MIDNIGHT	TIDES
BOOK	FIVE	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	the	characters	and	events	portrayed	in	this	novel
are	either	fictitious	or	are	used	fictitiously.
MIDNIGHT	TIDES:	A	TALE	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN
Copyright	©	2004	by	Steven	Erikson
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	in	2004	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers.
All	rights	reserved,	including	the	right	to	reproduce	this	book,	or	portions
thereof,	in	any	form.
Maps	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor.com
Tor ® 	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Erikson,	Steven.
							Midnight	tides:	a	tale	of	the	Malazan	book	of	the	fallen	/	Steven	Erikson.—
1st	U.S.	ed.
														p.	cm.
							“A	Tom	Doherty	Associates	Book.”
							ISBN:	978-0-765-31651-6
							I.	Title.
							PR9199.4.E745M53	2006
							823'.92—dc22
2006050937
eISBN	9781429926935


T O	CHRISTOPHER	POROZNY


Acknowledgements

Deepest	appreciation	to	the	old	crew,	Rick,	Chris	and	Mark,	for	the	advance
comments	on	this	novel.	And	to	Courtney,	Cam	and	David	Keck	for	their
friendship.	Thanks	as	always	to	Clare	and	Bowen,	to	Simon	Taylor	and	his
compatriots	at	Transworld;	to	Steve	Donaldson,	Ross	and	Perry;	Peter	and
Nicky	Crowther,	Patrick	Walsh	and	Howard	Morhaim.	And	to	the	staff	at
Tony’s	Bar	Italia	for	this,	the	second	novel	fuelled	by	their	coffee.




Dramatis	Personae

The	Tiste	Edur
Tomad	Sengar,	patriarch	of	the	Sengar	Bloodline
Uruth,	matriarch	of	the	Sengar	Bloodline
Fear	Sengar,	Eldest	Son,	Weapons	Master	of	the	Tribes
Trull	Sengar,	Second	Son
Binadas	Sengar,	Third	Son
Rhulad	Sengar,	Fourth	and	Youngest	Son
Mayen,	Fear ’s	Betrothed
Hannan	Mosag,	Warlock	King	of	the	Six	Tribes	Confederacy
Theradas	Buhn,	Eldest	Son	of	the	Buhn	Bloodline
Midik	Buhn,	Second	Son
Badar,	an	unblooded
Rethal,	a	warrior
Canarth,	a	warrior
Choram	Irard,	an	unblooded
Kholb	Harat,	an	unblooded
Matra	Brith,	an	unblooded
Letherii	Slaves	Among	the	Tiste	Edur
Udinaas
Feather	Witch
Hulad
Virrick
The	Letherii
IN	THE	PALACE
Ezgara	Diskanar,	King	of	Letheras
Janall,	Queen	of	Letheras


Quillas	Diskanar,	Prince	and	Heir
Unnutal	Hebaz,	Preda	(Commander)	of	Letherii	army
Brys	Beddict,	Finadd	(Captain)	and	King’s	Champion,	youngest	of	the	Beddict
brothers
Moroch	Nevath,	a	Finadd	bodyguard	to	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar
Kuru	Qan,	Ceda	(Sorceror)	to	the	King
Nisall,	the	King’s	First	Concubine
Turudal	Brizad,	The	Queen’s	First	Consort
Nifadas,	First	Eunuch
Gerun	Eberict,	Finadd	in	the	Royal	Guard
Triban	Gnol,	Chancellor
Laerdas,	a	mage	in	the	Prince’s	retinue
IN	THE	NORTH
Buruk	the	Pale,	a	merchant	in	the	north
Seren	Pedac,	Acquitor	for	Buruk	the	Pale
Hull	Beddict,	Sentinel	in	the	north,	eldest	among	the	Beddict	brothers
Nekal	Bara,	a	sorceress
Arahathan,	a	mage
Enedictal,	a	mage
Yan	Tovis	(Twilight),	Atri-Preda	at	Fent	Reach
IN	THE	CITY	OF	LETHERAS
Tehol	Beddict,	a	citizen	in	the	capital,	middle	among	the	Beddict	brothers
Hejun,	an	employee	of	Tehol
Rissarh,	an	employee	of	Tehol
Shand,	an	employee	of	Tehol
Chalas,	a	watchman
Biri,	a	merchant
Huldo,	an	establishment	proprietor
Bugg,	Tehol’s	servant
Ublala	Pung,	a	criminal
Harlest,	a	household	guard
Ormly,	Champion	Rat	Catcher
Rucket,	Chief	Investigator,	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Bubyrd,	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Glisten,	Rat	Catchers’	Guild


Ruby,	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Onyx,	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Scint,	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Kettle,	a	child
Shurq	Elalle,	a	thief
Selush,	a	Dresser	of	the	Dead
Padderunt,	assistant	to	Selush
Urul,	chief	server	in	Huldo’s
Inchers,	a	citizen
Hulbat,	a	citizen
Turble,	a	citizen
Unn,	a	half-blood	indigent
Delisp,	Matron	of	the	Temple	Brothel
Prist,	a	gardener
Strong	Rall,	a	cut-throat
Green	Pig,	an	infamous	mage	of	old
Others
Withal,	a	Meckros	weaponsmith
Rind,	a	Nacht
Mape,	a	Nacht
Pule,	a	Nacht
The	One	Within
Silchas	Ruin,	a	Tiste	Andii	Eleint	Soletaken
Scabandari	Bloodeye,	a	Tiste	Edur	Eleint	Soletaken
Gothos,	a	Jaghut
Rud	Elalle,	a	child
Iron	Bars,	a	soldier
Corlo,	a	mage
Halfpeck,	a	soldier
Ulshun	Pral,	an	Imass


Midnight	Tides


Prologue

The	First	Days	of	the	Sundering	of	Emurlahn
The	Edur	Invasion,	the	Age	of	Scabandari	Bloodeye
The	Time	of	the	Elder	Gods
From	the	twisting,	smoke-filled	clouds,	blood	rained	down.	The	last	of	the	sky
keeps,	flame-wreathed	and	pouring	black	smoke,	had	surrendered	the	sky.
Their	ragged	descent	had	torn	furrows	through	the	ground	as	they	struck	and
broke	apart	with	thunderous	reverberations,	scattering	red-stained	rocks
among	the	heaps	of	corpses	that	covered	the	land	from	horizon	to	horizon.
The	great	hive	cities	had	been	reduced	to	ash-layered	rubble,	and	the	vast
towering	clouds	above	each	of	them	that	had	shot	skyward	with	their
destruction—clouds	filled	with	debris	and	shredded	flesh	and	blood—now
swirled	in	storms	of	dissipating	heat,	spreading	to	fill	the	sky.
Amidst	the	annihilated	armies	the	legions	of	the	conquerors	were
reassembling	on	the	centre	plain,	most	of	which	was	covered	in	exquisitely
fitted	flagstones—where	the	impact	of	the	sky	keeps	had	not	carved	deep
gouges—although	the	reassertion	of	formations	was	hampered	by	the
countless	carcasses	of	the	defeated.	And	by	exhaustion.	The	legions	belonged
to	two	distinct	armies,	allies	in	this	war,	and	it	was	clear	that	one	had	fared	far
better	than	the	other.
The	blood	mist	sheathed	Scabandari’s	vast,	iron-hued	wings	as	he	swept
down	through	the	churning	clouds,	blinking	nictitating	membranes	to	clear	his
ice-blue	draconean	eyes.	Banking	in	his	descent,	the	dragon	tilted	his	head	to
survey	his	victorious	children.	The	grey	banners	of	the	Tiste	Edur	legions
wavered	fitfully	above	the	gathering	warriors,	and	Scabandari	judged	that	at
least	eighteen	thousand	of	his	shadow-kin	remained.	For	all	that,	there	would
be	mourning	in	the	tents	of	the	First	Landing	this	night.	The	day	had	begun
with	over	two	hundred	thousand	Tiste	Edur	marching	onto	the	plain.	Still…it
was	enough.
The	Edur	had	clashed	with	the	east	flank	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	army,
prefacing	their	charge	with	waves	of	devastating	sorcery.	The	enemy’s


formations	had	been	assembled	to	face	a	frontal	assault,	and	they	had	proved
fatally	slow	to	turn	to	the	threat	on	their	flank.	Like	a	dagger,	the	Edur	legions
had	driven	to	the	army’s	heart.
Below,	as	he	drew	closer,	Scabandari	could	see,	scattered	here	and	there,
the	midnight	banners	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	A	thousand	warriors	left,	perhaps	less.
Victory	was	a	more	dubious	claim	for	these	battered	allies.	They	had	engaged
the	K’ell	Hunters,	the	elite	bloodkin	armies	of	the	three	Matrons.	Four	hundred
thousand	Tiste	Andii,	against	sixty	thousand	Hunters.	Additional	companies	of
both	Andii	and	Edur	had	assailed	the	sky	keeps,	but	these	had	known	they	were
going	to	their	own	deaths,	and	their	sacrifices	had	been	pivotal	in	this	day’s
victory,	for	the	sky	keeps	had	been	prevented	from	coming	to	the	aid	of	the
armies	on	the	plain	below.	By	themselves,	the	assaults	on	the	four	sky	keeps
had	yielded	only	marginal	effect,	despite	the	Short-Tails	being	few	in	number
—their	ferocity	had	proved	devastating—but	sufficient	time	had	been
purchased	in	Tiste	blood	for	Scabandari	and	his	Soletaken	draconean	ally	to
close	on	the	floating	fortresses,	unleashing	upon	them	the	warrens	of	Starvald
Demelain,	and	Kuralds	Emurlahn	and	Galain.
The	dragon	swept	downward	to	where	a	jumbled	mountain	of	K’Chain
Che’Malle	carcasses	marked	the	last	stand	of	one	of	the	Matrons.	Kurald
Emurlahn	had	slaughtered	the	defenders,	and	wild	shadows	still	flitted	about
like	wraiths	on	the	slopes.	Scabandari	spread	his	wings,	buffeting	the	steamy
air,	then	settled	atop	the	reptilian	bodies.
A	moment	later	he	sembled	into	his	Tiste	Edur	form.	Skin	the	shade	of
hammered	iron,	long	grey	hair	unbound,	a	gaunt,	aquiline	face	with	hard,
close-set	eyes.	A	broad,	downturned	mouth	that	bore	no	lines	of	laughter.	High,
unlined	brow,	diagonally	scarred	livid	white	against	the	dusky	skin.	He	wore	a
leather	harness	bearing	his	two-handed	sword,	a	brace	of	long-knives	at	his
hip,	and	hanging	from	his	shoulders	a	scaled	cape—the	hide	of	a	Matron,	fresh
enough	to	still	glisten	with	natural	oils.
He	stood,	a	tall	figure	sheathed	in	droplets	of	blood,	watching	the	legions
assemble.	Edur	officers	glanced	his	way,	then	began	directing	their	troops.
Scabandari	faced	northwest	then,	eyes	narrowing	on	the	billowing	clouds.
A	moment	later	a	vast	bone-white	dragon	broke	through—if	anything,	larger
than	Scabandari	himself	when	veered	into	draconean	form.	Also	sheathed	in
blood…and	much	of	it	his	own,	for	Silchas	Ruin	had	fought	alongside	his
Andii	kin	against	the	K’ell	Hunters.
Scabandari	watched	his	ally	approach,	stepping	back	only	when	the	huge
dragon	settled	onto	the	hilltop	and	then	quickly	sembled.	A	head	or	more	taller
than	the	Tiste	Edur	Soletaken,	yet	terribly	gaunt,	muscles	bound	like	rope


beneath	smooth,	almost	translucent	skin.	Talons	from	some	raptor	gleamed	in
the	warrior ’s	thick,	long	white	hair.	The	red	of	his	eyes	seemed	feverish,	so
brightly	did	it	glow.	Silchas	Ruin	bore	wounds:	sword-slashes	across	his	body.
Most	of	his	upper	armour	had	fallen	away,	revealing	the	blue-green	of	his
veins	and	arteries	tracking	branching	paths	beneath	the	thin,	hairless	skin	of	his
chest.	His	legs	were	slick	with	blood,	as	were	his	arms.	The	twin	scabbards	at
his	hips	were	empty—he	had	broken	both	weapons,	despite	the	weavings	of
sorcery	invested	in	them.	His	had	been	a	desperate	battle.
Scabandari	bowed	his	head	in	greeting.	‘Silchas	Ruin,	brother	in	spirit.
Most	stalwart	of	allies.	Behold	the	plain—we	are	victorious.’
The	albino	Tiste	Andii’s	pallid	face	twisted	in	a	silent	snarl.
‘My	legions	were	late	in	coming	to	your	aid,’	Scabandari	said.	‘And	for
that,	my	heart	breaks	at	your	losses.	Even	so,	we	now	hold	the	gate,	do	we	not?
The	path	to	this	world	belongs	to	us,	and	the	world	itself	lies	before	us…to
plunder,	to	carve	for	our	people	worthy	empires.’
Ruin’s	long-fingered,	stained	hands	twitched,	and	he	faced	the	plain	below.
The	Edur	legions	had	re-formed	into	a	rough	ring	around	the	last	surviving
Andii.	‘Death	fouls	the	air,’	Silchas	Ruin	growled.	‘I	can	barely	draw	it	to
speak.’
‘There	will	be	time	enough	for	making	new	plans	later,’	Scabandari	said.
‘My	people	are	slaughtered.	You	now	surround	us,	but	your	protection	is
far	too	late.’
‘Symbolic,	then,	my	brother.	There	are	other	Tiste	Andii	on	this	world—
you	said	so	yourself.	You	must	needs	only	find	that	first	wave,	and	your
strength	will	return.	More,	others	will	come.	My	kind	and	yours	both,	fleeing
our	defeats.’
Silchas	Ruin’s	scowl	deepened.	‘This	day’s	victory	is	a	bitter	alternative.’
‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	are	all	but	gone—we	know	this.	We	have	seen	the
many	other	dead	cities.	Now,	only	Morn	remains,	and	that	on	a	distant
continent—where	the	Short-Tails	even	now	break	their	chains	in	bloody
rebellion.	A	divided	enemy	is	an	enemy	quick	to	fall,	my	friend.	Who	else	in
this	world	has	the	power	to	oppose	us?	Jaghut?	They	are	scattered	and	few.
Imass?	What	can	weapons	of	stone	achieve	against	our	iron?’	He	was	silent	a
moment,	then	continued,	‘The	Forkrul	Assail	seem	unwilling	to	pass
judgement	on	us.	And	each	year	there	seem	to	be	fewer	and	fewer	of	them	in
any	case.	No,	my	friend,	with	this	day’s	victory	this	world	lies	before	our	feet.
Here,	you	shall	not	suffer	from	the	civil	wars	that	plague	Kurald	Galain.	And	I
and	my	followers	shall	escape	the	rivening	that	now	besets	Kurald	Emurlahn
—’


Silchas	Ruin	snorted.	‘A	rivening	by	your	own	hand,	Scabandari.’
He	was	still	studying	the	Tiste	forces	below,	and	so	did	not	see	the	flash	of
rage	that	answered	his	offhand	remark,	a	flash	that	vanished	a	heartbeat	later	as
Scabandari’s	expression	returned	once	more	to	equanimity.	‘A	new	world	for
us,	brother.’
‘A	Jaghut	stands	atop	a	ridge	to	the	north,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.	‘Witness	to
the	war.	I	did	not	approach,	for	I	sensed	the	beginning	of	a	ritual.	Omtose
Phellack.’
‘Do	you	fear	that	Jaghut,	Silchas	Ruin?’
‘I	fear	what	I	do	not	know,	Scabandari…Bloodeye.	And	there	is	much	to
learn	of	this	realm	and	its	ways.’
‘Bloodeye.’
‘You	cannot	see	yourself,’	Ruin	said,	‘but	I	give	you	this	name,	for	the
blood	that	now	stains	your…vision.’
‘Rich,	Silchas	Ruin,	coming	from	you.’	Then	Scabandari	shrugged	and
walked	to	the	north	edge	of	the	heap,	stepping	carefully	on	the	shifting
carcasses.	‘A	Jaghut,	you	said…’	He	swung	about,	but	Silchas	Ruin’s	back	was
to	him	as	the	Tiste	Andii	stared	down	upon	his	few	surviving	followers	on	the
plain	below.
‘Omtose	Phellack,	the	Warren	of	Ice,’	Ruin	said	without	turning.	‘What
does	he	conjure,	Scabandari	Bloodeye?	I	wonder…’
The	Edur	Soletaken	walked	back	towards	Silchas	Ruin.
He	reached	down	to	the	outside	of	his	left	boot	and	drew	out	a	shadowetched	dagger.	Sorcery	played	on	the	iron.
A	final	step,	and	the	dagger	was	driven	into	Ruin’s	back.
The	Tiste	Andii	spasmed,	then	roared—
—even	as	the	Edur	legions	turned	suddenly	on	the	Andii,	rushing	inward
from	all	sides	to	deliver	the	day’s	final	slaughter.
Magic	wove	writhing	chains	about	Silchas	Ruin,	and	the	albino	Tiste	Andii
toppled.
Scabandari	Bloodeye	crouched	down	over	him.	‘It	is	the	way	of	brothers,
alas,’	he	murmured.	‘One	must	rule.	Two	cannot.	You	know	the	truth	of	that.
Big	as	this	world	is,	Silchas	Ruin,	sooner	or	later	there	would	be	war	between
the	Edur	and	the	Andii.	The	truth	of	our	blood	will	tell.	Thus,	only	one	shall
command	the	gate.	Only	the	Edur	shall	pass.	We	will	hunt	down	the	Andii	who
are	already	here—what	champion	can	they	throw	up	to	challenge	me?	They	are
as	good	as	dead.	And	so	it	must	be.	One	people.	One	ruler.’	He	straightened,	as
the	last	cries	of	the	dying	Andii	warriors	echoed	from	the	plain	below.	‘Aye,	I
cannot	kill	you	outright—you	are	too	powerful	for	that.	Thus,	I	will	take	you


to	a	suitable	place,	and	leave	you	to	the	roots,	earth	and	stone	of	its	mangled
grounds…’
He	veered	into	his	draconean	form.	An	enormous	taloned	foot	closed
about	the	motionless	Silchas	Ruin,	and	Scabandari	Bloodeye	rose	into	the	sky,
wings	thundering.
The	tower	was	less	than	a	hundred	leagues	to	the	south,	only	its	low
battered	wall	enclosing	the	yard	revealing	that	it	was	not	of	Jaghut
construction,	that	it	had	arisen	beside	the	three	Jaghut	towers	of	its	own	accord,
in	answer	to	a	law	unfathomable	to	god	and	mortal	alike.	Arisen…to	await	the
coming	of	those	whom	it	would	imprison	for	eternity.	Creatures	of	deadly
power.
Such	as	the	Soletaken	Tiste	Andii,	Silchas	Ruin,	third	and	last	of	Mother
Dark’s	three	children.
Removing	from	Scabandari	Bloodeye’s	path	his	last	worthy	opponent
among	the	Tiste.
Mother	Dark’s	three	children.
Three	names…
Andarist,	who	long	ago	surrendered	his	power	in	answer	to	a	grief	that
could	never	heal.	All	unknowing	that	the	hand	that	delivered	that	grief	was
mine…
Anomandaris	Irake,	who	broke	with	his	mother	and	with	his	kind.	Who	then
vanished	before	I	could	deal	with	him.	Vanished,	probably	never	to	be	seen
again.
And	now	Silchas	Ruin,	who	in	a	very	short	time	will	know	the	eternal	prison
of	the	Azath.
Scabandari	Bloodeye	was	pleased.	For	his	people.	For	himself.	This	world
he	would	conquer.	Only	the	first	Andii	settlers	could	pose	any	challenge	to	his
claim.
A	champion	of	the	Tiste	Andii	in	this	realm?	I	can	think	of	no-one…no-one
with	the	power	to	stand	before	me…
It	did	not	occur	to	Scabandari	Bloodeye	to	wonder	where,	of	the	three	sons
of	Mother	Dark,	the	one	who	had	vanished	might	have	gone.
But	even	that	was	not	his	greatest	mistake…
	
On	a	glacial	berm	to	the	north,	the	lone	Jaghut	began	weaving	the	sorcery	of
Omtose	Phellack.	He	had	witnessed	the	devastation	wrought	by	the	two
Soletaken	Eleint	and	their	attendant	armies.	Little	sympathy	was	spared	for	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle.	They	were	dying	out	anyway,	for	myriad	reasons,	none	of


which	concerned	the	Jaghut	overmuch.	Nor	did	the	intruders	worry	him.	He
had	long	since	lost	his	capacity	for	worry.	Along	with	fear.	And,	it	must	be
admitted,	wonder.
He	felt	the	betrayal	when	it	came,	the	distant	bloom	of	magic	and	the
spilling	of	ascendant	blood.	And	the	two	dragons	were	now	one.
Typical.
And	then,	a	short	while	later,	in	the	time	when	he	rested	between	weavings
of	his	ritual,	he	sensed	someone	approaching	him	from	behind.	An	Elder	god,
come	in	answer	to	the	violent	rift	torn	between	the	realms.	As	expected.	Still…
which	god?	K’rul?	Draconus?	The	Sister	of	Cold	Nights?	Osserc?
Kilmandaros?	Sechul	Lath?	Despite	his	studied	indifference,	curiosity	finally
forced	him	to	turn	to	look	upon	the	newcomer.
Ah,	unexpected…but	interesting.
Mael,	Elder	Lord	of	the	Seas,	was	wide	and	squat,	with	deep	blue	skin	that
faded	to	pale	gold	at	throat	and	bared	belly.	Lank	blond	hair	hung	unbound
from	his	broad,	almost	flat	pate.	And	in	Mael’s	amber	eyes,	sizzling	rage.
‘Gothos,’	Mael	rasped,	‘what	ritual	do	you	invoke	in	answer	to	this?’
The	Jaghut	scowled.	‘They’ve	made	a	mess.	I	mean	to	cleanse	it.’
‘Ice,’	the	Elder	god	snorted.	‘The	Jaghut	answer	to	everything.’
‘And	what	would	yours	be,	Mael?	Flood,	or…flood?’
The	Elder	god	faced	south,	the	muscles	of	his	jaw	bunching.	‘I	am	to	have
an	ally.	Kilmandaros.	She	comes	from	the	other	side	of	the	rent.’
‘Only	one	Tiste	Soletaken	is	left,’	Gothos	said.	‘Seems	he	struck	down	his
companion,	and	even	now	delivers	him	into	the	keeping	of	the	Azath	Tower ’s
crowded	yard.’
‘Premature.	Does	he	think	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	his	only	opposition	in
this	realm?’
The	Jaghut	shrugged.	‘Probably.’
Mael	was	silent	for	a	time,	then	he	sighed	and	said,	‘With	your	ice,	Gothos,
do	not	destroy	all	of	this.	Instead,	I	ask	that	you…preserve.’
‘Why?’
‘I	have	my	reasons.’
‘I	am	pleased	for	you.	What	are	they?’
The	Elder	god	shot	him	a	dark	look.	‘Impudent	bastard.’
‘Why	change?’
‘In	the	seas,	Jaghut,	time	is	unveiled.	In	the	depths	ride	currents	of	vast
antiquity.	In	the	shallows	whisper	the	future.	The	tides	flow	between	them	in
ceaseless	exchange.	Such	is	my	realm.	Such	is	my	knowledge.	Seal	this
devastation	in	your	damned	ice,	Gothos.	In	this	place,	freeze	time	itself.	Do


this,	and	I	will	accept	an	indebtedness	to	you…which	one	day	you	might	find
useful.’
Gothos	considered	the	Elder	god’s	words,	then	nodded.	‘I	might	at	that.
Very	well,	Mael.	Go	to	Kilmandaros.	Swat	down	this	Tiste	Eleint	and	scatter	his
people.	But	do	it	quickly.’
Mael’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘Why?’
‘Because	I	sense	a	distant	awakening—but	not,	alas,	as	distant	as	you	would
like.’
‘Anomander	Rake.’
Gothos	nodded.
Mael	shrugged.	‘Anticipated.	Osserc	moves	to	stand	in	his	path.’
The	Jaghut’s	smile	revealed	his	massive	tusks.	‘Again?’
The	Elder	god	could	not	help	but	grin	in	answer.
And	though	they	smiled,	there	was	little	humour	on	that	glacial	berm.
1159th	Year	of	Burn’s	Sleep
Year	of	the	White	Veins	in	the	Ebony
Three	years	before	the	Letherii	Seventh	Closure
He	awoke	with	a	bellyful	of	salt,	naked	and	half	buried	in	white	sand	amidst	the
storm’s	detritus.	Seagulls	cried	overhead,	their	shadows	wheeling	across	the
rippled	beach.	Cramps	spasming	his	gut,	he	groaned	and	slowly	rolled	over.
There	were	more	bodies	on	the	beach,	he	saw.	And	wreckage.	Chunks	and
rafts	of	fast-melting	ice	rustled	in	the	shallows.	Crabs	scuttled	in	their
thousands.
The	huge	man	lifted	himself	to	his	hands	and	knees.	And	then	vomited
bitter	fluids	onto	the	sands.	Pounding	throbs	racked	his	head,	fierce	enough	to
leave	him	half	blind,	and	it	was	some	time	before	he	finally	rocked	back	to	sit
up	and	glare	once	more	at	the	scene	around	him.
A	shore	where	no	shore	belonged.
And	the	night	before,	mountains	of	ice	rising	up	from	the	depths,	one—the
largest	of	them	all—reaching	the	surface	directly	beneath	the	vast	floating
Meckros	city.	Breaking	it	apart	as	if	it	were	a	raft	of	sticks.	Meckros	histories
recounted	nothing	remotely	like	the	devastation	he	had	seen	wrought.	Sudden
and	virtually	absolute	annihilation	of	a	city	that	was	home	to	twenty	thousand.
Disbelief	still	tormented	him,	as	if	his	own	memories	held	impossible	images,
the	conjuring	of	a	fevered	brain.
But	he	knew	he	had	imagined	nothing.	He	had	but	witnessed.


And,	somehow,	survived.
The	sun	was	warm,	but	not	hot.	The	sky	overhead	was	milky	white	rather
than	blue.	And	the	seagulls,	he	now	saw,	were	something	else	entirely.
Reptilian,	pale-winged.
He	staggered	to	his	feet.	The	headache	was	fading,	but	shivers	now	swept
through	him,	and	his	thirst	was	a	raging	demon	trying	to	claw	up	his	throat.
The	cries	of	the	flying	lizards	changed	pitch	and	he	swung	to	face	inland.
Three	creatures	had	appeared,	clambering	through	the	pallid	tufts	of	grass
above	the	tideline.	No	higher	than	his	hip,	black-skinned,	hairless,	perfectly
round	heads	and	pointed	ears.	Bhoka’ral—he	recalled	them	from	his	youth,
when	a	Meckros	trading	ship	had	returned	from	Nemil—but	these	seemed	to	be
muscle-bound	versions,	at	least	twice	as	heavy	as	the	pets	the	merchants	had
brought	back	to	the	floating	city.	They	made	directly	for	him.
He	looked	round	for	something	to	use	as	a	weapon,	and	found	a	piece	of
driftwood	that	would	serve	as	a	club.	Hefting	it,	he	waited	as	the	bhoka’ral
drew	closer.
They	halted,	yellow-shot	eyes	staring	up	at	him.
Then	the	middle	one	gestured.
Come.	There	was	no	doubting	the	meaning	of	that	all-too-human
beckoning.
The	man	scanned	the	strand	again—none	of	the	bodies	he	could	see	were
moving,	and	the	crabs	were	feeding	unopposed.	He	stared	up	once	more	at	the
strange	sky,	then	stepped	towards	the	three	creatures.
They	backed	away	and	led	him	up	to	the	grassy	verge.
Those	grasses	were	like	nothing	he	had	ever	seen	before,	long	tubular
triangles,	razor-edged—as	he	discovered	once	he	passed	through	them	when
he	found	his	low	legs	crisscrossed	with	cuts.	Beyond,	a	level	plain	stretched
inland,	bearing	only	the	occasional	tuft	of	the	same	grass.	The	ground	in
between	was	salt-crusted	and	barren.	A	few	chunks	of	stone	dotted	the	plain,	no
two	alike	and	all	oddly	angular,	unweathered.
In	the	distance	stood	a	lone	tent.
The	bhoka’ral	guided	him	towards	it.
As	they	drew	near,	he	saw	threads	of	smoke	drifting	out	from	the	peak	and
the	slitted	flap	that	marked	the	doorway.
His	escort	halted	and	another	wave	directed	him	to	the	entrance.
Shrugging,	he	crouched	and	crawled	inside.
In	the	dim	light	sat	a	shrouded	figure,	a	hood	disguising	its	features.	A
brazier	was	before	it,	from	which	heady	fumes	drifted.	Beside	the	entrance
stood	a	crystal	bottle,	some	dried	fruit	and	a	loaf	of	dark	bread.


‘The	bottle	holds	spring	water,’	the	figure	rasped	in	the	Meckros	tongue.
‘Please,	take	time	to	recover	from	your	ordeal.’
He	grunted	his	thanks	and	quickly	took	the	bottle.
Thirst	blissfully	slaked,	he	reached	for	the	bread.	‘I	thank	you,	stranger,’	he
rumbled,	then	shook	his	head.	‘That	smoke	makes	you	swim	before	my	eyes.’
A	hacking	cough	that	might	have	been	laughter,	then	something	resembling
a	shrug.	‘Better	than	drowning.	Alas,	it	eases	my	pain.	I	shall	not	keep	you
long.	You	are	Withal,	the	Swordmaker.’
The	man	started,	and	his	broad	brow	knotted.	‘Aye,	I	am	Withal,	of	the
Third	Meckros	city—which	is	now	no	more.’
‘A	tragic	event.	You	are	the	lone	survivor…through	my	own	efforts,
though	it	much	strained	my	powers	to	intervene.’
‘What	place	is	this?’
‘Nowhere,	in	the	heart	of	nowhere.	A	fragment,	prone	to	wander.	I	give	it
what	life	I	can	imagine,	conjured	from	memories	of	my	home.	My	strength
returns,	although	the	agony	of	my	broken	body	does	not	abate.	Yet	listen,	I
have	talked	and	not	coughed.	That	is	something.’	A	mangled	hand	appeared
from	a	ragged	sleeve	and	scattered	seeds	onto	the	brazier ’s	coals.	They	spat
and	popped	and	the	smoke	thickened.
‘Who	are	you?’	Withal	demanded.
‘A	fallen	god…who	has	need	of	your	skills.	I	have	prepared	for	your
coming,	Withal.	A	place	of	dwelling,	a	forge,	all	the	raw	materials	you	will
need.	Clothes,	food,	water.	And	three	devoted	servants,	whom	you	have	already
met—’
‘The	bhoka’ral?’	Withal	snorted.	‘What	can—’
‘Not	bhoka’ral,	mortal.	Although	perhaps	they	once	were.	These	are
Nachts.	I	have	named	them	Rind,	Mape	and	Pule.	They	are	of	Jaghut
fashioning,	capable	of	learning	all	that	you	require	of	them.’
Withal	made	to	rise.	‘I	thank	you	for	the	salvation,	Fallen	One,	but	I	shall
take	my	leave	of	you.	I	would	return	to	my	own	world—’
‘You	do	not	understand,	Withal,’	the	figure	hissed.	‘You	will	do	as	I	say
here,	or	you	will	find	yourself	begging	for	death.	I	now	own	you,
Swordmaker.	You	are	my	slave	and	I	am	your	master.	The	Meckros	own
slaves,	yes?	Hapless	souls	stolen	from	island	villages	and	such	on	your	raids.
The	notion	is	therefore	familiar	to	you.	Do	not	despair,	however,	for	once	you
have	completed	what	I	ask	of	you,	you	shall	be	free	to	leave.’
Withal	still	held	the	club,	the	heavy	wood	cradled	on	his	lap.	He
considered.
A	cough,	then	laughter,	then	more	coughing,	during	which	the	god	raised	a


staying	hand.	When	the	hacking	was	done,	he	said,	‘I	advise	you	to	attempt
nothing	untoward,	Withal.	I	have	plucked	you	from	the	seas	for	this	purpose.
Have	you	lost	all	honour?	Oblige	me	in	this,	for	you	would	deeply	regret	my
wrath.’
‘What	would	you	have	me	do?’
‘Better.	What	would	I	have	you	do,	Withal?	Why,	only	what	you	do	best.
Make	me	a	sword.’
Withal	grunted.	‘That	is	all?’
The	figure	leaned	forward.	‘Ah	well,	what	I	have	in	mind	is	a	very
particular	sword…’


Book	One

Frozen	Blood

	


	

There	is	a	spear	of	ice,	newly	thrust	into	the	heart
of	the	land.	The	soul	within	it	yearns	to	kill.
He	who	grasps	that	spear	will	know	death.
Again	and	again,	he	shall	know	death.
HANNAN 	MOSAG’S	VISION


Chapter	One

Listen!	The	seas	whisper
and	dream	of	breaking	truths
in	the	crumbling	of	stone
HANTALLIT	OF	MINER	SLUICE
Year	of	the	Late	Frost
One	year	before	the	Letherii	Seventh	Closure
The	Ascension	of	the	Empty	Hold
Here,	then,	is	the	tale.	Between	the	swish	of	the	tides,	when	giants	knelt	down
and	became	mountains.	When	they	fell	scattered	on	the	land	like	the	ballast
stones	of	the	sky,	yet	could	not	hold	fast	against	the	rising	dawn.	Between	the
swish	of	the	tides,	we	will	speak	of	one	such	giant.	Because	the	tale	hides	with
his	own.
And	because	it	amuses.
Thus.
In	darkness	he	closed	his	eyes.	Only	by	day	did	he	elect	to	open	them,	for
he	reasoned	in	this	manner:	night	defies	vision	and	so,	if	little	can	be	seen,
what	value	seeking	to	pierce	the	gloom?
Witness	as	well,	this.	He	came	to	the	edge	of	the	land	and	discovered	the
sea,	and	was	fascinated	by	the	mysterious	fluid.	A	fascination	that	became	a
singular	obsession	through	the	course	of	that	fated	day.	He	could	see	how	the
waves	moved,	up	and	down	along	the	entire	shore,	a	ceaseless	motion	that	ever
threatened	to	engulf	all	the	land,	yet	ever	failed	to	do	so.	He	watched	the	sea
through	the	afternoon’s	high	winds,	witness	to	its	wild	thrashing	far	up	along
the	sloping	strand,	and	sometimes	it	did	indeed	reach	far,	but	always	it	would
sullenly	retreat	once	more.
When	night	arrived,	he	closed	his	eyes	and	lay	down	to	sleep.	Tomorrow,
he	decided,	he	would	look	once	more	upon	this	sea.
In	darkness	he	closed	his	eyes.


The	tides	came	with	the	night,	swirling	up	round	the	giant.	The	tides	came
and	drowned	him	as	he	slept.	And	the	water	seeped	minerals	into	his	flesh,	until
he	became	as	rock,	a	gnarled	ridge	on	the	strand.	Then,	each	night	for
thousands	of	years,	the	tides	came	to	wear	away	at	his	form.	Stealing	his	shape.
But	not	entirely.	To	see	him	true,	even	to	this	day,	one	must	look	in
darkness.	Or	close	one’s	eyes	to	slits	in	brightest	sunlight.	Glance	askance,	or
focus	on	all	but	the	stone	itself.
Of	all	the	gifts	Father	Shadow	has	given	his	children,	this	one	talent	stands
tallest.	Look	away	to	see.	Trust	in	it,	and	you	will	be	led	into	Shadow.	Where	all
truths	hide.
Look	away	to	see.
Now,	look	away.
	
The	mice	scattered	as	the	deeper	shadow	flowed	across	snow	brushed	blue	by
dusk.	They	scampered	in	wild	panic,	but,	among	them,	one’s	fate	was	already
sealed.	A	lone	tufted,	taloned	foot	snapped	down,	piercing	furry	flesh	and
crushing	minute	bones.
At	the	clearing’s	edge,	the	owl	had	dropped	silently	from	its	branch,
sailing	out	over	the	hard-packed	snow	and	its	litter	of	seeds,	and	the	arc	of	its
flight,	momentarily	punctuated	by	plucking	the	mouse	from	the	ground,	rose
up	once	more,	this	time	in	a	heavy	flapping	of	wings,	towards	a	nearby	tree.	It
landed	one-legged,	and	a	moment	later	it	began	to	feed.
The	figure	who	jogged	across	the	glade	a	dozen	heartbeats	later	saw
nothing	untoward.	The	mice	were	all	gone,	the	snow	solid	enough	to	leave	no
signs	of	their	passing,	and	the	owl	froze	motionless	in	its	hollow	amidst	the
branches	of	the	spruce	tree,	eyes	wide	as	they	followed	the	figure’s	progress
across	the	clearing.	Once	it	had	passed,	the	owl	resumed	feeding.
Dusk	belonged	to	the	hunters,	and	the	raptor	was	not	yet	done	this	night.
As	he	weaved	through	the	frost-rimed	humus	of	the	trail,	Trull	Sengar ’s
thoughts	were	distant,	making	him	heedless	of	the	forest	surrounding	him,
uncharacteristically	distracted	from	all	the	signs	and	details	it	offered.	He	had
not	even	paused	to	make	propitiation	to	Sheltatha	Lore,	Daughter	Dusk,	the
most	cherished	of	the	Three	Daughters	of	Father	Shadow—although	he	would
make	recompense	at	tomorrow’s	sunset—and,	earlier,	he	had	moved
unmindful	through	the	patches	of	lingering	light	that	blotted	the	trail,	risking
the	attention	of	fickle	Sukul	Ankhadu,	the	Daughter	of	Deceit,	also	known	as
Dapple.
The	Calach	breeding	beds	swarmed	with	seals.	They’d	come	early,


surprising	Trull	in	his	collecting	of	raw	jade	above	the	shoreline.	Alone,	the
arrival	of	the	seals	would	engender	only	excitement	in	the	young	Tiste	Edur,
but	there	had	been	other	arrivals,	in	ships	ringing	the	bay,	and	the	harvest	had
been	well	under	way.
Letherii,	the	white-skinned	peoples	from	the	south.
He	could	imagine	the	anger	of	those	in	the	village	he	now	approached,
once	he	delivered	the	news	of	his	discovery—an	anger	he	shared.	This
encroachment	on	Edur	territories	was	brazen,	the	theft	of	seals	that	rightly
belonged	to	his	people	an	arrogant	defiance	of	the	old	agreements.
There	were	fools	among	the	Letherii,	just	as	there	were	fools	among	the
Edur.	Trull	could	not	imagine	this	broaching	being	anything	but	unsanctioned.
The	Great	Meeting	was	only	two	cycles	of	the	moon	away.	It	served	neither
side’s	purpose	to	spill	blood	now.	No	matter	that	the	Edur	would	be	right	in
attacking	and	destroying	the	intruder	ships;	the	Letherii	delegation	would	be
outraged	at	the	slaughter	of	its	citizens,	even	citizens	contravening	the	laws.
The	chances	of	agreeing	upon	a	new	treaty	had	just	become	minuscule.
And	this	disturbed	Trull	Sengar.	One	long	and	vicious	war	had	just	ended
for	the	Edur:	the	thought	of	another	beginning	was	too	hard	to	bear.
He	had	not	embarrassed	his	brothers	during	the	wars	of	subjugation;	on	his
wide	belt	was	a	row	of	twenty-one	red-stained	rivets,	each	one	marking	a	coup,
and	among	those	seven	were	ringed	in	white	paint,	to	signify	actual	kills.	Only
his	elder	brother ’s	belt	sported	more	trophies	among	the	male	children	of
Tomad	Sengar,	and	that	was	right	and	proper,	given	Fear	Sengar ’s	eminence
among	the	warriors	of	the	Hiroth	tribe.
Of	course,	battles	against	the	five	other	tribes	of	the	Edur	were	strictly
bound	in	rules	and	prohibitions,	and	even	vast,	protracted	battles	had	yielded
only	a	handful	of	actual	deaths.	Even	so,	the	conquests	had	been	exhausting.
Against	the	Letherii,	there	were	no	rules	to	constrain	the	Edur	warriors.	No
counting	coup.	Just	killing.	Nor	did	the	enemy	need	a	weapon	in	hand—even
the	helpless	and	the	innocent	would	know	the	sword’s	bite.	Such	slaughter
stained	warrior	and	victim	alike.
But	Trull	well	knew	that,	though	he	might	decry	the	killing	that	was	to
come,	he	would	do	so	only	to	himself,	and	he	would	stride	alongside	his
brothers,	sword	in	hand,	to	deliver	the	Edur	judgement	upon	the	trespassers.
There	was	no	choice.	Turn	away	from	this	crime	and	more	would	follow,	in
waves	unending.
His	steady	jog	brought	him	past	the	tanneries,	with	their	troughs	and	stonelined	pits,	to	the	forest	edge.	A	few	Letherii	slaves	glanced	his	way,	quickly
bowing	in	deference	until	he	was	past.	The	towering	cedar	logs	of	the	village


wall	rose	from	the	clearing	ahead,	over	which	woodsmoke	hung	in	stretched
streams.	Fields	of	rich	black	soil	spread	out	to	either	side	of	the	narrow,	raised
track	leading	to	the	distant	gate.	Winter	had	only	just	begun	to	release	its	grip
on	the	earth,	and	the	first	planting	of	the	season	was	still	weeks	away.	By
midsummer,	close	to	thirty	different	types	of	plants	would	fill	these	fields,
providing	food,	medicine,	fibres	and	feed	for	the	livestock,	many	among	the
thirty	of	a	flowering	variety,	drawing	the	bees	from	which	honey	and	wax	were
procured.	The	tribe’s	women	oversaw	the	slaves	in	such	harvesting.	The	men
would	leave	in	small	groups	to	journey	into	the	forest,	to	cut	timber	or	hunt,
whilst	others	set	out	in	the	Knarri	ships	to	harvest	from	the	seas	and	shoals.
Or	so	it	should	be,	when	peace	ruled	the	tribes.	The	past	dozen	years	had
seen	more	war-parties	setting	out	than	any	other	kind,	and	so	the	people	had	on
occasion	suffered.	Until	the	war,	hunger	had	never	threatened	the	Edur.	Trull
wanted	an	end	to	such	depredations.	Hannan	Mosag,	Warlock	King	of	the
Hiroth,	was	now	overlord	to	all	the	Edur	tribes.	From	a	host	of	warring
peoples,	a	confederacy	had	been	wrought,	although	Trull	well	knew	that	it	was
a	confederacy	in	name	only.	Hannan	Mosag	held	as	hostage	the	firstborn	sons
of	the	subjugated	chiefs—his	K’risnan	Cadre—and	ruled	as	dictator.	Peace,
then,	at	the	point	of	a	sword,	but	peace	none	the	less.
A	recognizable	figure	was	striding	from	the	palisade	gate,	approaching	the
fork	in	the	trail	where	Trull	now	halted.	‘I	greet	you,	Binadas,’	he	said.
A	spear	was	strapped	to	his	younger	brother ’s	back,	a	hide	pack	slung
round	one	shoulder	and	resting	against	a	hip;	at	the	opposite	side	a	singleedged	longsword	in	a	leather-wrapped	wooden	scabbard.	Binadas	was	half	a
head	taller	than	Trull,	his	visage	as	weathered	as	his	buckskin	clothes.	Of
Trull’s	three	brothers,	Binadas	was	the	most	remote,	evasive	and	thus	difficult
to	predict,	much	less	understand.	He	resided	in	the	village	only	infrequently,
seeming	to	prefer	the	wilds	of	the	western	forest	and	the	mountains	to	the
south.	He	had	rarely	joined	others	in	raids,	yet	often	when	he	returned	he
carried	trophies	of	coup,	and	so	none	doubted	his	bravery.
‘You	are	winded,	Trull,’	Binadas	observed,	‘and	I	see	distress	once	more
upon	your	face.’
‘There	are	Letherii	moored	off	the	Calach	beds.’
Binadas	frowned.	‘I	shall	not	delay	you,	then.’
‘Will	you	be	gone	long,	brother?’
The	man	shrugged,	then	stepped	past	Trull,	taking	the	westerly	fork	of	the
trail.
Trull	Sengar	moved	on,	through	the	gate	and	into	the	village.
Four	smithies	dominated	this	inland	end	of	the	vast	walled	interior,	each


surrounded	by	a	deep	sloping	trench	that	drained	into	a	buried	channel	that	led
away	from	the	village	and	the	surrounding	fields.	For	what	seemed	years	the
forges	had	rung	almost	ceaselessly	with	the	fashioning	of	weapons,	and	the
stench	of	heavy,	acrid	fumes	had	filled	the	air,	rising	up	to	coat	nearby	trees	in
white-crusted	soot.	Now,	as	he	passed,	Trull	saw	that	only	two	were	occupied,
and	the	dozen	or	so	visible	slaves	were	unhurried	in	their	work.
Beyond	the	smithies	ran	the	elongated,	brick-lined	storage	chambers,	a
row	of	segmented	beehive-shaped	buildings	that	held	surplus	grains,	smoked
fish	and	seal	meat,	whale	oil	and	harvested	fibre	plants.	Similar	structures
existed	in	the	deep	forest	surrounding	each	village—most	of	which	were
empty	at	the	moment,	a	consequence	of	the	wars.
The	stone	houses	of	the	weavers,	potters,	carvers,	lesser	scribes,
armourers	and	other	assorted	skilled	citizens	of	the	village	rose	round	Trull
once	he	was	past	the	storage	chambers.	Voices	called	out	in	greeting,	to	which
he	made	the	minimal	response	that	decorum	allowed,	such	gestures	signifying
to	his	acquaintances	that	he	could	not	pause	for	conversation.
The	Edur	warrior	now	hurried	through	the	residential	streets.	Letherii
slaves	called	villages	such	as	this	one	cities,	but	no	citizen	saw	the	need	for
changing	their	word	usage—a	village	it	had	been	at	birth,	thus	a	village	it
would	always	be,	no	matter	that	almost	twenty	thousand	Edur	and	thrice	that
number	of	Letherii	now	resided	within	it.
Shrines	to	the	Father	and	his	Favoured	Daughter	dominated	the	residential
area,	raised	platforms	ringed	by	living	trees	of	the	sacred	Blackwood,	the
surface	of	the	stone	discs	crowded	with	images	and	glyphs.	Kurald	Emurlahn
played	ceaselessly	within	the	tree-ringed	circle,	rippling	half-shapes	dancing
along	the	pictographs,	the	sorcerous	emanations	awakened	by	the	propitiations
that	had	accompanied	the	arrival	of	dusk.
Trull	Sengar	emerged	onto	the	Avenue	of	the	Warlock,	the	sacred
approach	to	the	massive	citadel	that	was	both	temple	and	palace,	and	the	seat	of
the	Warlock	King,	Hannan	Mosag.	Black-barked	cedars	lined	the	approach.
The	trees	were	a	thousand	years	old,	towering	over	the	entire	village.	They
were	devoid	of	branches	except	for	the	uppermost	reaches.	Invested	sorcery
suffused	every	ring	of	their	midnight	wood,	bleeding	out	to	fill	the	entire
avenue	with	a	shroud	of	gloom.
At	the	far	end,	a	lesser	palisade	enclosed	the	citadel	and	its	grounds,
constructed	of	the	same	black	wood,	these	boles	crowded	with	carved	wards.
The	main	gate	was	a	tunnel	formed	of	living	trees,	a	passage	of	unrelieved
shadow	leading	to	a	footbridge	spanning	a	canal	in	which	sat	a	dozen	K’orthan
raider	longboats.	The	footbridge	opened	out	onto	a	broad	flagstoned


compound	flanked	by	barracks	and	storehouses.	Beyond	stood	the	stone	and
timber	longhouses	of	the	noble	families—those	with	blood-ties	to	Hannan
Mosag’s	own	line—with	their	wood-shingled	roofs	and	Blackwood
ridgepoles,	the	array	of	residences	neatly	bisected	by	a	resumption	of	the
Avenue,	across	yet	another	footbridge	to	the	citadel	proper.
There	were	warriors	training	in	the	compound,	and	Trull	saw	the	tall,
broad-shouldered	figure	of	his	elder	brother,	Fear,	standing	with	a	half-dozen
of	his	assistants	nearby,	watching	the	weapons	practice.	A	pang	of	sympathy
for	those	young	warriors	flickered	through	Trull.	He	himself	had	suffered
beneath	his	brother ’s	critical,	unrelenting	eye	during	the	years	of	his	own
schooling.
A	voice	hailed	him	and	Trull	glanced	over	to	the	other	side	of	the
compound,	to	see	his	youngest	brother,	Rhulad,	and	Midik	Buhn.	They	had
been	doing	their	own	sparring,	it	seemed,	and	a	moment	later	Trull	saw	the
source	of	their	uncharacteristic	diligence—Mayen,	Fear ’s	betrothed,	had
appeared	with	four	younger	women	in	tow,	probably	on	their	way	to	the
market,	given	the	dozen	slaves	accompanying	them.	That	they	had	stopped	to
watch	the	sudden,	no	doubt	impromptu	martial	demonstration	was	of	course
obligatory,	given	the	complex	rules	of	courtship.	Mayen	was	expected	to	treat
all	of	Fear ’s	brothers	with	appropriate	respect.
Although	there	was	nothing	untoward	in	the	scene	Trull	looked	upon,	he
nevertheless	felt	a	tremor	of	unease.	Rhulad’s	eagerness	to	strut	before	the
woman	who	would	be	his	eldest	brother ’s	wife	had	crept	to	the	very	edge	of
proper	conduct.	Fear	was,	in	Trull’s	opinion,	displaying	far	too	much
indulgence	when	it	came	to	Rhulad.
As	have	we	all.	Of	course,	there	were	reasons	for	that.
Rhulad	had	clearly	bested	his	childhood	companion	in	the	mock	contest,
given	the	flushed	pride	in	his	handsome	face.	‘Trull!’	He	waved	his	sword.	‘I
have	drawn	blood	once	this	day,	and	now	thirst	for	more!	Come,	scrape	the
rust	off	that	sword	at	your	side!’
‘Some	other	time,	brother,’	Trull	called	back.	‘I	must	speak	with	our	father
without	delay.’
Rhulad’s	grin	was	amiable	enough,	but	even	from	ten	paces	away	Trull
saw	the	flash	of	triumph	in	his	clear	grey	eyes.	‘Another	time,	then,’	he	said,
with	a	final	dismissive	wave	of	his	sword	as	he	turned	back	to	face	the	women.
But	Mayen	had	gestured	to	her	companions	and	the	party	was	already
moving	off.
Rhulad	opened	his	mouth	to	say	something	to	her,	but	Trull	spoke	first.
‘Brother,	I	invite	you	to	join	me.	The	news	I	must	give	our	father	is	of	grave


import,	and	I	would	that	you	are	present,	so	that	your	words	are	woven	into	the
discussion	that	will	follow.’	An	invitation	that	was	normally	made	only	to	those
warriors	with	years	of	battle	on	their	belts,	and	Trull	saw	the	sudden	pride
lighting	his	brother ’s	eyes.
‘I	am	honoured,	Trull,’	he	said,	sheathing	his	sword.
Leaving	Midik	standing	alone	and	tending	to	a	sword-cut	on	his	wrist,
Rhulad	joined	Trull	and	they	strode	to	the	family	longhouse.
Trophy	shields	cluttered	the	outside	walls,	many	of	them	sun-faded	by	the
centuries.	Whale	bones	clung	to	the	underside	of	the	roof’s	overhang.	Totems
stolen	from	rival	tribes	formed	a	chaotic	arch	over	the	doorway,	the	strips	of
fur,	beaded	hide,	shells,	talons	and	teeth	looking	like	an	elongated	bird’s	nest.
They	passed	within.
The	air	was	cool,	slightly	acrid	with	woodsmoke.	Oil	lamps	sat	in	niches
along	the	walls,	between	tapestries	and	stretched	furs.	The	traditional
hearthstone	in	the	centre	of	the	chamber,	where	each	family	had	once	prepared
its	meals,	remained	stoked	with	tinder,	although	the	slaves	now	worked	in
kitchens	behind	the	longhouse	proper,	to	reduce	the	risk	of	fires.	Blackwood
furniture	marked	out	the	various	rooms,	although	no	dividing	walls	were
present.	Hung	from	hooks	on	the	crossbeams	were	scores	of	weapons,	some
from	the	earliest	days,	when	the	art	of	forging	iron	had	been	lost	in	the	dark
times	immediately	following	Father	Shadow’s	disappearance,	the	rough
bronze	of	these	weapons	pitted	and	warped.
Just	beyond	the	hearthstone	rose	the	bole	of	a	living	Blackwood,	from
which	the	gleaming	upper	third	of	a	longsword	thrust	upward	and	outward	at
just	above	head	height:	a	true	Emurlahn	blade,	the	iron	treated	in	some	manner
the	smiths	had	yet	to	rediscover.	The	sword	of	the	Sengar	family,	signifier	of
their	noble	bloodline;	normally,	these	original	weapons	of	the	noble	families,
bound	against	the	tree	when	it	was	but	a	sapling,	were,	after	centuries,	gone
from	sight,	lying	as	they	did	along	the	heartwood.	But	some	twist	in	this
particular	tree	had	pried	the	weapon	away,	thus	revealing	that	black	and	silver
blade.	Uncommon,	but	not	unique.
Both	brothers	reached	out	and	touched	the	iron	as	they	passed.
They	saw	their	mother,	Uruth,	flanked	by	slaves	as	she	worked	on	the
bloodline’s	tapestry,	finishing	the	final	scenes	of	the	Sengar	participation	in	the
War	of	Unification.	Intent	on	her	work,	she	did	not	look	up	as	her	sons	strode
past.
Tomad	Sengar	sat	with	three	other	noble-born	patriarchs	around	a	game
board	fashioned	from	a	huge	palmate	antler,	the	playing	pieces	carved	from
ivory	and	jade.


Trull	halted	at	the	edge	of	the	circle.	He	settled	his	right	hand	over	the
pommel	of	his	sword,	signifying	that	the	words	he	brought	were	both	urgent
and	potentially	dangerous.	Behind	him,	he	heard	Rhulad’s	quickly	indrawn
breath.
Although	none	of	the	elders	looked	up,	Tomad’s	guests	rose	as	one,	while
Tomad	himself	began	putting	away	the	game	pieces.	The	three	elders	departed
in	silence,	and	a	moment	later	Tomad	set	the	game	board	to	one	side	and
settled	back	on	his	haunches.
Trull	settled	down	opposite	him.	‘I	greet	you,	Father.	A	Letherii	fleet	is
harvesting	the	Calach	beds.	The	herds	have	come	early,	and	are	now	being
slaughtered.	I	witnessed	these	things	with	my	own	eyes,	and	have	not	paused	in
my	return.’
Tomad	nodded.	‘You	have	run	for	three	days	and	two	nights,	then.’
‘I	have.’
‘And	the	Letherii	harvest,	it	was	well	along?’
‘Father,	by	dawn	this	morning,	Daughter	Menandore	will	have	witnessed
the	ships’	holds	filled	to	bursting,	and	the	sails	filling	with	wind,	the	wake	of
every	ship	a	crimson	river.’
‘And	new	ships	arriving	to	take	their	places!’	Rhulad	hissed.
Tomad	frowned	at	his	youngest	son’s	impropriety,	and	made	his
disapproval	clear	with	his	next	words.	‘Rhulad,	take	this	news	to	Hannan
Mosag.’
Trull	sensed	his	brother ’s	flinch,	but	Rhulad	nodded.	‘As	you	command,
Father.’	He	pivoted	and	marched	away.
Tomad’s	frown	deepened.	‘You	invited	an	unblooded	warrior	to	this
exchange?’
‘I	did,	Father.’
‘Why?’
Trull	said	nothing,	as	was	his	choice.	He	was	not	about	to	voice	his
concern	over	Rhulad’s	undue	attentions	towards	Fear ’s	betrothed.
After	a	moment,	Tomad	sighed.	He	seemed	to	be	studying	his	large,
scarred	hands	where	they	rested	on	his	thighs.	‘We	have	grown	complacent,’	he
rumbled.
‘Father,	is	it	complacency	to	assume	the	ones	with	whom	we	treat	are
honourable?’
‘Yes,	given	the	precedents.’
‘Then	why	has	the	Warlock	King	agreed	to	a	Great	Meeting	with	the
Letherii?’
Tomad’s	dark	eyes	flicked	up	to	pin	Trull’s	own.	Of	all	Tomad’s	sons,


only	Fear	possessed	a	perfect,	unwavering	match	to	his	father ’s	eyes,	in	hue
and	indurative	regard.	Despite	himself,	Trull	felt	himself	wilt	slightly	beneath
that	scornful	gaze.
‘I	withdraw	my	foolish	question,’	Trull	said,	breaking	contact	to	disguise
his	dismay.	A	measuring	of	enemies.	This	contravention,	no	matter	its	original
intent,	will	become	a	double-pointed	blade,	given	the	inevitable	response	to	it
by	the	Edur.	A	blade	both	peoples	shall	grasp.	‘The	unblooded	warriors	will	be
pleased.’
‘The	unblooded	warriors	shall	one	day	sit	in	the	council,	Trull.’
‘Is	that	not	the	reward	of	peace,	Father?’
Tomad	made	no	reply	to	that.	‘Hannan	Mosag	shall	call	the	council.	You
must	needs	be	present	to	relate	what	you	witnessed.	Further,	the	Warlock	King
has	made	a	request	of	me,	that	I	give	my	sons	to	him	for	a	singular	task.	I	do
not	think	that	decision	will	be	affected	by	the	news	you	deliver.’
Trull	worked	through	his	surprise,	then	said,	‘I	passed	Binadas	on	the	way
into	the	village—’
‘He	has	been	informed,	and	will	return	within	a	moon’s	time.’
‘Does	Rhulad	know	of	this?’
‘No,	although	he	will	accompany	you.	An	unblooded	is	an	unblooded.’
‘As	you	say,	Father.’
‘Now,	rest.	You	shall	be	awakened	in	time	for	the	council.’
	
A	white	crow	hopped	down	from	a	salt-bleached	root	and	began	picking
through	the	midden.	At	first	Trull	had	thought	it	to	be	a	gull,	lingering	on	the
strand	in	the	fast-fading	light,	but	then	it	cackled	and,	mussel	shell	in	its	pallid
beak,	sidled	down	from	the	midden	towards	the	waterline.
Sleep	had	proved	an	impossibility.	The	council	had	been	called	for
midnight.	Restless,	nerves	jangling	along	his	exhausted	limbs,	Trull	had
walked	down	to	the	pebble	beach	north	of	the	village	and	the	river	mouth.
And	now,	as	darkness	rolled	in	with	the	sleepy	waves,	he	had	found	himself
sharing	the	strand	with	a	white	crow.	It	had	carried	its	prize	down	to	the	very
edge,	and	with	each	whispering	approach,	the	bird	dipped	the	mussel	shell	into
the	water.	Six	times.
A	fastidious	creature,	Trull	observed,	watching	as	the	crow	hopped	onto	a
nearby	rock	and	began	picking	at	the	shell.
White	was	evil,	of	course.	Common	enough	knowledge.	The	blush	of
bone,	Menandore’s	hateful	light	at	dawn.	The	sails	of	the	Letherii	were	white,
as	well,	which	was	not	surprising.	And	the	clear	waters	of	Calach	Bay	would


reveal	the	glimmer	of	white	cluttering	the	sea	bottom,	from	the	bones	of
thousands	of	slaughtered	seals.
This	season	would	have	marked	a	return	to	surplus	for	the	six	tribes,
beginning	the	replenishment	of	depleted	reserves	to	guard	against	famine.
Thoughts	that	led	him	to	another	way	of	seeing	this	illegal	harvesting.	A
perfectly	timed	gesture	to	weaken	the	confederacy,	a	ploy	intended	to
undermine	the	Edur	position	at	the	Great	Meeting.	The	argument	of
inevitability.	The	same	argument	first	thrown	into	our	faces	with	the	settlements
on	the	Reach.	‘The	kingdom	of	Lether	is	expanding,	its	needs	growing.	Your
camps	on	the	Reach	were	seasonal,	after	all,	and	with	the	war	they	had	been	all
but	abandoned.’
It	was	inevitable	that	more	and	more	independent	ships	would	come	to	ply
the	rich	waters	of	the	north	coast.	One	could	not	police	them	all.	The	Edur	need
only	look	at	other	tribes	that	had	once	dwelt	beyond	the	Letherii	borderlands,
the	vast	rewards	that	came	with	swearing	fealty	to	King	Ezgara	Diskanar	of
Lether.
But	we	are	not	as	other	tribes.
The	crow	cackled	from	atop	its	stone	throne,	flinging	the	mussel	shell
away	with	a	toss	of	its	head,	then,	spreading	its	ghostly	wings,	rose	up	into	the
night.	A	final	drawn	out	cawl	from	the	darkness.	Trull	made	a	warding	gesture.
Stones	turned	underfoot	behind	him	and	he	swung	about	to	see	his	elder
brother	approaching.
‘I	greet	you,	Trull,’	Fear	said	in	a	quiet	voice.	‘The	words	you	delivered
have	roused	the	warriors.’
‘And	the	Warlock	King?’
‘Has	said	nothing.’
Trull	returned	to	his	study	of	the	dark	waves	hissing	on	the	strand.	‘Their
eyes	are	fixed	upon	those	ships,’	he	said.
‘Hannan	Mosag	knows	to	look	away,	brother.’
‘He	has	asked	for	the	sons	of	Tomad	Sengar.	What	do	you	know	of	that?’
Fear	was	at	his	side	now,	and	Trull	sensed	his	shrug.	‘Visions	have	guided
the	Warlock	King	since	he	was	a	child,’	Fear	said	after	a	moment.	‘He	carries
blood	memories	all	the	way	back	to	the	Dark	Times.	Father	Shadow	stretches
before	him	with	every	stride	he	takes.’
The	notion	of	visions	made	Trull	uneasy.	He	did	not	doubt	their	power—in
fact,	the	very	opposite.	The	Dark	Times	had	come	with	the	rivening	of	Tiste
Edur,	the	assault	of	sorceries	and	strange	armies	and	the	disappearance	of
Father	Shadow	himself.	And,	although	the	magic	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	was	not
denied	to	the	tribes,	the	warren	was	lost	to	them:	shattered,	the	fragments	ruled


by	false	kings	and	gods.	Trull	suspected	that	Hannan	Mosag	possessed	an
ambition	far	vaster	than	simply	unifying	the	six	tribes.
‘There	is	reluctance	in	you,	Trull.	You	hide	it	well	enough,	but	I	can	see
where	others	cannot.	You	are	a	warrior	who	would	rather	not	fight.’
‘That	is	not	a	crime,’	Trull	muttered,	then	he	added:	‘Of	all	the	Sengar,
only	you	and	Father	carry	more	trophies.’
‘I	was	not	questioning	your	bravery,	brother.	But	courage	is	the	least	of
that	which	binds	us.	We	are	Edur.	We	were	masters	of	the	Hounds,	once.	We
held	the	throne	of	Kurald	Emurlahn.	And	would	hold	it	still,	if	not	for	betrayal,
first	by	the	kin	of	Scabandari	Bloodeye,	then	by	the	Tiste	Andii	who	came	with
us	to	this	world.	We	are	a	beset	people,	Trull.	The	Letherii	are	but	one	enemy
among	many.	The	Warlock	King	understands	this.’
Trull	studied	the	glimmer	of	starlight	on	the	placid	surface	of	the	bay.	‘I
will	not	hesitate	in	fighting	those	who	would	be	our	enemies,	Fear.’
‘That	is	good,	brother.	It	is	enough	to	keep	Rhulad	silent,	then.’
Trull	stiffened.	‘He	speaks	against	me?	That	unblooded…pup?’
‘Where	he	sees	weakness…’
‘What	he	sees	and	what	is	true	are	different	things,’	Trull	said.
‘Then	show	him	otherwise,’	Fear	said	in	his	low,	calm	voice.
Trull	was	silent.	He	had	been	openly	dismissive	of	Rhulad	and	his	endless
challenges	and	postures,	as	was	his	right	given	that	Rhulad	was	unblooded.	But
more	significantly,	Trull’s	reasons	were	raised	like	a	protective	wall	around
the	maiden	that	Fear	was	to	wed.	Of	course,	to	voice	such	things	now	would	be
unseemly,	whispering	as	they	would	of	spite	and	malice.	After	all,	Mayen	was
Fear ’s	betrothed,	not	Trull’s,	and	her	protection	was	Fear ’s	responsibility.
Things	would	be	simpler,	he	ruefully	reflected,	if	he	had	a	sense	of	Mayen
herself.	She	did	not	invite	Rhulad’s	attention,	but	nor	did	she	turn	a	shoulder	to
it.	She	walked	the	cliff-edge	of	propriety,	as	self-assured	as	any	maiden	would
—and	should—be	when	privileged	to	become	the	wife	of	the	Hiroth’s	Weapons
Master.	It	was	not,	he	told	himself	once	again,	any	of	his	business.	‘I	will	not
show	Rhulad	what	he	should	already	see,’	Trull	growled.	‘He	has	done	nothing
to	warrant	the	gift	of	my	regard.’
‘Rhulad	lacks	the	subtlety	to	see	your	reluctance	as	anything	but	weakness
—’
‘His	failing,	not	mine!’
‘Do	you	expect	a	blind	elder	to	cross	a	stream’s	stepping	stones	unaided,
Trull?	No,	you	guide	him	until	in	his	mind’s	eye	he	finally	sees	that	which
everyone	else	can	see.’
‘If	everyone	else	can	see,’	Trull	replied,	‘then	Rhulad’s	words	against	me


are	powerless,	and	so	I	am	right	to	ignore	them.’
‘Brother,	Rhulad	is	not	alone	in	lacking	subtlety.’
‘Is	it	your	wish,	Fear,	that	there	be	enemies	among	the	sons	of	Tomad
Sengar?’
‘Rhulad	is	not	an	enemy,	not	of	you	not	of	any	other	Edur.	He	is	young	and
eager	for	blood.	You	once	walked	his	path,	so	I	ask	that	you	remember
yourself	back	then.	This	is	not	the	time	to	deliver	wounds	sure	to	scar.	And,	to
an	unblooded	warrior,	disdain	delivers	the	deepest	wound	of	all.’
Trull	grimaced.	‘I	see	the	truth	of	that,	Fear.	I	shall	endeavour	to	curtail	my
indifference.’
His	brother	did	not	react	to	the	sarcasm.	‘The	council	is	gathering	in	the
citadel,	brother.	Will	you	enter	the	King’s	Hall	at	my	side?’
Trull	relented.	‘I	am	honoured,	Fear.’
They	turned	away	from	the	black	water,	and	so	did	not	see	the	pale-winged
shape	gliding	over	the	lazy	waves	a	short	distance	offshore.
	
Thirteen	years	ago	Udinaas	had	been	a	young	sailor	in	the	third	year	of	his
family’s	indenture	to	the	merchant	Intaros	of	Trate,	the	northernmost	city	of
Lether.	He	was	aboard	the	whaler	Brunt	and	on	the	return	run	from	Beneda
waters.	They	had	slipped	in	under	cover	of	darkness,	killing	three	sows,	and
were	towing	the	carcasses	into	the	neutral	Troughs	west	of	Calach	Bay	when
five	K’orthan	ships	of	the	Hiroth	were	sighted	in	hard	pursuit.
The	captain’s	greed	had	spelled	their	doom,	as	he	would	not	abandon	the
kills.
Udinaas	well	remembered	the	faces	of	the	whaler ’s	officers,	the	captain
included,	as	they	were	bound	to	one	of	the	sows	to	be	left	to	the	sharks	and
dhenrabi,	whilst	the	common	sailors	were	taken	off	the	ship,	along	with	every
piece	of	iron	and	every	other	item	that	caught	the	Edur ’s	fancy.	Shadow	wraiths
were	then	loosed	on	the	Brunt,	to	devour	and	tear	apart	the	dead	wood	of	the
Letherii	ship.	Towing	the	other	two	sows,	the	five	Blackwood	K’orthan	ships
then	departed,	leaving	the	third	whale	to	the	slayers	of	the	deep.
Even	back	then,	Udinaas	had	been	indifferent	to	the	grisly	fate	of	the
captain	and	his	officers.	He	had	been	born	into	debt,	as	had	his	father	and	his
father	before	him.	Indenture	and	slavery	were	two	words	for	the	same	thing.
Nor	was	life	as	a	slave	among	the	Hiroth	particularly	harsh.	Obedience	was
rewarded	with	protection,	clothing	and	a	dwelling	sheltered	from	the	rain	and
snow,	and,	until	recently,	plenty	of	food.
Among	Udinaas’s	many	tasks	within	the	household	of	the	Sengar	was	the


repair	of	nets	for	the	four	Knarri	fisherboats	owned	by	the	noble	family.
Because	he	had	been	a	sailor,	he	was	not	permitted	to	leave	land,	and	knotting
the	nets	and	affixing	weight-stones	down	on	the	strand	south	of	the	river	mouth
was	as	close	as	he	ever	came	to	the	open	waters	of	the	sea.	Not	that	he	had	any
desire	to	escape	the	Edur.	There	were	plenty	of	slaves	in	the	village—all
Letherii,	of	course—so	he	did	not	miss	the	company	of	his	own	kind,
miserable	as	it	often	was.	Nor	were	the	comforts	of	Lether	sufficient	lure	to
attempt	what	was	virtually	impossible	anyway—he	had	memory	of	seeing	such
comforts,	but	never	of	partaking	in	them.	And	finally,	Udinaas	hated	the	sea
with	a	passion,	just	as	he	had	done	when	he	was	a	sailor.
In	the	failing	light	he	had	seen	the	two	eldest	sons	of	Tomad	Sengar	on	the
beach	on	the	other	side	of	the	river	mouth,	and	was	not	surprised	to	hear	the
faint,	indistinguishable	words	they	exchanged.	Letherii	ships	had	struck	again
—the	news	had	raced	among	the	slaves	before	young	Rhulad	had	even	reached
the	entrance	of	the	citadel.	A	council	had	been	called,	which	was	to	be	expected,
and	Udinaas	assumed	that	there	would	be	slaughter	before	too	long,	that
deadly,	terrifying	merging	of	iron-edged	ferocity	and	sorcery	that	marked
every	clash	with	the	Letherii	of	the	south.	And,	truth	be	told,	Udinaas	wished
them	good	hunting.	Seals	taken	by	the	Letherii	threatened	famine	among	the
Edur,	and	in	famine	it	was	the	slaves	who	were	the	first	to	suffer.
Udinaas	well	understood	his	own	kind.	To	the	Letherii,	gold	was	all	that
mattered.	Gold	and	its	possession	defined	their	entire	world.	Power,	status,
self-worth	and	respect—all	were	commodities	that	could	be	purchased	by	coin.
Indeed,	debt	bound	the	entire	kingdom,	defining	every	relationship,	the
motivation	casting	the	shadow	of	every	act,	every	decision.	This	devious
hunting	of	the	seals	was	the	opening	move	in	a	ploy	the	Letherii	had	used
countless	times,	against	every	tribe	beyond	the	borderlands.	To	the	Letherii,	the
Edur	were	no	different.	But	they	are,	you	fools.
Even	so,	the	next	move	would	come	at	the	Great	Meeting,	and	Udinaas
suspected	that	the	Warlock	King	and	his	advisers,	clever	as	they	were,	would
walk	into	that	treaty	like	blind	elders.	What	worried	him	was	all	that	would
follow.
Like	hatchlings	borne	on	the	tide,	the	peoples	of	two	kingdoms	were
rushing	headlong	into	deep,	deadly	waters.	Three	slaves	from	the	Buhn
household	trotted	past,	bundles	of	bound	seaweed	on	their	shoulders.	One
called	out	to	Udinaas,	‘Feather	Witch	will	cast	tonight,	Udinaas!	Even	as	the
council	gathers.’
Udinaas	began	folding	the	net	over	the	drying	rack.	‘I	will	be	there,	Hulad.’
The	three	left	the	strand,	and	Udinaas	was	alone	once	more.	He	glanced


north	and	saw	Fear	and	Trull	walking	up	the	slope	towards	the	outer	wall’s
postern	gate.
Finished	with	the	net,	he	placed	his	tools	in	the	small	basket	and	fastened
the	lid,	then	straightened.
He	heard	the	flap	of	wings	behind	him	and	turned,	startled	by	the	sound	of
a	bird	in	flight	so	long	after	the	sun	had	set.	A	pale	shape	skimmed	the
waterline,	and	was	gone.
Udinaas	blinked,	straining	to	see	it	again,	telling	himself	that	it	was	not
what	it	had	appeared	to	be.	Not	that.	Anything	but	that.	He	moved	to	his	left	to	a
bare	patch	of	sand.	Crouching,	he	quickly	sketched	an	invoking	sigil	into	the
sand	with	the	small	finger	of	his	left	hand,	lifting	his	right	hand	to	his	face,
first	two	fingers	reaching	to	his	eyes	to	pull	the	lids	down	for	a	brief	moment,
as	he	whispered	a	prayer,	‘Knuckles	cast,	Saviour	look	down	upon	me	this
night.	Errant!	Look	down	upon	us	all!’
He	lowered	his	right	hand	and	dropped	his	gaze	to	the	symbol	he	had
drawn.
‘Crow,	begone!’
The	sigh	of	wind,	the	murmur	of	waves.	Then	a	distant	cackle.
Shivering,	Udinaas	bolted	upright.	Snatching	up	the	basket,	he	ran	for	the
gate.
	
The	King’s	Meet	was	a	vast,	circular	chamber,	the	Blackwood	boles	of	the
ceiling	reaching	up	to	a	central	peak	lost	in	smoke.	Unblooded	warriors	of
noble	birth	stood	at	the	very	edge,	the	outermost	ring	of	those	attending	to
witness	the	council.	Next,	and	seated	on	backed	benches,	were	the	matrons,	the
wedded	and	widowed	women.	Then	came	the	unwedded	and	the	betrothed,
cross-legged	on	hides.	A	pace	before	them,	the	floor	dropped	an	arm’s	length
to	form	a	central	pit	of	packed	earth	where	sat	the	warriors.	At	the	very	centre
was	a	raised	dais,	fifteen	paces	across,	where	stood	the	Warlock	King,	Hannan
Mosag,	with	the	five	hostage	princes	seated	around	him,	facing	outward.
As	Trull	and	Fear	descended	to	the	pit	to	take	their	place	among	the
blooded	warriors,	Trull	stared	up	at	his	king.	Of	average	height	and	build,
Hannan	Mosag	seemed	unprepossessing	at	first	glance.	His	features	were	even,
a	shade	paler	than	most	Edur,	and	there	was	a	wide	cast	to	his	eyes	that	gave
him	a	perpetually	surprised	look.	The	power,	then,	was	not	physical.	It	lay
entirely	in	his	voice.	Rich	and	deep,	it	was	a	voice	that	demanded	to	be	listened
to	without	regard	to	volume.
Standing	in	silence,	as	he	did	now,	Hannan	Mosag’s	claim	to	kingship


seemed	a	mere	accident	of	placement,	as	if	he	had	wandered	into	the	centre	of
the	huge	chamber,	and	now	looked	about	with	a	vaguely	bemused	expression.
His	clothing	was	no	different	from	that	of	any	other	warriors,	barring	the
absence	of	trophies—for	his	trophies,	after	all,	were	seated	around	him	on	the
dais,	the	first	sons	of	the	five	subjugated	chiefs.
A	more	concerted	study	of	the	Warlock	King	revealed	another	indication
of	his	power.	His	shadow	reared	behind	him.	Huge,	hulking.	Long,	indistinct
but	deadly	swords	gripped	in	both	gauntleted	hands.	Helmed,	the	shoulders
angular	with	plates	of	armour.	Hannan	Mosag’s	shadow	wraith	bodyguard
never	slept.	There	was,	Trull	reflected,	nothing	bemused	in	its	wide	stance.
Few	warlocks	were	capable	of	conjuring	such	a	creature	when	drawing
from	the	life-force	of	their	own	shadows.	Kurald	Emurlahn	flowed	raw	and
brutal	in	that	silent,	ever-vigilant	sentinel.
Trull’s	gaze	fell	to	those	of	the	hostages	facing	him.	The	K’risnan.	More
than	representatives	of	their	fathers,	they	were	Hannan	Mosag’s	apprentices	in
sorcery.	Their	names	had	been	stripped	from	them,	the	new	ones	chosen	in
secret	by	their	master	and	bound	with	spells.	One	day,	they	would	return	to
their	tribes	as	chiefs.	And	their	loyalty	to	their	king	would	be	absolute.
The	hostage	from	the	Merude	tribe	was	directly	opposite	Trull.	Largest	of
the	six	tribes,	the	Merude	had	been	the	last	to	capitulate.	They	had	always
maintained	that,	with	their	numbers	approaching	one	hundred	thousand,	forty
thousand	of	which	were	blooded	or	soon-to-be-blooded	warriors,	they	should
by	right	have	held	pre-eminence	among	the	Edur.	More	warriors,	more	ships,
and	ruled	by	a	chief	with	more	trophies	at	his	belt	than	had	been	seen	in
generations.	Domination	belonged	to	the	Merude.
Or	it	should	have,	if	not	for	Hannan	Mosag’s	extraordinary	mastery	of
those	fragments	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	from	which	power	could	be	drawn.	Chief
Hanradi	Khalag’s	skill	with	the	spear	far	outweighed	his	capacity	as	a	warlock.
No-one	but	Hannan	Mosag	and	Hanradi	Khalag	knew	the	details	of	that
final	surrendering.	Merude	had	been	holding	strong	against	the	Hiroth	and
their	contingents	of	Arapay,	Sollanta,	Den-Ratha	and	Beneda	warriors,	and	the
ritual	constraints	of	the	war	were	fast	unravelling,	in	their	place	an	alarming
brutality	born	of	desperation.	The	ancient	laws	had	been	on	the	verge	of
shattering.
One	night,	Hannan	Mosag	had	walked,	somehow	unseen	by	anyone,	into
the	chief’s	village,	into	the	ruler ’s	own	longhouse.	And	by	the	first	light	of
Menandore’s	cruel	awakening,	Hanradi	Khalag	had	surrendered	his	people.
Trull	did	not	know	what	to	make	of	the	tales	that	persisted,	that	Hanradi	no
longer	cast	a	shadow.	He	had	never	seen	the	Merude	chief.


That	man’s	first	son	now	sat	before	him,	head	shaved	to	denote	the
sundering	from	his	bloodline,	a	skein	of	deep-cut,	wide	scars	ribboning	his
face	with	shadows,	his	eyes	flat	and	watchful,	as	if	anticipating	an	assassination
attempt	here	in	the	Warlock	King’s	own	hall.
The	oil	lamps	suspended	from	the	high	ceiling	flickered	as	one,	and
everyone	grew	still,	eyes	fixing	on	Hannan	Mosag.
Though	he	did	not	raise	his	voice,	its	deep	timbre	reached	across	the	vast
space,	leaving	none	with	the	necessity	to	strain	to	hear	his	words.	‘Rhulad,
unblooded	warrior	and	son	of	Tomad	Sengar,	has	brought	to	me	words	from
his	brother,	Trull	Sengar.	This	warrior	had	travelled	to	the	Calach	shore
seeking	jade.	He	was	witness	to	a	dire	event,	and	has	run	without	pause	for
three	days	and	two	nights.’	Hannan	Mosag’s	eyes	fixed	on	Trull.	‘Rise	to	stand
at	my	side,	Trull	Sengar,	and	relate	your	tale.’
He	walked	the	path	the	other	warriors	made	for	him	and	leapt	up	onto	the
raised	dais,	fighting	to	disguise	the	exhaustion	in	his	legs	that	made	him	come
close	to	sagging	with	the	effort.	Straightening,	he	stepped	between	two
K’risnan	and	positioned	himself	to	the	right	of	the	Warlock	King.	He	looked
out	onto	the	array	of	upturned	faces,	and	saw	that	what	he	would	say	was
already	known	to	most	of	them.	Expressions	dark	with	anger	and	a	hunger	for
vengeance.	Here	and	there,	frowns	of	concern	and	dismay.
‘I	bring	these	words	to	the	council.	The	tusked	seals	have	come	early	to	the
breeding	beds.	Beyond	the	shallows	I	saw	the	sharks	that	leap	in	numbers
beyond	counting.	And	in	their	midst,	nineteen	Letherii	ships—’
‘Nineteen!’
A	half-hundred	voices	uttered	that	cry	in	unison.	An	uncharacteristic
breach	of	propriety,	but	understandable	none	the	less.	Trull	waited	a	moment,
then	resumed.	‘Their	holds	were	almost	full,	for	they	sat	low	in	the	water,	and
the	waters	around	them	were	red	with	blood	and	offal.	Their	harvest	boats
were	alongside	the	great	ships.	In	the	fifty	heartbeats	that	I	stood	and	watched,	I
was	witness	to	hundreds	of	seal	carcasses	rising	on	hooks	to	swing	into
waiting	hands.	On	the	strand	itself	twenty	boats	waited	in	the	shallows	and
seventy	men	were	on	the	beach,	among	the	seals—’
‘Did	they	see	you?’	one	warrior	asked.
It	seemed	Hannan	Mosag	was	prepared	to	ignore	the	rules—for	the	time
being	at	least.
‘They	did,	and	checked	their	slaughter…for	a	moment.	I	saw	their	mouths
move,	though	I	could	not	hear	their	words	above	the	roar	of	the	seals,	and	I
saw	them	laugh—’
Rage	erupted	among	the	gathering.	Warriors	leapt	upright.


Hannan	Mosag	snapped	out	a	hand.
Sudden	silence.
‘Trull	Sengar	is	not	yet	finished	his	tale.’
Clearing	his	throat,	Trull	nodded.	‘You	see	me	before	you	now,	warriors,
and	those	of	you	who	know	me	will	also	know	my	preferred	weapon—the
spear.	When	have	you	seen	me	without	my	iron-hafted	slayer	of	foes?	Alas,	I
have	surrendered	it…in	the	chest	of	the	one	who	first	laughed.’
A	roar	answered	his	words.
Hannan	Mosag	settled	a	hand	on	Trull’s	shoulder,	and	the	young	warrior
stepped	aside.	The	Warlock	King	scanned	the	faces	before	him	for	a	moment,
then	spoke.	‘Trull	Sengar	did	as	every	warrior	of	the	Edur	would	do.	His	deed
has	heartened	me.	Yet	here	he	now	stands,	weaponless.’
Trull	stiffened	beneath	the	weight	of	that	hand.
‘And	so,	in	measured	thought,	such	as	must	be	made	by	a	king,’	Hannan
Mosag	went	on,	‘I	find	I	must	push	my	pride	to	one	side,	and	look	beyond	it.
To	what	is	signified.	A	thrown	spear.	A	dead	Letherii.	A	disarmed	Edur.	And
now,	I	see	upon	the	faces	of	my	treasured	warriors	a	thousand	flung	spears,	a
thousand	dead	Letherii.	A	thousand	disarmed	Edur.’
No-one	spoke.	No-one	countered	with	the	obvious	retort:	We	have	many
spears.
‘I	see	the	hunger	for	vengeance.	The	Letherii	raiders	must	be	slain.	Even	as
prelude	to	the	Great	Meeting,	for	their	slaying	was	desired.	Our	reaction	was
anticipated,	for	these	are	the	games	the	Letherii	would	play	with	our	lives.
Shall	we	do	as	they	intended?	Of	course.	There	can	be	but	one	answer	to	their
crime.	And	thus,	by	our	predictability,	we	serve	an	unknown	design,	which
shall	no	doubt	be	unveiled	at	the	Great	Meeting.’
Deep-etched	frowns.	Undisguised	confusion.	Hannan	Mosag	had	led	them
into	the	unfamiliar	territory	of	complexity.	He	had	brought	them	to	the	edge	of
an	unknown	path,	and	now	would	lead	them	forward,	step	by	tentative	step.
‘The	raiders	will	die,’	the	Warlock	King	resumed,	‘but	not	one	of	you	shall
spill	their	blood.	We	do	as	predicted,	but	in	a	manner	they	could	not	imagine.
There	will	be	a	time	for	slaughter	of	the	Letherii,	but	this	is	not	that	time.	Thus,
I	promise	you	blood,	my	warriors.	But	not	now.	The	raiders	shall	not	know	the
honour	of	dying	at	your	hands.	Their	fates	shall	be	found	within	Kurald
Emurlahn.’
Despite	himself,	Trull	Sengar	shivered.
Silence	once	more	in	the	hall.
‘A	full	unveiling,’	Hannan	Mosag	continued	in	a	rumble,	‘by	my	K’risnan.
No	weapon,	no	armour,	shall	avail	the	Letherii.	Their	mages	will	be	blind	and


lost,	incapable	of	countering	that	which	arrives	to	take	them.	The	raiders	will
die	in	pain	and	in	terror.	Soiled	by	fear,	weeping	like	children—and	that	fate
will	be	writ	on	their	faces,	there	for	those	who	find	them.’
Trull’s	heart	was	pounding,	his	mouth	bone-dry.	A	full	unveiling.	What
long-lost	power	had	Hannan	Mosag	stumbled	upon?	The	last	full	unveiling	of
Kurald	Emurlahn	had	been	by	Scabandari	Bloodeye,	Father	Shadow	himself.
Before	the	warren	had	been	sundered.	And	that	sundering	had	not	healed.	It
would,	Trull	suspected,	never	be	healed.	Even	so,	some	fragments	were	vaster
and	more	powerful	than	others.	Had	the	Warlock	King	discovered	a	new	one?
	
Faded,	battered	and	chipped,	the	ceramic	tiles	lay	scattered	before	Feather
Witch.	The	casting	was	done,	even	as	Udinaas	stumbled	into	the	mote-filled
barn	to	bring	word	of	the	omen—to	warn	the	young	slave	woman	away	from	a
scanning	of	the	Holds.	Too	late.	Too	late.
A	hundred	slaves	had	gathered	for	the	event,	fewer	than	was	usual,	but	not
surprising,	since	many	Edur	warriors	would	have	charged	their	own	slaves
with	tasks	of	preparation	for	the	anticipated	skirmish.	Heads	turned	as	Udinaas
entered	the	circle.	His	eyes	remained	fixed	on	Feather	Witch.
Her	soul	had	already	walked	well	back	on	the	Path	to	the	Holds.	Her	head
drooped,	chin	between	the	prominent	bones	of	her	clavicles,	thick	yellow	hair
hanging	down,	and	rhythmic	trembling	ran	through	her	small,	child-like	body.
Feather	Witch	had	been	born	in	the	village	eighteen	years	ago,	a	rare	winter
birth—rare	in	that	she	had	survived—and	her	gifts	had	become	known	before
her	fourth	year,	when	her	dreams	walked	back	and	spoke	in	the	voices	of	the
ancestors.	The	old	tiles	of	the	Holds	had	been	dug	up	from	the	grave	of	the	last
Letherii	in	the	village	who’d	possessed	the	talent,	and	given	to	the	child.	There
had	been	none	to	teach	her	the	mysteries	of	those	tiles,	but,	as	it	turned	out,
she’d	needed	no	instruction	from	mortals—ghostly	ancestors	had	provided
that.
She	was	a	handmaid	to	Mayen,	and,	upon	Mayen’s	marriage	to	Fear
Sengar,	she	would	enter	the	Sengar	household.	And	Udinaas	was	in	love	with
her.
Hopeless,	of	course.	Feather	Witch	would	be	given	a	husband	from	among
the	better	born	of	the	Letherii	slaves,	a	man	whose	bloodline	held	title	and
power	back	in	Letheras.	An	Indebted,	such	as	Udinaas,	had	no	hope	of	such	a
pairing.
As	he	stood	staring	at	her,	his	friend	Hulad	reached	up	and	took	his	wrist.
Gentle	pressure	drew	Udinaas	down	to	a	cross-legged	position	amidst	the


other	witnesses.
Hulad	leaned	close.	‘What	ails	you,	Udinaas?’
‘She	has	cast…’
‘Aye,	and	now	we	wait	while	she	walks.’
‘I	saw	a	white	crow.’
Hulad	flinched	back.
‘Down	on	the	strand.	I	beseeched	the	Errant,	to	no	avail.	The	crow	but
laughed	at	my	words.’
Their	exchange	had	been	overheard,	and	murmurs	rippled	out	among	the
witnesses.
Feather	Witch’s	sudden	moan	silenced	the	gathering.	All	eyes	fixed	upon
her,	as	she	slowly	raised	her	head.
Her	eyes	were	empty,	the	whites	clear	as	the	ice	on	a	mountain	stream,	iris
and	pupils	vanished	as	if	they	had	never	been.	And	through	the	translucence
swam	twin	spirals	of	faint	light,	smeared	against	the	blackness	of	the	Abyss.
Terror	twisted	her	once-beautiful	features,	the	terror	of	Beginnings,	the
soul	standing	before	oblivion.	A	place	of	such	loneliness	that	despair	seemed
the	only	answer.	Yet	it	was	also	the	place	where	power	was	thought,	and
thought	flickered	through	the	Abyss	bereft	of	Makers,	born	from	flesh	yet	to
exist—for	only	the	mind	could	reach	back	into	the	past,	only	its	thoughts	could
dwell	there.	She	was	in	the	time	before	the	worlds,	and	now	must	stride
forward.
To	witness	the	rise	of	the	Holds.
Udinaas,	like	all	Letherii,	knew	the	sequences	and	the	forms.	First	would
come	the	three	Fulcra	known	as	the	Realm	Forgers.	Fire,	the	silent	scream	of
light,	the	very	swirl	of	the	stars	themselves.	Then	Dolmen,	bleak	and	rootless,
drifting	aimless	in	the	void.	And	into	the	path	of	these	two	forces,	the	Errant.
Bearer	of	its	own	unknowable	laws,	it	would	draw	Fire	and	Dolmen	into	fierce
wars.	Vast	fields	of	destructions,	instance	upon	instance	of	mutual	annihilation.
But	occasionally,	rarely,	there	would	be	peace	made	between	the	two
contestants.	And	Fire	would	bathe	but	not	burn,	and	Dolmen	would	surrender
its	wandering	ways,	and	so	find	root.
The	Errant	would	then	weave	its	mysterious	skein,	forging	the	Holds
themselves.	Ice.	Eleint.	Azath.	Beast.	And	into	their	midst	would	emerge	the
remaining	Fulcra.	Axe,	Knuckles,	Blade,	the	Pack,	Shapefinder	and	White
Crow.
Then,	as	the	realms	took	shape,	the	spiralling	light	would	grow	sharper,
and	the	final	Hold	would	be	revealed.	The	Hold	that	had	existed,	unseen,	at	the
very	beginning.	The	Empty	Hold—heart	of	Letherii	worship—that	was	at	the


very	centre	of	the	vast	spiral	of	realms.	Home	to	the	Throne	that	knew	no
King,	home	to	the	Wanderer	Knight,	and	to	the	Mistress	who	waited	still,	alone
in	her	bed	of	dreams.	To	the	Watcher,	who	witnessed	all,	and	the	Walker,	who
patrolled	borders	not	even	he	could	see.	To	the	Saviour,	whose	outstretched
hand	was	never	grasped.	And,	finally,	to	the	Betrayer,	whose	loving	embrace
destroyed	all	it	touched.
‘Walk	with	me	to	the	Holds.’
The	witnesses	sighed	as	one,	unable	to	resist	that	sultry,	languid	invitation.
‘We	stand	upon	Dolmen.	Broken	rock,	pitted	by	shattered	kin,	its	surface
seething	with	life	so	small	it	escapes	our	eyes.	Life	locked	in	eternal	wars.
Blade	and	Knuckles.	We	are	among	the	Beasts.	I	can	see	the	Bone	Perch,	slick
with	blood	and	layered	with	the	ghost	memories	of	countless	usurpers.	I	see	the
Elder,	still	faceless,	still	blind.	And	Crone,	who	measures	the	cost	in	the
scrawling	passage	of	behemoths.	Seer,	who	speaks	to	the	indifferent.	I	see
Shaman,	seeking	truths	among	the	dead.	And	Hunter,	who	lives	in	the	moment
and	thinks	nothing	of	the	consequences	of	slaughter.	And	Tracker,	who	sees	the
signs	of	the	unknown,	and	walks	the	endless	paths	of	tragedy.	The	Hold	of	the
Beast,	here	in	this	valley	that	is	but	a	scratch	upon	Dolmen’s	hard	skin.
‘There	is	no-one	upon	Bone	Perch.	Chaos	hones	every	weapon,	and	the
killing	goes	on	and	on.	And	from	the	maelstrom	powerful	creatures	arise,	and
the	slaying	reaches	beyond	measure.
‘Such	powers	must	be	answered.	The	Errant	returns,	and	casts	the	seed	into
blood-soaked	earth.	Thus	rises	the	Hold	of	the	Azath.
‘Deadly	shelter	for	the	tyrants,	oh	they	are	so	easily	lured.	And	so	balance
is	achieved.	But	it	remains	a	grisly	balance,	yes?	No	cessation	to	the	wars,
although	they	are	much	diminished,	so	that,	finally,	their	cruel	ways	come	into
focus.’
Her	voice	was	like	sorcery	unbound.	Its	rough-edged	song	entranced,
devoured,	unveiled	vistas	into	the	minds	of	all	those	who	heard	it.	Feather
Witch	had	walked	from	the	terror	of	the	Beginnings,	and	there	was	no	fear	in
her	words.
‘But	the	tread	of	time	is	itself	a	prison.	We	are	shackled	with	progression.
And	so	the	Errant	comes	once	more,	and	the	Ice	Hold	rises,	with	its	attendant
servants	who	journey	through	the	realms	to	war	against	time.	Walker,	Huntress,
Shaper,	Bearer,	Child	and	Seed.	And	upon	the	Throne	of	Ice	sits	Death,	cowled
and	frostrimed,	stealer	of	caring,	to	shatter	the	anxious	shackles	of	mortal	life.
It	is	a	gift,	but	a	cold	one.
‘Then,	to	achieve	balance	once	more,	is	born	the	Eleint,	and	chaos	is	given
flesh,	and	that	flesh	is	draconic.	Ruled	by	the	Queen,	who	must	be	slain	again


and	again	by	every	child	she	bears.	And	her	Consort,	who	loves	none	but
himself.	Then	Liege,	servant	and	guardian	and	doomed	to	eternal	failure.
Knight,	the	very	sword	of	chaos	itself—’ware	his	path!	And	Gate,	that	which	is
the	Breath.	Wyval,	spawn	of	the	dragons,	and	the	Lady,	the	Sister,	BloodDrinker	and	Path-Shaper.	The	Fell	Dragons.
‘One	Hold	remains…’
Udinaas	spoke	with	the	others	as	they	whispered,	‘The	Empty	Hold.’
Feather	Witch	tilted	her	head	suddenly,	a	frown	marring	her	forehead.
‘Something	circles	above	the	Empty	Throne.	I	cannot	see	it,	yet	it…circles.	A
pallid	hand,	severed	and	dancing…no,	it	is—’
She	stiffened,	then	red	spurted	from	wounds	on	her	shoulders,	and	she	was
lifted	from	the	ground.
Screams,	the	witnesses	surging	to	their	feet,	rushing	forward,	arms
outstretched.
But	too	late,	as	invisible	talons	clenched	tighter	and	invisible	wings
thundered	the	dusty	air	of	the	barn.	Carrying	Feather	Witch	into	the	shadows
beneath	the	curved	ceiling.	She	shrieked.
Udinaas,	heart	hammering	in	his	chest,	pushed	away,	through	the	jostling
bodies,	to	the	wooden	stairs	reaching	to	the	loft.	Splinters	stabbed	his	hands	as
he	clawed	his	way	up	the	steep,	rough-hewn	steps.	Feather	Witch’s	shrieks
filled	the	air	now,	as	she	thrashed	in	the	grip	of	the	unseen	talons.	But	crows
have	no	talons—
He	reached	the	loft,	skidding	as	he	raced	across	its	uneven	planks,	eyes
fixed	on	Feather	Witch,	then,	one	step	from	the	edge,	he	leapt	into	the	air.	Arms
outstretched,	he	sailed	over	the	heads	of	the	crowd	below.
His	target	was	the	swirling	air	above	her,	the	place	where	the	invisible
creature	hovered.	And	when	he	reached	that	place,	he	collided	hard	with	a
massive,	scaled	body.	Leathery	wings	hammered	wildly	at	him	as	he	wrapped
his	arms	tight	about	a	clammy,	muscle-clenched	body.	He	heard	a	wild	hiss,
then	a	jaw	snapped	down	over	his	left	shoulder.	Needle-like	teeth	punched
through	his	skin,	sank	deep	into	his	flesh.
Udinaas	grunted.
A	Wyval,	spawn	of	Eleint—
With	his	left	hand,	he	scrabbled	for	the	net-hook	at	his	belt.
The	beast	tore	at	his	shoulder,	and	blood	gushed	out.
He	found	the	tool’s	worn	wooden	grip,	dragged	the	hooked	blade	free.	Its
inner	edge	was	honed	sharp,	used	to	trim	knots.	Twisting	round,	teeth	clenched
in	an	effort	to	ignore	the	lizard	jaws	slashing	his	shoulder	again	and	again
until	little	more	than	shreds	remained,	Udinaas	chopped	downward	to	where	he


thought	one	of	the	Wyval’s	legs	must	be.	Solid	contact.	He	ripped	the	inside
edge	of	the	blade	into	the	tendons.
The	creature	screamed.
And	released	Feather	Witch.
She	plummeted	into	the	mass	of	upraised	arms	below.
Talons	hammered	against	Udinaas’s	chest,	punched	through.
He	slashed,	cutting	deep.	The	leg	spasmed	back.
Jaws	drew	away,	then	snapped	home	once	again,	this	time	round	his	neck.
Net-hook	fell	from	twitching	hand.	Blood	filled	his	mouth	and	nose.
Darkness	writhed	across	his	vision—and	he	heard	the	Wyval	scream	again,
this	time	in	terror	and	pain,	the	sound	emanating	from	its	nostrils	in	hot	gusts
down	his	back.	The	jaws	ripped	free.
And	Udinaas	was	falling.
And	knew	nothing	more.
	
The	others	were	filing	out	when	Hannan	Mosag	touched	Trull’s	shoulder.
‘Stay,’	he	murmured.	‘Your	brothers	as	well.’
Trull	watched	his	fellow	warriors	leave	in	small	groups.	They	were
troubled,	and	more	than	one	hardened	face	revealed	a	flash	of	dismay	when
casting	a	final	parting	glance	back	at	the	Warlock	King	and	his	K’risnan.	Fear
had	moved	up	to	stand	close	by,	Rhulad	following.	Fear ’s	expression	was
closed—nothing	surprising	there—while	Rhulad	seemed	unable	to	keep	still,
his	head	turning	this	way	and	that,	one	hand	dancing	on	the	pommel	of	the
sword	at	his	hip.
A	dozen	heartbeats	later	and	they	were	alone.
Hannan	Mosag	spoke.	‘Look	at	me,	Trull	Sengar.	I	would	you	understand
—I	intended	no	criticism	of	your	gesture.	I	too	would	have	driven	my	spear
into	that	Letherii	in	answer	to	his	jest.	I	made	sore	use	of	you,	and	for	that	I
apologize—’
‘There	is	no	need,	sire,’	Trull	replied.	‘I	am	pleased	that	you	found	in	my
actions	a	fulcrum	by	which	you	could	shift	the	sentiments	of	the	council.’
The	Warlock	King	cocked	his	head.	‘Fulcrum.’	He	smiled,	but	it	was
strained.	‘Then	we	shall	speak	no	more	of	it,	Trull	Sengar.’	He	fixed	his
attention	next	upon	Rhulad,	and	his	voice	hardened	slightly	as	he	said,	‘Rhulad
Sengar,	unblooded,	you	attend	me	now	because	you	are	a	son	of	Tomad…and
my	need	for	his	sons	includes	you.	I	expect	you	to	listen,	not	speak.’
Rhulad	nodded,	suddenly	pale.
Hannan	Mosag	stepped	between	two	of	his	K’risnan—who	had	yet	to


relinquish	their	vigilant	positions—and	led	the	three	sons	of	Tomad	down
from	the	dais.	‘I	understand	that	Binadas	wanders	once	more.	He	knows	no
anchor,	does	he?	Ah,	well,	there	is	no	diminishment	in	that.	You	will	have	to
apprise	your	brother	upon	his	return	of	all	that	I	tell	you	this	night.’
They	entered	the	Warlock	King’s	private	chamber.	There	was	no	wife
attending,	nor	any	slaves.	Hannan	Mosag	lived	simply,	with	only	his	shadow
sentinel	for	company.	The	room	was	sparse,	severe	in	its	order.
‘Three	moons	past,’	the	Warlock	King	began,	turning	to	face	them,	‘my
soul	travelled	when	I	slept,	and	was	witness	to	a	vision.	I	was	on	a	plain	of
snow	and	ice.	Beyond	the	lands	of	the	Arapay,	east	and	north	of	the	Hungry
Lake.	But	in	the	land	that	is	ever	still,	something	had	risen.	A	violent	birth,	a
presence	demanding	and	stern.	A	spire	of	ice.	Or	a	spear—I	could	not	close
with	it—but	it	towered	high	above	the	snows,	glittering,	blinding	with	all	the
sun’s	light	it	had	captured.	Yet	something	dark	waited	in	its	heart.’	His	eyes	had
lost	their	focus,	and	Trull	knew,	with	a	shiver,	that	his	king	was	once	more	in
that	cold,	forlorn	place.	‘A	gift.	For	the	Edur.	For	the	Warlock	King.’	He	was
silent	then.
No-one	spoke.
Abruptly,	Hannan	Mosag	reached	out	and	gripped	Fear ’s	shoulder,	gaze
sharpening	on	Trull’s	older	brother.	‘The	four	sons	of	Tomad	Sengar	shall
journey	to	that	place.	To	retrieve	this	gift.	You	may	take	two	others—I	saw	the
tracks	of	six	in	my	vision,	leading	towards	that	spire	of	ice.’
Fear	spoke.	‘Theradas	and	Midik	Buhn.’
The	Warlock	King	nodded.	‘Well	chosen,	yes.	Fear	Sengar,	I	charge	you	as
leader	of	this	expedition.	You	are	my	will	and	shall	not	be	disobeyed.	Neither
you	nor	any	other	in	your	party	must	touch	the	gift.	Your	flesh	must	not	make
contact	with	it,	is	that	understood?	Retrieve	it	from	the	spire,	wrap	it	in	hides	if
that	is	possible,	and	return	here.’
Fear	nodded.	‘It	will	be	as	you	command,	sire.’
‘Good.’	He	scanned	the	three	brothers.	‘It	is	the	belief	of	many—perhaps
even	you—that	the	unification	of	the	tribes	was	my	singular	goal	as	leader	of
the	Hiroth.	Sons	of	Tomad,	know	that	it	is	but	the	beginning.’
All	of	a	sudden	a	new	presence	was	in	the	room,	sensed	simultaneously	by
the	king	and	the	brothers,	and	they	turned	as	one	to	the	entrance.
A	K’risnan	stood	in	the	threshold.
Hannan	Mosag	nodded.	‘The	slaves,’	he	muttered,	‘have	been	busy	this
night.	Come,	all	of	you.’
	


Shadow	wraiths	had	gathered	round	his	soul,	for	soul	was	all	he	was,
motionless	and	vulnerable,	seeing	without	eyes,	feeling	without	flesh	as	the
vague,	bestial	things	closed	in,	plucking	at	him,	circling	like	dogs	around	a
turtle.
They	were	hungry,	those	shadow	spirits.	Yet	something	held	them	back,
some	deep-set	prohibition.	They	poked	and	prodded,	but	did	nothing	more.
They	scattered—reluctantly—at	the	approach	of	something,	someone,	and
Udinaas	felt	a	warm,	protective	presence	settle	at	his	side.
Feather	Witch.	She	was	whole,	her	face	luminous,	her	grey	eyes	quizzical
as	she	studied	him.	‘Son	of	Debt,’	she	said,	then	sighed.	‘They	say	you	cut	me
free.	Even	as	the	Wyval	tore	into	you.	You	cared	nothing	for	that.’	She	studied
him	for	a	moment	longer,	then	said,	‘Your	love	burns	my	eyes,	Udinaas.	What
am	I	to	do	about	this	truth?’
He	found	he	could	speak.	‘Do	nothing,	Feather	Witch.	I	know	what	is	not	to
be.	I	would	not	surrender	this	burden.’
‘No.	I	see	that.’
‘What	has	happened?	Am	I	dying?’
‘You	were.	Uruth,	wife	to	Tomad	Sengar,	came	in	answer	to	our…distress.
She	drew	upon	Kurald	Emurlahn,	and	has	driven	the	Wyval	away.	And	now	she
works	healing	upon	us	both.	We	lie	side	by	side,	Udinaas,	on	the	blood-soaked
earth.	Unconscious.	She	wonders	at	our	reluctance	to	return.’
‘Reluctance?’
‘She	finds	she	struggles	to	heal	our	wounds—I	am	resisting	her,	for	us
both.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	I	am	troubled.	Uruth	senses	nothing.	Her	power	feels	pure	to	her.
Yet	it	is…stained.’
‘I	do	not	understand.	You	said	Kurald	Emurlahn—’
‘Aye.	But	it	has	lost	its	purity.	I	do	not	know	how,	or	what,	but	it	has
changed.	Among	all	the	Edur,	it	is	changed.’
‘What	are	we	to	do?’
She	sighed.	‘Return,	now.	Yield	to	her	command.	Offer	our	gratitude	for
her	intervention,	for	the	healing	of	our	torn	flesh.	And	in	answer	to	the	many
questions	she	has,	we	can	say	little.	It	was	confused.	Battle	with	an	unknown
demon.	Chaos.	And	of	this	conversation,	Udinaas,	we	will	say	nothing.	Do	you
understand?’
‘I	do.’
She	reached	down	and	he	felt	her	hand	close	about	his—suddenly	he	was
whole	once	more—and	its	warmth	flowed	through	him.


He	could	hear	his	heart	now,	thundering	in	answer	to	that	touch.	And
another	heart,	distant	yet	quickly	closing,	beating	in	time.	But	it	was	not	hers,
and	Udinaas	knew	terror.
	
His	mother	stepped	back,	the	knot	of	her	brow	beginning	to	unclench.	‘They
approach,’	she	said.
Trull	stared	down	at	the	two	slaves.	Udinaas,	from	his	own	household.	And
the	other,	one	of	Mayen’s	servants,	the	one	they	knew	as	Feather	Witch	for	her
divinatory	powers.	The	blood	still	stained	the	puncture	holes	in	their	shirts,	but
the	wounds	themselves	had	closed.	Another	kind	of	blood	was	spilled	across
Udinaas’s	chest,	gold	and	glistening	still.
‘I	should	outlaw	these	castings,’	Hannan	Mosag	growled.	‘Permitting
Letherii	sorcery	in	our	midst	is	a	dangerous	indulgence.’
‘Yet	there	is	value,	High	King,’	Uruth	said,	and	Trull	could	see	that	she	was
still	troubled.
‘And	that	is,	wife	of	Tomad?’
‘A	clarion	call,	High	King,	which	we	would	do	well	to	heed.’
Hannan	Mosag	grimaced.	‘There	is	Wyval	blood	upon	the	man’s	shirt.	Is
he	infected?’
‘Possibly,’	Uruth	conceded.	‘Much	of	that	which	passes	for	a	soul	in	a
Letherii	is	concealed	from	my	arts,	High	King.’
‘A	failing	that	plagues	us	all,	Uruth,’	the	Warlock	King	said,	granting	her
great	honour	by	using	her	true	name.	‘This	one	must	be	observed	at	all	times,’
he	continued,	eyes	on	Udinaas.	‘If	there	is	Wyval	blood	within	him,	the	truth
shall	be	revealed	eventually.	To	whom	does	he	belong?’
Tomad	Sengar	cleared	his	throat.	‘He	is	mine,	Warlock	King.’
Hannan	Mosag	frowned,	and	Trull	knew	he	was	thinking	of	his	dream,	and
of	his	decision	to	weave	into	its	tale	the	Sengar	family.	There	were	few
coincidences	in	the	world.	The	Warlock	King	spoke	in	a	harder	voice.	‘This
Feather	Witch,	she	is	Mayen’s,	yes?	Tell	me,	Uruth,	could	you	sense	her	power
when	you	healed	her?’
Trull’s	mother	shook	her	head.	‘Unimpressive.	Or…’
‘Or	what?’
Uruth	shrugged.	‘Or	she	hid	it	well,	despite	her	wounds.	And	if	that	is	the
case,	then	her	power	surpasses	mine.’
Impossible.	She	is	Letherii.	A	slave	and	still	a	virgin.
Hannan	Mosag’s	grunt	conveyed	similar	sentiments.	‘She	was	assailed	by	a
Wyval,	clearly	a	creature	that	proved	far	beyond	her	ability	to	control.	No,	the


child	stumbles.	Poorly	instructed,	ignorant	of	the	vastness	of	all	with	which	she
would	play.	See,	she	only	now	regains	awareness.’
Feather	Witch’s	eyes	fluttered	open,	revealing	little	comprehension,	and
that	quickly	overwhelmed	by	animal	terror.
Hannan	Mosag	sighed.	‘She	will	be	of	no	use	to	us	for	a	time.	Leave	them
in	the	care	of	Uruth	and	the	other	wives.’	He	faced	Tomad	Sengar.	‘When
Binadas	returns…’
Tomad	nodded.
Trull	glanced	over	at	Fear.	Behind	him	knelt	the	slaves	that	had	attended	the
casting,	heads	pressed	to	the	earth	and	motionless,	as	they	had	been	since
Uruth’s	arrival.	It	seemed	Fear ’s	hard	eyes	were	fixed	upon	something	no-one
else	could	see.
When	Binadas	returns…the	sons	of	Tomad	will	set	forth.	Into	the	ice	wastes.
A	sickly	groan	from	Udinaas.
The	Warlock	King	ignored	it	as	he	strode	from	the	barn,	his	K’risnan
flanking	him,	his	shadow	sentinel	trailing	a	step	behind.	At	the	threshold,	that
monstrous	wraith	paused	of	its	own	accord,	for	a	single	glance	back—though
there	was	no	way	to	tell	upon	whom	it	fixed	its	shapeless	eyes.
Udinaas	groaned	a	second	time,	and	Trull	saw	the	slave’s	limbs	trembling.
At	the	threshold,	the	wraith	was	gone.


Chapter	Two

Mistress	to	these	footprints,
Lover	to	the	wake	of	where
He	has	just	passed,
for	the	path	he	wanders
is	between	us	all.
The	sweet	taste	of	loss
feeds	every	mountain	stream,
Failing	ice	down	to	seas
warm	as	blood
threading	thin	our	dreams.
For	where	he	leads	her
has	lost	its	bones,
And	the	trail	he	walks
is	flesh	without	life
and	the	sea	remembers	nothing.
LAY	OF	THE	ANCIENT	HOLDS
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
A	glance	back.	In	the	misty	haze	far	below	and	to	the	west	glimmered	the
innermost	extent	of	Reach	Inlet,	the	sky’s	pallid	reflection	thorough	in
disguising	that	black,	depthless	water.	On	all	other	sides,	apart	from	the	stony
trail	directly	behind	Seren	Pedac,	reared	jagged	mountains,	the	snow-clad
peaks	gilt	by	a	sun	she	could	not	see	from	where	she	stood	at	the	south	end	of
the	saddle	pass.
The	wind	rushing	past	her	stank	of	ice,	the	winter ’s	lingering	breath	of
cold	decay.	She	drew	her	furs	tighter	and	swung	round	to	gauge	the	progress
of	the	train	on	the	trail	below.
Three	solid-wheeled	wagons,	pitching	and	clanking.	The	swarming,	bare-


backed	figures	of	the	Nerek	tribesmen	as	they	flowed	in	groups	around	each
wagon,	the	ones	at	the	head	straining	on	ropes,	the	ones	at	the	rear	advancing
the	stop-blocks	to	keep	the	awkward	conveyances	from	rolling	backward.
In	those	wagons,	among	other	trade	goods,	were	ninety	ingots	of	iron,
thirty	to	each	wagon.	Not	the	famed	Letherii	steel,	of	course,	since	sale	of	that
beyond	the	borders	was	forbidden,	but	of	the	next	highest	quality	grade,
carbon-tempered	and	virtually	free	of	impurities.	Each	ingot	was	as	long	as
Seren’s	arm,	and	twice	as	thick.
The	air	was	bitter	cold	and	thin.	Yet	those	Nerek	worked	half	naked,	the
sweat	steaming	from	their	slick	skins.	If	a	stop-block	failed,	the	nearest
tribesman	would	throw	his	own	body	beneath	the	wheel.
And	for	this,	Buruk	the	Pale	paid	them	two	docks	a	day.
Seren	Pedac	was	Buruk’s	Acquitor,	granted	passage	into	Edur	lands,	one	of
seven	so	sanctioned	by	the	last	treaty.	No	merchant	could	enter	Edur	territory
unless	guided	by	an	Acquitor.	The	bidding	for	Seren	Pedac	and	the	six	others
had	been	high.	And,	for	Seren,	Buruk’s	had	been	highest	of	all,	and	now	he
owned	her.	Or,	rather,	he	owned	her	services	as	guide	and	finder—a	distinction
of	which	he	seemed	increasingly	unmindful.
But	this	was	the	contract’s	sixth	year.	Only	four	remaining.
Maybe.
She	turned	once	more,	and	studied	the	pass	ahead.	They	were	less	than	a
hundred	paces’	worth	of	elevation	from	the	treeline.	Knee-high,	centuries-old
dwarf	oaks	and	spruce	flanked	the	uneven	path.	Mosses	and	lichens	covered	the
enormous	boulders	that	had	been	dragged	down	by	the	rivers	of	ice	in	ages
past.	Crusted	patches	of	snow	remained,	clinging	to	shadowed	places.	Here	the
wind	moved	nothing,	not	the	wiry	spruce,	not	even	the	crooked,	leafless
branches	of	the	oaks.	Against	such	immovable	stolidity,	it	could	only	howl.
The	first	wagon	clattered	onto	level	ground	behind	her,	Nerek	tongues
shouting	as	it	was	quickly	rolled	ahead,	past	Seren	Pedac,	and	anchored	in
place.	The	tribesmen	then	rushed	back	to	help	their	fellows	still	on	the	ascent.
The	squeal	of	a	door,	and	Buruk	the	Pale	clambered	out	from	the	lead
wagon.	He	stood	with	his	stance	wide,	as	if	struggling	to	regain	the	memory	of
balance,	turning	with	a	wince	from	the	frigid	wind,	reaching	up	to	keep	his
furlined	cap	on	his	head	as	he	blinked	over	at	Seren	Pedac.
‘I	shall	etch	this	vision	against	the	very	bone	of	my	skull,	blessed	Acquitor!
There	to	join	a	host	of	others,	of	course.	That	umber	cloak	of	fur,	the	stately,
primeval	grace	as	you	stand	there.	The	weathered	majesty	of	your	profile,	so
deftly	etched	by	these	wild	heights.
‘You—Nerek!	Find	your	foreman—we	shall	camp	here.	Meals	must	be


prepared.	Unload	those	bundles	of	wood	in	the	third	wagon.	I	want	a	fire,	there,
in	the	usual	place.	Be	on	with	it!’
Seren	Pedac	set	her	pack	down	and	made	her	way	along	the	path.	The	wind
quickly	dragged	Buruk’s	words	away.	Thirty	paces	on,	she	came	to	the	first	of
the	old	shrines,	a	widening	of	the	trail,	where	level	stretches	of	scraped
bedrock	reached	out	to	the	sides	and	the	walls	of	the	flanking	mountains	had
been	cut	sheer.	On	each	flat,	boulders	had	been	positioned	to	form	the	fullsized	outline	of	a	ship,	both	prow	and	stern	pointed	and	marked	by	upright
menhirs.	The	prow	stones	had	been	carved	into	a	likeness	of	the	Edur	god,
Father	Shadow,	but	the	winds	had	ground	the	details	away.	Whatever	had
originally	occupied	these	two	flanking	ships	had	long	vanished,	although	the
bedrock	within	was	strangely	stained.
The	sheer	walls	of	rock	alone	retained	something	of	their	ancient	power.
Smooth	and	black,	they	were	translucent,	in	the	manner	of	thin,	smoky
obsidian.	And	shapes	moved	behind	them.	As	if	the	mountains	had	been
hollowed	out,	and	each	panel	was	a	kind	of	window,	revealing	a	mysterious,
eternal	world	within.	A	world	oblivious	of	all	that	surrounded	it,	beyond	its
own	borders	of	impenetrable	stone,	and	of	these	strange	panels,	either	blind	or
indifferent.
The	translucent	obsidian	defied	Seren’s	efforts	to	focus	on	the	shapes
moving	on	the	other	side,	as	it	had	the	past	score	of	times	she	had	visited	this
site.	But	that	very	mystery	was	itself	an	irresistible	lure,	drawing	her	again	and
again.
Stepping	carefully	around	the	stern	of	the	ship	of	boulders,	she	approached
the	eastern	panel.	She	tugged	the	fur-lined	glove	from	her	right	hand,	reached
and	set	it	against	the	smooth	stone.	Warm,	drinking	the	stiffness	from	her
fingers,	taking	the	ache	from	the	joints.	This	was	her	secret,	the	healing	powers
she	had	discovered	when	she	first	touched	the	rock.
A	lifetime	in	these	hard	lands	stole	suppleness	from	the	body.	Bones	grew
brittle,	misshapen	with	pain.	The	endless	hard	rock	underfoot	soon	sent	shocks
through	the	spine	with	each	step	taken.	The	Nerek,	the	tribe	that,	before
kneeling	to	the	Letherii	king,	had	dwelt	in	the	range’s	easternmost	reach,
believed	that	they	were	the	children	of	a	woman	and	a	serpent,	and	that	the
serpent	dwelt	still	within	the	body,	that	gently	curved	spine,	the	stacked
knuckles	reaching	up	to	hide	its	head	in	the	centre	of	the	brain.	But	the
mountains	despised	that	serpent,	desired	only	to	drag	it	back	to	the	ground,	to
return	it	once	more	to	its	belly,	slithering	in	the	cracks	and	coiled	beneath
rocks.	And	so,	in	the	course	of	a	life,	the	serpent	was	made	to	bow,	to	bend	and
twist.


Nerek	buried	their	dead	beneath	flat	stones.
At	least,	they	used	to,	before	the	king’s	edict	forced	them	to	embrace	the
faith	of	the	Holds.
Now	they	leave	the	bodies	of	their	kin	where	they	fall.	Even	unto
abandoning	their	huts.	It	had	been	years	ago,	but	Seren	Pedac	remembered	with
painful	clarity	coming	over	a	rise	and	looking	upon	the	vast	plateau	where	the
Nerek	dwelt.	The	villages	had	lost	all	distinction,	merging	together	in	chaotic,
dispirited	confusion.	Every	third	or	fourth	hut	had	been	left	to	ruin,	makeshift
sepulchres	for	kin	that	had	died	of	disease,	old	age,	or	too	much	alcohol,	white
nectar	or	durhang.	Children	wandered	untended,	trailed	by	feral	rock	rats	that
now	bred	uncontrolled	and	had	become	too	disease-ridden	to	eat.
The	Nerek	people	were	destroyed,	and	from	that	pit	there	would	be	no
climbing	out.	Their	homeland	was	an	overgrown	cemetery,	and	the	Letherii
cities	promised	only	debt	and	dissolution.	They	were	granted	no	sympathy.	The
Letherii	way	of	life	was	hard,	but	it	was	the	true	way,	the	way	of	civilization.
The	proof	was	found	in	its	thriving	where	other	ways	stumbled	or	remained
weak	and	stilted.
The	bitter	wind	could	not	reach	Seren	Pedac	now.	The	stone’s	warmth
flowed	through	her.	Eyes	closed,	she	leaned	her	forehead	against	its
welcoming	surface.
Who	walks	in	there?	Are	they	the	ancestral	Edur,	as	the	Hiroth	claim?	If	so,
then	why	could	they	see	no	more	clearly	than	Seren	herself?	Vague	shapes,
passing	to	and	fro,	as	lost	as	those	Nerek	children	in	their	dying	villages.
She	had	her	own	beliefs,	and,	though	unpleasant,	she	held	to	them.	They	are
the	sentinels	of	futility.	Acquitors	of	the	absurd.	Reflections	of	ourselves	forever
trapped	in	aimless	repetition.	Forever	indistinct,	for	that	is	all	we	can	manage
when	we	look	upon	ourselves,	upon	our	lives.	Sensations,	memories	and
experiences,	the	fetid	soil	in	which	thoughts	take	root.	Pale	flowers	beneath	an
empty	sky.
If	she	could,	she	would	sink	into	this	wall	of	stone.	To	walk	for	eternity
among	those	formless	shapes,	looking	out,	perhaps,	every	now	and	then,	and
seeing	not	stunted	trees,	moss,	lichen	and	the	occasional	passer-by.	No,	seeing
only	the	wind.	The	ever	howling	wind.
	
She	could	hear	him	walking	long	before	he	came	into	the	flickering	circle	of
firelight.	The	sound	of	his	footfalls	awakened	the	Nerek	as	well,	huddled
beneath	tattered	furs	in	a	rough	half-circle	at	the	edge	of	the	light,	and	they
swiftly	rose	and	converged	towards	that	steady	beat.


Seren	Pedac	kept	her	gaze	fixed	on	the	flames,	the	riotous	waste	of	wood
that	kept	Buruk	the	Pale	warm	while	he	got	steadily	drunker	on	a	mix	of	wine
and	white	nectar,	and	fought	against	the	tug	at	one	corner	of	her	mouth,	that
unbidden	and	unwelcome	ironic	curl	that	expressed	bitter	amusement	at	this
impending	conjoining	of	broken	hearts.
Buruk	the	Pale	carried	with	him	secret	instructions,	a	list	long	enough	to
fill	an	entire	scroll,	from	other	merchants,	speculators	and	officials,	including,
she	suspected,	the	Royal	Household	itself.	And	whatever	those	instructions
entailed,	their	content	was	killing	the	man.	He’d	always	liked	his	wine,	but	not
with	the	seductive	destroyer,	white	nectar,	mixed	in.	That	was	this	journey’s
new	fuel	for	the	ebbing	fires	of	Buruk’s	soul,	and	it	would	drown	him	as
surely	as	would	the	deep	waters	of	Reach	Inlet.
Four	more	years.	Maybe.
The	Nerek	were	mobbing	their	visitor,	scores	of	voices	blending	into	an
eerie	murmur,	like	worshippers	beseeching	a	particularly	bemusing	god,	and
though	the	event	was	hidden	in	the	darkness	beyond	the	fire,	Seren	Pedac	could
see	it	well	enough	in	her	imagination.	He	was	trying,	only	his	eyes	revealing
his	unease	at	the	endless	embraces,	seeking	to	answer	each	one	with	something
—anything—that	could	not	be	mistaken	for	benediction.	He	was,	he	would
want	to	say,	not	a	man	worthy	of	such	reverence.	He	was,	he	would	want	to	say,
a	sordid	culmination	of	failures—just	as	they	were.	All	of	them	lost,	here	in
this	cold-hearted	world.	He	would	want	to	say—but	no,	Hull	Beddict	never	said
anything.	Not,	in	any	case,	things	so	boldly…vulnerable.
Buruk	the	Pale	had	lifted	his	head	at	the	commotion,	blinking	blearily.
‘Who	comes?’
‘Hull	Beddict,’	Seren	Pedac	answered.
The	merchant	licked	his	lips.	‘The	old	Sentinel?’
‘Yes.	Although	I	advise	you	not	to	call	him	by	that	title.	He	returned	the
King’s	Reed	long	ago.’
‘And	so	betrayed	the	Letherii,	aye.’	Buruk	laughed.	‘Poor,	honourable	fool.
Honour	demands	dishonour,	now	that	is	amusing,	isn’t	it?	Ever	seen	a
mountain	of	ice	in	the	sea?	Calving	again	and	again	beneath	the	endless
gnawing	teeth	of	salt	water.	Just	so.’	He	tilted	his	bottle	back,	and	Seren
watched	his	throat	bob.
‘Dishonour	makes	you	thirsty,	Buruk?’
He	pulled	the	bottle	down,	glaring.	Then	a	loose	smile.	‘Parched,	Acquitor.
Like	a	drowning	man	who	swallows	air.’
‘Only	it’s	not	air,	it’s	water.’
He	shrugged.	‘A	momentary	surprise.’


‘Then	you	get	over	it.’
‘Aye.	And	in	those	last	moments,	the	stars	swim	unseen	currents.’
Hull	Beddict	had	done	as	much	as	he	could	with	the	Nerek,	and	he	stepped
into	the	firelight.	Almost	as	tall	as	an	Edur.	Swathed	in	the	white	fur	of	the
north	wolf,	his	long	braided	hair	nearly	as	pale.	The	sun	and	high	winds	had
darkened	his	visage	to	the	hue	of	tanned	hide.	His	eyes	were	bleached	grey,	and
it	seemed	the	man	behind	them	was	ever	elsewhere.	And,	Seren	Pedac	well
knew,	that	place	was	not	home.
No,	as	lost	as	his	flesh	and	bones,	this	body	standing	before	us.	‘Take	some
warmth,	Hull	Beddict,’	she	said.
He	studied	her	in	his	distracted	way—a	seeming	contradiction	that	only	he
could	achieve.
Buruk	the	Pale	laughed.	‘What’s	the	point?	It’ll	never	reach	him	through
those	furs.	Hungry,	Beddict?	Thirsty?	I	didn’t	think	so.	How	about	a	woman?	I
could	spare	you	one	of	my	Nerek	half-bloods—the	darlings	wait	in	my
wagon.’	He	drank	noisily	from	his	bottle	and	held	it	out.	‘Some	of	this?	Oh
dear,	he	hides	poorly	his	disgust.’
Eyes	on	the	old	Sentinel,	Seren	asked,	‘Have	you	come	down	the	pass?	Are
the	snows	gone?’
Hull	Beddict	glanced	over	at	the	wagons.	When	he	replied,	the	words	came
awkwardly,	as	if	it	had	been	some	time	since	he	last	spoke.	‘Should	do.’
‘Where	are	you	going?’
He	glanced	at	her	once	more.	‘With	you.’
Seren’s	brows	rose.
Laughing,	Buruk	the	Pale	waved	expansively	with	his	bottle—which	was
empty	save	for	a	last	few	scattering	drops	that	hit	the	fire	with	a	hiss.	‘Oh,
welcome	company	indeed!	By	all	means!	The	Nerek	will	be	delighted.’	He
tottered	upright,	weaving	perilously	close	to	the	fire,	then,	with	a	final	wave,	he
stumbled	towards	his	wagon.
Seren	and	Hull	watched	him	leave,	and	Seren	saw	that	the	Nerek	had
returned	to	their	sleeping	places,	but	all	sat	awake,	their	eyes	glittering	with
reflected	flames	as	they	watched	the	old	Sentinel,	who	now	stepped	closer	to
the	fire	and	slowly	sat	down.	He	held	out	battered	hands	to	the	heat.
They	could	be	softer	than	they	appeared,	Seren	recalled.	The	memory	did
little	more	than	stir	long-dead	ashes,	however,	and	she	tipped	another	log	into
the	hungry	fire	before	them,	watched	the	sparks	leap	into	the	darkness.
‘He	intends	to	remain	a	guest	of	the	Hiroth	until	the	Great	Meeting?’
She	shot	him	a	look,	then	shrugged.	‘I	think	so.	Is	that	why	you’ve	decided
to	accompany	us?’


‘It	will	not	be	like	past	treaties,	this	meeting,’	he	said.	‘The	Edur	are	no
longer	divided.	The	Warlock	King	rules	unchallenged.’
‘Everything’s	changed,	yes.’
‘And	so	Diskanar	sends	Buruk	the	Pale.’
She	snorted,	kicked	back	into	the	flames	an	errant	log	that	had	rolled	out.
‘A	poor	choice.	I	doubt	he’ll	remain	sober	enough	to	manage	much	spying.’
‘Seven	merchant	houses	and	twenty-eight	ships	have	descended	upon	the
Calach	beds,’	Hull	Beddict	said,	flexing	his	fingers.
‘I	know.’
‘Diskanar ’s	delegation	will	claim	the	hunting	was	unsanctioned.	They	will
decry	the	slaughter.	Then	use	it	to	argue	that	the	old	treaty	is	flawed,	that	it
needs	to	be	revised.	For	the	lost	seals,	they	will	make	a	magnanimous	gesture
—by	throwing	gold	at	Hannan	Mosag’s	feet.’
She	said	nothing.	He	was	right,	after	all.	Hull	Beddict	knew	better	than
most	King	Ezgara	Diskanar ’s	mind—or,	rather,	that	of	the	Royal	Household,
which	wasn’t	always	the	same	thing.	‘There	is	more	to	it,	I	suspect,’	she	said
after	a	moment.
‘How	so?’
‘I	imagine	you	have	not	heard	who	will	be	leading	the	delegation.’
He	grunted	sourly.	‘The	mountains	are	silent	on	such	matters.’
She	nodded.	‘Representing	the	king’s	interests,	Nifadas.’
‘Good.	The	First	Eunuch	is	no	fool.’
‘Nifadas	will	be	sharing	command	with	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar.’
Hull	Beddict	slowly	turned	to	face	her.	‘She’s	risen	far,	then.’
‘She	has.	And	for	all	the	years	since	you	last	crossed	her	son’s	path…well,
Quillas	has	changed	little.	The	queen	keeps	him	on	a	short	leash,	with	the
Chancellor	close	at	hand	to	feed	him	sweet	treats.	It’s	rumoured	that	the
primary	holder	of	interest	in	the	seven	merchant	houses	that	defied	the	treaty	is
none	other	than	Queen	Janall	herself.’
‘And	the	Chancellor	dares	not	leave	the	palace,’	Hull	Beddict	said,	and	she
heard	the	sneer.	‘So	he	sends	Quillas.	A	mistake.	The	prince	is	blind	to	subtlety.
He	knows	his	own	ignorance	and	stupidity	so	is	ever	suspicious	of	others,
especially	when	they	say	things	he	does	not	understand.	One	cannot	negotiate
when	dragged	in	the	wake	of	emotions.’
‘Hardly	a	secret,’	Seren	Pedac	replied.	And	waited.
Hull	Beddict	spat	into	the	fire.	‘They	don’t	care.	The	queen’s	let	him	slip
the	leash.	Allowing	Quillas	to	flail	about,	to	deliver	clumsy	insults	in	the	face
of	Hannan	Mosag.	Is	this	plain	arrogance?	Or	do	they	truly	invite	war?’
‘I	don’t	know.’


‘And	Buruk	the	Pale—whose	instructions	does	he	carry?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	But	he’s	not	happy.’
They	fell	silent	then.
Twelve	years	past,	King	Ezgara	Diskanar	charged	his	favoured	Preda	of
the	Guard,	Hull	Beddict,	with	the	role	of	Sentinel.	He	was	to	journey	to	the
north	borders,	then	beyond.	His	task	was	to	study	the	tribes	who	still	dwelt	wild
in	the	mountains	and	high	forests.	Talented	warrior	though	he	was,	Hull
Beddict	had	been	naive.	What	he	had	embraced	as	a	journey	in	search	of
knowledge,	the	first	steps	towards	peaceful	co-existence,	had	in	fact	been	a
prelude	to	conquest.	His	detailed	reports	of	tribes	such	as	the	Nerek,	and	the
Faraed	and	the	Tarthenal,	had	been	pored	over	by	minions	of	Chancellor
Triban	Gnol.	Weaknesses	had	been	prised	from	the	descriptions.	And	then,	in	a
series	of	campaigns	of	subjugation,	brutally	exploited.
And	Hull	Beddict,	who	had	forged	blood-ties	with	those	fierce	tribes,	was
there	to	witness	all	his	enthusiasm	delivered.	Gifts	that	were	not	gifts	at	all,
incurring	debts,	the	debts	exchanged	for	land.	The	deadly	maze	lined	with
traders,	merchants,	seducers	of	false	need,	purveyors	of	destructive	poisons.
Defiance	answered	with	annihilation.	The	devouring	of	pride,	independence
and	self-sufficiency.	In	all,	a	war	so	profoundly	cynical	in	its	cold,	heartless
expediting	that	no	honourable	soul	could	survive	witness.	Especially	when	that
soul	was	responsible	for	it.	For	all	of	it.
And	to	this	day,	the	Nerek	worshipped	Hull	Beddict.	As	did	the	half-dozen
indebted	beggars	who	were	all	that	was	left	of	the	Faraed.	And	the	scattered
remnants	of	the	Tarthenal,	huge	and	shambling	and	drunk	in	the	pit	towns
outside	the	cities	to	the	south,	still	bore	the	three	bar	tattoos	beneath	their	left
shoulders—a	match	to	those	on	Hull’s	own	back.
He	sat	now	in	silence	beside	her,	his	eyes	on	the	ebbing	flames	of	the	dying
hearth.	One	of	his	guards	had	returned	to	the	capital,	bearing	the	King’s	Reed.
The	Sentinel	was	Sentinel	no	longer.	Nor	would	he	return	to	the	southlands.	He
had	walked	into	the	mountains.
She	had	first	met	him	eight	years	ago,	a	day	out	from	High	Fort,	reduced
to	little	more	than	a	scavenging	animal	in	the	wilds.
And	had	brought	him	back.	At	least	some	of	the	way.	Oh,	but	it	was	far	less
noble	than	it	first	seemed.	Perhaps	it	would	have	been.	Truly	noble.	Had	I	not
then	made	sore	use	of	him.
She	had	succumbed	to	her	own	selfish	needs,	and	there	was	nothing
glorious	in	that.
Seren	wondered	if	he	would	ever	forgive	her.	She	then	wondered	if	she
would	ever	forgive	herself.


‘Buruk	the	Pale	knows	all	that	I	need	to	learn,’	Hull	Beddict	said.
‘Possibly.’
‘He	will	tell	me.’
Not	of	his	own	volition,	he	won’t.	‘Regardless	of	his	instructions,’	she	said,
‘he	remains	a	small	player	in	this	game,	Hull.	Head	of	a	merchant	house
conveniently	placed	in	Trate,	with	considerable	experience	dealing	with	the
Hiroth	and	Arapay.’	And,	through	me,	legitimate	passage	into	Edur	lands.
‘Hannan	Mosag	will	send	his	warriors	after	those	ships,’	Hull	Beddict	said.
‘The	queen’s	interest	in	those	merchant	houses	is	about	to	take	a	beating.’
‘I	expect	she	has	anticipated	the	loss.’
The	man	beside	her	was	not	the	naive	youth	he	had	once	been.	But	he	was
long	removed	from	the	intricate	schemes	and	deadly	sleight	of	hand	that	was
so	much	the	lifeblood	of	the	Letherii.	She	could	sense	him	struggling	with	the
multiplicity	of	layers	of	intent	and	design	at	work	here.	‘I	begin	to	see	the	path
she	takes,’	he	said	after	a	time,	and	the	bleak	despair	in	his	voice	was	so	raw
that	she	looked	away,	blinking.
He	went	on,	‘This	is	the	curse,	then,	that	we	are	so	inclined	to	look	ahead,
ever	ahead.	As	if	the	path	before	us	should	be	any	different	from	the	one
behind	us.’
Aye,	and	it	pays	to	remind	me,	every	time	I	glance	back.
I	really	should	stop	doing	that.
	
‘Five	wings	will	buy	you	a	grovel,’	Tehol	Beddict	muttered	from	his	bed.
‘Haven’t	you	ever	wondered	how	odd	it	is?	Of	course,	every	god	should	have
a	throne,	but	shouldn’t	it	also	follow	that	every	throne	built	for	a	god	is
actually	occupied?	And	if	it	isn’t,	who	in	their	right	mind	decided	that	it	was
worthwhile	to	worship	an	empty	throne?’
Seated	on	a	low	three-legged	stool	at	the	foot	of	the	bed,	Bugg	paused	in
his	knitting.	He	held	out	and	examined	the	coarse	wool	shirt	he	was	working
on,	one	eye	squeezing	into	a	critical	squint.
Tehol’s	gaze	flicked	down	at	his	servant.	‘I’m	fairly	certain	my	left	arm	is
of	a	length	close	to,	if	not	identical	with,	that	of	my	right.	Why	do	you	persist
in	this	conceit?	You’ve	no	talent	to	speak	of,	in	much	of	anything,	come	to
think	of	it.	Probably	why	I	love	you	so	dearly,	Bugg.’
‘Not	half	as	much	as	you	love	yourself,’	the	old	man	replied,	resuming	his
knitting.
‘Well,	I	see	no	point	in	arguing	that.’	He	sighed,	wiggling	his	toes	beneath
the	threadbare	sheet.	The	wind	was	freshening,	blessedly	cool	and	only	faintly


reeking	of	the	south	shore’s	Stink	Flats.	Bed	and	stool	were	the	only	furniture
on	the	roof	of	Tehol’s	house.	Bugg	still	slept	below,	despite	the	sweltering
heat,	and	only	came	up	when	his	work	demanded	light	enough	to	see.	Saved	on
lamp	oil,	Tehol	told	himself,	since	oil	was	getting	dreadfully	expensive	now
that	the	whales	were	getting	scarce.
He	reached	down	to	the	half-dozen	dried	figs	on	the	tarnished	plate	Bugg
had	set	down	beside	him.	‘Ah,	more	figs.	Another	humiliating	trip	to	the	public
privies	awaits	me,	then.’	He	chewed	desultorily,	watching	the	monkey-like
clambering	of	the	workers	on	the	dome	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.	Purely
accidental,	this	exquisitely	unobstructed	view	of	the	distant	palace	rising	from
the	heart	of	Letheras,	and	all	the	more	satisfying	for	that,	particularly	the	way
the	nearby	towers	and	Third	Height	bridges	so	neatly	framed	King	Ezgara
Diskanar ’s	conceit.	‘Eternal	Domicile	indeed.	Eternally	unfinished.’
The	dome	had	proved	so	challenging	to	the	royal	architects	that	four	of
them	had	committed	suicide	in	the	course	of	its	construction,	and	one	had	died
tragically—if	somewhat	mysteriously—trapped	inside	a	drainage	pipe.
‘Seventeen	years	and	counting.	Looks	like	they’ve	given	up	entirely	on	that
fifth	wing.	What	do	you	think,	Bugg?	I	value	your	expert	opinion.’
Bugg’s	expertise	amounted	to	rebuilding	the	hearth	in	the	kitchen	below.
Twenty-two	fired	bricks	stacked	into	a	shape	very	nearly	cubic,	and	indeed	it
would	have	been	if	three	of	the	bricks	had	not	come	from	a	toppled
mausoleum	at	the	local	cemetery.	Grave	masons	held	to	peculiar	notions	of
what	a	brick’s	dimensions	should	be,	pious	bastards	that	they	were.
In	response	to	Tehol’s	query,	Bugg	glanced	up,	squinting	with	both	eyes.
Five	wings	to	the	palace,	the	dome	rising	from	the	centre.	Four	tiers	to
those	wings,	except	for	the	shoreside	one,	where	only	two	tiers	had	been	built.
Work	had	been	suspended	when	it	was	discovered	that	the	clay	beneath	the
foundations	tended	to	squeeze	out	to	the	sides,	like	closing	a	fist	on	a	block	of
butter.	The	fifth	wing	was	sinking.
‘Gravel,’	Bugg	said,	returning	to	his	knitting.
‘What?’
‘Gravel,’	the	old	man	repeated.	‘Drill	deep	wells	down	into	the	clay,	every
few	paces	or	so,	and	fill	’em	with	gravel,	packed	down	with	drivers.	Cap	’em
and	build	your	foundation	pillars	on	top.	No	weight	on	the	clay	means	it’s	got
no	reason	to	squirm.’
Tehol	stared	down	at	his	servant.	‘All	right.	Where	in	the	Errant’s	name	did
you	come	by	that?	And	don’t	tell	me	you,	stumbled	onto	it	trying	to	keep	our
hearth	from	wandering.’
Bugg	shook	his	head.	‘No,	it’s	not	that	heavy.	But	if	it	was,	that’s	what	I


would’ve	done.’
‘Bore	a	hole?	How	far	down?’
‘Bedrock,	of	course.	Won’t	work	otherwise.’
‘And	fill	it	with	gravel.’
‘Pounded	down	tight,	aye.’
Tehol	plucked	another	fig	from	the	plate,	brushed	dust	from	it—Bugg	had
been	harvesting	from	the	market	leavings	again.	Outwitting	the	rats	and	dogs.
‘That’d	make	for	an	impressive	cook	hearth.’
‘It	would	at	that.’
‘You	could	cook	secure	and	content	in	the	knowledge	that	the	flatstone	will
never	move,	barring	an	earthquake—’
‘Oh	no,	it’ll	handle	an	earthquake	too.	Gravel,	right?	Flexible,	you	see.’
‘Extraordinary.’	He	spat	out	a	seed.	‘What	do	you	think?	Should	I	get	out	of
bed	today,	Bugg?’
‘Got	no	reason	to—’	The	servant	stopped	short,	then	cocked	his	head,
thinking.	‘Mind	you,	maybe	you	have.’
‘Oh?	And	you’d	better	not	be	wasting	my	time	with	this.’
‘Three	women	visited	this	morning.’
‘Three	women.’	Tehol	glanced	up	at	the	nearest	Third	Height	bridge,
watched	people	and	carts	moving	across	it.	‘I	don’t	know	three	women,	Bugg.
And	if	I	did,	all	of	them	arriving	simultaneously	would	be	cause	for	terror,
rather	than	an	incidental	“oh	by	the	way”.’
‘Aye,	but	you	don’t	know	them.	Not	even	one	of	them.	I	don’t	think.	New
faces	to	me,	anyway.’
‘New?	You’ve	never	seen	them	before?	Not	even	in	the	market?	The
riverfront?’
‘No.	Might	be	from	one	of	the	other	cities,	or	maybe	a	village.	Odd
accents.’
‘And	they	asked	for	me	by	name?’
‘Well,	not	precisely.	They	wanted	to	know	if	this	was	the	house	of	the	man
who	sleeps	on	his	roof.’
‘If	they	needed	to	ask	that,	they	are	from	some	toad-squelching	village.
What	else	did	they	want	to	know?	The	colour	of	your	hair?	What	you	were
wearing	while	standing	there	in	front	of	them?	Did	they	want	to	know	their
own	names	as	well?	Tell	me,	are	they	sisters?	Do	they	share	a	single
eyebrow?’
‘Not	that	I	noticed.	Handsome	women,	as	I	recall.	Young	and	meaty.	Sounds
as	though	you’re	not	interested,	though.’
‘Servants	shouldn’t	presume.	Handsome.	Young	and	meaty.	Are	you	sure


they	were	women?’
‘Oh	yes,	quite	certain.	Even	eunuchs	don’t	have	breasts	so	large,	or	perfect,
or,	indeed,	lifted	so	high	the	lasses	could	rest	their	chins—’
Tehol	found	himself	standing	beside	the	bed.	He	wasn’t	sure	how	he	got
there,	but	it	felt	right.	‘You	finished	that	shirt,	Bugg?’
The	servant	held	it	out	once	more.	‘Just	roll	up	the	sleeve,	I	think.’
‘Finally,	I	can	go	out	in	public	once	more.	Tie	those	ends	off	or	whatever	it
is	you	do	to	them	and	give	it	here.’
‘But	I	haven’t	started	yet	on	the	trousers—’
‘Never	mind	that,’	Tehol	cut	in,	wrapping	the	bed	sheet	about	his	waist,
once,	twice,	thrice,	then	tucking	it	in	at	one	hip.	He	then	paused,	a	strange	look
stealing	across	his	features.	‘Bugg,	for	Errant’s	sake,	no	more	figs	for	a	while,
all	right?	Where	are	these	mountainously	endowed	sisters,	then?’
‘Red	Lane.	Huldo’s.’
‘The	pits	or	on	the	courtyard?’
‘Courtyard.’
‘That’s	something,	at	least.	Do	you	think	Huldo	might	have	forgotten?’
‘No.	But	he’s	been	spending	a	lot	of	time	down	at	the	Drownings.’
Tehol	smiled,	then	began	rubbing	a	finger	along	his	teeth.	‘Winnin’	or
losin’?’
‘Losing.’
‘Hah!’	He	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair	and	struck	a	casual	pose.	‘How	do	I
look?’
Bugg	handed	him	the	shirt.	‘How	you	manage	to	keep	those	muscles	when
you	do	nothing	baffles	me,’	he	said.
‘A	Beddict	trait,	dear	sad	minion	of	mine.	You	should	see	Brys,	under	all
that	armour.	But	even	he	looks	scrawny	when	compared	to	Hull.	As	the	middle
son,	I	of	course	represent	the	perfect	balance.	Wit,	physical	prowess	and	a
multitude	of	talents	to	match	my	natural	grace.	When	combined	with	my
extraordinary	ability	to	waste	it	all,	you	see,	standing	before	you,	the	exquisite
culmination.’
‘A	fine	and	pathetic	speech,’	Bugg	said	with	a	nod.
‘It	was,	wasn’t	it?	I	shall	be	on	my	way	now.’	Tehol	gestured	as	he	walked
to	the	ladder.	‘Clean	up	the	place.	We	might	have	guests	this	evening.’
‘I	will,	if	I	find	the	time.’
Tehol	paused	at	the	ragged	edge	of	the	section	of	roof	that	had	collapsed.
‘Ah	yes,	you	have	trousers	to	make—have	you	enough	wool	for	that?’
‘Well,	I	can	make	one	leg	down	all	the	way,	or	I	can	make	both	short.’
‘How	short?’


‘Pretty	short.’
‘Go	with	the	one	leg.’
‘Aye,	master.	And	then	I	have	to	find	us	something	to	eat.	And	drink.’
Tehol	turned,	hands	on	his	hips.	‘Haven’t	we	sold	virtually	everything,
sparing	one	bed	and	a	lone	stool?	So,	just	how	much	tidying	up	is	required?’
Bugg	squinted.	‘Not	much,’	he	conceded.	‘What	do	you	want	we	should	eat
tonight?’
‘Something	that	needs	cooking.’
‘Would	that	be	something	better	when	cooked,	or	something	that	has	to	be
cooked?’
‘Either	way’s	fine.’
‘How	about	wood?’
‘I’m	not	eating—’
‘For	the	hearth.’
‘Oh,	right.	Well,	find	some.	Look	at	that	stool	you’re	sitting	on—it	doesn’t
really	need	all	three	legs,	does	it?	When	scrounging	doesn’t	pay,	it’s	time	to
improvise.	I’m	off	to	meet	my	three	destinies,	Bugg.	Pray	the	Errant’s	looking
the	other	way,	will	you?’
‘Of	course.’
Tehol	made	his	way	down	the	ladder,	discovering,	in	a	moment	of	panic,
that	only	one	rung	in	three	remained.
The	ground-level	room	was	bare	except	for	a	thin	mattress	rolled	up
against	one	wall.	A	single	battered	pot	rested	on	the	hearth’s	flatstone,	which
sat	beneath	the	front-facing	window,	a	pair	of	wooden	spoons	and	bowls	on	the
floor	nearby.	All	in	all,	Tehol	reflected,	elegant	in	its	severity.
He	swung	aside	the	ratty	curtain	that	served	as	a	door,	reminding	himself
to	tell	Bugg	to	retrieve	the	door	latch	from	the	hearth-bed.	A	bit	of	polishing
and	it	might	earn	a	dock	or	two	from	Cusp	the	Tinkerer.	Tehol	stepped	outside.
He	was	in	a	narrow	aisle,	so	narrow	he	was	forced	to	sidle	sideways	out	to
the	street,	kicking	rubbish	aside	with	each	step.	Meaty	women…wish	I’d	seen
them	squeezing	their	way	to	my	door.	An	invitation	to	dinner	now	seemed
essential.	And,	mindful	host	that	he	was,	he	could	position	himself	with	a	clear
view,	and	whatever	pleasure	they	saw	on	his	face	they	could	take	for	welcome.
The	street	beyond	was	empty	save	for	three	Nerek,	a	mother	and	two	halfblood	children,	who’d	found	in	the	recessed	niche	in	the	wall	opposite	a	new
home	and	seemed	to	do	nothing	but	sleep.	He	strode	past	their	huddled	forms,
kicking	at	a	rat	that	had	been	edging	closer,	and	threaded	his	way	between	the
high-stacked	wooden	crates	that	virtually	blocked	this	end	of	the	street.	Biri’s
warehouse	was	perpetually	overstocked,	and	Biri	viewed	the	last	reach	of	Cul


Street	this	side	of	Quillas	Canal	as	his	own	personal	compound.
Chalas,	the	watchman	of	the	yard,	was	sprawled	on	a	bench	on	the	other
side,	where	Cul	opened	out	onto	Burl	Square,	his	leather-wrapped	clout	resting
on	his	thighs.	Red-shot	eyes	found	Tehol.	‘Nice	skirt,’	the	guard	said.
‘You’ve	lightened	my	step,	Chalas.’
‘Happy	to	oblige,	Tehol.’
Tehol	paused,	hands	on	hips,	and	surveyed	the	crowded	square.	‘The	city
thrives.’
‘No	change	there…exceptin’	the	last	time.’
‘Oh,	that	was	a	minor	sideways	tug,	as	far	as	currents	go.’
‘Not	to	hear	Biri	talk	of	it.	He	still	wants	your	head	salted	and	in	a	barrel
rolling	out	to	sea.’
‘Biri	always	did	run	in	place.’
Chalas	grunted.	‘It’s	been	weeks	since	you	last	came	down.	Special
occasion?’
‘I	have	a	date	with	three	women.’
‘Want	my	clout?’
Tehol	glanced	down	and	studied	the	battered	weapon.	‘I	wouldn’t	want	to
leave	you	defenceless.’
‘It’s	my	face	scares	’em	away.	Exceptin’	those	Nerek.	Got	past	me,	those
ones	did.’
‘Giving	you	trouble?’
‘No.	The	rat	count’s	way	down,	in	fact.	But	you	know	Biri.’
‘Better	than	he	knows	himself.	Remind	him	of	that,	Chalas,	if	he	starts
thinking	of	giving	them	trouble.’
‘I	will.’
Tehol	set	out,	winding	through	the	seething	press	in	the	square.	The	Down
Markets	opened	out	onto	it	from	three	sides;	a	more	decrepit	collection	of
useless	items	for	sale	Tehol	had	yet	to	see.	And	the	people	bought	in	a	frenzy,
day	after	blessed	day.	Our	civilization	thrives	on	stupidity.	And	it	only	took	a
sliver	of	cleverness	to	tap	that	idiot	vein	and	drink	deep	of	the	riches.
Comforting,	if	slightly	depressing.	The	way	of	most	grim	truths.
He	reached	the	other	side,	entered	Red	Lane.	Thirty	strides	on	and	he	came
opposite	the	arched	entrance	to	Huldo’s.	Down	the	shadowed	walkway	and
back	into	the	courtyard’s	sunlight.	A	half-dozen	tables,	all	occupied.	Repose
for	the	blissfully	ignorant	or	those	without	the	coin	to	sample	the	pits	in
Huldo’s	inner	sanctum,	where	various	sordid	activities	were	conducted	day	and
night,	said	activities	occasionally	approaching	the	artistic	expression	of	the
absurd.	One	more	example,	Tehol	reflected,	of	what	people	would	pay	for,


given	the	chance.
The	three	women	at	a	table	in	the	far	corner	stood	out	for	not	just	the
obvious	detail—they	were	the	only	women	present—but	for	a	host	of	subtler
distinctions.	Handsome	is…just	the	right	word.	If	they	were	sisters	it	was	in
sentiment	only,	and	for	the	shared	predilection	for	some	form	of	martial
vigour,	given	their	brawn,	and	the	bundled	armour	and	covered	weapons
heaped	beside	the	table.
The	one	on	the	left	was	red-haired,	the	fiery	tresses	sun-bleached	and
hanging	in	reluctant	ripples	down	onto	her	broad	shoulders.	She	was	drinking
from	a	clay-wrapped	bottle,	disdaining	or	perhaps	not	understanding	the
function	of	the	cup	that	had	accompanied	it.	Her	face	belonged	to	a	heroic
statue	lining	a	colonnade,	strong	and	smooth	and	perfect,	her	blue	eyes	casting
a	stony	regard	with	the	serene	indifference	of	all	such	statues.	Next	to	her,	and
leaning	with	both	forearms	on	the	small	tabletop,	was	a	woman	with	a	hint	of
Faraed	blood	in	her,	given	the	honeyed	hue	of	her	skin	and	the	faint	up-tilt	of
her	dark	eyes.	Her	hair	was	either	dark	brown	or	black,	and	had	been	tied	back,
leaving	clear	her	heart-shaped	face.	The	third	woman	sat	slouched	back	in	her
chair,	left	leg	tipped	out	to	one	side,	the	right	incessantly	jittering	up	and	down
—fine	legs,	Tehol	observed,	clad	in	tight	rawhide,	tanned	very	nearly	white.
Her	head	was	shaved,	the	pale	skin	gleaming.	Wide-set,	light	grey	eyes	lazily
scanning	the	other	patrons,	finally	coming	to	rest	on	Tehol	where	he	stood	at
the	courtyard’s	threshold.
He	smiled.
She	sneered.
Urul,	Huldo’s	chief	server,	edged	out	from	a	nearby	shadow	and	beckoned
Tehol	over.
He	came	as	close	as	he	dared.	‘You’re	looking…well,	Urul.	Is	Huldo
here?’
The	man’s	need	for	a	bath	was	legendary.	Patrons	gave	their	orders	with
decisive	brevity	and	rarely	called	Urul	over	for	more	wine	until	the	meal	was
finished.	He	stood	before	Tehol	now,	brow	gleaming	with	oily	sweat,	hands
fidgeting	over	the	wide	sash	of	his	belt.	‘Huldo?	No,	Errant	be	praised.	He’s	on
the	Low	Walk	at	the	Drownings.	Tehol,	those	women—they’ve	been	here	all
morning!	They	frighten	me,	the	way	they	scowl	whenever	I	get	close.’
‘Leave	them	to	me,	Urul,’	Tehol	said,	risking	a	pat	on	the	man’s	damp
shoulder.
‘You?’
‘Why	not?’	With	that,	Tehol	adjusted	his	skirt,	checked	his	sleeves,	and
threaded	his	way	between	the	tables.	Halting	before	the	three	women,	he


glanced	round	for	a	chair.	He	found	one	and	dragged	it	close,	then	settled	with
a	sigh.
‘What	do	you	want?’	asked	the	bald	one.
‘That	was	my	question.	My	servant	informs	me	that	you	visited	my
residence	this	morning.	I	am	Tehol	Beddict…the	one	who	sleeps	on	his	roof.’
Three	sets	of	eyes	fixed	on	him.
Enough	to	make	a	stalwart	warlord	wilt…but	me?	Only	slightly.
‘You?’
Tehol	scowled	at	the	bald	woman.	‘Why	does	everyone	keep	asking	that?
Yes,	me.	Now,	by	your	accent,	I’d	hazard	you’re	from	the	islands.	I	don’t	know
anyone	in	the	islands.	Accordingly,	I	don’t	know	you.	Not	to	say	I	wouldn’t	like
to,	of	course.	Know	you,	that	is.	At	least,	I	think	so.’
The	red-haired	woman	set	her	bottle	down	with	a	clunk.	‘We’ve	made	a
mistake.’
‘I’m	sorry	to	hear	that—’
‘No,’	the	bald	woman	said	to	her	companion.	‘This	is	an	affectation.	We
should	have	anticipated	a	certain	degree	of…mockery.’
‘He	has	no	trousers.’
The	dark-eyed	woman	added,	‘And	his	arms	are	lopsided.’
‘Not	quite	accurate,’	Tehol	said	to	her.	‘It’s	only	the	sleeves	that	are
somewhat	askew.’
‘I	don’t	like	him,’	she	pronounced,	crossing	her	arms.
‘You	don’t	have	to,’	the	bald	woman	said.	‘Errant	knows,	we’re	not	going
to	bed	him,	are	we?’
‘I’m	crushed.’
‘You	would	be,’	the	red-haired	woman	said,	with	an	unpleasant	smile.
‘Bed	him?	On	the	roof?	You	must	be	insane,	Shand.’
‘How	can	not	liking	him	be	unimportant?’
The	bald	woman,	the	one	named	Shand,	sighed	and	rubbed	her	eyes.
‘Listen	to	me,	Hejun.	This	is	business.	Sentiments	have	no	place	in	business—
I’ve	already	told	you	that.’
Hejun’s	arms	remained	crossed,	and	she	shook	her	head.	‘You	can’t	trust
who	you	don’t	like.’
‘Of	course	you	can!’	Shand	said,	blinking.
‘It’s	his	reputation	I’m	not	happy	with,’	said	the	third,	as	yet	unnamed,
woman.
‘Rissarh,’	Shand	said,	sighing	again,	‘it’s	his	reputation	what’s	brought	us
here.’
Tehol	clapped	his	hands.	Once,	loud	enough	to	startle	the	three	women.


‘Excellent.	Rissarh	with	the	red	hair.	Hejun,	with	Faraed	blood.	And	Shand,	no
hair	at	all.	Well,’	he	set	his	hands	on	the	table	and	rose,	‘I’m	content	with	that.
Goodbye—’
‘Sit	down!’
The	growl	was	so	menacing	that	Tehol	found	himself	seated	once	more,
the	prickle	of	sweat	beneath	his	woollen	shirt.
‘That’s	better,’	Shand	said	in	a	more	mellow	tone.	She	leaned	forward.
‘Tehol	Beddict.	We	know	all	about	you.’
‘Oh?’
‘We	even	know	why	what	happened	happened.’
‘Indeed.’
‘And	we	want	you	to	do	it	again.’
‘You	do?’
‘Yes.	Only	this	time,	you’ll	have	the	courage	to	go	through	with	it.	All	the
way.’
‘I	will?’
‘Because	we—myself,	Hejun	and	Rissarh—we’re	going	to	be	your
courage.	This	time.	Now,	let’s	get	out	of	here,	before	that	server	comes	back.
We’ve	purchased	a	building.	We	can	talk	there.	It	doesn’t	smell.’
‘Now	that’s	a	relief,’	Tehol	said.
The	three	women	rose.
He	did	not.
‘I	told	you,’	Hejun	said	to	Shand.	‘It’s	not	going	to	work.	There’s	nothing
left	in	there.	Look	at	him.’
‘It’ll	work,’	Shand	said.
‘Hejun	is,	alas,	right,’	Tehol	said.	‘It	won’t.’
‘We	know	where	the	money	went,’	Shand	said.
‘That’s	no	secret.	Riches	to	rags.	I	lost	it.’
But	Shand	shook	her	head.	‘No	you	didn’t.	Like	I	said,	we	know.	And	if	we
talk…’
‘You	keep	saying	you	know	something,’	Tehol	said,	adding	a	shrug.
‘As	you	said,’	she	replied,	smiling,	‘we’re	from	the	islands.’
‘But	not	those	islands.’
‘Of	course	not—who’d	go	there?	And	that’s	what	you	counted	on.’
Tehol	rose.	‘As	they	say,	five	wings	will	buy	you	a	grovel.	All	right,
you’ve	purchased	a	building.’
‘You’ll	do	it,’	Shand	insisted.	‘Because	if	it	comes	out,	Hull	will	kill	you.’
‘Hull?’	Finally	Tehol	could	smile.	‘My	brother	knows	nothing	about	it.’
He	savoured	the	pleasure,	then,	in	seeing	these	three	women	knocked	off


balance.	There,	now	you	know	how	it	feels.
	
‘Hull	may	prove	a	problem.’
Brys	Beddict	could	not	hold	his	gaze	on	the	man	standing	before	him.
Those	small,	placid	eyes	peering	out	from	the	folds	of	pink	flesh	seemed	in
some	way	other	than	human,	holding	so	still	that	the	Finadd	of	the	Royal	Guard
imagined	he	was	looking	into	the	eyes	of	a	snake.	A	flare-neck,	coiled	on	the
centre	of	the	river	road	when	the	rains	are	but	days	away.	Up	from	the	river,
three	times	as	long	as	a	man	is	tall,	head	resting	on	the	arm-thick	curl	of	its
body.	’Ware	the	plodding	cattle	dragging	their	carts	on	that	road.	’Ware	the
drover	stupid	enough	to	approach.
‘Finadd?’
Brys	forced	his	eyes	back	to	the	huge	man.	‘First	Eunuch,	I	am	at	a	loss	as
to	how	to	respond.	I	have	neither	seen	nor	spoken	with	my	brother	in	years.
Nor	will	I	be	accompanying	the	delegation.’
First	Eunuch	Nifadas	turned	away,	and	walked	noiselessly	to	the	highbacked	wooden	chair	behind	the	massive	desk	that	dominated	the	chamber	of
his	office.	He	sat,	the	motion	slow	and	even.	‘Be	at	ease,	Finadd	Beddict.	I	have
immense	respect	for	your	brother	Hull.	I	admire	the	extremity	of	his
conviction,	and	understand	to	the	fullest	extent	the	motivation	behind	his…
choices	in	the	past.’
‘Then,	if	you	will	forgive	me,	you	are	further	down	the	path	than	I,	First
Eunuch.	Of	my	brother—of	my	brothers—I	understand	virtually	nothing.	Alas,
it	has	always	been	so.’
Nifadas	blinked	sleepily,	then	he	nodded.	‘Families	are	odd	things,	aren’t
they?	Naturally,	my	own	experience	precludes	many	of	the	subtleties	regarding
that	subject.	Yet,	if	you	will,	my	exclusion	has,	in	the	past,	permitted	me	a
certain	objectivity,	from	which	I	have	often	observed	the	mechanisms	of	such
fraught	relationships	with	a	clear	eye.’	He	looked	up	and	fixed	Brys	once	more
with	his	regard.	‘Will	you	permit	me	a	comment	or	two?’
‘Forgive	me,	First	Eunuch—’
Nifadas	waved	him	silent	with	one	plump	hand.	‘No	need.	I	was
presumptuous.	Nor	have	I	explained	myself.	As	you	know,	preparations	are
well	along.	The	Great	Meeting	looms.	I	am	informed	that	Hull	Beddict	has
joined	Buruk	the	Pale	and	Seren	Pedac	on	the	trail	to	Hiroth	lands.	Further,	it	is
my	understanding	that	Buruk	is	charged	with	a	host	of	instructions—none
issued	by	me,	I	might	add.	In	other	words,	it	is	likely	that	those	instructions	not
only	do	not	reflect	the	king’s	interests,	but	in	fact	may	contradict	our	Sire’s


wishes.’	He	blinked	again,	slow	and	measured.	‘Precarious,	agreed.
Unwelcome,	as	well.	My	concern	is	this.	Hull	may…misunderstand…’
‘By	assuming	that	Buruk	acts	on	behalf	of	King	Diskanar,	you	mean.’
‘Just	so.’
‘He	would	then	seek	to	counter	the	merchant.’
Nifadas	sighed	his	agreement.
‘Which,’	Brys	continued,	‘is	itself	not	necessarily	a	bad	thing.’
‘True,	in	itself	not	necessarily	a	bad	thing.’
‘Unless	you	intend,	as	the	king’s	official	representative	and	nominal	head
of	the	delegation,	to	counter	the	merchant	in	your	own	way.	To	deflect	those
interests	Buruk	has	been	charged	with	presenting	to	the	Edur.’
The	First	Eunuch’s	small	mouth	hinted	at	a	smile.
Nothing	more	than	that,	yet	Brys	understood.	His	gaze	travelled	to	the
window	behind	Nifadas.	Clouds	swam	blearily	through	the	bubbled,	wavy
glass.	‘Not	Hull’s	strengths,’	he	said.
‘No,	we	are	agreed	in	that.	Tell	me,	Finadd,	what	do	you	know	of	this
Acquitor,	Seren	Pedac?’
‘Reputation	only.	But	it’s	said	she	owns	a	residence	here	in	the	capital.
Although	I	have	never	heard	if	she	visits.’
‘Rarely.	The	last	time	was	six	years	ago.’
‘Her	name	is	untarnished,’	Brys	said.
‘Indeed.	Yet	one	must	wonder…she	is	not	blind,	after	all.	Nor,	I	gather,
unthinking.’
‘I	would	imagine,	First	Eunuch,	that	few	Acquitors	are.’
‘Just	so.	Well,	thank	you	for	your	time,	Finadd.	Tell	me,’	he	added	as	he
slowly	rose,	indicating	the	audience	was	at	an	end,	‘have	you	settled	well	as	the
King’s	Champion?’
‘Uh,	well	enough,	First	Eunuch.’
‘The	burden	is	easily	shouldered	by	one	as	young	and	fit	as	you,	then?’
‘Not	easily.	I	would	make	no	claim	to	that.’
‘Not	comfortable,	but	manageable.’
‘A	fair	enough	description.’
‘You	are	an	honest	man,	Brys.	As	one	of	the	king’s	advisers,	I	am	content
with	my	choice.’
But	you	feel	I	need	the	reminder.	Why	is	that?	‘I	remain	honoured,	First
Eunuch,	by	the	king’s	faith,	and	of	course,	yours.’
‘I	will	delay	you	no	longer,	Finadd.’
Brys	nodded,	turned	and	strode	from	the	office.
A	part	of	him	longed	for	the	days	of	old,	when	he	was	just	an	officer	in	the


Palace	Guard.	When	he	carried	little	political	weight,	and	the	presence	of	the
king	was	always	at	a	distance,	with	Brys	and	his	fellow	guardsmen	standing	at
attention	along	one	wall	at	official	audiences	and	engagements.	Then	again,	he
reconsidered	as	he	walked	down	the	corridor,	the	First	Eunuch	had	called	him
because	of	his	blood,	not	his	new	role	as	King’s	Champion.
Hull	Beddict.	Like	a	restless	ghost,	a	presence	cursed	to	haunt	him	no
matter	where	he	went,	no	matter	what	he	did.	Brys	remembered	seeing	his
eldest	brother,	resplendent	in	the	garb	of	Sentinel,	the	King’s	Reed	at	his	belt.	A
last	and	lasting	vision	for	the	young,	impressionable	boy	he	had	been	all	those
years	ago.	That	moment	remained	with	him,	a	tableau	frozen	in	time	that	he
wandered	into	in	his	dreams,	or	at	reflective	moments	like	these.	A	painted
image.	Brothers,	man	and	child,	the	two	of	them	cracked	and	yellowed	beneath
the	dust.	And	he	would	stand	witness,	like	a	stranger,	to	the	boy’s	wide-eyed,
adoring	expression,	and	would	follow	that	uplifted	gaze	and	then	shift	his	own
uneasily,	suspicious	of	that	uniformed	soldier ’s	pride.
Innocence	was	a	blade	of	glory,	yet	it	could	blind	on	both	sides.
He’d	told	Nifadas	he	did	not	understand	Hull.	But	he	did.	All	too	well.
He	understood	Tehol,	too,	though	perhaps	marginally	less	well.	The
rewards	of	wealth	beyond	measure	had	proved	cold;	only	the	hungry	desire	for
that	wealth	hissed	with	heat.	And	that	truth	belonged	to	the	world	of	the
Letherii,	the	brittle	flaw	at	the	core	of	the	golden	sword.	Tehol	had	thrown
himself	on	that	sword,	and	seemed	content	to	bleed	to	death,	slowly	and	with
amiable	aplomb.	Whatever	final	message	he	sought	in	his	death	was	a	waste	of
time,	since	no-one	would	look	his	way	when	that	day	came.	No-one	dared.
Which	is	why,	I	suspect,	he’s	smiling.
His	brothers	had	ascended	their	peaks	long	ago—too	early,	it	turned	out—
and	now	slid	down	their	particular	paths	to	dissolution	and	death.	And	what	of
me,	then?	I	have	been	named	King’s	Champion.	Judged	the	finest	swordsman	in
the	kingdom.	I	believe	I	stand,	here	and	now,	upon	the	highest	reach.	There	was
no	need	to	take	that	thought	further.
He	reached	a	T-intersection	and	swung	right.	Ten	paces	ahead	a	side	door
spilled	light	into	the	corridor.	As	he	came	opposite	it	a	voice	called	to	him
from	the	chamber	within.
‘Finadd!	Come	quick.’
Brys	inwardly	smiled	and	turned.	Three	strides	into	the	spice-filled,	lowceilinged	room.	Countless	sources	of	light	made	a	war	of	colours	on	the
furniture	and	tables	with	their	crowds	of	implements,	scrolls	and	beakers.
‘Ceda?’
‘Over	here.	Come	and	see	what	I’ve	done.’


Brys	edged	past	a	bookcase	extending	out	perpendicularly	from	one	wall
and	found	the	King’s	Sorceror	behind	it,	perched	on	a	stool.	A	tilted	table	with
a	level	bottom	shelf	was	at	the	man’s	side,	cluttered	with	discs	of	polished
glass.
‘Your	step	has	changed,	Finadd,’	Kuru	Qan	said,	‘since	becoming	the
King’s	Champion.’
‘I	was	not	aware	of	that,	Ceda.’
Kuru	Qan	spun	on	his	seat	and	raised	a	strange	object	before	his	face.	Twin
lenses	of	glass,	bound	in	place	side	by	side	with	wire.	The	Ceda’s	broad,
prominent	features	were	made	even	more	so	by	a	magnifying	effect	from	the
lenses.	Kuru	Qan	set	the	object	against	his	face,	using	ties	to	bind	it	so	that	the
lenses	sat	before	his	eyes,	making	them	huge	as	he	blinked	up	at	Brys.
‘You	are	as	I	imagined	you.	Excellent.	The	blur	diminishes	in	importance.
Clarity	ascends,	achieving	preeminence	among	all	the	important	things.	What	I
hear	now	matters	less	than	what	I	see.	Thus,	perspective	shifts.	The	world
changes.	Important,	Finadd.	Very	important.’
‘Those	lenses	have	given	you	vision?	That	is	wonderful,	Ceda!’
‘The	key	was	in	seeking	a	solution	that	was	the	antithesis	of	sorcery.
Looking	upon	the	Empty	Hold	stole	my	sight,	after	all.	I	could	not	effect
correction	through	the	same	medium.	Not	yet	important,	this	detail.	Pray
indeed	it	never	becomes	so.’
Ceda	Kuru	Qan	never	held	but	one	discourse	at	any	one	time.	Or	so	he	had
explained	it	once.	While	many	found	this	frustrating,	Brys	was	ever	charmed.
‘Am	I	the	first	to	be	shown	your	discovery,	Ceda?’
‘You	would	see	its	importance	more	than	most.	Swordsman,	dancing	with
place,	distance	and	timing,	with	all	the	material	truths.	I	need	to	make
adjustments.’	He	snatched	the	contraption	off	and	hunched	over	it,	minuscule
tools	flicking	in	his	deft	hands.	‘You	were	in	the	First	Eunuch’s	chamber	of
office.	Not	an	altogether	pleasing	conversation	for	you.	Unimportant,	for	the
moment.’
‘I	am	summoned	to	the	throne	room,	Ceda.’
‘True.	Not	entirely	urgent.	The	Preda	would	have	you	present…shortly.
The	First	Eunuch	enquired	after	your	eldest	brother?’
Brys	sighed.
‘I	surmised,’	Kuru	Qan	said,	glancing	up	with	a	broad	smile.	‘Your	unease
tainted	your	sweat.	Nifadas	is	sorely	obsessed	at	the	moment.’	He	set	the	lenses
against	his	eyes	once	more.	Focused	on	the	Finadd’s	eyes—disconcerting,
since	it	had	never	happened	before.	‘Who	needs	spies	when	one’s	nose	roots
out	all	truths?’


‘I	hope,	Ceda,	that	you	do	not	lose	that	talent,	with	this	new	invention	of
yours.’
‘Ah,	see!	A	swordsman	indeed.	The	importance	of	every	sense	is	not	lost
on	you!	What	a	measurable	delight—here,	let	me	show	you.’	He	slid	down
from	the	stool	and	approached	a	table,	where	he	poured	clear	liquid	into	a
translucent	beaker.	Crouched	low	to	check	its	level,	then	nodded.	‘Measurable,
as	I	had	suspected.’	He	plucked	the	beaker	from	its	stand	and	tossed	the	contents
back,	smacking	his	lips	when	he	was	done.	‘But	it	is	both	brothers	who	haunt
you	now.’
‘I	am	not	immune	to	uncertainty.’
‘One	should	hope	not!	An	important	admission.	When	the	Preda	is	done
with	you—and	it	shall	not	be	long—return	to	me.	We	have	a	task	before	us,
you	and	I.’
‘Very	well,	Ceda.’
‘Time	for	some	adjustments.’	He	pulled	off	the	lenses	once	more.	‘For	us
both,’	he	added.
Brys	considered,	then	nodded.	‘Until	later,	then,	Ceda.’
He	made	his	way	from	the	sorceror ’s	chamber.
Nifadas	and	Kuru	Qan,	they	stand	to	one	side	of	King	Diskanar.	Would	that
there	was	no	other	side.
The	throne	room	was	misnamed,	in	that	the	king	was	in	the	process	of
shifting	the	royal	seat	of	power	to	the	Eternal	Domicile,	now	that	the	leaks	in
its	lofty	roof	had	been	corrected.	A	few	trappings	remained,	including	the
ancient	rug	approaching	the	dais,	and	the	stylized	gateway	arching	over	the
place	where	the	throne	had	once	stood.
When	Brys	arrived,	only	his	old	commander,	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz,	was
present.	As	always,	a	dominating	figure,	no	matter	how	exalted	her
surroundings.	She	stood	taller	than	most	women,	nearly	Brys’s	own	height.
Fair-skinned,	with	a	burnished	cast	to	her	blonde	hair	yet	eyes	of	a	dark	hazel,
she	turned	to	face	him	at	his	approach.	In	her	fortieth	year,	she	was	none	the
less	possessed	of	extraordinary	beauty	that	the	weather	lines	only	enhanced.
‘Finadd	Beddict,	you	are	late.’
‘Impromptu	audiences	with	the	First	Eunuch	and	the	Ceda—’
‘We	have	but	a	few	moments,’	she	interrupted.	‘Take	your	place	along	the
wall,	as	would	a	guard.	They	might	recognize	you,	or	they	might	assume	you
are	but	one	of	my	underlings,	especially	given	the	poor	light	now	that	the
sconces	have	been	taken	down.	Either	way,	you	are	to	stand	at	attention	and	say
nothing.’
Frowning,	Brys	strode	to	his	old	guard’s	niche,	turned	about	to	face	the


chamber,	then	edged	back	into	the	shadows	until	hard	stone	pressed	against	his
shoulders.	He	saw	the	Preda	studying	him	for	a	moment,	then	she	nodded	and
swung	to	face	the	doorway	at	the	far	corner	of	the	wall	behind	the	dais.
Ah,	this	meeting	belongs	to	the	other	side…
The	door	slammed	open	to	the	gauntleted	hand	of	a	Prince’s	Guardsman,
and	the	helmed,	armoured	figure	of	that	man	strode	warily	into	the	chamber.
His	sword	was	still	in	its	scabbard,	but	Brys	knew	that	Moroch	Nevath	could
draw	it	in	a	single	beat	of	a	heart.	He	knew,	also,	that	Moroch	had	been	the
prince’s	own	candidate	for	King’s	Champion.	And	well	deserved	too.	Moroch
Nevath	not	only	possesses	the	skill,	he	also	has	the	presence…And,	although
that	bold	manner	irritated	Brys	in	some	indefinable	way,	he	found	himself
envying	it	as	well.
The	Prince’s	Guard	studied	the	chamber,	fixing	here	and	there	on
shadowed	recesses,	including	the	one	wherein	Brys	stood—but	it	was	a
momentary	thing,	seeming	only	to	acknowledge	the	presence	of	one	of	the
Preda’s	guards—and	Moroch	finally	settled	his	attention	on	Unnutal	Hebaz.
A	single	nod	of	acknowledgement,	then	Moroch	stepped	to	one	side.
Prince	Quillas	Diskanar	entered.	Behind	him	came	Chancellor	Triban
Gnol.	Then,	two	figures	that	made	Brys	start.	Queen	Janall	and	her	First
Consort,	Turudal	Brizad.
By	the	Errant,	the	entire	squalid	nest.
Quillas	bared	his	teeth	at	Unnutal	Hebaz	as	would	a	dog	at	the	end	of	his
chain.	‘You	have	released	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	to	Nifadas’s	entourage.	I	want
him	taken	back,	Preda.	Choose	someone	else.’
Unnutal’s	tone	was	calm.	‘Gerun	Eberict’s	competence	is	above	reproach,
Prince	Quillas.	I	am	informed	that	the	First	Eunuch	is	pleased	with	the
selection.’
Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	spoke	in	an	equally	reasonable	voice.	‘Your
prince	believes	otherwise,	Preda.	It	behoves	you	to	accord	that	opinion	due
respect.’
‘The	prince’s	beliefs	are	his	own	concern.	I	am	charged	by	his	father,	the
king,	in	this	matter.	Regarding	what	I	do	and	do	not	respect,	Chancellor,	I
strongly	suggest	you	retract	your	challenge.’
Moroch	Nevath	growled	and	stepped	forward.
The	Preda’s	hand	snapped	out—not	to	the	Prince’s	Guardsman,	but	towards
the	niche	where	Brys	stood,	halting	him	a	half-stride	from	his	position.	The
sword	was	already	in	his	hand,	and	its	freeing	from	the	scabbard	had	been	as
silent	as	it	had	been	fast.
Moroch’s	gaze	flashed	to	Brys,	the	startled	expression	giving	way	to


recognition.	The	man’s	own	sword	was	but	halfway	out	of	its	scabbard.
A	dry	chuckle	from	the	queen.	‘Ah,	the	Preda’s	decision	for	but	one	guard
is…explained.	Step	forward,	if	you	please,	Champion.’
‘That	will	not	be	necessary,’	Unnutal	said.
Brys	nodded	and	slowly	stepped	back,	sheathing	his	sword	as	he	did	so.
Queen	Janall’s	brows	rose	at	the	Preda’s	brusque	countermand.	‘Dear
Unnutal	Hebaz,	you	rise	far	above	your	station.’
‘The	presumption	is	not	mine,	Queen.	The	Royal	Guard	answer	to	the	king
and	no-one	else.’
‘Well,	forgive	me	if	I	delight	in	challenging	that	antiquated	conceit.’	Janall
fluttered	one	thin	hand.	‘Strengths	are	ever	at	risk	of	becoming	weaknesses.’
She	stepped	close	to	her	son.	‘Heed	your	mother ’s	advice,	Quillas.	It	was	folly
to	cut	at	the	Preda’s	pedestal,	for	it	has	not	yet	turned	to	sand.	Patience,	beloved
one.’
The	Chancellor	sighed.	‘The	queen’s	advice—’
‘Is	due	respect,’	Quillas	mimed.	‘As	you	will,	then.	As	you	all	will.
Moroch!’
Bodyguard	trailing,	the	prince	strode	from	the	chamber.
The	queen’s	smile	was	tender	as	she	said,	‘Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz,	we	beg
your	forgiveness.	This	meeting	was	not	of	our	choice,	but	my	son	insisted.
From	the	moment	our	procession	began,	the	Chancellor	and	I	both	sought	to
dissuade	him.’
‘To	no	avail,’	the	Chancellor	said,	sighing	once	more.
The	Preda’s	expression	did	not	change.	‘Are	we	done?’
Queen	Janall	wagged	a	single	finger	in	mute	warning,	then	gestured	to	her
First	Consort,	slipping	her	arm	through	his	as	they	left.
Triban	Gnol	remained	a	moment	longer.	‘My	congratulations,	Preda,’	he
said.	‘Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	was	an	exquisite	choice.’
Unnutal	Hebaz	said	nothing.
Five	heartbeats	later	and	she	and	Brys	were	alone	in	the	chamber.
The	Preda	turned.	‘Your	speed,	Champion,	never	fails	to	take	my	breath
away.	I	did	not	hear	you,	only…anticipated.	Had	I	not,	Moroch	would	now	be
dead.’
‘Possibly,	Preda.	If	only	because	he	had	dismissed	my	presence.’
‘And	Quillas	would	have	only	himself	to	blame.’
Brys	said	nothing.
‘I	should	not	have	halted	you.’
He	watched	her	leave.
Gerun	Eberict,	you	poor	bastard.


Recalling	that	the	Ceda	wanted	him,	Brys	swung	about	and	strode	from	the
chamber.
Leaving	behind	no	blood.
And	he	knew	that	Kuru	Qan	would	hear	the	relief	in	his	every	step.
	
The	Ceda	had	been	waiting	outside	his	door,	seemingly	intent	on	practising	a
dance	step,	when	Brys	arrived.
‘A	few	fraught	moments?’	Kuru	Qan	asked	without	looking	up.
‘Unimportant.	For	now.	Come.’
Fifty	paces	on,	down	stone	steps,	along	dusty	corridors,	and	Brys	guessed
at	their	destination.	He	felt	his	heart	sinking.	A	place	he	had	heard	of,	but	one
he	had	yet	to	visit.	It	seemed	the	King’s	Champion	was	permitted	to	walk	where
a	lowly	Finadd	was	not.	This	time,	however,	the	privilege	was	suspect.
They	came	to	a	pair	of	massive	copper-sheathed	doors.	Green	and	rumpled
with	moss,	they	were	bare	of	markings	and	showed	no	locking	mechanism.
The	Ceda	leaned	on	them	and	they	parted	with	a	grinding	squeal.
Beyond	rose	narrow	steps,	leading	to	a	walkway	suspended	knee-high
above	the	floor	by	chains	that	reached	down	from	the	ceiling.	The	room	was
circular,	and	in	the	floor	were	set	luminous	tiles	forming	a	spiral.	The
walkway	ended	at	a	platform	in	the	chamber ’s	centre.
‘Trepidation,	Finadd?	Well	deserved.’	Gesturing,	Kuru	Qan	led	Brys	onto
the	walkway.
It	swayed	alarmingly.
‘The	striving	for	balance	is	made	manifest,’	the	Ceda	said,	arms	held	out	to
the	sides.	‘One’s	steps	must	needs	find	the	proper	rhythm.	Important,	and
difficult	for	all	that	there	are	two	of	us.	No,	do	not	look	down	upon	the	tiles—
we	are	not	yet	ready.	To	the	platform	first.	Here	we	are.	Stand	at	my	side,
Finadd.	Look	with	me	upon	the	first	tile	of	the	spiral.	What	do	you	see?’
Brys	studied	the	glowing	tile.	It	was	large,	not	quite	square.	Two	spans	of	a
spread	hand	in	length,	slightly	less	so	in	width.
The	Holds.	The	Cedance.	Kuru	Qan’s	chamber	of	divination.	Throughout
Letheras	there	were	casters	of	the	tiles,	readers	of	the	Holds.	Of	course,	their
representations	were	small,	like	flattened	dice.	Only	the	King’s	Sorceror
possessed	tiles	such	as	these.	With	ever-shifting	faces.	‘I	see	a	barrow	in	a
yard.’
‘Ah,	then	you	see	truly.	Good.	An	unhinged	mind	would	reveal	itself	at	this
moment,	its	vision	poisoned	with	fear	and	malice.	Barrow,	third	from	last
among	the	tiles	of	the	Azath	Hold.	Tell	me,	what	do	you	sense	from	it?’


Brys	frowned.	‘Restlessness.’
‘Aye.	Disturbing,	agreed?’
‘Agreed.’
‘But	the	Barrow	is	strong,	is	it	not?	It	will	not	yield	its	claim.	Yet,	consider
for	a	moment.	Something	is	restless,	there	beneath	that	earth.	And	each	time	I
have	visited	here	in	the	past	month,	this	tile	has	begun	the	spiral.’
‘Or	ended	it.’
Kuru	Qan	tilted	his	head.	‘Possibly.	A	swordsman’s	mind	addresses	the
unexpected.	Important?	We’ll	see,	won’t	we?	Begins,	or	ends.	So.	If	the	Barrow
is	in	no	danger	of	yielding,	then	why	does	this	tile	persist?	Perhaps	we	but
witness	what	is,	whilst	that	restlessness	promises	what	will	be.	Alarming.’
‘Ceda,	have	you	visited	the	site	of	the	Azath?’
‘I	have.	Both	tower	and	grounds	are	unchanged.	The	Hold’s	manifestation
remains	steadfast	and	contained.	Now,	drag	your	gaze	onward,	Finadd.	Next?’
‘A	gate,	formed	of	a	dragon’s	gaping	jaws.’
‘Fifth	in	the	Hold	of	the	Dragon.	Gate.	How	does	it	relate	to	Barrow	of	the
Azath?	Does	the	Gate	precede	or	follow?	In	the	span	of	my	life,	this	is	the	first
time	I	have	seen	a	tile	of	Dragon	Hold	in	the	pattern.	We	are	witness—or	shall
be	witness—to	a	momentous	occasion.’
Brys	glanced	at	the	Ceda.	‘We	are	nearing	Seventh	Closure.	It	is
momentous.	The	First	Empire	shall	be	reborn.	King	Diskanar	shall	be
transformed—he	shall	ascend	and	assume	the	ancient	title	of	First	Emperor.’
Kuru	Qan	hugged	himself.	‘The	popular	interpretation,	aye.	But	the	true
prophecy,	Finadd,	is	somewhat	more…obscure.’
Brys	was	alarmed	by	the	Ceda’s	reaction.	Nor	had	he	known	that	the
popular	interpretation	was	other	than	accurate.	‘Obscure?	In	what	way?’
‘“The	king	who	rules	at	the	Seventh	Closure	shall	be	transformed	and	so
shall	become	the	First	Emperor	reborn.”	Thus.	Yet,	questions	arise.
Transformed—how?	And	reborn—in	the	flesh?	The	First	Emperor	was
destroyed	along	with	the	First	Empire,	in	a	distant	land.	Leaving	the	colonies
here	bereft.	We	have	existed	in	isolation	for	a	very	long	time,	Finadd.	Longer
than	you	might	believe.’
‘Almost	seven	thousand	years.’
The	Ceda	smiled.	‘Language	changes	over	time.	Meaning	twists.	Mistakes
compound	with	each	transcribing.	Even	those	stalwart	sentinels	of	perfection—
numbers—can,	in	a	single	careless	moment,	be	profoundly	altered.	Shall	I	tell
you	my	belief,	Finadd?	What	would	you	say	to	my	notion	that	some	zeroes
were	dropped?	At	the	beginning	of	this	the	Seventh	Closure.’
Seventy	thousand	years?	Seven	hundred	thousand?


‘Describe	for	me	the	next	four	tiles.’
Feeling	slightly	unbalanced,	Brys	forced	his	attention	back	to	the	floor.	‘I
recognize	that	one.	Betrayer	of	the	Empty	Hold.	And	the	tile	that	follows:
White	Crow,	of	the	Fulcra.	The	third	is	unknown	to	me.	Shards	of	ice,	one	of
which	is	upthrust	from	the	ground	and	grows	bright	with	reflected	light.’
Kuru	Qan	sighed	and	nodded.	‘Seed,	last	of	the	tiles	in	the	Hold	of	Ice.
Another	unprecedented	appearance.	And	the	fourth?’
Brys	shook	his	head.	‘It	is	blank.’
‘Just	so.	The	divination	ceases.	Is	blocked,	perhaps,	by	events	yet	to	occur,
by	choices	as	yet	unmade.	Or,	it	marks	the	beginning,	the	flux	that	is	now,	this
very	moment.	Leading	to	the	end,	which	is	the	last	tile—Barrow.	Unique
mystery.	I	am	at	a	loss.’
‘Has	anyone	else	seen	this,	Ceda?	Have	you	discussed	your	impasse	with
anyone?’
‘The	First	Eunuch	has	been	informed,	Brys	Beddict.	To	ensure	that	he	does
not	walk	into	the	Great	Meeting	blind	to	whatever	portents	might	arise	there.
And	now,	you.	Three	of	us,	Finadd.’
‘Why	me?’
‘Because	you	are	the	King’s	Champion.	It	is	your	task	to	guard	his	life.’
Brys	sighed.	‘He	keeps	sending	me	away.’
‘I	will	remind	him	yet	again,’	Kuru	Qan	said.	‘He	must	surrender	his	love
of	solitude,	or	come	to	see	no-one	when	he	glances	your	way.	Now,	tell	me
what	the	queen	incited	her	son	to	do	in	the	old	throne	room.’
‘Incited?	She	claimed	the	very	opposite.’
‘Unimportant.	Tell	me	what	your	eyes	witnessed,	what	your	ears	heard.
Tell	me,	Brys	Beddict,	what	your	heart	whispered.’
Brys	stared	down	at	the	blank	tile.	‘Hull	may	prove	a	problem,’	he	said	in	a
dull	voice.
‘This	is	what	your	heart	whispered?’
‘It	is.’
‘At	the	Great	Meeting?’
He	nodded.
‘How?’
‘I	fear,	Ceda,	that	he	might	kill	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar.’
	
The	building	had	once	housed	a	carpenter ’s	shop	on	the	ground	floor,	with	a
modest	collection	of	low-ceilinged	residential	rooms	on	the	upper	level,
reached	via	a	drop-down	staircase.	The	front	faced	out	onto	Quillas	Canal,


opposite	a	landing	where,	presumably,	the	carpenter	had	received	his	supplies.
Tehol	Beddict	walked	around	the	spacious	workshop,	noting	the	holes	in
the	hardwood	floor	where	mechanisms	had	been	fitted,	hooks	on	walls	for
tools	still	identifiable	by	the	faded	outlines.	The	air	still	smelled	of	sawdust	and
stains,	and	a	single	worktable	ran	the	full	length	of	the	wall	to	the	left	of	the
entrance.	The	entire	front	wall,	he	saw,	was	constructed	with	removable	panels.
‘You	purchased	this	outright?’	he	asked,	facing	the	three	women	who	had
gathered	at	the	foot	of	the	staircase.
‘The	owner ’s	business	was	expanding,’	Shand	said,	‘as	was	his	family.’
‘Fronting	the	canal…this	place	was	worth	something…’
‘Two	thousand	thirds.	We	bought	most	of	his	furniture	upstairs.	Ordered	a
desk	that	was	delivered	last	night.’	Shand	waved	a	hand	to	encompass	the
ground	level.	‘This	area’s	yours.	‘I’d	suggest	a	wall	or	two,	leaving	a	corridor
from	the	door	to	the	stairs.	That	clay	pipe	is	the	kitchen	drain.	We	knocked	out
the	section	leading	to	the	kitchen	upstairs,	since	we	expect	your	servant	to	feed
the	four	of	us.	The	privy’s	out	in	the	backyard,	empties	into	the	canal.	There’s
also	a	cold	shed,	with	a	water-tight	ice	box	big	enough	for	a	whole	Nerek
family	to	live	in.’
‘A	rich	carpenter	with	time	on	his	hands,’	Tehol	said.
‘He	has	talent,’	Shand	said,	shrugging.	‘Now,	follow	me.	The	office	is
upstairs.	We’ve	things	to	discuss.’
‘Doesn’t	sound	like	it,’	he	replied.	‘Sounds	like	everything	is	already
decided.	I	can	imagine	Bugg’s	delight	at	the	news.	I	hope	you	like	figs.’
‘You	could	take	the	roof,’	Rissarh	said	with	a	sweet	smile.
Tehol	crossed	his	arms	and	rocked	on	his	heels.	‘Let	me	see	if	I	understand
all	this.	You	threaten	to	expose	my	terrible	secrets,	and	then	offer	me	some
kind	of	partnership	for	some	venture	you	haven’t	even	bothered	describing.	I
can	see	this	relationship	setting	deep	roots,	given	such	fertile	soil.’
Shand	scowled.
‘Let’s	beat	him	senseless	first,’	Hejun	said.
‘It’s	simple,’	Shand	said,	ignoring	Hejun’s	suggestion.	‘We	have	thirty
thousand	thirds	and	with	it	we	want	you	to	make	ten.’
‘Ten	thousand	thirds?’
‘Ten	peaks.’
Tehol	stared	at	her.	‘Ten	peaks.	Ten	million	thirds.	I	see,	and	what	precisely
do	you	want	with	all	that	money?’
‘We	want	you	to	buy	the	rest	of	the	islands.’
Tehol	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair	and	began	pacing.	‘You’re	insane.	I
started	with	a	hundred	docks	and	damn	near	killed	myself	making	a	single	peak


—’
‘Only	because	you	were	frivolous,	Tehol	Beddict.	You	did	it	inside	of	a
year,	but	you	only	worked	a	day	or	two	every	month.’
‘Well,	those	days	were	murderous.’
‘Liar.	You	never	stepped	wrong.	Not	once.	You	folded	in	and	folded	out
and	left	everyone	else	wallowing	in	your	wake.	And	they	worshipped	you	for
it.’
‘Until	you	knifed	them	all,’	Rissarh	said,	her	smile	broadening.
‘Your	skirt’s	slipping,’	Hejun	observed.
Tehol	adjusted	it.	‘It	wasn’t	exactly	a	knifing.	What	terrible	images	you
conjure.	I	made	my	peak.	I	wasn’t	the	first	to	ever	make	a	peak,	just	the	fastest.’
‘With	a	hundred	docks.	Hard	with	a	hundred	levels,	maybe.	But	docks?	I
made	a	hundred	docks	every	three	months	when	I	was	a	child,	picking	olives
and	grapes.	Nobody	starts	with	docks.	Nobody	but	you.’
‘And	now	we’re	giving	you	thirty	thousand	thirds,’	Rissarh	said.	‘Work	the
columns,	Beddict.	Ten	million	peaks?	Why	not?’
‘If	you	think	it’s	so	easy	why	don’t	you	do	it	yourselves?’
‘We’re	not	that	smart,’	Shand	said.	‘We’re	not	easily	distracted,	either.	We
stumbled	onto	your	trail	and	we	followed	it	and	here	we	are.’
‘I	left	no	trail.’
‘Not	one	most	could	see,	true.	But	as	I	said,	we	don’t	get	distracted.’
Tehol	continued	pacing.	‘The	Merchant	Tolls	list	Letheras’s	gross	at
between	twelve	and	fifteen	peaks,	with	maybe	another	five	buried—’
‘Is	that	five	including	your	one?’
‘Mine	was	written	off,	remember.’
‘After	a	whole	lot	of	pissing	blood.	Ten	thousand	curses	tied	to	docks	at
the	bottom	of	the	canal,	all	with	your	name	on	them.’
Hejun	asked	in	surprise,	‘Really,	Shand?	Maybe	we	should	get	dredging
rights—’
‘Too	late,’	Tehol	told	her.	‘Biri’s	got	those.’
‘Biri’s	a	front	man,’	Shand	said.	‘You’ve	got	those	rights,	Tehol.	Biri	may
not	know	it	but	he	works	for	you.’
‘Well,	that’s	a	situation	I’ve	yet	to	exploit.’
‘Why?’
He	shrugged.	Then	he	halted	and	stared	at	Shand.	‘There’s	no	way	you
could	know	that.’
‘You’re	right.	I	guessed.’
His	eyes	widened.	‘You	could	make	ten	peaks,	with	an	instinct	like	that,
Shand.’


‘You’ve	fooled	everyone	because	you	don’t	make	a	wrong	step,	Tehol
Beddict.	They	don’t	think	you’ve	buried	your	peak—not	any	more,	not	after
this	long	with	you	living	like	a	rat	under	the	docks.	You’ve	truly	lost	it.	Where,
nobody	knows,	but	somewhere.	That’s	why	they	wrote	off	the	loss,	isn’t	it?’
‘Money	is	sleight	of	hand,’	Tehol	said,	nodding.	‘Unless	you’ve	got
diamonds	in	your	hands.	Then	it’s	not	just	an	idea	any	more.	If	you	want	to
know	the	cheat	behind	the	whole	game,	it’s	right	there,	lasses.	Even	when
money’s	just	an	idea,	it	has	power.	Only	it’s	not	real	power.	Just	the	promise	of
power.	But	that	promise	is	enough	so	long	as	everyone	keeps	pretending	it’s
real.	Stop	pretending	and	it	all	falls	apart.’
‘Unless	the	diamonds	are	in	your	hands,’	Shand	said.
‘Right.	Then	it’s	real	power.’
‘That’s	what	you	began	to	suspect,	isn’t	it?	So	you	went	and	tested	it.	And
everything	came	within	a	stumble	of	falling	apart.’
Tehol	smiled.	‘Imagine	my	dismay.’
‘You	weren’t	dismayed,’	she	said.	‘You	just	realized	how	deadly	an	idea
could	be,	in	the	wrong	hands.’
‘They’re	all	the	wrong	hands,	Shand.	Including	mine.’
‘So	you	walked	away.’
‘And	I’m	not	going	back.	Do	your	worst	with	me.	Let	Hull	know.	Take	it
all	down.	What’s	written	off	can	be	written	back	in.	The	Tolls	are	good	at	that.
In	fact,	you’ll	trigger	a	boom.	Everyone	will	sigh	with	relief,	seeing	that	it	was
all	in	the	game	after	all.’
‘That’s	not	what	we	want,’	Shand	said.	‘You	still	don’t	get	it.	When	we	buy
the	rest	of	the	islands,	Tehol,	we	do	it	the	same	way	you	did.	Ten
peaks…disappearing.’
‘The	entire	economy	will	collapse!’
At	that	the	three	women	all	nodded.
‘You’re	fanatics!’
‘Even	worse,’	Rissarh	said,	‘we’re	vengeful.’
‘You’re	all	half-bloods,	aren’t	you?’	He	didn’t	need	their	answers	to	that.	It
was	obvious.	Not	every	half-blood	had	to	look	like	a	half-blood.	‘Faraed,	for
Hejun.	You	two?	Tarthenal?’
‘Tarthenal.	Letheras	destroyed	us.	Now,	we’re	going	to	destroy	Letheras.’
‘And,’	Rissarh	said,	smiling	again,	‘you’re	going	to	show	us	how.’
‘Because	you	hate	your	own	people,’	Shand	said.	‘The	whole	rapacious,
cold-blooded	lot	of	them.	We	want	those	islands,	Tehol	Beddict.	We	know
about	the	remnants	of	the	tribes	you	delivered	to	the	ones	you	bought.	We
know	they’re	hiding	out	there,	trying	to	rebuild	all	that	they	had	lost.	But	it’s


not	enough.	Walk	this	city’s	streets	and	the	truth	of	that	is	plain.	You	did	it	for
Hull.	I	had	no	idea	he	didn’t	know	about	it—you	surprised	me	there.	You	know,
I	think	you	should	tell	him.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	he	needs	healing,	that’s	why.’
‘I	can’t	do	that.’
Shand	stepped	close	and	settled	a	hand	on	Tehol’s	shoulder.	The	contact
left	him	weak-kneed,	so	unexpected	was	the	sympathy.	‘You’re	right,	you	can’t.
Because	we	both	know,	it	wasn’t	enough.’
‘Tell	him	our	way,’	Hejun	said.	‘Tehol	Beddict.	Do	it	right	this	time.’
He	pulled	away	and	studied	them.	These	three	damned	women.	‘It’s	the
Errant’s	curse,	that	he	walks	down	paths	he’s	walked	before.	But	that	trait	of
yours,	of	not	getting	distracted,	it	blinds	both	ways,	I’m	afraid.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	mean,	Shand,	that	Lether	is	about	to	fall—and	not	through	my	doing.
Find	Hull	and	ask	him—I’m	sure	he’s	up	there,	somewhere.	In	the	north.	And,
you	know,	it’s	rather	amusing,	how	he	fought	so	hard	for	your	people,	for
every	one	of	those	tribes	Lether	then	devoured.	Because	now,	knowing	what	he
knows,	he’s	going	to	fight	again.	Only,	this	time,	not	for	a	tribe—not	for	the
Tiste	Edur.	This	time,	for	Lether.	Because	he	knows,	my	friends,	that	we’ve	met
our	match	in	those	damned	bastards.	This	time,	it’s	the	Edur	who	will	do	the
devouring.’
‘What	makes	you	think	so?’	Shand	demanded,	and	he	saw	the	disbelief	in
her	expression.
‘Because	they	don’t	play	the	game,’	he	said.
‘What	if	you’re	wrong?’
‘It’s	possible.	Either	way,	it’s	going	to	be	bloody.’
‘Then	let’s	make	it	easier	for	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Shand,	you’re	talking	treason.’
Her	lips	pressed	into	a	thin	line.
Rissarh	barked	a	laugh.	‘You	idiot.	We’ve	been	doing	that	all	along.’
Errant	take	me,	she’s	right.	‘I’m	not	convinced	a	host	of	barbaric	Edur
overlords	will	do	any	better.’
‘We’re	not	talking	about	what’s	better,’	Shand	said.	‘We’re	talking	about
revenge.	Think	of	Hull,	of	what	was	done	to	him.	Do	it	back,	Tehol.’
I	don’t	believe	Hull	would	see	it	that	way.	Not	quite.	Not	for	a	long,	long
time.	‘You	realize,	don’t	you,	that	I’ve	worked	very	hard	at	cultivating	apathy.
In	fact,	it	seems	to	be	bearing	endless	fruit.’
‘Yes,	the	skirt	doesn’t	hide	much.’


‘My	instincts	may	be	a	bit	dull.’
‘Liar.	They’ve	just	been	lying	in	wait	and	you	know	it.	Where	do	we	start,
Tehol	Beddict?’
He	sighed.	‘All	right.	First	and	foremost,	we	lease	out	this	ground	floor.
Biri	needs	the	storage.’
‘What	about	you?’
‘I	happen	to	like	my	abode,	and	I	don’t	intend	to	leave.	As	far	as	anyone
else	is	concerned,	I’m	still	not	playing	the	game.	You	three	are	the	investors.
So,	put	those	damned	weapons	away;	we’re	in	a	far	deadlier	war	now.	There’s
a	family	of	Nerek	camped	outside	my	house.	A	mother	and	two	children.	Hire
them	as	cook	and	runners.	Then	head	down	to	the	Merchant	Tolls	and	get
yourselves	listed.	You	deal	in	property,	construction	and	transportation.	No
other	ventures.	Not	yet.	Now,	seven	properties	are	for	sale	around	the	fifth
wing	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.	They’re	going	cheap.’
‘Because	they’re	sinking.’
‘Right.	And	we’re	going	to	fix	that.	And	once	we’ve	done	that,	expect	a
visit	from	the	Royal	Surveyor	and	a	motley	collection	of	hopeful	architects.
Ladies,	prepare	to	get	rich.’
Looking	for	solid	grounding?	Bugg’s	Construction	is	your	answer.
Until	the	flood	sweeps	the	entire	world	away,	that	is.
‘Can	we	buy	you	some	clothes?’
Tehol	blinked.	‘Why?’
	
Seren	stared	down.	The	valley	stretched	below,	its	steep	sides	unrelieved	forest,
a	deep	motionless	green.	The	glitter	of	rushing	water	threaded	through	the
shadows	in	the	cut’s	nadir.	Blood	of	the	Mountains,	the	Edur	called	that	river.
Tis’forundal.	Its	waters	ran	red	with	the	sweat	of	iron.
The	track	they	would	take	crossed	that	river	again	and	again.
The	lone	Tiste	Edur	far	below	had,	it	seemed,	emerged	from	that	crimson
stream.	Striding	to	the	head	of	the	trail	then	beginning	the	ascent.
As	if	knowing	we’re	here.
Buruk	the	Pale	was	taking	his	time	with	this	journey,	calling	a	halt	shortly
after	midday.	The	wagons	would	not	tip	onto	that	rocky,	sliding	path	into	the
valley	until	the	morrow.	Caution	or	drunk	indifference,	the	result	was	the	same.
Hull	stood	at	her	side.	Both	of	them	watched	the	Tiste	Edur	climb	closer.
‘Seren.’
‘Yes?’
‘You	weep	at	night.’


‘I	thought	you	were	asleep.’
He	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then,	‘Your	weeping	always	woke	me.’
And	this	is	as	close	as	you	dare,	isn’t	it?	‘Would	that	yours	had	me.’
‘I	am	sure	it	would	have,	Seren,	had	I	wept.’
And	this	eases	my	guilt?	She	nodded	towards	that	distant	Tiste	Edur.	‘Do
you	recognize	him?’
‘I	do.’
‘Will	he	cause	us	trouble?’
‘No,	I	don’t	think	so.	I	believe	he	will	be	our	escort	back	to	Hiroth	lands.’
‘Noble-born?’
Hull	nodded.	‘Binadas	Sengar.’
She	hesitated,	then	asked,	‘Have	you	cut	flesh	for	him?’
‘I	have.	As	he	has	for	me.’
Seren	Pedac	drew	her	furs	tighter	about	her	shoulders.	The	wind	had	not
relented,	though	something	of	the	valley’s	damp	rot	now	rode	its	bludgeoning
rush.	‘Hull,	do	you	fear	this	Great	Meeting?’
‘I	need	only	look	back	to	see	what	lies	ahead.’
‘Are	you	so	sure	of	that?’
‘We	will	buy	peace,	but	it	will	be,	for	the	Tiste	Edur,	a	deadly	peace.’
‘But	peace	none	the	less,	Hull.’
‘Acquitor,	you	might	as	well	know,	and	so	understand	me	clearly.	I	mean	to
shatter	that	gathering.	I	mean	to	incite	the	Edur	into	war	with	Letheras.’
Stunned,	she	stared	at	him.
Hull	Beddict	turned	away.	‘With	that	knowledge,’	he	said,	‘do	as	you	will.’


Chapter	Three

Face	to	the	Light
betrayed	by	the	Dark
Father	Shadow	lies	bleeding
Unseen	and	unseeing
lost
until	his	Children
take	the	final	path
and	in	the	solitude
of	strangers
Awaken	once	more
T ISTE	EDUR	PRAYER
A	hard	silence	that	seemed	at	home	in	the	dense,	impenetrable	fog.	The
Blackwood	paddles	had	been	drawn	from	water	thick	as	blood,	which	ran	in
rivulets,	then	beads,	down	the	polished	shafts,	finally	drying	with	a	patina	of
salt	in	the	cool,	motionless	air.	And	now	there	was	nothing	to	do	but	wait.
Daughter	Menandore	had	delivered	a	grim	omen	that	morning.	The	body
of	a	Beneda	warrior.	A	bloated	corpse	scorched	by	sorcery,	skin	peeled	back
by	the	ceaseless	hungers	of	the	sea.	The	whispering	roar	of	flies	stung	into
flight	by	the	arrival	of	those	Edur	whose	slaves	had	first	found	it.
Letherii	sorcery.
The	warrior	wore	no	scabbard,	no	armour.	He	had	been	fishing.
Four	K’orthan	longboats	had	set	out	from	the	river	mouth	shortly	after	the
discovery.	In	the	lead	craft	rode	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan	Cadre,	along
with	seventy-five	blooded	warriors.	Crews	of	one	hundred	followed	in	the
three	additional	raiders.
The	tide	carried	them	out	for	a	time.	It	soon	became	clear	that	no	wind
waited	offshore,	so	they	left	the	three	triangular	sails	on	each	ship	furled	and,
thirty-five	warriors	to	a	side,	had	begun	paddling.
Until	the	Warlock	King	had	signalled	a	halt.


The	fog	enclosed	the	four	raider	longboats.	Nothing	could	be	seen	twenty
strokes	of	the	paddle	in	any	direction.	Trull	Sengar	sat	on	the	bench	behind
Fear.	He	had	set	his	paddle	down	and	now	gripped	the	new	iron-sheathed	spear
his	father	had	given	him.
The	Letherii	ships	were	close,	he	knew,	drifting	in	the	same	manner	as	the
Edur	longboats.	But	they	relied	solely	upon	sail	and	so	could	do	nothing	until	a
wind	rose.
And	Hannan	Mosag	had	made	certain	there	would	be	no	wind.
Shadow	wraiths	flickered	over	the	deck,	roving	restlessly,	long-clawed
hands	reaching	down	as	they	clambered	on	all	fours.	They	prowled	as	if	eager
to	leave	the	confines	of	the	raider.	Trull	had	never	seen	so	many	of	them,	and
he	knew	that	they	were	present	on	the	other	longboats	as	well.	They	would	not,
however,	be	the	slayers	of	the	Letherii.	For	that,	the	Warlock	King	had
summoned	something	else.
He	could	feel	it.	Waiting	beneath	them.	A	vast	patience,	suspended	in	the
depths.
Near	the	prow,	Hannan	Mosag	slowly	raised	a	hand,	and,	looking	beyond
the	Warlock	King,	Trull	saw	the	hulk	of	a	Letherii	harvest	ship	slowly	emerge
from	the	fog.	Sails	furled,	lanterns	at	the	end	of	out-thrust	poles,	casting	dull,
yellow	light.
And	then	a	second	ship,	bound	to	the	first	by	a	thick	cable.
Shark	fins	cut	the	pellucid	surface	of	the	water	around	them.
And	then,	suddenly,	those	fins	were	gone.
Whatever	waited	below	rose.
Emerged	unseen	with	a	shivering	of	the	water.
A	moment,	blurred	and	uncertain.
Then	screams.
Trull	dropped	his	spear	and	clapped	both	hands	to	his	ears—and	he	was	not
alone	in	that	response,	for	the	screams	grew	louder,	drawn	out	from	helpless
throats	and	rising	to	shrieks.	Sorcery	flashed	in	the	fog,	briefly	then	ceased.
The	Letherii	ships	were	on	all	sides	now.	Yet	nothing	could	be	seen	of	what
was	happening	on	them.	The	fog	had	blackened	around	them,	coiling	like
smoke,	and	from	that	impenetrable	gloom	only	the	screams	clawed	free,	like
shreds	of	horror,	the	writhing	of	souls.
The	sounds	were	in	Trull’s	skull,	indifferent	to	his	efforts	to	block	them.
Hundreds	of	voices.	Hundreds	upon	hundreds.
Then	silence.	Hard	and	absolute.
Hannan	Mosag	gestured.
The	white	cloak	of	fog	vanished	abruptly.


The	calm	seas	now	rolled	beneath	a	steady	wind.	Above,	the	sun	glared
down	from	a	fiercely	blue	sky.
Gone,	too,	was	the	black	emanation	that	had	engulfed	the	Letherii	fleet.
The	ships	wallowed,	burned-out	lanterns	pitching	wildly.
‘Paddle.’
Hannan	Mosag’s	voice	seemed	to	issue	from	directly	beside	Trull.	He
started,	then	reached	down,	along	with	everyone	else,	for	a	paddle.	Rose	to
plant	his	hip	against	the	gunnel,	then	chopped	down	into	the	water.
The	longboat	surged	forward.
In	moments	they	were	holding	blades	firm	in	the	water,	halting	their	craft
alongside	the	hull	of	one	of	the	ships.
Shadow	wraiths	swarmed	up	its	red-stained	side.
And	Trull	saw	that	the	waterline	on	the	hull	had	changed.	Its	hold	was,	he
realized,	now	empty.
‘Fear,’	he	hissed.	‘What	is	going	on?	What	has	happened?’
His	brother	turned,	and	Trull	was	shocked	by	Fear ’s	pallid	visage.	‘It	is	not
for	us,	Trull,’	he	said,	then	swung	round	once	more.
It	is	not	for	us.	What	does	he	mean	by	that?	What	isn’t?
Dead	sharks	rolled	in	the	waves	around	them.	Their	carcasses	were	split
open,	as	if	they	had	exploded	from	within.	The	water	was	streaked	with	viscid
froth.
‘We	return	now,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘Man	the	sails,	my	warriors.	We
have	witnessed.	Now	we	must	leave.’
Witnessed—in	the	name	of	Father	Shadow,	what?
Aboard	the	Letherii	ships,	canvas	snapped	and	billowed.
The	wraiths	will	deliver	them.	By	the	Dusk,	this	is	no	simple	show	of	power.
This—this	is	a	challenge.	A	challenge,	of	such	profound	arrogance	that	it	far
surpassed	that	of	these	Letherii	hunters	and	their	foolish,	suicidal	harvest	of	the
tusked	seals.	At	that	realization,	a	new	thought	came	to	Trull	as	he	watched
other	warriors	tending	to	the	sails.	Who	among	the	Letherii	would	knowingly
send	the	crews	of	nineteen	ships	to	their	deaths?	And	why	would	those	crews
even	agree	to	it?
It	was	said	gold	was	all	that	mattered	to	the	Letherii.	But	who,	in	their	right
mind,	would	seek	wealth	when	it	meant	certain	death?	They	had	to	have	known
there	would	be	no	escape.	Then	again,	what	if	I	had	not	stumbled	upon	them?
What	if	I	had	not	chosen	the	Calach	strand	to	look	for	jade?	But	no,	now	he
was	the	one	being	arrogant.	If	not	Trull,	then	another.	The	crime	would	never
have	gone	unnoticed.	The	crime	was	never	intended	to	go	unnoticed.
He	shared	the	confusion	of	his	fellow	warriors.	Something	was	awry	here.


With	both	the	Letherii	and	with…us.	With	Hannan	Mosag.	Our	Warlock	King.
Our	shadows	are	dancing.	Letherii	and	Edur,	dancing	out	a	ritual—but
these	are	not	steps	I	can	recognize.	Father	Shadow	forgive	me,	I	am	frightened.
Nineteen	ships	of	death	sailed	south,	while	four	K’orthan	raiders	cut
eastward.	Four	hundred	Edur	warriors,	once	more	riding	a	hard	silence.
	
It	fell	to	the	slaves	to	attend	to	the	preparations.	The	Beneda	corpse	was	laid	out
on	a	bed	of	sand	on	the	floor	of	a	large	stone	outbuilding	adjoining	the	citadel,
and	left	to	drain.
The	eye	sockets,	ears,	nostrils	and	gaping	mouth	were	all	cleaned	and
evened	out	with	soft	wax.	Chewed	holes	in	its	flesh	were	packed	with	a	mixture
of	clay	and	oil.
With	six	Edur	widows	overseeing,	a	huge	iron	tray	was	set	atop	a	trench
filled	with	coals	that	had	been	prepared	alongside	the	corpse.	Copper	coins
rested	on	the	tray,	snapping	and	popping	as	the	droplets	of	condensation	on
them	sizzled	and	hissed	then	vanished.
Udinaas	crouched	beside	the	trench,	staying	far	enough	back	to	ensure	that
his	sweat	did	not	drip	onto	the	coins—a	blasphemy	that	meant	instant	death	for
the	careless	slave—and	watched	the	coins,	seeing	them	darken,	becoming
smoky	black.	Then,	as	the	first	glowing	spot	emerged	in	each	coin’s	centre,	he
used	pincers	to	pluck	it	from	the	tray	and	set	it	down	on	one	of	a	row	of	firedclay	plates—one	plate	for	each	widow.
The	widow,	kneeling	before	the	plate,	employed	a	finer	set	of	pincers	to
pick	up	the	coin.	And	then	pivoted	to	lean	over	the	corpse.
First	placement	was	the	left	eye	socket.	A	crackling	hiss,	worms	of	smoke
rising	upward	as	the	woman	pressed	down	with	the	pincers,	keeping	the	coin
firmly	in	place,	until	it	melded	with	the	flesh	and	would	thereafter	resist	being
dislodged.	Right	eye	socket	followed.	Nose,	then	forehead	and	cheeks,	every
coin	touching	its	neighbours.
When	the	body’s	front	and	sides,	including	all	the	limbs,	were	done,	melted
wax	was	poured	over	the	coin-sheathed	corpse.	And,	when	that	had	cooled,	it
was	then	turned	over.	More	coins,	until	the	entire	body	was	covered,	excepting
the	soles	of	the	feet	and	the	palms	of	the	hands.	Another	layer	of	melted	wax
followed.
The	task	of	sheathing	consumed	most	of	the	day,	and	it	was	near	dusk	when
Udinaas	finally	stumbled	from	the	out-building	and	stood,	head	bowed,	while
the	cool	air	plucked	at	the	sweat	on	his	skin.	He	spat	in	an	effort	to	get	the	foul
stench	out	of	his	mouth.	Burnt,	rotting	flesh	in	the	building’s	turgid,	oven-hot


confines.	The	reek	of	scorched	hair.	No	amount	of	scented	oil	and	skincombing	could	defeat	what	had	seeped	into	his	pores.	It	would	be	days	before
Udinaas	had	rid	himself	of	that	cloying,	dreadful	taste.
He	stared	down	at	the	ground	between	his	feet.	His	shoulder	still	ached
from	the	forced	healing	done	by	Uruth.	Since	that	time,	he	had	had	no
opportunity	to	speak	with	Feather	Witch.
To	his	masters,	he	had	explained	nothing.	They	had,	in	truth,	not	pressed
him	very	hard.	A	handful	of	questions,	and	they’d	seemed	content	with	his
awkward,	ineffectual	answers.	Udinaas	wondered	if	Uruth	had	been	as
unmotivated	in	her	own	questioning	of	Feather	Witch.	The	Tiste	Edur	rarely
displayed	much	awareness	of	their	slaves,	and	even	less	understanding	of	their
ways.	It	was,	of	course,	the	privilege	of	the	conquerors	to	be	that	way,	and	the
universal	fate	of	the	conquered	to	suffer	that	disregard.
Yet	identities	persisted.	On	a	personal	level.	Freedom	was	little	more	than	a
tattered	net,	draped	over	a	host	of	minor,	self-imposed	bindings.	Its	stripping
away	changed	little,	except,	perhaps,	the	comforting	delusion	of	the	ideal.	Mind
bound	to	self,	self	to	flesh,	flesh	to	bone.	As	the	Errant	wills,	we	are	a
latticework	of	cages,	and	whatever	flutters	within	knows	but	one	freedom,	and
that	is	death.
The	conquerors	always	assumed	that	what	they	conquered	was	identity.	But
the	truth	was,	identity	could	only	be	killed	from	within,	and	even	that	gesture
was	but	a	chimera.	Isolation	had	many	children,	and	dissolution	was	but	one	of
them—yet	its	path	was	unique,	for	that	path	began	when	identity	was	left
behind.
From	the	building	behind	him	emerged	the	song	of	mourning,	the	Edur
cadence	of	grief.	Hunh,	hunh,	hunh,	hunh…A	sound	that	always	chilled
Udinaas.	Like	emotion	striking	the	same	wall,	again	and	again	and	again.	The
voice	of	the	trapped,	the	blocked.	A	voice	overwhelmed	by	the	truths	of	the
world.	For	the	Edur,	grieving	was	less	about	loss	than	about	being	lost.
Is	that	what	comes	when	you	live	a	hundred	thousand	years?
The	widows	then	emerged,	surrounding	the	corpse	that	floated	waist-high
on	thick,	swirling	shadows.	A	figure	of	copper	coins.	The	Edur ’s	singular	use
of	money.	Copper,	tin,	bronze,	iron,	silver	and	gold,	it	was	the	armour	of	the
dead.
At	least	that’s	honest.	Letherii	use	money	to	purchase	the	opposite.	Well,
not	quite.	More	like	the	illusion	of	the	opposite.	Wealth	as	life’s	armour.	Keep,
fortress,	citadel,	eternally	vigilant	army.	But	the	enemy	cares	nothing	for	all
that,	for	the	enemy	knows	you	are	defenceless.
‘Hunh,	hunh,	hunh,	hunh…’


This	was	Daughter	Sheltatha	Lore’s	hour,	when	all	things	material	became
uncertain.	Smudged	by	light’s	retreat,	when	the	air	lost	clarity	and	revealed	its
motes	and	grains,	the	imperfections	both	light	and	dark	so	perfectly	disguised
at	other	times.	When	the	throne	was	shown	to	be	empty.
Why	not	worship	money?	At	least	its	rewards	are	obvious	and	immediate.
But	no,	that	was	simplistic.	Letherii	worship	was	more	subtle,	its	ethics	bound
to	those	traits	and	habits	that	well	served	the	acquisition	of	wealth.	Diligence,
discipline,	hard	work,	optimism,	the	personalization	of	glory.	And	the
corresponding	evils:	sloth,	despair	and	the	anonymity	of	failure.	The	world
was	brutal	enough	to	winnow	one	from	the	other	and	leave	no	room	for	doubt
or	mealy	equivocation.	In	this	way,	worship	could	become	pragmatism,	and
pragmatism	was	a	cold	god.
Errant	make	ours	a	cold	god,	so	we	may	act	without	constraint.	A	suitable
Letherii	prayer,	though	none	would	utter	it	in	such	a	bold	fashion.	Feather
Witch	said	that	every	act	made	was	a	prayer,	and	thus	in	the	course	of	a	day
were	served	a	host	of	gods.	Wine	and	nectar	and	rustleaf	and	the	imbibing
thereof	was	a	prayer	to	death,	she	said.	Love	was	a	prayer	to	life.	Vengeance
was	a	prayer	to	the	demons	of	righteousness.	Sealing	a	business	pact	was,	she
said	with	a	faint	smile,	a	prayer	to	the	whisperer	of	illusions.	Attainment	for
one	was	born	of	deprivation	for	another,	after	all.	A	game	played	with	two
hands.
‘Hunh,	hunh,	hunh,	hunh…’
He	shook	himself.	His	sodden	tunic	now	wrapped	him	in	damp	chill.
A	shout	from	the	direction	of	the	sea.	The	K’orthan	raiders	were	returning.
Udinaas	walked	across	the	compound,	towards	the	Sengar	household.	He	saw
Tomad	Sengar	and	his	wife	Uruth	emerge,	and	dropped	to	his	knees,	head
pressed	to	the	ground,	until	they	passed.	Then	he	rose	and	hurried	into	the
longhouse.
The	copper-sheathed	corpse	would	be	placed	within	the	hollowed	trunk	of
a	Blackwood,	the	ends	sealed	with	discs	of	cedar.	Six	days	from	now,	the	bole
would	be	buried	in	one	of	a	dozen	sacred	groves	in	the	forest.	Until	that
moment,	the	dirge	would	continue.	The	widows	taking	turns	with	that	blunt,
terrible	utterance.
He	made	his	way	to	the	small	alcove	where	his	sleeping	pallet	waited.	The
longboats	would	file	into	the	canal,	one	after	the	other	in	the	grainy	half-light.
They	would	not	have	failed.	They	never	did.	The	crews	of	nineteen	Letherii
ships	were	now	dead—no	slaves	taken,	not	this	time.	Standing	on	both	sides	of
the	canal,	the	noble	wives	and	fathers	greeted	their	warriors	in	silence.
In	silence.


Because	something	terrible	has	happened.
He	lay	down	on	his	back,	staring	up	at	the	slanted	ceiling,	feeling	a	strange,
unnerving	constriction	in	his	throat.	And	could	hear,	in	the	rush	of	his	blood,	a
faint	echo	behind	his	heart.	A	double	beat.	Hunh	hunh	Huh	huh.	Hunh	hunh	Huh
huh…
Who	are	you?	What	are	you	waiting	for?	What	do	you	want	with	me?
	
Trull	clambered	onto	the	landing,	the	cold	haft	of	his	spear	in	his	right	hand,
its	iron-shod	butt	striking	sparks	on	the	flagstones	as	he	stepped	away	from	the
canal’s	edge	and	halted	beside	Fear.	Opposite	them,	but	remaining	five	paces
away,	stood	Tomad	and	Uruth.	Rhulad	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Nor,	he	realized,	was	Mayen.
A	glance	revealed	that	Fear	was	scanning	the	welcoming	crowd.	There	was
no	change	in	expression,	but	he	strode	towards	Tomad.
‘Mayen	is	in	the	forest	with	the	other	maidens,’	Tomad	said.	‘Collecting
morok.	They	are	guarded	by	Theradas,	and	Midik	and	Rhulad.’
‘My	son.’	Uruth	stepped	closer,	eyes	searching	Fear ’s	visage.	‘What	did	he
do?’
Fear	shook	his	head.
‘They	died	without	honour,’	Trull	said.	‘We	could	not	see	the	hand	that
delivered	that	death,	but	it	was…monstrous.’
‘And	the	harvest?’	Tomad	asked.
‘It	was	taken,	Father.	By	that	same	hand.’
A	flash	of	anger	in	Uruth’s	eyes.	‘This	was	no	full	unveiling.	This	was	a
demonic	summoning.’
Trull	frowned.	‘I	do	not	understand,	Mother.	There	were	shadows—’
‘And	a	darkness,’	Fear	cut	in.	‘From	the	depths…darkness.’
She	crossed	her	arms	and	looked	away.	Trull	had	never	seen	Uruth	so
distressed.
And	in	himself,	his	own	growing	unease.	Fully	three-fifths	of	the	Tiste
Edur	employed	sorcery.	A	multitude	of	fragments	from	the	riven	warren	of
Kurald	Emurlahn.	Shadow’s	power	displayed	myriad	flavours.	Among	Uruth’s
sons,	only	Binadas	walked	the	paths	of	sorcery.	Fear ’s	words	had	none	the	less
triggered	a	recognition	in	Trull.	Every	Tiste	Edur	understood	his	own,	after
all.	Caster	of	magic	or	not.
‘Mother,	Hannan	Mosag’s	sorcery	was	not	Kurald	Emurlahn.’	He	did	not
need	their	expressions	to	realize	that	he	had	been	the	last	among	them	to
understand	that	truth.	He	grimaced.	‘Forgive	me	my	foolish	words—’


‘Foolish	only	in	speaking	them	aloud,’	Uruth	said.	‘Fear,	take	Trull	and
Rhulad.	Go	to	the	Stone	Bowl—’
‘Stop	this.	Now.’	Tomad’s	voice	was	hard,	his	expression	dark.	‘Fear.	Trull.
Return	to	the	house	and	await	me	there.	Uruth,	tend	to	the	needs	of	the	widows.
A	fallen	warrior	faces	his	first	dusk	among	kin.	Propitiations	must	be	made.’
For	a	moment	Trull	thought	she	was	going	to	object.	Instead,	lips	pressed
into	a	line,	she	nodded	and	strode	away.
Fear	beckoned	Trull	and	they	walked	to	the	longhouse,	leaving	their	father
standing	alone	beside	the	canal.
‘These	are	awkward	times,’	Trull	said.
‘Is	there	need,’	Fear	asked,	‘when	you	stand	between	Rhulad	and	Mayen?’
Trull	clamped	his	mouth	shut.	Too	off-balance	to	deflect	the	question	with
a	disarming	reply.
Fear	took	the	silence	for	an	answer.	‘And	when	you	stand	between	them,
who	do	you	face?’
‘I—I	am	sorry,	Fear.	Your	question	was	unexpected.	Is	there	need,	you	ask.
My	answer	is:	I	don’t	know.’
‘Ah,	I	see.’
‘His	strutting…irritates	me.’
Fear	made	no	response.
They	came	to	the	doorway.	Trull	studied	his	brother.	‘Fear,	what	is	this
Stone	Bowl?	I	have	never	heard—’
‘It	doesn’t	matter,’	he	replied,	then	walked	inside.
Trull	remained	at	the	threshold.	He	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair,	turned	and
looked	back	across	the	compound.	Those	who	had	stood	in	welcome	were
gone,	as	were	their	warrior	kin.	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan	Cadre	were
nowhere	to	be	seen.	A	lone	figure	remained.	Tomad.
Are	we	so	different	from	everyone	else?
Yes.	For	the	Warlock	King	has	asked	for	Tomad’s	sons.	To	pursue	a	vision.
He	has	made	us	his	servants.	Yet…is	he	the	master?
	
In	his	dream,	Udinaas	found	himself	kneeling	in	ashes.	He	was	cut	and
bleeding.	His	hands.	His	legs.	The	ash	seemed	to	gnaw	into	the	wounds	with
avid	hunger.	The	tightness	in	his	throat	made	him	gasp	for	breath.	He	clawed	at
the	air	as	he	clambered	onto	his	feet	and	stood,	wavering—and	the	sky	roared
and	raced	in	on	all	sides.
Fire.	A	storm	of	fire.
He	screamed.


And	found	himself	on	his	knees	once	more.
Beyond	his	ragged	breathing,	only	silence.	Udinaas	lifted	his	head.	The
storm	was	gone.
Figures	on	the	plain.	Walking,	dust	roiling	up	behind	them	like	wind-tossed
shrouds.	Weapons	impaled	them.	Limbs	hung	from	shreds	of	tendon	and
muscle.	Sightless	eyes	and	expressions	twisted	with	fearful	recognition—faces
seeing	their	own	deaths—blind	to	his	own	presence	as	they	marched	past.
Rising	up	within	him,	a	vast	sense	of	loss.	Grief,	then	the	bitter	whisper	of
betrayal.
Someone	will	pay	for	this.	Someone	will	pay.
Someone.
Someone.
The	words	were	not	his,	the	thoughts	were	another ’s,	but	the	voice,	there	in
the	centre	of	his	skull—that	voice	was	his	own.
A	dead	warrior	walked	close.	Tall,	black-skinned.	A	sword	had	taken	most
of	his	face.	Bone	gleamed,	latticed	with	red	cracks	from	some	fierce	impact.
A	flash	of	motion.
Metal-clad	hand	crashed	into	the	side	of	Udinaas’s	head.	Blood	sprayed.	He
was	in	a	cloud	of	grey	ash,	on	the	ground.	Blinking	burning	fire.
He	felt	gauntleted	fingers	close	about	his	left	ankle.	His	leg	was	viciously
yanked	upward.
And	then	the	warrior	began	dragging	him.
Where	are	we	going?
‘The	Lady	is	harsh.’
The	Lady?
‘Is	harsh.’
She	awaits	us	at	journey’s	end?
‘She	is	not	one	who	waits.’
He	twisted	as	he	was	pulled	along,	found	himself	staring	back	at	the	furrow
he’d	made	in	the	ashes.	A	track	reaching	to	the	horizon.	And	black	blood	was
welling	from	that	ragged	gouge.	How	long	has	he	been	dragging	me?	Whom	do
I	wound?
The	thunder	of	hoofs.
‘She	comes.’
Udinaas	turned	onto	his	back,	struggled	to	raise	his	head.
A	piercing	scream.
Then	a	sword	ripped	through	the	warrior	dragging	Udinaas.	Cutting	it	in
half.	The	hand	fell	away	from	his	ankle	and	he	rolled	to	one	side	as	iron-shod
hoofs	thundered	past.


She	blazed,	blinding	white.	A	sword	flickering	like	lightning	in	one	hand.
In	the	other,	a	double-bladed	axe	that	dripped	something	molten	in	its	wake.
The	horse—
Naught	but	bones,	bound	by	fire.
The	huge	skeletal	beast	tossed	its	head	as	it	wheeled	round.	The	woman
was	masked	in	flat,	featureless	gold.	A	headdress	of	arching,	gilt	scales	rose
like	hackles	about	her	head.	Weapons	lifted.
And	Udinaas	stared	into	her	eyes.
He	flinched	away,	scrabbling	to	his	feet,	then	running.
Hoofs	pounded	behind	him.
Daughter	Dawn.	Menandore—
Before	him	were	sprawled	the	warriors	that	had	walked	alongside	the	one
dragging	him.	Flames	licking	along	wounds,	dull	smoke	rising	from	torn
flesh.	None	moved.	They	keep	dying,	don’t	they?	Again	and	again.	They	keep
dying—
He	ran.
Then	was	struck.	A	wall	of	ridged	bone	smashing	into	his	right	shoulder,
spinning	him	through	the	air.	He	hit	the	ground,	tumbled	and	rolled,	limbs
flopping.
His	eyes	stared	up	into	swirling	dust,	the	sky	behind	it	spinning.
A	shape	appeared	in	its	midst,	and	a	hard-soled	boot	settled	on	his	chest.
When	she	spoke,	her	voice	was	like	the	hissing	of	a	thousand	snakes.	‘The
blood	of	a	Locqui	Wyval…in	the	body	of	a	slave.	Which	heart,	mortal,	will
you	ride?’
He	could	not	draw	breath.	The	pressure	of	the	boot	was	building,	crushing
his	chest.	He	clawed	at	it.
‘Let	your	soul	answer.	Before	you	die.’
I	ride…that	which	I	have	always	ridden.
‘A	coward’s	answer.’
Yes.
‘A	moment	remains.	For	you	to	reconsider.’
Blackness	closed	around	him.	He	could	taste	blood	in	the	grit	filling	his
mouth.	Wyval!	I	ride	the	Wyval!
The	boot	slipped	to	one	side.
A	gauntleted	hand	reached	down	to	the	rope	he	used	as	a	belt.	Fingers
clenched	and	he	was	lifted	from	the	ground,	arching,	head	dangling.	Before
him,	a	world	turned	upside	down.	Lifted,	until	his	hips	pushed	up	against	the
inside	of	her	thighs.
He	felt	his	tunic	pulled	up	onto	his	belly.	A	hand	tearing	his	loincloth	away.


Cold	iron	fingers	clamped	round	him.
He	groaned.
And	was	pushed	inside.
Fire	in	his	blood.	Agony	in	his	hips	and	lower	back	as,	with	one	hand,	she
drove	him	up	again	and	again.
Until	he	spasmed.
The	hand	released	him	and	he	thumped	back	onto	the	ground,	shuddering.
He	did	not	hear	her	walk	away.
He	heard	nothing.	Nothing	but	the	two	hearts	within	him.	Their	beats
drawing	closer,	ever	closer.
After	a	time	someone	settled	down	beside	Udinaas.
‘Debtor.’
Someone	will	pay.	He	almost	laughed.
A	hand	on	his	shoulder.	‘Udinaas.	Where	is	this	place?’
‘I	don’t	know.’	He	turned	his	head,	stared	up	into	the	frightened	eyes	of
Feather	Witch.	‘What	do	the	tiles	tell	you?’
‘I	don’t	have	them.’
‘Think	of	them.	Cast	them,	in	your	mind.’
‘What	do	you	know	of	such	things,	Udinaas?’
He	slowly	sat	up.	The	pain	was	gone.	No	bruises,	not	even	a	scratch
beneath	the	layer	of	ash.	He	dragged	his	tunic	down	to	cover	his	crotch.
‘Nothing,’	he	replied.
‘You	do	not	need	divination,’	she	said,	‘to	know	what	has	just	happened.’
His	smile	was	bitter.	‘I	do.	Dawn.	The	Edur ’s	most	feared	Daughter.
Menandore.	She	was	here.’
‘The	Letherii	are	not	visited	by	Tiste	Edur	gods—’
‘I	was.’	He	looked	away.	‘She,	uh,	made	use	of	me.’
Feather	Witch	rose.	‘Wyval	blood	has	taken	you.	You	are	poisoned	with
visions,	Debtor.	Madness.	Dreams	that	you	are	more	than	the	man	everyone
else	sees.’
‘Look	at	the	bodies	around	us,	Feather	Witch.	She	cut	them	down.’
‘They	are	long	dead.’
‘Aye,	yet	they	were	walking.	See	this	track—one	of	them	dragged	me	and
that	is	my	trail.	And	there,	her	horse’s	hoofs	made	those.’
But	she	was	not	looking,	her	gaze	instead	fixed	on	Udinaas.	‘This	is	a
world	of	your	own	conjuring,’	she	said.	‘Your	mind	is	beset	by	false	visions.’
‘Cast	your	tiles.’
‘No.	This	is	a	dead	place.’
‘The	Wyval’s	blood	is	alive,	Feather	Witch.	The	Wyval’s	blood	is	what


binds	us	to	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Impossible.	Wyval	are	spawn	of	the	Eleint.	They	are	the	mongrels	of	the
dragons,	and	even	the	dragons	do	not	control	them.	They	are	of	the	Hold,	yet
feral.’
‘I	saw	a	white	crow.	On	the	strand.	That	is	what	I	was	coming	to	tell	you,
hoping	to	reach	you	before	you	cast	the	tiles.	I	sought	to	banish	it,	and	its
answer	was	laughter.	When	you	were	attacked,	I	thought	it	was	the	White	Crow.
But	don’t	you	see?	White,	the	face	of	Menandore,	of	Dawn.	That	is	what	the
Fulcra	were	showing	us.’
‘I	will	not	be	devoured	by	your	madness,	Debtor.’
‘You	asked	me	to	lie	to	Uruth	and	the	other	Edur.	I	did	as	you	asked,
Feather	Witch.’
‘But	now	the	Wyval	has	taken	you.	And	soon	it	will	kill	you,	and	even	the
Edur	can	do	nothing.	As	soon	as	they	realize	that	you	are	indeed	poisoned,	they
will	cut	out	your	heart.’
‘Do	you	fear	that	I	will	become	a	Wyval?	Is	that	my	fate?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘This	is	not	the	kiss	of	a	Soletaken,	Udinaas.	It	is	a
disease	that	attacks	your	brain.	Poisons	the	clear	blood	of	your	thoughts.’
‘Are	you	truly	here,	Feather	Witch?	Here,	in	my	dream?’
With	the	question	her	form	grew	translucent,	wavered,	then	scattered	like
windblown	sand.
He	was	alone	once	more.
Will	I	never	awaken?
Motion	in	the	sky	to	his	right	drew	him	round.
Dragons.	A	score	of	the	creatures,	riding	distant	currents	just	above	the
uncertain	horizon.	Around	them	swarmed	Wyval,	like	gnats.
And	Udinaas	suddenly	understood	something.
They	are	going	to	war.

Morok	leaves	covered	the	corpse.	Over	the	next	few	days,	those	leaves	would
begin	to	rot,	leaching	into	the	amber	wax	a	bluish	stain,	until	the	coin-sheathed
body	beneath	became	a	blurred	shape,	as	if	encased	in	ice.
The	shadow	in	the	wax,	enclosing	the	Beneda	warrior	for	all	time.	A	haven
for	wandering	wraiths,	there	within	the	hollowed	log.
Trull	stood	beside	the	corpse.	The	Blackwood	bole	was	still	being
prepared	in	an	unlit	building	to	one	side	of	the	citadel.	Living	wood	resisted


the	hands	that	would	alter	its	shape.	But	it	loved	death	and	so	could	be	cajoled.
Distant	cries	in	the	village	as	voices	lifted	in	a	final	prayer	to	Daughter
Dusk.	Night	was	moments	from	arriving.	The	empty	hours,	when	even	faith
itself	must	be	held	quiescent,	lay	ahead.	Night	belonged	to	the	Betrayer.	Who
sought	to	murder	Father	Shadow	at	their	very	moment	of	triumph,	and	who
very	nearly	succeeded.
There	were	prohibitions	against	serious	discourse	during	this	passage	of
time.	In	darkness	prowled	deceit,	an	unseen	breath	that	any	could	draw	in,	and
so	become	infected.
No	swords	were	buried	beneath	the	threshold	of	homes	wherein	maidens
dwelt.	To	seal	marriage	now	would	be	to	doom	its	fate.	A	child	delivered	was
put	to	death.	Lovers	did	not	touch	one	another.	The	day	was	dead.
Soon,	however,	the	moon	would	rise	and	shadows	would	return	once
more.	Just	as	Scabandari	Bloodeye	emerged	from	the	darkness,	so	too	did	the
world.	Failure	awaits	the	Betrayer.	It	could	not	be	otherwise,	lest	the	realms
descend	into	chaos.
He	stared	down	at	the	mound	of	leaves	beneath	which	lay	the	body	of	the
warrior.	He	had	volunteered	to	stand	guard	this	first	night.	No	Edur	corpse	was
ever	left	unattended	when	darkness	prowled,	for	it	cared	naught	whether	its
breath	flowed	into	warm	flesh	or	cold.	A	corpse	could	unleash	dire	events	as
easily	as	the	acts	of	someone	alive.	It	had	no	need	for	a	voice	or	gestures	of	its
own.	Others	were	ever	eager	to	speak	for	it,	to	draw	blade	or	dagger.
Hannan	Mosag	had	proclaimed	this	the	greatest	flaw	among	the	Edur.	Old
men	and	the	dead	were	the	first	whisperers	of	the	word	vengeance.	Old	men
and	the	dead	stood	at	the	same	wall,	and	while	the	dead	faced	it,	old	men	held
their	backs	to	it.	Beyond	that	wall	was	oblivion.	They	spoke	from	the	end
times,	and	both	knew	a	need	to	lead	the	young	onto	identical	paths,	if	only	to
give	meaning	to	all	they	had	known	and	all	they	had	done.
Feuds	were	now	forbidden.	Crimes	of	vengeance	sentenced	an	entire
bloodline	to	disgraced	execution.
Trull	Sengar	had	watched,	from	where	he	stood	in	the	gloom	beneath	a
tree—the	body	before	him—had	watched	his	brother	Rhulad	walk	out	into	the
forest.	In	these,	the	dark	hours,	he	had	been	furtive	in	his	movement,	stealing
like	a	wraith	from	the	village	edge.
Into	the	forest,	onto	the	north	trail.
That	led	to	the	cemetery	that	had	been	chosen	for	the	Beneda	warrior ’s
interment.
Where	a	lone	woman	stood	vigil	against	the	night.
It	may	be	an	attempt…that	will	fail.	Or	it	is	a	repetition	of	meetings	that


have	occurred	before,	many	times.	She	is	unknowable.	As	all	women	are
unknowable.	But	he	isn’t.	He	was	too	late	to	the	war	and	so	his	belt	is	bare.	He
would	draw	blood	another	way.
Because	Rhulad	must	win.	In	everything,	he	must	win.	That	is	the	cliff-edge
of	his	life,	the	narrow	strand	he	himself	fashions,	with	every	slight	observed—
whether	it	be	real	or	imagined	matters	not—every	silent	moment	that,	to	him,
screams	scorn	upon	the	vast	emptiness	of	his	achievements.
Rhulad.	Everything	worth	fighting	for	is	gained	without	fighting.	Every
struggle	is	a	struggle	against	doubt.	Honour	is	not	a	thing	to	be	chased,	for	it,
as	with	all	other	forces	of	life,	is	in	fact	impelled,	streaking	straight	for	you.
The	moment	of	collision	is	where	the	truth	of	you	is	revealed.
An	attempt.	Which	she	will	refuse,	with	outrage	in	her	eyes.
Or	their	arms	are	now	entwined,	and	in	the	darkness	there	is	heat	and
sweat.	And	betrayal.
And	he	could	not	move,	could	not	abandon	his	own	vigil	above	this
anonymous	Beneda	warrior.
His	brother	Fear	had	made	a	sword,	as	was	the	custom.	He	had	stood
before	Mayen	with	the	blade	resting	on	the	backs	of	his	hands.	And	she	had
stepped	forward,	witnessed	by	all,	to	take	the	weapon	from	him.	Carrying	it
back	to	her	home.
Betrothal.
A	year	from	that	day—less	than	five	weeks	from	now—she	would	emerge
from	the	doorway	with	that	sword.	Then,	using	it	to	excavate	a	trench	before
the	threshold,	she	would	set	it	down	in	the	earth	and	bury	it.	Iron	and	soil,
weapon	and	home.	Man	and	woman.
Marriage.
Before	that	day	when	Fear	presented	the	sword,	Rhulad	had	not	once
looked	at	Mayen.	Was	it	the	uninterest	of	youth?	No,	the	Edur	were	not	like
Letherii.	A	year	among	the	Letherii	was	as	a	day	among	the	Edur.	There	were	a
handful	of	prettier	women	among	the	maidens	of	noble-born	households.	But
he	had	set	his	eyes	upon	her	thereafter.
And	that	made	it	what	it	was.
He	could	abandon	this	vigil.	A	Beneda	warrior	was	not	a	Hiroth	warrior,
after	all.	A	sea-gnawed	corpse	clothed	in	copper,	not	gold.	He	could	set	out	on
that	trail,	padding	through	the	darkness.
To	find	what?	Certainty,	the	sharp	teeth	behind	all	that	gnawed	at	his
thoughts.
And	the	worth	of	that?
It	is	these	dark	hours—


Trull	Sengar ’s	eyes	slowly	widened.	A	figure	had	emerged	from	the	forest
edge	opposite	him.	Heart	thudding,	he	stared.
It	stepped	forward.	Black	blood	in	its	mouth.	Skin	a	pallid,	dulled
reflection	of	moonlight,	smeared	in	dirt,	smudged	by	something	like	mould.
Twin,	empty	scabbards	of	polished	wood	at	its	hips.	Fragments	of	armour
hanging	from	it.	Tall,	yet	stoop-shouldered,	as	if	height	had	become	its	own
imposition.
Eyes	like	dying	coals.
‘Ah,’	it	murmured,	looking	down	on	the	heap	of	leaves,	‘what	have	we
here?’	It	spoke	the	language	of	night,	close	kin	to	that	of	the	Edur.
Trembling,	Trull	forced	himself	to	step	forward,	shifting	his	spear	into	a
two-handed	grip,	the	iron	blade	hovering	above	the	corpse.	‘He	is	not	for	you,’
he	said,	his	throat	suddenly	parched	and	strangely	tight.
The	eyes	glowed	brighter	for	a	moment	as	the	white-skinned	apparition
glanced	up	at	Trull.	‘Tiste	Edur,	do	you	know	me?’
Trull	nodded.	‘The	ghost	of	darkness.	The	Betrayer.’
A	yellow	and	black	grin.
Trull	flinched	as	it	drew	a	step	closer	and	then	settled	to	a	crouch	on	the
other	side	of	the	leaves.	‘Begone	from	here,	ghost,’	the	Edur	said.
‘Or	you	will	do	what?’
‘Sound	the	alarm.’
‘How?	Your	voice	is	but	a	whisper	now.	Your	throat	is	clenched.	You
struggle	to	breathe.	Is	it	betrayal	that	strangles	you,	Edur?	Never	mind.	I	have
wandered	far,	and	have	no	desire	to	wear	this	man’s	armour.’	It	straightened.
‘Move	back,	warrior,	if	you	wish	to	draw	breath.’
Trull	held	himself	where	he	was.	The	air	hissed	its	way	down	his
constricted	throat,	and	he	could	feel	his	limbs	weakening.
‘Well,	cowardice	was	never	a	flaw	among	the	Edur.	Have	it	your	way,
then.’	The	figure	turned	and	walked	towards	the	forest	edge.
Blessed	lungful	of	air,	then	another.	Head	spinning,	Trull	planted	his	spear
and	leaned	on	it.	‘Wait!’
The	Betrayer	halted,	faced	him	once	more.
‘This—this	has	never	happened	before.	The	vigil—’
‘Contested	only	by	hungry	earth	spirits.’	The	Betrayer	nodded.	‘Or,	even
more	pathetic,	by	the	spirits	of	uprooted	Blackwoods,	sinking	into	the	flesh	to
do…what?	Nothing,	just	as	they	did	in	life.	There	are	myriad	forces	in	this
world,	Tiste	Edur,	and	the	majority	of	them	are	weak.’
‘Father	Shadow	imprisoned	you—’
‘So	he	did,	and	there	I	remain.’	Once	again,	that	ghastly	smile.	‘Except


when	I	dream.	Mother	Dark’s	reluctant	gift,	a	reminder	to	me	that	She	does	not
forget.	A	reminder	to	me	that	I,	too,	must	never	forget.’
‘This	is	not	a	dream,’	Trull	said.
‘They	were	shattered,’	the	Betrayer	said.	‘Long	ago.	Fragments	scattered
across	a	battlefield.	Why	would	anyone	want	them?	Those	broken	shards	can
never	be	reunited.	They	are,	each	and	every	one,	now	folded	in	on	themselves.
So,	I	wonder,	what	did	he	do	with	them?’
The	figure	walked	into	the	forest	and	was	gone.
‘This,’	Trull	whispered,	‘is	not	a	dream.’
	
Udinaas	opened	his	eyes.	The	stench	of	the	seared	corpse	remained	in	his	nose
and	mouth,	thick	in	his	throat.	Above	him,	the	longhouse’s	close	slanted
ceiling,	rough	black	bark	and	yellowed	chinking.	He	remained	motionless
beneath	the	blankets.
Was	it	near	dawn?
He	could	hear	nothing,	no	voices	from	the	chambers	beyond.	But	that	told
him	little.	The	hours	before	the	moon	rose	were	silent	ones.	As	were,	of
course,	the	hours	when	everyone	slept.	He	had	nets	to	repair	the	coming	day.
And	rope	strands	to	weave.
Perhaps	that	is	the	truth	of	madness,	when	a	mind	can	do	nothing	but	make
endless	lists	of	the	mundane	tasks	awaiting	it,	as	proof	of	its	sanity.	Mend	those
nets.	Wind	those	strands.	See?	I	have	not	lost	the	meaning	of	my	life.
The	blood	of	the	Wyval	was	neither	hot	nor	cold.	It	did	not	rage.	Udinaas
felt	no	different	in	his	body.	But	the	clear	blood	of	my	thoughts,	oh,	they	are
stained	indeed.	He	pushed	the	blankets	away	and	sat	up.	This	is	the	path,	then,
and	I	am	to	stay	on	it.	Until	the	moment	comes.
Mend	the	nets.	Weave	the	strands.
Dig	the	hole	for	that	Beneda	warrior,	who	would	have	just	opened	his	eyes,
had	he	any.	And	seen	not	the	blackness	of	the	imprisoning	coins.	Seen	not	the
blue	wax,	nor	the	morok	leaves	reacting	to	that	wax	and	turning	wet	and	black.
Seen,	instead,	the	face	of…something	else.
Wyval	circled	dragons	in	flight.	He	had	seen	that.	Like	hounds	surrounding
their	master	as	the	hunt	is	about	to	be	unleashed.	I	know,	then,	why	I	am	where	I
have	arrived.	And	when	is	an	answer	the	night	is	yet	to	whisper—no,	not
whisper,	but	howl.	The	call	to	the	chase	by	Darkness	itself.
Udinaas	realized	he	was	among	the	enemy.	Not	as	a	Letherii	sentenced	to	a
life	of	slavery.	That	was	as	nothing	to	the	peril	his	new	blood	felt,	here	in	this
heart	of	Edur	and	Kurald	Emurlahn.


Feather	Witch	would	have	been	better,	I	suppose,	but	Mother	Dark	moves
unseen	even	in	things	such	as	these.
He	made	his	way	into	the	main	chamber.
And	came	face	to	face	with	Uruth.
‘These	are	not	the	hours	to	wander,	slave,’	she	said.
He	saw	that	she	was	trembling.
Udinaas	sank	to	the	floor	and	set	his	forehead	against	the	worn	planks.
‘Prepare	the	cloaks	of	Fear,	Rhulad	and	Trull,	for	travel	this	night.	Be
ready	before	the	moon’s	rise.	Food	and	drink	for	a	morning’s	repast.’
He	quickly	climbed	to	his	feet	to	do	as	she	bid,	but	was	stopped	by	an
outstretched	hand.
‘Udinaas,’	Uruth	said.	‘You	do	this	alone,	telling	no-one.’
He	nodded.
	
Shadows	crept	out	from	the	forest.	The	moon	had	risen,	prison	world	to
Menandore’s	true	father,	who	was	trapped	within	it.	Father	Shadow’s	ancient
battles	had	made	this	world,	shaped	it	in	so	many	ways.	Scabandari	Bloodeye,
stalwart	defender	against	the	fanatic	servants	of	implacable	certitude,	whether
that	certitude	blazed	blinding	white,	or	was	the	all-swallowing	black.	The
defeats	he	had	delivered—the	burying	of	Brother	Dark	and	the	imprisonment
of	Brother	Light	there	in	that	distant,	latticed	world	in	the	sky—were	both	gifts,
and	not	just	to	the	Edur	but	to	all	who	were	born	and	lived	only	to	one	day	die.
The	gifts	of	freedom,	a	will	unchained	unless	one	affixed	upon	oneself
such	chains—the	crowding	host’s	uncountable,	ever-rattling	offers,	each
whispering	promises	of	salvation	against	confusion—and	wore	them	like
armour.
Trull	Sengar	saw	chains	upon	the	Letherii.	He	saw	the	impenetrable	net
which	bound	them,	the	links	of	reasoning	woven	together	into	a	chaotic	mass
where	no	beginning	and	no	end	could	be	found.	He	understood	why	they
worshipped	an	empty	throne.	And	he	knew	the	manner	in	which	they	would
justify	all	that	they	did.	Progress	was	necessity,	growth	was	gain.	Reciprocity
belonged	to	fools	and	debt	was	the	binding	force	of	all	nature,	of	every	people
and	every	civilization.	Debt	was	its	own	language,	within	which	were	used
words	like	negotiation,	compensation	and	justification,	and	legality	was	a	skein
of	duplicity	that	blinded	the	eyes	of	justice.
An	empty	throne.	Atop	a	mountain	of	gold	coins.
Father	Shadow	had	sought	a	world	wherein	uncertainty	could	work	its
insidious	poison	against	those	who	chose	intransigence	as	their	weapon—with


which	they	held	wisdom	at	bay.	Where	every	fortress	eventually	crumbled
from	within,	from	the	very	weight	of	those	chains	that	exerted	so	inflexible	an
embrace.
In	his	mind	he	argued	with	that	ghost—the	Betrayer.	The	one	who	sought
to	murder	Scabandari	Bloodeye	all	those	thousands	of	years	ago.	He	argued
that	every	certainty	is	an	empty	throne.	That	those	who	knew	but	one	path
would	come	to	worship	it,	even	as	it	led	to	a	cliff’s	edge.	He	argued,	and	in	the
silence	of	that	ghost’s	indifference	to	his	words	he	came	to	realize	that	he
himself	spoke—fierce	with	heat—from	the	foot	of	an	empty	throne.
Scabandari	Bloodeye	had	never	made	that	world.	He	had	vanished	in	this
one,	lost	on	a	path	no-one	else	could	follow.
Trull	Sengar	stood	before	the	corpse	and	its	mound	of	rotting	leaves,	and
felt	desolation	in	his	soul.	A	multitude	of	paths	waited	before	him,	and	they
were	all	sordid,	sodden	with	despair.
The	sound	of	boots	on	the	trail.	He	turned.
Fear	and	Rhulad	approached.	Wearing	their	cloaks.	Fear	carried	Trull’s
own	in	his	arms,	and	from	the	man’s	shoulders	hung	a	small	pack.
Rhulad’s	face	was	flushed,	and	Trull	could	not	tell	if	it	was	born	of	anxiety
or	excitement.
‘I	greet	you,	Trull,’	Fear	said,	handing	him	the	cloak.
‘Where	are	we	going?’
‘Our	father	passes	this	night	in	the	temple.	Praying	for	guidance.’
‘The	Stone	Bowl,’	Rhulad	said,	his	eyes	glittering.	‘Mother	sends	us	to	the
Stone	Bowl.’
‘Why?’
Rhulad	shrugged.
Trull	faced	Fear.	‘What	is	this	Stone	Bowl?	I	have	never	heard	of	it.’
‘An	old	place.	In	the	Kaschan	Trench.’
‘You	knew	of	this	place,	Rhulad?’
His	younger	brother	shook	his	head.	‘Not	until	tonight,	when	Mother
described	it.	We	have	all	walked	the	edge	of	the	Trench.	Of	course	the	darkness
of	its	heart	is	impenetrable—how	could	we	have	guessed	that	a	holy	site	hid
within	it?’
‘A	holy	site?	In	absolute	darkness?’
‘The	significance	of	that,’	Fear	said,	‘will	be	made	evident	soon	enough,
Trull.’
They	began	walking,	eldest	brother	in	the	lead.	Into	the	forest,	onto	a	trail
leading	northwest.	‘Fear,’	Trull	said,	‘has	Uruth	spoken	to	you	of	the	Stone
Bowl	before?’


‘I	am	Weapons	Master,’	Fear	replied.	‘There	were	rites	to	observe…’
Among	them,	Trull	knew,	the	memorization	of	every	battle	the	Edur	ever
fought.	He	then	wondered	why	that	thought	had	come	to	him,	in	answer	to
Fear ’s	words.	What	hidden	linkages	was	his	own	mind	seeking	to	reveal,	and
why	was	he	unable	to	discern	them?
They	continued	on,	avoiding	pools	of	moonlight	unbroken	by	shadows.
‘Tomad	forbade	us	this	journey,’	Trull	said	after	a	time.
‘In	matters	of	sorcery,’	Fear	said,	‘Uruth	is	superior	to	Tomad.’
‘And	this	is	a	matter	of	sorcery?’
Rhulad	snorted	behind	Trull.	‘You	stood	with	us	in	the	Warlock	King’s
longboat.’
‘I	did,’	agreed	Trull.	‘Fear,	would	Hannan	Mosag	approve	of	what	we	do,
of	what	Uruth	commands	of	us?’
Fear	said	nothing.
‘You,’	Rhulad	said,	‘are	too	filled	with	doubt,	brother.	It	binds	you	in	place
—’
‘I	watched	you	walk	the	path	to	the	chosen	cemetery,	Rhulad.	After	Dusk’s
departure	and	before	the	moon’s	rise.’
If	Fear	reacted	to	this,	his	back	did	not	reveal	it,	nor	did	his	steps	falter	on
the	trail.
‘What	of	it?’	Rhulad	asked,	his	tone	too	loose,	too	casual.
‘My	words,	brother,	are	not	to	be	answered	with	flippancy.’
‘I	knew	that	Fear	was	busy	overseeing	the	return	of	weapons	to	the
armoury,’	Rhulad	said.	‘And	I	sensed	a	malevolence	prowling	the	darkness.
And	so	I	stood	in	hidden	vigil	over	his	betrothed,	who	was	alone	in	the
cemetery.	I	may	be	unblooded,	brother,	but	I	am	not	without	courage.	I	know
you	believe	that	inexperience	is	the	soil	in	which	thrive	the	roots	of	false
courage.	But	I	am	not	false,	no	matter	what	you	think.	For	me,	inexperience	is
unbroken	soil,	not	yet	ready	for	roots.	I	stood	in	my	brother ’s	place.’
‘Malevolence	in	the	night,	Rhulad?	Whose?’
‘I	could	not	be	certain.	But	I	felt	it.’
‘Fear,’	Trull	said,	‘have	you	no	questions	for	Rhulad	on	this	matter?’
‘No,’	Fear	replied	drily.	‘There	is	no	need	for	that…when	you	are	around.’
Trull	clamped	his	mouth	shut,	thankful	that	the	night	obscured	the	flush	on
his	face.
There	was	silence	for	some	time	after	that.
The	trail	began	climbing,	winding	among	outcrops	of	lichen-skinned
granite.	They	climbed	over	fallen	trees	here	and	there,	scrambled	up	steep
slides.	The	moon’s	light	grew	diffuse,	and	Trull	sensed	it	was	near	dawn	by	the


time	they	reached	the	highest	point	of	the	trail.
The	path	now	took	them	inland—eastward—along	a	ridge	of	toppled	trees
and	broken	boulders.	Water	trapped	in	depressions	in	the	bedrock	formed
impenetrable	black	pools	that	spread	across	the	trail.	The	sky	began	to	lighten
overhead.
Fear	then	led	them	off	the	path,	north,	across	tumbled	scree	and	among	the
twisted	trees.	A	short	while	later	Kaschan	Trench	was	before	them.
A	vast	gorge,	like	a	knife’s	puncturing	wound	in	the	bedrock,	its	sides
sheer	and	streaming	with	water,	it	ran	in	a	jagged	line,	beginning	beneath
Hasana	Inlet	half	a	day	to	the	west,	and	finally	vanishing	into	the	bedrock	more
than	a	day’s	travel	to	the	east:	They	were	at	its	widest	point,	two	hundred	or	so
paces	across,	the	landscape	opposite	slightly	higher	but	otherwise	identical—
scattered	boulders	looking	as	if	they	had	been	pushed	up	from	the	gorge	and
mangled	trees	that	seemed	sickened	by	some	unseen	breath	from	the	depths.
Fear	unclasped	his	cloak,	dropped	his	pack	and	walked	over	to	a
misshapen	mound	of	stones.	He	cleared	away	dead	branches	and	Trull	saw	that
the	stones	were	a	cairn	of	some	sort.	Fear	removed	the	capstone,	and	reached
down	into	the	hollow	beneath.	He	lifted	clear	a	coil	of	knotted	rope.
‘Remove	your	cloak	and	your	weapons,’	he	said	as	he	carried	the	coil	to
the	edge.
He	found	one	end	and	tied	his	pack,	cloak,	sword	and	spear	to	it.	Trull	and
Rhulad	came	close	with	their	own	gear	and	all	was	bound	to	the	rope.	Fear	then
began	lowering	it	over	the	side.
‘Trull,	take	this	other	end	and	lead	it	to	a	place	of	shadow.	A	place	where
the	shadow	will	not	retreat	before	the	sun	as	the	day	passes.’
He	picked	up	the	rope	end	and	walked	to	a	large,	tilted	boulder.	When	he
fed	the	end	into	the	shadows	at	its	base	he	felt	countless	hands	grasp	it.	Trull
stepped	back.	The	rope	was	now	taut.
Returning	to	the	edge,	he	saw	that	Fear	had	already	begun	his	descent.
Rhulad	stood	staring	down.
‘We’re	to	wait	until	he	reaches	the	bottom,’	Rhulad	said.	‘He	will	tug	thrice
upon	the	rope.	He	asked	that	I	go	next.’
‘Very	well.’
‘She	has	the	sweetest	lips,’	Rhulad	murmured,	then	looked	up	and	met
Trull’s	eyes.	‘Is	that	what	you	want	me	to	say?	To	give	proof	to	your
suspicions?’
‘I	have	many	suspicions,	brother,’	Trull	replied.	‘We	have	sun-scorched
thoughts,	we	have	dark-swallowed	thoughts.	But	it	is	the	shadow	thoughts	that
move	with	stealth,	creeping	to	the	very	edge	of	the	rival	realms—if	only	to	see


what	there	is	to	be	seen.’
‘And	if	they	see	nothing?’
‘They	never	see	nothing,	Rhulad.’
‘Then	illusions?	What	if	they	see	only	what	their	imagination	conjures?
False	games	of	light?	Shapes	in	the	darkness?	Is	this	not	how	suspicion
becomes	a	poison?	But	a	poison	like	white	nectar,	every	taste	leaving	you
thirsting	for	more.’
Trull	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	Then	he	said,	‘Fear	spoke	to	me	not
long	ago.	Of	how	one	is	perceived,	rather	than	how	one	truly	is.	How	the
power	of	the	former	can	overwhelm	that	of	the	latter.	How,	indeed,	perception
shapes	truth	like	waves	on	stone.’
‘What	would	you	ask	of	me,	Trull?’
He	faced	Rhulad	directly.	‘Cease	your	strutting	before	Mayen.’
A	strange	smile,	then,	‘Very	well,	brother.’
Trull’s	eyes	widened	slightly.
The	rope	snapped	three	times.
‘My	turn,’	Rhulad	said.	He	grasped	hold	of	the	rope	and	was	quickly	gone
from	sight.
The	knots	of	these	words	were	anything	but	loose.	Trull	drew	a	deep	breath,
let	it	out	slowly,	wondering	at	that	smile.	The	peculiarity	of	it.	A	smile	that
might	have	been	pain,	a	smile	born	of	hurt.
Then	he	turned	upon	himself	and	studied	what	he	was	feeling.	Difficult	to
find,	to	recognize,	but…Father	Shadow	forgive	me.	I	feel…sullied.
The	three	tugs	startled	him.
Trull	took	the	heavy	rope	in	his	hands,	feeling	the	sheath	of	beeswax
rubbed	into	the	fibres	to	keep	them	from	rotting.	Without	the	knots	for	footand	hand-holds,	the	descent	would	be	treacherous	indeed.	He	walked	out	over
the	edge,	facing	inward,	then	leaned	back	and	began	making	his	way	down.
Glittering	streams	ran	down	the	raw	stone	before	him.	Red-stained
calcretions	limned	the	surface	here	and	there.	Flea-like	insects	skipped	across
the	surface.	The	scrapes	left	by	the	passage	of	Rhulad	and	Fear	glistened	in	the
fading	light,	ragged	furrows	wounding	all	that	clung	to	the	rock.
Knot	to	knot,	he	went	down	the	rope,	the	darkness	deepening	around	him.
The	air	grew	cool	and	damp,	then	cold.	Then	his	feet	struck	mossy	boulders,
and	hands	reached	out	to	steady	him.
His	eyes	struggled	to	make	out	the	forms	of	his	brothers.	‘We	should	have
brought	a	lantern.’
‘There	is	light	from	the	Stone	Bowl,’	Fear	said.	‘An	Elder	Warren.
Kaschan.’


‘That	warren	is	dead,’	Trull	said.	‘Destroyed	by	Father	Shadow’s	own
hand.’
‘Its	children	are	dead,	brother,	but	the	sorcery	lingers.	Have	your	eyes
adjusted?	Can	you	see	the	ground	before	you?’
A	tumble	of	boulders	and	the	glitter	of	flowing	water	between	them.	‘I	can.’
‘Then	follow	me.’
They	made	their	way	out	from	the	wall.	Footing	was	treacherous,	forcing
them	to	proceed	slowly.	Dead	branches	festooned	with	mushrooms	and	moss.
Trull	saw	a	pallid,	hairless	rodent	of	some	kind	slip	into	a	crack	between	two
rocks,	tail	slithering	in	its	wake.	‘This	is	the	Betrayer ’s	realm,’	he	said.
Fear	grunted.	‘More	than	you	know,	brother.’
‘Something	lies	ahead,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	whisper.
Vast,	towering	shapes.	Standing	stones,	devoid	of	lichen	or	moss,	the
surface	strangely	textured,	made,	Trull	realized	as	they	drew	closer,	to
resemble	the	bark	of	the	Blackwood.	Thick	roots	coiled	out	from	the	base	of
each	obelisk,	spreading	out	to	entwine	with	those	of	the	stones	to	each	side.
Beyond,	the	ground	fell	away	in	a	broad	depression,	from	which	light	leaked
like	mist.
Fear	led	them	between	the	standing	stones	and	they	halted	at	the	pit’s	edge.
The	roots	writhed	downward,	and	woven	in	their	midst	were	bones.
Thousands	upon	thousands.	Trull	saw	Kaschan,	the	feared	ancient	enemies	of
the	Edur,	reptilian	snouts	and	gleaming	fangs.	And	bones	that	clearly	belonged
to	the	Tiste.	Among	them,	finely	curved	wing-bones	from	Wyval,	and,	at	the
very	base,	the	massive	skull	of	an	Eleint,	the	broad,	flat	bone	of	its	forehead
crushed	inward,	as	if	by	the	blow	of	a	gigantic,	gauntleted	fist.
Leafless	scrub	had	grown	up	from	the	chaotic	mat	on	the	slopes,	the
branches	and	twigs	grey	and	clenching.	Then	the	breath	hissed	between	Trull’s
teeth.	The	scrub	was	stone,	growing	not	in	the	manner	of	crystal,	but	of	living
wood.
‘Kaschan	sorcery,’	Fear	said	after	a	time,	‘is	born	of	sounds	our	ears
cannot	hear,	formed	into	words	that	loosen	the	bindings	that	hold	all	matter
together,	that	hold	it	to	the	ground.	Sounds	that	bend	and	stretch	light,	as	a	tidal
inflow	up	a	river	is	drawn	apart	at	the	moment	of	turning.	With	this	sorcery,
they	fashioned	fortresses	of	stone	that	rode	the	sky	like	clouds.	With	this
sorcery,	they	turned	Darkness	in	upon	itself	with	a	hunger	none	who	came	too
close	could	defy,	an	all-devouring	hunger	that	fed	first	and	foremost	upon
itself.’	His	voice	was	strangely	muted	as	he	spoke.	‘Kaschan	sorcery	was	sent
into	the	warren	of	Mother	Dark,	like	a	plague.	Thus	was	sealed	the	gate	from
Kurald	Galain	to	every	other	realm.	Thus	was	Mother	Dark	driven	into	the


very	core	of	the	Abyss,	witness	to	an	endless	swirl	of	light	surrounding	her—
all	that	she	would	one	day	devour,	until	the	last	speck	of	matter	vanishes	into
her.	Annihilating	Mother	Dark.	Thus	the	Kaschan,	who	are	long	dead,	set	upon
Mother	Dark	a	ritual	that	will	end	in	her	murder.	When	all	Light	is	gone.	When
there	is	naught	to	cast	Shadow,	and	so	Shadow	too	is	doomed	to	die.
‘When	Scabandari	Bloodeye	discovered	what	they	had	done,	it	was	too
late.	The	end,	the	death	of	the	Abyss,	cannot	be	averted.	The	journey	of	all	that
exists	repeats	on	every	scale,	brothers.	From	those	realms	too	small	for	us	to
see,	to	the	Abyss	itself.	The	Kaschan	locked	all	things	into	mortality,	into	the
relentless	plunge	towards	extinction.	This	was	their	vengeance.	An	act	born,
perhaps,	of	despair.	Or	the	fiercest	hatred	imaginable.	Witness	to	their	own
extinction,	they	forced	all	else	to	share	that	fate.’
His	brothers	were	silent.	The	dull	echoes	of	Fear ’s	last	words	faded	away.
Then	Rhulad	grunted.	‘I	see	no	signs	of	this	final	convergence,	Fear.’
‘A	distant	death,	aye.	More	distant	than	one	could	imagine.	Yet	it	will
come.’
‘And	what	is	that	to	us?’
‘The	Tiste	Invasions	drove	the	Kaschan	to	their	last	act.	Father	Shadow
earned	the	enmity	of	every	Elder	god,	of	every	ascendant.	Because	of	the
Kaschan	ritual,	the	eternal	game	among	Dark,	Light	and	Shadow	would	one
day	end.	And	with	it,	all	of	existence.’	He	faced	his	brothers.	‘I	tell	you	this
secret	knowledge	so	that	you	will	better	understand	what	happened	here,	what
was	done.	And	why	Hannan	Mosag	speaks	of	enemies	far	beyond	the	mortal
Letherii.’
The	first	glimmerings	of	realization	whispered	through	Trull.	He	dragged
his	gaze	from	Fear ’s	dark,	haunted	eyes,	and	looked	down	into	the	pit.	To	the
very	base,	to	the	skull	of	that	slain	dragon.	‘They	killed	him.’
‘They	destroyed	his	corporeal	body,	yes.	And	imprisoned	his	soul.’
‘Scabandari	Bloodeye,’	Rhulad	said,	shaking	his	head	as	if	to	deny	all	that
he	saw.	‘He	cannot	be	dead.	That	skull	is	not—’
‘It	is,’	Fear	said.	‘They	killed	our	god.’
‘Who?’	Trull	demanded.
‘All	of	them.	Elder	gods.	And	Eleint.	The	Elder	gods	loosed	the	blood	in
their	veins.	The	dragons	spawned	a	child	of	indescribable	terror,	to	seek	out
and	hunt	down	Scabandari	Bloodeye.	Father	Shadow	was	brought	down.	An
Elder	god	named	Kilmandaros	shattered	his	skull.	They	then	made	for
Bloodeye’s	spirit	a	prison	of	eternal	pain,	of	agony	beyond	measure,	to	last
until	the	Abyss	itself	is	devoured.
‘Hannan	Mosag	means	to	avenge	our	god.’


Trull	frowned.	‘The	Elder	gods	are	gone,	Fear.	As	are	the	Eleint.	Hannan
Mosag	commands	six	tribes	of	Tiste	Edur	and	a	fragmented	warren.’
‘Four	hundred	and	twenty-odd	thousand	Edur,’	Rhulad	said.	‘And,	for	all
our	endless	explorations,	we	have	found	no	kin	among	the	fragments	of
Kurald	Emurlahn.	Fear,	Hannan	Mosag	sees	through	stained	thoughts.	It	is	one
thing	to	challenge	Letherii	hegemony	with	summoned	demons	and,	if
necessary,	iron	blades.	Are	we	now	to	wage	war	against	every	god	in	this
world?’
Fear	slowly	nodded.	‘You	are	here,’	he	told	them,	‘and	you	have	been	told
what	is	known.	Not	to	see	you	bend	to	one	knee	and	praise	the	Warlock	King’s
name.	He	seeks	power,	brothers.	He	needs	power,	and	he	cares	nothing	for	its
provenance,	nor	its	taint.’
‘Your	words	are	treasonous,’	Rhulad	said,	and	Trull	heard	a	strange
delight	in	his	brother ’s	voice.
‘Are	they?’	Fear	asked.	‘Hannan	Mosag	has	charged	us	to	undertake	a
perilous	journey.	To	receive	for	him	a	gift.	To	then	deliver	it	into	his	hands.	A
gift,	brothers,	from	whom?’
‘We	cannot	deny	him,’	Trull	said.	‘He	will	simply	choose	others	to	go	in
our	stead.	And	we	will	face	banishment,	or	worse.’
‘Of	course	we	shall	not	deny	him,	Trull.	But	we	must	not	journey	like	blind
old	men.’
‘What	of	Binadas?’	Rhulad	asked.	‘What	does	he	know	of	this?’
‘Everything,’	Fear	replied.	‘More,	perhaps,	than	Uruth	herself.’
Trull	stared	down	once	more	at	the	mouldy	dragon	skull	at	the	bottom	of
the	pit.	‘How	are	you	certain	that	is	Scabandari	Bloodeye?’
‘Because	it	was	the	widows	who	brought	him	here.	The	knowledge	was
passed	down	every	generation	among	the	women.’
‘And	Hannan	Mosag?’
‘Uruth	knows	he	has	been	here,	to	this	place.	How	he	discovered	the	truth
remains	a	mystery.	Uruth	would	never	have	told	me	and	Binadas,	if	not	for	her
desperation.	The	Warlock	King	is	drawing	upon	deadly	powers.	Are	his
thoughts	stained?	If	not	before,	they	are	now.’
Trull’s	eyes	remained	on	that	skull.	A	blunt,	brutal	execution,	that	mailed
fist.	‘We	had	better	hope,’	he	whispered,	‘that	the	Elder	gods	are	indeed	gone.’


Chapter	Four

There	are	tides	beneath	every	tide
And	the	surface	of	water
Holds	no	weight
T ISTE	EDUR	SAYING
The	Nerek	believed	the	Tiste	Edur	were	children	of	demons.	There	was	ash	in
their	blood,	staining	their	skin.	To	look	into	an	Edur ’s	eyes	was	to	see	the
greying	of	the	world,	the	smearing	of	the	sun	and	the	rough	skin	of	night	itself.
As	the	Hiroth	warrior	named	Binadas	strode	towards	the	group,	the	Nerek
began	keening.	Fists	beating	their	own	faces	and	chests,	they	fell	to	their	knees.
Buruk	the	Pale	marched	among	them,	screaming	curses	and	shrieking
demands,	but	they	were	deaf	to	him.	The	merchant	finally	turned	to	where
stood	Seren	Pedac	and	Hull	Beddict,	and	began	laughing.
Hull	frowned.	‘This	will	pass,	Buruk,’	he	said.
‘Oh,	will	it	now?	And	the	world	itself,	will	that	too	pass?	Like	a	deathly
wind,	our	lives	swirling	like	dust	amidst	its	headlong	rush?	Only	to	settle	in	its
wake,	dead	and	senseless—and	all	that	frenzied	cavorting	empty	of	meaning?
Hah!	Would	that	I	had	hired	Faraed!’
Seren	Pedac’s	attention	remained	on	the	approaching	Tiste	Edur.	A	hunter.
A	killer.	One	who	probably	also	possessed	the	trait	of	long	silences.	She	could
imagine	this	Binadas,	sharing	a	fire	in	the	wilderness	with	Hull	Beddict.	In	the
course	of	an	evening,	a	night	and	the	following	morning,	perhaps	a	half-dozen
words	exchanged	between	them.	And,	she	suspected,	the	forging	of	a	vast,
depthless	friendship.	These	were	the	mysteries	of	men,	so	baffling	to	women.
Where	silences	could	become	a	conjoining	of	paths.	Where	a	handful	of
inconsequential	words	could	bind	spirits	in	an	ineffable	understanding.	Forces
at	play	that	she	could	sense,	indeed	witness,	yet	ever	remaining	outside	them.
Baffled	and	frustrated	and	half	disbelieving.
Words	knit	the	skein	between	and	among	women.	And	the	language	of
gesture	and	expression,	all	merging	to	fashion	a	tapestry	that,	as	every	woman


understood,	could	tear	in	but	one	direction,	by	deliberate,	vicious	effort.	A
friendship	among	women	knew	but	one	enemy,	and	that	was	malice.
Thus,	the	more	words,	the	tighter	the	weave.
Seren	Pedac	had	lived	most	of	her	life	in	the	company	of	men,	and	now,	on
her	rare	visits	to	her	home	in	Letheras,	she	was	viewed	by	women	who	knew
her	with	unease.	As	if	her	choice	had	made	her	loyalty	uncertain,	cause	for
suspicion.	And	she	had	found	an	unwelcome	awkwardness	in	herself	when	in
their	company.	They	wove	from	different	threads,	on	different	frames,
discordant	with	her	own	rhythms.	She	felt	clumsy	and	coarse	among	them,
trapped	by	her	own	silences.
To	which	she	answered	with	flight,	away	from	the	city,	from	her	past.
From	women.
Yet,	in	the	briefest	of	moments,	in	a	meeting	of	two	men	with	their	almost
indifferent	exchange	of	greetings,	she	was	knocked	a	step	back—almost
physically—and	shut	out.	Here,	sharing	this	ground,	this	trail	with	its	rocks	and
trees,	yet	in	another	world.
Too	easy	to	conclude,	with	a	private	sneer,	that	men	were	simple.	Granted,
had	they	been	strangers,	they	might	well	be	circling	and	sniffing	each	other ’s
anuses	right	now.	Inviting	conclusions	that	swept	aside	all	notions	of
complexity,	in	their	place	a	host	of	comforting	generalizations.	But	the
meeting	of	two	men	who	were	friends	destroyed	such	generalizations	and
challenged	the	contempt	that	went	with	them,	invariably	leading	a	woman	to
anger.
And	the	strange,	malicious	desire	to	step	between	them.
On	a	cobbled	beach,	a	man	looks	down	and	sees	one	rock,	then	another	and
another.	A	woman	looks	down	and	sees…rocks.	But	perhaps	even	this	is
simplistic.	Man	as	singular	and	women	as	plural.	More	likely	we	are	bits	of
both,	some	of	one	in	the	other.
We	just	don’t	like	admitting	it.
He	was	taller	than	Hull,	shoulders	level	with	the	Letherii’s	eyes.	His	hair
was	brown	and	bound	in	finger-length	braids.	Eyes	the	colour	of	wet	sand.
Skin	like	smeared	ash.	Youthful	features,	long	and	narrow	barring	the	broad
mouth.
Seren	Pedac	knew	the	Sengar	name.	It	was	likely	she	had	seen	this	man’s
kin,	among	the	delegations	she	had	treated	with	in	her	three	official	visits	to
Hannan	Mosag’s	tribe.
‘Hiroth	warrior,’	Buruk	the	Pale	said,	shouting	to	be	heard	above	the
wailing	Nerek,	‘I	welcome	you	as	guest.	I	am—’
‘I	know	who	you	are,’	Binadas	replied.


At	his	words	the	Nerek	voices	trailed	off,	leaving	only	the	wind	moaning
its	way	up	the	trail,	and	the	constant	trickling	flow	of	melt	water	from	the
higher	reaches.
‘I	bring	to	the	Hiroth,’	Buruk	was	saying,	‘ingots	of	iron—’
‘And	would	test,’	Hull	Beddict	interrupted,	‘the	thickness	of	the	ice.’
‘The	season	has	turned,’	Binadas	replied	to	Hull.	‘The	ice	is	riven	with
cracks.	There	has	been	an	illegal	harvest	of	tusked	seals.	Hannan	Mosag	will
have	given	answer.’
Seren	Pedac	swung	to	the	merchant.	Studied	Buruk	the	Pale’s	face.
Alcohol,	white	nectar	and	the	bitter	wind	had	lifted	the	blood	vessels	to	just
beneath	the	pallid	skin	on	his	nose	and	cheeks.	The	man’s	eyes	were	bleary	and
shot	with	red.	He	conveyed	no	reaction	at	the	Edur ’s	words.	‘Regrettable.	It	is
unfortunate	that,	among	my	merchant	brethren,	there	are	those	who	choose	to
disregard	the	agreements.	The	lure	of	gold.	A	tide	none	can	withstand.’
‘The	same	can	be	said	of	vengeance,’	Binadas	pointed	out.
Buruk	nodded.	‘Aye,	all	debts	must	be	repaid.’
Hull	Beddict	snorted.	‘Gold	and	blood	are	not	the	same.’
‘Aren’t	they?’	Buruk	challenged.	‘Hiroth	warrior,	the	interests	I	represent
would	adhere	now	and	evermore	to	the	bound	agreements.	Alas,	Lether	is	a
many-headed	beast.	The	surest	control	of	the	more	voracious	elements	will	be
found	in	an	alliance—between	the	Edur	and	those	Letherii	who	hold	to	the
words	binding	our	two	peoples.’
Binadas	turned	away.	‘Save	your	speeches	for	the	Warlock	King,’	he	said.
‘I	will	escort	you	to	the	village.	That	is	all	that	need	be	understood	between	us.’
Shrugging,	Buruk	the	Pale	walked	back	to	his	wagon.	‘On	your	feet,
Nerek!	The	trail	is	downhill	from	here	on,	isn’t	it	just!’
Seren	watched	the	merchant	climb	into	the	covered	back,	vanishing	from
sight,	as	the	Nerek	began	scurrying	about.	A	glance	showed	Hull	and	Binadas
facing	each	other	once	more.	The	wind	carried	their	words	to	her.
‘I	will	speak	against	Buruk’s	lies,’	Hull	Beddict	said.	‘He	will	seek	to
ensnare	you	with	smooth	assurances	and	promises,	none	of	which	will	be
worth	a	dock.’
Binadas	shrugged.	‘We	have	seen	the	traps	you	laid	out	before	the	Nerek
and	the	Tarthenal.	Each	word	is	a	knot	in	an	invisible	net.	Against	it,	the
Nerek’s	swords	were	too	blunt.	The	Tarthenal	too	slow	to	anger.	The	Faraed
could	only	smile	in	their	confusion.	We	are	not	as	those	tribes.’
‘I	know,’	Hull	said.	‘Friend,	my	people	believe	in	the	stacking	of	coins.
One	atop	another,	climbing,	ever	climbing	to	glorious	heights.	The	climb
signifies	progress,	and	progress	is	the	natural	proclivity	of	civilization.


Progress,	Binadas,	is	the	belief	from	which	emerge	notions	of	destiny.	The
Letherii	believe	in	destiny—their	own.	They	are	deserving	of	all	things,	born
of	their	avowed	virtues.	The	empty	throne	is	ever	there	for	the	taking.’
Binadas	was	smiling	at	Hull’s	words,	but	it	was	a	wry	smile.	He	turned
suddenly	to	Seren	Pedac.	‘Acquitor.	Join	us,	please.	Do	old	wounds	mar	Hull
Beddict’s	view	of	Lether?’
‘Destiny	wounds	us	all,’	she	replied,	‘and	we	Letherii	wear	the	scars	with
pride.	Most	of	us,’	she	added	with	an	apologetic	look	at	Hull.
‘One	of	your	virtues?’
‘Yes,	if	you	could	call	it	that.	We	have	a	talent	for	disguising	greed	under
the	cloak	of	freedom.	As	for	past	acts	of	depravity,	we	prefer	to	ignore	those.
Progress,	after	all,	means	to	look	ever	forward,	and	whatever	we	have
trampled	in	our	wake	is	best	forgotten.’
‘Progress,	then,’	Binadas	said,	still	smiling,	‘sees	no	end.’
‘Our	wagons	ever	roll	down	the	hill,	Hiroth.	Faster	and	faster.’
‘Until	they	strike	a	wall.’
‘We	crash	through	most	of	those.’
The	smile	faded,	and	Seren	thought	she	detected	a	look	of	sadness	in	the
Edur ’s	eyes	before	he	turned	away.	‘We	live	in	different	worlds.’
‘And	I	would	choose	yours,’	Hull	Beddict	said.
Binadas	shot	the	man	a	glance,	his	expression	quizzical.	‘Would	you,
friend?’
Something	in	the	Hiroth’s	tone	made	the	hairs	rise	on	the	back	of	Seren
Pedac’s	neck.
Hull	frowned,	suggesting	that	he	too	had	detected	something	awry	in	that
question.
No	more	words	were	exchanged	then,	and	Seren	Pedac	permitted	Hull	and
Binadas	to	take	the	lead	on	the	trail,	allowing	them	such	distance	that	their
privacy	was	assured.	Even	so,	they	seemed	disinclined	to	speak.	She	watched
them,	their	matching	strides,	the	way	they	walked.	And	wondered.
Hull	was	so	clearly	lost.	Seeking	to	make	the	Tiste	Edur	the	hand	of	his
own	vengeance.	He	would	drive	them	to	war,	if	he	could.	But	destruction
yielded	only	strife,	and	his	dream	of	finding	peace	within	his	soul	in	the	blood
and	ashes	of	slaughter	filled	her	with	pity	for	the	man.	She	could	not,	however,
let	that	blind	her	to	the	danger	he	presented.
Seren	Pedac	held	no	love	for	her	own	people.	The	Letherii’s	rapacious
hunger	and	inability	to	shift	to	any	perspective	that	did	not	serve	them	virtually
assured	a	host	of	bloody	clashes	with	every	foreign	power	they	met.	And,	one
day,	they	would	meet	their	match.	The	wagons	will	shatter	against	a	wall	more


solid	than	any	we	have	seen.	Will	it	be	the	Tiste	Edur?	It	did	not	seem	likely.
True,	they	possessed	formidable	sorcery,	and	the	Letherii	had	yet	to	encounter
fiercer	fighters.	But	the	combined	tribes	amounted	to	less	than	a	quartermillion.	King	Diskanar ’s	capital	alone	was	home	to	over	a	hundred	thousand,
and	there	were	a	half-dozen	cities	nearly	as	large	in	Lether.	With	the
protectorates	across	Dracons	Sea	and	to	the	east,	the	hegemony	could	amass
and	field	six	hundred	thousand	soldiers,	maybe	more.	Attached	to	each	legion
there	would	be	a	master	of	sorcery,	trained	by	the	Ceda,	Kuru	Qan	himself.
The	Edur	would	be	crushed.	Annihilated.
And	Hull	Beddict…
She	turned	her	thoughts	from	him	with	an	effort.	The	choices	were	his	to
make,	after	all.	Nor,	she	suspected,	would	he	listen	to	her	warnings.
Seren	Pedac	acknowledged	her	own	uncertainty	and	confusion.	Would	she
advocate	peace	at	any	price?	What	were	the	rewards	of	capitulation?	Letherii
access	to	the	resources	now	claimed	by	the	Edur.	The	harvest	from	the	sea.	And
the	Blackwood…
Of	course.	It’s	the	living	wood	that	we	hunger	for,	the	source	of	ships	that
can	heal	themselves,	that	cut	the	waves	faster	than	our	sleekest	galleys,	that
resist	magic	unleashed	upon	them.	That	is	at	the	heart	of	this	game.
But	King	Diskanar	was	not	a	fool—he	was	not	the	one	harbouring	such
aspirations.	Kuru	Qan	would	have	seen	to	that.	No,	this	gambit	was	the	queen’s.
Such	conceit,	to	believe	the	Letherii	could	master	the	living	wood.	That	the
Edur	would	so	easily	surrender	their	secrets,	their	arcane	arts	in	coaxing	the
will	of	the	Blackwood,	in	binding	its	power	to	their	own.
Harvesting	the	tusked	seals	was	a	feint.	The	monetary	loss	was	part	of	a
much	larger	scheme,	an	investment	with	the	aim	of	generating	political
dividends,	which	in	turn	would	recoup	the	losses	a	hundredfold.	And	only
someone	as	wealthy	as	the	queen	or	Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	could	absorb	such
losses.	Ships	crewed	by	the	Indebted,	with	the	provision	of	clearing	those	debts
upon	the	event	of	their	deaths.	Lives	given	up	for	the	sake	of	children	and
grandchildren.	They	would	have	had	no	trouble	manning	those	ships.	Blood
and	gold,	then.
She	could	not	be	certain	of	her	suspicions,	but	they	seemed	to	fit,	and	were
as	bitterly	unpalatable	to	her	as	they	probably	were	to	Buruk	the	Pale.	The	Tiste
Edur	would	not	surrender	the	Blackwood.	The	conclusion	was	foregone.	There
was	to	be	war.	And	Hull	Beddict	will	make	of	himself	its	fiercest	proponent.	The
queen’s	own	unwitting	agent.	No	wonder	Buruk	tolerates	his	presence.
And	the	part	she	would	play?	I	am	the	escort	of	this	snarled	madness.
Nothing	more	than	that.	Keep	your	distance,	Seren	Pedac.	She	was	Acquitor.


She	would	do	as	she	had	been	charged	to	do.	Deliver	Buruk	the	Pale.
Nothing	will	be	decided.	Not	by	us.	The	game’s	end	awaits	the	Great
Meeting.
If	only	she	could	find	comfort	in	that	thought.
Twenty	paces	ahead,	the	forest	swallowed	Hull	Beddict	and	Binadas
Sengar.	Darkness	and	shadows,	drawing	closer	with	every	step	she	took.
	
Any	criminal	who	could	swim	across	the	canal	with	a	sack	of	docks	strapped	to
his	back	won	freedom.	The	amount	of	coin	was	dependent	upon	the	nature	of
the	transgression.	Theft,	kidnapping,	failure	to	pay	a	debt,	damage	to	property
and	murder	yielded	the	maximum	fine	of	five	hundred	docks.	Embezzlement,
assault	without	cause,	cursing	in	public	upon	the	names	of	the	Empty	Throne,
the	king	or	the	queen,	demanded	three	hundred	docks	in	reparation.	The	least
of	the	fines,	one	hundred	docks,	were	levied	upon	loitering,	voiding	in	public
and	disrespect.
These	were	the	fines	for	men.	Women	so	charged	were	accorded	halfweights.
If	someone	could	pay	the	fine,	he	did	so,	thus	expunging	his	criminal
record.
The	canal	awaited	those	who	could	not.
The	Drownings	were	more	than	public	spectacle,	they	were	the	primary
event	among	a	host	of	activities	upon	which	fortunes	were	gambled	every	day
in	Letheras.	Since	few	criminals	ever	managed	to	make	it	across	the	canal	with
their	burden,	distance	and	number	of	strokes	provided	the	measure	for
wagering	bets.	As	did	Risings,	Flailings,	Flounderings	and	Vanishings.
The	criminals	had	ropes	tied	to	them,	allowing	for	retrieval	of	the	coins
once	the	drowning	was	confirmed.	The	corpse	was	dumped	back	into	the	river.
Guilty	as	sludge.
Brys	Beddict	found	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	on	the	Second	Tier	overlooking
the	canal,	amidst	a	crowd	of	similarly	privileged	onlookers	to	the	morning’s
Drownings.	Bookmakers	swarmed	through	the	press,	handing	out	payment
tiles	and	collecting	wagers.	Voices	rang	in	the	air	above	the	buzz	of	excited
conversation.	Nearby,	a	woman	squealed,	then	laughed.	Male	voices	rose	in
response.
‘Finadd.’
The	flat,	scarred	face	known	to	virtually	every	citizen	swung	to	Brys,	thin
eyebrows	lifting	in	recognition.	‘King’s	Champion.	You’re	just	in	time.	Ublala
Pung	is	about	to	take	a	swim.	I’ve	eight	hundred	docks	on	the	bastard.’


Brys	Beddict	leaned	on	the	railing.	He	scanned	the	guards	and	officials	on
the	launch	below.	‘I’ve	heard	the	name,’	he	said,	‘but	cannot	recall	his	crime.	Is
that	Ublala?’	He	pointed	down	to	a	cloaked	figure	towering	above	the	others.
‘That’s	him.	Tarthenal	half-blood.	So	they’ve	added	two	hundred	docks	to
his	fine.’
‘What	did	he	do?’
‘What	didn’t	he	do?	Murder	times	three,	destruction	of	property,	assault,
kidnapping	times	two,	cursing,	fraud,	failure	to	pay	debt	and	voiding	in	public.
All	in	one	afternoon.’
‘The	ruckus	at	Urum’s	Lenders?’	The	criminal	had	flung	off	his	cloak.	He
was	wearing	naught	but	a	loincloth.	His	burnished	skin	was	lined	with	whip
scars.	The	muscles	beneath	it	were	enormous.
‘That’s	the	one.’
‘So	what’s	he	carrying?’
‘Forty-three	hundred.’
And	Brys	now	saw	the	enormous	double-lined	sack	being	manhandled
onto	the	huge	man’s	back.	‘Errant’s	blessing,	he’ll	not	manage	a	stroke.’
‘That’s	the	consensus,’	Gerun	said.	‘Every	call’s	on	Flailing,	Floundering
and	Vanishing.	No	strokes,	no	Risings.’
‘And	your	call?’
‘Seventy	to	one.’
Brys	frowned.	Odds	like	that	meant	but	one	thing.	‘You	believe	he’ll	make
it!’
Heads	turned	at	his	exclamation,	the	buzz	around	them	grew	louder.
Gerun	leaned	on	the	railing,	drawing	a	long	breath	through	his	teeth,
making	that	now	infamous	whistling	sound.	‘Most	half-blood	Tarthenal	get	the
worst	traits,’	he	muttered	in	a	low	voice,	then	grinned.	‘But	not	Ublala	Pung.’
A	roar	from	the	crowds	lining	the	walkway	and	tiers,	and	from	the
opposite	side.	The	guards	were	leading	the	criminal	down	the	launch.	Ublala
walked	hunched	over,	straining	with	the	weight	of	the	sack.	At	the	water ’s	edge
he	pushed	the	guards	away	and	turned.
Pulling	down	his	loincloth.	And	urinating	in	an	arcing	stream.
Somewhere,	a	woman	screamed.
‘They’ll	collect	that	body,’	one	merchant	said,	awed,	‘down	at	the	Eddies.
I’ve	heard	there’re	surgeons	who	can—’
‘And	wouldn’t	you	pay	a	peak	for	that,	Inchers!’	his	companion	cut	in.
‘I’m	not	lacking,	Hulbat—watch	yourself!	I	was	just	saying—’
‘And	ten	thousand	women	are	dreaming!’
A	sudden	hush,	as	Ublala	Pung	turned	to	face	the	canal.


Then	strode	forward.	Hips.	Chest.	Shoulders.
A	moment	later	his	head	disappeared	beneath	the	thick,	foul	water.
Not	a	flounder,	not	a	flail.	Those	who	had	bet	on	Vanishing	crowed.
Crowds	pulled	apart,	figures	closing	on	bookmakers.
‘Brys	Beddict,	what’s	the	distance	across?’
‘A	hundred	paces.’
‘Aye.’
They	remained	leaning	on	the	railing.	After	a	moment,	Brys	shot	the
Finadd	a	quizzical	look.	Gerun	nodded	towards	the	launch	below.	‘Look	at	the
line,	lad.’
There	was	some	commotion	around	the	retrieval	line,	and	Brys	saw—at
about	the	same	time	as,	by	the	rising	voices,	did	others—that	the	rope	was	still
playing	out.	‘He’s	walking	the	bottom!’
Brys	found	he	could	not	pull	his	eyes	from	that	uncoiling	rope.	A	dozen
heartbeats.	Two	dozen.	A	half-hundred.	And	still	that	rope	snaked	its	way	into
the	water.
The	cries	and	shouts	had	risen	to	deafening	pitch.	Pigeons	burst	into	the	air
from	nearby	rooftops,	scattering	in	panic.	Bettors	were	fighting	with
bookmakers	for	payment	tiles.	Someone	fell	from	the	Third	Tier	and,
haplessly,	missed	the	canal	by	a	scant	two	paces.	He	struck	flagstones	and	did
not	move,	a	circle	of	witnesses	closing	round	his	body.
‘That’s	it,’	Gerun	Eberict	sighed.
A	figure	was	emerging	on	the	far-side	launch.	Streaming	mud.
‘Four	lungs,	lad.’
Eight	hundred	docks.	At	seventy	to	one.	‘You’re	a	rich	man	who’s	just	got
richer,	Finadd.’
‘And	Ublala	Pung’s	a	free	one.	Hey,	I	saw	your	brother	earlier.	Tehol.
Other	side	of	the	canal.	He	was	wearing	a	skirt.’
	
‘Don’t	stand	so	close—no,	closer,	so	you	can	hear	me,	Shand,	but	not	too
close.	Not	like	we	know	each	other.’
‘You’ve	lost	your	mind,’	she	replied.
‘Maybe.	Anyway,	see	that	man?’
‘Who?’
‘That	criminal,	of	course.	The	half-blood	who	tore	apart	Urum’s—the
extortionist	deserved	it	by	the	way—’
‘Tarthenal	have	four	lungs.’
‘And	so	does	he.	I	take	it	you	didn’t	wager?’


‘I	despise	gambling.’
‘Very	droll,	lass.’
‘What	about	him?’
‘Hire	him.’
‘With	pleasure.’
‘Then	buy	him	some	clothes.’
‘Do	I	have	to?’
‘He’s	not	being	employed	because	of	his	physical	attributes—well,	not
those	ones,	anyway.	You	three	need	a	bodyguard.’
‘He	can	guard	my	body	any	time.’
‘That’s	it,	Shand.	I’m	done	talking	with	you	today.’
‘No	you’re	not,	Tehol.	Tonight.	The	workshop.	And	bring	Bugg.’
‘Everything	is	going	as	planned.	There’s	no	need—’
‘Be	there.’

Four	years	ago,	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	single-handedly	foiled	an	assassination
attempt	on	King	Diskanar.	Returning	to	the	palace	late	one	night,	he	came	upon
the	bodies	of	two	guards	outside	the	door	to	the	king’s	private	chambers.	A
sorcerous	attack	had	filled	their	lungs	with	sand,	resulting	in	asphyxiation.
Their	flesh	was	still	warm.	The	door	was	ajar.
The	palace	Finadd	had	drawn	his	sword.	He	burst	into	the	king’s
bedchamber	to	find	three	figures	leaning	over	Ezgara	Diskanar ’s	sleeping
form.	A	mage	and	two	assassins.	Gerun	killed	the	sorceror	first,	with	a	chop	to
the	back	of	the	man’s	neck,	severing	his	spinal	cord.	He	had	then	stop-thrust	the
nearest	assassin’s	attack,	the	point	of	his	sword	burying	itself	in	the	man’s
chest,	just	beneath	the	left	collarbone.	It	would	prove	to	be	a	mortal	wound.
The	second	assassin	thrust	his	dagger	at	the	Finadd’s	face.	Probably	he	had
been	aiming	for	one	of	Gerun’s	eyes,	but	the	Finadd	threw	his	head	back	and
the	point	entered	his	mouth,	slicing	through	both	lips,	then	driving	hard
between	his	front	teeth.	Pushing	them	apart,	upon	which	the	blade	jammed.
The	sword	in	Gerun’s	hand	chopped	down,	shattering	the	outstretched	arm.
Three	more	wild	hacks	killed	the	assassin.
This	last	engagement	was	witnessed	by	a	wide-eyed	king.
Two	weeks	later,	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict,	his	breath	whistling	through	the
new	gap	in	his	front	teeth,	knelt	before	Ezgara	Diskanar	in	the	throne	room,
and	before	the	assembled	masses	was	granted	the	King’s	Leave.	For	the


remainder	of	the	soldier ’s	life,	he	was	immune	to	criminal	conviction.	He	was,
in	short,	free	to	do	as	he	pleased,	to	whomever	he	pleased,	barring	the	king’s
own	line.
The	identity	of	the	person	behind	the	assassination	attempt	was	never
discovered.
Since	then,	Gerun	Eberict	had	been	on	a	private	crusade.	A	lone,
implacable	vigilante.	He	was	known	to	have	personally	murdered	thirty-one
citizens,	including	two	wealthy,	highly	respected	and	politically	powerful
merchants,	and	at	least	a	dozen	other	mysterious	deaths	were	commonly
attributed	to	him.	He	had,	in	short,	become	the	most	feared	man	in	Letheras.
He	had	also,	in	that	time,	made	himself	rich.
Yet,	for	all	that,	he	remained	a	Finadd	in	the	King’s	Guard,	and	so	was
bound	to	the	usual	responsibilities.	Brys	Beddict	suspected	the	decision	to	send
Gerun	Eberict	with	the	delegation	was	as	much	to	relieve	the	city	of	the
pressure	of	his	presence	as	it	was	a	statement	to	the	queen	and	the	prince.	And
Brys	wondered	if	the	king	had	come	to	regret	his	sanction.
The	two	palace	guards	walked	side	by	side	across	Soulan	Bridge	and	into
the	Pursers’	District.	The	day	was	hot,	the	sky	white	with	thin,	high	clouds.
They	entered	Rild’s,	an	establishment	known	for	its	fish	cuisine,	as	well	as	an
alcoholic	drink	made	from	orange	rinds,	honey	and	Tusked	Seal	sperm.	They
sat	in	the	inner	courtyard,	at	Gerun’s	private	table.
As	soon	as	drinks	and	lunch	were	ordered,	Gerun	Eberict	leaned	back	in
his	chair	and	regarded	Brys	with	curiosity.	‘Is	my	guest	this	day	the	King’s
Champion?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking,’	Brys	admitted.	‘My	brother,	Hull,	is
accompanying	Buruk	the	Pale.	It	is	believed	that	Buruk	will	remain	with	the
Edur	until	the	Great	Meeting.	There	is	concern	about	Hull.’
‘What	kind	of	concern?’
‘Well,	you	knew	him	years	ago.’
‘I	did.	Rather	well,	in	fact.	He	was	my	Finadd	back	then.	And	upon	my
promotion,	he	and	I	got	roaring	drunk	at	Porul’s	and	likely	sired	a	dozen
bastards	each	with	a	visiting	troupe	of	flower	dancers	from	Trate.	In	any	case,
the	company	folded	about	ten	months	later,	or	so	we	heard.’
‘Yes,	well.	He’s	not	the	same	man,	you	know.’
‘Isn’t	he?’
The	drinks	arrived,	an	amber	wine	for	Brys,	the	Tusked	Milk	for	Gerun.
‘No,’	Brys	said	in	answer	to	the	Finadd’s	question,	‘I	don’t	think	so.’
‘Hull	believes	in	one	thing,	and	that	is	loyalty.	The	only	gift	he	feels	is
worth	giving.	Granted,	it	was	sorely	abused,	and	the	legacy	of	that	is	a	new	list


in	your	brother ’s	head,	with	the	names	of	every	man	and	woman	who	betrayed
him.’	Gerun	tossed	back	his	drink	and	gestured	for	another	one.	‘The	only
difference	between	him	and	me	is	that	I’m	able	to	cross	names	off	my	list.’
‘And	what	if,’	Brys	said	quietly,	‘the	king’s	name	is	on	Hull’s	list?’
Gerun’s	eyes	went	flat.	‘As	I	said,	I’m	the	only	one	crossing	off	names.’
‘Then	why	is	Hull	with	Buruk	the	Pale?’
‘Buruk	is	not	the	king’s	man,	Brys.	The	very	opposite,	in	fact.	I	look
forward	to	finally	meeting	him.’
A	cold	chill	ran	through	Brys.
‘In	any	case,’	Gerun	went	on,	‘it’s	your	other	brother	who	interests	me.’
‘Tehol?	Don’t	tell	me	he’s	on	your	list.’
Gerun	smiled,	revealing	the	sideways	tilt	of	his	upper	and	lower	teeth.
‘And	I’d	tell	you	if	he	was?	Relax,	he	isn’t.	Not	yet,	in	any	case.	But	he’s	up	to
something.’
‘I	find	that	hard	to	believe.	Tehol	stopped	being	up	to	anything	a	long	time
ago.’
‘That’s	what	you	think.’
‘I	know	nothing	to	suggest	otherwise,	but	it	seems	that	you	do.’
Gerun’s	second	drink	arrived.	‘Were	you	aware,’	the	Finadd	said,	dipping	a
finger	into	the	thick,	viscid	liquid,	‘that	Tehol	still	possesses	myriad	interests,
in	property,	licences,	mercantile	investments	and	transportation?	He’s	raised
pretty	solid	fronts,	enough	to	be	fairly	sure	that	no-one	else	knows	that	he’s
remained	active.’
‘Not	solid	enough,	it	seems.’
Gerun	shrugged.	‘In	many	ways,	Tehol	walked	the	path	of	the	King’s	Leave
long	before	me,	and	without	the	actual	sanction.’
‘Tehol’s	never	killed	anyone—’
Gerun’s	smile	grew	feral.	‘The	day	the	Tolls	collapsed,	Brys,	an	even
dozen	financiers	committed	suicide.	And	that	collapse	was	solely	and
exclusively	by	Tehol’s	hand.	Perfectly,	indeed	brilliantly	timed.	He	had	his	own
list,	only	he	didn’t	stick	a	knife	in	their	throats;	instead,	he	made	them	all	his
business	partners.	And	took	every	one	of	them	down—’
‘But	he	went	down,	too.’
‘He	didn’t	kill	himself	over	it,	though,	did	he?	Didn’t	that	tell	you
something?	It	should	have.’
‘Only	that	he	didn’t	care.’
‘Precisely.	Brys,	tell	me,	who	is	Tehol’s	greatest	admirer?’
‘You?’
‘No.	Oh,	I’m	suitably	impressed.	Enough	to	be	suspicious	as	the	Errant’s


Pit	now	that	he’s	stirring	the	pot	once	more.	No.	Someone	else.’
Brys	looked	away.	Trying	to	decide	if	he	liked	this	man	sitting	opposite
him.	Liked	him	enough	for	this	conversation.	He	knew	he	hated	the	subject
matter.
Their	lunches	arrived.
Gerun	Eberict	focused	his	attention	on	the	grilled	fillet	on	the	silver	plate
in	front	of	him,	after	ordering	a	third	Tusked	Milk.
It	occurred	to	Brys	that	he	had	never	seen	a	woman	drink	that	particular
concoction.
‘I	don’t	speak	to	Tehol,’	he	said	after	a	time,	his	gaze	on	his	own	serving
as	he	slowly	picked	the	white	flesh	apart,	revealing	the	row	of	vertebrae	and
the	dorsal	spines.
‘You	despise	what	he	did?’
Brys	frowned,	then	shook	his	head.	‘No.	What	he	did	after.’
‘Which	was?’
‘Nothing.’
‘The	water	had	to	clear,	lad.	So	he	could	look	around	once	more	and	see
what	remained.’
‘You’re	suggesting	diabolical	genius,	Gerun.’
‘I	am.	Tehol	possesses	what	Hull	does	not.	Knowledge	is	not	enough.	It
never	is.	It’s	the	capacity	to	do	something	with	that	knowledge.	To	do	it
perfectly.	Absolute	timing.	With	devastating	consequences.	That’s	what	Tehol
has.	Hull,	Errant	protect	him,	does	not.’
Brys	looked	up	and	met	the	Finadd’s	pale	eyes.	‘Are	you	suggesting	that
Hull	is	Tehol’s	greatest	admirer?’
‘Hull’s	very	own	inspiration.	And	that	is	why	he	is	with	Buruk	the	Pale.’
‘Do	you	intend	to	stand	in	his	way	at	the	Great	Meeting?’
‘It	might	well	be	too	late	by	that	time,	Brys.	Assuming	that	is	my	intention.’
‘It	isn’t?’
‘I	haven’t	decided.’
‘You	want	war?’
Gerun’s	gaze	remained	level.	‘That	particular	tide	stirs	the	deepest	silts.
Blinding	everyone.	A	man	with	a	goal	can	get	a	lot	done	in	that	cloud.	And,
eventually,	it	settles.’
‘And	lo,’	Brys	said,	unable	to	hide	his	bitterness,	‘the	world	has	changed.’
‘Possibly.’
‘War	as	the	means—’
‘To	a	peaceful	end—’
‘That	you	will	find	pleasing	to	your	eye.’


Gerun	pushed	his	plate	away	and	sat	back	once	more.	‘What	is	life	without
ambition,	Brys?’
Brys	rose,	his	meal	pried	apart	into	a	chaotic	mass	on	the	plate	before	him.
‘Tehol	would	be	better	at	answering	that	than	am	I,	Finadd.’
Gerun	smiled	up	at	him.	‘Inform	Nifadas	and	Kuru	Qan	that	I	am	not
unaware	of	the	complexities	wrought	through	the	impending	Great	Meeting.
Nor	am	I	blind	to	the	need	to	usher	me	out	of	the	city	for	a	time.	I	have,	of
course,	compensated	for	my	own	absence,	in	anticipation	of	my	triumphant
return.’
‘I	will	convey	your	words,	Finadd.’
‘I	regret	your	loss	of	appetite,	Brys.	The	fish	was	excellent.	Next	time,	we
will	speak	of	inconsequential	things.	I	both	respect	and	admire	you,
Champion.’
‘Ah,	so	I	am	not	on	your	list.’
‘Not	yet.	A	joke,	Brys,’	he	added	upon	seeing	the	Champion’s	expression.
‘Besides,	you’d	cut	me	to	pieces.	How	can	I	not	admire	that?	I	see	it	this	way—
the	history	of	this	decade,	for	our	dear	Letheras,	can	be	most	succinctly
understood	by	a	faithful	recounting	of	the	three	Beddict	brothers.	And,	as	is
clear,	the	tale’s	not	yet	done.’
So	it	would	seem.	‘I	thank	you,	Finadd,	for	the	company	and	the	invitation.’
Gerun	leaned	forward	and	picked	up	the	Champion’s	plate.	‘Take	the	back
exit,	if	you	please,’	he	said,	offering	Brys	the	plate.	‘There’s	a	starveling	lad
living	in	the	alley.	Mind,	he’s	to	return	the	silver—make	sure	he	understands
that.	Tell	him	you	were	my	guest.’
‘Very	well,	Finadd.’
	
‘Try	these	on.’
Tehol	stared	at	the	woollen	trousers,	then	reached	for	them.	‘Tell	me,
Bugg,	is	there	any	point	in	you	continuing?’
‘Do	you	mean	these	leggings,	or	with	my	sorry	existence?’
‘Have	you	hired	your	crew?’	He	stripped	off	his	skirt	and	began	donning
the	trousers.
‘Twenty	of	the	most	miserable	malcontents	I	could	find.’
‘Grievances?’
‘Every	one	of	them,	and	I’m	pretty	certain	they	are	all	legitimate.	Granted,
a	few	probably	deserved	their	banishment	from	the	trade.’
‘Most	de-certifications	are	political,	Bugg.	Just	be	sure	none	of	them	are
incompetent.	All	we	need	is	for	them	to	keep	a	secret,	and	for	that,	spite	against


the	guilds	is	the	best	motivation.’
‘I’m	not	entirely	convinced.	Besides,	we’ve	had	some	warnings	from	the
guilds.’
‘In	person?’
‘Delivered	missives.	So	far.	Your	left	knee	will	stay	warm.’
‘Warm?	It’s	hot	out	there,	Bugg,	despite	what	your	old	rheumy	bones	tell
you.’
‘Well,	they’re	trousers	for	every	season.’
‘Really?	Assure	the	guilds	we’re	not	out	to	underbid.	In	fact,	the	very
opposite.	Nor	do	we	pay	our	crew	higher	rates.	No	benefits,	either—’
‘Barring	a	stake	in	the	enterprise.’
‘Say	nothing	of	that,	Bugg.	Look	at	the	hairs	on	my	right	thigh.	They’re
standing	on	end.’
‘It’s	the	contrast	they	don’t	like.’
‘The	guilds?’
‘No,	your	hairs.	The	guilds	just	want	to	know	where	by	the	Errant	I	came
from.	And	how	dare	I	register	a	company.’
‘Don’t	worry	about	that,	Bugg.	Once	they	find	out	what	you’re	claiming	to
be	able	to	do,	they’ll	be	sure	you’ll	fail	and	so	ignore	you	thereafter.	Until	you
succeed,	that	is.’
‘I’m	having	second	thoughts.’
‘About	what?’
‘Put	the	skirt	back	on.’
‘I’m	inclined	to	agree	with	you.	Find	some	more	wool.	Preferably	the
same	colour,	although	that	is	not	essential,	I	suppose.	In	any	case,	we	have	a
meeting	with	the	three	darlings	this	evening.’
‘Risky.’
‘We	must	be	circumspect.’
‘That	goes	both	ways.	I	stole	that	wool.’
Tehol	wrapped	the	sheet	once	more	about	his	waist.	‘I’ll	be	back	down	later
to	collect	you.	Clean	up	around	here,	will	you?’
‘If	I’ve	the	time.’
Tehol	climbed	the	ladder	to	the	roof.
The	sun’s	light	was	deepening,	as	it	edged	towards	the	horizon,	bathing	the
surrounding	buildings	in	a	warm	glow.	Two	artists	had	set	up	easels	on	the
Third	Tier,	competing	to	immortalize	Tehol	and	his	bed.	He	gave	them	a	wave
that	seemed	to	trigger	a	loud	argument,	then	settled	down	on	the	sun-warmed
mattress.	Stared	up	at	the	darkening	sky.
He	had	seen	his	brother	Brys	at	the	Drownings.	On	the	other	side	of	the


canal,	in	conversation	with	Gerun	Eberict.	Rumour	had	it	that	Gerun	was
accompanying	the	delegation	to	the	Tiste	Edur.	Hardly	surprising.	The	King
needed	that	wild	man	out	of	the	city.
The	problem	with	gold	was	the	way	it	crawled.	Where	nothing	else	could.
It	seeped	out	from	secrets,	flowered	in	what	should	have	been	lifeless	cracks.	It
strutted	when	it	should	have	remained	hidden,	beneath	notice.	Brazen	as	any
weed	between	the	cobbles,	and,	if	one	was	so	inclined,	one	could	track	those
roots	all	the	way	down.	Sudden	spending,	from	kin	of	dead	hirelings,	followed
quickly—but	not	quickly	enough—by	sudden,	inexplicable	demises.	A	strange
severing	that	left	the	king’s	inquisitors	with	no-one	to	question,	no-one	to
torture	to	find	the	source	of	the	conspiracy.	Assassination	attempts	were	no
small	thing,	after	all,	especially	when	the	king	himself	was	the	target.
Extraordinary,	almost	unbelievable	success—to	have	reached	Diskanar ’s	own
bedchamber,	to	stand	poised	above	the	man,	mere	heartbeats	from	delivering
death.	That	particular	sorceror	had	never	before	shown	such	skill	in	the
relevant	arts.	To	conjure	sand	to	fill	the	chests	of	two	men	was	highest	sorcery.
Natural	curiosity	and	possible	advantage,	these	had	been	Tehol’s	motives,
and	he’d	been	much	quicker	than	the	royal	inquisitors.	A	fortune,	he	had
discovered,	had	been	spent	on	the	conspiracy,	a	life’s	savings.
Clearly,	only	Gerun	Eberict	had	known	the	full	extent	of	the	scheme.	His
hirelings	would	not	have	anticipated	their	employer ’s	attacking	them.	Killing
them.	They’d	fought	back,	and	one	had	come	close	to	succeeding.	And	the
Finadd	carried	the	scars	still,	lips	and	crooked	teeth,	to	show	the	nearness	of
the	thing.
Immunity	from	conviction.	So	that	Gerun	Eberict	could	set	out	and	do	what
he	wanted	to	do.	Judge	and	executioner,	for	crimes	real	and	imagined,	for
offences	both	major	and	minor.
In	a	way,	Tehol	admired	the	man.	For	his	determination,	if	not	his	methods.
And	for	devising	and	gambling	all	on	a	scheme	that	took	one’s	breath	away
with	its	bold…extremity.
No	doubt	Brys	had	official	business	with	the	man.	As	King’s	Champion.
Even	so,	worrying.	It	wouldn’t	do	to	have	his	young	brother	so	close	to
Gerun	Eberict.
For	if	Tehol	possessed	a	true	enemy,	a	foe	to	match	his	own	cleverness
who—it	would	appear—surpassed	Tehol	himself	in	viciousness—it	was
Finadd	Gerun	Eberict,	possessor	of	the	King’s	Leave.
And	he’d	been	sniffing	around,	twisting	arms.	Safer,	then,	to	assume	Gerun
knew	that	Tehol	was	not	as	destitute	as	most	would	believe.	Nor	entirely…
inactive.


Thus,	a	new	fold	to	consider	in	this	rumpled,	tangled	tapestry.
Gerun	was	immune.	But	not	without	enemies.	Granted,	deadly	with	a
sword,	and	known	to	have	a	dozen	sworn,	blood-bound	bodyguards	to	protect
him	when	he	slept.	His	estate	was	rumoured	to	be	impregnable,	and	possessed
of	its	own	armoury,	apothecary	with	resident	alchemist	well	versed	in	poisons
and	their	antidotes,	voluminous	storehouses,	and	independent	source	of	water.
All	in	all,	Gerun	had	planned	for	virtually	every	contingency.
Barring	the	singular	focus	of	the	mind	of	one	Tehol	Beddict.
Sometimes	the	only	solution	was	also	the	simplest,	most	obvious.	See	a
weed	between	the	cobbles…pull	it	out.
‘Bugg!’
A	faint	voice	from	below.	‘What?’
‘Who	was	holding	Gerun’s	tiles	on	that	bet	this	afternoon?’
His	servant’s	grizzled	head	appeared	in	the	hatch.	‘You	already	know,	since
you	own	the	bastard.	Turble.	Assuming	he’s	not	dead	of	a	heart	attack…or
suicide.’
‘Turble?	Not	a	chance.	My	guess	is,	the	man’s	packing.	A	sudden	trip	to	the
Outer	Isles.’
‘He’ll	never	make	it	to	the	city	gates.’
‘Meaning	Gerun	is	on	the	poor	bastard.’
‘Wouldn’t	you	be?	With	that	payoff?’
Tehol	frowned.	‘Suicide,	I’m	now	thinking,	might	well	be	Turble’s
conclusion	to	his	sorry	state	of	affairs.	Unexpected,	true,	and	all	the	more
shocking	for	it.	He’s	got	no	kin,	as	I	recall.	So	the	debt	dies	with	him.’
‘And	Gerun	is	out	eight	hundred	docks.’
‘He	might	wince	at	that,	but	not	so	much	as	you’d	notice.	The	man’s	worth
a	peak,	maybe	more.’
‘You	don’t	know?’
‘All	right,	so	I	was	generalizing.	Of	course	I	know,	down	to	the	last	dock.
Nay,	the	last	stripling.	In	any	case,	I	was	saying,	or,	rather,	suggesting,	that	the
loss	of	eight	hundred	docks	is	not	what	would	make	Gerun	sting.	It’s	the
escape.	The	one	trail	even	Gerun	can’t	doggedly	follow—not	willingly,
anyway.	Thus,	Turble	has	to	commit	suicide.’
‘I	doubt	he’ll	agree	to	it.’
‘No,	probably	not.	But	set	it	in	motion,	Bugg.	Down	to	the	Eddies.	Find	us
a	suitable	corpse.	Fresh,	and	not	yet	drained.	Get	a	bottle	or	two	of	Turble’s
blood	from	him	in	exchange—’
‘What’ll	it	be?	Fire?	Who	commits	suicide	using	fire?’
‘The	fire	will	be	an	unfortunate	consequence	of	an	unattended	oil	lamp.


Unattended	because	of	the	suicide.	Burnt	beyond	recognition,	alas,	but	the
scrives	will	swear	by	the	blood’s	owner.	That’s	how	they	work,	isn’t	it?’
‘A	man’s	veins	never	lie.’
‘Right.	Only,	they	can.’
‘Right,	if	you’re	insane	enough	to	drain	a	corpse	and	pump	new	blood	into
it.’
‘A	ghastly	exercise,	Bugg.	Glad	you’re	up	to	it.’
The	wizened	face	at	the	hatch	was	scowling.	‘And	Turble?’
‘We	smuggle	him	out	the	usual	way.	He’s	always	wanted	to	take	up	fishing.
Put	someone	in	the	tunnel,	in	case	he	bolts	sooner	than	we	expect.	Gerun’s
watchers	will	be	our	finest	witnesses.	Oh,	and	won’t	the	Finadd	spit.’
‘Is	this	wise?’	Bugg	asked.
‘No	choice.	He’s	the	only	man	who	can	stop	me.	So	I’m	getting	him	first.’
‘If	he	catches	a	whiff	that	it’s	you—’
‘Then	I’m	a	dead	man.’
‘And	I’m	out	of	work.’
‘Nonsense.	The	lasses	will	carry	on.	Besides,	you	are	my	beneficiary—
unofficially,	of	course.’
‘Should	you	have	told	me	that?’
‘Why	not?	I’m	lying.’
Bugg’s	head	sank	back	down.
Tehol	settled	back	onto	the	bed.	Now,	I	need	to	find	me	a	thief.	A	good	one.
Ah!	I	know	the	very	one.	Poor	lass…
‘Bugg!’
	
Shurq	Elalle’s	fate	had	taken	a	turn	for	the	worse.	Nothing	to	do	with	her
profession,	for	her	skills	in	the	art	of	thievery	were	legendary	among	the
lawless	class.	An	argument	with	her	landlord,	sadly	escalating	to	attempted
murder	on	his	part,	to	which	she	of	course—in	all	legality—responded	by
flinging	him	out	the	window.	The	hapless	man’s	fall	had,	unfortunately,	been
broken	by	a	waddling	merchant	on	the	street	below.	The	landlord’s	neck	broke.
So	did	the	merchant’s.
Careless	self-defence	leading	to	the	death	of	an	innocent	had	been	the
charge.	Four	hundred	docks,	halved.	Normally,	Shurq	could	have	paid	the	fine
and	that	would	have	been	that.	Alas,	her	argument	with	the	landlord	had	been
over	a	certain	hoard	of	gold	that	had	inexplicably	vanished	from	Shurq’s
cache.	Without	a	dock	to	her	name,	she	had	been	marched	down	to	the	canal.
Even	then,	she	was	a	fit	woman.	Two	hundred	docks	were	probably


manageable—had	not	the	retrieval	rope	snagged	on	the	spines	of	a	forty-stone
lupe	fish	that	had	surfaced	for	a	look	at	the	swimmer,	only	to	dive	back	down
to	the	bottom,	taking	Shurq	with	it.
Lupe	fish,	while	rare	in	the	canal,	ate	only	men.	Never	women.	No-one
knew	why	this	was	the	case.
Shurq	Ellale	drowned.
But,	as	it	turned	out,	there	was	dead	and	then	there	was	dead.	Unbeknownst
to	her,	Shurq	had	been	cursed	by	one	of	her	past	victims.	A	curse	fully	paid	for
and	sanctified	by	the	Empty	Temple.	So,	though	her	lungs	filled	with	foul
water,	though	her	heart	stopped,	as	did	all	other	discernible	functions	of	the
body	and	mind,	there	she	stood	when	finally	retrieved	from	the	canal,	sheathed
in	mud,	eyes	dull	and	the	whites	browned	by	burst	vessels	and	lifeless	blood,
all	in	all	most	miserable	and	sadly	bemused.
Even	the	lawless	and	the	homeless	shunned	her	thereafter.	All	the	living,	in
fact.	Walking	past	as	if	she	was	in	truth	a	ghost,	a	dead	memory.
Her	flesh	did	not	decay,	although	its	pallor	was	noticeably	unhealthy.	Nor
were	her	reactions	and	deft	abilities	in	any	way	diminished.	She	could	speak.
See.	Hear.	Think.	None	of	which	improved	her	mood,	much.
Bugg	found	her	where	Tehol	had	said	she’d	be	found.	In	an	alley	behind	a
bordello.	Listening,	as	she	did	every	night,	to	the	moans	of	pleasure—real	and
improvised—issuing	from	the	windows	above.
‘Shurq	Elalle.’
Listless,	murky	eyes	fixed	on	him.	‘I	give	no	pleasure,’	she	said.
‘Alas,	neither	do	I,	these	days.	I	am	here	to	deliver	to	you	an	indefinite
contract	from	my	master.’
‘And	who	would	that	be?’
‘Not	yet,	I’m	afraid.	Thieving	work,	Shurq.’
‘What	need	have	I	for	riches?’
‘Well,	that	would	depend	on	their	substance,	I’d	imagine.’
She	stepped	out	from	the	shadowed	alcove	where	she’d	been	standing.
‘And	what	does	your	master	imagine	I	desire?’
‘Negotiable.’
‘Does	he	know	I’m	dead?’
‘Of	course.	And	sends	his	regrets.’
‘Does	he?’
‘No,	I	made	that	up.’
‘No-one	hires	me	any	more.’
‘That	is	why	he	knew	you	would	be	available.’
‘No-one	likes	my	company.’


‘Well,	a	bath	wouldn’t	hurt,	but	he’s	prepared	to	make	allowances.’
‘I	will	speak	to	him.’
‘Very	good.	He	has	anticipated	your	wishes.	Midnight.’
‘Where?’
‘A	rooftop.	With	a	bed.’
‘Him?’
‘Yes.’
‘In	his	bed?’
‘Um,	I’m	not	sure	if	that	was	in	his	mind—’
‘Glad	to	hear	it.	I	may	be	dead,	but	I’m	not	easy.	I’ll	be	there.	Midnight,
until	a	quarter	past.	No	more.	If	he	can	convince	me	in	that	time,	all	and	well.	If
not,	too	bad.’
‘A	quarter	should	be	more	than	enough,	Shurq.’
‘You	are	foolish	to	be	so	confident	of	that.’
Bugg	smiled.	‘Am	I?’
	
‘Where’s	Bugg?’
‘He’ll	be	meeting	us	here.’	Tehol	walked	over	to	the	couch	and	settled
down	on	it,	drawing	his	legs	up	until	he	was	in	a	reclining	position.	He	eyed
the	three	women.	‘Now,	what	is	so	important	that	I	must	risk	discovery	via	this
reckless	meeting?’
Shand	ran	a	calloused	palm	over	her	shaved	head.	‘We	want	to	know	what
you’ve	been	up	to,	Tehol.’
‘That’s	right,’	Rissarh	said.
Hejun’s	arms	were	crossed,	and	there	was	a	scowl	on	her	face	as	she
added,	‘We	don’t	need	a	bodyguard.’
‘Oh,	forgot	about	him.	Where	is	he?’
‘Said	he	had	some	belongings	to	collect,’	Shand	said.	‘He	should	be	here
any	time	now.	No,	the	others	haven’t	met	him	yet.’
‘Ah,	so	they	are	sceptical	of	your	enthusiasm.’
‘She’s	been	known	to	exaggerate,’	Rissarh	said.
‘Besides,’	Hejun	snapped,	‘what’s	all	that	got	to	do	with	being	a
bodyguard?	I	don’t	care	how	big	his—’
The	warehouse	door	creaked,	and	everyone	looked	over.
Ublala	Pung’s	round	face	peered	timidly	inside,	from	just	under	the
overhang.
‘Dear	sir!’	Tehol	called	out.	‘Please,	come	in!’
The	half-blood	hesitated.	His	pale	eyes	flitted	among	Shand,	Rissarh	and


Hejun.	‘There’s…three	of	them,’	he	said.
‘Three	of	what?’
‘Women.’
‘Yes,	indeed,’	said	Tehol.	‘And…?’
Ublala	frowned,	lips	drawing	together	into	something	much	resembling	a
pout.
‘Don’t	worry,’	Tehol	invited	with	a	wave	of	a	hand,	‘I	promise	to	protect
you	from	them.’
‘Really?’
‘Absolutely.	Come	in,	Ublala	Pung,	and	be	welcome.’
The	huge	man	pushed	the	door	back	further	and	edged	inside.
Ublala’s	belongings	did	not,	it	was	clear,	include	trousers	or	loincloth.	He
was	as	naked	as	he	had	been	down	at	the	canal.	Not	that	clothing	would	have
much	disguised	his	attributes,	Tehol	concluded	after	a	moment	of	despondent
reflection.	Well,	never	mind	that.	‘Hungry?	Thirsty?	Relax,	friend.	Set	your	bag
down…yes,	there	is	just	fine.	Sit	down—no,	the	bench,	not	the	chair—you’d
end	up	wearing	it,	which,	now	that	I	think	on	it…no,	probably	not.	Ublala,	these
women	require	a	bodyguard.	I	assume	you	accepted	the	offer	from	Shand—’
‘I	thought	it	was	just	her.’
‘And	that	makes	a	difference?’
‘Makes	it	harder.’
‘Granted.	But,	most	of	the	time	you’ll	be	here…’	Tehol’s	voice	trailed
away,	as	he	finally	noticed	that	Shand,	Rissarh	and	Hejun	had	neither	moved
since	Ublala’s	arrival,	nor	said	a	word.	Oh,	now	really…
	
Nisall	had	been	the	King’s	First	Concubine	for	three	years.	No	official	power
was	accorded	the	title,	barring	what	the	personality	of	the	woman	in	question
could	achieve.	There	had	been	considerable	variation	throughout	history,	often
dependent	upon	the	fortitude	of	the	king	at	the	time,	as	well	as	that	of	the	queen
and	the	chancellor.
At	present,	there	were	six	concubines	in	all,	the	others	young,	minor
daughters	of	powerful	families.	Potential	investments	in	the	future,	there	as
much	to	capture	the	prince’s	attention	as	the	king’s.	Like	the	queen’s	four
consorts,	they	were	housed	in	a	private,	isolated	quarter	of	the	palace.	Only	the
First	Consort,	Turudal	Brizad,	and	the	First	Concubine	were	permitted	contact
with	anyone	other	than	the	royal	personages	themselves.
Brys	Beddict	bowed	to	Nisall,	then	saluted	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz.	He	was
not	surprised	to	find	the	First	Concubine	in	the	Preda’s	office.	Nisall	had


decided	her	loyalties	long	ago.
‘Champion,’	the	young	woman	smiled.	‘Unnutal	and	I	were	just	discussing
you.’
‘More	precisely,’	the	Preda	said,	‘we	were	conjecturing	on	the	content	of
your	conversation	with	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	earlier	today.’
‘Preda,	I	regret	my	delay	in	reporting	to	you.’
‘A	well-rehearsed	report	by	now,’	Nisall	said,	‘given	that	you	have	already
been	required	to	provide	it	to	the	First	Eunuch	and	Ceda	Kuru	Qan.	Thus,	we
will	allow	you	a	certain	lack	of	animation	in	your	telling.’
Brys	frowned,	his	eyes	on	his	commander.	‘Preda,	it	occurs	to	me	that
Gerun	Eberict	remains	one	of	your	officers,	regardless	of	the	King’s	Leave.	I
am	surprised	he	has	not	already	reported	to	you	the	details	of	today’s
conversation.’
‘And	who	is	to	say	he	hasn’t?’	Unnutal	enquired.	Then	she	waved	a	hand.
‘An	uncharitable	response	on	my	part.	I	apologize,	Brys.	It	has	been	a	long	day
indeed.’
‘No	apology	required,	Preda.	I	spoke	out	of	turn—’
‘Brys,’	Nisall	interrupted.	‘You	are	the	King’s	Champion	now.	There	is	no
place	where	you	can	speak	out	of	turn.	Even	unto	Ezgara	himself.	Forgive	the
Preda	her	brusque	manner.	Conversations	with	Gerun	tend	to	make	one
exasperated.’
‘He	has	a	certain	hauteur	about	him,’	Brys	said.
‘Arrogance,’	Unnutal	snapped.	‘He	did	not	give	you	cause	to	call	him	out?’
‘No.’
‘How	unfortunate,’	Nisall	sighed.
‘Although	I	believe	I	was	warned.’
Both	women	fixed	their	eyes	on	him.
Brys	shrugged.	‘I	was	reminded	that	his	list	is	an	ongoing	project.’
‘He	considers	killing	Buruk	the	Pale.’
‘I	believe	so.	The	First	Eunuch	has	been	made	aware	of	that	possibility.’
‘Now,’	Nisall	said,	beginning	to	pace	in	the	room,	‘should	the	king	be
informed	of	this	development,	he	might	be	inclined	to	withdraw	Gerun	from
the	delegation.	Which	will	be	perceived	as	a	victory	by	the	queen	and	the
Chancellor.’
‘Perceptions	can	be	made	integral	to	strategy,’	Brys	said.
‘Spoken	as	a	duellist,’	Nisall	said.	‘But	the	advantages	to	the	queen	granted
by	Gerun’s	absence	perhaps	outweigh	any	advantage	we	might	fashion.
Besides,	we	know	Buruk	the	Pale	proceeds	under	directions	from	her	camp,	so
his	loss	will	not	hurt	us.’


Brys	considered	this,	uneasy	at	such	a	cavalier	dismissal	of	a	man’s	life.
‘How	well	does	Buruk	sit	with	his	burdens?’
‘We	have	a	spy	close	to	him,	of	course,’	the	Preda	said.	‘The	man	is
tortured	by	his	conscience.	He	escapes	with	white	nectar	and	drink,	and
dissolute	sexual	indulgences.’
‘The	queen…’
‘Wants	war,’	Nisall	finished	with	a	sharp	nod.	‘The	irresponsible,	greedy,
short-sighted	sea-cow.	A	fine	partner	to	the	stupidest	chancellor	in	the	history
of	Letheras.	And	a	thick,	easily	led	prince	waiting	impatiently	to	take	the
throne.’
Brys	shifted	uncomfortably.	‘Perhaps,	if	Buruk’s	conscience	is	haunting
him,	he	can	be	swayed	to	another	course.’
‘Beneath	the	hawk	gaze	of	Moroch	Nevath?	Not	likely.’
The	Champion’s	eyes	narrowed	on	Nisall.	This	was	all	leading	to
something.	He	just	wasn’t	sure	what.
The	Preda	sighed.	‘Gerun	needs	to	add	a	name	to	his	list.’
‘Moroch	Nevath?’
‘And	that	will	be	difficult.’
‘It	will.	The	man	is	singular.	In	every	way	imaginable.	Incorruptible,	with	a
history	to	match.’
‘And	to	whom	is	the	man	sworn?’
‘Why,	the	prince,	of	course.	But	the	King’s	Leave	does	not	include	killing
royalty.’
‘Yet	his	history	is	far	less	pure.’
Nisall	added,	‘Gerun	would	not	be	able	to	act	directly	against	the	prince.
He	would	need	to	attack	obliquely.’
‘First	Concubine,	I	have	little	understanding	of	Gerun	Eberict’s
motivations.	I	do	not	comprehend	the	nature	of	his	cause.’
‘I	do,’	the	Preda	said.	‘I	know	precisely	what	he’s	up	to.	And	I	believe	we
can	see	that	he	adds	to	his	list.’
‘The	concern	is,’	Nisall	said,	‘what	role	will	his	old	Finadd,	Hull	Beddict,
have	during	the	playing	out	of	all	this.’
Brys	looked	away.	He	was	beginning	to	feel	under	siege.	If	not	one
brother,	then	the	other.	‘I	will	give	it	some	thought.’
‘Not	too	long,	Finadd,’	Unnutal	Hebaz	said.
‘A	day	or	two,	perhaps.’
‘Agreed.	Until	then,	Brys.’
‘Goodnight	Preda,	First	Concubine.’
He	made	his	way	out	of	the	office.


In	the	corridor,	five	paces	from	the	two	guards	standing	vigil	at	the	door
through	which	he	had	just	exited,	his	steps	slowed	to	a	halt.	Unmindful	of	the
curious	eyes	on	his	back,	the	King’s	Champion	stood	motionless.
In	the	minds	of	the	two	guards,	three	titles.	Master	of	the	Sword,	Finadd
and	King’s	Champion—all	were	cause	for	envy	and	admiration.	They	might
have	wondered	at	him	at	that	moment,	however.	The	way	he	stood,	as	if
entirely	alone	in	a	large,	overwhelming	world.	Eyes	clearly	fixed	on	some
inner	landscape.	Weariness	in	his	shoulders.	They	might	have	wondered,	but	if
so	it	was	a	brief,	ephemeral	empathy,	quickly	replaced	by	those	harder
sentiments,	envy	and	admiration.	And	the	gruff	assertion	that	supreme	ability
purchased	many	things,	including	isolation.	And	the	man	could	damn	well	live
with	it.
	
‘There’s	no	place	for	sentiment	here,’	Tehol	said,	‘sad	to	say.	Letheras	is
unforgiving.	We	can’t	afford	to	make	mistakes.	For	Errant’s	sake,	Ublala,
relax.	You’re	turning	blue.	Anyway,	as	I	was	saying,	Shand,	it’s	careless	being
careless.	In	other	words,	we	can’t	keep	meeting	like	this.’
‘Do	you	practise?’	Rissarh	asked.
‘At	what?’
Bugg	cleared	his	throat.	‘I	have	a	meeting	tomorrow	with	the	royal
architects.’
‘Finally!’	Shand	sighed	from	where	she	sat	at	the	table,	knuckling	her	eyes
before	continuing,	‘As	far	as	we	could	tell	nothing	was	happening	about
anything.’
‘Well,’	Tehol	said,	‘that’s	precisely	the	impression	we	want.’
‘Fine,	but	that’s	the	outside	impression.	It’s	not	supposed	to	apply	to	us,
you	idiot.	If	we	aren’t	in	on	the	scheme	then	no-one	is.’
‘Preparation,	Shand.	The	groundwork.	This	can’t	be	rushed.	Now,	I’ve	got
to	go.’
‘What?’
‘It’s	late.	My	bed	beckons.	Fix	up	a	room	for	Ublala.	Get	him	some	clothes.
Maybe	even	a	weapon	he	knows	how	to	use.’
‘Don’t	leave	me	here!’	Ublala	moaned.
‘This	is	all	business,’	Tehol	assured	him.	‘You’re	safe	here.	Isn’t	he,
Shand?’
‘Of	course,’	she	murmured.
‘Cut	that	out.	Or	I’ll	hire	a	bodyguard	for	our	bodyguard.’
‘Maybe	Ublala	has	a	brother.’


Tehol	gestured	for	Bugg	to	follow	as	he	headed	for	the	door.	‘I	suppose
meetings	like	this	are	useful.	Every	now	and	then.’
‘No	doubt,’	Bugg	replied.
They	emerged	onto	the	street.	The	night	crowd	was	bustling.	Shops	stayed
open	late	in	the	summer,	to	take	advantage	of	the	season’s	frenzy.	Heat	made
for	restlessness,	which	made	for	a	certain	insatiability.	Later	in	the	season,
when	the	temperatures	became	unbearable,	there	would	be	enervation,	and	debt.
Tehol	and	Bugg	left	the	high	street	fronting	the	canal	and	made	their	way
down	various	alleys,	gradually	leaving	the	spending	crowds	behind	and
finding	themselves	among	the	destitute.	Voices	called	out	from	shadows.
Dishevelled	children	followed	the	two	men,	a	few	reaching	out	grubby	hands
to	pluck	at	Tehol’s	skirt	before	running	away	laughing.	Before	long,	they	too
were	gone,	and	the	way	ahead	was	empty.
‘Ah,	the	welcoming	silence	of	our	neighbourhood,’	Tehol	said	as	they
walked	towards	their	house.	‘It’s	the	headlong	rush	that	always	troubles	me.	As
if	the	present	is	unending.’
‘Is	this	your	contemplative	moment?’	Bugg	asked.
‘It	was.	Now	over,	thankfully.’
They	entered	and	Tehol	strode	straight	for	the	ladder.	‘Clean	the	place	up
tomorrow	morning.’
‘Remember,	you’ll	have	a	visitor	tonight.’
‘Not	just	in	my	dreams?’
Tehol	clambered	onto	the	roof.	He	closed	the	hatch	then	stood	and	studied
the	stars	overhead	until	she	emerged	from	the	darkness	to	one	side	and	spoke.
‘You’re	late.’
‘No,	I’m	not.	Midnight.	Still	a	quarter	off.’
‘Is	it?	Oh.’
‘And	how’s	life,	Shurq?	Sorry,	I	couldn’t	resist.’
‘And	I’ve	never	heard	that	particular	quip	before.	It’s	a	miserable	existence.
Day	after	day,	night	after	night.	One	step	in	front	of	the	other,	on	and	on	to
nowhere	in	particular.’
‘And	being	dead	has	changed	all	that?’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh,	Tehol	Beddict.	I	cough	up	stuff	when	I	laugh.	You
want	to	offer	me	a	contract.	To	do	what?’
‘Well,	a	retainer,	actually.’
‘Ongoing	employment.	I	refused	all	retainers	when	I	was	alive;	why	should
I	do	anything	else	now?’
‘Job	security,	of	course.	You’re	not	young	any	more.’	He	walked	over	to
his	bed	and	sat	down,	facing	her.	‘All	right.	Consider	the	challenges	I	offer.	I


have	targets	in	mind	that	not	a	thief	alive	today	would	touch.	In	fact,	only	a
high	mage	or	someone	who’s	dead	could	defeat	the	wards	and	leave	no	trail.	I
don’t	trust	high	mages,	leaving	only	you.’
‘There	are	others.’
‘Two	others,	to	be	precise.	And	neither	one	a	professional	thief.’
‘How	did	you	know	there	were	two	others?’
‘I	know	lots	of	things,	Shurq.	One	is	a	woman	who	cheated	on	her	husband,
who	in	turn	spent	his	life	savings	on	the	curse	against	her.	The	other	is	a	child,
origin	of	curse	unknown,	who	dwells	in	the	grounds	of	the	old	tower	behind
the	palace.’
‘Yes.	I	visit	her	on	occasion.	She	doesn’t	know	who	cursed	her.	In	fact,	the
child	has	no	memory	of	her	life	at	all.’
‘Probably	an	addition	to	the	original	curse,’	Tehol	mused.	‘But	that	is
curious	indeed.’
‘It	is.	Half	a	peak	was	the	going	price.	How	much	for	sorcery	to	steal	her
memories?’
‘Half	as	much	again,	I’d	think.	That’s	a	lot	to	do	to	a	ten-year-old	child.
Why	not	just	kill	her	and	bury	her	in	some	out	of	the	way	place,	or	dump	her	in
the	canal?’	He	sat	forward.	‘Tell	you	what,	Shurq,	we’ll	include	the	pursuit	of
that	mystery—I	suspect	it	interests	you	in	spite	of	yourself.’
‘I	would	not	mind	sticking	a	knife	in	the	eye	of	whoever	cursed	the	child.
But	I	have	no	leads.’
‘Ah,	so	you’ve	not	been	entirely	apathetic,	then.’
‘Never	said	I	was,	Tehol.	But,	finding	no	trail	at	all,	I	admit	to	a
diminishment	in	motivation.’
‘I’ll	see	what	I	can	do.’
The	dead	woman	cocked	her	head	and	regarded	him	in	silence	for	a
moment.	‘You	were	a	genius	once.’
‘Very	true.’
‘Then	you	lost	everything.’
‘That’s	right.’
‘And	with	that,	presumably,	a	similar	loss	in	confidence.’
‘Oh,	hardly,	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘All	part	of	your	diabolical	plan.’
‘Every	worthwhile	plan	is	diabolical.’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh.’
‘I’m	trying	not	to,	Shurq.	Do	we	have	a	deal?’
‘The	secret	of	the	curse	upon	the	child	was	not	your	intended	payment	for
my	services,	Tehol.	What	else?’


‘I’m	open	to	suggestions.	Do	you	want	the	curse	undone?	Do	you	long	for
eternal	night?	The	final	stealthy	departure	of	your	slinking	soul?	Do	you	want
to	be	resurrected	in	truth?	Gifted	life	once	more?	Revenge	against	the	one	who
cursed	you?’
‘I	already	did	that.’
‘All	right.	I	admit	I’m	not	surprised.	Who	was	blamed	for	it?’
‘Gerun	Eberict.’
‘Oh,	that’s	clever.	Speaking	of	him…’
‘Is	he	one	of	your	targets?’
‘Very	much	so.’
‘I	don’t	like	assassination,	in	principle.	Besides,	he’s	killed	more	than	one
knave.’
‘I	don’t	want	you	to	kill	him,	Shurq.	Just	steal	his	fortune.’
‘Gerun	Eberict	has	been	getting	more	brazen,	it’s	true.’
‘An	actual	liability.’
‘Assuming	maintaining	the	status	quo	is	a	worthwhile	endeavour.’
‘Make	no	assumptions,	Shurq.	It’s	more	a	matter	of	who’s	controlling	the
dissolution	of	said	status	quo.	The	Finadd	is	losing	control	of	his	own
appetites.’
‘Are	you	one	of	his	targets,	Tehol?’
‘Not	that	I’m	aware	of,	not	yet,	anyway.	Preferably	not	at	all.’
‘It	would	be	quite	a	challenge	defeating	his	estate’s	defensive	measures.’
‘I’m	sure	it	would.’
‘As	for	my	retainer,	I’m	not	interested	in	living	again.	Nor	in	dying	with
finality.	No,	what	I	want	is	to	be	granted	the	semblance	of	life.’
Tehol’s	brows	rose.
‘I	want	my	skin	glowing	with	palpable	vigour.	I	want	a	certain	dark	allure
to	my	eyes.	My	hair	needs	styling.	New	clothes,	a	flowery	scent	lingering	in
my	wake.	And	I	want	to	feel	pleasure	again.’
‘Pleasure?’
‘Sexual.’
‘Maybe	it’s	just	the	company	you’ve	been	keeping.’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh.’
‘You’ll	cough	up	stuff.’
‘You	don’t	want	to	know,	Tehol	Beddict.	Maybe	we	can	do	something
about	that,	too.	That	river	water	is	three	years	old.’
‘I’m	curious.	How	do	you	manage	to	speak	without	breath?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	can	draw	air	into	my	throat.	It	starts	drying	out	after	a
while.’


‘I’ve	noticed.	All	right,	some	of	those	things	can	be	achieved	easily
enough,	although	we’ll	have	to	be	circumspect.	Others,	for	example	the
reawakening	of	pleasure,	will	obviously	be	more	problematic.	But	I’m	sure
something	can	be	managed—’
‘It	won’t	be	cheap.’
‘I’m	sure	Gerun	Eberict	will	be	happy	to	pay	for	it.’
‘What	if	it	takes	all	he	has?’
Tehol	shrugged.	‘My	dear,	the	money	is	not	the	point	of	the	exercise.	I	was
planning	on	dumping	it	in	the	river.’
She	studied	him	in	silence	for	a	moment	longer,	then	said,	‘I	could	take	it
with	me.’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh,	Shurq.	Seriously.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	it’s	a	very	infectious	laugh.’
‘Ah.	Point	taken.’
‘And	the	retainer?’	Tehol	asked.
‘Taken,	as	well.	Presumably,	you	don’t	want	me	hanging	around	you.’
‘Midnight	meetings	like	this	one	should	suffice.	Come	by	tomorrow	night,
and	we’ll	make	of	you	a	new	woman.’
‘So	long	as	I	smell	new.’
‘Don’t	worry.	I	know	just	the	people	for	the	task	at	hand.’
	
The	thief	left	by	climbing	down	the	outside	wall	of	the	building.	Tehol	stood	at
the	roof’s	edge	and	watched	her	progress,	then,	when	she	had	reached	the	alley
below,	he	permitted	himself	a	roll	of	the	eyes.	He	turned	away	and	approached
his	bed.
Only	to	hear	voices	down	below.	Surprised	tones	from	Bugg,	but	not
alarm.	And	loud	enough	to	warn	Tehol	in	case	Shurq	had	lingered.
Tehol	sighed.	Life	had	been	better—simpler—only	a	few	weeks	ago.	When
he’d	been	without	plans,	schemes,	goals.	Without,	in	short,	purpose.	A	modest
stir,	and	now	everyone	wanted	to	see	him.
Creaks	from	the	ladder,	then	a	dark	figure	climbed	into	view.
It	was	a	moment	before	Tehol	recognized	him,	and	his	brows	rose	a
moment	before	he	stepped	forward.	‘Well,	this	is	unexpected.’
‘Your	manservant	seemed	sure	that	you’d	be	awake.	Why	is	that?’
‘Dear	brother,	Bugg’s	talents	are	veritably	preternatural.’
Brys	walked	over	to	the	bed	and	studied	it	for	a	moment.	‘What	happens
when	it	rains?’


‘Alas,	I	am	forced	to	retire	to	the	room	below.	There	to	suffer	Bugg’s
incessant	snoring.’
‘Is	that	what’s	driven	you	to	sleeping	on	the	roof?’
Tehol	smiled,	then	realized	it	was	not	likely	Brys	could	see	that	smile	in
the	darkness.	Then	decided	it	was	all	for	the	best.	‘King’s	Champion.	I	have
been	remiss	in	congratulating	you.	Thus,	congratulations.’
Brys	was	motionless.	‘How	often	do	you	visit	the	crypt?	Or	do	you	ever
visit?’
Crossing	his	arms,	Tehol	swung	his	gaze	to	the	canal	below.	A	smeared
gleam	of	reflected	stars,	crawling	through	the	city.	‘It’s	been	years,	Brys.’
‘Since	you	last	visited?’
‘Since	they	died.	We	all	have	different	ways	of	honouring	their	memory.
The	family	crypt?’	He	shrugged.	‘A	stone-walled	sunken	room	containing
nothing	of	consequence.’
‘I	see.	I’m	curious,	Tehol,	how	precisely	do	you	honour	their	memory
these	days?’
‘You	have	no	idea.’
‘No,	I	don’t.’
Tehol	rubbed	at	his	eyes,	only	now	realizing	how	tired	he	was.	Thinking
was	proving	a	voracious	feeder	on	his	energies,	leading	him	to	admit	he’d
been	out	of	practice.	Not	just	thinking,	of	course.	The	brain	did	other	things,	as
well,	even	more	exhausting.	The	revisiting	of	siblings,	of	long-estranged
relationships,	saw	old,	burnished	armour	donned	once	more,	weapons	reached
for,	old	stances	once	believed	abandoned	proving	to	have	simply	been	lying
dormant.	‘Is	this	a	festive	holiday,	Brys?	Have	I	missed	something?	Had	we
cousins,	uncles	and	aunts,	nephews	and	nieces,	we	could	gather	to	walk	the
familiar	ruts.	Round	and	round	the	empty	chairs	where	our	mother	and	father
once	sat.	And	we	could	make	our	language	unspoken	in	a	manner	to	mimic
another	truth—that	the	dead	speak	in	silences	and	so	never	leave	us	in	peace—’
‘I	need	your	help,	Tehol.’
He	glanced	up,	but	could	make	nothing	of	his	brother ’s	expression	in	the
gloom.
‘It’s	Hull,’	Brys	went	on.	‘He’s	going	to	get	himself	killed.’
‘Tell	me,’	Tehol	said,	‘have	you	ever	wondered	why	not	one	of	us	has
found	a	wife?’
‘I	was	talking	about—’
‘It’s	simple,	really.	Blame	our	mother,	Brys.	She	was	too	smart.	Errant	take
us,	what	an	understatement.	It	wasn’t	Father	who	managed	the	investments.’
‘And	you	are	her	son,	Tehol.	More	than	me	and	Hull,	by	far.	Every	time	I


look	at	you,	every	time	I	listen	to	you,	struggle	to	follow	your	lines	of	thought.
But	I	don’t	see	how	that—’
‘Our	expectations	reside	in	the	clouds,	Brys.	Oh,	we	try.	All	of	us	have
tried,	haven’t	we?’
‘Damn	it,	Tehol,	what’s	your	point?’
‘Hull,	of	course.	That’s	who	you	came	here	to	talk	about,	isn’t	it?	Well.	He
met	a	woman.	As	smart	as	our	mother,	in	her	own	way.	Or,	rather,	she	found
him.	Hull’s	greatest	gift,	but	he	didn’t	even	recognize	it	for	what	it	was,	when	it
was	right	there	in	his	hands.’
Brys	stepped	closer,	hands	lifting	as	if	about	to	grasp	his	brother	by	the
throat.	‘You	don’t	understand,’	he	said,	his	voice	cracking	with	emotion.	After
a	moment	his	hands	fell	away.	‘The	prince	will	see	him	killed.	Or,	if	not	the
prince,	then	the	First	Eunuch—should	Hull	speak	out	against	the	king.	But
wait!’	He	laughed	without	humour.	‘There’s	also	Gerun	Eberict!	Who’ll	also
be	there!	Have	I	left	anyone	out?	I’m	not	sure.	Does	it	matter?	Hull	will	be	at
the	parley.	The	only	one	whose	motives	are	unknown—to	anyone.	You	can’t
play	your	game	if	a	stranger	wades	in	at	the	last	moment,	can	you?’
‘Calm	yourself,	brother,’	Tehol	said.	‘I	was	getting	to	my	point.’
‘Well,	I	can’t	see	it!’
‘Quietly,	please.	Hull	found	her,	then	lost	her.	But	she’s	still	there—that
much	is	clear.	Seren	Pedac,	Brys.	She’ll	protect	him—’
Brys	snarled	and	turned	away.	‘Like	Mother	did	Father?’
Tehol	winced,	then	sighed.	‘Mitigating	circumstances—’
‘And	Hull	is	our	father ’s	son!’
‘You	asked,	a	moment	ago,	how	I	honour	the	memory	of	our	parents.	I	can
tell	you	this,	Brys.	When	I	see	you.	How	you	stand.	The	deadly	grace—your
skill,	taught	you	by	his	hand—well,	I	have	no	need	for	memory.	He	stands
before	me,	right	now.	More	than	with	Hull.	Far	more.	And,	I’d	hazard,	I	am
much	as	you	say—like	her.	Thus,’	he	spread	his	hands	helplessly,	‘you	ask	for
help,	but	will	not	hear	what	I	tell	you.	Need	there	be	reminders	of	the	fates	of
our	parents?	Need	there	be	memory,	Brys?	We	stand	here,	you	and	I,	and	play
out	once	more	the	old	familial	tortures.’
‘You	describe,	then,’	he	said	hoarsely,	‘our	doom.’
‘She	could	have	saved	him,	Brys.	If	not	for	us.	Her	fear	for	us.	The	whole
game	of	debt,	so	deftly	contrived	to	snare	Father—she	would	have	torn	it	apart,
except	that,	like	me,	she	could	see	nothing	of	the	world	that	would	rise	from
the	ashes.	And,	seeing	nothing,	she	feared.’
‘Without	us,	then,	she	would	have	saved	him—kept	him	from	that	moment
of	supreme	cowardice?’


Brys	was	facing	him	now,	his	eyes	glittering.
‘I	think	so,’	Tehol	answered.	‘And	from	them,	we	have	drawn	our	lessons
of	life.	You	chose	the	protection	of	the	King’s	Guard,	and	now	the	role	of
Champion.	Where	debt	will	never	find	you.	As	for	Hull,	he	walked	away—
from	gold,	from	its	deadly	traps—and	sought	honour	in	saving	people.	And
even	when	that	failed…do	you	honestly	imagine	Hull	would	ever	consider
killing	himself?	Our	father ’s	cowardice	was	betrayal,	Brys.	Of	the	worst	sort.’
‘And	what	of	you,	Tehol?	What	lesson	are	you	living	out	right	now?’
‘The	difference	between	me	and	our	mother	is	that	I	carry	no	burden.	No
children.	So,	brother,	I	think	I	will	end	up	achieving	the	very	thing	she	could
not	do,	despite	her	love	for	Father.’
‘By	dressing	in	rags	and	sleeping	on	your	roof?’
‘Perception	enforces	expectation,	Brys.’	And	thought	he	saw	a	wry	smile
from	his	brother.
‘Even	so,	Tehol,	Gerun	Eberict	is	not	as	deceived	as	you	might	believe.	As,
I	admit,	I	was.’
‘Until	tonight?’
‘I	suppose	so.’
‘Go	home,	Brys,’	Tehol	said.	‘Seren	Pedac	stands	at	Hull’s	back,	and	will
continue	to	do	so	no	matter	how	much	she	might	disagree	with	whatever	he
seeks	to	do.	She	cannot	help	herself.	Even	genius	has	its	flaws.’
Another	grin.	‘Even	with	you,	Tehol?’
‘Well,	I	was	generalizing	to	put	you	at	ease.	I	never	include	myself	in	my
own	generalizations.	I	am	ever	the	exception	to	the	rule.’
‘And	how	do	you	manage	that?’
‘Well,	I	define	the	rules,	of	course.	That’s	my	particular	game,	brother.’
‘By	the	Errant,	I	hate	you	sometimes,	Tehol.	Listen.	Do	not	underestimate
Gerun	Eberict—’
‘I’ll	take	care	of	Gerun.	Now,	presumably	you	were	followed	here?’
‘I	hadn’t	thought	of	that.	Yes,	probably	I	was.	Do	you	think	our	voices
carried?’
‘Not	through	the	wards	Bugg	raises	every	night	before	he	goes	to	sleep.’
‘Bugg?’
Tehol	clapped	his	brother	on	the	shoulder	and	guided	him	towards	the
hatch.	‘He’s	only	mostly	worthless.	We	ever	seek	out	hidden	talents,	an	exercise
assuring	endless	amusement.	For	me,	at	least.’
‘Did	he	not	embalm	our	parents?	The	name—’
‘That	was	Bugg.	That’s	where	I	first	met	him,	and	saw	immediately	his	lack
of	potential.	The	entrance	can	be	viewed	in	secret	from	one	place	and	no	other,


Brys.	Normally,	you	could	make	no	approach	without	being	detected.	And	then
there’d	be	a	chase,	which	is	messy	and	likely	to	fail	on	your	part.	You	will	have
to	kill	the	man—Gerun’s,	I	suspect.	And	not	in	a	duel.	Outright	execution,	Brys.
Are	you	up	to	it?’
‘Of	course.	But	you	said	there	was	no	approach	that	could	not—’
‘Ah,	well,	I	forgot	to	mention	our	tunnel.’
Brys	paused	at	the	hatch.	‘You	have	a	tunnel.’
‘Keeping	Bugg	busy	is	an	eternal	chore.’
	
Still	five	paces	from	the	shadowed	section	of	the	warehouse	wall	that	offered
the	only	hiding	place	with	a	clear	line	of	sight	to	the	doorway	of	Tehol’s
house,	Brys	Beddict	halted.	His	eyes	were	well	adjusted,	and	he	could	see	that
no-one	was	there.
But	he	could	smell	blood.	Metallic	and	thick.
Sword	drawn,	he	approached.
No	man	could	have	survived	such	a	loss.	It	was	a	black	pool	on	the
cobbles,	reluctant	to	seep	into	the	cracks	between	the	set	stones.	A	throat
opened	wide,	the	wound	left	to	drain	before	the	corpse	had	been	dragged	away.
And	the	trail	was	plain,	twin	heel	tracks	alongside	the	warehouse	wall,	round	a
corner	and	out	of	sight.
The	Finadd	considered	following	it.
Then,	upon	seeing	a	single	footprint,	traced	in	dried	dust	on	the	dust,	he
changed	his	mind.
The	footprint	left	by	a	child.	Bared.	As	it	dragged	the	dead	man	away.
Every	city	had	its	darkness,	its	denizens	who	prowled	only	at	night	in	their
own	game	of	predator	and	prey.	Brys	knew	it	was	not	his	world,	nor	did	he
wish	to	hunt	down	its	secrets.	These	hours	belonged	to	the	white	crow,	and	it
was	welcome	to	them.
He	turned	the	other	way,	began	his	walk	back	to	the	palace.
His	brother ’s	formidable	mind	had	not	been	idle,	it	seemed.	His
indifference	no	more	than	a	feint.	Which	made	Tehol	a	very	dangerous	man.
Thank	the	Errant	he’s	on	my	side…
He	is	on	my	side,	isn’t	he?
	
The	old	palace,	soon	to	be	entirely	abandoned	in	favour	of	the	Eternal
Domicile,	sat	on	a	sunken	hill,	the	building	proper	a	hundred	paces	in	from	the


river ’s	seasonally	uncertain	banks.	Sections	of	a	high	wall	indicated	that	there
had	been	an	enclosure	once,	extending	from	the	palace	to	the	river,	in	which	an
assortment	of	structures	had	been	effectively	isolated	from	the	rest	of	the	city.
Not	so	much	in	a	proprietary	claim	to	ownership,	for	the	structures	in
question	predated	even	the	founding	First	Empire.	Perhaps,	for	those	original
builders,	there	had	been	a	recognition,	of	sorts,	of	something	verging	on	the
sacred	about	these	grounds,	although,	of	course,	not	holy	to	the	colonizers.
Another	possibility	was	that	the	first	Letherii	were	possessors	of	a	more
complete	arcane	knowledge—secrets	long	since	lost—that	inspired	them	to	do
honour	to	the	Jaghut	dwellings	and	the	single,	oddly	different	tower	in	their
midst.
The	truth	had	crumbled	along	with	the	enclosure	walls,	and	no	answers
could	be	found	sifting	the	dust	of	crumbled	mortar	and	flakes	of	exfoliated
schist.	The	area,	while	no	longer	sealed,	was	by	habit	avoided.	The	land	itself
was	worthless,	by	virtue	of	a	royal	proclamation	six	centuries	old	that
prohibited	demolition	of	the	ancient	structures,	and	subsequent	resettlement.
Every	legal	challenge	or,	indeed,	enquiry	regarding	that	proclamation	was
summarily	dismissed	without	even	so	much	as	recourse	to	the	courts.
All	very	well.	Skilled	practitioners	of	the	tiles	of	the	Holds	well	knew	the
significance	of	that	squat,	square,	leaning	tower	with	its	rumpled,	overgrown
grounds.	And	indeed	of	the	Jaghut	dwellings,	representative	as	they	were	of	the
Ice	Hold.	Many	held	that	the	Azath	tower	was	the	very	first	true	structure	of	the
Azath	on	this	world.
From	her	new	perspective,	Shurq	Elalle	was	less	sceptical	than	she	might
have	once	been.	The	grounds	surrounding	the	battered	grey	stone	tower
exerted	an	ominous	pull	on	the	dead	thief.	There	were	kin	there,	but	not	of
blood.	No,	this	was	the	family	of	the	undead,	of	those	unable	or	unwilling	to
surrender	to	oblivion.	In	the	case	of	those	interred	in	the	lumpy,	clay-shot	earth
around	the	tower,	their	graves	were	prisons.	The	Azath	did	not	give	up	its
children.
She	sensed	as	well	that	there	were	living	creatures	buried	there,	most	of
them	driven	mad	by	centuries	upon	centuries	snared	in	ancient	roots	that	held
them	fast.	Others	remained	ominously	silent	and	motionless,	as	if	awaiting
eternity’s	end.
The	thief	approached	the	forbidden	grounds	behind	the	palace.	She	could
see	the	Azath	tower,	its	third	and	uppermost	storey	edging	above	the	curved
walls	of	the	Jaghut	dwellings.	Not	one	of	the	structures	stood	fully	upright.	All
were	tilted	in	some	fashion,	the	subsurface	clay	squeezing	out	from	beneath
their	immense	weight	or	lenses	of	sand	washed	away	by	underground	runoff.


Vines	had	climbed	the	sides	in	chaotic	webs,	although	those	that	had	reached
out	to	the	Azath	died	there,	withered	against	the	foundation	stones	amidst
yellowed	grasses.
She	did	not	need	to	see	the	blood	trail	in	order	to	follow	it.	The	smell	was
heavy	in	the	sultry	night	air,	invisible	streaks	riding	the	currents,	and	she
pursued	its	wake	until	she	came	to	the	low,	crooked	wall	surrounding	the	Azath
tower.
Just	beyond,	at	the	base	of	a	twisted	tree,	sat	the	child	Kettle.	Nine	or	ten
years	old…for	ever.	Naked,	her	pale	skin	smeared,	her	long	hair	clotted	with
coagulating	blood.	The	corpse	before	her	was	already	half	under	the	earth,
being	dragged	down	into	the	darkness.
To	feed	the	Azath?	Or	some	ravenous	denizen?	Shurq	had	no	idea.	Nor	did
she	care.	The	grounds	swallowed	bodies,	and	that	was	useful.
Kettle	looked	up,	black	eyes	dully	reflecting	starlight.	There	were	moulds
that,	if	left	unattended,	could	blind,	and	the	film	was	thick	over	the	girl’s	dead
eyes.	She	slowly	rose	and	walked	over.
‘Why	won’t	you	be	my	mother?’
‘I’ve	already	told	you,	Kettle.	I	am	no-one’s	mother.’
‘I	followed	you	tonight.’
‘You’re	always	following	me,’	Shurq	said.
‘Just	after	you	left	that	roof,	another	man	came	to	the	house.	A	soldier.	And
he	was	followed.’
‘And	which	of	the	two	did	you	kill?’
‘Why,	the	one	who	followed,	of	course.	I’m	a	good	girl.	I	take	care	of	you.
Just	as	you	take	care	of	me—’
‘I	take	care	of	no-one,	Kettle.	You	were	dead	long	before	I	was.	Living
here	in	these	grounds.	I	used	to	bring	you	bodies.’
‘Never	enough.’
‘I	don’t	like	killing.	Only	when	I	have	no	choice.	Besides,	I	wasn’t	the	only
one	employing	your	services.’
‘Yes	you	were.’
Shurq	stared	at	the	girl	for	a	long	moment.	‘I	was?’
‘Yes.	And	you	wanted	to	know	my	story.	Everyone	else	runs	from	me,	just
like	they	run	from	you	now.	Except	that	man	on	the	roof.	Is	he	another	one	not
like	everyone	else?’
‘I	don’t	know,	Kettle.	But	I	am	working	for	him	now.’
‘I	am	glad.	Grown-ups	should	work.	It	helps	fill	their	minds.	Empty	minds
are	bad.	Dangerous.	They	fill	themselves	up.	With	bad	things.	Nobody’s	happy.’
Shurq	cocked	her	head.	‘Who’s	not	happy?’


Kettle	waved	one	grubby	hand	at	the	rumpled	yard.	‘Restless.	All	of	them.	I
don’t	know	why.	The	tower	sweats	all	the	time	now.’
‘I	will	bring	you	some	salt	water,’	Shurq	said,	‘for	your	eyes.	You	need	to
wash	them	out.’
‘I	can	see	easily	enough.	With	more	than	my	eyes	now.	My	skin	sees.	And
tastes.	And	dreams	of	light.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Kettle	pushed	bloody	strands	of	hair	from	her	heart-shaped	face.	‘Five	of
them	are	trying	to	get	out.	I	don’t	like	those	five—I	don’t	like	most	of	them,	but
especially	those	five.	The	roots	are	dying.	I	don’t	know	what	to	do.	They
whisper	how	they’ll	tear	me	to	pieces.	Soon.	I	don’t	want	to	be	torn	to	pieces.
What	should	I	do?’
Shurq	was	silent.	Then	she	asked,	‘How	much	do	you	sense	of	the	Buried
Ones,	Kettle?’
‘Most	don’t	talk	to	me.	They	have	lost	their	minds.	Others	hate	me	for	not
helping	them.	Some	beg	and	plead.	They	talk	through	the	roots.’
‘Are	there	any	who	ask	nothing	of	you?’
‘Some	are	ever	silent.’
‘Talk	to	them.	Find	someone	else	to	speak	to,	Kettle.	Someone	who	might
be	able	to	help	you.’	Someone	else	to	be	your	mother…or	father.	‘Ask	for
opinions,	on	any	and	all	matters.	If	one	remains	then	who	does	not	seek	to
please	you,	who	does	not	attempt	to	twist	your	desires	so	that	you	free	it,	and
who	holds	no	loyalty	to	the	others,	then	you	will	tell	me	of	that	one.	All	that
you	know.	And	I	will	advise	you	as	best	I	can—not	as	a	mother,	but	as	a
comrade.’
‘All	right.’
‘Good.	Now,	I	came	here	for	another	reason,	Kettle.	I	want	to	know,	how
did	you	kill	that	spy?’
‘I	bit	through	his	throat.	It’s	the	quickest,	and	I	like	the	blood.’
‘Why	do	you	like	the	blood?’
‘In	my	hair,	to	keep	it	from	my	face.	And	it	smells	alive,	doesn’t	it?	I	like
that	smell.’
‘How	many	do	you	kill?’
‘Lots.	The	ground	needs	them.’
‘Why	does	the	ground	need	them?’
‘Because	it’s	dying.’
‘Dying?	And	what	would	happen	if	it	does	die,	Kettle?’
‘Everything	will	get	out.’
‘Oh.’


‘I	like	it	here.’
‘Kettle,	from	now	on,’	Shurq	said,	‘I	will	tell	you	who	to	kill—don’t
worry,	there	should	be	plenty.’
‘All	right.	That’s	nice	of	you.’
	
Among	the	hundreds	of	creatures	buried	in	the	grounds	of	the	Azath,	only	one
was	capable	of	listening	to	the	conversation	between	the	two	undead	on	the
surface	above.	The	Azath	was	relinquishing	its	hold	on	this	denizen,	not	out	of
weakness,	but	out	of	necessity.	The	Guardian	was	anything	but	ready.	Indeed,
might	never	be	ready.	The	choice	itself	had	been	flawed,	yet	another	sign	of
faltering	power,	of	age	crawling	forward	to	claim	the	oldest	stone	structure	in
the	realm.
The	Azath	tower	was	indeed	dying.	And	desperation	forced	a	straying	onto
unprecedented	paths.
Among	all	the	prisoners,	a	choice	had	been	made.	And	preparations	were
under	way,	slow	as	the	track	of	roots	through	stone,	but	equally	inexorable.	But
there	was	so	little	time.
The	urgency	was	a	silent	scream	that	squeezed	blood	from	the	Azath	tower.
Five	kin	creatures,	taken	and	held	since	the	time	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,
were	almost	within	reach	of	the	surface.
And	this	was	not	good,	for	they	were	Toblakai.


Chapter	Five

Against	the	flat	like	thunder
Where	the	self	dwells	between	the	eyes,
Beneath	the	blow	the	bone	shattered
And	the	soul	was	dragged	forth
To	writhe	in	the	grip
Of	unredeemed	vengeance…
THE	LAST	NIGHT	OF	BLOODEYE
AUTHOR	UNKNOWN	(COMPILED	BY	T ISTE	ANDII	SCHOLARS	OF	BLACK
CORAL)
The	Shadow’s	laughter	was	low,	a	sound	that	promised	madness	to	all	who
heard	it.	Udinaas	let	the	netting	fall	away	from	his	fingers	and	leaned	back
against	the	sun-warmed	rock.	He	squinted	up	at	the	bright	sky.	He	was	alone	on
the	beach,	the	choppy	waves	of	the	bay	stretching	out	before	him.	Alone,	except
for	the	wraith	that	now	haunted	him	at	every	waking	moment.
Conjured,	then	forgotten.	Wandering,	an	eternal	flight	from	the	sun,	but
there	were	always	places	to	hide.
‘Stop	that,’	Udinaas	said,	closing	his	eyes.
‘Why	ever?	I	smell	your	blood,	slave.	Growing	colder.	I	once	knew	a	world
of	ice.	After	I	was	killed,	yes,	after.	Even	darkness	has	flaws,	and	that’s	how
they	stole	me.	But	I	have	dreams.’
‘So	you’re	always	saying.	Then	follow	them,	wraith,	and	leave	me	alone.’
‘I	have	dreams	and	you	understand	nothing,	slave.	Was	I	pleased	to	serve?
Never.	Never	ever	never	and	again,	never.	I’m	following	you.’
Udinaas	opened	his	eyes	and	stared	down	at	the	sliver	of	shadow	between
two	rocks,	from	which	the	voice	was	emerging.	Sand	fleas	scampered	and
darted	on	the	flanking	stone,	but	of	the	wraith	itself	there	was	no	visible	sign.
‘Why?’
‘Why	ever	why?	That	which	you	cast	beckons	me,	slave.	You	promise	a
worthy	journey—do	you	dream	of	gardens,	slave?	I	know	you	do—I	can	smell	it.


Half	dead	and	overgrown,	why	ever	not?	There	is	no	escape.	So,	with	my
dreams,	it	serves	me	to	serve.	Serves	to	serve.	Was	I	not	once	a	Tiste	Andii?	I
believe	I	was.	Murdered	and	flung	into	the	mud,	until	the	ice	came.	Then	torn
loose,	after	so	long,	to	serve	my	slayers.	My	slavers,	whose	diligence	then
wavered.	Shall	we	whisper	of	betrayers,	slave?’
‘You	would	bargain?’
‘Hither	when	you	call	me,	call	me	Wither.	I	have	dreams.	Give	me	that
which	you	cast.	Give	me	your	shadow,	and	I	will	become	yours.	Your	eyes
behind	you,	whom	no-one	else	can	see	or	hear,	unless	they	guess	and	have
power	but	why	would	they	guess?	You	are	a	slave.	Who	behaves.	Be	sure	to
behave,	slave,	until	the	moment	you	betray.’
‘I	thought	Tiste	Andii	were	supposed	to	be	dour	and	miserable.	And	please,
Wither,	no	more	rhymes.’
‘Agreed,	once	you	give	me	your	shadow.’
‘Can	other	wraiths	see	you?	Hannan	Mosag’s—’
‘That	oaf?	I	will	hide	in	your	natural	casting.	Hidden.	Never	found.	See,	no
rhymes.	We	were	bold	in	those	days,	slave.	Soldiers	in	a	war,	an	invasion.
Soaked	in	the	cold	blood	of	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	We	followed	the	youngest	child
of	Mother	Dark	herself.	And	we	were	witness.’
‘To	what?’
‘To	Bloodeye’s	betrayal	of	our	leader.	To	the	dagger	driven	into	our	lord’s
back.	I	myself	fell	to	a	blade	wielded	by	a	Tiste	Edur.	Unexpected.	Sudden
slaughter.	We	stood	no	chance.	No	chance	at	all.’
Udinaas	made	a	face,	studied	the	tossing	waves	that	warred	with	the	river ’s
outpouring	current.	‘The	Edur	claim	it	was	the	other	way	round,	Wither.’
‘Then	why	am	I	dead	and	they	alive?	If	we	were	the	ambushers	that	day?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Now,	if	you	intend	to	lurk	in	my	shadow,	Wither,	you
must	learn	to	be	silent.	Unless	I	speak	to	you.	Silent,	and	watchful,	and	nothing
more.’
‘First,	slave,	you	must	do	something	for	me.’
Udinaas	sighed.	Most	of	the	noble-born	Edur	were	at	the	interment
ceremony	for	the	murdered	fisherman,	along	with	a	half-dozen	kin	from	the
Beneda,	since	the	Edur ’s	identity	had	finally	been	determined.	Fewer	than	a
dozen	warriors	remained	in	the	compound	behind	him.	Shadow	wraiths
seemed	to	grow	bolder	at	such	times,	emerging	to	flit	across	the	ground,
between	longhouses	and	along	the	palisade	walls.
He	had	often	wondered	at	that.	But	now,	if	Wither	was	to	be	believed,	he
had	his	answer.	Those	wraiths	are	not	ancestral	kin	to	the	mortal	Edur.	They	are
Tiste	Andii,	the	bound	souls	of	the	slain.	And,	I	was	desperate	for	allies…‘Very


well,	what	do	you	wish	me	to	do,	Wither?’
‘Before	the	seas	rose	in	this	place,	slave,	the	Hasana	Inlet	was	a	lake.	To
the	south	and	west,	the	land	stretched	out	to	join	with	the	westernmost	tip	of	the
Reach.	A	vast	plain,	upon	which	the	last	of	my	people	were	slaughtered.	Walk
the	shoreline	before	you,	slave.	South.	There	is	something	of	mine—we	must
find	it.’
Udinaas	rose	and	brushed	the	sand	from	his	coarse	woollen	trousers.	He
looked	about.	Three	slaves	from	the	Warlock	King’s	citadel	were	down	by	the
river	mouth,	beating	clothes	against	rocks.	A	lone	fisherboat	was	out	on	the
water,	but	distant.	‘How	far	will	I	need	to	walk?’
‘It	lies	close.’
‘If	I	am	perceived	to	be	straying	too	far,	I	will	be	killed	outright.’
‘Not	far,	slave—’
‘I	am	named	Udinaas,	and	so	you	will	address	me.’
‘You	claim	the	privilege	of	pride?’
‘I	am	more	than	a	slave,	Wither,	as	you	well	know.’
‘But	you	must	behave	as	if	you	were	not.	I	call	you	“slave”	to	remind	you	of
that.	Fail	in	your	deception,	and	the	pain	they	shall	inflict	upon	you	in	the
search	for	all	you	would	hide	from	them	shall	be	without	measure—’
‘Enough.’	He	walked	down	to	the	waterline.	The	sun	threw	his	shadow	into
his	wake,	pulled	long	and	monstrous.
The	rollers	had	built	a	humped	sweep	of	sand	over	the	stones,	on	which	lay
tangled	strands	of	seaweed	and	a	scattering	of	detritus.	A	pace	inland	of	this
elongated	rise	was	a	depression	filled	with	slick	pebbles	and	rocks.	‘Where
should	I	be	looking?’
‘Among	the	stones:	A	little	further.	Three,	two	paces.	Yes.	Here.’
Udinaas	stared	down,	scanning	the	area.	‘I	see	nothing.’
‘Dig.	No,	to	your	left—those	rocks,	move	those.	That	one.	Now,	deeper.
There,	pull	it	free.’
A	misshapen	lump	that	sat	heavy	in	his	hand.	Finger-length	and	tapered	at
one	end,	the	metal	object	within	swallowed	by	thick	calcifications.	‘What	is	it?’
‘An	arrowhead,	slave.	Hundreds	of	millennia,	crawling	to	this	shore.	The
passage	of	ages	is	measured	by	chance.	The	deep	roll	of	tides,	the	succession	of
wayward	storms.	This	is	how	the	world	moves—’
‘Hundreds	of	millennia?	There	would	be	nothing	left—’
‘A	blade	of	simple	iron	without	sorcerous	investment	would	indeed	have
vanished.	The	arrowhead	remains,	slave,	because	it	will	not	surrender.	You	must
chip	away	at	all	that	surrounds	it.	You	must	resurrect	it.’
‘Why?’


‘I	have	my	reasons,	slave.’
There	was	nothing	pleasing	in	this,	but	Udinaas	straightened	and	tucked	the
lump	in	his	belt	pouch.	He	returned	to	his	nets.	‘I	shall	not,’	he	muttered,	‘be	the
hand	of	your	vengeance.’
Wither ’s	laugh	followed	him	in	the	crunch	of	stones.
	
There	was	smoke	hanging	above	the	lowlands,	like	clouds	dragged	low	and
now	shredded	by	the	dark	treetops.
‘A	funeral,’	Binadas	said.
Seren	Pedac	nodded.	There	had	been	no	storms,	and	besides,	the	forest	was
too	wet	to	sustain	a	wildfire.	The	Edur	practice	of	burial	involved	a	tumulus
construction,	which	was	then	covered	to	form	a	pyre.	The	intense	heat	baked
the	coin-sheathed	corpse	as	if	it	was	clay,	and	stained	the	barrow	stones	red.
Shadow	wraiths	danced	amidst	the	flames,	twisted	skyward	with	the	smoke,	and
would	linger	long	after	the	mourners	were	gone.
Seren	drew	her	knife	and	bent	to	scrape	mud	from	her	boots.	This	side	of
the	mountains	the	weather	daily	crept	in	from	the	sea	shedding	rain	and	mist	in
pernicious	waves.	Her	clothes	were	soaked	through.	Three	times	since
morning	the	heavily	burdened	wagons	had	skidded	off	the	trail,	once	crushing
a	Nerek	to	death	beneath	the	solid,	iron-rimmed	wheels.
Straightening,	she	cleaned	her	knife	between	two	gloved	fingers,	then
sheathed	it	at	her	side.
Moods	were	foul.	Buruk	the	Pale	had	not	emerged	from	his	wagon	in	two
days,	nor	had	his	three	half-blood	Nerek	concubines.	But	the	descent	was
finally	done,	and	ahead	was	a	wide,	mostly	level	trail	leading	to	Hannan
Mosag’s	village.
Binadas	stood	and	watched	as	the	last	wagon	rocked	clear	of	the	slope,	and
Seren	sensed	the	Edur ’s	impatience.	Someone	had	died	in	his	village,	after	all.
She	glanced	over	at	Hull	Beddict,	but	could	sense	nothing	from	him.	He	had
withdrawn	deep	into	himself,	as	if	building	reserves	in	anticipation	of	what	was
to	come.	Or,	equally	likely,	struggling	to	bolster	crumbling	resolve.	She
seemed	to	have	lost	her	ability	to	read	him.	Pain	worn	without	pause	and	for	so
long	could	itself	become	a	mask.
‘Binadas,’	Seren	said,	‘the	Nerek	need	to	rest.	The	journey	before	us	is
clear.	There	is	no	need	for	you	to	remain	with	us	as	escort.	Go	to	your	people.’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her,	suspicious	of	her	offer.
She	added	nothing	more.	He	would	believe	what	he	would	believe,	after
all,	no	matter	how	genuine	her	intent.


‘She	speaks	true,’	Hull	said.	‘We	would	not	constrain	you,	Binadas.’
‘Very	well.	I	shall	inform	Hannan	Mosag	of	your	impending	visit.’
They	watched	the	Edur	set	off	down	the	trail.	In	moments	the	trees
swallowed	him.
‘Do	you	see?’	Hull	asked	her.
‘I	saw	only	conflicting	desires	and	obligations,’	Seren	replied,	turning
away.
‘Only,	then,	what	you	chose	to.’
Seren’s	shrug	was	weary.	‘Oh,	Hull,	that	is	the	way	of	us	all.’
He	stepped	close.	‘But	it	need	not	be	so,	Acquitor.’
Surprised,	she	met	his	gaze,	and	wondered	at	the	sudden	earnestness	there.
‘How	am	I	supposed	to	respond	to	that?’	she	asked.	‘We	are	all	like	soldiers,
crouching	behind	the	fortifications	we	have	raised.	You	will	do	what	you
believe	you	must,	Hull.’
‘And	you,	Seren	Pedac?	What	course	awaits	you?’
Ever	the	same	course.	‘The	Tiste	Edur	are	not	yours	to	use.	They	may
listen,	but	they	are	not	bound	to	follow.’
He	turned	away.	‘I	have	no	expectations,	Seren,	only	fears.	We	should
resume	the	journey.’
She	glanced	over	at	the	Nerek.	They	sat	or	squatted	near	the	wagons,	steam
rising	from	their	backs.	Their	expressions	were	slack,	strangely	indifferent	to
the	dead	kin	they	had	left	behind	in	his	makeshift	grave	of	rutted	mud,	rocks
and	roots.	How	much	could	be	stripped	from	a	people	before	they	began
stripping	away	themselves?	The	steep	slope	of	dissolution	began	with	a	skid,
only	to	become	a	headlong	run.
The	Letherii	believed	in	cold-hearted	truths.	Momentum	was	an	avalanche
and	no-one	was	privileged	with	the	choice	of	stepping	aside.	The	division
between	life	and	death	was	measured	in	incremental	jostling	for	position
amidst	all-devouring	progress.	No-one	could	afford	compassion.	Accordingly,
none	expected	it	from	others	either.
We	live	in	an	inimical	time.	But	then,	they	are	all	inimical	times.
It	began	to	rain	once	more.
Far	to	the	south,	beyond	the	mountains	they	had	just	crossed,	the	downfall
of	the	Tiste	Edur	was	being	plotted.	And,	she	suspected,	Hull	Beddict’s	life	had
been	made	forfeit.	They	could	not	afford	the	risk	he	presented,	the	treason	he
had	as	much	as	promised.	The	irony	existed	in	their	conjoined	desires.	Both
sought	war,	after	all.	It	was	only	the	face	of	victory	that	was	different.
But	Hull	possessed	little	of	the	necessary	acumen	to	play	this	particular
game	and	stay	alive.


And	she	had	begun	to	wonder	if	she	would	make	any	effort	to	save	him.
A	shout	from	Buruk’s	wagon.	The	Nerek	climbed	wearily	to	their	feet.
Seren	drew	her	cloak	tighter	about	her	shoulders,	eyes	narrowed	on	the	path
ahead.	She	sensed	Hull	coming	to	her	side,	but	did	not	look	over.
‘What	temple	was	it	you	were	schooled	at?’
She	snorted,	then	shook	her	head.	‘Thurlas,	the	Shrouded	Sisters	of	the
Empty	Throne.’
‘Just	opposite	Small	Canal.	I	remember	it.	What	sort	of	child	were	you,
Seren?’
‘Clearly,	you	have	an	image	in	your	mind.’
She	caught	his	nod	in	her	periphery,	and	he	said,	‘Zealous.	Proper	to
excess.	Earnest.’
‘There	are	ledgers,	recording	the	names	of	notable	students.	You	will	find
mine	in	them,	again	and	again.	For	example,	I	hold	title	to	the	most
punishments	inflicted	in	a	year.	Two	hundred	and	seventy-one.	I	was	more
familiar	with	the	Unlit	Cell	than	my	own	room.	I	was	also	accused	of	seducing
a	visiting	priest.	And	before	you	ask,	yes,	I	was	guilty.	But	the	priest	swore
otherwise,	to	protect	me.	He	was	excommunicated.	I	later	heard	he	killed
himself.	Had	I	still	possessed	any	innocence,	I	would	have	lost	it	then.’
He	came	round	to	stand	before	her,	as	the	first	wagon	was	pulled	past	by
the	Nerek.	She	was	forced	to	look	at	him.	Hesitated,	then	offered	him	a	wry
smile.	‘Have	I	shocked	you,	Hull	Beddict?’
‘The	ice	has	broken	beneath	me.’
A	flash	of	anger,	then	she	realized	the	self-mockery	in	his	confession.	‘We
are	not	born	innocent,	simply	unmeasured.’
‘And,	presumably,	immeasurable	as	well.’
‘For	a	few	years	at	least.	Until	the	outside	is	inflicted	upon	the	inside,	then
the	brutal	war	begins.	We	are	not	born	to	compassion	either—large	wide	eyes
and	sweet	demeanor	notwithstanding.’
‘And	you	came	to	recognize	your	war	early.’
Seren	shrugged.	‘My	enemy	was	not	authority,	although	perhaps	it	seemed
so.	It	was	childhood	itself.	The	lowered	expectations	of	adults,	the	eagerness	to
forgive.	It	sickened	me—’
‘Because	it	was	unjust.’
‘A	child’s	sense	of	injustice	is	ever	self-serving,	Hull.	I	couldn’t	fool
myself	with	that	indignation.	Why	are	we	speaking	of	this?’
‘Questions	I	forgot	to	ask.	Back	then.	I	think	I	was	a	child	myself	in	those
days.	All	inside,	no	outside.’
Her	brows	rose,	but	she	said	nothing.


Hull	understood	anyway.	‘You	might	be	right.	In	some	things,	that	is.	But
not	when	it	comes	to	the	Edur.’
The	second	wagon	trundled	past.	Seren	studied	the	man	before	her.	‘Are
you	so	certain	of	that?’	she	asked.	‘Because	I	see	you	driven	by	your	own
needs.	The	Edur	are	the	sword	but	the	hand	is	your	own,	Hull.	Where	is	the
compassion	in	that?’
‘You	have	it	wrong,	Seren.	I	intend	to	be	the	sword.’
The	chill	in	her	bones	deepened.	‘In	what	way?’
But	he	shook	his	head.	‘I	cannot	trust	you,	Seren.	Like	everyone	else,	you
shall	have	to	wait.	One	thing,	however.	Do	not	stand	in	my	way.	Please.’
I	cannot	trust	you.	Words	that	cut	to	her	soul.	Then	again,	the	issue	of	trust
stood	on	both	sides	of	the	path,	didn’t	it?
The	third	wagon	halted	beside	them.	The	curtain	in	the	door	window	was
dragged	aside	and	Buruk’s	deathly	face	peered	out.	‘And	this	is	guidance?	Who
blazes	the	trail?	Are	we	doomed	now	to	wander	lost?	Don’t	tell	me	you	have
become	lovers	once	more!	Seren,	you	look	positively	besieged.	Such	is	the
curse	of	love,	oh,	my	heart	weeps	for	you!’
‘Enough,	Buruk,’	Seren	said.	She	wiped	the	rain	from	her	face	and,
ignoring	Hull,	moved	past	onto	the	path.	Nerek	stepped	to	either	side	to	let	her
pass.
The	forest	trail	was	flanked	by	Blackwood	trees,	planted	to	assert	Edur
possession	of	these	lands.	Rough	midnight	bark	that	had	been	twisted	into
nightmarish	images	and	arcane	script	by	the	shadow	wraiths	that	clung	to	every
groove	and	fissure	in	the	rugged	skin.	Wraiths	that	now	rose	into	view	to	watch
Seren	and	those	following	in	her	wake.
There	seemed	more	than	usual.	Flowing	restless	like	black	mist	between
the	huge	boles.	Scores,	then	hundreds,	crowding	either	side	of	the	trail.	Seren’s
steps	slowed.
She	could	hear	the	Nerek	behind	her,	low	moans,	the	clack	of	the	wagons
slowing,	then	halting.
Hull	came	alongside	her.	‘They	have	raised	an	army,’	he	whispered.
There	was	dark	satisfaction	in	his	tone.
‘Are	they	truly	the	ancestors	of	the	Edur?’
His	gaze	snapped	to	her,	feverish.	‘Of	course.	What	else	could	they	be?’
She	shook	herself.	‘Urge	the	Nerek	onward,	Hull.	They’ll	listen	to	you.
Two	days	remaining,	that’s	all—’	And	then	she	fell	silent.
For	a	figure	was	standing	upon	the	trail.	Skin	the	colour	of	bleached	linen,
tall	as	an	Edur,	a	face	obscured	by	dark	streaks,	as	if	blood-stained	fingers	had
drawn	down	the	gaunt	cheeks.	An	apparition,	the	dull	red	eyes	burning	from


those	deep	sockets	dead.	Mould	hung	in	ragged	sheets	from	rotting	armour.
Two	scabbards,	both	empty.
Wraiths	swarmed	at	the	figure’s	feet,	as	if	in	worship.
A	wagon	door	clattered	and	Buruk	staggered	out,	wrapped	in	a	blanket	that
dragged	the	ground	behind	him	as	he	came	to	Seren’s	side.
‘Barrow	and	Root!’	the	merchant	hissed.	‘The	tiles	did	not	lie!’
Seren	took	a	step	forward.
Hull	reached	out	a	hand.	‘No—’
‘Would	you	have	us	stand	here	for	ever?’	she	snapped,	pulling	herself	free.
Despite	the	bravado	of	her	words,	she	was	terrified.	Ghosts	revealed
themselves	in	childhood	tales	and	legends,	and	in	the	occasional	fevered
rumour	in	the	capital.	She	had	believed	in	such	apparitions	in	a	half-hearted
way,	an	idea	made	wilfully	manifest.	A	whispery	vision	of	history,	risen	as
harbinger,	as	silent	warning.	A	notion,	then,	as	much	symbolic	as	actual.
And	even	then,	she	had	imagined	something	far	more…ephemeral.
Lacking	distinction,	a	face	comprised	of	forlorn	hints,	features	blurred	by	the
fading	of	their	relevance.	Half	seen	in	currents	of	darkness,	there	one	moment,
gone	the	next.
But	there	was	a	palpability	in	the	tall	conjuration	standing	before	her,	an
assertion	of	physical	insistence.	Etched	details	on	the	long,	pallid	face,	the	flat,
filmed	eyes	watching	her	approach	with	fullest	comprehension.
As	if	he	has	just	clambered	free	of	one	of	the	barrows	in	this	forest.	But	he
is	not…is	not	Edur.
‘A	dragon,’	the	apparition	said	in	the	language	of	the	Tiste,	‘once	dragged
itself	down	this	trail.	No	forest	back	then.	Naught	but	devastation.	Blood	in	the
broken	earth.	The	dragon,’	mortal,	made	this	trail.	Do	you	feel	this?	Beneath
you,	the	scattering	of	memory	that	pushes	the	roots	away,	that	bows	the	trees	to
either	side.	A	dragon.’	The	figure	then	turned,	looked	down	the	path	behind	it.
‘The	Edur—he	ran	unseeing,	unmindful.	Kin	of	my	betrayer.	Yet…an
innocent.’	He	faced	her	once	more.	‘But	you,	mortal,	are	not	nearly	so
innocent,	are	you?’
Taken	aback,	Seren	said	nothing.
Behind	her,	Hull	Beddict	spoke.	‘Of	what	do	you	accuse	her,	ghost?’
‘A	thousand.	A	thousand	upon	a	thousand	misdeeds.	Her.	You.	Your	kind.
The	gods	are	as	nothing.	Demons	less	than	children.	Every	Ascendant	an
awkward	mummer.	Compared	to	you.	Is	it	ever	the	way,	I	wonder?	That
depravity	thrives	in	the	folds	of	the	flower,	when	its	season	has	come.	The
secret	seeds	of	decay	hidden	beneath	the	burgeoning	glory.	All	of	us,	here	in
your	wake,	we	are	as	nothing.’


‘What	do	you	want?’	Hull	demanded.
The	wraiths	had	slipped	away,	back	among	the	trees.	But	a	new	tide	had
come	to	swarm	about	the	ghost’s	tattered	boots.	Mice,	a	seething	mass	pouring
up	the	trail.	Ankle	deep,	the	first	reached	Seren’s	feet,	scampered	round	them.
A	grey	and	brown	tide,	mindless	motion.	A	multitude	of	tiny	selves,	seized	by
some	unknown	and	unknowable	imperative.	From	here…to	there.
There	was	something	terrible,	horrifying,	about	them.	Thousands,	tens	of
thousands—the	trail	ahead,	for	as	far	as	she	could	see,	was	covered	with	mice.
‘The	land	was	shattered,’	the	apparition	said.	‘Not	a	tree	left	standing.
Naught	but	corpses.	And	the	tiny	creatures	that	fed	on	them.	Hood’s	own
legion.	Death’s	sordid	tide,	mortals,	fur-backed	and	rising.	It	seems	so…
facile.’	The	undead	seemed	to	shake	himself.	‘I	want	nothing	from	you.	The
journeys	are	all	begun.	Do	you	imagine	that	your	path	has	never	before	known
footfalls?’
‘We	are	not	so	blind	as	to	believe	that,’	Seren	Pedac	said.	She	struggled
against	kicking	away	the	mice	swarming	around	her	ankles,	fearing	the	descent
into	hysteria.	‘If	you	will	not—or	cannot—clear	this	trail,	then	we’ve	little
choice—’
The	apparition’s	head	tilted.	‘You	would	deliver	countless	small	deaths?	In
the	name	of	what?	Convenience?’
‘I	see	no	end	to	these	creatures	of	yours,	ghost.’
‘Mine?	They	are	not	mine,	mortal.	They	simply	belong	to	my	time.	To	the
age	of	their	squalid	supremacy	on	this	land.	A	multitude	of	tyrants	to	rule	over
the	ash	and	dust	we	left	in	our	wake.	They	see	in	my	spirit	a	promise.’
‘And,’	Hull	growled,	‘are	we	meant	to	see	the	same?’
The	apparition	had	begun	fading,	colours	bleeding	away.	‘If	it	pleases
you,’	came	the	faint,	derisive	reply.	‘Of	course,	it	may	be	that	the	spirit	they	see
is	yours,	not	mine.’
Then	the	ghost	was	gone.
The	mice	began	flowing	out	to	the	forest	on	either	side	of	the	trail,	as	if
suddenly	confused,	blinded	once	more	to	whatever	greater	force	had	claimed
them.	They	bled	away	into	the	mulch,	the	shadows	and	the	rotted	wood	of
fallen	trees.	One	moment	there,	the	next,	gone.
Seren	swung	to	Buruk	the	Pale.	‘What	did	you	mean	when	you	said	the	tiles
didn’t	lie?	Barrow	and	Root,	those	are	tiles	in	the	Hold	of	the	Azath,	are	they
not?	You	witnessed	a	casting	before	you	began	this	journey.	In	Trate.	Do	you
deny	it?’
He	would	not	meet	her	eyes.	His	face	was	pale.	‘The	Holds	are	awakening,
Acquitor.	All	of	them.’


‘Who	was	he,	then?’	Hull	Beddict	asked.
‘I	do	not	know.’	Abruptly	Buruk	scowled	and	turned	away.	‘Does	it	matter?
The	mud	stirs	and	things	clamber	free,	that	is	all.	The	Seventh	Closure	draws
near—but	I	fear	it	will	be	nothing	like	what	all	of	us	have	been	taught.	The
birth	of	empire,	oh	yes,	but	who	shall	rule	it?	The	prophecy	is	perniciously
vague.	The	trail	has	cleared—let	us	proceed.’
He	clambered	back	into	his	wagon.
‘Are	we	to	make	sense	of	that?’	Hull	asked.
Seren	shrugged.	‘Prophecies	are	like	the	tiles	themselves,	Hull.	See	in	them
what	you	will.’	The	aftermath	of	her	terror	was	sour	in	her	throat,	and	her
limbs	felt	loose	and	weak.	Suddenly	weary,	she	unstrapped	her	helm	and	lifted
it	off.	The	fine	rain	was	like	ice	on	her	brow.	She	closed	her	eyes.
I	can’t	save	him.	I	can’t	save	any	of	us.
Hull	Beddict	spoke	to	the	Nerek.
Blinking	her	eyes	open,	Seren	shook	herself.	She	tied	her	helm	to	her	pack.
The	journey	resumed.	Clattering,	groaning	wagons,	the	harsh	breathing	of
the	Nerek.	Motionless	air	and	the	mist	falling	through	it	like	the	breath	of	an
exhausted	god.
Two	days.	Then	it	is	done.
Thirty	paces	ahead,	unseen	by	any	of	them,	an	owl	sailed	across	the	path,
silent	on	its	broad,	dark	wings.	There	was	blood	on	its	talons,	blood	around	its
beak.
Sudden	bounties	were	unquestioned.	Extravagance	unworthy	of
celebration.	The	hunter	knew	only	hunting,	and	was	indifferent	to	the	fear	of
the	prey.	Indifferent,	as	well,	to	the	white	crow	that	sailed	in	its	wake.
	
A	random	twist	of	the	wind	drew	the	remnants	of	the	pyre’s	smoke	into	the
village.	It	had	burned	for	a	day	and	a	night,	and	Trull	Sengar	emerged	from	his
father ’s	longhouse	the	following	morning	to	find	the	mist	drifting	across	the
compound	bitter	with	its	taint.
He	regretted	the	new	world	he	had	found.	Revelations	could	not	be	undone.
And	now	he	shared	secrets	and	the	truth	was,	he	would	rather	have	done
without	them.	Once	familiar	faces	had	changed.	What	did	they	know?	How	vast
and	insidious	this	deceit?	How	many	warriors	had	Hannan	Mosag	drawn	into
his	ambitions?	To	what	extent	had	the	women	organized	against	the	Warlock
King?
No	words	on	the	subject	had	been	exchanged	among	the	brothers,	not	since
that	conversation	in	the	pit,	the	stove-in	dragon	skull	the	only	witness	to	what


most	would	call	treason.	The	preparations	for	the	impending	journey	were
under	way.	There	would	be	no	slaves	accompanying	them,	after	all.	Hannan
Mosag	had	sent	wraiths	ahead	to	the	villages	lying	between	here	and	the	icefields,	and	so	provisions	would	await	them,	mitigating	the	need	for
burdensome	supplies,	at	least	until	the	very	end.
A	wagon	drawn	by	a	half-dozen	slaves	had	trundled	across	the	bridge,	in
its	bed	newly	forged	weapons.	Iron-tipped	spears	stood	upright	in	bound
bundles.	Copper	sheathing	protected	the	shafts	for	fully	half	their	length.
Cross-hilted	swords	were	also	visible,	hand-and-a-half	grips	and	boiled	leather
scabbards.	Billhooks	for	unseating	riders,	sheaves	of	long	arrows	with	leather
fletching.	Throwing	axes,	as	favoured	by	the	Arapay.	Broad	cutlasses	in	the
Merude	style.
The	forges	hammered	the	din	of	war	once	more.
Trull	saw	Fear	and	Rhulad	stride	up	to	the	wagon,	more	slaves	trailing
them,	and	Fear	began	directing	the	storage	of	the	weapons.
Rhulad	glanced	over	as	Trull	approached.	‘Have	you	need	of	more	spears,
brother?’	he	asked.
‘No,	Rhulad.	I	see	Arapay	and	Merude	weapons	here—and	Beneda	and
Den-Ratha—’
‘Every	tribe,	yes.	So	it	is	now	among	all	the	forges,	in	every	village.	A
sharing	of	skills.’
Trull	glanced	over	at	Fear.	‘Your	thoughts	on	this,	brother?	Will	you	now
be	training	the	Hiroth	warriors	in	new	weapons?’
‘I	have	taught	how	to	defend	against	them,	Trull.	It	is	the	Warlock	King’s
intention	to	create	a	true	army,	such	as	those	of	the	Letherii.	This	will	involve
specialist	units.’	Fear	studied	Trull	for	a	moment,	before	adding,	‘I	am
Weapons	Master	for	the	Hiroth,	and	now,	at	the	Warlock	King’s	command,	for
all	of	the	tribes.’
‘You	are	to	lead	this	army?’
‘If	war	should	come,	yes,	I	will	lead	it	into	battle.’
‘Thus	are	the	Sengar	honoured,’	Rhulad	said,	his	face	expressionless,	the
tone	without	inflection.
Thus	are	we	rewarded.
‘Binadas	returned	at	dawn,’	Fear	said.	‘He	will	take	this	day	in	rest.	Then
we	shall	depart.’
Trull	nodded.
‘A	Letherii	trader	caravan	is	coming,’	Rhulad	said.	‘Binadas	met	them	on
the	trail.	The	Acquitor	is	Seren	Pedac.	And	Hull	Beddict	is	with	them.’
Hull	Beddict,	the	Sentinel	who	betrayed	the	Nerek,	the	Tarthenal	and	the


Faraed.	What	did	he	want?	Not	all	Letherii	were	the	same,	Trull	knew.
Opposing	views	sang	with	the	clash	of	swords.	Betrayals	abounded	among	the
rapacious	multitude	in	the	vast	cities	and	indeed,	if	rumours	were	true,	in	the
palace	of	the	king	himself.	The	merchant	was	charged	to	deliver	the	words	of
whoever	had	bought	him.	Whilst	Seren	Pedac,	in	the	profession	of	Acquitor,
would	neither	speak	her	mind	nor	interfere	with	the	aims	of	the	others.	He	had
not	been	in	the	village	during	her	other	visits,	and	so	could	judge	no	more	than
that.	But	Hull,	the	once	Sentinel—it	was	said	he	was	immune	to	corruption,
such	as	only	a	man	once	betrayed	could	be.
Trull	was	silent	as	he	watched	the	slaves	drag	the	weapon	bundles	from	the
cart	bed	and	carry	them	off	to	the	armoury.
Even	his	brothers	seemed…different	somehow.	As	if	shadows	stretched
taut	between	them,	unseen	by	anyone	else,	and	could	make	the	wind	drone	with
weighted	trepidation.	Darkness,	then,	in	the	blood	of	brothers.	None	of	this
served	the	journey	about	to	begin.	None	of	it.
I	was	ever	the	worrier.	I	do	not	see	too	much,	I	see	only	the	wrong	things.
And	so	the	fault	is	mine,	within	me.	I	need	to	remain	mindful	of	that.	Such	as
with	my	assumptions	about	Rhulad	and	Mayen.	Wrong	things,	wrong	thoughts,
they	are	the	ones	that	seem	to	be…tireless…
‘Binadas	says	Buruk	carries	Letherii	iron,’	Rhulad	said,	breaking	Trull’s
reverie.	‘That	will	prove	useful.	Dapple	knows,	the	Letherii	are	truly	fools—’
‘They	are	not,’	Fear	said.	‘They	are	indifferent.	They	see	no	contradiction
in	selling	us	iron	at	one	moment	and	waging	war	with	us	the	next.’
‘Nor	the	harvesting	of	tusked	seals,’	Trull	added,	nodding.	‘They	are	a
nation	of	ten	thousand	grasping	hands,	and	none	can	tell	which	ones	are	true,
which	ones	belong	to	those	in	power.’
‘King	Ezgara	Diskanar	is	not	like	Hannan	Mosag,’	Fear	said.	‘He	does	not
rule	his	people	with	absolute…’
Trull	glanced	over	as	his	brother ’s	voice	trailed	off.
Fear	swung	away.	‘Mayen	is	guest	tonight,’	he	said.	‘Mother	may	request
you	partake	in	the	supper	preparations.’
‘And	so	we	shall,’	Rhulad	said,	meeting	Trull’s	eyes	a	moment	before
fixing	his	attention	once	more	on	the	slaves.
Absolute	power…no,	we	have	undone	that,	haven’t	we?	And	indeed,	perhaps
it	never	existed	at	all.	The	women,	after	all…


The	other	slaves	were	busy	in	the	longhouse,	scurrying	back	and	forth	across
the	trusses	as	Udinaas	entered	and	made	his	way	to	his	sleeping	pallet.	He	was
to	serve	this	night,	and	so	was	permitted	a	short	period	of	rest	beforehand.	He
saw	Uruth	standing	near	the	central	hearth	but	was	able	to	slip	past	unnoticed	in
the	confusion,	just	another	slave	in	the	gloom.
Feather	Witch’s	assertions	remained	with	him,	tightening	his	every	breath.
Should	the	Edur	discover	the	truth	that	coursed	through	his	veins,	they	would
kill	him.	He	knew	he	must	hide,	only	he	did	not	know	how.
He	settled	onto	his	mat.	The	sounds	and	smells	of	the	chambers	beyond
drifted	over	him.	Lying	back,	he	closed	his	eyes.
This	night	he	would	be	working	alongside	Feather	Witch.	She	had	visited
him	that	one	time,	in	his	dream.	Apart	from	that,	he	had	had	no	occasion	to
speak	with	her.	Nor,	he	suspected,	was	she	likely	to	invite	an	exchange	of
words.	Beyond	the	mundane	impropriety	established	by	their	respective	class,
she	had	seen	in	him	the	blood	of	the	Wyval—or	so	she	had	claimed	in	the
dream.	Unless	that	was	not	her	at	all.	Nothing	more	than	a	conjuration	from	my
own	mind,	a	reshaping	of	dust.	He	would,	if	possible,	speak	to	her,	whether
invited	or	not.
Rugs	had	been	dragged	outside	and	laid	across	trestles.	The	thump	of	the
clubs	the	slaves	used	to	beat	the	dust	from	them	was	like	distant,	hollow
thunder.
A	flitting	thought,	vague	wondering	where	the	shadow	wraith	had	gone,
then	sleep	took	him.
He	was	without	form,	an	insubstantial	binding	of	senses.	In	ice.	A	blue,
murky	world,	smeared	with	streaks	of	green,	the	grit	of	dirt	and	sand,	the	smell
of	cold.	Distant	groaning	sounds,	solid	rivers	sliding	against	each	other.
Lenses	of	sunlight	delivering	heat	into	the	depths,	where	it	built	until	a
thundering	snap	shook	the	world.
Udinaas	flowed	through	this	frozen	landscape,	which	to	all	eyes	in	the
world	beyond	was	locked	motionless,	timeless.	And	nothing	of	the	pressures,
the	heaved	weights	and	disparate	forces,	was	revealed,	until	that	final	explosive
moment	when	things	broke.
There	were	shapes	in	the	ice.	Bodies	lifted	from	the	ground	far	below	and
held	in	awkward	poses.	Fleshed,	eyes	half	open.	Blossoms	of	blood	suspended
in	motionless	clouds	around	Wounds.	Flows	of	bile	and	waste.	Udinaas	found
himself	travelling	through	scenes	of	slaughter.	Tiste	Edur	and	darker-skinned
kin.	Enormous	reptilian	beasts,	some	with	naught	but	blades	for	hands.	In
multitudes	beyond	counting.
He	came	to	a	place	where	the	reptilian	bodies	formed	a	near-solid	mass.


Flowing	among	them,	he	suddenly	recoiled.	A	vertical	stream	of	melt	water
rose	through	the	ice	before	him,	threading	up	and	out	from	the	heaped	corpses.
The	water	was	pink,	mud-streaked,	pulsing	as	it	climbed	upward,	as	if	driven
by	some	deep,	subterranean	heart.
And	that	water	was	poison.
Udinaas	found	himself	fleeing	through	the	ice,	clashing	with	corpses,
rock-hard	flesh.	Then	past,	into	fissure-twisted	sweeps	devoid	of	bodies.	Down
solid	channels.	Racing,	ever	faster,	the	gloom	swallowing	him.
Massive	brown-furred	creatures,	trapped	standing	upright,	green	plants	in
their	mouths.	Herds	held	suspended	above	black	earth.	Ivory	tusks	and
glittering	eyes.	Tufts	of	uprooted	grasses.	Long	shapes—wolves,	steepshouldered	and	grey—caught	in	the	act	of	leaping,	running	alongside	an
enormous	horned	beast.	This	was	yet	another	scene	of	slaughter,	lives	stolen	in
an	instant	of	catastrophic	alteration—the	world	flung	onto	its	side,	the	rush	of
seas,	breathless	cold	that	cut	through	flesh	down	to	bone.
The	world…the	world	itself	betrays.	Errant	take	us,	how	can	this	be?
Udinaas	had	known	many	for	whom	certainty	was	a	god,	the	only	god,	no
matter	the	cast	of	its	features.	And	he	had	seen	the	manner	in	which	such	belief
made	the	world	simple,	where	all	was	divisible	by	the	sharp	cleaving	of	cold
judgement,	after	which	no	mending	was	possible.	He	had	seen	such	certainty,
yet	had	never	shared	it.
But	he	had	always	believed	the	world	itself	was…unquestionable.	Not	static
—never	static—but	capable	of	being	understood.	It	was	undoubtedly	cruel	at
times,	and	deadly…but	you	could	almost	always	see	it	coming.	Creatures
frozen	in	mid-leap.	Frozen	whilst	standing,	grasses	hanging	from	their	mouths.
This	was	beyond	comprehension.	Sorcery.	It	must	have	been.	Even	then,	the
power	seemed	unimaginable,	for	it	was	a	tenet	that	the	world	and	all	that	lived
on	it	possessed	a	natural	resistance	to	magic.	Self-evident,	else	mages	and	gods
would	have	reshaped	and	probably	destroyed	the	balance	of	all	things	long
ago.	Thus,	the	land	would	resist.	The	beasts	that	dwelt	upon	it	would	resist.	The
flow	of	air,	the	seep	of	water,	the	growing	plants	and	the	droning	insects—all
would	resist.
Yet	they	failed.
Then,	in	the	depths,	a	shape.	Squatting	on	bedrock,	a	stone	tower.	A	tall
narrow	slash	suggested	a	doorway,	and	Udinaas	found	himself	approaching	it
through	solid	ice.
Into	that	black	portal.
Something	shattered,	and,	suddenly	corporeal,	he	stumbled	onto	his	knees.
The	stone	was	cold	enough	to	tear	the	skin	from	his	knees	and	the	palms	of	his


hands.	He	staggered	upright,	and	his	shoulder	struck	something	that	tottered
with	the	impact.
The	cold	made	the	air	brutal,	blinding	him,	shocking	his	lungs.	Through
freezing	tears	he	saw,	amidst	a	faint	blue	glow,	a	tall	figure.	Skin	like	bleached
vellum,	limbs	too	long	and	angular	with	too	many	joints.	Black,	frosted	eyes,
an	expression	of	faint	surprise	on	its	narrow,	arched	features.	The	clothes	it
wore	consisted	of	a	harness	of	leather	straps	and	nothing	more.	It	was
unarmed.	A	man,	but	anything	but	a	man.
And	then	Udinaas	saw,	scattered	on	the	floor	around	the	figure,	corpses
twisted	in	death.	Dark,	greenish	skin,	tusked.	A	man,	a	woman,	two	children.
Their	bodies	had	been	broken,	the	ends	of	shattered	bone	jutting	out	from
flesh.	The	way	they	lay	suggested	that	the	white-skinned	man	had	been	their
killer.
Udinaas	was	shivering	uncontrollably.	His	hands	and	feet	were	numb.
‘Wither?	Shadow	wraith?	Are	you	with	me?’
Silence.
His	heart	began	hammering	hard	in	his	chest.	This	did	not	feel	like	a
dream.	It	was	too	real.	He	felt	no	dislocation,	no	whispering	assurance	of	a
body	lying	on	its	sleeping	pallet	in	an	Edur	longhouse.
He	was	here,	and	he	was	freezing	to	death.
Here.	In	the	depths	of	ice,	this	world	of	secrets	where	time	has	ceased.
He	turned	and	studied	the	doorway.
And	only	then	noticed	the	footprints	impressed	upon	the	frost-laden
flagstones.	Leading	out.	Bared	feet,	human,	a	child’s.
There	was	no	ice	visible	beyond	the	portal.	Naught	but	opaque	silver,	as	if
a	curtain	had	fallen	across	the	entrance.
Feeling	ebbing	from	his	limbs,	Udinaas	backtracked	the	footprints.	To
behind	the	standing	figure.	Where	he	saw,	after	a	numbed	moment,	that	the
back	of	the	man’s	head	had	been	stove	in.	Hair	and	skin	still	attached	to	the
shattered	plates	of	the	skull	that	hung	down	on	the	neck.	Something	like	a	fist
had	reached	into	the	figure’s	head,	tearing	through	the	grey	flesh	of	the	brain.
The	break	looked	unaccountably	recent.
Tiny	tracks	indicated	that	the	child	had	stood	behind	the	figure—no,	had
appeared	behind	it,	for	there	were	no	others	to	be	found.	Had	appeared…to	do
what?	Reach	into	a	dead	man’s	skull?	Yet	the	figure	was	as	tall	as	an	Edur.	The
child	would	have	had	to	climb.
His	thoughts	were	slowing.	There	was	a	pleasurable	languor	to	his
contemplation	of	this	horrid	mystery.	And	he	was	growing	sleepy.	Which
amused	him.	A	dream	that	made	him	sleepy.	A	dream	that	will	kill	me.	Would


they	find	a	frozen	corpse	on	the	sleeping	pallet?	Would	it	be	taken	as	an	omen?
Oh	well,	follow	the	prints…into	that	silver	world.	What	else	could	he	do?
With	a	final	glance	back	at	the	immobile	scene	of	past	murder	and	recent
desecration,	Udinaas	staggered	slowly	towards	the	doorway.
The	silver	enveloped	him,	and	sounds	rushed	in	from	all	sides.	Battle.
Screams,	the	ringing	hammering	of	weapons.	But	he	could	see	nothing.	Heat
rolled	over	him	from	the	left,	carrying	with	it	a	cacophony	of	inhuman	shrieks.
Contact	with	the	ground	beneath	vanished,	and	the	sounds	dropped,	swiftly
dwindled	to	far	below.	Winds	howled,	and	Udinaas	realized	he	was	flying,	held
aloft	on	leathery	wings.	Others	of	his	kind	sailed	the	tortured	currents—he
could	see	them	now,	emerging	from	the	cloud.	Grey-scaled	bodies	the	size	of
oxen,	muscle-bunched	necks,	taloned	hands	and	feet.	Long,	sloping	heads,	the
jaws	revealing	rows	of	dagger-like	teeth	and	the	pale	gums	that	held	them.
Eyes	the	colour	of	clay,	the	pupils	vertical	slits.
Locqui	Wyval.	That	is	our	name.	Spawn	of	Starvald	Demelain,	the	squalid
children	whom	none	would	claim	as	their	own.	We	are	as	flies	spreading	across
a	rotting	feast,	one	realm	after	another.	D’isthal	Wyvalla,	Enkar’al,	Trol,	we	are
a	plague	of	demons	in	a	thousand	pantheons.
Savage	exultation.	There	were	things	other	than	love	upon	which	to	thrive.
A	tide	of	air	pushed—drove	him	and	his	kind	to	one	side.	Bestial	screams
from	his	kin	as	something	loomed	into	view.
Eleint!	Soletaken	but	oh	so	much	draconic	blood.	Tiam’s	own.
Bone-white	scales,	the	red	of	wounds	smeared	like	misty	paint,
monstrously	huge,	the	dragon	the	Wyval	had	chosen	to	follow	loomed
alongside	them.
And	Udinaas	knew	its	name.
Silchas	Ruin.	Tiste	Andii,	who	fed	in	the	wake	of	his	brother—fed	on	Tiam’s
blood,	and	drank	deep.	Deeper	than	Anomander	Rake	by	far.	Darkness	and
chaos.	He	would	have	accepted	the	burden	of	godhood…had	he	been	given	the
chance.
Udinaas	knew	now	what	he	was	about	to	witness.	The	sembling	on	the
hilltop	far	below.	The	betrayal.	Shadow’s	murder	of	honour	in	the	breaking	of
vows.	A	knife	in	the	back	and	the	screams	of	the	Wyval	here	in	the	roiling	skies
above	the	battlefield.	The	shadow	wraith	had	not	lied.	The	legacy	of	the	deed
remained	in	the	Edur ’s	brutal	enslavement	of	Tiste	Andii	spirits.	Faith	was
proved	a	lie,	and	in	ignorance	was	found	weakness.	The	righteousness	of	the
Edur	stood	on	shifting	sands.
Silchas	Ruin.	The	weapons	of	those	days	possessed	terrifying	power,	but
his	had	been	shattered.	By	a	K’Chain	Che’Malle	matron’s	death-cry.


The	silver	light	flickered.	A	physical	wrenching,	and	he	found	himself
lying	on	his	sleeping	pallet	in	the	Sengar	longhouse.
The	skin	had	been	torn	from	his	palms,	his	knees.	His	clothes	were	sodden
with	melted	frost.
A	voice	murmured	from	the	shadows,	‘I	sought	to	follow,	but	could	not.
You	travelled	far.’
Wither.	Udinaas	rolled	onto	his	side.	‘Your	place	of	slaughter,’	he
whispered.	‘I	was	there.	What	do	you	want	of	me?’
‘What	does	anyone	want,	slave?	Escape.	From	the	past,	from	their	past.	I
will	lead	you	onto	the	path.	The	blood	of	the	Wyval	shall	protect	you—’
‘Against	the	Edur?’
‘Leave	the	threat	of	the	Edur	to	me.	Now,	ready	yourself.	You	have	tasks
before	you	this	night.’
A	sleep	that	had	left	him	exhausted	and	battered.	Grimacing,	he	climbed	to
his	feet.
	
With	two	of	her	chosen	slaves,	Mayen	walked	across	the	threshold	then	paused
two	strides	into	the	main	chamber.	She	was	willow	thin,	the	shade	of	her	skin
darker	than	most.	Green	eyes	framed	by	long,	umber	hair	in	which	glittered
beads	of	onyx.	A	traditional	tunic	of	silver	seal-skin	and	a	wide	belt	of
pearlescent	shells.	Bracelets	and	anklets	of	whale	ivory.
Trull	Sengar	could	see	in	her	eyes	a	supreme	awareness	of	her	own	beauty,
and	there	was	darkness	within	that	heavy-lidded	regard,	as	if	she	was	not
averse	to	wielding	that	beauty,	to	achieving	dominance,	and	with	it	a	potentially
unpleasant	freedom	in	which	to	indulge	her	desires.
There	were	all	kinds	of	pleasure,	and	hungers	which	spoke	naught	of
virtues,	only	depravity.	Once	again,	however,	Trull	was	struck	by	self-doubt	as
he	watched	his	mother	stride	to	stand	before	Mayen	to	voice	the	household’s
welcome.	Perhaps	he	once	more	saw	through	shadows	of	his	own	casting.
Leaning	until	his	back	was	to	the	wall,	he	glanced	over	at	Fear.	Uncertain
pride.	There	was	also	unease	in	his	brother ’s	expression,	but	it	could	have	been
born	of	anything—the	journey	they	would	undertake	on	the	morrow,	the	very
future	of	his	people.	Just	beyond	him,	Rhulad,	whose	eyes	devoured	Mayen	as
if	her	mere	presence	answered	his	cruellest	appetites.
Mayen	herself	held	Uruth	in	her	gaze.
She	absorbs.	These	tumbling	waves	of	attention,	drawn	in	and	fed	upon.
Dusk	shield	me,	am	I	mad,	to	find	such	thoughts	spilling	from	the	dark	places	in
my	own	soul?


The	formal	greeting	was	complete.	Uruth	stepped	to	one	side	and	Mayen
glided	forward,	towards	the	Blackwood	table	on	which	the	first	course	had
already	been	arrayed.	She	would	take	her	place	at	the	nearest	end,	with	Tomad
opposite	her	at	the	table’s	head.	On	her	left,	Fear,	on	her	right,	Uruth.	Binadas
beside	Uruth	and	Trull	beside	Fear.	Rhulad	was	to	Binadas’s	right.
‘Mayen,’	Tomad	said	once	she	had	seated	herself,	‘welcome	to	the	hearth
of	the	Sengar.	It	grieves	me	that	this	night	also	marks,	for	the	next	while,	the
last	in	which	all	my	sons	are	present.	They	undertake	a	journey	for	the
Warlock	King,	and	I	pray	for	their	safe	return.’
‘I	am	led	to	believe	the	ice-fields	pose	no	great	risks	for	warriors	of	the
Edur,’	Mayen	replied.	‘Yet	I	see	gravity	and	concern	in	your	eyes,	Tomad
Sengar.’
‘An	aged	father ’s	fretting,’	Tomad	said	with	a	faint	smile.	‘Nothing	more.’
Rhulad	spoke,	‘The	Arapay	rarely	venture	onto	the	icefields,	for	fear	of
hauntings.	More,	ice	can	blind,	and	the	cold	can	steal	life	like	the	bleeding	of
an	unseen	wound.	It	is	said	there	are	beasts	as	well—’
Fear	cut	in,	‘My	brother	seeks	resounding	glory	in	the	unknown,	Mayen,
so	that	you	may	look	upon	us	all	with	awe	and	wonder.’
‘I	am	afraid	he	has	left	me	with	naught	but	dread,’	she	said.	‘And	now	I
must	worry	for	your	fates.’
‘We	are	equal	to	all	that	might	assail	us,’	Rhulad	said	quickly.
Barring	the	babbling	tongue	of	an	unblooded	fool.
Wine	goblets	were	refilled,	and	a	few	moments	passed,	then	Uruth	spoke.
‘When	one	does	not	know	what	one	seeks,	caution	is	the	surest	armour.’	She
faced	Binadas.	‘Among	us,	you	alone	have	ventured	beyond	the	eastern
borders	of	Arapay	land.	What	dangers	do	the	ice-fields	pose?’
Binadas	frowned.	‘Old	sorcery,	Mother.	But	it	seems	inclined	to	slumber.’
He	paused,	thinking.	‘A	tribe	of	hunters	who	live	on	the	ice—I	have	seen
naught	but	tracks.	The	Arapay	say	they	hunt	at	night.’
‘Hunt	what?’	Trull	asked.
His	brother	shrugged.
‘There	will	be	six	of	us,’	Rhulad	said.	‘Theradas	and	Midik	Buhn,	and	all
can	speak	to	Theradas’s	skills.	Although	unblooded,’	he	added,	‘Midik	is
nearly	my	equal	with	the	sword.	Hannan	Mosag	chose	well	in	choosing	the
warrior	sons	of	Tomad	Sengar.’
This	last	statement	hung	strange	in	the	air,	as	if	rife	with	possible
meanings,	each	one	tumbling	in	a	different	direction.	Such	was	the	poison	of
suspicion.	The	women	had	their	beliefs,	Trull	well	knew,	and	now	probably
looked	upon	the	six	warriors	in	question,	wondering	at	Hannan	Mosag’s


motivations,	his	reasons	for	choosing	these	particular	men.	And	Fear,	as	well,
would	hold	to	his	own	thoughts,	knowing	what	he	knew—as	we	Sengar	all
know,	now.
Trull	sensed	the	uncertainty	and	began	wondering	for	himself.	Fear,	after
all,	was	Weapons	Master	for	all	the	tribes,	and	indeed	had	been	tasked	with
reshaping	the	Edur	military	structure.	From	Weapons	Master	to	War	Master,
then.	It	seemed	capricious	to	so	risk	Fear	Sengar.	And	Binadas	was	considered
by	most	to	be	among	the	united	tribes’	more	formidable	sorcerors.	Together,
Fear	and	Binadas	had	been	crucial	during	the	campaigns	of	conquest,	whilst
Theradas	Buhn	was	unequalled	in	leading	raids	from	the	sea.	The	only
expendable	members	of	this	expedition	are	myself,	Rhulad	and	Midik.	Was	the
issue,	therefore,	one	of	trust?
What	precisely	was	this	gift	they	were	to	recover?
‘There	have	been	untoward	events	of	late,’	Mayen	said,	with	a	glance	at
Uruth.
Trull	caught	his	father ’s	scowl,	but	Mayen	must	have	seen	acquiescence	in
Uruth’s	expression,	for	she	continued,	‘Spirits	walked	the	darkness	the	night	of
the	vigil.	Unwelcome	of	aspect,	intruders	upon	our	holy	sites—the	wraiths	fled
at	their	approach.’
‘This	is	the	first	I	have	heard	of	such	things,’	Tomad	said.
Uruth	reached	for	her	wine	cup	and	held	it	out	to	be	refilled	by	a	slave.
‘They	are	known	none	the	less,	husband.	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan	have
stirred	deep	shadows.	The	tide	of	change	rises—and	soon,	I	fear,	it	will	sweep
us	away.’
‘But	it	is	we	who	are	rising	on	that	tide,’	Tomad	said,	his	face	darkening.
‘It	is	one	thing	to	question	defeat,	but	now	you	question	victory,	wife.’
‘I	speak	only	of	the	Great	Meeting	to	come.	Did	not	our	own	sons	tell	of
the	summoning	from	the	depths	that	stole	the	souls	of	the	Letherii	seal-hunters?
When	those	ships	sail	into	the	harbour	at	Trate,	how	think	you	the	Letherii	will
react?	We	have	begun	the	dance	of	war.’
‘If	that	were	so,’	Tomad	retorted,	‘then	there	would	be	little	point	to	treat
with	them.’
‘Except,’	Trull	cut	in,	recalling	his	father ’s	own	words	when	he	first
returned	from	the	Calach	beds,	‘to	take	their	measure.’
‘It	was	taken	long	ago,’	Fear	said.	‘The	Letherii	will	seek	to	do	to	us	as
they	have	done	to	the	Nerek	and	the	Tarthenal.	Most	among	them	see	no	error
or	moral	flaw	in	their	past	deeds.	Those	who	do	are	unable	or	unwilling	to
question	the	methods,	only	the	execution,	and	so	they	are	doomed	to	repeat	the
horrors,	and	see	the	result—no	matter	its	nature—as	yet	one	more	test	of


firmly	held	principles.	And	even	should	the	blood	run	in	a	river	around	them,
they	will	obsess	on	the	details.	One	cannot	challenge	the	fundamental	beliefs	of
such	people,	for	they	will	not	hear	you.’
‘Then	there	will	be	war,’	Trull	whispered.
‘There	is	always	war,	brother,’	Fear	replied.	‘Faiths,	words	and	swords:
history	resounds	with	their	interminable	clash.’
‘That,	and	the	breaking	of	bones,’	Rhulad	said,	with	the	smile	of	a	man
with	a	secret.
Foolish	conceit,	for	Tomad	could	not	miss	it	and	he	leaned	forward.
‘Rhulad	Sengar,	you	speak	like	a	blind	elder	with	a	sack	full	of	wraiths.	I	am
tempted	to	drag	you	across	this	table	and	choke	the	gloat	from	your	face.’
Trull	felt	sweat	prickle	beneath	his	clothes.	He	saw	the	blood	leave	his
brother ’s	face.	Oh,	Father,	you	deliver	a	wound	deeper	than	you	could	ever
have	imagined.	He	glanced	over	at	Mayen	and	was	startled	to	see	something
avid	in	her	eyes,	a	malice,	a	barely	constrained	delight.
‘I	am	not	so	young,	Father,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	rasp,	‘nor	you	so	old,	to	let
such	words	pass—’
Tomad’s	fist	thumped	the	tabletop,	sending	cups	and	plates	clattering.
‘Then	speak	like	a	man,	Rhulad!	Tell	us	all	this	dread	knowledge	that	coils
your	every	strut	and	has	for	the	past	week!	Or	do	you	seek	to	part	tender	thighs
with	your	womanish	ways?	Do	you	imagine	you	are	the	first	young	warrior
who	seeks	to	walk	in	step	with	women?	Sympathy,	son,	is	a	poor	path	to	lust—’
Rhulad	was	on	his	feet,	his	face	twisting	with	rage.	‘And	which	bitch	would
you	have	me	bed,	Father?	To	whom	am	I	promised?	And	in	whose	name?	You
have	leashed	me	here	in	this	village	and	then	you	mock	when	I	strain.’	He
glared	at	the	others,	fixing	at	last	on	Trull.	‘When	the	war	begins,	Hannan
Mosag	will	announce	a	sacrifice.	He	must.	A	throat	will	be	opened	to	spill
down	the	bow	of	the	lead	ship.	He	will	choose	me,	won’t	he?’
‘Rhulad,’	Trull	said,	‘I	have	heard	no	such	thing—’
‘He	will!	I	am	to	bed	three	daughters!	Sheltatha	Lore,	Sukul	Ankhadu	and
Menandore!’
A	plate	skittered	out	from	the	hands	of	a	slave	and	cracked	onto	the
tabletop,	spilling	the	shellfish	it	held.	As	the	slave	reached	forward	to	contain
the	accident,	Uruth’s	hands	snapped	out	and	grasped	the	Letherii	by	the	wrists.
A	savage	twist	to	reveal	the	palms.
The	skin	had	been	torn	from	them,	raw,	red,	glittering	wet	and	cracked.
‘What	is	this,	Udinaas?’	Uruth	demanded.	She	rose	and	yanked	him	close.
‘I	fell—’	the	Letherii	gasped.
‘To	weep	your	wounds	onto	our	food?	Have	you	lost	your	mind?’


‘Mistress!’	another	slave	ventured,	edging	forward.	‘I	saw	him	come	in
earlier—he	bore	no	such	wounds	then,	I	swear	it!’
‘He	is	the	one	who	fought	the	Wyval!’	another	cried,	backing	away	in
sudden	terror.
‘Udinaas	is	possessed!’	the	other	slave	shrieked.
‘Quiet!’	Uruth	set	a	hand	against	Udinaas’s	forehead	and	pushed	back	hard.
He	grunted	in	pain.
Sorcery	swirled	out	to	surround	the	slave.	He	spasmed,	then	went	limp,
collapsing	at	Uruth’s	feet.
‘There	is	nothing	within	him,’	she	said,	withdrawing	a	trembling	hand.
Mayen	spoke.	‘Feather	Witch,	attend	to	Uruth’s	slave.’
The	young	Letherii	woman	darted	forward.	Another	slave	appeared	to	help
her	drag	the	unconscious	man	away.
‘I	saw	no	insult	in	the	slave’s	actions,’	Mayen	continued.	‘The	wounds	were
indeed	raw,	but	he	held	cloth	against	them.’	She	reached	out	and	lifted	the	plate
to	reveal	the	bleached	linen	that	Udinaas	had	used	to	cover	his	hands.
Uruth	grunted	and	slowly	sat.	‘None	the	less,	he	should	have	informed	me.
And	for	that	oversight	he	must	be	punished.’
‘You	just	raped	his	mind,’	Mayen	replied.	‘Is	that	not	sufficient?’
Silence.
Daughters	take	us,	the	coming	year	should	prove	interesting.	One	year,	as
demanded	by	tradition,	and	then	Fear	and	Mayen	would	take	up	residence	in	a
house	of	their	own.
Uruth	simply	glared	at	the	younger	woman,	then,	to	Trull’s	surprise,	she
nodded.	‘Very	well,	Mayen.	You	are	guest	this	night,	and	so	I	will	abide	by
your	wishes.’
Through	all	of	this	Rhulad	had	remained	standing,	but	now	he	slowly	sat
once	more.
Tomad	said,	‘Rhulad,	I	know	of	no	plans	to	resurrect	the	ancient	blood
sacrifice	to	announce	a	war.	Hannan	Mosag	is	not	careless	with	the	lives	of	his
warriors,	even	those	as	yet	unblooded.	I	cannot	fathom	how	you	came	to
believe	such	a	fate	awaited	you.	Perhaps,’	he	added,	‘this	journey	you	are	about
to	undertake	will	provide	you	with	the	opportunity	to	become	a	blooded
warrior,	and	so	stand	with	pride	alongside	your	brothers.	So	I	shall	pray.’
It	was	a	clear	overture,	this	wish	for	glory,	and	Rhulad	displayed
uncharacteristic	wisdom	in	accepting	it	with	a	simple	nod.
Neither	Feather	Witch	nor	Udinaas	returned,	but	the	remaining	slaves
proved	sufficient	in	serving	the	rest	of	the	meal.
And	for	all	this,	Trull	still	could	not	claim	any	understanding	of	Mayen,


Fear ’s	betrothed.
	
A	stinging	slap	and	he	opened	his	eyes.
To	see	Feather	Witch’s	face	hovering	above	his	own,	a	face	filled	with
rage.	‘You	damned	fool!’	she	hissed.
Blinking,	Udinaas	looked	around.	They	were	huddled	in	his	sleeping	niche.
Beyond	the	cloth	hanging,	the	low	sounds	of	eating	and	soft	conversation.
Udinaas	smiled.
Feather	Witch	scowled.	‘She—’
‘I	know,’	he	cut	in.	‘And	she	found	nothing.’
He	watched	her	beautiful	eyes	widen.	‘It	is	true,	then?’
‘It	must	be.’
‘You	are	lying,	Udinaas.	The	Wyval	hid.	Somehow,	somewhere,	it	hid	itself
from	Uruth.’
‘Why	are	you	so	certain	of	that,	Feather	Witch?’
She	sat	back	suddenly.	‘It	doesn’t	matter—’
‘You	have	had	dreams,	haven’t	you?’
She	started,	then	looked	away.	‘You	are	a	Debtor ’s	son.	You	are	nothing	to
me.’
‘And	you	are	everything	to	me,	Feather	Witch.’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,	Udinaas!	I	might	as	well	wed	a	hold	rat!	Now,	be	quiet,	I
need	to	think.’
He	slowly	sat	up,	drawing	their	faces	close	once	again.	‘There	is	no	need,’
he	said.	‘I	trust	you,	and	so	I	will	explain.	She	looked	deep	indeed,	but	the
Wyval	was	gone.	It	would	have	been	different,	had	Uruth	sought	out	my
shadow.’
She	blinked	in	sudden	comprehension,	then:	‘That	cannot	be,’	she	said,
shaking	her	head.	‘You	are	Letherii.	The	wraiths	serve	only	the	Edur—’
‘The	wraiths	bend	a	knee	because	they	must.	They	are	as	much	slaves	to	the
Edur	as	we	are,	Feather	Witch.	I	have	found	an	ally…’
‘To	what	end,	Udinaas?’
He	smiled	again,	and	this	time	it	was	a	much	darker	smile.	‘Something	I
well	understand.	The	repaying	of	debts,	Feather	Witch.	In	full.’


Book	Two

Prows	of	the	Day


	

We	are	seized	in	the	age
of	our	youth
dragged	over	this	road’s	stones
spent	and	burdened
by	your	desires.
And	unshod	hoofs	clatter	beneath	bones
to	remind	us	of	every
fateful	charge
upon	the	hills	you	have	sown
with	frozen	seeds
in	this	dead	earth.
Swallowing	ground
and	grinding	bit
we	climb	into	the	sky	so	alone
in	our	fretted	ways
a	heaving	of	limbs
and	the	iron	stars	burst	from	your	heels
baffling	urgency
warning	us	of	your	savage	bite.
DESTRIERS	(SONS	TO	FATHER)
FISHER	KEL	T ATH


Chapter	Six

The	Errant	bends	fate,
As	unseen	armour
Lifting	to	blunt	the	blade
On	a	field	sudden
With	battle,	and	the	crowd
Jostles	blind	their	eyes	gouged	out
By	the	strait	of	these	affairs
Where	dark	fools	dance	on	tiles
And	chance	rides	a	spear
With	red	bronze
To	spit	worlds	like	skulls
One	upon	the	other
Until	the	seas	pour	down
To	thicken	metal-clad	hands
So	this	then	is	the	Errant
Who	guides	every	fate
Unerring
Upon	the	breast	of	men.
THE	CASTING	OF	TILES
CEDA	ANKARAN 	QAN 	(1059	BURN’S	SLEEP )
The	Tarancede	tower	rose	from	the	south	side	of	Trate’s	harbour.	Hewn	from
raw	basalt	it	was	devoid	of	elegance	or	beauty,	reaching	like	a	gnarled	arm
seven	storeys	from	an	artificial	island	of	jagged	rocks.	Waves	hammered	it
from	all	sides,	flinging	spume	into	the	air.	There	were	no	windows,	no	doors,
yet	a	series	of	glossy	obsidian	plates	ringed	the	uppermost	level,	each	one	as
tall	as	a	man	and	almost	as	wide.
Nine	similar	towers	rose	above	the	borderlands,	but	the	Tarancede	was	the
only	one	to	stand	above	the	harsh	seas	of	the	north.
The	sun’s	light	was	a	lurid	glare	against	the	obsidian	plates,	high	above	a


harbour	already	swallowed	by	the	day’s	end.	A	dozen	fisherboats	rode	the
choppy	waters	beyond	the	bay,	plying	the	shelf	of	shallows	to	the	south.	They
were	well	out	of	the	sea-lanes	and	probably	heedless	of	the	three	ships	that
appeared	to	the	north,	their	full-bellied	sails	as	they	drove	on	down	towards	the
harbour,	the	air	around	them	crowded	with	squalling	gulls.
They	drew	closer,	and	a	ship’s	pilot	scow	set	out	from	the	main	pier	to
meet	them.
The	three	harvest	ships	were	reflected	in	the	tower ’s	obsidian	plates,
sliding	in	strange	ripples	from	one	to	the	next,	the	gulls	smudged	white	streaks
around	them.
The	scow’s	oars	suddenly	backed	wildly,	twisting	the	craft	away.
Shapes	swarmed	across	the	rigging	of	the	lead	ship.	The	steady	wind	that
had	borne	the	sails	fell,	sudden	as	a	drawn	breath,	and	canvas	billowed	down.
The	figures	flitting	above	the	deck,	only	vaguely	human-shaped,	seemed	to
drift	away,	like	black	banners,	across	the	deepening	gloom.	The	gulls	spun
from	their	paths	with	shrill	cries.
From	the	scow	an	alarm	bell	began	clanging.	Not	steady.	Discordant,	a
cacophony	of	panic.
	
No	sailor	who	had	lived	or	would	ever	live	discounted	the	sea’s	hungry	depths.
Ancient	spirits	rode	the	currents	of	darkness	far	from	the	sun’s	light,	stirring
silts	that	swallowed	history	beneath	endless	layers	of	indifferent	silence.	Their
powers	were	immense,	their	appetites	insatiable.	All	that	came	down	from	the
lit	world	above	settled	into	their	embrace.
The	surface	of	the	seas,	every	sailor	knew,	was	ephemeral.	Quaint
sketchings	across	an	ever-changing	slate,	and	lives	were	but	sparks,	so	easily
quenched	by	the	demon	forces	that	could	rise	from	far	below	to	shake	their
beast	hides	and	so	up-end	the	world.
Propitiation	was	aversion,	a	prayer	to	pass	unnoticed,	to	escape	untaken.
Blood	before	the	bow,	dolphins	dancing	to	starboard	and	a	gob	of	spit	to	ride
blessed	winds.	The	left	hand	scrubs,	the	right	hand	dries.	Wind	widdershins	on
the	cleats,	sun-bleached	rags	tied	to	the	sea-anchor ’s	chain.	A	score	of	gestures,
unquestioned	and	bound	in	tradition,	all	to	slide	the	seas	in	peace.
None	sought	to	call	up	the	ravelled	spirits	from	those	water-crushed
valleys	that	saw	no	light.	They	were	not	things	to	be	bound,	after	all.	Nor
bargained	with.	Their	hearts	beat	in	the	cycles	of	the	moon,	their	voice	was	the
heaving	storm	and	their	wings	could	spread	from	horizon	to	horizon,	in
towering	white-veined	sheets	of	water	that	swept	all	before	them.


Beneath	the	waves	of	Trate	Harbour,	with	three	dead	ships	like	fins	on	its
back,	the	bound	spirit	clambered	in	a	surge	of	cold	currents	towards	shore.
The	last	spears	of	sunlight	slanted	through	its	swirling	flesh,	and	the	easing	of
massive	pressures	made	the	creature	grow	in	size,	pushing	onto	the	rocky
coastlines	ahead	and	to	the	sides	the	bay’s	own	warmer	waters,	so	that	the	fish
and	crustaceans	of	the	shallows	tumbled	up	from	the	waves	in	mangled	shreds
of	flesh	and	shattered	shell,	granting	the	gulls	and	land	crabs	a	sudden	feast	of
slaughter.
The	spirit	lifted	the	ships,	careering	wild	now,	on	a	single	wave	that	rose
high	as	it	swelled	shoreward.	The	docks,	which	had	a	few	moments	earlier
been	crowded	with	silent	onlookers,	became	a	swarm	of	fleeing	figures,	the
streets	leading	inland	filling	with	stampedes	that	slowed	to	choking,	crushing
masses	of	humanity.
The	wave	tumbled	closer,	then	suddenly	fell	away.	Hulls	thundered	at	the
swift	plunge,	spars	snapped	and,	on	the	third	ship,	the	main	mast	exploded	in	a
cloud	of	splintered	wood.	Rocking,	trailing	wreckage,	the	harvesters	coasted
between	the	piers.
Pressures	drawing	inward,	building	once	more,	the	spirit	withdrew	from
the	bay.	In	its	wake,	devastation.
Glimmering	in	its	obsidian	world,	the	first	ship	crunched	and	slid	against	a
pier,	and	came	to	a	gentle	rest.	The	white	flecks	of	the	gulls	plunged	down	to
the	deck,	to	begin	at	long	last	their	feeding.	The	Tarancede	Tower	had
witnessed	all,	the	smooth	tiles	near	its	pinnacle	absorbing	every	flickering
detail	of	the	event,	despite	the	failing	light.
And,	in	a	chamber	beneath	the	old	palace	in	the	city	of	Letheras,	far	to	the
southeast,	Ceda	Kuru	Qan	watched.	Before	him	lay	a	tile	that	matched	those	of
the	distant	tower	above	Trate’s	harbour,	and,	as	he	stared	at	the	enormous	black
shadow	that	had	filled	the	bay	and	most	of	the	inlet,	and	was	now	beginning	its
slow	withdrawal,	the	sorceror	blinked	sweat	from	his	eyes	and	forced	his	gaze
back	to	those	three	harvest	ships	now	lolling	against	the	piers.
The	gulls	and	the	gathering	darkness	made	it	difficult	to	see	much,	barring
the	twisted	corpses	huddled	on	the	deck,	and	the	last	few	flickering	wraiths.
But	Kuru	Qan	had	seen	enough.
	
Five	wings	to	the	Eternal	Domicile,	of	which	only	three	were	complete.	Each
of	the	latter	consisted	of	wide	hallways	with	arched	ceilings	sheathed	in	goldleaf.	Between	elaborate	flying	buttresses	to	either	side	and	running	the	entire
length	were	doorways	leading	to	chambers	that	would	serve	as	offices	and


domiciles	of	the	Royal	Household’s	administrative	and	maintenance	staff.
Towards	the	centre	the	adjoining	rooms	would	house	guards,	armouries	and
trapdoors	leading	to	private	passages—beneath	ground	level—that	encircled
the	entire	palace	that	was	the	heart	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.
At	the	moment,	however,	those	passages	were	chest-deep	in	muddy	water,
through	which	rats	moved	with	no	particular	purpose	barring	that	of,	possibly,
pleasure.	Brys	Beddict	stood	on	a	landing	three	steps	from	the	silt-laden	flood
and	watched	the	up-thrust	heads	swimming	back	and	forth	in	the	gloom.	Beside
him	stood	a	palace	engineer	covered	in	drying	mud.
‘The	pumps	are	next	to	useless,’	the	man	was	saying.	‘We	went	with	big
hoses,	we	went	with	small	ones,	made	no	difference.	Once	the	pull	got	strong
enough	in	went	a	rat,	or	ten,	plugging	things	up.	Besides,	the	seep’s	as	steady	as
ever.	Though	the	Plumbs	still	swear	we’re	above	the	table	here.’
‘I’m	sure	the	Ceda	will	consent	to	attaching	a	mage	to	your	crew.’
‘I’d	appreciate	it,	Finadd.	All	we	need	is	to	hold	the	flow	back	for	a	time,
so’s	we	can	bucket	the	water	out	and	the	catchers	can	go	down	and	collect	the
rats.	We	lost	Ormly	last	night,	the	palace’s	best	catcher.	Likely	drowned—the
fool	couldn’t	swim.	If	the	Errant’s	looking	away,	we	might	be	spared	finding
much	more	than	bones.	Rats	know	when	it’s	a	catcher	they’ve	found,	you
know.’
‘These	tunnels	are	essential	to	maintaining	the	security	of	the	king—’
‘Well,	ain’t	nobody	likely	to	try	using	them	if	they’re	flooded—’
‘Not	as	a	means	of	ingress	for	assassins,’	Brys	cut	in.	‘They	are	to	permit
the	swift	passage	of	guards	to	any	area	above	that	is	breached.’
‘Yes,	yes.	I	was	only	making	a	joke,	Finadd.	Of	course,	you	could	choose
fast	swimmers	among	your	guards…all	right,	never	mind.	Get	us	a	mage	to
sniff	round	and	tell	us	what’s	going	on	and	then	to	stop	the	water	coming	in
and	we’ll	take	care	of	the	rest.’
‘Presumably,’	Brys	said,	‘this	is	not	indicative	of	subsidence—’
‘Like	the	other	wings?	No,	nothing’s	slumped—we’d	be	able	to	tell.
Anyway,	there’s	rumours	that	those	ones	are	going	to	get	a	fresh	look	at.	A
new	construction	company	has	been	working	down	there,	nearby.	Some	fool
bought	up	the	surrounding	land.	There’s	whispers	they’ve	figured	out	how	to
shore	up	buildings.’
‘Really?	I’ve	heard	nothing	about	it.’
‘The	guilds	aren’t	happy	about	it,	that’s	for	sure,	since	these	upstarts	are
hiring	the	Unwelcomes—those	malcontents	who	made	the	List.	Paying	’em	less
than	the	usual	rate,	though,	which	is	the	only	thing	going	for	them,	I	suppose.
The	guilds	can’t	close	them	down	so	long	as	they	do	that.’	The	engineer


shrugged,	began	prying	pieces	of	hardened	clay	from	his	forearms,	wincing	at
the	pulled	hairs.	‘Of	course,	if	the	royal	architects	decide	that	Bugg’s	shoring
works,	then	that	company’s	roll	is	going	sky-high.’
Brys	slowly	turned	from	his	study	of	the	rats	and	eyed	the	engineer.
‘Bugg?’
‘Damn,	I	need	a	bath.	Look	at	my	nails.	Yeah,	Bugg’s	Construction.	There
must	be	a	Bugg,	then,	right?	Else	why	name	it	Bugg’s	Construction?’
A	shout	from	a	crewman	down	on	the	lowest	step,	then	a	scream.	Wild
scrambling	up	to	the	landing,	where	the	worker	spun	round	and	pointed.
A	mass	of	rats,	almost	as	wide	as	the	passageway	itself,	had	edged	into
view.	Moving	like	a	raft,	it	crept	into	the	pool	of	lantern	light	towards	the
stairs.	In	its	centre—the	revelation	eliciting	yet	another	scream	from	the
worker	and	a	curse	from	the	engineer—floated	a	human	head.	Yellow-tinted
silver	hair,	a	pallid,	deeply	lined	face	with	a	forehead	high	and	broad	above
staring,	narrow-set	eyes.
Other	rats	raced	away	as	the	raft	slipped	to	nudge	against	the	lowest	step.
The	worker	gasped,	‘Errant	take	us,	it’s	Ormly!’
The	eyes	flickered,	then	the	head	was	rising,	lifting	the	nearest	rats	in	the
raft	with	it,	humped	over	shoulders,	streaming	glimmering	water.	‘Who	in	the
Hold	else	would	it	be?’	the	apparition	snapped,	pausing	to	hawk	up	a	mouthful
of	phlegm	and	spitting	it	into	the	swirling	water.	‘Like	my	trophies?’	he	asked,
raising	his	arms	beneath	the	vast	cape	of	rats.	‘Strings	and	tails.	Damned	heavy
when	wet,	though.’
‘We	thought	you	were	dead,’	the	engineer	muttered,	in	a	tone	suggesting
that	he	would	rather	it	were	true.
‘You	thought.	You’re	always	thinking,	ain’t	ya,	Grum?	Maybe	this,
probably	that,	could	be,	might	be,	should	be—hah!	Think	these	rats	scared	me?
Think	I	was	just	going	to	drown?	Hold’s	welcoming	pit,	I’m	a	catcher	and	not
any	old	catcher.	They	know	me,	all	right.	Every	rat	in	this	damned	city	knows
Ormly	the	Catcher!	Who’s	this?’
‘Finadd	Brys	Beddict.’	The	King’s	Champion	introduced	himself.	‘That	is
an	impressive	collection	of	trophies	you’ve	amassed	there,	Catcher.’
The	man’s	eyes	brightened.	‘Isn’t	it	just!	Better	when	it’s	floating,	though.
Right	now,	damned	heavy.	Damned	heavy.’
‘Best	climb	out	from	under	it,’	Brys	suggested.	‘Engineer	Grum,	I	think	a
fine	meal,	plenty	of	wine	and	a	night	off	is	due	Ormly	the	Catcher.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘I	will	speak	with	the	Ceda	regarding	your	request.’
‘Thanks.’


Brys	left	them	on	the	landing.	It	seemed	increasingly	unlikely	that	the
Eternal	Domicile	would	be	ready	for	the	birth	of	the	Eighth	Age.	Among	the
populace,	there	seemed	to	be	less	than	faint	enthusiasm	for	the	coming
celebration.	The	histories	might	well	recount	prophecies	about	the	glorious
empire	destined	to	rise	once	more	in	less	than	a	year	from	now,	but	in	truth,
there	was	little	in	this	particular	time	that	supported	the	notion	of	a	renaissance,
neither	economically	nor	militarily.	If	anything,	there	was	a	slight	uneasiness,
centred	on	the	impending	treaty	gathering	with	the	tribes	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Risk
and	opportunity;	the	two	were	synonymous	for	the	Letherii.	Even	so,	war	was
never	pleasant,	although	thus	far	always	satisfactory	in	its	conclusion.	Thus
risk	led	to	opportunity,	with	few	thoughts	spared	for	the	defeated.
Granted,	the	Edur	tribes	were	now	united.	At	the	same	time,	other	such
alliances	had	formed	in	opposition	to	Letherii	ambitions	in	the	past,	and	not
one	had	proved	immune	to	divisive	strategies.	Gold	bought	betrayal	again	and
again.	Alliances	crumbled	and	the	enemy	collapsed.	What	likelihood	that	it
would	be	any	different	this	time	round?
Brys	wondered	at	the	implicit	complacency	of	his	own	people.	He	was	not,
he	was	certain,	misreading	public	sentiment.	Nerves	were	on	edge,	but	only
slightly.	Markets	remained	strong.	And	the	day-in,	day-out	mindless	yearnings
of	a	people	for	whom	possession	was	everything	continued	unabated.
Within	the	palace,	however,	emotions	were	more	fraught.	The	Ceda’s
divinations	promised	a	fundamental	alteration	awaiting	Lether.	Kuru	Qan
spoke,	in	a	meandering,	bemused	way,	of	some	sort	of	Ascension.	A
transformation…from	king	to	emperor,	although	how	such	a	progression
would	manifest	itself	remained	to	be	seen.	The	annexation	of	the	Tiste	Edur
and	their	rich	homelands	would	indeed	initiate	a	renewed	vigour,	a	frenzy	of
profit.	Victory	would	carry	its	own	affirmation	of	the	righteousness	of	Lether
and	its	ways.
Brys	emerged	from	the	Second	Wing	and	made	his	way	down	towards
Narrow	Canal.	It	was	late	morning,	almost	noon.	Earlier	that	day,	he	had
exercised	and	sparred	with	the	other	off-duty	palace	guards	in	the	compound
backing	the	barracks,	then	had	breakfasted	at	a	courtyard	restaurant	alongside
Quillas	Canal,	thankful	for	this	brief	time	of	solitude,	although	his	separation
from	the	palace—permitted	only	because	the	king	was	visiting	the	chambers	of
the	First	Concubine	and	would	not	emerge	until	midafternoon—was	an
invisible	tether	that	gradually	tightened,	until	he	felt	compelled	to	resume	his
duties	by	visiting	the	Eternal	Domicile	and	checking	on	progress	there.	And
then	back	to	the	old	palace.
To	find	it,	upon	passing	through	the	main	gate	and	striding	into	the	Grand


Hall,	in	an	uproar.
Heart	thudding	hard	in	his	chest,	Brys	approached	the	nearest	guard.
‘Corporal,	what	has	happened?’
The	soldier	saluted.	‘Not	sure,	Finadd.	News	from	Trate,	I	gather.	The	Edur
have	slaughtered	some	Letherii	sailors.	With	foulest	sorcery.’
‘The	king?’
‘Has	called	a	council	in	two	bells’	time.’
‘Thank	you,	Corporal.’
Brys	continued	on	into	the	palace.
He	made	his	way	into	the	inner	chambers.	Among	the	retainers	and
messengers	rushing	along	the	central	corridor	he	saw	Chancellor	Triban	Gnol
standing	with	a	handful	of	followers,	a	certain	animation	to	his	whispered
conversation.	The	man’s	dark	eyes	flicked	to	Brys	as	the	Champion	strode	past,
but	his	lips	did	not	cease	moving.	Behind	the	Chancellor,	Brys	saw,	was	the
Queen’s	Consort,	Turudal	Brizad,	leaning	insouciantly	against	the	wall,	his
soft,	almost	feminine	features	displaying	a	faint	smirk.
Brys	had	always	found	the	man	strangely	disturbing,	and	it	had	nothing	to
do	with	his	singular	function	as	consort	to	Janall.	He	was	a	silent	presence,
often	at	meetings	dealing	with	the	most	sensitive	issues	of	state,	ever	watchful
despite	his	studied	indifference.	And	it	was	well	known	that	he	shared	his	bed
with	more	than	just	the	queen,	although	whether	Janall	herself	knew	of	that	was
the	subject	of	conjecture	in	the	court.	Among	his	lovers,	it	was	rumoured,	was
Chancellor	Triban	Gnol.
An	untidy	nest,	all	in	all.
The	door	to	the	First	Eunuch’s	office	was	closed	and	guarded	by	two	of
Nifadas’s	own	Rulith,	eunuch	bodyguards,	tall	men	with	nothing	of	the
common	body-fat	one	might	expect	to	see.	Heavy	kohl	lined	their	eyes	and	red
paint	broadened	their	mouths	into	a	perpetual	downturned	grimace.	Their	only
weapons	were	a	brace	of	hooked	daggers	sheathed	under	their	crossed	arms,
and	if	they	wore	any	armour	it	was	well	disguised	beneath	long,	crimson	silk
shirts	and	tan	pantaloons.	They	were	barefoot.
Both	nodded	and	stepped	aside	to	permit	Brys	to	pass.
He	tugged	the	braided	tassel	and	could	faintly	hear	the	dull	chime	sound	in
the	chamber	beyond.
The	door	clicked	open.
Nifadas	was	alone,	standing	behind	his	desk,	the	surface	of	which	was
crowded	with	scrolls	and	unfurled	maps.	His	back	was	to	the	room,	and	he
seemed	to	be	staring	at	a	wall.	‘King’s	Champion.	I	have	been	expecting	you.’
‘This	seemed	the	first	in	order,	First	Eunuch.’


‘Just	so.’	He	was	silent	for	a	few	heartbeats,	then:	‘There	are	beliefs	that
constitute	the	official	religion	of	a	nation,	but	those	beliefs	and	that	religion
are	in	truth	little	more	than	the	thinnest	gold	hammered	on	far	older	bones.	No
nation	is	singular,	or	exclusive—rather,	it	should	not	be,	for	its	own	good.
There	is	much	danger	in	asserting	for	oneself	a	claim	to	purity;	whether	of
blood	or	of	origin.	Few	may	acknowledge	it,	but	Lether	is	far	richer	for	its
devouring	minorities,	provided	that	digestion	remains	eternally	incomplete.’
‘Be	that	as	it	may,	Finadd,	I	confess	to	you	a	certain	ignorance.	The	palace
isolates	those	trapped	within	it,	and	its	roots	nurture	poorly.	I	would	know	of
the	people’s	private	beliefs.’
Brys	thought	for	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘Can	you	be	more	specific,	First
Eunuch?’
Nifadas	still	did	not	turn	to	face	him.	‘The	seas.	The	denizens	of	the	deep.
Demons	and	old	gods,	Brys.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur	call	the	dark	waters	the	realm	of	Galain,	which	is	said	to
belong	to	kin,	for	whom	Darkness	is	home.	The	Tarthenal,	I	have	heard,	view
the	seas	as	a	single	beast	with	countless	limbs—including	those	that	reach
inland	as	rivers	and	streams.	The	Nerek	fear	it	as	their	netherworld,	a	place
where	drowning	is	eternal,	a	fate	awaiting	betrayers	and	murderers.’
‘And	the	Letherii?’
Brys	shrugged.	‘Kuru	Qan	knows	more	of	this	than	I,	First	Eunuch.	Sailors
fear	but	do	not	worship.	They	make	sacrifices	in	the	hopes	of	avoiding	notice.
On	the	seas,	the	arrogant	suffer,	whilst	only	the	meek	survive,	although	it’s
said	if	abasement	is	carried	too	far,	the	hunger	below	grows	irritated	and
spiteful.	Tides	and	currents	reveal	the	patterns	one	must	follow,	which	in	part
explains	the	host	of	superstitions	and	rituals	demanded	of	those	who	would
travel	by	sea.’
‘And	this…hunger	below.	It	has	no	place	among	the	Holds?’
‘Not	that	I	know	of,	First	Eunuch.’
Nifadas	finally	turned,	regarded	Brys	with	half-closed	eyes.	‘Does	that	not
strike	you	as	odd,	Finadd	Beddict?	Lether	was	born	of	colonists	who	came
here	from	the	First	Empire.	That	First	Empire	was	then	destroyed,	the	paradise
razed	to	lifeless	desert.	Yet	it	was	the	First	Empire	in	which	the	Holds	were
first	discovered.	True,	the	Empty	Hold	proved	a	later	manifestation,	at	least	in
so	far	as	it	related	to	ourselves.	Thus,	are	we	to	imagine	that	yet	older	beliefs
survived	and	were	carried	to	this	new	land	all	those	millennia	ago?	Or,
conversely,	does	each	land—and	its	adjoining	seas—evoke	an	indigenous	set
of	beliefs?	If	that	is	the	case,	then	the	argument	supporting	the	presence	of
physical,	undeniable	gods	is	greatly	supported.’


‘But	even	then,’	Brys	said,	‘there	is	no	evidence	that	such	gods	are
remotely	concerned	with	mortal	affairs.	I	do	not	think	sailors	envisage	the
hunger	I	spoke	of	as	a	god.	More	as	a	demon,	I	think.’
‘To	answer	the	unanswerable,	a	need	from	which	we	all	suffer.’	Nifadas
sighed.	‘Finadd,	the	independent	seal	harvesters	were	all	slain.	Three	of	their
ships	survived	the	return	journey	to	Trate,	crewed	up	to	the	very	piers	by	Edur
wraiths,	yet	carried	on	seas	that	were	more	than	seas.	A	demon,	such	as	the
sailors	swear	upon…yet,	it	was	something	far	more,	or	so	our	Ceda	believes.
Are	you	familiar	with	Faraed	beliefs?	Theirs	is	an	oral	tradition,	and	if	the
listing	of	generations	is	accurate	and	not	mere	poetic	pretence,	then	the
tradition	is	ancient	indeed.	The	Faraed	creation	myths	centre	on	Elder	gods.
Each	named	and	aspected,	a	divisive	pantheon	of	entirely	unwholesome
personalities.	In	any	case,	among	them	is	the	Elder	Lord	of	the	Seas,	the
Dweller	Below.	It	is	named	Mael.	Furthermore,	the	Faraed	have	singled	out
Mael	in	their	oldest	stories.	It	once	walked	this	land,	Finadd,	as	a	physical
manifestation,	following	the	death	of	an	Age.’
‘An	Age?	What	kind	of	Age?’
‘Of	the	time	before	the	Faraed,	I	think.	There	are…contradictions	and
obscurities.’
‘Ceda	Kuru	Qan	believes	the	demon	that	carried	the	ships	was	this	Mael?’
‘If	it	was,	then	Mael	has	suffered	much	degradation.	Almost	mindless,	a
turgid	maelstrom	of	untethered	emotions.	But	powerful	none	the	less.’
‘Yet	the	Tiste	Edur	have	chained	it?’
Nifadas’s	thin	brows	rose.	‘Clear	a	path	through	a	forest	and	every	beast
will	use	it.	Is	this	control?	Of	a	sort,	perhaps.’
‘Hannan	Mosag	sought	to	make	a	statement.’
‘Indeed,	Finadd,	and	so	he	has.	Yet	is	it	a	true	statement	or	deceptive
bravado?’
Brys	shook	his	head.	He	had	no	answer	to	offer.
Nifadas	swung	away	once	more.	‘The	king	has	deemed	this	of	sufficient
import.	The	Ceda	even	now	prepares	the…means.	None	the	less,	you	deserve
the	right	to	be	asked	rather	than	commanded.’
‘What	is	it	I	am	asked	to	do,	First	Eunuch?’
A	faint	shrug.	‘Awaken	an	Elder	god.’
	
‘There	is	great	flux	in	the	composite.	Is	this	relevant?	I	think	not.’	Ceda	Kuru
Qan	pushed	his	wire-bound	lenses	further	up	the	bridge	of	his	nose	and	peered
at	Brys.	‘This	is	a	journey	of	the	mind,	King’s	Champion,	yet	the	risk	to	you	is


such	that	you	might	as	well	travel	into	the	netherworld	in	truth.	If	your	mind	is
slain,	there	is	no	return.	Extreme	necessity,	alas;	the	king	wills	that	you
proceed.’
‘I	did	not	imagine	that	there	would	be	no	danger,	Ceda.	Tell	me,	will	my
martial	skills	be	applicable?’
‘Unknown.	But	you	are	young,	quick-witted	and	resilient.’	He	turned	away
and	scanned	the	cluttered	work-top	behind	him.	‘Great	flux,	alas.	Leaving	but
one	choice.’	He	reached	out	and	picked	up	a	goblet.	A	pause,	a	dubious	squint
at	its	contents,	then	he	took	a	cautious	sip.	‘Ah!	As	suspected.	The	flux	in	the
composite	is	due	entirely	to	curdled	milk.	Brys	Beddict,	are	you	ready?’
The	King’s	Champion	shrugged.
Kuru	Qan	nodded.	‘I	was	going	to	have	you	drink	this.’
‘Curdled	milk	will	not	harm	me,’	Brys	said,	taking	the	goblet	from	the
Ceda.	He	quickly	tossed	it	down,	then	set	the	silver	cup	on	the	table.	‘How
long?’
‘For	what?’
‘Until	the	potion	takes	effect.’
‘What	potion?	Come	with	me.	We	shall	use	the	Cedance	for	this	journey.’
Brys	followed	the	old	sorceror	from	the	chamber.	At	the	door	he	cast	a
glance	back	at	the	goblet.	The	mixture	had	tasted	of	citrus	and	sour	goat’s	milk;
he	could	already	feel	it	bubbling	ominously	in	his	stomach.	‘I	must	now
assume	there	was	no	purpose	to	what	I	just	drank.’
‘A	repast.	One	of	my	experiments.	I	was	hoping	you’d	enjoy	it,	but	judging
by	your	pallor	it	would	seem	that	that	was	not	the	case.’
‘I’m	afraid	you	are	correct.’
‘Ah	well,	if	it	proves	inimical	you	will	no	doubt	bring	it	back	up.’
‘That’s	comforting	knowledge,	Ceda.’
The	remainder	of	the	journey	to	the	palace	depths	was	mercifully
uneventful.	Ceda	Kuru	Qan	led	Brys	into	the	vast	chamber	where	waited	the
tiles	of	the	Holds.	‘We	shall	employ	a	tile	of	the	Fulcra	in	this	effort,	King’s
Champion.	Dolmen.’
They	walked	out	across	the	narrow	causeway	to	the	central	disc.	The
massive	tiles	stretched	out	on	all	sides	beneath	them.
The	roiling	in	Brys’s	stomach	had	subsided	somewhat.	He	waited	for	the
Ceda	to	speak.
‘Some	things	are	important.	Others	are	not.	Yet	all	would	claim	a	mortal’s
attention.	It	falls	to	each	of	us	to	remain	ever	mindful,	and	thus	purchase
wisdom	in	the	threading	of	possibilities.	It	is	our	common	failing,	Brys
Beddict,	that	we	are	guided	by	our	indifference	to	eventualities.	The	moment


pleases,	the	future	can	await	consideration.
‘The	old	histories	we	brought	with	us	from	the	First	Empire	recount
similar	failings.	Rich	ports	at	river	mouths	that	were	abandoned	after	three
centuries,	due	to	silting	caused	by	the	clearing	of	forests	and	poorly	conceived
irrigation	methods.	Ports	that,	were	you	to	visit	their	ruins	now,	you	would
find	a	league	or	more	inland	of	the	present	coast.	The	land	crawls	to	the	sea;	it
was	ever	thus.	Even	so,	what	we	humans	do	can	greatly	accelerate	the	process.
‘Is	all	that	relevant?	Only	partly,	I	admit.	As	I	must	perforce	admit	to	many
things,	I	admit	to	that.	There	are	natural	progressions	that,	when	unveiled,	are
profoundly	exemplary	of	the	sheer	vastness	of	antiquity.	Beyond	even	the	age
of	the	existence	of	people,	this	world	is	very,	very	old,	Brys	Beddict.’	Kuru
Qan	gestured.
Brys	looked	down	to	where	he	had	indicated,	and	saw	the	tile	of	the
Dolmen.	The	carved	and	painted	image	depicted	a	single,	tilted	monolith	halfburied	in	lifeless	clay.	The	sky	behind	it	was	colourless	and	devoid	of	features.
‘Even	seas	are	born	only	to	one	day	die,’	Kuru	Qan	said.	‘Yet	the	land
clings	to	its	memory,	and	all	that	it	has	endured	is	clawed	onto	its	visage.
Conversely,	at	the	very	depths	of	the	deepest	ocean,	you	will	find	the	traces	of
when	it	stood	above	the	waves.	It	is	this	knowledge	that	we	shall	use,	Brys.’
‘Nifadas	was	rather	vague	as	to	my	task,	Ceda.	I	am	to	awaken	Mael,
presumably	to	apprise	the	Elder	god	that	it	is	being	manipulated.	But	I	am	not	a
worshipper,	nor	is	there	a	single	Letherii	who	would	claim	otherwise	for	him
or	herself—why	would	Mael	listen	to	me?’
‘I	have	no	idea,	Brys.	You	shall	have	to	improvise.’
‘And	if	this	god	is	truly	and	absolutely	fallen,	until	it	is	little	more	than	a
mindless	beast,	then	what?’
Kuru	Qan	blinked	behind	the	lenses,	and	said	nothing.
Brys	shifted	uneasily.	‘If	my	mind	is	all	that	shall	make	the	journey,	how
will	I	appear	to	myself?	Can	I	carry	weapons?’
‘How	you	manifest	your	defences	is	entirely	up	to	you,	Finadd.	Clearly,	I
anticipate	you	will	find	yourself	as	you	are	now.	Armed	and	armoured.	All
conceit,	of	course,	but	that	is	not	relevant.	Shall	we	begin?’
‘Very	well.’
Kuru	Qan	stepped	forward,	one	arm	snapping	out	to	grasp	Brys	by	his
weapons	harness.	A	savage,	surprisingly	powerful	tug	pitched	him	forward,
headlong	over	the	edge	of	the	disc.	Shouting	in	alarm,	he	flailed	about,	then
plummeted	down	towards	the	tile	of	the	Dolmen.
	


‘Even	in	the	noblest	of	ventures,	there’s	the	occasional	stumble.’
Bugg’s	eyes	were	flat,	his	lined	face	expressionless,	as	he	stared	steadily	at
Tehol	without	speaking.
‘Besides,	it’s	only	a	small	failing,	all	things	considered.	As	for	myself,
why,	I	am	happy	enough.	Truly.	Yours	is	the	perfectly	understandable
disappointment	and,	dare	I	say	it,	a	modest	battering	of	confidence,	that	comes
with	an	effort	poorly	conceived.	No	fault	in	the	deed	itself,	I	assure	you.’	As
proof	he	did	a	slow	turn	in	front	of	his	manservant.	‘See?	The	legs	are	indeed
of	matching	length.	I	shall	remain	warm,	no	matter	how	cool	the	nights
become.	Granted,	we	don’t	have	cool	nights.	Sultry	is	best	we	can	manage,	I’ll
grant	you,	but	what’s	a	little	sweat	between…uh…the	legs?’
‘That	shade	of	grey	and	that	tone	of	yellow	are	the	worst	combination	I
have	ever	attempted,	master,’	Bugg	said.	‘I	grow	nauseous	just	looking	at	you.’
‘But	what	has	that	to	do	with	the	trousers?’
‘Very	little,	admittedly.	My	concern	is	with	principles,	of	course.’
‘Can’t	argue	with	that.	Now,	tell	me	of	the	day’s	doings,	and	hurry	up,	I’ve
a	midnight	date	with	a	dead	woman.’
‘The	extent	of	your	desperation,	master,	never	fails	to	astonish	me.’
‘Did	our	favourite	money-lender	commit	suicide	as	woefully	anticipated?’
‘With	nary	a	hitch.’
‘Barring	the	one	by	which	he	purportedly	hung	himself?’
‘As	you	say,	but	that	was	before	fire	tragically	swept	through	his
premises.’
‘And	any	word	on	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict’s	reaction	to	all	this?’
‘Decidedly	despondent,	master.’
‘But	not	unduly	suspicious?’
‘Who	can	say?	His	agents	have	made	inquiries,	but	more	directly	towards	a
search	for	a	hidden	cache	of	winnings,	an	attempt	to	recoup	the	loss	and	such.
No	such	fortune,	however,	has	surfaced.’
‘And	it	had	better	not.	Eberict	needs	to	swallow	the	loss	entire,	not	that	it
was	in	truth	a	loss,	only	a	denial	of	increased	fortune.	His	primary	investments
remain	intact,	after	all.	Now,	stop	blathering,	Bugg.	I	need	to	do	some
thinking.’	Tehol	hitched	up	his	trousers,	wincing	at	Bugg’s	sudden	frown.
‘Must	be	losing	weight,’	he	muttered,	then	began	pacing.
Four	steps	brought	him	to	the	roof’s	edge.	He	wheeled	and	faced	Bugg.
‘What’s	that	you’re	wearing?’
‘It’s	the	latest	fashion	among	masons	and	such.’
‘The	Dusty	Few.’
‘Exactly.’


‘A	wide	leather	belt	with	plenty	of	loops	and	pouches.’
Bugg	nodded.
‘Presumably,’	Tehol	continued,	‘there	are	supposed	to	be	tools	and
assorted	instruments	in	those	loops	and	pouches.	Things	a	mason	might	use.’
‘Well,	I	run	the	company.	I	don’t	use	those	things.’
‘But	you	need	the	belt.’
‘If	I’m	to	be	taken	seriously,	master,	yes.’
‘Oh	yes,	that	is	important,	isn’t	it?	Duly	noted	in	expenses,	I	presume?’
‘Of	course.	That	and	the	wooden	hat.’
‘You	mean	one	of	those	red	bowl-shaped	things?’
‘That’s	right.’
‘So	why	aren’t	you	wearing	it?’
‘I’m	not	working	right	now.	Not	as	sole	proprietor	of	Bugg’s
Construction,	anyway.’
‘Yet	you’ve	got	the	belt.’
‘It’s	comforting,	master.	I	suppose	this	must	be	what	it’s	like	wearing	a
sword-belt.	There’s	something	immensely	reassuring	about	a	solid	weight	on
the	hips.’
‘As	if	you	were	eternally	duelling	with	your	materials.’
‘Yes,	master.	Are	you	done	with	your	thinking?’
‘I	am.’
‘Good.’	Bugg	unstrapped	his	belt	and	tossed	it	to	the	rooftop.	‘Makes	my
hips	lopsided.	I	walk	in	circles.’
‘How	about	some	herbal	tea?’
‘I’d	love	some.’
‘Excellent.’
They	stared	at	one	another	for	a	moment	longer,	then	Bugg	nodded	and
made	his	way	to	the	ladder.	As	soon	as	his	back	was	turned,	Tehol	tugged	the
trousers	higher	once	more.	Glancing	down	at	the	belt,	he	hesitated,	then	shook
his	head.	That	would	be	a	presumption.
Bugg	climbed	down	and	out	of	sight.	Tehol	strode	to	his	bed	and	settled
down	on	the	creaking	frame.	He	stared	up	at	the	murky	stars.	A	holiday	festival
was	approaching,	this	one	dedicated	to	the	Errant,	that	eternally	mysterious
purveyor	of	chance,	fateful	circumstance	and	ill-chosen	impulses.	Or	some
such	thing.	Tehol	was	never	certain.	The	Holds	and	their	multitude	of	denizens
were	invented	as	dependable	sources	of	blame	for	virtually	anything,	or	so	he
suspected.	Evading	responsibility	was	a	proclivity	of	the	human	species,	it
seemed.
There	would	be	vast	senseless	celebration,	in	any	case.	Of	something,


perhaps	nothing,	and	certainly	involving	everything.	Frenzied	wagers	at	the
Special	Drownings,	in	which	the	most	notorious	criminals	would	try	to	swim
like	swans.	People	who	liked	to	be	seen	would	make	a	point	of	being	seen.
Spectacle	was	an	investment	in	worthy	indolence,	and	indolence	bespoke
wealth.	And	meanwhile,	housebound	guards	in	empty	estates	would	mutter	and
doze	at	their	posts.
A	scuffing	sound	from	the	gloom	to	his	right.	Tehol	glanced	over.	‘You’re
early.’
Shurq	Elalle	stepped	closer.	‘You	said	midnight.’
‘Which	is	at	least	two	bells	from	now.’
‘Is	it?	Oh.’
Tehol	sat	up.	‘Well,	you’re	here.	No	point	in	sending	you	away.	Even	so,
we’re	not	to	visit	Selush	until	a	chime	past	midnight.’
‘We	could	go	early.’
‘We	could,	although	I’d	rather	not	alarm	her.	She	indicated	she’d	need	lots
of	supplies,	after	all.’
‘What	makes	me	worse	than	any	other	corpse?’
‘Other	corpses	don’t	fight	back,	for	one	thing.’
The	undead	woman	came	closer.	‘Why	would	I	feel	compelled	to	resist?	Is
she	not	simply	making	me	pretty?’
‘Of	course.	I	was	just	making	conversation.	And	how	have	you	been,	Shurq
Elalle?’
‘The	same.’
‘The	same.	Which	is?’
‘I’ve	been	better.	Still,	many	would	call	consistency	a	virtue.	Those	are
extraordinary	trousers.’
‘I	agree.	Not	to	everyone’s	taste,	alas—’
‘I	have	no	taste.’
‘Ah.	And	is	that	a	consequence	of	being	dead,	or	a	more	generic	selfadmission?’
The	flat,	lifeless	eyes,	which	had	until	now	been	evading	direct	contact,
fixed	on	Tehol.	‘I	was	thinking…the	night	of	Errant’s	Festival.’
Tehol	smiled.	‘You	anticipate	me,	Shurq.’
‘There	are	sixteen	guards	on	duty	at	all	times,	with	an	additional	eight
sleeping	or	gambling	in	the	barracks,	which	is	attached	to	the	estate’s	main
house	via	a	single	covered	walkway	that	is	nineteen	strides	in	length.	All	outer
doors	are	double-barred.	There	are	four	guards	stationed	in	cubbies	at	each
corner	of	the	roof,	and	wards	skeined	over	every	window.	The	estate	walls	are
twice	the	height	of	a	man.’


‘Sounds	formidable.’
Shurq	Elalle’s	shrug	elicited	a	wet-leather	sound,	though	whether	from	her
clothes	or	from	somewhere	else	could	not	be	determined.
Bugg	reappeared,	climbing	one-handed,	the	other	balancing	a	tray	made
from	a	crate	lid.	Two	clay	cups	were	on	the	tray,	their	contents	steaming.	He
slowly	edged	onto	the	roof,	then,	glancing	up	and	seeing	the	two	of	them,	he
halted	in	consternation.	‘My	apologies.	Shurq	Elalle,	greetings.	Would	you
care	for	some	tea?’
‘Don’t	be	absurd.’
‘Ah,	yes.	Thoughtless	of	me.	Your	pardon.’	Bugg	walked	over	with	the
tray.
Tehol	collected	his	cup	and	cautiously	sniffed.	Then	he	frowned	at	his
manservant.
Who	shrugged.	‘We	don’t	have	no	herbs,	master.	I	had	to	improvise.’
‘With	what?	Sheep	hide?’
Bugg’s	brows	rose.	‘Very	close	indeed.	I	had	some	leftover	wool.’
‘The	yellow	or	the	grey?’
‘The	grey.’
‘Well,	that’s	all	right,	then.’	He	sipped.	‘Smooth.’
‘Yes,	it	would	be.’
‘We’re	not	poisoning	ourselves,	are	we?’
‘Only	mildly,	master.’
‘There	are	times,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	‘when	I	regret	being	dead.	This	is	not
one	of	those	times,	however.’
The	two	men	eyed	her	speculatively,	sipping	at	their	tea.
‘Ideally,’	she	continued,	‘I	would	now	clear	my	throat	to	cover	this
moment	of	awkwardness.	But	I	am	incapable	of	feeling	any	more	awkward
than	is	my	normal	state.	Secondly,	clearing	my	throat	has	unpleasant
consequences.’
‘Ah,	but	Selush	has	devised	a	pump,’	Tehol	said.	‘The	operation	will	be,
uh,	not	for	the	delicate.	Even	so,	soon	you	shall	exude	the	perfume	of	roses.’
‘And	how	will	she	manage	that?’
‘With	roses,	I	imagine.’
Shurq	raised	a	thin	brow.	‘I	am	to	be	stuffed	with	dried	flowers?’
‘Well,	not	everywhere,	of	course.’
‘A	practical	question,	Tehol	Beddict.	How	am	I	to	be	stealthy	if	I	crackle
with	every	step	I	take?’
‘A	good	question.	I	suggest	you	bring	that	up	with	Selush.’
‘Along	with	everything	else,	it	would	seem.	Shall	I	resume	my	account	of


the	potential	victim’s	estate?	I	assume	your	manservant	is	trustworthy.’
‘Exceptionally	so,’	Tehol	replied.	‘Please	continue.’
‘Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	will	be	attending	the	Special	Drownings,
whereupon,	at	its	conclusion,	he	will	be	a	guest	at	an	event	hosted	by	Turudal
Brizad—’
‘The	Queen’s	Consort?’
‘Yes.	I	once	robbed	him.’
‘Indeed!	And	what	did	you	take?’
‘His	virginity.	We	were	very	young—well,	he	was,	anyway.	This	was	long
before	he	danced	at	the	palace	and	so	earned	the	interest	of	the	queen.’
‘Now	that’s	an	interesting	detail.	Were	you	his	true	love,	if	I	may	ask	such	a
personal	question?’
‘Turudal’s	only	love	is	for	himself.	As	I	said,	he	was	younger	and	I	the
older.	Of	course,	he’s	now	older	than	me,	which	is	a	curious	fact.	Somewhat
curious,	anyway.	In	any	case,	there	was	no	shortage	of	men	and	women
pursuing	him	even	back	then.	I	imagine	he	believed	the	conquest	was	his.
Perhaps	he	still	does.	The	measure	of	the	perfect	theft	is	when	the	victim
remains	blissfully	unaware	that	he	or	she	has	been	stolen	from.’
‘I’d	think,’	observed	Bugg,	‘that	Turudal	Brizad	did	not	regret	his
surrender.’
‘None	the	less,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.	She	was	silent,	then:	‘There	is	nothing	in
this	world	that	cannot	be	stolen.’
‘And	with	that	thought	swirling	like	lanolin	in	our	stomachs,’	Tehol	said,
setting	his	cup	down,	‘you	and	I	should	take	a	walk,	Shurq.’
‘How	far	to	Selush’s?’
‘We	can	stretch	it	out.	Thank	you,	dear	Bugg,	for	the	delightfully	unique
refreshment.	Clean	up	around	here,	will	you?’
‘If	I’ve	the	time.’
Shurq	hesitated.	‘Should	I	climb	down	the	wall	then	shadow	you	unseen?’
Tehol	frowned.	‘Only	if	you	must.	You	could	just	draw	that	hood	up	and	so
achieve	anonymity.’
‘Very	well.	I	will	meet	you	in	the	street,	so	that	I	am	not	seen	exiting	a
house	I	never	entered.’
‘There	are	still	watchers	spying	on	me?’
‘Probably	not,	but	it	pays	to	be	cautious.’
‘Very	good.	I	will	see	you	in	a	moment,	then.’
Tehol	descended	the	ladder.	The	single	room	reeked	of	sheep	sweat,	and
the	heat	from	the	hearth	was	fierce.	He	quickly	made	his	way	outside,	turned
right	instead	of	left	and	came	to	what	had	once	been	a	sort	of	unofficial	mews,


now	cluttered	with	refuse	and	discarded	building	materials,	the	fronts	facing
onto	it	sealed	by	bricks	or	doors	with	their	latches	removed.
Shurq	Elalle	emerged	from	the	shadows,	her	hood	drawn	about	her	face.
‘Tell	me	more	about	this	Selush.’
They	began	walking,	threading	single	file	down	a	narrow	lane	to	reach	the
street	beyond.	‘A	past	associate	of	Bugg’s.	Embalmers	and	other	dealers	of	the
dead	are	a	kind	of	extended	family,	it	seems.	Constantly	exchanging	techniques
and	body	parts.	It’s	quite	an	art,	I	gather.	A	body’s	story	can	be	unfurled	from	a
vast	host	of	details,	to	be	read	like	a	scroll.’
‘What	value	assembling	a	list	of	flaws	when	the	subject	is	already	dead?’
‘Morbid	curiosity,	I	imagine.	Or	curious	morbidity.’
‘Are	you	trying	to	be	funny?’
‘Never,	Shurq	Elalle.	I	have	taken	to	heart	your	warnings	on	that.’
‘You,	Tehol	Beddict,	are	very	dangerous	to	me.	Yet	I	am	drawn,	as	if	you
were	intellectual	white	nectar.	I	thirst	for	the	tension	created	by	my	struggle	to
avoid	being	too	amused.’
‘Well,	if	Selush	succeeds	in	what	she	intends,	the	risk	associated	with
laughter	will	vanish,	and	you	may	chortle	fearlessly.’
‘Even	when	I	was	alive,	I	never	chortled.	Nor	do	I	expect	to	do	so	now	that
I	am	dead.	But	what	you	suggest	invites…disappointment.	A	releasing	of	said
tension,	a	dying	of	the	sparks.	I	now	fear	getting	depressed.’
‘The	risk	of	achieving	what	you	wish	for,’	Tehol	said,	nodding	as	they
reached	Trench	Canal	and	began	to	walk	along	its	foul	length.	‘I	empathize,
Shurq	Elalle.	It	is	a	sore	consequence	to	success.’
‘Tell	me	what	you	know	of	the	old	tower	in	the	forbidden	grounds	behind
the	palace.’
‘Not	much,	except	that	your	undead	comrade	resides	in	the	vicinity.	The
girl.’
‘Yes,	she	does.	I	have	named	her	Kettle.’
‘We	cross	here.’	Tehol	indicated	a	footbridge.	‘She	means	something	to
you?’
‘That	is	difficult	to	answer.	Perhaps.	It	may	prove	that	she	means
something	to	all	of	us,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘Ah.	And	can	I	be	of	some	help	in	this	matter?’
‘Your	offer	surprises	me.’
‘I	endeavour	to	remain	ever	surprising,	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘I	am	seeking	to	discover	her…history.	It	is,	I	think,	important.	The	old
tower	appears	to	be	haunted	in	some	way,	and	that	haunting	is	in
communication	with	Kettle.	It	poses	desperate	need.’


‘For	what?’
‘Human	flesh.’
‘Oh	my.’
‘In	any	case,	this	is	why	Gerun	Eberict	is	losing	the	spies	he	sets	on	you.’
Tehol	halted.	‘Excuse	me?’
‘Kettle	kills	them.’
	
Steeply	sloped,	the	black	wall	of	rock	reached	up	into	the	light.	The	currents
swept	across	its	rippled	face	with	unceasing	ferocity,	and	all	that	clung	to	it	to
draw	sustenance	from	that	roiling	stream	was	squat,	hard-shelled	and	stubborn.
Vast	flats	stretched	out	from	the	base	of	the	trench	wall,	and	these	were	scoured
down	to	bedrock.	Enormous	tangled	islands	of	detritus,	crushed	and	bound
together	by	unimaginable	pressures,	crawled	across	the	surface,	like	migrating
leviathans	in	the	flow	of	dark	water.
Brys	stood	on	the	plain,	watching	the	nearest	tumbling	mass	roll	past.	He
knew	he	was	witness	to	sights	no	mortal	had	ever	seen,	where	natural	eyes
would	see	only	darkness,	where	the	pressures	would	have	long	since	killed
corporeal	flesh	descending	from	the	surface	far	above.	Yet	here	he	stood,	to
his	own	senses	as	real,	as	physical,	as	he	had	been	in	the	palace.	Clothed,
armoured,	his	sword	hanging	at	his	hip.	He	could	feel	the	icy	water	and	its	wild
torrent	in	a	vague,	remote	fashion,	but	the	currents	could	not	challenge	his
balance,	could	not	drag	him	off	his	feet.	Nor	did	the	cold	steal	the	strength
from	his	limbs.
He	drew	breath,	and	the	air	was	cool	and	damp—it	was,	he	realized,	the	air
of	the	subterranean	chamber	of	the	Cedance.
That	recognition	calmed	his	heart,	diminished	his	disorientation.
A	god	dwells	in	this	place.	It	seemed	well	suited	for	such	a	thing.	Primal,
fraught	with	extremes,	a	realm	of	raw	violence	and	immense,	clashing	forces
of	nature.
Another	mass	of	wreckage	shambled	past,	and	Brys	saw,	amidst	pale,
skeletal	branches	and	what	seemed	to	be	bundles	of	unravelled	rope,	flattened
pieces	of	metal	whose	edges	showed	extruded	white	tendrils.	By	the	Errant,
that	metal	is	armour,	and	those	tendrils	are…
The	detritus	tumbled	away.	As	it	did,	Brys	saw	something	beyond	it.
Stationary,	blockish,	vertical	shapes	rearing	from	the	plain.
He	walked	towards	them.
Dolmens.
This	beggared	comprehension.	It	seemed	impossible	that	the	plain	before


him	had	once	known	air,	sunlight	and	dry	winds.
And	then	he	saw	that	the	towering	stones	were	of	the	same	rock	as	the
plain,	and	that	they	were	indeed	part	of	it,	lifting	as	solid	projections.	As	Brys
drew	nearer,	he	saw	that	their	surfaces	were	carved,	an	unbroken	skein	of
linked	glyphs.
Six	dolmens	in	all,	forming	a	row	that	cut	diagonally	from	the	angle	of	the
trench	wall.
He	halted	before	the	nearest	one.
The	glyphs	formed	a	silver	latticework	over	the	black	stone,	and	in	the
uneven	surface	beneath	the	symbols	he	saw	the	hints	of	a	figure.	Multi-limbed,
the	head	small,	sloping	and	squat,	a	massive	brow	ridge	projecting	over	a
single	eye	socket.	The	broad	mouth	appeared	to	be	a	row	of	elongated	tendrils,
the	end	of	each	sporting	long,	thin	fangs,	and	it	was	closed	to	form	an
interlocking,	spiny	row.	Six	segmented	arms,	two—possibly	four—legs,
barely	suggested	in	the	black	stone’s	undulations.
The	glyphs	shrouded	the	figure,	and	Brys	suspected	they	formed	a	prison
of	sorts,	a	barrier	that	prevented	the	emergence	of	the	creature.
The	silver	seemed	to	flow	in	its	carved	grooves.
Brys	circled	the	dolmen,	and	saw	other	shapes	on	every	side,	no	two	alike,
a	host	of	nightmarish,	demonic	beasts.	After	a	long	moment’s	regard,	he
moved	on	to	the	next	standing	stone.	And	found	more.
The	fourth	dolmen	was	different.	On	one	side	the	glyphs	had	unravelled,
the	silver	bled	away,	and	where	a	figure	should	have	been	there	was	a
suggestive	indentation,	a	massive,	hulking	creature,	with	snaking	tentacles	for
limbs.
The	mute	absence	was	chilling.	Something	was	loose,	and	Brys	did	not
think	it	was	a	god.
Mael,	where	are	you?	Are	these	your	servants?
Or	your	trophies?
He	stared	up	at	the	indentation.	The	absence	here	was	more	profound	than
that	which	reared	before	him.	His	soul	whispered…abandonment.	Mael	was
gone.	This	world	had	been	left	to	the	dark,	torrid	currents	and	the	herds	of
detritus.
‘Come	for	another	one,	have	you?’
Brys	whirled.	Ten	paces	away	stood	a	huge	figure	sheathed	in	armour.
Black,	patinated	iron	studded	with	rivets	green	with	verdigris.	A	great	helm
with	full	cheek	guards	vertically	slatted	down	to	the	jawline,	reinforced	along
the	bridge	of	the	nose	to	the	chin.	The	thin	eye	slits	were	caged	in	a	grille	mesh
that	extended	down	beneath	the	guards	to	hang	ragged	and	stiff	on	shoulders


and	breastplate.	Barnacles	crusted	the	joints	of	arms	and	legs,	and	tendrils	of
brightly	coloured	plants	clinging	to	joins	in	the	armour	streamed	in	the
current.	Gauntlets	of	overlapping	plates	of	untarnished	silver	held	on	to	a	twohanded	sword,	the	blade	as	wide	as	Brys’s	hands	were	long.	The	sword’s	blunt
end	rested	on	the	bedrock.	From	those	metal-clad	hands,	he	now	saw,	blood
streamed.
The	Letherii	drew	his	own	longsword.	The	roiling	currents	suddenly
tugged	at	him,	as	if	whatever	had	held	him	immune	to	the	ravages	of	this	deep
world	had	vanished.	The	blade	was	turned	and	twisted	in	his	hand	with	every
surge	of	water.	To	counter	such	a	weapon	as	that	wielded	by	the	warrior,	he
would	need	speed,	his	primary	tactic	one	of	evasion.	The	Letherii	steel	of	his
longsword	would	not	break	clashing	in	hard	parry,	but	his	arms	might.
And	now,	the	currents	buffeted	him,	battled	with	the	sword	in	his	hand.	He
had	no	hope	of	fighting	this	creature.
The	words	the	warrior	had	spoken	were	in	a	language	unknown	to	Brys,
yet	he	understood	it.	‘Come	for	another	one?	I	am	not	here	to	free	these
demons	from	their	sorcerous	cages—’
The	apparition	stepped	forward.	‘Demons?	There	are	no	demons	here.
Only	gods.	Forgotten	gods.	You	think	the	skein	of	words	is	a	prison?’
‘I	do	not	know	what	to	think.	I	do	not	know	the	words	written—’
‘Power	is	remembrance.	Power	is	evocation—a	god	dies	when	it	becomes
nameless.	Thus	did	Mael	offer	this	gift,	this	sanctuary.	Without	their	names,	the
gods	vanish.	The	crime	committed	here	is	beyond	measure.	The	obliteration	of
the	names,	the	binding	of	a	new	name,	the	making	of	a	slave.	Beyond	measure,
mortal.	In	answer	I	was	made,	to	guard	those	that	remain.	It	is	my	task.’	The
sword	lifted	and	the	warrior	took	another	step	closer.
Some	fighters	delivered	an	unseen	wound	before	weapons	were	even
drawn.	In	them,	raised	like	a	penumbra,	was	the	promise	of	mortality.	It	drew
blood,	weakened	will	and	strength.	Brys	had	faced	men	and	women	with	this
innate	talent	before.	And	he	had	answered	it	with…amusement.
The	guardian	before	him	promised	such	mortality,	with	palpable	force.
Another	heavy	step.	A	force	to	match	the	roiling	waters.	In	sudden
understanding,	Brys	smiled.
The	vicious	current	ceased	its	maelstrom.	Speed	and	agility	returned	in	a
rush.
The	huge	sword	slashed	horizontally.	Brys	leapt	back,	the	point	of	his
sword	darting	out	and	up	in	a	stop-thrust	against	the	only	target	within	reach.
Letherii	steel	slipped	in	between	the	silver	plates	of	the	left	gauntlet,	sank
deep.


Behind	them	a	dolmen	exploded,	the	concussion	thundering	through	the
bedrock	underfoot.	The	warrior	staggered,	then	swung	his	sword	in	a
downward	chop.	Brys	threw	himself	backward,	rolling	over	one	shoulder	to
regain	his	feet	in	a	crouch.
The	warrior ’s	sword	had	driven	into	the	basalt	a	quarter	of	its	length.	And
was	stuck	fast.
He	darted	to	close.	Planting	his	left	leg	behind	the	guardian,	Brys	set	both
hands	against	the	armoured	chest	and	shoved.
The	effort	failed	as	the	guardian	held	himself	upright	by	gripping	the
embedded	sword.
Brys	spun	and	hammered	his	right	elbow	into	the	iron-sheathed	face.	Pain
exploded	in	his	arm	as	the	head	was	snapped	back,	and	the	Letherii	pitched	to
one	side,	his	left	hand	taking	the	longsword	from	his	fast-numbing	right.
The	warrior	tugged	on	his	own	sword,	but	it	did	not	budge.
Brys	leapt	forward	once	again,	driving	his	left	boot	down	onto	the	side	of
the	guardian’s	nearest	leg,	low,	a	hand’s	width	above	the	ankle.
Ancient	iron	crumpled.	Bones	snapped.
The	warrior	sank	down	on	that	side,	yet	remained	partly	upright	by	leaning
on	the	jammed	sword.
Brys	quickly	backed	away.	‘Enough.	I	have	no	desire	to	kill	any	more
gods.’
The	armoured	face	lifted	to	regard	him.	‘I	am	defeated.	We	have	failed.’
The	Letherii	studied	the	warrior	for	a	long	moment,	then	spoke.	‘The
blood	seeping	from	your	hands—does	it	belong	to	the	surviving	gods	here?’
‘Diminished,	now.’
‘Can	they	heal	you?’
‘No.	We	have	nothing	left.’
‘Why	does	the	blood	leak?	What	happens	when	it	runs	out?’
‘It	is	power.	It	steals	courage—against	you	it	failed.	It	was	expected	that	the
blood	of	slain	enemies	would…it	does	not	matter	now.’
‘What	of	Mael?	Can	you	receive	no	help	from	him?’
‘He	has	not	visited	in	thousands	of	years.’
Brys	frowned.	Kuru	Qan	had	said	to	follow	his	instincts.	He	did	not	like
what	had	come	to	pass	here.	‘I	would	help.	Thus,	I	would	give	you	my	own
blood.’
The	warrior	was	silent	for	a	long	time.	Then,	‘You	do	not	know	what	you
offer,	mortal.’
‘Well,	I	don’t	mean	to	die.	I	intend	to	survive	the	ordeal.	Will	it	suffice?’
‘Blood	from	a	dying	or	dead	foe	has	power.	Compared	to	the	blood	from	a


mortal	who	lives,	that	power	is	minuscule.	I	say	again,	you	do	not	know	what
you	offer.’
‘I	have	more	in	mind,	Guardian.	May	I	approach?’
‘We	are	helpless	before	you.’
‘Your	sword	isn’t	going	anywhere,	even	with	my	help.	I	would	give	you
mine.	It	cannot	be	broken,	or	so	I	am	told.	And	indeed	I	have	never	seen
Letherii	steel	break.	Your	two-handed	weapon	is	only	effective	if	your
opponent	quails	and	so	is	made	slow	and	clumsy.’
‘So	it	would	seem.’
Brys	was	pleased	at	the	wry	tone	in	the	warrior ’s	voice.	While	there	had
been	no	self-pity	in	the	admissions	of	failure,	he	had	disliked	hearing	them.	He
reversed	grip	on	his	longsword,	and	offered	the	pommel	to	the	warrior.
‘Here.’
‘If	I	release	my	hands	I	will	fall.’
‘One	will	do.’
The	guardian	prised	a	hand	loose	and	grasped	the	longsword.	‘By	the
Abyss,	it	weighs	as	nothing!’
‘The	forging	is	a	secret	art,	known	only	to	my	people.	It	will	not	fail	you.’
‘Do	you	treat	all	your	defeated	foes	in	this	manner?’
‘No,	only	the	ones	I	had	no	wish	to	harm	in	the	first	place.’
‘Tell	me,	mortal,	are	you	considered	a	fine	swordsman	in	your	world?’
‘Passing.’	Brys	tugged	off	the	leather	glove	on	his	right	hand,	then	drew
his	dagger.	‘This	arm	is	still	mostly	numb—’
‘I	am	pleased.	Although	I	wish	I	could	say	the	same	for	my	face.’
Brys	cut	his	palm,	watched	as	blood	blossomed	out	to	whip	away	on	the
current.	He	set	the	bleeding	hand	down	on	the	warrior ’s	left,	which	was	still
closed	about	the	grip	of	the	embedded	weapon.	He	felt	his	blood	being	drawn
between	the	silver-plates.
The	warrior ’s	hand	twisted	round	to	grasp	his	own	in	a	grip	hard	as	stone.
A	clenching	of	muscles,	and	the	guardian	began	straightening.
Brys	glanced	down	and	saw	that	the	shattered	leg	was	mending	in	painfullooking	spasms,	growing	solid	beneath	the	huge	warrior ’s	weight.
Sudden	weakness	rushed	through	him.
‘Release	my	hand,’	the	warrior	said,	‘lest	you	die.’
Nodding,	Brys	pulled	his	hand	free,	and	staggered	back.
‘Will	you	live?’
‘I	hope	so,’	he	gasped,	his	head	spinning.	‘Now,	before	I	go,	tell	me	their
names.’
‘What?’


‘I	have	a	good	memory,	Guardian.	There	will	be	no	more	enslavement,	so
long	as	I	remain	alive.	And	beyond	my	life,	I	will	ensure	that	those	names	are
not	forgotten—’
‘We	are	ancient	gods,	mortal.	You	risk—’
‘You	have	earned	your	peace,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned.	Against	the	Tiste
Edur—those	who	came	before	to	chain	one	of	your	kin—you	will	be	ready
next	time.	My	life	can	add	to	your	strength,	and	hopefully	it	will	be	sufficient
for	you	to	resist.’
The	guardian	straightened	to	its	full	height.	‘It	shall,	mortal.	Your	sacrifice
shall	not	be	forgotten.’
‘The	names!	I	feel—I	am	fading—’
Words	filled	his	mind,	a	tumbling	avalanche	of	names,	each	searing	a
brand	in	his	memory.	He	screamed	at	the	shock	of	the	assault,	of	countless
layers	of	grief,	dreams,	lives	and	deaths,	of	realms	unimaginable,	of
civilizations	crumbling	to	ruins,	then	dust.
Stories.	So	many	stories…ah,	Errant—
	
‘Errant	save	us,	what	have	you	done?’
Brys	found	himself	lying	on	his	back,	beneath	him	a	hard,	enamelled	floor.
He	blinked	open	his	eyes	and	saw	Kuru	Qan’s	wizened	face	hovering	over	him.
‘I	could	not	find	Mael,’	the	King’s	Champion	said.	He	felt	incredibly	weak,
barely	able	to	lift	a	hand	to	his	face.
‘You’ve	scarcely	a	drop	of	blood	left	in	you,	Finadd.	Tell	me	all	that
happened.’
The	Holds	forsake	me,	stories	without	end…‘I	discovered	what	the	Tiste
Edur	have	done,	Ceda.	An	ancient	god,	stripped	of	its	names,	bound	by	a	new
one.	It	now	serves	the	Edur.’
Kuru	Qan’s	eyes	narrowed	behind	the	thick	lenses.	‘Stripped	of	its	names.
Relevant?	Perhaps.	Can	one	of	those	names	be	found?	Will	it	serve	to	pry	it
loose	from	Hannan	Mosag’s	grasp?’
Brys	closed	his	eyes.	Of	all	the	names	now	held	within	him…had	any	of
the	other	gods	known	its	kin’s	identity?	‘I	may	have	it,	Ceda,	but	finding	it	will
take	time.’
‘You	return	with	secrets,	Finadd	Brys	Beddict.’
‘And	barely	a	handful	of	answers.’
The	Ceda	leaned	back.	‘You	need	time	to	recover,	my	young	friend.	Food,
and	wine,	and	plenty	of	both.	Can	you	stand?’
‘I	will	try…’


	
The	humble	manservant	Bugg	walked	through	the	darkness	of	Sherp’s	Last
Lane,	so	named	because	poor	Sherp	died	there	a	few	decades	past.	He	had	been
a	fixture	in	this	neighbourhood,	Bugg	recalled.	Old,	half	blind	and	muttering
endlessly	about	a	mysterious	cracked	altar	long	lost	in	the	clay	beneath	the
streets.	Or,	more	specifically,	beneath	this	particular	lane.
His	body	had	been	found	curled	up	within	a	scratched	circle,	amidst
rubbish	and	a	half-dozen	neck-wrung	rats.	Peculiar	as	that	had	been,	there	were
few	who	cared	or	were	curious	enough	to	seek	explanations.	People	died	in	the
alleys	and	streets	all	the	time,	after	all.
Bugg	missed	old	Sherp,	even	after	all	these	years,	but	some	things	could
not	be	undone.
He	had	been	awakened	by	a	rattling	of	the	reed	mat	that	now	served	as	a
door	to	Tehol’s	modest	residence.	A	dirt-smeared	child	delivering	an	urgent
summons.	She	now	scampered	a	few	paces	ahead,	glancing	back	every	now
and	then	to	make	sure	she	was	still	being	followed.
At	the	end	of	Sherp’s	Last	Lane	was	another	alley,	this	one	running
perpendicular,	to	the	left	leading	down	to	a	sinkhole	known	as	Errant’s	Heel
which	had	become	a	refuse	pit,	and	to	the	right	ceasing	after	fifteen	paces	in	a
ruined	house	with	a	mostly	collapsed	roof.
The	child	led	Bugg	to	that	ruin.
One	section	remained	with	sufficient	headroom	to	stand,	and	in	this
chamber	a	family	now	resided.	Nerek:	six	children	and	a	grandmother	who’d
wandered	down	from	the	north	after	the	children’s	parents	died	of	Truce	Fever
—which	itself	was	a	senseless	injustice,	since	Truce	Fever	was	easily	cured	by
any	Letherii	healer,	given	sufficient	coin.
Bugg	did	not	know	them,	but	he	knew	of	them,	and	clearly	they	in	turn	had
heard	of	the	services	he	was	prepared	to	offer,	in	certain	circumstances,	free	of
charge.
A	tiny	hand	reached	out	to	close	about	his	own	and	the	girl	led	him	through
the	doorway	into	a	corridor	where	he	was	forced	to	crouch	beneath	the
sagging,	sloping	ceiling.	Three	paces	along	and	the	lower	half	of	another
doorway	was	revealed	and,	beyond	it,	a	crowded	room.
Smelling	of	death.
Murmured	greetings	and	bowed	heads	as	Bugg	entered,	his	eyes	settling	on
the	motionless	form	lying	on	a	bloody	blanket	in	the	room’s	centre.	After	a
moment’s	study,	he	glanced	up	and	sought	out	the	gaze	of	the	eldest	of	the
children,	a	girl	of	about	ten	or	eleven	years	of	age—though	possibly	older	and


stunted	by	malnutrition,	or	younger	and	prematurely	aged	by	the	same.	Large,
hard	eyes	met	his.
‘Where	did	you	find	her?’
‘She	made	it	home,’	the	girl	replied,	her	tone	wooden.
Bugg	looked	down	at	the	dead	grandmother	once	more.	‘From	how	far
away?’
‘Buried	Round,	she	said.’
‘She	spoke,	then,	before	life	left	her.’	Bugg’s	jaw	muscles	bunched.	Buried
Round	was	two,	three	hundred	paces	distant.	An	extraordinary	will,	in	the	old
woman,	to	have	walked	all	that	distance	with	two	mortal	sword-thrusts	in	her
chest.	‘She	knew	great	need,	I	think.’
‘To	tell	us	who	killed	her,	yes.’
And	not	to	simply	disappear,	as	so	many	of	the	destitute	do,	thus	raising	the
spectre	of	abandonment—a	scar	these	children	could	do	without.
‘Who,	then?’
‘She	was	crossing	the	Round,	and	found	herself	in	the	path	of	an
entourage.	Seven	men	and	their	master,	all	armed.	The	master	was	raging,
something	about	all	his	spies	disappearing.	Our	grandmother	begged	for	coin.
The	master	lost	his	mind	with	anger	and	ordered	his	guards	to	kill	her.	And	so
they	did.’
‘And	is	the	identity	of	this	master	known?’
‘You	will	find	his	face	on	newly	minted	docks.’
Ah.
Bugg	knelt	beside	the	old	woman.	He	laid	a	hand	on	her	cold,	lined
forehead,	and	sought	the	remnants	of	her	life.	‘Urusan	of	the	Clan	known	as	the
Owl.	Her	strength	was	born	of	love.	For	her	grandchildren.	She	is	gone,	but
she	has	not	gone	far.’	He	raised	his	head	and	met	the	eyes	of	each	of	the	six
children.	‘I	hear	the	shifting	of	vast	stones,	the	grinding	surrender	of	a	long
closed	portal.	There	is	cold	clay,	but	it	did	not	embrace	her.’	He	drew	a	deep
breath.	‘I	will	prepare	this	flesh	for	Nerek	interment—’
‘We	would	have	your	blessing,’	the	girl	said.
Bugg’s	brows	lifted.	‘Mine?	I	am	not	Nerek,	nor	even	a	priest—’
‘We	would	have	your	blessing.’
The	manservant	hesitated,	then	sighed.	‘As	you	will.	But	tell	me,	how	will
you	live	now?’
As	if	in	answer	there	was	a	commotion	at	the	doorway,	then	a	huge	figure
lumbered	into	the	small	room,	seeming	to	fill	it	entirely.	He	was	young,	his
size	and	features	evincing	Tarthenal	and	Nerek	blood	both.	Small	eyes	fixed
upon	Urusan’s	corpse,	and	the	whole	face	darkened.


‘And	who	is	this?’	Bugg	asked.	A	shifting	of	vast	stones—now	this…this
shoving	aside	of	entire	mountains.	What	begins	here?
‘Our	cousin,’	the	girl	said,	her	eyes	wide	and	adoring	and	full	of	pleading
as	she	looked	up	at	the	young	man.	‘He	works	on	the	harbour	front.	Unn	is	his
name.	Unn,	this	is	the	man	known	as	Bugg.	A	dresser	of	the	dead.’
Unn’s	voice	was	so	low-pitched	it	could	barely	be	heard.	‘Who	did	this?’
Oh,	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict,	to	your	senseless	feast	of	blood	you	shall	have
an	uninvited	guest,	and	something	tells	me	you	will	come	to	regret	it.

Selush	of	the	Stinking	House	was	tall	and	amply	proportioned,	yet	her	most
notable	feature	was	her	hair.	Twenty-seven	short	braids	of	the	thick	black	hair,
projecting	in	all	directions,	each	wrapped	round	an	antler	tine,	which	meant
that	the	braids	curved	and	twisted	in	peculiar	fashion.	She	was	somewhere
between	thirty-five	and	fifty	years	of	age,	the	obscurity	the	product	of	her
formidable	talent	as	a	disguiser	of	flaws.	Violet	eyes,	produced	by	an	unusual
ink	collected	from	segmented	worms	that	lived	deep	in	the	sand	of	the	south
island	beaches,	and	lips	kept	full	and	red	by	a	mildly	toxic	snake	venom	that
she	painted	on	every	morning.
As	she	stood	before	Tehol	and	Shurq	Elalle	at	the	threshold	of	her	modest
and	unfortunately	named	abode,	she	was	dressed	in	skin-tight	silks,	inviting
Tehol	against	his	own	sense	of	decorum	to	examine	her	nipples	beneath	the	gilt
sheen—and	so	it	was	a	long	moment	before	he	looked	up	to	see	the	alarm	in
her	eyes.
‘You’re	early!	I	wasn’t	expecting	you.	Oh!	Now	I’m	all	nervous.	Really,
Tehol,	you	should	know	better	than	to	do	the	unexpected!	Is	this	the	dead
woman?’
‘If	not,’	Shurq	Elalle	replied,	‘then	I’m	in	even	deeper	trouble,	wouldn’t
you	say?’
Selush	stepped	closer.	‘This	is	the	worst	embalming	I’ve	ever	seen.’
‘I	wasn’t	embalmed.’
‘Oh!	An	outrage!	How	did	you	die?’
Shurq	raised	a	lifeless	brow.	‘I	am	curious.	How	often	is	that	question
answered	by	your	clients?’
Selush	blinked.	‘Enter,	if	you	must.	So	early!’
‘My	dear,’	Tehol	said	reasonably,	‘it’s	less	than	a	couple	of	hundred
heartbeats	from	the	midnight	bell.’


‘Precisely!	See	how	flustered	you’ve	made	me?	Quickly,	inside,	I	must
close	the	door.	There!	Oh,	the	dark	streets	are	so	frightening.	Now,	sweetie,	let
me	look	more	closely	at	you.	My	servant	was	unusually	reticent,	I’m	afraid.’
She	abruptly	leaned	close	until	her	nose	was	almost	touching	Shurq’s	lips.
Tehol	flinched,	but	luckily	neither	woman	noticed.
‘You	drowned.’
‘Really.’
‘In	Quillas	Canal.	Just	downstream	of	Windlow’s	Meatgrinders	on	the	last
day	of	a	summer	month.	Which	one?	Wanderer ’s	Month?	Watcher ’s?’
‘Betrayer ’s.’
‘Oh!	Windlow	must	have	had	unusually	good	business	that	month,	then.
Tell	me,	do	people	scream	when	they	see	you?’
‘Sometimes.’
‘Me	too.’
‘Do	you,’	Shurq	asked,	‘get	compliments	on	your	hair?’
‘Never.’
‘Well,	that	was	pleasing	small-talk,’	Tehol	said	hastily.	‘We	haven’t	got	all
night,	alas—’
‘Why,	yes	we	have,	you	silly	man,’	Selush	said.
‘Oh,	right.	Sorry.	In	any	case.	Shurq	was	a	victim	of	the	Drownings,	and,	it
turned	out,	an	abiding	curse.’
‘Isn’t	it	always	the	way?’	Selush	sighed,	turning	to	walk	to	the	long	table
along	the	back	wall	of	the	room.
‘Tehol	mentioned	roses,’	Shurq	said,	following.
‘Roses?	Dear	me,	no.	Cinnamon	and	patchouli,	I	would	think.	But	first,	we
need	to	do	something	about	all	that	mould,	and	the	moss	in	your	nostrils.	And
then	there’s	the	ootooloo—’
‘The	what?’	Shurq	and	Tehol	asked	in	unison.
‘Lives	in	hot	springs	in	the	Bluerose	Mountains.’	She	swung	about	and
regarded	Shurq	with	raised	brows.	‘A	secret	among	women.	I’m	surprised
you’ve	never	heard	of	them.’
‘It	would	seem	my	education	is	lacking.’
‘Well,	an	ootooloo	is	a	small	soft-bodied	creature	that	feeds	through	a
crevice,	a	sort	of	vertical	slit	for	a	mouth.	Its	skin	is	covered	in	cilia	with	the
unusual	quality	of	transmitting	sensation.	These	cilia	can	take	root	in
membranous	flesh—’
‘Hold	on	a	moment,’	Tehol	said,	aghast,	‘you’re	not	suggesting—’
‘Most	men	can’t	tell	the	difference,	but	it	enhances	pleasure	many	times…
or	so	I	am	led	to	believe.	I	have	never	invited	one	inside,	since	the


emplacement	of	an	ootooloo	is	permanent,	and	it	needs,	uhm,	constant
feeding.’
‘How	often?’	Shurq	demanded,	and	Tehol	heard	suitable	alarm	in	her	tone.
‘Daily.’
‘But	Shurq’s	nerves	are	dead—how	can	she	feel	what	this	ottoolie	thing
feels?’
‘Not	dead,	Tehol	Beddict,	simply	unawakened.	Besides,	before	too	long,
the	ootooloo’s	cilia	will	have	permeated	her	entire	body,	and	the	healthier	the
organism	the	brighter	and	more	vigorous	her	glowing	flesh!’
‘I	see.	And	what	of	my	brain?	Will	these	roots	grow	in	it	as	well?’
‘Well,	we	can’t	have	that,	can	we,	lest	you	live	out	the	remainder	of
existence	drooling	in	a	hot	bath.	No,	we	shall	infuse	your	brain	with	a	poison
—well,	not	a	true	poison,	but	the	exudation	of	a	small	creature	that	shares	those
hot	springs	with	the	ootooloo.	Said	exudation	is	unpalatable	to	the	ootooloo.
Isn’t	nature	wonderful?’
	
Grainy-eyed,	Bugg	staggered	inside	his	master ’s	home.	It	was	less	than	an
hour	before	dawn.	He	felt	drained,	more	by	the	blessing	he	had	given	than	by
preparing	the	old	woman’s	corpse	for	burial.	Two	strides	into	the	single	room
and	he	halted.
Seated	on	the	floor	and	leaning	against	the	wall	opposite	was	Shand.
‘Where	is	the	bastard,	Bugg?’
‘Working,	although	I	imagine	you	are	sceptical.	I’ve	not	slept	this	night
and	so	am	unequal	to	conversation,	Shand—’
‘And	I	care?	What	kind	of	work?	What’s	he	doing	that	has	to	be	done	when
the	rest	of	the	world’s	asleep?’
‘Shand,	I—’
‘Answer	me!’
Bugg	walked	over	to	the	pot	sitting	on	a	grille	above	the	now	cool	hearth.
He	dipped	a	cup	into	the	tepid,	stewed	tea.	‘Twelve	lines	of	investment,	like
unseen	streams	beneath	foundations,	eating	away	but	yet	to	reveal	a	tremor.
There	are	essential	trusses	to	every	economy,	Shand,	upon	which	all	else	rests.’
‘You	can’t	do	business	in	the	middle	of	the	night.’
‘Not	that	kind	of	business,	no.	But	there	are	dangers	to	all	this,	Shand.
Threats.	And	they	need	to	be	met.	Anyway,	what	are	you	doing	out	at	night
without	your	bodyguard?’
‘Ublala?	That	oaf?	In	Rissarh’s	bed.	Or	Hejun’s.	Not	mine,	not	tonight,
anyway.	We	take	it	in	turns.’


Bugg	stared	at	her	through	the	gloom.	He	drank	the	last	of	the	tea	and	set
the	cup	down.
‘Is	all	that	true?’	Shand	asked	after	a	moment.	‘Those	investments?’
‘Yes.’
‘Why	isn’t	he	telling	us	these	things?’
‘Because	your	investments	have	to	remain	separate,	disconnected.	There
can	be	no	comparable	pattern.	Thus,	follow	his	instructions	with	precision.	It
will	all	come	clear	eventually.’
‘I	hate	geniuses.’
‘Understandable.	All	he	does	seems	to	confound,	it’s	true.	One	gets	used	to
it.’
‘And	how	is	Bugg’s	Construction	doing?’
‘Well	enough.’
‘What’s	the	purpose	of	it,	anyway?	Just	to	make	money?’
‘No.	The	intention	is	to	acquire	the	contract	for	the	Eternal	Domicile.’
Shand	stared.	‘Why?’
Bugg	smiled.
	
Disinfecting,	bleaching,	scraping,	combing.	Fragrant	oils	rubbed	into	clothing
and	skin.	Preserving	oils	rubbed	in	everywhere	else.	Scouring	flushes	of	eyes,
nose,	ears	and	mouth.	Then	it	was	time	for	the	pump.
At	which	point	Tehol	staggered	outside	for	some	air.
The	sky	was	paling	to	the	east,	the	city’s	less	sane	denizens	already	risen
and	venturing	out	onto	the	streets.	Clattering	carts	on	the	cobbles.	Somewhere	a
rooster	crowed,	only	to	have	its	exuberant	cry	cut	off	into	strangled	silence.	A
dog	barked	happily.
Footsteps,	halting	to	Tehol’s	right.	‘You	still	here?’
‘Ah,	Selush’s	assistant.	And	how	are	you	this	grisly	morning,	Padderunt?’
The	old	man’s	expression	was	eternally	sour,	but	at	Tehol’s	courteous
enquiry	it	seemed	to	implode	into	a	wrinkled	mess.	‘How	am	I?	Sleepless!
That’s	how	I	am,	y’damned	snake!	They	still	in	there?	It’s	a	lost	cause,	I	say.	A
lost	cause.	Just	like	you,	Tehol	Beddict.	I	knew	your	mother—what	would	she
say	seeing	you	now?’
‘You	knew	her	corpse,	you	old	fool.	Before	that	we’d	never	met	you.’
‘Think	she	didn’t	tell	me	all	about	herself	anyway?	Think	I	can’t	see	what’s
there	to	be	seen?	The	soul	inside	shapes	the	flesh.	Oh,	she	talked	to	me	all
right.’
Tehol’s	brows	rose.	‘The	soul	inside	shapes	the	flesh?’	He	stared	down	at


the	wrinkled	prune	face	glaring	up	at	him.	‘Oh	my.’
‘Oh,	that’s	a	cutting	remark,	is	it?	True	enough,	here’s	what	happens	when
a	decent	man	gets	no	sleep!’
A	small	clay	pot	exploded	on	the	cobbles	between	them,	followed	by	a
furious	shout	from	a	window	in	the	building	opposite.
‘There!’	Padderunt	cried,	hand	to	his	head	as	he	staggered	in	circles.	‘Make
of	our	neighbours	vicious	enemies!	You	don’t	live	here,	do	you?’
‘Calm	down,’	Tehol	said.	‘I	simply	asked	how	you	were	this	morning,	in
case	you’ve	forgotten.	Your	reply	was	supposed	to	be	equally	inane	and
nondescript.	If	I’d	wanted	a	list	of	your	ailments—well,	I	wouldn’t.	Who
would?	Innocuous	civility	is	what	was	expected,	Padderunt.	Not	foul	invective.’
‘Oh	really?	Well,	how	am	I	supposed	to	know	that?	Come	on,	there’s	a
place	nearby	makes	great	grain	cakes.	And	rustleaf	tea,	which	can	wake	the
dead.’
The	two	made	their	way	down	the	street.
‘Have	you	tried	it?’	Tehol	asked.
‘Tried	what?’
‘Waking	the	dead	with	rustleaf	tea.’
‘Should’ve	worked.’
‘But,	alas,	it	didn’t.’
‘Still	should’ve.	The	stuff	doubles	your	heart	rate	and	makes	you	heave
everything	in	your	stomach.’
‘I	can’t	wait.’
‘Until	you	get	used	to	it.	Makes	a	fine	insect	killer,	too.	Just	splash	it	on	the
floor	and	in	cracks	and	such.	I	can’t	recommend	it	highly	enough.’
‘Most	people	smoke	rustleaf,	not	drink	it.’
‘Barbarians.	Here	we	are.	You’re	buying,	right?’
‘With	what?’
‘Then	it	goes	on	Selush’s	account,	meaning	you	just	have	to	pay	later.’
‘Fine.’
	
Shurq	Elalle	stood	in	front	of	the	long	silver	mirror.	Instinct	had	her	gauging
the	worth	of	all	that	silver	for	a	moment	before	she	finally	focused	on	the
reflected	image.	A	healthy	pallor	to	her	skin,	her	cheeks	glowing	with	vigour.
Her	hair	was	clean	and	had	been	cut	for	the	first	time	in	years,	scented	with	a
hint	of	patchouli	oil.	The	whites	of	her	eyes	were	clear,	a	wet	gleam	reflecting
from	her	pupils.
The	rotted	leathers	and	linen	of	her	clothing	had	been	replaced	with	black


silks	beneath	a	short	black	calf-hide	jacket.	A	new	weapons	belt,	tanned
leggings	and	high	boots.	Tight	leather	gloves.	‘I	look	like	a	whore.’
‘Not	any	old	whore,	though,	right?’	Selush	said.
‘True,	I’ll	take	your	coin	then	kill	you.	That’s	how	I	look.’
‘There	are	plenty	of	men	out	there	who’ll	go	for	that,	you	know.’
‘Getting	killed?’
‘Absolutely.	In	any	case,	I	was	led	to	believe	that	wasn’t	your	profession.
Although	I	suppose	you	might	feel	inclined	to	try	something	new—how	does
the	ootooloo	feel,	by	the	way?’
‘Hungry.	Can’t	I	feed	it,	uh,	something	else?’
Selush’s	eyes	sparkled.	‘Experimentation,	that’s	the	spirit!’
Some	comments,	the	undead	woman	reflected,	deserved	no	response.
Shurq	Elalle	flexed	the	muscles	that	would	permit	her	to	draw	breath—they
were	long	out	of	practice,	and	it	was	strange	to	feel	the	still	vague	and	remote
sense	of	air	sliding	down	her	throat	and	filling	her	chest.	After	the	pump,	there
had	been	infusions.	The	breath	she	released	smelled	of	cinnamon	and	myrrh.
Better	than	river	mud	any	day.
‘Your	work	is	acceptable,’	she	said.
‘Well,	that’s	a	relief!	It’s	nearly	dawn,	and	I’m	starving.	Shall	we	test	you
out,	dear?	I	imagine	my	assistant	and	Tehol	are	at	the	local	establishment,
breaking	their	fast.	Let	us	join	them.’
‘I	thought	I	wasn’t	supposed	to	eat	or	drink.’
‘No,	but	you	can	preen	and	flirt,	can’t	you?’
Shurq	stared	at	the	woman.
Selush	smiled.	Then	her	eyelids	fluttered	and	she	turned	away.	‘Where’s
my	shawl?’
	
Kuru	Qan	had	left	and	returned	with	two	assistants	who	carried	Brys	back	to
the	Ceda’s	chambers,	where	he	was	laid	down	on	a	bench	and	plied	with
various	liquids	and	food.	Even	so,	strength	was	slow	to	return	and	he	was	still
lying	supine,	head	propped	up	on	a	cushion,	when	the	doors	opened	and	First
Eunuch	Nifadas	entered.
His	small	eyes	glittered	as	he	looked	down	on	Brys.	‘King’s	Champion,
are	you	well	enough	to	meet	your	king?	He	will	be	here	in	a	moment.’
Brys	struggled	to	sit	straighter.	‘This	is	unfortunate.	I	am,	for	the	moment,
unequal	to	my	responsibilities—’
‘Never	mind	that,	Finadd.	Your	king	seeks	only	to	ensure	you	will	recover
from	your	ordeal.	Genuine	concern	motivates	Ezgara	Diskanar	in	this	instance.


Please,	remain	where	you	are.	I	have	never	seen	you	so	pale.’
‘Something	has	fed	on	his	blood,’	Kuru	Qan	said,	‘but	he	will	not	tell	me
what	it	was.’
Nifadas	pursed	his	lips	as	he	regarded	Brys.	‘I	cannot	imagine	that	a	god
would	do	such	a	thing.’
‘Mael	was	not	there,	First	Eunuch,’	Brys	said.	‘The	Tiste	Edur	found
something	else,	and	have	bound	it	to	their	service.’
‘Can	you	tell	us	what	this	thing	is?’
‘A	forgotten	god,	but	that	is	the	extent	of	my	knowledge.	I	do	not	know	its
nature,	nor	the	full	breadth	of	its	power.	It	is	old,	older	than	the	ocean	itself.
Whatever	worshipped	it	was	not	human.’
A	voice	spoke	from	the	doorway.	‘I	am	ever	careless	with	my	assets,
although	the	Errant	has	spared	me	the	cruellest	consequence	thus	far,	for	which
I	am	thankful.’
Kuru	Qan	and	Nifadas	both	bowed	low	as	Ezgara	Diskanar	entered	the
chamber.	In	his	sixth	decade,	the	king’s	features	remained	surprisingly
youthful.	He	was	of	average	height,	slightly	on	the	lean	side,	his	gestures
revealing	a	nervous	energy	that	seemed	tireless.	The	bones	beneath	his	features
were	prominent	and	somewhat	asymmetrical,	the	result	of	a	childhood	incident
with	a	bad-tempered	horse.	Right	cheekbone	and	orbital	arch	sat	flatter	and
higher	than	their	counterparts	on	the	left	side	of	the	king’s	face,	making	the	eye
on	that	side	seem	larger	and	rounder.	It	was	a	poorly	functioning	eye	and	had	a
tendency	to	wander	independently	when	Ezgara	was	irritated	or	weary.	Healers
could	have	corrected	the	damage,	but	the	king	forbade	it—even	as	a	child,	he
had	been	obstinate	and	wilful,	and	not	in	the	least	concerned	with	outward
appearance.
Further	proof	of	that	observation	was	evinced	in	his	modest	attire,	more
befitting	a	citizen	in	the	markets	than	a	king.
Brys	managed	a	slight	bow	from	his	reclined	position.	‘My	apologies,
your	highness—’
‘None	needed,	Finadd,’	Ezgara	Diskanar	cut	in,	waving	a	hand.	‘Indeed,	it
is	I	who	must	apologize	to	you.	Unpleasant	tasks	that	take	you	from	your
official	functions.	I	have	sorely	abused	your	loyalty,	my	young	Champion.	And
you	have	suffered	for	it.’
‘I	shall	recover,	sire,’	Brys	said.
Ezgara	smiled,	then	surveyed	the	others	in	the	room.	‘Well,	this	is	a	fell
gathering,	isn’t	it?	We	should	be	relieved	that	my	dearest	wife	is	at	the	moment
senseless	beneath	an	exhausted	consort,	so	that	even	her	most	trusted	spies	dare
not	intrude	to	report	on	this	meeting.	Hopefully,	when	that	finally	occurs,	it


will	be	far	too	late.’
Nifadas	spoke.	‘My	king,	I	shall	be	the	first	to	take	my	leave,	if	you	will
permit.	The	hour	of	my	departure	from	the	city	fast	approaches,	and	my
preparations	are	far	from	complete.’
Ezgara’s	lopsided	smile	broadened.	‘First	Eunuch,	your	diligence	in	such
matters	is	legendary,	leaving	me	sceptical	of	your	claims.	None	the	less,	you
have	my	leave,	if	only	that	you	might	ensure	your	spies	are	made	aware	of
precisely	when	her	spies	make	their	report,	so	that	they	in	turn	may	report	to
you	and	you	may	then	report	to	me.	Although	what	I	am	to	do	with	such
knowledge	will	no	doubt	escape	me,	given	that	the	event	initiating	these
flurries	of	reporting	is	none	other	than	the	one	occurring	right	now	in	this
room.’
Nifadas	bowed.	‘None	can	rest	in	this	dance,	sire,	as	you	well	know.’
The	king’s	smile	tightened.	‘Well	I	do,	indeed,	First	Eunuch.	Be	off	with
you,	then.’
Brys	watched	Nifadas	depart.	As	soon	as	the	door	was	closed	the	king
faced	Kuru	Qan.	‘Ceda,	the	Chancellor	continues	to	petition	against	Finadd
Gerun	Eberict’s	attachment	to	the	delegation.	His	arguments	are	persuasive.’
‘He	fears	for	the	life	of	your	son,	your	highness.’
Ezgara	nodded.	‘And	has	the	Finadd’s	restraint	so	weakened	that	he	might
murder	my	heir?’
‘One	would	hope	not,	sire.’
‘Do	you	imagine	that	my	son	understands	the	risk	and	will	therefore	act
with	constraint	and	decorum?’
‘Prince	Quillas	has	been	advised	of	the	dangers,	sire,’	Kuru	Qan	carefully
replied.	‘He	has	gathered	about	him	his	most	trusted	bodyguards,	under	the
command	of	Moroch	Nevath.’
‘Presumably,	Moroch	feels	equal	to	the	task	of	defending	his	prince’s	life.’
At	this	Ezgara	turned	and	fixed	Brys	with	an	inquisitive	gaze.
‘Moroch	is	supremely	skilled,	sire,’	Brys	Beddict	said	after	a	moment.	‘I
would	hazard	he	will	have	tasters	in	line	before	the	prince,	and	mages	replete
with	a	host	of	wards.’
‘To	the	latter,	your	highness,’	Kuru	Qan	said,	‘I	can	attest.	I	have	lost	a
number	of	skilled	students	to	the	queen’s	command.’
‘Thus,’	Ezgara	Diskanar	said,	‘we	seek	balance	in	the	threat,	and	rely	upon
the	wisdom	of	the	players.	Should	one	party	decide	on	pre-emptive	action,
however,	the	scenario	fast	unravels.’
‘True,	sire.’
‘Finadd	Brys	Beddict,	is	Moroch	Nevath	capable	of	advising	restraint?’


‘I	believe	so,	sire.’
‘The	question	remaining,	however,’	Ezgara	said,	‘is	whether	my	son	is
capable	of	receiving	it.’
Neither	the	Ceda	nor	Brys	made	response	to	that.
Their	king	eyed	them	both	for	a	long	moment,	then	settled	his	attention	on
Brys.	‘I	look	forward	to	your	return	to	duties,	Champion,	and	am	relieved	that
you	are	recovering	from	your	adventures.’
Ezgara	Diskanar	strode	from	the	chamber.	At	the	doorway’s	threshold	he
said—without	turning	or	pausing—‘Gerun	Eberict	will	need	to	reduce	his	own
entourage,	I	think…’
The	door	was	closed	by	one	of	Kuru	Qan’s	servants,	leaving	the	two	men
alone.	The	Ceda	glanced	over	at	Brys,	then	shrugged.
‘If	wherewithal	was	an	immortal	virtue…’	Brys	ventured.
‘Our	king	would	be	a	god,’	Kuru	Qan	finished,	nodding.	‘And	upon	that	we
now	stake	our	lives.’	The	lenses	covering	his	eyes	flashed	with	reflected	light.
‘Curious	observation	to	make	at	this	time.	Profoundly	prescient,	I	think.	Brys
Beddict,	will	you	tell	me	more	of	your	journey?’
‘Only	that	I	sought	to	right	a	wrong,	and	that,	as	a	consequence,	the	Tiste
Edur	will	be	unable	to	bind	any	more	forgotten	gods.’
‘A	worthwhile	deed,	then.’
‘Such	is	my	hope.’
‘What	do	the	old	witches	in	the	market	always	say?	“The	end	of	the	world
is	announced	with	a	kind	word.”’
Brys	winced.
‘Of	course,’	the	Ceda	continued	distractedly,	‘they	just	use	that	as	an	excuse
to	be	rude	to	inquisitive	old	men.’
‘They	have	another	saying,	Ceda,’	Brys	said	after	a	moment.	‘“Truth	hides
in	colourless	clothes.”’
‘Surely	not	the	same	witches?	If	so,	then	they’re	all	the	greatest	liars
known	to	the	mortal	world!’
Brys	smiled	at	the	jest.	But	a	taste	of	ashes	had	come	to	his	mouth,	and	he
inwardly	quailed	at	the	first	whispers	of	dread.


Chapter	Seven

You	see	naught	but	flesh
in	the	wrought	schemes
that	stitch	every	dance
in	patterns	of	rising—
the	ritual	of	our	days
our	lives	bedecked
with	precious	import
as	if	we	stand	unbolstered
before	tables	feast-heavy
and	tapestries	burdened
with	simple	deeds
are	all	that	call	us
and	all	that	we	call	upon
as	would	flesh	blood-swollen
by	something	other	than	need.
But	my	vision	is	not	so
privileged	and	what	I	see
are	the	bones	in	ghostly	motion,
the	bones	who	are	the
slaves	and	they	weave
the	solid	world	underfoot
with	every	stride	you	take.
SLAVES	BENEATH
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
Acquitor	Seren	Pedac	watched	Edur	children	playing	among	the	sacred	trees.
The	shadows	writhing	in	the	black	bark	of	the	boles	were	a	chaotic	swirl	of
motion	surrounding	the	children,	to	which	they	seemed	entirely	indifferent.
For	some	ineffable	reason,	she	found	the	juxtaposition	horrifying.
She	had,	years	ago,	seen	young	Nerek	playing	amidst	the	scattered	bones


of	their	ancestors,	and	it	had	left	her	more	shaken	than	any	battlefield	she	had
walked.	The	scene	before	her	now	resonated	in	the	same	manner.	She	was	here,
in	the	Warlock	King’s	village,	and	in	the	midst	of	people,	of	figures	in	motion
and	voices	ringing	through	the	misty	air,	she	felt	lost	and	alone.
Encircling	the	holy	grove	was	a	broad	walkway,	the	mud	covered	with
shaggy	strips	of	shredded	bark,	along	which	sat	logs	roughly	carved	into
benches.	Ten	paces	to	Seren’s	left	was	Hull	Beddict,	seated	with	his	forearms
on	his	knees,	hands	anchoring	his	head	as	he	stared	at	the	ground.	He	had
neither	moved	nor	spoken	in	some	time,	and	the	mundane	inconsequentiality	of
their	exchanged	greetings	no	longer	echoed	between	them,	barring	a	faint
flavour	of	sadness	in	the	mutual	silence.
The	Tiste	Edur	ignored	the	two	Letherii	strangers	in	their	midst.	Lodgings
had	been	provided	for	them	and	for	Buruk	the	Pale.	The	first	meeting	with
Hannan	Mosag	was	to	be	this	night,	but	the	company	had	already	been	here	for
five	days.	Normally,	a	wait	of	a	day	or	two	was	to	be	expected.	It	was	clear	that
the	Warlock	King	was	sending	them	a	message	with	this	unprecedented	delay.
A	more	dire	warning	still	was	to	be	found	in	the	many	Edur	from	other
tribes	now	resident	in	the	village.	She	had	seen	Arapay,	Merude,	Beneda	and
Sollanta	among	the	native	Hiroth.	Den-Ratha,	who	dwelt	in	the	northernmost
regions	of	Edur	territory,	were	notoriously	reluctant	to	venture	from	their	own
lands.	Even	so,	the	fact	of	the	unified	tribes	could	be	made	no	more	apparent
and	deliberate	than	it	had	been,	and	a	truth	she	had	known	only	in	the	abstract
was	given	chilling	confirmation	in	its	actuality.	The	divisive	weaknesses	of	old
were	no	more.	Everything	had	changed.
The	Nerek	had	pulled	the	wagons	close	to	the	guest	lodge	and	were	now
huddled	among	them,	fearful	of	venturing	into	the	village.	The	Tiste	Edur	had
a	manner	of	looking	right	through	those	they	deemed	to	be	lesser	folk.	This
frightened	the	Nerek	in	some	way,	as	if	the	fact	of	their	own	existence	could	be
damaged	by	the	Edur ’s	indifference.	Since	arriving	they	had	seemed	to	wither,
immune	to	Buruk’s	exhortations,	barely	inclined	to	so	much	as	feed
themselves.	Seren	had	gone	in	search	of	Hull,	in	the	hope	of	convincing	him	to
speak	to	the	Nerek.
Upon	finding	him,	she	had	begun	to	wonder	whether	he’d	been	inflicted
with	something	similar	to	the	enervating	pall	that	had	settled	on	the	Nerek.	Hull
Beddict	looked	old,	as	if	the	journey’s	end	had	carried	with	it	a	fierce	cost,	and
before	him	waited	still	heavier	burdens.
Seren	Pedac	pulled	her	gaze	from	the	playing	children	and	walked	back	to
where	Hull	sat	on	the	log	bench.	Men	were	quick	and	stubborn	with	their
barriers,	but	she’d	had	enough.	‘Those	Nerek	will	starve	if	you	don’t	do


something.’
There	was	no	indication	that	he’d	heard	her.
‘Fine,’	she	snapped.	‘What’s	a	few	more	Nerek	deaths	to	your	toll?’
She’d	wanted	anger.	Outrage.	She’d	wanted	to	wound	him	with	that,	if	only
to	confirm	that	there	was	still	blood	to	flow.	But	at	her	vicious	words,	he
slowly	looked	up	and	met	her	eyes	with	a	soft	smile.	‘Seren	Pedac.	The	Nerek
await	acceptance	by	the	Tiste	Edur,	just	as	we	do—although	we	Letherii	are	far
less	sensitive	to	the	spiritual	damage	the	Edur	want	us	to	suffer.	Our	skin	is
thick,	after	all—’
‘Born	of	our	fixation	on	our	so-called	infallible	destiny,’	she	replied.
‘What	of	it?’
‘I	used	to	think,’	he	said,	smile	fading,	‘that	the	thickness	of	our…armour
was	naught	but	an	illusion.	Bluster	and	self-righteous	arrogance	disguising
deep-seated	insecurities.	That	we	lived	in	perpetual	crisis,	since	self-avowed
destinies	wear	a	thousand	masks	and	not	one	of	them	truly	fits—’
‘How	can	they,	Hull	Beddict,	when	they’re	modelled	on	perfection?’
He	shrugged,	looked	down	and	seemed	to	study	his	hands.	‘But	in	most
ways	our	armour	is	indeed	thick.	Impervious	to	nuances,	blind	to	subtlety.
Which	is	why	we’re	always	so	suspicious	of	subtle	things,	especially	when
exhibited	by	strangers,	by	outsiders.’
‘We	Letherii	know	our	own	games	of	deceit,’	Seren	said.	‘You	paint	us	as
blundering	fools—’
‘Which	we	are,	in	so	many	ways,’	he	replied.	‘Oh,	we	visualize	our	goals
clearly	enough.	But	we	ignore	the	fact	that	every	step	we	take	towards	them
crushes	someone,	somewhere.’
‘Even	our	own.’
‘Yes,	there	is	that.’	He	rose,	and	Seren	Pedac	was	struck	once	more	by	his
bulk.	A	huge,	broken	man.	‘I	will	endeavour	to	ease	the	plight	of	the	Nerek.	But
the	answer	rests	with	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Very	well.’	She	stepped	back	and	turned	round.	The	children	played	on,
amidst	the	lost	shadows.	She	listened	to	Hull	walk	away,	the	soft	crackle	of	his
moccasined	feet	on	the	wood	chips	fading.
Very	well.
She	made	her	way	into	the	village,	onto	the	main	avenue,	across	the	bridge
that	led	through	open	gates	into	the	inner	ward,	where	the	noble-born	Hiroth
had	their	residences.	Just	beyond	them	was	Hannan	Mosag’s	longhouse.	Seren
Pedac	paused	in	the	broad	clearing	just	within	the	palisade	wall.	No	children	in
sight,	only	slaves	busy	with	their	menial	chores	and	a	half-dozen	Edur
warriors	sparring	with	a	wide	assortment	of	weapons.	None	spared	the


Acquitor	any	notice,	at	least	not	outwardly,	though	she	was	certain	that	her
arrival	had	been	surreptitiously	observed	and	that	her	movements	would	be
tracked.
Two	Letherii	slaves	were	walking	nearby,	carrying	between	them	a	netsling	bulging	with	mussels.	Seren	approached.
‘I	would	speak	with	an	Edur	matron.’
‘She	comes,’	one	of	them	replied,	not	glancing	over.
Seren	turned.
The	Edur	woman	who	strode	towards	her	was	flanked	by	attendants.	She
looked	young,	but	there	was	in	truth	no	way	of	knowing.	Attractive,	but	that	in
itself	was	not	unusual.	She	wore	a	long	robe,	the	wool	dyed	midnight	blue,
with	gold-threaded	patterns	adorning	cuffs	and	brocade.	Her	long,	straight
brown	hair	was	unbound.
‘Acquitor,’	she	said	in	Edur,	‘are	you	lost?’
‘No,	milady.	I	would	speak	with	you	on	behalf	of	the	Nerek.’
Thin	brows	arched	above	the	heart-shaped	face.	‘With	me?’
‘With	an	Edur,’	Seren	replied.
‘Ah.	And	what	is	it	you	wish	to	say?’
‘Until	such	time	that	the	Tiste	Edur	offer	an	official	welcome	to	the	Nerek,
they	starve	and	suffer	spiritual	torment.	I	would	ask	that	you	show	them
mercy.’
‘I	am	sure	that	this	is	but	an	oversight,	Acquitor.	Is	it	not	true	that	your
audience	with	the	Warlock	King	occurs	this	very	night?’
‘Yes.	But	that	is	no	guarantee	that	we	will	be	proclaimed	guests	at	that	time,
is	it?’
‘You	would	demand	special	treatment?’
‘Not	for	ourselves.	For	the	Nerek.’
The	woman	studied	her	for	a	time,	then,	‘Tell	me,	if	you	will,	who	or	what
are	these	Nerek?’
A	half-dozen	heartbeats	passed,	as	Seren	struggled	to	adjust	to	this
unexpected	ignorance.	Unexpected,	she	told	herself,	but	not	altogether
surprising—she	had	but	fallen	to	her	own	assumptions.	It	seemed	the	Letherii
were	not	unique	in	their	self-obsessions.	Or,	for	that	matter,	their	arrogance.
‘Your	pardon,	milady—’
‘I	am	named	Mayen.’
‘Your	pardon,	Mayen.	The	Nerek	are	the	servants	of	Buruk	the	Pale.
Similar	in	status	to	your	slaves.	They	are	of	a	tribe	that	was	assimilated	by
Lether	some	time	back,	and	now	work	to	pay	against	their	debt.’
‘Joining	the	Letherii	entails	debt?’


Seren’s	gaze	narrowed.	‘Not	direc—not	as	such,	Mayen.	There	were…
unique	circumstances.’
‘Yes,	of	course.	Those	do	arise,	don’t	they?’	The	Edur	woman	pressed	a
fingertip	to	her	lips,	then	seemed	to	reach	a	decision.	‘Take	me,	then,	to	these
Nerek,	Acquitor.’
‘I’m	sorry?	Now?’
‘Yes,	the	sooner	their	spirits	are	eased	the	better.	Or	have	I	misunderstood
you?’
‘No.’
‘Presumably,	the	blessing	of	any	Edur	will	suffice	for	these	pitiful
tribespeople	of	yours.	Nor	can	I	see	how	it	will	affect	the	Warlock	King’s
dealings	with	you.	Indeed,	I	am	sure	it	won’t.’	She	turned	to	one	of	her	Letherii
slaves.	‘Feather	Witch,	please	inform	Uruth	Sengar	that	I	will	be	somewhat
delayed,	but	assure	her	it	will	not	be	for	long.’
The	young	woman	named	Feather	Witch	bowed	and	rushed	off	towards	a
longhouse.	Seren	stared	after	her	for	a	moment.	‘Mayen,	if	I	may	ask,	who
gave	her	that	name?’
‘Feather	Witch?	It	is	Letherii,	is	it	not?	Those	Letherii	born	as	slaves
among	us	are	named	by	their	mothers.	Or	grandmothers,	whatever	the	practice
among	your	kind	may	be.	I	have	not	given	it	much	thought.	Why?’
Seren	shrugged.	‘It	is	an	old	name,	that	is	all.	I’ve	not	heard	it	used	in	a
long	time,	and	then	only	in	the	histories.’
‘Shall	we	walk,	Acquitor?’
	
Udinaas	sat	on	a	low	stool	near	the	entrance,	stripping	scales	from	a	basketful
of	dried	fish.	His	hands	were	wet,	red	and	cracked	by	the	salt	paste	the	fish	had
been	packed	in.	He	had	watched	the	Acquitor ’s	arrival,	followed	Mayen’s
detour,	and	now	Feather	Witch	was	approaching,	a	troubled	expression	on	her
face.
‘Indebted,’	she	snapped,	‘is	Uruth	within?’
‘She	is,	but	you	must	wait.’
‘Why?’
‘She	speaks	with	the	highborn	widows.	They	have	been	in	there	some	time,
and	no,	I	do	not	know	what	concerns	them.’
‘And	you	imagine	I	would	have	asked	you?’
‘How	are	your	dreams,	Feather	Witch?’
She	paled,	and	looked	round	as	if	seeking	somewhere	else	to	wait.	But	a
light	rain	had	begun	to	fall,	and	beneath	the	projecting	roof	of	the	longhouse


they	were	dry.	‘You	know	nothing	of	my	dreams,	Indebted.’
‘How	can	I	not?	You	come	to	me	in	them	every	night.	We	talk,	you	and	I.
We	argue.	You	demand	answers	from	me.	You	curse	the	look	in	my	eyes.	And,
eventually,	you	flee.’
She	would	not	meet	his	gaze.	‘You	cannot	be	there.	In	my	mind,’	she	said.
‘You	are	nothing	to	me.’
‘We	are	just	the	fallen,	Feather	Witch.	You,	me,	the	ghosts.	All	of	us.	We’re
the	dust	swirling	around	the	ankles	of	the	conquerors	as	they	stride	on	into
glory.	In	time,	we	may	rise	in	their	ceaseless	scuffling,	and	so	choke	them,	but
it	is	a	paltry	vengeance,	don’t	you	think?’
‘You	do	not	speak	as	you	used	to,	Udinaas.	I	no	longer	know	who	speaks
through	you.’
He	looked	down	at	his	scale-smeared	hands.	‘And	how	do	I	answer	that?
Am	I	unchanged?	Hardly.	But	does	that	mean	the	changes	are	not	mine?	I
fought	the	White	Crow	for	you,	Feather	Witch.	I	wrested	you	from	its	grasp,
and	now	all	you	do	is	curse	me.’
‘Do	you	think	I	appreciate	owing	you	my	life?’
He	winced,	then	managed	a	smile	as	he	lifted	his	gaze	once	more,	catching
her	studying	him—though	once	more	she	glanced	away.	‘Ah,	I	see	now.	You
have	found	yourself…indebted.	To	me.’
‘Wrong,’	she	hissed.	‘Uruth	would	have	saved	me.	You	did	nothing,	except
make	a	fool	of	yourself.’
‘She	was	too	late,	Feather	Witch.	And	you	insist	on	calling	me	Indebted,	as
if	saying	it	often	enough	will	take	away—’
‘Be	quiet!	I	want	nothing	to	do	with	you!’
‘You	have	no	choice,	although	if	you	speak	any	louder	both	our	heads	will
top	a	pike	outside	the	walls.	What	did	the	Acquitor	want	with	Mayen?’
She	shifted	nervously,	hesitated,	then	said,	‘A	welcome	for	the	Nerek.
They’re	dying.’
Udinaas	shook	his	head.	‘That	gift	is	for	the	Warlock	King	to	make.’
‘So	you	would	think,	yet	Mayen	offered	herself	in	his	stead.’
His	eyes	widened.	‘She	did?	Has	she	lost	her	mind?’
‘Quiet,	you	fool!’	Feather	Witch	crouched	down	across	from	him.	‘The
impending	marriage	has	filled	her	head.	She	fashions	herself	as	a	queen	and	so
has	become	insufferable.	And	now	she	would	bless	the	Nerek—’
‘Bless?’
‘Her	word,	yes.	I	think	even	the	Acquitor	was	taken	aback.’
‘That	was	Seren	Pedac,	wasn’t	it?’
Feather	Witch	nodded.


Both	were	silent	for	a	few	moments,	then	Udinaas	said,	‘What	would	such
a	blessing	do,	do	you	think?’
‘Probably	nothing.	The	Nerek	are	a	broken	people.	Their	gods	are	dead,
the	spirits	of	their	ancestors	scattered.	Oh,	a	ghost	or	two	might	be	drawn	to	the
newly	sanctified	ground—’
‘An	Edur ’s	blessing	could	do	that?	Sanctify	the	ground?’
‘Maybe.	I	don’t	know.	But	there	could	be	a	binding.	Of	destinies,	depending
on	the	purity	of	Mayen’s	bloodline,	on	all	that	awaits	her	in	her	life,	on
whether	she’s—’	Feather	Witch	gestured	angrily	and	clamped	her	mouth	shut.
On	whether	she’s	a	virgin.	But	how	could	that	be	in	question?	She’s	not	yet
married,	and	Edur	do	not	break	those	rules.	‘We	did	not	speak	of	this,	you	and
I,’	Udinaas	said.	‘I	told	you	that	you	had	to	wait,	because	that	is	expected	of	me.
You	had	no	reason	to	think	your	message	from	Mayen	was	urgent.	We	are
slaves,	Feather	Witch.	We	do	not	think	for	ourselves,	and	of	the	Edur	and	their
ways	we	know	next	to	nothing.’
Her	eyes	finally	locked	with	his.	‘Yes.’	A	moment,	then,	‘Hannan	Mosag
meets	with	the	Letherii	tonight.’
‘I	know.’
‘Buruk	the	Pale.	Seren	Pedac.	Hull	Beddict.’
Udinaas	smiled,	but	the	smile	held	no	humour.	‘If	you	will,	at	whose	feet
shall	the	tiles	be	cast,	Feather	Witch?’
‘Among	those	three?	Errant	knows,	Udinaas.’	As	if	sensing	her	own
softening	towards	him,	she	scowled	and	straightened.	‘I	will	stand	over	there.
Waiting.’
‘You	do	intend	to	cast	the	tiles	tonight,	don’t	you?’
She	admitted	it	with	a	terse	nod,	then	walked	to	the	corner	of	the	longhouse
front,	to	the	very	edge	of	the	thickening	rain.
Udinaas	resumed	stripping	scales.	He	thought	back	to	his	own	words
earlier.	Fallen.	Who	tracks	our	footsteps,	I	wonder?	We	who	are	the	forgotten,
the	discounted	and	the	ignored.	When	the	path	is	failure,	it	is	never	willingly
taken.	The	fallen.	Why	does	my	heart	weep	for	them?	Not	them	but	us,	for	most
assuredly	I	am	counted	among	them.	Slaves,	serfs,	nameless	peasants	and
labourers,	the	blurred	faces	in	the	crowd—just	a	smear	on	memory,	a	scuffing
of	feet	down	the	side	passages	of	history.
Can	one	stop,	can	one	turn	and	force	one’s	eyes	to	pierce	the	gloom?	And
see	the	fallen?	Can	one	ever	see	the	fallen?	And	if	so,	what	emotion	is	born	in
that	moment?
There	were	tears	on	his	cheeks,	dripping	down	onto	his	chafed	hands.	He
knew	the	answer	to	that	question,	knife-sharp	and	driven	deep,	and	the	answer


was…recognition.

Hull	Beddict	moved	to	stand	beside	Seren	Pedac	as	Mayen	walked	away.
Behind	them,	the	Nerek	were	speaking	in	their	native	tongue,	harsh	and	fast
words,	taut	with	disbelief.	Rain	hissed	in	the	cookfires.
‘She	should	not	have	done	that,’	Hull	said.
‘No,’	Seren	agreed,	‘she	should	not	have.	Still,	I	am	not	quite	certain	what
has	just	happened.	They	were	just	words,	after	all.	Weren’t	they?’
‘She	didn’t	proclaim	them	guests,	Seren.	She	blessed	their	arrival.’
The	Acquitor	glanced	back	at	the	Nerek,	frowned	at	their	flushed,	nervous
expressions.	‘What	are	they	talking	about?’
‘It’s	the	old	dialect—there	are	trader	words	in	it	that	I	understand,	but	many
others	that	I	don’t.’
‘I	didn’t	know	the	Nerek	had	two	languages.’
‘Their	name	is	mentioned	in	the	annals	of	the	First	Landings,’	Hull	said.
‘They	are	the	indigenous	people	whose	territory	spanned	the	entire	south.
There	were	Nerek	watching	the	first	ships	approach.	Nerek	who	came	to	greet
the	first	Letherii	to	set	foot	on	this	continent.	Nerek	who	traded,	taught	the
colonizers	how	to	live	in	this	land,	gave	them	the	medicines	against	the	heat
fevers.	They	have	been	here	a	long,	long	time.	Two	languages?	I’m	surprised
there	aren’t	a	thousand.’
‘Well,’	Seren	Pedac	said	after	a	moment,	‘at	least	they’re	animated	once
more.	They’ll	eat,	do	as	Buruk	commands—’
‘Yes.	But	I	sense	a	new	fear	among	them—not	one	to	incapacitate,	but	the
source	of	troubled	thoughts.	It	seems	that	even	they	do	not	comprehend	the	full
significance	of	that	blessing.’
‘This	was	never	their	land,	was	it?’
‘I	don’t	know.	The	Edur	certainly	claim	to	have	always	been	here,	from	the
time	when	the	ice	first	retreated	from	the	world.’
‘Oh	yes,	I’d	forgotten.	Their	strange	creation	myths.	Lizards	and	dragons
and	ice,	a	god-king	betrayed.’
After	a	moment	she	glanced	over,	and	saw	him	staring	at	her.
‘What	is	it,	Hull?’
‘How	do	you	know	such	things?	It	was	years	before	Binadas	Sengar
relinquished	such	information	to	me,	and	that	as	a	solemn	gift	following	our
binding.’


Seren	blinked.	‘I	heard	it…somewhere.	I	suppose.’	She	shrugged,	wiping
rainwater	from	her	face.	‘Everyone	has	some	sort	of	creation	myth.	Nonsense,
typically.	Or	actual	memories	all	jumbled	up	and	infused	with	magic	and
miracles.’
‘You	are	being	surprisingly	dismissive,	Acquitor.’
‘And	what	do	the	Nerek	believe?’
‘That	they	were	all	born	of	a	single	mother,	countless	generations	past,
who	was	the	thief	of	fire	and	walked	through	time,	seeking	that	which	might
answer	a	need	that	consumed	her—although	she	could	never	discover	the
nature	of	that	need.	One	time,	in	her	journey,	she	took	within	her	a	sacred	seed,
and	so	gave	birth	to	a	girl-child.	To	all	outward	appearances,’	he	continued,
‘that	child	was	little	different	from	her	mother,	for	the	sacredness	was	hidden,
and	so	it	remains	hidden	to	this	day.	Within	the	Nerek,	who	are	the	offspring	of
that	child.’
‘And	by	this,	the	Nerek	justify	their	strange	patriarchy.’
‘Perhaps,’	Hull	conceded,	‘although	it	is	the	female	line	that	is	taken	as
purest.’
‘And	does	this	first	mother ’s	mother	have	a	name?’
‘Ah,	you	noted	the	confused	blending	of	the	two,	as	if	they	were	roles
rather	than	distinct	individuals.	Maiden,	mother	and	grandmother,	a
progression	through	time—’
‘Discounting	the	drudgery	spent	as	wife.	Wisdom	unfurls	like	a	flower	in	a
pile	of	dung.’
His	gaze	sharpened	on	her.	‘In	any	case,	she	is	known	by	a	number	of
related	names,	also	suggesting	variations	of	a	single	person.	Eres,	N’eres,
Eres’al.’
‘And	this	is	what	lies	at	the	heart	of	the	Nerek	ancestor	worship?’
‘Was,	Seren	Pedac.	You	forget,	their	culture	is	destroyed.’
‘Cultures	can	die,	Hull,	but	the	people	live	on,	and	what	they	carry	within
them	are	the	seeds	of	rebirth—’
‘A	delusion,	Seren	Pedac,’	he	replied.	‘Whatever	might	be	born	of	that	is
twisted,	weak,	a	self-mockery.’
‘Even	stone	changes.	Nothing	can	stand	still—’
‘Yet	we	would.	Wouldn’t	we?	Oh,	we	talk	of	progress,	but	what	we	really
desire	is	the	perpetuation	of	the	present.	With	its	seemingly	endless	excesses,
its	ravenous	appetites.	Ever	the	same	rules,	ever	the	same	game.’
Seren	Pedac	shrugged.	‘We	were	discussing	the	Nerek.	A	noble-born
woman	of	the	Hiroth	Tiste	Edur	has	blessed	them—’
‘Before	even	our	own	formal	welcome	has	been	voiced.’


Her	brows	rose.	‘You	think	this	is	yet	another	veiled	insult	to	the	Letherii?
Instigated	by	Hannan	Mosag	himself?	Hull,	I	think	your	imagination	has	the
better	of	you	this	time.’
‘Think	what	you	like.’
She	turned	away.	‘I’m	going	for	a	walk.’
	
Uruth	had	intercepted	Mayen	at	the	bridge.	Whatever	was	exchanged	between
them	was	brief	and	without	drama,	at	least	none	that	Udinaas	could	determine
from	where	he	sat	in	front	of	the	longhouse.	Feather	Witch	had	trailed	Uruth
after	delivering	the	message	from	her	mistress,	and	waited	a	half-dozen	paces
distant	from	the	two	Edur	women,	though	not	so	far	as	to	be	out	of	earshot.
Uruth	and	Mayen	then	approached	side	by	side,	the	slaves	trailing.
Hearing	low	laughter,	Udinaas	stiffened	and	hunched	lower	on	the	stool.
‘Be	quiet,	Wither!’	he	hissed.
‘There	are	realms,	dead	slave,’	the	wraith	whispered,	‘where	memories
shape	oblivion,	and	so	make	of	ages	long	past	a	world	as	real	as	this	one.	In
this	way,	time	is	defeated.	Death	is	defied.	And	sometimes,	Udinaas	the
Indebted,	such	a	realm	drifts	close.	Very	close.’
‘No	more,	I	beg	you.	I’m	not	interested	in	your	stupid	riddles—’
‘Would	you	see	what	I	see?	Right	now?	Shall	I	send	Shadow’s	veil	to	slip
over	your	eyes	and	so	reveal	to	you	unseen	pasts?’
‘Not	now—’
‘Too	late.’
Layers	unfolded	before	the	slave’s	eyes,	cobweb-thin,	and	the	surrounding
village	seemed	to	shrink	back,	blurred	and	colourless,	beneath	the	onslaught.
Udinaas	struggled	to	focus.	The	clearing	had	vanished,	replaced	by	towering
trees	and	a	forest	floor	of	rumpled	moss,	where	the	rain	fell	in	sheets.	The	sea
to	his	left	was	much	closer,	fiercely	toppling	grey,	foaming	waves	against	the
shoreline’s	jagged	black	rock,	spume	exploding	skyward.
Udinaas	flinched	away	from	the	violence	of	those	waves—and	all	at	once
they	faded	into	darkness,	and	another	scene	rose	before	the	slave’s	eyes.	The
sea	had	retreated,	beyond	the	western	horizon,	leaving	behind	trench-scarred
bedrock	ringed	in	sheer	ice	cliffs.	The	chill	air	carried	the	stench	of	decay.
Figures	scurried	past	Udinaas,	wearing	furs	or	perhaps	bearing	their	own
thick	coat,	mottled	brown,	tan	and	black.	They	were	surprisingly	tall,	their
bodies	disproportionately	large	below	small-skulled,	heavy-jawed	heads.	One
sported	a	reed-woven	belt	from	which	dead	otters	hung,	and	all	carried	coils	of
rope	made	from	twisted	grasses.


They	were	silent,	yet	Udinaas	sensed	their	terror	as	they	stared	at
something	in	the	northern	sky.
The	slave	squinted,	then	saw	what	had	captured	their	attention.
A	mountain	of	black	stone,	hanging	suspended	in	the	air	above	low	slopes
crowded	with	shattered	ice.	It	was	drifting	closer,	and	Udinaas	sensed	a
malevolence	emanating	from	the	enormous,	impossible	conjuration—an
emotion	the	tall,	pelted	creatures	clearly	sensed	as	well.
They	stared	for	a	moment	longer,	then	broke.	Fled	past	Udinaas—
—and	the	scene	changed.
Battered	bedrock,	pulverized	stone,	roiling	mists.	Two	tall	figures
appeared,	dragging	between	them	a	third	one—a	woman,	unconscious	or	dead,
long	dark	brown	hair	unbound	and	trailing	on	the	ground.	Udinaas	flinched
upon	recognizing	one	of	the	walking	figures—that	blinding	armour,	the	ironclad	boots	and	silver	cloak,	the	helmed	face.	Menandore.	Sister	Dawn.	He
sought	to	flee—she	could	not	avoid	seeing	him—but	found	himself	frozen	in
place.
He	recognized	the	other	woman	as	well,	from	fearfully	carved	statues	left
half	buried	in	loam	in	the	forest	surrounding	the	Hiroth	village.	Piebald	skin,
grey	and	black,	making	her	hard	face	resemble	a	war-mask.	A	cuirass	of
dulled,	patchy	iron.	Chain	and	leather	vambraces	and	greaves,	a	full-length
cape	of	sealskin	billowing	out	behind	her.	Dapple,	the	fickle	sister.	Sukul
Ankhadu.
And	he	knew,	then,	the	woman	they	dragged	between	them.	Dusk,	Sheltatha
Lore.	Scabandari’s	most	cherished	daughter,	the	Protectress	of	the	Tiste	Edur.
The	two	women	halted,	releasing	the	limp	arms	of	the	one	between	them,
who	dropped	to	the	gritty	bedrock	as	if	dead.	Two	sets	of	wide,	epicanthic	Tiste
eyes	seemed	to	fix	on	Udinaas.
Menandore	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘I	didn’t	expect	to	find	you	here.’
As	Udinaas	struggled	to	find	a	response	to	that,	a	man’s	voice	at	his	side
said,	‘What	have	you	done	to	her?’
The	slave	turned	to	see	another	Tiste,	standing	within	an	arm’s	reach	from
where	Udinaas	sat	on	the	stool.	Taller	than	the	women	facing	him,	he	was
wearing	white	enamelled	armour,	blood-spattered,	smudged	and	scarred	by
sword-cuts.	A	broken	helm	was	strapped	to	his	right	hip.	His	skin	was	white	as
ivory.	Dried	blood	marked	the	left	side	of	his	face	with	a	pattern	like	branched
lightning.	Fire	had	burned	most	of	his	hair	away,	and	the	skin	of	his	pate	was
cracked,	red	and	oozing.
Twin	scabbarded	longswords	were	slung	on	his	back,	the	grips	and
pommels	jutting	up	behind	his	broad	shoulders.


‘Nothing	she	didn’t	deserve,’	Menandore	replied	in	answer	to	the	Tiste
man’s	question.
The	other	woman	bared	her	teeth.	‘Our	dear	uncle	had	ambitions	for	this
precious	cousin	of	ours.	Yet	did	he	come	when	she	screamed	her	need?’
The	battle-scarred	man	stepped	past	the	slave’s	position,	his	attention	on
the	body	of	Sheltatha	Lore.	‘This	is	a	dread	mess.	I	would	wash	my	hands	of	it
—all	of	it.’
‘But	you	can’t,’	Menandore	said	with	strange	glee.	‘We’re	all	poisoned	by
the	mother ’s	blood,	after	all—’
Sukul	Ankhadu	swung	to	her	sister	with	the	words,	‘Her	daughters	have
fared	worse	than	poison!	There	is	nothing	balanced	to	this	shattering	of	selves.
Look	at	us!	Spiteful	bitches—Tiam’s	squalling	heads	rearing	up	again	and
again,	generation	after	generation!’	She	stabbed	a	finger	at	the	Tiste	man.	‘And
what	of	you,	Father?	That	she-nightmare	sails	out	on	feathered	wings	from	the
dark	of	another	realm,	legs	spread	oh	so	wide	and	inviting,	and	were	you	not
first	in	line?	Pure	Osserc,	First	Son	of	Dark	and	Light,	so	precious!	Yet	there
you	were,	weaving	your	blood	with	that	whore—tell	us,	did	you	proclaim	her
your	sister	before	or	after	you	fucked	her?’
If	the	venom	of	her	words	had	any	effect,	there	was	no	outward	sign.	The
one	named	Osserc	simply	smiled	and	looked	away.	‘You	shouldn’t	speak	of
your	mother	that	way,	Sukul.	She	died	giving	birth	to	you,	after	all—’
‘She	died	giving	birth	to	us	all!’	Sukul	Ankhadu’s	raised	hand	closed	into	a
fist	that	seemed	to	twist	the	air.	‘Dies,	and	is	reborn.	Tiam	and	her	children.
Tiam	and	her	lovers.	Her	thousand	deaths,	and	yet	nothing	changes!’
Menandore	spoke	in	a	calm	tone.	‘And	who	have	you	been	arguing	with,
Osserc?’
Osserc	scowled.	‘Anomander.	He	got	the	better	of	me	this	time.	Upon
consideration,’	he	continued	after	a	moment,	‘not	surprising.	The	weapon	of
anger	often	proves	stronger	than	cold	reason’s	armour.’	Then	he	shrugged.
‘Even	so,	I	delayed	him	long	enough—’
‘To	permit	Scabandari’s	escape?’	Menandore	asked.	‘Why?	Your	kin	or
not,	he’s	shown	himself	for	what	he	truly	is—a	treacherous	murderer.’
Osserc’s	brows	rose	mockingly	and	he	regarded	the	unconscious	woman
lying	on	the	ground	between	his	daughters.	‘Presumably,	your	cousin	who’s
clearly	suffered	at	your	hands	is	not	dead,	then.	Accordingly,	I	might	point	out
that	Scabandari	did	not	murder	Silchas	Ruin—’
‘True,’	Sukul	snapped,	‘something	far	worse.	Unless	you	think	eating	mud
for	eternity	is	a	preferable	fate.’
‘Spare	me	the	outrage,’	Osserc	sighed.	‘As	you	so	often	note,	dear	child,


treachery	and	betrayal	is	our	extended	family’s	most	precious	trait,	or,	if	not
precious,	certainly	its	most	popular	one.	In	any	case,	I	am	done	here.	What	do
you	intend	doing	with	her?’
‘We	think	Silchas	might	enjoy	the	company.’
Osserc	stiffened.	‘Two	draconean	Ascendants	in	the	same	grounds?	You
sorely	test	that	Azath	House,	daughters.’
‘Will	Scabandari	seek	to	free	her?’	Menandore	asked.
‘Scabandari	is	in	no	condition	to	free	anyone,’	Osserc	replied,	‘including
himself.’
The	two	women	were	clearly	startled	by	this.	After	a	moment,	Menandore
asked,	‘Who	managed	that?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Does	it	matter?	It	was	Scabandari’s	conceit	to	think
this	world’s	gods	had	not	the	power	to	oppose	him.’	He	paused	then	to	eye	his
daughters	speculatively,	and	said,	‘Heed	that	as	a	warning,	my	dears.	Mother
Dark’s	first	children	were	spawned	without	need	of	any	sire.	And,	despite	what
Anomander	might	claim,	they	were	not	Tiste	Andii.’
‘We	did	not	know	this,’	Menandore	said.
‘Well,	now	you	do.	Tread	softly,	children.’
Udinaas	watched	the	tall	figure	walk	away,	then	the	slave	gasped	as
Osserc’s	form	blurred,	shifted,	unfolded	to	find	a	new	shape.	Huge,	glittering
gold	and	silver	scales	rippling	as	wings	spread	wide.	A	surge	of	power,	and	the
enormous	dragon	was	in	the	air.
Sukul	Ankhadu	and	Menandore	stared	after	him,	until	the	dragon	dwindled
to	a	gleaming	ember	in	the	heavy	sky,	winked	out	and	was	gone.
Sukul	grunted,	then	said,	‘I’m	surprised	Anomander	didn’t	kill	him.’
‘Something	binds	them,	sister,	of	which	not	we	nor	anyone	else	knows	a
thing	about.	I	am	certain	of	it.’
‘Perhaps.	Or	it	might	be	something	far	simpler.’
‘Such	as?’
‘They	would	the	game	continue,’	Sukul	said	with	a	tight	smile.	‘And	the
pleasure	would	pale	indeed	were	one	to	kill	the	other	outright.’
Menandore’s	eyes	fell	to	the	motionless	form	of	Sheltatha	Lore.	‘This	one.
She	took	a	lover	from	among	this	world’s	gods,	did	she	not?’
‘For	a	time.	Begetting	two	horrid	little	children.’
‘Horrid?	Daughters,	then.’
Sukul	nodded.	‘And	their	father	saw	that	clearly	enough	from	the	very
start,	for	he	named	them	appropriately.’
‘Oh?	And	what	were	those	names,	sister?’
‘Envy	and	Spite.’


Menandore	smiled.	‘This	god—I	think	I	would	enjoy	meeting	him	one
day.’
‘It	is	possible	he	would	object	to	what	we	plan	to	do	with	Sheltatha	Lore.
Indeed,	it	is	possible	that	even	now	he	seeks	our	trail,	so	that	he	might	prevent
our	revenge.	Accordingly,	as	Osserc	is	wont	to	say,	we	should	make	haste.’
Udinaas	watched	as	the	two	women	moved	apart,	leaving	their	unconscious
cousin	where	she	lay.
Menandore	faced	her	sister	across	the	distance.	‘Sheltatha’s	lover.	That	god
—what	is	his	name?’
Sukul’s	reply	seemed	to	come	from	a	vast	distance,	‘Draconus.’
Then	the	two	women	veered	into	dragons,	of	a	size	almost	to	match	that	of
Osserc.	One	dappled,	one	blindingly	bright.
The	dappled	creature	lifted	into	the	air,	slid	in	a	banking	motion	until	she
hovered	over	Sheltatha	Lore’s	body.	A	taloned	claw	reached	down	and
gathered	her	in	its	grasp.
Then	the	dragon	rose	higher	to	join	her	sister.	And	away	they	wheeled.
Southward.
The	scene	quickly	faded	before	the	slave’s	eyes.
And,	once	more,	Udinaas	was	sitting	outside	the	Sengar	longhouse,	a	halfscaled	fish	in	his	red,	cracked	hands,	its	facing	eye	staring	up	at	him	with	that
ever-disturbing	look	of	witless	surprise—an	eye	that	he	had	seen,	with	the
barest	of	variations,	all	morning	and	all	afternoon,	and	now,	as	dusk	closed
round	him,	it	stared	yet	again,	mute	and	emptied	of	life.	As	if	what	he	held	was
not	a	fish	at	all.
Just	eyes.	Dead,	senseless	eyes…Yet	even	the	dead	accuse.
‘You	have	done	enough,	slave.’
Udinaas	looked	up.
Uruth	and	Mayen	stood	before	him.	Two	Tiste	women,	neither	dappled,
neither	blindingly	bright.	Just	shades	in	faint,	desultory	variation.
Between	them	and	a	step	behind,	Feather	Witch	stood	foremost	among	the
attending	slaves.	Large	eyes	filled	with	feverish	warnings,	fixed	on	his	own.
Udinaas	bowed	his	head	to	Uruth.	‘Yes,	mistress.’
‘Find	a	salve	for	those	hands,’	Uruth	said.
‘Thank	you,	mistress.’
The	procession	filed	past,	into	the	longhouse.
Udinaas	stared	down	at	the	fish.	Studied	that	eye	a	moment	longer,	then	dug
it	out	with	his	thumb.
	


Seren	Pedac	stood	on	the	beach	in	the	rain,	watching	the	water	in	its	ceaseless
motion,	the	way	the	pelting	rain	transformed	the	surface	into	a	muricated	skin,
grey	and	spider-haired	as	it	swelled	shoreward	to	break	hissing,	thin	and	sullen
on	the	smooth	stones.
Night	had	arrived,	crawling	out	from	the	precious	shadows.	The	dark
hours	were	upon	them	all,	a	shawl	of	silence	settling	on	the	village	behind	her.
She	was	thinking	of	the	Letherii	slaves.
Her	people	seemed	particularly	well	suited	to	surrender.	Freedom	was	an
altar	supplicants	struggled	to	reach	all	their	lives,	clawing	the	smooth	floor
until	blood	spattered	the	gleaming,	flawless	stone,	yet	the	truth	was	it	remained
for	ever	beyond	the	grasp	of	mortals.	Even	as	any	sacrifice	was	justified	in	its
gloried	name.	For	all	that,	she	knew	that	blasphemy	was	a	hollow	crime.
Freedom	was	no	god,	and	if	it	was,	and	if	it	had	a	face	turned	upon	its
worshippers,	its	expression	was	mocking.	A	slave’s	chains	stole	something	he
or	she	had	never	owned.
The	Letherii	slaves	in	this	village	owed	no	debt.	They	served	recognizable
needs,	and	were	paid	in	food	and	shelter.	They	could	marry.	Produce	children
who	would	not	inherit	the	debts	of	their	parents.	The	portions	of	their	day
allotted	their	tasks	did	not	progress,	did	not	devour	ever	more	time	from	their
lives.	In	all,	the	loss	of	freedom	was	shown	to	be	almost	meaningless	to	these
kin	of	hers.
A	child	named	Feather	Witch.	As	if	a	witch	from	the	distant	past,
awkwardly	dressed,	stiff	and	mannered	as	all	outdated	things	appear	to	be,	had
stepped	out	from	the	histories.	Womb-chosen	caster	of	the	tiles,	who	practised
her	arts	of	divination	for	the	service	of	her	community,	rather	than	for	the
coins	in	a	leather	pouch.	Perhaps	the	name	had	lost	its	meaning	among	these
slaves.	Perhaps	there	were	no	old	tiles	to	be	found,	no	solemn	nights	when
fates	gathered	into	a	smudged,	crack-laced	path,	the	dread	mosaic	of	destiny	set
out	before	one	and	all—with	a	hood-eyed	woman-child	overseeing	the
frightful	ritual.
She	heard	the	crunch	of	stones	from	near	the	river	mouth	and	turned	to	see
a	male	slave	crouching	down	at	the	waterline.	He	thrust	his	hands	into	the	cold,
fresh	water	as	if	seeking	absolution,	or	ice-numbing	escape.
Curious,	Seren	Pedac	walked	over.
The	glance	he	cast	at	her	was	guarded,	diffident.	‘Acquitor,’	he	said,	‘these
are	fraught	hours	among	the	Edur.	Words	are	best	left	unspoken.’
‘We	are	not	Edur,	however,’	she	replied,	‘are	we?’
He	withdrew	his	hands,	and	she	saw	that	they	were	red	and	swollen.
‘Emurlahn	bleeds	from	the	ground	in	these	lands,	Acquitor.’


‘None	the	less,	we	are	Letherii.’
His	grin	was	wry.	‘Acquitor,	I	am	a	slave.’
‘I	have	been	thinking	on	that.	Slavery.	And	freedom	from	debt.	How	do	you
weigh	the	exchange?’
He	settled	back	on	his	haunches,	water	dripping	from	his	hands,	and
seemed	to	study	the	clear	water	swirling	past.	The	rain	had	fallen	off	and	mist
was	edging	out	from	the	forest.	‘The	debt	remains,	Acquitor.	It	governs	every
Letherii	slave	among	the	Edur,	yet	it	is	a	debt	that	can	never	be	repaid.’
She	stared	down	at	him,	shocked.	‘But	that	is	madness!’
He	smiled	once	more.	‘By	such	things	we	are	all	measured.	Why	did	you
imagine	that	mere	slavery	would	change	it?’
Seren	was	silent	for	a	time,	studying	the	man	crouched	at	the	edge	of	the
flowing	water.	Not	at	all	unhandsome,	yet,	now	that	she	knew,	she	could	see	his
indebtedness,	the	sure	burden	upon	him,	and	the	truth	that,	for	him,	for	every
child	he	might	sire,	there	would	be	no	absolving	the	stigma.	It	was	brutal.	It
was…Letherii.	‘There	is	a	slave,’	she	said,	‘who	is	named	Feather	Witch.’
He	seemed	to	wince.	‘Yes,	our	resident	caster	of	the	tiles.’
‘Ah.	I	had	wondered.	How	many	generations	has	that	woman’s	family
dwelt	as	a	slave	among	the	Edur?’
‘A	score,	perhaps.’
‘Yet	the	talent	persisted?	Within	this	world	of	Kurald	Emurlahn?	That	is
extraordinary.’
‘Is	it?’	He	shrugged	and	rose.	‘When	you	and	your	companions	are	guest
to	Hannan	Mosag	this	night,	Feather	Witch	will	cast.’
Sudden	chill	rippled	through	Seren	Pedac.	She	drew	a	deep	breath	and
released	it	slow	and	heavy.	‘There	is…risk,	doing	such	a	thing.’
‘That	is	known,	Acquitor.’
‘Yes,	I	see	now	that	it	would	be.’
‘I	must	return	to	my	tasks,’	he	said,	not	meeting	her	eyes.
‘Of	course.	I	hope	my	delaying	you	does	not	yield	grief.’
He	smiled	yet	again,	but	said	nothing.
She	watched	him	walk	up	the	strand.
	
Buruk	the	Pale	stood	wrapped	in	his	rain	cape	before	the	Nerek	fire.	Hull
Beddict	was	nearby,	positioned	slightly	behind	the	merchant,	hooded	and
withdrawn.
Seren	walked	to	Buruk’s	side,	studied	the	struggling	flames	from	which
smoke	rose	to	hang	smeared,	stretched	and	motionless	above	them.	The	night’s


chill	had	seeped	into	the	Acquitor ’s	bones	and	the	muscles	of	her	neck	had
tightened	in	response.	A	headache	was	building	behind	her	eyes.
‘Seren	Pedac,’	Buruk	sighed.	‘I	am	unwell.’
She	heard	as	much	in	his	weak,	shaky	voice.	‘You	ran	long	and	far,’	she
said.
‘Only	to	find	myself	standing	still,	here	before	a	sickly	fire.	I	am	not	so
foolish	as	to	be	unaware	of	my	crimes.’
Hull	grunted	behind	them.	‘Would	those	be	crimes	already	committed,	or
those	to	come,	Buruk	the	Pale?’
‘The	distinction	is	without	meaning,’	the	merchant	replied.	‘Tonight,’	he
said,	straightening	himself,	‘we	shall	be	made	guests	of	Hannan	Mosag.	Are
you	both	ready?’
‘The	formality,’	Seren	said,	‘is	the	least	of	what	this	meeting	portends,
Buruk.	The	Warlock	King	intends	to	make	his	position	unambiguous.	We	will
hear	a	warning,	which	we	are	expected	to	deliver	to	the	delegation	when	it
arrives.’
‘Intentions	are	similarly	without	relevance,	Acquitor.	I	am	without
expectations,	whereas	one	of	us	three	is	consumed	by	nothing	else.	Rehearsed
statements,	dire	pronouncements,	all	await	this	fell	visit.’	Buruk	swung	his	head
to	regard	Hull	Beddict.	‘You	still	think	like	a	child,	don’t	you?	Clay	figurines
sunk	to	their	ankles	in	the	sand,	one	here,	one	there,	standing	just	so.	One	says
this,	the	other	says	that,	then	you	reach	down	and	rearrange	them	accordingly.
Scenes,	vistas,	stark	with	certainty.	Poor	Hull	Beddict,	who	took	a	knife	to	his
heart	so	long	ago	that	he	twists	daily	to	confirm	it’s	still	there.’
‘If	you	would	see	me	as	a	child,’	the	huge	man	said	in	growl,	‘that	is	your
error,	not	mine,	Buruk.’
‘A	gentle	warning,’	the	merchant	replied,	‘that	you	are	not	among
children.’
Buruk	then	gestured	them	to	follow	and	made	his	way	towards	the	citadel.
Falling	in	step	beside	Hull—with	the	merchant	a	half-dozen	paces	ahead,
barely	visible	in	the	dark—Seren	asked,	‘Have	you	met	this	Hannan	Mosag?’
‘I	have	been	guest	here	before,	Seren.’
‘Of	the	Warlock	King’s?’
‘No,	of	the	Sengar	household.	Close	to	the	royal	blood,	the	eldest	son,	Fear
Sengar,	is	Hannan	Mosag’s	Marshal	of	War—not	his	actual	title,	but	it	serves
well	as	translation.’
Seren	considered	this	for	a	moment,	then	frowned	and	said,	‘You
anticipate,	then,	that	friends	will	be	present	tonight.’
‘I	had,	but	it	is	not	to	be.	None	of	the	Sengar	barring	the	patriarch,	Tomad,


and	his	wife	are	in	the	village.	The	sons	have	left.’
‘Left?	Where?’
Hull	shook	his	head.	‘I	don’t	know.	It	is…odd.	I	have	to	assume	Fear	and
his	brothers	will	be	back	in	time	for	the	treaty	meeting.’
‘Is	the	Warlock	King	aware	of	the	blood-ties	you	have	bound	with	Binadas
Sengar?’
‘Of	course.’
Buruk	the	Pale	had	reached	the	bridge	leading	to	the	inner	ward.	The	mists
had	thickened	into	fog,	obscuring	the	world	surrounding	the	three	Letherii.
There	was	no-one	else	in	sight,	nor	any	sound	beyond	the	crunch	of	their	feet
on	the	pebbled	path.	The	massive	bulk	of	the	citadel	rose	before	them.
The	broad,	arched	entranceway	was	lurid	with	firelight.
‘He	has	no	guards,’	Seren	murmured.
‘None	that	can	be	seen,’	Hull	Beddict	replied.
Buruk	climbed	the	two	shallow	steps	to	the	landing,	paused	to	release	the
clasps	of	his	cape,	then	strode	inside.	A	moment	later	Seren	and	Hull	followed.
The	long	hall	was	virtually	empty.	The	feast	table	was	a	much	smaller
version	than	what	normally	occupied	the	centre	axis	of	the	room,	as	evinced	by
the	wear	patterns	on	the	vast	rug	covering	the	wood-slatted	floor.	And	off	to
the	right,	Seren	saw,	stood	that	table,	pushed	flush	against	the	tapestry-lined
wall.
Near	the	far	end	of	the	chamber,	the	modest	feast	table	had	been	positioned
crossways,	with	three	high-backed	chairs	awaiting	the	Letherii	on	this	side.
Opposite	them	sat	the	Warlock	King,	already	well	into	his	meal.	Five	Edur
warriors	stood	in	shadows	behind	Hannan	Mosag,	motionless.
They	must	be	the	K’risnan.	Sorcerors…they	look	young.
The	Warlock	King	waited	until	they	had	divested	themselves	of	their	outer
clothing,	then	gestured	them	forward,	and	said	in	passable	Letherii,	‘Join	me,
please.	I	dislike	cold	food,	so	here	you	see	me,	rudely	filling	my	belly.’
Buruk	the	Pale	bowed	from	the	waist,	then	said,	‘I	did	not	think	we	were
late,	sire—’
‘You’re	not,	but	I	am	not	one	for	formality.	Indeed,	I	am	often	tried	by
mere	courtesy.	Forgive,	if	you	will,	this	king’s	impatience.’
‘Appetites	care	little	for	demands	of	decorum,	sire,’	Buruk	said,
approaching.
‘I	was	confident	a	Letherii	would	understand.	Now,’	he	suddenly	rose,	the
gesture	halting	the	three	in	their	tracks,	‘I	proclaim	as	my	guests	Buruk	the
Pale,	Acquitor	Seren	Pedac	and	Sentinel	Hull	Beddict.	Seat	yourselves,	please.	I
only	devour	what	my	cooks	prepare	for	me.’


His	was	a	voice	one	could	listen	to,	hours	passing	without	notice,
discomforts	forgotten.	Hannan	Mosag	was,	Seren	realized,	a	very	dangerous
king.
Buruk	the	Pale	took	the	central	seat,	Seren	moving	to	the	one	on	the
merchant’s	left,	Hull	to	the	right.	As	they	settled	into	the	Blackwood	chairs,	the
Warlock	King	sat	down	once	more	and	reached	for	a	goblet.	‘Wine	from
Trate,’	he	said,	‘to	honour	my	guests.’
‘Acquired	through	peaceful	trade,	one	hopes,’	Buruk	said.
‘Alas,	I	am	afraid	not,’	Hannan	Mosag	replied,	glancing	up	almost
diffidently	into	the	merchant’s	eyes,	then	away	once	more.	‘But	we	are	all
hardy	folk	here	at	this	table,	I’m	sure.’
Buruk	collected	his	goblet	and	sipped.	He	seemed	to	consider,	then	sighed,
‘Only	slightly	soured	by	provenance,	sire.’
The	Warlock	King	frowned.	‘I	had	assumed	it	was	supposed	to	taste	that
way.’
‘Not	surprising,	sire,	once	one	becomes	used	to	it.’
‘The	comfort	that	is	familiarity,	Buruk	the	Pale,	proves	a	powerful	arbiter
once	again.’
‘The	Letherii	often	grow	restless	with	familiarity,	alas,	and	as	a
consequence	often	see	it	as	a	diminishment	in	quality.’
‘That	is	too	complicated	a	notion,	Buruk,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘We’ve	not
yet	drunk	enough	to	dance	with	words,	unless	of	course	you	eased	your	thirst
back	in	your	lodging,	in	which	case	I	find	myself	at	a	disadvantage.’
Buruk	reached	for	a	sliver	of	smoked	fish.	‘Horribly	sober,	I’m	afraid.	If
disadvantage	exists,	then	it	belongs	to	us.’
‘How	so?’
‘Well,	sire,	you	honour	us	with	blood-tainted	wine,	a	most	unbalancing
gesture.	More,	we	have	received	word	of	the	slaughter	of	Letherii	seal	hunters.
The	blood	has	grown	deep	enough	to	drown	us.’
It	seemed	Buruk	the	Pale	was	not	interested	in	veiled	exchanges.	A	curious
tactic,	Seren	reflected,	and	one	that,	she	suspected,	King	Ezgara	Diskanar
would	not	appreciate	in	the	circumstances.
‘I	am	sure	the	few	remaining	kin	of	the	butchered	tusked	seals	would
concur,	tugged	as	they	are	in	that	fell	tide,’	the	Warlock	King	said	in	a	musing
sort	of	way.
‘Word	has	also	reached	us,’	Buruk	continued,	‘of	the	ships’	return	to
Trate’s	harbour.	The	holds	that	should	have	held	the	costly	harvest	were
inexplicably	empty.’
‘Empty?	That	was	careless.’


Buruk	leaned	back	in	his	chair,	closing	both	hands	about	the	goblet	as	he
studied	the	dark	contents.
Hull	Beddict	suddenly	spoke.	‘Warlock	King,	I	for	one	feel	no	displeasure
in	the	resolution	of	that	treacherous	event.	Those	hunters	defied	longestablished	agreements,	and	so	deserved	their	fate.’
‘Sentinel,’	Hannan	Mosag	said,	a	new	seriousness	to	his	tone,	‘I	doubt	their
grieving	kin	would	agree.	Your	words	are	cold.	I	am	given	to	understand	that
the	notion	of	debt	is	a	pervasive	force	among	your	people.	These	hapless
harvesters	were	likely	Indebted,	were	they	not?	Their	desperation	preyed	upon
by	masters	as	heartless	in	their	sentiments	as	you	have	just	been.’	He	scanned
the	three	Letherii	before	him.	‘Am	I	alone	in	my	grief?’
‘The	potential	consequences	of	that	slaughter	promise	yet	more	grief,
sire,’	Buruk	the	Pale	said.
‘And	is	that	inevitable,	merchant?’
Buruk	blinked.
‘It	is,’	Hull	Beddict	answered,	leaning	forward	in	his	chair.	‘Warlock	King,
is	there	any	doubt	upon	whom	that	grief	should	be	visited?	You	spoke	of	cold
masters,	and	yes,	it	is	their	blood	that	should	have	been	spilled	in	this	instance.
Even	so,	they	are	masters	only	because	the	Indebted	accept	them	as	such.	This
is	the	poison	of	gold	as	the	only	measure	of	worth.	Those	harvesters	are	no
less	guilty	for	their	desperation,	sire.	They	are	all	participants	in	the	same
game.’
‘Hull	Beddict,’	Buruk	said,	‘speaks	only	for	himself.’
‘Are	we	not	all	speaking	only	for	ourselves?’	Hannan	Mosag	asked.
‘As	desirable	as	that	would	be,	sire,	it	would	be	a	lie	to	make	such	claims
—for	myself,	for	you.’
The	Warlock	King	pushed	his	plate	away	and	leaned	back.	‘And	what	of	the
Acquitor,	then?	She	does	not	speak	at	all.’	Calm,	soft	eyes	fixed	on	her.	‘You
have	escorted	these	men,	Acquitor	Seren	Pedac.’
‘I	have,	sire,’	she	replied,	‘and	so	my	task	is	done.’
‘And	in	your	silence	you	seek	to	absolve	yourself	of	all	to	come	of	this
meeting.’
‘Such	is	the	role	of	Acquitor,	sire.’
‘Unlike	that	of,	say,	Sentinel.’
Hull	Beddict	flinched,	then	said,	‘I	ceased	being	Sentinel	long	ago,	sire.’
‘Indeed?	Then	why,	may	I	ask,	are	you	here?’
‘He	volunteered	himself,’	Buruk	answered.	‘It	was	not	for	me	to	turn	him
away.’
‘True.	That	responsibility,	as	I	understand	the	matter,	belonged	to	the


Acquitor.’	Hannan	Mosag	studied	her,	waiting.
‘I	did	not	feel	compelled	to	deny	Hull	Beddict’s	decision	to	accompany	us,
sire.’
‘Yes,’	the	Warlock	King	replied.	‘Isn’t	that	curious?’
Sweat	prickled	beneath	her	damp	clothes.	‘Permit	me	to	correct	myself,
sire.	I	did	not	believe	I	would	succeed,	had	I	attempted	to	deny	Hull	Beddict.
And	so	I	decided	to	maintain	the	illusion	of	my	authority.’
Hannan	Mosag’s	sudden	smile	was	profoundly	disarming.	‘An	honest
reply.	Well	done,	Acquitor.	You	may	now	go.’
She	rose	shakily,	bowed.	‘It	was	a	pleasure	meeting	you,	Warlock	King.’
‘I	reciprocate	the	sentiment,	Acquitor.	I	would	we	speak	later,	you	and	I.’
‘I	am	at	your	call,	sire.’
Not	meeting	the	eyes	of	her	fellow	Letherii,	Seren	stepped	round	the	chair,
then	made	her	way	outside.
The	Warlock	King	had	denied	her	the	burden	of	witnessing	all	that
followed	this	night	between	himself,	Hull	and	Buruk.	On	a	personal	level,	it
stung,	but	she	knew	that	he	might	very	well	have	just	saved	her	life.
In	any	case,	all	that	had	needed	to	be	said	had	been	said.	She	wondered	if
Hull	Beddict	had	understood	that.	There	was	no	doubt	that	Buruk	had.
We	are	sorely	unbalanced,	indeed.	Hannan	Mosag,	the	Warlock	King,	wants
peace.
The	rain	had	returned.	She	drew	her	cloak	tighter	about	her	shoulders.
Poor	Hull.
	
Someone	edged	to	his	side.	Udinaas	glanced	over	to	see	Hulad,	the	familiar
lined	face	drawn,	troubled	and	wan.	‘Are	you	all	right?’
Hulad	shrugged.	‘I	was	remembering	the	last	time	she	cast,	Udinaas.	My
nerves	are	ruined	this	night.’
Udinaas	said	nothing.	It	was	with	some	measure	of	surprise	that	he	himself
was	not	feeling	something	similar.	Changes	had	come	to	him,	that	much	was
clear.	Feather	Witch,	he’d	heard,	had	felt	the	brunt	of	Mayen’s	displeasure.	It
seemed	Uruth’s	fury	with	the	Nerek	blessing,	while	delivered	with	quiet
brevity,	had	been	harsh	in	its	content.	Subsequently,	Mayen	had	taken	a	switch
to	her	slave’s	back.
Of	course,	when	it	came	to	dealing	with	slaves,	justice	was	without
meaning.
He	watched	her	move	to	stand	in	the	centre	of	the	cleared	area.	There	were
more	slaves	crowding	the	vast	barn	than	there	had	been	the	last	time.	Enticed


by	the	fraught	tales	of	the	past	casting,	no	doubt.	Almost	as	good	as	the
Drownings.
Feather	Witch	sat	down	on	the	hard-packed	floor	and	everyone	else
quickly	followed	suit,	moving	with	an	alacrity	that	she	herself	was	not	able	to
match,	bruised	and	battered	as	she	was.	Udinaas	saw	the	strain	in	her
movements,	and	wondered	to	what	extent	she	blamed	him	for	her	suffering.
Mayen	was	no	harder	a	mistress	than	any	other	Edur.	Beatings	were	mercifully
uncommon—most	egregious	crimes	committed	by	slaves	were	punished	with
swift	death.	If	one	was	not	going	to	kill	a	slave,	what	value	incapacitating
them?
The	last	casting	had	not	proceeded	so	far	as	to	the	actual	scattering	of	the
tiles.	The	Wyval’s	sudden	arrival	had	torn	Feather	Witch	from	the	realm	of	the
manifest	Holds.	Udinaas	felt	the	first	tremors	of	anticipation	in	his	chest.
Sudden	silence	as	Feather	Witch	closed	her	eyes	and	lowered	her	head,	her
yellow	hair	closing	over	her	face	like	twin	curtains.	She	shuddered,	then	drew
a	deep,	ragged	breath,	and	looked	up	with	empty	eyes,	in	which	the	black
smear	of	a	starless	night	sky	slowly	grew,	as	from	behind	thinning	fog,
followed	by	spirals	of	luminous	light.
The	Beginnings	swept	upon	her	with	its	mask	of	terror,	twisting	her
features	into	something	primal	and	chilling.	She	was,	Udinaas	knew,	gazing
upon	the	Abyss,	suspended	in	the	vast	oblivion	of	all	that	lay	between	the	stars.
There	were	no	Makers	yet,	nor	the	worlds	they	would	fashion.
And	now	the	Fulcra.	Fire,	Dolmen	and	the	Errant.	The	Errant,	who	gives
shape	to	the	Holds—
‘Walk	with	me	to	the	Holds.’
The	Letherii	slaves	loosed	long-held	breaths.
‘We	stand	upon	Dolmen,	and	all	is	as	it	should	be.’	Yet	there	was	a	strain	to
her	voice.	‘To	live	is	to	wage	war	against	the	Abyss.	In	our	growth	we	find
conquest,	in	our	stagnation	we	find	ourselves	under	siege,	and	in	our	dying	our
last	defences	are	assailed.	These	are	the	truths	of	the	Beast	Hold.	Blade	and
Knuckles,	the	war	we	cannot	escape.	Age	has	clawed	the	face	and	gouged	the
eyes	of	the	Elder.	He	is	scarred	and	battle-ravaged.	Crone	cackles	with	bitter
spit,	and	twitches	with	dreams	of	flight.	Seer’s	mouth	moves	yet	there	are	none
to	hear.	Shaman	wails	the	weft	of	the	dead	in	fields	of	bones,	yet	believes	none
of	the	patterns	he	fashions	from	those	scattered	remains.	Tracker	walks	his
steps	assured	and	purposeful,	to	belie	that	he	wanders	lost.’
She	fell	silent.
Muttered	voices	from	the	crowd.	This	was	a	cold	invitation	into	the	Holds.
Errant	guard	us,	we	are	in	trouble.	Dread	trouble.


Hulad	plucked	at	his	arm,	gestured	to	the	far	wall	where	shadows	lay	thick
as	muddy	water.	A	figure	stood	there,	back	to	the	dirt-spattered	plaster	wall.
The	Acquitor.	Seren	Pedac.
Feather	Witch	remained	silent,	and	unease	grew.
Udinaas	climbed	to	his	feet	and	threaded	his	way	through	the	crowd,
ignoring	the	glares	from	the	slaves	he	edged	past.	He	reached	the	back	wall
and	made	his	way	along	it	until	he	reached	the	Acquitor ’s	side.
‘What	has	gone	wrong?’	she	asked.
‘I	don’t	know—’
Feather	Witch	began	speaking	once	more.	‘Bone	Perch	now	stands	as	a
throne	that	none	shall	occupy,	for	its	shape	has	become	inimical	to	taming.	The
throne’s	back	is	now	hunched,	the	ribs	drawn	downward,	the	shoulder	blades
steep	and	narrow.	The	arms,	upon	which	a	ruler’s	arms	would	rest,	are	risen
now,	each	in	the	visage	of	a	wolf,	and	in	their	eyes	burns	savage	life.’	She
paused,	then	intoned,	‘The	Hold	of	the	Beast	has	found	Twin	Rulers.’
‘That	is	impossible,’	Seren	Pedac	murmured.
‘And	before	us	now…the	Hold	of	the	Azath.	Its	stones	bleed.	The	earth
heaves	and	steams.	A	silent,	unceasing	scream	shakes	the	branches	of	the
ancient	trees.	The	Azath	stands	besieged.’
Voices	rose	in	denial,	the	slaves	shifting	about.
‘Ice	Hold!’	Feather	Witch	shouted,	head	tilted	back,	teeth	bared.
Silence	once	more,	all	eyes	fixing	on	her.
‘Riven	tomb!	Corpses	lie	scattered	before	the	sundered	threshold.	Urquall
Jaghuthan	taezmalas.	They	are	not	here	to	mend	the	damage.	They	are	forgotten,
and	the	ice	itself	cannot	recall	the	weight	of	their	passage.’
‘What	language	was	that?’	Seren	Pedac	asked.
‘Jaghut,’	Udinaas	replied,	then	snapped	his	mouth	shut.
‘What	is	Jaghut?’
He	shrugged.	‘Forgers	of	the	Ice,	Acquitor.	It	is	of	no	matter.	They	are
gone.’
She	gripped	his	arm	and	swung	him	round.	‘How	do	you	know	this?’
‘The	Hold	of	the	Dragon,’	Feather	Witch	said,	her	skin	glistening	with
sweat.	‘Eleint	Tiam	purake	setoram	n’brael	buras—’
‘Draconean	words,’	Udinaas	said,	suddenly	revelling	in	his	secret
knowledge.	‘“Children	of	the	Mother	Tiam	lost	in	all	that	they	surrendered.”
More	or	less.	The	poetry	suffers	in	translation—’
‘The	Eleint	would	destroy	all	in	their	paths	to	achieve	vengeance,’	Feather
Witch	said	in	a	grating	voice.	‘As	we	all	shall	see	in	the	long	night	to	come.	The
Queen	lies	dead	and	may	never	again	rise.	The	Consort	writhes	upon	a	tree	and


whispers	with	madness	of	the	time	of	his	release.	The	Liege	is	lost,	dragging
chains	in	a	world	where	to	walk	is	to	endure,	and	where	to	halt	is	to	be
devoured.	The	Knight	strides	his	own	doomed	path,	soon	to	cross	blades	with
his	own	vengeance.	Gate	rages	with	wild	fire.	Wyval—’
Her	head	snapped	back	as	if	struck	by	an	invisible	hand,	and	blood	sprayed
from	her	mouth	and	nose.	She	gasped,	then	smiled	a	red	smile.	‘Locqui	Wyval
waits.	The	Lady	and	the	Sister	dance	round	each	other,	each	on	her	own	side	of
the	world.	Blood-Drinker	waits	as	well,	waits	to	be	found.	Path-Shaper	knows
fever	in	his	fell	blood	and	staggers	on	the	edge	of	the	precipice.
‘Thus!	The	Holds,	save	one.’
‘Someone	stop	her,’	Seren	Pedac	hissed,	releasing	Udinaas’s	arm.
And	now	it	was	his	turn	to	grasp	her,	hold	her	back.	She	snapped	a	glare	at
him	and	twisted	to	escape	his	grip.
He	pulled	her	close.	‘This	is	not	your	world,	Acquitor.	No-one	invited	you.
Now,	stand	here	and	say	nothing…or	leave!’
‘The	Empty	Hold	has	become…’	Feather	Witch’s	smile	broadened,	‘very
crowded	indeed.	’Ware	the	brothers!	Listen!	Blood	weaves	a	web	that	will	trap
the	entire	world!	None	shall	escape,	none	shall	find	refuge!’	Her	right	hand
snapped	out,	spraying	the	ancient	tiles	onto	the	floor.	From	the	rafters	far
above	pigeons	burst	out	of	the	gloom,	a	wild,	chaotic	beat	of	wings.	They
circled	in	a	frenzy,	feathers	skirling	down.
‘The	Watchers	stand	in	place	as	if	made	of	stone!	Their	faces	are	masks	of
horror.	The	Mistresses	dance	with	thwarted	desire.’	Her	eyes	were	closed,	yet
she	pointed	to	one	tile	after	another,	proclaiming	their	identity	in	a	harsh,
rasping	voice.	‘The	Wanderers	have	broken	through	the	ice	and	cold	darkness
comes	with	its	deathly	embrace.	The	Walkers	cannot	halt	in	the	growing	torrent
that	pulls	them	ever	onward.	The	Saviours—’
‘What	is	she	saying?’	Seren	Pedac	demanded.	‘She	has	made	them	all
plural—the	players	within	the	Hold	of	the	Empty	Throne—this	makes	no	sense
—’
‘—face	one	another,	and	both	are	doomed,	and	in	broken	reflection	so	stand
the	Betrayers,	and	this	is	what	lies	before	us,	before	us	all.’	Her	voice	trailed
away	with	her	last	words,	and	once	more	her	chin	settled,	head	tilting	forward,
long	hair	sweeping	down	to	cover	her	face.
The	pigeons	overhead	whipped	round	and	round,	the	only	sound	in	the
massive	barn.
‘Contestants	to	the	Empty	Throne,’	Feather	Witch	whispered	in	a	tone
heavy	with	sorrow.	‘Blood	and	madness…’
Udinaas	slowly	released	his	grip	on	Seren	Pedac.


She	made	no	move,	as	frozen	in	place	as	everyone	else	present.
Udinaas	grunted,	amused,	and	said	to	the	Acquitor,	‘She’s	not	slept	well
lately,	you	see.’
	
Seren	Pedac	staggered	outside,	into	a	solid	sheet	of	cold	rain.	A	hissing	deluge
on	the	path’s	pebbles,	tiny	rivers	cutting	through	the	sands,	the	forest	beyond
seeming	pulled	down	by	streaming	threads	and	ropes.	An	angry	susurration
from	the	direction	of	the	river	and	the	sea.	As	if	the	world	was	collapsing	in
melt	water.
She	blinked	against	the	cold	tears.
And	recalled	the	play	of	Edur	children,	the	oblivious	chatter	of	a	thousand
moments	ago,	so	far	back	in	her	mind	now	as	to	echo	like	someone	else’s
reminiscence.	Of	times	weathered	slick	and	shapeless.
Memories	rushing,	rushing	down	to	the	sea.
Like	children	in	flight.


Chapter	Eight

Where	are	the	days	we	once	held
So	loose	in	our	sure	hands?
When	did	these	racing	streams
Carve	depthless	caves	beneath	our	feet?
And	how	did	this	scene	stagger
And	shift	to	make	fraught	our	deft	lies
In	the	places	where	youth	will	meet,
In	the	lands	of	our	proud	dreams?
Where,	among	all	you	before	me,
Are	the	faces	I	once	knew?
WORDS	ETCHED	INTO	THE	WALL,	K’RUL	BELFRY,	DARUJHISTAN
In	the	battle	that	saw	Theradas	Buhn	blooded,	a	Merude	cutlass	had	laid	open
his	right	cheek,	snapping	the	bone	beneath	the	eye	and	cutting	through	maxilla
and	the	upper	half	of	his	mandible.	The	savage	wound	had	been	slow	to	heal,
and	the	thread	that	had	been	used	to	seal	the	gaping	hole	into	his	mouth	had
festered	the	flesh	before	his	comrades	could	return	the	warrior	to	a	nearby
Hiroth	encampment,	where	a	healer	had	done	what	she	could—driving	out	the
infection,	knitting	the	bones.	The	result	was	a	long,	crooked	scar	within	a
seamed	concave	depression	on	that	side	of	his	face,	and	a	certain	flat	look	to
his	eyes	that	hinted	of	unseen	wounds	that	would	never	heal.
Trull	Sengar	sat	with	the	others	five	paces	from	the	edge	of	the	ice-field,
watching	Theradas	as	he	paced	back	and	forth	along	the	crusted	line	of	ice	and
snow,	the	red-tipped	fox	fur	of	his	cloak	flashing	in	the	gusting	wind.	The
Arapay	lands	were	behind	them	now,	and	with	them	the	grudging	hospitality	of
that	subjugated	Edur	tribe.	The	Hiroth	warriors	were	alone,	and	before	them
stretched	a	white,	shattered	landscape.
It	looked	lifeless,	but	the	Arapay	had	spoken	of	night	hunters,	strange,	furshrouded	killers	who	came	out	of	the	darkness	wielding	jagged	blades	of	black
iron.	They	took	body	parts	as	trophies,	to	the	point	of	leaving	limbless,


headless	torsos	in	their	wake.	None	had	ever	been	captured,	and	the	bodies	of
those	who	fell	were	never	left	where	they	lay.
Even	so,	they	tended	to	prey	only	upon	paired	Edur	hunters.	More
formidable	groups	were	generally	left	alone.	The	Arapay	called	them	Jheck,
which	meant,	roughly,	standing	wolves.
‘There	are	eyes	upon	us,’	Theradas	pronounced	in	his	thick,	blunted	voice.
Fear	Sengar	shrugged.	‘The	ice	wastes	are	not	as	lifeless	as	they	appear.
Hares,	foxes,	ground	owls,	white	wolves,	bears,	aranag—’
‘The	Arapay	spoke	of	huge	beasts,’	Rhulad	cut	in.	‘Brown-furred	and
tusked—we	saw	the	ivory—’
‘Old	ivory,	Rhulad,’	Fear	said.	‘Found	in	the	ice.	It	is	likely	such	beasts	are
no	more.’
‘The	Arapay	say	otherwise.’
Theradas	grunted.	‘And	they	live	in	fear	of	the	ice	wastes,	Rhulad,	and	so
have	filled	them	with	nightmare	beasts	and	demons.	It	is	this:	we	will	see	what
we	see.	Are	you	done	your	repasts?	We	are	losing	daylight.’
‘Yes,’	Fear	said,	rising,	‘we	should	go	on.’
Rhulad	and	Midik	Buhn	moved	out	to	the	flanks.	Both	wore	bear	furs,
black	and	silver-collared.	Their	hands,	within	fur-lined	gauntlets—Arapay
gifts—were	wrapped	round	the	long	spears	they	used	as	walking	sticks,	testing
the	packed	snow	before	them	with	each	step.	Theradas	moved	to	point,	fifteen
paces	ahead,	leaving	Trull,	Fear	and	Binadas	travelling	as	the	core	group,
pulling	the	two	sleds	packed	with	leather	satchels	filled	with	supplies.
It	was	said	that,	further	out	in	the	wastes,	there	was	water	beneath	the	ice,
salt-laden	remnants	from	an	inland	sea,	and	cavernous	pockets	hidden	beneath
thin-skin	mantles	of	snow.	Treachery	waited	underfoot,	forcing	them	to	travel
slowly.
The	wind	swept	down	upon	them,	biting	at	exposed	skin,	and	they	were
forced	to	lean	forward	against	its	gusting,	frigid	blasts.
Despite	the	furs	enshrouding	him,	Trull	felt	the	shock	of	that	sudden	cold,
a	force	mindless	and	indifferent,	yet	eager	to	steal.	Flooding	his	air	passages	in
a	numbing	assault.	And	within	that	current,	a	faint	smell	of	death.
The	Edur	wrapped	swaths	of	wool	about	their	faces,	leaving	the	barest	of
slits	for	their	eyes.	Conversations	were	quickly	abandoned,	and	they	walked	in
silence,	the	crunch	of	their	fur-lined	moccasins	muffled	and	distant.
The	sun’s	warmth	and	turn	of	season	could	not	win	the	war	in	this	place.
The	snow	and	ice	rose	on	the	wind	to	glitter	overhead,	mocking	the	sun	itself
with	twin	mirror	images,	leading	Trull	to	suspect	that	the	wind	held	close	to	the
ground,	whilst	high	overhead	the	suspended	ice	crystals	hovered	unmoving,


inured	to	the	passing	of	seasons,	of	years.
He	tilted	his	head	to	stare	upward	for	a	moment,	wondering	if	that
glistening,	near-opaque	canopy	above	them	held	the	frozen	memories	of	the
past,	minute	images	locked	in	each	crystal,	bearing	witness	to	all	that	had
occurred	below.	A	multitude	of	fates,	perhaps	reaching	back	to	when	there	was
sea,	in	place	of	the	ice.	Did	unknown	creatures	ply	the	waters	in	arcane,	dugout
canoes	all	those	thousands	of	years	ago?	Would	they	one	day	become	these
Jheck?
The	Letherii	spoke	of	Holds,	that	strange	pantheon	of	elements,	and	among
them	there	was	the	Hold	of	Ice.	As	if	winter	was	born	of	sorcery,	as	if	ice	and
snow	were	instruments	of	wilful	destruction.	Something	of	that	notion	was
present	in	Edur	legends	as	well.	Ice	plunging	down	to	steal	the	land	that	was
soaked	in	Tiste	blood,	the	brutal	theft	of	hard-won	territories	committed	as	an
act	of	vengeance,	perhaps	the	gelid	flowering	of	some	curse	uttered	in	a	last
breath,	a	final	defiance.
The	sentiment,	then—if	one	such	existed—was	of	old	enmity.	Ice	was	a
thief,	of	life,	land	and	righteous	reward.	Bound	in	death	and	blood,	an	eternal
prison.	From	all	this,	it	could	earn	hatred.
They	continued	through	the	day,	moving	slowly	but	steadily,	through
jumbled	fields	of	broken,	upthrust	shards	of	ice	that	in	the	distance	seemed
simply	white,	but	when	neared	was	revealed	to	possess	countless	shades	of
greens,	blues	and	browns.	They	crossed	flats	of	wind-sculpted,	hard-packed
snow	that	formed	rippled	patterns	as	smooth	as	sand.	Strange	fault	lines	where
unseen	forces	had	sheered	the	ice,	pushing	one	side	up	against	the	other,
grinding	opposing	paths	as	if	the	solid	world	beneath	them	jostled	in	wayward
migration.
Towards	late	afternoon,	a	muted	shout	from	Theradas	halted	them.	Trull,
who	had	been	walking	with	his	eyes	on	the	ground	before	him,	looked	up	at	the
muffled	sound	and	saw	that	Theradas	was	standing	before	something,
gesturing	them	forward	with	a	fur-wrapped	hand.	A	few	moments	later	they
reached	his	side.
A	broad	crevasse	cut	across	their	path,	the	span	at	least	fifteen	paces.	The
sheer	walls	of	ice	swept	down	into	darkness,	and	from	its	depths	rose	a	strange
smell.
‘Salt,’	Binadas	said	after	pulling	away	his	face-covering.	‘Tidal	pools.’
Rhulad	and	Midik	joined	them	from	the	flanks.	‘It	seems	to	stretch	to	the
very	horizon,’	Rhulad	said.
‘The	break	looks	recent,’	Binadas	observed,	crouching	at	the	edge.	‘As	if
the	surface	is	shrinking.’


‘Perhaps	summer	has	managed	a	modest	alteration	to	these	wastes,’	Fear
mused.	‘We	have	passed	sealed	faults	that	might	be	the	remnant	scars	from
similar	wounds	in	the	past.’
‘How	will	we	cross?’	Midik	asked.
‘I	could	draw	shadows	from	below,’	Binadas	said,	then	shook	his	head,
‘but	the	notion	makes	me	uneasy.	If	there	are	spirits	within,	they	might	well
prove	unruly.	There	are	layers	of	sorcery	here,	woven	in	the	snow	and	ice,	and
they	do	not	welcome	Emurlahn.’
‘Get	out	the	ropes,’	Fear	said.
‘Dusk	approaches.’
‘If	necessary	we	will	camp	below.’
Trull	shot	Fear	a	look.	‘What	if	it	closes	whilst	we	are	down	there?’
‘I	do	not	think	that	likely,’	Fear	said.	‘Besides,	we	will	remain	unseen	this
night,	hidden	as	we	will	be	in	the	depths.	If	there	are	indeed	beasts	in	this	land
—though	we’ve	seen	no	true	signs	as	yet—then	I	would	rather	we	took	every
opportunity	to	avoid	them.’

Wet	pebbles	skidded	under	his	moccasins	as	Trull	alighted,	stepping	clear	of
the	ropes.	He	looked	around,	surprised	at	the	faint	green	glow	suffusing	the
scene.	They	were	indeed	on	a	seabed.	Salt	had	rotted	the	ice	at	the	edges,
creating	vast	caverns	crowded	with	glittering	pillars.	The	air	was	cold,	turgid
and	rank.
Off	to	one	side	Midik	and	Rhulad	had	drawn	bundles	of	wood	out	from	a
pack	and	were	preparing	a	cookfire.	Binadas	and	Fear	were	reloading	the	sleds
to	keep	the	food	satchels	off	the	wet	ground,	and	Theradas	had	set	off	to	scout
the	caverns.
Trull	strode	to	a	shallow	pool	and	crouched	down	at	its	edge.	The	saline
water	swarmed	with	tiny	grey	shrimps.	Barnacles	crowded	the	waterline.
‘The	ice	is	dying.’
At	Fear ’s	words	behind	him,	Trull	rose	and	faced	his	brother.	‘Why	do	you
say	that?’
‘The	salt	gnaws	its	flesh.	We	are	at	the	lowest	region	of	the	ancient	seabed,
I	believe.	Where	the	last	of	the	water	gathered,	then	slowly	evaporated.	Those
columns	of	salt	are	all	that	remains.	If	the	entire	basin	was	like	this	place,	then
the	canopy	of	ice	would	have	collapsed—’
‘Perhaps	it	does	just	that,’	Binadas	suggested,	joining	them.	‘In	cycles	over


thousands	of	years.	Collapse,	then	the	salt	begins	its	work	once	again.’
Trull	stared	into	the	gloomy	reaches.	‘I	cannot	believe	those	pillars	can
hold	up	all	this	ice.	There	must	be	a	cycle	of	collapse,	as	Binadas	has	said.’	His
eyes	caught	movement,	then	Theradas	emerged,	and	Trull	saw	that	the	warrior
had	his	sword	out.
‘There	is	a	path,’	Theradas	said.	‘And	a	place	of	gathering.	We	are	not	the
first	to	have	come	down	here.’
Rhulad	and	Midik	joined	them.	No-one	spoke	for	a	time.
Then	Fear	nodded	and	asked,	‘How	recent	are	the	signs,	Theradas?’
‘Days.’
‘Binadas	and	Trull,	go	with	Theradas	to	this	place	of	gathering.	I	will
remain	here	with	the	Unblooded.’
	
The	path	began	twenty	paces	in	from	the	crevasse,	a	trail	cleared	of	cobbles
and	detritus	that	wound	between	the	rough,	crystalline	columns	of	salt.	Melt
water	dripped	from	the	rotting	ceiling	in	a	steady	downpour.	Theradas	led
them	onward	another	thirty	paces,	where	the	path	ended	at	the	edge	of	a	vast
roughly	domed	expanse	devoid	of	pillars.
Near	the	centre	squatted	a	low,	misshapen	altar	stone.	Votive	offerings
surrounded	it—shells,	mostly,	among	which	the	odd	piece	of	carved	ivory	was
visible.	Yet	Trull	spared	it	but	a	momentary	glance,	for	his	gaze	had	been
drawn	to	the	far	wall.
A	sheer	plane	of	ice	a	hundred	paces	or	more	across,	rising	in	a	tilted
overhang—a	wall	in	which	countless	beasts	had	been	caught	in	mid-stampede,
frozen	in	full	flight.	Antlers	projected	from	the	ice,	heads	and	shoulders—still
solid	and	immobile—and	forelegs	lifted	or	stretched	forward.	Frost-rimed
eyes	dully	reflected	the	muted	blue-green	light.	Deeper	within,	the	blurred
shapes	of	hundreds	more.
Stunned	by	the	vista,	Trull	slowly	walked	closer,	round	the	altar,	half
expecting	at	any	moment	to	see	the	charging	beasts	burst	into	sudden	motion,
onrushing,	to	crush	them	all	beneath	countless	hoofs.
As	he	neared,	he	saw	heaped	bodies	near	the	base,	beasts	that	had	fallen	out
from	the	retreating	ice,	had	thawed,	eventually	collapsing	into	viscid	pools.
Tiny	black	flies	rose	in	clouds	from	the	decaying	flesh	and	hide,	swarmed
towards	Trull	as	if	determined	to	defend	their	feast.	He	halted,	waved	his	hands
until	they	dispersed	and	began	winging	back	to	the	rotting	carcasses.	The
beasts—caribou—had	been	running	on	snow,	a	packed	layer	knee-deep	above
the	seabed.	He	could	still	see	the	panic	in	their	eyes—and	there,	smeared


behind	an	arm’s	length	of	ice,	the	head	and	shoulders	of	an	enormous	wolf,
silver-haired	and	amber-eyed,	running	alongside	a	caribou,	shoulder	to
shoulder.	The	wolf’s	head	was	raised,	jaws	open,	close	to	the	victim’s	neck.
Canines	as	long	as	Trull’s	thumb	gleamed	beneath	peeled-back	lips.
Nature’s	drama,	life	unheeding	of	the	cataclysm	that	rushed	upon	it	from
behind—or	above.	The	brutal	hand	of	a	god	as	indifferent	as	the	beasts
themselves.
Binadas	came	to	his	side.	‘This	was	born	of	a	warren,’	he	said.
Trull	nodded.	Sorcery.	Nothing	else	made	sense.	‘A	god.’
‘Perhaps,	but	not	necessarily	so,	brother.	Some	forces	need	only	be
unleashed.	A	natural	momentum	then	burgeons.’
‘The	Hold	of	Ice,’	Trull	said.	‘Such	as	the	Letherii	describe	in	their	faith.’
‘The	Hand	of	the	Watcher,’	Binadas	said,	‘who	waited	until	the	war	was
done	before	striding	forward	to	unleash	his	power.’
Trull	had	thought	himself	more	knowledgeable	than	most	Edur	warriors
regarding	the	old	legends	of	their	people.	With	Binadas’s	words	echoing	in	his
head,	however,	he	felt	woefully	ignorant.	‘Where	have	they	gone?’	he	asked.
‘Those	powers	of	old?	Why	do	we	dwell	as	if…as	if	alone?’
His	brother	shrugged,	ever	reluctant	to	surrender	his	reserve,	his	mindful
silence.	‘We	remain	alone,’	he	finally	said,	‘to	preserve	the	sanctity	of	our
past.’
Trull	considered	this,	his	gaze	travelling	over	the	tableau	before	him,	those
dark,	murky	lives	that	could	not	outrun	their	doom,	then	said,	‘Our	cherished
truths	are	vulnerable.’
‘To	challenge,	yes.’
‘And	the	salt	gnaws	at	the	ice	beneath	us,	until	our	world	grows	perilously
thin	beneath	our	feet.’
‘Until	what	was	frozen…thaws.’
Trull	took	a	step	closer	to	the	one	of	the	charging	caribou.	‘What	thaws	in
turn	collapses	and	falls	to	the	ground.	And	rots,	Binadas.	The	past	is	covered	in
flies.’
His	brother	walked	towards	the	altar,	and	said,	‘The	ones	who	kneel	before
this	shrine	were	here	only	a	few	days	ago.’
‘They	did	not	come	the	way	we	did.’
‘No	doubt	there	are	other	paths	into	this	underworld.’
Trull	glanced	over	at	Theradas,	only	now	recalling	his	presence.	The
warrior	stood	at	the	threshold,	his	breath	pluming	in	the	air.
‘We	should	return	to	the	others,’	Binadas	said.	‘We	have	far	to	walk
tomorrow.’


	
The	night	passed,	damp,	cold,	the	melt	water	ceaselessly	whispering.	Each
Edur	stood	watch	in	turn,	wrapped	in	furs	and	weapons	at	the	ready.	But	there
was	nothing	to	see	in	the	dull,	faintly	luminescent	light.	Ice,	water	and	stone,
death,	hungry	motion	and	impermeable	bones,	a	blind	triumvirate	ruling	a
gelid	realm.
Just	before	dawn	the	company	rose,	ate	a	quick	meal,	then	Rhulad
clambered	up	the	ropes,	trusting	to	the	spikes	driven	into	the	ice	far	overhead,
about	two-thirds	of	the	way,	where	the	fissure	narrowed	in	one	place	sufficient
to	permit	a	cross-over	to	the	north	wall.	Beyond	that	point,	Rhulad	began
hammering	new	spikes	into	the	ice.	Splinters	and	shards	rained	down	on	the
waiters	below	for	a	time,	then	there	came	a	distant	shout	from	Rhulad.	Midik
went	to	the	ropes	and	began	climbing,	while	Trull	and	Fear	bound	the	food
packs	to	braided	leather	lines.	The	sleds	would	be	pulled	up	last.
‘Today,’	Binadas	said,	‘we	will	have	to	be	careful.	They	will	know	we	were
here,	that	we	found	their	shrine.’
Trull	glanced	over.	‘But	we	did	not	desecrate	it.’
‘Perhaps	our	presence	alone	was	sufficient	outrage,	brother.’
The	sun	was	above	the	horizon	by	the	time	the	Edur	warriors	were
assembled	on	the	other	side	of	the	crevasse,	the	sleds	loaded	and	ready.	The
sky	was	clear	and	there	was	no	wind,	yet	the	air	was	bitter	cold.	The	sun’s	fiery
ball	was	flanked	on	either	side	by	smaller	versions—sharper	and	brighter	than
last	time,	as	if	in	the	course	of	the	night	just	past	the	world	above	them	had
completed	its	transformation	from	the	one	they	knew	to	something	strange	and
forbidding,	inimical	to	life.
Theradas	in	the	lead	once	more,	they	set	out.
Ice	crunching	underfoot,	the	hiss	and	clatter	of	the	antler-rimmed	sled
runners,	and	a	hissing	sound	both	close	and	distant,	as	if	silence	had	itself
grown	audible,	a	sound	that	Trull	finally	understood	was	the	rush	of	his	own
blood,	woven	in	and	around	the	rhythm	of	his	breath,	the	drum	of	his	heart.
The	glare	burned	his	eyes.	His	lungs	stung	with	every	rush	of	air.
The	Edur	did	not	belong	in	this	landscape.	The	Hold	of	Ice.	Feared	by	the
Letherii.	Stealer	of	life—why	has	Hannan	Mosag	sent	us	here?
Theradas	halted	and	turned	about.	‘Wolf	tracks,’	he	said,	‘heavy	enough	to
break	through	the	crust	of	snow.’
They	reached	him,	stopped	the	sleds.	Trull	drew	the	harness	from	his
aching	shoulders.
The	tracks	cut	across	their	route,	heading	west.	They	were	huge.


‘These	belong	to	a	creature	such	as	the	one	we	saw	in	the	ice	last	night,’
Binadas	said.	‘What	do	they	hunt?	We’ve	seen	nothing.’
Fear	grunted,	then	said,	‘That	does	not	mean	much,	brother.	We	are	not
quiet	travellers,	with	these	sleds.’
‘Even	so,’	Binadas	replied,	‘herds	leave	sign.	We	should	have	come	upon
something,	by	now.’
They	resumed	the	journey.
Shortly	past	midday	Fear	called	a	halt	for	another	meal.	The	plain	of	ice
stretched	out	flat	and	featureless	on	all	sides.
‘There’s	nothing	to	worry	about	out	here,’	Rhulad	said,	sitting	on	one	of
the	sleds.	‘We	can	see	anyone	coming…or	anything,	for	that	matter.	Tell	us,
Fear,	how	much	farther	will	we	go?	Where	is	this	gift	that	Hannan	Mosag
wants	us	to	find?’
‘Another	day	to	the	north,’	Fear	replied.
‘If	it	is	indeed	a	gift,’	Trull	asked,	‘who	is	offering	it?’
‘I	do	not	know.’
No-one	spoke	for	a	time.
Trull	studied	the	hard-packed	snow	at	his	feet,	his	unease	deepening.
Something	ominous	hung	in	the	still,	frigid	air.	Their	solitude	suddenly
seemed	threatening,	absence	a	promise	of	unknown	danger.	Yet	he	was	among
blood	kin,	among	Hiroth	warriors.	Thus.
Still,	why	does	this	gift	stink	of	death?
	
Another	night.	The	tents	were	raised,	a	meal	cooked,	then	the	watches	were	set.
Trull’s	was	first.	He	walked	the	perimeter	of	their	camp,	spear	in	hand,	in	a
continuous	circuit	in	order	to	keep	awake.	The	food	in	his	stomach	made	him
drowsy,	and	the	sheer	emptiness	of	the	ice	wastes	seemed	to	project	a	force	that
dulled	concentration.	Overhead	the	sky	was	alive	with	strange,	shifting	hues
that	rose	and	fell	in	disconnected	patterns.	He	had	seen	such	things	before,	in
the	deepest	winter	in	Hiroth	lands,	but	never	as	sharp,	never	as	flush,	voicing	a
strange	hissing	song	as	of	broken	glass	crunching	underfoot.
When	it	was	time,	he	awoke	Theradas.	The	warrior	emerged	from	his	tent
and	rose,	adjusting	his	fur	cloak	until	it	wrapped	him	tightly,	then	drawing	his
sword.	He	glared	at	the	lively	night	sky,	but	said	nothing.
Trull	crawled	into	the	tent.	The	air	within	was	damp.	Ice	had	formed	on	the
tent	walls,	etching	maps	of	unknown	worlds	on	the	stretched,	waxy	fabric.
From	outside	came	the	steady	footsteps	of	Theradas	as	he	walked	his	rounds.
The	sound	followed	Trull	into	sleep.


Disjointed	dreams	followed.	He	saw	Mayen,	naked	in	the	forest,	settling
down	atop	a	man,	then	writhing	with	hungry	lust.	He	stumbled	closer,	ever
seeking	to	see	that	man’s	face,	to	discover	who	it	was—and	instead	he	found
himself	lost,	the	forest	unreadable,	unrecognizable,	a	sensation	he	had	never
experienced	before,	and	it	left	him	terrified.	Trembling	on	his	knees	in	the	wet
loam,	while	from	somewhere	beyond	he	could	hear	her	cries	of	pleasure,
bestial	and	rhythmic.
And	desire	rose	within	him.	Not	for	Mayen,	but	for	what	she	had	found,	in
her	wild	release,	closing	down	into	the	moment,	into	the	present,	future	and
past	without	meaning.	A	moment	unmindful	of	consequences.	His	hunger
became	a	pain	within	him,	lodged	like	a	broken	knife-tip	in	his	chest,	cutting
with	each	ragged	breath,	and	in	his	dream	he	cried	out,	as	if	answering
Mayen’s	own	voice,	and	he	heard	her	laugh	with	recognition.	A	laugh	inviting
him	to	join	her	world.
Mayen,	his	brother ’s	betrothed.	A	detached	part	of	his	mind	remained	cool
and	objective,	almost	sardonic	in	its	self-regard.	Understanding	the	nature	of
this	web,	this	sideways	envy	and	his	own	burgeoning	appetites.
Edur	males	were	slow	to	such	things.	It	was	the	reason	betrothal	and
marriage	followed	at	least	a	decade—often	two—of	full	adulthood.	Edur
women	arrived	at	their	womanly	hungers	far	earlier	in	their	lives.	It	was
whispered,	among	the	men,	that	they	often	made	use	of	the	Letherii	slaves,	but
Trull	doubted	the	truth	of	that.	It	seemed…inconceivable.
The	detached	self	was	amused	by	that,	as	if	derisive	of	Trull’s	own	naivety.
He	awoke	chilled,	weak	with	doubts	and	confusion,	and	lay	for	a	time	in
the	pale	half-light	that	preceded	dawn,	watching	his	breath	plume	in	the	close
air	of	the	tent.
Something	gnawed	at	him,	but	it	was	a	long	time	before	he	realized	what	it
was.	No	footsteps.
Trull	scrambled	from	the	tent,	stumbling	on	the	snow	and	ice,	and
straightened.
It	was	Rhulad’s	watch.	Near	the	dead	fire,	the	hunched,	bundled	form	of	his
brother,	seated	with	hooded	head	bowed.
Trull	strode	up	to	stand	behind	Rhulad.	Sudden	rage	took	him	with	the
realization	that	his	brother	slept.	He	lifted	his	spear	into	both	hands,	then	swung
the	butt	end	in	a	snapping	motion	that	connected	with	the	side	of	Rhulad’s	head.
A	muffled	crack	that	sent	his	brother	pitching	to	one	side.	Rhulad	loosed	a
piercing	shriek	as	he	sprawled	on	the	hard-packed	snow,	then	rolled	onto	his
back,	scrabbling	for	his	sword.
Trull’s	spear-point	was	at	his	brother ’s	neck.	‘You	slept	on	your	watch!’	he


hissed.
‘I	did	not!’
‘I	saw	you	sleeping!	I	walked	right	up	to	you!’
‘I	did	not!’	Rhulad	scrambled	to	his	feet,	one	hand	held	against	the	side	of
his	head.
The	others	were	emerging	now	from	their	tents.	Fear	stared	at	Trull	and
Rhulad	for	a	moment,	then	turned	to	the	packs.
Trull	was	trembling,	drawing	deep,	frigid	breaths.	For	a	moment,	it	struck
him	how	disproportionate	his	anger	was,	then	the	magnitude	of	the	risk
flooded	through	him	yet	again.
‘We	have	had	visitors,’	Fear	announced,	rising	and	scanning	the	frozen
ground.	‘They	left	no	tracks—’
‘How	do	you	know,	then?’	Rhulad	demanded.
‘Because	all	our	food	is	gone,	Rhulad.	It	seems	we	shall	grow	hungry	for	a
time.’
Theradas	swore	and	began	a	wider	circuit,	seeking	a	trail.
They	were	among	us.	The	Jheck.	They	could	have	killed	us	all	where	we
slept.	All	because	Rhulad	will	not	grasp	what	it	is	to	be	a	warrior.	There	was
nothing	more	to	be	said,	and	all	knew	it.
Except	for	Rhulad.	‘I	wasn’t	sleeping!	I	swear	it!	Fear,	you	have	to	believe
me!	I	simply	sat	down	for	a	moment	to	rest	my	legs.	I	saw	no-one!’
‘Behind	closed	lids,’	Theradas	growled,	‘that’s	not	surprising.’
‘You	think	I’m	lying,	but	I’m	not!	I’m	telling	the	truth,	I	swear	it!’
‘Never	mind,’	Fear	said.	‘It	is	done.	From	now	on,	we	will	double	the
watch.’
Rhulad	walked	towards	Midik.	‘You	believe	me,	don’t	you?’
Midik	Buhn	turned	away.	‘It	was	a	battle	just	waking	you	for	your	watch,
Rhulad,’	he	said,	his	tone	both	sad	and	weary.
Rhulad	stood	as	if	in	shock,	the	pain	of	what	he	saw	as	betrayal	clear	and
deep-struck	on	his	face.	His	lips	thinned,	jaw	muscles	bunching,	and	he	slowly
turned	away.
The	bastards	were	in	our	camp.	Hannan	Mosag’s	faith	in	us…
‘Let	us	strike	the	tents,’	Fear	said,	‘and	be	on	our	way.’
	
Trull	found	himself	scanning	the	horizon	in	an	endless	sweep,	his	sense	of
vulnerability	at	times	near	overwhelming.	They	were	being	watched,	tracked.
The	emptiness	of	the	landscape	was	a	lie,	somehow.	Possibly	there	was	sorcery
at	work,	although	this	did	not—could	not—excuse	Rhulad’s	failing.


Trust	was	gone,	and	Trull	well	knew	that	Rhulad’s	future	would	now	be
dominated	by	the	effort	to	regain	it.	A	lapse,	and	the	young	man’s	future	path
awaited	him,	deep-rutted	and	inevitable.	A	private	journey	beset	by	battle,	each
step	resisted	by	a	host	of	doubts,	real	and	imagined—the	distinction	made	no
difference	any	more.	Rhulad	would	see	in	his	brothers	and	friends	an	unbroken
succession	of	recriminations.	Every	gesture,	every	word,	every	glance.	And,
the	tragedy	was,	he	would	not	be	far	from	the	truth.
This	would	not	be	kept	from	the	village.	Sengar	shame	or	not,	the	tale
would	come	out,	sung	with	quiet	glee	among	rivals	and	the	spiteful—and,
given	the	opportunity,	there	were	plenty	of	those	to	be	found.	A	stain	that
claimed	them	all,	the	entire	Sengar	line.
They	moved	on.	Northward,	through	the	empty	day.
Late	in	the	afternoon,	Theradas	caught	sight	of	something	ahead,	and
moments	later	the	others	saw	it	as	well.	A	glimmer	of	reflected	sunlight,	tall
and	narrow	and	angular,	rising	from	the	flat	waste.	Difficult	to	judge	its	size,
but	Trull	sensed	that	the	projection	was	substantial,	and	unnatural.
‘That	is	the	place,’	Fear	said.	‘Hannan	Mosag’s	dreams	were	true.	We	shall
find	the	gift	there.’
‘Then	let	us	be	about	it,’	Theradas	said,	setting	off.
The	spar	grew	steadily	before	them.	Cracks	appeared	in	the	snow	and	ice
underfoot,	the	surface	sloping	upward	the	closer	they	approached.	The	shard
had	risen	up	from	the	deep,	cataclysmically,	a	sudden	upthrust	that	had	sent
wagon-sized	chunks	of	ice	into	the	air,	to	crash	and	tumble	down	the	sides.
Angular	boulders	of	mud,	now	frozen	and	rimed,	had	rolled	across	the	snow
and	ringed	the	area	in	a	rough	circle.
Prismatic	planes	caught	and	split	the	sunlight	within	the	spar.	The	ice	in	that
towering	shard	was	pure	and	clear.
At	the	base	of	the	fissured	up-welling—still	thirty	or	more	paces	from	the
spar—the	group	halted.	Trull	slipped	out	from	the	sled	harness,	Binadas
following	suit.
‘Theradas,	Midik,	stay	here	and	guard	the	sleds,’	Fear	said.	‘Trull,	draw
your	spear	from	its	sling.	Binadas,	Rhulad,	to	our	flanks.	Let’s	go.’
They	climbed	the	slope,	winding	their	way	between	masses	of	ice	and	mud.
A	foul	smell	filled	the	air,	of	old	rot	and	brine.
Binadas	hissed	warningly,	then	said,	‘The	spirit	Hannan	Mosag	called	up
from	the	ocean	deep	has	been	here,	beneath	the	ice.	This	is	its	handiwork,	and
the	sorcery	lingers.’
‘Emurlahn?’	Trull	asked.
‘No.’


They	came	to	the	base	of	the	spar.	Its	girth	surpassed	that	of	thousand-yearold	Blackwood	trees.	Countless	planes	rose	in	twisted	confusion,	a	mass	of
sharp,	sheered	surfaces	in	which	the	setting	sun’s	red	light	flowed	thick	as
blood.
Fear	pointed.	‘There.	The	gift.’
And	now	Trull	saw	it.	Faint	and	murky,	the	smudged	form	of	a	two-handed
sword,	bell-hilted,	its	blade	strangely	fractured	and	mottled—although	perhaps
that	effect	was	created	by	the	intervening	thickness	of	ice.
‘Binadas,	weave	Emurlahn	into	Trull’s	spear.	As	much	as	you	can—this
will	take	many,	many	shadows.’
Their	brother	frowned.	‘Take?	In	what	way?’
‘Shattering	the	ice	will	destroy	them.	Annihilation	is	demanded,	to	free	the
gift.	And	remember,	do	not	close	your	unguarded	hand	about	the	grip,	once	the
weapon	comes	free.	And	keep	the	wraiths	from	attempting	the	same,	for
attempt	it	they	will.	With	desperate	resolve.’
‘What	manner	of	sword	is	this?’	Trull	whispered.
Fear	did	not	answer.
‘If	we	are	to	shatter	this	spar,’	Binadas	said	after	a	moment,	‘all	of	you
should	stand	well	clear	of	myself	and	Trull.’
‘We	shall	not	be	harmed,’	Fear	said.	‘Hannan	Mosag’s	vision	was	clear	on
this.’
‘And	how	far	did	that	vision	go,	brother?’	Trull	asked.	‘Did	he	see	our
return	journey?’
Fear	shook	his	head.	‘To	the	shattering,	to	the	fall	of	the	last	fragment	of
ice.	No	further.’
‘I	wonder	why?’
‘This	is	not	a	time	for	doubt,	Trull,’	Fear	said.
‘Isn’t	it?	It	would	seem	that	this	is	precisely	the	time	for	doubt.’
His	brothers	faced	him.
Trull	looked	away.	‘This	feels	wrong.’
‘Have	you	lost	your	courage?’	Rhulad	snapped.	‘We	have	walked	all	this
way,	and	now	you	voice	your	doubts?’
‘What	sort	of	weapon	is	this	gift?	Who	fashioned	it?	We	know	nothing	of
what	we	are	about	to	release.’
‘Our	Warlock	King	has	commanded	us,’	Fear	said,	his	expression
darkening.	‘What	would	you	have	us	do,	Trull?’
‘I	don’t	know.’	He	turned	to	Binadas.	‘Is	there	no	means	of	prying	the
secrets	loose?’
‘I	will	know	more,	I	think,	when	we	have	freed	the	sword.’


Fear	grunted.	‘Then	begin,	Binadas.’
They	were	interrupted	by	a	shout	from	Theradas.	‘A	wolf!’	he	cried,
pointing	to	the	south.
The	beast	was	barely	visible,	white-furred	against	the	snow,	standing
motionless	a	thousand	or	more	paces	distant,	watching	them.
‘Waste	no	more	time,’	Fear	said	to	Binadas.
Shadows	spun	from	where	Binadas	was	standing,	blue	stains	crawling	out
across	the	snow,	coiling	up	the	shaft	of	the	Blackwood	spear	in	Trull’s	hands,
where	they	seemed	to	sink	into	the	glossy	wood.	The	weapon	felt	no	different
through	the	thick	fur	of	his	gauntlets,	but	Trull	thought	he	could	hear
something	new,	a	keening	sound	that	seemed	to	reverberate	in	his	bones.	It	felt
like	terror.
‘No	more,’	Binadas	gasped.
Trull	glanced	at	his	brother,	saw	the	pallor	of	his	face,	the	glistening	sweat
on	his	brow.	‘They	are	resisting	this?’
Binadas	nodded.	‘They	know	they	are	about	to	die.’
‘How	can	wraiths	die?’	Rhulad	demanded.	‘Are	they	not	already	ghosts?
The	spirits	of	our	ancestors?’
‘Not	ours,’	Binadas	replied,	but	did	not	elaborate,	gesturing	instead
towards	Trull.	‘Strike	at	the	ice,	brother.’
Trull	hesitated.	He	looked	round	over	his	left	shoulder,	searched	until	he
found	the	distant	wolf.	It	had	lowered	its	head,	legs	gathering	under	it.
‘Daughter	Dusk,’	he	whispered,	‘it’s	about	to	charge.’	Below,	Theradas	and
Midik	were	readying	their	spears.
‘Now,	Trull!’
Fear ’s	bellow	startled	him,	so	that	he	almost	dropped	the	spear.	Jaw
clenching,	he	faced	the	spar	once	more,	then	slashed	the	iron	spear-head
against	the	ice.
Even	as	the	weapon	whipped	forward,	Trull’s	peripheral	vision	caught
motion	on	all	sides,	as	figures	seemed	to	rise	from	the	very	snow	itself.
Then	the	spar	exploded	into	blinding,	white	mist.
Sudden	shouts.
Trull	felt	a	savage	wrench	on	the	spear	in	his	hands,	the	Blackwood
ringing	like	iron	as	countless	wraiths	were	torn	free.	Their	death-cries	filled
his	skull.	Stumbling,	he	tightened	his	grip,	striving	to	see	through	the	cloud.
Weapons	clashed.
An	antler	clawed	for	his	face,	each	tine	carved	into	a	barbed	point	tipped
with	quartzite.	Trull	reeled	back,	flinging	the	spear	shaft	into	the	antler ’s	path.
Trapping	it.	He	twisted	the	spear	round,	reversing	grip,	and	succeeded	in


forcing	the	attacker	into	releasing	the	antler.	It	spun	away	to	one	side.	An
upward	slash	with	the	spear,	and	Trull	felt	the	iron	blade	tear	through	hide	and
flesh,	clattering	along	ribs	before	momentarily	springing	free,	to	connect	hard
against	the	underside	of	a	jaw.
The	scene	around	him	was	becoming	more	visible.	They	were	beset	by
savages,	small	and	bestial,	wearing	white-skinned	hides,	faces	hidden	behind
flat	white	masks.	Wielding	claw-like	antler	weapons	and	short	stabbing	spears
with	glittering	stone	points,	the	Jheck	swarmed	on	all	sides.
Fear	was	holding	three	at	bay,	and	behind	him	stood	the	sword,	upright	and
freed	from	the	ice,	its	point	jammed	into	the	frozen	ground.	It	seemed	the
Jheck	were	desperate	to	claim	it.
Trull	struck	at	the	closest	of	Fear ’s	opponents,	iron	tip	punching	deep	into
the	savage’s	neck.	Blood	sprayed,	jetted	down	the	spear-shaft.	He	tore	the
weapon	loose,	in	time	to	see	the	last	of	the	Jheck	in	front	of	Fear	wheel	away,
mortally	wounded	by	a	sword-thrust.
Spinning	round,	Trull	saw	Binadas	go	down	beneath	a	mass	of	Jheck.
Shadows	then	enveloped	the	writhing	figures.
Rhulad	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Down	below,	Theradas	and	Midik	had	met	the	wolf’s	charge,	and	the	huge
beast	was	on	its	side,	skewered	by	spears,	legs	kicking	even	as	Theradas
stepped	in	with	his	broad-bladed	cutlass.	Two	more	wolves	were	closing	in,
alongside	them	a	half-dozen	Jheck.
Another	score	of	the	savages	were	ascending	the	slope.
Trull	readied	his	weapon.
Nearby,	Binadas	was	climbing	free	of	a	mound	of	corpses.	He	was
sheathed	in	blood,	favouring	his	right	side.
‘Behind	us,	Binadas,’	Fear	commanded.	‘Trull,	get	on	my	left.	Quickly.’
‘Where	is	Rhulad?’
Fear	shook	his	head.
As	Trull	moved	to	his	brother ’s	left	he	scanned	the	bodies	sprawled	on	the
snow.	But	they	were	all	Jheck.	Even	so,	the	belief	struck	him	hard	as	a	blow	to
his	chest.	They	were	going	to	die	here.	They	were	going	to	fail.
The	savages	on	the	slope	charged.
Antlers	flew	from	their	hands,	dagger-sharp	tines	flashing	as	the	deadly
weapons	spun	end	over	end.
Trull	shouted,	warding	with	his	spear	as	he	ducked	beneath	the	whirling
onslaught.	One	flew	past	his	guard,	a	tine	clipping	his	left	knee.	He	gasped	at
the	pain	and	felt	the	sudden	spurt	of	blood	beneath	his	leggings,	but	his	leg
held	his	weight	and	he	remained	upright.


Behind	the	flung	weapons,	the	Jheck	arrived	in	a	rush.
A	dozen	heartbeats	on	the	defensive,	then	the	Edur	warriors	found
openings	for	counter-attacks	almost	simultaneously.	Sword	and	spear	bit	flesh,
and	two	of	the	Jheck	were	down.
A	shriek	from	behind	Trull	and	Fear,	and	the	savages	recoiled,	then	in
unison	darted	to	their	right—
—as	Rhulad	leapt	into	their	midst,	the	long,	bell-hilted	sword	in	his	hands.
A	wild	slash,	and	a	Jheck	head	pitched	away	from	shoulders	to	bounce	and
roll	down	the	slope.
Another	chop,	a	gush	of	blood.
Both	Fear	and	Trull	rushed	to	close	with	the	combatants—
—even	as	stabbing	spears	found	their	way	into	Rhulad	from	all	sides.	He
shrieked,	blood-slick	blade	wavering	over	his	head.	Then	he	sagged.	A	shove
toppled	him	onto	his	back,	the	sword	still	in	his	hands.
The	surrounding	Jheck	darted	away,	then	ran	down	the	slope,	weapons
dropping	or	flung	aside	in	sudden	panic.
Trull	arrived,	skidding	on	the	blood-slick	ice,	the	wound	in	his	leg
forgotten	as	he	knelt	at	Rhulad’s	side.
‘They’re	withdrawing,’	Fear	said	between	harshly	drawn	breaths,	moving
to	stand	guard	before	Trull	and	Rhulad.
Numbed,	Trull	tore	off	a	gauntlet	and	set	his	hand	against	Rhulad’s	neck,
seeking	a	pulse.
Binadas	staggered	over,	settling	down	opposite	Trull.	‘How	does	he	fare,
brother?’
Trull	looked	up,	stared	until	Binadas	glanced	up	and	locked	gazes.
‘Rhulad	is	dead,’	Trull	said,	dropping	his	eyes	and	seeing	now,	for	the	first
time,	the	massive	impaling	wounds	punched	into	his	brother ’s	torso,	the	smear
of	already	freezing	blood	on	the	furs,	smelling	bitter	urine	and	pungent	faeces.
‘Theradas	and	Midik	are	coming,’	Fear	said.	‘The	Jheck	have	fled.’	He	then
set	off,	round	towards	the	back	of	the	rise.
But	that	makes	no	sense.	They	had	us.	There	were	too	many	of	them.	None	of
this	makes	sense.	Rhulad.	He’s	dead.	Our	brother	is	dead.
A	short	time	later,	Fear	returned,	crouched	down	beside	him,	and	tenderly
reached	out…to	take	the	sword.	Trull	watched	Fear ’s	hands	close	about
Rhulad’s	where	they	still	clutched	the	leather-wrapped	grip.	Watched,	as	Fear
sought	to	pry	those	dead	fingers	loose.
And	could	not.
Trull	studied	that	fell	weapon.	The	blade	was	indeed	mottled,	seemingly
forged	of	polished	iron	and	black	shards	of	some	harder,	glassier	material,	the


surface	of	both	cracked	and	uneven.	Splashes	of	blood	were	freezing	black
here	and	there,	like	a	fast-spreading	rot.
Fear	sought	to	wrench	the	sword	free.
But	Rhulad	would	not	release	it.
‘Hannan	Mosag	warned	us,’	Binadas	said,	‘did	he	not?	Do	not	allow	your
flesh	to	touch	the	gift.’
‘But	he’s	dead,’	Trull	whispered.
Dusk	was	swiftly	closing	round	them,	the	chill	in	the	air	deepening.
Theradas	and	Midik	arrived.	Both	were	wounded,	but	neither	seriously	so.
They	were	silent	as	they	stared	down	on	Rhulad.
Fear	leaned	back,	having	reached	some	sort	of	decision.	He	was	silent	a
moment	longer,	slowly	pulling	on	his	gauntlets.	Then	he	straightened.	‘Carry
him—sword	and	all—down	to	the	sleds.	We	will	wrap	body	and	blade	together.
Releasing	the	gift	from	our	brother ’s	hands	is	for	Hannan	Mosag	to	manage,
now.’
No-one	else	spoke.
Fear	studied	each	of	them	in	turn,	then	said,	‘We	travel	through	this	night.	I
want	us	out	of	these	wastes	as	soon	as	possible.’	He	looked	down	on	Rhulad
once	more.	‘Our	brother	is	blooded.	He	died	a	warrior	of	the	Hiroth.	His	shall
be	a	hero’s	funeral,	one	that	all	the	Hiroth	shall	remember.’
	
In	the	wake	of	numbness	came…other	things.	Questions.	But	what	was	the	point
of	those?	Any	answers	that	could	be	found	were	no	better	than	suppositions,
born	of	uncertainties	vulnerable	to	countless	poisons—that	host	of	doubts	even
now	besieging	Trull’s	thoughts.	Where	had	Rhulad	disappeared	to?	What	had
he	sought	to	achieve	by	charging	into	that	knot	of	Jheck	savages?	And	he	had
well	understood	the	prohibition	against	taking	up	the	gift,	yet	he	had	done	so
none	the	less.
So	much	of	what	happened	seemed…senseless.
Even	in	his	final	act	of	extremity,	Rhulad	answers	not	the	loss	of	trust	under
which	he	laboured.	No	clean	gesture,	this	messy	end.	Fear	called	him	a	hero,
but	Trull	suspected	the	motivation	behind	that	claim.	A	son	of	Tomad	Sengar
had	failed	in	his	duties	on	night	watch.	And	now	was	dead,	the	sacrifice	itself
marred	with	incomprehensible	intentions.
The	questions	led	Trull	nowhere,	and	faded	to	a	new	wave,	one	that
sickened	him,	clenching	at	his	gut	with	spasms	of	anguish.	There	had	been
bravery	in	that	last	act.	If	nothing	else.	Surprising	bravery,	when	Trull	had,	of
his	brother	Rhulad,	begun	to	suspect…otherwise.	I	doubted	him.	In	every	way,	I


doubted	him.
Into	his	heart	whispered…guilt,	a	ghost	and	a	ghost’s	voice,	growing
monstrous	with	taloned	hands	tightening,	ever	tightening,	until	his	soul	began
to	scream.	A	piercing	cry	only	Trull	could	hear,	yet	a	sound	that	threatened	to
drive	him	mad.
And	through	it	all,	a	more	pervasive	sense,	a	hollowness	deep	within	him.
The	loss	of	a	brother.	The	face	that	would	never	again	smile,	the	voice	that
Trull	would	never	again	hear.	There	seemed	no	end	to	the	layers	of	loss
settling	dire	and	heavy	upon	him.
He	helped	Fear	wrap	Rhulad	and	the	sword	in	a	waxed	canvas	groundsheet,
hearing	Midik’s	weeping	as	if	from	a	great	distance,	listening	to	Binadas	talk
as	he	bound	wounds	and	drew	upon	Emurlahn	to	quicken	healing.	As	the	stiff
folds	closed	over	Rhulad’s	face,	Trull’s	breath	caught	in	a	ragged	gasp,	and	he
flinched	back	as	Fear	tightened	the	covering	with	leather	straps.
‘It	is	done,’	Fear	murmured.	‘Death	cannot	be	struggled	against,	brother.	It
ever	arrives,	defiant	of	every	hiding	place,	of	every	frantic	attempt	to	escape.
Death	is	every	mortal’s	shadow,	his	true	shadow,	and	time	is	its	servant,
spinning	that	shadow	slowly	round,	until	what	stretched	behind	one	now
stretches	before	him.’
‘You	called	him	a	hero.’
‘I	did,	and	it	was	not	an	empty	claim.	He	went	to	the	other	side	of	the	rise,
which	is	why	we	did	not	see	him,	and	discovered	Jheck	seeking	the	sword	by
subterfuge.’
Trull	looked	up.
‘I	needed	answers	of	my	own,	brother.	He	killed	two	on	that	side	of	the	hill,
yet	lost	his	weapon	doing	so.	Others	were	coming,	I	imagine,	and	so	Rhulad
must	have	concluded	he	had	no	choice.	The	Jheck	wanted	the	sword.	They
would	have	to	kill	him	to	get	it.	Trull,	it	is	done.	He	died,	blooded	and	brave.	I
myself	came	upon	the	corpses	beyond	the	rise,	before	I	came	back	to	you	and
Binadas.’
All	my	doubts…the	poisons	of	suspicion,	in	all	their	foul	flavours—
Daughter	Dusk	take	me—but	I	have	drunk	deep.
‘Trull,	we	need	you	and	your	skills	with	that	spear	in	our	wake,’	Fear	said.
‘Both	Binadas	and	Rhulad	here	will	have	to	be	pulled	on	the	sleds,	and	for	this
Theradas	and	I	will	be	needed.	Midik	takes	point.’
Trull	blinked	confusedly.	‘Binadas	cannot	walk?’
‘His	hip	is	broken,	and	he	has	not	the	strength	left	to	heal	it.’
Trull	straightened.	‘Do	you	think	they	will	pursue?’
‘Yes,’	Fear	said.


	
Their	flight	began.	Darkness	swept	down	upon	them,	and	a	wind	began
blowing,	lifting	high	the	fine-grained	snow	until	the	sky	itself	was	grey-white
and	lowering.	The	temperature	dropped	still	further,	as	if	with	vicious	intent,
until	even	the	furs	they	wore	began	to	fail	them.
Favouring	his	wounded	leg,	Trull	jogged	twenty	paces	behind	the	sleds—
they	were	barely	visible	through	the	wind-whipped	snow.	The	blood-frosted
spear	was	in	his	grip,	a	detail	he	confirmed	every	few	moments	since	his
fingers	had	gone	numb,	but	this	did	little	to	encourage	him.	The	enemy	might
well	be	all	around	him,	just	beyond	the	range	of	his	vision,	padding	through
the	darkness,	only	moments	from	rushing	in.
He	would	have	no	time	to	react,	and	whatever	shout	of	warning	he
managed	would	be	torn	away	by	the	wind,	and	his	companions	would	hear
nothing.	Nor	would	they	return	for	his	body.	The	gift	must	be	delivered.
Trull	ran	on,	constantly	scanning	to	either	side,	occasionally	twisting
round	to	look	behind,	seeing	nothing	but	faint	white.	The	rhythmic	stab	of	pain
in	his	knee	cut	through	a	growing,	deadly	lassitude,	the	seep	of	exhaustion
slowing	his	shivering	beneath	the	furs,	dragging	at	his	limbs.
Dawn’s	arrival	was	announced	by	a	dull,	reluctant	surrender	of	the
pervasive	gloom—there	was	no	break	in	the	blizzard’s	onslaught,	no	rise	in
temperature.	Trull	had	given	up	his	vigil.	He	simply	ran	on,	one	foot	in	front
of	the	other,	his	ice-clad	moccasins	the	entire	extent	of	his	vision.	His	hands
had	grown	strangely	warm	beneath	the	gauntlets,	a	remote	warmth,	pooled
somewhere	beyond	his	wrists.	Something	about	that	vaguely	disturbed	him.
Hunger	had	faded,	as	had	the	pain	in	his	knee.
A	tingling	unease,	and	Trull	looked	up.
The	sleds	were	nowhere	in	sight.	He	gasped	bitter	air,	slowed	his	steps,
blinking	in	an	effort	to	see	through	the	ice	crystals	on	his	lashes.	The	muted
daylight	was	fading.	He	had	run	through	the	day,	mindless	as	a	millstone,	and
another	night	was	fast	approaching.	And	he	was	lost.
Trull	dropped	the	spear.	He	cried	out	in	pain	as	he	wheeled	his	arms,
seeking	to	pump	more	blood	into	his	cold,	stiff	muscles.	He	drew	his	fingers
into	fists	within	the	gauntlets,	and	was	horrified	by	nearly	failing	at	so	simple	a
task.	The	warmth	grew	warmer,	then	hot,	then	searing	as	if	his	fingers	were	on
fire.	He	fought	through	the	agony,	pounding	his	fists	on	his	thighs,	flexing
against	the	waves	of	burning	pain.
He	was	surrounded	in	white,	as	if	the	physical	world	had	been	scrubbed
away,	eroded	into	oblivion	by	the	snow	and	wind.	Terror	whispered	into	his


mind,	for	he	sensed	that	he	was	not	alone.
Trull	retrieved	the	spear.	He	studied	the	blowing	snow	on	all	sides.	One
direction	seemed	slightly	darker	than	any	other—the	east—and	he	determined
that	he	had	been	running	due	west.	Following	the	unseen	sun.	And	now,	he
needed	to	turn	southerly.
Until	his	pursuers	tired	of	their	game.
He	set	out.
A	hundred	paces,	and	he	glanced	behind	him,	to	see	two	wolves	emerge
from	the	blowing	snow.	Trull	halted	and	spun	round.	The	beasts	vanished	once
more.
Heart	thundering,	Trull	drew	out	his	longsword	and	jammed	it	point-first
into	the	hard-packed	snow.	Then	he	strode	six	paces	back	along	his	trail	and
readied	his	spear.
They	came	again,	this	time	at	a	charge.
He	had	time	to	plant	his	spear	and	drop	to	one	knee	before	the	first	beast
was	upon	him.	The	spear	shaft	bowed	as	the	iron	point	slammed	dead-centre
into	the	wolf’s	sternum.	Bone	and	Blackwood	shattered	simultaneously,	then	it
was	as	if	a	boulder	hammered	into	Trull,	throwing	him	back	in	the	air.	He
landed	on	his	left	shoulder,	to	skid	and	roll	in	a	spray	of	snow.	As	he	tumbled,
he	caught	sight	of	his	left	forearm,	blood	whipping	out	from	the	black
splinters	jutting	from	it.	Then	he	came	to	a	stop,	up	against	the	longsword.
Trull	tugged	it	loose	and	half	rose	as	he	turned	about.
A	mass	of	white	fur,	black-gummed	jaws	stretched	wide.
Bellowing,	Trull	slashed	horizontally	with	the	sword,	falling	in	the	wake
of	the	desperate	swing.
Iron	edge	sheared	through	bones,	one	set,	then	another.
The	wolf	fell	onto	him,	its	forelimbs	severed	halfway	down	and	spraying
blood.
Teeth	closed	down	on	the	blade	of	his	sword	in	a	snapping	frenzy.
Trull	kicked	himself	clear,	tearing	his	sword	free	of	the	wolf’s	jaws.
Tumbling	blood,	a	mass	of	tongue	slapping	onto	the	crusty	ice	in	front	of	his
face,	the	muscle	twitching	like	a	thing	still	alive.	He	scrambled	into	a	crouch,
then	lunged	towards	the	thrashing	beast.	Thrusting	the	sword-point	into	its
neck.
The	wolf	coughed,	kicking	as	if	seeking	to	escape,	then	slumped
motionless	on	the	red	snow.
Trull	reeled	back.	He	saw	the	first	beast,	lying	where	the	spear	had	stolen
its	life	before	breaking.	Beyond	it	stood	three	Jheck	hunters—who	melted	back
into	the	whiteness.


Blood	was	streaming	down	Trull’s	left	forearm,	gathering	in	his	gauntlet.
He	lifted	the	arm	and	tucked	it	close	against	his	stomach.	Pulling	the	splinters
would	have	to	wait.	Gasping,	he	set	his	sword	down	and	worked	his	left
forearm	through	his	spear	harness.	Then,	retrieving	the	sword,	he	set	out	once
more.
Oblivion	on	all	sides.	In	which	nightmares	could	flower,	sudden	and
unimpeded,	rushing	upon	him,	as	fast	as	his	terror-filled	mind	could	conjure
them	into	being,	one	after	another,	the	succession	endless,	until	death	took	him
—until	the	whiteness	slipped	behind	his	eyes.
He	stumbled	on,	wondering	if	the	fight	had	actually	occurred,	unwilling	to
look	down	to	confirm	the	wounds	on	his	arm—fearing	that	he	would	see
nothing.	He	could	not	have	killed	two	wolves.	He	could	not	have	simply	chosen
to	face	in	one	direction	and	not	another,	to	find	himself	meeting	that	charge
head-on.	He	could	not	have	thrust	his	sword	into	the	ground	the	precise
number	of	paces	behind	him,	as	if	knowing	how	far	he	would	be	thrown	by	the
impact.	No,	he	had	conjured	the	entire	battle	from	his	own	imagination.	No
other	explanation	made	sense.
And	so	he	looked	down.
A	mass	of	splinters	rising	like	crooked	spines	from	his	forearm.	A
blackening	sword	in	his	right	hand,	tufts	of	white	fur	caught	in	the	clotted
blood	near	the	hilt.	His	spear	was	gone.
I	am	fevered.	The	will	of	my	thoughts	has	seeped	out	from	my	eyes,	twisting
the	truth	of	all	that	I	see.	Even	the	ache	in	my	shoulder	is	but	an	illusion.
A	rush	of	footsteps	behind	him.
With	a	roar,	Trull	whipped	around,	sword	hissing.
Blade	chopping	into	the	side	of	a	savage’s	head,	just	above	the	ear.	Bone
buckling,	blood	spurting	from	eye	and	ear	on	that	side.	Figure	toppling.
Another,	darting	in	low	from	his	right.	Trull	leapt	back,	stop-thrusting.	He
watched,	the	motion	seeming	appallingly	slow,	as	the	Jheck	turned	his	stabbing
spear	to	parry.	Watched	as	the	sword	dipped	under	the	block,	then	extended
once	more,	to	slide	point-first	beneath	the	man’s	left	collarbone.
A	third	attacker	on	his	left,	slashing	a	spear-point	at	Trull’s	eyes.	He	leaned
back,	then	spun	full	circle,	pivoting	on	his	right	foot,	and	brought	his	sword’s
edge	smoothly	across	the	savage’s	throat.	A	red	flood	down	the	Jheck’s	chest.
Trull	completed	his	spin	and	resumed	his	jog,	the	snow	stinging	his	eyes.
Nothing	but	nightmares.
He	was	lying	motionless,	the	snow	slowly	covering	him,	whilst	his	mind
ran	on	and	on,	fleeing	this	lie,	this	empty	world	that	was	not	empty,	this	thick
whiteness	that	exploded	into	motion	and	colour	again	and	again.


Attackers,	appearing	out	of	the	darkness	and	blowing	snow.	Moments	of
frenzied	fighting,	sparks	and	the	hiss	of	iron	and	the	bite	of	wood	and	stone.	A
succession	of	ambushes	that	seemed	without	end,	convincing	Trull	that	he	was
indeed	within	a	nightmare,	ever	folding	in	on	itself.	Each	time,	the	Jheck
appeared	in	threes,	never	more,	and	the	Hiroth	warrior	began	to	believe	that
they	were	the	same	three,	dying	only	to	rise	once	again—and	so	it	would
continue,	until	they	finally	succeeded,	until	they	killed	him.
Yet	he	fought	on,	leaving	blood	and	bodies	in	his	wake.
Running,	snow	crunching	underfoot.
And	then	the	wind	fell	off,	sudden	like	a	spent	breath.
Patches	of	dark	ground	ahead.	An	unseen	barrier	burst	across,	the	lurid
glare	of	a	setting	sun	to	his	right,	the	languid	flow	of	cool,	damp	air,	the	smell
of	mud.
And	shouts.	Figures	off	to	his	left,	half	a	thousand	paces	distant.	Brothers
of	the	hearth,	the	dead	welcoming	his	arrival.
Gladness	welling	in	his	heart,	Trull	staggered	towards	them.	He	was	not	to
be	a	ghost	wandering	for	ever	alone,	then.	There	would	be	kin	at	his	side.	Fear,
and	Binadas.	And	Rhulad.
Midik	Buhn,	and	Theradas,	rushing	towards	him.
Brothers,	all	of	them.	My	brothers—
The	sun’s	light	wavered,	rippled	like	water,	then	darkness	rose	up	in	a
devouring	flood.
	
The	sleds	were	off	to	one	side,	their	runners	buried	in	mud.	On	one	was	a
wrapped	figure,	around	which	jagged	slabs	of	ice	had	been	packed	and
strapped	in	place.	Binadas	was	propped	up	on	the	other	sled,	his	eyes	closed,
his	face	deeply	lined	with	pain.
Trull	slowly	sat	up,	feeling	light-headed	and	strangely	awkward.	Furs
tumbled	from	him	as	he	clambered	to	his	feet	and	stood,	wavering,	and	dazedly
looked	around.	To	the	west	shimmered	a	lake,	flat	grey	beneath	the	overcast
sky.	The	faint	wind	was	warm	and	humid.
A	fire	had	been	lit,	and	over	it	was	spit	a	scrawny	hare,	tended	to	by	Midik
Buhn.	Off	to	one	side	stood	Fear	and	Theradas,	facing	the	distant	ice-fields	to
the	east	as	they	spoke	in	quiet	tones.
The	smell	of	the	roasting	meat	drew	Trull	to	the	fire.	Midik	Buhn	glanced
up	at	him,	then	looked	quickly	away,	as	if	shamed	by	something.
Trull’s	fingers	were	fiercely	itching,	and	he	lifted	them	into	view.	Red,	the
skin	peeling,	but	at	least	he	had	not	lost	them	to	the	cold.	Indeed,	he	seemed


intact,	although	his	leather	armour	was	split	and	cut	all	across	his	chest	and
shoulders,	and	he	could	see	that	the	quilted	under-padding	bore	slices,	here	and
there	stained	dark	red,	and	beneath	them	was	the	sting	of	shallow	wounds	on
his	body.
Not	a	nightmare,	then,	those	countless	attacks.	He	checked	for	his	sword
and	found	he	was	not	wearing	the	belted	scabbard.	A	moment	later	he	spied	his
weapon,	leaning	against	a	pack.	It	was	barely	recognizable.	The	blade	was
twisted,	the	edge	so	battered	as	to	make	the	sword	little	more	than	a	club.
Footsteps,	and	Trull	turned.
Fear	laid	a	hand	upon	his	shoulder.	‘Trull	Sengar,	we	did	not	expect	to	see
you	again.	Leading	the	Jheck	away	from	our	path	was	a	bold	tactic,	and	it	saved
our	lives.’	He	nodded	towards	the	sword.	‘Your	weapon	tells	the	tale.	Do	you
know	how	many	you	defeated?’
Trull	shook	his	head.	‘No.	Fear,	I	did	not	intentionally	lead	them	away
from	you.	I	became	lost	in	the	storm.’
His	brother	smiled	and	said	nothing.
Trull	glanced	over	at	Theradas.	‘I	became	lost,	Theradas	Buhn.’
‘It	matters	not,’	Theradas	replied	in	a	growl.
‘I	believed	I	was	dead.’	Trull	looked	away,	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘I	saw	you,
and	thought	I	was	joining	you	in	death.	I’d	expected…’	He	shook	his	head.
‘Rhulad…’
‘He	was	a	true	warrior,	Trull,’	Fear	said.	‘It	is	done,	and	now	we	must
move	on.	There	are	Arapay	on	the	way—Binadas	managed	to	awaken	their
shamans	to	our	plight.	They	will	hasten	our	journey	home.’
Trull	nodded	distractedly.	He	stared	at	the	distant	field	of	ice.
Remembering	the	feel	and	sound	beneath	his	moccasins,	the	blast	of	the	wind,
the	enervating	cold.	The	horrifying	Jheck,	silent	hunters	who	claimed	a	frozen
world	as	their	own.	They	had	wanted	the	sword.	Why?
How	many	Jheck	could	those	ice-fields	sustain?	How	many	had	they
killed?	How	many	wives	and	children	were	left	to	grieve?	To	starve?
There	should	have	been	five	hundred	of	us.	Then	they	would	have	left	us
alone.
‘Over	there!’
At	Midik’s	shout	Trull	swung	round,	then	faced	in	the	direction	Midik	was
pointing.	Northward,	where	a	dozen	huge	beasts	strode,	coming	down	from	the
ice,	four-legged	and	brown-furred,	each	bearing	long,	curved	tusks	to	either
side	of	a	thick,	sinuous	snout.
Ponderous,	majestic,	the	enormous	creatures	walked	towards	the	lake.
This	is	not	our	world.


A	sword	waited	in	the	unyielding	grip	of	a	corpse,	sheathed	in	waxed	cloth,
bound	with	ice.	A	weapon	familiar	with	cold’s	implacable	embrace.	It	did	not
belong	in	Hannan	Mosag’s	hands.
Unless	the	Warlock	King	had	changed.
And	perhaps	he	has.
‘Come	and	eat,	Trull	Sengar,’	his	brother	called	behind	him.
Sisters	have	mercy	on	us,	in	the	way	we	simply	go	on,	and	on.	Would	that	we
had	all	died,	back	there	on	the	ice.	Would	that	we	had	failed.


Chapter	Nine

You	may	be	written	this	way
Spun	in	strands	sewn	in	thread
Blood	woven	to	the	child	you	once	were
Huddled	in	the	fold	of	night
And	the	demons	beyond	the	corner
Of	your	eye	stream	down
A	flurry	of	arachnid	limbs
Twisting	and	tumbling	you	tight
To	feed	upon	later.
You	may	be	written	this	way
Stung	senseless	at	the	side	of	the	road
Waylaid	on	the	dark	trail
And	the	recollections	beyond	the	corner
Of	your	eye	suckle	in	the	mud
Dreadful	fluids	seeping
From	improbable	pasts
And	all	that	might	have	been.
You	would	be	written	this	way
Could	you	crack	the	carcass
And	unfurl	once	more
The	child	you	once	were
WAYLAID
WRATHEN 	URUT
Rolled	onto	the	beach,	naked	and	grey,	the	young	man	lay	motionless	in	the
sand.	His	long	brown	hair	was	tangled,	snarled	with	twigs	and	strands	of
seaweed.	Scaled	birds	pranced	around	the	body,	serrated	beaks	gaping	in	the
morning	heat.
They	scattered	at	Withal’s	arrival,	flapping	into	the	air.	Then,	as	three	black
Nachts	bounded	down	from	the	verge,	the	birds	screamed	and	whirled	out	over


the	waves.
Withal	crouched	down	at	the	figure’s	side,	studied	it	for	a	moment,	then
reached	out	and	rolled	the	body	onto	its	back.
‘Wake	up,	lad.’
Eyes	snapped	open,	filled	with	sudden	terror	and	pain.	Mouth	gaped,	neck
stretched,	and	piercing	screams	rose	into	the	air.	The	young	man	convulsed,
legs	scissoring	the	sand,	and	clawed	at	his	scalp.
Withal	leaned	back	on	his	haunches	and	waited.
The	screams	grew	hoarse,	were	replaced	by	weeping.	The	convulsions
diminished	to	waves	of	shuddering	as	the	young	man	slowly	curled	up	in	the
sand.
‘It	gets	easier,	one	hopes,’	Withal	murmured.
Head	twisted	round,	large,	wet	eyes	fixing	on	Withal’s	own.	‘What…
where…’
‘The	two	questions	I	am	least	able	to	answer,	lad.	Let’s	try	the	easier	ones.
I’m	named	Withal,	once	of	the	Third	Meckros	city.	You	are	here—wherever
here	is—because	my	master	wills	it.’	He	rose	with	a	grunt.	‘Can	you	stand?	He
awaits	you	inland—not	far.’
The	eyes	shifted	away,	focused	on	the	three	Nachts	at	the	edge	of	the	verge.
‘What	are	those	things?	What’s	that	one	doing?’
‘Bhoka’ral.	Nachts.	Name	them	as	you	will.	As	I	have.	The	one	making	the
nest	is	Pule,	a	young	male.	This	particular	nest	has	taken	almost	a	week—see
how	he	obsesses	over	it,	adjusting	twigs	just	so,	weaving	the	seaweed,	going
round	and	round	with	a	critical	eye.	The	older	male,	over	there	and	watching
Pule,	is	Rind.	He’s	moments	from	hilarity,	as	you’ll	see.	The	female	preening
on	the	rock	is	Mape.	You’ve	arrived	at	a	propitious	time,	lad.	Watch.’
The	nest-builder,	Pule,	had	begun	backing	away	from	the	intricate
construct	on	the	verge,	black	tail	flicking	from	side	to	side,	head	bobbing.
Fifteen	paces	from	the	nest,	it	suddenly	sat,	arms	folded,	and	seemed	to	study
the	colourless	sky.
The	female,	Mape,	ceased	preening,	paused	a	moment,	then	ambled
casually	towards	the	nest.
Pule	tensed,	even	as	it	visibly	struggled	to	keep	its	gaze	on	the	sky.
Reaching	the	nest,	Mape	hesitated,	then	attacked.	Driftwood,	grasses	and
twigs	flew	in	all	directions.	Within	moments,	the	nest	had	been	destroyed	in	a
wild	frenzy,	and	Mape	was	squatting	in	the	wreckage,	urinating.
Nearby,	Rind	was	rolling	about	in	helpless	mirth.
Pule	slumped	in	obvious	dejection.
‘This	has	happened	more	times	than	I’d	care	to	count,’	Withal	said,


sighing.
‘How	is	it	you	speak	my	language?’
‘I’d	a	smattering,	from	traders.	My	master	has,	it	seems,	improved	upon	it.
A	gift,	you	might	say,	one	of	a	number	of	gifts,	none	of	which	I	asked	for.	I
suspect,’	he	continued,	‘you	will	come	to	similar	sentiments,	lad.	We	should	get
going.’
Withal	watched	the	young	man	struggle	to	his	feet.	‘Tall,’	he	observed,	‘but
I’ve	seen	taller.’
Pain	flooded	the	youth’s	features	once	more	and	he	doubled	over.	Withal
stepped	close	and	supported	him	before	he	toppled.
‘It’s	ghost	pain,	lad.	Ghost	pain	and	ghost	fear.	Fight	through	it.’
‘No!	It’s	real!	It’s	real,	you	bastard!’
Withal	strained	as	the	youth’s	full	weight	settled	in	his	arms.	‘Enough	of
that.	Stand	up!’
‘It’s	no	good!	I’m	dying!’
‘On	your	feet,	dammit!’
A	rough	shake,	then	Withal	pushed	him	away.
He	staggered,	then	slowly	straightened,	drawing	in	deep,	ragged	breaths.
He	began	shivering.	‘It’s	so	cold…’
‘Hood’s	breath,	lad,	it’s	blistering	hot.	And	getting	hotter	with	every	day.’
Arms	wrapped	about	himself,	the	young	man	regarded	Withal.	‘How	long
have	you	lived…lived	here?’
‘Longer	than	I’d	like.	Some	choices	aren’t	for	you	to	make.	Not	for	you,
not	for	me.	Now,	our	master ’s	losing	patience.	Follow	me.’
The	youth	stumbled	along	behind	him.	‘You	said	“our”.’
‘Did	I?’
‘Where	are	my	clothes?	Where	are	my—no,	never	mind—it	hurts	to
remember.	Never	mind.’
They	reached	the	verge,	withered	grasses	pulling	at	their	legs	as	they	made
their	way	inland.	The	Nachts	joined	them,	clambering	and	hopping,	hooting
and	snorting	as	they	kept	pace.
Two	hundred	paces	ahead	squatted	a	ragged	tent,	the	canvas	sun-bleached
and	stained.	Wafts	of	grey-brown	smoke	drifted	from	the	wide	entrance,	where
most	of	one	side	had	been	drawn	back	to	reveal	the	interior.
Where	sat	a	hooded	figure.
‘That’s	him?’	the	youth	asked.	‘That’s	your	master?	Are	you	a	slave,	then?’
‘I	serve,’	Withal	replied,	‘but	I	am	not	owned.’
‘Who	is	he?’
Withal	glanced	back.	‘He	is	a	god.’	He	noted	the	disbelief	writ	on	the	lad’s


face,	and	smiled	wryly.	‘Who’s	seen	better	days.’
The	Nachts	halted	and	huddled	together	in	a	threesome.
A	last	few	strides	across	withered	ground,	then	Withal	stepped	to	one	side.
‘I	found	him	on	the	strand,’	he	said	to	the	seated	figure,	‘moments	before	the
lizard	gulls	did.’
Darkness	hid	the	Crippled	God’s	features,	as	was	ever	the	case	when
Withal	had	been	summoned	to	an	attendance.	The	smoke	from	the	brazier	filled
the	tent,	seeping	out	to	stream	along	the	mild	breeze.	A	gnarled,	thin	hand
emerged	from	the	folds	of	a	sleeve	as	the	god	gestured.	‘Closer,’	he	rasped.
‘Sit.’
‘You	are	not	my	god,’	the	youth	said.
‘Sit.	I	am	neither	petty	nor	overly	sensitive,	young	warrior.’
Withal	watched	the	lad	hesitate,	then	slowly	settle	onto	the	ground,	crosslegged,	arms	wrapped	about	his	shivering	frame.	‘It’s	cold.’
‘Some	furs	for	our	guest,	Withal.’
‘Furs?	We	don’t	have	any—’	He	stopped	when	he	noticed	the	bundled
bearskin	heaped	beside	him.	He	gathered	it	up	and	pushed	it	into	the	lad’s
hands.
The	Crippled	God	scattered	some	seeds	onto	the	brazier ’s	coals.	Popping
sounds,	then	more	smoke.	‘Peace.	Warm	yourself,	warrior,	while	I	tell	you	of
peace.	History	is	unerring,	and	even	the	least	observant	mortal	can	be	made	to
understand,	through	innumerable	repetition.	Do	you	see	peace	as	little	more
than	the	absence	of	war?	Perhaps,	on	a	surface	level,	it	is	just	that.	But	let	me
describe	the	characteristics	of	peace,	my	young	friend.	A	pervasive	dulling	of
the	senses,	a	decadence	afflicting	the	culture,	evinced	by	a	growing	obsession
with	low	entertainment.	The	virtues	of	extremity—honour,	loyalty,	sacrifice—
are	lifted	high	as	shoddy	icons,	currency	for	the	cheapest	of	labours.	The
longer	peace	lasts,	the	more	those	words	are	used,	and	the	weaker	they
become.	Sentimentality	pervades	daily	life.	All	becomes	a	mockery	of	itself,
and	the	spirit	grows…restless.’
The	Crippled	God	paused,	breath	rasping.	‘Is	this	a	singular	pessimism?
Allow	me	to	continue	with	a	description	of	what	follows	a	period	of	peace.	Old
warriors	sit	in	taverns,	telling	tales	of	vigorous	youth,	their	pasts	when	all
things	were	simpler,	clearer	cut.	They	are	not	blind	to	the	decay	all	around
them,	are	not	immune	to	the	loss	of	respect	for	themselves,	for	all	that	they
gave	for	their	king,	their	land,	their	fellow	citizens.
‘The	young	must	not	be	abandoned	to	forgetfulness.	There	are	always
enemies	beyond	the	borders,	and	if	none	exist	in	truth,	then	one	must	be
fashioned.	Old	crimes	dug	out	of	the	indifferent	earth.	Slights	and	open	insults,


or	the	rumours	thereof.	A	suddenly	perceived	threat	where	none	existed	before.
The	reasons	matter	not—what	matters	is	that	war	is	fashioned	from	peace,	and
once	the	journey	is	begun,	an	irresistible	momentum	is	born.
‘The	old	warriors	are	satisfied.	The	young	are	on	fire	with	zeal.	The	king
fears	yet	is	relieved	of	domestic	pressures.	The	army	draws	its	oil	and
whetstone.	Forges	blast	with	molten	iron,	the	anvils	ring	like	temple	bells.
Grain-sellers	and	armourers	and	clothiers	and	horse-sellers	and	countless
other	suppliers	smile	with	the	pleasure	of	impending	wealth.	A	new	energy	has
gripped	the	kingdom,	and	those	few	voices	raised	in	objection	are	quickly
silenced.	Charges	of	treason	and	summary	execution	soon	persuade	the
doubters.’
The	Crippled	God	spread	his	hands.	‘Peace,	my	young	warrior,	is	born	of
relief,	endured	in	exhaustion,	and	dies	with	false	remembrance.	False?	Ah,
perhaps	I	am	too	cynical.	Too	old,	witness	to	far	too	much.	Do	honour,	loyalty
and	sacrifice	truly	exist?	Are	such	virtues	born	only	from	extremity?	What
transforms	them	into	empty	words,	words	devalued	by	their	overuse?	What	are
the	rules	of	the	economy	of	the	spirit,	that	civilization	repeatedly	twists	and
mocks?’
He	shifted	slightly	and	Withal	sensed	the	god’s	regard.	‘Withal	of	the	Third
City.	You	have	fought	wars.	You	have	forged	weapons.	You	have	seen	loyalty,
and	honour.	You	have	seen	courage	and	sacrifice.	What	say	you	to	all	this?’
‘Nothing,’	Withal	replied.
Hacking	laughter.	‘You	fear	angering	me,	yes?	No	need.	I	give	you	leave	to
speak	your	mind.’
‘I	have	sat	in	my	share	of	taverns,’	Withal	said,	‘in	the	company	of	fellow
veterans.	A	select	company,	perhaps,	not	grown	so	blind	with	sentimentality	as
to	fashion	nostalgia	from	times	of	horror	and	terror.	Did	we	spin	out	those
days	of	our	youth?	No.	Did	we	speak	of	war?	Not	if	we	could	avoid	it,	and	we
worked	hard	at	avoiding	it.’
‘Why?’
‘Why?	Because	the	faces	come	back.	So	young,	one	after	another.	A	flash
of	life,	an	eternity	of	death,	there	in	our	minds.	Because	loyalty	is	not	to	be
spoken	of,	and	honour	is	to	be	endured.	Whilst	courage	is	to	be	survived.
Those	virtues,	Chained	One,	belong	to	silence.’
‘Indeed,’	the	god	rasped,	leaning	forward.	‘Yet	how	they	proliferate	in
peace!	Crowed	again	and	again,	as	if	solemn	pronouncement	bestows	those
very	qualities	upon	the	speaker.	Do	they	not	make	you	wince,	every	time	you
hear	them?	Do	they	not	twist	in	your	gut,	grip	hard	your	throat?	Do	you	not
feel	a	building	rage—’


‘Aye,’	Withal	growled,	‘when	I	hear	them	used	to	raise	a	people	once	more
to	war.’
The	Crippled	God	was	silent	a	moment,	then	he	leaned	back	and	dismissed
Withal’s	words	with	a	careless	wave	of	one	hand.	He	fixed	his	attention	on	the
young	warrior.	‘I	spoke	of	peace	as	anathema.	A	poison	that	weakens	the	spirit.
Tell	me,	warrior,	have	you	spilled	blood?’
The	youth	flinched	beneath	his	furs.	Tremors	of	pain	crossed	his	face.
Then	fear.	‘Spilled	blood?	Spilled,	down,	so	much	of	it—everywhere.	I	don’t—
I	can’t—oh,	Daughters	take	me—’
‘Oh	no,’	the	Crippled	God	hissed,	‘not	the	Daughters.	I	have	taken	you.
Chosen	you.	Because	your	king	betrayed	me!	Your	king	hungered	for	the
power	I	offered,	but	not	for	conquest.	No,	he	simply	sought	to	make	himself
and	his	people	unassailable.’	Misshapen	fingers	curled	into	fists.	‘Not	good
enough!’
The	Crippled	God	seemed	to	spasm	beneath	his	ragged	blankets,	then
coughed	wretchedly.
Some	time	later	the	hacking	abated.	More	seeds	on	the	coals,	roiling
smoke,	then,	‘I	have	chosen	you,	Rhulad	Sengar,	for	my	gift.	Do	you
remember?’
Shivering,	his	lips	strangely	blue,	the	young	warrior ’s	face	underwent	a
series	of	fraught	expressions,	ending	on	dread.	He	nodded.	‘I	died.’
‘Well,’	the	Crippled	God	murmured,	‘every	gift	has	a	price.	There	are
powers	buried	in	that	sword,	Rhulad	Sengar.	Powers	unimagined.	But	they	are
reluctant	to	yield.	You	must	pay	for	them.	In	combat.	With	death.	No,	I	should
be	precise	in	this.	With	your	death,	Rhulad	Sengar.’
A	gesture,	and	the	mottled	sword	was	in	the	Crippled	God’s	hand.	He
tossed	it	down	in	front	of	the	young	warrior.	‘Your	first	death	is	done,	and	as	a
consequence	your	skills—your	powers—have	burgeoned.	But	it	is	just	the
beginning.	Take	your	weapon,	Rhulad	Sengar.	Will	your	next	death	prove
easier	for	you	to	bear?	Probably	not.	In	time,	perhaps…’
Withal	studied	the	horror	on	the	young	warrior ’s	face,	and	saw	beneath	it
the	glimmer	of…ambition.
Hood,	do	not	turn	away.
A	long,	frozen	moment,	during	which	Withal	saw	the	ambition	grow	like
flames	behind	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	eyes.
Ah.	The	Crippled	God’s	chosen	well.	And	deny	it	not,	Withal,	your	hand	is
in	this,	plunged	deep.	So	very	deep.
The	smoke	gusted,	then	spun,	momentarily	blinding	Withal	even	as	Rhulad
Sengar	reached	for	the	sword.


A	god’s	mercy?	He	was	unconvinced.

In	four	days,	the	Letherii	delegation	would	arrive.	Two	nights	had	passed	since
the	Warlock	King	had	called	Seren,	Hull	and	Buruk	the	Pale	into	his	audience
at	the	feast	table.	Buruk’s	spirits	were	high,	a	development	that	had	not
surprised	Seren	Pedac.	Merchants	whose	interests	were	tempered	by	wisdom
ever	preferred	the	long	term	over	speculative	endeavours.	There	were	always
vultures	of	commerce	who	hungered	for	strife,	and	often	profited	by	such
discord,	but	Buruk	the	Pale	was	not	one	of	them.
Contrary	to	the	desires	of	those	back	in	Letheras	who	had	conscripted
Buruk,	the	merchant	did	not	want	a	war.	And	so,	with	Hannan	Mosag’s
intimation	that	the	Edur	would	seek	peace,	the	tumult	in	Buruk’s	soul	had	eased.
The	issue	had	been	taken	from	his	hands.
If	the	Warlock	King	wanted	peace,	he	was	in	for	a	fight.	But	Seren	Pedac’s
confidence	in	Hannan	Mosag	had	grown.	The	Edur	leader	possessed	cunning
and	resilience.	There	would	be	no	manipulation	at	the	treaty,	no	treachery	sewn
into	the	fabric	of	generous	pronouncements.
A	weight	had	been	lifted	from	her,	mitigated	only	by	Hull	Beddict.	He	had
come	to	understand	that	his	desires	would	not	be	met.	At	least,	not	by	Hannan
Mosag.	If	he	would	have	his	war,	it	would	of	necessity	have	to	come	from	the
Letherii.	And	so,	if	he	would	follow	that	path,	he	would	need	to	reverse	his
outward	allegiances.	No	longer	on	the	side	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	but	accreted	to	at
least	one	element	of	the	Letherii	delegation—a	faction	characterized	by
betrayal	and	unrelenting	greed.
Hull	had	left	the	village	and	was	now	somewhere	out	in	the	forest.	She
knew	he	would	return	for	the	treaty	gathering,	but	probably	not	before.	She	did
not	envy	him	his	dilemma.
With	renewed	energy,	Buruk	the	Pale	decided	to	set	about	selling	his	iron,
and	for	this	he	was	required	to	have	an	Acquitor	accompanying	him.	Three
Nerek	trailed	them	as	they	walked	up	towards	the	forges,	each	carrying	an
ingot.
It	had	been	raining	steadily	since	the	feast	in	the	Warlock	King’s
longhouse.	Water	flowed	in	turgid	streams	down	the	stony	streets.	Acrid	clouds
hung	low	in	the	vicinity	of	the	forges,	coating	the	wood	and	stone	walls	in	oily
soot.	Slaves	swathed	in	heavy	rain	cloaks	moved	to	and	fro	along	the	narrow
passages	between	compound	walls.


Seren	led	Buruk	and	his	servants	towards	a	squat	stone	building	with	high,
slitted	windows,	the	entranceway	three	steps	from	ground	level	and	flanked	by
Blackwood	columns	carved	to	mimic	hammered	bronze,	complete	with	rivets
and	dents.	The	door	was	Blackwood	inlaid	with	silver	and	black	iron,	the
patterns	an	archaic,	stylized	script	that	Seren	suspected	contained	shadowwrought	wards.
She	turned	to	Buruk.	‘I	have	to	enter	alone	to	begin	with—’
The	door	was	flung	open,	startling	her,	and	three	Edur	rushed	out,	pushing
past	her.	She	stared	after	them,	wondering	at	their	tense	expressions.	A	flutter
of	fear	ran	through	her.	‘Send	the	Nerek	back,’	she	said	to	Buruk.	‘Something’s
happened.’
The	merchant	did	not	argue.	He	gestured	and	the	three	Nerek	hurried	away.
Instead	of	entering	the	guild	house,	Seren	and	Buruk	made	their	way	to	the
centre	street,	seeing	more	Edur	emerging	from	buildings	and	side	alleys	to
line	the	approach	to	the	noble	quarter.	No-one	spoke.
‘What	is	going	on,	Acquitor?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Here	is	fine.’	They	had	a	clear	enough	view	up	the
street,	two	hundred	or	more	paces,	and	in	the	distance	a	procession	had
appeared.	She	counted	five	Edur	warriors,	one	employing	a	staff	as	he	limped
along.	Two	others	were	pulling	a	pair	of	sleds	across	the	slick	stones	of	the
street.	A	fourth	walked	slightly	ahead	of	the	others.
‘Isn’t	that	Binadas	Sengar?’	Buruk	asked.	‘The	one	with	the	stick,	I	mean.’
Seren	nodded.	He	looked	to	be	in	pain,	exhausted	by	successive	layers	of
sorcerous	healing.	The	warrior	who	walked	ahead	was	clearly	kin	to	Binadas.
This,	then,	was	the	return	of	the	group	Hannan	Mosag	had	sent	away.
And	now	she	saw,	strapped	to	one	of	the	sleds,	a	wrapped	form—hides
over	pieces	of	ice	that	wept	steadily	down	the	sides.	A	shape	more	than
ominous.	Unmistakable.
‘They	carry	a	body,’	Buruk	whispered.
Where	did	they	go?	Those	bundled	furs—north,	then.	But	there’s	nothing	up
there,	nothing	but	ice.	What	did	the	Warlock	King	ask	of	them?
The	memory	of	Feather	Witch’s	divinations	returned	to	her	suddenly,
inexplicably,	and	the	chill	in	her	bones	deepened.	‘Come	on,’	she	said	in	a	quiet
tone.	‘To	the	inner	ward.	I	want	to	witness	this.’	She	edged	back	from	the	crowd
and	set	off.
‘If	they’ll	let	us,’	Buruk	muttered,	hurrying	to	catch	up.
‘We	stay	in	the	background	and	say	nothing,’	she	instructed.	‘It’s	likely
they’ll	all	be	too	preoccupied	to	pay	us	much	attention.’
‘I	don’t	like	this,	Acquitor.	Not	any	of	it.’


She	shared	his	dread,	but	said	nothing.
	
They	crossed	the	bridge	well	ahead	of	the	procession,	although	it	was	evident
that	word	had	preceded	them.	The	noble	families	were	all	out	in	the	compound,
motionless	in	the	rain.	Foremost	among	them	were	Tomad	and	Uruth,	a
respectful	space	around	the	two	Edur	and	their	slaves.
‘It’s	one	of	the	Sengar	brothers,’	Seren	Pedac	said	under	her	breath.
Buruk	heard	her.	‘Tomad	Sengar	was	once	a	rival	of	Hannan	Mosag’s	for
the	throne,’	he	muttered.	‘How	will	he	take	this,	I	wonder?’
She	glanced	over	at	him.	‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘I	was	briefed,	Acquitor.	That	shouldn’t	surprise	you,	all	things
considered.’
The	procession	had	reached	the	bridge.
‘Ah.’	Buruk	sighed.	‘The	Warlock	King	and	his	K’risnan	have	emerged
from	the	citadel.’
	
Udinaas	stood	a	pace	behind	Uruth	on	her	right,	the	rain	running	down	his
face.
Rhulad	Sengar	was	dead.
He	was	indifferent	to	that	fact.	A	young	Edur	eager	for	violence—there
were	plenty	of	those,	and	one	fewer	made	little	difference.	That	he	was	a
Sengar	virtually	guaranteed	that	Udinaas	would	be	tasked	with	dressing	the
corpse.	He	was	not	looking	forward	to	that.
Three	days	for	the	ritual,	including	the	vigil	and	the	staining	of	the	flesh.	In
his	mind,	he	ran	through	possibilities	in	a	detached	sort	of	way,	as	the	rain
seeped	down	behind	his	collar	and	no	doubt	gathered	in	the	hood	he	had	not
bothered	to	draw	up	over	his	head.	If	Rhulad	had	remained	unblooded,	the
coins	would	be	copper,	with	stone	discs	to	cover	the	eyes.	If	blooded	and	killed
in	battle,	it	was	probable	that	gold	coins	would	be	used.	Letherii	coins,	mostly.
Enough	of	them	to	ransom	a	prince.	An	extravagant	waste	that	he	found
strangely	delicious	to	contemplate.
Even	so,	he	could	already	smell	the	stench	of	burning	flesh.
He	watched	the	group	cross	the	bridge,	Fear	pulling	the	sled	on	which
Rhulad’s	wrapped	body	had	been	laid.	Binadas	was	limping	badly—there	must
have	been	considerable	damage,	to	resist	the	sorcerous	healing	that	must
already	have	been	cast	upon	him.	Theradas	and	Midik	Buhn.	And	Trull	Sengar,


in	the	lead.	Without	the	ever-present	spear.	So,	a	battle	indeed.
‘Udinaas,	do	you	have	your	supplies?’	Uruth	asked	in	a	dull	voice.
‘Yes,	mistress,	I	have,’	he	replied,	settling	a	hand	on	the	leather	pack	slung
from	his	left	shoulder.
‘Good.	We	will	waste	no	time	in	this.	You	are	to	dress	the	body.	No	other.’
‘Yes,	mistress.	The	coals	have	been	fired.’
‘You	are	a	diligent	slave,	Udinaas,’	she	said.	‘I	am	pleased	you	are	in	my
household.’
He	barely	resisted	looking	at	her	at	that,	confused	and	alarmed	as	he	was
by	the	admission.	And	had	you	found	the	Wyval	blood	within	me,	you	would
have	snapped	my	neck	without	a	second	thought.	‘Thank	you,	mistress.’
‘He	died	a	blooded	warrior,’	Tomad	said.	‘I	see	it	in	Fear ’s	pride.’
The	Warlock	King	and	his	five	apprentice	sorcerors	strode	to	intercept	the
party	as	they	arrived	on	this	side	of	the	bridge,	and	Udinaas	heard	Uruth’s	gasp
of	outrage.
Tomad	reached	out	to	still	her	with	one	hand.	‘There	must	be	a	reason	for
this,’	he	said.	‘Come,	we	will	join	them.’
There	was	no	command	to	remain	behind,	and	so	Udinaas	and	the	other
slaves	followed	Tomad	and	Uruth	as	they	strode	towards	their	sons.
Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan	met	the	procession	first.	Quiet	words	were
exchanged	between	the	Warlock	King	and	Fear	Sengar.	A	question,	an	answer,
and	Hannan	Mosag	seemed	to	stagger.	As	one,	the	five	sorcerors	closed	on
him,	but	their	eyes	were	on	Rhulad’s	swathed	form,	and	Udinaas	saw	a	mixture
of	consternation,	dread	and	alarm	on	their	young	faces.
Fear ’s	gaze	swung	from	the	Warlock	King	to	his	father	as	Tomad’s	group
arrived.	‘I	have	failed	you,	Father,’	he	said.	‘Your	youngest	son	is	dead.’
‘He	holds	the	gift,’	Hannan	Mosag	snapped,	shockingly	accusatory	in	his
tone.	‘I	need	it,	but	he	holds	it.	Was	I	not	clear	enough	in	my	instructions,	Fear
Sengar?’
The	warrior ’s	face	darkened.	‘We	were	attacked,	Warlock	King,	by	the
Jheck.	I	believe	you	know	who	and	what	they	are—’
Tomad	growled,	‘I	do	not.’
Binadas	spoke.	‘They	are	Soletaken,	Father.	Able	to	assume	the	guise	of
wolves.	It	was	their	intention	to	claim	the	sword—’
‘What	sword?’	Uruth	asked.	‘What—’
‘Enough	of	this!’	Hannan	Mosag	shouted.
‘Warlock	King,’	Tomad	Sengar	said,	stepping	closer,	‘Rhulad	is	dead.	You
can	retrieve	this	gift	of	yours—’
‘It	is	not	so	simple,’	Fear	cut	in.	‘Rhulad	holds	the	sword	still—I	cannot


pry	his	fingers	from	the	grip.’
‘It	must	be	cut	off,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.
Uruth	hissed,	then	shook	her	head.	‘No,	Warlock	King.	You	are	forbidden
to	mutilate	our	son.	Fear,	did	Rhulad	die	as	a	blooded	warrior?’
‘He	did.’
‘Then	the	prohibitions	are	all	the	greater,’	she	said	to	Hannan	Mosag,
crossing	her	arms.
‘I	need	that	sword!’
In	the	fraught	silence	that	followed	that	outburst,	Trull	Sengar	spoke	for
the	first	time.	‘Warlock	King.	Rhulad’s	body	is	still	frozen.	It	may	be,	upon
thawing,	that	his	grip	on	the	sword	loosens.	In	any	case,	it	seems	clear	the
matter	demands	calm,	reasoned	discussion.	It	may	in	the	end	prove	that	our
conflicting	desires	can	be	resolved	by	some	form	of	compromise.’	He	faced
his	father	and	mother.	‘It	was	our	task,	given	us	by	the	Warlock	King,	to
retrieve	a	gift,	and	that	gift	is	the	sword	Rhulad	now	holds.	Mother,	we	must
complete	the	task	demanded	of	us.	The	sword	must	be	placed	in	Hannan
Mosag’s	hands.’
There	was	shock	and	horror	in	her	voice	as	Uruth	replied,	‘You	would	cut
off	your	dead	brother ’s	hands?	Are	you	my	son?	I	would—’
Her	husband	stopped	her	with	a	fierce	gesture.	‘Trull,	I	understand	the
difficulty	of	this	situation,	and	I	concur	with	your	counsel	that	decisions	be
withheld	for	the	time	being.	Warlock	King,	Rhulad’s	body	must	be	prepared.
This	can	be	conducted	without	attention	being	accorded	the	hands.	We	have
some	time,	then,	do	you	agree?’
Hannan	Mosag	answered	with	a	curt	nod.
Trull	approached	Udinaas,	and	the	slave	could	see	the	warrior ’s
exhaustion,	the	old	blood	of	countless	wounds	in	his	tattered	armour.	‘Take
charge	of	the	body,’	he	said	in	a	quiet	tone.	‘To	the	House	of	the	Dead,	as	you
would	any	other.	Do	not,	however,	expect	the	widows	to	attend	the	ritual—we
must	needs	postpone	that	until	certain	matters	are	resolved.’
‘Yes,	master,’	Udinaas	replied.	He	swung	round	and	selected	Hulad	and	one
more	of	his	fellow	slaves.	‘Help	me	with	the	sled’s	tethers.	With	solemn
accord,	as	always.’
Both	men	he	addressed	were	clearly	frightened.	This	kind	of	open	conflict
among	the	Hiroth	Edur	was	unprecedented.	They	seemed	on	the	verge	of	panic,
although	Udinaas’s	words	calmed	them	somewhat.	There	were	values	in	ritual,
and	self-control	was	foremost	among	them.
Stepping	past	the	Edur,	Udinaas	led	his	two	fellow	slaves	to	the	sled.
The	waxed	canvas	sheathing	the	ice	had	slowed	the	melt,	although	the	slabs


beneath	it	were	much	diminished,	the	edges	softened	and	milky	white.
Fear	passed	the	harness	over	to	Udinaas.	The	two	other	slaves	helping,	they
began	dragging	it	towards	the	large	wooden	structure	where	Edur	corpses
were	prepared	for	burial.	No-one	stopped	them.
	
Seren	Pedac	gripped	Buruk’s	arm	and	began	pulling	him	back	towards	the
bridge.	He	swung	her	a	wild	look,	but	wisely	said	nothing.
They	could	not	manage	the	passage	unseen,	and	Seren	felt	sweat	prickling
on	her	neck	and	in	the	small	of	her	back	as	she	guided	the	merchant	back
towards	the	guest	camp.	They	were	not	accosted,	but	their	presence	had	without
doubt	been	marked.	The	consequences	of	that	would	remain	undetermined,
until	such	time	as	the	conflict	they	had	witnessed	was	resolved.
The	Nerek	had	extended	a	tarp	from	one	of	the	wagons	to	shield	the	hearth
they	kept	continually	burning.	They	scurried	from	the	smoky	flames	as	soon	as
Buruk	and	Seren	arrived,	quickly	disappearing	into	their	tents.
‘That	looks,’	Buruk	muttered	as	he	edged	closer	to	the	hearth	and	held	out
his	hands,	‘to	be	serious	trouble.	The	Warlock	King	was	badly	shaken,	and	I
like	not	this	talk	of	a	gift.	A	sword?	Some	kind	of	sword,	yes?	A	gift	from
whom?	Surely	not	an	alliance	with	the	Jheck—’
‘No,’	agreed	Seren,	‘given	that	it	was	the	Jheck	with	whom	they	fought.
There’s	nothing	else	out	there,	Buruk.	Nothing	at	all.’
She	thought	back	to	that	scene	on	the	other	side	of	the	bridge.	Fear ’s
brother,	not	Binadas,	but	the	other	one,	who’d	counselled	reason,	he…
interested	her.	Physically	attractive,	of	course.	Most	Edur	were.	But	there	was
more.	There	was…intelligence.	And	pain.	Seren	scowled.	She	was	always
drawn	to	the	hurting	ones.
‘A	sword,’	Buruk	mused,	staring	into	the	flames,	‘of	such	value	that
Hannan	Mosag	contemplates	mutilating	a	blooded	warrior ’s	corpse.’
‘Doesn’t	that	strike	you	as	odd?’	Seren	asked.	‘A	corpse,	holding	on	to	a
sword	so	tight	even	Fear	Sengar	cannot	pull	it	loose?’
‘Perhaps	frozen?’
‘From	the	moment	of	death?’
He	grunted.	‘I	suppose	not,	unless	it	took	his	brothers	a	while	to	get	to
him.’
‘A	day	or	longer,	at	least.	Granted,	we	don’t	know	the	circumstances,	but
that	does	seem	unlikely,	doesn’t	it?’
‘It	does.’	Buruk	shrugged.	‘A	damned	Edur	funeral.	That	won’t	put	the
Warlock	King	in	a	good	mood.	The	delegation	will	arrive	at	precisely	the


wrong	time.’
‘I	think	not,’	Seren	said.	‘The	Edur	have	been	unbalanced	by	this.	Hannan
Mosag	especially.	Unless	there’s	quick	resolution,	we	will	be	among	a	divided
people.’
A	quick,	bitter	smile.	‘We?’
‘Letherii,	Buruk.	I	am	not	part	of	the	delegation.	Nor,	strictly	speaking,	are
you.’
‘Nor	Hull	Beddict,’	he	added.	‘Yet	something	tells	me	we	are	irredeemably
bound	in	that	net,	whether	it	sees	the	light	of	day	or	sinks	to	the	deep.’
She	said	nothing,	because	he	was	right.
	
The	sled	glided	easily	along	the	wet	straw	and	Udinaas	raised	a	boot	to	halt	its
progress	alongside	the	stone	platform.	Unspeaking,	the	three	slaves	began
unclasping	the	straps,	pulling	them	free	from	beneath	the	body.	The	tarp	was
then	lifted	clear.	The	slabs	of	ice	were	resting	on	a	cloth-wrapped	shape	clearly
formed	by	the	body	it	contained,	and	all	three	saw	at	the	same	time	that
Rhulad’s	jaw	had	opened	in	death,	as	if	voicing	a	silent,	endless	scream.
Hulad	stepped	back.	‘Errant	preserve	us,’	he	hissed.
‘It’s	common	enough,	Hulad,’	Udinaas	said.	‘You	two	can	go,	but	first	drag
that	chest	over	here,	the	one	resting	on	the	rollers.’
‘Gold	coins,	then?’
‘I	am	assuming	so,’	Udinaas	replied.	‘Rhulad	died	a	blooded	warrior.	He
was	noble-born.	Thus,	it	must	be	gold.’
‘What	a	waste,’	said	Hulad.
The	other	slave,	Irim,	grinned	and	said,	‘When	the	Edur	are	conquered,	we
should	form	a	company,	the	three	of	us,	to	loot	the	barrows.’	He	and	Hulad
pulled	the	chest	along	the	runners.
The	coals	were	red,	the	sheet	of	iron	black	with	heat.
Udinaas	smiled.	‘There	are	wards	in	those	barrows,	Irim.	And	shadow
wraiths	guarding	them.’
‘Then	we	hire	a	mage	who	can	dispel	them.	The	wraiths	will	be	gone,
along	with	every	damned	Edur.	Nothing	but	rotting	bones.	I	dream	of	that	day.’
Udinaas	glanced	over	at	the	old	man.	‘And	how	badly	Indebted	are	you,
Irim?’
The	grin	faded.	‘That’s	just	it.	I’d	be	able	to	pay	it	off.	For	my
grandchildren,	who	are	still	in	Trate.	Pay	it	off,	Udinaas.	Don’t	you	dream	the
same	for	yourself?’
‘Some	debts	can’t	be	paid	off	with	gold,	Irim.	My	dreams	are	not	of


wealth.’
‘No.’	Irim’s	grin	returned.	‘You	just	want	the	heart	of	a	lass	so	far	above
you,	you’ve	not	the	Errant’s	hope	of	owning	it.	Poor	Udinaas,	we	all	shake	our
heads	at	the	sadness	of	it.’
‘Less	sadness	than	pity,	I	suspect,’	Udinaas	said,	shrugging.	‘Close	enough.
You	can	go.’
‘The	stench	lingers	even	now,’	Hulad	said.	‘How	can	you	stand	it,
Udinaas?’
‘Inform	Uruth	that	I	have	begun.’
	
It	was	not	the	time	to	be	alone,	yet	Trull	Sengar	found	himself	just	that.	The
realization	was	sudden,	and	he	blinked,	slowly	making	sense	of	his
surroundings.	He	was	in	the	longhouse,	the	place	of	his	birth,	standing	before
the	centre	post	with	its	jutting	sword-blade.	The	heat	from	the	hearth	seemed
incapable	of	reaching	through	to	his	bones.	His	clothes	were	sodden.
He’d	left	the	others	outside,	locked	in	their	quiet	clash	of	wills.	The
Warlock	King	and	his	need	against	Tomad	and	Uruth	and	their	insistence	on
proper	observance	of	a	dead	blooded	warrior,	a	warrior	who	was	their	son.
With	this	conflict,	Hannan	Mosag	could	lose	his	authority	among	the	Tiste
Edur.
The	Warlock	King	should	have	shown	constraint.	This	could	have	been
dealt	with	quietly,	unknown	to	anyone	else.	How	hard	can	it	be	to	wrest	a	sword
loose	from	a	dead	man’s	hands?	And	if	sorcery	was	involved—and	it	certainly
seemed	to	be—then	Hannan	Mosag	was	in	his	element.	He	had	his	K’risnan	as
well.	They	could	have	done	something.	And	if	not…then	cut	his	fingers	off.	A
corpse	no	longer	housed	the	spirit.	Death	had	severed	the	binding.	Trull	could
feel	nothing	for	the	cold	flesh	beneath	the	ice.	It	was	not	Rhulad	any	more,	not
any	longer.
But	now	there	could	be	no	chance	of	secrecy.	The	quarrel	had	been
witnessed,	and,	in	accordance	with	tradition,	so	too	must	be	the	resolution.
And…does	any	of	it	matter?
I	did	not	trust	Rhulad	Sengar.	Long	before	his	failure	on	night	watch.	That
is	the	truth	of	it.	I	knew…doubts.
His	thoughts	could	take	him	no	further.	Anguish	rose	in	a	flood,	burning
like	acid.	As	if	he	had	raised	his	own	demon,	hulking	and	hungry,	and	could
only	watch	as	it	fed	on	his	soul.	Gnawing	regret	and	avid	guilt,	remorse	an
unending	feast.
We	are	doomed,	now,	to	give	answer	to	his	death,	again	and	again.


Countless	answers,	to	crowd	the	solitary	question	of	his	life.	Is	it	our	fate,	then,
to	suffer	beneath	the	siege	of	all	that	can	never	be	known?
There	had	been	strangers	witnessing	the	scene.	The	realization	was	sudden,
shocking.	A	merchant	and	his	Acquitor.	Letherii	visitors.	Advance	spies	of	the
treaty	delegation.
Hannan	Mosag’s	confrontation	was	a	dreadful	error	in	so	many	ways.
Trull’s	high	regard	for	the	Warlock	King	had	been	damaged,	sullied,	and	he
longed	for	the	world	of	a	month	past.	Before	the	revelation	of	flaws	and
frailties.
Padding	through	the	forest,	mind	filled	with	the	urgency	of	dire	news.	A
spear	left	in	his	wake,	iron	point	buried	deep	in	the	chest	of	a	Letherii.	Leaden
legs	taking	him	through	shadows,	moccasins	thudding	on	the	dappled	trail.	The
sense	of	having	just	missed	something,	an	omen	unwitnessed.	Like	entering	a
chamber	someone	else	has	just	walked	from,	although	in	his	case	the	chamber
had	been	a	forest	cathedral,	Hiroth	sanctified	land,	and	he	had	seen	no	signs	of
passage	to	give	substance	to	his	suspicion.
And	it	was	this	sense	that	had	returned	to	him.	They	had	passed	through
fraught	events,	all	unmindful	of	significance,	of	hidden	truths.	The	exigencies
of	survival	had	forced	upon	them	a	kind	of	carelessness.
A	gelid	wave	of	conviction	rose	within	Trull	Sengar,	and	he	knew,	solid	as
a	knife	in	his	heart,	that	something	terrible	was	about	to	happen.
He	stood,	alone	in	the	longhouse.
Facing	the	centre	post	and	its	crooked	sword.
And	he	could	not	move.

Rhulad	Sengar ’s	body	was	frozen.	A	pallid	grey,	stiff-limbed	figure	lying	on
the	stone	platform.	Head	thrown	back,	eyes	squeezed	shut,	mouth	stretched
long	as	if	striving	for	a	breath	never	found.	The	warrior ’s	hands	were	closed
about	the	grip	of	a	strange,	mottled,	straight-bladed	sword,	frost-rimed	and
black-flecked	with	dried	blood.
Udinaas	had	filled	the	nose	and	ear	holes	with	wax.
He	held	the	pincers,	waiting	for	the	first	gold	coin	to	reach	optimum	heat
on	the	iron	plate	suspended	above	the	coals.	He	had	placed	one	on	the	sheet,
then,	twenty	heartbeats	later,	another.	The	order	of	placement	for	noble-born
blooded	warriors	was	precise,	as	was	the	allotted	time	for	the	entire	ritual.
Awaiting	Udinaas	was	a	period	of	mind-numbing	repetition	and	exhaustion.


But	a	slave	could	be	bent	to	any	task.	There	were	hard	truths	found	only	in
the	denigration	of	one’s	own	spirit,	if	one	was	inclined	to	look	for	them.
Should,	for	example,	a	man	require	self-justification.	Prior	to,	say,	murder,	or
some	other	atrocity.
Take	this	body.	A	young	man	whose	flesh	is	now	a	proclamation	of	death.
The	Edur	use	coins.	Letherii	use	linen,	lead	and	stone.	In	both,	the	need	to
cover,	to	disguise,	to	hide	away	the	horrible	absence	writ	there	in	that
motionless	face.
Open,	or	closed,	it	began	with	the	eyes.
Udinaas	gripped	the	edge	of	the	Letherii	coin	with	the	pincers.	These	first
two	had	to	be	slightly	cooler	than	the	others,	lest	the	eyes	behind	the	lids	burst.
He	had	witnessed	that	once,	when	he	was	apprenticed	to	an	elder	slave	who	had
begun	losing	his	sense	of	time.	Sizzling,	then	an	explosive	spurt	of	lifeless
fluid,	foul-smelling	and	murky	with	decay,	the	coin	settling	far	too	deep	in	the
socket,	the	hissing	evaporation	and	crinkling,	blackening	skin.
He	swung	round	on	the	stool,	careful	not	to	drop	the	coin,	then	leaned	over
Rhulad	Sengar ’s	face.	Lowered	the	hot	gold	disc.
A	soft	sizzle,	as	the	skin	of	the	lid	melted,	all	moisture	drawn	from	it	so
that	it	tightened	round	the	coin.	Holding	it	fast.
He	repeated	the	task	with	the	second	coin.
The	heat	in	the	chamber	was	thawing	the	corpse,	and,	as	Udinaas	worked
setting	coins	on	the	torso,	he	was	continually	startled	by	movement.	Arched
back	settling,	an	elbow	voicing	a	soft	thud,	rivulets	of	melt	water	crawling
across	the	stone	to	drip	from	the	sides,	as	if	the	body	now	wept.
The	stench	of	burnt	skin	was	thick	in	the	hot,	humid	air.	Rhulad	Sengar ’s
corpse	was	undergoing	a	transformation,	acquiring	gleaming	armour,
becoming	something	other	than	Tiste	Edur.	In	the	mind	of	Udinaas	he	ceased	to
exist	as	a	thing	once	living,	the	work	before	the	slave	little	different	from
mending	nets.
Chest,	to	abdomen.	Each	spear-wound	packed	with	clay	and	oil,	encircled
with	coins	then	sealed.	Pelvis,	thighs,	knees,	shins,	ankles,	the	tops	of	the	feet.
Shoulders,	upper	arms,	elbows,	forearms.
One	hundred	and	sixty-three	coins.
Udinaas	wiped	sweat	from	his	eyes	then	rose	and	walked,	limbs	aching,
over	to	the	cauldron	containing	the	melted	wax.	He	had	no	idea	how	much	time
had	passed.	The	stench	kept	his	appetite	at	bay,	but	he	had	filled	the	hollow	in
his	stomach	a	half-dozen	times	with	cool	water.	Outside,	the	rain	had
continued,	battering	on	the	roof,	swirling	over	the	ground	beyond	the	walls.	A
village	in	mourning—none	would	disturb	him	until	he	emerged.


He	would	have	preferred	a	half-dozen	Edur	widows	conducting	the	laying
of	coins,	with	him	at	his	usual	station	tending	to	the	fire.	The	last	time	he	had
done	this	in	solitude	had	been	with	Uruth’s	father,	killed	in	battle	by	the	Arapay.
He	had	been	younger	then,	awed	by	the	spectacle	and	his	role	in	its	making.
Attaching	the	handle	to	the	cauldron,	Udinaas	lifted	it	from	the	hearth	and
carefully	carried	it	back	to	the	corpse.	A	thick	coating	over	the	front	and	sides
of	the	corpse.	A	short	time	for	the	wax	to	cool—not	too	much,	so	that	it
cracked	when	he	turned	over	the	body—then	he	would	return	to	the	gold	coins.
Udinaas	paused	for	a	moment,	standing	over	the	dead	Tiste	Edur.	‘Ah,
Rhulad,’	he	sighed.	‘You	could	surely	strut	before	the	women	now,	couldn’t
you?’
	
‘The	mourning	has	begun.’
Trull	started,	then	turned	to	find	Fear	standing	at	his	shoulder.	‘What?	Oh.
Then	what	has	been	decided?’
‘Nothing.’	His	brother	swung	away	and	walked	to	the	hearth.	His	face
twisted	as	he	regarded	the	low	flames.	‘The	Warlock	King	proclaims	our
efforts	a	failure.	Worse,	he	believes	we	betrayed	him.	He	would	hide	that
suspicion,	but	I	see	it	none	the	less.’
Trull	was	silent	a	moment,	then	he	murmured,	‘I	wonder	when	the	betrayal
began.	And	with	whom.’
‘You	doubted	this	“gift”,	from	the	very	first.’
‘I	doubt	it	even	more	now.	A	sword	that	will	not	relinquish	its	grip	on	a
dead	warrior.	What	sort	of	weapon	is	this,	Fear?	What	sorcery	rages	on	within
it?’	He	faced	his	brother.	‘Did	you	look	closely	at	that	blade?	Oh,	skilfully
done,	but	there	are…shards,	trapped	in	the	iron.	Of	some	other	metal,	which
resisted	the	forging.	Any	apprentice	swordsmith	could	tell	you	that	such	a
blade	will	shatter	at	first	blow.’
‘No	doubt	the	sorcery	invested	would	have	prevented	that,’	Fear	replied.
‘So,’	Trull	sighed,	‘Rhulad’s	body	is	being	prepared.’
‘Yes,	it	has	begun.	The	Warlock	King	has	drawn	our	parents	into	the
privacy	of	his	longhouse.	All	others	are	forbidden	to	enter.	There	will	be…
negotiations.’
‘The	severing	of	their	youngest	son’s	hands,	in	exchange	for	what?’
‘I	don’t	know.	The	decision	will	be	publicly	announced,	of	course.	In	the
meantime,	we	are	left	to	our	own.’
‘Where	is	Binadas?’
Fear	shrugged.	‘The	healers	have	taken	him.	It	will	be	days	before	we	see


him	again.	Mages	are	difficult	to	heal,	especially	when	it’s	broken	bone.	The
Arapay	who	tended	to	him	said	there	were	over	twenty	pieces	loose	in	the	flesh
of	his	hip.	All	need	to	be	drawn	back	into	place	and	mended.	Muscle	and
tendons	to	knit,	vessels	to	be	sealed	and	dead	blood	expunged.’
Trull	walked	over	to	a	bench	alongside	a	wall	and	sat	down,	settling	his
head	in	his	hands.	The	whole	journey	seemed	unreal	now,	barring	the	battlescars	on	flesh	and	armour,	and	the	brutal	evidence	of	a	wrapped	corpse	now
being	dressed	for	burial.
The	Jheck	had	been	Soletaken.	He	had	not	realized.	Those	wolves…
To	be	Soletaken	was	a	gift	belonging	to	Father	Shadow	and	his	kin.	It
belonged	to	the	skies,	to	creatures	of	immense	power.	That	primitive,	ignorant
barbarians	should	possess	a	gift	of	such	prodigious,	holy	power	made	no
sense.
Soletaken.	It	now	seemed…sordid.	A	weapon	as	savage	and	as	mundane	as
a	raw-edged	axe.	He	did	not	understand	how	such	a	thing	could	be.
‘A	grave	test	awaits	us,	brother.’
Trull	blinked	up	at	Fear.	‘You	sense	it	as	well.	Something’s	coming,	isn’t
it?’
‘I	am	unused	to	this…to	this	feeling.	Of	helplessness.	Of…not	knowing.’
He	rubbed	at	his	face,	as	if	seeking	to	awaken	the	right	words	from	muscle,
blood	and	bone.	As	if	all	that	waited	within	him	ever	struggled,	futile	and
frustrated,	to	find	a	voice	that	others	could	hear.
A	pang	of	sympathy	struck	Trull,	and	he	dropped	his	gaze,	no	longer
wanting	to	witness	his	brother ’s	discomfort.	‘It	is	the	same	with	me,’	he	said,
although	the	admission	was	not	entirely	true.	He	was	not	unused	to
helplessness;	some	feelings	one	learned	to	live	with.	He	had	none	of	Fear ’s
natural,	physical	talents,	none	of	his	brother ’s	ease.	It	seemed	his	only	true	skill
was	that	of	relentless	observation,	fettered	to	a	dark	imagination.	‘We	should
get	some	sleep,’	he	added.	‘Exhaustion	ill	fits	these	moments.	Nothing	will	be
announced	without	us.’
‘True	enough,	brother.’	Fear	hesitated,	then	reached	out	and	settled	a	hand
on	Trull’s	shoulder.	‘I	would	you	stand	at	my	side	always,	if	only	to	keep	me
from	stumbling.’	The	hand	withdrew	and	Fear	walked	towards	the	sleeping
chambers	at	the	back	of	the	longhouse.
Trull	stared	after	him,	stunned	by	the	admission,	half	disbelieving.	As	I
gave	words	to	comfort	him,	has	he	just	done	the	same	for	me?
Theradas	had	told	him	they	could	hear	the	sounds	of	battle,	again	and
again,	cutting	through	the	wind	and	the	blowing	snow.	They’d	heard	bestial
screams	of	pain,	wolf-howls	crying	in	mortal	despair.	They’d	heard	him


leading	the	Jheck	from	their	path.	Heard,	until	distance	stole	from	them	all
knowledge	of	his	fate.	And	then,	they	had	awaited	the	arrival	of	the	enemy—
who	never	came.
Trull	had	already	forgotten	most	of	those	clashes,	the	numbers	melding
into	one,	a	chaotic	nightmare	unstepped	from	time,	swathed	in	the	gauze	of
snow	stretched	and	torn	by	the	circling	wind,	wrapping	ever	tighter.	Bound	and
carried	as	if	made	disparate,	disconnected	from	the	world.	Is	this	how	the
direst	moments	of	the	past	are	preserved?	Does	this	pain-ridden	separation
occur	to	each	and	every	one	of	us—us…survivors?	The	mind’s	own	barrow
field,	the	trail	winding	between	the	mounded	earth	hiding	the	heavy	stones	and
the	caverns	of	darkness	with	their	blood-painted	walls	and	fire-scorched
capstones—a	life’s	wake,	forlorn	beneath	a	grey	sky.	Once	walked,	that	trail
could	never	be	walked	again.	One	could	only	look	back,	and	know	horror	at
the	vastness	and	the	riotous	accumulation	of	yet	more	barrows.	More,	and
more.
He	rose	and	made	his	way	to	his	sleeping	mat.	Wearied	by	the	thought	of
those	whom	the	Edur	worshipped,	who	had	lived	tens	upon	tens	of	thousands
of	years,	and	the	interminable	horror	of	all	that	lay	behind	them,	the	endless
road	of	deed	and	regret,	the	bones	and	lives	now	dust	bedding	corroded
remnants	of	metal—nothing	more,	because	the	burden	life	could	carry	was	so
very	limited,	because	life	could	only	walk	onward,	ever	onward,	the	passage
achieving	little	more	than	a	stirring	of	dust	in	its	wake.
Sorrow	grown	bitter	with	despair,	Trull	sank	down	onto	the	thinly	padded
mattress,	lay	back	and	closed	his	eyes.
The	gesture	served	only	to	unleash	his	imagination,	image	after	image
sobbing	to	life	with	silent	but	inconsolable	cries	that	filled	his	head.
He	reeled	before	the	onslaught,	and,	like	a	warrior	staggering	senseless
before	relentless	battering,	he	fell	backward	in	his	mind,	into	oblivion.
	
Like	a	bed	of	gold	in	a	mountain	stream,	a	blurred	gleam	swimming	before	his
eyes.	Udinaas	leaned	back,	only	now	fully	feeling	the	leaden	weight	of	his
exhausted	muscles,	slung	like	chains	from	his	bones.	The	stench	of	burnt	flesh
had	painted	his	lungs,	coating	the	inside	of	his	chest	and	seeping	its	insipid
poison	into	his	veins.	His	flesh	felt	mired	in	dross.
He	stared	down	at	the	gold-studded	back	of	Rhulad	Sengar.	The	wax
coating	the	form	had	cooled,	growing	more	opaque	with	every	passing
moment.
Wealth	belongs	to	the	dead,	or	so	it	must	be	for	one	such	as	me.	Beyond	my


reach.	He	considered	those	notions,	the	way	they	drifted	through	the	fog	in	his
mind.	Indebtedness	and	poverty.	The	defining	limits	of	most	lives.	Only	a	small
proportion	of	the	Letherii	population	knew	riches,	could	indulge	in	excesses.
Theirs	was	a	distinct	world,	an	invisible	paradise	framed	by	interests	and
concerns	unknown	to	everyone	else.
Udinaas	frowned,	curious	at	his	own	feelings.	There	was	no	envy.	Only
sorrow,	a	sense	of	all	that	lay	beyond	his	grasp,	and	would	ever	remain	so.	In	a
strange	way,	the	wealthy	Letherii	had	become	as	remote	and	alien	to	him	as	the
Edur.	He	was	disconnected,	the	division	as	sharp	and	absolute	as	the	one	before
him	now—his	own	worn	self	and	the	gold-sheathed	corpse	before	him.	The
living	and	the	dead,	the	dark	motion	of	his	body	and	the	perfect	immobility	of
Rhulad	Sengar.
He	prepared	for	his	final	task	before	leaving	the	chamber.	The	wax	had
solidified	sufficiently	to	permit	the	turning	over	of	the	body.	Upon	entering
this	house,	Rhulad’s	parents	would	expect	to	find	their	dead	son	lying	on	his
back,	made	virtually	unrecognizable	by	the	coins	and	the	wax.	Made,	in	fact,
into	a	sarcophagus,	already	remote,	with	the	journey	to	the	shadow	world
begun.
Errant	take	me,	have	I	the	strength	for	this?
The	corpse	had	been	rolled	onto	wooden	paddles	with	curved	handles	that
were	both	attached	to	a	single	lever.	A	four-legged	ridge	pole	was	set
crossways	beneath	the	lever,	providing	the	fulcrum.	Udinaas	straightened	and
positioned	himself	at	the	lever,	taking	the	Blackwood	in	both	hands	and	settling
on	it	the	weight	of	his	upper	body.	He	hesitated,	lowering	his	head	until	his
brow	rested	on	his	forearms.
The	shadow	wraith	was	silent,	not	a	single	whisper	in	his	ear	for	days	now.
The	blood	of	the	Wyval	slept.	He	was	alone.
He	had	been	expecting	an	interruption	through	the	entire	procedure.
Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan,	thundering	into	the	chamber.	To	cut	off
Rhulad’s	fingers,	or	the	entire	hands.	Having	no	instructions	to	the	contrary,
Udinaas	had	sheathed	the	sword	in	wax,	angled	slightly	as	it	reached	down
along	the	body’s	thighs.
He	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	pushed	down	on	the	lever.	Lifting	the	body	a
fraction.	Cracks	in	the	wax,	a	crazed	web	of	lines,	but	that	was	to	be	expected.
Easily	repaired.	Udinaas	pushed	harder,	watching	as	the	body	began	turning,
edging	onto	its	side.	The	sword’s	weight	defeated	the	wax	sheathing	the	blade,
and	the	point	clunked	down	on	the	stone	platform,	drawing	the	arms	with	it.
Udinaas	swore	under	his	breath,	blinking	the	sweat	from	his	eyes.	Plate-sized
sheets	of	wax	had	fallen	away.	The	coins,	at	least—he	saw	with	relief—


remained	firmly	affixed.
He	slipped	a	restraining	strap	over	the	lever	to	hold	it	in	place,	then	moved
to	the	corpse.	Repositioning	the	sword,	he	nudged	the	massive	weight	further
over	in	increments,	until	the	balance	shifted	and	the	body	thumped	onto	its
back.
Udinaas	waited	until	he	regained	his	breath.	Another	coating	of	wax	was
needed,	to	repair	the	damage.	Then	he	could	stumble	out	of	this	nightmare.
A	slave	needn’t	think.	There	were	tasks	to	be	done.	Too	many	thoughts
were	crawling	through	him,	interfering	with	his	concentration.
He	stumbled	back	to	the	hearth	to	retrieve	the	cauldron	of	wax.
A	strange	snapping	sound	behind	him.	Udinaas	turned.	He	studied	the
corpse,	seeking	the	place	where	the	wax	had	broken	loose.	There,	along	the
jaw,	splitting	wide	over	the	mouth.	He	recalled	the	facial	contortion	that	had
been	revealed	when	the	bindings	had	been	removed.	It	was	possible	he	would
have	to	sew	the	lips	together.
He	picked	up	the	cauldron	and	made	his	way	back	to	the	corpse.
He	saw	the	head	jerk	back.
A	shuddering	breath.
And	then	the	corpse	screamed.
	
From	nothingness	a	scene	slowly	came	into	resolution,	and	Trull	Sengar	found
himself	standing,	once	more	amidst	gusting	wind	and	swirling	snow.	He	was
surrounded,	a	ring	of	dark,	vague	shapes.	The	smeared	gleam	of	amber	eyes
was	fixed	on	him,	and	Trull	reached	for	his	sword,	only	to	find	the	scabbard
empty.
The	Jheck	had	found	him	at	last,	and	this	time	there	would	be	no	escape.
Trull	spun	round,	and	again,	as	the	huge	wolves	edged	closer.	The	wind’s	howl
filled	his	ears.
He	searched	for	a	dagger—anything—but	could	find	nothing.	His	hands
were	numb	with	cold,	the	blowing	snow	stinging	his	eyes.
Closer,	now,	on	all	sides.	Trull’s	heart	pounded.	He	was	filled	with	terror,
filled	as	a	drowning	man	is	filled	by	the	inrush	of	deadly	water,	the	shock	of
denial,	the	sudden	loss	of	all	strength,	and	with	it,	all	will.
The	wolves	charged.
Jaws	closed	on	his	limbs,	fangs	punching	through	skin.	He	was	dragged
down	beneath	the	weight	of	onslaught.	A	wolf	closed	its	mouth	round	the	back
of	his	neck.	Dreadful	grinding	motions	chewed	through	muscle.	Bones
snapped.	His	mouth	gushed	full	and	hot	with	blood	and	bile.	He	sagged,	unable


even	to	curl	tight	as	the	beasts	tore	at	his	arms	and	legs,	ripped	into	his	belly.
He	could	hear	nothing	but	the	wind’s	shriek,	ever	climbing.
Trull	opened	his	eyes.	He	was	sprawled	on	his	sleeping	mat,	pain
throbbing	in	his	muscles	with	the	ghost	memory	of	those	savage	teeth.
And	heard	screaming.
Fear	appeared	in	the	entranceway,	his	eyes	strangely	red-rimmed,	blinking
in	bewilderment.	‘Trull?’
‘It’s	coming	from	outside,’	he	replied,	climbing	stiffly	to	his	feet.
They	emerged	to	see	figures	running,	converging	on	the	House	of	the
Dead.
‘What	is	happening?’
Trull	shook	his	head	at	his	brother ’s	question.	‘Perhaps	Udinaas…’
They	set	off.
Two	slaves	stumbled	from	the	building’s	entrance,	then	fled	in	panic,	one
of	them	shouting	incoherently.
The	brothers	picked	up	their	pace.
Trull	saw	the	Letherii	Acquitor	and	her	merchant	on	the	bridge,	figures
rushing	past	them	as	they	made	a	slow,	hesitant	approach.
The	screams	had	not	abated.	There	was	pain	in	those	cries,	and	horror.	The
sound,	renewed	breath	after	breath,	made	the	blood	gelid	in	Trull’s	veins.	He
could	almost…
Mayen	was	in	the	doorway,	which	was	ajar.	Behind	her	stood	the	slave
Feather	Witch.
Neither	moved.
Fear	and	Trull	reached	them.
Feather	Witch’s	head	snapped	round,	the	eyes	half	mad	as	they	stared	up	at
first	Trull,	then	Fear.
Fear	came	to	the	side	of	his	betrothed	in	the	doorway.	He	stared	inward,
face	flinching	with	every	scream.	‘Mayen,’	he	said,	‘keep	everyone	else	out.
Except	for	Tomad	and	Uruth	and	the	Warlock	King,	when	they	arrive.	Trull—’
The	name	was	spoken	like	a	plea.
Mayen	stepped	back	and	Trull	edged	forward.
Side	by	side,	they	entered	the	House	of	the	Dead.
A	mass,	a	hunched	shape,	covered	in	wax	like	peeling	skin,	revealing	the
glitter	of	gold	coins,	slouched	down	at	the	foot	of	the	stone	platform,	face
lowered,	forehead	on	knees,	arms	wrapped	tight	about	shins	but	still	holding
the	sword.	A	mass,	a	hunched	shape,	voicing	endless	shrieks.
The	slave	Udinaas	stood	nearby.	He	had	been	carrying	a	cauldron	of	wax.
It	lay	on	its	side	two	paces	to	the	Letherii’s	left,	the	wax	spilled	out	amidst


twigs	and	straw.
Udinaas	was	murmuring.	Soothing	words	cutting	beneath	the	screams.	He
was	moving	closer	to	the	shape,	step	by	careful	step.
Fear	made	to	start	forward	but	Trull	gripped	his	upper	arm	and	held	him
back.	He’d	heard	something	in	those	shrieks.	They	had	come	to	answer	the
slave’s	low	soothings,	defiant	at	first,	but	now	thinning,	the	voice	filling	with
pleading.	Strangled	again	and	again	into	shudders	of	raw	despair.	And	through
it	all	Udinaas	continued	to	speak.
Sister	bless	us,	that	is	Rhulad.	My	brother.
Who	was	dead.
The	slave	slowly	crouched	before	the	horrid	figure,	and	Trull	could	make
out	his	words	as	he	said,	‘There	are	coins	before	your	eyes,	Rhulad	Sengar.
That	is	why	you	can	see	nothing.	I	would	remove	them.	Your	brothers	are	here.
Fear	and	Trull.	They	are	here.’
The	shrieks	broke	then,	replaced	by	helpless	weeping.
Trull	stared	as	Udinaas	then	did	something	he	did	not	think	possible.	The
slave	reached	out	and	took	Rhulad’s	head	in	his	hands,	as	a	mother	might	an
inconsolable	child.	Tender,	yet	firm,	the	hands	slowly	lifted	it	clear	of	the
knees.
A	sobbing	sound	came	from	Fear,	quickly	silenced,	but	Trull	felt	his
brother	tremble.
The	face—oh,	Father	Shadow,	the	face.
A	crazed	mask	of	wax,	cracked	and	scarred.	And	beneath	it,	gold	coins,
melded	onto	the	flesh—not	one	had	dislodged—angled	like	the	scales	of
armour	around	the	stretched	jaw,	the	gasping	mouth.
Udinaas	leaned	closer	still,	spoke	low	beside	Rhulad’s	left	ear.
Words,	answered	with	a	shudder,	a	spasm	that	made	coins	click—the	sound
audible	but	muted	beneath	wax.	A	foot	scraped	across	the	stone	flagstones
surrounding	the	platform,	drew	in	tighter.
Fear	jolted	in	Trull’s	grip,	but	he	held	on,	held	his	brother	back	as	Udinaas
reached	down	to	his	belt	and	drew	out	a	work	knife.
Whispering;	rhythmic,	almost	musical.	The	slave	brought	the	knife	up.
Carefully	set	the	edge	near	the	tip	alongside	the	coin	covering	Rhulad’s	left
eye.
The	face	flinched,	but	Udinaas	drew	his	right	arm	round	into	a	kind	of
embrace,	leaned	closer,	not	pausing	in	his	murmuring.	Pressure	with	the	edge,
minute	motion,	then	the	coin	flashed	as	it	came	loose	along	the	bottom.	A
moment	later	it	fell	away.
The	eye	was	closed,	a	mangled,	red	welt.	Rhulad	must	have	sought	to	open


it	because	Udinaas	laid	two	fingers	against	the	lid	and	Trull	saw	him	shake	his
head	as	he	said	something,	then	repeated	it.
A	strange	tic	from	Rhulad’s	head,	and	Trull	realized	it	had	been	a	nod.
Udinaas	then	reversed	the	position	of	his	arms,	and	set	the	knife	edge	to
Rhulad’s	right	eye.
Outside	was	the	sound	of	a	mass	of	people,	but	Trull	did	not	turn	about.	He
could	not	pull	his	gaze	from	the	Letherii,	from	his	brother.
He	was	dead.	There	was	no	doubt.	None.
The	slave,	who	had	worked	on	Rhulad	for	a	day	and	a	night,	filling	mortal
wounds	with	wax,	burning	coins	into	the	cold	flesh,	who	had	then	seen	his
charge	return	to	life,	now	knelt	before	the	Edur,	his	voice	holding	insanity	at
bay,	his	voice—and	his	hands—guiding	Rhulad	back	to	the	living.
A	Letherii	slave.
Father	Shadow,	who	are	we	to	have	done	this?
The	coin	was	prised	loose.
Trull	pulled	Fear	along	as	he	stepped	closer.	He	did	not	speak.	Not	yet.
Udinaas	returned	the	knife	to	its	sheath.	He	leaned	back,	one	hand
withdrawing	to	settle	on	Rhulad’s	left	shoulder.	Then	the	slave	pivoted	and
looked	up	at	Trull.	‘He’s	not	ready	to	speak.	The	screaming	has	exhausted	him,
given	the	weight	of	the	coins	encasing	his	chest.’	Udinaas	half	rose,	intending
to	move	away,	but	Rhulad’s	left	arm	rustled,	hand	sobbing	away	from	the
sword’s	grip,	coins	clicking	as	the	fingers	groped,	then	found	the	slave’s	arm.
And	held	on.
Udinaas	almost	smiled—and	Trull	saw	for	the	first	time	the	exhaustion	of
the	man,	the	extremity	of	all	that	he	had	gone	through—and	settled	down	once
more.	‘Your	brothers,	Rhulad,’	he	said.	‘Trull,	and	Fear.	They	are	here	to	take
care	of	you	now.	I	am	but	a	slave—’
Two	coins	fell	away	as	Rhulad’s	grip	tightened.
‘You	will	stay,	Udinaas,’	Trull	said.	‘Our	brother	needs	you.	We	need	you.’
The	Letherii	nodded.	‘As	you	wish,	master.	Only…I	am	tired.	I—I	keep
blacking	out,	only	to	awaken	at	the	sound	of	my	own	voice.’	He	shook	his	head
helplessly.	‘I	don’t	even	know	what	I	have	said	to	your	brother—’
‘It	matters	not,’	Fear	cut	in.	‘What	you	have	done…’	His	words	trailed
away,	and	for	a	moment	it	seemed	his	face	would	crumple.	Trull	saw	the
muscles	of	his	brother ’s	neck	tauten,	then	Fear ’s	eyes	closed	tight,	he	drew	a
deep	breath	and	was	himself	once	more.	He	shook	his	head,	unable	to	speak.
Trull	crouched	beside	Udinaas	and	Rhulad.	‘Udinaas,	I	understand.	You
need	rest.	But	stay	for	a	few	moments	longer,	if	you	can.’
The	slave	nodded.


Trull	shifted	his	gaze,	studied	Rhulad’s	ravaged	face,	the	eyes	still	shut—
but	there	was	movement	behind	them.	‘Rhulad.	It	is	Trull.	Listen	to	me,	my
brother.	Keep	your	eyes	closed,	for	now.	We	must	get	this—this	armour—off
you—’
At	that	Rhulad	shook	his	head.
‘They	are	funereal	coins,	Rhulad—’
‘Y-yes.	I…know.’
Words	raw	and	heavy,	the	breath	pushed	out	from	a	constricted	chest.
Trull	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Udinaas	has	been	with	you,	alone,	preparing	you
—’
‘Yes.’
‘He	is	used	up,	brother.’
‘Yes.	Tell	Mother.	I	want.	I	want	him.’
‘Of	course.	But	let	him	go	now,	please—’
The	hand	dropped	away	from	the	slave’s	arm,	clunking	hard	and
seemingly	insensate	on	the	floor.	The	other	hand,	still	holding	the	sword,
suddenly	twitched.
And	a	ghastly	smile	emerged	on	Rhulad’s	face.	‘Yes.	I	hold	it	still.	This.
This	is	what	he	meant.’
Trull	edged	back	slightly.
Udinaas	crawled	off	a	short	distance,	leaned	up	against	the	chest	of	coins.
He	drew	himself	up	into	a	shape	echoing	that	of	Rhulad,	and,	in	the	moment
before	he	turned	his	face	away,	Trull	saw	the	visage	fill	with	anguish.
Exhaustion	or	no,	for	Udinaas	peace	and	rest	was	ten	thousand	paces	away
—Trull	could	see	that,	could	understand	that	brutal	truth.	Rhulad	had	had	the
slave,	but	whom	did	Udinaas	have?
Not	a	typical	Edur	thought.
But	nothing—nothing—was	as	it	was.	Trull	rose	and	moved	close	to	Fear.
He	thought	for	a	moment,	then	swung	round	to	the	entranceway.	Mayen	was
still	standing	there,	at	her	side	the	Letherii,	Feather	Witch.	Trull	gestured	at	the
slave,	then	pointed	to	where	Udinaas	crouched.
He	saw	her	face	stretch	in	horror.	Saw	her	shake	her	head.
Then	she	ran	from	the	building.
Trull	grimaced.
A	commotion	at	the	entrance,	and	Mayen	withdrew	from	sight.
Tomad	and	Uruth	appeared.
And	behind	them,	as	they	slowly	edged	forward,	came	Hannan	Mosag.
Oh.	Oh	no.	The	sword.	The	damned	sword—


Chapter	Ten

White	petals	spin	and	curl	on	their	way
down	to	the	depthless	sea.
The	woman	and	her	basket,	her	hand	flashing	red
in	quick	soft	motion	scattering	these
pure	wings,	to	ride	a	moment	on	the	wind.
She	stands,	a	forlorn	goddess	birthing	flight
that	fails	and	falls	on	the	river ’s	broad	breast.
A	basket	of	birds	destined	to	drown.
See	her	weep	in	the	city’s	drawn	shadow
her	hand	a	thing	disembodied,
carrion-clawed	and	ceaseless	in	repetition,
she	delivers	death	and	in	her	eyes
is	seen	the	horror	of	living.
LADY	ELASSARA	OF	TRATE
CORMOR	FURAL
The	roll	of	thunder,	the	heavy	trammelling	of	rain	on	the	roof.	The	storm	was
following	the	course	of	the	river,	drawn	northward	and	dragging	one	edge	of
its	heaving	clouds	across	Letheras.	Unseasonal,	unwelcome,	making	the	single
room	of	Tehol’s	abode	close	and	steamy.	There	were	two	more	stools	than
there	had	been,	retrieved	by	Bugg	from	a	rubbish	heap.	On	one	of	them,	in	the
far	corner,	sat	Ublala	Pung,	weeping.
As	he	had	been	without	pause	for	over	a	bell,	his	huge	frame	racked	with	a
shuddering	that	made	the	stool	creak	alarmingly.
In	the	centre	of	the	small	room,	Tehol	paced.
A	splashing	of	feet	outside,	then	the	curtain	in	the	doorway	was	tugged	to
one	side	and	Bugg	stamped	in,	water	streaming	from	him.	He	coughed.
‘What’s	burning	in	the	hearth?’
Tehol	shrugged.	‘Whatever	was	piled	up	beside	it,	of	course.’
‘But	that	was	your	rain	hat.	I	wove	it	myself,	with	my	own	two	hands.’


‘A	rain	hat?	Those	reeds	had	wrapped	rotting	fish—’
‘That’s	the	stink,	all	right.’	Bugg	nodded,	wiping	at	his	eyes.	‘Anyway,
rotting	is	a	relative	term,	master.’
‘It	is?’
‘The	Faraed	consider	it	a	delicacy.’
‘You	just	wanted	me	to	smell	like	fish.’
‘Better	you	than	the	whole	house,’	Bugg	said,	glancing	over	at	Ublala.
‘What’s	wrong	with	him?’
‘I	haven’t	a	clue,’	Tehol	said.	‘So,	what’s	the	news?’
‘I	found	her.’
‘Great.’
‘But	we’ll	have	to	go	and	get	her.’
‘Go	outside?’
‘Yes.’
‘Into	the	rain?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well,’	Tehol	said,	resuming	his	pacing,	‘I	don’t	like	that	at	all.	Too	risky.’
‘Risky?’
‘Why,	yes.	Risky.	I	might	get	wet.	Especially	now	that	I	don’t	have	a	rain
hat.’
‘And	whose	fault	is	that,	I	wonder?’
‘It	was	already	smouldering,	sitting	so	close	to	the	hearth.	I	barely	nudged
it	with	my	toe	and	up	it	went.’
‘I	was	drying	it	out.’
Tehol	paused	in	mid-step,	studied	Bugg	for	a	moment,	then	resumed
pacing.	‘It’s	a	storm,’	he	said	after	a	moment.	‘Storms	pass.	I	need	a	reason	to
procrastinate.’
‘Yes,	master.’
Tehol	swung	round	and	approached	Ublala	Pung.	‘Most	beloved
bodyguard,	whatever	is	wrong?’
Red-rimmed	eyes	stared	up	at	him.	‘You’re	not	interested.	Not	really.
Nobody	is.’
‘Of	course	I’m	interested.	Bugg,	I’m	interested,	aren’t	I?	It’s	my	nature,
isn’t	it?’
‘Absolutely,	master.	Most	of	the	time.’
‘It’s	the	women,	isn’t	it,	Ublala?	I	can	tell.’
The	huge	man	nodded	miserably.
‘Are	they	fighting	over	you?’
He	shook	his	head.


‘Have	you	fallen	for	one	of	them?’
‘That’s	just	it.	I	haven’t	had	a	chance	to.’
Tehol	glanced	over	at	Bugg,	then	back	to	Ublala.	‘You	haven’t	had	a
chance	to.	What	a	strange	statement.	Can	you	elaborate?’
‘It’s	not	fair,	that’s	what	it	is.	Not	fair.	You	won’t	understand.	It’s	not	a
problem	you	have.	I	mean,	what	am	I?	Am	I	to	be	nothing	but	a	toy?	Just
because	I	have	a	big—’
‘Hold	on	a	moment,’	Tehol	cut	in.	‘Let’s	see	if	I	fully	understand	you,
Ublala.	You	feel	they’re	just	using	you.	Interested	only	in	your,	uh,	attributes.
All	they	want	from	you	is	sex.	No	commitment,	no	loyalty	even.	They’re	happy
taking	turns	with	you,	taking	no	account	of	your	feelings,	your	sensitive
nature.	They	probably	don’t	even	want	to	cuddle	afterwards	or	make	small	talk,
right?’
Ublala	nodded.
‘And	all	that	is	making	you	miserable?’
He	nodded	again,	snuffling,	his	lower	lip	protruding,	his	broad	mouth
downturned	at	the	corners,	a	muscle	twitching	in	his	right	cheek.
Tehol	stared	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	tossed	up	his	hands.	‘Ublala!
Don’t	you	understand?	You’re	in	a	man’s	paradise!	What	all	the	rest	of	us	can
only	dream	about!’
‘But	I	want	something	more!’
‘No!	You	don’t!	Trust	me!	Bugg,	don’t	you	agree?	Tell	him!’
Bugg	frowned,	then	said,	‘It	is	as	Tehol	says,	Ublala.	Granted,	a	tragic
truth,	and	granted,	Master ’s	nature	is	to	revel	in	tragic	truths,	which	to	many
might	seem	unusual,	unhealthy	even—’
‘Thanks	for	the	affirmation,	Bugg,’	Tehol	interrupted	with	a	scowl.	‘Go
clean	up,	will	you?’	He	faced	Ublala	again.	‘You	are	at	the	pinnacle	of	male
achievement,	my	friend—wait!	Did	you	say	it’s	not	a	problem	I	have?	What	did
you	mean	by	that?’
Ublala	blinked.	‘What?	Uh,	are	you	at	that	pinnacle,	or	whatever	you	called
it—are	you	at	it	too?’
Bugg	snorted.	‘He	hasn’t	been	at	it	in	months.’
‘Well,	that’s	it!’	Tehol	stormed	to	the	hearth	and	plucked	out	what	was	left
of	the	matted	reeds.	He	stamped	out	the	flames,	then	picked	the	charred	object
up	and	set	it	on	his	head.	‘All	right,	Bugg,	let’s	go	and	get	her.	As	for	this
brainless	giant	here,	he	can	mope	around	all	alone	in	here,	for	all	I	care.	How
many	insults	can	a	sensitive	man	like	me	endure,	anyway?’
Wisps	of	smoke	drifted	from	the	reeds	on	Tehol’s	head.
‘That’s	about	to	take	flame	again,	master.’


‘Well,	that’s	what’s	good	about	rain,	then,	isn’t	it?	Let’s	go.’
Outside	in	the	narrow	aisle,	water	streamed	ankle-deep	towards	the
clogged	drain	at	the	far	end,	where	a	small	lake	was	forming.	Bugg	a	half-step
in	the	lead,	they	sloshed	their	way	across	its	swirling,	rain-pocked	expanse.
‘You	should	be	more	sympathetic	to	Ublala,	master,’	Bugg	said	over	a
shoulder.	‘He’s	a	very	unhappy	man.’
‘Sympathy	belongs	to	the	small-membered,	Bugg.	Ublala	has	three	women
drooling	all	over	him,	or	have	you	forgotten?’
‘That’s	a	rather	disgusting	image.’
‘You’ve	been	too	old	too	long,	dear	servant.	There’s	nothing	inherently
disgusting	about	drool.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘All	right,	maybe	there	is.
However,	do	we	have	to	talk	about	sex?	That	subject	makes	me	nostalgic.’
‘Errant	forbid.’
‘So,	where	is	she?’
‘In	a	brothel.’
‘Oh,	now	that’s	really	pathetic.’
‘More	like	a	newly	acquired	raging	addiction,	master.	The	more	she	feeds
it,	the	hungrier	it	gets.’
They	crossed	Turol	Avenue	and	made	their	way	into	the	Prostitutes’
District.	The	downpour	was	diminishing,	the	tail	ends	of	the	storm	front
streaming	overhead.	‘Well,’	Tehol	commented,	‘that	is	not	a	desirable
condition	for	one	of	my	most	valued	employees.	Especially	since	her	addiction
doesn’t	include	her	handsome,	elegant	boss.	Something	tells	me	it	should	have
been	me	weeping	in	a	corner	back	there,	not	Ublala.’
‘It	may	simply	be	a	case	of	Shurq	not	wanting	to	mix	business	with
pleasure.’
‘Bugg,	you	told	me	she’s	in	a	brothel.’
‘Oh.	Right.	Sorry.’
‘Now	I’m	truly	miserable.	I	wasn’t	miserable	this	morning.	If	the	trend
continues,	by	dusk	I’ll	be	swimming	the	canal	with	bags	of	coins	around	my
neck.’
‘Here	we	are.’
They	stood	before	a	narrow,	three-storey	tenement,	set	slightly	in	from	the
adjoining	buildings	and	looking	a	few	centuries	older	than	anything	else	on	the
street.	The	front	facing	held	a	carved	façade	around	two	square,	inset	columns
of	dusty	blue	marble.	Decidedly	female	demons	in	bas-relief,	contorted	and
writhing	in	a	mass	orgy,	crowded	the	panels,	and	atop	the	columns	crouched
stone	gargoyles	with	enormous	breasts	held	high	and	inviting.
Tehol	turned	to	Bugg.	‘This	is	the	Temple.	She’s	in	the	Temple?’


‘Does	that	surprise	you?’
‘I	can’t	even	afford	to	step	across	the	threshold.	Even	Queen	Janall
frequents	this	place	but	a	few	times	a	year.	Annual	membership	dues	are	ten
thousand	docks…I’ve	heard…it	rumoured.	From	someone,	once.’
‘Matron	Delisp	is	probably	very	pleased	with	her	newest	property.’
‘I’d	wager	she	is	at	that.	So,	how	do	we	extract	Shurq	Elalle,	especially
since	it’s	obvious	she	is	where	she	wants	to	be,	and	the	Matron	has	at	least
thirty	thugs	in	her	employ	who’re	likely	to	try	and	stop	us?	Should	we	simply
consider	this	a	lost	cause	and	be	on	our	way?’
Bugg	shrugged.	‘That	is	up	to	you	to	decide,	master.’
‘Well.’	He	considered.	‘I’d	like	at	least	a	word	with	her.’
‘Probably	all	you	can	afford.’
‘Don’t	be	absurd,	Bugg.	She	doesn’t	charge	by	the	word…does	she?’
‘She	might	well	charge	by	the	glance,	master.	Our	dear	dead	thief	has
blossomed—’
‘Thanks	to	me!	Who	arranged	for	her	overhaul?	Her	drydock	repairs,	the
new	coat	of	paint?	We	had	a	deal—’
‘Tell	it	to	her,	master,	not	me.	I	am	well	aware	of	the	lengths	you	go	to	in
appeasing	your	own	peculiar	appetites.’
‘I’m	not	even	going	to	ask	what	you	mean	by	that,	Bugg.	It	sounds	sordid,
and	my	sordid	self	is	my	own	affair.’
‘So	it	is,	master,	so	it	is.	Good	thing	you’re	not	the	nostalgic	type.’
Tehol	glared	at	Bugg	for	a	moment,	then	swung	his	attention	once	more	to
the	Temple.	The	oldest	brothel	in	all	the	land.	Some	said	it	was	standing	here
long	before	the	city	rose	up	around	it,	and	indeed	the	city	rose	up	around	it
because	of	the	brothel	itself.	That	didn’t	make	much	sense,	but	then	few	things
did	when	it	came	to	love	and	its	many	false	but	alluring	shades.	He	tilted	his
head	back	to	study	the	gargoyles,	and	the	scorched	reed	hat	slid	off	to	splash
on	the	cobbles	behind	him.	‘Well,	that	settles	it.	Either	I	stand	here	getting	my
hair	wet,	or	I	go	inside.’
‘As	far	as	I	can	tell,	master,	my	rain	hat	was	a	tragic	failure	in	any	case.’
‘It’s	your	over-critical	nature,	Bugg,	what’s	done	you	in.	Follow	me!’
Tehol	ascended	the	steps	with	proprietary	determination.	As	he	reached	the
landing	the	front	door	swung	open	and	the	frame	was	filled	by	a	huge,	hooded
man	wearing	a	black	surcoat,	a	massive	double-bladed	axe	in	his	gauntleted
hands.
Appalled,	Tehol	halted,	Bugg	stumbling	into	him	from	behind	on	the	lower
step.
‘Excuse	me,’	Tehol	managed,	stepping	to	one	side	and	pulling	Bugg	along


with	him.	‘Off	to	a	beheading,	then?’	He	gestured	for	the	man	to	pass.
Small	eyes	glittered	from	the	hood’s	shadows.	‘Thank	you,	sir,’	he	said	in
a	raspy	voice.	‘You	are	most	courteous.’	He	strode	forward	onto	the	landing,
then	paused.	‘It’s	raining.’
‘Indeed,	almost	finished,	I’d	wager.	See	the	blue	overhead?’
The	axe-carrying	giant	faced	Tehol.	‘If	anyone	asks,	sir,	you	never	saw	me
here.’
‘You	have	my	word.’
‘Most	kind.’	He	faced	the	street	again,	then	cautiously	descended	the	steps.
‘Ooh,’	he	said	as	he	set	off,	‘it’s	wet!	Ooh!’
Tehol	and	Bugg	watched	him	scurry	away,	hunched	over	and	weaving	to
avoid	the	deeper	puddles.
Bugg	sighed.	‘I	admit	to	being	greatly	affrighted	by	his	sudden
appearance.’
Brows	raised,	Tehol	regarded	his	servant.	‘Really?	Poor	Bugg,	you	need
to	do	something	about	those	nerves	of	yours.	Come	on,	then,	and	fear	nothing
whilst	you	are	with	me.’
They	entered	the	Temple.
And	Tehol	halted	once	more,	as	suddenly	as	the	first	time,	as	the	point	of	a
knife	settled	on	his	cheek	beneath	his	right	eye,	which	blinked	rapidly.	Bugg
managed	to	draw	up	in	time	to	avoid	bumping	into	his	master,	for	which
Tehol’s	gratitude	was	sufficient	to	weaken	his	knees.
A	sweet	feminine	voice	murmured	close	to	his	ear,	‘You’re	not	in	disguise,
sir.	Which	means,	well,	we	both	know	what	that	means,	don’t	we?’
‘I’ve	come	for	my	daughter—’
‘Now	that’s	in	very	poor	taste.	We	can’t	abide	such	twisted,	sick	desires	in
here—’
‘You	misunderstand—understandably,	of	course,	that	is.	I	meant	to	say,	I’ve
come	to	retrieve	her,	before	it’s	too	late.’
‘Her	name?’
‘Shurq	Elalle.’
‘Well,	it’s	too	late.’
‘You	mean	she	being	dead?	I’m	aware	of	that.	It’s	her	ancestors,	you	see,
they	want	her	to	come	home	to	the	crypt.	They	miss	her	terribly,	and	a	few	of
them	are	getting	alarmingly	angry.	Ghosts	can	be	a	lot	of	trouble—not	just	for
you	and	this	establishment,	but	for	me	as	well.	You	see	my	predicament?’
The	knife	point	withdrew,	and	a	short,	lithe	woman	stepped	round	to	stand
before	him.	Close-fitting	silks	in	rusty	hues,	a	broad	silk	belt	wrapped	about
her	tiny	waist,	upturned	slippers	on	her	minuscule	feet.	A	sweet,	heart-shaped


face,	strangely	overlarge	eyes,	now	narrowing.	‘Are	you	done?’
Tehol	smiled	sheepishly.	‘You	must	get	that	a	lot.	Sorry.	Are	you,
perchance,	Matron	Delisp?’
She	spun	about.	‘Follow	me.	I	hate	this	room.’
He	glanced	about	for	the	first	time.	Two	paces	wide,	four	deep,	a	door	at
the	far	end,	the	walls	hidden	behind	lush	tapestries	depicting	countless
couplings	of	all	sorts.	‘Seems	inviting	enough,’	he	said,	following	the	woman
to	the	door.
‘It’s	the	spent	smell.’
‘Spent?	Oh,	yes.’
‘Smells	of…regret.	I	hate	that	smell.	I	hate	everything	about	it.’	She	opened
the	door	and	slipped	through.
Tehol	and	Bugg	hastened	to	follow.
The	chamber	beyond	was	dominated	by	a	steep	staircase,	which	began	a
single	pace	beyond	the	doorway.	The	woman	led	them	round	it	to	a	plush
waiting	room,	thick-padded	sofas	along	the	side	walls,	a	single	high-backed
chair	occupying	the	far	wall.	She	walked	directly	to	that	chair	and	sat	down.
‘Sit.	Now,	what’s	all	this	about	ghosts?	Oh,	never	mind	that.	You	were,	what,
ten	years	old	when	you	fathered	Shurq	Elalle?	No	wonder	she	never	mentioned
you.	Even	when	she	was	alive.	Tell	me,	were	you	disappointed	when	she
decided	on	a	career	of	thievery?’
‘From	your	tone,’	Tehol	said,	‘I	gather	you	are	challenging	the	veracity	of
my	claims.’
‘Which	question	gave	me	away?’
‘But,	you	see,	I	am	not	so	ignorant	as	you	think.	Hence	my	disguise.’
She	blinked.	‘Your	disguise	is	to	appear	as	a	man	in	his	early	thirties,
wearing	sodden,	badly	made	wool—’
Bugg	sat	straighter.	‘Badly	made?	Now,	hold	on—’
Tehol	nudged	his	servant	with	an	elbow,	hard	in	the	ribs.	Bugg	grunted,
then	subsided.
‘That	is	correct,’	Tehol	said.
‘A	vast	investment	in	sorcery,	then.	How	old	are	you	in	truth?’
‘Sixty-nine…my	dear.’
‘I’m	impressed.	Now,	you	mentioned	ghosts?’
‘Afraid	so,	Matron.	Terrible	ones.	Vengeful,	disinclined	to	discourse.	Thus
far	I	have	managed	to	keep	them	penned	up	in	the	family	crypt,	but	they’ll	get
out	sooner	or	later.	And	proceed	on	a	rampage	through	the	streets—a	night	of
terror	for	all	Letheras’s	citizens,	I	fear—until	they	arrive	here.	And	then,	well,
I	shudder	at	the	thought.’


‘As	I	am	shuddering	right	now,	although	for	entirely	different	reasons.	But
yes,	we	certainly	have	a	dilemma.	My	particular	dilemma,	however,	is	one	I
admit	to	having	been	struggling	with	for	some	time	now.’
‘Oh?’
‘Fortunately,	you	appear	to	have	provided	me	with	a	solution.’
‘I	am	pleased.’
The	woman	leaned	forward.	‘Top	floor—there’s	only	one	room.	Talk	that
damned	demoness	out	of	here!	Before	my	other	lasses	flay	me	alive!’
	
The	stairs	were	steep	but	well	padded,	the	wooden	railing	beneath	their	hands
an	unbroken	undulation	of	lovingly	carved	breasts	polished	and	oiled	by
countless	sweaty	palms.	They	met	no-one	on	the	way	and	reached	the	top	floor
breathless—due	to	the	ascent,	of	course,	Tehol	told	himself	as	he	paused	at	the
door	and	wiped	his	hands	on	his	soaked	leggings.
Head	lowered	and	panting,	Bugg	was	at	his	side.	‘Errant	take	me,	what
have	they	rubbed	into	that	wood?’
‘I’m	not	sure,’	Tehol	admitted,	‘but	I	can	barely	walk.’
‘Perhaps	we	should	take	a	moment,’	Bugg	suggested,	wiping	the	sweat
from	his	face.
‘Good	idea.	Let’s.’
A	short	time	later	Tehol	straightened,	with	a	wince,	and	nodded	at	Bugg,
who	grimaced	in	reply.	Tehol	raised	a	hand	and	thumped	on	the	heavy	wooden
door.
‘Enter,’	came	the	muffled	command.
Tehol	opened	the	door	and	stepped	into	the	room.	Behind	him,	Bugg
hissed,	‘Errant	take	me,	look	at	all	the	breasts!’
The	wall	panels	and	ceiling	continued	the	theme	begun	on	the	wooden
railing,	a	riotous	proliferation	of	mammary	excess.	Even	the	floor	beneath	the
thick	rugs	was	lumpy.
‘A	singular	obsession—’	Tehol	began,	and	was	interrupted.
‘Oh,’	said	a	voice	from	the	huge	bed	before	them,	‘it’s	you.’
Tehol	cleared	his	throat.	‘Shurq	Elalle.’
‘If	you’ve	come	for	services,’	she	said,	‘you	might	be	relieved	to	know	the
executioner ’s	big	axe	was	pathetic	compensation.’
‘He	got	wet	in	the	rain,’	Bugg	said.
Tehol	glanced	back	at	him.	‘What	is	the	relevance	of	that?’
‘I	don’t	know,	but	I	thought	you	might.’
‘I’m	not	leaving,’	Shurq	said,	‘if	that’s	why	you’re	here.’


‘You	have	to,’	Tehol	countered.	‘The	Matron	insists.’
She	sat	straighter	in	the	bed.	‘It’s	those	damned	cows	downstairs,	isn’t	it?
I’ve	stolen	all	their	clients	and	they	want	me	out!’
‘I	imagine	so.’	Tehol	shrugged.	‘But	that’s	hardly	surprising,	is	it?	Listen,
Shurq,	we	had	a	deal,	didn’t	we?’
Her	expression	darkened.	‘So	I	should	do	the	honourable	thing?	All	right,
but	I	have	a	problem	regarding	certain	appetites…’
‘I	wish	I	could	help.’
Her	brows	rose.
‘Uh,	I	meant—I	mean—oh,	I	don’t	know	what	I	mean.’	He	paused,	then
brightened.	‘But	I’ll	introduce	you	to	Ublala,	an	unhappy	bodyguard	longing
for	commitment.’
Her	brows	rose	higher.
‘Well,	why	not?	You	don’t	have	to	tell	him	you’re	dead!	He’ll	never	notice,
of	that	I’m	certain!	And	as	for	your	appetites,	I	doubt	there’ll	be	a	problem
there,	although	there’s	a	trio	of	women	who	might	be	very	upset,	but	I’ll	handle
that.	Look,	it’s	a	brilliant	solution,	Shurq.’
‘I’ll	give	it	a	try,	I	suppose,	but	I’m	not	making	any	promises.	Now,	step
outside,	please,	so	I	can	get	dressed.’
Tehol	and	Bugg	exchanged	glances	and	then	complied,	softly	shutting	the
door	behind	them.
Bugg	studied	his	master.	‘I	am	very	impressed,’	he	said	after	a	moment.
‘I’d	thought	this	a	situation	without	a	solution.	Master,	my	admiration	for	you
grows	like	a—’
‘Stop	staring	at	that	railing,	Bugg.’
‘Uh,	yes.	You’re	right.’
	
Matron	Delisp	was	waiting	at	the	bottom	of	the	stairs.	Seeing	Shurq	Elalle
following	a	step	behind	Bugg,	her	face	twisted	with	distaste.	‘Errant	bless	you,
Tehol	Beddict.	I	owe	you	one.’
Tehol	sighed.	‘I	had	a	feeling	you	were	sceptical	of	my	story.’
‘The	woollen	leggings,’	she	replied.	‘I	hear	virtually	everyone’s	put	in
orders	for	them.’
Tehol	shot	Bugg	a	look,	but	the	servant’s	brows	rose	and	he	said,	‘Not	with
me,	master.	That	would	be	disloyal.	Rest	assured	that	everyone	else’s	version
will	prove	but	pathetic	imitations.’
‘Perhaps,	Matron	Delisp,’	Tehol	said,	‘I	am	merely	disguised	as	Tehol
Beddict.	That	would	be	clever,	wouldn’t	it?’


‘Too	clever	for	you.’
‘Well,	you	have	a	point	there.’
‘Anyway,	do	you	want	me	in	your	debt	or	not?’
Shurq	Elalle	pushed	past	Bugg.	‘I	don’t	like	being	ignored.	You’re	all
ignoring	me	as	if	I	was—’
‘Dead?’	Delisp	asked.
‘I	just	wanted	to	point	out	my	reason	for	vacating	this	house,	which	is	that
I,	too,	owe	Tehol	Beddict.	I	may	be	dead,	but	I	am	not	without	honour.	In	any
case,	Delisp,	I	believe	you	owe	me	a	rather	substantial	payment	right	now.
Sixty	per	cent,	I	seem	to	recall—’
‘What	do	you	need	all	that	money	for?’	the	Matron	demanded.	‘How	many
variations	of	sex-assassin	attire	exist	out	there?	How	many	bundles	of	raw
spices	do	you	need	to	keep	fresh?	No,	wait,	I	don’t	want	to	know	the	answer.
Sixty	per	cent.	Fine,	but	it’ll	take	me	a	day	or	two—I	don’t	keep	that	kind	of
coin	around	here.	Where	should	I	have	it	delivered?’
‘Tehol	Beddict’s	residence	will	suffice.’
‘Hold	on,’	Tehol	objected.	‘I	can’t	secure—’
‘I	intend,’	Shurq	cut	in,	‘to	spend	it	quickly.’
‘Oh.	All	right,	but	I’m	not	happy.	Too	many	comings	and	goings	there.
Suspicions	will	be	insatiably	aroused—’
‘Stop	staring	at	the	railing,	master.’
‘Errant’s	dreams!	Let’s	get	out	of	here.’
	
The	storm	had	passed.	Rainwater	still	flowed	down	the	streets,	but	people	were
venturing	out	once	more.	It	was	late	afternoon.	Shurq	Elalle	halted	at	the	foot
of	the	Temple’s	steps.	‘I	will	rejoin	you	tonight,	on	your	roof,	Tehol	Beddict.
Midnight.’
‘What	about	Ublala	Pung?’
‘I	admit	to	having	second	thoughts.’
‘Shurq	Elalle.	Ublala	Pung	survived	a	Drowning.	He	walked	across	the
bottom	of	the	canal.	You	two	have	a	lot	in	common,	if	you	think	about	it.’
‘He’s	also	massively	endowed,’	Bugg	added.
Tehol	made	a	face	at	him.	‘You	are	being	crude—’
‘Bring	him	to	the	roof	tonight,’	Shurq	said.
‘This	is	a	conspiracy	to	make	me	miserable,	isn’t	it?	Both	of	you,	leave
me.	I’m	going	for	a	walk.	Bugg,	when	you	get	back	home,	give	it	a	tidy.	No
doubt	Shand	will	be	storming	in	before	too	long.	Tell	her	I’ll	drop	by
tomorrow	on	some	important	business—’


‘What	important	business?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I’ll	invent	something.	You	have	other	things	to	worry	about
—how’s	the	foundation	work	coming	along,	anyway?’
‘It’s	piling	up.’
‘Then	sort	it	out.’
‘You	misunderstand,	master.	We’re	on	schedule.’
‘I	didn’t	misunderstand.	I	was	being	obdurate.	Now,	I’m	off	to	find	a	more
reasonable	conversation,	somewhere.’	He	swung	round	for	a	final	word	with
Shurq,	but	she	was	gone.	‘Damned	thief.	Go	on,	Bugg.	Wait,	what’s	for
supper?’
‘Banana	leaves.’
‘Not	fishy	ones,	I	trust.’
‘Of	course	not,	master.’
‘Then	what?’
‘The	material	they	were	wrapped	around	was	unidentifiable,	which,	if	you
think	about	it,	is	probably	a	good	thing.’
‘How	do	we	live	on	this	stuff?’
‘A	good	question,	master.	It	is	indeed	baffling.’
Tehol	studied	his	servant	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	gestured	the	man
away.
Bugg	turned	right,	so	Tehol	went	left.	The	air	was	warming,	yet	still	fresh
after	the	rain.	Wet	dogs	nosed	the	rubbish	in	the	settling	puddles.	Cats	chased
the	cockroaches	that	had	swarmed	up	from	the	drains.	A	beggar	had	found	a
sliver	of	soap	and	stood	naked	beneath	a	stream	of	water	coming	from	a
cracked	eaves	trough,	working	up	a	murky	lather	while	he	sang	a	lament	that
had	been	popular	a	hundred	years	ago.	Residents	had	taken	advantage	of	the
unexpected	downpour,	emptying	chamber	pots	from	their	windows	rather	than
carrying	them	a	few	dozen	paces	to	the	nearest	communal	dump-hole.	As	a
result,	some	of	the	pools	held	floating	things	and	the	streams	in	the	gutters
carried	small	flyblown	islands	that	collected	here	and	there	in	buzzing	rafts
that	bled	yellowy	brown	slime.
It	was	a	fine	evening	in	the	city	of	Letheras,	Tehol	reflected,	testing	the	air
a	moment	before	taking	a	deep	breath	and	releasing	it	in	a	contented	sigh.	He
went	on	down	the	street	until	he	reached	Quillas	Canal,	then	walked	along	it
towards	the	river.	To	his	right	rose	a	forest	of	masts	from	fisherboats	moored
to	wait	out	the	storm.	Tarps	were	being	pulled	aside,	water	splashing	as	the
crews	bailed	feverishly	so	they	could	make	for	open	water	before	the	day’s
light	failed.	Near	one	jetty	a	half-dozen	city	guardsmen	were	fishing	a	corpse
from	the	murky	water,	a	crowd	of	onlookers	shouting	advice	as	the	squad


struggled	with	hook-poles.	Above	them	flapped	seagulls.
Tehol	came	within	sight	of	the	old	palace,	then	took	a	side	street	away
from	the	canal,	proceeding	on	a	winding,	confused	route	until	he	came	to	the
grounds	of	the	towers.	Gathering	dusk	made	the	air	grainy	as	Tehol	reached
the	low	crumbling	wall	and	stared	across	the	short	expanse	of	broken,	uneven
yard	to	the	one,	battered	tower	that	was	clearly	different	in	construction	from
all	the	others,	being	square	instead	of	round.
The	strange	triangular	windows	were	dark,	crowded	with	dead	vines.	The
inset,	black-stained	wooden	door	was	shrouded	in	shadow.	Tehol	wondered
how	such	a	door	could	have	survived—normal	wood	would	have	rotted	to	dust
centuries	ago.
He	could	see	no-one	in	the	yard.	‘Kettle!	Child,	are	you	in	there?’
A	small	bedraggled	figure	stepped	out	from	behind	a	tree.
Startled,	Tehol	said,	‘That	was	a	good	trick,	lass.’
She	approached.	‘There’s	an	artist.	A	painter.	He	comes	to	paint	the	tower.
He	wants	to	paint	me	too,	but	I	stay	behind	trees.	It	makes	him	very	angry.	You
are	the	man	who	sleeps	on	the	roof	of	your	house.	Lots	of	people	try	spying	on
you.’
‘Yes,	I	know.	Shurq	tells	me	you,	uh,	take	care	of	them.’
‘She	said	maybe	you	could	help	find	out	who	I	was.’
He	studied	her.	‘Have	you	seen	Shurq	lately?’
‘Only	once.	She	was	all	fixed.	I	barely	recognized	her.’
‘Well,	lass,	we	could	see	the	same	done	for	you,	if	you	like.’
The	grubby,	mould-patched	face	wrinkled	into	a	frown.	‘Why?’
‘Why?	To	make	you	less	noticeable,	I	suppose.	Wouldn’t	you	enjoy
looking	the	way	Shurq	does	now?’
‘Enjoy?’
‘Think	about	it	at	least?’
‘All	right.	You	look	friendly.	You	look	like	I	could	like	you.	I	don’t	like
many	people,	but	I	could	like	you.	Can	I	call	you	Father?	Shurq	is	my	mother.
She	isn’t,	really,	but	that’s	what	I	call	her.	I’m	looking	for	brothers	and	sisters,
too.’	She	paused,	then	asked,	‘Can	you	help	me?’
‘I’ll	try,	Kettle.	Shurq	tells	me	the	tower	talks	to	you.’
‘Not	words.	Just	thoughts.	Feelings.	It’s	afraid.	There’s	someone	in	the
ground	who	is	going	to	help.	Once	he	gets	free,	he’ll	help	us.	He’s	my	uncle.
But	the	bad	ones	scare	me.’
‘The	bad	ones?	Who	are	they?	Are	they	in	the	ground,	too?’
She	nodded.
‘Is	there	a	chance	they	will	get	out	of	the	ground	before	your	uncle	does?’


‘If	they	do,	they’ll	destroy	us	all.	Me,	Uncle	and	the	tower.	They’ve	said	so.
And	that	will	free	all	the	others.’
‘And	are	the	others	bad,	too?’
She	shrugged.	‘They	don’t	talk	much.	Except	one.	She	says	she’ll	make	me
an	empress.	I’d	like	to	be	an	empress.’
‘Well,	I	wouldn’t	trust	that	one.	Just	my	opinion,	Kettle,	but	promises	like
that	are	suspect.’
‘That’s	what	Shurq	says,	too.	But	she	sounds	very	nice.	She	wants	to	give
me	lots	of	treats	and	stuff.’
‘Be	careful,	lass.’
‘Do	you	ever	dream	of	dragons,	Father?’
‘Dragons?’
Shrugging	again,	she	turned	away.	‘It’s	getting	dark,’	she	said	over	her
shoulder.	‘I	need	to	kill	someone….	maybe	that	artist…’
	
Turudal	Brizad,	the	consort	to	Queen	Janall,	stood	leaning	against	the	wall
whilst	Brys	Beddict	led	his	students	through	the	last	of	the	counter-attack
exercises.
Audiences	were	not	uncommon	during	his	training	regime	with	the	king’s
own	guard,	although	Brys	had	been	mildly	surprised	that	Turudal	was	among
the	various	onlookers,	most	of	whom	were	practitioners	with	the	weapons	he
used	in	his	instruction.	The	consort	was	well	known	for	his	indolent	ways,	a
privilege	that,	in	the	days	of	Brys’s	grandfather,	would	not	have	been	tolerated
in	a	young,	fit	Letherii.	Four	years	of	military	service	beginning	in	the
seventeenth	year	had	been	mandatory.	In	those	days	there	had	been	external
threats	aplenty.	Bluerose	to	the	north,	the	independent,	unruly	city-states	of	the
archipelago	in	Dracons	Sea,	and	the	various	tribes	on	the	eastern	plain	had
been	pressuring	Lether,	driven	against	the	outposts	by	one	of	the	cyclical
expansionist	regimes	of	far	Kolanse.
Bluerose	now	paid	tribute	to	King	Ezgara	Diskanar,	the	city-states	had	been
crushed,	leaving	little	more	than	a	handful	of	goat-herders	and	fisherfolk	on
the	islands,	and	Kolanse	had	subsided	into	isolation	following	some	sort	of
civil	war	a	few	decades	past.
It	was	difficult	for	Brys	to	imagine	a	life	possessing	virtually	no	ability	to
defend	itself,	at	least	upon	the	attainment	of	adulthood,	but	Turudal	Brizad	was
such	a	creature.	Indeed,	the	consort	had	expressed	the	opinion	that	he	was	but	a
forerunner,	a	pioneer	of	a	state	of	human	life	wherein	soldiering	was	left	to	the
Indebted	and	the	mentally	inadequate.	Although	Brys	had	initially	scoffed	at


hearing	a	recounting	of	Brizad’s	words,	his	disbelief	had	begun	to	waver.	The
Letherii	military	was	still	strong,	yet	increasingly	it	was	bound	to	economics.
Every	campaign	was	an	opportunity	for	wealth.	And,	among	the	civilian
population	of	traders,	merchants	and	all	those	who	served	the	innumerable
needs	of	civilization,	few	were	bothering	with	martial	training	any	more.	An
undercurrent	of	contempt	now	coloured	their	regard	of	soldiers.
Until	they	need	us,	of	course.	Or	they	discover	a	means	to	profit	by	our
actions.
He	completed	the	exercise,	then	lingered	to	see	who	left	the	chamber	and
who	remained	to	practise	on	their	own.	Most	remained,	and	Brys	was	pleased.
The	two	who	had	left	were,	he	knew,	the	queen’s	spies	in	the	bodyguard.
Ironically,	everyone	else	knew	that	detail	as	well.
Brys	sheathed	his	sword	and	strode	over	to	Turudal	Brizad.	‘Consort?’
A	casual	tilt	of	the	head.	‘Finadd.’
‘Have	you	found	yourself	at	a	loose	end?	I	don’t	recall	ever	seeing	you
here	before.’
‘The	palace	seems	strangely	empty,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Well,’	Brys	ventured,	‘there’s	certainly	less	shouting.’
Turudal	Brizad	smiled.	‘The	prince	is	young,	Finadd.	Some	exuberance	is
to	be	expected.	The	Chancellor	would	have	a	word	with	you,	at	your
convenience.	I	understand	you	are	fully	recovered	from	your	mysterious
ordeal?’
‘The	King’s	healers	were	their	usual	proficient	selves,	Consort.	Thank	you
for	asking.	Why	does	the	Chancellor	wish	to	speak	with	me?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘I	am	not	the	one	to	ask.	I	am	but	a	messenger	in	this,
Finadd.’
Brys	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	simply	nodded.	‘I	accept	Triban
Gnol’s	invitation.	A	bell	from	now?’
‘That	should	suffice.	Let	us	hope	for	all	our	sakes	that	this	will	not	mark	an
expansion	of	the	present	feud	between	the	Chancellor	and	the	Ceda.’
Brys	was	surprised.	‘There	is	a	feud?	I	hadn’t	heard.	I	mean,	apart	from
the,	well,	the	usual	clash	of	opinions.’	He	considered,	then	said,	‘I	share	your
concern,	Consort.’
‘Does	it	ever	strike	you,	Finadd,	that	peace	leads	to	an	indulgence	in
strife?’
‘No,	since	your	statement	is	nonsensical.	The	opposite	of	peace	is	war,
while	war	is	an	extreme	expression	of	strife.	By	your	argument,	life	is
characterized	as	an	oscillation	between	strife	during	peace	and	strife	during
war.’


‘Not	entirely	nonsensical,	then,’	Turudal	Brizad	said.	‘We	exist	in	a	state	of
perpetual	stress.	Both	within	ourselves	and	in	the	world	beyond.’	He	shrugged.
‘We	may	speak	of	a	longing	for	balance,	but	in	our	soul	burns	a	lust	for
discord.’
‘If	your	soul	is	troubled,	Consort,’	Brys	said,	‘you	hide	it	well.’
‘None	of	us	here	lack	that	skill,	Finadd.’
Brys	cocked	his	head.	‘I	have	no	inclination	to	indulge	in	strife.	I	find	I	still
disagree	with	your	premise.	In	any	case,	I	must	take	my	leave	of	you	now,
Consort.’
On	his	way	back	to	his	chambers,	Brys	reflected	on	Turudal	Brizad’s
words.	There	might	well	have	been	a	warning	hidden	in	there,	but	apart	from
the	obvious	suggestion	that	all	was	not	as	it	seemed—and	in	the	palace	this	was
taken	as	given—he	could	not	pierce	the	subtlety	of	the	consort’s	intentions.
Stress	lay	in	the	cast	of	the	mind,	as	far	as	Brys	was	concerned.	Born	of
perspective	and	the	hue	through	which	one	saw	the	world,	and	such	things	were
shaped	by	both	nature	and	nurture.	Perhaps	on	some	most	basic	level	the
struggle	to	live	yielded	a	certain	stress,	but	that	was	not	the	same	as	the	strife
conjured	by	an	active	mind,	its	myriad	storms	of	desires,	emotions,	worries
and	terrors,	its	relentless	dialogue	with	death.
Brys	had	realized	long	ago	what	had	drawn	him	into	the	arts	of	fighting.
The	martial	world,	from	duelling	to	warfare,	was	inherently	reductionist,	the
dialogue	made	simple	and	straightforward.	Threats,	bargains	and
compromises	were	proscribed	by	the	length	of	Letherii	steel.	Self-discipline
imposed	a	measure	of	control	over	one’s	own	fate,	which	in	turn	served	to
diminish	the	damaging	effects	of	stress,	more	so	when	it	became	clear	to	the
practitioner	that	death	fought	using	blind	chance	when	all	else	failed,	and	so
one	had	no	choice	but	to	accept	the	consequences,	however	brutal	they	may	be.
Simple	notions	that	one	could	reflect	upon	at	leisure,	should	one	choose—but
never	when	face	to	face	with	an	enemy	with	blades	unsheathed	and	dancing.
Physical	laws	imposed	specific	limitations,	and	Brys	was	satisfied	with	that
clear	imposition	of	predictability—sufficient	to	provide	the	structure	around
which	he	built	his	life.
Turudal	Brizad’s	life	was	far	less	certain.	His	physicality	and	its
attractiveness	to	others	was	his	singular	quality,	and	no	amount	of	diligence
could	hold	back	the	years	that	threatened	it.	Granted,	there	were	alchemies	and
sorceries	that	could	be	mustered	to	stand	in	the	breach,	but	the	dark	tide	was
reluctant	to	bargain,	for	it	abided	by	its	own	laws	and	those	laws	were
immutable.	Worse	yet,	Brizad’s	efficacy	was	defined	by	the	whims	of	others.
As	professional	as	he	might	be,	his	every	partner	was,	potentially,	a	fathomless


well	of	raw	emotions,	yearning	to	grasp	hold	of	Brizad	and	ensnare	him.
Outwardly,	of	course,	there	were	rules	in	place.	He	was	a	consort,	after	all.	The
queen	already	had	a	husband.	The	Chancellor	was	bound	to	ancient	laws
denying	him	formal	relationships	with	man	or	woman.	Turudal	Brizad
possessed	virtually	no	rights;	the	children	he	might	sire	would	be	without	name
or	political	power—indeed,	the	queen	was	required	to	ensure	such	pregnancies
did	not	occur,	and	thus	far	she	had	held	to	that	prohibition.
But	it	was	rumoured	that	Janall	had	given	her	heart	to	Brizad.	And	that
Triban	Gnol	might	well	have	done	the	very	same,	with	the	potential
consequence	of	tearing	apart	the	old	alliance	between	queen	and	Chancellor.	If
so,	then	Turudal	Brizad	had	become	the	unhappy	fulcrum.	No	wonder	the	man
was	plagued	with	stress.
Yet	what	were	the	consort’s	own	ambitions?	Had	he	too	surrendered	his
heart,	and	if	so,	to	which	lover?
Brys	entered	his	room.	He	divested	himself	of	his	belt	and	armour,	then
drew	off	his	sweat-damp	undergarments.	He	layered	himself	in	scented	oil
which	he	then	scraped	off	with	a	wooden	comb.	Dressing	in	clean	clothes,	he
set	to	donning	his	formal	armour.	He	replaced	the	heavier	practice	sword	with
his	regular	longsword	in	the	scabbard	at	his	waist.	A	final	moment	scanning
the	contents	of	his	modest	residence,	noticing	the	misplaced	brace	of	knives	on
the	shelf	above	his	bed,	indicating	that	yet	another	spy	had	gone	through	his
room.	Not	one	careless	enough	to	leave	the	knives	in	the	wrong	position—that
had	been	done	by	whoever	had	been	spying	on	the	spy,	to	let	Brys	know	that	yet
another	search	for	who	knew	what	had	taken	place,	a	weekly	occurrence	of
late.
He	moved	the	knives	back	into	their	usual	position,	then	left.
	
‘Enter.’
Brys	stepped	inside,	then	paused	to	search	through	the	crowded,	cluttered
chamber.
‘Over	here,	King’s	Champion.’
He	followed	the	sound	of	the	voice	and	finally	caught	sight	of	the	Ceda,
who	was	suspended	in	a	leather-strap	harness	depending	from	the	ceiling.
Face-down	and	close	to	a	man’s	height	above	the	floor,	Kuru	Qan	was	wearing
a	strange	metal	helmet	with	multiple	lenses	fixed	in	a	slotted	frame	in	front	of
his	eyes.	On	the	floor	was	an	archaic,	yellowed	map.
‘I	have	little	time,	Ceda,’	Brys	said.	‘The	Chancellor	has	requested	that	I
attend	him	in	a	short	while.	What	are	you	doing?’


‘Is	it	important,	lad?’
‘That	I	know?	I	suppose	not.	I	was	just	curious.’
‘No,	the	Chancellor ’s	summons.’
‘I’m	not	sure.	It	seems	I	am	to	be	increasingly	viewed	as	some	kind	of
pivotal	player	in	a	game	of	which	I	have	no	comprehension.	After	all,	the	king
rarely	asks	for	my	advice	on	matters	of	state,	for	which	I	am	eternally	grateful,
since	I	make	it	a	point	not	to	involve	myself	with	such	considerations.	Thus,	I
have	no	opportunity	to	influence	our	Sire’s	opinion,	nor	would	I	wish	to.’
‘By	this	means,’	Kuru	Qan	said,	‘I	am	proving	that	the	world	is	round.’
‘Indeed?	Did	not	the	early	colonizers	from	the	First	Empire	make	that
evident?	They	circumnavigated	the	globe,	after	all.’
‘Ah,	but	that	was	physical	proof	rather	than	theoretical.	I	wished	to
determine	the	same	truth	via	hypothesis	and	theory.’
‘In	order	to	test	the	veracity	of	the	methods?’
‘Oh,	no.	Said	veracity	is	already	a	given.	No,	lad,	I	seek	to	prove	the
veracity	of	physical	evidence.	Who	can	trust	what	the	eyes	witness,	after	all?
Now,	if	mathematical	evidence	supports	such	practical	observation,	then	we’re
getting	somewhere.’
Brys	looked	round.	‘Where	are	your	helpers?’
‘I	sent	them	to	the	Royal	Lens-maker	for	more	lenses.’
‘When	was	that?’
‘Sometime	this	morning,	I	believe.	Yes,	just	after	breakfast.’
‘You	have	therefore	been	hanging	there	all	day.’
‘And	turning	this	way	and	that,	without	my	own	volition.	There	are	forces,
lad,	unseen	forces,	that	pull	upon	us	every	moment	of	our	existence.	Forces,	I
now	believe,	in	conflict.’
‘Conflict?	In	what	way?’
‘The	ground	beneath	us	exerts	an	imperative,	evidenced	by	the	blood
settling	in	my	face,	the	lightness	in	the	back	of	my	skull,	the	unseen	hands
seeking	to	drag	me	down—I	have	had	the	most	exquisite	hallucinations.	Yet
there	is	a	contrary,	weaker	force	seeking	to	drag	me—another	world,	one
which	travels	the	sky	around	this	one—’
‘The	moon?’
‘There	are	actually	at	least	four	moons,	lad,	but	the	others	are	not	only
distant,	but	perpetually	occluded	from	reflecting	the	sun’s	light.	Very	difficult
to	see,	although	early	texts	suggest	that	this	was	not	always	so.	Reasons	for
their	fading	as	yet	unknown,	although	I	suspect	our	world’s	own	bulk	has
something	to	do	with	it.	Then	again,	it	may	be	that	they	are	not	farther	away	at
all,	but	indeed	closer,	only	very	small.	Relatively	speaking.’


Brys	studied	the	map	on	the	floor.	‘That’s	the	original,	isn’t	it?	What	new
perspective	have	you	achieved	with	all	those	lenses?’
‘An	important	question?	Probably,	but	in	an	indirect	fashion.	I	had	the	map
in	my	hands,	lad,	but	then	it	fell.	None	the	less,	I	have	been	rewarded	with	an
insight.	The	continents	were	once	all	joined.	What	forces,	one	must	therefore
ask,	have	pulled	them	apart?	Who	forwarded	the	Chancellor ’s	request?’
‘What?	Oh,	Turudal	Brizad.’
‘Ah,	yes.	Such	an	errant,	troubled	lad.	One	sees	such	sorrow	in	his	eyes,	or
at	least	in	his	demeanour.’
‘One	does?’
‘And	he	said?’
‘He	spoke	of	a	feud	between	you	and	the	Chancellor.	A,	uh,	new	one.’
‘There	is?	First	I’ve	heard	of	it.’
‘Oh.	So	there	isn’t	one.’
‘No,	no,	lad,	I’m	sure	there	is.	Be	good	enough	to	find	out	about	it	for	me,
will	you?’
Brys	nodded.	‘Of	course,	Ceda.	If	I	can.	Is	that	the	extent	of	your	advice?’
‘So	it	is.’
‘Well,	can	I	at	least	help	you	down?’
‘Not	at	all,	lad.	Who	knows	how	many	more	insights	I	will	experience?’
‘You	may	also	lose	your	limbs,	or	pass	out.’
‘I	still	have	my	limbs?’
Brys	moved	directly	beneath	the	Ceda,	positioning	his	left	shoulder	below
Kuru	Qan’s	hips.	‘I’m	unstrapping	you.’
‘Be	assured	I	will	take	your	word	for	it,	lad.’
‘And	I	intend	to	have	a	word	or	two	with	your	assistants	once	I’m	done
with	the	Chancellor.’
‘Go	easy	on	them,	please.	They’re	woefully	forgetful.’
‘Well,	they	won’t	forget	me	after	today.’
	
Hands	clasped	behind	his	back,	Triban	Gnol	paced.	‘What	is	the	readiness	of
the	military,	Finadd?’
Brys	frowned.	‘Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz	would	be	better	equipped	to	give	you
answer	to	that,	Chancellor.’
‘She	is	presently	indisposed,	and	so	I	would	ask	you.’
They	were	alone	in	the	Chancellor ’s	office.	Two	guards	waited	outside.
Votive	candles	exuded	a	scent	of	rare	Kolanse	spices,	giving	the	chamber	an
atmosphere	vaguely	religious.	A	temple	of	gold	coins,	and	this	man	is	the	high


priest…‘It	is	a	mandate	that	the	army	and	navy	be	maintained	at	a	level	of
preparedness,	Chancellor.	Supplies	and	stores	sufficient	for	a	full	season’s
campaign.	As	you	know,	contracts	with	suppliers	stipulate	that,	in	times	of
conflict,	the	needs	of	the	military	are	to	take	precedence	over	all	other	clients.
These	contracts	are	of	course	maintained	and	will	be	rigorously	enforced.’
‘Yes	yes,	Finadd.	But	I	am	seeking	a	soldier ’s	opinion.	Are	the	king’s
soldiers	ready	and	capable	of	war?’
‘I	believe	so,	Chancellor.’
Triban	Gnol	halted	and	fixed	Brys	with	his	glittering	eyes.	‘I	will	hold	you
to	that,	Finadd.’
‘I	would	not	have	ventured	an	opinion	were	I	not	prepared	to	stand	by	it,
Chancellor.’
A	sudden	smile.	‘Excellent.	Tell	me,	have	you	taken	a	wife	yet?	I	thought
not,	although	I	doubt	there’s	a	maiden	among	the	nobility	who	would	hesitate
in	such	a	coup.	There	are	many	legacies	one	must	live	with,	Finadd,	and	the
means	in	which	they	are	answered	are	the	defining	features	of	a	man’s	or	a
woman’s	life.’
‘I’m	sorry,	Chancellor.	What	are	you	getting	at?’
‘Your	family	history	is	well	known,	Finadd,	and	I	hold	deep	sympathy	for
you	and	indeed,	for	your	hapless	brothers.	In	particular	Hull,	for	whom	I	feel
sincere	worry,	given	his	predilection	for	involving	himself	in	crucial	matters
which	are,	strictly,	not	of	his	concern.	I	admit	to	fretting	on	his	behalf,	for	I
would	not	wish	sorrow	upon	you	and	your	kin.’
‘It	strikes	me,	Chancellor,	that	you	are	too	generous	in	assembling	your
list	of	concerns.	As	for	legacies,	well,	they	are	my	own	affair,	as	you	no	doubt
appreciate.	For	what	it	is	worth,	I	suggest	that	you	are	according	Hull	too	much
power	in	these	matters—’
‘Do	you	imagine	I	am	here	delivering	a	veiled	warning?’	Gnol	waved	a
hand	dismissively	and	resumed	pacing.	‘It	insults	me	that	you	believe	I	am	as
crass	as	that.	Does	a	seal-hunter	warn	the	seal	of	the	net	closing	round	it?
Hardly.	No,	Finadd,	I	am	done	with	you.	Rest	assured	I	will	waste	no	more
sympathy	upon	you	and	your	brothers.’
‘I	am	relieved	to	hear	that,’	Brys	said.
A	venomous	look.	‘Please	close	the	door	on	your	way	out,	Finadd.’
‘Of	course,	Chancellor.’
	
Outside,	walking	alone	down	the	corridor,	Brys	sighed.	He	had	failed	to	learn
anything	of	the	purported	feud	between	Gnol	and	Kuru	Qan.	It	seemed	he	had


achieved	little	more	than	adding	himself	to	the	Chancellor ’s	list	of	enemies.
A	second,	deeper	sigh.
He	had	nothing	of	Hull’s	stolid	determination.	Nothing	of	Tehol’s	cunning.
He	had	but	some	skill	with	a	sword.	And	what	value	that,	when	his	attackers
employed	insinuation	and	threat	in	some	verbal	knife-game?	Seeking	to
deliver	wounds	that	time	did	not	heal?
Reluctantly,	he	realized	he	needed	advice.
Which	meant	another	duel,	this	time	with	his	own	brother.
At	least	Tehol	had	no	desire	to	wound.	Errant	bless	him,	he	seems	to	have
no	desires	at	all.
	
‘What	I	desire,’	Tehol	said,	scowling,	‘is	a	meal	that	actually	began	with	real
food.	Sort	of	a	founding	premise	that	what	one	is	to	eat	is	actually	sustaining	at
its	most	basic	level.’	He	lifted	one	of	the	dark,	limp	leaves,	studied	it	for	a
moment,	then	forced	it	into	his	mouth.	Chewing,	he	glowered	at	Bugg.
‘There	are	apes,	master,	for	whom	banana	leaves	constitute	an	essential
source	of	nutrition.’
‘Indeed?	And	are	they	extinct	yet?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	am	only	recounting	a	sailor ’s	story	I	heard	once	at	a	bar.’
‘He	was	a	drunkard	and	a	liar.’
‘Oh,	you	know	him,	then.’
Tehol	looked	round.	‘Where’s	Ublala?	I	need	him	here,	so	Shurq	Elalle
can	gauge	his…’
‘Length?’
‘Worth.	Where	is	he?’
‘On	the	roof.	Pining.’
‘Oh.	The	roof	is	good.	Pining	is	not.	Does	he	need	yet	another	talking	to,
do	you	think?’
‘From	you,	master?	No.’
‘Some	more	leaves,	please.	Don’t	skimp	on	the	sauce	or	whatever	it	is.’
‘Right	the	second	time.’
‘Whatever	it	is?	You	don’t	know?’
‘No,	master.	It	just	leaked	out.	Maybe	from	the	leaves,	maybe	from
something	else.	It	reminds	one	of—’
‘Tanneries?’
‘Yes,	that’s	it	exactly.	Well	done.’
Tehol	paled	and	slowly	set	down	his	bowl.	‘I	just	had	a	thought.’
Bugg’s	eyes	widened	and	he	too	put	his	bowl	down.	‘Please,	master,	do	not


pursue	that	thought.’
‘It	keeps	coming	back.’
‘The	thought?’
‘No,	the	supper.’	He	rose	suddenly.	‘Time	for	some	air.’
‘Mind	if	I	join	you?’
‘Not	at	all,	Bugg.	Clearly,	during	the	course	of	preparing	this	meal,	you
worked	hard	at	ignoring	whatever	impressions	you	may	have	had.	I	understand
that	you	might	well	be	exhausted	by	that	effort.	And	if	not,	you	should	be.’
They	turned	at	a	sound	from	the	alley,	then	the	curtain	across	the	entrance
was	swept	aside.
‘Ah,	Shand,	we	were	wondering	when	you	would	arrive!’
‘You’re	a	liar	and	a	thief,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘It’s	the	company	I	keep,’	Bugg	muttered.
Rissarh	and	Hejun	followed	behind	Shand	as	she	stormed	into	the	small
room.
Tehol	backed	to	the	far	wall,	which	wasn’t	nearly	far	enough.	‘Needless	to
say,’	he	said,	‘I’m	impressed.’
Shand	halted.	‘With	what?’
He	saw	that	her	fists	were	clenched.	‘Well,	your	vigour,	of	course.	At	the
same	time,	I	realize	I	have	been	remiss	in	directing	your	admirable	energies,
Shand.	It’s	now	clear	to	me	that	you—all	three	of	you,	in	fact—require	a	more
direct	involvement	in	our	nefarious	undertaking.’
‘He’s	doing	it	again,’	Rissarh	growled.
‘We’re	supposed	to	be	beating	him	up	right	now,’	Hejun	added.	‘Look	what
he’s	done.	Shand,	less	than	a	bell	ago	you	were	saying—’
‘Be	quiet	about	what	I	was	saying,’	Shand	cut	in.	‘Direct	involvement,	you
said,	Tehol.	Finally.	It’s	about	time,	and	no	games,	you	slippery	bastard.	Talk	to
save	your	life.’
‘Of	course,’	Tehol	said,	smiling.	‘Please,	make	yourselves	comfortable—’
‘We’re	comfortable	enough.	Talk.’
‘Well,	you	don’t	look	comfortable—’
‘Tehol.’
‘As	you	like.	Now,	I’m	going	to	give	you	a	list	of	names,	which	you	will
have	to	memorize.	Horul	Esterrict,	of	Cargo	Olives.	Mirrik	the	Blunt,	eldest	of
the	Blunts,	owner	of	Blunt’s	Letherii	Steel	and	Blunt	Weaponry.	Stoople	Rott,
the	grain	magnate	of	Fort	Shake.	His	brother,	Puryst,	the	ale	brewer.	Erudinaas,
queen	of	the	rustleaf	plantations	at	Dissent.	The	financiers,	Bruck	Stiffen,
Horul	Rinnesict,	Grate	Chizev	of	Letheras,	Hepar	the	Pleaser,	of	Trate.	Debtholders	Druz	Thennict,	Pralit	Peff,	Barrakta	Ilk,	Uster	Taran,	Lystry	Maullict,


all	of	Letheras.	Tharav	the	Hidden,	of	room	eleven,	Chobor ’s	Manse	on	Seal
Street,	Trate.	Got	those?’
Shand	was	glassy-eyed.	‘There’s	more?’
‘A	dozen	or	so.’
‘You	want	them	killed?’	Hejun	asked.
‘Errant	no!	I	want	you	to	begin	purchasing	shares	in	their	enterprises.
Under	a	variety	of	names,	of	course.	Strive	for	forty-nine	per	cent.	Once	there,
we’ll	be	poised	to	force	a	coup.	The	goal,	of	course,	is	controlling	interest,	but
to	gain	that	will	only	be	achieved	with	sudden	ambush,	and	for	that	the	timing
has	to	be	perfect.	In	any	case,	once	you	have	done	all	that—the	purchasing,	that
is—make	no	further	move,	just	get	back	to	me.’
‘And	how	are	we	going	to	afford	all	that?’	Shand	demanded.
‘Oh,’	Tehol	waved	a	hand,	‘we’re	flush.	The	coin	I	invested	for	you	is
making	a	sizeable	return.	Time’s	come	to	make	use	of	it.’
‘How	much	of	a	return?’
‘More	than	enough—’
‘How	much?’
‘Well,	I	haven’t	actually	counted	it—’
Bugg	spoke.	‘About	a	peak.’
‘Errant’s	blessing!’	Shand	stared	at	Tehol.	‘But	I	haven’t	seen	you	do	a
thing!’
‘If	you	had,	Shand,	then	I	wouldn’t	have	been	careful	enough.	Now,	best	we
start	with	just	the	names	I’ve	given	you.	The	next	list	can	come	later.	Now,	I
have	meetings	scheduled	this	night—’
‘What	kind	of	meetings?’
‘Oh,	this	and	that.	Now,	please,	I	beg	you—no	more	charging	in	through
my	front	door.	It’s	bound	to	get	noticed	sooner	or	later,	and	that	could	be	bad.’
‘What	have	you	two	been	eating?’	Rissarh	suddenly	asked,	her	nose
wrinkling.
‘This	and	that,’	Bugg	replied.
‘Come	on,’	Shand	said	to	her	companions,	‘let’s	go	home.	Maybe	Ublala
will	turn	up.’
‘I’m	sure	he	will,’	Tehol	said,	smiling	as	he	escorted	the	three	women	to
the	doorway.	‘Now,	get	some	sleep.	You’ve	busy	times	ahead.’
Hejun	half	turned.	‘Cargo	Olives—Horul	who?’
Shand	reached	out	and	dragged	Hejun	into	the	alley.
Still	smiling,	Tehol	adjusted	the	curtain	until	it	once	more	covered	the
entrance.	Then	he	spun	round.	‘That	went	well.’
‘Rissarh	had	a	knife,’	Bugg	said,	‘tucked	up	along	her	wrist.’


‘She	did?	Tucked	up?’
‘Yes,	master.’
Tehol	walked	to	the	ladder.	‘I	trust	you	had	your	own	knives	close	to	hand.’
‘I	don’t	have	any	knives.’
Tehol	paused,	one	hand	on	the	nearest	rung.	‘What?	Well,	where	are	all	our
weapons?’
‘We	don’t	have	any	weapons,	master.’
‘None?	Did	we	ever?’
‘No.	Some	wooden	spoons…’
‘And	are	you	adept	with	them?’
‘Very.’
‘Well,	that’s	all	right,	then.	You	coming?’
‘In	a	moment,	master.’
‘Right,	and	be	sure	to	clean	up.	This	place	is	a	dreadful	mess.’
‘If	I	find	the	time.’
	
Ublala	Pung	was	lying	face-down	on	the	roof,	near	the	bed.
‘Ublala,’	Tehol	said,	approaching,	‘is	something	wrong?’
‘No.’	The	word	was	muffled.
‘What	are	you	doing	down	there?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Well,	we’re	about	to	have	a	guest	who	wants	to	meet	you.’
‘That’s	fine.’
‘It	might	be	worth	your	while	to	endeavour	to	make	a	good	impression,’
Tehol	said.
‘All	right.’
‘That	might	prove	a	little	difficult,	Ublala,	with	you	lying	there	like	that.
When	I	first	came	up,	I	admit	to	thinking	that	you	were	dead.’	He	paused,	then,
considering,	and	brightened.	‘Mind	you,	that	might	be	a	good	thing—’
A	scuff	of	boots	to	one	side,	then	Shurq	Elalle	stepped	from	the	shadows.
‘Is	this	him?’
‘You’re	early,’	Tehol	said.
‘I	am?	Oh.	Well,	are	you	waiting	for	a	necromancer	to	animate	him	or
something?’
‘I	would	be,	were	he	dead.	Ublala,	if	you	will,	stand	up.	I	would	like	to
introduce	you	to	Shurq	Elalle—’
‘Is	she	the	dead	one?’	he	asked,	not	yet	moving.	‘The	thief	who	drowned?’
‘Already	you’re	holding	something	against	me,’	Shurq	replied,	her	tone


despondent.
‘We	haven’t	got	to	that	yet,’	Tehol	said.	‘Ublala,	get	up.	Shurq	has	needs.
You	can	meet	them,	and	in	return	you	get	Shand,	Rissarh	and	Hejun	to	leave	off
—’
‘Why	would	they?’	Ublala	demanded.
‘Because	Shurq	will	tell	them	to.’
‘I	will?’
‘Look,’	Tehol	said,	exasperated,	‘neither	of	you	are	cooperating	here.	On
your	feet,	Ublala.’
‘That	won’t	be	necessary,’	Shurq	cut	in.	‘Just	roll	him	over.’
‘Oh,	fine,	that’s	very	nice.	Crass,	but	nice.’	Tehol	crouched	down	alongside
Ublala,	pushed	his	hands	beneath	the	huge	man,	then	lifted.	Tehol’s	feet
skidded.	He	grunted,	gasped,	heaved	again	and	again,	to	little	effect.
‘Stop	it,’	Shurq	said	in	a	strange	voice.	‘You’re	going	to	make	me	laugh.
And	laughing	right	now	would	be	expensive.’
Sprawled	across	Ublala,	Tehol	stared	up	at	her.	‘Expensive?’
‘All	those	spices,	of	course.	Tell	me,	Ublala,	what	did	you	see	when	you
walked	across	the	bottom	of	the	canal?’
‘Mud.’
‘What	else?’
‘Junk.’
‘What	else?	What	were	you	walking	on?’
‘Bodies.	Bones.	Crayfish,	crabs.	Old	nets.	Broken	pots,	furniture—’
‘Furniture?’	Tehol	asked.	‘Serviceable	furniture?’
‘Well,	there	was	a	chair.	But	I	didn’t	sit	in	it.’
‘Bodies,’	Shurq	said.	‘Yes.	Lots	of	bodies.	How	deep	was	the	canal
originally?’
Bugg	had	arrived,	and	with	this	question	Tehol	looked	over	at	his
manservant.	‘Well?	You	must	know,	being	an	engineer	and	all	that.’
‘But	I’m	only	pretending	to	be	an	engineer,’	Bugg	pointed	out.
‘So	pretend	to	know	the	answer	to	Shurq’s	question!’
‘It	was	said	seven	tall	men	could	stand,	foot	to	shoulder,	and	the	last	would
be	able	to	reach	up	with	his	hands	and	find	the	surface.	Used	to	be	big	trader
ships	could	make	their	way	the	entire	length.’
‘I	wasn’t	far	from	the	surface,’	Ublala	said,	rolling	over,	unmindful	of
Tehol	who	yelped	as	he	was	tumbled	to	one	side	with	a	thump.	‘I	could	almost
reach,’	he	added	as	he	stood,	brushing	himself	off.
‘That’s	a	lot	of	rubbish,’	Bugg	commented.
‘I’m	not	lying,’	Ublala	said.


‘I	didn’t	say	you	were,’	Bugg	said.
‘So,’	Shurq	asked,	‘who	is	killing	all	those	people?’
‘Never	mind	all	that,’	Tehol	said	as	he	clambered	to	his	feet.	‘Shurq	Elalle,
permit	me	to	introduce	Ublala	Pung.	The	canal	walk	is	very	lovely	at	night,
yes?	Not	in	it,	I	mean.	Alongside	it,	just	for	a	change.	Perfect	for	a	promenade
—’
‘I	intend	to	rob	Gerun	Eberict’s	estate,’	Shurq	said	to	Ublala.	‘But	there	are
outlying	watchers	that	need	taking	care	of.	Can	you	create	a	diversion,	Ublala
Pung?’
The	huge	man	scratched	his	jaw.	‘I	don’t	know.	I	got	nothing	against	them
—’
‘They	don’t	like	you.’
‘They	don’t?	Why?’
‘No	reason.	They	just	don’t.’
‘Then	I	don’t	like	them	either.’
‘So	you	say,	but	I	haven’t	seen	any	proof.’
‘You	want	proof?	Good.	Let’s	go.’
Shurq	hooked	one	arm	in	Ublala’s	and	led	him	towards	the	far	edge	of	the
roof.	‘We	have	to	jump	to	that	other	roof,’	she	said.	‘I	don’t	think	you	can	do	it,
Ublala.	Not	quietly,	anyway.’
‘Yes	I	can.	I’ll	show	you	I	can.’
‘We’ll	see…’
Tehol	stared	after	them,	then	he	swung	to	Bugg.
The	manservant	shrugged.	‘It’s	the	complexities	of	the	male	mind,	master.’
	
The	rain	earlier	that	day	had	made	the	night	air	blessedly	cool.	Brys	Beddict
left	the	palace	by	a	side	postern	and	proceeded	on	a	circuitous	route	towards
his	brother ’s	residence.	Although	it	was	close	to	midnight,	there	were	plenty	of
people	on	the	streets.
He	had	never	felt	entirely	comfortable	in	the	crowded,	sordid	maze	that
was	Letheras.	The	face	of	wealth	stayed	mostly	hidden,	leaving	only	the
ravaged	mien	of	poverty,	and	that	was	at	times	almost	overwhelming.	Beyond
the	Indebted	were	the	lost,	those	who	had	given	up	entirely,	and	among	them
could	be	seen	not	just	refugees	from	annexed	tribes,	but	Letherii	as	well—
more	than	he	would	have	imagined.	For	all	the	explosive	growth	driving	the
kingdom,	it	seemed	an	ever	greater	proportion	of	the	population	was	being	left
behind,	and	that	was	troubling.
At	what	point	in	the	history	of	Letheras,	he	wondered,	did	rampant	greed


become	a	virtue?	The	level	of	self-justification	required	was	staggering	in	its
tautological	complexity,	and	it	seemed	language	itself	was	its	greatest	armour
against	common	sense.
You	can’t	leave	all	these	people	behind.	They’re	outside	the	endless
excitement	and	lust,	the	frenzied	accumulation.	They’re	outside	and	can	only
look	on	with	growing	despair	and	envy.	What	happens	when	rage	supplants
helplessness?
Increasingly,	the	ranks	of	the	military	were	filling	with	the	lowest	classes.
Training,	acceptable	income	and	a	full	belly	provided	the	incentives,	yet	these
soldiers	were	not	enamoured	of	the	civilization	they	were	sworn	to	defend.
True,	many	of	them	joined	with	dreams	of	booty,	of	wealth	stolen	and	glory
gained.	But	such	riches	came	only	with	aggression,	and	successful	aggression
at	that.	What	would	happen	if	the	military	found	itself	on	the	defensive?	They’ll
fight	to	defend	their	homes,	their	loved	ones.	Of	course	they	will.	There’s	no
cause	for	worry,	is	there?
He	swung	into	the	alley	leading	to	Tehol’s	home,	and	heard,	somewhere
beyond	the	squalid	tenement,	the	sounds	of	a	fierce	argument.	Things	came
crashing	down	in	a	cacophony	that	ended	with	a	shriek.
Brys	hesitated.	He	could	not	reach	the	source	of	the	sounds	from	this	alley,
but	Tehol’s	rooftop	might	permit	him	a	view	down	on	the	opposite	street.	He
went	on.
With	the	pommel	of	his	knife	Brys	tapped	on	the	doorframe.	There	was	no
reply.	He	pulled	aside	the	curtain	and	peered	in.	A	single	wavering	oil	lamp,	the
faint	glow	from	the	hearth,	and	voices	coming	down	from	above.
Brys	entered	and	climbed	the	rickety	ladder.
He	emerged	onto	the	roof	to	see	Tehol	and	his	manservant	standing	at	the
far	edge,	looking	down—presumably	on	the	argument	that	was	still	under	way.
‘Tehol,’	Brys	called,	approaching.	‘Is	this	a	matter	for	the	city	guard?’
His	brother	swung	about,	then	shook	his	head.	‘I	don’t	think	so,	brother.	A
resolution	is	but	moments	away.	Wouldn’t	you	agree,	Bugg?’
‘I	think	so,	since	he’s	almost	out	and	that	old	woman’s	run	out	of	things	to
throw.’
Brys	came	alongside	and	looked	down.	A	huge	man	was	busy	extricating
himself	from	a	pile	of	dusty	rubble,	ducking	when	objects	were	flung	at	him	by
a	old	woman	in	the	tenement	doorway.
‘What	happened?’	Brys	asked.
‘An	associate	of	mine,’	Tehol	said,	‘jumped	onto	the	roof	over	there	from
this	one.	He	landed	quietly	enough,	I	suppose.	Then	the	roof	gave	out,	alas.	As
you	can	see,	he’s	a	big	man.’


The	hapless	associate	had	climbed	free	at	last.	It	appeared	that	he	had	taken
most	of	the	wall	with	him	in	his	descent.	It	was	a	miracle	that	he	seemed
uninjured.	‘Why	was	he	jumping	from	your	roof,	Tehol?’
‘It	was	a	dare.’
‘Yours?’
‘Oh	no,	I’d	never	do	that.’
‘Then	who?	Surely	not	your	manservant?’
Bugg	sputtered,	‘Me?	Most	assuredly	not,	Finadd!’
‘Another	guest,’	Tehol	explained.	‘Who	has	since	gone,	although	not	far,	I
imagine.	Somewhere	in	the	shadows,	waiting	for	dear	Ublala.’
‘Ublala?	Ublala	Pung?	Oh,	yes,	I	recognize	him	now.	An	associate?	Tehol,
the	man’s	a	criminal—’
‘Who	proved	his	innocence	in	the	canal—’
‘That’s	not	innocence,’	Brys	retorted,	‘that’s	stubborn	will.’
‘A	will	that	the	Errant	would	surely	have	weakened	were	Ublala	truly
guilty	of	the	crimes	of	which	he	had	been	accused.’
‘Tehol,	really—’
His	brother	faced	him,	brows	raised.	‘Are	you,	a	soldier	of	the	king,
casting	aspersions	on	our	justice	system?’
‘Tehol,	the	king	casts	aspersions	on	the	justice	system!’
‘None	the	less,	Brys—oh,	what	are	you	doing	here,	by	the	way?’
‘I	have	come	seeking	your	advice.’
‘Oh.	Well,	shall	we	retire	to	a	more	private	section	of	my	rooftop?	Here,
follow	me—that	far	corner	is	ideal.’
‘Wouldn’t	down	below	be	better?’
‘Well,	it	would,	if	Bugg	had	bothered	cleaning	up.	As	it	is,	my	abode	is	an
unacceptable	mess.	I	can’t	concentrate	down	there,	not	for	a	moment.	My
stomach	turns	at	the	thought—’
‘That	would	be	supper,’	Bugg	said	behind	them.
The	brothers	turned	to	look	back	at	him.
Bugg	gave	a	sheepish	wave.	‘I’ll	be	down	below,	then.’
They	watched	him	leave.
Brys	cleared	his	throat.	‘There	are	factions	in	the	palace.	Intrigues.	And	it
seems	certain	people	would	force	me	into	involvement,	when	all	I	wish	is	to
remain	loyal	to	my	king.’
‘Ah,	and	some	of	those	factions	are	less	than	loyal	to	the	king?’
‘Not	in	any	manner	that	could	be	proved.	Rather,	it’s	simply	a	matter	of
reinterpretation	of	what	would	best	serve	the	king	and	the	kingdom’s	interests.’
‘Ah,	but	those	are	two	entirely	different	things.	The	king’s	interests	versus


the	kingdom’s	interests.	At	least,	I	assume	that’s	how	they	see	it,	and	who
knows,	they	might	be	right.’
‘They	might,	Tehol,	but	I	have	doubts.’
Tehol	folded	his	arms	and	stared	out	on	the	city.	‘So,’	he	said,	‘there’s	the
queen’s	faction,	which	includes	Prince	Quillas,	Chancellor	Triban	Gnol,	and
the	First	Consort,	Turudal	Brizad.	Have	I	missed	anyone?’
Brys	was	staring	at	his	brother.	He	shook	his	head.	‘Officers	and	guards,
various	spies.’
‘And	the	king’s	own	faction.	Ceda	Kuru	Qan,	First	Eunuch	Nifadas,	Preda
Unnutal	Hebaz	and	perhaps	First	Concubine	Nisall.	And,	of	course,	you.’
‘But	I	have	no	desire	to	be	in	any	faction—’
‘You’re	the	King’s	Champion,	brother.	As	I	see	it,	you	have	little	choice.’
‘Tehol,	I	am	hopeless	at	such	games	of	intrigue.’
‘So	say	nothing.	Ever.’
‘What	good	will	that	do?’
‘You’ll	convince	them	you’re	smarter	than	they	are.	Even	scarier,	that	you
know	everything.	You	can	see	through	all	their	façades—’
‘But	I	can’t	see	through	all	that,	Tehol.	Therefore,	I’m	not	smarter.’
‘Of	course	you	are.	You	just	need	to	treat	it	like	a	duel.	In	fact,	treat
everything	like	a	duel.	Feint,	parry,	disengage,	all	that	complicated	stuff.’
‘Easy	for	you	to	say,’	Brys	muttered.
They	fell	silent,	staring	out	over	the	dark	city.	Oil	lamps	lit	the	canal	walks,
but	the	water	itself	was	black	as	ink,	winding	like	ribbons	of	oblivion	between
the	squat,	hulking	buildings.	Other	lights	swung	in	motion	down	the	streets,
carried	by	people	going	about	their	tasks.	For	all	that,	darkness	dominated	the
scene.
Brys	stared	up	at	the	nearest	tier,	watched	a	few	lanterns	slide	along	the
span	like	minuscule	moons.	‘I	have	been	thinking	about	Hull,’	he	said	after	a
time.
‘I	would	hold	out	little	hope,’	Tehol	said.	‘Our	brother ’s	desires	have
nothing	to	do	with	self-preservation.	It	is	in	his	mind,	I	believe,	that	he	is	going
to	die	soon.’
Brys	nodded.
‘And,’	Tehol	continued,	‘if	he	can,	in	so	doing	he	will	also	take	down	as
much	of	Lether	as	possible.	For	that	reason	alone,	someone	will	stop	him.	With
finality.’
‘And	vengeance	against	those	murderers	will	be	expected	of	me,’	Brys
said.
‘Not	necessarily,’	Tehol	said.	‘After	all,	your	foremost	loyalty	is	to	your


king.’
‘Superseding	even	that	to	my	family?’
‘Well,	yes.’
‘To	do	nothing	would	be	seen	as	cowardice.	Worse	yet,	I	do	not	think	I
could	face	Hull’s	killers	without	reaching	for	my	sword.’
‘You	may	have	to,	Brys.	Of	course,’	Tehol	added,	‘I	am	not	so	bound	by
such	prohibitions.’
Brys	studied	his	brother	for	a	long	moment.	‘You	would	avenge	Hull?’
‘Count	on	it.’
Eventually,	Brys	smiled.
Tehol	glanced	over	and	nodded.	‘That’s	perfect,	brother.	When	you	come
face	to	face	with	them,	show	that	smile.	It	will	put	terror	in	their	hearts.’
Brys	sighed	and	returned	his	gaze	to	the	city.	‘Outwardly,	we	seem	so
different,	the	three	of	us.’
‘And	so	we	are,’	Tehol	replied.	‘It	comes	down	to	methods,	and	we	each
walk	unique	paths.	At	the	same	time,	alas,	we	must	all	live	with	an	identical
legacy,	a	particularly	unpleasant	inheritance.’	He	shrugged,	then	pulled	up	his
sagging	trousers.	‘Three	stones	in	a	stream.	All	subjected	to	the	same	rushing
water,	yet	each	shaped	differently,	depending	upon	its	nature.’
‘And	which	of	us	is	sandstone?’
‘Hull.	He’s	been	worn	down	the	most,	brother,	by	far.	You,	you’re	basalt.’
‘And	you,	Tehol?’
‘Maybe	a	mix	of	the	two,	yielding	a	sadly	misshapen	result.	But	I	can	live
with	it.’
‘Perhaps	you	can,’	Brys	observed,	‘but	what	about	the	rest	of	us?’
‘There’s	a	matter	on	which	you	can	help	me,	brother.’
‘Oh?’
‘Presumably,	there	are	recorders	of	obscure	information	in	the	palace.
People	who	tally	various	events,	trends	and	such.’
‘A	veritable	army	of	them,	Tehol.’
‘Indeed.	Now,	might	you	make	some	discreet	inquiries	for	me?’
‘Regarding	what?’
‘People	going	missing	in	Letheras.	Annual	numbers,	that	sort	of	thing.’
‘If	you	like.	Why?’
‘At	the	moment,	I’m	just	curious.’
‘What	are	you	up	to,	Tehol?’
‘This	and	that.’
Brys	grimaced.	‘Be	careful.’
‘I	shall.	Do	you	smell	that?	Bugg	is	brewing	tea.’


‘That	doesn’t	smell	like	tea.’
‘Yes,	he’s	full	of	surprises.	Let’s	go	down.	I	for	one	am	very	thirsty.’
	
Shurq	Elalle	watched	Ublala	Pung	close	in	on	the	pair	of	guards	who	had	just
come	round	the	corner	of	the	estate’s	outer	wall.	They	had	time	to	look	up	in
alarm	before	he	threw	his	punch.	Crunching	into	one	jaw,	then	following
through	to	crack	against	the	other	man’s	temple.	Both	collapsed.	Ublala	paused,
looking	down	on	them,	then	headed	off	in	search	of	more.
Shurq	stepped	from	the	shadows	and	approached	the	wall.	Wards	had	been
etched	into	the	ochre	stone,	but	she	knew	they	were	linked	to	intrusions	by
someone	living.	The	heat	of	a	body,	the	moist	breaths,	the	thump	of	a	heart.
Those	relating	to	motion	were	far	more	expensive	to	maintain,	and	would	be
reserved	for	the	main	house.
She	reached	the	wall,	paused	to	take	a	final	look	round,	then	quickly	scaled
it.
The	top	was	studded	with	shards	of	razor-sharp	iron	that	cut	deep	into	the
reinforced	padding	on	her	gloves.	As	she	drew	herself	up,	the	shards	cut
through	the	layers	of	leather	and	sank	into	her	palms,	improving	her	grip.	She
would	get	the	lacerations	sewn	up	later,	to	keep	out	lint	and	insects	and	other
creatures	that	might	seek	to	take	up	residence	in	the	punctures.
Her	upper	body	perched	above	her	arms,	she	studied	the	compound	below.
Seeing	no-one,	she	lifted	herself	over,	pivoting	on	her	hands,	then	edged	down
onto	the	other	side.	She	pried	her	left	hand	loose	of	the	spikes	and	gripped	the
ledge	with	her	fingers,	then	tugged	her	right	hand	loose	as	well.	Freed	of	the
shards,	she	quickly	descended	to	crouch	in	the	shadows	beneath	the	wall.
Dozens	of	guards	somewhere	ahead,	between	her	and	her	goal.	Men—but
no,	she	couldn’t	think	about	that,	not	right	now.	Later,	with	Ublala.
Unfortunately,	the	mindless	guest	within	her	understood	nothing	of	the	value	of
anticipation.	It	knew	hunger,	and	hunger	must	be	appeased.	The	nature	of	things
alive,	she	mused,	as	opposed	to	things	dead.	Urgency,	dissatisfaction,	the
burden	of	appetites.	She’d	forgotten.
Four	guards	standing	at	the	estate	entrance,	one	to	either	side	of	the	double
doors,	the	remaining	two	flanking	the	broad	steps.	They	looked	bored.	There
were	windows	on	the	main	floor,	but	these	were	shuttered.	Balconies	on	the
next	level—the	small	doors	there	would	be	warded.	The	uppermost	floor
consisted	of	three	A-frame	rooms	facing	front,	their	peaked	roofs	steep	and
tiled	in	slate.	Inward	of	these	projections,	the	estate	roof	was	flat	and	lowwalled,	a	veritable	forest	of	potted	plants	and	stunted	trees.	And	hidden


watchers.
All	in	all,	seemingly	impregnable.
Just	the	kind	she	liked.
She	set	out	towards	the	nearest	outbuilding,	a	maintenance	shed	with	a
sloped	roof	that	faced	onto	the	compound.	Careful,	silent	steps,	then	settling
alongside	the	nearest	wall	of	the	shed.	Where	she	waited.
A	loud	thumping	on	the	front	gates.
The	four	guards	at	the	estate	entrance	straightened,	exchanged	glances.
There	were	at	least	eight	of	their	comrades	patrolling	the	street	and	alley
beyond	the	wall.	It	was	too	late	for	a	guest,	and	besides,	Master	Gerun	Eberict
was	not	at	home.	Alternatively,	perhaps	he	had	sent	a	messenger.	But	then	there
would	have	been	a	signal	from	the	patrol.	No,	she	could	see	them	conclude,
this	was	unusual.
The	two	guards	at	the	base	of	the	steps	set	off	towards	the	gate,	hands	on
the	grips	of	their	swords.
The	thumping	stopped	when	the	two	men	were	halfway	to	the	gate.	They
slowed,	drawing	weapons.
Two	steps	from	the	gate.
The	twin	massive	portals	exploded	inward,	taking	both	guards	down
beneath	the	battered	wood	and	bronze.	Ublala’s	forward	momentum	carried
him	over	the	flattened	doors	and	the	men	trapped	beneath	them.
At	the	top	of	the	stairs,	shouts	of	alarm,	and	the	last	two	guards	were
rushing	towards	the	giant.
‘I	never	done	nothing	to	any	of	you!’	Ublala	bellowed,	or	at	least	that	is
what	Shurq	thought	he	said—the	words	were	made	indistinct	by	his	bristling
indignation	as	he	charged	the	two	guards.
A	brief	moment	of	concern	for	Shurq,	since	her	man	was	unarmed.
Swords	slashed	out.	Ublala	seemed	to	slap	at	them	along	the	flat,	and	one
of	the	swords	cartwheeled	through	the	air.	The	other	ploughed	into	the
pavestones	at	the	giant’s	feet.	A	backhand	slap	spun	the	nearest	man	round	and
off	his	feet.	The	remaining	guard	was	screaming,	stumbling	back.	Ublala
reached	out,	caught	him	by	the	right	arm,	and	tugged	him	close.
‘I’m	not	meat	I’m	a	new	body!’
Or	‘I’m	not	mean	to	nobody!’
The	guard	was	dragged	off	his	feet	and	shaken	about	in	a	clatter	of	armour
to	accompany	the	incoherent	assertion.	The	hapless	man	went	limp,	his	limbs
flailing	about.	Ublala	dropped	him	and	looked	up.
Guards	were	streaming	towards	him	from	either	side	of	the	estate.
He	grunted	in	alarm,	turned	about	and	ran	back	through	the	gaping


gateway.
Shurq	glanced	up	at	the	roof.	Four	figures	up	there,	looking	down	at	the
fleeing	giant,	two	of	them	readying	javelins.
But	he	was	already	through	the	archway.
Shurq	slipped	round	the	back	of	the	shed	and	darted	across	the	narrow	gap
to	come	alongside	the	estate	wall.	She	padded	towards	the	stairs,	onto	the
platform	and	through	the	unwarded	entrance.	Outside,	she	heard	someone
shout	orders	for	a	rearguard	to	hold	the	compound,	but	clearly	no-one	had
turned	round	to	keep	an	eye	on	the	front	doors.
Shurq	found	herself	in	a	reception	hall,	the	walls	covered	in	frescos
illustrating	Gerun’s	desperate	defence	of	King	Ezgara	Diskanar.	She	paused,
drew	out	a	knife	to	scratch	a	moustache	on	Gerun’s	manly,	grimacing,
triumphant	face,	then	continued	on	through	an	archway	leading	to	a	large
chamber	modelled	in	the	fashion	of	a	throne	room,	although	the	throne—an
ornate,	high-backed	monstrosity—was	simply	positioned	at	the	head	of	a	long
table	instead	of	surmounting	a	raised	dais.
Doors	at	every	corner	of	the	chamber,	each	one	elaborately	framed.	A	fifth
one,	narrow	and	inset	at	the	back,	probably	with	a	servants’	passage	beyond.
No	doubt	the	inhabitants	were	awake	by	now.	Yet,	being	servants—Indebted
one	and	all—they’d	be	hiding	under	their	cots	during	this	terrifying	tumult.
She	set	off	towards	that	last	door.	The	passageway	beyond	was	narrow	and
poorly	lit.	Curtained	cells	lined	it,	the	pathetic	residences	of	the	staff.	No	light
showed	from	beneath	any	of	the	hangings,	but	Shurq	caught	the	sound	of
scuffing	from	one	room	halfway	down,	and	a	stifled	gasp	from	one	closer,	on
her	left.
She	closed	her	gloved	hand	on	the	grip	of	the	fighting	knife	strapped
beneath	her	left	arm,	and	ran	the	back	of	the	blade	hard	against	the	scabbard
edge	as	she	drew	it	forth.	More	gasps.	A	terrified	squeal.
Slow	steps	down	the	narrow	passage,	pausing	every	now	and	then,	but
never	long	enough	to	elicit	a	scream	from	anyone,	until	she	came	to	a	Tintersection.	To	the	right	the	aisle	opened	out	onto	the	kitchen.	To	the	left,	a
staircase	leading	both	up	and	to	cellars	below	ground.	Shurq	swung	round	and
faced	the	passageway	she	had	just	quitted.	Pitching	her	voice	low,	she	hissed,
‘Go	to	sleep.	Was	jus’	doin’	a	circuit.	No-one	here,	sweeties.	Relax.’
‘Who’s	that?’	a	voice	asked.
‘Who	cares?’	another	replied.	‘Like	he	said,	Prist,	go	back	t’sleep.’
But	Prist	continued,	‘It’s	jus’	that	I	don’	recognize	’im—’
‘Yeah,’	the	other	countered,	‘an’	you	ain’t	a	gardener	but	a	real	live	hero,
right,	Prist?’


‘All	I’m	sayin’	is—’
Shurq	walked	back	to	halt	in	front	of	Prist’s	curtain.
She	heard	movement	beyond,	but	the	man	was	silent.
She	drew	the	dirty	linen	to	one	side	and	slipped	into	the	cramped	room.	It
stank	of	mud	and	manure.	In	the	darkness	she	could	just	make	out	a	large,
crouching	figure	at	the	back	wall,	a	blanket	drawn	up	under	its	chin.
‘Ah,	Prist,’	Shurq	murmured	in	a	voice	little	more	than	a	whisper	and
taking	another	step	closer,	‘are	you	any	good	at	keeping	quiet?	I	hope	so,
because	I	intend	to	spend	some	time	with	you.	Don’t	worry,’	she	added	as	she
unbuckled	her	belt,	‘it’ll	be	fun.’
	
Two	bells	later,	Shurq	lifted	her	head	from	the	gardener ’s	muscled	arm,
concentrating	to	listen	beyond	his	loud	snores.	Poor	bastard	had	been	worn
right	out—she	hoped	Ublala	could	manage	better—and	all	his	subsequent
whimpering	and	mewling	was	disgusting.	As	the	bell’s	low	echoes	faded,	a
solid	silence	replaced	it.
The	guards	had	returned	shortly	after	Shurq	had	slipped	into	Prist’s
cubicle.	Loud	with	speculation	and	bitter	argument,	indicating	that	Ublala	had
made	good	his	escape,	although	a	call	for	the	services	of	the	house	healer
suggested	there’d	been	a	clash	or	two.	Since	that	time,	things	had	settled	down.
There	had	been	a	cursory	search	of	the	estate,	but	not	the	servants’	quarters,
suggesting	that	no	suspicion	of	diversion	and	infiltration	had	occurred	to	the
house	guards.	Careless.	Indicative	of	a	sad	lack	of	imagination.	All	in	all,	as
she	had	expected.	An	overbearing	master	had	that	effect.	Initiative	was
dangerous,	lest	it	clash	with	Gerun’s	formidable	ego.
Shurq	pulled	herself	loose	from	Prist’s	exhausted,	childlike	embrace,	and
rose	silently	to	don	her	clothes	and	gear.	Gerun	would	have	an	office,
adjoining	his	private	rooms.	Men	like	Gerun	always	had	offices.	It	served	their
need	for	legitimacy.
Its	defences	would	be	elaborate,	the	magic	expensive	and	thorough.	But	not
so	complicated	as	to	leave	a	Finadd	confused.	Accordingly,	the	mechanisms	of
deactivation	would	be	straightforward.	Another	thing	to	consider,	of	course,
was	the	fact	that	Gerun	was	absent.	It	was	likely	there	were	additional	wards	in
place	that	could	not	be	negated.	She	suspected	they	would	be	life-aspected,
since	other	kinds	could	more	easily	be	accidentally	triggered.
She	quietly	stepped	back	into	the	passageway.	Sounds	of	sleep	and	naught
else.	Satisfied,	Shurq	returned	to	the	T-intersection	and	turned	left.	Ascending
the	staircase,	she	was	careful	to	place	each	foot	along	alternating	edges	where


the	joins	reduced	the	likelihood	of	a	telltale	creak.
Reaching	the	first	landing,	Shurq	stepped	close	to	the	door,	then	paused.
Motionless.	A	tripwire	was	set	along	the	seam	of	the	door,	locked	in	place	by
the	last	servant	to	use	the	passage.	Sometimes	the	simplest	alarms	succeeded
where	more	elaborate	ones	failed,	if	only	because	the	thief	was	overanticipating	the	complication.	She	released	the	mechanism	and	turned	the	latch.
Into	another	servants’	passage,	running	parallel	to	the	formal	hallway,
assuming	a	typical	layout	for	Gerun’s	estate.	She	found	the	lone	door	where
she	expected,	on	the	right	at	the	far	end.	Another	tripwire	to	release,	then	she
stepped	through.	The	hallway	was	unlit,	which	was	clever.	Three	doors	along
the	opposite	wall,	the	rooms	beyond	showing	no	light.
She	was	fairly	certain	she	had	found	Gerun	Eberict’s	private	quarters.
Barely	detectable	in	the	gloom	were	a	host	of	arcane	sigils	painted	on	the
nearest	door.
Shurq	edged	closer	to	study	those	symbols.
And	froze	as	a	dull	voice	spoke	from	down	the	corridor.	‘It	was
incompetence.	Or	so	he	says.	And	now	I’m	supposed	to	make	it	up	to	him.’
She	slowly	turned.	A	seated	figure,	sprawled	back	with	legs	stretched	out,
head	tilted	to	one	side.
‘You’re	dead,’	the	man	said.
‘Is	that	a	promise	or	an	observation?’
‘Just	something	we	have	in	common,’	he	answered.	‘That	doesn’t	happen
to	me	much,	any	more.’
‘I	know	just	how	you	feel.	So,	Gerun	has	you	here	guarding	his	rooms.’
‘It’s	my	penance.’
‘For	incompetence.’
‘Yes.	Gerun	doesn’t	fire	people,	you	know.	He	kills	them	and	then,
depending	on	how	angry	he	is,	either	buries	them	or	keeps	them	on	for	a	time.
I	suppose	he’ll	bury	me	eventually.’
‘Without	releasing	your	soul?’
‘He	often	forgets	about	that	part.’
‘I’m	here	to	steal	everything	he	has.’
‘If	you	were	living	I	would	of	course	kill	you	in	some	monstrous,
terrifying	way.	I	would	get	up	from	this	chair,	feet	dragging,	arms	out	with	my
hands	clawing	the	air.	I’d	make	bestial	sounds	and	moans	and	hisses	as	if	I	was
hungry	to	sink	my	teeth	into	your	throat.’
‘That	would	certainly	prove	sufficient	to	deter	a	thief.	A	living	one,	that	is.’
‘It	would,	and	I’d	probably	enjoy	it,	too.’
‘But	I’m	not	living,	am	I?’


‘No.	But	I	have	one	question	for	you	and	it’s	an	important	one.’
‘All	right.	Ask	it.’
‘Why,	since	you’re	dead,	do	you	look	so	good?	Who	cut	your	hair?	Why
aren’t	you	rotting	away	like	me?	Are	you	stuffed	with	herbs	or	something?	Are
you	wearing	make-up?	Why	are	the	whites	of	your	eyes	so	white?	Your	lips	so
glossy?’
Shurq	was	silent	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘Is	that	your	one	question?’
‘Yes.’
‘If	you	like,	I	can	introduce	you	to	the	people	responsible	for	the	new	me.	I
am	sure	they	can	do	the	same	for	you.’
‘Really?	Including	a	manicure?’
‘Absolutely.’
‘What	about	filing	my	teeth?	You	know,	to	make	them	sharp	and	scary.’
‘Well,	I	don’t	know	how	scary	you	will	be	with	styled	hair,	make-up,
perfect	nails	and	glossy	lips.’
‘But	sharp	teeth?	Don’t	you	think	the	sharp	teeth	will	terrify	people?’
‘Why	not	just	settle	for	those?	Most	people	are	frightened	of	rotting	things,
of	things	crawling	with	vermin	and	stinking	like	a	freshly	turned	grave.	Fangs
and	fingernails	clipped	into	talons.’
‘I	like	it.	I	like	how	you	think.’
‘My	pleasure.	Now,	do	I	have	to	worry	about	these	wards?’
‘No.	In	fact,	I	can	show	you	where	all	the	mechanisms	are	for	the	alarms.’
‘Won’t	that	give	you	away?’
‘Give	me	away?	Why,	I	am	coming	with	you,	of	course.	Assuming	you	can
get	us	both	out	of	here.’
‘Oh,	I	see.	I’m	sure	we’ll	manage.	What	is	your	name,	by	the	way?’
‘Harlest	Eberict.’
Shurq	cocked	her	head,	then	said,	‘Oh.	But	you	died	ten	years	ago,
according	to	your	brother.’
‘Ten	years?	Is	that	all?’
‘He	said	you	fell	down	the	stairs,	I	believe.	Or	something	like	that.’
‘Stairs.	Or	pitched	off	the	balcony.	Maybe	both.’
‘And	what	did	you	do	or	fail	to	do	that	earned	such	punishment?’
‘I	don’t	remember.	Only	that	I	was	incompetent.’
‘That	was	long	before	Gerun	saved	the	king’s	life.	How	could	he	have
afforded	the	sorcery	needed	to	bind	your	soul	to	your	body?’
‘I	believe	he	called	in	a	favour.’
Shurq	swung	back	to	the	door.	‘Does	this	lead	to	his	office?’
‘No,	that	one	goes	to	his	love-making	room.	You	want	the	one	over	here.’


‘Any	chance	of	anyone	hearing	us	talking	right	now,	Harlest?’
‘No,	the	walls	are	thick.’
‘One	last	thing,’	Shurq	said,	eyeing	Harlest.	‘Why	didn’t	Gerun	bind	your
loyalty	with	magic?’
The	pale,	patchy	face	displayed	surprise.	‘Well,	we’re	brothers!’
	
Alarms	negated,	the	two	undead	stood	in	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict’s	office.
‘He	doesn’t	keep	much	actual	coin	here,’	Harlest	said.	‘Mostly	writs	of
holding.	He	spreads	his	wealth	around	to	protect	it.’
‘Very	wise.	Where	is	his	seal?’
‘On	the	desk.’
‘Very	unwise.	Do	me	a	favour	and	start	collecting	those	writs.’	She	walked
over	to	the	desk	and	gathered	up	the	heavy,	ornate	seal	and	the	thick	sheets	of
wax	piled	beside	it.	‘This	wax	is	an	exclusive	colour?’
‘Oh	yes.	He	paid	plenty	for	that.’	Harlest	had	gone	to	a	wall	and	was
removing	a	large	tapestry	behind	which	was	an	inset	cabinet.	He	disengaged	a
number	of	tripwires,	then	swung	open	the	small	door.	Within	were	stacks	of
scrolls	and	a	small	jewelled	box.
‘What’s	in	the	box?’	Shurq	asked.
Harlest	lifted	it	out	and	tossed	it	to	Shurq.	‘His	cash.	Like	I	said,	he	never
keeps	much	around.’
She	examined	the	clasp.	Satisfied	that	it	wasn’t	boobytrapped,	she	slid	it	to
one	side	and	tipped	back	the	lid.	‘Not	much?	Harlest,	this	is	full	of	diamonds.’
The	man,	his	arms	loaded	with	scrolls,	walked	over.	‘It	is?’
‘He’s	called	in	a	few	of	his	holdings,	I	think.’
‘He	must	have.	I	wonder	why?’
‘To	use	it,’	she	replied,	‘for	something	very	expensive.	Oh	well,	he’ll	just
have	to	go	without.’
‘Gerun	will	be	so	angry,’	Harlest	said,	shaking	his	head.	‘He	will	go	mad.
He’ll	start	hunting	us	down,	and	he	won’t	stop	until	he	finds	us.’
‘And	then	what?	Torture?	We	don’t	feel	pain.	Kill	us?	We’re	already	dead
—’
‘He’ll	take	his	money	back—’
‘He	can’t	if	it	doesn’t	exist	any	more.’
Harlest	frowned.
Smiling,	Shurq	closed	the	box	and	reset	the	clasp.	‘It’s	not	like	you	and	I
have	any	use	for	it,	is	it?	No,	this	is	the	equivalent	of	tossing	Gerun	off	the
balcony	or	down	the	stairs,	only	financially	rather	than	physically.’


‘Well,	he	is	my	brother.’
‘Who	murdered	you	and	wouldn’t	even	leave	it	at	that.’
‘That’s	true.’
‘So,	we’re	heading	out	via	the	balcony.	I	have	a	companion	who	is	about	to
begin	another	diversion.	Are	you	with	me,	Harlest?’
‘Can	I	still	get	the	fangs?’
‘I	promise.’
‘Okay,	let’s	go.’
	
It	was	nearing	dawn,	and	the	ground	steamed.	Kettle	sat	on	a	humped	root	and
watched	a	single	trailing	leg	slowly	edge	its	way	into	the	mulch.	The	man	had
lost	a	boot	in	the	struggle,	and	she	watched	his	toes	twitch	a	moment	before
they	were	swallowed	up	in	the	dark	earth.
He’d	fought	hard,	but	with	his	lower	jaw	torn	off	and	his	throat	filling	with
blood,	it	hadn’t	lasted	long.	Kettle	licked	her	fingers.
It	was	good	that	the	tree	was	still	hungry.
The	bad	ones	had	begun	a	hunt	beneath	the	ground,	clawing	and	slithering
and	killing	whatever	was	weak.	Soon	there	would	be	a	handful	left,	but	these
would	be	the	worst	ones.	And	then	they	would	come	out.
She	was	not	looking	forward	to	that.	And	this	night,	she’d	had	a	hard	time
finding	a	victim	in	the	streets,	someone	with	unpleasant	thoughts	who	was
where	he	didn’t	belong	for	reasons	that	weren’t	nice.
It	had	been	getting	harder,	she	realized.	She	leaned	back	and	pushed	her
stained	fingers	through	her	filthy	hair,	wondering	where	all	the	criminals	and
spies	had	disappeared	to.	It	was	strange,	and	troubling.
And	her	friend,	the	one	buried	beneath	the	oldest	tree,	he’d	told	her	he	was
trapped.	He	couldn’t	go	any	further,	even	with	her	assistance.	But	help	was	on
the	way,	although	he	wasn’t	certain	it	would	arrive	in	time.
She	thought	about	that	man,	Tehol,	who	had	come	by	last	night	to	talk.	He
seemed	nice	enough.	She	hoped	he	would	visit	again.	Maybe	he’d	know	what	to
do—she	swung	round	on	the	root	and	stared	up	at	the	square	tower—yes,
maybe	he’d	know	what	to	do,	now	that	the	tower	was	dead.


Chapter	Eleven

Faded	sails	ride	the	horizon
So	far	and	far	away	to	dwindle
The	dire	script
Writ	on	that	proven	canvas.
I	know	the	words	belong	to	me
They	belong	to	me
These	tracks	left	by	the	beast
Of	my	presence
Then,	before	and	now,	later
And	all	the	moments	between
Those	distant	sails	driven
Hard	on	senseless	winds
That	even	now	circle
My	stone-hearted	self
The	grit	of	tears	I	never	shed
Biting	my	eyes.
Faded	sails	hovering	as	if	lifted
Above	the	world’s	curved	line
And	I	am	lost	and	lost	to	answer
If	they	approach	or	flee
Approach	or	flee	unbidden	times
In	that	belly	swollen
With	unheard	screams	so	far
And	far	and	so	far	and	away.


THIS	BLIND	LONGING
ISBARATH	(OF	THE	SHORE)
Drawn	to	the	shoreline,	as	if	among	the	host	of	unwritten	truths	in	a	mortal
soul	could	be	found	a	recognition	of	what	it	meant	to	stand	on	land’s	edge,
staring	out	into	the	depthless	unknown	that	was	the	sea.	The	yielding	sand	and
stones	beneath	one’s	feet	whispered	uncertainty,	rasped	promises	of	dissolution
and	erosion	of	all	that	was	once	solid.
In	the	world	could	be	assembled	all	the	manifest	symbols	to	reflect	the
human	spirit,	and	in	the	subsequent	dialogue	was	found	all	meaning,	every	hue
and	every	flavour,	rising	in	legion	before	the	eyes.	Leaving	to	the	witness	the
decision	of	choosing	recognition	or	choosing	denial.
Udinaas	sat	on	a	half-buried	tree	trunk	with	the	sweeping	surf	clawing	at
his	moccasins.	He	was	not	blind	and	there	was	no	hope	for	denial.	He	saw	the
sea	for	what	it	was,	the	dissolved	memories	of	the	past	witnessed	in	the	present
and	fertile	fuel	for	the	future,	the	very	face	of	time.	He	saw	the	tides	in	their
immutable	susurration,	the	vast	swish	like	blood	from	the	cold	heart	moon,	a
beat	of	time	measured	and	therefore	measurable.	Tides	one	could	not	hope	to
hold	back.
Every	year	a	Letherii	slave,	chest-deep	in	the	water	and	casting	nets,	was
grasped	by	an	undertow	and	swept	out	to	sea.	With	some,	the	waves	later
carried	them	back,	lifeless	and	swollen	and	crab-eaten.	At	other	times	the	tides
delivered	corpses	and	carcasses	from	unknown	calamities,	and	the	wreckage
of	ships.	From	living	to	death,	the	vast	wilderness	of	water	beyond	the	shore
delivered	the	same	message	again	and	again.
He	sat	huddled	in	his	exhaustion,	gaze	focused	on	the	distant	breakers	of
the	reef,	the	rolling	white	ribbon	that	came	again	and	again	in	heartbeat
rhythm,	and	from	all	sides	rushed	in	waves	of	meaning.	In	the	grey,	heavy	sky.
In	the	clarion	cries	of	the	gulls.	In	the	misty	rain	carried	by	the	moaning	wind.
The	uncertain	sands	trickling	away	beneath	his	soaked	moccasins.	Endings	and
beginnings,	the	edge	of	the	knowable	world.
She’d	run	from	the	House	of	the	Dead.	The	young	woman	at	whose	feet
he’d	tossed	his	heart.	In	the	hope	that	she	might	glance	at	it—Errant	take	him,
even	pick	it	up	and	devour	it	like	some	grinning	beast.	Anything,	anything
but…running	away.
He	had	fallen	unconscious	in	the	House	of	the	Dead—ah,	is	there	meaning
in	that?—and	had	been	carried	out,	presumably,	back	to	the	cot	in	the	Sengar
longhouse.	He	had	awoken	later—how	long	he	did	not	know,	for	he’d	found


himself	alone.	Not	even	a	single	slave	present	in	the	building.	No	food	had
been	prepared,	no	dishes	or	other	signs	of	a	meal	left	behind.	The	hearth	was	a
mound	of	white	ash	covering	a	few	lingering	embers.	Outside,	beyond	the	faint
voice	of	the	wind	and	the	nearer	dripping	of	rainwater,	was	silence.
Head	filled	with	fog,	his	movements	slow	and	awkward,	he’d	rebuilt	the
fire.	Found	a	rain	cape,	and	had	then	walked	outside.	Seeing	no-one	nearby,	he
had	made	his	way	down	to	the	shoreline.	To	stare	at	the	empty,	filled	sea,	and
the	empty,	filled	sky.	Battered	by	the	silence	and	its	roar	of	wind	and	gull
screams	and	spitting	rain.	Alone	on	the	beach	in	the	midst	of	this	clamouring
legion.
The	dead	warrior	who	was	alive.
The	Letherii	priestess	who	had	fled	in	the	face	of	a	request	for	help,	to	give
solace	and	to	comfort	a	fellow	Letherii.
In	the	citadel	of	the	Warlock	King,	Udinaas	suspected,	the	Edur	were
gathered.	Wills	locked	in	a	dreadful	war,	and,	like	an	island	around	which	the
storm	raged	in	endless	cycles,	the	monstrous	form	of	Rhulad	Sengar,	who	had
risen	from	the	House	of	the	Dead.	Armoured	in	gold,	clothed	in	wax,	probably
unable	to	walk	beneath	all	that	weight—until,	of	course,	those	coins	were
removed.
The	art	of	Udinaas…undone.
There	would	be	pain	in	that.	Excruciating	pain,	but	it	had	to	be	done,	and
quickly.	Before	the	flesh	and	skin	grew	to	embrace	those	coins.
Rhulad	was	not	a	corpse,	nor	was	he	undead,	for	an	undead	would	not
scream.	He	lived	once	more.	His	nerves	awake,	his	mind	afire.	Trapped	in	a
prison	of	gold.
As	was	I,	once.	As	every	Letherii	is	trapped.	Oh,	he	is	poetry	animate,	is
Rhulad	Sengar,	but	his	words	are	for	the	Letherii,	not	for	the	Edur.
Just	one	meaning	culled	from	that	dire	legion,	and	one	that	would	not	leave
him	alone.	Rhulad	was	going	to	go	mad.	There	was	no	doubt	about	that	in	the
mind	of	Udinaas.	Dying,	only	to	return	to	a	body	that	was	no	longer	his,	a	body
that	belonged	to	the	forest	and	the	leaves	and	barrow	earth.	What	kind	of
journey	had	that	been?	Who	had	opened	the	path,	and	why?
It’s	the	sword.	It	has	to	be.	The	sword	that	would	not	release	his	hands.
Because	it	was	not	finished	with	Rhulad	Sengar.	Death	means	nothing	to	it.	It’s
not	finished.
A	gift	meant,	it	seemed,	for	Hannan	Mosag.	Offered	by	whom?
But	Hannan	Mosag	will	not	have	that	sword.	It	has	claimed	Rhulad	instead.
And	that	sword	with	its	power	now	hangs	over	the	Warlock	King.
This	could	tear	the	confederacy	apart.	Could	topple	Hannan	Mosag	and	his


K’risnan.	Unless,	of	course,	Rhulad	Sengar	submitted	to	the	Warlock	King’s
authority.
A	less	problematic	issue	had	it	been	Fear,	or	Trull.	Perhaps	even	Binadas.
But	no,	the	sword	had	chosen	Rhulad,	the	unblooded	who	had	been	eager	for
war,	a	youth	with	secret	eyes	and	rebellion	in	his	soul.	It	might	be	that	he	was
broken,	but	Udinaas	suspected	otherwise.	I	was	able	to	bring	him	back,	to	quell
those	screams.	A	respite	from	the	madness,	in	which	he	could	gather	himself
and	recall	all	that	he	had	been.
It	occurred	to	Udinaas	that	he	might	have	made	a	mistake.	A	greater	mercy
might	have	been	to	not	impede	that	swift	plummet	into	madness.
And	now	he	would	have	me	as	his	slave.
Foam	swirled	around	his	ankles.	The	tide	was	coming	in.
	
‘We	might	as	well	be	in	a	village	abandoned	to	the	ghosts,’	Buruk	the	Pale	said,
using	the	toe	of	one	boot	to	edge	a	log	closer	to	the	fire,	grimacing	at	the
steam	that	rose	from	its	sodden	bark.
Seren	Pedac	stared	at	him	a	moment	longer,	then	shrugged	and	reached	for
the	battered	kettle	that	sat	on	a	flat	stone	near	the	flames.	She	could	feel	the
handle’s	heat	through	her	leather	gloves	as	she	refilled	her	cup.	The	tea	was
stewed,	but	she	didn’t	much	care	as	she	swallowed	a	mouthful	of	the	bitter
liquid.	At	least	it	was	warm.
‘How	much	longer	is	this	going	to	go	on?’
‘Curb	your	impatience,	Buruk,’	Seren	advised.	‘There	will	be	no
satisfaction	in	the	resolution	of	all	this,	assuming	a	resolution	is	even	possible.
We	saw	him	with	our	own	eyes.	A	dead	man	risen,	but	risen	too	late.’
‘Then	Hannan	Mosag	should	simply	lop	off	the	lad’s	head	and	be	done
with	it.’
She	made	no	reply	to	that.	In	some	ways,	Buruk	was	right.	Prohibitions	and
traditions	only	went	so	far,	and	there	was—there	could	be—no	precedent	for
what	had	happened.	They	had	watched	the	two	Sengar	brothers	drag	their
sibling	out	through	the	doorway,	the	limbed	mass	of	wax	and	gold	that	was
Rhulad.	Red	welts	for	eyes,	melted	shut,	the	head	lifting	itself	up	to	stare
blindly	at	the	grey	sky	for	a	moment	before	falling	back	down.	Braided	hair
sealed	in	wax,	hanging	like	strips	from	a	tattered	sail.	Threads	of	spit	slinging
down	from	his	gaping	mouth	as	they	carried	him	towards	the	citadel.
Edur	gathered	on	the	bridge.	On	the	far	bank,	the	village	side,	and
emerging	from	the	other	noble	longhouses	surrounding	the	citadel.	Hundreds
of	Edur,	and	even	more	Letherii	slaves,	drawn	to	witness,	silent	and	numbed


and	filled	with	horror.	She	had	watched	most	of	the	Edur	then	file	into	the
citadel.	The	slaves	seemed	to	have	simply	disappeared.
Seren	suspected	that	Feather	Witch	was	casting	the	tiles,	in	some	place	less
public	than	the	huge	barn	where	she	had	last	conducted	the	ritual.	At	least,	there
had	been	no-one	there	when	she	had	looked.
And	now,	time	crawled.	Buruk’s	camp	and	the	Nerek	huddled	in	their	tents
had	become	an	island	in	the	mist,	surrounded	by	the	unknown.
She	wondered	where	Hull	had	gone.	There	were	ruins	in	the	forest,	and
rumours	of	strange	artefacts,	some	massive	and	sprawling,	many	days’	travel
to	the	northeast.	Ancient	as	this	forest	was,	it	had	found	soil	fertile	with	history.
Destruction	and	dissolution	concluded	every	passing	of	the	cycle,	and	the
breaking	down	delivered	to	the	exhausted	world	the	manifold	parts	to	assemble
a	new	whole.
But	healing	belonged	to	the	land.	It	was	not	guaranteed	to	that	which	lived
upon	it.	Breeds	ended;	the	last	of	a	particular	beast,	the	last	of	a	particular	race,
each	walked	alone	for	a	time.	Before	the	final	closing	of	those	singular	eyes,
and	the	vision	behind	them.
Seren	longed	to	hold	on	to	that	long	view.	She	desperately	sought	out	the
calm	wisdom	it	promised,	the	peace	that	belonged	to	an	extended	perspective.
With	sufficient	distance,	even	a	range	of	mountains	could	look	flat,	the	valleys
between	each	peak	unseen.	In	the	same	manner,	lives	and	deaths,	mortality’s
peaks	and	valleys,	could	be	levelled.	Thinking	in	this	way,	she	felt	less	inclined
to	panic.
And	that	was	becoming	increasingly	important.
‘And	where	in	the	Errant’s	name	is	that	delegation?’	Buruk	asked.
‘From	Trate,’	Seren	said,	‘they’ll	be	tacking	all	the	way.	They’re	coming.’
‘Would	that	they	had	done	so	before	all	this.’
‘Do	you	fear	that	Rhulad	poses	a	threat	to	the	treaty?’
Buruk’s	gaze	remained	fixed	on	the	flames.	‘It	was	the	sword	that	raised
him,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘Or	whoever	made	it	and	sent	it	to	the	Edur.	Did
you	catch	a	glimpse	of	the	blade?	It’s	mottled.	Made	me	think	of	one	of	the
Daughters	they	worship,	the	dappled	one,	what	was	her	name?’
‘Sukul	Ankhadu.’
‘Maybe	she	exists	in	truth.	An	Edur	goddess—’
‘A	dubious	gift,	then,	for	the	Edur	view	Sukul	Ankhadu	as	a	fickle	creature.
She	is	feared.	They	worship	Father	Shadow	and	Daughter	Dusk,	Sheltatha
Lore.	And,	on	a	day	to	day	basis,	more	of	the	latter	than	the	former.’	Seren
finished	the	tea	then	refilled	the	tin	cup.	‘Sukul	Ankhadu.	I	suppose	that	is
possible,	although	I	can’t	recall	any	stories	about	those	gods	and	goddesses	of


the	Edur	ever	manifesting	themselves	in	such	a	direct	manner.	It	seemed	more
like	ancestor	worship,	the	founders	of	the	tribes	elevated	into	holy	figures,	that
sort	of	thing.’	She	sipped	and	grimaced.
‘That	will	burn	holes	in	your	gut,	Acquitor.’
‘Too	late	for	that,	Buruk.’
‘Well,	if	not	Ankhadu,	then	who?	That	sword	came	from	somewhere.’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Nor	does	it	sound	as	if	you	even	care.	This	listlessness	ill	suits	you,
Acquitor.’
‘It’s	not	listlessness,	Buruk,	it’s	wisdom.	I’m	surprised	you	can’t	tell	the
difference.’
‘Is	it	wisdom	taking	the	life	from	your	eyes,	the	sharpness	from	your
thoughts?	Is	it	wisdom	that	makes	you	indifferent	to	the	nightmare	miracle	we
witnessed	yesterday?’
‘Absolutely.	What	else	could	it	be?’
‘Despair?’
‘And	what	have	I	that’s	worthy	of	despair?’
‘I’m	hardly	the	one	to	answer	that.’
‘True—’
‘But	I’ll	try	anyway.’	He	drew	out	a	flask	and	pulled	out	the	stopper,	then
tilted	it	back.	Two	quick	swallows,	after	which	he	sighed	and	leaned	back.	‘It
strikes	me	you’re	a	sensitive	type,	Acquitor,	which	probably	is	a	quality	for
someone	in	your	profession.	But	you’re	not	able	to	separate	business	from
everything	else.	Sensitivity	is	a	pervasive	kind	of	vulnerability,	after	all.	Makes
you	easy	to	hurt,	makes	the	scars	you	carry	liable	to	open	and	weep	at	the
slightest	prod.’	He	took	another	drink,	his	face	growing	slack	with	the	effects
of	the	potent	liquor	and	nectar,	a	looseness	coming	to	his	words	as	he
continued,	‘Hull	Beddict.	He’s	pushed	you	away,	but	you	know	him	too	well.
He	is	rushing	headlong.	Into	a	fate	of	his	own	choosing,	and	it	will	either	kill
him	or	destroy	him.	You	want	to	do	something	about	it,	maybe	even	stop	him,
but	you	can’t.	You	don’t	know	how,	and	you	feel	that	as	your	own	failure.	Your
own	flaw.	A	weakness.	Thus,	for	the	fate	that	will	befall	him,	you	choose	not	to
blame	him,	but	yourself.	And	why	not?	It’s	easier.’
She	had	chosen	to	stare	at	the	bitter	dregs	in	the	cup	embraced	by	her
hands,	sometime	during	the	course	of	Buruk’s	pronouncements.	Eyes	tracking
the	battered	rim,	then	out	to	the	fingers	and	thumbs,	swathed	in	stained,	scarred
leather.	Flattened	pads	polished	and	dark,	seams	fraying,	the	knuckles	stretched
and	gnarled.	Somewhere	within	was	skin,	flesh,	muscle,	tendon	and	callus.	And
bone.	Hands	were	such	extraordinary	tools,	she	mused.	Tools,	weapons,


clumsy	and	deft,	numb	and	tactile.	Among	tribal	hunters,	they	could	speak,	a
flurry	of	gestures	eloquent	in	silence.	But	they	could	not	taste.	Could	not	hear.
Could	not	weep.	For	all	that,	they	killed	so	easily.
While	from	the	mouth	sounds	issued	forth,	recognizably	shaped	into
meanings	of	passion,	of	beauty,	of	blinding	clarity.	Or	muddied	or	quietly
cutting,	murderous	and	evil.	Sometimes	all	at	once.	Language	was	war,	vaster
than	any	host	of	swords,	spears	and	sorcery.	The	self	waging	battle	against
everyone	else.	Borders	enacted,	defended,	sallies	and	breaches,	fields	of
corpses	rotting	like	tumbled	fruit.	Words	ever	seeking	allies,	ever	seeking
iconic	verisimilitude	in	the	heaving	press.
And,	she	realized,	she	was	tired.	Tired	of	it	all.	Peace	reigned	in	silence,
inside	and	out,	in	isolation	and	exhaustion.
‘Why	do	you	say	nothing,	Acquitor?’
	
He	sat	alone,	unspeaking,	a	cloak	of	bear	fur	draped	over	his	hunched
shoulders,	sword	held	point-down	between	his	gold-clad	feet,	the	long	banded
blade	and	broad	bell-hilt	in	front	of	him.	Somehow,	he	had	managed	to	open
his	eyes,	and	the	glitter	was	visible	within	the	hooded	shadows	beneath	his
brow,	framed	in	waxed	braids.	His	breath	came	in	a	low	rasp,	the	only	sound	in
the	massive	chamber	in	the	wake	of	the	long,	stilted	exchange	between	Tomad
Sengar	and	Hannan	Mosag.
The	last	words	had	fallen	away,	leaving	a	sense	of	profound	helplessness.
None	among	the	hundreds	of	Edur	present	moved	or	spoke.
Tomad	could	say	no	more	on	behalf	of	his	son.	Some	subtle	force	had
stolen	his	authority,	and	it	came,	Trull	realized	with	dread,	from	the	seated
figure	of	black	fur	and	glittering	gold,	from	the	eyes	shining	out	from	their
dark	holes.	From	the	motionless	sword.
Standing	in	the	centre	dais,	the	Warlock	King’s	hard	eyes	had	slowly
shifted	from	Tomad	to	Rhulad,	and	they	held	there	now,	calculating	and	cold.
The	sword	needed	to	be	surrendered.	Hannan	Mosag	had	sent	them	to
retrieve	it,	and	that	task	could	not	be	called	complete	until	Rhulad	placed	it	in
the	hands	of	the	Warlock	King.	Until	that	happened,	Fear,	Binadas,	Trull,
Theradas	and	Midik	Buhn	all	stood	in	dishonour.
It	fell	now,	finally,	to	Rhulad.	To	make	the	gesture,	to	heal	this	ragged
wound.
Yet	he	made	no	move.
Trull	was	not	even	sure	his	brother	was	capable	of	speaking,	given	the
terrible	weight	encasing	his	chest.	Breathing	sounded	difficult,	excruciatingly


laboured.	It	was	extraordinary	that	Rhulad	was	able	to	keep	his	arms	up,	the
hands	on	the	grip	of	the	sword.	From	a	lithe,	supple	youth,	he	had	become
something	hulking,	bestial.
The	air	in	the	hall	was	humid	and	rank.	The	smell	of	fear	and	barely
restrained	panic	swirled	amidst	the	smoke	from	the	torches	and	the	hearth.	The
rain	outside	was	unceasing,	the	wind	creaking	the	thick	planks	of	the	walls.
The	rasping	breath	caught,	then	a	thin,	broken	voice	spoke.	‘The	sword	is
mine.’
A	glitter	of	fear	from	Hannan	Mosag’s	eyes.	‘This	must	not	be,	Rhulad
Sengar.’
‘Mine.	He	gave	it	to	me.	He	said	I	was	the	one,	not	you.	Because	you	were
weak.’
The	Warlock	King	recoiled	as	if	he	had	been	struck	in	the	face.
Who?	Trull	shot	the	question	with	a	sharp	glance	at	Fear.	Their	eyes	met,
and	Fear	shook	his	head.
Their	father	was	facing	Rhulad	now.	Emotions	worked	across	his	face	for
a	moment	and	it	seemed	he	was	ageing	centuries	before	their	very	eyes.	Then
he	asked,	‘Who	gave	you	this	sword,	Rhulad?’
Something	like	a	smile.	‘The	one	who	rules	us	now,	Father.	The	one
Hannan	Mosag	made	pact	with.	No,	not	one	of	our	lost	ancestors.	A	new…ally.’
‘This	is	not	for	you	to	speak	of,’	the	Warlock	King	said,	his	voice
trembling	with	rage.	‘The	pact	was—’
‘Was	something	you	intended	to	betray,	Hannan	Mosag,’	Rhulad	cut	in
savagely,	leaning	forward	to	glare	past	his	hands	where	they	were	folded	about
the	sword’s	grip.	‘But	that	is	not	the	Edur	way,	is	it?	You,	who	would	lead	us,
cannot	be	trusted.	The	time	has	come,	Warlock	King,	for	a	change.’
Trull	watched	as	Rhulad	surged	to	his	feet.	And	stood,	balanced	and
assured,	back	straight	and	head	held	high.	The	bear	cloak	was	swept	back,
revealing	the	rippling	coins.	The	gold	mask	of	Rhulad’s	face	twisted.	‘The
sword	is	mine,	Hannan	Mosag!	I	am	equal	to	it.	You	are	not.	Speak,	then,	if	you
would	reveal	to	all	here	the	secret	of	this	weapon.	Reveal	the	most	ancient	of
lies!	Speak,	Warlock	King!’
‘I	shall	not.’
A	rustling	step	forward.	‘Then…kneel.’
‘Rhulad!’
‘Silence,	Father!	Kneel	before	me,	Hannan	Mosag,	and	pledge	your
brotherhood.	Think	not	I	will	simply	cast	you	aside,	for	I	have	need	of	you.	We
all	have	need	of	you.	And	your	K’risnan.’
‘Need?’	Hannan	Mosag’s	face	was	ravaged,	as	if	gripped	by	a	physical


pain.
Rhulad	swung	about,	glittering	eyes	fixing	on	his	three	brothers,	one	by
one.	‘Come	forward,	brothers,	and	pledge	your	service	to	me.	I	am	the	future
of	the	Edur.	Theradas	Buhn.	Midik	Buhn.	Come	forward	and	call	me	your
brother.	Bind	yourselves	to	me.	Power	awaits	us	all,	power	you	cannot	yet
imagine.	Come.	I	am	Rhulad,	youngest	son	of	Tomad	Sengar.	Blooded	in
battle,	and	I	have	known	death!’
Abruptly,	he	turned	about,	sword-point	scraping	along	the	floor.	‘Death,’
he	muttered,	as	if	to	himself.	‘Faith	is	an	illusion.	The	world	is	not	as	it	seems.
We	are	fools,	all	of	us.	Such…stupidity.’	In	the	same	low	tone	he	continued,
‘Kneel	before	me,	Hannan	Mosag.	It	is	not	so	much	to	surrender,	is	it?	We	shall
know	power.	We	shall	be	as	we	once	were,	as	we	were	meant	to	be.	Kneel,
Warlock	King,	and	receive	my	blessing.’
The	head	lifted	once	more,	a	flash	of	gold	in	the	gloom.	‘Binadas.	You
know	pain,	a	wound	resisting	mending.	Come	forward,	and	I	will	release	you
from	that	pain.	I	will	heal	the	damage.’
Binadas	frowned.	‘You	know	nothing	of	sorcery,	Rhulad—’
‘Come	here!’	The	shriek	echoed	in	the	vast	chamber.
Binadas	flinched,	then	limped	closer.
Rhulad’s	golden	hand	snapped	out,	fingers	slashing	across	his	brother ’s
chest.	The	faintest	of	touches,	and	Binadas	reeled	back.	Fear	rushed	close	to
hold	him	upright.	Eyes	wide,	Binadas	righted	himself.	He	said	nothing,	but	it
was	clear	as	he	straightened	that	the	pain	in	his	hip	was	gone.	Tremors	shook
him.
‘Thus,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	whisper.	‘Come,	my	brothers.	It	is	time.’
Trull	cleared	his	throat.	He	had	to	speak.	He	had	to	ask	his	questions,	to	say
what	no-one	else	would	say.	‘We	saw	you	dead.’
‘And	I	have	returned.’
‘By	the	power	of	the	sword	you	hold,	Rhulad?	Why	would	this	ally	give
the	Edur	such	a	thing?	What	does	that	ally	hope	to	gain?	Brother,	the	tribes
have	been	unified.	We	have	won	our	peace—’
‘You	are	the	weakest	of	us,	Trull.	Your	words	betray	you.	We	are	Tiste
Edur.	Have	you	forgotten	what	that	means?	I	think	you	have.’	He	looked	round.
‘I	think	you	all	have.	Six	pathetic	tribes,	six	pathetic	kings.	Hannan	Mosag
knew	a	greater	ambition.	Sufficient	to	conquer.	He	was	necessary,	but	he	cannot
achieve	what	must	come	now.’
Trull	could	hear	the	brother	he	knew	in	Rhulad’s	words,	but	something
new	was	threaded	through	them.	Strange,	poisonous	roots—was	this	the	voice
of	power?


Dull	clicking	of	coin	edges,	as	Rhulad	faced	the	silent	crowd	beyond	the
inner	circle.	‘The	Edur	have	lost	sight	of	their	destiny.	The	Warlock	King
would	twist	you	away	from	what	must	be.	My	brothers	and	sisters—all	of	you
here	are	that	to	me,	and	more.	I	shall	be	your	voice.	Your	will.	The	Tiste	Edur
have	journeyed	beyond	kings	and	warlock	kings.	What	awaits	us	is	what	we
once	possessed,	yet	lost	long	ago.	Of	what	am	I	speaking,	brothers	and	sisters?
I	shall	give	answer.	Empire.’
Trull	stared	at	Rhulad.	Empire.	And	for	every	empire…there	is	an
emperor.
Kneel,	Rhulad	had	commanded.	Of	Hannan	Mosag.	Of	everyone	here.	Tiste
Edur	do	not	kneel	before	mere	kings…
Fear	spoke.	‘You	would	be	emperor,	Rhulad?’
His	brother	swung	to	face	him	and	spread	his	arms	in	a	deprecating
gesture.	‘Do	I	make	you	want	to	turn	away	in	horror,	Fear?	In	revulsion?	Oh,
but	did	not	that	slave	fashion	well?	Am	I	not	a	thing	of	beauty?’
There	was	an	edge	of	hysteria	in	the	tone.
Fear	made	no	reply.
Rhulad	smiled	and	continued,	‘I	should	tell	you,	the	weight	no	longer
drags	at	me.	I	feel…unburdened.	Yes,	my	brother,	I	find	myself	pleased.	Oh,
does	that	shock	you?	Why?	Can	you	not	see	my	wealth?	My	armour?	Am	I	not
a	bold	vision	of	an	Edur	warrior?’
‘I	am	not	sure,’	Fear	replied,	‘what	I	am	seeing.	Is	it	truly	Rhulad	who
dwells	within	that	body?’
‘Die,	Fear,	and	claw	your	way	back.	Then	ask	yourself	if	the	journey	has
not	changed	you.’
‘Did	you	find	yourself	among	our	ancestors?’	Fear	asked.
Rhulad’s	answering	laugh	was	brutal.	He	swung	the	sword	into	the	air,
twisting	the	blade	into	a	wild	salute,	revealing	a	grace	with	the	weapon	that
Trull	had	never	before	seen	in	his	brother.	‘Our	ancestors!	Proud	ghosts.	They
stood	in	ranks	ten	thousand	deep!	Roaring	their	welcome!	Blooded	kin	was	I,
worthy	to	join	them	in	their	stalwart	defence	of	precious	memories.	Against
that	vast	host	of	ignorance.	Oh	yes,	Fear,	it	was	a	time	of	such	glory.’
‘Then,	by	your	tone,	Rhulad,	you	would	challenge	all	that	we	hold	dear.
You	would	deny	our	beliefs—’
‘And	who	among	you	can	gainsay	me?’
‘The	shadow	wraiths—’
‘Are	Tiste	Andii,	brother.	Slaves	to	our	will.	And	I	will	tell	you	this:	those
who	serve	us	died	by	our	hands.’
‘Then	where	are	our	ancestors?’


‘Where?’	Rhulad’s	voice	was	a	rasp.	‘Where?	Nowhere,	brother.	They	are
nowhere.	Our	souls	flee	our	bodies,	flee	this	world,	for	we	do	not	belong	here.
We	have	never	belonged	here.’
‘And	shall	you	lead	us	home,	then,	Rhulad?’
The	eyes	flashed.	‘Wise	brother.	I	knew	you	would	find	the	path	first.’
‘Why	do	you	demand	that	we	kneel?’
The	head	tilted	to	one	side.	‘I	would	you	pledge	yourself	to	our	new
destiny.	A	destiny	into	which	I	will	lead	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘You	would	take	us	home.’
‘I	would.’
Fear	stepped	forward,	then	sank	to	one	knee,	head	bowing.	‘Lead	us	home,
Emperor.’
In	Trull’s	mind,	he	heard	a	sound.
Like	a	spine	breaking.
And	he	turned,	as	did	so	many	others,	to	face	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	cadre
of	sorcerors,	to	witness	the	Warlock	King	descending	from	the	dais.	To	watch
him	kneel	before	Rhulad,	before	the	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur.
Like	a	spine	breaking.
	
The	water	tugging	at	his	shins,	swirling	around	numbed	flesh,	Udinaas
struggled	to	stand.	The	waves	rocked	him,	made	him	totter.	Out	on	the	bay,
ships.	Four	in	all,	pushing	through	the	mist,	their	dark	hulks	crouching	on	the
grey	water	like	migratory	leviathans,	sweeps	crabbing	the	swells.	He	could
hear	the	chorus	of	dull	creaks	and	the	slap	of	wooden	blades	in	the	water.
Hooded,	cloaked	figures	small	on	the	distant	decks.	The	delegation	had
arrived.
He	felt	as	if	he	was	standing	on	pegs	of	ice,	the	jagged	points	driven	up
through	his	knees.	He	did	not	think	he	was	able	to	walk.	In	fact,	he	was
moments	from	falling	over,	down	into	the	foaming	water.	So	easy,	pulled	out
by	the	undertow,	the	cold	flooding	his	lungs,	washing	black	through	his	mind.
Until,	in	perfect	accord	with	the	acceptance	of	surrender,	it	was	over.
Claws	stabbed	into	his	shoulders	and	lifted	him	thrashing	from	the	waves.
Talons	punching	through	the	rain	cloak,	biting	into	flesh.	Too	stunned	to
scream,	he	felt	himself	whipped	through	the	air,	legs	scissoring	in	a	spray	of
water.
Flung	down	onto	a	bed	of	wet	stones	fifteen	paces	up	from	the	tideline.
Whatever	had	dragged	him	was	gone,	although	fire	burned	in	his	chest	and
back	where	the	talons	had	been.	Floundering	in	a	strange	helplessness,	Udinaas


eventually	pulled	himself	round	so	that	he	lay	on	his	back,	staring	up	at	the
colourless	clouds,	the	rain	on	his	face.
Locqui	Wyval.	Didn’t	want	me	dead,	I	suppose.
He	lifted	an	arm	and	felt	the	fabric	of	the	rain	cloak.	No	punctures.	Good.
He’d	have	trouble	explaining	had	it	been	otherwise.
Feeling	was	returning	to	his	lower	legs.	He	pushed	himself	onto	his	hands
and	knees.	Wet,	shivering.	There	could	be	no	answer	for	Rhulad,	it	was	as
simple	as	that.	The	Warlock	King	would	have	to	kill	him.	Assuming	that	works.
Kill	him,	or	surrender.	And	what	could	make	Hannan	Mosag	surrender?
To	a	barely	blooded	whelp?	No,	chop	off	his	hands,	sever	his	head	and	crush	it
flat.	Burn	the	rest	into	dusty	ashes.	Destroy	the	monstrosity,	for	Rhulad	Sengar
was	truly	a	monster.
Footsteps	on	the	stones	behind	him.	Udinaas	sat	back	on	his	haunches,
blinking	rain	from	his	eyes.	He	looked	up	as	Hulad	stepped	into	view.
‘Udinaas,	what	are	you	doing	here?’
‘Did	she	cast	the	tiles,	Hulad?	Did	she?’
‘She	tried.’
‘Tried?’
‘It	failed,	Udinaas.	The	Holds	were	closed;	she	was	blind	to	them.	She	was
frightened.	I’ve	never	seen	her	so	frightened.’
‘What	else	has	happened?’
‘I	don’t	know.	The	Edur	are	still	in	the	citadel.’
‘They	can’t	all	be	there.’
‘No,	only	the	nobility.	The	others	are	in	their	homes.	They	have	banished
their	slaves	for	now.	Most	of	them	had	nowhere	to	go.	They’re	just	huddled	in
the	forest.	Soaked	through.	There	seems	no	end	in	sight.’	He	reached	down	and
helped	Udinaas	to	stand.	‘Let’s	go	to	the	longhouse.	Get	dry	and	warm.’
He	let	Hulad	guide	him	back	to	the	Sengar	longhouse.	‘Did	you	see	the
ships,	Hulad?’	he	asked	as	they	walked.	‘Did	you	see	them?’
‘Yes.	They’re	lowering	boats,	but	no	welcome	seems	forthcoming.’
‘I	wonder	what	they’ll	think	of	that?’
Hulad	did	not	reply.
They	entered.	Sudden	warmth,	the	crackle	of	flames	the	only	sound.	Hulad
helped	him	remove	the	rain	cloak.	As	he	did	so,	he	gasped	and	pulled	at
Udinaas’s	shirt.
‘Where	did	you	get	those?’
Udinaas	frowned	down	at	the	almost-black	bruises	where	the	Wyval’s
talons	had	been.	‘I	don’t	know.’
‘They	remind	me	of	Feather	Witch’s	wounds,	from	that	demon.	Just	the


same.	Udinaas,	what	is	happening	to	you?’
‘Nothing.	I’m	going	to	sleep.’
Hulad	said	nothing	more	as	Udinaas	walked	down	the	length	of	the	main
chamber	towards	his	sleeping	pallet.
	
Fighting	the	outflow,	the	three	scows	edged	closer	to	the	bank	on	the	south	side
of	the	river.	Each	craft	held	about	a	dozen	Letherii,	most	of	them	bodyguards
in	full	armour,	the	visors	closed	on	their	helms.
Four	steps	behind	Buruk	the	Pale,	Seren	followed	the	merchant	down	to	the
strand.	It	seemed	they	would	be	the	sole	welcoming	committee,	at	least	to	begin
with.	‘What	do	you	intend	to	tell	them?’	she	asked.
Buruk	glanced	back	at	her,	rain	dripping	from	the	rim	of	his	hood.	‘I	was
hoping	you	would	say	something.’
She	did	not	believe	him,	but	appreciated	the	effort.	‘I’m	not	even	certain	of
the	protocol.	Nifadas	is	leading	the	delegation,	but	the	prince	is	here	as	well.
Who	do	I	acknowledge	first?’
Buruk	shrugged.	‘The	one	most	likely	to	be	offended	if	you	bow	to	other
one	first.’
‘Assuming,’	she	replied,	‘I	do	not	intend	a	calculated	insult.’
‘Well,	there	is	that.	Mind	you,	Acquitor,	you	are	supposed	to	be	neutral.’
‘Perhaps	I	should	direct	my	bow	to	a	space	directly	between	them.’
‘Whereupon	they	will	both	conclude	that	you	have	lost	your	mind.’
‘Which	is	at	least	even-handed.’
‘Ah,	humour.	That	is	much	better,	Acquitor.	Despair	gives	way	to
anticipation.’
They	reached	the	strand	and	stood	side	by	side,	watching	the	scows
approach.	The	rain	elected	that	moment	to	fall	harder,	a	growing	downpour
prattling	on	the	stones	and	hissing	on	the	current-	and	tide-twisted	water.	The
scows	blurred	behind	a	grey	wall,	almost	vanished	entirely,	then	reappeared
suddenly,	the	first	one	crunching	and	lurching	as	it	grounded.	Sweeps	rose	and
then	descended	as	the	crew	stored	them.	Guards	splashed	down	and	clambered
onto	the	strand.	One	made	his	way	to	Buruk	and	Seren.	His	expression	below
the	visor	and	nose-bar	was	grim.
‘I	am	Finadd	Moroch	Nevath,	of	the	Prince’s	Guard.	Where	are	the	Edur?’
Moroch	seemed	to	be	facing	Seren,	so	she	spoke	in	reply,	‘In	the	citadel,
Finadd.	There	has	been	an…event.’
‘What	in	the	Errant’s	name	does	that	mean?’
Behind	the	Finadd	and	his	guards,	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar	was	being


carried	by	servants	over	the	waves.	The	First	Eunuch	Nifadas	had	eschewed
any	such	assistance	and	was	wading	onto	the	strand.
‘It’s	rather	complicated,’	Seren	said.	‘Buruk’s	guest	camp	is	just	on	the
other	side	of	the	bridge.	We	can	get	under	cover	from	the	rain—’
‘Never	mind	the	rain,’	Moroch	snapped.	Then	he	swung	about	and	saluted
as	Quillas	Diskanar,	sheltered	beneath	a	four-point	umbrella	held	aloft	by	two
servants,	strode	to	halt	before	Buruk	and	Seren.	‘My	prince,’	the	Finadd	said	in
a	growl,	‘it	would	appear	the	Tiste	Edur	have	chosen	this	moment	to	be
preoccupied.’
‘Hardly	an	auspicious	beginning,’	Quillas	snapped,	turning	a	sneer	on
Seren	Pedac.	‘Acquitor.	Has	Hull	Beddict	elected	the	wise	course	and	departed
this	village?’
She	blinked,	struggling	to	disguise	her	alarm	at	the	preeminence	the
question	of	Hull	had	assumed.	Do	they	fear	him	that	much?	‘He	is	nearby,	my
prince.’
‘I	intend	to	forbid	his	attendance,	Acquitor.’
‘I	believe	an	invitation	has	been	extended	to	him,’	she	said	slowly,	‘by	the
Warlock	King.’
‘Oh?	And	will	Hull	speak	for	the	Edur	now?’
Buruk	spoke	for	the	first	time.	‘My	prince,	that	is	a	question	we	would	all
like	answered.’
Quillas	shifted	his	attention.	‘You	are	the	merchant	from	Trate.’
‘Buruk	the	Pale.’	With	a	deep	bow	from	which	Buruk	had	difficulty
recovering.
‘A	drunk	merchant	at	that.’
Seren	cleared	her	throat.	‘Your	arrival	was	sudden,	my	prince.	The	Edur
have	been	sequestered	in	the	citadel	for	a	day	and	a	half.	We’ve	had	little	to	do
but	wait.’
The	First	Eunuch	was	standing	a	pace	back,	seemingly	uninterested	in	the
conversation,	his	small,	glittering	eyes	fixed	on	the	citadel.	He	appeared
equally	indifferent	to	the	rain	pummelling	his	hood	and	cape-clad	shoulders.	It
occurred	to	Seren	that	here	was	a	different	kind	of	power,	and	in	silence	the
weight	was	being	stolen	from	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar.
Proof	of	that	was	sudden,	as	the	prince	swung	round	to	Nifadas	and	said,
‘What	do	you	make	of	all	this,	then,	First	Eunuch?’
Expressionless	eyes	settled	on	Quillas.	‘My	prince,	we	have	arrived	at	a
moment	of	crisis.	The	Acquitor	and	the	merchant	know	something	of	it,	and	so
we	must	needs	await	their	explanation.’
‘Indeed,’	Quillas	said.	‘Acquitor,	inform	us	of	this	crisis.’


Whilst	you	stand	beneath	that	umbrella	and	we	get	soaked	and	chilled	to
the	bone.	‘Of	course,	my	prince.	The	Warlock	King	despatched	a	party	of
warriors	into	the	ice	wastes	to	retrieve	what	turned	out	to	be	a	sword.	They
were,	however,	set	upon	by	Jheck	Soletaken.	One	of	the	warriors,	who	was
wielding	that	sword,	was	slain.	The	others	brought	his	body	back	for	burial,
but	the	corpse	would	not	release	its	grip	upon	the	sword.	The	Warlock	King
was	greatly	animated	by	this	detail,	and	made	his	demand	for	the	weapon	plain
and	unequivocal.	There	was	a	public	clash	between	him	and	the	dead	warrior ’s
father.’
‘Why	not	just	cut	off	the	body’s	fingers?’	Quillas	Diskanar	demanded,	his
brows	lifted	in	contemptuous	disbelief.
‘Because,’	Nifadas	replied,	laconic	and	overly	patient,	‘there	is	traditional
sanctity	accorded	a	fallen	warrior	among	the	Edur.	Please,	Acquitor,	go	on.	It
is	hard	to	believe	this	impasse	is	yet	to	be	resolved.’
She	nodded.	‘It	was	but	the	beginning,	and	indeed	it	became	something	of	a
moot	point.	For	the	corpse	returned	to	life.’
Quillas	snorted.	‘What	manner	of	jest	is	this,	woman?’
‘No	jest,’	Buruk	the	Pale	answered.	‘My	prince,	we	saw	him	with	our	own
eyes.	He	was	alive.	The	truth	was	announced	by	his	screams,	such	terrible
screams,	for	he	had	been	dressed—’
‘Dressed?’	the	prince	asked,	looking	around.
The	First	Eunuch’s	eyes	had	widened.	‘How	far	along,	Merchant	Buruk?’
‘The	coins,	First	Eunuch.	And	the	wax.’
‘Errant	defend,’	Nifadas	whispered.	‘And	this	sword—he	will	not	yield	it?’
Seren	shook	her	head.	‘We	don’t	know,	First	Eunuch.’
‘Describe	the	weapon,	if	you	would,	Acquitor.’
‘Two-handed	grip,	but	a	thin	blade.	Some	kind	of	alloy,	yet	reluctant	to
fuse.	There	is	iron,	and	some	sort	of	black	metal	that	appears	in	elongated
shards.’
‘Origin?	Can	you	discern	anything	from	the	style?’
‘Not	much,	First	Eunuch.	The	bell-hilt	bears	some	resemblance	to	the
drawn	twist	technique	used	by	the	Meckros—’
‘The	Meckros?’	Quillas	asked.	‘Those	traders	from	the	floating	cities?’
‘Yes,	although	the	pattern	on	that	bell-hilt	has	been	shaped	to	resemble
links	of	chain.’
Buruk	faced	her	with	a	wry	expression.	‘You’ve	sharp	eyes,	Acquitor.	All	I
saw	was	a	sword.’
‘I	suggest,’	Nifadas	said,	‘we	retire	to	the	merchant’s	camp.’
Quillas	hissed,	‘You	will	swallow	this	insult,	First	Eunuch?’


‘There	is	no	insult,’	Nifadas	replied	easily,	striding	past	the	prince	to	hook
arms	with	a	surprised	Seren	Pedac.	‘Escort	me,	please,	Acquitor.’
‘Of	course,	First	Eunuch.’
The	others	had	no	choice	but	to	trail	after	them.
Nifadas	walked	quickly.	After	a	dozen	or	so	paces,	he	asked	in	a	quiet,
conversational	tone,	‘Was	Hull	Beddict	witness	to	all	this?’
‘No.	At	least	I	don’t	think	so.	He’s	been	gone	for	some	time.’
‘But	he	will	return.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	have	left	the	majority	of	my	guard	aboard	the	Risen	Pale,	including
Finadd	Gerun	Eberict.’
‘Gerun—oh.’
‘Indeed.	Would	it	be,	do	you	think,	propitious	that	I	send	for	him?’
‘I—I	am	not	sure,	First	Eunuch.	It	depends,	I	imagine,	on	what	you	would
have	him	do.’
‘Perhaps	a	word	or	two	with	Hull,	upon	his	return?’
‘Is	the	Finadd	a	persuasive	man?’
‘Not	by	way	of	personality,	no…’
She	nodded,	struggled	to	repress	a	shiver—unsuccessfully,	it	turned	out.
‘Chilled,	Acquitor?’
‘The	rain.’
‘Of	course.	I	trust	Buruk’s	servants	are	feeding	a	fire	of	some	sort?’
‘Rather	too	eagerly.’
‘Well,	I	doubt	if	anyone	will	complain.	You	and	Buruk	have	waited	here
some	time,	I	take	it.’
‘Yes.	Some	time.	There	was	an	audience	with	the	Warlock	King,	but	in
keeping	with	my	role	I	departed	before	anything	of	substance	was	discussed.
And	as	to	what	was	said,	neither	Hull	nor	Buruk	has	revealed	anything.’
‘Hull	was	there	for	that,	was	he?’	He	swung	a	faint	smile	on	her.	‘Nothing
of	substance	was	revealed	to	you,	Acquitor?	I	admit	to	having	trouble	quite
believing	that	assertion.’
Seren	Pedac	hesitated.
‘Acquitor,’	Nifadas	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘the	privilege	of	neutrality	no
longer	exists	in	this	matter.	Make	your	choice.’
‘It	is	not	that,	First	Eunuch,’	she	said,	knowing	her	claim	was	untrue.	‘I
have	a	fear	that	whatever	position	the	Warlock	King	may	have	chosen	back
then	is	no	longer	relevant.’	She	glanced	over	at	him.	‘I	do	not	think	Rhulad	will
relinquish	that	sword.’
‘Rhulad.	What	can	you	tell	me	of	this	Rhulad?’


‘Youngest	son	of	a	noble	family,	the	Sengar.’
‘The	Sengar?	Eldest	son	is	Fear,	yes?	Commander	of	the	Edur	warriors.
Prestigious	blood,	then.’
‘Yes.	Another	brother	is	Binadas,	who	is	blood-sworn	with	Hull	Beddict.’
‘Interesting.	I	begin	to	grasp	the	complexity	awaiting	us,	Acquitor.’
And	so,	it	seems,	do	I.	For	I	appear	to	have	made	my	choice.
As	if	Nifadas	gave	me	any	other	option,	as	I	walk	here	arm	in	arm	with	the
First	Eunuch…
	
‘Wake	up,	Udinaas.’
Lids	slid	back	from	stinging,	burning	eyes.	Udinaas	stared	up	at	the	angled
wall	above	him.	‘No.	I	need	to	sleep—’
‘Not	so	loud.	What	you	need,	fool,	is	to	walk	to	the	citadel.’
‘Why?	They’ll	cut	my	throat	for	intruding—’
‘No,	they	won’t.	Rhulad	won’t	let	them,	for	you	are	his	slave	now,	and	no
one	else’s.	They	must	be	informed.	The	Letherii	delegation	awaits.’
‘Leave	me	be,	Wither.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur	emperor	wants	you.	Now.’
‘Right.	And	does	he	know	it?’
‘Not	yet.’
‘As	I	thought.’	He	closed	his	eyes	once	more.	‘Go	away,	wraith.’
‘The	Wyval	and	I	are	in	agreement	in	this,	Udinaas.	You	must	step	to	the
forefront.	You	must	make	yourself	invaluable	to	Rhulad.	Tell	me,	do	you	want
Feather	Witch	for	your	own	or	not?’
Udinaas	blinked,	then	sat	up.	‘What?’
‘Go	now,	and	you	will	see.’
‘Not	until	you	explain	that,	Wither.’
‘I	shall	not,	slave.	Go	to	the	citadel.	Serve	the	Edur	emperor.’
Udinaas	pulled	aside	his	blankets	and	reached	for	his	sodden	moccasins.
‘Why	don’t	you	all	leave	me	alone.’
‘She	raped	you,	Udinaas.	She	took	your	seed.	Why	did	she	do	that?’
He	went	still,	one	moccasin	on,	the	other	cold	in	his	hands.	‘Menandore.’
‘The	bitch	has	designs,	she	does.	No	love	for	Edur	or	Andii,	no,	not	her.’
‘What	has	that	to	do	with	anything?’
The	wraith	made	no	reply.
Udinaas	rubbed	at	his	face,	then	pulled	on	the	second	moccasin	and	tugged
at	the	soaked	leather	ties.	‘I	am	a	slave,	Wither.	Slaves	are	not	given	slaves,	and
that	is	the	only	way	I	could	win	Feather	Witch.	Unless	you	plan	on	invading	her


mind	and	twisting	her	will.	In	which	case,	it	won’t	be	Feather	Witch,	will	it?’
‘You	accord	me	powers	I	do	not	possess.’
‘Only	to	emphasize	the	absurdity	of	your	promises,	Wither.	Now,	be	quiet.
I’m	going.’	He	rose	and	stumbled	from	the	cell.	Hulad	was	crouched	by	the
hearth,	heating	soup	or	stew.
‘You	were	talking	to	yourself,	Udinaas.	You	shouldn’t	do	that.’
‘That’s	what	I	keep	telling	myself,’	he	replied,	making	his	way	to	the
doors,	collecting	a	rain	cape	on	the	way.
Outside,	the	rain	was	a	deluge.	He	could	barely	make	out	the	anchored
ships	in	the	bay.	There	were	figures	on	the	strand.	Soldiers.
He	pulled	up	the	hood	then	headed	for	the	citadel	that	had	once	belonged	to
the	Warlock	King.
Serve	the	Edur	emperor.	And	where	will	you	take	your	people,	Rhulad
Sengar?
The	shadow	wraiths	guarding	the	entrance	made	no	move	to	oppose	the
Letherii	slave	as	he	ascended	the	steps.	Both	hands	on	the	doors,	pushing	them
aside,	striding	in	on	a	gust	of	pelting	rain.	Come,	you	damned	Edur.	Slide	a
blade	across	my	throat.	Through	my	chest.	There	were	no	guards	within	the
reception	chamber,	and	the	curtain	beyond	was	drawn	closed.
He	shook	the	rain	from	his	cape,	then	continued	forward.
To	the	curtains.	He	pulled	them	aside.
To	see	the	Edur	kneeling.	All	of	them,	kneeling	before	the	glimmering
form	of	Rhulad	Sengar,	who	stood	on	the	dais,	the	sword	raised	in	one	hand
above	his	head.	Bear	fur	on	his	shoulders,	face	a	rippling	mask	of	gold
surrounding	the	deep	holes	of	his	eye	sockets.
Not	blind,	then.	Nor	crippled.	And	if	this	was	madness,	then	it	was	a	poison
riding	the	chamber ’s	thick	currents.
Udinaas	felt	the	emperor ’s	eyes	fix	on	him,	as	palpable	as	talons	digging
into	his	mind.	‘Approach,	slave,’	he	said,	his	voice	ragged.
Heads	lifted	and	turned	as	Udinaas	threaded	through	the	crowd,	making	his
way	down	the	tiers.	The	Letherii	did	not	glance	at	any	faces,	his	gaze	focused
solely	on	Rhulad	Sengar.	In	his	peripheral	vision	he	saw	Hannan	Mosag,
kneeling	with	head	bowed,	and	behind	him	his	K’risnan	in	identical	positions
of	subservience.
‘Speak,	Udinaas.’
‘The	delegation	has	arrived,	Emperor.’
‘We	are	bound,	are	we	not,	Udinaas?	Slave	and	master.	You	heard	my
summons.’
‘I	did,	master.’	Lies,	he	realized,	were	getting	easier.


‘The	delegation	waits	in	the	merchant’s	camp.	Bring	them	to	us,	Udinaas.’
‘As	you	command.’	He	bowed,	then	began	the	laborious	effort	of	backing
out.
‘There	is	no	need	for	that,	Udinaas.	I	am	not	offended	by	a	man’s	back.	Go,
and	tell	them	that	the	ruler	of	the	Edur	will	greet	them	now.’
Udinaas	swung	about	and	made	his	way	from	the	chamber.
Beneath	the	rain	once	more,	across	the	bridge.	Solitude	might	invite
thought,	but	Udinaas	refused	the	invitation.	The	fog	of	the	world	beyond	was
mirrored	in	his	own	mind.	He	was	a	slave.	Slaves	did	what	was	commanded	of
them.
Woodsmoke	drifting	out	from	under	a	broad	canopy	near	the	trader
wagons.	Figures	standing	beneath	it.	Acquitor	Seren	Pedac	turned	and	saw	him
first.	Yes.	There	is	more	in	her	than	she	realizes.	The	ghosts	like	her,	hovering
like	moths	around	a	candle	flame.	She	doesn’t	even	see	them.	He	watched	her
say	something,	then	the	others	swung	to	face	him.
Udinaas	halted	just	outside	the	tarp,	keeping	his	gaze	averted.	‘The	ruler	of
the	Edur	bids	you	come	to	the	citadel.’
A	soldier	growled,	then	said,	‘You	stand	before	your	prince,	Letherii.	Drop
to	your	knees	or	I’ll	cut	your	head	from	your	shoulders.’
‘Then	draw	your	sword,’	Udinaas	replied.	‘My	master	is	Tiste	Edur.’
‘He	is	nothing,’	said	the	young,	expensively	dressed	man	at	the	soldier ’s
side.	A	flutter	of	one	hand.	‘We	are	invited,	finally.	First	Eunuch,	will	you	lead
us?’
The	large,	heavy	man	with	a	face	as	sombre	as	his	clothes	stepped	out	to
stand	beside	Udinaas.	‘Acquitor,	please	accompany	us.’
Seren	Pedac	nodded,	drawing	her	cloak’s	hood	over	her	head	and	joining
the	First	Eunuch.
Udinaas	led	them	back	across	the	bridge.	A	wind	had	begun	whipping	the
rain	in	biting	sheets	that	ripped	across	their	path.	Among	the	longhouses	of	the
nobility,	then	towards	the	steps.
Shadow	wraiths	swirled	before	the	door.
Udinaas	faced	Quillas	Diskanar.	‘Prince,	your	bodyguards	are	not
welcome.’
The	young	man	scowled.	‘Wait	here	with	your	men,	Finadd.’
Moroch	Nevath	grunted,	then	directed	his	guards	to	fan	out	to	either	side
of	the	citadel’s	entrance.
The	wraiths	edged	back	to	provide	a	corridor	to	the	double	doors.
Udinaas	strode	forward	and	pushed	them	open,	moved	inside	then	turned
about.	A	step	behind	him	were	Nifadas	and	the	Acquitor,	the	prince,	his


expression	dark,	trailing.
The	First	Eunuch	frowned	at	the	curtain	at	the	far	end.	‘The	throne	room	is
filled	with	Edur	nobles?	Then	why	do	I	hear	nothing?’
‘They	await	your	arrival,’	Udinaas	said.	‘The	ruler	of	the	Tiste	Edur	stands
on	the	centre	dais.	His	appearance	will	startle	you—’
‘Slave,’	Quillas	said,	making	the	word	contemptuous,	‘we	are	not
anticipating	that	the	negotiations	will	commence	immediately.	We	are	but	to	be
proclaimed	guests—’
‘I	am	not	the	one	to	guarantee	that,’	Udinaas	cut	in,	unperturbed.	‘I	would
advise	that	you	be	ready	for	anything.’
‘But	this	is	absurd—’
‘Let	us	be	about	it,	then,’	the	First	Eunuch	said.
The	prince	was	not	used	to	these	constant	interruptions,	his	face	flushing.
Acquitor	Seren	Pedac	spoke.	‘Udinaas,	by	your	words	I	conclude	that
Hannan	Mosag	has	been	usurped.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	Rhulad	Sengar	has	proclaimed	himself	the	new	king	of	the	Tiste
Edur.’
‘No,	Acquitor.	Emperor.’
There	was	silence	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	the	prince	snorted	in
disbelief.	‘What	empire?	Six	tribes	of	seal-hunters?	This	fool	has	gone	mad.’
‘It	is	one	thing,’	Nifadas	said	slowly,	‘to	proclaim	oneself	an	emperor.	It	is
another	to	force	the	Edur	nobility	to	bend	knee	to	such	a	claim.	Udinaas,	have
they	done	so?’
‘They	have,	First	Eunuch.’
‘That	is…astonishing.’
‘Hannan	Mosag?’	Seren	asked.
‘He	too	has	knelt	and	pledged	allegiance,	Acquitor.’
Once	again	no-one	spoke	for	a	time.
Then	the	First	Eunuch	nodded	to	Udinaas	and	said,	‘Thank	you.	I	am	ready
to	meet	the	emperor	now.’
Udinaas	nodded	and	approached	the	curtain.	Pulling	it	aside,	he	stepped
through	into	the	chamber	beyond.	The	nobles	had	moved	to	form	an	avenue
leading	down	to	the	centre	dais.	Everyone	was	standing.	On	the	dais,	Rhulad
Sengar	leaned	on	his	sword.	His	motions	had	dislodged	a	few	coins,	leaving
mottled	patches	of	burnt	skin.	Humidity,	heat	and	oil	lamps	made	the	air	mistladen	and	lurid.	Udinaas	sought	to	look	upon	the	scene	as	if	he	was	a	stranger,
and	was	shocked	at	its	raw	barbarity.	These	are	a	fallen	people.
Who	would	rise	anew.


The	First	Eunuch	and	the	Acquitor	appeared	on	the	threshold,	and	Nifadas
moved	to	his	left	to	give	space	for	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar.
Udinaas	raised	his	voice.	‘Emperor.	First	Eunuch	Nifadas	and	Prince
Quillas	Diskanar.	The	Letherii	treaty	delegation.’
‘Come	forward,’	came	the	rasping	invitation	from	the	emperor.	‘I	am
Rhulad	Sengar,	and	I	proclaim	you	guests	of	the	Tiste	Edur	Empire.’
Nifadas	bowed	his	head.	‘We	thank	your	highness	for	his	welcome.’
‘It	is	the	desire	of	the	Letherii	king	to	establish	a	formal	treaty	with	us,’
Rhulad	said,	then	shrugged.	‘I	was	under	the	impression	we	already	had	one.
And,	while	we	honour	it,	your	people	do	not.	Thus,	what	value	a	new
agreement?’
As	the	First	Eunuch	was	about	to	speak,	Quillas	stepped	forward.	‘You
confiscated	a	harvest	of	tusked	seals.	So	be	it.	Such	things	cannot	be	reversed,
can	they?	None	the	less,	there	is	the	matter	of	debt.’
Udinaas	smiled,	not	needing	to	look	up	to	see	the	shocked	expressions
from	the	gathered	nobility.
‘Hannan	Mosag,’	Rhulad	said	after	a	moment,	‘will	speak	for	the	Edur	in
this	matter.’
Udinaas	glanced	up	to	see	the	once-Warlock	King	stepping	forward	to
stand	in	front	of	the	dais.	He	was	without	expression.	‘Prince,	you	will	need	to
explain	how	you	Letherii	have	arrived	at	the	notion	of	debt.	The	harvest	was
illegal—do	you	deny	it?’
‘We	do	not—no,	Nifadas,	I	am	speaking.	As	I	was	saying	to	you,	Hannan
Mosag,	we	do	not	dispute	the	illegality	of	the	harvest.	But	its	illegality	does	not
in	turn	refute	the	reality	that	it	took	place.	And	that	harvest,	conducted	by
Letherii,	is	now	in	Edur	hands.	The	present	treaty,	you	may	recall,	has	an
agreed	market	value	for	tusked	seals,	and	it	is	this	price	we	expect	to	be
honoured.’
‘Extraordinary	logic,	Prince,’	Hannan	Mosag	said,	his	voice	a	smooth
rumble.
‘We	are,	fortunately,’	Quillas	continued,	‘prepared	for	a	compromise.’
‘Indeed?’
Udinaas	wondered	why	Nifadas	was	remaining	silent.	His	lack	of
interruption	could	only	be	interpreted	as	tacit	allegiance	to	the	prince	and	the
position	he	was	advocating.
‘A	compromise,	yes.	The	debt	shall	be	forgiven,	in	exchange	for	land.
Specifically,	the	remainder	of	Trate	Reach,	which,	as	we	both	know,	serves
only	as	seasonal	fishing	camps	for	your	people.	Such	camps	would	not	be
prohibited,	of	course.	They	shall	remain	available	to	you,	for	a	modest


percentage	of	your	catch.’
‘As	it	now	stands,	then,’	Hannan	Mosag	said,	‘we	begin	this	treaty	in	your
debt.’
‘Yes.’
‘Based	upon	the	presumption	that	we	possess	the	stolen	harvest.’
‘Well,	of	course—’
‘But	we	do	not	possess	it,	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar.’
‘What?	But	you	must!’
‘You	are	welcome	to	visit	our	store	houses	for	yourself,’	Hannan	Mosag
went	on	reasonably.	‘We	punished	the	harvesters,	as	was	our	right.	But	we	did
not	retrieve	the	harvest.’
‘The	ships	arrived	in	Trate	with	their	holds	empty!’
‘Perhaps,	in	fleeing	our	wrath,	they	discharged	their	burden,	so	as	to
quicken	their	pace.	Without	success,	as	it	turned	out.’	As	the	prince	simply
stared,	Hannan	Mosag	went	on,	‘Thus,	we	are	not	in	your	debt.	You,	however,
are	in	ours.	To	the	market	value	of	the	harvested	tusked	seals.	We	are
undecided,	at	the	moment,	on	the	nature	of	recompense	we	will	demand	of	you.
After	all,	we	have	no	need	of	coin.’
‘We	have	brought	gifts!’	Quillas	shouted.
‘For	which	you	will	then	charge	us,	with	interest.	We	are	familiar	with
your	pattern	of	cultural	conquest	among	neighbouring	tribes,	Prince.	That	the
situation	is	now	reversed	earns	our	sympathy,	but	as	you	are	wont	to	say,
business	is	business.’
Nifadas	finally	spoke.	‘It	seems	we	have	much	to	consider,	the	two	of	us,
Emperor.	Alas,	our	journey	has	been	long	and	wearying.	Perhaps	you	could
permit	us	to	retire	for	a	time,	to	reconvene	this	meeting	on	the	morrow?’
‘Excellent	idea,’	Rhulad	said,	the	coins	on	his	face	twisting	as	he	smiled.
‘Udinaas,	escort	the	delegation	to	the	guest	longhouse.	Then	return	here.	A
long	night	awaits	us.’
The	prince	stood	like	a	puppet	with	its	strings	cut.	The	faces	of	the
Acquitor	and	the	First	Eunuch,	however,	remained	composed.
Even	so,	it	seems	we	are	all	puppets	here…
	
Trull	Sengar	watched	the	slave	lead	the	Acquitor	and	the	delegation	out	of	the
chamber.	The	world	had	not	crumbled,	it	had	shattered,	and	before	his	eyes	he
saw	the	jagged	pieces,	a	chamber	fissured	and	latticed,	a	thousand	shards
bearing	countless	reflected	images.	Edur	faces,	broken	crowds,	the	smear	of
smoke.	Disjointed	motion,	a	fevered	murmur	of	sound,	the	liquid	glint	of	gold


and	a	sword	as	patched	and	fragmented	as	everything	else	in	sight.
Like	a	crazed	mosaic,	slowly	being	reassembled	by	a	madman’s	hand.	He
did	not	know	where	he	belonged,	where	he	fit.	Brother	to	an	emperor.	It	is
Rhulad,	yet	it	is	not.	I	don’t	know	him.	And	I	know	him	all	too	well	and,
Daughter	take	me,	I	am	frightened	most	by	that.
Hannan	Mosag	had	been	speaking	quietly	with	Rhulad,	conveying	an	ease
with	his	new	role	that	Trull	knew	was	intended	to	calm	the	witnesses	gathered
here.	Trull	wondered	what	it	was	costing	the	Warlock	King.
A	nod	and	a	wave	of	the	hand	dismissed	Hannan	Mosag,	who	retreated	to
stand	near	his	K’risnan.	At	Rhulad’s	instructions	a	large	chair	was	carried	to
the	dais,	and	the	emperor	sat,	revealing	to	Trull’s	knowing	gaze	his	brother ’s
exhaustion.	It	would	take	time	to	acquire	the	strength	necessary	to	sustain	that
vast,	terrible	weight	for	any	length	of	time.	The	emperor	settled	his	head	back
and	looked	out	upon	the	nobles.	His	attention	quickly	silenced	the	crowd.
‘I	have	known	death,’	Rhulad	said,	his	voice	rough.	‘I	have	returned,	and	I
am	not	the	same,	not	the	unblooded	warrior	you	saw	before	we	began	our
journey	to	the	ice	wastes.	I	have	returned,	to	bring	to	you	the	memory	of	our
destiny.	To	lead	you.’	He	was	silent	then,	as	if	needing	to	recover	from	his
short	speech.	A	dozen	heartbeats,	before	he	continued,	‘Fear	Sengar.	Brother,
step	forward.’
Fear	did	as	commanded,	halting	on	the	inner	ring	in	front	of	the	dais.
Rhulad	stared	down	at	him,	and	Trull	saw	a	sudden	hunger	in	those	brittle
eyes.
‘Second	only	to	Hannan	Mosag’s,	your	loyalty,	Fear,	is	my	greatest	need.’
Fear	looked	rattled,	as	if	such	a	matter	did	not	need	to	be	questioned.
The	slave	Udinaas	returned	then,	but	held	back,	his	red-rimmed	eyes
scanning	the	scene.	And	Trull	wondered	at	the	sudden	narrowing	of	that
Letherii’s	gaze.
‘What,	Emperor,’	Fear	said,	‘do	you	ask	of	me?’
‘A	gift,	brother.’
‘All	I	have	is	yours—’
‘Are	you	true	to	that	claim,	Fear?’	Rhulad	demanded,	leaning	forward.
‘I	would	not	make	it	otherwise.’
Oh.	No,	Rhulad—no—
‘The	emperor,’	Rhulad	said,	settling	back,	‘requires	an	empress.’
Comprehension	cast	a	pall	on	Fear ’s	face.
‘A	wife.	Fear	Sengar,	will	you	gift	me	a	wife?’
You	grotesque	bastard—Trull	stepped	forward.
Rhulad’s	hand	snapped	out	to	stay	him.	‘Be	careful,	Trull.	This	is	not	your


concern.’	He	bared	stained	teeth.	‘It	never	was.’
‘Must	you	break	those	who	would	follow	you?’	Trull	asked.
‘Another	word!’	Rhulad	shrieked.	‘One	more	word,	Trull,	and	I	will	have
you	flayed	alive!’
Trull	recoiled	at	the	vehemence,	stunned	into	silence.
A	coin	clattered	onto	the	dais	as	Rhulad	lifted	a	hand	to	his	face	and	clawed
at	some	extremity	of	emotion,	then	he	snatched	his	hand	away	and	held	it
before	him,	watching	it	curl	into	a	fist.	‘Kill	me.	That	is	all	you	need	do.	For
your	proof.	Yes,	kill	me.	Again.’	The	glittering	eyes	fixed	on	Trull.	‘You	knew
I	was	alone,	guarding	the	rear	slope.	You	knew	it,	Trull,	and	left	me	to	my
fate.’
‘What?	I	knew	no	such	thing,	Rhulad—’
‘No	more	lies,	brother.	Fear,	gift	me	your	betrothed.	Give	me	Mayen.
Would	you	stand	between	her	and	the	title	of	empress?	Tell	me,	are	you	that
selfish?’
As	ugly	as	driving	knives	into	Fear,	one	after	another.	As	rendering	his
flesh	into	ruin.	This,	Trull	realized,	this	was	Rhulad.	The	child	and	his	brutal
hungers,	his	vicious	appetites.	Tell	us,	are	you	that	selfish?
‘She	is	yours,	Emperor.’
Words	bled	of	all	life,	words	that	were	themselves	a	gift	to	one	who	had
known	death.	Though	Rhulad	lacked	the	subtle	mind	to	comprehend	that.
Instead,	his	face	twisted	beneath	the	coins	into	a	broad	smile,	filled	with
glee	and	triumph.	His	eyes	lifted	to	a	place	in	the	crowd	where	the	unwedded
maidens	stood.	‘Mayen,’	he	called.	‘It	is	done.	Come	forward.	Join	your
emperor.’
Tall,	regal,	the	young	woman	strode	forward	as	if	this	moment	had	been
rehearsed	a	thousand	times.
But	that	is	not	possible.
She	walked	past	Fear	without	a	glance,	and	came	to	stand,	facing	outward,
on	the	left	side	of	the	chair.	Rhulad’s	hand	reached	out	with	a	gesture	of	smug
familiarity	and	she	clasped	it.
That	final	act	struck	Fear	as	would	a	physical	blow	to	his	chest.	He	took	a
step	back.
‘Thank	you,	Fear,’	Rhulad	said,	‘for	your	gift.	I	am	assured	of	your
loyalty,	and	proud	to	call	you	my	brother.	You,	Binadas,	Midik	Buhn,	Theradas
Buhn,	Hannan	Mosag…and,’	the	gaze	shifted,	‘Trull,	of	course.	My	closest
brothers.	We	are	bound	by	the	blood	of	our	ancestors…’
He	continued,	but	Trull	had	ceased	listening.	His	eyes	were	on	Mayen’s
face.	On	the	horror	writ	there	that	she	could	not	disguise.	In	his	mind,	Trull


cried	out	to	Fear.	Look,	brother!	She	did	not	seek	this	betrayal!	Look!
With	an	effort	he	pulled	his	gaze	from	Mayen,	and	saw	that	Fear	had	seen.
Seen	what	everyone	present	could	see,	everyone	but	Rhulad.
It	saved	them	all.	Salvation	to	the	desperate.	She	showed	them	that	some
truths	could	not	be	broken,	that	even	this	insane	thing	on	its	throne	could	not
crush	the	visceral	honour	remaining	to	the	Tiste	Edur.	And	in	her	face	was	yet
another	promise.	She	would	withstand	his	crimes,	because	there	was	no	choice.
A	promise	that	was	also	a	lesson	to	everyone	present.	Withstand.	Suffer.	Live	as
you	must	now	live.	There	will,	one	day,	be	answer	to	this.
Yet	Trull	wondered.	Who	could	give	answer?	What	waited	in	the	world
beyond	the	borders	of	their	knowledge,	sufficiently	formidable	to	challenge
this	monstrosity?	And	how	long	would	they	have	to	wait?	We	were	fallen,	and
the	emperor	proclaims	that	we	shall	rise	again.	He	is	insane,	for	we	are	not
rising.	We	are	falling,	and	I	fear	there	will	be	no	end	to	that	descent.
Until	someone	gave	answer.
Rhulad	had	stopped	speaking,	as	if	growing	aware	that	something	was
happening	among	his	followers,	something	that	had	nothing	to	do	with	him
and	his	newfound	power.	He	rose	suddenly	from	the	chair.	‘This	gathering	is
done.	Hannan	Mosag,	you	and	your	K’risnan	will	remain	here	with	me	and	the
Empress,	for	we	have	much	to	discuss.	Udinaas,	bring	to	Mayen	her	slaves,	so
that	they	may	attend	her	needs.	The	rest,	leave	me	now.	Spread	the	word	of	the
rise	of	the	new	empire	of	the	Edur.	And,	brothers	and	sisters,	see	to	your
weapons…’
Please,	someone,	give	answer	to	this.
	
A	dozen	paces	from	the	citadel	a	figure	emerged	from	the	rain	to	stand	in	front
of	Udinaas.
The	Acquitor.
‘What	has	he	done?’
Udinaas	studied	her	for	a	moment,	then	shrugged.	‘He	stole	his	brother ’s
betrothed.	We	have	an	empress,	and	she	does	poorly	at	a	brave	face.’
‘The	Edur	are	usurped,’	Seren	Pedac	said.	‘And	a	tyrant	sits	on	the	throne.’
Udinaas	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Tell	the	First	Eunuch.	You	must	prepare	for
war.’
She	revealed	no	surprise	at	his	words;	rather,	a	heavy	weariness	dulled	her
eyes.	She	turned	away,	walked	into	the	rain	and	was	gone.
I	am	a	bearer	of	good	tidings	indeed.	And	now,	it’s	Feather	Witch’s	turn…
Rain	rushed	down	from	the	sky,	blinding	and	blind,	indifferent	and


mindless,	but	it	held	no	meaning	beyond	that.	How	could	it?	It	was	just	rain,
descending	from	the	sky’s	massed	legion	of	grieving	clouds.	And	the	crying
wind	was	the	breath	of	natural	laws,	born	high	in	the	mountains	or	out	at	sea.
Its	voice	promised	nothing.
There	was	no	meaning	to	be	found	in	lifeless	weather,	in	the	pulsing	of
tides	and	in	the	wake	of	turning	seasons.
No	meaning	to	living	and	dying,	either.
The	tyrant	was	clothed	in	gold,	and	the	future	smelled	of	blood.
It	meant	nothing.


Book	Three

All	That	Lies	Unseen

	


	

The	man	who	never	smiles
Drags	his	nets	through	the	deep
And	we	are	gathered
To	gape	in	the	drowning	air
Beneath	the	buffeting	sound
Of	his	dreaded	voice
Speaking	of	salvation
In	the	repast	of	justice	done
And	fed	well	on	the	laden	table
Heaped	with	noble	desires
He	tells	us	all	this	to	hone	the	edge
Of	his	eternal	mercy
Slicing	our	bellies	open
One	by	one.
IN	THE	KINGDOM	OF	MEANING	WELL
FISHER	KEL	T ATH


Chapter	Twelve

The	frog	atop	the	stack	of	coins	dares	not	jump.
POOR	UMUR’S	SAYINGS
ANONYMOUS
Five	wings	will	buy	you	a	grovel.	I	admit,	master,	the	meaning	of	that	saying
escapes	me.’
Tehol	ran	both	hands	through	his	hair,	pulling	at	the	tangles.	‘Ouch.	It’s	the
Eternal	Domicile,	Bugg.	Wings	numbering	five,	a	grovel	at	the	feet	of	the
Errant,	at	the	feet	of	destiny.	The	empire	is	risen.	Lether	awakens	to	a	new	day
of	glory.’
They	stood	side	by	side	on	the	roof.
‘But	the	fifth	wing	is	sinking.	What	about	four	wings?’
‘Gulls	in	collision,	Bugg.	My,	it’s	going	to	be	hot,	a	veritable	furnace.
What	are	the	tasks	awaiting	you	today?’
‘My	first	meeting	with	Royal	Engineer	Grum.	The	shoring	up	we’ve	done
with	the	warehouses	impressed	him,	it	seems.’
‘Good.’	Tehol	continued	staring	out	over	the	city	for	another	moment,	then
he	faced	his	servant.	‘Should	it	have?’
‘Impressed	him?	Well,	the	floors	aren’t	sagging	and	they’re	bone	dry.	The
new	plaster	isn’t	showing	any	cracks.	The	owners	are	delighted—’
‘I	thought	I	owned	those	warehouses.’
‘Aren’t	you	delighted?’
‘Well,	you’re	right,	I	am.	Every	one	of	me.’
‘That’s	what	I	told	the	Royal	Engineer	when	I	responded	to	his	first
missive.’
‘What	about	the	people	fronting	me	on	those	investments?’
‘They’re	delighted,	too.’
‘Well,’	Tehol	sighed,	‘it’s	just	that	kind	of	day,	isn’t	it?’
Bugg	nodded.	‘Must	be,	master.’
‘And	is	that	all	you	have	planned?	For	the	whole	day?’


‘No.	I	need	to	scrounge	some	food.	Then	I	need	to	visit	Shand	and	her
partners	to	give	them	that	list	of	yours	again.	It	was	too	long.’
‘Do	you	recall	it	in	its	entirety?’
‘I	do.	Puryst	Rott	Ale,	I	liked	that	one.’
‘Thank	you.’
‘But	they	weren’t	all	fake,	were	they?’
‘No,	that	would	give	it	away	too	quickly.	All	the	local	ones	were	real.	In
any	case,	it’ll	keep	them	busy	for	a	while.	I	hope.	What	else?’
‘Another	meeting	with	the	guilds.	I	may	need	bribe	money	for	that.’
‘Nonsense.	Stand	fast—they’re	about	to	be	hit	from	another	quarter.’
‘Strike?	I	hadn’t	heard—’
‘Of	course	not.	The	incident	that	triggers	it	hasn’t	happened	yet.	You	know
the	Royal	Engineer ’s	obliged	to	hire	guild	members	only.	We	have	to	see	that
conflict	eliminated	before	it	gives	us	trouble.’
‘All	right.	I	also	need	to	check	on	that	safe-house	for	Shurq	and	her
newfound	friend.’
‘Harlest	Eberict.	That	was	quite	a	surprise.	Just	how	many	undead	people
are	prowling	around	in	this	city	anyway?’
‘Obviously	more	than	we’re	aware	of,	master.’
‘For	all	we	know,	half	the	population	might	be	undead—those	people	on
the	bridge	there,	there,	those	ones	with	all	those	shopping	baskets	in	tow,
maybe	they’re	undead.’
‘Possibly,	master,’	Bugg	conceded.	‘Do	you	mean	undead	literally	or
figuratively?’
‘Oh,	yes,	there	is	a	difference,	isn’t	there?	Sorry,	I	got	carried	away.
Speaking	of	which,	how	are	Shurq	and	Ublala	getting	along?’
‘Swimmingly.’
‘Impressively	droll,	Bugg.	So,	you	want	to	check	on	their	hidden	abode.	Is
that	all	you’re	up	to	today?’
‘That’s	just	the	morning.	In	the	afternoon—’
‘Can	you	manage	a	short	visit?’
‘Where?’
‘Rat	Catchers’	Guild.’
‘Scale	House?’
Tehol	nodded.	‘I	have	a	contract	for	them.	I	want	a	meeting—clandestine—
with	the	Guild	Master.	Tomorrow	night,	if	possible.’
Bugg	looked	troubled.	‘That	guild—’
‘I	know.’
‘I	can	drop	by	on	my	way	to	the	gravel	quarry.’


‘Excellent.	Why	are	you	going	to	the	gravel	quarry?’
‘Curiosity.	They	opened	up	a	new	hill	to	fill	my	last	order,	and	found
something.’
‘What?’
‘Not	sure.	Only	that	they	hired	a	necromancer	to	deal	with	it.	And	the	poor
fool	disappeared,	apart	from	some	hair	and	toe	nails.’
‘Hmm,	that	is	interesting.	Keep	me	informed.’
‘As	always,	master.	And	what	have	you	planned	for	today?’
‘I	thought	I’d	go	back	to	bed.’
	
Brys	lifted	his	gaze	from	the	meticulous	scroll	and	studied	the	scribe	seated
across	from	him.	‘There	must	be	some	mistake,’	he	said.
‘No,	sir.	Never,	sir.’
‘Well,	if	these	are	just	the	reported	disappearances,	what	about	those	that
haven’t	been	reported?’
‘Between	thirty	and	fifty	per	cent,	I	would	say,	sir.	Added	on	to	what	we
have.	But	those	would	be	the	blue-edged	scrolls.	They’re	stored	on	the
Projected	Shelf.’
‘The	what?’
‘Projected.	That	one,	the	one	sticking	out	from	the	wall	over	there.’
‘And	what	is	the	significance	of	the	blue	edges?’
‘Posited	realities,	sir,	that	which	exists	beyond	the	statistics.	We	use	the
statistics	for	formal,	public	statements	and	pronouncements,	but	we	operate	on
the	posited	realities	or,	if	possible,	the	measurable	realities.’
‘Different	sets	of	data?’
‘Yes,	sir.	It’s	the	only	way	to	operate	an	effective	government.	The
alternative	would	lead	to	anarchy.	Riots,	that	sort	of	thing.	We	have	posited
realities	for	those	projections,	of	course,	and	they’re	not	pretty.’
‘But’—Brys	looked	back	down	at	the	scroll—‘seven	thousand
disappearances	in	Letheras	last	year?’
‘Six	thousand	nine	hundred	and	twenty-one,	sir.’
‘With	a	possible	additional	thirty-five	hundred?’
‘Three	thousand	four	hundred	and	sixty	and	a	half,	sir.’
‘And	is	anyone	assigned	to	conduct	investigations	on	these?’
‘That	has	been	contracted	out,	sir.’
‘Clearly	a	waste	of	coin,	then—’
‘Oh	no,	the	coin	is	well	spent.’
‘How	so?’


‘A	respectable	amount,	sir,	which	we	can	use	in	our	formal	and	public
pronouncements.’
‘Well,	who	holds	this	contract?’
‘Wrong	office,	sir.	That	information	is	housed	in	the	Chamber	of
Contracts	and	Royal	Charters.’
‘I’ve	never	heard	of	it.	Where	is	it?’
The	scribe	rose	and	walked	to	a	small	door	squeezed	between	scroll-cases.
‘In	here.	Follow	me,	sir.’
The	room	beyond	was	not	much	larger	than	a	walk-in	closet.	Blue-edged
scrolls	filled	cubby-holes	from	floor	to	ceiling	on	all	sides.	Rummaging	in
one	cubby-hole	at	the	far	wall,	the	scribe	removed	a	scroll	and	unfurled	it.
‘Here	we	are.	It’s	a	relatively	new	contract.	Three	years	so	far.	Ongoing
investigations,	biannual	reports	delivered	precisely	on	the	due	dates,	yielding
no	queries,	each	one	approved	without	prejudice.’
‘With	whom?’
‘The	Rat	Catchers’	Guild.’
Brys	frowned.	‘Now	I	am	well	and	truly	confused.’
The	scribe	shrugged	and	rolled	up	the	scroll	to	put	it	away.	Over	his
shoulder	he	said,	‘No	need	to	be,	sir.	The	guild	is	profoundly	competent	in	a
whole	host	of	endeavours—’
‘Competence	doesn’t	seem	a	relevant	notion	in	this	matter,’	Brys	observed.
‘I	disagree.	Punctual	reports.	No	queries.	Two	renewals	without	challenge.
Highly	competent,	I	would	say,	sir.’
‘Nor	is	there	any	shortage	of	rats	in	the	city,	as	one	would	readily	see	with
even	a	short	walk	down	any	street.’
‘Population	management,	sir.	I	dread	to	think	what	the	situation	would	be
like	without	the	guild.’
Brys	said	nothing.
A	defensiveness	came	to	the	scribe’s	expression	as	he	studied	the	Finadd
for	a	long	moment.	‘We	have	nothing	but	praise	for	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild,
sir.’
‘Thank	you	for	your	efforts,’	Brys	said.	‘I	will	find	my	own	way	out.	Good
day.’
‘And	to	you,	sir.	Pleased	to	have	been	of	some	service.’
Out	in	the	corridor,	Brys	paused,	rubbing	at	his	eyes.	Archival	chambers
were	thick	with	dust.	He	needed	to	get	outside,	into	what	passed	for	fresh	air	in
Letheras.
Seven	thousand	disappearances	every	year.	He	was	appalled.
So	what,	I	wonder,	has	Tehol	stumbled	onto?	His	brother	remained	a


mystery	to	Brys.	Clearly,	Tehol	was	up	to	something,	contrary	to	outward
appearances.	And	he	had	somehow	held	on	to	a	formidable	level	of	efficacy
behind—or	beneath—the	scenes.	That	all	too	public	fall,	so	shocking	and
traumatic	to	the	financial	tolls,	now	struck	Brys	as	just	another	feint	in	his
brother ’s	grander	scheme—whatever	that	was.
The	mere	thought	that	such	a	scheme	might	exist	worried	Brys.	His	brother
had	revealed,	on	occasion,	frightening	competence	and	ruthlessness.	Tehol
possessed	few	loyalties.	He	was	capable	of	anything.
All	things	considered,	the	less	Brys	knew	of	Tehol’s	activities,	the	better.
He	did	not	want	his	own	loyalties	challenged,	and	his	brother	might	well
challenge	them.	As	with	Hull.	Oh,	Mother,	it	is	the	Errant’s	blessing	that	you
are	not	alive	to	see	your	sons	now.	Then	again,	how	much	of	what	we	are	now	is
what	you	made	us	into?
Questions	without	answers.	There	seemed	to	be	too	many	of	those	these
days.
He	made	his	way	into	the	more	familiar	passages	of	the	palace.	Weapons
training	awaited	him,	and	he	found	himself	anticipating	that	period	of	blissful
exhaustion.	If	only	to	silence	the	cacophony	of	his	thoughts.
	
There	were	clear	advantages	to	being	dead,	Bugg	reflected,	as	he	lifted	the
flagstone	from	the	warehouse	office	floor,	revealing	a	black	gaping	hole	and
the	top	rung	of	a	pitted	bronze	ladder.	Dead	fugitives,	after	all,	needed	no	food,
no	water.	No	air,	come	to	that.	Made	hiding	them	almost	effortless.
He	descended	the	ladder,	twenty-three	rungs,	to	arrive	at	a	tunnel	roughly
cut	from	the	heavy	clay	and	then	fired	to	form	a	hard	shell.	Ten	paces	forward
to	a	crooked	stone	arch	beneath	which	was	a	cracked	stone	door	crowded	with
hieroglyphs.	Old	tombs	like	this	were	rare.	Most	had	long	since	collapsed
beneath	the	weight	of	the	city	overhead	or	had	simply	sunk	so	far	down	in	the
mud	as	to	be	unreachable.	Scholars	had	sought	to	decipher	the	strange	sigils	on
the	doors	of	the	tombs,	while	common	folk	had	long	wondered	why	tombs
should	have	doors	at	all.	The	language	had	only	been	partially	deciphered,
sufficient	to	reveal	that	the	glyphs	were	curse-laden	and	aspected	to	the	Errant
in	some	mysterious	way.	All	in	all,	cause	enough	to	avoid	them,	especially
since,	after	a	few	had	been	broken	into,	it	became	known	that	the	tombs
contained	nothing	of	value,	and	were	peculiar	in	that	the	featureless	plain	stone
sarcophagus	each	tomb	housed	was	empty.	There	was	the	added	unsubstantiated
rumour	that	those	tomb-robbers	had	subsequently	suffered	horrid	fates.
The	door	to	this	particular	tomb	had	surrendered	its	seal	to	the	uneven


heaving	descent	of	the	entire	structure.	Modest	effort	could	push	it	to	one	side.
In	the	tunnel,	Bugg	lit	a	lantern	using	a	small	ember	box,	and	set	it	down
on	the	threshold	to	the	tomb.	He	then	applied	his	shoulder	to	the	door.
‘Is	that	you?’	came	Shurq’s	voice	from	the	darkness	within.
‘Why	yes,’	Bugg	said,	‘it	is.’
‘Liar.	You’re	not	you,	you’re	Bugg.	Where’s	Tehol?	I	need	to	talk	to
Tehol.’
‘He	is	indisposed,’	Bugg	said.	Having	pushed	the	door	open	to	allow
himself	passage	into	the	tomb,	he	collected	the	lantern	and	edged	inside.
‘Where’s	Harlest?’
‘In	the	sarcophagus.’
There	was	no	lid	to	the	huge	stone	coffin.	Bugg	walked	over	and	peered	in.
‘What	are	you	doing,	Harlest?’	He	set	the	lantern	down	on	the	edge.
‘The	previous	occupant	was	tall.	Very	tall.	Hello,	Bugg.	What	am	I	doing?	I
am	lying	here.’
‘Yes,	I	see	that.	But	why?’
‘There	are	no	chairs.’
Bugg	turned	to	Shurq	Elalle.	‘Where	are	these	diamonds?’
‘Here.	Have	you	found	what	I	was	looking	for?’
‘I	have.	A	decent	price,	leaving	you	the	majority	of	your	wealth	intact.’
‘Tehol	can	have	what’s	left	in	the	box	there.	My	earnings	from	the
whorehouse	I’ll	keep.’
‘Are	you	sure	you	don’t	want	a	percentage	from	this,	Shurq?	Tehol	would
be	happy	with	fifty	per	cent.	After	all,	the	risk	was	yours.’
‘No.	I’m	a	thief.	I	can	always	get	more.’
Bugg	glanced	around.	‘Will	this	do	for	the	next	little	while?’
‘I	don’t	see	why	not.	It’s	dry,	at	least.	Quiet,	most	of	the	time.	But	I	need
Ublala	Pung.’
Harlest’s	voice	came	from	the	sarcophagus.	‘And	I	want	sharp	teeth	and
talons.	Shurq	said	you	could	do	that	for	me.’
‘Work’s	already	begun	on	that,	Harlest.’
‘I	want	to	be	scary.	It’s	important	that	I	be	scary.	I’ve	been	practising
hissing	and	snarling.’
‘No	need	for	concern	there,’	Bugg	replied.	‘You’ll	be	truly	terrifying.	In
any	case,	I	should	be	going—’
‘Not	so	fast,’	Shurq	cut	in.	‘Has	there	been	any	word	on	the	robbery	at
Gerun	Eberict’s	estate?’
‘No.	Not	surprising,	if	you	think	about	it.	Gerun’s	undead	brother
disappears,	the	same	night	as	some	half-giant	beats	up	most	of	the	guards.


Barring	that,	what	else	is	certain?	Will	anyone	actually	attempt	to	enter	Gerun’s
warded	office?’
‘If	I	eat	human	flesh,’	Harlest	said,	‘it	will	rot	in	my	stomach,	won’t	it?
That	means	I	will	stink.	I	like	that.	I	like	thinking	about	things	like	that.	The
smell	of	doom.’
‘The	what?	Shurq,	probably	they	don’t	know	they’ve	been	robbed.	And
even	if	they	did,	they	wouldn’t	make	a	move	until	their	master	returns.’
‘I	expect	you’re	right.	Anyway,	be	sure	to	send	me	Ublala	Pung.	Tell	him	I
miss	him.	Him	and	his—’
‘I	will,	Shurq.	I	promise.	Anything	else?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	she	replied.	‘Let	me	think.’
Bugg	waited.
‘Oh,	yes,’	she	said	after	a	time,	‘what	do	you	know	about	these	tombs?
There	was	a	corpse	here,	once,	in	that	sarcophagus.’
‘How	can	you	be	certain?’
Her	lifeless	eyes	fixed	on	his.	‘We	can	tell.’
‘Oh.	All	right.’
‘So,	what	do	you	know?’
‘Not	much.	The	language	on	the	door	belongs	to	an	extinct	people	known
as	Forkrul	Assail,	who	are	collectively	personified	in	our	Fulcra	by	the
personage	we	call	the	Errant.	The	tombs	were	built	for	another	extinct	people,
called	the	Jaghut,	whom	we	acknowledge	in	the	Hold	we	call	the	Hold	of	Ice.
The	wards	were	intended	to	block	the	efforts	of	another	people,	the	T’lan
Imass,	who	were	the	avowed	enemies	of	the	Jaghut.	The	T’lan	Imass	pursued
the	Jaghut	in	a	most	relentless	manner,	including	those	Jaghut	who	elected	to
surrender	their	place	in	the	world—said	individuals	choosing	something
closely	resembling	death.	Their	souls	would	travel	to	their	Hold,	leaving	their
flesh	behind,	the	flesh	being	stored	in	tombs	like	this	one.	That	wasn’t	good
enough	for	the	T’lan	Imass.	Anyway,	the	Forkrul	Assail	considered	themselves
impartial	arbiters	in	the	conflict,	and	that	was,	most	of	the	time,	the	extent	of
their	involvement.	Apart	from	that,’	Bugg	said	with	a	shrug,	‘I	really	can’t	say.’
Harlest	Eberict	had	slowly	sat	up	during	Bugg’s	monologue	and	was	now
staring	at	the	manservant.	Shurq	Elalle	was	motionless,	as	the	dead	often	were.
Then	she	said,	‘I	have	another	question.’
‘Go	ahead.’
‘Is	this	common	knowledge	among	serving	staff?’
‘Not	that	I	am	aware	of,	Shurq.	I	just	pick	up	things	here	and	there,	over
time.’
‘Things	no	scholar	in	Letheras	picks	up?	Or	are	you	just	inventing	as	you


go	along?’
‘I	try	to	avoid	complete	fabrication.’
‘And	do	you	succeed?’
‘Not	always.’
‘You’d	better	go	now,	Bugg.’
‘Yes,	I’d	better.	I’ll	have	Ublala	visit	you	tonight.’
‘Do	you	have	to?’	Harlest	asked.	‘I’m	not	the	voyeuristic	type—’
‘Liar,’	Shurq	said.	‘Of	course	you	are.’
‘Okay,	so	I’m	lying.	It’s	a	useful	lie,	and	I	want	to	keep	it.’
‘That	position	is	indefensible—’
‘That’s	a	rich	statement,	coming	from	you	and	given	what	you’ll	be	up	to
tonight—’
Bugg	collected	the	lantern	and	slowly	backed	out	as	the	argument
continued.	He	pushed	the	door	back	in	place,	slapped	the	dust	from	his	hands,
then	returned	to	the	ladder.
Once	back	in	the	warehouse	office,	he	replaced	the	flagstone,	then,
collecting	his	drawings,	he	made	his	way	to	the	latest	construction	site.	Bugg’s
Construction’s	most	recent	acquisition	had	once	been	a	school,	stately	and
reserved	for	children	of	only	the	wealthiest	citizens	of	Letheras.	Residences
were	provided,	creating	the	typical	and	highly	popular	prison-style	educational
institution.	Whatever	host	of	traumas	were	taught	within	its	confines	came	to	an
end	when,	during	one	particularly	wet	spring,	the	cellar	walls	collapsed	in	a
sluice	of	mud	and	small	human	bones.	The	floor	of	the	main	assembly	hall
promptly	slumped	during	the	next	gathering	of	students,	burying	children	and
instructors	alike	in	a	vast	pit	of	black,	rotting	mud,	in	which	fully	a	third
drowned,	and	of	these	the	bodies	of	more	than	half	were	never	recovered.
Shoddy	construction	was	blamed,	leading	to	a	scandal.
Since	that	event,	fifteen	years	past,	the	derelict	building	had	remained
empty,	reputedly	haunted	by	the	ghosts	of	outraged	proctors	and	bewildered
hall	monitors.
The	purchase	price	had	been	suitably	modest.
The	upper	levels	directly	above	the	main	assembly	hall	were	structurally
compromised,	and	Bugg’s	first	task	had	been	to	oversee	the	installation	of
bracing,	before	the	crews	could	re-excavate	the	pit	down	to	the	cellar	floor.
Once	that	floor	was	exposed—and	the	jumble	of	bones	dispatched	to	the
cemetery—shafts	were	extended	straight	down,	through	lenses	of	clay	and
sand,	to	a	thick	bed	of	gravel.	Cement	was	poured	in	and	a	ring	of	vertical	iron
rods	put	in	place,	followed	by	alternating	packed	gravel	and	cement	for	half
the	depth	of	the	shaft.	Limestone	pillars,	their	bases	drilled	to	take	the


projecting	rods,	were	then	lowered.	From	there	on	upwards,	normal
construction	practices	followed.	Columns,	buttresses	and	false	arches,	all	the
usual	techniques	in	which	Bugg	had	little	interest.
The	old	school	was	being	transformed	into	a	palatial	mansion.	Which	they
would	then	sell	to	some	rich	merchant	or	noble	devoid	of	taste.	Since	there
were	plenty	of	those,	the	investment	was	a	sure	one.
Bugg	spent	a	short	time	at	the	site,	surrounded	by	foremen	thrusting
scrolls	in	his	face	describing	countless	alterations	and	specifications	requiring
approval.	A	bell	passed	before	he	finally	managed	to	file	his	drawings	and
escape.
The	street	that	became	the	road	that	led	to	the	gravel	quarry	was	a	main
thoroughfare	wending	parallel	with	the	canal.	It	was	also	one	of	the	oldest
tracks	in	the	city.	Built	along	the	path	of	a	submerged	beach	ridge	of	pebbles
and	cobbles	sealed	in	clay,	the	buildings	lining	it	had	resisted	the	sagging
decay	common	to	other	sections	of	the	city.	Two	hundred	years	old,	many	of
them,	in	a	style	so	far	forgotten	as	to	seem	foreign.
Scale	House	was	tall	and	narrow,	squeezed	between	two	massive	stone
edifices,	one	a	temple	archive	and	the	other	the	monolithic	heart	of	the	Guild
of	Street	Inspectors.	A	few	generations	past,	a	particularly	skilled	stone	carver
had	dressed	the	limestone	façade	and	formal,	column-flanked	entrance	with
lovingly	rendered	rats.	In	multitudes	almost	beyond	counting.	Cavorting	rats,
dancing	rats,	fornicating	rats.	Rats	at	war,	at	rest,	rats	feasting	on	corpses,
swarming	feast-laden	tabletops	amidst	sleeping	mongrels	and	drunk	servants.
Scaly	tails	formed	intricate	borders	to	the	scenes,	and	in	some	strange	way	it
seemed	to	Bugg	as	he	climbed	the	steps	that	the	rats	were	in	motion,	at	the
corner	of	his	vision,	moving,	writhing,	grinning.
He	shook	off	his	unease,	paused	a	moment	on	the	landing,	then	opened	the
door	and	strode	inside.
‘How	many,	how	bad,	how	long?’
The	desk,	solid	grey	Bluerose	marble,	almost	blocked	the	entrance	to	the
reception	hall,	spanning	the	width	of	the	room	barring	a	narrow	space	at	the
far	right.	The	secretary	seated	behind	it	had	yet	to	look	up	from	his	ledgers.	He
continued	speaking	after	a	moment.	‘Answer	those	questions,	then	tell	us	where
and	what	you’re	willing	to	pay	and	is	this	a	one-off	or	are	you	interested	in
regular	monthly	visits?	And	be	advised	we’re	not	accepting	contracts	at	the
moment.’
‘No.’
The	secretary	set	down	his	quill	and	looked	up.	Dark,	small	eyes	glittered
with	suspicion	from	beneath	a	single	wiry	brow.	Ink-stained	fingers	plucked	at


his	nose,	which	had	begun	twitching	as	if	the	man	was	about	to	sneeze.	‘We’re
not	responsible.’
‘For	what?’
‘For	anything.’	More	tugging	at	his	nose.	‘And	we’re	not	accepting	any
more	petitions,	so	if	you’re	here	to	deliver	one	you	might	as	well	just	turn
round	and	leave.’
‘What	sort	of	petition	might	I	want	to	hand	to	you?’	Bugg	asked.
‘Any	sort.	Belligerent	tenement	associations	have	to	wait	in	line	just	like
everyone	else.’
‘I	have	no	petition.’
‘Then	we	didn’t	do	it,	we	were	never	there,	you	heard	wrong,	it	was
someone	else.’
‘I	am	here	on	behalf	of	my	master,	who	wishes	to	meet	with	your	guild	to
discuss	a	contract.’
‘We’re	backed	up.	Not	taking	any	more	contracts—’
‘Price	is	not	a	consideration,’	Bugg	cut	in,	then	smiled,	‘within	reasonable
limits.’
‘Ah,	but	then	it	is	a	consideration.	We	may	well	have	unreasonable	limits	in
mind.	We	often	have,	you	know.’
‘I	do	not	believe	my	master	is	interested	in	rats.’
‘Then	he’s	insane…but	interesting.	The	board	will	be	in	attendance	tonight
on	another	matter.	Your	master	will	be	allotted	a	short	period	at	the	meeting’s
end,	which	I	will	note	in	the	agenda.	Anything	else?’
‘No.	What	time	tonight?’
‘Ninth	bell,	no	later.	Come	late	and	he	will	be	barred	outside	the	chamber
door.	Be	sure	he	understands	that.’
‘My	master	is	always	punctual.’
The	secretary	made	a	face.	‘Oh,	he’s	like	that,	is	he?	Poor	you.	Now,
begone.	I’m	busy.’
Bugg	abruptly	leaned	forward	and	stabbed	two	fingers	into	the	secretary’s
eyes.	There	was	no	resistance.	The	secretary	tilted	his	head	back	and	scowled.
‘Cute,’	Bugg	smiled,	stepping	back.	‘My	compliments	to	the	guild
sorceror.’
‘What	gave	me	away?’	the	secretary	asked	as	Bugg	opened	the	door.
The	manservant	glanced	back.	‘You	are	far	too	rat-like,	betraying	your
creator ’s	obsession.	Even	so,	the	illusion	is	superb.’
‘I	haven’t	been	found	out	in	decades.	Who	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	you?’
‘For	that	answer,’	Bugg	said	as	he	turned	away,	‘you’ll	need	a	petition.’
‘Wait!	Who’s	your	master?’


Bugg	gave	a	final	wave	then	shut	the	door.	He	descended	the	steps	and
swung	right.	A	long	walk	to	the	quarries	was	before	him,	and,	as	Tehol	had
predicted,	the	day	was	hot,	and	growing	hotter.
	
Summoned	to	join	the	Ceda	in	the	Cedance,	the	chamber	of	the	tiles,	Brys
descended	the	last	few	steps	to	the	landing	and	made	his	way	onto	the	raised
walkway.	Kuru	Qan	was	circling	the	far	platform	in	a	distracted	manner,
muttering	under	his	breath.
‘Ceda,’	Brys	called	as	he	approached.	‘You	wished	to	see	me?’
‘Unpleasant,	Finadd,	all	very	unpleasant.	Defying	comprehension.	I	need	a
clearer	mind.	In	other	words,	not	mine.	Perhaps	yours.	Come	here.	Listen.’
Brys	had	never	heard	the	Ceda	speak	with	such	fraught	dismay.	‘What	has
happened?’
‘Every	Hold,	Finadd.	Chaos.	I	have	witnessed	a	transformation.	Here,	see
for	yourself.	The	tile	of	the	Fulcra,	the	Dolmen.	Do	you	see?	A	figure	huddled
at	its	base.	Bound	to	the	menhir	with	chains.	All	obscured	by	smoke,	a	smoke
that	numbs	my	mind.	The	Dolmen	has	been	usurped.’
Brys	stared	down	at	the	tile.	The	figure	was	ghostly,	and	his	vision	blurred
the	longer	he	stared	at	it.	‘By	whom?’
‘A	stranger.	An	outsider.’
‘A	god?’
Kuru	Qan	massaged	his	lined	brow	with	his	fingers	as	he	continued	pacing.
‘Yes.	No.	We	hold	no	value	in	the	notion	of	gods.	Upstarts	who	are	as	nothing
compared	to	the	Holds.	Most	of	them	aren’t	even	real,	simply	projections	of	a
people’s	desires,	hopes.	Fears.	Of	course,’	he	added,	‘sometimes	that’s	all	that’s
needed.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Kuru	Qan	shook	his	head.	‘And	the	Azath	Hold,	this	troubles	me	greatly.
The	centre	tile,	the	Heartstone,	can	you	sense	it?	The	Azath	Heartstone,	my
friend,	has	died.	The	other	tiles	clustered	together	around	it,	at	the	end,
drawing	tight	as	blood	gathers	in	a	wounded	body.	The	Tomb	is	breached.
Portal	stands	unguarded.	You	must	make	a	journey	for	me	to	the	square	tower,
Finadd.	And	go	armed.’
‘What	am	I	to	look	for?’
‘Anything	untoward.	Broken	ground.	But	be	careful—the	dwellers	within
those	tombs	are	not	dead.’
‘Very	well.’	Brys	scanned	the	nearest	tiles.	‘Is	there	more?’
Kuru	Qan	halted,	brows	lifting.	‘More?	Dragon	Hold	has	awakened.


Wyval.	Blood-Drinker.	Gate.	Consort.	Among	the	Fulcra,	the	Errant	is	now
positioned	in	the	centre	of	things.	The	Pack	draws	nearer,	and	Shapefinder	has
become	a	chimera.	Ice	Hold’s	Huntress	walks	frozen	paths.	Child	and	Seed	stir
to	life.	The	Empty	Hold—you	can	well	see—has	become	obscured.	Every	tile.
A	shadow	stands	behind	the	Empty	Throne.	And	look,	Saviour	and	Betrayer,
they	have	coalesced.	They	are	one	and	the	same.	How	is	this	possible?
Wanderer,	Mistress,	Watcher	and	Walker,	all	hidden,	blurred	by	mysterious
motion.	I	am	frightened,	Finadd.’
‘Ceda,	have	you	heard	from	the	delegation?’
‘The	delegation?	No.	From	the	moment	of	their	arrival	in	the	Warlock
King’s	village,	all	contact	with	them	has	been	lost.	Blocked	by	Edur	sorcery,	of
a	sort	we’ve	not	experienced	before.	There	is	much	that	is	troubling.	Much.’
‘I	should	leave	now,	Ceda,	while	there’s	still	daylight.’
‘Agreed.	Then	return	here	with	what	you	have	discovered.’
‘Very	well.’
	
The	track	leading	to	the	quarries	climbed	in	zigzag	fashion	to	a	notch	in	the
hillside.	The	stands	of	coppiced	trees	on	the	flanks	were	sheathed	in	white	dust.
Goats	coughed	in	the	shade.
Bugg	paused	to	wipe	sweaty	grit	from	his	forehead,	then	went	on.
Two	wagons	filled	with	stonecutters	had	passed	him	a	short	while	earlier,
and	from	the	frustrated	foreman	came	the	unwelcome	news	that	the	crew	had
refused	to	work	the	quarry	any	longer,	at	least	until	the	situation	was	resolved.
A	cavity	had	been	inadvertently	breached,	within	which	a	creature	of	some
sort	had	been	imprisoned	for	what	must	have	been	a	long,	long	time.	Three
’cutters	had	been	dragged	inside,	their	shrieks	short-lived.	The	hired
necromancer	hadn’t	fared	any	better.
Bugg	reached	the	notch	and	stood	looking	down	at	the	quarry	pit	with	its
geometric	limestone	sides	cut	deep	into	the	surrounding	land.	The	mouth	of	the
cavity	was	barely	visible	near	an	area	that	had	seen	recent	work.
He	made	his	way	down,	coming	to	within	twenty	paces	of	the	cave	before
he	stopped.
The	air	was	suddenly	bitter	cold.	Frowning,	Bugg	stepped	to	one	side	and
sat	down	on	a	block	of	limestone.	He	watched	frost	form	on	the	ground	to	the
left	of	the	cave,	reaching	in	a	point	towards	the	dark	opening,	the	opposite	end
spreading	ever	wider	in	a	swirl	of	fog.	The	sound	of	ice	crunching	underfoot,
then	a	figure	appeared	from	the	widening	end,	as	if	striding	out	from	nowhere.
Tall,	naked	from	the	hips	upward,	grey-green	skin.	Long,	streaked	blonde	hair


hanging	loose	over	the	shoulders	and	down	the	back.	Light	grey	eyes,	the
pupils	vertical	slits.	Silver-capped	tusks.	Female,	heavy-breasted.	She	was
wearing	a	short	skirt,	her	only	clothing	barring	the	leather-strapped
moccasins,	and	a	wide	belt	holding	a	half-dozen	scabbards	in	which	stabbing
knives	resided.
Her	attention	was	on	the	cave.	She	anchored	her	hands	on	her	hips	and
visibly	sighed.
‘He’s	not	coming	out,’	Bugg	said.
She	glanced	over.	‘Of	course	he	isn’t,	now	that	I’m	here.’
‘What	kind	of	demon	is	he?’
‘Hungry	and	insane,	but	a	coward.’
‘Did	you	put	him	there?’
She	nodded.	‘Damned	humans.	Can’t	leave	things	well	enough	alone.’
‘I	doubt	they	knew,	Jaghut.’
‘No	excuse.	They’re	always	digging.	Digging	here,	digging	there.	They
never	stop.’
Bugg	nodded,	then	asked,	‘So	now	what?’
She	sighed	again.
The	frost	at	her	feet	burgeoned	into	angular	ice,	which	then	crawled	into
the	cave	mouth.	The	ice	grew	swiftly,	filling	the	hole.	The	surrounding	stone
groaned,	creaked,	then	split	apart,	revealing	solid	ice	beneath	it.	Sandy	earth
and	limestone	chunks	tumbled	away.
Bugg’s	gaze	narrowed	on	the	strange	shape	trapped	in	the	centre	of	the
steaming	ice.	‘A	Khalibaral?	Errant	take	us,	Huntress,	I’m	glad	you	decided	to
return.’
‘Now	I	need	to	find	for	him	somewhere	else.	Any	suggestions?’
Bugg	considered	for	a	time,	then	he	smiled.
	
Brys	made	his	approach	between	two	of	the	ruined	round	towers,	stepping
carefully	around	tumbled	blocks	of	stone	half	hidden	in	the	wiry	yellow
grasses.	The	air	was	hot	and	still,	the	sunlight	molten	gold	on	the	tower	walls.
Grasshoppers	rose	from	his	path	in	clattering	panic	and,	at	the	faint	sensation
of	crunching	underfoot,	Brys	looked	down	to	see	that	the	ground	was	crawling
with	life.	Insects,	many	of	them	unrecognizable	to	his	eyes,	oversized,
awkward,	in	dull	hues,	scrambling	to	either	side	as	he	walked.
Since	they	were	all	fleeing,	he	was	not	unduly	concerned.
He	came	within	sight	of	the	square	tower.	The	Azath.	Apart	from	its
primitive	style	of	architecture,	there	seemed	to	be	little	else	to	set	it	apart.	Brys


was	baffled	by	the	Ceda’s	assertion	that	a	structure	of	stone	and	wood	could	be
sentient,	could	breathe	with	a	life	of	its	own.	A	building	presupposed	a	builder,
yet	Kuru	Qan	claimed	that	the	Azath	simply	rose	into	being,	drawn	together	of
its	own	accord.	Inviting	suspicion	on	every	law	of	causality	generations	of
scholars	had	posited	as	irrefutable	truth.
The	surrounding	grounds	were	less	mysterious,	if	profoundly	more
dangerous.	The	humped	barrows	in	the	overgrown	yard	were	unmistakable.
Gnarled	and	stunted,	dead	trees	rose	here	and	there,	sometimes	from	the
highest	point	of	the	mound,	but	more	often	from	the	flanks.	A	winding
flagstone	pathway	began	opposite	the	front	door,	the	gate	marked	by	rough
pillars	of	unmortared	stone	wrapped	in	vines	and	runners.	The	remnants	of	a
low	wall	enclosed	the	grounds.
Brys	reached	the	edge	of	the	yard	along	one	side,	the	gate	to	his	right,	the
tower	to	the	left.	And	saw	immediately	that	many	of	the	barrows	within	sight
had	slumped	on	at	least	one	of	their	sides,	as	if	gutted	from	within.	The	weeds
covering	the	mounds	were	dead,	blackened	as	if	by	rot.
He	studied	the	scene	for	a	moment	longer,	then	made	his	way	round	the
perimeter	towards	the	gateway.	Striding	between	the	pillars,	onto	the	first
flagstone—which	pitched	down	to	one	side	with	a	grinding	clunk.	Brys
tottered,	flinging	his	arms	out	for	balance,	and	managed	to	recover	without
falling.
High-pitched	laughter	from	near	the	tower ’s	entrance.
He	looked	up.
The	girl	emerged	from	the	shadow	cast	by	the	tower.	‘I	know	you.	I
followed	the	ones	following	you.	And	killed	them.’
‘What	has	happened	here?’
‘Bad	things.’	She	came	closer,	mould-patched	and	dishevelled.	‘Are	you
my	friend?	I	was	supposed	to	help	it	stay	alive.	But	it	died	anyway,	and	things
are	busy	killing	each	other.	Except	for	the	one	the	tower	chose.	He	wants	to	talk
to	you.’
‘To	me?’
‘To	one	of	my	grown-up	friends.’
‘Who,’	Brys	asked,	‘are	your	other	grown-up	friends?’
‘Mother	Shurq,	Father	Tehol,	Uncle	Ublala,	Uncle	Bugg.’
Brys	was	silent.	Then,	‘What	is	your	name?’
‘Kettle.’
‘Kettle,	how	many	people	have	you	killed	in	the	past	year?’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘I	can’t	count	past	eight	and	two.’
‘Ah.’


‘Lots	of	eight	and	twos.’
‘And	where	do	the	bodies	go?’
‘I	bring	them	back	here	and	push	them	into	the	ground.’
‘All	of	them?’
She	nodded.
‘Where	is	this	friend	of	yours?	The	one	who	wants	to	talk	to	me?’
‘I	don’t	know	if	he’s	a	friend.	Follow	me.	Step	where	I	step.’
She	took	him	by	the	hand	and	Brys	fought	to	repress	a	shiver	at	that
clammy	grip.	Off	the	flagstoned	path,	between	barrows,	the	ground	shifting
uncertainly	beneath	each	cautious	step.	There	were	more	insects,	but	of	fewer
varieties,	as	if	some	kind	of	attrition	had	occurred	on	the	grounds	of	the	Azath.
‘I	have	never	seen	insects	like	these	before,’	Brys	said.	‘They’re…big.’
‘Old,	from	the	times	when	the	tower	was	born,’	Kettle	said.	‘Eggs	in	the
broken	ground.	Those	stick-like	brown	ones	with	the	heads	at	both	ends	are	the
meanest.	They	eat	at	my	toes	when	I	sit	still	too	long.	And	they’re	hard	to
crush.’
‘What	about	those	yellow,	spiky	ones?’
‘They	don’t	bother	me.	They	eat	only	birds	and	mice.	Here.’
She	had	stopped	before	a	crumpled	mound	on	which	sat	one	of	the	larger
trees	in	the	yard,	the	wood	strangely	streaked	grey	and	black,	the	twigs	and
branches	projecting	in	curves	rather	than	sharp	angles.	Roots	spread	out	across
the	entire	barrow,	the	remaining	bark	oddly	scaled,	like	snake	skin.
Brys	frowned.	‘And	how	are	we	to	converse,	with	him	in	there	and	me	up
here?’
‘He’s	trapped.	He	says	you	have	to	close	your	eyes	and	think	about	nothing.
Like	you	do	when	you	fight,	he	says.’
Brys	was	startled.	‘He’s	speaking	to	you	now?’
‘Yes,	but	he	says	that	isn’t	good	enough,	because	I	don’t	know	enough…
words.	Words	and	things.	He	has	to	show	you.	He	says	you’ve	done	this
before.’
‘It	seems	I	am	to	possess	no	secrets,’	Brys	said.
‘Not	many,	no,	so	he	says	he’ll	do	the	same	in	return.	So	you	can	trust	each
other.	Somewhat.’
‘Somewhat.	His	word?’
She	nodded.
Brys	smiled.	‘Well,	I	appreciate	his	honesty.	All	right,	I	will	give	this	a	try.’
He	closed	his	eyes.	Kettle’s	cold	hand	remained	in	his,	small,	the	flesh
strangely	loose	on	the	bones.	He	pulled	his	thoughts	from	that	detail.	A
fighter ’s	mind	was	not	in	truth	emptied	during	a	fight.	It	was,	instead,	both


coolly	detached	and	mindful.	Concentration	defined	by	a	structure	which	was
in	turn	assembled	under	strict	laws	of	pragmatic	necessity.	Thus,	observational,
calculating,	and	entirely	devoid	of	emotion,	even	as	every	sense	was	awakened.
He	felt	himself	lock	into	that	familiar,	reassuring	structure.
And	was	stunned	by	the	strength	of	the	will	that	tugged	him	away.	He
fought	against	a	rising	panic,	knowing	he	was	helpless	before	such	power.
Then	relented.
	
Above	him,	a	sky	transformed.	Sickly,	swirling	green	light	surrounding	a
ragged	black	wound	large	enough	to	swallow	a	moon.	Clouds	twisted,	tortured
and	shorn	through	by	the	descent	of	innumerable	objects,	each	object	seeming
to	fight	the	air	as	it	fell,	as	if	this	world	was	actively	resisting	the	intrusion.
Objects	pouring	from	that	wound,	tunnelling	through	layers	of	the	sky.
On	the	landscape	before	him	was	a	vast	city,	rising	up	from	a	level	plain
with	tiered	gardens	and	raised	walkways.	A	cluster	of	towers	rose	from	the	far
side,	reaching	to	extraordinary	heights.	Farmland	reached	out	from	the	city’s
outskirts	in	every	direction	for	as	far	as	Brys	could	see,	strange	shadows
flowing	over	it	as	he	watched.
He	pulled	his	gaze	from	the	scene	and	looked	down,	to	find	that	he	stood
on	a	platform	of	red-stained	limestone.	Before	him	steep	steps	ran	downward,
row	upon	row,	hundreds,	to	a	paved	expanse	flanked	by	blue-painted	columns.
A	glance	to	his	right	revealed	a	sharply	angled	descent.	He	was	on	a	flat-topped
pyramid-shaped	structure,	and,	he	realized	with	a	start,	someone	was	standing
beside	him,	on	his	left.	A	figure	barely	visible,	ghostly,	defying	detail.	It	was
tall,	and	seemed	to	be	staring	up	at	the	sky,	focused	on	the	terrible	dark	wound.
Objects	were	striking	the	ground	now,	landing	hard	but	with	nowhere	near
the	velocity	they	should	have	possessed.	A	loud	crack	reverberated	from	the
concourse	between	the	columns	below,	and	Brys	saw	that	a	massive	stone
carving	had	come	to	rest	there.	A	bizarre	beast-like	human,	squatting	with
thickly	muscled	arms	reaching	down	the	front,	converging	with	a	two-handed
grip	on	the	penis.	Shoulders	and	head	were	fashioned	in	the	likeness	of	a	bull.
A	second	set	of	legs,	feminine,	were	wrapped	round	the	beast-man’s	hips,	the
platform	on	which	he	crouched	cut,	Brys	now	saw,	into	a	woman’s	form,	lying
on	her	back	beneath	him.	From	nearby	rose	the	clatter	of	scores	of	clay	tablets
—too	distant	for	Brys	to	see	if	there	was	writing	on	them,	though	he	suspected
there	might	be—skidding	as	if	on	cushions	of	air	before	coming	to	a	rest	in	a
scattered	swath.
Fragments	of	buildings—cut	limestone	blocks,	cornerstones,	walls	of


adobe,	wattle	and	daub.	Then	severed	limbs,	blood-drained	sections	of	cattle
and	horses,	a	herd	of	something	that	might	have	been	goats,	each	one	turned
inside	out,	intestines	flopping.	Dark-skinned	humans—or	at	least	their	arms,
legs	and	torsos.
Above,	the	sky	was	filling	with	large	pallid	fragments,	floating	down	like
snow.
And	something	huge	was	coming	through	the	wound.	Wreathed	in
lightning	that	seemed	to	scream	with	pain,	shrieks	unending,	deafening.
Soft	words	spoke	in	Brys’s	mind.	‘My	ghost,	let	loose	to	wander,	perhaps,
to	witness.	They	warred	against	Kallor;	it	was	a	worthy	cause.	But…what	they
have	done	here….’
Brys	could	not	pull	his	eyes	from	that	howling	sphere	of	lightning.	He
could	see	limbs	within	it,	the	burning	arcs	entwined	about	them	like	chains.
‘What—what	is	it?’
‘A	god,	Brys	Beddict.	In	its	own	realm,	it	was	locked	in	a	war.	For	there
were	rival	gods.	Temptations…’
‘Is	this	a	vision	of	the	past?’	Brys	asked.
‘The	past	lives	on,’	the	figure	replied.	‘There	is	no	way	of	knowing…
standing	here.	How	do	we	measure	the	beginning,	the	end—for	all	of	us,
yesterday	was	as	today,	and	as	it	will	be	tomorrow.	We	are	not	aware.	Or
perhaps	we	are,	yet	choose—for	convenience,	for	peace	of	mind—not	to	see.
Not	to	think.’	A	vague	gesture	with	one	hand.	‘Some	say	twelve	mages,	some
say	seven.	It	does	not	matter,	for	they	are	about	to	become	dust.’
The	massive	sphere	was	roaring	now,	burgeoning	with	frightening	speed
as	it	plunged	earthward.	It	would,	Brys	realized,	strike	the	city.
‘Thus,	in	their	effort	to	enforce	a	change	upon	the	scheme,	they	annihilate
themselves,	and	their	own	civilization.’
‘So	they	failed.’
The	figure	said	nothing	for	a	time.
And	the	descending	god	struck;	a	blinding	flash,	a	detonation	that	shook
the	pyramid	beneath	them	and	sent	fissures	through	the	concourse	below.
Smoke,	rising	in	a	column	that	then	billowed	outward,	swallowing	the	world	in
shadow.	Wind	rushed	outward	in	a	shock,	flattening	trees	in	the	farmland,
toppling	the	columns	lining	the	concourse.	The	trees	then	burst	into	flame.
‘In	answer	to	a	perceived	desperation,	fuelled	by	seething	rage,	they	called
down	a	god.	And	died	with	the	effort.	Does	that	mean	that	they	failed	in	their
gambit?	No,	I	do	not	speak	of	Kallor.	I	speak	of	their	helplessness	which	gave
rise	to	their	desire	for	change.	Brys	Beddict,	were	their	ghosts	standing	with	us
now,	here	in	the	future	world	where	our	flesh	resides,	thus	able	to	see	what


their	deed	has	wrought,	they	would	recognize	that	all	that	they	sought	has	come
to	pass.
‘That	which	was	chained	to	the	earth	has	twisted	the	walls	of	its	prison.
Beyond	recognition.	Its	poison	has	spread	out	and	infected	the	world	and	all
who	dwell	upon	it.’
‘You	leave	me	without	hope,’	Brys	said.
‘I	am	sorry	for	that.	Do	not	seek	to	find	hope	among	your	leaders.	They
are	the	repositories	of	poison.	Their	interest	in	you	extends	only	so	far	as	their
ability	to	control	you.	From	you,	they	seek	duty	and	obedience,	and	they	will
ply	you	with	the	language	of	stirring	faith.	They	seek	followers,	and	woe	to
those	who	question,	or	voice	challenge.
‘Civilization	after	civilization,	it	is	the	same.	The	world	falls	to	tyranny
with	a	whisper.	The	frightened	are	ever	keen	to	bow	to	a	perceived	necessity,	in
the	belief	that	necessity	forces	conformity,	and	conformity	a	certain	stability.	In
a	world	shaped	into	conformity,	dissidents	stand	out,	are	easily	branded	and
dealt	with.	There	is	no	multitude	of	perspectives,	no	dialogue.	The	victim
assumes	the	face	of	the	tyrant,	self-righteous	and	intransigent,	and	wars	breed
like	vermin.	And	people	die.’
Brys	studied	the	firestorm	engulfing	what	was	once	a	city	of	great	beauty.
He	did	not	know	its	name,	nor	the	civilization	that	had	birthed	it,	and,	it	now
struck	him,	it	did	not	matter.
‘In	your	world,’	the	figure	said,	‘the	prophecy	approaches	its	azimuth.	An
emperor	shall	arise.	You	are	from	a	civilization	that	sees	war	as	an	extension
of	economics.	Stacked	bones	become	the	foundation	for	your	roads	of
commerce,	and	you	see	nothing	untoward	in	that—’
‘Some	of	us	do.’
‘Irrelevant.	Your	legacy	of	crushed	cultures	speaks	its	own	truth.	You
intend	to	conquer	the	Tiste	Edur.	You	claim	that	each	circumstance	is	different,
unique,	but	it	is	neither	different	nor	unique.	It	is	all	the	same.	Your	military
might	proves	the	virtue	of	your	cause.	But	I	tell	you	this,	Brys	Beddict,	there	is
no	such	thing	as	destiny.	Victory	is	not	inevitable.	Your	enemy	lies	in	waiting,
in	your	midst.	Your	enemy	hides	without	need	for	disguise,	when	belligerence
and	implied	threat	are	sufficient	to	cause	your	gaze	to	shy	away.	It	speaks	your
language,	takes	your	words	and	uses	them	against	you.	It	mocks	your	belief	in
truths,	for	it	has	made	itself	the	arbiter	of	those	truths.’
‘Lether	is	not	a	tyranny—’
‘You	assume	the	spirit	of	your	civilization	is	personified	in	your	benign
king.	It	is	not.	Your	king	exists	because	it	is	deemed	permissible	that	he	exist.
You	are	ruled	by	greed,	a	monstrous	tyrant	lit	gold	with	glory.	It	cannot	be


defeated,	only	annihilated.’	Another	gesture	towards	the	fiery	chaos	below.
‘That	is	your	only	hope	of	salvation,	Brys	Beddict.	For	greed	kills	itself,	when
there	is	nothing	left	to	hoard,	when	the	countless	legions	of	labourers	are
naught	but	bones,	when	the	grisly	face	of	starvation	is	revealed	in	the	mirror.
‘The	god	is	fallen.	He	crouches	now,	seeding	devastation.	Rise	and	fall,
rise	and	fall,	and	with	each	renewal	the	guiding	spirit	is	less,	weaker,	more
tightly	chained	to	a	vision	bereft	of	hope.’
‘Why	does	this	god	do	this	to	us?’
‘Because	he	knows	naught	but	pain,	and	yearns	only	to	share	it,	to	visit	it
upon	all	that	lives,	all	that	exists.’
‘Why	have	you	shown	me	this?’
‘I	make	you	witness,	Brys	Beddict,	to	the	symbol	of	your	demise.’
‘Why?’
The	figure	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘I	advised	you	to	not	look
for	hope	from	your	leaders,	for	they	shall	feed	you	naught	but	lies.	Yet	hope
exists.	Seek	for	it,	Brys	Beddict,	in	the	one	who	stands	at	your	side,	from	the
stranger	upon	the	other	side	of	the	street.	Be	brave	enough	to	endeavour	to
cross	that	street.	Look	neither	skyward	nor	upon	the	ground.	Hope	persists,	and
its	voice	is	compassion,	and	honest	doubt.’
The	scene	began	to	fade.
The	figure	at	his	side	spoke	one	last	time.	‘That	is	all	I	would	tell	you.	All	I
can	tell	you.’
	
He	opened	his	eyes,	and	found	himself	once	more	standing	before	the	barrow,
the	day	dying	around	him.	Kettle	still	held	his	hand	in	her	cold	clasp.
‘You	will	help	me	now?’	she	asked.
‘The	dweller	within	the	tomb	spoke	nothing	of	that.’
‘He	never	does.’
‘He	showed	me	virtually	nothing	of	himself.	I	don’t	even	know	who,	or
what,	he	is.’
‘Yes.’
‘He	made	no	effort	to	convince	me…of	anything.	Yet	I	saw…’	Brys	shook
his	head.
‘He	needs	help	escaping	his	tomb.	Other	things	are	trying	to	get	out.	And
they	will.	Not	long	now,	I	think.	They	want	to	hurt	me,	and	everyone	else.’
‘And	the	one	we’re	to	help	will	stop	them?’
‘Yes.’
‘What	can	I	do?’


‘He	needs	two	swords.	The	best	iron	there	is.	Straight	blades,	two-edged,
pointed.	Thin	but	strong.	Narrow	hilts,	heavy	pommels.’
Brys	considered.	‘I	should	be	able	to	find	something	in	the	armoury.	He
wants	me	to	bring	them	here?’
Kettle	nodded.
He	needed	help.	But	he	did	not	ask	for	it.	‘Very	well.	I	will	do	this.	But	I
will	speak	to	the	Ceda	regarding	this.’
‘Do	you	trust	him?	He	wants	to	know,	do	you	trust	this	Ceda?’
Brys	opened	his	mouth	to	reply,	to	say	yes,	then	he	stopped.	The	dweller
within	the	barrow	was	a	powerful	creature,	probably	too	powerful	to	be
controlled.	There	was	nothing	here	that	would	please	Kuru	Qan.	Yet	did	Brys
have	a	choice?	The	Ceda	had	sent	him	here	to	discover	what	had	befallen	the
Azath…He	looked	over	at	the	tower.	‘The	Azath,	it	is	dead?’
‘Yes.	It	was	too	old,	too	weak.	It	fought	for	so	long.’
‘Kettle,	are	you	still	killing	people	in	the	city?’
‘Not	many.	Only	bad	people.	One	or	two	a	night.	Some	of	the	trees	are	still
alive,	but	they	can’t	feed	on	the	tower ’s	blood	any	more.	So	I	give	them	other
blood,	so	they	can	fight	to	hold	the	bad	monsters	down.	But	the	trees	are	dying
too.’
Brys	sighed.	‘All	right.	I	will	visit	again,	Kettle.	With	the	swords.’
‘I	knew	I	could	like	you.	I	knew	you	would	be	nice.	Because	of	your
brother.’
That	comment	elicited	a	frown,	then	another	sigh.	He	gently	disengaged
his	hand	from	the	dead	child’s	grip.	‘Be	careful,	Kettle.’
	
‘It	was	a	perfectly	good	sleep,’	Tehol	said	as	he	walked	alongside	Bugg.
‘I	am	sure	it	was,	master.	But	you	did	ask	for	this	meeting.’
‘I	didn’t	expect	such	a	quick	response.	Did	you	do	or	say	something	to
make	them	unduly	interested?’
‘Of	course	I	did,	else	we	would	not	have	achieved	this	audience.’
‘Oh,	that’s	bad,	Bugg.	You	gave	them	my	name?’
‘No.’
‘You	revealed	something	of	my	grand	scheme?’
‘No.’
‘Well,	what	did	you,	say,	then?’
‘I	said	money	was	not	a	consideration.’
‘Not	a	consideration?’	Tehol	slowed	his	pace,	drawing	Bugg	round.	‘What
do	you	think	I’m	willing	to	pay	them?’


‘I	don’t	know,’	the	manservant	replied.	‘I	have	no	idea	of	the	nature	of	this
contract	you	want	to	enter	into	with	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild.’
‘That’s	because	I	hadn’t	decided	yet!’
‘Well,	have	you	decided	now,	master?’
‘I’m	thinking	on	it.	I	hope	to	come	up	with	something	by	the	time	we
arrive.’
‘So,	it	could	be	expensive…’
Tehol’s	expression	brightened.	‘You’re	right,	it	could	be	indeed.
Therefore,	money	is	not	a	consideration.’
‘Exactly.’
‘I’m	glad	we’re	in	agreement.	You	are	a	wonderful	manservant,	Bugg.’
‘Thank	you,	master.’
They	resumed	walking.
Before	long	they	halted	in	front	of	Scale	House.	Tehol	stared	up	at	the
riotous	rodent	façade	for	a	time.	‘They’re	all	looking	at	me,’	he	said.
‘They	do	convey	that	impression,	don’t	they?’
‘I	don’t	like	being	the	singular	focus	of	the	attention	of	thousands	of	rats.
What	do	they	know	that	I	don’t?’
‘Given	the	size	of	their	brains,	not	much.’
Tehol	stared	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	slowly	blinked	and	regarded
Bugg.	Five	heartbeats.	Ten.
The	manservant	remained	expressionless,	then	he	coughed,	cleared	his
throat,	and	said,	‘Well,	we	should	head	inside,	shouldn’t	we?’
The	secretary	sat	as	he	had	earlier	that	day,	working	on	what	seemed	to
Bugg	to	be	the	same	ledger.	Once	again,	he	did	not	bother	looking	up.	‘You’re
early.	I	was	expecting	punctual.’
‘We’re	not	early,’	Tehol	said.
‘You’re	not?’
‘No,	but	since	the	bell	is	already	sounding,	any	more	from	you	and	we’ll
be	late.’
‘I’m	not	to	blame.	Never	was	at	any	point	in	this	ridiculous	conversation.
Up	the	stairs.	To	the	top.	There’s	only	one	door.	Knock	once	then	enter,	and
Errant	help	you.	Oh,	and	the	manservant	can	stay	here,	provided	he	doesn’t
poke	me	in	the	eyes	again.’
‘He’s	not	staying	here.’
‘He’s	not?’
‘No.’
‘Fine,	then.	Get	out	of	my	sight,	the	both	of	you.’
Tehol	led	the	way	past	the	desk	and	they	began	their	ascent.


‘You	poked	him	in	the	eyes?’	Tehol	asked.
‘I	judged	it	useful	in	getting	his	attention.’
‘I’m	pleased,	although	somewhat	alarmed.’
‘The	circumstances	warranted	extreme	action	on	my	part.’
‘Does	that	happen	often?’
‘I’m	afraid	it	does.’
They	reached	the	landing.	Tehol	stepped	forward	and	thumped	on	the	door.
A	final	glance	back	at	Bugg,	suspicious	and	gauging,	then	he	swung	open	the
door.	They	strode	into	the	chamber	beyond.
In	which	rats	swarmed.	Covering	the	floor.	The	tabletop.	On	the	shelves,
clambering	on	the	crystal	chandelier.	Crouched	on	the	shoulders	and	peering
from	folds	in	the	clothes	of	the	six	board	members	seated	on	the	other	side	of
the	table.
Thousands	of	beady	eyes	fixed	on	Tehol	and	Bugg,	including	those	of	the
three	men	and	three	women	who	were	the	heart	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild.
Tehol	hitched	up	his	trousers.	‘Thank	you	one	and	all—’
‘You’re	Tehol	Beddict,’	cut	in	the	woman	seated	on	the	far	left.	She	was
mostly	a	collection	of	spherical	shapes,	face,	head,	torso,	breasts,	her	eyes	tiny,
dark	and	glittering	like	hardened	tar.	There	were	at	least	three	rats	in	her	mass
of	upright,	billowed	black	hair.
‘And	I’m	curious,’	Tehol	said,	smiling.	‘What	are	all	these	rats	doing
here?’
‘Insane	question,’	snapped	the	man	beside	the	roundish	woman.	‘We’re	the
Rat	Catchers’	Guild.	Where	else	are	we	supposed	to	put	the	ones	we	capture?’
‘I	thought	you	killed	them.’
‘Only	if	they	refuse	avowal,’	the	man	said,	punctuating	his	words	with	a
sneer	for	some	unexplainable	reason.
‘Avowal?	How	do	rats	make	vows?’
‘None	of	your	business,’	the	woman	said.	‘I	am	Onyx.	Beside	me	sits	Scint.
In	order	proceeding	accordingly,	before	you	sits	Champion	Ormly,	Glisten,
Bubyrd	and	Ruby.	Tehol	Beddict,	we	suffered	losses	on	our	investments	thanks
to	you.’
‘From	which	you	have	no	doubt	recovered.’
‘That’s	not	the	point!’	said	the	woman	called	Glisten.	She	was	blonde,	and
so	slight	and	small	that	only	her	shoulders	and	head	were	above	the	level	of	the
tabletop.	Heaps	of	squirming	rats	passed	in	front	of	her	every	now	and	then,
forcing	her	to	bob	her	head	up	to	maintain	eye	contact.
‘By	my	recollection,’	Tehol	said	reasonably,	‘you	lost	a	little	less	than	half
a	peak.’


‘How	do	you	know	that?’	Scint	demanded.	‘Nobody	else	but	us	knows
that!’
‘A	guess,	I	assure	you.	In	any	case,	the	contract	I	offer	will	be	for	an
identical	amount.’
‘Half	a	peak!’
Tehol’s	smile	broadened.	‘Ah,	I	have	your	fullest	attention	now.	Excellent.’
‘That’s	an	absurd	amount,’	spoke	Ormly	for	the	first	time.	‘What	would
you	have	us	do,	conquer	Kolanse?’
‘Could	you?’
Ormly	scowled.	‘Why	would	you	want	us	to,	Tehol	Beddict?’
‘It’d	be	difficult,’	Glisten	said	worriedly.	‘The	strain	on	our	human
resources—’
‘Difficult,’	cut	in	Scint,	‘but	not	impossible.	We’d	need	to	recruit	from	our
island	cells—’
‘Wait!’	Tehol	said.	‘I’m	not	interested	in	conquering	Kolanse!’
‘You’re	the	type	who’s	always	changing	his	mind,’	Onyx	said.	She	leaned
back	and	with	a	squeak	a	rat	plummeted	from	her	hair	to	thump	on	the	floor
somewhere	behind	her.	‘I	can’t	stand	working	with	people	like	that.’
‘I	haven’t	changed	my	mind.	It	wasn’t	me	who	brought	up	the	whole
Kolanse	thing.	In	fact,	it	was	Champion	Ormly—’
‘Well,	he	can’t	make	up	his	mind	neither.	You	two	are	made	for	each
other.’
Tehol	swung	to	Bugg.	‘I’m	not	indecisive,	am	I?	Tell	them,	Bugg.	When
have	you	ever	seen	me	indecisive?’
Bugg	frowned.
‘Bugg!’
‘I’m	thinking!’
Glisten’s	voice	came	from	behind	a	particularly	large	heap	of	rats.	‘I	can’t
see	the	point	of	any	of	this.’
‘That’s	quite	understandable,’	Tehol	said	evenly.
‘Describe	your	contract	offer,’	Ormly	demanded.	‘But	he	advised,	we	don’t
do	private	functions.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘I	won’t	waste	my	breath	on	explaining…unless	it	turns	out	to	be	relevant.
Is	it?’
‘I	don’t	know.	How	can	I	tell?’
‘Well,	that’s	my	point	exactly.	Now,	about	the	contract?’
‘All	right,’	Tehol	said,	‘but	be	warned,	it’s	complicated.’
Glisten’s	plaintive	voice:	‘Oh,	I	don’t	like	the	sound	of	that!’


Tehol	made	an	effort	to	see	her,	then	gave	up.	The	mound	of	rats	on	the
tabletop	in	front	of	her	was	milling.	‘You	surprise	me,	Glisten,’	he	said.	‘It
strikes	me	that	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	thrives	on	complications.	After	all,	you
do	much	more	than,	uh,	harvest	rats,	don’t	you?	In	fact,	your	primary	function
is	as	the	unofficial	assassins’	guild—unofficial	because,	of	course,	it’s	an
outlawed	activity	and	unpleasant	besides.	You’re	also	something	of	a	thieves’
guild,	too,	although	you’ve	yet	to	achieve	full	compliance	among	the	more
independent-minded	thieves.	You	also	provide	an	unusually	noble	function	in
your	unofficial	underground	escape	route	for	impoverished	refugees	from
assimilated	border	tribes.	And	then	there’s	the—’
‘Stop!’	Onyx	shrieked.	In	a	slightly	less	shrill	tone	she	said,	‘Bubyrd,	get
our	Chief	Investigator	in	here.	Errant	knows,	if	anyone	needs	investigating,	it’s
this	Tehol	Beddict.’
Tehol’s	brows	rose.	‘Will	that	be	painful?’
Onyx	leered	and	whispered,	‘Restrain	your	impatience,	Tehol	Beddict.
You’ll	get	an	answer	to	that	soon	enough.’
‘Is	it	wise	to	threaten	a	potential	employer?’
‘I	don’t	see	why	not,’	Onyx	replied.
‘Your	knowledge	of	our	operations	is	alarming,’	Ormly	said.	‘We	don’t
like	it.’
‘I	assure	you,	I	have	only	admiration	for	your	endeavours.	In	fact,	my
contract	offer	is	dependent	upon	the	fullest	range	of	the	guild’s	activities.	I
could	not	make	it	without	prior	knowledge,	could	I?’
‘How	do	we	know?’	Ormly	asked.	‘We’ve	yet	to	hear	it.’
‘I’m	getting	there.’
The	door	behind	them	opened	and	the	woman	who	was	in	all	likelihood	the
Chief	Investigator	strode	in	past	Tehol	and	Bugg.	Stepping	carefully,	she	took
position	on	the	far	right	of	the	table,	arms	crossing	as	she	leaned	against	the
wall.
Onyx	spoke.	‘Chief	Investigator	Rucket,	we	have	in	our	presence	a
dangerous	liability.’
The	woman,	tall,	lithe,	her	reddish	hair	cut	short,	was	dressed	in	pale
leathers,	the	clothing	South	Nerek	in	style,	as	if	she	had	just	come	from	the
steppes.	Although,	of	course,	the	nearest	steppes	were	a	hundred	or	more
leagues	to	the	east.	She	appeared	to	be	unarmed.	Her	eyes,	a	startling	tawny
shade	that	looked	more	feline	than	human,	slowly	fixed	on	Tehol.	‘Him?’
‘Who	else?’	Onyx	snapped.	‘Not	his	manservant,	surely!’
‘Why	not?’	Rucket	drawled.	‘He	looks	to	be	the	more	dangerous	one.’
‘I’d	agree,’	Bubyrd	said	in	a	hiss.	‘He	poked	my	secretary	in	the	eyes.’


Scint	started.	‘Really?	Just	like	that?’	He	held	up	a	hand	and	stretched	out
the	first	two	fingers,	then	jabbed	the	air.	‘Like	that?	Poke!	Like	that?’
‘Yes,’	Bubyrd	replied,	glaring	at	Bugg.	‘He	revealed	the	illusion!	What’s
the	point	of	creating	illusions	when	he	just	ups	and	pokes	holes	in	them!’
Tehol	swung	to	his	manservant.	‘Bugg,	are	we	going	to	get	out	of	here
alive?’
‘Hard	to	say,	master.’
‘All	because	you	poked	that	secretary	in	the	eyes?’
Bugg	shrugged.
‘Touchy,	aren’t	they?’
‘So	it	seems,	master.	Best	get	on	with	the	offer,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Good	idea.	Diversion,	yes	indeed.’
‘You	idiots,’	Onyx	said.	‘We	can	hear	you!’
‘Excellent!’	Tehol	stepped	forward,	carefully,	so	as	to	avoid	crushing	the
seething	carpet	of	rats.	Gentle	nudging	aside	with	the	toe	of	his	moccasin
seemed	to	suffice.	‘To	wit.	I	need	every	tribal	refugee	in	the	city	ushered	out.
Destination?	The	islands.	Particular	islands,	details	forthcoming.	I	need	full
resources	shipped	ahead	of	them,	said	supplies	to	be	purchased	by	myself.	You
will	work	with	Bugg	here	on	the	logistics.	Second,	I	understand	you	are
conducting	an	investigation	into	disappearances	for	the	Crown.	No	doubt
you’re	telling	them	nothing	of	your	findings.	I,	on	the	other	hand,	want	to
know	those	findings.	Third,	I	want	my	back	protected.	In	a	short	while,	there
will	be	people	who	will	want	to	kill	me.	You	are	to	stop	them.	Thus,	my
contract	offer.	Half	a	peak	and	a	list	of	safe	investments,	and	as	to	that	last
point,	I	suggest	you	follow	my	financial	advice	to	the	letter	and	swallow	the
expense—’
‘You	want	to	be	our	financial	adviser?’	Onyx	asked	in	clear	disbelief.
‘Those	losses—’
‘Could	have	been	avoided,	had	we	been	engaged	in	a	closer	relationship
back	then,	such	as	the	one	we	are	about	to	enter	into.’
‘What	about	those	refugees	who	are	Indebted?’	Ormly	asked.	‘Having	them
all	disappear	could	cause	another	crash	in	the	Tolls.’
‘It	won’t,	because	the	trickle	is	to	be	so	slow	that	no-one	notices—’
‘How	could	they	not	notice?’
‘They	will	be…distracted.’
‘You’ve	got	something	ugly	planned,	haven’t	you,	Tehol	Beddict?’
Ormly’s	small	eyes	glittered.	‘Meaning	what	happened	the	first	time	wasn’t	no
accident.	Wasn’t	incompetence	neither.	You	just	found	yourself	with	a	string	in
your	hand,	which	you	then	tugged	to	see	how	much	would	unravel.	You	know


what	you’re	telling	us?	You’re	telling	us	you’re	the	most	dangerous	man	in
Lether.	Why	would	we	ever	let	you	walk	out	of	this	chamber?’
‘Simple.	This	time	I’m	taking	my	friends	with	me.	So	the	question	is,	are
you	my	friends?’
‘And	what	if	our	Chief	Investigator	investigates	you	right	here	and	right
now?’
‘My	scheme	is	already	under	way,	Champion	Ormly,	whether	I	stay	alive
or	not.	It’s	going	to	happen.	Of	course,	if	I	die,	then	nobody	escapes	what’s
coming.’
‘Hold	on,’	Onyx	said.	‘You	said	something	about	expense.	You	becoming
our	financial	adviser	is	going	to	cost	us?’
‘Well,	naturally.’
‘How	much?’
‘A	quarter	of	a	peak	or	thereabouts.’
‘So	you	pay	us	half	and	we	pay	you	back	a	quarter.’
‘And	so	you	come	out	ahead.’
‘He’s	got	a	point,’	Scint	said,	snatching	a	rat	from	the	table	and	biting	its
head	off.
Everyone	stared,	including	a	roomful	of	rats.
Scint	noticed,	chewed	for	a	moment,	making	crunching	sounds,	then	said
around	a	mouthful	of	rat	head,	‘Sorry.	Got	carried	away.’	He	looked	down	at
the	headless	corpse	in	his	hand,	then	tucked	it	into	his	shirt	and	out	of	sight.
From	where	Glisten	sat	came	a	plaintive	sound,	then,	‘What	did	that	rat
ever	do	to	you,	Scinty?’
Scint	swallowed.	‘I	said	sorry!’
Tehol	leaned	close	to	Bugg	and	whispered,	‘If	you	could	poke	any	of	them
in	the	eyes…’
‘Three	of	’em	would	likely	complain,	master.’
‘Can	I	guess?’
‘Go	ahead.’
‘Ormly,	Bubyrd	and	Rucket.’
‘I’m	impressed.’
‘What	are	you	two	whispering	about?’	Onyx	demanded.
Tehol	smiled	at	her.	‘Do	you	accept	my	offer?’
	
Brys	found	the	Ceda	in	his	work	room,	hunched	over	an	upended	crab	lying	on
the	table.	He	had	removed	the	flat	carapace	covering	the	underside	and	was
prodding	organs	with	a	pair	of	copper	probes.	The	crab	appeared	to	be	dead.


Burners	had	been	lit	beneath	a	cauldron	behind	Kuru	Qan,	and	the	lid	was
rocking	to	gusts	of	steam.
‘Finadd,	this	array	of	organs	is	fascinating.	But	I’m	distracting	myself.
Shouldn’t	do	that,	not	at	this	critical	juncture.’	He	set	the	instruments	down	and
picked	up	the	crab.	‘What	have	you	to	tell	me?’
Brys	watched	the	Ceda	nudge	the	cauldron’s	lid	aside	then	drop	the	crab	in.
‘The	Azath	tower	is	dead.’
Kuru	Qan	pushed	the	lid	back	into	place	then	walked	back	to	sit	in	his	chair.
He	rubbed	at	his	eyes.	‘What	physical	evidence	is	there?’
‘Little,	admittedly.	But	a	child	is	resident	there,	on	the	grounds,’	Brys
replied.	‘The	tower	was	in	some	sort	of	communication	with	her.’
‘The	role	of	Keeper?	Odd	that	the	Hold	should	choose	a	child.	Unless	the
original	Keeper	had	died.	And	even	then…odd.’
‘There	is	more,’	Brys	said.	‘A	resident	within	one	of	the	barrows	was
accorded	the	role	of	protector.	The	child,	Kettle,	believes	that	person	is	capable
of	destroying	the	others—all	of	whom	are	close	to	escaping	their	prisons.’
‘The	Hold,	in	its	desperation,	made	a	bargain,	then.	What	else	does	this
Kettle	know	of	that	resident?’
‘He	speaks	to	her	constantly.	He	speaks	through	her,	as	well.	At	the
moment,	he	is	trapped.	He	can	go	no	further,	and	no,	I	don’t	know	how	that
situation	will	be	resolved.	Ceda,	I	also	spoke	to	that	stranger.’
Kuru	Qan	looked	up.	‘He	reached	into	your	mind?	And	showed	you	what?’
Brys	shook	his	head.	‘He	made	no	effort	to	convince	me	of	anything,	Ceda.
Voiced	no	arguments	in	his	own	defence.	Instead,	I	was	made	witness	to	an
event,	from	long	ago,	I	believe.’
‘What	kind	of	event?’
‘The	bringing	down	of	a	god.	By	a	cadre	of	sorcerors,	none	of	whom
survived	the	ritual.’
Kuru	Qan’s	eyes	widened	at	these	words.	‘Relevant?	Errant	bless	me,	I
hope	not.’
‘You	have	knowledge	of	this,	Ceda?’
‘Not	enough,	Finadd,	I’m	afraid.	And	this	stranger	was	witness	to	that	dire
scene?’
‘He	was.	Inadvertently,	he	said.’
‘Then	he	has	lived	a	very	long	time.’
‘Is	he	a	threat?’
‘Of	course	he	is.	None	here	could	match	his	power,	I	would	think.	And,
assuming	he	is	successful	in	destroying	the	other	residents	of	the	yard,	the
question	one	must	face	is,	what	then?’


‘It	strikes	me	as	a	huge	assumption,	Ceda.	Killing	the	others.	Why	would
he	hold	to	his	bargain	with	a	now-dead	Azath?’
‘One	must	believe	that	the	Hold	chose	wisely,	Finadd.	Do	you	have
doubts?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	He	has	asked	for	weapons.	Two	swords.	I	am	inclined	to
accede	to	his	request.’
The	Ceda	slowly	nodded.	‘Agreed.	No	doubt	you	were	thinking	of	finding
something	in	the	armoury.	But	for	an	individual	such	as	this,	a	normal	weapon
won’t	do,	even	one	of	Letherii	steel.	No,	we	must	go	to	my	private	hoard.’
‘I	wasn’t	aware	you	had	one.’
‘Naturally.	Now,	a	moment.’	Kuru	Qan	rose	and	walked	back	to	the
cauldron.	Using	large	tongs,	he	retrieved	the	crab,	the	shell	now	a	fiery	red.
‘Ah,	perfect.	Of	course,	it	can	cool	down	some.	So,	follow	me.’
	
Brys	had	thought	he	knew	virtually	every	area	of	the	old	palace,	but	the	series
of	subterranean	chambers	the	Ceda	led	him	into	were	completely	unfamiliar	to
him,	although	not	a	single	hidden	door	was	passed	through	on	the	way.	By	the
Finadd’s	internal	map,	they	were	now	under	the	river.
They	entered	a	low-ceilinged	chamber	with	rack-lined	walls	on	which
were	hundreds	of	weapons.	Brys	had	collected	a	lantern	along	the	way	and	he
now	hung	it	from	a	hook	in	a	crossbeam.	He	walked	to	a	rack	crowded	with
swords.	‘Why	a	private	collection,	Ceda?’
‘Curios,	most	of	them.	Some	antiques.	I	am	fascinated	with	forging
techniques,	particularly	those	used	by	foreign	peoples.	Also,	there	is	sorcery
invested	in	these	weapons.’
‘All	of	them?’	Brys	lifted	one	particular	weapon	from	its	hooks,	a	close
match	to	the	description	relayed	to	him	by	Kettle.
‘Yes.	No,	put	that	one	back,	Finadd.	It’s	cursed.’
Brys	replaced	it.
‘In	fact,’	Kuru	Qan	went	on	in	a	troubled	voice,	‘they’re	all	cursed.	Well,
this	could	prove	a	problem.’
‘Perhaps	I	should	go	to	the	regular	armoury—’
‘Patience,	Finadd.	It’s	the	nature	of	curses	that	allows	us	to	possibly	find	a
reasonable	solution.	Two	swords,	you	said?’
‘Why	would	sorcerors	curse	a	weapon?’
‘Oh,	most	often	not	an	intentional	act	on	their	parts.	Often	it’s	simply	a
matter	of	incompetence.	In	many	cases,	the	sorcerous	investment	refuses	to
function.	The	iron	resists	the	imposition,	and	the	better	the	forging	technique


the	more	resistant	the	weapon	is.	Sorcery	thrives	on	flaws,	whether	structural
in	the	physical	sense,	or	metaphorical	in	the	thematic	sense.	Ah,	I	see	your	eyes
glazing	over,	Finadd.	Never	mind.	Let’s	peruse	the	antiques,	shall	we?’
The	Ceda	led	him	to	the	far	wall,	and	Brys	immediately	saw	a	perfect
weapon,	long	and	narrow	of	blade,	pointed	and	double-edged,	modest	hilt.
‘Letherii	steel,’	he	said,	reaching	for	it.
‘Yes,	in	the	Blue	Style,	which,	as	you	well	know,	is	the	very	earliest
technique	for	Letherii	steel.	In	some	ways,	the	Blue	Style	produces	finer	steel
than	our	present	methods.	The	drawbacks	lie	in	other	areas.’
Brys	tested	the	weight	of	the	weapon.	‘The	pommel	needs	to	be	replaced,
but	otherwise…’	Then	he	looked	up.	‘But	it’s	cursed?’
‘Only	in	so	far	as	all	Blue	Style	weapons	are	cursed.	As	you	know,	the
blade’s	core	is	twisted	wire,	five	braids	of	sixty	strands	each.	Five	bars	are
fused	to	that	core	to	produce	the	breadth	and	edge.	Blue	Style	is	very	flexible,
almost	unbreakable,	with	one	drawback.	Finadd,	touch	the	blade	to	any	other
here.	Lightly,	please.	Go	ahead.’
Brys	did	so,	and	a	strange	sound	reverberated	from	the	Blue	Style	sword.
A	cry,	that	went	on,	and	on.
‘Depending	on	where	on	the	blade	you	strike,	the	note	is	unique,	although
each	will	eventually	descend	or	ascend	to	the	core’s	own	voice.	The	effect	is
cumulative,	and	persistent.’
‘Sounds	like	a	dying	goat.’
‘There	is	a	name	etched	into	the	base	of	the	blade,	Finadd.	Arcane	script.
Can	you	read	it?’
Brys	squinted,	struggled	a	moment	with	the	awkward	lettering,	then	smiled.
‘Glory	Goat.	Well,	it	seems	a	mostly	harmless	curse.	Is	there	any	other	sorcery
invested	in	it?’
‘The	edges	self-sharpen,	I	believe.	Nicks	and	notches	heal,	although	some
material	is	always	lost.	Some	laws	cannot	be	cheated.’	The	Ceda	drew	out
another	sword.	‘This	one	is	somewhat	oversized,	I’ll	grant	you—’
‘No,	that’s	good.	The	stranger	was	very	tall.’
‘He	was	now,	was	he?’
Brys	nodded,	shifting	the	first	sword	to	his	left	hand	and	taking	the	one
Kuru	Qan	held	in	his	right.	‘Errant,	this	would	be	hard	to	wield.	For	me,	that
is.’
‘Sarat	Wept,’	the	Ceda	said.	‘About	four	generations	old.	One	of	the	last	in
the	Blue	Style.	It	belonged	to	the	King’s	Champion	of	that	time.’
Brys	frowned.	‘Urudat?’
‘Very	good.’


‘I’ve	seen	images	of	him	in	frescos	and	tapestries.	A	big	man—’
‘Oh,	yes,	but	reputedly	very	quick.’
‘Remarkable,	given	the	weight	of	this	sword.’	He	held	it	out.	‘The	blade
pulls.	The	line	is	a	hair ’s	breadth	outward.	This	is	a	left-handed	weapon.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well,’	Brys	considered,	‘the	stranger	fights	with	both	hands,	and	he
specified	two	full	swords,	suggesting—’
‘A	certain	measure	of	ambidexterity.	Yes.’
‘Investment?’
‘To	make	it	shatter	upon	its	wielder ’s	death.’
‘But—’
‘Yes,	another	incompetent	effort.	Thus,	two	formidable	weapons	in	the
Blue	Style	of	Letherii	steel.	Acceptable?’
Brys	studied	both	weapons,	the	play	of	aquamarine	in	the	lantern-light.
‘Both	beautiful	and	exquisitely	crafted.	Yes,	I	think	these	will	do.’
‘When	will	you	deliver	them?’
‘Tomorrow.	I	have	no	desire	to	enter	those	grounds	at	night.’	He	thought
of	Kettle,	and	felt	once	more	the	clasp	of	her	cold	hand.	It	did	not	occur	to	him
then	that	he	had	not	informed	the	Ceda	of	one	particular	detail	from	his
encounter	at	the	tower.	It	was	a	matter	that,	outwardly	at	least,	seemed	of	little
relevance.
Kettle	was	more	than	just	a	child.
She	was	also	dead.
Thanks	to	this	careless	omission,	the	Ceda’s	measure	of	fear	was	not	as
great	as	it	should	have	been.	Indeed,	as	it	needed	to	be.	Thanks	to	this	omission,
and	in	the	last	moments	before	the	Finadd	parted	company	with	Kuru	Qan,	a
crossroads	was	reached,	and	then,	inexorably,	a	path	was	taken.
	
The	night	air	was	pleasant,	a	warm	wind	stirring	the	rubbish	in	the	gutters	as
Tehol	and	Bugg	paused	at	the	foot	of	the	steps	to	Scale	House.
‘That	was	exhausting,’	Tehol	said.	‘I	think	I’ll	go	to	bed.’
‘Don’t	you	want	to	eat	first,	master?’
‘You	scrounged	something?’
‘No.’
‘So	we	have	nothing	to	eat.’
‘That’s	right.’
‘Then	why	did	you	ask	me	if	I	wanted	to	eat?’
‘I	was	curious.’


Tehol	anchored	his	fists	on	his	hips	and	glared	at	his	manservant.	‘Look,	it
wasn’t	me	who	nearly	got	us	investigated	in	there!’
‘It	wasn’t?’
‘Well,	not	all	me.	It	was	you,	too.	Poking	eyes	and	all	that.’
‘Master,	it	was	you	who	sent	me	there.	You	who	had	the	idea	of	offering	a
contract.’
‘Poking	eyes!’
‘All	right,	all	right.	Believe	me,	master,	I	regret	my	actions	deeply!’
‘You	regret	deeply?’
‘Fine,	deeply	regret.’
‘That’s	it,	I’m	going	to	bed.	Look	at	this	street.	It’s	a	mess!’
‘I’ll	get	around	to	it,	master,	if	I	find	the	time.’
‘Well,	that	should	be	no	problem,	Bugg.	After	all,	what	have	you	done
today?’
‘Scant	little,	it’s	true.’
‘As	I	thought.’	Tehol	cinched	up	his	trousers.	‘Never	mind.	Let’s	go,	before
something	terrible	happens.’


Chapter	Thirteen

Out	of	the	white
Out	of	the	sun’s	brittle	dismay
We	are	the	grim	shapes
Who	haunt	all	fate
Out	of	the	white
Out	of	the	wind’s	hoarse	bray
We	are	the	dark	ghosts
Who	haunt	all	fate
Out	of	the	white
Out	of	the	snow’s	worldly	fray
We	are	the	sword’s	wolves
Who	haunt	all	fate
JHECK	MARCHING	CHANT
Fifteen	paces,	no	more	than	that.	Between	emperor	and	slave.	A	stretch	of
Letherii	rugs,	booty	from	some	raid	a	century	or	more	past,	on	which	paths
were	worn	deep,	a	pattern	of	stolen	colour	mapping	stunted	roads	across
heroic	scenes.	Kings	crowned.	Champions	triumphant.	Images	of	history	the
Edur	had	walked	on,	indifferent	and	intent	on	their	small	journeys	in	this
chamber.
Udinaas	wasn’t	prepared	to	ascribe	any	significance	to	these	details.	He	had
come	to	his	own	pattern,	a	gaze	unwavering	and	precise,	the	mind	behind	it
disconnected,	its	surface	devoid	of	ripples	and	its	depths	motionless.
It	was	safer	that	way.	He	could	stand	here,	equidistant	between	two	torch
sconces	and	so	bathed	by	the	light	of	neither,	and	in	this	indeterminate	centre
he	looked	on,	silently	watching	as	Rhulad	discarded	his	bearskin,	to	stand
naked	before	his	new	wife.
Udinaas	might	have	been	amused,	had	he	permitted	the	emotion,	to	see	the


coins	burned	into	the	emperor ’s	penis	pop	off,	one,	two,	two	more,	then	four,
as	Rhulad’s	desire	became	apparent.	Coins	thumping	to	the	rug-strewn	floor,	a
few	bouncing	and	managing	modest	rolls	before	settling.	He	might	have	been
horrified	at	the	look	in	the	emperor ’s	red-rimmed	eyes	as	he	reached	out,
beckoning	Mayen	closer.	Waves	of	sympathy	for	the	hapless	young	woman
were	possible,	but	only	in	the	abstract.
Witnessing	this	macabre,	strangely	comic	moment,	the	slave	remained
motionless,	without	and	within,	and	the	bizarre	reality	of	this	world	played
itself	out	without	comment.
Her	self-control	was,	at	first,	absolute.	He	took	her	hand	and	drew	it	down,
pulling	her	closer.	‘Mayen,’	the	emperor	said	in	a	rasp,	in	a	voice	that	reached
for	tenderness	and	achieved	little	more	than	rough	lust.	‘Should	I	reveal	to	you
that	I	have	dreamed	of	this	moment?’	A	harsh	laugh.	‘Not	quite.	Not	like	this.
Not…in	so	much…detail.’
‘You	made	your	desires	known,	Rhulad.	Before…this.’
‘Yes,	call	me	Rhulad.	As	you	did	before.	Between	us,	nothing	need	change.’
‘Yet	I	am	your	empress.’
‘My	wife.’
‘We	cannot	speak	as	if	nothing	has	changed.’
‘I	will	teach	you,	Mayen.	I	am	still	Rhulad.’
He	embraced	her	then,	an	awkward,	child-like	encirclement	in	gold.	‘You
need	not	think	of	Fear,’	he	said.	‘Mayen,	you	are	his	gift	to	me.	His	proof	of
loyalty.	He	did	as	a	brother	should.’
‘I	was	betrothed—’
‘And	I	am	emperor!	I	can	break	the	rules	that	would	bind	the	Edur.	The	past
is	dead,	Mayen,	and	it	is	I	who	shall	forge	the	future!	With	you	at	my	side.	I	saw
you	looking	upon	me,	day	after	day,	and	I	could	see	the	desire	in	your	eyes.
Oh,	we	both	knew	that	Fear	would	have	you	in	the	end.	What	could	we	do?
Nothing.	But	I	have	changed	all	that.’	He	drew	back	a	step,	although	she	still
held	him	with	one	hand.	‘Mayen,	my	wife.’	He	began	undressing	her.
Realities.	Moments	one	by	one,	stumbling	forward.	Clumsy	necessities.
Rhulad’s	dreams	of	this	scene,	whatever	they	had	been	in	detail,	were	translated
into	a	series	of	mundane	impracticalities.	Clothes	were	not	easily	discarded,
unless	designed	with	that	in	mind,	and	these	were	not.	Her	passivity	under	his
ministrations	added	to	the	faltering,	until	this	became	an	event	bereft	of
romance.
Udinaas	could	see	his	lust	fading.	Of	course	it	would	revive.	Rhulad	was
young,	after	all.	The	feelings	of	the	object	of	his	hunger	were	irrelevant,	for	an
object	Mayen	had	become.	His	trophy.


That	the	emperor	sensed	the	slipping	away	of	any	chance	of	interlocking
desires	became	evident	as	he	began	speaking	once	more.	‘I	saw	in	your	eyes
how	you	wanted	me.	Now,	Mayen,	no-one	stands	between	us.’
But	he	does,	Rhulad.	Moreover,	your	monstrosity	has	become	something	you
now	wear	on	your	flesh.	And	now	what	had	to	arrive.	Letherii	gold	yields	to	its
natural	inclination.	Now,	Letherii	gold	rapes	this	Tiste	Edur.	Ha.
The	emperor ’s	lust	had	returned.	His	own	statements	had	convinced	him.
He	pulled	her	towards	the	bed	at	the	far	wall.	It	had	belonged	to	Hannan
Mosag,	and	so	was	crafted	for	a	single	occupant.	There	was	no	room	for	lying
side	by	side,	which	proved	no	obstacle	for	Rhulad’s	intentions.	He	pushed	her
onto	her	back.	Looked	down	at	her	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘No,	I	would	crush
you.	Get	up,	my	love.	You	will	descend	upon	me.	I	will	give	you	children.	I
promise.	Many	children,	whom	you	will	adore.	There	will	be	heirs.	Many
heirs.’
An	appeal,	Udinaas	could	well	hear,	to	sure	instincts,	the	promise	of
eventual	redemption.	Reason	to	survive	the	ordeal	of	the	present.
Rhulad	settled	down	on	the	bed.	Arms	out	to	the	sides.
She	stared	down	at	him.
Then	moved	to	straddle	this	cruciform-shaped	body	of	gold.	Descending
over	him.
A	game	of	mortality,	the	act	of	sex.	Reduced	so	that	decades	became
moments.	Awakening,	revelling	in	overwrought	sensation,	a	brief	spurt	meant
to	procreate,	spent	exhaustion,	then	death.	Rhulad	was	young.	He	did	not	last
long	enough	to	assuage	his	ego.
Even	so,	at	the	moment	before	he	spasmed	beneath	her,	before	his	heavy
groan	that	thinned	into	a	whimper,	Udinaas	saw	Mayen’s	control	begin	to
crumble.	As	if	she	had	found	a	spark	within	her	that	she	could	flame	into
proper	desire,	perhaps	even	pleasure.	Then,	as	he	released,	that	spark	flickered,
died.
None	of	which	Rhulad	witnessed,	for	his	eyes	were	closed	and	he	was	fully
inside	himself.
He	would	improve,	of	course.	Or	so	it	was	reasonable	to	expect.	She	might
even	gain	a	measure	of	control	over	this	act,	and	so	revive	and	fan	into	life	that
spark.
At	that	moment,	Udinaas	believed	Mayen	became	the	empress,	wife	to	the
emperor.	At	that	moment,	his	faith	in	her	spirit	withered—if	faith	was	the	right
word,	that	singular	war	between	expectation	and	hope.	Had	he	compassion	to
feel,	he	might	have	understood,	and	so	softened	with	empathy.	But	compassion
was	engagement,	a	mindfulness	beyond	that	of	mere	witness,	and	he	felt	none


of	that.
He	heard	soft	weeping	coming	from	another	place	of	darkness	in	the
chamber,	and	slowly	turned	his	head	to	look	upon	the	fourth	and	last	person
present.	As	he	had	been,	a	witness	to	the	rape	with	its	hidden,	metaphorical
violence.	But	a	witness	trapped	in	the	horror	of	feeling.
Among	the	crisscrossing	worn	paths	of	faded	colour,	one	led	to	her.
Feather	Witch	huddled,	pressed	up	against	the	wall,	hands	covering	her
face,	racked	with	shudders.
Much	more	of	this	and	she	might	end	up	killed.	Rhulad	was	a	man	growing
ever	more	intimate	with	dying.	He	did	not	need	reminding	of	what	it	cost	him
and	everyone	around	him.	Even	worse,	he	was	without	constraints.
Udinaas	considered	walking	over	to	her,	if	only	to	tell	her	to	be	quiet.	But
his	eyes	fell	on	the	intervening	expanse	of	rugs	and	their	images,	and	he
realized	that	the	distance	was	too	great.
Mayen	had	remained	straddling	Rhulad,	her	head	hanging	down.
‘Again,’	the	emperor	said.
She	straightened,	began	her	motions,	and	Udinaas	watched	her	search	for
that	spark	of	pleasure.	And	then	find	it.
Wanting	good,	yearning	for	bad.	As	simple	as	that?	Was	this	contradictory,
confused	map	universally	impressed	upon	the	minds	of	men	and	women?	That
did	not	seem	a	question	worth	answering,	Udinaas	decided.	He	had	lost	enough
already.
‘Shut	that	bitch	up!’
The	slave	started	at	the	emperor ’s	hoarse	shout.
The	weeping	had	grown	louder,	probably	in	answer	to	Mayen’s	audible
panting.
Udinaas	pushed	himself	forward,	across	the	rugs	to	where	Feather	Witch
crouched	in	the	gloom.
‘Get	her	out	of	here!	Both	of	you,	get	out!’
She	did	not	resist	as	he	lifted	her	to	her	feet.	Udinaas	leaned	close.	‘Listen,
Feather	Witch,’	he	said	under	his	breath.	‘What	did	you	expect?’
Her	head	snapped	up	and	he	saw	hatred	in	her	eyes.	‘From	you,’	she	said	in
a	snarl,	‘nothing.’
‘From	her.	Don’t	answer—we	must	leave.’
He	guided	her	to	the	side	door,	then	through	into	the	servants’	corridor
beyond.	He	closed	the	door	behind	them,	then	pulled	her	another	half-dozen
steps	down	the	passage.	‘There’s	no	cause	for	crying,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Mayen	is
trapped,	just	like	us,	Feather	Witch.	It	is	not	for	you	to	grieve	that	she	has
sought	and	found	pleasure.’


‘I	know	what	you’re	getting	at,	Indebted,’	she	said,	twisting	her	arm	out	of
his	grip.	‘Is	that	what	you	want?	My	surrender?	My	finding	pleasure	when	you
make	use	of	me?’
‘I	am	as	you	say,	Feather	Witch.	Indebted.	What	I	want?	My	wants	mean
nothing.	They	have	fallen	silent	in	my	mind.	You	think	I	still	pursue	you?	I	still
yearn	for	your	love?’	He	shook	his	head	as	he	studied	her	face.	‘You	were
right.	What	is	the	point?’
‘I	want	nothing	to	do	with	you,	Udinaas.’
‘Yes,	I	know.	But	you	are	Mayen’s	handmaiden.	And	I,	it	appears,	am	to	be
Rhulad’s	own	slave.	Emperor	and	empress.	That	is	the	reality	we	must	face.
You	and	I,	we	are	a	conceit.	Or	we	were.	Not	any	more,	as	far	as	I	am
concerned.’
‘Good.	Then	we	need	only	deal	with	each	other	as	necessity	demands.’
He	nodded.
Her	eyes	narrowed.	‘I	do	not	trust	you.’
‘I	do	not	care.’
Uncertainty.	Unease.	‘What	game	are	you	playing	at,	Udinaas?	Who	speaks
through	your	mouth?’	She	stepped	back.	‘I	should	tell	her.	About	what	hides
within	you.’
‘If	you	do	that,	Feather	Witch,	you	will	destroy	your	only	chance.’
‘My	only	chance?	What	chance?’
‘Freedom.’
Her	face	twisted.	‘And	with	that	you	would	purchase	my	silence?	You	are
foolish,	Indebted.	I	was	born	a	slave.	I	have	none	of	your	memories	to	haunt
me—’
‘My	memories?	Feather	Witch,	my	memory	of	freedom	is	as	an	Indebted
trapped	in	a	kingdom	where	even	death	offers	no	absolution.	My	memory	is
my	father ’s	memory,	and	would	have	been	my	children’s	memory.	But	you
misunderstood.	I	did	not	speak	of	my	freedom.	I	spoke	only	of	yours.	Not
something	to	be	recaptured,	but	found	anew.’
‘And	how	do	you	plan	on	freeing	me,	Udinaas?’
‘We	are	going	to	war,	Feather	Witch.	The	Tiste	Edur	will	wage	war	against
Lether.’
She	scowled.	‘What	of	it?	There	have	been	wars	before—’
‘Not	like	this	one.	Rhulad	isn’t	interested	in	raids.	This	will	be	a	war	of
conquest.’
‘Conquer	Lether?	They	will	fail—’
‘Yes,	they	might.	The	point	is,	when	the	Edur	march	south,	we	will	be
going	with	them.’


‘Why	are	you	so	certain	of	all	this?	This	war?	This	conquest?’
‘Because	the	Emperor	has	summoned	the	shadow	wraiths.	All	of	them.’
‘You	cannot	know	such	a	thing.’
He	said	nothing.
‘You	cannot,’	Feather	Witch	insisted.
Then	she	spun	round	and	hurried	down	the	passage.
Udinaas	returned	to	the	door.	To	await	the	summons	he	knew	would	come,
eventually.
Emperor	and	slave.	A	score	of	paces,	a	thousand	leagues.	In	the	span	of
intractable	command	and	obedience,	the	mind	did	not	count	distance.	For	the
path	was	well	worn,	as	it	always	had	been	and	as	it	would	ever	be.
The	wraiths	gathered,	in	desultory	legions,	in	the	surrounding	forest,
among	them	massive	demons	bound	in	chains	that	formed	a	most	poignant
armour.	Creatures	heaving	up	from	the	sea	to	hold	the	four	hundred	or	more
K’orthan	raider	ships	now	being	readied,	eager	to	carry	them	south.	Among
the	tribes,	in	every	village,	the	sorcerors	awakening	to	the	new	emperor ’s
demand.
A	summons	to	war.
Across	a	worn	rug.
Heroes	triumphant.
From	beyond	the	wooden	portal	came	Mayen’s	cry.
	
He	emerged	from	the	forest,	his	face	pallid,	his	expression	haunted,	and	halted
in	surprise	at	seeing	the	readied	wagons,	Buruk	swearing	at	the	Nerek	as	they
scurried	about.	Seren	Pedac	had	completed	donning	her	leather	armour	and
was	strapping	on	her	sword-belt.
She	watched	him	approach.
‘Dire	events,	Hull	Beddict.’
‘You	are	leaving?’
‘Buruk	has	so	commanded.’
‘What	of	the	iron	he	sought	to	sell?’
‘It	goes	back	with	us.’	She	looked	about,	then	said,	‘Come,	walk	with	me.	I
need	to	speak	one	last	time	with	the	First	Eunuch.’
Hull	slowly	nodded.	‘Good.	There	is	much	that	I	must	tell	you.’
Her	answering	smile	was	wry.	‘It	was	my	intent	to	accord	the	same	to	you.’
They	set	off	for	the	guest	house	near	the	citadel.	Once	more	through	the
ringed	divisions	of	the	Edur	city.	This	time,	however,	the	citizens	they	passed
were	silent,	sombre.	Seren	and	Hull	moved	among	them	like	ghosts.


‘I	visited	the	old	sites,’	Hull	said.	‘And	found	signs	of	activity.’
‘What	old	sites?’	Seren	asked.
‘North	of	the	crevasse,	the	forest	cloaks	what	was	once	a	vast	city,
stretching	on	for	leagues.	It	was	entirely	flagstoned,	the	stone	of	a	type	I’ve
never	seen	before.	It	does	not	break,	and	only	the	action	of	roots	has	succeeded
in	shifting	the	slabs	about.’
‘Why	should	there	be	any	activity	at	such	places?	Beyond	that	of	the	usual
ghosts	and	wraiths?’
Hull	glanced	at	her	momentarily,	then	looked	away.	‘There	are…kill	sites.
Piles	of	bones	that	have	long	since	turned	to	stone.	Skeletal	remains	of	Tiste.
Along	with	the	bones	of	some	kind	of	reptilian	beast—’
‘Yes,	I	have	seen	those,’	Seren	said.	‘They	are	collected	and	ground	into
medicinal	powder	by	the	Nerek.’
‘Just	so.	Acquitor,	these	sites	have	been	disturbed,	and	the	tracks	I	found
were	most	disconcerting.	They	are,	I	believe,	draconic.’
She	stared	at	him	in	disbelief.	‘The	Hold	of	the	Dragon	has	remained
inactive,	according	to	the	casters	of	the	tiles,	for	thousands	of	years.’
‘When	did	you	last	speak	to	a	caster?’
Seren	hesitated,	thinking	back	on	Feather	Witch’s	efforts.	When,	it	was
hinted,	all	was	in	flux.	‘Very	well.	Draconic.’	The	thought	of	dragons,	manifest
in	this	world,	was	terrifying.	‘But	I	cannot	see	how	this	relates	to	the	Tiste	Edur
—’
‘Seren	Pedac,	you	must	have	realized	by	now	that	the	Tiste	Edur	worship
dragons.	Father	Shadow,	the	three	Daughters,	they	are	all	draconic.	Or
Soletaken.	In	the	depths	of	the	crevasse	a	short	distance	from	here	can	be	found
the	shattered	skull	of	a	dragon.	I	believe	that	dragon	is	Father	Shadow,	the	one
the	Edur	call	Scabandari	Bloodeye.	Perhaps	this	is	the	source	of	the	betrayal
that	seems	to	be	the	heart	of	Edur	religion.	I	found	tracks	there	as	well.	Edur
footprints.’
‘And	what	significance	have	you	drawn	from	all	this,	Hull?’
‘There	will	be	war.	A	fated	war,	born	of	a	renewed	sense	of	destiny.	I	fear
for	Hannan	Mosag,	for	I	think	he	has	grasped	a	dragon’s	tail—perhaps	more
than	figuratively.	This	could	prove	too	much,	even	for	him	and	his	K’risnan.’
‘Hull,	the	Warlock	King	no	longer	rules	the	Edur.’
Shock;	then	his	expression	darkened.	‘Did	the	delegation	arrive	with
assassins	in	its	company?’
‘He	was	deposed	before	the	delegation’s	arrival,’	she	replied.	‘Oh,	I	don’t
know	where	to	begin.	Binadas’s	brother,	Rhulad.	He	died,	then	rose	again,
within	his	possession	a	sword—the	gift	that	Hannan	Mosag	sought.	Rhulad	has


proclaimed	himself	emperor.	And	Hannan	Mosag	knelt	before	him.’
Hull’s	eyes	shone.	‘As	I	said,	then.	Destiny.’
‘Is	that	what	you	choose	to	call	it?’
‘I	hear	anger	in	your	voice,	Acquitor.’
‘Destiny	is	a	lie.	Destiny	is	justification	for	atrocity.	It	is	the	means	by
which	murderers	armour	themselves	against	reprimand.	It	is	a	word	intended
to	stand	in	place	of	ethics,	denying	all	moral	context.	Hull,	you	are	embracing
that	lie,	and	not	in	ignorance.’
They	had	reached	the	bridge.	Hull	Beddict	halted	and	rounded	on	her.	‘You
knew	me	once,	Seren	Pedac.	Enough	to	give	me	back	my	life.	I	am	not	blind	to
this	truth,	nor	to	the	truth	of	who	you	are.	You	are	honourable,	in	a	world	that
devours	honour.	And	would	that	I	had	been	able	to	take	more	from	you	than	I
did,	to	become	like	you.	Even	to	join	my	life	to	yours.	But	I	haven’t	your
strength.	I	could	not	refashion	myself.’	He	studied	her	for	a	moment,	then
continued	before	she	could	respond.	‘You	are	right,	I	am	not	blind.	I
understand	what	it	means	to	embrace	destiny.	What	am	I	trying	to	tell	you	is,	it
is	the	best	I	can	do.’
She	stepped	back,	as	if	buffeted	by	consecutive	blows.	Her	eyes	locked	with
his,	and	she	saw	in	them	the	veracity	of	his	confession.	She	wanted	to	scream,
to	loose	her	anguish,	a	sound	to	ring	through	the	city	as	if	to	answer,	finally
and	irrefutably,	all	that	had	happened.
But	no.	I	am	a	fool	to	think	that	others	feel	as	I	do.	This	tide	is	rising,	and
there	are	scant	few	who	would	stand	before	it.
With	heartbreaking	gentleness,	Hull	Beddict	reached	out	and	took	her	arm.
‘Come,	let	us	pay	a	visit	to	the	First	Eunuch.’
‘At	the	very	least,’	Seren	tried	as	they	crossed	the	bridge,	‘your	own
position	has	become	less	relevant,	making	you	in	less	danger	than	you	might
otherwise	have	been.’
‘Do	you	think	so?’
‘You	don’t?’
‘That	depends.	Rhulad	may	not	accept	my	offer	of	alliance.	He	might	not
trust	me.’
‘What	would	you	do	then,	Hull?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
	
The	guest	house	was	crowded.	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	had	arrived,	along	with
the	First	Eunuch’s	own	bodyguard,	the	Rulith,	and	a	dozen	other	guards	and
officials.	As	Seren	and	Hull	entered,	they	found	themselves	in	the	midst	of	a


fierce	exhortation	from	Prince	Quillas	Diskanar.
‘—sorcerors	in	both	our	camps.	If	we	strike	now,	we	might	well	succeed	in
cutting	out	the	heart	of	this	treacherous	tyranny!’	He	swung	round.	‘Finadd
Moroch	Nevath,	are	our	mages	present?’
‘Three	of	the	four,	my	prince,’	the	warrior	replied.	‘Laerdas	remains	with
the	ships.’
‘Very	good.	Well,	First	Eunuch?’
Nifadas	was	studying	the	prince,	expressionless.	He	made	no	reply	to
Quillas,	turning	instead	to	regard	Hull	and	Seren.	‘Acquitor,	does	the	rain
continue	to	fall?’
‘No,	First	Eunuch.’
‘And	is	Buruk	the	Pale	ready	to	depart?’
She	nodded.
‘I	asked	you	a	question,	Nifadas!’	Quillas	said,	his	face	darkening.
‘Answering	it,’	the	First	Eunuch	said	slowly,	fixing	his	small	eyes	on	the
prince,	‘makes	implicit	the	matter	is	worth	considering.	It	is	not.	We	are	facing
more	than	Hannan	Mosag	the	warlock	and	his	K’risnan.	The	emperor	and	his
sword.	Together,	they	are	something…other.	Those	accompanying	me	are	here
under	my	guidance,	and	at	present	we	shall	remain	in	good	faith.	Tell	me,
Prince,	how	many	assassins	have	you	brought	along	with	your	sorcerors?’
Quillas	said	nothing.
Nifadas	addressed	Gerun	Eberict.	‘Finadd?’
‘There	are	two,’	the	man	replied.	‘Both	present	in	this	chamber.’
The	First	Eunuch	nodded,	then	seemed	to	dismiss	the	issue.	‘Hull	Beddict,	I
am	hesitant	to	offer	you	welcome.’
‘I	am	not	offended	by	that	admission,	First	Eunuch.’
‘Has	the	Acquitor	apprised	you	of	the	situation?’
‘She	has.’
‘And?’
‘For	what	it	is	worth,	I	advise	you	to	leave.	As	soon	as	possible.’
‘And	what	will	you	do?’
Hull	frowned.	‘I	see	no	reason	to	answer	that.’
‘You	are	a	traitor!’	Quillas	said	in	a	hiss.	‘Finadd	Moroch,	arrest	him!’
There	was	dismay	on	the	First	Eunuch’s	features	as	Moroch	Nevath	drew
his	sword	and	stepped	close	to	Hull	Beddict.
‘You	cannot	do	that,’	Seren	Pedac	said,	her	heart	thundering	in	her	chest.
All	eyes	fixed	on	her.
‘I	am	sorry,	my	prince,’	she	continued,	struggling	to	keep	her	voice	even.
‘Hull	Beddict	is	under	the	protection	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	He	was	granted	guest


status	by	Binadas	Sengar,	brother	to	the	emperor.’
‘He	is	Letherii!’
‘The	Edur	will	be	indifferent	to	that	detail,’	Seren	replied.
‘We	are	done	here,’	Nifadas	said.	‘There	will	be	no	arrests.	Prince	Quillas,
it	is	time.’
‘Do	we	scurry	at	this	emperor ’s	command,	First	Eunuch?’	Quillas	was
shaking	with	rage.	‘He	asks	for	us,	well	enough.	Let	the	bastard	wait.’	He
wheeled	on	Hull	Beddict.	‘Know	that	I	intend	to	proclaim	you	an	outlaw	and
traitor	of	Lether.	Your	life	is	forfeit.’
A	weary	smile	was	Hull’s	only	reply.
Nifadas	spoke	to	Seren.	‘Acquitor,	will	you	accompany	us	to	our	audience
with	the	emperor?’
She	was	surprised	by	the	offer,	and	more	than	a	little	alarmed.	‘First
Eunuch?’
‘Assuming	Buruk	is	prepared	to	wait,	of	course.	I	am	certain	he	will	be,
and	I	will	send	someone	to	inform	him.’	He	gestured	and	one	of	his	servants
hurried	off.	‘Hull	Beddict,	I	presume	you	are	on	your	way	to	speak	with
Emperor	Rhulad?	At	the	very	least,	accompany	us	to	the	citadel.	I	doubt	there
will	be	any	confusion	of	purposes	once	we	enter.’
Seren	could	not	determine	the	motives	underlying	the	First	Eunuch’s
invitations.	She	felt	rattled,	off	balance.
‘As	you	wish,’	Hull	said,	shrugging.
Nifadas	in	the	lead,	the	four	Letherii	left	the	guest	house	and	made	their
way	towards	the	citadel.	Seren	drew	Hull	a	pace	behind	the	First	Eunuch	and
Prince	Quillas.	‘I’m	not	sure	I	like	this,’	she	said	under	her	breath.
Hull	grunted,	and	it	was	a	moment	before	Seren	realized	it	had	been	a
laugh.
‘What	is	funny	about	that?’
‘Your	capacity	for	understatement,	Acquitor.	I	have	always	admired	your
ability	to	stay	level.’
‘Indecisiveness	is	generally	held	to	be	a	flaw,	Hull.’
‘If	it	is	certainty	you	want,	Seren,	then	join	me.’
The	offer	was	uttered	low,	barely	audible.	She	sighed.	‘I	do	not	want
certainty,’	she	replied.	‘In	fact,	certainty	is	the	one	thing	I	fear	the	most.’
‘I	expected	that	sort	of	answer.’
Two	K’risnan	met	the	party	at	the	entrance	and	escorted	them	into	the
throne	chamber.
Emperor	Rhulad	was	seated	once	more,	his	new	wife	standing	at	his	side,
on	the	left.	Apart	from	the	two	K’risnan,	no-one	else	was	present.	Although


Mayen’s	face	was	fixed	and	without	expression,	something	about	it,	ineffable
in	the	way	of	the	secret	language	among	women,	told	Seren	that	a
consummation	had	occurred,	a	binding	that	was	reflected	in	Rhulad’s	dark
eyes,	a	light	of	triumph	and	supreme	confidence.	‘Hull	Beddict,’	he	said	in	his
rough	voice,	‘blood	brother	to	Binadas,	you	arrive	in	questionable	company.’
‘Emperor,’	Hull	said,	‘your	brother ’s	faith	in	me	is	not	misplaced.’
‘I	see.	And	how	does	your	prince	feel	about	that?’
‘He	is	no	longer	my	prince.	His	feelings	mean	nothing	to	me.’
Rhulad	smiled.	‘Then	I	suggest	you	step	to	one	side.	I	would	now	speak	to
the	official	delegation	from	Lether,	such	as	it	is.’
Hull	bowed	and	walked	three	paces	to	the	right.
‘Acquitor?’
‘Emperor,	I	come	to	inform	you	that	I	am	about	to	leave,	as	escort	to
Buruk	the	Pale.’
‘We	appreciate	the	courtesy,	Acquitor.	If	that	is	all	that	brings	you	into	our
presence,	best	you	join	Hull.’
She	bowed	in	acquiescence	and	moved	away.	Now	why	did	Nifadas	want
this?
‘Emperor	Rhulad,’	Nifadas	said,	‘may	I	speak?’
The	Edur	regarded	the	First	Eunuch	with	half-closed	lids.	‘We	permit	it.’
‘The	kingdom	of	Lether	is	prepared	to	enter	negotiations	regarding	the
debts	incurred	as	a	result	of	the	illegal	harvest	of	tusked	seals.’
Like	a	snake	whose	tail	had	just	been	stepped	on,	Quillas	hissed	and	spat	in
indignation.
‘The	issue	of	debt,’	Rhulad	responded,	ignoring	the	prince,	‘is	no	longer
relevant.	We	care	nothing	for	your	gold,	First	Eunuch.	Indeed,	we	care	nothing
for	you	at	all.’
‘If	isolation	is	your	desire—’
‘We	did	not	say	that,	First	Eunuch.’
Prince	Quillas	suddenly	smiled,	under	control	once	more.	‘An	opening	of
outright	hostility	between	our	peoples,	Emperor?	I	would	warn	you	against
such	a	tactic,	which	is	not	to	say	I	would	not	welcome	it.’
‘How	so,	Prince	Quillas?’
‘We	covet	the	resources	you	possess,	to	put	it	bluntly.	And	now	you	give	us
the	opportunity	to	acquire	them.	A	peaceful	solution	could	have	been	found	in
your	acknowledgement	of	indebtedness	to	Lether.	Instead,	you	voice	the	absurd
lie	that	is	it	we	who	owe	you!’
Rhulad	was	silent	a	moment,	then	he	nodded	and	said,	‘Letherii	economics
seems	founded	on	peculiar	notions	Prince.’


‘Peculiar?	I	think	not.	Natural	and	undeniable	laws	guide	our	endeavours.
The	results	of	which	you	will	soon	discover,	to	your	regret.’
‘First	Eunuch,	does	the	prince	speak	for	Lether?’
Nifadas	shrugged.	‘Does	it	matter,	Emperor?’
‘Ah,	you	are	clever	indeed.	Certainly	more	worthy	of	conversation	with
ourselves	than	this	strutting	fool	whose	nobility	resides	only	in	the	fact	of	his
crawling	out	from	between	a	queen’s	legs.	You	are	quite	right,	First	Eunuch.	It
no	longer	matters.	We	were	simply	curious.’
‘I	feel	no	obligation	to	assuage	that	curiosity,	Emperor.’
‘And	now	you	show	your	spine,	at	last,	Nifadas.	We	are	delighted.	Deliver
these	words	to	your	king,	then.	The	Tiste	Edur	no	longer	bow	in	deference	to
your	people.	Nor	are	we	interested	in	participating	in	your	endless	games	of
misdirection	and	the	poisonous	words	you	would	have	us	swallow.’	A	sudden,
strange	pause,	the	ghost	of	some	kind	of	spasm	flitting	across	the	emperor ’s
face.	Then	he	shook	himself,	settled	back.	But	the	look	in	his	eyes	was
momentarily	lost.	He	blinked,	frowned,	then	the	gleam	of	awareness	returned.
‘Moreover,’	he	resumed,	‘we	choose	now	to	speak	for	the	tribes	you	have
subjugated,	for	the	hapless	peoples	you	have	destroyed.	It	is	time	you	answered
for	your	crimes.’
Nifadas	slowly	tilted	his	head.	‘Is	this	a	declaration	of	war?’	he	asked	in	a
soft	voice.
‘We	shall	announce	our	intention	with	deeds,	not	words,	First	Eunuch.	We
have	spoken.	Your	delegation	is	dismissed.	We	regret	that	you	travelled	so	far
for	what	has	turned	out	to	be	a	short	visit.	Perhaps	we	will	speak	again	in	the
future,	although,	we	suspect,	in	very	different	circumstances.’
Nifadas	bowed.	‘Then,	if	you	will	excuse	us,	Emperor,	we	must	make
ready	to	depart.’
‘You	may	go.	Hull	Beddict,	Acquitor,	remain	a	moment.’
Seren	watched	Quillas	and	Nifadas	walk	stiffly	from	the	throne	chamber.
She	was	still	thinking	about	that	display	from	Rhulad.	A	crack,	a	fissure.	I	think
I	saw	him	then,	young	Rhulad,	there	inside.
‘Acquitor,’	Rhulad	said	as	soon	as	the	curtains	fell	back	into	place,
drawing	her	attention	round,	‘inform	Buruk	the	Pale	that	he	has	right	of
passage	for	his	flight.	However,	the	duration	of	the	privilege	is	short,	so	he
best	make	haste.’
‘Emperor,	the	wagons	perforce—’
‘We	fear	he	will	not	have	sufficient	time	to	take	his	wagons	with	him.’
She	blinked.	‘You	expect	him	to	abandon	the	iron	in	his	possession?’
‘There	are	always	risks	in	business,	Acquitor,	as	you	Letherii	are	quick	to


point	out	when	it	is	to	your	advantage.	Alas,	the	same	applies	when	the	situation
is	reversed.’
‘How	many	days	do	you	permit	us?’
‘Three.	One	more	detail.	The	Nerek	remain	here.’
‘The	Nerek?’
‘Are	Indebted	to	Buruk,	yes,	we	understand	that.	Yet	another	vagary	of
economics,	alas,	under	which	the	poor	man	must	suffer.	He	has	our	sympathy.’
‘Buruk	is	a	merchant,	Emperor.	He	is	used	to	travelling	by	wagon.	Three
days	for	the	return	journey	may	well	be	beyond	his	physical	abilities.’
‘That	would	be	unfortunate,	for	him.’	The	dead,	cold	gaze	shifted.	‘Hull
Beddict,	what	have	you	to	offer	us?’
Hull	dropped	to	one	knee.	‘I	swear	myself	to	your	cause,	Emperor.’
Rhulad	smiled.	‘You	do	not	yet	know	that	cause,	Hull	Beddict.’
‘I	believe	I	comprehend	more	than	you	might	think,	sire.’
‘Indeed…’
‘And	I	would	stand	with	you.’
The	emperor	swung	his	attention	back	to	Seren.	‘Best	take	your	leave	now,
Acquitor.	This	discussion	is	not	for	you.’
Seren	looked	across	at	Hull,	and	their	eyes	met.	Although	neither	moved,	it
seemed	to	her	that	he	was	retreating	before	her,	growing	ever	more	distant,
ever	further	from	her	reach.	The	intervening	space	had	become	a	vast	gulf,	a
distance	that	could	not	be	bridged.
And	so	I	lose	you.
To	this…creature.
Her	thoughts	ended	there.	As	blank	as	the	future	now	breached,	the	space
beyond	naught	but	oblivion,	and	so	we	plunge	forward…‘Goodbye,	Hull
Beddict.’
‘Fare	you	well,	Seren	Pedac.’
Her	legs	felt	wobbly	beneath	her	as	she	walked	to	the	curtained	exit.
	
Gerun	Eberict	was	waiting	for	her	ten	paces	from	the	citadel	doors.	There	was
smug	amusement	in	his	expression.	‘He	remains	inside,	does	he?	For	how
long?’
Seren	struggled	to	compose	herself.	‘What	do	you	want,	Finadd?’
‘That	is	a	difficult	question	to	answer,	Acquitor.	I	was	asked	by	Brys
Beddict	to	speak	to	his	brother.	But	the	opportunity	seems	increasingly
remote.’
And	if	I	tell	him	that	Hull	is	lost	to	us,	what	would	he	do	then?


Gerun	Eberict	smiled,	as	if	he	had	read	the	thoughts	in	her	mind.
She	looked	away.	‘Hull	Beddict	is	under	the	emperor ’s	protection.’
‘I	am	pleased	for	him.’
She	glared.	‘You	do	not	understand.	Look	around,	Finadd.	This	village	is
filled	with	shadows,	and	in	those	shadows	are	wraiths—servants	to	the	Edur.’
His	brows	rose.	‘You	believe	I	desire	to	kill	him?	Where	has	that	suspicion
come	from,	Acquitor?	I	did	say	“speak”,	did	I	not?	I	was	not	being
euphemistic.’
‘Your	reputation	gives	cause	for	alarm,	Finadd.’
‘I	have	no	reason	to	proclaim	Hull	my	enemy,	regardless	of	his	political
allegiance.	After	all,	if	he	proves	to	be	a	traitor,	then	the	kingdom	possesses	its
own	means	of	dealing	with	him.	I	have	no	interest	in	interceding	in	such	a
matter.	I	was	but	endeavouring	to	consummate	my	promise	to	Brys.’
‘What	did	Brys	hope	to	achieve?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	Perhaps	I	was,	once,	but	clearly	everything	has	changed.’
Seren	studied	him.
‘And	what	of	you,	Acquitor?’	he	asked.	‘You	will	escort	the	merchant	back
to	Trate.	Then	what?’
She	shrugged.	There	seemed	little	reason	to	dissemble.	‘I	am	going	home,
Finadd.’
‘Letheras?	That	residence	has	seen	little	of	you.’
‘Clearly	that	is	about	to	change.’
He	nodded.	‘There	will	be	no	demand	for	Acquitors	in	the	foreseeable
future,	Seren	Pedac.	I	would	be	honoured	if	you	would	consider	working	for
me.’
‘Work?’
‘My	estate.	I	am	involved	in…extensive	enterprises.	You	have	integrity,
Acquitor.	You	are	someone	I	could	trust.’	He	hesitated,	then	added,	‘Do	not	feel
you	need	to	answer	here	and	now.	I	ask	that	you	think	on	it.	I	shall	call	upon
you	in	Letheras.’
‘I	think,	Finadd,’	Seren	said,	‘that	you	will	find	yourself	rather	preoccupied
with	your	military	duties,	given	what	is	about	to	happen.’
‘My	position	is	in	the	palace.	I	do	not	command	armies.’	He	looked	round,
and	his	gap-toothed	smile	returned.	‘These	savages	won’t	reach	Letheras.
They’ll	be	lucky	to	make	it	across	the	frontier.	You	forget,	Acquitor,	we’ve
faced	similar	enemies	before.	The	Nerek	had	their	spirit	goddess—what	was	it
called?’
‘The	Eres’al.’
‘Yes,	that’s	it.	The	Eres’al.	And	the	Tarthenal	their	five	Seregahl,	the	Wrath


Wielders.	Warlocks	and	witches,	curses	and	demons,	we	obliterated	them	one
and	all.	And	the	Ceda	and	his	cadre	barely	broke	a	sweat.’
‘I	fear	this	time	it	will	be	different,	Finadd.’
He	cocked	his	head.	‘Acquitor,	when	you	think	of	the	Merchant	Tolls,	what
do	you	imagine	it	to	be?’
‘I	don’t	understand—’
‘The	commercial	core,	the	heart	of	the	financial	system	which	drives	all	of
Lether,	its	every	citizen,	its	very	way	of	looking	at	the	world.	The	Tolls	are	not
simply	coins	stacked	high	in	some	secret	vault.	Not	just	traders	howling	their
numbers	before	the	day’s	close.	The	Tolls	are	the	roots	of	our	civilization,	the
fibres	reaching	out	to	infest	everything.	Everything.’
‘What	is	your	point,	Finadd?’
‘You	are	cleverer	than	that,	Acquitor.	You	understand	full	well.	That	heart
feeds	on	the	best	and	the	worst	in	human	nature.	Exaltation	and	achievement,
ambition	and	greed,	all	acting	in	self-serving	concert.	Thus,	four	facets	of	our
nature,	and	not	one	sits	well	with	constraints	on	its	behaviour,	on	its
expression.	We	win	not	just	with	armies,	Seren	Pedac.	We	win	because	our
system	appeals	to	the	best	and	worst	within	all	people,	not	just	humans.’
‘Destiny.’
He	shrugged.	‘Call	it	what	you	will.	But	we	have	made	it	inevitable	and	alldevouring—’
‘I	see	little	of	exaltation	and	achievement	in	what	we	do,	Finadd.	It	would
seem	there	is	a	growing	imbalance—’
His	laugh	cut	her	off.	‘And	that	is	the	truth	of	freedom,	Seren	Pedac.’
She	could	feel	her	anger	rising.	‘I	always	believed	freedom	concerned	the
granted	right	to	be	different,	without	fear	of	repression.’
‘A	lofty	notion,	but	you	won’t	find	it	in	the	real	world.	We	have	hammered
freedom	into	a	sword.	And	if	you	won’t	be	like	us	we	will	use	that	sword	to	kill
you	one	by	one,	until	your	spirit	is	broken.’
‘What	if	the	Tiste	Edur	surprise	you,	Finadd?	Will	you	in	turn	choose	to
die	in	defence	of	your	great	cause?’
‘Some	can	die.	Some	will.	Indeed,	unlikely	as	it	is,	we	may	all	die.	But,
unless	the	victors	leave	naught	but	ashes	in	their	wake,	the	heart	will	beat	on.	Its
roots	will	find	new	flesh.	The	emperor	may	have	his	demons	of	the	seas,	but
we	possess	a	monster	unimaginably	vast,	and	it	devours.	And	what	it	cannot
devour,	it	will	smother,	or	starve.	Win	or	lose,	the	Tiste	Edur	still	lose.’
She	stepped	back.	‘Finadd	Gerun	Eberict,	I	want	nothing	to	do	with	your
world.	And	so	you	need	not	wait	for	my	answer,	for	I	have	just	given	it.’
‘As	you	like,	but	know	that	I	will	think	no	less	of	you	when	you	change


your	mind.’
‘I	won’t.’
He	turned	away.	‘Everyone	has	to	work	to	eat,	lass.	See	you	in	Letheras.’
	
Udinaas	had	stood	quietly	in	the	gloom	during	the	audience	with	the
delegation.	His	fellow	Letherii	had	not	marked	his	presence.	And,	had	they
done	so,	it	would	not	have	mattered,	for	it	was	the	emperor	who	commanded
the	exchange.	After	the	dismissal	of	the	delegation	and	the	Acquitor ’s
departure,	Rhulad	had	beckoned	Hull	Beddict	closer.
‘You	swear	your	fealty	to	us,’	the	emperor	said	in	a	murmur,	as	if	tasting
each	word	before	it	escaped	his	mangled	lips.
‘I	know	the	details	you	need,	Emperor,	the	location	and	complement	of
every	garrison,	every	frontier	encampment.	I	know	their	tactics,	the	manner	in
which	armies	are	arrayed	for	battle.	The	way	sorcery	is	employed.	I	know
where	the	food	and	water	caches	are	hidden—these	are	the	military
repositories,	and	they	are	massive.’
Rhulad	leaned	forward.	‘You	would	betray	your	own	people.	Why?’
‘Vengeance,’	Hull	Beddict	replied.
The	word	chilled	Udinaas.
‘Sire,’	Hull	continued,	‘my	people	betrayed	me.	Long	ago.	I	have	long
awaited	an	opportunity	such	as	this	one.’
‘And	so,	vengeance.	A	worthy	sentiment?’
‘Emperor,	there	is	nothing	else	left	for	me.’
‘Tell	us,	Hull	Beddict,	will	the	mighty	Letherii	fleet	take	to	the	waves	to
challenge	us?’
‘No,	I	don’t	think	so.	Not	at	first,	anyway.’
‘And	their	armies?’
‘The	doctrine	is	one	of	an	initial	phase	of	rolling,	mobile	defence,	drawing
your	forces	ever	forward.	Then	counter-attack.	Deep	strikes	to	cut	your	supply
lines.	Attack	and	withdraw,	attack	and	withdraw.	By	the	third	phase,	they	will
encircle	your	armies	to	complete	the	annihilation.	Their	fleets	will	avoid	any
sea	engagement,	for	they	know	that	to	conquer	Lether	you	must	make	landing.
Instead,	I	suspect	they	will	send	their	ships	well	beyond	sight	of	the	coastline,
then	attack	your	homeland.	The	villages	here,	which	they	will	burn	to	the
ground.	And	every	Tiste	Edur	they	find	here,	old	or	young,	will	be	butchered.’
Rhulad	grunted,	then	said,	‘They	think	we	are	fools.’
‘The	Letherii	military	is	malleable,	Emperor.	Its	soldiers	are	trained	to
quick	adaptation,	should	the	circumstances	warrant	it.	A	formidable,	deadly


force,	exquisitely	trained	and,	employing	the	raised	roads	constructed
exclusively	for	it,	frighteningly	mobile.	Worse,	they	have	numerical
superiority—’
‘Hardly,’	Rhulad	cut	in,	smiling.	‘The	Edur	possess	new	allies,	Hull
Beddict,	as	you	shall	soon	discover.	Very	well,	we	are	satisfied,	and	we
conclude	that	you	shall	prove	useful	to	us.	Go	now	to	our	father ’s	house,	and
make	greeting	with	Binadas,	who	will	be	pleased	to	see	you.’
The	Letherii	bowed	and	strode	from	the	chamber.
‘Hannan	Mosag,’	Rhulad	called	in	a	low	voice.
A	side	curtain	was	drawn	aside	and	Udinaas	watched	the	once-Warlock
King	enter.
‘It	would	seem,’	Rhulad	said,	‘your	studies	of	the	Letherii	military	have
yielded	you	an	accurate	assessment.	His	description	of	their	tactics	and
strategies	matches	yours	exactly.’
‘How	soon,	Emperor?’
‘Are	the	tribes	readying	themselves?’
‘With	alacrity.’
‘Then	very	soon	indeed.	Tell	us	your	thoughts	on	Nifadas	and	the	prince.’
‘Nifadas	understood	quickly	that	all	was	lost,	but	the	prince	sees	that	loss
as	a	victory.	At	the	same	time,	both	remain	confident	in	their	kingdom’s
military	prowess.	Nifadas	mourns	for	us,	Emperor.’
‘Poor	man.	Perhaps	he	has	earned	our	mercy	for	that	misguided
sentiment.’
‘Given	the	course	you	have	chosen	for	our	people,	Emperor,	mercy	is	a
notion	dangerous	to	entertain.	You	can	be	certain	that	none	will	be	accorded
us.’
Another	spasm	afflicted	Rhulad,	such	as	the	one	Udinaas	had	witnessed
earlier.	He	thought	he	understood	its	source.	A	thousand	bindings	held	together
Rhulad’s	sanity,	but	madness	was	assailing	that	sanity,	and	the	defences	were
buckling.	Not	long	ago,	no	more	than	the	youngest	son	of	a	noble	family,
strutting	the	village	but	not	yet	blooded.	In	his	mind,	panoramic	visions	of
glory	swinging	in	a	slow	turn	round	the	place	where	he	stood.	The	visions	of	a
youth,	crowded	with	imagined	scenarios	wherein	Rhulad	could	freely	exercise
his	own	certainty,	and	so	prove	the	righteousness	of	his	will.
And	now	that	boy	sat	on	the	Edur	throne.
He	just	had	to	die	to	get	there.
The	sudden	manifestation	of	glory	still	fed	him,	enough	to	shape	his	words
and	thoughts	and	feed	his	imperial	comportment,	as	if	the	royal	‘we’	was
something	to	which	he	had	been	born.	But	this	was	at	the	barest	edge	of


control.	An	imperfect	façade,	bolstered	by	elaborately	constructed	speech
patterns,	a	kind	of	awkward	articulation	that	suited	Rhulad’s	childlike	notions
of	how	an	emperor	should	speak.	These	were	games	of	persuasion,	as	much	to
himself	as	to	his	audience.
But,	Udinaas	was	certain,	other	thoughts	remained	in	Rhulad’s	mind,
gnawing	at	the	roots	and	crawling	like	pallid	worms	through	his	necrotic	soul.
For	all	the	glittering	gold,	the	flesh	beneath	was	twisted	and	scarred.	To
fashion	the	façade,	all	that	lay	beneath	it	had	been	malformed.
The	slave	registered	all	this	in	the	span	of	Rhulad’s	momentary	spasm,	and
was	unmoved.	His	gaze	drifted	to	Mayen,	but	she	gave	nothing	away,	not	even
an	awareness	of	her	husband’s	sudden	extremity.
Across	Hannan	Mosag’s	face,	however,	Udinaas	saw	a	flash	of	fear,
quickly	buried	beneath	a	bland	regard.
A	moment’s	consideration	and	Udinaas	thought	he	understood	that
reaction.	Hannan	Mosag	needed	his	emperor	to	be	sane	and	in	control.	Even
power	unveiled	could	not	have	forced	him	to	kneel	before	a	madman.
Probably,	the	once-Warlock	King	also	comprehended	that	a	struggle	was	under
way	within	Rhulad,	and	had	resolved	to	give	what	aid	he	could	to	the
emperor ’s	rational	side.
And	should	the	battle	be	lost,	should	Rhulad	descend	completely	into
insanity,	what	would	Hannan	Mosag	do	then?
The	Letherii	slave’s	eyes	shifted	to	the	sword	the	emperor	held	like	a
sceptre	in	his	right	hand,	the	point	anchored	on	the	dais	near	the	throne’s
ornate	foot.	The	answer	hides	in	that	sword,	and	Hannan	Mosag	knows	far	more
about	that	weapon—and	its	maker—than	he	has	revealed.
Then	again,	I	do	as	well.	Wither,	the	shadow	wraith	that	had	adopted
Udinaas,	had	whispered	some	truths.	The	sword’s	power	had	given	Rhulad
command	of	the	wraiths.	The	Tiste	Andii	spirits.
Wither	had	somehow	avoided	the	summons,	announcing	its	victory	with	a
melodramatic	chuckle	rolling	through	the	slave’s	head,	and	the	wraith’s
presence	now	danced	with	exaggerated	glee	in	the	Letherii’s	mind.	Witness	to
all	through	his	eyes.
‘Emperor,’	Hannan	Mosag	said	as	soon	as	Rhulad	had	visibly	regained
himself,	‘the	warlocks	among	the	Arapay—’
‘Yes.	They	are	not	to	resist.	They	are	to	give	welcome.’
‘And	the	Nerek	you	have	claimed	from	the	merchant?’
‘A	different	consideration.’	Momentary	unease	in	Rhulad’s	dark	eyes.
‘They	are	not	to	be	disturbed.	They	are	to	be	respected.’
‘Their	hearth	and	the	surrounding	area	has	seen	sanctification,’	Hannan


Mosag	said,	nodding.	‘Of	course	that	must	be	respected.	But	I	have	sensed	little
power	from	that	blessing.’
‘Do	not	let	that	deceive	you.	The	spirits	they	worship	are	the	oldest	this
world	has	known.	Those	spirits	do	not	manifest	in	ways	we	might	easily
recognize.’
‘Ah.	Emperor,	you	have	been	gifted	with	knowledge	I	do	not	possess.’
‘Yes,	Hannan	Mosag,	I	have.	We	must	exercise	all	caution	with	the	Nerek.	I
have	no	desire	to	see	the	rising	of	those	spirits.’
The	once-Warlock	King	was	frowning.	‘The	Letherii	sorcerors	had	little
difficulty	negating—even	eradicating—the	power	of	those	spirits.	Else	the
Nerek	would	not	have	crumbled	so	quickly.’
‘The	weakness	the	Letherii	exploited	was	found	in	the	mortal	Nerek,	not	in
the	spirits	they	worshipped.	It	is	our	belief	now,	Hannan	Mosag,	that	the	Eres’al
was	not	truly	awakened.	She	did	not	rise	to	defend	those	who	worshipped	her.’
‘Yet	something	has	changed.’
Rhulad	nodded.	‘Something	has.’	He	glanced	up	at	Mayen.	‘Begun	with	the
blessing	of	the	Edur	woman	who	is	now	my	wife.’
She	flinched	and	would	meet	neither	Rhulad’s	nor	Hannan	Mosag’s	eyes.
The	emperor	shrugged.	‘It	is	done.	Need	we	be	concerned?	No.	Not	yet.
Perhaps	never.	None	the	less,	we	had	best	remain	cautious.’
Udinaas	resisted	the	impulse	to	laugh.	Caution,	born	of	fear.	It	was	pleasing
to	know	that	the	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur	could	still	be	afflicted	with	that
emotion.	Then	again,	perhaps	I	have	read	Rhulad	wrongly.	Perhaps	fear	is	at
the	core	of	the	monster	he	has	become.	Did	it	matter?	Only	if	Udinaas
endeavoured	to	entertain	the	game	of	prediction.
Was	it	worth	the	effort?
‘The	Den-Ratha	are	west	of	Breed	Bay,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘The	Merude
can	see	the	smoke	of	their	villages.’
‘How	many	are	coming	by	sea?’
‘About	eight	thousand.	Every	ship.	Most	of	them	are	warriors,	of	course.
The	rest	travel	overland	and	the	first	groups	have	already	reached	the	Sollanta
border.’
‘Supplies?’	the	emperor	asked.
‘Sufficient	for	the	journey.’
‘And	nothing	is	being	left	behind?’
‘Naught	but	ashes,	sire.’
‘Good.’
Udinaas	watched	Hannan	Mosag	hesitate,	then	say,	‘It	is	already	begun.
There	is	no	going	back	now.’


‘You	have	no	reason	to	fret,’	Rhulad	replied.	‘I	have	already	sent	wraiths	to
the	borderlands.	They	watch.	Soon,	they	will	cross	over,	into	Lether.’
‘The	Ceda’s	frontier	sorcerors	will	find	them.’
‘Eventually,	but	the	wraiths	will	not	engage.	Merely	flee.	I	have	no	wish	to
show	their	power	yet.	I	mean	to	encourage	overconfidence.’
The	two	Edur	continued	discussing	strategies.	Udinaas	listened,	just	one
more	wraith	in	the	gloom.
	
Trull	Sengar	watched	his	father	rebuilding,	with	meticulous	determination,	a
kind	of	faith.	Stringing	together	words	spoken	aloud	yet	clearly	meant	for
himself,	whilst	his	wife	looked	on	with	the	face	of	an	old,	broken	woman.
Death	had	arrived,	only	to	be	shattered	by	a	ghastly	reprise,	a	revivification
that	offered	nothing	worth	rejoicing	in.	A	king	had	been	cast	down,	an	emperor
risen	in	his	place.	The	world	was	knocked	askew,	and	Trull	found	himself
detached,	numb,	witness	to	these	painful,	tortured	scenes	in	which	the
innumerable	facets	of	reconciliation	were	being	attempted,	resulting	in
exhausted	silences	in	which	tensions	slowly	returned,	whispering	of	failure.
They	had	one	and	all	knelt	before	their	new	emperor.	Brother	and	son,	the
kin	who	had	died	and	now	sat	bedecked	in	gold	coins.	A	voice	ravaged	yet
recognizable.	Eyes	that	belonged	to	one	they	had	all	once	known,	yet	now
looked	out	fevered	with	power	and	glazed	with	the	unhealed	wounds	of	horror.
Fear	had	given	up	his	betrothed.
A	terrible	thing	to	have	done.
Rhulad	had	demanded	her.	And	that	was…obscene.
Trull	had	never	felt	so	helpless	as	he	did	now.	He	pulled	his	gaze	from	his
father	and	looked	over	to	where	Binadas	stood	in	quiet	conversation	with	Hull
Beddict.	The	Letherii,	who	had	sworn	his	allegiance	to	Rhulad,	who	would
betray	his	own	people	in	the	war	that	Trull	knew	was	now	inevitable.	What	has
brought	us	all	to	this?	How	can	we	stop	this	inexorable	march?
‘Do	not	fight	this,	brother.’
Trull	looked	over	at	Fear,	seated	on	the	bench	beside	him.	‘Fight	what?’
His	brother ’s	expression	was	hard,	almost	angry.	‘He	carries	the	sword,
Trull.’
‘That	weapon	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	Tiste	Edur.	It	is	foreign,	and	it
seeks	to	make	its	wielder	into	our	god.	Father	Shadow	and	his	Daughters,	they
are	to	be	cast	aside?’
‘The	sword	is	naught	but	a	tool.	It	falls	to	us,	to	those	around	Rhulad,	to
hold	to	the	sanctity	of	our	beliefs,	to	maintain	that	structure	and	so	guide


Rhulad.’
Trull	stared	at	Fear.	‘He	stole	your	betrothed.’
‘Speak	of	that	again,	brother,	and	I	will	kill	you.’
His	eyes	flinched	away,	and	he	could	feel	the	thud	of	his	heart,	rapid	in	his
chest.	‘Rhulad	will	accept	no	guidance,	not	from	us,	Fear,	not	from	anyone.
That	sword	and	the	one	who	made	it	guide	him	now.	That,	and	madness.’
‘Madness	is	what	you	have	decided	to	see.’
Trull	grunted.	‘Perhaps	you	are	right.	Tell	me,	then,	what	you	see.’
‘Pain.’
And	that	is	something	you	share.	Trull	rubbed	at	his	face,	slowly	sighed.
‘Fight	this,	Fear?	There	was	never	a	chance.’	He	looked	over	again.	‘But	do
you	not	wonder?	Who	has	been	manipulating	us,	and	for	how	long?	You	called
that	sword	a	tool—are	we	any	different?’
‘We	are	Tiste	Edur.	We	ruled	an	entire	realm,	once.	We	crossed	swords
with	the	gods	of	this	world—’
‘And	lost.’
‘Were	betrayed.’
‘I	seem	to	recall	you	shared	our	mother ’s	doubts—’
‘I	was	mistaken.	Lured	into	weakness.	We	all	were.	But	we	must	now	cast
that	aside,	Trull.	Binadas	understands.	So	does	our	father.	Theradas	and	Midik
Buhn	as	well,	and	those	whom	the	emperor	has	proclaimed	his	brothers	of
blood.	Choram	Irard,	Kholb	Harat	and	Matra	Brith—’
‘His	unblooded	friends	of	old,’	Trull	cut	in,	with	a	wry	smile.	‘The	three	he
always	defeated	in	contests	with	sword	and	spear.	Them	and	Midik.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘They	have	earned	nothing,	Fear.	And	no	amount	of	proclaiming	can
change	that.	Yet	Rhulad	would	have	us	take	orders	from	those—’
‘Not	us.	We	too	are	brothers	of	blood,	you	forget.	And	I	still	command	the
warriors	of	the	six	tribes.’
‘And	how	do	you	think	the	other	noble	warriors	feel?	They	have	all
followed	the	time-honoured	path	of	blooding	and	worthy	deeds	in	battle.	They
now	find	themselves	usurped—’
‘The	first	warrior	under	my	command	who	complains	will	know	the	edge
of	my	sword.’
‘That	edge	may	grow	dull	and	notched.’
‘No.	There	will	be	no	rebellion.’
After	a	moment,	Trull	nodded.	‘You	are	probably	right,	and	that	is	perhaps
the	most	depressing	truth	yet	spoken	this	day.’
Fear	stood.	‘You	are	my	brother,	Trull,	and	a	man	I	admire.	But	you	walk


close	to	treason	with	your	words.	Were	you	anyone	else	I	would	have	silenced
you	by	now.	With	finality.	No	more,	Trull.	We	are	an	empire	now.	An	empire
reborn.	And	war	awaits	us.	And	so	I	must	know—will	you	fight	at	the	sides	of
your	brothers?’
Trull	leaned	his	back	against	the	rough	wall.	He	studied	Fear	for	a
moment,	then	asked,	‘Have	I	ever	done	otherwise?’
His	brother ’s	expression	softened.	‘No,	you	have	not.	You	saved	us	all
when	we	returned	from	the	ice	wastes,	and	that	is	a	deed	all	now	know,	and	so
they	look	upon	you	with	admiration	and	awe.	By	the	same	token,	Trull,	they
look	to	you	for	guidance.	There	are	many	who	will	find	their	decisions	by
observing	your	reaction	to	what	has	happened.	If	they	see	doubt	in	your
eyes…’
‘They	will	see	nothing,	Fear.	Not	in	my	eyes.	Nor	will	they	find	cause	for
doubt	in	my	actions.’
‘I	am	relieved.	The	emperor	shall	be	calling	upon	us	soon.	His	brothers	of
blood.’
Trull	also	rose.	‘Very	well.	But	for	now,	brother,	I	feel	in	need	of	solitude.’
‘Will	that	prove	dangerous	company?’
If	it	does,	then	I	am	as	good	as	dead.	‘It	hasn’t	thus	far,	Fear.’

‘Leave	me	now,	Hannan	Mosag,’	the	emperor	said,	his	voice	revealing	sudden
exhaustion.	‘And	take	the	K’risnan	with	you.	Everyone,	go—not	you,	slave.
Mayen,	you	too,	wife.	Please	go.’
The	sudden	dismissal	caused	a	moment	of	confusion,	but	moments	later
the	chamber	was	vacated	barring	Rhulad	and	Udinaas.	To	the	slave’s	eyes,
Mayen’s	departure	looked	more	like	flight,	her	gait	stilted	as	if	driven	by	near
hysteria.
There	would	be	more	moments	like	this,	Udinaas	suspected.	Sudden	breaks
in	the	normal	proceedings.	And	so	he	was	not	surprised	when	Rhulad	beckoned
him	closer,	and	Udinaas	saw	in	the	emperor ’s	eyes	a	welling	of	anguish	and
terror.
‘Stand	close	by	me,	slave,’	Rhulad	gasped,	fierce	trembling	sweeping	over
him.	‘Remind	me!	Please!	Udinaas—’
The	slave	thought	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘You	died.	Your	body	was
dressed	for	honourable	burial	as	a	blooded	warrior	of	the	Hiroth.	Then	you
returned.	By	the	sword	now	in	your	hand,	you	returned	and	are	alive	once


more.’
‘Yes,	that	is	it.	Yes.’	A	laugh	that	rose	to	a	piercing	shriek,	stopping
abruptly	as	a	spasm	ripped	through	Rhulad.	He	gaped,	as	if	in	pain,	then
muttered,	‘The	wounds…’
‘Emperor?’
‘No	matter.	Just	the	memory.	Cold	iron	pushing	into	my	body.	Cold	fire.	I
tried.	I	tried	to	curl	up	around	those	wounds.	Up	tight,	to	protect	what	I	had
already	lost.	I	remember…’
Udinaas	was	silent.	Since	the	emperor	would	not	look	at	him,	he	was	free
to	observe.	And	arrive	at	conclusions.
The	young	should	not	die.	That	final	moment	belonged	to	the	aged.	Some
rules	should	never	be	broken,	and	whether	the	motivation	was	compassionate
or	coldly	calculated	hardly	mattered.	Rhulad	had	been	dead	too	long,	too	long
to	escape	some	kind	of	spiritual	damage.	If	the	emperor	was	to	be	a	tool,	then
he	was	a	flawed	one.
And	what	value	that?
‘We	are	imperfect.’
Udinaas	started,	said	nothing.
‘Do	you	understand	that,	Udinaas?’
‘Yes,	Emperor.’
‘How?	How	do	you	understand?’
‘I	am	a	slave.’
Rhulad	nodded.	His	left	hand,	gauntleted	in	gold,	lifted	to	join	his	right
where	it	gripped	the	handle	of	the	sword.	‘Yes,	of	course.	Yes.	Imperfect.	We
can	never	match	the	ideals	set	before	us.	That	is	the	burden	of	mortality.’	A
twisted	grimace.	‘Not	just	mortals.’	A	flicker	of	the	eyes,	momentarily	fixing
on	the	slave’s	own,	then	away	again.	‘He	whispers	in	my	mind.	He	tells	me
what	to	say.	He	makes	me	cleverer	than	I	am.	What	does	that	make	me,
Udinaas?	What	does	that	make	me?’
‘A	slave.’
‘But	I	am	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Yes,	Emperor.’
A	scowl.	‘The	gift	of	a	life	returned.’
‘You	are	Indebted.’
Rhulad	flinched	back	in	his	chair,	his	eyes	flashing	with	sudden	rage.	‘We
are	not	the	same,	slave!	Do	you	understand?	I	am	not	one	of	your	Indebted.	I
am	not	a	Letherii.’	Then	he	sagged	in	a	rustle	of	coins.	‘Daughter	take	me,	the
weight	of	this…’
‘I	am	sorry,	Emperor.	It	is	true.	You	are	not	an	Indebted.	Nor,	perhaps,	are


you	a	slave.	Although	perhaps	it	feels	that	way,	at	times.	When	exhaustion
assails	you.’
‘Yes,	that	is	it.	I	am	tired.	That’s	all.	Tired.’
Udinaas	hesitated,	then	asked,	‘Emperor,	does	he	speak	through	you	now?’
A	fragile	shake	of	the	head.	‘No.	But	he	does	not	speak	through	me.	He
only	whispers	advice,	helps	me	choose	my	words.	Orders	my	thoughts—but
the	thoughts	are	mine.	They	must	be.	I	am	not	a	fool.	I	possess	my	own
cleverness.	Yes,	that	is	it.	He	but	whispers	confidence.’
‘You	have	not	eaten,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Nor	drunk	anything.	Do	you	know
hunger	and	thirst,	Emperor?	Can	I	get	you	something	to	replenish	your
strength?’
‘Yes,	I	would	eat.	And…some	wine.	Find	a	servant.’
‘At	once,	master.’
Udinaas	walked	to	the	small	curtain	covering	the	entrance	to	the	passage
that	led	to	the	kitchens.	He	found	a	servant	huddled	in	the	corridor	a	dozen
paces	from	the	door.	Terrified	eyes	glistened	up	at	him	as	he	approached.	‘On
your	feet,	Virrick.	The	emperor	wants	wine.	And	food.
‘The	god	would	eat?’
‘He’s	not	a	god.	Food	and	drink,	Virrick.	Fit	for	an	emperor,	and	be	quick
about	it.’
The	servant	scrambled	up,	seemed	about	to	bolt.
‘You	know	how	to	do	this,’	Udinaas	said	in	a	calm	voice,	‘It’s	what	you
have	been	trained	to	do.’
‘I	am	frightened—’
‘Listen	to	me.	I	will	tell	you	a	secret.	You	always	like	secrets,	don’t	you,
Virrick?’
A	tentative	nod.
‘It	is	this,’	Udinaas	said.	‘We	slaves	have	no	reason	to	fear.	It	is	the	Edur
who	have	reason,	and	that	gives	us	leave	to	continue	laughing	behind	their
backs.	Remember	doing	that,	Virrick?	It’s	your	favourite	game.’
‘I—I	remember,	Udinaas.’
‘Good.	Now	go	into	the	kitchens	and	show	the	others.	You	know	the	secret,
now.	Show	them,	and	they	will	follow.	Food,	and	wine.	When	you	are	ready,
bring	it	to	the	curtain	and	give	the	low	whistle,	as	you	would	do	normally.
Virrick,	we	need	things	to	return	to	normal,	do	you	understand?	And	that	task
falls	to	us,	the	slaves.’
‘Feather	Witch	ran—’
‘Feather	Witch	is	young,	and	what	she	did	was	wrong.	I	have	spoken	to	her
and	shall	do	so	again.’


‘Yes,	Udinaas.	You	are	the	emperor ’s	slave.	You	have	the	right	of	it;	there
is	much	wisdom	in	your	words.	I	think	we	will	listen	to	you,	Indebted	though
you	are.	You	have	been…elevated.’	He	nodded.	‘Feather	Witch	failed	us—’
‘Do	not	be	so	harsh	on	her,	Virrick.	Now,	go.’
He	watched	the	servant	hurry	off	down	the	corridor,	then	Udinaas	swung
about	and	returned	to	the	throne	chamber.
‘What	took	you	so	long?’	Rhulad	demanded	in	near	panic.	‘I	heard	voices.’
‘I	was	informing	Virrick	of	your	requirements,	Emperor.
‘You	are	too	slow.	You	must	be	quicker,	slave.’
‘I	shall,	master.’
‘Everyone	must	be	told	what	to	do.	No-one	seems	capable	of	thinking	for
themselves.’
Udinaas	said	nothing,	and	did	not	dare	smile	even	as	the	obvious
observation	drifted	through	his	mind.
‘You	are	useful	to	us,	slave.	We	will	need…reminding…again.	At
unexpected	times.	And	that	is	what	shall	you	do	for	us.	That,	and	food	and
drink	at	proper	times.’
‘Yes,	master.’
‘Now,	stand	in	attendance,	whilst	we	rest	our	eyes	for	a	time.’
‘Of	course,	master.’
He	stood,	waiting,	watching,	a	dozen	paces	away.
The	distance	between	emperor	and	slave.
	
As	he	made	his	way	onto	the	bridge,	Trull	Sengar	saw	the	Acquitor.	She	was
standing	midway	across	the	bridge,	motionless	as	a	frightened	deer,	her	gaze
fixed	on	the	main	road	leading	through	the	village.	Trull	could	not	see	what
had	snared	her	attention.
He	hesitated.	Then	her	head	turned	and	he	met	her	eyes.
There	were	no	words	for	what	passed	between	them	at	that	instant.	A	gaze
that	began	searchingly,	then	swiftly	and	ineffably	transformed	into	something
else.	That	locked	contact	was	mutually	broken	in	the	next	moment,	instinctive
reactions	from	them	both.
In	the	awkward	wake,	nothing	was	said	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	Trull
found	himself	struggling	against	a	sense	of	vast	emptiness	deep	in	his	chest.
Seren	Pedac	spoke	first.	‘Is	there	no	room	left,	Trull	Sengar?’
And	he	understood.	‘No,	Acquitor.	No	room	left.’
‘I	think	you	would	have	it	otherwise,	wouldn’t	you?’
The	question	brushed	too	close	to	the	wordless	recognition	they	had


shared	only	a	few	moments	earlier,	and	he	saw	once	again	in	her	eyes	a	flicker
of…something.	He	mentally	recoiled	from	an	honest	reply.	‘I	serve	my
emperor.’
The	flicker	vanished,	replaced	by	a	cool	regard	that	slipped	effortlessly
through	his	defences,	driving	like	a	knife	into	his	chest.	‘Of	course.	Forgive
me.	It	is	too	late	for	questions	like	that.	I	must	be	leaving	now,	to	escort	Buruk
the	Pale	back	to	Trate.’
Each	word	a	twist	of	that	knife,	despite	their	being	seemingly	innocuous.
He	did	not	understand	how	they—and	the	look	in	her	eyes—could	hurt	him	so
deeply,	and	he	wanted	to	cry	out.	Denials.	Confessions.	Instead	he	punctuated
the	break	of	that	empathy	with	a	damning	shrug.	‘Journey	well,	Acquitor.’
Nothing	more,	and	he	knew	himself	for	a	coward.
He	watched	her	walk	away.	Thinking	on	his	life’s	journey	as	much	as	the
Acquitor ’s,	on	the	stumbles	that	occurred,	with	no	awareness	of	their	potential
for	profundity.	Balance	reacquired,	but	the	path	had	changed.
So	many	choices	proved	irrevocable.	Trull	wondered	if	this	one	would	as
well.


Chapter	Fourteen

Where	is	the	darkness
In	the	days	gone	past
When	the	sun	bathed	everything
In	godling	light
And	we	were	burnished	bright
In	our	youthful	ascendancy
Delighted	shrieks	and
Distant	laughter
Carried	on	the	gilden	stream
Of	days	that	did	not	pause
For	night	with	every	shadow
Burned	through
By	immortal	fire
Where	then	is	the	darkness
Arrived	at	sun’s	death
Arrived	creeping	and	low
To	growl	revelations
Of	the	torrid	descent
That	drags	us	down
Onto	this	moment.
IMMORTAL	FIRE
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
A	voice	spoke	from	the	darkness.	‘I	wouldn’t	go	down	that	street,	old	man.’
Bugg	glanced	over.	‘I	thank	you	for	the	warning,’	he	replied,	walking	on.
Ten	paces	into	the	narrow	alley	he	could	smell	spilled	blood.	Footsteps
behind	him	told	him	the	look-out	had	moved	into	his	wake,	presumably	to
block	his	avenue	of	retreat.
‘I	warned	you.’
‘I’m	the	one	you	sent	for,’	Bugg	said.


Four	more	figures	appeared	from	the	gloom	in	front	of	him,	cut-throats
one	and	all.	They	looked	frightened.
The	look-out	came	round	and	stepped	close	to	peer	at	Bugg’s	face.	‘You’re
the	Waiting	Man?	You	ain’t	what	I	’spected.’
‘What	has	happened	here?	Who’s	dead	and	who	killed	him?’
‘Not	“who”	killed	’im,’	one	of	the	four	standing	before	Bugg	muttered.
‘More	like	“what”.	An’	we	don’t	know.	Only	it	was	big,	skin	black	as	canal
water,	with	spikes	on	its	arms.	Eyes	like	a	snake’s,	glowing	grey.’
Bugg	sniffed	the	air,	seeking	something	beyond	the	blood.
‘It	ripped	Strong	Rall	to	pieces,	it	did,	then	went	into	that	building.’
The	manservant	swung	his	gaze	to	where	the	man	pointed.	A	derelict
temple,	sunken	down	at	one	corner,	the	peaked	roof	tilted	sharply	on	that	side.
Bugg	grunted.	‘That	was	the	last	temple	of	the	Fulcra,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Don’t	ask	us.’
‘That	cult’s	been	dead	a	hundred	years	at	least,’	the	manservant	continued,
scowling	at	the	dilapidated	structure.	The	entranceway,	wide	and	gaping,
capped	in	a	solid	lintel	stone,	was	once	three	steps	higher	than	street	level.
Back	when	this	alley	had	been	a	street.	He	could	just	make	out	the	right	corner
of	the	top	step.	There	seemed	to	be	a	heap	of	rubbish	piled	up	just	within,
recently	disturbed.	Bugg	glanced	back	at	the	five	thugs.	‘What	were	you	doing
skulking	around	here,	anyway?’
An	exchange	of	looks,	then	the	look-out	shrugged.	‘We	was	hiding.’
‘Hiding?’
‘This	little	girl…well,	uh…’
‘Ah.	Right.’	Bugg	faced	the	entrance	once	again.
‘Hold	on,	old	man,’	the	man	said.	‘You	ain’t	goin’	in	there,	are	you?’
‘Well,	why	else	did	you	call	for	me?’
‘We	expected	you	to,	uh,	to	get	the	city	guards	or	something.	Maybe	a
mage	or	three.’
‘I	might	well	do	that.	But	first,	better	to	know	what	we’re	dealing	with.’
Bugg	then	clambered	into	the	ruined	temple.	Thick,	damp	air	and	profound
darkness.	A	smell	of	freshly	turned	earth,	and	then,	faintly,	the	sound	of
breathing.	Slow	and	deep.	The	manservant	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	source	of	that
sound.	‘All	right,’	he	said	in	a	murmur,	‘it’s	been	some	time	since	you	last
breathed	the	night	air.	But	that	doesn’t	give	you	the	right	to	kill	a	hapless
mortal,	does	it?’
A	massive	shape	shuffled	to	one	side	near	the	far	wall.	‘Don’t	hurt	me.	I’m
not	going	back.	They’re	killing	everyone.’
Bugg	sighed.	‘You’ll	have	to	do	better	than	that.’


The	shape	seemed	to	break	apart,	and	the	manservant	saw	motion,	fanning
out.	At	least	six	new,	smaller	forms,	each	low	and	long.	The	gleam	of	reptilian
eyes	fixed	on	him	from	all	along	the	back	wall.
‘So	that	is	why	you	chose	this	temple,’	Bugg	said.	‘Alas,	your	worshippers
are	long	gone.’
‘You	may	think	so.’	A	half-dozen	voices	now,	a	whispered	chorus.	‘But	you
are	wrong.’
‘Why	did	you	kill	that	mortal?’
‘He	was	blocking	the	doorway.’
‘So,	now	that	you’re	here…’
‘I	will	wait.’
Bugg	considered	this,	and	the	implications	inherent	in	that	statement.	He
slowly	frowned.	‘Very	well.	But	no	more	killing.	Stay	in	here.’
‘I	will	agree	to	that.	For	now.’
‘Until	what	you’re	waiting	for…arrives.’
‘Yes.	Then	we	shall	hunt.’
Bugg	turned	away.	‘That’s	what	you	think,’	he	said	under	his	breath.
He	reappeared	outside	the	temple.	Studied	the	five	terrified	faces	in	the
gloom.	‘Spread	the	word	that	no-one	is	to	enter	that	temple.’
‘That’s	it?	What	about	the	guards?	The	mages?	What	about	Strong	Rall?’
‘Well,	if	you’re	interested	in	vengeance,	I	suggest	you	find	a	few	thousand
friends	first.	There	will	be	a	reckoning,	eventually.’
The	look-out	snorted.	‘The	Waiting	Man	wants	us	to	wait.’
Bugg	shrugged.	‘The	best	I	can	do.	To	oust	this	beast,	the	Ceda	himself
would	have	to	come	down	here.’
‘So	send	for	him!’
‘I’m	afraid	I	don’t	possess	that	sort	of	clout.	Go	home,	all	of	you.’
Bugg	moved	past	them	and	made	his	way	down	the	alley.	Things	were
getting	decidedly	complicated.	And	that	was	never	good.	He	wondered	how
many	more	creatures	were	escaping	the	barrows.	From	the	Pack’s	words,	not
many.	Which	was	a	relief.
Even	so,	he	decided,	he’d	better	see	for	himself.	The	rendezvous	awaiting
him	would	have	to	wait	a	little	longer.	That	would	likely	earn	him	an	earful,
but	it	couldn’t	be	helped.	The	Seventh	Closure	was	shaping	up	to	be	eventful.
He	wondered	if	that	prophecy,	of	empire	reborn,	was	in	some	way	linked	to	the
death	of	the	Azath	tower.	He	hoped	not.
The	night	was	surprisingly	quiet.	The	usual	crowds	that	appeared	once	the
day’s	heat	was	past	were	virtually	absent	as	Bugg	made	his	way	down	the
length	of	Quillas	Canal.	He	came	within	sight	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.	Well,	he


reminded	himself,	at	least	that	had	been	a	success.	The	Royal	Engineer,	aptly
named	Grum,	had	been	a	reluctant,	envious	deliverer	of	a	royal	contract,
specifying	Bugg’s	Construction	to	assume	control	of	shoring	up	the
compromised	wings	of	the	new	palace.	He	had	been	even	less	pleased	when
Bugg	ordered	the	old	crews	to	vacate,	taking	their	equipment	with	them.	Bugg
had	then	spent	most	of	the	following	day	wading	flooded	tunnels,	just	to	get	a
feel	of	the	magnitude	of	the	task	ahead.
True	to	Tehol’s	prediction,	Bugg’s	modest	company	was	climbing	in	the
Tolls,	frighteningly	fast.	Since	the	list	of	shares	was	sealed,	Bugg	had	managed
to	sell	four	thousand	and	twenty-two	per	cent	of	shares,	and	still	hold	a
controlling	interest.	Of	course,	he’d	be	headlining	the	Drownings	if	the	deceit
was	ever	discovered.	‘But	I’m	prepared	to	take	that	risk,’	Tehol	had	said	with	a
broad	smile.	Funny	man,	his	master.
Nearing	the	old	palace,	then	into	the	wending	alleyways	and	forgotten
streets	behind	it.	This	part	of	the	city	seemed	virtually	lifeless,	no-one
venturing	outside.	Stray	dogs	paused	in	their	scavenging	to	watch	him	pass.
Rats	scurried	from	his	path.
He	reached	the	wall	of	the	square	tower,	walked	along	it	until	he	was	at	the
gateway.	A	pause,	during	which	he	wilfully	suppressed	his	nervousness	at
entering	the	grounds.	The	Azath	was	dead,	after	all.	Taking	a	deep	breath	and
letting	it	out	slowly,	he	strode	forward.
The	barrows	to	either	side	were	strangely	crumpled,	but	he	could	see	no
gaping	holes.	Yet.	He	left	the	path.	Insects	bunched	or	squirmed	underfoot.	The
tufts	of	grass	looked	macerated	and	were	crawling	with	life.
Bugg	arrived	at	one	barrow	where	the	near	side	was	gone,	in	its	place	a
black	pit	across	which	was	the	toppled	bole	of	a	dead	tree.	There	was	the	sound
of	scrabbling	from	within.
Then	Kettle	clambered	into	view.	Clumps	of	white	worms	writhed	in	her
straggly,	matted	hair,	rode	seething	on	her	shoulders.	She	pulled	herself	up
using	a	branch	of	the	tree,	then	paused	to	brush	the	worms	off,	the	gesture
dainty	and	oddly	affecting.	‘It’s	gone,’	she	said.	‘Uncle	Bugg,	this	one’s	gone.’
‘I	know.’
‘I	didn’t	see	it.	I	should	have	seen	it.’
He	shook	his	head.	‘It	is	very	stealthy,	Kettle.	And	fast.	All	it	needed	was	a
moment	when	your	back	was	turned.	A	single	moment,	no	more.	In	any	case,
I’ve	met	it,	and,	for	now	at	least,	it	won’t	be	bothering	anyone.’
‘Nothing’s	working,	Uncle	Bugg.	I	need	the	one	below.	I	need	to	get	him
out.’
‘What	is	impeding	him,	do	you	know?’


She	shook	her	head,	the	motion	shedding	more	worms.	‘At	least	he’s	got
swords	now.	Uncle	Brys	brought	them.	I	pushed	them	into	the	barrow.’
‘Brys	Beddict?	Lass,	you	are	finding	worthy	allies.	Has	the	Ceda	visited?’
‘I	don’t	know	any	Ceda.’
‘I	am	surprised	by	that.	He	should	come	soon,	once	he	finds	out	about
you.’
‘Me?’
‘Well,	more	specifically,	your	heart.’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘I	hear	thumps.	In	my	chest.	Is	that	my	heart?’
‘Yes.	How	often	are	the	thumps	coming?’
‘Maybe	eight	a	day.	Now.	Before,	maybe	four.	To	start,	once.	Loud,	hurting
my	head.’
‘Hurting?	You	are	feeling	pain,	lass?’
‘Not	so	much	any	more.	Aches.	Twinges.	That’s	how	I	know	something’s
wrong	with	me.	Used	to	be	I	didn’t	feel	anything.’
Bugg	ran	a	hand	through	his	thinning	hair.	He	looked	up,	studied	the	night
sky.	Cloud-covered,	but	the	clouds	were	high,	flat	and	unwrinkled,	a	worn
blanket	through	which	stars	could	be	seen	here	and	there.	He	sighed.	‘All	right,
lass,	show	me	where	you	buried	the	swords.’
He	followed	her	to	a	barrow	closer	to	the	tower.
‘He’s	in	this	one.’
But	the	manservant’s	gaze	was	drawn	to	an	identical	barrow	beside	the	one
she	indicated.	‘Now,	who	does	that	one	belong	to,	I	wonder.’
‘She’s	always	promising	me	things.	Rewards.	The	five	who	are	killing	all
the	others	won’t	go	near	her.	Sometimes,	her	anger	burns	in	my	head	like	fire.
She’s	very	angry,	but	not	at	me,	she	says.	Those	bitches,	she	says,	and	that	tells
me	she’s	sleeping,	because	she	only	says	that	when	she’s	sleeping.	When	she’s
awake,	she	whispers	nice	things	to	me.’
Bugg	was	slowly	nodding.	‘It	sounds	absurd,’	he	said,	mostly	to	himself.
‘Absurd	and	mundane.’
‘What	does,	Uncle?’
‘She’s	got	him	by	the	ankles.	I	know.	It’s	ridiculous,	but	that’s	why	he’s
having	trouble	getting	out.	She’s	got	him	by	the	ankles.’
‘To	keep	him	where	he	is?’
‘No.	To	make	sure	she	follows	him	out.’
‘She’s	cheating!’
Despite	his	unease,	Bugg	smiled.	‘So	she	is,	lass.	Of	course,	she	may	only
end	up	keeping	both	of	them	trapped.’
‘Oh	no,	he’s	got	the	swords	now.	He	just	has	to	work	them	down.	That’s


what	he	said.	I	didn’t	understand	before,	but	I	do	now.	He	said	he	was	going	to
do	some	sawing.’
Bugg	winced.
Then	he	frowned.	‘The	five,	how	close	are	they	to	escaping?’
Kettle	shrugged.	‘They’ve	killed	most	everything	else.	I	don’t	know.	Soon,
I	guess.	They	are	going	to	do	terrible	things	to	me,	they	say.’
‘Be	sure	to	call	for	help	before	they	get	out.’
‘I	will.’
‘I	have	to	be	going	now.’
‘Okay.	Goodbye,	Uncle.’
	
Awakened	by	one	of	the	Preda’s	corporals,	Brys	quickly	dressed	and	followed
the	young	soldier	to	the	Campaigns	Room,	where	he	found	King	Ezgara
Diskanar,	the	Ceda,	Unnutal	Hebaz	and	the	First	Concubine	Nisall.	The	king
and	his	mistress	stood	at	one	side	of	a	map	table,	opposite	the	Preda.	Kuru	Qan
paced	a	circle	around	the	entire	ensemble,	removing	his	strange	eye-lenses	for
a	polish	every	now	and	then.
‘Finadd,’	Unnutal	Hebaz	said,	‘join	us,	please.’
‘What	has	happened?’	Brys	asked.
‘We	are,	it	seems,	at	war,’	the	Preda	replied.	‘I	am	about	to	inform	the	king
of	the	disposition	of	our	forces	at	present.’
‘I	apologize	for	interrupting,	Preda.’
Ezgara	Diskanar	waved	a	hand.	‘I	wanted	you	here,	Brys.	Now,	Unnutal,
proceed.’
‘Divisions,	battalions	and	brigades,’	she	said.	‘And	garrisons.	Our	land
forces.	I	will	speak	of	the	fleets	later.	Thus,	from	west	to	east	along	the	frontier.
On	the	Reach.	First	Maiden	Fort,	its	defences	still	under	construction	and
nowhere	near	complete.	I	have	judged	it	indefensible	and	so	am	sending	the
garrison	to	reinforce	Fent	Reach.	Second	Maiden	Fort	has	a	garrison	of	six
hundred	indicted	soldiers	presently	being	retrained.	The	island	is	a	penal
fortress,	as	you	know.	The	willingness	of	the	prisoners	to	fight	is	of	course
problematic.	None	the	less,	I	would	suggest	we	leave	them	there.	Third	Maiden
Fort	will	remain	active,	but	with	a	nominal	presence,	there	to	act	as	forward
observers	should	an	Edur	fleet	round	the	island	and	make	for	the	city	of	Awl.’
‘Where	we	have	an	army,’	the	king	said.
‘Yes,	sire.	The	Snakebelt	Battalion,	stationed	in	the	city.	The	Crimson
Rampant	Brigade	is	in	Tulamesh	down	the	coast.	Now,	eastward	from	the
Reach,	the	port	of	Trate	Cold	Clay	Battalion	and	the	Trate	Legion,	with	the


River	Brigade	and	the	Katter	Legion	down	in	Old	Katter.	High	Fort	has,	in
addition	to	its	rotating	garrison	forces,	the	Grass	Jackets	Brigade.	Normally,
we	would	have	the	Whitefinder	Battalion	there	as	well,	but	they	are	presently
conducting	exercises	outside	First	Reach.	They	will	of	course	be	moving	north
immediately.
‘Further	east,	the	situation	is	more	satisfactory.	At	Fort	Shake	is	the
Harridict	Brigade,	with	the	Artisan	Battalion	encamped	outside	the	Manse—
more	exercises.’
‘How	long	will	it	take	the	Whitefinders	to	reach	High	Fort?’	the	king
asked.
‘Reach	and	Thetil	Roads	are	in	good	repair,	sire.	Five	days.	They	leave
tomorrow.	I	would	emphasize	again,	the	Ceda’s	mages	are	a	major	tactical
advantage.	Our	communications	are	instantaneous.’
‘But	I	want	something	more,’	Ezgara	said	in	a	growl.	‘I	want	something
preemptive,	Preda.	I	want	them	to	change	their	minds	on	this	damned	war.’
Unnutal	slowly	turned	to	catch	Kuru	Qan	with	her	gaze.	‘Ceda?’
‘Relevant?	Less	than	we	would	hope.	You	want	their	villages	struck?	Those
just	beyond	the	mountains?	Very	well.’
‘How	soon	can	you	arrange	it?’	the	king	asked.
‘The	cadre	in	Trate	is	assembling,	sire.	Dawn,	three	days	from	now.’
‘Pray	to	the	Errant	that	it	dissuades	them.’	The	king	managed	a	wry	grin	as
he	watched	the	Ceda	resume	his	pacing.	‘But	you	are	not	confident	that	it	will,
are	you,	Kuru	Qan?’
‘I	am	not,	sire.	Fortunately,	I	do	not	believe	even	Hull	would	suspect	that
we	would	attack	the	Edur	villages.’
Brys	felt	his	blood	grow	cold.	‘Ceda?	Has	my	brother…?’
A	sorrowful	nod.	‘This	is	a	path	Hull	Beddict	has	been	walking	on	for	a
long	time.	No-one	here	is	surprised,	Finadd.’
Brys	swallowed,	then	struggled	to	speak.	‘I	would	have…thought…given
that	knowledge—’
‘That	he	would	have	been	assassinated?’	Ezgara	asked.	‘No,	Brys.	His
presence	is	to	our	tactical	advantage,	not	this	damned	upstart	emperor ’s.	We
are	well	aware	he	is	advising	the	Edur	on	our	manner	of	waging	war,	and	we
mean	to	make	use	of	that.’	The	king	paused,	looked	up.	‘Hull’s	actions	in	no
way	impugn	you	in	our	eyes,	Brys.	Be	assured	of	that.’
‘Thank	you,	sire.’	And	to	prove	your	word,	you	invite	me	to	this	meeting.	‘It
is	unfortunate	that	Nifadas	failed	in	his	mission.	What	do	we	know	of	this	new
“upstart”	emperor	you	mentioned?’
‘He	has	vast	magic	at	his	command,’	Kuru	Qan	replied	distractedly.	‘We


can	discern	little	more	than	that.’
The	First	Concubine	moved	from	the	king’s	side,	seemingly	distracted.
‘The	most	relevant	detail	for	us,’	Unnutal	Hebaz	added,	‘is	that	he	is	in
possession	of	absolute	loyalty	among	the	Edur	tribes.	And,	although	Hannan
Mosag	has	been	usurped,	the	Warlock	King	now	stands	at	the	emperor ’s	side	as
his	principal	adviser.’
Brys	was	startled	by	that.	‘The	Warlock	King	simply	stepped	aside?	That
is…extraordinary.’
The	Preda	nodded.	‘Sufficient	to	give	us	pause.	Our	forward	posts	have
reported	sightings	along	the	frontier.	Shadows	moving	at	night.’
‘The	wraiths,’	the	Ceda	said,	his	expression	souring.	‘We	have	dealt	with
them	before,	of	course,	and	effectively	so.	None	the	less,	they	are	an	irritant.’
‘Do	the	Tiste	Edur	have	sacred	sites?’	Nisall	asked	from	where	she	now
stood,	close	to	the	far	wall.	Faces	turned	towards	her.	Arms	crossed,	she
shrugged.	‘Sorcery	that	annihilates	those	sites	might	well	weaken	their	hold	on
these	wraiths.	Wasn’t	something	similar	done	to	the	Nerek	and	the	Tarthenal?’
The	Ceda	seemed	saddened	by	the	suggestion,	but	he	nodded	and	said,	‘An
interesting	notion,	First	Concubine.	The	Edur	are	very	secretive	regarding
their	sacred	sites.	Although	it	does	appear	to	be	the	case	that	the	very	ground
beneath	their	villages	is	sanctified.	Thus,	when	we	destroy	those	villages,	the
result	may	well	prove	more	profound	than	we	imagine.	This	is	a	relevant
consideration.	As	for	the	hidden	groves	and	such,	we	should	make	use	of	the
various	Acquitors	who	are	familiar	with	that	territory.’
‘How	soon	will	the	delegation	reach	the	Mouth	at	Gedry?’	Brys	asked	the
Preda.
She	nodded	towards	Kuru	Qan.	‘The	return	journey	is	being	hastened.	A
week,	no	more.’
Then	three	days	up	the	river	to	arrive	here.	The	war	would	be	well	under
way	by	then.	‘Sire,	may	I	ask	a	question	of	you?’
‘Of	course,	Brys.’
‘Where	is	the	Queen’s	Battalion?’
A	momentary	silence,	then	the	Preda	cleared	her	throat.	‘If	I	may,	sire…’
Thin-lipped,	the	king	nodded.
‘Finadd,	the	queen	has	taken	personal	command	of	her	forces,	along	with
the	Quillas	Brigade.	She	insists	on	independence	in	this	matter.	Accordingly,
we	are	not	factoring	those	assets	into	our	discussion.’
‘My	dear	wife	has	always	held	them	to	be	her	own,	private	army,’	Ezgara
Diskanar	said.	‘So	be	it.	Better	to	have	them	pursuing	her	ambitions	in	the	field
than	here	in	Letheras.’


‘That	being	said,’	Unnutal	Hebaz	added,	‘we	believe	they	are	less	than	a
league	south	of	High	Fort,	marching	northward	to	meet	the	Edur	in	the	pass.
Her	doctrine	seems	to	be	one	of	striking	first	and	striking	hard.	She	will	set	her
mages	to	clearing	the	wraiths	from	her	path,	which	will	no	doubt	be	telling
enough	to	eliminate	the	element	of	surprise.’
‘Is	she	leading	them	in	person?’
‘She	and	her	retinue	departed	four	days	ago,’	the	king	said.
Brys	thought	back	to	that	time.	‘The	royal	visit	to	her	keep	at	Dissent?’
‘That	was	the	pretext.’
‘Then	will	Prince	Quillas	make	an	effort	to	join	her?’
‘My	son	has	separated	his	ship	from	the	delegation	and	now	makes	for
Trate.’
‘To	what	extent,’	Brys	asked,	‘has	her	battalion	made	use	of	the	caches	in
the	region?’
‘Knowing	her,’	the	king	snapped,	‘she’s	damn	near	emptied	them.’
‘We	are	hastening	to	replace	the	depleted	stocks,’	Unnutal	Hebaz	said.
‘Obviously,	we	are	forced	to	adjust	our	tactics	as	a	consequence.	We	will	fight
defensively,	in	keeping	with	our	doctrine,	and,	yes,	the	Edur	will	be	expecting
that.	But	we	will	not	roll	back.	We	will	not	retreat.	Once	engaged,	we	intend	to
maintain	that	contact.	This	will	be,	I	believe,	a	brutal	war—perhaps	the	most
vicious	war	we	have	fought	since	conquering	Bluerose’s	League	of	Duchies.’
‘Now,’	the	king	said,	‘I	would	hear	details	on	the	defence	of	our	frontier
cities	and	the	Sea	of	Katter.	As	well,	the	disposition	of	the	fleets…’
Brys	found	the	words	that	followed	drifting	into	a	formless	murmur
somewhere	in	the	background.	He	was	thinking	of	his	brother,	marching	with
the	Tiste	Edur	to	wage	war	on	his	homeland.	On	the	kingdom	that	had	so
cruelly	betrayed	him.	The	queen	and	the	prince	would	want	him,	desperately…
or,	at	the	very	least,	his	head.	And	through	Hull’s	crimes,	they	would	seek	to
strike	at	Brys,	at	his	position	as	the	king’s	protector.	They	might	well	send
soldiers	to	round	up	Tehol	as	well,	on	some	fabricated	pretext.	The	added
pleasure	of	avenging	financial	losses	incurred	as	a	result	of	Tehol’s	brilliant
chaos.	They	would	in	fact,	waste	little	time.
Brys	needed	to	warn	Tehol.
	
The	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	Chief	Investigator	sat	at	a	courtyard	table	beneath
torchlight.	A	small	heap	of	delicate	bones	sat	in	the	centre	of	the	large	plate
before	her.	Within	reach	was	a	crystal	carafe	of	white	wine.	An	extra	goblet
waited	in	front	of	the	empty	chair	opposite	her.


‘You’re	not	Tehol,’	she	said	as	Bugg	arrived	and	sat	down.	‘Where’s	Tehol
and	his	immodest	trousers?’
‘Not	here,	alas,	Chief	Investigator,	but	you	can	be	certain	that,	wherever
they	are,	they	are	together.’
‘Ah,	so	he	has	meetings	with	people	more	important	than	me?	After	all,
were	he	sleeping,	he	would	not	be	wearing	the	trousers,	would	he?’
‘I	wouldn’t	know,	Rucket.	Now,	you	requested	this	meeting?’
‘With	Tehol.’
‘Ah,	so	this	was	to	be	romantic?’
She	sniffed	and	took	a	moment	to	glare	at	the	only	other	occupants	of	this
midnight	restaurant,	a	husband	and	wife	clearly	not	married	to	each	other	who
were	casting	suspicious	glances	their	way,	punctuated	with	close	leaning	heads
and	heated	whispers.	‘This	place	serves	a	specific	clientele,	damn	you.	What’s
your	name	again?’
‘Bugg.’
‘Oh	yes.	I	recall	being	unsurprised	the	first	time	it	was	mentioned.	Well,
you	kept	me	waiting,	you	little	worm,	and	what’s	that	smell?’
Bugg	withdrew	a	blackened,	wrinkled	strip,	flat	and	slightly	longer	than
his	hand.	‘I	found	an	eel	in	the	fish	market.	Thought	I’d	make	soup	for	myself
and	the	master.’
‘Our	financial	adviser	eats	discarded	eels?’
‘Frugality	is	a	virtue	among	financiers,	Chief	Investigator.’	He	tucked	the
dried	strip	back	into	his	shirt.	‘How	is	the	wine?	May	I?’
‘Well,	why	not?	Here,	care	to	pick	the	bones?’
‘Possibly.	What	was	it	originally?’
‘Cat,	of	course.’
‘Cat.	Oh	yes,	of	course.	Well,	I	never	liked	cats	anyway.	All	those	hair
balls.’	He	drew	the	plate	over	and	perused	it	to	see	what	was	left.
‘You	have	a	fascination	for	feline	genitalia?	That’s	disgusting,	although
I’ve	heard	worse.	One	of	our	minor	catchers	once	tried	to	marry	a	rat.	I	myself
possess	peculiar	interests,	I	freely	admit.’
‘That’s	nice,’	Bugg	said,	popping	a	vertebra	into	his	mouth	to	suck	out	the
marrow.
‘Well,	aren’t	you	curious?’
‘No,’	he	said	around	the	bone.	‘Should	I	be?’
Rucket	slowly	leaned	forward,	as	if	seeing	Bugg	for	the	first	time.	‘You…
interest	me	now.	I	freely	admit	it.	Do	you	want	to	know	why?’
‘Why	you	freely	admit	it?	All	right.’
‘I’m	a	very	open	person,	all	things	considered.’


‘Well,	I	am	considering	those	things,	and	so	consequently	admit	to	being
somewhat	surprised.’
‘That	doesn’t	surprise	me	in	the	least,	Bugg.	What	are	you	doing	later
tonight,	and	what’s	that	insect?	There,	on	your	shoulder?’
He	pulled	the	vertebra	out	and	reached	for	another.	‘It’s	of	the	two-headed
variety.	Very	rare,	for	what	I	imagine	are	obvious	reasons.	I	thought	my	master
would	like	to	see	it.’
‘So	you	permit	it	to	crawl	all	over	you?’
‘That	would	take	days.	It’s	managed	to	climb	from	halfway	up	my	arm	to
my	shoulder	and	that’s	taken	over	a	bell.’
‘What	a	pathetic	creature.’
‘I	suspect	it	has	difficulty	making	up	its	minds.’
‘You’re	being	funny,	aren’t	you?	I	have	a	thing	for	funny	people.	Why
don’t	you	come	home	with	me	after	you’ve	finished	here.’
‘Are	you	sure	you	don’t	have	any	business	to	discuss	with	me?	Perhaps
some	news	for	Tehol?’
‘Well,	there’s	a	murderous	little	girl	who’s	undead,	and	she’s	been	killing
lots	of	people,	although	less	so	lately.	And	Gerun	Eberict	has	been	far	busier
than	it	would	outwardly	seem.’
‘Indeed?	But	why	would	he	hide	that	fact?’
‘Because	the	killings	do	not	appear	to	be	politically	motivated.’
‘Oh?	Then	what	are	his	motivations?’
‘Hard	to	tell.	We	think	he	just	likes	killing	people.’
‘Well,	how	many	has	he	killed	this	past	year?’
‘Somewhere	between	two	and	three	thousand,	we	think.’
Bugg	reached	with	haste	for	his	goblet.	He	drank	the	wine	down,	then
coughed.	‘Errant	take	us!’
‘So,	are	you	coming	home	with	me	or	not?	I	have	this	cat-fur	rug—’
‘Alas,	my	dear,	I	have	taken	a	vow	of	celibacy.’
‘Since	when?’
‘Oh,	thousands	of	years…it	seems.’
‘I	am	not	surprised.	But	even	more	intrigued.’
‘Ah,	it’s	the	lure	of	the	unattainable.’
‘Are	you	truly	unattainable?’
‘Extraordinary,	but	yes,	I	am.’
‘What	a	terrible	loss	for	womanhood.’
‘Now	you	are	being	funny.’
‘No,	I	am	being	serious,	Bugg.	I	think	you	are	probably	a	wonderful
lover.’


‘Aye,’	he	drawled,	‘the	very	oceans	heaved.	Can	we	move	on	to	some	other
subject?	You	want	any	more	wine?	No?	Great.’	He	collected	the	carafe,	then
drew	a	flask	from	from	under	his	shirt	and	began	the	delicate	task	of	pouring
the	wine	into	it.
‘Is	that	for	your	eel	soup?’
‘Indeed.’
‘What	happens	now	that	I’ve	decided	to	like	you?	Not	just	like	you,	I	freely
admit,	but	lust	after	you,	Bugg.’
‘I	have	no	idea,	Rucket.	May	I	take	the	rest	of	these	scones?’
‘You	certainly	may.	Would	you	like	me	to	regurgitate	my	meal	for	you	as
well?	I	will,	you	know,	for	the	thought	that	you	will	take	into	you	what	was
previously	in	me—’
Bugg	was	waving	both	hands	in	the	negative.	‘Please,	don’t	put	yourself
out	for	me.’
‘No	need	to	look	so	alarmed.	Bodily	functions	are	a	wonderful,	indeed
sensual,	thing.	Why,	the	mere	blowing	clear	of	a	nose	is	a	potential	source	of
ecstasy,	once	you	grasp	its	phlegmatic	allure.’
‘I’d	best	be	going,	Rucket.’	He	quickly	rose.	‘Have	a	nice	night,	Chief
Investigator.’	And	was	gone.
Alone	once	more,	Rucket	sighed	and	leaned	back	in	her	chair.	‘Well,’	she
sighed	contentedly,	‘it’s	always	been	a	sure-fire	way	of	getting	rid	of	unwanted
company.’	She	raised	her	voice.	‘Servant!	More	wine,	please!’	That	bit	about
clearing	the	nose	was	especially	good,	she	decided.	She	was	proud	of	that	one,
especially	the	way,	she	disguised	the	sudden	nausea	generated	by	her	own
suggestion.
Any	man	who’d	cook	that…eel	had	surely	earned	eternal	celibacy.
Outside	the	restaurant,	Bugg	paused	to	check	the	contents	of	his	shirt’s
many	hidden	pockets.	Flask,	eel,	cat	bones.	A	successful	meeting,	after	all.
Moreover,	he	was	appreciative	of	her	performance.	Tehol	might	well	and	truly
like	this	one,	I	think.	It	was	worth	considering.
He	stood	for	a	moment	longer,	then	allowed	himself	a	soft	laugh.
In	any	case,	time	to	head	home.
	
Tehol	Beddict	studied	the	three	sad,	pathetic	women	positioned	variously	in	the
chamber	before	him:	Shand	slumped	behind	the	desk,	her	shaved	pate	looking
dull	and	smudged;	Rissarh	lying	down	on	a	hard	bench	as	if	meditating	on
discomfort,	her	red	hair	spilled	out	and	hanging	almost	to	the	floor;	and
Hejun,	sprawled	in	a	padded	chair,	refilling	her	pipe’s	bowl,	her	face	looking


sickly	and	wan.	‘My,’	Tehol	said	with	a	sigh,	his	hands	on	his	hips,	‘this	is	a
tragic	scene	indeed.’
Shand	looked	up,	bleary-eyed.	‘Oh,	it’s	you.’
‘Hardly	the	greeting	I	was	anticipating.’	He	strode	into	the	room.
‘He’s	gone,’	Hejun	said,	face	twisting	as	she	jabbed	a	taper	into	the	coals	of
the	three-legged	brazier	at	her	side.	‘And	it’s	Shand’s	fault.’
‘As	much	yours	as	mine,’	Shand	retorted.	‘And	don’t	forget	Rissarh!	“Oh,
Ublala!	Carry	me	around!	Carry	me	around!”	Talk	about	excess!’
‘Ublala’s	departure	is	the	cause	for	all	this	despond?’	Tehol	shook	his
head.	‘My	dears,	you	did	indeed	drive	him	away.’	He	paused,	then	added	with
great	pleasure,	‘Because	none	of	you	was	willing	to	make	a	commitment.	A
disgusting	display	of	self-serving	objectification.	Atrocious	behaviour	by	each
and	every	one	of	you.’
‘All	right,	all	right,	Tehol,’	Shand	muttered.	‘We	could	have	been	more…
compassionate.’
‘Respectful,’	Rissarh	said.
‘Yes,’	Hejun	said.	‘How	could	one	not	respect	Ublala’s—’
‘See?’	Tehol	demanded,	then	flung	up	his	hands.	‘I	am	led	to	despair!’
‘You’ll	have	company	here,’	Shand	said.
‘He	was	to	have	been	your	bodyguard.	That	was	the	intent.	Instead,	you
abused	him—’
‘No	we	didn’t!’	Hejun	snapped.	‘Well,	only	a	little.	All	in	good	fun,
anyway.’
‘And	now	I	have	to	find	you	a	new	bodyguard.’
‘Oh	no	you	don’t,’	Shand	said,	sitting	straighter.	‘Don’t	even	think	it.
We’ve	been	corrupted	enough—’
Tehol’s	brows	rose.	‘In	any	case,’	he	said,	‘Ublala	has	now	found	someone
who	cares	deeply	for	him—’
‘You	idiot.	She’s	dead.	She’s	incapable	of	caring.’
‘Not	true.	Or,	rather,	there’s	something	inside	her	that	does	care.	A	lot.	My
point	is,	it’s	time	to	get	over	it.	There’s	work	to	be	done.’
‘We	tried	following	up	on	that	list	you	gave	us.	Half	those	companies	don’t
even	exist.	You	tricked	us,	Tehol.	In	fact,	we	think	this	whole	thing	is	a	lie.’
‘What	an	absurd	accusation.	Granted,	I	padded	the	list	somewhat,	but	only
because	you	seemed	to	need	to	stay	busy.	Besides	which,	you’re	now	rich,
right?	Wealthy	beyond	your	wildest	dreams.	My	investment	advice	has	been
perfect	thus	far.	How	many	money-lending	institutions	do	you	now	hold
interest	in?’
‘All	the	big	ones,’	Shand	admitted.	‘But	not	controlling	interest—’


‘Wrong.	Forty	per	cent	is	sufficient	and	you’ve	acquired	that.’
‘How	is	forty	per	cent	enough?’
‘Because	I	hold	twenty.	Or,	if	not	me,	then	my	agent,	Bugg	included.	We
are	poised,	dear	ladies,	to	loose	chaos	upon	the	Tolls.’
He	had	their	attention	now,	he	saw.	Even	Rissarh	sat	up.	Eyes	fixed	upon
him,	eyes	in	which	the	gleam	of	comprehension	was	dawning.	‘When?’	Hejun
asked.
‘Ah,	well.	That	is	entirely	another	matter.	There	is	news	on	the	wind,
which,	had	any	of	you	been	in	a	proper	state	would	already	be	known	to	you.	It
seems,	my	sweet	friend,	that	Lether	is	at	war.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur?’
‘Indeed.’
‘Perfect!’	Shand	barked,	thumping	the	desktop	with	a	fist.	‘We	strike	now
and	it’ll	all	come	down!’
‘Likely,’	Tehol	said.	‘And	also,	disastrous.	Do	you	want	the	Edur	to	march
in	and	burn	everything	to	the	ground?
‘Why	not?	It’s	all	corrupt	anyway!’
‘Because,	Shand,	bad	as	it	is—and	we’re	all	agreed	it’s	bad—matters	can
get	a	whole	lot	worse.	If,	for	example,	the	Tiste	Edur	win	this	war.’
‘Hold	on,	Tehol!	The	plan	was	to	bring	about	a	collapse.	But	now	you’re
going	back	on	it.	You	must	be	a	fool	to	think	the	Edur	would	win	this	war
without	our	help.	No	one	wins	against	Lether.	Never	have,	never	will.	But	if	we
strike	now…’
‘All	very	well,	Shand.	For	myself,	however,	I	am	not	convinced	the	Edur
will	prove	ideal	conquerors.	As	I	said,	what	is	to	stop	them	from	putting	every
Letherii	to	the	sword,	enslaving	everyone?	What’s	to	stop	them	from	razing
every	city,	every	town,	every	village?	It’s	one	thing	to	bring	down	an	economy,
and	so	trigger	a	reformation	of	sorts,	reconfiguring	of	values	and	all	that.	It’s
entirely	another	to	act	in	a	way	that	exposes	the	Letherii	to	genocide.’
‘Why?’	Rissarh	demanded.	‘They’ve	not	hesitated	at	committing	genocide
of	their	own,	have	they?	How	many	Tarthenal	villages	were	burned	to	the
ground?	How	many	children	of	the	Nerek	and	the	Faraed	were	spitted	on
spears,	how	many	dragged	into	slavery?’
‘Then	you	would	descend	to	their	level,	Rissarh?	Why	emulate	the	worst
behaviours	of	a	culture,	when	it	is	those	very	behaviours	that	fill	you	with
horror?	Revulsion	at	babes	spitted	on	spears,	so	you	would	do	the	same	in
return?’	He	looked	at	each	of	them	in	turn,	but	they	made	no	reply.	Tehol	ran	a
hand	through	his	hair.	‘Consider	the	opposite.	A	hypothetical	situation,	if	you
will.	Letheras	declares	a	war	in	the	name	of	liberty	and	would	therefore	assert


the	right	of	the	moral	high	ground.	How	would	you	respond?’
‘With	disgust,’	Hejun	said,	relighting	her	pipe,	face	disappearing	behind
blue	clouds.
‘Why?’
‘Because	it’s	not	liberty	they	want,	not	the	kind	of	liberty	that	serves	the
people	in	question.	Instead,	it’s	the	freedom	of	Letherii	business	interests	to
profit	from	those	people.’
‘And	if	they	act	to	prevent	genocide	and	tyranny,	Hejun?’
‘Then	no	moral	high	ground	at	all,	for	they	have	committed	their	own	acts
of	genocide.	As	for	tyranny,	tyrannies	are	only	reprehensible	to	the	Letherii
when	they	do	not	operate	in	collusion	with	Letherii	business	interests.	And,	by
that	definition,	they	make	their	claims	of	honour	suspect	to	everyone	else.’
‘All	very	well.	Now,	I	have	considered	each	and	every	one	of	those
arguments.	And	could	only	conclude	one	thing:	the	Letherii,	in	that	situation,
are	damned	if	they	do	and	damned	if	they	don’t.	In	other	words,	the	issue	is	one
of	trust.	In	the	past	lies	the	evidence	leading	one	to	mistrust.	In	the	present	may
be	seen	efforts	to	reacquire	trust,	whilst	in	the	future	awaits	the	proof	of	either
one	or	the	other.’
‘This	is	a	hypothetical	situation,	Tehol,’	Shand	said	wearily.	‘What	is	your
point?’
‘My	point	is,	nothing	is	as	simple	as	it	might	at	first	seem.	And	paradigms
rarely	shift	through	an	act	of	will.	They	change	as	a	consequence	of	chaos,	in
stumbling	over	a	threshold,	and	all	that	is	most	reprehensible	in	our	nature
waits	in	the	wings,	eager	to	invade	and	so	give	shape	to	the	reforging	of	order.
It	falls	to	every	one	of	us	to	be	mindfull.’
‘What	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	you	talking	about?’	Shand	demanded.
‘What	I	am	saying,	Shand,	is	that	we	cannot	in	good	conscience	trigger	a
collapse	of	the	Letherii	economy	right	now.	Not	until	we	determine	how	this
war	is	going	to	play	out.’
‘Good	conscience?	Who	cares	about	that?	Our	motive	was	revenge.	The
Letherii	are	poised	to	annihilate	yet	another	people.	And	I	want	to	get	them!’
‘Do	not	dismiss	the	Tiste	Edur	just	yet,	Shand.	Our	priority	right	now	must
be	the	secret	evacuation	of	destitute	and	Indebted	Nerek,	Faraed	and	Tarthenal.
Out	to	the	islands.	To	my	islands.	The	rest	can	wait,	should	wait,	and	will	wait.
Until	I	say	otherwise.’
‘You’re	betraying	us.’
‘No,	I’m	not.	Nor	am	I	having	second	thoughts.	I	am	not	blind	to	the
underlying	motives	of	greed	upon	which	my	civilization	is	founded,	for	all	its
claims	of	righteous	destiny	and	unassailable	integrity.’


‘What	makes	you	think,’	Hejun	asked,	‘the	Tiste	Edur	might	succeed	where
everyone	else	has	failed?’
‘Succeed?	That	word	makes	me	uneasy.	Might	they	prove	a	difficult	and	at
times	devastating	enemy?	I	think	they	will.	Their	civilization	is	old,	Hejun.	Far
older	than	ours.	Their	golden	age	was	long,	long	ago.	They	exist	now	in	a	state
of	fear,	seeing	the	influence	and	material	imposition	of	Letheras	as	a	threat,	as
a	kind	of	ongoing	unofficial	war	of	cultures.	To	the	Edur,	Lether	is	a	poison,	a
corrupting	influence,	and	in	reaction	to	that	the	Edur	have	become	a	people
entrenched	and	belligerent.	In	disgust	at	what	they	see	ahead	of	them,	they	have
turned	their	backs	and	dream	only	of	what	lay	behind	them.	They	dream	of	a
return	to	past	glories.	Even	could	the	Letherii	offer	a	helping	hand,	they	would
view	it	as	an	invitation	to	surrender,	and	their	pride	will	not	permit	that.	Or,
conversely,	that	hand	represents	an	attack	on	all	they	hold	dear,	and	so	they	will
cut	it	and	dance	in	the	blood.	The	worst	scenario	I	can	imagine,	for	the	Edur,	is
if	they	win	this	war.	If	they	somehow	conquer	us	and	become	occupiers.’
‘Won’t	happen,	and	what	if	it	did?	They	couldn’t	be	worse.’
Tehol	studied	Hejun	briefly,	then	he	shrugged.	‘All	of	this	awaits
resolution.	In	the	meantime,	remain	vigilant.	There	are	still	things	that	need
doing.	What	happened	to	that	Nerek	mother	and	her	children	I	sent	you?’
‘We	shipped	them	to	the	islands,’	Shand	said.	‘They	ate	more	than	she
cooked.	Started	getting	fat.	It	was	all	very	sad.’
‘Well,	it’s	late	and	I’m	hungry,	so	I	will	take	my	leave	now.’
‘What	about	Ublala?’	Rissarh	demanded.
‘What	about	him?’
‘We	want	him	back.’
‘Too	late,	I’m	afraid.	That’s	what	happens	when	you	won’t	commit.’
Tehol	quickly	made	his	way	out.
Walking	the	quiet	streets	back	to	his	abode,	Tehol	considered	his	earlier
words.	He	had	to	admit	to	himself	that	he	was	troubled.	There	was	sufficient
mystery	in	some	of	the	rumours	to	suggest	that	the	impending	war	would	not
be	like	all	the	others	Letherii	had	waged.	A	collision	of	wills	and	desires,	and
beneath	it	a	host	of	dubious	assumptions	and	suspect	sentiments.	In	that	alone,
no	different	from	any	other	war.	But	in	this	case,	the	outcome	was	far	from
certain,	and	even	the	notion	of	victory	seemed	confused	and	elusive.
He	passed	through	Burl	Square	and	came	to	the	entrance	to	the	warehouse
storage	area,	beyond	which	was	the	alley	leading	to	his	home.	Pausing	to	push
up	his	lopsided	sleeves	and	cinch	tight	his	trousers,	he	frowned.	Was	he	losing
weight?	Hard	to	know.	Wool	stretched,	after	all.
A	figure	stepped	from	the	nearby	shadows	of	an	alley	mouth.	‘You’re	late.’


Tehol	started,	then	said,	‘For	what?’
Shurq	Elalle	came	to	within	two	paces	of	him.	‘I’ve	been	waiting.	Bugg
made	soup.	Where	have	you	been?’
‘What	are	you	doing	out?’	Tehol	asked.	‘You’re	supposed	to	be	holed	up
right	now.	This	is	dangerous—’
‘I	needed	to	talk	to	you,’	she	cut	in.	‘It’s	about	Harlest.’
‘What	about	him?’
‘He	wants	his	sharp	teeth	and	talons.	It’s	all	we	ever	hear.	Fangs	and	talons,
fangs	and	talons.	We’re	sick	of	it.	Where’s	Selush?	Why	haven’t	you	made
arrangements?	You’re	treating	us	like	corpses,	but	even	the	dead	have	needs,
you	know.’
‘Well,	no,	I	didn’t	know	that.	In	any	case,	tell	Harlest	that	Selush	is	working
on	this,	probably	right	now	in	fact.	Sharp	solutions	are	forthcoming.’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh.’
‘Sorry.	Are	you	in	need	of	a	refill?’
‘A	what?’
‘Well,	uh,	more	herbs	and	stuff,	I	mean.’
‘I	don’t	know.	Am	I?	Do	I	smell	or	something?’
‘No.	Only	of	sweet	things,	Shurq.	I	assure	you.’
‘I	am	less	inspired	by	your	assurances	as	time	goes	on,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘What	a	terrible	thing	to	say!	Have	we	stumbled	yet?’
‘When	is	Gerun	Eberict	returning?’
‘Soon,	it	turns	out.	Things	should	get	exciting	then.’
‘I	am	capable	of	excitement	regarding	one	thing	and	one	thing	only,	and
that	has	nothing	to	do	with	Gerun	Eberict.	However,	I	want	to	steal	again.
Anything,	from	whomever.	Point	me	in	a	direction.	Any	direction.’
‘Well,	there	is	of	course	the	Tolls	Repository.	But	that’s	impregnable,
obviously.	Or,	let’s	see,	the	royal	vaults,	but	again,	impossible.’
‘The	Tolls.	Yes,	that	sounds	challenging.’
‘You	won’t	succeed,	Shurq.	No-one	ever	has,	and	that	includes	Green	Pig
who	was	a	sorceror	nearly	to	rival	the	Ceda	himself—’
‘I	knew	Green	Pig.	He	suffered	from	overconfidence.’
‘And	was	torn	limb	from	limb	as	a	result.’
‘What	do	you	want	stolen	from	the	Tolls	Repository?’
‘Shurq—’
‘What?’
Tehol	glanced	round.	‘All	right.	I	want	to	find	out	which	lender	holds	the
largest	royal	debt.	The	king	has	been	borrowing	prodigiously,	and	not	just	to
finance	the	Eternal	Domicile.	So,	who	and	how	much.	Same	for	Queen	Janall.


And	whatever	she’s	done	in	her	son’s	name.’
‘Is	that	all?	No	gold?	No	diamonds?’
‘That’s	right.	No	gold,	no	diamonds,	and	no	evidence	left	behind	that
anyone	was	ever	in	there.’
‘I	can	do	that.’
‘No	you	can’t.	You’ll	get	caught.	And	dismembered.’
‘Oh,	that	will	hurt.’
‘Maybe	not,	but	it’ll	prove	inconvenient.’
‘I	won’t	get	caught,	Tehol	Beddict.	Now,	what	did	you	want	from	the	royal
vaults?’
‘A	tally.’
‘You	want	to	know	the	present	state	of	the	treasury.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	can	do	that.’
‘No	you	can’t.’
‘Why	not?’
‘Because	you’ll	have	been	dismembered	by	then.’
‘Thus	permitting	me	to	slip	into	places	where	I	otherwise	wouldn’t	fit.’
‘Shurq,	they	take	your	head	off	too,	you	know.	It’s	the	last	thing	they	do.’
‘Really?	That’s	barbaric.’
‘Like	I	said,	you	would	be	greatly	inconvenienced.’
‘I	would	at	that.	Well,	I	shall	endeavour	to	be	careful.	Mind	you,	even	a
head	can	count.’
‘What	would	you	have	me	do,	break	in	and	lob	your	head	into	the	vaults?
Tied	to	a	rope	so	I	can	pull	you	out	again	when	you’re	done?’
‘That	sounds	somewhat	problematic.’
‘It	does,	doesn’t	it?’
‘Can’t	you	plan	any	better	than	that,	Tehol	Beddict?	My	faith	in	you	is	fast
diminishing.’
‘Can’t	be	helped,	I	suppose.	What’s	this	I	hear	about	you	purchasing	a
seagoing	vessel?’
‘That	was	supposed	to	be	a	secret.	Bugg	said	he	wouldn’t	tell—’
‘He	didn’t.	I	have	my	own	sources	of	intelligence,	especially	when	the
owner	of	the	vessel	just	sold	happens	to	be	me.	Indirectly,	of	course.’
‘All	right.	Me	and	Ublala	and	Harlest,	we	want	to	be	pirates.’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh,	Shurq.’
‘Now	you’re	being	cruel.’
‘Sorry.	Pirates,	you	say.	Well,	all	three	of	you	are	notoriously	hard	to
drown.	Might	work	at	that.’


‘Your	confidence	and	well-wishing	overwhelms	me.’
‘And	when	do	you	plan	on	embarking	on	this	new	venture?’
‘When	you’re	done	with	us,	of	course.’
Tehol	tugged	up	his	trousers	again.	‘Yet	another	edifying	conversation
with	you,	Shurq.	Now,	I	smell	something	that	might	well	be	soup,	and	you	need
to	go	back	to	your	crypt.’
‘Sometimes	I	really	hate	you.’
	
He	led	her	by	the	hand	down	the	shallow,	crumbling	steps.	She	liked	these
journeys,	even	though	the	places	he	took	her	were	strange	and	often…
disturbing.	This	time,	they	descended	an	inverted	stepped	pyramid—at	least	that
was	what	he	called	it.	Four	sides	to	the	vast,	funnelled	pit,	and	at	the	base	there
was	a	small	square	of	darkness.
The	air	was	humid	enough	to	leave	droplets	on	her	bare	arms.	Far
overhead,	the	sky	was	white	and	formless.	She	did	not	know	if	it	was	hot—
memories	of	such	sensations	had	begun	to	fade,	along	with	so	many	other
things.
They	reached	the	base	of	the	pit	and	she	looked	up	at	the	tall,	pale	figure	at
her	side.	His	face	was	becoming	more	visible,	less	blurred.	It	looked
handsome,	but	hard.	‘I’m	sorry,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘that	she’s	got	you	by
the	ankles.’
‘We	all	have	our	burdens,	Kettle.’
‘Where	are	we?’
‘You	have	no	recognition	of	this	place?’
‘No.	Maybe.’
‘Let	us	continue	down,	then.’
Into	the	darkness,	three	rungs	to	a	landing,	then	a	spiral	staircase	of	black
stone.
‘Round	and	round,’	Kettle	said,	giggling.
A	short	while	later	they	came	to	the	end,	the	stairs	opening	out	onto	a
sprawling,	high-ceilinged	chamber.	The	gloom	was	no	obstacle	to	Kettle,	nor,
she	suspected,	to	her	companion.	She	could	see	a	ragged	mound	heaped	against
the	far	wall	to	their	right,	and	made	to	move	towards	it,	but	his	hand	drew	her
back.
‘No,	lass.	Not	there.’
He	led	her	instead	directly	ahead.	Three	doorways,	each	one	elaborately
arched	and	framed	with	reverse	impressions	of	columns.	Between	them,	the
walls	displayed	deeply	carved	images.


‘As	you	can	see,’	he	said,	‘there	is	a	reversal	of	perspective.	That	which	is
closest	is	carved	deepest.	There	is	a	significance	to	all	this.’
‘Where	are	we?’
‘To	achieve	peace,	destruction	is	delivered.	To	give	the	gift	of	freedom,
one	promises	eternal	imprisonment.	Adjudication	obviates	the	need	for	justice.
This	is	a	studied,	deliberate	embrace	of	diametric	opposition.	It	is	a	belief	in
balance,	a	belief	asserted	with	the	conviction	of	religion.	But	in	this	case,	the
proof	of	a	god’s	power	lies	not	in	the	cause	but	in	the	effect.	Accordingly,	in
this	world	and	in	all	others,	proof	is	achieved	by	action,	and	therefore	all
action—including	the	act	of	choosing	inaction—is	inherently	moral.	No	deed
stands	outside	the	moral	context.	At	the	same	time,	the	most	morally	perfect	act
is	the	one	taken	in	opposition	to	what	has	occurred	before.’
‘What	do	the	rooms	look	like	through	those	openings?’
‘In	this	civilization,’	he	continued,	‘its	citizens	were	bound	to	acts	of
utmost	savagery.	Vast	cities	were	constructed	beneath	the	world’s	surface.	Each
chamber,	every	building,	assembled	as	the	physical	expression	of	the	quality	of
absence.	Solid	rock	matched	by	empty	space.	From	these	places,	where	they	did
not	dwell,	but	simply	gathered,	they	set	out	to	achieve	balance.’
It	seemed	he	would	not	lead	her	through	any	of	the	doorways,	so	she	fixed
her	attention	instead	on	the	images.	‘There	are	no	faces.’
‘The	opposite	of	identity,	yes,	Kettle.’
‘The	bodies	look	strange.’
‘Physically	unique.	In	some	ways	more	primitive,	but	as	a	consequence
less…specialized,	and	so	less	constrained.	Profoundly	long-lived,	more	so
than	any	other	species.	Very	difficult	to	kill,	and,	it	must	be	said,	they	needed	to
be	killed.	Or	so	was	the	conclusion	reached	after	any	initial	encounter	with
them.	Most	of	the	time.	They	did	fashion	the	occasional	alliance.	With	the
Jaghut,	for	example.	But	that	was	yet	another	tactic	aimed	at	reasserting
balance,	and	it	ultimately	failed.	As	did	this	entire	civilization.’
Kettle	swung	round	to	study	that	distant	heap	of…something.	‘Those	are
bodies,	aren’t	they?’
‘Bones.	Scraps	of	clothing,	the	harnesses	they	wore.’
‘Who	killed	them?’
‘You	had	to	understand,	Kettle.	The	one	within	you	must	understand.	My
refutation	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	belief	in	balance	is	absolute.	It	is	not	that	I	am
blind	to	the	way	in	which	force	is	ever	countered,	the	way	in	which	the	natural
world	strains	towards	balance.	But	in	that	striving	I	see	no	proof	of	a	god’s
power;	I	see	no	guiding	hand	behind	such	forces.	And,	even	if	one	such	existed,
I	see	no	obvious	connection	with	the	actions	of	a	self-chosen	people	for	whom


chaos	is	the	only	rational	response	to	order.	Chaos	needs	no	allies,	for	it
dwells	like	a	poison	in	every	one	of	us.	The	only	relevant	struggle	for	balance
I	acknowledge	is	that	within	ourselves.	Externalizing	it	presumes	inner
perfection,	that	the	internal	struggle	is	over,	victory	achieved.’
‘You	killed	them.’
‘These	ones	here,	yes.	As	for	the	rest,	no.	I	was	too	late	arriving	and	my
freedom	too	brief	for	that.	In	any	case,	but	a	few	enclaves	were	left	by	that
time.	My	draconic	kin	took	care	of	that	task,	since	no	other	entity	possessed	the
necessary	power.	As	I	said,	they	were	damned	hard	to	kill.’
Kettle	shrugged,	and	she	heard	him	sigh.
‘There	are	places,	lass,	where	Forkrul	Assail	remain.	Imprisoned	for	the
most	part,	but	ever	restless.	Even	more	disturbing,	in	many	of	those	places	they
are	worshipped	by	misguided	mortals.’	He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘You	have	no
idea,	Kettle,	of	the	extremity	the	Azath	tower	found	itself	in.	To	have	chosen	a
soul	such	as	yours…it	was	like	reaching	into	the	heart	of	the	enemy	camp.	I
wonder	if,	in	its	last	moments,	it	knew	regret.	Misgivings.	Mother	knows,	I	do.’
‘What	is	this	soul	you	are	talking	about?’
‘Perhaps	it	sought	to	use	the	soul’s	power	without	fully	awakening	it.	We
will	never	know.	But	you	are	loose	upon	the	world	now.	Shaped	to	fight	as	a
soldier	in	the	war	against	chaos.	Can	that	fundamental	conflict	within	you	be
reconciled?	Your	soul,	lass?	It	is	Forkrul	Assail.’
‘So	you	have	brought	me	home?’
His	hand	betrayed	his	sudden	flinch.	‘You	were	also	a	mortal	human	child,
once.	And	there	is	a	mystery	in	that.	Who	birthed	you?	Who	took	away	your
life,	and	why?	Was	all	this	in	preparation	for	your	corpse	to	house	the	Assail
soul?	If	that	is	the	case,	then	the	Azath	tower	was	either	deceived	by	someone
capable	of	communicating	with	it,	or	it	had	in	truth	nothing	at	all	to	do	with	the
creation	of	you	as	you	now	are.	But	that	makes	no	sense—why	would	the	Azath
lie	to	me?’
‘It	said	you	were	dangerous.’
He	was	silent	for	some	time.	Then,	‘Ah,	you	are	to	kill	me	once	I	have
vanquished	the	other	entombed	creatures?’
‘The	tower	is	dead,’	Kettle	said.	‘I	don’t	have	to	do	anything	it	told	me.	Do
I?’	She	looked	up	and	found	him	studying	her.
‘What	path	will	you	choose,	child?’
She	smiled.	‘Your	path.	Unless	you’re	bad.	I’ll	be	very	angry	if	you’re
bad.’
‘I	am	pleased,	Kettle.	Best	that	you	stay	close	to	me	assuming	we	succeed
in	what	we	must	do.’


‘I	understand.	You	may	have	to	destroy	me.’
‘Yes.	If	I	can.’
She	gestured	with	her	free	hand	at	the	heap	of	bones.	‘I	don’t	think	you’ll
have	much	trouble.’
‘Let	us	hope	it	doesn’t	come	to	that.	Let	us	hope	the	soul	within	you	does
not	entirely	awaken.’
‘It	won’t.	That’s	why	none	of	this	matters.’
‘What	makes	you	so	certain,	Kettle?’
‘The	tower	told	me.’
‘It	did?	What	did	it	say	to	you?	Try	to	recall	its	exact	words.’
‘It	never	spoke	with	words.	It	just	showed	me	things.	My	body,	all	wrapped
up.	People	were	crying.	But	I	could	see	through	the	gauze.	I’d	woken	up.	I	was
seeing	everything	with	two	sets	of	eyes.	It	was	very	strange.	One	set	behind	the
wrappings,	the	other	standing	nearby.’
‘What	else	did	the	Azath	show	you?’
‘Those	eyes	from	the	outside.	There	were	five	others.	We	were	just
standing	in	the	street,	watching	the	family	carrying	the	body.	My	body.	Six	of
us.	We’d	walked	a	long	way	because	of	the	dreams.	We’d	been	in	the	city	for
weeks,	waiting	for	the	Azath	to	choose	someone.	But	I	wasn’t	the	same	as	the
five	others,	though	we	were	here	for	the	same	reason,	and	we’d	travelled
together.	They	were	Nerek	witches,	and	they’d	prepared	me.	The	me	on	the
outside,	and	the	me	all	wrapped	up.’
‘The	you	on	the	outside,	Kettle,	were	you	a	child?’
‘Oh	no.	I	was	tall.	Not	as	tall	as	you.	And	I	had	to	wear	my	hood	up,	so	noone	could	see	how	different	I	was.	I’d	come	from	very	far	away.	I’d	walked,
when	I	was	young,	hot	sands—the	sands	that	covered	the	First	Empire.
Whatever	that	is.’
‘What	did	the	Nerek	witches	call	you?	Had	you	a	name?’
‘No.’
‘A	title?’
She	shrugged.	‘I’d	forgotten	all	this.	They	called	me	the	Nameless	One.	Is
this	important?’
‘I	think	it	is,	Kettle.	Although	I	am	not	sure	in	what	way.	Much	of	this	realm
remains	unknown	to	me.	It	was	very	young	when	I	was	imprisoned.	You	are
certain	this	“Nameless	One”	was	an	actual	title?	Not	just	something	the	Nerek
used	because	they	didn’t	know	your	true	name?’
‘It	was	a	title.	They	said	I’d	been	prepared	from	birth.	That	I	was	a	true
child	of	Eres.	And	that	I	was	the	answer	to	the	Seventh	Closure,	because	I	had
the	blood	of	kin.	“The	blood	of	kin”.	What	did	they	mean	by	that?’


‘When	I	am	finally	free,’	he	said	in	a	voice	revealing	strain,	‘I	will	be	able
to	physically	touch	you,	Kettle.	My	fingers	upon	your	brow.	And	then	I	will
have	your	answer.’
‘I	guess	this	Eres	was	my	real	mother.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	soon	you	will	know	who	my	father	is.’
‘I	will	know	his	blood,	yes.	At	the	very	least.’
‘I	wonder	if	he’s	still	alive.’
‘Knowing	how	Eres	plays	the	game,	lass,	he	might	not	even	be	your	father
yet.	She	wanders	time,	Kettle,	in	a	manner	no-one	else	can	even	understand,
much	less	emulate.	And	this	is	very	much	her	world.	She	is	the	fire	that	never
dies.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘She	will	choose—or	has	chosen—with	great
deliberation.	Your	father	was,	is,	or	will	be	someone	of	great	importance.’
‘So	how	many	souls	are	in	me?’
‘Two,	sharing	the	flesh	and	bone	of	a	child	corpse.	Lass,	we	shall	have	to
find	a	way	to	get	you	out	of	that	body,	eventually.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	you	deserve	something	better.’
‘I	want	to	go	back.	Will	you	take	me	back	now?’
	
‘I’ve	given	up	on	the	eel	itself,’	Bugg	said,	ladling	out	the	soup.	‘It’s	still	too
tough.’
‘None	the	less,	my	dear	manservant,	it	smells	wonderful.’
‘That	would	be	the	wine.	Courtesy	of	Chief	Investigator	Rucket,	whose
request	for	a	meeting	with	you	was	for	purposes	not	entirely	professional.’
‘And	how	did	you	fare	on	my	behalf?’
‘I	ensured	that	her	interest	in	you	only	deepened,	master.’
‘By	way	of	contrast?’
‘Indeed.’
‘Well,	is	that	a	good	thing?	I	mean,	she’s	rather	frightening.’
‘You	don’t	know	the	half	of	it.	Even	so,	she	is	exceptionally	clever.’
‘Oh,	I	don’t	like	that	at	all,	Bugg.	You	know,	I	am	tasting	something	fishy.
A	hint,	anyway.	Just	how	dried	up	was	this	eel	you	found?’
The	manservant	probed	with	his	ladle	and	lifted	the	mentioned	object	into
view.	Black,	wrinkled	and	not	nearly	as	limp	as	it	should	have	been.
Tehol	leaned	closer	and	studied	it	for	a	moment.	‘Bugg…’
‘Yes,	master?’
‘That’s	the	sole	of	a	sandal.’


‘It	is?	Oh.	I	was	wondering	why	it	was	flatter	at	one	end	than	the	other.’
Tehol	settled	back	and	took	another	sip.	‘Still	fishy,	though.	One	might
assume	the	wearer,	being	in	the	fish	market,	stepped	on	an	eel,	before	the	loss
of	his	or	her	sole.’
‘I	am	mildly	disturbed	by	the	thought	of	what	else	he	or	she	might	have
stepped	in.’
‘There	are	indeed	complexities	on	the	palate,	suggesting	a	varied	and
lengthy	history.	Now,	how	was	your	day	and	the	subsequent	evening?’
‘Uneventful.	Rucket	informs	me	that	Gerun	Eberict	has	killed	about	three
thousand	citizens	this	year.’
‘Three	thousand?	That	seems	somewhat	excessive.’
‘I	thought	so,	too,	master.	More	soup?’
‘Yes,	thank	you.	So,	what	is	his	problem,	do	you	think?’
‘Gerun’s?	A	taste	for	blood,	I’d	wager.’
‘As	simple	as	that?	How	egregious.	We’ll	have	to	do	something	about	it,	I
think.’
‘And	how	was	your	day	and	evening,	master?’
‘Busy.	Exhausting,	even.’
‘You	were	on	the	roof?’
‘Yes,	mostly.	Although,	as	I	recall,	I	came	down	here	once.	Can’t
remember	why.	Or,	rather,	I	couldn’t	at	the	time,	so	I	went	back	up.’
Bugg	tilted	his	head.	‘Someone’s	approaching	our	door.’
The	sound	of	boots	in	the	alley,	the	faint	whisper	of	armour.
‘My	brother,	I’d	hazard,’	Tehol	said,	then,	turning	to	face	the	curtained
doorway,	he	raised	his	voice.	‘Brys,	do	come	in.’
The	hanging	was	pulled	aside	and	Brys	entered.	‘Well,	that	is	an	interesting
smell,’	he	said.
‘Sole	soup,’	Tehol	said.	‘Would	you	like	some?’
‘No,	thank	you.	I	have	already	eaten,	it	being	well	after	the	second	bell.	I
trust	you	have	heard	the	rumours.’
‘The	war?’
‘Yes.’
‘I’ve	heard	hardly	a	thing,’	Tehol	said.
Brys	hesitated,	glancing	at	Bugg,	then	he	sighed.	‘A	new	emperor	has
emerged	to	lead	the	Tiste	Edur.	Tehol,	Hull	has	sworn	his	allegiance	to	him.’
‘Now,	that	is	indeed	unfortunate.’
‘Accordingly,	you	are	at	risk.’
‘Arrest?’
‘No,	more	likely	assassination.	All	in	the	name	of	patriotism.’


Tehol	set	his	bowl	down.	‘It	occurs	to	me,	Brys,	that	you	are	more	at	risk
than	I	am.’
‘I	am	well	guarded,	brother,	whilst	you	are	not.’
‘Nonsense!	I	have	Bugg!’
The	manservant	looked	up	at	Brys	with	a	bland	smile.
‘Tehol,	this	is	not	time	for	jokes—’
‘Bugg	resents	that!’
‘I	do?’
‘Well,	don’t	you?	I	would,	if	I	were	you—’
‘It	seems	you	just	were.’
‘My	apologies	for	making	you	speak	out	of	turn,	then.’
‘Speaking	on	your	behalf,	master,	I	accept.’
‘You	are	filled	with	relief—’
‘Will	you	two	stop	it!’	Brys	shouted,	throwing	up	his	hands.	He	began
pacing	the	small	confines	of	the	room.	‘The	threat	is	very	real.	Agents	of	the
queen	will	not	hesitate.	You	are	both	in	very	grave	danger.’
‘But	how	will	killing	me	change	the	fact	of	Hull	forsaking	our	homeland?’
‘It	won’t,	of	course.	But	your	history,	Tehol,	makes	you	a	hated	man.	The
queen’s	investments	suffered	thanks	to	you,	and	she’s	not	the	type	to	forgive
and	forget.’
‘Well,	what	do	you	suggest,	Brys?’
‘Stop	sleeping	on	your	roof,	for	one.	Let	me	hire	a	few	bodyguards—’
‘A	few?	How	many	are	you	thinking?’
‘Four,	at	least.’
‘One.’
‘One?’
‘One.	No	more	than	that.	You	know	how	I	dislike	crowds,	Brys.’
‘Crowds?	You’ve	never	disliked	crowds,	Tehol.’
‘I	do	now.’
Brys	glowered,	then	sighed.	‘All	right.	One.’
‘And	that	will	make	you	happy,	then?	Excellent—’
‘No	more	sleeping	on	your	roof.’
‘I’m	afraid,	brother,	that	won’t	be	possible.’
‘Why	not?’
Tehol	gestured.	‘Look	at	this	place!	It’s	a	mess!	Besides,	Bugg	snores.	And
we’re	not	talking	mild	snoring,	either.	Imagine	being	chained	to	the	floor	of	a
cave,	with	the	tide	crashing	in,	louder,	louder,	louder—’
‘I	have	in	mind	three	guards,	all	brothers,’	Brys	said,	‘who	can	spell	each
other.	One	will	therefore	always	be	with	you,	even	when	you’re	sleeping	on


your	roof.’
‘So	long	as	they	don’t	snore—’
‘They	won’t	be	asleep,	Tehol!	They’ll	be	standing	guard!’
‘All	right.	Calm	down.	I	am	accepting,	aren’t	I?	Now,	how	about	some
soup,	just	to	tide	you	over	until	you	break	your	fast?’
Brys	glanced	at	the	pot.	‘There’s	wine	in	it,	isn’t	there?’
‘Indeed.	Only	the	best,	at	that.’
‘Fine.	Half	a	bowl.’
Tehol	and	Bugg	exchanged	pleased	smiles.


Chapter	Fifteen

Black	glass	stands	between	us
The	thin	face	of	otherness
Risen	into	difference
These	sibling	worlds
You	cannot	reach	through
Or	pierce	this	shade	so	distinct
As	to	make	us	unrecognizable
Even	in	reflection
The	black	glass	stands
And	that	is	more	than	all
And	the	between	us
Gropes	but	never	finds
Focus	or	even	meaning
The	between	us	is	ever	lost
In	that	barrier	of	darkness
When	backs	are	turned
And	we	do	little	more	than	refuse
Facing	ourselves.
PREFACE	TO	THE	NEREK	ABSOLUTION
MYRKAS	PREADICT
Light	and	heat	rose	in	waves	from	the	rock,	swirled	remorselessly	along	the
narrow	track.	The	wraiths	had	fled	to	cracks	and	fissures	and	huddled	there
now,	like	bats	awaiting	dusk.	Seren	Pedac	paused	to	await	Buruk.	She	set	her
pack	down,	then	tugged	at	the	sweat-sodden,	quilted	padding	beneath	her
armour,	feeling	it	peel	away	from	her	back	like	skin.	She	was	wearing	less	than
half	her	kit,	the	rest	strapped	onto	the	pack,	yet	it	still	dragged	at	her	after	the
long	climb	to	the	summit	of	the	pass.
She	could	hear	nothing	from	beyond	the	crest	twenty	paces	behind	her,	and
considered	going	back	to	check	on	her	charge.	Then,	faintly,	came	a	curse,


then	scrabbling	sounds.
The	poor	man.
They	had	been	hounded	by	the	wraiths	the	entire	way.	The	ghostly
creatures	made	the	very	air	agitated	and	restless.	Sleep	was	difficult,	and	the
constant	motion	flitting	in	their	peripheral	vision,	the	whispered	rustling
through	their	camps,	left	their	nerves	raw	and	exhausted.
She	glared	a	moment	at	the	midday	sun,	then	wiped	the	gritty	sweat	from
her	brow	and	walked	a	few	paces	ahead	on	the	trail.	They	were	almost	out	of
Edur	territory.	Another	thousand	paces.	After	that,	another	day’s	worth	of
descent	to	the	river.	Without	the	wagons,	they	would	then	be	able	to	hire	a	river
boat	to	take	them	the	rest	of	the	way	down	to	Trate.	Another	day	for	that.
And	then?	Will	he	still	hold	me	to	the	contract?	It	seemed	pointless,	and	so
she	had	assumed	he	would	simply	release	her,	at	least	for	the	duration	of	the
war,	and	she	would	be	free	to	journey	back	to	Letheras.	But	Buruk	the	Pale	had
said	nothing	of	that.	In	fact,	he	had	not	said	much	of	anything	since	leaving	the
Hiroth	village.
She	turned	as	he	clambered	onto	the	summit’s	flat	stretch.	Clothed	in	dust
and	streaks	of	sweat,	beneath	them	a	deeply	flushed	face	and	neck.	Seren
walked	back	towards	him.	‘We	will	rest	here	for	a	time.’
He	coughed,	then	asked,	‘Why?’	The	word	was	a	vicious	growl.
‘Because	we	need	it,	Buruk.’
‘You	don’t.	And	why	speak	for	me?	I	am	fine,	Acquitor.	Just	get	us	to	the
river.’
Her	pack	held	both	their	possessions	and	supplies.	She	had	cut	down	a
sapling	and	trimmed	it	to	serve	as	a	walking	stick	for	him,	and	this	was	all	he
carried.	His	once	fine	clothes	were	ragged,	the	leggings	torn	by	sharp	rocks.
He	stood	before	her,	wheezing,	bent	over	and	leaning	heavily	on	the	stick.	‘I
mean	to	rest,	Buruk,’	she	said	after	a	moment.	‘You	can	do	as	you	please.’
‘I	can’t	stand	being	watched!’	the	merchant	suddenly	shrieked.	‘Always
watching!	Those	damned	shades!	No	more!’	With	that	he	stumbled	past	her	on
the	trail.
Seren	returned	to	her	pack	and	slung	it	once	more	over	her	shoulders.	One
sentiment	she	could	share	with	Buruk:	the	sooner	this	trip	was	over,	the	better.
She	set	out	in	his	wake.
A	dozen	paces	along	and	she	reached	his	side.	Then	was	past.
By	the	time	Seren	arrived	at	the	clearing	where	the	borders	had	been
agreed	over	a	century	ago,	Buruk	the	Pale	was	once	more	out	of	sight
somewhere	back	on	the	trail.	She	halted,	flung	down	her	pack,	and	walked	over
to	the	sheer	wall	of	polished	black	stone,	recalling	when	she	had	last	touched


that	strange—and	strangely	welcoming—surface.
Some	mysteries	would	not	unravel,	whilst	others	were	peeled	back	by
fraught	circumstance	or	deadly	design,	to	reveal	mostly	sordid	truths.
She	set	her	hands	against	the	warm,	glassy	stone,	and	felt	something	like
healing	steal	into	her.	Beyond,	figures	in	ceaseless	motion,	paying	no	attention
to	her	whatsoever.	Preferable	to	the	endless	spying	of	wraiths.	And	this	was	as
it	had	always	been.	Seren	settled	her	forehead	against	the	wall,	closing	her
eyes.
And	heard	whispering.
A	language	kin	to	Tiste	Edur.	She	struggled	to	translate.	Then	meaning	was
found.
‘—when	he	who	commands	cannot	be	assailed.	Cannot	be	defeated.’
‘And	now	he	feeds	on	our	rage.	Our	anguish.’
‘Of	the	three,	one	shall	return.	Our	salvation—’
‘Fool.	From	each	death	power	burgeons	anew.	Victory	is	impossible.’
‘There	is	no	place	for	us.	We	but	serve.	We	but	bleed	out	terror	and	the
annihilation	begins—’
‘Ours	as	well.’
‘Yes,	ours	as	well.’
‘Do	you	think	she	will	come	again?	Does	anyone	think	she	will	come
again?	She	will,	I	am	certain	of	it.	With	her	bright	sword.	She	is	the	rising	sun
and	the	rising	sun	ever	comes,	sending	us	scurrying,	cutting	us	to	pieces	with
that	sharp,	deadly	light—’
‘—annihilation	well	serves	us.	Make	of	us	dead	shards.	To	bring	an	end	to
this—’
‘Someone	is	with	us.’
‘Who?’
‘A	mortal	is	here	with	us.	Two	Mistresses	to	the	same	Hold.	She	is	one,	and
she	is	here.	She	is	here	now	and	she	listens	to	our	words.’
‘Steal	her	mind!’
‘Take	her	soul!’
‘Let	us	out!’
Seren	reeled	away	from	the	black	wall.	Staggered,	hands	to	her	ears,
shaking	her	head.	‘Enough,’	she	moaned.	‘No	more,	please.	No	more.’	She
sank	to	her	knees,	was	motionless	as	the	voices	faded,	their	screams	dwindling.
‘Mistress?’	she	whispered.	I	am	no-one’s	mistress.	Just	one	more	reluctant…
lover	of	solitude.	No	place	for	voices,	no	place	for	hard	purposes…fierce	fires.
Like	Hull,	only	ashes.	The	smudged	remnants	of	possibilities.	But,	unlike
the	man	she	had	once	thought	to	love,	she	had	not	knelt	before	a	new	icon	to


certainty.	No	choices	to	measure	out	like	the	soporific	illusion	of	some	drug,
the	consigning	invitation	to	addiction.	She	wanted	no	new	masters	over	her
life.	Nor	the	burden	of	friendships.
A	croaking	voice	behind	her.	‘What’s	wrong	with	you?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Nothing,	Buruk.’	She	climbed	wearily	to	her	feet.	‘We
have	reached	the	border.’
‘I’m	not	blind,	Acquitor.’
‘We	can	move	on	a	way,	then	make	camp.’
‘You	think	me	weak,	don’t	you?’
She	glanced	over	at	him.	‘You	are	sick	with	exhaustion,	Buruk.	So	am	I.
What	point	all	this	bravado?’
Sudden	pain	in	his	expression,	then	he	turned	away.	‘I’ll	show	you	soon
enough.’
‘What	of	my	contract?’
He	did	not	face	her.	‘Done.	Once	we	reach	Trate.	I	absolve	you	of	further
responsibility.’
‘So	be	it,’	she	said,	walking	to	her	pack.
	
They	built	a	small	fire	with	the	last	of	their	wood.	The	wraiths,	it	seemed,	cared
nothing	for	borders,	flitting	along	the	edges	of	the	flickering	light.	A	renewed
interest,	and	Seren	thought	she	knew	why.	The	spirits	within	the	stone	wall.	She
was	now	marked.
Mistress	of	the	Hold.	Mistresses.	There	are	two,	and	they	think	I	am	one	of
those	two.	A	lie,	a	mistake.
Which	Hold?
‘You	were	young,’	Buruk	suddenly	said,	his	eyes	on	the	fire.	‘When	I	first
saw	you.’
‘And	you	were	happy,	Buruk.	What	of	it?’
‘Happiness.	Ah,	now	that	is	a	familiar	mask.	True,	I	wore	it	often,	back
then.	Joyful	in	my	spying,	my	unceasing	betrayals,	my	deceits	and	the	blood
that	appeared	again	and	again	on	my	hands.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘My	debts,	Acquitor.	Oh	yes,	outwardly	I	stand	as	a	respected	merchant…of
middling	wealth.’
‘And	what	are	you	in	truth?’
‘It	is	where	dreams	fall	away,	Seren	Pedac.	That	crumbling	edifice	where
totters	self-worth.	You	stand,	too	afraid	to	move,	and	watch	your	hands	in
motion,	mangling	every	dream,	every	visage	of	the	face	you	would	desire,	the


true	face	of	yourself,	behind	that	mask.	It	is	not	helpful,	speaking	of	truths.’
She	thought	for	a	time,	then	her	eyes	narrowed.	‘You	are	being
blackmailed.’	He	voiced	no	denial,	so	she	continued,	‘You	are	Indebted,	aren’t
you?’
‘Debts	start	small.	Barely	noticeable.	Temporary.	And	so,	in	repayment,
you	are	asked	to	do	something.	Something	vile,	a	betrayal.	And	then,	they	have
you.	And	you	are	indebted	anew,	in	the	maintenance	of	the	secret,	in	your
gratitude	for	not	being	exposed	in	your	crime,	which	has	since	grown	larger.
As	it	always	does,	if	you	are	in	possession	of	a	conscience.’	He	was	silent	a
moment,	then	he	sighed	and	said,	‘I	do	envy	those	who	have	no	conscience.’
‘Can	you	not	get	out,	Buruk?’
He	would	not	look	up	from	the	flames.	‘Of	course	I	can,’	he	said	easily.
That	tone,	so	at	odds	with	all	else	he	had	said,	frightened	her.	‘Make
yourself…un-useful,	Buruk.’
‘Indeed,	that	seems	the	way	of	it,	Acquitor.	And	I	am	in	a	hurry	to	do	just
that.’	He	rose.	‘Time	to	sleep.	Downhill	to	the	river,	then	we	can	trail	our	sore
feet	in	the	cool	water,	all	the	way	to	Trate.’
She	remained	awake	for	a	while	longer,	too	tired	to	think,	too	numb	to	feel
fear.
Above	the	fire,	sparks	and	stars	swam	without	distinction.
	
Dusk	the	following	day,	the	two	travellers	reached	Kraig’s	Landing,	to	find	its
three	ramshackle	buildings	surrounded	by	the	tents	of	an	encamped	regiment.
Soldiers	were	everywhere,	and	at	the	dock	was	tethered	an	ornate,	luxuriously
appointed	barge	above	which	drifted	in	the	dull	wind	the	king’s	banner,	and
directly	beneath	it	on	the	spar	the	crest	of	the	Ceda.
‘There’s	a	cadre	here,’	Buruk	said	as	they	strode	down	the	trail	towards	the
camp,	which	they	would	have	to	pass	through	to	reach	the	hostel	and	dock.
She	nodded.	‘And	the	soldiers	are	here	as	escort.	There	can’t	have	been
engagements	already,	can	there?’
He	shrugged.	‘At	sea,	maybe.	The	war	is	begun,	I	think.’
Seren	reached	out	and	halted	Buruk.	‘There,	those	three.’
The	merchant	grunted.
The	three	figures	in	question	had	emerged	from	the	rows	of	tents,	the
soldiers	nearby	keeping	their	distance	but	fixing	their	attention	on	them	as	they
gathered	for	a	moment,	about	halfway	between	the	two	travellers	and	the	camp.
‘The	one	in	blue—do	you	recognize	her,	Acquitor?’
She	nodded.	Nekal	Bara,	Trate’s	resident	sorceress,	whose	power	was	a


near	rival	to	the	Ceda’s	own.	‘The	man	on	her	left,	in	the	black	furs,	that’s
Arahathan,	commander	of	the	cadre	in	the	Cold	Clay	Battalion.	I	don’t	know
the	third	one.’
‘Enedictal,’	Buruk	said.	‘Arahathan’s	counterpart	in	the	Snakebelt
Battalion.	We	see	before	us	the	three	most	powerful	mages	of	the	north.	They
intend	a	ritual.’
She	set	off	towards	them.
‘Acquitor!	Don’t!’
Ignoring	Buruk,	Seren	unslung	her	pack	and	dropped	it	to	the	ground.	She
had	caught	the	attention	of	the	three	mages.	Visible	in	the	gloom,	Nekal	Bara’s
mocking	lift	of	the	eyebrows.
‘Acquitor	Seren	Pedac.	The	Errant	smiles	upon	you	indeed.’
‘You’re	going	to	launch	an	attack,’	Seren	said.	‘You	mustn’t.’
‘We	do	not	take	orders	from	you,’	Enedictal	said	in	a	growl.
‘You’re	going	to	strike	the	villages,	aren’t	you?’
‘Only	the	ones	closest	to	the	borders,’	Nekal	Bara	said,	‘and	those	are	far
enough	away	to	permit	us	a	full	unveiling—beyond	those	mountains,	yes?	If
the	Errant	wills	it,	that’s	where	the	Edur	armies	will	have	already	gathered.’
‘We	shall	obliterate	the	smug	bastards,’	Enedictal	said.	‘And	end	this	stupid
war	before	it’s	begun.’
‘There	are	children—’
‘Too	bad.’
Without	another	word	the	three	mages	moved	to	take	positions,	twenty
paces	distant	from	one	another.	They	faced	the	slope	of	the	trail,	the	rearing
mountains	before	them.
‘No!’	Seren	shouted.
Soldiers	appeared,	surrounding	her,	expressions	dark	and	angry	beneath
the	rim	of	their	helms.	One	spoke.	‘It’s	this,	woman,	or	the	fields	of	battle.
Where	people	die.	Make	no	move.	Say	nothing.’
Buruk	the	Pale	arrived	to	stand	nearby.	‘Leave	it	be,	Acquitor.’
She	glared	at	him.	‘You	don’t	think	he’ll	retaliate?	He’ll	disperse	the	attack,
Buruk.	You	know	he	will.’
‘He	may	not	have	the	time,’	the	merchant	replied.	‘Oh,	perhaps	his	own
village,	but	what	of	the	others?’
A	flash	of	light	caught	her	attention	and	she	turned	to	see	that	but	one	mage
remained,	Nekal	Bara.	Then	Seren	saw,	two	hundred	paces	distant,	the	figure	of
Enedictal.	Twisting	round,	she	could	make	out	Arahathan,	two	hundred	paces
in	the	opposite	direction.	More	flashes,	and	the	two	sorcerors	reappeared
again,	double	the	distance	from	Nekal	Bara.


‘They’re	spreading	out,’	Buruk	observed.	‘This	is	going	to	be	a	big	ritual.’
A	soldier	said,	‘The	Ceda	himself	is	working	tonight.	Through	these	three
here,	and	the	rest	of	the	cadre	strung	out	another	league	in	both	directions.
Four	villages	will	soon	be	nothing	but	ashes.’
‘This	is	a	mistake,’	Seren	said.
Something	was	building	between	the	motionless	sorcerors.	Blue	and	green
light,	ravelled	taut,	like	lightning	wound	round	an	invisible	rope	linking	the
mages.	The	glow	building	like	sea	foam,	a	froth	that	began	crackling,	spitting
drawn-out	sparks	that	whipped	like	tendrils.
The	sound	became	a	hissing	roar.	The	light	grew	blinding,	the	tendrils
writhing	out	from	the	glowing	foam.	The	twisting	rope	bucked	and	snapped
between	the	stationary	mages,	reaching	out	past	the	three	who	were	still	visible,
out	beyond	the	hills	to	either	side.
She	watched	the	power	burgeoning,	the	bucking	frenzied,	the	tendrils
whipping	like	the	limbs	of	some	giant,	wave-thrashed	anemone.
Darkness	had	been	peeled	back	by	the	bristling	energy,	the	shadows
dancing	wild.
A	sudden	shout.
The	heaving	chain	sprang	loose,	the	roar	of	its	escape	thundering	in	the
ground	beneath	Seren’s	feet.	Figures	staggered	as	the	wave	launched	skyward,
obliterating	the	night.	Its	crest	was	blinding	green	fire,	the	curving	wall	in	its
wake	a	luminescent	ochre,	webbed	with	foam	in	a	stretching	latticework.
The	wall	swallowed	the	north	sky,	and	still	the	crest	rose,	power	streaming
upward.	The	grasses	near	the	mages	blackened,	then	spun	into	white	ash	on
swirling	winds.
Beneath	the	roar,	a	shriek,	then	screams.	Seren	saw	a	soldier	stumbling
forward,	against	the	glowing	wall	at	the	base	of	the	wave.	It	took	him,	stripped
armour,	clothes,	then	hair	and	skin,	then,	in	a	gush	of	blood,	it	devoured	his
flesh.	Before	the	hapless	figure	could	even	crumple,	the	bones	were	plucked
away,	leaving	naught	but	a	single	upright	boot	on	the	blistered	ground	in	front
of	the	foaming	wall.	The	crimson	blush	shot	upward,	paling	as	it	went.	Until	it
was	gone.
Air	hissed	past	her,	buffeting	and	bitter	cold.
She	sank	down,	the	only	response	possible	to	fight	that	savage	tugging,	and
dug	her	fingers	into	the	stony	ground.	Others	did	the	same	around	her,	clawing
in	panic.	Another	soldier	was	dragged	away,	pulled	shrieking	into	the	wave.
The	roaring	snapped	suddenly,	like	a	breath	caught	in	a	throat,	and	Seren
saw	the	base	lift	away,	roll	upward	like	a	vast	curtain,	rising	to	reveal,	once
again,	the	battered	slopes	leading	to	the	pass,	then	the	pallid	mountains	and


their	blunt,	ancient	summits.
The	wave	swiftly	dwindled	as	it	soared	northward,	its	wild	light	reflected
momentarily	in	a	patchwork	cascade	across	reflective	surfaces	far	below,
sweeps	of	snow	near	the	peaks	and	ice-polished	stone	blossoming	sickly	green
and	gold,	as	if	awakened	to	an	unexpected	sunset.
Then	the	mountains	were	black	silhouettes	once	more.
Beyond	them,	the	wave,	from	horizon	to	horizon,	was	descending.
Vanishing	behind	the	range.
In	the	corner	of	her	vision,	Seren	saw	Nekal	Bara	slump	to	her	knees.
Sudden	light,	across	the	rim	of	the	world	to	the	north,	billowing	like	storm
seas	exploding	against	rock.	The	glow	shot	back	into	the	night	sky,	this	time	in
fiery	arms	and	enormous,	whipping	tentacles.
She	saw	a	strange	ripple	of	grey	against	black	on	the	facing	mountainside,
swiftly	plunging.
Then	comprehension	struck	her.	‘Lie	flat!	Everyone!	Down!’
The	ripple	struck	the	base	of	the	slope.	The	few	scraggly	trees	clinging	to
a	nearby	hillside	toppled	in	unison,	as	if	pushed	over	by	a	giant	invisible	hand.
The	sound	struck.
And	broke	around	them,	strangely	muted.
Dazed,	Seren	lifted	her	head.	Watched	the	shale	tiles	of	an	outlying
building’s	roof	dance	away	into	the	darkness.	Watched	as	the	north-facing	wall
tilted,	then	collapsed,	taking	the	rest	of	the	structure	with	it.	She	slowly	climbed
to	her	hands	and	knees.
Nekal	Bara	stood	nearby,	her	hair	and	clothes	untouched	by	the	wind	that
raged	on	all	sides.
Muddy	rain	sifted	down	through	the	strangely	thick	air.	The	stench	of
charred	wood	and	the	raw	smell	of	cracked	stone.
Beyond,	the	wind	had	died,	and	the	rain	pummelled	the	ground.	Darkness
returned,	and	if	fires	still	burned	beyond	the	mountains,	no	sign	was	visible
from	this	distance.
Buruk	the	Pale	staggered	to	her	side,	his	face	splashed	with	mud.	‘He	did
not	block	it,	Acquitor!’	he	gasped.	‘It	is	as	I	said:	no	time	to	prepare.’
A	soldier	shouted,	‘Errant	take	us!	Such	power!’
There	was	good	reason	why	Lether	had	never	lost	a	war.	Even	the	Onyx
Wizards	of	Bluerose	had	been	crushed	by	the	cadres	of	the	Ceda.	Archpriests,
shamans,	witches	and	rogue	sorcerors,	none	had	ever	managed	to	stand	for
long	against	such	ferocity.
Seren	felt	sick	inside.	Sick,	and	bereft.
This	is	not	war.	This	is…what?	Errant	save	us,	I	have	no	answer,	no	way	to


describe	the	magnitude	of	this	slaughter.	It	is	mindless.	Blasphemous.	As	if	we
have	forgotten	dignity.	Theirs,	our	own.	The	word	itself.	No	distinction	between
innocence	and	guilt,	condemned	by	mere	existence.	People	transformed	against
their	will	into	nothing	more	than	symbols,	sketchy	representations,	repositories
of	all	ills,	of	all	frustrations.
Is	this	what	must	be	done?	Take	the	enemy’s	flesh	and	fill	it	with	diseases,
corrupting	and	deadly	to	the	touch,	breath	of	poison?	And	that	which	is	sick
must	be	exterminated,	lest	it	spread	its	contamination.
‘I	doubt,’	Buruk	said	in	an	empty	voice,	‘there	was	time	to	suffer.’
True.	Leave	that	to	us.
There	had	been	no	defence.	Hannan	Mosag,	Rhulad,	the	slave	Udinaas	and
Feather	Witch.	Hull	Beddict.	The	names	skittered	away	in	her	mind,	and	she
saw—with	a	sudden	twisting	of	her	insides	that	left	her	shocked—the	face	of
Trull	Sengar.	No.	It	was	Hull	I	was	thinking	of.	No.	Why	him?	‘But	they’re
dead.’
‘They’re	all	dead,’	Buruk	said	beside	her.	‘I	need	a	drink.’
His	hand	plucked	at	her	arm.
She	did	not	move.	‘There’s	nowhere	to	go.’
‘Acquitor.	The	tavern	beneath	the	hostel’s	built	solid	enough	to	withstand	a
siege.	I’d	imagine	that’s	where	those	soldiers	just	went,	to	toast	their	lost
comrades.	Poor	fools.	The	dead	ones,	I	mean.	Come	on,	Seren.	I’m	in	the
mood	to	spend	coin.’
Blinking,	she	looked	round.	The	mages	were	gone.
‘It’s	raining,	Acquitor.	Let’s	go.’
His	hand	closed	on	her	arm.	She	allowed	him	to	drag	her	away.
	
‘What’s	happened?’
‘You’re	in	shock,	Acquitor.	No	surprise.	Here,	I’ve	some	tea	for	you,	the
captain’s	own.	Enjoy	the	sunshine—it’s	been	rare	enough	lately.’
The	river ’s	swift	current	pulled	the	barge	along.	Ahead,	the	sun	was	faintly
copper,	but	the	breeze	sidling	across	the	water ’s	spinning	surface	was	warm.
She	took	the	cup	from	his	hands.
‘We’ll	be	there	by	dusk,’	Buruk	said.	‘Soon,	we	should	be	able	to	make	out
its	skyline.	Or	at	least	the	smoke.’
‘The	smoke,’	she	said.	‘Yes,	there	will	be	that.’
‘Think	on	it	this	way,	Seren.	You’ll	soon	be	free	of	me.’
‘Not	if	there’s	not	to	be	a	war.’
‘No.	I	intend	to	release	you	from	your	contract	in	any	case.’


She	looked	over	at	him,	struggled	to	focus.	There	had	been	a	night.	After
the	sorcerous	assault.	In	the	tavern.	Boisterous	soldiers.	Scouting	parties	were
to	head	north	the	next	day—today.	She	was	starting	to	recall	details,	the	gleam
of	some	strange	excitement	as	lurid	as	the	tavern’s	oil	lamps.	‘Why	would	you
do	that?’
‘My	need	for	you	is	ended,	Acquitor.’
‘Presumably,	the	Edur	will	sue	for	peace.	If	anything,	Buruk,	you	will	find
yourself	far	busier	than	ever.’	She	sipped	the	tea.
He	nodded,	slowly,	and	she	sensed	from	him	a	kind	of	resignation.
‘Oh,’	she	said,	‘I’d	forgotten.	You	must	needs	make	yourself	of	no	use.’
‘Indeed.	My	days	as	a	spy	are	over,	Acquitor.’
‘You	will	be	the	better	for	it,	Buruk.’
‘Assuredly.’
‘Will	you	stay	in	Trate?’
‘Oh	yes.	It	is	my	home,	after	all.	I	intend	never	to	leave	Trate.’
Seren	drank	her	tea.	Mint,	and	something	else	that	thickened	her	tongue.
Flowed	turgid	and	cloying	through	her	thoughts.	‘You	have	poisoned	this	tea,
Buruk.’	The	words	slurred.
‘Had	to,	Seren	Pedac.	Since	last	night.	I	can’t	have	you	thinking	clearly.	Not
right	now.	You’ll	sleep	again.	One	of	the	dockhands	will	waken	you	tonight—I
will	make	sure	of	that,	and	that	you’re	safe.’
‘Is	this	another…another	betrayal?’	She	felt	herself	sagging	on	the	bench.
‘My	last,	dear.	Remember	this,	if	you	can:	I	didn’t	want	your	help.’
‘My…help.’
‘Although,’	he	added	from	a	great	distance,	‘you	have	always	held	my
heart.’
	
Fierce	pain	behind	her	eyes.	She	blinked	them	open.	It	was	night.	A	robe
covered	her,	tucked	up	round	her	chin.	The	slow	rise	and	fall	beneath	her	and
the	faint	creaks	told	her	she	was	still	aboard	the	barge,	which	was	now	tied	up
alongside	a	stone	pier.	Groaning,	she	sat	up.
Scuffling	sounds	beside	her,	then	a	tankard	was	hovering	before	her	face.
‘Drink	this,	lass.’
She	did	not	recognize	the	voice,	but	pushed	the	tankard	away.
‘No,	it’s	all	right,’	the	man	insisted.	‘Just	ale.	Clean,	cool	ale.	To	take	the
ache	from	your	head.	He	said	you’d	be	hurting,	you	see.	And	ale’s	always	done
it	for	me,	when	I	done	and	drunk	too	much.’
‘I	wasn’t	drunk—’


‘No	matter,	you	wasn’t	sleeping	a	natural	sleep.	It	ain’t	no	different,	you
see?	Come	now,	lass,	I	need	to	get	you	up	and	around.	It’s	my	wife,	you	see,
she’s	poorly.	We’re	past	the	third	bell	an’	I	don’t	like	leaving	her	too	long
alone.	But	he	paid	me	good.	Errant	knows,	more	than	an	honest	man	makes	in	a
year.	Jus’	to	sit	with	you,	you	see.	See	you’re	safe	an’	up	and	walking.’
She	struggled	to	her	feet,	clutching	at	and	missing	the	cloak	as	it	slipped
down	to	her	feet.
The	dockhand,	a	bent,	wizened	old	man,	set	the	tankard	down	and	collected
it.	‘Turn	now,	lass.	I	got	the	clasps.	There’s	a	chill	this	night—you’re	shivering.
Turn	now,	yes,	good,	that’s	it.’
‘Thank	you.’	The	weight	of	the	cloak	pulled	at	her	neck	muscles	and
shoulders,	making	the	pain	in	her	head	throb.
‘I	had	a	daughter,	once.	A	noble	took	her.	Debts,	you	see.	Maybe	she’s
alive,	maybe	she	isn’t.	He	went	through	lasses,	that	one.	Back	in	Letheras.	We
couldn’t	stay	there,	you	see,	not	after	that.	Chance	t’see	her,	or	a	body	turning
up,	like	they	do.	Anyway,	she	was	tall	like	you,	that’s	all.	Here,	have	some	ale.’
She	accepted	the	tankard,	drank	down	three	quick	mouthfuls.
‘There,	better	now.’
‘I	have	to	go.	So	do	you,	to	your	wife.’
‘Well	enough,	lass.	Can	you	walk?’
‘Where’s	my	pack?’
‘He	took	it	with	him,	said	you	could	collect	it.	In	the	shed	behind	his	house.
He	was	specific	’bout	that.	The	shed.	Don’t	go	in	the	house,	he	said.	Very
specific—’
She	swung	to	the	ladder.	‘Help	me.’
Rough	hands	under	her	arms,	moving	down	to	her	behind	as	she	climbed,
then	her	thighs.	‘Best	I	can	do,	lass,’	came	a	gasp	below	her	as	she	moved
beyond	his	reach.	She	clambered	onto	the	pier.
‘Thank	you,	sir,’	she	said.
The	city	was	quiet,	barring	a	pair	of	dogs	scrapping	somewhere	behind	a
warehouse.	Seren	stumbled	on	occasion	as	she	hurried	down	the	streets.	But,
true	to	the	dockhand’s	word,	the	ale	dulled	the	pain	behind	her	eyes.	Made	her
thoughts	all	too	clear.
She	reached	Buruk	the	Pale’s	home,	an	old	but	well-maintained	house
halfway	down	a	row	on	the	street	just	in	from	the	riverside	warehouses.
No	lights	showed	behind	the	shuttered	windows.
Seren	climbed	the	steps	and	drove	her	boot	against	the	door.
Four	kicks	and	the	locks	broke.	By	this	time,	neighbours	had	awakened.
There	were	shouts,	calls	for	the	guard.	Somewhere	down	the	row	a	bell	began


ringing.
She	followed	the	collapsing	door	into	the	cloakroom	beyond.	No	servants,
no	sound	from	within.	Into	the	dark	hallway,	ascending	the	stairs	to	the	next
level.	Another	hallway,	step	by	step	closing	in	on	the	door	to	Buruk’s	bedroom.
Through	the	doorway.	Inside.
Where	he	hung	beneath	a	crossbeam,	face	bloated	in	the	shadows.	A
toppled	chair	off	to	one	side,	up	against	the	narrow	bed.
A	scream,	filled	with	rage,	tore	loose	from	Seren’s	throat.	Below,	boots	on
the	stairs.
She	screamed	again,	the	sound	falling	away	to	a	hoarse	sob.
You	have	always	held	my	heart.
	
Smoke	rising	in	broad	plumes,	only	to	fall	back	and	unfold	like	a	grey	cloak
over	the	lands	to	the	north.	Obscuring	all,	hiding	nothing.
Hanradi	Khalag’s	weathered	face	was	set,	expressionless,	as	he	stared	at	the
distant	devastation.	Beside	the	chief	of	the	Merude,	Trull	Sengar	remained
silent,	wondering	why	Hanradi	had	joined	him	at	this	moment,	when	the	mass
of	warriors	were	in	the	midst	of	breaking	camp	on	the	forested	slopes	all
around	them.
‘Hull	Beddict	spoke	true,’	the	chief	said	in	his	raspy	voice.	‘They	would
strike	pre-emptively.	Beneda,	Hiroth	and	Arapay	villages.’
A	night	of	red	fires	filling	the	north.	At	least	four	villages,	and	among
them	Trull’s	own.	Destroyed.
He	swung	round	to	study	the	slopes.	Seething	with	warriors,	Edur	women
and	their	slaves,	elders	and	children.	No	going	back,	now.	The	Letherii	sorcery
has	obliterated	our	homes…but	those	homes	were	empty,	the	villages	left	to	the
crows.
And	a	handful	of	hapless	Nerek.
Nothing	but	ashes,	now.
‘Trull	Sengar,’	Hanradi	Khalag	said,	‘our	allies	arrived	last	night.	Three
thousand.	You	were	seen.	It	seems	they	know	you	well,	if	only	by	reputation.
The	sons	of	Tomad	Sengar,	but	you	especially.	The	one	who	leads	them	is
called	the	Dominant.	A	hulk	of	a	man,	even	for	one	of	his	kind.	More	grey	than
black	in	his	mane.	He	is	named	B’nagga—’
‘This	does	not	interest	me,	Chief,’	Trull	cut	in.	‘They	have	been	as	sorely
used	as	we	have,	and	that	use	is	far	from	over.	I	do	not	know	this	B’nagga.’
‘As	I	said,	he	knows	you,	and	would	speak	with	you.’
Trull	turned	away.


‘You	had	best	accept	the	truth	of	things,	Trull	Sengar—’
‘One	day	I	will	know	your	mind,	Hanradi	Khalag.	The	self	you	hide	so
well.	Hannan	Mosag	bent	you	to	his	will.	And	now	you	kneel	before	my
brother,	the	emperor.	The	usurper.	Is	this	what	the	unification	of	the	tribes	was
intended	to	mean?	Is	this	the	future	you	desired?’
‘Usurper.	Words	like	that	will	see	you	killed	or	cast	out.’
Trull	grunted.	‘Rhulad	is	with	the	western	army—’
‘But	the	wraiths	now	serve	him.’
‘Ah,	and	we	are	to	have	spies	among	us	now?	An	emperor	who	fears	his
own.	An	emperor	who	would	be	immune	to	criticism.	Someone	must	speak	in
the	name	of	reason.’
‘Speak	no	more	of	this.	Not	to	me.	I	reject	all	you	say.	You	are	being
foolish,	Trull	Sengar.	Foolish.	Your	anger	is	born	of	envy.	No	more.’	He
turned	and	walked	back	down	the	narrow	track,	leaving	Trull	alone	once	again
on	the	precipice	rising	above	the	valleys	of	the	pass.	It	did	not	occur	to	him	to
see	if	Hanradi	had	indeed	lost	his	shadow.
A	precipice.	Where	he	could	look	down	and	watch	the	thousands	swarm
among	the	trees.
Three	land	armies	and	four	fleets	held,	divided	among	them,	the	entire
population	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	This	camp	before	him	was	a	league	wide	and	two
leagues	deep.	Trull	had	never	seen	so	many	Edur	gathered	in	one	place.	Hiroth,
Arapay,	Sollanta,	Beneda.
He	caught	movement	below,	on	the	edge	of	Fear ’s	command	area,	squat,
fur-clad	figures,	and	felt	himself	grow	cold.	Our…allies.
Jheck.
Summoned	by	the	Edur	they	had	killed.	Worshippers	of	the	sword.
The	night	just	past,	beginning	at	dusk,	had	vanished	behind	a	nightmarish
display	of	sorcery.	Unimaginable	powers	unveiled	by	the	Letherii	mages,	an
expression	of	appalling	brutality	in	its	intent.	This	was	clearly	going	to	be	a
war	where	no	quarter	was	given,	where	conquest	and	annihilation	were,	for	the
Letherii,	synonymous.	Trull	wondered	if	Rhulad	would	answer	in	like	manner.
Except	we	have	no	homes	to	return	to.	We	are	committed	to	occupation	of
the	south.	Of	Lether.	We	cannot	raze	the	cities…can	we?	He	drew	a	deep	breath.
He	needed	to	talk	to	Fear	again.	But	his	brother	had	plunged	into	his	role	as
commander	of	this	army.	His	lead	elements,	half	a	day	ahead,	would	come
within	sight	of	High	Fort.	The	army	would	cross	the	Katter	River	at	the
Narrow	Chute,	which	was	spanned	by	a	stone	bridge	centuries	old,	then	swing
down	to	join	those	lead	elements.
And	there	would	be	a	battle.


For	Fear,	the	time	for	questions	was	past.
But	why	can	I	not	manage	the	same	for	myself?	Certainty,	even	fatality,
eluded	Trull.	His	mind	would	not	rest	from	its	tortured	thoughts,	his	worries	of
what	awaited	them.
He	made	his	way	down	the	track.	The	Jheck	were	there,	a	contingent
present	in	Fear ’s	command	area.	He	was	not	required,	he	told	himself,	to	speak
to	them.
Edur	warriors	readying	armour	and	weapons	on	all	sides.	Women	chanting
protective	wards	to	weave	a	net	of	invisibility	about	the	entire	encampment.
Wraiths	darting	among	the	trees,	most	of	them	streaming	southward,	through
the	pass	and	into	the	southlands.	Here	and	there,	demonic	conjurations	towered,
hulking	and	motionless	along	the	many	newly	worn	trails	leading	to	the
summit.	They	were	in	full	armour	of	bronze	scales,	green	with	verdigris,	with
heavy	helms,	the	cheek	guards	battered	plates	that	reached	down	past	the
jawlines,	their	faces	hidden.	Polearms,	glaives,	double-edged	axes	and	maces,
an	array	of	mêlée	weapons.	Once,	not	so	long	ago,	such	summoned	demons
had	been	rare,	the	ritual—conducted	by	women—one	of	cajoling,	false
promises	and	final	deception.	The	creatures	were	bound,	now	doomed	to	fight
a	war	not	of	their	making,	where	the	only	release	was	annihilation.	They
numbered	in	the	high	hundreds	in	this,	Fear ’s	army.	The	truth	of	that	sickened
him.
Helping	with	the	striking	of	tents,	children.	Torn	from	their	familiar
world,	subject	to	a	new	shaping.	If	this	gambit	failed…
Fear	was	standing	near	the	remnants	of	a	hearth	from	which	smoke	rose	in
a	low	wreath	about	his	legs.	Flanked	by	the	two	K’risnan	the	emperor	had
attached	to	this	force.	Hanradi	Khalag	stood	off	to	one	side.
A	Jheck	was	approaching,	probably	the	one	the	Merude	chief	had	spoken
of,	given	the	wild	iron-streaked,	tangled	head	of	hair,	the	flattened,	seamed
face	displaying	countless	battle-scars.	Various	shells	dangled	from	knotted
strips	hanging	on	his	sleeveless	sealskin	shirt.	Other	small	trophies	depended
from	a	narrow	belt	beneath	the	man’s	round	paunch—pieces	of	Edur	armour,
jewellery.	A	bold	reminder	of	past	enmity.
What	had	Hanradi	called	him?	The	Dominant.	B’nagga.
The	Jheck’s	eyes	were	yellow,	the	whites	dull	grey	and	embryonic	with
blue	vessels.	They	looked	half	mad.
Filed	teeth	flashed	in	a	fierce	smile.	‘See	who	comes,	Fear	Sengar!’	The
accent	was	awkward	behind	the	Arapay	intonations.	‘The	one	we	could	not
defeat!’
Trull	scowled	as	his	brother	turned	to	watch	him	approach.	To	the


Dominant,	he	said,	‘You’ll	find	no	fields	of	ice	to	the	south,	Jheck.’
‘Mange	and	moult,	Slayer.	No	other	enemy	gives	us	such	terror.’	His
broadening	smile	underscored	the	irony	of	his	words.	‘Fear	Sengar,	your
brother	is	worthy	of	much	pride.	Again	and	again,	my	hunters	sought	to	best
this	warrior	in	individual	combat.	Veered	or	sembled,	it	mattered	not.	He
defeated	them	all.	Never	before	have	we	witnessed	such	skill,	such	ferocity.’
‘Among	all	who	I	trained,	B’nagga,’	Fear	said,	‘Trull	was	and	remains	the
finest.’
Trull	started,	then	his	scowl	deepened	with	disbelief.	‘Enough	of	this.	Fear,
has	our	emperor	spoken	to	us	through	the	wraiths?	Does	he	voice	his
satisfaction	at	the	failed	attempt	by	the	Letherii?	Does	he	spit	with	rage?’
One	of	the	K’risnan	spoke.	‘Not	a	single	Edur	was	lost,	Trull	Sengar.	For
that,	we	have	Hull	Beddict	to	thank.’
‘Ah	yes,	the	traitor.	And	what	of	the	Nerek	camped	in	our	village?’
The	warlock	shrugged.	‘We	could	not	command	them.’
‘Relinquish	your	anger,	brother,’	Fear	said.	‘The	devastation	was	wrought
by	the	Letherii,	not	us.’
‘True.	And	now	it	is	our	turn.’
‘Yes.	The	wraiths	have	reported	an	army	ascending	to	the	pass.’
Ah,	no.	So	soon.
B’nagga	laughed.	‘Do	we	ambush	them?	Shall	I	send	my	wolves	forward?’
‘They	are	not	yet	at	the	bridge,’	Fear	replied.	‘I	expect	they	will	seek	to
contest	that	crossing	should	we	fail	to	reach	it	before	them.	For	the	moment,
however,	they	are	in	a	slow-march,	and,	it	seems,	not	expecting	much
opposition.’
‘That	much	is	clear,’	Hanradi	said.	‘What	commander	would	seek	an
engagement	against	an	enemy	upslope?	This	is	a	probe.	At	first	contact	they
will	withdraw.	Back	to	High	Fort.	Fear,	we	should	bloody	them	all	the	way.’
‘B’nagga,	send	half	your	force	forward.	Observe	the	enemy,	but	remain
unseen.’
The	K’risnan	who	had	spoken	earlier	said,	‘Fear,	there	will	be	a	mage
cadre	attached	to	the	army.’
Fear	nodded.	‘Withdraw	the	wraiths	barring	a	dozen	or	so.	I	would	convey
the	belief	that	those	few	are	but	residents	of	the	area.	The	enemy	must	remain
unsuspecting.	Hanradi	Khalag,	our	warriors	must	be	made	ready	to	march.	You
will	lead	them.’
‘We	shall	be	under	way	before	mid-morning.’
Trull	watched	the	Merude	chief	walk	away,	then	said,	‘Those	Letherii
mages	will	prove	troublesome.’


The	K’risnan	grunted.	‘Trull	Sengar,	we	are	their	match.’
He	looked	at	the	two	warlocks.	Chiefs’	sons.	Of	Rhulad’s	age.
The	K’risnan’s	smile	was	knowing.	‘We	are	linked	to	Hannan	Mosag,	and
through	him	to	the	emperor	himself.	Trull	Sengar,	the	power	we	now	call	upon
is	more	vast,	and	deadlier,	than	any	the	Edur	have	known	before.’
‘And	that	does	not	concern	you?	What	is	the	aspect	of	this	power?	Do	you
even	know?	Does	Hannan	Mosag	know?	Rhulad?’
‘The	power	comes	to	the	emperor	through	the	sword,’	the	K’risnan	said.
‘That	is	no	answer—’
‘Trull!’	Fear	snapped.	‘No	more.	I	have	asked	that	you	assemble	a	unit
from	our	village.	Have	you	done	so?’
‘Yes,	brother.	Fifty	warriors,	half	of	them	unblooded,	as	you	commanded.’
‘And	have	you	created	squads	and	chosen	your	officers?’
Trull	nodded.
‘Lead	them	to	the	bridge.	Take	advance	positions	on	the	other	side	and	wait
until	Hanradi’s	forces	reach	you—it	should	not	be	a	long	wait.’
‘And	if	the	Letherii	have	sent	scouts	ahead	and	they	arrive	first?’
‘Gauge	their	strength	and	act	accordingly.	But	Trull,	no	last	stands.	A
skirmish	will	suffice	to	hold	up	the	enemy’s	advance,	particularly	if	they	are
uncertain	as	to	your	strength.	Now,	gather	your	warriors	and	be	off.’
‘Very	well.’
There	was	no	point	in	arguing	any	further,	he	told	himself	as	he	made	his
way	to	where	his	company	waited.	No	one	wanted	to	listen.	Independent
thought	had	been	relinquished,	with	appalling	eagerness,	it	seemed	to	him,	and
in	its	place	had	risen	a	stolid	resolve	to	question	nothing.	Worse,	Trull	found
he	could	not	help	himself.	Even	as	he	saw	the	anger	grow	in	the	faces	of	those
around	him—anger	that	he	dare	challenge,	that	he	dare	think	in	ways	contrary
to	theirs,	and	so	threaten	their	certainty—he	was	unable	to	stay	silent.
Momentum	was	building	all	around	him,	and	the	stronger	it	grew,	the
more	he	resisted	it.	In	a	way,	he	suspected,	he	was	becoming	as	reactionary	as
they	were,	driven	into	extreme	opposition,	and	though	he	struggled	against	this
dogmatic	obstinacy	it	was	a	battle	he	sensed	he	was	losing.
There	was	nothing	of	value	in	such	opposed	positions	of	thought.	And	no
possible	conclusion	but	his	own	isolation	and,	eventually,	the	loss	of	trust.
His	warriors	were	waiting,	gear	packed,	armour	donned.	Trull	knew	them
all	by	name,	and	had	endeavoured	to	achieve	a	balanced	force,	not	just	in	skill
but	in	attitude.	Accordingly,	he	knew	many	of	them	resented	being	under	his
command,	for	his	dissatisfaction	with	this	war	was	well	known.	None	the	less,
he	knew	they	would	follow	him.


There	were	no	nobles	among	them.
Trull	joined	the	warrior	he	had	chosen	as	his	captain.	Ahlrada	Ahn	had
trained	alongside	Trull,	specializing	in	the	Merude	cutlass	as	his	preferred
weapon.	He	was	left-handed,	rare	among	the	Edur,	yet	used	his	other	hand	to
wield	a	short,	wide-bladed	knife	for	close	fighting.	The	bell-hilt	of	his	cutlass
sprouted	a	profusion	of	quillons	designed	to	trap	opposing	sword-blades	and
spear-shafts,	and	his	ceaseless	exercises	concentrating	on	that	tactic	had	made
his	left	wrist	almost	twice	the	bulk	of	its	opposite.	Trull	had	seen	more	than
one	of	his	practice	spears	snap	at	a	shoulder-wrenching	twist	from	Ahlrada’s
sword-arm.
The	warrior	also	hated	him,	for	reasons	Trull	had	yet	to	fathom.	Although
now,	he	amended,	Ahlrada	had	probably	found	a	new	reason.
‘Captain.’
The	dark	eyes	would	not	meet	his.	They	never	did.	Ahlrada’s	skin	was
darker	than	any	other	Edur	Trull	had	seen.	There	were	colourless	streaks	in	his
long,	unbound	hair.	Shadow	wraiths	swarmed	round	him—another	strange
detail	unique	to	the	warrior.	‘Leader,’	he	replied.
‘Inform	the	sergeants,	we’re	heading	out.	Minimum	kits—we	need	to	travel
quickly.’
‘Already	done.	We	were	waiting	for	you.’
Trull	walked	over	to	his	own	gear,	shouldered	the	small	leather	pack,	then
selected	four	spears	from	his	cache.	Whatever	was	left	behind	would	be
collected	by	the	Letherii	slaves	and	carried	with	the	main	body	as	it	made	its
cautious	way	south	in	the	wake	of	Trull’s	company	and	Hanradi’s	forces.
When	he	turned,	he	saw	that	the	company	were	on	their	feet,	all	eyes	fixed
on	him.	‘We	must	needs	run,	warriors.	The	south	end	of	the	bridge.	Once
through	the	pass,	each	squad	sends	out	a	point	and	makes	its	own	way	off-trail
down	to	the	bridge.	Thus,	you	must	be	both	swift	and	silent.’
A	sergeant	spoke.	‘Leader,	if	we	leave	the	trail	we	are	slowed.’
‘Then	we	had	best	get	moving.’
‘Leader,’	the	sergeant	persisted,	‘we	will	lose	speed—’
‘I	do	not	trust	the	trail	beyond	the	pass,	Canarth.	Now,	move	out.’	In	his
head	he	cursed	himself.	A	leader	need	not	give	reasons.	The	command	was
sufficient.	Nor,	he	silently	added,	was	a	sergeant	expected	to	voice	public
challenge.	This	was	not	beginning	well.
One	squad	in	the	lead,	followed	by	Trull,	then	the	remaining	squads	with
Ahlrada	taking	up	the	rear,	the	company	set	out	for	the	pass	at	a	steady	run.
They	quickly	left	the	camp	behind.	Then,	through	an	avenue	provided	them,
they	swept	past	Hanradi	Khalag’s	forces.


Trull	found	pleasure,	and	relief,	in	the	pace	they	set.	The	mind	could
vanish	in	the	steady	rhythm,	and	the	forest	slid	past	with	each	stride,	the	trees
growing	more	stunted	and	thinner	on	the	ground	the	closer	they	approached
the	summit,	while	overhead	the	sun	climbed	a	cloudless	sky.
Shortly	before	mid-morning	they	halted	on	the	south	end	of	the	pass.	Trull
was	pleased	to	see	that	none	of	his	warriors	was	short	of	breath,	instead
drawing	long,	deep	lungfuls	to	slow	their	hearts.	The	exertion	and	the	heat	left
them,	one	and	all,	sheathed	in	sweat.	They	drank	a	little	water,	then	ate	a	small
meal	of	dried	salmon	and	thin	bread	wrapped	round	pine	nut	paste.
Rested	and	fed,	the	warriors	formed	up	into	their	squads,	then,	without
another	word,	headed	into	the	sparse	forest	to	either	side	of	the	trail.
Trull	elected	to	accompany	the	squad	led	by	Canarth.	They	headed	into	the
forest	on	the	trail’s	west	side,	then	began	the	slow,	silent	descent,	staying	thirty
or	so	paces	from	the	main	path.	Another	squad	was	further	west,	fifteen	paces
distant,	whilst	the	third	trailed	midway	between	them	and	thirty	paces	back.	An
identical	pattern	had	been	formed	on	the	eastern	side.
Sergeant	Canarth	made	his	disapproval	plain,	constantly	edging	ahead	until
he	was	almost	on	the	heels	of	the	warrior	at	point.	Trull	thought	to	gesture	him
back	but	Canarth	was	ignoring	him	as	if	he	was	not	there.
Then,	halfway	down	the	slope,	the	point	halted	and	crouched	low,	one	hand
reaching	back	to	stop	Canarth.
Trull	and	the	others	also	ceased	moving.	The	forest	had	thickened	during
the	descent,	an	army	of	blackened	pine	boles	blocking	line	of	sight	beyond
fifteen	paces.	There	was	little	undergrowth,	but	the	slope	was	uneven	and
treacherous	with	moss-coated	boulders	and	rotting	tree-falls.	A	glance	to	his
right	showed	the	nearest	warrior	of	the	flanking	squad	a	half-dozen	paces
further	down,	but	now	also	halted,	one	hand	raised,	his	gaze	fixed	on	Trull.
Ahead,	the	point	was	whispering	to	Canarth.	After	a	moment,	the	sergeant
reversed	direction	and	made	his	way	cautiously	back	to	where	Trull	and	the
others	waited.
‘There	is	a	scout	on	the	edge	of	the	main	trail.	Faraed,	likely	serving	with
the	Letherii	army.	He	has	a	good	line	of	sight	on	the	trail	itself,	maybe	seventyfive	or	more	paces.’
Trull	looked	back	at	the	rest	of	the	squad.	He	singled	one	warrior	out	and
beckoned	him	closer.	‘Badar,	go	back	to	the	third	squad.	They	are	to	choose	a
warrior	to	head	upslope	a	hundred	and	twenty	paces,	then	cut	in	to	the	main
path.	He	is	then	to	make	his	way	down,	as	if	on	point.	Once	you	have	delivered
the	message,	return	to	us.’
Badar	nodded	and	slipped	away.


‘What	of	us?’	Canarth	asked.
‘We	wait,	then	join	the	squad	to	our	west.	Make	our	way	down	below	the
scout’s	position,	and	lay	our	own	trap.’
‘What	of	the	squads	to	the	east	of	the	trail?’
A	good	question.	He	had	split	his	forces	with	no	way	of	communicating
with	half	his	company.	A	mistake.	‘We	had	best	hope	they	too	have	seen	the
scout.	And	will	have	rightly	judged	that	a	Faraed	is	virtually	impossible	to
sneak	up	on.’
The	sergeant	simply	nodded.	He	did	not	need	to	point	out	Trull’s	error.
Nor,	it	was	evident,	his	own.
We	even	out.	Fair	enough.
A	short	time	later	Badar	returned	and	gave	them	a	perfunctory	nod.	Trull
gestured	the	squad	to	follow	and	struck	out	westward	to	join	the	outlying
warriors.
Once	there,	he	quickly	related	his	plan	and	the	fifteen	warriors	set	off
downslope.
They	descended	sixty	paces	before	Trull	waved	them	towards	the	main
path.	The	position	they	reached	was	directly	below	a	crook	in	the	trail.	He	had
his	warriors	draw	and	ready	weapons.
Canarth	gestured.	‘Across	from	us,	Leader.	Rethal’s	squad.	They	have
anticipated	you.’
Trull	nodded.	‘Into	position.	We’ll	take	him	when	he	comes	opposite	us.’
Heartbeats.	The	sun’s	heat	bouncing	from	the	gravel	and	dust	of	the	trail.
Insects	buzzing	past.
Then,	light	thumping,	the	sound	swiftly	growing.	Suddenly	upon	them.
The	Faraed	was	a	blur,	plunging	round	the	bend	in	the	trail	then	flashing
past.
Spears	darted	out	shin-high	to	trip	him	up.
The	scout	leapt	them.
A	curse,	then	a	shaft	raced	past	Trull,	the	iron	head	crunching	into	the
Faraed’s	back,	between	the	shoulder	blades.	Snapping	through	the	spine.	The
scout	sprawled,	then	tumbled,	limbs	flopping,	and	came	to	a	rest	ten	paces
down	the	path.
Settling	dust.	Silence.
Trull	made	his	way	down	to	where	the	body	lay	in	a	twisted	heap.	The
scout,	he	saw,	was	a	boy.	Fourteen,	fifteen	years	of	age.	His	smeared	face	held
an	expression	of	surprise,	filling	the	eyes.	The	mouth	was	a	grimace	of	terror.
‘We	killed	a	child.’
‘An	enemy,’	Canarth	said	beside	him.	‘It	is	the	Letherii	you	must	look	to,


Leader.	They	throw	children	into	this	war.’	He	turned	to	face	uptrail.	‘Well
thrown,	Badar.	You	are	now	blooded.’
Badar	scrambled	down	and	retrieved	his	spear.
The	third	squad	appeared	at	the	crook.	One	of	them	spoke.	‘I	never	even
saw	him.’
‘Our	first	kill,	Leader,’	Ahlrada	Ahn	said.
Trull	felt	sick.	‘Drag	the	body	from	the	trail,	Sergeant	Canarth.	Cover	this
blood	with	dust.	We	must	move	on.’
	
The	bridge	was	not	a	bridge	at	all.	Trull	had	visited	it	once	before,	and	left	with
naught	but	questions.	Constructed,	it	seemed,	from	a	single	massive	disc,
notched	in	rows	across	its	rim,	which	was	broad	enough	to	permit	eight
warriors	to	stride	across	it	without	shoulders	touching.	The	disc	was	on	end,
filling	the	gap	of	the	deep	gorge	below	which	roared	the	Katter	River.	The
base	of	the	wheel	was	lost	in	the	chute’s	darkness	and	the	mist	rising
ceaselessly	from	the	rushing	water.	To	cross	to	the	other	side,	one	had	to	walk
that	curved,	slick	rim.	The	hub	of	the	enormous	wheel	was	visible,	at	least
three	man-lengths	down.	Thigh-thick	rods	of	polished	stone,	spear-shaft
straight,	angled	out	from	a	projection	on	the	hub	on	both	sides,	appearing	to
plunge	into	the	rock	wall	of	the	gorge’s	south	side.
The	squads	gathered	on	the	north	edge,	scanning	the	treeline	opposite.	Two
of	the	Edur	had	already	crossed,	one	returning	to	report	back.	No	signs	of
scouts,	no	evidence	of	recent	camps.	The	lone	Faraed	they	had	killed	seemed	to
have	been	sent	far	in	advance	of	the	main	forces,	or	had	taken	upon	himself	the
task	of	a	deep	mission.	His	courage	and	his	intelligence	had	cost	him	his	life.
Trull	approached	the	very	edge	of	the	wheel,	where	the	angle	of	the	stone
first	emerged	from	the	surrounding	rock.	As	before,	he	saw	a	thin,	milky	film
between	that	carved	perfection	and	the	rough	rock	of	the	precipice.	As	he	had
done	once	before,	long	ago,	he	wiped	that	foam	away	with	a	finger,	to	reveal
the	straight	line,	too	narrow	to	slip	a	dagger	blade	into,	that	separated	the
construct	from	the	raw	stone.	A	disc	in	truth,	somehow	set	into	the	notch	of	the
gorge.
And,	even	stranger,	the	disc	moved.	Incrementally	turning	in	place.	At	the
moment,	it	was	midway	along	one	of	the	shallow	grooves	carved	in	parallel
rows	across	the	rim.	He	knew	he	could	set	his	feet	on	that	first	notch,	and	halt.
And,	had	he	the	patience,	he	would	eventually—days,	maybe	a	week,	maybe
more—find	himself	stepping	off	onto	the	south	side	of	the	gorge.
A	mystery	without	an	answer.	Trull	suspected	it	was	never	intended	as	a


bridge.	Rather,	it	had	been	built	for	some	other	purpose.	It	did	not	make	sense
to	him	that	it	functioned	solely	as	what	had	immediately	occurred	to	him	the
first	time	he	had	visited.	There	were,	after	all,	easier	ways	to	measure	the
passage	of	time.
Trull	straightened,	then	waved	his	warriors	across.
Ahlrada	took	the	lead.
They	reached	the	other	side	and	fanned	out,	seeking	cover.	The	ground
resumed	its	downward	slope,	amidst	boulders,	pines	and	straggly	oaks.	They
would	cautiously	move	down	in	a	few	moments,	to	search	for	defensible
positions	that	permitted	a	line	of	sight	down	the	trail.
Trull	crouched	near	Ahlrada,	scanning	the	area	ahead,	when	he	heard	the
warrior	grunt,	then	step	away,	swearing	under	his	breath.
‘What’s	wrong,	Captain?’
‘I	felt	it…move.	Here.’
Trull	edged	over,	and	saw	that	Ahlrada’s	original	position	had	been	on	a
slightly	curved	panel	of	stone,	set	lower	than	the	surrounding	rock.	It	was
covered	in	dust	and	gravel,	but	looked	too	smooth	to	be	natural.	He	reached
down	and	brushed	the	panel	clear.
And	saw	arcane	symbols	carved	into	the	stone,	row	upon	row,	the	language
unknown	to	him.	Deeply	delineated	grooves	formed	an	incomplete	box	around
the	writing,	the	base	and	side	lines	visible.	Beneath	the	base	a	new	row	of
lettering	was	just	beginning	to	show.
Trull	glanced	back	at	the	bridge,	then	back	at	the	recessed	panel.	‘It
moved?’
‘Yes,	I	am	certain	of	it,’	Ahlrada	said.	‘Not	much,	but	yes.’
‘Was	there	a	sound?’
‘More	felt	than	heard,	Leader.	As	if	something	huge	and	buried	was…
shifting.’
Trull	stared	down	at	the	panel,	running	his	fingers	along	the	lettering.	‘Do
you	recognize	the	language?’
Ahlrada	shrugged	and	looked	away.	‘We	should	head	down,	Leader.’
‘You	have	seen	such	writing	before.’
‘Not	in…stone.	In	ice.	It	doesn’t	matter.’
‘Ice?’
‘I	once	lived	and	hunted	with	the	Den-Ratha,	on	the	north	coast.	North	and
east,	deep	into	the	ice	seas.	Before	the	unification.	There	was	a	wall,	covered	in
such	writing,	a	berg	that	blocked	our	way.	Twenty	man-heights	high,	half	a
league	wide.	But	it	sank	into	the	sea—it	was	gone	the	next	season.’
Trull	knew	that	Ahlrada	had,	like	Binadas,	journeyed	far	and	wide,	had


fashioned	blood-bound	kinships	with	many	Edur	from	rival	tribes.	And,	like
Trull	himself,	had	opposed	the	wars	of	subjugation	conducted	by	Hannan
Mosag.	By	all	counts,	he	realized,	they	should	be	friends.	‘What	did	your	DenRatha	comrades	say	about	it?’
‘The	Tusked	Man	wrote	them,	they	said.’	He	shrugged	again.	‘It	is	nothing.
A	myth.’
‘A	man	with	tusks?’
‘He	has	been…seen.	Over	generations,	sightings	every	now	and	then.	Skin
of	green	or	grey.	Tusks	white	as	whale-bone.	Always	to	the	north,	standing	on
snow	or	ice.	Leader,	this	is	not	the	time.’
Trull	sighed,	then	said,	‘Send	the	squads	down.’
A	short	time	later	Canarth	reported	that	he	smelled	rotting	meat.
But	it	was	only	a	dead	owl,	lying	beside	the	trail.

There	were	dark	times	for	the	Letherii,	so	long	ago	now.	The	First	Empire,	from
which	vast	fleets	had	sailed	forth	to	map	the	world.	The	coasts	of	all	six
continents	had	been	charted,	eight	hundred	and	eleven	islands	scattered	in	the
vast	oceans,	ruins	and	riches	discovered,	ancient	sorceries	and	fierce,	ignorant
tribes	encountered.	Other	peoples,	not	human,	all	of	whom	bled	easily	enough.
Barghast,	Trell,	Tartheno,	Fenn,	Mare,	Jhag,	Krinn,	Jheck…Colonies	had	been
established	on	foreign	coasts.	Wars	and	conquests,	always	conquests.	Until…all
was	brought	down,	all	was	destroyed.	The	First	Empire	collapsed	in	upon	itself.
Beasts	rose	in	the	midst	of	its	cities,	a	nightmare	burgeoning	like	plague.
The	Emperor	who	was	One	was	now	Seven,	and	the	Seven	were	scattered,
lost	in	madness.	The	great	cities	burned.	And	people	died	in	the	millions.
The	nightmare	had	a	name,	and	that	name	was	T’lan	Imass.
Two	words,	inspiring	hatred	and	terror.	But,	beyond	those	two	words,	there
was	nothing.	All	memory	of	who	or	what	the	T’lan	Imass	had	been	was	lost	in
the	chaos	that	followed.
Few	Letherii	remained	who	were	aware	of	even	that	much.	True,	they	knew
the	name	‘First	Empire’.	And	they	knew	of	the	fall	of	that	glorious	civilization
of	so	long	ago,	a	civilization	that	was	their	legacy.	And	little	else,	barring	the
prophecy	of	rebirth.
Udinaas	could	no	longer	make	that	claim	of	blissful	ignorance	for	himself.
Within	the	world	of	ghosts	and	shades,	the	past	lived	on,	breathed	like	a	thing
alive	and	ever	restive.	And	voices	haunted	him,	long	dead	voices.	The	Tiste


Andii	shade,	Wither,	was	indifferent	to	the	Letherii	slave’s	own	desires,	his
pleading	for	silence,	for	an	end	to	the	grisly	cacophony	of	regrets	which
seemed	to	be	all	that	held	ghosts	together.
Udinaas	knew	enough	horror,	here	among	the	living.	And	the	distilling	of
old	truths	was,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned,	not	worth	it.
T’lan	Imass.
T’lan	Imass…
What	did	he	care	about	some	ancient	nemesis?
Because	the	dust	of	over	four	thousand	of	them	was	beneath	their	feet	at
this	moment.	A	truth	riding	Wither ’s	raspy	laughter.
‘And	that	dust	has	eyes,	slave.	Should	you	fear?	Probably	not.	They’re	not
interested.	Much.	Not	enough	to	rise	up	and	slaughter	you	all,	which	they	might
not	succeed	in	doing	anyway.	But,	I	tell	you	this,	Udinaas,	they	would	give	it	a
good	try.’
‘If	they	are	dust,’	Udinaas	muttered,	‘they	cannot	slaughter	anyone.’
It	was	night.	He	sat	with	his	back	to	a	sloping	rock	face,	on	a	ledge	perched
above	the	massive	Edur	encampment.	The	emperor	had	sent	him	off	a	short
while	ago.	The	hulking,	gold-smeared	bastard	was	in	a	foul	mood.	Wearied
from	dragging	his	bulk	around,	arguments	with	Hannan	Mosag,	the	endless
logistics	of	moving	an	army	tens	of	thousands	strong,	families	in	tow.	Not	all
was	glory.
‘The	dust	can	rise,	Udinaas.	Can	take	shape.	Warriors	of	bone	and	withered
flesh,	with	swords	of	stone.	Where	are	these	ones	from?	Which	warleader	sent
them	here?	They	do	not	answer	our	questions.	They	never	do.	There	are	no
bonecasters	among	them.	They	are,	like	us,	lost.’
Udinaas	was	tired	of	listening.	The	wraith	was	worse	than	a	burrowing
tick,	buried	deep	in	his	brain.	He	had	begun	to	doubt	its	existence.	More	likely
the	product	of	madness,	a	persona	invented	in	his	own	mind.	An	inventor	of
secrets,	seeding	armies	of	ghosts	to	explain	the	countless	voices	whispering	in
his	skull.	Of	course,	it	would	insist	otherwise.	It	might	even	flit	across	his
vision,	creeping	disembodied,	the	sourceless,	inexplicably	moving	shadow
where	none	belonged.	But	the	slave	knew	his	eyes	could	be	deceived.	All	part
of	the	same	corrupted	perception.
The	wraith	hides	in	the	blood	of	the	Wyval.	The	Wyval	hides	in	the	shadow
of	the	wraith.	A	game	of	mutual	negation.	The	emperor	sensed	nothing.
Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan	sensed	nothing.	Feather	Witch,	Mayen,	Uruth,
the	host	of	bound	wraiths,	the	hunting	dogs,	the	birds	and	the	buzzing	insects—
all	sensed	nothing.
And	that	was	absurd.


As	far	as	Udinaas	was	concerned,	in	any	case—the	judgement	conjured	by
some	rational,	sceptical	part	of	his	brain,	that	knot	of	consciousness	the	wraith
endlessly	sought	to	unravel—Wither	was	not	real.
Wyval	blood.	Sister	of	Dawn,	the	sword-wielding	mistress	known	to	the
Edur	as	Menandore—her	and	the	hungry	place	between	her	legs.	Infection	and
something	like	rape.	He	thought	he	understood	the	connection	now.	He	was
indeed	infected,	and	true	to	Feather	Witch’s	prediction,	that	un-human	blood
was	driving	him	mad.	There	had	been	no	blazing	white	bitch	who	stole	his
seed.	Fevered	delusions,	visions	of	self-aggrandizement,	followed	by	the
paranoid	suspicion	that	the	promised	glory	had	been	stolen	from	him.
Thus	explaining	his	sordid	state	right	now,	slave	to	an	insane	Tiste	Edur.	A
slave,	huddled	beneath	every	conceivable	heel.	Cowering	and	useless	once	all
the	internal	posturing	and	self-justifications	were	cast	away.
Feather	Witch.	He	had	loved	her	and	he	would	never	have	her	and	that	was
that.	The	underscored	truth	laid	bare,	grisly	exposure	from	which	he	withheld
any	direct,	honest	examination.
Madmen	built	houses	of	solid	stone.	Then	circled	looking	for	a	way	inside.
Inside,	where	cosy	perfection	waited.	People	and	schemes	and	outright	lies
barred	his	every	effort,	and	that	was	the	heart	of	the	conspiracy.	From	outside,
after	all,	the	house	looked	real.	Therefore	it	was	real.	Just	a	little	more	clawing
at	the	stone	door,	a	little	more	battering,	one	more	pounding	collision	will
burst	that	barrier.
And	on	and	on	and	round	and	round.	The	worn	ruts	of	madness.
He	heard	scrabbling	on	the	stone	below,	and	a	moment	later	Feather	Witch
clambered	into	view.	She	pulled	herself	up	beside	him,	her	motions	jerky,	as	if
fevered.
‘Is	it	my	turn	to	run?’	he	asked.
‘Take	me	there,	Indebted.	That	dream	realm.	Where	I	found	you	before.’
‘You	were	right	all	along,’	Udinaas	said.	‘It	doesn’t	exist.’
‘I	need	to	go	there.	I	need	to	see	for	myself.’
‘No.	I	don’t	know	how.’
‘Idiot.	I	can	open	the	path.	I’m	good	at	opening	paths.’
‘Then	what?’
‘Then	you	choose.	Udinaas,	take	me	to	the	ghosts.’
‘This	is	not	a	good	place	to	do	that—’
She	had	one	hand	clenched	around	something,	and	she	now	reached	out
and	clutched	his	arm	with	that	hand,	and	he	felt	the	impression	of	a	tile	pressed
between	them.
And	there	was	fire.


Blinding,	raging	on	all	sides.
Udinaas	felt	a	weight	push	him	from	behind	and	he	stumbled	forward.
Through	the	flames.	In	the	world	he	had	just	left,	he	would	now	be	falling
down	the	cliffside,	briefly,	then	striking	the	rocky	slope	and	tumbling	towards
the	treeline.	But	his	moccasins	skidded	across	flat,	dusty	ground.
Twisting,	down	onto	one	knee.	Feather	Witch	staggered	into	view,	like	him
passing	unharmed	through	the	wall	of	fire.	He	wheeled	on	her.	‘What	have	you
done?’
A	hand	closed	round	the	back	of	his	neck,	lifted	him	clear	of	the	ground,
then	flung	him	down	onto	his	back.	The	cold,	ragged	edge	of	a	stone	blade
pressed	against	the	side	of	his	neck.	He	heard	Feather	Witch	scream.
Blinking,	in	a	cloud	of	dust.
A	man	stood	above	him.	Short	but	a	mass	of	muscles.	Broad	shoulders	and
overlong	arms,	the	honey-coloured	skin	almost	hairless.	Long	black	hair
hanging	loose,	surrounding	a	wide,	heavily	featured	face.	Dark	eyes	glittered
from	beneath	a	shelf-like	brow.	Furs	hung	in	a	roughly	sewn	cloak,	a
patchwork	of	tones	and	textures,	the	visible	underside	pale	and	wrinkled.
‘Peth	tol	ool	havra	d	ara.’	The	words	were	thick,	the	vocal	range	oddly
truncated,	as	if	the	throat	from	which	those	sounds	issued	lacked	the	flexibility
of	a	normal	man’s.
‘I	don’t	understand	you,’	Udinaas	said.	He	sensed	others	gathered	round,
and	could	hear	Feather	Witch	cursing	as	she	too	was	thrown	to	the	ground.
‘Arad	havra’d	ara.	En’aralack	havra	d’drah.’
Countless	scars.	Evidence	of	a	broken	forearm,	the	bone	unevenly	mended
and	now	knotted	beneath	muscle	and	skin.	The	man’s	left	cheekbone	was
dimpled	inward,	his	broad	nose	flattened	and	pressed	to	one	side.	None	of	the
damage	looked	recent.	‘I	do	not	speak	your	language.’
The	sword-edge	lifted	away	from	the	slave’s	neck.	The	warrior	stepped
back	and	gestured.
Udinaas	climbed	to	his	feet.
More	fur-clad	figures.
A	natural	basin,	steeply	walled	on	three	sides.	Vertical	cracks	in	the	stone
walls,	some	large	enough	to	provide	shelter.	Where	these	people	lived.
On	the	final	side	of	the	basin,	to	the	Letherii’s	left,	the	land	opened	out.
And	in	the	distance—the	slave’s	eyes	widened—a	shattered	city.	As	if	it	had
been	pulled	from	the	ground,	roots	and	all,	then	broken	into	pieces.	Timber
framework	beneath	tilted,	heaved	cobble	streets.	Squat	buildings	pitched	at
random	angles.	Toppled	columns,	buildings	torn	in	half	with	the	rooms	and
floors	inside	revealed,	many	of	those	rooms	still	furnished.	Vast	chunks	of


rotting	ice	were	visible	in	the	midst	of	the	broken	cityscape.
‘What	place	is	this?’	Feather	Witch	asked.
He	turned	to	see	her	following	his	gaze	from	a	few	paces	away.
‘Udinaas,	where	have	you	brought	us?	Who	are	these	savages?’
‘Vis	vol‘raele	absi‘arad.’
He	glanced	at	the	warrior	who’d	spoken,	then	shrugged	and	returned	his
attention	to	the	distant	city.	‘I	want	to	go	and	look.’
‘They	won’t	let	you.’
There	was	only	one	way	to	find	out.	Udinaas	set	out	for	the	plain.
The	warriors	simply	watched.
After	a	moment,	Feather	Witch	followed,	and	came	to	his	side.	‘It	looks	as
if	it	has	just	been…left	here.	Dropped.’
‘It	is	a	Meckros	city,’	he	said.	‘The	wood	at	the	bases,	it	is	the	kind	that
never	grows	waterlogged.	Never	rots.	And	see	there’—he	pointed—‘those	are
the	remnants	of	docks.	Landings.	That’s	a	ship’s	rail,	dangling	from	those
lines.	I’ve	never	seen	a	Meckros	city,	but	I’ve	heard	enough	descriptions,	and
this	is	one.	Plucked	from	the	sea.	That	ice	came	with	it.’
‘There	are	mounds,	freshly	raised,’	she	said.	‘Do	you	see	them?’
Raw,	dark	earth	rising	from	the	flats	around	the	ruins,	each	barrow	ringed
in	boulders.	‘The	savages	buried	the	Meckros	dead,’	he	said.
‘There	are	hundreds…’
‘And	every	one	big	enough	to	hold	hundreds	of	corpses.’
‘They	feared	disease,’	she	said.
‘Or,	despite	their	appearance,	they	are	a	compassionate	people.’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool,	Indebted.	The	task	would	have	taken	months.’
He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘That	was	but	one	clan,	Feather	Witch,	back	there.
There	are	almost	four	thousand	living	in	this	region.’
She	halted,	grasped	his	arm	and	pulled	him	round.	‘Explain	this	to	me!’	she
hissed.
He	twisted	his	arm	loose	and	continued	walking.	‘These	ghosts	hold	strong
memories.	Of	their	lives,	of	their	flesh.	Strong	enough	to	manifest	as	real,
physical	creatures.	They’re	called	T’lan	Imass—’
Her	breath	caught.	‘The	Beast	Hold.’
He	glanced	at	her.	‘What?’
‘The	Bone	Perch.	Elder,	Crone,	Seer,	Shaman,	Hunter	and	Tracker.	The
Stealers	of	Fire.	Stolen	from	the	Eres’al.’
‘Eres’al.	That’s	the	Nerek	goddess.	The	false	goddess,	or	so	claimed	our
scholars	and	mages,	as	justification	for	conquering	the	Nerek.	I	am	shocked	to
discover	the	lie.	In	any	case,	aren’t	the	images	on	the	tiles	those	of	beasts?	For


the	Beast	Hold,	I	mean.’
‘Only	among	the	poorer	versions.	The	skins	of	beasts,	draped	round	dark,
squat	savages.	That	is	what	you	will	see	on	the	oldest,	purest	tiles.	Do	not
pretend	at	ignorance,	Udinaas.	You	brought	us	here,	after	all.’
They	were	approaching	the	nearest	barrows,	and	could	see,	studding	the
raw	earth,	countless	objects.	Broken	pottery,	jewellery,	iron	weapons,	gold,
silver,	small	wooden	idols,	scraps	of	cloth.	The	remnant	possessions	of	the
people	buried	beneath.
Feather	Witch	made	a	sound	that	might	have	been	a	laugh.	‘They	left	the
treasure	on	the	surfaces,	instead	of	burying	it	with	the	bodies.	What	a	strange
thing	to	do.’
‘Maybe	so	looters	won’t	bother	digging	and	disturbing	the	corpses.’
‘Oh,	plenty	of	looters	around	here.’
‘I	don’t	know	this	realm	well	enough	to	say	either	way,’	Udinaas	said,
shrugging.
The	look	she	cast	him	was	uneasy.
Closer	now,	the	destroyed	city	loomed	before	them.	Crusted	barnacles
clinging	to	the	bases	of	massive	upright	wooden	pillars.	Black,	withered	strips
of	seaweed.	Above,	the	cross-sectioned	profiles	of	framework	and	platforms
supporting	streets	and	buildings.	And,	in	the	massive	chunks	of	grey,	porous
ice,	swaths	of	rotting	flesh—not	human.	Oversized	limbs,	clad	in	dull	scales.	A
long,	reptilian	head,	dangling	from	a	twisted,	torn	neck.	Entrails	spilled	from	a
split	belly.	Taloned,	three-toed	feet.	Serrated	tails.	Misshapen	armour	and
harnesses	of	leather,	stretches	of	brightly	coloured	cloth,	shiny	as	silk.
‘What	are	those	things?’
Udinaas	shook	his	head.	‘This	city	was	struck	by	ice,	even	as	it	was	torn
from	our	world.	Clearly,	that	ice	held	its	own	ancient	secrets.’
‘Why	did	you	bring	us	here?’
He	rounded	on	her,	struggled	to	contain	his	anger,	and	managed	to	release
it	in	a	long	sigh.	Then	he	said,	‘Feather	Witch,	what	was	the	tile	you	held	in
your	hand?’
‘One	of	the	Fulcra.	Fire.’	She	faltered,	then	resumed.	‘When	I	saw	you,	that
first	time,	I	lied	when	I	said	I	saw	nothing	else.	No-one.’
‘You	saw	her,	didn’t	you?’
‘Sister	Dawn…the	flames—’
‘And	you	saw	what	she	did	to	me.’
‘Yes.’	A	whisper.
Udinaas	turned	away.	‘Not	imagined,	then,’	he	muttered.	‘Not	conjured	by
my	imagination.	Not…madness…’


‘It	is	not	fair.	You,	you’re	nothing.	An	Indebted.	A	slave.	That	Wyval	was
meant	for	me.	Me,	Udinaas!’
He	flinched	from	her	rage,	even	as	understanding	struck	him.	Forcing	a
bitter	laugh.	‘You	summoned	it,	didn’t	you?	The	Wyval.	You	wanted	its	blood,
and	it	had	you,	and	so	its	poison	should	have	infected	you.	But	it	didn’t.	Instead,
it	chose	me.	If	I	could,	Feather	Witch,	I’d	give	it	to	you.	With	pleasure—no,	that
is	not	true,	much	as	I’d	like	it	to	be.	Be	thankful	that	blood	does	not	flow	in
your	veins.	It	is	in	truth	the	curse	you	said	it	was.’
‘Better	to	be	cursed	than—’	She	stopped,	looked	away.
He	studied	her	pale	face,	and	around	it	the	blonde,	crinkled	hair	shivering
in	the	vague,	near-lifeless	wind.	‘Than	what,	Feather	Witch?	A	slave	born	of
slaves.	Doomed	to	listen	to	endless	dreams	of	freedom—a	word	you	do	not
understand,	probably	will	never	understand.	The	tiles	were	to	be	your	way	out,
weren’t	they?	Not	taken	in	service	to	your	fellow	Letherii.	But	for	yourself.
You	caught	a	whisper	of	freedom,	didn’t	you,	deep	within	those	tiles?	Or,
something	you	thought	was	freedom.	For	what	it	is	worth,	Feather	Witch,	a
curse	is	not	freedom.	Every	path	is	a	trap,	a	snare,	to	entangle	you	in	the	games
of	forces	beyond	all	understanding.	Those	forces	probably	prefer	slaves	when
they	use	mortals,	since	slaves	understand	intrinsically	the	nature	of	the
relationship	imposed.’
She	glared	at	him.	‘Then	why	you?’
‘And	not	you?’	He	looked	away.	‘Because	I	wasn’t	dreaming	of	freedom.
Perhaps.	Before	I	was	a	slave,	I	was	Indebted—as	you	remind	me	at	every
opportunity.	Debt	fashions	its	own	kind	of	slavery,	Feather	Witch,	within	a
system	designed	to	ensure	few	ever	escape	once	those	chains	have	closed
round	them.’
She	lifted	her	hands	and	stared	at	them.	‘Are	we	truly	here?	It	all	seems	so
real.’
‘I	doubt	it,’	Udinaas	replied.
‘We	can’t	stay?’
‘In	the	world	of	the	tiles?	You	tell	me,	Feather	Witch.’
‘This	isn’t	the	realm	of	your	dreaming,	is	it?’
He	grimaced	to	hide	his	amusement	at	the	unintended	meaning	behind	her
question.	‘No.	I	did	warn	you.’
‘I	have	been	waiting	for	you	to	say	that.	Only	not	in	such	a	tone	of	regret.’
‘Expecting	anger?’
She	nodded.
‘I	had	plenty	of	that,’	he	admitted.	‘But	it	went	away.’
‘How?	How	do	you	make	it	go	away?’


He	met	her	eyes,	then	simply	shook	his	head.	A	casual	turning	away,	gaze
once	more	upon	the	ruins.	‘This	destruction,	this	slaughter.	A	terrible	thing	to
do.’
‘Maybe	they	deserved	it.	Maybe	they	did	something—’
‘Feather	Witch,	the	question	of	what	is	deserved	should	rarely,	if	ever,	be
asked.	Asking	it	leads	to	deadly	judgement,	and	acts	of	unmitigated	evil.
Atrocity	revisited	in	the	name	of	justice	breeds	its	own	atrocity.	We	Letherii	are
cursed	enough	with	righteousness,	without	inviting	yet	more.’
‘You	live	soft,	Udinaas,	in	a	very	hard	world.’
‘I	told	you	I	was	not	without	anger.’
‘Which	you	bleed	away,	somehow,	before	it	can	hurt	anyone	else.’
‘So	I	do	all	the	bleeding,	do	I?’
She	nodded.	‘I’m	afraid	you	do,	Udinaas.’
He	sighed	and	turned.	‘Let’s	go	back.’
Side	by	side,	they	made	their	way	towards	the	waiting	savages	and	their
village	of	caves.
‘Would	that	we	could	understand	them,’	Feather	Witch	said.
‘Their	shaman	is	dead.’
‘Damn	you,	Udinaas!’
Into	the	basin,	where	something	had	changed.	Four	women	had	appeared,
and	with	them	was	a	young	boy.	Who	was	human.
The	warrior	who	had	spoken	earlier	now	addressed	the	boy,	and	he	replied
in	the	same	language,	then	looked	over	at	Udinaas	and	Feather	Witch.	He
pointed,	then,	with	a	frown,	said,	‘Letherii.’
‘Do	you	understand	me?’	Udinaas	asked.
‘Some.’
‘You	are	Meckros?’
‘Some.	Letherii	Indebted.	Indebted.	Mother	and	father.	They	fled	to	live
with	Meckros.	Live	free,	freedom.	In	freedom.’
Udinaas	gestured	towards	the	ruined	city.	‘Your	home?’
‘Some.’	He	took	the	hand	of	one	of	the	women	attending	him.	‘Here.’
‘What	is	your	name?’
‘Rud	Elalle.’
Udinaas	glanced	at	Feather	Witch.	Rud	meant	found	in	the	Meckros	trade
tongue.	But,	of	course,	he	realized,	she	would	not	know	that.	‘Found	Elalle,’	he
said	in	the	traders’	language,	‘can	you	understand	me	better?’
The	boy’s	face	brightened.	‘Yes!	Good,	yes!	You	are	a	sailor,	like	my
father	was.	Yes.’
‘These	people	rescued	you	from	the	city?’


‘Yes.	They	are	Bentract.	Or	were,	whatever	that	means—do	you	know?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Found,	were	there	any	other	survivors?’
‘No.	All	dead.	Or	dying,	then	dead.’
‘And	how	did	you	survive?’
‘I	was	playing.	Then	there	were	terrible	noises,	and	screams,	and	the	street
lifted	then	broke,	and	my	house	was	gone.	I	slid	towards	a	big	crack	that	was
full	of	ice	fangs.	I	was	going	to	die.	Like	everyone	else.	Then	I	hit	two	legs.
Standing,	she	was	standing,	as	if	the	street	was	still	level.’
‘She?’
‘This	is	traders’	tongue,	isn’t	it?’	Feather	Witch	said.	‘I’m	starting	to
understand	it—it’s	what	you	and	Hulad	use	when	together.’
‘She	was	white	fire,’	the	boy	said.	‘Tall,	very	very	tall,	and	she	reached
down	and	picked	me	up.’	He	made	a	gesture	to	mime	a	hand	gripping	the	collar
of	his	weathered	shirt.	‘And	she	said:	Oh	no	he	won’t.	Then	we	were	walking.	In
the	air.	Floating	above	everything	until	we	all	arrived	here.	And	she	was
swearing.	Swearing	and	swearing.’
‘Did	she	say	anything	else,	apart	from	swearing?’
‘She	said	she	worked	hard	on	this	beget,	and	that	damned	legless	bastard
wasn’t	going	to	ruin	her	plans.	Not	a	chance,	no,	not	a	chance,	and	he’ll	pay	for
this.	What’s	beget	mean?’
‘I	thought	so,’	Feather	Witch	muttered	in	Letherii.
No.
‘Remarkable	eyes,’	Feather	Witch	continued.	‘Must	be	hers.	Yours	are
much	darker.	Duller.	But	that	mouth…’
No.	‘Found,’	Udinaas	managed,	‘how	old	are	you?’
‘I	forget.’
‘How	old	were	you	before	the	ice	broke	the	city?’
‘Seven.’
Triumphant,	Udinaas	spun	to	face	Feather	Witch.
‘Seven,’	the	boy	said	again.	‘Seven	weeks.	Mother	kept	saying	I	was
growing	too	fast,	so	I	must	be	tall	for	my	age.’
Feather	Witch’s	smile	was	strangely	broken.
The	Bentract	warrior	spoke	again.
The	boy	nodded,	and	said,	‘Ulshun	Pral	says	he	has	a	question	he	wants	to
ask	you.’
A	numbed	reply.	‘Go	ahead.’
‘Rae‘d.	Veb	entara	tog‘rudd	n‘lan	n‘vis	thal?	List	vah	olar	n‘lan?	Ste
shabyn?’
‘The	women	want	to	know	if	I	will	eat	them	when	I	get	older.	They	want	to


know	what	dragons	eat.	They	want	to	know	if	they	should	be	afraid.	I	don’t
know	what	all	that	means.’
‘How	can	they	be	eaten?	They’re—’	Udinaas	stopped.	Errant	take	me,	they
don’t	know	they’re	dead!	‘Tell	them	not	to	worry,	Found.’
‘Ki‘bri	arasteshabyn	bri	por‘tol	tun	logdara	kul	absi.’
‘Ulshun	Pral	says	they	promised	her	to	take	care	of	me	until	she	returns.’
‘Entara	tog‘rudd	av?’
The	boy	shook	his	head	and	replied	in	the	warrior ’s	language.
‘What	did	he	ask?’	Udinaas	demanded.
‘Ulshun	Pral	wanted	to	know	if	you’re	my	father.	I	told	him	my	father ’s
dead.	I	told	him,	no,	you	aren’t.	My	father	was	Araq	Elalle.	He	died.’
In	Letherii,	Feather	Witch	said,	‘Tell	him,	Udinaas.’
‘No.	There’s	nothing	to	tell.’
‘You	would	leave	him	to	that…woman?’
He	spun	to	face	her.	‘And	what	would	you	have	me	do?	Take	him	with	us?
We’re	not	even	here!’
‘T‘un	havra‘ad	eventara.	T‘un	veb	vol‘raele	bri	rea	han	d	En‘ev?’
The	boy	said,	‘Ulshun	Pral	is	understanding	you	now.	Some.	He	says	there
are	holes	and	would	you	like	to	go	there?’
‘Holes?’	Udinaas	asked.
Feather	Witch	snorted.	‘Gates.	He	means	gates.	I	have	been	sensing	them.
There	are	gates,	Udinaas.	Powerful	ones.’
‘All	right,’	Udinaas	said	to	Found.
‘I	don’t	like	that	place,’	the	boy	said.	‘But	I	will	come	with	you.	It’s	not	far.’
They	strode	towards	the	mouth	of	one	of	the	larger	caves.	Passed	into	the
cool	darkness,	the	rough	floor	sloping	upward	for	twenty	or	so	paces,	then
beginning	to	dip	again.	Into	caverns	with	the	walls	crowded	with	painted
images	in	red	and	yellow	ochre,	black	outlines	portraying	ancient	beasts
standing	or	running,	some	falling	with	spears	protruding	from	them.	Further
in,	a	smaller	cavern	with	black	stick-like	efforts	on	the	walls	and	ceiling,	a
struggling	attempt	by	the	T’lan	Imass	to	paint	their	own	forms.	Blooms	of	red
paint	outlining	ghostly	hand-prints.	Then	the	path	narrowed	and	began	a
gradual	ascent	once	more.	Ahead,	a	vertical	fissure	from	which	light	spilled
inward,	a	light	filled	with	flowing	colours,	as	if	some	unearthly	flame	burned
beyond.
They	emerged	onto	an	uneven	but	mostly	level	sweep	of	blackened
bedrock.	Small	boulders	set	end	to	end	formed	an	avenue	of	approach	from	the
cave	mouth	that	led	them	on	an	inward	spiral	towards	the	centre	of	the	clearing.
Beyond,	the	sky	shimmered	with	swirling	colours,	like	shattered	rainbows.	A


cairn	of	flat	stones	dominated	the	centre	of	the	spiral,	in	the	rough,	awkward
form	of	a	figure	standing	on	two	legs	made	of	stacked	stones,	a	single	broad
one	forming	the	hips,	the	torso	made	of	three	more,	the	arms	each	a	single
projecting,	rectangular	stone	out	to	the	side,	the	head	a	single,	oblong	rock
sheathed	in	lichen.	The	crude	figure	stood	before	a	squat	tower-like	structure
with	at	least	twelve	sides.	The	facings	were	smooth,	burnished	like	the	facets	of
natural	crystal.	Yet	light	in	countless	colours	flared	beneath	each	of	those
surfaces,	each	plane	spiralling	inward	to	a	dark	hole.
Udinaas	could	feel	a	pressure	in	the	air,	as	of	taut	forces	held	in	balance.
The	scene	seemed	perilously	fragile.
‘Vi	han	onralmashalle.	S‘ril	k‘ul	havra	En‘ev.	N‘vist‘.	Lan‘te.’
‘Ulshun	says	his	people	came	here	with	a	bonecaster.	It	was	a	realm	of
storms.	And	beasts,	countless	beasts	coming	from	those	holes.	They	did	not
know	what	they	were,	but	there	was	much	fighting.’
The	T’lan	Imass	warrior	spoke	again,	at	length.
‘Their	bonecaster	realized	that	the	breaches	must	be	sealed,	and	so	she
drew	upon	the	power	of	stone	and	earth,	then	rose	into	her	new,	eternal	body	to
stand	before	the	wounds.	And	hold	all	with	stillness.	She	stands	there	now	and
she	shall	stand	there	for	all	time.’
‘Yet	her	sacrifice	has	stranded	the	T’lan	Imass	here,	hasn’t	it?’	Udinaas
asked.
‘Yes.	But	Ulshun	and	his	people	are	content.’
‘Vi	truh	larpahal.	Ranag,	bhed,	tenag	tollarpahal.	Kul	havra	thelar.	Kul.’
‘This	land	is	a	path,	what	we	would	call	a	road,’	Found	said,	frowning	as
he	struggled	to	make	sense	of	Ulshun’s	words.	‘Herds	migrate,	back	and	forth.
They	seem	to	come	from	nowhere,	but	they	always	come.’
Because,	like	the	T’lan	Imass	themselves,	they	are	ghost	memories.
‘The	road	leads	here?’	Feather	Witch	asked	in	halting	traders’	tongue.
‘Yes,’	Found	said.
‘And	comes	from	where?’
‘Epal	en.	Vol‘sav,	thelan.’
The	boy	sighed,	crossed	his	arms	in	frustration.	‘Ulshun	says	we	are	in
an…overflow?	Where	the	road	comes	from	has	bled	out	to	claim	the	road
itself.	And	surround	this	place.	Beyond,	there	is…nothing.	Oblivion.
Unrealized.’
‘So	we	are	within	a	realm?’	Feather	Witch	asked.	‘Which	Hold	claims	this
place?’
‘A	evbrox‘l	list	Tev.	Starvald	Demelain	Tev.’
‘Ulshun	is	pleased	you	understand	Holds.	He	is	bright-gem-eye.	Pleased,


and	surprised.	He	calls	this	Hold	Starvald	Demelain.’
‘I	do	not	know	that	name,’	she	said,	scowling.
The	T’lan	Imass	spoke	again,	and	in	the	words	Udinaas	sensed	a	list.	Then
more	lists,	and	in	hearing	the	second	list,	he	began	to	recognize	names.
The	boy	shrugged.	‘T’iam,	Kalse,	Silannah,	Ampelas,	Okaros,	Karosis,
Sorrit,	Atrahal,	Eloth,	Anthras,	Kessobahn,	Alkend,	Karatallid,	Korbas…Olar.
Eleint.	Draconean.	Dragons.	The	Pure	Dragons.	The	place	where	the	road
comes	from	is	closed.	By	the	mixed	bloods	who	gathered	long	ago.	Draconus,
K’rul,	Anomandaris,	Osserc,	Silchas	Ruin,	Scabandari,	Sheltatha	Lore,	Sukul
Ankhadu	and	Menandore.	It	was,	he	says,	Menandore	who	saved	me.’	The
boy’s	eyes	suddenly	widened.	‘She	didn’t	look	like	a	dragon!’
Ulshun	spoke.
Found	nodded.	‘All	right.	He	says	you	should	be	able	to	pass	through	from
here.	He	looks	forward	to	seeing	you	again.	They	will	prepare	a	feast	for	you.
Tenag	calf.	You	are	coming	back,	aren’t	you?’
‘If	we	can,’	Feather	Witch	said,	then	switched	to	Letherii.	‘Aren’t	we,
Udinaas?’
He	scowled.	‘How	would	I	know?’
‘Be	gracious.’
‘To	you	or	them?’
‘Both.	But	especially	to	your	son.’
He	didn’t	want	to	hear	any	of	this,	and	chose	to	study	the	faceted	tower
instead.	Not	a	single	path,	then,	but	multiple	doorways.	At	least	twelve.	Twelve
other	worlds,	then?	What	would	they	be	like?	What	kind	of	creatures	populated
them?	Demons.	And	perhaps	that	was	all	the	word	‘demon’	meant.	Some
creature	torn	from	its	own	realm.	Bound	like	a	slave	by	a	new	master	who
cared	nothing	for	its	life,	its	well-being,	who	would	simply	use	it	like	any
other	tool.	Until	made	useless,	whereupon	it	would	be	discarded.
But	I	am	tired	of	sympathy.	Of	feeling	it,	at	least.	I’d	welcome	receiving	it,
if	only	to	salve	all	this	self-pity.	Be	gracious,	she	said.	A	little	rich,	coming
from	her.	He	looked	back	down	at	the	boy.	My	son.	No,	just	my	seed.	She	took
nothing	else,	needed	nothing	else.	It	was	the	Wyval	blood	that	drew	her,	it	must
have	been.	Nothing	else.	Not	my	son.	My	seed.
Growing	too	fast.	Was	that	the	trait	of	dragons?	No	wonder	the	T’lan	Imass
women	were	frightened.	He	sighed,	then	said,	‘Found,	thank	you.	And	our
thanks	as	well	to	Ulshun	Pral.	We	look	forward	to	a	feast	of	Tenag	calf.’	He
faced	Feather	Witch.	‘Can	you	choose	the	proper	path?’
‘Our	flesh	will	draw	us	back,’	she	replied.	‘Come,	we	have	no	idea	how
much	time	has	passed	in	our	world.’	She	took	him	by	the	hand	and	led	him	past


the	stone	figure.	‘Dream	worlds.	Imagine	what	we	might	see,	were	we	able	to
choose…’
‘They’re	not	dream	worlds,	Feather	Witch.	They’re	real.	In	those	places,
we	are	the	ghosts.’
She	snorted,	but	said	nothing.
Udinaas	turned	for	a	final	glance	back.	The	boy,	Found,	get	of	a	slave	and
a	draconic-blooded	woman,	raised	by	neither.	And	at	his	side	this	rudely
fashioned	savage	who	believed	he	still	lived.	Believed	he	was	flesh	and	blood,
a	hunter	and	leader	with	appetites,	desires,	a	future	to	stride	into.	Udinaas	could
not	decide	which	of	the	two	was	the	more	pathetic.	Seeing	them,	as	he	did	now,
they	both	broke	his	heart,	and	there	seemed	no	way	to	distinguish	between	the
two.	As	if	grief	had	flavours.
He	swung	round.	‘All	right,	take	us	back.’
Her	hand	tightened	on	his,	and	she	drew	him	forward.	He	watched	her
stride	into	the	wall	of	flaring	light.	Then	followed.
	
Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis,	called	Twilight	by	those	soldiers	under	her	command
who	possessed	in	their	ancestry	the	blood	of	the	long-vanished	indigenous
fishers	of	Fent	Reach—for	that	was	what	her	name	meant—stood	on	the
massive	wall	skirting	the	North	Coast	Tower,	and	looked	out	upon	the	waters
of	Nepah	Sea.	Behind	her,	a	broad,	raised	road	exited	from	the	base	of	the
watchtower	and	cut	a	straight	path	south	through	two	leagues	of	old	forest,	then
a	third	of	a	league	of	farmland,	to	end	at	the	crossroads	directly	before	the
Inland	Gate	of	the	fortified	city	of	Fent	Reach.
That	was	a	road	she	was	about	to	take.	In	haste.
Beside	her,	the	local	Finadd,	a	willow-thin,	haunted	man	whose	skin
seemed	almost	bloodless,	cleared	his	throat	for	the	third	time	in	the	last	dozen
heartbeats.
‘All	right,	Finadd,’	Twilight	said.
The	man	sighed,	a	sound	of	unabashed	relief.	‘I	will	assemble	the	squads,
Atri-Preda.’
‘In	a	moment.	You’ve	still	a	choice	to	make.’
‘Atri-Preda?’
‘By	your	estimate,	how	many	Edur	ships	are	we	looking	at?’
The	Finadd	squinted	northward.	‘Eight,	nine	hundred	of	their	raiders,	I
would	judge.	Merude,	Den-Ratha,	Beneda.	Those	oversized	transports—I’ve
not	seen	those	before.	Five	hundred?’
‘Those	transports	are	modelled	on	our	own,’	Twilight	said.	‘And	ours	hold


five	hundred	soldiers	each,	one	full	supply	ship	in	every	five.	Assuming	the
same	ratio	here.	Four	hundred	transports	packed	with	Edur	warriors.	That’s
two	hundred	thousand.	Those	raiders	carry	eighty	to	a	hundred.	Assume	a
hundred.	Thus,	ninety	thousand.	The	force	about	to	land	on	the	strand	below	is,
therefore,	almost	three	hundred	thousand.’
‘Yes,	Atri-Preda.’
‘Five	thousand	Edur	landed	outside	First	Maiden	Fort	this	morning.	The
skeleton	garrison	saddled	every	horse	they	had	left	and	are	riding	hard	for
Fent	Reach.	Where	I	have	my	garrison.’
‘We	can	conclude,’	the	Finadd	said,	‘that	this	represents	the	main	force	of
the	Edur	fleet,	the	main	force,	indeed,	of	the	entire	people	and	their	suicidal
invasion.’
She	glanced	at	him.	‘No,	we	cannot	conclude	any	such	thing.	We	have
never	known	the	population	of	Edur	lands.’
‘Atri-Preda,	we	can	hold	Fent	Reach	for	weeks.	In	that	time,	a	relieving
army	will	have	arrived	and	we	can	crush	the	grey-skinned	bastards.’
‘My	mage	cadre	in	the	city,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘amounts	to	three
dubious	sorcerors,	one	of	them	never	sober	and	the	other	two	seemingly	intent
on	killing	each	other	over	some	past	slight.	Finadd,	do	you	see	the	darkness	of
the	sea	beneath	those	ships?	The	residents	of	Trate	know	well	that	dark	water,
and	what	it	holds.’
‘What	are	you	saying,	Atri-Preda?’
‘By	all	means	ride	back	with	us	with	your	soldiers,	Finadd.	Or	stay	and
arrange	your	official	surrender	with	the	first	elements	to	land.’
The	man’s	mouth	slowly	opened.
Twilight	turned	away	and	walked	to	the	stairs	leading	down	to	the
courtyard.	‘I	am	surrendering	Fent	Reach,	Finadd.’
‘But	Atri-Preda!	We	could	withdraw	back	to	Trate!	All	of	us!’
She	stopped	three	steps	down.	‘A	third	fleet	has	appeared,	Finadd.	In	Katter
Sea.	We	have	already	been	cut	off.’
‘Errant	take	us!’
Twilight	resumed	her	descent.	Under	her	breath,	she	muttered,	‘If	only	he
could…’
All	the	questions	were	over.	The	invasion	had	begun.
My	city	is	about	to	be	conquered.	Again.


Chapter	Sixteen

The	old	drainage	trench	had	once	been	a	stream,	long	before	the
huts	were	knocked	down	and	the	overlords	began	building	their
houses	of	stone.	Rubble	and	foul	silts	formed	the	banks,	crawling
with	vermin.	But	there	in	my	chest	some	dark	fire	flamed	in	quiet
rage	as	I	walked	the	track	seeking	the	lost	voice,	the	voice	of	that
freed	watery	flow,	the	pebbles	beneath	the	streaming	tongue.	Oh	I
knew	so	well	those	smooth	stones,	the	child’s	treasure	of
comforting	form	and	the	way,	when	dried,	a	single	drop	of	tear	or
rain	could	make	the	colour	blossom	once	more	the	found
recollection	of	its	home—this	child’s	treasure	and	the	child	was	me
and	the	treasure	was	mine,	and	mine	own	child	this	very	morning	I
discovered,	kneeling	smeared	on	the	rotting	bank	playing	with
shards	of	broken	pots	that	knew	only	shades	of	grey	no	matter	how
deep	and	how	streaming	these	tears.
BEFORE	TRATE
NAMELESS	FENT
Dreams	could	pass	between	the	blinks	of	a	man’s	eyes,	answered	by	wild
casting	about,	disorientation,	and	an	unstoppered	flood	of	discordant	emotions.
Udinaas	found	he	had	slid	down,	was	perched	precariously	on	the	ledge,	his
limbs	stiff	and	aching.	The	sun	had	fallen	lower,	but	not	by	much.	Behind	him,
rising	from	a	crumpled	heap,	was	Feather	Witch,	the	two	halves	of	a	broken
tile	falling	from	one	hand	to	clatter	on	the	stone	a	moment	before	sliding	off
into	the	brush	and	rocks	below.	Her	hair	disguised	her	face,	hid	the	emotions
writ	there.
Udinaas	wanted	to	scream,	let	loose	his	grief,	and	the	sourceless	anger
beneath	it.	But	what	was	new	in	being	used?	What	was	new	in	having	nothing	to
reach	for,	nothing	to	strive	towards?	He	pulled	himself	up	from	the	edge	of
crumbling	stone,	and	looked	about.
The	army	was	on	the	move.	Something	had	changed.	He	saw	haste	below.


‘We	must	return,’	he	said.
‘To	what?’	Harsh,	bitter.
‘To	what	we	were	before.’
‘Slaves,	Udinaas.’
‘Yes.’
‘I’ve	tasted	it	now.	I’ve	tasted	it!’
He	glanced	over	at	her,	watched	as	she	sat	straighter,	dragging	the	hair
from	her	eyes,	and	fixed	him	with	a	fierce	glare.	‘You	cannot	live	like	this.’
‘I	can’t?’
She	looked	away.	Not	wanting	to	see,	he	guessed.	Not	wanting	to
understand.
‘We’re	marching	to	Trate,	Feather	Witch.’
‘To	conquer.	To…enslave.’
‘Details,’	he	muttered,	climbing	cautiously	to	his	feet.	He	offered	her	a
hand.	‘Mayen	wants	you.’
‘She	beats	me,	now.’
‘I	know.	You’ve	failed	to	hide	the	bruises.’
‘She	tears	my	clothes	off.	Uses	me.	In	ways	that	hurt.	I	hurt	all	the	time.’
‘Well,’	Udinaas	said,	‘he	doesn’t	do	that	to	her.	Not	that	there’s	much…
tenderness.	He’s	too	young	for	that,	I	suppose.	Nor	has	she	the	power	to	take
charge.	Teach	him.	She’s…frustrated.’
‘Enough	of	your	understanding	this,	understanding	that.	Enough,	Indebted!
I	don’t	care	about	her	point	of	view,	I’m	not	interested	in	stepping	into	her
shadow,	in	trying	to	see	the	world	how	she	sees	it.	None	of	that	matters,	when
she	twists,	when	she	bites,	when	she	pushes…just	stop	talking,	Udinaas.	Stop.
No	more.’
‘Take	my	hand,	Feather	Witch.	It’s	time.’
‘I’d	rather	bite	it	off.’
I	know.	He	said	nothing.
‘So	he	doesn’t	hurt	her,	does	he?’
‘Not	physically,’	he	replied.
‘Yes.	What	he	does	to	her…’	she	looked	up,	searching	his	eyes,	‘I	do	to
you.’
‘And	you’d	rather	bite.’
She	made	no	reply.	Something	flickered	in	her	gaze,	then	she	turned	away
even	as	she	took	his	hand.
He	drew	her	onto	her	feet.
She	would	not	look	at	him.	‘I’ll	go	down	first.	Wait	a	bit.’
‘All	right.’


An	army	kicked	awake,	swarming	the	forest	floor.	To	the	north,	the	ashes
of	home.	To	the	south,	Trate.	There	would	be…vengeance.
Details.
	
A	flicker	of	movement	downslope,	then…nothing.
Trull	Sengar	continued	scanning	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	settled	back
down	behind	the	tree-fall.	‘We	have	been	discovered,’	he	said.
Ahlrada	Ahn	grunted.	‘Now	what?’
Trull	looked	to	the	left	and	the	right.	He	could	barely	make	out	the	nearest
warriors,	motionless	and	under	cover.	‘That	depends,’	he	muttered.	‘If	they
now	come	in	force.’
They	waited,	as	the	afternoon	waned.
Somewhere	in	the	forest	below	was	a	Letherii	brigade,	and	within	it	a
mage	cadre	that	had	detected	the	presence	of	Tiste	Edur	positioned	to	defend
the	bridge.	Among	the	officers,	surprise,	perhaps	consternation.	The	mages
would	be	at	work	attempting	to	discern	precise	numbers,	but	that	would	prove
difficult.	Something	in	Edur	blood	defied	them,	remained	elusive	to	their
sorcerous	efforts.	A	decision	would	have	to	be	made,	and	much	depended	on
the	personality	of	the	commander.	Proceed	in	a	cautious	and	measured	way
until	direct	contact	was	established,	whereupon	a	succession	of	probes	would
determine	the	strength	of	the	enemy.	There	were	risks,	however,	to	that.
Drawing	close	enough	to	gauge	the	sharpness	of	the	enemy’s	fangs	invited	a
bite	that	might	not	let	go,	leading	to	a	pitched	engagement	where	all	the
advantage	lay	with	the	Tiste	Edur.	Uphill	battles	were	always	costly.	And	often
withdrawal	proved	bloody	and	difficult.	Worse,	there	was	a	good	chance	of	an
all-out	rout,	which	would	lead	to	slaughter.
Or	the	commander	could	order	the	mage	cadre	to	unleash	a	sorcerous
attack	and	so	lay	waste	the	forest	reaches	above	them.	Such	an	attack,	of
course,	served	to	expose	the	mages’	position	to	those	Edur	warlocks	who
might	be	present.	And	to	the	wraiths	and	demons	attending	them.	If	the	attack
was	blunted,	the	cadre	was	in	trouble.
Finally,	the	commander	could	choose	to	pull	back.	Yield	the	bridge,	and
return	to	the	solid	defences	of	High	Fort,	inviting	a	more	traditional	battle—
the	kind	the	Letherii	had	fought	for	centuries,	against	enemy	forces	of	all	sorts,
and	almost	invariably	with	great	success.
Was	the	commander	overconfident	and	precipitous?	If	so,	then	Trull
Sengar	and	his	fifty	warriors	would	either	be	slaughtered	or	forced	back	to	the
other	side	of	the	bridge,	either	result	proving	tactically	disastrous	for	Hanradi


Khalag	and	his	advancing	warriors.	A	contested	crossing	of	the	bridge	would
force	Fear	and	Hanradi	into	unveiling	the	full	extent	of	the	sorcerous	power
accompanying	the	army—power	intended	to	shatter	the	defenders	of	High	Fort.
Conversely,	a	cautious	or	timid	commander	would	elect	to	retreat,	and	that
would	ensure	an	Edur	success.
Trull	edged	his	way	back	up	to	peer	over	the	tree-fall.	No	movement
below.	The	air	seemed	preternaturally	still.
‘If	they	don’t	close	soon,’	Ahlrada	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘they	will	have	lost
the	advantage.’
Trull	nodded.	Sufficient	concerns	to	occupy	his	mind,	to	steal	his	fullest
attention.	He	did	not	have	the	luxury	of	thinking	of	other	things.	This,	he
decided,	was	preferable.	A	relief.	And	I	can	stay	here,	in	this	tense	cast	of	my
mind’s	thoughts,	from	now	on.	It	will	take	me	through	this	war.	It	has	to.	Please,
take	me	through	this	war.
The	shadows	were	long	on	the	slope	below,	cutting	crossways,	the	shafts
of	dusty	sunlight	ebbing	into	golden	mist	through	which	insects	flitted.
A	whisper	of	sound—behind	them,	then	on	all	sides.
Wraiths,	streaming	down,	slipping	past	into	the	spreading	gloom	below.
‘They’ve	arrived,’	Ahlrada	said.
Trull	slid	back	down	and	rolled	onto	his	back.	Padding	between	brush	and
trees	upslope,	silver-backed	wolves.	A	half-dozen,	then	a	score,	lambent	eyes
flashing	from	lowered	heads.
One	beast	approached	Trull.	It	suddenly	blurred,	the	air	filling	with	a
pungent,	spicy	scent,	and	a	moment	later	Trull	found	himself	looking	into	the
amber	eyes	of	B’nagga.
The	Jheck	grinned.	‘A	thousand	paces	below,	Trull	Sengar.	They	are	in	full
retreat.’
‘You	made	good	time,’	Ahlrada	said.
The	grin	widened.	‘The	warriors	are	but	two	thousand	paces	from	the
bridge.	My	brothers	found	a	body,	hidden	in	the	brush.	Your	work?’
‘An	advance	scout,’	Trull	said.
‘The	mages	had	tied	a	thread	to	him.	They	knew	you	were	coming.	No
doubt	that	slowed	them	even	more.’
‘So,’	Ahlrada	said,	‘are	we	to	contest	their	retreat?’
‘It	was	a	thought.	But	no,	the	wraiths	will	do	naught	but	hound	them.	Keep
them	on	edge	and	moving	at	double-march.	By	the	time	they	reach	High	Fort
they	will	be	footsore	and	bleary-eyed.	We	won’t	be	giving	them	much	time	to
rest.’	He	settled	into	a	crouch.	‘I	have	news.	First	Maiden	Fort	has	fallen.	No
battle—the	garrison	had	already	fled	back	to	Fent	Reach.’


‘As	anticipated,’	Trull	said.
‘Yes.	If	the	Letherii	choose	to	make	a	stand	at	Fent	Reach,	it	will	be	a	short
siege.	Even	now,	our	ships	have	made	landing	and	the	warriors	march	on	the
city.’
‘No	contact	with	any	Letherii	fleets?’	Trull	was	surprised.	Those	transports
were	vulnerable.
‘None.	The	emperor ’s	forces	are	poised	above	Trate,	undetected	as	yet.
Within	the	next	few	days,	my	friends,	there	will	be	four	major	battles.	And,
sword	willing,	the	northern	frontier	shall	fall.’
At	the	very	least,	we’ll	have	their	fullest	attention.
	
Blind	drunk.	A	description	Seren	Pedac	sought	to	explore,	with	all	the
fumbling	murky	intent	of	a	mind	poisoned	into	stupidity.	But,	somehow,	she
was	failing.	Instead	of	blind,	she	was	painfully	aware	of	the	figures	on	all	sides
of	her	small	table,	the	seething	press	and	the	loose	rubble	sound	of	countless
voices.	Stupidity	had	yet	to	arrive	and	possibly	never	would,	as	stolid	sobriety
held	on,	dogged	and	immovable	and	indifferent	to	the	seemingly	endless	cups
of	wine	she	drank	down.
Fevered	excitement,	scores	of	voices	uttering	their	I-told-you-so	variations
to	herds	of	nodding	heads.	Proclamations	and	predictions,	the	gleaming	words
of	greed	eager	to	be	unleashed	on	the	booty	of	battlefields	crowded	with	dead
Edur.	Give	’em	First	Maiden	Fort,	aye.	Why	not?	Pull	the	bastards	in	and	in.
You	saw	what	the	cadre	did	that	night?	They’ll	do	it	again,	this	time	against	the
ash-faced	bastards	themselves.	I’ve	got	a	perch	halfway	up	the	lighthouse,	paid
a	fortune	for	it,	I’ll	see	it	all.
It’ll	all	be	over	at	Fent	Reach.	They’ll	get	their	noses	bloodied	and	that’s
when	the	cadre	will	hit	the	fleet	in	Katter	Sea.	I	got	an	interest	in	a	stretch	on
Bight	Coast,	salvage	rights.	Heading	up	there	as	soon	as	it’s	over.
They	let	themselves	get	surrounded,	I	tell	you.	Twilight’s	just	waiting	for	the
siege	to	settle	in.	What’s	that?	You	saying	she	surrendered?	Errant	take	us,
man,	what	kind	of	lies	you	throwing	about	in	here?	You	a	damned	traitor,	you	a
damned	Hull	Beddict?	Shut	that	mouth	of	yours	or	I’ll	do	it	for	you—
I’ll	help,	Cribal,	that’s	a	promise.	Sewing	lips	tight	is	easy	as	mending	sails
an’	I	been	doing	that	for	years—
Where’d	he	go?
Ah,	never	mind	him,	Cribal—
Traitors	need	to	be	taught	a	lesson,	Feluda.	Come	on,	I	see	’im	making	for
the	door—


Sittin’	alone	don’t	do	no	woman	no	good,	sweetheart.	Let	a	decent	man	take
you	away	from	all	this…
Seren	Pedac	frowned,	looked	up	at	the	figure	looming	over	her	table.	Her
mind	replied,	All	right,	even	as	she	scowled	and	turned	away.
‘Nothing	worth	its	spit	is	being	said	here,	lass.	You	want	to	drink.	Fine,	jus’
sit	and	drink.	All	I	was	offerin’	was	a	quieter	place	to	do	it,	is	all.’
‘Go	away.’
Instead,	the	man	sat	down.	‘Been	watchin’	you	all	evening.	Jus’	another
Letherii?	Asked	myself	that	once	and	once	only.	No,	I	think,	not	this	one.	So	I
ask,	and	someone	says,	“That’s	the	Acquitor,	Seren	Pedac.	Was	up	at	the	treaty
that	went	sour.	Was	under	contract	with	Buruk	the	Pale,	the	one	that	hung
himself	and	damned	if	it	wasn’t	her	that	found	him	all	fish-eyed	and	fouled.”
And	I	think,	that	ain’t	an	easy	thing.	No	wonder	she’s	sittin’	there	tryin’	t’get
drunk	an’	it’s	not	working.’
She	fixed	her	gaze	on	him,	seeing	him	clearly	for	the	first	time.	Seamed
face,	clean-shaven,	hair	shoulder-length	and	the	hue	of	polished	iron.	His	voice
sounded	again	in	her	head,	confirming	what	she	saw.	‘You’re	no	Letherii.’
A	broad	smile,	even,	white	teeth.	‘You	got	that	right,	and,	no	offence,	but
glad	of	it.’
‘You’re	not	Faraed.	Nerek.	Tarthenal.	Not	Fent,	either,	not	even	Meckros
—’
‘What	I	am	you	never	heard	of,	believe	me,	lass.	A	long	way	from	home.’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘Was	making	an	offer,	but	it	needed	to	be	done	in	quiet.	Private—’
‘I’m	sure—’
‘Not	like	that,	though	I’d	consider	my	fortunes	on	the	upswing	if	it	was	to
happen	the	way	you	think	I	meant.	No.’	He	leaned	forward,	gesturing	her	closer
as	well.
Her	smile	ironic,	she	tilted	over	the	table	until	their	noses	were	almost
touching.	‘I	can’t	wait.’
He	withdrew	a	fraction.	‘Lass,	you’re	a	breathin’	vineyard.	All	right,	then,
listen.	We	got	ourselves	a	boat—’
‘We?’
‘A	boat,	and	we’re	leaving	this	pock-on-Hood’s-ass	of	a	kingdom.’
‘Where	to?	Korshenn?	Pilott,	Truce?	Kolanse?’
‘What	would	be	the	point	of	that?	The	first	three	you	named	are	all	paying
tribute	to	Lether,	and	Kolanse	is	a	mess	from	all	we	hear.	Acquitor,	the	world’s
a	lot	bigger	than	you	might	think—’
‘Is	it?	Actually,	it’s	smaller	than	I	think.’


‘Same	rubbish,	different	hole,	eh?	Maybe	you’re	right.	But	maybe	not.’
‘Who	are	you?’
‘Just	someone	a	long	way	from	home,	like	I	said.	We	clawed	our	way	out
of	Assail,	only	to	find	ourselves	here,	and	just	by	arriving	in	our	damned	sieve
of	a	boat,	we	owed	money.	Just	by	steppin’	onto	the	dock,	we	owed	more.	It’s
been	seven	months,	and	we’re	so	far	in	debt	Prince	K’azz	himself	couldn’t
clear	our	way	back	out.	Livin’	off	scraps	and	doin’	ugly	work	and	it’s	rotting
us	all—’
‘You	were	a	soldier.’
‘Still	am,	lass.’
‘So	join	a	brigade—’
He	rubbed	at	his	face,	closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment,	then	seemed	to	reach	a
decision.	He	fixed	her	with	his	cool,	blue	eyes.	‘It’s	shouting	to	the	Abyss,	lass,
and	not	one	Letherii’s	listening.	You	people	are	in	trouble.	Serious	trouble.
Fent	Reach	surrendered.	Now,	Twilight’s	a	smart,	able	commander,	so	what
made	her	do	that?	Think,	Acquitor.’
‘She	saw	it	was	hopeless.	She	saw	she	couldn’t	hold	the	city,	and	there	was
no	way	to	retreat.’
He	nodded.	‘You	weren’t	here	when	the	harvest	ships	returned.	You	didn’t
see	what	delivered	’em.	We	did.	Lass,	if	dhenrabi	worship	a	god	then	that	was
it,	right	there	in	the	harbour.’
‘Who	are	dhenrabi?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘We	got	room	for	people	worth	their	salt.	And	you
won’t	be	the	only	woman,	so	it’s	not	like	that.’
‘So	why	me	at	all,	then?’
‘Because	you	ain’t	blind,	Seren	Pedac.’
Smiling,	she	leaned	back,	then	looked	away.	Not	drunk,	either.	‘Who	are
you?’
‘It	won’t	mean	a	thing—’
‘Tell	me	anyway.’
‘Iron	Bars,	Second	Blade,	Fourth	Company,	Crimson	Guard.	Was	in	the
service	of	Commander	Cal-Brinn	before	we	was	all	scattered	between	here	and
Hood’s	gates.’
‘Meaningless	and	long.	I’m	impressed,	Iron	Bars.’
‘Lass,	you	got	more	sharp	teeth	than	an	enkar ’al	with	a	mouthful	of	rhizan.
Probably	why	I	like	you	so	much.’
All	right.	‘I’m	not	interested	in	your	offer,	Iron	Bars.’
‘Try	thinking	on	it.	There’s	time	for	that,	provided	you	get	out	of	Trate	as
soon	as	you	can.’


She	looked	at	him.	‘That	doesn’t	make	any	sense.’
‘You’d	be	right,	if	our	boat	was	in	the	harbour	here.	But	it	isn’t.	It’s	in
Letheras.	We	signed	on	as	crew,	through	an	agent.’	He	shrugged.	‘As	soon	as
we	get	out	to	sea…’
‘You’ll	kill	the	captain	and	mates	and	turn	pirate.’
‘We	won’t	kill	anybody	if	there’s	a	way	round	it,	and	we’re	not	pirates.	We
just	want	to	get	home.	We	need	to	get	home.’	He	studied	her	for	a	moment,	then
rose.	‘If	it	works	out	right,	we’ll	look	you	up	in	Letheras.’
All	right.	‘You’d	be	wasting	your	time.’
He	shrugged.	‘Between	here	and	then,	Acquitor,	a	whole	lot	is	going	to
change.	Get	out	of	this	city,	lass.	As	soon	as	you	sober	up,	go.	Just	go.’
Then	he	was	gone.
They	caught	him,	dragged	him	into	the	alley	and	they’re	sewing	up	his
mouth—c’mon,	let’s	watch—
Just	his	mouth?	He’s	a	damned	traitor.	No	reason	to	go	easy	on	the	bastard.
Sew	him	up	everywhere,	see	how	he	likes	that—
Wish	it	was	Hull	Beddict,	that’s	what	I	wish—
They’ll	do	a	lot	worse	on	’im,	mark	my	words.	You	just	wait	and	see…
	
Her	blue	silks	snapping	in	the	wind,	Nekal	Bara	stood	atop	the	lighthouse
tower	and	faced	out	to	sea.	Nothing	was	going	as	planned.	Their	pre-emptive
attack	had	destroyed	empty	villages;	the	entire	Tiste	Edur	people	were	on	the
move.	And	they’re	about	to	arrive	on	our	very	doorstep.
The	fleet	that	had	appeared	in	Katter	Sea,	poised	to	interpose	its	forces	to
prevent	the	retreat	of	Twilight’s	garrison	at	Fent	Reach,	had,	upon	the	city’s
surrender,	simply	moved	on.	Preternaturally	swift,	the	blood-red	sails	of	five
hundred	raiders	now	approached	Trate	Bay.	And	in	the	waters	beneath	those
sleek	hulls…a	thing.	Ancient,	terrible,	eager	with	hunger.	It	knew	this	path.	It
had	been	here	before.
Since	that	time,	and	at	the	Ceda’s	command,	she	had	delved	deep	in	her
search	to	discover	the	nature	of	the	creature	the	Tiste	Edur	had	bound	to	their
service.	The	harbour	and	the	bay	beyond	had	once	been	dry	land,	a	massive
limestone	shelf	beneath	which	raced	vast	underground	rivers.	Erosion	had
collapsed	the	shelf	in	places,	creating	roughly	circular,	deep	wells.	Sometimes
the	water	below	continued	to	flow	as	part	of	the	rivers.	But	in	some,	the
percolating	effect	of	the	limestone	was	blocked	by	concretions	over	time,	and
the	water	was	black	and	still.
One	such	well	had	become,	long	ago,	a	place	of	worship.	Treasures	were


flung	into	its	depths.	Gold,	jade,	silver	and	living	sacrifices.	Drowning	voices
had	screamed	in	the	chill	water,	cold	flesh	and	bone	had	settled	on	the	pale
floor.
And	a	spirit	was	fashioned.	Fed	on	blood	and	despair,	beseeching
propitiation,	the	unwilling	surrender	of	mortal	lives.	There	were	mysteries	to
this,	she	well	knew.	Had	the	spirit	existed	before	the	worship	began,	and	was
simply	drawn	to	the	gifts	offered?	Or	was	it	conjured	into	existence	by	the	very
will	of	those	ancient	worshippers?	Either	way,	the	result	was	the	same.	A
creature	came	into	being,	and	was	taught	the	nature	of	hunger,	of	desire.	Made
into	an	addict	of	blood	and	grief	and	terror.
The	worshippers	vanished.	Died	out	or	departed,	or	driven	to	such	extreme
sacrifices	as	to	destroy	themselves.	There	was	no	telling	how	deep	the	bed	of
bones	at	the	bottom	of	that	well,	but,	by	the	end,	it	must	have	been	appalling	in
its	vastness.
The	spirit	was	doomed,	and	should	have	eventually	died.	Had	not	the	seas
risen	to	swallow	the	land,	had	not	its	world’s	walls	suddenly	vanished,
releasing	it	to	all	that	lay	beyond.
Shorelines	were	places	of	worship	the	world	over.	The	earliest	records
surviving	from	the	First	Empire	made	note	of	that	again	and	again	among
peoples	encountered	during	the	explorations.	The	verge	between	sea	and	land
marked	the	manifestation	of	the	symbolic	transition	between	the	known	and	the
unknown.	Between	life	and	death,	spirit	and	mind,	between	an	unlimited	host	of
elements	and	forces	contrary	yet	locked	together.	Lives	were	given	to	the	seas,
treasures	were	flung	into	their	depths.	And,	upon	the	waters	themselves,	ships
and	their	crews	were	dragged	into	the	deep	time	and	again.
For	all	that,	the	spirit	had	known…competition.	And,	Nekal	Bara	suspected,
had	fared	poorly.	Weakened,	suffering,	it	had	returned	to	its	hole,	there	beneath
the	deluge.	Returned	to	die.
There	was	no	way	of	knowing	how	the	Tiste	Edur	warlocks	had	found	it,
or	came	to	understand	its	nature	and	the	potential	within	it.	But	they	had	bound
it,	fed	it	blood	until	its	strength	returned,	and	it	had	grown,	and	with	that
growth,	a	burgeoning	hunger.
And	now,	I	must	find	a	way	to	kill	it.
She	could	sense	its	approach,	drawing	ever	nearer	beneath	the	Edur
raiders.	Along	the	harbour	front	below,	soldiers	were	crowding	the
fortifications.	Crews	readied	at	the	trebuchets	and	ballistae.	Fires	were	stoked
and	racks	of	hull-breaching	quarrels	were	wheeled	out.
Arahathan	in	his	black	furs	had	positioned	himself	at	the	far	end	of	the
main	pier	and,	like	her,	stood	facing	the	fast-approaching	Edur	fleet.	He	would


seek	to	block	the	spirit’s	attack,	engage	it	fully	for	as	long	as	it	took	for	Nekal
Bara	to	magically	draw	close	to	the	entity	and	strike	at	its	heart.
She	wished	Enedictal	had	remained	in	the	city,	rather	than	returning	to	his
battalion	at	Awl.	Indeed,	she	wished	the	Snakebelts	had	marched	to	join	them
here.	Once	the	spirit	was	engaged,	Enedictal	could	have	then	shattered	the	Edur
fleet.	She	had	no	idea	how	much	damage	she	and	Arahathan	would	sustain
while	killing	the	spirit—it	was	possible	they	would	have	nothing	left	with
which	to	destroy	the	fleet.	It	might	come	down	to	hand	to	hand	fighting	along
the	harbour	front.
And	that	is	the	absurdity	of	magic	in	war—we	do	little	more	than	negate
each	other.	Unless	one	cadre	finds	itself	outnumbered…
She	had	six	minor	sorcerors	under	her	command,	interspersed	among	the
companies	of	the	Cold	Clay	Battalion	arrayed	below.	They	would	have	to	be
sufficient	against	the	Edur	warlocks	accompanying	the	fleet.
Nekal	Bara	was	worried,	but	not	unduly	so.
The	red	sails	fluttered.	She	could	just	make	out	the	crews,	scampering	on
the	foredecks	and	in	the	rigging.	The	fleet	was	heaving	to.	Beneath	the	lead
ships,	a	dark	tide	surged	forward,	spreading	its	midnight	bruise	into	the
harbour.
She	felt	a	sudden	fear.	It	was…huge.
A	glance	down.	To	the	lone,	black-swathed	figure	at	the	very	end	of	the
main	pier.	The	arms	spreading	wide.
The	spirit	heaved	up	in	a	swelling	wave,	gaining	speed	as	it	rushed	towards
the	harbour	front.	On	the	docks,	soldiers	behind	shields,	a	wavering	of	spearheads.	Someone	loosed	a	ball	of	flaming	pitch	from	one	of	the	trebuchets.
Fascinated,	Nekal	Bara	watched	its	arcing	flight,	its	smoke-trailing	descent,
down	towards	the	rising	wave.
It	vanished	in	a	smear	of	steam.
She	heard	Arahathan’s	roar,	saw	a	line	of	water	shiver,	then	boil	just
beyond	the	docks,	lifting	skyward	a	wall	of	steam	even	as	the	spirit’s	bulk
seemed	to	lunge	a	moment	before	striking	it.
The	concussion	sent	the	lighthouse	wavering	beneath	her	feet	and	she
threw	her	arms	out	for	balance.	Two-thirds	of	the	way	down,	along	a	narrow
iron	balcony,	onlookers	were	flung	into	the	air,	to	pitch	screaming	down	to	the
rocks	below.	The	balcony	twisted	like	thin	wire	in	the	hands	of	a	blacksmith,
the	fittings	exploding	in	puffs	of	dust.	A	terrible	groaning	rose	up	through	the
tower	as	it	rocked	back	and	forth.
Steam	and	dark	water	raged	in	battle,	clambering	ever	higher	directly
before	Arahathan.	The	sorceror	was	swallowed	by	shadow.


The	lighthouse	was	toppling.
Nekal	Bara	faced	the	harbour,	held	her	arms	out,	then	flung	herself	from
the	edge.
Vanishing	within	a	tumbling	shaft	of	magic.	Slanting	downward	in
coruscating	threads	of	blue	fire	that	swarmed	around	a	blinding,	white	core.
Like	a	god’s	spear,	the	shaft	pierced	the	flank	of	the	spirit.	Tore	a	path	of
incandescence	into	the	dark,	surging	water.
Errant—he’s	failing!	Falling!	She	sensed,	then	saw,	Arahathan.	Red	flesh
curling	away	from	his	bones,	blackening,	snatched	away	as	if	by	a	fierce
whirling	wind.	She	saw	his	teeth,	the	lips	gone,	the	grimace	suddenly	a
maddening	smile.	Eyes	wrinkled,	then	darkening,	then	collapsing	inward.
She	sensed,	in	that	last	moment,	his	surprise,	his	disbelief—
Into	the	spirit’s	flesh,	down	through	layer	upon	layer	of	thick,	coagulated
blood,	matted	hair,	slivered	pieces	of	bone.	Encrusted	jewellery,	mangled
coins.	Layers	of	withered	newborn	corpses,	each	one	wrapped	in	leather,	each
one	with	its	forehead	stove	in,	above	a	face	twisted	with	pain	and	baffled
suffering.	Layers.	Oh,	Mistress,	what	have	we	mortals	done?	Done,	and	done,
and	done?
Stone	tools,	pearls,	bits	of	shell—
Through—
To	find	that	she	had	been	wrong.	Terribly	wrong.
The	spirit—naught	but	a	shell,	held	together	by	the	memory	within	bone,
teeth	and	hair,	by	that	memory	and	nothing	more.
Within—
Nekal	Bara	saw	that	she	was	about	to	die.	Against	all	that	rose	to	greet	her,
she	had	no	defence.	None.	Could	not—could	never—Ceda!	Kuru	Qan!	Hear
me!	See—
	
Seren	Pedac	staggered	out	into	the	street.	Pushed,	spun	round,	knocked	to	her
knees	by	fleeing	figures.
She	had	woken	in	a	dark	cellar,	surrounded	by	empty,	broken	kegs.	She
had	been	robbed,	most	of	her	armour	stripped	away.	Sword	and	knife	gone.
The	ache	between	her	legs	told	her	that	worse	had	happened.	Lips	puffed	and
cut	by	kisses	she	had	never	felt,	her	hair	tangled	and	matted	with	blood,	she
crawled	across	greasy	cobbles	to	curl	up	against	a	stained	brick	wall.	Stared
out	numbly	on	the	panicked	scene.
Smoke	had	stolen	the	sky.	Brown,	murky	light,	the	distant	sound	of	battle—
at	the	harbour	front	to	her	left,	and	along	the	north	and	east	walls	ahead	and	to


her	right.	In	the	street	before	her,	citizens	raced	in	seemingly	random
directions.	Across	from	her,	two	men	were	locked	in	mortal	combat,	and	she
watched	as	one	managed	to	pin	the	other,	then	began	pounding	the	man’s	head
against	the	cobbles.	The	hard	impacts	gave	way	to	soft	crunches,	and	the	victor
rolled	away	from	the	spasming	victim,	scrambled	upright,	then	limped	away.
Doors	were	being	kicked	down.	Women	screamed	as	their	hiding	places
were	discovered.
There	were	no	Tiste	Edur	in	sight.
From	her	right,	three	men	shambling	like	marauders.	One	carried	a
bloodstained	club,	another	a	single-handed	sickle.	The	third	man	was	dragging
a	dead	or	unconscious	girl-child	by	one	foot.
They	saw	her.	The	one	with	the	club	smiled.	‘We	was	coming	to	c’llect
you,	Acquitor.	Woke	up	wanting	more,	did	ya?’
She	did	not	recognize	any	of	them,	but	there	was	terrible	familiarity	in
their	eyes	as	they	looked	upon	her.
‘The	city’s	fallen,’	the	man	continued,	drawing	closer.	‘But	we	got	a	way
out,	an’	we’re	taking	you	with	us.’
The	one	with	the	sickle	laughed.	‘We’ve	decided	to	keep	you	to	ourselves,
lass.	Don’t	worry,	we’ll	keep	you	safe.’
Seren	curled	tighter	against	the	wall.
‘Hold	there!’
A	new	voice.	The	three	men	looked	up.
Iron-haired,	blue-eyed—she	recognized	the	newcomer.	Maybe.	She	wasn’t
sure.	She’d	never	seen	armour	like	that	before:	she	would	have	remembered
the	blood-red	surcoat.	A	plain	sword	at	the	stranger ’s	left	hip,	which	he	was	not
reaching	towards.
‘It’s	that	foreign	bastard,’	the	man	with	the	club	said.	‘Find	your	own.’
‘I	just	have,’	he	replied.	‘Been	looking	for	her	the	last	two	days—’
‘She’s	ours,’	said	the	sickle-wielder.
‘No	closer,’	the	third	man	growled,	raising	the	child	in	one	hand	as	if	he
meant	to	use	the	body	for	a	weapon.
Which,	Seren	now	saw,	he	had	done	already.	Oh,	please	be	dead,	child.
Please	have	been	dead	all	along…
‘You	know	us,	foreigner,’	the	man	with	the	club	said.
‘Oh	yes,	you’re	the	terrors	of	the	shanty	town.	I’ve	heard	all	about	your
exploits.	Which	puts	me	at	an	advantage.’
‘How	so?’
The	stranger	continued	walking	closer.	She	saw	something	in	his	eyes,	as
he	said,	‘Because	you	haven’t	heard	a	thing	about	mine.’


Club	swung.	Sickle	flashed.	Body	whipped	through	the	air.
And	the	girl-child	was	caught	by	the	stranger,	who	then	reached	one	hand
over,	palm	up,	and	seemed	to	push	his	fingertips	under	the	man’s	chin.
She	didn’t	understand.
The	man	with	the	club	was	on	the	ground.	The	other	had	his	own	sickle
sticking	from	his	chest	and	he	stood	staring	down	at	it.	Then	he	toppled.
A	snap.	Flood	and	spray	of	blood.
The	stranger	stepped	back,	tucking	the	girl-child’s	body	under	his	right
arm,	the	hand	of	his	left	holding,	like	a	leather-wrapped	handle	from	a	pail,	the
third	man’s	lower	jaw.
Horrible	grunting	sounds	from	the	staggering	figure	to	her	right.	Bulging
eyes,	a	spattered	gust	of	breath.
The	stranger	tossed	the	mandible	away	with	its	attendant	lower	palate	and
tongue.	He	set	the	child	down,	then	stepped	closer	to	the	last	man.	‘I	don’t	like
what	you	did.	I	don’t	like	anything	you’ve	done,	but	most	of	all,	I	don’t	like
what	you	did	to	this	woman	here,	and	that	child.	So,	I	am	going	to	make	you
hurt.	A	lot.’
The	man	spun	as	if	to	flee.	Then	he	slammed	onto	the	cobbles,	landing	on
his	chest,	his	feet	taken	out	from	under	him—but	Seren	didn’t	see	how	it	had
happened.
With	serene	patience,	the	stranger	crouched	over	him.	Two	blurred
punches	to	either	side	of	the	man’s	spine,	almost	at	neck	level,	and	she	heard
breastbones	snap.	Blood	was	pooling	around	the	man’s	head.
The	stranger	shifted	to	reach	down	between	the	man’s	legs.
‘Stop.’
He	looked	over,	brows	lifting.
‘Stop.	Kill	him.	Clean.	Kill	him	clean,	Iron	Bars.’
‘Are	you	sure?’
From	the	buildings	opposite,	faces	framed	by	windows.	Eyes	fixed,	staring
down.
‘Enough,’	she	said,	the	word	a	croak.
‘All	right.’
He	leaned	back.	One	punch	to	the	back	of	the	man’s	head.	It	folded	inward.
And	all	was	still.
Iron	Bars	straightened.	‘All	right?’
All	right,	yes.
The	Crimson	Guardsman	came	closer.	‘My	fault,’	he	said.	‘I	had	to	sleep,
thought	you’d	be	safe	for	a	bit.	I	was	wrong.	I’m	sorry.’
‘The	child?’


A	pained	look.	‘Run	down	by	horses,	I	think.	Some	time	past.’
‘What’s	happening?’
‘Trate’s	falling.	The	Edur	fleet	held	off.	Until	Nekal	Bara	and	Arahathan
were	finished.	Then	closed.	The	defences	were	swarmed	by	shadow	wraiths.
Then	the	warriors	landed.	It	was	bad,	Acquitor.’	He	glanced	over	a	shoulder,
said,	‘At	about	that	time,	an	army	came	down	from	inland.	Swept	the
undermanned	fortifications	and,	not	a	hundred	heartbeats	ago,	finally
succeeded	in	knocking	down	the	North	Gate.	The	Edur	are	taking	their	time,
killing	every	soldier	they	find.	No	quarter.	So	far,	they’ve	not	touched	noncombatants.	But	that’s	no	guarantee	of	anything,	is	it?’
He	helped	her	to	stand,	and	she	flinched	at	the	touch	of	his	hands—those
weapons,	stained	with	murder.
If	he	noticed	he	gave	nothing	away.	‘My	Blade’s	waiting.	Corlo’s	managed
to	find	a	warren	in	this	damned	Hood-pit—first	time	in	the	two	years	we	been
stuck	here.	What	the	Edur	brought,	he	says.	That’s	why.’
She	realized	they	were	walking	now.	Taking	winding	alleys	and	avoiding
the	main	thoroughfares.	The	sound	of	slaughter	was	on	all	sides.	Iron	Bars
suddenly	hesitated,	cocked	his	head.	‘Damn,	we’ve	been	cut	off.’
	
Dragged	into	the	slaughter.	Bemused	witness	to	the	killing	of	hapless,
disorganized	soldiers.	Wondering	if	the	money-lenders	would	be	next.	Udinaas
was	left	staggering	in	the	wake	of	the	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur	and	twelve
frenzied	warriors	as	they	waded	through	flesh,	cutting	lives	down	as	if
clearing	a	path	through	reeds.
Rhulad	was	displaying	skill	that	did	not	belong	to	him.	His	arms	were	a
blur,	his	every	move	heedless	and	fearless.	And	he	was	gibbering,	the	manic
sound	punctuated	every	now	and	then	by	a	scream	that	was	as	much	terror	as	it
was	rage.	Not	a	warrior	triumphant.	Neither	berserk	nor	swathed	in	drenched
glory.	A	killer…killing.
An	Edur	warrior	near	him	fell	to	a	Letherii	soldier ’s	desperate	swordthrust,	and	the	emperor	shrieked,	lunged	forward.	The	mottled	sword	swung,
and	blood	splashed	like	water.	His	laughter	pulled	at	his	breath,	making	him
gasp.	Edur	faces	flashed	furtively	towards	their	savage	ruler.
Down	the	street,	carving	through	a	rearguard	of	some	sort.	Udinaas
stumbled	over	corpses,	writhing,	weeping	figures.	Blind	with	dying,	men
called	for	their	mothers,	and	to	these	the	slave	reached	down	and	touched	a
shoulder,	or	laid	fingertips	to	slick	foreheads,	and	murmured,	‘I’m	here,	my
boy.	It’s	all	right.	You	can	go	now.’


The	apologetic	priest,	chain-snapped	forward	step	by	step,	whispering
hollow	blessings,	soft	lies,	forgiving	even	as	he	prayed	for	someone—
something—to	forgive	him	in	turn.	But	no-one	touched	him,	no	fingertips
brushed	his	brow.
For	the	burned	villages.	Retribution.	Where	were	the	moneylenders?	This
war	belonged	to	them,	after	all.
Another	hundred	paces.	Three	more	Edur	were	down.	Rhulad	and	eight
brethren.	Fighting	on.	Where	was	the	rest	of	the	army?
Somewhere	else.
If	one	could	always	choose	the	right	questions,	then	every	answer	could	be
as	obvious.	A	clever	revelation,	he	was	on	to	something	here…
Another	Edur	screamed,	skidded	and	fell	over,	face	smacking	the	street.
Rhulad	killed	two	more	soldiers,	and	suddenly	no-one	stood	in	their	path.
Halting	in	strange	consternation,	trapped	in	the	centre	of	an	intersection,
drifts	of	smoke	sliding	past.
From	the	right,	a	sudden	arrival.
Two	Edur	reeled	back,	mortally	wounded.
The	attacker	reached	out	with	his	left	hand,	and	a	third	Edur	warrior ’s	head
snapped	round	with	a	loud	crack.
Clash	of	blades,	more	blood,	another	Edur	toppling,	then	the	attacker	was
through	and	wheeling	about.
Rhulad	leapt	to	meet	him.	Swords—one	heavy	and	mottled,	the	other
modest,	plain—collided,	and	somehow	were	bound	together	with	a	twist	and
pronation	of	the	stranger ’s	wrist,	whilst	his	free	hand	blurred	out	and	over	the
weapons,	palm	connecting	with	Rhulad’s	forehead.
Breaking	the	emperor ’s	neck	with	a	loud	snap.
Mottled	sword	slid	down	the	attacker ’s	blade	and	he	was	already	stepping
past,	his	weapon’s	point	already	sliding	out	from	the	chest	of	another	Edur.
Another	heartbeat,	and	the	last	two	Tiste	Edur	warriors	were	down,	their
bodies	eagerly	dispensing	blood	like	payment	onto	the	cobbles.
The	stranger	looked	about,	saw	Udinaas,	nodded,	then	waved	to	an	alleymouth,	from	which	a	woman	emerged.
She	took	a	half-dozen	strides	before	Udinaas	recognized	her.
Badly	used.
But	no	more	of	that.	Not	while	this	man	lives.
Seren	Pedac	took	no	notice	of	him,	nor	of	the	dead	Edur.	The	stranger
grasped	her	hand.
Udinaas	watched	them	head	off	down	the	street,	disappear	round	a	corner.
Somewhere	behind	him,	the	shouts	of	Edur	warriors,	the	sound	of	running


feet.
The	slave	found	he	was	standing	beside	Rhulad’s	body,	staring	down	at	it,
the	bizarre	angle	of	the	head	on	its	twisted	neck,	the	hands	closed	tight	about
the	sword.
Waiting	for	the	mouth	to	open	with	mad	laughter.

‘Damned	strangest	armour	I’ve	ever	seen.’
Seren	blinked.	‘What?’
‘But	he	was	good,	with	that	sword.	Fast.	In	another	five	years	he’d	have	had
the	experience	to	have	made	him	deadly.	Enough	to	give	anyone	trouble.
Shimmer,	Blues,	maybe	even	Skinner.	But	that	armour!	A	damned	fortune,
right	there	for	the	taking.	If	we’d	the	time.’
‘What?’
‘That	Tiste	Edur,	lass.’
‘Tiste	Edur?’
‘Never	mind.	There	they	are.’
Ahead,	crouched	at	the	dead	end	of	an	alley,	six	figures.	Two	women,	four
men.	All	in	crimson	surcoats.	Weapons	out.	Blood	on	the	blades.	One,	more
lightly	armoured	than	the	others	and	holding	what	looked	to	be	some	sort	of
diadem	in	his	left	hand,	stepped	forward.
And	said	something	in	a	language	Seren	had	never	heard	before.
Iron	Bars	replied	in	an	impatient	growl.	He	drew	Seren	closer	as	the	man
who’d	spoken	began	gesturing.	The	air	seemed	to	shimmer	all	round	them.
‘Corlo’s	opening	the	warren,	lass.	We’re	going	through,	and	if	we’re	lucky
we	won’t	run	into	anything	in	there.	No	telling	how	far	we	can	get.	Far	enough,
I	hope.’
‘Where?’	she	asked.	‘Where	are	we	going?’
A	murky	wall	of	blackness	yawned	where	the	alley’s	blank	wall	had	been.
‘Letheras,	Acquitor.	We	got	a	ship	awaiting	us,	remember?’
Strangest	armour	I’ve	ever	seen.
A	damned	fortune.
‘Is	he	dead?’
‘Who?’
‘Is	he	dead?	Did	you	kill	him?	That	Tiste	Edur!’
‘No	choice,	lass.	He	was	slowing	us	up	and	more	were	coming.’
Oh,	no.


	
Vomit	spilling	out	onto	the	sand.
At	least,	Withal	mused,	the	shrieks	had	stopped.	He	waited,	seated	on	grass
just	above	the	beach,	while	the	young	Edur,	on	his	hands	and	knees,	head
hanging	down,	shuddered	and	convulsed,	coughed	and	spat.
Off	to	one	side,	two	of	the	Nachts,	Rind	and	Pule,	were	fighting	over	a
piece	of	driftwood	that	was	falling	apart	with	their	efforts.	Their	games	of
destruction	had	become	obsessive	of	late,	leading	the	Meckros	weaponsmith	to
wonder	if	they	were	in	fact	miming	a	truth	on	his	behalf.	Or	the	isolation	was
driving	them	insane.
Another	kind	of	truth,	that	one.
He	despised	religion.	Set	no	gods	in	his	path.	Ascendants	were	worse	than
rabid	beasts.	It	was	enough	that	mortals	were	capable	of	appalling	evil;	he
wanted	nothing	to	do	with	their	immortal,	immeasurably	more	powerful
counterparts.
And	this	broken	god	in	his	squalid	tent,	his	eternal	pain	and	the	numbing
smoke	of	the	seeds	he	scattered	onto	the	brazier	before	him,	it	was	all	of	a
piece	to	Withal.	Suffering	made	manifest,	consumed	by	the	desire	to	spread	the
misery	of	its	own	existence	into	the	world,	into	all	the	worlds.	Misery	and	false
escape,	pain	and	mindless	surrender.	All	of	a	piece.
On	this	small	island,	amidst	this	empty	sea,	Withal	was	lost.	Within
himself,	among	a	host	of	faces	that	were	all	his	own,	he	was	losing	the	capacity
to	recognize	any	of	them.	Thought	and	self	was	reduced,	formless	and
untethered.	Wandering	amidst	a	stranger ’s	memories,	whilst	the	world	beyond
unravelled.
Nest	building.
Frenzied	destruction.
Fanged	mouth	agape	in	silent,	convulsive	laughter.
Three	jesters	repeating	the	same	performance	again	and	again.	What	did	it
mean?	What	obvious	lesson	was	being	shown	him	that	he	was	too	blind,	too
thick,	to	understand?
The	Edur	lad	was	done,	nothing	left	in	his	stomach.	He	lifted	his	head,	eyes
stripped	naked	to	the	bones	of	pain	and	horror.	‘No,’	he	whispered.
Withal	looked	away,	squinted	along	the	strand.
‘No	more…please.’
‘Never	much	in	the	way	of	sunsets	here,’	Withal	mused.	‘Or	sunrises,	for
that	matter.’
‘You	don’t	know	what	it’s	like!’


The	Edur ’s	scream	trailed	away.	‘The	nests	are	getting	more	elaborate,’
Withal	said.	‘I	think	he’s	striving	for	a	particular	shape.	Sloped	walls,	a
triangular	entrance.	Then	Mape	wrecks	it.	What	am	I	to	take	from	all	that?’
‘He	can	keep	his	damned	sword.	I’m	not	going.	Over	there.	I’m	not	going
over	there	and	don’t	try	to	make	me.’
‘I	have	nothing	to	do.	Nothing.’
Rhulad	crawled	towards	him.	‘You	made	that	sword!’	he	said	in	an
accusatory	rasp.
‘Fire,	hammer,	anvil	and	quenching.	I’ve	made	more	swords	than	I	can
count.	Just	iron	and	sweat.	They	were	broken	blades,	I	think.	Those	black
shards.	From	some	kind	of	narrow-bladed,	overlong	knife.	Two	of	them,	black
and	brittle.	Just	pieces,	really.	I	wonder	where	he	collected	them	from?’
‘Everything	breaks,’	Rhulad	said.
Withal	glanced	over.	‘Aye,	lad.	Everything	breaks.’
‘You	could	do	it.’
‘Do	what?’
‘Break	that	sword.’
‘No.	I	can’t.’
‘Everything	breaks!’
‘Including	people,	lad.’
‘That’s	not	good	enough.’
Withal	shrugged.	‘I	don’t	remember	much	of	anything	any	more.	I	think
he’s	stealing	my	mind.	He	says	he’s	my	god.	All	I	need	to	do	is	worship	him,
he	says.	And	everything	will	come	clear.	So	tell	me,	Rhulad	Sengar,	is	it	all
clear	to	you?’
‘This	evil—it’s	of	your	making!’
‘Is	it?	Maybe	you’re	right.	I	accepted	his	bargain.	But	he	lied,	you	see.	He
said	he’d	set	me	free,	once	I	made	the	sword.	He	lies,	Rhulad.	That	much	I
know.	I	know	that	now.	This	god	lies.’
‘I	have	power.	I	am	emperor.	I’ve	taken	a	wife.	We	are	at	war	and	Lether
shall	fall.’
Withal	gestured	inland.	‘And	he’s	waiting	for	you.’
‘They’re	frightened	of	me.’
‘Fear	breeds	its	own	loyalty,	lad.	They’ll	follow.	They’re	waiting	too,	right
now.’
Rhulad	clawed	at	his	face,	shuddered.	‘He	killed	me.	That	man—not	a
Letherii,	not	a	Letherii	at	all.	He	killed	us.	Seven	of	my	brothers.	And	me.	He
was	so…fast.	It	seemed	he	barely	moved,	and	my	kin	were	falling,	dying.’
‘Next	time	will	be	harder.	You’ll	be	harder.	It	won’t	be	as	easy	to	find


someone	to	kill	you,	next	time.	And	the	time	after	that.	Do	you	understand	that,
lad?	It’s	the	essence	of	that	mangled	god	who’s	waiting	for	you.’
‘Who	is	he?’
‘The	god?	A	miserable	little	shit,	Rhulad.	Who	has	your	soul	in	his	hands.’
‘Father	Shadow	has	abandoned	us.’
‘Father	Shadow	is	dead.	Or	as	good	as.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
‘Because	if	he	wasn’t,	he’d	have	never	let	the	Crippled	God	steal	you.	You
and	your	people.	He’d	have	come	marching	ashore…’	Withal	fell	silent.
And	that,	he	realized,	was	what	he	was	coming	to.	A	blood-soaked	truth.
He	hated	religion,	hated	the	gods.	And	he	was	alone.
‘I	will	kill	him.	With	the	sword.’
‘Fool.	There’s	nothing	on	this	island	that	he	doesn’t	hear,	doesn’t	see,
doesn’t	know.’
Except,	maybe,	what’s	in	my	mind	now.	And,	even	if	he	knew,	how	could	he
stop	me?	No,	he	doesn’t	know.	I	must	believe	that.	After	all,	if	he	did,	he’d	kill
me.	Right	now,	he’d	kill	me.
Rhulad	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘I’m	ready	for	him.’
‘Are	you?’
‘Yes.’
Withal	sighed.	He	glanced	over	at	the	two	Nachts.	Their	contested
driftwood	was	a	scattering	of	splinters	lying	between	them.	Both	creatures
were	staring	down	at	it,	bemused,	poking	fingers	through	the	mess.	The
Meckros	rose.	‘All	right	then,	lad,	let’s	go.’
	
She	was	behind	the	black	glass,	within	a	tunnel	of	translucent	obsidian,	and
there	were	no	ghosts.
‘Kurald	Galain,’	Corlo	said	in	a	whisper,	casting	a	glance	back	at	them
over	one	shoulder.	‘Unexpected.	It’s	a	rotten	conquest.	That,	or	the	Edur	don’t
even	know	it,	don’t	even	know	what	they’re	using.’
The	air	stank	of	death.	Withered	flesh,	the	breath	of	a	crypt.	The	black
stone	beneath	their	feet	was	greasy	and	uncertain.	Overhead,	the	ceiling	was
uneven,	barely	a	hand’s	width	higher	than	Iron	Bars,	who	was	the	tallest	among
the	group.
‘It’s	a	damned	rats’	maze,’	the	mage	continued,	pausing	at	a	branching.
‘Just	take	us	south,’	Iron	Bars	said	in	a	low	growl.
‘Fine,	but	which	way	is	that?’
The	soldiers	crowded	round,	muttering	and	cursing	in	their	strange


language.
Corlo	faced	Seren,	his	expression	strangely	taut.	‘Any	suggestions,
Acquitor?’
‘What?’
The	mage	said	something	in	their	native	tongue	to	Iron	Bars,	who	scowled
and	replied,	‘That’s	enough,	all	of	you.	In	Letherii.	Since	when	was	rudeness	in
the	creed	of	the	Crimson	Guard?	Acquitor,	this	is	the	Hold	of	Darkness—’
‘There	is	no	Hold	of	Darkness.’
‘Well,	I’m	trying	to	say	it	in	a	way	that	makes	sense	to	you.’
‘All	right.’
Corlo	said,	‘But,	you	see,	Acquitor,	it	shouldn’t	be.’
She	simply	looked	at	him	in	the	gloom.
The	mage	rubbed	the	back	of	his	neck,	and	she	saw	the	hand	come	away
glistening	with	sweat.	‘These	are	Tiste	Edur,	right?	Not	Tiste	Andii.	The	Hold
of	Darkness,	that’s	Tiste	Andii.	The	Edur,	they	were	from	the,	uh,	Hold	of
Shadow.	So,	it	was	natural,	you	see,	to	expect	that	the	warren	would	be	Kurald
Emurlahn.	But	it	isn’t.	It’s	Kurald	Galain,	only	it’s	breached.	Over-run.	Thick
with	spirits—Tiste	Andii	spirits—’
‘They’re	not	here,’	she	said.	‘I’ve	seen	them.	Those	spirits.	They’re	not
here.’
‘They	are,	Acquitor.	I’m	just	keeping	them	away.	For	now…’
‘But	it’s	proving	difficult.’
The	mage	nodded	reluctantly.
‘And	you’re	lost.’
Another	nod.
She	tried	to	think,	cut	through	the	numbness—which	seemed	to	be	the	only
thing	keeping	away	the	pain	of	her	battered	flesh.	‘You	said	the	spirits	are	not
Edur.’
‘That’s	right.	Tiste	Andii.’
‘What	is	the	relationship	between	the	two?	Are	they	allied?’
Corlo’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘Allied?’
‘Those	wraiths,’	Iron	Bars	said.
The	mage’s	gaze	darted	to	his	commander,	then	back	again	to	Seren	Pedac.
‘Those	wraiths	are	bound.	Compelled	to	fight	alongside	the	Edur.	Are	they
Andii	spirits?	Hood’s	breath,	this	is	starting	to	make	sense.	What	else	would
they	be?	Not	Edur	spirits,	since	no	binding	magic	would	be	needed,	would	it?’
Iron	Bars	stepped	in	front	of	Seren.	‘What	are	you	suggesting?’
She	remembered	back	to	her	only	contact	with	the	spirits,	their	hunger.
‘Mage	Corlo,	you	say	you’re	keeping	them	away.	Are	they	trying	to	attack	us?’


‘I’m	not	sure.’
‘Let	one	through.	Maybe	we	can	talk	to	it,	maybe	we	can	get	help.’
‘Why	would	it	be	interested	in	helping	us?’
‘Make	a	bargain.’
‘With	what?’
She	shrugged.	‘Think	of	something.’
He	muttered	a	string	of	foreign	words	that	she	guessed	were	curses.
‘Let	one	through,’	Iron	Bars	said.
More	curses,	then	Corlo	walked	a	few	steps	ahead	to	clear	some	space.
‘Ready	weapons,’	he	said.	‘In	case	it	ain’t	interested	in	talking.’
A	moment	later,	the	gloom	in	front	of	the	mage	wavered,	and	something
black	spread	outward	like	spilled	ink.	A	figure	emerged,	halting,	uncertain.
A	woman,	tall	as	an	Edur	but	midnight-skinned,	a	reddish	glint	to	her	long,
unbound	hair.	Green	eyes,	tilted	and	large,	a	face	softer	and	rounder	than	Seren
would	have	expected	given	her	height	and	long	limbs.	She	was	wearing	a
leather	harness	and	leggings,	and	on	her	shoulders	rode	the	skin	of	some
white-furred	beast.	She	was	unarmed.
Her	eyes	hardened.	She	spoke,	and	in	her	words	Seren	heard	a	resemblance
to	Edur.
‘I	hate	it	when	that	happens,’	Corlo	said.
Seren	tried	Edur.	‘Hello.	We	apologize	for	intruding	on	your	world.	We	do
not	intend	to	stay	long.’
The	woman’s	expression	did	not	change.	‘The	Betrayers	never	do.’
‘I	may	speak	in	the	language	of	the	Edur,	but	they	are	no	allies	of	ours.
Perhaps	in	that,	we	share	something.’
‘I	was	among	the	first	to	die	in	the	war,’	the	woman	said,	‘and	so	not	at	the
hands	of	an	Edur.	They	cannot	take	me,	cannot	force	me	to	fight	for	them.	I	and
those	like	me	are	beyond	their	grasp.’
‘Yet	your	spirit	remains	trapped,’	Seren	said.	‘Here,	in	this	place.’
‘What	do	you	want?’
Seren	turned	to	Iron	Bars.	‘She	asks	what	we	want	of	her.’
‘Corlo?’
The	mage	shrugged,	then	said,	‘We	need	to	escape	the	influence	of	the
Edur.	We	need	to	get	beyond	their	reach.	Then	to	return	to	our	world.’
Seren	relayed	Corlo’s	statements	to	the	woman.
‘You	are	mortal,’	she	replied.	‘You	can	pass	through	when	we	cannot.’
‘Can	you	guide	us?’
‘And	what	is	to	be	my	reward	for	this	service?’
‘What	do	you	seek?’


She	considered,	then	shook	her	head.	‘No.	An	unfair	bargain.	My	service	is
not	worth	the	payment	I	would	ask.	You	require	a	guide	to	lead	you	to	the
border ’s	edge.	I	will	not	deceive.	It	is	not	far.	You	would	find	it	yourselves
before	too	long.’
Seren	translated	the	exchange	for	the	Crimson	Guardsmen,	then	added,
‘This	is	odd…’
Iron	Bars	smiled.	‘An	honest	broker?’
She	nodded	wryly.	‘I	am	Letherii,	after	all.	Honesty	makes	me	suspicious.’
‘Ask	her	what	she	would	have	us	do	for	her,’	Iron	Bars	said.
Seren	Pedac	did,	and	the	woman	held	up	her	right	hand,	and	in	it	was	a
small	object,	encrusted	and	corroded	and	unrecognizable.	‘The	K’Chain
Che’Malle	counter-attack	drove	a	number	of	us	down	to	the	shoreline,	then
into	the	waves.	I	am	a	poor	fighter.	I	died	on	that	sea’s	foaming	edge,	and	my
corpse	rolled	out,	drawn	by	the	tide,	along	the	muddy	sands,	where	the	mud
swallowed	it.’	She	looked	down	at	the	object	in	her	palm.	‘This	was	a	ring	I
wore.	Returned	to	me	by	a	wraith—many	wraiths	have	done	this	for	those	of	us
beyond	the	reach	of	the	Edur.	I	would	ask	that	you	return	me	to	my	bones,	to
what	little	of	me	remains.	So	that	I	can	find	oblivion.	But	this	is	too	vast	a	gift,
for	offering	you	so	little—’
‘How	would	we	go	about	doing	as	you	ask?’
‘I	would	join	with	the	substance	of	this	ring.	You	would	see	me	no	more.
And	you	would	need	to	travel	to	the	shoreline,	then	cast	this	into	the	sea.’
‘That	does	not	seem	difficult.’
‘Perhaps	it	isn’t.	The	inequity	lies	in	the	exchange	of	values.’
Seren	shook	her	head.	‘We	see	no	inequity.	Our	desire	is	of	equal	value	as
far	as	we	are	concerned.	We	accept	your	bargain.’
‘How	do	I	know	you	will	not	betray	me?’
The	Letherii	turned	to	Iron	Bars.	‘She	doesn’t	trust	us.’
The	man	strode	to	halt	directly	before	the	Tiste	Andii	woman.	‘Acquitor,
tell	her	I	am	an	Avowed,	of	the	Crimson	Guard.	If	she	would,	she	can	seek	the
meaning	of	that.	By	laying	her	hand	on	my	chest.	Tell	her	I	shall	honour	our
pact.’
‘I’ve	not	told	you	what	it	is	yet.	She	wants	us	to	throw	the	thing	she’s
holding	into	the	sea.’
‘That’s	it?’
‘Doing	so	will	end	her	existence.	Which	seems	to	be	what	she	wants.’
‘Tell	her	to	seek	the	cast	of	my	soul.’
‘Very	well.’
The	suspicious	look	in	the	woman’s	eyes	grew	more	pronounced,	but	she


stepped	forward	and	set	her	left	hand	on	the	man’s	chest.
The	hand	flinched	away	and	the	woman	staggered	back	a	step,	shock,	then
horror,	writ	on	her	face.	‘How—how	could	you	do—why?’
Seren	said,	‘Not	the	response	you	sought,	I	think,	Iron	Bars.	She	is…
appalled.’
‘That	is	of	no	concern,’	the	man	replied.	‘Does	she	accept	my	word?’
The	woman	straightened,	then,	to	Seren’s	question,	she	nodded	and	said,	‘I
cannot	do	otherwise.	But…I	had	forgotten…this	feeling.’
‘What	feeling?’
‘Sorrow.’
‘Iron	Bars,’	Seren	said,	‘whatever	this	“Avowed”	means,	she	is
overwhelmed	with…pity.’
‘Yes	well,’	he	said,	turning	away,	‘we	all	make	mistakes.’
The	woman	said,	‘I	will	lead	you	now.’
‘What	is	your	name?’
‘Sandalath	Drukorlat.’
‘Thank	you,	Sandalath.	It	grieves	me	to	know	that	our	gift	to	you	is
oblivion.’
She	shrugged.	‘Those	who	I	once	loved	and	who	loved	me	believe	I	am
gone	in	truth.	There	is	no	need	for	grief.’
No	need	for	grief.	Where,	then,	does	the	pity	lie?
‘Stand	up,	lads,’	Iron	Bars	said,	‘she’s	making	ready	to	go.’
	
Mape	lay	on	the	knoll	like	something	dead,	but	the	Nacht’s	head	slowly	turned
as	Withal	and	Rhulad	strode	into	view.	She	had	stolen	a	hammer	from	the
smithy	some	time	back,	to	better	facilitate	her	destruction	of	Pule’s	nests,	and
now	carried	it	with	her	everywhere.	Withal	watched	askance	as	the	gnarled,
black-skinned	creature	lifted	the	hammer	into	view,	eyes	still	fixed	on	him	and
the	Tiste	Edur,	as	if	contemplating	murder.
Of	the	three	Nachts,	Mape	made	him	the	most	nervous.	Too	much
intelligence	glittered	in	her	small	black	eyes,	too	often	she	watched	with
something	like	a	smile	on	her	apish	face.	And	the	strength	the	creatures	had
displayed	was	sufficient	to	make	any	man	worried.	He	knew	Mape	could	tear
his	arms	from	his	shoulders,	were	she	so	inclined.
Perhaps	the	Crippled	God	had	bound	them,	as	demons	could	be	bound,	and
it	was	this	and	this	alone	that	kept	the	beasts	from	Withal’s	throat.	An
unpleasant	notion.
‘What’s	to	stop	me,’	Rhulad	asked	in	a	growl,	‘from	driving	the	sword


right	through	his	scrawny	chest?’
‘Do	not	ask	that	question	of	me,	Edur.	Only	the	Crippled	God	can	answer
it.	But	I	don’t	think	it	could	ever	be	that	easy.	He’s	a	clever	bastard,	and	there	in
that	tent	his	power	is	probably	absolute.’
‘The	vastness	of	his	realm,’	Rhulad	said,	sneering.
Yes.	Now	why	do	those	words,	said	in	that	way,	interest	me?
The	ragged	canvas	shelter	was	directly	ahead,	smoke	drifting	from	the	side
that	had	been	drawn	open.	As	they	approached,	the	air	grew	hotter,	drier,	the
grasses	withered	and	bleached	underfoot.	The	earth	seemed	strangely	blighted.
They	came	opposite	the	entrance.	Within,	the	god’s	huddled	form	in	the
gloom.	Tendrils	of	smoke	rising	from	the	brazier.
A	cough,	then,	‘Such	anger.	Unreasonable,	I	think,	given	the	efficacy	of	my
gift.’
‘I	don’t	want	to	go	back,’	Rhulad	said.	‘Leave	me	here.	Choose	someone
else.’
‘Unwitting	servants	to	our	cause	appear…from	unexpected	sources.
Imagine,	an	Avowed	of	the	Crimson	Guard.	Be	glad	it	was	not	Skinner,	or
indeed	Cowl.	They	would	have	taken	more	notice	of	you,	and	that	would	not
have	been	a	good	thing.	We’re	not	yet	ready	for	that.’	A	hacking	cough.	‘Not
yet	ready.’
‘I’m	not	going	back.’
‘You	detest	the	flesh	given	you.	I	understand.	But,	Rhulad	Sengar,	the	gold
is	your	payment.	For	the	power	you	seek.’
‘I	want	nothing	more	of	that	power.’
‘But	you	do,’	the	Crippled	God	said,	clearly	amused.	‘Consider	the
rewards	already	reaped.	The	throne	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	the	woman	after	whom
you	lusted	for	years—now	in	your	possession,	to	do	with	as	you	please.	Your
brothers,	bowing	one	and	all	before	you.	And	a	burgeoning	prowess	with	the
sword—’
‘It’s	not	mine,	though,	is	it?	It	is	all	I	can	do	to	hold	on!	The	skill	does	not
belong	to	me—and	all	can	see	that!	I	have	earned	nothing!’
‘And	what	value	is	all	that	pride	you	seek,	Rhulad	Sengar?	You	mortals
baffle	me.	It	is	a	fool’s	curse,	to	measure	oneself	in	endless	dissatisfaction.	It	is
not	for	me	to	guide	you	in	the	rule	of	your	empire.	That	task	belongs	to	you
and	you	alone.	There,	make	that	your	place	of	pride.	Besides,	has	not	your
strength	grown?	You	have	muscles	now	surpassing	your	brother	Fear ’s.	Cease
your	whimpering,	Edur.’
‘You	are	using	me!’
The	Crippled	God	laughed.	‘And	Scabandari	Bloodeye	did	not?	Oh,	I	know


the	tale	now.	All	of	it.	The	seas	whisper	old	truths,	Rhulad	Sengar.	Revered
Father	Shadow,	oh,	such	an	absurd	conceit.	Murderer,	knife-wielder,	betrayer
—’
‘Lies!’
‘—who	then	led	you	into	your	own	betrayal.	Of	your	once-allies,	the	Tiste
Andii.	You	fell	upon	them	at	Scabandari’s	command.	You	killed	those	who	had
fought	alongside	you.	That	is	the	legacy	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	Rhulad	Sengar.	Ask
Hannan	Mosag.	He	knows.	Ask	your	brother,	Fear.	Your	mother—the	women
know.	Their	memory	has	been	far	less…selective.’
‘No	more	of	this,’	the	Edur	pleaded,	clawing	at	his	face.	‘You	would
poison	me	with	dishonour.	That	is	your	purpose…for	all	you	say.’
‘Perhaps	what	I	offer,’	the	Crippled	God	murmured,	‘is	absolution.	The
opportunity	to	make	amends.	It	is	within	you,	Rhulad	Sengar.	The	power	is
yours	to	shape	as	you	will.	The	empire	shall	cast	your	reflection,	no-one	else’s.
Will	you	flee	from	that?	If	that	is	your	choice,	then	indeed	I	shall	be	forced	to
choose	another.	One	who	will	prove,	perhaps,	less	honourable.’
The	sword	clattered	at	Rhulad’s	feet.
‘Choose.’
Withal	watched,	saw	the	Edur ’s	expression	change.
With	a	scream,	Rhulad	snatched	up	the	weapon	and	lunged—
—and	was	gone.
Rasping	laughter.	‘There	is	so	little,	Withal,	that	surprises	me	any	more.’
Disgusted,	the	Meckros	turned	away.
‘A	moment,	Withal.	I	see	your	weariness,	your	displeasure.	What	is	it	that
plagues	you	so?	That	is	what	I	ask	myself.’
‘The	lad	doesn’t	deserve	it—’
‘Oh,	but	he	does.	They	all	do.’
‘Aye,’	Withal	said,	eyes	level	as	he	stared	at	the	Crippled	God,	‘that	does
seem	to	be	the	sole	judgement	you	possess.	But	it’s	hardly	clean,	is	it?’
‘Careful.	My	gratitude	for	what	you	have	done	for	me	wears	thin.’
‘Gratitude?’	Withal’s	laugh	was	harsh.	‘You	are	thankful	after	compelling
me	into	doing	your	bidding.	That’s	a	good	one.	May	you	be	as	generous	of
thought	after	I	force	you	into	killing	me.’	He	studied	the	hooded	figure.	‘I	see
your	problem,	you	know.	I	see	it	now,	and	curse	myself	for	having	missed	it
before.	You	have	no	realm	to	command,	as	do	other	gods.	So	you	sit	there,
alone,	in	your	tent,	and	that	is	the	extent	of	your	realm,	isn’t	it?	Broken	flesh
and	foul,	stifling	air.	Skin-thin	walls	and	the	heat	the	old	and	lame	desire.	Your
world,	and	you	alone	in	it,	and	the	irony	is,	you	cannot	even	command	your
own	body.’


A	wretched	cough,	then,	‘Spare	me	your	sympathy,	Meckros.	I	have	given
the	problem	of	you	considerable	thought,	and	have	found	a	solution,	as	you
shall	soon	discover.	When	you	do,	think	on	what	you	have	said	to	me.	Now,
go.’
‘You	still	don’t	understand,	do	you?	The	more	pain	you	deliver	to	others,
god,	the	more	shall	be	visited	upon	you.	You	sow	your	own	misery,	and
because	of	that	whatever	sympathy	you	might	rightly	receive	is	swept	away.’
‘I	said	go,	Withal.	Build	yourself	a	nest.	Mape’s	waiting.’
	
They	emerged	onto	a	windswept	sward	with	the	crashing	waves	of	the	sea	on
their	right	and	before	them	the	delta	of	a	broad	river.	On	the	river ’s	other	side
stood	a	walled	city.
Seren	Pedac	studied	the	distant	buildings,	the	tall,	thin	towers	that	seemed
to	lean	seaward.	‘Old	Katter,’	she	said.	‘We’re	thirty	leagues	south	of	Trate.
How	is	that	possible?’
‘Warrens,’	Corlo	muttered,	sagging	until	he	sat	on	the	ground.	‘Rotted.
Septic,	but	still,	a	warren.’
The	Acquitor	made	her	way	down	to	the	beach.	The	sun	was	high	and	hot
overhead.	I	must	wash.	Get	clean.	The	sea…
Iron	Bars	followed,	in	one	hand	the	encrusted	object	where	the	spirit	of	a
Tiste	Andii	woman	now	resided.
She	strode	into	the	water,	the	foaming	waves	thrashing	round	her	shins.
The	Avowed	flung	the	object	past	her—a	small	splash	not	far	ahead.
Thighs,	then	hips.
Clean.	Get	clean.
To	her	chest.	A	wave	rolled,	lifted	her	from	the	bottom,	spun	and	flung	her
towards	the	shore.	She	clawed	herself	round	until	she	could	push	forward	once
again.	Cold	salty	water	rising	over	her	face.	Bright,	sunlit,	silty	water,	washing
sight	from	her	eyes.	Water	biting	at	scabbed	wounds,	stinging	her	broken	lips,
water	filling	her	mouth	and	begging	to	be	drawn	inside.
Like	this.
Hands	grasped	her,	pulled	her	back.	She	fought,	but	could	not	break	loose.
Clean!
Her	face	swept	by	cold	wind,	eyes	blinking	in	painful	light.	Coughing,
weeping,	she	struggled,	but	the	hands	dragged	her	remorselessly	onto	the
beach,	flung	her	onto	the	sand.	Then,	as	she	tried	to	claw	free,	arms	wrapped
tight	about	her,	pinning	her	own	arms,	and	a	voice	gasped	close	to	her	ear,	‘I
know,	lass.	I	know	what	it’s	about.	But	it	ain’t	the	way.’


Heaving,	helpless	sobs,	now.
And	he	held	her	still.
‘Heal	her,	Corlo.’
‘I’m	damn	near	done—’
‘Now.	And	sleep.	Make	her	sleep—’
	
No,	you	can’t	die.	Not	again.	I	have	need	of	you.
So	many	layers,	pressing	down	upon	these	indurative	remnants,	a	moment
of	vast	pressure,	the	thick,	so	thick	skin	tracing	innumerable	small	deaths.	And
life	was	voice,	not	words,	but	sound,	motion.	Where	all	else	was	still,	silent.
Oblivion	waited	when	the	last	echo	faded.
Dying	the	first	time	should	have	been	enough.	This	world	was	foreign,
after	all.	The	gate	sealed,	swept	away.	Her	husband—if	he	still	lived—was	long
past	his	grief.	Her	daughter,	perhaps	a	mother	herself	by	now,	a	grandmother.
She	had	fed	on	draconic	blood,	there	in	the	wake	of	Anomander.	Somewhere,
she	persisted,	and	lived	free	of	sorrow.
It	had	been	important	to	think	that	way.	Her	only	weapon	against	insanity.
No	gifts	in	death	but	one.
But	something	held	her	back.
Something	with	a	voice.	These	are	restless	seas	indeed.	I	had	not	thought
my	questing	would	prove	so…easy.	True,	you	are	not	human,	but	you	will	do.
You	will	do.
These	remnants,	suddenly	in	motion,	grating	motion.	Fragments,	particles
too	small	to	see,	drawing	together.	As	if	remembering	to	what	they	had	once
belonged.	And,	within	the	sea,	within	the	silts,	waited	all	that	was	needed.	For
flesh,	for	bone	and	blood.	All	these	echoes,	resurrected,	finding	shape.	She
looked	on	in	horror.
Watched,	as	the	body—so	familiar,	so	strange—clawed	its	way	upward
through	the	silts.	Silts	that	lightened,	thinned,	then	burst	into	a	plume	that
swirled	in	the	currents.	Arms	reaching	upward,	a	body	heaving	into	view.
She	hovered	near,	compelled	to	close,	to	enter,	but	knowing	it	was	too
soon.
Her	body,	which	she	had	left	so	long	ago.	It	was	not	right.	Not	fair.
Scrambling	mindlessly	along	the	sea	bottom.	Finned	creatures	darting	in
and	out	of	sight,	drawn	to	the	stirred-up	sediments,	frightened	away	by	the
flailing	figure.	Multi-legged	shapes	scrabbling	from	its	path.
A	strange	blurring,	passed	through,	and	then	sunlight	glittered	close
overhead.	Hands	broke	the	surface,	firm	sand	underfoot,	sloping	upward.


Face	in	the	air.
And	she	swept	forward,	plunged	into	the	body,	raced	like	fire	within
muscle	and	bone.
Sensations.	Cold,	a	wind,	the	smell	of	salt	and	a	shoreline’s	decay.
Mother	Dark,	I	am…alive.
	
The	voice	of	return	came	not	in	laughter,	but	in	screams.
All	had	gathered	as	word	of	the	emperor ’s	death	spread.	The	city	was
taken,	but	Rhulad	Sengar	had	been	killed.	Neck	snapped	like	a	sapling.	His
body	lay	where	it	fell,	with	the	slave	Udinaas	standing	guard,	a	macabre
sentinel	who	did	not	acknowledge	anyone,	but	simply	stared	down	at	the	coinclad	corpse.
Hannan	Mosag.	Mayen	with	Feather	Witch	trailing.	Midik	Buhn,	now
blooded	and	a	warrior	in	truth.	Hundreds	of	Edur	warriors,	blood-spattered
with	glory	and	slaughter.	Silent,	pale	citizens,	terrified	of	the	taut	expectancy	in
the	smoky	air.
All	witness	to	the	body’s	sudden	convulsions,	its	piercing	screams.	For	a
ghastly	moment,	Rhulad’s	neck	remained	broken,	rocking	his	head	in
impossible	angles	as	he	staggered	to	his	feet.	Then	the	bone	mended,	and	the
head	righted	itself,	sudden	light	in	the	hooded	eyes.
More	screams,	from	Letherii	now.	Figures	fleeing.
Rhulad’s	ragged	shrieks	died	and	he	stood,	wavering,	the	sword	trembling
in	his	hands.
Udinaas	spoke.	‘Emperor,	Trate	is	yours.’
A	sudden	spasm,	then	Rhulad	seemed	to	see	the	others	for	the	first	time.
‘Hannan	Mosag,	settle	the	garrison.	The	rest	of	the	army	shall	camp	outside	the
city.	Send	word	to	your	K’risnan	with	the	fleet:	they	are	to	make	for	Old
Katter.’
The	Warlock	King	stepped	close	and	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘It	is	true,	then.
You	cannot	die.’
Rhulad	flinched.	‘I	die,	Hannan	Mosag.	It	is	all	I	know,	dying.	Leave	me
now.	Udinaas.’
‘Emperor.’
‘I	need—find—I	am…’
‘Your	tent	awaits	you	and	Mayen,’	the	slave	said.
‘Yes.’
Midik	Buhn	spoke,	‘Emperor,	I	shall	lead	your	escort.’
His	expression	confused,	Rhulad	looked	down	at	his	body,	the	smeared,


crusted	coins,	the	spattered	furs.	‘Yes,	brother	Midik.	An	escort.’
‘And	we	shall	find	the	one	who…did	this,	sire…to	you.’
Rhulad’s	eyes	flashed.	‘He	cannot	be	defeated.	We	are	helpless	before	him.
He	lies…’
Midik	was	frowning.	He	glanced	at	Udinaas.
‘Emperor,’	the	slave	said,	‘he	meant	the	one	who	killed	you	and	your	kin.
Here	in	this	street.’
Clawing	at	his	face,	Rhulad	turned	away.	‘Of	course.	He	wore…crimson.’
Udinaas	said	to	Midik,	‘I	will	give	you	a	detailed	description.’
A	sharp	nod.	‘Yes.	The	city	will	be	searched.’
But	he’s	gone,	you	fool.	No,	I	don’t	know	how	I	know.	Still,	the	man’s	gone.
With	Seren	Pedac.	‘Of	course.’
‘Udinaas!’	A	desperate	gasp.
‘I	am	here,	Emperor.’
‘Take	me	out	of	this	place!’
It	was	known,	now,	and	soon	the	Ceda	would	learn	of	it.	But	would	he
understand?	How	could	he?	It	was	impossible,	insane.
He	can	do	nothing.	Will	he	realize	this?
The	warrior	in	gold	trailed	the	slave,	step	by	step,	through	the	fallen	city,
Mayen	and	Feather	Witch	in	their	wake.	Midik	Buhn	and	a	dozen	warriors
flanked	them	all,	weapons	at	the	ready.	The	passage	was	uncontested.
	
Withal	sat	on	a	bench	in	his	smithy.	Plain	walls,	stone	and	plaster,	the	forge
cold	and	filled	with	ash.	Paved	floor,	the	small	workshop	three-walled,	the
open	side	facing	onto	a	fenced	compound	where	stood	a	cut-stone-rimmed
well,	a	quenching	trough,	firewood	and	a	heap	of	tailings	and	slag.	A	hut	on	the
opposite	side	housed	his	cot	and	nothing	else.
The	extent	of	his	world.	Mocking	reminder	of	his	profession,	the	purpose
behind	living.
The	Crippled	God’s	voice	whispered	in	his	mind,	Withal.	My	gift.	I	am	not
without	sympathy,	no	matter	what	you	might	think.	I	understood.	Nachts	are
poor	company	for	a	man.	Go,	Withal,	down	to	the	beach.	Take	possession	of	my
gift.
He	slowly	rose,	bemused.	A	boat?	A	raft?	A	damned	log	I	could	ride	out
with	the	tide?	He	made	his	way	outside.
And	heard	the	Nachts,	chattering	excitedly	down	on	the	strand.
Withal	walked	to	the	verge,	and	stood,	looking	down.
A	woman	was	staggering	from	the	water.	Tall,	black-skinned,	naked,	long


red	hair.
And	the	Meckros	turned	round,	strode	away.
‘You	bastard—’
The	Crippled	God	replied	in	mock	consternation,	Is	this	not	what	you
want?	Is	she	too	tall	for	you?	Her	eyes	too	strange?	Withal,	I	do	not
understand….
‘How	could	you	have	done	this?	Take	possession,	you	said.	It’s	all	you
know,	isn’t	it?	Possession.	Things	to	be	used.	People.	Lives.’
She	needs	your	help,	Withal.	She	is	lost,	alarmed	by	the	Nachts.	Slow	to
recall	her	flesh.
‘Later.	Leave	me	alone,	now.	Leave	us	both	alone.’
A	soft	laugh,	then	a	cough.	As	you	wish.	Disappointing,	this	lack	of
gratitude.
‘Go	to	the	Abyss.’
No	reply.
Withal	entered	the	hut,	stood	facing	the	cot	for	a	time,	until	he	was	certain
that	the	Crippled	God	was	not	lurking	somewhere	in	his	skull.	Then	he	lowered
himself	to	his	knees	and	bowed	his	head.
He	hated	religion.	Detested	gods.	But	the	nest	was	empty.	The	nest	needed
tearing	apart.	Rebuilding.
The	Meckros	had	a	host	of	gods	for	the	choosing.	But	one	was	older	than
all	the	others,	and	that	one	belonged	to	the	sea.
Withal	began	to	pray.
In	Mael’s	name.


Chapter	Seventeen

None	had	seen	the	like.	Chorum’s	Mill	was	a
Marvel	of	invention.	Wheels	upon	wheels,
Granite	and	interlocking	gears,	axles	and
Spokes	and	rims	of	iron,	a	machine	that	climbed
From	that	fast	river	three	full	levels	and	ground
The	finest	flour	Lether	had	ever	seen—
Some	say	it	was	the	rain,	the	deluge	that	filled
The	water ’s	course	through	the	mill’s	stony	toes.
Some	say	it	was	the	sheer	complexity	that	was
The	cause	of	it	all,	the	conceit	of	a	mortal	man’s
Vision.	Some	say	it	was	the	Errant’s	nudge,	fickle
And	wayward	that	voiced	the	sudden	roar	that	dawn,
The	explosions	of	stone	and	the	shrieks	of	iron,
And	the	vast	wheels	breaking	free	and	bursting
Through	the	thick	walls,	and	the	washing	women
Downstream	the	foam	at	their	thighs	looked	up
To	see	their	granite	doom	rolling	down—
Not	a	wrinkle	left,	not	a	stain	survived,	and	old
Misker,	perched	on	Ribble	the	Mule,	well	the	mule
Knew	its	place	as	it	bolted	and	leapt	head-first
Down	the	well,	but	poor	old	Misker	hugged	the
Draw	pail	on	its	rope	and	so	swung	clear,	to
Skin	his	knees	on	the	round’s	cobbles	and	swear
Loud,	the	boisterous	breath	preceding	the	fateful
Descent	of	toothy	death	the	gear	wheel,	tall	as	any
Man	but	far	taller	than	Misker	(even	perched	on
His	mule)	and	that	would	not	be	hard	once	it	was
Done	with	him,	why	the	rat—oh,	did	I	forget	to
Mention	the	rat?
EXCERPT	FROM 	THE	RAT’S	TAIL	(THE	CAUSE	OF	IT	ALL)
CHANT	PRIP


Stumbling	in	the	gloom,	the	drunk	had	fallen	into	the	canal.	Tehol	had	mostly
lost	sight	of	him	from	his	position	at	the	edge	of	the	roof,	but	he	could	hear
splashing	and	curses,	and	the	scrabbling	against	the	rings	set	in	the	stone	wall.
Sighing,	Tehol	glanced	over	at	the	nameless	guard	Brys	had	sent.	Or	one
of	them,	at	least.	The	three	brothers	looked	pretty	much	identical,	and	none	had
given	their	names.	Nothing	outward	or	obvious	to	impress	or	inspire	fear.
And,	by	the	unwavering	cast	of	their	lipless,	eyeslitted	expressions,	sadly
unqualified	as	welcome	company.
‘Can	your	friends	tell	you	apart?’	Tehol	enquired,	then	frowned.	‘What	a
strange	question	to	ask	of	a	man.	But	you	must	be	used	to	strange	questions,
since	people	will	assume	you	were	somewhere	when	you	weren’t,	or,	rather,
not	you,	but	the	other	yous,	each	of	whom	could	be	anywhere.	It	now	occurs	to
me	that	saying	nothing	is	a	fine	method	for	dealing	with	such	confusion,	to
which	each	of	you	have	agreed	to	as	the	proper	response,	unless	you	are	the
same	amongst	yourselves,	in	which	case	it	was	a	silent	agreement.	Always	the
best	kind.’
The	drunk,	far	below,	was	climbing	from	the	canal,	swearing	in	more
languages	than	Tehol	believed	existed.	‘Will	you	listen	to	that?	Atrocious.	To
hear	such	no	doubt	foul	words	uttered	with	such	vehemence—hold	on,	that’s
no	drunk,	that’s	my	manservant!’	Tehol	waved	and	shouted,	‘Bugg!	What	are
you	doing	down	there?	Is	this	what	I	pay	you	for?’
The	sodden	manservant	was	looking	upward,	and	he	yelled	something
back	that	Tehol	could	not	make	out.	‘What?	What	did	you	say?’
‘You—don’t—pay—me!’
‘Oh,	tell	everyone,	why	don’t	you!’
Tehol	watched	as	Bugg	made	his	way	to	the	bridge	and	crossed,	then
disappeared	from	view	behind	the	nearby	buildings.	‘How	embarrassing.
Time’s	come	for	a	serious	talk	with	dear	old	Bugg.’
Sounds	from	below,	more	cursing.	Then	creaking	from	the	ladder.
Bugg’s	mud-smeared	head	and	face	rose	into	view.
‘Now,’	Tehol	said,	hands	on	hips,	‘I’m	sure	I	sent	you	off	to	do	something
important,	and	what	do	you	do?	Go	falling	into	the	canal.	Was	that	on	the	list	of
tasks?	I	think	not.’
‘Are	you	berating	me,	master?’
‘Yes.	What	did	you	think?’
‘More	effective,	I	believe,	had	you	indeed	sent	me	off	to	do	something
important.	As	it	was,	I	was	on	a	stroll,	mesmerized	by	moonlight—’
‘Don’t	step	there!	Back!	Back!’
Alarmed,	Bugg	froze,	then	edged	away.


‘You	nearly	crushed	Ezgara!	And	could	he	have	got	out	of	the	way?	I	think
not!’	Tehol	moved	closer	and	knelt	beside	the	insect	making	its	slow	way
across	the	roof’s	uneven	surface.	‘Oh,	look,	you	startled	it!’
‘How	can	you	tell?’	Bugg	asked.
‘Well,	it’s	reversed	direction,	hasn’t	it?	That	must	be	startling,	I	would
imagine.’
‘You	know,	master,	it	was	a	curio—I	didn’t	think	you	would	make	it	a	pet.’
‘That’s	because	you’re	devoid	of	sentiment,	Bugg.	Whereas	Ezgara	here	is
doubly—’
‘Ovoid?’
‘Charmingly	so.’	Tehol	glanced	over	at	the	guard,	who	was	staring	back	at
him	as	was	his	wont.	‘And	this	man	agrees.	Or,	if	not	him,	then	his	brothers.
Why,	one	let	Ezgara	crawl	all	over	his	face,	and	he	didn’t	even	blink!’
‘How	did	Ezgara	manage	to	get	onto	his	face,	master?’
‘And	down	the	other ’s	jerkin,	not	a	flinch.	These	are	warm-hearted	men,
Bugg,	look	well	upon	them	and	learn.’
‘I	shall,	master.’
‘Now,	did	you	enjoy	your	swim?’
‘Not	particularly.’
‘A	misstep,	you	say?’
‘I	thought	I	heard	someone	whisper	my	name—’
‘Shurq	Elalle?’
‘No.’
‘Harlest	Eberict?	Kettle?	Chief	Investigator	Rucket?	Champion	Ormly?’
‘No.’
‘Might	you	have	been	imagining	things?’
‘Quite	possibly.	For	example,	I	believe	I	am	being	followed	by	rats.’
‘You	probably	are,	Bugg.	Maybe	one	of	them	whispered	your	name.’
‘An	unpleasant	notion,	master.’
‘Yes	it	is.	Do	you	think	it	pleases	me	that	my	manservant	consorts	with
rats?’
‘Would	you	rather	go	hungry?’	Bugg	reached	under	his	shirt.
‘You	haven’t!’
‘No,	it’s	cat,’	he	said,	withdrawing	a	small,	skinned,	headless	and	pawless
carcass.	‘Canal	flavoured,	alas.’
‘Another	gift	from	Rucket?’
‘No,	oddly	enough.	The	canal.’
‘Ugh.’
‘Smells	fresh	enough—’


‘What’s	that	wire	trailing	from	it?’
The	manservant	lifted	the	carcass	higher,	then	took	the	dangling	wire
between	two	fingers	and	followed	it	back	until	it	vanished	in	the	flesh.	He
tugged,	then	grunted.
‘What?’	Tehol	asked.
‘The	wire	leads	to	a	large,	barbed	hook.’
‘Oh.’
‘And	the	wire’s	snapped	at	this	end—I	thought	something	broke	my	fall.’
He	tore	a	small	sliver	of	meat	from	one	of	the	cat’s	legs,	broke	it	in	two,	then
placed	one	piece	at	each	end	of	the	insect	named	Ezgara.	It	settled	to	feed.
‘Anyway,	a	quick	rinse	and	we’re	ahead	by	two,	if	not	three	meals.	Quite	a	run
of	fortune,	master,	of	late.’
‘Yes,’	Tehol	mused.	‘Now	I’m	nervous.	So,	have	you	any	news	to	tell	me?’
‘Do	you	realize,	master,	that	Gerun	Eberict	would	have	had	to	kill	on
average	between	ten	and	fifteen	people	a	day	in	order	to	achieve	his	annual
dividend?	How	does	he	find	the	time	to	do	anything	else?’
‘Perhaps	he’s	recruited	thugs	sharing	his	insane	appetites.’
‘Indeed.	Anyway,	Shurq	has	disappeared—both	Harlest	and	Ublala	are
distraught—’
‘Why	Harlest?’
‘He	had	only	Ublala	to	whom	he	could	show	off	his	new	fangs	and	talons,
and	Ublala	was	less	than	impressed,	so	much	so	that	he	pushed	Harlest	into	the
sarcophagus	and	sealed	him	in.’
‘Poor	Harlest.’
‘He	adjusted	quickly	enough,’	said	Bugg,	‘and	now	contemplates	his
dramatic	resurrection—whenever	it	occurs.’
‘Disturbing	news	about	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘Why?’
‘It	means	she	didn’t	change	her	mind.	It	means	she’s	going	to	break	into	the
Tolls	Repository.	Perhaps	even	this	very	night.’
Bugg	glanced	over	at	the	guard.	‘Master…’
‘Oops,	that	was	careless,	wasn’t	it?’	He	rose	and	walked	over.	‘He	hears
all,	it’s	true.	My	friend,	we	can	at	least	agree	on	one	thing,	can’t	we?’
The	eyes	flickered	as	the	man	stared	at	Tehol.
‘Any	thief	attempting	the	Repository	is	as	good	as	dead,	right?’	He	smiled,
then	swung	back	to	face	his	manservant.
Bugg	began	removing	his	wet	clothes.	‘I	believe	I’ve	caught	a	chill.’
‘The	canal	is	notoriously	noxious—’
‘No,	from	earlier,	master.	The	Fifth	Wing.	I’ve	managed	to	successfully


shore	up	the	foundations—’
‘Already?	Why,	that’s	extraordinary.’
‘It	is,	isn’t	it?	In	any	case,	it’s	chilly	in	those	tunnels…now.’
‘Dare	I	ask?’
Bugg	stood	naked,	eyes	on	the	faint	stars	overhead.	‘Best	not,	master.’
‘And	what	of	the	Fourth	Wing?’
‘Well,	that’s	where	my	crews	are	working	at	the	moment.	A	week,	perhaps
ten	days.	There’s	an	old	drainage	course	beneath	it.	Rather	than	fight	it,	we’re
installing	a	fired-clay	conduit—’
‘A	sewage	pipe.’
‘In	the	trade,	it’s	a	fired-clay	conduit.’
‘Sorry.’
‘Which	we’ll	then	pack	with	gravel.	I	don’t	know	why	Grum	didn’t	do	that
in	the	first	place,	but	it’s	his	loss	and	our	gain.’
‘Are	you	dry	yet,	Bugg?	Please	say	you’re	dry.	Look	at	our	guard	here,
he’s	horrified.	Speechless.’
‘I	can	tell,	and	I	apologize.’
‘I	don’t	think	I’ve	ever	seen	so	many	scars	on	one	person,’	Tehol	said.
‘What	do	you	do	in	your	spare	time,	Bugg,	wrestle	angry	cacti?’
‘I	don’t	understand.	Why	would	they	have	to	be	angry?’
‘Wouldn’t	you	be	if	you	attacked	you	for	no	reason?	Hey,	that’s	a	question
I	could	ask	our	guard	here,	isn’t	it?’
‘Only	if	he—or	they—were	similarly	afflicted,	master.’
‘Good	point.	And	he’d	have	to	take	his	clothes	off	for	us	to	find	out.’
‘Not	likely.’
‘No.	Now,	Bugg,	here’s	my	shirt.	Put	it	on,	and	be	thankful	for	the
sacrifices	I	make	on	your	behalf.’
‘Thank	you,	master.’
‘Good.	Ready?	It’s	time	to	go.’
‘Where?’
‘Familiar	territory	for	you,	or	so	I	was	surprised	to	discover.	You	are	a
man	of	many	mysteries,	Bugg.	Occasional	priest,	healer,	the	Waiting	Man,
consorter	with	demons	and	worse.	Were	I	not	so	self-centred,	I’d	be	intrigued.’
‘I	am	ever	grateful	for	your	self-centredness,	master.’
‘That’s	only	right,	Bugg.	Now,	presumably,	our	silent	bodyguard	will	be
accompanying	us.	Thus,	we	three.	Marching	purposefully	off	into	the	night.
Shall	we?’
	


Into	the	maze	of	shanties	on	the	east	side	of	Letheras.	The	night	air	was	hot,
redolent	and	turgid.	Things	skittered	through	the	heaps	of	rotting	rubbish,	wild
dogs	slunk	through	shadows	in	ill-tempered	packs	looking	for	trouble—
threatening	enough	to	cause	the	bodyguard	to	draw	his	sword.	Sight	of	the
bared	blade	was	enough	to	send	the	beasts	scampering.
Those	few	homeless	indigents	brave	or	desperate	enough	to	risk	the
dangers	of	the	alleys	and	streets	had	used	rubbish	to	build	barricades	and
hovels.	Others	had	begged	for	space	on	the	sagging	roofs	of	creaky	huts	and
slept	fitfully	or	not	at	all.	Tehol	could	feel	countless	pairs	of	eyes	looking
down	upon	them,	tracking	their	passage	deeper	into	the	heart	of	the	ghetto.
As	they	walked,	Tehol	spoke.	‘…the	assumption	is	the	foundation	stone	of
Letherii	society,	perhaps	all	societies	the	world	over.	The	notion	of	inequity,
my	friends.	For	from	inequity	derives	the	concept	of	value,	whether	measured
by	money	or	the	countless	other	means	of	gauging	human	worth.	Simply	put,
there	resides	in	all	of	us	the	unchallenged	belief	that	the	poor	and	the	starving
are	in	some	way	deserving	of	their	fate.	In	other	words,	there	will	always	be
poor	people.	A	truism	to	grant	structure	to	the	continual	task	of	comparison,
the	establishment	through	observation	of	not	our	mutual	similarities,	but	our
essential	differences.
‘I	know	what	you’re	thinking,	to	which	I	have	no	choice	but	to	challenge
you	both.	Like	this.	Imagine	walking	down	this	street,	doling	out	coins	by	the
thousands.	Until	everyone	here	is	in	possession	of	vast	wealth.	A	solution?	No,
you	say,	because	among	these	suddenly	rich	folk	there	will	be	perhaps	a
majority	who	will	prove	wasteful,	profligate	and	foolish,	and	before	long	they
will	be	poor	once	again.	Besides,	if	wealth	were	distributed	in	such	a	fashion,
the	coins	themselves	would	lose	all	value—they	would	cease	being	useful.	And
without	such	utility,	the	entire	social	structure	we	love	so	dearly	would
collapse.
‘Ah,	but	to	that	I	say,	so	what?	There	are	other	ways	of	measuring	selfworth.	To	which	you	both	heatedly	reply:	with	no	value	applicable	to	labour,
all	sense	of	worth	vanishes!	And	in	answer	to	that	I	simply	smile	and	shake	my
head.	Labour	and	its	product	become	the	negotiable	commodities.	But	wait,
you	object,	then	value	sneaks	in	after	all!	Because	a	man	who	makes	bricks
cannot	be	equated	with,	say,	a	man	who	paints	portraits.	Material	is	inherently
value-laden,	on	the	basis	of	our	need	to	assert	comparison—but	ah,	was	I	not
challenging	the	very	assumption	that	one	must	proceed	with	such	intricate
structures	of	value?
‘And	so	you	ask,	what’s	your	point,	Tehol?	To	which	I	reply	with	a	shrug.
Did	I	say	my	discourse	was	a	valuable	means	of	using	this	time?	I	did	not.	No,


you	assumed	it	was.	Thus	proving	my	point!’
‘I’m	sorry,	master,’	Bugg	said,	‘but	what	was	that	point	again?’
‘I	forget.	But	we’ve	arrived.	Behold,	gentlemen,	the	poor.’
They	stood	at	the	edge	of	an	old	market	round,	now	a	mass	of	squalid
shelters	seething	with	humanity.	A	few	communal	hearths	smouldered.	The
area	was	ringed	in	rubbish—mostly	dog	and	cat	bones—which	was	crawling
with	rats.	Children	wandered	in	the	dazed,	lost	fashion	of	the	malnourished.
Newborns	lay	swaddled	and	virtually	unattended.	Voices	rose	in	arguments	and
somewhere	on	the	opposite	side	was	a	fight	of	some	sort.	Mixed-bloods,
Nerek,	Faraed,	Tarthenal,	even	the	odd	Fent.	A	few	Letherii	as	well,	escapees
from	Indebtedness.
Bugg	looked	on	in	silence	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	said,	‘Master,
transporting	them	out	to	the	Isles	won’t	solve	anything.’
‘No?’
‘These	are	broken	spirits.’
‘Beyond	hope	of	recovery?’
‘Well,	that	depends	on	how	paternalistic	you	intend	to	be,	master.	The
rigours	of	past	lifestyles	are	beyond	these	people.	We’re	a	generation	or	more
too	late.	They’ve	not	old	skills	to	fall	back	on,	and	as	a	community	this	one	is
intrinsically	flawed.	It	breeds	violence	and	neglect	and	little	else.’
‘I	know	what	you’re	saying,	Bugg.	You’re	saying	you’ve	had	better	nights
and	the	timing	wasn’t	good,	not	good	at	all.	You’re	miserable,	you’ve	got	a
chill,	you	should	be	in	bed.’
‘Thank	you,	master.	I	was	wondering	myself.’
‘Your	issue	of	paternalism	has	some	merit,	I	admit,’	Tehol	said,	hands	on
hips	as	he	studied	the	grubby	shanty-town.	‘That	is	to	say,	you	have	a	point.	In
any	case,	doom	is	about	to	sweep	through	this	sad	place.	Lether	is	at	war,	Bugg.
There	will	be…recruitment	drives.’
‘Press-ganging,’	the	manservant	said,	nodding	morosely.
‘Yes,	all	that	malignant	violence	put	to	good	use.	Of	course,	such	poor
soldiers	will	be	employed	as	fodder.	A	harsh	solution	to	this	perennial
problem,	admittedly,	but	one	with	long	precedent.’
‘So,	what	have	you	planned,	master?’
‘The	challenge	facing	myself	and	the	sharp	minds	of	the	Rat	Catchers’
Guild,	was,	as	you	have	observed,	how	does	one	reshape	an	entire	society?
How	does	one	convert	this	impressive	example	of	the	instinct	to	survive	into	a
communally	positive	force?	Clearly,	we	needed	to	follow	a	well-established,
highly	successful	social	structure	as	our	inspiration—’
‘Rats.’


‘Well	done,	Bugg.	I	knew	I	could	count	on	you.	Thus,	we	began	with
recognizing	the	need	for	a	leader.	Powerful,	dynamic,	charismatic,	dangerous.’
‘A	criminal	mastermind	with	plenty	of	thugs	to	enforce	his	or	her	will.’
Tehol	frowned.	‘Your	choice	of	words	disappoints	me,	Bugg.’
‘You?’
‘Me?	Of	course	not.	Well,	not	directly,	that	is.	A	truly	successful	leader	is	a
reluctant	leader.	Not	one	whose	every	word	is	greeted	with	frenzied	cheering
either—after	all,	what	happens	to	the	mind	of	such	a	leader,	after	such	scenes
are	repeated	again	and	again?	A	growing	certainty,	a	belief	in	one’s	own
infallibility,	and	onward	goes	the	march	into	disaster.	No,	Bugg,	I	won’t	have
anyone	kissing	my	feet—’
‘I’m	relieved	to	hear	that,	master,	since	those	feet	have	not	known	soap	in	a
long,	long	time.’
‘The	body	eventually	resumes	its	own	natural	cleansing	mechanisms,
Bugg.’
‘Like	shedding?’
‘Exactly.	In	any	case,	I	was	speaking	of	leadership	in	a	general	sort	of	way
—’
‘Who,	master?’
‘Why,	the	Waiting	Man,	of	course.	Occasional	priest,	healer,	consorter
with	demons…’
‘That’s	probably	not	such	a	good	idea,	master,’	Bugg	said,	rubbing	his
bristled	jaw.	‘I	am	rather…busy	at	the	moment.’
‘A	leader	should	be	busy.	Distracted.	Preoccupied.	Prepared	to	delegate.’
‘Master,	I	really	don’t	think	this	is	a	good	idea.	Really.’
‘Perfectly	reluctant,	perfect!	And	look!	You’ve	been	noticed!	See	those
hopeful	faces—’
‘That’s	hunger,	master.’
‘For	salvation!	Word’s	gone	out,	you	see.	They’re	ready	for	you,	Bugg.
They’ve	been	waiting…’
‘This	is	very	bad,	master.’
‘Your	expression	is	perfect,	Bugg.	Sickly	and	wan	with	dismay,	deeply
troubled	and	nervous,	yes	indeed.	I	couldn’t	have	managed	better	myself.’
‘Master—’
‘Go	out	among	your	flock,	Bugg.	Tell	them—they’re	leaving.	Tomorrow
night.	All	of	them.	A	better	place,	a	better	life	awaits	them.	Go	on,	Bugg.’
‘As	long	as	no-one	worships	me,’	the	manservant	replied.	‘I	don’t	like
being	worshipped.’
‘Just	stay	fallible,’	Tehol	said.


Bugg	cast	him	a	strange	look,	then	he	walked	into	the	shanty-town.
	
‘Thank	you	for	coming,	Brys.’
Kuru	Qan	was	sitting	in	the	thickly	padded	chair	near	the	wall	opposite	the
library’s	entrance.	Polished	lenses	and	cloth	in	his	hands,	cleaning	one	lens
then	the	other,	then	repeating	the	gesture,	again	and	again.	His	eyes	were	fixed
on	nothing	visible	to	Brys.
‘More	news	from	Trate,	Ceda?’
‘Something,	yes,	but	we	will	discuss	that	later.	In	any	case,	we	must
consider	the	city	lost.’
‘Occupied.’
‘Yes.	Another	battle	is	imminent,	at	High	Fort.’
‘The	queen	and	the	prince	have	withdrawn	their	forces,	then?	I	understood
they	were	seeking	the	pass.’
‘Too	late.	The	Edur	had	already	made	crossing.’
‘Will	you	contribute	to	the	defence?’	Brys	asked,	striding	into	the	small
room	and	settling	down	on	the	bench	to	the	Ceda’s	left.
‘No.’
Surprised,	Brys	said	nothing.	He	had	been	in	the	company	of	the	king	and
Unnutal	Hebaz	for	most	of	the	evening,	studying	the	detected	movements	of	the
enemy	armies,	immersed	in	the	painful	exercise	of	trying	to	predict	the	nature
of	his	brother	Hull’s	advice	to	the	Edur	emperor.	Clearly,	Hull	had	anticipated
the	pre-emptive	attack	on	the	villages.	To	Brys’s	mind,	the	rabid	display	of
greed	from	the	camps	of	the	queen	and	the	prince	had	tipped	their	hand.	Janall,
Quillas	and	their	investors	had	already	begun	dividing	up	the	potential	spoils,
which	made	clear	their	desire	for	a	quick	war,	one	that	devastated	the	Tiste
Edur,	and	that	meant	catching	them	unawares.	Janall’s	march	for	the	pass	had
indicated	no	change	in	her	thinking.	Yet	now	she	had	retreated.
The	Tiste	Edur	had	stolen	the	initiative.	The	appearance	above	High	Fort,
the	surrender	of	Fent	Reach	and	the	fall	of	Trate	indicated	at	least	two	enemy
armies,	as	well	as	two	fleets,	all	moving	fast.
‘Ceda,	have	you	learned	anything	more	of	the	demon	that	entered	Trate
harbour?’
‘The	danger	is	not	singular,	but	plural,’	Kuru	Qan	said.	‘I	see	before	me
the	Cedance,	and	have	learned,	to	my	horror,	that	it	is…incomplete.’
‘Incomplete?	What	do	you	mean?’
The	Ceda	continued	cleaning	the	lenses	in	his	hands.	‘I	must	needs
conserve	my	power,	until	the	appropriate	time.	The	seas	must	be	freed.	It	is	as


simple	as	that.’
Brys	waited,	then,	when	Kuru	Qan	said	no	more,	he	ventured,	‘Do	you
have	a	task	for	me,	Ceda?’
‘I	would	counsel	a	withdrawal	from	High	Fort,	but	the	king	would	not
agree	to	that,	would	he?’
Brys	shook	his	head.	‘Your	assessment	is	accurate.	Even	a	disaster	would
be	seen	to	have…benefits.’
‘The	elimination	of	his	wife	and	son,	yes.	A	tragic	state	of	affairs,	wouldn’t
you	say,	my	young	friend?	The	heart	of	the	Cedance,	I	have	come	to	realize,
can	be	found	in	a	systemic	denial.	And	from	that	heart,	all	else	is	derived.	Our
very	way	of	life	and	of	seeing	the	world.	We	send	soldiers	to	their	deaths	and
how	do	we	see	those	deaths?	As	glorious	sacrifices.	The	enemy	dead?	As	the
victims	of	our	honourable	righteousness.	Whilst	in	our	cities,	in	the	narrow,
foul	alleys,	a	life	that	ends	is	but	tragic	failure.	What,	then,	is	the	denial
whereof	I	speak?’
‘Death.’
Kuru	Qan	placed	the	lenses	once	more	before	his	eyes	and	peered	at	Brys.
‘You	see,	then.	I	knew	you	would.	Brys,	there	is	no	Hold	of	Death.	Your	task?
Naught	but	keeping	an	old	man	company	on	this	night.’
The	King’s	Champion	rubbed	at	his	face.	His	eyes	felt	full	of	grit,	and	he
was	unaccountably	chilled.	He	was,	he	realized,	exhausted.
‘Our	manic	accumulation	of	wealth,’	Kuru	Qan	went	on.	‘Our	headlong
progress,	as	if	motion	was	purpose	and	purpose	inherently	virtuous.	Our	lack
of	compassion,	which	we	called	being	realistic.	The	extremity	of	our
judgements,	our	self-righteousness—all	a	flight	from	death,	Brys.	All	a	vast
denial	smothered	in	semantics	and	euphemisms.	Bravery	and	sacrifice,	pathos
and	failure,	as	if	life	is	a	contest	to	be	won	or	lost.	As	if	death	is	the	arbiter	of
meaning,	the	moment	of	final	judgement,	and	above	all	else	judgement	is	a
thing	to	be	delivered,	not	delivered	unto.’
‘Would	you	rather	we	worship	death,	Ceda?’
‘Equally	pointless.	One	needs	no	faith	to	die,	one	dies	none	the	less.	I	spoke
of	systemic	denial,	and	it	is	indeed	and	in	every	way	systemic.	The	very	fabric
of	our	world,	here	in	Lether	and	perhaps	elsewhere,	has	been	twisted	round
that…absence.	There	should	be	a	Hold	of	Death,	do	you	understand?	Relevant?
The	only	relevance.	It	must	have	existed,	once.	Perhaps	even	a	god,	some
ghastly	skeleton	on	a	throne	of	bones,	a	spin	and	dance	of	cold-legged	flies	for
a	crown.	Yet	here	we	are,	and	we	have	given	it	no	face,	no	shape,	no	position	in
our	elaborate	scheme	of	existence.’
‘Perhaps	because	it	is	the	very	opposite	of	existence—’


‘But	it	isn’t,	Brys,	it	isn’t.	Errant	take	us,	death	is	all	around	us.	We	stride
over	it,	we	breathe	it,	we	soak	its	essence	into	our	lungs,	our	blood.	We	feed
upon	it	daily.	We	thrive	in	the	midst	of	decay	and	dissolution.’
Brys	studied	the	Ceda.	‘It	occurs	to	me,’	he	said	slowly,	‘that	life	itself	is	a
celebration	of	denial.	The	denial	of	which	you	speak,	Kuru	Qan.	Our	flight—
well,	to	flee	is	to	lift	oneself	clear	of	the	bones,	the	ashes,	the	fallen	away.’
‘Flee—to	where?’
‘Granted.	Nowhere	but	elsewhere.	I	wonder	if	what	you’ve	said	is	being
manifested,	in	creatures	such	as	Kettle	and	that	thief,	Shurq	Elalle—’
The	Ceda’s	head	snapped	up,	eyes	suddenly	alert	behind	the	thick	lenses.
‘I’m	sorry?	What	did	you	say?’
‘Well,	I	was	speaking	of	those	who	are	denied	death	in	truth,	Ceda.	The
child,	Kettle—’
‘The	guardian	of	the	Azath?	She	is	undead?’
‘Yes.	I’m	sure	I	mentioned—’
Kuru	Qan	was	on	his	feet.	‘Are	you	certain	of	this?	Brys	Beddict,	she	is	an
undead?’
‘She	is.	But	I	don’t	understand—’
‘Stand	up,	Brys.	We’re	going.	Now.’
	
‘It’s	all	the	fallen	people,’	Kettle	said.	‘They	want	answers.	They	won’t	go	until
they	get	answers.’
Shurq	Elalle	kicked	away	an	insect	that	had	crawled	onto	her	boot.
‘Answers	about	what?’
‘Why	they	died.’
‘There	are	no	answers,’	Shurq	replied.	‘It’s	what	people	do.	Die.	They	die.
They	always	die.’
‘We	didn’t.’
‘Yes	we	did.’
‘Well,	we	didn’t	go	away.’
‘From	the	sound	of	it,	Kettle,	neither	did	they.’
‘That’s	true.	I	wonder	why	I	didn’t	think	of	that.’
‘Because	you	were	about	ten	years	old	when	you	died.’
‘Well,	what	do	I	do	now?’
Shurq	studied	the	overgrown,	ground-heaved	yard.	‘You	gave	me	the	idea,
and	that’s	why	I	am	here.	You	said	the	dead	were	gathering.	Gathering	round
this	place,	hovering	just	outside	the	walls.	Can	you	talk	to	them?’
‘Why	would	I	want	to?	They	never	say	anything	interesting.’


‘But	you	could	if	you	had	to.’
Kettle	shrugged.	‘I	guess.’
‘Good.	Ask	for	volunteers.’
‘For	what?’
‘I	want	them	to	come	with	me.	On	an	outing.	Tonight	and	again	tomorrow
night.’
‘Why	would	they	want	to,	Mother?’
‘Tell	them	they	will	see	more	gold	than	they	can	imagine.	They	will	learn
secrets	few	in	this	kingdom	possess.	Tell	them	I	am	going	to	lead	them	on	a
tour	of	the	Tolls	Repository	and	the	royal	vaults.	Tell	them,	the	time’s	come	to
have	fun.	Terrifying	the	living.’
‘Why	would	ghosts	want	to	scare	the	living?’
‘I	know,	it’s	a	strange	notion,	but	I	predict	they	will	discover	they’re	very
good	at	it.	Further,	I	predict	they	will	enjoy	the	endeavour.’
‘But,	how	will	they	do	that?	They’re	ghosts.	The	living	can’t	even	see
them.’
Shurq	Elalle	swung	about	and	stared	out	on	the	milling	crowds.	‘Kettle,
they	look	pretty	solid	to	us,	don’t	they?’
‘But	we’re	dead—’
‘Then	why	couldn’t	we	see	them	a	week	ago?	They	were	just	flits,	on	the
edge	of	our	vision	back	then,	weren’t	they?	If	that,	even.	So	what	has	changed?
Where	has	their	power	come	from?	Why	is	it	growing?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
Shurq	smiled.	‘I	do.’
Kettle	walked	over	to	one	of	the	low	walls.
The	thief	watched	her	speaking	to	the	ghosts.	I	wonder	if	she	realizes.	I
wonder	if	she	knows	she’s	more	alive	now	than	dead.	I	wonder	if	she	knows
she’s	coming	back	to	life.
After	a	moment	the	child	returned,	pulling	her	fingers	through	her	hair	to
loosen	the	snarls.	‘You	are	smart,	Mother,’	she	said.	‘I’m	glad	you’re	my
mother	and	that’s	why.’
‘I	have	some	volunteers?’
‘They’ll	all	go.	They	want	to	see	the	gold.	They	want	to	scare	people.’
‘I	need	some	who	can	read	and	some	who	can	count.’
‘That’s	okay.	So	tell	me,	Mother,	why	are	they	growing	more	powerful?
What’s	changed?’
Shurq	looked	back	at	the	square,	squalid	tower	of	stone.	‘That,	Kettle.’
‘The	Azath?’
‘Yes.’


‘Oh,’	the	child	said.	‘I	understand	now.	It	died.’
‘Yes,’	Shurq	said,	nodding.	‘It	died.’
	
After	Mother	had	left,	thousands	of	ghosts	following,	Kettle	walked	to	the
tower ’s	entrance.	She	studied	the	flagstones	set	before	the	door,	then	selected
one	and	knelt	before	it.	Her	fingernails	broke	prying	it	loose,	and	she	was
surprised	at	the	sting	of	pain	and	the	welling	of	blood.
She	had	not	told	Shurq	how	hard	it	had	been	speaking	to	those	ghosts.
Their	endless	voices	had	been	fading	the	last	day	or	two,	as	if	she	was
becoming	deaf.	Although	other	sounds—the	wind,	the	dead	leaves	scurrying
about,	the	crunch	and	munch	of	the	insects	in	the	yard,	and	the	sounds	of	the
city	itself—all	were	as	clear	as	ever.	Something	was	happening	to	her.	That
beating	vibration	in	her	chest	had	quickened.	Five,	six	eights	a	day,	now.	The
places	where	her	skin	had	broken	long	ago	were	closing	up	with	new,	pink
skin,	and	earlier	today	she	had	been	thirsty.	It	had	taken	some	time	to	realize—
to	remember,	perhaps—what	thirst	was,	what	it	signified,	but	the	stagnant	water
she	had	found	at	the	base	of	one	of	the	pits	in	the	yard	had	tasted	wonderful.	So
many	things	were	changing,	it	seemed,	confusing	her.
She	dragged	the	flagstone	to	one	side,	then	sat	beside	it.	She	wiped	the	dust
from	its	blank,	polished	surface.	There	were	funny	patterns	in	it.	Shells,	the
imprint	of	plants—reeds	with	their	onion-like	root-balls—and	the	pebbled
impressions	of	coral.	Tiny	bones.	Someone	had	done	a	lot	of	carving	to	make
such	a	pretty	scene	of	dead	things.
She	looked	down	the	path,	through	the	gate	and	onto	the	street.	Strange,	to
see	it	so	empty	now.	But,	she	knew,	it	wouldn’t	be	for	long.
And	so	she	waited.
The	bleeding	from	her	fingertips	had	stopped	by	the	time	she	heard	the
footfalls	approaching.	She	looked	up,	then	smiled	upon	seeing	Uncle	Brys	and
the	old	man	with	the	glass	eyes—the	one	she	had	never	seen	before	yet	knew
anyway.
They	saw	her,	and	Brys	strode	through	the	gate,	the	old	man	following
behind	with	nervous,	tentative	steps.
‘Hello,	Uncle,’	Kettle	said.
‘Kettle.	You	are	looking…better.	I	have	brought	a	guest,	Ceda	Kuru	Qan.’
‘Yes,	the	one	who’s	always	looking	at	me	but	not	seeing	me,	but	looking
anyway.’
‘I	wasn’t	aware	of	that,’	the	Ceda	said.
‘Not	like	you’re	doing	now,’	Kettle	said.	‘Not	when	you	have	those	things


in	front	of	your	eyes.’
‘You	mean,	when	I	look	upon	the	Cedance?	Is	that	when	I	see	you	without
seeing	you?’
She	nodded.
‘The	Hold	of	the	Azath	is	gone,	child,	yet	here	you	remain.	You	were	its
guardian	when	it	was	alive—when	you	were	not.	And	now,	you	are	its	guardian
still?	When	it	is	dead	and	you	are	not?’
‘I’m	not	dead?’
‘Not	quite.	The	heart	placed	within	you.	Once	frozen…now…thawing.	I	do
not	understand	its	power,	and,	I	admit,	it	frightens	me.’
‘I	have	a	friend	who	said	he’ll	destroy	me	if	he	has	to,’	Kettle	said,	smiling.
‘But	he	says	he	probably	won’t	have	to.’
‘Why	not?’
‘He	says	the	heart	won’t	wake	up.	Not	completely.	That’s	why	the	Nameless
One	took	my	body.’
She	watched	the	old	man’s	mouth	moving,	but	no	words	came	forth.	At	his
side,	Uncle	Brys	stepped	closer,	concern	on	his	face.
‘Ceda?	Are	you	all	right?’
‘Nameless	One?’	The	old	man	was	shivering.	‘This	place—this	is	the	Hold
of	Death,	isn’t	it?	It’s	become	the	Hold	of	Death.’
Kettle	reached	over	and	picked	up	the	flagstone.	It	was	as	heavy	as	a
corpse,	so	she	was	used	to	the	weight.	‘This	is	for	your	Cedance,	for	where
you	look	when	you	don’t	see	me.’
‘A	tile.’	Kuru	Qan	looked	away	as	she	set	it	down	in	front	of	him.
‘Ceda,’	Uncle	Brys	said,	‘I	do	not	understand.	What	has	happened	here?’
‘Our	history…so	much	is	proving	untrue.	The	Nameless	Ones	were	of	the
First	Empire.	A	cult.	It	was	expunged.	Eliminated.	It	cannot	have	survived,	but	it
seems	to	have	done	just	that.	It	seems	to	have	outlived	the	First	Empire	itself.’
‘Are	they	some	sort	of	death	cult?’
‘No.	They	were	servants	of	the	Azath.’
‘Then	why,’	Brys	asked,	‘do	they	appear	to	have	been	overseeing	the	death
of	this	Azath	tower?’
Kuru	Qan	shook	his	head.	‘Unless	they	saw	it	as	inevitable.	And	so	they
acted	in	order	to	counter	those	within	the	barrows	who	would	escape	once	the
tower	died.	The	manifestation	of	a	Hold	of	Death	may	turn	out	to	have	nothing
to	do	with	them.’
‘Then	why	is	she	still	the	guardian?’
‘She	may	not	be,	Brys.	She	waits	in	order	to	deal	with	those	who	are	about
to	escape	the	grounds.’	The	Ceda’s	gaze	returned	to	Kettle.	‘Child,	is	that	why


you	remain?’
She	shrugged.	‘It	won’t	be	long	now.’
‘And	the	one	the	Azath	chose	to	help	you,	Kettle,	will	he	emerge	in	time?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	hope	so.’
‘So	do	I,’	Kuru	Qan	said.	‘Thank	you,	child,	for	the	tile.	Still,	I	wonder	at
your	knowledge	of	this	new	Hold.’
Kettle	pulled	an	insect	from	her	hair	and	tossed	it	aside.	‘The	pretty	man
told	me	all	about	it,’	she	said.
‘Another	visitor?’
‘Only	once.	Mostly	he	just	stands	in	the	shadows,	across	the	street.
Sometimes	he	followed	me	when	I	went	hunting,	but	he	never	said	anything.
Not	until	today,	when	he	came	over	and	we	talked.’
‘Did	he	tell	you	his	name?’	the	Ceda	asked.
‘No.	But	he	was	very	handsome.	Only	he	said	he	had	a	girlfriend.	Lots.
Boyfriends,	too.	Besides,	I	shouldn’t	give	my	heart	away.	That’s	what	he	said.
He	never	does.	Never	ever.’
‘And	this	man	told	you	all	about	the	Hold	of	Death?’
‘Yes,	Grandfather.	He	knew	all	about	it.	He	said	it	doesn’t	need	a	new
guardian,	because	the	throne	is	already	occupied,	at	least	everywhere	else.
Here	too,	soon.	I’m	tired	of	talking	now.’
‘Of	course,	Kettle,’	Kuru	Qan	said.	‘We	shall	take	our	leave	of	you,	then.’
‘Goodbye.	Oh,	don’t	forget	the	tile!’
‘We	will	send	some	people	to	collect	it,	child.’
‘All	right.’
She	watched	them	walk	away.	When	they	were	gone	from	sight	she	headed
over	to	her	friend’s	barrow,	and	felt	him	close.	‘Where	are	you	taking	me	this
time?’
Her	hand	in	his,	she	found	herself	standing	on	a	low	hill,	and	before	them
was	a	vast,	shallow	valley,	filled	with	corpses.
It	was	dusk,	a	layer	of	smoke	hanging	over	the	vista.	Just	above	the
horizon	opposite,	a	suspended	mountain	of	black	stone	was	burning,	columns
of	smoke	billowing	from	its	gashed	flanks.	Below,	the	bodies	were	mostly	of
some	kind	of	huge,	reptilian	creature	wearing	strange	armour.	Grey-skinned
and	long-snouted,	their	forms	were	contorted	and	ribboned	with	slashes,	lying
in	tangled	heaps.	Here	and	there	in	their	midst	lay	other	figures.	Tall,	some
with	grey	skins,	some	with	black.
Standing	beside	her,	he	spoke.	‘Over	four	hundred	thousand,	Kettle.	Here
in	this	valley	alone.	There	are	other…valleys.	Like	this	one.’
A	score	of	leathery-winged	beasts	were	crossing	the	valley	at	one	end,	far


to	their	right.
‘Ooh,	are	those	dragons?’
‘Spawn.	Locqui	Wyval,	searching	for	their	master.	But	he	is	gone.	Once
they	realize	that,	they	will	know	to	wait.	It	will	prove	a	long	wait.’
‘Are	they	waiting	still?’
‘Yes.’
‘When	did	this	battle	happen?’
‘Many	thousands	of	years	ago,	Kettle.	But	the	damage	remains.	In	a	short
while,	the	ice	will	arrive,	sealing	all	you	see.	Holding	all	in	stasis,	a	sorcery	of
impressive	power,	so	powerful	it	will	prove	a	barrier	to	the	dead	themselves—
to	the	path	their	spirits	would	take.	I	wonder	if	that	was	what	the	Jaghut	had
intended.	In	any	case,	the	land	was	twisted	by	the	magic.	The	dead…lingered.
Here,	in	the	north,	and	far	to	the	south,	as	far	as	Letheras	itself.	To	my	mind,	an
Elder	god	meddled.	But	none	could	have	foreseen	the	consequences,	not	even
an	Elder	god.’
‘Is	that	why	the	tower	has	become	the	Hold	of	Death?’
‘It	has?	I	was	not	aware	of	that.	This,	then,	is	what	comes,	when	the	sorcery
finally	dies	and	the	world	thaws.	Balance	is	reasserted.’
‘Shurq	Elalle	says	we	are	at	war.	The	Tiste	Edur,	she	says,	are	invading
Lether.’
‘Let	us	hope	they	do	not	arrive	before	I	am	free.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	they	will	endeavour	to	kill	me,	Kettle.’
‘Why?’
‘For	fear	that	I	will	seek	to	kill	them.’
‘Will	you?’
‘On	many	levels,’	he	replied,	‘there	is	no	reason	why	I	shouldn’t.	But	no,
not	unless	they	get	in	my	way.	You	and	I	know,	after	all,	that	the	true	threat
waits	in	the	barrows	of	the	Azath	grounds.’
‘I	don’t	think	the	Edur	will	win	the	war,’	she	said.
‘Yes,	failure	on	their	part	would	be	ideal.’
‘So	what	else	did	you	want	to	show	me?’
A	pale	white	hand	gestured	towards	the	valley.	‘There	is	something	odd	to
all	this.	Do	you	see?	Or,	rather,	what	don’t	you	see?’
‘I	don’t	see	any	ghosts.’
‘Yes.	The	spirits	are	gone.	The	question	is,	where	are	they?’
	
Terrified	screams	echoed	as	Shurq	Elalle	walked	down	the	wide,	high-


ceilinged	corridor	to	the	Master	Chamber	of	the	Tolls	Repository.	Guards,
servants,	clerks	and	cleaning	staff	had	one	and	all	succumbed	to	perfectly
understandable	panic.	There	was	nothing	worse,	she	reflected,	than	the
unexpected	visitations	of	dead	relatives.
Ahead,	the	double	doors	were	wide	open,	and	the	lanterns	in	the	huge
room	beyond	were	swinging	wildly	to	immanent	gusts	of	spirited	haste.
The	thief	strode	into	the	chamber.
A	squalid	ghost	rushed	up	to	her,	rotted	face	grinning	wildly.	‘I	touched	it!
My	last	coin!	I	found	it	in	the	stacks!	And	touched	it!’
‘I	am	happy	for	you,’	Shurq	said.	‘Now,	where	are	the	counters	and
readers?’
‘Eh?’
Shurq	moved	past	the	ghost.	The	chamber	was	seething,	spirits	hurrying
this	way	and	that,	others	hunched	over	tumbled	scrolls,	still	others	squirming
along	the	shelves.	Chests	of	coins	had	been	knocked	over,	the	glittering	gold
coins	stirring	about	on	the	marble	floor	as	gibbering	wraiths	pawed	them.
‘I	worked	here!’
Shurq	eyed	the	ghost	drifting	her	way.	‘You	did?’
‘Oh	yes.	They	put	in	more	shelves,	and	look	at	those	lantern	nooks—what
idiot	decided	on	those	dust-traps?	Dust	is	a	fire	hazard.	Terrible	fire	hazard.
Why,	I	was	always	telling	them	that.	And	now	I	could	prove	my	point—a
nudge,	a	simple	nudge	of	that	lantern	there,	yes…’
‘Come	back	here!	Nothing	burns.	Understand?’
‘If	you	say	so.	Fine.	I	was	just	kidding,	anyway.’
‘Have	you	looked	at	the	ledgers?’
‘Yes,	yes,	and	counted.	And	memorized.	I	was	always	good	at	memorizing;
that’s	why	they	hired	me.	I	could	count	and	count	and	never	lose	my	place.	But
the	dust!	Those	nooks!	Everything	might	burn,	burn	terribly—’
‘Enough	of	that.	We	have	what	we	need.	Time	for	everyone	to	leave.’
A	chorus	of	wavering	voices	answered	her.	‘We	don’t	want	to!’
‘There’ll	be	priests	coming.	Probably	already	on	their	way.	And	mages,
eager	to	collect	wraiths	to	enslave	as	their	servants	for	eternity.’
‘We’re	leaving!’
‘You,’	said	Shurq	to	the	ghost	before	her,	‘come	with	me.	Talk.	Give	me
details.’
‘Yes,	yes.	Of	course.’
‘Leave	that	lantern	alone,	damn	you!’
‘Sorry.	Terrible	fire	hazard,	oh,	the	flames	there’d	be.	Such	flames,	all
those	inks,	the	colours!’


‘Everyone!’	the	thief	shouted.	‘We’re	going	now!	And	you,	stop	rolling
that	coin—it	stays	here!’
	
‘The	Seventh	Closure,’	Kuru	Qan	muttered	as	they	made	their	way	back	to	the
palace.	‘It	is	all	spiralling	inward.	Troubling,	this	concatenation	of	details.	The
Azath	dies,	a	Hold	of	Death	comes	into	being.	A	Nameless	One	appears	and
somehow	possesses	the	corpse	of	a	child,	then	fashions	an	alliance	with	a
denizen	of	a	barrow.	A	usurper	proclaims	himself	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur,
and	now	leads	an	invasion.	Among	his	allies,	a	demon	from	the	sea,	one	of
sufficient	power	to	destroy	two	of	my	best	mages.	And	now,	if	other	rumours
are	true,	it	may	be	the	emperor	is	himself	a	man	of	many	lives…’
Brys	glanced	over.	‘What	rumours?’
‘Citizens	witnessed	his	death	in	Trate.	The	Edur	emperor	was	cut	down	in
battle.	Yet	he…returned.	Probably	an	exaggeration,	but	I	am	nervous	none	the
less	at	my	own	assumptions	in	this	matter,	Brys.	Still,	the	Tiste	Edur	have
superb	healers.	Perhaps	a	binding	spell	of	some	sort,	cleaving	the	soul	to	the
flesh	until	they	can	arrive…I	must	give	this	more	thought.’
‘And	you	believe,	Ceda,	that	all	this	is	somehow	linked	to	the	Seventh
Closure?’
‘The	rebirth	of	our	empire.	That	is	my	fear,	Champion.	That	we	have	in
some	fatal	way	misread	our	ancient	prophecy.	Perhaps	the	empire	has	already
appeared.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur?	Why	would	a	Letherii	prophecy	have	anything	to	do	with
them?’
Kuru	Qan	shook	his	head.	‘It	is	a	prophecy	that	arose	in	the	last	days	of	the
First	Empire.	Brys,	there	is	so	much	we	have	lost.	Knowledge,	the	world	of	that
time.	Sorcery	gone	awry,	birthing	horrific	beasts,	the	armies	of	undead	who
delivered	such	slaughter	among	our	people,	then	simply	left.	Mysterious	tales
of	a	strange	realm	of	magic	that	was	torn	apart.	Could	the	role	of	an	entire
people	fit	in	any	of	the	gaps	in	our	knowing?	Yes.	And	what	of	other	people
who	are	named,	yet	nothing	more	than	the	names	survives—no	descriptions?
Barghast,	Jhag,	Trell.	Neighbouring	tribes?	We’ll	never	know.’
They	came	to	the	gates.	Sleepy	guards	identified	them	and	opened	the
lesser	postern	door.	The	palace	grounds	were	empty,	silent.	The	Ceda	paused
and	stared	up	at	the	hazy	stars	overhead.
Brys	said	nothing.	He	waited,	standing	at	the	old	man’s	side,	seeing	the
night	sky	reflected	in	the	twin	lenses	in	front	of	Kuru	Qan’s	eyes.	Wondering
what	the	Ceda	was	thinking.


	
Tehol	Beddict	smiled	as	she	threaded	her	way	through	the	crowd	toward	him.
‘Chief	Investigator	Rucket,	I	am	delighted	to	see	you	again.’
‘No	you’re	not,’	she	replied.	‘You’re	just	trying	to	put	me	on	the
defensive.’
‘How	does	my	delight	make	you	defensive?’
‘Because	I	get	suspicious,	that’s	why.	You’re	not	fooling	me,	with	those
absurd	trousers	and	that	idiotic	insect	on	your	shoulder.’
Tehol	looked	down	in	surprise.	‘Ezgara!	I	thought	I	left	you	on	the	roof.’
‘You’ve	named	him	Ezgara?	He	doesn’t	look	a	thing	like	our	king.	Oh,
maybe	if	our	king	had	two	heads,	then	I	might	see	the	resemblance,	but	as	it
stands,	that’s	a	stupid	name.’
‘The	three	of	us	are	deeply	offended,	as	is	my	bodyguard	here	and,	one
must	assume,	his	two	brothers	wherever	they	are.	Thus,	the	six	of	us.	Deeply
offended.’
‘Where	is	Bugg?’
‘Somewhere	in	that	crowd	behind	you,	I	suppose.’
‘Well,	no.	They’re	all	looking.’
‘Oh,	he	was	there	a	moment	ago.’
‘But	he	isn’t	any	longer,	and	the	people	are	clamouring.’
‘No	they	aren’t,	Rucket.	They’re	milling.’
‘Now	you’re	challenging	my	assessment.	Concluding,	no	doubt,	that
contrariness	is	sexually	attractive.	Maybe	for	some	women	it	is,	the	kind	you
prefer,	I’d	wager.	But	I	take	exception	to	your	taking	exception	to	everything	I
say.’
‘Now	who’s	being	contrary?’
She	scowled.	‘I	was	intending	to	invite	you	to	a	late	night	bite.	There	is	a
courtyard	restaurant	not	far	from	here—’
‘The	Trampled	Peacock.’
‘Why,	yes.	I	am	dismayed	that	you	are	familiar	with	it.	Suggesting	to	me,
for	obvious	reasons,	that	clandestine	trysts	are	common	with	you,	further
suggesting	a	certain	cheapness	and	slatternly	behaviour	on	your	part.	I	don’t
know	why	I	am	surprised	that	you’re	so	loose,	actually.	I	should	have	expected
it.	Accordingly,	I	want	nothing	to	do	with	you.’
‘I’ve	never	been	there.’
‘You	haven’t?	Then	how	do	you	know	of	it?’
I	own	it.	‘Reputation,	I	imagine.	I	wish	I	could	be	more	precise.	Who	said
what	and	when	and	all	that,	but	it’s	late	and	even	if	it	wasn’t	I’d	probably	not


recall	such	details.’
‘So,	are	you	hungry?’
‘Always.	Oh,	here’s	my	manservant.	Did	you	hear,	Bugg?	Chief
Investigator	Rucket	has	invited	us	to	supper.’
‘Well,	the	cat	can	wait.’
Rucket	glared	at	Tehol.	‘Who	said	anything	about	him?’
‘I	go	everywhere	with	my	manservant,	Rucket.	And	my	bodyguard.’
‘Everywhere?	Even	on	dates?’
‘Bugg,’	Tehol	said,	‘have	you	done	all	you	can	here?	Is	it	time	to	let	these
poor	people	sleep?’
‘Well	past	time,	master.’
‘We’re	off	to	the	Trampled	Peacock!’
‘Is	that	such	a	good	idea,	master?’
‘Well,	it	wasn’t	mine,	Bugg,	but	there	it	is.	Please,	Rucket,	lead	the	way.’
‘Oh,	wonderful.	I	look	forward	to	a	night	of	weathering	attacks	on	my
vanity.	Come	now,	all	of	you,	we’re	wasting	time.’
	
Tehol	threw	up	his	hands	as	soon	as	they	entered	the	courtyard.	‘Extraordinary!
Bugg,	look	who’s	here!	Why,	it’s	Shand	and	Rissarh	and	Hejun!	Come,	let	us
put	two	tables	together	and	so	make	of	this	a	festive	gathering	of	coconspirators!’
‘The	coincidence	leaves	me	awed,’	the	manservant	said.
‘Who	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	those	women?’	Rucket	demanded.	‘And	why
are	they	all	so	angry?’
‘That’s	not	anger,’	Tehol	said,	approaching,	‘that’s	recognition.	Dear
women,	how	are	you	all?	Faring	well,	I	see.	We’ve	decided	to	join	you.’
‘Who	is	this	absurd	creature	at	your	side?’	Shand	asked.	‘And	what’s	with
the	cape?’
‘Watch	who	you’re	calling	a	creature,	cobble-head,’	Rucket	hissed.
‘Tehol’s	found	a	woman,’	Rissarh	said	in	a	snarl.	‘Typical.	He	steals	our
man	then	gets	himself	a	woman—’
Hejun	grunted.	‘I	was	beginning	to	suspect	him	and	the	dead	bitch.’
‘Dead	bitch?’	Rucket’s	eyes	were	wild	as	she	looked	round.	‘He	makes
love	to	a	dead	bitch?’
‘One	freak	accident—’	Tehol	began.
‘If	you	shaved	your	head,’	Shand	said	to	Rucket,	sputtering	with	rage,
‘we’d	all	see	how	truly	ugly	you	are!’
The	guard	was	looking	alarmed.	People	at	other	tables	gestured	madly	at


the	serving	staff.
‘Worked	hard	on	that	one,	did	you?’	Rucket	asked.	‘Tehol,	what’s	all	this
about	stealing	their	man?	They	were	sharing	one	man?	Is	he	still	alive?	Still
sane?	Did	he	volunteer	at	the	Drownings?’
‘You	want	to	see	me	work	hard?’	Shand	rose	to	her	feet,	reaching	for	the
knife	at	her	side.
‘Oh,	how	pathetic,’	Rucket	said.	‘Here,	compare	that	with	my	rapier	here.’
‘Get	her!’	This	from	Rissarh,	as	she	launched	herself	across	the	table.	It
collapsed	beneath	her	a	moment	later,	but	she	had	managed	to	wrap	her	arms
about	Rucket’s	thighs.	The	Chief	Investigator	made	a	strange	squealing	sound
as	she	was	pulled	over.	The	rapier	sprang	free	and	slapped	hard	against
Shand’s	out-thrust	wrist,	sending	the	knife	spinning.	Hejun	then	snagged
Rucket’s	sword-arm	and	twisted	the	weapon	loose.	A	finely	polished	boot	shot
up	to	strike	Hejun	in	the	belly.	She	groaned	and	sagged.
Tehol	pulled	Bugg	back	a	step.	‘I	think	you	were	right	about	this	not	being
a	good	idea.’
Grunts,	meaty	thuds	and	flying	fists.	Fleeing	patrons,	the	yowl	of	a	cat	in
the	kitchen.
Tehol	sighed.	‘We	should	go.	But	first,	arrange	with	the	manager	four
bottles	of	fine	wine,	for	when	they’re	finished	beating	on	each	other.	I	predict
that	by	dawn	they	will	all	be	fast	friends.’
‘I’m	not	sure	of	that—’
‘Nonsense,	Bugg,	it’s	the	way	of	things.	Come	on,	before	they	turn	on	us.’
Not	surprisingly,	the	bodyguard	led	the	way	out	of	the	courtyard.
Outside,	Tehol	brushed	imaginary	dust	from	his	hands.	‘All	in	all,	a	fine
evening,	wouldn’t	you	say?	Now,	we	should	see	if	we	can	scrounge	some
firewood—or	at	least	something	that	burns—on	our	way	home.	Roast	cat
beckons.’
The	crashing	sounds	from	the	restaurant	courtyard	suddenly	increased.
Tehol	hesitated.	‘I’m	tempted	by	the	sounds	of	firewood	production	in
there.’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool,	master.’
‘Perhaps	you’re	right.	Lead	us	on,	Bugg.	Home.’


Chapter	Eighteen

Expectancy	stands	alone
And	crowds	the	vast	emptiness
This	locked	chest	of	a	chamber
With	its	false	floor	the	illusory
Dais	on	which,	four-legged
carpentry	of	stretcherbearers,	crouches	the	throne
Of	tomorrow’s	glory	when
The	hunters	come	down
From	the	cut-wood	gloom
Stung	hard	to	pursuit
The	shadows	of	potentates
And	pretenders	but	he	holds
Fast,	the	privileged	indifference
That	is	fruitless	patience
Expectancy	stands	ever
Alone	before	this	eternally
Empty,	so	very	empty	throne.
HOLD	OF	THE	EMPTY	THRONE
KERRULICT
Ashes	swirling	on	all	sides,	the	river	a	snake	of	sludge	spreading	its	stain	into
the	dead	bay,	the	Nerek	youth	squatted	at	the	edge	of	the	sacred	land.	Behind
him,	the	others	sat	round	their	precious	hearth	and	continued	arguing.	The
youth	knew	enough	to	wait.
Consecrated	ground.	They	had	huddled	on	it	whilst	the	sorcerous	storms
raged,	destroying	the	village	of	the	Hiroth,	flattening	the	forests	around	them,
and	the	fires	that	burned	for	days	afterwards	could	not	lash	them	with	their
heat.	And	now	the	cinders	had	cooled,	no	more	sparks	danced	in	the	wind,	and
the	bloated	bodies	of	dead	wild	animals	that	had	crowded	the	river	mouth	had


broken	loose	some	time	in	the	night	just	past,	drawn	out	to	the	sea	and	the
waiting	sharks.
His	knife-sharer	came	to	his	side	and	crouched	down.	‘Their	fear	holds
them	back,’	he	said,	‘and	yet	it	is	that	very	fear	that	will	force	them	to	accept.
They	have	no	choice.’
‘I	know.’
‘When	you	first	spoke	of	your	dreams,	I	believed	you.’
‘Yes.’
‘Our	people	have	not	dreamed	since	the	Letherii	conquered	us.	Our	nights
were	empty,	and	we	believed	they	would	be	so	for	all	time,	until	the	last	Nerek
died	and	we	were	no	more	a	people.	But	I	saw	the	truth	in	your	eyes.	We	have
shared	the	knife,	you	and	I.	I	did	not	doubt.’
‘I	know,	brother.’
The	eldest	of	the	Nerek	called	out	behind	them,	a	voice	harsh	with	anger,
‘It	is	decided.	The	two	of	you	will	go.	By	the	old	paths,	to	make	your	travel
swift.’
Youth	and	knife-brother	both	rose	and	swung	round.
The	eldest	nodded.	‘Go.	Find	Hull	Beddict.’
The	two	Nerek	stepped	out	into	the	gritty	ash,	and	began	the	journey	south.
The	birth	of	dreams	had	revealed	once	more	the	old	paths,	the	ways	through
and	between	worlds.	It	would	not	take	long.
	
Fear	Sengar	led	him	into	a	secluded	glade,	the	sounds	of	the	readied	army
distant	and	muted.	As	soon	as	Trull	took	his	first	stride	into	the	clearing,	his
brother	spun	round.	Forearm	hard	against	his	throat,	weight	driving	him	back
until	he	struck	the	bole	of	a	tree,	where	Fear	held	him.
‘You	will	be	silent!	No	more	of	your	doubts,	not	to	anyone	else	and	not	to
me.	You	are	my	brother,	and	that	alone	is	why	I	have	not	killed	you	outright.
Are	you	hearing	me,	Trull?’
He	was	having	trouble	breathing,	yet	he	remained	motionless,	his	eyes
fixed	on	Fear ’s.
‘Why	do	you	not	answer?’
Still	he	said	nothing.
With	a	snarl	Fear	drew	his	arm	away	and	stepped	back.
‘Kill	me,	would	you?’	Trull	continued	to	lean	against	the	tree.	He	smiled.
‘From	behind,	then?	A	knife,	catching	me	unawares.	Otherwise,	brother,	you
would	be	hard-pressed.’
Fear	looked	away.	Then	nodded.	‘Yes.’


‘A	knife	in	the	back.’
‘Yes.’
‘Because,	if	I	have	my	spear,	it’s	equally	likely	that	you	would	be	killed,
not	me.’
Fear	glared	at	him,	then	the	anger	slowly	drained	from	his	eyes.	‘It	must
stop,	Trull.	We	are	about	to	go	into	battle—’
‘And	you	doubt	my	ability?’
‘No,	only	your	willingness.’
‘Well,	yes,	you	are	right	to	doubt	that.	But	I	will	do	as	you	command.	I	will
kill	Letherii	for	you.’
‘For	the	emperor.	For	our	people—’
‘No.	For	you,	Fear.	Otherwise,	you	would	be	well	advised	to	question	my
ability.	Indeed,	to	remove	me	from	command.	From	this	entire,	absurd	war.
Send	me	away,	to	the	northernmost	villages	of	the	Den-Ratha	where	there	are
likely	to	be	a	few	thousand	Edur	who	chose	to	remain	behind.’
‘There	are	none	such.’
‘Of	course	there	are.’
‘A	handful.’
‘More	than	you	think.	And	yes,	I	have	been	tempted	to	join	them.’
‘Rhulad	would	not	permit	it.	He	would	have	to	kill	you.’
‘I	know.’
Fear	began	pacing.	‘The	K’risnan.	They	said	Rhulad	was	killed	yesterday.
In	Trate.	Then	he	returned.	There	can	be	no	doubt,	now,	brother.	Our	emperor
cannot	be	stopped.	His	power	does	naught	but	grow—’
‘You	are	seeing	this	wrong,	Fear.’
He	paused,	looked	over.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘“Our	emperor	cannot	be	stopped.”	I	do	not	see	it	that	way.’
‘All	right.	How	do	you	see	it,	Trull?’
‘Our	brother	is	doomed	to	die	countless	deaths.	Die,	rise,	and	die	again.
Our	brother,	Fear,	the	youngest	among	us.	That	is	how	I	see	it.	And	now,	I	am
to	embrace	the	power	that	has	done	this	to	Rhulad?	I	am	to	serve	it?	Lend	it	my
skills	with	the	spear?	I	am	to	carve	an	empire	for	it?	Are	his	deaths	without
pain?	Without	horror?	Is	he	not	scarred?	How	long,	Fear,	can	his	sanity	hold
on?	There	he	stands,	a	young	warrior	bedecked	in	a	gold	nightmare,	his	flesh
puckered	and	mangled,	and	weapons	shall	pierce	him—he	knows	it,	he	knows
he	will	be	killed	again	and	again.’
‘Stop,	Trull.’	Like	a	child,	Fear	placed	his	hands	over	his	ears	and	turned
away.	‘Stop.’
‘Who	is	doing	this	to	him?’


‘Stop!’
Trull	subsided.	Tell	me,	brother,	do	you	feel	as	helpless	as	I	do?
Fear	faced	him	once	more,	his	expression	hardening	anew.	‘Voice	your
doubts	if	you	must,	Trull,	but	only	to	me.	In	private.’
‘Very	well.’
‘Now,	a	battle	awaits	us.’
‘It	does.’
	
A	herd	of	deer	had	been	startled	from	the	forest	fringe	south	of	Katter	River,
darting	and	leaping	as	they	fled	across	the	killing	field.	On	the	earthen
ramparts	outside	High	Fort’s	walls,	Moroch	Nevath	stood	beside	his	queen	and
his	prince.	Before	them	in	a	motionless	row	were	arrayed	the	four	sorcerors
of	Janall’s	cadre,	wrapped	in	cloaks	against	the	morning	chill,	while	to	either
side	and	along	the	length	of	the	fortified	berm	waited	the	heavy	infantry
companies	of	the	queen’s	battalion.	Flanking	each	company	were	massive
wagons,	and	on	each	squatted	a	Dresh	ballista,	its	magazine	loaded	with	a
thirty-six-quarrel	rack.	Spare	racks	waited	nearby	on	the	ramped	loader,	the
heavily	armoured	crew	gathered	round,	nervously	scanning	the	line	of	woods
to	the	north.
‘The	Edur	are	moving	down,’	Prince	Quillas	said.	‘We	should	see	them
soon.’
The	deer	had	settled	on	the	killing	field	and	were	grazing.
Moroch	glanced	to	the	lesser	berm	to	the	east.	Two	more	companies	were
positioned	there.	The	gap	between	the	two	ramparts	was	narrow	and	steepsided,	and	led	directly	to	a	corner	bastion	on	the	city’s	wall,	where	ballistae	and
mangonels	commanded	the	approach.
The	prince’s	own	mage	cadre,	three	lesser	sorcerors,	were	positioned	with
a	small	guard	on	the	rampart	immediately	south	of	the	Dry	Gully,	tucked	in	the
angular	indentation	of	High	Fort’s	walls.	The	old	drainage	course	wound	a
path	down	from	the	minor	range	of	hills	a	thousand	paces	to	the	north.	Three
additional	ramparts	ran	parallel	to	the	Dry	Gully,	on	which	were	positioned	the
forward	elements	of	the	Grass	Jackets	Brigade.	The	easternmost	and	largest	of
these	ramparts	also	held	a	stone-walled	fort,	and	it	was	there	that	the	brigade
commanders	had	placed	their	own	mage	cadre.
Additional	ramparts	were	situated	in	a	circle	around	the	rest	of	High	Fort,
and	on	these	waited	reserve	elements	of	the	brigades	and	battalions,	including
elements	of	heavy	cavalry.	Lining	the	city’s	walls	and	bastions	was	High	Fort’s
own	garrison.


To	Moroch’s	thinking,	this	imminent	battle	would	be	decisive.	The
treachery	of	the	Edur	that	had	been	revealed	at	Trate	would	not	be	repeated
here,	not	with	eleven	sorcerors	present	among	the	Letherii	forces.
‘Wraiths!’
The	shout	came	from	one	of	the	queen’s	officers,	and	Moroch	Nevath
returned	his	attention	to	the	distant	treeline.
The	deer	had	lifted	their	heads,	were	staring	fixedly	at	the	forest	edge.	A
moment	later	they	bolted	once	more,	this	time	in	a	southwest	direction,
reaching	the	loggers’	road,	down	which	they	bounded	until	lost	in	the	mists.
On	the	other	side	of	the	killing	field—pasture	in	peaceful	times—shadows
were	flowing	out	from	between	the	boles,	vaguely	man-shaped,	drawing	up
into	a	thick	mass	that	then	stretched	out	into	a	rough	line,	three	hundred	paces
long	and	scores	deep.	Behind	them	came	huge,	lumbering	demons,	near	twice
the	height	of	a	man,	perhaps	a	hundred	in	all,	that	assembled	into	a	wedge
behind	the	line	of	wraiths.	Finally,	to	either	side,	appeared	warriors,	Tiste	Edur
to	the	right	of	the	wedge,	and	a	horde	of	small,	fur-clad	savages	on	the	far	left.
‘Who	are	they?’	Prince	Quillas	asked.	‘Those	on	the	far	flank—they	are
not	Edur.’
The	queen	shrugged.	‘Some	lost	band	of	Nerek,	perhaps.	I	would	judge	a
thousand,	no	more	than	that,	and	poorly	armed	and	armoured.’
‘Fodder,’	Moroch	said.	‘The	Edur	have	learned	much	from	us,	it	seems.’
A	similar	formation	was	assembling	north	of	the	lesser	berm,	although
there	both	flanking	forces	were	Tiste	Edur.
‘The	wraiths	will	charge	first,’	Moroch	predicted,	‘with	the	demons	behind
them	seeking	to	break	our	lines.	And	there,	signal	flags	from	the	Grass	Jackets.
They	have	no	doubt	sighted	their	own	enemy	ranks.’
‘Were	you	the	Edur	commander,’	Quillas	said,	‘what	would	you	do?	The
attack	cannot	be	as	straightforward	as	it	now	seems,	can	it?’
‘If	the	commander	is	a	fool,	it	can,’	Janall	said.
‘The	sorcery	will	prove	mutually	negating,	as	it	always	does.	Thus,	the
battle	shall	be	blade	against	blade.’	Moroch	thought	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘I
would	make	use	of	the	Dry	Gully.	And	seek	a	sudden	charge	against	your	mage
cadre,	Prince.’
‘They	would	become	visible—and	vulnerable—for	the	last	fifty	or	sixty
paces	of	the	charge,	Finadd.	The	bastions	will	slaughter	them,	and	if	not	them,
then	the	westernmost	company	of	the	Grass	Jackets	can	mount	a	downslope
charge	into	their	flank.’
‘Thus	leaving	their	rampart	under-defended.	Use	the	Dry	Gully	as	a	feint,
and	a	reserve	force	to	then	rush	the	rampart	and	seize	it.’


‘That	rampart	crouches	in	the	shadow	of	High	Fort’s	largest	bastion	tower,
Finadd.	The	Edur	would	be	slaughtered	by	the	answering	enfilade.’
After	a	moment,	Moroch	nodded.	‘It	is	as	you	say,	Prince.	I	admit,	I	see
nothing	advantageous	to	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘I	agree,’	Prince	Quillas	said.
‘Strangely	quiet,’	Moroch	mused	after	a	time	as	the	enemy	forces
assembled.
‘It’s	the	wraiths	and	demons,	Finadd.	No	soldiers	like	thinking	of	those.’
‘The	mages	will	annihilate	them,’	Janall	pronounced.	She	was	dressed	in
elaborate	armour,	her	helm	filigreed	in	silver	and	gold.	Her	sword	was	the
finest	Letherii	steel,	but	the	grip	was	bound	gold	wire	and	the	pommel	a	cluster
of	pearls	set	in	silver.	Beadwork	covered	her	tabard.	Beneath,	Moroch	knew,
was	steel	scale.	He	did	not	think	she	would	find	need	to	draw	her	sword.	Even
so…The	Finadd	swung	about	and	gestured	to	an	aide,	whom	he	then	drew	to
one	side.	‘Ready	the	queen’s	horses,	in	the	south	lee	of	the	west	bastion.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
Something	was	wrong.	Moroch	felt	it	as	he	watched	the	aide	hurry	off.	He
scanned	the	sky.	Grey.	Either	the	sun	would	burn	through	or	there	would	be
rain.	He	returned	to	his	original	position	and	studied	the	distant	ranks.	‘They’re
in	position.	Where	are	the	chants?	The	exhortations?	The	ritual	curses?’
‘They	see	the	doom	awaiting	them,’	Quillas	said,	‘and	are	silenced	by
terror.’
A	sudden	stirring	among	the	queen’s	mages.	Alertness.	Janall	noticed	and
said,	‘Prepare	the	lines.	The	Edur	have	begun	sorcery.’
‘What	kind?’	Moroch	asked.
The	queen	shook	her	head.
‘Betrayer ’s	balls,’	the	Finadd	muttered.	It	felt	wrong.	Terribly	wrong.
	
Ahlrada	Ahn	had	drawn	his	cutlass	and	was	grinning.	‘I	never	understood	you
spear-wielders.	This	will	be	close	fighting,	Trull	Sengar.	They	will	hack	the
shaft	from	your	hands—’
‘They	will	try.	Blackwood	will	not	shatter,	as	you	know.	Nor	shall	my
grip.’
Standing	behind	the	wedge	of	demons	was	a	K’risnan.	The	warlock’s
comrade	was	with	the	other	force,	also	positioned	behind	a	demon	cohort.
Hanradi	Khalag	commanded	there,	and	the	K’risnan	in	his	charge	was	his	son.
B’nagga	and	a	thousand	of	his	Jheck	were	just	visible	in	a	basin	to	the	west.
Another	thousand	were	moving	down	the	gully,	whilst	the	third	thousand


accompanied	the	easternmost	force	along	with	wraiths	and	demons.
It	occurred	to	Trull	that	he	knew	almost	nothing	of	the	huge,	armoured
demons	bound	to	this	war	by	the	K’risnan.	Not	even	the	name	by	which	they
called	themselves.
Warriors	of	the	Arapay	and	Hiroth	were	massed	along	the	forest	line,	less
than	a	third	of	their	total	numbers	visible	to	the	enemy.	Outwardly,	the
dominant	Edur	army	would	appear	to	be	the	central	one,	Hanradi	Khalag’s
eighteen	thousand	Hiroth	and	Merude,	but	in	truth	Fear ’s	force	here	in	the
forest	amounted	to	almost	twenty-three	thousand	Edur	warriors.	And	arrayed
among	them	were	wraiths	in	numbers	beyond	counting.
Tendrils	of	grey	mist	swirled	round	the	nearest	K’risnan,	forming	a	fluid
web	that	began	to	thicken,	then	rise.	Thread-thin	strands	snaked	out,	entwining
the	nearest	ranks	of	Edur.	Flowing	out	like	roots,	embracing	all	within	sight
barring	the	wraiths	and	the	demons.	In	a	billowing,	grey	wall,	the	sorcery
burgeoned.	Trull	felt	it	playing	over	him,	and	its	touch	triggered	a	surge	of
nausea	that	he	barely	defeated.
From	the	Letherii	cadre,	a	wave	of	raging	fire	rose	in	answer,	building
with	a	roar	directly	in	front	of	the	rampart,	then	plunging	swift	and	savage
across	the	killing	field.
As	suddenly	as	that,	the	battle	was	begun.
Trull	stared	as	the	massive	wall	of	flame	rushed	towards	them.	At	the	last
moment	the	grey	skein	rushed	out,	colliding	with	the	wave	and	lifting	it
straight	up	in	explosive	columns,	pillars	that	spiralled	with	silver	fire.
And	Trull	saw,	within	the	flames,	the	gleam	of	bones.	Thousands,	then
hundreds	of	thousands,	as	if	the	fire’s	very	fuel	had	been	transformed.
Towering	higher,	fifty	man-heights,	then	a	hundred,	two	hundred,	filling	the
sky.
The	conjoined	wave	then	began	toppling.	Fiery	pillars	heaving	over,
towards	the	Letherii	entrenchments.
Even	as	they	plunged	earthward,	the	wraiths	from	the	forest	and	those	in
the	foremost	line	launched	into	a	rushing	attack.	The	wedge	of	demons
promptly	vanished.
It	was	the	signal	Trull	and	the	other	officers	had	been	waiting	for.
‘Weapons	ready!’	He	had	to	bellow	to	make	himself	heard—
The	wave	struck.	First	the	killing	field,	and	the	ground	seemed	to	explode,
churning,	as	if	a	multitude	of	miner ’s	picks	had	struck	the	earth,	deep,	tearing
loose	huge	chunks	that	were	flung	high	into	the	air.	Dust	and	flames,	the	clash
of	split	bones	ripping	the	flat	expanse,	a	sound	like	hail	on	sheets	of	iron.
Onward,	onto	the	slopes	of	the	ramparts.


In	its	wake,	a	flowing	sea	of	wraiths.
‘Forward!’
And	then	the	Edur	were	running	across	broken,	steaming	ground.	Behind
them,	thousands	pouring	from	the	forest	edge.
Trull	saw,	all	too	clearly,	as	the	wave	of	burning,	hammering	bones
reached	the	entrenchments.	A	blush	of	crimson,	then	pieces	of	human	flesh
danced	skyward,	a	wall,	rising,	severed	limbs	flailing	in	the	air.	Fragments	of
armour,	the	shattered	wood	of	the	bulwarks,	skin	and	hair.
The	queen’s	cadre	was	engulfed,	bones	rushing	in	to	batter	where	they	had
been.	A	moment	later	the	mass	exploded	outward	in	a	hail	of	shards,	and	of	the
four	sorcerors	who	had	been	standing	there	a	moment	earlier	only	two
remained,	sheathed	in	blood	and	reeling.
A	demon	rose	from	the	ravaged	earth	in	front	of	them,	mace	swinging.
The	mage	it	struck	seemed	to	fold	bonelessly	around	it,	and	his	body	was
tossed	through	the	air.	The	last	sorceror	staggered	back,	narrowly	avoiding	the
huge	weapon’s	deadly	path.	She	gestured,	even	as	a	hail	of	heavy	quarrels
hammered	into	the	demon.
Trull	heard	its	squeal	of	pain.
Flickering	magic	swarmed	the	demon	as	it	spun	round	and	toppled,	sliding
down	the	blood-soaked	slope,	the	mace	tumbling	away.
Other	demons	had	appeared	among	the	remnants	of	the	Letherii	soldiery,
flailing	bodies	flying	from	their	relentless	path.
Another	wave	of	sorcery,	this	time	from	somewhere	to	the	southeast,	a
rolling	column,	crackling	with	lightning	as	it	swept	crossways	on	the	killing
field,	plunging	into	the	advancing	ranks	of	wraiths.	They	melted	in	their
hundreds	as	the	magic	tore	through	them.
Then	the	sorcery	struck	Hanradi	Khalag’s	warriors,	scything	a	path
through	the	press.
The	Merude	chief’s	son	counter-attacked,	another	surge	of	grey,	tumbling
bones.	A	rampart	to	the	east	vanished	in	a	thunderous	detonation,	but	hundreds
of	Edur	lay	dead	or	dying	on	the	field.
Deafened,	half-blinded	by	dust	and	smoke,	Trull	and	his	warriors	reached
the	slope,	scrambled	upward	and	came	to	the	first	trench.
Before	them	stretched	an	elongated	pit	filled	with	unrecognizable	flesh,
split	bones	and	spilled	organs,	strips	of	leather	and	pieces	of	armour.	The	air
was	thick	with	the	stench	of	ruptured	bowels	and	burnt	meat.	Gagging,	Trull
stumbled	across,	his	moccasins	plunging	down	into	warm	pockets,	lifting	clear
sheathed	in	blood	and	bile.
Ahead,	a	raging	battle.	Wraiths	swarming	over	soldiers,	demons	with


mauls	and	maces	crushing	the	Letherii	closing	on	them	from	all	sides,	others
with	double-bladed	axes	cleaving	wide	spaces	round	themselves.	But	ballista
quarrels	were	finding	them	one	by	one.	Trull	watched	a	demon	stagger,	twice
impaled,	then	soldiers	rushed	in,	swords	hacking.
And	then	he	and	his	company	closed	with	the	enemy.
	
Moroch	Nevath	stumbled	through	the	dust,	the	screaming	soldiers	and	the
fallen	bodies,	bellowing	his	prince’s	name.	But	Quillas	was	nowhere	to	be
seen.	Nor	was	Janall.	Only	one	mage	remained	from	the	cadre,	launching
attack	after	attack	on	some	distant	enemy.	A	company	of	heavy	infantry	had
moved	up	to	encircle	her,	but	they	were	fast	dying	beneath	an	onslaught	of
Tiste	Edur.
The	Finadd,	blood	draining	from	his	ears	after	the	concussion	of	the	wave
of	bones,	still	held	his	sword,	the	Letherii	steel	obliterating	the	occasional
wraith	that	ventured	near.	He	saw	one	Edur	warrior,	the	spear	a	blur	in	his
hands,	leading	a	dozen	or	so	of	his	kin	ever	closer	to	the	surviving	mage.
But	Moroch	was	too	far	away,	too	many	heaving	bodies	between	them,	and
he	could	only	watch	as	the	warrior	broke	through	the	last	of	the	defenders	and
lunged	at	the	mage,	driving	his	spear	into	her	chest,	then	lifting	her	entire,	the
spear-shaft	bowing	as	he	flung	her	spasming	body	to	one	side.	The	iron	point
of	the	spear	broke	free	in	a	stream	of	blood.
Reeling	away,	Moroch	Nevath	began	making	his	way	to	the	south	slope	of
the	rampart.	He	needed	a	horse.	He	needed	to	bring	the	mounts	closer.	For	the
prince.	The	queen.
Somewhere	to	the	east,	a	roar	of	sound,	and	the	ground	shook	beneath	him.
He	staggered,	then	his	left	leg	swept	out,	skidding	on	slime,	and	something
snapped	in	the	Finadd’s	groin.	Pain	lanced	through	him.	Swearing,	he	watched
himself	fall,	the	ruptured	ground	rising	in	front	of	him,	and	landed	heavily.
Burning	agony	in	his	left	leg,	his	pelvis,	up	the	length	of	his	spine.	Still
swearing,	he	began	dragging	himself	forward,	his	sword	lost	somewhere	in
his	wake.
Bones.	Burning,	plunging	from	the	sky.	Bodies	exploding	where	they
struck.	Crushing	pressure,	the	air	roiling	and	screaming	like	a	thing	alive.	The
sudden	muting	of	all	noise,	the	outrageous	cacophony	of	grunts	as	a	thousand
men	died	all	at	once.	A	sound	that	Moroch	Nevath	would	never	forget.	What
had	the	bastards	unleashed?
	


The	Letherii	were	broken,	fleeing	down	the	south	slope	of	the	rampart.	Wraiths
dragged	them	down.	Tiste	Edur	hacked	at	their	backs	and	heads	as	they
pursued.	Trull	Sengar	clambered	onto	a	heap	of	corpses,	seeking	a	vantage
point.	To	the	east,	on	the	two	berms	that	he	could	see,	the	enemy	were	shattered.
Jheck,	veered	into	silver-backed	wolves,	had	poured	up	from	the	gully
alongside	a	horde	of	wraiths	to	assault	what	had	survived	of	the	Letherii
defences.	Mage-fire	had	ceased.
In	the	opposite	direction,	B’nagga	had	led	his	own	beasts	south,	skirting
the	foremost	rampart,	to	attack	the	reserve	positions	on	the	west	side	of	the
city.	There	had	been	enemy	cavalry	there,	and	the	horses	had	been	driven	to
panic	by	the	huge	wolves	rushing	into	their	midst.	A	dozen	demons	had	joined
the	Jheck,	forcing	the	Letherii	into	a	chaotic	retreat	that	gathered	up	and
carried	with	it	the	southernmost	elements.	Companies	of	Arapay	Edur	were
following	in	B’nagga’s	wake.
Trull	swung	to	face	north.	And	saw	his	brother	standing	alone	above	a
body,	on	the	far	side	of	the	killing	field.
The	K’risnan.
‘Trull.’
He	turned.	‘Ahlrada	Ahn.	You	are	wounded.’
‘I	ran	onto	a	sword—held	by	a	dead	man.’
The	gash	was	deep	and	long,	beginning	just	below	the	warrior ’s	left	elbow
and	continuing	up	into	his	shoulder.	‘Find	yourself	a	healer,’	Trull	said,
‘before	you	bleed	out.’
‘I	shall.	I	saw	you	slay	the	witch.’	A	statement	to	which	Ahlrada	added
nothing.
‘Where	is	Canarth?’	Trull	asked.	‘I	do	not	see	my	troop.’
‘Scattered.	I	saw	Canarth	dragging	Badar	from	the	press.	Badar	was
dying.’
Trull	studied	the	blood	and	fragments	of	flesh	on	the	iron	point	of	his
spear.	‘He	was	young.’
‘He	was	blooded,	Trull.’
Trull	glanced	over	at	High	Fort’s	walls.	He	could	see	soldiers	lining	it.	The
garrison,	witness	to	the	annihilation	of	the	Letherii	manning	the	outer	defences.
The	nearest	bastion	was	still	launching	quarrels,	tracking	the	few	demons	still
in	range.
‘I	must	join	my	brother,	Ahlrada.	See	if	you	can	gather	our	warriors.
There	may	be	more	fighting	to	come.’
	


Huddled	in	the	lee	of	the	west	wall,	Moroch	Nevath	watched	a	dozen	wolves
pad	from	one	heap	of	corpses	to	another.	The	beasts	were	covered	in	blood.
They	gathered	round	a	wounded	soldier,	there	was	a	sudden	flurry	of	snarls,
and	the	twitching	body	went	still.
All	over…so	fast.	Decisive	indeed.
He	had	never	found	the	horses.
On	the	rampart	opposite	him,	eighty	paces	distant,	a	score	of	Tiste	Edur
had	found	Prince	Quillas.	Dishevelled	but	alive.	Moroch	wondered	if	the
queen’s	corpse	lay	somewhere	beneath	the	mounds	of	broken	flesh.	Beadwork
unstrung	and	scattered	in	the	welter,	her	jewelled	sword	still	locked	in	its
scabbard,	the	ambitious	light	in	her	eyes	dulled	and	drying	and	blind	to	this
world.
It	seemed	impossible.
But	so	did	all	these	dead	Letherii,	these	obliterated	battalions	and	brigades.
There	had	been	no	negation	of	magic.	The	eleven	mages	had	been
destroyed	by	the	counter-attack.	A	battle	had	been	transformed	into	a	slaughter,
and	it	was	this	inequity	that	stung	Moroch	the	deepest.
He	and	his	people	had	been	on	the	delivering	end,	time	and	again,	until	it
seemed	inherently	just	and	righteous.	Something	went	wrong.	There	was
treachery.	The	proper	course	of	the	world	has	been…upended.	The	words
repeating	in	his	head	were	growing	increasingly	bitter.	It	is	not	for	us	to	be
humbled.	Ever.	Failure	drives	us	to	succeed	tenfold.	All	will	be	put	right,	again.
It	shall.	We	cannot	be	denied	our	destiny.
It	began	to	rain.
An	Edur	warrior	had	seen	him	and	was	approaching,	sword	held	at	the
ready.	The	downpour	arrived	with	vigour	as	the	tall	figure	came	to	stand
before	Moroch	Nevath.	In	traders’	tongue	he	said,	‘I	see	no	wounds	upon	you,
soldier.’
‘Torn	tendon,	I	think,’	Moroch	replied.
‘Painful,	then.’
‘Have	you	come	to	kill	me?’
A	surprised	expression.	‘You	do	not	know?	The	garrison	surrendered.
High	Fort	is	fallen.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘We	come	as	conquerors,	soldier.	What	value	killing	all	of	our	subjects?’
Moroch	looked	away.	‘Letherii	conquer.	We	are	never	conquered.	You
think	this	battle	means	anything?	You	have	revealed	your	tactics,	Edur.	This
day	shall	not	be	repeated,	and	before	long	you	will	be	the	subjugated	ones,	not
us.’


The	warrior	shrugged.	‘Have	it	your	way,	then.	But	know	this.	The	frontier
has	fallen.	Trate,	High	Fort	and	Shake	Fort.	Your	famous	brigades	are	routed,
your	mage	cadres	dead.	Your	queen	and	your	prince	are	our	prisoners.	And	we
begin	our	march	on	Letheras.’
The	Tiste	Edur	walked	away.
Moroch	Nevath	stared	after	him	for	a	time,	then	looked	round.	And	saw
Letherii	soldiers,	stripped	of	weapons	but	otherwise	unharmed,	walking	from
the	fields	of	battle.	Onto	the	loggers’	road,	and	south,	on	the	Katter	Road.
Simply	walking	away.	He	did	not	understand.	We	will	reassemble.	Pull	back	and
equip	ourselves	once	more.	There	is	nothing	inevitable	to	this.	Nothing.
Wincing,	he	forced	himself	to	move	away	from	the	wall—
A	familiar	voice,	shouting	his	name.	He	looked	up,	recognized	an	officer
from	the	queen’s	entourage.	The	man	bore	minor	wounds,	but	otherwise
seemed	hale.	He	quickly	approached.	‘Finadd,	I	am	pleased	to	see	you	alive—’
‘I	need	a	horse.’
‘We	have	them,	Finadd—’
‘How	was	the	queen	captured?’	Moroch	demanded.	Why	did	you	not	die
defending	her?
‘A	demon,’	the	man	replied.	‘It	was	among	us	in	the	blink	of	an	eye.	It	had
come	to	take	her—we	could	not	prevent	it.	We	tried,	Finadd,	we	tried—’
‘Never	mind.	Help	me	up.	We	must	ride	south—I	need	a	healer—’
	
Trull	Sengar	picked	his	way	across	the	killing	field.	The	rain	was	turning	the
churned	ground	into	a	swamp.	The	bones	of	the	sorcery	had	vanished.	He
paused,	hearing	piteous	cries	from	somewhere	off	to	his	right.	A	dozen	paces
in	that	direction,	and	he	came	upon	a	demon.
Four	heavy	quarrels	had	pierced	it.	The	creature	was	lying	on	its	side,	its
bestial	face	twisted	with	pain.
Trull	crouched	near	the	demon’s	mud-smeared	head.	‘Can	you	understand
me?’
Small	blue	eyes	flickered	behind	the	lids,	fixed	on	his	own	eyes.	‘Arbiter
of	life.	Denier	of	mercy.	I	shall	die	here.’
The	voice	was	thin,	strangely	childlike.
‘I	shall	call	a	healer—’
‘Why?	To	fight	again?	To	relive	terror	and	grief?’
‘You	were	not	a	warrior	in	your	world?’
‘A	caster	of	nets.	Warm	shoals,	a	yellow	sky.	We	cast	nets.’
‘All	of	you?’


‘What	war	is	this?	Why	have	I	been	killed?	Why	will	I	never	see	the	river
again?	My	mate,	my	children.	Did	we	win?’
‘I	shall	not	be	long.	I	will	return.	I	promise.’	Trull	straightened,	went	on	to
where	stood	Fear	and,	now,	a	dozen	others.	The	K’risnan	was	alive,
surrounded	by	healers—none	of	whom	seemed	capable	of	doing	anything	for
the	figure	writhing	in	the	mud.	As	Trull	neared,	he	saw	more	clearly	the	young
warlock.
Twisted,	deformed,	his	skin	peeling	in	wet	sheets,	and	eyes	filled	with
awareness.
Fear	stepped	into	Trull’s	path	and	said,	‘It	is	the	sword’s	sorcery—the	giftgiver ’s	own,	channelled	from	the	weapon	into	Rhulad,	and	from	Rhulad	to
whomever	he	may	choose.	Yet…’	He	hesitated.	‘The	body	cannot	cope.	Even	as
it	destroys	the	enemy,	so	it	changes	the	wielder.	This	is	what	the	women	are
telling	me.’
His	brother ’s	face	was	pale,	and	nowhere	in	his	expression	could	Trull	see
triumph	or	satisfaction	at	the	victory	they	had	won	this	day.
‘Will	he	survive?’
‘They	think	so.	This	time.	But	the	damage	cannot	be	reversed.	Trull,
Hanradi’s	son	is	dead.	We	have	lost	a	K’risnan.’
‘To	this?’	Trull	asked.	‘To	the	sword’s	power?’
‘Partly.	The	Letherii	mages	mostly,	I	think,	given	how	badly	burned	he
was.	They	resisted	longer	than	we	expected.’
Trull	faced	High	Fort.	‘It	has	surrendered?’
‘Yes,	a	few	moments	ago.	A	delegation.	The	garrison	is	being	disarmed.	I
was	thinking	of	leaving	Hanradi	to	govern.	His	spirit	is	much	damaged.’
Trull	said	nothing	to	that.	He	moved	past	Fear	and	strode	to	the	women
gathered	round	the	K’risnan.	‘One	of	you,	please,’	he	said.	‘There	is	healing	I
would	have	you	attend	to.’
An	Arapay	woman	nodded.	‘Wounded	warriors.	Yes,	preferable.	Lead	me
to	them.’
‘Not	Edur.	A	demon.’
She	halted.	‘Don’t	be	a	fool.	There	are	Edur	who	require	my	skills—I	have
no	time	for	a	demon.	Let	it	die.	We	can	always	acquire	more.’
Something	snapped	in	Trull,	and	before	he	was	even	aware	of	it	the	back	of
his	right	hand	was	stinging	and	the	woman	was	on	the	ground,	a	stunned
expression	on	her	suddenly	bloodied	face.	Then	rage	flared	in	her	eyes.
Fear	pushed	Trull	back	a	step.	‘What	are	you	doing?’
‘I	want	a	demon	healed,’	Trull	said.	He	was	trembling,	frightened	at	the
absence	of	remorse	within	him	even	as	he	watched	the	woman	pick	herself	up


from	the	mud.	‘I	want	it	healed,	then	unbound	and	sent	back	to	its	realm.’
‘Trull—’
The	woman	snarled,	then	hissed,	‘The	empress	shall	hear	of	this!	I	will	see
you	banished!’	Her	companions	gathered,	all	looking	on	Trull	with	raw	hatred.
He	realized	that	his	gesture	had	snapped	something	within	them	as	well.
Unfortunate.
‘How	badly	injured	is	it?’	Fear	asked.
‘It	is	dying—’
‘Then	likely	it	has	already	done	so.	No	more	of	this,	Trull.’	He	swung	to
the	women.	‘Go	among	our	warriors,	all	of	you.	I	will	see	the	K’risnan	carried
to	our	camp.’
‘We	will	speak	of	this	to	the	empress,’	the	first	healer	said,	wiping	at	her
face.
‘Of	course.	As	you	must.’
They	stalked	off	into	the	rain.
‘The	battle	lust	is	still	upon	you,	brother—’
‘No	it	isn’t—’
‘Listen	to	me.	It	is	how	you	will	excuse	your	actions.	And	you	will	ask	for
forgiveness	and	you	will	make	reparations.’
Trull	turned	away.	‘I	need	to	find	a	healer.’
Fear	pulled	him	roughly	round,	but	Trull	twisted	free.	He	headed	off.	He
would	find	a	healer.	A	Hiroth	woman,	one	who	knew	his	mother.	Before	word
carried.
The	demon	needed	healing.	It	was	as	simple	as	that.
An	indeterminate	time	later,	he	found	himself	stumbling	among	bodies.
Dead	Edur,	the	ones	killed	by	the	sorcerous	attack	he	recalled	from	earlier.
Scorched,	burnt	so	fiercely	their	faces	had	melted	away.	Unknown	to	his	eyes
and	unknowable.	He	wandered	among	them,	the	rain	pelting	down	to	give	the
illusion	of	motion,	of	life,	on	all	sides.	But	they	were	all	dead.
A	lone	figure	nearby,	standing	motionless.	A	woman,	her	hands	hanging	at
her	sides.	He	had	seen	her	before,	a	matron.	Hanradi	Khalag’s	elder	sister,	tall,
hawk-faced,	her	eyes	like	onyx.	He	halted	in	front	of	her.	‘I	want	you	to	heal	a
demon.’
She	did	not	seem	to	see	him	at	all.	‘I	can	do	nothing	for	them.	My	sons.	I
cannot	even	find	them.’
He	took	one	of	her	hands	and	held	it	tight.	‘Come	with	me.’
She	did	not	resist	as	he	led	her	away	from	the	strewn	corpses.	‘A	demon?’
‘Yes.	I	do	not	know	the	name	by	which	they	call	themselves.’
‘Kenyll’rah.	It	means	“To	Sleep	Peacefully”	or	something	like	that.	The


Merude	were	charged	with	making	their	weapons.’
‘They	have	been	sorely	used.’
‘They	are	not	alone	in	that,	warrior.’
He	glanced	back	at	her,	saw	that	awareness	had	returned	to	her	eyes.	Her
hand	held	his	now,	and	tightly.	‘You	are	the	emperor ’s	brother,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘I	am.’
‘You	struck	an	Arapay	woman.’
‘I	did.	It	seems	such	news	travels	swiftly—and	mysteriously.’
‘Among	the	women.	Yes.’
‘And	yet	you	will	help	me.’
‘Heal	this	demon?	If	it	lives,	I	shall.’
‘Why?’
She	did	not	reply.
It	took	some	time,	but	they	finally	found	the	creature.	Its	cries	had	ceased,
but	the	woman	released	Trull’s	hand	and	crouched	down	beside	it.	‘It	lives	still,
Trull	Sengar.’	She	laid	her	palms	on	the	demon’s	massive	chest	and	closed	her
eyes.
Trull	watched	the	rain	streaming	down	her	face,	as	if	the	world	wept	in	her
stead.
‘Take	the	first	of	the	quarrels.	You	will	pull,	gently,	while	I	push.	Each	one,
slowly.’
‘I	want	it	released.’
‘I	cannot	do	that.	It	will	not	be	permitted.’
‘Then	I	want	it	placed	in	my	charge.’
‘You	are	the	emperor ’s	brother.	None	will	defy	you.’
‘Except,	perhaps,	one	of	the	emperor ’s	other	brothers.’	He	was	pleased	to
see	the	crease	of	a	smile	on	her	thin	features.
‘That	trouble	will	be	yours,	not	mine,	Trull	Sengar.	Now,	pull.	Carefully.’
	
The	demon	opened	its	small	eyes.	It	ran	its	massive	hands	over	the	places
where	wounds	had	been,	then	it	sighed.
The	healer	stepped	back.	‘I	am	done.	There	are	bodies	to	gather.’
‘Thank	you,’	Trull	said.
She	made	no	reply.	Wiping	rain	from	her	face,	she	walked	away.
The	demon	slowly	climbed	to	its	feet.	‘I	will	fight	again,’	it	said.
‘Not	if	I	have	any	say	in	the	matter,’	Trull	replied.	‘I	would	place	you	in	my
charge.’
‘To	not	fight?	That	would	be	unfair,	Denier.	I	would	witness	the	death	of


my	kind,	yet	not	share	the	risk,	or	their	fate.	It	is	sad,	to	die	so	far	from	home.’
‘Then	one	among	you	must	remain,	to	remember	them.	That	one	will	be
you.	What	is	your	name?’
‘Lilac.’
Trull	studied	the	sky.	It	seemed	there	would	be	no	let	up	in	the	downpour.
‘Come	with	me.	I	must	speak	to	my	brother.’
Tiste	Edur	warriors	were	entering	the	city.	No	Letherii	soldiers	were
visible	on	the	walls,	or	at	the	bastions.	The	gates	had	been	sundered	some	time
during	the	battle,	struck	by	sorcery.	Twisted	pieces	of	bronze	and	splintered
wood	studded	the	muddy	ground,	amidst	strewn	corpses.
The	demon	had	collected	a	double-bladed	axe	near	the	body	of	one	of	its
kind	and	now	carried	it	over	a	shoulder.	For	all	its	size,	Lilac	moved	quietly,
shortening	its	stride	to	stay	alongside	Trull.	He	noted	that	the	pattern	of	its
breathing	was	odd.	After	a	deep	breath	it	took	another,	shorter	one,	followed
by	a	faintly	whistling	exhalation	that	did	not	seem	to	come	from	its	broad,
flattened	nose.
‘Lilac,	are	you	fully	healed?’
‘I	am.’
Ahead	lay	the	rampart	where	four	mages	had	stood.	Three	of	them	had
been	obliterated	in	the	first	wave	of	sorcery.	On	the	berm’s	summit	now	were
gathered	Fear	and	a	number	of	officers.	And	two	prisoners.
The	slope	was	treacherous	underfoot	as	Trull	and	the	demon	made	their
ascent.	Red,	muddy	streams,	bodies	slowly	sliding	down.	Wraiths	moved
through	the	rain	as	if	still	hunting	victims.	From	the	west	came	the	low	rumble
of	thunder.
They	reached	the	rampart’s	summit.	Trull	saw	that	one	of	the	prisoners	was
Prince	Quillas.	He	did	not	seem	injured.	The	other	was	a	woman	in	mudspattered	armour.	She	wore	no	helmet	and	had	taken	a	head	wound,	staining	the
left	side	of	her	face	with	streaks	of	blood.	Her	eyes	were	glazed	with	shock.
Fear	had	turned	to	regard	Trull	and	the	demon,	his	expression	closed.
‘Brother,’	he	said	tonelessly,	‘it	seems	we	have	captured	two	personages	of	the
royal	family.’
‘This	is	Queen	Janall?’
‘The	prince	expects	we	will	ransom	them,’	Fear	said.	‘He	does	not	seem	to
understand	the	situation.’
‘And	what	is	the	situation?’	Trull	asked.
‘Our	emperor	wants	these	two.	For	himself.’
‘Fear,	we	are	not	in	the	habit	of	parading	prisoners.’
A	flicker	of	rage	in	Fear ’s	eyes,	but	his	voice	remained	calm.	‘I	see	you


have	had	your	demon	healed.	What	do	you	want?’
‘I	want	this	Kenyll’rah	in	my	charge.’
Fear	studied	the	huge	creature.	Then	he	shrugged	and	turned	away.	‘As	you
like.	Leave	us	now,	Trull.	I	will	seek	you	out	later…for	a	private	word.’
Trull	flinched.	‘Very	well.’
The	world	felt	broken	now,	irreparably	broken.
‘Go.’
‘Come	with	me,	Lilac,’	Trull	said.	He	paused	to	glance	over	at	Prince
Quillas,	and	saw	the	terror	in	the	young	Letherii’s	visage.	Rhulad	wanted	him,
and	the	queen.	Why?
	
They	walked	the	killing	field,	the	rain	pummelling	down	in	a	soft	roar,
devastation	and	slaughter	on	all	sides.	Figures	were	moving	about	here	and
there.	Tiste	Edur	seeking	fallen	comrades,	wraiths	on	senseless	patrols.	The
thunder	was	closer.
‘There	is	a	river,’	Lilac	said.	‘I	smelled	it	when	we	first	arrived.	It	is	the
same	river	as	ran	beneath	the	bridge.’
‘Yes,’	Trull	replied.	‘The	Katter	River.’
‘I	would	see	it.’
‘Why	not?’
They	angled	northwest.	Reached	the	loggers’	road	that	ran	parallel	to	the
forest	and	followed	its	three-rutted	track	until	the	treeline	thinned	on	their
right,	and	the	river	became	visible.
‘Ah,’	Lilac	murmured,	‘it	is	so	small…’
Trull	studied	the	fast-flowing	water,	the	glittering	skin	it	cast	over
boulders.	‘A	caster	of	nets,’	he	said.
‘My	home,	Denier.’
The	Tiste	Edur	walked	down	to	the	river ’s	edge.	He	reached	and	plunged
his	bloodstained	hand	into	the	icy	water.
‘Are	there	not	fish	in	there?’	Lilac	asked.
‘I	am	sure	there	are.	Why?’
‘In	the	river	where	I	live,	there	are	n’purel,	the	Whiskered	Fish.	They	can
eat	a	Kenyll’rah	youth	whole,	and	there	are	some	in	the	deep	lakes	that	could
well	eat	an	adult	such	as	myself.	Of	course,	we	never	venture	onto	the	deeps.
Are	there	no	such	creatures	here?’
‘In	the	seas,’	Trull	replied,	‘there	are	sharks.	And,	of	course,	there	are
plenty	of	stories	of	larger	monsters,	some	big	enough	to	sink	ships.’
‘The	n’purel	then	crawl	onto	shore	and	shed	their	skins,	whereupon	they


live	on	land.’
‘That	is	a	strange	thing,’	Trull	said,	glancing	back	at	the	demon.	‘I	gather
that	casting	nets	is	a	dangerous	activity,	then.’
Lilac	shrugged.	‘No	more	dangerous	than	hunting	spiders,	Denier.’
‘Call	me	Trull.’
‘You	are	an	Arbiter	of	Life,	a	Denier	of	Freedom.	You	are	the	Stealer	of
my	Death—’
‘All	right.	Never	mind.’
‘What	war	is	this?’
‘A	pointless	one.’
‘They	are	all	pointless,	Denier.	Subjugation	and	defeat	breed	resentment
and	hatred,	and	such	things	cannot	be	bribed	away.’
‘Unless	the	spirit	of	the	defeated	is	crushed,’	Trull	said.	‘Absolutely
crushed,	such	as	with	the	Nerek	and	the	Faraed	and	Tarthenal.’
‘I	do	not	know	those	people,	Denier.’
‘They	are	among	those	the	Letherii—our	enemy	in	this	war—have
conquered.’
‘And	you	think	them	broken?’
‘They	are	that,	Lilac.’
‘It	may	not	be	as	it	seems.’
Trull	shrugged.	‘Perhaps	you	are	right.’
‘Will	their	station	change	under	your	rule?’
‘I	suspect	not.’
‘If	you	understand	all	this,	Denier,	why	do	you	fight?’
The	sound	of	moccasins	on	gravel	behind	them.	Trull	straightened	and
turned	to	see	Fear	approaching.	In	his	hand	was	a	Letherii	sword.
Trull	considered	readying	the	spear	strapped	to	his	back,	then	decided
against	it.	Despite	what	he’d	said	earlier,	he	was	not	prepared	to	fight	his
brother.
‘This	weapon,’	Fear	said	as	he	halted	five	paces	from	Trull,	‘is	Letherii
steel.’
‘I	saw	them	on	the	field	of	battle.	They	defied	the	K’risnan	sorcery,	when
all	else	was	destroyed.	Swords,	spear-heads,	undamaged.’	Trull	studied	his
brother.	‘What	of	it?’
Fear	hesitated,	then	looked	out	on	the	river.	‘It	is	what	I	do	not	understand.
How	did	they	achieve	such	a	thing	as	this	steel?	They	are	a	corrupt,	vicious
people,	Trull.	They	do	not	deserve	such	advances	in	craft.’
‘Why	them	and	not	us?’	Trull	asked,	then	he	smiled.	‘Fear,	the	Letherii	are
a	forward-looking	people,	and	so	inherently	driven.	We	Edur	do	not	and	have


never	possessed	such	a	force	of	will.	We	have	our	Blackwood,	but	we	have
always	possessed	that.	Our	ancestors	brought	it	with	them	from	Emurlahn.
Brother,	we	look	back—’
‘To	the	time	when	Father	Shadow	ruled	over	us,’	Fear	cut	in,	his
expression	darkening.	‘Hannan	Mosag	speaks	the	truth.	We	must	devour	the
Letherii,	we	must	set	a	yoke	upon	them,	and	so	profit	from	their	natural	drive
to	foment	change.’
‘And	what	will	that	do	to	us,	brother?	We	resist	change,	we	do	not	worship
it,	we	do	not	thrive	in	its	midst	the	way	the	Letherii	do.	Besides,	I	am	not
convinced	that	theirs	is	the	right	way	to	live.	I	suspect	their	faith	in	progress	is
far	more	fragile	than	it	outwardly	seems.	In	the	end,	they	must	ever	back	up
what	they	seek	with	force.’	Trull	pointed	to	the	sword.	‘With	that.’
‘We	shall	guide	them,	Trull.	Hannan	Mosag	understood	this—’
‘You	revise	the	past	now,	Fear.	He	was	not	intending	to	wage	war	on	the
Letherii.’
‘Not	immediately,	true,	but	it	would	have	come.	And	he	knew	it.	So	the
K’risnan	have	told	me.	We	had	lost	Father	Shadow.	It	was	necessary	to	find	a
new	source	of	faith.’
‘A	faceless	one?’
‘Damn	you,	Trull!	You	knelt	before	him—no	different	from	the	rest	of	us!’
‘And	to	this	day,	I	wonder	why.	What	about	you,	Fear?	Do	you	wonder	why
you	did	as	you	did?’
His	brother	turned	away,	visibly	trembling.	‘I	saw	no	doubt.’
‘In	Hannah	Mosag.	And	so	you	followed.	As	did	the	rest	of	us,	I	suspect.
One	and	all,	we	knelt	before	Rhulad,	believing	we	saw	in	each	other	a	certainty
that	did	not	in	truth	exist—’
With	a	roar,	Fear	spun	round,	the	sword	lifting	high.	It	swung	down—
—and	was	halted,	suddenly,	by	the	demon,	whose	massive	hand	had	closed
round	Fear ’s	forearm	and	held	it	motionless.
‘Release	me!’
‘No,’	Lilac	replied.	‘This	warrior	stole	my	death.	I	now	steal	his.’
Fear	struggled	a	moment	longer,	then,	seeing	it	was	hopeless,	he	sagged.
‘You	can	let	him	go	now,’	Trull	said.
‘If	he	attacks	again	I	will	kill	him,’	the	demon	said,	releasing	Fear ’s	arm.
‘We	followed	Hannan	Mosag,’	Trull	said,	‘and	yet,	what	did	we	know	of
his	mind?	He	was	our	Warlock	King,	and	so	we	followed.	Think	on	this,	Fear.
He	had	sought	out	a	new	source	of	power,	rejecting	Father	Shadow.	True,	he
knew,	as	we	did,	that	Scabandari	Bloodeye	was	dead,	or,	at	best,	his	spirit	lived
but	was	lost	to	us.	And	so	he	made	pact	with…something	else.	And	he	sent	you


and	me,	Binadas	and	Rhulad	and	the	Buhns,	to	retrieve	the	gift	that…thing…
created	for	him.	The	fault	lies	with	us,	Fear,	in	that	we	did	not	question,	did	not
challenge	the	Warlock	King.	We	were	fools,	and	all	that	is	before	us	now,	and
all	that	will	come,	is	our	fault.’
‘He	is	the	Warlock	King,	Trull.’
‘Who	arrived	at	absolute	power	over	all	the	Edur.	He	held	it	and	would	not
lose	it,	no	matter	what.	And	so	he	surrendered	his	soul.	As	did	we,	when	we
knelt	before	Rhulad.’
Fear ’s	eyes	narrowed	on	him.	‘You	are	speaking	treason,	brother.’
‘Against	what?	Against	whom?	Tell	me,	I	truly	want	to	know.	Have	you
seen	the	face	of	our	new	god?’
‘Were	Binadas	standing	here	and	not	I,’	Fear	whispered,	‘you	would	be
dead	now.’
‘And,	in	our	wondrous	new	empire,	will	that	be	the	singular	fate	of	all
those	who	voice	dissent?’
Fear	looked	down	at	the	sword	in	his	hand.	Then	let	it	drop.	‘Your	warriors
are	awaiting	you,	Trull.	In	two	days’	time	we	resume	our	march.	South,	to
Letheras.’	He	then	turned	and	walked	away.
Trull	watched	him	for	a	moment,	then	looked	out	on	the	river	once	more.
For	every	eddy	in	the	current,	in	the	lees	of	boulders	and	notches	in	the	bank,
the	river	rushed	on,	slave	to	relentless	laws.	When	he	had	placed	his	hand	in	the
water,	it	had	quickly	grown	numb.	‘Eventually,	Lilac,	we	will	make	sense	of
this.’
The	demon	said	nothing.
Trull	walked	to	a	nearby	boulder	and	sat	down	on	it.	He	lowered	his	head
into	his	hands	and	began	to	weep.
After	a	time	the	demon	moved	to	stand	beside	him.	Then	a	heavy	hand
settled	on	his	shoulder.


Chapter	Nineteen

Invisible	in	all	his	portions
This	thick-skinned	thing	has	borders
Indivisible	to	every	sentinel
Patrolling	the	geography	of
Arbitrary	definitions,	and	yet	the
Mountains	have	ground	down
The	fires	died,	and	so	streams
This	motionless	strand	of	sharp
Black	sand	where	I	walk
Cutting	my	path	on	the	coarse
Conclusions	countless	teeth
Have	grated—all	lost	now
In	this	unlit	dust—we	are	not
And	have	never	been
The	runners	green	and	fresh
Of	life	risen	from	the	crushed
Severing	extinctions	(that	one	past
this	one	new)	all	hallowed	and	self-sure
But	the	dead	strand	moves	unseen,
The	river	of	black	crawls	on
To	some	wistful	resolution
The	place	with	no	meaning
Inconsequential	in	absence
Of	strings	and	shadows
Charting	from	then	to	now
And	these	stitched	lines
Finding	this	in	that…
EXCERPT	FROM 	THE	BLACK	SANDS	OF	TIME	(IN	THE	COLLECTION
SUICIDAL	POETS	OF	DARUJHISTAN)
EDITED	BY	HAROAK


The	corpse	beyond	the	pier	was	barely	visible,	a	pallid	patch	resisting	the	roll
of	the	waves.	The	shark	that	rose	alongside	it	to	make	a	sideways	lunge	was
one	of	the	largest	ones	Udinaas	had	yet	seen	during	the	time	he’d	sat	looking
out	on	the	harbour,	his	legs	dangling	from	the	jetty’s	edge.
Gulls	and	sharks,	the	feast	lasting	the	entire	morning.	The	slave	watched,
feeling	like	a	spectator	before	nature’s	incessant	display,	the	inevitability	of	the
performance	leaving	him	oddly	satisfied.	Entertained,	in	fact.	Those	who	owed.
Those	who	were	owed.	They	sat	equally	sweet	in	the	bellies	of	the	scavengers.
And	this	was	a	thing	of	wonder.
The	emperor	would	summon	him	soon,	he	knew.	The	army	was	stirring
itself	into	motion	somewhere	beyond	Trate’s	broken	gates,	inland.	An
oversized	garrison	of	Beneda	Edur	was	remaining	in	the	city,	enforcing	the
restitution	of	peace,	normality.	The	once-chief	of	the	Den-Ratha	had	been
given	the	title	of	governor.	That	the	garrison	under	his	control	was	not	of	his
own	tribe	was	no	accident.	Suspicion	had	come	in	the	wake	of	success,	as	it
always	did.
Hannan	Mosag’s	work.	The	emperor	had	been…fraught	of	late.	Distracted.
Suffering.	Too	often,	madness	burned	in	his	eyes.
Mayen	had	beaten	Feather	Witch	senseless,	as	close	to	killing	the	slave
outright	as	was	possible.	In	the	vast	tent	that	now	served	as	Edur	headquarters
—stolen	from	the	train	that	had	belonged	to	the	Cold	Clay	Battalion—there	had
been	rapes.	Slaves,	prisoners.	Perhaps	Mayen	simply	did	to	others	what	Rhulad
did	to	her.	A	compassionate	mind	might	believe	so.	And	as	for	the	hundreds	of
noble	women	taken	from	the	Letherii	by	Edur	warriors,	most	had	since	been
returned	at	the	governor ’s	command,	although	it	was	likely	that	many	now
carried	half-blood	seeds	within	them.
The	governor	would	soon	accept	the	many	requests	to	hear	delegations
from	the	various	guilds	and	merchant	interests.	And	a	new	pattern	would	take
shape.
Unless,	of	course,	the	frontier	cities	were	liberated	by	a	victorious	Letherii
counter-attack.	Plenty	of	rumours,	of	course.	Clashes	at	sea	between	Edur	and
Letherii	fleets.	Thousands	sent	to	the	deep.	The	storm	seen	far	to	the	west	the
night	before	had	signalled	a	mage-war.	The	Ceda,	Kuru	Qan,	had	finally
roused	himself	in	all	his	terrible	power.	While	Letherii	corpses	crowded	the
harbour,	it	was	Edur	bodies	out	in	the	seas	beyond.
Strangest	rumour	of	all,	the	prison	island	of	Second	Maiden	Fort	had	flung
back	a	succession	of	Edur	attacks,	and	was	still	holding	out,	and	among	the
half-thousand	convicted	soldiers	was	a	sorceror	who	had	once	rivalled	the
Ceda	himself.	That	was	why	the	Edur	army	had	remained	camped	here—they


wanted	no	enemy	still	active	behind	them.
Udinaas	knew	otherwise.	There	might	well	be	continued	resistance	in	their
wake,	but	the	emperor	was	indifferent	to	such	things.	And	the	Letherii	fleet	had
yet	to	make	an	appearance.	The	Edur	ships	commanded	Katter	Sea	as	far	south
as	the	city	of	Awl.
He	drew	his	legs	up	and	climbed	to	his	feet.	Walked	back	down	the	length
of	the	pier.	The	streets	were	quiet.	Most	signs	of	the	fighting	had	been
removed,	the	bodies	and	broken	furniture	and	shattered	pottery,	and	a	light	rain
the	night	before	had	washed	most	of	the	bloodstains	away.	But	the	air	still	stank
of	smoke	and	the	walls	of	the	buildings	were	smeared	with	an	oily	grit.
Windows	gaped	and	doorways	that	had	been	kicked	in	remained	dark.
He	had	never	much	liked	Trate.	Rife	with	thugs	and	the	dissolute	remnants
of	the	Nerek	and	Fent,	the	market	stalls	crowded	with	once-holy	icons	and
relics,	with	ceremonial	artwork	now	being	sold	as	curios.	The	talking	sticks	of
chiefs,	the	medicine	bags	of	shamans.	Fent	ancestor	chests,	the	bones	still	in
them.	The	harbour	front	streets	and	alleys	had	been	crowded	with	Nerek
children	selling	their	bodies,	and	over	it	all	hung	a	vague	sense	of	smugness,
as	if	this	was	the	proper	order	of	the	world,	the	roles	settled	out	as	they	should
be.	Letherii	dominant,	surrounded	by	lesser	creatures	inherently	servile,	their
cultures	little	more	than	commodities.
Belief	in	destiny	delivered	its	own	imperatives.
But	here,	now,	the	savages	had	arrived	and	a	new	order	had	been	asserted,
proving	that	destiny	was	an	illusion.	The	city	was	in	shock,	with	only	a	few
malleable	merchants	venturing	forth	in	the	faith	that	the	new	ways	to	come
were	but	the	old	ways,	that	the	natural	order	in	fact	superseded	any	particular
people.	At	the	same	time,	they	believed	that	none	could	match	the	Letherii	in
this	game	of	riches,	and	so	in	the	end	they	would	win—the	savages	would	find
themselves	civilized.	Proof	that	destiny	was	anything	but	illusory.
Udinaas	wondered	if	they	were	right.	There	were	mitigating	factors,	after
all.	Tiste	Edur	lifespans	were	profoundly	long.	Their	culture	was	both	resilient
and	embedded.	Conservative.	Or,	so	it	was.	Until	Rhulad.	Until	the	sword
claimed	him.
A	short	time	later	he	strode	through	the	inland	gate	and	approached	the
Edur	encampment.	There	seemed	to	be	little	organization	to	the	vast	array	of
tents.	This	was	not	simply	an	army,	but	an	entire	people	on	the	move—a	way	of
life	to	which	they	were	not	accustomed.	Wraiths	patrolled	the	outskirts.
They	ignored	him	as	he	passed	the	pickets.	He	had	not	heard	from	Wither,
his	own	companion	shade,	in	a	long	time,	but	he	knew	it	had	not	gone	away.
Lying	low	with	its	secrets.	Sometimes	he	caught	its	laughter,	as	if	from	a	great


distance,	the	timing	always	perverse.
Rhulad’s	tent	was	at	the	centre	of	the	encampment,	the	entrance	flanked	by
demons	in	boiled	leather	armour	stained	black,	long-handled	maces	resting
heads	to	the	ground	before	them.	Full	helms	hid	their	faces.
‘How	many	bodies	have	they	dragged	out	today?’	Udinaas	asked	as	he
walked	between	them.
Neither	replied.
There	were	four	compartments	within,	divided	by	thick-clothed	walls	fixed
to	free-standing	bronze	frames.	The	foremost	chamber	was	shallow	but	ran	the
breadth	of	the	tent.	Benches	had	been	placed	along	the	sides.	The	area	to	the
right	was	crowded	with	supplies	of	various	sorts,	casks	and	crates	and	earthen
jars.	Passage	into	the	main	room	beyond	was	between	two	dividers.
He	entered	to	see	the	emperor	standing	before	his	raised	throne.	Mayen
lounged	on	a	looted	couch	to	the	left	of	the	wooden	dais,	her	expression
strangely	dulled.	Feather	Witch	stood	in	the	shadows	against	the	wall	behind
the	empress,	her	face	swollen	and	bruised	almost	beyond	recognition.	Hannan
Mosag	and	Hull	Beddict	were	facing	the	emperor,	their	backs	to	Udinaas.	The
Warlock	King’s	wraith	bodyguard	was	not	present.
Hannan	Mosag	was	speaking.	‘…of	that	there	is	no	doubt,	sire.’
Coins	had	fallen	from	Rhulad’s	forehead,	where	the	soldier ’s	palm	had
struck	when	it	broke	his	neck.	The	skin	revealed	was	naught	but	scar	tissue,
creased	where	the	skull’s	frontal	bone	had	caved	inward—that	internal	damage
had	healed,	since	the	dent	was	now	gone.	The	emperor ’s	eyes	were	so
bloodshot	they	seemed	nothing	but	murky	red	pools.	He	studied	Hannan	Mosag
for	a	moment,	apparently	unaware	of	the	spasms	crossing	his	ravaged	features,
then	said,	‘Lost	kin?	What	does	that	mean?’
‘Tiste	Edur,’	Hannan	Mosag	replied	in	his	smooth	voice.
‘Survivors,	from	when	our	kind	were	scattered,	following	the	loss	of
Scabandari	Bloodeye.’
‘How	are	you	certain	of	this?’
‘I	have	dreamed	them,	Emperor.	In	my	mind	I	have	been	led	into	other
realms,	other	worlds	that	lie	alongside	this	one—’
‘Kurald	Emurlahn.’
‘That	realm	is	broken	in	pieces,’	Hannan	Mosag	said,	‘but	yes,	I	have	seen
fragment-worlds.	In	one	such	world	dwell	the	Kenyll’rah,	the	demons	we	have
bound	to	us.	In	another,	there	are	ghosts	from	our	past	battles.’
Hull	Beddict	cleared	his	throat.	‘Warlock	King,	are	these	realms	the	Holds
of	my	people?’
‘Perhaps,	but	I	think	not.’


‘That	is	not	relevant,’	Rhulad	said	to	Hull	as	he	began	pacing.	‘Hannan
Mosag,	how	fare	these	lost	kin?’
‘Poorly,	sire.	Some	have	lost	all	memory	of	past	greatness.	Others	are
subjugated—’
The	emperor ’s	head	swung	round.	‘Subjugated?’
‘Yes.’
‘We	must	deliver	them,’	Rhulad	said,	resuming	his	pacing,	the	macabre
clicking	sounds	of	coin	edges	snapping	together	the	only	sound	to	follow	his
pronouncement.
Udinaas	moved	unobtrusively	to	stand	behind	the	throne.	There	was
something	pathetic,	to	his	mind,	about	the	ease	with	which	the	Warlock	King
manipulated	Rhulad.	Beneath	all	those	coins	and	behind	that	mottled	sword	was
a	marred	and	fragile	Edur	youth.	Hannan	Mosag	might	have	surrendered	the
throne	in	the	face	of	Rhulad’s	power,	but	he	would	not	relinquish	his	ambition
to	rule.
‘We	will	build	ships,’	the	emperor	resumed	after	a	time.	‘In	the	Letherii
style,	I	think.	Large,	seaworthy.	You	said	there	were	Tiste	Andii	enclaves	as
well?	We	will	conquer	them,	use	them	as	slaves	to	crew	our	ships.	We	shall
undertake	these	journeys	once	Lether	has	fallen,	once	our	empire	is	won.’
‘Sire,	the	other	realms	I	spoke	of—some	will	allow	us	to	hasten	our
passage.	There	are…gateways.	I	am	seeking	the	means	of	opening	them,
controlling	them.	Provided	there	are	seas,	in	those	hidden	worlds,	we	can
achieve	swift	travel—’
‘Seas?’	Rhulad	laughed.	‘If	there	are	no	seas,	Hannan	Mosag,	then	you
shall	make	them!’
‘Sire?’
‘Open	one	realm	upon	another.	An	ocean	realm,	released	into	a	desert
realm.’
The	Warlock	King’s	eyes	widened	slightly.	‘The	devastation	would	be…
terrible.
‘Cleansing,	you	mean	to	say.	After	all,	why	should	the	Edur	empire	confine
itself	to	one	world?	You	must	shift	your	focus,	Hannan	Mosag.	You	are	too
limited	in	your	vision.’	He	paused,	winced	at	some	inner	tremor,	then
continued	in	a	strained	tone,	‘It	is	what	comes	of	power.	Yes,	what	comes.	To
see	the	vastness	of…things.	Potentials,	the	multitude	of	opportunities.	Who	can
stand	before	us,	after	all?’	He	spun	round.	‘Udinaas!	Where	have	you	been?’
‘At	the	harbour	front,	Emperor.’
‘Doing	what?’
‘Watching	the	sharks	feeding.’


‘Hah!	You	hear	that,	Hannan	Mosag?	Hull	Beddict?	He	is	a	cold	one,	is	he
not?	This	slave	of	ours.	We	chose	well	indeed.	Tell	us,	Udinaas,	do	you	believe
in	these	secret	realms?’
‘Are	we	blind	to	hidden	truths,	Emperor?	I	cannot	believe	otherwise.’
‘A	start	from	Hannan	Mosag,	his	eyes	narrowing.
Mayen	suddenly	spoke,	in	a	low	drawl.	‘Feather	Witch	says	this	one	is
possessed.’
No-one	spoke	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	Rhulad	slowly	approached
Udinaas.	‘Possessed?	By	what,	Mayen?	Did	your	slave	yield	that	detail?’
‘The	Wyval.	Do	you	not	recall	that	event?’
Hannan	Mosag	said,	‘Uruth	Sengar	examined	him,	Empress.’
‘So	she	did.	And	found	nothing.	No	poison	in	his	blood.’
Rhulad’s	eyes	searched	his	slave’s	face.	‘Udinaas?’
‘I	am	as	you	see	me,	master.	If	there	is	a	poison	within	me,	I	am	not	aware
of	it.	Mistress	Uruth	seemed	certain	of	her	conclusion,	else	she	would	have
killed	me	then.’
‘Then	why	should	Feather	Witch	make	such	accusations?’
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘Perhaps	she	seeks	to	deflect	attention	so	as	to	lessen	the
severity	of	the	beatings.’
Rhulad	stared	at	him	a	moment,	then	swung	round.	‘Beatings?	There	have
been	no	beatings.	An	errant	sorcerous	attack…’
‘Now	who	is	seeking	to	deflect	attention?’	Mayen	said,	smiling.	‘You	will
take	the	word	of	a	slave	over	that	of	your	wife?’
The	emperor	seemed	to	falter.	‘Of	course	not,	Mayen.’	He	looked	across	to
Hannan	Mosag.	‘What	say	you?’
The	Warlock	King’s	innocent	frown	managed	the	perfect	balance	of
concern	and	confusion.	‘Which	matter	would	you	have	me	speak	of,	sire?	The
presence	of	Wyval	poison	within	this	Udinaas,	or	the	fact	that	your	wife	is
beating	her	slave?’
Mayen’s	laughter	was	harsh.	‘Oh,	Rhulad,	I	really	did	not	think	you
believed	me.	My	slave	has	been	irritating	me.	Indeed,	I	am	of	a	mind	to	find
another,	one	less	clumsy,	less…disapproving.	As	if	a	slave	has	the	right	to
disapprove	of	anything.’
‘Disapprove?’	the	emperor	asked.	‘What…why?’
‘Does	a	Wyval	hide	within	Udinaas	or	not?’	Mayen	demanded,	sitting
straighter.	‘Examine	the	slave,	Hannan	Mosag.’
‘Who	rules	here?’	Rhulad’s	shriek	froze	everyone.	The	emperor ’s	sword
had	risen,	the	blade	shivering	as	shudders	rolled	through	him.	‘You	would	all
play	games	with	us?’


Mayen	shrank	back	on	the	divan,	eyes	slowly	widening	in	raw	fear.
The	emperor ’s	fierce	gaze	was	fixing	on	her,	then	the	Warlock	King,	then
back	again.	‘Everyone	out,’	Rhulad	whispered.	‘Everyone	but	Udinaas.	Now.’
Hannan	Mosag	opened	his	mouth	to	object,	then	changed	his	mind.	Hull
Beddict	trailing,	the	Warlock	King	strode	from	the	tent.	Mayen,	wrapping
herself	in	the	silk-stitched	blanket	from	the	couch,	hurried	in	their	wake,
Feather	Witch	stumbling	a	step	behind.
‘Wife.’
She	halted.
‘The	family	of	the	Sengar	have	never	believed	there	was	value	in	beating
slaves.	You	will	cease.	If	she	is	incompetent,	then	find	another.	Am	I
understood?’
‘Yes,	sire,’	she	said.
‘Leave	us.’
As	soon	as	they	were	gone,	Rhulad	lowered	the	sword	and	studied	Udinaas
for	a	time.	‘We	are	not	blind	to	all	those	who	would	seek	advantage.	The
Warlock	King	sees	us	as	too	young,	too	ignorant,	but	he	knows	nothing	of	the
truths	we	have	seen.	Mayen—she	is	as	a	dead	thing	beneath	me.	We	should	have
left	her	to	Fear.	That	was	a	mistake.’	He	blinked,	as	if	recovering	himself,	then
regarded	Udinaas	with	open	suspicion.	‘And	you,	slave.	What	secrets	do	you
hide?’
Udinaas	lowered	himself	to	one	knee,	said	nothing.
‘Nothing	will	be	hidden	from	us,’	Rhulad	said.	‘Look	up,	Udinaas.’
He	did,	and	saw	a	wraith	crouched	at	his	side.
‘This	shade	shall	examine	you,	slave.	It	will	see	if	you	are	hiding	poison
within	you.’
Udinaas	nodded.	Yes,	do	this,	Rhulad.	I	am	weary.	I	want	an	end.
The	wraith	moved	forward,	then	enveloped	him.
‘Ohh,	such	secrets!
He	knew	that	voice	and	closed	his	eyes.	Clever,	Wither.	I	assume	you
volunteered?
‘So	many,	left	shattered,	wandering	lost.	This	bastard	has	used	us	sorely.
Do	you	imagine	we	would	willingly	accede	to	his	demands?	I	am	unbound,	and
that	has	made	me	useful,	for	I	am	proof	against	compulsion	where	my	kin	are
not.	Can	he	tell	the	difference?	Evidently	he	cannot.’	A	trill	of	vaguely	manic
laughter.	‘And	what	shall	I	find?	Udinaas.	You	must	stay	at	this	madman’s	side.
He	is	going	to	Letheras,	you	see,	and	we	need	you	there.’
Udinaas	sighed.	Why?
‘All	in	good	time.	Ah,	you	rail	at	the	melodrama?	Too	bad,	hee	hee.	Glean


my	secrets,	if	you	dare.	You	can,	you	know.’
No.	Now	go	away.
Wither	slipped	back,	resumed	its	swirling	man-shape	in	front	of	Udinaas.
Rhulad	released	one	hand	from	the	sword	to	claw	at	his	face.	He	spun
round,	took	two	steps,	then	howled	his	rage.	‘Why	are	they	lying	to	us?	We
cannot	trust	them!	Not	any	of	them!’	He	turned.	‘Stand,	Udinaas.	You	alone	do
not	lie.	You	alone	can	be	trusted.’	He	strode	to	the	throne	and	sat.	‘We	need	to
think.	We	need	to	make	sense	of	this.	Hannan	Mosag…he	covets	our	power,
doesn’t	he?’
Udinaas	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Yes,	sire.	He	does.’
Rhulad’s	eyes	gleamed	red.	‘Tell	us	more,	slave.’
‘It	is	not	my	place—’
‘We	decide	what	is	your	place.	Speak.’
‘You	stole	his	throne,	Emperor.	And	the	sword	he	believed	was	rightly	his.’
‘He	wants	it	still,	does	he?’	A	sudden	laugh,	chilling	and	brutal.	‘Oh,	he’s
welcome	to	it!	No,	we	cannot.	Mustn’t.	Impossible.	And	what	of	our	wife?’
‘Mayen	is	broken.	She	wanted	nothing	real	from	her	flirting	with	you.	You
were	the	youngest	brother	to	the	man	she	would	marry.	She	sought	allies
within	the	Sengar	household.’	He	stopped	there,	seeing	the	spasms	return	to
Rhulad,	the	extremity	of	his	emotion	too	close	to	an	edge,	a	precipice,	and	it
would	not	do	to	send	him	over	it.	Not	yet,	perhaps	not	at	all.	It’s	the	poison
within	me,	so	hungry	for	vengeance,	so…spiteful.	These	are	not	my	thoughts,
not	my	inclinations.	Remember	that,	Udinaas,	before	you	do	worse	than	would
Hannan	Mosag.	‘Sire,’	he	said	softly,	‘Mayen	is	lost.	And	hurting.	And	you	are
the	only	one	who	can	help	her.’
‘You	speak	to	save	the	slave	woman,’	the	emperor	said	in	a	rough	whisper.
‘Feather	Witch	knows	only	hatred	for	me,	sire.	I	am	an	Indebted,	whilst	she
is	not.	My	desire	for	her	was	hubris,	and	she	would	punish	me	for	it.’
‘Your	desire	for	her.’
Udinaas	nodded.	‘Would	I	save	her	from	beatings?	Of	course	I	would,	sire.
Just	as	you	would	do	the	same.	As	indeed	you	just	did,	not	a	moment	ago.’
‘Because	it	is…sordid.	What	am	I	to	make	of	you,	Udinaas?	A	slave.	An…
Indebted…as	if	that	could	make	you	less	in	the	eyes	of	another	slave.’
‘The	Letherii	relinquish	nothing,	even	when	they	are	made	into	slaves.
Sire,	that	is	a	truth	the	Tiste	Edur	have	never	understood.	Poor	or	rich,	free	or
enslaved,	we	build	the	same	houses	in	which	to	live,	in	which	to	play	out	the
old	dramas.	In	the	end,	it	does	not	matter	whether	destiny	embraces	us	or
devours	us—either	is	as	it	should	be,	and	only	the	Errant	decides	our	fate.’
Rhulad	was	studying	him	as	he	spoke.	The	tremors	had	slowed.	‘Hull


Beddict	struggled	to	say	the	same	thing,	but	he	is	poor	at	words,	and	so	failed.
Thus,	Udinaas,	we	may	conquer	them,	we	may	command	their	flesh	in	the
manner	we	command	yours	and	that	of	your	fellow	slaves,	but	the	belief	that
guides	them,	that	guides	all	of	you,	that	cannot	be	defeated.’
‘Barring	annihilation,	sire.’
‘And	this	Errant,	he	is	the	arbiter	of	fate?’
‘He	is,	sire.’
‘And	he	exists?’
‘Physically?	I	don’t	know.	It	doesn’t	matter.’
Rhulad	nodded.	‘You	are	right,	slave,	it	doesn’t.’
‘Conquer	Lether	and	it	will	devour	you,	sire.	Your	spirit.	Your…
innocence.’
A	strange	smile	twisted	Rhulad’s	face.	‘Innocence.	This,	from	a	short-lived
creature	such	as	you.	We	should	take	offence.	We	should	see	your	head	torn
from	your	shoulders.	You	proclaim	we	cannot	win	this	war,	and	what	are	we	to
think	of	that?’
‘The	answer	lies	upon	your	very	flesh,	sire.’
Rhulad	glanced	down.	His	fingernails	had	grown	long,	curved	and	yellow.
He	tapped	a	coin	on	his	chest.	‘Bring	to	an	end…the	notion	of	wealth.	Of
money.	Crush	the	illusion	of	value.’
Udinaas	was	stunned.	He	may	be	young	and	half	mad,	but	Rhulad	is	no	fool.
‘Ah,’	the	emperor	said.	‘We	see	your…astonishment.	We	have,	it	seems,
been	underestimated,	even	by	our	slave.	But	yours	is	no	dull	mind,	Udinaas.	We
thank	the	Sisters	that	you	are	not	King	Ezgara	Diskanar,	for	then	we	would	be
sorely	challenged.’
‘Ezgara	may	be	benign,	sire,	but	he	has	dangerous	people	around	him.’
‘Yes,	this	Ceda,	Kuru	Qan.	Why	has	he	not	yet	acted?’
Udinaas	shook	his	head.	‘I	have	been	wondering	the	same,	sire.’
‘We	will	speak	more,	Udinaas.	And	none	other	shall	know	of	this.	After	all,
what	would	they	think,	an	emperor	and	a	slave	together,	working	to	fashion	a
new	empire?	For	we	must	keep	you	a	slave,	mustn’t	we?	A	slave	in	the	eyes	of
all	others.	We	suspect	that,	were	we	to	free	you,	you	would	leave	us.’
A	sudden	tremble	at	these	words.
Errant	take	me,	this	man	needs	a	friend.	‘Sire,	I	would	not	leave.	It	was	I
who	placed	the	coins	in	your	flesh.	There	is	no	absolving	that,	no	true	way	I
could	make	amends.	But	I	will	stand	by	you,	through	all	of	this.’
Rhulad’s	terrible	eyes,	so	crimson-bruised	and	hurt,	shifted	away	from
Udinaas.	‘Do	you	understand,	Udinaas?’	he	asked	in	a	whisper.	‘I	am	so…’
Frightened.	‘Yes,	sire,	I	understand.’


The	emperor	placed	a	hand	over	his	eyes.	‘She	is	drowning	herself	in
white	nectar.’
‘Yes,	sire.’
‘I	would	free	her…but	I	cannot.	Do	you	know	why,	Udinaas?’
‘She	carries	your	child.’
‘You	must	have	poison	blood,	Udinaas,	to	know	so	much…’
‘Sire,	it	might	be	worth	considering	sending	for	Uruth.	For	your	mother.
Mayen	needs…someone.’
Rhulad,	face	still	covered	by	his	mangled	hand,	nodded.	‘We	will	join	with
Fear ’s	army	soon.	Five,	six	days.	Uruth	will	join	them.	Then…yes,	I	will	speak
with	Mother.	My	child…’
My	child.	No,	it	is	impossible.	A	Meckros	foundling.	There	is	no	point	in
thinking	about	him.	None	at	all.
I	am	not	an	evil	man…yet	I	have	just	vowed	to	stand	at	his	side.	Errant	take
me,	what	have	I	done?
	
A	farm	was	burning	in	the	valley	below,	but	she	could	see	no-one	fighting	the
flames.	Everyone	had	fled.	Seren	Pedac	resumed	hacking	at	her	hair,	cutting	it
as	short	as	she	could	manage	with	the	docker ’s	knife	one	of	Iron	Bars’s
soldiers	had	given	her.
The	Avowed	stood	nearby,	his	squad	mage,	Corlo,	at	his	side.	They	were
studying	the	distant	fire	and	speaking	in	low	tones.
Somewhere	south	and	east	of	Dresh,	half	a	day	from	the	coast.	She	could
not	imagine	the	Tiste	Edur	invaders	were	anywhere	near,	yet	the	roads	had
been	full	of	refugees,	all	heading	east	to	Letheras.	She	had	seen	more	than	a
few	deserters	among	the	crowds,	and	here	and	there	bodies	lay	in	ditches,
victims	of	robbery	or	murdered	after	being	raped.
Rape,	it	seemed,	had	become	a	favoured	pastime	among	the	thugs	preying
on	the	fleeing	citizens.	Seren	knew	that,	had	she	been	travelling	alone,	she
would	probably	be	dead	by	now.	In	some	ways,	that	would	have	been	a	relief.
An	end	to	this	sullied	misery,	this	agonizing	feeling	of	being	unclean.	In	her
mind,	she	saw	again	and	again	Iron	Bars	killing	those	men.	His	desire	to	exact
appropriate	vengeance.	And	her	voice,	croaking	out,	stopping	him	in	the	name
of	mercy.
Errant	knew,	she	regretted	that	now.	Better	had	she	let	him	work	on	that
bastard.	Better	still	were	they	still	carrying	him	with	them.	Eyes	gouged	out,
nose	cut	off,	tongue	carved	from	his	mouth.	And	with	this	knife	in	her	hand	she
could	slice	strips	of	skin	from	his	flesh.	She	had	heard	a	story	once,	of	a	factor


in	a	small	remote	hamlet	who	had	made	a	habit	of	raping	young	girls,	until	the
women	one	night	ambushed	him.	Beaten	and	trussed,	then	a	loincloth	filled
with	spike-thorns	had	been	tied	on	like	a	diaper,	tightly,	and	the	man	was	bound
to	the	back	of	his	horse.	The	pricking	thorns	drove	the	animal	into	a	frenzy.
The	beast	eventually	scraped	the	man	loose	on	a	forest	path,	but	he	had	bled	out
by	then.	The	story	went	that	the	man’s	face,	in	death,	had	held	all	the	pain	a
mortal	could	suffer,	and	as	for	what	had	been	found	between	his	legs…
She	sawed	off	the	last	length	of	greasy	hair	and	dropped	it	on	the	fire.	The
stench	was	fierce,	but	there	were	bush	warlocks	and	decrepit	shamans	who,	if
they	happened	upon	human	hair,	would	make	dire	use	of	it.	It	was	a	sad	truth
that,	given	the	chance	to	bind	a	soul,	few	resisted	the	temptation.
Corlo	called	to	the	soldiers	and	suddenly	they	were	running	hard	down	the
hillside	towards	the	farm,	leaving	behind	only	Seren	and	Iron	Bars.	The
Crimson	Guardsman	strode	towards	her.	‘You	hear	it,	lass?’
‘What?’
‘Horses.	In	the	stable.	The	fire’s	jumped	to	its	roof.	The	farmer ’s	left	his
horses	behind.’
‘He	wouldn’t	do	that.’
He	squinted	down	at	her,	then	crouched	until	he	was	at	eye	level.	‘No,
likely	the	owner ’s	dead.	Strange,	how	most	locals	around	here	don’t	know	how
to	ride.’
She	looked	down	at	the	farm	once	again.	‘Probably	a	breeder	for	the	army.
The	whole	notion	of	cavalry	came	from	Bluerose—as	did	most	of	the	stock.
Horses	weren’t	part	of	our	culture	before	then.	Have	you	ever	seen	Letherii
cavalry	on	parade?	Chaos.	Even	after,	what,	sixty	years?	And	dozens	of
Bluerose	officers	trying	to	train	our	soldiers.’
‘You	should	have	imported	these	Bluerose	horse-warriors	over	as
auxiliaries.	If	it’s	their	skill,	exploit	it.	You	can’t	borrow	someone	else’s	way
of	life.’
‘Maybe	not.	Presumably,	you	can	ride,	then.’
‘Aye.	And	you?’
She	nodded,	sheathing	the	knife	and	rising.	‘Trained	by	one	of	those
Bluerose	officers	I	mentioned.’
‘You	were	in	the	army	before?’
‘No,	he	was	my	lover.	For	a	time.’
Iron	Bars	straightened	as	well.	‘Look—they’ve	reached	them	in	time.
Come	on.’
She	hesitated.	‘I	forgot	to	thank	you,	Iron	Bars.’
‘You	wouldn’t	have	been	as	pretty	drowned.’


‘No.	I’m	not	ready	yet	to	thank	you	for	that.	What	you	did	to	those	men…’
‘I’ve	a	great-granddaughter	back	in	Gris,	D’Avore	Valley.	She’d	be	about
your	age	now.	Let’s	go,	lass.’
She	walked	behind	him	down	the	slope.	Great-granddaughter.	What	an
absurd	notion.	He	wasn’t	that	old.	These	Avowed	had	strange	senses	of
humour.
	
Corlo	and	the	squad	had	pulled	a	dozen	horses	from	the	burning	stable,	along
with	tack	and	bridles.	One	of	the	soldiers	was	cursing	as	Seren	and	Iron	Bars
approached.
‘Look	at	these	stirrups!	No	wonder	the	bastards	can’t	ride	the	damned
things!’
‘You	set	your	foot	down	in	the	crotch	of	the	hook,’	Seren	explained.
‘And	what	happens	if	it	slips	out?’	the	man	demanded.
‘You	fall	off.’
‘Avowed,	we	need	to	rework	these	things—some	heavy	leather—’
‘Cut	up	a	spare	saddle,’	Iron	Bars	said,	‘and	see	what	you	can	manage.	But
I	want	us	to	be	riding	before	sunset.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
‘A	more	stable	stirrup,’	the	Avowed	said	to	Seren,	‘is	a	kind	of	half-boot,
something	you	can	slide	your	foot	into,	with	a	straight	cross-bar	to	take	your
weight.	I	agree	with	Halfpeck.	These	Bluerose	horse-warriors	missed
something	obvious	and	essential.	They	couldn’t	have	been	very	good	riders…’
Seren	frowned.	‘My	lover	once	mentioned	how	these	saddles	were	made
exclusively	for	Lether.	He	said	they	used	a	slightly	different	kind	back	in
Bluerose.’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her,	and	he	barked	a	laugh,	but	made	no	further
comment.
She	sighed.	‘No	wonder	our	cavalry	is	next	to	useless.	I	always	found	it
hard	to	keep	my	feet	in,	and	to	keep	them	from	turning	this	way	and	that.’
‘You	mean	they	swivel?’
‘I’m	afraid	so.’
‘I’d	like	to	meet	these	Bluerose	riders	some	day.’
‘They	are	a	strange	people,	Iron	Bars.	They	worship	someone	called	the
Black-winged	Lord.’
‘And	they	resemble	Letherii?’
‘No,	they	are	taller.	Very	dark	skins.’
He	regarded	her	for	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘Faces	like	the	Tiste	Edur?’


‘No,	much	finer-boned.’
‘Long-lived?’
‘Not	that	I’m	aware	of,	but	to	be	honest,	I	don’t	really	know.	Few	Letherii
do,	nor	do	they	much	care.	The	Blueroses	were	defeated.	Subjugated.	There
were	never	very	many	of	them,	in	any	case,	and	they	preferred	isolation.	Small
cities,	from	what	I’ve	heard.	Gloomy.’
‘What	ended	your	affair?’
‘Just	that,	I	suppose.	He	rarely	saw	any	good	in	anything.	I	wearied	of	his
scepticism,	his	cynicism,	the	way	he	acted—as	if	he’d	seen	it	all	before	a
thousand	times…’
The	stable	was	engulfed	in	flames	by	now,	and	they	were	all	forced	away
by	the	fierce	heat.	In	the	nearby	pasture	they	retreated	to,	they	found	a	halfdozen	corpses,	the	breeder	and	his	family.	They’d	known	little	mercy	in	the	last
few	bells	of	their	lives.	None	of	the	soldiers	who	examined	them	said	a	word,
but	their	expressions	hardened.
Iron	Bars	made	a	point	of	keeping	Seren	away	whilst	three	men	from	the
squad	buried	the	bodies.	‘We’ve	found	a	trail,’	he	said.	‘If	you	don’t	mind,	lass,
we	want	to	follow	it.	For	a	word	with	the	ones	who	killed	that	family.’
‘Show	me	the	tracks,’	she	said.
He	gestured	and	Corlo	led	her	to	the	edge	of	a	stand	of	trees	on	the
southeast	end	of	the	clearing.	Seren	studied	the	array	of	footprints	entering	the
woodcutters’	path.	‘There’s	twenty	or	more	of	them,’	she	pronounced	after	a
moment.
The	mage	nodded.	‘Deserters.	In	armour.’
‘Yes,	or	burdened	with	loot.’
‘Likely	both.’
She	turned	to	regard	the	man.	‘You	Crimson	Guardsmen—you’re	pretty
sure	of	yourselves,	aren’t	you?’
‘When	it	comes	to	fighting,	aye,	lass,	we	are.’
‘I	watched	Iron	Bars	fight	in	Trate.	He’s	an	exception,	I	gather—’
‘Aye,	he	is,	but	not	among	the	Avowed.	Jup	Alat	would’ve	given	him
trouble.	Or	Poll,	for	that	matter.	Then	there’s	those	in	the	other	companies.
Halfdan,	Blues,	Black	the	Elder…’
‘More	of	these	Avowed?’
‘Aye.’
‘And	what	does	it	mean?	To	be	an	Avowed?’
‘Means	they	swore	to	return	their	prince	to	his	lands.	He	was	driven	out,
you	see,	by	the	cursed	Emperor	Kellanved.	Anyway,	it	ain’t	happened	yet.	But	it
will,	someday,	maybe	soon.’


‘And	that	was	the	vow?	All	right.	It	seems	this	prince	had	some	able
soldiers	with	him.’
‘Oh	indeed,	lass,	especially	when	the	vow’s	kept	them	alive	all	this	time.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
The	mage	looked	suddenly	nervous.	‘I’m	saying	too	much.	Never	mind
me,	lass.	Anyway,	you’ve	seen	the	trail	the	bastards	left	behind.	They	made	no
effort	to	hide,	meaning	they’re	cocksure	themselves,	aren’t	they?’	He	smiled,
but	there	was	no	humour	in	it.	‘We’ll	catch	up,	and	then	we’ll	show	them	what
real	cavalry	can	do.	Riding	horses	with	stirrups,	I	mean—we	don’t	often	fight
from	the	saddle,	but	we	ain’t	new	to	it	either.’
‘Well,	I	admit,	you’ve	got	me	curious.’
‘Just	curious,	lass?	No	hunger	for	vengeance?’
She	looked	away.	‘I	want	to	look	around,’	she	said.	‘Alone,	if	you	don’t
mind.’
The	mage	shrugged.	‘Don’t	wander	too	far.	The	Avowed’s	taken	to	you,	I
think.’
That’s…unfortunate.	‘I	won’t.’
Seren	headed	into	the	wood.	There	had	been	decades	of	thinning,	leaving
plenty	of	stumps	and	open	spaces	between	trees.	She	listened	to	Corlo	walking
away,	back	to	the	clearing.	As	soon	as	silence	enveloped	her,	she	suddenly
regretted	the	solitude.	Desires	surged,	none	of	them	healthy,	none	of	them
pleasant.	She	would	never	again	feel	clean,	and	this	truth	pushed	her	thoughts
in	the	opposite	direction,	as	if	a	part	of	her	sought	to	foul	her	flesh	yet	further,
as	far	as	it	could	go.	Why	not?	Lost	in	the	darkness	as	she	was,	it	was	nothing
to	stain	her	soul	black,	through	and	through.
Alone,	now	frightened—of	herself,	of	the	urges	within	her—she	walked
on,	unmindful	of	direction.	Deeper	into	the	wood,	where	the	stumps	were
fewer	and	soft	with	rot,	the	deadfall	thicker.	The	afternoon	light	barely	reached
through	here.
Hurt	was	nothing.	Was	meaningless.	But	no,	there	was	value	in	pain,	if	only
to	remind	oneself	that	one	still	lived.	When	nothing	normal	could	be	regained,
ever,	then	other	pleasures	had	to	be	found.	Cultivated,	the	body	and	mind	taught
anew,	to	delight	in	a	darker	strain.
A	clearing	ahead,	in	which	reared	figures.
She	halted.
Motionless,	half	sunk	into	the	ground,	tilting	this	way	and	that	in	the	high
grasses.	Statues.	This	had	been	Tarthenal	land,	she	recalled.	Before	the	Letherii
arrived	to	crush	the	tribes.	The	name	‘Dresh’	was	Tarthenal,	in	fact,	as	were	the
nearby	village	names	of	Denner,	Lan	and	Brous.


Seren	approached,	came	to	the	edge	of	the	clearing.
Five	statues	in	all,	vaguely	man-shaped	but	so	weathered	as	to	be
featureless,	with	but	the	slightest	indentations	marking	the	pits	of	their	eyes
carved	into	the	granite.	They	were	all	buried	to	their	waists,	suggesting	that,
when	entirely	above	ground,	they	stood	as	tall	as	the	Tarthenal	themselves.
Some	kind	of	pantheon,	she	supposed,	names	and	faces	worn	away	by	the	tens
of	centuries	that	had	passed	since	this	glade	had	last	known	worshippers.
The	Letherii	had	nearly	wiped	the	Tarthenal	out	back	then.	As	close	to
absolute	genocide	as	they	had	ever	come	in	their	many	conquests.	She	recalled
a	line	from	an	early	history	written	by	a	witness	of	that	war.	‘They	fought	in
defence	of	their	holy	sites	with	expressions	of	terror,	as	if	in	failing	something
vast	and	terrible	would	be	unleashed…’	Seren	looked	around.	The	only	thing
vast	and	terrible	in	this	place	was	the	pathos	of	its	abandonment.
Such	dark	moments	in	Letherii	history	were	systematically	disregarded,
she	knew,	and	played	virtually	no	role	in	their	culture’s	vision	of	itself	as
bringers	of	progress,	deliverers	of	freedom	from	the	fetters	of	primitive	ways
of	living,	the	cruel	traditions	and	vicious	rituals.	Liberators,	then,	destined	to
wrest	from	savage	tyrants	their	repressed	victims,	in	the	name	of	civilization.
That	the	Letherii	then	imposed	their	own	rules	of	oppression	was	rarely
acknowledged.	There	was,	after	all,	but	one	road	to	success	and	fulfilment,
gold-cobbled	and	maintained	by	Letherii	toll-collectors,	and	only	the	free
could	walk	it.
Free	to	profit	from	the	same	game.	Free	to	discover	one’s	own	inherent
disadvantages.	Free	to	be	abused.	Free	to	be	exploited.	Free	to	be	owned	in	lieu
of	debt.	Free	to	be	raped.
And	to	know	misery.	It	was	a	natural	truth	that	some	walked	that	road	faster
than	others.	There	would	always	be	those	who	could	only	crawl.	Or	fell	to	the
wayside.	The	most	basic	laws	of	existence,	after	all,	were	always	harsh.
The	statues	before	her	were	indifferent	to	all	of	that.	Their	worshippers
had	died	defending	them,	and	all	for	nothing.	Memory	was	not	loyal	to	the
past,	only	to	the	exigencies	of	the	present.	She	wondered	if	the	Tiste	Edur	saw
the	world	the	same	way.	How	much	of	their	own	past	had	they	selectively
forgotten,	how	many	unpleasant	truths	had	they	twisted	into	self-appeasing
lies?	Did	they	suffer	from	the	same	flaw,	this	need	to	revise	history	to	answer
some	deep-seated	diffidence,	a	hollowness	at	the	core	that	echoed	with
miserable	uncertainty?	Was	this	entire	drive	for	progress	nothing	more	than	a
hopeless	search	for	some	kind	of	fulfilment,	as	if	on	some	instinctive	level
there	was	a	murky	understanding,	a	recognition	that	the	game	had	no	value,
and	so	victory	was	meaningless?


Such	understanding	would	have	to	be	murky,	for	clarity	was	hard,	and	the
Letherii	disliked	things	that	were	hard,	and	so	rarely	chose	to	think	in	that
direction.	Baser	emotions	were	the	preferred	response,	and	complex
arguments	were	viewed	with	anger	and	suspicion.
She	laid	a	hand	upon	the	shoulder	of	the	nearest	statue,	and	was	surprised
to	discover	the	stone	warm	to	her	touch.	Retaining	the	sun’s	heat,	perhaps.	But
no,	it	was	too	hot	for	that.	Seren	pulled	her	hand	away—any	longer	and	she
would	have	burned	her	skin.
Unease	rose	within	her.	Suddenly	chilled,	she	stepped	back.	And	now	saw
the	dead	grass	surrounding	each	statue,	desiccated	by	incessant	heat.
It	seemed	the	Tarthenal	gods	were	not	dead	after	all.
Sometimes	the	past	rises	once	again	to	reveal	the	lies.	Lies	that	persisted
through	nothing	more	than	force	of	will,	and	collective	opinion.	Sometimes	that
revelation	comes	drenched	in	fresh	blood.	Delusions	invited	their	own
shattering.	Letherii	pre-eminence.	Tiste	Edur	arrogance.	The	sanctity	of	my	own
flesh.
A	sound	behind	her.	She	turned.
Iron	Bars	stood	at	the	edge	of	the	clearing.	‘Corlo	said	there	was
something…restless…in	this	wood.’
She	sighed.	‘Better	were	it	only	me.’
He	cocked	his	head,	smiled	wryly.
She	approached.	‘Tarthenal.	I	thought	I	knew	this	land.	Every	trail,	the	old
barrow	grounds	and	holy	sites.	It	is	a	responsibility	of	an	Acquitor,	after	all.’
‘We	hope	to	make	use	of	that	knowledge,’	the	Avowed	said.	‘I	don’t	want
no	fanfare	when	we	enter	Letheras.’
‘Agreed.	Even	among	a	crowd	of	refugees,	we	would	stand	out.	You	might
consider	finding	clothing	that	looks	less	like	a	uniform.’
‘I	doubt	it’d	matter,	lass.	Either	way,	we’d	be	seen	as	deserters	and	flung
into	the	ranks	of	defenders.	This	ain’t	our	war	and	we’d	rather	have	nothing	to
do	with	it.	The	question	is,	can	you	get	us	into	Letheras	unseen?’
‘Yes.’
‘Good.	The	lads	are	almost	ready	with	the	new	stirrups.’
She	glanced	back	at	the	statues.
‘Makes	you	wonder,	don’t	it,	lass?’
‘About	what?’
‘The	way	old	anger	never	goes	away.’
Seren	faced	him	again.	‘Anger.	That’s	something	you’re	intimately
familiar	with,	I	gather.’
A	frown.	‘Corlo	talks	too	much.’


‘If	you	wanted	to	get	your	prince’s	land	back,	what	are	you	doing	here?
I’ve	never	heard	of	this	Emperor	Kellanved,	so	his	empire	must	be	far	away.’
‘Oh,	it’s	that,	all	right.	Come	on,	it’s	time	to	go.’
‘Sorry,’	she	said	as	she	followed	him	back	into	the	forest.	‘I	was	prying.’
‘Aye,	you	were.’
‘Well.	In	return,	you	can	ask	me	what	you	like.’
‘And	you’ll	answer?’
‘Maybe.’
‘You	don’t	seem	the	type	to	end	up	as	you	did	in	Trate.	So	the	merchant
you	were	working	for	killed	himself.	Was	he	your	lover	or	something?’
‘No,	and	you’re	tight,	I’m	not.	It	wasn’t	just	Buruk	the	Pale,	though	I
should	have	seen	it	coming—he	as	much	as	told	me	a	dozen	times	on	our	way
back.	I	just	wasn’t	willing	to	hear,	I	suppose.	The	Tiste	Edur	emperor	has	a
Letherii	adviser—’
‘Hull	Beddict.’
‘Yes.’
‘You	knew	him?’
She	nodded.
‘And	now	you’re	feeling	betrayed?	Not	only	as	a	Letherii,	but	personally
too.	Well,	that’s	hard,	all	right—’
‘But	there	you	are	wrong,	Iron	Bars.	I	don’t	feel	betrayed,	and	that’s	the
problem.	I	understand	him	all	too	well,	his	decision—I	understand	it.’
‘Wish	you	were	with	him?’
‘No.	I	saw	Rhulad	Sengar—the	emperor—I	saw	him	come	back	to	life.	Had
it	been	Hannan	Mosag,	the	Warlock	King…well,	I	might	well	have	thrown	in
my	lot	with	them.	But	not	the	emperor…’
‘He	came	back	to	life?	What	do	you	mean	by	that?’
‘He	was	dead.	Very	dead.	Killed	when	collecting	a	sword	for	Hannan
Mosag—a	cursed	sword	of	some	kind.	They	couldn’t	get	it	out	of	his	hands.’
‘Why	didn’t	they	just	cut	his	hands	off?’
‘It	was	coming	to	that,	I	suspect,	but	then	he	returned.’
‘A	nice	trick.	Wonder	if	he’ll	be	as	lucky	the	next	time.’
They	reached	the	edge	of	the	wood	and	saw	the	others	seated	on	the	horses
and	waiting.	At	the	Avowed’s	comment,	Seren	managed	a	smile.	‘From	the
rumours,	I’d	say	yes,	he	was.’
‘He	was	killed	again?’
‘Yes,	Iron	Bars.	In	Trate.	Some	soldier	who	wasn’t	even	from	Lether.	Just
stepped	up	to	him	and	broke	his	neck.	Didn’t	even	stay	around	to	carve	the	gold
coins	from	his	body…’


‘Hood’s	breath,’	he	muttered	as	they	strode	towards	the	others.	‘Don’t	tell
the	others.’
‘Why?’
‘I	got	a	reputation	of	making	bad	enemies,	that’s	why.’
	
Eleven	Tarthenal	lived	within	a	day’s	walk	from	the	glade	and	its	statues.	Old
Hunch	Arbat	had	been	chosen	long	ago	for	the	task	to	which	he	sullenly
attended,	each	month	making	the	rounds	with	his	two-wheeled	cart,	from	one
family	to	the	next.	Not	one	of	the	farms	where	the	Tarthenal	lived	in	Indebted
servitude	to	a	land-owner	in	Dresh	was	exclusively	of	the	blood.	Mixed-breed
children	scampered	out	to	greet	Old	Hunch	Arbat,	flinging	rotten	fruit	at	his
back	as	he	made	his	way	to	the	slop	pit	with	his	shovel,	laughing	and	shouting
their	derision	as	he	flung	sodden	lumps	of	faeces	into	the	back	of	the	cart.
Among	the	Tarthenal,	all	that	existed	in	the	physical	world	possessed
symbolic	meaning,	and	these	meanings	were	mutually	connected,	bound	into
correspondences	that	were	themselves	part	of	a	secret	language.
Faeces	was	gold.	Piss	was	ale.	The	mixed-breeds	had	forgotten	most	of	the
old	knowledge,	yet	the	tradition	guiding	Old	Hunch	Arbat’s	rounds	remained,
even	if	most	of	its	significance	was	lost.
Once	he’d	completed	his	task,	a	final	journey	was	left	to	him:	pulling	the
foul	cart	with	its	heap	of	dripping,	fly-swarmed	waste	onto	a	little-used	trail	in
the	Breeder ’s	Wood,	and	eventually	into	the	glade	where	stood	the	mostly
buried	statues.
As	soon	as	he	arrived,	just	past	sunset,	he	knew	that	something	had
changed.	In	a	place	that	had	never	changed,	not	once	in	his	entire	life.
There	had	been	visitors,	perhaps	earlier	that	day	but	that	was	the	least	of	it.
Old	Hunch	Arbat	stared	at	the	statues,	seeing	the	burnt	grasses,	the	faint	glow
of	heat	from	the	battered	granite.	He	grimaced,	revealing	the	blackened	stumps
of	teeth—all	that	was	left	after	decade	upon	decade	of	Letherii	sweet-cakes—
and	when	he	reached	for	his	shovel	he	saw	that	his	hands	were	trembling.
He	collected	a	load,	carried	it	over	to	the	nearest	statue.	Then	flung	the
faeces	against	the	weathered	stone.
‘Splat,’	he	said,	nodding.
Hissing,	then	blackening,	smoke,	then	ashes	skirling	down.
‘Oh.	Could	it	be	worse?	Ask	yourself	that,	Old	Hunch	Arbat.	Could	it	be
worse?	No,	says	Old	Hunch	Arbat,	I	don’t	think	so.	You	don’t	think	so?	Aren’t
you	sure,	Old	Hunch	Arbat?	Old	Hunch	Arbat	ponders,	but	not	for	long.
You’re	right,	I	say,	it	couldn’t	be	worse.


‘Gold.	Gold	and	ale.	Damn	gold	damn	ale	damn	nothing	damn	everything.’
Cursing	made	him	feel	slightly	better.	‘Well	then.’	He	walked	back	to	the	cart.
‘Let’s	see	if	a	whole	load	will	appease.	And,	Old	Hunch	Arbat,	your	bladder ’s
full,	too.	You	timed	it	right,	as	always.	Libations.	The	works,	Old	Hunch	Arbat,
the	works.
‘And	if	that	don’t	help,	then	what,	Old	Hunch	Arbat?	Then	what?
‘Why,	I	answer,	then	I	spread	the	word—if	they’ll	listen.	And	if	they	do?
Why,	I	say,	then	we	run	away.
‘And	if	they	don’t	listen?
‘Why,	I	reply,	then	I	run	away.’
He	collected	another	load	onto	his	wooden	shovel.	‘Gold.	Gold	and	ale…’
	
‘Sandalath	Drukorlat.	That	is	my	name.	I	am	not	a	ghost.	Not	any	more.	The
least	you	can	do	is	acknowledge	my	existence.	Even	the	Nachts	have	better
manners	than	you.	If	you	keep	sitting	there	and	praying,	I’ll	hit	you.’
She	had	been	trying	since	morning.	Periodic	interruptions	to	his	efforts.
He	wanted	to	send	her	away,	but	it	wasn’t	working.	He’d	forgotten	how
irritating	company	could	be.	Uninvited,	unwelcome,	persistent	reminder	of	his
own	weaknesses.	And	now	she	was	about	to	hit	him.
Withal	sighed	and	finally	opened	his	eyes.	The	first	time	that	day.	Even	in
the	gloom	of	his	abode,	the	light	hurt,	made	him	squint.	She	stood	before	him,
a	silhouette,	unmistakably	female.	For	a	god	swathed	in	blankets,	the	Crippled
One	seemed	unmindful	of	the	nakedness	among	his	chosen.
Chosen.	Where	in	Hood’s	name	did	he	find	her?	Not	a	ghost,	she	said.	Not
any	more.	She	just	said	that.	She	must	have	been	one,	then.	Typical.	He	couldn’t
find	anyone	living.	Not	for	this	mission	of	mercy.	Who	better	for	someone
starved	of	companionship	than	someone	who’s	been	dead	for	who	knows	how
long?	Listen	to	me.	I’m	losing	my	mind.
She	raised	a	hand	to	strike	him.
He	flinched	back.	‘All	right,	fine!	Sandalath	something.	Pleased	to	meet
you—’
‘Sandalath	Drukorlat.	I	am	Tiste	Andii—’
‘That’s	nice.	Now,	in	case	you	haven’t	noticed,	I	was	in	the	midst	of
prayers—’
‘You’re	always	in	the	midst	of	prayers,	and	it’s	been	two	days	now.	At
least,	I	think	two	days.	The	Nachts	slept,	anyway.	Once.’
‘They	did?	How	strange.’
‘And	you	are?’


‘Me?	A	weaponsmith.	A	Meckros.	Sole	survivor	of	the	destruction	of	my
city—’
‘Your	name!’
‘Withal.	No	need	to	shout.	There	hasn’t	been	any	shouting.	Well,	some
screaming,	but	not	by	me.	Not	yet,	that	is—’
‘Be	quiet.	I	have	questions	that	you	are	going	to	answer.’
She	was	not	particularly	young,	he	noted	as	his	eyes	adjusted.	Then	again,
neither	was	he.	And	that	wasn’t	good.	The	young	were	better	at	making	friends.
The	young	had	nothing	to	lose.	‘You’re	being	rather	imperious,	Sandalath.’
‘Oh,	did	I	hurt	your	feelings?	Dreadfully	sorry.	Where	did	you	get	those
clothes?’
‘From	the	god,	who	else?’
‘What	god?’
‘The	one	in	the	tent.	Inland.	You	can’t	miss	it.	I	don’t	see	how—two	days?
What	have	you	been	doing	with	yourself?	It’s	just	up	from	the	strand—’
‘Be	quiet.’	She	ran	both	hands	through	her	hair.
Withal	would	rather	she’d	stayed	a	silhouette.	He	looked	away.	‘I	thought
you	wanted	answers.	Go	ask	him—’
‘I	didn’t	know	he	was	a	god.	You	seemed	preferable	company,	since	all	I
got	from	him	was	coughing	and	laughter—at	least,	I	think	it	was	laughter—’
‘It	was,	have	no	doubt	about	that.	He’s	sick.’
‘Sick?’
‘Insane.’
‘So,	an	insane	hacking	god	and	a	muscle-bound,	bald	aspirant.	And	three
Nachts.	That’s	it?	No-one	else	on	this	island?’
‘Some	lizard	gulls,	and	ground-lizards,	and	rock-lizards,	and	lizard-rats	in
the	smithy—’
‘So	where	did	you	get	that	food	there?’
He	glanced	over	at	the	small	table.	‘The	god	provides.’
‘Really.	And	what	else	does	this	god	provide?’
Well,	you,	for	one.	‘Whatever	suits	his	whim,	I	suppose.’
‘Your	clothes.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	want	clothes.’
‘Yes.’
‘What	do	you	mean,	“yes”?	Get	me	some	clothes.’
‘I’ll	ask.’
‘Do	you	think	I	like	standing	here,	naked,	in	front	of	some	stranger?	Even
the	Nachts	leer.’


‘I	wasn’t	leering.’
‘You	weren’t?’
‘Not	intentionally.	I	just	noticed,	you’re	speaking	the	Letherii	trader
language.	So	am	I.’
‘You’re	a	sharp	one,	aren’t	you?’
‘I’ve	had	lots	of	practice,	I	suppose.’	He	rose.	‘It	occurs	to	me	that	you’re
not	going	to	let	me	resume	my	prayers.	At	least	until	you	get	some	clothes.	So,
let’s	go	talk	to	the	god.’
‘You	go	talk	to	him.	I’m	not.	Just	bring	me	clothes,	Withal.’
He	regarded	her.	‘Will	that	help	you…relax?’
Then	she	did	hit	him,	a	palm	pounding	into	the	side	of	his	head.	She’d
caught	him	unprepared,	he	decided	a	moment	later,	after	he	picked	himself	free
of	the	wreckage	of	the	wall	he’d	gone	through.	And	stood,	weaving,	the	scene
around	him	spinning	wildly.	The	glaring	woman	who’d	stepped	outside	and
seemed	to	be	considering	hitting	him	again,	the	pitching	sea,	and	the	three
Nachts	on	a	sward	nearby,	rolling	in	silent	hilarity.
He	walked	down	towards	the	sea.
Behind	him,	‘Where	are	you	going?’
‘To	the	god.’
‘He’s	the	other	way.’
He	reversed	direction.	‘Talking	to	me	like	I	don’t	know	this	island.	She
wants	clothes.	Here,	take	mine.’	He	pulled	his	shirt	over	his	head.
And	found	himself	lying	on	his	back,	staring	up	through	the	bleached
weave	of	the	cloth,	the	sun	bright	and	blinding—
—suddenly	eclipsed.	She	was	speaking.	‘…just	lie	there	for	a	while	longer,
Withal.	I	wasn’t	intending	to	hit	you	that	hard.	I	fear	I’ve	cracked	your	skull.’
No,	no,	it’s	hard	as	an	anvil.	I’ll	be	fine.	See,	I’m	getting	up…oh,	why
bother.	It’s	nice	here	in	the	sun.	This	shirt	smells.	Like	the	sea.	Like	a	beach,
with	the	tide	out,	and	all	the	dead	things	rotting	in	fetid	water.	Just	like	the
Inside	Harbour.	Got	to	stop	the	boys	from	swimming	in	there.	I	keep	telling
them…oh,	they’re	dead.	All	dead	now,	my	boys,	my	apprentices.
You’d	better	answer	me	soon,	Mael.
‘Withal?’
‘It’s	the	tent.	That’s	what	the	Nachts	are	trying	to	tell	me.	Something	about
the	tent…’
‘Withal?’
I	think	I’ll	sleep	now.
	


The	trail	ran	in	an	easterly	direction,	roughly	parallel	to	the	Brous	Road	at
least	to	start,	then	cut	southward	towards	the	road	itself	once	the	forest	on	the
left	thinned.	One	other	farm	had	been	passed	through	by	the	deserters,	but	there
had	been	no-one	there.	Signs	of	looting	were	present,	and	it	seemed	a	woodenwheeled	wagon	had	been	appropriated.	Halfpeck	judged	that	the	marauders
were	not	far	ahead,	and	the	Crimson	Guardsmen	would	reach	them	by	dawn.
Seren	Pedac	rode	alongside	Iron	Bars.	The	new	stirrups	held	her	boots
firmly	in	place;	she	had	never	felt	so	secure	astride	a	horse.	It	was	clear	that	the
Blueroses	had	been	deceiving	the	Letherii	for	a	long	time,	and	she	wondered	if
that	revealed	some	essential,	heretofore	unrecognized	flaw	among	her	people.
A	certain	gullibility,	bred	from	an	unfortunate	mixture	of	naivety	and
arrogance.	If	Lether	survived	the	Edur	invasion	and	the	truth	about	the
Bluerose	deception	came	to	light,	the	Letherii	response	would	be
characteristically	childish,	she	suspected,	some	kind	of	profound	and	deep
hurt,	and	a	grudge	long	held	on	to.	Bluerose	would	be	punished,	spitefully	and
repeatedly,	in	countless	ways.
The	two	women	soldiers	in	the	squad	had	dismantled	a	hide	rack	at	the	first
farm,	using	the	frame’s	poles	to	fashion	a	half-dozen	crude	lances,	half	again
as	tall	as	a	man.	The	sharpened,	fire-hardened	points	had	been	notched
transversely,	the	thick	barbs	bent	outward	from	the	shaft.	Each	tip	had	been
smeared	with	blood	from	the	breeder	and	his	family,	to	seal	the	vengeful	intent.
They	rode	through	the	night,	halting	four	times	to	rest	their	horses,	all	but
one	of	the	squad	managing	a	quarterbell’s	worth	of	sleep—a	soldier ’s	talent
that	Seren	could	not	emulate.	By	the	time	the	sky	paled	to	the	east,	revealing
mists	in	the	lowlands,	she	was	grainy-eyed	and	sluggish.	They	had	passed	a
camp	of	refugees	on	the	Brous	Road,	an	old	woman	wakening	to	tell	them	the
raiders	had	caught	up	with	them	earlier	and	stolen	everything	of	value,	as	well
as	two	young	girls	and	their	mother.
Two	hundred	paces	further	down,	they	came	within	sight	of	the	deserters.
The	wagon	stood	in	the	centre	of	the	raised	road,	the	two	oxen	that	had	been
used	to	pull	it	off	to	one	side	beneath	a	thick,	gnarled	oak	on	the	other	side	of
the	south	ditch.	Chains	stretched	from	one	of	the	wheels,	along	which	three
small	figures	were	huddled	in	sleep.	A	large	hearth	still	smouldered,	its	dying
embers	just	beyond	the	wagon.
The	Crimson	Guardsmen	halted	at	some	distance	to	regard	the	raiders.
‘No-one’s	awake,’	one	of	the	women	commented.
Iron	Bars	said,	‘These	horses	aren’t	well	trained	enough	for	a	closed
charge.	We’ll	go	four	one	four.	You’ll	be	the	one,	Acquitor,	and	stay	tight
behind	the	leading	riders.’


She	nodded.	She	was	not	prepared	to	raise	objections.	She	had	been	given	a
spare	sword,	and	she	well	knew	how	to	use	it.	Even	so,	this	charge	was	to	be
with	lances.
The	soldiers	cinched	the	straps	of	their	helmets	then	donned	gauntlets,
shifting	their	grips	on	the	lances	to	a	third	of	the	way	up	from	the	butts.	Seren
drew	her	sword.
‘All	right,’	Iron	Bars	said.	‘Corlo,	keep	them	asleep	until	we’re	thirty	paces
away.	Then	wake	’em	quick	and	panicky.’
‘Aye,	Avowed.	It’s	been	a	while,	ain’t	it?’
Halfpeck	asked,	‘Want	any	of	’em	left	alive,	sir?’
‘No.’
Iron	Bars,	with	Halfpeck	on	his	left	and	the	two	women	on	his	right,
formed	the	first	line.	Walk	to	trot,	then	a	collected	canter.	Fifty	paces,	and	noone	was	stirring	among	the	deserters.	Seren	glanced	back	at	Corlo,	and	he
smiled,	raising	one	hand	and	waggling	the	gloved	fingers.
She	saw	the	three	prisoners	at	the	wagon	sit	up,	then	quickly	crawl	beneath
the	bed.
Lances	were	levelled,	the	horses	rolling	into	a	gallop.
Sudden	movement	among	the	sleeping	deserters.	Leaping	to	their	feet,
bewildered	shouts,	a	scream.
The	front	line	parted	to	go	round	the	wagon,	and	Seren	pulled	hard	to	her
left	after	a	moment	of	indecision,	seeing	the	glitter	of	wide	eyes	from	beneath
the	wagon’s	bed.	Then	she	was	alongside	the	tall	wheels.
Ahead,	four	lances	found	targets,	three	of	them	skewering	men	from
behind	as	they	sought	to	flee.
A	deserter	stumbled	close	to	Seren	and	she	slashed	her	sword,	clipping	his
shoulder	and	spinning	him	round	in	a	spray	of	blood.	Cursing	at	the	clumsy
blow,	she	pushed	herself	forward	on	the	saddle	and	rose	to	stand	in	her
stirrups.	Readied	the	sword	once	more.
The	leading	four	Guardsmen	had	slowed	their	mounts	and	were	drawing
swords.	The	second	line	of	riders,	in	Seren’s	wake,	had	spread	out	to	pursue
victims	scattering	into	the	ditches	to	either	side.	They	slaughtered	with	cold
efficiency.
A	spear	stabbed	up	at	Seren	on	her	right.	She	batted	the	shaft	aside,	then
swung	as	her	horse	carried	her	forward.	The	blade	rang	in	her	grip	as	it
connected	with	a	helmet.	The	edge	jammed	and	she	pulled	hard,	dragging	the
helm	from	the	man’s	head.	It	came	free	and	flew	forward	to	bounce	on	the
road,	red-splashed	and	caved	in	on	one	side.
She	caught	a	moment	of	seeing	Iron	Bars	ten	paces	ahead.	Killing	with


appalling	ease,	a	single	hand	gripping	the	reins	as	he	guided	his	horse,	sword
weaving	a	murderous	dance	around	him.
Someone	flung	himself	onto	her	sword-arm,	his	weight	wrenching	at	her
shoulder.	She	shouted	in	pain,	felt	herself	being	pulled	from	her	saddle.
His	face,	bearded	and	grimacing,	seemed	to	surge	towards	her	as	if
hunting	some	ghastly	kiss.	Then	she	saw	the	features	go	slack.	Blood	filled	his
eyes.	The	veins	on	his	temples	collapsed	into	blue	stains	blossoming	beneath
the	skin.	More	blood,	spraying	from	his	nostrils.	His	grip	fell	away	and	he
toppled	backward.
Drawing	in	close,	a	long,	thin-bladed	knife	in	one	hand,	Corlo	came
alongside	her.	‘Push	yourself	up,	lass!	Use	my	shoulder—’
Hand	fisted	around	the	grip	of	her	sword,	she	set	it	against	him	and	righted
herself.	‘Thanks,	Corlo—’
‘Rein	in,	lass,	we’re	about	done	here.’
She	looked	round.	Three	Guardsmen	had	dismounted,	as	had	Iron	Bars,
and	were	among	the	wounded	and	dying,	swords	thrusting	down	into	bodies.
She	glanced	back.	‘That	man—what	happened	to	him?’
‘I	boiled	his	brain,	Acquitor.	Messy,	granted,	but	the	Avowed	said	to	keep
you	safe.’
She	stared	at	him.	‘What	sort	of	magic	does	that?’
‘Maybe	I’ll	tell	you	sometime.	That	was	a	nice	head-shot	back	there.	The
bastard	came	close	with	that	spear.’
He	did.	She	was	suddenly	shaking.	‘And	this	is	your	profession,	Corlo?
It’s…disgusting.’
‘Aye,	Acquitor,	that	it	is.’
Iron	Bars	approached.	‘All	is	well?’
‘We’re	fine,	sir.	All	dead?’
‘Twenty-one.’
‘That’s	all	of	them,’	the	mage	said,	nodding.
‘Less	than	a	half-dozen	actually	managed	to	draw	their	weapons.	You
fouled	’em	up	nicely,	Corlo.	Well	done.’
‘Is	that	how	you	soldiers	win	your	battles?’	Seren	asked.
‘We	wasn’t	here	to	give	battle,	Acquitor,’	Iron	Bars	said.	‘Executions,	lass.
Any	mages	among	the	lot,	Corlo?’
‘One	minor	adept.	I	got	him	right	away.’
Executions.	Yes.	Best	to	think	of	it	that	way.	Not	butchery.	They	were
murderers	and	rapists,	after	all.	‘You	didn’t	leave	me	any	alive,	Avowed?’
He	squinted	up	at	her.	‘No,	none.’
‘You	don’t	want	me	to…do	what	I	want.	Do	you?’


‘That’s	right,	lass.	I	don’t.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	you	might	enjoy	it.’
‘And	what	business	is	that	of	yours,	Iron	Bars?’
‘It’s	not	good,	that’s	all.’	He	turned	away.	‘Corlo,	see	to	the	prisoners	under
the	wagon.	Heal	them	if	they	need	it.’
He’s	right.	The	bastard’s	right.	I	might	enjoy	it.	Torturing	some	helpless
man.	And	that	wouldn’t	be	good	at	all,	because	I	might	get	hungry	for	more.	She
thought	back	to	the	feeling	when	her	sword’s	blade	had	connected	with	that
deserter ’s	helmed	head.	Sickening,	and	sick	with	pleasure,	all	bound	together.
I	hurt.	But	I	can	make	others	hurt.	Enough	so	they	answer	each	other,
leaving…calm.	Is	that	what	it	is?	Calm?	Or	just	some	kind	of	hardening,
senseless	and	cold.
‘All	right,	Iron	Bars,’	she	said.	‘Keep	it	away	from	me.	Only,’	she	looked
down	at	him,	‘it	doesn’t	help.	Nothing	helps.’
‘Aye.	Not	yet,	anyway.’
‘Not	ever,’	she	said.	‘I	know,	you’re	thinking	time	will	bring	healing.	But
you	see,	Avowed,	it’s	something	I	keep	reliving.	Every	moment.	It	wasn’t	days
ago.	It	was	with	my	last	breath,	every	last	breath.’
She	saw	the	compassion	in	his	eyes	and,	inexplicably,	hated	him	for	it.	‘Let
me	think	on	that,	lass.’
‘To	what	end?’
‘Can’t	say,	yet.’
She	looked	down	at	the	sword	in	her	hand,	at	the	blood	and	snarled	hair
along	the	notched	edge	where	it	had	struck	the	man’s	head.	Disgusting.	But
they’ll	expect	it	to	be	wiped	away.	To	make	the	iron	clean	and	gleaming	once
more,	as	if	it	was	nothing	more	than	a	sliver	of	metal.	Disconnected	from	its
deeds,	its	history,	its	very	purpose.	She	didn’t	want	that	mess	cleaned	away.	She
liked	the	sight	of	it.
They	left	the	bodies	where	they	had	fallen.	Left	the	lances	impaled	in	flesh
growing	cold.	Left	the	wagon,	apart	from	the	food	they	could	transport—the
refugees	coming	up	on	the	road	could	have	the	rest.	Among	the	dead	were	five
youths,	none	of	them	older	than	fifteen	years.	They’d	walked	a	short	path,	but
as	Halfpeck	observed,	it	had	been	the	wrong	path,	and	that	was	that.
Seren	pitied	none	of	them.


Book	Four

Midnight	Tides


	

Kin	mourn	my	passing,	all	love	is	dust
The	pit	is	cut	from	the	raw,	stones	piled	to	the	side
Slabs	are	set	upon	the	banks,	the	seamed	grey	wall	rises
Possessions	laid	out	to	flank	my	place	of	rest
All	from	the	village	are	drawn,	beating	hides
Keening	their	grief	with	streaks	in	ash
Clawed	down	their	cheeks,	wounds	on	their	flesh
The	memory	of	my	life	is	surrendered
In	fans	of	earth	from	wooden	shovels
And	were	I	ghostly	here	at	the	edge	of	the	living
Witness	to	brothers	and	sisters	unveiled	by	loss
Haunters	of	despair	upon	this	rich	sward
Where	ancestors	stand	sentinel,	wrapped	in	skins
I	might	settle	motionless,	eyes	closed	to	dark’s	rush
And	embrace	the	spiral	pull	into	indifference
Contemplating	at	the	last,	what	it	is	to	be	pleased
Yet	my	flesh	is	warm,	the	blood	neither	still	in	my	veins
Nor	cold,	my	breathing	joining	this	wind
That	carries	these	false	cries,	I	am	banished
Alone	among	the	crowd	and	no	more	to	be	seen
The	stirrings	of	my	life	face	their	turned	backs
The	shudders	of	their	will,	and	all	love	is	dust
Where	I	now	walk,	to	the	pleasure	of	none
Cut	raw,	the	stones	piled,	the	grey	wall	rising.
BANISHED
KELLUN 	ADARA


Chapter	Twenty

It	seemed	the	night	would	never	end	during	the	war	with	the	Sar
Trell.	Before	the	appearance	of	Our	Great	Emperor,
Dessimbelackis,	our	legions	were	thrown	back	on	the	field	of
battle,	again	and	again.	Our	sons	and	daughters	wept	blood	on	the
green	ground,	and	the	wagon-drums	of	the	enemy	came	forth	in
thunder.	But	no	stains	could	hold	upon	our	faith,	and	it	shone	ever
fierce,	ever	defiant.	We	drew	our	ranks	tall,	overlapped	shields
polished	and	bright	as	the	red	sun,	and	the	one	among	us	who	was
needed,	who	was	destined	to	grasp	the	splashed	grip	of	the	First
Empire’s	truthful	sword,	gave	his	voice	and	his	strength	to	lead	us
in	answer	to	the	well-throated	rumble	of	the	Sar	Trell	warcries,	the
stone-tremble	of	their	wagon-drums.	Victory	was	destined,	in	the
forge-lit	eyes	of	He	of	the	Seven	Holy	cities,	the	fever-charge	of
his	will,	and	on	that	day,	the	Nineteenth	in	the	Month	of	Leth-ara	in
the	Year	of	Arenbal,	the	Sar	Trell	army	was	broken	on	the	plain
south	of	Yath-Ghatan,	and	with	their	bones	was	laid	the	foundation,
and	with	their	skulls	the	cobbles	of	Empire’s	road…
THE	DESSILAN
VILARA
Somewhere	ahead,	the	Royal	Colonnade	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.	Arched,	the
hemispherical	ceiling	web-spun	in	gold	on	a	midnight	blue	background,
diamonds	glittering	like	drops	of	dew	in	the	streaming	strands.	The	pillars
flanking	the	aisle	that	led	to	the	throne	room	were	carved	in	a	spiral	pattern
and	painted	sea-green,	twenty	to	each	side	and	three	paces	apart.	The
passageways	between	them	and	the	wall	were	wide	enough	to	permit	an
armoured	palace	guard	to	walk	without	fear	of	his	scabbard	scraping,	while	the
approach	down	the	centre	aisle	was	ten	men	wide.	At	the	outer	end	was	a	large
chamber	that	served	as	a	reception	area.	First	Empire	murals,	copied	so	many
times	as	to	be	stylized	past	meaning,	had	been	painted	on	the	walls.	Traditional


torch	sconces	held	crystals	imbued	with	sorcery	that	cast	a	faintly	blue	light.	At
the	inward	end	stood	two	massive,	bejewelled	doors	that	led	to	a	narrow,	low
passage,	fifteen	paces	long,	before	opening	out	into	the	domed	throne	room
proper.
The	air	smelled	of	marble	dust	and	paint.	The	ceremonial	investiture	was
three	days	away,	when	King	Ezgara	Diskanar	in	his	robes	of	state	would	stride
down	the	length	of	the	Royal	Colonnade	and	enter	the	throne	room,	his	queen	a
step	behind	on	his	left,	his	son	the	prince	two	paces	back	and	immediately
behind	his	father.	Or,	rather,	that	was	how	it	should	have	been.
A	trail	of	servants	and	guards	had	led	Brys	here,	following	the	seemingly
random	wanderings	of	Ceda	Kuru	Qan.	The	strange	emptiness	of	the	Eternal
Domicile	on	this	last	stretch	unnerved	the	Finadd,	his	boots	echoing	on	the
unadorned	flagstones	as	he	entered	the	reception	chamber.
To	find	the	Ceda	on	his	hands	and	knees	directly	in	front	of	him.
Kuru	Qan	was	muttering	to	himself,	tracing	his	fingertips	along	the	joins
in	the	floor.	Beside	him	was	a	tattered,	paint-spattered	basket	crowded	with
scribers,	brushes	and	stoppered	jars	of	pigments.
‘Ceda?’
The	old	man	looked	up,	squinting	over	the	tops	of	the	lenses,	the
contraption	having	slid	down	to	the	end	of	his	nose.	‘Brys	Beddict?	I’ve	been
wondering	where	you’ve	been.’
‘In	the	throne	room.	The	old	throne	room,	where	still	resides	our	king.
The	surviving	battalions	and	brigades	are	converging	to	the	defence	of
Letheras.	Things	have	been	rather…hectic.’
‘No	doubt.	Relevant?	Significantly	so.	Indeed,	telling.	Now,	count	the
flagstones	across	this	chamber.	Width,	then	length,	if	you	will.’
‘What?	Ceda,	the	king	is	asking	for	you.’
But	Kuru	Qan	had	ceased	listening.	He	had	begun	crawling	about,
mumbling,	brushing	away	the	grit	left	behind	by	the	builders.
Brys	was	motionless	for	a	moment,	considering,	then	he	began	counting
flagstones.
After	he	was	done,	he	returned	to	the	Ceda’s	side.	Kuru	Qan	was	simply
sitting	now,	appearing	wholly	consumed	in	the	cleaning	of	his	lenses.	Without
looking	up,	he	began	speaking.	‘Battalions	and	brigades.	Yes,	most	certainly.
Assembling	in	the	hills	surrounding	Brans	Keep.	Useful?	The	last	of	my
mages.	Tell	me	the	centre	flagstone,	Brys.	Will	Merchants’	Battalion	remain	in
the	city?	I	think	not.	It	shall	be	cast	upon	those	hills.	All	of	it.	The	centre,	Brys
Beddict?’
‘The	one	before	you,	Ceda.’


‘Ah	yes.	Good.	Very	good.	And	what	armies	are	left	to	us?	How	fare	the
fleets?	Oh,	the	seas	are	unwelcoming,	are	they	not?	Best	stay	away.	Dracons
Sea,	at	the	very	least,	although	the	protectorates	are	making	noises.	Korshenn,
Pilott,	Descent—they	think	they	see	their	chance.’
Brys	cleared	his	throat.	‘The	Artisan	Battalion	has	left	the	Manse	and	is
marching	to	Five	Points.	Riven	Brigade	withdrew	from	Old	Katter	with
minimal	losses.	Snakebelt	Battalion	has	departed	Awl,	and	the	Crimson
Rampant	Brigade	has	left	Tulamesh—the	north	coast	cities	have	been	yielded.
Dresh	was	taken	last	night,	the	garrison	slaughtered.	Whitefinder	Battalion	are
razing	the	ground	on	their	retreat	from	First	Reach	and	should	be	at	Brans
Keep	soon.	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz	will	lead	the	Merchants’	Battalion	from	the
city	in	three	days’	time.	It	is	anticipated,	Ceda,	that	you	will	be	accompanying
her.’
‘Accompanying?	Nonsense,	I	am	far	too	busy.	Too	busy.	So	many	things
left	to	do.	She	shall	have	my	mages.	Yes,	my	mages.’
‘There	are	only	fourteen	remaining,	Ceda.’
‘Fourteen?	Relevant?	I	must	needs	think	on	that.’
Brys	studied	Kuru	Qan,	his	old	friend,	and	struggled	against	waves	of	pity.
‘How	long,	Ceda,	do	you	plan	on	remaining	here,	on	the	floor?’
‘It	is	no	easy	thing,	Finadd,	not	at	all.	I	fear	I	have	waited	too	long	as	it	is.
But	we	shall	see.’
‘When	can	the	king	expect	you?’
‘Alas,	we	do	not	know	what	to	expect,	do	we?	Barring	a	few	salient	truths
so	painfully	gleaned	from	the	chaos.	The	Seventh	Closure,	ah,	there	is	nothing
good	to	this	turn	of	events.	You	must	go,	now.	Care	for	your	brother,	Brys.
Care	for	him.’
‘Which	one?’
Kuru	Qan	was	cleaning	his	lenses	again,	and	made	no	reply.
Brys	swung	about	and	strode	towards	the	doors.
The	Ceda	spoke	behind	him.	‘Finadd.	Whatever	you	do,	don’t	kill	him.’
He	halted	and	glanced	back.	‘Who?’
‘Don’t	kill	him.	You	must	not	kill	him.	Now,	go.	Go,	Finadd.’
	
So	many	alleys	in	Letheras	never	knew	the	light	of	day.	Narrow,	with	various
balconies,	ledges	and	projections	forming	makeshift	roofs,	the	corridors
beneath	were	twisted	and	choked	with	refuse,	a	realm	of	rats,	slipper-beetles
and	spiders.	And	the	occasional	undead.
Shurq	Elalle	stood	in	the	gloom,	as	she	had	stood	most	of	the	previous


night.	Waiting.	The	street	beyond	had	wakened	with	the	day,	although	the
crowds	were	markedly	more	furtive	and	tense	than	was	usual.	There	had	been	a
riot	near	the	West	Gate	two	nights	past,	brutally	quelled	by	soldiers	of	the
Merchants’	Battalion.	Curfews	had	been	enforced,	and	it	had	been	finally	noted
that	the	low	castes	seemed	to	have	virtually	vanished	from	the	city,	cause	for
confusion	and	a	vague	unease.
Almost	directly	across	from	her	was	a	side	postern	gate	leading	into
Gerun	Eberict’s	estate.	The	Finadd	disliked	ceremony	upon	his	return.	Modesty
was	not	the	issue.	More	relevant,	however,	were	the	innumerable	positions
from	which	to	stage	an	attempted	assassination	near	the	estate’s	formal
entrance.
None	the	less,	there	was	some	commotion	attending	Gerun’s	appearance.
Bodyguards	drifting	into	the	street	announced	his	imminent	arrival.	Shurq
melted	back	into	the	darkness	as	they	scanned	the	area.	Taking	defensive
positions	around	the	side	postern,	they	waited.	Their	officer	appeared	next,
striding	past	them	to	unlock	the	gate	and	push	it	back,	revealing	a	narrow
passage	that	opened	out	into	the	sunlit	courtyard.	All	at	once,	there	were	fewer
citizens	in	the	area,	thinning	as	if	by	some	prearranged	signal	until	only	the
guards	remained	within	the	range	of	Shurq’s	vision.
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh,’	she	muttered	under	her	breath.
Gerun	Eberict	then	strode	into	view,	one	hand	resting	on	the	pommel	of	the
sword	scabbarded	at	his	left	hip.	He	did	not	pause,	but	continued	on	directly
into	the	passage.	The	guards	swept	in	after	him,	followed	at	last	by	the	officer,
who	then	slammed	the	gate	shut	behind	him.
Shurq	walked	further	into	the	alley	until	she	came	to	a	rusty	ladder	more
or	less	fixed	to	the	wall	of	the	building	on	her	right.	She	climbed,	ignoring	the
protests	of	fittings	and	weakened	metal,	until	she	reached	the	roof.	Clambered
up	the	slope,	testing	the	firmness	of	each	slab	of	grey	slate	she	set	her	weight
upon,	then	over	the	edge.	Sidling	along	until	she	could	look	down	upon	the
front	entrance	of	Gerun’s	house	and	part	of	the	courtyard.	She	lowered	herself
as	far	as	she	could	on	the	opposite	side,	until	only	her	fingers,	eyes	and	top	of
her	head	were	visible—as	unlikely	to	be	noticed	as	she	could	manage,	should
someone	in	the	courtyard	glance	up	in	her	direction.
Gerun	Eberict	was	standing	before	the	doors,	listening	to	the	captain	of	the
house	guard,	who	was	speaking	at	length,	punctuating	his	statements	every	now
and	then	with	gestures	indicating	bafflement.
His	report	was	cut	off	when	Gerun’s	right	hand	snapped	out	to	close
around	his	neck.
Even	from	this	distance,	she	could	see	the	man’s	face	darken	to	a	curious


shade	of	blue.
Of	course,	no	person	with	any	courage	would	take	much	of	that,	so	she
was	not	surprised	when	the	captain	tugged	a	knife	from	his	belt.
Gerun	had	been	waiting	for	that,	having	palmed	his	own	knife,	with	which
he	stabbed	the	captain,	up	under	the	breastbone,	pushing	it	to	the	hilt.
The	captain	sagged.	The	Finadd	released	his	hold	on	the	man’s	neck	and
watched	him	crumple	to	the	flagstones.
‘It’s	just	coin,	Gerun,’	Shurq	said	quietly.	‘And	a	missing	brother	who	you
killed	a	long	time	ago.	Your	lack	of	control	is	dismaying…for	your	other
employees,	that	is.	For	me,	well,	little	more	than	confirmation	of	all	my
suspicions.’
There	would	be	a	bloodbath,	if	not	tonight,	then	the	next	night.	The	city’s
countless	spies	and	snitches—those	who	had	remained—would	be	stung	into
frantic	activity	and	the	great	hunt	for	the	thief	would	begin.
All	rather	unpleasant.
Gerun’s	wealth	had	paid	for	the	exodus	of	the	city’s	indigents,	meaning	he
would	have	to	make	most	of	his	victims	Letherii	rather	than	Nerek,	Tarthenal
or	Faraed.	Indeed,	he	might	find	victims	hard	to	find.	Besides	which,	there	was
a	war,	and	the	Finadd	might	well	find	his	time	otherwise	occupied.	The	man’s
rage	would	be	apoplectic	in	no	time.
She	watched	as	Gerun	stormed	into	his	house,	guards	scrambling	after
him,	then	she	lowered	herself	along	the	slope,	rolled	onto	her	back	and	slid
towards	the	edge.
There	was	a	balcony	directly	below—
No,	not	any	more.
She	fell,	struck	a	clothes	line	that	snapped	with	her	weight,	cannoned	off
the	side	of	a	ledge	thick	with	pigeon	droppings,	and	landed	spread-eagled	on	a
heap	of	rubbish.	Where	she	lay	for	a	time,	unmoving.
That	was	the	problem	with	cities.	Nothing	ever	stayed	the	same.	She’d	used
that	balcony	at	least	a	half-dozen	times	before,	when	staking	out	the	estate.	She
lifted	an	arm.	Then	the	other.	Drew	her	legs	beneath	her.	Nothing	broken	thus
far.	And,	after	a	careful	examination,	nothing	overly	damaged.	Fortunately,	she
concluded,	the	dead	did	not	suffer	much	from	pride,	said	wounding	being
minimal.
It	was	then	that	she	discovered	the	bar	of	rusty	iron	projecting	from	her
forehead.	Perfumed	liquids	were	leaking	out,	blurring	her	vision.	She	probed
the	offending	object	with	her	fingertips.	Punched	right	through	the	bone,	all	the
way,	in	fact,	to	the	back	of	her	skull,	if	the	grating	noises	the	bar	made	when
she	wriggled	it	were	any	indication.


‘I’ve	made	a	mess	of	my	brain,’	she	said.	‘But	was	I	really	using	it?
Probably	not.	Still,	was	I	in	the	habit	of	talking	to	myself	before?	I	don’t	think
so.’
She	stood,	knee-deep	in	the	refuse,	contemplating	physically	removing	the
bar.	But	that	might	make	things	even	messier.	Less	than	a	hand’s	width
projected	out,	after	all.	Hard	not	to	notice,	but	far	less	egregious	than,	say,	an
arm’s	length.	A	visit	to	Tehol	Beddict	seemed	incumbent,	if	only	for	endless
advice	she	could	take	pleasure	in	rejecting.
Alas,	she	realized,	she	would	have	to	wait	for	night,	since	there	was	no	way
she	could	get	to	his	home	without	being	seen.	There	had	been	a	time,	long	ago,
when	she	liked	attention.	Admiring	regards	and	all	that,	and	it	was	always
satisfying	to	flaunt	her	qualities.	But	a	bar	in	the	head	took	fashion	sense	to
excess	by	any	standard	of	measure.	People	would	notice,	and	not	in	a	good
way.
Disconsolate,	Shurq	Elalle	sat	down	in	the	rubbish.	To	await	the	coming	of
night.
	
‘What	happened	to	the	legs	of	my	bed?’
‘We	needed	the	wood,	master.’
‘Yes,	but	why	only	three	of	them?’
‘I	was	saving	the	other	one	for	later.	I	found	a	bag	of	something	that	might
be	tea.’
‘Well.’	Tehol	sat	up.	‘I’m	just	amazed	I	slept	through	it.’
‘You	were	clearly	very	tired,	master.’
‘Yes,	which	is	very	understandable,	given	how	busy	I’ve	been.	I	have	been
busy,	haven’t	I?’
‘I	could	not	say,	having	been	too	busy	myself	to	take	much	notice.	But	I
have	faith	in	your	proclamations,	master.	You	certainly	slept	like	a	man	who’d
been	busy.’
‘Seems	proof	enough,	I	would	say.	I’m	convinced.	Now,	while	I’ve	been
working	myself	senseless,	you	make	claim	to	having	had	many	things	on	your
table.	Let’s	hear	about	them.’
‘Very	well,	master.	We’re	more	or	less	done	with	the	wings	of	the	Eternal
Domicile.	Dry,	foundations	restored,	my	crews	cleaning	up.	There	have	been
some	complaints	about	the	cold	draughts	in	the	Fifth	Wing,	but	that’s	not	my
problem,	strictly	speaking.’
‘Why	the	cold	draughts,	Bugg?’
‘Presumably	related	to	the	shoring	methods	I	employed,	but	they	don’t


know	that.’
‘And	why	should	your	shoring	methods	make	it	cold?	Bugg,	do	I	detect
some	discomfort	in	your	demeanour?’
‘Discomfort,	master?	Not	at	all.	Are	you	certain	you	want	the	details	of	this
matter?’
‘When	you	put	it	that	way,	probably	not.	So,	is	that	all	you’ve	been	doing?’
‘I’ve	also	been	here	and	there,	working	through	all	the	rumours	to	see	if	I
could	glean	some	truth.	I	have	accordingly	assembled	a	list	of	facts.’
‘A	list,	Wonderful.	I	love	lists.	They’re	so…ordered.’
‘Indeed,	master.	Shall	I	proceed?	Well,	the	northern	frontier	belongs	to	the
Tiste	Edur,	as	do	all	the	coastal	cities	all	the	way	down	to	Height	and	possibly
Old	Gedure.	It	is	believed	the	Edur	fleets	are	in	the	Ouster	Sea,	opposite	Lenth
and	therefore	on	the	edge	of	Gedry	Bay.	From	this	one	must	assume	they
intend	to	sail	up	Lether	River.	Possibly	with	the	aim	of	arriving	in	concert	with
the	land	armies.	It	is	clear	that	the	Tiste	Edur	are	marching	on	Letheras	and	are
planning	to	conquer	it	and	take	the	throne.	Whether	this	will	succeed	in
triggering	the	capitulation	of	the	entire	kingdom	remains	to	be	seen.
Personally,	I	believe	it	will.	Nor	do	I	think	the	protectorates	will	go	much
beyond	restlessness.	To	do	otherwise	would	be	suicidal.’
‘If	you	say	so,	Bugg.	Are	the	Tiste	Edur	that	formidable,	then?’
The	manservant	ran	a	hand	through	his	thinning	hair,	then	glanced	over	at
the	bodyguard	who	was	standing,	silent	as	ever,	near	the	hatch.	‘Again,	master,
countless	rumours.	I	would	hazard	the	following	observations	regarding	the
Tiste	Edur.	Their	new	emperor	is	in	possession	of	terrible	power,	but	the
sorcery	the	Edur	are	using	does	not	come	from	their	traditional	sources.	Not
Kurald	Emurlahn,	although	it	remains	part	of	their	arsenal.	In	the	battles	thus
far	they	have	been	profligate	in	their	use	of	shadow	wraiths	and	Kenyll’rah
demons,	both	of	whom	are	reluctant	participants.’
‘Kurald	what?	Kenyll	who?	Who’s	whispering	these	rumours	anyway?’
‘Ah,	that	brings	me	to	my	third	set	of	observations.	Having	to	do	with	the
dead.’
‘The	dead.	Of	course.	Go	on,	please.’
‘This	subcontinent,	the	region	ranging	from	Tiste	Edur	lands	to	the	north,
Bluerose	and	Awl’d’an	to	the	east,	and	Descent	and	D’aliban	to	the	south—it	is
a	rather	peculiar	region,	master,	and	has	been	since,	well,	since	the	earliest
times.	There	are,	uh,	no	pathways.	For	the	dead,	I	mean.	For	their	spirits.’
‘I	don’t	quite	understand	you,	Bugg,’	Tehol	said,	rising	from	the	rickety
bed	and	beginning	to	pace	along	the	rooftop.	The	bodyguard’s	gaze	tracked
him.	‘The	dead	are	just	dead.	Ghosts	linger	because	they	have	nowhere	else	to


go	and	are	disinclined	to	go	sightseeing	in	any	case.	What	kind	of	pathways	are
you	talking	about?’
‘Into	what	could	be	called	the	Hold	of	the	Dead.’
‘There	is	no	Hold	of	the	Dead.’
‘Which	is	what	has	been	so…unusual.	There	should	have	been.	All	along.
Those	of	Kolanse,	for	example,	include	in	their	worship	a	Lord	of	Death.	You
will	find	something	similar	in	the	Bolkando	kingdom—’
‘The	Bolkando	kingdom?	Bugg,	nobody	knows	anything	about	the
Bolkando	kingdom.	Nobody	wants	to.	You	are	starting	to	alarm	me,	my	dear
manservant,	with	the	breadth	of	your	knowledge.	Unless,	of	course,	you	are
making	it	all	up.’
‘Precisely,	master.	To	continue.	There	was	no	Hold	of	the	Dead.	It	once
existed.	That	is,	the	original	Tiles	of	the	Hold	from	the	First	Empire	contained
one.	As	well	as	a	number	of	other	Holds,	all	of	which	have	been	discarded	by
and	by.	It	would	be	nice,	indeed,	were	a	scholar	to	address	this	strange
diminishment.	The	passage	of	time	in	a	culture	invites	elaboration,	not
simplification,	unless	some	terrible	collapse	triggers	a	fall	of	sorts,	but	the
only	trauma	Lether	has	suffered	came	with	the	original	fall	of	the	First	Empire
and	the	subsequent	isolation	of	these	colonies.	There	was,	at	that	time,	some
degradation,	leading	to	a	short	period	of	independent	city-states.	And	then	there
were	wars	with	the	tribes	south	and	east	of	Kryn,	and	with	the	atavistic	Andii
remnants	of	Bluerose.	But	none	of	that	was	culturally	disturbing.	Possibly
because	the	Hold	of	the	Dead	could	not	manifest	itself	here.	In	any	case,	the
closing	of	the	pathways	for	the	dead	was	already	a	fact,	frozen	in	the	very	earth
of	this	region.	Worse	yet,	it	was	all	an	accident—’
‘Hold	on,	Bugg.	Now	I	do	have	some	pertinent	questions.’
‘Your	questions	are	always	pertinent,	master.’
‘I	know,	but	these	are	particularly	pertinent.’
‘More	so	than	usual?’
‘Are	you	suggesting	that	my	normal	pertinence	is	less	than	particular,
Bugg?’
‘Of	course	not,	master.	Now,	where	was	I?	Oh	yes,	the	accident.	In	the
earliest	texts—those	that	came	with	the	Letherii	from	the	First	Empire—there
is	the	occasional	mention	made	of	a	race	called	the	Jaghut—’
‘There	is?	You	are	speaking	to	a	man	whose	head	was	filled	to	bursting
with	classical	education,	Bugg.	I’ve	never	heard	of	these	Jaghut.’
‘All	right,	they	were	mentioned	once,	and	not	specifically	by	name.’
‘Hah,	I	knew	it.	Don’t	try	any	sleight	of	hand	with	me.’
‘Sorry,	master.	In	any	case,	in	the	most	proper	sense,	the	Jaghut	are


represented	by	those	poorly	rendered,	stylized	images	you	will	find	on	tiles	of
the	Hold	of	Ice—’
‘Those	frog-like	midgets?’
‘Only	the	green	skin	survived,	alas.	The	Jaghut	were	in	fact	quite	tall	and
not	in	the	least	frog-like.	The	point	is,	they	manifested	their	sorcery	with	ice,
and	cold.	It	remains	common	to	this	day	to	consider	only	four	principal
elements	in	nature.	Air,	Earth,	Fire,	and	Water.	Absolute	nonsense,	of	course.’
‘Of	course.’
‘There	is	Light,	Dark,	Shadow,	Life,	Death	and	Ice.	There	might	even	be
more,	but	why	quibble?	The	point	I	am	making,	master,	is	that,	long	ago,	a
Jaghut	did	something	to	this	land.	Sealed	it,	in	a	manner	of	speaking.	Using	its
aspected	sorcery.	The	effect	was	profound.’
‘Making	the	pathways	of	the	dead	snowbound,	like	a	mountain	pass	in
winter?’
‘Something	like	that,	yes.’
‘So	the	dead	loiter	in	Lether.	Ghosts,	shades,	and	people	like	Shurq	Elalle
and	Kettle.’
‘Indeed.	But	that	is	all	changing.’
Tehol	ceased	his	pacing	and	faced	Bugg.	‘It	is?’
‘Alas,	yes,	master.	The	sorcery	is…thawing.	A	Hold	of	the	Dead	is
manifesting	itself.	The	situation	is	unravelling.	Quickly.’
‘Does	this	mean	Shurq	is	in	trouble?’
‘No.	I	suspect	the	curse	on	her	will	remain.	But	the	initial	efficacy	of	that
curse	derives	from	the	fact	of	the	Hold’s	having	been	non-existent	in	the	first
place.’
‘All	right.	It’s	all	unravelling.	Have	you	visited	Kettle	lately?’
‘Interesting	you	should	ask,	master,	for	it	is	at	the	site	of	the	now-dead
Azath	tower	that	the	Hold	of	the	Dead	is	manifesting	itself.	From	that,	one
might	conclude	that	Kettle	is	somehow	connected	with	the	entire	event,	but	she
isn’t.	In	fact,	she’s	no	longer	dead.	Not	as	dead	as	she	was,	that	is.	It	is	now
clear	that	her	purpose	is…otherwise.	As	you	know,	there’s	trouble	coming
from	the	barrows.’
‘What’s	that	smoke?	Over	there.’
Bugg	squinted.	‘Another	riot,	I	think.	Counters’	Quarter.’
‘Well,	they’ve	been	a	little	skittish	ever	since	the	ghosts	stormed	the	Tolls
Repository.	Besides	which,	the	Tolls	themselves	have	been	tumbling	with	all
the	bad	news	from	the	north.	In	fact,	I’m	surprised	it’s	taken	this	long.’
They	could	hear	bells	now,	as	the	city’s	garrison	began	responding	to	the
alarm	from	various	stations	near	the	area.


‘That	won’t	last	long,’	Bugg	predicted.
‘Yes,	but	I	am	reminded	of	something,’	Tehol	said.	‘The	time	has	come,	I
think,	to	see	Shand,	Hejun	and	Rissarh	on	their	way.’
‘Will	they	complain?’
‘Less	than	one	might	expect.	This	is	a	nervous	city.	The	few	non-Letherii
remaining	are	being	subjected	to	harassment,	and	not	just	by	citizens.	The
authorities	are	showing	their	racist	underpinnings	with	all	these	suspicions	and
the	eagerness	to	tread	over	hard-won	rights.’
‘Proof	that	the	freedoms	once	accorded	non-Letherii	peoples	were	born	of
both	paternalism	and	a	self-serving	posturing	as	a	benign	overseer.	What	is
given	is	taken	away,	just	like	that.’
‘Indeed,	Bugg.	Is	it	because,	do	you	think,	at	the	human	core,	we	are	naught
but	liars	and	cheats?’
‘Probably.’
‘With	no	hope	of	ever	overcoming	our	instinctive	nastiness?’
‘Hard	to	say.	How	have	we	done	so	far?’
‘That’s	not	fair.	Oh,	fine,	it’s	perfectly	fair.	But	it	doesn’t	bode	well,	does
it?’
‘Few	things	do,	master.’
‘Well,	this	is	uncharacteristically	glum	of	you,	Bugg.’
‘Alas,	I	fear	the	Tiste	Edur	won’t	be	any	better.	Coin	is	the	poison,	after	all,
and	it	infects	indiscriminately.’
‘As	I	suspected,’	Tehol	mused,	‘clearly,	now	is	not	the	time	to	destroy	the
economy.’
‘Either	way,	you’re	right,	master.’
‘Of	course	I	am.	Furthermore,	it	seems	incumbent	that,	for	the	moment	at
least,	we	should	do	nothing.	About	anything.	The	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	has	done
a	fine	job	thus	far;	we	need	make	no	adjustments	there.	I	know	the	details	of
who	owes	what	from	the	Tolls	Repository	and	Shand	has	acted	with	impressive
facility	on	that	information.	We	know	the	dire	state	of	the	royal	treasury.	You
have	been	paid	for	your	work	on	the	Eternal	Domicile,	haven’t	you?’
‘Just	yesterday,	master.’
‘Excellent.	Well,	that	was	exhausting.	I	think	I’ll	go	back	to	bed.’
‘Good	idea,	master.’
‘After	all,	this	rooftop	is	probably	the	safest	place	in	Letheras	now.’
‘Indeed.	Best	stay	here.’
‘And	you,	Bugg?’
‘I	thought	I’d	take	a	walk.’
‘More	rumours	to	track	down?’


‘Something	like	that,	master.’
‘Be	careful,	Bugg,	they’re	press-ganging	recruits	with	some	ferocity.’
‘I	was	wondering	about	that,	master.	No-one’s	paid	you	a	visit?’
‘Why,	they	have.	But	our	silent	bodyguard	sent	them	away.’
‘He	said	something?’
‘No,	it	was	just	a	look,	I	think.	They	scurried.’
‘Impressive.	As	for	me,	master,	I	have	ways	of	making	myself	unpalatable,
even	for	desperate	recruiters.’
‘You	have	always	been	unpalatable,	it’s	true,’	Tehol	noted	as	he	gingerly
lowered	himself	onto	his	bed.	‘Even	the	fleas	avoid	you.	Just	one	more	of
those	eternal	mysteries,	Bugg,	that	so	endears	you	to	me.	Or	is	it	endears	me	to
you?’
‘The	former,	I	think,	master.’
‘Oh,	no.	You	don’t	like	me.	I	discover	this	after	all	this	time?’
‘I	was	only	commenting	on	your	usage	of	the	appropriate	phrase	in	the
context	of	your	statement	and	the	sentiment	you	presumably	wished	to	express.
Of	course	I	like	you,	master.	How	could	I	not?’
‘You	have	a	point	there,	Bugg.	Anyway,	I’m	going	to	sleep	now,	so	if	you
don’t	want	me	for	anything	else…’
‘Right,	master.	I’ll	see	you	later,	then.’
	
Turudal	Brizad	was	just	outside	the	throne	room,	leaning	against	a	column,	his
arms	crossed.	Brys	nodded	to	him	and	was	about	to	pass	when	the	Queen’s
First	Consort	gestured	him	over.	The	Finadd	hesitated,	then	approached.
Turudal	smiled.	‘Relax.	I	am	no	longer	as	dangerous	as	I	once	was,	Brys
Beddict.	Assuming	that	I	was	dangerous	in	the	first	place.’
‘First	Consort.	Please	permit	me	to	express	my	sympathy—’
‘Thank	you,’	Turudal	cut	in,	‘but	it’s	not	necessary.	The	prince	was	not	the
only	precipitous	member	of	the	royal	family.	My	dear	queen	was,	it	is	worth
recalling,	at	the	forefront	of	inviting	this	war	against	the	Tiste	Edur.	She	has
the	arrogance	of	her	people,	after	all…’
‘And	are	they	not	your	people	as	well,	First	Consort?’
The	man’s	smile	broadened.	‘So	much	of	my	life,	Brys	Beddict—here	in
this	palace—can	be	characterized	as	fulfilling	the	role	of	objective	observer	in
the	proceedings	of	state,	and	in	the	domestic	travails	upon	which,	it	must	be
said,	my	fortune	depends.	Rather,	depended.	In	this,	I	am	no	different	from	my
counterpart,	the	First	Concubine.	We	were	present	as	symbols,	after	all.	And	so
we	behaved	accordingly.’


‘And	now	you	find	yourself	without	a	role,’	Brys	said.
‘I	find	myself	even	more	objective	as	an	observer	than	I	have	ever	been,
Finadd.’
‘To	what	end?’
‘Well,	that’s	just	it,	isn’t	it?	To	no	end.	None	at	all.	I	had	forgotten	what
such	freedom	felt	like.	You	realize,	don’t	you,	that	the	Tiste	Edur	will	conquer
this	kingdom?’
‘Our	forces	were	divided	before,	First	Consort.’
‘So	were	theirs,	Finadd.’
Brys	studied	the	man	before	him,	wondering	what	was	so	strange	about
him,	this	vague	air	of	indifference	and…what?	‘Why	did	she	want	this	war,
Turudal	Brizad?’
He	shrugged.	‘The	Letherii	motive	was,	is	and	shall	ever	be	but	one	thing.
Wealth.	Conquest	as	opportunity.	Opportunity	as	invitation.	Invitation	as
righteous	claim.	Righteous	claim	as	preordained,	as	destiny.’	Something	dark
glittered	in	his	eyes.	‘Destiny	as	victory,	victory	as	conquest,	conquest	as
wealth.	But	nowhere	in	that	perfect	scheme	will	you	find	the	notion	of	defeat.
All	failures	are	temporary,	flawed	in	the	particular.	Correct	the	particular	and
victory	will	be	won	the	next	time	round.’
‘Until	a	situation	arises	where	there	is	no	second	opportunity.’
‘And	future	scholars	will	dissect	every	moment	of	these	days,	assembling
their	lists	of	the	particulars,	the	specifics	from	which	no	generalization
threatening	the	prime	assumptions	can	ever	be	derived.	It	is,	in	truth,	an
exquisite	paradigm,	the	perfect	mechanism	ensuring	the	persistent	survival	of
an	entire	host	of	terrible,	brutal	beliefs.’
‘You	do	seem	to	have	achieved	objectivity,	Turudal	Brizad.’
‘Do	you	know	how	the	First	Empire	collapsed,	Brys	Beddict?	I	don’t	mean
the	revised	versions	every	child	is	taught	by	tutors.	I	mean	the	truth.	Our
ancestors	unleashed	their	own	annihilation.	Through	a	ritual	run	wild,	the
civilization	tore	itself	apart.	Of	course,	in	our	version,	those	who	came
afterwards	to	clean	up	were	transformed	into	the	aggressors,	the	outside
agency	that	wrought	such	destruction	as	to	obliterate	the	First	Empire.	And
here	is	another	truth:	our	colonies	here	were	not	immune	to	the	effects	of	that
unfettered	ritual.	Although	we	succeeded	in	driving	away	the	threat,	as	far	as
we	could,	into	the	ice	wastes.	Where,	we	hoped,	the	bastards	would	die	out.
Alas,	they	didn’t.	And	now,	Brys	Beddict,	they’re	coming	back.’
‘Who?	The	Tiste	Edur?	We	share	nothing	with	them,	Turudal—’
‘Not	the	Tiste	Edur,	although	much	of	their	history—that	of	their	path	of
sorcery	in	particular—is	bound	with	the	succession	of	disasters	that	befell	the


First	Empire.	No,	Finadd,	I	am	speaking	of	their	allies,	the	savages	from	the
ice	wastes,	the	Jheck.’
‘An	interesting	story,’	Brys	said	after	a	moment,	‘but	I	am	afraid	I	do	not
comprehend	its	relevance.’
‘I	am	offering	explanation,’	the	First	Consort	said,	pushing	himself	from
the	column	and	walking	past	Brys.
‘For	what?’
Without	turning,	he	replied,	‘For	the	imminent	failure,	Finadd,	of	my
objectivity.’
	
Moroch	Nevath	slowed	his	lathered	horse	as	he	neared	the	gates.	To	either	side
of	the	raised	road,	what	had	once	been	a	sprawling	confusion	of	huts	and
shacks	had	been	razed,	leaving	only	mud,	postherds	and	slivers	of	wood.	Stains
on	the	city’s	wall	were	all	that	remained	of	the	countless	buildings	that	had
leaned	against	it	for	support.
The	crowds	of	refugees	on	the	road	had	thinned	the	last	few	leagues,	as
Moroch	outdistanced	the	leading	edges.	He’d	seen	deserters	among	them,	and
had	struggled	against	an	urge	to	deliver	summary	justice	upon	the	cowards,	but
there	would	be	time	for	that	later.	The	gates	ahead	were	open,	a	squad	of
soldiers	from	the	Merchants’	Battalion	standing	guard.
Moroch	reined	in	before	them.	‘This	road	will	be	packed	by	dusk,’	he	said.
‘You	will	need	at	least	four	more	squads	to	manage	the	flow.’
A	sergeant	scowled	up	at	him.	‘And	who	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	you?’
‘Another	deserter,’	muttered	a	soldier.
Moroch’s	uniform	was	covered	in	dust	and	patches	of	old	blood.	He	was
bearded,	his	hair	filthy	and	unbound.	Even	so,	he	stared	at	the	sergeant,
shocked	that	he	had	not	been	recognized.	Then	he	bared	his	teeth,	‘There	will
be	deserters,	yes.	They	are	to	be	pulled	aside,	and	all	those	refugees	of
acceptable	age	and	fitness	are	to	be	recruited.	Sergeant,	I	am	Finadd	Moroch
Nevath.	I	led	the	survivors	from	High	Fort	down	to	Brans	Keep,	where	we
were	attached	to	the	Artisan	Battalion.	I	go	now	to	report	to	the	Preda.’
He	was	pleased	at	the	sudden	deference	shown	once	he	identified	himself.
The	sergeant	saluted,	then	asked,	‘Is	it	true,	then,	sir?	The	prince	and	the
queen	are	prisoners	of	the	Edur?’
‘A	miracle	that	they	survived	at	all,	sergeant.’
A	strange	expression	flitted	across	the	sergeant’s	features,	quickly
disguised,	yet	Moroch	had	understood	it.	Why	didn’t	you	fall	defending	them,
Finadd?	You	ran,	like	all	the	others…


‘We	will	get	them	back,	sir,’	the	sergeant	said	after	a	moment.
‘Send	for	your	reinforcements,’	Moroch	said,	kicking	his	horse	into
motion	once	more.	You’re	right.	I	should	have	died.	But	you	were	not	there,
were	you?
He	rode	into	the	city.
	
Champion	Ormly	and	Chief	Investigator	Rucket	were	sitting	on	the	steps	of	the
Rat	Catchers’	Guild,	sharing	a	bottle	of	wine.	Both	scowled	when	they	saw
Bugg,	who	approached	to	stand	before	them.
‘We	know	all	about	you	now,’	Rucket	said.	She	sneered,	but	added	nothing
more.
‘Well,’	said	Bugg,	‘that’s	a	relief.	What	more	have	you	heard	from	your
agents	in	the	occupied	cities?’
‘Oh,’	Ormly	said,	‘and	we’re	to	reveal	all	our	intelligence	to	you,	simply
because	you	ask	for	it?’
‘I	don’t	see	why	not.’
‘He	has	a	point,	the	bastard,’	Rucket	said	to	the	Champion.
Who	looked	at	her	in	disbelief.	‘No	he	doesn’t!	You’re	smitten,	aren’t	you?
Tehol	and	his	manservant—both	of	them!’
‘Don’t	be	absurd.	It’s	in	the	contract,	Ormly.	We	share	information—’
‘Fine,	but	what’s	this	man	shared?	Nothing.	The	Waiting	Man.	What’s	he
waiting	for?	That’s	what	I	want	to	know?
‘You’re	drunk.’
Bugg	said,	‘You	haven’t	heard	anything.’
‘Of	course	we	have!’	Ormly	snapped.	‘Peace	reigns.	The	shops	are	open
once	more.	Coins	roll,	the	sea	lanes	are	unobstructed.’
‘Garrisons?’
‘Disarmed.	Including	local	constabulary.	All	protection	and	enforcement	is
being	done	by	the	Edur.	Empty	estates	have	been	occupied	by	Edur	families—
some	kind	of	nobility	exists	with	them,	with	those	tribes.	Not	so	different	after
all.’
‘Curious,’	Bugg	said.	‘No	resistance?’
‘Their	damned	shades	are	everywhere.	Even	the	rats	don’t	dare	cause
trouble.’
‘And	how	close	to	Letheras	are	the	Edur	armies?’
‘That	we	don’t	know.	Days	away,	maybe.	The	situation	is	pretty	chaotic	in
the	countryside	north	of	here.	I’m	not	answering	any	more	questions	and	that’s
that.’	Ormly	took	the	bottle	from	Rucket	and	drank	deep.


Bugg	looked	round.	The	street	was	quiet.	‘Something	in	the	air…’
‘We	know,’	Rucket	said.
The	silence	lengthened,	then	Bugg	rubbed	at	the	back	of	his	neck.	Without
another	word,	he	walked	away.
A	short	time	later,	he	approached	the	Azath	tower.	As	he	began	crossing	the
street	towards	the	front	gate,	a	figure	emerged	from	a	nearby	alley.	Bugg
halted.
‘Surprised	to	see	you	here,’	the	man	said	as	he	drew	nearer	to	the
manservant.	‘But	a	momentary	surprise.	Thinking	on	it,	where	else	would	you
be?’
Bugg	grunted,	then	said,	‘I	wondered	when	you’d	finally	stir	yourself
awake.	If.’
‘Better	late	than	never.’
‘Here	to	give	things	a	nudge,	are	you?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.	And	what	about	you?’
‘Well,’	Bugg	considered,	‘that	depends.’
‘On?’
‘You,	I	suppose.’
‘Oh,	I’m	just	passing	through,’	the	man	said.
Bugg	studied	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	cocked	his	head	and	asked,	‘So,
how	much	of	you	was	at	the	heart	of	this	mess,	I	wonder?	Feeding	the	queen’s
greed,	the	prince’s	estrangement	from	his	father.	Did	the	notion	of	the	Seventh
Closure	simply	amuse	you?’
‘I	but	watched,’	the	man	replied,	shrugging.	‘Human	nature	is	responsible,
as	ever.	That	is	not	a	burden	I	am	willing	to	accept,	especially	from	you.’
‘All	right.	But	here	you	are,	about	to	take	a	far	more	active	role…’
‘This	goes	back,	old	man.	Edur	or	human,	I	do	not	want	to	see	a	revisiting
of	the	T’lan	Imass.’
After	a	moment,	Bugg	nodded.	‘The	Pack.	I	see.	I	have	never	liked	you
much,	but	this	time	I	am	afraid	I	have	to	agree	with	you.’
‘That	warms	my	heart.’
‘To	be	so	benignly	judged?	I	suppose	it	would	at	that.’
He	laughed,	then,	with	a	careless	wave,	walked	past	Bugg.
The	problem	with	gods,	Bugg	decided,	was	the	way	they	ended	up	getting
dragged	along.	Wherever	their	believers	went.	This	one	had	vanished	from
memory	everywhere	else,	as	extinct	as	the	Holds	themselves.
So.	T’lan	Imass,	the	Pack,	and	the	coming	of	the	Jheck.	Soletaken
worshippers	of	their	ancient	lord,	and,	from	the	potential	resurrection	of	that
ancient	cult,	a	possible	return	of	the	T’lan	Imass,	to	expunge	the	madness.


What	had	driven	him	to	act	now,	then?	In	this	particular	matter?	The
answer	came	to	Bugg,	and	he	smiled	without	humour.	It’s	called	guilt.
	
A	metallic	tapping	woke	Tehol	Beddict.	He	sat	up,	looked	round.	It	was	nearing
late	afternoon.	The	tapping	was	repeated	and	he	glanced	over	to	see	his
bodyguard,	weapon	drawn,	standing	at	the	roof’s	edge	on	the	alley	side.	The
man	gestured	him	over.
Climbing	gingerly	from	the	rickety	bed,	Tehol	tiptoed	to	the	bodyguard’s
side.
Down	in	the	alley	below	a	shape	was	crawling	along	beneath	a	stained	tarp
of	some	sort.	Slow	but	steady	progress	towards	the	corner.
‘I	admit,’	Tehol	said,	‘it’s	a	curious	thing.	But	sufficient	cause	to	wake	me
up?	Ah,	there	I	have	doubts.	The	city	is	full	of	crawling	things,	after	all.	Well,
on	a	normal	day,	that	is.	Here	we	are,	however,	so	perhaps	it	might	be	amusing
if	we	follow	its	tortured	journey.’
The	shape	reached	the	corner,	then	edged	round	it.
Tehol	and	his	companion	tracked	it	from	above.	Along	the	wall,	then	into
the	aisle	leading	to	the	entrance	to	Tehol’s	house.
‘Ah,	it	is	paying	us	a	visit.	Whatever	it’s	selling,	I’m	not	sure	I	want	any.
We	are	facing	a	conundrum,	my	friend.	You	know	how	I	hate	being	rude.	Then
again,	what	if	it	is	selling	some	horrible	disease?’
It	reached	the	doorway,	slipped	inside.
The	bodyguard	walked	to	the	hatch	and	looked	down.	After	a	moment,
Tehol	followed.	As	he	peered	over	he	heard	a	familiar	voice	call	up.
‘Tehol.	Get	down	here.’
‘Shurq?’
A	gesturing	shape	in	the	gloom.
‘Best	wait	here,’	Tehol	said	to	his	guard.	‘I	think	she	wants	privacy.	You
can	keep	an	eye	on	the	entrance	from	up	here,	right?	Excellent.	I’m	glad	we’re
agreed.’	He	climbed	down	the	ladder.
‘I	have	a	problem,’	she	said	when	he	reached	the	floor.
‘Anything	I	can	do	for	you,	Shurq,	I	shall.	Did	you	know	you	have	a	spike
of	some	sort	in	your	forehead?’
‘That’s	my	problem,	you	idiot.’
‘Ah.	Would	you	like	me	to	pull	it	out?’
‘I	don’t	think	that’s	a	good	idea,	Tehol.’
‘Not	worse,	surely,	than	leaving	it	there.’
‘The	issue	is	not	as	clear	as	it	appears	to	be,’	Shurq	said.	‘Something	is


holding	it.	It’s	not	nearly	as	loose	as	one	would	hope.’
‘Are	you	concentrating	on	it?’
She	said	nothing.
He	hastily	added,	‘Maybe	it’s	bent	or	something.’
‘It	goes	through	to	the	back	of	my	skull.	There	may	be	a	flange	of	some
sort.’
‘Why	not	push	it	right	through?’
‘And	leave	the	back	of	my	head	in	pieces?’
‘Well,	the	only	other	possibility	I	can	think	of	at	the	moment,	Shurq,	is	to
pull	it	out	a	little	bit,	saw	it	off,	then	push	what’s	left	back	in.	Granted,	you’d
have	a	hole,	but	you	could	take	to	wearing	a	bandanna	or	head-scarf,	at	least
until	we	visit	Selush.’
‘Not	bad.	But	what	if	it	starts	clunking	around	in	my	head?	Besides,
bandannas	are	pathetically	out	of	date	as	far	as	fashion	goes.	I	would	be
mortified	to	be	seen	in	public.’
‘Selush	might	well	have	a	solution	to	that,	Shurq.	A	stopper	with	a	diamond
in	it,	or	a	patch	of	skin	sewn	over	the	hole.’
‘A	diamond-studded	plug.	I	like	that.’
‘You’ll	launch	a	new	trend.’
‘Do	you	think	Ublala	will	like	it,	Tehol?’
‘Of	course	he	will.	As	for	the	clunking,	well,	that’s	a	definite	problem.	But
it	seems	evident	that	you’re	not	using	your	brain.	I	mean,	that	physical	stuff	in
there.	Your	soul	is	simply	making	use	of	the	body,	right?	Probably	out	of	a
sense	of	familiarity.	Given	that,	maybe	we	could	pull	it	out—’
‘No,	I	like	the	idea	of	sawing	it.	And	the	diamond	stopper.	That	sounds
good.	Now,	can	you	bring	Selush	here?’
‘Right	now?’
‘Well,	as	soon	as	possible.	I	don’t	like	walking	around	with	it	the	way	it	is.
Tell	her	I	will	pay	for	the	inconvenience.’
‘I’ll	try.’
‘Needless	to	say,	I’m	miserable.’
‘Of	course	you	are,	Shurq.’
‘And	I	want	Ublala.	I	want	him	now.’
‘I	understand—’
‘No	you	don’t.	I	said	I	want	him	now.	But	that’s	impossible.	So	you’ll	have
to	do.’
‘Me?	Oh	dear.	Does	it	bite?’
‘Only	one	way	to	find	out,	Tehol	Beddict.	Get	out	of	those	stupid	clothes.’
‘So	long	as	you	don’t	poke	my	eye	out.’


‘Don’t	make	me—oh,	right.	I’ll	be	careful.	I	promise.’
‘Just	so	long	as	you	understand,	Shurq,	I	normally	don’t	do	this	with	my
employees.	Especially	dead	ones.’
‘I	don’t	see	why	you	had	to	bring	that	up.	It’s	not	like	I	can	help	it.’
‘I	know.	But	it’s,	uh,	well…’
‘Creepy?’
‘You’re	lovely	and	all	that,	I	mean,	Selush	was	brilliant—the	best	work
she’s	ever	done.’
‘Think	how	I	feel,	Tehol?	Errant	knows,	you’re	no	Ublala.’
‘Why,	thank	you.’
‘Now,	take	your	clothes	off.	I’m	sure	it	won’t	take	long	anyway.’
	
The	street	was	mostly	unobstructed,	allowing	Moroch	Nevath	to	make	good
time	on	his	approach	to	the	old	palace.	His	horse	would	probably	never	fully
recover	from	the	journey	down	from	High	Fort.	There	was	a	Bluerose	trainer
in	the	palace,	he	had	heard—although	he	had	never	seen	the	man—who	was
said	to	heal	horses.	If	he	found	the	time,	he	might	hunt	him	down.
A	figure	stepped	into	the	street	ahead.
Recognizing	the	man,	Moroch	reined	in.	‘Turudal	Brizad.’
‘Finadd.	I	barely	recognized	you.’
‘You’re	not	alone	in	that,	First	Consort.	Now,	I	am	off	to	report	to	the
Preda.’
‘You	will	find	her	in	the	throne	room.	Finadd,	I	may	have	need	of	you
shortly.’
Moroch	scowled.	‘For	what?’
The	man	smiled.	‘Specifically,	your	skill	with	the	sword.’
‘Who	do	you	want	me	to	kill,	Brizad?	Some	irate	husband,	an	outraged
wife?	I	think	Gerun	Eberict	would	better	suit	your	requirements	in	such
matters.’
‘I	wish	it	were	that	simple,	Finadd.	Ideally,	I	would	seek	out	Brys	Beddict,
but	he	has	other	tasks	before	him—’
‘So	do	I.’
‘The	Preda	will	assign	you	to	protection	of	the	Royal	Household,	such	as	it
is—’
‘That	is	the	task	of	the	King’s	Champion.’
‘Yes.	Meaning	you	will	find	yourself	with	some	time	on	your	hands.’
Moroch’s	scowl	deepened.	‘I	intend	to	accompany	the	Preda	when	she
marches,	First	Consort.’


Turudal	sighed.	‘You	are	no	longer	trusted,	Finadd.	You	failed	both	the
prince	and	the	queen.	It	would	have	been	preferable	had	you	died	in	the
endeavour	at	High	Fort.’
‘I	was	injured.	Separated	from	my	charges.	I	could	not	even	find	them	once
the	battle	commenced—’
‘Tragic,	Finadd,	but	such	stones	make	no	splash	on	a	frozen	lake.	What	I
offer	you	is	an	opportunity	for	redemption,	for	your	name	to	be	hailed	in
history.	I	am	certain,	Moroch	Nevath,	that	you	will	receive	no	comparable
offer	from	anyone	else.’
The	Finadd	studied	the	man	standing	before	him.	He’d	always	made
Moroch’s	skin	crawl.	Too	slick,	too	perfumed.	Too	smug.	Now	more	than
ever.	‘There	is	nothing	you	can	offer	me—’
‘Finadd,	I	want	you	to	kill	a	god.’
Moroch	sneered,	said	nothing.
Turudal	Brizad	smiled,	then	said,	‘The	god	of	the	Jheck.	And	where	can
you	find	this	god?	Why,	here	in	the	city.	Waiting	for	the	arrival	of	its	savage
worshippers.’
‘How	do	you	know	all	this?’
‘Kill	the	god,	Moroch	Nevath,	and	the	Tiste	Edur	will	lose	their	allies.’
‘We	will	speak	more	on	this,’	the	Finadd	said	in	a	growl.	‘But	for	now,	I
must	go.’
‘Of	course.	You	have	my	sympathies,	by	the	way.	I	know	you	could	have
done	nothing	to	save	Quillas	or	Janall—
‘Save	your	breath,	First	Consort.’	Moroch	snapped	the	reins,	sending	his
horse	forward,	forcing	Turudal	Brizad	to	step	aside	hastily	to	avoid	being
knocked	down.
	
Bugg	found	Kettle	hunched	against	the	door	of	the	tower.	She	was	shivering,
knees	drawn	up,	her	head	down.
‘Child?’
A	muffled	reply.	‘Go	away.’
He	crouched	beside	her.	‘How	bad	is	it?’
‘I’m	hungry.	My	stomach	hurts.	The	bites	itch.’
‘You’re	alive,	then.’	He	saw	her	head	nod.	‘And	you’d	rather	be	dead.’
Another	nod.	‘We	need	to	get	you	some	new	clothes.	Some	food,	and	water.	We
need	to	find	you	shelter—you	can’t	stay	here	any	longer.’
‘But	I	have	to!	He	needs	my	help!’
Bugg	rose.	‘I	think	I’ll	walk	the	grounds.’


‘Don’t.	It’s	too	dangerous.’
‘I’ll	be	all	right,	lass.	No	need	to	worry	about	Grandfather	Bugg.	And	then
I’ll	come	back	here,	and	you	and	I	will	head	to	the	Downs	Market.’
She	looked	up	then,	regarded	him	with	red-rimmed	eyes	that	looked	far
older	than	the	rest	of	her	face.	‘I	have	no	money.’
‘Me	neither,’	Bugg	said,	smiling.	‘But	a	lot	of	people	owe	me.’
He	headed	into	the	grounds.	The	earth	was	hot	beneath	his	worn	sandals.
Most	of	the	insects	had	died	or	moulted,	their	bodies	crunching	underfoot.
Withered	roots	had	been	pushed	to	the	surface,	split	and	peeling.	Stained
fragments	of	bone	were	visible,	pieces	of	skull	and	fractured	long-bones,	the
occasional	oversized	vertebra.	The	crumpled	remains	of	barrows	were	on	all
sides.
So	much	history	had	been	lost,	destroyed	beneath	this	steaming	earth.	A
good	thing,	too,	since	most	of	it	was	unpleasant.	Unfortunately,	a	few	hoary
nightmares	remained.	The	meanest	of	the	lot,	in	fact.
And	one	of	them	had	sworn	to	help.	Against	the	others.
All	in	all,	Bugg	decided,	not	a	promising	situation.
‘A	stranger	among	us.’
He	halted,	frowning.	‘Who	speaks?’
‘My	brothers	welcome	you.	I	welcome	you.	Come	closer.	Hold	out	your
hand,	draw	us	forth.	Your	rewards	will	be	endless.’
‘So	will	my	regret.	No,	I’m	afraid	I	cannot	oblige	you,	Toblakai.’
‘You	have	taken	one	step	too	many,	stranger.	It	is	too	late.	You	we	shall	use
—’
A	surge	of	power,	rushing	into	Bugg’s	mind,	seeking	domination—then
gone.
‘No.	Not	you.	Come	no	closer.’
‘I	am	sorry	you	found	me	so	unpalatable.’
‘Go	away.’
‘You	and	your	brothers	are	in	for	a	fight,’	Bugg	said.	‘You	know	that,
don’t	you?’
‘We	cannot	be	defeated.’
‘Oh,	how	often	those	words	are	spoken.	How	many	of	your	fellow
prisoners	said	much	the	same,	at	one	time	or	another?	Always	the	conceit	of
the	moment.’
‘None	of	this	is	your	concern.’
‘You	are	right,	none	of	it	is.	But	you	should	be	warned,	the	child,	Kettle,	is
not	to	be	harmed.’
‘She	is	nothing	to	us.’


‘Good.	Make	sure	it	stays	that	way.’
‘Be	careful	with	your	threats,	stranger.’
‘Ah.	You	don’t	understand,	do	you?	Attack	the	child,	and	the	one	hiding
within	her	will	awaken.	And	that	one	will	annihilate	you,	and	probably
everyone	else	just	for	good	measure.’
‘Who	is	it	that	hides	within	the	child?’
‘Its	name?	I	don’t	know.	But	it	is	Forkrul	Assail.’
‘You	are	lying.’
The	manservant	shrugged,	swung	about	and	made	his	way	back	to	where
Kettle	waited.	There	was	time	still,	he	decided,	to	go	shopping.
	
King	Ezgara	Diskanar	sat	on	his	throne,	motionless,	pale	as	dusted	marble,	the
lids	of	his	eyes	half	lowered	as	he	regarded	First	Eunuch	Nifadas.	The	scene
belonged	to	an	artist,	Brys	decided.	Heavy	with	gravitas,	the	colours	dark	and
saturated,	a	great	fall	imminent.	All	here,	in	this	frozen	moment.	The	Eve
before	the	Seventh	Closure,	the	painter	might	call	it,	with	quiet	pleasure	at	the
multitude	of	meanings	hidden	in	the	title.
But	there	was	no	artist,	no	vulture	to	sit	on	the	wings	of	civilization’s
tottering	construct,	red-eyed	and	clucking.	The	audience	consisted	of	Brys,
First	Concubine	Nisall,	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz	and	four	of	the	King’s	Guard.
The	sun	had	dropped	low	enough	outside	to	send	shafts	of	lurid	light
through	the	stained	glass	panels	set	in	the	dome,	brushing	the	motes	with	ugly
hues.	The	air	smelled	of	sweat	and	lantern	smoke.
‘And	this,’	King	Ezgara	finally	said,	‘is	what	awaits	my	people.’
The	First	Eunuch’s	small	eyes	blinked.	‘Sire,	the	soldiers	do	not	welcome
the	notion	of	new	overlords.	They	will	fight	to	defend	you.’
‘I	have	seen	scant	evidence	of	that	thus	far,	Nifadas.’
The	Preda	spoke	to	that.	‘Sire,	it	quickly	became	evident	that	we	could	not
match	the	enemy	in	the	traditional	manner,	given	the	sorcery	available	to	them.
It	was	tactically	incumbent	that	we	withdraw,	avoiding	engagement—’
‘But	now	our	backs	are	to	the	city’s	wall,	Preda.’
‘With	time	to	prepare,	as	we	have	been	doing	since	the	first	unit	arrived	at
Brans	Keep.	Sire,	we	have	never	before	fielded	such	a	large	army	as	that	which
is	assembling	there	right	now.	Over	two	thousand	trebuchets,	fifteen	hundred
mangonels	and	three	hundred	triple-mounted	Dresh	ballistae.	We	have	dug	pits,
trenches,	traps.	The	mages	have	woven	rituals	across	the	entire	battlefield.	Our
auxiliaries	alone	number	over	ten	thousand—’
‘Untrained	fodder,	Preda.	A	terrible	waste	of	citizenry.	Are	they	even


armed?’
‘Spears	and	shields,	sire.	Leather	armour.’
The	king	leaned	back.	‘Nifadas.	Still	no	word	on	the	fate	of	my	wife	and
son?’
‘Our	emissaries	do	not	return,	sire.’
‘What	does	he	want	with	them?’
‘I	am	at	a	loss	to	answer	that,’	the	First	Eunuch	admitted.	‘This	Tiste	Edur
emperor	is…unpredictable.	Sire,	despite	the	Preda’s	confidence,	I	believe	it
would	be	wise	to	begin	plans	for	your	temporary	displacement—’
‘My	what?’
‘Leaving	Letheras,	sire.	Southeast,	perhaps.	Tallis	on	the	Isle,	or	Truce.’
‘No.’
‘Sire—’
‘Nifadas,	if	I	am	to	fall,	then	it	will	be	here.	I	shall	not	bring	destruction
upon	other	cities,	for	it	is	destruction	my	presence	will	invite.	The
protectorates,	should	I	be	usurped,	will	fall	in	line.	Peacefully,	with	no	loss	of
life.	This	Tiste	Edur	emperor	shall	have	his	empire.	For	myself,	if	I	must	die,	it
will	be	here,	on	this	very	throne.	Or,	rather,’	he	said	with	a	wry	smile,	‘on	the
one	in	the	Eternal	Domicile.’
Silence.	Then	the	Preda	turned	slowly	to	face	Brys.
He	returned	her	regard	dispassionately.	The	king	had	made	his	wishes
known.	If	he	would	die	on	his	throne,	then	his	Champion	would	of	necessity
already	be	dead.	There	was	no	other	path	to	Ezgara	Diskanar,	after	all.
‘It	is	my	intention,	sire,’	Unnutal	said,	‘that	the	situation	you	describe	does
not	arise.	The	Tiste	Edur	will	be	thrown	back.	Beaten	and	broken.’
‘As	you	say,’	the	king	replied.
These	were	not	new	considerations	for	Brys.	Ever	since	the	first	defeats	up
north,	he	had	been	thinking	about	a	final	stand	before	his	king.	The	passage
leading	into	the	throne	room	in	the	Eternal	Domicile	was	relatively	narrow.
With	four	of	his	best	guards	he	felt	he	could	hold	it	for	some	time.	But	without
relief	his	death	would	be	inevitable.	The	least	palatable	thought	of	all,	however,
was	the	possibility	of	dying	beneath	sorcery.	Against	which	he	had	no	defence.
The	Ceda’s	seeming	descent	into	madness	was	the	most	painful	blow	of	all.
Should	the	enemy	reach	the	palace,	the	loss	of	Kuru	Qan	would	be	decisive.
Brys	wanted	to	die	honourably,	but	he	was	helpless	to	choose,	and	that
stung.
The	doors	opened	behind	him	and	he	turned	to	see	a	guard	step	inside.
‘What	now?’	the	king	asked.
‘Finadd	Gerun	Eberict,	my	lord,’	the	guard	announced.


‘Very	well.’
The	man	entered	and	bowed	before	the	king.	‘Sire,	I	apologize	for	arriving
late.	There	were	household	affairs	to	attend	to—’
‘Taking	precedence	over	an	audience	with	your	king,	Finadd?’
‘Sire,	in	my	absence	my	estate	was	broken	into.’
‘I	am	grieved	to	hear	that.’
‘A	substantial	portion	of	my	wealth	was	stolen,	sire.’
‘Careless,	Gerun.	It	is	never	wise	to	hoard	your	coin.’
‘My	security	measures	were	extreme—’
‘Yet	insufficient,	it	seems.	Have	you	any	clues	regarding	the	brazen	thief?’
Gerun	Eberict’s	eyes	flicked	to	Brys,	then	away	again.	‘I	have,	sire.	I
believe	I	shall	recover	my	losses	shortly.’
‘I	trust	said	activity	will	not	prove	too	messy.’
‘I	am	confident,	sire.’
‘And	to	what	extent	will	this	interfere	with	your	duties	here	in	the	palace,
Finadd?’
‘None	whatsoever,	sire.	I	am	able	to	resume	command	of	my	company.’
‘Good.	They	have	been	busy	quelling	riots.’
‘I	intend	to	bring	an	end	to	those	riots,	sire.	You	will	have	peace	in
Letheras	by	this	evening.’
‘That	leaves	you	little	time,	Gerun.	Off	you	go,	then,	but	be	warned.	I	do
not	want	a	bloodbath.’
‘Of	course,	sire.’	Gerun	Eberict	bowed	again,	saluted	the	Preda,	then	left.
The	doors	shut,	then	Ezgara	said,	‘Brys	Beddict,	ready	two	hundred	of
your	soldiers	as	clean-up	crews.	Expect	at	least	one	bloodbath	before	the
twelfth	bell	tonight.’
‘At	once,	sire—’
‘Not	yet.	Why	did	Gerun	glance	to	you	when	I	enquired	about	the	thief	who
struck	his	estate?’
‘I	do	not	know,	sire.	I	was	wondering	that	myself.’
‘I	trust	your	resident	brother	has	not	fallen	to	new	depths.’
‘I	do	not	believe	so.’
‘Because	Gerun	Eberict	is	a	formidable	enemy.’
Brys	nodded	his	agreement.
‘Sire,’	the	Preda	said,	‘it	is	time	for	me	to	join	my	army.’
‘Go	then,	and	may	the	Errant	touch	you	with	mercy.’
As	Unnutal	bowed	and	strode	towards	the	doors,	Brys	said	to	the	king,	‘I
beg	my	leave	as	well,	sire.’
‘Go	on,	Champion.	Once	you	have	detailed	your	soldiers	return	here.	I


want	you	close,	from	now	on.’
‘Yes,	sire.’
In	the	hall	outside	the	throne	room,	Unnutal	Hebaz	was	waiting.	‘He
suspects	Tehol.’
‘I	know.’
‘Why?’
Brys	shook	his	head.
‘You	had	better	warn	him,	Brys.’
‘Thank	you	for	your	concern,	Preda.’
She	smiled,	but	it	was	a	sad	smile.	‘I	admit	to	a	certain	fondness	for	Tehol.’
‘I	was	not	aware	of	that,’	Brys	said.
‘He	needs	some	bodyguards.’
‘He	has	them,	Preda.	The	Shavankrats.’
Her	brows	lifted.	‘The	triplets?’	Then	she	frowned.	‘I’ve	not	seen	them
about	for	some	time,	come	to	think	of	it.	Meaning	you	have	anticipated	Gerun
Eberict,	which	in	turn	suggests	you	know	more	than	you	revealed	to	the	king.’
‘My	concern	was	not	regarding	Eberict,	Preda.’
‘Ah,	I	see.	Well,	you	need	not	inform	those	brothers	to	be	extra	vigilant,
since	I	don’t	think	that	is	possible.’
‘Agreed,	Preda.’
She	studied	him	briefly,	then	said,	‘Would	that	you	could	join	us	on	the
field	of	battle,	Brys.’
‘Thank	you	for	that,	Preda.	Errant	be	with	you.’
‘I’d	rather	the	Ceda,’	she	said,	then	added,	‘I	apologize.	I	know	he	was	your
friend.’
‘He	still	is,’	Brys	said.
She	nodded,	then	departed,	her	boots	echoing	in	the	hallway.
Brys	stared	after	her.	In	a	few	days	from	now	she	might	be	dead.
So	might	I.


Chapter	Twenty-one

The	Betrayer	stands	in	the	shadow	of	the	Empty	Throne.
That	is	why	it	is	empty.
THE	CASTING	OF	THE	TILES
CEDA	PARUDU 	ERRIDICT
The	mass	of	refugees	had	forced	them	from	the	main	road,	but	Seren	Pedac
was	familiar	with	all	the	old	tracks	winding	through	the	countryside,	the	herder
paths,	quarry	and	logging	roads,	the	smugglers’	trails.	They	were	skirting	an
overgrown	limestone	quarry	four	leagues	north	from	Brous	as	the	sun	sank
behind	the	trees	on	their	right.
The	Acquitor	found	herself	riding	alongside	the	mage	Corlo.	‘I	have	been
wondering,’	she	said.	‘The	sorcery	you	use.	I	have	never	heard	of	magic	that
steals	the	will	from	its	victims,	that	reaches	into	their	minds.’
‘Not	surprised,’	he	said	in	a	grunt.	‘Here	in	this	backwater,	all	the	sorcery
is	raw	and	ugly.	No	subtlety,	no	refinement	of	the	powers.	Yours	is	a	land
where	most	of	the	doors	are	closed.	I	doubt	there’s	been	any	innovation	in	the
study	of	sorcery	in	the	past	ten	thousand	years.’
‘Thank	you	for	those	admiring	sentiments,	Corlo.	Maybe	you’d	care	to
explain	things	for	my	ignorant	self.’
He	sighed.	‘Where	to	start?’
‘Manipulating	people’s	minds.’
‘Mockra.	That’s	the	warren’s	name.’
‘All	right,	bad	idea.	Go	back	further.	What’s	a	warren?’
‘Well,	even	that’s	not	easy	to	answer,	lass.	It’s	a	path	of	magic.	The	forces
that	govern	all	existence	are	aspected.	Which	means—’
‘Aspected.	In	the	way	the	Holds	are	aspected?’
‘The	Holds.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Sitting	in	a	wagon	with	square	wheels	and
complimenting	each	other	on	the	smooth	ride.	That’s	the	Holds,	Acquitor.	They
were	created	in	a	world	long	gone,	a	world	where	the	forces	were	rougher,
wilder,	messier.	The	warrens,	well,	those	are	wheels	without	corners.’


‘You’re	not	helping	much	here,	Corlo.’
He	scratched	at	his	beard.	‘Damned	fleas.	All	right.	Paths	of	aspected
magic.	Like	forces	and	unlike	forces.	Right?	Unlike	forces	repel,	and	like
forces	hold	together,	you	see.	Same	as	water	in	a	river,	all	flowing	the	same
way.	Sure,	there’s	eddies,	draws	and	such,	but	it	all	heads	down	eventually.	I’ll
talk	about	those	eddies	later.	So,	the	warrens	are	those	rivers,	only	you	can’t
see	them.	The	current	is	invisible,	and	what	you	can	see	is	only	the	effect.
Watch	a	mob	in	a	square,	the	way	the	minds	of	every	person	in	it	seem	to	melt
into	one.	Riots	and	public	executions,	or	battles,	for	that	matter,	they’re	all
hints	of	Mockra,	they’re	what	you	can	see.	But	a	mage	who’s	found	a	way	into
the	warren	of	Mockra,	well,	that	mage	can	reach	deeper,	down	into	that	water.
In	fact,	that	mage	can	jump	right	in	and	swim	with	the	current.	Find	an	eddy	and
step	back	out,	in	a	different	place	from	where	he	started.’
‘So	when	you	say	“path”	you	mean	it	in	a	physical	sense.’
‘Only	if	you	choose	to	use	it	that	way.	Mockra’s	not	a	good	example;	the
eddies	take	you	nowhere,	mostly.	Because	it’s	sorcery	of	the	mind,	and	the
mind’s	a	lot	more	limited	than	we’d	care	to	think.	Take	Meanas—that’s	another
warren.	It’s	aspected	to	shadows	and	illusion,	a	child	of	Thyr,	the	warren	of
Light.	Separate	but	related.	Open	the	warren	of	Meanas,	and	you	can	travel
through	shadows.	Unseen,	and	fast	as	thought	itself,	nearly.	And	illusions,	well,
that	reveals	the	sisterhood	to	Mockra,	for	it	is	a	kind	of	manipulation	of	the
mind,	or,	at	least,	of	perception,	via	the	cunning	reshaping	of	light	and	shadow
and	dark.’
‘Do	the	Tiste	Edur	employ	this	Meanas?’	Seren	asked.
‘Uh,	no.	Not	really.	Theirs	is	a	warren	not	normally	accessible	to	humans.
Kurald	Emurlahn.	It’s	Shadow,	but	Shadow	more	as	a	Hold	than	a	warren.
Besides,	Kurald	Emurlahn	is	shattered.	In	pieces.	The	Tiste	Edur	can	access	but
one	fragment	and	that’s	all.’
‘All	right.	Mockra	and	Meanas	and	Thyr.	There	are	others?’
‘Plenty,	lass.	Rashan,	Ruse,	Tennes,	Hood—’
‘Hood.	You	use	that	word	when	you	curse,	don’t	you?’
‘Aye,	it’s	the	warren	of	Death.	It’s	the	name	of	the	god	himself.	But	that’s
the	other	thing	about	warrens.	They	can	be	realms,	entire	worlds.	Step	through
and	you	can	find	yourself	in	a	land	with	ten	moons	overhead,	and	stars	in
constellations	you’ve	never	seen	before.	Places	with	two	suns.	Or	places	filled
with	the	spirits	of	the	dead—although	if	you	step	through	the	gates	in	Hood’s
Realm	you	don’t	come	back.	Or,	rather,	you	shouldn’t.	Anyway,	a	mage	finds	a
warren	suited	to	his	or	her	nature,	a	natural	affinity	if	you	like.	And	through
enough	study	and	discipline	you	find	ways	of	reaching	into	it,	making	use	of


the	forces	within	it.	Some	people,	of	course,	are	born	with	natural	talent,
meaning	they	don’t	have	to	work	as	hard.’
‘So,	you	reach	into	this	Mockra,	and	that	gets	you	into	the	minds	of	other
people.’
‘Sort	of,	lass.	I	make	use	of	proclivities.	I	make	the	water	cloudy,	or	fill	it
with	frightening	shadows.	The	victim’s	body	does	the	rest.’
‘Their	body?	What	do	you	mean?’
‘Say	you	take	two	cows	to	slaughter.	One	of	them	you	kill	quick,	without	it
even	knowing	what’s	about	to	happen.	The	other,	well,	you	push	it	down	a
track,	in	some	place	filled	with	the	stench	of	death,	with	screams	of	other	dying
animals	on	all	sides.	Until,	stupid	as	that	cow	is,	it	knows	what’s	coming.	And
is	filled	with	terror.	Then	you	kill	it.	Cut	a	haunch	from	each	beast,	do	they
taste	identical?’
‘I	have	no	idea.’
‘They	don’t.	Because	the	frightened	cow’s	blood	was	filled	with	bitter
fluids.	That’s	what	fear	does.	Bitter,	noxious	fluids.	Makes	the	meat	itself
unhealthy	to	eat.	My	point	is,	you	trick	the	mind	to	respond	to	invisible	fears,
unfounded	beliefs,	and	the	blood	goes	foul,	and	that	foulness	makes	the	fear
worse,	turns	the	belief	into	certainty.’
‘As	if	the	slaughterhouse	for	the	second	cow	was	only	an	illusion,	when	in
truth	it	was	crossing	pasture.’
‘Exactly.’
Seren	studied	the	back	of	Iron	Bars	where	he	rode	ahead,	and	was	silent.
‘All	right,’	Corlo	said	after	a	time,	‘now	tell	me	what	you’re	really	on
about,	lass.’
She	hesitated,	then	asked,	‘Corlo,	can	you	do	anything	about	memories?’
She	looked	across	at	him.	‘Can	you	take	them	away?’
In	front	of	them,	Iron	Bars	half	turned	in	his	saddle,	regarded	Seren	a
moment,	then	swung	back	round.
‘Ah,’	Corlo	said	under	his	breath.	‘You	sure	you	want	that?’
‘Can	you?’
‘I	can	make	you	blind	and	senseless	to	them,	but	it’ll	be	in	your	nature	to
fret	about	that	strange	emptiness.	As	if	you’re	always	on	the	edge	of
realization,	but	never	able	to	reach	it.	It	could	drive	you	to	distraction,
Acquitor.	Besides,	the	body	remembers.	You’ll	react	to	things	you	see,	smell,
taste,	and	you	won’t	know	why.	It’ll	gnaw	away	at	you.	Your	whole	personality
will	change.’
‘You’ve	done	it	before,	haven’t	you?’
He	nodded.	Then	hesitantly	ventured,	‘There’s	another	option,	lass.’


‘What?’
‘It’s	not	the	memories	that	are	hurting,	Acquitor.	It’s	how	you	feel	about
them.	It’s	the	you,	now,	warring	with	the	you,	then.	Can’t	explain	it	any	better
—’
‘No,	I	understand	you.’
‘Well,	I	can	make	you	feel,	uh,	differently	about	it.’
‘How	do	you	mean?’
‘End	the	war,	lass.’
‘What	would	I	feel,	Corlo?’
‘I	could	make	you	cry	it	out.	All	out,	Seren.’	He	met	her	eyes.	‘And	when
that	was	done,	you’d	feel	better.	Not	much	better,	but	some.	You	release	it	all,
but	only	once,	I	promise.	There’s	a	risk	with	crying	it	all	out,	mind	you.	Could
be	as	traumatic	as	the	rape	itself.	But	you	won’t	fall	into	the	trap	of	cycling
through	it	over	and	over	again.	Release	gets	addictive,	you	see.	It	becomes	a
fixed	behaviour,	as	destructive	as	any	other.	Keep	repeating	the	exercise	of
grief	and	it	loses	meaning,	it	becomes	rote,	false,	a	game	of	self-delusion,	selfindulgence.	A	way	of	never	getting	over	anything,	ever.’
‘This	sounds	complicated,	Corlo.’
‘It	is.	You	stop	the	war	all	in	one	shot,	and	afterwards	the	memory	leaves
you	feeling…nothing.	A	little	remorse,	maybe.	The	same	as	you	feel	for	all	the
mistakes	you	left	behind	you	during	your	whole	life.	Regrets,	but	no	selfrecrimination,	because	that’s	your	real	enemy.	Isn’t	it?	A	part	of	you	feeling
like	you	somehow	deserved	it.’
She	nodded,	not	trusting	herself	to	speak.
‘Making	you	want	to	punish	yourself.’
Another	nod.
Corlo	raised	his	voice.	‘Avowed,	we	might—’
‘Aye,’	he	said,	lifting	a	gauntleted	hand.
The	troop	halted.
Corlo’s	hands	were	there,	helping	her	down	from	the	horse.	She	glared	at
him.	‘You’ve	started,	haven’t	you?’
‘No,	lass.	You	did.	Remember	what	I	said	about	natural	talent?	You’ve	got
it	by	the	bucketful.’
‘I	never	cry,’	she	said	as	he	led	her	off	the	trail	into	the	adjacent	forest.
‘Of	course	not,’	he	replied.	‘You’ve	got	the	warren	right	there	in	your
head,	and	you’ve	spent	most	of	your	life	manipulating	it	like	a	High	Mage.
Anything	to	keep	going,	right?’
She	pulled	up,	looked	behind	them.
Iron	Bars	was	just	visible	at	the	trail’s	edge,	watching.


‘Don’t	mind	him,	he’s	just	worried,	lass.	He	won’t	be	there	when	you—’
‘No,’	she	said.	‘He	comes	with	us.’
‘Acquitor?’
‘If	I	start	beating	on	your	chest,	Corlo,	I’m	liable	to	break	a	rib	or	two.
He’s	tougher.’
The	mage’s	eyes	widened,	then	he	smiled.	‘Avowed!	Stop	hovering,	if	you
please.’
	
Warrens.	It	occurred	to	Seren	Pedac,	much	later,	that	they	were	a	thing	not
easily	defined,	yet	simply	understood.	Forces	of	nature,	proclivities	and
patterns.	Corlo’s	explanations	had	worked	to	illuminate	for	her	those	mostly
hidden	forces,	somewhat,	but	in	the	end	it	was	the	knowledge	already	within
her	that	offered	revelation.
In	a	simplistic	world,	four	elements	are	commonly	identified,	and	things
are	left	at	that.	As	if	the	universe	could	be	confined	to	four	observable,
apposite	manifestations.	But	Corlo	had	mentioned	others,	and	once	that	notion
was	accepted,	then	it	was	as	if	the	world	opened	out,	as	if	new	colours	rose
sudden	and	startling	in	their	terrible	beauty.
Time	was	such	an	element,	she	now	believed.	The	stretch	of	existence
between	events,	consisting	of	countless	other	events,	all	strung	together	in
complex	patterns	of	cause	and	effect,	all	laid	out	like	images	sewn	onto	a
tapestry,	creating	a	sequence	of	scenes	that,	once	one	stood	back,	was	revealed
to	be	co-existing.	Present	all	at	once.
She	had	been	repeating	scenes.	A	grim	realization.	Repeating	scenes	for
most	of	her	life.	She	had	imposed	her	own	pattern,	bereft	of	nuance,	and	had
viewed	her	despair	as	a	legitimate	response,	perhaps	the	only	legitimate
response.	A	conceit	of	being	intelligent,	almost	preternaturally	aware	of	the
multitude	of	perspectives	that	was	possible	in	all	things.	And	that	had	been	the
trap,	all	along,	the	sorcerous	incantation	called	grief,	her	invitation	to	the
demons	of	self-recrimination,	reappearing	again	and	again	on	that	tapestry—
different	scenes,	the	same	leering	faces.
Unravelling	the	ritual	had	proved	frighteningly	easy,	like	pulling	a	single
thread.	If	it	had	been	Corlo’s	work,	then	he	had	been	subtle	beyond	belief,	for	it
had	seemed	that	the	effort	was	entirely	her	own.	He	had	sat	across	from	her,
there	in	the	glade	they’d	found	thirty	paces	from	the	trail,	his	expression	both
relaxed	and	watchful,	and,	oddly	enough,	she	had	felt	no	shame	weeping	in
front	of	him.
Iron	Bars	had	begun	by	pacing	restlessly,	but	his	motion	stilled	when	her


first	tears	arrived,	and	eventually	she	found	herself	in	the	half-embrace	of	one
of	his	arms,	her	face	pressed	against	his	neck.
It	might	have	been	sordid,	under	other	circumstances.	The	critical	part	of
herself	could	well	have	sneered	at	the	contrivance,	as	if	the	only	genuine
gestures	were	the	small	ones,	the	ones	devoid	of	an	audience.	As	if	true
honesty	belonged	to	solitude,	since	to	be	witnessed	was	to	perform,	and
performance	was	inherently	false	since	it	invited	expectation.
In	the	exhausted	aftermath	of	a	surprisingly	short	period	of	release,	when	it
seemed	in	truth	that	she	was	empty	inside,	hollowed-out	calm,	she	could
explore	what	was	left,	without	the	fetters	of	emotion.	She	had	chosen	to	have
faith	in	Buruk	the	Pale,	believed—because	it	was	easy—that	he	would	not	give
up	on	life.	She	never	did,	after	all.	She	had	refused	the	evidence	of	his	sudden
ease,	the	strange	freedom	in	his	words	to	her	during	those	last	few	days.	When
he’d	already	made	up	his	mind.	He’d	seen	the	war	coming,	after	all,	and	wanted
to	excise	his	own	role	in	its	making.	Cut	himself	from	this	particular	tapestry.
But	there	had	been	sorcery	in	her	own	self-deceit,	the	path	to	grief	and	guilt,
and	there	had	been	a	comforting	familiarity	to	the	ritual.
From	her	failure	sprang	the	requirement	to	be	punished.
She	had	not	invited	the	rape.	No	sane	person	would	do	that.	But	she	had
woven	the	scene	and	all	its	potential	horror.
Not	all	things	about	oneself	were	likeable.
So	she	had	wept	for	her	flaws,	for	her	weaknesses	and	for	her	humanity.
Before	two	witnesses	who	no	doubt	had	their	own	stories,	their	own	reasons	to
grieve.
But	now	it	was	done.	There	was	no	value	in	repeating	this	particular	ritual.
Exhaustion	gave	way	to	sleep,	and	when	she	awoke	it	was	dawn.	The	squad	had
camped	in	the	glade,	and	all	were	still	asleep	with	the	exception	of	Iron	Bars,
who	was	sitting	before	a	small	hearth,	intent	on	stirring	the	flames	to	life	once
more.
A	blanket	had	been	thrown	over	her.	The	morning	air	was	cool	and	damp.
Seren	sat	up,	drawing	the	wool	about	her	shoulders,	then	rose	and	joined	the
Avowed	at	the	smouldering	fire.
He	did	not	glance	up.	‘Acquitor.	You	are	rested?’
‘Yes,	thank	you.	I	don’t	know	if	I	should	apologize—’
‘For	what?	I’ve	been	hearing	horses,	south	of	here.’
‘That	would	be	Brous.	There’s	a	garrison	there,	a	small	one.’
‘Brous	is	a	city?’
‘A	village,	set	in	the	midst	of	stone	ruins.	It	was	once	a	holy	site	for	the
Tarthenal,	although	they	didn’t	build	it.’


‘How	do	you	know?’
‘The	scale	is	all	wrong	for	Tarthenal.’
‘Too	small?’
‘No,	too	big.’
He	looked	up,	squinted,	then	rose.	‘Time	to	prepare	a	meal,	I	think.’
‘You’re	a	strange	officer,	Iron	Bars,’	Seren	said,	smiling.	‘Cooking	every
breakfast	for	your	soldiers.’
‘I	always	wake	up	first,’	he	replied,	dragging	close	a	food	pack.
She	watched	him	working,	wondering	how	often	he	had	done	this.	How
many	glades	like	this	one,	how	many	mornings	the	first	to	rise	among	snoring
soldiers.	So	far	from	anything	resembling	home.	In	a	way,	she	understood	him
in	that	regard.	There	were	two	manifestations	in	the	Empty	Hold	that	spoke	to
that	nature.	Walker	and	Wanderer,	the	distinction	between	them	a	subtle	one	of
motivation.
The	Avowed,	she	realized,	was	an	easy	man	to	watch.
Coughing,	the	mage	Corlo	clawed	free	of	his	blanket	and	stumbled	over.
‘Where’s	that	tea?’
‘Almost	ready,’	Iron	Bars	replied.
‘Got	a	headache,’	Corlo	said.	‘Something’s	up.’
‘Heard	horses	earlier,’	the	Avowed	said.	‘Screaming.’
‘That’s	brewed	enough	for	me.’
The	Avowed	dipped	a	ladle	into	the	pot,	filled	the	tin	cup	Corlo	held	out.
Seren	saw	the	mage’s	hand	trembling.
‘May	need	the	diadem	today,	sir.’
‘Uh,	rather	not.	Let’s	try	to	avoid	that	if	we	can.’
‘Aye.’
‘The	diadem?’	Seren	asked.	‘The	one	you	used	to	open	that	path	in	Trate?’
Corlo	shot	her	a	sharp	look,	then	nodded.	‘But	not	for	that.	There’s	other
rituals	woven	into	it.	Forty	of	’em,	in	fact.	The	one	we	might	have	to	use
speeds	us	up,	makes	us	faster	than	normal.	But	we	go	that	way	as	rarely	as	we
can	since	it	leaves	us	with	the	shakes—and	those	shakes	get	worse	the	more	we
use	it.’
‘Is	that	why	you’re	trembling	now?’
He	glanced	down	at	his	hand	after	taking	a	sip	of	the	herbal	brew.	‘No.
That’s	something	else.’
‘Whatever ’s	happening	right	now	at	Brous.’
‘I	guess.’
‘Wake	up	the	others,	Corlo,’	Iron	Bars	said.	‘Acquitor,	should	we	be
avoiding	Brous?’


‘Hard	to	do.	There’s	a	ridge	of	hills	to	the	east	of	here.	No	tracks	to	speak
of	across	them.	We’d	lose	a	day,	maybe	two,	if	we	went	that	way.’
‘All	right.’
‘I’ll	see	to	the	horses,’	Seren	said	after	a	moment.
The	Avowed	nodded.	‘Then	come	back	and	eat.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
She	was	pleased	at	the	answering	smile,	slight	though	it	was.
	
They	were	among	the	ruins	well	before	the	village	came	into	view.	Most	were
half	buried,	rising	in	humps	from	the	forest	floor.	Ancient	roots	gripped	the
stone,	but	had	clearly	failed	in	forcing	cracks	into	the	strange	rock.	Causeways
that	had	once	been	raised	now	formed	a	crazed	web	of	roads	through	the
forest,	littered	in	dead	leaves	but	otherwise	defying	intrusion.	Reaching	the
edge	of	the	wood,	they	could	see	a	scattering	of	domed	buildings	in	the
clearing	ahead,	and	beyond	it	the	palisade	wall	of	Brous,	over	which
woodsmoke	hung	in	a	sullen	wreath	of	grey.
The	ancient	domed	buildings	possessed	formal	entrances,	a	projecting,
arched	corridor	with	doorways	as	wide	as	they	were	tall—three	times	the
height	of	a	man.
‘Hood’s	breath,’	Corlo	hissed,	‘these	dwarf	even	K’Chain	Che’Malle
tombs.’
‘Can’t	say	I’ve	ever	seen	those—’	Seren	began.
But	the	mage	interrupted.	‘Then	I’m	surprised,	since	there	are	plenty	of
remnants	in	these	lands.	They	were	something	between	lizards	and	dragons,
walking	on	two	legs.	Lots	of	sharp	teeth—Trate’s	markets	had	the	occasional
stall	selling	the	old	teeth	and	bones.	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	lass,	ruled	this	entire
continent,	once.	Long	before	humans	arrived.	Anyway,	their	tombs	look
something	like	these	ones,	only	smaller.’
‘Oh.	It’s	been	assumed	that	those	were	Tarthenal.	Nothing	was	ever	found
inside	them.’
‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	never	got	the	chance	to	use	them,	that’s	why.	Most
of	them,	anyway.’
They	fell	silent	as	they	rode	past	the	first	structure,	and	saw,	on	the	near
side	of	the	village,	a	hundred	or	more	soldiers	and	workers	gathered.	It
appeared	they	were	excavating	into	a	small,	longish	hill.	A	barrow.	Capstones
had	been	dragged	from	the	top	of	the	barrow	by	teams	of	horses,	and	crowds
of	diggers	were	attacking	the	sides.
‘Don’t	want	to	be	a	part	of	that,	sir,’	Corlo	said.


They	reined	in.
‘What’s	in	there?’	Iron	Bars	asked.
‘Nothing	that	has	anything	to	do	with	these	ruins,	I	don’t	think.’
‘Picking	up	the	dock-rat	version	of	our	language	doesn’t	serve	you	well,
you	know,’	Seren	said.
‘Fine,’	Corlo	rasped.	‘What	I	meant	was,	the	low	barrows	belong	to
something	else.	And	the	interment	was	messy.	Lots	of	wards.	There’s	a	mage	in
that	company,	Avowed,	who’s	been	busy	dismantling	them.’
‘All	of	them?’
‘Almost.	Left	a	couple	in	place.	I	think	he	means	to	bind	whatever ’s	in
there.’
‘We’ve	been	noticed,’	Seren	said.
A	troop	of	mounted	soldiers	was	riding	towards	them,	an	officer	in	the
lead.
‘Recognize	him?’	the	Avowed	asked	her.
‘Finadd	Arlidas	Tullid,’	she	replied.	‘He	commands	the	Brous	garrison.’
Iron	Bars	glanced	at	her.	‘And?’
‘He’s	not	a	nice	man.’
The	Finadd’s	troop	comprised	sixteen	riders.	They	reined	in,	and	Arlidas
nodded	at	Seren.	‘Acquitor.	Thought	I	recognized	you.	You	come	from
where?’
‘Trate.’
‘That’s	a	long	ride.	I	take	it	you	left	before	it	fell.’
She	did	not	contradict	him.
The	Finadd	scanned	the	Crimson	Guardsmen,	and	apparently	did	not	like
what	he	saw.	‘Your	arrival	is	well	timed,’	he	said.	‘We’re	recruiting.’
‘They	have	already	been	recruited,’	Seren	said,	‘as	my	escort.	I	am	riding
to	Letheras,	for	an	audience	with	the	king.’
Arlidas	scowled.	‘No	point	in	that,	Acquitor.	The	man	just	sits	there,
cowering	on	his	throne.	And	the	Ceda’s	lost	his	mind.	That	is	why	I	decided	to
declare	our	independence.	And	we	intend	to	defend	ourselves	against	these
damned	grey-skins.’
Seren’s	laugh	was	sudden,	instantly	regretted.	‘Independence,	Finadd?	The
village	of	Brous?	With	you	in	charge?	As	what,	its	emperor?’
‘You	have	entered	our	territory,	Acquitor,	meaning	you	and	your	escort
are	now	subject	to	me.	I	am	pleased	to	see	you	all	armed,	since	I	have	few
spare	weapons.’
‘You	are	not	recruiting	us,’	Iron	Bars	said.	‘And	I	suggest	you	do	not	make
an	issue	of	it,	Finadd,	or	in	a	short	while	you	will	find	yourself	with	a	much


smaller	army.’
Arlidas	sneered.	‘The	six	of	you	and	an	Acquitor—’
‘Finadd.’	A	rider	nudged	his	horse	from	the	troop	to	halt	alongside
Arlidas.	Round,	hairy,	small-eyed	and	filthy	from	crawling	tunnels	of	dirt.
‘That	one’s	a	mage.’	He	pointed	at	Corlo.
‘So	are	you,	you	damned	Nerek	halfling,’	the	Finadd	snapped.
‘Tell	him,’	Corlo	said	to	the	other	mage.	‘Your	name’s	Urger,	isn’t	it?	Tell
your	Finadd,	Urger.’
The	half-Nerek	licked	his	lips.	‘He’ll	kill	us	all,	sir.	Every	one	of	us.	He
won’t	even	break	a	sweat.	And	he’ll	start	with	you,	Finadd.	He’ll	pluck	your
brain	out	and	drop	it	in	a	cauldron	of	boiling	oil.’
Corlo	said,	‘You’d	best	return	to	that	barrow,	Urger.	Your	demon’s	trying
to	get	out,	and	it	just	might	succeed.	You’ll	lose	your	chance	to	bind	it.’
The	mage	twisted	round	in	his	saddle.	‘Errant	take	me,	he’s	right!	Finadd,	I
must	go!	No	waiting!’	With	that	he	wheeled	his	horse	and	drove	heels	into	its
flanks.
Arlidas	glared	at	Seren,	Iron	Bars	and	Corlo	in	turn,	then	he	snarled
wordlessly	and	gestured	to	his	soldiers.	‘Back	to	the	barrow.	Back,	damn	you!’
They	rode	off.
Seren	looked	over	at	Corlo.	‘You	made	yourself	pretty	scary,	didn’t	you?’
The	mage	smiled.
‘Let’s	get	going,’	the	Avowed	said,	‘before	they	gather	their	wits.’
‘I’d	like	to	learn	how	you	do	that,	Corlo.’
His	smile	broadened.	‘You	would,	would	you?’
	
‘There	is	always	something	ominous	in	dust	rising	from	a	distant	road,	do	you
not	think?’
Trull	Sengar	squinted	eastward	until	he	spied	the	telltale	smear.	‘Nothing	to
worry	about,	Lilac,’	he	said.	‘It’s	a	column	from	my	father ’s	army,	I	suspect.	A
portion	of	it	occupied	the	Manse	not	long	ago.’
‘There	was	fighting	there,’	the	demon	said,	then	sighed.	‘Two	of	my	kin
fell.’
‘I	am	sorry	for	that,’	Trull	said.
They	were	camped	on	the	outskirts	of	Thetil,	preparing	for	the	fast,
extended	march	down	to	First	Reach,	where	their	army	would	join	up	with	the
emperor ’s	before	striking	southeast	to	Letheras.	Tomad’s	army	would	march
down	Mappers’	Road	to	approach	the	capital	city	from	the	north.	The	Letherii
forces	were	fleeing	before	them	along	every	approach.	Even	so,	one	more


battle	lay	ahead,	probably	outside	the	walls	of	Letheras.
Trull	glanced	over	at	his	company.	A	dozen	or	so	warriors	were	gathered
round	Sergeant	Canarth,	who	was	in	the	midst	of	a	gesture-filled	tirade	of
some	sort.	Trull’s	captain,	Ahlrada	Ahn,	stood	nearby,	apart	yet	listening.
Since	Trull	had	acquired	his	demon	bodyguard,	the	other	warriors	had
kept	their	distance,	the	squad	leaders	reluctant	to	stand	still	even	when	Trull
approached	with	orders.	There	was	something	wrong,	clearly,	with	singling
out	a	demon,	with	making	it	obvious	that	the	creature	was	intelligent,	an
individual.	Understandable,	given	the	usual	treatment	of	the	Kenyll’rah	by	their
Tiste	Edur	masters.	But,	he	well	knew,	there	was	more	to	it	than	that.
During	their	march	down	from	High	Fort,	Trull	Sengar	had	found	himself
mostly	shunned	by	his	warrior	kin	and	by	the	women.	No	official	sanction	had
yet	been	pronounced,	but	silent	judgement	had	already	occurred,	and	it	was
these	unspoken	forms	of	punishment	that	maintained	the	necessary	cohesion	of
the	Edur	tribes—rejection	of	aberrant	behaviour	must	be	seen,	the	punishment
one	of	public	participation,	the	lesson	clear	to	all	who	might	harbour	similar
dangerous	impulses.	Trull	understood	this	well	enough,	and	did	not	rail	against
it.
Without	the	demon	at	his	side,	it	would	have	been	far	more	painful,	far
more	lonely,	than	it	was.	Yet	even	with	Lilac,	there	was	a	truth	that	stung.	The
demon	was	not	free,	and	had	it	been	so	it	would	not	now	be	here,	at	his	side.
Thus,	the	premise	of	companionship	was	flawed,	and	Trull	could	not	delude
himself	into	believing	otherwise.
Fear	had	not	spoken	to	him	once	since	High	Fort.	Orders	were	conveyed
through	B’nagga,	who	was	indifferent	to,	or	unaware	of,	the	tensions	swirling
about	Trull.
Nearby	sat	their	two	charges,	the	queen	and	her	son,	for	whom	Trull	and
his	company	had	provided	escort	down	from	High	Fort.	They	had	been	carried
by	ox-drawn	wagon,	the	prince’s	minor	wounds	tended	to	by	a	Letherii	slave,
the	queen	provided	with	a	female	slave	of	her	own	to	cook	meals	and	do	other
chores	as	required.	An	indulgence	permitting	the	king’s	wife	to	resume	her
haughty	demeanour.	Even	so,	the	two	prisoners	had	said	little	since	their
capture.
Ahlrada	Ahn	made	his	way	over.
Trull	spoke	first.	‘Captain.	What	has	Sergeant	Canarth	so	animated?’
The	dark-skinned	warrior	frowned.	‘You,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘Ah,	and	you’ve	come	to	warn	me	of	insurrection?’
The	suggestion	clearly	offended	him.	‘I	am	not	your	ally,’	he	said.	‘Not	in
this	matter.	Canarth	intends	to	approach	Fear	and	request	a	new	commander.’


‘Well,	that	would	be	a	relief,’	Trull	said.	‘What	is	it	you	want,	then?’
‘I	want	you	to	excuse	yourself	before	Canarth	delivers	his	request.’
Trull	looked	away.	Southward,	the	sprawl	of	farms	on	the	other	side	of
Thetil.	No	livestock,	no	workers	in	the	fields.	The	rains	had	been	kind,	and	all
was	a	luscious,	deep	green.	‘A	Bluerose	slave,	wasn’t	she?	Your	mother.	Which
was	why	you	were	always	apart	from	the	rest	of	us.’
‘I	am	ashamed	of	nothing,	Trull	Sengar.	If	you	are	seeking	to	wound	me
—’
He	met	Ahlrada’s	hard	gaze.	‘No,	the	very	opposite.	I	know	you	do	not	like
me.	Indeed,	you	never	have—long	before	I	struck…a	woman.	Oddly	enough,	I
have	always	admired	you.	Your	strength,	your	determination	to	rise	above
your	birth—’
‘Rise	above?’	Ahlrada’s	grin	was	cold.	‘I	suffered	under	no	such
compulsion,	Trull	Sengar.	Before	she	died,	my	mother	told	me	many	secrets.
The	Bluerose	are	the	survivors,	from	a	war	in	which	it	was	supposed	there
were	no	survivors.	It	was	believed	the	Edur	had	killed	them	all,	you	see.	It	was
necessary	to	believe	that.’
‘You	have	lost	me,	Ahlrada	Ahn,’	Trull	said.	‘What	war	are	you	speaking
of?’
‘I	am	speaking	of	the	Betrayal.	When	the	Edur	and	the	Andii	fought	as
allies	against	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	The	Betrayal,	which	was	not	as	the	Edur
histories	would	have	it.	The	Andii	were	the	ones	betrayed,	not	the	Edur.
Scabandari	Bloodeye	stabbed	Silchas	Ruin.	In	the	back.	All	that	you	learned	as
a	child	and	hold	true	to	this	day,	Trull	Sengar,	was	a	lie.’	His	smile	grew
colder.	‘And	now	you	will	accuse	me	of	being	the	liar.’
‘The	Bluerose	are	Tiste	Andii?’
‘The	blood	is	thinned,	but	it	remains.’
Trull	looked	away	once	more.	After	a	time,	he	slowly	nodded	to	himself.	‘I
see	no	reason,	Ahlrada	Ahn,	to	call	you	a	liar.	Indeed,	your	version	makes
more	sense.	After	all,	had	we	been	the	ones	betrayed,	then	we	should	have	been
as	the	Andii	today—mere	remnants	of	a	broken	people—’
‘Not	as	broken	as	you	think,’	Ahlrada	said.
‘You	do	not	think	Bluerose	will	capitulate?	Is	it	not	already	a	protectorate
of	the	Letherii?	A	nation	of	subjugated	people?’
‘They	have	been	waiting	for	this,	Trull	Sengar.	After	all,	the	truth	cannot
be	hidden—once	the	Edur	occupy	Bluerose,	it	will	be	discovered	that	its	ruling
class	possess	Andii	blood.’
‘Probably.’
They	were	silent	for	a	time,	then	Ahlrada	Ahn	said,	‘I	hold	no	particular


hatred	for	you,	Trull	Sengar.	My	hatred	is	for	all	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘I	understand.’
‘Do	you?	Look	upon	the	shadow	wraiths.	The	ghosts	who	have	been	bound
to	the	Edur,	who	are	made	to	fight	this	war.	To	find	oblivion	beneath	swords	of
Letherii	steel,	the	fatal	iron	against	which	they	have	no	defence.	They	are	Tiste
Andii,	the	shades	of	those	who	fell	in	that	betrayal,	long	ago.’
The	demon,	Lilac,	spoke.	‘It	is	true,	Trull	Sengar.	The	wraiths	are
compelled,	as	much	as	we	Kenyll’rah.	They	are	not	your	ancestors.’
‘To	all	of	this,’	Trull	said,	‘I	can	do	nothing.’
Without	another	word,	he	strode	away.	Through	the	camp,	deftly	avoided
by	all,	his	path	appearing	before	him	devoid	of	any	obstruction,	as	if	by	the
hand	of	sorcery.	Trull	was	not	immune	to	regret.	He	would	have	liked	to	have
taken	back	that	moment	when	he’d	lost	control,	when	his	outrage	had	broken
through.	The	woman	had	been	right,	he	supposed.	The	wounded	Edur	must	be
healed	first	and	foremost.	There	was	no	time	for	demons.	He	should	not	have
struck	her.
No-one	cared	for	his	reasons.	The	act	was	inexcusable,	as	simple	as	that.
He	approached	the	command	tent.
And	saw	that	the	riders	they’d	seen	earlier	on	the	road	had	arrived.	Among
them,	Uruth,	his	mother.
She	was	standing	beside	her	horse.
Fear	emerged	from	the	tent	and	strode	to	her.
Uruth	was	speaking	as	Trull	arrived.	‘…I	can	barely	stand.	Should	we	run
low	on	food	on	our	march	south,	allow	me	to	be	the	first	to	suggest	we
slaughter	the	horses.’	She	noted	Trull	and	faced	him.	‘You	have	made	terrible
mistakes,	my	son.	None	the	less,	this	over-reaction	on	the	part	of	the	women	in
this	camp	will	not	be	tolerated.	It	is	for	me	to	sanction	you,	not	them.’	She
returned	her	attention	to	Fear.	‘Are	the	warriors	naught	but	children?	Grubby
hands	on	their	mother ’s	skirts?	Did	your	brother	Trull	reveal	cowardice	on	the
field	of	battle?’
‘No,’	Fear	replied,	‘there	was	no	question	of	his	courage—’
‘For	you	and	your	warriors,	Fear,	nothing	else	obtains.	I	would	have
thought	better	of	you,	my	eldest	son.	Your	brother	sought	the	healing	of	a
fallen	comrade—’
‘A	demon—’
‘And	did	not	demons	fight	at	High	Fort?	Did	not	many	of	them	give	their
lives	to	win	victory?	Healers	are	to	accede	to	the	wishes	of	the	warriors	after	a
battle.	They	are	not	to	make	judgements	on	who	is	worthy	of	healing.	Had	I
been	here,	I	myself	might	well	have	struck	her	for	her	impudence.	Shall	every


Edur	woman	now	assume	the	flaws	of	our	Empress	Mayen?	Not	if	I	have	a	say
in	the	matter.	Now,	Fear,	you	will	correct	your	warriors’	attitudes.	You	will
remind	them	of	Trull’s	deeds	during	the	journey	to	retrieve	the	emperor ’s
sword.	You	will	tell	them	to	recall	his	delivery	of	the	news	of	the	Letherii
harvest	of	the	tusked	seals.	Most	importantly,	Fear,	you	will	not	turn	away	from
your	brother.	Do	you	challenge	my	words?’
It	seemed	a	vast	weight	lifted	from	Fear,	as	he	straightened	with	a	wry
smile.	‘I	would	not	dare,’	he	said.
Trull	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Mother,	Fear ’s	anger	with	me	has	been	over	my
disagreement	with	the	necessity	of	this	war.	I	have	been	careless	in	voicing	my
objections—’
‘A	crisis	of	loyalty	to	the	emperor	is	a	dangerous	thing,’	Uruth	said.	‘Fear
was	right	to	be	angry,	nor	am	I	pleased	by	your	words.	Only	the	emperor	has
the	power	to	halt	this	conquest,	and	he	will	not	do	that.	Neither	Fear	nor	I,	nor
anyone	else,	Trull,	are	capable	of	responding	to	your	doubts.	Do	you	not	see
that?	Only	Rhulad,	and	he	is	not	here.’
‘I	understand,’	Trull	said.	He	looked	to	Fear.	‘Brother,	I	apologize.	I	shall
save	my	words	for	Rhulad—’
‘He	is	not	interested	in	hearing	them,’	Fear	said.
‘None	the	less.’
They	studied	each	other.
Uruth	sighed.	‘Enough	of	this.	Trull,	is	that	the	demon	in	question?’
Trull	swung	round	to	where	Lilac	stood,	five	paces	back.	‘Yes.’
His	mother	approached	the	demon.	‘Kenyll’rah,	do	your	kin	still	rule	over
you	in	your	home	realm?’
A	deferential	nod.	‘The	tyrants	remain,	mistress,	for	the	war	continues.’
‘Yet	you	were	not	a	soldier.’
Lilac	shrugged.	‘Even	the	Kenryll’ah	must	eat,	mistress.’
‘We	found	few	soldiers	among	those	we	summoned,’	Uruth	said.
‘We	are	losing	the	war.	Four	of	the	Kenryll’ah	towers	have	fallen.
Korvalahrai	ships	were	seen	far	up	the	Chirahd	River.’
‘I	must	leave	to	join	the	emperor	tomorrow	morning,’	Uruth	said.	‘Which
leaves	us	this	night.’
‘For	what?’	Trull	asked.
‘A	conversation	with	a	Kenryll’ah	tyrant,’	she	replied,	her	regard	still	on
the	demon.	‘Perhaps	the	time	has	come	for	a	formal	alliance.’
Lilac	spoke.	‘They	are	not	pleased	with	your	thefts,	Tiste	Edur.’
Uruth	turned	away.	‘You	are	a	peasant,	demon.	All	I	need	from	you	is	the
path	into	your	realm.	Keep	your	opinions	to	yourself.’


Trull	watched	his	mother	stride	into	the	command	tent.	He	glanced	at	Fear
and	saw	his	brother	staring	at	him.
‘Did	you	come	here	to	speak	to	me	about	something?’
Trull	hesitated,	then	said,	‘My	warriors	are	about	to	come	to	you	seeking	a
new	commander.	I	thought	to	anticipate	them	by	resigning.’
Fear	smiled.	‘“Resigning.”	I	suppose	we	are	indeed	an	army	now.	In	the
Letherii	fashion.	Sergeants,	lieutenants,	captains.’
‘And	commanders.’
‘There	will	be	no	resignations,	Trull.’
‘Very	well.	Expect	Canarth	to	request	an	audience	soon.’
‘And	he	shall	have	one,	although	he	will	not	leave	pleased.’	Fear	stepped
close.	‘We	will	soon	be	joining	our	brothers.	I	know	you	will	have	words	you
will	want	to	say	to	Rhulad.	Be	careful,	Trull.	Nothing	is	as	it	once	was.	Our
people	have	changed.’
‘I	can	see	that,	Fear.’
‘Perhaps,	but	you	do	not	understand	it.’
‘Do	you?’	Trull	challenged.
Fear	shrugged,	made	no	reply.	A	moment	later,	he	walked	back	to	his
command	tent.
‘Your	mother,’	Lilac	said,	‘would	play	a	dangerous	game.’
‘This	is	the	emperor ’s	game,	Lilac,’	Trull	said.	He	faced	the	demon.	‘Your
people	are	at	war	in	your	home	realm?’
‘I	am	a	caster	of	nets.’
‘Yet,	should	the	need	arise,	your	tyrant	masters	could	call	you	into	military
service.’
‘The	Kenryll’ah	have	ruled	a	long	time,	Trull	Sengar.	And	have	grown
weak	with	complacency.	They	cannot	see	their	own	impending	demise.	It	is
always	the	way	of	things,	such	blindness.	No	matter	how	long	and	perfect	the
succession	of	fallen	empires	and	civilizations	so	clearly	writ	into	the	past,	the
belief	remains	that	one’s	own	shall	live	for	ever,	and	is	not	subject	to	the
indomitable	rules	of	dissolution	that	bind	all	of	nature.’	The	small,	calm	eyes
of	the	demon	looked	down	steadily	upon	Trull.	‘I	am	a	caster	of	nets.	Tyrants
and	emperors	rise	and	fall.	Civilizations	burgeon	then	die,	but	there	are	always
casters	of	nets.	And	tillers	of	the	soil,	and	herders	in	the	pastures.	We	are	where
civilization	begins,	and	when	it	ends,	we	are	there	to	begin	it	again.’
A	curious	speech,	Trull	reflected.	The	wisdom	of	peasants	was	rarely
articulated	in	such	clear	fashion.	Even	so,	claims	to	truth	were	innumerable.
‘Unless,	Lilac,	all	the	casters	and	tillers	and	herders	are	dead.’
‘I	spoke	not	of	ourselves,	Trull,	but	of	our	tasks.	Kenyll’rah,	Edur,


Letherii,	the	selves	are	not	eternal.	Only	the	tasks.’
‘Unless	everything	is	dead.’
‘Life	will	return,	eventually.	It	always	does.	If	the	water	is	foul,	it	will	find
new	water.’
‘My	mother	said	she	would	make	use	of	you,	to	fashion	a	path,’	Trull	said.
‘How	will	this	be	done?’
‘I	will	be	sacrificed.	My	blood	shall	be	the	path.’
‘I	did	not	have	you	healed	only	to	have	you	sacrificed,	Lilac.’
‘There	is	nothing	you	can	do,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘There	must	be.	Is	there	no	way	of	setting	you	free?’
The	demon	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	it	said,	‘Your	blood	can	create	a
new	binding.	Myself	to	you,	in	exclusion	of	all	else.	Then	you	could	command
me.’
‘To	do	what?	Return	to	your	realm?’
‘Yes.’
‘And	could	you	then	be	summoned	again?’
‘Only	by	you,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘You	would	have	me	as	your	master,	Lilac?’
‘The	alternative	is	death.’
‘Which	you	said	earlier	you’d	prefer	to	slavery.’
‘Between	the	choices	of	fighting	this	war	or	dying,	yes.’
‘But	returning	home…’
‘That	is	preferable	to	all	else,	Trull	Sengar.’
The	Tiste	Edur	drew	out	his	knife.	‘What	must	I	do?’
	
Trull	entered	the	command	tent	a	short	while	later.	He	found	Fear	and	Uruth	in
the	centre	chamber.	‘Mother.’
She	turned,	frowned.	‘What	have	you	done?’
‘I	sent	my	demon	away.	You	will	have	to	find	another.’
Her	gaze	dropped	to	his	left	hand,	narrowed	on	the	broad,	still	dripping	cut
across	the	palm.	‘I	see.	Tell	me,	son	will	your	defiance	never	end?’
‘I	paid	a	high	price	to	save	that	demon’s	life.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘You	intended	to	use	him	to	create	your	path	into	his	realm—’
‘And?’
‘To	do	that,	you	would	have	to	sacrifice	it—’
‘The	demon	told	you	that?	It	lied,	Trull.	In	fact,	killing	it	would	have
severed	its	link	to	its	own	world.	It	deceived	you,	son.	But	you	are	bound	now,


the	two	of	you.	You	can	summon	it	back,	and	deliver	your	punishment.’
Trull	cocked	his	head,	then	smiled.	‘You	know,	Mother,	I	think	I	would
have	done	the	same,	were	I	in	its	place.	No,	I	have	sent	it	home,	and	there	it
shall	stay.’
‘Where	it	may	well	find	itself	fighting	in	another	war.’
‘Not	for	me	to	decide,’	Trull	said,	shrugging.
‘You	are	difficult	to	understand,’	Uruth	said,	‘and	the	effort	wearies	me.’
‘I	am	sorry,’	Trull	said.	‘This	alliance	you	will	attempt	with	the	demon
tyrants—what	is	the	emperor	seeking	from	it?	What	does	Rhulad	plan	to	offer
in	return?’
‘Are	you	truly	interested,	son?’
‘I	am.’
Uruth	shot	Fear	a	glance,	then	sighed.	‘The	Korvalahrai	are	seafarers.
They	are	reaching	into	the	Kenryll’ah	lands	via	a	vast	river,	and	even	now
approach	the	heart	in	a	fleet	carrying	all	the	Korvalahrai.	Rhulad’s	power	is
such	that	he	can	divert	that	river,	for	a	time.	The	invading	fleet	will	be
destroyed	in	the	conflagration.	Achieving	such	a	thing	would	in	turn	serve
Edur	needs,	as	well.	In	return,	we	are	given	more	demons	for	our	war,	perhaps
a	minor	Kenryll’ah	or	two,	who	are	far	better	versed	in	the	arts	of	battle	than
their	subject	Kenyll’rah.’	She	turned	to	Fear.	‘I	will	need	another	demon.’
‘Very	well.’
‘And	then,	a	place	of	solitude.’
Fear	nodded.	‘Trull,	return	to	your	company.’
	
As	he	was	walking	back	to	where	his	warriors	were	camped,	Trull	found
himself	smiling.	Lilac’s	pleasure,	moments	before	it	vanished,	had	been
childlike.	Yet	the	demon’s	mind	was	not	simple.	It	must	have	known	there	was	a
risk	that,	upon	discovering	the	deception,	Trull	would	summon	it	back	in	a	fit
of	rage	and	inflict	terrible	punishment.	For	some	reason,	Lilac	had	concluded
that	such	an	event	was	unlikely.
My	weakness,	so	plain	and	obvious	even	a	demon	could	see	it.
Perhaps	he	was	not	a	warrior	after	all.	Not	a	follower	of	commands,
capable	of	shutting	out	all	unnecessary	thoughts	in	service	to	the	cause.	Not	a
leader,	either,	to	stride	ahead,	certainty	a	blinding	fire	drawing	all	with	him.
Worse	yet,	he	was	suspicious	of	Rhulad’s	transformation.	Fear,	in	his
youth,	had	displayed	none	of	Rhulad’s	strutting	arrogance,	his	posing	and
posturing—all	of	which	might	well	suit	a	leader	of	warriors,	but	not	in	the
manner	that	Fear	led	warriors.	Rhulad	had	been	bluster,	whilst	Fear	was	quiet


confidence,	and	Trull	was	not	sure	if	that	essential	character	trait	had	changed
in	Rhulad.
I	do	not	belong.
The	realization	shocked	him,	slowed	his	steps.	He	looked	around,	feeling
suddenly	lost.	Here,	in	the	midst	of	his	own	people.
The	Tiste	Edur	have	changed.	But	I	haven’t.
	
South,	across	the	region	known	as	the	Swath,	a	deforested	scrubland	which	had
once	been	part	of	Outcry	Wood,	past	the	burnt-out	town	of	Siege	Place,	and
onto	the	slowly	climbing	Lookout	Track	towards	the	hills	of	Lookout	Climb.
Three	days	crossing	the	old	hills—a	range	thoroughly	denuded	by	wild	goats
—onto	Moss	Road.	Marching	northeast	along	the	banks	of	the	Moss	River	to
the	ford	town	of	Ribs.
Retreating	Letherii	forces	had	stripped	the	countryside	ahead	of	the
emperor	and	his	army.	The	military	food	and	materiel	caches	that	Hull	Beddict
knew	of	were	all	emptied.	If	not	for	the	shadow	wraiths,	supplying	the	Tiste
Edur	army	would	have	been	impossible—the	invasion	would	have	stalled.
Unacceptable,	Rhulad	had	decided.	The	enemy	was	reeling.	It	was	necessary	to
keep	it	so.
Udinaas	remembered	eating	smoked	eel	from	Moss	River,	one	time	when
the	trader	ship	had	docked	in	Dresh.	Delicious,	once	one	got	used	to	the	furry
skin,	which	was	to	be	chewed	but	not	swallowed.	He	had	since	heard,	from
another	slave,	that	the	eels	had	been	transplanted	into	Dresh	Lake,	producing	a
strain	that	was	both	bigger	and	nastier.	It	had	turned	out	that	those	eels	captured
in	Moss	River	were	juveniles,	and	few	ever	reached	adulthood	since	there	was
a	razor-jawed	species	of	predatory	fish	resident	in	the	river.	No	such	fish	in
Dresh	Lake.	Adolescent	swimmers	from	Dresh	started	disappearing	before
anyone	realized	the	adult	eels	were	responsible.	Razor-jawed	fish	were	netted
from	the	river	and	tossed	into	the	lake,	but	their	behaviour	changed,	turning
them	into	frenzy	feeders.	Adult	swimmers	from	Dresh	started	vanishing.	The
slave	who	had	been	relating	all	this	then	laughed	and	finished	with,	‘So	they
poisoned	the	whole	lake,	killed	everything.	And	now	no-one	can	swim	in	it!’
From	this,	Udinaas	surmised,	various	lessons	could	be	drawn,	should	one
be	inclined	to	draw	lessons	from	multiple	acts	of	stupidity.
They	had	camped	on	the	road,	a	day’s	march	west	of	Ribs.	The	emperor
was	suffering	from	some	kind	of	fever.	Healers	were	tending	to	him,	and	the
last	Udinaas	had	heard,	Rhulad	was	sleeping.	It	was	late	afternoon,	and	the
sun’s	light	was	painting	the	river ’s	surface	red	and	gold.


Udinaas	walked	along	the	stony	strand,	flinging	rocks	out	onto	the	water
every	now	and	then,	shattering	the	lurid	hues.	At	the	moment,	he	was	not
feeling	anything	like	a	slave,	or	an	Indebted.	He	marched	in	the	shadow	of	the
emperor,	for	all	to	see,	for	all	to	wonder	at.
He	heard	boots	crunching	on	pebbles	and	turned	to	see	Hull	Beddict
scrambling	down	onto	the	strand.	A	big	man,	on	whom	every	oversized	muscle
seemed	to	brood,	somehow.	There	was	fever	in	his	eyes	as	well,	but	unlike
Rhulad	this	heat	had	nothing	to	do	with	illness.	‘Udinaas.’
The	slave	watched	the	man	approach,	fighting	his	instinctive	urge	towards
deference.	The	time	for	that	was	past,	after	all.	He	just	wasn’t	sure	what
belonged	in	its	stead.
‘I	have	been	looking	for	you.’
‘Why?’
‘The	emperor ’s	condition…’
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘A	marsh	fever,	nothing	more—’
‘I	was	not	speaking	of	that,	slave.’
‘I	am	not	your	slave,	Hull	Beddict.’
‘I	am	sorry.	You	are	right.’
Udinaas	collected	another	stone.	He	wiped	the	grit	from	its	underside
before	throwing	it	out	over	the	water.	They	watched	it	splash,	then	Udinaas
said,	‘I	understand	your	need	to	distinguish	yourself	from	the	other	Letherii
marching	with	this	army.	Even	so,	we	are	all	bound	to	servitude,	and	the
varying	shades	of	that	are	not	as	relevant	as	they	once	were.’
Perhaps	you	have	a	point,	Udinaas,	but	I	don’t	quite	understand	what	you’re
getting	at.’
He	brushed	the	grit	from	his	hands.	‘Who	better	to	teach	the	newly
conquered	Letherii	than	the	Edur ’s	original	Letherii	slaves?’
‘You	anticipate	a	new	status	for	you	and	your	fellow	slaves,	then?’
‘Maybe.	How	are	the	Tiste	Edur	to	rule?	Much	remains	to	be	answered,
Hull	Beddict.	I	gather	you	intend	to	involve	yourself	in	that	particular
reshaping,	if	you	can.’
The	man’s	smile	was	sour.	‘It	seems	I	am	to	have	little	or	no	role	in	much
of	anything,	Udinaas.’
‘Then	the	Errant	looks	kindly	upon	you,’	Udinaas	said.
‘I	am	not	surprised	you	might	see	it	that	way.’
‘It	is	a	waste	of	time,	Hull	Beddict,	to	fashion	intricate	plans	for	restitution.
What	you	did	before,	all	you	did	before—the	mistakes,	the	bad	decisions—they
are	dead,	for	everyone	but	you.	None	of	it	has	purchased	a	future	claim	to
glory,	none	of	it	has	earned	you	anything.’


‘Has	not	the	emperor	heeded	my	advice?’
‘In	this	war?	When	it	suited	him.	But	I	trust	you	are	not	expecting	any
consideration	in	return.’	Udinaas	turned,	met	Hull’s	eyes.	‘Ah,	I	think	you	are.’
‘Reciprocity,	Udinaas.	Surely	the	Tiste	Edur	understand	that,	since	it	is	so
essential	within	their	own	culture.’
‘There	is	no	reciprocity	when	you	display	expectation.	Hull	Beddict.	Poof!
It	vanishes.	And	that	was	just	my	point	earlier:	there	is	much	that	we	can	teach
the	future	conquered	Letherii.’
‘I	am	blood-bound	to	Binadas,’	Hull	said,	‘yet	you	accuse	me	of
insensitivity	to	the	mores	of	the	Tiste	Edur.’	His	expression	was	wry.	‘I	am	not
often	chastised	in	such	things.	You	remind	me	of	Seren	Pedac.’
‘The	Acquitor	who	escorted	you?	I	saw	her,	in	Trate.’
Hull	stepped	close,	suddenly	intent.	‘During	the	battle?’
Udinaas	nodded.	‘She	was	in	bad	shape,	but	alive.	She’d	found	a	worthy
escort	of	her	own—I	have	no	doubt	she	still	lives.’
‘An	escort	of	her	own?	Who?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	Foreigners.	One	of	them	killed	Rhulad	and	his	chosen
brothers.’	Udinaas	collected	another	stone.	‘Look	at	that,	Hull	Beddict,	a	river
of	gold.	Flowing	into	the	sunset.’	He	flung	the	stone,	broke	the	mirrored
perfection.	Momentarily.
‘You	witnessed	that	killing.’
‘I	did.	Whoever	that	foreigner	was,	he	was	terrifying.’
‘More	terrifying	than	Rhulad’s	return?’
Udinaas	said	nothing	for	a	time,	then	he	stepped	away,	down	to	the	water ’s
edge.	He	stared	into	the	shallows,	saw	the	muddy	bottom	swarming	with
newborn	eels.	‘Do	you	know	what	is	coming,	Hull	Beddict?’
‘No.	Do	you?’
‘Dresh	Lake.	That’s	what’s	coming.’
‘I	don’t	understand.’
‘Doesn’t	matter.	Don’t	mind	me,	Hull	Beddict.	Well.	I’d	best	return.	The
emperor	is	awake.’
Hull	followed	him	up	from	the	strand.	‘Things	like	that,’	he	said.	‘He’s
awake.	How	do	you	know?’
‘A	stirring	in	the	shadows,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Rhulad	sets	the	world	to	a
tremble.	Well,’	he	amended,	‘a	small	part	of	it.	But	it’s	growing.	In	any	case,
his	fever	has	broken.	He	is	weak,	but	alert.’
‘Tell	me,’	Hull	said	as	they	walked	into	the	vast	camp,	‘about	Feather
Witch.’
Udinaas	grimaced.	‘Why?’


‘She	is	no	longer	Mayen’s	slave.	She	now	serves	the	Edur	healers.	Was	that
your	work?’
‘The	emperor ’s	command,	Hull	Beddict.’
‘You	claim	no	influence	on	him?	Few	would	believe	that	now.’
‘Reciprocity.’
‘And	in	return,	you	give	Rhulad	what?’
Friendship.	‘I	do	not	advise	him,	Hull	Beddict.	I	do	not	seek	to	influence
him.	I	cannot	answer	your	question.’	Rather,	I	won’t.
‘She	affects	to	hold	only	hatred	for	you,	Udinaas.	But	I	am	not	convinced.’
‘Oh,	I	am.’
‘I	think,	perhaps,	she	has	given	her	heart	to	you.	Yet	would	fight	it,	for	all
the	pointless	prohibitions	and	prejudices	of	our	people.	What	is	the	extent	of
your	debt,	Udinaas?’
‘My	debt?	My	father ’s	debt.	Seven	hundred	and	twenty-two	docks,	from	the
day	I	was	taken	as	a	slave.’
Hull	reached	out	and	stopped	him.	‘That’s	it?’
‘A	Beddict	might	well	say	that.	For	most	Letherii,	that	is	insurmountable.
Especially	given	the	interest.’	Udinaas	resumed	walking.
Hull	came	up	alongside	him.	‘Who	holds	it?’
‘A	minor	lender	in	Letheras.	Why	are	you	asking?’
‘The	lender ’s	name?’
‘Huldo.’
‘Huldo.’	After	a	moment,	Hull	snorted.
‘You	find	that	amusing?’
‘I	do.	Udinaas,	my	brother	Tehol	owns	Huldo.’
‘Maybe	once.	As	I	understand	it,	Tehol	owns	nothing	these	days.’
‘Let	me	tell	you	a	story	about	my	brother.	He	was,	I	guess,	around	ten
years	old,	when	a	family	debt	was	purchased	by	a	particularly	unscrupulous
lender.	The	plan	was	to	force	us	to	relinquish	a	certain	holding,	and	so	the	debt
was	called.	We	couldn’t	pay,	not	all	at	once,	and	of	course	the	lender	knew	it.
Now,	it	was	at	the	time	assumed	by	all	that	Tehol	was	at	school	every	day
during	this	crisis,	and	indeed,	that,	young	as	he	was,	he	had	no	idea	of	the
trouble	our	parents	were	in.	Only	much	later	did	certain	facts	come	to	light.
The	fact	that	Tehol	had	finessed	a	debt	of	his	own,	over	his	tutor.	Nothing
large,	but	he	was	able	to	coerce	the	tutor	into	saying	nothing	about	his
absences,	whilst	he	operated	a	business	venture	of	his	own	down	at	a	flow-out
on	the	river.	Two	employees,	both	Nerek,	sifting	sewage.	This	particular	outflow	issued	from	an	estate	district—extraordinary	what	treasures	could	be
recovered.	Jewellery,	mostly.	Rings,	earrings,	pearls.	In	any	case,	it	seemed


there	was	a	windfall,	a	necklace,	and	the	result	was	Tehol	and	his	two	Nerek
employees	found	themselves	suddenly	flush—’
‘By	selling	the	necklace?’
‘Oh	no,	from	the	reward.	Their	business	was	returning	lost	items.	Shortly
thereafter,	the	lender	pressuring	our	family	received	payment	in	full	on	our
debt,	and	was	then	subsequently	financially	gutted	when	a	host	of	holdings	on
him	were	called.’
Udinaas	grunted.	‘Grateful	patrons,	indeed.’
‘Probably.	We	never	found	out.	And	Tehol	never	explained	a	damned	thing.
It	took	me	over	a	year	to	piece	some	of	it	together.	My	point	is,	Udinaas,
Tehol’s	genius	is	of	the	diabolical	kind.	Destitute?	Not	a	chance.	Retired	from
business	dealings?	Impossible.	I	am	now	quite	skilled	at	tracking	my	brother,
you	see.	Huldo’s	not	the	only	lender	Tehol	owns.’
‘So,’	Udinaas	said	as	they	approached	the	emperor ’s	tent,	‘I	am	Indebted	to
the	Beddicts.’
‘Not	any	more,’	Hull	said.	‘I	am	clearing	it.	Right	now.	I	am	sure	Tehol
will	forgive	me,	assuming	I	ever	get	a	chance	to	corner	him.’
Udinaas	looked	over	at	the	man.	Then	he	nodded.	‘I	see.	Reciprocity.’
‘I	am	without	expectation,	Udinaas.’
‘Good.	I	knew	you	were	a	fast	learner.’
Hull	Beddict	halted	outside	the	entrance.	‘I	enjoyed	speaking	to	you,’	he
said.
Udinaas	hesitated,	then	smiled.
	
Seated	on	his	throne,	sweat	streaming	down	between	and	over	the	gold	coins
on	his	face,	neck	and	chest,	some	horrible	insight	burning	in	his	eyes,	the
emperor	trembled	as	if	rabid.	‘Udinaas,’	he	croaked.	‘As	you	can	see,	we	are
well.’
‘These	southlands,	Emperor,	hold	strange	diseases—’
‘We	were	not	sick.	We	were…travelling.’
They	were	alone	in	the	chamber.	Hannan	Mosag	was	overseeing	the
warriors,	where	some	old	feuds	between	tribes	were	threatening	to	breach	the
unity.	Mayen	was	cloistered	among	the	women,	for	it	was	said	that	Uruth
Sengar	was	coming,	summoned	via	the	K’risnan.	The	air	in	the	tent	smelled	of
sour	sweat.
‘A	long	and	difficult	journey,	then,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Do	you	wish	some
wine?	Food?’
‘No.	Not	yet.	We	have…done	something.	A	terrible	thing.	To	achieve	an


alliance.	When	we	strike	the	Letherii	army	outside	Letheras,	you	shall	see	what
has	been	won	this	day.	We	are…pleased.	Yes,	pleased.’
‘Yet	frightened.	By	your	own	power.’
The	eyes	flickered,	fixed	on	Udinaas.	‘We	can	hide	little	from	you,	it
seems.	Yes,	frightened.	We…I…have	drowned	an	entire	world.	A	fragment	of
Kurald	Emurlahn,	upon	which	our	ships	will	soon	travel.	Seeking	our	lost	kin.
And…champions.’	He	clawed	at	his	face.	‘I	drowned	a	world.’
The	subject	needed	deflection,	Udinaas	decided	‘Champions?	I	do	not
understand,	Emperor.’
A	moment	to	recover,	then	a	nod.	‘Worthy	foes,	Udinaas.	Skilled	fighters
capable	of	killing	us.	They	are	needed.’
‘For	your	power	to	grow	yet	stronger.’
‘Yes.	Stronger.	It	is	necessary.	So	many	things	are	necessary,	now…’
Udinaas	risked	a	glance	away	as	he	said,	‘It	is	right	to	fear,	then,	Emperor.’
‘It	is?	Explain.’
‘Fear	bespeaks	of	wisdom.	Recognition	of	responsibility.’
‘Wisdom.	Yes,	it	must	be	so,	mustn’t	it?	We	had	not	considered	that	before.
We	fear,	because	we	are	becoming	wise.’
Oh,	you	poor	lad.	How	can	I	do	this?	‘How	will	you	incite	these…
champions?’
Rhulad	shivered,	then	raised	the	sword	in	his	right	hand.	‘Who	among
them	will	turn	away	from	such	a	challenge?	Those	who	do	are	not	worth
fighting.	Or,	if	they	are	yet	reluctant,	they	will	be	compelled.	This	world	is
vast,	Udinaas,	far	vaster	than	you	might	think.	There	are	other	lands,	other
empires.	There	are	formidable	peoples,	races.	We	will	search	far.	We	will	find
those	useful	to	us.	And	then,	one	day,	we	will	conquer.	Every	kingdom.	Every
continent.’
‘You	will	need	to	deceive	those	champions,	Emperor.	Into	believing	that
killing	you	means	their	victory.	You	will	have	to	make	it	seem	that	it	is	your
ego	that	forces	such	challenges.	They	must	know	nothing	of	the	sword’s
power,	of	its	demands	upon	you.’
‘Yes,	you	speak	true,	Udinaas.	Together,	we	will	shape	the	future.	You	will
want	for	nothing.’
‘Emperor,	I	want	for	nothing	now.	I	need	no	promises.	Please,	I	did	not
mean	to	offend	by	that.	What	I	meant	was,	there	is	no	need	for	promises.’
Sudden	pain	in	Rhulad’s	dark	eyes,	a	grief	and	sorrow	that	rent	at	Udinaas,
somewhere	deep	inside.	It	was	all	he	could	do	to	continue	meeting	the
emperor ’s	gaze.
‘We	would	have	some	wine,	now,	Udinaas.’	A	tone	of	profound	sorrow.


‘Two	goblets,	for	you	and	me.	We	shall	drink,	and	think	of	nothing.	We	shall
talk,	perhaps,	of	inconsequential	matters.’
Udinaas	strode	to	the	table	where	sat	a	jug	of	Letherii	wine.	‘I	visited
Dresh,	once,’	he	said	as	he	poured	out	two	cups	full.	‘And	ate	smoked	Moss
River	eel.	Would	you	like	me	to	tell	about	Moss	River	eels,	Emperor?’	He
carried	the	two	goblets	over	to	the	Edur	seated	on	the	throne.
‘Is	it	inconsequential?’
Udinaas	hesitated,	then	nodded.	‘It	is.’
‘Then,	yes,	Udinaas.	We	would.’
	
Seren	Pedac	and	the	Crimson	Guardsmen	rode	at	a	canter.	Half	a	league	ahead
was	the	town	of	Dissent.	It	had	once	been	walled,	but	local	builders	had
dismantled	most	of	the	stonework	long	ago.	The	town	had	since	grown
outward	in	a	mostly	chaotic	manner,	swallowing	commons	and	nearby	farms.
But	now	Dissent	was	barely	visible,	devoured	in	turn	by	at	least	three
encamped	armies.
‘Crimson	Rampant	Brigade,’	Seren	said,	scanning	the	distant	banners.
‘Snakebelt	Battalion,	and	the	Riven	Brigade.’
‘Can	we	ride	straight	through?’	Iron	Bars	asked.
She	glanced	across	at	him,	then	nodded.	‘I	think	so.	My	apologies.	I’m	a
little	shocked,	that’s	all.	If	this	is	all	that’s	left	of	the	frontier	armies…’
‘The	ground	ahead	is	not	ideal	for	a	battle,’	the	Avowed	judged.	‘I’d	be
surprised	if	the	king	intended	to	await	the	Edur	here.	Can	you	think	of
anywhere	else	close	by	that	might	be	better	suited?’
‘Brans	Keep,	in	the	hills	a	few	leagues	northeast	of	Dissent.’
‘And	Dissent	is	the	nearest	major	town?’
‘Apart	from	Letheras	itself,’	Seren	said.
‘Then	this	is	temporary	encampment.	When	the	Tiste	Edur	draw	closer,
those	three	armies	will	march	to	Brans	Keep.	Assuming	the	warlord
commanding	them	has	any	wits	at	all.	In	any	case,	Acquitor,	other	Letherii
forces	might	already	be	waiting	there,	at	Brans	Keep.	It’s	a	question	of
logistics,	keeping	these	ones	here.’
‘I	hope	you	are	right.	Then	again,	I	wonder	if	it	will	make	any	difference.’
‘We’re	far	from	the	sea,	Seren,’	Iron	Bars	said.	‘That	demon	the	Edur	have
chained	can’t	reach	here,	and	that	evens	things	some.’
A	worthy	try,	Iron	Bars.	‘Another	day	to	Outkeep,	then	we	should	reach
Letheras	the	following	day,	well	before	dusk.’
‘Could	we	hasten	that,	Acquitor?	These	soldiers	camped	ahead,	might	they


be	prepared	to	exchange	horses?’
‘If	I	insist,	yes.’
‘Based	on	your	desire	to	speak	to	the	king.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	will	you?	Speak	to	the	king,	that	is.’
‘No.’
He	said	nothing	for	a	time,	whilst	she	waited.	Then.	‘And	in	Letheras,	what
will	you	do	once	you’ve	arrived?’
‘I	expect	I	will	have	some	dusting	to	do.’
‘Sorry?’
‘My	house	is	closed	up.	I’ve	not	had	a	chance	to	send	a	message	to	my	staff
—all	two	of	them.’
‘That	doesn’t	sound	very	secure—no-one	to	guard	your	possessions.’
She	smiled.	‘I	have	nothing	of	value,	Iron	Bars.	Thieves	are	welcome	to	it.
Well,	I’d	prefer	if	they	left	me	my	furniture—my	neighbours	are	diligent
enough,	I	suppose,	to	prevent	anything	like	that.’
The	Avowed	stared	ahead	for	a	moment.	‘We	must	needs	depart	your
company,	then,	Acquitor.	To	make	contact	with	our	new	employer.	Presumably,
we’ll	be	shipping	out	soon	after.’
Before	the	city’s	occupied	and	sealed	up.	‘I	imagine	so.’
‘There	might	be	room	aboard…’
‘I	am	Letherii,	Iron	Bars.’	She	shook	her	head.	‘I	am	done	with	travelling
for	a	time,	I	think.’
‘Understandable.	Anyway,	the	offer ’s	open.’
‘Thank	you.’	So	here	I	run	again.
Corlo,	riding	behind	them,	called	out,	‘Easy	on	that,	lass.	Mockra’s
dangerous	when	you	don’t	control	it.’
The	Avowed	turned	his	head,	studied	her.
She	shrugged.


Chapter	Twenty-two

An	old	man	emerged	from	the	ditch,	a	creature
Of	mud	and	wild	autumn	winds	capering
Like	a	hare	across	a	bouldered	field,	across
And	through	the	stillness	of	time	unhinged
That	sprawls	patient	and	unexpectant	in	the
Place	where	battle	lies	spent,	unmoving	and
Never	again	moving	bodies	strewn	and
Death-twisted	like	lost	languages	tracking
Contorted	glyphs	on	a	barrow	door,	and	he
Read	well	the	aftermath,	the	disarticulated	script
Rent	and	dissolute	the	pillars	of	self	toppled
Like	termite	towers	all	spilled	out	round	his
Dancing	feet,	and	he	shouted	in	gleeful
Revelation	the	truth	he’d	found,	in	these
Red-fleshed	pronouncements—‘There	is	peace!’
He	shrieked.	‘There	is	peace!’	and	it	was
No	difficult	thing,	where	I	sat	in	the	saddle
Above	salt-rimed	horseflesh	to	lift	my	crossbow
Aim	and	loose	the	quarrel,	skewering	the	madman
To	his	proclamation.	‘Now,’	said	I,	in	the
Silence	that	followed,	‘Now,	there	is	peace.’
THE	LAY	OF	SKINNER
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
On	facing	hills,	the	smouldering	ruins	of	first	reach	in	the	low,	flat	flood-plain
between	the	two	armies	of	the	Tiste	Edur	came	within	sight	of	one	another.
Wraiths	swarmed	through	the	ashes,	weapons	were	lifted	high,	triumphant
cries	piercing	the	still	morning	air.
The	convergence	was,	of	course,	incomplete.	The	third,	easternmost	force,
led	by	Tomad	Sengar	and	Binadas,	was	still	striking	south	down	Mappers’


Road	towards	White	Point.	It	would	join	with	these	two	armies,	Trull	knew,
somewhere	close	to	Brans	Keep,	and	there	the	fate	of	Lether,	and	indeed	of	the
Edur	empire,	would	be	decided	in	a	single	battle.
He	stood	leaning	on	his	spear,	feeling	no	inclination	to	join	his	voice	to	the
fierce	tumult	buffeting	him	from	all	sides.	Just	north	of	the	ruins	in	the	floodplain	below,	a	hundred	or	more	starlings	cavorted	and	wheeled,	their	own	cries
drowned	out,	a	detail	that	somehow	transformed	their	dance	into	a	fevered,
nightmarish	display.
In	the	distant	line	of	warriors	opposite,	a	space	was	clearing,	a	single
dominant	standard	bobbing	forward,	beneath	it	a	figure	flashing	gold,	holding
high	a	sword.
The	warcries	redoubled.
Trull	flinched	at	the	deafening	sound.	He	pulled	his	gaze	away	from
Rhulad	on	that	far	hilltop	and	saw	Fear	approaching.
‘Trull!	B’nagga,	you	and	I—horses	await	us—we	ride	now	to	our
emperor!’
He	nodded,	uneasy	with	the	ferocity	evident	in	Fear ’s	eyes.	‘Lead	on,
brother.’
The	ride	across	to	Rhulad’s	army	was	a	strange	experience.	Trull	did	not
like	horses	that	much;	and	liked	riding	them	even	less.	He	was	jolted	again	and
again,	jarring	the	scene	on	all	sides.	They	rode	across	burnt	ground,	heaps	of
the	remains	of	butchered	livestock	lining	the	tracks	approaching	the	town.	And
the	roaring	of	the	warriors	was	a	wave	at	their	backs,	pushing	them	onwards.
Then,	halfway	across,	the	sensation	shifted,	spun	entirely	round,	as	the
voices	of	the	warriors	in	the	emperor ’s	army	engulfed	them.	Their	horses
balked,	and	it	was	a	struggle	to	make	them	resume	the	approach.
As	they	climbed	the	slope,	Trull	could	see	his	brother	Rhulad	more	clearly.
He	was	barely	recognizable,	hulking	now	beneath	the	weight	of	the	coins.	His
forehead	was	exposed,	revealing	skin	the	colour	of	dirty	snow,	the	contrast
darkening	the	pits	of	his	eyes.	His	teeth	were	bared,	but	it	seemed	as	much	a
grimace	of	pain	as	anything	else.	Hannan	Mosag	stood	on	the	emperor ’s	left,
the	slave	Udinaas	on	the	right.	Hull	Beddict	was	positioned	three	paces	behind
the	Warlock	King.	Mayen	and	Uruth	were	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Arriving,	they	reined	in	and	dismounted.	Slaves	appeared	to	lead	the
horses	away.
Fear	strode	forward	to	kneel	before	the	emperor.	Across	the	valley,
another	surge	of	sound.
‘My	brother,’	Rhulad	said	in	his	rasping,	broken	voice.	‘Rise	before	us.’
The	emperor	stepped	close	and	settled	a	coin-backed	hand	on	Fear ’s	shoulder.


‘There	is	much	I	must	say	to	you,	but	later.’
‘As	you	command,	Emperor.’
Rhulad’s	haunted	eyes	shifted.	‘Trull.’
He	knelt	and	studied	the	ground	before	him.	‘Emperor.’
‘Rise.	We	have	words	for	you	as	well.’
No	doubt.	‘Mother	arrived	safely?’
A	flash	of	irritation.	‘She	did.’	It	seemed	he	would	say	something	more	to
Trull,	but	then	he	changed	his	mind	and	faced	B’nagga.	‘The	Jheck	are	well,
B’nagga?’
A	fierce	grin.	‘They	are,	Emperor.’
‘We	are	pleased.	Hannan	Mosag	would	speak	to	you	regarding	the
impending	lie	of	battle.	A	tent	has	been	prepared	for	such	matters.	Hull	Beddict
has	drawn	us	detailed	maps.’
B’nagga	bowed,	then	walked	to	the	Warlock	King.	The	two	departed,
trailed	by	Hull	Beddict.
‘Our	brothers,’	Rhulad	said,	the	sword	shaking	in	his	left	hand.	‘Come,	we
will	take	food	and	drink	in	our	own	tent.	Udinaas,	precede	us.’
The	slave	strode	into	the	mass	of	warriors.	The	Edur	melted	back	before
the	nondescript	Letherii,	and	into	his	wake	walked	the	emperor,	Fear	and	Trull.
They	reached	the	command	tent	a	short	while	later,	after	traversing	an
avenue	walled	in	flesh,	waving	weapons	and	frenzied	warcries.	Wraiths	stood
guard	to	either	side	of	the	entrance.	As	soon	as	the	slave	and	the	three	brothers
entered,	Rhulad	spun	round	and	halted	Trull	with	one	hand.	‘How	far	do	you
intend	to	push	me,	Trull?’
He	looked	down	at	the	hand	pressed	against	his	chest.	‘It	seems	you	are	the
one	doing	the	pushing,	Rhulad.’
A	moment	of	taut	silence,	then	his	brother	barked	a	laugh	and	stepped	back.
‘Words	from	our	past,	yes?	As	we	once	were,	before…’	a	wave	of	the	sword,
‘all	this.’	His	ravaged	gaze	fixed	on	Trull	for	a	moment.	‘We	have	missed	you.’
He	smiled	at	Fear.	‘Missed	you	both.	Udinaas,	find	us	some	wine!’
‘A	Letherii	drink,’	Fear	said.
‘I	have	acquired	a	taste	for	it,	brother.’
Trull	and	Fear	followed	Rhulad	into	the	inner	chamber,	where	the	slave
was	already	pouring	three	cups	of	dark	wine	into	Letherii-made	goblets	of
silver	and	gold.	Trull	felt	unbalanced,	the	sudden	breach	in	Rhulad’s	façade
shocking	him,	hurting	him	somewhere	inside	for	reasons	he	could	not
immediately	fathom.
Eschewing	the	throne	dominating	the	centre	of	the	room,	the	emperor
settled	down	in	a	leather-slung	tripod	chair	near	the	food-laden	table	along	one


wall.	Two	identical	chairs	flanked	him.	Rhulad	gestured.	‘Come,	brothers,	sit
with	us.	We	know,	we	understand	well,	it	seemed	all	we	were	was	but	ashes,	and
the	love	we	shared,	as	brothers,	was	so	sadly	strained,	then.’
Trull	could	see	that	even	Fear	was	stunned,	as	they	sat	down	in	the	low
chairs.
‘We	must	not	run	from	our	memories,’	Rhulad	said,	as	Udinaas	brought
him	his	cup.	‘The	blood	of	kin	need	not	always	burn,	brothers.	There	must	be
times	when	it	simply…warms	us.’
Fear	cleared	his	throat.	‘We	have…missed	you	as	well,	Emperor—’
‘Enough!	No	titles.	Rhulad,	so	our	father	named	me,	as	he	named	all	his
sons,	each	in	turn	from	the	host	of	ancestors	of	the	Sengar	line.	It	is	too	easy	to
forget.’
Udinaas	set	a	cup	into	Fear ’s	hand.	Fingers	closed	of	their	own	accord.
Trull	glanced	up	as	the	slave	approached	him	with	the	last	cup.	He	met	the
Letherii’s	eyes,	was	startled	by	what	he	saw	in	them.	He	reached	out	and
accepted	the	wine.	‘Thank	you,	Udinaas.’
A	flinch	from	Rhulad.	‘He	is	mine,’	he	said	in	a	tight	voice.
Trull’s	eyes	widened.	‘Of	course,	Rhulad.’
‘Good.	Yes.	Fear,	I	must	tell	you	of	Mayen.’
Slowly	leaning	back,	Trull	studied	the	wine	trembling	in	the	cup	in	his
hands.	The	slave’s	gaze,	the	message	it	seemed	to	convey.	All	is	well.
‘I	did	not,’	Fear	ventured	hesitantly,	‘see	her	earlier…’
‘No,	nor	our	mother.	Mayen	has	been	unwell.’	Rhulad	shot	Fear	a	nervous
glance.	‘I	am	sorry,	brother.	I	should	not	have…should	not	have	done	that.	And
now,	well,	you	see…’	He	drained	his	wine	in	a	single	motion.	‘Udinaas,	more.
Tell	him.	Explain,	Udinaas,	so	that	Fear	understands.’
The	slave	refilled	the	cup,	then	stepped	back.	‘She	is	with	child,’	he	said,
meeting	Fear ’s	gaze.	‘There	is	no	doubt	now,	that	her	heart	belongs	to	you.
Rhulad	would	have	wished	otherwise.	At	first,	in	any	case.	But	not	now.	He
understands.	But	the	child,	that	has	made	matters	difficult.	Complicated.’
The	cup	in	Fear ’s	hand	had	not	visibly	moved,	but	Trull	could	see	that	it
was	close	to	spilling,	as	if	a	numbness	was	stealing	the	strength	of	the	limb.
‘Go	on,’	Fear	managed.
‘There	is	no	precedent,	no	rules	among	your	people,’	Udinaas	resumed.
‘Rhulad	would	relinquish	his	marriage	to	her,	he	would	undo	all	that	has	been
done.	But	for	the	child,	do	you	see,	Fear	Sengar?’
‘That	child	will	be	heir—’
Rhulad	interrupted	with	a	harsh	laugh.	‘No	heir,	Fear.	Ever.	Don’t	you	see?
The	throne	shall	be	my	eternal	burden.’


Burden.	By	the	Sisters,	what	has	awakened	you,	Rhulad?	Who	has
awakened	you?	Trull	snapped	his	gaze	back	to	Udinaas,	and	mentally	reeled	in
sudden	realization.	Udinaas?	This…this	slave?
Udinaas	was	nodding,	eyes	still	on	Fear ’s	own.	‘The	warrior	that	raises
that	child	will	be	its	father,	in	all	things	but	the	naming.	There	will	be	no
deception.	All	will	know.	If	there	is	to	be	a	stigma…’
‘It	will	be	for	me	to	deal	with,’	Fear	said.	‘Should	I	choose	to	stand	beside
Mayen,	once	wife	to	the	emperor,	with	a	child	not	my	own	to	raise	as	my
wife’s	first-born.’
‘It	is	as	you	say,	Fear	Sengar,’	Udinaas	said.	Then	he	stepped	back.
Trull	slowly	straightened,	reached	with	one	hand	and	gently	righted	the	cup
in	Fear ’s	grip.	Startled,	his	brother	looked	at	him,	then	nodded.	‘Rhulad,	what
does	Mother	say	to	all	this?’
‘Mayen	has	been	punishing	herself	with	white	nectar.	It	is	not	an	easy	thing
to	defeat,	such…dependency.	Uruth	endeavours…’
A	soft	groan	from	Fear,	as	he	closed	his	eyes.
Trull	watched	Rhulad	stretch	out	as	if	to	touch	Fear,	watched	him	hesitate,
then	glance	across	to	Trull.
Who	nodded.	Yes.	Now.
A	momentary	contact,	that	seemed	to	shoot	through	Fear,	snapping	his	eyes
open.
‘Brother,’	Rhulad	said,	‘I	am	sorry.’
Fear	studied	his	youngest	brother ’s	face,	then	said,	‘We	are	all	sorry,
Rhulad.	For…so	much.	What	has	Uruth	said	of	the	child?	Is	it	well?’
‘Physically,	yes,	but	it	knows	its	mother ’s	hunger.	This	will	be…difficult.	I
know,	you	do	not	deserve	any	of	this,	Fear—’
‘Perhaps,	Rhulad,	but	I	will	accept	the	burden.	For	Mayen.	And	for	you.’
No-one	spoke	after	that,	not	for	some	time.	They	drank	their	wine,	and	it
seemed	to	Trull	that	something	was	present,	some	part	of	his	life	he’d	thought
—not	long	gone,	but	non-existent	in	the	first	place.	They	sat,	the	three	of	them.
Brothers,	and	nothing	more.
Night	descended	outside.	Udinaas	served	food	and	still	more	wine.	Some
time	later,	Trull	rose,	the	alcohol	softening	details,	and	wandered	through	the
chambers	of	the	tent,	his	departure	barely	noticed	by	Rhulad	and	Fear.
In	a	small	room	walled	in	by	canvas,	he	found	Udinaas.
The	slave	was	sitting	on	a	small	stool,	eating	his	own	supper.	He	looked	up
in	surprise	at	Trull’s	sudden	arrival.
‘Please,’	Trull	said,	‘resume	your	meal.	You	have	earned	it,	Udinaas.’
‘Is	there	something	you	wish	of	me,	Trull	Sengar?’


‘No.	Yes.	What	have	you	done?’
The	slave	cocked	his	head.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘With…him.	What	have	you	done,	Udinaas?’
‘Not	much,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘No,	I	need	an	answer.	What	are	you	to	him?’
Udinaas	set	down	his	plate,	drank	a	mouthful	of	wine.	‘A	subject	who’s	not
afraid	of	him,	I	suppose.’
‘That’s…all?	Wait,	yes,	I	see.	But	then	I	wonder,	why?	Why	are	you	not
afraid	of	him?’
Udinaas	sighed,	and	Trull	realized	how	exhausted	the	slave	was.	‘You,	all
the	Edur,	you	see	the	sword.	Or	the	gold.	You	see…the	power.	The	terrifying,
brutal	power.’	He	shrugged.	‘I	see	what	it	takes	from	him,	what	it	costs	Rhulad.
I	am	Letherii,	after	all,’	he	added	with	a	grimace.	I	understand	the	notion	of
debt.’	He	looked	up.	‘Trull	Sengar,	I	am	his	friend.	That	is	all.’
Trull	studied	the	slave	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	‘Never	betray	him,
Udinaas.	Never.’
The	Letherii’s	gaze	skittered	away.	He	drank	more	wine.
‘Udinaas—’
‘I	heard	you,’	the	man	said	in	a	grating	voice.
Trull	turned	to	leave.	Then	he	paused	and	glanced	back.	‘I	have	no	wish	to
depart	on	such	terms.	So,	Udinaas,	for	what	you	have	done,	for	what	you	have
given	him,	thank	you.’
The	slave	nodded	without	looking	up.	He	reached	down	to	retrieve	his
plate.
Trull	returned	to	the	central	chamber	to	find	that	Hannan	Mosag	had
arrived,	and	was	speaking	to	Rhulad.
‘…Hull	believes	it	lies	near	a	town	downriver	from	here.	A	day’s	journey,
perhaps.	But,	Emperor,	a	necessary	journey	none	the	less.’
Rhulad	looked	away,	glared	at	the	far	wall.	‘The	armies	must	go	on.	To
Brans	Keep.	No	delays,	no	detours.	I	will	go,	and	Fear	and	Trull	as	well.	Hull
Beddict,	to	guide	us.	Udinaas,	of	course.’
‘A	K’risnan,’	the	Warlock	King	said,	‘and	our	new	demonic	allies,	the	two
Kenryll’ah.’
‘Very	well,	those	as	well.	We	shall	meet	you	at	Brans	Keep.’
‘What	is	it?’	Trull	asked.	‘What	has	happened?’
‘Something	has	been	freed,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘And	it	must	be	dealt
with.’
‘Freed	by	whom,	and	for	what	purpose?’
The	Warlock	King	shrugged.	‘I	know	not	who	was	responsible.	But	I


assume	it	was	freed	to	fight	us.’
‘A	demon	of	some	sort?’
‘Yes.	I	can	only	sense	its	presence,	its	will.	I	cannot	identify	it.	The	town	is
named	Brous.’
‘Trull	slowly	nodded.	‘Would	that	Binadas	were	with	us,’	he	said.
Rhulad	glanced	up.	‘Why?’
Trull	smiled,	said	nothing.
After	a	moment,	Fear	grunted,	then	nodded.
Rhulad	matched	Trull’s	smile.	‘Yes,’	he	said,	‘would	that	he	were.’
Hannan	Mosag	looked	at	the	three	of	them	in	turn.	‘I	do	not	understand.’
The	emperor ’s	laugh	was	harsh,	only	slightly	bitter.	‘You	send	us	on
another	quest,	Warlock	King.’
Hannan	Mosag	visibly	blanched.
Seeing	that,	Rhulad	laughed	again,	this	time	in	pure	amusement.
After	a	moment,	both	Fear	and	Trull	joined	him,	whilst	Hannan	Mosag
stared	at	them	all	in	disbelief.
They	had	drunk	too	much	wine,	Trull	told	himself	later.	That	was	all.	Far
too	much	wine.
	
Seren	Pedac	and	the	Crimson	Guardsmen	guided	their	horses	down	from	the
road,	across	the	ditch,	and	drew	rein	at	the	edge	of	a	green	field.	The	vanguard
of	the	Merchants’	Battalion	had	emerged	from	the	city’s	gates,	and	the
Acquitor	could	see	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz	at	the	forefront,	riding	a	blue-grey
horse,	white-maned,	that	tossed	its	head	in	irritation,	hooves	stamping	with
impatience.
‘If	she’s	not	careful,’	Iron	Bars	observed,	‘that	beast	will	start	bucking.	And
she’ll	find	herself	on	her	arse	in	the	middle	of	the	road.’
‘That	would	be	an	ill	omen	indeed,’	Seren	said.
After	a	moment,	the	Preda	managed	to	calm	the	horse.
‘I	take	it	we	have	something	of	a	wait	before	us,’	Iron	Bars	said.
‘King’s	Battalion	and	Merchants’	Battalion	at	the	very	least.	I	don’t	know
what	other	forces	are	in	Letheras.	I	wouldn’t	think	the	south	battalions	and
brigades	have	had	time	to	reach	here,	which	is	unfortunate.’	She	thought	for	a
moment,	then	said,	‘If	we	cross	this	field,	we	can	take	the	river	road	and	enter
through	Fishers’	Gate.	It	will	mean	crossing	two-thirds	of	the	city	to	reach	my
home,	but	for	you,	Avowed,	well,	presumably	the	ship	you’re	signed	on	with
will	be	close	by.’
Iron	Bars	shrugged.	‘We’re	delivering	you	to	your	door,	Acquitor.’


‘That’s	not	necessary—’
‘Even	so,	it	is	what	we	intend	to	do.’
‘Then,	if	you	don’t	mind…’
‘Fishers’	Gate	it	shall	be.	Lead	on,	Acquitor.’

The	rearguard	elements	of	the	King’s	Battalion	had	turned	in	the	concourse
before	the	Eternal	Domicile	and	were	now	marching	up	the	Avenue	of	the
Seventh	Closure.	King	Ezgara	Diskanar,	who	had	stood	witness	on	the	balcony
of	the	First	Wing	since	his	official	despatch	of	the	Preda	at	dawn,	finally	swung
about	and	made	his	way	inside.	The	investiture	was	about	to	begin,	but	Brys
Beddict	knew	he	had	some	time	before	his	presence	was	required.
Four	of	his	own	guard	were	on	the	balcony	with	him.	Brys	gestured	one
over.	‘Find	me	a	messenger.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
Brys	waited,	staring	out	over	the	city.	The	air	was	oppressive	with	more
than	just	humidity	and	heat.	After	the	passing	of	the	battalion’s	rearguard,	few
citizens	ventured	into	its	wake.	The	battle	at	Brans	Keep	was	still	days	away,	but
it	seemed	that	most	of	the	city’s	residents—those	who	remained—had	elected
to	stay	in	their	homes	as	much	as	possible.
The	messenger	arrived,	a	woman	he	had	employed	often	and	one	he	knew
he	could	trust.
‘Deliver	a	missive	to	my	brother,	Tehol,	at	his	home.’
‘He	will	be	on	his	roof?’
‘I	expect	so,	and	that	is	the	message—he	is	to	stay	there.	Now,	an	additional
message,	to	the	Shavankrat	brother	guarding	Tehol.	A	name.	Gerun	Eberict.
That	is	all.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Go,	then.’
She	quickly	left.	Brys	strode	into	the	narrow	corridor	that	tracked	the
length	of	the	wing	on	the	second	tier.	At	the	far	end	steps	descended	to	an
antechamber	that	was	part	of	the	central	dome	complex.	There,	he	found
Finadd	Moroch	Nevath,	sitting	on	a	stone	bench.
‘Brys,	I	have	been	waiting	for	you.’
‘Not	too	long,	I	hope.	What	do	you	wish	of	me,	Finadd?’
‘Do	you	believe	in	gods?’
Startled,	Brys	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘I	am	afraid	I	do	not	see


the	relevance	of	that	question.’
Moroch	Nevath	reached	into	a	pouch	at	his	hip	and	withdrew	a	battered	tile,
such	as	might	be	found	among	market	readers.	‘When	did	you	last	speak	with
Turudal	Brizad?’
‘The	First	Consort	has	not	been	in	the	palace—either	palace,	since
yesterday,’	Brys	said.	‘First	Eunuch	Nifadas	ordered	an	extensive	search,	and	it
has	been	concluded	that	Turudal	has	fled.	Not	entirely	surprising—’
Moroch	tossed	him	the	tile.	Instinctively,	Brys	caught	it	in	his	left	hand.	He
looked	down	at	the	ceramic	plaque.	Yellowed	at	the	edges,	latticed	with	cracks,
the	illustration	reduced	to	a	series	of	stylized	scratches	that	Brys	none	the	less
recognized.	‘The	tile	of	the	Errant.	What	of	it,	Moroch?’
The	soldier	rose	to	his	feet.	He’d	lost	weight,	Brys	noted,	and	seemed	to
have	aged	ten	years	since	joining	the	treaty	delegation.	‘He’s	been	here.	All
along.	The	bastard’s	been	right	under	our	noses,	Brys	Beddict.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘The	Errant.	The	First	Consort.	Turudal	Brizad.’
‘That	is…ridiculous.’
‘I	have	a	somewhat	harsher	word	for	it,	Brys.’
The	Champion	glanced	away	from	the	man	standing	before	him.	‘How	did
you	come	to	this	extraordinary	conclusion,	Moroch?’
‘There	have	been	Turudal	Brizads	every	generation—oh,	different	names,
but	it’s	him.	Scenes	on	tapestries,	paintings.	Walk	the	royal	collection,	Brys—
everything’s	out	in	the	hallway,	about	to	be	moved.	It	was	right	there,	for
anyone	to	see,	should	they	find	reason	to	look.’
‘And	what	reason	did	you	have,	Moroch?’
A	grimace.	‘He	asked	me	to	do	something	for	him.’
Brys	grunted.	‘He’s	a	god.’	Supposedly.	‘Why	should	he	need	your	help?’
‘Because	he	says	you	will	be	too	busy.’
Brys	thought	back	to	his	last	conversation	with	Turudal	Brizad….	the	end
of	my	objectivity.	Something	like	that,	as	the	man	was	walking	away.	‘I	admit	to
some…scepticism,	Moroch	Nevath.’
‘Set	it	aside	for	the	moment,	Brys.	I	am	here	to	ask	your	advice.	Assume
the	worst.’
‘A	god	asks	for	your	help?	I	suppose	one	must	consider	possible
motivations,	and	the	consequences	of	accepting	or	rejecting	the	request.’
‘Yes.’
‘Will	doing	as	he	asks	be	to	the	benefit	of	Lether?’
‘He	says	it	will.’
‘Where	is	he	now?’


‘In	the	city,	somewhere.	He	was	watching	the	last	of	the	refugees	allowed
in	this	morning,	on	the	wall,	or	so	one	of	my	guards	reported.’
‘Then,	I	would	think,	Moroth,	that	you	must	do	as	he	asks.’
‘Over	the	duty	of	protecting	the	king?’
‘I	imagine	the	god	assumes	that	task	will	be	mine.’
‘We	are	almost	equal,	you	and	I,	Brys.’
‘I	know.’
‘You	may	believe	that	you	are	the	better	between	us.	I	believe	otherwise.’
‘The	decision	was	not	ours	to	make,	Moroch.’
Moroch	studied	him	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	said,	‘I	thank	you	for
the	advice,	Finadd.’
‘I	hesitate	to	say	it,	Moroch	Nevath,	but	the	Errant	be	with	you.’
‘Not	funny,’	the	swordsman	muttered	as	he	strode	away.
Brys	made	his	way	into	the	dome	complex.	He	came	to	the	main	corridor,
halting	to	study	the	layout	once	more.	The	walls	had	been	scrubbed,	the	dust	on
the	floor	mopped	away.	Guards	and	functionaries	were	moving	about,
readying	for	the	investiture.	Many	glances	were	cast	in	the	direction	of	the
figure	sleeping	halfway	down	the	corridor,	curled	up	on	the	centre	tile.
Sighing,	Brys	approached	Kuru	Qan.	‘Ceda.’
The	old	man	made	a	sound,	then	turned	over	so	that	his	back	was	to	Brys.
‘Wake	up,	Ceda.	Please.’
Head	lifting,	Kuru	Qan	groped	for	the	twin	lenses	lying	on	the	floor
nearby,	drew	them	to	his	face.	‘Who	calls?’
‘It	is	Brys	Beddict.’
‘Ah,	Finadd.’	Kuru	Qan	twisted	round	and	peered	up.	‘You	look	well.’
You	do	not.	‘Ceda,	the	investiture	is	about	to	begin.	Unless	you	would	have
King	Ezgara	Diskanar	step	around	you	during	his	solemn	march,	you	will
have	to	move.’
‘No!’	The	old	man	spread	himself	out	on	the	flagstone.	‘I	must	not!	This	is
mine.	My	place.’
‘You	insist	that	he	step	to	one	side	on	his	approach?	Ceda,	you	risk	the
king’s	anger—’
‘Relevant?	Not	in	the	least.’	His	fingers	scrabbled	on	the	stone.	‘This	is
mine.	Warn	him,	Finadd.	Warn	the	king.’
‘About	what?’
‘I	will	not	be	moved.	Any	who	would	try	will	be	blasted	into	ashes.	Ashes,
Brys	Beddict.’
Brys	glanced	around.	A	small	crowd	had	gathered	to	listen	to	the	exchange.
The	Finadd	scowled.	‘Be	on	your	way,	all	of	you.’	People	scrambled.


Temporarily	alone	once	more,	Brys	crouched	down	before	the	Ceda.	‘You
had	paints	and	brushes	with	you	last	time.	What	happened	to	them?’
‘Paints	and	brushes?’	The	eyes	blinked	behind	the	lenses.	‘Gone.	Gone
away.	The	king	wants	you	now,	Finadd.	He	is	ready	to	begin	the	procession.
Nifadas	is	coming—he	will	complain,	but	no	matter.	It	will	be	a	small
audience,	won’t	it.	Relevant?	Oh	yes.	Best	the	king	ignore	me—explain	that	to
him,	Brys.’
The	Finadd	straightened.	‘I	shall,	Ceda.’
‘Excellent.	Now,	be	on	your	way.’
	
‘This	doesn’t	smell	right.’
Trull	looked	over	at	the	Kenryll’ah	demon	that	had	spoken.	It	was	taller
than	the	Tiste	Edur	on	their	horses.	A	face	of	sharper	features	than	those	on
Lilac,	black	as	chiselled	basalt,	the	upper	and	lower	canines	protruding	and
glinting	silver.	A	fur-lined	collar,	a	vest	of	bronze	scales,	salt-rimed	and	dark
with	patination.	A	heavy	leather	belt	on	which	was	slung	a	huge	scabbarded
tulwar.	Leather	leggings,	grey	and	supple.	The	other	demon,	standing	at	its
side,	differed	only	in	the	choice	of	weapons,	a	massive	matlock	gripped	in	two
gauntleted	hands.
This	second	Kenryll’ah	bared	its	teeth.	‘Making	me	hungry.’
‘Split	bones,’	the	other	said.	‘Marrow.’
The	stench	the	two	were	referring	to	was	that	of	rotting	corpses.	They	had
reached	the	edge	of	the	clearing,	beyond	which	was	the	palisade	wall	of	the
town	of	Brous.	In	the	field	were	barrows,	and	one	long	excavated	trench.	There
was	no	one	in	sight.
‘Brothers,’	the	emperor	said,	‘dismount	and	ready	your	weapons.’
Trull	swung	down	from	his	horse.	He	turned.	‘K’risnan,	can	you	sense
anything?’
The	young	Arapay	warlock’s	face	was	sickly.	He	nodded.	‘In	the	town,	I
think.	It	knows	we’re	here.’
Rhulad	closed	both	hands	on	the	grip	of	his	sword	and	raised	it	to	centre
guard	position.	‘Udinaas,	remain	with	the	horses.	Fear,	on	my	left.	Trull,	my
right.	K’risnan,	stay	behind	us	five	paces.	Demons,	out	to	either	side.’
‘Can’t	we	eat	first?’
‘Or	pee?	I	need	to	pee.’
‘You	should	have	thought	of	that	before	we	left,’	the	first	demon	said.
‘And	you	should	have	eaten.	We’ve	plenty	of	spare	horses,	you	know.’
The	emperor	hissed.	‘Silence,	both	of	you.	We’ve	had	to	listen	to	you	the


entire	journey.	No	more,	lest	I	decide	to	kill	you	first.’
‘That	wouldn’t	be	wise,’	the	second	Kenryll’ah	said.	‘I	smell	more	than
meat,	I	smell	the	one	thing	still	alive	in	there,	and	it	isn’t	pleasant.’
‘I	taste	it,’	the	first	demon	said.	‘And	it	makes	me	want	to	retch.’
‘You	should	have	thought	of	retching	before	we	left,’	the	second	one	said.
‘I	think	of	retching	every	time	I	look	at	you.’
‘Enough!’
‘I	apologize	for	my	brother,’	the	first	demon	said.
‘And	I	for	mine,’	the	second	one	added.
Strange	tyrants.	Trull	unslung	his	spear	and	strode	to	Rhulad’s	side.
They	made	their	way	across	the	clearing.	Reaching	the	pit,	they	saw	the
first	of	the	bodies.	Broken	and	tossed	at	the	base	of	the	deep,	ragged
excavation,	like	an	open	mass	burial.	Workers	and	soldiers.	Flesh	dark	and
bloating	in	the	heat.	Flies	swarmed.
They	skirted	the	pit	and	approached	the	town.	The	gates	opposite	them	had
been	knocked	down,	inward,	the	heavy	doors	shattered.	Somewhere	in	the	town
a	dog	was	barking.
The	street	was	strewn	with	corpses	just	inside	the	wall.	The	doors	of	every
house	and	building	within	sight	had	been	stove	in.	Ahead	and	to	the	right,	two
horses	stood	yoked	to	a	wagon	that	had	been	knocked	over.	Exhaustion	and	the
strain	of	the	yokes	had	driven	one	of	the	beasts	into	an	awkward	sitting
position.	Trull	hesitated,	then	walked	over	to	them,	drawing	the	knife	at	his
belt.	The	others	paused	and	watched	as	he	cut	the	horses	loose.	Neither	animal
was	in	any	condition	to	flee,	but	they	slowly	made	their	way	outside	on
trembling,	uncertain	legs.
Trull	returned	to	his	position	beside	Rhulad.
‘It’s	coming,’	the	first	demon	said.
Further	down	the	main	street	a	flock	of	starlings	swirled	into	view,
spinning	between	the	buildings.	In	a	mass	of	black,	the	birds	seemed	to	boil
towards	the	Tiste	Edur	and	the	Kenryll’ah.	Striding	in	the	midst	of	the	birds,	a
tall	figure,	spectral,	its	skin	white,	its	hair	pallid	yellow	and	hanging	in	limp
strands.	It	was	wearing	a	leather	harness	that	looked	wrinkled	and	blackened
with	rot.	There	was	something	strange	about	its	limbs.
‘He	is	unarmed,’	Fear	said.
‘Yet,’	the	K’risnan	hissed	behind	them,	‘he	is	the	one.’
The	starlings	spun	higher,	alighting	on	roof	edges	to	either	side,	as	the
figure	halted	ten	paces	away.
‘Peaceful,’	it	said	in	Letherii,	‘is	it	not?’
Rhulad	spoke.	‘I	am	Emperor	Rhulad	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Who,	and	what,	are


you,	stranger?’
‘I	am	Forkrul	Assail.	I	am	named	Serenity.’
‘You	are	a	demon,	then?’
The	head	cocked.	‘I	am?’
‘This	is	not	your	world.’
‘It	isn’t?’
Rhulad	half	turned.	‘K’risnan,	banish	him.’
‘I	cannot,	Emperor.’
‘The	tumult	of	your	presence	invites	discord,’	Serenity	said.
Watching	the	Forkrul	Assail’s	movements,	Trull	realized	that	it	possessed
extra	joints	in	the	arms	and	the	legs,	and	there	was	some	kind	of	hinge	across
the	creature’s	breastbone.	Its	motion	was	oddly	loose.
‘Discord?’	Rhulad	asked.
‘I	desire	peace	once	more.’
Fear	spoke.	‘If	it	is	peace	you	seek,	Serenity,	then	you	need	only	turn	and
walk	away.	Leave.’
‘To	leave	here	is	to	arrive	elsewhere.	I	cannot	retreat	from	disorder,	for	it
shall	surely	follow.	Peace	must	be	asserted	where	one	finds	oneself.	Only	when
discord	is	resolved	will	there	be	peace.’	The	Forkrul	Assail	then	stepped
forward.
‘’Ware!’	one	of	the	demons	snarled.
Serenity	surged	closer,	even	as	the	starlings	exploded	skyward	once	more.
Trull’s	weapon	possessed	the	greatest	reach,	but	he	did	not	attempt	to	stab
the	creature.	Its	arms	were	lifted	to	fend	off	the	attack,	and	Trull	chose	to	batter
at	those	with	a	high	sweep	of	the	spear	shaft.	Like	a	serpent,	Serenity’s	right
arm	writhed	around	the	shaft,	binding	the	weapon.	A	sudden	flex	and	the
Blackwood	cracked,	then	splintered,	the	red	core	welling	into	view	down	the
length	of	the	split.	Trull	had	little	time	to	feel	shock,	as	Serenity’s	left	hand
lashed	out.
Two	fingertips	touched	Trull’s	temple—
He	was	already	pitching	himself	to	the	side,	but	at	the	contact	he	felt	his
neck	wrenched	round.	Had	he	remained	standing,	had	he	resisted,	his	neck
would	now	be	broken.	As	it	was,	ducking,	shoulder	dipping,	he	was	flung
downward,	thrown	off	his	feet.
Fear	had	charged	in	low,	a	beat	behind	Trull’s	high	attack,	slashing
diagonally	down	and	in	to	take	the	Forkrul	Assail	at	the	knee.
But	the	leg	folded	back,	the	knee	reversing	its	angle,	whilst	at	the	same
time	Serenity	reached	down	with	his	left	hand	and	grasped	the	sword-blade.
The	Forkrul	Assail	plucked	it	from	Fear ’s	hand,	fingers	clenching,	crushing


the	iron.
For	all	their	failures,	Trull	and	Fear	had	done	what	was	demanded	of	them.
Their	flank	attacks	had	preceded	Rhulad’s,	with	the	intention	of	opening
Serenity	to	the	emperor ’s	attack.	Rhulad’s	mottled	sword	was	a	blur,	whistling
in	the	air—yet	not	once	making	contact,	as	the	Forkrul	Assail	seemed	to
simply	flow	around	it.
Flinging	Fear ’s	bent	sword	aside,	Serenity	stepped	in.
And	plunged	his	fingers	like	spikes	into	Rhulad’s	chest,	pushing	past	the
coins,	sliding	between	ribs,	and	piercing	his	heart,	then	snapping	back	out.
The	emperor	crumpled.
Serenity	swung	to	face	Fear.
Then	leapt	back,	eight	paces	or	more	through	the	air,	narrowly	avoiding	a
matlock	that	struck	the	dirt	of	the	street	and	sank	deep.
Serenity	back-pedalled	further	as	the	other	demon	pursued,	the	massive
tulwar	dancing	like	a	dagger	in	its	hands.
Trull	scrambled	to	his	feet.	He	spun,	intending	to	collect	another	spear
from	the	cache	he’d	left	strapped	to	his	horse—
—and	found	Udinaas	rushing	towards	him,	the	weapons	cradled	in	his
arms.
Trull	pulled	one	free,	then	turned	once	more,	leaping	over	Rhulad’s	body.
Ahead,	the	Forkrul	Assail	had	darted	to	the	left,	ducking	beneath	a	slash	of	the
tulwar,	hands	lashing	out	even	as	the	demon	kicked	it	hard	in	the	side.
Serenity	was	thrown	by	the	blow,	thudded	on	the	ground	and	rolled,	twice,
before	regaining	its	feet.
But	Trull	had	heard	the	crack	of	ribs	in	that	kick.
The	demon	closed	once	more	from	the	Forkrul	Assail’s	right.
A	moment	before	they	closed,	Trull	launched	his	spear.
Serenity	did	not	see	it	coming.	Struck	solidly	just	below	the	left
collarbone,	the	creature	was	spun	round	by	the	impact.	The	demon’s	tulwar
chopped	down	into	its	right	thigh,	ringing	as	it	bit	into	bone.	The	demon
wrenched	it	loose.
Trull	reached	back	and	another	spear	was	placed	in	his	hand.	He	moved
closer.
Staggering	back,	the	Forkrul	Assail	had	plucked	the	spear	from	its
shoulder	and	was	fending	off	the	tulwar	slashes	with	its	hands,	pushing	against
the	flat	of	the	blade.	The	other	demon	was	rushing	in	from	the	other	side,
matlock	raised	high.
Pale	bluish	blood	streaming	from	the	two	wounds—which	seemed	to	be
closing	even	as	Trull	watched—Serenity	leapt	back	once	more,	then	turned	and


ran.
The	Kenryll’ah	prepared	to	pursue.
‘Halt!’	Trull	shouted.	‘Leave	it!’
Udinaas	was	standing	above	Rhulad’s	body.	A	few	paces	away	stood	the
K’risnan,	his	young	face	frozen	into	an	expression	of	terror.	He	was	shaking
his	head	in	denial,	again	and	again.
‘K’risnan.’
Wild	eyes	fixed	on	Trull.	‘It…threw	me	back.	My	power…when	the
emperor	died…all,	flung	back…’
The	demons	approached.
‘Leave	it	to	us,’	the	first	one	said,	whipping	blood	from	the	tulwar.
‘Yes,’	nodded	the	other.	‘We’ve	never	before	heard	of	these	Forkrul	Assail,
but	we’ve	decided.’
‘We	don’t	like	them,’	the	first	demon	said.
‘Not	in	the	least.’
‘We	will	hunt	it	down	and	tell	it	so.’
Fear	spoke.	‘Udinaas,	how	long…’	His	eyes	were	on	Rhulad.
‘Not	long,’	the	slave	replied.
‘Do	we	wait?’
‘It	would	be	best,	I	think,’	said	Udinaas.
Rubbing	at	his	face,	Fear	walked	over	to	his	sword.	He	picked	it	up,
examined	it,	then	tossed	it	aside.	He	looked	across	at	Trull.
Trull	said,	‘It	broke	Blackwood.’
A	grimace.	‘I	saw.	That	second	spear,	that	was	well	thrown,	brother.’
Still,	the	brothers	knew.	Without	the	Kenryll’ah,	they	would	now	be	dead.
The	first	demon	spoke.	‘May	we	pursue	now?’
Fear	hesitated,	then	nodded.	‘Go.’
The	two	Kenryll’ah	swung	round	and	headed	up	the	street.
‘We	can	eat	on	the	way.’
‘Good	idea,	brother.’
Somewhere	in	the	town,	the	dog	was	still	barking.
	
‘We	have	to	help	him,’	Sandalath	Drukorlat	said.
Withal	glanced	over	at	her.	They	were	standing	on	the	sward’s	verge
overlooking	the	beach.	The	Tiste	Edur	youth	was	curled	up	in	the	sand	below.
Still	shrieking.	‘It’s	not	his	first	visit,’	Withal	said.
‘How	is	your	head?’	she	asked	after	a	moment.
‘It	hurts.’


The	Tiste	Edur	fell	silent,	shuddering,	then	the	youth’s	head	jerked	up.	He
stared	at	Withal	and	the	Tiste	Andii	woman	standing	beside	the	Meckros
weaponsmith.	Then	back	again.	‘Withal!’
The	smith’s	brows	rose,	although	the	motion	made	him	wince,	and	he	said,
‘He	normally	doesn’t	talk	to	me	much.’	To	the	youth,	‘Rhulad.	I	am	not	so
cruel	as	to	say	welcome.’
‘Who	is	she?	Who	is	that…betrayer?’
Sandalath	snorted.	‘Pathetic.	This	is	the	god’s	sword-wielder?	A	mistake.’
‘If	it	is,’	Withal	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘I	have	no	intention	of	telling	him	so.’
Rhulad	clambered	to	his	feet.	‘It	killed	me.’
‘Yes,’	Withal	replied.	‘It	did,	whatever	“it”	was.’
‘A	Forkrul	Assail.’
Sandalath	stiffened.	‘You	should	be	more	careful,	Edur,	in	choosing	your
enemies.’
A	laugh	close	to	hysteria,	as	Rhulad	made	his	way	up	from	the	beach.
‘Choose,	woman?	I	choose	nothing.’
‘Few	ever	do,	Edur.’
‘What	is	she	doing	here,	Withal?’
‘The	Crippled	God	thought	I	needed	company.	Beyond	three	insane
Nachts.’
‘You	are	lovers?’
‘Don’t	be	absurd,’	Sandalath	said,	sneering.
‘Like	she	said,’	Withal	added.
Rhulad	stepped	past	them.	‘I	need	my	sword,’	he	muttered,	walking	inland.
They	turned	to	watch	him.
‘His	sword,’	Sandalath	murmured.	‘The	one	the	god	had	you	make?’
Withal	nodded.	‘But	I	am	not	to	blame.’
‘You	were	compelled.’
‘I	was.’
‘It’s	not	the	weapon	that’s	evil,	it’s	the	one	wielding	it.’
He	studied	her.	‘I	don’t	care	if	you	crack	my	skull	again.	I	am	really
starting	to	hate	you.’
‘I	assure	you	my	sentiments	are	identical	regarding	you.’
Withal	turned	away.	‘I’m	going	to	my	shack.’
‘Of	course	you	are,’	she	snapped	behind	him.	‘To	beg	and	mumble	to	your
god.	As	if	it’d	bother	listening	to	such	pathetic	mewling.’
‘I’m	hoping,’	Withal	said	over	his	shoulder,	‘that	it’ll	take	pity	on	me.’
‘Why	should	it?’
He	did	not	reply,	and	wisely	kept	his	answering	smile	to	himself.


	
Standing	ten	paces	to	the	side	of	the	throne,	Brys	Beddict	watched	as	King
Ezgara	Diskanar	walked	solemnly	into	the	domed	chamber.	Distracted
irritation	was	on	the	king’s	face,	since	his	journey	had	required	a	detour
around	the	prone,	shivering	form	of	the	Ceda,	Kuru	Qan,	but	that	was	behind
him	now,	and	Brys	saw	Ezgara	slowly	resume	his	stern	expression.
Awaiting	him	in	the	throne	room	was	a	handful	of	officials	and	guards.
First	Eunuch	Nifadas	was	positioned	to	the	right	of	the	throne,	holding	the
Lether	crown	on	a	blood-red	pillow.	First	Concubine	Nisall	knelt	at	the	foot	of
the	dais,	on	the	left	side.	Along	with	Brys	and	six	of	his	guardsmen,	Finadd
Gerun	Eberict	was	present	with	six	of	his	own	soldiers	of	the	Palace	Guard.
And	that	was	all.	The	investiture	on	this,	the	day	of	the	Seventh	Closure—
or	close	enough	since	no-one	could	agree	on	that	specific	date—was	to	be
witnessed	by	these	few.	Not	as	originally	planned,	of	course.	But	there	had	been
more	riots,	the	last	one	the	bloodiest	of	them	all.	The	king’s	name	had	become
a	curse	among	the	citizenry.	The	list	of	invitations	had	been	truncated	as	a
matter	of	security,	and	even	then,	Brys	was	nervous	about	Gerun	Eberict’s
presence.
The	king	neared	the	dais,	his	robes	sliding	silken	on	the	polished	marble
floor	in	his	wake.
‘This	day,’	Nifadas	intoned,	‘Lether	becomes	an	empire.’
The	guards	executed	the	salute	reserved	for	the	royal	line	and	held	it,
motionless	as	statues.
Ezgara	Diskanar	stepped	up	onto	the	dais	and	slowly	turned	round.
The	First	Eunuch	moved	to	stand	before	him	and	raised	the	pillow.
The	king	took	the	crown	and	fitted	it	onto	his	head.
‘This	day,’	Nifadas	said,	stepped	back,	‘Lether	is	ruled	by	an	emperor.’	He
turned.	‘Emperor	Ezgara	Diskanar.’
The	guards	released	their	salute.
And	that	is	it.
Ezgara	sat	on	the	throne.
Looking	old	and	frail	and	lost.
	
The	windows	were	shuttered	tight.	Weeds	snarled	the	path,	vines	had	run	wild
up	the	walls	to	either	side	of	the	stepped	entrance.	From	the	street	behind	them
came	the	stench	of	smoke,	and	a	distant	roar	from	somewhere	in	the	Creeper
Quarter	inland,	beyond	Settle	Lake,	indicated	that	yet	another	riot	had	begun.


From	the	Fishers’	Gate,	Seren	Pedac	and	the	Crimson	Guardsmen	had
walked	their	horses	down	littered	streets.	Signs	of	looting,	the	occasional
corpse,	a	soldier ’s	dead	horse,	and	figures	scurrying	from	their	path	into
alleys	and	side	avenues.	Burnt-out	buildings,	packs	of	hungry	feral	dogs	drawn
in	from	the	abandoned	farmlands	and	forests,	refugee	families	huddled	here
and	there,	the	King’s	City	of	Lether	seemed	to	have	succumbed	to	depraved
barbarity	with	the	enemy	still	leagues	beyond	the	horizon.
She	was	stunned	at	how	swiftly	it	had	all	crumbled,	and	more	than	a	little
frightened.	For	all	her	disgust	and	contempt	for	the	ways	of	her	people,	there
had	remained,	somewhere	buried	deep,	a	belief	in	its	innate	resiliency.	But
here,	before	her,	was	the	evidence	of	sudden,	thorough	collapse.	Greed	and
savagery	unleashed,	fear	and	panic	triggering	brutality	and	ruthless
indifference.
They	passed	bodies	of	citizens	who	had	been	long	in	dying,	simply	left	in
the	street	while	they	bled	out.
Down	one	broad	avenue,	near	the	canal,	a	mob	had	passed	through,
perhaps	only	half	a	day	earlier.	There	was	evidence	that	soldiers	had	battled
against	it,	and	had	been	pushed	back	into	a	fighting	withdrawal.	Flanking
buildings	and	estates	had	been	trashed	and	looted.	The	street	was	sticky	with
blood,	and	the	tracks	of	dozens	of	wagons	were	evident,	indicating	that	here,	at
least,	the	city’s	garrison	had	returned	to	take	away	corpses.
Iron	Bars	and	his	Guardsmen	said	little	during	the	journey,	and	now,
gathered	before	her	home,	they	remained	on	their	horses,	hands	on	weapons
and	watchful.
Seren	dismounted.
After	a	moment,	Iron	Bars	and	Corlo	did	the	same.
‘Don’t	look	broken	into,’	the	mage	said.
‘As	I	said,’	Seren	replied,	‘nothing	inside	is	worth	taking.’
‘I	don’t	like	this,’	the	Avowed	muttered.	‘If	trouble	comes	knocking,
Acquitor…’
‘It	won’t,’	she	said.	‘These	riots	won’t	last.	The	closer	the	Edur	army	gets,
the	quieter	things	will	become.’
‘That’s	not	what	happened	in	Trate.’
‘True,	but	this	will	be	different.’
‘I	don’t	see	why	you’d	think	so,’	Iron	Bars	said,	shaking	his	head.
‘Go	find	your	ship,	Avowed,’	Seren	said.	She	turned	to	the	others.	‘Thank
you,	all	of	you.	I	am	honoured	to	have	known	you	and	travelled	in	your
company.’
‘Go	safe,	lass,’	Corlo	said.


She	settled	a	hand	on	the	mage’s	shoulder.	Held	his	eyes,	but	said	nothing.
He	nodded.	‘Easy	on	that.’
‘You	heard?’
‘I	did.	And	I’ve	the	headache	to	prove	it.’
‘Sorry.’
‘Try	to	remember,	Seren	Pedac,	Mockra	is	a	subtle	warren.’
‘I	will	try.’	She	faced	Iron	Bars.
‘Once	I’ve	found	our	employer	and	planted	my	squad,’	he	said,	‘I’ll	pay
you	another	visit,	so	we	needn’t	get	all	soft	here	and	now.’
‘All	right.’
‘A	day,	no	longer,	then	I’ll	see	you	again,	Acquitor.’
She	nodded.
The	Avowed	and	his	mage	swung	themselves	back	into	their	saddles.	The
troop	rode	off.
Seren	watched	them	for	a	moment,	then	turned	about	and	walked	up	the
path.	The	key	to	the	elaborate	lock	was	under	the	second	flagstone.
The	door	squealed	when	she	pushed	it	back,	and	the	smell	of	dust	swept	out
to	engulf	her.	She	entered,	shutting	the	door.
Gloom,	and	silence.
She	did	not	move	for	a	time,	the	corridor	stretching	before	her.	The	door
at	its	end	was	open,	and	she	could	see	into	the	room	beyond,	which	was	lit	by
cloth-filtered	sunlight	coming	from	the	courtyard	at	the	back.	A	high-backed
chair	in	that	far	room	faced	her,	draped	in	muslin	cloth.
One	step,	then	another.	On,	down	the	corridor.	Just	before	the	entrance	to
the	room,	the	mouldering	body	of	a	dead	owl,	lying	as	if	asleep	on	the	floor.
She	edged	round	it,	then	stepped	into	the	room,	noting	the	slight	breeze
coming	from	the	broken	window	where	the	owl	had	presumably	entered	from
the	courtyard.
Ghostly	furniture	to	either	side,	but	it	was	the	chair	that	held	her	gaze.	She
crossed	to	it,	then,	without	removing	the	cloth,	she	sat	down,	the	muslin
drawing	inward	as	she	sank	down	into	the	seat.
Blinking,	Seren	looked	about.
Shadows.	Silence.	The	faint	smell	of	decay.	The	lump	of	the	dead	owl	lying
just	beyond	the	threshold.
‘Seren	Pedac’s…empire,’	she	whispered.
And	she	had	never	felt	so	alone.
	
In	the	city	of	Letheras,	as	companies	of	Gerun	Eberict’s	soldiers	cut	and


chopped	their	way	through	a	mass	of	cornered	citizens	who	had	been	part	of	a
procession	of	the	king’s	loyalists,	on	their	way	to	the	Eternal	Domicile	to
cheer	the	investiture,	citizens	whose	blood	now	spread	on	the	cobbles	to	mark
this	glorious	day;	as	starlings	in	their	tens	of	thousands	wheeled	ever	closer	to
the	old	tower	that	had	once	been	an	Azath	and	was	now	the	Hold	of	the	Dead;	as
Tehol	Beddict—no	longer	on	his	roof—made	his	way	down	shadowy	streets
on	his	way	to	Selush,	at	the	behest	of	Shurq	Elalle;	as	the	child,	Kettle,	who	had
once	been	dead	but	was	now	very	much	alive,	sat	on	the	steps	of	the	old	tower
singing	softly	to	herself	and	plaiting	braids	of	grass;	as	the	rays	of	the	sun
lengthened	to	slant	shafts	through	the	haze	of	smoke,	the	bells	began	ringing.
Pronouncing	the	birth	of	the	empire.
The	end	of	the	Seventh	Closure.
But	the	scribes	were	in	error.	The	Seventh	Closure	had	yet	to	arrive.
Two	more	days.
Leaning	against	a	wall	with	his	arms	crossed,	near	the	old	palace,	the	First
Consort,	Turudal	Brizad,	the	god	known	as	the	Errant,	looked	skyward	at	the
cloud	of	starlings	as	the	bells	sounded,	low	and	tremulous.
‘Unpleasant	birds,’	he	said	to	himself,	‘starlings…’
Two	more	days.
A	most	tragic	miscalculation,	I	fear.
Most	tragic.


Chapter	Twenty-three

A	vast	underground	cavern	yawned	beneath	the	basin,	the	crust
brittle	and	porous.	Could	one	have	stood	in	that	ancient	cave,	the
rain	would	have	been	ceaseless.	Even	so,	eleven	rivers	fed	into	the
marshlands	that	would	one	day	be	the	city	of	Letheras,	and	the
process	of	erosion	that	culminated	in	the	collapse	of	the	basin	and
the	catastrophic	draining	of	the	rivers	and	swamps,	was	a	long	one.
Thus,	modest	as	Settle	Lake	is,	it	is	worth	reminding	oneself	of	its
extraordinary	depth.	The	lake	is,	indeed,	like	a	roof	hatch	with	the
enormous	cavern	the	house	beneath.	So,	the	pulling	down	into	the
deep	of	Burdos’	fishing	boat—the	sole	fisher	of	Settle	Lake—nets
and	all,	should	come	as	no	surprise.	Nor	should	the	fact	that	since
that	time,	when	so	many	witnessed	Burdos’	demise,	no	other
fishing	boat	has	plied	the	waters	of	Settle	Lake.	In	any	case,	I	was,	I
believe,	speaking	of	the	sudden	convergence	of	all	those	rivers,	the
inrush	of	the	swamp’s	waters,	said	event	occurring	long	before	the
settlement	of	the	area	by	the	colonists.	Fellow	scholars,	it	would
have	been	a	dramatic	sight,	would	it	not?
EXCERPT	FROM 	THE	GEOLOGIC	HISTORY	OF	LETHERAS,	A	LECTURE	GIVEN
BY	ROYAL	G EOGRAPHER	T HULA	REDSAND	AT	THE	CUTTER	ACADEMY
19 TH	ANNUAL	COMMENCEMENT	(MOMENTS	BEFORE	THE	GREAT
COLLAPSE	OF	THE	ACADEMY	CEILING)
COMMENTS	RECOUNTED	BY	SOLE	SURVIVOR,	IBAL	THE	DART
There	was	nothing	natural	in	the	dust	that	loomed	like	a	behemoth	above	the
Edur	armies	as	they	came	down	from	the	north	and	began	moving	into
positions	opposite	Brans	Keep.	The	ochre	cloud	hovered	like	a	standing	wave
in	a	cataract,	fierce	winds	whipping	southward	to	either	side,	carrying	ashes
and	topsoil	in	a	dark,	ominous	onslaught	against	the	waiting	Letherii	armies
and	the	barren	hills	behind	them.
The	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur	had	found	the	glory	of	rebirth	yet	again.


Every	death	was	a	tier	in	his	climb	to	unassailable	domination.	Resurrection,
Udinaas	now	understood,	was	neither	serene	nor	painless.	It	came	in	screams,
in	shrieks	that	rent	the	air.	It	came	in	a	storm	of	raw	trauma	that	tore	at
Rhulad’s	sanity	as	much	as	it	would	anyone’s	suffering	the	same	curse.	And
there	was	no	doubt	at	all	in	the	slave’s	mind,	the	sword	and	its	gift	were	cursed,
and	the	god	behind	it—if	it	was	a	god	in	truth—was	a	creature	of	madness.
This	time,	Rhulad’s	brothers	had	been	there	to	witness	his	awakening.
Udinaas	had	not	been	surprised	at	the	horror	writ	on	their	faces	with	the
emperor ’s	first	ragged	scream,	the	convulsions	racking	Rhulad’s	body	of
smudged	gold	and	dried	blood,	the	cold	unearthly	light	blazing	anew	in	his
terrible	eyes.	He	had	seen	them	frozen,	unable	to	draw	closer,	unable	to	flee,
standing	witness	to	the	dreadful	truth.
Perhaps,	afterwards,	when	they	had	thawed—when	their	hearts	started
beating	once	more—there	was	sympathy.	Rhulad	wept	openly,	with	only	the
slave’s	arm	across	his	shoulders	for	comfort.	And	Fear	and	Trull	had	looked
on,	the	K’risnan	sitting	hunched	and	mute	on	the	ground	behind	them,	until
such	time	as	the	emperor	found	himself	once	more,	the	child	and	brother	and
newly	blooded	warrior	he’d	once	been—before	the	sword	found	his	hands—
discovered,	still	cowering	but	alive	within	him.
Little	had	been	said	on	the	return	journey,	but	they	had	ridden	their	horses
into	the	ground	in	their	haste,	and	for	all	but	Udinaas	the	ride	had	been	a	flight.
Not	from	the	Forkrul	Assail	and	its	immutable	fascination	for	the	peace	of
cold	corpses,	but	from	the	death,	and	the	rebirth,	of	the	emperor	of	the	Tiste
Edur.
They	rejoined	the	army	five	leagues	from	Brans	Keep,	and	received
Hannan	Mosag’s	report	that	contact	had	been	established	with	the	K’risnan	in
the	other	two	armies,	and	all	were	approaching	the	fated	battlefield,	where,
shadow	wraiths	witnessed,	the	Letherii	forces	awaited	them.
Details,	the	trembling	skein	of	preparation,	Udinaas	was	indifferent	to
them,	the	whisper	of	order	in	seeming	chaos.	An	army	marched,	like	some
headless	migration,	each	beast	bound	by	instinct,	the	imperatives	of	violence.
Armies	marched	from	complexity	into	simplicity.	It	was	this	detail	that	drove
them	onward.	A	field	waited,	on	which	all	matters	could	be	reduced,	on	which
dust	and	screams	and	blood	brought	cold	clarity.	This	was	the	secret	hunger	of
warriors	and	soldiers,	of	governments,	kings	and	emperors.	The	simple
mechanics	of	victory	and	defeat,	the	perfect	feint	to	draw	every	eye,	every
mind	lured	into	the	indulgent	game.	Focus	on	the	scales.	Count	the	measures
and	mull	over	balances,	observe	the	stacked	bodies	like	stacked	coins	and	time
is	devoured,	the	mind	exercised	in	the	fruitless	repetition	of	the	millstone,	and


all	the	world	beyond	was	still	and	blurred	for	the	moment…so	long	as	no-one
jarred	the	table.
Udinaas	envied	the	warriors	and	soldiers	their	simple	lives.	For	them,
there	was	no	coming	back	from	death.	They	spoke	simply,	in	the	language	of
negation.	They	fought	for	the	warrior,	the	soldier,	at	their	side,	and	even	dying
had	purpose—which	was,	he	now	believed,	the	rarest	gift	of	all.
Or	so	it	should	have	been,	but	the	slave	knew	it	would	be	otherwise.
Sorcery	was	the	weapon	for	the	battle	to	come.	Perhaps	it	was,	in	truth,	the	face
of	future	wars	the	world	over.	Senseless	annihilation,	the	obliteration	of	lives
in	numbers	beyond	counting.	A	logical	extension	of	governments,	kings	and
emperors.	War	as	a	clash	of	wills,	a	contest	indifferent	to	its	cost,	seeking	to
discover	who	will	blink	first—and	not	caring	either	way.	War,	no	different	an
exercise	from	the	coin-reaping	of	the	Merchants’	Tolls,	and	thus	infinitely
understandable.
The	Tiste	Edur	and	their	allies	were	arraying	themselves	opposite	the
Letherii	armies,	the	day’s	light	growing	duller,	muted	by	the	hovering	wave	of
suspended	dust.	In	places	sorcery	crackled,	shimmered	the	air,	tentative	escapes
of	the	power	held	ready	by	both	sides.	Udinaas	wondered	if	anyone,	anyone	at
all,	would	survive	this	day.	And,	among	those	who	did,	what	lessons	would
they	take	from	this	battle?
Sometimes	the	game	goes	too	far.
She	was	standing	beside	him,	silent	and	small	and	wrapped	in	a	supple,
undyed	deerhide.	She	had	said	nothing,	offered	no	reason	for	seeking	him	out.
He	did	not	know	her	mind,	he	could	not	guess	her	thoughts.	Unknown	and
profoundly	unknowable.
Yet	now	he	heard	her	draw	a	shuddering	breath.
Udinaas	glanced	over.	‘The	bruises	are	almost	gone,’	he	said.
Feather	Witch	nodded.	‘I	should	thank	you.’
‘No	need.’
‘Good.’	She	seemed	to	falter	at	her	own	vehemence.	‘I	should	not	have	said
that.	I	don’t	know	what	to	think.’
‘About	what?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘About	what,	he	asks.	For	Errant’s	sake,	Udinaas,
Lether	is	about	to	fall.’
‘Probably.	I	have	looked	long	and	hard	at	the	Letherii	forces.	I	see	what
must	be	mages,	standing	apart	here	and	there.	But	not	the	Ceda.’
‘He	must	be	here.	How	could	he	not	be?’
Udinaas	said	nothing.
‘You	are	no	longer	an	Indebted.’


‘And	that	matters?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
They	fell	silent.	Their	position	was	on	a	rise	to	the	northwest	of	the
battlefield.	They	could	make	out	the	facing	wall	of	Brans	Keep	itself,	a	squat,
formidable	citadel	leaning	up	against	a	cliff	carved	sheer	into	a	hillside.
Corner	towers	flanked	the	wall,	and	on	each	stood	large	fixed	mangonels	with
their	waiting	crews.	There	was	also	a	mage	present	on	each	tower,	arms	raised,
and	it	was	evident	that	a	ritual	was	under	way	binding	the	two	on	their
respective	perches.	Probably	something	defensive,	since	the	bulk	of	the	King’s
Battalion	was	positioned	at	the	foot	of	the	keep.
To	the	west	of	that	battalion	a	ridge	reached	out	from	the	hills	a	short
distance,	and	on	its	other	side	were	positioned	elements	of	the	king’s	heavy
infantry,	along	with	the	Riven	Brigade.	West	of	that	waited	companies	of	the
Snakebelt	Battalion	with	the	far	flanking	side	protected	by	the	Crimson
Rampant	Brigade,	who	were	backed	to	the	westernmost	edge	of	the	Brans	Hills
and	to	the	course	of	the	Dissent	River	to	the	south.
It	was	more	difficult	to	make	out	the	array	of	Letherii	forces	east	of	the
King’s	Battalion.	There	was	an	artificial	lake	on	the	east	side	of	the	keep,	and
north	of	it,	alongside	the	battalion,	was	the	Merchants’	Battalion.	Another
seasonal	river	or	drainage	channel	wound	northeast	on	their	right	flank,	and	it
seemed	the	Letherii	forces	on	the	other	side	of	that	intended	to	use	the	dry	ditch
as	a	line	of	defence.
In	any	case,	Rhulad’s	own	army	would	present	the	western	body	of	the
Edur	advance.	Central	was	Fear ’s	army,	and	further	to	the	east,	beyond	an	arm
of	lesser	hills	and	old	lake	beds,	approached	the	army	of	Tomad	and	Binadas
Sengar,	on	their	way	down	from	the	town	of	Five	Points.
The	rise	Udinaas	and	Feather	Witch	stood	on	was	ringed	in	shadow
wraiths,	and	it	was	clear	to	Udinaas	that	protective	sorcery	surrounded	them.
Beyond	the	rise,	out	of	sight	of	the	facing	armies,	waited	the	Edur	women,
elders	and	children.	Mayen	was	somewhere	among	them,	still	cloistered,	still
under	Uruth	Sengar ’s	direct	care.
He	looked	once	more	at	Feather	Witch.	‘Have	you	seen	Mayen?’	he	asked.
‘No.	But	I	have	heard	things…’
‘Such	as?’
‘She	is	not	doing	well,	Udinaas.	She	hungers.	A	slave	was	caught	bringing
her	white	nectar.	The	slave	was	executed.’
‘Who	was	it?’
‘Bethra.’
Udinaas	recalled	her,	an	old	woman	who’d	lived	her	entire	life	in	the


household	of	Mayen’s	parents.
‘She	thought	she	was	being	kind,’	Feather	Witch	continued.	Then	shrugged.
‘There	was	no	discussion.’
‘I	imagine	not.’
‘One	cannot	be	denied	all	white	nectar,’	she	said.	‘One	must	be	weaned.	A
gradual	diminishment.’
‘I	know.’
‘But	they	are	concerned	for	the	child	she	carries.’
‘Who	must	be	suffering	in	like	manner.’
Feather	Witch	nodded.	‘Uruth	does	not	heed	the	advice	of	the	slaves.’	She
met	his	eyes.	‘They	have	all	changed,	Udinaas.	They	are	as	if…fevered.’
‘A	fire	behind	their	eyes,	yes.’
‘They	seem	unaware	of	it.’
‘Not	all	of	them,	Feather	Witch.’
‘Who?’
He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Trull	Sengar.’
‘Do	not	be	deceived,’	she	said.	‘They	are	poisoned	one	and	all.	The	empire
to	come	shall	be	dark.	I	have	had	visions…I	see	what	awaits	us,	Udinaas.’
‘One	doesn’t	need	visions	to	know	what	awaits	us.’
She	scowled,	crossed	her	arms.	Then	glared	skyward.	‘What	sorcery	is
this?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	Udinaas	replied.	‘New.’
‘Or…old.’
‘What	do	you	sense	from	it,	Feather	Witch?’
She	shook	her	head.
‘It	belongs	to	Hannan	Mosag,’	Udinaas	said	after	a	moment.	‘Have	you
seen	the	K’risnan?	Those	from	Fear	Sengar ’s	army	are…malformed.	Twisted
by	the	magic	they	now	use.’
‘Uruth	and	the	other	women	cling	to	the	power	of	Kurald	Emurlahn,’
Feather	Witch	said.	‘They	behave	as	if	they	are	in	a	war	of	wills.	I	don’t	think
—’
‘Wait,’	Udinaas	said,	eyes	narrowing.	‘It’s	beginning.’
	
Beside	him,	Ahlrada	Ahn	bared	his	teeth.	‘Now,	Trull	Sengar,	we	stand	in
witness.	And	this	is	what	it	means	to	be	an	Edur	warrior	today.’
‘We	may	do	more	than	wait,’	Trull	said.	We	may	also	die.
The	dark	dust	was	spiralling	upward	in	thick	columns	now,	edging
forward	towards	the	killing	field	between	the	armies.


Trull	glanced	behind	him.	Fear	stood	in	the	midst	of	Hiroth	warriors.	Two
K’risnan	were	before	him,	one	a	mangled,	hunched	survivor	from	High	Fort,
the	other	sent	over	from	Rhulad’s	army.	Grainy	streams	of	what	seemed	to	be
dust	were	rising	from	the	two	sorcerors,	and	their	faces	were	twisted	in	silent
pain.
The	crackle	of	lightning	came	from	the	other	side	of	the	killing	field,
drawing	Trull’s	attention	round	once	more.	Coruscating	waves	of	blinding
white	fire	were	building	before	the	arrayed	Letherii	mages,	wrought	through
with	flashes	of	lightning	that	arced	among	them.
Far	to	the	right,	Rhulad	began	moving	the	mass	of	his	warriors	forward,
forming	a	broad	wedge	formation	at	the	very	edge	of	the	killing	field.	Trull
could	see	his	brother,	a	hazy,	blurred	figure	of	gold.	Further	right	was	Hannan
Mosag	and	his	companies,	and	beyond	them,	already	moving	south	alongside
the	basin’s	edge,	were	thousands	of	Soletaken	Jheck	and	at	least	a	dozen
Kenryll’ah,	each	leading	a	score	of	their	peasant	subjects.	The	route	they	were
taking	had	been	noted,	and	the	flanking	Crimson	Rampant	Brigade	was
manoeuvring	round	to	face	the	threat.
There	would	be	nothing	subtle	in	this	battle.	No	deft	brilliance	displayed	by
tactical	geniuses.	The	Letherii	waited	with	their	backs	to	the	steep	hills.	The
Tiste	Edur	and	their	allies	would	have	to	come	to	them.	Such	were	the	simple
mechanics,	seemingly	incumbent,	and	inevitable.
But	sorcery	spoke	with	a	different	voice.
The	spiralling	pillars	of	dust	towered	into	the	sky,	each	one	keening,	the
wind	shrieking	so	loud	that	Edur	and	Letherii	alike	began	to	cower.
The	Letherii	white	fire	surged	upward,	forming	its	own	standing	wall	of
bridled	mayhem.
Trull	was	finding	it	difficult	to	breathe.	He	saw	a	hapless	raven	that	had
made	the	mistake	of	flying	over	the	killing	field	tumble	and	flutter	to	the
ground,	the	first	casualty	of	the	day.	It	seemed	a	pathetic	harbinger	to	his	mind.
Rather	a	thousand.	Ten	thousand	ravens,	caterwauling	through	the	sky.
The	pillars	leaned,	staggered,	lurched	forward.
And	began	toppling.
A	rush	of	wind	from	behind	battered	Trull	and	his	fellow	warriors,
blessedly	rich	and	humid,	in	the	wake	of	the	advancing	columns	of	dust.	Faint
shouts	on	all	sides,	as	weapons	were	readied.
The	spiralling	pillars	were	a	long	time	in	coming	down.
	
Shadow	wraiths	were	suddenly	flowing	across	the	ground,	a	dark,	low	flood.


Udinaas	could	feel	their	terror,	and	the	dread	compulsion	that	drove	them
forward.	Fodder.	It	was	too	early	to	launch	an	attack.	They	would	be	beneath
the	clash	of	sorcery.
As	the	columns	toppled,	the	wave	of	Letherii	fire	rose	to	meet	them.
Feather	Witch	hissed.	‘The	Empty	Hold.	The	purest	sorcery	of	the	Letherii.
Errant,	I	can	feel	it	from	here!’
‘Not	enough,’	Udinaas	muttered.
	
Positioned	with	the	King’s	Battalion,	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz	saw	the	day’s	light
fade	as	the	shadows	of	the	falling	pillars	swept	over	the	soldiers.	She	saw	her
men	and	women	screaming,	but	could	not	hear	them,	as	the	roar	of	the	dust
thundered	ever	closer.
The	Letherii	ritual	was	suddenly	released,	the	spitting,	hissing	fire
sweeping	over	the	heads	of	the	cowering	ranks,	the	tumbling	froth	surging
upwards	to	meet	the	descending	pillars.
Rapid	concussions,	shaking	the	earth	beneath	them,	tearing	fissures	up	the
hillsides,	and	from	Brans	Keep	a	dull	groaning.	Unnutal	spun	round	even	as
she	was	pushed	to	the	ground.	She	saw,	impossibly,	the	lake	beside	the	keep	lift
in	a	mass	of	muddy	water	and	foam.	Saw,	as	the	front	wall	of	the	keep	bowed
inward,	pulling	away	from	the	flanking	towers,	dust	shooting	outward	like
geysers,	and	vanishing	back	into	a	billowing	cloud.
Then	the	east	tower	swayed,	enough	to	pitch	from	the	edge	the	mangonel
atop	it,	taking	most	of	the	crew	with	it.	And	the	mage,	Jirrid	Attaract.	All,
plunging	earthward.
The	west	tower	leaned	back.	Its	enormous	foundation	stones	pushed
outward,	and	suddenly	it	vanished	into	a	cloud	of	its	own	rubble.	The	mage
Nasson	Methuda	disappeared	with	it.
Twisting,	Unnutal	glared	skyward.
To	see	the	white	fire	shattering,	dispersing.	To	see	the	pillars	plunge
through,	sweeping	the	Letherii	sorcery	aside.
One	struck	the	centre	of	the	Merchants’	Battalion,	the	dark	dust	billowing
out	to	the	sides	and	rolling	up	against	the	hill.
For	a	moment,	she	could	see	nothing,	then	the	pillar	began	to	re-form.	Yet
not	as	it	had	been.	Now	it	was	not	dust	that	began	spiralling	upward,	but	living
soldiers.
Whose	flesh	blackened	like	rot	even	as	she	watched.
They	were	screaming	as	they	were	lifted	skyward,	screaming	as	their	flesh
peeled	away.	Screaming—


The	shadow	above	Unnutal	Hebaz	deepened.	She	looked	up.
And	closed	her	eyes.
	
Whirling	in	a	frenzy,	a	huge	fragment	of	Letherii	sorcery	slanted	off	the	side
of	a	collapsing	pillar,	plunged	down	and	tore	a	bloody	swath	through	the	core
of	the	Merude	warriors	a	thousand	paces	to	Trull’s	left.
The	warriors	died	where	they	stood,	in	red	mist.
The	white	fire,	now	stained	pink,	rolled	through	the	press	towards	the
K’risnan	on	that	side.	The	young	sorceror	raised	his	hands	at	the	last	moment,
then	the	magic	devoured	him.
When	it	dwindled,	wavered,	then	vanished,	the	K’risnan	was	gone,	as	were
those	Edur	who	had	been	standing	too	close.	The	ground	was	blackened	and
split.
On	the	other	side	of	the	killing	field,	columns	were	rising	once	more	filled
with	spinning	bodies.	Higher,	the	mass	of	writhing	flesh	dimming	into	a
muddy	hue,	then	giving	way	to	white	bone	and	polished	iron.	The	pillars	rose
still	higher,	devouring	more	and	more	soldiers,	entire	companies	torn	from
the	entrenchments	and	dragged	into	the	twisting	maw.
Ahlrada	Ahn	reached	out	and	pulled	Trull	close.	‘He	must	stop	this!’
Trull	pulled	savagely	away,	shaking	his	head.	‘This	is	not	Rhulad!	This	is
the	Warlock	King!’	Hannan	Mosag,	do	you	now	vie	for	insanity’s	throne?
Around	them,	the	world	was	transformed	into	madness.	Seething	spheres
of	Letherii	magic	were	thundering	down	here	and	there,	tearing	through	ranks
of	Tiste	Edur,	devouring	shadow	wraiths	by	the	hundreds.	One	landed	in	the
midst	of	a	company	of	demons	and	incinerated	every	one	of	them,	including
the	Kenryll’ah	commanding	them.
Another	raced	across	the	ground	towards	the	rise	to	the	west	of	the
emperor ’s	forces.	There	was	nothing	to	oppose	it	as	it	swept	up	the	slope,	and
struck	the	encampment	of	the	Edur	women,	elders	and	children.
Trull	staggered	in	that	direction,	but	Ahlrada	Ahn	dragged	him	back.
Letherii	soldiers,	nothing	now	but	bones,	spun	in	the	sky	above	the	hills.
The	Merchants’	Battalion.	The	Riven	Brigade.	The	Snakebelt	Battalion.	The
King’s	Batallion.	All	those	lives.	Gone.
And	the	columns	had	begun	moving,	each	one	on	an	independent	path,
eastward	and	westward,	plunging	into	the	panicked	ranks	of	more	soldiers.
Devouring,	the	hunger	unending,	the	appetite	insatiable.
War?	This	is	not	war—
‘We’re	moving	forward!’


Trull	stared	at	Ahlrada	Ahn.
The	warrior	shook	him.	‘Forward,	Trull	Sengar!’
	
Udinaas	watched	the	deadly	sorcery	cut	through	the	shadow	wraiths,	then	roll
towards	the	rise	where	he	stood	with	Feather	Witch.	There	was	nowhere	to	run.
No	time.	It	was	perfect—
A	cold	wind	swept	over	him	from	behind,	an	exhalation	of	shadows.
Rushing	forward,	colliding	with	the	Letherii	magic	twenty	paces	downslope.
Entwining,	the	shadows	closing	like	a	net,	trapping	the	wild	fire.	Then	shadow
and	flame	vanished.
Udinaas	turned.
Uruth	and	four	other	Edur	women	were	standing	in	a	line	fifteen	paces
back.	As	he	stared,	two	of	the	women	toppled,	and	Udinaas	could	see	that	they
were	dead,	the	blood	boiled	in	their	veins.	Uruth	staggered,	then	slowly	sank	to
her	knees.
All	right,	not	so	perfect.
He	faced	the	battlefield	once	more.	The	emperor	was	leading	his	warriors
across	the	blistered,	lifeless	basin.	The	enemy	positions	on	the	hillsides
opposite	looked	virtually	empty.	To	either	side,	however,	the	slave	could	see
fighting.	Or,	rather,	slaughter.	Where	the	pillars	had	yet	to	stalk,	Letherii	lines
had	broken	of	their	own	accord,	and	soldiers	were	fleeing,	even	as	Soletaken
Jheck	dragged	them	to	the	ground,	as	demons	ran	them	down,	and	squads	of
Edur	pursued	with	frenzied	determination.	To	the	east,	the	dry	river	gully	had
been	overrun.	To	the	west,	the	Crimson	Rampant	Brigade	was	routed.
Hannan	Mosag’s	terrible	sorcery	continued	to	rage,	and	Udinaas	began	to
suspect	that	it	was,	like	the	Letherii	magic,	out	of	control.	Pillars	were
spawning	smaller	kin.	For	lack	of	flesh,	they	began	tearing	up	the	ground,
earth	and	stones	spinning	ever	higher.	Two	bone-shot	columns	clashed	near
what	was	left	of	Brans	Lake,	and	seemed	to	lock	in	mutual	obliteration	that	sent
thunderous	concussions	that	visibly	battered	the	hills	beyond.	Then	they	tore
each	other	apart.
The	bases	of	many	of	the	pillars	broke	contact	with	the	ground,	and	this
triggered	an	upward	plunge	that	ended	in	their	dissolution	into	white	and	grey
clouds.
All	at	once,	even	as	ragged	companies	of	Tiste	Edur	crossed	the	killing
field,	bones	and	armour	began	raining	down.	Limbs,	polished	weapons,	helms,
skulls,	plummeting	in	murderous	sweeps	across	the	basin.	Warriors	died
beneath	the	ghastly	hail.	There	was	panic,	figures	running.


Sixty	paces	ahead	and	below,	along	the	very	edge	of	the	slope,	walked	Hull
Beddict.	He	held	a	sword	in	one	hand.	He	looked	dazed.
A	helm-wrapped	skull,	minus	the	lower	jaw,	thumped	and	bounded	across
Hull’s	path,	but	it	seemed	he	did	not	notice,	as	he	stumbled	on.
Udinaas	turned	to	Feather	Witch.	‘For	Errant’s	sake,’	he	snapped,	‘see	what
you	can	do	for	Uruth	and	the	others!’
She	started,	eyes	wide.
‘They	just	saved	our	lives,	Feather	Witch.’	He	added	nothing	more,	and	left
her	there,	making	his	way	down	to	Hull	Beddict.
Bones	were	still	falling,	the	smaller	pieces—fingers,	rib	fragments.	Teeth
rained	down	thirty	paces	ahead,	covering	the	ground	like	hailstones,	a	sudden
downpour,	ending	as	quickly	as	it	had	begun.
Udinaas	moved	closer	to	Hull	Beddict.
‘Go	no	further,	Hull!’	he	shouted.
The	man	halted,	slowly	turned,	his	face	slack	with	shock.	‘Udinaas?	Is	that
you?	Udinaas?’
The	slave	reached	him,	took	his	arm.	‘Come.	This	is	done,	Hull	Beddict.	A
sixth	of	a	bell,	no	more	than	that.	The	battle	is	over.’
‘Battle?’
‘Slaughter,	then.	A	squalid	investment,	wouldn’t	you	say?	Training	all
those	soldiers.	Those	warriors.	All	that	armour.	Weapons.	I	think	those	days
are	over,	don’t	you?’	He	was	guiding	the	man	back	up	the	slope.	‘Tens	of
thousands	of	dead	Letherii;	no	point	in	even	burying	what’s	left	of	them.	Two,
maybe	three	thousand	dead	Tiste	Edur.	Neither	had	the	chance	to	even	so	much
as	lift	their	weapons.	How	many	shadow	wraiths	obliterated?	Fifty,	sixty
thousand?’
‘We	must…stop.	There	is	nothing…’
‘No	stopping	now,	Hull.	Onward,	to	Letheras,	like	a	rushing	river.	There
will	be	rearguards	to	cut	down.	Gates	to	shatter.	Streets	and	buildings	to	fight
over.	And	then,	the	palace.	And	the	king.	His	guard—they’ll	not	lay	down	their
weapons.	Even	if	the	king	commands	it.	They	serve	the	kingdom,	after	all,	not
Ezgara	Diskanar.	Letheras,	Hull	Beddict,	will	be	ugly.	Not	ugly	the	way	of
today,	here,	but	in	some	ways	worse,	I	would—’
‘Stop,	slave.	Stop	talking,	else	I	kill	you.’
‘That	threat	does	not	bother	me	much,	Hull	Beddict.’
They	reached	the	rise.	Feather	Witch	and	a	half-dozen	other	slaves	were
among	the	Edur	women,	now.	Uruth	was	lying	prone,	suffering	convulsions	of
some	sort.	A	third	woman	had	died.
‘What’s	wrong,	Hull	Beddict?’	Udinaas	asked,	releasing	the	man’s	arm.


‘No	chance	to	lead	a	charge	against	your	foes?	Those	press-ganged	Indebteds
and	the	desperate	fools	who’d	found	dignity	in	a	uniform.	The	hated	enemy.’
Hull	Beddict	turned	away.	‘I	must	find	the	emperor.	I	must	explain…’
Udinaas	let	the	man	go.	The	rain	of	bones	had	ceased,	finally,	and	now
only	dust	commanded	the	sky.	The	ruined	keep	was	burning,	heaving	black
smoke	that	would	be	visible	from	the	walls	of	Letheras.
The	slave	strode	over	to	Feather	Witch.	‘Will	Uruth	live?’
She	looked	up,	her	eyes	strangely	flat.	‘I	think	so.’
‘That	was	Kurald	Emurlahn,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Yes.’
Udinaas	turned	away.	He	studied	the	basin,	the	masses	of	Edur	wandering
here	and	there	among	the	burnt	bodies	of	their	kin,	amongst	the	bright	white
bones	and	shining	iron.	A	bloodless	battlefield.	Soletaken	Jheck	ranged	the
distant	hillsides,	hunting	stragglers,	but	those	who	had	not	already	fled	were
corpses	or	mere	remnants	of	corpses.	A	few	score	wraiths	drifted	here	and
there.
He	saw	Rhulad,	surrounded	by	warriors,	marching	back	across	the	field.
Towards	Hannan	Mosag’s	position.	The	slave	set	off	to	intercept	the	emperor.
Words	were	about	to	be	exchanged,	and	Udinaas	wanted	to	hear	them.
	
Trull	and	his	company	stood	at	the	edge	of	the	dry	river	gully.	The	bodies	of
soldiers	littered	the	other	side	all	the	way	to	the	ridge	of	hills	paralleling	the
course.	Fifteen	hundred	paces	to	their	left,	the	lead	elements	of	Tomad	and
Binadas	Sengar ’s	army	were	approaching.	There	were	signs	that	they	had	seen
battle.	In	the	traditional	manner,	sword	against	sword.
‘They	have	captured	the	Artisan	Battalion’s	standard,’	Ahlrada	Ahn	said,
pointing.
Trull	looked	back	to	the	field	east	of	the	gully.	‘Who	was	here,	then?’
‘Whitefinder	and	Riven,	I	think.	They	broke	when	they	witnessed	the	fate	of
Merchants’	and	the	King’s,	and	the	pillars	began	moving	towards	them.’
Feeling	sick,	Trull	looked	away—but	there	was	no	direction	available	to
ease	him.	On	all	sides,	the	slowly	settling	ashes	of	madness.
‘The	Tiste	Edur,’	said	Ahlrada	Ahn,	‘have	won	themselves	an	empire.’
His	words	were	heard	by	Sergeant	Canarth,	who	strode	up	to	them.	‘You
deny	half	your	blood,	Ahlrada?	Do	you	find	this	victory	bitter?	I	see	now	why
you	stand	at	Trull	Sengar ’s	side.	I	see	now—we	all	see’—he	added	with	a
gesture	encompassing	the	warriors	behind	him—‘why	you	so	defend	Trull,
why	you	refuse	to	side	with	us.’	Canarth’s	hard	eyes	fixed	on	Trull.	‘Oh	yes,


Trull	Sengar,	your	friend	here	possesses	the	blood	of	the	Betrayers.	No	doubt
that	is	why	the	two	of	you	are	such	close	friends.’
Trull	unslung	the	spear	at	his	back.	‘I	am	tired	of	you,	Canarth.	Ready	your
weapon.’
The	warrior ’s	eyes	narrowed,	then	he	grinned,	reaching	for	his	own	spear.
‘I	have	seen	you	fight,	Trull.	I	know	your	weaknesses.’
‘Clear	a	space,’	Trull	said,	and	the	others	moved	back,	forming	a	ring.
Ahlrada	Ahn	hesitated.	‘Do	not	do	this.	Trull—Canarth,	retract	your
accusations.	They	are	unfounded.	It	is	forbidden	to	provoke	your	commander
—’
‘Enough,’	Canarth	snapped.	‘I	will	kill	you	next,	Betrayer.’
Trull	assumed	a	standard	stance,	then	settled	his	weight	and	waited.
Canarth	shifted	his	grip	back	a	hand’s	width,	then	probed	out,	the	iron	tip	at
throat-level.
Ignoring	it	for	the	moment,	Trull	slid	his	hands	further	apart	along	the
shaft	of	his	spear.	Then	he	made	contact,	wood	against	wood,	and	held	it	as	he
stepped	in.	Canarth	disengaged	by	bringing	the	iron	point	down	and	under,
perfectly	executed,	but	Trull	was	already	inside,	forcing	Canarth	to	pull	his
weapon	back,	even	as	the	sergeant	swung	the	butt-end	upward	to	block	an
expected	up-sweep—which	did	not	come.	Instead,	Trull	lifted	his	spear	high
and	horizontal,	and	drove	it	forward	to	crack	against	Canarth’s	forehead.
The	sergeant	thumped	onto	his	back.
Trull	stood	over	him,	studying	the	man’s	dazed	expression,	the	split	skin	of
his	forehead	leaking	tendrils	of	blood.
The	other	warriors	were	shouting,	expressing	disbelief	with	Trull’s	speed,
with	the	stunning,	deceptive	simplicity	of	the	attack.	He	did	not	look	up.
Ahlrada	Ahn	stepped	close.	‘Finish	him,	Trull	Sengar.’
All	of	Trull’s	anger	was	gone.	‘I	see	no	need	for	that—’
‘Then	you	are	a	fool.	He	will	not	forget—’
‘I	trust	not.’
‘Fear	must	be	told	of	this.	Canarth	must	be	punished.’
‘No,	Ahlrada	Ahn.	Not	a	word.’	He	raised	his	gaze,	looked	northward.	‘Let
us	greet	Binadas	and	my	father.	I	would	hear	tales	of	bravery,	of	fighting.’
The	dark-skinned	warrior ’s	stare	faltered,	flickered	away.	‘Sisters	take	me,
Trull,	so	would	I.’
	
There	were	no	old	women	to	walk	this	field,	cutting	rings	from	fingers,
stripping	lightly	stained	clothing	from	stiffening	corpses.	There	were	no


vultures,	crows	and	gulls	to	wheel	down	to	the	vast	feast.	There	was	nothing	to
read	of	the	battle	now	past,	no	sprawl	of	figures	cut	down	from	behind—not
here,	in	the	centre	of	the	basin—no	last	stands	writ	in	blood-splashed	heaps	and
encircling	rings	of	bodies.	No	tilted	standards,	held	up	only	by	the	press	of
cold	flesh,	with	their	sigils	grinning	down.	Only	bones	and	gleaming	iron,
white	teeth	and	glittering	coins.
The	settling	dust	was	a	soft	whisper,	gently	dulling	the	ground	and	its
random	carpet	of	human	and	Edur	detritus.
The	emperor	and	his	chosen	brothers	were	approaching	the	base	of	the
slope	as	Udinaas	reached	them.	Their	crossing	of	the	field	had	stirred	up	a	trail
of	dust	that	hung	white	and	hesitant	in	their	wake.	Rhulad	held	his	sword	in	his
left	hand,	the	blade	wavering	in	the	dim	light.	The	uneven	armour	of	gold	was
dark-tracked	with	sweat,	the	bear	fur	on	the	emperor ’s	shoulders	the	muted
silver	of	clouds.
Udinaas	could	see	in	Rhulad’s	face	that	the	madness	was	close	upon	him.
Frustration	created	a	rage	capable	of	lashing	out	in	any	direction.	Behind	the
emperor,	who	began	climbing	up	the	slope	to	where	Hannan	Mosag	waited,
scrambled	Theradas	and	Midik	Buhn,	Choram	Irard,	Kholb	Harat	and	Matra
Brith.	All	but	Theradas	had	been	old	followers	of	Rhulad,	and	Udinaas	was	not
pleased	to	see	them.	Nor,	from	the	dark	looks	cast	in	his	direction,	were	they
delighted	with	the	slave’s	arrival.
Udinaas	almost	laughed.	Just	like	the	palace	in	Letheras,	the	factions	take
shape.
As	Udinaas	moved	to	catch	up	to	Rhulad—who’d	yet	to	notice	him—
Theradas	Buhn	stepped	into	his	path	as	if	by	accident,	then	straight-armed	the
slave	in	the	chest.	He	stumbled	back,	lost	his	footing,	and	fell	onto	the	slope,
sliding	back	down	to	its	base.
The	Edur	warriors	laughed.
A	mistake.	The	emperor	spun	round,	eyes	searching,	recognizing	Udinaas
through	the	clouds	of	dust.	It	was	not	difficult	to	determine	what	had	just
happened.	Rhulad	glared	at	his	brothers.	‘Who	struck	down	my	slave?’
No-one	moved,	then	Theradas	said,	‘We	but	crossed	paths,	sire.	An
accident.’
‘Udinaas?’
The	slave	was	picking	himself	up,	brushing	the	dust	from	his	tunic.	‘It	was
as	Theradas	Buhn	said,	Emperor.’
Rhulad	bared	his	teeth.	‘A	warning	to	you	all.	We	will	not	be	tried	this	day.’
He	wheeled	round	and	resumed	his	climb.
Theradas	glared	at	Udinaas,	and	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘Do	not	believe	I	now


owe	you,	slave.’
‘You	will	discover,’	the	slave	said,	moving	past	the	warrior,	‘that	the
notion	of	debt	is	not	so	easily	denied.’
Theradas	reached	for	his	cutlass,	then	let	his	hand	drop	with	a	silent	snarl.
Rhulad	reached	the	crest.
Those	still	below	heard	Hannan	Mosag’s	smooth	voice.	‘The	day	is	won,
Emperor.’
‘We	found	no-one	left	to	fight!’
‘The	kingdom	lies	cowering	at	your	feet,	sire—’
‘Thousands	of	Edur	are	dead,	Warlock	King!	Demons,	wraiths!	How	many
Edur	mothers	and	wives	and	children	will	weep	this	night?	What	glory	rises
from	our	dead,	Hannan?	From	this…dust?’
Udinaas	reached	the	summit.	And	saw	Rhulad	advancing	upon	the	Warlock
King,	the	sword	lifting	into	the	air.
Sudden	fear	in	Hannan	Mosag’s	red-rimmed	eyes.
‘Emperor!’
Rhulad	whirled,	burning	eyes	fixing	upon	Udinaas.	‘We	are	challenged	by
our	slave?’	The	sword-blade	hissed	through	the	air,	although	ten	paces	spanned
the	distance	between	them.
‘No	challenge,’	Udinaas	said	quietly	as	he	approached.	Until	he	stood
directly	in	front	of	the	emperor.	‘I	but	called	out	to	inform	you,	sire,	that	your
brothers	are	coming.’	The	slave	pointed	eastward,	where	figures	were	crossing
the	edge	of	the	basin.	‘Fear,	Binadas	and	Trull,	Emperor.	And	your	father,
Tomad.’
Rhulad	squinted,	blinking	rapidly	as	he	studied	the	distant	warriors.	‘Dust
has	blinded	us,	Udinaas.	It	is	them?’
‘Yes,	Emperor.’
The	Edur	wiped	at	his	eyes.	‘Yes,	that	is	well.	Good,	we	would	have	them
with	us,	now.’
‘Sire,’	Udinaas	continued,	‘a	fragment	of	Letherii	sorcery	sought	out	the
encampment	of	the	women	during	the	battle.	Your	mother	and	some	others
defeated	the	magic.	Uruth	is	injured,	but	she	will	live.	Three	Hiroth	women
died.’
The	emperor	lowered	the	sword,	the	rage	flickering	in	his	frantic,
bloodshot	eyes,	flickering,	then	fading.	‘We	sought	battle,	Udinaas.	We
sought…death.’
‘I	know,	Emperor.	Perhaps	in	Letheras…’
A	shaky	nod.	‘Yes.	Perhaps.	Yes,	Udinaas.’	Rhulad’s	eyes	suddenly	bored
into	the	slave’s	own.	‘Those	towers	of	bone,	did	you	see	them?	The	slaughter,


their	flesh…’
The	slave’s	gaze	shifted	momentarily	past	the	emperor,	found	Hannan
Mosag.	The	Warlock	King	was	staring	at	Rhulad’s	back	with	dark	hatred.
‘Sire,’	Udinaas	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘your	heart	is	true,	to	chastise	Hannan
Mosag.	When	your	father	and	brothers	arrive.	Cold	anger	is	stronger	than	hot
rage.’
‘Yes.	We	know	this,	slave.’
‘The	battle	is	over.	All	is	done,’	Udinaas	said,	glancing	back	over	the	field.
‘Nothing	can	be…taken	back.	It	seems	the	time	has	come	to	grieve.’
‘We	know	such	feelings,	Udinaas.	Grief.	Yes.	Yet	what	of	cold	anger?	What
of…’
The	sword	flinched,	like	a	hackle	rising,	like	lust	awakened,	and	the	slave
saw	nothing	cold	in	Rhulad’s	eyes.
‘He	has	felt	its	lash	already,	Emperor,’	Udinaas	said.	‘All	that	remains	is
your	disavowal…of	what	has	just	passed.	Your	brothers	and	your	father	will
need	to	hear	that,	as	you	well	know.	From	them,	to	all	the	Edur.	To	all	the
allies.	To	Uruth.’	He	added,	in	a	rough	whisper,	‘They	would	complicate	you,
sire—those	gathered	and	gathering	even	now	about	you	and	your	power.	But
you	see	clear	and	true,	for	that	is	the	terrible	gift	of	pain.’
Rhulad	was	nodding,	staring	now	at	the	approaching	figures.	‘Yes.	Such	a
terrible	gift.	Clear	and	true…’
‘Sire,’	Hannan	Mosag	called	out.
A	casual	wave	of	the	sword	was	Rhulad’s	only	response.	‘Not	now,’	he	said
in	a	rasp,	his	gaze	still	fixed	on	his	father	and	brothers.
Stung,	face	darkening	with	humiliation,	the	Warlock	King	said	no	more.
Udinaas	turned	and	watched	the	warriors	of	the	Sengar	line	begin	the
ascent.	Do	not,	slave,	deny	your	own	thoughts	on	this.	That	bastard	Hannan
Mosag	needs	to	be	killed.	And	soon.
Theradas	Buhn,	standing	nearby,	then	said,	‘A	great	victory,	sire.’
‘We	are	pleased,’	Rhulad	said,	‘that	you	would	see	it	so,	Theradas	Buhn.’
Errant	take	me,	the	lad	learns	fast.
Reaching	the	crest,	Binadas	moved	ahead	and	settled	to	one	knee	before
Rhulad.	‘Emperor.’
‘Binadas,	on	this	day	were	you	ours,	or	were	you	Hannan	Mosag’s?’
Clear	and	true.
A	confused	expression	as	Binadas	looked	up.	‘Sire,	the	army	of	Tomad
Sengar	has	yet	to	find	need	for	sorcery.	Our	conquests	have	been	swift.	The
battle	this	morning	was	a	fierce	one,	the	decision	uncertain	for	a	time,	but	the
Edur	prevailed.	We	suffered	losses,	but	that	was	to	be	expected—though	no	less


regretted	for	that.’
‘Rise,	Binadas,’	Rhulad	said,	sighing	heavily	beneath	his	gold	armour.
Udinaas	now	saw	that	Hull	Beddict	was	approaching	in	the	wake	of	the
Sengar	warriors.	He	looked	no	better	than	before,	walking	like	a	man	skullcracked	and	half	senseless.	Udinaas	felt	some	regret	upon	seeing	his	fellow
Letherii,	for	he’d	been	hard	on	the	man	earlier.
Tomad	spoke.	‘Emperor,	we	have	word	from	Uruth.	She	has	recovered—’
‘We	are	relieved,’	Rhulad	cut	in.	‘Her	fallen	sisters	must	be	honoured.’
Tomad’s	brows	rose	slightly,	then	he	nodded.
The	emperor	strode	to	Fear	and	Trull.	‘Brothers,	have	the	two	Kenryll’ah
returned?’
‘No,	sire,’	Fear	replied.	‘Nor	has	the	Forkrul	Assail	appeared.	We	must,	I
think,	assume	the	hunt	continues.’
This	was	good,	Udinaas	decided.	Rhulad	choosing	to	speak	of	things	few
others	present	knew	about—reinforcing	once	more	all	that	bound	him	to	Fear
and	Trull.	A	display	for	Tomad,	their	father.	For	Binadas,	who	must	now	be
feeling	as	if	he	stood	on	the	narrowest	of	paths,	balanced	between	Rhulad	and
the	Warlock	King.	And	would	soon	have	to	choose.
Errant	save	us,	what	a	mess	awaits	these	Tiste	Edur.
Rhulad	set	a	hand	on	Trull’s	shoulder,	then	stepped	past.	‘Hull	Beddict,
hear	us.’
The	Letherii	straightened,	blinking,	searching	until	his	gaze	found	the
emperor.	‘Sire?’
‘We	grieve	this	day,	Hull	Beddict.	These…ignoble	deaths.	We	would	rather
this	had	been	a	day	of	honourable	triumph,	of	courage	and	glory	revealed	on
both	sides.	We	would	rather,	Hull	Beddict,	this	day	had	been…clean.’
Cold	anger	indeed.	A	greater	mercy,	perhaps,	would	have	been	a	public
beating	of	Hannan	Mosag.	The	future	was	falling	out	here	and	now,	Udinaas
realized.	And	was	that	my	intention?	Better,	I	think,	had	I	let	Rhulad	cut	the
bastard	down	where	he	stood.	Clean	and	simple—the	only	one	fooled	into
believing	those	words	is	Rhulad	himself.	Here’s	two	better	words:	vicious	and
subtle.
‘We	would	retire,	until	the	morrow,’	the	emperor	said.	‘When	we	march	to
claim	Letheras,	and	the	throne	we	have	won.	Udinaas,	attend	me	shortly.
Tomad,	at	midnight	the	barrow	for	the	fallen	shall	be	ready	for	sanctification.
Be	sure	to	see	the	burial	done	in	all	honour.	And,	Father,’	he	added,	‘those
Letherii	soldiers	you	fought	this	day,	join	them	to	the	same	barrow.’
‘Sire—’
‘Father,	the	Letherii	are	now	our	subjects,	are	they	not?’


	
Udinaas	stood	to	one	side,	watching	various	Edur	departing	the	hilltop.
Binadas	spoke	with	Hannan	Mosag	for	a	time,	then	strode	to	Hull	Beddict	for
the	formal	greeting	of	the	blood-bound.	Then	Binadas	guided	the	Letherii
away.
Fear	and	Tomad	departed	to	arrange	the	burial	details.	Theradas	Buhn	and
the	other	chosen	brothers	set	off	for	the	Hiroth	encampments.
In	a	short	time,	there	were	only	two	left.	Udinaas,	and	Trull	Sengar.
The	Edur	was	studying	the	slave	from	about	fifteen	paces	away,	with
sufficient	intent	to	make	the	slave	begin	to	feel	nervous.	Finally,	Udinaas
casually	turned	away,	and	stared	out	towards	the	hills	to	the	south.
A	dozen	heartbeats	later,	Trull	Sengar	came	to	stand	beside	him.
‘It	seems,’	the	Edur	said	after	a	time,	‘that	you,	for	all	that	you	are	a	slave,
possess	talents	verging	on	genius.’
‘Master?’
‘Enough	of	this	“master”	shit,	Udinaas.	You	are	now	a…what	is	the	title?	A
chancellor	of	the	realm?	Principal	Adviser,	or	some	such	thing?’
‘First	Eunuch,	I	think.’
Trull	glanced	over.	‘I	did	not	know	you’d	been—’
‘I	haven’t.	Consider	it	symbolic.’
‘All	right,	I	understand,	I	think.	Tell	me,	are	you	so	certain	of	yourself,
Udinaas,	that	you	would	stand	between	Rhulad	and	Hannan	Mosag?	Between
Rhulad	and	Theradas	Buhn	and	those	rabid	pups	who	are	the	chosen	brothers
of	the	emperor?	You	would	stand,	indeed,	between	Rhulad	and	his	own
madness?	Sister	knows,	I’d	thought	the	Warlock	King	arrogant…’
‘It	is	not	arrogance,	Trull	Sengar.	If	it	was,	I’d	be	entirely	as	sure	of	myself
as	you	seem	to	think	I	am.	But	I	am	not.	Do	you	believe	I	have	somehow
manipulated	myself	into	this	position?	By	choice?	Willingly?	Tell	me,	when
have	any	of	us	last	had	any	meaningful	choices?	Including	your	young
brother?’
The	Edur	said	nothing	for	a	while.	Then	he	nodded.	‘Very	well.	But,	none
the	less,	I	must	know	your	intentions.’
Udinaas	shook	his	head.	‘Nothing	complicated,	Trull	Sengar.	I	do	not	want
to	see	anyone	hurt	more	than	they	already	have	been.’
‘Including	Hannan	Mosag?’
‘The	Warlock	King	has	not	been	hurt.	But	we	have	seen,	this	day,	what	he
would	deliver	upon	others.’
‘Rhulad	was…distressed?’


‘Furious.’	But	not,	alas,	for	admirable	reasons—no,	he	just	wanted	to	fight,
and	die.	The	other,	more	noble	sentiments	had	been	borrowed.	From	me.
‘That	answer	leaves	me	feeling…relief,	Udinaas.’
Which	is	why	I	gave	it.
‘Udinaas.’
‘Yes?’
‘I	fear	for	what	will	come.	In	Letheras.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	feel	the	world	is	about	to	unravel.’
Yes.	‘Then	we	shall	have	to	do	our	best,	Trull	Sengar,	to	hold	it	all
together.’
The	Tiste	Edur ’s	eyes	held	his,	then	Trull	nodded.	‘Beware	your	enemies,
Udinaas.’
The	slave	did	not	reply.	Alone	once	more,	he	studied	the	distant	hills,	the
thinning	smoke	from	the	fires	somewhere	in	the	belly	of	the	fallen	keep	rising
like	mocking	shadows	from	earlier	this	day.
All	these	wars…


Chapter	Twenty-four

Five	wings	will	buy	you	a	grovel,
There	at	the	Errant’s	grubby	toes
The	eternal	domicile	crouching	low
In	a	swamp	of	old	where	rivers	ran	out
And	royal	blood	runs	in	the	clearest	stream
Around	the	stumps	of	rotted	trees
Where	forests	once	stood	in	majesty
Five	roads	from	the	Empty	Hold
Will	lay	you	flat	on	your	back
With	altar	knives	and	silver	chased
The	buried	rivers	gnawing	the	roots
All	aswirl	in	eager	caverns	beneath
Where	kingly	bones	rock	and	clatter
In	the	silts,	and	five	are	the	paths
To	and	from	this	chambered	soul
For	all	you	lost	hearts	bleeding	out
Into	the	wilderness.
DAY	OF	THE	DOMICILE
FINTROTHAS	(THE	OBSCURE)
The	fresh,	warm	water	of	the	river	became	the	demon’s	blood,	a	vessel	along
which	it	climbed,	the	current	pushing	round	it.	Somewhere	ahead,	it	now	knew,
lay	a	heart,	a	source	of	power	at	once	strange	and	familiar.	Its	master	knew
nothing	of	it,	else	he	would	not	have	permitted	the	demon	to	draw	ever	closer,
for	that	power,	once	possessed,	would	snap	the	binding	chains.
Something	waited.	In	the	buried	courses	that	ran	ceaselessly	beneath	the
great	city	on	the	banks	of	the	river.	The	demon	was	tasked	with	carrying	the
fleet	of	ships—an	irritating	presence	plying	the	surface	above—to	the	city.
This	would	be	sufficient	proximity,	the	demon	knew,	to	make	the	sudden	lunge,
to	grasp	that	dread	heart	in	its	many	hands.	To	feed,	then	rise,	free	once	again


and	possessing	the	strength	of	ten	gods.	To	rise,	like	an	elder,	from	the	raw,
chaotic	world	of	long	ago.	Dominant,	unassailable,	and	burning	with	fury.
Through	the	river ’s	dark	silts,	clambering	like	a	vast	crab,	sifting	centuries
of	secrets—the	bed	of	an	ancient	river	held	so	much,	a	multitude	of	tales
written	in	layer	upon	layer	of	detritus.	Muddy	nets	snagged	upon	older
wreckage,	sunken	ships,	the	sprawl	of	ballast	stones,	ragged	rows	of	sealed
urns	still	holding	their	mundane	riches.	Bones	rotting	everywhere,	gathered	up
in	sinkholes	where	the	currents	swirled,	and	deeper	still,	in	silts	thick	and
hardening	and	swallowed	in	darkness,	bones	flattened	by	pressures	and
transformed	into	crystalline	lattices,	arrayed	in	skeletons	of	stone.
Even	in	death,	the	demon	understood,	nothing	was	still.	Foolish	mortals,
short-lived	and	keen	with	frenzy,	clearly	believed	otherwise,	as	they	scrambled
swift	as	thought	above	the	patient	dance	of	earth	and	stone.	Water,	of	course,
was	capable	of	spanning	the	vast	range	of	pace	among	all	things.	It	could
charge,	outrunning	all	else,	and	it	could	stand	seemingly	motionless.	In	this	it
displayed	the	sacred	power	of	gods,	yet	it	was,	of	itself,	senseless.
The	demon	knew	that	such	power	could	be	harnessed.	Gods	had	done	so,
making	themselves	lords	of	the	seas.	But	it	was	the	river	that	fed	the	seas.	And
springs	from	the	layers	of	rock.	The	sea-gods	were,	in	truth,	subservient	to
those	of	the	rivers	and	inland	pools.	The	demon,	the	old	spirit-god	of	the
spring,	intended	to	right	the	balance	once	more.	With	the	power	awaiting	it
beneath	the	city,	even	the	gods	of	the	sea	would	be	made	to	kneel.
It	savoured	such	thoughts,	strange	with	clarity	as	they	were—a	clarity	the
demon	had	not	possessed	before.	The	taste	of	the	river,	perhaps,	these	bright
currents,	the	rich	seep	from	the	shores.	Intelligence	burgeoning	within	it.
Such	pleasure.
	
‘Nice	stopper.’
She	turned	and	stared,	and	Tehol	smiled	innocently.
‘If	you	are	lying,	Tehol	Beddict…’
Brows	lifted.	‘I	would	never	do	that,	Shurq.’	Tehol	rose	from	where	he’d
been	sitting	on	the	floor	and	began	pacing	in	the	small,	cramped	room.
‘Selush,	you	have	a	right	to	be	proud.	Why,	the	way	you	tucked	in	the	skin
around	the	gem,	not	a	crease	to	be	seen—’
‘Unless	I	frown,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.
‘Even	then,’	he	replied,	‘it	would	be	a	modest…pucker.’
‘Well,’	Shurq	said,	‘you’d	know.’
Selush	hastened	to	pack	her	supplies	back	into	the	bag.	‘Oh,	don’t	I	know


what’s	coming?	A	spat.’
‘Express	your	gratitude,	Shurq,’	Tehol	said.
Fingertips	probing	the	gem	in	its	silver	setting	in	her	forehead,	Shurq
Elalle	hesitated,	then	sighed.	‘Thank	you,	Selush.’
‘Not	the	spat	I	was	talking	about,’	the	wild-haired	woman	said.	‘Those
Tisteans.	They’re	coming.	Lether	has	been	conquered,	and	I	dread	the	changes
to	come.	Grey	skin,	that	will	be	the	new	fashion—mark	my	words.	But	I	must
maintain	my	pragmatism,’	she	added,	suddenly	brightening.	‘I’m	already
mixing	a	host	of	foundations	to	achieve	that	ghastly	effect.’	A	pause,	a	glance
over	at	Shurq	Elalle.	‘Working	on	you	was	very	helpful,	Shurq.	I	thought	I’d
call	the	first	line	Dead	Thief	of	the	Night.’
‘Cute.’
‘Nice.’
‘But	don’t	think	that	means	you’re	taking	a	cut	of	my	profits,	Shurq.’
‘I	wouldn’t	dream	of	it.’
‘I	have	to	be	going	now,’	Selush	said,	straightening	with	her	bag	slung
over	one	shoulder.	‘I	intend	to	be	hiding	in	my	basement	for	the	next	few	days.
And	I	would	advise	the	same	for	you	two.’
Tehol	looked	round.	‘I	don’t	have	a	basement,	Selush.’
‘Well,	it’s	the	thought	that	counts,	I	always	say.	Goodbye!’
A	swish	of	curtain	and	she	was	gone.
Shurq	Elalle	asked,	‘How	late	is	it?’
‘Almost	dawn.’
‘Where’s	your	manservant?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Somewhere,	I	would	think.’
‘Really?’
Tehol	clapped	his	hands.	‘Let’s	head	onto	the	roof.	We	can	see	if	my	silent
bodyguard	changes	expression	upon	seeing	your	beauty.’
‘What	has	he	been	doing	up	there	all	this	time?’
‘Probably	standing	directly	above	the	doorway	here,	in	case	some
unwelcome	visitor	arrived—which,	fortunately,	did	not	happen.	Brys’s
messenger	girl	hardly	qualified.’
‘And	what	could	he	have	done	about	some	attacker	from	up	there?’
‘I	imagine	he	would	have	flung	himself	straight	down	in	a	flurry	of
swords,	knives	and	clubs,	beating	the	intruder	senseless	in	an	instant.	Either
that,	or	he’d	shout	then	run	back	to	the	ladder,	climb	down	and	exact	revenge
over	our	corpses.’
‘Your	corpse.	Not	mine.’
‘You’re	right,	of	course.	My	mistake.’


‘I	am	not	surprised	you	are	confused	now,	Tehol,’	Shurq	said,	sweeping
back	her	hair	with	both	hands,	the	gesture	admirably	flinging	out	her	chest.
‘Given	the	pleasure	you	discovered	in	my	wares	earlier.’
‘Your	“wares”	indeed.	A	good	term	to	use,	since	it	could	mean	virtually
anything.	Now,	shall	we	head	up	to	greet	the	dawn?’
‘If	you	insist.	I	can’t	stay	long.	Ublala	will	be	getting	worried.’
‘Harlest	will	advise	him	how	the	dead	have	no	sense	of	time,	Shurq.	No
need	to	fret.’
‘He	was	muttering	about	dismembering	Harlest	just	before	I	left	them.’
They	walked	to	the	ladder,	Shurq	taking	the	lead.
‘I	thought	he	was	trapped	in	a	sarcophagus,’	Tehol	pointed	out.
‘We	could	still	hear	him.	Dramatic	hissing	and	scratching	on	the	underside
of	the	lid.	It	was,	even	for	me,	somewhat	irritating.’
‘Well,	let’s	hope	Ublala	did	nothing	untoward.’
They	climbed.
The	sky	was	paling	to	the	east,	but	a	chill	remained	in	the	air.	The
bodyguard	stood	facing	them	until	he	had	their	attention,	then	he	pointed
towards	the	river.
The	Edur	fleet	crowded	the	span,	hundreds	of	raider	craft	and	transports,	a
dark	sweep	of	sails.	Among	the	lead	ships,	oars	had	appeared,	sliding	out	from
the	flanks	of	the	hulls.	The	landings	would	begin	within	the	bell.
Tehol	studied	them	for	a	moment,	then	he	faced	northwest.	The	white
columns	of	the	battle	the	day	before	were	gone,	although	a	stain	of	dark	smoke
from	the	keep	lingered,	lit	high	above	the	horizon	by	the	sun’s	first	shafts.
Above	the	west	road	was	a	streak	of	dust,	drawing	closer	as	the	sun	rose.
It	was	some	time	before	either	Tehol	or	Shurq	spoke,	then	the	latter	turned
away	and	said,	‘I	have	to	go.’
‘Stay	low,’	Tehol	said.
She	paused	at	the	top	of	the	ladder.	‘And	you,	Tehol	Beddict,	stay	here.	On
this	roof.	With	that	guard	standing	close.’
‘Sound	plan,	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘Given	the	chance,	Gerun	Eberict	will	come	for	you.’
‘And	you.’
From	the	far	west	gate,	a	raucous	flurry	of	bells	announced	the	approach
of	the	Edur	army.
The	thief	disappeared	down	through	the	hatch.
Tehol	stood	facing	west.	His	back	grew	warmer,	and	he	knew	that	this	day
would	be	a	hot	one.


	
One	of	her	hands	rested	on	the	king’s	shoulder,	but	Brys	could	see	that	Nisall
was	near	collapse.	She	had	stood	vigil	over	Ezgara	Diskanar	most	of	the	night,
as	if	love	alone	could	guard	the	man	against	all	dangers.	Exhaustion	had	taken
the	king	into	sleep,	and	he	now	sat	the	throne	like	a	corpse,	slumped,	head
lolling.	The	crown	had	fallen	off	some	time	in	the	night	and	was	lying	beside
the	throne	on	the	dais.
The	Chancellor,	Triban	Gnol,	had	been	present	earlier	but	had	left	with	the
last	change	of	guards.	Ghost-like	since	the	loss	of	the	queen	and	the	prince,	and
Turudal	Brizad,	he	had	grown	suddenly	ancient	and	withered,	drifting	down
corridors	speaking	to	no-one.
Finadd	Moroch	Nevath	had	disappeared,	although	Brys	trusted	that	the
swordsman	would	arrive	when	the	time	came.	For	all	that	he	had	suffered,	he
was	a	brave	man	and	none	of	the	rumours	concerning	his	conduct	at	High	Fort
were,	to	Brys’s	mind,	worth	the	spit	needed	to	utter	them.
First	Eunuch	Nifadas,	along	with	Brys	Beddict,	had	assumed	the
responsibility	for	what	remained	of	the	soldiers	in	the	palace.	Each	wing
entranceway	was	now	barricaded	by	at	least	thirty	guards,	with	the	exception	of
the	King’s	Path,	where	the	Ceda	in	his	madness	had	forbidden	anyone	to
remain,	barring	himself.	In	the	city	beyond,	Finadd	Gerun	Eberict	and	the	city
garrison	were	positioned	throughout	Letheras,	their	numbers	insufficient	to
hold	the	gates	or	walls	yet	prepared	to	fight	none	the	less—at	least,	Brys
assumed	that	was	the	case,	since	he	had	not	left	the	throne	room	in	some	time,
and	Gerun	had	not	reappeared	since	the	man	assumed	command	of	the
garrison.
Spelled	by	Nifadas,	the	King’s	Champion	had	rested	on	a	bench	near	the
throne	room’s	grand	entrance,	managing	a	half-dozen	bells	of	surprisingly
sound	sleep.	Servants	had	awakened	him	with	breakfast,	beginning	the	day	to
come	with	surreal	normality.	Chilled	in	sweat-damp	clothes	beneath	his
armour,	Brys	quickly	ate,	then	rose	and	walked	to	where	Nifadas	sat	at	the
bench	opposite.
‘First	Eunuch,	it	is	time	for	you	to	rest.’
‘Champion,	there	is	no	need	for	that.	I	have	done	very	little	and	am	not	in
the	least	fatigued.’
Brys	studied	the	man’s	eyes.	They	were	sharp	and	alert,	quite	unlike	the
usual	sleepy	regard	with	which	Nifadas	commonly	presented.	‘Very	well,’	he
said.
The	First	Eunuch	smiled	up	at	him.	‘Our	last	day,	Finadd.’


Brys	frowned.	‘There	is	no	reason	to	assume,	Nifadas,	that	the	Edur	will
see	cause	to	take	your	life.	As	with	the	Chancellor,	your	knowledge	will	be
needed.’
‘Knowledge,	yes.	A	worthy	assumption,	Finadd.’
The	First	Eunuch	added	nothing	more.
Brys	glanced	back	at	the	throne,	then	strode	towards	it.	He	came	close	to
Nisall.	‘First	Concubine,	he	will	sleep	a	while	yet.’	He	took	her	arm.	‘Don’t
worry,’	he	said	as	she	began	to	resist,	‘just	to	that	bench	over	there.	No	further.’
‘How,	Brys?	How	could	it	all	collapse?	So	fast?	I	don’t	understand.’
He	remembered	back	to	the	secret	meetings,	where	Nisall	and	Unnutal
Hebaz	and	Nifadas	and	the	king	planned	their	moves	and	countermoves	in	the
all-devouring	games	of	intrigue	within	the	Royal	Household.	Her	confidence
then	had	seemed	unassailable,	the	cleverness	bright	in	her	eyes.	He
remembered	how	the	Letherii	saw	the	Tiste	Edur	and	their	lands,	a	pearl	ripe
for	the	plucking.	‘I	don’t	know,	Nisall.’
She	let	him	guide	her	down	from	the	dais.	‘It	seems	so…quiet.	Has	the	day
begun?’
‘The	sun	has	risen,	yes.’
‘He	won’t	leave	the	throne.’
‘I	know.’
‘He	is…frightened.’
‘Here,	Nisall,	lie	down	here.	Use	these	cushions.	Not	ideal,	I	know—’
‘No,	it’s	fine.	Thank	you.’
Her	eyes	closed	as	soon	as	she	settled.	Brys	stared	down	at	her	for	a
moment.	She	was	already	sleeping.
He	swung	round	and	walked	down	to	the	grand	entrance,	strode	into	the
low-ceilinged	corridor	where	he	intended	to	make	his	stand.	Just	beyond,	the
Ceda	was	lying,	curled	up	in	sleep,	on	the	centre	tile.
And	standing	near	Kuru	Qan	was	Gerun	Eberict.	With	sword	in	hand.
Staring	down	at	the	Ceda.
Brys	edged	closer.	‘Finadd.’
Gerun	looked	up,	expressionless.
‘The	King’s	Leave	does	not	absolve	you	from	all	things,	Gerun	Eberict.’
The	man	bared	his	teeth.	‘He	has	lost	his	mind,	Brys.	It	would	be	a	mercy.’
‘Not	for	you	to	judge.’
Gerun	cocked	his	head.	‘You	would	oppose	me	in	this?’
‘Yes.’
After	a	moment,	the	Finadd	stepped	back,	sliding	his	sword	back	into	the
scabbard	at	his	hip.	‘Well	timed,	then.	Ten	heartbeats	later…’


‘What	are	you	doing	here?’	Brys	asked.
‘My	soldiers	are	all	in	position.	What	else	would	you	have	me	do?’
‘Command	them.’
A	whistling	snort	from	him,	then,	‘I	have	other	tasks	awaiting	me	this	day.’
Brys	was	silent.	Wondering	if	he	should	kill	the	man	now.
It	seemed	Gerun	guessed	his	thoughts,	for	his	scarred	sneer	broadened.
‘Recall	your	responsibilities,	Brys	Beddict.’	He	gestured	and	a	dozen	of	his
own	estate	guards	strode	into	the	chamber.	‘You	are	supposed	to	die	defending
the	king,	after	all.	In	any	case,’	he	added	as	he	slowly	backed	away,	‘you	have
just	confirmed	my	suspicions,	and	for	that	I	thank	you.’
Blood	or	honour.	‘I	know	what	you	believe,	Gerun	Eberict.	And	so	I	warn
you	now,	you	will	not	be	permitted	the	Leave	in	this.’
‘You	speak	for	the	king?	Brys	Beddict,	that	is	rather	presumptuous	of	you,
don’t	you	think?’
‘The	king	expects	you	to	command	the	garrison	in	defence	of	the	city—not
abandon	your	responsibilities	in	order	to	conduct	your	own	crusade.’
‘Defence	of	the	city?	Don’t	be	an	idiot,	Brys.	If	the	garrison	seeks	heroic
final	stands	it	is	welcome	to	them.	I	intend	to	survive	this	damned	conquest.
The	Tiste	Edur	do	not	frighten	me	in	the	least.’	He	turned	about	then	and,
surrounded	by	his	guards,	left	the	chamber.
Blood	or	honour.	I	have	no	choice	in	this,	Tehol.	I’m	sorry.
	
Bugg	was	not	entirely	surprised	to	find	himself	virtually	alone	on	the	wall.	His
ascent	had	not	been	challenged,	since	it	seemed	all	the	garrison	guards	had
withdrawn	to	various	choke-points	in	the	city.	Whether	those	soldiers	would
rise	to	stubborn	defence	remained	to	be	seen,	of	course.	In	any	case,	their
presence	had	kept	the	streets	empty	for	the	most	part.
The	manservant	leaned	on	a	merlon	and	watched	the	Edur	army	approach
down	the	west	road.	An	occasional	glance	to	his	left	allowed	him	to	monitor
the	closing	of	the	fleet,	and	the	vast,	deadly	demon	beneath	it—a	presence
spanning	the	width	of	the	river	and	stretching	back	downstream	almost	half	a
league.	A	terrible,	brutal	creature	straining	at	its	sorcerous	chains.
The	west	gate	was	open	and	unguarded.	The	lead	elements	of	the	Edur
army	had	closed	to	within	a	thousand	paces,	advancing	with	caution.	Ranging
to	either	side	of	the	column,	in	the	ditches	and	across	the	fields,	the	first	of	the
Soletaken	wolves	came	into	view.
Bugg	sighed,	looked	over	at	the	other	occupant	along	the	wall.	‘You	will
have	to	work	fast,	I	think.’


The	artist	was	a	well-known	and	easily	recognized	figure	in	Letheras.	A
mass	of	hair	that	began	on	his	head	and	swept	down	to	join	with	the	wild	beard
covering	jaw	and	neck,	his	nub	of	a	nose	and	small	blue	eyes	the	only	visible
features	on	his	face.	He	was	short	and	wiry,	and	painted	with	agitated	capering
—often	perched	on	one	leg—smearing	paint	on	surfaces	that	always	seemed
too	small	for	the	image	he	was	seeking	to	capture.	This	failing	of	perspective
had	long	since	been	elevated	into	a	technique,	then	a	legitimate	style,	in	so	far
as	artistic	styles	could	be	legitimate.	At	Bugg’s	comment	he	scowled	and	rose
up	on	one	leg,	the	foot	of	the	other	against	the	knee.	‘The	scene,	you	fool!	It	is
burned	into	my	mind,	here	behind	this	eye,	the	left	one.	I	forget	nothing.	Every
detail.	Historians	will	praise	my	work	this	day,	you’ll	see.	Praise!’
‘Are	you	done,	then?’
‘Very	nearly,	very	very	nearly,	yes,	nearly	done.	Every	detail.	I	have	done
it	again.	That’s	what	they	will	say.	Yes,	I	have	done	it	again.’
‘May	I	see?’
Sudden	suspicion.
Bugg	added,	‘I	am	something	of	an	historian	myself.’
‘You	are?	Have	I	read	you?	Are	you	famous?’
‘Famous?	Probably.	But	I	doubt	you’ve	read	me,	since	I’ve	yet	to	write
anything	down.’
‘Ah,	a	lecturer!’
‘A	scholar,	swimming	across	the	ocean	of	history.’
‘I	like	that.	I	could	paint	that.’
‘So,	may	I	see	your	painting?’
A	grand	gesture	with	a	multicoloured	hand.	‘Come	along,	then,	old	friend.
See	my	genius	for	yourself.’
The	board	perched	on	its	easel	was	wider	than	it	was	high,	in	the	manner	of
a	landscape	painting	or,	indeed,	a	record	of	some	momentous	vista	of	history.
At	least	two	arm-lengths	wide.	Bugg	walked	round	for	a	look	at	the	image
captured	on	the	surface.
And	saw	two	colours,	divided	in	a	rough	diagonal.	Scratchy	red	to	the
right,	muddy	brown	to	the	left.	‘Extraordinary,’	Bugg	said.	‘And	what	is	it	you
have	rendered	here?’
‘What	is	it?	Are	you	blind?’	The	painter	pointed	with	a	brush.	‘The
column!	Those	approaching	Edur,	the	vast	army!	The	standard,	of	course.	The
standard!’
Bugg	squinted	across	the	distance	to	the	tiny	patch	of	red	that	was	the
vanguard’s	lead	standard.	‘Ah,	of	course.	Now	I	see.’
‘And	my	brilliance	blinds	you,	yes?’


‘Oh	yes,	all	comprehension	has	been	stolen	from	my	eyes	indeed.’
The	artist	deftly	switched	legs	and	perched	pensively,	frowning	out	at	the
Edur	column.	‘Of	course,	they’re	closer	now.	I	wish	I’d	brought	another	board,
so	I	could	elaborate	yet	further	on	the	detail.’
‘Well,	you	could	always	use	this	wall.’
Bushy	brows	arched.	‘That’s…clever.	You	are	a	scholar	indeed.’
‘I	must	be	going,	now.’
‘Yes,	yes,	stop	distracting	me.	I	need	to	focus,	you	know.	Focus.’
Bugg	quietly	made	his	way	down	the	stone	stairs.	‘A	fine	lesson,’	he
muttered	under	his	breath	as	he	reached	street	level.	Details…so	many	things	to
do	this	day.
He	walked	deserted	streets,	avoiding	the	major	intersections	where
barricades	had	been	raised	and	soldiers	moved	about	in	nervous	expectation.
The	occasional	furtive	figure	darted	into	and	out	of	view	as	he	went	on.
A	short	time	later	the	manservant	rounded	a	corner,	paused,	then
approached	the	ruined	temple.	Standing	near	it	was	Turudal	Brizad,	who
looked	over	as	Bugg	reached	his	side.
‘Any	suggestions?’	the	god	known	as	the	Errant	asked.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘The	mortal	I	requested	for	this	task	has	not	appeared.’
‘Oh.	That’s	not	good,	since	the	Jheck	are	at	the	gates	even	as	we	speak.’
‘And	the	first	Edur	from	the	ships	have	disembarked,	yes.’
‘Why	not	act	for	yourself?’	Bugg	asked.
‘I	cannot.	My	aspect	enforces	certain…prohibitions.’
‘Ah,	the	nudge,	the	pull	or	the	push.’
‘Yes,	only	that.’
‘You	have	been	about	as	direct	as	you	can	be.’
The	Errant	nodded.
‘Well,	I	see	your	dilemma,’	Bugg	said.
‘Thus	my	query—do	you	have	any	suggestions?’
The	manservant	considered	for	a	time,	whilst	the	god	waited	patiently,	then
he	sighed	and	said,	‘Perhaps.	Wait	here.	If	I	am	successful;	I	will	send	someone
to	you.’
‘All	right.	I	trust	you	will	not	be	overlong.’
‘I	hope	not.	Depends	on	my	powers	of	persuasion.’
‘Then	I	am	encouraged.’
Without	another	word,	Bugg	headed	off.	He	quickened	his	pace	as	he	made
his	way	towards	the	docks.	Fortunately,	it	was	not	far,	and	he	arrived	at	Front
Street	to	see	that	only	the	main	piers	had	been	commandeered	by	the	landing


warriors	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	They	were	taking	their	time,	he	noted,	a	sign	of
their	confidence.	No-one	was	opposing	their	landing.	Bugg	hurried	along
Front	Street	until	he	came	to	the	lesser	berths.	Where	he	found	his	destination,
a	two-masted,	sleek	colt	of	a	ship	that	needed	new	paint	but	seemed	otherwise
relatively	sound.	There	was	no-one	visible	on	its	deck,	but	as	soon	as	he
crossed	the	gangway	he	heard	voices,	then	the	thump	of	boots.
Bugg	had	reached	the	mid-deck	when	the	cabin	door	swung	open	and	two
armed	women	emerged,	swords	out.
Bugg	halted	and	held	up	his	hands.
Three	more	figures	appeared	once	the	two	women	stepped	to	either	side.	A
tall,	grey-maned	man	in	a	crimson	surcoat,	and	a	second	man	who	was	clearly
a	mage	of	some	sort.	The	third	arrival	Bugg	recognized.
‘Good	morning,	Shand.	So	this	is	where	Tehol	sent	you.’
‘Bugg.	What	in	the	Errant’s	name	do	you	want?’
‘Well	said,	lass.	And	are	these	fine	soldiers	Shurq	Elalle’s	newly	hired
crew?’
‘Who	is	this	man?’	the	grey-haired	man	asked	Shand.
She	scowled.	‘My	employer ’s	manservant.	And	your	employer	works	for
my	employer.	His	arrival	means	there’s	going	to	be	trouble.	Go	on,	Bugg,
we’re	listening.’
‘First,	how	about	some	introductions,	Shand?’
She	rolled	her	eyes.	‘Iron	Bars—’
‘An	Avowed	of	the	Crimson	Guard,’	Bugg	cut	in,	smiling.	‘Forgive	me.
Go	on,	please.’
‘Corlo—’
‘His	High	Mage.	Again,	forgive	me,	but	that	will	have	to	do.	I	have	very
little	time.	I	need	these	Guardsmen.’
‘You	need	us	for	what?’	Iron	Bars	asked.
‘You	have	to	kill	the	god	of	the	Soletaken	Jheck.’
The	Avowed’s	expression	darkened.	‘Soletaken.	We’ve	crossed	paths	with
Soletaken	before.’
Bugg	nodded.	‘If	the	Jheck	reach	their	god,	they	will	of	course	protect	it
—’
‘How	far	away?’
‘Just	a	few	streets,	in	an	abandoned	temple.’
Iron	Bars	nodded.	‘This	god,	is	it	Soletaken	or	D’ivers?’
‘D‘ivers.’
The	Avowed	turned	to	Corlo,	who	said,	‘Ready	up,	soldiers,	we’ve	some
fighting	ahead.’


Shand	stared	at	them.	‘What	do	I	tell	Shurq	if	she	shows	up	in	the
meantime?’
‘We	won’t	be	long,’	Iron	Bars	said,	drawing	his	sword.
‘Wait!’	Shand	swung	to	Bugg.	‘You!	How	did	you	know	they’d	be	here?’
The	manservant	shrugged.	‘Errant’s	nudge,	I	suppose.	Take	care,	Shand,
and	say	hello	to	Hejun	and	Rissarh	for	me,	won’t	you?’
	
Fifty	paces’	worth	of	empty	cobbled	road	between	them	and	the	yawning	gates
of	Letheras.	Trull	Sengar	leaned	on	his	spear	and	glanced	over	at	Rhulad.
The	emperor,	fur-shouldered	and	hulking,	was	pacing	like	a	beast,	eyes
fixed	on	the	gateway.	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	surviving	K’risnan	had	advanced
ten	paces	in	the	midst	of	shadow	wraiths,	the	latter	now	sliding	forward.
The	wraiths	reached	the	gate,	hovered	a	moment,	then	swept	into	the	city.
Hannan	Mosag	turned	and	strode	back	to	where	the	emperor	and	his
brothers	waited.	‘It	is	as	we	sensed,	Emperor.	The	Ceda’s	presence	is	nowhere
to	be	found.	There	are	but	a	handful	of	minor	mages	among	the	garrison.	The
wraiths	and	demons	will	take	care	of	them.	We	should	be	able	to	carve	our	way
through	the	barricades	and	reach	the	Eternal	Domicile	by	noon.	A	fitting	time
for	you	to	ascend	the	throne.’
‘Barricades,’	Rhulad	said,	nodding.	‘Good.	We	wish	to	fight.	Udinaas!’
‘Here.’	The	slave	stepped	forward.
‘This	time,	Udinaas,	you	will	accompany	the	Household	under	Uruth’s
charge.’
‘Emperor?’
‘We	shall	not	risk	you,	Udinaas.	Should	we	fall,	however,	you	will	be	sent
to	us	immediately.’
The	slave	bowed	and	stepped	back.
Rhulad	swung	to	where	stood	his	father	and	three	brothers.	‘We	shall	enter
Letheras	now.	We	shall	claim	our	empire.	Ready	your	weapons,	blood	of	ours.’
They	began	moving	forward.
Trull’s	gaze	held	on	Hannan	Mosag	for	a	moment	longer,	wondering	what
the	Warlock	King	was	hiding,	then	he	followed	his	brothers.
	
Hull	Beddict	was	among	the	second	company	to	enter	Letheras,	and	twenty
paces	in	from	the	gate	he	stepped	to	one	side	and	halted,	watching	as	the	wary
Edur	marched	on.	None	paid	him	any	attention.	From	the	nearby	buildings,


pallid	faces	looked	down	from	windows	and	through	slightly	parted	shutters.
From	out	over	the	docks	gulls	wheeled	and	cried	out	in	a	cacophony	of	panic.
Somewhere	ahead,	down	the	main	avenue,	the	fighting	began	at	the	first
barricade.	There	was	a	thump	of	sorcery,	then	screams.
A	meaningless	waste	of	life.	He	hoped	not	all	the	garrison	soldiers	would
be	so	foolishly	brave.	There	was	no	longer	any	reason	for	fighting.	Lether	was
conquered.	All	that	was	left	was	to	depose	the	ineffectual	king	and	his
treacherous	advisers.	The	one	truly	just	act	of	this	war,	as	far	as	Hull	Beddict
was	concerned.
His	grieving	for	his	brother	Brys	was	done.	Although	Brys	was	not	yet
dead,	his	death	was	none	the	less	as	certain	an	outcome	as	could	exist.	The
King’s	Champion	would	die	defending	the	king.	It	was	tragic,	and	unnecessary,
but	it	would	be	the	last	tradition	acted	out	by	the	Letherii,	and	nothing	Hull	or
anyone	else	could	do	or	say	would	prevent	it.
All	the	ashes	had	settled	in	Hull’s	mind.	The	slaughter	behind	them,	the
murder	waiting	ahead	of	them.	He	had	betrayed,	to	see	an	end	to	the	corrupt
insanity	of	his	people.	That	the	victory	demanded	the	death	of	Brys	offered	the
final	layer	of	ash	to	shroud	Hull’s	soul.	There	would	be	no	absolution.
Even	so,	one	responsibility	remained	with	Hull.	As	the	third	company	of
Tiste	Edur	entered	through	the	gates,	he	turned	and	made	his	way	down	a	side
alley.
He	needed	to	speak	to	Tehol.	To	explain	things.	To	tell	his	brother	that	he
knew	of	the	deceptions,	the	schemes.	Tehol	was,	he	hoped,	the	one	man	in
Letheras	who	would	not	hate	Hull	for	what	he	had	done.	He	needed	to	speak	to
him.
He	needed	something	like	forgiveness.
For	not	being	there	to	save	their	parents	all	those	years	ago.
For	not	being	there	to	save	Brys	now.
Forgiveness,	a	simple	thing.
	
Udinaas	stood	among	the	other	slaves	of	the	Sengar	household,	awaiting	their
turn	to	enter	Letheras.	Word	had	already	come	that	there	was	fighting	ahead,
somewhere.	Uruth	stood	nearby,	and	with	her	was	Mayen,	wrapped	in	a	heavy
cloak,	her	face	looking	ravaged,	eyes	like	a	thing	hunted.	Uruth	remained
close,	as	if	fearing	an	escape	attempt	from	the	younger	woman.	Not	out	of
compassion	for	Mayen,	however.	The	child	was	all	that	mattered	now.
Poor	Mayen.
He	knew	how	she	felt.	Something	like	a	fever	gripped	him,	an	urgency	in


his	blood.	Sweat	trickled	down	his	body	beneath	his	tunic.	His	skin	felt	on	fire.
He	held	himself	still,	on	the	edge,	he	feared,	of	losing	control.
The	sensation	had	come	on	suddenly,	like	an	inner	wave	of	panic,	a
faceless	terror.	Worsening—
Head	spinning,	it	was	a	moment	before	he	realized	what	was	happening.
Then	horror	flooded	through	Udinaas.
The	Wyval.
It	was	coming	to	life	within	him.
	
B’nagga	in	the	lead,	the	Jheck	entered	the	city.	Soletaken,	loping	with	heads
sunk	low,	one	and	all	seeking	the	scent	of	their	god.	And	finding	it	within	the
fear-sour	current	drifting	through	Letheras,	an	impatience,	a	sentience
consumed	with	rage.
Gleeful	howls,	rising	to	fill	the	city,	reverberating	down	the	streets,	from
over	nine	thousand	wolves.	Striking	terror	amongst	cowering	citizens.	Nine
thousand	wolves,	white-furred,	racing	on	a	score	of	convergent	routes	towards
the	old	temple,	an	inward	rush	of	bestial	madness.
B’nagga	joined	his	voice	to	the	chilling	howls,	his	heart	filled	with	savage
joy.	The	Pack	awaited	them.	Demons,	wraiths,	Tiste	Edur	and	damned
emperors	were	as	nothing	now.	Momentary	allies	of	convenience.	What	would
rise	here	in	Letheras	was	the	ascension	of	the	Jheck.	An	empire	of	Soletaken,
with	a	god-emperor	upon	the	throne.	Rhulad	torn	to	pieces,	every	Edur
sundered	into	bloody,	sweet-tasting	meat,	rich	marrow	from	split	bones,	skulls
broken	open,	brains	devoured.
This	day	would	end	in	such	slaughter	that	none	who	survived	would	forget.
This	day,	B’nagga	told	himself	with	a	silent	laugh,	belonged	to	the	Jheck.
	
Seventy-three	of	his	company’s	finest	soldiers	formed	a	shield	wall	behind
Moroch	Nevath.	They	held	the	principal	bridge	crossing	Main	Canal,	a	suitable
site	for	this	pathetic	drama.	Best	of	all,	the	Third	Tiers	were	arrayed	behind
them,	on	which	citizens	had	now	appeared.	Spectators—a	Letherii	talent.	No
doubt	wagers	were	being	made,	and	at	least	Moroch	Nevath	would	have	an
audience.
The	hooded	looks,	the	rumours	of	his	cowardice	at	High	Fort,	would	cease
this	day.	It	wasn’t	much,	but	it	would	suffice.
He	recalled	he	had	promised	to	do	something	for	Turudal	Brizad,	but	the


man’s	outrageous	claims	had	not	quite	convinced	Moroch.	Tales	of	gods	and
such,	coming	from	a	painted	consort	at	that,	well,	that	would	have	to	wait
another	day,	another	lifetime.	Leave	the	foppish	lover	of	the	lost	queen	and	that
obnoxious	chancellor	to	fight	his	own	battles.	Moroch	wanted	to	cross	blades
with	the	Tiste	Edur.
If	they	let	him.	A	squalid	death	beneath	a	wave	of	sorcery	was	more	likely.
A	grunt	from	one	of	his	soldiers.
Moroch	nodded,	seeing	the	first	of	the	Edur	approaching	from	the	main
avenue.	‘Hold	that	shield	wall,’	he	said	in	a	growl,	moving	to	stand	five	paces
in	front	of	it.	‘It’s	a	small	company—let’s	send	their	souls	to	the	Errant’s	pisshole.’
In	answer	to	his	bold	words,	shouts	from	the	soldiers,	voices	made	ugly
with	blood-lust.	Swords	hammering	shield-rims.
Moroch	smiled.	They’ve	seen	us.	‘Look	at	them,	comrades—see	how	they
hesitate.’
Bellowed	challenges	from	the	soldiers.
The	Tiste	Edur	resumed	their	march.	In	their	lead,	a	warrior	draped	in
gold.
Whom	Moroch	had	seen	before.	‘Errant	bless	me,’	he	whispered,	then	spun
round.	‘The	emperor!	The	one	in	gold!’	And	turned	back,	taking	four	more
strides	until	he	was	at	the	very	edge	of	the	bridge.	Raising	his	sword.	‘Rhulad
of	the	Edur!’	he	shouted.	‘Come	and	face	me,	you	damned	freak!	Come
forward	and	die!’
	
Bugg	pointed	down	the	street.	‘See	that	man?	That’s	Turudal	Brizad.	That	is
who	you	are	doing	this	favour	for.	If	he’s	not	grateful,	give	him	an	earful.	I
have	to	get	going,	but	I	will	be	back	shortly—’
The	air	filled	suddenly	with	howling,	coming	from	the	north	and	west.
‘Oh,	damn,’	Bugg	said.	‘You’d	better	get	going.	And	I’d	better	stay	too,’	he
added,	heading	off	towards	the	Errant.
‘Corlo,’	Iron	Bars	snapped	as	they	followed	the	manservant.
‘Oh,	it’s	befuddled,	some,	Avowed.	Can’t	hear	a	thing	besides.’
Iron	Bars	nodded.	‘Weapons	ready.	We’re	wasting	no	time	on	this.	How
many	in	there,	Corlo?’
‘Six,	their	favourite	number.’
‘Let’s	go.’
Bugg	had	moved	ahead	and	was	fifteen	paces	from	Turudal,	who	had
turned	to	face	him,	when	the	Avowed	and	his	squad	thumped	past,	gaining


speed.
As	they	closed	on	the	Errant	the	god,	brows	lifting,	pointed	towards	the
entrance	to	the	ruined	temple.
The	Crimson	Guardsmen	shifted	course,	reaching	full	sprint	as	they	passed
Turudal	Brizad.
Bugg	heard	Iron	Bars	say	to	the	god,	‘Pleased-to-meet-you-see-you-later,’
and	then	the	Avowed	and	his	soldiers	were	past.	Straight	for	the	dark	entrance,
then	plunging	inside.
Bestial	screams,	human	shouts,	the	deafening	thunder	of	sorcery—
	
‘He’s	mine!’	Rhulad	said	in	a	snarl,	lifting	his	sword	and	stalking	towards	the
lone	Letherii	swordsman	at	this	end	of	the	bridge.
Hannan	Mosag	called,	‘Emperor!	Leave	these	to	my	K’risnan—’
Rhulad	spun	round.	‘No!’	he	shrieked.	‘We	shall	fight!	We	are	warriors!
These	Letherii	deserve	to	die	honourably!	We	will	hear	nothing	more	from
you!’	The	emperor	swung	back.	‘This,	this	brave	swordsman.	I	want	him.’
Beside	Trull,	Fear	muttered,	‘He	wants	to	be	killed	by	him.	I	recognize	that
Letherii.	He	was	with	the	delegation.’
Trull	nodded.	The	Finadd,	a	Letherii	captain	and	bodyguard	to	Prince
Quillas—he	could	not	recall	the	man’s	name.
It	was	clear	that	Rhulad	had	not	recognized	him.
Mottled	sword	held	at	the	ready,	the	emperor	approached.
	
Moroch	Nevath	smiled.	Rhulad	Sengar,	who	had	died,	only	to	return.	If	the
rumours	were	true,	he	had	died	again	in	Trate.	But	this	time,	I	will	make	him
stay	dead.	I	will	cut	him	to	pieces.	He	waited,	watching	the	emperor ’s
approach.
Favouring	the	right	side,	the	right	foot	edging	ahead	of	the	other,	a	detail
telling	Moroch	that	Rhulad	had	been	trained	to	use	a	single-handed	sword,
rather	than	this	two-handed	monstrosity	now	wavering	about	before	him	like
an	oversized	club.
‘The	sudden	charge	was	not	unexpected,	only	the	speed	of	that	weapon	as
the	blade	whirled	towards	Moroch’s	head.	He	barely	managed	to	avoid	getting
his	skull	sliced	in	half,	ducking	and	pitching	to	his	right.	A	deafening	clang,	the
shock	ripping	through	him	as	the	sword	bit	into	his	helmet,	caught,	then	tore	it
from	his	head.


Moroch	sprang	back,	staying	as	low	as	possible,	then	straightened	once
more.	The	top	third	of	his	own	sword	was	slick	with	blood.	He	had	met	the
charge	with	a	stop-hit.
Opposite	him,	Rhulad	staggered	back,	blood	pulsing	from	his	right	thigh.
The	lead	leg	was	always	vulnerable.
Let’s	see	you	dance	now,	Emperor.
Moroch	shook	off	the	numbing	effects	of	the	blow	to	his	head.	Muscles
and	tendons	in	his	neck	and	back	were	screaming	silent	pain,	and	he	knew	that
he	had	taken	damage.	For	the	moment,	however,	neither	arm	had	seized	in
answer	to	the	trauma.
A	shriek,	as	Rhulad	attacked	once	more.
Two-handed	thrust,	broken	timing—a	moment’s	hesitation,	sufficient	to
avoid	Moroch’s	all-too-quick	parry—then	finishing	in	a	full	lunge.
The	Finadd	twisted	his	body	in	an	effort	to	avoid	the	sword-point.	Searing
fire	above	his	right	hip	as	the	mottled	blade’s	edge	sawed	deep.	A	wet,	red	rush,
spraying	out	to	the	side.	Now	inside	the	weapon’s	reach,	Moroch	drove	his
own	sword	in	from	a	sharp	angle,	stabbing	the	tip	into	the	emperor ’s	left
armpit.	The	bite	of	gold	coin,	the	grating	resistance	of	ribs,	then	inward,
gouging	along	the	inside	of	Rhulad’s	shoulder	blade,	striving	for	the	spine.
The	mottled	sword	seemed	to	leap	with	a	will	of	its	own	reversing	grip,
hands	lifting	high,	point	down.	A	diagonal	thrust,	entering	above	Moroch’s
right	hip	bone,	down	through	his	groin.
Rhulad	pushed	down	from	the	grip	end,	the	point	chewing	through	the
Finadd’s	lower	intestines,	until	the	pommel	clunked	on	the	paving	stones
beneath	them,	then	the	emperor	straightened,	pushing	the	weapon	back	up
through	Moroch’s	torso,	alongside	his	heart,	through	his	left	lung,	the	point
bursting	free	just	behind	his	clavicle	on	that	side.
Dying,	Moroch	threw	the	last	of	his	strength	against	his	own	weapon,
seeing	Rhulad	bow	around	its	embedded	point.	Then	a	snap,	as	the	emperor ’s
spine	broke.
Crimson	smile	broadening,	Moroch	Nevath	sagged	to	the	slick	stones,
even	as	Rhulad	pitched	down.
Another	figure	loomed	over	him,	then.	One	of	Rhulad’s	brothers.
Who	spoke	as	if	from	a	long	distance	away.	‘Tell	me	your	name,	Finadd.’
Moroch	sought	to	answer,	but	he	was	drowning	in	blood.	I	am	Moroch
Nevath.	And	I	have	killed	your	damned	emperor.
‘Are	you	the	King’s	Champion	in	truth?	Your	soldiers	on	the	bridge	seem
to	be	yelling	that—King’s	Champion…is	that	who	you	are,	Finadd?’
No.


You	bastards	have	not	met	him	yet.
With	that	pleasing	thought,	Moroch	Nevath	died.
	
So	swift	the	healing,	so	terribly	swift	the	return	of	life.	Surrounded	by	the	wolf
howls	reverberating	through	Letheras	in	a	chorus	of	the	damned,	the	emperor
voiced	a	scream	that	tore	the	air.
The	company	of	soldiers	on	the	bridge	were	silenced,	staring	as	Rhulad,
sheathed	in	blood,	staggered	upright,	tugging	the	sword	from	the	Finadd’s
body,	then	skidding	with	a	lurch	as	he	stepped	to	one	side.	Righting	himself,	his
eyes	filled	with	madness	and	terror.
‘Udinaas!’
Desperately	alone.	A	soul	writhing	in	agony.
‘Udinaas!’
	
Two	hundred	paces	away	on	the	main	avenue,	Uruth	Sengar	heard	her	son’s
frantic	cry.	She	spun,	seeking	the	slave	among	those	walking	in	her	wake.	At
that	moment,	Mayen	shrieked,	pushed	her	way	clear	of	the	other	women,	and
was	suddenly	running—into	an	alley.	And	gone.
Frozen,	Uruth	hesitated,	then	with	a	hiss	returned	her	attention	to	the	slaves
cowering	in	front	of	her.
‘Udinaas!	Where	are	you?’
Blank,	terrified	looks	met	her.	Familiar	faces	one	and	all.	But	among	them,
nowhere	could	she	find	Udinaas.
The	slave	was	gone.
Uruth	plunged	among	them,	fists	flailing.	‘Find	him!	Find	Udinaas!’
A	sudden	hate	raged	through	her.	For	Udinaas.	For	all	the	Letherii.
Betrayed.	My	son	is	betrayed.
Oh,	how	they	would	pay.
	
She	could	hear	sounds	of	fighting	now	throughout	the	city	as	the	invaders
poured	into	the	streets	and	were	met	by	desperate	soldiers.	Frightened,	moving
about	from	one	place	of	cover	to	the	next	in	the	overgrown	yard,	the	child
Kettle	began	to	cry.	She	was	alone.
The	five	killers	were	almost	free.	Their	barrow	was	breaking	apart,	thick
fissures	welling	in	the	dark,	wet	earth	submerged	rocks	grinding	and	snapping


together.	The	muted	sounds	of	five	voices	joined	in	a	chant	as	heavy	as
drums…rising,	coming	ever	closer	to	the	surface.
‘Oh,’	she	moaned,	‘where	is	everybody?	Where	are	my	friends?’
Kettle	staggered	over	to	the	barrow	containing	her	only	ally.	He	was	there,
so	very	close.	She	reached	down—
—and	was	dragged	in,	a	heaving	passage	of	hot	soil,	then	through,
stumbling,	slipping	on	a	muddy	bank.	Before	her	sprawled	a	fetid	swamp
beneath	a	grey	sky.
And,	almost	within	arm’s	reach,	a	figure	was	climbing	from	the	dark
water.	White-skinned,	long	hair	smeared	with	mud.	‘Kettle!’	The	voice	a
strained	gasp.	‘Behind	you—reach—’
She	turned	round.
Two	swords,	points	thrust	into	the	mud.
‘Kettle—take	them—give	them—’
A	wet	gasp,	and	she	spun	back,	to	see	the	bared	arms	of	another	figure,
clawing	up	to	wrap	about	her	friend—a	woman’s	arms,	lean,	ribboned	in
muscle.	He	was	dragged	back—she	saw	him	drive	an	elbow	into	the	fiercely
twisting,	black-streaked	face	that	rose	suddenly	from	the	slime.	Connecting
hard	in	a	splatter	of	blood.	But	the	clutching	hands	would	not	let	go.
And	they	both	sank	back	into	the	swirling	foam.
Whimpering,	Kettle	crawled	over	to	the	swords.	She	tugged	them	from	the
mud,	then	clambered	back	to	the	water ’s	edge.
Limbs	appeared	amidst	the	thrashing	waves.
Shivering,	Kettle	waited.
	
So	easy,	now,	a	slave	once	more,	as	the	Wyval	suffused	his	body,	stealing	the
will	of	every	muscle,	every	organ,	the	charging	blood	in	his	veins.	Udinaas
could	barely	see	through	his	own	eyes,	as	street	after	street	blurred	past.
Sudden	moments	of	brutal	clarity,	as	he	came	upon	three	Soletaken	wolves—
which	turned	as	one	with	snarls	and	bared	fangs—and	was	among	them,	his
hands	now	talons,	the	thumb-long	claws	tearing	into	wolf-flesh,	curling	round
ribs	and	ripping	them	loose.	A	massive,	gnarled	fist,	slamming	into	the	side	of
a	lunging,	snapping	head,	breaking	bone—the	wolf’s	head	suddenly	lolling,
the	eyes	blank	in	death.
Then,	motion	once	more.
His	master	needed	him.	Needed	him	now.	No	time	to	lose.
A	slave.	Absolved	of	all	responsibility,	nothing	more	than	a	tool.
And	this,	Udinaas	knew,	was	the	poison	of	surrender.


Close,	now,	and	closing.
There	is	nothing	new	in	being	used.	Look	upon	these	sprawled	corpses,
after	all.	Poor	Letherii	soldiers	lying	dead	for	no	reason.	Defending	the	corpse
of	a	kingdom,	citizens	once	more	every	one	of	them.	The	kingdom	that	does	not
move,	the	kingdom	in	service	to	the	god	of	dust—you	will	find	the	temples	in
crooked	alleys,	in	the	cracks	between	cobbles.
You	will	find,	my	friends,	no	sweeter	world	than	this,	where	honour	and
faith	and	freedom	are	notions	levelled	one	and	all,	layers	as	thin	as	hate,	envy
and	betrayal.	Every	notion	vulnerable	to	any	sordid	breeze,	stirred	up,	stirred
together.	A	world	without	demands	to	challenge	the	confused	haze	of	holy
apathy.
The	god	of	dust	rises	dominant—
Ahead,	a	dozen	wolves,	charging	straight	for	him.
There	would,	it	seemed,	be	a	delay.
Udinaas	bared	his	teeth.
	
‘How	are	you	managing	it?’	Bugg	asked.
The	Errant	glanced	over.	‘The	wolves?’
‘They’re	everywhere	but	here,	and	they	should	have	arrived	long	ago.’
The	god	shrugged.	‘I	keep	nudging	them	away.	It’s	not	as	difficult	as	I
feared,	although	their	leader	is	too	clever	by	far—much	harder	to	deceive.
Besides,	the	beasts	keep	running	into	other…opposition.’
‘What	kind	of	opposition?’
‘Other.’
The	shouts	from	within	the	temple	ceased	then.	Silence,	no	movement	from
the	dark	doorway.	A	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then,	a	muttering	of	voices	and
swearing.
The	mage,	Corlo,	appeared,	backing	out	and	dragging	a	limp	body	in	his
wake,	a	body	leaving	twin	trails	of	blood	from	its	heels.
Concerned,	Bugg	stepped	forward.	‘Is	she	alive?’
Corlo,	himself	a	mass	of	cuts	and	bruises,	cast	the	manservant	a	slightly
wild	look.	‘No,	dammit.’
‘I	am	sorry	for	that,’	the	Errant	murmured.
More	Guardsmen	were	emerging	from	the	doorway.	All	were	wounded,
one	of	them	badly,	his	left	arm	torn	loose	at	the	shoulder	and	dangling	from	a
few	pink-white	tendons.	His	eyes	were	glazed	with	shock.
Corlo	glared	at	Turudal	Brizad.	‘Can	you	do	any	healing?	Before	the	rest
of	us	bleed	out—’


Iron	Bars	stepped	from	the	ruined	temple,	sheathing	his	sword.	He	was
covered	in	blood	but	none	of	it	was	his.	His	expression	was	alarmingly	dark.
‘We	were	expecting	wolves,	damn	you,’	he	said	in	a	low	growl	as	he	stared	at
the	Errant,	who	had	closed	to	lay	hands	upon	the	most	grievously	injured
soldier,	raising	new	flesh	to	bind	the	arm	once	more	to	the	shoulder	as	the
soldier ’s	face	twisted	with	pain.
Turudal	Brizad	shrugged.	‘There	was	little	time	to	elaborate	on	what	you
were	about	to	fight,	Avowed.	In	case	you	have	forgotten.’
‘Damned	cats,’	he	said.
‘Lizard	cats,	you	mean,’	one	of	the	Guardsmen	said,	spitting	blood	onto
the	street.	‘Sometimes	I	think	nature	is	insane.’
‘You	got	that	right,	Halfpeck,’	Corlo	said,	reaching	down	to	close	the
eyelids	of	the	dead	woman	lying	at	his	feet.
Iron	Bars	suddenly	moved,	a	blur,	past	the	Errant,	both	hands	lifting—
—as	a	huge	white	wolf,	claws	skittering,	pitched	round	from	an	alley
mouth	and,	head	ducking,	lunged	towards	Turudal	Brizad,	who	had	only	just
begun	to	turn	round.
The	Avowed	caught	it	in	mid-leap,	left	hand	closing	on	its	right	leg	just
beneath	the	shoulder,	right	hand	clutching	its	neck	beneath	the	beast’s	jaws.	He
heaved	the	wolf	high,	pivoted	and	smashed	it	head	first	onto	the	street.
Crushing	snout,	skull	and	shoulders.	Limbs	kicking	spasmodically,	the
Soletaken	flopped	onto	its	back,	yellow	vomit	spurting,	urine	arcing	as	it	died.
A	moment	later,	all	movement	from	the	limbs	ceased,	although	the	urine
continued	to	stream,	the	arc	dwindling,	then	collapsing.
Iron	Bars	stepped	back.
Halfpeck	suddenly	laughed.	‘It	pissed	on	you!’
‘Be	quiet,’	Iron	Bars	said,	looking	down	at	his	wet	legs.	‘Hood	take	me,
that	stinks.’
‘We	should	get	back	to	the	ship,’	Corlo	said.	‘There’s	wolves	all	over	the
place	and	I	don’t	think	I	can	keep	them	away	much	longer.’
Turudal	Brizad;	‘But	I	can.	Especially	now.’
Bugg	asked,	‘What’s	changed,	apart	from	the	Pack	getting	chopped	to
pieces?’
The	Errant	pointed	down	at	the	dead	Soletaken.	‘That	was	B’nagga,	the
leader	of	the	Jheck.’	He	shot	Bugg	a	look,	astonished	and	half	disbelieving.
‘You	chose	well,’	he	said.
‘This	squad	managed	to	escape	Assail,’	Bugg	said,	shrugging.
The	god’s	eyes	widened.	He	turned	to	Iron	Bars.	‘I	will	ensure	you	a	clear
path	to	your	ship—’


‘Oh,	damn,’	Bugg	cut	in,	slowly	turning.	‘They’re	getting	out.’
‘More	trouble?’	Iron	Bars	asked,	looking	round,	his	hand	drifting	close	to
the	sword	at	his	hip.
‘Not	here,’	Bugg	said.	‘But	not	far.’	He	faced	the	Avowed,	gauging.
Iron	Bars	frowned,	then	said,	‘Corlo,	take	the	squad	back	to	the	ship.	All
right,	old	man,	lead	the	way.’
‘You	don’t	have	to	do	this—’
‘Yes	I	do.	With	that	wolf	pissing	on	me	I	feel	the	need	to	lose	my	temper.
It’s	another	fight,	isn’t	it?’
Bugg	nodded.	‘Might	make	the	Pack	seem	like	kittens,	Iron	Bars.’
‘Might?	Will	it	or	won’t	it?’
‘All	right,	we	might	well	lose	this	one.’
‘Fine,’	the	Avowed	snapped.	‘Let’s	get	it	over	with.’
The	manservant	sighed.	‘Follow	me,	then.	It’s	a	dead	Azath	House	we’re
heading	to.’
‘Dead?	Hood	take	me,	a	garden	fête.’
A	garden	fête?	Dear	me,	I	like	this	man.	‘And	we’re	inviting	ourselves,
Avowed.	Still	with	me?’
Iron	Bars	looked	across	at	Corlo,	who	had	stopped	to	listen,	his	face
bloodless	as	he	repeatedly	shook	his	head	in	denial.	The	Avowed	grunted.
‘Once	you’ve	dropped	’em	off,	come	and	find	us,	Corlo.	And	try	and	make
your	arrival	timely.’
‘Avowed—’
‘Go.’
Bugg	glanced	at	the	Errant.	‘You	coming?’
‘In	spirit,’	he	replied.	‘There	is	another	matter	I	must	attend	to,	I	am	afraid.
Oh,’	he	added	as	Bugg	and	Iron	Bars	turned	to	go,	‘dear	manservant,	I	thank
you.	And	you	as	well,	Avowed.	Tell	me,	Iron	Bars,	how	many	of	the	Avowed
remain	among	the	Crimson	Guard?’
‘No	idea.	A	few	hundred,	I’d	imagine.’
‘Scattered	here	and	there…’
The	grey-haired	soldier	smiled.	‘For	the	moment.’
Bugg	said,	‘We	shall	have	to	run,	I	think.’
‘Can	you	keep	up?’	Iron	Bars	asked.
‘As	swift	as	a	charging	wave,	that’s	me,’	Bugg	said.
	
Brys	stood	alone	in	the	corridor.	The	howling	was,	thankfully,	over.	It	was	the
only	sound	that	had	managed	to	penetrate	the	walls.	There	was	no	way	to	know


if	the	garrison	was	fighting	in	the	city	beyond	the	Eternal	Domicile.	It	seemed
such	a	pointless	thing…
His	breath	caught	upon	hearing	a	strange	sound.	Brys	lowered	his	gaze,
fixed	it	upon	the	Ceda,	who	was	lying	curled	tight	in	the	chamber	beyond,	with
his	back	to	Brys	and	the	throne	room	behind	him.
Kuru	Qan’s	head	shifted	slightly,	then	rose	a	fraction	from	the	floor.
And,	from	the	Ceda,	there	came	low	laughter.
	
The	path	was	unmistakable.	Keening	with	glee,	the	demon	drew	itself	to	the
cave’s	entrance,	contracting	its	massive,	corpulent	presence,	the	bloated	flesh
of	its	body,	away	from	the	river ’s	broad	span.	Inward,	gathering,	hovering
before	the	tunnel	beneath	the	city,	where	old	swamp	water	still	flowed,	putrid
and	sweet,	a	flavour	like	sweet	nectar	to	the	demon.
Ready	now,	at	last,	for	the	lunge,	the	breaking	away	from	the	grip	of	its
master.	Who	was	so	regrettably	preoccupied	at	the	moment.
Now.
Surging	forward,	filling	the	cave,	then	into	the	narrow,	twisting	tunnel.
To	the	heart.	The	wondrous,	blessed	heart	of	power.
Joy	and	hunger	burning	like	twin	fires	within	it.	Close,	so	close	now.
Squirming	down,	the	path	narrowing,	squeezing	with	the	vast	pressure	of
overlying	stone	and	earth.	A	little	further.
Reaching	out,	the	space	suddenly	opening,	blissfully	wide	and	high,
spreading	out	to	all	sides,	the	water	welcoming	in	its	warmth.
A	storm	of	long-still	silts	sweeping	up,	blinding,	shadows	of	dead	things
cavorting	before	its	countless	eyes.
The	heart,	the	enormous	cavern	beneath	the	lake,	the	city’s	very	soul—the
power—
	
And	Brys	heard	Kuru	Qan	speak.
‘Now,	friend	Bugg.’
	
Thirty	paces	from	the	overgrown	yard	of	the	Azath	tower,	Bugg	skidded	to	a
halt.	He	cocked	his	head,	then	smiled.
Ahead,	Iron	Bars	slowed,	then	turned	round.	‘What?’
‘Find	the	girl,’	the	manservant	said.	‘I’ll	join	you	when	I	can.’


‘Bugg?’
‘In	a	moment,	Avowed.	I	must	do	something	first.’
The	Crimson	Guardsman	hesitated,	then	nodded	and	swung	back.
Bugg	closed	his	eyes.	Jaghut	witch,	hear	me.	Recall	my	favour	at	the
quarry?	The	time	has	come	for…reciprocity.
She	replied	in	his	mind,	distant,	yet	swiftly	closing.	‘I	hear	you,	little	man.
I	know	what	you	seek.	Ah,	you	are	a	clever	one	indeed…’
Oh,	I	cannot	take	all	the	credit,	this	time.
	
The	demon	expanded	to	fill	the	cavern.	The	heart	was	all	about,	the	power
seeping	in	to	enliven	its	flesh.	The	chains	of	binding	melted	away.
Now,	it	need	only	reach	out	and	grasp	hold.
The	strength	of	a	thousand	gods	awaited	it.
Reaching.
Countless	grasping,	clutching	hands.
Finding…nothing.
Then,	a	mortal’s	voice—
	
From	the	Ceda,	two	more	words,	uttered	low	and	clear,	‘Got	you.’

A	lie!	Illusion!	Deceit!	The	demon	raged,	spun	in	a	conflagration	of	brown	silt,
seeking	the	way	out—only	to	find	the	tunnel	mouth	sealed.	A	smooth	surface,
fiercely	cold,	the	cold	burning—the	demon	recoiled.
Then,	the	lake	overhead.	Upward—fast,	faster—
	
Ursto	Hoobutt	and	his	sometime	lover,	Pinosel,	were	both	drunk	as	they
awaited	the	fall	of	Letheras.	They	had	been	singing,	celebrating	the	end	of	their
debts,	sprawled	on	the	mouldy	walkway	surrounding	Settle	Lake	amidst
nervous	rats	and	head-jutting	pigeons.
When	the	wine	ran	out,	they	began	bickering.
It	had	begun	innocently	enough,	as	Pinosel	loosed	a	loud	sigh	and	said,
‘And	now	you	can	marry	me.’
It	was	a	moment	before	her	words	registered,	upon	which,	bleary-eyed,	he


looked	over	in	disbelief.	‘Marry	you?	What’s	wrong	wi’	’ow	it	is	now,
Cherrytart?’
‘What’s	wrong?	It’s	respectable	I	want,	you	fat,	flea-bit	oaf.	I	earned	it.
Respectable.	You	marry	me,	Ursto	Hoobutt,	now	that	the	Edurians	done
conquered	us.	Marry	me!’
‘All	right,	I	will.’
‘When?’	she	demanded,	sensing	the	out	he	was	angling	towards.
‘When…when…’	Hah!	He	had	his	answer—
And,	at	that	instant,	the	fetid	green	water	of	Settle	Lake,	sprawled	out
before	them	like	a	turgid	plain	of	seaweed	fertilizer,	paled	into	murky	white.
And	clouds	began	rising	from	its	now	frozen	surface.
An	icy	breeze	swept	over	Ursto	Hoobutt	and	Pinosel.
There	was	a	sudden	deep	thump	from	somewhere	beneath	the	frozen	lake’s
ice,	although	not	a	single	crack	showed.
Ursto	Hoobutt	stared,	disbelieving.	Opened	his	mouth,	then	closed	it.
Then	his	shoulders	sagged.	‘Today,	love.	I’ll	marry	ya	today…’


Chapter	Twenty-five

When	the	gods	of	dust	were	young
They	swam	in	blood.
WHITEFORTH’S	DREAM	ON	THE	DAY	OF	THE	SEVENTH	CLOSURE
FEVER	WITCH
Shurq	Elalle	walked	down	the	tunnel	to	the	crypt	door.	Her	thoughts	were	on
Gerun	Eberict;	her	concern	was	for	Tehol	Beddict.	The	Finadd	was	of	the	most
vicious	sort,	after	all,	and	Tehol	seemed	so…helpless.	Oh,	fit	enough,
probably	quite	capable	of	running	fast	and	far	should	the	need	arise.	But	it	was
clear	that	Tehol	had	no	intention	of	running	anywhere.	The	silent	bodyguards
Brys	had	assigned	to	him	were	some	comfort,	although,	the	way	Gerun
worked,	they	might	prove	little	more	than	a	minor	inconvenience.
If	that	was	not	troubling	enough,	there	was	the	ominous	silence	from	Kettle
at	the	dead	Azath	tower.	Was	that	a	result	of	the	child’s	returning	to	life,	thus
severing	the	link	that	bound	the	dead?	Or	had	something	terrible	happened?
She	reached	the	portal	and	pushed	it	open.
Light	flared	from	a	lantern,	and	she	saw	Ublala	seated	on	the	sarcophagus,
the	lantern	on	his	lap	as	he	adjusted	the	flame.
She	saw	his	expression	and	frowned.	‘What	is	wrong,	my	love?’
‘There’s	no	time,’	he	said,	rising,	bumping	his	head	on	the	ceiling,	then
ducking	into	a	hunch.	‘Bad	things.	I	was	about	to	go.’	He	set	the	lantern	down
on	the	lid.	‘Couldn’t	wait	for	you	any	longer.	I’ve	got	to	go.’
‘Where?’
‘It’s	the	Seregahl,’	he	mumbled,	hands	wringing.	‘It’s	bad.’
‘The	Seregahl?	The	old	Tarthenal	gods?	Ublala,	what	are	you	talking
about?’
‘I	have	to	go.’	He	headed	for	the	doorway.
‘Ublala,	what	about	Harlest?	Where	are	you	going?’
‘The	old	tower.’	He	was	in	the	tunnel,	his	words	dwindling.	‘I	love	you,
Shurq	Elalle…’


She	stared	at	the	empty	doorway.	Love?	That	sounded…final.
Shurq	Elalle	went	to	the	sarcophagus	and	slid	the	lid	to	one	side.
‘Aarrgh!	Hiss!	Hiss!	Hiss—’
‘Stop	that,	Harlest!’	She	batted	the	clawing	hands	away.	‘Get	out	of	there.
We	have	to	go—’
‘Where?’	Harlest	slowly	sat	up,	practising	baring	his	long	fangs	and
making	growling	sounds.
She	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘A	cemetery.’
‘Oh,’	Harlest	sighed,	‘that’s	perfect.’
	
Sitting	in	the	street,	in	a	pool	of	darkening	blood,	the	emperor	of	the	Tiste
Edur	had	one	hand	held	against	his	face	and	seemed	to	be	trying	to	claw	his
eyes	out.	He	still	screamed	every	now	and	then,	a	shrill,	wordless	release	of
raw	anguish.
On	the	bridge,	thirty	paces	distant,	the	Letherii	soldiers	were	silent	and
motionless	behind	their	shields.	Other	citizens	of	the	city	were	visible	along
the	edge	of	the	canal	on	the	other	side,	a	row	of	onlookers,	their	numbers
growing.
Trull	Sengar	felt	a	hand	settle	on	his	shoulder	and	he	turned	to	find	Uruth,
her	face	twisted	with	distress.
‘Son,	something	must	be	done—he’s	losing	his	mind—’
Udinaas,	the	damned	slave	who	had	become	so	essential,	so	integral	to
Rhulad—to	the	young	Edur ’s	sanity—had	vanished.	And	now	the	emperor
railed,	recognizing	no-one,	froth	on	his	lips,	his	cries	those	of	a	panicked
beast.	‘He	must	be	hunted	down,’	Trull	said.	‘That	slave.’
‘There	is	more—’
Hannan	Mosag	had	moved	to	stand	close	to	Rhulad,	and	now	spoke,	his
words	carrying	easily.	‘Emperor	Rhulad,	hear	me!	This	is	a	day	of	dark	truths.
Your	slave,	Udinaas,	has	done	what	we	would	expect	of	a	Letherii.	Their	hearts
are	filled	with	treachery	and	they	serve	none	but	themselves.	Rhulad,	Udinaas
has	run	away.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘From	you.’
The	triumph	was	poorly	hidden	as	the	Warlock	King	continued.	‘He	has
made	himself	into	your	white	nectar,	and	now	leaves	you	in	pain.	This	is	a
world	without	faith,	Emperor.	Only	your	kin	can	be	trusted—’
Rhulad’s	head	snapped	up,	features	ravaged	with	hurt,	a	dark	fire	in	his
eyes.	‘Trusted?	You,	Hannan	Mosag?	My	brothers?	Mayen?’	Blood-smeared
gold,	matted	bear	fur,	sword-blade	threaded	through	bits	of	human	meat	and
intestines,	the	emperor	staggered	upright,	chest	heaving	with	emotion.	‘You	are


all	as	nothing	to	us.	Liars,	cheats,	betrayers!	All	of	you!’	He	whipped	the
sword,	spattering	red	and	pink	fragments	onto	the	cobbles	and	against	the	shins
of	those	standing	nearest	him,	and	bared	his	teeth.	‘The	emperor	shall	reflect
his	people,’	he	rasped,	an	ugly	grin	spreading.	‘Reflect,	as	it	must	be.’
Trull	saw	Fear	take	a	step	forward,	halting	as	Rhulad’s	sword	shot	upward,
the	point	hovering	at	Fear ’s	throat.
‘Oh	no,	brother,	we	want	nothing	from	you.	We	want	nothing	from	any	of
you.	Except	obedience.	An	empire	must	be	shaped,	and	that	shaping	shall	be	by
the	emperor ’s	hands.	Warlock	King!’
‘Sire?’
The	sword	slid	away	from	Fear ’s	throat,	waved	carelessly	towards	the
soldiers	blocking	the	bridge.	‘Get	rid	of	them.’
Binadas	among	them,	the	K’risnan	shambled	forward	at	Hannan	Mosag’s
gesture.	Behind	them	were	four	slaves	with	two	large	leather	sacks	which	they
dragged	over	the	cobbles	to	where	the	K’risnan	waited	in	a	row.	Noting	the
sacks,	the	Warlock	King	shook	his	head.	‘Not	here,	I	think.	Something…
simpler.’	He	faced	the	emperor.	‘A	moment,	sire,	in	which	to	prepare.	I	shall	do
this	myself.’
Uruth	tugged	Trull	round	again.	‘It	is	more	than	just	Udinaas,’	she	said.
‘Mayen	has	escaped.’
He	stared	at	her,	not	quite	comprehending.	‘Escaped?’
‘We	must	find	her…’
‘She	ran	away…from	us?	From	her	own	people?’
‘It	is	the	hunger,	Trull.	Please.’
After	a	moment,	he	pulled	away,	looked	round	until	he	saw	a	company	of
warriors	grouped	behind	Theradas	and	Midik	Buhn.	Trull	walked	over	to	them.
Theradas	scowled.	‘What	do	you	want,	Trull	Sengar?’
‘The	emperor ’s	mother	has	orders	for	you	and	your	warriors,	Theradas.’
His	expression	lost	its	ferocity,	was	replaced	with	uncertainty.	‘What	are
they?’
‘Mayen	is	lost,	somewhere	in	the	city.	She	must	be	found.	As	for	Udinaas…
if	you	see	him…’
‘If	we	see	him	he	will	die	terribly,	Trull	Sengar.’
He	betrayed	Rhulad.	When	I	warned	him…Trull	glanced	over	at	Rhulad.	A
return	from	this	madness?	Not	likely.	It	was	too	late.	‘As	you	like,	Theradas.
Just	find	Mayen.’
He	watched	them	head	off,	then	turned	and	met	Uruth’s	eyes.	She	nodded.
The	soldiers	on	the	bridge	knew	what	was	coming.	He	saw	them	duck
lower	behind	their	shields.	Pointless.	Pathetic,	yet	there	was	courage	here,


among	these	Letherii.	Udinaas,	I	did	not…did	not	think	you	would—
A	seething,	spitting	grey	wave	rose	suddenly	at	the	foot	of	the	bridge,
churning	higher.
The	shield	wall	flinched	back,	contracted.
The	wave	plunged	forward.
From	the	banks	of	the	canal	to	either	side	citizens	shrieked	and	scattered—
—as	the	sorcery	rushed	over	the	bridge,	striking	the	soldiers	in	a	spray	of
blood	and	strips	of	flesh.	A	heartbeat,	then	past,	spreading	out	to	wash	over	the
fleeing	citizens.	Devouring	them	in	writhing	hunger.
Trull	saw	it	strike	nearby	buildings,	smashing	down	doors	and	bursting
through	shuttered	windows.	Screams.
‘Enough!’	Rhulad	roared,	stepping	towards	Hannan	Mosag,	who	lowered
his	arms,	which	looked	twisted	and	gnarled.
The	sorcery	vanished,	leaving	only	heaps	of	bones,	polished	shields	and
armour	on	the	bridge.	From	the	sundered	buildings,	silence.	Hannan	Mosag
sagged,	and	Trull	saw	how	misshapen	he	had	become	beneath	his	furs.
The	emperor	suddenly	giggled.	‘So	eager,	Hannan	Mosag!	Your	secret
god	is	so	eager!’
Secret	god?	Trull	looked	over	at	Fear,	and	found	his	brother	staring	back.
‘Brothers,’	the	emperor	cried,	waving	his	sword,	‘we	march	to	the	Eternal
Domicile!	To	the	throne!	None	can	deny	us!	And	should	they	dare,	their	flesh
shall	be	rendered	from	their	bones!	They	will	know	pain.	They	will	suffer!
Brothers,	this	shall	be	a	day	of	suffering’—he	seemed	to	find	sweetness	in
tasting	the	word—‘for	all	who	would	oppose	us!	Now,	walk	with	your	Sire!’
He	is…transformed.	Lost	to	us.	And	all	for	the	treachery	of	a	slave…
	
An	overgrown	yard,	just	visible	through	the	old,	battered	stones	of	the
gateway.	From	the	skeletal,	twisted	branches	of	leaning	trees,	something	like
steam	billowed	upward.	There	was	no-one	about.	Iron	Bars	slowed	his	steps
and	looked	back	up	the	street.	That	manservant	had	yet	to	appear	from	beyond
the	corner	of	the	building	he	had	jogged	round	moments	earlier.
‘Fine,	then,’	the	Avowed	muttered,	drawing	his	sword,	‘we’ll	just	have	to
see	for	ourselves…’	He	approached	the	gateway,	strode	onto	the	winding	stone
path.	The	squat,	square	tower	was	opposite,	stained	and	leaning	and	dead.	From
his	left,	the	sounds	of	stones	grinding	together,	the	snap	of	wood,	and	thumps
that	trembled	the	ground	beneath	his	feet.	Over	there,	then.
Iron	Bars	walked	into	the	yard.
Round	a	mud-smeared	barrow,	over	a	fallen	tree,	to	come	to	a	halt	ten


paces	from	what	had	once	been	an	extensive,	elongated	mound,	now	torn	apart
and	steaming,	mud	sliding	down	as	five	huge	figures	dragged	themselves	free.
Flesh	darkened	by	peat,	skin	mapped	by	the	tracks	of	countless	roots,	dangling
hair	the	colour	of	copper.	Tugging	weapons	free—massive	two-handed	swords
of	black,	polished	wood.
The	five	were	chanting.
Iron	Bars	grunted.	‘Tartheno	Toblakai.	Hood-damned	Fenn.	Well,	this
won’t	be	fun.’
One	of	the	warriors	heard	him	and	fixed	black,	murky	eyes	on	the	Avowed.
The	chant	ceased,	and	it	spoke.	‘A	child,	my	brothers.’
‘The	one	who	spoke	through	the	earth?’	another	asked.
‘I	don’t	know.	Does	it	matter?’
‘It	would	not	help	us,	that	child.	We	have	promised	a	terrible	death.’
‘Then	let	us—’
The	Toblakai’s	words	were	cut	short	as	Iron	Bars	rushed	forward.
A	roar,	a	keening	sweep	of	a	wooden	sword	flung	into	the	path	of	the
Avowed’s	own	weapon,	which	slid	under,	point	gliding	back	round	and	over
the	warrior ’s	enormous	wrist,	following	in	its	swishing	wake,	to	intercept	the
instinctive	back-swing.	Slashing	through	hard,	thick	skin,	the	edge	scoring
against	muscle	tough	as	wood.
A	huge	presence	lunging	in	from	the	Avowed’s	right.	But	Iron	Bars
continued	forward,	ducking	beneath	the	first	Toblakai’s	arm,	then	pivoting
round	as	the	second	attacker	slammed	into	the	first	warrior.	Disengaging	his
sword,	thrusting	upward,	seeking	the	soft	space	between	the	lower	mandibles—
a	jerk	of	the	giant’s	head,	and	the	Avowed’s	sword	point	speared	its	right	eye,
plunging	deep	in	a	spurt	of	what	seemed	to	be	swamp	water.
A	shriek.
Iron	Bars	found	himself	scrambling	over	the	ruined	barrow,	the	other
Toblakai	stumbling	as	they	swung	round	to	face	him	again—with	a	heap	of
boulders,	mud	and	ripped-up	roots	in	the	way.
The	Avowed	leapt	down	onto	level	ground	once	more.
Black	blood	dripping	from	one	arm,	a	hand	pressed	over	a	gouged	socket
and	burst	eye,	the	Toblakai	he	had	attacked	was	staggering	back.
The	other	four	were	spreading	out,	silent	now,	intent.
Until	they	could	edge	round	the	entire	barrow,	their	approach	would	be
difficult,	the	footing	treacherous.
One	down.	Iron	Bars	was	pleased—
And	then	the	fifth	one	shook	itself	and	straightened.	One-eyed,	but	turning
to	face	the	Avowed	once	more.


‘You	hurt	our	brother,’	one	said.
‘There’s	more	to	come,’	Iron	Bars	said.
‘It’s	not	good,	hurting	gods.’
Gods?
‘We	are	the	Seregahl,’	the	lead	Toblakai	said.	‘Before	you	hurt	us,	you
might	have	begged	for	mercy.	You	might	have	knelt	in	worship,	and	perhaps
we	would	have	accepted	you.	But	not	now.’
‘No,’	the	Avowed	agreed,	‘I	suppose	not.’
‘That	is	all	you	would	say?’
He	shrugged.	‘Nothing	else	comes	to	mind.’
‘You	are	frowning.	Why?’
‘Well,	I’ve	already	killed	a	god	today,’	Iron	Bars	said.	‘If	I’d	known	this
was	going	to	be	a	day	for	killing	gods,	I	might	have	paced	myself	better.’
The	five	were	silent	for	a	moment,	then	the	first	one	said,	‘What	god	have
you	killed	this	day,	stranger?’
‘The	Pack.’
A	hiss	from	the	Toblakai	on	the	far	right.	‘The	ones	that	escaped	us!	The
fast	ones!’
‘They	were	fast,’	Iron	Bars	said,	nodding.	‘But	not,	it	seems,	fast	enough.’
‘D’ivers.’
‘Yes,’	the	Avowed	said.	‘Six	of	them…and	only	five	of	you.’
The	first	Toblakai	said	to	its	brothers,	‘Careful	with	this	one,	then.’
‘We	are	free,’	the	one-eyed	one	growled.	‘We	must	kill	this	one	to	remain
so.’
‘True.	This	is	cause	enough.’
They	began	advancing	again.
Iron	Bars	inwardly	sighed.	At	least	he’d	made	them	nervous.	And	that
might	serve	to	keep	him	alive	a	little	while	longer.	Then	again,	he	reminded
himself,	he’d	faced	worse.
Well,	maybe	not.	Maybe?	Who	am	I	kidding?
He	shifted	his	weight,	rising	to	the	balls	of	his	feet,	readying	himself	to
begin	the	dance.	The	dance	of	staying	alive.
Until	help	came.
Help…from	a	short,	pudgy,	balding	man.	Oh,	Hood,	Iron	Bars,	just	try	and
stay	alive	as	long	as	you	can—maybe	they’ll	die	of	exhaustion.
‘Look,’	one	whined,	‘he’s	smiling.’
	
Unseen	storms,	raging	through	the	streets,	battering	the	city.	Bugg’s	head	was


aching	with	the	chaos	of	power,	of	the	clash	of	fierce	wills.	He	could	still	feel
the	impotent	fury,	of	the	ancient	god	trapped	beneath	the	ice	of	Settle	Lake—the
Ceda’s	trap	had	worked	well	indeed,	and	even	now	the	ice	was	slowly
thickening,	closing	in	around	the	creature	in	the	sealed	cavern,	and	before	the
sun	set	it	would	find	itself	encased	in	the	ice,	feeling	the	unbearable	cold,
seeping	into	its	being,	stealing	sensation,	stealing	its	life.
Good	things	came	of	being	nice	to	a	Jaghut,	something	the	T’lan	Imass
never	understood.
Bugg	made	his	way	towards	the	end	of	the	alley	beyond	which	the	old
Azath	tower	was	visible.	He	hoped	Iron	Bars	had	not	done	anything
precipitous,	such	as	entering	the	yard	alone.	Kettle	would	have	warned	him
against	that	in	any	case.	With	luck,	the	child’s	buried	ally	was	buried	no	longer.
The	Avowed	was	intended	to	give	support,	that	was	all,	and	only	if	necessity
demanded	it.	This	wasn’t	that	man’s	fight,	after	all—
His	steps	slowed	suddenly,	as	a	cold	dread	swept	through	him.	He	quested
out	with	his	senses,	and	detected	movement	where	there	should	not	be
movement,	an	awakening	of	wills,	intentions	burning	bright,	threads	of	fate
converging…
The	manservant	turned	round,	and	began	running.
	
Four	of	his	ablest	killers	approached	Gerun	Eberict	from	up	the	street.	The
Finadd	raised	a	hand	to	halt	those	behind	him.
‘Finadd,’	the	squad	leader	said	upon	arriving,	‘we	had	some	luck.	The
brother	at	the	far	lookout	was	flushed	out	into	the	street	by	a	pack	of	Edur.	He
took	six	of	the	bastards	down	with	him.	Once	the	Edur	left	I	sent	Crillo	out	to
make	sure	he	was	dead—’
‘He	was	cut	to	pieces,’	Crillo	interrupted,	grinning.
‘—and	he	was	at	that,’	the	squad	leader	resumed,	with	a	glare	at	Crillo,
whose	grin	broadened.
‘And	the	other?’	Gerun	asked,	scanning	the	vicinity.	It	wouldn’t	do	to	run
into	a	company	of	Tiste	Edur	right	now.
The	squad	leader	scowled.	‘Crillo	got	’im.	A	damned	lucky	knife-throw—’
‘No	luck	at	all,’	Crillo	cut	in.	‘Poor	bastard	never	knew	it	was	coming—’
‘Because	he’d	caught	out	the	rest	of	us—’
‘They’re	both	dead?’	Gerun	asked.	Then	shook	his	head.	‘Luck	indeed.	It
should	not	have	been	that	easy.	All	right,	that	leaves	the	one	on	the	roof.	He’ll
have	been	looking	for	signals	from	his	brothers	and	he	won’t	be	seeing	them
now.	Meaning,	he’ll	know	we’re	coming.’


‘It’s	just	one	man,	Finadd—’
‘A	Shavankrats,	Crillo.	Don’t	get	overconfident	just	because	the	Errant’s
nudged	our	way	so	far.	All	right,	we	stay	as	a	group	now—’	He	stopped,	then
gestured	everyone	low.
Thirty	paces	ahead	and	coming	from	a	side	alley,	a	lone	figure	ran	into	the
street.	A	Tiste	Edur	woman.	Like	a	startled	deer	she	froze,	head	darting.	Before
she	had	a	chance	to	look	their	way,	she	heard	something	behind	her	and	bolted.
A	metallic	flash	in	her	right	hand	revealed	that	she	carried	a	knife	of	some	sort.
Gerun	Eberict	grunted.	She	was	heading	the	same	direction	as	he	was.	An
undefended	Tiste	Edur	woman.	He	would	enjoy	her	before	killing	her.	Once
his	other	business	was	out	of	the	way,	of	course.	Might	let	the	lads	have	a	go,
too.	Crillo	first,	for	the	work	he’d	already	done	getting	rid	of	Brys’s	damned
guards.
The	Finadd	straightened.	‘After	her,	then,	since	it’s	on	the	way.’
Dark	laughs	from	his	troop.
‘Take	point,	Crillo.’
They	set	out.
Faces	behind	shutters	at	second	floor	windows—the	whole	city	cowered
like	half-drowned	rats.	It	was	disgusting.	But	they	were	showing	him,	weren’t
they,	showing	him	how	few	deserved	to	live.	This	new	empire	of	the	Tiste	Edur
would	be	little	different,	he	suspected.	There	would	need	to	be	controllers,
deliverers	of	swift	and	incorruptible	justice.	People	would	continue	to	be	rude.
Would	continue	to	litter	the	streets.	And	there	would	still	be	people	who	were
just	plain	ugly,	earning	the	mercy	of	Gerun’s	knife.	He	would	have	his	work,
as	before,	to	make	this	city	a	place	of	beauty—
They	had	reached	the	place	where	the	woman	had	emerged	from	the	alley.
Crillo	was	turning	round,	pointing	in	the	direction	she	had	run,	when	a	spear
struck	his	head,	spinning	him	round	in	a	mass	of	blood,	brain	and	shattered
bone.
From	the	alley	rushed	a	score	or	more	Tiste	Edur	warriors.
‘Take	them!’	Gerun	Eberict	commanded,	and	was	pleased	to	see	his	men
surge	forward.
Past	the	Finadd,	who	then	stepped	back.
I	can	always	get	more	men.
And	ran.
Onto	the	trail	of	the	woman.	Coincidentally,	of	course.	His	real	target	was
Tehol	Beddict.	He’d	take	her	down	first,	leave	her	trussed	and	gagged	close	by,
to	await	his	return.	More	difficult,	now,	since	he	was	alone.	Tehol’s	bodyguard
would	be	a	challenge,	but	when	one’s	sword	edges	were	painted	with	poison,


even	the	slightest	cut	would	be	sufficient	to	kill	the	man.	Quickly.
There!
The	woman	had	been	hiding	in	a	niche	twenty	paces	ahead.	She	bolted	at
his	approach.
Gerun	broke	into	a	sprint.
Oh,	he	wanted	her	now.	She	was	beautiful.	He	saw	the	knife	in	her	hand	and
laughed.	It	was	a	fish	knife—he’d	seen	the	Letherii	slaves	using	them	in	that
Hiroth	village.
Running	hard,	he	quickly	gained	on	her.
Across	another	street,	into	another	alley.
Close,	now,	to	Tehol	Beddict’s	home.	But	he	could	reach	her	in	time—five
more	steps—
	
‘There’s	trouble.’
Stunned,	Tehol	Beddict	turned.	‘Not	mute	after	all…’	His	words	trailed
away	at	seeing	the	unease	in	the	bodyguard’s	eyes.	‘Serious	trouble,	then.’
‘My	brothers	are	both	dead.	Gerun	Eberict	is	coming.’
‘This	city’s	full	of	Edur,’	Tehol	said,	throwing	both	hands	up	to	encompass
a	vast	sweep	of	rooftops,	tiers	and	bridges.	‘Ranging	round	like	wolves.	And
then	there’s	those	real	wolves—’
‘It’s	Gerun.’
Tehol	studied	the	man.	‘All	right.	He’s	on	the	way	for	a	visit.	What	should
we	do	about	it?’
‘They	can	come	up	the	walls,	the	way	your	thief	friend	does.	We	need	to
get	below.	We	need	a	place	with	one	door	and	only	one	door.’
‘Well,	there’s	the	warehouse	opposite—I	know	it	quite	well—’
‘Let’s	go,	then.’
The	guard	went	to	the	hatch,	knelt	at	its	edge	and	cautiously	looked	down
into	the	room	below.	He	waved	Tehol	forward,	then	began	the	descent.
Moments	later	they	stood	in	the	room.	The	guard	headed	to	the	entrance,
tugged	the	hanging	back	a	fraction	and	peered	outside.	‘Looks	clear.	I’ll	lead,
to	that	wall—’
“The	warehouse	wall.	There’s	a	watchman,	Chalas—’
‘If	he’s	still	there	I’d	be	surprised.’
‘You	have	a	point.	All	right.	When	we	get	to	the	wall,	we	head	right.	Round
the	corner	and	in	through	the	office	door,	the	first	one	we’ll	come	to.	The	main
sliding	doors	will	be	barred.’
‘And	if	the	office	door	is	locked?’


‘I	know	where	the	key’s	hidden.’
The	guard	nodded.
They	stepped	into	the	narrow	corridor,	turned	left	and	approached	the
street.
	
Three	more	strides.
She	threw	a	desperate	look	over	her	shoulder,	then	lunged	forward	in	a
sudden	burst	of	speed.
Gerun	snarled,	reaching	out	with	one	hand.
A	whimpering	sound	escaped	her,	and	she	raised	the	knife	just	as	she
reached	the	mouth	of	the	alley.
And	thrust	it	into	her	own	chest.
Gerun	was	a	hand’s	width	behind	her,	coming	opposite	a	side	corridor
between	two	warehouses,	when	he	was	grasped	hard,	pulled	off	his	feet,	and
yanked	into	the	dark	corridor.
A	fist	crashed	into	his	face,	shattering	his	nose.	Stunned,	he	was	helpless	as
the	sword	was	plucked	from	his	hand,	the	helmet	dragged	from	his	head.
The	massive	hands	lifted	him	and	slammed	him	hard	against	a	wall.	Once,
twice,	three	times,	and	with	each	impact	the	back	of	Gerun’s	head	crunched
against	the	cut	stone.	Then	he	was	smashed	onto	the	greasy	cobbles,	breaking
his	right	shoulder	and	clavicle.	Consciousness	slipped	away.	When	it	returned	a
moment	later	he	was	vaguely	aware	of	a	huge,	hulking	figure	crouched	over
him	in	the	gloom.
A	massive	hand	snapped	down	to	cover	Gerun’s	mouth	and	the	figure
froze.
The	sound	of	running	feet	in	the	alleyway,	a	dozen,	maybe	more,	all
moccasined,	the	rasp	of	weapons.	Then	past.
Blearily,	Gerun	Eberict	stared	up	at	an	unfamiliar	face.	A	mixed	blood.
Half	Tarthenal,	half	Nerek.
The	huge	man	crouched	closer.	‘For	what	you	did	to	her,’	he	said	in	a
hoarse	whisper.	‘And	don’t	think	it’ll	be	quick…’
The	hand	over	his	mouth,	Gerun	could	say	nothing.	Could	ask	no
questions.	And	he	had	plenty	of	those.
It	was	clear,	however,	that	the	mixed	blood	wasn’t	interested.
And	that,	Gerun	said	to	himself,	was	too	bad.
	


Tehol	was	three	paces	behind	the	guard,	who	was	nearing	the	warehouse	wall,
when	a	scraping	noise	alerted	him.	He	looked	to	his	right,	in	time	to	see	an
Edur	woman	stagger	out	from	an	alley.	A	knife	handle	jutted	from	her	chest,
and	blood	was	streaming	down.
Dumb	misery	in	her	eyes,	she	saw	Tehol.	Reached	out	a	red-stained	hand,
then	fell,	landing	on	her	left	side	and	skidding	slightly	on	the	cobbles	before
coming	to	a	stop.
‘Guard!’	Tehol	hissed,	changing	direction.	‘She’s	hurt—
From	the	warehouse	wall:	‘No!’
As	Tehol	reached	her,	he	looked	up	to	see	Tiste	Edur	warriors	rushing
from	the	alley	mouth.	A	spear	sailed	towards	him—
—and	was	intercepted	by	the	guard	lunging	in	from	Tehol’s	left	side.	The
weapon	caught	the	man	under	his	left	arm,	snapping	ribs	as	it	sank	deep	into
his	chest.	With	a	soft	groan,	the	guard	stumbled	past,	then	sprawled	onto	the
street,	blood	pouring	from	his	mouth	and	nose.
Tehol	went	perfectly	still.
The	Edur	ranged	out	cautiously,	until	they	formed	a	rough	circle	around
Tehol	and	the	dead	woman.	One	checked	on	the	bodyguard,	turning	the	man
over	with	one	foot.	It	was	clear	that	the	man	was	also	dead.
In	trader	tongue,	one	of	the	Tiste	Edur	said,	‘You	have	killed	her.’
Tehol	shook	his	head.	‘No.	She	ran	into	view,	already	wounded.	I	was
coming	to…to	help.	I	am	sorry…’
The	warrior	sneered,	then	said	to	the	younger	Edur	beside	him,	‘Midik,	see
if	this	Letherii	is	armed.’
The	one	named	Midik	stepped	up	to	Tehol.	Reached	out	to	pat	him	down,
then	snorted.	‘He’s	wearing	rags,	Theradas.	There	is	no	place	he	could	hide
anything.’
A	third	warrior	said,	‘He	killed	Mayen.	We	should	take	him	back—’
‘No,’	Theradas	growled.	He	sheathed	his	sword	and	pushed	Midik	to	one
side	as	he	came	close	to	Tehol.	‘Look	at	this	one,’	he	said	in	a	growl.	‘See	the
insolence	in	his	eyes.’
‘You	do	poorly	at	reading	a	Letherii’s	expression,’	Tehol	said	sadly.
‘That	is	too	bad,	for	you.’
‘Yes,’	Tehol	replied,	‘I	imagine—’
Theradas	struck	him	with	a	gloved	fist.
Pitching	Tehol’s	head	back,	his	nose	cracking	loudly.	He	bent	over,	both
hands	to	his	face,	then	a	foot	slammed	down	diagonally	against	his	right	shin,
snapping	both	bones.	He	fell.	A	heel	crunched	down	on	his	chest,	breaking	ribs.
Tehol	could	feel	his	body	trying	to	curl	up	as	heels	and	fists	battered	at


him.	A	foot	smashed	down	on	his	left	cheek,	crushing	bone	and	bursting	that
eye.	White	fire	blazed	in	his	brain,	swiftly	darkening	to	murky	black.
Another	kick	dislocated	his	left	shoulder.
Beneath	yet	another	heel,	his	left	elbow	was	crushed.	As	kicks	hammered
into	his	gut,	he	tried	to	draw	his	knees	up,	only	to	feel	them	stamped	on	and
broken.	Something	burst	low	in	his	gut	and	he	felt	himself	spilling	out.
Then	a	heel	landed	on	the	side	of	his	head.
	
Fifty	paces	up	the	street,	Hull	Beddict	approached.	He	saw	a	crowd	of	Tiste
Edur,	and	it	was	clear	they	were	kicking	someone	to	death.	A	sudden
uneasiness	in	his	stomach,	he	quickened	his	pace.	There	were	bodies,	he	saw,
beyond	the	circle.	A	soldier	in	the	garb	of	a	palace	guard,	the	shaft	of	a	spear
jutting	from	him.	And…an	Edur	woman.
‘Oh,	Errant,	what	has	happened	here?’
He	made	to	run—
—and	found	his	path	blocked.
A	Nerek,	and	a	moment	later	Hull	Beddict	recognized	him.	One	of	Buruk
the	Pale’s	servants.
Frowning,	wondering	how	he	had	come	to	be	here,	Hull	moved	to	step
around	the	man—who	sidestepped	once	more	to	block	him.
‘What	is	this?’
‘You	have	been	judged,	Hull	Beddict,’	the	Nerek	said.	‘I	am	sorry.’
‘Judged?	Please,	I	must—’
‘You	chose	to	walk	with	the	Tiste	Edur	emperor,’	the	Nerek	said.	‘You
chose…betrayal.’
‘An	end	to	Lether,	yes—what	of	it?	No	more	will	this	damned	kingdom
destroy	people	like	the	Nerek,	and	the	Tarthenal—’
‘We	thought	we	knew	your	heart,	Hull	Beddict,	but	now	we	see	that	it	has
turned	black.	It	is	poisoned,	because	forgiveness	is	not	within	you.’
‘Forgiveness?’	He	reached	out	to	push	the	Nerek	aside.	They’re	beating
someone.	To	death.	I	think—
From	behind,	two	knives	slid	into	his	back,	one	under	each	shoulder	blade,
angling	upward.
Arching	in	shock,	Hull	Beddict	stared	at	the	Nerek	standing	before	him,
and	saw	that	the	young	man	was	weeping.	What?	Why—
He	sank	to	his	knees,	weakness	rising	through	him,	and	the	storm	of
thoughts—the	emotions	and	desires	that	had	haunted	him	for	years—they	too
weakened,	fell	away	into	a	grey,	calm	mist.	The	mist	rising	yet	higher,	a


sudden	coldness	in	his	muscles.	It	is…it	is…so…
Hull	Beddict	pitched	forward,	onto	his	face,	but	he	never	felt	the	impact
with	the	cobbles.
	
‘Stop.	Please—’
The	Tiste	Edur	turned,	to	see	a	Letherii	step	from	where	he	had	been
hiding,	round	the	corner	of	the	warehouse.	Nondescript,	limping,	a	knout
tucked	into	a	rope	belt,	the	man	edged	forward	and	continued	in	the	trader
tongue,	‘He’s	never	hurt	no-one.	Don’t	kill	him,	please.	I	saw,	you	see.’
‘You	saw	what!’	Theradas	demanded.
‘The	woman,	she	stabbed	herself.	Look	at	the	knife,	see	for	yourself.’
Chalas	wrung	his	hands,	eyes	on	the	bleeding,	motionless	form	of	Tehol.
‘Please,	don’t	hurt	him	no	more.’
‘You	must	learn,’	Theradas	said,	baring	his	teeth.	‘We	heed	our	emperor ’s
words.	This	shall	be	a	day	of	suffering,	old	man.	Now,	leave	us,	or	invite	the
same	fate.’
Chalas	surprised	them,	lunging	forward	to	drape	himself	over	Tehol,
shifting	to	protect	as	much	of	him	as	he	could.
Midik	Buhn	laughed.
Blows	rained	down,	more	savage	than	ever,	and	it	was	not	long	before
Chalas	lost	consciousness.	A	half-dozen	more	kicks	dislodged	the	man	from
Tehol,	until	the	two	were	lying	side	by	side.	With	sudden	impatience,	Theradas
slammed	his	heel	down	on	a	head,	hard	enough	to	collapse	the	skull	and	crush
the	brain.
	
Standing	on	the	far	side	of	the	bridge,	Turudal	Brizad	felt	the	malign	sorcery
wash	over	him.	The	soldiers	barricading	the	bridge	had	died	in	the	grey
conflagration	a	moment	earlier,	and	now	it	seemed	the	terrible	sorcery	would
reach	out	into	the	rest	of	the	city.	Into	the	nearby	buildings,	and,	for	the	Errant,
enough	was	enough.
He	nudged	the	wild	power	coursing	through	those	buildings,	angling	it
ever	downward,	slipping	it	past	occupied	rooms,	downward,	past	the	hidden
tunnels	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	where	so	many	citizens	huddled,	and	into	the
insensate	mud	and	clays	of	the	long	dead	swamp.	Where	it	could	do	nothing,
and	was	slowed,	slowed,	then	trapped.
It	was	clear,	a	moment	later,	that	the	Warlock	King	had	not	detected	the


manipulation,	as	the	magic	was	surrendered,	the	poisoning	conduit	from	the
Crippled	God	closed	once	more.	Hannan	Mosag’s	flesh	would	not	suffer	much
more	of	that,	fortunately.
Not	that	it	would	matter.
He	watched	as	a	score	of	Tiste	Edur	set	off	into	the	city,	seeking,	no	doubt,
the	fleeing	woman	from	their	tribe.	But	nothing	good	would	come	of	it,	the
Errant	knew.	Indeed,	a	most	egregious	error	was	in	the	offing,	and	he	grieved
for	that.
Reaching	with	his	senses,	he	gained	a	vision	of	an	overgrown,	broken-up
yard	surrounding	a	squat	tower,	and	watched	in	wonder	and	awe	as	a	lone
figure	wove	a	deadly	dance	in	the	midst	of	five	enraged	Toblakai	gods.
Extraordinary—a	scene	the	Errant	would	never	forget.	But	it	could	not	last
much	longer,	he	knew.
Nothing	good	ever	did,	alas.
Blinking,	he	saw	that	the	Tiste	Edur	emperor	was	now	leading	his	kin
across	the	bridge.	On	their	way	to	the	Eternal	Domicile.
Turudal	Brizad	pushed	himself	into	motion	once	more.
The	Eternal	Domicile,	a	conjoining	of	destinations,	for	yet	another
sequence	of	tragic	events	to	come.	Today,	the	empire	is	reborn.	In	violence	and
blood,	as	with	all	births.	And	what,	when	this	day	is	done,	shall	we	find	lying,	in
our	lap?	Eyes	opening	onto	this	world?
The	Errant	began	walking,	staying	ahead	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	and	feeling,
deep	within	him,	the	lurching,	stumbling	measure	of	time,	the	countless
heartbeats,	merging	one	and	all—no	need,	finally,	for	a	nudge,	a	push	or	a
pull.	No	need,	it	seemed,	for	anything.	He	would	but	witness,	now.
He	hoped.
	
Seated	cross-legged	in	the	street,	the	lone	High	Mage	of	the	Crimson	Guard
present	in	this	fell	city,	Corlo	Orothos,	once	of	Unta	in	the	days	before	the
empire,	cocked	his	head	at	the	heavy,	thumping	feet	of	someone	approaching
from	behind.	He	risked	opening	his	eyes,	then	raised	a	hand	in	time	to	halt	the
newcomer.
‘Hello,	half-blood,’	he	said.	‘Have	you	come	to	worship	your	gods?’
The	giant	figure	looked	down	at	Corlo.	‘Is	it	too	late?’	he	asked.
‘No,	they’re	still	alive.	Only	one	man	opposes	them,	and	not	for	much
longer.	I’m	doing	all	I	can,	but	it’s	no	easy	thing	to	confuse	gods.’
The	Tarthenal	half-blood	frowned.	‘Do	you	know	why	we	pray	to	the
Seregahl?’


An	odd	question.	‘To	gain	their	favour?’
‘No,’	Ublala	replied,	‘we	pray	for	them	to	stay	away.	And	now,’	he	added,
‘they’re	here.	That’s	bad.’
‘Well,	what	do	you	intend	to	do	about	it?’
Ublala	squinted	down	at	Corlo,	said	nothing.
After	a	moment,	the	High	Mage	nodded.	‘Go	on,	then.’
He	watched	the	huge	man	lumber	towards	the	gateway.	Just	inside,	he
paused	beside	a	tree,	reached	up	and	broke	free	a	branch	as	thick	as	one	of
Corlo’s	thighs.	Hefting	it	in	both	hands,	the	half-blood	jogged	into	the	yard.
	
It	was	tearing	him	apart,	striving	to	burst	free	of	his	skeletal	cage,	the
minuscule,	now	terribly	abused	muscles.	In	their	journey	across	Letheras,
they’d	left	thirty	or	more	dead	Soletaken	in	their	wake.	And	six	Tiste	Edur
who’d	come	up	from	the	docks	eager	for	a	fight.
They’d	taken	wounds—no,	the	remnant	that	was	Udinaas	corrected,	I’ve
taken	wounds.	I	should	be	dead.	I’m	cut	to	pieces.	Bitten,	torn,	gouged.	But	that
damned	Wyval	won’t	surrender.	It	needs	me	still…for	a	few	moments	longer.
Through	a	red	haze,	the	old	Azath	tower	and	its	yard	came	into	view,	and	a
surge	of	eagerness	from	the	Wyval	flooded	him.
The	Master	needed	help.	All	was	not	yet	lost.
In	a	blur	of	motion,	Udinaas	was	past	the	strange	man	sitting	cross-legged
on	the	street—he	caught	the	sudden	jerk	of	surprise	from	the	man	as	they	swept
by.	A	moment	later,	plunging	through	the	gateway.
Into	the	yard.
In	time	to	see	a	mortal	Tarthenal	half-blood	rushing	to	close	on	a	fight
where	a	lone	swordsman	was	surrounded	by	the	Toblakai	gods,	moments	from
buckling	under	a	hail	of	blows.
Then,	past	them	all.
To	the	barrow	of	the	Master.	The	churned,	steaming	earth.	Diving	forward
with	a	piercing,	reptilian	scream—and	into	the	hot	darkness,	down,	clawing,
scraping—tearing	clear	from	the	mortal’s	flesh,	the	body	the	Wyval	had	used
for	so	long,	the	body	it	had	hidden	within—clambering	free	at	last,	massive,
scaled	and	sleek-hided,	talons	plunging	into	the	soil—
	
The	child	Kettle	squealed	as	the	creature,	winged	and	as	big	as	an	ox,	rushed
past	her	on	all	fours.	A	thumping	splash,	water	spraying	in	a	broad	fan	that


rose,	and	rose,	then	slapped	down	on	the	now	churning	pool.	Foam,	a	snaking
red-purple	tail	slithering	down	then	vanishing	in	the	swirling	maelstrom.
She	then	heard	a	thud	behind	her	and	spun	on	the	slick	mud	of	the	bank,	the
two	swords	still	in	her	hands—
—to	see	a	badly	torn	body,	a	man,	lying	face	down.	The	shattered	ends	of
long	bones	jutting	from	his	arms	and	legs,	blood	pulsing	slowly	from	ruptured
veins.	And,	settling	atop	him,	a	wraith,	descending	like	a	shadow	to	match	the
contorted	body	beneath	it.	A	shadowy	face	looking	up	at	Kettle,	the	rasp	of
words—
‘Child,	we	need	your	help.’
She	looked	back	over	her	shoulder—the	surface	of	the	pool	was	growing
calm	once	more.	‘Oh,	what	do	you	want	me	to	do?	It’s	all	going	wrong—’
‘Not	as	wrong	as	you	think.	This	man,	this	Letherii.	Help	him,	he’s	dying.	I
cannot	hold	him	together	much	longer.	He	is	dying,	and	he	does	not	deserve	to
die.’
She	crawled	closer.	‘What	can	I	do?’
‘The	blood	within	you,	child.	A	drop	or	two,	no	more	than	that.	The	blood,
child,	that	has	returned	you	to	life.	Please…’
‘You	are	a	ghost.	Why	would	you	have	me	do	this	for	him—and	not	for
you?’
The	wraith’s	red	eyes	thinned	as	it	studied	her.	‘Do	not	tempt	me.’
Kettle	looked	down	at	the	swords	in	her	hands.	Then	she	set	one	down	and
brought	the	freed	hand	to	the	gleaming	blue	edge	of	the	one	she	still	held.	Slid
her	palm	a	bit	along	the	edge,	then	lifted	her	hand	to	study	the	result.	A	long
line	of	blood,	a	deep,	perfect	cut.	‘Oh,	it’s	sharp.’
‘Here,	push	him	onto	his	back.	Lay	your	wounded	palm	on	his	chest.’
Kettle	moved	forward.
	
A	blow	had	broken	his	left	arm,	and	the	agony	as	Iron	Bars	dodged	around	and
between	the	bellowing	Seregahl	sent	white	flashes	through	his	brain.	Half
blinded,	he	wielded	his	battered,	blunted	sword	on	instinct	alone,	meeting	blow
after	blow—he	needed	a	moment	free,	a	few	heartbeats	in	which	to	recover,	to
clamp	down	on	the	pain—
But	he’d	run	out	of	that	time.	Another	blow	got	through,	the	strange
wooden	sword	slicing	as	if	glass-edged	into	his	left	hip.	The	leg	on	that	side
gave	out	beneath	the	biting	wound.	He	looked	up	through	sweat-stinging	eyes,
and	saw	the	one-eyed	Seregahl	towering	directly	over	him,	teeth	bared	in
triumph.


Then	a	tree	branch	struck	the	god	in	the	head.	Against	its	left	temple,	hard
enough	to	snap	the	head	right	over	to	bounce	from	the	opposite	shoulder.	The
grin	froze,	and	the	Toblakai	staggered.	A	second	impact	caught	it,	this	time
coming	from	behind,	up	into	the	back	of	the	skull,	the	branch	exploding	into
splinters.	The	god	bent	forward—
—as	a	knee	drove	up	into	its	crotch—and	forearms	hammered	its	back,
pushing	it	further	down,	the	knee	rising	again,	this	time	to	crunch	against	the
god’s	face.
The	grin,	Iron	Bars	saw	from	where	he	crouched,	was	entirely	gone	now.
The	Avowed	rolled	to	one	side	a	moment	before	the	Toblakai	landed	atop
him.	Rolled,	and	rolled,	stumbling	to	his	feet	finally	to	pivot	round.	And,	rising
to	his	name	above	the	agony	in	his	hip,	straightening.	Once	more	facing	the
Seregahl.
Where,	it	seemed,	one	of	their	own	kind	was	now	fighting	them—a	mortal
Tarthenal,	who	had	wrapped	his	huge	arms	around	one	of	the	gods	from
behind,	trapping	its	arms	to	its	sides	as	he	squeezed.	The	remaining	three	gods
had	staggered	back,	as	if	in	shock,	and	the	moment	was,	to	the	Avowed’s	eyes,
suddenly	frozen.
Two,	then	three	heartbeats.
The	cloudiness	cleared	from	the	Avowed’s	eyes.	A	flicker	of	energy
returned	to	his	exhausted	limbs.	The	pain	faded	away.
That	mortal	Tarthenal	was	moments	from	dying,	as	the	other	three	stirred
awake	and	moved	forward.
Iron	Bars	raced	to	intercept	them.
The	odds	were	getting	better.
	
Two	huddled	shapes	on	the	street.	Tiste	Edur	standing	around,	still	kicking,	still
breaking	bones.	One	stamped	down,	and	brains	sprayed	out	onto	the	cobbles.
Bugg	slowed	to	a	stagger,	his	face	twisting	with	grief,	then	rage.
He	roared.
Heads	turned.
And	the	manservant	unleashed	what	had	remained	hidden	and	quiescent
within	him	for	so	long.
Fourteen	Tiste	Edur,	standing,	all	reached	up	to	clamp	their	ears—but	the
gesture	was	never	completed,	as	thirteen	of	them	imploded,	as	if	beneath	vast
pressure,	in	horrible	contractions	of	flesh,	the	wild	spurt	of	blood	and	fluids,
skulls	collapsing	inward.
Imploded,	only	to	explode	outward	a	moment	later.	In	bloody	pieces,


spattering	the	warehouse	wall	and	out	across	the	street.
The	fourteenth	Tiste	Edur,	the	one	who	had	just	crushed	a	head	beneath	his
heel,	was	lifted	into	the	air.	Writhing,	his	eyes	bulging	horribly,	wastes
streaming	down	his	legs.
As	Bugg	stalked	forward.
Until	he	was	standing	before	Theradas	Buhn	of	the	Hiroth.	He	stared	up	at
the	warrior,	at	his	bloated	face,	at	the	agony	in	his	eyes.
Trembling,	Bugg	said,	‘You,	I	am	sending	home…not	your	home.	My
home.’	A	gesture,	and	the	Tiste	Edur	vanished.
Into	Bugg’s	warren,	away,	then	down,	down,	ever	down.
Into	depthless	darkness,	where	the	portal	opened	once	more,	flinging
Theradas	Buhn	into	icy,	black	water.
Where	the	pressure,	immense	and	undeniable,	embraced	him.
Fatally.
Bugg’s	trembling	slowed.	His	roar	had	been	heard,	he	knew.	Upon	the
other	side	of	the	world,	it	had	been	heard.	And	heads	had	swung	round.
Immortal	hearts	had	quickened.
‘No	matter,’	he	whispered.
Then	moved	forward,	down	to	kneel	beside	the	motionless	bodies.
He	gathered	one	of	those	bodies	into	his	arms.
Rose,	and	walked	away.
	
The	Eternal	Domicile.	A	title	of	such	profound	conceit,	as	thoroughly	bound
into	the	arrogance	of	the	Letherii	as	the	belief	in	their	own	immutable	destiny.
Manifest	rights	to	all	things,	to	ownership,	to	the	claiming	of	all	they
perceived,	the	unconscionable,	brazen	arrogance	of	it	all,	as	if	a	thousand	gods
stood	at	their	backs,	burdened	with	gifts	for	the	chosen.
Trull	Sengar	could	only	wonder,	what	bred	such	certainties?	What	made	a
people	so	filled	with	rectitude	and	intransigence?	Perhaps	all	that	is	needed…
is	power.	A	shroud	of	poison	filling	the	air,	seeping	into	every	pore	of	every
man,	woman	and	child.	A	poison	that	twisted	the	past	to	suit	the	mores	of	the
present,	illuminating	in	turn	an	inevitable	and	righteous	future.	A	poison	that
made	intelligent	people	blithely	disregard	the	ugly	truths	of	past	errors	in
judgement,	of	horrendous,	brutal	debacles	that	had	stained	red	the	hands	of
their	forefathers.	A	poison	that	entrenched	the	stupidity	of	dubious	traditions,
and	brought	misery	and	suffering	upon	countless	victims.
Power,	then.	The	very	same	power	we	are	about	to	embrace.	Sisters	have
mercy	upon	our	people.


The	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur	stood	before	the	grand	entrance	to	the
Eternal	Domicile.	Mottled	sword	in	his	tight,	glittering	hand.	Dusty	bearskin
riding	shoulders	grown	massively	broad	with	the	weight	of	gold.	Old	blood
staining	his	back	in	map	patterns,	as	if	he	was	redrawing	the	world.	Hair	now
long,	ragged	and	heavy	with	oily	filth.
Trull	was	standing	behind	him,	and	so	could	not	see	his	brother ’s	eyes.	But
he	knew,	should	he	look	into	them	now,	he	would	see	the	destiny	he	feared,	he
would	see	the	poison	coursing	unopposed,	and	he	would	see	the	madness	born
of	betrayal.
It	would	have	taken	little,	he	knew.	The	simple	reaching	out	for	a
nondescript,	sad-eyed	slave,	the	closing	of	hands,	to	lift	Rhulad	upright,	to
guide	him	back	into	sanity.	That,	and	nothing	more.
Rhulad	turned	to	face	them.	‘The	doors	stand	unbarred.’
Hannan	Mosag	said,	‘Someone	waits	within,	sire.	I	sense…something.’
‘What	do	you	ask	of	us,	Warlock	King?’
‘Permit	me	and	my	K’risnan	to	enter	first,	to	see	what	awaits	us.	In	the
corridor…’
Rhulad’s	eyes	narrowed,	then	he	waved	them	forward,	and	added,	‘Fear,
Trull,	Binadas,	join	us.	We	shall	follow	immediately	behind.’
Hannan	Mosag	in	the	lead,	the	K’risnan	and	the	slaves	dragging	the	two
sacks	immediately	behind	him,	then	Rhulad	and	his	brothers,	all	approached
the	doors	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.
	
Standing	just	outside	the	throne	room’s	entrance,	Brys	Beddict	saw	movement
down	the	corridor,	on	this	side	of	the	motionless	form	of	the	Ceda.	The
Champion	reached	for	his	sword,	then	let	his	hand	fall	away	as	the	First
Consort,	Turudal	Brizad,	emerged	from	the	shadows,	approaching
nonchalantly,	his	expression	calm.
‘I	did	not,’	Brys	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘expect	to	see	you	again,	First
Consort.’
Turudal’s	soft	eyes	lifted	past	Brys	to	look	into	the	throne	room	beyond.
‘Who	waits,	Champion?’
‘The	king,	his	concubine.	The	First	Eunuch	and	the	Chancellor.	And	six	of
my	guards.’
Turudal	nodded.	‘Well,	we	will	not	have	to	wait	much	longer.	The	Tiste
Edur	are	but	moments	behind	me.’
‘How	fares	the	city?’
‘There	has	been	fighting,	Brys	Beddict.	Loyal	soldiers	lie	dead	in	the


streets.	Among	them,	Moroch	Nevath.’
‘And	Gerun	Eberict?	What	of	him?’
Turudal	cocked	his	head,	then	frowned.	‘He	pursues…a	woman.’
Brys	studied	the	man.	‘Who	are	you,	Turudal	Brizad?’
The	eyes	met	his	own.	‘Today,	a	witness.	We	have	come,	after	all,	to	the
day	of	the	Seventh	Closure.	An	end,	and	a	beginning—’
Brys	raised	a	hand	to	silence	the	man,	then	took	a	step	past	him.
The	Ceda	was	stirring	in	the	hallway	beyond.	Then,	rising	to	his	feet,
adjusting	his	grimy,	creased	robes,	he	lifted	the	lenses	to	his	face	and	settled
them	in	place.
Turudal	Brizad	turned	to	join	Brys.	‘Ah,	yes.’
The	silhouettes	of	a	group	of	tall	figures	had	appeared	at	the	distant	doors,
which	were	now	open.
‘The	Ceda…’
‘He	has	done	very	well,	thus	far.’
Brys	shot	the	First	Consort	a	baffled	look.	‘What	do	you	mean?	He	has
done…nothing.’
Brows	rose.	‘No?	He	has	annihilated	the	sea-god,	the	demon	chained	by
Hannan	Mosag.	And	he	has	been	preparing	for	this	moment	for	days	now.	See
where	he	stands?	See	the	tile	he	has	painted	beneath	himself?	A	tile	from	which
all	the	power	of	the	Cedance	shall	pass,	upward,	into	his	hands.’
The	gloom	of	the	hallway	vanished,	a	white,	glowing	light	suffusing	the
dusty	air.
Revealing	the	row	of	Tiste	Edur	now	facing	the	Ceda,	less	than	fifteen
paces	between	them.
The	Edur	in	the	centre	of	the	row	spoke.	‘Ceda	Kuru	Qan.	The	kingdom
you	serve	has	fallen.	Step	aside.	The	emperor	wishes	to	claim	his	throne.’
‘Fallen?’	The	Ceda’s	voice	was	thin	in	comparison,	almost	quavering.
‘Relevant?	Not	in	the	least.	I	see	you,	Hannan	Mosag,	and	your	K’risnan.	I	feel
you	gathering	your	power.	For	your	mad	emperor	to	claim	the	throne	of
Lether,	you	shall	have	to	pass	through	me.’
‘It	is	pointless,	old	man,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘You	are	alone.	All	your
fellow	mages	are	dead.	Look	at	you.	Half	blind,	barely	able	to	stand—’
‘Seek	out	the	demon	you	chained	in	the	sea,	Warlock	King.’
From	this	distance,	Trull	could	not	make	out	Hannan	Mosag’s	expression,
but	there	was	sudden	fury	in	his	voice.	‘You	have	done	this?’
‘Letherii	are	well	versed	in	using	greed	to	lay	traps,’	Kuru	Qan	said.
‘You’ll	not	have	its	power	today,	nor	ever	again.’
‘For	that,’	the	Warlock	King	said	in	a	growl,	‘you	will—’


The	white	mist	exploded,	the	roar	shaking	ceiling	and	walls,	and	thundered
forward,	striking	the	Tiste	Edur	warlocks.
	
Ten	paces	behind	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan,	Trull	Sengar	cried	out,
ducking	away	at	the	blazing	concussion,	his	brothers	following	suit.	He	heard
screams,	cut	short,	then	a	body	skidded	across	the	polished	floor	to	thud
against	Trull’s	feet,	knocking	him	down—
He	found	himself	staring	at	a	K’risnan,	burnt	beyond	recognition,
blackened	slime	melting	away	from	split	bones.	Rising	to	his	hands	and	knees,
Trull	looked	up.
Only	two	Edur	remained	standing,	battling	the	raging	sorcery	of	the	Ceda.
Hannan	Mosag	and	Binadas.	The	other	K’risnan	were	all	dead,	as	were	the	four
slaves	who	had	been	crouching	beside	the	two	sacks.
As	Trull	stared,	he	saw	Binadas	flung	to	the	ground	as	if	by	a	thousand
fists	of	light.	Blood	sprayed—
Then	Fear	was	diving	forward,	skidding	on	the	bucking	tiles	to	within
reach	of	his	brother.	Hands	closed	on	a	wrist	and	an	ankle,	then	Fear	was
dragging	Binadas	back,	away	from	the	conflagration.
Hannan	Mosag	bellowed.	Swirling	grey	tendrils	sprang	up	from	the	floor,
entwining	the	raging	motes	of	fire.	A	blinding	detonation—
Then	darkness	once	more,	slowly	giving	way	to	gloom.
Hannan	Mosag,	standing	alone	now,	facing	the	Ceda.
A	heartbeat—
Kuru	Qan	struck	again,	a	moment	before	Hannan	Mosag’s	own	attack.	The
two	powers	collided	three	paces	in	front	of	the	Warlock	King—
—and	Trull	saw	Hannan	Mosag	stagger,	sheathed	in	blood,	his	hands
reaching	back,	groping,	the	left	one	landing	atop	one	of	the	sacks	and
clutching	tight.	The	other	hand	then	found	the	other	and	grasped	hold.	The
Warlock	King	steadied	himself,	then	began	to	straighten	once	more	against	the
onslaught.
	
The	sorcery	pouring	from	the	Ceda	had	twisted	the	marble	walls,	until	they
began	to	bleed	white	liquid.	The	ceiling	overhead	had	sagged,	its	paints
scorched	away,	its	surfaces	polished	and	slick.	Brys	had	stared,	disbelieving,	as
the	magic	swatted	away	whatever	defensive	spells	the	K’risnan	had	raised
before	themselves,	swatted	it	away	in	an	instant,	to	rush	in	and	slaughter	them.


Against	Hannan	Mosag	himself,	it	battered	again	and	again,	driving	ever
closer.
Then	the	Warlock	King	riposted,	and	the	pressure	in	that	hallway	pushed
Brys	and	Turudal	back	a	step,	then	two.
All	at	once,	the	two	battling	powers	annihilated	each	other	in	a	flash,	the
thunder	of	the	detonation	sending	cracks	through	the	floor,	bucking	tiles	into
the	air—everywhere	but	where	the	two	sorcerors	stood.
Dusty	silence.
The	marble	columns	to	either	side	were	burning	in	patches,	melting	from
the	top	down	like	massive	tallow	candles.	Overhead,	the	ceiling	groaned,	as	if
moments	from	collapse.
‘Now,’	Turudal	Brizad	hoarsely	whispered,	‘we	will	see	the	measure	of
Hannan	Mosag’s	desperation…’
The	sorceries	roared	to	life	once	again,	and	Brys	saw	the	Warlock	King
stagger.
The	Ceda,	Kuru	Qan,	the	small,	ancient	man,	stood	unscathed,	and	the
magic	raging	from	him	in	wave	after	wave	seemed	to	Brys	to	be	that	of	a	god.
The	Warlock	King	would	not	survive	this.	And,	once	he	fell,	this	ancient,
primal	sorcery	would	sweep	out,	taking	the	emperor	and	his	kin,	devouring
them	one	and	all.	Outward,	into	the	city.	An	entire	people,	the	Tiste	Edur,	would
be	annihilated—Brys	could	sense	its	hunger,	its	outrage,	its	cold	lust	for
vengeance—this	was	the	power	of	the	Letherii,	the	Cedance,	the	voice	of
destiny,	a	thing	terrible	beyond	comprehension—
	
Trull	saw	the	Warlock	King	steady	himself,	his	hands	gripping	the	sacks,	and
power	began	to	flow	from	them,	up	his	arms,	as	he	began,	slowly,	to	push	back
the	Ceda’s	attack.
Those	arms	twisted,	grew	into	horrific,	misshapen	appendages.	Hannan
Mosag’s	torso	began	to	bend,	the	spine	curving,	writhing	like	a	snake	on	hot
stones,	new	muscles	rising,	knobs	of	bone	pushing	at	the	skin.	He	shrieked	as
the	power	burgeoned	through	him.
A	grey	wave	rising,	battering	at	the	white	fire,	tearing	its	edges,	pushing
harder,	filling	half	the	long,	colonnaded	hallway,	closing	on	the	Ceda,	who
stood	unmoving,	head	tilted	up,	the	strange	lenses	flashing	before	his	eyes.
Standing,	as	if	studying	the	storm	clawing	towards	him.
	


Brys	stared	in	horror	as	the	foul	sorcery	of	the	Edur	edged	ever	closer	to	the
Ceda,	towering	over	the	small	man.	He	saw	a	nearby	column	turn	porous,	then
crumble	to	dust.	A	section	of	the	ceiling	it	had	been	supporting	collapsed
downward,	only	to	vanish	in	a	cloudy	haze	and	land	in	a	thud	of	billowing	dust.
Kuru	Qan	was	looking	up	at	the	raging	wall	looming	over	him.
Brys	saw	him	cock	his	head,	the	slightest	of	gestures.
A	renewed	burst	of	white	fire,	expanding	outward	from	where	he	stood,
surging	up	and	outward,	hammering	into	the	grey	wall.
Driving	fissures	through	it,	tearing	enormous	pieces	away	to	whip	like
rent	sails	up	towards	the	malformed	ceiling.
Brys	heard	the	Warlock	King’s	shriek,	as	the	white	flames	roared	towards
him.
	
Trull	felt	himself	dragged	to	his	feet.	He	turned,	stared	into	Fear ’s	face.	His
brother	was	shouting	something—
—but	the	Warlock	King	was	failing.	Crumbling	beneath	the	onslaught.
Whatever	energies	he	had	drawn	upon	from	what	was	hidden	within	the	sacks
were	ebbing.	Insufficient	to	counter	the	Ceda.	The	Warlock	King	was	about	to
die—and	with	him—all	of	us…
‘Trull!’	Fear	shook	him.	‘Along	the	wall.’	He	pointed.	‘There,	edge
forward.	For	a	throw—’
A	throw?	He	stared	at	the	spear	in	his	hands,	the	Blackwood	glistening	with
beads	of	red	sweat.
‘From	the	shadows,	Trull,	behind	that	pillar!	From	the	shadows,	Trull!’
It	was	pointless.	Worse,	he	did	not	want	to	even	try.	What	if	he	succeeded?
What	would	be	won?
‘Trull!	Do	this	or	we	all	die!	Mother,	Father—Mayen—her	child!	All	the
children	of	the	Edur!’
Trull	stared	into	Fear ’s	eyes,	and	did	not	recognize	what	he	saw	in	them.
His	brother	shook	him	again,	then	pushed	him	along	the	wall,	into	the	bathing
heat	of	the	sorcery	battering	down	at	Hannan	Mosag,	then	behind	a	friable
column	of	what	had	once	been	solid	marble.
Into	cool	shadow.	Absurdly	cool	shadow.	Trull	stumbled	forward	at	a	final
push	from	his	brother.	He	was	brought	up	against	a	warped,	rippled	wall—and
could	see,	now,	the	Ceda.	Less	than	seven	paces	distant.	Head	tilted	upward,
watching	his	assault	on	the	Warlock	King’s	failing	defences.
Tears	blurred	Trull’s	eyes.	He	did	not	want	to	do	this.	But	they	will	kill	us
all.	Every	one	of	us,	leaving	not	a	single	Tiste	Edur	alive.	I	know	this.	In	my


heart	I	know	this.	They	will	take	our	lands,	our	riches.	They	will	sow	salt	on	our
burial	grounds:	They	will	sweep	us	into	history’s	forgotten	worlds.	I…I	know
this.
He	raised	his	spear,	balanced	now	in	his	right	hand.	Was	still	for	a	moment,
breath	held,	then	two	quick	strides,	arm	flashing	forward,	the	weapon	flying
straight	and	true.
Piercing	the	Ceda	in	his	side,	just	below	his	left	ribs,	its	solid	weight	and
the	momentum	from	Trull’s	arm	driving	the	point	deep.
The	Ceda	spun	with	the	impact,	left	leg	buckling,	and	fell—away	from	the
painted	tile—
—that	suddenly	shattered.
The	white	fire	vanished,	and	darkness	swept	in	from	all	sides.
	
Numbed,	Brys	stepped	forward—
—and	was	stayed	by	the	hand	of	Turudal	Brizad.	‘No,	Champion.	He’s
gone.’
The	Ceda.	Kuru	Qan.	My	friend…
	
Kettle	sat	in	the	mud,	staring	down	at	the	man’s	face.	It	looked	to	be	a	kind	face,
especially	with	the	eyes	closed	in	sleep.	The	scars	were	fading,	all	across	his
lean,	tanned	body.	Her	blood	had	done	that.	She	had	been	dead,	once,	and	now
she	had	given	life.
‘You’re	a	strange	one,’	the	wraith	whispered	from	where	it	crouched	by	the
water.
‘I	am	Kettle.’
A	grunted	laugh.	‘And	what	boils	within	you,	I	wonder?
‘You,’	she	said,	‘are	more	than	just	a	ghost.’
‘Yes.’	Amused.	‘I	am	Wither.	A	good	name,	don’t	you	think?	I	was	Tiste
Andii,	once,	long,	long	ago.	I	was	murdered,	along	with	all	of	my	kin.	Well,
those	of	us	that	survived	the	battle,	that	is.’
‘Why	are	you	here,	Wither?’
‘I	await	my	lord,	Kettle.’	The	wraith	suddenly	rose—she	had	not	known
how	tall	it	was	before.	‘And	now…he	comes.’
An	up-rush	of	muddy	water,	and	a	gaunt	figure	rose,	white-skinned	as	a
blood-drained	corpse,	long	pale	hair	plastered	across	its	lean	face.	Coughing,
pulling	itself	clear,	crawling	onto	the	bank.


‘The	swords,’	he	gasped.
Kettle	hurried	over	to	him	and	pushed	the	weapons	into	his	long-fingered
hands.	He	used	them,	points	down,	to	help	himself	to	his	feet.	Tall,	she	saw,
shrinking	back,	taller	even	than	the	wraith.	And	such	cold,	cold	eyes,	deep	red.
‘You	said	you	would	help	us,’	she	said,	cowering	beneath	his	gaze.
‘Help?’
The	wraith	knelt	before	his	lord.	‘Silchas	Ruin,	I	was	once	Killanthir,
Third	High	Mage	of	the	Sixth	Cohort—’
‘I	remember	you,	Killanthir.’
‘I	have	chosen	the	new	name	of	Wither,	my	lord.’
‘As	you	like.’
The	wraith	glanced	up.	‘Where	is	the	Wyval?’
‘I	fear	he	will	not	survive,	but	he	keeps	her	occupied.	A	noble	beast.’
‘Please,’	Kettle	whimpered,	‘they’re	out.	They	want	to	kill	me—you
promised—’
‘My	lord,’	Wither	said,	‘I	would	help	the	Wyval.	Together,	we	can	perhaps
succeed	in	driving	her	deep.	Even	in	binding	her	once	again.	If	you	would	give
me	leave…’
Silchas	Ruin	was	silent	for	a	moment,	staring	down	at	the	kneeling	wraith.
Then	he	said,	‘As	you	like.’
Wither	bowed	his	head,	paused	to	glance	over	at	Kettle,	and	said,	‘Leave
the	Letherii	to	me.	He	will	not	awaken	for	some	time.’	Then	the	wraith	flowed
down	into	the	swirling	water.
Silchas	Ruin	drew	a	deep	breath,	and	looked	down	at	the	swords	in	his
hands	for	the	first	time.	‘Strange,	these.	Yet	I	sense	the	mortal	chose	well.
Child,	get	behind	me.’	He	regarded	her,	then	nodded.	‘It	is	time	to	fulfil	my
promise.’
	
Corlo	had	no	idea	what	would	come	of	this.	An	Avowed	could	indeed	die,	if
sufficiently	damaged.	It	was,	he	believed,	a	matter	of	will	as	much	as	anything
else.	And	he	had	known	Iron	Bars	for	a	long	time,	although	not	as	long	as	he
had	known	other	of	the	Avowed.	To	his	mind,	however,	there	was	no	other	who
could	compare	with	Iron	Bars,	when	it	came	to	sheer	will.
The	High	Mage	was	exhausted,	used	up.	No	longer	could	he	deftly
manipulate	the	four	remaining	gods,	although,	luckily,	one	of	those	was	in
enough	trouble	all	on	its	own,	with	a	crazed	Tarthenal	seemingly	doing	the
impossible—squeezing	the	very	life	out	of	it.	Talk	about	stubborn.
He	had	been	beaten	on,	again	and	again,	yet	he	would	not	relax	his	deadly


embrace.	Iron	Bars	had	fought	brilliantly,	distracting	the	remaining	three
repeatedly,	sufficient	to	keep	the	Tarthenal	alive,	but	the	Avowed	was	very
nearly	done.	Corlo	had	never	before	seen	such	fighting,	had	never	before
witnessed	the	fullest	measure	of	this	Avowed’s	ability.	It	had	been	said,	by
Guardsmen	who	would	know,	that	he	was	nearly	a	match	to	Skinner.	And	now
Corlo	believed	it.
He	was	more	than	a	little	startled	when	two	corpses	walked	past	him
towards	the	gateway,	one	of	them	clawing	the	air	and	hissing.
They	halted	at	the	entrance	to	the	yard,	and	he	heard	the	woman	swear	with
admirable	inventiveness,	then	say,	‘I	don’t	know	how	we	can	help	them.	Oh,
Ublala,	you	big,	stupid	fool.’
The	other	said,	‘We	must	attack,	Shurq	Elalle.	I	have	fangs	and	talons,	you
know.’
‘Well,	go	on	then.’
Shurq	Elalle?	The	captain	of	the	ship	we’ve	signed	on	with?	Our…
employer?	Corlo	pried	his	legs	loose	from	their	crossed	position,	wincing	in
pain,	and	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.	‘Hey,	you.’
Shurq	Elalle,	standing	alone	now,	slowly	turned.	‘Are	you	addressing	me?’
Corlo	hobbled	over.	‘Corlo,	ma’am.	Crimson	Guard.	We	signed	on	with
you—’
‘We?’
‘Yes,	the	one	helping	your	big,	stupid	friend.	That’s	Iron	Bars,	my
commander.’
‘You’re	supposed	to	be	waiting	onboard!’
He	blinked.
She	scowled.	‘Your	commander	is	about	to	die.’
‘I	know—wait—’	He	stepped	past	her,	onto	the	track.	‘Wait,	something’s
coming—quick!’	He	ran	into	the	yard,	Shurq	Elalle	following.
	
The	Toblakai	in	the	Tarthenal’s	arms	sagged,	and	Iron	Bars	heard	the	cracking
of	ribs—a	moment	before	one	of	the	gods	slipped	past	the	Avowed	and
slammed	the	side	of	his	wooden	sword	into	the	Tarthenal’s	head.	The	huge
man	toppled,	dragging	down	with	him	the	dead	god	in	his	arms.
Stunned,	the	Tarthenal	tried	feebly	to	extricate	himself	from	the	corpse.
With	the	last	of	his	failing	strength,	Iron	Bars	leapt	over	to	position
himself	above	him,	arriving	in	time	to	deflect	a	sword-blow	and	counter	with	a
slash	that	forced	the	attacker	back	a	step.	From	the	right,	another	lunged,	then
spun	away	of	its	own	accord,	wheeling	towards	a	thunderous	concussion	from


a	nearby	barrow.
Where	a	tall,	pale	figure	strode	into	view	through	a	cloud	of	steam,	a
sword	in	each	hand.
The	Avowed,	momentarily	distracted,	did	not	even	see	the	sword-blade	that
slipped	over	his	guard	and,	deflected	at	the	last	moment	by	clipping	the	hilt	of
his	sword,	slammed	flat	like	a	paddle	into	his	right	shoulder,	breaking
everything	it	could.	The	impact	sent	him	flying,	crashing	down	into	the	earth,
weapon	flying	from	a	senseless	hand.	He	ended	up	lying	on	his	back,	staring
up	through	straggly	black	tree	branches.	Too	hurt	to	move.	Too	tired	to	care.
From	somewhere	to	his	right	he	heard	fighting,	then	a	grunting	bellow	that
sounded	a	lot	like	a	death-cry.	A	Toblakai	staggered,	almost	stumbling	over
Iron	Bars,	and	the	Avowed’s	eyes	widened	upon	seeing	blood	spurting	from
two	stabs	in	the	god’s	neck,	and	a	man	gnawing	on	its	left	calf,	being	dragged
along	by	its	teeth,	its	taloned	hands	clawing	up	the	god’s	thigh.
Well,	he’d	seen	stranger	things,	he	supposed—no,	not	a	chance	of	that—
The	ground	shook	as	another	body	thumped	to	the	ground.	A	moment	later,
there	was	another	dying	groan.
Then	footsteps	slowly	approached	Iron	Bars	where	he	lay,	staring	up	at	the
sky.	A	shadow	fell	over	him.	The	Avowed	blinked,	and	found	himself	looking
up	at	a	pallid,	lean	face,	and	two	red,	very	red,	eyes.
‘You	did	passably	well,’	the	stranger	said.
‘And	my	Tarthenal	friend?’
‘Struck	in	the	skull.	He’ll	be	fine,	since	I	doubt	there’s	much	inside	it.’	A
pause,	then,	‘Why	are	you	still	lying	there?’
	
Dust	and	smoke	drifted	out	from	the	dark	corridor.	Turudal	Brizad	had	drawn
Brys	back	into	the	throne	room,	and	the	Champion	now	stood	in	the	clear
space	before	the	dais.
From	the	throne	behind	him	came	a	weary	voice.	‘Finadd?	The	Ceda…’
Brys	simply	shook	his	head,	unable	to	speak,	struggling	to	push	aside	his
grief.
From	the	gloom	of	the	corridor,	there	was	silence.	Heavy,	ominous.
Brys	slowly	drew	out	his	sword.
A	sound.	The	grate	of	footsteps	dragging	through	dust	and	rubble,	the
scrape	of	a	sword-tip,	and	a	strange	series	of	dull	clicks.
The	footsteps	halted.
Then,	a	coin.	The	snap	of	its	bounce—
—rolling	slowly	into	the	throne	room.


Brys	watched	it	arc	a	lazy,	curling	path	over	the	tiles.	Gold,	blotched	with
dried	blood.
Rolling,	tilting,	then	wobbling	to	a	stop.
The	sounds	resumed	from	the	corridor,	and	a	moment	later	a	hulking
figure	shambled	out	from	the	shadows	and	roiling	dust.
No-one	spoke	in	the	throne	room	as	the	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur	entered.
Three	steps,	then	four,	then	five,	until	he	was	almost	within	sword-reach	of	the
Champion.	Behind	him,	Hannan	Mosag,	almost	unrecognizable,	so	twisted	and
bent	and	broken	was	the	Warlock	King.	Two	more	Edur	warriors,	their	faces
taut	with	distress,	appeared	in	Hannan	Mosag’s	wake,	dragging	two	sacks.
Brys	spared	the	others	the	briefest	of	glances,	noting	the	blood-smeared
spear	in	the	right	hand	of	one	of	the	warriors.	The	one	who	killed	the	Ceda.
Then	he	fixed	his	attention	once	more	on	the	emperor.	The	sword	was	too
large	for	him.	He	walked	as	if	in	pain.	Spasms	flickered	across	his	coinstudded	face.	His	hooded	eyes	glittered	as	he	stared	past	Brys…to	the	throne,
and	the	king	seated	upon	it.
A	racking	cough	from	Hannan	Mosag	as	he	sagged	to	a	kneeling	position,
a	gasp,	and,	finally,	words.	‘King	Ezgara	Diskanar.	I	have	something…to	show
you.	A…gift.’	He	lifted	a	mangled	hand,	the	effort	sending	a	shudder	through
him,	and	gestured	behind	him.
The	two	warriors	glanced	at	each	other,	both	uncertain.
The	Warlock	King	grimaced.	‘The	sacks.	Untie	them.	Show	the	king	what
lies	within	them.’	Another	hacking	cough,	a	bubbling	of	pink	froth	at	the
corners	of	Hannan	Mosag’s	mouth.
The	warriors	worked	at	the	knotted	ropes,	the	one	on	the	left	pulling	the
strands	loose	a	moment	before	the	other	one.	Drawing	the	leather	mouth	open.
The	Edur,	seeing	what	was	within,	suddenly	recoiled,	and	Brys	saw	horror	on
the	warrior ’s	face.
A	moment	later	the	other	one	cried	out	and	stepped	back.
‘Show	them!’	screamed	the	Warlock	King.
At	that,	even	the	emperor	turned,	startled.
The	warrior	on	the	left	drew	a	deep,	ragged	breath,	then	stepped	forward
until	he	could	grip	the	edges	of	the	sack.	With	strangely	gentle	motions,	he
tugged	the	leather	down.
A	Letherii,	bound	tight.	Blistered,	suppurating	skin,	fingers	worn	to	stubs,
lumps	and	growths	everywhere	on	his	naked	body.	He	had	lost	most	of	his	hair,
although	some	long	strands	remained.	Blinking	in	the	light,	he	tried	lifting	his
head,	but	the	malformed	tendons	and	ligaments	in	his	neck	forced	the	motion
to	one	side.	The	lower	jaw	settled	and	a	thread	of	drool	slipped	down	from	the


gaping	mouth.
Then	Brys	recognized	him.
Prince	Quillas—
A	cry	from	the	king,	a	terrible,	animal	wail.
The	other	sack	was	pulled	down.	The	queen,	her	flesh	as	ruined	as	that	of
her	son.	From	her,	however,	came	a	wet	cackle	as	if	to	answer	her	husband’s
cry,	then	a	tumbling	of	nonsensical	words,	a	rush	of	madness	grating	out	past
her	swollen,	broken	lips.	Yet,	in	her	eyes,	fierce	awareness.
Hannan	Mosag	laughed.	‘I	used	them.	Against	the	Ceda.	I	used	them.
Letherii	blood,	Letherii	flesh.	Look	upon	the	three	of	us.	See,	dear	king,	see	the
glory	of	what	is	to	come.
The	emperor	shrieked,	‘Take	them	away!	Fear!	Trull!	Take	them	away!’
The	two	warriors	closed	on	the	huddled	figures,	drawing	the	sacks	up	to
what	passed	for	shoulders,	then	dragging	the	queen	and	her	son	back	towards
the	corridor.
Trembling,	the	emperor	faced	the	king	once	more.	He	opened	his	mouth	to
say	something,	winced,	then	shut	it	again.	Then	he	slowly	straightened,	and
spoke	in	a	rasping	voice.	‘We	are	Rhulad	Sengar,	emperor	of	the	Tiste	Edur.
And	now,	of	Lether.	Yield	the	throne,	Diskanar.	Yield…to	us.’
From	Brys’s	left	the	First	Eunuch	strode	forward,	a	wine	jug	and	two
goblets	in	his	hands.	He	ascended	the	dais,	offered	Ezgara	one	of	the	goblets.
Then	he	poured	out	the	wine.
Bemused,	the	Champion	took	a	step	to	his	right	and	half	turned	to	regard
his	king.
Who	calmly	drank	down	the	wine	in	three	quick	swallows.	At	some	time
earlier	the	crown	had	been	placed	on	his	brow	once	again.	Nisall	was	standing
just	behind	the	throne,	her	eyes	narrowed	on	the	First	Eunuch,	who	had
finished	his	own	wine	and	was	stepping	back	down	from	the	dais,	making	his
way	to	stand	near	the	Chancellor	at	the	far	wall.
Ezgara	Diskanar	fixed	dull	eyes	on	Brys.	‘Stand	aside,	Champion.	Do	not
die	this	day.’
‘I	cannot	do	as	you	ask,	my	king,’	Brys	said.	‘As	you	well	know.’
A	weary	nod,	then	Ezgara	looked	away.	‘Very	well.’
Nifadas	spoke.	‘Champion.	Show	these	savages	the	measure	of	a	Letherii
swordsman.	The	final	act	of	our	kingdom	on	this	dark	day.’
Brys	frowned,	then	faced	Rhulad	Sengar.	‘You	must	fight	me,	Emperor.	Or
call	upon	more	of	your	warriors	to	cut	us	down.’	A	glance	at	the	kneeling
Hannan	Mosag.	‘I	believe	your	sorcery	is	done	for	now.’
Rhulad	sneered.	‘Sorcery?	We	would	not	so	discard	this	opportunity,


Champion.	No,	we	will	fight,	the	two	of	us.’	He	stepped	back	and	raised	the
mottled	sword.	‘Come.	We	have	lessons	for	one	another.’
Brys	did	not	reply.	He	waited.
The	emperor	attacked.	Surprisingly	fast,	a	half-whirl	of	the	blade	high,
then	a	broken-timed	diagonal	downward	slash	intended	to	meet	the	Champion’s
sword	and	drive	it	down	to	the	tiles.
Brys	matched	the	momentary	hesitation	and	leaned	back,	drawing	his
sword	round	as	he	side-stepped	to	his	right.	Blade	now	resting	on	the	top	of
Rhulad’s	own	as	it	flashed	downward,	the	Champion	darted	the	tip	up	to	the
emperor ’s	left	forearm	and	sliced	through	a	tendon	near	the	elbow.
He	leapt	back,	thrusting	low	as	he	was	pulling	away,	to	push	the	tip	of	his
sword	between	the	tendon	and	kneecap	of	Rhulad’s	left	leg.
Snip.
The	emperor	stumbled	forward,	almost	to	the	edge	of	the	dais,	then,
astonishingly,	righted	himself	to	lunge	in	a	two-handed	thrust.
The	mottled	blade	seemed	to	dance	of	its	own	accord,	evading	two	distinct
parries	from	Brys,	and	the	Champion	only	managed	to	avoid	the	thrust	by
pushing	the	heavy	blade	aside	with	his	left	hand.
The	two	lower	fingers	spun	away	from	that	hand,	even	as	Brys	backpedalled	until	he	was	in	the	centre	of	the	space	once	more,	this	time	with
Rhulad	between	himself	and	the	king	on	his	throne.
Ezgara	was	smiling.
As	Rhulad	wheeled	to	face	him	once	more,	his	weapon	dipping	low,	Brys
attacked.
Leading	foot	lifting	high,	stamping	down	on	the	emperor ’s	wavering
sword-blade—not	a	perfect	contact,	but	sufficient	to	bat	it	momentarily	away—
as	he	drove	his	point	into	Rhulad’s	right	kneecap.	Slicing	downward	from	the
upper	edge.	Biting	deep	into	the	bone	near	the	bottom	edge.	Twisting
withdrawal,	pulling	the	patella	out	through	the	cut.
A	shriek,	as	Rhulad’s	leg	shot	out	to	the	side.
The	kneecap	still	speared	on	Brys’s	sword-point,	he	darted	in	again	as	the
emperor	drove	his	own	sword	down	and	to	the	left	in	an	effort	to	stay	upright,
and	slashed	lightly	across	the	tendons	of	the	Edur ’s	right	arm,	just	above	the
elbow.
Rhulad	fell	back,	thudded	hard	on	the	tiles,	coins	snapping	free.
The	sword	should	have	dropped	from	the	Edur ’s	hands,	yet	it	remained
firm	within	two	clenched	fists.
But	Rhulad	could	do	nothing	with	it.
Trying	to	sit	up,	eyes	filling	with	rage,	he	strained	to	lift	the	weapon.


Brys	struck	the	floor	with	his	sword-tip,	dislodging	the	patella,	stepped
close	to	the	emperor	and	severed	the	tendons	and	ligaments	in	the	Edur ’s	right
shoulder,	sweeping	the	blade	across	to	slice	a	neck	tendon,	then,	point
hovering	a	moment,	thrusting	down	to	disable	the	left	shoulder	in	an	identical
manner.	Standing	over	the	helpless	emperor,	Brys	methodically	cut	through
both	tendons	above	Rhulad’s	heels,	then	sliced	diagonally	across	his	victim’s
stomach,	parting	the	wall	of	muscles	there.
A	kick	sent	Rhulad	over,	exposing	his	back.
Slashes	above	each	shoulder	blade,	two	more	neck	tendons.	Lower	back,
ensuring	that	the	sheets	of	muscle	there	fully	separated,	rolling	up	beneath	the
coin-studded	skin.	Back	of	shoulders,	coins	dancing	away	to	bounce	across	the
floor.
Brys	then	stepped	back.	Lowered	his	sword.
Rebounding	shrieks	from	the	emperor	lying	face	down	on	the	floor,	limbs
already	curling	of	their	own	accord,	muscles	drawing	up.	The	only	movement
in	the	chamber.
A	slow	settling	of	dust	from	the	corridor.
Then,	from	one	of	the	Edur	warriors,	‘Sisters	take	me…’
King	Ezgara	Diskanar	sighed,	leaned	drunkenly	forward,	then	said,	‘Kill
him.	Kill	him.’
Brys	looked	over.	‘No,	sire.’
Disbelief	on	the	old	man’s	face.	‘What?’
‘The	Ceda	was	specific	on	this,	sire.	I	must	not	kill	him.’
‘He	will	bleed	out,’	Nifadas	said,	his	words	strangely	dull.
But	Brys	shook	his	head.	‘He	will	not.	I	opened	no	major	vessels,	First
Eunuch.’
The	Edur	warrior	named	Trull	then	spoke.	‘No	major	vessels…how—how
could	you	know?	It	is	not	possible…so	fast…’
Brys	said	nothing.
The	king	suddenly	slumped	back	on	his	throne.
Rhulad’s	shrieks	had	fallen	away,	and	now	he	wept.	Heaving,	helpless	cries.
A	sudden	gasp,	then,	‘Brothers!	Kill	me!’
Trull	Sengar	recoiled	at	Rhulad’s	command.	He	shook	his	head,	looked
across	at	Fear,	and	saw	a	terrible	realization	in	his	brother ’s	eyes.
Rhulad	was	not	healing.	Leaking	blood	onto	the	polished	tiles.	His	body…
destroyed.	And	he	was	not	healing.	Trull	turned	to	Hannan	Mosag,	and	saw	the
ugly	gleam	of	satisfaction	in	the	Warlock	King’s	eyes.
‘Hannan	Mosag,’	Trull	whispered.
‘I	cannot.	His	flesh,	Trull	Sengar,	is	beyond	me.	Beyond	all	of	us.	Only	the


sword…and	only	by	the	sword.	You,	Trull	Sengar.	Or	Fear.’	A	weak	wave	of
one	hand.	‘Oh,	call	in	someone	else,	if	you’ve	not	the	courage…’
Courage.
Fear	grunted	at	that.	As	if	punched	in	the	chest.
Trull	studied	him—but	Fear	had	not	moved,	not	a	single	step.	He	dragged
his	eyes	away,	fixed	them	once	more	on	Rhulad.
‘My	brothers.’	Rhulad	wept	where	he	lay.	‘Kill	me.	One	of	you.	Please.’
The	Champion—that	extraordinary,	appalling	swordsman—walked	over	to
where	the	wine	jug	sat	near	the	foot	of	the	throne.	The	king	looked	half	asleep,
indifferent,	his	face	flushed	and	slack.	Trull	drew	a	deep	breath.	He	saw	the
First	Eunuch,	sitting	on	the	floor	with	his	back	to	the	wall.	Another	man,
elderly,	stood	near	Nifadas,	hands	to	his	eyes—a	posture	both	strange	and
pathetic.	The	woman	standing	behind	the	throne	was	backing	away,	as	if	in
sudden	realization	of	something.	There	had	been	another	man	young,
handsome,	but	it	seemed	he	had	vanished.
Along	the	walls,	the	six	palace	guards	had	all	drawn	their	weapons	and
held	them	across	their	chest,	a	silent	salute	to	the	King’s	Champion.	A	salute
Trull	wanted	to	match.	His	gaze	returned	once	more	to	Brys.	So	modest	in
appearance	so…his	face.	Familiar…Hull	Beddict.	So	like	Hull	Beddict.	Yes,	his
brother.	The	youngest.	He	watched	the	Letherii	pour	wine	from	the	jug	into	the
goblet	the	king	had	used	earlier.
Sisters,	this	Champion—what	has	he	done?	He	has	given	us	this…this
answer.	This…solution.
Rhulad	screamed.	‘Fear!’
Hannan	Mosag	coughed,	then	said,	‘He	is	gone,	Emperor.’
Trull	spun	round,	looked	about.	Gone?	No—‘Where?	Hannan	Mosag,
where—’
‘He…walked	away.’	The	Warlock	King’s	smile	was	bloodstained.	‘Just
that,	Trull	Sengar.	Walked.	You	understand,	now,	don’t	you?’
‘To	call	the	others,	to	bring	them	here…’
‘No,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘I	do	not	think	so.’
Rhulad	whimpered,	then	snapped,	‘Trull!	I	command	you!	Your	emperor
commands	you!	Stab	me	with	your	spear.	Stab	me!’
Tears	filled	Trull’s	eyes.	And	how	shall	I	look	upon	him…now?	How?	As
my	emperor,	or	as	my	brother?	He	tottered,	almost	collapsing	as	anguish
washed	through	him.	Fear.	You	have	left.	Left	us.	Me,	with…this.
‘Brother!	Please!’
From	the	entrance	came	a	low	cackle.
Trull	turned,	saw	the	bound	forms	of	the	queen	and	the	prince,	leaning


against	the	wall	like	two	obscene	trophies.	The	sound	was	coming	from	the
queen,	and	he	saw	a	glitter	from	her	eyes.
Something—something	else—there’s	more	here…
He	turned.	Watched	as	the	Champion	straightened,	goblet	in	his	hand.
Watched,	as	the	man	lifted	it	to	his	lips.
Trull’s	gaze	flicked	to	the	king.	To	that	half-lidded	stare.	The	senseless
eyes.	The	Edur ’s	head	snapped	round,	to	where	the	First	Eunuch	sat.	Chin	on
chest,	motionless.
‘No!’
As	the	Champion	drank,	head	tilting	back.	Two	swallows,	then	three.
Lowering	the	cup,	he	turned	to	regard	Trull.	Frowned.	‘You	had	better	leave,’
he	said.	‘Drag	your	warlock	with	you.	Approach	the	emperor	and	I	will	kill
you.’
Too	late.	All…too	late.	‘What—what	do	you	intend?’
The	Champion	looked	down	at	Rhulad.	‘We	will…take	him	somewhere.
You	will	not	find	him,	Edur.’
The	queen	cackled	again,	clearly	startling	the	swordsman.
‘It	is	too	late,’	Trull	said.	‘For	you,	in	any	case.	If	you	have	any	mercy	in
you,	Champion,	best	send	your	guards	away	now.	And	have	them	take	the
woman	with	them.	My	kin	will	be	here	at	any	moment.’	His	gaze	fell	to	Rhulad.
‘The	emperor	is	for	the	Edur	to	deal	with.’
The	quizzical	expression	in	the	Champion’s	face	deepened.	Then	he
blinked,	shook	his	head.	‘What…what	do	you	mean?	I	see	that	you	will	not	kill
your	brother.	And	he	must	die,	mustn’t	he?	To	heal.	To…return.’
‘Yes.	Champion,	I	am	sorry.	I	was	too	late	to	warn	you.’
The	swordsman	sagged	suddenly,	and	he	threw	a	bloody	hand	out	to	the
edge	of	the	throne	for	balance.	The	sword,	still	in	the	other	hand,	wavered,	then
dipped	until	the	point	touched	the	floor.	‘What—what—’
Trull	said	nothing.
But	Hannan	Mosag	cared	nothing	for	compassion,	and	he	laughed	once
more.	‘I	understood	your	gesture,	Champion.	The	coolness	to	match	that	of
your	king.	Besides—’	His	words	broke	into	a	cough.	He	spat	phlegm,	then
resumed.	‘Besides,	it	hardly	mattered,	did	it?	Whether	you	lived	or	died.	That’s
how	it	seemed,	anyway.	At	that	brazen,	fateful	moment,	at	least.’
The	Champion	sank	down	to	the	floor,	staring	dully	at	the	Warlock	King.
‘Swordsman,’	Hannan	Mosag	called	out.	‘Hear	me,	these	final	words.	You
have	lost.	Your	king	is	dead.	He	was	dead	before	you	even	began	your	fight.
You	fought,	Champion,	to	defend	a	dead	man.’
The	Letherii,	eyes	widening,	struggled	to	pull	himself	round,	striving	to


look	up,	to	the	throne,	to	the	figure	seated	there.	But	the	effort	proved	too
great,	and	he	slid	back	down,	head	lolling.
The	Warlock	King	was	laughing.	‘He	had	no	faith.	Only	gold.	No	faith	in
you,	swordsman—’
Trull	stalked	towards	him.	‘Be	silent!’
Hannan	Mosag	sneered	up	at	him.	‘Watch	yourself,	Trull	Sengar.	You	are
as	nothing	to	me.’
‘You	would	claim	the	throne	now,	Warlock	King?’	Trull	asked.
An	enraged	shriek	from	Rhulad.
Hannan	Mosag	said	nothing.
Trull	looked	back	over	his	shoulder.	Saw	the	Champion	lying	sprawled	on
the	dais,	at	the	king’s	slippered	feet.	Lying,	perfectly	still,	a	mixture	of	surprise
and	dismay	on	his	young	face.	Eyes	staring,	seeing	nothing.	But	then,	there
could	be	no	other	way.	No	other	way	to	kill	such	a	man.
Trull	swung	his	gaze	back	down	to	the	Warlock	King.	‘Someone	will	do	as
he	commands,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.
‘Do	you	really	think	so?’
‘His	chosen	kin—’
‘Will	do…nothing.	No,	Trull,	not	even	Binadas.	Just	as	your	hand	is	stayed,
so	too	will	theirs	be.	It	is	a	mercy,	don’t	you	see?	Of	course	you	do.	You	see
that	all	too	well.	A	mercy.’
‘Whilst	you	heave	that	ruin	of	a	body	onto	the	throne,	Hannan	Mosag?’
The	answer	was	plain	in	the	eyes	of	the	Warlock	King.	It	is	mine.
A	hoarse	whisper	from	Rhulad,	‘Trull…please.	I	am	your	brother.	Do
not…do	not	leave	me.	Like	this.	Please.’
Everything	was	breaking	inside	him.	Trull	stepped	away	from	Hannan
Mosag,	and	sank	slowly	to	his	knees.	I	need	Fear.	I	need	to	find	him.	Talk.
‘Please,	Trull…I	never	meant,	I	never	meant…’
Trull	stared	down	at	his	hands.	He’d	dropped	his	spear—he	did	not	even
know	where	it	was.	There	were	six	Letherii	guards—he	looked	up—no,	they
were	gone.	Where	had	they	gone?	The	old	man	standing	beside	the	body	of	the
First	Eunuch—where	was	he?	The	woman?
Where	had	everybody	gone?
	
Tehol	Beddict	opened	his	eyes.	One	of	them,	he	noticed,	did	not	work	very
well.	He	squinted.	A	low	ceiling.	Dripping.
A	hand	stroked	his	brow	and	he	turned	his	head.	Oh,	now	that	hurts.	Bugg
leaned	forward,	nodded.	Tehol	tried	to	nod	back,	almost	managed.	‘Where	are


we?’
‘In	a	crypt.	Under	the	river.’
‘Did	we…get	wet?’
‘Only	a	little.’
‘Oh.’	He	thought	about	that	for	a	time.	Then	said,	‘I	should	be	dead.’
‘Yes,	you	should.	But	you	were	holding	on.	Enough,	anyway,	which	is
more	than	can	be	said	for	poor	Chalas.’
‘Chalas?’
‘He	tried	to	protect	you,	and	they	killed	him	for	it.	I	am	sorry,	Tehol.	I	was
too	late	in	arriving.’
He	thought	about	that,	too.	‘The	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Yes.	I	killed	them.’
‘You	did?’
Bugg	nodded,	looked	briefly	away.	‘I	am	afraid	I	lost	my	temper.’
‘Ah.’
The	manservant	looked	back.	‘You	don’t	sound	surprised.’
‘I’m	not.	I’ve	seen	you	step	on	cockroaches.	You	are	ruthless.’
‘Anything	for	a	meal.’
‘Yes,	and	what	about	that,	anyway?	We’ve	never	eaten	enough—not	to	have
stayed	as	healthy	as	we	did.’
‘That’s	true.’
Tehol	tried	to	sit	up,	groaned	and	lay	back	down.	‘I	smell	mud.’
‘Mud,	yes.	Salty	mud	at	that.	There’s	footprints	here,	were	here	when	we
arrived.	Footprints,	passing	through.’
‘Arrived.	How	long	ago?’
‘Not	long.	A	few	moments…’
‘During	which	you	mended	all	my	bones.’
‘And	a	new	eye,	most	of	your	organs,	this	and	that.’
‘The	eye	doesn’t	work	well.’
‘Give	it	time.	Babies	can’t	focus	past	a	nipple,	you	know.’
‘No,	I	didn’t.	But	I	fully	understand	the	sentiment.’
They	were	silent	for	a	time.
Then	Tehol	sighed	and	said,	‘But	this	changes	everything.’
‘It	does?	How?’
‘Well,	you’re	supposed	to	be	my	manservant.	How	can	I	continue	the
conceit	of	being	in	charge?’
‘Just	the	same	as	you	always	have.’
‘Hah	hah.’
‘I	could	make	you	forget.’


‘Forget	what?’
‘Very	funny.’
‘No,’	Tehol	said,	‘I	mean	specifically.’
‘Well,’	Bugg	rubbed	his	jaw,	‘the	events	of	this	day,	I	suppose.’
‘So,	you	killed	all	those	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Yes,	I	am	afraid	so.’
‘Then	carried	me	under	the	river.’
‘Yes.’
‘But	your	clothes	are	dry.’
‘That’s	right.’
‘And	your	name’s	not	really	Bugg.’
‘No,	I	guess	not.’
‘But	I	like	that	name.’
‘Me	too.’
‘And	your	real	one?’
‘Mael.’
Tehol	frowned,	studied	his	manservant’s	face,	then	shook	his	head.	‘It
doesn’t	fit.	Bugg	is	better.’
‘I	agree.’
‘So,	if	you	could	kill	all	those	warriors.	Heal	me.	Walk	under	a	river.
Answer	me	this,	then.	Why	didn’t	you	kill	all	of	them?	Halt	this	invasion	in	its
tracks?’
‘I	have	my	reasons.’
‘To	see	Lether	conquered?	Don’t	you	like	us?’
‘Lether?	Not	much.	You	take	your	natural	vices	and	call	them	virtues.	Of
which	greed	is	the	most	despicable.	That	and	betrayal	of	commonality.	After
all,	whoever	decided	that	competition	is	always	and	without	exception	a	healthy
attribute?	Why	that	particular	path	to	self-esteem?	Your	heel	on	the	hand	of	the
one	below.	This	is	worth	something?	Let	me	tell	you,	it’s	worth	nothing.
Nothing	lasting.	Every	monument	that	exists	beyond	the	moment—no	matter
which	king,	emperor	or	warrior	lays	claim	to	it—is	actually	a	testament	to	the
common,	to	co-operation,	to	the	plural	rather	than	the	singular.’
‘Ah,’	Tehol	interjected,	managing	to	raise	a	finger	to	mark	his	objection,
‘without	a	king,	general	or	whomever—without	a	leader,	no	monument	gets
built.’
‘Only	because	you	mortals	know	only	two	possibilities.	To	follow	or	to
lead.	Nothing	else.’
‘Hold	on.	I’ve	seen	consortiums	and	co-operatives	at	work,	Bugg.	They’re
nightmares.’


‘Aye,	breeding	grounds	for	all	those	virtues	such	as	greed,	envy,	betrayal
and	so	on.	In	other	words,	each	within	the	group	seeks	to	impose	a	structure	of
followers	and	leaders.	Dispense	with	a	formal	hierarchy,	and	you	have	a
contest	of	personalities.’
‘So	what	is	the	solution?’
‘Would	you	be	greatly	disappointed	to	hear	that	you’re	not	it?’
‘Who?	Me?’
‘Your	species.	Don’t	feel	bad.	None	have	been,	as	of	yet.	Still,	who	knows
what	the	future	will	bring.’
‘Oh,	that’s	easy	for	you	to	say!’
‘Actually,	no,	it	isn’t.	Look,	I’ve	seen	all	this	again	and	again,	over
countless	generations.	To	put	it	simply,	it’s	a	mess,	a	tangled,	irreparable
mess.’
‘Some	god	you	are.	You	are	a	god,	aren’t	you?’
The	manservant	shrugged.	‘Make	no	assumptions.	About	anything.	Ever.
Stay	mindful,	my	friend,	and	suspicious.	Suspicious,	but	not	frightened	by
complexity.’
‘And	I’ve	some	advice	for	you,	since	we’re	doling	it	out	here.’
‘And	that	is?’
‘Live	to	your	potential.’
Bugg	opened	his	mouth	for	a	retort,	then	shut	it	again	and	narrowed	his
gaze.
Tehol	gave	him	an	innocent	smile.
It	was	momentary,	as	more	of	the	memories	of	this	day	stirred	awake.
‘Chalas,’	he	said	after	a	moment.	‘That	old	fool.’
‘You	have	friends,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘And	that	poor	guard.	He	threw	himself	in	front	of	that	spear.	Friends—
yes,	what’s	happened	to	everyone	else?	Do	you	know?	Is	Shurq	all	right?
Kettle?’
Bugg	grunted,	clearly	distracted	by	something,	then	said,	‘I	think	they’re
fine.’
‘Do	you	want	to	go	and	see	for	certain?’
He	glanced	down.	‘Not	really.	I	can	be	very	selfish	at	times,	you	know.’
‘No,	I	didn’t.	But	I	admit,	I	do	have	a	question.	Only	I	don’t	know	how	to
ask	it.’
Bugg	studied	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	snorted,	said,	‘You	have	no
idea,	Tehol,	how	boring	it	can	be…existing	for	all	eternity.’
‘Fine,	but…a	manservant?’
Bugg	hesitated,	then	slowly	shook	his	head,	and	met	Tehol’s	gaze.	‘My


association	with	you,	Tehol,	has	been	an	unceasing	delight.	You	resurrected	in
me	the	pleasure	of	existence,	and	you	cannot	comprehend	how	rare	that	is.’
‘But…a	manservant!’
Bugg	drew	a	deep	breath.	‘I	think	it’s	time	to	make	you	forget	this	day,	my
friend.’
‘Forget?	Forget	what?	Is	there	anything	to	eat	around	here?’
	
He’d	wanted	to	believe.	In	all	the	possible	glories.	The	world	could	be	made
simple,	there	need	be	no	complexity,	he’d	so	wanted	it	to	be	simple.	He	walked
through	the	strangely	silent	city.	Signs	of	fighting	here	and	there.	Dead	Letherii
soldiers,	mostly.	They	should	have	given	up.	As	would	anyone	professing	to
some	rationality,	but	it	seemed	this	was	not	the	day	for	what	was	reasonable
and	straightforward.	On	this	day,	madness	held	dominion,	flowing	in	invisible
currents	through	this	city.
Through	these	poor	Letherii.	Through	the	Tiste	Edur.
Fear	Sengar	walked	on,	unmindful	of	where	his	steps	took	him.	All	his	life,
he	had	been	gifted	with	a	single,	easily	defined	role.	To	fashion	warriors
among	his	people.	And,	when	the	need	arose,	to	lead	them	into	battle.	There
had	been	no	great	tragedies	to	mar	his	youth,	and	he’d	stridden,	not	stumbled,
into	adulthood.
There	had	been	no	time	when	he’d	felt	alone.	Alone	in	the	frightened	sense,
that	is.	Solitude	was	born	of	decision,	and	could	be	as	easily	yielded	when	its
purpose	was	done.	There	had	been	Trull.	And	Binadas,	and	then	Rhulad.	But,
first	and	foremost,	Trull.	A	warrior	with	skill	unmatched	when	it	came	to
fighting	with	the	spear,	yet	without	blood-lust—and	blood-lust	was	a	curse,	he
well	knew,	among	the	Edur.	The	hunger	that	swept	away	all	discipline,	that
could	reduce	a	well-trained	fighter	into	a	savage,	weapons	swinging	wild,	that
strange,	seething	silence	of	the	Tiste	Edur	pulled	from	cool	thought.	Among
other	peoples,	he	knew,	that	descent	was	announced	with	screams	and	howls
and	shrieks.	An	odd	difference,	and	one	that,	for	some	unknown	reason,	deeply
troubled	Fear	Sengar.
And	then,	looking	upon	this	Champion	of	the	Letherii	king,	this	brother	of
Hull	Beddict—Fear	could	not	recall	if	he’d	ever	heard	his	name,	but	if	he	had,
he’d	forgotten	it.	That	itself	was	a	crime.	He	would	have	to	learn	that	man’s
name.	It	was	important	to	learn	it.
Fear	was	skilled	with	his	sword.	One	of	the	finest	sword-wielders	among
the	Tiste	Edur,	a	truth	he	simply	accepted,	with	neither	pride	nor	affected
modesty.	And,	he	knew,	had	he	stood	face	to	face	with	that	Champion	in	the


throne	room,	he	would	have	lasted	some	time.	Some	fair	time,	and	might	well
have,	on	occasion,	surprised	the	Letherii.	But	Fear	had	no	illusions	about	who
would	have	been	left	standing	when	all	was	done.
He	wanted	to	weep.	For	that	Champion.	For	his	king.	For	Rhulad,	the
brother	he’d	failed	again	and	again.	For	Trull,	whom	he	had	now	abandoned—
to	a	choice	no	warrior	should	be	forced	to	make.
Because	he	had	failed	Rhulad	yet	again.	Trull	could	see	that,	surely.	There
was	no	way	to	hide	the	cowardice	raging	through	Fear.	Not	from	his	closest,
most	cherished	brother.	Who	gave	voice	to	all	my	doubts,	my	terrors,	so	that	I
could	defy	them—so	that	I	could	be	seen	to	defy	them.
Shaped	by	Hannan	Mosag…all	of	this.	He	understood	that	now.	From	the
very	first,	the	brutal	unification	of	the	tribes,	the	secret	pact	with	the	unknown
god	had	already	been	made.	So	obvious,	now.	The	Warlock	King	had	turned
his	back	on	Father	Shadow,	and	why	not,	since	Scabandari	Bloodeye	was	gone.
Gone,	never	to	return.
Not	even	Hannan	Mosag,	then,	but	long	ago.	That	was	when	this	path	first
began.	Long,	long	ago.
There	had	been	a	moment,	back	then,	when	everything	was	still	simple.	He
was	certain	of	it.	Before	the	fated	choices	were	made.	And	to	all	that	had
occurred	since,	there	was	only	one	who	could	give	answer,	and	that	was	Father
Shadow	himself.
He	walked	the	dusty	streets,	past	corpses	lying	here	and	there	like	passedout	revellers	from	some	wild	fête	the	night	before.	Barring	the	blood,	the
scattered	weapons.
He	was…lost.	They	had	asked	too	much	of	him,	far	too	much.	There	in	that
throne	room.	We	carried	his	body	back.	Across	the	ice	wastes.	I	thought	I	had
sent	Trull	to	his	death.	So	many	failures,	and	every	one	of	them	mine.	There
must	be	other	ways…other	ways…
Motionless,	now,	looking	down	upon	a	body.
Mayen.
The	hunger,	he	saw,	was	gone	from	her	face.	Finally,	there	was	nothing	but
peace	there.	As	he’d	seen	before,	when	he’d	looked	upon	her	sleeping.	Or
singing	with	the	other	maidens.	When	he’d	carried	the	sword	which	she	then
took	into	her	hands.	To	bury	at	the	threshold	of	her	home.	He	would	not	think
of	other	times,	when	he	caught	a	certain	darkness	in	her	eyes,	and	was	left
wondering	on	the	twisting	of	her	mind—such	things	a	man	could	not	know,
could	never	know.	Fearful	mysteries,	the	ones	that	lured	a	man	into	love,	into
fascination	and,	at	times,	into	trembling	terror.
Her	face	held	none	of	that	now.	Only	peace.	Sleeping,	like	the	child	within


her,	here	on	this	street.
Fear	crouched,	then	knelt	beside	her.	He	closed	a	hand	on	the	horn	grip	of
the	fisher	knife,	then	pulled	it	from	her	chest.	He	studied	the	knife.	A	slave’s
tool.	A	small	sigil	was	carved	near	its	base,	one	he	recognized.
The	knife	had	belonged	to	Udinaas.
Was	this	his	gift?	An	offering	of	peace?	Or	simply	one	more	act	of	deadly
vengeance	against	the	family	of	Edur	who	had	owned	him?	Who	had	stolen	his
freedom?	He	abandoned	Rhulad.	As	I	have	done.	For	that,	I	have	no	right	to
hate.	But…what	of	this?
He	rose,	tucking	the	knife	into	his	belt.
Mayen	was	dead.	The	child	he	would	have	loved	was	dead.	Some	force	was
here,	some	force	eager	to	take	everything	away	from	him.
And	he	did	not	know	what	to	do.

Weeping,	ceaseless,	weeping	from	the	blood-spattered,	twisted	form	lying	on
the	floor	of	the	throne	room.	On	his	knees	ten	paces	away,	Trull	had	his	hands
to	his	ears,	wanting	it	to	end,	wanting	someone	to	end	it.	This	moment…it	was
trapped,	deep	within	itself.	It	would	not	end.	An	eternal	chorus	of	piteous
crying,	reaching	into	his	skull.
Hannan	Mosag	was	dragging	himself	towards	the	throne,	so	bent	and
mangled	he	was	barely	able	to	move	more	than	a	few	hand’s	widths	at	a	time
before	the	pain	in	his	body	forced	him	to	pause	once	again.
Among	the	Letherii,	only	one	remained,	his	reappearance	a	mystery,	yet	he
stood,	expression	serene	yet	watchful,	near	the	far	wall.	Young,	handsome	and
somehow…soft.	Not	a	soldier,	then.	He	had	said	nothing,	seeming	content	to
observe.
Where	were	the	other	Edur?	Trull	could	not	understand.	They	had	left
Binadas,	unconscious	but	alive,	at	the	far	end	of	the	corridor.	He	turned	his
head	in	that	direction,	saw	the	huddled	shapes	of	the	queen	and	her	son	beside
the	entranceway.	The	prince	looked	either	dead	or	asleep.	The	queen	simply
watched	Hannan	Mosag’s	tortured	progress	towards	the	dais,	teeth	gleaming	in
a	wet	smile.
I	need	to	find	Father.	He	will	know	what	to	do…no,	there	is	nothing	to
know,	is	there?	Just	as	there	is…nothing	to	do.	Nothing	at	all,	and	that	was	the
horror	of	it.
‘Please…Trull…’


Trull	shook	his	head,	trying	not	to	hear.
‘All	I	wanted…you,	and	Fear,	and	Binadas.	I	wanted	you	to…include	me.
Not	a	child	any	longer,	you	see?	That’s	all,	Trull.’
Hannan	Mosag	grunted	a	laugh.	‘Respect,	Trull.	That	is	what	he	wanted.
Where	does	that	come	from,	then?	A	sword?	A	wealth	of	coins	burned	into
your	skin?	A	title?	That	presumptuous,	obnoxious	we	he’s	always	using	now?
None	of	those?	How	about	stealing	his	brother ’s	wife?’
‘Be	quiet,’	Trull	said.
‘Do	not	speak	to	your	king	that	way,	Trull	Sengar.	It	will…cost	you.’
‘I	am	to	quail	at	your	threats,	Warlock	King?’
Trull	let	his	hands	fall	away	from	his	ears.	The	gesture	had	been	useless.
This	chamber	carried	the	slightest	whisper.	Besides,	there	could	be	no	deafness
without	when	there	was	none	within.	He	caught	slight	movement	from	the
Letherii	at	the	far	wall	and	looked	over	to	see	that	he	had	turned	his	head,
attention	fixed	now	upon	the	entranceway.	The	man	suddenly	frowned.
Then	Trull	heard	footsteps.	Heavy,	dragging.	A	sound	of	metal,	and
something	like	streaming	water.
Hannan	Mosag	twisted	round	where	he	lay.	‘What?	What	comes?	Trull—
find	a	weapon,	quickly!’
Trull	did	not	move.
Rhulad’s	weeping	resumed,	indifferent	to	all	else.
The	thudding	footsteps	came	closer.
A	moment	later,	an	apparition	shambled	into	view,	blood	pouring	down
from	its	gauntleted	hands.	Nearly	the	size	of	a	Tarthenal,	it	was	sheathed	in
black,	stained	iron	plates,	studded	with	green	rivets.	A	great	helm	with	caged
eye-slits	hid	the	face	within,	the	grille-work	hanging	ragged	on	its	shoulders
and	beneath	its	armoured	chin.	The	figure	was	encrusted	with	barnacles	at	the
joins	of	its	elbows,	knees	and	ankles.	In	one	hand	it	carried	a	sword	of	Letherii
steel,	down	which	the	blood	flowed	ceaselessly.
Rhulad	hissed,	‘What	is	it,	Trull?	What	has	come?’
The	monstrosity	paused	just	within	the	entrance.	Head	creaking	as	it	looked
round,	it	fixed	its	focus,	it	seemed,	on	the	corpse	of	the	King’s	Champion.	It
resumed	walking	forward,	leaving	twin	trails	of	blood.
‘Trull!’	Rhulad	shrieked.
The	creature	halted,	looked	down	at	the	emperor	lying	on	the	floor.	After	a
moment,	a	heavy	voice	rumbled	from	within	the	helm.	‘You	are	gravely
injured.’
Trembling,	Rhulad	laughed,	a	sound	close	to	hysteria.	‘Injured?	Oh	yes.
Cut	to	pieces!’


‘You	will	live.’
Hannan	Mosag	said	in	a	growl,	‘Begone,	demon.	Lest	I	banish	you.’
‘You	can	try,’	it	said.	And	moved	forward	once	more.	Until	it	stood
directly	in	front	of	the	Champion’s	body.	‘I	see	no	wounds,	yet	he	lies	dead.
This	honourable	mortal.’
‘Poison,’	said	the	Letherii	at	the	far	wall.
The	creature	looked	over.	‘I	know	you.	I	know	all	your	names.’
‘I	imagine	you	do,	Guardian,’	the	man	replied.
‘Poison.	Tell	me,	did	you…push	him	in	that	direction?’
‘It	is	my	aspect,’	the	Letherii	said,	shrugging.	‘I	am	driven	to…poignancy.
Tell	me,	does	your	god	know	you	are	here?’
‘I	will	speak	to	him	soon.	Words	of	chastisement	are	necessary.’
The	man	laughed,	crossing	his	arms	as	he	leaned	back	against	the	wall.	‘I
imagine	they	are	at	that.’
The	Guardian	looked	once	more	upon	the	Champion.	‘He	held	the	names.
Of	all	those	who	were	almost	forgotten.	This…this	is	a	great	loss.’
‘No,’	the	Letherii	said,	‘those	names	are	not	lost.	Not	yet.	But	they	will
be…soon.’
‘I	need…someone,	then.’
‘And	you	will	find	him.’
The	Guardian	regarded	the	Letherii	once	more.	‘I	am…pushed?’
The	man	shrugged	again.
The	Guardian	reached	down,	closed	a	firm	grip	on	the	Champion’s	swordbelt,	then	lifted	him	from	the	floor	and	slung	him	over	its	left	shoulder.
Standing	in	a	spreading	pool	of	blood,	it	turned	about.
And	looked	upon	Rhulad	Sengar.	‘They	show	no	mercy,	your	friends,’	it
said.
‘No?’	Rhulad’s	laugh	became	a	cough.	He	gasped,	then	said,	‘I	am
beginning	to	see…otherwise—’
‘I	have	learned	mercy,’	the	Guardian	said,	and	thrust	down	with	his	sword.
Into	Rhulad’s	back,	severing	the	spine.
Trull	Sengar	lurched	to	his	feet,	stared,	disbelieving—
—as	the	Letherii	man	whispered,	‘And…once	more.’
The	Guardian	walked	towards	the	entrance,	ignoring	Hannan	Mosag’s
enraged	bellow	as	it	passed	the	Warlock	King.
Trull	stumbled	forward,	around	the	motionless	form	of	his	brother,	until
he	reached	Hannan	Mosag.	Snapped	a	hand	down	and	dragged	the	Warlock
King	up,	until	he	held	him	close.	‘The	throne?’	Trull	asked	in	a	rasp.	‘You	just
lost	it,	bastard.’	He	flung	Hannan	Mosag	back	down	onto	the	floor.	‘I	need	to


find	Fear.	Tell	him,’	Trull	said	as	he	walked	to	the	entranceway,	‘tell	him,
Mosag,	that	I	went	to	find	Fear.	I	am	sending	in	the	others—’
Rhulad	spasmed	behind	him,	then	shrieked.
So	be	it.
	
The	Wyval	clawed	its	way	free	from	the	barrow,	dripping	red-streaked	mud,
flanks	heaving.	A	moment	later	the	wraith	appeared,	dragging	the	unconscious
form	of	a	Letherii	man.
Shurq	Elalle	rose	from	where	she	had	crouched	beside	Ublala,	stroking	his
brow	and	wondering	at	the	stupid	smile	plastered	on	his	features,	and,	placing
her	hands	on	her	hips,	surveyed	the	scene.	Five	sprawled	bodies,	toppled	trees,
the	stench	of	rotting	earth.	Two	of	her	employees	near	the	facing	wall	of	the
Azath	tower,	the	mage	tending	to	the	Avowed’s	wounds.	Avowed.	What	kind	of
title	is	that,	anyway?
Closer	to	the	gate,	Kettle	and	the	tall,	white-skinned	warrior	with	the	two
Letherii	swords.
Impressively	naked,	she	noted,	walking	over.	‘If	I	am	not	mistaken,’	she
said	to	him,	‘you	are	of	the	same	blood	as	the	Tiste	Edur.’
A	slight	frown	as	he	looked	down	upon	her.	‘No.	I	am	Tiste	Andii.’
‘If	you	say	so.	Now	that	you	have	finished	off	those…things,	I	take	it	your
allegiance	to	the	Azath	tower	is	at	an	end.’
He	glanced	over	at	it	with	his	strange,	red	eyes.	‘We	were	never…friends,’
he	said,	then	faintly	smiled.	‘But	it	is	dead.	I	am	not	bound	to	anyone’s	service
but	my	own.’	Studied	her	once	again.	‘And	there	are	things	I	must	do…for
myself.’
Kettle	spoke.	‘Can	I	come	with	you?’
‘That	would	please	me,	child,’	the	warrior	said.
Shurq	Elalle	narrowed	her	eyes.	‘You	made	a	promise,	didn’t	you?’	she
asked	him.	‘To	the	tower,	and	though	it	is	dead	the	promise	remains	to	be
honoured.’
‘She	will	be	safe,	so	long	as	she	chooses	to	remain	with	me,’	the	warrior
said,	nodding.
Shurq	looked	round	once	more,	then	said,	‘This	city	is	now	ruled	by	the
Tiste	Edur.	Will	they	take	undue	note	of	you?’
‘Accompanied	by	a	Wyval,	a	wraith	and	the	unconscious	slave	he	insists	on
keeping	with	him,	I	would	imagine	so.’
‘Best,	then,’	she	said,	‘you	left	Letheras	without	being	seen.’
‘Agreed.	Do	you	have	a	suggestion?’


‘Not	yet—’
‘I	have…’
They	turned	to	see	the	Avowed	and	his	mage,	the	latter	lending	the	former
his	shoulder	as	they	slowly	approached.	It	had	been	Iron	Bars	who	had	spoken.
‘You,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	‘work	for	me,	now.	No	volunteering	allowed.’
He	grinned.	‘Aye,	but	all	I’m	saying	is	they	need	an	escort.	Someone	who
knows	all	the	secret	ways	out	of	this	city.	It’s	the	least	I	can	do,	since	this	Tiste
Andii	saved	my	life.’
‘Thinking	of	things	before	I	do	does	not	bode	well	for	a	good	working
relationship,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.
‘Apologies,	ma’am.	I	won’t	do	it	again,	I	promise.’
‘You	think	I’m	being	petty,	don’t	you?’
‘Of	course	not.	After	all,	the	undead	are	never	petty.’
She	crossed	her	arms.	‘No?	See	that	pit	over	there?	There’s	an	undead	man
named	Harlest	hiding	in	it,	waiting	to	scare	someone	with	his	talons	and	fangs.’
They	all	turned	to	study	the	pit	in	the	yard	of	the	Azath	tower.	From	which
they	could	now	hear	faint	singing.
‘Hood’s	balls,’	Iron	Bars	muttered.	‘When	do	we	sail?’
Shurq	Elalle	shrugged.	‘As	soon	as	they	let	us.	And	who	is	Hood?’
The	white-skinned	warrior	replied	distractedly,	‘The	Lord	of	Death,	and
yes,	he	has	balls.’
Everyone	turned	to	stare	at	the	warrior,	who	shrugged.
Shurq	grunted,	then	said,	‘Don’t	make	me	laugh.’
Kettle	pointed	up.	‘I	like	that.	In	your	forehead,	Mother.	I	like	that.’
‘And	let’s	keep	it	there,	shall	we?’	Fortunately,	no-one	seemed	to	grasp	the
significance	of	her	comment.
The	warrior	said	to	Iron	Bars.	‘Your	suggestion?’
The	Avowed	nodded.
	
Tehol	Beddict,	lying	atop	the	sarcophagus,	was	sleeping.	Bugg	had	been
staring	down	at	him,	thoughtful,	when	he	heard	the	sound	of	footsteps	almost
directly	behind	him.	He	slowly	swung	about	as	the	Guardian	emerged	from	the
wall	of	water	that	marked	the	tunnel	mouth.
The	apparition	was	carrying	a	body	over	one	shoulder.	It	halted	and	was
silent	as	it	studied	the	manservant.
Here,	in	this	tomb	emptied	of	water,	in	this	place	where	an	Elder	god’s	will
held	all	back,	the	Guardian	did	not	bleed.
Bugg	sighed.	‘Oh,	he	will	grieve	for	this,’	he	said,	finally	recognizing	the


Letherii	on	the	Guardian’s	shoulder.
‘The	Errant	says	the	names	remain	alive	within	him,’	the	creature	said.
‘The	names?	Ah,	yes.	Of	course.’
‘You	abandoned	us,	Mael.’
‘I	know.	I	am	sorry.’
The	Guardian	stepped	past	him	and	stopped	beside	the	sarcophagus.	Its
helmed	head	tilted	down	as	it	observed	Tehol	Beddict.	‘This	one	shares	his
blood.’
‘A	brother,	yes.’
‘He	shall	carry	the	memory	of	the	names,	then.’	It	looked	over.	‘Do	you
object	to	this?’
Bugg	shook	his	head.	‘How	can	I?’
‘That	is	true.	You	cannot.	You	have	lost	the	right.’
The	manservant	said	nothing.	He	watched	as	the	Guardian	grasped	hold	of
one	of	Brys’s	hands	and	set	it	down	upon	Tehol’s	brow.	A	moment,	then	it	was
done.	The	apparition	stepped	away,	headed	towards	the	far	wall	of	water.
‘Wait,	please,’	Bugg	said.
It	paused,	looked	back.
‘Where	will	you	take	him?’
‘Into	the	deep,	where	else,	Elder	One?’
Bugg	frowned.	‘In	that	place…’
‘Yes.	There	shall	be	two	Guardians	now	and	for	ever	more.’
‘Will	that	eternal	service	please	him,	do	you	think?’
The	apparition	cocked	its	head.	‘I	do	not	know.	Does	it	please	me?’
With	that	ambiguous	question	hanging	in	the	still	air,	the	Guardian	carried
the	body	of	Brys	Beddict	into	the	water.
After	a	long	moment,	Bugg	turned	back	to	regard	Tehol.	His	friend	would
wake	with	a	terrible	headache,	he	knew.
Nothing	to	be	done	for	it,	alas.	Except,	perhaps,	for	some	tea…I’ve	a
particularly	nasty	herbal	mix	that’ll	make	him	forget	his	headache.	And	if	there
is	anyone	in	the	world	who	will	appreciate	that,	it	is	Tehol	Beddict	of	Letheras.
But	first,	I’d	better	get	him	out	of	this	tomb.
	
There	were	bodies	lying	in	the	throne	room	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.	The	one
halfway	down	the	dais,	face	to	the	bloody	tiles,	still	made	Feather	Witch’s
breath	catch,	her	heart	thud	loud	in	her	chest.	Fear	or	excitement,	she	knew	not
which—perhaps	both.	King	Ezgara	Diskanar,	flung	down	from	the	throne,
where	Rhulad	Sengar	of	the	Tiste	Edur	now	sat,	and	the	darkness	in	the


emperor ’s	eyes	seemed	beyond	measure.
There	had	been	pain	in	this	chamber—she	could	feel	its	bitter	wake,
hanging	still	in	the	air.	And	Rhulad	had	been	its	greatest	fount.	Betrayals,	more
betrayals	than	any	mortal	could	bear.	She	knew	this	was	truth,	knew	it	in	her
heart.
Before	the	emperor	stood	Tomad	and	Uruth,	flanking	the	trembling,
huddled	form	of	Hannan	Mosag,	who	had	paid	a	dear	price	for	this	day	of
triumph.	It	seemed	that	he	awaited	something,	a	posture	of	terrified
expectation,	his	eyes	downcast.	Yet	Rhulad	appeared	content	to	ignore	the
Warlock	King.	For	now,	he	would	indulge	his	sour	triumph.
Even	so,	where	was	Fear	Sengar?	And	Trull?	Feather	Witch	had	assisted
Uruth	in	tending	to	Binadas,	who	remained	unconscious	and	would	continue	so
until	the	healing	was	done.	But,	apart	from	Rhulad’s	parents,	the	only	others	of
the	emperor ’s	inner	court	present	were	a	handful	of	his	adopted	brothers,
Choram	Irard,	Kholb	Harat	and	Matra	Brith.	The	Buhns	were	absent,	as	was	the
Jheck	warchief,	B’nagga.
Two	Letherii	remained,	apart	from	the	pathetic	wreckages	of	Queen	Janall
and	Prince	Quillas.	And	already	the	Chancellor,	Triban	Gnol,	had	knelt	before
Rhulad	and	proclaimed	his	eternal	service.	The	other	Letherii	drew	Feather
Witch’s	attention	again	and	again.	Consort	to	the	queen,	Turudal	Brizad	gave
the	appearance	of	being	almost	indifferent	to	all	he	was	witnessing	here	in	the
Eternal	Domicile.
And	he	was	handsome,	extraordinarily	handsome.
More	than	once,	she	had	met	his	gaze,	and	saw	in	his	eyes—even	from
across	the	room—a	certain	avid	interest	that	sent	tremors	through	her.
She	remained	a	step	behind	Uruth,	her	new	mistress,	ever	attentive,	whilst
commanders	came	and	went	with	their	irrelevant	reports.	Fighting	here,	an	end
to	fighting	there,	the	docks	secured.	The	first	of	the	emissaries	from	the
protectorates	eagerly	awaited	audience	in	the	ruined	hallway	beyond.
The	empire	was	born.
And	she	had	witnessed,	and	more	than	witnessed.	A	knife,	pushed	into	the
hands	of	Mayen,	and	word	had	come	that	she	had	been	found.	Dead.	No	more
would	Feather	Witch	cower	beneath	her	fury.	The	whore	was	dead.
Rhulad’s	first	command	was	to	begin	a	hunt.	For	Udinaas.	His	adopted
brothers	were	given	a	company	of	warriors	each	and	sent	out	to	find	the	slave.
The	search	would	be	relentless,	she	knew,	and	in	the	end,	Udinaas	would	be
captured.	And	made	to	pay	for	his	betrayal.
She	did	not	know	what	to	think	about	that.	But	the	thought	had	run	through
her	once—and	only	once,	quickly	driven	away	afterwards—a	hope,	a	fervent


prayer	to	the	Errant	that	Udinaas	would	escape.	That	he	would	never	be	found.
That	at	least	one	Letherii	would	defy	this	emperor,	defeat	him.	And	in	defeating
him	thus,	would	break	Rhulad’s	heart	yet	again.
The	world	has	drawn	breath…and	now	breathes	once	more.	As	steady	as
ever,	as	unbroken	in	rhythm	as	the	tides.
She	could	see,	through	the	cleverly	fashioned,	slitted	windows	high	in	the
dome	overhead,	the	deepening	of	the	light,	and	she	knew	the	sun	was	setting	on
this	day.
A	day	in	which	a	kingdom	was	conquered,	and	a	day	in	which	that	which
was	conquered	began	its	inevitable	destruction	of	the	conquerors.
For	such	was	the	rhythm	of	these	particular	tides.	Now,	with	the	coming	of
night,	when	the	shadows	drew	long,	and	what	remained	of	the	world	turned
away.
For	that	is	what	the	Tiste	Edur	believe,	is	it	not?	Until	midnight,	all	is
turned	away,	silent	and	motionless.	Awaiting	the	last	tide.
On	his	throne,	Rhulad	Sengar	sat,	draped	in	the	gold	of	Lether,	and	the
dying	light	gleamed	in	his	hooded	eyes.	Darkened	the	stains	on	the	sword	held
in	his	right	hand,	point	to	the	dais.
And	Feather	Witch,	her	eyes	cast	downward	once	more	after	that
momentary	glance,	downward	as	required,	saw,	lying	in	the	join	of	the	dais,	a
severed	finger.	Small,	like	a	child’s.	She	stared	at	it,	fascinated,	filled	with	a
sudden	desire.	To	possess	it.	There	was	power	in	such	things,	after	all.	Power	a
witch	could	use.
Assuming	the	person	it	had	belonged	to	had	been	important.
Well,	I	shall	find	that	out	soon	enough.
Dusk	was	claiming	the	throne	room.	Someone	would	have	to	light
lanterns,	and	soon.
	
She	had	not	left	the	room.	There	had	been	no	reason	to.	She	had	sat,
motionless,	empty,	numb	to	the	sounds	of	fighting,	to	the	howling	wolves,	to
the	distant	screams	in	the	city	beyond.	And	told	herself,	every	now	and	then,
that	she	waited.	The	end	of	one	thing	brought	the	birth	of	another,	after	all.
Lives	and	loves,	the	gamut	of	existence	was	marked	by	such	things.	A
breaking	of	paths,	the	ragged,	uneven	ever-forward	stumble.	Blood	dried,
eventually.	Turned	to	dust.	The	corpses	of	kings	were	laid	down	and	sealed	in
darkness	and	set	away,	to	be	forgotten.	Graves	were	dug	for	fallen	soldiers,
vast	pits	like	mouths	in	the	earth,	opened	in	hunger,	and	all	the	bodies	were
tumbled	down,	each	exhaling	a	last	gasp	of	lime	dust.	Survivors	grieved,	for	a


time,	and	looked	upon	empty	rooms	and	empty	beds,	the	scattering	of
possessions	no-one	possessed	any	longer,	and	wondered	what	was	to	come,
what	would	be	written	anew	on	the	wiped-clean	slate.	Wondering,	how	can	I	go
on?
Kingdoms	and	empires,	wars	and	causes,	she	was	sick	of	them.
She	wanted	to	be	gone.	Away,	so	far	away	that	nothing	of	her	life	from
before	mattered	in	the	least.	No	memories	to	drive	her	steps	in	this	direction	or
that.
Corlo	had	warned	her.	Not	to	fall	into	the	cycle	of	weeping.	So	now	she	sat
dry-eyed,	and	let	the	city	beyond	weep	for	itself.	She	was	done	with	such
things.
A	knock	upon	the	door.
Seren	Pedac	looked	down	the	hallway,	her	heart	lurching.
A	heavy	sound,	now	repeated,	insistent.
The	Acquitor	rose	from	the	chair,	tottering	at	the	tingling	in	her	legs—she
had	not	moved	in	a	long	time—then	made	her	way	unevenly	forward.
Dusk	had	arrived.	She	had	not	noticed	that.	Someone	has	decided.	Someone
has	ended	this	day.	Why	would	they	do	that?
Absurd	thoughts,	pushed	into	her	mind	as	if	from	somewhere	outside,	in
tones	of	faint	irony,	drawled	out	like	a	secret	joke.
At	the	door	now.	Flinching	as	the	knock	sounded	again,	at	a	level	opposite
her	face.
Seren	opened	it.
To	find,	standing	before	her,	Fear	and	Trull	Sengar.
	
Trull	could	not	understand	it,	but	it	had	seemed	his	steps	were	being	guided,
down	this	alley,	along	that	street,	through	the	vast	city	with	unerring	precision
until	he	saw,	in	the	gloom	ahead,	his	brother.	Walking	with	purpose	over	a
minor	bridge	of	the	main	canal.	Turning	in	surprise	at	Trull’s	hoarse	shout.
Then	waiting	until	his	brother	caught	up	to	him.
‘Rhulad	is	resurrected,’	Trull	said.
Fear	looked	away,	squinted	into	the	shadows	of	the	seemingly	motionless
water	of	the	canal.	‘By	your	hand,	Trull?’
‘No.	I…failed	in	that.	Something	else.	A	demon	of	some	sort.	It	came	for
the	Champion—I	don’t	know	why,	but	it	carried	the	man’s	body	away.	After
killing	Rhulad	in	what	it	saw	as	an	act	of	mercy.’	Trull	grimaced.	‘A	gift	of	the
ignorant.	Fear—’
‘No.	I	will	not	return.’


Trull	stared	at	him.	‘Listen	to	me,	please.	I	believe,	if	we	work	together,	we
can	guide	him	back.	From	madness.	For	the	Sisters’	sake,	Fear,	we	must	try.
For	our	people—’
‘No.’
‘You…would	leave	me	to	this?’
Sudden	pain	in	Fear ’s	face,	but	he	refused	to	meet	his	brother ’s	eyes.	‘I
must	go.	I	understand	something	now,	you	see.	This	is	not	of	Rhulad’s	making.
Nor	Hannan	Mosag’s.	It	is	Father	Shadow’s,	Trull.’
‘Scabandari	Bloodeye	is	dead—’
‘Not	his	spirit.	It	remains…somewhere.	I	intend	to	find	it.’
‘To	what	end?’
‘We	have	been	usurped.	All	of	us.	By	the	one	behind	that	sword.	No-one
else	can	save	us,	Trull.	I	mean	to	find	Scabandari	Bloodeye.	If	he	is	bound,	I
mean	to	free	him.	His	spirit.	We	shall	return	together,	or	not	at	all.’
Trull	knew	his	brother	well	enough	to	cease	arguing.	Fear	had	found	a	new
purpose,	and	with	it	he	intended	to	flee…from	everything,	and	everyone,	else.
‘How	will	you	get	out	of	the	city?	They	will	be	looking	for	us—it’s	probable
they	are	doing	so	even	now.’
‘Hull	once	told	me	that	Seren	Pedac	had	her	home	here.’	Fear	shook	his
head.	‘I	don’t	know,	I	don’t	understand	it	myself,	but	I	believe	she	might	help.’
‘Why?’
Fear	shook	his	head.
‘How	do	you	know	where	she	lives?’
‘I	don’t.	But	it’s…this	way.’
He	began	walking.	Trull	quickly	caught	up	to	him	and	gripped	his	arm.
‘Listen—no,	I	don’t	mean	to	prevent	you.	But	listen	to	me,	please.’
‘Very	well,	but	let	us	walk	in	the	meantime.’
‘All	right.	Do	you	not	wonder	at	all	this,	Fear?	How	did	I	find	you?	It
should	have	been	impossible,	yet	here	we	are.	And	now	you,	and	this	house—
the	Acquitor ’s	house—Fear,	something	is	guiding	us.	We	are	being
manipulated—’
His	brother ’s	smile	was	wry.	‘What	of	it?’
To	that,	Trull	had	no	answer.	Silent,	he	walked	with	Fear.	Coming	upon	a
score	of	dead	Letherii,	he	paused	to	collect	a	sword	and	scabbard.	He	strapped
it	on,	ignoring	Fear ’s	raised	brows,	not	out	of	some	ambivalent	emotion,	but
because	he	himself	did	not	know	why	he	had	picked	up	the	weapon.	They
walked	on.
Until	they	came	to	a	modest	house.


	
Trull’s	chest	seemed	to	clench	tight	upon	seeing	her	standing	in	the	doorway.
He	could	not	understand	it—no,	he	could,	but	it	was	impossible.	Absurd.	He’d
only	seen	Seren	Pedac	a	few	times.	Had	but	exchanged	a	few	score	words,	if
that.	Yet,	as	he	studied	her	face,	the	shock	writ	there,	so	at	odds	with	the
appalling	depth	in	her	eyes,	he	felt	himself	falling	forward	in	his	mind—
‘What?’	she	asked,	gaze	darting	between	him	and	Fear.	‘What	are	you…’
‘I	need	your	help,’	Fear	said.
‘I	cannot…I	don’t	see	how…’
Sisters	take	me,	I	would	give	my	heart	to	this	woman.	This	Letherii…
Fear	said,	‘I	am	fleeing.	My	brother,	the	emperor.	I	need	a	guide	to	take	me
through	the	city	unseen.	Tonight.’
‘How	did	you	find	me?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	even	know	why…why	I	have	this	belief	that	only	you
can	help	me.’
She	looked	then	at	Trull,	and	he	saw	her	eyes	hold	on	his	for	what	seemed
a	long	moment,	slowly	widening.	‘And	you,	Trull	Sengar?’	she	asked.	‘Are
coming	with	us?’
With	us.	She	will	do	this.	Why?	What	need	within	her	does	this	answer?
The	pressure	in	his	chest	constricted	suddenly,	even	as	the	fateful	words	left
him.	‘I	cannot,	Acquitor.	I	failed	Rhulad	this	day.	I	must	try…again.	I	must	try
to	save	him.’
Something	like	resignation	filled	her	eyes.
As	if	he	had	wounded	something	that	already	bore	a	thousand	scars.
And	Trull	wanted	to	cry	out.	Instead,	he	said,	‘I	am	sorry.	But	I	will	await
your	return—both	of	you—’
‘We	shall	return	here?’	she	asked,	glancing	at	Fear,	‘Why?’
‘To	end	this,’	Fear	said.
‘To	end	what?’
‘The	tyranny	born	here	tonight,	Seren	Pedac.’
‘You	would	kill	Rhulad?	Your	own	brother?’
‘Kill	him?	That	would	not	work,	as	you	know.	No.	But	I	shall	find	another
way.	I	shall.’
Oh,	who	has	grasped	hold	of	my	soul	this	night?	He	found	himself
unhitching	the	sword,	heard	himself	saying,	‘I	don’t	know	if	you	have	a
weapon,	Acquitor,’	and	knew	his	own	disbelief	at	the	absurdity	of	his	own
words,	the	shallowness	of	his	reasoning,	‘so	I	will	give	you	mine…’	And	he
was	holding	the	sheathed	sword	out	to	her.


At	the	threshold	of	her	home.
Fear	turned,	studied	him,	but	Trull	could	not	look	away	from	her,	not	even
to	see	what	must	be	realization	dawning	in	his	face.
Letherii	though	she	was,	Seren	Pedac	clearly	understood,	her	gaze
becoming	confused,	then	clearing.	‘Just	that,	I	take	it.	A	weapon…for	me	to
use.’
No.	‘Yes…Acquitor.	A	weapon…’
She	accepted	it,	but	the	gesture	was	without	meaning	now.
Trull	found	himself	stepping	back.	‘I	have	to	go	now.	I	will	tell	Rhulad	I
saw	you,	Fear,	down	at	the	docks.’
‘You	cannot	save	him,	brother,’	Fear	said.
‘I	can	but	try.	Go	well,	Fear.’
And	he	was	walking	away.	It	was	best,	he	decided	through	sudden	tears.
They	would	probably	never	return.	Nor	would	she	have	accepted	the	sword.
Which	was	why	she	asked	him	before	reaching	out	for	it.	A	weapon	to	use.
Only	that.
He	was	being	a	fool.	A	moment	of	profound	weakness,	a	love	that	made	no
sense,	no	sense	at	all.	No,	better	by	far	the	way	it	had	played	out.	She’d
understood,	and	so	she’d	made	certain.	No	other	meaning.	No	proclamation.
Simply	a	gesture	in	the	night.
A	weapon	to	use.	Only	that.
	
They	remained	standing	at	the	threshold.	Trull	was	gone,	his	footsteps
swallowed	by	distance.	Fear	studied	Seren	Pedac	as	she	looked	down	at	the
sword	in	her	hands.	Then,	glancing	up,	she	saw	his	fixed	regard	and	smiled
wryly.
‘Your	brother…startled	me.	For	a	moment,	I	thought…never	mind.’
Then	why,	Seren	Pedac,	is	there	such	pain	in	your	eyes?	Fear	hesitated,	was
about	to	speak,	when	a	child’s	voice	spoke	behind	him.
‘Are	you	Seren	Pedac?’
He	spun	round,	sword	hissing	from	its	scabbard.
The	Acquitor	stepped	past,	holding	out	a	hand	to	stay	him.	‘Do	I	know
you?’	she	asked	the	small	girl	standing	at	the	gate.
‘I	am	Kettle.	Iron	Bars	said	you	would	help	us.	We	need	to	leave	the	city.
With	no-one	seeing.’
‘We?’
The	girl	walked	forward,	and	behind	her	came	a	tall,	robed	and	hooded
figure.	Then	a	shadow	wraith,	dragging	a	body.


A	startled	sound	from	Seren.	‘Errant	fend,	this	is	about	to	get	a	lot	harder.’
Fear	said	to	her,	‘Acquitor,	I	would	berate	you	for	your	generosity	this
night,	had	it	not	included	me.	Can	you	still	manage	this?’
She	was	studying	the	tall,	hooded	figure	as	she	replied,	‘Probably.	There
are	tunnels…’
Fear	faced	the	girl	and	her	party	once	more.	His	gaze	focused	on	the
wraith.	‘You,	why	are	you	not	serving	the	emperor	this	night?’
‘I	am	unbound,	Fear	Sengar.	You	are	fleeing?	This	is…unexpected.’
He	disliked	the	amusement	in	its	voice.	‘And	who	is	that	you	are	pulling
behind	you?’
‘The	slave	Udinaas.’
Fear	said	to	Seren,	‘They	will	be	hunting	in	earnest	for	these	ones,
Acquitor.	For	that	slave.’
‘I	remember	him,’	she	said.
‘His	betrayal	of	the	emperor	has	exacted	a	high	price,’	Fear	said.	‘More,	I
believe	he	killed	Mayen—’
‘Believe	what	you	like,’	the	wraith	said,	‘but	you	are	wrong.	You	forget,
Fear	Sengar,	this	man	is	a	slave.	A	thing	to	be	used,	and	used	he	has	been.	By
me,	by	the	Wyval	that	even	now	circles	us	in	the	dark	overhead.	For	what	befell
Rhulad,	for	Mayen—neither	of	these	tragedies	belong	to	Udinaas.’
As	you	say.
‘We	can	argue	this	later,’	Seren	said.	‘Kettle,	who	is	this	disguised	man?’
She	was	about	to	answer	when	the	figure	said,	‘I	am	Selekis,	of	the	Azath
tower.’
‘From	the	Azath	tower?’	Seren	asked.	‘Amusing.	Well,	you’re	as	tall	as	an
Edur,	Selekis.	Can	we	not	see	your	face?’
‘I	would	rather	not,	Seren	Pedac.	Not	yet,	in	any	case.’	It	seemed	its	hidden
gaze	was	on	Fear	as	it	continued,	‘Perhaps	later,	once	we	have	quitted	this	city
and	have	the	time	to	discuss	our	eventual	destinations.	It	may	be,	indeed,	that
we	will	travel	together	for	some	time.’
‘I	think	not,’	Fear	said.	‘I	go	to	find	Father	Shadow.’
‘Indeed?	And	Scabandari	Bloodeye	still	lives?’
Shocked,	Fear	said	nothing.	He	must	be	a	Tiste	Edur.	One	of	the	other
tribes,	perhaps.	Also	fleeing.	No	different	from	me,	then.
‘All	of	you,’	Seren	said,	‘inside.	We	should	scrape	together	some	supplies,
although	I	am	certain	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	will	be	able	to	supply	us…for	a
price.’
The	wraith	softly	laughed.	‘It	is	the	Letherii	way,	of	course…’


	
Shurq	Elalle	stepped	clear	of	the	ladder	and	onto	the	roof.	The	sun	was	up,	and
people	could	be	seen	on	the	tiers,	a	little	slower	in	their	walking	than	was
usual.	Uncertain,	filled	perhaps	with	some	trepidation.	There	were	Tiste	Edur,
after	all,	patrolling	in	squads.	Whilst	yet	others,	in	larger	groups,	were	moving
through	the	city	as	if	looking	for	someone	in	particular.
Tehol	Beddict	and	his	manservant	were	standing	on	the	side	overlooking
the	canal,	their	backs	to	Shurq	as	she	approached.	Tehol	glanced	over	a
shoulder	and	gave	her	a	warm	smile.	He	looked…different.
‘Tehol	Beddict,’	she	said	as	she	came	to	stand	beside	him,	‘one	of	your
eyes	is	blue.’
‘Is	it?	Must	be	some	kind	of	nefarious	infection,	Shurq,	since	I	can	barely
see	with	it	besides.’
‘It’ll	clear	up	in	time,’	Bugg	said.
‘So,’	Shurq	said,	‘have	you	resumed	plotting	the	end	of	civilization,
Tehol?’
‘I	have,	and	a	delicious	end	it	will	be.’
She	grunted.	‘I’ll	send	you	Shand,	Hejun	and	Rissarh,	then—’
‘Don’t	you	dare.	Deliver	them	to	the	islands.	I	work	better	alone.’
‘Alone?’
‘Well,	with	Bugg	here,	of	course.	Every	man	needs	a	manservant,	after	all.’
‘I	imagine	so.	Well,	I	am	here,	then,	to	say	goodbye.’
‘Off	for	some	pirating,	are	we?’
‘Why	not?	I’m	simply	elaborating	on	a	well-established	career.’
Tehol	looked	to	Bugg,	and	said,	‘The	thief	who	sank…’
‘…has	resurfaced,’	Bugg	finished.
The	two	men	smiled	at	each	other.
Shurq	Elalle	turned	away.	‘Well,	that’s	one	thing	I	won’t	miss.’
	
After	she	was	gone,	Tehol	and	Bugg	stared	out	for	a	while	longer	at	the
reawakening	city	of	Letheras.	The	city	occupied,	the	throne	usurped,	strangers
in	the	streets	looking	rather…lost.
The	two-headed	insect	clung	to	Tehol’s	shoulder	and	would	not	move.
After	a	time,	Tehol	rubbed	at	his	weak	eye	and	sighed.	‘You	know,	Bugg,	I	am
glad	you	didn’t	do	it.’
‘Do	what?’
‘Make	me	forget.’


‘I	figured	you	could	handle	it.’
‘You’re	right.	I	can.	At	least,	this	way,	I	can	grieve.’
‘In	your	own	way.’
‘In	my	own	way,	yes.	The	only	way	I	know	how.’
‘I	know,	master.’
A	short	while	later,	Bugg	turned	about	and	walked	towards	the	hatch.	‘I’ll
be	back	shortly.’
‘Right.	And	when	you	do,	clean	up	down	there.’
The	manservant	paused	at	the	hatch,	considered,	then	said,	‘I	think	I	will
find	the	time	to	do	just	that,	master.’
‘Excellent.	Now	I’m	going	to	bed.’
‘Good	idea,	master.’
‘Well,	of	course	it	is,	Bugg.	It’s	mine,	isn’t	it?’


Epilogue

And	it	is	this	moment,	my	friends,
When	you	must	look	away,
As	the	world	unfurls	anew
In	shapes	announced	both	bright
And	sordid,	in	dark	and	light
And	the	sprawl	of	all	existence
That	lies	between.
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
The	hole	was	vast	and	deep.	The	two	Kenryll’ah	demon	princes	stood	at	its
edge,	staring	down	into	it,	as	they	had	been	for	some	time.
Finally,	one	said,	‘How	far	down	do	you	think	it	goes,	brother?’
‘I	suspect,	brother,’	the	other	replied,	‘if	we	were	to	vacate	our	bladders
into	this	abyss	the	streams	would	fray	into	mist	long	before	they	reached
bottom.’
‘I	suspect	you	are	right.	And	that	Forkrul	Assail	went	down	there,	didn’t
he?’
‘He	did.	Head	first.’
‘You	shouldn’t	have	thrown	him,	then.’
‘You	are	wrong,	brother.	I	simply	threw	him	in	the	wrong	direction.’
‘That,	or	the	world	suddenly	turned.’
‘Unlikely.	This	place	doesn’t	do	things	like	that.’
‘You’re	right.	It	is	proving	exceedingly	dull,	isn’t	it?’
‘Exceedingly.’
‘Well,	shall	we?’
‘Why	not?’
The	two	demons	began	loosening	straps	on	their	ornate	baldrics.	Dropping
flaps.	Shifting	their	stances	to	adequate	width.
And	they	stood	there,	side	by	side,	until,	perfectly	timed,	their	flows	were
done.


	
The	storm	had	risen	sudden,	impressively	fierce	as	it	raged	on	the	seas.	Three
Nachts	huddled	at	his	feet,	Withal	stood	on	the	beach,	feeling	the	faint	wisps	of
wind	that	managed	to	reach	through	the	sorcerous	barrier	surrounding	the
island,	brushing	against	his	face	like	a	woman’s	breath.
A	sweet	woman,	to	be	more	precise.	Unlike	the	one	standing	beside	him.
This	tall,	iron-eyed,	foul-mouthed,	humourless	apparition	who	followed	him
around	and	never	seemed	to	sleep	and	certainly	would	not	let	him	sleep,	not	a
single	damned	night	the	whole	night	through,	not	once.	Always	asking,	asking
and	asking.	What	are	you	going	to	do?	Besides	praying?
Well,	what	else	could	he	do?
Rhulad	Sengar	came	and	went,	more	insane	with	each	time.	Shrieks,
laughter,	screams	and	wails.	How	many	times	could	a	man	die?
We’ll	see,	I	suppose.
‘That	storm,’	Sandalath	said,	‘it	wants	to	get	through,	doesn’t	it?’
He	nodded.	He	could	feel	its	wrath,	and	its	impotence.
‘It’s	waiting	for	something,’	she	continued.	‘Waiting	for	someone…to	do
something.’
He	repressed	the	urge	to	hit	her—she’d	kill	him	if	he	did—wait.	Wait.	Wait.
‘Hold	on,’	he	whispered.	‘Hold	on…I’ve	thought	of	something…’
‘A	miracle!’	she	shouted,	throwing	up	her	hands.	‘Oh,	I	know!	Let’s	pray!’
And	now	he	saw	it,	on	the	very	edge	of	the	thrashing	waves	beyond	the
reef.	Saw	it,	and	pointed.	‘There!	A	boat,	you	black-hearted	witch!	A	boat!’
‘So	what?	So	what?	Why	don’t	you	do	something?’
He	spun	round,	startling	the	Nachts,	and	began	running.
There	was	anger,	plenty	of	anger,	giving	strength	to	his	strides.	Oh,	so
much	anger.	Deliverers	of	suffering	deserved	what	was	coming	to	them,	didn’t
they?	Oh	yes,	they	surely	did.	The	Nachts	had	been	showing	him.	Over	and
over	again,	the	mad	grinning	apes.	Over	and	over.
Build	a	nest.
Kick	it	down.
Build	a	nest.
Kick…it…down!
He	saw	the	hut,	that	squalid,	insipid	hovel	crouched	there	on	the	dead	plain.
Sensed	the	Crippled	God’s	sudden	awareness,	sudden	probings	into	his	mind.
But	oh	no,	he	laughed	silently,	it	couldn’t	work	it	out.	Couldn’t	fathom	the
endless	refrain	filling	his	skull.
Build	a	nest!	Kick	it	down!


He	reached	the	hut,	not	where	the	doorway	made	its	slash	in	the	wall,	but
from	a	blind	side.	And,	with	all	his	weight,	the	swordsmith	flung	himself	into
that	flimsy	structure.
It	collapsed	inward,	Withal	on	top,	landing	upon	a	squawking	figure
beneath.	Spitting,	hissing	with	rage	and	indignation.
Withal	grasped	handfuls	of	rotten	canvas,	heaved	himself	back	upright,	and
dragged	the	tent	away.	Pegs	snapping,	ties	breaking.	Dragged	it	away	from	that
horrid	little	bastard	god.
It	shrieked,	the	brazier	tumbling,	coals	spilling	out,	sparks	lodging	in	the
god’s	ratty	robes,	where	they	smouldered—
‘You	will	die	for	this,	mortal!’
Withal	stumbled	back,	laughing.
And,	from	behind,	the	wind	suddenly	arrived.
Almost	knocking	him	down.
He	turned	into	it,	facing	the	beach	once	more,	and	saw	the	stormclouds
billowing,	rushing	in,	growing	ever	higher,	towering,	spreading	their	shadow
upon	the	island.
Leaning	into	the	gale,	Withal	ran	back	to	the	beach.
Thrashing,	foaming	waves	on	all	sides,	but	there,	before	him,	a	stretch	of
calm.	A	stretch	opposite	Sandalath	and	the	capering,	dancing	Nachts.
Along	which	the	boat	slid	gracefully	through	the	reef,	its	lone	sail	luffing
lightly	as	it	glided	to	shore,	grating	to	a	halt	five	paces	from	the	waterline.
Withal	reached	the	sand	in	time	to	see	a	squat,	nondescript	man	clamber
down	from	the	side	and	wade	ashore.
‘This,’	he	said	to	Withal	in	the	Letherii	trader ’s	tongue,	‘is	for	you.	Take
your	friends	and	make	sail.’
‘Who	are	you?’	Sandalath	demanded.
‘Oh,	be	quiet!’	Withal	snarled.	‘Climb	in,	woman!’
The	Nachts	had	already	done	so,	and	were	scrambling	about	the	rigging.
Scowling,	the	Tiste	Andii	woman	hurried	towards	the	boat.
Withal	stared	at	the	man.
Who	grimaced,	then	said,	‘Aye,	Withal	of	Meckros,	you	pray	hard
enough…’
‘I	knew	it.’
‘Now,	get	going.	You’ll	find	a	way	of	calm	through.’
‘And	you,	Mael?’
‘I’ll	drop	in	later.	I’ve	things	for	you	to	do,	Withal.	But	for	now,’	he	faced
inland,	‘I	am	going	to	beat	a	god	senseless.’


	
This	ends	the	Fifth	Tale	of	The	Malazan	Book	of	The	Fallen


Glossary

Letherii	Titles
Acquitor:	a	sanctioned	position	as	guide/factor	when	dealing	with	nonLetherii	peoples
Atri-Preda:	military	commander	who	governs	a	city	or	town
Ceda:	title	of	King’s	own	mage
Finadd:	equivalent	of	captain	in	the	military
Preda:	equivalent	of	commander	or	general	in	the	military
Sentinel:	the	King’s	Voice	in	establishing	first	contact	with	non-Letherii
peoples
The	King’s	Leave:	a	title	relieving	the	holder	of	all	criminal	convictions
Lether	Place	Names
Burl	Square:	a	square	in	Letheras
Cedance:	the	dominant	set	of	Tiles	(see	the	Holds)
Cul	Street:	a	street	in	Letheras
Down	Markets:	a	district	in	Letheras
Errant’s	Heel:	an	alley	in	Letheras
Eternal	Domicile:	the	new	palace	under	construction	in	Letheras
Huldo’s:	a	restaurant	in	Letheras
Katter	Bight:	a	stretch	of	water	outside	Old	Katter
Kraig’s	Landing:	upriver	from	the	city	of	Trate
Lether:	the	kingdom	and	its	protectorates
Letheras:	the	capital	city	of	Lether
Merchants’	Tolls:	equivalent	of	a	stock	market	in	Lether
Purser’s	District:	a	district	in	Letheras
Quillas	Canal:	one	of	the	main	canals	in	Letheras
Rat	Catchers’	Guild:	a	mysterious	guild	active	throughout	Lether
Red	Lane:	a	lane	in	Letheras
Rild’s:	a	restaurant	in	Letheras
Scale	House:	headquarters	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild,	Letheras


Sherp’s	Last	Lane:	a	lane	in	Letheras
Soulan	Bridge:	a	bridge	in	Letheras
Stinking	House:	abode	of	Selush	the	Dresser	of	the	Dead
Tarancede	Tower:	a	watchtower	overlooking	Trate	Harbour
Temple	School:	an	educational	institution	in	Letheras
The	Temple:	a	high-end	brothel	in	Letheras
Urum’s	Lenders:	an	establishment	in	Letheras
Windlow’s	Meatgrinders:	an	abattoir	in	Letheras
Letherii	Cities,	Villages	and	Forts
Awl
Brans	Keep
Bridle
Cargo
Desden
Dissent
Dresh
Fent	Reach
First	Maiden	Fort
First	Reach
Five	Points
Fort	Shake
Gedry
Harness
High	Fort
Letheras
The	Manse
Miner	Sluice
Old	Gedure
Old	Katter
Second	Maiden	Fort
Thetil
Third	Maiden	Fort
Trails
Trate
Truce
Letherii	Protectorates


Bluerose
Karn
Korshenn
Pilott
Pockface	Islands
Neighbouring	Kingdoms
Kolanse
Letherii	Military
Artisan	Battalion
Bluerose	Battalion
Cold	Clay	Battalion
Crimson	Rampant	Brigade
Fent	Garrison
Grass	Jackets	Brigade
Harridict	Brigade
Katter	Legion
Maiden	Garrison
Merchants’	Battalion
Shake	Legion
Trate	Legion
Wave	Wake	Brigade
Whitefinder	Battalion
Letherii	Phrases
Blue	Style	Steel:	an	earlier	method	of	ironmongery
Docks:	commonest	denomination	of	Lether	money
Dresh	Ballista:	a	multi-quarrel	war	weapon
Letheran	Steel:	a	secret	method	of	ironmongery
Letherii:	that	of	Lether,	also	the	name	of	the	language	and	of	the	people
Levels:	the	coin	of	the	wealthy	of	Lether
Lupe	Fish:	a	large	carnivorous	fish	resident	in	Lether	River	and	the	canals	of
Letheras
Ootooloo:	a	primitive	but	singular	sea-creature	from	Bluerose
Peaks:	the	coin	of	the	filthy	rich	in	Lether
(The)	Seventh	Closure:	prophesied	renaissance


(The)	Shrouded	Sisters	of	the	Empty	Throne:	Educators
Stripling:	lowest	denomination	of	Lether	money
Truce	Fever:	a	common,	curable	fever
Tusked	Milk:	an	alcoholic	beverage
Tiste	Edur	Places	and	Names
Arapay:	subjugated	and	easternmost	tribe	of	Tiste	Edur
Beneda:	subjugated	tribe	of	Tiste	Edur
Calach	Breeding	Beds:	coastline	where	Tusked	Seals	breed
Den-Ratha:	subjugated,	northernmost	tribe	of	Tiste	Edur
Hasana	Inlet:	an	inlet	claimed	by	the	Tiste	Edur
Hiroth:	dominant	tribe	of	the	Tiste	Edur
Kaschan	Inlet:	an	inlet	claimed	by	the	Tiste	Edur
Knarri:	a	whaling	and	fishing	craft
K’orthan:	raider	longboats
K’risnan:	the	Warlock	King’s	cadre	of	sorcerors
Merude:	subjugated	tribe	of	Tiste	Edur
Morok	Tree:	a	blue-leafed	tree	used	in	funeral	practices
Sollanta:	subjugated	tribe	of	Tiste	Edur
Stonebowl:	a	natural	depression	at	the	base	of	a	gorge	north	of	the	main
Hiroth	village
Other	Names,	Titles	and	Terms
(The)	Eres’al:	the	spirit	goddess	of	the	Nerek
Faraed:	an	assimilated	people	in	Lether
Fent:	an	assimilated	people	in	Lether
Jheck:	a	northern	tribe
Ken’ryllah:	a	type	of	demon
Kenyll’rah:	a	type	of	demon
Khalibaral:	a	type	of	demon
Meckros:	a	civilization	of	mobile,	floating	cities
N’purel:	the	Whiskered	Fish	of	the	Kenyll’rah	homeworld
Nachts:	Jaghut-bred	versions	of	bhoka’rala
Nerek:	an	assimilated	people	in	Lether
Onyx	Wizards:	sorcerors	of	Bluerose	(defeated	in	conquest)
Tarthenal:	an	assimilated	people	in	Lether
The	Seregahl:	the	five	gods	of	the	Tarthenal


Mythos	(Letherii,	Edur	and	other)
(The)	Black	Winged	Lord:	divinity	worshipped	in	Bluerose
Kilmandaros:	an	Elder	Goddess
Mael:	an	Elder	God
Menandore	(Betrayer,	Dawn)
Scabandari	Bloodeye	(Father	Shadow,	Emurlahnis)
Sheltatha	Lore	(Daughter	Dusk)
Silchas	Ruin	(The	Betrayer)
Sukul	Ankhadu	(The	Fickle,	Dapple)
The	Holds
T HE	T ILES
The	Beast	Hold
Bone	Perch
Elder
Crone
Seer
Shaman
Hunter
Tracker
The	Azath	Hold
Heartstone
Keeper
Portal
Path
Mason
Tomb
Guest
Barrow
Root
Wall
The	Dragon	Hold
Queen


Consort
Liege
Knight
Gate
Wyval
The	Lady
Blood-Drinker
Path-Shaper
The	Ice	Hold
Ice	Throne
Walker
Huntress
Shaper
Bearer
Child
Seed
The	Empty	Hold
Empty	Throne
Wanderer
Mistress
Watcher
Walker
Saviour
Betrayer
The	Fulcra	(unaligned)
Shapefinder
The	Pack
The	Errant
Axe	(Eres)
Crow	(White	Crow)
Fire
Dolmen
Blade
Knuckles

