DUST	OF	DREAMS
BOOK	NINE	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


Dust
of	Dreams


	
	
	
	
	
This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	of	the	characters,	organizations,	and	events	portrayed	in	this	novel	are	either	products	of	the	author’s
imagination	or	are	used	fictitiously.
DUST	OF	DREAM S:	BOOK	NINE	OF	THE	M ALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN
Copyright	©	2009	by	Steven	Erikson
First	published	in	Great	Britain	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of	Transworld	Publishers
All	rights	reserved.
M ap	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor®	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Erikson,	Steven.
Dust	of	dreams	/	Steven	Erikson.	—	1st	ed.
			p.	cm.	—(The	M alazan	book	of	the	fallen	;	bk.	9)
“A	Tom	Doherty	Associates	book.”
ISBN	978-0-7653-1009-5	(hardcover)
ISBN	978-0-7653-1655-4	(trade	paperback)
I.	Title.
PR9199.4.E745D87	2010
813'.6—dc22
2009040411
First	U.S.	Edition:	January	2010
eISBN	9781429969550


	
	
	
	
Ten	years	ago	I	received	an	endorsement	from	a	most
unexpected	source,	from	a	writer	I	respected	and	admired.
The	friendship	born	in	that	moment	is	one	I	deeply	treasure.
With	love	and	gratitude,	I	dedicate	this	novel
to	Stephen	R.	Donaldson.


	

Acknowledgments
Commenting	on	the	first	half	of	a	very	long,	two-volume	novel	is	not	an	easy	task.	My	thanks	(and	sympathy)
go	 to	 William	 Hunter,	 Hazel	 Kendall,	 Bowen	 Thomas-Lundin,	 and	 Aidan-Paul	 Canavan	 for	 their	 percipience
and	 forbearance.	 Appreciation	 also	 goes	 to	 the	 staff	 at	 The	 Black	 Stilt	 and	 Café	 Macchiato	 in	 Victoria	 who
were	 very	 understanding	 in	 my	 surrender	 to	 caffeine-free	 coffee.	 Thanks	 too	 to	 Clare	 Thomas;	 and	 special
gratitude	 goes	 to	 my	 students	 in	 the	 writing	 workshop	 I	 have	 been	 conducting	 for	 the	 past	 few	 months.
Shannon,	Margaret,	Shigenori,	Brenda,	Jade,	and	Lenore:	you	have	helped	remind	me	what	fiction	writing	is	all
about.


	

Author’s	Note
While	I	am,	of	course,	not	known	for	writing	door-stopper	tomes,	the	conclusion	of	‘The	Malazan	Book	of	the
Fallen’	was,	to	my	mind,	always	going	to	demand	something	more	than	modern	bookbinding	technology	could
accommodate.	 To	 date,	 I	 have	 avoided	 writing	 cliff-hangers,	 principally	 because	 as	 a	 reader	 I	 always	 hated
having	to	wait	to	find	out	what	happens.	Alas,	Dust	of	Dreams	is	the	first	half	of	a	two-volume	novel,	to	be
concluded	with	The	Crippled	God.	Accordingly,	if	you’re	looking	for	resolutions	to	various	story-threads,	you
won’t	find	them.	Also,	do	note	that	there	is	no	epilogue	and,	structurally,	Dust	of	Dreams	does	not	follow	the
traditional	arc	for	a	novel.	To	this,	all	I	can	ask	of	you	is,	please	be	patient.	I	know	you	can	do	it:	after	all,	you
have	waited	this	long,	haven’t	you?
Steven	Erikson
Victoria,	B.C.




	

Dramatis	Personae
The	Malazans
Adjunct	Tavore
High	Mage	Quick	Ben
Fist	Keneb
Fist	Blistig
Captain	Lostara	Yil
Banaschar
Captain	Kindly
Captain	Skanarow
Captain	Faradan	Sort
Captain	Ruthan	Gudd
Captain	Fast
Captain	Untilly	Rum
Lieutenant	Pores
Lieutenant	Raband
Sinn
Grub
The	Squads
Sergeant	Fiddler
Corporal	Tarr
Koryk
Smiles
Bottle
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas
Cuttle
Sergeant	Gesler
Corporal	Stormy
Shortnose
Flashwit
Mayfly
Sergeant	Cord
Corporal	Shard
Limp
Ebron
Crump	(Jamber	Bole)
Sergeant	Hellian
Corporal	Touchy
Corporal	Brethless
Balgrid
Maybe


Sergeant	Balm
Corporal	Deadsmell
Throatslitter
Galt
Lobe
Widdershins
Sergeant	Thom	Tissy
Tulip
Gullstream
Sergeant	Urb
Corporal	Reem
Masan	Gilani
Saltlick
Scant
Sergeant	Sinter
Corporal	Pravalak	Rim
Honey
Strap	Mull
Shoaly
Lookback
Sergeant	Badan	Gruk
Corporal	Ruffle
Skim
Nep	Furrow
Reliko
Vastly	Blank
Sergeant	Primly
Corporal	Kisswhere
Hunt
Mulvan	Dreader
Neller
Skulldeath
Drawfirst
	
Dead	Hedge
Alchemist	Bavedict
Sergeant	Sunrise
Sergeant	Nose	Stream
Corporal	Sweetlard
Corporal	Rumjugs
The	Khundryl
Warleader	Gall
Hanavat	(Gall’s	wife)
Jarabb
Shelemasa
Vedith
The	Perish	Grey
Helms
Mortal	Sword	Krughava
Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian


Destriant	Run’Thurvian
The	Letherii
King	Tehol
Queen	Janath
Chancellor	Bugg
Ceda	Bugg
Treasurer	Bugg
Yan	Tovis	(Twilight)
Yedan	Derryg	(the	Watch)
Brys	Beddict
Atri-Ceda	Aranict
Shurq	Elalle
Skorgen	Kaban
Ublala	Pung
Witch	Pully
Witch	Skwish
Brevity
Pithy
Rucket
Ursto	Hoobutt
Pinosel
The	Barghast
Warleader	Onos	Toolan
Hetan
Stavi
Storii
Warchief	Stolmen
Warlock	Cafal
Strahl
Bakal
Warchief	Maral	Eb
Skincut	Ralata
Awl	Torrent
Setoc	of	the	Wolves
The	Snake
Rutt
Held
Badalle
Saddic
Brayderal
Imass
Onrack
Kilava
Ulshun	Pral
T’lan	Imass
Lera	Epar


Kalt	Urmanal
Rystalle	Ev
Brolos	Haran
Ilm	Absinos
Ulag	Togtil
Nom	Kala
Inistral	Ovan
K’Chain	Che’malle
Matron	Gunth’an	Acyl
J’an	Sentinel	Bre’nigan
K’ell	Hunter	Sag’Churok
One	Daughter	Gunth	Mach
K’ell	Hunter	Kor	Thuran
K’ell	Hunter	Rythok
Shi’Gal	Assassin	Gu’Rull
Sulkit
Destriant	Kalyth	(Elan)
Others
Silchas	Ruin
Rud	Elalle
Telorast
Curdle
The	Errant	(Errastas)
Knuckles	(Sechul	Lath)
Kilmandaros
Mael
Olar	Ethil
Udinaas
	
Sheb
Taxilian
Veed
Asane
Breath
Last
Nappet
Rautos
	
Sandalath	Drukorlat
Withal
Mape
Rind
Pule
Bent
Roach


Dust
of	Dreams


Prologue
	
Elan	Plain,	west	of	Kolanse
	
There	was	light,	and	then	there	was	heat.
He	knelt,	carefully	taking	each	brittle	fold	in	his	hands,	ensuring	that	every	crease	was	perfect,	that	nothing
of	the	baby	was	exposed	to	the	sun.	He	drew	the	hood	in	until	little	more	than	a	fist-sized	hole	was	left	for	her
face,	her	features	grey	smudges	in	the	darkness,	and	then	he	gently	picked	her	up	and	settled	her	into	the	fold
of	his	left	arm.	There	was	no	hardship	in	this.
They’d	 camped	 near	 the	 only	 tree	 in	 any	 direction,	 but	 not	 under	 it.	 The	 tree	 was	 a	 gamleh	 tree	 and	 the
gamlehs	 were	 angry	 with	 people.	 In	 the	 dusk	 of	 the	 night	 before,	 its	 branches	 had	 been	 thick	 with	 fluttering
masses	of	grey	leaves,	at	least	until	they	drew	closer.	This	morning	the	branches	were	bare.
Facing	west,	Rutt	stood	holding	the	baby	he	had	named	Held.	The	grasses	were	colourless.	In	places	they
had	been	scoured	away	by	the	dry	wind,	wind	that	had	then	carved	the	dust	out	round	their	roots	to	expose	the
pale	 bulbs	 so	 the	 plants	 withered	 and	 died.	 After	 the	 dust	 and	 bulbs	 had	 gone,	 sometimes	 gravel	 was	 left.
Other	 times	 it	 was	 just	 bedrock,	 black	 and	 gnarled.	 Elan	 Plain	 was	 losing	 its	 hair,	 but	 that	 was	 something
Badalle	might	say,	her	green	eyes	fixed	on	the	words	in	her	head.	There	was	no	question	she	had	a	gift,	but
some	gifts,	Rutt	knew,	were	curses	in	disguise.
Badalle	 walked	 up	 to	 him	 now,	 her	 sun-charred	 arms	 thin	 as	 stork	 necks,	 the	 hands	 hanging	 at	 her	 sides
coated	in	dust	and	looking	oversized	beside	her	skinny	thighs.	She	blew	to	scatter	the	flies	crusting	her	mouth
and	intoned:
‘Rutt	he	holds	Held
Wraps	her	good
In	the	morning
And	then	up	he	stands—’
‘Badalle,’	he	said,	knowing	she	was	not	finished	with	her	poem	but	knowing,	as	well,	that	she	would	not	be
rushed,	‘we	still	live.’
She	nodded.
These	few	words	of	his	had	become	a	ritual	between	them,	although	the	ritual	never	lost	its	taint	of	surprise,
its	faint	disbelief.	The	ribbers	had	been	especially	hard	on	them	last	night,	but	the	good	news	was	that	maybe
they	had	finally	left	the	Fathers	behind.
Rutt	adjusted	the	baby	he’d	named	Held	in	his	arm,	and	then	he	set	out,	hobbling	on	swollen	feet.	Westward,
into	the	heart	of	the	Elan.
He	did	not	need	to	look	back	to	see	that	the	others	were	following.	Those	who	could,	did.	The	ribbers	would
come	for	the	rest.	He’d	not	asked	to	be	the	head	of	the	snake.	He’d	not	asked	for	anything,	but	he	was	the
tallest	and	might	be	he	was	the	oldest.	Might	be	he	was	thirteen,	could	be	he	was	fourteen.
Behind	him	Badalle	said,
‘And	walks	he	starts
Out	of	that	morning
With	Held	in	his	arms
And	his	ribby	tail
It	snakes	out
Like	a	tongue
From	the	sun.
You	need	the	longest
Tongue
When	searching	for


Water
Like	the	sun	likes	to	do	.	.	.’
Badalle	watched	him	for	a	time,	watched	as	the	others	fell	into	his	wake.	She	would	join	the	ribby	snake	soon
enough.	She	blew	at	the	flies,	but	of	course	they	came	right	back,	clustering	round	the	sores	puffing	her	lips,
hopping	up	to	lick	at	the	corners	of	her	eyes.	She	had	been	a	beauty	once,	with	these	green	eyes	and	her	long
fair	hair	like	tresses	of	gold.	But	beauty	bought	smiles	for	only	so	long.	When	the	larder	gapes	empty,	beauty
gets	smudged.	‘And	the	flies,’	she	whispered,	‘make	patterns	of	suffering.	And	suffering	is	ugly.’
She	watched	Rutt.	He	was	the	head	of	the	snake.	He	was	the	fangs,	too,	but	that	last	bit	was	for	her	alone,
her	private	joke.
This	snake	had	forgotten	how	to	eat.
She’d	been	among	the	ones	who’d	come	up	from	the	south,	from	the	husks	of	homes	in	Korbanse,	Krosis
and	Kanros.	Even	the	isles	of	Otpelas.	Some,	like	her,	had	walked	along	the	coast	of	the	Pelasiar	Sea,	and	then
to	the	western	edge	of	Stet	which	had	once	been	a	great	forest,	and	there	they	found	the	wooden	road,	Stump
Road	they	sometimes	called	it.	Trees	cut	on	end	to	make	flat	circles,	pounded	into	rows	that	went	on	and	on.
Other	children	then	arrived	from	Stet	itself,	having	walked	the	old	stream	beds	wending	through	the	grey	tangle
of	shattered	tree-fall	and	diseased	shrubs.	There	were	signs	that	Stet	had	once	been	a	forest	to	match	its	old
name	 which	 was	 Forest	 Stet,	 but	 Badalle	 was	 not	 entirely	 convinced—all	 she	 could	 see	 was	 a	 gouged
wasteland,	ruined	and	ravaged.	There	were	no	trees	standing	anywhere.	They	called	it	Stump	Road,	but	other
times	it	was	Forest	Road,	and	that	too	was	a	private	joke.
Of	 course,	 someone	 had	 needed	 lots	 of	 trees	 to	 make	 the	 road,	 so	 maybe	 there	 really	 had	 once	 been	 a
forest	there.	But	it	was	gone	now.
At	 the	 northern	 edge	 of	 Stet,	 facing	 out	 on	 to	 the	 Elan	 Plain,	 they	 had	 come	 upon	 another	 column	 of
children,	and	a	day	later	yet	another	one	joined	them,	down	from	the	north,	from	Kolanse	itself,	and	at	the	head
of	this	one	there	had	been	Rutt.	Carrying	Held.	Tall,	his	shoulders,	elbows,	knees	and	ankles	protruding	and	the
skin	 round	 them	 slack	 and	 stretched.	 He	 had	 large,	 luminous	 eyes.	 He	 still	 had	 all	 his	 teeth,	 and	 when	 the
morning	arrived,	each	morning,	he	was	there,	at	the	head.	The	fangs,	and	the	rest	just	followed.
They	all	believed	he	knew	where	he	was	going,	but	they	didn’t	ask	him	since	the	belief	was	more	important
than	the	truth,	which	was	that	he	was	just	as	lost	as	all	the	rest.
‘All	day	Rutt	holds	Held
And	keeps	her
Wrapped
In	his	shadow.
It’s	hard
Not	to	love	Rutt
But	Held	doesn’t
And	no	one	loves	Held
But	Rutt.’
Visto	had	come	from	Okan.	When	the	starvers	and	the	bone-skinned	inquisitors	marched	on	the	city	his	mother
had	sent	him	running,	hand	in	hand	with	his	sister	who	was	two	years	older	than	he	was,	and	they’d	run	down
streets	 between	 burning	 buildings	 and	 screams	 filled	 the	 night	 and	 the	 starvers	 kicked	 in	 doors	 and	 dragged
people	 out	 and	 did	 terrible	 things	 to	 them,	 while	 the	 bone-skins	 watched	 on	 and	 said	 it	 was	 necessary,
everything	here	was	necessary.
They’d	pulled	his	sister	out	of	his	grip,	and	it	was	her	scream	that	still	echoed	in	his	skull.	Each	night	since
then,	 he	 had	 ridden	 it	 on	 the	 road	 of	 sleep,	 from	 the	 moment	 his	 exhaustion	 took	 him	 until	 the	 moment	 he
awoke	to	the	dawn’s	pale	face.
He	ran	for	what	seemed	forever,	westward	and	away	from	the	starvers.	Eating	what	he	could,	savaged	by
thirst,	 and	 when	 he’d	 outdistanced	 the	 starvers	 the	 ribbers	 showed	 up,	 huge	 packs	 of	 gaunt	 dogs	 with	 redrimmed	eyes	and	no	fear	of	anything.	And	then	the	Fathers,	all	wrapped	in	black,	who	plunged	into	the	ragged
camps	 on	 the	 roads	 and	 stole	 children	 away,	 and	 once	 he	 and	 a	 few	 others	 had	 come	 upon	 one	 of	 their	 old
night-holds	and	had	seen	for	themselves	the	small	split	bones	mottled	blue	and	grey	in	the	coals	of	the	hearth,
and	so	understood	what	the	Fathers	did	to	the	children	they	took.
Visto	 remembered	 his	 first	 sight	 of	 Forest	 Stet,	 a	 range	 of	 denuded	 hills	 filled	 with	 torn-up	 stumps,	 roots


reminding	him	of	one	of	the	bone-yards	that	ringed	 the	city	that	had	been	his	home,	left	after	the	last	of	the
livestock	 had	 been	 slaughtered.	 And	 at	 that	 moment,	 looking	 upon	 what	 had	 once	 been	 a	 forest,	 Visto	 had
realized	that	the	entire	world	was	now	dead.	There	was	nothing	left	and	nowhere	to	go.
Yet	onward	he	trudged,	now	just	one	among	what	must	be	tens	of	thousands,	maybe	even	more,	a	road	of
children	 leagues	 long,	 and	 for	 all	 that	 died	 along	 the	 way,	 others	 arrived	 to	 take	 their	 place.	 He	 had	 not
imagined	 that	 so	 many	 children	 existed.	 They	 were	 like	 a	 great	 herd,	 the	 last	 great	 herd,	 the	 sole	 source	 of
food	and	nourishment	for	the	world’s	last,	desperate	hunters.
Visto	was	fourteen	years	old.	He	had	not	yet	begun	his	growth-spurt	and	now	never	would.	His	belly	was
round	and	rock	hard,	protruding	so	that	his	spine	curved	deep	just	above	his	hips.	He	walked	like	a	pregnant
woman,	 feet	 splayed,	 bones	 aching.	 He	 was	 full	 of	 Satra	 Riders,	 the	 worms	 inside	 his	 body	 endlessly
swimming	and	getting	bigger	by	the	day.	When	they	were	ready—soon—they	would	pour	out	of	him.	From	his
nostrils,	from	the	corners	of	his	eyes,	from	his	ears,	from	his	belly	button,	his	penis	and	his	anus,	and	from	his
mouth.	And	to	those	who	witnessed,	he	would	seem	to	deflate,	skin	crinkling	and	collapsing	down	into	weaving
furrows	running	the	length	of	his	body.	He	would	seem	to	instantly	turn	into	an	old	man.	And	then	he	would
die.
Visto	was	almost	impatient	for	that.	He	hoped	ribbers	would	eat	his	body	and	so	take	in	the	eggs	the	Satra
Riders	had	left	behind,	so	that	they	too	would	die.	Better	yet,	Fathers—but	they	weren’t	that	stupid,	he	was
sure—no,	they	wouldn’t	touch	him	and	that	was	too	bad.
The	 Snake	 was	 leaving	 behind	 Forest	 Stet,	 and	 the	 wooden	 road	 gave	 way	 to	 a	 trader’s	 track	 of	 dusty,
rutted	 dirt,	 wending	 out	 into	 the	 Elan.	 So,	 he	 would	 die	 on	 the	 plain,	 and	 his	 spirit	 would	 pull	 away	 from	 the
shrunken	 thing	 that	 had	 been	 its	 body,	 and	 begin	 the	 long	 journey	 back	 home.	 To	 find	 his	 sister.	 To	 find	 his
mother.
And	already,	his	spirit	was	tired,	so	tired,	of	walking.
	
At	day’s	end,	Badalle	forced	herself	to	climb	an	old	Elan	longbarrow	with	its	ancient	tree	at	the	far	end—grey
leaves	fluttering—from	which	she	could	turn	and	look	back	along	the	road,	eastward,	as	far	as	her	eyes	could
retrace	the	day’s	interminable	journey.	Beyond	the	mass	of	the	sprawled	camp,	she	saw	a	wavy	line	of	bodies
stretching	to	the	horizon.	This	had	been	an	especially	bad	day,	too	hot,	too	dry,	the	lone	waterhole	a	slough	of
foul,	vermin-ridden	mud	filled	with	rotting	insect	carcasses	that	tasted	like	dead	fish.
She	stood,	looking	for	a	long	time	on	the	ribby	length	of	the	Snake.	Those	that	fell	on	the	track	had	not	been
pushed	aside,	simply	trampled	on	or	stepped	over,	and	so	the	road	was	now	a	road	of	flesh	and	bone,	fluttering
threads	of	hair,	and,	she	knew,	staring	eyes.	The	Snake	of	Ribs.	Chal	Managal	in	the	Elan	tongue.
She	blew	flies	from	her	lips.
And	voiced	another	poem.
‘On	this	morning
We	saw	a	tree
With	leaves	of	grey
And	when	we	got	closer
The	leaves	flew	away.
At	noon	the	nameless	boy
With	the	eaten	nose
Fell	and	did	not	move
And	down	came	the	leaves
To	feed.
At	dusk	there	was	another	tree
Grey	fluttering	leaves
Settling	in	for	the	night
Come	the	morning
They’ll	fly	again.’
	
Ampelas	Rooted,	the	Wastelands
	


The	machinery	was	coated	in	oily	dust	that	gleamed	in	the	darkness	as	the	faint	glow	of	the	lantern	light	slid
across	it,	conveying	motion	where	none	existed,	the	illusion	of	silent	slippage,	as	of	reptilian	scales	that	seemed,
as	ever,	cruelly	appropriate.	She	was	breathing	hard	as	she	hurried	down	the	narrow	corridor,	ducking	every
now	and	then	to	avoid	the	lumpy	black	cables	slung	along	from	the	ceiling.	Her	nose	and	throat	stung	with	the
rank	metal	reek	of	the	close,	motionless	air.	Surrounded	by	the	exposed	guts	of	Root,	she	felt	besieged	by	the
unknowable,	the	illimitable	mystery	of	dire	arcana.	Yet,	she	had	made	these	unlit,	abandoned	passageways	her
favoured	haunt,	knowing	full	well	the	host	of	self-recriminating	motivations	that	had	guided	her	to	such	choices.
The	Root	invited	the	lost,	and	Kalyth	was	indeed	lost.	It	was	not	that	she	could	not	find	her	way	among	the
countless	 twisting	 corridors,	 or	 through	 the	 vast	 chambers	 of	 silent,	 frozen	 machines,	 evading	 the	 pits	 in	 the
floors	 over	 which	 flagstones	 had	 never	 been	 installed,	 and	 staying	 clear	 of	 the	 chaos	 of	 metal	 and	 cables
spilling	out	from	unpanelled	walls—no,	she	knew	her	way	round,	now,	after	months	of	wandering.	This	curse
of	helpless,	hopeless	bewilderment	belonged	to	her	spirit.	She	was	not	who	they	wanted	her	to	be,	and	nothing
she	said	could	convince	them	of	that.
She	had	been	born	in	a	tribe	on	the	Elan	Plain.	She	had	grown	into	adulthood	there,	from	child	to	girl,	from
girl	 to	 woman,	 and	 there	 had	 been	 nothing	 to	 set	 her	 apart,	 nothing	 to	 reveal	 her	 as	 unique,	 or	 gifted	 with
unexpected	talents.	She	had	married	a	month	after	her	first	blooding.	She	had	borne	three	children.	She	had
almost	loved	her	husband,	and	had	learned	to	live	with	his	faint	disappointment	in	her,	as	her	youthful	beauty
gave	way	to	weary	motherhood.	She	had,	in	truth,	lived	a	life	no	different	from	that	of	her	own	mother,	and	so
had	seen	clearly—without	any	special	talent—the	path	of	her	life	ahead,	year	after	year,	the	slow	decay	of	her
body,	the	loss	of	suppleness,	deepening	lines	upon	her	face,	the	sag	of	her	breasts,	the	miserable	weakening	of
her	bladder.	And	one	day	she	would	find	herself	unable	to	walk,	and	the	tribe	would	leave	her	where	she	was.
To	die	in	solitude,	as	dying	was	always	a	thing	of	solitude,	as	it	must	ever	be.	For	the	Elan	knew	better	than	the
settled	 peoples	 of	 Kolanse,	 with	 their	 crypts	 and	 treasure	 troves	 for	 the	 dead,	 with	 the	 family	 servants	 and
advisors	all	throat-cut	and	packed	in	the	corridor	to	the	sepulchre,	servants	beyond	life	itself,	servants	for	ever.
Everyone	 died	 in	 solitude,	 after	 all.	 A	 simple	 enough	 truth.	 A	 truth	 no	 one	 need	 fear.	 The	 spirits	 waited
before	 they	 cast	 judgement	 upon	 a	 soul,	 waited	 for	 that	 soul—in	 its	 dying	 isolation—to	 set	 judgement	 upon
itself,	upon	the	life	it	had	lived,	and	if	peace	came	of	that,	then	the	spirits	would	show	mercy.	If	torment	rode
the	Wild	Mare,	why,	then,	the	spirits	knew	to	match	it.	When	the	soul	faced	itself,	after	all,	it	was	impossible	to
lie.	Deceiving	arguments	rang	loud	with	falsehood,	their	facile	weakness	too	obvious	to	ignore.
It	had	been	a	life.	Far	from	perfect,	but	only	vaguely	unhappy.	A	life	one	could	whittle	down	into	something
like	contentment,	even	should	the	result	prove	shapeless,	devoid	of	meaning.
She	had	been	no	witch.	She	had	not	possessed	the	breath	of	a	shaman,	and	so	would	never	be	a	Rider	of
the	Spotted	Horse.	And	when	the	end	of	that	life	had	come	for	her	and	her	people,	on	a	morning	of	horror	and
violence,	all	that	she	had	revealed	then	was	a	damning	selfishness—in	refusing	to	die,	in	fleeing	all	that	she	had
known.
These	were	not	virtues.
She	possessed	no	virtues.
Reaching	the	central,	spiral	staircase—each	step	too	shallow,	too	broad	for	human	strides—she	set	off,	her
gasps	 becoming	 shallower	 and	 quicker	 with	 the	 exertion	 as	 she	 ascended	 level	 after	 level,	 up	 and	 out	 from
Root,	 into	 the	 lower	 chambers	 of	 Feed,	 where	 she	 made	 use	 of	 the	 counterweighted	 ramp	 that	 lifted	 her	 by
way	 of	 a	 vertical	 shaft	 past	 the	 seething	 vats	 of	 fungi,	 the	 stacked	 pens	 of	 orthen	 and	 grishol,	 drawing	 to	 a
grating,	shivering	halt	on	the	base	level	of	Womb.	Here,	the	cacophony	of	the	young	assailed	her,	the	hissing
shrieks	 of	 pain	 as	 the	 dread	 surgeries	 were	 performed—as	 destinies	 were	 decreed	 in	 bitter	 flavours—and,
having	 regained	 some	 measure	 of	 her	 wind,	 she	 hastened	 to	 ascend	 past	 the	 levels	 of	 terrible	 outrage,	 the
stench	 of	 wastes	 and	 panic	 that	 shone	 like	 oil	 on	 soft	 hides	 among	 shapes	 writhing	 on	 all	 sides—shapes	 she
was	careful	to	avoid	with	her	eyes,	hurrying	with	her	hands	clapped	over	her	ears.
From	 Womb	 to	 Heart,	 where	 she	 now	 passed	 among	 towering	 figures	 that	 paid	 her	 no	 heed,	 and	 from
whose	 paths	 she	 had	 to	 duck	 and	 dodge	 lest	 they	 simply	 trample	 her	 underclaw.	 Ve’Gath	 Soldiers	 stood
flanking	the	central	ramp,	twice	her	height	and	in	their	arcane	armour	resembling	the	vast	machinery	of	Root
far	below.	Ornate	grilled	visors	hid	their	faces	save	their	fanged	snouts,	and	the	line	of	their	jaws	gave	them
ghastly	grins,	as	if	the	implicit	purpose	of	their	breed	delighted	them.	More	so	than	the	J’an	or	the	K’ell,	the
true	 soldiers	 of	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 frightened	 Kalyth	 to	 the	 very	 core	 of	 her	 being.	 The	 Matron	 was


producing	them	in	vast	numbers.
No	further	proof	was	needed—war	was	coming.
That	 the	 Ve’Gath	 gave	 the	 Matron	 terrible	 pain,	 each	 one	 thrust	 out	 from	 her	 in	 a	 welter	 of	 blood	 and
pungent	fluid,	had	become	irrelevant.	Necessity,	Kalyth	well	knew,	was	the	cruellest	master	of	all.
Neither	 soldier	 guarding	 the	 ramp	 impeded	 her	 as	 she	 strode	 on	 to	 it,	 the	 flat	 stone	 underfoot	 pitted	 with
holes	 designed	 to	 hold	 claws,	 and	 from	 which	 cold	 air	 flowed	 up	 around	 her—the	 plunge	 in	 ambient
temperature	 on	 the	 ramp	 evidently	 served	 somehow	 to	 quell	 the	 instinctive	 fear	 the	 K’Chain	 experienced	 as
the	 conveyance	 lifted	 with	 squeals	 and	 groans	 up	 past	 the	 levels	 of	 Heart,	 ending	 at	 Eyes,	 the	 Inner	 Keep,
Acyl	Nest	and	home	of	the	Matron	herself.	Riding	the	ramp	alone,	however,	the	strain	of	the	mechanism	was
less	pronounced,	and	she	heard	little	more	than	the	rush	of	air	that	ever	disoriented	her	with	a	sense	of	falling
even	as	she	raced	upward,	and	the	sweat	on	her	limbs	and	upon	her	brow	quickly	cooled.	She	was	shivering
by	the	time	the	ramp	slowed	and	then	halted	at	the	base	level	of	Eyes.
J’an	 Sentinels	 observed	 her	 arrival	 from	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 half-spiral	 stairs	 that	 led	 to	 the	 Nest.	 As	 with	 the
Ve’Gath,	they	were	seemingly	indifferent	to	her—no	doubt	aware	that	she	had	been	summoned,	but	even	were
that	not	so	they	would	see	in	her	 no	threat	 whatsoever	 to	the	 Matron	they	 had	 been	 bred	 to	protect.	Kalyth
was	not	simply	harmless;	she	was	useless.
The	hot,	rank	air	engulfed	her,	cloying	as	a	damp	cloak,	as	she	made	her	way	to	the	stairs	and	began	the
awkward	climb	to	the	Matron’s	demesne.
At	the	landing	one	last	sentinel	stood	guard.	At	least	a	thousand	years	old,	Bre’nigan	was	gaunt	and	tall—
taller	 even	 than	 a	 Ve’Gath—and	 his	 multilayered	 scales	 bore	 a	 silvered	 patina	 that	 made	 the	 creature	 seem
ghostly,	as	if	hewn	from	sun-bleached	mica.	Neither	pupil	nor	iris	was	visible	in	his	slitted	eyes,	simply	a	murky
yellow,	misshapen	with	cataracts.	She	suspected	the	bodyguard	was	blind,	but	in	truth	there	was	no	way	to	tell,
for	when	Bre’nigan	moved,	the	J’an	displayed	perfect	sureness,	indeed,	grace	and	liquid	elegance.	The	long,
vaguely	curved	sword	slung	through	a	brass	ring	at	his	hip—a	ring	half	embedded	in	the	creature’s	hide—was
as	tall	as	Kalyth,	the	blade	a	kind	of	ceramic	bearing	a	faint	magenta	hue,	although	the	flawless	edge	gleamed
silver.
She	greeted	Bre’nigan	with	a	nod	that	elicited	no	reaction	whatsoever,	and	then	stepped	past	the	sentinel.
Kalyth	had	hoped—no,	she	had	prayed—and	when	she	set	eyes	upon	the	two	K’Chain	standing	before	the
Matron,	 and	 saw	 that	 they	 were	 unaccompanied,	 her	 spirits	 plummeted.	 Despair	 welled	 up,	 threatened	 to
consume	her.	She	fought	to	draw	breath	into	her	tight	chest.
Beyond	the	newcomers	and	huge	on	the	raised	dais,	Gunth’an	Acyl,	the	Matron,	emanated	agony	in	waves
—and	 in	 this	 she	 was	 unchanged	 and	 unchanging,	 but	 now	 Kalyth	 felt	 from	 the	 enormous	 queen	 a	 bitter
undercurrent	of	.	.	.	something.
Unbalanced,	 distraught,	 Kalyth	 only	 then	 discerned	 the	 state	 of	 the	 two	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle,	 the	 grievous
wounds	 half-healed,	 the	 chaotic	 skeins	 of	 scars	 on	 their	 flanks,	 necks	 and	 hips.	 The	 two	 creatures	 looked
starved,	driven	to	appalling	extremes	of	deprivation	and	violence,	and	she	felt	an	answering	pang	in	her	heart.
But	such	empathy	was	shortlived.	The	truth	remained:	the	K’ell	Hunter	Sag’Churok	and	the	One	Daughter
Gunth	Mach	had	failed.
The	Matron	spoke	in	Kalyth’s	mind,	although	it	was	not	speech	of	any	sort,	simply	the	irrevocable	imposition
of	 knowledge	 and	 meaning.	 ‘Destriant	 Kalyth,	 an	 error	 in	 choice.	 We	 remain	 broken.	 I	 remain	 broken.
You	cannot	mend,	not	alone,	you	cannot	mend.’
Neither	 knowledge	 nor	 meaning	 proved	 gifts	 to	 Kalyth.	 For	 she	 could	 sense	 Gunth’an	 Acyl’s	 madness
beneath	the	words.	The	Matron	was	undeniably	insane.	So	too	the	course	of	action	she	had	forced	upon	her
children,	and	upon	Kalyth	herself.	No	persuasion	was	possible.
It	was	likely	that	Gunth’an	Acyl	comprehended	Kalyth’s	convictions—her	belief	that	the	Matron	was	mad
—but	 this	 too	 made	 no	 difference.	 Within	 the	 ancient	 queen,	 there	 was	 naught	 but	 pain	 and	 the	 torment	 of
desperate	need.
‘Destriant	Kalyth,	they	shall	try	again.	What	is	broken	must	be	mended.’
Kalyth	did	not	believe	Sag’Churok	and	the	One	Daughter	could	survive	another	quest.	And	that	was	another
truth	that	failed	in	swaying	Acyl’s	imperative.
‘Destriant	Kalyth,	you	shall	accompany	this	Seeking.	K’Chain	Che’Malle	are	blind	to	recognition.’
And	 so,	 at	 last,	 they	 had	 reached	 what	 she	 had	 known	 to	 be	 inevitable,	 despite	 her	 hopes,	 her	 prayers.	 ‘I


cannot,’	she	whispered.
‘You	 shall.	 Guardians	 are	 chosen.	 K’ell	 Sag’Churok,	 Rythok,	 Kor	 Thuran.	 Shi’gal	 Gu’Rull.	 One
Daughter	Gunth	Mach.’
‘I	 cannot,’	 Kalyth	 said	 again.	 ‘I	 have	 no	 .	 .	 .	 talents.	 I	 am	 no	 Destriant—I	 am	 blind	 to	 whatever	 it	 is	 a
Destriant	needs.	I	cannot	find	a	Mortal	Sword,	Matron.	Nor	a	Shield	Anvil.	I	am	sorry.’
The	 enormous	 reptile	 shifted	 her	 massive	 weight,	 and	 the	 sound	 was	 as	 of	 boulders	 settling	 in	 gravel.
Lambent	eyes	fixed	upon	Kalyth,	radiating	waves	of	stricture.
‘I	have	chosen	you,	Destriant	Kalyth.	It	is	my	children	who	are	blind.	The	failure	is	theirs,	and	mine.
We	have	failed	every	war.	I	am	the	last	Matron.	The	enemy	seeks	me.	The	enemy	will	destroy	me.	Your
kind	 thrives	 in	 this	 world—to	 that	 not	 even	 my	 children	 are	 blind.	 Among	 you,	 I	 shall	 find	 new
champions.	My	Destriant	must	find	them.	My	Destriant	leaves	with	the	dawn.’
Kalyth	 said	 no	 more,	 knowing	 any	 response	 was	 useless.	 After	 a	 moment,	 she	 bowed	 and	 then	 walked,
feebly,	as	if	numb	with	drink,	from	the	Nest.
A	Shi’gal	would	accompany	them.	The	significance	of	this	was	plain.	There	would	be	no	failure	this	time.	To
fail	was	to	receive	the	Matron’s	displeasure.	Her	judgement.	Three	K’ell	Hunters	and	the	One	Daughter,	and
Kalyth	herself.	If	they	failed	.	.	.	against	the	deadly	wrath	of	a	Shi’gal	Assassin,	they	would	not	survive	long.
Come	the	dawn,	she	knew,	she	would	begin	her	last	journey.
Out	into	the	wastelands,	to	find	Champions	that	did	not	even	exist.
And	 this,	 she	 now	 understood,	 was	 the	 penance	 set	 upon	 her	 soul.	 She	 must	 be	 made	 to	 suffer	 for	 her
cowardice.	I	should	have	died	with	the	rest.	With	my	husband.	My	children.	I	should	not	have	run	away.
I	now	must	pay	for	my	selfishness.
The	one	mercy	was	that,	when	the	final	judgement	arrived,	it	would	come	quickly.	She	would	not	even	feel,
much	less	see,	the	killing	blow	from	the	Shi’gal.
A	 Matron	 never	 produced	 more	 than	 three	 assassins	 at	 any	 one	 time,	 and	 their	 flavours	 were	 anathema,
preventing	 any	 manner	 of	 alliance.	 And	 should	 one	 of	 them	 decide	 that	 the	 Matron	 must	 be	 expunged,	 the
remaining	 two,	 by	 their	 very	 natures,	 would	 oppose	 it.	 Thus,	 each	 Shi’gal	 warded	 the	 Matron	 against	 the
others.	Sending	one	with	the	Seeking	was	a	grave	risk,	for	now	there	would	be	only	two	assassins	defending
her	at	any	time.
Further	proof	of	the	Matron’s	madness.	To	so	endanger	herself,	whilst	at	the	same	time	sending	away	her
One	Daughter—her	only	child	with	the	potential	to	breed—was	beyond	all	common	sense.
But	then,	Kalyth	was	about	to	march	to	her	own	death.	What	did	she	care	about	these	terrifying	creatures?
Let	the	war	come.	Let	the	mysterious	enemy	descend	upon	Ampelas	Rooted	and	all	the	other	Rooted,	and	cut
down	every	last	one	of	these	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	The	world	would	not	miss	them.
Besides,	 she	 knew	 all	 about	 extinction.	 The	 only	 real	 curse	 is	 when	 you	 find	 yourself	 the	 last	 of	 your
kind.	 Yes,	 she	 well	 understood	 such	 a	 fate,	 and	 she	 knew	 the	 true	 depth	 of	 loneliness—no,	 not	 that	 paltry,
shallow,	self-pitying	game	played	out	by	people	everywhere—but	the	cruel	comprehension	of	a	solitude	without
cure,	without	hope	of	salvation.
Yes,	 everyone	 dies	 alone.	 And	 there	 may	 be	 regrets.	 There	 may	 be	 sorrows.	 But	 these	 are	 as	 nothing	 to
what	 comes	 to	 the	 last	 of	 a	 breed.	 For	 then	 there	 can	 be	 no	 evading	 the	 truth	 of	 failure.	 Absolute,	 crushing
failure.	The	failure	of	one’s	own	kind,	sweeping	in	from	all	sides,	finding	this	last	set	of	shoulders	to	settle	upon,
with	a	weight	no	single	soul	can	withstand.
There	 had	 been	 a	 residual	 gift	 of	 sorts	 with	 the	 language	 of	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle,	 and	 it	 now	 tortured
Kalyth.	Her	mind	had	awakened,	far	beyond	what	she	had	known	in	her	life	before	now.	Knowledge	was	no
blessing;	awareness	was	a	disease	that	stained	the	entire	spirit.	She	could	gouge	out	her	own	eyes	and	still	see
too	much.
Did	 the	 shamans	 of	 her	 tribe	 feel	 such	 crushing	 guilt,	 when	 recognition	 of	 the	 end	 finally	 arrived?	 She
remembered	anew	the	bleakness	in	their	eyes,	and	understood	it	in	ways	she	had	not	comprehended	before,	in
the	 life	 she	 had	 once	 lived.	 No,	 she	 could	 do	 naught	 but	 curse	 the	 deadly	 blessings	 of	 these	 K’Chain
Che’Malle.	Curse	them	with	all	her	heart,	all	her	hate.
Kalyth	 began	 her	 descent.	 She	 needed	 the	 closeness	 of	 Root;	 she	 needed	 the	 decrepit	 machinery	 on	 all
sides,	the	drip	of	viscid	oils	and	the	foul,	close	air.	The	world	was	broken.	She	was	the	last	of	the	Elan,	and
now	 her	 sole	 remaining	 task	 on	 this	 earth	 was	 to	 oversee	 the	 annihilation	 of	 the	 last	 Matron	 of	 the	 K’Chain


Che’Malle.	Was	there	satisfaction	in	that?	If	so,	it	was	an	evil	kind	of	satisfaction,	making	its	taste	all	the	more
alluring.
Among	her	people,	death	arrived	winging	across	the	face	of	the	setting	sun,	a	black,	tattered	omen	low	in
the	 sky.	 She	 would	 be	 that	 dread	 vision,	 that	 shred	 of	 the	 murdered	 moon.	 Driven	 to	 the	 earth	 as	 all	 things
were,	eventually.
This	is	all	true.
See	the	bleakness	in	my	eyes.
	
Shi’gal	 Gu’Rull	 stood	 upon	 the	 very	 edge	 of	 Brow,	 the	 night	 winds	 howling	 round	 his	 tall,	 lean	 form.	 Eldest
among	the	Shi’gal,	the	assassin	had	fought	and	defeated	seven	other	Shi’gal	in	his	long	service	to	Acyl.	He	had
survived	sixty-one	centuries	of	life,	of	growth,	and	was	twice	the	height	of	a	full-grown	K’ell	Hunter,	for	unlike
the	 Hunters—who	 were	 flavoured	 with	 mortality’s	 sudden	 end	 at	 the	 close	 of	 ten	 centuries—the	 Shi’gal
possessed	no	such	flaw	in	their	making.	They	could,	potentially,	outlive	the	Matron	herself.
Bred	for	cunning,	Gu’Rull	held	no	illusions	regarding	the	sanity	of	Mother	Acyl.	Her	awkward	assumption	of
godly	 structures	 of	 faith	 ill	 fitted	 both	 her	 and	 all	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 The	 matron	 sought	 human
worshippers,	human	servants,	but	humans	were	too	frail,	too	weak	to	be	of	any	real	value.	The	woman	Kalyth
was	 proof	 enough	 of	 that,	 despite	 the	 flavour	 of	 percipience	 Acyl	 had	 given	 her—a	 percipience	 that	 should
have	 delivered	 certitude	 and	 strength,	 yet	 had	 been	 twisted	 by	 a	 weak	 mind	 into	 new	 instruments	 of	 selfrecrimination	and	self-pity.
That	flavour	would	fade	in	the	course	of	the	Seeking,	as	Kalyth’s	swift	blood	ever	thinned	Acyl’s	gift,	with
no	daily	replenishment	possible.	The	Destriant	would	revert	to	her	innate	intelligence,	and	that	was	a	meagre
one	by	any	standard.	She	was	already	useless,	as	far	as	Gu’Rull	was	concerned.	And	upon	this	meaningless
quest,	she	would	become	a	burden,	a	liability.
Better	 to	 kill	 her	 as	 soon	 as	 possible,	 but	 alas,	 Mother	 Acyl’s	 command	 permitted	 no	 such	 flexibility.	 The
Destriant	must	choose	a	Mortal	Sword	and	a	Shield	Anvil	from	among	her	own	kind.
Sag’Churok	had	recounted	the	failure	of	their	first	selection.	The	mass	of	flaws	that	had	been	their	chosen
one:	 Redmask	 of	 the	 Awl.	 Gu’Rull	 did	 not	 believe	 the	 Destriant	 would	 fare	 any	 better.	 Humans	 might	 well
have	thrived	in	the	world	beyond,	but	they	did	so	as	would	feral	orthen,	simply	by	virtue	of	profligate	breeding.
They	possessed	no	other	talents.
The	 Shi’gal	 lifted	 his	 foreshortened	 snout	 and	 opened	 his	 nostril	 slits	 to	 scent	 the	 chill	 night	 air.	 The	 wind
came	from	the	east	and,	as	usual,	it	stank	of	death.
Gu’Rull	had	plundered	the	pathetic	memories	of	the	Destriant,	and	therefore	knew	that	no	salvation	would
be	found	to	the	east,	on	the	plains	known	as	the	Elan.	Sag’Churok	and	Gunth	Mach	had	set	out	westward,	into
the	Awl’dan,	and	there	too	they	found	only	failure.	The	north	was	a	forbidding,	lifeless	realm	of	ice,	tortured
seas	and	bitter	cold.
Thus,	they	must	journey	south.
The	Shi’gal	had	not	ventured	outside	Ampelas	Rooted	in	eight	centuries.	In	that	short	span	of	time,	it	was
likely	 that	 little	 had	 changed	 in	 the	 region	 known	 to	 humans	 as	 the	 Wastelands.	 Nonetheless,	 some	 advance
scouting	was	tactically	sound.
With	this	in	mind,	Gu’Rull	unfolded	his	month-old	wings,	spreading	the	elongated	feather-scales	so	that	they
could	flatten	and	fill	out	under	the	pressure	of	the	wind.
And	then	the	assassin	dropped	over	the	sheer	edge	of	Brow,	wings	snapping	out	to	their	fullest	extent,	and
there	arose	the	song	of	flight,	a	low,	moaning	whistle	that	was,	for	the	Shi’gal,	the	music	of	freedom.
Leaving	Ampelas	Rooted	.	.	.	it	had	been	too	long	since	Gu’Rull	felt	this	.	.	.	this	exhilaration.
The	two	new	eyes	beneath	the	lines	of	his	jaw	now	opened	for	the	first	time,	and	the	compounded	vision—
of	the	sky	ahead	and	the	ground	below—momentarily	confused	the	assassin,	but	after	a	time	Gu’Rull	was	able
to	enforce	the	necessary	separation,	so	that	the	vistas	found	their	proper	relationship	to	one	another,	creating	a
vast	panorama	of	the	world	beyond.
Acyl’s	new	flavours	were	ambitious,	indeed,	brilliant.	Was	such	creativity	implicit	in	madness?	Perhaps.
Did	that	possibility	engender	hope	in	Gu’Rull?	No.	Hope	was	not	possible.
The	assassin	soared	through	the	night,	high	above	a	blasted,	virtually	lifeless	landscape.	Like	a	shred	of	the
murdered	moon.


	
The	Wastelands
	
He	was	not	alone.	Indeed,	he	had	no	memory	of	ever	having	been	alone.	The	notion	was	impossible,	in	fact,
and	that	much	he	understood.	As	far	as	he	could	tell,	he	was	incorporeal,	and	possessed	of	the	quaint	privilege
of	being	able	to	move	from	one	companion	to	another	almost	at	will.	If	they	were	to	die,	or	somehow	find	a
means	of	rejecting	him,	why,	he	believed	he	would	cease	to	exist.	And	he	so	wanted	to	stay	alive,	floating	as
he	did	in	the	euphoric	wonder	of	his	friends,	his	bizarre,	disjointed	family.
They	 traversed	 a	 wilderness	 ragged	 and	 forlorn,	 a	 place	 of	 broken	 rock,	 wind-rippled	 fans	 of	 grey	 sand,
screes	of	volcanic	glass	that	began	and	ended	with	random	indifference.	Hills	and	ridges	clashed	in	wayward
confusion,	 and	 not	 a	 single	 tree	 broke	 the	 undulating	 horizon.	 The	 sun	 overhead	 was	 a	 blurred	 eye	 that
smeared	a	path	through	thin	clouds.	The	air	was	hot,	the	wind	constant.
The	only	nourishment	the	group	had	been	able	to	find	came	from	the	strange	swarms	of	scaled	rodents—
their	stringy	meat	tasting	of	dust—and	an	oversized	breed	of	rhizan	that	possessed	pouches	under	their	wings
swollen	with	milky	water.	Day	and	night	capemoths	tracked	them,	waiting	ever	patient	for	one	to	fall	and	not
rise,	but	this	did	not	seem	likely.	Flitting	from	one	person	to	the	next,	he	could	sense	their	innate	resolve,	their
unfailing	strength.
Such	 fortitude,	 alas,	 could	 not	 prevent	 the	 seemingly	 endless	 litany	 of	 misery	 that	 seemed	 to	 comprise	 the
bulk	of	their	conversation.
‘What	 a	 waste,’	 Sheb	 was	 saying,	 clawing	 at	 his	 itching	 beard.	 ‘Sink	 a	 few	 wells,	 pile	 these	 stones	 into
houses	and	shops	and	whatnot.	Then	you’d	have	something	worth	something.	Empty	land	is	useless.	I	long	for
the	day	when	it’s	all	put	to	use,	everything,	right	over	the	surface	of	the	world.	Cities	merging	into	one—’
‘There’d	 be	 no	 farms,’	 objected	 Last,	 but	 as	 always	 it	 was	 a	 mild,	 diffident	 objection.	 ‘Without	 farms,
nobody	eats—’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,’	snapped	Sheb.	‘Of	course	there’d	be	farms.	Just	none	of	this	kind	of	useless	land,	where
nothing	lives	but	damned	rats.	Rats	in	the	ground,	rats	in	the	air,	and	bugs,	and	bones—can	you	believe	all	the
bones?’
‘But	I—’
‘Be	quiet,	Last,’	said	Sheb.	‘You	never	got	nothing	useful	to	say,	ever.’
Asane	then	spoke	in	her	frail,	quavering	voice.	‘No	fighting,	please.	It’s	horrible	enough	without	you	picking
fights,	Sheb—’
‘Careful,	hag,	or	you’re	next.’
‘Care	to	try	me,	Sheb?’	Nappet	asked.	He	spat.	‘Didn’t	think	so.	You	talk,	Sheb,	and	that’s	all	you	do.	One
of	 these	 nights,	 when	 you’re	 asleep,	 I’m	 gonna	 cut	 out	 your	 tongue	 and	 feed	 it	 to	 the	 fuckin’	 capemoths.
Who’d	complain?	Asane?	Breath?	Last?	Taxilian?	Rautos?	Nobody,	Sheb,	we’d	all	be	dancing.’
‘Leave	me	out	of	this,’	said	Rautos.	‘I	suffered	enough	for	a	lifetime	when	I	was	living	with	my	wife	and,
needless	to	say,	I	don’t	miss	her.’
‘Here	goes	Rautos	again,’	snarled	Breath.	‘My	wife	did	this,	my	wife	said	that.	I’m	sick	of	hearing	about
your	wife.	She	ain’t	here,	is	she?	You	probably	drowned	her,	and	that’s	why	you’re	on	the	run.	You	drowned
her	 in	 your	 fancy	 fountain,	 just	 held	 her	 down,	 watching	 as	 her	 eyes	 went	 wide,	 her	 mouth	 opened	 and	 she
screamed	through	the	water.	You	watched	and	smiled,	that’s	what	you	did.	I	don’t	forget,	I	can’t	forget,	it	was
awful.	You’re	a	murderer,	Rautos.’
‘There	she	goes,’	said	Sheb,	‘talking	about	drowning	again.’
‘Might	cut	out	her	tongue,	too,’	said	Nappet,	grinning.	‘Rautos’s,	too.	No	more	shit	about	drowning	or	wives
or	 complainin’—the	 rest	 of	 you	 are	 fine.	 Last,	 you	 don’t	 say	 nothing	 and	 when	 you	 do,	 it	 don’t	 rile	 nobody.
Asane,	you	mostly	know	when	to	keep	your	mouth	shut.	And	Taxilian	hardly	ever	says	nothing	anyway.	Just
us,	and	that’d	be—’
‘I	see	something,’	said	Rautos.
He	 felt	 their	 attentions	 shift,	 find	 focus,	 and	 he	 saw	 with	 their	 eyes	 a	 vague	 smudge	 on	 the	 horizon,
something	thrusting	skyward,	too	narrow	to	be	a	mountain,	too	massive	to	be	a	tree.	Still	leagues	away,	rising
like	a	tooth.
‘I	want	to	see	that,’	announced	Taxilian.


‘Shit,’	said	Nappet,	‘ain’t	nowhere	else	to	go.’
The	 others	 silently	 agreed.	 They	 had	 been	 walking	 for	 what	 seemed	 forever,	 and	 the	 arguments	 about
where	they	should	go	had	long	since	withered	away.	None	of	them	had	any	answers,	none	of	them	even	knew
where	they	were.
And	so	they	set	out	for	that	distant,	mysterious	edifice.
He	was	content	with	that,	content	to	go	with	them,	and	he	found	himself	sharing	Taxilian’s	curiosity,	which
grew	in	strength	and	if	challenged	would	easily	overwhelm	Asane’s	fears	and	the	host	of	obsessions	plaguing
the	 others—Breath’s	 drowning,	 Rautos’s	 miserable	 marriage,	 Last’s	 meaningless	 life	 of	 diffidence,	 Sheb’s
hatred	and	Nappet’s	delight	in	viciousness.	And	now	the	conversations	fell	away,	leaving	naught	but	the	crunch
and	thud	of	bare	feet	on	the	rough	ground,	and	the	low	moan	of	the	ceaseless	wind.
	
High	 above,	 a	 score	 of	 capemoths	 tracked	 the	 lone	 figure	 walking	 across	 the	 Wastelands.	 They	 had	 been
drawn	 by	 the	 sound	 of	 voices,	 only	 to	 find	 this	 solitary,	 gaunt	 figure.	 Skin	 of	 dusty	 green,	 tusks	 framing	 its
mouth.	Carrying	a	sword	but	otherwise	naked.	A	lone	wanderer,	who	spoke	in	seven	voices,	who	knew	himself
by	seven	names.	He	was	many,	but	he	was	one.	They	were	all	lost,	and	so	was	he.
The	 capemoths	 hungered	 for	 his	 life	 to	 end.	 But	 it	 had	 been	 weeks.	 Months.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 they	 just
hungered.
	
There	 were	 patterns	 and	 they	 demanded	 consideration.	 The	 elements	 remained	 disarticulated,	 however,	 in
floating	tendrils,	in	smears	of	loose	black	like	stains	swimming	in	his	vision.	But	at	least	he	could	now	see,	and
that	was	something.	The	rotted	cloth	had	pulled	away	from	his	eyes,	tugged	by	currents	he	could	not	feel.
The	 key	 to	 unlocking	 everything	 would	 be	 found	 in	 the	 patterns.	 He	 was	 certain	 of	 that.	 If	 only	 he	 could
draw	them	together,	he	would	understand;	he	would	know	all	he	needed	to	know.	He	would	be	able	to	make
sense	of	the	visions	that	tore	through	him.
The	strange	two-legged	lizard,	all	clad	in	black	gleaming	armour,	its	tail	nothing	more	than	a	stub,	standing	on
a	stone	landing	of	some	sort,	whilst	rivers	of	blood	flowed	down	gutters	to	each	side.	Its	unhuman	eyes	fixed
unblinking	on	the	source	of	all	that	blood—a	dragon,	nailed	to	a	latticework	of	enormous	wooden	beams,	the
spikes	rust-hued	and	dripping	with	condensation.	Suffering	roiled	down	from	this	creature,	a	death	denied,	a	life
transformed	into	an	eternity	of	pain.	And	from	the	standing	lizard,	cold	satisfaction	rose	in	a	cruel	penumbra.
In	another,	two	wolves	seemed	to	be	watching	him	from	a	weathered	ridge	of	grasses	and	bony	outcrops.
Guarded,	 uneasy,	 as	 if	 measuring	 a	 rival.	 Behind	 them,	 rain	 slanted	 down	 from	 heavy	 clouds.	 And	 he	 found
himself	turning	away,	as	if	indifferent	to	their	regard,	to	walk	across	a	denuded	plain.	In	the	distance,	dolmens
of	some	sort	rose	from	the	ground,	scores	of	them,	arranged	without	any	discernible	order,	and	yet	all	seemed
identical—perhaps	statues,	then.	He	drew	closer,	frowning	at	the	shapes,	so	oddly	surmounted	by	jutting	cowls,
their	hunched,	narrow	backs	to	him,	tails	curled	round.	The	ground	they	crouched	on	glittered	as	if	strewn	with
diamonds	or	crushed	glass.
Even	as	he	closed	in	on	these	silent,	motionless	sentinels,	moments	from	reaching	the	nearest	one,	a	heavy
shadow	slipped	over	him	and	the	air	was	suddenly	frigid.	In	wrought	despair,	he	halted,	looked	up.
Nothing	but	stars,	each	one	drifting	as	if	snapped	from	its	tether,	like	motes	of	dust	on	a	slowly	draining	pool.
Faint	 voices	 sinking	 down,	 touching	 his	 brow	 like	 flecks	 of	 snow,	 melting	 in	 the	 instant,	 all	 meaning	 lost.
Arguments	in	the	Abyss,	but	he	understood	none	of	them.	To	stare	upward	was	to	reel,	unbalanced,	and	he	felt
his	feet	lift	from	the	earth	until	he	floated.	Twisting	round,	he	looked	down.
More	 stars,	 but	 emerging	 from	 their	 midst	 a	 dozen	 raging	 suns	 of	 green	 fire,	 slashing	 through	 the	 black
fabric	of	space,	fissures	of	light	bleeding	through.	The	closer	they	came,	the	more	massive	they	grew,	blinding
him	 to	 all	 else,	 and	 the	 maelstrom	 of	 voices	 rose	 to	 a	 clamour,	 and	 what	 had	 once	 felt	 like	 flakes	 of	 snow,
quickly	melting	upon	his	heated	brow,	now	burned	like	fire.
If	 he	 could	 but	 draw	 close	 the	 fragments,	 make	 the	 mosaic	 whole,	 and	 so	 comprehend	 the	 truth	 of	 the
patterns.	If	he	could—
Swirls.	Yes,	they	are	that.	The	motion	does	not	deceive,	the	motion	reveals	the	shape	beneath.
Swirls,	in	curls	of	fur.
Tattoos—see	them	now—see	them!


All	at	once,	as	the	tattoos	settled	into	place,	he	knew	himself.
I	am	Heboric	Ghost	Hands.	Destriant	to	a	cast-down	god.	I	see	him—
I	see	you,	Fener.
The	shape,	so	massive,	so	lost.	Unable	to	move.
His	god	was	trapped,	and,	like	Heboric,	was	mute	witness	to	the	blazing	jade	suns	as	they	bore	down.	He
and	his	god	were	in	their	path,	and	these	were	forces	that	could	not	be	pushed	aside.	No	shield	existed	solid
enough	to	block	what	was	coming.
The	 Abyss	 cares	 nothing	 for	 us.	 The	 Abyss	 comes	 to	 deliver	 its	 own	 arguments,	 against	 which	 we
cannot	stand.
Fener,	I	have	doomed	you.	And	you,	old	god,	you	have	doomed	me.
Yet,	I	no	longer	regret.	For	this	is	as	it	should	be.	After	all,	war	knows	no	other	language.	In	war	we
invite	our	own	destruction.	In	war	we	punish	our	children	with	a	broken	legacy	of	blood.
He	understood	now.	The	gods	of	war	and	what	they	meant,	what	their	very	existence	signified.	And	as	he
stared	 upon	 those	 jade	 suns	 searing	 ever	 closer,	 he	 was	 overwhelmed	 by	 the	 futility	 hiding	 behind	 all	 this
arrogance,	this	mindless	conceit.
See	us	wave	our	banners	of	hate.
See	where	it	gets	us.
A	final	war	had	begun.	Facing	an	enemy	against	whom	no	defence	was	possible.	Neither	words	nor	deeds
could	fool	this	clear-eyed	arbiter.	Immune	to	lies,	indifferent	to	excuses	and	vapid	discourses	on	necessity,	on
the	 weighing	 of	 two	 evils	 and	 the	 facile	 righteousness	 of	 choosing	 the	 lesser	 one—and	 yes,	 these	 were	 the
arguments	he	was	hearing,	empty	as	the	ether	they	travelled.
We	 stood	 tall	 in	 paradise.	 And	 then	 called	 forth	 the	 gods	 of	 war,	 to	 bring	 destruction	 down	 upon
ourselves,	 our	 world,	 the	 very	 earth,	 its	 air,	 its	 water,	 its	 myriad	 life.	 No,	 show	 me	 no	 surprise,	 no
innocent	bewilderment.	I	see	now	with	the	eyes	of	the	Abyss.	I	see	now	with	my	enemy’s	eyes,	and	so	I
shall	speak	with	its	voice.
Behold,	my	friends,	I	am	justice.
And	when	at	last	we	meet,	you	will	not	like	it.
And	 if	 irony	 awakens	 in	 you	 at	 the	 end,	 see	 me	 weep	 with	 these	 tears	 of	 jade,	 and	 answer	 with	 a
smile.
If	you’ve	the	courage.
Have	you,	my	friends,	the	courage?


Book	One

The	Sea	Does	Not
Dream	of	You


	
	
	
	
I	will	walk	the	path	forever	walked
One	step	ahead	of	you
And	one	step	behind
I	will	choke	in	the	dust	of	your	passing
And	skirl	more	into	your	face
It	all	tastes	the	same
Even	when	you	feign	otherwise
	
But	here	on	the	path	forever	walked
The	old	will	lie	itself	anew
We	can	sigh	like	kings
Like	empresses	on	gift-carts
Resplendent	in	imagined	worth.
	
I	will	walk	the	path	forever	walked
Though	my	time	is	short
As	if	the	stars	belong
Cupped	here	in	my	hands
Showering	out	these	pleasures
That	so	sparkle	in	the	sun
When	down	they	drift	settling	flat
	
To	make	this	path	forever	walked
Behind	you	behind	me
Between	the	step	past,	the	step	to	come
Look	up	look	up	once
Before	I	am	gone
	
TELLER	OF	TALES
FASSTAN	OF	KOLANSE


Chapter	One
Abject	misery	lies	not	in	what	the	blanket	reveals,	but	in	what	it	hides.
KING	TEHOL	THE	ONLY	OF	LETHER

War	 had	 come	 to	 the	 tangled,	 overgrown	 grounds	 of	 the	 dead	 Azath	 tower	 in	 the	 city	 of	 Letheras.
Swarms	 of	 lizards	 had	 invaded	 from	 the	 river’s	 shoreline.	 Discovering	 a	 plethora	 of	 strange	 insects,
they	began	a	feeding	frenzy.
Oddest	 among	 the	 arcane	 bugs	 was	 a	 species	 of	 two-headed	 beetle.	 Four	 lizards	 spied	 one	 such
creature	and	closed	in,	surrounding	it.	The	insect	noted	threats	from	two	directions	and	made	a	careful
half-turn,	only	to	find	two	additional	threats,	whereupon	it	crouched	down	and	played	dead.
This	didn’t	work.	One	of	the	lizards,	a	wall-scampering	breed	with	a	broad	mouth	and	gold-flecked
eyes,	lunged	forward	and	gobbled	up	the	insect.
This	 scene	 was	 played	 out	 throughout	 the	 grounds,	 a	 terrible	 slaughter,	 a	 rush	 to	 extinction.	 The
fates,	this	evening,	did	not	appear	kind	to	the	two-headed	beetles.
Not	 all	 prey,	 however,	 was	 as	 helpless	 as	 it	 might	 initially	 seem.	 The	 role	 of	 the	 victim	 in	 nature	 is
ephemeral,	 and	 that	 which	 is	 fed	 upon	 might	 in	 time	 feed	 upon	 the	 feeders	 in	 the	 eternal	 drama	 of
survival.
A	lone	owl,	already	engorged	on	lizards,	was	the	sole	witness	to	the	sudden	wave	of	writhing	deaths
on	 the	 rumpled	 earth	 below,	 as	 from	 the	 mouths	 of	 dying	 lizards,	 grotesque	 shapes	 emerged.	 The
extinction	 of	 the	 two-headed	 beetles	 proved	 not	 as	 imminent	 a	 threat	 as	 it	 had	 seemed	 only	 moments
earlier.
But	 owls,	 being	 among	 the	 least	 clever	 of	 birds,	 are	 unmindful	 of	 such	 lessons.	 This	 one	 watched,
wide-eyed	 and	 empty.	 Until	 it	 felt	 a	 strange	 stirring	 in	 its	 own	 gut,	 sufficient	 to	 distract	 it	 from	 the
wretched	dying	below,	that	array	of	pale	lizard	bellies	blotting	the	dark	ground.	It	did	not	think	of	the
lizards	 it	 had	 eaten.	 It	 did	 not	 take	 note,	 even	 in	 retrospect,	 of	 the	 sluggish	 efforts	 some	 of	 them	 had
displayed	at	escaping	its	swooping	talons.
The	owl	was	in	for	a	long	night	of	excruciating	regurgitation.	Dimwitted	as	it	was,	from	that	moment
on	and	for	ever	more,	lizards	were	off	its	menu.
The	 world	 delivers	 its	 lessons	 in	 manners	 subtle	 or,	 if	 required,	 cruel	 and	 blunt,	 so	 that	 even	 the
thickest	 of	 subjects	 will	 comprehend.	 Failing	 that,	 they	 die.	 For	 the	 smart	 ones,	 of	 course,
incomprehension	is	inexcusable.
______
A	night	of	heat	in	Letheras.	Stone	dripped	sweat.	The	canals	looked	viscid,	motionless,	the	surface	strangely
flattened	 and	 opaque	 with	 swirls	 of	 dust	 and	 rubbish.	 Insects	 danced	 over	 the	 water	 as	 if	 seeking	 their
reflections,	but	this	smooth	patina	yielded	nothing,	swallowing	up	the	span	of	stars,	devouring	the	lurid	torchlight
of	the	street	patrols,	and	so	the	winged	insects	spun	without	surcease,	as	though	crazed	with	fever.
Beneath	a	bridge,	on	stepped	banks	buried	in	darkness,	crickets	crawled	like	droplets	of	oozing	oil,	glistening,
turgid,	haplessly	crunched	underfoot	as	two	figures	drew	together	and	huddled	in	the	gloom.
‘He	never	would’ve	went	in,’	one	of	them	said	in	a	hoarse	whisper.	‘The	water	reeks,	and	look,	no	ripples,
no	nothing.	He’s	scarpered	to	the	other	side,	somewhere	in	the	night	market	where	he	can	get	lost	fast.’
‘Lost,’	grunted	the	other,	a	woman,	lifting	up	the	dagger	in	one	gloved	hand	and	examining	the	edge,	‘that’s	a
good	one.	Like	he	could	get	lost.	Like	any	of	us	could.’
‘You	think	he	can’t	wrap	himself	up	like	we	done?’
‘No	time	for	that.	He	bolted.	He’s	on	the	run.	Panicked.’
‘Looked	 like	 panic,	 didn’t	 it,’	 agreed	 her	 companion,	 and	 then	 he	 shook	 his	 head.	 ‘Never	 seen	 anything


so	.	.	.	disappointing.’
The	woman	sheathed	her	dagger.	‘They’ll	flush	him	out.	He’ll	come	back	across,	and	we	jump	him	then.’
‘Stupid,	thinking	he	could	get	away.’
After	a	few	moments,	Smiles	unsheathed	her	dagger	again,	peered	at	the	edge.
Beside	her,	Throatslitter	rolled	his	eyes	but	said	nothing.
	
Bottle	straightened,	gestured	for	Koryk	to	join	him,	then	watched,	amused,	as	the	broad-shouldered	half-blood
Seti	 shoved	 and	 elbowed	 his	 way	 through	 the	 crowd,	 leaving	 a	 wake	 of	 dark	 glares	 and	 bitten-off	 curses—
there	 was	 little	 risk	 of	 trouble,	 of	 course,	 since	 clearly	 the	 damned	 foreigner	 was	 looking	 for	 just	 that,	 and
instincts	being	what	they	were	the	world	over,	no	one	was	of	a	mind	to	take	on	Koryk.
Too	bad.	It’d	be	a	thing	worth	seeing,	Bottle	smiled	to	himself,	if	a	mob	of	irate	Letherii	shoppers	descended
on	the	glowering	barbarian,	pummelling	him	into	the	ground	with	loaves	of	crusty	bread	and	bulbous	root-crops.
Then	again,	such	distractions	wouldn’t	do.	Not	right	now,	anyway,	when	they’d	found	their	quarry,	with	Tarr
and	Corabb	moving	round	back	of	the	tavern	to	cover	the	alley	bolt-hole,	and	Maybe	and	Masan	Gilani	up	on
the	roof	by	now,	in	case	their	target	got	imaginative.
Koryk	arrived,	in	a	sweat,	scowling	and	grinding	his	teeth.	‘Miserable	turds,’	he	muttered.	‘What’s	with	this
lust	to	spend	coin?	Markets	are	stupid.’
‘Keeps	people	happy,’	said	Bottle,	‘or	if	not	exactly	happy,	then	.	.	.	temporarily	satiated.	Which	serves	the
same	function.’
‘Which	is?’
‘Keeping	them	outa	trouble.	The	disruptive	kind	of	trouble,’	he	added,	seeing	Koryk’s	knotted	forehead,	his
darting	eyes.	‘The	kind	that	comes	when	a	population	finds	the	time	to	think,	really	think,	I	mean—when	they
start	realizing	what	a	piece	of	shit	all	this	is.’
‘Sounds	like	one	of	the	King’s	speeches—they	put	me	to	sleep,	like	you’re	doing	right	now,	Bottle.	Where
exactly	is	he,	then?’
‘One	of	my	rats	is	crouching	at	the	foot	of	a	banister—’
‘Which	one?’
‘Baby	Smiles—she’s	the	best	for	this.	Anyway,	she’s	got	her	beady	eyes	fixed	right	on	him.	He’s	at	a	table
in	 the	 corner,	 just	 under	 a	 shuttered	 window—but	 it	 doesn’t	 look	 like	 the	 kind	 anyone	 could	 actually	 climb
through.	Basically,’	Bottle	concluded,	‘he’s	cornered.’
Koryk’s	frown	deepened.	‘That’s	too	easy,	isn’t	it?’
Bottle	scratched	at	his	stubble,	shifted	from	one	foot	to	the	other,	and	then	sighed.	‘Aye,	way	too	easy.’
‘Here	come	Balm	and	Gesler.’
The	two	sergeants	arrived.
‘What	are	we	doing	here?’	Balm	asked,	eyes	wide.
Gesler	 said,	 ‘He’s	 in	 his	 funk	 again,	 never	 mind	 him.	 We	 got	 us	 a	 fight	 ahead,	 I	 figure.	 A	 nasty	 one.	 He
won’t	go	down	easy.’
‘What’s	the	plan,	then?’	Koryk	asked.
‘Stormy	leads	the	way.	He’s	going	to	spring	him	loose—if	he	heads	for	the	back	door	your	friends	will	take
him	down.	Same	for	if	he	goes	up.	My	guess	is,	he’ll	dodge	round	Stormy	and	try	for	the	front	door—that’s
what	I’d	do.	Stormy’s	huge	and	mean	but	he	ain’t	fast.	And	that’s	what	we’re	counting	on.	The	four	of	us	will
be	waiting	for	the	bastard—we’ll	take	him	down.	With	Stormy	coming	up	behind	him	and	holding	the	doorway
to	stop	any	retreat.’
‘He’s	 looking	 nervous	 and	 in	 a	 bad	 mood	 in	 there,’	 Bottle	 said.	 ‘Warn	 Stormy—he	 just	 might	 stand	 and
fight.’
‘We	hear	a	scrap	start	and	in	we	go,’	said	Gesler.
The	gold-hued	sergeant	went	off	to	brief	Stormy.	Balm	stood	beside	Koryk,	looking	bewildered.
People	were	rolling	in	and	out	of	the	tavern	like	it	was	a	fast	brothel.	Stormy	then	appeared,	looming	over
almost	 everyone	 else,	 his	 visage	 red	 and	 his	 beard	 even	 redder,	 as	 if	 his	 entire	 face	 was	 aflame.	 He	 tugged
loose	the	peace-strap	on	his	sword	as	he	lumbered	towards	the	door.	Seeing	him,	people	scattered	aside.	He
met	one	more	customer	at	the	threshold	and	took	hold	of	the	man	by	the	front	of	his	shirt,	then	threw	him	into
his	 own	 wake—the	 poor	 fool	 yelped	 as	 he	 landed	 face	 first	 on	 the	 cobbles	 not	 three	 paces	 from	 the	 three


Malazans,	where	he	writhed,	hands	up	at	his	bloodied	chin.
As	Stormy	plunged	into	the	tavern,	Gesler	arrived,	stepping	over	the	fallen	citizen,	and	hissed,	‘To	the	door
now,	all	of	us,	quick!’
Bottle	let	Koryk	take	the	lead,	and	held	back	even	for	Balm	who	almost	started	walking	 the	 other	 way—
before	Gesler	yanked	the	man	back.	If	there	 was	going	to	be	 a	scrap,	Bottle	preferred	to	leave	most	of	the
nasty	work	to	the	others.	He’d	done	his	job,	after	all,	in	tracking	and	finding	the	quarry.
Chaos	erupted	in	the	tavern,	furniture	crashing,	startled	shouts	and	terrified	screams.	Then	something	went
thump!	And	all	at	once	white	smoke	was	billowing	out	from	the	doorway.	More	splintering	furniture,	a	heavy
crash,	and	then	a	figure	sprinted	out	from	the	smoke.
An	elbow	cracked	hard	on	Koryk’s	jaw	and	he	toppled	like	a	tree.
Gesler	ducked	a	lashing	fist,	just	in	time	to	meet	an	upthrust	knee,	and	the	sound	the	impact	made	was	of
two	 coconuts	 in	 collision.	 The	 quarry’s	 leg	 spun	 round,	 taking	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 man	 with	 it	 in	 a	 wild	 pirouette,
whilst	Gesler	rocked	back	to	promptly	sit	down	on	the	cobbles,	his	eyes	glazed.
Shrieking,	Balm	back-stepped,	reaching	for	his	short	sword—and	Bottle	leapt	forward	to	pin	the	sergeant’s
arm—as	the	target	lunged	past	them	all,	running	hard	but	unevenly	for	the	bridge.
Stormy	stumbled	out	from	the	tavern,	his	nose	streaming	blood.	‘You	didn’t	get	him?	You	damned	idiots—
look	at	my	face!	I	took	this	for	nothing!’
Other	customers	pushed	out	round	the	huge	Falari,	eyes	streaming	and	coughing.
Gesler	 was	 climbing	 upright,	 wobbly,	 shaking	 his	 head.	 ‘Come	 on,’	 he	 mumbled,	 ‘let’s	 get	 after	 him,	 and
hope	Throatslitter	and	Smiles	can	slow	him	down	some.’
Tarr	and	Corabb	showed	up	and	surveyed	the	scene.	‘Corabb,’	said	Tarr,	‘stay	with	Koryk	and	try	bringing
him	round.’	And	then	he	joined	Bottle,	Gesler,	Stormy	and	Balm	as	they	set	out	after	their	target.
Balm	glared	across	at	Bottle.	‘I	coulda	had	him!’
‘We	need	the	fool	alive,	you	idiot,’	snapped	Bottle.
The	sergeant	gaped.	‘We	do?’
	
‘Look	at	that,’	hissed	Throatslitter.	‘Here	he	comes!’
‘Limping	bad,	too,’	observed	Smiles,	sheathing	her	dagger	once	more.	‘We	come	up	both	sides	and	go	for
his	ankles.’
‘Good	idea.’
Throatslitter	went	left,	Smiles	went	right,	and	they	crouched	at	either	end	of	the	landing	on	this	side	of	the
bridge.	 They	 listened	 to	 the	 step-scruff	 of	 the	 limping	 fugitive	 as	 he	 reached	 the	 span,	 drawing	 ever	 closer.
From	the	edge	of	the	market	street	on	the	opposite	side,	shouts	rang	through	the	air.	The	scuffling	run	on	the
bridge	picked	up	pace.
At	 the	 proper	 moment,	 as	 the	 target	 reached	 the	 end	 and	 stepped	 out	 on	 to	 the	 street’s	 cobbles,	 the	 two
Malazan	marines	leapt	out	from	their	hiding	places,	converging,	each	wrapping	arms	round	one	of	the	man’s
legs.
The	three	went	down	in	a	heap.
Moments	later,	amidst	a	flurry	of	snarled	curses,	gouging	thumbs	and	frantic	kicking,	the	rest	of	the	hunters
arrived,	and	finally	succeeded	in	pinning	down	their	quarry.
Bottle	 edged	 closer	 to	 gaze	 down	 at	 their	 victim’s	 bruised,	 flushed	 visage.	 ‘Really,	 Sergeant,	 you	 had	 to
know	it	was	hopeless.’
Fiddler	glared.
‘Look	what	you	did	to	my	nose!’	Stormy	said,	gripping	one	of	Fiddler’s	arms	and	apparently	contemplating
breaking	it	in	two.
‘You	used	a	smoker	in	the	tavern,	didn’t	you?’	Bottle	asked.	‘What	a	waste.’
‘You’ll	all	pay	for	this,’	said	Fiddler.	‘You	have	no	idea—’
‘He’s	probably	right,’	said	Gesler.	‘So,	Fid,	we	gonna	have	to	hold	you	down	here	for	ever,	or	will	you	come
peacefully	now?	What	the	Adjunct	wants,	the	Adjunct	gets.’
‘Easy	for	you,’	hissed	Fiddler.	‘Just	look	at	Bottle	there.	Does	he	look	happy?’
Bottle	scowled.	‘No,	I’m	not	happy,	but	orders	are	orders,	Sergeant.	You	can’t	just	run	away.’
‘Wish	I’d	brought	a	sharper	or	two,’	Fiddler	said,	‘that	would’ve	settled	it	just	fine.	All	right	now,	you	can	all


let	me	up—I	think	my	knee’s	busted	anyway.	Gesler,	you	got	a	granite	jaw,	did	you	know	that?’
‘And	it	cuts	me	a	fine	profile	besides,’	said	Gesler.
‘We	was	hunting	Fiddler?’	Balm	suddenly	asked.	‘Gods	below,	he	mutiny	or	something?’
Throatslitter	patted	his	sergeant	on	the	shoulder.	‘It’s	all	right	now,	Sergeant.	Adjunct	wants	Fiddler	to	do	a
reading,	that’s	all.’
Bottle	winced.	That’s	all.	Sure,	nothing	to	it.	I	can’t	wait.
They	dragged	Fiddler	to	his	feet,	and	wisely	held	on	to	the	man	as	they	marched	him	back	to	the	barracks.
	
Grey	and	ghostly,	the	oblong	shape	hung	beneath	the	lintel	over	the	dead	Azath’s	doorway.	It	looked	lifeless,
but	of	course	it	wasn’t.
‘We	could	throw	stones,’	said	Sinn.	‘They	sleep	at	night,	don’t	they?’
‘Mostly,’	replied	Grub.
‘Maybe	if	we’re	quiet.’
‘Maybe.’
Sinn	fidgeted.	‘Stones?’
‘Hit	it	and	they’ll	wake	up,	and	then	out	they’ll	come,	in	a	black	swarm.’
‘I’ve	always	hated	wasps.	For	as	long	as	I	can	remember—I	must’ve	been	bad	stung	once,	do	you	think?’
‘Who	hasn’t?’	Grub	said,	shrugging.
‘I	could	just	set	it	on	fire.’
‘No	sorcery,	Sinn,	not	here.’
‘I	thought	you	said	the	house	was	dead.’
‘It	is	.	.	.	I	think.	But	maybe	the	yard	isn’t.’
She	glanced	round.	‘People	been	digging	here.’
‘You	ever	gonna	talk	to	anybody	but	me?’	Grub	asked.
‘No.’	The	single	word	was	absolute,	immutable,	and	it	did	not	invite	any	further	discussion	on	that	issue.
He	eyed	her.	‘You	know	what’s	happening	tonight,	don’t	you?’
‘I	don’t	care.	I’m	not	going	anywhere	near	that.’
‘Doesn’t	matter.’
‘Maybe,	if	we	hide	inside	the	house,	it	won’t	reach	us.’
‘Maybe,’	Grub	allowed.	‘But	I	doubt	the	Deck	works	like	that.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
‘Well,	I	don’t.	Only,	Uncle	Keneb	told	me	Fiddler	talked	about	me	last	time,	and	I	was	jumping	into	the	sea
around	then—I	wasn’t	in	the	cabin.	But	he	just	knew,	he	knew	exactly	what	I	was	doing.’
‘What	were	you	doing?’
‘I	went	to	find	the	Nachts.’
‘But	how	did	you	know	they	were	there?	You	don’t	make	sense,	Grub.	And	anyway,	what	use	are	they?
They	just	follow	Withal	around.’
‘When	they’re	not	hunting	little	lizards,’	Grub	said,	smiling.
But	Sinn	was	not	in	the	mood	for	easy	distraction.	‘I	look	at	you	and	I	think	.	.	.	Mockra.’
To	that,	Grub	made	no	reply.	Instead,	he	crept	forward	on	the	path’s	uneven	pavestones,	eyes	fixed	on	the
wasp	nest.
Sinn	followed.	‘You’re	what’s	coming,	aren’t	you?’
He	snorted.	‘And	you	aren’t?’
They	reached	the	threshold,	halted.	‘Do	you	think	it’s	locked?’
‘Shh.’
Grub	 crouched	 down	 and	 edged	 forward	 beneath	 the	 huge	 nest.	 Once	 past	 it,	 he	 slowly	 straightened	 and
reached	for	the	door’s	latch.	It	came	off	in	his	hand,	raising	a	puff	of	sawdust.	Grub	glanced	back	at	Sinn,	but
said	nothing.	Facing	the	door	again,	he	gave	it	a	light	push.
It	crumpled	like	wafer	where	his	fingers	had	prodded.	More	sawdust	sifted	down.
Grub	raised	both	hands	and	pushed	against	the	door.
The	barrier	disintegrated	in	clouds	and	frail	splinters.	Metal	clunked	on	the	floor	just	beyond,	and	a	moment
later	the	clouds	were	swept	inward	as	if	on	an	indrawn	breath.


Grub	stepped	over	the	heap	of	rotted	wood	and	vanished	in	the	gloom	beyond.
After	a	moment,	Sinn	followed,	ducking	low	and	moving	quickly.
	
From	 the	 gloom	 beneath	 a	 nearly	 dead	 tree	 in	 the	 grounds	 of	 the	 Azath,	 Lieutenant	 Pores	 grunted.	 He
supposed	he	should	have	called	them	back,	but	to	do	so	would	have	revealed	his	presence,	and	though	he	could
never	be	sure	when	it	came	to	Captain	Kindly’s	orders—designed	and	delivered	as	they	were	with	deliberate
vagueness,	like	flimsy	fronds	over	a	spike-filled	pit—he	suspected	that	he	was	supposed	to	maintain	some	sort
of	subterfuge	when	following	the	two	runts	around.
Besides,	he’d	made	some	discoveries.	Sinn	wasn’t	mute	at	all.	Just	a	stubborn	little	cow.	What	a	shock.	And
she	 had	 a	 crush	 on	 Grub,	 how	 sweet—sweet	 as	 tree	 sap,	 twigs	 and	 trapped	 insects	 included—why,	 it	 could
make	 a	 grown	 man	 melt,	 and	 then	 run	 down	 a	 drain	 into	 that	 depthless	 sea	 of	 sentimentality	 where	 children
played,	and,	occasionally,	got	away	with	murder.
Well,	the	difference	was	Pores	had	a	very	good	memory.	He	recalled	in	great	detail	his	own	childhood,	and
could	 he	 have	 reached	 back,	 into	 his	 own	 past,	 he’d	 give	 that	 snot-faced	 jerk	 a	 solid	 clout	 to	 the	 head.	 And
then	look	down	at	that	stunned,	hurt	expression,	and	say	something	like	‘Get	used	to	it,	little	Pores.	One	day
you’ll	meet	a	man	named	Kindly	.	.	.’
Anyway,	the	mice	had	scurried	into	the	Azath	House.	Maybe	something	would	take	care	of	them	in	there,
bringing	to	a	satisfying	conclusion	this	stupid	assignment.	A	giant,	ten-thousand-year-old	foot,	stomping	down,
once,	twice.	Splat,	splot,	like	stinkberries,	Grub	a	smear,	Sinn	a	stain.
Gods	no,	I’d	get	blamed!	Growling	under	his	breath,	he	set	out	after	them.
In	retrospect,	he	supposed	he	should	have	remembered	that	damned	wasp	nest.	At	the	very	least,	it	should
have	caught	his	attention	as	he	leapt	for	the	doorway.	Instead,	it	caught	his	forehead.
Sudden	flurry	of	enraged	buzzing,	as	the	nest	rocked	out	and	then	back,	butting	his	head	a	second	time.
Recognition,	comprehension,	and	then,	appropriately	enough,	blind	panic.
Pores	whirled	and	ran.
A	thousand	or	so	angry	black	wasps	provided	escort.
Six	 stings	 could	 drop	 a	 horse.	 He	 shrieked	 as	 a	 fire	 ignited	 on	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck.	 And	 then	 again,	 as
another	stinger	stabbed,	this	time	on	his	right	ear.
He	whirled	his	arms.	There	was	a	canal	somewhere	ahead—they’d	crossed	a	bridge,	he	recalled,	off	to	the
left.
Another	explosion	of	agony,	this	time	on	the	back	of	his	right	hand.
Never	mind	the	canal!	I	need	a	healer—fast!
He	could	no	longer	hear	any	buzzing,	but	the	scene	before	him	had	begun	to	tilt,	darkness	bleeding	out	from
the	shadows,	and	the	lights	of	lanterns	through	windows	blurred,	lurid	and	painful	in	his	eyes.	His	legs	weren’t
working	too	well,	either.
There,	the	Malazan	Barracks.
Deadsmell.	Or	Ebron.
Staggering	now,	struggling	to	fix	his	gaze	on	the	compound	gate—trying	to	shout	to	the	two	soldiers	standing
guard,	but	his	tongue	was	swelling	up,	filling	his	mouth.	He	was	having	trouble	breathing.	Running	.	.	.
Running	out	of	time—
	
‘Who	was	that?’
Grub	came	back	from	the	hallway	and	shook	his	head.	‘Someone.	Woke	up	the	wasps.’
‘Glad	they	didn’t	come	in	here.’
They	were	standing	in	a	main	chamber	of	some	sort,	a	stone	fireplace	dominating	one	wall,	framed	by	two
deep-cushioned	 chairs.	 Trunks	 and	 chests	 squatted	 against	 two	 other	 walls,	 and	 in	 front	 of	 the	 last	 one,
opposite	the	cold	hearth,	there	was	an	ornate	couch,	above	it	a	large	faded	tapestry.	All	were	little	more	than
vague,	grainy	shapes	in	the	gloom.
‘We	need	a	candle	or	a	lantern,’	said	Sinn.	‘Since,’	she	added	with	an	edge	to	her	tone,	‘I	can’t	use	sorcery
—’
‘You	 probably	 can,’	 said	 Grub,	 ‘now	 that	 we’re	 nowhere	 near	 the	 yard.	 There’s	 no	 one	 here,	 no,	 um,


presence,	I	mean.	It	really	is	dead.’
With	a	triumphant	gesture	Sinn	awakened	the	coals	in	the	fireplace,	although	the	flames	flaring	to	life	there
were	strangely	lurid,	spun	through	with	green	and	blue	tendrils.
‘That’s	too	easy	for	you,’	Grub	said.	‘I	didn’t	even	feel	a	warren.’
She	said	nothing,	walking	up	to	study	the	tapestry.
Grub	followed.
A	battle	scene	was	depicted,	which	for	such	things	was	typical	enough.	It	seemed	heroes	only	existed	in	the
midst	of	death.	Barely	discernible	in	the	faded	weave,	armoured	reptiles	of	some	sort	warred	with	Tiste	Edur
and	Tiste	Andii.	The	smoke-shrouded	sky	overhead	was	crowded	with	both	floating	mountains—most	of	them
burning—and	dragons,	and	some	of	these	dragons	seemed	enormous,	five,	six	times	the	size	of	the	others	even
though	 they	 were	 clearly	 more	 distant.	 Fire	 wreathed	 the	 scene,	 as	 fragments	 of	 the	 aerial	 fortresses	 broke
apart	 and	 plunged	 down	 into	 the	 midst	 of	 the	 warring	 factions.	 Everywhere	 was	 slaughter	 and	 harrowing
destruction.
‘Pretty,’	murmured	Sinn.
‘Let’s	check	the	tower,’	said	Grub.	All	the	fires	in	the	scene	reminded	him	of	Y’Ghatan,	and	his	vision	of
Sinn,	marching	through	the	flames—she	could	have	walked	into	this	ancient	battle.	He	feared	that	if	he	looked
closely	 enough	 he’d	 see	 her,	 among	 the	 hundreds	 of	 seething	 figures,	 a	 contented	 expression	 on	 her	 roundcheeked	face,	her	dark	eyes	satiated	and	shining.
They	set	off	for	the	square	tower.
Into	the	gloom	of	the	corridor	once	more,	where	Grub	paused,	waiting	for	his	eyes	to	adjust.	A	moment	later
green	flames	licked	out	from	the	chamber	they	had	just	quit,	slithering	across	the	stone	floor,	drawing	closer.
In	the	ghoulish	glow,	Sinn	smiled.
The	fire	followed	them	up	the	saddled	stairs	to	the	upper	landing,	which	was	bare	of	all	furnishings.	Beneath
a	shuttered,	web-slung	window	was	slumped	a	desiccated	corpse.	Leathery	strips	of	skin	here	and	there	were
all	that	held	the	carcass	together,	and	Grub	could	see	the	oddity	of	the	thing’s	limbs,	the	extra	joints	at	knee,
elbow,	 wrist	 and	 ankle.	 The	 very	 sternum	 seemed	 horizontally	 hinged	 midway	 down,	 as	 were	 the	 prominent,
birdlike	collarbones.
He	 crept	 forward	 for	 a	 closer	 look.	 The	 face	 was	 frontally	 flattened,	 sharpening	 the	 angle	 where	 the
cheekbones	swept	back,	almost	all	the	way	to	the	ear-holes.	Every	bone	he	could	see	seemed	designed	to	fold
or	 collapse—not	 just	 the	 cheeks	 but	 the	 mandibles	 and	 brow-ridges	 as	 well.	 It	 was	 a	 face	 that	 in	 life,	 Grub
suspected,	could	manage	a	bizarre	array	of	expressions—far	beyond	what	a	human	face	could	achieve.
The	skin	was	bleached	white,	hairless,	and	Grub	knew	that	if	he	so	much	as	touched	the	corpse,	it	would	fall
to	dust.
‘Forkrul	Assail,’	he	whispered.
Sinn	rounded	on	him.	‘How	do	you	know	that?	How	do	you	know	anything	about	anything?’
‘On	the	tapestry	below,’	he	said,	‘those	lizards.	I	think	they	were	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’	He	glanced	at	her,
and	then	shrugged.	‘This	Azath	House	didn’t	die,’	he	said.	‘It	just	.	.	.	left.’
‘Left?	How?’
‘I	think	it	just	walked	out	of	here,	that’s	what	I	think.’
‘But	you	don’t	know	anything!	How	can	you	say	things	like	that?’
‘I	bet	Quick	Ben	knows,	too.’
‘Knows	what?’	she	hissed	in	exasperation.
‘This.	The	truth	of	it	all.’
‘Grub—’
He	met	her	gaze,	studied	the	fury	in	her	eyes.	‘You,	me,	the	Azath.	It’s	all	changing,	Sinn.	Everything—it’s
all	changing.’
Her	small	hands	made	fists	at	her	sides.	The	flames	dancing	from	the	stone	floor	climbed	the	frame	of	the
chamber’s	entranceway,	snapping	and	sparking.
Grub	snorted,	‘The	way	you	make	it	talk	.	.	.’
‘It	can	shout,	too,	Grub.’
He	nodded.	‘Loud	enough	to	break	the	world,	Sinn.’
‘I	would,	you	know,’	she	said	with	sudden	vehemence,	‘just	to	see	what	it	can	do.	What	I	can	do.’


‘What’s	stopping	you?’
She	grimaced	as	she	turned	away.	‘You	might	shout	back.’
	
Tehol	the	Only,	King	of	Lether,	stepped	into	the	room	and,	arms	out	to	the	sides,	spun	in	a	circle.	Then	beamed
at	Bugg.	‘What	do	you	think?’
The	manservant	held	a	bronze	pot	in	his	battered,	blunt	hands.	‘You’ve	had	dancing	lessons?’
‘No,	look	at	my	blanket!	My	beloved	wife	has	begun	embroidering	it—see,	there	at	the	hem,	above	my	left
knee.’
Bugg	leaned	forward	slightly.	‘Ah,	I	see.	Very	nice.’
‘Very	nice?’
‘Well,	I	can’t	quite	make	out	what	it’s	supposed	to	be.’
‘Me	neither.’	He	paused.	‘She’s	not	very	good,	is	she?’
‘No,	she’s	terrible.	Of	course,	she’s	an	academic.’
‘Precisely,’	Tehol	agreed.
‘After	all,’	said	Bugg,	‘if	she	had	any	skill	at	sewing	and	the	like—’
‘She’d	never	have	settled	for	the	scholarly	route?’
‘Generally	speaking,	people	useless	at	everything	else	become	academics.’
‘My	thoughts	inexactly,	Bugg.	Now,	I	must	ask,	what’s	wrong?’
‘Wrong?’
‘We’ve	 known	 each	 other	 for	 a	 long	 time,’	 said	 Tehol.	 ‘My	 senses	 are	 exquisitely	 honed	 for	 reading	 the
finest	 nuances	 in	 your	 mood.	 I	 have	 few	 talents	 but	 I	 do	 assert,	 howsoever	 immodestly,	 that	 I	 possess
exceptional	ability	in	taking	your	measure.’
‘Well,’	sighed	Bugg,	‘I	am	impressed.	How	could	you	tell	I’m	upset?’
‘Apart	from	besmirching	my	wife,	you	mean?’
‘Yes,	apart	from	that.’
Tehol	 nodded	 towards	 the	 pot	 Bugg	 was	 holding,	 and	 so	 he	 looked	 down,	 only	 to	 discover	 that	 it	 was	 no
longer	a	pot,	but	a	mangled	heap	of	tortured	metal.	Sighing	again,	he	let	it	drop	to	the	floor.	The	thud	echoed	in
the	chamber.
‘It’s	the	subtle	details,’	said	Tehol,	smoothing	out	the	creases	in	his	Royal	Blanket.	‘Something	worth	saying
to	my	wife	.	.	.	casually,	of	course,	in	passing.	Swift	passing,	as	in	headlong	flight,	since	she’ll	be	armed	with
vicious	fishbone	needles.’
‘The	 Malazans,’	 said	 Bugg.	 ‘Or,	 rather,	 one	 Malazan.	 With	 a	 version	 of	 the	 Tiles	 in	 his	 sweaty	 hands.	 A
potent	version,	and	this	man	is	no	charlatan.	He’s	an	adept.	Terrifyingly	so.’
‘And	he’s	about	to	cast	the	Tiles?’
‘Wooden	cards.	The	rest	of	the	world’s	moved	on	from	Tiles,	sire.	They	call	it	the	Deck	of	Dragons.’
‘Dragons?	What	dragons?’
‘Don’t	ask.’
‘Well,	is	there	nowhere	you	can,	um,	hide,	O	wretched	and	miserable	Elder	God?’
Bugg	made	a	sour	face.	‘Not	likely.	I’m	not	the	only	problem,	however.	There’s	the	Errant.’
‘He’s	still	here?	He’s	not	been	seen	for	months—’
‘The	Deck	poses	a	threat	to	him.	He	may	object	to	its	unveiling.	He	may	do	something	.	.	.	precipitous.’
‘Hmm.	The	Malazans	are	our	guests,	and	accordingly	if	they	are	at	risk,	it	behoves	us	to	protect	them	or,
failing	that,	warn	them.	If	that	doesn’t	work,	we	can	always	run	away.’
‘Yes,	sire,	that	might	be	wise.’
‘Running	away?’
‘No,	a	warning.’
‘I	shall	send	Brys.’
‘Poor	Brys.’
‘Now,	that’s	not	my	fault,	is	it?	Poor	Brys,	exactly.	It’s	high	time	he	started	earning	his	title,	whatever	it	is,
which	 at	 the	 moment	 escapes	 me.	 It’s	 that	 bureaucratic	 mindset	 of	 his	 that’s	 so	 infuriating.	 He	 hides	 in	 the
very	 obscurity	 of	 his	 office.	 A	 faceless	 peon,	 dodging	 this	 way	 and	 that	 whenever	 responsibility	 comes	 aknocking	at	his	door.	Yes,	I’ve	had	my	fill	of	the	man,	brother	or	not—’


‘Sire,	you	put	Brys	in	charge	of	the	army.’
‘Did	I?	Of	course	I	did.	Let’s	see	him	hide	now!’
‘He’s	waiting	for	you	in	the	throne	room.’
‘Well,	he’s	no	fool.	He	knows	when	he’s	cornered.’
‘Rucket	is	there,	too,’	said	Bugg,	‘with	a	petition	from	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild.’
‘A	petition?	For	what,	more	rats?	On	your	feet,	old	friend,	the	time	has	come	to	meet	our	public.	This	whole
kingship	thing	is	a	real	bother.	Spectacles,	parades,	tens	of	thousands	of	adoring	subjects—’
‘You’ve	not	had	any	spectacles	or	parades,	sire.’
‘And	still	they	adore	me.’
Bugg	rose	and	preceded	King	Tehol	across	the	chamber,	through	the	door,	and	into	the	throne	room.
The	only	people	awaiting	them	were	Brys,	Rucket	and	Queen	Janath.	Tehol	edged	closer	to	Bugg	as	they
ascended	the	dais.	‘See	Rucket?	See	the	adoration?	What	did	I	tell	you?’
The	King	sat	down	on	the	throne,	smiled	at	the	Queen	who	was	already	seated	in	a	matching	throne	to	his
left,	and	then	leaned	back	and	stretched	out	his	legs—
‘Don’t	do	that,	brother,’	advised	Brys.	‘The	view	from	here	.	.	.’
Tehol	straightened.	‘Oops,	most	royally.’
‘About	that,’	said	Rucket.
‘I	see	with	relief	that	you’ve	shed	countless	stones	of	weight,	Rucket.	Most	becoming.	About	what?’
‘That	adoration	bit	you	whispered	to	Bugg.’
‘I	thought	you	had	a	petition?’
‘I	want	to	sleep	with	you.	I	want	you	to	cheat	on	your	wife,	Tehol.	With	me.’
‘That’s	your	petition?’
‘What’s	wrong	with	it?’
Queen	Janath	spoke.	‘It	can’t	be	cheating.	Cheating	would	be	behind	my	back.	Deceit,	deception,	betrayal.
I	happen	to	be	sitting	right	here,	Rucket.’
‘Precisely,’	Rucket	replied,	‘let’s	do	without	such	grim	details.	Free	love	for	all,’	and	she	smiled	up	at	Tehol.
‘Specifically,	you	and	me,	sire.	Well,	not	entirely	free,	since	I	expect	you	to	buy	me	dinner.’
‘I	 can’t,’	 said	 Tehol.	 ‘Nobody	 wants	 my	 money	 any	 more,	 now	 that	 I	 actually	 have	 some,	 and	 isn’t	 that
always	the	way?	Besides,	a	public	dalliance	by	the	King?	What	sort	of	example	would	that	set?’
‘You	wear	a	blanket,’	Rucket	pointed	out.	‘What	kind	of	example	is	that?’
‘Why,	one	of	airy	aplomb.’
Her	brows	lifted.	‘Most	would	view	your	aired	aplomb	with	horror,	sire.	But	not,’	she	added	with	a	winning
smile,	‘me.’
‘Gods	below,’	Janath	sighed,	rubbing	at	her	brow.
‘What	sort	of	petition	is	this?’	Tehol	demanded.	‘You’re	not	here	representing	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	at	all,
are	you?’
‘Actually,	I	am.	To	further	cement	our	ties.	As	everyone	knows,	sex	is	the	glue	that	holds	society	together,
so	I	figured—’
‘Sex?	Glue?’	Tehol	sat	forward.	‘Now	I’m	intrigued.	But	let’s	put	that	aside	for	the	moment.	Bugg,	prepare
a	 proclamation.	 The	 King	 shall	 have	 sex	 with	 every	 powerful	 woman	 in	 the	 city,	 assuming	 she	 can	 be
definitively	 determined	 to	 actually	 be	 a	 woman—we’ll	 need	 to	 devise	 some	 sort	 of	 gauge,	 get	 the	 Royal
Engineers	on	it.’
‘Why	 stop	 with	 powerful	 women?’	 Janath	 asked	 her	 husband.	 ‘Don’t	 forget	 the	 power	 that	 exists	 in	 a
household,	after	all.	And	what	about	a	similar	proclamation	for	the	Queen?’
Bugg	 said,	 ‘There	 was	 a	 tribe	 once	 where	 the	 chief	 and	 his	 wife	 had	 the	 privilege	 of	 bedding	 imminent
brides	and	grooms	the	night	before	the	marriage.’
‘Really?’
‘No,	sire,’	admitted	Bugg,	‘I	just	made	that	up.’
‘I	can	write	it	into	our	histories	if	you	like,’	said	Janath	in	barely	concealed	excitement.
Tehol	made	a	face.	‘My	wife	becomes	unseemly.’
‘Just	tossing	my	coin	into	this	treasure	trove	of	sordid	idiocy,	beloved.	Rucket,	you	and	I	need	to	sit	down
and	have	a	little	talk.’


‘I	never	talk	with	the	other	woman,’	pronounced	Rucket,	standing	straighter	and	lifting	her	chin.
Tehol	slapped	his	hands.	‘Well,	another	meeting	done!	What	shall	we	do	now?	I’m	for	bed.’	And	then,	with
a	quick	glance	at	Janath,	‘In	the	company	of	my	dearest	wife,	of	course.’
‘We	haven’t	even	had	supper	yet,	husband.’
‘Supper	in	bed!	We	can	invite—oh,	scratch	that.’
Brys	stepped	forward.	‘About	the	army.’
‘Oh,	it’s	always	about	the	army	with	you.	Order	more	boots.’
‘That’s	just	it—I	need	more	money.’
‘Bugg,	give	him	more	money.’
‘How	much,	sire?’
‘Whatever	he	needs	for	the	boots	and	whatnot.’
‘It’s	not	boots,’	said	Brys.	‘It’s	training.’
‘They’re	going	to	train	without	boots?	Extraordinary.’
‘I	want	to	make	use	of	these	Malazans	quartered	in	our	city.	These	“marines.”	And	their	tactics.	I	want	to
reinvent	the	entire	Letherii	military.	I	want	to	hire	the	Malazan	sergeants.’
‘And	does	their	Adjunct	find	this	acceptable?’
‘She	does.	Her	soldiers	are	getting	bored	and	that’s	not	good.’
‘I	imagine	not.	Do	we	know	when	they’re	leaving?’
Brys	frowned.	‘You’re	asking	me?	Why	not	ask	her?’
‘Ah,	the	agenda	is	set	for	the	next	meeting,	then.’
‘Shall	I	inform	the	Adjunct?’	Bugg	asked.
Tehol	rubbed	his	chin,	and	then	nodded.	‘That	would	be	wise,	yes,	Bugg.	Very	wise.	Well	done.’
‘What	about	my	petition?’	demanded	Rucket.	‘I	got	dressed	up	and	everything!’
‘I	will	take	it	under	advisement.’
‘Great.	How	about	a	Royal	Kiss	in	the	meantime?’
Tehol	fidgeted	on	his	throne.
‘Airy	aplomb	shrinking,	husband?	Clearly,	it	knows	better	than	you	that	there	are	limits	to	my	forbearance.’
‘Well,’	said	Rucket,	‘what	about	a	Royal	Squeeze?’
‘There’s	an	idea,’	said	Bugg,	‘raise	the	taxes.	On	guilds.’
‘Fine,’	 snapped	 Rucket,	 ‘I’m	 leaving.	 Another	 petition	 rejected	 by	 the	 King.	 Making	 the	 mob	 ever	 more
restive.’
‘What	mob?’	Tehol	asked.
‘The	one	I’m	about	to	assemble.’
‘You	wouldn’t.’
‘A	woman	scorned,	’tis	a	dangerous	thing,	sire.’
‘Oh,	give	her	a	kiss	and	squeeze,	husband.	I’ll	avert	my	eyes.’
Tehol	leapt	to	his	feet,	and	then	quickly	sat	back	down.	‘In	a	moment,’	he	gasped.
‘Gives	a	new	meaning	to	regal	bearing,’	commented	Bugg.
But	Rucket	was	smiling.	‘Let’s	just	take	that	as	a	promissory	note.’
‘And	the	mob?’	asked	Bugg.
‘Miraculously	dispersed	in	a	dreamy	sigh,	O	Chancellor,	or	whatever	you	are.’
‘I’m	the	Royal	Engineers—yes,	all	of	them.	Oh,	and	Treasurer.’
‘And	Spittoon	Mangler,’	Tehol	added.
The	others	frowned.
Bugg	scowled	at	Tehol.	‘I’d	been	pleasantly	distracted	until	you	said	that.’
‘Is	something	wrong?’	Brys	asked.
‘Ah,	brother,’	Tehol	said,	‘we	need	to	send	you	to	the	Adjunct—with	a	warning.’
‘Oh?’
‘Bugg?’
‘I’ll	walk	you	out,	Brys.’
After	 the	 two	 had	 left,	 Tehol	 glanced	 at	 Janath,	 and	 then	 at	 Rucket,	 and	 found	 them	 both	 still	 frowning.
‘What?’


‘Something	we	should	know?’	Janath	asked.
‘Yes,’	added	Rucket,	‘on	behalf	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild,	I	mean.’
‘Not	 really,’	 Tehol	 replied.	 ‘A	 minor	 matter,	 I	 assure	 you.	 Something	 to	 do	 with	 threatened	 gods	 and
devastating	divinations.	Now,	I’m	ready	to	try	for	my	kiss	and	squeeze—no,	wait.	Some	deep	breathing	first.
Give	me	a	moment—yes,	no,	wait.’
‘Shall	I	talk	about	my	embroidery?’	Janath	asked.
‘Yes,	that	sounds	perfect.	Do	proceed.	Be	right	there,	Rucket.’
	
Lieutenant	 Pores	 opened	 his	 eyes.	 Or	 tried	 to,	 only	 to	 find	 them	 mostly	 swollen	 shut.	 But	 through	 the	 blurry
slits	he	made	out	a	figure	hovering	over	him.	A	Nathii	face,	looking	thoughtful.
‘You	recognize	me?’	the	Nathii	asked.
Pores	tried	to	speak,	but	someone	had	bound	his	jaw	tight.	He	nodded,	only	to	find	his	neck	was	twice	the
normal	size.	Either	that,	he	considered,	or	his	head	had	shrunk.
‘Mulvan	 Dreader,’	 the	 Nathii	 said.	 ‘Squad	 healer.	 You’ll	 live.’	 He	 leaned	 back	 and	 said	 to	 someone	 else,
‘He’ll	live,	sir.	Won’t	be	much	use	for	a	few	days,	though.’
Captain	Kindly	loomed	into	view,	his	face—consisting	entirely	of	pinched	features—its	usual	expressionless
self.	‘For	this,	Lieutenant	Pores,	you’re	going	up	on	report.	Criminal	stupidity	unbecoming	to	an	officer.’
‘Bet	there’s	a	stack	a	those,’	muttered	the	healer	as	he	moved	to	depart.
‘Did	you	say	something,	soldier?’
‘No,	sir.’
‘Must	be	my	poor	hearing,	then.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Are	you	suggesting	I	have	poor	hearing,	soldier?’
‘No,	sir!’
‘I	am	certain	you	did.’
‘Your	hearing	is	perfect,	Captain,	I’m	sure	of	it.	And	that’s,	uh,	a	healer’s	assessment.’
‘Tell	me,’	said	Captain	Kindly,	‘is	there	a	cure	for	thinning	hair?’
‘Sir?	Well,	of	course.’
‘What	is	it?’
‘Shave	your	head.	Sir.’
‘It	looks	to	me	as	though	you	don’t	have	enough	things	to	do,	Healer.	Therefore,	proceed	through	the	squads
of	 your	 company	 to	 mend	 any	 and	 every	 ailment	 they	 describe.	 Oh,	 delouse	 the	 lot	 besides,	 and	 check	 for
blood	blisters	on	the	testicles	of	the	men—I	am	certain	that’s	a	dread	sign	of	something	awry.’
‘Blood	blisters,	sir?	On	the	testicles?’
‘The	flaw	in	hearing	seems	to	be	yours,	not	mine.’
‘Uh,	 nothing	 dread	 or	 awry,	 sir.	 Just	 don’t	 pop	 ’em,	 they	 bleed	 like	 demons.	 Comes	 with	 too	 much	 riding,
sir.’
‘Indeed.’
	.	.	.
‘Healer,	why	are	you	still	standing	there?’
‘Sorry,	sir,	on	my	way!’
‘I	shall	expect	a	detailed	report	on	the	condition	of	your	fellow	soldiers.’
‘Aye,	sir!	Testicular	inspection,	here	I	go.’
Kindly	 leaned	 forward	 again	 and	 studied	 Pores.	 ‘You	 can’t	 even	 talk,	 can	 you?	 Unexpected	 mercy	 there.
Six	 black	 wasp	 stings.	 You	 should	 be	 dead.	 Why	 aren’t	 you?	 Never	 mind.	 Presumably,	 you’ve	 lost	 the	 two
runts.	Now	I’ll	need	to	unchain	that	cattle-dog	to	find	them.	Tonight	of	all	nights.	Recover	quickly,	Lieutenant,
so	I	can	thrash	your	hide.’
	
Outside	 the	 dormitory,	 Mulvan	 Dreader	 paused	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then	 set	 off	 at	 a	 swift	 pace	 to	 rejoin	 his
companions	 in	 an	 adjoining	 dorm.	 He	 entered	 the	 chamber,	 scanned	 the	 various	 soldiers	 lounging	 on	 cots	 or
tossing	knuckles,	until	he	spied	the	wizened	black	face	of	Nep	Furrow	barely	visible	between	two	cots,


whereupon	he	marched	up	to	the	Dal	Honese	shaman,	who	was	sitting	crosslegged	with	a	nasty	smile	on	his
lips.
‘I	know	what	you	done,	Nep!’
‘Eh?	Eggit’way	fra	meen!’
‘You’ve	been	cursin’	Kindly,	haven’t	you?	Blood	blisters	on	his	balls!’
Nep	Furrow	cackled.	‘Black	blibbery	spoots,	hah!’
‘Stop	it—stop	what	you’re	doing,	damn	you!’
‘Too	laber!	Dey	doan	gee’way!’
‘Maybe	he	should	find	out	who’s	behind	it—’
‘Doan	deedat!	Pig!	Nathii	frup	pahl!	Voo	booth	voo	booth!’
Mulvan	Dreader	stared	down	at	the	man,	uncomprehending.	He	cast	a	beseeching	glance	over	at	Strap	Mull
the	next	cot	along.	‘What	did	he	just	say?’
The	other	Dal	Honese	was	lying	on	his	back,	hands	behind	his	head.	‘Hood	knows,	some	shaman	tongue,	I
expect.’	And	then	added,	‘Curses,	I’d	wager.’
The	 Nathii	 glared	 back	 down	 at	 Nep	 Furrow.	 ‘Curse	 me	 and	 I’ll	 boil	 your	 bones,	 y’damned	 prune.	 Now,
leave	off	Kindly,	or	I’ll	tell	Badan.’
‘Beedan	nar’ere,	izzee?’
‘When	he	gets	back.’
‘Pahl!’
	
No	one	could	claim	that	Preda	Norlo	Trumb	was	the	most	perceptive	of	individuals,	and	the	half-dozen	Letherii
guards	under	his	command,	who	stood	in	a	twitching	clump	behind	the	Preda,	were	now	faced	with	the	very
real	possibility	that	Trumb’s	stupidity	was	going	to	cost	them	their	lives.
Norlo	was	scowling	belligerently	at	the	dozen	or	so	riders.	‘War	is	war,’	he	insisted,	‘and	we	were	at	war.
People	died,	didn’t	they?	That	kind	of	thing	doesn’t	go	unpunished.’
The	black-skinned	sergeant	made	some	small	gesture	with	one	gloved	hand	and	crossbows	were	levelled.	In
rough	Letherii	he	said,	‘One	more	time.	Last	time.	They	alive?’
‘Of	 course	 they’re	 alive,’	 Norlo	 Trumb	 said	 with	 a	 snort.	 ‘We	 do	 things	 properly	 here.	 But	 they’ve	 been
sentenced,	you	see.	To	death.	We’ve	just	been	waiting	for	an	officer	of	the	Royal	Advocate	to	come	by	and
stamp	the	seal	on	the	orders.’
‘No	seal,’	said	the	sergeant.	‘No	death.	Let	them	go.	We	take	now.’
‘Even	if	their	crimes	were	commuted,’	the	Preda	replied,	‘I’d	still	need	a	seal	to	release	them.’
‘Let	them	go	now.	Or	we	kill	you	all.’
The	Preda	stared,	and	then	turned	back	to	his	unit.	‘Draw	your	weapons,’	he	snapped.
‘Not	a	chance,’	said	gate-guard	Fifid.	‘Sir.	We	even	twitch	towards	our	swords	and	we’re	dead.’
Norlo	Trumb’s	face	darkened	in	the	lantern	light.	‘You’ve	just	earned	a	court-martial,	Fifid—’
‘At	least	I’ll	be	breathing,	sir.’
‘And	the	rest	of	you?’
None	of	the	other	guards	spoke.	Nor	did	they	draw	their	swords.
‘Get	them,’	growled	the	sergeant	from	where	he	sat	slouched	on	his	horse.	‘No	more	nice.’
‘Listen	to	this	confounded	ignorant	foreigner!’	Norlo	Trumb	turned	back	to	the	Malazan	sergeant.	‘I	intend
to	make	an	official	protest	straight	to	the	Royal	Court,’	he	said.	‘And	you	will	answer	to	the	charges—’
‘Get.’
And	to	the	left	of	the	sergeant	a	young,	oddly	effeminate	warrior	slipped	down	from	his	horse	and	settled
hands	on	the	grips	of	two	enormous	falchions	of	some	sort.	His	languid,	dark	eyes	looked	almost	sleepy.
At	last,	something	shivered	up	Trumb’s	spine	to	curl	worm-like	on	the	back	of	his	neck.	He	licked	suddenly
dry	lips.	‘Spanserd,	guide	this	Malazan,	uh,	warrior,	to	the	cells.’
‘And?’	the	guard	asked.
‘And	release	the	prisoners,	of	course!’
‘Yes,	sir!’
	


Sergeant	Badan	Gruk	allowed	himself	the	barest	of	sighs—not	enough	to	be	visible	to	anyone—and	watched
with	relief	as	the	Letherii	guard	led	Skulldeath	towards	the	gaol-block	lining	one	wall	of	the	garrison	compound.
The	other	marines	sat	motionless	on	their	horses,	but	their	tension	was	a	stink	in	Badan’s	nostrils,	and	under
his	hauberk	sweat	ran	in	streams.	No,	he’d	not	wanted	any	sort	of	trouble.	Especially	not	a	bloodbath.	But	this
damned	shrew-brained	Preda	had	made	it	close.	His	heart	thumped	loud	in	his	chest	and	he	forced	himself	to
glance	back	at	his	soldiers.	Ruffle’s	round	face	was	pink	and	damp,	but	she	offered	him	a	wink	before	angling
her	crossbow	upward	and	resting	the	stock’s	butt	on	one	soft	thigh.	Reliko	was	cradling	his	own	crossbow	in
one	 arm	 while	 the	 other	 arm	 was	 stretched	 out	 to	 stay	 Vastly	 Blank,	 who’d	 evidently	 realized—finally—that
there’d	been	trouble	here	in	the	compound,	and	now	looked	ready	to	start	killing	Letherii—once	he	was	pointed
in	the	right	direction.	Skim	and	Honey	were	side	by	side,	their	heavy	assault	crossbows	aimed	with	unwavering
precision	 at	 the	 Preda’s	 chest—a	 detail	 the	 man	 seemed	 too	 stupid	 to	 comprehend.	 The	 other	 heavies
remained	in	the	background,	in	ill	mood	for	having	been	rousted	from	another	drunken	night	in	Letheras.
Badan	 Gruk’s	 scan	 ended	 on	 the	 face	 of	 Corporal	 Pravalak	 Rim,	 and	 sure	 enough,	 he	 saw	 in	 that	 young
man’s	features	something	of	what	he	himself	felt.	A	damned	miracle.	Something	that’d	seemed	impossible	to
ever	have	believed—they’d	all	seen—
A	heavy	door	clunked	from	the	direction	of	the	gaol.
Everyone—Malazan	and	Letherii—now	fixed	gazes	on	the	four	figures	slowly	approaching.	Skulldeath	was
half-carrying	 his	 charge,	 and	 the	 same	 was	 true	 of	 the	 Letherii	 guard,	 Spanserd.	 The	 prisoners	 they’d	 just
helped	from	their	cells	were	in	bad	shape.
‘Easy,	Blank,’	muttered	Reliko.
‘But	that’s—they—but	I	know	them	two!’
‘Aye,’	the	heavy	infantryman	sighed.	‘We	all	do,	Vastly.’
Neither	prisoner	showed	any	signs	of	having	been	beaten	or	tortured.	What	left	them	on	the	edge	of	death
was	simple	neglect.	The	most	effective	torture	of	all.
‘Preda,’	said	Badan	Gruk,	in	a	low	voice.
Norlo	Trumb	turned	to	face	him.	‘What	is	it	now?’
‘You	don’t	feed	them?’
‘The	condemned	received	reduced	rations,	I	am	afraid—’
‘How	long?’
‘Well,	as	I	said,	Sergeant,	we	have	been	awaiting	the	officer	of	the	Royal	Advocate	for	some	time.	Months
and—’
Two	 quarrels	 skimmed	 past	 the	 Preda’s	 head,	 one	 on	 either	 side,	 and	 both	 sliced	 the	 man’s	 ears.	 He
shrieked	in	sudden	shock	and	fell	back,	landing	heavily	on	his	behind.
Badan	pointed	at	the	now	cowering	garrison	guards.	‘No	move	now.’	And	then	he	twisted	in	his	saddle	to
glare	at	Honey	and	Skim.	In	Malazan	he	said,	‘Don’t	even	think	about	reloading!	Shit-brained	sappers!’
‘Sorry,’	said	Skim,	‘I	guess	we	both	just	sort’ve	.	.	.	twitched.’	And	she	shrugged.
Honey	handed	her	his	crossbow	and	dropped	down	from	his	horse.	‘I’ll	retrieve	the	quarrels—anybody	see
where	they	ended	up?’
‘Bounced	and	skittered	between	them	two	buildings	there,’	Reliko	said,	pointing	with	his	chin.
The	 Preda’s	 shock	 had	 shifted	 into	 fury.	 Ears	 streaming	 blood,	 he	 now	 staggered	 to	 his	 feet.	 ‘Attempted
murder!	I	will	see	those	two	arrested!	You’ll	swim	the	canal	for	this!’
‘No	understand,’	said	Badan	Gruk.	‘Pravalak,	bring	up	the	spare	horses.	We	should’ve	brought	Dreader.	I
don’t	think	they	can	even	ride.	Flank	’em	close	on	the	way	back—we’ll	take	it	slow.’
He	studied	the	stumbling	figures	leaning	on	their	escorts.	Sergeant	Sinter	and	her	sister,	Kisswhere.	Looking
like	Hood’s	own	soiled	loincloth.	But	alive.	‘Gods	below,’	he	whispered.	They	are	alive.
	
‘Aaii!	My	leg’s	fallen	off!’
Banaschar	sat	motionless	in	the	chair	and	watched	the	small	skeletal	lizard	lying	on	its	side	and	spinning	now
in	circles	on	the	floor,	one	leg	kicking.
‘Telorast!	Help	me!’
The	other	reptile	perched	on	the	window	sill	and	looked	down,	head	tilting	from	one	side	to	the	other,	as	if
seeking	the	perfect	angle	of	regard.	‘It’s	no	use,	Curdle,’	it	finally	replied.	‘You	can’t	get	anywhere	like	that.’


‘I	need	to	get	away!’
‘From	what?’
‘From	the	fact	that	my	leg’s	fallen	off!’
Telorast	scampered	along	the	sill	until	it	was	as	close	as	it	could	get	to	Banaschar.	‘Sodden	priest	of	wine,
hssst!	Look	over	here—the	window!	It’s	me,	the	clever	one.	Stupid	one’s	down	on	the	floor	there,	see	her?
She	 needs	 your	 help.	 No,	 of	 course	 you	 can’t	 make	 her	 any	 less	 stupid—we’re	 not	 discussing	 that	 here.
Rather,	 it’s	 one	 of	 her	 legs,	 yes?	 The	 gut	 binding	 or	 whatever	 has	 broken.	 She’s	 crippled,	 helpless,	 useless.
She’s	 spinning	 in	 circles	 and	 that’s	 far	 too	 poignant	 for	 us.	 Do	 you	 understand?	 O	 Wormlet	 of	 the	 Worm
Goddess,	 O	 scurrier	 of	 the	 worship-slayer	 eyeless	 bitch	 of	 the	 earth!	 Banaschar	 the	 Drunk,	 Banaschar	 the
Wise,	the	 Wisely	 Drunk.	 Please	 be	 so	kind	 and	 nimble	 as	 to	 repair	my	 companion,	 my	 dear	 sister,	 the	 stupid
one.’
‘You	might	know	the	answer	to	this,’	said	Banaschar.	‘Listen,	if	life	is	a	joke,	what	kind	of	joke?	The	funny
ha	ha	kind?	Or	the	“I’m	going	to	puke”	kind?	Is	it	a	clever	joke	or	a	stupid	one	that’s	repeated	over	and	over
again	so	that	even	if	it	was	funny	to	begin	with	it’s	not	funny	any	more?	Is	it	the	kind	of	joke	to	make	you	laugh
or	make	you	cry?	How	many	other	ways	can	I	ask	this	simple	question?’
‘I’m	 confident	 you	 can	 think	 of	 a	 few	 hundred	 more,	 good	 sir.	 Defrocked,	 detached,	 essentially	 castrated
priest.	Now,	see	those	strands	there?	Near	the	unhinged	leg—oh,	Curdle,	will	you	stop	that	spinning?’
‘I	 used	 to	 laugh,’	 said	 Banaschar.	 ‘A	 lot.	 Long	 before	 I	 decided	 on	 becoming	 a	 priest,	 of	 course.	 Nothing
amusing	 in	 that	 decision,	 alas.	 Nor	 in	 the	 life	 that	 followed.	 Years	 and	 years	 of	 miserable	 study,	 rituals,
ceremonies,	 the	 rigorous	 exercises	 of	 magery.	 And	 the	 Worm	 of	 Autumn,	 well,	 she	 did	 abide,	 did	 she	 not?
Delivered	our	just	reward—too	bad	I	missed	out	on	the	fun.’
‘Pitiful	wretch	of	pointless	pedantry,	would	you	be	so	kind—yes,	reach	out	and	down,	out	and	down,	a	little
further,	 ah!	 You	 have	 it!	 The	 twine!	 The	 leg!	 Curdle,	 listen—see—stop,	 right	 there,	 no,	 there,	 yes,	 see?
Salvation	is	in	hand!’
‘I	can’t!	Everything’s	sideways!	The	world	pitches	into	the	Abyss!’
‘Never	mind	that—see?	He’s	got	your	leg.	He’s	eyeing	the	twine.	His	brain	stirs!’
‘There	used	to	be	drains,’	said	Banaschar,	holding	up	the	skeletal	leg.	‘Under	the	altar.	To	collect	the	blood,
you	see,	down	into	amphorae—we’d	sell	that,	you	know.	Amazing	the	stuff	people	will	pay	for,	isn’t	it?’
‘What’s	he	doing	with	my	leg?’
‘Nothing—so	 far,’	 replied	 Telorast.	 ‘Looking,	 I	 think.	 And	 thinking.	 He	 lacks	 all	 cleverness,	 it’s	 true.	 NotApsalar	Apsalar’s	left	earlobe	possessed	more	cleverness	than	this	pickled	grub.	But	never	mind	that!	Curdle,
use	your	forelimbs,	your	arms,	I	mean,	and	crawl	closer	to	him—stop	kicking	in	circles!	Stop	it!’
‘I	can’t!’	came	the	tiny	shriek.
And	round	and	round	Curdle	went.
‘Old	blood	out,	shiny	coins	in.	We’d	laugh	at	that,	but	it	wasn’t	the	happy	kind	of	laugh.	More	like	disbelief,
and	 yes,	 more	 than	 a	 little	 cynicism	 regarding	 the	 inherent	 stupidity	 of	 people.	 Anyway,	 we	 ended	 up	 with
chests	and	chests	of	riches—more	than	you	could	even	imagine.	Vaults	filled	to	bursting.	You	could	buy	a	lot
of	laughs	with	that,	I’m	sure.	And	the	blood?	Well,	as	any	priest	will	tell	you,	blood	is	cheap.’
‘Please	oh	please,	show	the	mercy	your	ex-goddess	so	despised.	Spit	in	her	face	with	a	gesture	of	goodwill!
You’ll	be	amply	rewarded,	yes,	amply!’
‘Riches,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Worthless.’
‘Different	reward,	we	assure	you.	Substantial,	meaningful,	valuable,	timely.’
He	looked	up	from	his	study	of	the	leg	and	eyed	Telorast.	‘Like	what?’
The	reptile’s	skeleton	head	bobbed.	‘Power,	my	friend.	More	power	than	you	can	imagine—’
‘I	doubt	that	most	sincerely.’
‘Power	 to	 do	 as	 you	 please,	 to	 whomever	 or	 whatever	 you	 please!	 Power	 gushing	 out,	 spilling	 down,
bubbling	up	and	leaving	potent	wet	spots!	Worthy	reward,	yes!’
‘And	if	I	hold	you	to	that?’
‘As	surely	as	you	hold	that	lovely	leg,	and	the	twine,	as	surely	as	that!’
‘The	pact	is	sealed,’	said	Banaschar.
‘Curdle!	You	hear	that!’
‘I	heard.	Are	you	mad?	We	don’t	share!	We	never	share!’


‘Shhh!	He’ll	hear	you!’
‘Sealed,’	repeated	Banaschar,	sitting	up.
‘Ohhh,’	wailed	Curdle,	spinning	faster	and	faster.	‘You’ve	done	it	now!	Telorast,	you’ve	done	it	now!	Ohhh,
look,	I	can’t	get	away!’
‘Empty	promises,	Curdle,	I	swear	it!’
‘Sealed,’	said	Banaschar	again.
‘Aaii!	Thrice	sealed!	We’re	doomed!’
‘Relax,	lizard,’	said	Banaschar,	leaning	over	and	reaching	down	for	the	whirling	creature,	‘soon	you’ll	dance
again.	And,’	he	added	as	he	snatched	up	Curdle,	‘so	will	I.’
Holding	the	bony	reptile	in	one	hand,	the	leg	in	the	other,	Banaschar	glanced	over	at	his	silent	guest—who
sat	in	shadows,	lone	eye	glittering.	‘All	right,’	said	Banaschar,	‘I’ll	listen	to	you	now.’
‘I	am	pleased,’	murmured	the	Errant,	‘for	we	have	very	little	time.’
	
Lostara	Yil	sat	on	the	edge	of	her	cot,	a	bowl	filled	with	sand	on	her	lap.	She	dipped	her	knife’s	blade	into	the
topped	gourd	to	her	right,	to	coat	the	iron	in	the	pulp’s	oil,	and	then	slid	the	blade	into	the	sand,	and	resumed
scouring	the	iron.
She	had	been	working	on	this	one	weapon	for	two	bells	now,	and	there	had	been	other	sessions	before	this
one.	More	than	she	could	count.	Others	swore	that	the	dagger’s	iron	could	not	be	cleaner,	could	not	be	more
flawless,	but	she	could	still	see	the	stains.
Her	fingers	were	rubbed	raw,	red	and	cracked.	The	bones	of	her	hands	ached.	They	felt	heavier	these	days,
as	 if	 the	 sand	 had	 imparted	 something	 to	 her	 skin,	 flesh	 and	 bones,	 beginning	 the	 process	 of	 turning	 them	 to
stone.	 There	 might	 come	 a	 time	 when	 she	 lost	 all	 feeling	 in	 them,	 and	 they	 would	 hang	 from	 her	 wrists	 like
mauls.	But	not	useless,	no.	With	them	she	could	well	batter	down	the	world—if	that	would	do	any	good.
The	pommel	of	a	weapon	thumped	on	her	door	and	a	moment	later	it	was	pushed	open.	Faradan	Sort	leaned
in,	eyes	searching	until	she	found	Lostara	Yil.	‘Adjunct	wants	you,’	she	said	tonelessly.
So,	it	was	time.	Lostara	collected	a	cloth	and	wiped	down	the	knife-blade.	The	captain	stood	in	the	doorway,
watching	without	expression.
She	 rose,	 sheathed	 the	 weapon,	 and	 then	 collected	 her	 cloak.	 ‘Are	 you	 my	 escort?’	 she	 asked	 as	 she
approached	the	door.
‘We’ve	had	one	run	away	already	this	night,’	Faradan	replied,	falling	in	step	beside	Lostara	as	they	made
their	way	up	the	corridor.
‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
‘Not	really,	but	I	am	to	accompany	you	this	evening.’
‘Why?’
Faradan	Sort	did	not	reply.	They’d	reached	the	pair	of	ornate,	red-stained	double	doors	that	marked	the	end
of	the	corridor,	and	the	captain	drew	them	open.
Lostara	Yil	strode	into	the	chamber	beyond.	The	ceiling	of	the	Adjunct’s	quarters—the	command	centre	in
addition	to	her	residence—was	a	chaotic	collection	of	corbels,	vaults	and	curved	beams.	Consequently	it	was
enwreathed	 in	 cobwebs	 from	 which	 shrivelled	 moths	 dangled	 down,	 mocking	 flight	 in	 the	 vague	 draughts.
Beneath	a	central,	oddly	misshapen	miniature	dome	stood	a	huge	rectangular	table	with	a	dozen	high-backed
chairs.	A	series	of	high	windows	ran	across	the	wall	opposite	the	door,	reached	by	a	raised	platform	that	was
lined	with	a	balustrade.	In	all,	to	Lostara’s	eyes,	one	of	the	strangest	rooms	she	had	ever	seen.	The	Letherii
called	 it	 the	 Grand	 Lecture	 Medix,	 and	 it	 was	 the	 largest	 chamber	 in	 the	 college	 building	 that	 temporarily
served	as	the	officers’	quarters	and	HQ.
Adjunct	Tavore	stood	on	the	raised	walkway,	intent	on	something	beyond	one	of	the	thick-glassed	windows.
‘You	requested	me,	Adjunct.’
Tavore	did	not	turn	round	as	she	said,	‘There	is	a	tablet	on	the	table,	Captain.	On	it	you	will	find	the	names
of	those	who	will	attend	the	reading.	As	there	may	be	some	resistance	from	some	of	them,	Captain	Faradan
Sort	will	accompany	you	to	the	barracks.’
‘Very	well.’	Lostara	walked	over	and	collected	the	tablet,	scanned	the	names	scribed	into	the	golden	wax.
Her	brows	rose.	‘Adjunct?	This	list—’
‘Refusals	not	permitted,	Captain.	Dismissed.’


	
Out	in	the	corridor	once	again,	the	two	women	paused	upon	seeing	a	Letherii	approaching.	Plainly	dressed,	an
unadorned	 long,	 thin-bladed	 sword	 scabbarded	 at	 his	 hip,	 Brys	 Beddict	 possessed	 no	 extraordinary	 physical
qualities,	and	yet	neither	Lostara	nor	Faradan	Sort	could	take	their	eyes	off	him.	Even	a	casual	glance	would
slide	past	only	to	draw	inexorably	back,	captured	by	something	ineffable	but	undeniable.
They	parted	to	let	him	by.
He	halted	to	deliver	a	deferential	half-bow.	‘Excuse	me,’	he	said,	addressing	Lostara,	‘I	would	speak	with
the	Adjunct,	if	that	is	possible.’
‘Of	course,’	she	replied,	reaching	to	open	one	of	the	double	doors.	‘Just	step	inside	and	announce	yourself.’
‘Thank	you.’	A	brief	smile,	and	then	he	entered	the	chamber,	closing	the	door	behind	him.
Lostara	sighed.
‘Yes,’	agreed	Faradan	Sort.
After	a	moment	they	set	out	once	more.
	
As	soon	as	the	Adjunct	turned	to	face	him,	Brys	Beddict	bowed,	and	then	said,	‘Adjunct	Tavore,	greetings	and
salutations	from	the	King.’
‘Be	sure	to	return	the	sentiments,	sir,’	she	replied.
‘I	 shall.	 I	 have	 been	 instructed	 to	 deliver	 a	 caution,	 Adjunct,	 with	 respect	 to	 this	 session	 of	 divination	 you
intend	this	night.’
‘What	manner	of	caution,	and	from	whom,	if	I	may	ask?’
‘There	is	an	Elder	God,’	said	Brys.	‘One	who	traditionally	chose	to	make	the	court	of	Letheras	his	temple,	if
you	will,	and	did	so	for	an	unknown	number	of	generations.	He	acted,	more	often	than	not,	as	consort	to	the
Queen,	and	was	known	to	most	as	Turudal	Brizad.	Generally,	of	course,	his	true	identity	was	not	known,	but
there	can	be	no	doubt	that	he	is	the	Elder	God	known	as	the	Errant,	Master	of	the	Tiles,	which,	as	you	know,	is
the	Letherii	corollary	to	your	Deck	of	Dragons.’
‘Ah,	I	begin	to	comprehend.’
‘Indeed,	Adjunct.’
‘The	Errant	would	view	the	divination—and	the	Deck—as	an	imposition,	a	trespass.’
‘Adjunct,	the	response	of	an	Elder	God	cannot	be	predicted,	and	this	is	especially	true	of	the	Errant,	whose
relationship	with	fate	and	chance	is	rather	intense,	as	well	as	complicated.’
‘May	I	speak	with	this	Turudal	Brizad?’
‘The	Elder	God	has	not	resumed	that	persona	since	before	the	Emperor’s	reign;	nor	has	he	been	seen	in	the
palace.	Yet	I	am	assured	that	once	more	he	has	drawn	close—probably	stirred	awake	by	your	intentions.’
‘I	am	curious,	who	in	the	court	of	your	king	is	capable	of	discerning	such	things?’
Brys	shifted	uneasily.	‘That	would	be	Bugg,	Adjunct.’
‘The	Chancellor?’
‘If	that	is	the	capacity	in	which	you	know	him,	then	yes,	the	Chancellor.’
Through	all	of	this	she	had	remained	standing	on	the	platform,	but	now	she	descended	the	four	steps	at	one
end	and	walked	closer,	colourless	eyes	searching	Brys’s	face.	‘Bugg.	One	of	my	High	Mages	finds	him	.	.	.
how	 did	 he	 put	 it?	 Yes.	 “Adorable.”	 But	 then,	 Quick	 Ben	 is	 unusual	 and	 prone	 to	 peculiar,	 often	 sardonic
assessments.	Is	the	Chancellor	a	Ceda—if	that	is	the	proper	term	for	High	Mage?’
‘It	would	be	best	to	view	him	as	such,	yes,	Adjunct.’
She	seemed	to	consider	the	matter	for	a	time,	and	then	she	said,	‘While	I	am	confident	in	the	abilities	of	my
mages	to	defend	against	most	threats	.	.	.	that	of	an	Elder	God	is	likely	well	beyond	their	capacities.	What	of
your	Ceda?’
‘Bugg?	 Uh,	 no,	 I	 do	 not	 think	 he’s	 much	 frightened	 by	 the	 Errant.	 Alas,	 he	 intends	 to	 take	 refuge	 tonight
should	 you	 proceed	 with	 the	 reading.	 As	I	 stated	 earlier,	 I	 am	 here	to	 give	 caution	 and	 convey	 King	 Tehol’s
genuine	concern	for	your	safety.’
She	seemed	to	find	his	words	discomforting,	for	she	turned	away	and	walked	slowly	round	to	halt	at	one	end
of	the	rectangular	table,	whereupon	she	faced	him	once	more.	‘Thank	you,	Brys	Beddict,’	she	said	with	stilted
formality.	 ‘Unfortunately,	 I	 have	 delayed	 this	 reading	 too	 long	 as	 it	 is.	 Guidance	 is	 necessary	 and,	 indeed,
pressing.’


He	cocked	his	head.	What	were	these	Malazans	up	to?	A	question	often	voiced	in	the	Royal	Court,	and	no
doubt	 everywhere	 else	 in	 the	 city,	 for	 that	 matter.	 ‘I	 understand,	 Adjunct.	 Is	 there	 any	 other	 way	 we	 can
assist?’
She	frowned.	‘I	am	not	sure	how,	given	your	Ceda’s	aversion	to	attending,	even	as	a	spectator.’
‘He	does	not	wish	his	presence	to	deliver	undue	influence	on	the	divination,	I	suspect.’
The	 Adjunct	 opened	 her	 mouth	 to	 say	 something,	 stopped,	 closed	 it	 again.	 And	 it	 was	 possible	 her	 eyes
widened	a	fraction	before	she	looked	away.	‘What	other	form	of	assistance	is	possible,	then?’
‘I	am	prepared	to	volunteer	myself,	as	the	King’s	Sword.’
She	shot	him	a	glance,	clearly	startled.	‘The	Errant	would	hesitate	in	crossing	you,	sir?’
He	 shrugged.	 ‘At	 the	 very	 least,	 Adjunct,	 I	 can	 negotiate	 with	 him	 from	 a	 position	 of	 some	 knowledge—
with	respect	to	his	history	among	my	people,	and	so	on.’
‘And	you	would	risk	this	for	us?’
Brys	hesitated,	never	adept	at	lying.	‘It	is	no	risk,	Adjunct,’	he	managed.
And	 saw	 his	 abysmal	 failure	 in	 her	 narrowed	 gaze.	 ‘Courtesy	 and	 decency	 demand	 that	 I	 reject	 your
generous	offer.	However,’	she	added,	‘I	must	descend	to	rudeness	and	say	to	you	that	your	presence	would	be
most	appreciated.’
He	bowed	again.
‘If	you	need	to	report	back	to	your	king,’	said	the	Adjunct,	‘there	is	still	time—not	much	time,	but	sufficient
for	a	brief	account,	I	should	think.’
‘That	will	not	be	necessary,’	said	Brys.
‘Then	please,	help	yourself	to	some	wine.’
He	grimaced.	‘Thank	you,	but	I	have	given	up	wine,	Adjunct.’
‘There	is	a	jug	of	ale,	there,	under	that	side	table.	Falari,	I	believe—a	decent	brew,	I’m	told.’
He	smiled	and	saw	her	start,	and	wondered,	although	not	for	long,	as	women	often	reacted	that	way	when
he	smiled.	‘Yes,	I	would	like	to	give	that	a	try,	thank	you.’
______
‘What	I	can’t	tolerate,’	he	said,	‘is	the	very	fact	of	your	existence.’
The	man	sitting	opposite	him	looked	up.	‘So	it’s	mutual.’
The	tavern	was	crowded,	the	clientele	decidedly	upscale,	smug	with	privilege.	Coins	in	heaps,	dusty	bottles
and	 glittering	 glass	 goblets,	 and	 an	 eye-dazzling	 array	 of	 ostentatious	 attire—most	 of	 which	 suggested	 some
version	of	the	Royal	Blanket,	although	this	generally	involved	only	a	narrow	wrap	swathing	the	hips	and	groin.
Here	 and	 there,	 some	 overscented	 young	 man	 also	 wore	 woollen	 pants	 with	 one	 trouser	 leg	 ending	 halfway
down.
In	a	cage	near	the	table	where	the	two	Malazans	sat,	two	strange	birds	exchanged	guttural	comments	every
now	and	then,	in	tones	singularly	unimpressed.	Short-beaked,	yellow-plumed	and	grey-hooded,	they	were	the
size	of	starlings.
‘Maybe	it	is,’	the	first	man	said	after	taking	a	mouthful	of	the	heady	wine,	‘but	it’s	still	different.’
‘That’s	what	you	think.’
‘It	is,	you	ear-flapped	idiot.	For	one	thing,	you	were	dead.	You	hatched	a	damned	cusser	under	your	butt.
Those	clothes	you’re	wearing	right	now,	they	were	in	shreds.	Fragments.	Flecks	of	ash.	I	don’t	care	how	good
Hood’s	 seamstresses	 might	 be—or	 even	 how	 many	 millions	 of	 ’em	 he’s	 got	 by	 now,	 nobody	 could	 have
stitched	all	that	back	together—of	course,	there	are	no	stitches,	not	where	they’re	not	supposed	to	be,	I	mean.
So,	your	clothes	are	intact.	Just	like	you.’
‘What’s	 your	 point,	 Quick?	 I	 put	 myself	 back	 together	 in	 Hood’s	 cellar,	 right?	 I	 even	 helped	 out	 Ganoes
Paran,	and	rode	with	a	Trygalle	troupe	for	a	time.	When	you’re	dead	you	can	do	.	.	.	stuff—’
‘That	depends	on	your	will-power,	actually—’
‘The	Bridgeburners	ascended,’	Hedge	pointed	out.	‘Blame	Fid	for	that—nothing	to	do	with	me.’
‘And	you’re	their	messenger,	are	you?’
‘Could	be.	It’s	not	like	I	was	taking	orders	from	anybody—’
‘Whiskeyjack?’
Hedge	shifted	uneasily,	glanced	away,	and	then	shrugged.	‘Funny,	that.’
‘What?’


The	sapper	nodded	towards	the	two	caged	birds.	‘Those	are	jaraks,	aren’t	they?’
Quick	Ben	tilted	his	head	downward	and	knuckled	his	brow	with	both	hands.	‘Some	kind	of	geas,	maybe?
Some	curse	of	evasiveness?	Or	just	the	usual	obstinate	stupidity	we	all	knew	so	well?’
‘There	you	go,’	said	Hedge,	reaching	for	his	ale,	‘talkin’	to	yourself	again.’
‘You’re	 shying	 from	 certain	 topics,	 Hedge.	 There’s	 secrets	 you	 don’t	 want	 to	 spill,	 and	 that	 makes	 me
nervous.	And	not	just	me—’
‘Fid	always	gets	nervous	round	me.	You	all	do.	It’s	just	my	stunning	looks	and	charm,	I	figure.’
‘Nice	try,’	drawled	Quick	Ben.	‘I	was	actually	talking	about	the	Adjunct.’
‘What	 reason’s	 she	 got	 to	 be	 nervous	 about	 me?’	 Hedge	 demanded.	 ‘In	 fact,	 it’s	 the	 other	 damned	 way
round!	 There’s	 no	 making	 sense	 of	 that	 woman—you’ve	 said	 so	 yourself	 often	 enough,	 Quick.’	 He	 leaned
forward,	eyes	narrowing.	‘You	heard	something	new?	About	where	we’re	going?	About	what	in	Hood’s	name
we’re	doing	next?’
The	wizard	simply	stared.
Hedge	 reached	 under	 a	 flap	 and	 scratched	 above	 his	 ear,	 and	 then	 settled	 back,	 looking	 pleased	 with
himself.
A	moment	later	two	people	arrived	to	halt	at	their	table.	Glancing	up,	Hedge	started	guiltily.
‘High	 Mage,	 sapper,’	 said	 Lostara	 Yil,	 ‘the	 Adjunct	 requests	 your	 immediate	 presence.	 If	 you	 will	 follow
us.’
‘Me?’	asked	Hedge,	his	voice	almost	a	squeal.
‘First	name	on	the	list,’	said	Faradan	Sort	with	a	hard	smile.
‘Now	you’ve	done	it,’	hissed	Quick	Ben.
	
As	the	four	foreigners	left,	one	of	the	jarak	birds	said,	‘I	smell	death.’
‘No	you	don’t,’	croaked	the	other.
‘I	smell	death,’	the	first	one	insisted.
‘No.	You	smell	dead.’
After	 a	 moment,	 the	 first	 bird	 lifted	 a	 wing	 and	 thrust	 its	 head	 underneath,	 and	 then	 withdrew	 and	 settled
once	more.	‘Sorry.’
	
The	matted	wicker	bars	of	the	pen	wall	between	them,	Captain	Kindly	and	the	Wickan	cattle-dog	Bent	glared
at	each	other	with	bared	teeth.
‘Listen	to	me,	dog,’	said	Kindly,	‘I	want	you	to	find	Sinn,	and	Grub.	Any	funny	business,	like	trying	to	rip	out
my	throat,	and	I’ll	stick	you.	Mouth	to	butt,	straight	through.	Then	I’ll	saw	off	your	head	and	sink	it	in	the	river.
I’ll	 chop	 off	 your	 paws	 and	 sell	 ’em	 to	 ugly	 witches.	 I’ll	 strip	 your	 hide	 and	 get	 it	 cut	 up	 and	 made	 into
codpieces	for	penitent	sex-addicts-turned-priests,	the	ones	with	certain	items	hidden	under	their	cots.	And	I’ll
do	all	this	while	you’re	still	alive.	Am	I	understood?’
The	lips	on	the	beast’s	scarred,	twisted	muzzle	had	if	anything	curled	back	even	further,	revealing	blood-red
lacerations	 from	 the	 splintered	 fangs.	 Crimson	 froth	 bubbled	 out	 between	 the	 gaps.	 Above	 that	 smashed
mouth,	Bent’s	eyes	burned	like	two	tunnels	into	a	demon	lord’s	brain,	swirling	with	enraged	madness.	At	the
dog’s	 back	 end,	 the	 stub	 of	 the	 tail	 wagged	 in	 fits	 and	 starts,	 as	 if	 particularly	 pleasing	 thoughts	 spasmed
through	the	beast.
Kindly	stood,	holding	a	braided	leather	leash	with	one	end	tied	into	a	noose.	‘I’m	going	to	slip	this	over	your
head,	 dog.	 Make	 a	 fuss	 and	 I’ll	 hang	 you	 high	 and	 laugh	 at	 every	 twitch.	 In	 fact,	 I’ll	 devise	 a	 hundred	 new
ways	of	killing	you	and	I’ll	use	every	one	of	them.’	He	lifted	the	noose	into	view.
A	matted	ball	of	twigs,	hair	and	clumps	of	mud	that	had	been	lying	off	to	one	side	of	the	pen—a	heap	that
had	 been	 doing	 its	 own	 growling—suddenly	 launched	 itself	 forward	 in	 a	 flurry	 of	 bounds	 until	 it	 drew	 close
enough	to	fling	itself	into	the	air—sharp,	tiny	teeth	aiming	for	the	captain’s	neck.
He	lashed	out	his	left	fist,	intercepting	the	lapdog	in	mid-air.	A	muted	crunching	sound,	and	the	clack	of	jaws
snapping	shut	on	nothing,	as	the	Hengese	lapdog	named	Roach	abruptly	altered	course,	landing	and	bouncing	a
few	times	behind	Bent,	where	it	lay	stunned,	small	chest	heaving,	pink	tongue	lolling.
The	gazes	of	Kindly	and	the	cattle-dog	had	remained	locked	through	all	of	this.


‘Oh,	 never	 mind	 the	 damned	 leash,’	 said	 the	 captain	 after	 a	 moment.	 ‘Never	 mind	 Grub	 and	 Sinn.	 Let’s
make	this	as	simple	as	possible.	I	am	going	to	draw	my	sword	and	chop	you	to	pieces,	dog.’
‘Don’t	do	that!’	said	a	voice	behind	him.
Kindly	 turned	 to	 see	 Grub	 and,	 behind	 the	 boy,	 Sinn.	 Both	 stood	 just	 inside	 the	 stable	 entrance,	 wearing
innocent	expressions.	‘Convenient,’	he	said.	‘The	Adjunct	wants	you	both.’
‘The	reading?’	Grub	asked.	‘No,	we	can’t	do	that.’
‘But	you	will.’
‘We	thought	we	could	hide	in	the	old	Azath,’	said	Grub,	‘but	that	won’t	work—’
‘Why?’	Kindly	demanded.
Grub	shook	his	head.	‘We	don’t	want	to	go.	It’d	be	.	.	.	bad.’
The	captain	held	up	the	leash	with	its	noose.	‘One	way	or	the	other,	maggots.’
‘Sinn	will	burn	you	to	a	crisp!’
Kindly	snorted.	‘Her?	Probably	just	wet	herself,	from	the	look	on	her	face.	Now,	will	this	be	nice	or	will	it
be	my	way?	Aye,	you	can	guess	which	way	I’m	leaning,	can’t	you?’
‘It’s	the	Azath—’	began	Grub.
‘Not	my	problem,’	cut	in	Kindly.	‘You	want	to	whine,	save	it	for	the	Adjunct.’
They	set	out.
‘Everyone	hates	you,	you	know,’	Grub	said.
‘Seems	fair,’	Kindly	replied.
	
She	rose	from	her	chair,	wincing	at	the	ache	in	her	lower	back,	and	then	waddled	towards	the	door.	She	had
few	 acquaintances,	 barring	 a	 titchy	 midwife	 who	 stumbled	 in	 every	 now	 and	 then,	 inside	 a	 cloud	 of	 eyewatering	d’bayang	fumes,	and	the	old	woman	down	the	lane	who’d	baked	her	something	virtually	every	day
since	she	started	showing.	And	it	was	late,	which	made	the	heavy	knock	at	her	door	somewhat	unusual.
Seren	Pedac,	who	had	once	been	an	Acquitor,	opened	the	door.
‘Oh,’	she	said,	‘hello.’
The	old	man	bowed.	‘Lady,	are	you	well?’
‘Well,	I’ve	no	need	for	any	masonry	work,	sir—’
‘Acquitor—’
‘I	am	no	longer—’
‘Your	title	remains	on	the	kingdom’s	tolls,’	he	said,	‘and	you	continue	to	receive	your	stipend.’
‘And	 twice	 I	 have	 requested	 that	 both	 be	 terminated.’	 And	 then	 she	 paused	 and	 cocked	 her	 head.	 ‘I’m
sorry,	but	how	do	you	know	about	that?’
‘My	apologies,	Acquitor.	I	am	named	Bugg,	and	my	present	responsibilities	include	those	of	Chancellor	of
the	Realm,	among,	uh,	other	things.	Your	requests	were	noted	and	filed	and	subsequently	rejected	by	me.’	He
held	 up	 a	 hand.	 ‘Be	 at	 ease,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 dragged	 from	 your	 home	 to	 resume	 work.	 You	 are	 essentially
retired,	and	will	receive	your	full	pension	for	the	rest	of	your	life,	Acquitor.	In	any	case,’	he	added,	‘I	am	not
visiting	this	night	in	that	capacity.’
‘Oh?	Then,	sir,	what	is	it	you	want?’
‘May	I	enter?’
She	stepped	back,	and	once	he’d	come	inside	she	shut	the	door,	edged	past	him	in	the	narrow	corridor,	and
led	 him	 into	 the	 sparsely	 furnished	 main	 room.	 ‘Please	 sit,	 Chancellor.	 Having	 never	 seen	 you,	 I’m	 afraid	 I
made	no	connection	with	the	kind	gentleman	who	helped	me	move	a	few	stones.’	She	paused,	and	then	said,
‘If	rumours	are	correct,	you	were	once	the	King’s	manservant,	yes?’
‘Indeed	 I	 was.’	 He	 waited	 until	 she’d	 settled	 into	 her	 chair	 before	 seating	 himself	 in	 the	 only	 other	 chair.
‘Acquitor,	you	are	in	your	sixth	month?’
She	started.	‘Yes.	And	which	file	did	you	read	to	discover	that?’
‘Forgive	me,’	he	said,	‘I	am	feeling	unusually	clumsy	tonight.	In,	uh,	your	company,	I	mean.’
‘It	has	been	some	time	since	I	last	intimidated	anyone,	Chancellor.’
‘Yes,	well,	perhaps	.	.	.	well,	it’s	not	quite	you,	Acquitor.’
‘Should	I	be	relieved	that	you	have	retracted	your	compliment?’
‘Now	you	play	with	me.’


‘I	do.	Chancellor,	please,	what	is	all	this	about?’
‘I	 think	 it	 best	 you	 think	 of	 me	 in	 a	 different	 capacity,	 Acquitor.	 Rather	 than	 “chancellor”,	 may	 I	 suggest
“Ceda”.’
Her	eyes	slowly	widened.	‘Ah.	Very	well.	Tehol	Beddict	had	quite	the	manservant,	it	seems.’
‘I	am	here,’	said	Bugg,	eyes	dropping	momentarily	to	the	swell	of	her	belly,	‘to	provide	a	measure	of	.	.	.
protection.’
She	felt	a	faint	twist	of	fear	inside.	‘For	me,	or	my	baby?	Protection	from	what?’
He	leaned	forward,	hands	entwined.	‘Seren	Pedac,	your	child’s	father	was	Trull	Sengar.	A	Tiste	Edur	and
brother	to	Emperor	Rhulad.	He	was,	however,	somewhat	more	than	that.’
‘Yes,’	she	said,	‘he	was	my	love.’
His	gaze	shied	away	and	he	nodded.	‘There	is	a	version	of	the	Tiles,	consisting	of	Houses,	a	kind	of	formal
structure	 imposed	 on	 various	 forces	 at	 work	 in	 the	 universe.	 It	 is	 called	 the	 Deck	 of	 Dragons.	 Within	 this
Deck,	 the	 House	 of	 Shadow	 is	 ruled,	 for	 the	 moment,	 not	 by	 the	 Tiste	 Edur	 who	 founded	 that	 realm,	 but	 by
new	entities.	In	the	House,	there	is	a	King,	no	Queen	as	yet,	and	below	the	King	of	High	House	Shadow	there
are	sundry,	uh,	servants.	Such	roles	find	new	faces	every	now	and	then.	Mortal	faces.’
She	 watched	 him,	 her	 mouth	 dry	 as	 sun-baked	 stone.	 She	 watched	 as	 he	 wrung	 his	 hands,	 as	 his	 eyes
shifted	away	again	and	again.	‘Mortal	faces,’	she	said.
‘Yes,	Acquitor.’
‘Trull	Sengar.’
‘The	Knight	of	Shadow.’
‘Cruelly	abandoned,	it	would	seem.’
‘Not	by	choice,	nor	neglect,	Acquitor.	These	Houses,	they	are	engaged	in	war,	and	this	war	escalates—’
‘Trull	did	not	choose	that	title,	did	he?’
‘No.	Choice	plays	little	part	in	such	things.	Perhaps	even	the	Lords	and	Ladies	of	the	Houses	are	in	truth
less	omnipotent	than	they	would	like	to	believe.	The	same,	of	course,	can	be	said	for	the	gods	and	goddesses.
Control	is	an	illusion,	a	deceptive	one	that	salves	thin-skinned	bluster.’
‘Trull	is	dead,’	Seren	said.
‘But	the	Knight	of	Shadow	lives	on,’	Bugg	replied.
The	 dread	 had	 been	 building	 within	 her,	 an	 icy	 tide	 rising	 to	 flood	 every	 space	 within	 her,	 between	 her
thoughts,	drowning	them	one	by	one,	and	now	cold	fear	engulfed	her.	‘Our	child,’	she	whispered.
Bugg’s	 eyes	 hardened.	 ‘The	 Errant	 invited	 the	 murder	 of	 Trull	 Sengar.	 Tonight,	 Acquitor,	 the	 Deck	 of
Dragons	will	be	awakened,	in	this	very	city.	This	awakening	is	in	truth	a	challenge	to	the	Errant,	an	invitation	to
battle.	Is	he	ready?	Is	he	of	sufficient	strength	to	counter-attack?	Will	this	night	end	awash	in	mortal	blood?	I
cannot	say.	One	thing	I	mean	to	prevent,	Seren	Pedac,	is	the	Errant	striking	his	enemies	through	the	child	you
carry.’
‘That’s	not	good	enough,’	she	whispered.
His	brows	rose.	‘Acquitor?’
‘I	 said	 it’s	 not	 good	 enough!	 Who	 is	 this	 King	 of	 High	 House	 Shadow?	 How	 dare	 he	 claim	 my	 child!
Summon	him,	Ceda!	Here!	Now!’
‘Summon?	Acquitor,	even	if	I	could,	that	would	be	.	.	.	please,	you	must	understand.	To	summon	a	god—
even	if	naught	but	a	fragment	of	its	spirit—will	be	to	set	afire	the	brightest	beacon—one	that	will	be	seen	by
not	just	the	Errant,	but	other	forces	as	well.	On	this	night,	Acquitor,	we	must	do	nothing	to	draw	attention	to
ourselves.’
‘It	is	you	who	needs	to	understand,	Ceda.	If	the	Errant	wants	to	harm	my	child	.	.	.	you	may	well	be	a	Ceda,
but	the	Errant	is	a	god.	Who	has	already	murdered	the	man	I	loved—a	Knight	of	Shadow.	You	may	not	be
enough.	 My	 child	 is	 to	 be	 the	 new	 Knight	 of	 Shadow?	 Then	 the	 High	 King	 of	 Shadow	 will	 come	 here—
tonight—and	he	will	protect	his	Knight!’
‘Acquitor—’
‘Summon	him!’
‘Seren—I	 am	 enough.	 Against	 the	 Errant.	 Against	 any	 damned	 fool	 who	 dares	 to	 come	 close,	 I	 am
enough.’
‘That	makes	no	sense.’


‘Nevertheless.’
She	stared	at	him,	unable	to	disguise	her	disbelief,	her	terror.
‘Acquitor,	there	are	other	forces	in	the	city.	Ancient,	benign	ones,	yet	powerful	nonetheless.	Would	it	ease
your	concern	if	I	summon	them	on	your	behalf?	On	your	unborn	son’s	behalf?’
Son.	The	red-eyed	midwife	was	right,	then.	‘They	will	listen	to	you?’
‘I	believe	so.’
After	a	moment,	she	nodded.	‘Very	well.	But	Ceda,	after	tonight—I	will	speak	to	this	King	of	Shadow.’
He	flinched.	‘I	fear	you	will	find	the	meeting	unsatisfactory,	Acquitor.’
‘I	will	decide	that	for	myself.’
Bugg	sighed.	‘So	you	shall,	Seren	Pedac.’
‘When	will	you	summon	your	friends,	Ceda?’
‘I	already	have.’
	
Lostara	Yil	had	said	there’d	be	eleven	in	all	not	counting	Fiddler	himself.	That	was	madness.	Eleven	players
for	the	reading.	Bottle	glanced	across	at	Fiddler	as	they	marched	up	the	street	in	the	wake	of	the	two	women.
The	man	looked	sick,	rings	under	his	eyes,	mouth	twisted	in	a	grimace.	The	darker	roots	of	his	hair	and	beard
made	the	silvered	ends	seem	to	hover	like	an	aura,	a	hint	of	chaos.
Gesler	 and	 Stormy	 clumped	 along	 behind	 them.	 Too	 cowed	 for	 their	 usual	 arguing	 with	 each	 other	 about
virtually	 everything.	 As	 bad	 as	 a	 married	 couple,	 they	 were.	 Maybe	 they	 sensed	 the	 trouble	 on	 the	 way—
Bottle	was	sure	those	two	marines	had	more	than	just	gold-hued	skin	setting	them	apart	from	everyone	else.
Clearly,	whatever	fates	existed	displayed	a	serious	lack	of	discrimination	when	choosing	to	single	out	certain
people	from	the	herd.	Gesler	and	Stormy	barely	had	one	brain	between	them.
Bottle	 tried	 to	 guess	 who	 else	 would	 be	 there.	 The	 Adjunct	 and	 Lostara	 Yil,	 of	 course,	 along	 with	 Fiddler
himself,	and	 Gesler	 and	 Stormy.	 Maybe	Keneb—he’d	 been	 at	the	last	 one,	hadn’t	he?	 Hard	 to	 remember—
most	of	that	night	was	a	blur	now.	Quick	Ben?	Probably.	Blistig?	Well,	one	sour,	miserable	bastard	might	settle
things	out	some.	Or	just	make	everything	worse.	Sinn?	Gods	forbid.
‘This	is	a	mistake,’	muttered	Fiddler.	‘Bottle—what’re	you	sensing?	Truth	now.’
‘You	want	the	truth?	Really?’
‘Bottle.’
‘Fine,	I’m	too	scared	to	edge	out	there—this	is	an	old	city,	Sergeant.	There’s	.	.	.	things.	Mostly	sleeping	up
until	now.	I	mean,	for	as	long	as	we’ve	been	here.’
‘But	now	they’re	awake.’
‘Aye.	Noses	in	the	air.	This	reading,	Sergeant,	it’s	about	as	bad	an	idea	as	voicing	a	curse	in	Oponn’s	name
while	sitting	in	Hood’s	lap.’
‘You	think	I	don’t	know	that?’
‘Can	you	spike	the	whole	thing,	Sergeant?	Just	say	it	won’t	go,	you’re	all	closed	up	inside	or	something?’
‘Not	likely.	It	just	.	.	.	takes	over.’
‘And	then	there’s	no	stopping	it.’
‘No.’
‘Sergeant.’
‘What?’
‘We’re	going	to	be	exposed,	horribly	exposed.	Like	offering	our	throats	to	whoever—and	they’re	probably
not	merciful	types.	So,	how	do	we	defend	ourselves?’
Fiddler	glanced	across	at	him,	and	then	edged	closer.	Ahead	was	the	HQ—they	were	running	out	of	time.	‘I
can’t	do	nothing,	Bottle.	Except	take	the	head	off,	and	with	luck	some	of	those	nasties	will	go	down	with	it.’
‘You’re	going	to	be	sitting	on	a	cusser,	aren’t	you?’
Fiddler	shifted	the	leather	satchel	slung	from	one	shoulder,	and	that	was	confirmation	enough	for	Bottle.
‘Sergeant,	when	we	get	into	the	room,	let	me	try	one	last	time	to	talk	her	out	of	it.’
‘Let’s	hope	she	at	least	holds	to	the	number.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Eleven	is	bad,	twelve	is	worse.	But	thirteen	would	be	a	disaster.	Thirteen’s	a	bad	number	for	a	reading.	We
don’t	want	thirteen,	anything	but—’


‘Lostara	said	eleven,	Sergeant.	Eleven.’
‘Aye.’	And	Fiddler	sighed.
	
When	another	knock	sounded	at	the	door,	Bugg	raised	a	hand.	‘Permit	me,	please,	Acquitor.’	And	he	rose	at
her	nod	and	went	to	let	in	their	new	guests.
She	 heard	 voices,	 and	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 the	 Ceda	 appear	 with	 two	 bedraggled	 figures:	 a	 man,	 a	 woman,
dressed	in	rags.	They	halted	just	inside	the	main	room	and	a	roiling	stink	of	grime,	sweat	and	alcohol	wafted
towards	 Seren	 Pedac.	 She	 struggled	 against	 an	 impulse	 to	 recoil	 as	 the	 pungent	 aroma	 swept	 over	 her.	 The
man	grinned	with	greenish	teeth	beneath	a	massive,	red-veined,	bulbous	nose.	‘Greetings,	Mahybe!	Whachoo
got	t’drink?	Ne’er	mind,’	and	he	flourished	a	clay	flask	in	one	blackened	hand.	‘Lovey	dear	moogins,	find	us	all
some	cups,	willya?’
Bugg	was	grimacing.	‘Acquitor,	these	are	Ursto	Hoobutt	and	Pinosel.’
‘I	don’t	need	a	cup,’	Seren	said	to	the	woman	who	was	rummaging	through	a	cupboard.
‘As	you	like,’	replied	Pinosel.	‘But	you	won’t	be	no	fun	at	this	party.	Tha’s	typical.	Pregnant	women	ain’t	no
fun	at	all—always	struttin’	around	like	a	god’s	gift.	Smug	cow—’
‘I	don’t	need	this	rubbish.	Bugg,	get	them	out	of	here.	Now.’
Ursto	walked	up	to	Pinosel	and	clopped	her	on	the	side	of	the	head.	‘Behave,	you!’	Then	he	smiled	again	at
Seren.	‘She’s	jealous,	y’see.	We	bin	tryin	and,	uh,	tryin.	Only,	she’s	this	wrinkled	up	bag	and	I	ain’t	no	better.
Soft	as	a	teat,	I	am,	and	no	amount	a	lust	makes	no	diff’rence.	All	I	do	is	dribble	dribble	dribble.’	He	winked.
‘O’course,	iffin	it	wuz	you	now,	well—’
Pinosel	snorted.	‘Now	that’s	an	invitation	that’d	make	any	woman	abort.	Pregnant	or	not!’
Seren	glared	at	the	Ceda.	‘You	cannot	be	serious.’
‘Acquitor,	these	two	are	the	remnants	of	an	ancient	pantheon,	worshipped	by	the	original	inhabitants	of	the
settlement	buried	in	the	silts	beneath	Letheras.	In	fact,	Ursto	and	Pinosel	are	the	first	two,	the	Lord	and	the
Lady	 of	 Wine	 and	 Beer.	 They	 came	 into	 being	 as	 a	 consequence	 of	 the	 birth	 of	 agriculture.	 Beer	 preceded
bread	 as	 the	 very	 first	 product	 of	 domesticated	 plants.	 Cleaner	 than	 water,	 and	 very	 nutritious.	 The	 first
making	 of	 wine	 employed	 wild	 grapes.	 These	 two	 creations	 are	 elemental	 forces	 in	 the	 history	 of	 humanity.
Others	include	such	things	as	animal	husbandry,	the	first	tools	of	stone,	bone	and	antler,	the	birth	of	music	and
dance	and	the	telling	of	tales.	Art,	on	stone	walls	and	on	skin.	Crucial,	profound	moments	one	and	all.’
‘So,’	she	asked,	‘what’s	happened	to	them?’
‘Mindful	and	respectful	partaking	of	their	aspects	have	given	way	to	dissolute,	careless	excess.	Respect	for
their	gifts	has	vanished,	Acquitor.	The	more	sordid	the	use	of	those	gifts,	the	more	befouled	become	the	giftgivers.’
Ursto	belched.	‘We	don’t	mind,’	he	said.	‘Far	worse	if	we	wuz	outlawed,	becuz	that’d	make	us	evil	and	we
don’t	wanna	be	evil,	do	we,	sweet	porridge?’
‘We’s	unber	attack	alla	time,’	snarled	Pinosel.	‘Here,	les	fill	these	cups.	Elder?’
‘Half	measure,	please,’	said	Bugg.
‘Excuse	me,’	said	Seren	Pedac.	‘Ceda,	you	have	just	described	these	two	drunks	as	the	earliest	gods	of	all.
But	Pinosel	just	called	you	“Elder”.’
Ursto	 cackled.	 ‘Ceda?	 Mealyoats,	 y’hear	 that?	 Ceda!’	 He	reeled	 a	 step	closer	to	 Seren	 Pedac.	‘O	 round
one,	blessed	Mahybe,	we	may	be	old,	me	and	Pinosel,	compared	to	the	likes	a	you.	But	against	this	one	’ere,
we’re	just	babies!	Elder,	yes,	Elder,	as	in	Elder	God!’
‘Time	to	party!’	crowed	Pinosel.
	
Fiddler	 halted	 just	 within	 the	 entrance.	 And	 stared	 at	 the	 Letherii	 warrior	 standing	 near	 the	 huge	 table.
‘Adjunct,	is	this	one	a	new	invite?’
‘Excuse	me,	Sergeant?’
He	pointed.	‘The	King’s	Sword,	Adjunct.	Was	he	on	your	list?’
‘No.	Nonetheless,	he	will	stay.’
Fiddler	turned	a	bleak	look	on	Bottle,	but	said	nothing.
Bottle	scanned	the	group	awaiting	them,	did	a	quick	head	count.	‘Who’s	missing?’	he	asked.


‘Banaschar,’	Lostara	Yil	said.
‘He	is	on	his	way,’	said	the	Adjunct.
‘Thirteen,’	muttered	Fiddler.	‘Gods	below.	Thirteen.’
	
Banaschar	 paused	 in	 the	 alley,	 lifted	 his	 gaze	 skyward.	 Faint	 seepage	 of	 light	 from	 various	 buildings	 and
lantern-poled	streets,	but	that	did	not	reach	high	enough	to	devour	the	spray	of	stars.	He	so	wanted	to	get	out
of	 this	city.	 Find	a	 hilltop	in	 the	 countryside,	 soft	 grass	 to	 lie	 on,	 wax	 tablet	 in	 his	 hands.	 The	 moon,	 when	 it
showed,	 was	 troubling	 enough.	 But	 that	 new	 span	 of	 stars	 made	 him	 far	 more	 nervous,	 a	 swath	 like	 sword
blades,	faintly	green,	that	had	risen	from	the	south	to	slash	through	the	old	familiar	constellations	of	Reacher’s
Span.	He	could	not	be	certain,	but	he	thought	those	swords	were	getting	bigger.	Coming	closer.
Thirteen	in	all—at	least	that	was	the	number	he	could	make	out.	Perhaps	there	were	more,	still	too	faint	to
burn	through	the	city’s	glow.	He	suspected	the	actual	number	was	important.	Significant.
Back	in	Malaz	City,	the	celestial	swords	would	not	even	be	visible,	Banaschar	surmised.	Not	yet,	anyway.
Swords	in	the	sky,	do	you	seek	an	earthly	throat?
He	 glanced	 over	 at	 the	 Errant.	 If	 anyone	 could	 answer	 that,	 it	 would	 be	 this	 one.	 This	 self-proclaimed
Master	 of	 the	 Tiles.	 God	 of	 mischance,	 player	 of	 fates.	 A	 despicable	 creature.	 But	 no	 doubt	 powerful.
‘Something	wrong?’	Banaschar	asked,	for	the	Errant’s	face	was	ghostly	white,	slick	with	sweat.
The	one	eye	fixed	his	gaze	for	a	moment	and	then	slid	away.	‘Your	allies	do	not	concern	me,’	he	said.	‘But
another	has	come,	and	now	awaits	us.’
‘Who?’
The	 Errant	 grimaced.	 ‘Change	 of	 plans.	 You	 go	 in	 ahead	 of	 me.	 I	 will	 await	 the	 full	 awakening	 of	 this
Deck.’
‘We	agreed	you	would	simply	stop	it	before	it	can	begin.	That	was	all.’
‘I	cannot.	Not	now.’
‘You	assured	me	there	would	be	no	violence	this	night.’
‘And	that	would	have	been	true,’	the	god	replied.
‘But	now	someone	stands	in	your	way.	You	have	been	outmanoeuvred,	Errant.’
A	flash	of	anger	in	the	god’s	lone	eye.	‘Not	for	long.’
‘I	will	accept	no	innocent	blood	spilled—not	my	comrades’.	Take	down	your	enemy	if	you	like,	but	no	one
else,	do	you	understand	me?’
The	Errant	bared	his	teeth.	‘Then	just	keep	them	out	of	my	way.’
After	a	moment,	Banaschar	resumed	his	journey,	emerging	along	one	side	of	the	building	and	then	walking
towards	 the	 entrance.	 Ten	 paces	 away	 he	 halted	 once	 more,	 for	 a	 final	 few	 mouthfuls	 of	 wine,	 before
continuing	on.
But	that’s	the	problem	with	the	Bonehunters,	isn’t	it?
Nobody	can	keep	them	out	of	anyone’s	way.
	
Standing	motionless	in	the	shadows	of	the	alley—after	the	ex-priest	had	gone	inside—waited	the	Errant.
The	thirteenth	player	in	this	night’s	game.
Had	he	known	that—had	he	been	able	to	pierce	the	fog	now	thickening	within	that	dread	chamber	and	so
make	full	count	of	those	present—he	would	have	turned	round,	discarding	all	his	plans.	No,	he	would	have	run
for	the	hills.
Instead,	the	god	waited,	with	murder	in	his	heart.
As	 the	 city’s	 sand	 clocks	 and	 banded	 wicks—insensate	 and	 indifferent	 to	 aught	 but	 the	 inevitable
progression	of	time—approached	the	sounding	of	the	bells.
To	announce	the	arrival	of	midnight.


Chapter	Two
Do	not	come	here	old	friend
If	you	bring	bad	weather
I	was	down	where	the	river	ran
Running	no	more
Recall	that	span	of	bridge?
Gone	now	the	fragments	grey
And	scattered	on	the	sand
Nothing	to	cross
You	can	walk	the	water’s	flow
Wending	slow	into	the	basin
And	find	the	last	place	where
Weather	goes	to	die
If	I	see	you	hove	into	view
I’ll	know	your	resurrection’s	come
In	tears	rising	to	drown	my	feet
In	darkening	sky
You	walk	like	a	man	burned	blind
Groping	hands	out	to	the	sides
I’d	guide	you	but	this	river
Will	not	wait
Rushing	me	to	the	swallowing	sea
Beneath	fleeing	birds	of	white
Do	not	come	here	old	friend
If	you	bring	bad	weather
	
BRIDGE	OF	THE	S UN
FISHER	KEL	TATH

He	 stood	 amidst	 the	 rotted	 remnants	 of	 ship	 timbers,	 tall	 yet	 hunched,	 and	 if	 not	 for	 his	 tattered	 clothes	 and
long,	wind-tugged	hair,	he	could	have	been	a	statue,	a	thing	of	bleached	marble,	toppled	from	the	Meckros	city
behind	him	to	land	miraculously	upright	on	the	colourless	loess.	For	as	long	as	Udinaas	had	been	watching,	the
distant	figure	had	not	moved.
A	scrabble	of	pebbles	announced	the	arrival	of	someone	else	coming	up	from	the	village,	and	a	moment	later
Onrack	T’emlava	stepped	up	beside	him.	The	warrior	said	nothing	for	a	time,	a	silent,	solid	presence.
This	was	not	a	world	to	be	rushed	through,	Udinaas	had	come	to	realize;	not	that	he’d	ever	been	particularly
headlong	in	the	course	of	his	life.	For	a	long	time	since	his	arrival	here	in	the	Refugium,	he	had	felt	as	if	he
were	 dragging	 chains,	 or	 wading	 through	 water.	 The	 slow	 measure	 of	 time	 in	 this	 place	 resisted	 hectic
presumptions,	forcing	humility,	and,	Udinaas	well	knew,	humility	always	arrived	uninvited,	kicking	down	doors,
shattering	walls.	It	announced	itself	with	a	punch	to	the	head,	a	knee	in	the	groin.	Not	literally,	of	course,	but
the	result	was	the	same.	Driven	to	one’s	knees,	struggling	for	breath,	weak	as	a	sickly	child.	With	the	world
standing,	looming	over	the	fool,	slowly	wagging	one	finger.
There	really	should	be	more	of	that.	Why,	if	I	was	the	god	of	all	gods,	it’s	the	only	lesson	I	would	ever
deliver,	as	many	times	as	necessary.
Then	again,	that’d	make	me	one	busy	bastard,	wouldn’t	it	just.
The	sun	overhead	was	cool,	presaging	the	winter	to	come.	The	shoulder-women	said	there	would	be	deep


snow	in	the	months	ahead.	Desiccated	leaves,	caught	in	the	tawny	grasses	of	the	hilltop,	fluttered	and	trembled
as	 if	 shivering	 in	 dread	 anticipation.	 He’d	 never	 much	 liked	 the	 cold—the	 slightest	 chill	 and	 his	 hands	 went
numb.
‘What	does	he	want?’	Onrack	asked.
Udinaas	shrugged.
‘Must	we	drive	him	off?’
‘No,	Onrack,	I	doubt	that	will	be	necessary.	For	the	moment,	I	think,	there’s	no	fight	left	in	him.’
‘You	know	more	of	this	than	me,	Udinaas.	Even	so,	did	he	not	murder	a	child?	Did	he	not	seek	to	kill	Trull
Sengar?’
‘He	 crossed	 weapons	 with	 Trull?’	 Udinaas	 asked.	 ‘My	 memories	 of	 that	 are	 vague.	 I	 was	 preoccupied
getting	smothered	by	a	wraith	at	the	time.	Well,	then,	friend,	I	can	understand	how	you	might	want	to	see	the
last	of	him.	As	for	Kettle,	I	don’t	think	any	of	that	was	as	simple	as	it	looked.	The	girl	was	already	dead,	long
dead,	before	the	Azath	seeded	her.	All	Silchas	Ruin	did	was	crack	the	shell	so	the	House	could	send	down	its
roots.	In	the	right	place	and	at	the	right	time,	thus	ensuring	the	survival	of	this	realm.’
The	Imass	was	studying	him,	his	soft,	brown	eyes	nested	in	lines	of	sorrow,	in	lines	that	proved	that	he	felt
things	 too	 deeply.	 This	 fierce	 warrior	 who	 had—apparently—once	 been	 naught	 but	 leathery	 skin	 and	 bones
was	now	as	vulnerable	as	a	child.	This	trait	seemed	true	of	all	the	Imass.	‘You	knew,	then,	all	along,	Udinaas?
The	fate	awaiting	Kettle?’
‘Knew?	No.	Guessed,	mostly.’
Onrack	grunted.	‘You	rarely	err	in	your	guesses,	Udinaas.	Very	well,	go	then.	Speak	with	him.’
Udinaas	smiled	wryly.	‘Not	bad	at	guessing	yourself,	Onrack.	Will	you	wait	here?’
‘Yes.’
He	was	glad	of	that,	for	despite	his	conviction	that	Silchas	Ruin	did	not	intend	violence,	with	the	White	Crow
there	was	no	telling.	If	Udinaas	ended	up	cut	down	by	one	of	those	keening	swords,	at	least	his	death	would	be
witnessed,	and	unlike	his	son,	Rud	Elalle,	Onrack	was	not	so	foolish	as	to	charge	out	seeking	vengeance.
As	he	drew	closer	to	the	albino	Tiste	Andii,	it	became	increasingly	evident	that	Silchas	Ruin	had	not	fared
well	since	his	sudden	departure	from	this	realm.	Most	of	his	armour	was	shorn	away,	leaving	his	arms	bare.
Old	blood	stained	the	braided	leather	collar	of	his	scorched	gambeson.	He	bore	new,	barely	healed	gashes	and
cuts,	and	mottled	bruises	showed	below	skin	like	muddy	water	beneath	ice.
His	eyes,	alas,	remained	hard,	unyielding,	red	as	fresh	blood	in	their	shadowed	sockets.
‘Longing	for	that	old	Azath	barrow?’	Udinaas	asked	as	he	halted	ten	paces	from	the	gaunt	warrior.
Silchas	Ruin	sighed.	‘Udinaas.	I	had	forgotten	your	bright	gift	with	words.’
‘I	can’t	recall	anyone	ever	calling	it	a	gift,’	he	replied,	deciding	to	let	the	sarcasm	pass,	as	if	his	stay	in	this
place	had	withered	his	natural	acuity.	‘A	curse,	yes,	all	the	time.	It’s	amazing	I’m	still	breathing,	in	fact.’
‘Yes,’	the	Tiste	Andii	agreed,	‘it	is.’
‘What	do	you	want,	Silchas	Ruin?’
‘We	travelled	together	for	a	long	time,	Udinaas.’
‘Running	in	circles,	yes.	What	of	it?’
The	Tiste	Andii	glanced	away.	‘I	was	.	.	.	misled.	By	all	that	I	saw.	An	absence	of	sophistication.	I	imagined
the	rest	of	that	world	was	no	different	from	Lether	.	.	.	until	that	world	arrived.’
‘The	Letherii	version	of	sophistication	is	rather	narcissistic,	granted.	Comes	with	being	the	biggest	lump	of
turd	on	the	heap.	Locally	speaking.’
Ruin’s	expression	soured.	‘A	turd	thoroughly	crushed	under	heel,	now.’
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘Comes	to	us	all,	sooner	or	later.’
‘Yes.’
Silence	 stretched	 between	 them,	 and	 still	 Ruin	 would	 not	 meet	 his	 gaze.	 Udinaas	 understood	 well	 enough,
and	knew	too	that	it	would	be	unseemly	to	show	any	pleasure	at	the	White	Crow’s	humbling.
‘She	will	be	Queen,’	Silchas	Ruin	said	abruptly.
‘Who?’
The	 warrior	 blinked,	 as	 if	 startled	 by	 the	 question,	 and	 then	 fixed	 his	 unhuman	 attention	 once	 more	 upon
Udinaas.	‘Your	son	is	in	grave	danger.’
‘Is	he	now?’


‘I	 thought,	 in	 coming	 here,	 that	 I	 would	 speak	 to	 him.	 To	 offer	 what	 meagre	 advice	 of	 any	 worth	 I	 might
possess.’	He	gestured	at	the	place	where	he	stood.	‘This	is	as	far	as	I	could	manage.’
‘What’s	holding	you	back?’
Ruin’s	expression	soured.	‘To	the	Blood	of	the	Eleint,	Udinaas,	any	notion	of	community	is	anathema.	Or	of
alliance.	If	in	spirit	the	Letherii	possess	an	ascendant,	it	is	the	Eleint.’
‘Ah,	I	see.	Which	was	why	Quick	Ben	managed	to	defeat	Sukul	Ankhadu,	Sheltatha	Lore	and	Menandore.’
Silchas	Ruin	nodded.	‘Each	intended	to	betray	the	others.	It	is	the	flaw	in	the	blood.	More	often	than	not,	a
fatal	one.’	He	paused,	and	then	said,	‘So	it	proved	with	me	and	my	brother	Anomander.	Once	the	Draconic
blood	took	hold	of	us,	we	were	driven	apart.	Andarist	stood	between	us,	reaching	with	both	hands,	seeking	to
hold	us	close,	but	our	newfound	arrogance	surpassed	him.	We	ceased	to	be	brothers.	Is	it	any	wonder	that	we
—’
‘Silchas	Ruin,’	Udinaas	cut	in,	‘why	is	my	son	in	danger?’
The	warrior’s	eyes	flashed.	‘My	lesson	in	humility	very	nearly	killed	me.	But	I	survived.	When	Rud	Elalle’s
own	lesson	arrives,	he	may	not	be	so	fortunate.’
‘Ever	 had	 a	 child,	 Silchas?	 I	 thought	 not.	 Giving	 advice	 to	 a	 child	 is	 like	 flinging	 sand	 at	 an	 obsidian	 wall.
Nothing	 sticks.	 The	 brutal	 truth	 is	 that	 we	 each	 suffer	 our	 own	 lessons—they	 can’t	 be	 danced	 round.	 They
can’t	be	slipped	past.	You	cannot	gift	a	child	with	your	scars—they	arrive	like	webs,	constricting,	suffocating,
and	 that	 child	 will	 struggle	 and	 strain	 until	 they	 break.	 No	 matter	 how	 noble	 your	 intent,	 the	 only	 scars	 that
teach	them	anything	are	the	ones	they	earn	themselves.’
‘Then	I	must	ask	you,	as	his	father,	for	a	boon.’
‘Are	you	serious?’
‘I	am,	Udinaas.’
Fear	 Sengar	 had	 tried	 to	 stab	 this	 Tiste	 Andii	 in	 the	 back,	 had	 tried	 to	 step	 into	 Scabandari	 Bloodeye’s
shadow.	 Fear	 had	 been	 a	 difficult	 man,	 but	 Udinaas,	 for	 all	 his	 jibes	 and	 mockery,	 his	 bitter	 memories	 of
slavery,	had	not	truly	disliked	him.	Nobility	could	be	admired	even	when	not	met	eye	to	eye.	And	he	had	seen
Trull	Sengar’s	grief.	‘What	would	you	ask	of	me,	then?’
‘Give	him	to	me.’
‘What?’
The	 Tiste	 Andii	 held	 up	 a	 hand.	 ‘Make	 no	 answer	 yet.	 I	 will	 explain	 the	 necessity.	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 what	 is
coming,	Udinaas,	and	when	I	am	done,	I	believe	you	will	understand.’
Udinaas	 found	 he	 was	 trembling.	 And	 as	 Silchas	 Ruin	 continued	 to	 speak,	 he	 felt	 the	 once-solid	 ground
inexorably	shifting	beneath	his	feet.
The	seemingly	turgid	pace	of	this	world	was	proved	an	illusion,	a	quaint	conceit.
The	truth	was,	everything	was	pitching	headlong,	a	hundred	thousand	boulders	sliding	down	a	mountainside.
The	truth	was,	quite	simply,	terrifying.
	
Onrack	 stood	 watching	 the	 two	 figures.	 The	 conversation	 had	 stretched	 on	 much	 longer	 than	 the	 Imass	 had
anticipated,	and	his	worry	was	burgeoning	along	with	it.	Little	good	was	going	to	come	of	this,	he	was	certain.
He	 heard	 a	 coughing	 grunt	 behind	 him	 and	 turned	 to	 see	 the	 two	 emlava	 crossing	 his	 trail	 a	 hundred	 or	 so
paces	 back.	 They	 swung	 their	 massive,	 fanged	 heads	 in	 his	 direction	 and	 eyed	 him	 warily,	 as	 if	 seeking
permission—but	 he	 could	 see	 by	 their	 loping	 gait	 and	 ducked	 tail-stubs	 that	 they	 were	 setting	 out	 on	 a	 hunt.
The	guilt	beneath	their	intent	seemed	instinctive,	as	did	their	wide-eyed	belligerence.	They	might	be	gone	a	day,
or	weeks.	In	need	of	a	major	kill,	with	winter	fast	approaching.
Onrack	turned	his	attention	back	to	Udinaas	and	Silchas	Ruin,	and	saw	that	they	were	now	walking	towards
him,	side	by	side,	and	the	Imass	could	read	well	enough	Udinaas’s	battered	spirit,	his	fugue	of	despair.
No,	nothing	good	was	on	its	way	here.
He	heard	the	scrabble	behind	him	as	the	emlava	reached	the	point	where	the	trail	they’d	taken	would	move
them	 out	 of	 Onrack’s	 line	 of	 sight,	 and	 both	 animals	 bolted	 to	 escape	 his	 imagined	 attention.	 But	 he	 had	 no
interest	in	calling	them	back.	He	never	did.	The	beasts	were	simply	too	stupid	to	take	note	of	that.
	
Intruders	into	this	realm	rode	an	ill	tide,	arriving	like	vanguards	to	legions	of	chaos.	Change	stained	the	world


the	hue	of	fresh	 blood	more	often	than	not.	When	 the	 truth	was,	the	one	thing	all	Imass	desired	was	 peace,
affirmed	in	the	ritual	of	living,	secure	and	stable	and	exquisitely	predictable.	Heat	and	smoke	from	the	hearths,
the	 aromas	 of	 cooking	 meats,	 tubers,	 melted	 marrow.	 The	 nasal	 voices	 of	 the	 women	 singing	 as	 they	 went
about	 their	 day’s	 modest	 demands.	 The	 grunts	 and	 gasps	 of	 love-making,	 the	 chants	 of	 children.	 Someone
might	be	working	an	antler	tine,	the	spiral	edge	of	a	split	long-bone,	or	a	core	of	flint.	Another	kneeling	by	the
stream,	 scraping	 down	 a	 hide	 with	 polished	 blades	 and	 thumbnail	 scrapers,	 and	 nearby	 there	 was	 the	 faint
depression	 marking	 a	 pit	 of	 sand	 where	 other	 skins	 had	 been	 buried.	 When	 anyone	 needed	 to	 urinate	 they
would	squat	over	the	pit	to	send	their	stream	down.	To	cure	the	hides.
Elders	sat	on	boulders	and	watched	the	camp	and	all	their	kin	going	about	their	tasks,	and	they	dreamed	of
the	 hidden	 places	 and	 the	 pathways	 that	 opened	 in	 the	 fever	 of	 droning	 voices	 and	 drumming	 and	 swirling
scenes	painted	on	torch-lit	stone,	deep	in	the	seethe	of	night	when	spirits	blossomed	before	the	eyes	in	myriad
colours,	when	the	patterns	rose	to	the	surface	and	floated	and	flowed	in	the	smoky	air.
The	hunt	and	the	feast,	the	gathering	and	the	shaping.	Days	and	nights,	births	and	deaths,	laughter	and	grief,
tales	told	and	retold,	the	mind	within	unfolding	to	reveal	itself	like	a	gift	to	every	kin,	every	warm,	familiar	face.
This,	 Onrack	 knew,	 was	 all	 that	 mattered.	 Every	 appeasement	 of	 the	 spirits	 sought	 the	 protection	 of	 that
precious	peace,	that	perfect	continuity.	The	ghosts	of	ancestors	hovered	close	to	stand	sentinel	over	the	living.
Memories	 wove	 strands	 that	 bound	 everyone	 together,	 and	 when	 those	 memories	 were	 shared,	 that	 binding
grew	ever	stronger.
In	the	camp	behind	him,	his	beloved	mate,	Kilava,	reclined	on	heaps	of	soft	furs,	only	days	away	from	giving
birth	 to	 their	 second	 child.	 Shoulder-women	 brought	 her	 wooden	 bowls	 filled	 with	 fat,	 delicious	 grubs	 still
steaming	from	the	hot	flat-rocks	lining	the	hearths.	And	cones	of	honey	and	pungent	teas	of	berry	and	bark.
They	fed	her	continuously	and	would	do	so	until	her	labour	pains	began,	to	give	her	the	strength	and	reserves
she	would	need.
He	 recalled	 the	 night	 he	 and	 Kilava	 went	 to	 the	 home	 of	 Seren	 Pedac,	 in	 that	 strange,	 damaged	 city	 of
Letheras.	To	hear	of	Trull	Sengar’s	death	had	been	one	of	the	hardest	moments	of	Onrack’s	life.	But	to	find
himself	standing	before	his	friend’s	widow	had	proved	even	more	devastating.	Setting	eyes	upon	her,	he	had
felt	himself	collapse	inside	and	he	had	wept,	beyond	any	consolation,	and	he	had—some	time	later—wondered
at	Seren’s	fortitude,	her	preternatural	calm,	and	he	had	told	himself	that	she	must	have	gone	through	her	own
grief	in	the	days	and	nights	immediately	following	her	love’s	murder.	She	had	watched	him	weep	with	sorrow
in	her	eyes	but	no	tears.	She’d	made	tea,	then,	methodical	in	its	preparation,	while	Onrack	huddled	inside	the
embrace	of	Kilava’s	arms.
Only	 later	 would	 he	 rail	 at	 the	 injustice,	 the	 appalling	 senselessness	 of	 his	 friend’s	 death.	 And	 for	 the
duration	of	that	night,	as	he	struggled	to	speak	to	her	of	Trull—of	the	things	they	had	shared	since	that	moment
of	 frail	 sympathy	 when	 Onrack	 elected	 to	 free	 the	 warrior	 from	 his	 Shorning—he	 was	 reminded	 again	 and
again	 of	 fierce	 battles,	 defiant	 stands,	 acts	 of	 breathtaking	 courage,	 any	 one	 of	 which	 would	 have	 marked	 a
worthy	 end,	 a	 death	 swollen	 with	 meaning,	 shining	 with	 sacrifice.	 And	 yet	 Trull	 Sengar	 had	 survived	 those,
every	one	of	them,	fashioning	a	kind	of	triumph	in	the	midst	of	pain	and	loss.
Had	Onrack	been	there,	in	the	blood-splashed	arena	of	sand,	Trull’s	back	would	not	have	been	unguarded.
The	murderer	would	never	have	succeeded	in	his	act	of	brutal	treachery.	And	Trull	Sengar	would	have	lived	to
see	 his	 own	 child	 growing	 in	 Seren	 Pedac’s	 belly,	 would	 have	 witnessed,	 in	 awe	 and	 wonder,	 that	 glow	 of
focused	inwardness	in	the	expression	of	the	Acquitor.	No	male	could	know	such	a	sense	of	completeness,	of
course,	for	she	had	become	a	vessel	of	that	continuity,	an	icon	of	hope	and	optimism	for	the	future	world.
Oh,	if	Trull	could	have	witnessed	that—no	one	deserved	it	more,	after	all	the	battles,	the	wounds,	the	ordeals
and	the	vast	solitude	that	Onrack	could	never	pierce—so	many	betrayals	and	yet	he	had	stood	unbowed	and
had	given	of	himself	all	that	he	could.	No,	there	had	been	nothing	fair	in	this.
Seren	 Pedac	 had	 been	 kind	 and	 gracious.	 She	 had	 permitted	 Kilava’s	 ritual	 ensuring	 a	 safe	 birth.	 But	 she
had	also	made	it	clear	that	she	desired	nothing	else,	that	this	journey	would	be	her	own,	and	indeed,	she	was
strong	enough	to	make	it.
Yes,	women	could	be	frightening.	In	their	strengths,	their	capacity	to	endure.
As	much	as	Onrack	would	have	treasured	being	close	to	Kilava	now,	to	treat	her	with	gifts	and	morsels,	any
such	 attempt	 would	 have	 been	 met	 with	 ridicule	 from	 the	 shoulder-women	 and	 a	 warning	 snarl	 from	 Kilava
herself.	He	had	learned	to	keep	his	distance,	now	that	the	birthing	was	imminent.


In	any	case,	he	had	grown	fond	of	Udinaas.	True,	a	man	far	more	inclined	to	edged	commentary	than	Trull
had	been,	prone	to	irony	and	sarcasm,	since	these	were	the	only	weapons	Udinaas	could	wield	with	skill.	Yet
Onrack	had	come	to	appreciate	his	wry	wit,	and	more	than	that,	the	man	had	displayed	unexpected	virtues	in
his	newfound	role	as	father—ones	that	Onrack	noted	and	resolved	to	emulate	when	his	time	arrived.
He	had	missed	such	an	opportunity	the	first	time	round,	and	the	man	who	was	his	first	son,	Ulshun	Pral,	had
been	raised	by	others,	by	adopted	uncles,	brothers,	aunts.	Even	Kilava	had	been	absent	more	often	than	not.
And	 so,	 while	 Ulshun	 was	 indeed	 of	 their	 shared	 blood,	 he	 belonged	 more	 to	 his	 people	 than	 he	 did	 to	 his
parents.	There	was	only	faint	sorrow	in	this,	Onrack	told	himself,	fragments	of	regret	that	could	find	no	fit	in
his	memories	of	the	Ritual’s	deathless	existence.
So	 much	 had	 changed.	 This	 world	 seemed	 to	 rush	 past,	 ephemeral	 and	 elusive,	 days	 and	 nights	 slipping
through	his	hands.	Time	and	again	he	was	almost	paralysed	by	a	sense	of	loss,	overwhelmed	with	anguish	at
the	 thought	 of	 another	 moment	 gone,	 another	 instant	 dwindling	 in	 his	 wake.	 He	 struggled	 to	 remain	 mindful,
senses	bristling	to	every	blessed	arrival,	to	absorb	and	devour	and	luxuriate	in	its	taste,	and	then	would	come	a
moment	when	everything	flooded	over	him	and	he	would	be	engulfed,	flailing	in	the	blinding,	deafening	deluge.
Too	many	feelings,	and	it	seemed	weeping	was	his	answer	to	so	much	in	this	mortal	life—in	joy,	in	sorrow,	in
gifts	received	and	in	the	losses	suffered.	Perhaps	he	had	forgotten	all	the	other	possible	ways	of	responding.
Perhaps	 they	 were	 the	 first	 to	 go	 once	 time	 became	 meaningless,	 cruel	 as	 a	 curse,	 leaving	 tears	 as	 the	 last
thing	to	dry	up.
Udinaas	and	Silchas	Ruin	drew	closer.
And	once	more,	Onrack	felt	like	weeping.
	
The	 D’rhasilhani	 coast	 looked	 gnawed	 and	 rotted,	 with	 murky	 silt-laden	 rollers	 thrashing	 amidst	 pitted
limestone	outcrops	and	submerged	sandbars	overgrown	with	mangroves.	Heaps	of	foam	the	hue	of	pale	flesh
lifted	 and	 sagged	 with	 every	 breaker,	 and	 through	 the	 eyeglass	 Shield	 Anvil	 Tanakalian	 could	 see,	 above	 the
tideline	where	crescent	pockets	of	sand	and	gravel	were	visible,	mounds	of	dead	fish,	swarmed	by	gulls	and
something	else—long,	low	and	possibly	reptilian—that	heaved	and	bulled	through	the	slaughter	every	now	and
then,	sending	the	gulls	flapping	and	screeching.
He	was	relieved	he	was	not	standing	on	that	shore,	so	alien	from	the	coast	he	had	known	almost	all	of	his
life—where	 the	 water	 was	 deep,	 clear	 and	 deathly	 cold;	 where	 every	 inlet	 and	 reach	 was	 shrouded	 in	 the
gloom	 of	 black	 cliffs	 and	 thick	 forests	 of	 pine	 and	 fir.	 He	 had	 not	 imagined	 that	 such	 shorelines	 as	 he	 was
seeing	now	even	existed.	Squalid,	fetid,	like	some	overripe	pig	slough.	Northeastward	along	the	coastline,	at	the
base	of	 a	young	range	of	mountains	angling	south,	 what	must	be	 a	 huge	river	 emptied	 out	into	 this	vast	bay,
filling	the	waters	with	its	silts.	The	constant	inflow	of	fresh	water,	thick	and	milky-white,	had	poisoned	most	of
the	bay,	as	far	as	Tanakalian	could	determine.	And	this	did	not	seem	right.	He	felt	as	if	he	was	looking	upon
the	scene	of	a	vast	crime	of	some	sort,	a	fundamental	wrongness	spreading	like	sepsis.
‘What	is	your	wish,	sir?’
The	Shield	Anvil	lowered	the	eyeglass	and	frowned	at	the	coast	filling	the	view	to	the	north.	‘Make	for	the
river	mouth,	Captain.	I	gauge	the	outflow	channel	lies	upon	the	other	side,	closest	to	that	eastern	shore—the
cliffs	seem	sheer.’
‘Even	from	here,	sir,’	said	the	captain,	‘the	barely	submerged	banks	upon	this	side	are	plain	to	our	sight.’	He
hesitated.	 ‘It	 is	 the	 ones	 we	 cannot	 see	 that	 concern	 me,	 Shield	 Anvil.	 I	 am	 not	 even	 appeased	 should	 we
await	the	tide.’
‘Can	we	not	withdraw,	further	out	to	sea,	and	then	make	our	approach	closer	to	the	eastern	coastline?’
‘Into	 the	 head	 of	 the	 river’s	 current?	 Possibly,	 although	 in	 the	 clash	 with	 the	 tide,	 that	 current	 will	 be
treacherous.	Shield	Anvil,	this	delegation	we	seek—not	a	seafaring	people,	I	assume?’
Tanakalian	smiled.	‘A	range	of	virtually	impassable	mountains	blocks	the	kingdom	from	the	coast,	and	even
on	 the	 landward	 side	 of	 that	 range	 a	 strip	 of	 territory	 is	 claimed	 by	 pastoral	 tribes—there	 is	 peace	 between
them	and	the	Bolkando.	Nonetheless,	to	answer	you,	sir,	no,	the	Bolkando	are	not	a	seafaring	people.’
‘Thus,	this	river	mouth	.	.	.’
‘Yes,	 Captain.	 By	 gracious	 agreement	 with	 the	 D’rhasilhani,	 the	 Bolkando	 delegation	 is	 permitted	 an
encampment	on	the	east	side	of	the	river.’
‘The	threat	of	invasion	can	make	lifelong	enemies	into	the	closest	allies,’	observed	the	captain.


‘So	it	seems,’	agreed	Tanakalian.	‘What	is	extraordinary	is	that	the	alliances	seem	to	be	holding,	even	now
when	 there	 will	 be	 no	 invasion	 from	 the	 Lether	 Empire.	 I	 suspect	 certain	 benefits	 from	 peace	 became
evident.’
‘Profitable,	you	mean.’
‘Mutually	so,	yes,	Captain.’
‘I	must	attend	to	the	ship	now,	sir,	if	we	are	to	revise	our	approach	to	the	place	of	landing.’
The	Shield	Anvil	nodded	and,	as	the	captain	departed,	Tanakalian	raised	the	eyeglass	once	more,	leaning	for
support	 against	 the	 starboard	 figurehead	 as	 he	 steadied	 himself.	 The	 seas	 were	 not	 especially	 rough	 this	 far
inside	the	nameless	bay,	but	in	moments	the	Throne	of	War	would	begin	to	come	about,	and	he	was	intent	on
making	use	of	the	hard	pitch	to	scan	further	along	the	sheer	cliffs	of	the	eastern	shoreline.
The	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava	 remained	 in	 her	 cabin.	 Since	 his	 return	 from	 visiting	 the	 Adjunct,	 Destriant
Run’Thurvian	had	elected	to	begin	an	extended	period	of	secluded	meditation,	and	was	also	below	decks.	The
presence	of	either	one	would	have	imposed	a	degree	of	formality	that	Tanakalian	found	increasingly	chafing.
He	understood	the	necessity	for	propriety,	and	the	burden	of	tradition	that	ensured	meaning	to	all	that	they	did
—and	 all	 that	 they	 were—but	 he	 had	 spent	 time	 on	 the	 command	 ship	 of	 the	 Adjunct,	 in	 the	 company	 of
Malazans.	 They	 displayed	 an	 ease	 in	 shared	 hardship	 that	 had	 at	 first	 shocked	 the	 Shield	 Anvil,	 until	 he
comprehended	 the	 value	 of	 such	 behaviour.	 There	 could	 be	 no	 challenging	 the	 discipline	 of	 the	 Bonehunters
when	 battle	 was	 summoned.	 But	 the	 force	 that	 truly	 held	 them	 together	 was	 found	 in	 the	 camaraderie	 they
displayed	during	those	interminably	long	periods	of	inactivity,	such	as	all	armies	were	forced	to	endure.	Indeed,
Tanakalian	 had	 come	 to	 delight	 in	 their	 brash	 lack	 of	 decorum,	 their	 open	 irreverence	 and	 their	 strange
penchant	for	revelling	in	the	absurd.
Perhaps	 an	 ill	 influence,	 as	 Run’Thurvian’s	 faintly	 disapproving	 frowns	 implied,	 whenever	 Tanakalian
attempted	 his	 own	 ironic	 commentary.	 Of	 course,	 the	 Destriant	 possessed	 no	 shortage	 in	 his	 list	 of
disappointments	regarding	the	Order’s	new	Shield	Anvil.	Too	young,	woefully	inexperienced,	and	dismayingly
inclined	to	rash	judgement—this	last	flaw	simply	unacceptable	in	one	bearing	the	title	of	Shield	Anvil.
‘Your	 mind	 is	 too	 active,	 sir,’	 the	 Destriant	 had	 said	 once.	 ‘It	 is	 not	 for	 the	 Shield	 Anvil	 to	 make
judgement.	Not	for	you	to	decide	who	is	worthy	of	your	embrace.	No,	sir,	but	you	have	never	disguised
your	predilections.	I	give	you	that.’
Generous	of	the	man,	all	things	considered.
As	 the	 ship	 lost	 headway	 in	 its	 long,	 creaking	 coming-about,	 Tanakalian	 studied	 that	 forbidding	 coast,	 the
tortured	 mountains—many	 of	 them	 with	 cones	 shrouded	 in	 smoke	 and	 foul	 gases.	 It	 would	 not	 do	 to	 find
themselves	thrown	against	that	deadly	shoreline,	although	given	the	natural	inclination	of	outflow	currents,	the
risk	 was	 very	 real.	 Leading	 the	 Shield	 Anvil	 to	 one	 of	 those	 ghastly	 judgements,	 and	 in	 this	 case,	 even	 the
Destriant	could	not	find	fault.
With	 a	 faint	 smile,	 Tanakalian	 lowered	 the	 eyeglass	 once	 more	 and	 returned	 it	 to	 its	 sealskin	 sheath	 slung
beneath	his	left	arm.	He	descended	from	the	forecastle	and	made	his	way	below	decks.	They	would	require
Run’Thurvian	and	his	sorcery	to	ensure	safe	passage	into	the	river	mouth,	and	this,	Tanakalian	concluded,	was
fair	 justification	 for	 interrupting	 the	 Destriant’s	 meditation,	 which	 had	 been	 going	 on	 for	 days	 now.
Run’Thurvian	might	well	cherish	his	privilege	of	solitude	and	unmitigated	isolation,	but	certain	necessities	could
not	be	avoided	even	by	the	Order’s	Destriant.	The	old	man	could	do	with	the	fresh	air,	besides.
The	 command	 ship	 was	 alone	 in	 this	 bay.	 The	 remaining	 twenty-four	 serviceable	 Thrones	 of	 War	 held
position	far	out	to	sea,	more	than	capable	of	weathering	whatever	the	southern	ocean	could	muster,	barring	a
typhoon,	of	course,	and	that	season	had	passed,	according	to	local	pilots.
Since	they	had	relinquished	the	Froth	Wolf	to	the	Adjunct,	the	Listral	now	served	as	the	Order’s	flagship.
The	 oldest	 ship	 in	 the	 fleet—almost	 four	 decades	 since	 the	 laying	 of	 the	 keels—the	 Listral	 was	 the	 last
survivor	 of	 the	 first	 line	 of	 trimarans,	 bearing	 antiquated	 details	 in	 style	 and	 decoration.	 This	 lent	 the	 ship	 a
ferocious	aspect,	with	every	visible	span	of	ironwood	carved	into	the	semblance	of	a	snarling	wolf’s	head,	and
the	centre	hull	was	entirely	shaped	as	a	lunging	wolf,	three-quarters	submerged	so	that	the	crest	of	foam	at	the
bow	churned	from	the	beast’s	gaping,	fanged	mouth.
Tanakalian	loved	this	ship,	even	the	archaic	row	of	inside-facing	cabins	lining	the	corridor	of	the	first	level
below	deck.	Listral	could	manage	but	half	as	many	passengers	as	could	the	second	and	third	lines	of	Thrones
of	War.	At	the	same	time,	each	cabin	was	comparatively	spacious,	indeed,	almost	luxurious.


The	Destriant’s	abode	encompassed	the	last	two	cabins	of	this,	the	starboard	hull.	The	wall	between	them
now	 bore	 a	 narrow,	 low	 door.	 The	 stern	 chamber	 served	 as	 Run’Thurvian’s	 private	 residence,	 whilst	 the
forward	 cabin	 had	 been	 sanctified	 as	 a	 temple	 of	 the	 Wolves.	 As	 expected,	 Tanakalian	 found	 the	 Destriant
kneeling,	 head	 bowed,	 before	 the	 twin-headed	 altar.	 Yet	 something	 was	 wrong—the	 air	 reeked	 of	 charred
flesh,	burnt	hair,	and	Run’Thurvian,	his	back	to	Tanakalian,	remained	motionless	as	the	Shield	Anvil	swung	in
through	the	corridor	hatch.
‘Destriant?’
‘Come	no	closer,’	croaked	Run’Thurvian,	his	voice	almost	unrecognizable,	and	Tanakalian	now	heard	the	old
man’s	desperate	wheezing	of	breath.	‘There	is	not	much	time,	Shield	Anvil.	I	had	.	.	.	concluded	.	.	.	that	none
would	 disturb	 me	 after	 all,	 no	 matter	 how	 overlong	 my	 absence.’	 A	 hacking,	 bitter	 laugh.	 ‘I	 had	 forgotten
your	.	.	.	temerity,	sir.’
Tanakalian	drew	a	step	closer.	‘Sir,	what	has	happened?’
‘Stay	back,	I	beg	you!’	gasped	the	Destriant.	‘You	must	take	my	words	to	the	Mortal	Sword.’
Something	glittered	on	the	polished	wooden	floor	around	the	kneeling	form,	as	if	the	man	had	leaked	out	on
all	sides—but	the	smell	was	not	one	of	urine,	and	the	liquid,	while	thick	as	blood,	seemed	almost	golden	in	the
faint	 lantern	 light.	 Real	 fear	 flowed	 through	 Tanakalian	 upon	 seeing	 it,	 and	 the	 Destriant’s	 words	 barely
reached	him	over	the	thumping	of	his	own	heart.	‘Destriant—’
‘I	travelled	far,’	Run’Thurvian	said.	‘Doubts	.	.	.	a	growing	unease.	Listen!	She	is	not	as	we	believed.	There
will	be	.	.	.	betrayal.	Tell	Krughava!	The	vow—we	have	made	a	mistake!’
The	puddle	was	spreading,	thick	as	honey,	and	it	seemed	the	robed	shape	of	the	Destriant	was	diminishing,
collapsing	into	itself.
He	is	dying.	By	the	Wolves,	he	is	dying.	‘Destriant,’	Tanakalian	said,	forcing	his	terror	down,	swallowing
against	the	horror	of	what	he	was	witnessing,	‘will	you	accept	my	embrace?’
The	laugh	that	made	its	way	out	sounded	as	if	it	had	bubbled	up	through	mud.	‘No.	I	do	not.’
Stunned,	the	Shield	Anvil	staggered	back.
‘You	 .	 .	 .	 you	 are	 .	 .	 .	 insufficient.	 You	 always	 were—another	 one	 of	 Krughava’s	 errors	 in	 .	 .	 .	 in
judgement.	You	fail	me,	and	so	you	shall	fail	her.	The	Wolves	shall	abandon	us.	The	vow	betrays	them,	do	you
understand?	I	have	seen	our	deaths—this	one	here	before	you,	and	the	ones	to	come.	You,	Tanakalian.	The
Mortal	Sword	too,	and	every	brother	and	sister	of	the	Grey	Helms.’	He	coughed,	and	something	gushed	out	in
the	 convulsion,	 spraying	 the	 altar	 with	 liquid	 and	 shapeless	 gobbets	 that	 slid	 down	 into	 the	 folds	 of	 stone	 fur,
traversing	the	necks	of	the	Wolves.
The	 kneeling	 figure	 slumped,	 folded	 in	 the	 middle	 at	 an	 impossible	 angle.	 The	 sound	 made	 when
Run’Thurvian’s	forehead	struck	the	floor	was	that	of	a	hen’s	egg	breaking,	and	that	span	of	bone	offered	little
resistance,	so	that	the	man’s	face	collapsed	as	well.
As	Tanakalian	stared,	drawn	forward	once	more,	he	saw	watery	streams	leaking	out	from	the	Destriant’s
ruined	head.
The	man	had	simply	.	.	.	melted.	He	could	see	that	greyish	pulp	boiling,	thinning	down	into	clear	streams	of
fat.
And	 he	 so	 wanted	 to	 scream,	 to	 unleash	 his	 horror,	 but	 a	 deeper	 dread	 had	 claimed	 him.	 He	 would	 not
accept	my	embrace.	I	have	failed	him,	he	said.	I	will	fail	them	all,	he	said.
Betrayal?
No,	that	I	cannot	believe.
I	will	not.
Although	 he	 knew	 Run’Thurvian	 was	 dead,	 Tanakalian	 spoke	 to	 him	 nonetheless.	 ‘The	 failure,	 Destriant,
was	yours,	not	mine.	You	journeyed	far,	did	you?	I	suggest	.	.	.	not	far	enough.’	He	paused,	struggling	to	quell
the	trembling	that	had	come	to	him.	‘Destriant.	Sir.	It	pleases	me	that	you	rejected	my	embrace.	For	I	see	now
that	you	did	not	deserve	it.’
No,	he	was	not	simply	a	Shield	Anvil,	in	the	manner	of	all	those	who	had	come	before,	all	those	who	had
lived	 and	 died	 beneath	 the	 burden	 of	 that	 title.	 He	 was	 not	 interested	 in	 passive	 acceptance.	 He	 would	 take
upon	himself	mortal	pain,	yes,	but	not	indiscriminately.
I	too	am	mortal,	after	all.	It	is	my	essence	that	I	am	able	to	weigh	my	judgement.	Of	what	is	worthy.
And	what	is	not.


No,	I	shall	not	be	as	other	Shield	Anvils.	The	world	has	changed—we	must	change	with	it.	We	must
change	to	meet	it.	He	stared	down	at	the	heaped	mess	that	was	all	that	remained	of	Destriant	Run’Thurvian.
There	 would	 be	 shock.	 Dismay	 and	 faces	 twisted	 into	 distraught	 fear.	 The	 Order	 would	 be	 flung	 into
disarray,	and	it	would	fall	to	the	Mortal	Sword,	and	to	the	Shield	Anvil,	to	steady	the	rudder,	until	such	time	as	a
new	Destriant	was	raised	among	the	brothers	and	sisters.
Of	 more	 immediate	 concern,	 however,	 as	 far	 as	 Tanakalian	 was	 concerned,	 was	 that	 there	 would	 be	 no
sorcerous	 protection	 in	 traversing	 the	 channel.	 In	 his	 assessment—shaky	 as	 it	 might	 be	 at	 the	 moment—he
judged	that	news	to	be	paramount.
The	Mortal	Sword	would	have	to	wait.
He	had	nothing	to	tell	her	in	any	case.
‘Did	you	embrace	our	brother,	Shield	Anvil?’
‘Of	course,	Mortal	Sword.	His	pain	is	with	me,	now,	as	is	his	salvation.’
	
The	mind	shaped	its	habits	and	habits	reshaped	the	body.	A	lifelong	rider	walked	with	bowed	legs,	a	seafarer
stood	wide	no	matter	how	sure	the	purchase.	Women	who	twirled	strands	of	their	hair	would	in	time	come	to
sit	with	heads	tilted	to	one	side.	Some	people	prone	to	worry	might	grind	their	teeth,	and	years	of	this	would
thicken	the	muscles	of	the	jaws	and	file	the	molars	down	to	smooth	lumps,	bereft	of	spurs	and	crowns.
Yedan	Derryg,	the	Watch,	wandered	down	to	the	water’s	edge.	The	night	sky,	so	familiar	to	one	who	had
wrapped	his	life	about	this	late	stretch	of	time	preceding	the	sun’s	rise,	was	now	revealed	to	him	as	strange,
jarred	free	of	the	predictable,	the	known,	and	the	muscles	of	his	jaw	worked	in	steady,	unceasing	rhythm.
The	 reflected	 smear	 of	 vaguely	 green	 comets	 rode	 the	 calm	 surface	 of	 the	 inlet,	 like	 slashes	 of	 luminous
glow-spirits,	 as	 were	 wont	 to	 gather	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 ships.	 There	 were	 strangers	 in	 the	 sky.	 Drawing	 closer
night	after	night,	as	if	summoned.	The	blurred	moon	had	set,	which	was	something	of	a	relief,	but	Yedan	could
still	observe	the	troubled	behaviour	of	the	tide—the	things	that	had	once	been	certain	were	certain	no	longer.
He	was	right	to	worry.
Suffering	was	coming	to	the	shore,	and	the	Shake	would	not	be	spared.	This	was	a	 knowledge	he	 shared
with	Twilight,	and	he	had	seen	the	growing	fear	in	the	rheumy	eyes	of	the	witches	and	warlocks,	leading	him	to
suspect	that	they	too	had	sensed	the	approach	of	something	vast	and	terrible.	Alas,	shared	fears	did	not	forge
any	renewed	commitment	to	co-operation—for	them	the	political	struggle	remained,	had	indeed	intensified.
Fools.
Yedan	 Derryg	 was	 not	 a	 loquacious	 man.	 He	 might	 well	 possess	 a	 hundred	 thousand	 words	 in	 his	 head,
open	to	virtually	infinite	rearrangement,	but	that	did	not	mean	he	laboured	under	the	need	to	give	them	voice.
There	seemed	to	be	little	point	in	that,	and	in	his	experience	comprehension	diminished	as	complexity	deepened
—this	 was	 not	 a	 failing	 of	 skills	 in	 communication,	 he	 believed,	 but	 one	 of	 investment	 and	 capacity.	 People
dwelt	 in	 a	 swamp	 of	 feelings	 that	 stuck	 like	 gobs	 of	 mud	 to	 every	 thought,	 slowing	 those	 thoughts	 down,
making	 them	 almost	 shapeless.	 The	 inner	 discipline	 demanded	 in	 order	 to	 cleanse	 such	 maladroit	 tendencies
was	 usually	 too	 fierce,	 too	 trying,	 just	 too	 damned	 hard.	 This,	 then,	 marked	 the	 unwillingness	 to	 make	 the
necessary	 investment.	 The	 other	 issue	 was	 a	 far	 crueller	 judgement,	 in	 that	 it	 had	 to	 do	 with	 the	 recognition
that	in	the	world	there	were	numerically	far	more	stupid	people	than	there	were	smart	ones.	The	difficulty	was
in	 the	 innate	 cleverness	 of	 the	 stupid	 in	 disguising	 their	 own	 stupidity.	 The	 truth	 was	 rarely	 displayed	 in	 an
honest	 frown	 or	 a	 sincere	 knotting	 of	 the	 brow.	 Instead,	 it	 was	 revealed	 in	 a	 flash	 of	 suspicion,	 the	 hint	 of
diffidence	 in	 an	 offhand	 dismissal,	 or,	 perversely,	 muteness	 offered	 up	 to	 convey	 a	 level	 of	 thoughtful
consideration	which,	in	truth,	did	not	exist.
Yedan	Derryg	had	little	time	for	such	games.	He	could	smell	an	idiot	from	fifty	paces	off.	He	watched	their
sly	evasions,	listened	to	their	bluster,	and	wondered	again	and	again	why	they	could	never	reach	that	essential
realization,	which	was	that	the	amount	of	effort	engaged	in	hiding	their	own	stupidity	would	serve	them	better
used	in	cogent	exercise	of	what	little	wits	they	possessed.	Assuming,	of	course,	that	improvement	was	even
possible.
There	were	too	many	mechanisms	in	society	designed	to	hide	and	indeed	coddle	its	myriad	fools,	particularly
since	fools	generally	held	the	majority.	In	addition	to	such	mechanisms,	one	could	also	find	various	snares	and
traps	 and	 ambushes,	 one	 and	 all	 fashioned	 with	 the	 aim	 of	 isolating	 and	 then	 destroying	 smart	 people.	 No
argument,	no	matter	how	brilliant,	can	defeat	a	knife	in	the	groin,	after	all.	Nor	an	executioner’s	axe.	And	the


bloodlust	of	a	mob	was	always	louder	than	a	lone,	reasonable	voice.
The	true	danger,	Yedan	Derryg	understood,	was	to	be	found	in	the	hidden	deceivers—those	who	could	play
the	 fool	 yet	 possessed	 a	 kind	 of	 cunning	 that,	 while	 narrowly	 confined	 to	 the	 immediate	 satisfaction	 of	 their
own	 position,	 proved	 of	 great	 skill	 in	 exploiting	 the	 stupid	 and	 the	 brilliant	 alike.	 These	 were	 the	 ones	 who
hungered	for	power	and	more	often	than	not	succeeded	in	acquiring	it.	No	genius	would	willingly	accept	true
power,	of	course,	in	full	knowledge	of	its	deadly	invitations.	And	fools	could	never	succeed	in	holding	on	to	it
for	very	long,	unless	they	were	content	as	figureheads,	in	which	case	the	power	they	held	was	an	illusion.
Gather	 a	 modest	 horde	 of	 such	 hidden	 deceivers—those	 of	 middling	 intelligence	 and	 clever	 malice	 and
avaricious	ambition—and	serious	trouble	was	pretty	much	assured.	A	singular	example	of	this	was	found	in	the
coven	 of	 witches	 and	 warlocks	 who,	 until	 recently,	 had	 ruled	 the	 Shake—inasmuch	 as	 a	 scattered,	 dissolute
and	depressed	people	could	be	ruled.
Jaws	 bunching,	 Yedan	 Derryg	 crouched	 down.	 Ripples	 from	 the	 faint	 waves	 rolled	 round	 the	 toes	 of	 his
boots,	 gurgled	 into	 the	 pits	 they	 made	 in	 the	 soft	 sand.	 His	 arms	 trembled,	 every	 muscle	 aching	 with
exhaustion.	The	brine	from	the	shoreline	could	not	wash	the	stench	from	his	nostrils.
Behind	him,	in	the	squalid	huddle	of	huts	beyond	the	berm,	voices	had	awakened.	He	heard	someone	come
on	to	the	shore,	staggering	it	seemed,	drawing	closer	in	fits	and	starts.
Yedan	Derryg	reached	down	his	hands	until	the	cold	water	flowed	over	them,	and	what	was	clear	suddenly
clouded	in	dark	blooms.	He	watched	as	the	waves,	sweeping	out	so	gently,	tugged	away	the	stains,	and	in	his
mind	uttered	a	prayer.
This	to	the	sea
This	from	the	shore
This	I	give	freely
Until	the	waters	run	clear
She	came	up	behind	him.	‘In	the	name	of	the	Empty	Throne,	Yedan,	what	have	you	done?’
‘Why,’	he	replied	to	his	sister’s	horrified	disbelief,	‘I	have	killed	all	of	them	but	two,	my	Queen.’
She	stepped	round,	splashed	into	the	water	until	she	faced	him,	and	then	set	a	palm	against	his	forehead	and
pushed	until	she	could	see	his	face,	until	she	could	stare	into	his	eyes.	‘But	.	.	.	why?	Did	you	think	I	could	not
handle	them?	That	we	couldn’t?’
He	shrugged.	‘They	wanted	a	king.	One	to	control	you.	One	they	could	control	in	turn.’
‘And	 so	 you	 murdered	 them?	 Yedan,	 the	 longhouse	 has	 become	 an	 abattoir!	 And	 you	 truly	 think	 you	 can
just	wash	your	hands	of	what	you	have	done?	You’ve	just	butchered	twenty-eight	people.	Shake.	My	people!
Old	men	and	old	women!	You	slaughtered	them!’
He	frowned	up	at	her.	‘My	Queen,	I	am	the	Watch.’
She	 stared	 down	 at	 him,	 and	 he	 could	 read	 her	 expression	 well	 enough.	 She	 believed	 her	 brother	 had
become	a	madman.	She	was	recoiling	in	horror.
‘When	Pully	and	Skwish	return,’	he	said,	‘I	will	kill	them,	too.’
‘You	will	not.’
He	 could	 see	 that	 a	 reasonable	 conversation	 with	 his	 sister	 was	 not	 possible,	 not	 at	 this	 moment,	 with	 the
cries	of	shock	and	grief	rising	ever	higher	in	the	village.	‘My	Queen—’
‘Yedan,’	 she	 gasped.	 ‘Don’t	 you	 see	 what	 you	 have	 done	 to	 me?	 Don’t	 you	 realize	 the	 wound	 you	 have
delivered—that	you	would	do	such	a	thing	in	my	name	.	.	.’	She	seemed	unable	to	finish	the	statement,	and	he
saw	tears	in	her	eyes	now.	And	then	that	gaze	iced	over	and	her	tone	hardened	as	she	said,	‘You	have	two
choices	left,	Yedan	Derryg.	Stay	and	be	given	to	the	sea.	Or	accept	banishment.’
‘I	am	the	Watch—’
‘Then	we	will	be	blind	to	the	night.’
‘That	cannot	be	permitted,’	he	replied.
‘You	fool—you’ve	left	me	no	choice!’
He	slowly	straightened.	‘Then	I	shall	accept	the	sea—’
She	turned	round,	faced	the	dark	waters.	Her	shoulders	shook	as	she	lowered	her	head.	‘No,’	she	managed
in	a	grating	voice.	‘Get	out	of	here,	Yedan.	Go	north,	into	the	old	Edur	lands.	I	will	not	accept	one	more	death
in	my	name—not	one.	No	matter	how	deserved	it	is.	You	are	my	brother.	Go.’


She	 was	 not	 one	 of	 the	 deceivers,	 he	 knew.	 Nor	 was	 she	 a	 fool.	 Given	 the	 endless	 opposition	 from	 the
coven,	she	had	possessed	less	power	than	her	title	proclaimed.	And	perhaps,	intelligent	as	Yan	Tovis	was,	she
had	 been	 content	 to	 accept	 that	 limitation.	 Had	 the	 witches	 and	 warlocks	 been	 as	 wise	 and	 sober	 in	 their
recognition	of	the	deadly	lure	of	ambition,	he	could	well	have	left	things	as	they	were.	But	they	had	not	been
interested	in	a	balance.	They	wanted	what	they	had	lost.	They	had	not	shown	the	intelligence	demanded	by	the
situation.
And	so	he	had	removed	them,	and	now	his	sister’s	power	was	absolute.	Understandable,	then,	that	she	was
so	distraught.	Eventually,	he	told	himself,	she	would	come	to	comprehend	what	was	now	necessary.	Namely,
his	return,	as	the	Watch,	as	the	balance	to	her	potentially	unchecked	power.
He	would	need	to	be	patient.
‘I	shall	do	as	you	say,’	he	said	to	her.
She	would	not	turn	round,	and	so,	with	a	nod,	Yedan	Derryg	set	out,	northward	along	the	shoreline.	He’d	left
his	 horse	 and	 pack-mount	 tethered	 two	 hundred	 paces	 along,	 just	 above	 the	 high-water	 mark.	 One	 sure
measure	of	intelligence,	after	all,	was	in	the	accurate	anticipation	of	consequences.	Emotions	stung	to	life	could
drown	one	as	easily	as	a	riptide,	and	he	had	no	desire	to	deepen	her	straits.
Soon	the	sun	would	rise,	although	with	rain	on	the	way	its	single	glaring	eye	would	likely	not	be	visible	for
long,	 and	 that	 too	 was	 well.	 Leave	 the	 cloud’s	 tears	 to	 wash	 away	 all	 the	 blood,	 and	 before	 too	 long	 the
absence	 of	 over	 a	 score	 of	 brazen,	 incipient	 tyrants	 would	 rush	 in	 among	 the	 Shake	 like	 a	 sudden	 fresh	 and
bracing	wind.
Strangers	rode	 the	 night	 sky,	 and	 if	 the	 Shake	 had	 any	 hope	 of	 surviving	 what	 was	 coming,	 the	 politics	 of
betrayal	must	be	swept	away.	With	finality.
It	was	his	responsibility,	after	all.	Perhaps	his	sister	had	forgotten	the	oldest	vows	that	bound	the	Watch.	But
he	had	not.	And	so	he	had	done	what	was	necessary.
There	 was	 no	 pleasure	 in	 the	 act.	 Satisfaction,	 yes,	 as	 would	 be	 felt	 by	 any	 wise,	 intelligent	 person	 who
succeeds	in	sweeping	aside	a	multitude	of	shortsighted	sharks,	thus	clearing	the	water.	But	no	pleasure.
To	his	right,	as	he	walked	the	shoreline,	the	land	was	growing	light.
But	the	sea	to	his	left	remained	dark.
Sometimes	the	verge	between	the	two	grew	very	narrow	indeed.
	
Shifting	weight	from	one	foot	to	the	other,	Pully	stared	down	into	the	pit.	Snakes	swarmed	by	the	hundred	in
that	hole,	sluggish	at	first	but	now,	as	the	day	warmed,	they	writhed	like	worms	in	an	open	wound.	She	tugged
at	her	nose,	which	had	a	tendency	to	tingle	whenever	she	fell	back	into	the	habit	of	chewing	her	lips,	but	the
tingling	wouldn’t	leave.	Which	meant,	of	course,	that	she	was	gnawing	away	at	those	wrinkled	flaps	covering
what	was	left	of	her	teeth.
Getting	old	was	a	misery.	First	the	skin	sagged.	Then	aches	settled	into	every	place	and	places	that	didn’t
even	 exist.	 Pangs	 and	 twinges	 and	 spasms,	 and	 all	 the	 while	 the	 skin	 kept	 sagging,	 lines	 deepening,	 folds
folding,	and	all	beauty	going	away.	The	lilt	of	upright	buttocks,	the	innocence	of	wide,	shallow	tits.	The	face	still
able	to	brave	the	weather,	and	lips	still	sweet	and	soft	as	pouches	of	rendered	fat.	All	gone.	What	was	left	was
a	mind	that	still	imagined	itself	young,	its	future	stretching	out,	trapped	inside	a	sack	of	loose	meat	and	brittle
bones.	It	wasn’t	fair.
She	yanked	at	her	nose	again,	trying	to	get	the	feeling	back.	And	that	was	another	thing.	The	wrong	parts
kept	on	growing.	Ears	and	nose,	warts	and	moles,	hairs	sprouting	everywhere.	The	body	forgot	its	own	rules,
the	flesh	went	senile	and	the	bright	mind	within	could	wail	all	it	wanted,	but	nothing	that	was	real	ever	changed
except	for	the	worse.
She	 widened	 her	 stance	 and	 sent	 a	 stream	 of	 piss	 down	 into	 the	 stony	 earth.	 Even	 simple	 things	 got	 less
predictable.	Oh,	what	a	misery	ageing	was.
Skwish’s	head	popped	up	amidst	seething	snakes,	eyes	blinking.
‘Yah,’	said	Pully,	‘I’m	still	here.’
‘How	long?’
‘Day	and	a	night	and	now	it’s	morning.	Y’amby	get	what	yer	needed?	I	got	aches.’
‘An’	I	got	reck’lections	I	ain’t	ever	wanted.’	Skwish	started	working	herself	free	of	the	heaps	of	serpents,
none	of	which	minded	much	or	even	noticed,	busy	as	they	were,	breeding	in	a	frenzy	that	seemed	to	last	for


ever.
‘T’which	we	might	want,	iyerplease?’
‘Mebee.’
Skwish	 reached	 up	 and,	 grunting,	 Pully	 helped	 her	 friend	 out	 of	 the	 pit.	 ‘Yee,	 y’smell	 ripe,	 woman.	 Snake
piss	and	white	smear,	there’ll	be	onward	eggs	in	yer	ears.’
‘It’s	a	cold	spirit	t’travel	on,	Pully,	an’	I	ain’t	ever	doin	it	agin,	so’s	if	I	rank	it’s	the	leese	of	our	perbems.
Gaf,	I	need	a	dunk	in	the	sea.’
They	set	off	for	the	village,	a	half	day’s	journey	coastward.
‘An	ya	tervilled	afar,	Skwish,	did	yee?’
‘It’s	bad	an’	it’s	bad,	Pully.	Cold	blood	t’the	east	no	sun	could	warm.	I	seen	solid	black	clouds	rollin	down,
an’	 iron	 rain	 an	 gashes	 in	 th’geround.	 I	 see	 the	 stars	 go	 away	 an’	 nothing	 but	 green	 glows,	 an’	 them	 green
glows	they	is	cold,	too,	cold	as	th’east	blooding.	All	stems	but	one	branch,	y’see.	One	branch.’
‘So’s	we	guessed	right,	an’	next	time	Twilight	goes	an’	seal	barks	on	’bout	a	marchin’	the	Shake	away	from
the	shore,	you	can	talk	up	an’	cut	er	down	and	down.	An’	then	we	vote	and	get	er	gone.	Er	and	the	Watch,
too.’
Skwish	 nodded,	 trying	 to	 work	 globs	 of	 snake	 sperm	 out	 of	 her	 hair,	 without	 much	 success.	 ‘Comes	 to
what’s	d’served,	Pully.	The	Shake	did	ever	’ave	clear	eyes.	Y’	can’t	freck	on	an’	on	thinkin’	th’world	won’t
push	back.	It’ll	push	awright.	Till	the	shore	breaks	an’	breaks	it	will	an’	when	it	does,	we	ever	do	drown.	I	saw
dust,	Pully,	but	it	wasn’t	no	puffy	earth.	T’was	specks	a	bone	an’	skin	an’	dreams	an’	motes	a	surprise,	hah!
We’s	so	freckered,	sister,	it’s	all	we	can	do	is	laughter	an	prance	into	the	sea.’
‘Goo’	anough	fra	me,’	Pully	grumbled.	‘I	got	so	many	aches	I	might	be	the	def’nition	a	ache	irrself.’
The	two	Shake	witches—the	last	left	alive,	as	they	were	soon	to	learn—set	out	for	the	village.
	
Take	a	scintillating,	flaring	arm	of	the	sun’s	fire,	give	it	form,	a	life	of	its	own,	and	upon	the	faint	cooling	of	the
apparition,	a	man	such	as	Rud	Elalle	might	emerge,	blinking	with	innocence,	unaware	that	all	he	touched	could
well	explode	into	destructive	flames—had	he	been	of	such	mind.	And	to	teach,	to	guide	him	into	adulthood,	the
singular	aversion	remained:	no	matter	what	you	do,	do	not	awaken	him	to	his	anger.
Sometimes,	Udinaas	had	come	to	realize,	potential	was	a	force	best	avoided,	for	the	potential	he	sensed	in
his	son	was	not	a	thing	for	celebration.
No	 doubt	 every	 father	 felt	 that	 flash	 of	 blinding,	 burning	 truth—the	 moment	 when	 he	 sensed	 his	 son’s
imminent	 domination,	 be	 it	 physical	 or	 something	 less	 overtly	 violent	 in	 its	 promise.	 Or	 perhaps	 such	 a	 thing
was	 in	 fact	 rare,	 conjured	 from	 the	 specific.	 After	 all,	 not	 every	 father’s	 son	 could	 veer	 into	 the	 shape	 of	 a
dragon.	Not	every	father’s	son	held	the	dawn’s	golden	immanence	in	his	eyes.
Rud	Elalle’s	gentle	innocence	was	a	soft	cloak	hiding	a	monstrous	nature,	and	that	was	an	unavoidable	fact,
the	burning	script	of	his	son’s	blood.	Silchas	Ruin	had	spoken	to	that,	with	knowing,	with	the	pained	truth	in	his
face.	 The	 ripening	 harvest	 of	 the	 Eleint,	 a	 fecund	 brutality	 that	 sought	 only	 to	 appease	 itself—that	 saw	 the
world	(any	world,	every	world)	as	a	feeding	ground,	and	the	promise	of	satisfaction	waited	in	the	bloated	glut
of	power.
Rare	 the	 blood-fouled	 who	 managed	 to	 overcome	 that	 innate	 megalomania.	 ‘Ah,	 Udinaas,’	 Silchas	 Ruin
had	 said.	 ‘My	 brother,	 perhaps,	 Anomander.	 Osserc?	 Maybe,	 maybe	 not.	 There	 was	 a	 Bonecaster,
once	.	.	.	and	a	Soletaken	Jaghut.	A	handful	of	others—when	the	Eleint	blood	within	them	was	thinner
—and	that	is	why	I	have	hope	for	Rud	Elalle,	Udinaas.	He	is	third-generation—did	he	not	clash	with	his
mother’s	will?’
Well,	it	was	said	that	he	had.
Udinaas	rubbed	his	face.	He	glanced	again	at	the	tusk-framed	hut,	wondering	if	he	should	march	inside,	put
an	end	to	that	parley	right	now.	Silchas	Ruin,	after	all,	had	not	included	himself	among	those	who	had	mastered
their	 Draconean	 blood.	 A	 sliver	 of	 honesty	 from	 the	 White	 Crow,	 plucked	 from	 that	 wound	 of	 humility,	 no
doubt.	It	was	all	that	was	holding	Udinaas	back.
Crouched	 beside	 him,	 shrouded	 by	 gusts	 of	 smoke	 from	 the	 hearth,	 Onrack	 released	 a	 long	 sigh	 that
whistled	from	his	nostrils—break	a	nose	enough	times	and	every	breath	was	tortured	music.	At	least	it	was	so
with	this	warrior.	‘He	will	take	him,	I	think.’
Udinaas	nodded,	not	trusting	himself	to	speak.


‘I	am	.	.	.	confused,	my	friend.	That	you	would	permit	this	.	.	.	meeting.	That	you	would	excuse	yourself	and
so	provide	no	counter	to	the	Tiste	Andii’s	invitation.	That	hut,	Udinaas,	may	be	a	place	filled	with	lies.	What	is
to	stop	the	White	Crow	from	offering	your	son	the	sweet	sip	of	terrible	power?’
There	was	genuine	worry	in	Onrack’s	tone,	deserving	more	than	bludgeoning	silence.	Udinaas	rubbed	again
at	his	face,	unable	to	determine	which	was	the	more	insensate:	his	features	or	his	hands;	and	wondering	why
an	answer	seemed	to	important	to	him.	‘I	have	walked	in	the	realm	of	Starvald	Demelain,	Onrack.	Among	the
bones	of	countless	dead	dragons.	At	the	gate	itself,	the	corpses	were	heaped	like	glitter	flies	along	a	window
sill.’
‘If	it	is	indeed	in	the	nature	of	the	Eleint	to	lust	for	self-destruction,’	ventured	Onrack,	‘would	it	not	be	better
to	guide	Rud	away	from	such	a	flaw?’
‘I	 doubt	 that	 would	 work,’	 Udinaas	 said.	 ‘Can	 you	 turn	 nature	 aside,	 Onrack?	 Every	 season	 the	 salmon
return	from	the	seas	and	heave	their	dying	bodies	upstream,	to	find	where	they	were	born.	Ancient	tenag	leave
the	herds	to	die	amid	the	bones	of	kin.	Bhederin	migrate	into	the	heart	of	the	plains	every	summer,	and	return
to	forest	fringes	every	winter—’
‘Simpler	creatures	one	and	all—’
‘And	 I	 knew	 slaves	 in	 the	 Hiroth	 village—ones	 who’d	 been	 soldiers	 once,	 and	 they	 withered	 with	 the
anguish	 of	 knowing	 that	 there	 were	 places	 of	 battle—places	 of	 their	 first	 blooding—that	 they	 would	 never
again	see.	They	longed	to	return,	to	walk	those	old	killing	grounds,	to	stand	before	the	barrows	filled	with	the
bones	 of	 fallen	 friends,	 comrades.	 To	 remember,	 and	 to	 weep.’	 Udinaas	 shook	 his	 head.	 ‘We	 are	 not	 much
different	 from	 the	 beasts	 sharing	 our	 world,	 Onrack.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 truly	 sets	 us	 apart	 is	 our	 talent	 for
rejecting	the	truth—and	we’re	damned	good	at	that.	The	salmon	does	not	question	its	need.	The	tenag	and	the
bhederin	do	not	doubt	what	compels	them.’
‘Then	you	would	doom	your	son	to	his	fate?’
Udinaas	bared	his	teeth.	‘The	choice	isn’t	mine	to	make.’
‘Is	it	Silchas	Ruin’s?’
‘It	may	seem,	Onrack,	that	we	are	protected	here,	but	that’s	an	illusion.	The	Refugium	is	a	rejection	of	so
many	truths	it	leaves	me	breathless.	Ulshun	Pral,	you,	all	your	people—you	have	willed	yourself	this	life,	this
world.	 And	 the	 Azath	 at	 the	 gate—it	 holds	 you	 to	 your	 convictions.	 This	 place,	 wondrous	 as	 it	 is,	 remains	 a
prison.’	He	snorted.	‘Should	I	chain	him	here?	Can	I?	Dare	I?	You	forget,	I	was	a	slave.’
‘My	 friend,’	 said	 Onrack,	 ‘I	 am	 free	 to	 travel	 the	 other	 realms.	 I	 am	 made	 flesh.	 Made	 whole.	 This	 is	 a
truth,	is	it	not?’
‘If	this	place	is	destroyed,	you	will	become	a	T’lan	Imass	once	more.	That’s	the	name	for	it,	isn’t	it?	That
immortality	of	bones	and	dried	flesh?	The	tribe	here	will	fall	to	dust.’
Onrack	was	staring	at	him	with	horror-filled	eyes.	‘How	do	you	know	this?’
‘I	do	not	believe	Silchas	Ruin	is	lying.	Ask	Kilava—I	have	seen	a	certain	look	in	her	eyes,	especially	when
Ulshun	Pral	visits,	or	when	she	sits	beside	you	at	the	fire.	She	knows.	She	cannot	protect	this	world.	Not	even
the	Azath	will	prevail	against	what	is	coming.’
‘Then	it	is	we	who	are	doomed.’
No.	There	is	Rud	Elalle.	There	is	my	son.
‘And	so,’	said	Onrack	after	a	long	pause,	‘you	will	send	your	son	away,	so	that	he	may	live.’
No,	friend.	I	send	him	away	.	.	.	to	save	you	all.	But	he	could	not	say	that,	could	not	reveal	that.	For	he
knew	Onrack	well	now;	and	he	knew	Ulshun	Pral	and	all	the	others	here.	And	they	would	not	accept	such	a
potential	sacrifice—they	would	not	see	Rud	Elalle	risk	his	life	in	their	name.	No,	they	would	accept	their	own
annihilation,	without	a	second	thought.	Yes,	Udinaas	knew	these	Imass.	It	was	not	pride	that	made	them	what
they	 were.	 It	 was	 compassion.	 The	 tragic	 kind	 of	 compassion,	 the	 kind	 that	 sacrifices	 itself	 and	 sees	 that
sacrifice	as	the	only	choice	and	thus	no	choice	at	all,	one	that	must	be	accepted	without	hesitation.
Better	to	take	the	fear	and	the	hope	and	all	the	rest	and	hold	it	inside.	What	could	he	give	Onrack	now,	at
this	moment?	He	did	not	know.
Another	pause,	and	then	the	Imass	continued,	‘It	is	well,	then.	I	understand,	and	approve.	There	is	no	reason
that	 he	 must	 die	 with	 us.	 No	 reason,	 indeed,	 that	 he	 must	 witness	 such	 a	 thing	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 pass.	 You
would	spare	him	the	grief,	as	much	as	such	a	thing	is	possible.	But,	Udinaas,	it	is	not	acceptable	that	you	share
our	fate.	You	too	must	depart	this	realm.’


‘No,	friend.	That	I	will	not	do.’
‘Your	son’s	need	for	you	remains.’
Oh,	 Rud	 loves	 you	 all,	 Onrack.	 Almost	 as	 much	 as	 he	 seems	 to	 love	 me.	 I	 will	 stay	 nonetheless,	 to
remind	him	of	what	he	fights	to	preserve.	‘Where	he	and	Silchas	Ruin	will	go,	I	cannot	follow,’	he	said.	And
then	he	grunted	and	managed	to	offer	Onrack	a	wry	smile.	‘Besides,	here	and	only	here,	in	your	company—in
the	company	of	all	the	Imass—I	am	almost	content.	I’ll	not	willingly	surrender	that.’	So	many	truths	could	hide
inside	glib	lies.	While	the	reason	was	a	deceit,	the	sentiments	stacked	so	carefully	within	it	were	not.
So	 much	 easier,	 he	 told	 himself,	 to	 think	 like	 a	 tenag,	 or	 a	 bhederin.	 Truth	 from	 surface	 to	 core,	 solid	 and
pure.	Yes,	that	would	indeed	be	easier	than	this.
Rud	Elalle	emerged	from	the	hut,	followed	a	moment	later	by	Silchas	Ruin.
Udinaas	could	see	in	his	son’s	face	that	any	formal	parting	would	prove	too	fraught.	Best	this	was	done	with
as	little	gravitas	as	possible.	He	rose,	and	Onrack	did	the	same.
Others	 stood	 nearby,	 watchful,	 instincts	 awakened	 that	 something	 grave	 and	 portentous	 was	 happening.
Respect	and	courtesy	held	them	back	one	and	all.
‘We	should	keep	this	.	.	.	casual,’	Udinaas	said	under	his	breath.
Onrack	nodded.	‘I	shall	try,	my	friend.’
He	 is	no	dissembler,	oh	no.	Less	 human	than	he	 looks,	then.	They	 all	are,	damn	them.	 ‘You	 feel	 too
much,’	Udinaas	said,	as	warmly	as	he	could	manage,	for	he	did	not	want	the	observation	to	sting.
But	Onrack	wiped	at	his	cheeks	and	nodded,	saying	nothing.
So	much	for	making	this	casual.	‘Oh,	come	with	me,	friend.	Even	Rud	cannot	withstand	your	gifts.’
And	together,	they	approached	Rud	Elalle.
Silchas	 Ruin	 moved	 off	 to	 await	 his	 new	 charge,	 and	 observed	 the	 emotional	 farewells	 with	 eyes	 like
knuckles	of	blood.
	
Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava	 reminded	 Tanakalian	 of	 his	 childhood.	 She	 could	 have	 stridden	 out	 from	 any	 of	 a
dozen	tales	of	legend	he	had	listened	to	curled	up	beneath	skins	and	furs,	all	those	breathtaking	adventures	of
great	heroes	pure	of	heart,	bold	and	stalwart,	who	always	knew	who	deserved	the	sharp	end	of	their	sword,
and	who	only	ever	erred	in	their	faith	in	others—until	such	time,	at	the	tale’s	dramatic	climax,	when	the	truth	of
betrayal	and	whatnot	was	revealed,	and	punishment	soundly	delivered.	His	grandfather	always	knew	when	to
thicken	 the	 timbre	 of	 his	 voice,	 where	 to	 pause	 to	 stretch	 out	 suspense,	 when	 to	 whisper	 some	 awful
revelation.	All	to	delight	the	wide-eyed	child	as	night	drew	in.
Her	hair	was	the	hue	of	iron.	Her	eyes	blazed	like	clear	winter	skies,	and	her	face	could	have	been	carved
from	 the	 raw	 cliffs	 of	 Perish.	 Her	 physical	 strength	 was	 bound	 to	 a	 matching	 strength	 of	 will	 and	 neither
seemed	 assailable	 by	 any	 force	 in	 the	 mortal	 world.	 It	 was	 said	 that,	 even	 though	 she	 was	 now	 in	 her	 fifth
decade	 of	 life,	 no	 brother	 or	 sister	 of	 the	 Order	 could	 best	 her	 in	 any	 of	 a	 score	 of	 weapons:	 from	 skinning
knife	to	mattock.
When	 Destriant	 Run’Thurvian	 had	 come	 to	 her,	 speaking	 of	 fraught	 dreams	 and	 fierce	 visions,	 it	 was	 as
tinder-dry	kindling	to	the	furnace	of	Krughava’s	inviolate	sense	of	purpose,	and,	it	turned	out,	her	belief	in	her
own	imminent	elevation	to	heroic	status.
Few	 childhood	 convictions	 survived	 the	 grisly	 details	 of	 an	 adult’s	 sensibilities,	 and	 although	 Tanakalian
accounted	himself	still	young,	still	awaiting	the	temper	of	wisdom,	he	had	already	seen	enough	to	comprehend
the	true	horror	waiting	beneath	the	shining	surface	of	the	self-avowed	hero	known	to	all	as	the	Mortal	Sword
of	 the	 Grey	 Helms	 of	 Perish.	 Indeed,	 he	 had	 come	 to	 suspect	 that	 no	 hero,	 no	 matter	 what	 the	 time	 or	 the
circumstance,	was	anything	like	the	tales	told	him	so	many	years	ago.	Or	perhaps	it	was	his	growing	realization
that	 so	 many	 so-called	 virtues,	 touted	 as	 worthy	 aspirations,	 possessed	 a	 darker	 side.	 Purity	 of	 heart	 also
meant	vicious	intransigence.	Unfaltering	courage	saw	no	sacrifice	as	too	great,	even	if	that	meant	leading	ten
thousand	 soldiers	 to	 their	 deaths.	 Honour	 betrayed	 could	 plunge	 into	 intractable	 insanity	 in	 the	 pursuit	 of
satisfaction.	Noble	vows	could	drown	a	kingdom	in	blood,	or	crush	an	empire	into	dust.	No,	the	true	nature	of
heroism	was	a	messy	thing,	a	confused	thing	of	innumerable	sides,	many	of	them	ugly,	and	almost	all	of	them
terrifying.
So	the	Destriant,	in	his	last	breaths,	had	made	a	grim	discovery.	The	Grey	Helms	were	betrayed.	If	not	now,
then	 soon.	 Words	 of	 warning	 to	 awaken	 in	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 all	 those	 blistering	 fires	 of	 outrage	 and


indignation.	And	Run’Thurvian	had	expected	the	Shield	Anvil	to	rush	into	Krughava’s	cabin	to	repeat	the	dire
message,	to	see	the	fires	alight	in	her	bright	blue	eyes.
Brothers	and	sisters!	Draw	your	swords!	The	streams	must	run	crimson	in	answer	to	our	besmirched
honour!	Fight!	The	enemy	is	on	all	sides!
Well.
Not	 only	 had	 Tanakalian	 found	 himself	 unwilling	 to	 embrace	 the	 Destriant	 and	 his	 mortal	 pain,	 he	 was
reluctant	to	launch	such	devastating	frenzy	upon	the	Grey	Helms.	The	old	man’s	explanations,	his	reasons—
the	 details—had	 been	 virtually	 non-existent.	 Essential	 information	 was	 lacking.	 A	 hero	 without	 purpose	 was
like	a	blinded	cat	in	a	pit	of	hounds.	Who	could	predict	the	direction	of	Krughava’s	charge?
No,	this	needed	sober	contemplation.	The	private,	meditative	kind.
The	 Mortal	 Sword	 had	 greeted	 the	 dreadful	 news	 of	 the	 Destriant’s	 horrid	 death	 in	 pretty	 much	 the
expected	 manner.	 A	 hardening	 of	 already	 hard	 features,	 eyes	 glaring	 like	 ice,	 the	 slow,	 building	 rise	 of
questions	 that	 Tanakalian	 either	 could	 not	 hope	 to	 answer,	 or,	 as	 it	 turned	 out,	 was	 unwilling	 to	 answer.
Questions	 and	 unknowns	 were	 the	 deadliest	 foes	 for	 one	 such	 as	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava,	 who	 thrived	 on
certainty	 regardless	 of	 its	 relationship	 to	 reality.	 He	 could	 see	 how	 she	 was	 rocked,	 all	 purchase	 suddenly
uncertain	 beneath	 her	 boots;	 and	 the	 way	 her	 left	 hand	 twitched—as	 if	 eager	 for	 the	 grip	 of	 her	 sword,	 the
sure	promise	of	the	heavy	iron	blade;	and	the	way	she	instinctively	straightened—as	if	awaiting	the	weight	of
her	 chain	 surcoat—for	 this	 surely	 was	 news	 that	 demanded	 she	 wear	 armour.	 But	 he	 had	 struck	 her
unawares,	 in	 her	 vulnerability,	 and	 this	 might	 well	 constitute	 its	 own	 version	 of	 betrayal,	 and	 he	 knew	 to	 be
careful	at	that	moment,	to	display	for	her	a	greater	helplessness	than	she	herself	might	be	feeling;	to	unveil	in
his	eyes	and	in	his	seemingly	unconscious	gestures	enormous	measures	of	need	and	need	for	reassurance.	To,
in	short,	fling	himself	like	a	child	upon	her	stolid	majesty.
If	 this	 made	 him	 into	 something	 despicable,	 a	 dissembler,	 a	 creature	 of	 intrigue	 and	 cunning	 manipulation,
well,	these	were	dire	charges	indeed.	He	would	have	to	consider	them,	as	objectively	as	possible,	and	withhold
no	judgement	no	matter	how	self-damning,	no	matter	how	condign.
The	Shield	Anvils	of	old,	of	course,	would	not	have	bothered.	But	absence	of	judgement	in	others	could	only
emerge	 from	 absence	 of	 judgement	 in	 oneself,	 a	 refusal	 to	 challenge	 one’s	 own	 assumptions	 and	 beliefs.
Imagine	the	atrocities	such	inhuman	postures	invited!	No,	that	was	a	most	presumptuous	game	and	not	one	he
would	play.
Besides,	 giving	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 what	 she	 needed	 most	 at	 that	 moment—all	 his	 apparently	 instinctive
nudges	to	remind	her	of	her	noble	responsibilities—was	in	fact	the	proper	thing	to	do.	It	would	serve	no	one	to
have	Krughava	display	extreme	distress	or,	Wolves	forbid,	outright	panic.	They	were	sailing	into	war,	and	they
had	lost	their	Destriant.	Matters	were	fraught	enough	in	bare	facts	alone.
She	 needed	 to	 steel	 herself,	 and	 she	 needed	 to	 be	 seen	 doing	 so	 by	 her	 Shield	 Anvil	 in	 this	 moment	 of
privacy,	 and	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 presumed	 success	 she	 would	 then	 find	 the	 necessary	 confidence	 to	 repeat	 the
stern	ritual	before	the	brothers	and	sisters	of	the	Order.
But	that	latter	scene	must	wait,	for	the	time	had	come	to	greet	the	Bolkando	emissaries,	and	Tanakalian	was
comforted	in	the	solid	crunch	of	his	and	her	boots	on	the	strand	of	crushed	coral	that	served	as	a	beach	in	this
place	 of	 landing.	 One	 pace	 behind	 the	 Mortal	 Sword—and	 while	 curiosity	 and	 wonder	 at	 the	 Destriant’s
absence	might	trouble	the	crew	of	the	skiff	and	the	captain	and	all	the	others	aboard	the	Listral,	 now	 firmly
anchored	in	the	broad	disc	of	a	slow	eddy	in	the	river	mouth,	neither	Krughava	nor	her	Shield	Anvil	seemed	to
be	 displaying	 anything	 untoward	 as	 they	 set	 out	 for	 the	 elaborate	 field	 tent	 of	 the	 Bolkando.	 And	 such	 was
their	faith	in	their	commanders	that	minds	settled	back	into	peaceful	repose.
Could	 such	 observations	 be	 seen	 as	 cynical?	 He	 thought	 not.	 Comportment	 had	 value	 at	 times	 like	 these.
There	was	no	point	in	distressing	the	members	of	the	Order,	only	to	pointedly	delay	resolution	until	after	this
parley.
The	air	was	sultry,	heat	seething	up	from	the	blinding	white	strand.	The	shattered	carapaces	of	crabs	were
baked	red	by	the	sun,	forming	a	ragged	row	at	the	fringe	of	the	high-water	line.	Even	the	gulls	looked	beaten
half-senseless	where	they	perched	on	the	bones	of	uprooted	mangrove	trunks.
The	two	Perish	worked	their	way	up	the	verge	and	set	out	across	a	silted	floodplain	that	spread	away	in	a
broad	fan	from	the	river	on	their	left.	Bright	green	tufts	of	seasonal	grasses	dotted	the	expanse.	A	long	column
of	Bolkando	sentries	stood	lining	the	bank	of	the	river,	about	twenty	paces	back	from	row	upon	row	of	short,


tapering	 logs	 stacked	 in	 the	 mud.	 Oddly,	 those	 sentries,	 tall,	 dark-skinned	 and	 barbaric	 in	 their	 spotted	 hide
cloaks,	were	all	facing	the	river	and	so	presenting	their	backs	to	the	two	Perish	guests.
A	moment	later	Tanakalian	was	startled	to	see	some	of	those	logs	explode	into	thrashing	motion.	He	tugged
the	 eyeglass	 from	 its	 holster	 and	 slowed	 to	 examine	 the	 river	 bank	 through	 the	 magnifying	 lenses.	 Lizards.
Enormous	lizards—no	wonder	the	Bolkando	warriors	have	their	backs	to	us!
If	Krughava	had	noticed	anything	of	the	scene	at	the	river	bank,	she	gave	no	sign.
The	Bolkando	pavilion	sprawled	vast	enough	to	encompass	scores	of	rooms.	The	flaps	of	the	main	entrance
were	 drawn	 back	 and	 bound	 to	 ornate	 wooden	 poles	 with	 gilt	 crow-hook	 clasps.	 The	 sunlight,	 filtering	 in
through	the	weave	of	the	canopy,	transformed	the	spaces	within	into	a	cool,	soft	world	of	cream	and	gold,	and
both	Tanakalian	and	Krughava	halted	once	inside,	startled	by	the	blessed	drop	in	temperature.	The	air,	fanning
across	their	faces,	carried	the	scents	of	exotic,	unknown	spices.
Awaiting	them	was	a	functionary	of	some	sort,	dressed	in	deerskin	and	silvered	mail	so	fine	it	wouldn’t	stop
a	child’s	dagger.	The	man,	his	face	veiled,	bowed	from	the	waist	and	then	gestured	the	two	Perish	through	a
corridor	walled	in	silks.	At	the	far	end,	perhaps	fifteen	paces	along,	stood	two	guards,	again	bedecked	in	long
surcoats	 of	 the	 same	 ephemeral	 chain.	 Tucked	 into	 narrow	 belts	 were	 throwing	 knives,	 two	 on	 each	 hip.
Leather	 sheaths,	 trimmed	 in	 slivers	 of	 bone,	 slung	 under	 the	 left	 arm,	 indicated	 larger	 weapons,	 cutlasses
perhaps,	but	these	were	pointedly	empty.	The	soldiers	wore	skullcap	helms	but	no	face-guards,	and	as	he	drew
closer,	Tanakalian	was	startled	to	see	a	complex	skein	of	scarification	on	those	grim	faces,	every	etched	seam
stained	with	deep	red	dye.
Both	guards	stood	at	attention,	and	neither	seemed	to	take	any	notice	of	the	two	guests.	Tanakalian	followed
a	step	behind	Krughava	as	she	passed	between	them.
The	chamber	beyond	was	spacious.	All	the	furniture	within	sight—and	there	was	plenty	of	it—appeared	to
consist	of	articulating	segments,	as	if	capable	of	being	folded	flat	or	dismantled,	yet	this	did	nothing	to	diminish
their	 delicate	 beauty.	 No	 wood	 within	 sight	 was	 bare	 of	 a	 glossy	 cream	 lacquer	 that	 made	 the	 Shield	 Anvil
think	of	polished	bone	or	ivory.
Two	 dignitaries	 awaited	 them,	 both	 seated	 along	 one	 side	 of	 a	 rectangular	 table	 on	 which	 wrought	 silver
goblets	had	been	arrayed,	three	before	each	chair.	Servants	stood	behind	the	two	figures,	and	two	more	were
positioned	beside	the	seats	intended	for	the	Perish.
The	 walls	 to	 the	 right	 and	 left	 held	 tapestries,	 each	 one	 bound	 to	 a	 wooden	 frame,	 although	 not	 tightly.
Tanakalian’s	attention	was	caught	when	he	saw	how	the	scenes	depicted—intimate	gardens	devoid	of	people
—seemed	 to	 flow	 with	 motion,	 and	 he	 realized	 that	 the	 tapestries	 were	 of	 the	 finest	 silks	 and	 the	 images
themselves	had	been	designed	to	awaken	to	currents	of	air.	And	so,	to	either	side	as	they	walked	to	the	chairs,
water	flowed	in	stony	beds,	flower-heads	wavered	in	gentle,	unfelt	breaths	of	wind,	leaves	fluttered,	and	now
all	 the	 pungent	 scents	 riding	 the	 air	 brought	 to	 him	 in	 greater	 force	 this	 illusion	 of	 a	 garden.	 Even	 the	 light
reaching	down	through	the	canopy	was	artfully	dappled.
One	 such	 as	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava,	 of	 course,	 was	 inured,	 perhaps	 even	 indifferent,	 to	 these	 subtleties,
and	 he	 was	 reminded,	 uncharitably,	 of	 a	 boar	 crashing	 through	 the	 brush	 as	 he	 followed	 her	 to	 the	 waiting
seats.
The	 dignitaries	 both	 rose,	 the	 gesture	 of	 respect	 exquisitely	 timed	 to	 coincide	 with	 the	 arrival	 of	 their
armoured,	clanking	guests.
Krughava	was	the	first	to	speak,	employing	the	trader	tongue.	‘I	am	Krughava,	Mortal	Sword	of	the	Grey
Helms.’	Saying	this,	she	tugged	off	her	heavy	gauntlets.	‘With	me	is	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian.’
The	 servants	 were	 all	 pouring	 a	 dark	 liquid	 from	 one	 of	 three	 decanters.	 When	 the	 two	 Bolkando
representatives	picked	up	their	filled	goblets,	Krughava	and	Tanakalian	followed	suit.
The	man	on	the	left,	likely	in	his	seventh	decade,	his	dark	face	etched	with	jewel-studded	scars	on	brow	and
cheeks,	 replied	 in	 the	 same	 language.	 ‘Welcome,	 Mortal	 Sword	 and	 Shield	 Anvil.	 I	 am	 Chancellor	 Rava	 of
Bolkando	Kingdom,	and	I	speak	for	King	Tarkulf	in	this	parley.’	He	then	indicated	the	much	younger	man	at
his	side.	‘This	is	Conquestor	Avalt,	who	commands	the	King’s	Army.’
Avalt’s	martial	profession	was	plain	to	see.	In	addition	to	the	same	chain	surcoat	as	worn	by	the	guards	in
the	corridor,	he	wore	scaled	vambraces	and	greaves.	His	brace	of	throwing	knives,	plain-handled	and	polished
by	long	use,	was	accompanied	by	a	short	sword	scabbarded	under	his	right	arm	and	a	sheathed	cutlass	under
his	 left.	 Strips	 of	 articulated	 iron	 spanned	 his	 hands	 from	 wrist	 to	 knuckle,	 and	 then	 continued	 on	 down	 the


length	 of	 all	 four	 fingers,	 while	 an	 oblong	 piece	 of	 rippled	 iron	 protected	 the	 upper	 half	 of	 his	 thumbs.	 The
Conquestor’s	 helm	 rested	 on	 the	 table,	 the	 skullcap	 sporting	 flared	 cheek-guards	 as	 well	 as	 a	 nose-bridge
wrought	 in	 the	 likeness	 of	 a	 serpent	 with	 a	 strangely	 broad	 head.	 A	 plethora	 of	 scars	 adorned	 the	 warrior’s
face,	the	pattern	ruined	by	an	old	sword	slash	running	diagonally	down	his	right	cheek,	ending	at	the	corner	of
his	thin-lipped	mouth.	That	the	blow	had	been	a	vicious	one	was	indicated	by	the	visible	dent	in	his	cheekbone.
Once	 the	 introductions	 and	 acknowledgements	 had	 been	 made,	 the	 Bolkando	 raised	 their	 goblets,	 and
everyone	drank.
The	liquid	was	foul	and	Tanakalian	fought	down	a	gag.
Seeing	their	expressions,	the	Chancellor	smiled.	‘Yes,	it	is	atrocious,	is	it	not?	Blood	of	the	King’s	fourteenth
daughter,	mixed	with	the	sap	of	the	Royal	Hava	tree—the	very	tree	that	yielded	the	spike	thorn	that	opened
her	neck	vein.’	He	paused,	and	then	added,	‘It	is	the	Bolkando	custom,	in	honour	of	a	formal	parley,	that	he
sacrifice	a	child	of	his	own	to	give	proof	to	his	commitment	to	the	proceedings.’
Krughava	set	the	goblet	down	with	more	force	than	was	necessary,	but	said	nothing.
Clearing	his	throat,	Tanakalian	said,	‘While	we	are	honoured	by	the	sacrifice,	Chancellor,	our	custom	holds
that	we	must	now	grieve	for	the	death	of	the	King’s	fourteenth	child.	We	Perish	do	not	let	blood	before	parley,
but	I	assure	you,	our	word,	when	given,	is	similarly	honour-bound.	If	you	now	seek	some	gesture	of	proof	of
that,	then	we	are	at	a	loss.’
‘None	is	necessary,	my	friends.’	Rava	smiled.	‘The	virgin	child’s	blood	is	within	us	now,	is	it	not?’
When	 the	 servants	 filled	 the	 second	 of	 the	 three	 goblets	 arrayed	 before	 each	 of	 them,	 Tanakalian	 could
sense	 Krughava	 stiffening.	 This	 time,	 however,	 the	 liquid	 ran	 clear,	 and	 from	 it	 wafted	 a	 delicate	 scent	 of
blossoms.
The	Chancellor,	who	could	not	have	been	blind	to	the	sudden	awkwardness	in	the	reactions	of	the	Perish,
renewed	his	smile.	‘Nectar	of	the	sharada	flowers	from	the	Royal	Garden.	You	will	find	it	most	cleansing	of
palate.’
They	drank	and,	indeed,	the	rush	of	sweet,	crisp	wine	was	a	palpable	relief.
‘The	 sharada,’	 continued	 the	 Chancellor,	 ‘is	 fed	 exclusively	 from	 the	 still-births	 of	 the	 wives	 of	 the	 King,
generation	upon	generation.	The	practice	has	not	been	interrupted	in	seven	generations.’
Tanakalian	made	a	soft	sound	of	warning,	sensing	that	Krughava—her	comportment	in	blazing	ruins—was
moments	 from	 flinging	 the	 silver	 goblet	 into	 the	 Chancellor’s	 face.	 Quickly	 setting	 his	 own	 goblet	 down	 he
reached	for	hers	and,	with	only	a	little	effort,	pried	it	from	her	hand	and	carefully	returned	it	to	the	tabletop.
The	 servants	 poured	 the	 last	 offering,	 which	 to	 Tanakalian’s	 eyes	 looked	 like	 simple	 water,	 although	 of
course	 by	 now	 that	 observation	 was	 not	 as	 reassuring	 as	 he	 would	 have	 preferred.	 A	 final	 cleansing,	 yes,
from	the	Royal	Well	that	holds	the	bones	of	a	hundred	mouldering	kings!	Delicious!
‘Spring	water,’	said	the	Chancellor,	his	gentle	tones	somewhat	strained,	‘lest	in	our	many	words	we	should
grow	 thirsty.	 Please,	 now,	 let	 us	 take	 our	 seats.	 Once	 our	 words	 are	 completed,	 we	 shall	 dine	 on	 the	 finest
foods	the	kingdom	has	to	offer.’
Sixth	son’s	testicles!	Third	daughter’s	left	breast!
Tanakalian	could	almost	hear	Krughava’s	inner	groan.
	
The	sun	was	low	when	the	final	farewells	were	uttered	and	the	two	barbarians	marched	back	down	to	their
launch.	Chancellor	Rava	and	Conquestor	Avalt	escorted	the	Perish	for	precisely	half	the	distance,	where	they
waited	until	that	clumsy	skiff	was	pushed	off	the	sands	where	it	wallowed	about	before	the	rowers	found	their
rhythm,	and	then	the	two	dignitaries	turned	about	and	walked	casually	back	towards	the	pavilion.
‘Curious,	wasn’t	it?’	Rava	murmured.	‘This	mad	need	of	theirs	to	venture	east.’
‘All	warnings	unheeded,’	Avalt	said,	shaking	his	head.
‘What	will	you	say	to	old	Tarkulf?’	the	Chancellor	asked.
The	Conquestor	shrugged.	‘To	give	the	fools	whatever	they	need,	of	course,	with	a	minimum	of	haggling	on
price.	I	will	also	advise	we	hire	a	salvage	fleet	from	Deal,	to	follow	in	the	wake	of	their	ships.	At	least	as	far
as	the	edge	of	the	Pelasiar	Sea.’
Rava	grunted.	‘Excellent	notion,	Avalt.’
They	strolled	into	the	pavilion,	made	their	way	down	the	corridor	and	returned	to	the	main	chamber,	secure
once	more	in	the	presence	of	servants	whose	eardrums	had	been	punctured	and	tongues	carved	out—although


there	was	always	the	chance	of	lip-reading	spies,	meaning	of	course	that	these	four	hapless	creatures	would
have	to	die	before	the	sun	had	set.
‘This	 land-based	 force	 of	 theirs	 to	 cross	 the	 kingdom	 with,’	 Rava	 said,	 sitting	 down	 once	 more,	 ‘do	 you
foresee	any	problem?’
Avalt	collected	the	second	decanter	and	 poured	 some	more	wine.	‘No.	These	Perish	place	much	value	in
honour.	 They	 will	 stay	 true	 to	 their	 word,	 at	 least	 on	 the	 march	 out.	 Those	 that	 make	 it	 back	 from	 the
Wastelands—assuming	any	do—will	be	in	no	position	to	do	much	besides	submitting	to	our	will.	We	will	strip
the	survivors	of	any	valuables	and	sell	them	on	as	castrated	slaves	to	the	D’rhesh.’
Rava	made	a	face.	‘So	long	as	Tarkulf	never	finds	out.	We	were	caught	completely	unawares	when	those
allies	of	the	Perish	ran	headlong	into	our	forces.’
Avalt	 nodded,	 recalling	 the	 sudden	 encounter	 during	 the	 long	 march	 towards	 the	 border	 of	 the	 Lether
Empire.	If	the	Perish	were	barbaric,	then	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	were	barely	human.	But	Tarkulf—damn
his	scaly	crocodile	hide—had	taken	a	liking	to	them,	and	that	was	when	this	entire	nightmare	began.	Nothing
worse,	in	Avalt’s	opinion,	than	a	king	deciding	to	lead	his	own	army.	Every	night	scores	of	spies	and	assassins
had	waged	a	vicious	but	mostly	silent	war	in	the	camps.	Every	morning	the	nearby	swamps	were	filled	with
corpses	and	squalling	carrion	birds.	And	there	stood	Tarkulf,	breathing	deep	the	night-chilled	air	and	smiling	at
the	cloudless	sky—the	raving,	blessedly	thick-headed	fool.
Well,	thank	the	nine-headed	goddess	the	King	was	back	in	his	palace,	sucking	the	bones	of	frog	legs,	and	the
Burned	Tears	were	encamped	across	the	river-bed	just	beyond	the	northeast	marches,	dying	of	marsh	fever
and	whatnot.
Rava	drained	his	wine	and	then	poured	some	more.	‘Did	you	see	her	face,	Avalt?’
The	Conquestor	nodded.	‘Still-births	.	.	.	fourteenth	daughter’s	blood	.	.	.	you	always	had	a	fertile,	if	vaguely
nasty	imagination,	Rava.’
‘Belt	juice	is	an	acquired	taste,	Avalt.	Strangers	rarely	take	to	it.	I	admit,	I	was	reluctantly	impressed	that
neither	one	actually	gagged	on	the	vile	stuff.’
‘Wait	until	it	shows	up	in	any	new	scars	they	happen	to	suffer.’
‘That	reminds	me—where	was	their	Destriant?	I	fully	expected	their	High	Priest	would	have	accompanied
them.’
Rava	shrugged.	‘For	the	moment,	we	cannot	infiltrate	their	ranks,	so	that	question	cannot	yet	be	answered.
Once	they	come	ashore	and	enter	our	kingdom,	we’ll	have	plenty	of	camp	followers	and	bearers	and	we	will
glean	all	we	need	to	know.’
Avalt	leaned	back,	and	then	shot	the	Chancellor	a	glance.	‘The	fourteenth?	Felash,	yes?	Why	her,	Rava?’
‘The	bitch	spurned	my	advances.’
‘Why	didn’t	you	just	steal	her?’
Rava’s	wrinkled	face	twisted.	‘I	tried.	Heed	this	warning,	Conquestor,	do	not	try	getting	past	a	Royal	blood’s
handmaidens—the	cruellest	assassins	this	world	has	ever	seen.	Word	got	back	to	me,	of	course	.	.	.	three	days
and	 four	 nights	 of	 the	 most	 despicable	 torture	 of	 my	 agents.	 And	 the	 bitches	 had	 the	 temerity	 to	 send	 me	 a
bottle	of	their	pickled	eyeballs.	Brazen!’
‘Have	you	retaliated?’	Avalt	asked,	taking	a	drink	to	disguise	his	shiver	of	horror.
‘Of	course	not.	I	overreached,	casting	my	lust	upon	her.	Lesson	succinctly	delivered.	Heed	that	as	well,	my
young	warrior.	Not	every	slap	of	the	hand	should	ignite	a	messy	feud.’
‘I	heed	everything	you	say,	my	friend.’
They	drank	again,	each	with	his	own	thoughts.
Which	was	just	as	well.
	
The	servant	standing	behind	and	to	the	right	of	the	Chancellor	was	making	peace	with	his	personal	god,	having
worked	hard	at	exchanging	the	blink	code	with	his	fellow	spy	across	the	table	from	him,	and	well	knowing	that
he	was	about	to	have	his	throat	slit	wide	open.	In	the	interval	when	the	two	snakes	were	escorting	the	Perish
down	to	their	boat,	he	had	passed	on	to	a	plate-bearer	a	cogent	account	of	everything	that	had	been	said	in	the
chamber,	 and	 that	 woman	 was	 now	 preparing	 to	 set	 out	 this	 very	 night	 on	 her	 perilous	 return	 journey	 to	 the
capital.
Perhaps	 Chancellor	 Rava,	 having	 overreached,	 was	 content	 to	 accept	 the	 grisly	 lesson	 of	 his	 temerity,	 as


delivered	by	Lady	Felash’s	torturers	upon	his	clumsy	agents.	The	Lady,	alas,	was	not.
It	was	said	that	Rava’s	penis	had	all	the	lure	of	an	eviscerated	snake	belly.	The	very	thought	of	that	worm
creeping	 up	 her	 thigh	 was	 enough	 to	 send	 the	 fourteenth	 daughter	 of	 the	 King	 into	 a	 sizzling	 rage	 of
indignation.	No,	she	had	only	begun	delivering	her	lessons	to	the	hoary	old	Chancellor.
In	the	tiny	kingdom	of	Bolkando,	life	was	an	adventure.
	
Yan	Tovis	was	of	a	mind	to	complete	the	ghastly	slaughter	her	brother	had	begun,	although	it	was	questionable
whether	 she’d	 succeed,	 given	 the	 blistering,	 frantic	 fury	 of	 Pully	 and	 Skwish	 as	 they	 spat	 and	 cursed	 and
danced	out	fragments	of	murder	steps,	sending	streams	of	piss	in	every	direction	until	the	hide	walls	of	the	hut
were	wine-dark	with	the	deluge.	Twilight’s	own	riding	boots	were	similarly	splashed,	although	better	suited	to
shed	such	effrontery.	Her	patience,	however,	was	not	so	immune.
‘Enough	of	this!’
Two	twisted	faces	snapped	round	to	glare	at	her.	‘We	must	hunt	him	down!’	snarled	Pully.	‘Blood	curses!
Rat	poisons,	thorn	fish.	Nine	nights	in	pain!	Nine	an’	nine	amore!’
‘He	is	banished,’	said	Yan	Tovis.	‘The	matter	is	closed.’
Skwish	coughed	up	phlegm	and,	snapping	her	head	round,	sent	it	splatting	against	the	wall	just	to	the	left	of
Twilight.	Growling,	Yan	Tovis	reached	for	her	sword.
‘Accident!’	shrieked	Pully,	lunging	to	collide	with	her	sister,	and	then	pushing	the	suddenly	pale	witch	back.
Yan	 Tovis	 struggled	 against	 unsheathing	 the	 weapon.	 She	 hated	 getting	 angry,	 hated	 that	 loss	 of	 control,
especially	since	once	it	was	awakened	in	her,	it	was	almost	impossible	to	rein	in.	At	this	moment,	she	was	at
the	 very	 edge	 of	 rage.	 One	 more	 insult—by	 the	 Errant,	 an	 unguarded	 expression—and	 she	 would	 kill	 them
both.
Pully	had	wits	enough	to	recognize	the	threat,	it	was	clear,	since	she	continued	pushing	Skwish	back,	until
they	 were	 both	 against	 the	 far	 wall,	 and	 then	 she	 pitched	 round,	 head	 bobbing.	 ‘R’grets,	 Queen,	 umbeliss
r’grets.	Grief,	an’	I’m	sure,	grief,	Highness,	an’	it	may	be	that	shock	has	the	sting	a	venom	in	these	old	veins.
Pologies,	fra	me	and	Skwish.	Terrible	tale,	terrible	tale!’
Yan	Tovis	managed	to	release	the	grip	of	her	longsword.	In	bleak	tones	she	said,	‘We	have	no	time	for	all
this.	 The	 Shake	 has	 lost	 its	 coven,	 barring	 you	 two.	 And	 it	 has	 lost	 its	 Watch.	 There	 are	 but	 the	 three	 of	 us
now.	A	queen	and	two	witches.	We	need	to	discuss	what	we	must	do.’
‘An’	it	says,’	said	Pully,	vigorously	nodding,	‘an’	it	says	the	sea	is	blind	t’the	shore	an’	as	blind	to	the	Shake,
and	the	sea,	it	does	rises.	It	does	rises,	Highness.	The	sixth	prophecy—’
‘Sixth	 prophecy!’	 hissed	 Skwish,	 pushing	 her	 way	 round	 her	 sister	 and	 glaring	 at	 Yan	 Tovis.	 ‘What	 of
th’fifteenth	prophecy?	The	Night	of	Kin’s	Blood!	“And	it	rises	and	the	shore	will	drown,	all	in	a	night	tears	into
water	 and	 the	 world	 runs	 red!	 Kin	 upon	 kin,	 slaughter	 marks	 the	 Shake	 and	 the	 Shake	 shall	 drown!	 In	 the
unbreathing	air.”	And	what	could	be	more	unbreathing	than	the	sea?	Your	brother	has	killed	us	all	an	us	all!’
‘Banished,’	said	Twilight,	her	tone	flat.	‘I	have	no	brother.’
‘We	need	a	king!’	wailed	Skwish,	pulling	at	her	hair.
‘We	do	not!’
The	two	witches	froze,	frightened	by	her	ferocity,	shocked	by	her	words.
Yan	Tovis	drew	a	deep	breath—there	was	no	hiding	the	tremble	in	her	hands,	the	extremity	of	her	fury.	‘I
am	not	blind	to	the	sea,’	she	said.	‘No—listen	to	me,	both	of	you!	Be	silent	and	just	listen!	The	water	is	indeed
rising.	That	fact	is	undeniable.	The	shore	drowns—even	as	half	the	prophecies	proclaim.	I	am	not	so	foolish	as
to	ignore	the	wisdom	of	the	ancient	seers.	The	Shake	are	in	trouble.	It	falls	to	us,	to	me,	to	you,	to	find	a	way
through.	 For	 our	 people.	 Our	 feuding	 must	 end—but	 if	 you	 cannot	 set	 aside	 all	 that	 has	 happened,	 and	 do	 it
now,	then	you	leave	me	no	choice	but	to	banish	you	both.’	Even	as	she	uttered	the	word	‘banish’	she	saw—
with	 no	 little	 satisfaction—that	 both	 witches	 had	 heard	 something	 different,	 something	 far	 more	 savage	 and
final.
Skwish	 licked	 her	 withered	 lips,	 and	 then	 seemed	 to	 sag	 against	 the	 hut’s	 wall.	 ‘We	 muss	 flee	 th’shore,
Queen.’
‘I	know.’
‘We	muss	leave.	Pu’a’call	out	t’the	island,	gather	all	the	Shake.	We	muss	an’	again	we	muss	begin	our	last
journey.’


‘As	prophesized,’	whispered	Pully.	‘Our	lass	journey.’
‘Yes.	 Now	 the	 villagers	 are	 burying	 the	 bodies—they	 need	 you	 to	 speak	 the	 closing	 prayers.	 And	 then	 I
shall	see	to	the	ships—I	will	go	myself	back	out	to	Third	Maiden	Isle—we	need	to	arrange	an	evacuation.’
‘Of	the	Shake	only	y’mean!’
‘No,	Pully.	That	damned	island	is	going	to	be	inundated.	We	take	everyone	with	us.’
‘Scummy	prizzners!’
‘Murderers,	slackers,	dirt-spitters,	hole-plungers!’
Yan	Tovis	glared	at	the	two	hags.	‘Nonetheless.’
Neither	one	could	hold	her	gaze,	and	after	a	moment	Skwish	started	edging	towards	the	doorway.	‘Prayers
an’	yes,	prayers.	Fra	th’dead	coven,	fra	all	th’Shake	an’	th’shore.’
Once	Skwish	had	darted	out	of	sight,	Pully	sketched	a	ghastly	curtsy	and	then	hastened	after	her	sister.
Alone	once	more,	Yan	Tovis	collapsed	down	into	the	saddle-stool	that	passed	for	her	throne.	She	so	wanted
to	weep.	In	frustration,	in	outrage	and	in	anguish.	No,	she	wanted	to	weep	for	herself.	The	loss	of	a	brother—
again—again.
Oh.	Damn	you,	Yedan.
Even	more	distressing,	she	thought	she	understood	his	motivations.	In	one	blood-drenched	night,	the	Watch
had	obliterated	a	dozen	deadly	conspiracies,	each	one	intended	to	bring	her	down.	How	could	she	hate	him	for
that?
But	 I	 can.	 For	 you	 no	 longer	 stand	 at	 my	 side,	 brother.	 Now,	 when	 the	 Shore	 drowns.	 Now,	 when	 I
need	you	most.
Well,	 it	 served	 no	 one	 for	 the	 Queen	 to	 weep.	 True	 twilight	 was	 not	 a	 time	 for	 pity,	 after	 all.	 Regrets,
perhaps,	but	not	pity.
And	if	all	the	ancient	prophecies	were	true?
Then	her	Shake,	broken,	decimated	and	lost,	were	destined	to	change	the	world.
And	 I	 must	 lead	 them.	 Flanked	 by	 two	 treacherous	 witches.	 I	 must	 lead	 my	 people—away	 from	 the
shore.
	
With	the	arrival	of	darkness,	two	dragons	lifted	into	the	night	sky,	one	bone-white,	the	other	seeming	to	blaze
with	some	unquenchable	fire	beneath	its	gilt	scales.	They	circled	once	round	the	scatter	of	flickering	hearths
that	marked	the	Imass	encampment,	and	then	winged	eastward.
In	their	wake	a	man	stood	on	a	hill,	watching	until	they	were	lost	to	his	sight.	After	a	time	a	second	figure
joined	him.
If	they	wept	the	darkness	held	that	truth	close	to	its	heart.
From	somewhere	in	the	hills	an	emlava	coughed	in	triumph,	announcing	to	the	world	that	it	had	made	a	kill.
Hot	blood	soaked	the	ground,	eyes	glazed	over,	and	something	that	had	lived	free	lived	no	more.


Chapter	Three
On	this	the	last	day	the	tyrant	told	the	truth
His	child	who	had	walked	from	the	dark	world
Now	rose	as	a	banner	before	his	father’s	walls
And	flames	mocked	like	celebrants	from	every	window
A	thousand	thousand	handfuls	of	ash	upon	the	scene
It	is	said	that	blood	holds	neither	memory	nor	loyalty
On	this	the	last	day	the	tyrant	thus	beheld	a	truth
The	son	was	born	in	a	dark	room	to	womanly	cries
And	walked	a	dark	keep	along	halls	echoing	pain
Only	to	flee	on	a	moonless	night	beneath	the	cowl
Of	his	master’s	weighted	fist	and	ravaging	face
The	beget	proved	to	all	that	a	shadow	stretches	far
Only	to	march	back	to	its	dire	maker	ever	deepening
Its	matching	desire	and	this	truth	is	plain	as	it	is	blind
Tyrants	and	saints	alike	must	fall	to	the	ground
In	their	last	breaths	taken	in	turn	by	the	shadow
Of	their	final	repose	where	truth	holds	them	fast
On	a	bed	of	stone.
THE	S UN	WALKS	FAR
RESTLO	FARAN

‘Your	kisses	make	my	lips	numb.’
‘It’s	the	cloves,’	Shurq	Elalle	replied,	sitting	up	on	the	edge	of	the	bed.
‘Got	a	toothache?’
‘Not	that	I’m	aware	of.’	Scanning	the	clothing	littering	the	floor,	she	spied	her	leggings	and	reached	over	to
collect	them.	‘You	marching	soon?’
‘We	are?	I	suppose	so.	The	Adjunct’s	not	one	to	let	us	know	her	plans.’
‘Commander’s	privilege.’	She	rose	to	tug	the	leggings	up,	frowning	as	she	wriggled—was	she	getting	fat?
Was	that	even	possible?
‘Now	there’s	a	sweet	dance.	I’m	of	a	mind	to	just	lean	forward	here	and—’
‘I	wouldn’t	do	that,	love.’
‘Why	not?’
You’ll	get	yourself	a	numb	face.	‘Ah,	a	woman	needs	her	secrets.’	Well,	this	one	does,	at	least.
‘I’m	also	of	a	mind	to	stay	right	here,’	the	Malazan	said.
Leaning	far	over	to	lace	up	her	boots,	Shurq	scowled.	‘It’s	not	even	midnight,	Captain.	I	wasn’t	planning	on
a	quiet	evening	at	home.’
‘You’re	insatiable.	Why,	if	I	was	half	the	man	I’d	like	to	be	.	.	.’
She	 smiled.	 It	 was	 hard	 being	 annoyed	 with	 this	 one.	 She’d	 even	 grown	 used	 to	 that	 broad	 waxed
moustache	 beneath	 his	 misshapen	 nose.	 But	 he	 was	 right	 about	 her	 in	 ways	 even	 he	 couldn’t	 imagine.
Insatiable	indeed.	She	tugged	on	the	deerhide	jerkin	and	tightened	the	straps	beneath	her	breasts.
‘Careful,	you	don’t	want	to	constrict	your	breathing,	Shurq.	Hood	knows,	the	fashions	hereabouts	all	seem
designed	 to	 emasculate	 women—would	 that	 be	 the	 right	 word?	 Emasculate?	 Everything	 seems	 designed	 to
imprison	you,	your	spirit,	as	if	a	woman’s	freedom	was	some	kind	of	threat.’
‘All	self-imposed,	sweetie,’	she	replied,	clasping	her	weapon	belt	and	then	collecting	her	cape	from	where	it
lay	in	a	heap	on	the	floor.	She	shook	it	out.	‘Take	ten	women,	all	best	friends.	Watch	one	get	married.	Before


you	 know	 it	 she’s	 top	 of	 the	 pile,	 sitting	 smug	 and	 superior	 on	 her	 marital	 throne.	 And	 before	 long	 every
woman	in	that	gaggle’s	on	the	hunt	for	a	husband.’	She	swung	the	cape	behind	her	and	fastened	the	clasps	at
her	shoulders.	‘And	Queen	Perfect	Bitch	sits	up	there	nodding	her	approval.’
‘History?	My	my.	Anyway,	that	doesn’t	last.’
‘Oh?’
‘Sure.	It’s	sweet	blossoms	until	her	husband	runs	off	with	one	of	those	best	friends.’
She	snorted	and	then	cursed.	‘Damn	you,	I	told	you	not	to	make	me	laugh.’
‘Nothing	will	crack	the	perfection	of	your	face,	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘You	know	what	they	say—age	stalks	us	all,	Ruthan	Gudd.’
‘Some	old	hag	hunting	you	down?	No	sign	of	that.’
She	made	her	way	to	the	door.	‘You’re	lovely,	Ruthan,	even	when	you’re	full	of	crap.	My	point	was,	most
women	don’t	like	each	other.	Not	really,	not	in	the	general	sense.	If	one	ends	up	wearing	chains,	she’ll	paint
them	 gold	 and	 exhaust	 herself	 scheming	 to	 see	 chains	 on	 every	 other	 woman.	 It’s	 our	 innate	 nasty	 streak.
Lock	up	when	you	leave.’
‘As	I	said—I	intend	staying	the	night.’
Something	 in	 his	 tone	 made	 her	 turn	 round.	 Her	 immediate	 reaction	 was	 to	 simply	 kick	 him	 out,	 if	 only	 to
emphasize	the	fact	that	he	was	a	guest,	not	an	Errant-damned	member	of	the	household.	But	she’d	heard	a
whisper	of	iron	beneath	the	man’s	words.	‘Problems	in	the	Malazan	compound,	Captain?’
‘There’s	an	adept	in	the	marines	.	.	.’
‘Adept	at	what?	Should	you	introduce	him	to	me?’
His	 gaze	 flicked	 away,	 and	 he	 slowly	 edged	 up	 in	 the	 bed	 to	 rest	 his	 back	 against	 the	 headboard.	 ‘Our
version	 of	 a	 caster	 of	 the	 Tiles.	 Anyway,	 the	 Adjunct	 has	 ordered	 a	 .	 .	 .	 a	 casting.	 Tonight.	 Starting	 about
now.’
‘And?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Maybe	I’m	just	superstitious,	but	the	idea’s	given	me	a	state	of	the	nerves.’
No	wonder	you	were	so	energetic.	‘And	you	want	to	stay	as	far	away	as	possible.’
‘Aye.’
‘All	right,	Ruthan.	I	should	be	back	before	dawn,	I	hope.	We	can	breakfast	together.’
‘Thanks,	Shurq.	Oh,	have	fun	and	don’t	wear	yourself	out.’
Little	chance	of	that,	love.	‘Get	your	rest,’	she	said,	opening	the	door.	‘Come	the	morning	you’ll	need	it.’
Always	give	them	something	before	leaving.	Something	to	feed	anticipation,	since	anticipation	so	well	served
to	blind	a	man	to	certain	obvious	discrepancies	in,	uh,	appetite.	She	descended	the	stairs.	Cloves.	Ridiculous.
Another	 visit	 to	 Selush	 was	 required.	 Shurq	 Elalle’s	 present	 level	 of	 maintenance	 was	 proving	 increasingly
complicated,	not	to	mention	egregiously	expensive.
Stepping	 outside,	 she	 was	 startled	 as	 a	 huge	 figure	 loomed	 out	 from	 the	 shadows	 of	 an	 alcove.	 ‘Ublala!
Shades	of	the	Empty	Throne,	you	startled	me.	What	are	you	doing	here?’
‘Who	is	he?’	the	giant	demanded.	‘I’ll	kill	him	for	you	if	you	like.’
‘No,	I	don’t	like.	Have	you	been	following	me	around	again?	Listen,	I’ve	explained	all	this	before,	haven’t
I?’
Ublala	Pung’s	gaze	dropped	to	his	feet.	He	mumbled	something	inaudible.
‘What?’
‘Yes.	I	said	“yes”,	Captain.	Oh,	I	want	to	run	away!’
‘I	thought	Tehol	had	you	inducted	into	the	Palace	Guard,’	she	said,	hoping	to	distract	him.
‘I	don’t	like	polishing	boots.’
‘Ublala,	you	only	have	to	do	that	once	every	few	days—or	you	can	hire	someone—’
‘Not	my	boots.	Everyone	else’s.’
‘The	other	guards’?’
He	nodded	glumly.
‘Ublala,	 walk	 with	 me—I	 will	 buy	 you	 a	 drink.	 Or	 three.’	 They	 set	 off	 up	 the	 street	 towards	 the	 canal
bridge.	‘Listen,	those	guards	are	just	taking	advantage	of	your	kindness.	You	don’t	have	to	polish	their	boots.’
‘I	don’t?’
‘No.	You’re	a	guardsman.	If	Tehol	knew	about	it	.	.	.	well,	you	should	probably	tell	your	comrades	in	the


Guard	that	you’re	going	to	have	a	word	with	your	best	friend,	the	King.’
‘He	is	my	best	friend,	isn’t	he?	He	gave	me	chicken.’
They	crossed	the	bridge,	waving	at	swarming	sludge	flies,	and	made	their	way	on	to	an	avenue	flanking	one
of	the	night	markets.	More	than	the	usual	number	of	Malazan	soldiers	wandering	about,	she	noted.	‘Exactly.
Chicken.	And	a	man	like	Tehol	won’t	share	chicken	with	just	anyone,	will	he?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Maybe.’
‘No	no,	Ublala,	trust	me	on	this.	You’ve	got	friends	in	high	places.	The	King,	the	Chancellor,	the	Ceda,	the
Queen,	 the	 King’s	 Sword.	 Any	 one	 of	 them	 would	 be	 delighted	 to	 share	 chicken	 with	 you,	 and	 you	 can	 bet
they	wouldn’t	be	so	generous	with	any	of	your	fellow	guards.’
‘So	I	don’t	have	to	polish	boots?’
‘Just	your	own,	or	you	can	hire	someone	to	do	that.’
‘What	about	stitching	tears	in	their	uniforms?	Sharpening	their	knives	and	swords?	And	what	about	washing
their	underclothes—’
‘Stop!	None	of	that—and	now	especially	I	want	you	to	promise	to	talk	to	your	friends.	Any	one	of	them.
Tehol,	Bugg,	Brys,	Janath.	Will	you	do	that	for	me?	Will	you	tell	them	what	the	other	guards	are	making	you
do?’
‘All	right.’
‘Good,	those	bastard	comrades	of	yours	in	the	Guard	are	in	for	some	serious	trouble.	Now,	here’s	a	suitable
bar—they	use	benches	instead	of	chairs,	so	you	won’t	be	getting	stuck	like	last	time.’
‘Good.	I’m	thirsty.	You’re	a	good	friend,	Shurq.	I	want	to	sex	you.’
‘How	sweet.	But	just	so	you	understand,	lots	of	men	sex	me	and	you	can’t	let	that	bother	you,	all	right?’
‘All	right.’
‘Ublala—’
‘Yes,	all	right,	I	promise.’
	
Kisswhere	sat	slumped	in	the	saddle	as	the	troop	rode	at	a	slow	trot	towards	the	city	of	Letheras.	She	would
not	glance	across	to	her	sister,	Sinter,	lest	the	guilt	she	was	feeling	simply	overwhelm	her,	a	clawing,	stabbing
clutch	at	her	soul,	dragging	it	into	oblivion.
She’d	known	all	along	Sinter	would	follow	her	anywhere,	and	when	the	recruiter	train	rolled	into	their	village
in	the	jungles	of	Dal	Hon,	well,	it	had	been	just	one	more	test	of	that	secret	conviction.	The	worst	of	it	was,
joining	the	marines	had	been	little	more	than	a	damned	whim.	Spurred	by	a	bit	of	a	local	mess,	the	spiralling
inward	of	suspicions	that	would	find	at	its	heart	none	other	than	Kisswhere	herself—the	cursed	‘other’	woman
who	dwelt	like	a	smiling	shadow	unseen	on	the	edge	of	a	family—oh,	she	could	have	weathered	the	scandal,
with	just	one	more	toss	of	her	head	and	a	few	careless	gestures.	It	wasn’t	that	she’d	loved	the	man—all	the
forest	spirits	well	knew	that	an	adulterous	man	wasn’t	worth	a	woman’s	love,	for	he	lived	only	for	himself	and
would	make	no	sacrifice	in	the	name	of	his	wife’s	honour,	nor	that	of	their	children.	No,	her	motives	had	been
rather	less	romantic.
Boredom	proved	a	cruel	shepherd—the	switch	never	stopped	snapping.	A	hunger	for	the	forbidden	added
yet	another	dark	shade	to	the	cast	of	her	impulses.	She’d	known	all	along	that	there	would	come	a	time	when
they’d	drive	her	from	the	village,	when	she’d	be	outcast	for	the	rest	of	her	life.	Such	banishment	was	no	longer
a	death	sentence—the	vast	world	beyond	the	jungle	now	opened	a	multitude	of	escape	routes.	The	Malazan
Empire	was	vast,	holding	millions	of	citizens	on	three	continents.	Yes,	she	knew	she	would	have	no	difficulty
vanishing	 within	 that	 blessed	 anonymity.	 And	 besides,	 she	 knew	 she’d	 always	 have	 company.	 Sinter—so
capable,	so	practical—was	the	perfect	companion	for	all	her	adventures.	And	oh,	the	White	Jackal	well	knew,
her	sister	was	a	beauty	and	together	they’d	never	have	to	fear	an	absence	of	male	company.
The	 recruiters	 seemed	 to	 offer	 a	 quick	 escape,	 fortuitous	 in	 its	 timing,	 and	 were	 happy	 to	 pay	 all	 travel
expenses.	So	she’d	grasped	hold	of	the	hyena’s	tail.
And	sure	enough,	sister	Sinter	was	quick	to	follow.
It	should	have	ended	there.	But	Badan	Gruk	was	whipped	into	the	rushing	current	of	their	wake.	The	fool
had	fallen	for	Sinter.
If	 she’d	 bothered	 putting	 any	 thought	 behind	 her	 decisions,	 she	 would	 have	 comprehended	 the	 terrible
disaster	she	had	dragged	them	all	into.	The	Malazan	marines	demanded	a	service	of	ten	years,	and	Kisswhere


had	simply	smiled	and	shrugged	and	then	had	signed	on	for	the	long	count,	telling	herself	that,	as	soon	as	she
tired	of	the	game,	she’d	just	desert	the	ranks	and,	once	more,	vanish	into	anonymity.
Alas,	Sinter’s	 nature	 was	 a	 far	 tighter	weave.	 What	 she	 took	 inside	 she	kept,	 and	 a	 vow	 once	 made	 was
held	to,	right	down	to	her	dying	breath.
It	 did	 not	 take	 long	 for	 Kisswhere	 to	 realize	 the	 mistake	 she’d	 made.	 She	 couldn’t	 very	 well	 run	 off	 and
abandon	her	sister,	who’d	then	gone	and	showed	enough	of	her	talents	to	be	made	a	sergeant.	And	although
Kisswhere	was	more	or	less	indifferent	to	Badan	Gruk’s	fate—the	man	so	wretchedly	ill	cast	as	a	soldier,	still
more	so	as	a	squad	sergeant—it	had	become	clear	to	her	that	Sinter	had	tightened	some	knots	between	them.
Just	as	Sinter	had	followed	Kisswhere,	so	Badan	Gruk	had	followed	Sinter.	But	the	grisly	yoke	of	responsibility
proved	not	at	the	core	of	the	ties	between	Sinter	and	Badan	Gruk.	There	was	something	else	going	on.	Did	her
sister	in	fact	love	the	fool?	Maybe.
Life	had	been	so	much	easier	back	in	the	village,	despite	all	the	sneaking	round	and	frantic	hip-locking	in	the
bushes	up	from	the	river—at	least	then	Kisswhere	was	on	her	own,	and	no	matter	what	happened	to	her,	her
sister	would	have	been	free	of	it.	And	safe.
Could	she	take	it	all	back	.	.	.
This	 jaunt	 among	 the	 marines	 was	 likely	 to	 kill	 them	 all.	 It	 had	 stopped	 being	 fun	 long	 ago.	 The	 horrid
voyage	on	those	foul	transports,	all	the	way	to	Seven	Cities.	The	march.	Y’Ghatan.	More	sea	voyages.	Malaz
City.	The	coastal	invasion	on	this	continent—the	night	on	the	river—chains,	darkness,	rotting	cells	and	no	food
—
No,	Kisswhere	could	not	look	across	at	Sinter,	and	so	witness	her	broken	state.	Nor	could	she	meet	Badan
Gruk’s	tortured	eyes,	all	that	raw	grief	and	anguish.
She	wished	she	had	died	in	that	cell.
She	 wished	 they	 had	 taken	 the	 Adjunct’s	 offer	 of	 discharge	 once	 the	 outlawing	 was	 official.	 But	 Sinter
would	have	none	of	that.	Of	course	not.
They	 were	 riding	 in	 darkness,	 but	 Kisswhere	 sensed	 when	 her	 sister	 suddenly	 pulled	 up.	 Soldiers
immediately	 behind	 them	 veered	 aside	 to	 avoid	 the	 horses	 colliding.	 Grunts,	 curses,	 and	 then	 Badan	 Gruk’s
worried	voice.	‘Sinter?	What’s	wrong?’
Sinter	twisted	in	her	saddle.	‘Is	Nep	with	us?	Nep	Furrow?’
‘No,’	Badan	replied.
Kisswhere	saw	real	fear	sizzle	awake	in	her	sister,	and	her	own	heart	started	pounding	in	answer.	Sinter	had
sensitivities—
‘In	the	city!	We	need	to	hurry—’
‘Wait,’	croaked	Kisswhere.	‘Sinter,	please—if	there’s	trouble	there,	let	them	handle	it—’
‘No—we	have	to	ride!’
And	 suddenly	 she	 drove	 heels	 into	 her	 horse’s	 flanks	 and	 the	 beast	 lunged	 forward.	 A	 moment	 later	 and
everyone	 was	 following,	 Kisswhere	 in	 their	 company.	 Her	 head	 spun—she	 thought	 she	 might	 well	 be	 flung
from	her	mount—too	weak,	too	weary—
But	her	sister.	Sinter.	Her	damned	sister,	she	was	a	marine,	now.	She	was	one	of	the	Adjunct’s	very	own—
and	 though	 that	 bitch	 had	 no	 idea,	 it	 was	 soldiers	 like	 Sinter—the	 quiet	 ones,	 the	 insanely	 loyal	 ones—who
were	the	iron	spine	of	the	Bonehunters.
Malice	 flashed	 through	 Kisswhere,	 ragged	 as	 a	 flag	 at	 midnight.	 Badan	 knows	 it.	 I	 know	 it.	 Tavore—
you’ve	stolen	my	sister.	And	that,	you	cold	bitch,	I	will	not	accept!
I	want	her	back,	damn	you.
I	want	my	sister	back.
	
‘So	where	is	the	fool?’
Fist	Keneb	shrugged.	‘Arbin	prefers	the	company	of	heavies.	The	soldiers	with	dirt	on	their	noses	and	dust
storms	in	their	skulls.	The	Fist	plays	knuckles	with	them,	gets	drunk	with	them,	probably	sleeps	with	some	of
them,	for	that	matter.’
Blistig	grunted	as	he	sat	down.	‘And	this	is	the	proper	way	to	earn	respect?’
‘That	depends,	I	suppose,’	Keneb	said.	‘If	Arbin	wins	at	knuckles,	drinks	everyone	else	under	the	table,	and
wears	out	every	lover	brave	enough	to	share	a	bed,	then	maybe	it	works.’


‘Don’t	 be	 a	 fool,	 Keneb.	 A	 Fist	 needs	 to	 keep	 distant.	 Bigger	 than	 life,	 and	 meaner	 besides.’	 He	 poured
himself	another	tankard	of	the	foamy	local	beer.	‘Glad	you’re	sitting	here,	I’d	imagine.’
‘I	didn’t	even	belong	at	the	last	reading.	I	was	there	in	Grub’s	place,	that’s	all.’
‘Now	the	boy’s	got	to	swallow	his	own	troubles.’	Blistig	leaned	forward—they	had	found	an	upscale	tavern,
overpriced	and	so	not	likely	to	draw	any	Malazan	soldiers	below	the	rank	of	captain,	and	for	a	time	over	the
past	 weeks	 the	 Fists	 had	 gathered	 here,	 mostly	 to	 drink	 and	 complain.	 ‘What’s	 one	 of	 those	 readings	 like?
Y’hear	all	sorts	of	rumours.	People	spitting	up	newts	or	snakes	slithering	out	of	their	ears,	and	woe	betide	any
baby	born	at	that	moment	anywhere	in	the	district—three	eyes	and	forked	tongues.’	He	shook	his	head,	drank
down	three	quick	mouthfuls,	and	then	wiped	at	his	mouth.	‘It’s	said	that	whatever	happened	at	that	last	one—it
made	 up	 the	 Adjunct’s	 mind,	 about	 everything	 that	 followed.	 The	 whole	 night	 in	 Malaz	 City.	 All	 skirling	 out
with	the	cards.	Even	Kalam’s	murder—’
‘We	don’t	know	he	was	murdered,’	cut	in	Keneb.
‘You	were	there,	in	that	cabin,’	Blistig	insisted.	‘What	happened?’
Keneb	glanced	away,	suddenly	wanting	something	stronger	than	beer.	He	found	that	he	was	unaccountably
chilled,	clammy	as	if	fevered.	‘It’s	about	to	begin,’	he	muttered.	‘Touched	once	.	.	.’
‘Anybody	with	neck	hairs	has	left	the	barracks,	did	you	know	that?	The	whole	damned	army	has	scattered
into	the	city	tonight.	You’re	scaring	me,	Keneb.’
‘Relax,’	he	heard	himself	reply.	‘I	spat	up	only	one	newt,	as	I	recall.	Here	comes	Madan.’
	
Deadsmell	had	hired	a	room	for	the	night,	fourth	floor	with	a	balcony	and	quick	access	to	the	roof.	A	damned
month’s	wages,	but	he	had	a	view	of	the	temporary	headquarters—well,	its	squat	dome	at	any	rate,	and	at	the
far	end	of	the	inn’s	roof	it	was	a	short	drop	to	an	adjoining	building,	a	quick	sprint	across	its	length	and	down	to
an	alley	not	three	streets	from	the	river.	Best	he	could	do,	all	things	considered.
Masan	Gilani	had	arrived	with	a	cask	of	ale	and	a	loaf	of	bread,	though	the	only	function	Deadsmell	could
foresee	 for	 the	 bread	 was	 to	 be	 used	 to	 soak	 up	 vomit—gods	 knew	 he	 wasn’t	 hungry.	 Ebron,	 Shard,	 Cord,
Limp	 and	 Crump	 then	 crowded	 in,	 arms	 loaded	 with	 dusty	 bottles	 of	 wine.	 The	 mage	 was	 deathly	 pale	 and
shaky.	 Cord,	 Shard	 and	 Limp	 looked	 frightened,	 while	 Crump	 was	 grinning	 like	 a	 man	 struck	 senseless	 by	 a
fallen	tree	branch.
Scowling	at	them	all,	Deadsmell	lifted	his	own	knapsack	from	the	floor	and	set	it	with	a	thump	on	the	lone
table.	At	the	sound	Ebron’s	head	snapped	round.
‘Hood	take	you,	necromancer,	you	and	your	stinking	magics.	If	I’d	a	known—’
‘You	 weren’t	 even	 invited,’	 Deadsmell	 said	 in	 a	 growl,	 ‘and	 you	 can	 leave	 any	 time.	 And	 what’s	 that	 exIrregular	doing	with	that	driftwood?’
‘I’m	 going	 to	 carve	 something!’	 Crump	 said	 with	 a	 bright	 toothy	 smile,	 like	 a	 horse	 begging	 an	 apple.
‘Maybe	a	big	fish!	Or	a	troop	of	horse-soldiers!	Or	a	giant	salamander—though	that	could	be	dangerous,	oh,
too	dangerous,	unless’n	I	give	its	tail	a	plug	so	you	can	pull	it	off—and	a	hinged	jaw	that	goes	up	and	down	and
makes	laughing	sounds.	Why	I	could—’
‘Stuff	it	in	your	mouth,	is	what	you	could	do,’	Deadsmell	cut	in.	‘Better	yet,	I’ll	do	it	for	you,	sapper.’
The	smile	faltered.	‘No	need	to	be	mean	and	all.	We	all	come	here	to	do	stuff.	Sergeant	Cord	and	Corporal
Shard	 are	 gonna	 drink,	 they	 said,	 and	 pray	 to	 the	 Queen	 of	 Dreams.	 Limp’s	 gonna	 sleep	 and	 Ebron’s	 gonna
make	 protection	 magics	 and	 all.’	 His	 equine	 eyes	 swivelled	 to	 Masan	 Gilani—who	 was	 slumped	 in	 the	 lone
cushy	 chair,	 legs	 outstretched,	 lids	 lowered,	 fingers	 laced	 together	 on	 her	 lap—and	 Crump’s	 long	 jaw	 slowly
sagged.	‘And	she’s	gonna	be	beautiful,’	he	whispered.
Sighing,	 Deadsmell	 untied	 the	 pack’s	 leather	 strings	 and	 began	 lifting	 out	 various	 small	 dead	 creatures.	 A
flicker	bird,	a	black-furred	rat,	an	iguana,	and	a	strange	blue-skinned,	big-eyed	thing	that	might	be	a	bat	or	a
shell-less	turtle—he’d	found	the	fox-sized	creature	hanging	by	its	three-tipped	tail	on	a	stall	in	the	market.	The
old	 woman	 had	 cackled	 when	 he’d	 purchased	 it,	 a	 rather	 ominous	 reaction,	 as	 far	 as	 Deadsmell	 was
concerned.	Even	so,	he	had	a	decent	enough—
Glancing	up,	he	saw	that	everyone	was	staring	at	him.	‘What?’
Crump’s	frown	was	darkening	his	normally	insipid	face	into	something	.	.	.	alarming.	‘You,’	he	said.	‘You’re
not,	by	any	chance,	you’re	not	a	.	.	.	a	.	.	.	a	necromancer?	Are	you?’
‘I	didn’t	invite	you	here,	Crump!’


Ebron	 was	 sweating.	 ‘Listen,	 sapper—you,	 Crump	 Bole	 or	 whatever	 your	 name	 is.	 You’re	 not	 a	 Mott
Irregular	 no	 longer,	 remember	 that.	 You’re	 a	 soldier.	 A	 Bonehunter.	 You	 take	 orders	 from	 Cord,	 Sergeant
Cord,	right?’
Clearing	his	throat,	Cord	spoke	up,	‘That’s	right,	Crump.	And,	uh,	I’m	ordering	you	to,	uh,	to	carve.’
Crump	 blinked,	 licked	 his	 lips,	 and	 then	 nodded	 at	 his	 sergeant.	 ‘Carve,	 right.	 What	 do	 you	 want	 me	 to
carve,	Sergeant?	Go	on,	anything!	Except’n	not	no	necromancers,	all	right?’
‘Sure.	 How	 about	 everybody	 here	 in	 this	 room,	 except	 Deadsmell,	 of	 course.	 But	 everyone	 else.	 Uhm,
riding	horses,	galloping	horses.	Horses	galloping	over	flames.’
Crump	wiped	at	his	lips	and	shot	Masan	Gilani	a	shy	glance.	‘Her,	too,	Sergeant?’
‘Go	 ahead,’	 Masan	 Gilani	 drawled.	 ‘Can’t	 wait	 to	 see	 it.	 Don’t	 forget	 to	 include	 yourself,	 Crump.	 On	 the
biggest	horse.’
‘Yah,	with	a	giant	sword	in	one	hand	and	a	cusser	in	the	other!’
‘Perfect.’
Deadsmell	returned	to	his	menagerie	of	dead	animals,	arranging	them	in	a	circle,	head	to	tail,	on	the	tabletop.
‘Gods,	those	stink,’	Limp	said.	‘Can’t	you	dip	’em	in	scented	oils	or	something?’
‘No,	 I	 can’t.	 Now	 shut	 up	 everyone.	 This	 is	 about	 saving	 all	 our	 skins,	 right?	 Even	 yours,	 Ebron,	 as	 if
Rashan’s	 going	 to	 help	 one	 whit	 tonight.	 To	 keep	 Hood	 from	 this	 room	 is	 down	 to	 me.	 So,	 no	 more
interruptions,	unless	you	want	to	kill	me—’
Crump’s	head	bobbed	up.	‘That	sounds	perfect—’
‘And	everyone	else,	too,	including	you,	Crump.’
‘That	doesn’t	sound	so	perfect.’
‘Carve,’	Cord	ordered.
The	sapper	bent	his	head	back	down	to	the	task	once	more,	the	tip	of	his	tongue	poking	out	like	a	botfly	grub
coming	up	for	air.
Deadsmell	fixed	his	attention	on	the	array	of	carcasses.	The	fox-sized	bat	turtle	thing	seemed	to	be	staring
up	at	him	with	one	giant	doe	eye.	He	fought	down	a	shiver,	the	motion	becoming	a	flinch	when	the	dead	iguana
languidly	blinked.	‘Gods	below,’	he	moaned.	‘High	House	Death	has	arrived.’
Corks	started	popping.
______
‘We’re	being	followed.’
‘Wha?	 Now	 Urb,	 tha’s	 your	 shadow,	 is	 all.	 We’re	 the	 ones	 doin’	 th’folloan,	 right?	 I	 ain’t	 ’lowing	 no	 twofaced	corporal	a	mine	t’go	awol—now,	we	turn	leff	’ere—’
‘Right,	Hellian.	You	just	turned	right.’
‘Tha’s	only	cos	we’re	side	by	side,	meanin’	you	see	it	diffren.	It	was	leff	for	me	and	if	it’s	right	for	you	tha’s
your	 probbem.	 Now	 look,	 izzat	 a	 broffle?	 He	 went	 up	 a	 broffle?	 Wha	 kinda	 corporal	 o’	 mine	 iz	 he?	 Whas
wrong	wi’	Mlazan	women,	hey?	We	get	’im	an’	I	wan	you	t’cut	off	his	balls,	okay?	Put	an	end	t’this	onct	and
ferawl.’
When	 they	 arrived	 at	 the	 narrow	 stairs	 tucked	 between	 two	 broad,	 antiquated	 entrances,	 Hellian	 reached
out	with	both	hands,	as	if	to	grasp	the	rails.	But	there	were	no	rails	and	so	she	fell	flat	on	to	the	steps,	audibly
cracking	 her	 chin.	 ‘Ow!	 Damn	 reels	 broke	 right	 off	 in	 my	 hands!’	 And	 she	 groped	 and	 clutched	 with	 her
fingers.	‘Turned	t’dust	too,	see?’
Urb	leaned	closer	to	make	sure	her	sodden	brains	weren’t	leaking	out—not	that	Hellian	would	notice—and
was	relieved	to	see	nothing	more	than	a	minor	scrape	on	the	underside	of	her	chin.	While	she	struggled	to	her
feet,	 patting	 at	 her	 bleached	 hair,	 he	 glanced	 back	 once	 more	 up	 the	 street	 they	 had	 just	 come	 down.	 ‘It’s
Skulldeath	doing	the	lurking,	Hellian—’
She	reeled	round,	blinking	owlishly.	‘Squealdeath?	Him	agin?’	She	made	more	ineffectual	adjustments	to	her
hair.	‘Oh,	he’s	a	darling	thing,	izzn’t	he?	Wants	to	climb	inta	my	knickers—’
‘Hellian,’	Urb	groaned.	‘He’s	made	that	desire	plain	enough—he	wants	to	marry	you—’
She	 glared.	 ‘No	 no,	 ijit.	 He	 wants	 to	 wear	 ’em.	 All	 th’rest	 he	 don’t	 know	 nuffin	 about.	 He’s	 only	 done	 it
wi’boys,	y’see.	Kept	trying	t’get	on	his	stomach	under	me	or	me	doin’	th’same	under	’im	wi’	the	wrong	’ole
showin’	an’	we	end	up	wrasslin’	instead	a	other	more	fun	stuff.	Anyway,	les	go	an’	get	our	corporal,	affore	he
d’scends	into	cruption.’


Frowning	to	hide	his	discomfiture,	Urb	followed	Hellian’s	swaying	behind	up	the	stairs.	‘Soldiers	use	whores
all	the	time,	Hellian—’
‘It’s	their	innocence,	Urb,	that	a	right	an’	proper	sergeant	needs	t’concern	’erself	wiff.’
‘They’re	grown	men,	Hellian—they	ain’t	so	innocent—’
‘Who?	 I	 wuz	 talkin’	 bout	 my	 corporal,	 bout	 Touchy	 Breffless.	 The	 way	 he’s	 always	 talking	 wi’imself	 no
woman’s	 gong	 go	 near	 ’im.	 Bein’	 insane	 ain’t	 a	 quality	 women	 look	 for,	 y’know.	 In	 their	 men,	 I	 mean.’	 She
waved	vaguely	at	the	door	in	front	of	her.	‘Which	iz	why	they’s	now	tryin’	whores,	an’	I	ain’t	gonna	allow	it.’
She	tried	a	few	times	to	grasp	the	latch,	finally	succeeded,	and	then	twisted	it	in	both	directions,	up	and	down,
up	and	down.	‘Gor	b’low!	Who	invented	this	piece	a	crud?’
Urb	reached	past	her	and	pushed	open	the	door.
Hellian	stepped	in,	still	trying	to	work	the	latch.	‘Don’t	worry,	Urb,	I’ll	get	it	right—jus’	watch	an’	learn.’
He	 edged	 past	 her	 and	 paused	 in	 the	 narrow	 hallway,	 impressed	 by	 the	 extraordinary	 wallpaper,	 which
seemed	to	consist	of	gold	leaf,	poppy-red	velvet	and	swaths	of	piebald	rabbit	skins	all	in	a	crazed	pattern	that
unaccountably	made	him	want	to	empty	his	coin	purse.	And	the	black	wooden	floor,	polished	and	waxed	until	it
seemed	 almost	 liquid,	 as	 if	 they	 were	 walking	 upon	 glass	 beneath	 which	 waited	 the	 torment	 of	 unending
oblivion—he	wondered	if	the	whole	thing	weren’t	ensorcelled.
‘Where	you	goin?’	Hellian	demanded.
‘You	opened	the	door,’	Urb	said.	‘And	asked	me	to	take	point.’
‘I	did?	I	did?	Take	point—in	a	broffle?’
‘That’s	right.’
‘Okay,	then	get	your	weapon	out,	Urb,	in	case	we	get	jumped.’
He	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘I’m	a	fast	draw,	Hellian.’
‘Not	what	I	seen,’	she	said	behind	him.
Confused,	he	paused	again.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Meanin’	you	need	some	lessons	in	cruption,	I’d	say.’	She	straightened	up,	but	that	wasn’t	so	straight,	since
she	 used	 a	 wall	 to	 manage	 the	 posture.	 ‘Unless	 o’course	 it’s	 Squatdeath	 y’want.	 Not	 that	 you’d	 fit	 in	 my
knickers,	though.	Hey,	are	these	baby	pelts?’
‘Rabbit.	I	ain’t	interested	in	Skulldeath,	Hellian.	And	no,	I	don’t	want	to	wear	your	knickers—’
‘Listen	you	two—’	someone	snapped	from	behind	a	door	to	one	side,	‘quit	that	foreign	jabbering	and	find	a
room!’
Face	darkening,	Hellian	reached	for	her	sword,	but	the	scabbard	was	empty.	‘Who	stole—you,	Urb,	gimme
your	sword,	damn	you!	Or	bust	down	this	door—yah,	this	one	’ere.	Bust	it	down	the	middle.	Use	your	head—
smash	it!’
Instead	of	attempting	any	of	that,	Urb	took	Hellian’s	arm	and	guided	her	farther	down	the	corridor.	‘They’re
not	in	that	one,’	he	said,	‘that	man	was	speaking	Letherii.’
‘That	was	Letherii?	That	foreign	jabber?	No	wonder	this	city’s	fulla	ijits,	talking	like	that.’
Urb	 moved	 up	 alongside	 another	 door	 and	 leaned	 close	 to	 listen.	 He	 grunted.	 ‘Voices.	 Negotiating.	 This
could	be	the	one.’
‘Kick	it	down,	bash	it,	find	us	a	battering	ram	or	a	cusser	or	an	angry	Napan—’
Urb	flipped	the	latch	and	shoved	the	door	back	and	then	he	stepped	inside.
Two	corporals,	mostly	undressed,	and	two	women,	one	stick	thin,	the	other	grossly	fat,	all	staring	at	him	with
wide	eyes.	Urb	pointed	at	Brethless	and	then	at	Touchy.	‘You	two,	get	your	clothes	on.	Your	sergeant’s	in	the
corridor—’
‘No	 I	 ain’t!’	 and	 Hellian	 reeled	 into	 the	 room,	 eyes	 blazing.	 ‘He	 hired	 two	 of	 ’em!	 Cruption!	 Scat,	 hags,
afore	I	cut	my	leg	off!’
The	thin	one	spat	something	and	suddenly	had	a	knife	in	a	hand,	waving	it	threateningly	as	she	advanced	on
Hellian.	The	fat	prostitute	picked	up	a	chair	and	lumbered	forward	a	step	behind	her.
Urb	 chopped	 one	 hand	 down	 to	 crack	 on	 the	 knife-wielder’s	 wrist—sending	 the	 weapon	 clattering	 on	 the
floor—and	used	his	other	to	grasp	the	fat	woman’s	face	and	push	her	back.	Squealing,	the	monstrous	whore
fell	on	to	her	ample	backside—the	room	shook	with	the	impact.	Clutching	her	bruised	forearm,	the	skinny	one
darted	past	and	out	the	door,	shrieking.
The	corporals	were	scrambling	with	their	clothes,	faces	frantic	with	worry.


‘Get	a	refund!’	Hellian	bellowed.	‘Those	two	should	be	paying	you!	Not	t’other	way	round!	Hey,	who	called
in	the	army?’
The	army,	as	it	turned	out,	was	the	establishment’s	six	pleasure	guards,	armed	with	clubs,	but	the	fight	in	the
room	only	turned	nasty	when	the	fat	woman	waded	back	in,	chair	swinging.
	
Standing	 near	 the	 long	 table,	 Brys	 Beddict	 took	 a	 cautious	 sip	 of	 the	 foreign	 ale,	 bemused	 at	 the	 motley
appearance	of	the	reading’s	participants,	the	last	of	whom	arrived	half-drunk	with	a	skittish	look	to	his	eyes.
An	ex-priest	of	some	sort,	he	surmised.
They	were	a	serious,	peculiar	lot,	these	Malazans.	With	a	talent	for	combining	offhand	casual	rapport	with
the	grimmest	of	subject	matter,	a	careless	repose	and	loose	discipline	with	savage	professionalism.	He	was,	he
admitted,	oddly	charmed.
At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 Adjunct	 was	 somewhat	 more	 challenging	 in	 that	 respect.	 Tavore	 Paran	 seemed
virtually	 devoid	 of	 social	 graces,	 despite	 her	 noble	 ancestry—which	 should	 have	 schooled	 her	 in	 basic
decorum;	 as	 indeed	 her	 high	 military	 rank	 should	 have	 smoothed	 all	 the	 jagged	 edges	 of	 her	 nature.	 The
Adjunct	 was	 awkward	 in	 command	 and	 clumsy	 in	 courtesy,	 as	 if	 consistently	 distracted	 by	 some
insurmountable	obstacle.
Brys	could	imagine	that	such	an	obstacle	might	well	be	found	in	the	unruliness	of	her	legions.	And	yet	her
officers	 and	 soldiers	 displayed	 not	 a	 flicker	 of	 insubordination,	 not	 a	 single	 eye-roll	 behind	 her	 back,	 nor	 the
glare	of	daggers	cast	sidelong.	There	was	loyalty,	yes,	but	it	was	strangely	flavoured	and	Brys	was	still	unable
to	determine	its	nature.
Whatever	the	source	of	the	Adjunct’s	distraction,	she	was	clearly	finding	no	release	from	its	strictures,	and
Brys	thought	that	the	burden	was	slowly	overwhelming	her.
Most	of	the	others	were	strangers	to	him,	or	at	best	vaguely	familiar	faces	attesting	to	some	past	incidental
encounter.	 He	 knew	 the	 High	 Mage,	 Ben	 Adaephon	 Delat,	 known	 to	 the	 other	 Malazans	 as	 Quick	 Ben—
although	to	Brys	that	name	seemed	a	version	lacking	in	the	respect	a	Ceda	surely	deserved.	He	knew	Hedge
and	Fiddler	as	well,	both	of	whom	had	been	among	the	soldiers	first	into	the	palace.
Others	in	the	group	startled	him.	Two	children,	a	boy	and	a	girl,	and	a	Tiste	Andii	woman,	mature	in	years
and	manner	and	clearly	put	out	by	her	inclusion	in	this	ragged	assembly.	All	the	rest,	with	the	exception	of	the
ex-priest,	 were	 officers	 or	 soldiers	 in	 the	 Adjunct’s	 army.	 Two	 gold-skinned,	 fair-haired	 marines—neither
young—named	 Gesler	 and	 Stormy.	 A	 nondescript	 man	 named	 Bottle	 who	 couldn’t	 be	 much	 older	 than	 two
decades;	and	Tavore’s	aide,	the	startlingly	beautiful,	tattooed	officer,	Lostara	Yil,	who	moved	with	a	dancer’s
grace	and	whose	exotic	features	were	only	tempered	by	an	air	of	ineffable	sorrow.
Soldiers	lived	difficult	lives,	Brys	well	knew.	Friends	lost	in	horrible,	sudden	ways.	Scars	hardening	over	the
years,	ambitions	crushed	and	dreams	set	aside.	The	world	of	possibilities	diminished	and	betrayals	threatened
from	every	shadow.	A	soldier	must	place	his	or	her	trust	in	the	one	who	commands,	and	by	extension	in	that
which	 the	 commander	 serves	 in	 turn.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 these	 Bonehunters,	 Brys	 understood	 that	 they	 and	 their
Adjunct	had	been	betrayed	by	their	empire’s	ruler.	They	were	adrift,	and	it	was	all	Tavore	could	do	to	hold	the
army	together:	that	they	had	launched	an	invasion	of	Lether	was	in	itself	extraordinary.	Divisions	and	brigades
—in	 his	 own	 kingdom’s	 history—had	 mutinied	 in	 response	 to	 commands	 nowhere	 near	 as	 extreme.	 For	 this
reason	 alone,	 Brys	 held	 the	 Adjunct	 in	 true	 respect,	 and	 he	 was	 convinced	 that	 she	 possessed	 some	 hidden
quality,	 a	 secret	 virtue,	 that	 her	 soldiers	 well	 recognized	 and	 responded	 to—and	 Brys	 wondered	 if	 he	 would
come	to	see	it	for	himself,	perhaps	this	very	night.
Although	 he	 stood	 at	 ease,	 curious	 and	 moderately	 attentive,	 sipping	 his	 ale,	 he	 could	 well	 sense	 the
burgeoning	tension	in	the	room.	No	one	was	happy,	least	of	all	the	sergeant	who	would	awaken	the	cards—the
poor	man	looked	as	bedraggled	as	a	dog	that	had	just	swum	the	breadth	of	River	Lether,	his	eyes	red-shot	and
bleak,	his	face	battered	as	if	he	had	been	in	a	brawl.
The	young	soldier	named	Bottle	was	hovering	close	to	Fiddler,	and,	employing—perhaps	for	Brys’s	benefit
—the	trader	tongue,	he	spoke	to	the	sergeant	in	a	low	tone.	‘Time	for	a	Rusty	Gauntlet?’
‘What?	A	what?’
‘That	drink	you	invented	last	reading—’
‘No,	no	alcohol.	Not	this	time.	Leave	me	alone.	Until	I’m	ready.’
‘How	will	we	know	when	you’re	ready?’	Lostara	Yil	asked	him.


‘Just	 sit	 down,	 in	 any	 order,	 Captain.	 You’ll	 know.’	 He	 shot	 the	 Adjunct	 a	 beseeching	 look.	 ‘There’s	 too
much	power	here.	Way	too	much.	I’ve	no	idea	what	I’ll	bring	down.	This	is	a	mistake.’
Tavore’s	pinched	features	somehow	managed	to	tauten.	‘Sometimes,	Sergeant,	mistakes	are	necessary.’
Hedge	 coughed	 abruptly,	 and	 then	 waved	 a	 hand.	 ‘Sorry,	 Adjunct,	 but	 you’re	 talking	 to	 a	 sapper	 there.
Mistakes	mean	we	turn	into	red	mist.	I	take	it	you’re	referring	to	other	kinds,	maybe?	I	hope?’
The	Adjunct	swung	to	Gesler’s	oversized	companion.	‘Adjutant	Stormy,	how	does	one	turn	an	ambush?’
‘I	ain’t	no	adjutant	any	more,’	the	bearded	man	growled.
‘Answer	my	question.’
The	 huge	 man	 glared,	 then,	 seeing	 as	 it	 elicited	 no	 reaction	 whatsoever	 from	 the	 Adjunct,	 he	 grunted	 and
then	said,	‘You	spring	it	and	then	charge	’em,	hard	and	fast.	Y’climb	down	the	bastards’	throats.’
‘But	first	the	ambush	must	be	sprung.’
‘Unless	 y’can	 sniff	 ’em	 out	 beforehand,	 aye.’	 His	 small	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 her.	 ‘We	 gonna	 sniff	 or	 charge
tonight,	Adjunct?’
Tavore	 made	 no	 reply	 to	 that,	 facing	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 woman	 instead.	 ‘Sandalath	 Drukorlat,	 please	 sit.	 I
understand	your	reluctance—’
‘I	don’t	know	why	I’m	here,’	Sandalath	snapped.
‘History,’	muttered	the	ex-priest.
A	 long	 moment	 of	 silence,	 and	 then	 the	 girl	 named	 Sinn	 giggled,	 and	 everyone	 jumped.	 Seeing	 this,	 Brys
frowned.	‘Excuse	me	for	interrupting,	but	is	this	the	place	for	children?’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘The	girl’s	a	High	Mage,	Brys.	And	the	boy’s	.	.	.	well,	he’s	different.’
‘Different?’
‘Touched,’	said	Banaschar.	‘And	not	in	a	good	way,	either.	Please,	Adjunct,	call	it	off.	Send	Fiddler	back	to
the	barracks.	There’s	too	many	here—the	safest	readings	involve	a	few	people,	not	a	mob	like	this	one.	Your
poor	reader’s	gonna	start	bleeding	from	the	ears	halfway	through.’
‘He’s	right,’	said	Quick	Ben,	shifting	uneasily	in	his	chair.	‘Fid’s	ugly	enough	without	earrings	of	blood	and
whatnot.’
The	 Adjunct	 faced	 Fiddler.	 ‘Sergeant,	 you	 know	 my	 desire	 in	 this—more	 than	 anyone	 else	 here,	 you	 also
know	my	reasons.	Speak	now	honestly,	are	you	capable	of	this?’
All	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 sapper,	 and	 Brys	 could	 see	 how	 everyone—excepting	 perhaps	 Sinn—was	 silently
imploring	Fiddler	to	snap	shut	the	lid	on	this	dread	box.	Instead,	he	grimaced,	staring	at	the	floor,	and	said,	‘I
can	do	it,	Adjunct.	That’s	not	the	problem.	It’s	.	.	.	unexpected	guests.’
Brys	saw	the	ex-priest	flinch	at	that,	and	a	sudden,	hot	flood	of	alarm	rose	through	the	King’s	Sword.	He
stepped	forward—
But	 the	 Deck	 was	 in	 Fiddler’s	 hands	 and	 he	 was	 standing	 at	 one	 end	 of	 the	 table—even	 though	 not
everyone	had	taken	seats—and	three	cards	clattered	and	slid	on	the	polished	surface.
The	reading	had	begun.
	
Standing	in	the	gloom	outside	the	building,	the	Errant	staggered	back,	as	if	buffeted	by	invisible	fists.	He	tasted
blood	in	his	mouth,	and	hissed	in	fury.
	
In	 the	 main	 room	 of	 her	 small	home,	 Seren	 Pedac’s	 eyes	 widened	 and	then	 she	 shouted	 in	 alarm	 as	 Pinosel
and	Ursto	Hoobutt	ignited	into	flames	where	they	sat—and	she	would	have	lunged	forward	if	not	for	Bugg’s
staying	hand.	A	hand	sheathed	in	sweat.
‘Do	not	move,’	the	old	man	gasped.	‘Those	fires	burn	nothing	but	them—’
‘Nothing	but	them?	What	does	that	mean?’
It	was	clear	that	the	two	ancient	gods	had	ceased	being	aware	of	their	surroundings—she	 could	 see	 their
eyes	staring	out	through	the	blue	flames,	fixed	upon	nothing.
‘Their	essence,’	Bugg	whispered.	‘They	are	being	devoured	.	.	.	by	the	power—the	power	awakened.’	He
was	trembling	as	if	close	to	incapacitation,	sweat	streaming	like	oil	down	his	face.
Seren	 Pedac	 edged	 back	 and	 placed	 her	 hands	 upon	 her	 swollen	 belly.	 Her	 mouth	 was	 dry,	 her	 heart
pounding	hard.	‘Who	assails	them?’


‘They	stand	between	your	child	and	that	power—as	do	I,	Acquitor.	We	.	.	.	we	can	withstand.	We	must—’
‘Who	is	doing	this?’
‘Not	malign—just	vast.	Abyss	below,	this	is	no	ordinary	caster	of	the	Tiles!’	 She	 sat,	 terrified	 now,	 her
fear	 for	 her	 unborn	 son	 white-hot	 in	 her	 soul,	 and	 stared	 at	 Pinosel	 and	 Ursto	 Hoobutt—who	 burned	 and
burned,	and	beneath	the	flames	they	were	melting	like	wax.
	
In	 a	 crowded	 room	 on	 the	 top	 floor	 of	 an	 inn,	 a	 flurry	 of	 once-dead	 beasts	 now	 scampered,	 snarled	 and
snapped	jaws.	The	black-furred	rat,	trailing	entrails,	had	suddenly	fallen	upward	to	land	on	the	ceiling,	claws
digging	into	the	plaster,	intestines	dangling	like	tiny	sausages	in	a	smoke-house.	The	blue	bat-turtle	had	bitten
off	 the	 iguana’s	 tail	 and	 that	 creature	 escaped	 in	 a	 slithering	 dash	 and	 was	 now	 butting	 at	 the	 window’s
shutters	 as	 if	 desperate	 to	 get	 out.	 The	 flicker	 bird,	 shedding	 oily	 feathers,	 flapped	 in	 frantic	 circles	 over	 the
heads	 of	 everyone—none	 of	 whom	 had	 time	 to	 notice,	 as	 bottles	 smashed	 down,	 wine	 spilling	 like	 thinned
blood,	 and	 the	 barely	 begun	 carving	 of	 riders	 on	 charging	 horses	 now	 writhed	 and	 reared	 on	 Crump’s	 lap,
whilst	he	stared	bug-eyed,	mouth	gaping—and	moments	later	the	first	tiny	horse	dragged	itself	free	and	leapt
down	 from	 the	 sapper’s	 thigh,	 wooden	 hoofs	 clopping	 across	 the	 floor,	 misshapen	 lump	 of	 rider	 waving	 a
splinter.
Bellowing,	 shouts,	 shrieks—Ebron	 vomited	 violently,	 and,	 ducking	 to	 avoid	 that	 gush,	 Limp	 slipped	 in	 a
puddle	of	wine	and	shattered	his	left	knee.	He	howled.
Deadsmell	started	crawling	for	a	corner.	He	saw	Masan	Gilani	roll	under	the	fancy	bed	as	the	flicker	bird
cracked	headlong	into	a	bedpost,	exploding	in	a	cloud	of	rank	feathers.
Smart	woman.	Now,	if	only	there	was	room	under	there	for	me,	too.
	
In	another	section	of	the	city,	witnesses	would	swear	in	the	Errant’s	name,	swear	indeed	on	the	Empty	Throne
and	 on	 the	 graves	 of	 loved	 ones,	 that	 two	 dragons	 burst	 from	 the	 heart	 of	 an	 inn,	 wreckage	 sailing	 out	 in	 a
deadly	rain	of	bricks,	splinters,	dust	and	fragments	of	sundered	bodies	that	cascaded	down	into	streets	as	far
as	 fifty	 paces	 away—and	 even	 in	 the	 aftermath	 the	 next	 morning	 no	 other	 possible	 explanation	 sufficed	 to
justify	that	shattered	ruin	of	an	entire	building,	from	which	no	survivors	were	pulled.
______
The	 entire	 room	 trembled,	 and	 even	 as	 Hellian	 drove	 her	 elbow	 into	 a	 bearded	 face	 and	 heard	 a	 satisfying
crunch,	 the	 wall	 opposite	 her	 cracked	 like	 fine	 glass	 and	 then	 toppled	 into	 the	 room,	 burying	 the	 figures
thrashing	about	in	pointless	clinches	on	the	floor.	Women	screamed—well,	the	fat	one	did,	and	she	was	loud
enough	 and	 repetitive	 enough	 in	 those	 shrieks	 to	 fill	 in	 for	 everyone	 else—all	 of	 whom	 were	 too	 busy
scrabbling	out	from	the	wreckage.
Hellian	 staggered	 back	 a	 step,	 and	 then,	 as	 the	 floor	 suddenly	 heaved,	 she	 found	 herself	 running	 although
she	could	not	be	sure	of	her	precise	direction,	but	it	seemed	wise	to	find	the	door	wherever	that	might	be.
When	she	found	it,	she	frowned,	since	it	was	lying	flat	on	the	floor,	and	so	she	paused	and	stared	down	for	a
time.
Until	Urb	stumbled	into	her.	‘Something	just	went	up	across	the	street!’	he	gasped,	spitting	blood.	‘We	got	to
get	out	of	here—’
‘Where’s	my	corporal?’
‘Already	down	the	stairs—let’s	go!’But,	no,	it	was	time	for	a	drink—
‘Hellian!	Not	now!’
‘Gare	away!	If	not	now,	when?’
	
‘Spinner	of	Death,	Knight	of	Shadow,	Master	of	the	Deck.’	Fiddler’s	voice	was	a	cold,	almost	inhuman	growl.
‘Table	holds	them,	but	not	the	rest.’	And	he	started	flinging	cards,	and	each	one	he	threw	shot	like	a	plate	of
iron	to	a	lodestone,	striking	one	person	after	another—hard	against	their	chests,	staggering	them	back	a	step,
and	with	each	impact—as	Brys	stared	in	horror—the	victim	was	lifted	off	the	floor,	chair	tumbling	away,	and
slammed	against	the	wall	behind	them	no	matter	the	distance.


The	collisions	cracked	bones.	Backs	of	heads	crunched	bloodily	on	the	walls.
It	was	all	happening	too	fast,	with	Fiddler	standing	as	if	in	the	heart	of	a	maelstrom,	solid	as	a	deep-rooted
tree.
The	first	struck	was	the	girl,	Sinn.	‘Virgin	of	Death.’	As	the	card	smacked	into	her	chest	it	heaved	her,	limbs
flailing,	up	to	a	section	of	wall	just	beneath	the	ceiling.	The	sound	she	made	when	she	hit	was	sickening,	and
she	went	limp,	hanging	like	a	spiked	rag	doll.
‘Sceptre.’
Grub	shrieked,	seeking	to	fling	himself	to	one	side,	and	the	card	deftly	slid	beneath	him,	fixing	on	to	his	chest
and	shoving	him	bodily	across	the	floor,	up	against	the	wall	just	left	of	the	door.
Quick	 Ben’s	 expression	 was	 one	 of	 stunned	 disbelief	 as	 Fiddler’s	 third	 card	 slapped	 against	 his	 sternum.
‘Magus	 of	 Dark.’	 He	 was	 thrown	 into	 the	 wall	 behind	 him	 with	 enough	 force	 to	 send	 cracks	 through	 the
plaster	and	he	hung	there,	motionless	as	a	corpse	on	a	spike.
‘Mason	 of	 Death.’	 Hedge	 bleated	 and	 made	 the	 mistake	 of	 turning	 round.	 The	 card	 struck	 his	 back	 and
hammered	 him	 face	 first	 into	 the	 wall,	 whereupon	 the	 card	 began	 pushing	 him	 upward,	 leaving	 a	 red	 streak
below	the	unconscious	man.
The	others	followed,	quick	as	a	handful	of	flung	stones.	In	each,	the	effect	was	the	same.	Violent	impact,
walls	that	shook.	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	Queen	of	Dark.	Lostara	Yil,	Champion	of	Life.
‘Obelisk.’	Bottle.
Gesler,	Orb.
Stormy,	Throne.
And	then	Fiddler	faced	Brys.	‘King	of	Life.’
The	card	flashed	out	from	his	hand,	glittering	like	a	dagger,	and	Brys	snatched	a	breath	the	instant	before	it
struck,	eyes	closing—he	felt	the	blow,	but	nowhere	near	as	viciously	as	had	the	others,	and	nothing	touched	his
breast.	He	opened	his	eyes	to	see	the	card	hovering,	shivering,	in	the	air	before	him.
Above	it,	he	met	Fiddler’s	flat	eyes.
The	sapper	nodded.	‘You’re	needed.’
What?
Two	 remained	 untouched,	 and	 Fiddler	 turned	 to	 the	 first	 and	 nearest	 of	 these.	 ‘Banaschar,’	 he	 said.	 ‘You
keep	poor	company.	Fool	in	Chains.’	He	drew	a	card	and	snapped	out	his	hand.	The	ex-priest	grunted	and	was
flung	 back	 over	 his	 chair,	 whereupon	 he	 shot	 upward	 to	 the	 domed	 ceiling.	 Dust	 engulfed	 the	 man	 at	 the
impact.
Fiddler	now	faced	the	Adjunct.	‘You	knew,	didn’t	you?’
Staring,	pale	as	snow,	she	said	nothing.
‘For	you,	Tavore	Paran	.	.	.	nothing.’
She	flinched.
The	door	suddenly	opened,	hinges	squealing	in	the	frozen	silence.
Turudal	Brizad	stepped	into	the	chamber	and	then	halted.	Turudal	.	.	.	no,	of	course	not.	The	Errant.	Who
stands	 unseen	 behind	 the	 Empty	 Throne.	 I	 wondered	 when	 you	 would	 show	 yourself.	 Brys	 realized	 he
had	 drawn	 his	 sword;	 realized,	 too,	 that	 the	 Errant	 was	 here	 to	 kill	 him—a	 deed	 without	 reason,	 a	 desire
without	motive—at	least	none	fathomable	to	anyone	but	the	Errant	himself.
He	will	kill	me.
And	then	Fiddler—for	his	audacity.
And	then	everyone	else	here,	so	that	there	be	no	witnesses.
Fiddler	slowly	turned	to	study	the	Errant.	The	Malazan’s	smile	was	chilling.	‘If	that	card	was	for	you,’	he
said,	‘it	would	have	left	the	table	the	moment	you	opened	the	door.	I	know,	you	think	it	belongs	to	you.	You
think	it’s	yours.	You	are	wrong.’
The	Errant’s	lone	eye	seemed	to	flare.	‘I	am	the	Master	of	the	Tiles—’
‘And	I	don’t	care.	Go	on	then.	Play	with	your	tiles,	Elder.	You	cannot	stand	against	the	Master	of	the	Deck
—your	time,	Errant,	is	past.’
‘I	have	returned!’
As	the	Errant,	raw	power	building	round	him,	took	another	stride	into	the	chamber,	Fiddler’s	low	words	cut
into	his	path.	‘I	wouldn’t	do	that.’


The	Elder	God	sneered.	‘Do	you	think	Brys	Beddict	can	stop	me?	Can	stop	what	I	intend	here?’
Fiddler’s	brows	lifted.	‘I	have	no	idea.	But	if	you	take	one	more	step,	Errant,	the	Master	of	the	Deck	will
come	through.	Here,	now.	Will	you	face	him?	Are	you	ready	for	that?’
And	Brys	glanced	to	that	card	lying	on	the	table.	Inanimate,	motionless.	It	seemed	to	yawn	like	the	mouth	of
the	Abyss	itself,	and	he	suddenly	shivered.
Fiddler’s	 quiet	 challenge	 had	 halted	 the	 Errant,	 and	 Brys	 saw	 uncertainty	 stirred	 to	 life	 on	 the	 oncehandsome	features	of	Turudal	Brizad.
‘For	what	it	is	worth,’	Brys	Beddict	said	then,	‘you	would	not	have	made	it	past	me	anyway,	Errant.’
The	single	eye	flicked	to	him.	‘Ridiculous.’
‘I	have	lived	in	stone,	Elder	One.	I	am	written	with	names	beyond	counting.	The	man	who	died	in	the	throne
room	is	not	the	man	who	has	returned,	no	matter	what	you	see.’
‘You	tempt	me	to	crush	you,’	the	Errant	said	in	a	half-snarl.
Fiddler	swung	round,	stared	down	at	the	card	on	the	table.	‘He	is	awakened.’	He	faced	the	Elder	God.	‘It
may	be	too	late	.	.	.	for	you.’
And	Brys	saw	the	Errant	suddenly	step	back,	once,	twice,	the	third	time	taking	him	through	the	doorway.	A
moment	later	and	he	vanished	from	sight.
Bodies	were	sliding	slowly	towards	the	floor.	As	far	as	Brys	could	see,	not	one	was	conscious.	Something
eased	in	the	chamber	like	the	release	of	a	breath	held	far	too	long.
‘Adjunct.’
Tavore’s	attention	snapped	from	the	empty	doorway	back	to	the	sapper.
Spring	the	ambush.	Find	your	enemy.
‘This	 wasn’t	 a	 reading,’	 Fiddler	 said.	 ‘No	 one	 here	 was	 found.	 No	 one	 was	 claimed.	 Adjunct,	 they	 were
marked.	Do	you	understand?’
‘I	do,’	she	whispered.
‘I	think,’	Fiddler	said,	as	grief	clenched	his	face,	‘I	think	I	can	see	the	end.’
She	nodded.
‘Tavore,’	said	Fiddler,	his	voice	now	ragged.	‘I	am	so	sorry.’
To	that,	the	Adjunct	simply	shook	her	head.
And	 Brys	 knew	 that,	 while	 he	 did	 not	 understand	 everything	 here,	 he	 understood	 enough.	 And	 if	 it	 could
have	 meant	 anything,	 anything	 at	 all,	 he	 would	 have	 repeated	 Fiddler’s	 words	 to	 her.	 To	 this	 Adjunct,	 this
Tavore	Paran,	this	wretchedly	lonely	woman.
At	 that	 moment,	 the	 limp	 form	 of	 Banaschar	 settled	 on	 to	 the	 tabletop,	 like	 a	 corpse	 being	 lowered	 on	 a
noose.	As	he	came	to	rest,	he	groaned.
Fiddler	walked	over	and	collected	the	card	called	the	Master	of	the	Deck.	He	studied	it	for	a	moment,	and
then	returned	it	to	the	deck	in	his	hands.	Glancing	over	at	Brys,	he	winked.
‘Nicely	played,	Sergeant.’
‘Felt	so	lifeless	.	.	.	still	does.	I’m	kind	of	worried.’
Brys	nodded.	‘Even	so,	the	role	did	not	feel	.	.	.	vacant.’
‘That’s	true.	Thanks.’
‘You	know	this	Master?’
‘Aye.’
‘Sergeant,	had	the	Errant	called	your	bluff—’
Fiddler	grinned.	‘You	would’ve	been	on	your	own,	sir.	Still,	you	sounded	confident	enough.’
‘Malazans	aren’t	the	only	ones	capable	of	bluffing.’
And,	as	they	shared	a	true	smile,	the	Adjunct	simply	stared	on,	from	one	man	to	the	other,	and	said	nothing.
	
Bugg	stood	at	the	back	window,	looking	out	on	Seren	Pedac’s	modest	garden	that	was	now	softly	brushed	with
the	silvery	tones	reflected	down	from	the	dusty,	smoky	clouds	hanging	over	the	city.	There	had	been	damage
done	this	night,	far	beyond	one	or	two	knocked-down	buildings.	The	room	had	been	silent	behind	him	for	some
time	 now,	 from	 the	 moment	 that	 the	 reading	 had	 ended	 a	 short	 while	 ago.	 He	 still	 felt	 .	 .	 .	 fragile,	 almost
fractured.
He	heard	her	stir	into	motion	behind	him,	the	soft	grunt	as	she	climbed	upright,	and	then	she	was	beside	him.


‘Are	they	dead,	Bugg?’
He	turned	and	glanced	at	the	now	conjoined,	colourless	puddles	on	the	floor	beneath	the	two	chairs.	‘I	don’t
know,’	he	admitted,	and	then	added,	‘I	think	so.’
‘Th-that	was	not	.	.	.	expected—please	tell	me,	Ceda,	that	such	a	fate	was	not	in	the	plans	tonight.’
‘No,	Acquitor.’
‘Then	.	.	.	what	happened?’
He	 rubbed	 at	 the	 bristles	 on	 his	 chin,	 and	 then	 sighed	 and	 shook	 his	 head.	 ‘She	 chooses	 a	 narrow	 path—
gods,	the	audacity	of	it!	I	must	speak	with	the	King.	And	with	Brys—we	need	to	decide—’
‘Ceda!	Who	killed	Pinosel	and	Ursto?’
He	faced	her,	blinked.	‘Death	but	passed	through.	Even	the	Errant	was	.	.	.	dismissed.’	He	snorted.	‘Yes.
Dismissed.	There	is	so	much	power	in	this	Deck	of	Dragons.	In	the	right	hands,	it	could	drain	us	all	dry.	Every
god,	new	and	elder.	Every	ascendant	cast	into	a	role.	Every	mortal	doomed	to	become	a	face	on	a	card.’	He
resumed	 his	 gaze	 out	 the	 window.	 ‘He	 dropped	 one	 on	 to	 the	 table.	 Your	 son’s.	 The	 table	 would	 hold	 it,	 he
said.	Thus,	he	made	no	effort	to	claim	your	son.	He	let	it	be.	He	let	him	be.’	And	then	he	shivered.	‘Pinosel
and	Ursto—they	just	sat	too	close	to	the	fire.’
‘They	.	.	.	what?’
‘The	caster	held	back,	Acquitor.	No	one	attacked	Ursto	and	Pinosel.	Even	your	unborn	son’s	card	did	not
try	for	him.	The	caster	locked	it	down.	As	would	a	carpenter	driving	a	nail	through	a	plank	of	wood.	Abyss
take	me,	the	sheer	brazen	power	to	do	that	leaves	me	breathless.	Acquitor,	Ursto	and	Pinosel	were	here	to
defend	you	from	the	Errant.	And	yes,	we	felt	him.	We	felt	his	murderous	desire.	But	then	he	was	thrown	back,
his	power	scattered.	What	arrived	in	its	place	was	like	the	face	of	the	sun,	ever	growing,	becoming	so	vast	as
to	fill	the	world—they	were	pinned	there,	trapped	in	those	chairs,	unable	to	move	.	.	.’	He	shook	himself.	‘We
all	were.’	He	looked	down	at	the	puddles.	‘Acquitor,	I	truly	do	not	know	if	they	are	dead.	The	Lord	of	Death
fed	on	no	one	this	night,	beyond	a	few	hapless	souls	in	a	destroyed	inn.	They	may	be	simply	.	.	.	reduced	.	.	.
and	after	a	time	they	will	reconstitute	themselves,	find	their	shapes—their	flesh	and	bone—once	more.	I	do	not
know,	yet	I	will	hope.’
He	saw	her	studying	his	face,	and	wondered	if	he’d	managed	to	hide	any	of	his	anxiety,	his	grief.	The	look
in	her	eyes	spoke	of	his	failure.
‘Speak	with	this	caster,’	she	said.	‘And	.	.	.	ask	him	.	.	.	to	refrain.	Never	again	in	this	city.	Please.’
‘He	was	unwilling,	Acquitor.	He	did	what	he	could.	To	protect	.	.	.	everyone.’	Except,	I	think,	himself.	‘I
do	not	think	there	will	be	another	reading.’
She	stared	out	the	window.	‘What	awaits	him?	My	.	.	.	son,’	she	asked	in	a	whisper.
He	understood	her	question.	‘He	will	have	you,	Seren	Pedac.	Mothers	possess	a	strength,	vast	and	strange
—’
‘Strange?’
Bugg	 smiled.	 ‘Strange	 to	 us.	 Unfathomable.	 Also,	 your	 son’s	 father	 was	 much	 loved.	 There	 will	 be	 those
among	his	friends	who	would	not	hesitate—’
‘Onrack	T’emlava,’	she	said.
Bugg	nodded.	‘An	Imass.’
‘Whatever	that	is.’
‘Acquitor,	the	Imass	are	many	things,	and	among	those	things,	one	virtue	stands	above	all	the	others.	Their
loyalty	cannot	be	sundered.	They	feel	such	forces	with	a	depth	vast	and—’
‘Strange?’
Bugg	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	knowing	that	he	could,	if	he	so	chose,	be	offended	by	the	implication	in	that
lone	word	she	had	added	to	his	sentence.	Instead,	he	smiled.	‘Even	so.’
‘I	 am	 sorry,	 Ceda.	 You	 are	 right.	 Onrack	 was	 .	 .	 .	 remarkable,	 and	 a	 great	 comfort	 to	 me.	 Still,	 I	 do	 not
expect	him	to	visit	again.’
‘He	will,	when	your	son	is	born.’
‘How	will	he	know	when	that	happens?’
‘Because	 his	 bonecaster	 wife,	 Kilava,	 set	 a	 blessing	 upon	 you	 and	 your	 child.	 By	 this	 means	 she	 remains
aware	of	you	and	your	condition.’
‘Oh.	Would	she	have	sensed	tonight,	then?	The	risk?	The	danger?’


‘Perhaps,’	 Bugg	 replied.	 ‘She	 would	 have	 been	 .	 .	 .	 attentive.	 And	 had	 some	 form	 of	 breach	 occurred	 to
directly	threaten	you,	then	I	suspect	that	yes,	she	would	have	.	.	.	intervened.’
‘How	could	she	have	hoped	to	defend	me,’	Seren	said,	‘if	three	ancient	gods	had	already	failed?’
Bugg	 sighed.	 ‘A	 conviction	 I	 am	 slowly	 coming	 to	 accept.	 People	 do	 not	 understand	 power.	 They	 view	 it
exclusively	as	a	contest,	this	against	that;	which	is	the	greater?	Which	wins,	which	fails?	Power	is	less	about
actual	 conflict—recognizing	 as	 it	 does	 the	 mutual	 damage	 conflict	 entails,	 with	 such	 damage	 making	 one
vulnerable—less	about	actual	conflict,	then,	than	it	is	about	statements.	Presence,	Acquitor,	is	power’s	truest
expression.	And	presence	is,	at	its	core,	the	occupation	of	space.	An	assertion,	if	you	will.	One	that	must	be
acknowledged	by	other	powers,	lesser	or	greater,	it	matters	not.’
‘I	am	not	sure	I	understand	you.’
‘Kilava	 would	 have	 invoked	 her	 presence,	 Acquitor.	 One	 that	 embraced	 you.	 Now,	 if	 you	 still	 insist	 on
simplistic	comparisons,	then	I	tell	you,	she	would	have	been	as	a	stone	in	a	stream.	The	water	may	dream	of
victory,	may	even	yearn	for	it,	but	it	had	best	learn	patience,	yes?	Consider	every	dried	stream	bed	you	have
seen,	Acquitor,	and	judge	who	was	the	ultimate	victor	in	that	war	of	patience.’
The	woman	sighed,	and	Bugg	heard	her	exhaustion.
He	bowed	to	her.	‘I	shall	leave—matters	remain	pressing	for	me—but	the	danger	to	you	and	your	unborn
son	has	passed.’
She	glanced	back	at	the	puddles.	‘Do	I	just	.	.	.	mop	that	up?’
‘Leave	it	for	the	morning—it	may	be	that	you	will	find	little	more	than	a	stain	by	then.’
‘I	can	point	to	it	when	I	have	guests	and	say:	“This	is	where	two	gods	melted.”	’
Yes,	 she	 had	 need	 to	 defend	 herself	 against	 the	 events	 of	 this	 night.	 No	 room	 in	 her	 thoughts,	 for	 the
moment,	for	anything	but	the	child	within	her.	Despite	her	words,	she	was	not	indifferent	to	the	sundering	of
Pinosel	 and	 Ursto.	 Everything	 right	 now	 was	 about	 control—and	 this,	 Bugg	 understood,	 came	 from	 that
ineffable	strength	within	a	woman	who	was	or	would	be	a	mother.	‘They	are	stubborn,	those	two.	I	would	not
discount	them	quite	yet.’
‘I	 hope	 you	 are	 right.	 Thank	 you,	 Ceda—even	 if	 the	 threat	 did	 not	 come	 to	 pass,	 I	 do	 appreciate	 your
willingness	to	protect	us.	Please	do	not	be	offended	if	I	add	that	I	hope	I	never	experience	another	night	like
this.’
‘I	take	no	offence.	Goodnight,	Acquitor.’
	
Beyond	 the	 moment’s	 heat,	 in	 the	 cool	 trickle	 that	 was	 the	 aftermath	 of	 a	 confrontation,	 bleak	 realizations
shook	free	in	the	mind	of	the	Errant.	While	he	did	not	know	if	indeed	the	Master	of	the	Deck	had	awakened—
as	the	Malazan	had	claimed—the	risk	of	such	a	premature	clash	had	been	too	great.	As	for	Brys	Beddict	and
his	bold	arrogance,	ah,	that	was	a	different	matter.
The	 Errant	 stood	 in	 an	 alley,	 not	 far	 from	 the	 Malazan	 headquarters,	 and	 he	 trembled	 with	 rage	 and
something	 else,	 something	 that	 tasted	 delicious.	 The	 promise	 of	 vengeance.	 No,	 Brys	 Beddict	 would	 not
survive	his	return	journey	to	the	palace.	It	did	not	matter	the	fool’s	skills	with	a	sword.	Against	the	raw	assault
of	the	Errant’s	sorcery,	no	flickering	blade	could	defend.
True,	this	would	be	no	gentle,	unseen	nudge.	But	old	habits,	by	their	very	predictability,	could	be	exploited.
Defended	 against.	 Besides,	 at	 times,	 the	 subtle	 did	 not	 satisfy.	 He	 recalled,	 with	 a	 rush	 of	 pleasure,	 holding
Feather	 Witch’s	 head	 under	 the	 water,	 until	 her	 feeble	 struggles	 ceased.	 Yes,	 there	 was	 glory	 in	 being	 so
forceful,	so	direct	in	the	implementation	of	one’s	own	will.
It	could	become	addictive,	and	indeed,	he	welcomed	the	invitation.
So	 much	 gnawed	 at	 him	 at	 the	 moment,	 however,	 that	 he	 was	 anxious	 and	 wary	 about	 doing	 much	 of
anything.	The	caster	had	been	.	.	.	frightening.	The	ones	who	were	made	miserable	by	the	use	of	their	own
power	ever	disturbed	the	Errant,	for	he	could	not	fathom	such	creatures,	did	not	understand	their	reluctance,
the	 self-imposed	 rules	 governing	 their	 behaviour.	 Motives	 were	 essential—one	 could	 not	 understand	 one’s
enemy	without	a	sense	of	what	they	wanted,	what	they	hungered	for.	But	that	caster,	all	he	had	hungered	for
was	to	be	left	alone.
Perhaps	 that	 in	 itself	 could	 be	 exploited.	 Except	 that,	 clearly,	 when	 the	 caster	 was	 pushed,	 he	 did	 not
hesitate	 to	 push	 back.	 Unblinking,	 smiling,	 appallingly	 confident.	 Leave	 him	 for	 now.	 Think	 of	 the	 others—
any	threats	to	me?


The	Acquitor’s	child	had	guardians	assembled	to	defend	it.	Those	squalid	drunks.	Mael.	Other	presences,	as
well.	 Something	 ancient,	 black-furred	 with	 glowing	 eyes—he’d	 heard	 its	 warning	 growl,	 like	 a	 rumble	 of
thunder—and	that	had	been	enough	to	discourage	the	Errant’s	approach.
Well,	the	child	could	wait.
Oh,	this	was	a	vicious	war	indeed.	But	he	had	potential	allies.	Banaschar.	A	weak	man,	one	he	could	use
again.	And	Fener,	the	cowering	god	of	war—yes,	he	could	feed	on	the	fool’s	power.	He	could	take	what	he
wanted,	 all	 in	 exchange	 for	 the	 sanctuary	 he	 offered.	 Finally,	 there	 were	 other	 forces,	 far	 to	 the	 east,	 who
might	well	value	his	alliance.
Much	still	to	do.	But	for	now,	this	night,	he	would	have	his	vengeance	against	that	miserable	heap	of	armour,
Brys	Beddict.
And	 so	 he	 waited	 for	 the	 fool	 to	 depart	 the	 headquarters.	 No	 nudge	 this	 time.	 No,	 only	 his	 hands	 on	 the
bastard’s	throat	would	appease	the	depth	of	the	Errant’s	malice.	True	enough,	the	man	who	had	died	was	not
the	same	man	who	returned.	More	to	Brys	Beddict	than	just	an	interminable	skein	of	names	written	into	the
stone	of	his	soul.	There	was	something	else.	As	if	the	man	cast	more	than	one	shadow.	If	Brys	was	destined
for	 something	 else,	 for	 something	 more	 than	 he	 was	 now,	 then	 it	 behoved	 the	 Errant	 to	 quell	 the	 threat
immediately.
Remove	him	from	the	game,	and	this	time	make	certain	he	stayed	dead.
	
Nothing	 could	 be	 worse	 than	 to	 walk	 into	 a	 room	 in	 a	 middling	 inn,	 stride	 up	 to	 the	 bed,	 and	 fling	 back	 the
woollen	blanket,	only	to	find	a	dragon.	Or	two.	All	unwillingly	unveiled.	And	in	a	single	miserable	instant,	the
illusions	of	essential,	mutual	protection,	are	cast	off.	Violent	transformation	and	lo,	it	turns	out,	one	small	room
in	an	inn	cannot	hold	two	dragons.
It	is	the	conviction	of	serving	staff	the	world	over	that	they	have	seen	everything.	The	hapless	maid	working
at	the	inn	in	question	could	now	make	claim	to	such	an	achievement.	Alas,	it	was	a	shortlived	triumph.
Telorast	and	Curdle,	sembled	once	more	into	their	quaint,	tiny	skeletal	forms—which	had	become	so	much	a
part	 of	 them,	 so	 preciously	 adorable,	 that	 neither	 could	 bear	 to	 part	 with	 the	 lovely	 lizards—were	 now	 on	 a
hilltop	a	few	leagues	north	of	the	city.	Once	past	the	indignity	of	the	unexpected	event	and	their	panicked	flight
from	Letheras,	they	had	spent	the	last	bell	or	so	howling	in	laughter.
The	expression	on	the	maid’s	face	was	truly	unforgettable,	and	when	Curdle’s	draconic	head	had	smashed
through	the	wall	to	fill	the	corridor,	why,	every	resident	guest	had	then	popped	out	from	their	rooms	for	a	look
at	the	source	of	the	terrible	ruckus,	my,	such	consternation—Curdle	squealed	in	gut-busting	hilarity,	or	would
have,	had	she	a	gut.
Telorast’s	 tiny	 fangs	 still	 glistened	 with	 blood,	 although	 when	 she’d	 last	 used	 them	 they	 had	 been	 much,
much	larger.	An	instinctive	snap—no	one	could	blame	her,	not	really—had	collected	up	a	fat	merchant	in	the
street	below,	a	moment	before	she	herself	landed	to	fill	it	amidst	crashing	bricks	and	quarried	limestone,	and
was	it	not	essential	among	carnivores	to	indulge	in	blubber	on	occasion?	It	must	be	so,	for	some	scholar	had
said	it,	once,	somewhere.	In	any	case,	he	had	been	delicious!
Could	 one	 blame	 the	 shark	 that	 takes	 a	 swimmer’s	 leg?	 The	 coiling	 serpent	 that	 devours	 a	 toddler?	 The
wolves	that	run	down	an	old	woman?	Of	course	not.	One	might	decry	the	deed	and	weep	for	the	slain	victims,
but	 to	 then	 track	 and	 hunt	 the	 killer	 down—as	 if	 it	 was	 some	 kind	 of	 evil	 murderer—was	 simply	 ridiculous.
Indeed,	it	was	hubris	of	the	worst	sort.	‘It’s	the	way	of	the	world	that	there	are	hunters	and	the	hunted,	Curdle.
And	to	live	in	the	world	is	to	accept	that	as	a	truth.	Beasts	eat	other	beasts,	and	the	same	is	true	for	all	these
precious	 humans—do	 they	 not	 thrive	 and	 preen	 as	 hunters?	 Of	 course	 they	 do.	 But	 sometimes	 the	 hunter
becomes	the	hunted,	yes?	Consider	if	you	will	and	you	will:	some	bow-legged	yokel	traps	a	hare	for	supper—
should	the	rest	of	the	hares	all	gather	and	incite	themselves	into	deadly	vengeance	against	that	yokel?	Would
this	be	proper	and	just?’
‘I	dare	say	the	hares	would	think	so!’	cried	Curdle,	spiny	tail	lashing	the	short	grasses.
‘No	doubt,	no	doubt,	but	think	of	the	outrage	among	the	yokel’s	family	and	friends!	Why,	there’d	be	a	war,	a
feud!	 Soldiers	 would	 be	 called	 in,	 slit-eyed	 scouts	 and	 master	 hunters	 wearing	 green	 floppy	 hats,	 the	 king
would	raise	taxes	and	a	thousand	whores	would	follow	in	the	baggage	train!	Poets	would	sing	rousing	ballads
to	fan	the	flames	of	righteousness!	Entire	epics	would	be	penned	to	recount	the	venal	escapades!’
‘They’re	just	puffed	up	on	themselves,	Telorast.	That’s	all.	They’re	all	emperors	and	empresses	in	their	own


puny	minds,	don’t	you	see?	With	all	in	the	domain	theirs	to	do	with	as	they	will.	How	dare	some	dumb	beast
bite	back!’
‘We’ll	get	them	in	the	end,	Curdle.’
‘Us	and	the	hares!’
‘Exactly!	Rule	the	domain,	will	you?	No,	my	friends,	the	domain	rules	you!’
Telorast	 fell	 silent	 then,	 as	 grim	 thoughts	 whispered	 through	 her.	 ‘Curdle,’	 she	 ventured,	 lifting	 her	 small
reptilian	skull.	‘We’ll	need	to	act	soon.’
‘I	know.	It’s	awful!’
‘Someone	in	the	city’s	causing	trouble.	We	don’t	like	trouble,	do	we?	At	least,	I	don’t	think	we	do.’
‘Unless	it’s	ours,	Telorast.	If	we’re	the	ones	causing	trouble,	that’s	just	fine.	Perfect,	in	fact.’
‘Until	 it	 all	 goes	 wrong,	 like	 last	 time.	 And	 wasn’t	 that	 your	 fault?	 That’s	 how	 I	 remember	 it,	 Curdle.	 All
your	fault.	This	time	round,	watch	yourself.	Do	as	I	say,	everything	I	say.’
‘Should	we	tear	him	apart	then?’
‘Who?’
‘The	 one	 who	 likes	 keeping	 the	 throne	 empty.	 In	 out	 in	 out	 in	 out,	 just	 shuffle	 them	 through.	 Nobody	 get
comfortable!	Chaos	and	confusion,	civil	wars	and	betrayals	and	blood	everywhere!	What	a	creep!’
‘You	think	we	should	tear	him	apart,	Curdle?’
‘I	 thought	 I	 was	 supposed	 to	 be	 following	 your	 lead.	 So	 lead,	 Telorast!	 Do	 we	 rend	 him	 into	 little	 messy
pieces	or	don’t	we?’
‘That	 depends.’	 Telorast	 leapt	 to	 her	 taloned	 feet	 and	 began	 pacing,	 tiny	 forearms	 twitching.	 ‘Is	 he	 the
enemy?’
‘Is	he—what?	Sweetness,	aren’t	they	all	our	enemies?’
‘Agh!	You’re	right!	What	got	into	me?’
‘Simple,	he	just	thought	to	ignore	us.	We	don’t	like	being	ignored.	People	who	ignore	us	die.	That’s	the	rule
we’ve	always	lived	by.	Snub	us	and	we’ll	chew	you	into	mangled	flaps	of	skin	and	hair!	Chips	of	bone,	things
that	drip	and	leak!’
‘Should	we	go	and	kill	him	then?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Oh,	tell	me	what	to	do!	I	can’t	tell	you	to	follow	my	lead	unless	I	get	guidance	from	you	first!’
‘It’s	a	partnership	all	right,’	agreed	Curdle.	‘Let	me	think.’
Telorast	paused,	head	lifting	yet	higher.	‘Gah!	What’s	those	green	blobs	in	the	sky?’
	
‘Don’t	come	near	me.’
Withal	eyed	his	wife,	decided	he’d	seen	this	before,	and	so	kept	his	distance.	‘Why	did	she	want	you	there
at	all?	That’s	what	I	can’t	figure.’
Sandalath	 sat	 down,	 the	 effort	 a	 protracted	 procedure	 measured	 in	 winces,	 grunts	 and	 cautious	 sighs.	 ‘I
didn’t	anticipate	a	physical	assault,	that’s	for	sure.’
Withal	almost	stepped	forward	then,	but	managed	to	restrain	his	instinctive	gesture.	‘She	beat	you	up?	Gods
below,	I	knew	the	Adjunct	was	a	hard	woman,	but	that’s	going	too	far!’
‘Oh,	be	quiet.	Of	course	she	didn’t	beat	me	up.	Let’s	just	say	the	cards	were	assigned	with	some,	uh,	force.
As	if	that	would	convince	us	of	anything.	The	whole	sorcery	surrounding	the	Deck	of	Dragons	is	an	affront	to
sensible	creatures—like	me.’
Sensible?	Well,	I	suppose.	‘The	caster	found	you	a	card,	then.	Which	one?’
He	watched	as	she	weighed	the	value	of	answering	him.	‘It	threw	me	into	a	wall.’
‘What	did?’
‘The	card,	you	idiot!	Queen	of	Dark!	As	if	I	could	be	anything	like	that—stupid	deck,	what	does	it	know	of
High	 House	 Dark?	 The	 past	 is	 dead,	 the	 thrones	 abandoned.	 There	 is	 no	 King	 and	 certainly	 no	 Queen!	 It’s
senseless—how	can	Quick	Ben	be	Magus	of	Dark?	He’s	not	even	Tiste	Andii.	Bah,	all	nonsense,	all	of	it—
gods,	I	think	my	ribs	are	cracked.	Make	some	tea,	love,	be	useful.’
‘Glad	I	waited	up	for	you,’	Withal	muttered,	setting	off	to	brew	a	pot.	‘Any	preferences?’
‘No,	 but	 add	 a	 drop	 of	 d’bayang	 oil,	 will	 you?	 Next	 time,	 I’ll	 wear	 armour.	 Is	 it	 cold	 in	 here?	 Feed	 the
hearth,	I	don’t	want	to	get	a	chill.	Throw	me	those	furs.	Is	that	water	pipe	just	ornamental?	Do	we	have	any


durhang?	Gods,	it	hurts	to	talk.’
News	to	me,	darling.
	
The	dead	iguana’s	last	animate	act	had	been	to	clamp	its	jaws	on	Limp’s	right	ear.	The	soldier	was	weeping
softly	 as	 Deadsmell	 knelt	 beside	 him	 and	 tried	 to	 prise	 loose	 the	 lizard’s	 savage	 grip.	 Blood	 flowed	 and	 it
looked	as	if	Limp	was	going	to	be	left	with	half	an	ear	on	that	side.
Ebron	was	sitting	on	the	bed,	head	in	his	hands.	‘It’ll	be	all	right,	Limp.	We’ll	get	the	knee	fixed	up.	Maybe
sew	that	bit	of	ear	back	on—’
‘No	we	won’t,’	said	Deadsmell.	‘That’ll	go	septic	for	sure	and	then	spread	out.	Iguana	saliva,	especially	a
dead	iguana’s	saliva,	is	bound	to	be	nasty	stuff.	As	it	is,	I’ll	need	to	work	a	ritual	to	purge	whatever	toxins	have
already	slipped	into	him.’	He	paused.	‘Masan,	you	can	crawl	out	from	under	the	bed	now.’
‘So	you	say,’	the	woman	replied,	then	coughed.	‘Hood-damned	hairballs—I’ll	never	be	clean	again.’
Limp	squealed	when	Deadsmell	worked	a	knife-blade	between	the	iguana’s	jaws	and,	failing	to	open	them,
simply	 started	 cutting	 at	 the	 tendons	 and	 muscle	 tissue	 at	 the	 hinges.	 A	 moment	 later	 and	 the	 creature	 fell
away,	startling	everyone	when	it	whistled	an	exhalation	through	its	slitted	nostrils.
‘I	 thought	 you	 said	 it	 was	 dead!’	 Cord	 accused,	 walking	 over	 to	 slam	 his	 boot	 heel	 down	 on	 the	 iguana’s
head.	Things	splatted	out	to	the	sides.
‘Now	it	is,’	Deadsmell	affirmed.	‘Lie	still,	Limp.	Let’s	get	the	healing	started—’
‘You	 should	 never	 let	 necromancers	 heal	 people,’	 Crump	 complained,	 glowering	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 the
room.	The	various	components	of	his	wood	carving,	shapeless	riders	on	shapeless	horses,	had	all	vanished	out
into	the	corridor	after	breaching	the	door,	which	seemed	to	have	been	achieved	by	a	combination	of	chewing
and	hacking	and	who	knew	what	else.
Deadsmell	scowled	over	at	the	sapper.	‘You	wouldn’t	be	saying	that	if	you	were	dying	of	some	wound	and	I
was	your	only	hope.’
‘Yes	I	would.’
The	necromancer	offered	him	a	nasty	smile.	‘We’ll	see	some	day,	won’t	we?’
‘No	we	won’t.	I’ll	kill	you	first	before	I	get	wounded.’
‘And	then	we’d	both	be	dead.’
‘That’s	right,	so	there!	Just	what	I	was	saying—nothing	good	comes	of	no	necromancers	no	how!’
The	flicker	bird	was	a	mashed	heap	of	feathers	on	the	floor.	The	bat-turtle	had	fled	through	the	hole	in	the
door,	possibly	in	pursuit	of	the	wooden	troop.	The	black-furred	rat	still	clung	on	all	fours	to	the	ceiling.
Shard	moved	to	stand	opposite	Ebron.	‘Was	Deadsmell	right,	mage?	Did	the	Lord	of	Death	show	up	here?’
‘No.	Not	as	such.	Why	don’t	you	ask	him	yourself—’
‘Because	he’s	busy	healing.	I	want	to	hear	from	you,	Ebron.’
‘More	like	all	the	warrens	woke	up	all	at	once.	Corporal,	I	don’t	know	what	the	Adjunct’s	playing	at,	but	it
won’t	be	fun.	We’re	gonna	march	soon—I	think	tonight’s	decided	it.	The	roles	are	set,	only	I	doubt	anybody—
even	Tavore—knows	all	the	players.	Noses	are	gonna	get	bloodied.’
Deadsmell	had	of	course	been	listening.	Working	on	the	wreck	that	was	Limp’s	knee	had	become	rote	for
the	 healer—as	 it	 was	 for	 virtually	 every	 healer	 in	 the	 company,	 not	 one	 of	 whom	 had	 escaped	 delivering
ministrations	to	the	hapless	fool.	‘Ebron’s	right.	I	don’t	envy	your	squad,	if	you	end	up	as	Sinn’s	escort	again—
she’s	right	in	the	middle	of	it.’
‘I	don’t	like	her	neither,’	said	Crump.
Ebron	sneered	at	Deadsmell.	‘How	close	we	happen	to	be	with	anybody	won’t	make	any	difference.	We’re
all	in	trouble.’
An	 odd,	 frothy,	 bubbling	 sound	 drew	 everyone’s	 attention,	 and	 all	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 crushed	 head	 of	 the
iguana,	as	it	exhaled	yet	again.
A	snort	came	from	under	the	bed.	‘I	ain’t	leaving	here	until	the	sun	comes	up.’
	
The	 others	 had	 left,	 their	 departure	 more	 a	 headlong	 flight	 than	 a	 solemn	 dismissal,	 until	 only	 the	 Adjunct,
Lostara	Yil	and	Brys	Beddict	remained.	Plaster	dust	hazed	the	light	from	the	lanterns,	and	the	floor	ground	and
crunched	underfoot.


Brys	 watched	 as	 the	 Adjunct	 slowly	 sat	 down	 in	 the	 chair	 at	 the	 head	 of	 the	 table,	 and	 it	 was	 hard	 to
determine	which	woman	was	more	shaken	or	distraught.	Whatever	sorrow	was	buried	within	Lostara	Yil	now
seemed	 much	 closer	 to	 the	 surface,	 and	 she	 had	 said	 not	 a	 word	 since	 Fiddler’s	 exit,	 standing	 with	 arms
crossed—a	gesture	that	likely	had	as	much	to	do	with	aching	ribs	as	anything	else.
‘Thank	you,’	said	the	Adjunct,	‘for	being	here,	sir.’
Startled,	 Brys	 frowned.	 ‘I	 may	 well	 have	 been	 the	 reason	 for	 the	 Errant’s	 attention,	 Adjunct.	 You	 would
perhaps	be	more	justified	in	cursing	me	instead.’
‘I	do	not	believe	that,’	she	replied.	‘We	are	in	the	habit	of	acquiring	enemies.’
‘This	 is	 the	 Errant’s	 back	 yard,’	 Brys	 pointed	 out.	 ‘Naturally,	 he	 resents	 intruders.	 But	 even	 more,	 he
despises	the	other	residents	who	happen	to	share	it	with	him.	People	like	me,	Adjunct.’
She	glanced	up	at	him.	‘You	were	dead,	once.	Or	so	I	understand.	Resurrected.’
He	nodded.	‘It	is	extraordinary	how	little	choice	one	has	in	such	matters.	If	I	mull	on	that	overlong	I	become
despondent.	I	do	not	appreciate	the	notion	of	being	so	easily	manipulated.	I	would	prefer	to	think	of	my	soul	as
my	own.’
She	 looked	 away,	 and	 then	 settled	 her	 hands	 flat	 on	 the	 table	 before	 her—a	 strange	 gesture—whereupon
she	seemed	to	study	them.	‘Fiddler	spoke	of	the	Errant’s	.	.	.	rival.	The	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.’	She
hesitated,	and	then	added,	‘That	man	is	my	brother,	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘Ah.	I	see.’
She	shook	her	head	but	would	not	look	up,	intent	on	her	hands.	‘I	doubt	that.	We	may	share	blood,	but	in	so
far	 as	 I	 know,	 we	 are	 not	 allies.	 Not	 .	 .	 .	 close.	 There	 are	 old	 issues	 between	 us.	 Matters	 that	 cannot	 be
salved,	not	by	deed,	not	by	word.’
‘Sometimes,’	Brys	ventured,	‘when	nothing	can	be	shared	except	regret,	then	regret	must	serve	as	the	place
to	begin.	Reconciliation	does	not	demand	that	one	side	surrender	to	the	other.	The	simple,	mutual	recognition
that	mistakes	were	made	is	in	itself	a	closing	of	the	divide.’
She	managed	a	half-smile.	‘Brys	Beddict,	your	words,	however	wise,	presume	communication	between	the
parties	involved.	Alas,	this	has	not	been	the	case.’
‘Perhaps,	then,	you	might	have	welcomed	the	Master’s	attention	this	night.	Yet,	if	I	did	indeed	understand
Fiddler,	no	such	contact	was	in	truth	forthcoming.	Your	soldier	bluffed.	Tell	me,	if	you	would,	is	your	brother
aware	of	your	.	.	.	predicament?’
She	shot	him	a	look,	sharp,	searching.	‘I	do	not	recall	sharing	any	details	of	my	predicament.’
Brys	was	silent.	Wondering	what	secret	web	he	had	just	set	trembling.
She	rose,	frowned	over	at	Lostara	for	a	moment,	as	if	surprised	to	find	her	still	there,	and	then	said,	‘Inform
the	King	that	we	intend	to	depart	soon.	We	will	be	rendezvousing	with	allies	at	the	border	to	the	Wastelands,
whereupon	 we	 shall	 march	 east.’	 She	 paused.	 ‘Naturally,	 we	 must	 ensure	 that	 we	 are	 well	 supplied	 with	 all
necessities—of	course,	we	shall	pay	in	silver	and	gold	for	said	materiel.’
‘We	would	seek	to	dissuade	you,	Adjunct,’	said	Brys.	‘The	Wastelands	are	aptly	named,	and	as	for	the	lands
east	of	them,	what	little	we	hear	has	not	been	promising.’
‘We’re	not	looking	for	promises,’	the	Adjunct	replied.
Brys	Beddict	bowed.	‘I	shall	take	my	leave	now,	Adjunct.’
‘Do	you	wish	an	escort?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘That	will	not	be	necessary.	Thank	you	for	the	offer.’
	
The	 roof	 would	 have	 to	 do.	 He’d	 wanted	 a	 tower,	 something	 ridiculously	 high.	 Or	 a	 pinnacle	 and	 some
tottering,	ragged	keep	moments	from	plunging	off	the	cliff	into	the	thrashing	seas	below.	Or	perhaps	a	cliff-side
fastness	on	some	raw	mountain,	slick	with	ice	and	drifts	of	snow.	An	abbey	atop	a	mesa,	with	the	only	access
through	a	rope	and	pulley	system	with	a	wicker	basket	to	ride	in.	But	this	roof	would	have	to	do.
Quick	Ben	glared	at	the	greenish	smear	in	the	south	sky,	that	troop	of	celestial	riders	not	one	of	whom	had
any	good	news	to	deliver,	no	doubt.	Magus	of	Dark.	The	bastard!	You	got	a	nasty	nose,	Fid,	haven’t	you
just.	And	don’t	even	try	it	with	that	innocent	look.	One	more	disarming	shrug	from	you	and	I’ll	ram	ten
warrens	down	your	throat.
Magus	of	Dark.
There	was	a	throne	once	.	.	.	no,	never	mind.


Just	stay	away	from	Sandalath,	that’s	all.	Stay	away,	ducked	out	of	sight.	It	was	just	a	reading,	after
all.	Fiddler’s	usual	mumbo	jumbo.	Means	nothing.	Meant	nothing.	Don’t	bother	me,	I’m	busy.
Magus	of	Dark.
Fiddler	 was	 now	 drunk,	 along	 with	 Stormy	 and	 Gesler,	 badly	 singing	 old	 Napan	 pirate	 songs,	 not	 one	 of
which	was	remotely	clever.	Bottle,	sporting	three	fractured	ribs,	had	shuffled	off	to	find	a	healer	he	could	bribe
awake.	Sinn	and	Grub	had	run	away,	like	a	couple	of	rats	whose	tails	had	just	been	chopped	off	by	the	world’s
biggest	cleaver.	And	Hedge	.	.	.	Hedge	was	creeping	up	behind	him	right	now,	worse	than	an	addled	assassin.
‘Go	away.’
‘Not	a	chance,	Quick.	We	got	to	talk.’
‘No	we	don’t.’
‘He	said	I	was	the	Mason	of	Death.’
‘So	build	a	crypt	and	climb	inside,	Hedge.	I’ll	be	happy	to	seal	it	for	you	with	every	ward	I	can	think	of.’
‘The	thing	is,	Fid’s	probably	right.’
Eyes	narrowing,	Quick	Ben	faced	the	sapper.	‘Hood’s	been	busy	of	late.’
‘You’d	know	more	of	that	than	me,	and	don’t	deny	it.’
‘It’s	got	nothing	to	do	with	us.’
‘You	sure?’
Quick	Ben	nodded.
‘Then	why	am	I	the	Mason	of	Death?’
The	shout	echoed	from	the	nearby	rooftops	and	Quick	Ben	flinched.	‘Because	you’re	needed,’	he	said	after
a	moment.
‘To	do	what?’
‘You’re	needed,’	Quick	Ben	snarled,	‘to	build	us	a	road.’
Hedge	stared.	‘Gods	below,	where	are	we	going?’
‘The	real	question	is	whether	we’ll	ever	get	there.	Listen,	Hedge,	she’s	nothing	like	you	think.	She’s	nothing
like	 any	 of	 us	 thinks.	 I	 can’t	 explain—I	 can’t	 get	 any	 closer	 than	 that.	 Don’t	 try	 anticipating.	 Or	 secondguessing—she’ll	confound	you	at	every	turn.	Just	look	at	this	reading—’
‘That	was	Fid’s	doing—’
‘You	think	so?	You’re	dead	wrong.	He	knows	because	she	told	him.	Him	and	no	one	else.	Now,	you	can	try
to	twist	Fiddler	for	details	all	you	like—it	won’t	work.	The	truth	as	much	as	cut	out	his	tongue.’
‘So	 what’s	 made	 you	 the	 Magus	 of	 Dark?	 What	 miserable	 piss-sour	 secret	 you	 holding	 back	 on	 now,
Quick?’
The	wizard	turned	away	once	more,	stared	out	over	the	city,	and	then	stiffened.	‘Shit,	what	now?’
	
The	 sorcery	 erupted	 from	 an	 alley	 mouth,	 striking	 Brys	 Beddict	 from	 his	 left	 side.	 The	 impact	 sent	 him
sprawling,	grey	tendrils	writhing	like	serpents	about	his	body.	In	the	span	of	a	single	heartbeat,	the	magic	had
bound	him	tight,	arms	trapped.	The	coils	began	constricting.
Lying	on	his	back,	staring	up	at	the	night	sky—that	had	at	last	begun	to	pale—Brys	heard	footsteps	and	a
moment	later	the	Errant	stepped	into	the	range	of	his	vision.	The	god’s	single	eye	gleamed	like	a	star	burning
through	mist.
‘I	warned	you,	Brys	Beddict.	This	time,	there	will	be	no	mistakes.	Yes,	it	was	me	who	nudged	you	to	take
that	 mouthful	 of	 poisoned	 wine—oh,	 the	 Chancellor	 had	 not	 anticipated	 such	 a	 thing,	 but	 he	 can	 be	 forgiven
that.	After	all,	how	could	I	have	imagined	that	you’d	found	a	guardian	among	Mael’s	minions?’	He	paused,	and
then	said,	‘No	matter.	I	am	done	with	subtlety—this	is	much	better.	I	can	look	into	your	eyes	and	watch	you
die,	and	what	could	be	more	satisfying	than	that?’
The	sorcery	tautened,	forcing	Brys’s	breath	from	his	lungs.	Darkness	closed	in	round	his	vision	until	all	he
could	 see	 was	 the	 Errant’s	 face,	 a	 visage	 that	 had	 lost	 all	 grace	 as	 avid	 hunger	 twisted	 the	 features.	 He
watched	 as	 the	 god	 lifted	 one	 hand	 and	 slowly	 clenched	 the	 fingers—and	 the	 pressure	 around	 Brys’s	 chest
built	until	his	ribs	creaked.
The	new	fist	that	arrived	hammered	like	a	maul	against	the	side	of	the	Errant’s	head,	snapping	it	far	over.
The	gleaming	eye	seemed	to	wink	out	and	the	god	crumpled,	vanishing	from	Brys’s	dwindling	vision.
All	at	once	the	coils	weakened,	and	then	frayed	into	dissolving	threads.


Brys	drew	a	ragged,	delicious	breath	of	chill	night	air.
He	heard	horse	hoofs,	a	half	dozen	beasts,	maybe	more,	approaching	at	a	canter	from	up	the	street.	Blinking
sweat	from	his	eyes,	Brys	rolled	on	to	his	stomach	and	then	forced	himself	to	his	knees.
A	hand	closed	on	his	harness	and	lifted	him	to	his	feet.
He	found	himself	staring	up	at	a	Tarthenal—a	familiar	face,	the	heavy,	robust	features	knotted	absurdly	into
a	fierce	frown.
‘I	got	a	question	for	you.	It	was	for	your	brother	and	I	was	on	my	way	but	then	I	saw	you.’
The	 riders	 arrived,	 horses	 skidding	 on	 the	 dew-slick	 cobbles—a	 Malazan	 troop,	 Brys	 saw,	 weapons
unsheathed.	One	of	them,	a	dark-skinned	woman,	pointed	with	a	sword.	‘He	crawled	into	that	alley—come	on,
let’s	chop	the	bastard	into	stewing	meat!’	She	made	to	dismount	and	then	seemed	to	sag	and	an	instant	later
she	collapsed	on	to	the	street,	weapon	clattering.
Other	soldiers	dropped	down	from	their	mounts.	Three	of	them	converged	on	the	unconscious	woman,	while
the	others	fanned	out	and	advanced	into	the	alley.
Brys	 was	 still	 having	 difficulty	 staying	 upright.	 He	 found	 himself	 leaning	 with	 one	 forearm	 against	 the
Tarthenal.	‘Ublala	Pung,’	he	sighed,	‘thank	you.’
‘I	got	a	question.’
Brys	nodded.	‘All	right,	let’s	hear	it.’
‘But	that’s	the	problem.	I	forgot	what	it	was.’
One	of	the	Malazans	crowded	round	the	woman	now	straightened	and	faced	them.	‘Sinter	said	there	was
trouble,’	he	said	in	heavily	accented	trader	tongue.	‘Said	we	needed	to	hurry—to	here,	to	save	someone.’
‘I	believe,’	Brys	said,	‘the	danger	has	passed.	Is	she	all	right,	sir?’
‘I’m	 a	 sergeant—people	 don’t	 “sir”	 me	 .	 .	 .	 sir.	 She’s	 just	 done	 in.	 Both	 her	 and	 her	 sister.’	 He	 scowled.
‘But	 we’ll	 escort	 you	 just	 the	 same,	 sir—she’d	 never	 forgive	 us	 if	 something	 happened	 to	 you	 now.	 So,
wherever	you’re	going	.	.	.’
The	 other	 soldiers	 emerged	 from	 the	 alley,	 and	 one	 said	 something	 in	 Malazan,	 although	 Brys	 needed	 no
translation	to	understand	that	they’d	found	no	one—the	Errant’s	survival	instincts	were	ever	strong,	even	when
he’d	been	knocked	silly	by	a	Tarthenal’s	fist.
‘It	seems,’	Brys	said,	‘I	shall	have	an	escort	after	all.’
‘It	is	not	an	offer	you	can	refuse,	sir,’	said	the	sergeant.
Nor	will	I.	Lesson	learned,	Adjunct.
The	soldiers	were	attempting	to	heave	the	woman	named	Sinter	back	into	her	saddle.	Ublala	Pung	stepped
up	to	them.	‘I	will	carry	her,’	he	said.	‘She’s	pretty.’
‘Do	as	the	Toblakai	says,’	said	the	sergeant.
‘She’s	 pretty,’	 Ublala	 Pung	 said	 again,	 as	 he	 took	 her	 limp	 form	 in	his	 arms.	 ‘Pretty	 smelly,	 too,	 but	 that’s
okay.’
‘Perimeter	escort,’	snapped	the	sergeant,	‘crossbows	cocked.	Anybody	steps	out,	nail	’em.’
Brys	prayed	there	would	be	no	early	risers	between	here	and	the	palace.	‘Best	we	hurry,’	he	ventured.
	
On	a	rooftop	not	far	away,	Quick	Ben	sighed	and	then	relaxed.
‘What	was	all	that	about?’	Hedge	asked	beside	him.
‘Damned	Toblakai	.	.	.	but	that’s	not	the	interesting	bit,	though,	is	it?	No,	it’s	that	Dal	Honese	woman.	Well,
that	can	all	wait.’
‘You’re	babbling,	wizard.’
Magus	of	Dark.	Gods	below.
	
Alone	in	the	cellar	beneath	the	dormitories,	Fiddler	stared	down	at	the	card	in	his	hand.	The	lacquered	wood
glistened,	dripped	as	if	slick	with	sweat.	The	smell	rising	from	it	was	of	humus,	rich	and	dark,	a	scent	of	the
raw	earth.
‘Tartheno	Toblakai,’	he	whispered.
Herald	of	Life.
Well,	just	so.


He	set	it	down	and	then	squinted	at	the	second	card	he	had	withdrawn	to	close	this	dread	night.	Unaligned.
Chain.	Aye,	we	all	know	about	those,	my	dear.	Fret	naught,	it’s	the	price	of	living.
Now,	if	only	you	weren’t	so	.	.	.	strong.	If	only	you	were	weaker.	If	only	your	chains	didn’t	reach	right
into	the	heart	of	the	Bonehunters—if	only	I	knew	who	was	dragging	who,	why,	I	might	have	reason	to
hope.
But	he	didn’t,	and	so	there	wasn’t.


Chapter	Four
Behold	these	joyful	devourers
The	land	laid	out	skewered	in	silver
Candlesticks	of	softest	pewter
Rolling	the	logs	down	cut	on	end
To	make	roads	through	the	forest
That	once	was—before	the	logs
(Were	rolled	down	cut	on	end)—
We	called	it	stump	road	and	we
Called	it	forest	road	when
Our	imaginations	starved
You	can	make	fans	with	ribs
Of	sheep	and	pouches	for	baubles
By	pounding	flat	the	ears
Of	old	women	and	old	men—
Older	is	best	for	the	ear	grows
For	ever	it’s	said,	even	when
There’s	not	a	scrap	anywhere	to	eat
So	we	carried	our	wealth
In	pendulum	pouches	wrinkled
And	hairy,	diamonds	and	gems
Enough	to	buy	a	forest	or	a	road
But	maybe	not	both
Enough	even	for	slippers	of
Supplest	skin	feathered	in	down
Like	a	baby’s	cheek
There	is	a	secret	we	know
When	nothing	else	is	left
And	the	sky	stops	its	tears
A	belly	can	bulge	full
On	diamonds	and	gems
And	a	forest	can	make	a	road
Through	what	once	was
You	just	won’t	find	any	shade
	
PENDULUMS	WERE	ONCE	TOYS
BADALLE	OF	KORBANSE	SNAKE

To	journey	into	the	other	worlds,	a	shaman	or	witch	of	the	Elan	would	ride	the	Spotted	Horse.	Seven	herbs,
softened	 with	 beeswax	 and	 rolled	 into	 a	 ball	 and	 then	 flattened	 into	 an	 oblong	 disc	 that	 was	 taken	 into	 the
mouth	and	held	between	lip	and	gum.	Coolness	slowly	numbing	and	saliva	rising	as	if	the	throat	was	the	mouth
of	 a	 spring,	 a	 tingling	 sensation	 lifting	 to	 gather	 behind	 the	 eyes	 in	 coalescing	 colours	 and	 then,	 in	 a	 blinding
flash,	 the	 veil	 between	 worlds	 vanished.	 Patterns	 swirled	 in	 the	 air;	 complex	 geometries	 played	 across	 the
landscape—a	landscape	that	could	be	the	limitless	wall	of	a	hide	tent,	or	the	rolling	plains	of	a	cave	wall	where
ran	the	beasts—until	the	heart-stains	emerged,	pulsing,	blotting	the	scene	in	undulating	rows,	sweet	as	waves
and	tasting	of	mother’s	milk.


So	 arrived	 the	 Spotted	 Horse,	 a	 cascade	 of	 heart-stains	 rippling	 across	 the	 beast,	 down	 its	 long	 neck,
sweeping	along	its	withers,	flowing	like	seed-heads	from	its	mane	and	tail.
Ride	 into	 the	 alien	 world.	 Ride	 among	 the	 ancestors	 and	 the	 not-yet-born,	 among	 the	 tall	 men	 with	 their
eternally	swollen	members,	the	women	with	their	forever-filled	wombs.	Through	forests	of	black	threads,	the
touch	or	brush	of	any	one	of	them	an	invitation	to	endless	torment,	for	this	was	the	path	of	return	for	all	life,
and	to	be	born	was	to	pass	through	and	find	the	soul’s	fated	thread—the	tale	of	a	future	death	that	could	not
be	escaped.	To	ride	the	other	way,	however,	demanded	a	supple	traverse,	evading	such	threads,	lest	one’s	own
birth-fate	 become	 entangled,	 knotted,	 and	 so	 doom	 the	 soul	 to	 eternal	 prison,	 snared	 within	 the	 web	 of
conflicted	fates.
Prophecies	could	be	found	among	the	black	threads,	but	the	world	beyond	that	forest	was	the	greatest	gift.
Timeless,	home	to	all	the	souls	that	ever	existed;	this	was	where	grief	was	shed,	where	sorrow	dried	up	and
blew	away	like	dust,	where	scars	vanished.	To	journey	into	this	realm	was	to	be	cleansed,	made	whole,	purged
of	all	regrets	and	dark	desires.
Riding	the	Spotted	Horse	and	then	returning	was	to	be	reborn,	guiltless,	guileless.
Kalyth	 knew	 all	 this,	 but	 only	 second-hand.	 The	 riders	 among	 her	 people	 passed	 on	 the	 truths,	 generation
upon	generation.	Any	one	of	the	seven	herbs,	if	taken	alone,	would	kill.	The	seven	mixed	in	wrong	proportions
delivered	 madness.	 And,	 finally,	 only	 those	 chosen	 as	 worthy	 by	 the	 shamans	 and	 witches	 would	 ever	 know
the	gift	of	the	journey.
For	one	such	as	Kalyth,	mired	in	the	necessary	mediocrity	so	vital	to	the	maintenance	of	family,	village	and
the	Elan	way	of	living,	to	take	upon	herself	such	a	ritual—to	even	so	much	as	taste	the	seven	herbs—was	a
sentence	to	death	and	damnation.
Of	course,	the	Elan	were	gone.	No	more	shamans	or	witches	to	be	found.	No	families,	no	villages,	no	clans,
no	herds—every	ring	of	tipi	stones,	spanning	the	rises	tucked	at	the	foot	of	yet	higher	hilltops,	now	marked	the
motionless	remnant	of	a	final	camp,	a	camp	never	to	be	returned	to,	the	stones	destined	to	sink	slowly	where
they	lay,	the	lichen	on	their	undersides	dying,	the	grasses	so	indifferently	crushed	beneath	them	turning	white
as	bone.	Such	boulder	rings	were	now	maps	of	extinction	and	death.	They	held	no	promises,	only	the	sorrow	of
endings.
She	 had	 suffered	 her	 own	 damnation,	 one	 devoid	 of	 any	 crime,	 any	 real	 culpability	 beyond	 her	 cowardly
flight:	 her	 appalling	 abandonment	 of	 her	 family.	 There	 had	 been	 no	 shamans	 left	 to	 utter	 the	 curse,	 but	 that
hardly	mattered,	did	it?
She	sat,	as	the	sun	withered	in	the	west	and	the	grasses	surrounding	her	grew	wiry	and	grey,	staring	down
at	the	disc	lying	in	the	palm	of	her	hand.
Elan	 magic.	 As	 foreign	 to	 her	 world	 now	 as	 the	 Che’Malle	 machines	 in	 Ampelas	 Rooted	 had	 been	 when
she’d	first	set	eyes	upon	them.	To	ride	the	Spotted	Horse	through	the	ashes	of	her	people	invited	.	.	.	what?
She	did	not	know,	could	not	know.	Would	she	find	the	spirits	of	her	kin—would	they	truly	look	upon	her	with
love	 and	 forgiveness?	 Was	 this	 her	 secret	 desire?	 Not	 a	 quest	 into	 the	 realms	 of	 prophecy	 seeking	 hidden
knowledge;	not	searching	for	a	Mortal	Sword	and	a	Shield	Anvil	for	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle?
Dire	confusion—her	motivations	were	suspect—hah,	rotted	through	and	through!
And	 might	 there	 not	 be	 another	 kind	 of	 salvation	 she	 was	 seeking	 here?	 The	 invitation	 into	 madness,	 into
death	itself?	Possibly.
‘Beware	the	leader	who	has	nothing	to	lose.’
Her	people	were	proud	of	their	wise	sayings.	And	yet	now,	in	their	mortal	silence,	wisdom	and	pride	proved
a	perfect	match	in	value.	Namely:	worthless.
The	Che’Malle	were	camped—if	one	could	call	it	that—behind	the	rise	at	her	back.	They	had	built	a	fire
inviting	Kalyth’s	comfort,	but	this	night	she	was	not	interested	in	comfort.
The	 Shi’gal	 Assassin	 still	 circled	 high	 in	 the	 darkening	 sky	 above	 them—their	 nightly	 sentinel	 who	 never
tired	 and	 never	 spoke	 and	 yet	 was	 known	 to	 all	 (she	 suspected)	 as	 their	 potential	 slayer,	 should	 they	 fail.
Blessings	of	the	spirits,	that	was	a	ghastly	creature,	a	demon	to	beggar	her	worst	nightmares.	Oh,	how	it	sailed
the	night	winds,	a	cold-eyed	raptor,	a	conjuration	of	singular	purpose.
Kalyth	shivered.	Then,	squeezing	shut	her	eyes	as	the	sun’s	sickle	of	fire	dipped	below	the	horizon,	she	slid
the	disc	into	her	mouth.
Stinging	like	a	snake’s	bite,	and	then	numbness,	spreading,	spreading	.	.	.


	
‘Never	trust	a	leader	who	has	nothing	to	lose.’
At	 these	 muttered	 words	 from	 the	 human	 female,	 drifting	 over	 the	 hummock	 down	 to	 where	 stood	 the
K’Chain	 Che’Malle,	 the	 K’ell	 Hunter	 Sag’Churok	 swung	 round	 his	 massive,	 scarred	 head.	 Over	 his	 eyes,
three	 distinct	 lids	 blinked	 in	 succession,	 reawakening	 the	 camp’s	 reflected	 firelight	 in	 a	 wet	 gleam.	 The
Matron’s	daughter,	Gunth	Mach,	seemed	to	flinch,	but	she	remained	closed	to	Sag’Churok’s	tentative	query.
The	 other	 two	 K’ell	 Hunters,	 indifferent	 to	 anything	 the	 human	 might	 say,	 were	 half-crouched	 and	 facing
away	 from	 the	 ring	 of	 stones	 that	 surrounded	 a	 half-dozen	 bricks	 of	 burning	 bhederin	 dung,	 away	 from	 the
flames	that	could	steal	their	night	vision.	The	enormous	cutlasses	at	the	ends	of	their	wrists	rested	point-down,
their	arms	stretched	out	to	the	sides.	By	nature,	K’ell	disliked	such	menial	tasks	as	sentry	duty.	They	existed	to
pursue	quarry,	after	all.	But	the	Matron	had	elected	to	send	them	out	without	J’an	Sentinels;	further	proof	that
in	keeping	all	her	guardians	close,	Gunth’an	Acyl	feared	for	her	own	life.
Senior	 among	 these	 K’ell,	 Sag’Churok	 was	 Gunth	 Mach’s	 protector,	 and	 should	 the	 time	 come	 when	 the
Destriant	found	a	Mortal	Sword	and	a	Shield	Anvil,	then	he	would	also	assume	the	task	of	escorting	them	on
the	return	to	Acyl	Nest.
Errors	in	judgement	plagued	Ampelas	Rooted.	A	flawed	Matron	produced	flawed	spawn.	This	was	a	known
truth.	It	was	not	a	thing	that	could	be	defeated	or	circumvented.	The	spawn	must	follow.	Even	so,	Sag’Churok
knew	an	abiding	sense	of	failure,	a	dull,	persistent	anguish.
Beware	the	leader	.	.	.
Yes.	The	one	they	had	chosen,	known	as	Redmask,	had	proved	as	flawed	as	any	K’Chain	Che’Malle	of	the
Hive,	and	the	cruel	logic	of	that	still	stung.	Perhaps	the	Matron	was	correct	in	electing	a	human	to	undertake
the	search	this	time.
Visions	bound	with	intent	whispered	through	Sag’Churok.	The	Shi’gal	Assassin,	wheeling	in	the	darkness	far
above	them,	had	thrust	a	sending	into	the	brain	of	the	K’ell	Hunter.	Cold,	rough-skinned,	careless	of	the	pain
the	 sending	 delivered—indeed,	 it	 was	 of	 such	 power	 that	 Gunth	 Mach’s	 head	 snapped	 up,	 eyes	 fixing	 on
Sag’Churok	as	ripples	overflowed	to	brush	her	senses.
Intruders	in	vast	herd,	countless	fires.
‘Perhaps,	then,	among	these	ones?’	Sag’Churok	sent	in	return.
The	one	who	leads	is	not	for	us.
A	 bestial	 scent	 followed	 that	 statement,	 one	 that	 Sag’Churok	 recognized.	 Glands	 awakened	 beneath	 the
heavy	 armoured	 scales	 along	 the	 K’ell’s	 spine,	 the	 first	 of	 the	 instinctive	 preparations	 for	 hunting,	 for	 battle,
and	 as	 those	 scales	 seemed	 to	 lift	 and	 float	 on	 the	 thickening	 layer	 of	 oil,	 the	 innermost	 lids	 closed	 over	 his
eyes,	rising	from	below	to	entirely	sheathe	his	vision.	Boulders	on	a	distant	hill	suddenly	glowed,	still	bearing
the	 heat	 of	 the	 sun.	 Small	 creatures	 moved	 in	 the	 grasses,	 revealed	 by	 their	 breaths,	 their	 rapidly	 beating
hearts.
K’ell	 Rythok	 and	 Kor	 Thuran	 both	 caught	 the	 bitter	 signature	 of	 the	 oil,	 and	 they	 straightened	 from	 their
crouches,	swinging	free	their	swords.
A	final	thought	reached	Sag’Churok.	Too	many	to	slay.	Best	avoid.
‘How	do	we	avoid,	Shi’gal	Gu’Rull?	Do	they	bestride	our	chosen	path?’
But	the	Assassin	did	not	deem	such	questions	worth	an	answer,	and	Sag’Churok	felt	the	Shi’gal’s	contempt.
Gunth	Mach	sent	her	guardian	a	private	thought.	He	wishes	that	we	fail.
‘If	he	so	hungers	to	slay,	then	why	not	these	strangers?’
It	is	not	for	me	to	say,	she	replied.	Gu’Rull	spoke	not	to	me,	after	all,	but	to	you.	He	would	admit	to
nothing,	but	he	holds	you	in	respect.	You	have	Hunted	and	like	me	you	have	borne	wounds	and	tasted
your	own	blood	and	in	that	taste	we	both	saw	our	mortality.	This,	Gu’Rull	shares	with	you,	while	Rythok
and	Kor	Thuran	do	not.
‘And	yet	in	his	careless	power	his	thoughts	leak	to	you—’
Does	he	know	of	my	growth?	I	think	not.	Only	you	know	the	truth,	Sag’Churok.	To	all	others	I	reveal
nothing.	They	believe	me	still	little	more	than	a	drone,	a	promise,	a	possibility.	I	am	close,	first	love,	so
very	close.
Yes,	 he	 had	 known,	 or	 thought	 he	 had.	 Now,	 shock	 threatened	 to	 reveal	 itself	 and	 the	 K’ell	 struggled	 to
contain	it.	‘Gunth’an	Acyl?’


She	cannot	see	past	her	suffering.
Sag’Churok	was	not	certain	of	that,	but	he	sent	nothing.	It	was	not	for	him	to	counsel	Gunth	Mach,	after	all.
Also,	 the	 notion	 that	 the	 Shi’gal	 Assassin	 sought	 to	 share	 anything	 with	 him	 was	 troubling.	 The	 taste	 of
mortality	was	the	birth	of	weakness,	after	all.
Rythok	 addressed	 him	 suddenly,	 gruffly	 pushing	 through	 his	 inner	 turmoil.	 ‘You	 waken	 to	 threat,	 yet	 we
sense	nothing.	Even	so,	should	we	not	quench	this	useless	fire?’
Yes,	Rythok.	The	Destriant	sleeps	and	we	have	no	need.
‘Do	you	hunt?’
No.	But	we	are	not	alone	in	this	land—human	herds	move	to	the	south.
‘Is	this	not	what	Acyl	desires?	Is	this	not	what	the	Destriant	must	find?’
Not	 these	 ones,	 Rythok.	 Yet,	 we	 shall	 pass	 through	 this	 herd	 .	 .	 .	 you	 will,	 I	 think,	 taste	 your	 own
blood	soon.	You	and	Kor	Thuran.	Prepare	yourselves.
And,	with	faint	dismay,	Sag’Churok	saw	that	they	were	pleased.
	
The	 air	 thickened,	 clear	 as	 the	 humour	 of	 an	 eye,	 and	 all	 that	 Kalyth	 could	 see	 through	 it	 shimmered	 and
shifted,	swam	and	blurred.	The	sweep	of	stars	flowed	in	discordant	motion;	the	grasses	of	the	undulating	hills
wavered,	 as	 if	 startled	 by	 wayward	 winds.	 Motes	 of	 detritus	 drifted	 about,	 shapeless	 and	 faintly	 pulsing
crimson,	some	descending	to	roll	across	the	ground,	others	wandering	skyward	as	if	on	rising	currents.
Every	place	held	every	memory	of	what	it	had	once	been.	A	plain	that	had	been	the	bottom	of	a	lake,	the
floor	of	a	shallow	sea,	the	lightless	depths	of	a	vast	ocean.	A	hill	that	had	been	the	peak	of	a	young	mountain,
one	of	a	chain	of	islands,	the	jagged	fang	of	the	earth	buried	in	glacial	ice.	Dust	that	had	been	plants,	sand	that
had	been	stone,	stains	that	had	been	bone	and	flesh.	Most	memories,	Kalyth	understood,	remain	hidden,	unseen
and	beneath	the	regard	of	flickering	life.	Yet,	once	the	eyes	were	awakened,	every	memory	was	then	unveiled,
a	fragment	here,	a	hint	there,	a	host	of	truths	whispering	of	eternity.
Such	knowledge	could	crush	a	soul	with	its	immensity,	or	drown	it	beneath	a	deluge	of	unbearable	futility.	As
soon	as	the	distinction	was	made,	that	separation	of	self	from	all	the	rest,	from	the	entire	world	beyond—its
ceaseless	measure	of	time,	its	whimsical	game	with	change	played	out	in	slow	siege	and	in	sudden	catastrophe
—then	the	self	became	an	orphan,	bereft	of	all	security,	and	face	to	face	with	a	world	now	become	at	best	a
stranger,	at	worst	an	implacable,	heartless	foe.
In	arrogance	we	orphan	ourselves,	and	then	rail	at	the	awful	solitude	we	find	on	the	road	to	death.
But	 how	 could	 one	 step	 back	 into	 the	 world?	 How	 could	 one	 learn	 to	 swim	 such	 currents?	 In	 selfproclamation,	the	soul	decided	what	it	was	that	lay	within	in	opposition	to	all	that	lay	beyond.	Inside,	outside,
familiar,	strange,	that	which	is	possessed,	that	which	is	coveted,	all	that	is	within	grasp	and	all	that	is	forever
beyond	reach.	The	distinction	was	a	deep,	vicious	cut	of	a	knife,	severing	tendons	and	muscles,	arteries	and
nerves.
A	knife?
No,	 that	 was	 the	 wrong	 weapon,	 a	 pathetic	 construct	 from	 her	 limited	 imagination.	 Indeed,	 the	 force	 that
divided	was	something	.	.	.	other.
It	was,	she	now	believed,	maybe	even	alive.
The	multilayered	vista	before	her	was	suddenly	transformed.	Grasses	withered	and	blew	away.	High	dunes
of	sand	humped	the	horizon,	and	in	a	basin	just	ahead	of	her	she	saw	a	figure,	its	back	to	her	as	it	knelt	in	the
hard-edged	shadow	of	a	monolith	of	some	sort.	The	stone—if	that	was	what	it	was—was	patinated	with	rust,
the	mottled	stains	looking	raw,	almost	fresh	against	the	green-black	rock.
She	found	herself	drawing	closer.	The	figure	was	not	simply	kneeling	in	worship	or	obeisance,	she	realized.
It	was	digging,	hands	thrust	deep	into	the	sands,	almost	up	to	the	elbows.
He	 was	 an	 old	 man,	 his	 skin	 blue-black.	 Bald,	 the	 skin	 covering	 the	 skull	 scarred.	 If	 he	 heard	 her
approaching,	he	gave	no	sign.
Was	 this	 some	 moment	 of	 the	 past?	 Millennia	 unfolding	 as	 all	 those	 layers	 fleeted	 away?	 Was	 she	 now
witness	to	a	memory	of	the	Wastelands?
The	monolith,	Kalyth	suddenly	comprehended,	was	carved	in	the	likeness	of	a	finger.	And	the	stone	that	she
had	first	seen	as	green	and	black	was	growing	translucent,	serpentine	green,	revealing	inner	flaws	and	facets.
She	saw	seams	like	veins	of	deep	emerald,	and	masses	that	might	be	bone,	the	colour	of	true	jade,	deep	within


the	edifice.
The	old	man—whose	skin	was	not	blue	and	black	as	she	had	first	believed,	but	so	thickly	tattooed	in	swirling
fur	that	nothing	of	its	natural	tone	remained—now	spoke,	though	he	did	not	cease	thrusting	his	hands	into	the
sand	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 monolith.	 ‘There	 is	 a	 tribe	 in	 the	 Sanimon,’	 he	 said,	 ‘that	 claims	 it	 was	 the	 first	 to
master	the	forging	of	iron.	They	still	make	tools	and	weapons	in	the	traditional	manner—quenching	blades	in
sand,	just	as	I’m	doing	right	now,	do	you	see?’
Though	she	did	not	know	his	language,	she	understood	him,	and	at	his	question	she	squinted	once	more	at	his
arms—if	his	hands	gripped	weapons,	then	he	had	pushed	them	deep	into	the	sands	indeed.
Yet	she	saw	no	forge—not	even	a	firepit—anywhere	in	sight.
‘I	do	not	think,’	the	man	continued,	gasping	every	now	and	then,	as	if	in	pain,	‘I	do	not	think,	however,	that	I
have	it	exactly	right.	There	must	be	some	other	secrets	involved.	Quenching	in	water	or	manure	piles—I	have
no	experience	in	such	things.’	He	paused.	‘At	least,	I	don’t	think	I	do.	So	much	.	.	.	forgotten.’
‘You	are	not	Elan,’	Kalyth	said.
He	smiled	at	her	words,	although	instead	of	looking	at	her	he	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	monolith.	‘But	here	is	a
thing,’	he	said.	‘I	can	name,	oh,	a	hundred	different	tribes.	Seven	Cities	tribes,	Quon	Talian	tribes,	Korel	tribes,
Genabackan—and	they	all	share	one	thing	and	one	thing	only	and	do	you	know	what	that	is?’
He	waited,	as	if	he	had	addressed	the	monolith	rather	than	Kalyth,	who	stood	beside	him,	close	enough	to
reach	out	and	touch.	‘I	will	tell	you,’	he	then	said.	‘Every	one	of	them	is	or	is	about	to	be	extinct.	Melted	away,
in	the	fashion	of	all	peoples,	eventually.	Sometimes	some	semblance	of	their	blood	lives	on,	finds	new	homes,
watered	down,	forgetful.	Or	they’re	nothing	but	dust,	even	their	names	gone,	for	ever	gone.	No	one	to	mourn
the	loss	.	.	.	and	all	that.’
‘I	am	the	last	Elan,’	she	told	him.
He	resumed	pushing	his	hands	deep	into	the	sand,	as	deep	as	he	could	manage.	‘I	am	readying	myself	.	.	.
to	wield	a	most	formidable	weapon.	They	thought	to	hide	it	from	me.	They	failed.	Weapons	must	be	tempered
and	tempered	well,	of	course.	They	even	thought	to	kill	it.	As	if	such	a	thing	is	remotely	possible’—he	paused
—‘then	again,	perhaps	it	is.	The	key	to	everything,	you	see,	is	to	cut	clean,	down	the	middle.	A	clean	cut—
that’s	what	I	dream	of.’
‘I	dream	of	.	.	.	this,’	she	said.	‘I	have	ridden	the	Spotted	Horse.	I	have	found	you	in	the	realms	beyond—
why?	Have	you	summoned	me?	What	am	I	to	you?	What	are	you	to	me?’
He	laughed.	‘Now	that	amuses	me!	I	see	where	you’re	pointing—you	think	I	don’t?	You	think	I	am	blind	to
this,	too?’
‘I	ride	the—’
‘Oh,	enough	of	that!	You	took	something.	That’s	how	you	get	here,	that’s	how	everyone	gets	here.	Or	they
dance	and	dance	until	they	fall	into	and	out	from	their	bodies.	Whatever	you	took	just	eased	you	back	into	the
rhythm	that	exists	in	all	things—the	pulse	of	the	universe,	if	you	like.	With	enough	discipline	you	don’t	need	to
take	anything	at	all—which	is	a	good	thing,	since	after	ten	or	twenty	years	of	eating	herbs	or	whatever,	most
shamans	are	inured	to	their	effects	anyway.	So	the	ingesting	serves	only	as	ritual,	as	permission	to	journey.’	He
suddenly	halted	all	motions.	‘Spotted	Horse	.	.	.	yes,	visual	hallucinations,	patterns	floating	in	front	of	the	eyes.
The	 Bivik	 called	 it	 Wound	 Drumming—like	 blossoming	 bloodstains,	 I	 suppose	 they	 meant.	 Thump	 thump
thump	.	.	.	And	the	Fenn—’
‘The	Matron	looks	to	our	kind,’	she	cut	in.	‘The	old	ways	have	failed.’
‘The	old	ways	ever	fail,’	the	old	man	said.	‘So	too	the	new	ways,	more	often	than	not.’
‘She	is	desperate—’
‘Desperation	delivers	poison	counsel.’
‘Have	you	nothing	worthwhile	to	tell	me?’
‘The	secret	lies	in	the	tempering,’	he	said.	‘That	is	a	worthwhile	thing	to	tell	you.	Your	weapon	must	be	well
tempered.	 Soundly	 forged,	 ingeniously	 annealed,	 the	 edges	 honed	 with	 surety.	 The	 finger	 points	 straight
towards	 them,	 you	 see—well,	 if	 this	 were	 a	 proper	 sky,	 you’d	 see.’	 His	 broad	 face	 split	 in	 a	 smile	 that	 was
more	a	grimace	than	a	signature	of	pleasure—and	she	thought	that,	despite	his	words	suggesting	otherwise,	he
might	be	blind.
‘It	is	a	flaw,’	he	continued,	‘to	view	mortals	and	gods	as	if	they	were	on	opposite	sides.	A	 flaw.	An	 error
most	fundamental.	Because	then,	when	the	blade	comes	down,	why,	they	are	for	ever	lost	to	each	other.	Now,


does	she	understand?	Possibly,	but	if	so,	then	she	terrifies	me—for	such	wisdom	seems	almost	.	.	.	inhuman.’
He	shook	himself	and	leaned	back,	withdrawing	his	arms	from	the	sand.
She	stared,	curious	and	wondering	at	the	weapons	he	held—only	to	find	he	held	none.	And	that	his	hands,
the	hue	of	rust,	gleamed	as	if	polished.
He	held	them	up.	‘Expected	green,	did	you?	Green	jade,	yes,	and	glowing.	But	not	this	time,	not	for	this,	oh
no.	Are	they	ready?	Ready	to	grasp	that	most	deadly	weapon?	I	think	not.’
And	down	went	those	hands,	plunging	into	the	sands	once	more.
	
A	foot	troop	of	human	scouts,	ranging	well	north	of	the	main	herd,	had	caught	sight	of	the	lone	campfire.	They
now	moved	towards	it—even	as	the	distant	flickering	flames	winked	out—and,	spreading	out	into	a	crescent
formation,	they	displayed	great	skill	in	stealth,	moving	virtually	unseen	across	the	plain.
One	of	the	scouts,	white-painted	face	covered	in	dark	cloth,	came	near	a	motionless	hare	and	the	creature
sensed	nothing	of	the	warrior	edging	past,	no	more	than	five	paces	away.
Few	plains	were	truly	flat	or	featureless.	Dips	and	rises	flowed	on	all	sides;	stretches	tilted	and	in	so	doing
mocked	all	sense	of	distance	and	perspective;	burrow	mounds	hid	beneath	tufts	of	grass;	gullies	ran	in	narrow,
treacherous	 channels	 that	 one	 could	 not	 see	 until	 one	 stumbled	 into	 them.	 To	 move	 unseen	 across	 this
landscape	was	to	travel	as	did	the	four-legged	hunters	and	prey,	from	scant	cover	to	scant	cover,	in	fits	and
starts,	eloquent	as	shadows.	Even	so,	the	Wastelands	were	aptly	named,	for	much	of	the	natural	plain	had	been
scoured	away,	and	spans	of	little	more	than	broken	rock	and	windblown	sand	challenged	any	measure	of	skill.
Despite	such	restrictions,	these	scouts,	eighteen	in	number,	betrayed	not	a	breath	as	they	closed	in	on	where
that	 campfire	 had	 been.	 Although	 all	 bore	 weapons—javelins	 and	 odd	 single-edged	 cutlasses—the	 former
remained	 slung	 across	 their	 broad	 backs,	 while	 the	 swords	 were	 strapped	 tight,	 bound	 and	 muffled	 at	 their
sides.
Clearly,	then,	curiosity	drove	them	to	seek	out	the	lone	camp,	to	discover	with	whom	they	shared	this	land.
Two	thousand	paces	and	closing,	the	scouts	slipped	into	a	broad	basin,	and	all	that	lit	them	now	was	the	pale
jade	glow	of	the	mysterious	travellers	in	the	night	sky.
The	 crescent	 formation	 slowly	 inverted,	 the	 central	 scout	 moving	 ahead	 to	 form	 its	 apex.	 When	 the	 troop
reached	a	certain	distance,	the	lead	scout	would	venture	closer	on	his	own.
Gu’Rull	 stood	 awaiting	 him.	 The	 towering	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 should	 have	 been	 clearly	 visible,	 but	 not	 a
single	 human	 saw	 him.	 When	 it	 was	 time	 to	 kill,	 the	 Shi’gal	 Assassin	 could	 cloud	 the	 minds	 of	 his	 victims,
although	this	was	generally	only	effective	while	such	targets	were	unsuspecting;	and	against	other	Shi’gal,	J’an
Sentinels	and	senior	Ve’Gath	Soldiers,	no	such	confusion	was	possible.
These	humans,	of	course,	were	feeble,	and	for	all	their	stealth,	the	heat	of	their	bodies	made	them	blaze	like
beacons	in	Gu’Rull’s	eyes.
The	lead	scout	padded	directly	towards	the	Assassin,	who	waited,	wings	folded	and	retracted.	The	hinged
claws	 on	 his	 narrow,	 long	 fingers	 slowly	 emerged	 from	 their	 membrane	 sheaths,	 slick	 with	 neural	 venom—
although	in	the	case	of	these	soft-skinned	humans,	poison	was	not	necessary.
When	the	warrior	came	into	range,	Gu’Rull	saw	the	man	hesitate—as	if	some	instinct	had	awakened	within
him—but	it	was	too	late.	The	Assassin	lashed	out	one	hand.	Claws	sliced	into	the	man’s	head	from	one	side,
through	flesh	and	bone,	and	the	strength	of	the	blow	half	tore	the	scout’s	head	from	his	neck.
Long	 before	 the	 first	 victim	 fell,	 Gu’Rull	 was	 on	 the	 move,	 an	 arching	 scythe	 of	 night	 rushing	 to	 the	 next
warrior.	 Claws	 plunged	 into	 the	 man’s	 midsection,	 hooked	 beneath	 the	 rib	 cage,	 and	 the	 assassin	 lifted	 him
from	his	feet	and	then	flung	the	flailing,	blood-spewing	body	away.
Daggers	flashed	in	the	air	as	the	rest	of	the	scouts	converged.	Two	of	the	thrown	weapons	struck	Gu’Rull,
both	 skidding	 off	 his	 thick,	 sleek	 scales.	 Javelins	 were	 readied,	 poised	 for	 the	 throw—but	 the	 Shi’gal	 was
already	 amongst	 them,	 batting	 aside	 panicked	 thrusts,	 claws	 raking	 through	 bodies,	 head	 snapping	 out	 on	 its
long	neck,	jaws	crushing	skulls,	chests,	biting	through	shoulders.	Blood	spattered	like	sleet	on	the	rough,	stony
ground,	and	burst	in	dark	mists	in	the	wake	of	the	Assassin’s	deadly	blows.
Two	scouts	pulled	back,	sought	to	flee,	and	for	the	moment	Gu’Rull	let	them	go,	occupied	as	he	was	with
the	last	warriors	surrounding	him.	He	understood	that	they	were	not	cowards—the	two	now	running	as	fast	as
they	 could	 southward,	 each	 choosing	 his	 own	 path—no,	 they	 sought	 to	 bring	 word	 of	 the	 slaughter,	 the	 new
foe,	to	the	ruler	of	the	herd.


This	was	unacceptable,	of	course.
Moments	later	and	the	Assassin	stood	alone,	tail	lashing,	hands	shedding	long	threads	of	blood.	He	drew	a
breath	into	his	shallow	lungs,	and	then	into	his	deep	lungs,	restoring	strength	and	vigour	to	his	muscles.
He	unfolded	his	wings.
The	last	two	needed	to	die.
Gu’Rull	launched	himself	into	the	air,	wings	flapping,	feather-scales	whistling	a	droning	dirge.
Once	aloft,	the	bright	forms	of	the	two	scouts	shone	like	pyres	on	the	dark	plain.	While,	in	the	Assassin’s
wake	as	he	swept	towards	the	nearer	of	the	two,	sixteen	corpses	slowly	cooled,	dimming	like	fading	embers
from	a	scattered	hearth.
	
Sag’Churok	 could	 smell	 blood	 in	 the	 air.	 He	 heard,	 as	 well,	 the	 frustrated	 snorts	 from	 the	 two	 unblooded
Hunters	 who	 stood,	 limbs	 quivering	 with	 the	 sweet	 flood	 of	 the	 Nectar	 of	 Slaying	 that	 now	 coursed	 through
their	 veins	 and	 arteries,	 their	 tails	 lashing	 the	 air.	 They	 had	 indeed	 lost	 control	 of	 their	 fight	 glands,	 a	 sign	 of
their	inexperience,	their	raw	youth,	and	Sag’Churok	was	both	amused	and	disgusted.
Although,	in	truth,	he	himself	struggled	against	unleashing	the	full	flow	of	the	nectar,	forcing	open	his	sleep
glands	to	counteract	the	ferocious	fires	within.
The	Shi’gal	had	hunted	this	night,	and	in	so	doing,	he	had	mocked	the	K’ell,	stealing	their	glory,	denying	them
the	pleasure	they	sought,	the	pleasure	they	had	been	born	to	pursue.
Come	 the	 dawn,	 Sag’Churok	 would	 lead	 the	 Seeking	 well	 away	 from	 that	 scene	 of	 slaughter.	 Destriant
Kalyth	need	not	know	anything	of	it—the	frame	of	her	mind	was	weak	enough	as	it	was.	The	Seeking	would
work	 eastward,	 further	 out	 into	 the	 wastes,	 where	 no	 food	 could	 be	 found	 for	 the	 strangers.	 Of	 course,	 this
caution	would	likely	fail,	if	the	herd	was	as	vast	as	Gu’Rull	had	intimated.
And	so	Sag’Churok	knew	that	his	fellow	Hunters	would	find	their	blood	before	too	long.
They	hissed	and	snorted,	quivered	and	yawned	with	their	jaws.	The	heavy	blades	thumped	and	grated	over
the	ground.
	
It	 did	 not	 occur	 to	 Gu’Rull	 that	 the	 scores	 upon	 scores	 of	 dogs	 plaguing	 the	 human	 herd	 were	 anything	 but
scavengers,	such	as	the	beasts	that	had	once	tracked	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	Furies	in	times	of	war.	And	so
the	 Assassin	 paid	 no	 attention	 whatsoever	 to	 the	 six	 beasts	 that	 had	 moved	 parallel	 to	 the	 scouts,	 and	 had
made	no	effort	to	cloud	their	senses.	And	even	as	these	beasts	now	fled	south,	clearly	making	for	the	human
herd,	 Gu’Rull	 attributed	 no	 special	 significance	 to	 their	 peregrinations.	 Scavengers	 were	 commonplace,	 their
needs	singular	and	far	from	complex.
The	Assassin	killed	the	scouts,	both	times	descending	from	above,	tearing	their	heads	from	their	shoulders
when	they	each	halted	upon	hearing	the	moan	of	Gu’Rull’s	wings.	Task	completed,	the	Shi’gal	rose	high	into
the	dark	sky,	seeking	the	strong	flows	of	air	that	he	would	ride	through	the	course	of	the	day	to	come—air	cold
enough	 to	 keep	 him	 from	 overheating,	 for	 he	 had	 discovered	 that	 during	 the	 day	 his	 wings,	 when	 fully
outstretched,	absorbed	vast	amounts	of	heat,	which	in	turn	strained	his	equanimity	and	naturally	calm	repose.
And	that	would	not	do.
	
Kalyth	watched	the	scene	before	her	fragment	and	then	vanish	as	if	blown	away	in	a	gust	of	wind	she	could
not	feel.	The	old	man,	the	monolith,	his	polished	hands	and	all	his	words—they	had	been	a	distraction,	proof	of
her	ignorance	that	she	had	so	easily	been	snared	by	something—and	someone—not	meant	for	her.
But	it	seemed	that	willpower	alone	was	not	enough,	particularly	when	she	had	no	real	destination	in	mind—
she	had	but	mentally	reached	out	for	a	notion,	a	vague	feeling	of	the	familiar—was	it	any	wonder	she	stumbled
about,	aimless,	lost,	pathetically	vulnerable?
Faintly,	as	if	from	the	ether,	she	heard	the	old	man	say,	‘It	ever	appears	dead,	spiked	so	cruelly	and	no,	you
will	see	no	motion,	not	a	twitch.	Even	the	blood	does	not	drip.	Do	not	be	deceived.	She	will	be	freed.	She	must.
It	is	necessary.’
She	thought	he	might	have	said	something	more,	but	his	voice	dwindled,	and	the	landscape	before	her	found
a	new	shape.	Wreckage	or	pyres	burned	across	an	unnaturally	flat	plain.	Smoke	rolled	black	and	hot,	stinging


her	eyes.	She	could	make	no	sense	of	what	she	saw;	the	horizons	seethed,	as	if	armies	contended	on	all	sides
but	nowhere	close.
Heavy	shadows	scudded	over	the	littered	ground	and	she	looked	up,	but	beyond	the	columns	of	smoke	rising
from	the	pyres,	the	sky	was	empty,	colourless.	Something	about	those	untethered	shadows	frightened	Kalyth,
the	way	they	seemed	to	be	converging,	gathering	speed,	and	she	could	feel	herself	drawn	after	them,	swept
into	their	wake.
It	 seemed	 then	 that	 she	 truly	 left	 her	 body	 behind,	 and	 now	 sailed	 on	 the	 same	 currents,	 casting	 her	 own
paltry,	 shapeless	 shadow,	 and	 she	 saw	 that	 the	 wreckage	 looked	 familiar—not	 pyres	 as	 such,	 after	 all,	 but
crushed	 and	 twisted	 pieces	 of	 the	 kinds	 of	 mechanism	 she	 had	 seen	 in	 Ampelas	 Rooted.	 Her	 unease
deepened.	Was	this	a	vision	of	the	future?	Or	some	frayed	remnant	of	the	distant	past?	She	suspected	that	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	fought	vast	wars	centuries	ago,	yet	she	also	knew	that	a	new	war	was	coming.
The	horizon	drew	closer,	at	a	point	where	the	massive	shadows	seemed	destined	to	converge.	Its	seething
edge	 was	 indeed	 armies	 locked	 in	 battle,	 yet	 she	 could	 make	 out	 little	 detail.	 Humans?	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle?
She	could	not	tell,	and	even	as	she	swept	towards	them,	they	grew	indistinct,	as	if	swallowed	in	dust.
There	 would	 be	 nothing	 easy	 in	 any	 of	 this,	 Kalyth	 realized.	 No	 gifts	 delivered	 with	 simple	 clarity,	 with
unambiguous	meaning.	She	floundered	in	sudden	panic,	trying	to	pull	herself	back	as	the	shadows	swarmed	to
a	single	 point,	 only	 to	vanish,	as	 if	 plunging	 through	a	gate—she	did	not	 want	 to	follow.	She	wanted	 none	 of
this.
Twin	 suns	 blazed	 to	 life,	 blinding	 her.	 Searing	 heat	 washed	 over	 her,	 building,	 and	 she	 screamed	 as	 she
withered	in	the	firestorm—but	it	was	too	late—
	
She	awoke	lying	on	the	damp	grasses,	lids	fluttering	open,	to	find	herself	staring	up	at	a	paling	sky.	Dull	motes
still	drifted	across	her	vision,	but	she	could	feel	their	loss	of	strength.	Kalyth	had	returned,	no	wiser,	no	surer	of
the	path	ahead.
Groaning,	she	rolled	on	to	her	side,	and	then	to	her	hands	and	knees.	Every	bone	in	her	body	ached;	twinges
speared	every	muscle,	and	she	shivered,	chilled	right	down	to	the	roots	of	her	soul.	Lifting	her	head,	she	saw
that	 Sag’Churok	 stood	 beside	 her,	 the	 Hunter’s	 terrible	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 her	 as	 if	 contemplating	 a	 hare	 trapped
under	his	talons.
She	looked	away	and	then	climbed	to	her	feet.	The	thin	odour	of	dung	smoke	reached	her	and	she	turned	to
see	Gunth	Mach	hunkered	down	before	the	campfire,	her	huge	hands	deftly	turning	skewers	of	dripping	meat.
The	 damned	 creatures	 had	 been	 obsessed	 with	 meat	 from	 the	 moment	 they	 departed	 the	 Nest—on	 this
journey	 she’d	 yet	 to	 see	 them	 unwrap	 a	 single	 root	 crop	 or	 lump	 of	 bread	 (or	 what	 passed	 for	 bread,	 for
although	 on	 the	 tongue	 it	 possessed	 the	 consistency	 of	 a	 fresh	 mushroom,	 she	 had	 seen	 loaves	 in	 countless
shapes	and	sizes).	Meat	to	break	the	night’s	fast,	meat	at	the	mid-morning	rest	stop,	meat	whilst	on	the	move
at	afternoon’s	waning,	and	meat	at	the	final	meal	well	after	the	sun’s	setting.	She	suspected	that,	if	not	for	her,
it	 would	 have	 been	 eaten	 raw.	 The	 Wastelands	 offered	 little	 else,	 she	 had	 discovered—even	 the	 grasses,
berries	and	tubers	that	had	once	been	common	on	the	plains	of	the	Elan	were	entirely	absent	here.
Feeling	miserable,	and	terribly	alone,	she	went	over	to	collect	her	breakfast.
	
Stavi	looked	to	her	sister	and	saw,	as	ever,	her	own	face,	although	the	expression	was	never	a	match	to	her
own.	Twins	they	might	be,	but	they	were	also	two	sides	of	a	coin,	and	took	turns	in	what	they	offered	to	the
world.	Hetan	knew	as	much,	and	had	observed	more	than	once	how,	when	one	of	her	first	daughters	set	eyes
upon	 the	 other,	 there	 grew	 a	 look	 of	 surprise	 and	 something	 like	 guilt	 in	 the	 child’s	 face—as	 if	 in	 seeing	 an
unexpected	attitude	displayed	in	her	other	self,	she	had	perhaps	ambushed	her	own	innermost	feelings.
Not	 surprisingly,	 Stavi	 and	 Storii	 were	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 avoiding	 one	 another’s	 regard,	 as	 much	 as	 was
possible,	 as	 if	 neither	 welcomed	 that	 flash	 of	 confusion.	 They	 much	 preferred	 to	 sow	 confusion	 in	 everyone
else,	particularly,	Hetan	noted	yet	again,	their	adopted	father.
Although	 not	 within	 hearing	 range	 of	 the	 conversation,	 Hetan	 could	 well	 see	 how	 it	 was	 proceeding.	 The
girls	had	stalked	the	poor	man,	wicked	as	a	pair	of	hunting	cats,	and	whatever	it	was	that	they	wanted	from
him,	they	would	get.	Without	fail.
Or	so	it	would	be,	each	and	every	time,	if	not	for	their	cruel	and	clever	mother,	who,	when	she	took	it	upon


herself,	could	stride	into	the	midst	of	the	ambush	and,	with	a	bare	word	or	gesture,	send	the	two	little	witches
scampering.	 Knowing	 this,	 of	 course,	 at	 least	 one	 of	 the	 twins	 would	 have	 her	 attention	 fixed	 on	 Hetan’s
location,	 measuring	 distances	 and	 the	 intensity	 of	 their	 mother’s	 attention.	 Hetan	 knew	 that,	 should	 she	 so
much	 as	 turn	 towards	 them,	 the	 girls	 would	 break	 off	 the	 wheedling,	 crassly	 manipulative	 assault	 on	 their
father,	and,	flicking	dark,	sharp	glares	her	way,	scuttle	off	in	the	manner	of	frustrated	evil	imps	the	world	over.
Oh,	they	could	be	lovable	enough,	when	it	suited	them,	and,	in	sly	gift	from	their	true	father,	both	possessed
a	 natural	 talent	 for	 conveying	 innocence,	 so	 pure	 and	 so	 absolute	 it	 verged	 on	 the	 autistic,	 guaranteed	 to
produce	 nausea	 in	 their	 mother,	 and	 other	 mothers	 besides.	 Why,	 Hetan	 had	 seen	 great-aunts—normally
indulgent	as	befitted	their	remote	roles—narrow	their	gazes	when	witnessing	the	display.
Of	course,	it	was	no	easy	thing	to	measure	evil,	or	even	to	be	certain	that	the	assignation	was	appropriate.
Was	it	not	a	woman’s	gift	to	excel	in	the	entirely	essential	guidance	of	every	aspect	of	her	chosen	man’s	life?
It	 most	 certainly	 was.	 Accordingly,	 Hetan	 pitied	 the	 future	 husbands	 of	 Storii	 and	 Stavi.	 At	 the	 same	 time,
however,	she	was	not	about	to	see	her	own	man	savaged	by	the	two	creatures.	The	issue	was	down	to	simple
possession.	And	the	older	the	twins	grew,	the	more	brazen	their	efforts	at	stealing	him	away	from	her.
Yes,	she	understood	all	of	this.	It	was	not	anything	direct,	or	even	conscious	on	the	part	of	the	girls.	They
were	simply	trying	out	their	skills	at	capturing,	rending	and	devouring.	And	it	was	also	natural	that	they	would
decide	upon	their	own	mother	as	competition.	There	were	times,	Hetan	reflected,	when	she	wished	she	could
track	 down	 their	 distant,	 wayward	 and	 diabolical	 father,	 and	 thrust	 both	 rotters	 on	 to	 his	 plump	 lap—yes,
Kruppe	of	Darujhistan	was	indeed	welcome	to	his	inadvertent	get.
Alas,	 she	 could	 well	 see	 that	 the	 man	 who	 now	 stood	 in	 Kruppe’s	 stead	 would	 not	 have	 accepted	 such	 a
gesture,	no	matter	how	just	Hetan	might	deem	it.	Such	were	the	myriad	miseries	of	parenthood.	And	her	bad
luck	in	choosing	an	honourable	mate.
He	was	vulnerable,	apt	to	descend	into	indulgence,	and	the	twins	knew	it	and	like	piranhas	they	had	closed
in.	 It	 wasn’t	 that	 Stavi	 and	 Storii	 were	 uniquely	 insensitive—like	 all	 girls	 of	 their	 age,	 they	 just	 didn’t	 care.
They	wanted	whatever	they	wanted	and	would	do	whatever	was	necessary	to	get	it.
Long	before	their	coming	of	age,	of	course,	tribal	life	among	the	White	Face	Barghast	would	beat	that	out	of
them,	or	at	least	repress	its	more	vicious	impulses,	all	of	which	were	necessary	to	a	proper	life.
Storii	 was	 the	 first	 to	 note	 Hetan’s	 approach,	 and	 the	 dark	 intent	 in	 her	 mother’s	 eyes	 was	 reflected	 in	 a
sudden	 flash	 of	 terror	 and	 malice	 in	 the	 girl’s	 sweet,	 rounded	 face.	 She	 flicked	 her	 fingertips	 against	 her
sister’s	shoulder	and	Stavi	flinched	at	the	stinging	snap	and	then	caught	sight	of	Hetan.	In	a	heartbeat	the	twins
were	in	full	flight,	bounding	away	like	a	pair	of	stoats,	and	their	adopted	father	stared	after	them	in	surprise.
Hetan	arrived.	‘Beloved,	you	have	all	the	wit	of	a	bhederin	when	it	comes	to	those	two.’
Onos	Toolan	blinked	at	her,	and	then	he	sighed.	‘I	am	afraid	I	was	frustrating	them	nonetheless.	It	is	difficult
to	concentrate—they	speak	too	fast,	so	breathless—I	lose	all	sense	of	what	they	mean,	or	want.’
‘You	can	be	certain	that	whatever	it	was,	its	function	was	to	spoil	them	yet	further.	But	I	have	broken	their
siege,	Tool,	to	tell	you	that	the	clan	chiefs	are	assembling—well,	those	who	managed	to	heed	the	summons.’
She	hesitated.	‘They	are	troubled,	husband.’
Even	 this	 did	 little	 to	 penetrate	 the	 sorrow	 that	 he	 had	 folded	 round	 him	 since	 the	 brutal	 death	 of	 Toc	 the
Younger.	‘How	many	clans	sent	no	one?’	he	asked.
‘Almost	a	third.’
He	frowned	at	that,	but	said	nothing.
‘Mostly	 from	 the	 southern	 extremes,’	 Hetan	 said.	 ‘That	 is	 why	 those	 here	 are	 now	 saying	 that	 they	 must
have	 mutinied—lost	 their	 way,	 their	 will.	 That	 they	 have	 broken	 up	 and	 wandered	 into	 the	 kingdoms,	 the
warriors	hiring	on	as	bodyguards	and	such	to	the	Saphin	and	the	Bolkando.’
‘You	said	“mostly”,	Hetan.	What	of	the	others?’
‘All	outlying	clans,	those	who	travelled	farthest	in	the	dispersal—except	for	one.	Gadra,	which	had	found	a
decent	bhederin	herd	in	a	pocket	between	the	Akryn	and	the	Awl’dan,	enough	to	sustain	them	for	a	time—’
‘The	 Gadra	 warchief—Stolmen,	 yes?	 I	 sensed	 no	 disloyalty	 in	 him.	 Also,	 what	 chance	 of	 mutiny	 in	 that
region?	They	would	have	nowhere	to	go—that	makes	no	sense.’
‘You	are	right,	it	doesn’t.	We	should	have	heard	from	them.	You	must	speak	to	the	clan	chiefs,	Tool.	They
need	to	be	reminded	why	we	are	here.’	She	studied	his	soft	brown	eyes	for	a	moment,	and	then	looked	away.
The	crisis,	she	knew,	dwelt	not	just	in	the	minds	of	the	Barghast	clan	chiefs,	but	also	in	the	man	standing	beside


her.	Her	husband,	her	love.
‘I	do	not	know,’	said	Tool,	slowly,	as	if	searching	for	the	right	words,	‘if	I	can	help	them.	The	shoulder-seers
were	 bold	 in	 their	 first	 prophecies,	 igniting	 the	 fires	 that	 have	 brought	 us	 here,	 but	 with	 each	 passing	 day	 it
seems	their	tongues	wither	yet	more,	their	words	dry	up,	and	all	I	can	see	in	them	is	the	fear	in	their	eyes.’
She	took	him	by	the	arm	and	tugged	until	he	followed	her	out	from	the	edge	of	the	vast	encampment.	They
walked	beyond	the	pickets	and	then	the	ring-trench	dry-latrines,	and	still	further,	on	to	the	hard	uneven	ground
where	the	herds	had	tracked	not	so	long	ago,	in	the	season	of	rains.
‘We	 were	 meant	 to	 wage	 war	 against	 the	 Tiste	 Edur,’	 Tool	 said	 as	 they	 drew	 up	 atop	 a	 ridge	 and	 stared
northward	 at	 distant	 dust-clouds.	 ‘The	 shoulder-seers	 rushed	 their	 rituals	 in	 finding	 pathways	 through	 the
warrens.	 The	 entire	 White	 Face	 Barghast	 impoverished	 itself	 to	 purchase	 transports	 and	 grain.	 We	 hurried
after	the	Grey	Swords.’	He	was	silent	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	he	said,	‘We	sought	the	wrong	enemy.’
‘No	 glory	 to	 be	 found	 in	 crushing	 a	 crushed	 people,’	 Hetan	 observed,	 tasting	 the	 bitterness	 of	 her	 own
words.
‘Nor	a	people	terrorized	by	one	of	their	own.’
There	 had	 been	 fierce	 clashes	 over	 this.	 Despite	 his	 ascension	 to	 Warchief,	 a	 unanimous	 proclamation
following	the	tragic	death	of	her	father,	Onos	Toolan	had	almost	immediately	found	himself	at	odds	with	all	the
clan	chiefs.	War	against	the	Lether	Empire	would	be	an	unjust	war,	the	Edur	hegemony	notwithstanding.	Not
only	 were	 the	 Letherii	 not	 their	 enemy,	 even	 these	 Tiste	 Edur,	 crouching	 in	 the	 terrible	 shadow	 of	 their
emperor,	 likely	 bore	 no	 relationship	 whatsoever	 to	 those	 ancient	 Edur	 who	 had	 preyed	 upon	 the	 Barghast	 so
many	generations	past.	The	entire	notion	of	vengeance,	or	that	of	a	war	resumed,	suddenly	tasted	sour,	and	for
Tool,	an	Imass	who	felt	nothing	of	the	old	festering	wounds	in	the	psyche	of	the	Barghast—who	was	indeed
deaf	to	the	fury	of	the	awakened	Barghast	gods	.	.	.	well,	he’d	shown	no	patience	with	those	so	eager	to	shed
blood.
The	shoulder-seers	had	by	this	time	lost	all	unity	of	vision.	The	prophecy,	which	had	seemed	so	simple	and
clear,	was	all	at	once	mired	in	ambiguity,	seeding	such	discord	among	the	seers	that	even	their	putative	leader,
Cafal,	brother	to	Hetan,	failed	in	his	efforts	to	quell	the	schisms	among	the	shamans.	Thus,	they	had	been	no
help	in	the	battle	of	wills	between	Tool	and	the	chiefs;	and	they	were	no	help	now.
Cafal	persisted	in	travelling	from	tribe	to	tribe—she	had	not	seen	her	brother	in	months.	If	he	had	succeeded
in	 repairing	 any	 damage,	 she’d	 not	 heard	 of	 it;	 even	 among	 the	 shoulder-seers	 in	 this	 camp,	 she	 sensed	 a
pervasive	unease,	and	a	sour	reluctance	to	speak	with	anyone.
Onos	 Toolan	 had	 been	 unwilling	 to	 unleash	 the	 White	 Faces	 upon	 the	 Lether	 Empire—and	 his	 will	 had
prevailed,	until	 that	 one	 fated	 day,	 when	 the	 last	 of	 the	 Awl	 fell—when	Toc	 the	 Younger	 had	 died.	 Not	 only
had	Hetan’s	own	clan,	the	Senan,	been	unleashed,	so	too	had	the	dark	hunger	of	Tool’s	own	sister,	Kilava.
Hetan	 missed	 that	 woman,	 and	 knew	 that	 her	 husband’s	 grief	 was	 complicated	 by	 her	 departure—a
departure	that	he	might	well	see	as	her	abandoning	him	in	the	moment	of	his	greatest	need.	Hetan	suspected,
however,	that	in	witnessing	Toc’s	death—and	the	effect	it	had	had	upon	her	brother,	Kilava	had	been	brutally
reminded	of	the	ephemeral	nature	of	love	and	friendship—and	so	she	had	set	out	to	rediscover	her	own	life.	A
selfish	impulse,	perhaps,	and	an	unfair	wounding	of	a	brother	already	reeling	from	loss.
Yes,	Kilava	deserved	a	good	hard	slap	to	the	side	of	that	shapely	head,	and	Hetan	vowed	that	she	would	be
the	one	to	deliver	it,	when	next	they	met.
‘I	see	no	enemy,’	her	husband	said	now.
She	nodded.	Yes,	this	was	the	crisis	afflicting	her	people,	and	so	they	looked	to	their	Warchief.	In	need	of	a
direction,	a	purpose.	Yet	he	gave	them	nothing.	‘We	have	too	many	young	warriors,’	she	said.	‘Trained	in	the
ancient	ways	of	fighting,	eager	to	see	their	swords	drink	blood—slaughtering	a	half-broken,	exhausted	Letherii
army	 did	 little	 to	 whet	 the	 appetites	 of	 those	 in	 our	 own	 clan—yet	 it	 was	 enough	 to	 ignite	 envy	 and	 feuding
with	virtually	everyone	else.’
‘Things	were	simpler	among	the	Imass,’	said	Tool.
‘Oh,	rubbish!’
He	shot	her	a	glare,	and	then	looked	away	once	more,	shoulders	slumping.	‘Well,	we	had	purpose.’
‘You	had	a	ridiculous	war	against	a	foe	that	had	no	real	desire	to	fight	you.	And	so,	instead	of	facing	the
injustice	you	were	committing,	you	went	and	invoked	the	Ritual	of	Tellann.	Clever	evasion,	I	suppose,	if	rather
insane.	What’s	so	frightening	about	facing	your	own	mistakes?’


‘Dear	wife,	you	should	not	ask	that	question.’
‘Why	not?’
He	met	her	eyes	again,	not	with	anger	this	time,	but	bleak	despair.	‘You	may	find	that	mistakes	are	all	you
have.’
She	grew	very	still,	chilled	despite	the	burgeoning	heat	of	the	morning.	‘Oh,	and	for	you,	does	that	include
me?’
‘No,	 I	 speak	 to	 help	 you	 understand	 an	 Imass	 who	 was	 once	 a	 T’lan.’	 He	 hesitated,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘With
you,	with	our	children,	I	had	grown	to	believe	that	such	things	were	at	last	behind	me—those	dread	errors	and
the	burden	of	all	they	yielded.	And	then,	in	an	instant	.	.	.	I	am	reminded	of	my	own	stupidity.	It	does	no	good
to	ignore	one’s	own	flaws,	Hetan.	The	delusion	comforts,	but	it	can	prove	fatal.’
‘You’re	not	dead.’
‘Am	I	not?’
She	 snorted	 and	 turned	 away.	 ‘You’re	 just	 as	 bad	 as	 your	 sister!’	 Then	 wheeled	 back	 to	 him.	 ‘Wake	 up!
Your	twenty-seven	clans	are	down	to	nineteen—how	many	more	will	you	lose	because	you	can’t	be	bothered
to	make	a	decision?’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her.	‘What	would	you	have	me	decide?’	he	asked	quietly.
‘We	are	White	Face	Barghast!	Find	us	an	enemy!’
	
The	privilege	of	being	so	close	to	home	was	proving	too	painful,	even	as	Torrent—the	last	warrior	of	the	Awl
—sought	to	exult	in	the	anguish.	Punishment	for	surviving,	for	persisting,	like	one	last	drop	of	blood	refusing	to
soak	into	the	red	mud;	he	did	not	know	what	held	him	upright,	breathing,	heart	pounding	on	and	on,	thoughts
clawing	 through	 endless	 curtains	 of	 dust.	 Somewhere,	 deep	 inside,	 he	 prayed	 he	 would	 find	 his	 single,	 pure
truth,	squeezed	down	into	a	knucklebone,	polished	by	all	the	senseless	winds,	the	pointless	rains,	the	spiralling
collapse	of	season	upon	season.	A	little	knot	of	something	like	bone,	to	stumble	over,	to	roll	across,	to	send	him
sprawling.
He	 might	 find	 it,	 but	 he	 suspected	 not.	 He	 did	 not	 possess	 the	 wit.	 He	 was	 not	 sharp	 in	 the	 way	 of	 Toc
Anaster,	the	Mezla	who	haunted	his	dreams.	Thundering	hoofs,	a	storm-wracked	night	sky,	winds	howling	like
wolves,	and	the	dead	warrior’s	single	eye	fixed	like	an	opal	in	its	shadowed	socket.	A	face	horrifying	in	its	red,
glistening	ruin—the	skin	cut	away,	smeared	teeth	exposed	in	a	feral	grin—oh,	perhaps	indeed	the	Mezla	rode
into	 Torrent’s	 dreams,	 a	 harbinger	 of	 nightmares,	 a	 mocker	 of	 his	 precious,	 fragile	 truth.	 One	 thing	 seemed
clear—the	 dead	 archer	 was	 hunting	 Torrent,	 fired	 by	 hatred	 for	 the	 last	 Awl	 warrior,	 and	 the	 pursuit	 was
relentless,	Torrent’s	steps	dragging	even	as	he	ran	for	his	life,	gasping,	shrieking—until	with	a	start	he	would
awaken,	sheathed	in	sweat	and	shivering.
It	seemed	that	Toc	Anaster	was	in	no	hurry	to	bring	the	hunt	to	its	grisly	conclusion.	The	ghost’s	pleasure
was	in	the	chase.	Night	after	night	after	night.
The	Awl	warrior	no	longer	wore	a	copper	mask.	The	irritating	rash	that	had	mottled	his	face	was	now	gone.
He	had	elected	to	deliver	himself	and	the	children	into	the	care	of	the	Gadra	clan,	camped	as	they	were	at	the
very	edge	of	the	Awl’dan.	He	had	not	wished	to	witness	the	devastating	grief	of	the	strange	warrior	named
Tool,	over	Toc	Anaster’s	death.
Shortly	after	joining	the	clan,	and	with	the	fading	of	his	rash,	Gadra	women	had	taken	an	interest	in	him,	and
they	were	not	coy,	displaying	a	boldness	that	almost	frightened	Torrent—he	had	fled	a	woman’s	advance	more
than	 once—but	 of	 late	 the	 dozen	 or	 so	 intent	 on	 stalking	 and	 trapping	 him	 had	 begun	 cooperating	 with	 one
another.
And	so	he	took	to	his	horse,	riding	hard	out	from	the	camp,	spending	the	entire	span	of	the	sun’s	arc	well
away	from	their	predations.	Red-eyed	with	exhaustion,	miserable	in	his	solitude,	and	at	war	with	himself.	He
had	 never	 lain	 with	 a	 woman,	 after	 all.	 He	 had	 no	 idea	 what	 it	 involved,	 beyond	 those	 shocking	 childhood
memories	 of	 seeing,	 through	 the	 open	 doorways	 of	 huts,	 adults	 clamped	 round	 one	 another	 grunting	 and
moaning	and	sighing.	But	they	had	been	Awl—not	these	savage,	terrifying	Barghast	who	coupled	with	shouts
and	barks	of	laughter,	the	men	bellowing	like	bears	and	the	women	clawing	and	scratching	and	biting.
No,	none	of	it	made	any	sense.	For,	even	as	he	endeavoured	to	escape	these	mad	women	with	their	painted
faces	 and	 bright	 eyes,	 he	 wanted	 what	 they	 offered.	 He	 fled	 his	 own	 desire,	 and	 each	 time	 he	 did	 so	 the
torture	he	inflicted	upon	himself	stung	all	the	worse.


Such	misery	as	no	man	deserves!
He	should	have	rejoiced	in	his	freedom,	here	on	the	vast	plains	so	close	to	the	Awl’dan.	To	see	the	herds	of
bhederin—which	 his	 own	 people	 had	 never	 thought	 to	 tame—and	 the	 scattering	 of	 rodara,	 too,	 that	 the
surviving	children	of	the	Awl	now	cared	for—and	to	know	that	the	cursed	Letherii	were	not	hunting	them,	not
slaughtering	them	.	.	.	he	should	be	exulting	in	the	moment.
Was	he	not	alive?	Safe?	And	was	he	not	the	Clan	Leader	of	the	Awl?	Undisputed	ruler	of	a	vast	tribe	of	a
few	 score	 children,	 some	 of	 whom	 had	 already	 forgotten	 their	 own	 language,	 and	 now	 spoke	 the	 barbaric
foreign	tongue	of	the	Barghast,	and	had	taken	to	painting	their	bodies	with	red	and	yellow	ochre	and	braiding
their	hair?
He	rode	his	horse	at	a	slow	canter,	already	two	or	more	leagues	from	the	Gadra	encampment.	The	herds
had	swung	round	to	the	southeast	the	night	before,	so	he	had	seen	no	one	on	his	journey	out.	When	he	first
caught	sight	of	the	Barghast	dogs,	he	thought	they	might	be	wolves,	but	upon	seeing	Torrent	they	altered	their
route	 straight	 towards	 him—something	 no	 pack	 of	 wolves	 would	 do—and	 as	 they	 drew	 closer	 he	 could	 see
their	 short-haired,	 mottled	 hides,	 their	 shortened	 muzzles	 and	 small	 ears.	 Larger	 than	 any	 Awl	 or	 Letherii
breed,	the	beasts	were	singularly	savage.	Until	this	moment,	they	had	ignored	Torrent,	beyond	the	occasional
baring	of	fangs	as	they	trotted	past	in	the	camp.
He	slipped	his	lance	from	its	sling	and	anchored	it	in	the	stirrup	step	just	inside	his	right	foot.	Six	dogs,	loping
closer—they	were,	he	realized,	exhausted.
Torrent	reined	in	to	await	them,	curious.
The	beasts	slowed,	and	then	encircled	the	warrior	and	his	horse.	He	watched	as	they	sank	down	on	to	their
bellies,	jaws	hanging,	tongues	lolling	and	slick	with	thick	threads	of	saliva.
Confused,	Torrent	settled	back	in	the	saddle.	Could	he	just	ride	through	this	strange	circle,	continue	on	his
way?
If	these	were	Awl	dogs,	what	would	their	behaviour	signify?	He	shook	his	head—maybe	if	they	were	drays,
then	he	would	imagine	that	an	enemy	had	drawn	near.	Frowning,	Torrent	stood	in	his	stirrups	and	squinted	to
the	north,	whence	the	dogs	had	come.	Nothing	.	.	.	and	then	he	shaded	his	eyes.	Yes,	nothing	on	the	horizon,
but	above	that	horizon—circling	birds?	Possibly.
What	to	do?	Return	to	the	camp,	find	a	warrior	and	tell	him	or	her	of	what	he	had	seen?	Your	dogs	found
me.	They	laid	themselves	down.	Far	to	the	north	.	.	.	some	birds.	 Torrent	 snorted.	 He	 gathered	 the	 reins
and	 nudged	 his	 mount	 between	 two	 of	 the	 prone	 dogs,	 and	 then	 swung	 his	 horse	 northward.	 Birds	 were	 not
worth	reporting—he	needed	to	see	what	had	drawn	them.
Of	the	six	dogs	he	left	behind	him,	two	fell	into	his	wake,	trotting.	The	remaining	four	rose	and	set	out	for
the	camp	to	the	south.
In	the	time	of	Redmask,	Torrent	had	known	something	close	to	contentment.	The	Awl	had	found	someone
to	follow.	A	true	leader,	a	saviour.	And	when	the	great	victories	had	come—the	death	of	hundreds	of	Letherii
invaders	 in	 fierce,	 triumphant	 battles—they	 were	 proof	 of	 Redmask’s	 destiny.	 He	 could	 not	 be	 certain	 when
things	began	to	go	wrong,	but	he	recalled	the	look	in	Toc	Anaster’s	eye,	the	cynical	set	of	his	foreign	face,	and
with	 every	 comment	 the	 man	 uttered,	 the	 solid	 foundations	 of	 Torrent’s	 faith	 seemed	 to	 reverberate,	 as	 if
struck	deadly	blows	.	.	.	until	the	first	cracks	arrived,	until	Torrent’s	very	zeal	was	turned	upon	itself,	jaded	and
mocking,	and	what	had	been	a	strength	became	a	weakness.
Such	 was	 the	 power	 of	 scepticism.	 A	 handful	 of	 words	 to	 dismantle	 certainty,	 like	 seeds	 flung	 at	 a	 stone
wall—tender	greens	and	tiny	roots,	yes,	but	in	time	they	would	take	down	that	wall.
Contentment	alone	should	have	made	Torrent	suspicious,	but	it	had	reared	up	before	him	like	a	god	of	purity
and	 willingly	 he	 had	 knelt,	 head	 bowed,	 to	 take	 comfort	 in	 its	 shadow.	 In	 any	 other	 age,	 Redmask	 could	 not
have	 succeeded	 in	 commanding	 the	 Awl.	 Without	 the	 desperation,	 without	 the	 succession	 of	 defeats	 and
mounting	losses,	without	extinction	itself	looming	before	them	like	a	cliff’s	edge,	the	tribes	would	have	driven
him	away—as	they	had	done	once	before.	Yes,	they	had	been	wiser,	then.
Some	 forces	 could	 not	 be	 defeated,	 and	 so	 it	 was	 with	 the	 Letherii.	 Their	 hunger	 for	 land,	 their	 need	 to
possess	and	rule	over	all	that	they	possessed—these	were	terrible	desires	that	spread	like	the	plague,	poisoning
the	souls	of	the	enemy.	Once	the	fever	of	seeing	the	world	as	they	did	erupted	like	fire	in	one’s	brain,	the	war
was	over,	the	defeat	absolute	and	irreversible.
Even	these	Barghast—his	barbaric	saviours—were	doomed.	Akrynnai	traders	set	up	camps	up	against	the


picket	 lines.	 D’rhasilhani	 horse	 sellers	 drove	 herd	 after	 herd	 in	 a	 mostly	 futile	 parade	 past	 the	 encampment,
and	every	now	and	then	a	Barghast	warrior	would	select	one	of	the	larger	animals,	examine	it	for	a	time,	and
then,	with	a	dismissive	bark	of	laughter,	send	it	back	to	the	herd.	Before	too	long,	Torrent	believed,	a	breed	of
sufficient	height	and	girth	would	arrive,	and	that	would	be	that.
Invaders	 did	 not	 stay	 invaders	 for	 ever.	 Eventually,	 they	 became	 no	 different	 from	 every	 other	 tribe	 or
people	in	a	land.	Languages	muddied,	blended,	surrendered.	Habits	were	exchanged	like	currency,	and	before
too	 long	 everyone	 saw	 the	 world	 the	 same	 way	 as	 everyone	 else.	 And	 if	 that	 way	 was	 wrong,	 then	 misery
was	assured,	for	virtually	everyone,	for	virtually	ever.
The	Awl	should	have	bowed	to	the	Letherii.	They	would	be	alive	now,	instead	of	lying	in	jumbled	heaps	of
mouldering	bones	in	the	mud	of	a	dead	sea.
Redmask	had	sought	to	stop	time	itself.	Of	course	he	failed.
Sometimes,	belief	was	suicide.
Torrent	had	cast	away	his	faiths,	his	certainties,	his	precious	beliefs.	He	did	nothing	to	resist	the	young	ones
losing	their	language.	He	saw	the	ochre	paint	on	their	faces,	the	spiked	hair,	and	was	indifferent	to	it.	Yes,	he
was	the	leader	of	the	Awl,	the	last	there	would	ever	be,	and	it	was	his	task	to	oversee	the	peaceful	obliteration
of	his	culture.	Ways	will	pass.	He	vowed	he	would	not	miss	them.
No,	Torrent	wore	no	copper	mask.	Not	any	more.	And	his	face	was	clear	as	his	eyes.
He	slowed	his	horse’s	canter	as	soon	as	he	made	out	the	corpses,	the	bodies	scattered	about.	Crows	and
gold-beaked	 vultures	 moved	 here	 and	 there	 in	 the	 carrion	 dance,	 whilst	 rhinazan	 flapped	 about,	 disturbing
capemoths	 into	 flight—sudden	 blossoms	 of	 white	 petals	 that	 settled	 almost	 as	 quickly	 as	 they	 appeared.	 A
scene	of	the	plains	that	Torrent	knew	well.
A	troop	of	Barghast	had	been	ambushed.	Slaughtered.
He	rode	closer.
No	obvious	tracks,	neither	foot	nor	hoof,	led	away	from	the	killing	ground.	He	saw	how	the	Barghast	had
been	 in	 close	 formation—and	 that	 was	 odd,	 contrary	 to	 what	 Torrent	 had	 seen	 of	 their	 patrols.	 Perhaps,	 he
thought,	they	had	contracted	defensively,	which	suggested	an	enemy	in	overwhelming	numbers.	But	then	.	.	.
there	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 that.	 And	 whoever	 had	 murdered	 these	 warriors	 must	 have	 taken	 their	 own	 dead	 with
them—he	walked	his	horse	in	a	circuit	round	the	bodies—saw	no	trailing	smears	of	blood,	no	swaths	through
the	grasses	to	mark	dragged	heels.
The	bodies,	he	realized	then,	had	not	been	looted.	Their	beautiful	weapons	were	scattered	about,	the	blades
devoid	of	blood.
Torrent	felt	his	nerves	awaken,	as	if	brushed	by	something	unholy.	He	looked	once	more	at	the	corpses—
not	 a	 contraction,	 but	 a	 converging	 .	 .	 .	 upon	 a	 single	 foe.	 And	 the	 wounds—despite	 the	 efforts	 of	 the
scavengers—displayed	nothing	of	what	one	would	expect.	As	if	they	closed	upon	a	beast,	and	see	how	the
blows	 struck	 downward	 upon	 them.	 A	 plains	 bear?	 No,	 there	 are	 none	 left.	 The	 last	 surviving	 skin	 of
one	of	those	beasts—among	my	people—was	said	to	be	seven	generations	old.	He	remembered	the	thing,
vast,	yes,	but	tattered.	And	the	claws	had	been	removed	and	since	lost.	Still	.	.	.
Torrent	 glanced	 at	 the	 two	 dogs	 as	 they	 trotted	 up.	 The	 beasts	 looked	 preternaturally	 cowed,	 stubby	 tails
ducked,	the	glances	they	sent	him	beseeching	and	frightened.	If	they	had	been	Awl	drays,	they	would	now	be
moving	on	to	the	enemy’s	trail,	eager,	hackles	raised.	He	scowled	down	at	the	quivering	beasts.
He	swung	his	horse	back	round	and	set	off	for	the	Gadra	camp.	The	dogs	hurried	after	him.
A	beast,	yet	one	that	left	no	trail	whatsoever.	A	ghost	creature.
Perhaps	 his	 solitary	 rides	 had	 come	 to	 an	 end.	 He	 would	 have	 to	 surrender	 to	 those	 eager	 women.	 They
could	take	away	his	unease,	he	hoped.
Leave	 the	 hunt	 to	 the	 Barghast.	 Give	 their	 shamans	 something	 worthwhile	 to	 do,	 instead	 of	 getting
drunk	on	D’ras	beer	every	night.	Report	to	the	chief,	and	then	be	done	with	it.
He	already	regretted	riding	out	to	find	the	bodies.	For	all	he	knew	the	ghost	creature	was	close,	had	in	fact
been	watching	him.	Or	something	of	its	foul	sorcery	lingered	upon	the	scene,	and	now	he	was	marked,	and	it
would	 find	 him	 no	 matter	 where	 he	 went.	 He	 could	 almost	 smell	 that	 sorcery,	 clinging	 to	 his	 clothes.	 Acrid,
bitter	as	a	snake’s	belly.
	
Setoc,	who	had	once	been	named	Stayandi,	and	who	in	her	dreams	was	witness	to	strange	scenes	of	familiar


faces	 speaking	 in	 strange	 tongues,	 of	 laughter	 and	 love	 and	 tenderness—an	 age	 in	 the	 time	 before	 her
beasthood—stood	facing	the	empty	north.
She	 had	 seen	 the	 four	 dogs	 come	 into	 the	 camp,	 in	 itself	 an	 event	 unworthy	 of	 much	 attention,	 and	 if	 the
patrol	was	late	in	returning,	well,	perhaps	they	had	surprised	a	mule	deer	and	made	a	kill,	thus	explaining	the
absence	 of	 two	 dogs	 from	 the	 pack,	 as	 the	 beasts	 would	 have	 been	 strapped	 to	 a	 travois	 to	 carry	 back	 the
meat.	Explanations	such	as	these	served	for	the	moment,	despite	the	obvious	flaws	in	logic	(these	four	would
have	 remained	 with	 the	 patrol	 in	 such	 a	 case,	 feeding	 on	 the	 butchered	 carcass	 and	 its	 offal	 and	 whatnot);
although	the	truth	of	it	was	Setoc	spared	few	thoughts	for	what	interpretations	the	nearby	Barghast	might	kick
up	 in	 small	 swirls	 of	 agitated	 dust,	 as	 they	 tracked	 with	 their	 eyes	 the	 sweat-lathered	 beasts,	 or	 for	 their
growing	alarm	when	the	dogs	then	sank	down	on	to	their	bellies.
So,	 she	 watched	 as	 a	 dozen	 or	 so	 warriors	 gathered	 weapons	 and	 slowly	 converged	 on	 the	 exhausted
beasts,	and	then	returned	her	attention	to	the	north.
Yes,	the	animals	stank	of	death.
And	the	wild	wolves	in	the	emptiness	beyond,	who	had	given	her	life,	had	howled	with	the	dawn	their	tale	of
terror.
Yes,	her	first	family	ever	remained	close	by,	accorded	a	kind	of	holy	protection	in	the	legend	that	was	the
girl’s	finding—no	Barghast	would	hunt	the	animals,	and	now	even	the	Akrynnai	had	been	told	the	story	of	her
birth	 among	 the	 pack,	 of	 the	 lone	 warrior’s	 discovery	 of	 her.	 Spirit-blessed,	 they	 now	 all	 said	 when	 looking
upon	her.	The	holder	of	a	thousand	hearts.
At	first,	that	last	title	had	confused	Setoc,	but	her	memories	slowly	awakened,	with	each	day	that	she	grew
older,	taller,	sharper-eyed.	Yes,	she	held	within	herself	a	thousand	hearts,	even	more.	Wolf	gifts.	Milk	she	had
suckled,	milk	of	blood,	milk	of	a	thousand	slain	brothers	and	sisters.	And	did	she	not	recall	a	night	of	terror	and
slaughter?	A	night	fleeing	in	the	darkness?
They	spoke	of	her	legend,	and	even	the	shoulder-seers	made	her	offerings	and	would	come	up	and	touch
her	to	ease	their	troubled	expressions.
And	now	the	Great	Warlock,	the	Finder	of	the	Barghast	Gods,	the	one	named	Cafal,	had	come	to	the	Gadra,
to	speak	with	her,	to	search	her	soul	if	she	so	permitted	it.
The	wild	wolves	cried	out	to	her,	their	minds	a	confused	tumult	of	fear	and	worry.	Anxious	for	their	child,
yes,	and	for	a	future	time	when	storms	gathered	from	every	horizon.	They	understood	that	she	would	be	at	the
very	heart	of	that	celestial	conflagration.	They	begged	to	sacrifice	their	own	lives	so	that	she	might	live.	And
that,	she	would	not	permit.
If	she	was	spirit-blessed,	then	the	wolves	were	the	spirits	that	had	so	blessed	her.	If	she	was	a	thing	to	be
worshipped	here	among	the	Barghast,	then	she	was	but	a	symbol	of	the	wild	and	it	was	this	wild	that	must	be
worshipped—if	only	they	could	see	that.
She	glanced	back	at	the	cowering	dogs,	and	felt	a	rush	of	sorrowful	regret	at	what	such	beasts	could	have
been,	if	their	wildness	was	not	so	chained,	so	bound	and	muzzled.
God,	my	children,	does	not	await	us	in	the	wilderness.	God,	my	children,	is	the	wilderness.
Witness	its	laws	and	be	humbled.
In	humility,	find	peace.
But	know	this:	peace	is	not	always	life.	Sometimes,	peace	is	death.	In	the	face	of	this,	how	can	one
not	be	humble?
The	wild	laws	are	the	only	laws.
She	would	give	these	words	to	Cafal.	She	would	see	in	his	face	their	effect.
And	then	she	would	tell	him	that	the	Gadra	clan	was	going	to	die,	and	that	many	other	Barghast	clans	would
follow.	She	would	 warn	 him	to	look	to	the	skies,	 for	from	 the	 skies	death	was	coming.	She	would	warn	 him
against	further	journeys—he	must	return	to	his	own	clan.	He	must	make	peace	with	the	spirit	of	his	own	kin.
The	peace	of	life,	before	the	arrival	of	the	peace	of	death.
Warriors	had	gathered	round	the	dogs,	readying	weapons	and	such.	Tension	flowed	out	from	them	in	ripples,
spreading	through	the	camp.	In	moments	a	warleader	would	be	selected	from	among	the	score	or	so	milling
about.	Setoc	pitied	them	all,	but	especially	that	doomed	leader.
A	wind	was	blowing	in	from	the	east,	scratching	loose	her	long	sun-bleached	hair	until	it	whispered	across
her	face	like	withered	grass.	And	still	the	stench	of	death	filled	her	senses.


	
Cafal’s	heavy	features	had	broadened,	grown	more	robust	since	his	youth,	and	there	were	deeply	etched	lines
of	stress	between	his	brows	and	framing	his	mouth.	Years	ago,	in	a	pit	beneath	a	temple	floor,	he	had	spoken
with	 the	 One	 Who	 Blesses,	 with	 the	 Malazan	 captain,	 Ganoes	 Paran.	 And,	 seeking	 to	 impress	 the	 man—
seeking	 to	 prove	 that,	 somehow,	 his	 wisdom	 belied	 his	 few	 years—he	 had	 uttered	 words	 he	 had	 heard	 his
father	use,	claiming	them	as	his	own.
‘A	man	possessing	power	must	act	decisively	.	.	.	else	it	trickle	away	through	his	fingers.’
The	observation,	while	undoubtedly	true,	now	echoed	sourly.	The	voice	that	made	that	pronouncement,	back
then,	was	all	wrong.	It	had	no	right	to	the	words.	Cafal	could	not	believe	his	own	pretensions	uttered	by	that
younger	self,	that	bold,	clear-eyed	fool.
A	 pointless,	 stupid	 accident	 had	 stolen	 away	 his	 father,	 Humbrall	 Taur.	 For	 all	 that	 the	 huge,	 wise	 warrior
had	wielded	his	power,	neither	wisdom	nor	that	power	availed	him	against	blind	chance.	The	lesson	was	plain,
the	 message	 bleak	 and	 humbling.	 Power	 was	 proof	 against	 nothing,	 and	 that	 was	 the	 only	 wisdom	 worth
recognizing.
He	wondered	what	had	happened	to	that	miserable	Malazan	captain,	chosen	and	cursed	(and	was	there	any
real	difference	between	the	two?),	and	he	wondered,	too,	why	he	now	longed	to	speak	with	Ganoes	Paran,	to
exchange	a	new	set	of	words,	these	ones	more	honest,	more	measured,	more	knowing.	Yes,	the	young	were
quick	 with	 judgement,	 quick	 to	 chastise	 their	 torpid	 elders.	 The	 young	 understood	 nothing	 about	 the	 value	 of
sober	contemplation.
Ganoes	Paran	had	been	indecisive,	in	Cafal’s	eyes	back	then.	Pitifully,	frustratingly	so.	But	to	the	Cafal	of
this	 day,	 here	 on	 this	 foreign	 plain	 under	 foreign	 skies,	 that	 Malazan	 of	 years	 ago	 had	 been	 rightly	 cautious,
measured	by	a	wisdom	to	which	young	Cafal	had	been	woefully	blind.	And	this	is	how	we	gauge	a	life,	this
is	how	we	build	the	bridge	from	what	we	were	to	what	we	are.	Ganoes	Paran,	do	you	ever	look	down?
Do	you	ever	stand	frozen	in	place	by	that	depthless	chasm	below?
Do	you	ever	dream	of	jumping?
Onos	Toolan	had	been	given	all	the	power	Cafal’s	own	father	had	once	commanded,	and	there	was	nothing
undeserved	 in	 that.	 And	 now,	 slowly,	 inexorably,	 it	 was	 trickling	 away	 through	 the	 fingers	 of	 that	 ancient
warrior.	Cafal	could	do	nothing	to	stop	it—he	was	as	helpless	as	Tool	himself.	Once	again,	blind	chance	had
conspired	against	the	Barghast.
When	 word	 reached	 him	 that	 wardogs	 had	 returned	 to	 the	 camp—beasts	 bereft	 of	 escort	 and	 therefore
mutely	announcing	that	something	ill	had	befallen	a	scouting	troop—and	that	a	war-party	was	forming	to	set
out	 on	 the	 back-trail,	 Cafal	 drew	 on	 his	 bhederin-hide	 cloak,	 grunting	 beneath	 its	 weight,	 and	 kicked	 at	 the
ragged,	tufted	doll	crumpled	on	the	tent	floor	near	the	foot	of	his	cot.	‘Wake	up.’
The	 sticksnare	 spat	 and	 snarled	 as	 it	 scrambled	 upright.	 ‘Very	 funny.	 Respect	 your	 elders,	 O	 Great
Warlock.’
The	 irony	 oozing	 like	 pine	 sap	 from	 the	 title	 made	 Cafal	 wince,	 and	 then	 he	 cursed	 himself	 when
Talamandas	 snorted	 in	 amusement	 upon	 seeing	 the	 effect	 of	 his	 mockery.	 He	 paused	 at	 the	 entrance.	 ‘We
should	have	burned	you	on	a	pyre	long	ago,	sticksnare.’
‘Too	many	value	me	to	let	you	do	that.	I	travel	the	warrens.	I	deliver	messages	and	treat	with	foreign	gods.
We	speak	of	matters	of	vast	importance.	War,	betrayals,	alliances,	betrayals—’
‘You’re	repeating	yourself.’
‘—and	war.’
‘And	are	the	Barghast	gods	pleased	with	your	efforts,	Talamandas?	Or	do	they	snarl	with	fury	as	you	flit
this	way	and	that	at	the	behest	of	human	gods?’
‘They	cannot	live	in	isolation!	We	cannot!	They	are	stubborn!	They	lack	all	sophistication!	They	embarrass
me!’
Sighing,	Cafal	stepped	outside.
The	sticksnare	scrambled	after	him,	skittish	as	a	stoat.	‘If	we	fight	alone,	we	will	all	die.	We	need	allies!’
Cafal	paused	and	looked	down,	wondering	if	Talamandas	was,	perhaps,	insane.	How	many	times	could	they
repeat	this	same	conversation?	‘Allies	against	whom?’	he	asked,	as	he	had	done	countless	times	before.
‘Against	what	comes!’
And	there,	the	same	meaningless	answer,	the	kind	of	answer	neither	Cafal	nor	Tool	could	use.	Hissing	under


his	breath,	the	Great	Warlock	set	off	once	more,	ignoring	Talamandas	who	scrambled	in	his	wake.
The	war-party	had	left	the	camp.	At	a	trot,	the	warriors	were	already	reaching	the	north	ridge.	Once	over
the	crest,	they	would	vanish	from	sight.
Cafal	 saw	 the	 wolf-child,	 Setoc,	 standing	 at	 the	 camp’s	 edge,	 evidently	 watching	 the	 warriors,	 and
something	in	her	stance	suggested	she	longed	to	lope	after	them,	teeth	bared	and	hackles	raised,	eager	to	join
in	the	hunt.
He	set	out	in	that	direction.
There	 was	 no	 doubt	 that	 she	 was	 Letherii,	 but	 that	 legacy	 existed	 only	 on	 the	 surface—her	 skin,	 her
features,	 the	 traits	 of	 whatever	 parents	 had	 given	 her	 birth	 and	 then	 lost	 her.	 But	 that	 nascent	 impression	 of
civilization	had	since	faded,	eroded	away.	She	had	been	given	back	to	the	wild,	a	virgin	sacrifice	whose	soul
had	been	devoured	whole.	She	belonged	to	the	wolves,	and,	perhaps,	to	the	Wolf	God	and	Goddess,	the	Lord
and	Lady	of	the	Beast	Throne.
The	Barghast	had	come	to	find	the	Grey	Swords,	to	fight	at	their	side—believing	that	Toc	Anaster	and	his
army	knew	the	enemy	awaiting	them.	The	Barghast	gods	had	been	eager	to	serve	Togg	and	Fanderay,	to	run
with	the	bold	pack	in	search	of	blood	and	glory.	They	had	been,	Cafal	now	understood,	worse	than	children.
The	Grey	Swords	were	little	more	than	rotting	meat	when	the	first	scouts	found	them.
So	much	for	glory.
Was	 Setoc	 the	 inheritor	 of	 the	 blessing	 once	 bestowed	 upon	 the	 Grey	 Swords?	 Was	 she	 now	 the	 child	 of
Togg	and	Fanderay?
Even	Talamandas	did	not	know.
‘Not	her!’	the	sticksnare	now	snarled	behind	him.	‘Cast	her	out,	Cafal!	Banish	her	to	the	wastes	where	she
belongs!’
But	he	continued	on.	When	he	was	a	dozen	paces	away,	she	briefly	glanced	back	at	him	before	returning
her	attention	upon	the	empty	lands	to	the	north.	Moments	later,	he	reached	her	side.
‘They	are	going	to	die,’	she	said.
‘What?	Who?’
‘The	 warriors	 who	 just	 left.	 They	 will	 die	 as	 did	 the	 scout	 troop.	 You	 have	 found	 the	 enemy,	 Great
Warlock	.	.	.	but	it	is	the	wrong	enemy.	Again.’
Cafal	swung	round.	He	saw	Talamandas	squatting	in	the	grasses	five	paces	back.	‘Chase	them	down,’	he
told	the	sticksnare.	‘Bring	them	back.’
‘Believe	nothing	she	says!’
‘This	is	not	a	request,	Talamandas.’
With	a	mocking	cackle	the	sticksnare	darted	past,	bounding	like	a	bee-stung	hare	on	to	the	trail	of	the	warparty.
‘There	is	no	use	in	doing	that,’	Setoc	said.	‘This	entire	clan	is	doomed.’
‘Such	pronouncements	weary	me,’	Cafal	replied.	‘You	are	like	a	poison	thorn	in	this	clan’s	heart,	stealing	its
strength,	its	pride.’
‘Is	that	why	you’ve	come?’	she	asked.	‘To	.	.	.	pluck	out	this	thorn?’
‘If	I	must.’
‘Then	why	are	you	waiting?’
‘I	 would	 know	 the	 source	 of	 your	 pronouncements,	 Setoc.	 Are	 you	 plagued	 with	 visions?	 Do	 spirits	 visit
your	dreams?	What	have	you	seen?	What	do	you	know?’
‘The	rhinazan	whisper	in	my	ear,’	she	said.
Was	she	taunting	him?	‘Winged	lizards	do	not	whisper	anything,	Setoc.’
‘No?’
‘No.	Is	nonsense	all	you	can	give	me?	Am	I	to	be	nothing	but	the	object	of	your	contempt?’
‘The	 Awl	 warrior,	 the	 one	 so	 aptly	 named	 Torrent,	 has	 found	 the	 war-party.	 He	 adds	 to	 your	 doll’s
exhortations.	But	.	.	.	the	warleader	is	young.	Fearless.	Why	do	the	fools	choose	one	such	as	that?’
‘When	 older	 warriors	 see	 a	 pack	 of	 wardogs	 drag	 themselves	 into	 the	 camp,’	 said	 Cafal,	 ‘they	 hold	 a
meeting	to	discuss	matters.	The	young	ones	clutch	their	weapons	and	leap	to	their	feet,	eyes	blazing.’
‘It	is	a	wonder,’	she	observed,	‘that	any	warrior	ever	manages	to	get	old.’
Yes.	It	is.


‘The	Awl	has	convinced	them.’
‘Not	Talamandas?’
‘No.	They	say	dead	warlocks	never	have	anything	good	to	say.	They	say	your	sticksnare	kneels	at	the	foot
of	the	Death	Reaper.	They	call	it	a	Malazan	puppet.’
By	the	spirits,	I	cannot	argue	against	any	of	that!
‘You	 sense	 all	 that	 takes	 place	 on	 these	 plains,	 Setoc.	 What	 do	 you	 know	 of	 the	 enemy	 that	 killed	 the
scouts?’
‘Only	what	the	rhinazan	whisper,	Great	Warlock.’
Winged	 lizards	 again	 .	 .	 .	 spirits	 below!	 ‘In	 our	 homeland,	 on	 the	 high	 desert	 mesas,	 there	 are	 smaller
versions	that	are	called	rhizan.’
‘Smaller,	yes.’
He	frowned.	‘Meaning?’
She	shrugged.	‘Just	that.	Smaller.’
He	wanted	to	shake	her,	rattle	loose	her	secrets.	‘Who	killed	our	scouts?’
She	bared	her	teeth	but	did	not	face	him.	‘I	have	already	told	you,	Great	Warlock.	Tell	me,	have	you	seen
the	green	spears	in	the	sky	at	night?’
‘Of	course.’
‘What	are	they?’
‘I	don’t	 know.	 Things	 have	 been	 known	 to	 fall	 from	 the	 sky,	 whilst	others	 simply	 pass	 by	 like	 wagons	 set
ablaze,	crossing	the	firmament	night	after	night	for	weeks	or	months	.	.	.	and	then	vanishing	as	mysteriously	as
they	arrived.’
‘Uncaring	of	the	world	below.’
‘Yes.	The	firmament	is	speckled	with	countless	worlds	no	different	from	ours.	To	the	stars	and	to	the	great
burning	wagons,	we	are	as	motes	of	dust.’
She	 turned	 to	 study	 him	 as	 he	 spoke	 these	 words.	 ‘That	 is	 .	 .	 .	 interesting.	 This	 is	 what	 the	 Barghast
believe?’
‘What	do	the	wolves	believe,	Setoc?’
‘Tell	me,’	she	said,	‘when	a	hunter	throws	a	javelin	at	a	fleeing	antelope,	does	the	hunter	aim	at	the	beast?’
‘Yes	and	no.	To	strike	true,	the	hunter	must	throw	into	the	space	in	front	of	the	antelope—into	the	path	it
will	take.’	He	studied	her.	‘Are	you	saying	that	these	spears	of	green	fire	are	the	javelins	of	a	hunter,	and	that
we	are	the	antelope?’
‘And	if	the	antelope	darts	this	way,	dodges	that?’
‘A	good	hunter	will	not	miss.’
The	war-party	had	reappeared	on	the	ridge,	and	accompanying	it	was	the	Awl	warrior	on	his	horse,	along
with	two	more	dogs.
Cafal	said,	‘I	will	find	Stolmen,	now.	He	will	want	to	speak	with	you,	Setoc.’	He	hesitated,	and	then	added,
‘Perhaps	the	Gadra	warchief	can	glean	clearer	answers	from	you,	for	in	that	I	have	surely	failed.’
‘The	wolves	are	clear	enough,’	she	replied,	‘when	speaking	of	war.	All	else	confuses	them.’
‘So	you	indeed	serve	the	Lady	and	Lord	of	the	Beast	Throne.	As	would	a	priestess.’
She	shrugged.
‘Who,’	Cafal	asked	again,	‘is	the	enemy?’
Setoc	looked	at	him.	‘The	enemy,	Great	Warlock,	is	peace.’	And	she	smiled.
	
The	 ribbers	 had	 dragged	 Visto’s	 body	 a	 dozen	 or	 so	 paces	 out	 into	 the	 flat,	 until	 something	 warned	 them
against	eating	the	wrinkled,	leathery	flesh	of	the	dead	boy.	With	the	dawn,	Badalle	and	a	few	others	walked
out	to	stand	round	the	shrunken,	stomach-burst	thing	that	had	once	been	Visto.
The	others	waited	for	Badalle	to	find	her	words.
Rutt	was	late	in	arriving	as	he	had	to	check	on	Held	and	make	adjustments	to	the	baby’s	wrap.	By	the	time
he	joined	them,	Badalle	was	ready.	‘Hear	me,	then,’	she	said,	‘at	Visto’s	deading.’
She	 blew	 flies	 from	 her	 lips	 and	 then	 scanned	 the	 faces	 arrayed	 round	 her.	 There	 was	 an	 expression	 she
wanted	to	find,	but	couldn’t.	Even	remembering	what	it	looked	like	was	hard,	no,	impossible.	She’d	lost	it,	truth
be	told.	But	wanted	it,	and	she	knew	she	would	recognize	it	as	soon	as	she	saw	it	again.	An	expression	.	.	.


some	kind	of	expression	.	.	.	what	was	it?	After	a	moment,	she	spoke,
‘We	all	come	from	some	place
And	Visto	was	no	different
He	come
From	some
Place
And	it	was	different	and
It	was	the	same	no	different
If	you	know	what	I	mean
And	you	do
You	have	to
All	you	standing	here
The	point	is	that	Visto
He	couldn’t	remember
Anything	about	that	place
Except	that	he	come	from	it
And	that’s	like	lots	of	you
So	let’s	say	now
He’s	gone	back	there
To	that	place
Where	he	come	from
And	everything	he	sees
He	remembers
And	everything	he	remembers
Is	new’
They	 always	 waited,	 never	 knowing	 if	 she	 was	 finished	 until	 it	 became	 obvious	 that	 she	 was,	 and	 in	 that
time	Badalle	looked	down	at	Visto.	The	eggs	of	the	Satra	Riders	clung	like	crumbs	to	Visto’s	lips,	as	if	he	had
been	gobbling	down	cake.	The	adult	riders	had	chewed	out	through	his	stomach	and	no	one	knew	where	they
went,	maybe	into	the	ground—they	did	all	that	at	night.
Maybe	 some	 of	 the	 ribbers	 had	 been	 careless,	 with	 their	 eager	 jaws	 and	 all,	 which	 was	 good	 since	 then
there’d	 be	 fewer	 of	 them	 strong	 enough	 to	 launch	 attacks	 on	 the	 ribby	 snake.	 It	 wasn’t	 as	 bad	 having	 them
totter	 along	 in	 the	 distance,	 keeping	 pace,	 getting	 weaker	 just	 as	 the	 children	 did,	 until	 they	 lay	 down	 and
weren’t	 trouble	 any	 more.	 You	 could	 live	 with	 that,	 no	 different	 from	 the	 crows	 and	 vultures	 overhead.
Animals	showed,	didn’t	they,	how	to	believe	in	patience.
She	lifted	her	head	and	as	if	that	was	a	signal	the	others	turned	away	and	walked	slowly	back	to	the	trail
where	the	ones	who	could	were	standing,	getting	ready	for	the	day’s	march.
Rutt	said,	‘I	liked	Visto.’
‘We	all	liked	Visto.’
‘We	shouldn’t	have.’
‘No.’
‘Because	that	makes	it	harder.’
‘The	Satra	Riders	liked	Visto	too,	even	more	than	we	did.’
Rutt	shifted	Held	from	the	crook	of	his	right	arm	into	the	crook	of	his	left	arm.	‘I’m	mad	at	Visto	now.’
Brayderal,	who	had	showed	up	to	walk	at	the	snake’s	head	only	two	days	ago—maybe	coming	from	back
down	 the	 snake’s	 body,	 maybe	 coming	 from	 somewhere	 else—walked	 out	 to	 stand	 close	 to	 them,	 as	 if	 she
wanted	 to	 be	 part	 of	 something.	 Something	 made	 up	 of	 Rutt	 and	 Held	 and	 Badalle.	 But	 whatever	 that
something	was,	it	had	no	room	for	Brayderal.	Visto’s	deading	didn’t	leave	a	hole.	The	space	just	closed	up.
Besides,	something	about	the	tall,	bony	girl	made	Badalle	uneasy.	Her	face	was	too	white	beneath	all	this
sun.	 She	 reminded	 Badalle	 of	 the	 bone-skins—what	 were	 they	 called	 again?	 Quisiters?	 Quitters?	 Could	 be,
yes,	the	Quitters,	the	bone-skins	who	stood	taller	than	anyone	else	and	from	that	height	they	saw	everything


and	commanded	everyone	and	when	they	said	Starve	and	die,	why,	that’s	just	what	everyone	did.
If	 they	 knew	 about	 the	 Chal	 Managal,	 they	 would	 be	 angry.	 They	 might	 even	 chase	 after	 it	 and	 find	 the
head,	 find	 Rutt	 and	 Badalle,	 and	 then	 do	 that	 quitting	 thing	 with	 the	 hands,	 the	 thing	 that	 broke	 the	 necks	 of
people	like	Rutt	and	Badalle.
‘We	would	be	.	.	.	quitted	unto	deading.’
‘Badalle?’
She	looked	at	Rutt,	blew	flies	from	her	lips,	and	then—ignoring	Brayderal	as	if	she	wasn’t	there—set	off	to
rejoin	the	ribby	snake.
The	 track	 stretched	 westward,	 straight	 like	 an	 insult	 to	 nature,	 and	 at	 the	 distant	 end	 of	 the	 stony,	 lifeless
ground,	 the	 horizon	 glittered	 as	 if	 crusted	 with	 crushed	 glass.	 She	 heard	 Rutt’s	 scrabbling	 steps	 coming	 up
behind	 her,	 and	 then	 veering	 slightly	 as	 he	 made	 for	 the	 front	 of	 the	 column.	 She	 might	 be	 his	 second	 but
Badalle	wouldn’t	walk	with	him.	Rutt	had	Held.	That	was	enough	for	Rutt.
Badalle	had	her	words,	and	that	was	almost	too	much.
She	 saw	 Brayderal	 follow	 Rutt.	 They	 were	 almost	 the	 same	 height,	 but	 Rutt	 looked	 the	 weaker,	 closer	 to
deading	than	Brayderal,	and	seeing	that,	Badalle	felt	a	flash	of	anger.	It	should	have	been	the	other	way	round.
They	needed	Rutt.	They	didn’t	need	Brayderal.
Unless	she	was	planning	on	stepping	into	Rutt’s	place	when	Rutt	finally	broke,	planning	on	being	the	snake’s
new	head,	its	slithery	tongue,	its	scaly	jaws.	Yes,	that	might	be	what	Badalle	was	seeing.	And	Brayderal	would
take	up	Held	all	wrapped	tight	and	safe	from	the	sun,	and	they’d	all	set	out	on	another	day,	with	her	instead	of
Rutt	leading	them.
That	made	a	kind	of	sense.	No	different	than	with	the	ribber	packs—when	the	leader	got	sick	or	lame	or
just	wasn’t	strong	enough	any	more,	why,	that	other	ribber	that	showed	up	and	started	trotting	alongside	it,	it
was	there	just	for	this	moment.	To	take	over.	To	keep	things	going.
No	different	from	what	sons	did	to	fathers	and	daughters	did	to	mothers,	and	princes	to	kings	and	princesses
to	queens.
Brayderal	walked	almost	at	Rutt’s	side,	up	there	at	the	head.	Maybe	she	talked	with	Rutt,	maybe	she	didn’t.
Some	things	didn’t	need	talking	about,	and	besides,	Rutt	wasn’t	one	to	say	much	anyway.
‘I	don’t	like	Brayderal.’
If	anyone	nearby	heard	her,	they	gave	no	sign.
Badalle	blew	to	scatter	the	flies.	They	needed	to	find	water.	Even	half	a	day	without	it	and	the	snake	would
get	too	ribby,	especially	in	this	heat.
On	this	morning,	she	did	as	she	always	did.	Eating	her	fill	of	words,	drinking	deep	the	spaces	in	between,
and	mad—so	mad—that	none	of	it	gave	her	any	strength.
	
Saddic	had	been	Rutt’s	second	follower,	the	first	being	Held.	He	now	walked	among	the	four	or	so	moving	in	a
loose	clump	a	few	paces	behind	Rutt	and	the	new	girl.	Badalle	was	a	little	way	back,	in	the	next	clump.	Saddic
worshipped	 her,	 but	 he	 would	 not	 draw	 close	 to	 her,	 not	 yet,	 because	 there	 would	 be	 no	 point.	 He	 had	 few
words	 of	 his	 own—he’d	 lost	 most	 of	 them	 early	 on	 in	 this	 journey.	 So	 long	 as	 he	 was	 in	 hearing	 range	 of
Badalle,	he	was	content.
She	fed	him.	With	her	sayings	and	her	seeings.	She	kept	Saddic	alive.
He	 thought	 about	 what	 she	 had	 said	 for	 Visto’s	 deading.	 About	 how	 some	 of	 it	 wasn’t	 true,	 the	 bit	 about
Visto	 not	 remembering	 anything	 about	 where	 he’d	 come	 from.	 He’d	 remembered	 too	 much,	 in	 fact.	 So,
Badalle	had	knowingly	told	an	untruth	about	Visto.	At	his	deading.	Why	had	she	done	that?
Because	Visto	was	gone.	Her	words	weren’t	for	him	because	he	was	gone.	They	were	for	us.	She	was
telling	 us	 to	 give	 up	 remembering.	 Give	 it	 up	 so	 when	 we	 find	 it	 again	 it	 all	 feels	 new.	 Not	 the
remembering	 itself	 but	 the	 things	 we	 remembered.	 The	 cities	 and	 villages	 and	 the	 families	 and	 the
laughing.	The	water	and	the	food	and	full	stomachs.	Is	that	what	she	was	telling	us?
Well,	he	had	his	meal	for	the	day,	didn’t	he?	She	was	generous	that	way.
The	feet	at	the	ends	of	his	legs	were	like	wads	of	leather.	They	didn’t	feel	much	and	that	was	a	relief	since
the	stones	on	the	track	were	sharp	and	so	many	others	had	bleeding	feet	making	it	hard	to	walk.	The	ground
was	even	worse	to	either	side	of	the	trail.
Badalle	was	smart.	She	was	the	brain	behind	the	jaws,	the	tongue.	She	took	what	the	snake’s	eyes	saw.	She


made	 sense	 of	 what	 the	 tongue	 tasted.	 She	 gave	 names	 to	 the	 things	 of	 this	 new	 world.	 The	 moths	 that
pretended	 to	 be	 leaves	 and	 the	 trees	 that	 invited	 the	 moths	 to	 be	 leaves	 so	 that	 five	 trees	 shared	 one	 set	 of
leaves	between	them,	and	when	the	trees	got	hungry	off	went	the	leaves,	looking	for	food.	No	other	tree	could
do	that,	and	so	no	other	tree	lived	on	the	Elan.
She	talked	about	the	jhaval,	the	carrion	birds	no	bigger	than	sparrows,	that	were	the	first	to	swarm	a	body
when	it	fell,	using	their	sharp	beaks	to	stab	and	drink.	Sometimes	the	jhaval	didn’t	even	wait	for	the	body	to
fall.	Saddic	had	seen	them	attacking	a	wounded	ribber,	even	vultures	and	crows.	Sometimes	each	other,	too,
when	the	frenzy	was	on	them.
Satra	Riders,	as	what	did	in	poor	Visto,	and	flow-worms	that	moved	in	a	seething	carpet,	pushing	beneath	a
corpse	to	squirm	in	the	shade.	They	bit	and	drenched	themselves	in	whatever	seeped	down	and	as	the	ground
softened	down	they	went,	finally	able	to	pierce	the	skin	of	the	blistered	earth.
Saddic	looked	in	wonder	at	this	new	world,	listened	in	awe	as	Badalle	gave	the	strange	things	names	and
made	for	them	all	a	new	language.
Close	 to	 noon	 they	 found	 a	 waterhole.	 The	 crumbled	 foundations	 of	 makeshift	 corrals	 surrounded	 the
shallow,	muddy	pit.
The	snake	halted,	and	then	began	a	slow,	tortured	crawl	into	and	out	of	the	churned-up	mud.	The	wait	alone
killed	scores,	and	even	as	children	emerged	from	the	morass,	slathered	black,	some	fell	to	convulsions,	curling
round	mud-filled	guts.	Some	spilled	out	their	bowels,	fouling	things	for	everyone	that	came	after.
It	was	another	bad	day	for	the	Chal	Managal.
Later	in	the	afternoon,	during	the	worst	of	the	heat,	they	spied	a	greyish	cloud	on	 the	 horizon	 ahead.	 The
ribbers	began	howling,	dancing	in	terror,	and	as	the	cloud	rushed	closer,	the	dogs	finally	fled.
What	looked	like	rain	wasn’t	rain.	What	looked	like	a	cloud	wasn’t	a	cloud.
These	were	locusts,	but	not	the	normal	kind	of	locusts.
Wings	glittering,	the	swarm	filling	half	the	sky,	and	then	all	the	sky,	the	sound	a	clicking	roar—the	rasp	of
wings,	the	snapping	open	of	jaws—each	creature	a	finger	long.	Out	from	within	the	cloud,	as	it	engulfed	the
column,	 lunged	 buzzing	 knots	 where	 the	 insects	 massed	 almost	 solid.	 When	 one	 of	 these	 hammered	 into	 a
huddle	 of	 children,	 shrieks	 of	 pain	 and	 horror	 erupted—the	 flash	 of	 red	 meat,	 and	 then	 bone—and	 then	 the
horde	swept	on,	leaving	behind	clumps	of	hair	and	heaps	of	gleaming	bone.
These	locusts	ate	meat.
This	was	the	first	day	of	the	Shards.


Chapter	Five
The	painter	must	be	mute
The	sculptor	deaf
Talents	are	passed	out
Singly
As	everyone	knows
Oh	let	them	dabble
We	smile	our	indulgence
No	end	to	our	talent
For	allowances
But	talents	are	passed	out
Singly
We	permit	you	one
Worth	lauding
The	rest	may	do	service
In	serviceable	fashion
But	greatness?
That	is	a	title	passed	out
Singly
Don’t	be	greedy
Over	trying	our	indulgence
Permission
Belongs	to	us
Behind	the	makeshift	wall—
The	bricks	of	our
Reasonable	scepticism.
	
A	POEM	THAT	S ERVES
ASTATTLE	P OHM

Corporal	Tarr’s	memory	of	his	father	could	be	entirely	summed	up	inside	a	single	recollected	quote,	ringing	like
Talian	death	bells	across	the	breadth	of	Tarr’s	childhood.	A	raw,	stentorian	pronouncement	battering	down	on
the	flinching	son.	‘Sympathy?	Aye,	I	have	sympathy—for	the	dead	and	no	one	else!	Ain’t	nobody	in	this	world
deserves	sympathy	unless	they’re	dead!	You	understanding	me,	son?’
‘You	understanding	me,	son?’
Yes,	 sir.	 Good	 words	 for	 making	 a	 soldier.	 Kept	 the	 brain	 from	 getting	 too	 .	 .	 .	 cluttered.	 With	 things	 that
might	get	in	the	way	of	holding	his	shield	just	so,	stabbing	out	with	his	short	sword	right	there.	It	was	a	kind	of
discipline,	what	others	might	call	obstinate	stupidity,	but	that	simply	showed	that	lots	of	people	didn’t	understand
soldiering.
Teaching	people	to	be	disciplined,	he	was	discovering,	wasn’t	easy.	He	walked	the	length	of	Letherii	soldiers
—and	 aye,	 that	 description	 was	 a	 sorry	 stretch—who	 stood	 at	 what	 passed	 for	 attention	 for	 these	 locals.	 A
row	of	red	faces	in	the	blazing	sunlight,	dripping	like	melting	wax.
‘Harridict	Brigade,’	Tarr	said	in	a	snarl,	‘what	kind	of	name	is	that?	Who	in	Hood’s	name	was	Harridict—
no,	don’t	answer	 me,	 you	 damned	 fool!	 Some	 useless	 general,	 I’d	 imagine,	 or	 worse,	 some	 merchant	 house
happy	to	kit	you	all	in	its	house	colours.	Merchants!	Businesses	got	no	place	in	the	military.	We	built	an	empire
across	 three	 continents	 by	 keeping	 ’em	 outa	 things!	 Businesses	 are	 the	 vultures	 of	 war,	 and	 maybe	 those


beaks	look	like	smiles,	but	take	it	from	me,	they’re	just	beaks.’
He	halted	then,	his	repertoire	of	words	exhausted,	and	gestured	to	Cuttle,	who	stepped	up	with	a	hard	grin—
the	idiot	loved	this	Braven	role,	as	it	was	being	called	now	(‘Letherii	got	master	sergeants;	we	Malazans	got
Braven	 Sergeants,	 and	 say	 it	 toothy	 when	 you	 say	 it,	 lads,	 and	 be	 sure	 to	 keep	 the	 joke	 private’—so	 said
Ruthan	Gudd	and	that,	Tarr	had	decided	then	and	there,	was	a	soldier).
Cuttle	was	wide	and	solid,	a	perfect	fit	to	the	role.	Wider	than	Tarr	but	shorter	by	half	a	head,	which	meant
that	Tarr	was	an	even	better	fit.	Not	one	of	these	miserable	excuses	for	soldiers	could	stand	toe	to	toe	with
either	 Malazan	 for	 anything	 past	 twenty	 heartbeats,	 and	 that	 was	 the	 awful	 truth.	 They	 were	 soft.	 ‘This
brigade,’	Cuttle	now	said,	loud	and	contemptuous,	‘is	a	waste	of	space!’	He	paused	to	glare	at	the	faces,	which
were	slowly	hardening	under	the	assault.
About	time.	Tarr	watched	on,	thumbs	hooked	now	in	his	weapon	belt.
‘Aye,’	Cuttle	went	on,	‘I’ve	listened	to	your	drunken	stories—’	and	his	tone	invited	them	to	sit	at	his	table:
knowing	and	wise	and	damned	near	.	.	.	sympathetic.	‘And	aye,	I’ve	seen	for	myself	that	raw,	ugly	pig	you	call
magic	 hereabouts.	 Undisciplined—no	 finesse—brutal	 power	 but	 nothing	 clever.	 So,	 for	 you	 lot,	 battle	 means
eating	 dirt,	 and	 a	 battlefield	 is	 where	 hundreds	 die	 for	 no	 good	 reason.	 Your	 mages	 have	 made	 war	 a
miserable,	 useless	 joke—’	 and	 he	 spun	 round	 and	 stepped	 up	 to	 one	 soldier,	 nose	 to	 nose.	 ‘You!	 How	 many
times	has	this	brigade	taken	fifty	per	cent	or	more	losses	in	a	single	battle?’
The	soldier—and	Cuttle	had	chosen	well—almost	bared	his	teeth.	‘Seven	times,	Braven	Sergeant!’
‘Seventy-five	per	cent	losses?’
‘Four,	Braven	Sergeant!’
‘Losses	at	ninety?’
‘Once,	Braven	Sergeant,	but	not	ninety—one	hundred	per	cent,	Braven	Sergeant.’
Cuttle	let	his	jaw	drop.	‘One	hundred?’
‘Yes,	Braven	Sergeant!’
‘Wiped	out	to	the	last	soldier?’
‘Yes,	Braven	Sergeant!’
And	Cuttle	leaned	even	closer,	his	face	turning	crimson.	In	a	bellowing	shout,	he	said,	‘And	has	it	not	once
occurred	to	you—any	of	you—that	you	might	do	better	by	murdering	all	your	mages	at	the	very	start	of	the
battle?’
‘Then	the	other	side	would—’
‘You	parley	with	’em	first,	of	course—you	all	agree	to	butcher	the	bastards!’	He	reeled	back	and	threw
up	his	hands.	‘You	don’t	fight	wars!	You	don’t	fight	battles!	You	just	all	form	up	and	make	new	cemeteries!’
He	wheeled	on	them.	‘Are	you	all	idiots?’
	
On	a	balcony	overlooking	the	parade	grounds,	Brys	Beddict	winced.	Beside	him,	standing	in	the	shade,	Queen
Janath	grunted	and	then	said,	‘You	know,	he	has	a	point.’
‘It	is,	for	the	moment,’	Brys	said,	‘almost	irrelevant.	We	have	few	mages	of	any	stature	left,	and	even	those
ones	have	gone	to	ground—it	seems	there	is	a	quiet	revolution	under	way,	and	I	suspect	that	when	the	dust	has
settled,	 the	 entire	 discipline	 of	 sorcery	 will	 be	 transformed.’	 He	 hesitated,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘In	 any	 case,	 that
wasn’t	what	alarmed	me—listening	to	that	soldier	down	there.	It’s	their	notion	of	taking	matters	into	their	own
hands.’
‘An	invitation	to	mutiny,’	Janath	was	nodding,	‘but	you	could	look	at	it	another	way.	Their	kind	of	thinking	in
turn	 keeps	 their	 commanders	 in	 check—following	 orders	 is	 one	 thing,	 but	 if	 those	 orders	 are	 suicidal	 or	 just
plain	stupid	.	.	.’
‘The	thought	of	my	soldiers	second-guessing	me	at	every	turn	hardly	inspires	confidence.	I	am	beginning	to
regret	 employing	 these	 Malazans	 in	 the	 reshaping	 of	 the	 Letherii	 military.	 Perhaps	 the	 way	 they	 do	 things
works	for	them,	but	it	does	not	necessarily	follow	that	it	will	work	for	us.’
‘You	may	be	right,	Brys.	There	is	something	unusual	about	the	Malazans.	I	find	them	fascinating.	Imagine,
an	entire	civilization	that	does	not	suffer	fools.’
‘From	 what	 I	 have	 heard,’	 Brys	 pointed	 out,	 ‘that	 did	 not	 protect	 them	 from	 betrayal—their	 very	 own
Empress	was	prepared	to	sacrifice	them	all.’
‘But	they	did	not	kneel	to	the	axe,	did	they?’


‘I	see	your	point.’
‘There	exists	an	exchange	of	trust	between	the	ruler	and	the	ruled.	Abuse	that	from	either	direction	and	all
mutual	agreements	are	nullified.’
‘Civil	war.’
‘Unless	 one	 of	 the	 aggrieved	 parties	 has	 the	 option	 of	 simply	 leaving.	 Assuming	 it’s	 not	 interested	 in
retribution	or	vengeance.’
Brys	 thought	 about	 that	 for	 a	 time,	 watching	 the	 relentless	 bullying	 of	 his	 Letherii	 soldiers	 by	 those	 two
Bonehunters	in	the	yard	below.	‘Perhaps	they	have	things	to	teach	us	after	all,’	he	mused.
	
Cuttle	stepped	close	to	Tarr	and	hissed,	‘Gods	below,	Corporal,	they’re	worse	than	sheep!’
‘Been	thrashed	too	many	times,	that’s	their	problem.’
‘So	what	do	we	do	with	them?’
Tarr	shrugged.	‘All	I	can	think	of	is	thrash	’em	again.’
Cuttle’s	small	eyes	narrowed	on	his	corporal.	‘Somehow,	that	don’t	sound	right.’
Grimacing,	Tarr	looked	away.	‘I	know.	But	it’s	all	I’ve	got.	If	you’ve	a	better	idea,	feel	free,	sapper.’
‘I’ll	get	’em	marching	round—that’ll	give	us	time	to	think.’
	
‘There	must	be	some	clever	strategy	at	work	down	there,’	Brys	concluded	after	a	time,	and	then	he	turned	to
the	 Queen.	 ‘We	 should	 probably	 attend	 to	 Tehol—he	 said	 something	 about	 a	 meeting	 in	 advance	 of	 the
meeting	with	the	Adjunct.’
‘Actually,	that	was	Bugg.	Tehol	proposed	a	meeting	to	discuss	Bugg’s	idea	of	the	meeting	in	advance—oh,
listen	 to	 me!	 That	 man	 is	 like	 an	 infection!	 Yes,	 let	 us	 march	 with	 solemn	 purpose	 upon	 my	 husband—your
brother—and	at	least	find	out	whatever	needs	finding	out	before	the	Malazans	descend	upon	us.	What	must
they	think?	Our	King	wears	a	blanket!’
	
Lostara	 Yil’s	 hand	 crept	 to	 the	 knife	 at	 her	 hip	 and	 then	 drew	 back	 once	 more.	 A	 muttering	 whisper	 in	 her
head	was	telling	her	the	blade	needed	cleaning,	but	she	had	just	cleaned	and	honed	it	not	a	bell	ago,	and	even
the	sheath	was	new.	None	of	this	was	logical.	None	of	this	made	sense.	Yes,	she	understood	the	reasons	for
her	obsession.	Twisted,	pathetic	reasons,	but	then,	driving	a	knife	through	the	heart	of	the	man	she	loved	was
bound	to	leave	an	indelible	stain	on	her	soul.	The	knife	had	become	a	symbol—she’d	be	a	fool	not	to	see	that.
Still,	her	hand	itched,	desperate	to	draw	forth	the	knife.
She	sought	to	distract	herself	by	watching	Fist	Blistig	pacing	along	the	far	wall,	measuring	out	a	cage	no	one
else	 could	 see—yet	 she	 knew	 its	 dimensions.	 Six	 paces	 in	 length,	 about	 two	 wide,	 the	 ceiling	 low	 enough	 to
make	the	man	hunch	over,	the	floor	worn	smooth,	almost	polished.	She	understood	that	kind	of	invention,	all	the
effort	in	making	certain	the	bars	fit	tightly,	that	the	lock	was	solid	and	the	key	flung	into	the	sea.
Fist	 Keneb	 was	 watching	 the	 man	 as	 well,	 doing	 an	 admirable	 job	 of	 keeping	 his	 thoughts	 to	 himself.	 He
was	the	only	one	seated	at	the	table,	seemingly	relaxed,	although	Lostara	well	knew	that	he	was	probably	as
bruised	and	battered	as	she	was—Fiddler’s	cursed	reading	had	left	them	all	in	rough	shape.	Being	bludgeoned
unconscious	was	never	a	pleasant	experience.
The	 three	 of	 them	 looked	 over	 as	 Quick	 Ben	 walked	 into	 the	 chamber.	 The	 High	 Mage	 carried	 an	 air	 of
culpability	about	him,	which	was	nothing	new.	For	all	his	bravado,	accusations	clung	to	him	like	gnats	on	a	web.
Of	 course	 he	 was	 hiding	 secrets.	 Of	 course	 he	 was	 playing	 unseen	 games.	 He	 was	 Quick	 Ben,	 the	 last
surviving	wizard	of	the	Bridgeburners.	He	thought	outwitting	gods	was	fun.	But	even	he	had	taken	a	beating	at
Fiddler’s	reading,	which	should	have	humbled	the	man.
She	 squinted	 as	 he	 sauntered	 up	 to	 the	 table,	 pulled	 out	 the	 chair	 beside	 Keneb,	 and	 sat,	 whereupon	 he
began	drumming	his	fingers	on	the	varnished	surface.
No,	not	much	humility	there.
‘Where	 is	 she?’	 Quick	 Ben	 asked.	 ‘We’re	 seeing	 the	 King	 in	 a	 bell’s	 time—we	 need	 to	 settle	 on	 what
we’re	doing.’
Blistig	had	resumed	pacing,	and	at	the	wizard’s	words	he	snorted	and	then	said,	‘She’s	settled	already.	This


is	just	a	courtesy.’
‘Since	when	is	the	Adjunct	interested	in	decorum?’	Quick	Ben	retorted.	‘No,	we	need	to	discuss	strategies.
Everything	has	changed—’
Keneb	straightened	at	that.	‘What	has,	High	Mage?	Since	the	reading?	Can	you	be	specific?’
The	wizard	grinned.	‘I	can,	but	maybe	she	doesn’t	want	me	to.’
‘Then	the	rest	of	us	should	just	leave	you	and	her	to	it,’	said	Blistig,	his	blunt	features	twisting	with	disgust.
‘Unless	your	egos	demand	an	audience,	in	which	case,	why,	we	wouldn’t	want	those	bruised,	would	we?’
‘Got	a	dog	house	in	there,	Blistig?	You	could	always	take	a	nap.’
Lostara	made	sure	to	glance	away,	amused.	She	had	none	of	their	concerns	on	her	mind.	In	fact,	she	didn’t
care	where	this	pointless	army	ended	up.	Maybe	the	Adjunct	would	simply	dissolve	the	miserable	thing,	cashier
them	all	out.	Letheras	was	a	nice	enough	city,	although	a	little	too	humid	for	her	tastes—it	was	probably	drier
inland,	away	from	this	sluggish	river.
She	 knew	 that	 such	 an	 outcome	 was	 unlikely,	 of	 course.	 Impossible,	 in	 fact.	 Maybe	 Tavore	 Paran	 didn’t
possess	 the	 nobility’s	 addiction	 to	 material	 possessions.	 The	 Bonehunters	 were	 the	 exception.	 This	 was	 her
army.	And	she	didn’t	want	it	sitting	pretty	on	a	shelf	like	some	prized	bauble.	No,	she	wanted	to	use	it.	Maybe
even	use	it	up.
Which	was	where	everyone	else	came	in.	Blistig	and	Keneb,	Quick	Ben	and	Sinn.	Ruthan	Gudd—not	that
he	 ever	 bothered	 attending	 briefings—and	 Arbin	 and	 Lostara	 herself.	 Add	 to	 that	 eight	 and	 a	 half	 thousand
soldiers	in	Tavore’s	own	command,	along	with	the	Burned	Tears	and	the	Perish,	and	that,	Lostara	supposed,
more	than	satisfied	whatever	noble	acquisitiveness	the	Adjunct	might	harbour.
It	was	no	wonder	these	men	here	were	nervous.	Something	was	driving	the	Adjunct,	her	very	own	fierce,
cruel	 obsession.	 Quick	 Ben	 might	 have	 some	 idea	 about	 it,	 but	 she	 suspected	 the	 man	 was	 mostly	 bluff	 and
bluster.	The	one	soldier	who	might	well	know	wasn’t	even	here.	Thank	the	gods	above	and	below	for	that
one	mercy.
‘We’re	 marching	 into	 the	 Wastelands,’	 said	 Keneb.	 ‘We	 know	 that	 much,	 I	 suppose.	 Just	 not	 the	 reasons
why.’
Lostara	Yil	cleared	her	throat.	‘That	is	a	rumour,	Fist.’
His	brows	lifted.	‘I	understood	it	to	be	more	certain	than	that.’
‘Well,’	 said	 Quick	 Ben,	 ‘it’s	 imprecise,	 as	 most	 rumours	 turn	 out	 to	 be.	 More	 specifically,	 it’s	 incomplete.
Which	is	why	most	of	the	speculation	thus	far	has	been	useless.’
‘Go	on,’	said	Keneb.
The	wizard	drummed	the	tabletop	once	more,	and	then	said,	‘We’re	not	marching	into	the	Wastelands,	my
friends.	 We’re	 marching	 through	 them.’	 He	 smiled	 but	 it	 wasn’t	 a	 real	 smile.	 ‘See	 how	 that	 added	 detail
makes	all	the	difference?	Because	now	the	rumours	can	chew	hard	on	possibilities.	The	notion	of	goals,	right?
Her	 goals.	 What	 she	 needs	 us	 to	 do	 to	 meet	 them.’	 He	 paused	 and	 then	 added,	 ‘What	 we	 need	 to	 do	 to
convince	ourselves	and	our	soldiers	that	meeting	them	is	even	worth	it.’
Well,	that	was	said	plainly	enough.	Here,	chew	hard	on	this	mouthful	of	glass.
‘Unwitnessed,’	Keneb	muttered.
Quick	Ben	fluttered	a	hand	dismissively.	‘I	don’t	think	we	have	a	problem	with	that.	She’s	already	said	what
she	 needed	 to	 say	 on	 that	 subject.	 It’s	 settled.	 Her	 next	 challenge	 will	 come	 when	 she	 finally	 spills	 out
precisely	what	she’s	planning.’
‘But	you	think	you’ve	already	figured	that	out.’
Lostara	wasn’t	fooled	by	the	High	Mage’s	coy	smile.	The	idiot	hasn’t	a	clue.	He’s	just	like	the	rest	of	us.
Adjunct	Tavore	made	her	entrance	then,	dragging	Sinn	by	one	skinny	arm—and	the	expression	on	the	girl’s
face	was	a	dark	storm	of	indignation	and	fury.	The	older	woman	pulled	out	the	chair	opposite	Keneb	and	sat
Sinn	down	in	it,	then	walked	to	position	herself	at	one	end,	where	she	remained	standing.	When	she	spoke,	her
tone	was	uncharacteristically	harsh,	as	if	rage	seethed	just	beneath	the	surface.	‘The	gods	can	have	their	war.
We	 will	 not	 be	 used,	 not	 by	 them,	 not	 by	 anyone.	 I	 do	 not	 care	 how	 history	 judges	 us—I	 hope	 that’s	 well
understood.’
Lostara	found	 herself	 captivated;	 she	 could	 not	take	 her	 eyes	 off	 the	 Adjunct,	seeing	 at	 last	 a	 side	 of	 her
that	had	remained	hidden	for	so	long—that	indeed	might	never	before	have	revealed	itself.	It	was	clear	that
the	others	were	equally	shocked,	as	not	one	spoke	to	fill	the	silence	when	Tavore	paused—showing	them	all


the	cold	iron	of	her	eyes.
‘Fiddler’s	reading	made	it	plain,’	she	resumed.	‘That	reading	was	an	insult.	To	all	of	us.’	She	began	drawing
off	her	leather	gloves	with	a	kind	of	ferocious	precision.	‘No	one	owns	our	minds.	Not	Empress	Laseen,	not
the	gods	themselves.	In	a	short	time	we	will	speak	with	King	Tehol	of	Lether.	We	will	formalize	our	intention
to	 depart	 this	 kingdom,	 marching	 east.’	 She	 slapped	 the	 first	 glove	 down.	 ‘We	 will	 request	 the	 necessary
permissions	 to	 ensure	 our	 peaceful	 passage	 through	 the	 petty	 kingdoms	 beyond	 the	 Letherii	 border.	 If	 this
cannot	be	achieved,	then	we	will	cut	our	way	through.’	Down	thumped	the	second	glove.
If	 there	 was	 any	 doubt	 in	 this	 chamber	 that	 this	 woman	 commanded	 the	 Bonehunters,	 it	 had	 been
obliterated.	Succinctly.
‘Presumably,’	she	went	on,	her	voice	a	rasp,	‘you	wish	to	learn	of	our	destination.	We	are	marching	to	war.
We	are	marching	to	an	enemy	that	does	not	know	we	even	exist.’	Her	icy	gaze	fixed	on	Quick	Ben	and	it	was
a	measure	of	the	man’s	courage	that	he	did	not	flinch.	‘High	Mage,	your	dissembling	is	at	an	end.	Know	that	I
value	your	penchant	for	consorting	with	the	gods.	You	will	now	report	to	me	what	you	believe	is	coming.’
Quick	Ben	licked	his	lips.	‘Shall	I	be	specific	or	will	a	summary	suffice,	Adjunct?’
She	said	nothing.
The	 High	 Mage	 shrugged.	 ‘It	 will	 be	 war,	 yes,	 but	 a	 messy	 one.	 The	 Crippled	 God’s	 been	 busy,	 but	 his
efforts	have	been,	without	exception,	defensive,	for	the	Fallen	One	also	happens	to	know	what	is	coming.	The
bastard’s	desperate,	probably	terrified,	and	thus	far,	he	has	failed	more	often	than	succeeded.’
‘Why?’
He	blinked.	‘Well,	people	have	been	getting	in	the	way—’
‘People,	yes.	Mortals.’
Quick	Ben	nodded,	eyes	narrowing.	‘We	have	been	the	weapons	of	the	gods.’
‘Tell	me,	High	Mage,	how	does	it	feel?’
Her	questions	struck	from	unanticipated	directions,	Lostara	could	see,	and	it	was	clear	that	Quick	Ben	was
mentally	reeling.	This	was	a	sharp	talent,	a	surprising	one,	and	it	told	Lostara	that	Adjunct	Tavore	possessed
traits	that	made	her	a	formidable	tactician—but	why	had	none	of	them	seen	this	before?
‘Adjunct,’	the	wizard	ventured,	‘the	gods	have	inevitably	regretted	using	me.’
The	answer	evidently	satisfied	her.	‘Go	on,	High	Mage.’
‘They	will	chain	him	again.	This	time	it	will	be	absolute,	and	once	chained,	they	will	suck	everything	out	of
him—like	bloodflies—’
‘Are	the	gods	united	on	this?’
‘Of	course	not—excuse	me,	Adjunct.	Rather,	the	gods	are	never	united,	even	when	in	agreement.	Betrayals
are	 virtually	 guaranteed—which	 is	 why	 I	 cannot	 fathom	 Shadowthrone’s	 thinking.	 He’s	 not	 that	 stupid—he
can’t	be	that	stupid—’
‘He	 has	 outwitted	 you,’	 Tavore	 said.	 ‘You	 “cannot	 fathom”	 his	 innermost	 intentions.	 High	 Mage,	 the	 first
god	you	have	mentioned	here	is	one	that	most	of	us	wouldn’t	expect	to	be	at	the	forefront	of	all	of	this.	Hood,
yes.	 Togg,	 Fanderay—even	 Fener.	 Or	 Oponn.	 And	 what	 of	 the	 Elder	 Gods?	 Mael,	 K’rul,	 Kilmandaros.	 No.
Instead,	you	speak	of	Shadowthrone,	the	upstart—’
‘The	once	Emperor	of	the	Malazan	Empire,’	cut	in	Keneb.
Quick	 Ben	 scowled.	 ‘Aye,	 even	 back	 then—and	 it’s	 not	 easy	 to	 admit	 this—he	 was	 a	 wily	 bastard.	 The
times	I	thought	I’d	worked	round	him,	beat	him	clean,	it	turned	out	he	had	been	playing	me	all	along.	He	was
the	ruler	of	shadows	long	before	he	even	ascended	to	that	title.	Dancer	gave	him	the	civilized	face,	that	mask
of	honest	morality—just	as	Cotillion	does	now.	But	don’t	be	fooled,	those	two	are	ruthless—none	of	us	mortals
are	worth	a	damned	thing,	except	as	a	means	to	an	end—’
‘And	what,	High	Mage,	would	that	end	be?’
Quick	Ben	threw	up	his	hands	and	leaned	back.	‘I	have	little	more	than	rude	guesses,	Adjunct.’
But	Lostara	saw	something	shining	in	the	wizard’s	eyes,	as	if	he	had	been	stirred	into	wakefulness	from	a
long,	 long	 sleep.	 She	 wondered	 if	 this	 was	 how	 he	 had	 been	 with	 Whiskeyjack,	 with	 Dujek	 Onearm.	 No
wonder	they	saw	him	as	their	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole.
‘I	would	hear	those	guesses,’	the	Adjunct	said.
‘The	pantheon	comes	crashing	down—and	what	emerges	from	the	dust	and	ashes	is	almost	unrecognizable.
The	same	for	sorcery—the	warrens—the	realm	of	K’rul.	All	fundamentally	changed.’


‘Yet,	one	assumes,	at	the	pinnacle	.	.	.	Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion.’
‘A	safe	assumption,’	Quick	Ben	admitted,	‘which	is	why	I	don’t	trust	it.’
Tavore	looked	startled.	‘Altruism	from	those	two?’
‘I	don’t	even	believe	in	altruism,	Adjunct.’
‘Thus,’	she	observed,	‘your	confusion.’
The	wizard’s	ascetic	face	was	pinched,	as	if	he	was	tasting	something	unbearably	foul.	‘Who’s	to	say	that
the	 changes	 create	 something	 better,	 something	 more	 equitable?	 Who’s	 to	 say	 that	 what	 emerges	 isn’t	 even
worse	than	what	we	have	right	now?	Yes,	it	might	seem	a	good	move—driving	that	mob	of	miserable	gods	off
some	cliff,	or	some	other	place	that	puts	them	out	of	reach,	that	puts	us	out	of	their	reach.’	He	was	musing
now,	as	if	unaware	of	his	audience.	‘But	consider	that	eventuality.	Without	the	gods,	we’re	on	our	own.	And
with	 us	 on	 our	 own—Abyss	 fend!—what	 mischief	 we	 might	 do!	 What	 grotesque	 invention	 to	 plague	 the
world!’
‘But	.	.	.	not	entirely	on	our	own.’
‘The	 fun	 would	 pall,’	 Quick	 Ben	 said,	 as	 if	 irritated	 with	 the	 objection.	 ‘Shadowthrone	 has	 to	 realize	 that.
Who	 would	 he	 have	 left	 to	 play	 with?	 And	 with	 K’rul	 a	 corpse,	 sorcery	 will	 rot,	 grow	 septic—it	 will	 kill
whoever	dares	use	it.’
‘Perhaps,’	said	Tavore	with	a	certain	remorselessness,	‘it	is	not	Shadowthrone’s	intent	to	reshape	anything.
Rather,	to	end	it	once	and	for	all.	To	wipe	the	world	clean.’
‘I	doubt	that.	Kallor	tried	it	and	the	lesson	wasn’t	lost	on	anyone—how	could	it	be?	Gods	know,	Kellanved
then	went	and	claimed	that	destroyed	warren	for	the	empire,	so	he	couldn’t	be	blind	.	.	.’	His	words	fell	away,
but	Lostara	saw	how	his	thoughts	suddenly	raced	down	a	new,	treacherous	track,	destination	unknown.
Yes,	they	claimed	Kallor’s	legacy.	But	.	.	.	what	does	that	signify?
No	 one	 spoke	 for	 a	 time.	 Blistig	 stood	 rooted—he	 had	 not	 moved	 from	 the	 moment	 the	 Adjunct	 began
speaking,	and	what	should	have	been	a	confused	expression	was	nowhere	to	be	seen	on	his	rough	features.
Instead,	he	was	closed	up	with	a	kind	of	obstinate	belligerence,	as	if	everything	he	had	heard	thus	far	wasn’t
relevant,	could	not	rattle	the	cage—for	even	as	the	cage	imprisoned	him	within	it,	so	it	kept	everything	else	at	a
safe	distance.
Sinn	sat	perched	on	the	oversized	chair,	glowering	at	the	tabletop,	pretending	not	to	listen	to	anything	being
said	here,	but	she	was	paler	than	usual.
Keneb	leaned	forward	on	his	elbows,	his	hands	against	the	sides	of	his	face:	the	pose	of	a	man	wishing	to	be
elsewhere.
‘It	 comes	 down	 to	 gates,’	 Quick	 Ben	 muttered.	 ‘I	 don’t	 know	 how,	 or	 even	 why,	 but	 my	 gut	 tells	 me	 it
comes	down	to	gates.	Kurald	Emurlahn,	Kurald	Galain,	Starvald	Demelain—the	old	ones—and	the	Azath.	No
one	has	plumbed	the	secrets	of	the	Houses	as	they	have,	not	even	Gothos.	Windows	on	to	the	past,	into	the
future,	 paths	 leading	 to	 places	 no	 mortal	 has	 ever	 visited.	 They	 have	 crawled	 up	 and	 down	 the	 skeleton	 of
existence,	eager	as	bone-grubs—’
‘Too	many	assumptions,’	Tavore	said.	‘Rein	yourself	in,	High	Mage.	Tell	me,	have	you	seen	the	face	of	our
enemy	to	the	east?’
The	look	he	shot	her	was	bleak,	wretched.	‘Justice	is	a	sweet	notion.	Too	bad	its	practice	ends	up	awash	in
innocent	blood.	Honest	judgement	is	cruel,	Adjunct,	so	very	cruel.	And	what	makes	it	a	disaster	is	the	way	it
spreads	outward,	swallowing	everything	in	its	path.	Allow	me	to	quote	Imperial	Historian	Duiker:	“The	object
of	justice	is	to	drain	the	world	of	colour.”	’
‘Some	would	see	it	that	way—’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘Some?	Those	cold-eyed	arbiters	can’t	see	it	any	other	way!’
‘Nature	insists	on	a	balance—’
‘Nature	is	blind.’
‘Thus	favouring	the	notion	that	justice	too	is	blind.’
‘Blinkered,	not	blind.	The	whole	notion	is	founded	on	a	deceit:	that	truths	are	reducible—’
‘Wait!’	 barked	 Keneb.	 ‘Wait—wait!	 You’re	 leaving	 me	 behind,	 both	 of	 you!	 Adjunct,	 are	 you	 saying	 that
justice	is	our	enemy?	Making	us	what,	the	champions	of	injustice?	How	can	justice	be	an	enemy—how	can
you	expect	to	wage	war	against	it?	How	can	a	simple	soldier	cut	down	an	idea?’	His	chair	rocked	back	as	he
suddenly	rose.	‘Have	you	lost	your	minds?	I	don’t	understand—’


‘Sit	down,	Fist!’
Shocked	by	the	order,	he	sank	back,	looking	defeated,	bewildered.
Hood	knew,	Lostara	Yil	sympathized.
‘Kolanse,’	 said	 Tavore.	 ‘According	 to	 Letherii	 writings,	 an	 isolated	 confederation	 of	 kingdoms.	 Nothing
special,	nothing	particularly	unique,	barring	a	penchant	for	monotheism.	For	the	past	decade,	suffering	a	terrible
drought,	sufficient	to	cripple	the	civilization.’	She	paused.	‘High	Mage?’
Quick	Ben	rubbed	vigorously	at	his	face,	and	then	said,	‘The	Crippled	God	came	down	in	pieces.	Everyone
knows	that.	Most	of	him,	it’s	said,	fell	on	Korel,	which	is	what	gave	that	continent	its	other	name:	Fist.	Other
bits	 fell	 .	 .	 .	 elsewhere.	 Despite	 the	 damage	 done	 to	 Korel,	 that	 was	 not	 where	 the	 true	 heart	 of	 the	 god
landed.	No,	it	spun	away	from	the	rest	of	him.	It	found	its	very	own	continent	.	.	.’
‘Kolanse,’	said	Keneb.	‘It	landed	in	Kolanse.’
Tavore	said,	‘I	mentioned	that	penchant	for	monotheism—it	is	hardly	surprising,	given	what	must	have	been
a	most	traumatic	visitation	by	a	god—the	visitor	who	never	went	away.’
‘So,’	 said	 Keneb	 through	 clenched	 teeth,	 ‘we	 are	 marching	 to	 where	 the	 gods	 are	 converging.	 Gods	 that
intend	to	chain	the	Crippled	God	one	final	time.	But	we	refuse	to	be	anyone’s	weapon.	If	that	is	so,	then	what
in	Hood’s	name	will	we	be	doing	there?’
‘I	think,’	Quick	Ben	croaked,	‘we	will	have	the	answer	to	that	when	we	get	there.’
Keneb	groaned	and	slumped	back	down,	burying	his	face	in	his	hands.
‘Kolanse	has	been	usurped,’	said	Tavore.	‘Not	in	the	name	of	the	Crippled	God,	but	in	the	name	of	justice.
Justice	of	a	most	terrible	kind.’
Quick	Ben	said,	‘Ahkrast	Korvalain.’
Sinn	jumped	as	if	stung,	then	huddled	down	once	more.
Keneb’s	 hands	 dropped	 away,	 though	 the	 impressions	 of	 his	 fingertips	 remained,	 mottling	 his	 face.	 ‘I’m
sorry,	what?’
‘The	Elder	Warren,	Fist,’	said	the	Adjunct,	‘of	the	Forkrul	Assail.’
‘They	are	preparing	the	gate,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘and	for	that,	they	need	lots	of	blood.	Lots.’
Lostara	 finally	 spoke.	 She	 could	 not	 help	 it.	 She	 knew	 more	 about	 the	 cult	 of	 Shadow	 than	 anyone	 here,
possibly	 excepting	 Quick	 Ben.	 ‘Adjunct,	 you	 say	 we	 march	 at	 the	 behest	 of	 no	 god.	 Yet,	 I	 suspect,
Shadowthrone	will	be	most	pleased	when	we	strike	for	Kolanse,	when	we	set	out	to	destroy	that	unholy	gate.’
‘Thank	 you,’	 Tavore	 said.	 ‘I	 take	 it	 we	 now	 comprehend	 High	 Mage	 Quick	 Ben’s	 angst.	 His	 fear	 that,
somehow,	we	are	playing	into	Shadowthrone’s	hands.’
I	think	we	are.
‘Even	when	he	was	Emperor,’	said	Keneb,	‘he	learned	to	flinch	from	the	sting	of	justice.’
‘The	T’lan	Imass	occupation	of	Aren,’	said	Blistig,	nodding.
Tavore	flicked	a	glance	at	Blistig,	and	then	said,	‘Though	we	may	share	an	enemy	it	does	not	mean	we	are
allies.’
Adjunct,	 that	 is	 too	 brazen.	 Fiddler’s	 reading	 was	 anything	 but	 subtle.	 But	 she	 was	 awestruck.	 By
what	 Tavore	 had	 done	 here.	 Something	 blistered	 in	 this	 chamber	 now,	 touching	 like	 fire	 everyone	 present—
even	Blistig.	Even	that	whelp	of	nightmare,	Sinn.	If	a	god	showed	its	face	in	this	chamber	at	this	moment,	six
fists	would	vie	to	greet	it.
‘What	is	the	gate	for?’	Lostara	asked.	‘Adjunct?	Do	you	know	that	gate’s	purpose?’
‘The	delivery	of	justice,’	Quick	Ben	offered	in	answer.	‘Or	so	one	presumes.’
‘Justice	against	whom?’
The	High	Mage	shrugged.	‘Us?	The	gods?	Kings	and	queens,	priests,	emperors	and	tyrants?’
‘The	Crippled	God?’
Quick	Ben’s	grin	was	feral.	‘They’re	sitting	right	on	top	of	him.’
‘Then	the	gods	might	well	stand	back	and	let	the	Forkrul	Assail	do	their	work	for	them.’
‘Not	likely—you	can’t	suck	power	from	a	dead	god,	can	you?’
‘So,	we	could	either	find	ourselves	the	weapon	in	the	hands	of	the	gods	after	all,	or,	if	we	don’t	cooperate,
trapped	 between	 two	 bloodthirsty	 foes.’	 Even	 as	 she	 spoke	 those	 words,	 Lostara	 regretted	 them.	 Because,
once	said,	everything	points	to	.	.	.	points	to	the	worst	thing	imaginable.	Oh,	Tavore,	now	I	understand
your	defiance	when	it	comes	to	how	history	will	judge	us.	And	your	words	that	what	we	will	do	will	be


unwitnessed—that	was	less	a	promise,	I	think	now.	More	like	a	prayer.
‘It	is	time,’	the	Adjunct	said,	collecting	her	gloves,	‘to	speak	with	the	King.	You	can	run	away	now,	Sinn.
The	rest	of	you	are	with	me.’
______

Brys	 Beddict	 needed	 a	 moment	 alone,	 and	 so	 he	 held	 back	 when	 the	 Queen	 entered	 the	 throne	 room,	 and
moved	a	few	paces	away	from	the	two	helmed	guards	flanking	the	entrance.	The	Errant	was	on	his	mind,	a
one-eyed	nemesis	clutching	a	thousand	daggers.	He	could	almost	feel	the	god’s	cold	smile,	icy	and	chilling	as	a
winter	breath	on	the	back	of	his	neck.	Inside	and	outside,	in	front	of	him	and	behind	him,	it	made	no	difference.
The	Errant	passed	through	every	door,	stood	on	both	sides	of	every	barrier.	The	thirst	for	blood	was	pervasive,
and	Brys	felt	trapped	like	a	fly	in	amber.
If	not	for	a	Tarthenal’s	mallet	fist,	Brys	Beddict	would	be	dead.
He	was	still	shaken.
Since	his	 return	 to	 the	 mortal	 world,	 he	 had	 felt	 strangely	 weightless,	 as	 if	 nothing	 in	 this	 place	 could	 hold
him	down,	could	keep	him	firmly	rooted	to	the	earth.	The	palace,	which	had	once	been	the	very	heart	of	his
life,	 his	 only	 future,	 now	 seemed	 but	 a	 temporary	 respite.	 This	 was	 why	 he	 had	 petitioned	 his	 brother	 to	 be
given	command	of	the	Letherii	army—even	in	the	absence	of	enemies	he	could	justify	travelling	out	from	the
city,	to	wander	to	the	very	border	marches	of	the	kingdom.
What	was	he	looking	for?	He	did	not	know.	Would	he—could	he—find	it	in	the	reaches	beyond	the	city’s
walls?	Was	something	out	there	awaiting	him?	Such	thoughts	were	like	body-blows	to	his	soul,	for	they	sent
him	reeling	back—into	brother	Hull’s	shadow.
Perhaps	he	haunts	me	now.	His	dreams,	his	needs,	slipping	like	veils	in	front	of	my	eyes.	Perhaps	he
has	cursed	me	with	his	own	thirst—too	vast	to	be	appeased	in	a	single	life—no,	he	will	now	use	mine.
Ungracious	fears,	these.	Hull	Beddict	was	dead.	The	only	thing	that	haunted	Brys	now	was	his	memories	of
the	man,	and	they	belonged	to	no	one	else,	did	they?
Let	 me	 lead	 the	 army.	 Let	 us	 march	 into	 unknown	 lands—leave	 me	 free,	 brother,	 to	 try	 again,	 to
deliver	 unto	 strangers	 a	 new	 meaning	 to	 the	 name	 ‘Letherii’—not	 one	 foul	 with	 treachery,	 not	 one	 to
become	a	curse	word	to	every	nation	we	encounter.
Let	me	heal	Hull’s	wounds.
He	wondered	if	Tehol	would	understand	any	of	that,	and	then	snorted—the	sound	startling	both	guards,	their
eyes	shifting	to	him	and	then	away	again.	Of	course	Tehol	would	understand.	All	too	well,	in	fact,	on	levels	far
surpassing	Brys’s	paltry,	shallow	efforts.	And	he	would	say	something	offhand,	that	would	cut	deep	enough	to
bite	 bone—or	 he	 might	 not—Tehol	 was	 never	 as	 cruel	 as	 Brys	 dreaded.	 And	 what	 odd	 dynamic	 is	 that?
Only	that	he’s	too	smart	for	me	.	.	.	and	if	I	had	his	wits,	why,	I	would	use	them	with	all	the	deadly	skill	I
use	when	wielding	a	sword.
Hull	 had	 been	 the	 dreamer,	 and	 his	 dreams	 were	 the	 kind	 that	 fed	 on	 his	 own	 conscience	 before	 all	 else.
And	see	how	that	blinded	him?	See	how	that	destroyed	him?
Tehol	 tempered	 whatever	 dream	 he	 held.	 It	 helped	 having	 an	 Elder	 God	 at	 his	 side,	 and	 a	 wife	 who	 was
probably	a	match	to	Tehol’s	own	genius.	It	helps,	too,	I	suppose,	that	he’s	half	mad.
What	of	 Brys,	then?	 This	brother	least	 of	 the	three?	 Taking	 hold	 of	 a	sword	 and	 making	 it	a	 standard,	 an
icon	of	adjudication.	A	weapon	master	stood	before	two	worlds:	the	complex	one	within	the	weapon’s	reach
and	the	simplified	one	beyond	it.	I	am	Hull’s	opposite,	in	all	things.
So	why	do	I	now	yearn	to	follow	in	his	steps?
He	had	been	interred	within	stone	upon	the	unlit	floor	of	an	ocean.	His	soul	had	been	a	single	thread	woven
into	a	skein	of	forgotten	and	abandoned	gods.	How	could	that	not	have	changed	him?	Perhaps	his	new	thirst
was	their	thirst.	Perhaps	it	had	nothing	whatsoever	to	do	with	Hull	Beddict.
Perhaps,	indeed,	this	was	the	Errant’s	nudge.
Sighing,	he	faced	the	doors	to	the	throne	room,	adjusted	his	weapon	belt,	and	then	strode	into	the	chamber.
Brother	 Tehol,	 King	 of	 Lether,	 was	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 a	 coughing	 fit.	 Janath	 was	 at	 his	 side,	 thumping	 on	 his
back.	Bugg	was	pouring	water	into	a	goblet,	which	he	then	held	at	the	ready.
Ublala	 Pung	 stood	 before	 the	 throne.	 He	 swung	 round	 at	 Brys’s	 approach,	 revealing	 an	 expression	 of
profound	distress.	‘Preda!	Thank	the	spirits	you’re	here!	Now	you	can	arrest	and	execute	me!’
‘Ublala,	why	would	I	do	that?’


‘Look,	I	have	killed	the	King!’
But	Tehol	was	finally	recovering,	sufficiently	to	take	the	goblet	Bugg	proffered.	He	drank	down	a	mouthful,
gasped,	and	then	sat	back	on	the	throne.	In	a	rasp	he	said,	‘It’s	all	right,	Ublala,	you’ve	not	killed	me	.	.	.	yet.
But	that	was	a	close	one.’
The	Tarthenal	whimpered	and	Brys	could	see	that	the	huge	man	was	moments	from	running	away.
‘The	 King	 exaggerates,’	 said	 Janath.	 ‘Be	 at	 ease,	 Ublala	 Pung.	 Welcome,	 Brys,	 I	 was	 wondering	 where
you’d	got	to,	since	I	could	have	sworn	you	were	on	my	heels	only	a	few	moments	ago.’
‘What	have	I	missed?’
Bugg	said,	‘Ublala	Pung	was	just	informing	us	of,	among	other	things,	something	he	had	forgotten.	A	matter
most,	well,	extraordinary.	Relating	to	the	Toblakai	warrior,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘The	slayer	of	Rhulad	Sengar	has	returned?’
‘No,	we	are	blessedly	spared	that,	Brys.’	And	then	Bugg	hesitated.
‘It	turns	out,’	explained	Janath—as	Tehol	quickly	drank	down	a	few	more	mouthfuls	of	water—‘that	Karsa
Orlong	set	a	charge	upon	Ublala	Pung,	one	that	he	had	until	today	entirely	forgotten,	distracted	as	he	has	been
of	late	by	the	abuses	heaped	upon	him	by	his	fellow	guards.’
‘I’m	sorry—what	abuses?’
Tehol	 finally	 spoke.	 ‘We	 can	 get	 to	 that	 later.	 The	 matter	 may	 no	 longer	 be	 relevant,	 in	 any	 case,	 since	 it
seems	Ublala	must	leave	us	soon.’
Brys	squinted	at	the	abject	Tarthenal.	‘Where	are	you	going?’
‘To	the	islands,	Preda.’
‘The	islands?’
Ublala	nodded	solemnly.	‘I	must	gather	all	the	Tarthenal	and	make	an	army.	And	then	we	have	to	go	to	find
Karsa	Orlong.’
‘An	army?	Why	would	Karsa	Orlong	want	an	army	of	Tarthenal?’
‘To	destroy	the	world!’
‘Of	 course,’	 interjected	 Bugg,	 ‘by	 my	 last	 census	 there	 are	 fourteen	 hundred	 and	 fifty-one	 Tarthenal	 now
settled	 on	 the	 islands.	 One	 half	 of	 them	 not	 yet	 adults—under	 seventy	 years	 of	 age	 by	 Tarthenal	 reckoning.
Ublala’s	potential	“army”	will	amount	to	around	five	hundred	adults	of	reasonable	maturity	and	dubious	martial
prowess.’
‘To	destroy	the	world!’	Ublala	shouted	again.	‘I	need	a	boat!	A	big	one!’
‘These	 sound	 like	 heady	 matters,’	 Brys	 said	 after	 a	 moment,	 ‘which	 require	 more	 discussion.	 For	 the
moment—forgive	 me,	 Ublala—we	 are	 soon	 to	 entertain	 the	 Malazan	 high	 command.	 Should	 we	 not	 begin
discussing	that	impending	meeting?’
‘What’s	to	discuss?’	Tehol	asked.	He	scowled	suddenly	down	at	his	cup.	‘Gods	below,	I’ve	been	drinking
water!	 Bugg,	 are	 you	 trying	 to	 poison	 me	 or	 something?	 Wine,	 man,	 wine!	 Oops,	 sorry,	 Brys,	 that	 was
insensitive	of	me.	Beer,	man,	beer!’
‘The	 Malazans	 will	 probably	 petition	 us,’	 Brys	 said.	 ‘For	 some	 unfathomable	 reason,	 they	 intend	 to	 march
into	the	Wastelands.	They	will	seek	to	purchase	writs	of	passage—which	will	involve	diplomatic	efforts	on	our
part—as	well	as	sufficient	supplies	to	satisfy	their	troops.	King	Tehol,	I	admit	to	having	little	confidence	with
respect	to	those	writs	of	passage—we	all	know	the	inherent	duplicity	of	the	Bolkando	and	the	Saphii—’
‘You	want	to	provide	the	Malazans	with	an	escort,’	said	Janath.
‘A	big	one!’	shouted	Ublala,	as	if	unaware	that	the	conversation	in	the	throne	room	had	moved	on.	‘I	want
Captain	Shurq	Elalle.	Because	she’s	friendly	and	she	likes	sex.	Oh,	and	I	need	money	for	food	and	chickens,
too,	and	boot	polish	to	make	my	army.	Can	I	get	all	that?’
‘Of	course	you	can!’	replied	Tehol	with	a	bright	smile.	‘Chancellor,	see	to	it,	won’t	you?’
‘This	very	day,	King,’	said	Bugg.
‘Can	I	go	now?’	Ublala	asked.
‘If	you	like.’
‘Sire,’	began	Brys,	in	growing	exasperation,	‘I	think—’
‘Can	I	stay?’	Ublala	asked.
‘Naturally!’
‘Sire—’


‘Dear	 brother,’	 said	 Tehol,	 ‘have	 you	 gleaned	 no	 hint	 of	 my	 equanimity?	 Of	 course	 you	 can	 escort	 the
Malazans,	although	I	think	your	chances	with	the	Adjunct	are	pretty	minimal,	but	who	am	I	to	crush	hopeless
optimism	 under	 heel?	 I	 mean,	 would	 I	 even	 be	 married	 to	 this	 lovely	 woman	 at	 my	 side	 here,	 if	 not	 for	 her
seemingly	 unrealistic	 hopes?’	 Bugg	 delivered	 a	 new	 mug	 to	 the	 King,	 this	 one	 filled	 with	 beer.	 ‘Bugg,	 thank
you!	Do	you	think	Ublala’s	worked	up	a	thirst?’
‘Undoubtedly,	sire.’
‘Then	pour	away!’
‘Not	away!’	cried	Ublala.	‘I	want	some!’
‘It	would	give	me	an	opportunity	to	observe	the	Malazan	military	in	the	field,	sire,’	explained	Brys,	‘and	to
learn	what	I	can—’
‘Nobody’s	objecting,	Brys!’
‘I	am	simply	stating	the	accurate	reasons	justifying	my	desire—’
‘Desires	 should	 never	 be	 justified,’	 Tehol	 said,	 wagging	 a	 finger.	 ‘All	 you	 end	 up	 doing	 is	 illuminating	 the
hidden	reasons	by	virtue	of	their	obvious	absence.	Now,	brother,	you	happen	to	be	the	most	eligible	Beddict—
legitimately	eligible,	I	mean—so	why	not	cast	wide	your	amorous	net?	Even	if,	by	some	peculiar	quirk	on	your
part,	the	Adjunct	is	not	to	your	tastes,	there	is	always	her	aide—what	was	that	foreign-sounding	name	again,
Bugg?’
‘Blistig.’
Tehol	frowned.	‘Really?’
Brys	rubbed	 at	 his	 brow,	 and	 at	an	 odd	 splashing	 sound	 glanced	 over	at	 Ublala	 and	 saw	 the	 man	 guzzling
from	 an	 enormous	 pitcher,	 a	 brown	 pool	 spreading	 round	 his	 bare	 feet.	 ‘Her	 name	 is	 Lostara	 Yil,’	 he	 said,
unaccountably	weary,	almost	despondent.
‘Then,’	demanded	Tehol,	‘who	is	Blistig,	Bugg?’
‘Sorry,	one	of	the	Fists—uhm,	Atri-Predas—in	her	command.	My	mistake.’
‘Is	he	pretty?’
‘I’m	sure	someone	exists	in	the	world	who	might	think	so,	sire.’
‘Tehol,’	said	Brys,	‘we	need	to	discuss	the	motivations	of	these	Malazans.	Why	the	Wastelands?	What	are
they	looking	for?	What	do	they	hope	to	achieve?	They	are	an	army,	after	all,	and	armies	exist	to	wage	wars.
Against	whom?	The	Wastelands	are	empty.’
‘It’s	no	use,’	said	Janath.	‘I’ve	already	tried	addressing	this	with	my	husband.’
‘A	most	enlightening	discussion,	dear	wife,	I	assure	you.’
She	regarded	him	with	raised	brows.	‘Oh?	That	hardly	describes	my	conclusions.’
‘Isn’t	 it	 obvious?’	 Tehol	 asked,	 gaze	 flicking	 from	 Janath	 to	 Brys,	 to	 Bugg	 and	 hence	 to	 Ublala,	 and	 then
back	to	Brys	once	more—and	then,	with	a	slight	widening	of	his	eyes,	back	again	to	the	Tarthenal	who	had	just
consumed	most	of	the	contents	of	the	pitcher	and	was	belching	golden	froth	that	ran	down	his	chin.	Noting	the
King’s	attention,	Ublala	Pung	wiped	his	chin	and	smiled.
‘Isn’t	what	obvious?’	Janath	asked.
‘Huh?	Oh,	they’re	not	going	to	the	Wastelands,	my	Queen,	they’re	going	to	Kolanse.	They’re	just	passing
through	the	Wastelands	since	they	no	longer	have	the	transports	to	get	to	Kolanse	by	sea.	Nor	have	we	the
ships	to	accommodate	them,	alas.’
‘What	do	they	seek	in	Kolanse?’	Brys	asked.
Tehol	shrugged.	‘How	should	I	know?	Do	you	think,	maybe,	we	should	ask	them?’
‘I	would	wager,’	said	Bugg,	‘they’ll	rightly	tell	us	it’s	none	of	our	business.’
‘Is	it?’
‘Sire,	your	question	encourages	me	to	dissemble,	and	I’d	rather	not	do	that.’
‘Entirely	understandable,	Bugg.	Let’s	leave	it	there,	then.	Are	you	unwell,	Ublala	Pung?’
The	giant	was	frowning	down	at	his	feet.	‘Did	I	piddle	myself?’
‘No,	that’s	beer.’
‘Oh.	That’s	good,	then.	But	.	.	.’
‘Yes,	Ublala?’
‘Where	are	my	boots?’
Janath	reached	out	and	stayed	her	husband’s	hand	as	he	was	lifting	his	goblet	to	drink.	‘Not	again,	husband.


Ublala,	you	informed	us	earlier	that	you	fed	your	boots	to	the	other	guards	in	your	billet.’
‘Oh.’	Ublala	belched,	wiped	foam	from	his	nose,	and	then	smiled	again.	‘I	remember	now.’
Tehol	 blessed	 his	 wife	 with	 a	 grateful	 look	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘That	 reminds	 me,	 did	 we	 send	 healers	 to	 the
palace	barracks?’
‘Yes,	sire.’
‘Well	done,	Bugg.	Now	then,	since	I	hear	the	Malazan	entourage	on	its	way	in	the	hallway	beyond:	Brys,
how	big	do	you	want	to	make	your	escort?’
‘Two	brigades	and	two	battalions,	sire.’
‘Is	that	reasonable?’	Tehol	asked,	looking	round.
‘I	have	no	idea,’	Janath	replied.	‘Bugg?’
‘I’m	no	general,	my	Queen.’
‘We	need	an	expert	opinion,	then,’	said	Tehol.	‘Brys?’
	
Nothing	 good	 was	 going	 to	 come	 of	 this,	 Bottle	 knew,	 but	 he	 also	 recognized	 the	 necessity	 and	 so	 walked
uncomplaining	in	Ebron’s	company	as	they	cut	across	the	round	with	its	heaving,	shouting	throng	locked	in	a
frenzy	of	buying	and	selling	and	consuming—like	seabirds	flocking	to	a	single	rock	day	after	day,	reliving	the
same	rituals	that	built	up	a	life	in	layers	of	.	.	.	well,	don’t	hedge	now	.	.	.	of	guano.	Of	course,	one	man’s
shit	was	another	man’s	.	.	.	whatever.
There	 was	 a	 hidden	 privilege	 in	 being	 a	 soldier,	 he	 decided.	 He	 had	 been	 pushed	 outside	 normal	 life,
protected	 from	 the	 rigours	 of	 meeting	 most	 basic	 needs—food,	 drink,	 clothes,	 shelter:	 all	 of	 these	 were
provided	 to	 him	 in	 some	 form	 or	 other.	 And	 family—don’t	 forget	 that.	 All	 in	 exchange	 for	 the	 task	 of
delivering	 terrible	 violence;	 only	 every	 now	 and	 then	 to	 be	 sure,	 for	 such	 things	 could	 not	 be	 sustained	 over
long	periods	of	time	without	crushing	the	capacity	for	feeling,	without	devouring	a	mortal’s	humanity.
In	that	context,	Bottle	reconsidered—with	a	dull	spasm	of	anguish	deep	inside—maybe	the	exchange	wasn’t
that	reasonable	after	all.	Less	a	privilege	than	a	burden,	a	curse.	Seeing	the	faces	in	this	crowd	flashing	past,	a
spinning,	whirling	cascade	of	masks—each	a	faintly	stunning	alternative	to	his	own—he	felt	himself	not	simply
pushed	 outside,	 but	 estranged.	 Leaving	 him	 bemused,	 even	 perturbed,	 as	 he	 witnessed	 their	 seemingly
mindless,	pointless	activities,	only	to	find	himself	envious	of	these	shallow,	undramatic	lives—wherein	the	only
need	was	satiation.	Possessions,	stuffed	bellies,	expanding	heaps	of	coin.
What	 do	 any	 of	 you	 know	 about	 life?	 he	 wanted	 to	 ask.	 Try	 stumbling	 through	 a	 burning	 city.	 Try
cradling	a	dying	friend	with	blood	like	tattered	shrouds	on	all	sides.	Try	glancing	to	an	animated	face
beside	you,	only	to	glance	a	second	time	and	find	it	empty,	lifeless.
A	soldier	knew	what	was	real	and	what	was	ephemeral.	A	soldier	understood	how	thin,	how	fragile,	was	the
fabric	of	life.
Could	 one	 feel	 envy	 when	 looking	 upon	 the	 protected,	 ignorant	 lives	 of	 others—those	 people	 whose
cloistered	 faith	 saw	 strength	 in	 weakness,	 who	 found	 hope	 in	 the	 false	 assurance	 of	 routine?	 Yes,	 because
once	you	become	aware	of	that	fragility,	there	is	no	going	back.	You	lose	a	thousand	masks	and	are	left
with	but	one,	with	its	faint	lines	of	contempt,	its	downturned	mouth	only	a	comment	away	from	a	sneer,
its	promise	of	cold	indifference.
Gods,	we’re	just	going	for	a	walk	here.	I	don’t	need	to	be	thinking	any	of	this.
Ebron	 tugged	 at	 his	 arm	 and	 they	 edged	 into	 a	 narrow,	 high-walled	 alley.	 Twenty	 paces	 down,	 the	 wellswept	 corridor	 broadened	 out	 into	 a	 secluded	 open-air	 tavern	 shaded	 by	 four	 centuries-old	 fig	 trees,	 one	 at
each	corner.
Deadsmell	 was	 already	 sitting	 at	 one	 of	 the	 tables,	 scraping	 chunks	 of	 meat	 and	 vegetable	 from	 copper
skewers	with	his	dagger	and	with	a	stab	lifting	morsels	to	his	grease-stained	mouth,	a	tall	cup	of	chilled	wine
within	reach.
Leave	it	to	necromancers	to	find	pleasure	in	everything.
He	looked	up	as	they	arrived.	‘You’re	late.’
‘See	how	you	suffered	for	it?’	Ebron	snapped,	dragging	out	a	chair.
‘Yes,	 well,	 one	 must	 make	 do.	 I	 recommend	 these	 things—they’re	 like	 Seven	 Cities	 tapu,	 though	 not	 as
spicy.’
‘What’s	the	meat?’	Bottle	asked,	sitting	down.


‘Something	called	orthen.	A	delicacy,	I’m	told.	Delicious.’
‘Well,	we	might	as	well	eat	and	drink,’	said	Ebron,	‘while	we	discuss	the	miserable	extinction	of	sorcery	and
the	beginning	of	our	soon-to-be-useless	lives.’
Deadsmell	leaned	back,	eyes	narrowing	on	the	mage.	‘If	you’re	going	to	steal	my	appetite,	you’re	paying	for
it	first.’
‘It	 was	 the	 reading,’	 Bottle	 said,	 and	 oh,	 how	 that	 snared	 their	 attention,	 not	 to	 mention	 demolished	 the
incipient	argument	between	the	two	men.	‘What	the	reading	revealed	goes	back	to	the	day	we	breached	the
city	wall	and	struck	for	the	palace—do	you	recall	those	conflagrations?	That	damned	earthquake?’
‘It	was	the	dragon	that	showed	up,’	said	Deadsmell.
‘It	was	munitions,’	countered	Ebron.
‘It	was	neither.	It	was	Icarium	Lifestealer.	He	was	here,	waiting	in	line	to	cross	blades	with	the	Emperor,
but	he	never	got	to	him,	because	of	that	Toblakai—who	was	none	other	than	Leoman	of	the	Flails’	old	friend
back	in	Raraku,	by	the	way.	Anyway,	Icarium	did	something,	right	here	in	Letheras.’	Bottle	paused	and	eyed
Ebron.	‘What	are	you	getting	when	you	awaken	your	warren?’
‘Confusion,	powers	spitting	at	each	other,	nothing	you	can	grasp	tight,	nothing	you	can	use.’
‘And	it’s	got	worse	since	the	reading,	hasn’t	it?’
‘It	 has,’	 confirmed	 Deadsmell.	 ‘Ebron	 will	 tell	 you	 about	 the	 mad	 house	 we	 unleashed	 the	 night	 of	 the
reading—I	could	have	sworn	Hood	stepped	right	into	our	room.	But	the	truth	was,	the	Reaper	was	nowhere
even	close.	If	anything,	he	was	sent	sprawling	the	other	way.	And	now,	it’s	all	.	.	.	jumpy,	twisty.	You	take	hold
and	everything	shudders	until	it	squirms	loose.’
Bottle	was	nodding.	‘That’s	the	real	reason	Fid	was	so	reluctant.	His	reading	fed	into	what	Icarium	made
here	all	those	months	back.’
‘Made?’	Ebron	demanded.	‘Made	what?’
‘I’m	not	sure—’
‘Liar.’
‘No,	Ebron,	I’m	really	not	sure	.	.	.	but	I	have	an	idea.	Do	you	want	to	hear	it	or	not?’
‘No,	yes.	Go	on,	I	need	to	finish	my	list	of	reasons	to	commit	suicide.’
A	server	arrived,	a	man	older	than	a	Jaghut’s	stockings,	and	the	next	few	moments	were	spent	shouting	at
the	deaf	codger—fruitlessly—until	Ebron	stumbled	on	to	the	bright	notion	of	pointing	at	Deadsmell’s	plate	and
goblet	and	showing	two	fingers.
As	the	man	set	off,	wilful	as	a	snail,	Bottle	said,	‘It	might	not	be	that	bad,	Ebron.	I	think	what	we’re	dealing
with	here	is	the	imposition	of	a	new	pattern	on	to	the	old,	familiar	one.’
‘Pattern?	What	pattern?’
‘The	warrens.	That	pattern.’
Deadsmell	 dropped	 his	 last	 skewer—scraped	 clean—on	 the	 plate	 and	 leaned	 forward.	 ‘You’re	 saying
Icarium	went	and	made	a	new	set	of	warrens?’
‘Swallow	what’s	in	your	mouth	before	you	gape,	please.	Yes,	that’s	my	idea.	I’m	telling	you,	Fiddler’s	game
was	insane	with	power.	Almost	as	bad	as	if	someone	tried	a	reading	while	sitting	in	K’rul’s	lap.	Well,	not	quite,
since	this	new	pattern	is	young,	the	blood	still	fresh—’
‘Blood?’	demanded	Ebron.	‘What	blood?’
‘Icarium’s	blood,’	Bottle	said.
‘Is	he	dead	then?’
‘Is	he?	How	should	I	know?	Is	K’rul	dead?’
‘Of	course	not,’	Deadsmell	answered.	‘If	he	was,	the	warrens	would	have	died—that’s	assuming	all	your
theories	about	K’rul	and	the	warrens	are	even	true—’
‘They	are.	It	was	blood	magic.	That’s	how	the	Elder	Gods	did	things—when	we	use	sorcery	we’re	feeding
on	K’rul’s	blood.’
No	one	spoke	for	a	time.	The	server	approached	with	a	heavy	tray.	It	was	like	watching	the	tide	come	in.
‘So,’	 ventured	 Ebron	 once	 the	 tray	 clunked	 down	 and	 the	 plates	 and	 wine	 and	 goblets	 were	 randomly
arrayed	on	the	table	by	a	quivering	hand,	‘are	things	going	to	settle	out,	Bottle?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	he	admitted,	pouring	out	some	wine	as	the	waiter	shuffled	away.	‘We	may	have	to	do	some
exploring.’


‘Of	what?’
‘The	new	warrens,	of	course.’
‘How	can	they	be	any	different?’	Ebron	asked.	‘It’s	the	fact	that	they’re	mostly	the	same	that’s	got	things
confused—has	to	be.	If	they	were	completely	different,	there	wouldn’t	be	this	kind	of	trouble.’
‘Good	point.	Well,	we	should	see	if	we	can	nudge	things	together,	until	the	overlap	is	precise.’
Deadsmell	snorted.	‘Bottle,	we’re	squad	mages,	for	Hood’s	sake.	We’re	like	midges	feeding	on	a	herd	of
bhederin—and	 here	 you’re	 suggesting	 we	 try	 and	 drive	 that	 herd.	 It’s	 not	 going	 to	 happen.	 We	 haven’t	 the
power—even	if	we	put	ourselves	together	on	this.’
‘That’s	why	I’m	thinking	we	should	involve	Quick	Ben,	maybe	even	Sinn—’
‘Don’t	 even	 think	 that,’	 Ebron	 said,	 eyes	 wide.	 ‘You	 don’t	 want	 her	 anywhere	 close,	 Bottle.	 I	 still	 can’t
believe	the	Adjunct	made	her	High	Mage—’
‘Well,’	cut	in	Deadsmell,	‘since	she’s	mute	she’ll	be	the	only	High	Mage	in	history	who	never	complains.’
‘Just	Quick	Ben,	then.’
‘He’ll	complain	enough	for	both	of	them,’	Deadsmell	nodded.
‘Just	how	nasty	is	he?’	Ebron	asked	Bottle.
‘Quick?	Well,	he	gave	a	dragon	a	bloody	nose.’
‘A	real	dragon	or	a	Soletaken	dragon?’
‘It	 makes	 no	 difference,	 Ebron—you	 pretty	 much	 can’t	 tell	 just	 from	 looking	 at	 them.	 You’ll	 only	 know	 a
Soletaken	when	it	veers.	Anyway,	don’t	forget,	he	faced	down	the	Edur	mages	once	we	quit	Seven	Cities.’
‘That	was	illusion.’
‘Ebron,	I	was	in	on	that—a	lot	closer	than	you.	Sure,	maybe	it	was	illusion,	but	maybe	not.’	He	paused,	then
said,	 ‘That’s	 another	 thing	 to	 consider.	 The	 local	 mages.	 They	 used	 raw	 sorcery,	 pretty	 much	 Chaotic	 and
nothing	else.	No	warrens.	But	now	there’s	warrens	here.	The	local	mages	are	in	worse	shape	than	we	are.’
‘I	still	don’t	like	the	idea	of	some	kind	of	collective	ritual,’	Deadsmell	said.	‘When	you’re	under	siege	you
don’t	pop	your	head	up	over	the	parapet,	do	you?	Unless	you	want	feather	eyelashes.’
‘Well,	Fiddler	went	and	did	just	that	with	the	reading,	didn’t	he?	Nobody	died—’
‘Rubbish.	A	whole	building	went	crashing	down!’
‘Nothing	new	there,	Ebron.	This	whole	city	is	on	shaky	ground.’
‘People	died,	is	what	I’m	telling	you,	Bottle.	And	if	that’s	not	bad	enough,	there	were	plenty	of	witnesses
claiming	to	see	two	dragons	rise	out	of	the	rubble.’	He	ducked	his	head	and	looked	round.	‘I	don’t	like	dragons.
I	 don’t	 like	 places	 where	 dragons	 show	up	 all	 the	 time.	 Say	 we	 try	 some	 ritual—what	 if	 fifty	 dragons	 come
blasting	down	out	of	the	sky,	splatting	right	on	top	of	us?	What	then,	hey?’
‘Well,	I	don’t	know,	Ebron.	It	depends.	I	mean,	are	they	real	or	Soletaken?’
	
Sinn	held	Grub’s	hand	in	a	tight,	sweaty	grip.	They	were	edging	once	more	on	to	the	grounds	of	the	old	Azath
tower.	The	day	was	hot,	steamy,	the	air	above	the	tortured	mounds	glittering	with	whirling	insects.	‘Can	you
smell	it?’	she	asked.
He	didn’t	want	to	reply.
She	 shot	 him	 a	 wild	 look,	 and	 then	 tugged	 him	 on	 to	 the	 winding	 stone	 path.	 ‘It’s	 all	 new,	 Grub.	 You	 can
drink	it	like	water.	It	tastes	sweet—’
‘It	tastes	dangerous,	Sinn.’
‘I	 can	 almost	 see	 it.	 New	 patterns,	 getting	 stronger—it’s	 running	 roots	 right	 through	 this	 place.	 This	 is	 all
new,’	she	said	again,	almost	breathless.	‘Just	like	us—you	and	me,	Grub,	we’re	going	to	leave	all	the	old	people
behind.	Feel	this	power!	With	it	we	can	do	anything!	We	can	knock	down	gods!’
‘I	don’t	want	to	knock	anything	down,	especially	gods!’
‘You	didn’t	have	to	listen	to	Tavore,	Grub.	And	Quick	Ben.’
‘We	can’t	just	play	with	this	stuff,	Sinn.’
‘Why	not?	No	one	else	is.’
‘Because	it’s	broken,	that’s	why.	It	doesn’t	feel	right	at	all—these	new	warrens,	they	feel	wrong,	Sinn.	The
pattern	is	broken.’
They	 halted	 just	 outside	 the	 tower’s	 now	 gaping	 doorway	 and	 its	 seemingly	 lifeless	 wasp	 nest.	 She	 faced
him,	eyes	bright.	‘So	let’s	fix	it.’


He	stared	at	her.	‘How?’
‘Come	on,’	she	said,	pulling	him	into	the	gloom	of	the	Azath	tower.
Feet	 crunching	 on	 dead	 wasps,	 she	 led	 him	 without	 hesitation	 to	 the	 stairs.	 They	 climbed	 to	 the	 empty
chamber	that	had	once	been	the	nexus	of	the	Azath’s	power.
It	was	empty	no	longer.
Blood-red	 threads	 sizzled	 within,	 forming	 a	 knotted,	 chaotic	 web	 that	 spanned	 the	 entire	 chamber.	 The	 air
tasted	metallic,	bitter.
They	stood	side	by	side	at	the	threshold.
‘It	uses	what	it	finds,’	Sinn	whispered.
‘So	now	what?’
‘Now,	we	step	inside.’
	
‘They	march	in	circles	any	longer	and	they’ll	drop.’
Corporal	 Tarr	 squinted	 at	 the	 gasping,	 foot-dragging	 soldiers.	 ‘They’re	 out	 of	 shape,	 all	 right.	 Pathetic.	 Of
course,	we	were	supposed	to	think	of	something.’
Cuttle	 scratched	 at	 his	 jaw.	 ‘So	 we	 ended	 up	 thrashing	 them	 after	 all.	 Look,	 here	 comes	 Fid,	 thank	 the
gods.’
The	 sergeant	 scowled	 upon	 seeing	 his	 two	 soldiers	 and	 almost	 turned	 round	 before	 Cuttle’s	 frantic
beckoning	beat	down	his	defences,	or	at	least	elicited	the	man’s	pity.	Raking	fingers	through	his	red	and	grey
beard,	he	walked	over.	‘What	are	you	two	doing	to	those	poor	bastards?’
‘We	run	out	of	things	to	make	them	do,’	Cuttle	said.
‘Well,	stumbling	round	inside	a	compound	only	takes	it	so	far.	You	need	to	get	them	out	of	the	city.	Get	them
practising	 entrenchments,	 redoubts	 and	 berms.	 You	 need	 to	 turn	 their	 penchant	 for	 wholesale	 rout	 into
something	 like	 an	 organized	 withdrawal.	 You	 need	 to	 stretch	 their	 chain	 of	 command	 and	 see	 who’s	 got	 the
guts	to	step	up	when	it	snaps.	You	need	to	make	those	ones	squad-leaders.	War	games,	too—set	them	against
one	of	the	other	brigades	or	battalions	being	trained	by	our	marines.	They	need	to	win	a	few	times	before	they
can	learn	how	to	avoid	losing.	Now,	if	Hedge	comes	by,	you	ain’t	seen	me,	right?’
They	watched	him	head	off	down	the	length	of	the	colonnade.
‘That’s	depressing,’	Cuttle	muttered.
‘I’ll	never	make	sergeant,’	Tarr	said,	‘not	in	a	thousand	years.	Damn.’
‘Good	point,	you	just	lifted	my	mood,	Corporal.	Thanks.’
	
Hedge	 pounced	 on	 his	 old	 friend	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 colonnade.	 ‘What’re	 you	 bothering	 with	 them	 for,	 Fid?
These	Bonehunters	ain’t	Bridgeburners	and	those	Letherii	ain’t	soldiers.	You’re	wasting	your	time.’
‘Gods	below,	stop	stalking	me!’
Hedge’s	expression	fell.	‘It’s	not	that,	Fid.	Only,	we	were	friends—’
‘And	then	you	died.	So	I	went	and	got	over	you.	And	now	you	show	up	all	over	again.	If	you	were	just	a
ghost	then	maybe	I	could	deal	with	it—aye,	I	know	you	whispered	in	my	ear	every	now	and	then,	and	saved
my	skin	and	all	that	and	it’s	not	that	I	ain’t	grateful	either.	But	.	.	.	well,	we	ain’t	squad	mates	any	more,	are
we?	You	came	back	when	you	weren’t	supposed	to,	and	in	your	head	you’re	still	a	Bridgeburner	and	you	think
the	same	of	me.	Which	is	why	you	keep	slagging	off	these	Bonehunters,	like	it	was	some	rival	division.	But	it
isn’t,	because	the	Bridgeburners	are	finished,	Hedge.	Dust	and	ashes.	Gone.’
‘All	right	all	right!	So	maybe	I	need	to	make	some	adjustments,	too.	I	can	do	that!	Easy.	Watch	me!	First
thing—I’ll	get	the	captain	to	give	me	a	squad—’
‘What	makes	you	think	you	deserve	to	lead	a	squad?’
‘Because	I	was	a—’
‘Exactly.	A	damned	Bridgeburner!	Hedge,	you’re	a	sapper—’
‘So	are	you!’
‘Mostly	I	leave	that	to	Cuttle	these	days—’
‘You	did	the	drum!	Without	me!’
‘You	weren’t	there—’


‘That	makes	no	difference!’
‘How	can	it	not	make	a	difference?’
‘Let	me	work	on	that.	The	point	is,	you	were	doing	sapping	stuff,	Fid.	In	fact,	the	point	is,	you	and	me	need
to	get	drunk	and	find	us	some	whores—’
‘Only	works	the	other	way	round,	Hedge.’
‘Now	you’re	talking!	And	listen,	I’ll	get	a	finger-bone	nose-ring	so	I	can	fit	right	in	with	these	bloodthirsty
Bonehunters	you’re	so	proud	of,	how	does	that	sound?’
Fiddler	stared	at	the	man.	His	ridiculous	leather	cap	with	its	earflaps,	his	hopeful	grin.	‘Get	a	nose-ring	and
I’ll	 kill	 you	 myself,	 Hedge.	 Fine,	 then,	 let’s	 stir	 things	 up.	 Just	 don’t	 even	 think	 about	 asking	 for	 a	 squad,	 all
right?’
‘So	what	am	I	supposed	to	do	instead?’
‘Tag	along	with	Gesler’s	squad—I	think	it’s	short	of	a	body.’	And	then	he	snorted	a	laugh.	‘A	body.	You.
Good	one.’
‘I	told	you	I	wasn’t	dead	no	more,	Fid.’
‘If	you	say	so.’
	
Lieutenant	Pores	sat	in	the	captain’s	chair	behind	the	captain’s	desk,	and	held	his	hands	folded	together	on	the
surface	before	him	as	he	regarded	the	two	women	who	had,	until	recently,	been	rotting	in	cells	in	some	Letherii
fort.	‘Sisters,	right?’
When	neither	replied,	Pores	nodded.	‘Some	advice,	then.	Should	either	of	you	one	day	achieve	higher	rank
—say,	 captain—you	 too	 will	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 stating	 the	 obvious.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 you	 are	 stuck	 with	 the
absurd	 requirement	 of	 answering	 stupid	 questions	 with	 honest	 answers,	 all	 the	 while	 keeping	 a	 straight	 face.
You	will	need	to	do	a	lot	of	this	with	me.’
The	woman	on	the	right	said,	‘Aye,	sir,	we’re	sisters.’
‘Thank	you,	Sergeant	Sinter.	Wasn’t	that	satisfying?	I’m	sure	it	was.	What	I	will	find	even	more	satisfying	is
watching	 you	 two	 washing	 down	 the	 barracks’	 latrines	 for	 the	 next	 two	 weeks.	 Consider	 it	 your	 reward	 for
being	so	incompetent	as	to	be	captured	by	these	local	fools.	And	then	failing	to	escape.’	He	scowled.	‘Look	at
you	two—nothing	but	skin	and	bones!	Those	uniforms	look	like	shrouds.	I	order	you	to	regain	your	lost	weight,
in	all	the	right	places,	within	the	same	fortnight.	Failure	to	do	will	result	in	a	month	on	half-rations.	Furthermore,
I	want	you	both	to	get	your	hair	cut,	down	to	the	scalp,	and	to	deposit	said	sheared	hair	on	this	desk	precisely
at	the	eighth	bell	this	evening.	Not	earlier,	not	later.	Understood?’
‘Yes,	sir!’	barked	Sergeant	Sinter.
‘Very	 good,’	 nodded	 Pores.	 ‘Now	 get	 out	 of	 here,	 and	 if	 you	 see	 Lieutenant	 Pores	 in	 the	 corridor	 remind
him	that	he	has	been	ordered	to	a	posting	on	Second	Maiden	Fort,	and	the	damned	idiot	should	be	on	his	way
by	now.	Dismissed!’
As	soon	as	the	two	women	were	gone,	Pores	leapt	up	from	behind	the	captain’s	desk,	scanned	the	surface
to	ensure	nothing	had	been	knocked	askew,	and	then	carefully	repositioned	the	chair	just	so.	With	a	nervous
glance	 out	 the	 window,	 he	 hurried	 out	 into	 the	 reception	 room	 and	 sat	 down	 behind	 his	 own,	 much	 smaller
desk.	Hearing	heavy	boots	in	the	corridor	he	began	shuffling	the	scrolls	and	wax	tablets	on	the	surface	in	front
of	him,	planting	a	studious	frown	on	his	features	in	time	for	his	captain’s	portentous	arrival.
As	soon	as	the	door	opened,	Pores	leapt	to	attention.	‘Good	morning,	sir!’
‘It’s	mid-afternoon,	Lieutenant.	Those	wasp	stings	clearly	rotted	what’s	left	of	your	brain.’
‘Yes,	sir!’
‘Have	those	two	Dal	Honese	sisters	reported	yet?’
‘No,	sir,	not	hide	nor	.	.	.	hair,	sir.	We	should	be	seeing	one	or	both	any	time	now—’
‘Oh,	and	is	that	because	you	intend	to	physically	hunt	them	down,	Lieutenant?’
‘As	 soon	 as	 I’ve	 done	 this	 paperwork,	 sir,	 I	 will	 do	 just	 that,	 even	 if	 it	 takes	 me	 all	 the	 way	 to	 Second
Maiden	Fort,	sir.’
Kindly	scowled.	‘What	paperwork?’
‘Why,	sir,’	Pores	gestured,	‘this	paperwork,	sir.’
‘Well,	don’t	dally,	Lieutenant.	As	you	know,	I	need	to	attend	a	briefing	at	half	seventh	bell,	and	I	want	them
in	my	office	before	then.’


‘Yes,	sir!’
Kindly	 walked	 past	 and	 went	 inside.	 Where,	 Pores	 imagined,	 he	 would	 spend	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 afternoon
looking	at	his	collection	of	combs.
	
‘Everyone’s	right,’	Kisswhere	muttered	as	she	and	her	sister	made	their	back	to	the	dormitory,	‘Captain	Kindly
is	not	only	a	bastard,	but	insane.	What	was	all	that	about	our	hair?’
Sinter	shrugged.	‘No	idea.’
‘Well,	there’s	no	regulations	about	our	hair.	We	can	complain	to	the	Fist—’
‘No	we	won’t,’	Sinter	cut	in.	‘Kindly	wants	hair	on	his	desk,	we	give	him	hair	on	his	desk.’
‘Not	mine!’
‘Nor	mine,	Kisswhere,	nor	mine.’
‘Then	whose?’
‘Not	whose.	What’s.’
Corporal	Pravalak	Rim	was	waiting	at	the	entrance.	‘Did	you	get	commendations	then?’	he	asked.
‘Oh	love,’	said	Kisswhere,	‘Kindly	doesn’t	give	out	commendations.	Just	punishments.’
‘What?’
Sinter	said,	‘The	captain	ordered	us	to	put	on	weight,’	and	then	she	stepped	past	him,	‘among	other	things.’
And	then	she	paused	and	turned	back	to	Pravalak.	‘Corporal,	find	us	some	shears,	and	a	large	burlap	sack.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	Shears—how	big?’
‘I	don’t	care,	just	find	some.’
Kisswhere	 offered	 the	 young	 man	 a	 broad	 smile	 as	 he	 hurried	 off,	 and	 then	 she	 went	 inside,	 marching
halfway	down	the	length	of	the	dormitory.	She	halted	at	the	foot	of	a	cot	where	the	bedding	had	been	twisted
into	 something	 resembling	 a	 nest.	 Squatting	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 this	 nest	 was	 a	 wrinkled,	 scarified,	 tattooed	 bad
dream	with	small	glittering	eyes.	‘Nep	Furrow,	I	need	a	curse.’
‘Eh?	Geen	way!	Groblet!	Coo!’
‘Captain	Kindly.	I	was	thinking	hives,	the	real	itchy	kind.	No,	wait,	that’ll	just	make	him	even	meaner.	Make
him	cross-eyed—but	not	so	he	notices,	just	everyone	else.	Can	you	do	that,	Nep?’
‘War	butt	wod	i’meen,	eh?’
‘How	about	a	massage?’
‘Kissands?’
‘My	very	own,	yes.’
‘Urble	ong	eh?	Urble	ong?’
‘Bell	to	bell,	Nep.’
‘Nikked?’
‘Who,	you	or	me?’
‘Bat!’
‘Fine,	but	we’ll	need	to	rent	a	room,	unless	of	course	you	want	an	audience?’
Nep	 Furrow	 was	 getting	 excited,	 in	 all	 the	 wrong	 ways,	 she	 saw.	 He	 jumped	 round,	 squirmed,	 his	 skin
glistening	with	sweat.	‘Blether	squids,	Kiss,	blether	squids!’
‘With	the	door	barred,’	she	said.	‘I	won’t	have	any	strangers	walking	in.’
‘Hep	haw!	Curseed?’
‘Aye,	cross-eyed,	but	he	can’t	know	it—’
‘Impable,	lees	in	glusion.’
‘Illusion?	A	glamour?	Oh,	that’s	very	good.	Get	on	it,	then,	thanks.’
	
Badan	 Gruk	 rubbed	 at	 his	 face	 as	 Sinter	 collapsed	 on	 to	 the	 cot	 beside	 him.	 ‘What	 in	 Hood’s	 name	 are	 we
doing	here?’	he	asked.
Her	 dark	 eyes	 flicked	 to	 his—the	 momentary	 contact	 sweet	 as	 a	 caress—and	 then	 she	 looked	 away.
‘You’re	the	only	kind	of	soldier	a	body	can	trust,	Badan,	did	you	know	that?’
‘What?	No,	I—’
‘You’re	reluctant.	You’re	not	cut	out	for	violence	and	so	you	don’t	go	looking	for	it.	You	use	your	wits	first


and	 that	 silly	 bonekisser	 as	 a	 last	 resort.	 The	 dangerous	 ones	 do	 it	 the	 other	 way	 round	 and	 that	 costs	 lives
every	 time.	 Every	 time.’	 She	 paused.	 ‘Did	 I	 hear	 right?	 Some	 drunk	 marine	 sergeant	 crossed	 this	 damned
empire	from	tavern	to	tavern?’
He	nodded.	‘And	left	a	trail	of	local	sympathizers,	too.	But	she	wasn’t	afraid	of	spilling	blood,	Sinter,	she	just
picked	out	the	right	targets—people	nobody	liked.	Tax	collectors,	provosts,	advocates.’
‘But	she’s	a	drunk?’
‘Aye.’
Shaking	her	head,	Sinter	fell	back	on	to	the	cot.	She	stared	at	the	ceiling.	‘How	come	she	doesn’t	get	busted
down?’
‘Because	she’s	one	of	the	Y’Ghatan	Stormcrawlers,	that’s	why.	Them	that	went	under.’
‘Oh,	right.’	A	moment’s	consideration,	and	then:	‘Well,	we’re	marching	soon.’
Badan	rubbed	at	his	face	again.	‘But	nobody	knows	where,	or	even	why.	It’s	a	mess,	Sinter.’	He	hesitated,
and	then	asked,	‘You	got	any	bad	feelings	about	it?’
‘Got	no	feelings	at	all,	Badan.	About	anything.	And	no,	I	don’t	know	what	took	me	by	the	throat	the	night	of
Fid’s	reading,	either.	In	fact,	I	don’t	even	remember	much	of	that	night,	not	the	ride,	nor	what	followed.’
‘Nothing	followed.	Mostly,	you	just	passed	out.	Some	Fenn	had	already	stepped	in,	anyway.	Punched	a	god
in	the	side	of	the	head.’
‘Good.’
‘That’s	it?	That’s	all	you’re	going	to	say?’
‘Well,	like	the	one-eyed	hag	says,	there’s	all	kinds	of	worship	in	the	world,	Badan.’
‘I	don’t	.	.	.’	but	the	look	she	shot	him	ground	the	words	down	to	dust	in	his	mouth.	He	flinched	and	glanced
away.	‘That	thing	you	said	about	wits,	Sinter,	was	that	a	joke,	too?’
She	sighed,	closing	her	eyes.	‘No,	Badan.	No.	Wake	me	when	Rim	gets	back,	will	you?’
	
Trailed	by	Lostara	Yil,	Keneb,	Blistig	and	Quick	Ben,	the	Adjunct	Tavore	strode	down	the	length	of	the	throne
room	and	halted	ten	paces	from	the	two	thrones.
‘Welcome	 to	 you	 all,’	 said	 King	 Tehol.	 ‘Adjunct,	 my	 Chancellor	 here	 informs	 me	 that	 you	 have	 a	 list	 of
requests,	most	of	which	will	contribute	to	a	happy	burgeoning	of	the	royal	coffers.	Now,	if	I	was	the	venal	sort
I	 would	 say	 let’s	 get	 right	 to	 that.	 But	 I	 am	 no	 such	 sort	 and	 so	 I	 would	 like	 to	 broach	 an	 entirely	 different
matter,	one	of	immense	importance.’
‘Of	course,	sire,’	said	Tavore.	‘We	are	at	your	disposal	and	will	assist	in	any	way	we	can.’
The	King	beamed.
Lostara	wondered	at	the	Queen’s	sigh,	but	not	for	long.
‘Wonderful!	 Now,	 as	 soon	 as	 I	 recall	 the	 specific	 details	 of	 what	 I	 wanted	 to	 ask,	 why,	 I	 will.	 In	 the
meantime,	 my	 Ceda	 tells	 me	 that	 you	 have	 stirred	 awake	 a	 sorcerous	 nest	 of	 trouble.	 My	 Chancellor,	 alas,
assures	 me	 that	 the	 confusion	 is	 exaggerated—which	 of	 the	 two	 am	 I	 to	 believe?	 Please,	 if	 you	 can,	 break
asunder	this	dreadful	deadlock.’
Frowning,	Tavore	turned	and	said,	‘High	Mage,	can	you	address	this	matter,	please?’
Quick	Ben	moved	to	stand	beside	the	Adjunct.	‘Sire,	both	your	Chancellor	and	your	Ceda	are,	essentially,
correct.’
Lostara	saw	Bugg	smile,	and	then	scowl	from	where	he	stood	to	the	right	of	Tehol’s	throne.
‘How	fascinating,’	the	King	murmured,	leaning	forward	to	settle	his	chin	in	one	hand.	‘Can	you	elaborate,
High	Mage?’
‘Probably	not,	but	I	will	try.	The	situation,	terrifying	as	it	is,	is	probably	temporary.	The	reading	of	the	Deck
of	 Dragons,	 which	 Preda	 Brys	 Beddict	 attended,	 seems	 to	 have	 illuminated	 a	 structural	 flaw	 in	 the	 .	 .	 .
uhm	 .	 .	 .	 fabric	 of	 reality,	 a	 wounding	 of	 sorts.	 It	 seems,	 sire,	 that	 someone—someone	 very	 powerful—
attempted	to	impose	a	new	structure	upon	the	already	existing	warrens	of	sorcery.’
Brys	 Beddict,	 positioned	 to	 the	 left	 of	 the	 Queen,	 asked,	 ‘High	 Mage,	 can	 you	 explain	 these	 “warrens”
which	seem	so	central	to	your	notions	of	magic?’
‘Unlike	the	sorcery	that	prevailed	on	this	continent	until	recently,	Preda,	magic	everywhere	else	exists	in	a
more	formalized	state.	The	power,	so	raw	here,	is	elsewhere	refined,	aspected,	organized	into	something	like
themes,	 and	 these	 themes	 are	 what	 we	 call	 warrens.	 Many	 are	 accessible	 to	 mortals	 and	 gods	 alike;	 others


are’—and	 he	 glanced	 at	 Bugg—‘Elder.	 Some	 are	 virtually	 extinct,	 or	 inaccessible	 due	 to	 ignorance	 or
deliberate	 rituals	 of	 sealing.	 Some,	 in	 addition,	 are	 claimed	 and	 ruled	 over	 by	 elements	 either	 native	 to	 those
warrens,	or	so	fundamentally	related	to	them	as	to	make	the	distinction	meaningless.’
King	Tehol	lifted	a	finger.	‘A	moment,	whilst	I	blink	the	glaze	from	my	eyes.	Now,	let’s	mull	on	what	has
been	said	thus	far—I’m	good	at	mulling,	by	the	way.	If	I	understand	you,	High	Mage,	the	realm	the	Tiste	Edur
called	Kurald	Emurlahn	represents	one	of	these	warrens,	yes?’
‘Aye,’	Quick	Ben	responded,	and	then	hastily	added,	‘sire.	The	Tiste	warrens—and	there	are	three	that	we
know	of—are	all	Elder.	Two	of	them,	by	the	way,	are	no	longer	ruled	by	the	Tiste.	One	is	virtually	sealed.	The
other	has	been	usurped.’
‘And	how	do	these	warrens	relate	to	your	Deck	of	Dragons?’
The	High	Mage	flinched.	‘Not	my	Deck,	sire,	I	assure	you.	There	is	no	simple	answer	to	your	question—’
‘It’s	 about	 time!	 I	 was	 beginning	 to	 feel	 very	 stupid.	 Please	 understand,	 I	 have	 no	 problem	 about	 being
stupid.	Feeling	stupid	is	entirely	another	matter.’
‘Ah,	yes,	sire.	Well,	the	Deck	of	Dragons	probably	originated	as	a	means	of	divination—less	awkward	than
tiles,	burnt	bones,	silt	patterns,	random	knots,	knucklebones,	puke,	faeces—’
‘Understood!	Please,	there	are	ladies	present,	good	sir!’
‘Forgive	 me,	 sire.	 In	 some	 obvious	 ways,	 the	 High	 Houses	 of	 the	 Deck	 relate	 to	 certain	 warrens	 and	 as
such	they	present	a	kind	of	window	looking	in	on	those	warrens—conversely,	of	course,	things	can	in	turn	look
out	from	the	other	side,	which	is	what	makes	a	reading	so	.	.	.	risky.	The	Deck	is	indifferent	to	barriers—in	the
right	hands	it	can	reveal	patterns	and	relationships	hidden	to	mortal	eyes.’
‘Even	what	you	describe,’	said	Brys,	‘hardly	matches	what	happened	at	that	reading,	High	Mage.’
‘Aye,	Preda,	which	brings	us	back	to	the	wound	that	is	this	city.	Someone	drew	a	knife	and	carved	a	new
pattern	 here.	 New,	 and	 yet	 ancient	 beyond	 belief.	 There	 was	 an	 attempt	 at	 a	 reawakening,	 but	 what	 awoke
was	broken.’
‘And	do	you	know	who	that	“someone”	might	have	been?’	King	Tehol	asked.
‘Icarium	Lifestealer,	sire.	A	Champion	intended	to	cross	blades	with	Emperor	Rhulad	Sengar.’
Tehol	leaned	back	and	said,	‘Ceda,	do	you	have	anything	to	add	at	this	moment?’
Bugg	started	and	then	winced.	‘The	High	Mage’s	knowledge	is	most	impressive,	sire.	Uncannily	so.’
Queen	Janath	asked,	‘Can	this	wound	be	healed,	Ceda?	And	if	not,	what	is	the	threat	to	Letheras	should	it
continue	to	.	.	.	bleed?’
The	old	man	made	a	face	that	suggested	he’d	just	tasted	something	unpleasant.	‘Letheras	is	now	like	a	pool
of	 water	 with	 all	 the	 silts	 stirred	 up.	 We	 are	 blinded,	 groping,	 and	 none	 of	 us	 can	 draw	 more	 than	 a	 thin,
shallow	 handful	 of	 magic.	 The	 effect	 ripples	 outward	 and	 will	 soon	 incapacitate	 the	 mages	 throughout	 the
kingdom.’
‘High	Mage,’	Janath	then	said,	‘you	said	earlier	that	the	effect	is	temporary.	Does	this	presume	a	healing	is
imminent?’
‘Most	wounds	heal	themselves,	over	time,	Highness.	I	expect	that	will	begin	.	.	.	as	soon	as	we	Malazans
get	the	Hood	out	of	here.	The	reading	gave	that	wound	a	sharp	poke.	Blood	flowed	out,	and	in	this	instance,
blood	is	power.’
‘Well	now,’	mused	the	King.	‘How	fascinating,	how	curious,	how	alarming.	I	think	we	had	best	proceed	with
haste	to	the	matter	of	filling	the	royal	coffers.	Adjunct	Tavore,	you	wish	to	supply	a	baggage	train	sufficient	to
see	 you	 into	 and,	 presumably,	 across	 the	 Wastelands.	 This	 we	 are	 happy	 to	 provide,	 at	 a	 complimentary,
reduced	 rate—to	 show	 our	 appreciation	 of	 your	 exemplary	 efforts	 in	 ousting	 the	 Edur	 tyranny.	 Now,	 my
Chancellor	has	already	begun	arranging	matters	from	our	end,	and	he	informs	me	that	his	projected	estimate	to
meet	your	needs	is	substantial.	It	will	take	us	approximately	four	weeks	to	assemble	such	a	train	and	hopefully
only	moments	for	you	to	pay	for	it.	Of	course,	Brys	will	arrange	his	escort’s	resupply,	so	you	need	not	worry
about	that.’
He	 paused	 then,	 noting	 the	 Adjunct’s	 involuntary	 start.	 ‘Ah,	 your	 escort.	 Yes,	 my	 brother	 insists	 that	 he
accompany	 you	 through	 the	 neighbouring	 kingdoms.	 Quite	 simply,	 neither	 Saphinand	 nor	 Bolkando	 can	 be
trusted	to	do	anything	but	betray	and	undermine	you	at	every	turn.	Depressing	neighbours—but	then,	so	were
we	 to	 them	 not	 so	 long	 ago.	 I	 am	 considering	 announcing	 a	 Royal	 Project	 to	 construct	 the	 world’s	 highest
fence	for	ever	separating	our	respective	territories,	with	some	fine	hedging	to	soften	the	effect.	Yes	yes,	dear


wife,	I	am	now	rambling	and	yes,	it	was	fun!’
‘Sire,’	said	Tavore,	‘thank	you	for	the	offer	of	an	escort,	but	I	assure	you,	there	is	no	need.	Those	kingdoms
we	seek	to	pass	through	may	well	be	treacherous,	but	I	doubt	they	can	succeed	in	surprising	us.’	Her	tone	was
flat	and	though	she	couldn’t	see,	Lostara	was	certain	that	the	Adjunct’s	eyes	were	if	anything	even	flatter.
‘They	are	thieves,’	said	Brys	Beddict.	‘Your	baggage	train,	Adjunct,	will	be	enormous—the	lands	you	seek
are	bereft—it	may	be	that	even	Kolanse	itself	is	unable	to	accommodate	you.’
‘Excuse	me,’	said	Tavore.	‘I	do	not	recall	stating	our	intended	destination.’
‘There’s	little	else	out	there,’	said	Brys,	shrugging.
The	Adjunct	said	nothing	and	all	at	once	the	atmosphere	was	tense.
‘Preda	Brys,’	said	the	King,	‘will	be	assisting	in	policing	your	train	as	you	pass	through	two	entire	nations	of
pickpockets.’
Still	 Tavore	 hesitated.	 ‘Sire,	 we	 have	 no	 desire	 to	 embroil	 your	 kingdom	 in	 a	 war,	 should	 Saphinand	 or
Bolkando	attempt	to	betray	the	passage	agreements.’
‘It	 will	 be	 our	 very	 presence,’	 said	 Brys,	 ‘that	 will	 ensure	 nothing	 so	 overt	 on	 their	 part,	 Adjunct.	 Please
understand,	 if	 we	 do	 not	 escort	 you	 and	 you	 subsequently	 find	 yourselves	 in	 a	 vicious	 war	 with	 no	 retreat
possible,	then	we	in	turn	will	have	no	choice	but	to	march	to	your	rescue.’
‘Just	so,’	agreed	the	King.	‘So	accept	the	escort,	Adjunct,	or	I	shall	hold	my	breath	until	I	achieve	a	most
royal	shade	of	purple.’
Tavore	bowed	her	head	in	acquiescence.	‘I	withdraw	all	objections,	sire.	Thank	you	for	the	escort.’
‘That’s	 better.	 Now,	 I	 must	 now	 seek	 reassurance	 from	 my	 staff	 on	 three	 distinct	 issues.	 Chancellor,	 are
you	content	with	everything	pertaining	to	outfitting	the	Adjunct’s	forces?’
‘I	am,	sire,’	said	Bugg.
‘Excellent.	Royal	Treasurer,	are	you	confident	that	the	Malazans	have	sufficient	funds	for	this	enterprise?’
‘So	I	am	assured,	sire,’	said	Bugg.
‘Good.	Ceda,	do	you	concur	that	the	departure	of	the	Malazans	will	hasten	the	healing	that	has	befallen	the
city?’
‘I	do,	sire,’	said	Bugg.
‘Consensus	at	last!	How	delightful!	Now	what	should	we	do?’
Queen	 Janath	 stood.	 ‘Food	 and	 wine	 awaits	 us	 in	 the	 dining	 hall.	 Allow	 me	 to	 lead	 our	 guests.’	 And	 she
stepped	down	from	the	dais.
‘Darling	wife,’	said	Tehol,	‘for	you	I	make	all	manner	of	allowances.’
‘I	am	relieved	that	you	so	willingly	assume	such	a	burden,	husband.’
‘So	am	I,’	he	replied.


Chapter	Six
The	beetle	that	walks	slowly	has	nothing	to	fear.
SAPHII	SAYING

Coated	 in	 dust-spattered	 blood,	 Vedith	 rode	 out	 of	 the	 billowing	 smoke,	 in	 his	 wake	 piteous	 screams	 and	 the
raucous	roar	of	flames	as	they	engulfed	the	three-storey	government	building	in	the	town’s	centre.	Most	of	the
other	structures	lining	the	main	street	were	already	gutted,	although	fires	still	licked	the	blackened	frames	and
the	foul	smoke	lifted	pillars	skyward.
Four	other	riders	emerged	behind	Vedith,	scimitars	unsheathed,	the	Aren	steel	blades	streaked	with	gore.
Hearing	 their	 wild	 whoops,	 Vedith	 scowled.	 The	 mangled	 round	 shield	 strapped	 to	 his	 right	 forearm	 had
driven	 splinters	 through	 the	 wrist	 and	 that	 hand	 could	 not	 grip	 the	 reins.	 In	 his	 left	 hand	 he	 held	 his	 own
scimitar,	the	blade	snapped	a	hand’s-width	above	the	hilt—he	would	have	thrown	it	away	but	he	valued	the	hilt,
grip	and	pommel	too	much	to	part	with	it.
His	horse’s	reins	dragged	between	the	beast’s	front	legs	and	at	any	moment	the	galloping	mount,	in	her	fear
and	pain,	might	slam	a	hoof	down	on	them,	which	would	snap	her	neck	down	and	send	her	rider	tumbling.
He	rose	in	his	stirrups,	leaned	forward—pounded	by	the	horse’s	pitching	neck—and	bit	the	animal’s	left	ear,
tugging	backwards.	Squealing,	the	beast’s	head	lifted,	her	plunging	hoofs	slowing,	drawing	up.	This	gave	Vedith
time	to	sheathe	what	was	left	of	his	father’s	sword	and	then	slip	his	arm	round	the	horse’s	neck,	easing	the
pressure	of	his	teeth.
Moments	later,	the	wounded	mare	pitched	and	wobbled	down	off	the	cobbled	road	into	the	high	grasses	of
the	ditch	and	clumped	to	a	halt,	body	trembling.
Murmuring	calming	words,	the	warrior	released	the	animal’s	ear	and	settled	back	on	the	saddle,	collecting
the	reins	with	his	one	usable	hand.
His	four	companions	rode	up	and,	beasts	jostling	on	the	road,	they	held	their	swords	high	in	triumph,	even	as
they	spat	dust	and	blood	from	their	mouths.
Vedith	 felt	 sick.	 But	 he	 understood.	 The	 growing	 list	 of	 proscriptions,	 the	 ever-dwindling	 freedom,	 the
indignities	and	undisguised	contempt.	Each	day	in	the	past	week	more	Bolkando	soldiers	had	arrived,	fortlets
springing	 up	 round	 the	 Khundryl	 encampment	 like	 mushroom	 knuckles	 on	 dung.	 And	 tensions	 twisted	 ever
tighter.	Arguments	burst	to	life	like	spotfires,	and	then,	all	at	once—
He	guided	his	horse	back	on	to	the	road	and	glared	back	at	the	burning	town.	And	then	scanned	the	horizons
to	either	side.	Columns	of	coiling	black	smoke	rose	everywhere	like	crooked	spears—yes,	the	patience	of	the
Burned	Tears	was	at	an	end,	and	he	knew	that	a	dozen	villages,	twice	as	many	hamlets,	scores	of	farms	and,
now,	one	town,	had	felt	the	wrath	of	the	Khundryl.
Vedith’s	 raiding	 party,	 thirty	 warriors—most	 of	 them	 barely	 into	 their	 third	 decade—had	 clashed	 with	 a
garrison.	 The	 fighting	 had	 been	 ferocious.	 He’d	 lost	 most	 of	 his	 troop,	 and	 this	 had	 been	 fuel	 enough	 to	 set
ablaze	 the	 Khundryl	 fury,	 inflicting	 wrathful	 vengeance	 upon	 wounded	 soldiers	 and	 the	 civilian	 inhabitants	 of
the	town.
The	taste	of	that	slaughter	left	a	bitter,	toxic	stain,	inside	and	out.
His	horse	could	not	hold	still.	Her	slashed	flank	still	bled	freely.	She	circled,	head	tossing,	kicking	with	the
wounded	hind	leg.
They’d	 left	 scores	 of	 corpses	 in	 that	 nameless	 town.	 This	 very	 morning	 it	 had	 been	 a	 peaceful	 place,	 life
awakening	and	crawling	on	to	the	old	familiar	trails,	a	slow	beating	heart.	Now	it	was	ruin	and	charred	meat—
they’d	not	even	bothered	looting,	so	fierce	upon	them	was	the	lust	for	slaughter.
To	 a	 proud	 people,	 the	 contempt	 of	 others	 drives	 the	 deepest	 wound.	 These	 Bolkando	 had	 thought	 the
Khundryl	knives	were	dull.	Dull	knives,	dull	minds.	They	had	thought	they	could	cheat	the	savages,	mock	them,
ply	them	with	foul	liquor	and	steal	their	wealth.


We	are	Seven	Cities—did	you	think	you	were	the	first	to	try	to	play	such	games	with	us?
Stragglers	were	still	emerging—three,	two,	a	lone	wounded	warrior	slumped	over	his	saddle,	two	more.
The	soldiers	of	the	garrison	had	not	understood	how	to	meet	a	cavalry	charge.	It	was	as	if	they	had	never
before	seen	such	a	thing,	gaping	at	the	precise	execution,	the	deadly	timing	of	the	javelins	launched	when	the
two	sides	were	but	a	dozen	paces	apart.	The	Bolkando	line—formed	up	across	the	main	street—had	crumpled
as	the	barbed	javelins	punched	through	shield	and	scale	armour,	as	figures	reeled,	buckled	and	fouled	others.
The	 Khundryl	 warhorses	 and	 their	 howling,	 scimitar-slashing	 riders	 then	 smashed	 into	 that	 tattered
formation.
A	 slaughter.	 Until	 the	 rear	 sections	 of	 the	 Bolkando	 dispersed,	 scattering	 into	 clumps,	 pelting	 into	 the	 side
avenues,	the	alleys,	the	sheltered	mouths	of	stone-faced	shops.	The	battle	broke	up	then,	knots	spinning	away.
Khundryl	warriors	were	forced	to	dismount,	unable	to	press	into	the	narrower	alleys,	or	draw	back	out	into	the
open	soldiers	crouched	behind	drawn-up	shields	in	the	niches	of	doorways.	Still	outnumbered,	warriors	of	the
Burned	Tears	began	falling.
It	 had	 taken	 most	 of	 the	 morning	 to	 hunt	 down	 and	 butcher	 the	 last	 garrison	 soldier.	 And	 barely	 a	 bell	 to
murder	 the	 townsfolk	 who	 had	 not	 fled—who	 had,	 presumably,	 imagined	 that	 seventy-five	 soldiers	 would
prevail	 against	 a	 mere	 thirty	 savages—and	 then	 set	 fire	 to	 the	 town,	 roasting	 alive	 the	 few	 who	 had
successfully	hidden	themselves.
Such	 scenes,	 Vedith	 knew,	 were	 raging	 across	 the	 entire	 countryside	 now.	 No	 one	 was	 spared,	 and	 to
deliver	the	message	in	the	clearest	way	imaginable,	every	Bolkando	farm	was	being	stripped	of	anything	and
everything	edible	or	otherwise	useful.	The	revolt	had	been	ignited	by	the	latest	Bolkando	price	hike—a	hundred
per	cent,	applicable	only	to	the	Khundryl—on	all	necessities,	including	fodder	for	the	horses.	Revile	 us,	 yes,
even	as	you	take	our	silver	and	gold.
He	 had	 a	 dozen	 warriors	 with	 him	 now,	 one	 of	 them	 likely	 to	 die	 soon—well	 before	 they	 reached	 the
encampment.	And	thick	splinters	rode	up	his	forearm	like	extra	longbones,	pain	throbbing.
Yes,	the	losses	had	been	high.	But	then,	what	other	troop	had	attacked	a	garrisoned	town?
Still,	he	wondered	if,	perhaps,	the	Burned	Tears	had	kicked	awake	the	wrong	nest.
‘Bind	Sidab’s	wounds,’	he	now	said	in	a	growl.	‘Has	he	his	sword?’
‘He	has,	Vedith.’
‘Give	it	to	me—mine	broke.’
Although	he	was	dying	and	knew	it,	Sidab	lifted	his	head	at	this	and	showed	Vedith	a	red	smile.
‘It	shall	weight	my	hand	as	did	my	father’s	sword,’	Vedith	said.	‘I	shall	wield	it	with	pride,	Sidab.’
The	 man	 nodded,	 smile	 fading.	 He	 coughed	 out	 a	 gout	 of	 blood	 and	 then	 slid	 out	 of	 his	 saddle,	 thumping
heavily	on	to	the	cobbled	road.
‘Sidab	stays	behind.’
The	others	nodded	and	spat	to	make	a	circle	round	the	corpse,	thus	sanctifying	the	ground,	completing	the
only	funeral	ceremony	needed	for	Khundryl	warriors	on	the	path	of	war.	Vedith	reached	out	and	took	up	the
reins	of	Sidab’s	horse.	He	would	take	the	beast	as	well,	and	ride	it,	to	ease	his	own	mount’s	discomfort.	‘We
return	to	Warleader	Gall.	Our	words	shall	make	his	eyes	shine.’
	
Warleader	Gall	sagged	back	into	his	antler	and	rope	throne,	the	knots	creaking.	‘Coltaine’s	sweet	breath,’	he
sighed,	squeezing	shut	his	eyes.
Jarabb,	Tear	Runner	to	the	warleader	and	the	only	other	occupant	of	Gall’s	tent,	removed	his	helmet,	and
then	the	padded	doeskin	cap,	and	raked	thick	fingers	through	his	hair,	before	stepping	forward	and	dropping	to
one	knee.	‘Command	me,’	he	said.
Gall	groaned.	‘Not	now,	Jarabb.	The	time	for	play’s	over—my	Fall-damned	young	braves	have	given	us	a
war.	Twenty	raids	have	howled	back	into	camp,	sacks	filled	with	hens	and	pups	and	whatnot.	I’d	wager	nigh
on	a	thousand	innocent	farmers	and	villagers	already	dead—’
‘And	hundreds	of	soldiers,	Warleader,’	reminded	Jarabb.	‘The	fortlets	burn—’
‘And	 I’ve	 been	 coughing	 from	 the	 smoke	 all	 morning—we	 didn’t	 need	 to	 torch	 them—that	 timber	 would
have	been	useful.	So	we	spit	and	snarl	like	a	desert	lynx	in	her	lair,	and	what	do	you	think	King	Tarkulf	is	going
to	do?	Wait,	never	mind	him—the	man’s	got	fungi	for	brains—it’s	the	Chancellor	and	his	cute	Conquestor	we
have	 to	 worry	 about.	 Let	 me	 tell	 you	 what	 they’ll	 do,	 Jarabb.	 They	 won’t	 demand	 we	 return	 to	 this	 camp.


They	won’t	insist	on	reparations	and	blood-coin.	No,	they’ll	raise	an	army	and	march	straight	for	us.’
‘Warleader,’	Jarabb	said,	straightening,	‘wildlands	beckon	us	north	and	east—once	out	on	the	plains,	no	one
can	catch	us.’
‘All	very	well,	but	these	Bolkando	aren’t	our	enemy.	They	were	supplying	us—’
‘We	loot	all	we	can	before	fleeing.’
‘And	won’t	the	Adjunct	be	thrilled	by	how	we’ve	smoothed	the	sand	before	her.	This	is	a	mess,	Jarabb.	A
mess.’
‘What,	then,	will	you	do,	Warleader?’
Gall	finally	opened	his	eyes,	blinked,	and	then	coughed.	After	a	moment	he	said,	‘I	won’t	try	to	mend	what
cannot	be	undone.	This	aids	the	Adjunct	nothing.	No,	we	need	to	seize	the	bull’s	cock.’	He	surged	to	his	feet,
collected	 up	 his	 crow-feather	 cloak.	 ‘Break	 this	 camp—kill	 all	 livestock	 and	 start	 curing	 the	 meat.	 It	 will	 be
weeks	 before	 the	 Bolkando	 muster	 the	 numbers	 they	 need	 against	 us.	 To	 ensure	 safe	 passage	 of	 the
Bonehunters—not	to	mention	the	Grey	Helms—we’re	going	to	march	on	the	capital.	We’re	going	to	pose	such
a	threat	that	Tarkulf	voids	his	bladder	and	overrules	his	advisors—I	want	the	King	thinking	he	might	be	facing
a	three-pronged	invasion	of	his	piss-ass	latrine	pit	of	a	kingdom.’
Jarabb	smiled.	He	could	see	the	embers	glowing	in	his	warleader’s	dark	eyes.	Which	meant	that,	once	all
the	 orders	 were	 barked	 and	 all	 the	 other	 runners	 were	 scrambling	 dust-trails,	 Gall’s	 mood	 would	 be	 much
improved.
Sufficient,	perhaps,	to	once	more	invite	some	.	.	.	play.
All	he	need	do	was	make	sure	the	old	man’s	wife	was	nowhere	close.
	
Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian	shifted	uncomfortably	beneath	his	chain	surcoat.	The	quilted	underpadding	had	worn
through	on	his	right	shoulder—he	should	have	patched	it	this	morning	and	would	have	done	so	had	he	not	been
so	eager	to	witness	the	landing	of	the	first	cohort	of	Grey	Helms	on	this	wretched	ground.
For	all	his	haste	he	found	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	already	positioned	on	the	rise	overlooking	the	shoreline,
red-faced	beneath	her	heavy	helm.	Though	the	sun	was	barely	above	the	mountain	peaks	to	the	east,	the	air
was	 stifling,	 oppressive,	 swarming	 with	 sand	 flies.	 As	 he	 approached	 he	 could	 see	 in	 her	 eyes	 the	 doom	 of
countless	epic	poems,	as	if	she	had	devoted	her	life	to	absorbing	the	tragedies	of	a	thousand	years’	worth	of
fallen	civilizations,	finding	the	taste	savagely	pleasing.
Yes,	she	was	a	holy	terror,	this	hard,	iron	woman.
Upon	arriving	at	her	side,	he	bowed	in	greeting.	‘Mortal	Sword.	This	is	a	portentous	occasion.’
‘Yet	but	two	of	us	stand	here,	sir,’	she	rumbled	in	reply,	‘when	there	should	be	three.’
He	nodded.	‘A	new	Destriant	must	be	chosen.	Who	among	the	elders	have	you	considered,	Mortal	Sword?’
Four	 squat,	 broad-beamed	 avars—the	 landing	 craft	 of	 the	 Thrones	 of	 War—were	 fast	 closing	 on	 the
channel	wending	through	the	mud	flats,	oar	blades	flashing.	The	tide	wasn’t	cooperating	at	all.	The	bay	should
be	 swelling	 with	 inflow;	 instead	 the	 water	 churned,	 as	 if	 confused.	 Tanakalian	 squinted	 at	 the	 lead	 avar,
expecting	it	to	run	aground	at	any	moment.	The	heavily	burdened	brothers	and	sisters	would	have	to	disembark
and	then	slog	on	foot—he	wondered	how	deep	the	mud	was	out	there.
‘I	am	undecided,’	Krughava	finally	admitted.	‘None	of	our	elders	happens	to	be	very	old.’
True	 enough.	 This	 long	 sea	 voyage	 had	 worn	 through	 the	 lives	 of	 a	 score	 or	 more	 of	 the	 most	 ancient
brothers	 and	 sisters.	 Tanakalian	 swung	 round	 to	 study	 the	 two	 encampments	 situated	 two	 thousand	 paces
inland,	one	on	this	side	of	the	river	and	the	other	on	the	opposite,	west	side.	As	yet	there	had	been	no	direct
contact	with	the	Akrynnai	delegation—if	 the	 mob	of	spike-haired,	 endlessly	singing,	spear-waving	barbarians
truly	justified	such	an	honorific.	So	long	as	they	stayed	on	the	other	side	of	the	river,	the	Akrynnai	could	sing
until	the	mountains	sank	into	the	sea.
The	 Bolkando	 camp,	 an	 ever	 burgeoning	 city	 of	 gaudy	 tents,	 was	 already	 aswarm—as	 if	 the	 imminent
landing	of	the	Perish	had	sent	them	into	a	frenzy.	Strange	people,	these	Bolkando.	Scar-faced	yet	effete,	polite
yet	 clearly	 bloodthirsty.	 Tanakalian	 did	 not	 trust	 them,	 and	 it	 looked	 as	 if	 their	 escort	 through	 the	 mountain
passes	and	into	the	kingdom	amounted	to	an	entire	army—three	or	four	thousand	strong—and	though	he	didn’t
think	the	average	Bolkando	soldier	could	hope	to	match	a	Grey	Helm,	still	their	sheer	numbers	were	cause	for
concern.	‘Mortal	Sword,’	he	said,	facing	her	once	more,	‘do	we	march	into	betrayal?’
‘This	 journey	 must	 be	 considered	 one	 through	 hostile	 territory,	 Shield	 Anvil.	 We	 will	 march	 in	 armour,


weapons	at	hand.	Should	the	Bolkando	escort	precede	us	into	the	pass,	then	I	shall	have	no	cause	for	worry.
Should	they	divide	to	form	advance	and	rear	elements,	I	will	be	forced	to	take	measure	of	the	strength	of	that
rearguard.	If	it	is	modest	then	we	need	have	little	concern.	If	it	is	overstrength	relative	to	the	advance	element,
then	 one	 must	 consider	 the	 possibility	 that	 a	 second	 army	 awaits	 us	 at	 the	 far	 end	 of	 the	 pass.	 Given,’	 she
added,	‘that	we	must	travel	in	column,	such	an	ambush	would	put	us	at	a	disadvantage,	initially	at	least.’
‘We	had	best	hope,’	observed	Tanakalian,	‘that	they	intend	treating	with	us	honourably.’
‘If	not,	they	will	regret	their	temerity,	sir.’
Three	legions,	eighteen	cohorts	and	three	supply	companies.	Five	thousand	brothers	and	sisters	in	the	land
force.	The	remaining	legions	would	accompany	the	Thrones	of	War	on	the	ill-mapped	sea-lanes	south	of	the
coast,	seeking	the	Pelasiar	Sea.	It	had	been	the	judgement	of	both	the	Adjunct	and	Krughava	that	the	Burned
Tears	 needed	 support.	 Given	 the	 reported	 scarcity	 of	 resources	 in	 the	 Wastelands,	 the	 Bonehunters	 would
travel	 independent	 of	 the	 more	 southerly	 forces	 consisting	 of	 the	 Khundryl	 mounted	 and	 the	 Perish	 foot
legions.	 The	 two	 elements	 would	 march	 eastward	 on	 parallel	 tracks,	 with	 perhaps	 twenty	 leagues	 between
them,	until	reaching	the	borders	of	the	first	kingdom	beyond	the	Wastelands.
In	Krughava’s	mind,	Tanakalian	well	knew,	a	holy	war	awaited	them,	the	singular	purpose	of	their	existence,
and	upon	that	foreign	soil	the	Grey	Helms	would	find	their	glory,	their	heroic	triumph	in	service	to	the	Wolves
of	Winter.	He	shared	with	her	that	sense	of	purpose,	fate’s	bold	promise,	and	like	her	he	did	not	fear	war.	They
were	trained	in	the	ways	of	violence,	sworn	to	those	cusps	of	history	hacked	into	shape	on	battlefields.	With
sword	 and	 will,	 they	 could	 change	 the	 world.	 Such	 was	 the	 truth	 of	 war,	 for	 all	 that	 soft	 fools	 might	 wish
otherwise,	might	dream	of	peace	and	harmony	between	strangers.
Romantics	with	their	wishful	notions	invariably	delivered	the	asp’s	bite,	whether	they	sought	to	or	not.	Hope
and	faith	seeped	through	like	the	sweetest	nectar,	only	to	sour	into	vile	poison.	Most	virtues,	Tanakalian	well
knew,	were	defenceless.	Abused	and	corrupted	with	ease,	ever	made	to	turn	in	the	wielder’s	hand.	It	took	a
self-deluded	mind	to	force	justice	upon	a	world	when	that	world	cared	for	nothing;	when	all	reality	mocked	the
righteous	with	its	indifference.
War	 swept	 such	 games	 aside.	 It	 was	 pure,	 unapologetic	 in	 its	 brutality.	 Justice	 arrived	 with	 the	 taste	 of
blood,	both	sweet	and	bitter	and	that	too	was	as	it	should	be.
No,	he	would	tell	the	Mortal	Sword	nothing	of	the	Destriant’s	final	words	of	terror,	of	his	unmanned	panic,
the	shrill	clangour	of	his	warnings.	Such	failings	served	no	one,	after	all.
Even	 so,	 Tanakalian	 vowed	 to	 remain	 watchful,	 wary,	 trusting	 nothing	 and	 expecting	 betrayal	 from	 every
stranger.
Run’Thurvian	was	too	old	for	war.	Fear	took	his	life—I	could	see	that	clearly	enough.	He	was	blind,
driven	to	madness.	Babbling.	It	was	all	so	.	.	.	undignified.
The	avars	had	run	aground	over	a	hundred	paces	from	the	high-tide	mark.	Burdened	soldiers	stumbled	shindeep	in	fly-swarmed	mud,	whilst	the	crews	struggled	to	drag	the	boats	free	to	retrace	their	route	back	to	the
anchored	Thrones.
They	were	in	for	a	long	day.
	
‘Well	now,’	muttered	Chancellor	Rava	as	he	perused	the	coded	missive,	‘our	dear	King	seems	to	have	led	our
precious	kingdom	into	a	royal	mess.’
Avalt	 paced	 in	 front	 of	 the	 old	 man,	 from	 one	 side	 of	 the	 tent’s	 shrouded	 chamber	 to	 the	 other.	 He	 could
guess	at	most	of	the	details	hidden	on	the	parchment	in	Rava’s	hands.	The	Chancellor’s	comment	was,	if	the
truth	 was	 laid	 bare,	 entirely	 inaccurate.	 The	 ‘mess’	 didn’t	 come	 from	 King	 Tarkulf.	 In	 fact,	 it	 was	 without
question	 the	 product	 of	 certain	 excesses	 among	 servants	 of	 the	 Chancellor	 and,	 indeed,	 of	 Conquestor	 Avalt
himself.	‘What	we	now	need	to	determine,’	he	said,	his	voice	still	cracking	from	the	tirade	he	had	delivered	a
short	time	earlier	to	a	select	company	of	merchant	agents	and	spies,	‘is	the	nature	of	the	relationship	between
our	Perish	friends	and	these	Khundryl	bandits.’
‘True,’	 Rava	 replied.	 ‘However,	 do	 recall	 that	 the	 Perish	 seem	 to	 hold	 to	 an	 absurdly	 elevated	 notion	 of
honour.	 Once	 we	 present	 to	 them	 our	 version	 of	 the	 Khundryl’s	 sudden,	 inexplicable	 rampage	 .	 .	 .	 once	 we
speak	of	the	atrocities	and	the	slaughter	of	hundreds,	if	not	thousands	of	innocents	.	.	.’	he	smiled,	‘I	believe
we	shall	see,	to	our	blessed	relief,	a	most	stern	disavowal	from	the	Mortal	Sword.’
Avalt’s	nod	was	sharp.	‘Which	will	permit	me	to	concentrate	my	forces	on	crushing	the	Khundryl	without


having	to	worry	about	the	Perish.’
Rava’s	watery	eyes	seemed	to	slide	from	Avalt	as	he	asked,	‘Is	there	cause	for	worry,	Conquestor?	Do	we
not	possess	the	military	might	to	obliterate	both	forces	if	necessary?’
Avalt	 stiffened.	 ‘Of	 course,	 Chancellor.	 But	 have	 you	 forgotten	 our	 latest	 intelligence	 from	 Lether?	 The
third	element	in	this	foreign	alliance	intends	to	march	through	our	kingdom.	Perhaps,	even	then,	we	could	crush
all	 three	 forces.	 But	 at	 a	 dreadful	 cost.	 Furthermore,	 we	 do	 not	 know	 yet	 what	 agreements	 have	 been
fashioned	 between	 the	 Letherii	 and	 these	 Malazans—we	 could	 well	 end	 up	 with	 the	 very	 war	 we	 did
everything	we	could	to	avoid—’
‘Resulting	in	the	exposure	of	our	deceptions	with	regard	to	our	putative	allies,	the	Saphii	and	the	Akrynnai.’
‘Said	deceptions	making	obvious	the	betrayals	we	intended—yet	with	us	suddenly	incapable	of	backing	them
with	force.	It	is	one	thing	to	make	promises	only	to	abandon	our	allies	in	the	field—if	we	cannot	then	occupy
the	lands	of	those	allies	once	their	armies	have	been	annihilated,	then	the	entire	enterprise	fails.’
‘Let	 us	 assume,	 for	 the	 moment,’	 said	 Rava,	 ‘that	 the	 Letherii	 threat	 no	 longer	 exists,	 and	 so	 the	 great
Bolkando	 Alliance	 need	 never	 show	 its	 paper	 fangs.	 What	 we	 presently	 face,	 at	 its	 worst,	 is	 three
disconnected	armies	marching	every	which	way	across	our	kingdom.	One	of	those	has	now	given	us	a	bloody
nose,	but	it	is	likely	that	the	Khundryl	will	beat	a	hasty	retreat,	now	that	they’ve	satisfied	their	bloodlust.	They
will	take	their	loot	and	flee	into	the	Wastelands.	Naturally,	that	will	be	a	fatal	error—we	need	only	move	a	few
legions	of	your	Third	Regulars	to	occupy	the	border	forts	and	trenchworks—so	that	whatever	remnants	of	the
Khundryl	come	crawling	back	will	not	present	any	sort	of	threat.’	He	raised	a	finger.	‘We	must	be	sure	to	have
our	own	commanders	in	charge,	to	profit	from	enslaving	the	Khundryl	refugees.’
‘Of	course.’
‘To	continue,	then,	we	are	left	with	the	Perish	and	the	Malazans,	and	both,	by	all	counts,	appear	eminently
civilized.	 Of	 a	 sort	 to	 deplore	 the	 Khundryl	 excesses,	 and	 indeed	 they	 may	 end	 up	 feeling	 somewhat
responsible.	They	may,	in	fact,	offer	reparations.’
Avalt	had	ceased	pacing	and	he	now	stood,	staring	down	at	the	Chancellor.	‘What,	then,	of	the	ambush	we
were	planning	in	the	pass?’
‘I	would	advise	that	it	remain	in	place,	for	the	moment,	Conquestor.	At	least	until	we	are	able	to	gauge	the
Mortal	Sword’s	reaction	when	we	deliver	the	news	of	the	Khundryl	and	their	unwarranted	depredations.’
‘I	assume	you	will	assure	the	Mortal	Sword	of	our	faith	in	her	and	her	Grey	Helms,’	said	Avalt.	‘And	that
we	recognize	that	the	actions	of	barbarians—allies	or	not—cannot	be	predicted,	and	that	we	in	no	way	hold
the	Perish	responsible.’
Rava	 was	 nodding.	 ‘And	 so,	 having	 said	 just	 that,	 the	 fact	 that	 we	 are	 observed	 to	 array	 our	 escort	 in	 a
defensive	posture	will	simply	indicate	our	.	.	.	cautious	natures.’
‘Thus	 encouraging	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 to	 make	 allowances,	 in	 her	 desire	 to	 alleviate	 our	 newfound
uncertainty.’
‘Precisely.	Well	said,	Conquestor.’
Avalt	resumed	pacing.	‘So,	we	drive	the	Khundryl	into	the	Wastelands,	and	then	enslave	whoever	makes	it
back.	 We	 ambush	 the	 Perish,	 resulting	 in	 a	 treasure	 trove	 of	 exquisite	 weaponry	 and	 armour—sufficient	 to
outfit	a	new	elite	element—’
‘Two	units,’	Rava	reminded	him.	‘Your	private	guard	and	one	for	me	as	well.’
‘As	agreed,	Chancellor.	To	resume,	we	are	then	facing	one	remaining	army.	The	Malazans.’
‘We	must	assume	that	word	will	reach	them	of	the	fate	of	their	allies.’
‘To	 which	 they	 will	 react,	 either	 with	 a	 perception	 of	 sudden	 vulnerability,	 in	 which	 case	 they	 will	 beat	 a
retreat,	or	with	anger,	inciting	aggression	on	their	part.’
‘Less	than	ten	thousand	of	the	fools,’	observed	Rava.	‘If	we	invite	our	allies	among	the	Akrynnai	and	Saphii,
we	can	divide	the	spoils—’
‘I	want	those	crossbows	of	theirs,’	Avalt	said.	‘I	cannot	tell	you	how	frustrating	it	has	been	to	fail	again	and
again	in	stealing	one	thus	far.	With	a	legion	or	two	armed	with	those	weapons	I	could	overrun	Saphinand	in	a
month.’
‘All	in	due	course,’	Rava	said.
‘All	of	this	assumes	the	Letherii	do	not	get	involved.’
The	Chancellor	sighed,	and	then	made	a	face.	‘My	finest	spies	fall	one	after	another	in	that	court,	and	those


few	 who	 have	 managed	 to	 escape	 are	 convinced	 that	 King	 Tehol	 is	 even	 worse	 than	 Tarkulf.	 A	 useless,
bumbling	idiot.’
‘But	you	are	not	convinced,	Chancellor?’
‘Of	 course	 not.’	 He	 paused,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘most	 of	 the	 time.	 We	 may	 be	 dealing	 with	 a	 situation	 there
uncannily	identical	to	our	own.’
Avalt	caught	his	breath,	frozen	in	place	once	again.	‘Errant’s	nudge,	can	it	be,	Rava?’
‘I	wish	I	knew.	Tehol	Beddict’s	wife	remains	an	unknown	entity.’
‘But	surely	not	in	a	position	to	match	Queen	Abrastal?’
Rava	 shrugged.	 ‘On	 the	 face	 of	 it,	 it	 seems	 unlikely.	 She	 possesses	 no	 private	 army.	 No	 elite	 units	 like
Abrastal’s	Evertine	Legion	or	anything	comparable.	If	she	has	spies—and	what	queen	doesn’t—they	seem	to
be	engaged	in	intelligence	gathering	only,	rather	than	active	sabotage.’
‘Yet,’	said	Avalt,	‘someone	is	clearly	hunting	down	your	spies—’
‘Even	 there,	 I	 cannot	 be	 certain.	 Each	 has	 died	 in	 mysterious	 circumstances—well,	 ones	 that	 I	 find
mysterious.	Tragic	mishaps,	each	and	every	one.	As	if	the	Errant	himself	was	giving	each	one	his	personal	.	.	.
attention.’
‘Now	that	is	an	alarming	thought,	Chancellor.’
‘Well,	 blessedly,	 not	 one	 has	 been	 exposed	 or	 captured.	 The	 accidents	 that	 have	 befallen	 them	 invariably
resulted	in	sudden	death.’
Avalt	frowned.	‘The	only	situation	I	can	imagine	that	fits	the	situation,	Chancellor,	is	that	our	own	networks
have	been	so	compromised	by	the	Letherii	that	neither	public	exposure	nor	torture	is	deemed	necessary.	Such
a	notion	chills	me	to	the	bone.’
‘You	 assume	 the	 Letherii	 have	 managed	 that	 infiltration,’	 said	 Rava.	 ‘Is	 it	 not	 more	 likely	 that	 the
compromise	originates	from	within	our	own	kingdom?’
‘Surely	not	Tarkulf’s	spies—’
‘No,	we	have	them	all	in	hand.	No,	my	friend,	is	it	truly	inconceivable	that	the	Queen	has	her	own	agents
ensconced	in	Tehol’s	palace?’
‘Actively	 eliminating	 rivals,	 yes,	 that	 seems	 terrifyingly	 possible,’	 conceded	 Avalt.	 ‘Then,	 what	 is	 she
planning?’
‘I	wish	I	knew.’	And	Rava	sat	forward,	fixing	Avalt	with	a	hard	stare.	‘Assure	me,	Conquestor,	that	at	no
time	will	this	situation	force	the	Queen	into	the	fore—at	no	time,	Avalt,	will	we	give	her	reason	to	shove	her
useless	husband	aside	and	sound	the	call.’
Avalt	was	suddenly	trembling.	The	thought	of	the	Evertine	Legion	stirred	awake,	actually	on	the	march	to
clean	up	whatever	mess	the	kingdom	had	been	plunged	into	.	.	.	no,	that	must	not	be.	‘Surely,’	he	said,	voice
breaking,	‘this	present	game	is	too	small	to	concern	Queen	Abrastal.’
Rava’s	face	was	grave.	He	lifted	the	parchment	note	and	fluttered	it	like	a	tiny	white	flag.	‘An	addendum
informs	me,	Conquestor,	that	the	King’s	fourteenth	daughter	and	her	handmaiden	are	no	longer	resident	in	the
palace.’
‘What?	Where	have	they	gone?’
To	that,	the	Chancellor	had	no	answer.
And	that	silence	filled	Avalt	with	dread.
	
The	 Bolkando	 commanders	 took	 their	 time	 to	 emerge	 from	 their	 encampment	 and	 ascend,	 with	 great
ceremony,	to	the	rise	where	Tanakalian	and	the	Mortal	Sword	stood.	It	was	late	afternoon.	The	Perish	legions,
in	full	kit,	had	formed	up	and	were	now	marching	to	the	floodplain	a	thousand	paces	inland,	where	the	supply
units	had	already	begun	staking	out	the	tent	rows	and	service	blocks.	The	insects	swarming	over	the	brothers
and	 sisters	 formed	 sunlit,	 glittering	 clouds	 that	 spun	 and	 whirled	 even	 as	 orange-winged	 martins	 flickered
through	them.
The	river	lizards	that	had	been	basking	on	the	banks	for	most	of	the	day	had	begun	rising	up	on	their	stubby
legs	and	slinking	their	way	into	the	water,	warily	eyed	by	the	herons	and	storks	stalking	the	reedy	shallows.
Nights	in	this	country,	Tanakalian	suspected,	would	not	be	pleasant.	He	could	imagine	all	manner	of	horrid,
poisonous	creatures	creeping,	crawling	and	flying	in	the	sweltering,	steamy	darkness.	The	sooner	they	climbed
into	the	mountain	passes	the	better	he	would	feel.	This	notion	of	insanely	inimical	nature	was	new	to	him,	and


most	unwelcome.
His	 attention	 was	 drawn	 back	 to	 Chancellor	 Rava	 and	 Conquestor	 Avalt	 as	 the	 unlikely	 pair—both	 riding
chairs	affixed	to	the	saddled	shoulders	of	four	burly	slaves	slowly	climbing	the	slope—rocked	back	and	forth,
like	kings	on	shaky	thrones.	Others	flanked	them	with	feather	fans,	keeping	insects	at	bay.	A	train	of	a	dozen
more	 trailed	 the	 two	 men.	 This	 time,	 at	 least,	 there	 were	 no	 armoured	 guards—nothing	 so	 obvious,	 although
Tanakalian	suspected	that	more	than	a	few	of	those	supposed	slaves	were	in	fact	bodyguards.
‘Solemn	greetings!’	called	the	Chancellor,	waving	one	limp	hand.	He	then	snapped	something	to	his	porters
and	 they	 set	 down	 his	 chair.	 He	 stepped	 daintily	 on	 to	 the	 ground,	 adjusting	 his	 silken	 robes,	 and	 was	 joined
moments	later	by	Avalt.	They	strode	up	to	the	Perish.
‘A	flawlessly	executed	landing—congratulations,	Mortal	Sword.	Your	soldiers	are	indeed	superbly	trained.’
‘Kind	words,	Chancellor,’	Krughava	rumbled	in	reply.	‘Strictly	speaking,	however,	they	are	not	my	soldiers.
They	are	my	brothers	and	sisters.	We	are	as	much	a	priesthood	as	we	are	a	military	company.’
‘Of	course,’	murmured	Rava,	‘and	this	is	certainly	what	makes	you	unique	on	this	continent.’
‘Oh?’
Conquestor	Avalt	smiled	and	provided	explanation,	‘You	arrive	possessing	a	code	of	conduct	unmatched	by
any	native	military	force.	We	seek	to	learn	much	from	you—matters	of	discipline	and	behaviour	that	we	can
apply	to	our	own	people	to	the	benefit	of	all.’
‘It	distresses	me,’	said	Krughava,	‘that	you	hold	your	own	soldiers	in	such	low	opinion,	Conquestor.’
Tanakalian	 squinted	 as	 if	 he’d	 caught	 a	 glare	 of	 sunlight	 from	 some	 distant	 weapon,	 and	 hoped	 that	 this
seemingly	unconscious	expression	hid	his	smile.
When	he	looked	back	he	saw	Avalt’s	own	eyes	widening	within	their	cage	of	dyed	scars,	and	then	thinning.
‘You	misunderstand,	Mortal	Sword.’
Rava	said,	‘You	have	perchance	already	sensed	something	of	the	incessant	intrigue	compounding	alliances
and	agreements	of	mutual	protection	between	the	border	nations,	Mortal	Sword.	Such	things,	while	regrettable,
are	necessary.	The	Saphii	do	not	trust	the	Akrynnai.	The	Akrynnai	do	not	trust	the	Awl	nor	the	D’rhasilhani.
And	 the	 Bolkando	 trust	 none	 of	 them.	 Foreign	 armies,	 we	 have	 all	 long	 since	 learned,	 cannot	 be	 held	 to	 the
same	high	comportment	as	one	holds	one’s	own	forces.’	He	spread	his	hands.	‘Conquestor	Avalt	was	simply
expressing	our	unexpected	pleasure	in	finding	in	you	such	unimpeachable	honour.’
‘Ah,’	said	Krughava,	with	all	the	percipient	wit	of	a	cliff	goat.
Avalt	was	struggling	to	master	his	anger,	and	Tanakalian	knew	that	the	Mortal	Sword—for	all	her	seemingly
oblivious	 insensitivity—was	 well	 taking	 note	 of	 this	 interesting	 flaw	 in	 the	 commander	 overseeing	 Bolkando
Kingdom’s	combined	military	might.	A	commander	with	a	temper	and,	evidently,	poor	discipline	in	mastering	it
—particularly	in	front	of	strangers	and	potential	enemies—was	one	who	would	squander	his	soldiers	to	answer
some	insult,	real	or	imagined.	He	was,	therefore,	both	more	dangerous	and	less	threatening,	the	former	for	the
risk	 of	 his	 doing	 the	 unexpected,	 the	 precipitous;	 and	 the	 latter	 for	 what	 would	 likely	 be	 a	 blunt,	 unsubtle
execution,	fuelled	by	an	overwhelming	need	for	satisfaction.
Tanakalian	 ran	 through	 these	 details	 in	 his	 mind,	 forcing	 himself	 to	 inwardly	 articulate	 the	 lessons	 that	 he
knew	Krughava	had	comprehended	in	an	instant.	Now	that	the	Destriant	was	gone,	it	fell	to	the	Shield	Anvil	to
seek	a	path	as	close	as	possible	to	the	Mortal	Sword,	to	find	a	way	into	her	mind,	to	how	she	thought	and	those
duties	that	drove	her.
During	these	moments	of	reflection,	Chancellor	Rava	had	been	speaking:	‘.	.	.	unexpected	tragedies,	Mortal
Sword,	which	have	put	us	in	a	most	awkward	position.	It	is	necessary,	therefore,	that	we	take	measured	pause
here,	whilst	your	formidable	forces	are	poised	outside	the	kingdom’s	boundaries.’
Krughava	had	cocked	her	head.	‘Since	you	have	not	yet	described	these	tragedies,	Chancellor,	I	can	only
observe	that,	from	my	experience,	most	tragedies	are	unexpected,	and	invariably	lead	to	awkwardness.	Since	it
seems	that	the	fact	that	we	have	not	yet	crossed	into	your	kingdom	is,	for	you,	a	salient	point,	am	I	to	assume
that	your	“unexpected	tragedies”	have	in	some	way	jeopardized	our	agreement?’
Now	 it	 was	 the	 Chancellor’s	 turn	 to	 fail	 in	 disguising	 his	 irritation.	 ‘You	 Perish,’	 he	 now	 said,	 tone	 brittle,
‘have	acknowledged	a	binding	alliance	with	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	who	are	guests	of	the	kingdom	at	the
moment—guests	who	have	ceased	to	behave	in	a	civilized	fashion.’
‘Indeed?	What	leads	you	to	this	assessment,	Chancellor?’
‘This—this	assessment?’


As	Rava	spluttered,	speechless,	Conquestor	Avalt	spoke	sardonically:	‘How	might	you	assess	the	following,
Mortal	 Sword?	 The	 Khundryl	 have	 broken	 out	 of	 their	 settlement	 and	 are	 now	 raiding	 throughout	 the
countryside.	 Burning	 and	 looting	 farms,	 stealing	 herds,	 putting	 to	 the	 torch	 forts	 and	 hamlets	 and	 indeed	 an
entire	town.	But	I	am	remiss	in	speaking	only	of	material	depredations.	I	forgot	to	mention	scores	of	murdered
soldiers	and	thousands	of	slaughtered	civilians.	I	failed	in	citing	the	rapes	and	butchering	of	children—’
‘Enough!’	Krughava’s	bellow	sent	all	the	Bolkando	flinching	back.
The	Chancellor	was	first	to	recover.	‘Is	this	to	be	the	manner	of	your	vaunted	honour,	Mortal	Sword?’	he
demanded,	red-faced,	eyes	bright.	‘Can	you	not	comprehend	our	newfound	caution—nay,	our	distrust?	Have
we	been	led	to	expect	such	treachery—’
‘You	go	too	far,’	said	Krughava,	and	Tanakalian	saw	the	faint	curl	of	a	smile	on	her	lips—a	detail	that	took
his	breath	away.
It	seemed	to	exert	a	similar	effect	upon	the	Bolkando	dignitaries,	as	Rava	paled	and	Avalt	settled	a	mailed
hand	on	his	sword.
‘What,’	demanded	Rava	in	a	rasp,	‘does	that	mean?’
‘You	describe	a	local	history	of	internecine	treachery	and	incessant	betrayal,	sirs,	so	much	so	as	to	be	part
of	your	very	natures,	and	then	you	express	horror	and	outrage	at	the	supposed	betrayal	of	the	Khundryl.	Your
protestations	are	melodramatic,	sirs.	False	in	their	extremity.	I	begin	to	see	in	you	Bolkando	a	serpent	delighting
in	the	cleverness	of	its	own	forked	tongue.’	She	paused	in	the	shocked	silence,	and	then	added,	‘When	I	invited
you	 into	 the	 illusion	 of	 my	 ignorance,	 sirs,	 you	 slithered	 with	 eager	 glee.	 Who	 here	 among	 us,	 then,	 is	 the
greater	fool?’
Tanakalian	 gave	 credit	 to	 both	 men	 as	 he	 saw	 the	 rapid	 reassessment	 betrayed	 in	 their	 features.	 After	 a
tense	 moment,	 Krughava	 continued	 in	 a	 quieter	 tone,	 ‘Sirs,	 I	 have	 known	 Warleader	 Gall	 of	 the	 Khundryl
Burned	 Tears	 for	 some	 time	 now.	 In	 the	 course	 of	 a	 long	 ocean	 voyage,	 no	 duplicities	 of	 character	 remain
hidden.	 You	 assert	 the	 uniqueness	 of	 the	 Grey	 Helms,	 and	 in	 this	 you	 clearly	 reveal	 to	 me	 your	 lack	 of
understanding	with	respect	to	the	Khundryl.	The	Burned	Tears,	sirs,	are	in	fact	a	warrior	cult.	Devoted	to	the
very	heart	of	their	souls	to	a	legendary	warleader.	This	warleader,	Coltaine,	was	of	such	stature,	such	honour,
that	 he	 earned	 worship	 not	 among	 his	 allies,	 but	 among	 his	 putative	 enemies.	 Such	 as	 the	 Khundryl	 Burned
Tears.’	She	paused,	and	then	said,	‘I	am	assured,	therefore,	that	Warleader	Gall	and	his	people	were	provoked.
Possessed	 of	 admirable	 forbearance,	 as	 I	 know	 him	 to	 be,	 Gall	 would	 have	 bowed	 as	 a	 sapling	 to	 the	 wind.
Until	such	time	as	the	insults	demanded	answer.
‘They	 have	 raided	 and	 conducted	 wholesale	 looting?	 From	 this	 detail	 I	 conclude	 Bolkando	 merchants	 and
the	 King’s	 agents	 sought	 to	 take	 advantage	 of	 the	 Khundryl,	 imposing	 usurious	 increases	 in	 the	 price	 of
essential	supplies.	Furthermore,	you	state	that	they	broke	out	of	their	settlement.	What	manner	of	settlement
requires	a	violent	exit?	The	only	one	that	comes	to	mind	is	one	under	siege.	Accordingly,	and	in	consideration
of	 such	 provocation,	 I	 reaffirm	 the	 alliance	 between	 the	 Khundryl	 Burned	 Tears	 and	 the	 Grey	 Helms.	 If
enemies	to	us	you	choose	to	be,	sirs,	then	we	must	consider	that	we	are	now	at	war.	Attend	to	your	brigade,
Conquestor—it	is	tactically	imperative	that	we	obliterate	your	presence	here	prior	to	invading	your	kingdom.’
For	 all	 his	 doubt	 and	 suspicions	 and,	 indeed,	 fears,	 Tanakalian	 was	 not	 averse	 to	 revelling	 in	 pride	 at	 this
moment;	 seeing	 the	 effect	 of	 the	 Mortal	 Sword’s	 words	 upon	 the	 Chancellor	 and	 the	 Conquestor	 he	 felt
savage	pleasure.	Play	 games	 with	 us,	 will	 you?	 The	 Khundryl	 may	 sting,	 but	 the	 Perish	 shall	 rend	 and
tear.
They	would	not	call	Krughava’s	bluff,	for	it	was	no	bluff,	and	they	both	clearly	knew	it.
Nor,	 Tanakalian	 knew,	 would	 they	 accede	 to	 a	 state	 of	 war—not	 here	 against	 the	 Perish,	 and	 not,	 by
extension,	against	the	Burned	Tears.	The	fools	had	miscalculated,	badly	miscalculated.
And	now	would	begin	the	desperate	renewal	of	negotiations,	and	the	footing	that	had	heretofore	been	on	a
matching	level—as	courtesy	demanded—was	level	no	longer.
After	 all,	 you	 may	 at	 this	 moment	 face	 two	 bridling,	 angry	 armies,	 my	 friends,	 and	 find	 yourselves
shaking	with	terror.
Wait	until	you	meet	the	Bonehunters.
He	watched	as,	following	hasty	reiterations	of	a	desire	to	work	things	through	peacefully,	the	Chancellor	and
the	 Conquestor	 retreated	 back	 down	 the	 slope—not	 even	 bothering	 with	 the	 ridiculous	 chairs.	 The	 slaves
stumbled	after	them	in	a	fan-waving	mob.


Beside	him,	Krughava	sighed,	and	then	said,	‘It	occurs	to	me,	sir,	that	the	Bolkando	expected	the	Khundryl
to	prove	little	more	than	a	minor	irritant,	confined	to	the	region	surrounding	their	settlement.	Easily	contained,
or,	indeed,	quickly	driven	over	the	border	into	the	Wastelands.	That	notion	led,	inevitably,	to	the	conceit	that	we
here	could	be	isolated	and	dealt	with	at	their	leisure.’
‘Then	an	ambush	was	intended	all	along?’
‘Or	the	threat	thereof,	to	win	further	concessions.’
‘Well,’	 said	 Tanakalian,	 ‘if	 the	 Khundryl	 will	 neither	 remain	 close	 to	 their	 settlement	 nor	 retreat	 over	 the
border,	then	it	follows	that	but	one	course	remains.’
She	nodded.	‘As	a	barbed	spear,’	she	said,	‘Gall	will	lead	his	people	into	the	very	heart	of	the	kingdom.’	She
rolled	her	shoulders	in	a	rustle	of	chain	and	buckles.	‘Shield	Anvil,	inform	the	legion	commands	that	we	are	to
march	two	bells	before	dawn—’
‘Even	if	that	means	we	are	pursued	by	the	Bolkando	escort?’
She	 bared	 her	 teeth.	 ‘Have	 you	 gauged	 those	 troops,	 sir?	 They	 could	 be	 naked	 and	 not	 keep	 up	 with	 us.
Their	baggage	train	alone	is	thrice	the	size	of	their	combatants	in	column.	That,’	she	pronounced,	‘is	an	army
used	to	going	nowhere.’
She	set	off,	then,	to	beat	down	the	two	Bolkando	delegates,	from	flickering	daggers	to	misshapen	lumps	of
lead.
Tanakalian,	on	the	other	hand,	made	his	way	to	the	Perish	camp.
The	insects	were	maddening,	and	from	the	rushes	lining	the	river	birds	screamed.
	
The	 rain	 thrashed	 down,	 making	 the	 world	 grey	 and	 turning	 the	 stony	 track	 into	 a	 foaming	 stream.	 The	 tall
black	boles	of	the	trees	to	either	side	loomed	into	view	and	then	receded	in	rippling	waves	as	Yan	Tovis	guided
her	horse	down	the	now	treacherous	trail.	Her	waxed	cloak	was	drawn	tight	about	her,	the	hood	pulled	over
her	 helm.	 Two	 days	 and	 three	 nights	 of	 this	 and	 she	 was	 chilled	 and	 soaked	 through.	 Ever	 since	 she	 had
departed	the	Cities	Road,	five	leagues	from	Dresh,	cutting	northward	to	where	she	had	left	her	people,	league
after	league	of	this	forest	had	begun	to	weigh	upon	her.	Her	descent	to	the	coast	was	also	a	journey	into	the
past,	 civilization	 fading	 into	 ghostly	 hopes	 in	 her	 wake.	 Patches	 of	 clear-cut	 meadow,	 bordered	 by	 snarled
bomas	 of	 cut	 branches,	 hacked	 brush	 and	 root	 stumps,	 the	 triple	 ruts	 of	 log-tracks	 wending	 in	 and	 out;	 the
rubbish	of	old	camps	and	the	ash	heaps	and	trenches	of	charcoal	makers:	these	marked	the	brutal	imposition	of
Dresh’s	hunger	and	need.
As	with	the	islands	of	Katter	Bight,	desolation	was	the	promise.	As	she	had	ridden	through	the	old	timber
camps,	 she	 had	 seen	 the	 soil	 erosion,	 the	 deep	 rocky	 channels	 cutting	 through	 every	 clearing.	 And	 when	 in
Dresh,	resigning	her	commission,	she	had	noted	the	nervousness	among	the	garrison	troops.	Following	a	royal
decree	halting	logging	operations,	there	had	been	riots—much	of	the	city’s	wealth	came	from	the	forest,	after
all,	 and	 while	 the	 prohibition	 was	 a	 temporary	 one,	 during	 which	 the	 King’s	 agents	 set	 about	 devising	 a	 new
system—one	centred	on	sustainability—the	stink	of	panic	clogged	the	city	streets.
Yan	Tovis	was	not	surprised	that	King	Tehol	had	begun	challenging	the	fundamental	principles	and	practices
of	 Lether,	 but	 she	 suspected	 that	 he	 would	 soon	 find	 himself	 a	 solitary,	 beleaguered	 voice	 of	 reason.	 Even
common	 sense	 was	 an	 enemy	 to	 the	 harvesters	 of	 the	 future.	 The	 beast	 that	 was	 civilization	 ever	 faced
forward,	 and	 in	 making	 its	 present	 world	 it	 devoured	 the	 world	 to	 come.	 It	 was	 an	 appalling	 truth	 that	 one’s
own	children	could	be	so	callously	sacrificed	to	immediate	comforts,	yet	this	was	so	and	it	had	always	been	so.
Dreamers	 were	 among	 the	 first	 to	 turn	 their	 backs	 on	 historical	 truths.	 King	 Tehol	 would	 be	 swept	 aside,
drowned	in	the	inexorable	tide	of	unmitigated	growth.	No	one,	after	all,	can	stand	between	the	glutton	and	the
feast.
She	wished	him	well,	even	as	she	knew	he	would	fail.
In	the	midst	of	pelting	rain	she	had	left	the	camps	behind,	taking	one	of	the	old	wood-bison	migration	routes
through	 virgin	 forest.	 The	 mud	 of	 the	 ancient	 track	 swarmed	 with	 leeches	 and	 she	 was	 forced	 to	 dismount
every	bell	or	so	to	tug	the	mottled	black	and	brown	creatures	from	her	horse’s	legs,	until	the	path	led	down	on
to	a	sinkhole	basin	that	proved	to	be	a	salt-trap—the	plague	of	leeches	ended	abruptly	and,	as	she	continued
down-slope,	did	not	return.
Signs	of	the	old	dwellers	began	to	appear—perhaps	they	were	Shake	remnants,	perhaps	they	belonged	to	a
people	now	forgotten.	She	saw	the	slumping	humps	of	round	huts	covered	in	wax-leaved	vines.	She	saw	on


the	massive	trunks	of	the	most	ancient	trees	crumbled	visages,	carved	by	hands	long	since	rotted	to	nothing.
The	wooden	faces	were	smeared	in	black-slime,	moss	and	lumps	of	sickly	fungi.	She	halted	her	mount	beside
one	 such	 creation	 and	 stared	 at	 it	 through	 the	 rain	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 She	 could	 think	 of	 no	 finer	 symbol	 of
impermanence.	The	blunted	expression,	its	pits	of	sorrow	that	passed	for	eyes:	these	things	haunted	her	long
after	she	had	left	the	ruined	settlement.
The	track	eventually	merged	with	a	Shake	road	that	had	once	joined	two	coastal	villages,	and	this	was	the
path	she	now	took.
The	rain	had	become	a	deluge,	and	its	hissing	rose	to	a	roar	on	her	hood,	a	curtain	of	water	sheeting	down	in
front	of	her	eyes.
Her	horse	halted	suddenly	and	she	lifted	her	head	to	see	a	lone	rider	blocking	her	path.
He	seemed	a	figure	sculpted	in	flowing	water.	‘Listen	to	me,’	she	said,	loud,	unexpectedly	harsh.	‘Do	you
truly	imagine	that	you	can	follow	us,	brother?’
Yedan	Derryg	made	no	reply—his	typical	statement	of	obstinacy.
She	wanted	to	curse	him,	but	knew	that	even	that	would	be	useless.	‘You	killed	the	witches	and	warlocks.
Pully	and	Skwish	are	not	enough.	Do	you	understand	what	you	have	forced	upon	me,	Yedan?’
He	straightened	in	his	saddle	at	that.	Even	in	the	gloom	she	saw	his	jaws	bunching	as	he	chewed	for	a	time
on	his	reply,	before	saying,	‘You	cannot.	You	must	not.	Make	the	journey,	sister,	upon	the	mortal	path.’
‘Because	it	is	the	only	one	you	can	follow,	banished	as	you	are.’
But	he	shook	his	head.	‘The	road	you	seek	is	but	a	promise.	Never	attempted.	A	promise,	Yan	Tovis.	Will
you	risk	the	lives	of	our	people	upon	such	a	thing?’
‘You	have	left	me	no	choice.’
‘Take	the	mortal	path,	as	you	said	you	would.	Eastward	to	Bluerose	and	thence	across	the	sea—’
She	wanted	to	scream	at	him.	Instead,	she	bared	her	teeth.	‘You	damned	fool,	Yedan.	Have	you	seen	the
camp	 of	 our—my—people?	 The	 population	 of	 the	 whole	 island—old	 prisoners	 and	 their	 families,	 merchants
and	hawkers,	cut-throats	and	pirates—everyone	 joined	 us!	 Not	 even	 including	 the	 Shake,	 there	 are	 close	 to
ten	thousand	Letherii	refugees	in	my	camp!	What	am	I	to	do	with	them	all?	How	do	I	feed	them?’
‘They	are	not	your	responsibility,	Twilight.	Disperse	them—the	islands	are	very	nearly	under	water	now—
this	crisis	belongs	to	King	Tehol—to	Lether.’
‘You	 forget,’	 she	 snapped,	 ‘Second	 Maiden	 proclaimed	 its	 independence.	 And	 made	 me	 Queen.	 The
moment	we	arrived	on	the	mainland,	we	became	invaders.’
He	cocked	his	head.	‘It	is	said	the	King	is	a	compassionate	man—’
‘He	may	well	be,	but	how	will	everyone	else	think—all	those	people	whose	lands	we	must	cross?	When	we
beg	 for	 food	 and	 shelter?	 When	 our	 hunger	 grasps	 tight	 our	 souls,	 so	 that	 begging	 becomes	 demands?	 The
northern	territories	have	not	yet	recovered	from	the	Edur	War—fields	lie	fallow;	the	places	where	sorcery	was
unleashed	 now	 seethe	 with	 nightmare	 creatures	 and	 poisonous	 plants.	 I	 will	 not	 descend	 upon	 King	 Tehol’s
most	fragile	subjects	with	fifteen	thousand	desperate	trespassers!’
‘Take	me	back,	then,’	Yedan	said.	‘Your	need	for	me—’
‘I	cannot!	You	are	a	Witchslayer!	You	would	be	torn	to	pieces!’
‘Then	find	a	worthy	mate—a	king—’
‘Yedan	Derryg,	move	aside.	I	will	speak	with	you	no	longer.’
He	collected	his	reins	and	made	way	for	her	to	pass.	‘The	mortal	path,	sister.	Please.’
Coming	alongside,	she	raised	a	gloved	hand	as	if	to	strike	him,	then	lowered	it	and	kicked	her	horse	forward.
Feeling	his	gaze	upon	her	back	was	not	enough	to	twist	her	round	in	her	saddle.	The	weight	of	his	disapproval
settled	on	her	shoulders,	and	with	a	faint	shock	she	discovered	that	it	was	not	entirely	unfamiliar.	Perhaps,	as	a
child	.	.	.	well,	some	traits	refused	to	go	away,	no	matter	the	span	of	years.	The	notion	made	her	even	more
miserable.
A	short	time	later	she	caught	the	rank	smell	of	cookfires	dying	in	the	rain.
My	people,	my	realm,	I	am	home.
	
Pithy	and	Brevity	sat	on	a	rolled-up,	half-buried	log	at	what	used	to	be	the	high-water	mark,	their	bare	feet	in
the	lukewarm	water	of	the	sea’s	edge.	The	story	went	that	this	precious,	magical	mix	of	fresh	rain	and	salty
surf	 was	 a	 cure	 for	 all	 manner	 of	 foot	 ailments,	 including	 bad	 choices	 that	 sent	 one	 walking	 in	 entirely	 the


wrong	direction.	Of	course,	life	being	what	it	is,	you	can’t	cure	what	you	ain’t	done	yet,	though	it	never	hurts
to	try.
‘Besides,’	said	Brevity,	her	short	dark	hair	flattened	on	to	her	round	cheeks,	‘if	we	didn’t	swing	the	vote,	you
and	me,	why,	we’d	be	swimming	to	the	nearest	tavern	right	about	now.’
‘Praying	that	there’s	still	some	beer	on	tap,’	Pithy	added.
‘It	was	the	ice	melt,	dearie,	that	done	in	the	island,	and	sure,	maybe	it	would’ve	subsided	some,	maybe	even
enough,	but	who	wanted	to	hold	their	breaths	waiting	for	that?’	She	pulled	a	sodden	rustleaf	stick	from	some
fold	 in	 her	 cloak	 and	 jammed	 it	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 her	 mouth.	 ‘Anyway,	 we	 got	 us	 a	 Queen	 now	 and	 a
government—’
‘A	 divided	 government,	 Brevity.	 Shake	 on	 one	 side,	 Forters	 on	 the	 other,	 and	 the	 Queen	 hogtied	 and
stretched	in	between—I	can	hear	her	creaking	day	and	night.	What	we’re	looking	at	here	is	an	impasse	and	it
won’t	hold	that	way	for	much	longer.’
‘Well,	with	only	two	witches	left,	it’s	not	like	the	Shake	can	do	nothing	but	wave	a	bony	fist	our	way.’	Pithy
kicked	her	feet,	making	desultory	splashes	quickly	beaten	down	by	the	rain.	‘We	need	to	make	our	move	soon.
We	need	to	swing	the	Queen	over	to	our	side.	You	and	me,	Brev,	we	should	be	leading	the	contingent	to	King
Tehol,	with	a	tidy	resettlement	scheme	that	includes	at	least	three	chests	heaped	with	coins.’
‘One	for	you,	one	for	me,	and	one	for	Twilight’s	treasury.’
‘Precisely.’
‘Think	she’ll	go	for	it?’
‘Why	not?	We	can’t	stay	here	on	this	rotten	coast	much	longer,	can	we?’
‘Good	point.	She	saved	us	from	drowning	on	the	island,	didn’t	she?	No	point	in	then	having	us	drown	here	in
the	Errant’s	endless	piss.	Fent’s	Toes,	what	a	miserable	place	this	is.’
‘You	know,’	said	Pithy	after	a	time,	‘you	and	me,	we	could	just	abandon	’em	all.	Make	our	way	to	Letheras.
How	long	do	you	think	it’d	take	us	to	get	reestablished?’
Brevity	shook	her	head.	‘We’d	get	recognized,	dearie.	Worse,	our	scheme	ain’t	going	to	work	a	second	time
—people	will	see	the	signs	and	know	it	for	what	it	is.’
‘Bah,	every	five	years	by	my	count	you	can	find	another	crop	of	fools	with	too	much	money.	Happy	to	hand
it	over.’
‘Maybe,	but	it’s	not	the	marks	I	was	thinking	about—it’s	the	authorities.	I	ain’t	in	no	mood	to	get	arrested	all
over	again.	Twice	offending	means	the	Drownings	for	sure.’
Pithy	shivered.	‘Got	a	point	there.	All	right,	then	we	go	the	honest	politician	route,	we	climb	the	ladder	of,
uh,	secular	power.	We	soak	and	scam	legitimately.’
Brevity	sucked	on	the	stick	and	then	nodded.	‘We	can	do	that.	Popularity	contest.	We	divide	up	our	rivals	in
the	Putative	Assembly.	You	bed	one	half,	I	bed	the	other,	we	set	ourselves	up	as	bitter	rivals	and	make	up	two
camps.	Get	voted	as	the	Assembly’s	official	representatives	to	the	court	of	the	Queen.’
‘And	then	we	become	the	choke-point.’
‘Information	and	wealth,	up	and	down,	down	and	up.	Neither	side	knowing	anything	but	what	we	decide	to
tell	’em.’
‘Precisely.	No	real	difference	from	being	the	lying,	cheating	brokers	we	once	were.’
‘Right,	only	even	more	crooked.’
‘But	with	a	smile.’
‘With	a	smile,	always,	dearie.’
______
Yan	Tovis	rode	down	into	the	camp.	The	place	stank.	Figures	stumbled	in	the	mud	and	rain.	The	entire	shallow
bay	offshore	was	brown	with	churned-up	runoff.	They	were	short	of	food.	All	the	boats	anchored	in	the	bay
sat	low,	wallowing	in	the	rolling	waves.
The	mortal	path.	Twilight	shook	her	head.
Unmindful	of	the	countless	eyes	finding	her	as	she	rode	into	the	makeshift	town,	she	continued	on	until	she
reached	the	Witch’s	Tent.	Dismounting,	she	stepped	over	the	drainage	trench	and	ducked	inside.
‘We’s	in	turble,’	croaked	Skwish	from	the	far	end.	‘People	getting	sick	now—we’s	running	outa	herbs	and
was’not.’	She	fixed	baleful	eyes	on	Twilight.
At	her	side,	Pully	smacked	her	gums	for	a	moment,	and	then	asked,	‘What	you	going	t’do,	Queenie?	Nafore


everone	dies?’
She	did	not	hesitate.	‘We	must	journey.	But	not	on	the	mortal	path.’
Could	two	ancient	women	be	shocked?
Seemed	they	could.
‘By	my	Royal	Blood,’	Twilight	said,	‘I	will	open	the	Road	to	Gallan.’	She	stared	down	at	the	witches,	their
gaping	mouths,	their	wide	eyes.	‘To	the	Dark	Shore.	I	am	taking	us	home.’
	
He	wished	he	could	remember	his	own	name.	He	wished	for	some	kind	of	understanding.	How	could	such	a
disparate	collection	of	people	find	themselves	stumbling	across	this	ravaged	landscape?	Had	the	world	ended?
Were	they	the	last	ones	left?
But	 no,	 not	 quite,	 not	 quite	 accurate.	 While	 none	 of	 his	 companions,	 bickering	 and	 cursing,	 showed	 any
inclination	to	glance	back	on	their	own	trail,	he	found	his	attention	drawn	again	and	again	to	that	hazy	horizon
whence	they	had	come.
Someone	was	there.
Someone	was	after	them.
If	he	could	find	out	all	the	important	things,	he	might	have	less	reason	to	fear.	He	might	even	discover	that
he	knew	who	hunted	them.	He	might	find	a	moment	of	peace.
Instead,	the	others	looked	ahead,	as	if	they	had	no	choice,	no	will	to	do	otherwise.	The	edifice	they	had	set
out	 towards—what	 seemed	 weeks	 ago—was	 finally	 drawing	 near.	 Its	 immensity	 had	 mocked	 their	 sense	 of
distance	and	perspective,	but	even	that	was	not	enough	to	account	for	the	length	of	their	trek.	He	had	begun	to
suspect	that	his	sense	of	time	was	awry,	that	the	others	measured	the	journey	in	a	way	fundamentally	different
from	him—for	was	he	not	a	ghost?	He	could	only	slip	into	and	through	them	like	a	shadow.	He	felt	nothing	of
the	weight	of	each	step	they	took.	Even	their	suffering	eluded	him.
And	yet,	by	all	manner	of	reason,	should	he	not	be	the	one	to	have	found	time	compacted,	condensed	to	a
thing	 of	 ephemeral	 ease?	 Why	 then	 the	 torture	 in	 his	 soul?	 The	 exhaustion?	 This	 fevered	 sense	 of	 crawling
along	 every	 increment	 inside	 each	 of	 these	 bodies,	 one	 after	 another,	 round	 and	 round	 and	 round?	 When	 he
first	awoke	among	them,	he	had	felt	himself	blessed.	Now	he	felt	trapped.
The	edifice	reared	into	the	scoured	blue	sky.	Grey	and	black,	carved	scales	possibly	rent	by	fractures	and
mottled	 with	 rusty	 stains,	 it	 was	 a	 tower	 of	 immense,	 alien	 artistry.	 At	 first,	 it	 had	 seemed	 little	 more	 than
wreckage,	a	looming,	rotted	fang	rendered	almost	shapeless	by	centuries	of	abandonment.	But	the	closing	of
distance	had,	perversely,	altered	that	perception.	Even	so	.	.	.	on	the	flat	land	spreading	out	from	its	base,	there
was	no	sign	of	settlement,	no	ancient,	blunted	furrows	betraying	once-planted	fields,	no	tracks,	no	roads.
They	could	discern	the	nature	of	the	monument	now.	Perhaps	a	thousand	reaches	tall,	it	stood	alone,	emptyeyed,	a	dragon	of	stone	balanced	on	its	hind	limbs	and	curling	tail.	One	of	its	forelimbs	reached	down	to	sink
talons	into	the	ground;	the	other	was	drawn	up	and	angled	slightly	outward,	as	if	poised	to	swipe	some	enemy
from	its	path.	Even	its	hind	limbs	were	asymmetrically	positioned,	tensed,	coiled.
No	real	dragon	could	match	its	size,	and	yet	as	they	edged	closer—mute	now,	diminished—they	could	see
the	 astonishing	 detail	 of	 the	 creation.	 The	 iridescence	 of	 the	 whorls	 in	 each	 scale,	 lightly	 coated	 in	 dust;	 the
folded-back	 skin	 encircling	 the	 talons—talons	 which	 were	 at	 least	 half	 again	 as	 tall	 as	 a	 man,	 their	 polished,
laminated	 surfaces	 scarred	 and	 chipped.	 They	 could	 see	 creases	 in	 the	 hide	 that	 they	 had	 first	 taken	 to	 be
fractures;	 the	 weight	 of	 muscles	 hanging	 slack;	 the	 seams	 and	 blood	 vessels	 in	 the	 folded,	 arching	 wings.	 A
grainy	haze	obscured	the	edifice	above	its	chest	height,	as	if	it	was	enwreathed	in	a	ring	of	suspended	dust.
‘No,’	whispered	Taxilian,	‘not	suspended.	That	ring	is	moving	.	.	.	round	and	round	it	swirls,	do	you	see?’
‘Sorcery,’	said	Breath,	her	tone	oddly	flat.
‘As	might	a	million	moons	orbit	a	dead	sun,’	Rautos	observed.	‘Countless	lifeless	worlds,	each	one	no	bigger
than	a	grain	of	sand—you	say	magic	holds	it	in	place,	Breath—are	you	certain?’
‘What	 else?’	 she	 snapped,	 dismissive.	 ‘All	 we	 ever	 get	 from	 you.	 Theories.	 About	 this	 and	 that.	 As	 if
explanations	meant	anything.	What	difference	does	knowing	make,	you	fat	oaf?’
‘It	eases	the	fire	in	my	soul,	witch,’	Rautos	replied.
‘The	fire	is	the	reason	for	living.’
‘Until	it	burns	you	up.’
‘Oh,	stop	it,	you	two,’	moaned	Asane.


Breath	wheeled	on	her.	‘I’m	going	to	drown	you,’	she	pronounced.	‘I	don’t	even	need	water	to	do	it.	I’ll	use
sand.	I’ll	hold	you	under	and	feel	your	every	struggle,	your	every	twitch—’
‘It’s	not	just	a	statue,’	said	Taxilian.
‘Someone	carved	down	a	mountain,’	said	Nappet.	‘Means	nothing.	It’s	just	stupid,	useless.	We’ve	walked
for	days	and	days.	For	this.	Stupid.	I’m	of	a	mind	to	kick	you	bloody,	Taxilian.	For	wasting	my	time.’
‘Wasting	your	time?	Why,	Nappet,	what	else	were	you	planning	to	do?’
‘We	 need	 water.	 Now	 we’re	 going	 to	 die	 out	 here,	 just	 so	 you	 could	 look	 at	 this	 piece	 of	 stone.’	 Nappet
lifted	a	battered	fist.	‘If	I	kill	you,	we	can	drink	your	blood—that’ll	hold	us	for	a	time.’
‘It	will	kill	you	in	turn,’	Rautos	said.	‘You	will	die	in	great	pain.’
‘What	do	you	know	about	it?	We’ll	cook	you	down	and	drink	all	that	melted	fat.’
‘It’s	not	just	a	statue,’	Taxilian	repeated.
Last,	who	was	not	much	for	talking,	surprised	everyone	when	he	said,	‘He’s	right.	It	was	alive,	once,	this
dragon.’
Sheb	snorted.	‘Errant	save	us,	you’re	an	idiot,	Last.	This	thing	was	never	anything	but	a	mountain.’
‘It	was	no	mountain,’	Last	insisted,	brow	darkening.	‘There	are	no	mountains	here	and	there	never	were—
anybody	can	see	that.	No,	it	was	alive.’
‘He’s	right,	I	think,’	said	Taxilian,	‘only	maybe	not	in	the	way	you	think,	Sheb.	This	was	built,	and	then	it	was
lived	in.’	He	spread	his	hands.	‘It	is	a	city.	And	we’re	going	to	find	a	way	inside.’
The	ghost,	who	had	been	hovering,	swept	this	way	and	that,	impatient	and	fearful,	anxious	and	excited,	now
wanted	to	cry	out	with	joy,	and	would	have,	had	he	a	voice.
‘A	city?’	Sheb	stared	at	Taxilian	for	a	long	moment,	and	then	spat.	‘But	abandoned	now,	right?	Dead,	right?’
‘I	would	say	so,’	Taxilian	replied.	‘Long	dead.’
‘So,’	 and	 Sheb	 licked	 his	 lips,	 ‘there	 might	 be	 .	 .	 .	 loot.	 Forgotten	 treasure—after	 all,	 who	 else	 has	 ever
come	 out	 here?	 The	 Wastelands	 promise	 nothing	 but	 death.	 Everyone	 knows	 that.	 We’re	 probably	 the	 first
people	to	have	ever	seen	this—’
‘Barring	its	inhabitants,’	murmured	Rautos.	‘Taxilian,	can	you	see	a	way	inside?’
‘No,	not	yet.	But	come,	we’ll	find	one,	I’m	certain	of	it.’
Breath	stepped	in	front	of	the	others	as	if	to	block	their	way.	‘This	place	is	cursed,	can’t	you	feel	that?	It
doesn’t	belong	to	people—people	like	you	and	me—we	don’t	belong	here.	Listen	to	me!	If	we	go	inside,	we’ll
never	leave!’
Asane	whimpered,	shrinking	back.	‘I	don’t	like	it	either.	We	should	just	go,	like	she	says.’
‘We	can’t!’	barked	Sheb.	‘We	need	water!	How	do	you	think	a	city	this	size	can	survive	here?	It’s	sitting	on
a	source	of	water—’
‘Which	probably	dried	up	and	that’s	why	they	left!’
‘Dried	up,	maybe,	for	ten	thousand	thirsty	souls.	Not	seven.	And	who	knows	how	long	ago?	No,	you	don’t
understand—if	we	don’t	find	water	in	there,	we’re	all	going	to	die.’
The	ghost	was	oddly	baffled	by	all	this.	They	had	found	a	spring	only	two	evenings	back.	They	all	carried
waterskins	that	still	sloshed—although,	come	to	think	of	it,	he	could	not	recall	where	they	had	found	them—did
his	companions	always	have	those	skins?	And	what	about	the	broad	hats	they	wore,	shielding	them	from	the
bright,	 hard	 sunlight?	 The	 walking	 sticks?	 Taxilian’s	 rope-handled	 scribe	 box?	 Rautos’s	 map-case	 that	 folded
out	into	a	desktop?	Breath’s	cloak	of	sewn	pockets,	each	pocket	carrying	a	Tile?	Nappet	and	his	knotted	skullbreaker	tucked	into	his	belt?	Sheb’s	brace	of	daggers?	Asane’s	spindle	and	the	bag	of	raw	wool	from	which
she	 spun	 out	 her	 lacy	 webs?	 Last’s	 iron	 pot	 and	 fire	 kit;	 his	 hand-sickle	 and	 collection	 of	 cooking	 knives—
where,	the	ghost	wondered—in	faint	horror—had	all	these	things	come	from?
‘No	 food,	 no	 water,’	 Nappet	 was	 saying,	 ‘Sheb’s	 right.	 But,	 most	 importantly,	 if	 we	 find	 a	 door,	 we	 can
defend	it.’
The	 words	 hung	 in	 the	 silence	 that	 followed,	 momentarily	 suspended	 and	 then	 slowly	 rising	 like	 grit—the
ghost	could	see	them,	the	way	they	lost	shape	but	not	meaning,	definition	but	not	dread	import.	Yes,	Nappet
had	spoken	aloud	the	secret	knowledge.	The	words	that	terror	had	carved	bloody	on	their	souls.
Someone	was	hunting	them.
Asane	began	weeping,	softly,	sodden	hitches	catching	in	her	throat.
Sheb’s	hands	closed	into	fists	as	he	stared	at	her.


But	Nappet	had	turned	to	face	Last,	and	was	eyeing	the	huge	man	speculatively.	‘I	know,’	he	said,	‘you’re	a
thick-skulled	 farmer,	 Last,	 but	 you	 look	 strong.	 Can	 you	 handle	 a	 sword?	 If	 we	 need	 someone	 to	 hold	 the
portal,	can	you	do	that?’
The	man	frowned,	and	then	nodded.	‘Maybe	I	ain’t	never	used	a	sword,	but	nobody	will	get	past.	I	swear	it.
Nobody	gets	past	me.’
And	Nappet	was	holding	a	sheathed	sword,	which	he	now	offered	to	Last.
The	ghost	recoiled	upon	seeing	that	weapon.	He	knew	it,	yet	knew	it	not.	A	strange,	frightening	weapon.	He
watched	as	Last	drew	the	sword	from	its	sheath.	Single-edged,	dark,	mottled	iron,	its	tip	weighted	and	slightly
flaring.	The	deep	ferule	running	the	length	of	the	blade	was	a	black,	nightmarish	streak,	like	an	etching	of	the
Abyss	itself.	It	stank	of	death—the	whole	weapon,	this	terrible	instrument	of	destruction.
Last	hefted	the	sword	in	his	hand.	‘I	would	rather	a	spear,’	he	said.
‘We	don’t	like	spears,’	Nappet	hissed.	‘Do	we?’
‘No,’	the	others	chorused.
Last’s	frown	deepened.	‘No,	me	neither.	I	don’t	know	why	I	.	.	.	why	I	.	.	.	wanted	one.	An	imp’s	whisper
in	my	head,	I	guess.’	And	he	made	a	warding	gesture.
Sheb	spat	to	seal	the	fend.
‘We	don’t	like	spears,’	Rautos	whispered.	‘They’re	.	.	.	dangerous.’
The	ghost	agreed.	Fleshless	and	yet	chilled,	shivering.	There	had	been	a	spear	in	his	past—yes?	Perhaps?	A
dreadful	 thing,	 lunging	 at	 his	 face,	 his	 chest,	 slicing	 the	 muscles	 of	 his	 arms.	 Reverberations,	 shivering	 up
through	his	bones,	rocking	him	back,	one	step,	then	another—
Gods,	he	did	not	like	spears!
‘Come	on,’	Taxilian	said.	‘It	is	time	to	find	a	way	in.’
There	was	a	way	in.	The	ghost	knew	that.	There	was	always	a	way	in.	The	challenge	was	in	finding	it,	in
seeing	 it	 and	 knowing	 it	 for	 what	 it	 was.	 The	 important	 doors	 stayed	 hidden,	 disguised,	 shaped	 in	 ways	 to
deceive.	The	important	doors	opened	from	one	side	only,	and	once	you	were	through	they	closed	in	a	gust	of
cold	air	against	the	back	of	the	neck.	And	could	never	be	opened	again.
Such	was	the	door	he	sought,	the	ghost	realized.
Did	it	wait	in	this	dead	city?
He	 would	 have	 to	 find	 it	 soon.	 Before	 the	 hunter	 found	 him—found	 them	 all.	 Spear	 Wielder,	 slayer,	 the
One	who	does	not	retreat,	who	mocks	in	silence,	who	would	not	flinch—no,	he’s	not	done	with	me,	with
us,	with	me,	with	us.
We	need	to	find	the	door.
The	way	in.
They	reached	the	dragon’s	stone	forelimb	with	its	claws	that	stood	arrayed	like	massive,	tapering	pillars	of
marble,	tips	sunk	deep	into	the	hard	earth.	Everywhere	surrounding	the	foundations	the	ground	was	fissured,
fraught	 with	 cracks	 that	 tracked	 outward.	 Rautos	 grunted	 as	 he	 crouched	 down	 to	 peer	 into	 one	 such	 rent.
‘Deep,’	he	muttered.	‘The	city	is	settling,	suggesting	that	it	has	indeed	sucked	out	the	water	beneath	it.’
Taxilian	was	scanning	the	massive	tower	that	comprised	the	limb	in	front	of	them,	tilting	his	head	back,	and
back.	After	a	moment	he	staggered,	cursing.	‘Too	much,’	he	gasped.	‘This	one	leg	could	encompass	a	halfdozen	Ehrlii	spires—if	it	is	indeed	hollow,	it	could	hold	a	thousand	inhabitants	all	by	itself.’
‘And	yet,’	Rautos	said,	coming	up	alongside	him,	‘look	at	the	artistry—the	genius	of	the	sculptors—have	you
ever	seen	such	skill,	on	such	a	scale,	Taxilian?’
‘No,	it	surpasses	.	.	.	it	surpasses.’
Sheb	stepped	in	between	two	of	the	talons,	slipped	into	shadows	and	out	of	sight.
There	were	no	obvious	entranceways,	no	formal	portals	or	ramps,	no	gates;	no	windows	or	apertures	higher
up.
‘It	seems	entirely	self-contained,’	said	Taxilian.	‘Did	you	notice—no	evidence	of	outlying	farms	or	pasture
land.’
‘None	that	survived	the	interval	of	abandonment,’	Rautos	replied.	‘For	all	we	know,	after	all,	this	could	be	a
hundred	thousand	years	old.’
‘That	would	surprise	me—yes,	the	surface	is	eroded,	worn	down,	but	if	it	was	as	old	as	you	suggest,	why,	it
would	be	little	more	than	a	shapeless	lump,	a	giant	termite	tower.’


‘Are	you	certain	of	that?’
‘No,’	 Taxilian	 admitted.	 ‘But	 I	 recall	 once,	 in	 a	 scriptorium	 in	 Erhlitan,	 seeing	 a	 map	 dating	 from	 the	 First
Empire.	It	showed	a	line	of	rugged	hills	inland	of	the	city.	They	ran	like	a	spine	parallel	to	the	coast.	Elevations
had	been	noted	here	and	there.	Well,	those	hills	are	still	there,	but	not	as	bold	or	as	high	as	what	was	noted	on
the	map.’
‘And	how	old	was	the	map?’	Rautos	asked.
Taxilian	shrugged.	‘Twenty	thousand?	Fifty?	Five?	Scholars	make	a	career	of	not	agreeing	on	anything.’
‘Was	the	map	on	hide?	Surely,	no	hide	could	last	so	long,	not	even	five	thousand	years—’
‘Hide,	yes,	but	treated	in	some	arcane	way.	In	any	case,	it	had	been	found	in	a	wax-sealed	container.	Seven
Cities	is	mostly	desert.	Without	moisture,	nothing	decays.	It	just	shrinks,	dries	up.’	He	gestured	with	one	hand
at	the	stone	façade	before	them.	‘Anyway,	this	should	be	much	more	weathered	if	it	was	so	old	as	to	outlast
signs	of	farming.’
Rautos	nodded,	convinced	by	Taxilian’s	reasoning.
‘Haunted,’	said	Breath.	‘You’re	going	to	get	us	all	killed,	Taxilian.	So	I	now	curse	your	name,	your	soul.	I
will	make	you	pay	for	killing	me.’
He	glanced	at	her,	said	nothing.
Rautos	spoke.	‘See	that	hind	foot,	Taxilian?	It	is	the	only	one	on	a	pedestal.’
The	two	men	headed	off	in	that	direction.
Breath	walked	up	to	Asane.	‘Spin	that	cocoon,	woman,	make	yourself	somewhere	you	can	hide	inside.	Until
you’re	 nothing	 but	 a	 rotted	 husk.	 Don’t	 think	 you	 can	 crawl	 back	 out.	 Don’t	 think	 you	 can	 show	 us	 all	 your
bright,	 painted	 wings.	 Your	 hopes,	 Asane,	 your	 dreams	 and	 secrets—all	 hollow.’	 She	 held	 up	 a	 thin	 spidery
hand.	‘I	can	crush	it	all,	so	easily—’
Last	stepped	up	to	her,	then	pushed	her	back	so	that	she	stumbled.	‘I	grow	tired	of	listening	to	you,’	he	said.
‘Leave	her	alone.’
Breath	cackled	and	danced	away.
‘Thank	you,’	said	Asane.	‘She	is	so	.	.	.	hurtful.’
But	Last	faced	her	and	said,	‘This	is	not	a	place	for	fears,	Asane.	Conquer	yours,	and	do	it	soon.’
Nearby,	Nappet	snickered.	‘Dumb	farmer’s	maybe	not	so	dumb	after	all.	Doesn’t	make	him	any	less	ugly
though,	does	it?’	He	laughed.
As	Rautos	and	Taxilian	drew	closer	to	the	hind	limb	they	could	see	that	the	pedestal	was	rectangular,	like
the	 foundation	 of	 a	 temple.	 The	 vertical	 wall	 facing	 them,	 as	 tall	 as	 they	 were,	 bore	 the	 faint	 remnants	 of	 a
frieze,	framed	in	an	elaborate	border.	All	too	eroded	to	interpret.	But	no	sign	of	an	entranceway.
‘We	are	confounded	again,’	Rautos	said.
‘I	do	not	think	so,’	Taxilian	replied.	‘You	look	wrongly,	friend.	You	search	out	what	rises	in	front	of	you.	You
scan	right	and	left,	you	crane	your	sight	upward.	Yes,	the	city	encourages	such	deception.	The	dragon	invites
it,	perched	as	it	is.	And	yet	.	.	.’	He	pointed.
Rautos	followed	the	line	of	that	lone	finger,	and	grunted	in	surprise.	At	the	base	of	the	pedestal,	wind-blown
sands	formed	a	hollow.	‘The	way	in	is	downward.’
Sheb	joined	them.	‘We	need	to	dig.’
‘I	think	so,’	agreed	Taxilian.	‘Call	the	others,	Sheb.’
‘I	don’t	take	orders	from	you.	Errant	piss	on	you	highborn	bastards.’
‘I’m	not	highborn,’	said	Taxilian.
Sheb	sneered.	‘You	make	like	you	are,	which	is	just	as	bad.	Get	back	down	where	you	belong,	Taxilian,	and
if	you	can’t	manage	on	your	own	then	I’ll	help	and	that’s	a	promise.’
‘I	just	have	some	learning,	Sheb—why	does	that	threaten	you	so?’
Sheb	rested	a	hand	 on	one	 of	his	daggers.	 ‘I	don’t	like	 pretenders	 and	that’s	what	you	are.	 You	think	 big
words	 make	 you	 smarter,	 better.	 You	 like	 the	 way	 Rautos	 here	 respects	 you,	 you	 think	 he	 sees	 you	 as	 an
equal.	But	you’re	wrong	in	that—you	ain’t	his	equal.	He’s	just	humouring	you,	Taxilian.	You’re	a	clever	pet.’
‘This	 is	 how	 Letherii	 think,’	 said	 Rautos,	 sighing.	 ‘It’s	 what	 keeps	 everyone	 in	 their	 place,	 upward,
downward—even	as	people	claim	they	despise	the	system	they	end	up	doing	all	they	can	to	keep	it	in	place.’
Taxilian	sighed	in	turn.	‘I	do	understand	that,	Rautos.	Stability	helps	remind	you	of	where	you	stand.	Affirms
you’ve	got	a	legitimate	place	in	society,	for	good	or	ill.’


‘Listen	to	you	two	shit-eaters.’
By	this	time	the	others	had	arrived.	Taxilian	pointed	at	the	depression.	‘We	think	we’ve	found	a	way	in,	but
we’ll	have	to	dig.’
Last	approached	with	a	shovel	in	his	hands.	‘I’ll	start.’
The	 ghost	 hovered,	 watching.	 Off	 to	 the	 west,	 the	 sun	 was	 settling	 into	 horizon’s	 lurid	 vein.	 When	 Last
needed	a	rest,	Taxilian	took	his	place.	Then	Nappet,	followed	by	Sheb.	Rautos	tried	then,	but	by	this	point	the
pit	was	deep	and	he	had	difficulty	making	his	way	down,	and	an	even	harder	time	flinging	the	sand	high	enough
to	keep	it	from	sifting	back.	His	stint	did	not	last	long	before,	with	a	snarl,	Sheb	told	him	to	get	out	and	leave
the	task	to	the	lowborns	who	knew	this	business.	Last	and	Taxilian	struggled	to	lift	Rautos	out	of	the	pit.
In	the	dusty	gloom	below,	the	excavation	had	revealed	one	edge	of	stone	facing,	the	huge	blocks	set	without
mortar.
The	argument	from	earlier	disturbed	the	ghost,	although	he	was	not	sure	why	it	was	so.	He	was	past	such
silly	things,	after	all.	The	games	of	station,	so	bitter,	so	self-destructive—it	all	seemed	such	a	waste	of	time	and
energy,	 the	 curse	 of	 people	 who	 could	 look	 outward	 but	 never	 inward.	 Was	 that	 a	 measure	 of	 intelligence?
Were	such	hapless	victims	simply	dimwitted,	incapable	of	introspection	and	honest	self-judgement?	Or	was	it	a
quality	of	low	intelligence	that	its	possessor	instinctively	fled	the	potentially	deadly	turmoil	of	knowing	too	many
truths	about	oneself?
Yes,	it	was	this	notion—of	self-delusion—that	left	him	feeling	strangely	anxious,	exposed	and	vulnerable.	He
could	 see	 its	 worth,	 after	 all.	 When	 the	 self	 was	 a	 monster—who	 wouldn’t	 hide	 from	 such	 a	 thing?	 Who
wouldn’t	 run	 when	 it	 loomed	 close?	 Close	 enough	 to	 smell,	 to	 taste?	 Yes,	 even	 the	 lowest	 beast	 knew	 the
value	of	not	knowing	itself	too	well.
‘I’ve	reached	the	floor,’	announced	Sheb,	straightening.	When	the	others	crowded	to	the	uncertain	edge,	he
snarled,	‘Keep	your	distance,	fools!	You	want	to	bury	me?’
‘Tempting,’	said	Nappet.	‘But	then	we’d	have	to	dig	out	your	miserable	corpse.’
The	shovel	scraped	on	flagstones.	After	a	time	Sheb	said,	‘Got	the	top	of	the	doorway	here	in	front	of	me—
it’s	low	.	.	.	but	wide.	There’s	a	ramp,	no	steps.’
Yes,	thought	the	ghost,	that	is	as	it	should	be.
Sheb	wasn’t	interested	in	handing	off	the	task,	now	that	he	could	see	the	way	in.	He	dug	swiftly,	grunting
with	 every	 upward	 heave	 of	 heavy,	 damp	 sand.	 ‘I	 can	 smell	 the	 water,’	 he	 gasped.	 ‘Could	 be	 the	 tunnel’s
flooded—but	at	least	we	won’t	die	of	thirst,	will	we?’
‘I’m	not	going	down	there,’	said	Breath,	‘if	there’s	water	in	the	tunnel.	I’m	not.	You’ll	all	drown.’
The	ramp	angled	downward	for	another	six	or	seven	paces,	enough	to	leave	Sheb	exhausted.	Nappet	took
over	and	a	short	time	later,	with	dusk	gathering	at	their	backs,	a	thrust	of	the	shovel	plunged	into	empty	space.
They	were	through.
The	tunnel	beyond	was	damp,	the	air	sweet	with	rotting	mould	and	sour	with	something	fouler.	The	water
pooled	on	the	floor	was	less	than	a	finger’s	width	deep,	slippery	underfoot.	The	darkness	was	absolute.
Everyone	 lit	 lanterns.	 Watching	 this,	 the	 ghost	 found	 himself	 frightened	 yet	 again.	 As	 with	 all	 the	 other
accoutrements;	as	with	the	sudden	appearance	of	the	shovel,	he	was	missing	essential	details—they	could	not
simply	veer	into	existence	as	needed,	after	all.	Reality	didn’t	work	that	way.	No,	it	must	be	that	he	was	blind	to
things,	 a	 vision	 cursed	 to	 be	 selective,	 yielding	 only	 that	 which	 was	 needed,	 that	 which	 was	 relevant	 to	 the
moment.	 For	 all	 he	 knew,	 he	 suddenly	 realized,	 there	 might	 be	 a	 train	 of	 wagons	 accompanying	 this	 group.
There	might	be	servants.	Bodyguards.	An	army.	The	real	world,	he	comprehended	with	a	shock,	was	not	what
he	saw,	not	what	he	interacted	with	instant	by	instant.	The	real	world	was	unknowable.
He	thought	he	might	howl.	He	thought	he	might	give	voice	to	his	horror,	his	abject	revelation.	For,	if	indeed
the	 world	 was	 unknowable,	 then	 so	 too	 were	 the	 forces	 acting	 upon	 him,	 and	 how	 could	 one	 guard	 against
that?
Frozen,	unable	to	move.	Until	the	group	descended	into	the	tunnel,	and	then	yet	another	discovery	assailed
him,	as	chains	dragged	him	down	into	the	pit,	pulling	him—shrieking	now—into	the	passageway.
He	was	not	free.
He	was	bound	to	the	lives	of	these	strange	people,	not	one	of	whom	knew	he	even	existed.	He	was	their
slave,	yet	rendered	so	useless	that	he	had	no	voice,	no	body,	no	identity	beyond	this	fragile	mockery	of	self—
and	how	long	could	such	a	entity	survive,	when	it	was	invisible	to	everyone	else?	When	even	the	stone	walls


and	pools	of	slimy	water	did	not	acknowledge	his	arrival?
Was	this,	then,	the	torment	of	all	ghosts?
The	 possibility	 was	 so	 terrible,	 so	 awful,	 that	 he	 recoiled.	 How	 could	 mortal	 souls	 deserve	 such	 eternal
penitence?	 What	 vast	 crime	 did	 the	 mere	 act	 of	 living	 commit?	 Or	 had	 he	 been	 personally	 consigned	 to	 this
fate?	By	some	god	or	goddess	cruel	in	judgement,	devoid	of	all	mercy?
At	 that	 thought,	 even	 as	 he	 flailed	 about	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 his	 masters,	 he	 felt	 a	 sudden	 rage.	 A	 blast	 of
indignation.	What	god	or	goddess	dares	to	presume	the	right	to	judge	me?	That	is	arrogance	too	vast	to
have	been	earned.
Whoever	 you	 are,	 I	 will	 find	 you.	 I	 swear	 it.	 I	 will	 find	 you	 and	 I	 will	 cut	 you	 down.	 Humble	 you.
Down	to	your	knees.	How	dare	you!	How	dare	you	judge	anyone,	when	you	ever	hide	your	face?	When
you	strip	away	all	possible	truth	of	your	existence?	Your	wilful	presence?
Hiding	 from	 me,	 whoever—whatever—you	 are,	 is	 a	 childish	 game.	 An	 unworthy	 game.	 Face	 your
child.	Face	all	your	children.	Show	me	the	veracity	of	your	right	to	cast	judgement	upon	me.
Do	this,	and	I	will	accept	you.
Remain	hidden,	even	as	you	consign	my	soul	to	suffering,	and	I	will	hunt	you	down.
I	will	hunt	you	down.
The	ramp	climbed	until	it	reached	a	broad,	low-ceilinged	chamber.
Crowded	 with	 reptilian	 corpses.	 Rotting,	 reeking,	 in	 pools	 of	 thick	 ichor	 and	 rank	 blood.	 Twenty,	 perhaps
more.
K’Chain	Che’Malle.	The	makers	of	this	city.
Each	one	throat-cut.	Executed	like	goats	on	an	altar.
Beyond	 them,	 a	 spiralling	 ramp	 climbed	 steeply	 upward.	 No	 one	 said	 a	 thing	 as	 they	 picked	 careful,
independent	paths	through	the	slaughter.	Taxilian	in	the	lead,	they	began	the	ascent.
The	 ghost	 watched	 as	 Breath	 paused	 to	 bend	 down	 and	 run	 a	 finger	 through	 decaying	 blood.	 She	 slipped
that	finger	into	her	mouth,	and	smiled.


Book	Two

Eaters	of
Diamonds
and	Gems


	
	
	
	
I	heard	a	story
Of	a	river
Which	is	where	water	flows	over	the	ground
			glistening	in	the	sun
It’s	a	legend
And	untrue
In	the	story	the	water	is	clear	and	that’s
			why	it’s	untrue
We	all	know
Water	Is	the	colour
Of	blood
People	make	up	legends
To	teach	lessons
So	I	think	The	story	is	about	us
About	a	river	of	blood
And	one	day
We’ll	run	clear
OF	A	RIVER
BADALLE


Chapter	Seven
The	horrid	creatures	jostle	in	their	line
A	row	of	shields	and	a	row	of	painted	faces
They	marched	out	of	my	mouth
As	slayers	are	wont	to	do
When	no	one	was	looking	busy	as	they	were
With	their	precious	banners	and	standards
And	with	the	music	of	stepping	in	time
As	the	righteous	are	wont	to	do
Now	see	all	these	shiny	weapons	so	eager
To	clash	in	the	discord	of	stunned	agreement
Blind	as	millipedes	in	the	mud
As	between	lovers	words	may	do
In	the	murky	depths	swans	slip	like	seals
Scaling	the	ice	walls	of	cold’s	prison
All	we	dream	is	without	tether
	
CONFESSIONS	OF	THE	CONDEMNED
BANATHOS	OF	BLUEROSE

	
The	 errant	 walked	 the	 flooded	 tunnel,	 remembering	 the	 bodies	 that	 had	 once	 drifted	 there,	 shifting	 like	 logs,
flesh	 turning	 to	 jelly.	 Now	 on	 occasion,	 in	 pushing	 a	 foot	 forward,	 he	 kicked	 aside	 unseen	 bones.	 Darkness
promised	no	solitude,	no	true	abandonment,	no	final	resting	place.	Darkness	was	nothing	more	than	a	home	for
the	forgotten.	Which	was	why	sarcophagi	had	lids	and	crypts	were	sealed	under	stone	and	barrows	beneath
heaped	 earth.	 Darkness	 was	 the	 vision	 behind	 shuttered	 eyes,	 little	 more	 than	 the	 dismissal	 of	 light	 when
details	ceased	to	be	relevant.
He	could	find	such	a	world.	All	he	needed	to	do	was	close	his	one	remaining	eye.	It	should	work.	He	did	not
understand	 why	 it	 didn’t.	 The	 water,	 bitter	 cold,	 lapped	 round	 his	 thighs.	 He	 welcomed	 its	 gift	 of	 numbness.
The	 air	 was	 foul,	 but	 he	 was	 used	 to	 that.	 There	 should	 be	 nothing	 to	 hold	 him	 here,	 chaining	 him	 to	 this
moment.
Events	were	unfolding,	so	many	events,	and	not	all	of	them	shifting	to	his	touch,	twisting	to	his	will.	Anger
was	 giving	 way	 to	 fear.	 He	 had	 sought	 out	 the	 altar	 Feather	 Witch	 had	 consecrated	 in	 his	 name.	 He	 had
expected	to	find	her	soul,	her	fleshless	will	curling	in	sinew	currents	round	the	submerged	rubble,	but	there	had
been	nothing,	no	one.	Where	had	she	gone?
He	could	still	feel	her	hair	beneath	his	hand,	the	muted	struggles	as	some	remnant	of	her	sanity	groped	for
air,	 for	 one	 more	 moment	 of	 life.	 His	 palm	 tingled	 with	 the	 echo	 of	 her	 faint	 convulsions	 beginning	 in	 that
moment	when	she	surrendered	and	filled	her	lungs	with	water,	once,	twice,	like	a	newborn	trying	out	the	gifts
of	an	unknown	world,	only	to	retreat,	fade	away,	and	slide	like	an	eel	back	into	the	darkness,	where	the	first
thing	forgotten	was	oneself.
This	should	not	be	haunting	him.	His	act	had	been	one	of	mercy.	Gangrenous,	insane,	she’d	had	little	time
left.	It	had	been	the	gentlest	of	nudges,	not	at	all	motivated	by	vengeance	or	disgust.	Still,	she	might	well	have
cursed	him	in	that	last	exhaled,	soured	breath.
Her	 soul	 should	 be	 swimming	 these	 black	 waters.	 But	 the	 Errant	 knew	 that	 he	 had	 been	 alone.	 The	 altar
chamber	had	offered	him	little	more	than	desolation.
Wading,	the	tunnel’s	slimy	floor	descending	with	each	step,	his	feet	suddenly	lost	all	grip	and	the	water	rose


yet	higher,	past	his	chest,	closing	over	his	shoulders	and	lapping	at	his	throat.	The	top	of	his	head	brushed	the
gritty	stone	of	the	tunnel’s	ceiling,	and	then	he	was	under,	blinking	the	sting	from	his	eye.
He	 pushed	 onward	 through	 the	 murk,	 until	 the	 water	 turned	 salty,	 and	 light,	 reflecting	 down	 from	 a	 vague
surface	fathoms	overhead,	flashed	like	dulled,	smeared	memories	of	lightning.	He	could	feel	the	heavy	tugs	of
wayward	currents	and	he	knew	that	a	storm	did	indeed	rage,	there	upon	the	ceiling	of	this	world,	but	it	could
do	little	to	him	down	here.	Scraping	through	thick	mud,	he	walked	the	ocean	floor.
Nothing	decayed	in	this	place,	and	all	that	had	not	been	crushed	to	dust	by	the	immense	pressures	now	lay
scattered	beneath	monochrome	draperies	of	silt,	like	furniture	in	a	vast,	abandoned	room.	Everything	about	this
realm	 invited	 horror.	 Time	 lost	 its	 way	 here,	 wandering	 until	 the	 ceaseless	 rain	 of	 detritus	 weighed	 it	 down,
brought	it	to	its	knees,	and	then	buried	it.	Anything—anyone—could	fall	to	the	same	fate.	The	danger,	the	risk,
was	 very	 real.	 No	 creature	 of	 sentience	 could	 withstand	 this	 place	 for	 long.	 Futility	 delivered	 its	 crushing
symphony	and	the	dread	music	was	eternal.
He	found	himself	walking	down	the	length	of	a	vast	skeleton,	jagged	uneven	ribs	rising	like	the	columns	of	a
colonnade	to	either	side,	a	roofless	temple	sagging	under	its	own	senseless	burden.	He	passed	the	snaking	line
of	boulders	that	was	the	immense	creature’s	spine.	Four	scapulae	formed	broad	concave	platforms	just	ahead,
from	 which	 bizarre	 long	 bones	 radiated	 out	 like	 toppled	 pillars.	 He	 could	 just	 make	 out,	 in	 the	 gloom,	 the
massive	crown	of	the	back	of	the	monster’s	skull.	Here,	then,	awaited	another	kind	of	temple.	Precious	store
of	self,	a	space	insisting	on	its	occupation,	an	existence	that	demanded	acknowledgement	of	its	own	presence.
The	 Errant	 sympathized	 with	 the	 notion.	 Such	 delicate	 conceits	 assembled	 the	 bones	 of	 the	 soul,	 after	 all.
He	 moved	 past	 the	 last	 of	 the	 scapulae,	 noting	 the	 effect	 of	 some	 crushing,	 no	 doubt	 crippling	 impact.	 The
bone	looked	like	a	giant	broken	plate.
Coming	 alongside	 the	 skull,	 he	 saw	 that	 the	 cave	 of	 its	 nearest	 orbital	 socket	 was	 shattered,	 above	 and
behind	 an	 elongated,	 partly	 collapsed	 snout	 crowded	 with	 serrated	 teeth.	 The	 Elder	 God	 paused	 and	 studied
that	 damage	 for	 some	 time.	 He	 could	 not	 imagine	 what	 this	 beast	 had	 been;	 he	 suspected	 it	 was	 a	 child	 of
these	 deep	 currents,	 a	 swimmer	 through	 ancient	 ages,	 entirely	 uncomprehending	 that	 its	 time	 was	 past.	 He
wondered	if	mercy	had	delivered	that	death	blow.
Ah,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 fight	 his	 own	 nature,	 could	 he?	 Most	 of	 his	 nudges	 were	 fatal	 ones,	 after	 all.	 The
impetus	might	find	many	justifications,	and	clearly	mercy	numbered	among	them.	This	was,	he	told	himself,	a
momentary	 obsession.	 The	 feel	 of	 her	 hair	 under	 his	 hand	 .	 .	 .	 a	 lapse	 of	 conscience,	 then,	 this	 tremor	 of
remorse.	It	would	pass.
He	pushed	on,	knowing	that	at	last,	he’d	found	the	right	trail.
There	 were	 places	 that	 could	 only	 be	 found	 by	 invitation,	 by	 the	 fickle	 generosity	 of	 the	 forces	 that	 gave
them	shape,	that	made	them	what	they	were.	Such	barriers	defied	the	hungers	and	needs	of	most	seekers.	But
he	had	learned	the	secret	paths	long,	long	ago.	He	required	no	invitations,	and	no	force	could	stand	in	the	way
of	his	hunger.
The	dull	gleam	of	the	light	in	the	tower	reached	him	before	he	could	make	out	anything	else,	and	he	flinched
at	seeing	that	single	mocking	eye	floating	in	the	gloom.	Currents	swept	fiercely	around	him	as	he	drew	closer,
buffeting	his	body	as	if	desperate	to	turn	him	aside.	Silts	swirled	up,	seeking	to	blind	him.	But	he	fixed	his	gaze
on	that	fitful	glow,	and	before	long	he	could	make	out	the	squat,	blockish	house,	the	black,	gnarled	branches	of
the	trees	in	the	yard,	and	then	the	low	stone	wall.
Dunes	of	silt	were	heaped	up	against	the	tower	side	of	the	Azath.	The	mounds	in	the	yard	were	sculpted,
half-devoured,	exposing	the	roots	of	the	leaning	trees.	As	the	Errant	stepped	on	to	the	snaking	flagstones	of
the	path,	he	could	see	bones	scattered	out	from	those	sundered	barrows.	Yes,	they	had	escaped	their	prisons
at	long	last,	but	death	had	arrived	first.
Patience	was	the	curse	of	longevity.	It	could	lure	its	ageless	victim	into	somnolence,	until	flesh	itself	rotted
off,	and	the	skull	rolled	free.
He	reached	the	door.	Pushed	it	open.
The	 currents	 within	 the	 narrow	 entranceway	 swept	 over	 him	 warm	 as	 tears.	 As	 the	 portal	 closed	 behind
him,	the	Errant	gestured.	A	moment	later	he	was	standing	on	dry	stone.	Hovering	faint	on	the	air	around	him
was	the	smell	of	wood-smoke.	A	wavering	globe	of	lantern	light	approached	from	the	corridor	beyond.
The	threadbare	figure	that	stepped	into	view	sent	a	pang	through	the	Errant.	Memories	murky	as	the	seabottom	spun	up	to	momentarily	blind	him.	The	gaunt	Forkrul	Assail	was	hunched	at	the	shoulders,	as	if	every


proof	 of	 justice	 had	 bowed	 him	 down,	 left	 him	 broken.	 His	 pallid	 face	 was	 a	 mass	 of	 wrinkles,	 like	 crushed
leather.	Tortured	eyes	fixed	on	the	Errant	for	a	moment,	and	then	the	Assail	turned	away.	‘Fire	and	wine	await
us,	Errastas—come,	you	know	the	way.’
They	 walked	 through	 the	 double	 doors	 at	 the	 conjunction	 of	 the	 corridors,	 into	 the	 dry	 heat	 of	 the	 hearth
room.	The	Assail	gestured	at	a	sideboard	as	he	hobbled	to	one	of	the	chairs	flanking	the	fireplace.	Ignoring	the
invitation	to	drink—for	the	moment—the	Errant	walked	to	the	other	chair	and	settled	into	it.
They	sat	facing	one	another.
‘You	have	suffered	some,’	said	the	Assail,	‘since	I	last	saw	you,	Errastas.’
‘Laughter	from	the	Abyss,	Setch,	have	you	seen	yourself	lately?’
‘The	 forgotten	 must	 never	 complain.’	 He’d	 found	 a	 crystal	 goblet	 and	 he	 now	 held	 it	 up	 and	 studied	 the
flickering	flames	trapped	in	the	amber	wine.	‘When	I	look	at	myself,	I	see	.	.	.	embers.	They	dim,	they	die.	It
is,’	he	added,	‘well.’	And	he	drank.
The	Errant	bared	his	teeth.	‘Pathetic.	Your	hiding	is	at	an	end,	Knuckles.’
Sechul	Lath	smiled	at	the	old	title,	but	it	was	a	bitter	smile.	‘Our	time	is	past.’
‘It	was,	yes.	But	now	it	shall	be	reborn.’
Sechul	shook	his	head.	‘You	were	right	to	surrender	the	first	time—’
‘That	was	no	surrender!	I	was	driven	out!’
‘You	were	forced	to	relinquish	all	that	you	no	longer	deserved.’	The	haunted	eyes	lifted	to	trap	the	Errant’s
glare.	‘Why	the	resentment?’
‘We	were	allies!’
‘So	we	were.’
‘We	shall	be	again,	Knuckles.	You	were	the	Elder	God	who	stood	closest	to	my	throne—’
‘Your	Empty	Throne,	yes.’
‘A	battle	 is	 coming—listen	 to	 me!	 We	 can	 cast	 aside	 all	 these	 pathetic	new	 gods.	 We	 can	 drown	 them	 in
blood!’	The	Errant	leaned	forward.	‘Do	you	fear	that	it	will	be	you	and	me	alone	against	them?	I	assure	you,
old	friend,	we	shall	not	be	alone.’	He	settled	back	once	more,	stared	into	the	fire.	‘Your	mortal	kin	have	found
new	power,	made	new	alliances.’
Knuckles	snorted.	‘You	would	trust	to	the	peace	and	justice	of	the	Forkrul	Assail?	After	all	they	once	did	to
you?’
‘I	trust	the	necessity	they	have	recognized.’
‘Errastas,	my	time	is	at	an	end.’	He	made	a	rippling	gesture	with	his	fingers.	‘I	leave	it	to	the	Twins.’	He
smiled.	‘They	were	my	finest	cast.’
‘I	refuse	to	accept	that.	You	will	not	stand	aside	in	what	is	to	come.	I	have	forgotten	nothing.	Remember
the	power	we	once	wielded?’
‘I	remember—why	do	you	think	I’m	here?’
‘I	want	that	power	again.	I	will	have	it.’
‘Why?’	Knuckles	asked	softly.	‘What	is	it	you	seek?’
‘Everything	that	I	have	lost!’
‘Ah,	old	friend,	then	you	do	not	remember	everything.’
‘No?’
‘No.	You	have	forgotten	why	you	lost	it	in	the	first	place.’
A	long	moment	of	silence.
The	Errant	rose	and	went	over	to	pour	himself	a	goblet	of	wine.	He	returned	and	stood	looking	down	upon
his	fellow	Elder	God.	‘I	am	not	here,’	he	said,	‘for	you	alone.’
Knuckles	winced.
‘I	 intend,	 as	 well,	 to	 summon	 the	 Clan	 of	 Elders—all	 who	 have	 survived.	 I	 am	 Master	 of	 the	 Tiles.	 They
cannot	deny	me.’
‘No,’	Knuckles	muttered,	‘that	we	cannot	do.’
‘Where	is	she?’
‘Sleeping.’
The	Errant	grimaced.	‘I	already	knew	that,	Setch.’
‘Sit	down,	 Errastas.	For	now,	please.	Let	us	just	.	.	.	sit	here.	Let	us	drink	in	remembrance	of	friendship.


And	innocence.’
‘When	our	goblets	are	empty,	Knuckles.’
He	closed	his	eyes	and	nodded.	‘So	be	it.’
‘It	 pains	 me	 to	 see	 you	 so,’	 the	 Errant	 said	 as	 he	 sat	 back	 down.	 ‘We	 shall	 return	 you	 to	 what	 you	 once
were.’
‘Dear	Errastas,	have	you	not	learned?	Time	cares	nothing	for	our	wants,	and	no	god	that	has	ever	existed
can	be	as	cruel	as	time.’
The	Errant	half-closed	his	remaining	eye.	‘Wait	until	you	see	the	world	I	shall	make,	Setch.	Once	more,	you
shall	 stand	 beside	 the	 Empty	 Throne.	 Once	 more,	 you	 shall	 know	 the	 pleasure	 of	 mischance,	 striking	 down
hopeful	mortals	one	by	one.’
‘I	do	remember,’	Knuckles	murmured,	‘how	they	railed	at	misfortune.’
‘And	sought	to	appease	ill	fate	with	ever	more	blood.	Upon	the	altars.	Upon	the	fields	of	battle.’
‘And	in	the	dark	bargains	of	the	soul.’
The	Errant	nodded.	Pleased.	Relieved.	Yes,	he	could	wait	for	this	time,	this	brief	healing	span.	It	served	and
served	well.
He	could	grant	her	a	few	more	moments	of	rest.
‘So	tell	me,’	ventured	Knuckles,	‘the	tale.’
‘What	tale?’
‘The	one	that	took	your	eye.’
The	Errant	scowled	and	looked	away,	his	good	mood	evaporating.	‘Mortals,’	he	said,	‘will	eat	anything.’
	
In	the	tower	of	the	Azath,	within	a	chamber	that	was	an	entire	realm,	she	slept	and	she	dreamed.	And	since
dreams	existed	outside	of	time,	she	was	walking	anew	a	landscape	that	had	been	dead	for	millennia.	But	the
air	 was	 sharp	 still,	 the	 sky	 overhead	 as	 pure	 in	 its	 quicksilver	 brilliance	 as	 the	 day	 of	 its	 violent	 birth.	 On	 all
sides	 buildings,	 reduced	 to	 rubble,	 formed	 steep-sided,	 jagged	 mounds.	 Passing	 floods	 had	 caked	 mud	 on
everything	to	a	height	level	with	her	hips.	She	walked,	curious,	half-disbelieving.
Was	this	all	that	remained?	It	was	hard	to	believe.
The	 mounds	 looked	 strangely	 orderly,	 the	 chunks	 of	 stone	 almost	 uniform	 in	 size.	 No	 detritus	 had	 drifted
down	into	the	streets	or	lanes.	Even	the	flood	silts	had	settled	smooth	on	every	surface.
‘Nostalgia,’	a	voice	called	down.
She	halted,	looked	up	to	see	a	white-skinned	figure	perched	atop	one	of	the	mounds.	Gold	hair	hanging	long,
loose,	 hinting	 of	 deep	 shades	 of	 crimson.	 A	 white-bladed	 two-handed	 sword	 leaned	 against	 one	 side	 of	 his
chest,	 the	 multifaceted	 crystal	 pommel	 flashing	 in	 the	 brightness.	 He	 took	 many	 forms,	 this	 creature.	 Some
pleasant,	others—like	this	one—like	a	spit	of	acid	in	her	eyes.
‘This	is	your	work,	isn’t	it?’
One	of	his	hands	stroked	the	sword’s	enamel	blade,	the	sensuality	of	the	gesture	making	her	shiver.	He	said,
‘I	deplore	your	messiness,	Kilmandaros.’
‘While	you	make	death	seem	so	.	.	.	tidy.’
He	shrugged.	‘Tell	me,	if	on	your	very	last	day—day	or	night,	it	makes	no	difference—you	find	yourself	in	a
room,	on	a	bed,	even.	Too	weak	to	move,	but	able	to	look	around—that’s	all.	Tell	me,	Kilmandaros,	will	you	not
be	 comforted	 by	 the	 orderliness	 of	 all	 that	 you	 see?	 By	 the	 knowledge	 that	 it	 will	 persist	 beyond	 you,
unchanged,	bound	to	its	own	slow,	so	slow	measure	of	decay?’
‘You	ask	if	I	will	be	what,	Osserc?	Nostalgic	about	a	room	I’m	still	in?’
‘Is	that	not	the	final	gift	of	dying?’
She	held	up	her	hands	and	showed	him	her	fists.	‘Come	down	here	and	receive	just	such	a	gift,	Osserc.	I
know	this	body—this	face	that	you	show	me	now.	I	know	the	seducer	and	know	him	too	well.	Come	down—
do	you	not	miss	my	embrace?’
And	 in	 the	 dread	 truths	 of	 dreams,	 Osserc	 then	 chuckled.	 The	 kind	 of	 laugh	 that	 cut	 into	 its	 victim,	 that
shocked	tight	the	throat.	Dismissive,	devoid	of	empathy.	A	laugh	that	said:	You	no	longer	matter	to	me.	I	see
your	hurt	and	it	amuses	me.	I	see	how	you	cannot	let	go	of	the	very	thing	I	have	so	easily	flung	away:
the	conceit	that	we	still	matter	to	each	other.
So	much,	yes,	in	a	dream’s	laugh.


‘Emurlahn	 is	 in	 pieces,’	 he	 said.	 ‘And	 most	 of	 them	 are	 now	 as	 dead	 as	 this	 one.	 Would	 you	 blame	 me?
Anomander?	Scabandari?’
‘I’m	not	interested	in	your	stupid	finger-pointing.	The	one	who	accuses	has	nothing	to	lose	and	everything	to
hide.’
‘Yet	you	joined	with	Anomander—’
‘He	too	was	not	interested	in	blame.	We	joined	together,	yes,	to	save	what	we	could.’
‘Too	bad,	then,’	Osserc	said,	‘that	I	got	here	first.’
‘Where	have	the	people	gone,	Osserc?	Now	that	you’ve	destroyed	their	city.’
His	 brows	 lifted.	 ‘Why,	 nowhere.’	 He	 gestured,	 a	 broad	 sweep	 of	 one	 hand,	 encompassing	 the	 rows	 of
mounds	around	them.	‘I	denied	them	their	moment	of	.	.	.	nostalgia.’
She	found	herself	trembling.	‘Come	down	here,’	she	said	in	a	rasp,	‘your	death	is	long	overdue.’
‘Others	concur,’	he	admitted.	‘In	fact,	it’s	why	I’m,	uh,	lingering	here.	Only	one	portal	survives.	No,	not	the
one	you	came	through—that	one	has	since	crumbled.’
‘And	who	waits	for	you	there,	Osserc?’
‘Edgewalker.’
Kilmandaros	bared	her	massive	fangs	in	a	broad	smile.	And	then	threw	a	laugh	back	at	him.	She	moved	on.
His	 voice	 sounded	 surprised	 as	 he	 called	 out	 behind	 her.	 ‘What	 are	 you	 doing?	 He	 is	 angry.	 Do	 you	 not
understand?	He	is	angry!’
‘And	this	is	my	dream,’	she	whispered.	‘Where	all	that	has	been	is	yet	to	be.’	And	still,	she	wondered.	She
had	no	recollection,	after	all,	of	this	particular	place.	Nor	of	meeting	Osserc	among	the	shattered	remnants	of
Kurald	Emurlahn.
Sometimes	it	is	true,	she	told	herself,	that	dreams	prove	troubling.
	
‘Clouds	on	the	horizon.	Black,	advancing	in	broken	lines.’	Stormy	knuckled	his	eyes	and	then	glared	across	at
Gesler	from	a	momentarily	reddened	face.	‘What	kind	of	stupid	dream	is	that?’
‘How	 should	 I	 know?	 There	 are	 cheats	 who	 make	 fortunes	 interpreting	 the	 dreams	 of	 fools.	 Why	 not	 try
one	of	those?’
‘You	calling	me	a	fool?’
‘Only	if	you	follow	my	advice,	Stormy.’
‘Anyway,	that’s	why	I	howled.’
Gesler	leaned	forward,	clearing	tankards	and	whatnot	to	make	room	for	his	thick,	scarred	forearms.	‘Falling
asleep	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 a	 drinking	 session	 is	 unforgivable	 enough.	 Waking	 up	 screaming,	 why,	 that’s	 just
obnoxious.	Had	half	the	idiots	in	here	clutching	at	their	chests.’
‘We	shouldn’t’ve	skipped	out	on	the	war-game,	Ges.’
‘Not	again.	It	wasn’t	like	that.	We	volunteered	to	go	and	find	Hellian.’	He	nodded	to	the	third	occupant	of
the	table,	although	only	the	top	of	her	head	was	visible,	the	hair	sodden	along	one	side	where	it	had	soaked	up
spilled	ale.	Her	snores	droned	through	the	wood	of	the	table	like	a	hundred	pine	beetles	devouring	a	sick	tree.
‘And	look,	we	found	her,	only	she	was	in	no	shape	to	lead	her	squad.	In	fact,	she’s	in	no	shape	for	anything.
She	could	get	mugged,	raped,	even	murdered.	We	needed	to	stand	guard.’
Stormy	belched	and	scratched	at	his	beard.	‘It	wasn’t	a	fun	dream,	that’s	all.’
‘When	was	the	last	fun	dream	you	remember	having?’
‘Don’t	know.	Been	some	time,	I	think.	But	maybe	we	just	forget	those	ones.	Maybe	we	only	remember	the
bad	ones.’
Gesler	refilled	their	tankards.	‘So	there’s	a	storm	coming.	Impressive	subtlety,	your	dreams.	Prophetic,	even.
You	sleep	to	the	whispers	of	the	gods,	Stormy.’
‘Now	ain’t	you	in	a	good	mood,	Ges.	Remind	me	not	to	talk	about	my	dreams	no	more.’
‘I	didn’t	want	you	talking	about	them	this	time	round.	It	was	the	scream.’
‘Not	a	scream,	like	I	told	you.	It	was	a	howl.’
‘What’s	the	difference?’
Scowling,	Stormy	reached	for	his	tankard.	‘Only,	sometimes,	maybe,	gods	don’t	whisper.’
	


‘Furry	women	still	haunting	your	dreams?’
Bottle	opened	his	eyes	and	contemplated	throwing	a	knife	into	her	face.	Instead,	he	slowly	winked.	‘Good
afternoon,	Captain.	I’m	surprised	you’re	not—’
‘Excuse	me,	soldier,	but	did	you	just	wink	at	me?’
He	sat	up	on	his	cot.	‘Was	that	a	wink,	Captain?	Are	you	sure?’
Faradan	Sort	turned	away,	muttering	under	her	breath	as	she	marched	towards	the	barracks	door.
Once	 the	 door	 shut	 behind	 her,	 Bottle	 sat	 back,	 frowning.	 Now,	 messing	 with	 an	 officer’s	 head	 was	 just,
well,	second	nature.	No,	what	disturbed	him	was	the	fact	that	he	was	suddenly	unsure	if	she’d	spoken	at	all.
As	 a	 question,	 it	 didn’t	 seem	 a	 likely	 fit,	 not	 coming	 from	 Faradan	 Sort.	 In	 fact,	 he	 doubted	 she	 even	 knew
anything	 about	 his	 particular	 curse—how	 could	 she?	 There	 wasn’t	 a	 fool	 alive	 who	 confided	 in	 an	 officer.
Especially	 ones	 who	 viciously	 killed	 talented,	 happily	 married	 scorpions	 for	 no	 good	 reason.	 And	 if	 she	 did
indeed	 know	 something,	then	 it	 meant	 someone	had	traded	that	bit	of	 information	 in	exchange	 for	 something
else.	A	favour,	a	deal,	which	was	nothing	less	than	a	behind-the-back	betrayal	of	every	common	soldier	in	the
legion.
Who	was	vile	enough	to	do	that?
He	opened	his	eyes	and	looked	around.	He	was	alone	in	the	barracks.	Fiddler	had	taken	the	squad	out	for
that	 field	 exercise,	 the	 war-game	 against	 Brys	 Beddict’s	 newly	 assembled	 battalions.	 Complaining	 of	 a	 bad
stomach,	Bottle	had	whined	and	groaned	his	way	out	of	it.	Not	for	him	some	useless	trudging	through	bush	and
farmland;	besides,	it	hadn’t	been	so	long	ago	that	they	were	killing	Letherii	for	real.	There	was	a	good	chance
someone—on	either	side—would	forget	that	everyone	was	friends	now.	The	point	was,	he’d	been	the	first	one
quick	enough	with	the	bad-stomach	complaint,	so	no	one	else	could	take	it	up—he’d	caught	the	vicious	glare
from	Smiles,	which	of	course	he’d	long	got	used	to	since	he	was	always	faster	off	the	mark	than	she	was.
Smiles.	Bottle	fixed	his	gaze	on	her	cot,	studied	it	through	a	suspicious	squint.	Behind-the-back	shit	was	her
forte,	wasn’t	it?	Aye,	and	who	else	had	it	in	for	him?
He	swung	his	feet	to	the	floor	and—gods,	that	stone	was	cold!—padded	over	to	her	berth.
It	 paid	 to	 approach	 these	 things	 cautiously.	 If	 anyone	 was	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 rigging	 booby	 traps	 to	 just	 about
everything	 they	 didn’t	 want	 anyone	 else	 to	 touch,	 it	 was	 that	 spitting	 half-mad	 kitten	 with	 the	 sharp	 eyestickers.	Bottle	drew	his	eating	knife	and	began	probing	under	the	thin	mattress,	leaning	close	to	peer	at	seams
and	 seemingly	 random	 projections	 of	 tick	 straw—any	 one	 of	 which	 could	 be	 coated	 in	 poison—projections
which,	 he	 discovered,	 turned	 out	 to	 be,	 uh,	 random	 projections	 of	 tick	 straw.	 Trying	 to	 lull	 me	 into
something	.	.	.	I	can	smell	it.
He	knelt	and	peeked	under	the	frame.	Nothing	obvious,	and	that	made	him	even	more	suspicious.	Muttering,
Bottle	 crawled	 round	 to	 kneel	 in	 front	 of	 her	 lockbox.	 Letherii	 issue—not	 something	 they’d	 be	 taking	 with
them.	 She’d	 not	 have	 had	 much	 time	 to	 rig	 it,	 not	 deviously,	 anyway.	 No,	 the	 needles	 and	 blades	 would	 be
poorly	hidden.
She’d	sold	him	out,	but	she	would	learn	to	regret	doing	that.
Finding	 nothing	 on	 the	 outside	 of	 the	 trunk,	 he	 slipped	 his	 knife	 point	 into	 the	 lock	 and	 began	 working	 the
mechanism.
Discovering	that	the	lockbox	wasn’t	even	locked	froze	him	into	a	long	moment	of	terror,	breath	held,	sudden
sweat	 beading	 his	 forehead.	 A	 snare	 for	 sure.	 A	 killer	 snare.	 Smiles	 doesn’t	 invite	 people	 in,	 oh	 no,	 not
her.	If	I	just	lift	this	lid,	I’m	a	dead	man.
He	 whirled	 upon	 hearing	 the	 scrape	 of	 boots,	 and	 found	 himself	 looking	 up	 at	 Corabb	 Bhilan	 Thenu’alas.
‘Hood’s	breath,	soldier,	stop	sneaking	up	on	me	like	that!’
‘What’re	you	doing?’	Corabb	asked.
‘Me?	What’re	you	doing?	Don’t	tell	me	the	scrap’s	already	over—’
‘No.	I	lost	my	new	sword.	Sergeant	got	mad	and	sent	me	home.’
‘Bad	luck,	Corabb.	No	glory	for	you.’
‘Wasn’t	 looking	 for	 any—wasn’t	 real	 fighting,	 Bottle.	 I	 don’t	 see	 the	 point	 in	 that.	 They’d	 only	 learn
anything	if	we	could	use	our	weapons	and	kill	a	few	hundred	of	them.’
‘Right.	That	makes	sense.	Bring	it	up	with	Fiddler—’
‘I	did.	Just	before	he	sent	me	back.’
‘He’s	getting	more	unreasonable	by	the	day.’


‘Funny,’	Corabb	said,	‘that’s	exactly	what	I	said	to	him.	Anyway,	what’re	you	doing?	This	isn’t	your	bunk.’
‘You’re	a	sharp	one	all	right,	Corabb.	See,	it’s	like	this.	Smiles	is	trying	to	murder	me.’
‘Is	she?	Why?’
‘Women	 like	 her	 don’t	 need	 reasons,	 Corabb.	 She’s	 set	 booby	 traps.	 Poison,	 is	 my	 guess.	 Because	 I	 was
staying	behind,	you	see?	She’s	set	a	trap	to	kill	me.’
‘Oh,’	said	Corabb.	‘That’s	clever.’
‘Not	clever	enough,	friend.	Because	now	you’re	here.’
‘I	am,	yes.’
Bottle	edged	back	from	the	lockbox.	‘It’s	unlocked,’	he	said,	‘so	I	want	you	to	lift	the	lid.’
Corabb	stepped	past	and	flung	the	lid	back.
After	he’d	recovered	from	his	flinch,	Bottle	crawled	up	for	a	look	inside.
‘Now	what?’	Corabb	asked	behind	him.	‘Was	that	practice?’
‘Practice?’
‘Aye.’
‘No,	Corabb—gods,	this	is	strange—look	at	this	gear!	Those	clothes.’
‘Well,	what	I	meant	was,	do	you	want	me	to	open	Smiles’s	box	next?’
‘What?’
‘That’s	Cuttle’s.	You’re	at	Cuttle’s	bunk,	Bottle.’	He	pointed.	‘Hers	is	right	there.’
‘Well,’	Bottle	muttered	as	he	stood	up	and	dropped	the	lid	on	the	lockbox.	‘That	explains	the	codpiece.’
‘Oh	.	.	.	does	it?’
They	stared	at	each	other.
‘So,	just	how	many	bastards	do	you	think	you’ve	sired	by	now?’
‘What?’
‘What?’
‘You	just	say	something,	Corabb?’
‘What?’
‘Before	that.’
‘Before	what?’
‘Something	about	bastards.’
‘Are	you	calling	me	a	bastard?’	Corabb	demanded,	his	face	darkening.
‘No,	of	course	not.	How	would	I	know?’
‘How—’
‘It’s	none	of	my	business,	right?’	Bottle	slapped	the	man	on	one	solid	shoulder	and	set	off	to	find	his	boots.
‘I’m	going	out.’
‘Thought	you	were	sick.’
‘Better	now.’
Once	he’d	made	his	escape—in	all	likelihood	narrowly	avoiding	being	beaten	to	death	by	the	squad’s	biggest
fist	over	some	pathetic	misunderstanding—Bottle	glared	up	at	the	mid-afternoon	sun	for	a	moment,	and	then
set	off.	All	right,	you	parasite,	I’m	paying	attention	now.	Where	to?
‘It’s	about	time.	I	was	having	doubts—’
Quick	Ben!	Since	when	were	you	playing	around	with	Mockra?	And	do	you	have	any	idea	how	our
skulls	will	ache	by	this	evening?
‘Relax,	I	got	something	for	that.	Bottle,	I	need	you	to	go	to	the	Old	Palace.	I’m	down	in	the	crypts.’
Where	you	belong.
‘First	 time	 anybody’s	 expressed	 that	 particular	 sentiment,	 Bottle.	 Tell	 me	 when	 you	 get	 to	 the
grounds.’
What	are	you	doing	in	the	crypts,	Quick	Ben?
‘I’m	at	the	Cedance.	You	need	to	see	this,	Bottle.’
Did	you	find	them,	then?
‘Who?’
Sinn	and	Grub.	Heard	they	went	missing.
‘No,	they’re	not	here,	and	no	sign	that	anyone’s	been	down	here	in	some	time.	As	I’ve	already	told	the


Adjunct,	the	two	imps	are	gone.’
Gone?	Gone	where?
‘No	idea.	But	they’re	gone.’
Bad	news	for	the	Adjunct—she’s	losing	her	mages—
‘She’s	got	me.	She	doesn’t	need	anyone	else.’
And	all	my	fears	are	laid	to	rest.
‘You	may	not	have	realized,	Bottle,	but	I	was	asking	you	about	your	furry	lover	for	a	reason.’
Jealousy?
‘Hurry	up	and	get	here	so	I	can	throttle	you.	No,	not	jealousy.	Although,	come	to	think	on	it,	I	can’t
even	recall	the	last	time—’
You	said	you	had	a	reason,	Quick	Ben.	Let’s	hear	it.
‘What’s	Deadsmell	been	telling	you?’
What?	Nothing.	Well.
‘Hah,	 I	 knew	 it!	 Don’t	 believe	 him,	 Bottle.	 He	 hasn’t	 any	 idea—any	 idea	 at	 all—about	 what’s	 in	 the
works.’
You	know,	Quick	Ben,	oh	.	.	.	never	mind.	So,	I’m	on	the	grounds.	Where	to	now?
‘Anybody	see	you?’
You	didn’t	tell	me	to	do	this	sneakily!
‘Anybody	in	sight?’
Bottle	looked	round.	Wings	of	the	Old	Palace	were	settled	deep	in	mud,	plaster	cracking	or	simply	gone,	to
reveal	fissured,	slumping	brick	walls.	Snarls	of	grasses	swallowed	up	old	flagstone	pathways.	A	plaza	of	some
sort	off	to	his	left	was	now	a	shallow	pond.	The	air	was	filled	with	spinning	insects.	No.
‘Good.	Now,	follow	my	instructions	precisely,	Bottle.’
You	sure?	I	mean,	I	was	planning	on	ignoring	every	third	direction	you	gave	me.
‘Fiddler	needs	to	have	a	few	words	with	you,	soldier.	About	rules	of	conduct	when	it	comes	to	High
Mages.’
Look,	Quick	Ben,	if	you	want	me	to	find	this	Cedance,	leave	me	to	it.	I	have	a	nose	for	those	kinds	of
things.
‘I	knew	it!’
You	knew	what?	I’m	just	saying—
‘She’s	been	whispering	in	your	ear—’
Gods	below,	Quick	Ben!	The	noises	she	makes	aren’t	whispers.	They’re	not	even	words.	I	don’t—
‘She	gives	you	visions,	doesn’t	she?	Flashes	of	her	own	memories.	Scenes.’
How	do	you	know	that?
‘Tell	me	some.’
Why	do	you	think	it’s	any	of	your	business?
‘Choose	one,	damn	you.’
He	slapped	at	a	mosquito.	Some	would	be	easier	than	others,	he	knew.	Easier	because	they	were	empty	of
meaning.	 Most	 memories	 were,	 he	 suspected.	 Frozen	 scenes.	 Jungle	 trails,	 the	 bark	 of	 four-legged	 monkeys
from	 cliff-sides.	 Huddled	 warmth	 in	 the	 night	 as	 hunting	 beasts	 coughed	 in	 the	 darkness.	 But	 there	 was	 one
that	returned	again	and	again,	in	innumerable	variations.
The	sudden	blossoming	of	blue	sky,	an	opening	ahead,	the	smell	of	salt.	Soft	rush	of	gentle	waves	on	white
coral	 beach.	 Padding	 breathless	 on	 to	 the	 strand	 in	 a	 chorus	 of	 excited	 cries	 and	 chatter.	 Culmination	 of
terrifying	journeys	overland	where	it	seemed	home	would	never	again	find	them.	And	then,	in	sudden	gift	.	.	.
Shorelines,	 Quick.	 Bright	 sun,	 hot	 sand	 underfoot.	 Coming	 home	 .	 .	 .	 even	 when	 the	 home	 has	 never
been	visited	before.	And,	all	at	once,	they	gather	to	begin	building	boats.
‘Boats?’
Always	boats.	Islands.	Places	where	the	tawny	hunters	do	not	stalk	the	night.	Places,	where	they	can
be	.	.	.	safe.
‘The	Eres—’
Lived	 for	 the	 seas.	 The	 oceans.	 Coming	 from	 the	 great	 continents,	 they	 existed	 in	 a	 state	 of	 flight.
Shorelines	fed	them.	The	vast	emptiness	beyond	the	reefs	called	to	them.


‘Boats?	What	kind	of	boats?’
It	varies—I	don’t	always	travel	with	the	same	group.	Dug-outs.	Reed	boats	and	bamboo	rafts.	Skins,
baskets	 bridged	 by	 saplings—like	 nests	 in	 toppled	 trees.	 Quick	 Ben,	 the	 Eres’al—they	 were	 smart,
smarter	than	you	might	think.	They	weren’t	as	different	from	us	as	they	might	seem.	They	conquered	the
entire	world.
‘So	what	happened	to	them?’
Bottle	shrugged.	I	don’t	know.	I	think,	maybe,	we	happened	to	them.
He	 had	 found	 a	 sundered	 doorway.	 Walking	 the	 length	 of	 dark,	 damp	 corridors	 and	 following	 the	 narrow
staircases	spiralling	downward	to	landings	ankle-deep	in	water.	Sloshing	this	way	and	that,	drawing	unerringly
closer	 to	 that	 pulsing	 residue	 of	 ancient	 power.	 Houses,	 Tiles,	 Holds,	 Wandering—that	 all	 sounds	 simple
enough,	doesn’t	it,	Quick	Ben?	Logical.	But	what	about	the	roads	of	the	sea?	Where	do	they	fit	in?	Or
the	siren	calls	of	the	wind?	The	point	is,	we	see	ourselves	as	the	great	trekkers,	the	bold	travellers	and
explorers.	 But	 the	 Eres’al,	 High	 Mage,	 they	 did	 it	 first.	 There	 isn’t	 a	 place	 we	 step	 anywhere	 in	 this
world	 that	 they	 haven’t	 stepped	 first.	 Humbling	 thought,	 isn’t	 it?	 He	 reached	 a	 narrow	 tunnel	 with	 an
uneven	 floor	 that	 formed	 islands	 between	 pools.	 A	 massive	 portal	 with	 a	 leaning	 lintel	 stone	 beckoned.	 He
stepped	through	and	saw	the	causeway,	and	the	broader	platform	at	the	end,	where	stood	Quick	Ben.
‘All	right,	I’m	here,	Quick	Ben.	With	soaked	feet.’
The	vast	chamber	was	bathed	in	golden	light	that	rose	like	mist	from	the	Tiles	spreading	out	from	the	disc.
Quick	Ben,	head	tilted	to	one	side,	watched	Bottle	approach	up	the	causeway,	an	odd	look	in	his	eyes.
‘What?’
He	blinked,	and	then	gestured.	‘Look	around,	Bottle.	The	Cedance	is	alive.’
‘Signifying	what?’
‘I	was	hoping	you	could	tell	me.	The	magic	here	should	be	waning.	We’ve	unleashed	the	warrens,	after	all.
We’ve	brought	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	We’ve	slammed	the	door	on	Chaos.	It’s	like	bringing	the	wheel	to	a	tribe
that	has	only	used	sleds	and	travois—there’s	been	a	revolution	among	this	kingdom’s	mages.	Even	the	priests
are	finding	everything	upside	down—it’d	be	nice	to	sneak	a	spy	into	the	cult	of	the	Errant.	Anyway,	this	place
should	be	dying,	Bottle.’
Bottle	 looked	 round.	 One	 Tile	 close	 by	 displayed	 a	 scatter	 of	 bones	 carved	 like	 impressions	 into	 the	 stone
surface,	impressions	that	glowed	as	if	filled	with	embers.	Nearby	was	another	showing	an	empty	throne.	But
the	 brightest	 Tile	 of	 all	 lifted	 its	 own	 image	 above	 the	 flat	 surface,	 so	 that	 it	 floated,	 swirling,	 in	 three
dimensions.	A	dragon,	wings	spread	wide,	jaws	open.	‘Hood’s	breath,’	he	muttered,	repressing	a	shiver.
‘Your	roads	of	the	sea,	Bottle,’	said	Quick	Ben.	‘They	make	me	think	about	Mael.’
‘Well,	hard	not	to	think	about	Mael	in	this	city,	High	Mage.’
‘You	know,	then.’
Bottle	nodded.
‘That’s	 not	 nearly	 as	 worrisome	 as	 what	 was	 happening	 back	 in	 the	 Malazan	 Empire.	 The	 ascension	 of
Mallick	Rel,	the	Jhistal.’
Bottle	frowned	at	Quick	Ben.	‘How	can	that	be	more	worrying	than	finding	an	Elder	God	standing	next	to
the	Letherii	throne?’
‘It’s	not	the	throne	he’s	standing	beside.	It’s	Tehol.	From	what	I	gather,	that	relationship	has	been	there	for
some	 time.	 Mael’s	 hiding	 here,	 trying	 to	 keep	 his	 head	 down.	 But	 he	 hasn’t	 much	 say	 when	 some	 mortal
manages	to	grasp	some	of	his	power,	and	starts	forcing	concessions.’
‘The	Elder	God	of	the	Seas,’	said	Bottle,	‘was	ever	a	thirsty	god.	And	his	daughter	isn’t	much	better.’
‘Beru?’
‘Who	else?	The	Lady	of	Fair	Seas	is	an	ironic	title.	It	pays,’	he	added,	eyeing	the	dragon	Tile,	‘not	to	take
things	so	literally.’
‘I’m	thinking,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘of	asking	the	Adjunct	to	elevate	you	to	High	Mage.’
‘Don’t	 do	 that,’	 snapped	 Bottle.	 ‘Give	 me	 a	 reason	 not	 to.	 And	 not	 one	 of	 those	 pathetic	 ones	 about
comradeship	and	how	you’re	so	needed	in	Fid’s	squad.’
‘All	 right.	 See	 what	 you	 think	 of	 this	 one,	 then.	 Keep	 me	 where	 I	 am	 .	 .	 .	 as	 your	 shaved	 knuckle	 in	 the
hole.’
The	 High	 Mage’s	 glittering	 eyes	 narrowed,	 and	 then	 he	 smiled.	 ‘I	 may	 not	 like	 you	 much,	 Bottle,	 but


sometimes	.	.	.	I	like	what	you	say.’
‘Lucky	you.	Now,	can	we	get	out	of	this	place?’
	
‘I	think	it	is	time,’	she	said,	‘for	us	to	leave.’
Withal	squinted	at	her,	and	then	rubbed	at	the	bristle	on	his	chin.	‘You	want	better	accommodation,	love?’
‘No,	you	idiot.	I	mean	leave.	The	Bonehunters,	this	city,	all	of	it.	You	did	what	you	had	to	do.	I	did	what	I
had	to	do—my	miserable	family	of	Rake’s	runts	are	gone,	now.	Nothing	holds	us	here	any	more.	Besides,’	she
added,	‘I	don’t	like	where	things	are	going.’
‘That	reading—’
‘Meaningless.’	She	fixed	a	level	gaze	on	him.	‘Do	I	look	like	the	Queen	of	High	House	Dark?’
Withal	hesitated.
‘Do	you	value	your	life,	husband?’
‘If	 you	 want	 us	 to	 leave,	 why,	 I	 don’t	 expect	 anyone	 will	 try	 to	 stop	 us.	 We	 can	 book	 passage	 .	 .	 .
somewhere.’	And	then	he	frowned.	‘Hold	on,	Sand.	Where	will	we	go?’
Scowling,	she	rose	and	began	pacing	round	their	small,	sparsely	furnished	room.	‘Remember	the	Shake?	On
that	prison	island?’
‘Aye.	The	ones	that	used	old	Andii	words	for	some	things.’
‘Who	worship	the	shore,	yes.’
‘Well?’	he	asked.
‘Who	also	seemed	to	think	that	the	shore	was	dying.’
‘Maybe	the	one	they	knew—I	mean,	there’s	always	some	kind	of	shore.’
‘Rising	sea	levels.’
‘Aye.’
‘Those	 sea	 levels,’	 she	 continued,	 now	 facing	 the	 window	 and	 looking	 out	 over	 the	 city,	 ‘have	 been	 kept
unnaturally	low	.	.	.	for	a	long	time.’
‘They	have?’
‘Omtose	Phellack.	The	rituals	of	ice.	The	Jaghut	and	their	war	with	the	T’lan	Imass.	The	vast	ice	fields	are
melting,	Withal.’	She	faced	him.	‘You’re	Meckros—you’ve	seen	for	yourself	the	storms—we	saw	it	again	at
Fent	Reach—the	oceans	are	in	chaos.	Seasons	are	awry.	Floods,	droughts,	infestations.	And	where	does	the
Adjunct	want	to	take	her	army?	East.	To	Kolanse.	But	it’s	a	common	opinion	here	in	Lether	that	Kolanse	is
suffering	a	terrible	drought.’	Her	dark	eyes	hardened.	‘Have	you	ever	seen	an	entire	people	starving,	dying	of
thirst?’
‘No.	Have	you?’
‘I	am	old,	husband.	I	remember	the	Saelen	Gara,	an	offshoot	Andii	people	in	my	home	world.	They	lived	in
the	forests.	 Until	 the	 forests	 died.	 We	begged	 them,	 then,	 to	 come	 to	Kharkanas.	 To	 the	 cities	 of	 the	 realm.
They	 refused.	 Their	 hearts	 were	 broken,	 they	 said.	 Their	 world	 had	 died,	 and	 so	 they	 elected	 to	 die	 with	 it.
Andarist	 begged	 .	 .	 .’	 Her	 gaze	 clouded	 then	 and	 she	 turned	 away,	 back	 to	 the	 window.	 ‘Yes,	 Withal,	 to
answer	you.	Yes,	I	have.	And	I	will	not	see	it	again.’
‘Very	well.	Where	to,	then?’
‘We	will	begin,’	she	said,	‘with	a	visit	to	the	Shake.’
‘What	have	they	to	tell	you,	Sand?	Garbled	memories.	Ignorant	superstitions.’
‘Withal.	 I	 fell	 in	 battle.	 We	 warred	 with	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 Until	 the	 Tiste	 Edur	 betrayed	 us,
slaughtered	 us.	 Clearly,	 they	 were	 not	 as	 thorough	 as	 they	 perhaps	 should	 have	 been.	 Some	 Andii	 survived.
And	it	seems	that	there	were	more	than	just	K’Chain	Che’Malle	dwelling	in	that	region.	There	were	humans.’
‘The	Shake.’
‘People	who	would	become	the	Shake,	once	they	took	in	the	surviving	Andii.	Once	the	myths	and	legends	of
both	 groups	 knitted	 together	 and	 became	 indistinguishable.’	 She	 paused,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘But	 even	 then,	 there
must	 have	 been	 a	 schism	 of	 some	 sort.	 Unless,	 of	 course,	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 of	 Bluerose	 were	 an	 earlier
population,	 a	 migration	 distinct	 from	 our	 own.	 But	 my	 thinking	 is	 this:	 some	 of	 the	 Shake,	 with	 Tiste	 Andii
among	them,	split	away,	travelled	inland.	They	were	the	ones	who	created	Bluerose,	a	theocracy	centred	on
the	worship	of	the	Black-Winged	Lord.	On	Anomander	Rake,	Son	of	Darkness.’
‘Is	 it	 not	 equally	 possible,’	 ventured	 Withal,	 ‘that	 all	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 left?	 Leaving	 just	 the	 Shake,	 weakly


blood-mixed	here	and	there,	perhaps,	but	otherwise	just	human,	yet	now	possessing	that	knitted	skein	of	myths
and	such?’
She	 glanced	 at	 him,	 frowned.	 ‘That’s	 a	 thought,	 husband.	 The	 Tiste	 Andii	 survivors	 used	 the	 humans,	 to
begin	with,	to	regain	their	strength—to	stay	alive	on	this	unknown	world—even	to	hide	them	from	Edur	hunting
parties.	And	then,	when	at	last	they	judged	they	were	ready,	and	it	was	safe,	they	all	left.’
‘But	 wouldn’t	 the	 Shake	 have	 then	 rejected	 them?	 Their	 stories?	 Their	 words?	 After	 all,	 they	 certainly
didn’t	worship	the	Tiste	Andii,	did	they?	They	worshipped	the	shore—and	you	have	to	admit,	that’s	one	strange
religion	they	have.	Praying	to	a	strip	of	beach	and	whatnot.’
‘And	that	is	what	interests	me	more	than	those	surviving	Tiste	Andii.	And	that	is	why	I	wish	to	speak	with
their	elders,	their	witches	and	warlocks.’
‘Deadsmell	 described	 the	 horrid	 skeletons	 his	 squad	 and	 Sinn	 found	 on	 the	 north	 end	 of	 the	 island.	 Half
reptilian,	half	human.	Misbegotten—’
‘That	 were	 quickly	 killed,	 disposed	 of.	 The	 taint,	 Withal,	 of	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 And	 so,	 before	 we	 Tiste
even	arrived,	they	lived	in	the	shadow	of	the	Che’Malle.	And	it	was	not	in	isolation.	No,	there	was	some	form
of	contact,	some	kind	of	relationship.	There	must	have	been.’
He	 thought	 about	 that,	 still	 uncertain	 as	 to	 where	 her	 thoughts	 were	 taking	 her.	 Why	 it	 had	 become	 so
important	that	she	uncover	the	secrets	of	the	Shake.	‘Sandalath,	why	did	you	Tiste	war	against	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle?’
She	looked	startled.	‘Why?	Because	they	were	different.’
‘I	see.	And	they	fought	against	you	in	turn.	Because	you	were	different,	or	because	you	were	invading	their
world?’
She	reached	up	and	closed	the	shutters,	blocking	out	the	cityscape	and	sky	beyond.	The	sudden	gloom	was
like	a	shroud	on	their	conversation.	‘I’m	going	out	now,’	she	said.	‘Start	packing.’
	
With	delicate	precision,	Telorast	nipped	at	the	eyelid,	clasping	it	and	lifting	it	away	from	the	eye.	Curdle	leaned
in	for	a	closer	look,	then	pulled	back,	hind	claws	scrabbling	to	maintain	their	grip	on	the	front	of	Banaschar’s
tunic.
‘He’s	piss	drunk,	all	right.	Snuffed	candle.	Doused	fire,	gutted	lamp,	the	reeking	dead.’
Telorast	 released	 the	 lid,	 watched	 it	 sink	 back	 down.	 Banaschar	 sighed	 wetly,	 groaned	 and	 shifted	 in	 the
chair,	head	lolling.
The	 two	 skeletal	 creatures	 scrambled	 down	 and	 rendezvoused	 on	 the	 window	 sill	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the
small	room.	They	tilted	their	heads	closer	together.
‘What	now?’	Curdle	whispered.
‘What	kind	of	question	is	that?	What	now?	What	now?	Have	you	lost	your	mind?’
‘Well,	what	now,	Telorast?’
‘How	should	I	know!	But	listen,	we	need	to	do	something!	That	Errant—he’s	.	.	.	he’s—well,	I	hate	him,	is
what!	And	worse,	he’s	using	Banaschar,	our	very	own	ex-priest.’
‘Our	pet.’
‘That’s	right.	Our	pet—not	his!’
‘We	should	kill	him.’
‘Who?	Banaschar	or	the	Errant?’
‘If	 we	 kill	 Banaschar,	 then	 nobody	 has	 a	 pet.	 If	 we	 kill	 the	 Errant,	 then	 we	 can	 keep	 Banaschar	 all	 to
ourselves.’
‘Right,	Curdle,’	Telorast	said,	nodding,	‘but	which	one	would	make	the	Errant	angrier?’
‘Good	 question.	 We	 need	 something	 to	 make	 him	 go	 mad,	 completely	 mad—that’s	 the	 best	 revenge	 for
stealing	our	pet.’
‘And	then	we	kill	him.’
‘Who?’
‘It	doesn’t	matter!	Why	are	you	being	so	thick?	Oh,	what	a	ridiculous	question!	Listen,	Curdle,	now	we	got
ourselves	a	plan	and	that’s	good.	It’s	a	start.	So	let’s	think	some	more.	Vengeance	against	the	Errant.’
‘The	Elder	God.’
‘Right.’


‘Who’s	still	around.’
‘Right.’
‘Stealing	pets.’
‘Curdle—’
‘I’m	just	thinking	out	loud,	that’s	all!’
‘You	call	that	thinking?	No	wonder	we	ended	up	torn	to	pieces	and	dead	and	worse	than	dead!’
‘Oh,	and	what	are	you	thinking,	then?’
‘I	didn’t	have	any	time	to,	since	I	had	to	answer	all	your	questions!’
‘You	always	got	an	excuse,	Telorast,	did	you	know	that?	Always.’
‘And	you’re	it,	Curdle,	did	you	know	that?’
A	voice	croaked	from	the	other	side	of	the	room,	‘What	are	you	two	whispering	about	over	there?’
The	 two	 skeletons	 flinched.	 Then,	 tail	 lashing	 about,	 Telorast	 ducked	 a	 head	 in	 Banaschar’s	 direction.
‘Absolutely	nothing,	and	that’s	a	fact.	In	fact,	beloved	pet,	that’s	the	problem!	Every	time!	It’s	Curdle.	She’s	an
idiot!	She	drives	me	mad!	Drives	you	to	drink,	too,	I	bet.’
‘The	 Errant’s	 game	 is	 one	 of	 fate,’	 Banaschar	 said,	 rubbing	 at	 his	 face.	 ‘He	 uses—abuses—proclivities,
tendencies.	 He	 nudges,	 pushes	 over	 the	 edge.’	 He	 blinked	 blearily	 at	 the	 two	 skeletons.	 ‘To	 take	 him	 down,
you	need	to	take	advantage	of	that	selfsame	obsession.	You	need	to	set	a	trap.’
Telorast	and	Curdle	hopped	down	from	the	sill	and	advanced	on	the	seated	man,	tails	flicking,	heads	low.	‘A
trap,’	whispered	Telorast.	‘That’s	good.	We	thought	you’d	switched	gods,	that’s	what	we	thought—’
‘Don’t	tell	him	what	we	thought!’	Curdle	hissed.
‘It	doesn’t	matter	now—he’s	on	our	side!	Weren’t	you	listening?’
‘The	Errant	wants	all	he	once	had,’	said	Banaschar.	‘Temples,	worshippers,	domination.	Power.	To	do	that,
he	needs	to	take	down	the	gods.	The	High	Houses	.	.	.	all	in	ruins.	Smouldering	heaps.	This	coming	war	with
the	 Crippled	 God	 presents	 him	 with	 his	 chance—a	 few	 nudges	 on	 the	 battlefield—who’d	 notice?	 He	 wants
spilled	blood,	my	friends,	that’s	what	he	wants.’
‘Who	doesn’t?’	asked	Curdle.
The	two	creatures	had	reached	Banaschar’s	scuffed	boots	and	were	now	bobbing	and	fawning.	‘The	chaos
of	battle,’	murmured	Telorast,	‘yes,	that	would	be	ideal.’
‘For	us,’	nodded	Curdle.
‘Precisely.	Our	chance.’
‘To	do	what?’	Banaschar	asked.	‘Find	yourselves	a	couple	of	thrones?’	He	snorted.	Ignoring	them	as	they
prostrated	 themselves	 at	 his	 feet,	 he	 held	 up	 his	 hands	 and	 stared	 at	 them.	 ‘See	 this	 tremble,	 friends?	 What
does	 it	 truly	 signify?	 I	 will	 tell	 you.	 I	 am	 the	 last	 living	 priest	 of	 D’rek.	 Why	 was	 I	 spared?	 I	 lost	 all	 the
privileges	of	worship	within	a	temple.	I	lost	a	secular	game	of	influence	and	power,	diminished	in	the	eyes	of
my	 brothers	 and	 sisters.	 In	 the	 eyes	 of	 everyone,	 I	 imagine.	 But	 I	 never	 gave	 up	 worshipping	 my	 god.’	 He
squinted.	 ‘I	 should	 be	 dead.	 Was	 I	 simply	 forgotten?	 Has	 it	 taken	 longer	 than	 D’rek	 thought?	 To	 hunt	 us	 all
down?	When	will	my	god	find	me?’	After	a	moment	longer	he	lowered	his	hands	on	to	his	thighs.	‘I	just	.	.	.
wait.’
‘Our	pet’s	disenchanted,’	whispered	Telorast.
‘That’s	bad,’	Curdle	whispered	back.
‘We	need	to	find	him	a	woman.’
‘Or	a	child	to	eat.’
‘They	don’t	eat	children,	Curdle.’
‘Well,	some	other	kind	of	treat,	then.’
‘A	bottle!’
‘A	bottle,	yes,	that’s	good!’
They	went	hunting.
Banaschar	waited.
	
Koryk	trained	his	crossbow	on	the	back	of	the	scout’s	helmed	head.	His	finger	edged	down	to	the	iron	press.
The	point	of	a	knife	hovered	into	view	opposite	his	right	eye.	‘I	got	orders,’	whispered	Smiles,	‘to	kill	you	if
you	kill	anyone.’


He	drew	his	finger	back.	‘Like	Hood	you	have.	Besides,	it	might	be	an	accident.’
‘Oh,	I	saw	that	for	sure,	Koryk.	Your	trigger	finger	just	accidentally	slipping	down	like	that.	And	then,	oh,	in
went	my	knife	point—another	accident.	Tragedies!	We’ll	burn	you	on	a	pyre	Seti	style	and	that’s	a	promise.’
He	 lowered	 the	 crossbow	 and	 rolled	 on	 to	 his	 side,	 out	 of	 sight	 of	 the	 clumsy	 scout	 on	 the	 track	 below.
‘Right,	 that	 makes	 perfect	 sense,	 Smiles.	 A	 pyre	 for	 the	 people	 who	 live	 on	 the	 grasslands.	 We	 like	 our
funerals	to	involve,	why,	everyone.	We	burn	down	whole	villages	and	scorch	the	ground	for	leagues	in	every
direction.’
She	blinked	at	him,	and	then	shrugged.	‘Whatever	you	do	with	your	dead,	then.’
He	worked	his	way	down	the	slope,	Smiles	following.
‘My	turn,’	she	said	when	they	reached	the	draw.	‘Get	back	up	there.’
‘You	waited	till	we	got	down	here	to	say	that?’
She	grinned.
Leaving	 him	 to	 scrabble	 back	 into	 position,	 Smiles	 set	 off	 through	 the	 brush.	 It	 wasn’t	 that	 the	 Letherii
scouts	were	especially	bad.	It	was	more	the	case	that	their	tradition	of	warfare	kept	them	trapped	in	the	idea
of	huge	armies	clashing	on	open	fields.	Where	scouts	were	employed	simply	to	find	the	enemy	encampments.
The	notion	of	a	foe	that	could	melt	into	the	landscape	the	way	the	Malazans	could,	or	even	the	idea	that	the
enemy	 might	 split	 its	 forces,	 avoid	 direct	 clashes,	 and	 whittle	 the	 Letherii	 down	 with	 raids,	 ambushes	 and
disrupted	supply	lines—none	of	that	was	part	of	their	military	thinking.
The	 Tiste	 Edur	 had	 been	 tougher	 by	 far.	 Their	 fighting	 style	 was	 much	 closer	 to	 the	 Malazan	 one,	 which
probably	explained	why	the	Edur	conquered	the	Letherii	the	first	time	round.
Of	 course,	 the	 Malazans	 could	 stand	 firm	 in	 a	 big	 scrap,	 but	 it	 made	 sense	 to	 have	 spent	 some	 time
demoralizing	and	weakening	their	foe	beforehand.
These	Letherii	had	a	lot	still	to	learn.	After	all,	one	day	the	Malazans	might	be	back.	Not	the	Bonehunters,
but	 the	 imperial	 armies	 of	 the	 Empress.	 A	 new	 kingdom	 to	 conquer,	 a	 new	 continent	 to	 subjugate.	 If	 King
Tehol	wanted	to	hold	on	to	what	he	had,	his	brother	had	better	be	commanding	a	savvy,	nasty	army	that	knew
how	to	face	down	Malazan	marines,	heavies,	squad	mages,	sappers	with	munitions,	and	decent	cavalry.
She	quietly	grunted	as	she	approached	the	hidden	camp.	Poor	Brys	Beddict.	They	might	as	well	surrender
now.
‘If	you	was	any	less	ugly,’	a	voice	said,	‘I’d	a	killed	you	for	sure.’
She	halted,	scowling.	‘Took	your	time	announcing	yourself,	picket.’
The	soldier	that	edged	into	view	was	dark-skinned,	barring	a	piebald	blotch	of	pink	disfiguring	half	his	face
and	most	of	his	forehead.	The	heavy	crossbow	in	his	hands	was	cocked	but	no	quarrel	rested	in	the	slot.
Smiles	pushed	past	him.	‘Talk	about	ugly—you	live	in	my	nightmares,	Gullstream,	you	know	that?’
The	man	stepped	in	behind	her.	‘Can’t	help	being	so	popular	with	the	ladies,’	he	said.	‘Especially	the	Letherii
ones.’
Despite	the	blotch,	there	was	indeed	something	about	Gullstream	that	made	women	take	a	second	and	third
look.	 She	 suspected	 he	 might	 have	 some	 Tiste	 Andii	 blood	 in	 his	 veins.	 The	 almond-shaped	 eyes	 that	 never
seemed	to	settle	on	any	one	colour;	his	way	of	moving—as	if	he	had	all	the	time	in	the	world—and	the	fact
that	he	was,	according	to	rumour,	well-hung.	Shaking	her	head	to	clear	away	stupid	thoughts,	she	said,	‘Their
scouts	have	gone	right	past—staying	on	the	track	mostly.	So	the	Fist	can	move	us	all	up.	We’ll	fall	on	the	main
column	screaming	our	lungs	out	and	that	will	be	that.’
As	 she	 was	 saying	 this,	 they	 entered	 the	 camp—a	 few	 hundred	 soldiers	 sitting	 or	 lying	 quietly	 amidst	 the
trees,	stumps	and	brush.
Seeing	Keneb,	Smiles	headed	over	to	make	her	report.
The	Fist	was	sitting	on	a	folding	camp	stool,	using	the	point	of	his	dagger	to	scrape	mud	from	the	soles	of	his
boots.	A	cup	of	steaming	herbal	tea	rested	on	a	stump	beside	him.	Sprawled	on	the	ground	a	few	paces	away
was	 Sergeant	 Fiddler,	 and	 just	 beyond	 him	 Sergeant	 Balm	 sat	 crosslegged,	 studying	 the	 short	 sword	 he	 was
holding,	his	expression	confused.	A	dozen	heavies	waited	nearby,	grouped	together	and	seeming	to	be	engaged
in	comparing	their	outthrust	hands—counting	knuckle	hairs,	I	bet.
‘Fist,	Scout	Smiles	reporting,	sir.’
Keneb	glanced	up.	‘As	predicted?’
‘Aye,	sir.	Can	we	go	kill	’em	all	now?’


The	Fist	looked	over	at	Fiddler,	‘Looks	like	you	lost	your	bet,	Sergeant.’
Eyes	still	closed,	Fiddler	grunted,	then	said,	‘We	ain’t	done	any	killing	yet,	sir.	Brys	Beddict’s	been	fishin	in
our	brains	for	some	time	now,	he’s	bound	to	have	snagged	a	fin	or	gill	or	two.	Smiles,	how	many	scouts	on	the
track?’
‘Just	the	one,	Sergeant.	Picking	his	nose.’
Fiddler	 opened	 his	 eyes	 and	 squinted	 over	 at	 Keneb.	 ‘Like	 that,	 Fist.	 Beddict’s	 reconfigured	 his	 scouting
patrols—they	 pair	 up.	 If	 Smiles	 and	 Koryk	 saw	 only	 one,	 then	 where	 was	 the	 other	 one?’	 He	 shifted	 to	 get
more	comfortable	and	closed	his	eyes	again.	‘And	he	runs	five	units—five	pairs—in	advance	of	his	main	body.
So.’
‘So,’	 repeated	 Keneb,	 frowning.	 He	 rose,	 slipped	 the	 dagger	 into	 his	 scabbard.	 ‘If	 he’s	 sent	 one	 or	 two
down	the	track,	they	were	meant	to	be	seen.	Sergeant	Balm,	find	me	that	map.’
‘Map,	sir?	What	map?’
Muttering	under	his	breath,	Keneb	walked	over	to	the	heavies.	‘You	there—yes,	you—name?’
‘Reliko,	sir.’
‘What	are	you	doing	with	those	heavies,	Reliko?’
‘Why,	cos	I	am	one,	sir.’
Watching	this,	Smiles	snorted.	The	top	of	Reliko’s	gnarly	head	barely	reached	her	shoulder.	The	man	looked
like	a	prune	with	arms	and	legs.
‘Who’s	your	sergeant?’	Keneb	asked	the	Dal	Honese	soldier.
‘Badan	 Gruk,	 sir.	 But	 he	 stayed	 back	 sick,	 sir,	 along	 with	 Sergeant	 Sinter	 and	 Kisswhere.	 Me	 and	 Vastly
Blank	here,	we	squadding	up	with	Drawfirst	and	Shoaly,	under	Sergeant	Primly,	sir.’
‘Very	well.	Go	into	the	command	tent	and	bring	me	the	map.’
‘Aye	sir.	You	want	the	table	with	it?’
‘No,	that	won’t	be	necessary.’
As	the	soldier	walked	off,	Fiddler	said,	‘Coulda	been	there	and	back	by	now,	sir.	All	by	yourself.’
‘I	could	have,	yes.	And	just	for	that	observation,	Sergeant,	go	and	get	that	map-table	for	me.’
‘Thought	it	wasn’t	necessary,	sir?’
‘I	changed	my	mind.	On	your	feet.’
Groaning,	Fiddler	sat	up,	nudged	Balm	and	said,	‘You	and	me,	we	got	work	to	do.’
Blinking,	Balm	stared	at	him	a	moment.	Then	he	leapt	upright,	sword	in	his	hand.	‘Where	are	they,	then?’
‘Follow	me,’	Fiddler	said,	climbing	to	his	feet.	‘And	put	that	thing	away	before	you	poke	me	with	it.’
‘Why	would	I	stab	you?	I	mean,	I	know	you,	right?	I	think.	Aye,	I	know	you.’
They	passed	Reliko	on	their	way	to	the	tent.
As	the	soldier	stepped	up,	Keneb	took	the	rolled-up	hide.	‘Thank	you.	Reliko,	before	you	go,	a	question—
why	are	all	the	heavies	examining	their	hands?’
‘We	was	adding	up	lost	bits,	sir,	t’see	if	it	made	up	a	whole	hand.’
‘Does	it?’
‘We’re	 missing	 a	 thumb,	 but	 we	 heard	 there’s	 a	 heavy	 without	 any	 thumbs—might	 be	 over	 in	 Blistig’s
legion.’
‘Indeed,	and	what	would	his	name	be?’
‘Nefarias	Bredd,	sir.’
‘And	how	would	this	soldier	be	able	to	wield	any	weapons,	without	thumbs?’
Reliko	shrugged.	‘Can’t	say,	sir,	as	I	only	seen	’im	once,	and	that	was	from	too	far	away.	I	expect	he	ties
’em	up	sort	of,	somehow.’
‘Perhaps,’	ventured	Keneb,	‘he’s	missing	only	one	thumb.	Shield	hand,	perhaps.’
‘Might	be,	sir,	might	be,	in	which	case	as	soon	as	we	find	a	thumb,	why,	we’ll	let	him	know.’	Reliko	returned
to	his	companions.
Keneb	stared	after	the	soldier,	frowning.
‘Kingdoms	toppled	one	by	one,’	said	Smiles,	‘because	of	soldiers	like	him,	sir.	Keep	telling	yourself	that—
that’s	how	I	do	it.’
‘Do	what,	scout?’
‘Stay	sane,	sir.	He’s	the	one,	you	know.’


‘Who,	what?’
‘The	shortest	heavy	in	the	history	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	sir.’
‘Really?	Are	you	certain	of	that,	scout?’
‘Sir?’
But	he’d	unfurled	the	map	and	was	now	studying	it.
Fiddler	and	Balm	were	approaching,	a	heavy	table	between	them.	As	soon	as	they	arrived,	Keneb	rolled	up
the	map	and	set	it	on	the	tabletop.	‘You	can	take	that	back	now,	Sergeants.	Thank	you.’
	
Smiles	 jogged	 her	 way	 back	 to	 where	 Koryk	 was	 hidden	 along	 the	 ridge.	 Behind	 her	 clunked	 Corporal	 Tarr,
sounding	like	a	damned	tinker’s	cart.	She	shot	him	a	glare	over	one	shoulder.	‘You	shoulda	strapped	down,	you
know	that,	don’t	you?’
‘This	is	a	damned	feint,’	said	Tarr,	‘what	difference	does	it	make?’
They	reached	the	base	of	the	ridge.
‘I’ll	wait	here.	Go	collect	the	fool,	Smiles,	and	be	quick	about	it.’
Biting	back	a	retort,	she	set	off	up	the	slope.	It’d	be	different,	she	knew,	if	she	was	the	corporal.	And	this
was	a	perfect	example.	If	she	was	corporal,	it’d	be	Tarr	doing	this	climb	and	that	was	a	fact.
Koryk	heard	her	coming	and	worked	his	way	down	to	meet	her.	‘No	column,	huh?’
‘No,	how’d	you	guess?’
‘Didn’t	have	to.	I	waited.	And	.	.	.	no	column.’
They	descended	the	slope	side	by	side	to	where	Tarr	waited.
‘We	lost	the	enemy,	Corporal?’
‘Something	 like	 that,	 Koryk.	 And	 now	 the	 Fist’s	 got	 us	 on	 the	 move—we’re	 going	 to	 be	 buggered	 trying
catch-up,	too.	He’s	now	thinking	we’ve	stuck	our	heads	in	a	wasp	nest.’
‘These	Letherii	couldn’t	turn	an	ambush	on	us,’	Koryk	pronounced.	‘We	would’ve	sniffed	it	out	by	now.’
‘But	we	didn’t,’	Smiles	pointed	out.	‘We	been	flushed,	Koryk.’
‘Lazy,’	pronounced	Tarr.	‘Overconfident.	Fiddler	was	right.’
‘Of	course	he	was,’	said	Smiles.	‘He’s	Fiddler.	It’s	always	the	problem,	the	people	in	charge	never	listen	to
the	people	in	the	know.	It’s	like	two	different	worlds,	two	different	languages.’
She	stopped	when	she	noticed	both	men	looking	at	her.	‘What?’
‘Nothing,’	said	Tarr,	‘except,	well,	that	was	a	sharp	observation	there,	Smiles.’
‘Oh,	and	did	that	shock	you	two?’
‘Shocked	me,’	admitted	Koryk.
She	scowled	at	him.
But	secretly,	she	was	pleased.	That’s	right.	I	ain’t	the	fool	you	think	I	am.	I	ain’t	the	fool	nobody	thinks
I	am.	Everybody,	I	mean.	Well,	they’re	the	real	fools,	anyway.
They	hurried	on,	but	long	before	they	caught	up	to	the	company,	it	was	all	over.
	
The	 Letherii	 ambush	 caught	 Keneb’s	 mob	 coming	 down	 a	 forested	 slope	 that	 funnelled	 before	 reaching	 the
basin.	Enemy	ranks	rose	up	on	both	sides	from	fast-dug	foxholes	and	loosed	a	few	hundred	un-fletched	arrows
with	 soft	 clay	 balls	 instead	 of	 barbed	 iron	 points.	 If	 the	 flights	 had	 been	 real,	 half	 the	 Malazans	 would	 have
been	downed,	dead	or	wounded.	A	few	more	salvos	and	most	of	the	rest	would	be	out	of	commission.
Brys	Beddict	made	an	appearance	in	the	midst	of	Letherii	catcalls	and	cheering,	walking	up	to	Fist	Keneb
and	painting	with	one	dripping	finger	a	red	slash	across	his	boiled-leather	cuirass.
‘Sorry,	Fist,	but	you	have	just	been	wiped	out.’
‘Indeed,	Commander,’	Keneb	acknowledged.	‘Three	hundred	dead	Bonehunters,	cut	down	in	a	pocket.	Very
well	done,	although	I	suspect	it	highlights	a	lesson	as	yet	undiscovered.’
The	smile	on	Brys’s	face	faded	slightly.	‘Fist?	I’m	afraid	I	don’t	understand	you.’
‘Sometimes,	one’s	tactics	must	prove	brutal	in	the	execution,	Commander.	Especially	when	the	timing’s	off
and	nothing	can	be	done	for	it.’
‘I’m	sorry?’
Horns	sounded	suddenly,	from	the	ridge	lines	beyond	the	Letherii	units—on	all	sides,	in	fact.


Keneb	said,	‘Three	hundred	dead	Bonehunters,	Commander,	and	eight	hundred	dead	Letherii,	including	their
supreme	 commander.	 Not	 an	 ideal	 exchange	 for	 either	 side,	 but	 in	 a	 war,	 probably	 one	 the	 Adjunct	 could
stomach.’
Brys	sighed,	his	expression	wry.	‘Lesson	delivered,	Fist	Keneb.	My	compliments	to	the	Adjunct.’
At	that	moment,	Fiddler	walked	up	to	them.	‘Fist,	you	owe	me	and	my	squad	two	nights’	leave,	sir.’
Keneb	grinned	at	Brys	Beddict.	‘As	much	as	the	Adjunct	would	appreciate	the	compliments,	Commander,
they	in	fact	belong	to	this	sergeant	here.’
‘Ah,	I	see.’
‘That’s	 another	 lesson	 to	 mull	 over,’	 Keneb	 said,	 ‘the	 one	 about	 listening	 to	 your	 veterans,	 regardless	 of
rank.’
‘Well,’	mused	Brys,	‘I	may	have	to	go	hunting	for	my	few	surviving	veterans,	then.	None	the	less,	Fist,	the
sacrifice	 of	 three	 hundred	 of	 your	 soldiers	 strikes	 me	 as	 a	 loss	 you	 can	 ill	 afford,	 regardless	 of	 the	 battle’s
outcome.’
‘True.	Hence	my	comment	about	timing,	Commander.	I	sent	a	rider	to	Fist	Blistig	but	we	could	not	respond
in	time	to	your	ambush.	Obviously,	I	would	rather	have	avoided	all	contact	with	your	troops.	But	since	I	know
we’d	all	 prefer	 to	 sleep	 in	 real	 beds	 tonight,	 I	 thought	 it	 more	 instructive	 to	 invite	 the	 engagement.	 Now,’	 he
added,	smiling,	‘we	can	all	march	back	to	Letheras.’
Brys	drew	out	a	handkerchief,	wetted	it	from	his	canteen,	and	then	stepped	up	to	Fist	Keneb,	and	carefully
cleaned	off	the	streak	of	red	paint.
	
Captain	 Faradan	 Sort	 entered	 Kindly’s	 office	 to	 find	 her	 counterpart	 standing	 to	 one	 side	 of	 his	 desk	 and
staring	down	at	an	enormous	mound	of	what	looked	like	hair	heaped	on	the	desktop.
‘Gods	below,	what	is	that?’
Kindly	glanced	over.	‘What	does	it	look	like?’
‘Hair.’
‘Correct.	Animal	hair,	as	best	as	I	can	determine.	A	variety	of	domestic	beasts.’
‘It	reeks.	What	is	it	doing	on	your	desk?’
‘Good	question.	Tell	me,	was	Lieutenant	Pores	in	the	outer	office?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘No	one	there,	I’m	afraid.’
He	grunted.	‘Hiding,	I	expect.’
‘I	doubt	he’d	do	something	like	this,	Kindly—’
‘Oh,	 never	 directly.	 No,	 but	 I	 would	 wager	 a	 wagonload	 of	 imperials	 he’s	 had	 a	 hand	 in	 it.	 He	 imagines
himself	very	clever,	does	my	lieutenant.’
‘If	he	owns	anything	he	values	greatly,’	she	said,	‘crush	it	under	a	heel.	That’s	how	I	took	care	of	the	one	I
sensed	was	going	to	give	me	trouble.	That	was	back	in	Seven	Cities,	and	to	this	day	he	looks	at	me	with	hurt	in
his	eyes.’
He	glanced	at	her.	‘Hurt?	Truly?’
‘Truly.’
‘That’s	.	.	.	exceptional	advice,	Faradan.	Thank	you.’
‘You’re	welcome.	Anyway,	I	was	coming	by	to	see	if	you’d	had	any	better	luck	finding	our	two	wayward
mages.’
‘No.	We	need	to	get	High	Mage	Quick	Ben	involved	in	the	search,	I	believe.	Assuming,’	he	added,	‘they’re
worth	finding.’
She	turned	away,	walked	to	the	window.	‘Kindly,	Sinn	saved	many,	many	lives	at	Y’Ghatan.	She	did	so	the
night	of	the	assault	and	again	with	the	survivors	under	the	city.	Her	brother,	Corporal	Shard,	is	beside	himself
with	worry.	She	is	precipitous,	yes,	but	I	do	not	consider	that	necessarily	a	fault.’
‘And	the	Adjunct	has,	it	seems,	desperate	need	for	mages,’	said	Kindly.	‘Why	is	that?’
She	shrugged.	‘I	know	as	little	as	you,	Kindly.	We	will	march	soon,	away	from	the	comforts	of	Letheras.’
The	 man	 grunted.	 ‘Never	 let	 a	 soldier	 get	 too	 comfortable.	 Leads	 to	 trouble	 every	 time.	 She’s	 right	 in
kicking	us	into	motion.	Still,	it’d	be	a	comfort	to	know	what	we’re	heading	into.’
‘And	a	greater	comfort	to	have	more	than	one	half-mad	High	Mage	to	support	eight	thousand	soldiers.’	She
paused,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘We	 won’t	 find	 ourselves	 another	 Beak	 hiding	 among	 the	 squads.	 We’ve	 had	 our


miracle,	Kindly.’
‘You’re	starting	to	sound	as	grim	as	Blistig.’
She	shook	herself.	‘You’re	right.	Apologies.	I’m	just	worried	about	Sinn,	that’s	all.’
‘Then	find	Quick	Ben.	Get	him	looking	into	those	closets	or	Whatever	they’re	called—’
‘Warrens.’
‘Right.’
Sighing,	she	swung	round	and	went	to	the	door.	‘I’ll	send	Pores	to	you	if	I	see	him.’
‘You	won’t,’	Kindly	said.	‘He’ll	come	up	for	air	sooner	or	later,	Faradan.	Leave	the	lieutenant	to	me.’
	
Sergeant	 Sinter	 and	 her	 sister	 sat	 playing	 the	 Dal	 Honese	 version	 of	 bones	 with	 Badan	 Gruk.	 The	 human
finger	bones	were	polished	with	use,	gleaming	amber.	The	legend	was	that	they’d	belonged	to	three	Li	Heng
traders	who’d	come	to	the	village,	only	to	be	caught	thieving.	They’d	lost	more	than	their	hands,	naturally.	Dal
Honese	 weren’t	 much	 interested	 in	 delivering	 lessons;	 they	 preferred	 something	 more	 succinct	 and,	 besides,
executing	the	fools	just	left	the	path	open	for	more	to	come	wandering	in,	and	everyone	liked	a	good	torture
session.
That	was	before	things	got	civilized,	of	course.	Kellanved	had	put	an	end	to	torture.	‘A	state	that	employs
torture	invites	barbarism	and	deserves	nothing	better	than	to	suffer	the	harvest	of	its	own	excesses.’	That	was
said	 to	 have	 been	 from	 the	 Emperor	 himself,	 although	 Sinter	 had	 her	 doubts.	 Sounded	 too	 .	 .	 .	 literate,
especially	for	a	damned	Dal	Honese	thief.
Anyway,	life	stopped	being	much	fun	once	civilization	arrived,	or	so	the	old	ones	muttered.	But	then,	they
were	always	muttering.	It	was	the	last	career	to	take	up	before	dying	of	oldness,	the	reward	for	living	so	long,
she	 supposed.	 She	 didn’t	 expect	 to	 survive	 her	 career	 as	 a	 soldier.	 It	 was	 interesting	 to	 see	 how	 it	 was	 the
green,	fresh	ones	who	did	all	the	complaining.	The	veterans	just	stayed	quiet.	So	maybe	all	that	bitching	was	at
both	ends	of	life,	the	young	and	the	old	trapped	inside	chronic	dissatisfaction.
Kisswhere	collected	up	the	bones	and	tossed	them	again.	‘Hah!	Poor	Badan	Gruk—you	won’t	ever	match
that,	let’s	see	you	try!’
It	was	a	pretty	good	cast,	Sinter	had	to	acknowledge.	Four	of	the	core	patterns	with	only	a	couple	of	spars
missing	and	one	true	bridge.	Badan	would	need	a	near	perfect	throw	to	top	Kisswhere’s	run.
‘I’ll	stop	there,	I	said.	Toss	’em,	Badan.	And	no	cheating.’
‘I	don’t	cheat,’	he	said	as	he	collected	up	the	bones.
‘Then	what’s	that	you	just	palmed?’
Badan	opened	his	hand	and	scowled.	‘This	one’s	gummed!	No	wonder	you	got	those	casts!’
‘If	it	was	gummed,’	Kisswhere	retorted,	‘then	it	was	from	my	sister’s	last	throw!’
‘Hood’s	breath,’	sighed	Sinter.	‘Look,	you	fools,	we’re	all	cheating.	It’s	in	our	blood.	So	now	we’ve	got	to
accept	the	fact	that	none	of	us	is	going	to	admit	they	were	the	one	using	the	gum	to	get	a	stick.	Clean	the	thing
off	and	let’s	get	on	with	it.’
The	others	subsided	and	Sinter	was	careful	to	hide	her	relief.	That	damned	gum	had	been	in	her	pouch	too
long,	making	it	dirty,	and	she	could	feel	the	stuff	on	her	fingers.	She	surreptitiously	brought	her	hands	down	to
her	thighs	and	rubbed	as	if	trying	to	warm	up.
Kisswhere	shot	her	a	jaded	look.	The	damned	barracks	was	hot	as	a	head-shrinker’s	oven.
They	made	a	point	of	ignoring	the	clump	of	boots	as	someone	marched	up	to	their	table.	Badan	Gruk	threw
the	bones—and	achieved	six	out	of	six	in	the	core.
‘Did	you	see	that!	Look!’	Badan’s	smile	was	huge	and	hugely	fake.	‘Look,	you	two,	look	at	that	cast!’
But	they	were	looking	at	him	instead,	because	cheaters	couldn’t	stand	that	for	long—they’d	twitch,	they’d
bead	up,	they’d	squirrel	on	the	chair.
‘Look!’	he	said	again,	pointing,	but	the	command	sounded	more	like	a	plea,	and	all	at	once	he	sagged	back
and	raised	his	hands.	‘Fingers	clean,	darlings—’
‘That	would	be	a	first,’	said	the	man	standing	now	at	their	table.
Badan	Gruk’s	expression	displayed	hurt	and	innocence,	with	just	a	touch	of	indignation.	‘That	wasn’t	called
for,	 sir.	 You	 saw	 my	 throw—you	 can	 see	 my	 fingers,	 too.	 Clean	 as	 clean	 can	 be.	 No	 gum,	 no	 tar,	 no	 wax.
Soldiers	can’t	be	smelly	or	dirty—it’s	bad	for	morale.’
‘You	sure	about	that?’


Sinter	twisted	in	her	chair.	‘Can	we	help	you,	Lieutenant	Pores?’
The	man’s	eyes	flickered	in	surprise.	‘You	mistake	me,	Sergeant	Sinter.	I	am	Captain—’
‘Kindly	was	pointed	out	to	us,	sir.’
‘I	thought	I	ordered	you	to	cut	your	hair.’
‘We	did,’	said	Kisswhere.	‘It	grew	back.	It’s	a	trait	among	Dal	Honese,	right	in	the	blood,	an	aversion—is
that	the	word,	Sint?	Sure	it	is.	Aversion.	To	bad	haircuts.	We	get	them	and	our	hair	insists	on	growing	back	to
what	looks	better.	Happens	overnight,	sir.’
‘You	might	be	comfortable,’	said	Pores,	‘believing	that	I’m	not	Captain	Kindly;	that	I’m	not,	in	fact,	the	man
who	was	pointed	out	to	you.	But	can	you	be	certain	that	the	right	one	was	pointed	out	to	you?	If	Lieutenant
Pores	was	doing	the	pointing,	for	example.	He’s	one	for	jokes	in	bad	taste.	Infamous	for	it,	in	fact.	He	could
have	elected	to	take	advantage	of	you—it’s	a	trait	of	his,	one	suspects.	In	the	blood,	as	it	were.’
‘So,’	asked	Sinter,	‘who	might	he	have	pointed	to,	sir?’
‘Why,	anyone	at	all.’
‘But	Lieutenant	Pores	isn’t	a	woman	now,	is	she?’
‘Of	course	not,	but—’
‘It	was	a	woman,’	continued	Sinter,	‘who	did	the	pointing	out.’
‘Ah,	 but	 she	 might	 have	 been	 pointing	 to	 Lieutenant	 Pores,	 since	 you	 asked	 about	 whoever	 was	 your
immediate	superior.	Well,’	said	Pores,	‘now	that	that’s	cleared	up,	I	need	to	check	if	you	two	women	have	put
on	the	weight	you	were	ordered	to.’
Kisswhere	and	Sinter	both	leaned	back	to	regard	him.
The	man	gave	them	a	bright	smile.
‘Sir,’	said	Sinter,	‘how	precisely	do	you	intend	to	do	that?’
The	 smile	 was	 replaced	 by	 an	 expression	 of	 shock.	 ‘Do	 you	 imagine	 your	 captain	 to	 be	 some	 dirty	 old
codger,	Sergeant?	I	certainly	hope	not!	No,	you	will	come	to	my	office	at	the	ninth	bell	tonight.	You	will	strip
down	to	your	undergarments	in	the	outer	office.	When	you	are	ready,	you	are	to	knock	and	upon	hearing	my
voice	you	are	to	enter	immediately.	Am	I	understood,	soldiers?’
‘Yes	sir,’	said	Sinter.
‘Until	then.’
The	officer	marched	off.
‘How	long,’	asked	Kisswhere	after	he’d	left	the	barracks,	‘are	we	going	to	run	with	this,	Sint?’
‘Early	 days	 yet,’	 she	 smiled,	 collecting	 the	 bones.	 ‘Badan,	 since	 you’re	 out	 of	 the	 game	 for	 being	 too
obvious,	I	need	you	to	do	a	chore	for	me—well,	not	much	of	a	chore—anyway,	I	need	you	to	go	out	into	the
city	and	find	me	two	of	the	fattest,	ugliest	whores	you	can.’
‘I	don’t	like	where	this	is	all	going,’	Badan	Gruk	muttered.
‘Listen	to	you,’	chided	Sinter,	‘you’re	getting	old.’
	
‘What	did	she	say?’
Sandalath	Drukorlat	scowled.	‘She	wondered	why	we’d	waited	so	long.’
Withal	grunted.	‘That	woman,	Sand	.	.	.’
‘Yes.’	She	paused	just	inside	the	doorway	and	glared	at	the	three	Nachts	huddled	beneath	the	window	sill.
Their	 long	 black,	 muscled	 arms	 were	 wrapped	 about	 one	 another,	 forming	 a	 clump	 of	 limbs	 and	 torsos	 from
which	three	blunt	heads	made	an	uneven	row,	eyes	thinned	and	darting	with	suspicion.	‘What’s	with	them?’
‘I	think	they’re	coming	with	us,’	Withal	replied.	‘Only,	of	course,	they	don’t	know	where	we’re	going.’
‘Tie	them	up.	Lock	them	up—do	something.	Just	keep	them	here,	husband.	They’re	grotesque.’
‘They’re	not	my	pets,’	he	said.
She	crossed	her	arms.	‘Really?	Then	why	do	they	spend	all	their	time	under	your	feet?’
‘Honestly,	I	have	no	idea.’
‘Who	do	they	belong	to?’
He	studied	them	for	a	long	moment.	Not	one	of	the	Nachts	would	meet	his	eyes.	It	was	pathetic.
‘Withal.’
‘All	right.	I	think	they’re	Mael’s	pets.’
‘Mael!?’


‘Aye.	I	was	praying	to	him,	you	see.	And	they	showed	up.	On	the	island.	Or	maybe	they	showed	up	before
I	started	praying—I	can’t	recall.	But	they	got	me	off	that	island,	and	that	was	Mael’s	doing.’
‘Then	send	them	back	to	him!’
‘That	doesn’t	seem	to	be	the	way	praying	works,	Sand.’
‘Mother	bless	us,’	she	sighed,	striding	forward.	‘Pack	up—we’re	leaving	tonight.’
‘tonight?	It’ll	be	dark,	Sand!’
She	gave	him	the	same	glare	she’d	given	Rind,	Pule	and	Mape.
Dark,	aye.	Never	mind.
The	worst	of	it	was,	in	turning	away,	he	caught	the	looks	of	sympathy	in	the	Nachts’	beady	eyes,	tracking
him	like	mourners	at	a	funeral.
Well,	a	man	learns	to	take	sympathy	where	he	can	get	it.
	
‘If	this	is	a	new	warren,’	whispered	Grub,	‘then	I	think	I’d	rather	we	kept	the	old	ones.’
Sinn	 was	 quiet,	 as	 she	 had	 been	 for	 most	 of	 what	 must	 have	 been	 an	 entire	 day,	 maybe	 longer,	 as	 they
wandered	this	terrible	world.
Windswept	desert	stretched	out	in	all	directions.	The	road	they	walked	cut	across	it	straight	as	a	spear.	Here
and	there,	off	to	one	side,	they	spied	fields	of	stones	that	might	have	once	been	dwellings,	and	the	remnants	of
sun-fired	mud-brick	pen	or	garden	walls,	but	nothing	grew	here,	nothing	at	all.	The	air	was	acrid,	smelling	of
burning	pitch—and	that	was	not	too	surprising,	as	black	pillars	of	smoke	stalked	the	horizons.
On	the	road	itself,	constructed	of	crushed	rock	and,	possibly,	glass,	they	came	upon	scenes	of	devastation.
Burnt-out	 hulks	 of	 carriages	 and	 wagons,	 scorched	 clothing	 and	 shattered	 furniture.	 Fire-blackened	 corpses,
limbs	curled	like	tree	roots	and	hands	like	bird	feet,	mouths	agape	and	hollow	sockets	staring	at	the	empty	sky.
Twisted	pieces	of	metal	lay	scattered	about,	none	remotely	identifiable	to	Grub.
Breathing	 made	 his	 throat	 sore,	 and	 the	 bitter	 chill	 of	 the	 morning	 had	 given	 way	 to	 blistering	 heat.	 Eyes
stinging,	feet	dragging,	he	followed	in	Sinn’s	wake	until	her	shadow	lengthened	to	a	stretched-out	shape	painted
in	 pitch,	 and	 to	 his	 eyes	 it	 was	 as	 if	 he	 was	 looking	 down	 upon	 the	 woman	 she	 would	 one	 day	 become.	 He
realized	that	his	fear	of	her	was	growing—and	her	silence	was	making	it	worse.
‘Will	you	now	be	mute	to	me	as	well?’	he	asked	her.
She	glanced	back	over	her	shoulder.	Momentarily.
It	would	soon	grow	cold	again—he’d	lost	too	much	fluid	to	survive	a	night	of	shivering.	‘We	need	to	camp,
Sinn.	Make	a	fire—’
She	barked	a	laugh,	but	did	not	turn	round.	‘Fire,’	she	said.	‘Yes.	Fire.	Tell	me,	Grub,	what	do	you	believe
in?’
‘What?’
‘Some	 things	 are	 more	 real	 than	 others.	 For	 everyone.	 Each	 one,	 different,	 always	 different.	 What’s	 the
most	real	to	you?’
‘We	can’t	survive	this	place,	that’s	what’s	most	real,	Sinn.	We	need	water.	Food.	Shelter.’
He	 saw	 her	 nod.	 ‘That’s	 what	 this	 warren	 is	 telling	 us,	 Grub.	 Just	 that.	 What	 you	 believe	 has	 to	 do	 with
surviving.	 It	 doesn’t	 go	 any	 further,	 does	 it?	 What	 if	 I	 told	 you	 that	 it	 used	 to	 be	 that	 for	 almost	 everybody?
Before	the	cities,	before	people	invented	being	rich.’
‘Being	rich?	I	don’t	know	what	you’re	talking	about.’
‘Before	some	people	found	other	things	to	believe	in.	Before	they	made	those	things	more	real	than	anything
else.	 Before	 they	 decided	 it	 was	 all	 right	 even	 to	 kill	 for	 them.	 Or	 enslave	 people.	 Or	 keep	 them	 stupid	 and
poor.’	She	shot	him	a	look.	‘Did	you	know	I	had	a	Tanno	tutor?	A	Spiritwalker.’
‘I	don’t	know	anything	about	them.	Seven	Cities	priests,	right?’
‘He	once	told	me	that	an	untethered	soul	can	drown	in	wisdom.’
‘What?’
‘Wisdom	 grows	 by	 stripping	 away	 beliefs,	 until	 the	 last	 tether	 is	 cut,	 and	 suddenly	 you	 float	 free.	 Only,
because	your	eyes	are	wide	open,	you	see	right	away	that	you	can’t	float	in	what	you’re	in.	You	can	only	sink.
That’s	 why	 the	 meanest	 religions	 work	 so	 hard	 at	 keeping	 their	 followers	 ignorant.	 Knowledge	 is	 poison.
Wisdom	is	depthless.	Staying	ignorant	keeps	you	in	the	shallows.	Every	Tanno	one	day	takes	a	final	spiritwalk.
They	cut	the	last	tether,	and	the	soul	can’t	go	back.	When	that	happens,	the	other	Tannos	mourn,	because	they


know	that	the	spiritwalker	has	drowned.’
His	 mouth	 was	 too	 dry,	 his	 throat	 too	 sore,	 but	 even	 if	 that	 had	 been	 otherwise,	 he	 knew	 he	 would	 have
nothing	to	say	to	any	of	that.	He	knew,	after	all,	about	his	own	ignorance.
‘Look	around,	Grub.	See?	There	are	no	gifts	here.	Look	at	these	stupid	bodies	and	their	stupid	wagonloads
of	furniture.	The	last	thing	that	was	real	for	them,	the	only	thing,	was	fire.’
His	attention	was	drawn	to	a	dust-cloud,	rising	in	a	slanted	shroud	of	gold.	Something	was	on	a	track	that
would	converge	with	this	road.	A	herd?	An	army?
‘Fire	is	not	the	gift	you	think	it	is,	Grub.’
‘We’ll	die	tonight	without	it.’
‘We	need	to	stay	on	this	road.’
‘Why?’
‘To	find	out	where	it	leads.’
‘We’ll	die	here,	then.’
‘This	land,	Grub,’	she	said,	‘has	generous	memories.’
	
The	 sun	 was	 low	 by	 the	 time	 the	 army	 arrived.	 Horse-drawn	 chariots	 and	 massive	 wagons	 burdened	 with
plunder.	The	warriors	were	dark-skinned,	tall	and	thin,	bedecked	in	bronze	armour.	Grub	thought	there	might	be
a	 thousand	 of	 them,	 maybe	 more.	 He	 saw	 spearmen,	 archers,	 and	 what	 must	 be	 the	 equivalent	 of	 heavy
infantry,	armed	with	sickle-bladed	axes	and	short	curved	swords.
They	cut	across	the	track	of	the	road	as	if	blind	to	it,	and	as	Grub	stared	he	was	startled	to	realize	that	the
figures	and	their	horses	and	chariots	were	vaguely	transparent.	They	are	ghosts.	‘These,’	he	said	to	Sinn	who
stood	beside	him,	‘are	this	land’s	memories?’
‘Yes.’
‘Can	they	see	us?’
She	 pointed	 at	 one	 chariot	 that	 had	 thundered	 past	 only	 to	 turn	 round	 at	 the	 urging	 of	 the	 man	 behind	 the
driver,	and	 was	 now	 drawing	 up	 opposite	 them.	 ‘See	 him—he’s	 a	 priest.	 He	 can’t	 see	 us,	 but	 he	 senses	 us.
Holiness	isn’t	always	in	a	place,	Grub.	Sometimes	it’s	what’s	passing	through.’
He	shivered,	hugged	himself.	‘Stop	this,	Sinn.	We’re	not	gods.’
‘No,	we’re	not.	We’re’—and	she	laughed—‘more	like	divine	messengers.’
The	priest	had	leapt	down	from	the	chariot—Grub	could	now	see	the	old	blood	splashed	across	the	spokes
of	the	high	wheels,	and	saw	where	blades	were	fitted	in	times	of	battle,	projecting	out	from	the	hubs.	A	mass
charge	by	such	instruments	of	war	would	deliver	terrible	slaughter.
The	hawk-faced	man	was	edging	closer,	groping	like	a	blind	man.
Grub	made	to	step	back	but	Sinn	caught	him	by	the	arm	and	held	him	fast.
‘Don’t,’	she	murmured.	‘Let	him	touch	the	divine,	Grub.	Let	him	receive	his	gift	of	wisdom.’
The	priest	had	raised	his	hands.	Beyond,	the	entire	army	had	halted,	and	Grub	saw	what	must	be	a	king	or
commander—perched	on	a	huge,	ornate	chariot—drawing	up	to	observe	the	strange	antics	of	his	priest.
‘We	can	give	him	no	wisdom,’	Grub	said.	‘Sinn—’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool.	Just	stand	here.	Wait.	We	don’t	have	to	do	anything.’
Those	 two	 outstretched	 hands	 came	 closer.	 The	 palms	 were	 speckled	 with	 dried	 blood.	 There	 were,
however,	no	calluses	upon	them.	Grub	hissed,	‘He	is	no	warrior.’
‘No,’	Sinn	agreed,	‘but	he	so	likes	the	blood.’
The	palms	hovered,	slipped	forward,	and	unerringly	settled	upon	their	brows.
Grub	saw	the	priest’s	eyes	widen,	and	he	knew	at	once	that	the	man	was	seeing	through—through	to	this
road	and	its	litter	of	destruction—to	an	age	either	long	before	or	yet	to	come:	the	age	in	which	Grub	and	Sinn
existed,	solid	and	real.
The	priest	lurched	back	and	howled.
Sinn’s	laughter	was	harsh.	‘He	saw	what	was	real!	He	saw!’	She	spun	to	face	Grub,	her	eyes	bright.	‘The
future	is	a	desert!	And	a	road!	And	no	end	to	the	stupid	wars,	the	insane	slaughter—’	She	whirled	back	and
jabbed	a	finger	at	the	wailing	priest	who	was	staggering	back	to	his	chariot.	‘He	believed	in	the	sun	god!	He
believed	in	immortality—of	glory,	of	wealth—golden	fields,	lush	gardens,	sweet	rains	and	sweet	rivers	flowing
without	 cease!	 He	 believed	 his	 people	 are—hah!—chosen!	 They	 all	 do,	 don’t	 you	 see?	 They	 do,	 we	 do,


everyone	 does!	 See	 our	 gift,	 Grub?	 See	 what	 knowledge	 yields	 him?	 The	 sanctuary	 of	 ignorance—is
shattered!	Garden	into	wilderness,	cast	out	into	the	seas	of	wisdom!	Is	not	our	message	divine?’
Grub	did	not	think	he	had	any	tears	left	in	him.	He	was	wrong.
The	 army	 and	 its	 priest	 and	 its	 king	 all	 fled,	 wild	 as	 the	 wind.	 But,	 before	 they	 did,	 slaves	 appeared	 and
raised	a	cairn	of	stones.	Which	they	then	surrounded	with	offerings:	jars	of	beer	and	wine	and	honey,	dates,
figs,	loaves	of	bread	and	two	throat-cut	goats	spilling	blood	into	the	sand.
The	feast	was	ghostly,	but	Sinn	assured	Grub	that	it	would	sustain	them.	Divine	gifts,	she	said,	were	not	gifts
at	all.	The	receiver	must	pay	for	them.
‘And	he	has	done	that,	has	he	not,	Grub?	Oh,	he	has	done	that.’
	
The	 Errant	 stepped	 into	 the	 vast,	 impossible	 chamber.	 Gone	 now	 the	 leisure	 of	 reminiscences,	 the	 satisfied
stirring	 of	 brighter	 days	 long	 since	 withered	 colourless,	 almost	 dead.	 Knuckles	 trailed	 a	 step	 behind	 him,	 as
befitted	his	role	of	old	and	his	role	to	come.
She	 was	 awake,	 hunched	 over	 a	 scattering	 of	 bones.	 Trapped	 in	 games	 of	 chance	 and	 mischance,	 the
brilliant,	 confounding	 offerings	 of	 Sechul	 Lath,	 Lord	 of	 the	 Hold	 of	 Chance—the	 Toppler,	 the	 Conniver,	 the
Wastrel	 of	 Ruin.	 Too	 foolish	 to	 realize	 that	 she	 was	 challenging,	 in	 the	 Lord’s	 cast,	 the	 very	 laws	 of	 the
universe	which	were,	in	truth,	far	less	predictable	than	any	mortal	might	believe.
The	Errant	walked	up	and	with	one	boot	kicked	the	ineffable	pattern	aside.
Her	 face	 stretched	 into	 a	 mask	 of	 rage.	 She	 reared,	 hands	 lifting—and	 then	 froze	 as	 she	 fixed	 her	 eyes
upon	the	Errant.
‘Kilmandaros.’
He	saw	the	flicker	of	fear	in	her	gaze.
‘I	have	come,’	he	said	to	her,	‘to	speak	of	dragons.’


Chapter	Eight
In	 my	 lifelong	 study	 of	 the	 scores	 of	 species	 of	 ants	 to	 be	 found	 in	 the	 tropical	 forests	 of	 Dal
Hon,	I	am	led	to	the	conviction	that	all	forms	of	life	are	engaged	in	a	struggle	to	survive,	and	that
within	each	species	there	exists	a	range	of	natural	but	variable	proclivities,	of	physical	condition
and	 of	 behaviour,	 which	 in	 turn	 weighs	 for	 or	 against	 in	 the	 battle	 to	 survive	 and	 procreate.
Further,	it	is	my	suspicion	that	in	the	act	of	procreation,	such	traits	are	passed	on.	By	extension,
one	can	see	that	ill	traits	reduce	the	likelihood	of	both	survival	and	procreation.	On	the	basis	of
these	 notions,	 I	 wish	 to	 propose	 to	 my	 fellow	 scholars	 at	 this	 noble	 gathering	 a	 law	 of	 survival
that	pertains	to	all	forms	of	life.	But	before	I	do	so,	I	must	add	one	more	caveat,	drawn	from	the
undeniable	behavioural	characteristics	of,	in	my	instance	of	speciality,	ants.	To	whit,	success	of
one	form	of	life	more	often	than	not	initiates	devastating	population	collapse	among	competitors,
and	 indeed,	 sometimes	 outright	 extinction.	 And	 that	 such	 annihilation	 of	 rivals	 may	 in	 fact	 be	 a
defining	feature	of	success.
Thus,	my	colleagues,	I	wish	to	propose	a	mode	of	operation	among	all	forms	of	life,	which	I
humbly	call—in	my	four-volume	treatise—‘The	Betrayal	of	the	Fittest’.
OBSESSIONAL	S CROLLS
S IXTH	DAY	PROCEEDINGS
ADDRESS	OF	SKAVAT 	GILL
UNTA,	MALAZAN	EM PIRE,	1097	BURN’S	SLEEP

	
As	if	riding	a	scent	on	the	wind;	or	through	the	tremble	in	the	ground	underfoot;	or	perhaps	the	air	itself	carried
alien	 thoughts,	 thoughts	 angry,	 malign—whatever	 the	 cause,	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 knew	 they	 were	 now
being	 hunted.	 They	 had	 no	 patience	 for	 Kalyth	 and	 her	 paltry	 pace,	 and	 it	 was	 Gunth	 Mach	 whose	 posture
slowly	 shifted,	 spine	 drawing	 almost	 horizontal	 to	 the	 ground—as	 if	 in	 the	 course	 of	 a	 single	 morning	 some
force	 reshaped	 her	 skeleton,	 muscles	 and	 joints—and	 before	 the	 sun	 stood	 high	 she	 had	 gathered	 up	 the
Destriant	 and	 set	 her	 down	 behind	 the	 humped	 shoulder-blades,	 where	 the	 dorsal	 spikes	 had	 flattened	 and
where	 the	 thick	 hide	 had	 formed	 something	 like	 a	 saddle	 seat.	 And	 Kalyth	 found	 herself	 riding	 a	 K’Chain
Che’Malle,	 the	 sensation	 far	 more	 fluid	 than	 that	 she	 recalled	 of	 sitting	 on	 the	 back	 of	 a	 horse,	 so	 that	 it
seemed	they	flowed	over	the	broken	scrubland,	at	a	speed	somewhere	between	a	canter	and	a	gallop.	Gunth
Mach	 made	 use	 of	 her	 forelimbs	 only	 as	 they	 skirted	 slopes	 or	 ascended	 the	 occasional	 low	 hill;	 mostly	 the
scarred,	scale-armoured	arms	remained	drawn	up	like	the	pincers	of	a	mantis.
The	K’ell	Hunters	Rythok	and	Kor	Thuran	flanked	her,	with	Sag’Churok	almost	a	third	of	a	league	ahead—
even	 from	 her	 vantage	 point	 atop	 Gunth	 Mach,	 Kalyth	 rarely	 caught	 sight	 of	 the	 huge	 creature,	 a	 speck	 of
motion	betrayed	only	by	its	shadow.	All	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	now	bore	on	their	scaled	hides	the	mottled
hues	of	the	ground	and	its	scant	plant	cover.
And	yet	.	.	.	and	yet	.	.	.	they	were	afraid.
Not	of	those	human	warriors	who	pursued	them—that	was	little	more	than	an	inconvenience,	an	obstacle	to
their	mission.	No,	instead,	the	fear	within	these	terrible	demons	was	deeper,	visceral.	It	rode	out	from	Gunth’an
Acyl,	the	Matron,	in	ice-laden	ripples,	crowding	up	against	each	and	every	one	of	her	children.	The	pressure
built,	grinding,	thunderous.
A	war	is	coming.	We	all	know	this.	But	as	to	the	face	of	this	enemy,	I	alone	am	blind.
Destriant—what	does	it	mean	to	be	one?	To	these	creatures?	What	faith	am	I	supposed	to	shape?	I
have	 no	 history	 to	 draw	 from,	 no	 knowledge	 of	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 legends	 or	 myths—assuming	 they
have	any.	Gunth’an	Acyl	has	fixed	her	eyes	upon	humankind.	She	would	pillage	the	beliefs	of	my	kind.
She	is	indeed	mad!	I	can	give	them	nothing!


She	would	pluck	not	a	single	fragment	from	her	own	people.	They	were	all	dead,	after	all.	Betrayed	by	their
own	faiths—that	the	rains	would	always	come;	that	the	land	would	ever	provide;	that	children	would	be	born
and	mothers	and	aunts	would	raise	them;	that	there	would	be	campfires	and	singing	and	dancing	and	loves	and
passions	and	laughter.	All	lies,	delusions,	false	hopes—there	was	no	point	in	stirring	those	ashes.
What	else	was	left	to	her,	then,	to	make	this	glorious	new	religion?	When	countless	thousands	of	lizard	eyes
fixed	unblinking	on	her,	what	could	she	offer	them?
They	had	travelled	east	for	the	morning	but	were	now	angling	southward	once	more,	and	Kalyth	sensed	a
gradual	 slowing	 of	 pace,	 and	 as	 they	 slipped	 over	 a	 low	 rise	 she	 caught	 sight	 of	 Sag’Churok,	 stationary	 and
apparently	watching	their	approach.
Something	had	happened.	Something	had	changed.
A	 gleam	 of	 weathered	 white—the	 trunk	 of	 a	 fallen	 tree?—amidst	 the	 low	 grasses	 directly	 ahead,	 and	 for
the	 first	 time	 Kalyth	 was	 jolted	 as	 Gunth	 Mach	 leapt	 to	 one	 side	 to	 avoid	 it.	 As	 they	 passed	 the	 object,	 the
Destriant	saw	that	it	was	a	long	bone.	Whatever	it	had	belonged	to,	she	realized,	must	have	been	enormous.
The	other	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	reacting	in	a	like	manner	as	each	came	upon	another	skeletal	remnant,
dancing	away	as	if	the	splintered	bones	exuded	some	poison	aura	that	assailed	their	senses.	Kalyth	saw	that
the	K’ell’s	flanks	glistened,	dripping	with	oil	from	their	glands,	and	so	she	knew	that	they	were	all	afflicted	by
an	extremity	of	emotion—terror,	rage?	She	had	no	means	of	reading	such	things.
Was	this	yet	another	killing	field?	She	wasn’t	sure,	but	something	whispered	to	her	that	all	of	these	broken
bones	 belonged	 to	 a	 single,	 gargantuan	 beast.	 A	 dragon?	 Think	 of	 the	 Nests,	 the	 Rooted.	 Carved	 in	 the
likeness	of	dragons	.	.	.	dawn’s	breath,	can	this	be	the	religion	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle?	The	worship
of	dragons?
It	made	a	kind	of	sense—were	these	reptiles	not	physically	similar	to	such	mythical	beasts?	Though	she	had
never	seen	a	dragon,	even	among	her	own	people	there	were	legends,	and	in	fact	she	recalled	one	tale	told	to
her	 as	 a	 child—a	 fragmented,	 confused	 story,	 which	 made	 its	 recounting	 rare	 since	 it	 possessed	 little
entertainment	 value.	 ‘Dragons	 swim	 the	 sky.	 Fangs	 slash	 and	 blood	 rains	 down.	 The	 dragons	 warred
with	one	another,	scores	upon	scores,	and	the	earth	below,	and	all	things	that	dwelt	upon	it,	could	do
naught	but	cower.	The	breath	of	the	dragons	made	a	conflagration	of	the	sky	.	.	.’
They	 arrived	 where	 waited	 Sag’Churok.	 As	 soon	 as	 Gunth	 Mach	 halted,	 Kalyth	 slipped	 down,	 her	 legs
almost	folding	under	her.	Righting	herself,	she	looked	around.
Skull	fragments.	Massive	fangs	chipped	and	split.	It	was	as	if	the	creature	had	simply	blown	apart.
Kalyth	looked	upward	and	saw,	directly	overhead,	a	dark	speck,	wheeling,	circling.	He	shows	himself.	This,
here,	 this	 is	 important.	 She	 finally	 understood	 what	 had	 so	 agitated	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 Not	 fear.	 Not
rage.	Anticipation.	They	expect	something	from	me.
She	 fought	 down	 a	 moment	 of	 panic.	 Mouth	 dry,	 feeling	 strangely	 displaced	 inside	 her	 own	 body,	 she
wandered	into	the	midst	of	the	bone-field.	There	were	gouges	scored	into	the	shattered	plates	of	the	dragon’s
skull,	the	tracks	of	bites	or	talons.	She	found	a	dislodged	tooth	and	pulled	it	up	from	its	web	of	grasses,	heavy
as	 a	 club	 in	 her	 hands.	 Sun-bleached	 and	 polished	 on	 one	 side,	 pitted	 and	 stained	 amber	 on	 the	 other.	 She
thought	she	might	laugh—a	part	of	her	had	never	even	believed	in	dragons.
The	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 remained	 at	 a	 respectful	 distance,	 watching	 her.	 What	 do	 you	 want	 of	 me?
Should	I	pray?	Raise	a	cairn	from	these	bones?	Let	blood?	Her	searching	gaze	caught	something—a	large
fragment	of	the	back	of	the	skull,	and	embedded	in	it	.	.	.	she	walked	closer,	crouched	down.
A	 fang,	 much	 like	 the	 one	 she	 still	 carried,	 only	 larger,	 and	 strangely	 discoloured.	 The	 sun	 had	 failed	 to
bleach	this	one.	The	wind	and	the	grit	it	carried	had	not	pitted	its	enamel.	The	rain	had	not	polished	its	surface.
It	had	been	torn	from	its	root,	so	deeply	had	it	impaled	the	dragon’s	skull.	And	it	was	the	hue	of	rust.
She	set	down	the	tooth	she	had	brought	over,	and	knelt.	Reaching	out,	she	ran	her	fingers	along	the	reddish
fang.	 Cold	 as	 metal,	 a	 chill	 defying	 the	 sun	 and	 its	 blistering	 heat.	 Its	 texture	 reminded	 Kalyth	 of	 petrified
wood.	 She	 wondered	 what	 creature	 this	 could	 have	 belonged	 to—an	 iron	 dragon?	 But	 how	 can	 that	 be?
She	attempted	to	remove	the	tooth,	but	it	would	not	budge.
Sag’Churok	spoke	in	her	mind,	in	a	voice	strangely	faint.	‘Destriant,	in	this	place	it	is	difficult	to	reach
you.	Your	mind.	The	otataral	would	deny	us.’
‘The	what?’
‘There	 is	 no	 single	 god.	 There	 can	 never	 be	 a	 single	 god.	 For	 there	 to	 be	 one	 face,	 there	 must	 be


another.	The	Nah’ruk	did	not	see	it	in	such	terms,	of	course.	They	spoke	of	forces	in	opposition,	of	the
necessity	of	tension.	All	that	binds	must	be	bound	to	two	foci,	at	the	minimum.	Even	should	a	god	exist
alone,	isolated	in	its	perfection,	it	will	come	to	comprehend	the	need	for	a	force	outside	itself,	beyond
its	omniscience.	If	all	remains	within,	Destriant—exclusively	within,	that	is—then	there	is	no	reason	for
anything	to	exist,	no	reason	for	creation	itself.	If	all	is	ordered,	untouched	by	chaos,	then	the	universe
that	 was,	 is	 and	 will	 ever	 be,	 is	 without	 meaning.	 Without	 value.	 The	 god	 would	 quickly	 comprehend,
then,	 that	 its	 own	 existence	 is	 also	 without	 meaning,	 and	 so	 it	 would	 cease.	 It	 would	 succumb	 to	 the
logic	of	despair.’
She	 was	 studying	 the	 rusty	 fang	 as	 Sag’Churok’s	 words	 whispered	 through	 her	 head.	 ‘I’m	 sorry,’	 she
sighed,	‘I	don’t	understand.’	But	then,	maybe	she	did.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	resumed:	‘In	 its	 knowledge,	 the	 god	 would	 understand	 the	 necessity	 for	 that
which	lies	outside	itself,	beyond	its	direct	control.	In	that	tension	meaning	will	be	found.	In	that	struggle
value	is	born.	If	it	suits	you	and	your	kind,	Destriant,	fill	the	ether	with	gods,	goddesses,	First	Heroes,
spirits	and	demons.	Kneel	to	one	or	many,	but	never—never,	Kalyth—hold	to	a	belief	that	but	one	god
exists,	 that	 all	 that	 is	 resides	 within	 that	 god.	 Should	 you	 hold	 such	 a	 belief,	 then	 by	 every	 path	 of
reasoning	 that	 follows,	 you	 cannot	 but	 conclude	 that	 your	 one	 god	 is	 cursed,	 a	 thing	 of	 impossible
aspirations	and	deafening	injustice,	whimsical	in	its	cruelty,	blind	to	mercy	and	devoid	of	pity.	Do	not
misunderstand	me.	Choose	to	live	within	one	god	as	you	like,	but	in	so	doing	be	certain	to	acknowledge
that	there	is	an	“other”,	an	existence	beyond	your	god.	And	if	your	god	has	a	face,	then	so	too	does
that	other.	In	such	comprehension,	Destriant,	will	you	come	to	grasp	the	freedom	that	lies	at	the	heart	of
all	 life;	 that	 choice	 is	 the	 singular	 moral	 act	 and	 all	 one	 chooses	 can	 only	 be	 considered	 in	 a	 moral
context	if	that	choice	is	free.’
Freedom.	That	notion	mocked	her.	‘What—what	is	this	“otataral”	you	spoke	of,	Sag’Churok?’
‘We	 are	 reviled	 for	 revealing	 the	 face	 of	 that	 other	 god—that	 god	 of	 negation.	 Your	 kind	 have	 a
flawed	 notion	 of	 magic.	 You	 cut	 the	 veins	 of	 other	 worlds	 and	 drink	 of	 the	 blood,	 and	 this	 is	 your
sorcery.	But	you	do	not	understand.	All	life	is	sorcery.	In	its	very	essence,	the	soul	is	magical,	and	each
process	 of	 chemistry,	 of	 obeisance	 and	 cooperation,	 of	 surrender	 and	 of	 struggle—at	 every	 scale
conceivable—is	a	consort	of	sorcery.	Destroy	magic	and	you	destroy	life.’	There	was	a	long	pause,	and
then	 a	 flood	 of	 bitter	 amusement	 flowed	 through	 Kalyth.	 ‘When	 we	 kill,	 we	 kill	 magic.	 Consider	 the
magnitude	of	that	crime,	if	you	dare.
‘What	 is	 otataral,	 you	 ask?	 Otataral	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 magic.	 Negation	 to	 creation,	 absence	 to
presence.	 If	 life	 is	 your	 god,	 then	 otataral	 is	 the	 other	 god,	 and	 that	 god	 is	 death.	 But,	 please
understand,	 it	 is	 not	 an	 enemy.	 It	 is	 the	 necessary	 manifestation	 of	 a	 force	 in	 opposition.	 Both	 are
essential,	and	together	they	are	bound	in	the	nature	of	existence	itself.	We	are	reviled	for	revealing	the
truth.
‘The	lesser	creatures	of	this	and	every	other	world	do	not	question	any	of	this.	Their	comprehension
is	implicit.	When	we	kill	the	beasts	living	on	this	plain,	when	we	close	our	jaws	about	the	back	of	the
neck.	 When	 we	 grip	 hard	 to	 choke	 off	 the	 wind	 pipe.	 When	 we	 do	 all	 this,	 we	 watch,	 with	 intimate
compassion,	with	profound	understanding,	the	light	of	life	leave	our	victim’s	eyes.	We	see	the	struggle
give	way	to	acceptance,	and	in	our	souls,	Destriant,	we	weep.’
Still	 she	 knelt,	 but	 now	 there	 were	 tears	 streaming	 down	 her	 face,	 as	 all	 that	 Sag’Churok	 felt	 was
channelled	through	her,	cruel	as	sepsis,	sinking	deep	into	her	own	soul.
‘The	 slayer,	 the	 Otataral	 Dragon,	 has	 been	 bound.	 But	 it	 will	 be	 freed.	 They	 will	 free	 it.	 For	 they
believe	that	they	can	control	it.	They	cannot.	Destriant,	will	you	now	give	us	the	face	of	our	god?’
She	whirled	round.	‘How	am	I	supposed	to	do	that?’	she	demanded.	‘Is	this	Otataral	Dragon	your	god?’
‘No,	Destriant,’	Sag’Churok	replied	in	sorrow,	‘it	is	the	other.’
She	 ran	 her	 hands	 through	 the	 brittle	 tangles	 of	 her	 hair.	 ‘What	 you	 want	 .	 .	 .	 that	 face.’	 She	 shook	 her
head.	‘It	can’t	be	dead.	It	must	be	alive,	a	living	thing.	You	built	keeps	in	the	shape	of	dragons,	but	that	faith	is
ruined,	destroyed	by	failure.	You	were	betrayed,	Sag’Churok.	You	all	were.’	She	gestured,	encompassing	this
killing	field.	‘Look	here—the	“other”	killed	your	god.’
All	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	facing	her	now.
‘My	 own	 people	 were	 betrayed	 as	 well.	 It	 seems,’	 she	 added	 wryly,	 ‘we	 share	 something	 after	 all.	 It’s	 a


beginning,	of	sorts.’	She	scanned	the	area	once	more.	‘There	is	nothing	here,	for	us.’
‘You	misunderstand,	Destriant.	It	is	here.	It	is	all	here.’
‘What	do	you	want	me	to	do?’	She	was	close	to	tears	yet	again,	but	this	time	from	helplessness.	‘They’re
just	.	.	.	bones.’
She	started	as	Rythok	stepped	forward,	massive	blades	lifting	threateningly.
Some	silent	command	visibly	battered	the	Hunter	and	he	halted,	trembling,	jaws	half	agape.
If	she	failed,	she	realized,	they	might	well	kill	her.	Cut	her	down	as	they	had	done	Redmask,	the	poor	fool.
These	 creatures	 managed	 failure	 no	 better	 than	 humans.	 ‘I’m	 sorry,’	 she	 whispered.	 ‘But	 I	 don’t	 believe	 in
anything.	 Not	 gods,	 not	 anything.	 Oh,	 they	 might	 exist,	 but	 about	 us	 they	 don’t	 care.	 Why	 should	 they?	 We
destroy	to	create.	But	we	deny	the	value	of	everything	we	destroy,	which	serves	to	make	its	destruction	easier
on	our	consciences.	All	that	we	reshape	to	suit	us	is	diminished,	its	original	beauty	for	ever	lost.	We	have	no
value	system	that	does	not	beggar	the	world,	that	does	not	slaughter	the	beasts	we	share	it	with—as	if	we	are
the	gods.’	She	sank	back	down	on	to	her	knees	and	clutched	the	sides	of	her	head.	‘Where	are	these	thoughts
coming	from?	It	was	all	so	much	simpler,	once,	here—in	my	mind—so	much	simpler.	Spirits	below,	I	so	want
to	go	back!’
She	 only	 realized	 she	 had	 been	 beating	 at	 her	 temples	 when	 two	 massive	 hands	 grasped	 her	 wrists	 and
pulled	down	her	arms.	She	stared	up	into	Gunth	Mach’s	emerald	eyes.
And	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 the	 Daughter	 spoke	 inside	 her	 mind.	 ‘Release,	 now.	 Breathe	 deep	 my	 breath,
Destriant.’
Kalyth’s	desperate	gasping	now	caught	a	strange,	pungent	scent,	emanating	from	Gunth	Mach.
The	world	spun.	She	sagged	back,	sprawled	to	the	ground.	As	something	unfolded	in	her	skull	like	an	alien
flower,	virulent,	beguiling—she	lost	grip	of	her	own	body,	was	whipped	away.
And	 found	 herself	 standing	 on	 cold,	 damp	 stone,	 nostrils	 filling	 with	 a	 pungent,	 rank	 stench.	 Her	 eyes
adjusted	to	the	gloom,	and	she	cried	out	and	staggered	back.
A	dragon	reared	above	her,	its	slick	scales	the	colour	of	rust.	Enormous	spikes	pinned	its	forelimbs,	holding
the	creature	up	against	a	massive,	gnarled	tree.	Other	spikes	had	been	driven	into	it	but	the	dragon’s	immense
weight	had	pulled	them	loose.	Its	wedge-shaped	head,	big	as	a	migrant’s	wagon,	hung	down,	streaming	drool.
The	wings	were	crumpled	like	storm-battered	caravan	tents.	Fresh	blood	surrounded	the	base	of	the	tree,	so
that	it	seemed	that	the	entire	edifice	rose	from	a	gleaming	pool.
‘The	slayer,	the	Otataral	Dragon,	has	been	bound.	But	it	will	be	freed	.	.	.’	Sag’Churok’s	words	echoed
in	her	mind.	‘They	will	free	it.’	Who?	No	matter,	she	realized.	It	would	be	done.	This	Otataral	Dragon	would
be	 loosed	 upon	 the	 world,	 upon	 every	 world.	 A	 force	 of	 negation,	 a	 slayer	 of	 magic.	 And	 they	 would	 lose
control	of	it—only	mad	fools	could	believe	they	could	enslave	such	an	entity.
‘Wait,’	she	hissed,	thoughts	racing,	‘wait.	Forces	in	opposition.	Take	away	one—spike	it	to	a	tree—and	the
other	is	lost.	It	cannot	exist,	cannot	survive	looking	across	the	Abyss	and	seeing	nothing,	no	one,	no	foe.	This	is
why	you	have	lost	your	god,	Sag’Churok.	Or,	if	it	still	lives,	it	has	been	driven	into	the	oblivion	of	insanity.	Too
alone.	An	orphan	.	.	.	just	like	me.’
A	revelation,	of	sorts.	What	could	she	make	of	it?
Kalyth	stared	up	at	the	dragon.	‘When	you	are	finally	freed,	then	perhaps	your	“other”	will	return,	to	engage
with	you	once	more.	In	that	eternal	battle.’	But	even	then,	this	scheme	had	failed	before.	It	would	fail	again,
because	it	was	flawed—something	was	wrong,	something	was	.	.	.	broken.	‘Forces	in	opposition,	yes,	that	I
do	understand.	And	we	each	play	our	roles.	We	each	fashion	our	“others”	and	chart	the	course	of	our
lives	as	that	eternal	campaign,	seasons	of	gain,	seasons	of	loss.	Battles	and	wounds	and	triumphs	and
bitter	defeats.	In	comforts	we	fashion	our	strongholds.	In	convictions	we	occupy	our	fortifications.	In
violence	we	forge	our	peace.	In	peace,	we	win	desolation.’
Somewhere	far	behind	her,	Kalyth’s	body	was	lying	on	half-dead	grasses,	cast	down	on	to	the	heart-stone	of
the	Wastelands.	‘It	is	here.	It	is	all	here.’
‘We	are	broken	indeed.	We	are	.	.	.	fallen.’
What	do	to,	then,	when	the	battle	cannot	be	won?	No	answers	burgeoned	before	her.	The	only	truth	rearing
to	confront	her	was	this	blood-soaked	sacrifice,	destined	to	be	un-done.	‘Is	it	true,	then,	that	a	world	without
magic	is	a	dead	world?	Is	this	what	you	promise?	Is	this	to	be	your	future?	But	no,	for	when	you	are	at	last
freed,	then	your	enemy	will	awaken	once	more,	and	the	war	will	resume.’


There	was	no	place	in	that	scheme	for	mortals.	A	new	course	for	the	future	was	needed.	For	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle.	 For	 all	 humans	 in	 every	 empire,	 every	 tribe.	 If	 nothing	 changed	 in	 the	 mortal	 world,	 then	 there
would	be	no	end	to	the	conflicts,	to	the	interminable	forces	in	opposition,	be	they	cultures,	religions,	whatever.
She	had	no	idea	that	intelligent	life	could	be	so	stupid.
‘They	want	a	faith	from	me.	A	religion.	They	want	to	return	to	the	vanity	of	the	righteous.	I	can’t	do	it.	I
can’t.	Rythok	had	better	kill	me,	for	I	will	offer	them	nothing	they	want	to	hear.’
Abruptly,	she	was	staring	up	at	a	cloudless	blue	sky,	heat	rustling	across	her	bare	limbs,	her	face,	the	tracks
of	dried	tears	tight	on	her	cheeks.	She	sat	up.	Her	muscles	ached.	A	sour	taste	thickened	her	tongue.
Still	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	faced	her.
‘Very	well,’	she	said,	rising	to	her	feet.	‘I	give	you	this.	Find	your	faith	in	each	other.	Look	no	further.	The
gods	will	war,	and	all	that	we	do	will	remain	beneath	their	notice.	Stay	low.	Move	quietly.	Out	of	sight.	We	are
ants	 in	 the	 grass,	 lizards	 among	 the	 rocks.’	 She	 paused.	 ‘Somewhere,	 out	 there,	 you	 will	 find	 the	 purest
essence	of	that	philosophy.	Perhaps	in	one	person,	perhaps	in	ten	thousand.	Looking	to	no	other	entity,	no	other
force,	no	other	will.	Bound	solely	in	comradeship,	in	loyalty	honed	absolute.	Yet	devoid	of	all	arrogance.	Wise
in	 humility.	 And	 that	 one,	 or	 ten	 thousand,	 is	 on	 a	 path.	 Unerring,	 it	 readies	 itself,	 not	 to	 shake	 a	 fist	 at	 the
heavens.	But	to	lift	a	lone	hand,	a	hand	filled	with	tears.’	She	found	she	was	glaring	at	the	giant	reptiles.	‘You
want	a	faith?	You	want	someone	or	something	to	believe	in?	No,	do	not	worship	the	one	or	the	ten	thousand.
Worship	 the	 sacrifice	 they	 will	 make,	 for	 they	 make	 it	 in	 the	 name	 of	 compassion—the	 only	 cause	 worth
fighting	and	dying	for.’
Suddenly	exhausted,	she	turned	away,	kicked	aside	the	bleached	fang	at	her	feet.	‘Now,	let	us	go	find	our
champions.’
	
She	 led	 the	 way,	 and	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 were	 content	 with	 that.	 Sag’Churok	 watched	 the	 frail,	 puny
human	taking	her	meagre	strides,	leaving	behind	the	rise	where	two	dragons	had	done	battle.
And	the	K’ell	Hunter	was	well	pleased.
He	sensed,	in	a	sweet	wave,	Gunth	Mach’s	pride.
Pride	in	their	Destriant.
	
Drawn	by	four	oxen	the	large	wagon	rolled	into	the	camp,	mobbed	by	mothers,	husbands,	wives	and	children
who	raised	their	voices	in	ululating	grief.	Arms	reached	out	as	if	to	grab	hold	of	their	dead	loved	ones	who	lay
stacked	like	felled	boles	on	the	flat	bed,	as	the	burden	of	the	slain	rocked	to	a	halt.	The	mob	churned.	Dogs
howled.
On	a	nearby	hill,	Setoc	stood	watching	the	bedlam	in	the	camp,	the	only	motion	from	her	the	stirring	of	her
weathered	 hair.	 Warriors	 were	 running	 back	 to	 their	 yurts	 to	 ready	 themselves	 for	 war,	 although	 none	 knew
the	enemy’s	face,	and	there	was	no	trail	to	track.	Would-be	war	leaders	shouted	and	bellowed,	beating	on	their
own	 chests	 or	 waving	 weapons	 in	 the	 air.	 For	 all	 the	 grief	 and	 anger,	 there	 was	 something	 pathetic	 to	 the
whole	scene,	something	that	made	her	turn	away,	suddenly	weary.
No	one	liked	being	a	victim	of	the	unknown.	They	were	driven	to	lash	out,	driven	to	deliver	indiscriminate
violence	upon	whoever	happened	to	be	close.	She	could	hear	some	of	those	warriors	vowing	vengeance	upon
the	Akrynnai,	the	D’rhasilhani,	even	the	Letherii.
The	 Gadra	 Clan	 was	 going	 to	 war.	 Warchief	 Stolmen	 was	 under	 siege	 in	 his	 own	 tent,	 and	 to	 deny	 the
murderous	hunger	of	his	warriors	would	see	him	deposed,	bloodily.	No,	he	would	need	to	stand	tall,	drawing	his
bhederin	 cloak	 about	 his	 broad	 shoulders,	 and	 take	 up	 his	 twin-bladed	 axe.	 His	 wife,	 if	 anything	 fiercer	 than
Stolmen	 himself,	 would	 begin	 painting	 the	 white	 mask	 of	 death,	 the	 slayer’s	 bone-grin,	 upon	 her	 husband’s
scarred	features.	Her	own	mother,	a	wrinkled	hatchet-faced	hag,	would	do	the	same	to	her.	Edges	singing	on
whetstones,	the	Barghast	were	going	to	war.
She	 saw	 Cafal	 emerging	 from	 Stolmen’s	 tent.	 Even	 at	 this	 distance,	 she	 could	 read	 his	 frustration	 as	 he
marched	 towards	 the	 largest	 crowd	 of	 warriors.	 And	 when	 his	 steps	 slowed	 and	 he	 finally	 halted,	 Setoc
understood	him	well	enough.	He	had	lost	the	Gadra.	She	watched	as	he	looked	round	until	he	caught	sight	of
yet	another	solitary	figure.
Torrent	was	already	saddling	his	horse.	Not	to	join	in	this	madness.	But	to	leave.


As	Cafal	set	out	towards	the	Awl	warrior,	Setoc	went	down	to	meet	them.
Whatever	 words	 they	 exchanged	 before	 she	 arrived	 were	 terse,	 unsatisfying	 to	 the	 Great	 Warlock.	 He
noted	her	approach	and	faced	her.	‘You	too?’	he	asked.
‘I	will	go	with	you,’	she	said.	‘The	wolves	will	join	none	of	this.	It	is	empty.’
‘The	Gadra	mean	to	wage	war	against	the	Akrynnai,’	said	Cafal.	‘But	the	Akrynnai	have	done	nothing.’
She	nodded,	reaching	up	to	pull	her	long	fair	hair	from	her	face	as	the	hot	wind	gusted.
Torrent	was	lifting	himself	on	to	his	horse.	His	face	was	bleak,	haunted.	He	had	the	look	of	a	man	who	did
not	sleep	well	at	night.	He	gathered	his	reins.
Cafal	turned	to	him.	‘Wait!	Please,	Torrent,	wait.’
The	man	grimaced.	‘Is	this	to	be	my	life?	Dragged	from	one	woman’s	tent	to	the	next?	Am	I	to	rut	my	days
away?	Or	do	I	choose	instead	to	fight	at	your	side?	Why	would	I	do	that?	You	Barghast—you	are	no	different
from	 my	 own	 people,	 and	 you	 will	 share	 their	 fate.’	 He	 nodded	 towards	 Setoc.	 ‘The	 wolf-child	 is	 right.	 The
scavengers	of	this	land	will	grow	fat.’
Setoc	 caught	 a	 flash	 of	 something	 crouched	 behind	 a	 tuft	 of	 grass—a	 hare,	 no,	 Talamandas,	 that	 thing	 of
twine	and	sticks.	Child	of	the	mad	Barghast	gods,	child	of	children.	Spying	on	them.	She	sneered.
‘But,’	asked	Cafal,	‘where	will	you	go,	Torrent?’
‘I	 shall	 ride	 to	 Tool,	 and	 beg	 my	 leave	 of	 him.	 I	 shall	 ask	 for	 his	 forgiveness,	 for	 I	 should	 have	 been	 the
warrior	to	fall	against	the	Letherii,	in	defence	of	the	Awl	children.	Not	his	friend.	Not	the	Mezla.’
Cafal’s	 eyes	 had	 widened	 at	 Torrent’s	 words,	 and	 after	 a	 moment	 he	 seemed	 to	 sag.	 ‘Ah,	 Torrent.
Malazans	have	a	way	.	.	.’	He	lifted	a	sad	smile	to	the	Awl.	‘They	do	humble	us	all.	Tool	will	reject	your	words
—there	is	nothing	to	forgive.	There	is	no	crime	set	against	you.	It	was	the	Mezla’s	way,	his	choice.’
‘He	rode	out	in	my	place—’
The	Great	Warlock	straightened.	‘And	could	you	have	fared	as	well	as	he	did,	Torrent?’
That	was	a	cruel	question	and	Setoc	saw	how	it	stung	the	young	warrior.	‘That	is	not	the—’
‘But	it	is,’	Cafal	snapped.	‘If	Toc	had	judged	you	his	superior	in	battle	he	would	have	exhorted	you	to	ride
against	 the	 Letherii.	 He	 would	 have	 taken	 the	 children	 away.	 And	 if	 it	 was	 that	 Malazan	 sitting	 here	 on	 his
horse	before	me	right	now,	he	would	not	be	moaning	about	forgiveness.	Do	you	understand	me,	Torrent?’
The	man	looked	cruelly	bludgeoned	by	Cafal’s	words.	‘Even	if	it	is	so,	I	ride	to	Tool,	and	then	I	shall	set	off,
on	my	own.	I	have	chosen.	Tie	no	strands	to	my	fate,	Great	Warlock.’
Setoc	barked	a	laugh.	‘He	is	not	the	one	to	do	that,	Torrent.’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her.	She	thought	he	might	retort—accusations,	anger,	bridling	indignation.	Instead,	he
said	nothing,	simply	drawing	up	his	reins.	A	last	glance	back	to	Cafal.	‘You	walk,	but	I	ride.	I	am	not	interested
in	slowing	my	pace	to	suit	you—’
‘And	what	if	I	told	you	I	could	travel	in	such	a	way	as	to	reach	Tool	long	before	you	will?’
‘You	cannot.’
Setoc	saw	the	Great	Warlock	lick	dry	lips;	saw	the	sweat	that	had	appeared	upon	his	broad,	flat	brow,	and
her	heart	began	thudding	hard	in	her	chest.	‘Cafal,’	she	said,	her	voice	flat,	‘this	is	not	your	land.	The	warrens
you	people	speak	of	are	weak	here—I	doubt	you	can	even	reach	them.	Your	gods	are	not	ready—’
‘Speak	not	of	the	Barghast	gods!’	squealed	a	voice.	Talamandas,	the	sticksnare,	scrambled	out	from	cover
and	came	closer	in	fits	and	starts.	‘You	know	nothing,	witch—’
‘I	 know	 enough,’	 she	 replied.	 ‘Yes,	 your	 kind	 once	 walked	 these	 plains,	 but	 how	 long	 ago	 was	 that?	 You
warred	with	the	Tiste	Edur.	You	were	driven	from	this	place.	A	thousand	years	ago?	Ten	thousand?	So	now
you	return,	to	avenge	your	ancestors—but	you	found	the	Edur	nothing	like	your	legends.	Unlike	you	Barghast,
they	had	moved	on—’
‘As	the	victorious	ever	do,’	the	sticksnare	hissed.	‘Their	wounds	heal	quickly,	yes.	Nothing	festers,	nothing
rots,	there	is	no	bitterness	on	their	tongues.’
She	spat	in	disbelief.	‘How	can	you	say	that?	Their	Emperor	is	dead.	They	are	driven	from	all	the	lands	they
conquered!’
‘But	not	by	our	hands!’
The	 shriek	 snatched	 heads	 round.	 Warriors	 drew	 closer.	 Cafal	 remained	 silent,	 his	 expression	 suddenly
closed,	 while	 Torrent	 leaned	 forward	 on	 the	 saddle,	 squinting	 down	 at	 the	 sticksnare	 as	 if	 doubting	 his	 own
sanity.


Setoc	smiled	at	Talamandas.	‘Yes,	that	is	what	galls,	isn’t	it?	So.	Now,’	and	she	turned	to	face	the	score	or
so	warriors	half-encircling	them,	‘now,	yes,	you	would	deliver	such	defeat	upon	the	Akrynnai.	Wounds	that	will
fester,	rot	that	sinks	deep	into	the	soul,	that	cruel	taste	riding	every	breath.’
Her	tirade	seemed	to	buffet	them.	She	spat	again.	‘They	did	not	kill	your	scouts.	You	all	know	this.	And	you
do	not	even	care.’	She	pointed	at	Cafal.	‘And	so	the	Great	Warlock	now	goes	to	Tool,	and	he	will	say	to	him:
War	 Master,	 yet	 another	 clan	 has	 broken	 away.	 They	 wage	 senseless	 war	 upon	 the	 wrong	 enemy,	 and	 so	 it
will	 come	 to	 pass	 that,	 by	 the	 actions	 of	 the	 Gadra	 Clan,	 every	 people	 in	 this	 land	 will	 rise	 up	 against	 the
Barghast.	Akrynnai,	D’rhasilhani,	Keryn,	Saphinand,	Bolkando.	You	will	be	assailed	from	all	sides.	And	those
of	 you	 not	 killed	 in	 battle	 will	 be	 driven	 into	 the	 Wastelands,	 that	 vast	 ocean	 of	 nothing,	 and	 there	 you	 will
vanish,	your	bones	turning	to	dust.’
There	was	movement	in	the	crowd,	and	warriors	stepped	aside	as	a	scowling	Warchief	Stolmen	lumbered
forward,	his	wife	a	step	behind	him.	That	woman’s	eyes	were	dark,	savage	with	hatred	as	she	fixed	her	glare
upon	Setoc.
‘This	is	what	you	do,	witch,’	she	said	in	a	rasp.	‘You	weaken	us.	Again	and	again,	you	seek	to	weaken	us!’
‘Are	you	so	eager	to	see	your	children	die?’	Setoc	asked	her.
‘Eager	to	see	them	win	glory!’
‘For	themselves	or	for	you,	Sekara?’
Sekara	 would	 have	 flung	 herself	 at	 Setoc	 then,	 but	 Stolmen	 held	 out	 a	 staying	 arm,	 knocking	 her	 back.
Though	he	could	not	see	it,	his	wife	then	shot	him	a	look	of	venomous	malice.
Torrent	spoke	quietly	to	Setoc.	‘Come	with	me,	wolf-child.	We	will	ride	out	of	this	madness.’	He	reached
down	with	one	hand.
She	grasped	hold	of	his	forearm	and	he	swung	her	easily	on	to	the	horse’s	back.	As	she	closed	her	arms
round	his	waist	he	said,	‘Do	you	need	to	collect	anything,	Setoc?	From	your	tent?’
‘No.’
‘Send	them	off!’	snarled	Sekara.	‘Go,	you	foreign	liars!	Akrynnai	spies!	Go	and	poison	your	own	kind!	With
terror—tell	them,	we	are	coming!	The	White	Face	Barghast!	And	we	shall	make	of	this	land	our	home	once
again!	Tell	them,	witch!	They	are	the	invaders,	not	us!’
Setoc	had	long	sensed	the	animosity	building	among	the	women	in	this	clan.	She	drew	too	many	eyes	among
the	 men.	 Her	 wildness	 made	 them	 hungry,	 curious—she	 was	 not	 blind	 to	 any	 of	 this.	 Even	 so,	 this	 burst	 of
spite	 startled	 her,	 frightened	 her.	 She	 forced	 herself	 to	 meet	 Sekara’s	 blazing	 eyes.	 ‘I	 am	 the	 holder	 of	 a
thousand	hearts.’	Saying	this,	she	looked	to	Sekara’s	husband	and	smiled	a	knowing	smile.
Stolmen	was	forced	to	restrain	his	wife	as	she	sought	to	lunge	forward,	a	knife	in	one	hand.
Torrent	backed	his	horse,	and	she	could	feel	how	he	tensed.	‘Enough	of	that!’	he	snapped	over	his	shoulder.
‘Do	you	want	us	skinned	alive?’
The	mob	had	grown	and	now	surrounded	them.	And,	she	saw	at	last,	there	were	far	more	women	than	men
in	it.	She	felt	herself	withering	beneath	the	hateful	stares	fixed	upon	her.	Not	just	wives,	either.	That	she	was
sitting	snug	against	Torrent	was	setting	fires	in	the	eyes	of	the	younger	women,	the	maidens.
Cafal	stepped	closer,	his	face	pale	in	dread	mockery	of	the	white	paint	of	the	warriors.	‘I	am	going	to	open
a	warren,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘With	the	help	of	Talamandas.	We	leave	together,	or	you	will	be	killed	here,
do	you	understand?	It’s	too	late	for	the	Gadra—your	words,	Setoc,	held	too	many	truths.	They	are	shamed.’
‘Be	quick,	then,’	Torrent	said	in	a	growl.
He	swung	round.	‘Talamandas.’
‘Leave	 them	 to	 their	 fate,’	 muttered	 the	 sticksnare,	 crouched	 like	 a	 miniature	 ghoul.	 It	 seemed	 to	 be
twitching	as	if	plucked	and	prodded	by	unseen	hands.
‘No.	All	of	us.’
‘You	will	regret	your	generosity,	Cafal.’
‘The	warren,	Talamandas.’
The	sticksnare	snarled	wordlessly	and	then	straightened,	spreading	wide	its	scrawny	twig	arms.
‘Cafal!’	hissed	Setoc.	‘Wait!	There	is	a	sickness—’
White	fire	erupted	around	them	in	a	sudden	deafening	roar.	The	horse	screamed,	reared.	Setoc’s	grip	broke
and	 she	 tumbled	 back.	 Searing	 heat,	 stunning	 cold.	 As	 quickly	 as	 the	 flames	 arrived,	 they	 vanished	 with	 a
thunderous	 clap	 that	 reverberated	 in	 her	 skull.	 A	 kick	 from	 a	 hoof	 sent	 her	 skidding,	 pain	 throbbing	 from	 a


bruised	 thigh.	 There	 was	 darkness	 now—or,	 she	 thought	 with	 a	 shock—she	 was	 blind.	 Her	 eyes	 curdled	 in
their	sockets,	cooked	like	eggs—
Then	 she	 caught	 a	 glimmer,	 something	 smeared,	 a	 reflected	 blade.	 Torrent’s	 horse	 was	 backing,	 twisting
from	side	to	side—the	Awl	warrior	still	rode	the	beast	and	she	could	hear	him	cursing	as	he	fought	to	steady
the	animal.	He	had	drawn	his	scimitar.
‘Gods	below!’
That	 cry	 had	 come	 from	 Cafal.	 Setoc	 sat	 up.	 Stony,	 damp	 earth,	 clumps	 of	 mould	 or	 guano	 squishing
beneath	her.	She	smelled	burning	grasses.	Crawling	to	the	vague	blot	in	the	gloom	whence	came	the	Warlock’s
voice,	she	struggled	against	waves	of	nausea.	‘You	fool,’	she	croaked.	‘You	should	have	listened.	Cafal—’
‘Talamandas.	He’s	.	.	.	he’s	destroyed.’
The	stench	of	something	smouldering	was	stronger	now,	and	she	caught	the	gleam	of	scattered	embers.	‘He
burned?	He	burned,	didn’t	he?	The	wrong	warren—it	ate	him,	devoured	him—I	warned	you,	Cafal.	Something
has	infected	your	warrens—’
‘No,	 Setoc,’	 Cafal	 cut	 in.	 ‘It	 is	 not	 like	 that,	 not	 like	 what	 you	 say—we	 knew	 of	 that	 poison.	 We	 were
warded	against	it.	This	was	.	.	.	different.	Spirits	fend,	we	have	lost	our	greatest	shaman—’
‘You	 did	 not	 know	 it,	 did	 you?	 That	 gate?	 It	 was	 unlike	 anything	 you’ve	 ever	 known,	 wasn’t	 it?	 Listen	 to
me!	It	is	what	I	have	been	trying	to	tell	you!’
They	heard	Torrent	dismount,	his	moccasins	thudding	on	the	yielding,	strangely	soft	ground.	‘Be	quiet,	both
of	you.	Argue	what	happened	later.	Listen	to	the	echoes—I	think	we	are	trapped	inside	a	cavern.’
‘Well,’	said	Setoc,	carefully	climbing	to	her	feet.	‘There	must	be	a	way	out.’
‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘Because,	there’s	bats.’
‘But	I	have	my	damned	horse!	Cafal—take	us	somewhere	else!’
‘I	cannot.’
‘What?’
‘The	power	belonged	to	Talamandas.	A	binding	of	agreements,	promises,	with	countless	human	gods.	With
Hood,	Lord	of	Death.	The	Barghast	gods	are	young,	too	young.	I—I	cannot	even	sense	them.	I	am	sorry,	I	do
not	know	where	we	are.’
‘I	am	cursed	to	follow	fools!’
Setoc	 flinched	 at	 the	 anguish	 in	 that	 shout.	 Poor	 Torrent.	 You	 just	 wanted	 to	 leave	 there,	 to	 ride	 out.
Away.	Your	stupid	sense	of	honour	demanded	you	visit	Tool.	And	now	look	.	.	.
No	one	spoke	for	a	time,	the	only	sounds	their	breathing	and	anxious	snorts	from	the	horse.	Setoc	sought	to
sense	 some	 flow	 of	 air,	 but	 there	 was	 nothing.	 Her	 thigh	 aching,	 she	 sank	 back	 down.	 She	 then	 chose	 a
direction	at	random	and	crawled.	The	guano	thickened	so	that	her	hands	plunged	through	up	to	her	wrists,	and
then	 she	 found	 a	 stone	 barrier.	 Wiping	 the	 mess	 from	 her	 hands,	 she	 tracked	 with	 her	 fingers.	 ‘Wait!	 These
stones	are	set—I’ve	found	a	wall.’
Scrabbling	 sounds	 behind	 her,	 and	 then	 the	 scratch	 of	 flint	 and	 iron.	 Sparks,	 actinic	 flashes,	 and	 then	 a
burgeoning	glow.	Moments	later	Torrent	had	a	taper	lit	and	was	setting	the	flame	to	the	wick	of	a	small	camp
lantern.	The	chamber	took	shape	around	them.
The	entire	cavern	was	constructed	of	set	stones,	the	ones	overhead	massive,	wedged	in	place	in	seemingly
precipitous	disorder.	In	seething	patches	here	and	there	clung	bats,	chittering	and	squeaking	now	in	agitation.
‘Look,	there!’	Cafal	pointed.
The	bats	were	converging	on	a	conjoining	of	ill-set	stones,	wriggling	into	cracks.
‘There’s	the	way	out.’
Torrent’s	laugh	was	bitter.	‘We	are	entombed.	One	day,	looters	will	break	in,	find	the	bones	of	two	men,	a
child,	and	a	damned	horse.	For	us	to	ride	into	the	deathworld,	or	so	they	might	think.	Then	again,	they	might
wonder	at	the	gnaw	marks	on	all	but	one	set	of	bones,	and	at	the	scratchings	and	gougings	on	the	stone.	Tiny
bat	bones	and	heaps	of	dried-out	scat	.	.	.’
‘Crush	 that	 imagination	 of	 yours,	 Torrent,’	 advised	 Cafal.	 ‘Though	 the	 way	 out	 is	 nothing	 but	 cracks,	 we
know	the	world	outside	is	close.	We	need	only	dig	our	way	out.’
‘This	is	a	stone	barrow	or	something	much	like	it,	Cafal.	If	we	start	dragging	stones	loose	the	whole	thing	is
likely	to	come	down	on	us.’


‘We	 have	 no	 choice.’	 He	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 wall	 where	 the	 bats	 had	 swarmed	 through	 moments	 earlier.
Drawing	a	dagger,	he	began	probing.	A	short	time	later,	Torrent	joined	him,	using	his	hunter’s	knife.
To	the	sounds	of	scraping	and	sifting	earth,	Setoc	sat	down	closer	to	the	lantern.	Memories	of	that	white	fire
haunted	 her.	 Her	 head	 ached	 as	 if	 the	 heat	 had	 seared	 parts	 of	 her	 brain,	 leaving	 blank	 patches	 that	 pulsed
behind	her	eyes.	She	could	hear	no	muted	howls—the	Wolves	were	lost	to	her	in	this	place.	What	world	have
we	found?	What	waits	beyond	these	stone	walls?	Does	a	sun	shine	out	there?	Does	it	blaze	with	death,
or	is	this	a	realm	for	ever	dark,	lifeless?
Well,	someone	built	this	place.	But	.	.	.	if	this	is	indeed	a	barrow,	where	are	the	bones?	She	picked	up
the	lantern,	wincing	at	the	hot	handle	which	had	not	been	tilted	to	one	side.	Gingerly	rising,	she	played	the	light
over	the	damp,	mottled	ground	at	her	feet.	Guano,	a	few	stones	dislodged	from	above.	If	there	had	ever	been	a
body	 interred	 in	 this	 place,	 it	 had	 long	 since	 rotted	 down	 to	 crumbs.	 And	 it	 had	 not	 been	 adorned	 with
jewellery;	no	buckles	nor	clasps	to	evince	clothing	of	any	sort.	‘This,’	she	ventured,	‘is	probably	thousands	of
years	old.	There’s	nothing	left	of	whoever	was	buried	here.’
A	 muted	 mutter	 from	 Torrent,	 answered	 by	 a	 grunt	 from	 Cafal,	 who	 then	 glanced	 back	 at	 her.	 ‘Where
we’re	 digging,	 Setoc—someone	 has	 been	 through	 this	 way	 before.	 If	 this	 is	 a	 barrow,	 it’s	 been	 long	 since
looted,	emptied	out.’
‘Since	when	does	loot	include	the	corpse	itself?’
‘The	guano	is	probably	acidic,’	Cafal	said.	‘It	probably	dissolved	the	bones.	The	point	is,	we	can	dig	our	way
out	and	it’s	not	likely	everything	will	collapse	down	on	us—’
‘Don’t	be	so	certain	of	that,’	Torrent	said.	‘We	need	to	make	a	hole	big	enough	to	get	my	horse	out.	The
looters	had	no	need	to	be	so	ambitious.’
‘You	had	best	prepare	yourself	for	the	notion	of	killing	your	mount,’	Cafal	said.
‘No.	She	is	an	Awl	horse.	The	last	Awl	horse,	and	she	is	mine—no,	we	belong	to	each	other.	Both	alone.	If
she	must	die,	then	I	will	die	with	her.	Let	this	barrow	be	our	home	in	the	deathworld.’
‘You	have	a	morbid	cast	of	mind,’	Cafal	said.
‘He	has	earned	the	right,’	Setoc	murmured,	still	scanning	the	ground	as	she	walked	a	slow	circuit.	‘Ah!’	She
bent	 down,	 retrieved	 a	 small,	 half-encrusted	 object.	 ‘A	 coin.	 Copper.’	 She	 scraped	 the	 green	 disk	 clean	 and
held	it	close	to	the	lantern.	‘I	recognize	nothing—not	Letherii,	nor	Bolkando.’
Cafal	joined	her.	‘Permit	me,	Setoc.	My	clan	was	in	the	habit	of	collecting	coins	to	make	our	armour.	It	was
his	damned	hauberk	of	coins	that	dragged	my	father	to	the	sea	bottom.’
She	handed	it	to	him.
He	studied	it	for	a	long	time,	one	side,	then	the	other,	over	and	over.	And	finally	sighed	and	handed	it	back.
‘No.	Some	empress,	I	imagine,	looking	so	regal.	The	crossed	swords	on	the	other	side	could	be	Seven	Cities,
but	the	writing	is	all	wrong.	This	is	not	our	world,	Setoc.’
‘I	didn’t	think	it	was.’
‘Done	with	that,	Cafal?’	Torrent	asked	from	where	he	worked	at	the	wall,	impatience	giving	an	edge	to	his
tone.
Cafal	offered	her	a	wry	smile	and	then	returned	to	Torrent’s	side.
A	loud	scrape	followed	by	a	heavy	thud,	and	cool	dew-heavy	air	flowed	into	the	chamber.
‘Smell	that?	It’s	a	damned	forest.’
At	Cafal’s	words,	Setoc	joined	them.	She	held	up	the	lantern.	Night,	cool	 .	.	 .	cooler	 than	the	Awl’dan.
‘Trees,’	she	said,	peering	at	the	ragged	boles	faintly	visible	in	the	light.
There	was	possibly	a	bog	out	there—she	could	hear	frogs.
‘If	it	was	night,’	Torrent	wondered,	‘what	were	the	bats	doing	inside	here?’
‘Perhaps	 it	 was	 only	 nearing	 dusk	 when	 we	 arrived.	 Or	 dawn	 is	 but	 moments	 away.’	 Cafal	 tugged	 at
another	stone.	‘Help	me	with	this	one,’	he	said	to	Torrent.	‘It’s	too	heavy	for	one	man—Setoc,	please,	stand
back,	give	us	room.’
As	they	dragged	the	huge	stone	free,	other	rough-hewn	boulders	tumbled	down.	A	large	lintel	stone	ground
its	 way	 loose	 and	 both	 men	 leapt	 back	 as	 it	 crashed	 on	 to	 the	 rubble.	 Clouds	 of	 dust	 billowed	 and	 a	 terrible
grating	groan	sounded	from	the	barrow’s	ceiling.
Coughing,	Cafal	waved	at	Setoc.	‘Quickly!	Out!’
She	scrambled	over	the	stones,	eyes	stinging,	and	staggered	outside.	Three	paces	and	then	she	turned	about.


She	 heard	 the	 thump	 of	 stones	 from	 the	 ceiling.	 The	 horse	 shrilled	 in	 pain.	 From	 the	 gaping	 entrance	 Cafal
appeared,	followed	a	moment	later	by	Torrent,	who	had	somehow	brought	his	mount	down	on	to	its	knees.	He
held	 the	 reins	 and	 with	 rapid	 twitches	 on	 them	 he	 urged	 his	 horse	 forward.	 Its	 head	 thrust	 into	 view,	 eyes
flashing	in	the	reflected	lantern	light.
Setoc	had	never	before	seen	a	horse	crawl—she	had	not	thought	it	even	possible,	but	here	this	mare	was
lurching	through	the	gap,	sheathed	in	dust	and	streaks	of	sweat.	More	rocks	tumbled	behind	the	beast	and	she
squealed	in	pain,	lunging,	forelimbs	scrabbling	as	she	lifted	herself	up	from	the	front	end.
Moments	after	the	animal	finally	lumbered	clear	the	moss-humped	roof	of	the	barrow	collapsed	in	thunder
and	 dust.	 Decades-old	 trees	 that	 had	 grown	 upon	 it	 toppled	 in	 a	 thrash	 of	 branches	 and	 leaves.	 Wood
splintered.
Blood	streamed	from	the	mare’s	haunches.	Torrent	had	calmed	the	beast	once	more	and	was	tending	to	the
gashes.	‘Not	so	bad,’	he	muttered.	‘Had	she	broken	a	hip	.	.	.’
Setoc	saw	that	the	warrior	was	trembling.	This	bond	he	had	forged	with	his	hapless	mare	stood	in	place	of
all	 those	 ties	 that	 had	 been	 so	 cruelly	 severed	 from	 his	 young	 life,	 and	 it	 was	 fast	 becoming	 something
monstrous.	‘If	she	must	die,	then	I	will	die	with	her.’	Madness,	Torrent.	It’s	a	damned	horse,	a	dumb	beast
with	its	spirit	broken	by	bit	and	rein.	If	she’d	a	broken	hip	or	leg,	we’d	eat	well	this	day.
She	watched	Cafal	observing	the	Awl	for	a	time,	before	he	turned	away	and	scanned	the	forest	surrounding
them.	Then	he	lifted	his	eyes	to	the	heavens.	‘No	moons,’	he	said.	‘And	the	stars	seem	.	.	.	hazy—there’s	not
enough	of	them.	No	constellations	I	recognize.’
‘There	are	no	wolves	here.’
He	faced	her.
‘Their	ghosts,	yes.	But	.	.	.	none	living.	They	last	ran	here	centuries	past.	Centuries.’
‘Well,	there’s	deer	scat	and	trails—so	they	didn’t	starve	to	death.’
‘No.	 Hunted.’	 She	 hugged	 herself.	 ‘Tell	 me	 the	 mind	 of	 those	 who	 would	 kill	 every	 last	 wolf,	 who	 would
choose	to	never	again	hear	their	mournful	howls,	or	to	see—with	a	shiver—a	pack	standing	proud	on	a	rise.
Great	Warlock,	explain	this	to	me,	for	I	do	not	understand.’
He	 shrugged.	 ‘We	 hate	 rivals,	 Setoc.	 We	 hate	 seeing	 the	 knowing	 burn	 in	 their	 eyes.	 You	 have	 not	 seen
civilized	lands.	The	animals	go	away.	And	they	never	return.	They	leave	silence,	and	that	silence	is	filled	with
the	chatter	of	our	kind.	Given	the	ability,	we	kill	even	the	night.’	His	eyes	fell	to	the	lantern	in	her	hand.
Scowling,	she	doused	it.
In	 the	 sudden	 darkness,	 Torrent	 cursed.	 ‘That	 does	 not	 help,	 wolf-child.	 We	 light	 fires,	 but	 the	 darkness
remains—in	our	minds.	Cast	light	within	and	you	will	not	like	what	you	see.’
A	part	of	her	wanted	to	weep.	For	the	ghosts.	For	herself.	‘We	need	to	find	a	way	home.’
Cafal	 sighed.	 ‘There	 is	 power	 here.	 Unfamiliar.	 Even	 so,	 perhaps	 I	 can	 make	 use	 of	 it.	 I	 sense	 it	 .	 .	 .
fragmented,	 shredded.	 It	 has,	 I	 think,	 not	 been	 used	 in	 a	 long,	 long	 time.’	 He	 looked	 round.	 ‘I	 must	 clear	 a
space.	Sanctify	it.’
‘Even	without	Talamandas?’	Torrent	asked.
‘He	 would	 have	 been	 of	 little	 help	 here,’	 Cafal	 replied.	 ‘His	 bindings	 all	 severed.’	 He	 glanced	 at	 Setoc.
‘You,	wolf-child,	can	help.’
‘How?’
‘Summon	the	wolf	ghosts.’
‘No.’	The	thought	made	her	feel	wretched.	‘I	can	give	them	nothing	in	return.’
‘Perhaps,	a	way	through.	Into	another	world,	even	our	own,	where	they	will	find	living	kin,	where	they	will
run	unseen	shoulder	to	shoulder	with	them,	and	remember	the	hunt,	old	loyalties,	sparks	of	love.’
She	eyed	him.	‘Is	such	a	thing	possible?’
‘I	don’t	know.	But,	let	us	try.	I	do	not	like	this	world.	Even	in	this	forest,	the	air	is	tainted.	Foul.	We	have
most	 of	 the	 night	 ahead	 of	 us.	 Let	 us	 do	 what	 we	 can	 to	 be	 gone	 before	 the	 sun	 rises.	 Before	 we	 are
discovered.’
‘Sanctify	your	ground,	then,’	Setoc	said.
She	walked	off	into	the	wood,	sat	down	upon	the	mossy	trunk	of	a	fallen	tree—no,	a	tree	that	had	been	cut
down,	 cleanly—no	 axe	 could	 have	 managed	 such	 level	 precision.	 Why	 then	 had	 it	 been	 simply	 left	 here?
‘There	is	madness	here,’	she	whispered.	Closing	her	eyes,	she	sought	to	drive	the	bleak	thoughts	away.


Ghosts!	Wolves!	Listen	to	my	mind’s	howl!	Hear	the	sorrow,	the	anger!	Hear	my	promise—I	will	guide
you	from	this	infernal	realm.	I	will	find	you	kin.	Kin	of	hot	blood,	warm	fur,	the	cry	of	newborn	pups,
the	snarl	of	rival	males—I	will	show	you	grasslands,	my	children.	Vistas	unending!
And	she	felt	them,	the	beasts	that	had	fallen	in	pain	and	grief	here	in	this	very	forest,	so	long,	long	ago.	The
first	to	come	to	her	was	the	last	survivor	of	that	time,	the	last	to	be	cornered	and	viciously	slain.	She	heard	the
echo	 of	 snarling	 hounds,	 the	 cries	 of	 human	 voices.	 She	 felt	 the	 wolf’s	 terror,	 its	 despair,	 its	 helpless
bemusement.	 She	 felt,	 as	 well,	 as	 the	 beast’s	 lifeblood	 spilled	 into	 the	 churned-up	 soil,	 its	 surrender,	 its
understanding—in	that	final	moment—that	its	terrible	loneliness	was	at	last	coming	to	an	end.
And	 her	 mind	 howled	 anew,	 a	 silent	 cry	 that	 nevertheless	 sent	 rooks	 thrashing	 from	 tree	 branches	 in
raucous	flight.	That	froze	deer	and	hares	in	their	tracks,	as	some	ancient	terror	within	them	was	stirred	to	life.
Howls	answered	her.	Closing	from	all	sides.
Come	to	me!	Gather	all	that	remains	of	your	power!
She	could	hear	thrashing	in	the	brush,	as	will	and	memory	alone	bulled	through	the	bracken.	And	she	sensed,
with	 a	 shock,	 more	 than	 one	 species.	 Some	 dark,	 black-furred	 and	 low	 to	 the	 ground,	 eyes	 blazing	 yellow;
others	tall	at	the	shoulders,	rangy,	with	ebon-tipped	silver	fur.	And	she	saw	their	ancestors,	even	larger	beasts,
short-nosed,	massively	muscled.
They	 came	 in	 multitudes	 beyond	 comprehension,	 and	 each	 bore	 their	 death	 wounds,	 the	 shafts	 of	 spears
jutting	 from	 throat	 and	 flank,	 blood-gushing	 punctures	 streaming	 from	 chest.	 Snares	 and	 traps	 clanking	 and
dragging	 from	 broken	 limbs.	 Bloated	 from	 poison—she	 saw,	 with	 mounting	 horror,	 a	 legacy	 of	 such	 hateful,
spiteful	slaughter	that	she	cried	out,	a	shriek	tearing	at	her	own	throat.
Torrent	was	shouting,	fighting	to	control	his	panicked	horse	as	wolf	ghosts	flooded	in,	thousands,	hundreds	of
thousands—this	was	an	old	world,	and	here,	before	her,	crowding	close	with	need,	was	the	toll	amassed	by	its
insane	victors,	its	triumphant	tyrants.
Oh,	there	were	other	creatures	as	well,	caught	in	the	rushing	tide,	beasts	long	since	crumbled	to	dust.	She
saw	 stags,	 bhederin,	 large	 cats.	 She	 saw	 huge	 furred	 beasts	 with	 broad	 heads	 and	 horns	 jutting	 from	 black
snouts—so	many,	gods,	so	many—
‘Setoc!	Stop!	The	power—it	is	too	great—it	overwhelms!’
But	she	had	lost	all	control.	She	had	not	expected	anything	like	this.	The	pressure,	crushing	in	from	all	sides
now,	 threatened	 to	 destroy	 her.	 She	 wept	 like	 the	 last	 child	 on	 earth,	 the	 last	 living	 thing,	 sole	 witness	 to	 the
legacy	of	all	that	her	kind	had	achieved.	This	desolation.	This	suicidal	victory	over	nature	itself.
‘Setoc!’
All	at	once	she	saw	something	glowing	before	her:	a	portal,	pathetically	small,	nothing	more	than	a	bolt-hole.
She	raised	a	trembling	hand	and	pointed	towards	it.	‘My	loved	ones,’	she	whispered,	‘the	way	through.	Make
it	bigger.’
	
They	had	wandered	far	beyond	the	chamber	of	slaughter,	where	scores	of	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	seemingly
been	 sacrificed.	 Lanterns	 cast	 fitful	 light	 against	 metal	 entrails	 embedded	 in	 niches	 along	 the	 walls	 of	 the
corridors,	 and	 from	 the	 ceiling	 thick	 cables	 sagged,	 dripping	 some	 kind	 of	 viscous	 oil.	 The	 air	 was	 rank	 with
acidic	 vapours,	 making	 their	 eyes	 water.	 Side	 passages	 opened	 to	 rooms	 crowded	 with	 strange,
incomprehensible	machinery,	the	floor	slick	with	spilled	oils.
Taxilian	 led	 the	 others	 in	 their	 exploration,	 wending	 ever	 deeper	 into	 the	 maze	 of	 wide,	 low-ceilinged
corridors.	 Moving	 a	 step	 behind	 him,	 Rautos	 could	 hear	 the	 man	 muttering,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 make	 out	 the
words—he	 feared	 Taxilian	 might	 be	 going	 mad.	 This	 was	 an	 alien	 world,	 shaped	 by	 alien	 minds.	 Sense	 and
understanding	eluded	them	all,	and	from	this	was	born	fear.
Behind	Rautos,	almost	on	his	heels,	was	Breath,	coughing,	gasping,	as	if	her	endless	talk	of	drowning	had
thickened	the	air	around	her.
‘Tunnels!’	 she	 hissed.	 ‘I	 hate	 tunnels.	 Pits,	 caves.	 Dark—always	 dark—rooms.	 Where	 is	 he	 leading	 us?
We’ve	passed	countless	ramps	leading	to	higher	levels—what	is	the	fool	looking	for?’
Rautos	had	no	answers,	so	he	said	nothing.
Behind	 Breath,	 Sheb	 and	 Nappet	 were	 bickering.	 Those	 two	 would	 come	 to	 blows	 soon;	 they	 were	 too
much	alike.	Both	vicious,	both	fundamentally	amoral,	both	born	betrayers.	Rautos	wished	they	would	kill	each
other—they	would	not	be	missed.


‘Ah!’	cried	Taxilian.	‘Found	it!’
Rautos	moved	up	to	the	man’s	side.	They	stood	at	the	threshold	of	a	vast	eight-walled	chamber.	A	narrow
ledge	encircled	it	level	with	the	passage	they	had	just	traversed.	The	actual	floor	was	lost	in	darkness	below.
Taxilian	edged	out	to	the	right,	lifting	his	lantern.
The	monstrous	mechanism	filling	the	centre	of	the	expanse	towered	past	level	after	level—only	a	few	with
balconies	to	match	the	one	they	were	on—until	it	vanished	high	overhead.	It	seemed	to	be	constructed	entirely
of	metal,	gleaming	like	brass	and	the	purest	iron,	eight	cylinders	each	the	size	of	a	city	tower.	Spigots	jutted	out
from	 bolted	 collars	 that	 fastened	 the	 segments	 every	 second	 level,	 and	 attached	 to	 these	 were	 black,	 pliant
ropes	of	some	sort	that	reached	out	like	the	strands	of	an	abandoned	spider’s	web,	converging	on	huge	boxes
of	metal	affixed	to	the	walls.	Peering	downward,	Rautos	could	just	make	out	a	change	in	the	configuration	of
the	towers,	as	if	each	one	sat	upon	a	beehive	dome.
His	gaze	caught	and	held	upon	one	piece	of	metal,	bent	so	perfectly	between	two	fittings,	and	he	frowned	as
if	 silts	 had	 been	 brushed	 from	 some	 deeply	 submerged	 memory.	 He	 groped	 towards	 it,	 fighting	 back	 a
whimper,	and	then	the	blinding	clouds	returned,	and	he	was	swept	away	once	more.	He	reeled	and	would	have
fallen	from	the	ledge	had	not	Breath	roughly	pulled	him	back.
‘Idiot!	Do	you	want	to	kill	yourself?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Sorry.	Thank	you.’
‘Don’t	bother.	I	acted	on	instinct.	If	I’d	thought	about	it,	I	probably	would	have	let	you	go.	You’re	nothing	to
me,	fat	old	man.	Nothing.	No	one	is,	not	here,	not	one	of	you.’
She	had	raised	her	voice	to	make	certain	everyone	else	heard	her	last	words.
Sheb	snorted.	‘Bitch	needs	a	lesson	or	two,	I	think.’
Breath	spun	to	face	him.	‘Hungry	for	a	curse,	are	you?	What	part	of	your	body	do	you	want	to	rot	off	first?
Maybe	I’ll	do	the	choosing—’
‘Set	your	magic	on	me,	woman,	and	I	will	throttle	you.’
She	laughed,	turned	away.	‘Play	with	Asane	if	you	have	the	need.’
Rautos,	after	a	few	deep,	calming	breaths,	set	out	after	Taxilian,	who	had	begun	walking	round	the	ledge,
eyes	fixed	on	the	edifice.
‘It’s	an	engine,’	he	said	when	Rautos	drew	close.
‘A	what?	As	in	a	mill?	But	I	see	nothing	like	gears	or—’
‘Like	that,	 yes.	 You	 can	 hide	 gears	and	 levers	 inside,	 in	 housings	 to	 keep	 them	 clean	 of	 grit	 and	 whatnot.
Even	more	relevantly,	you	can	seal	things	and	make	use	of	alternating	pressures,	and	so	move	things	from	one
place	to	another.	It’s	a	common	practice	in	alchemy,	especially	if	one	conjures	such	pressures	using	heat	and
cold.	I	once	saw	a	sorcerous	invention	that	could	draw	the	ether	out	of	a	glass	jar,	thus	quenching	the	lit	candle
within	it.	A	pump	bound	in	wards	was	used	to	draw	out	the	life	force	that	exists	in	the	air.’	He	waved	one	hand
at	the	towers.	‘Heat,	cold—I	think	these	are	vast	pressure	chambers	of	some	sort.’
‘For	what	purpose?’
Taxilian	looked	at	him	with	glittering	eyes.	‘That’s	what	I	mean	to	find	out.’
There	were	no	ladders	or	bridges	across	to	the	towers.	Taxilian	led	him	back	to	the	entranceway.	‘We’re
going	up	now,’	he	said.
‘We	need	food,’	said	Last,	his	expression	worried,	frightened.	‘We	could	get	lost	in	here—’
‘Stop	whimpering,’	growled	Nappet.	‘I	could	walk	us	out	of	here	in	no	time.’
‘None	of	you,’	cut	in	Asane,	startling	everyone,	‘wants	to	talk	about	what	we	found	in	the	first	room.	That’s
what	 you’re	 all	 running	 from.	 Those—those	 monsters—they	 were	 all	 slaughtered.’	 She	 glared	 at	 them,
diffident,	and	rushed	on.	‘What	killed	them	could	still	be	here!	We	don’t	know	anything	about	any	of	this—’
‘Those	 monsters	 didn’t	 die	 in	 battle,’	 said	 Sheb.	 ‘That	 was	 a	 ritual	 killing	 we	 saw.	 Sacrifices,	 that’s	 what
they	were.’
‘Maybe	they	had	no	choice.’
Sheb	snorted.	‘I	can’t	think	of	many	beasts	choosing	to	be	sacrificed.	Of	course	they	had	no	choice.	This
place	is	abandoned—you	can	feel	it.	Smell	it	in	the	stale	air.’
‘When	we	climb	higher,’	said	Last,	‘we’ll	get	out	of	the	wet,	and	we	can	see	if	there’s	tracks	in	the	dust.’
‘Gods	below,	the	farmer’s	good	for	something	after	all,’	said	Nappet	with	a	hard	grin.
‘Let’s	go,	then,’	said	Taxilian,	and	he	set	off.	Once	more	the	others	fell	in	behind	him.


	
Drifting	 between	 all	 of	 them,	 voiceless,	 half-blinded	 with	 sorrow	 that	 swept	 down	 like	 curtains	 of	 rain,	 the
ghost	 yearned	 to	 reach	 through.	 To	 Taxilian,	 Rautos,	 even	 stolid,	 slow-thinking	 Last.	 In	 their	 journey	 through
the	 bowels	 of	 the	 Dragon	 Keep,	 knowledge	 had	 erupted,	 thunderous,	 pounding	 concussions	 that	 sent	 him
reeling.
He	 knew	 this	 place.	 He	 knew	 its	 name.	 Kalse	 Rooted.	 A	 demesne	 of	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle,	 a	 border
keep.	 A	 vast	 body	 now	 drained	 of	 all	 life,	 a	 corpse	 standing	 empty-eyed	 on	 the	 plain.	 And	 he	 knew	 that	 a
Shi’gal	Assassin	had	slain	those	K’ell	Hunters.	To	seal	the	failure	of	this	fortress.
Defeat	was	approaching.	The	whispering	chant,	the	song	of	scales.	The	great	army	sent	out	from	here
had	 been	 annihilated.	 Naught	 but	 a	 pathetic	 rearguard	 left	 behind.	 The	 J’an	 Sentinels	 would	 have
taken	the	Matron	away,	to	the	field	of	the	fallen,	there	to	entomb	her	for	evermore.
Taxilian!	Hear	me.	What	is	lifeless	is	not	necessarily	dead.	That	which	falls	can	rise	again.	Take	care
—take	great	care—in	this	place	.	.	.
But	his	cries	were	not	heard.	He	was	trapped	outside,	made	helpless	with	all	that	he	understood,	with	this
cascade	of	secrets	that	could	do	little	more	than	tumble	into	an	abyss	of	ignorance.
He	knew	how	Asane	railed	in	her	own	mind,	how	she	longed	to	escape	her	own	flesh.	She	wanted	out	from
all	 that	 had	 failed	 her.	 Her	 damned	 flesh,	 her	 dying	 organs,	 her	 very	 mind.	 She	 had	 been	 awakened	 to	 the
comprehension	that	the	body	was	a	prison,	but	one	prone	to	terrible,	inexorable	decay.	Oh,	there	was	always
that	final	flight,	when	the	corroded	bars	ceased	to	pose	a	barrier;	when	the	soul	was	free	to	fly,	to	wing	out	in
search	 of	 unseen	 shores.	 But	 with	 that	 release—for	 all	 she	 knew—all	 that	 she	 called	 herself	 would	 be	 lost.
Asane	would	end.	Cease,	and	that	which	was	born	from	the	ashes	held	no	regard	for	the	living	left	behind,	no
regard	for	that	world	of	aches,	pain,	and	suffering.	It	was	transformed	into	indifference,	and	all	that	was	past
—all	that	belonged	to	the	mortal	life	now	done—meant	nothing	to	it;	she	could	not	comprehend	such	a	cruel
rebirth.
She	longed	for	death	none	the	less.	Longed	to	escape	her	withered	husk	with	all	its	advancing	decrepitude,
its	sundering	into	the	pathos	of	the	broken.	Fear	alone	held	her	back—back	from	that	ledge	in	the	eight-sided
chamber,	back	 from	 that	 fatal	 drop	 to	some	 unseen	 floor	 far	 below.	 And	 that	 same	 fear	 clawed	 at	 her	 now.
Demons	stalked	this	keep.	She	dreaded	what	was	coming.
Walking	a	step	behind	her	was	Last,	aptly	choosing	a	rearguard	position.	His	shoulders	were	hunched,	head
ducked	as	if	the	corridor’s	ceiling	were	much	lower	than	it	was.	He	was	a	man	born	to	open	spaces,	boundless
skies	 overhead,	 the	 sweep	 of	 vistas.	 Within	 this	 haunted	 maze,	 he	 felt	 diminished,	 almost	 crippled.	 Vertigo
lunged	at	him	with	each	turn	and	twist.	He	saw	how	the	walls	closed	in.	He	felt	the	mass	looming	over	them
all,	the	unbearable	weight	of	countless	storeys	overhead.
He	had	a	sudden	memory	of	his	childhood.	He	had	been	helping	his	father—before	the	debts	arrived,	before
everything	was	taken	away	that	meant	anything	at	all—he	had	been	helping	his	father,	he	recalled,	dismantle	a
shed	behind	the	stables.	They	had	prised	loose	the	warped	planks	and	were	stacking	them	in	a	disordered	heap
this	side	of	the	pen’s	fence.	Finishing	a	task	begun	months	earlier,	before	the	planting.	By	late	afternoon	the
shed	was	down,	and	his	father	had	told	him	to	rearrange	the	boards,	sorting	them	by	length	and	condition.
He	had	set	to	the	task.	Recollection	grew	hazy	then,	up	until	the	moment	he	lifted	a	grey,	weathered	plank—
one	 from	 last	 season’s	 work—and	 saw	 how	 its	 recent	 shifting	 from	 the	 day’s	 work	 just	 done	 had	 crushed	 a
nest	of	mice,	the	woven	bundle	of	grasses	flattened,	smeared	in	a	tangle	of	blood	and	tiny	entrails.	Hairless,
pink	pups	scattered	about,	crushed,	each	one	yielding	up	their	single	drop	of	lifeblood.	Both	parents	suffocated
beneath	the	weight	of	the	overburden.
Kneeling	before	this	tableau,	his	presence	looming	like	a	god	come	too	late,	he	stared	down	at	this	destroyed
family.	Silly	to	weep,	of	course.	There	were	plenty	of	other	mice—Errant	knew	the	yard’s	cats	stayed	fat.	So,
foolish,	these	tears.
Yes,	he’d	been	just	a	child.	A	sensitive	age,	no	doubt.	And	later	that	night	his	father	took	him	by	the	hand
and	led	him	out	to	the	modest	barrow	on	the	old	plot,	continuing	what	had	been	their	the	post-supper	ritual	ever
since	 his	 mother	 was	 put	 into	 the	 ground,	 and	 they	 burned	 knotted	 hoops	 of	 wrinkle	 grass	 with	 their	 dried
blossoms	 that	 flared	 bright	 the	 instant	 flames	 touched	 them.	 Bursts	 of	 fire	 that	 blotted	 the	 eyes	 with	 pulsing
afterglows.	 And	 when	 his	 father	 saw	 the	 tears	 on	 his	 son’s	 cheeks	 he	 drew	 him	 close	 and	 said,	 ‘I’ve	 been
waiting	for	that.’


Yes,	 the	 levels	 above	 seemed	 well	 built,	 the	 walls	 solid	 and	 sturdy.	 No	 reason	 to	 think	 it	 would	 all	 come
down	at	the	careless	toss	of	some	child	god.	These	kinds	of	thoughts,	well,	they	could	only	make	a	man	angry.
In	ways	every	child	would	understand.
He	walked	with	his	huge	hands	balled	into	fists.
Sheb	was	fairly	certain	that	he	had	died	in	prison,	or	come	close	enough	to	dead	that	the	cell	cutter	simply
ordered	the	bearers	to	carry	him	out	to	the	lime	pits,	and	they	spilled	him	down	on	to	a	bed	of	dusted	corpses.
Searing	pain	from	the	lime	had	roused	him	from	his	fevered	oblivion,	and	he	must	have	climbed	his	way	out,
pushed	through	the	bodies	that	had	been	dumped	on	top	of	him.
He	recalled	struggling.	Vast,	unshifting	weights.	He	recalled	even	thinking	that	he	had	failed.	That	he	was
too	weak,	that	he	would	never	get	free.	He	even	remembered	seeing	swaths	of	red,	blistered	skin	on	his	arms,
sloughing	away	in	his	frenzied	thrashing.	And	a	nightmare	instant	where	he	gouged	out	his	own	burning	eyes	to
bring	an	end	to	their	agony.
Mad	delusions,	of	course.	He	had	won	free.	Had	he	not,	would	he	be	alive	now?	Walking	at	Nappet’s	side?
No,	he	had	cheated	them	all.	Those	Hivanar	agents	who	brought	the	embezzlement	charges	against	him,	the
advocates	who	bribed	him	out	of	the	Drownings	(where,	he	knew,	he	would	have	survived),	seeing	him	instead
sent	to	the	work	camps.	Ten	years’	hard	labour—no	one	survived	that.
Except	me.	Sheb	the	unkillable.	And	one	day,	Xaranthos	Hivanar,	I	will	come	back	to	steal	the	rest	of
your	wealth.	I	still	know	what	I	know,	don’t	I?	And	you	will	pay	to	keep	me	quiet.	And	this	time	round	I
won’t	 get	 careless.	 I’ll	 see	 your	 corpse	 lying	 in	 a	 pauper’s	 pit.	 I	 swear	 it	 before	 the	 Errant	 himself.	 I
swear	it!
Walking	at	Sheb’s	side,	Nappet	held	on	to	his	cold,	hard	grin.	He	knew	Sheb	wanted	to	be	the	bully	in	this
crowd.	 The	 man	 had	 a	 viper’s	 heart,	 a	 stony	 knuckle	 of	 a	 thing,	 beating	 out	 venom	 in	 turgid	 spurts.	 One	 of
these	nights,	he	vowed,	he’d	throw	the	fool	on	his	back	and	give	him	the	old	snake-head	where	it	counted.
Sheb	 had	 been	 in	 a	 Letherii	 prison—Nappet	 was	 certain	 of	 it.	 His	 habits,	 his	 manners,	 his	 skittish	 way	 of
moving—they	told	 him	 all	 he	 needed	 to	know	 about	 ratty	 little	 Sheb.	 He’d	been	 used	 and	 used	 well	 in	 those
cells.	Calluses	on	the	knees.	Fish	Breath.	Slick	cheeks.	There	were	plenty	of	names	for	men	like	him.
Sheb	had	got	it	enough	to	start	liking	it,	and	all	this	bitching	back	and	forth	between	Nappet	and	Sheb,	well,
that	was	just	seeing	who’d	be	the	first	one	doing	the	old	cat	stretch.
Four	years’	back-breaking	quarrying	up	near	Bluerose.	That	had	been	Nappet’s	sentence	for	that	little	gory
mess	back	in	Letheras,	the	sister’s	husband	who’d	liked	throwing	the	frail	thing	around—well,	no	brother	was
going	to	let	that	just	sidle	past.	No	brother	worth	anything.
The	 only	 damned	 shame	 was	 that	 he	 hadn’t	 managed	 to	 kill	 the	 bastard.	 Close,	 though.	 Enough	 broken
bones	 so	 that	 the	 man	 had	 trouble	 sitting	 up,	 never	 mind	 stalking	 the	 house	 breaking	 things	 and	 hitting
defenceless	women.
Not	that	she’d	been	grateful.	Family	loyalty	only	went	one	way,	it	turned	out.	He	forgave	her	quick	enough
for	ratting	on	him.	She’d	walked	in	on	a	messy	scene,	after	all.	Screams	aplenty.	Her	poor	mind	was	confused
—she’d	never	been	very	sharp	to	begin	with.	If	she	had	been,	why,	she’d	never	have	married	that	nub-nosed
swaggering	turd	in	the	first	place.
Anyway,	 Nappet	 knew	 he’d	 get	 Sheb	 sooner	 or	 later.	 So	 long	 as	 Sheb	 understood	 that	 between	 them	 he
was	the	man	in	charge.	And	he	knew	that	Sheb	would	want	it	rough,	at	least	to	start	with,	so	he	could	look
outraged,	wounded	and	all	that.	The	two	of	them,	they’d	played	in	the	same	yard,	after	all.
Breath	stumbled	and	Nappet	shoved	her	forward.	‘Stupid	woman.	Frail	and	stupid,	that’s	what	you	are,	like
every	other	woman.	Almost	as	bad	as	the	hag	back	there.	You	got	a	swamp	drying	out	in	that	blonde	hair,	did
you	know	that?	You	stink	of	the	swamp—not	that	we	been	through	one.’
She	shot	him	a	glare,	before	hurrying	on.
Breath	could	smell	mud.	Its	stench	seemed	to	ooze	from	her	pores.	Nappet	was	right	in	that,	but	that	didn’t
stop	her	thinking	about	ways	to	kill	him.	If	not	for	Taxilian,	and	maybe	Last,	he	and	Sheb	would	have	raped	her
by	 now.	 Once	 or	 twice,	 to	 convince	 her	 about	 who	 was	 in	 charge.	 After	 that,	 she	 knew,	 they’d	 be	 happy
enough	with	each	other.
She’d	been	told	a	story,	once,	although	she	could	not	recall	who	had	told	it	to	her,	or	where	they	had	been.	It
was	a	tale	about	a	girl	who	was	a	witch,	though	she	didn’t	know	it	yet.	She	was	a	seer	of	the	Tiles	long	before
she	saw	her	first	Tile.	A	gift	no	one	thought	to	even	look	for	in	this	small,	wheat-haired	child.


Even	 before	 her	 first	 bloodflow,	 men	 had	 been	 after	 her.	 Not	 the	 tall	 grey-skinned	 ones,	 though	 the	 girl
feared	them	the	most—for	reasons	never	explained—but	men	living	in	the	same	place	as	her.	Letherii.	Slaves,
yes,	slaves,	just	like	she’d	been.	That	girl.	That	witch.
And	there	was	one	man,	maybe	the	only	one	among	them	all,	who	did	not	look	on	her	with	hunger.	No,	in	his
eyes	there	had	been	love.	That	real	thing,	that	genuine	thing	that	girls	dreamed	of	finding.	But	he	was	lowborn.
He	was	nothing.	A	mender	of	nets,	a	man	whose	red	hands	shed	fish	scales	when	he	returned	from	his	day’s
work.
The	tragedy	was	this,	then.	The	girl	had	not	yet	found	her	Tiles.	Had	she	done	so	early	enough,	she	would
have	taken	that	man	to	her	bed.	She	would	have	made	him	her	first	man.	So	that	what	was	born	between	her
legs	was	not	born	in	pain.	So	that	it	would	not	become	so	dark	in	its	delicious	desires.
Before	 the	 Tiles,	 then,	 she	 had	 given	 herself	 to	 other	 men,	 unloving	 men.	 She’d	 given	 herself	 over	 to	 be
used.
The	same	men	who	then	in	turn	gave	her	a	new	name,	one	born	of	the	legend	of	the	White	Crow,	who	once
offered	 the	 gift	 of	 flight	 to	 humans,	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a	 single	 feather.	 And,	 urged	 on	 by	 promises,	 men	 would
grasp	 hold	 of	 that	 feather	 and	 seek	 to	 fly.	 Only	 to	 fall	 to	 their	 deaths.	 With	 the	 crow	 laughing	 as	 they	 fell.
Crows	needed	to	eat	just	like	everything	else,	after	all.
‘I	am	the	White	Crow,	and	I	will	feed	on	your	dreams.	And	feed	well.’
They	called	her	Feather,	for	the	promise	she	offered,	and	never	delivered.	Had	she	found	the	Tiles,	Breath
was	certain,	she	would	have	been	given	a	different	name.	That	little	blonde	girl.	Whoever	she	was.
Rautos,	who	had	yet	to	discover	his	family	name,	was	thinking	of	his	wife.	Trying	to	recall	something	of	their
lives	together,	something	other	than	the	disgusting	misery	of	their	last	years.
A	man	does	not	marry	a	girl,	nor	a	woman.	He	marries	a	promise,	and	it	shines	with	a	bright	purity	that	is
ageless.	It	shines,	in	other	words,	with	the	glory	of	lies.	The	deception	is	self-inflicted.	The	promise	was	simple
in	its	form,	as	befitted	the	thick-headedness	of	young	men,	and	in	its	essence	it	offered	the	delusion	that	the
present	 moment	 was	 eternal;	 that	 nothing	 would	 change;	 not	 the	 fires	 of	 desire,	 not	 the	 flesh	 itself,	 not	 the
intense	look	in	the	eye.
Now	here	he	was,	at	the	far	end	of	a	marriage—where	she	was	at	this	moment	he	had	no	idea.	Perhaps
he’d	 murdered	 her.	 Perhaps,	 as	 was	 more	 likely	 given	 the	 cowardice	 in	 his	 soul,	 he	 had	 simply	 fled	 her.	 No
matter.	He	could	look	back	with	appalling	clarity	now,	and	see	how	her	dissolution	had	matched	his	own.	They
had	each	settled	like	a	lump	of	wax,	melting	season	by	season,	descending	into	something	shapeless,	something
not	 even	 hinting	 at	 the	 forms	 they	 had	 once	 possessed.	 Smeared,	 sagging,	 two	 heaps	 of	 sour	 smells,	 chafed
skin,	 groans	 born	 of	 fitful	 motion.	 Fools	 that	 they	 both	 were,	 they	 had	 not	 moved	 through	 the	 years	 hand	 in
hand—no,	they’d	not	possessed	that	wisdom,	that	ironic	recognition	of	the	inevitable.
Neither	had	mitigated	their	youthful	desires	with	the	limits	imposed	so	cruelly	by	age.	He	had	dreamed	of
finding	 a	 younger	 woman,	 someone	 nubile,	 soft,	 unblemished.	 She	 had	 longed	 for	 a	 tall,	 sturdy	 benefactor	 to
soften	her	bedding	with	romance	and	delight	her	with	the	zealotry	of	the	enchanted.
They	had	won	nothing	for	all	their	desires	except	misery	and	loneliness.	Like	two	burlap	sacks	filled	with
tarnished	baubles,	each	squatting	alone	in	its	own	room.	In	dust	and	cobwebs.
We	 stopped	 talking—no,	 be	 truthful,	 we	 never	 talked.	 Oh,	 past	 each	 other	 often	 enough	 in	 those
early	 years.	 Yes,	 we	 talked	 past	 each	 other,	 avid	 and	 sharp,	 too	 humourless	 to	 be	 wry—fools	 that	 we
were.	Could	we	have	learned	how	to	laugh	back	then?	So	much	might	have	turned	out	differently.	So
much	.	.	.
Regrets	and	coin,	the	debt	ever	mounts.
This	 nightmarish	 keep	 was	 the	 perfect	 match	 to	 the	 frightening	 chaos	 in	 his	 mind.	 Incomprehensible
workings,	gargantuan	machines,	corridors	and	strange	ramps	leading	upward	to	the	next	levels,	mysteries	on	all
sides.	As	if	.	.	.	as	if	Rautos	was	losing	his	sense	of	himself,	was	losing	talents	he	had	long	taken	for	granted.
How	could	knowledge	collapse	so	quickly?	What	was	happening	to	him?	Could	the	mind	sink	into	a	formless,
unstructured	thing	to	match	the	flesh	that	held	it?
Perhaps,	he	thought	with	a	start,	he	had	not	fled	at	all.	Instead,	he	was	lying	on	his	soft	bed,	eyes	open	but
seeing	nothing	of	the	truth,	whilst	his	soul	wandered	the	maze	of	a	broken	brain.	The	thought	horrified	Rautos
and	he	physically	picked	up	his	pursuit	of	Taxilian,	until	he	trod	on	the	man’s	heel.
A	glance	back,	brows	raised.


Rautos	mumbled	an	apology,	wiped	sweat	from	his	jowly	face.
Taxilian	 returned	 his	 attention	 to	 this	 steep	 ramp	 before	 him,	 and	 the	 landing	 he	 could	 now	 see	 ahead	 and
above.	The	air	was	growing	unbearably	warm.	He	suspected	there	were	chutes	and	vents	that	moved	currents
of	 warmth	 and	 cold	 throughout	 this	 alien	 city,	 but	 as	 yet	 he’d	 found	 none,	 not	 a	 single	 grated	 opening—and
there	 were	 no	 draughts	 flowing	 past.	 If	 currents	 flowed	 in	 this	 air,	 they	 were	 so	 muted,	 so	 constrained,	 that
human	skin	could	not	sense	their	whispering	touch.
The	city	was	dead,	and	yet	it	lived,	it	breathed,	and	somewhere	a	heart	beat	a	slow	syncopation,	a	heart	of
iron	and	brass,	of	copper	and	acrid	oil.	Valves	and	gears,	rods	and	hinges,	collars	and	rivets.	He	had	found	the
lungs,	and	he	knew	that	in	one	of	the	levels	still	awaiting	them	he	would	find	the	heart.	Then,	higher	still,	into
the	dragon’s	skull,	where	slept	the	massive	mind.
All	his	life,	dreams	had	filled	his	thoughts,	his	inner	world,	that	played	as	would	a	god,	maker	of	impossible
inventions,	machines	so	complex,	so	vast,	they	would	strike	like	bolts	of	lightning	should	a	mortal	mind	suddenly
comprehend	them.	Creations	to	carry	people	across	great	distances,	swifter	than	any	horse	or	ship.	Others	that
could	surround	a	human	soul,	preserve	its	every	thought	and	sense,	its	very	knowledge	of	itself—and	keep	it	all
safe	beyond	the	failing	of	mortal	flesh.	Creations	to	end	all	hunger,	all	poverty,	to	crush	avarice	before	it	was
born,	to	cast	out	cruelty	and	indifference,	to	defy	every	inequity	and	deny	the	lure	of	sadistic	pleasure.
Moral	 constructs—oh,	 they	 were	 a	 madman’s	 dreams,	 to	 be	 sure.	 Humans	 insisted	 on	 others	 behaving
properly,	but	rarely	forced	the	same	standards	upon	themselves.	Justifications	dispensed	with	logic,	thriving	on
opportunism	and	delusions	of	pious	propriety.
As	a	child	he	had	heard	tales	of	heroes,	tall,	stern-faced	adventurers	who	claimed	the	banners	of	honour	and
loyalty,	 of	 truthfulness	 and	 integrity.	 And	 yet,	 as	 the	 tales	 spun	 out,	 Taxilian	 would	 find	 himself	 assailed	 by	 a
growing	 horror,	 as	 the	 great	 hero	 slashed	 and	 murdered	 his	 way	 through	 countless	 victims,	 all	 in	 pursuit	 of
whatever	he	(and	the	world)	deemed	a	righteous	goal.	His	justice	was	sharp,	but	it	bore	but	one	edge,	and	the
effort	of	the	victims	to	preserve	their	lives	was	somehow	made	sordid,	even	evil.
But	a	moral	machine,	ah,	would	it	not	be	forced	by	mechanics	alone	to	hold	itself	to	the	same	standard	it	set
upon	every	other	sentient	entity?	Immune	to	hypocrisy,	its	rule	would	be	absolute	and	absolutely	just.
A	young	man’s	dreams,	assuredly.	Such	a	machine,	he	now	knew,	would	quickly	conclude	that	the	only	truly
just	act	was	the	thorough	annihilation	of	every	form	of	intelligent	life	in	every	realm	known	to	it.	Intelligence
was	incomplete—perhaps	it	always	would	be—it	was	flawed.	It	could	not	distinguish	its	own	lies	from	its	own
truths.	Upon	the	scale	of	the	self,	they	often	weighed	the	same.	Mistakes	and	malice	were	arguments	of	intent
alone,	not	effect.
There	 would	 always	 be	 violence,	 catastrophe,	 shortsighted	 stupidity,	 incompetence	 and	 belligerence.	 The
meat	of	history,	after	all,	was	the	flyblown	legacy	of	such	things.
And	yet.	And	 yet.	 The	 dragon	 is	 home	 to	 a	 city,	 the	 city	 that	 lives	 when	 not	 even	 echoes	 survive	 to
walk	its	streets.	Its	very	existence	is	a	salutation.
Taxilian	believed—well,	he	so	wanted	to	believe—that	he	would	discover	an	ancient	truth	in	this	place.	He
would	come,	 yes,	 face	 to	 face	 with	 a	 moral	 construct.	 And	 as	 for	Asane’s	 words	 earlier,	 her	 fretting	 on	 the
slaughtered	K’Chain	Che’Malle	in	the	first	chamber,	such	a	scene	made	sense	now	to	Taxilian.	The	machine
mind	had	come	to	its	inevitable	conclusion.	It	had	delivered	the	only	possible	justice.
If	only	he	could	awaken	it	once	more,	perfection	would	return	to	the	world.
	
Taxilian	could	sense	nothing,	of	course,	of	the	ghost’s	horror	at	such	notions.	Justice	without	compassion	was
the	destroyer	of	morality,	a	slayer	blind	to	empathy.
Leave	such	things	to	nature,	to	the	forces	not	even	the	gods	can	control.	If	you	must	hold	to	a	faith,
Taxilian,	 then	 hold	 to	 that	 one.	 Nature	 may	 be	 slow	 to	 act,	 but	 it	 will	 find	 a	 balance—and	 that	 is	 a
process	not	one	of	us	can	stop,	for	it	belongs	to	time	itself.
And,	the	ghost	now	knew,	he	had	a	thing	about	time.
	
They	came	upon	vast	chambers	crowded	with	vats	in	which	grew	fungi	and	a	host	of	alien	plants	that	seemed
to	need	no	light.	They	stumbled	upon	seething	nests	of	scaled	rats—orthen—that	scattered	squealing	from	the
lantern’s	harsh	light.


Dormitories	 in	 rows	 upon	 rows,	 assembly	 halls	 and	 places	 of	 worship.	 Work	 stalls	 and	 low-ceilinged
expanses	 given	 over	 to	 arcane	 manufacture—stacks	 of	 metal,	 each	 one	 identical,	 proof	 of	 frightening
precision.	Armouries	bearing	ranks	of	strange	weapons,	warehouses	with	stacked	packages	of	foodstuffs,	icerooms	 filled	 with	 butchered,	 frozen	 meat	 hanging	 from	 hooks.	 Niches	 in	 which	 were	 stored	 bolts	 of	 cloth,
leather,	and	scaled	hides.	Rooms	cluttered	with	gourds	arranged	on	shelves.
A	city	indeed,	awaiting	them.
And	still,	Taxilian	led	them	ever	upward.	Like	a	man	possessed.
______
A	riot	had	erupted.	Armed	camps	of	islanders	raged	back	and	forth	along	the	shoreline,	while	mobs	plunged
into	 the	 forests,	 weapons	 slick	 and	 dripping,	 into	 the	 makeshift	 settlements,	 conducting	 pathetic	 looting	 and
worse	 among	 the	 poorest	 refugees.	 Murder,	 rapes,	 and	 everywhere,	 flames	 lifting	 orange	 light	 into	 the	 air.
Before	dawn,	the	fires	had	ignited	the	forest,	and	hundreds	more	died	in	smoke	and	heat.
Yan	Tovis	had	drawn	her	Shake	down	on	to	the	stony	shoreline,	where	numbers	alone	kept	the	worst	of	the
killers	at	bay.
The	ex-prisoners	of	Second	Maiden	Fort	had	not	taken	well	the	rumour—sadly	accurate—that	the	Queen	of
Twilight	was	preparing	to	lead	them	into	an	unknown	world,	a	realm	of	darkness,	a	road	without	end.	That,	if
she	 failed	 and	 lost	 her	 way,	 would	 find	 them	 all	 abandoned,	 trapped	 for	 ever	 in	 a	 wasteland	 that	 had	 never
known	a	sun’s	light,	a	sun’s	blessed	warmth.
A	few	thousand	islanders	had	taken	refuge	among	the	Shake.	The	rest,	she	knew,	were	busy	dying	or	killing
each	 other	 amidst	 grey	 smoke	 and	 raging	 flames.	 Standing	 facing	 the	 ravaged	 slope	 with	 its	 morbid	 treestumps	 and	 destroyed	 huts,	 her	 face	 smeared	 with	 ash	 and	 sweat,	 her	 eyes	 streaming	 from	 the	 smoke,	 Yan
Tovis	struggled	to	find	her	courage,	her	will	to	take	command	once	more.	She	was	exhausted,	in	her	bones	and
in	her	soul.	Waves	of	ash-filled	heat	gusted	against	her.	Distant	screams	drifted	through	the	air,	cutting	through
the	surly	growl	of	the	motley	rabble	edging	ever	closer.
Someone	 was	 pushing	 through	 the	 crowd	 behind	 her,	 snarling	 curses	 and	 dire	 warnings.	 A	 moment	 later,
Skwish	 scrambled	 forward.	 ‘There’s	 near	 a	 thousand	 gulpin’	 down	 o’er	 there,	 Queen.	 When	 they	 get	 their
nerve,	they’re	gonna	carve	inta	us—we	got	a	line	a	ex-guards	an’	the	like	betwixt	’em	an’	us.	You	better	do
somethin’	and	do	it	fast	.	.	.	Highness.’
She	 could	 hear	 renewed	 fighting,	 somewhere	 down	 the	 beach.	 Twilight	 frowned.	 Something	 about	 that
sound	.	.	.	‘Do	you	hear	that?’	she	asked	the	witch	cowering	at	her	side.
‘Wha?’
‘That’s	an	organized	advance,	Skwish.’	And	she	pushed	past	the	old	woman,	making	her	way	towards	that
steady	clash	of	iron,	the	shouts	of	commands	being	given,	the	shrieks	and	cries	of	dying	looters.	Even	in	the
uncertain	 flickering	 light	 from	 the	 forest	 fire,	 she	 could	 see	 how	 the	 mob	 was	 curling	 back—a	 wedge	 of
Letherii	soldiers	was	pushing	through,	drawing	ever	closer.
Twilight	halted.	Yedan	Derryg.	And	his	troop.	My	brother—damn	him!
She	 saw	 her	 ex-guards	 shift	 uneasily	 as	 the	 wedge	 cut	 through	 the	 last	 looters.	 They	 did	 not	 know	 if	 the
newcomers	would	attack	them	next—if	they	did,	the	poorly	armed	islanders	would	be	cut	to	pieces.	Twilight
hurried,	determined	to	throw	herself	between	the	two	forces.
She	heard	Yedan	snap	an	order,	and	saw	the	perfect	precision	of	his	thirty	or	so	soldiers	wheeling	round,	the
wedge	 dispersing,	 flattening	 out	 to	 form	 a	 new	 line	 facing	 the	 churning	 crowd	 of	 looters,	 locking	 shields,
drawing	up	their	weapons.
The	threat	from	that	direction	was	now	over.	Actual	numbers	were	irrelevant.	Discipline	among	a	few	could
defeat	 a	 multitude—that	 was	 Letherii	 doctrine,	 borne	 out	 in	 countless	 battles	 against	 wild	 tribes	 on	 the
borderlands.	Yan	Tovis	knew	it	as	did	her	brother.
She	 pushed	 through	 her	 island	 guard,	 seeing	 the	 loose	 relief	 on	 the	 faces	 that	 swung	 to	 her,	 the	 sudden
deliverance	from	certain	death.
Yedan,	blackened	with	soot	and	spatters	of	blood,	must	have	seen	her	before	she	spied	him,	for	he	stepped
into	her	path,	lifting	his	helm’s	cheek-guards,	revealing	his	black	beard,	the	bunching	muscles	of	his	jaw.	‘My
Queen,’	 he	 said.	 ‘Dawn	 fast	 approaches—the	 moment	 of	 the	 Watch	 is	 almost	 past—you	 will	 lose	 the
darkness.’	He	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘I	do	not	believe	we	can	survive	another	day	in	this	uprising.’
‘Of	course	we	can’t,	you	infuriating	bastard!’


‘The	Road	to	Gallan,	my	Queen.	If	you	will	open	the	way,	it	must	be	now.’	He	gestured	with	a	gauntleted
hand.	‘When	they	see	the	portal	born,	they	will	try	for	it—to	escape	the	flames.	To	escape	the	retribution	of
the	kingdom.	You	will	have	two	thousand	criminals	rushing	on	your	heels.’
‘And	what	is	there	to	do	about	it?’	Even	as	she	asked,	she	knew	how	he	would	answer.	Knew,	and	wanted
to	scream.
‘Queen,	my	soldiers	will	hold	the	portal.’
‘And	be	slaughtered!’
He	said	nothing.	Muscles	knotted	rhythmically	beneath	his	beard.
‘Damn	you!	Damn	you!’
‘Unveil	the	Road,	my	Queen.’
She	spun	to	her	two	captains	among	the	ex-prison	guards.	‘Pithy.	Brevity.	Support	Yedan	Derryg’s	soldiers
—for	as	long	as	you	can—but	be	sure	not	to	get	so	entangled	that	your	people	cannot	withdraw—I	want	you
through	the	gate,	do	you	understand?’
‘We	shall	do	as	you	say,	Highness,’	Brevity	replied.
Yan	Tovis	studied	the	two	women,	wondering	yet	again	why	the	others	had	elected	them	as	their	captains.
They’d	 never	 been	 soldiers—anyone	 could	 see	 that.	 Damned	 criminals,	 in	 fact.	 Yet	 they	 could	 command.
Shaking	her	head,	she	faced	her	brother	once	more.
‘Will	you	follow	us?’
‘If	we	can,	my	Queen.	But	we	must	be	certain	to	hold	until	we	see	the	portalway	failing.’	He	paused,	and
then	added	with	his	usual	terseness,	‘It	will	be	close.’
Yan	Tovis	wanted	to	tear	at	her	hair.	‘Then	I	begin—and,’	she	hesitated,	‘I	will	talk	to	Pully	and	Skwish.	I
will—’
‘Do	not	defend	what	I	have	done,	sister.	The	time	to	lead	is	now.	Go,	do	what	must	be	done.’
Gods,	you	pompous	idiot.
Don’t	die,	damn	you.	Don’t	you	dare	die!
She	 did	 not	 know	 if	 he	 heard	 her	 sob	 as	 she	 rushed	 away.	 He’d	 dropped	 his	 cheek-guards	 once	 more.
Besides,	those	helms	blunted	all	but	the	sharpest	sounds.
The	Road	to	Gallan.	The	road	home.	Ever	leading	me	to	wonder,	why	did	we	leave	in	the	first	place?
What	drove	us	from	Gallan?	The	first	shoreline?	What	so	fouled	the	water	that	we	could	no	longer	live
there?
She	 reached	 the	 ancient	 shell	 midden	 where	 she	 and	 the	 witches	 had	 sanctified	 the	 ground,	 climbed,
achingly,	raw	with	desperation,	to	join	the	pair	of	old	witches.
Their	eyes	glittered,	with	madness	or	terror—she	could	never	tell	with	these	two	hags.
‘Now?’	asked	Pully.
‘Yes.	Now.’
And	Yan	Tovis	turned	round.	From	her	vantage	point,	she	looked	upon	her	cowering	followers.	Her	people,
crowded	 along	 the	 length	 of	 beach.	 Behind	 them	 the	 forest	 was	 a	 wall	 of	 fire.	 Ashes	 and	 smoke,	 a
conflagration.	This—this	is	what	we	leave.	Remember	that.	 From	 where	 she	 stood,	 she	 could	 not	 even	 see
her	brother.
No	one	need	ever	ask	why	we	fled	this	world.
She	whirled	round,	drawing	her	blessed	daggers.	And	laid	open	her	forearms.	The	gift	of	royal	blood.	To	the
shore.
Pully	and	Skwish	screamed	the	Words	of	Sundering,	their	twisted	hands	grasping	her	wrists,	soaking	in	her
blood	like	leeches.
They	should	not	complain.	That	but	two	remain.	They	will	learn,	I	think,	to	thank	my	brother.	When
they	see	what	royal	blood	gives	them.	When	they	see.
Darkness	yawned.	Impenetrable,	a	portal	immune	to	the	water	that	its	lower	end	carved	into.
The	road	home.
Weeping,	Yan	Tovis,	Twilight,	Queen	of	the	Shake,	pulled	her	arms	loose	from	the	witches’	grip,	and	lunged
forward.	Into	the	cold	past.
Where	none	could	hear	her	screams	of	grief.
	


The	mob	hesitated	longer	than	Yedan	expected,	hundreds	of	voices	crying	out	upon	witnessing	the	birth	of	the
portal,	those	cries	turning	to	need	and	then	anger	as	the	Shake	and	the	islanders	among	them	plunged	into	the
gate,	vanishing—escaping	this	madness.
He	stood	with	his	troop,	gauging	the	nearest	of	the	rioters.	‘Captain	Brevity,’	he	called	over	a	shoulder.
‘Watch.’
‘Do	not	tarry	here.	We	will	do	what	needs	doing.’
‘We	got	our	orders.’
‘I	said	we	will	hold.’
‘Sorry,’	the	woman	snapped.	‘We	ain’t	in	the	mood	to	watch	you	go	all	heroic	here.’
‘Asides,’	added	Pithy,	‘our	lads	couldn’t	live	with	themselves	if	they	just	left	you	to	it.’
A	half-dozen	voices	loudly	objected	to	her	claim,	to	which	both	captains	laughed.
Biting	 back	 a	 smile,	 Yedan	 said	 nothing.	 The	 mob	 was	 moments	 from	 rushing	 them—they	 were	 being
pushed	 from	 behind.	 It	 was	 always	 this	 way,	 he	 knew.	 Someone	 else’s	 courage,	 so	 boisterous	 in	 its	 refuge
among	walls	of	flesh,	so	easy	with	someone	else’s	life.	He	could	see,	in	heaving	eddies,	the	worst	of	them,	and
set	their	details	in	his	mind,	to	test	their	courage	when	at	last	he	came	face	to	face	with	each	one.
‘Wake	up,	soldiers,’	he	shouted.	‘Here	they	come.’
The	 first	 task	 in	 driving	 back	 a	 charging	 mob	 was	 two	 quick	 steps	 forward,	 right	 into	 the	 faces	 of	 the
foremost	 attackers.	 Cut	 them	 down,	 pull	 back	 a	 single	 stride,	 and	 hold	 fast.	 As	 the	 survivors	 were	 thrust
forward	once	more,	repeat	the	aggression,	messy	and	brutal,	and	this	time	advance	into	the	teeth	of	the	crowd,
blades	 chopping,	 stabbing,	 shield	 rims	 slamming	 into	 bodies,	 studded	 heels	 crunching	 down	 on	 those	 that	 fell
underfoot.
The	nearest	ranks	recoiled	from	the	assault.
Then	retaliated,	rising	like	a	wave.
Yedan	 and	 his	 troop	 delivered	 fierce	 slaughter.	 Held	 for	 twenty	 frantic	 heartbeats,	 and	 then	 were	 driven
back	 one	 step,	 and	 then	 another.	 Better-armed	 looters	 began	 appearing,	 thrust	 to	 the	 forefront.	 The	 first
Letherii	soldier	fell,	stabbed	through	a	thigh.	Two	of	Brevity’s	guards	hurried	forward	and	pulled	the	man	from
the	line,	a	cutter	rushing	in	to	staunch	the	wound	with	clumps	of	spider’s	web.
Pithy	shouted	from	a	position	directly	behind	Yedan:	‘More	than	half	through,	Watch!’
The	armed	foes	that	fell	to	his	soldiers	either	reeled	back	or	collapsed	at	their	feet.	These	latter	ones	gave
up	the	weapons	they	held	to	more	of	the	two	captains’	guards,	who	reached	through	quick	as	cats	to	snatch
them	away	before	the	attackers	could	recover	them.	The	two	women	were	busy	arming	others	to	bolster	their
rearguard—Yedan	could	imagine	no	other	reason	for	the	risky—and,	truth	be	told,	irritating—tactic.
His	 soldiers	 were	 tiring—it	 had	 been	 some	 time	 since	 they’d	 last	 worn	 full	 armour.	 He’d	 been	 slack	 in
keeping	them	fit.	Too	much	riding,	not	enough	marching.	When	had	any	of	them	last	drawn	blood?	The	Edur
invasion	for	most	of	them.
They	were	paying	for	it	now.	Ragged	gasps,	slowing	arms,	stumbles.
‘Back	one	step!’
The	line	edged	back—
‘Now	forward!	Hard!’
The	 mob	 had	 seen	 that	 retreat	 as	 a	 victory,	 the	 beginnings	 of	 a	 rout.	 The	 sudden	 attack	 into	 their	 faces
shocked	them,	their	weapons	unreadied,	their	minds	on	everything	but	defence.	That	front	line	melted,	as	did
the	one	behind	it,	and	then	a	third.	Yedan	and	his	soldiers—knowing	that	this	was	their	last	push—fought	like
snarling	beasts.
And	 all	 at	 once,	 the	 hundreds	 crowding	 before	 them	 suddenly	 scattered—the	 rough	 ranks	 shattering.
Weapons	thrown	aside,	fleeing	as	fast	as	legs	could	carry	them,	down	the	strand,	out	into	the	shallows.	Scores
were	 trampled,	 driven	 into	 mud	 or	 stones	 or	 water.	 Fighting	 broke	 out	 in	 desperate	 efforts	 to	 clear	 paths
through.
Yedan	withdrew	his	troop.	They	staggered	back	to	the	waiting	rearguard—who	looked	upon	them	in	silence,
perhaps	disbelieving.
‘Attend	to	the	wounded,’	barked	Yedan,	lifting	his	cheek	grilles	to	cool	his	throbbing	face,	snatching	in	deep
breaths.
‘We	 can	 get	 moving	 now,’	 Brevity	 said,	 tugging	 at	 his	 shield	 arm.	 ‘We	 can	 just	 walk	 on	 through	 to	 .	 .	 .


wherever.	You,	Watch,	you	need	to	be	in	charge	of	the	Shake	army,	did	you	know	that?’
‘The	Shake	have	no	army—’
‘They	better	get	one	and	soon.’
‘Besides,	I	am	an	outlaw—I	slaughtered—’
‘We	 know	 what	 you	 did.	 You’re	 an	 Errant-damned	 up-the-wall	 madman,	 Yedan	 Derryg.	 Best	 kinda
commander	an	army	could	have.’
Pithy	said,	‘Leave	the	petitioning	to	us,	sweetie.’	And	she	smiled.
He	looked	round.	One	wounded.	None	dead.	None	dead	that	counted,	anyway.	Screams	of	pain	rose	from
the	killing	field.	He	paid	that	no	attention,	simply	sheathed	his	sword.
When	 Yedan	 Derryg	 walked	 into	 the	 fading	 portalway—the	 last	 of	 them	 all—he	 did	 not	 look	 back.	 Not
once.
	
There	 was	 great	 joy	 in	 discarding	 useless	 words.	 Although	 one	 could	 not	 help	 but	 measure	 each	 day	 by	 the
sun’s	fiery	passage	through	the	empty	sky,	and	each	night	by	the	rise	and	set	of	a	haze-shrouded	moon	and	the
jade	 slashes	 cutting	 across	 the	 starscape,	 the	 essential	 meaning	 of	 time	 had	 vanished	 from	 Badalle’s	 mind.
Days	 and	 nights	 were	 a	 tumbling	 cavort,	 round	 and	 round	 with	 no	 beginning	 and	 no	 end.	 Jaws	 to	 tail.	 They
rolled	on	and	left	nothing	but	a	scattering	of	motionless	small	figures	collapsed	on	to	the	plain.	Even	the	ribbers
had	abandoned	them.
Here,	 at	 the	 very	 edge	 of	 the	 Glass,	 there	 were	 only	 the	 opals—fat	 carrion	 beetles	 migrating	 in	 from	 the
blasted,	lifeless	flanks	to	either	side	of	the	trail.	And	the	diamonds—glittering	spiked	lizards	that	sucked	blood
from	 the	 fingertips	 their	 jaws	 clamped	 tight	 round	 every	 night—diamonds	 becoming	 rubies	 as	 they	 grew
engorged.	 And	 there	 were	 the	 Shards,	 the	 devouring	 locusts	 sweeping	 down	 in	 glittering	 storms,	 stripping
children	almost	where	they	stood,	leaving	behind	snarls	of	rags,	tufts	of	hair	and	pink	bones.
Insects	and	lizards	ruled	this	scorched	realm.	Children	were	interlopers,	invaders.	Food.
Rutt	had	tried	to	lead	them	round	the	Glass,	but	there	was	no	way	around	that	vast	blinding	desert.	A	few	of
them	 gathered	 after	 the	 second	 night.	 They	 had	 been	 walking	 south,	 and	 at	 this	 day’s	 end	 they	 had	 found	 a
sinkhole	 filled	 with	 bright	 green	 water.	 It	 tasted	 of	 limestone	 dust	 and	 made	 many	 children	 writhe	 in	 pain,
clutching	their	stomachs.	It	made	a	few	of	them	die.
Rutt	 sat	 holding	 Held,	 and	 to	 his	 left	 crouched	 Brayderal—the	 tall	 bony	 girl	 who	 reminded	 Badalle	 of	 the
Quitters.	She	had	pushed	her	way	in,	and	for	that	Badalle	did	not	like	her,	did	not	trust	her,	but	Rutt	turned	no
one	away.	Saddic	was	there	as	well,	a	boy	who	looked	upon	Badalle	with	abject	adoration.	It	was	disgusting,
but	he	listened	best	to	her	poems,	her	sayings,	and	he	could	repeat	them	back	to	her,	word	for	word.	He	said
he	was	collecting	them	all.	To	one	day	make	a	book.	A	book	of	this	journey.	He	believed,	therefore,	that	they
were	going	to	survive	this,	and	that	made	him	a	fool.
The	four	of	them	had	sat,	and	in	the	silences	that	stretched	out	and	round	and	in	and	through	and	sometimes
between	them	all,	they	pondered	what	to	do	next.	Words	weren’t	needed	for	that	kind	of	conversation.	And	no
one	had	the	strength	for	gestures,	either.	Badalle	thought	that	Saddic’s	book	should	hold	vast	numbers	of	blank
pages,	 to	 mark	 such	 silences	 and	 all	 they	 contained.	 The	 truths	 and	 the	 lies,	 the	 needs	 and	 the	 wants.	 The
nows	and	the	thens,	the	theres	and	the	heres.	If	she	saw	such	pages,	and	could	crisp	back	each	one,	one	after
another,	she	would	nod,	remembering	how	it	was.	How	it	was.
It	was	Brayderal	who	stained	the	first	blank	page.	‘We	got	to	go	back.’
Rutt	lifted	his	bloodshot	eyes.	He	drew	Held	tighter	against	his	chest.	Adjusted	the	tattered	hood,	reached	in
a	lone	finger	to	stroke	an	unseen	cheek.
That	was	his	answer,	and	Badalle	agreed	with	him.	Yes	she	did.	Stupid,	dangerous	Brayderal.
Who	scratched	a	bit	at	the	sores	encrusting	her	nostrils.	‘We	can’t	go	round	it.	We	can	only	cross	it.	But
crossing	it	means	we	all	die	and	die	bad.	I’ve	heard	of	this	Glass	Desert.	Never	crossed.	No	one	ever	crosses
it.	It	goes	on	for	ever,	straight	down	the	throat	of	the	setting	sun.’
Oh,	Badalle	liked	that	one.	That	was	a	good	scene	to	keep	alive	in	her	head.	Down	the	throat,	a	diamond
throat,	 a	 throat	 of	 glass,	 sharp,	 so	 very	 sharp	 glass.	 And	 they	 were	 the	 snake.	 ‘We	 got	 thick	 skin,’	 she	 said,
since	the	page	was	already	ruined.	‘We	go	down	the	throat.	We	go	down	it,	because	that’s	what	snakes	do.’
‘Then	we	die.’
They	all	gave	her	silence	for	that.	To	say	such	things!	To	blot	the	page	that	way!	They	gave	her	silence.	For


that.
Rutt	 turned	 his	 head.	 Rutt	 set	 his	 eyes	 upon	 the	 Glass	 Desert.	 He	 stared	 that	 way	 a	 long,	 long	 time,	 as
darkness	 quenched	 the	 glittering	 flats.	 And	 then	 he	 finished	 his	 looking,	 and	 he	 leaned	 forward	 and	 rocked
Held	to	sleep.	Rocked	and	rocked.
So	it	was	decided.	They	were	going	into	the	Glass	Desert.
Brayderal	took	a	blank	page	for	herself.	She	had	thousands	to	choose	from.
Badalle	 crawled	 off,	 trailed	 by	 Saddic,	 and	 she	 sat	 staring	 into	 the	 night.	 She	 threw	 away	 words.	 There.
Here.	 Then.	 Now.	 When.	 Everybody	 had	 to	 cut	 what	 they	 carried,	 to	 cross	 this	 desert.	 Toss	 away	 what
wasn’t	needed.	Even	poets.
‘You	have	a	poem,’	Saddic	said,	a	dark	shape	beside	her.	‘I	want	to	hear	it.’
‘I	am	throwing	away
Words.	You	and	me
Is	a	good	place	to	start
Yesterday	I	woke	up
With	five	lizards
Sucking	my	fingers
Like	tiny	pigs	or	rat	pups
They	drank	down
You	and	me
I	killed	two	of	them
And	ate	what	they	took
But	that	wasn’t	taking	back
The	words	stayed	gone
We	got	to	lighten	the	load
Cut	down	on	what	we	carry
Today	I	stop	carrying
You
Tomorrow	I	stop	carrying
Me.’
After	a	time	of	no	words,	Saddic	stirred.	‘I’ve	got	it,	Badalle.’
‘To	go	with	the	silent	pages.’
‘The	what?’
‘The	blank	ones.	The	ones	that	hold	everything	that’s	true.	The	ones	that	don’t	lie	about	anything.	The	silent
pages,	Saddic.’
‘Is	that	another	poem?’
‘Just	don’t	put	it	on	a	blank	page.’
‘I	won’t.’
He	 seemed	 strangely	 satisfied,	 and	 he	 curled	 up	 tight	 against	 her	 hip,	 like	 a	 ribber	 when	 ribbers	 weren’t
ribbers	but	pets,	and	he	went	to	sleep.	She	looked	down	on	him,	and	thought	about	eating	his	arms.


Chapter	Nine
Down	past	the	wind-groomed	grasses
In	the	sultry	curl	of	the	stream
There	was	a	pool	set	aside
In	calm	interlude	away	from	the	rushes
Where	not	even	the	reeds	waver
Nature	takes	no	time	to	harbour	our	needs
For	depthless	contemplation
Every	shelter	is	a	shallow	thing
The	sly	sand	grips	hard	no	manner
Of	anchor	or	even	footfall
Past	the	bend	the	currents	run	thin
In	wet	chuckle	where	a	faded	tunic
Drapes	the	shoulders	of	a	broken	branch
These	are	the	dangers	I	might	see
Leaning	forward	if	the	effort	did	not	prove
So	taxing	but	that	ragged	collar
Covers	no	pale	breast	with	tapping	pulse
This	shirt	wears	the	river	in	birth	foam
And	languid	streaming	tatters
Soon	I	gave	up	the	difficult	rest
And	floated	down	in	search	of	boots
Filled	with	pebbles	as	every	man	needs
Somewhere	to	stand.
	
CLOTHES	REMAIN
FISHER

	
‘I’m	stuffed,’	said	King	Tehol,	and	then,	with	a	glance	at	his	guest,	added,	‘Sorry.’
Captain	 Shurq	 Elalle	 regarded	 him	 with	 her	 crystal	 goblet	 halfway	 to	 her	 well-padded,	 exquisitely	 painted
lips.	‘Yet	another	swollen	member	at	my	table.’
‘Actually,’	observed	Bugg,	‘this	is	the	King’s	table.’
‘I	wasn’t	being	literal,’	she	replied.
‘Which	is	a	good	thing,’	cried	Tehol,	‘since	my	wife	happens	to	be	sitting	right	here	beside	me.	And	though
she	 has	 no	 need	 to	 diet,	 we’d	 all	 best	 stay	 figurative.’	 And	 his	 eyes	 shifted	 nervously	 before	 he	 hid	 himself
behind	his	own	goblet.
‘Just	 like	 old	 times,’	 said	 Shurq.	 ‘Barring	 the	 awkward	 pauses,	 the	 absurd	 opulence,	 and	 the	 weight	 of	 an
entire	kingdom	pressing	down	upon	us.	Remind	me	to	decline	the	next	invitation.’
‘Longing	for	a	swaying	deck	under	your	feet?’	Tehol	asked.	‘Oh,	how	I	miss	the	sea—’
‘How	can	you	miss	what	you’ve	never	experienced?’
‘Well,	good	point.	I	should	have	been	more	precise.	I	miss	the	false	memory	of	missing	a	life	on	the	sea.	It
was,	at	the	risk	of	being	coarse,	my	gesture	of	empathy.’
‘I	 don’t	 really	 think	 the	 captain’s	 longings	 should	 be	 the	 subject	 of	 conversation,	 husband,’	 Queen	 Janath
said,	mostly	under	her	breath.
Shurq	 heard	 her	 none	 the	 less.	 ‘Highness,	 this	 night	 has	 made	 it	 grossly	 obvious	 that	 you	 hold	 to	 an


unreasonable	prejudice	against	the	dead.	If	I	was	still	alive	I’d	be	offended.’
‘No	you	wouldn’t.’
‘In	a	gesture	of	empathy,	indeed	I	would!’
‘Well,	I	do	apologize,’	said	the	Queen.	‘I	just	find	your,	uh,	excessively	overt	invitations	to	be	somewhat	offputting—’
‘My	excessively	overt	what?	It’s	called	make-up!	And	clothes!’
‘More	like	dressing	the	feast,’	murmured	Janath.
Tehol	and	Bugg	shared	a	wince.
Shurq	Elalle	smirked.	‘Jealousy	does	not	become	a	queen—’
‘Jealousy?	Are	you	mad?’
The	volume	of	the	exchange	was	escalating.	‘Yes,	jealousy!	I’m	not	getting	any	older	and	that	fact	alone—’
‘Not	any	older,	true	enough,	just	more	and	more	.	.	.	putrid.’
‘No	 less	 putrid	 than	 your	 unseemly	 bigotry!	 And	 all	 I	 need	 do	 by	 way	 of	 remedy	 is	 a	 bag	 full	 of	 fresh
herbs!’
‘That’s	what	you	think.’
‘Not	a	single	man’s	ever	complained.	I	bet	you	can’t	say	the	same.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
Shurq	Elalle	then	chose	the	most	vicious	reply	of	all.	She	said	nothing.	And	took	another	delicate	mouthful	of
wine.
Janath	stared,	and	then	turned	on	her	husband.
Who	flinched.
In	a	tight,	low	voice,	Janath	asked,	‘Dear	husband,	do	I	fail	in	pleasing	you?’
‘Of	course	not!’
‘Am	I	the	subject	of	private	conversations	between	you	and	this—this	creature?’
‘Private?	You,	her?	Not	at	all!’
‘Oh,	so	what	then	is	the	subject	of	those	conversations?’
‘No	subject—’
‘Too	busy	to	talk,	then,	is	it?	You	two—’
‘What?	No!’
‘Oh,	there’s	always	time	for	a	few	explicit	instructions.	Naturally.’
‘I	don’t—we	don’t—’
‘This	 is	 insane,’	 snapped	 Shurq	 Elalle.	 ‘When	 I	 can	 get	 a	 man	 like	 Ublala	 Pung	 why	 should	 I	 bother	 with
Tehol	here?’
The	King	vigorously	nodded,	and	then	frowned.
Janath	narrowed	her	gaze	on	the	undead	captain.	‘Am	I	to	understand	that	my	husband	is	not	good	enough
for	you?’
Bugg	clapped	his	hands	and	rose.	‘Think	I’ll	take	a	walk	in	the	garden.	By	your	leave,	sire—’
‘No!	Not	for	a	moment!	Not	unless	I	can	go	with	you!’
‘Don’t	even	think	it,’	hissed	Janath.	‘I’m	defending	your	honour	here!’
‘Bah!’	barked	Shurq	Elalle.	‘You’re	defending	your	choice	in	men!	That’s	different.’
Tehol	 straightened,	pushing	 his	chair	back	and	mustering	the	few	 remaining	tatters	 of	his	dignity.	 ‘We	can
only	conclude,’	he	intoned	loftily,	‘that	nostalgic	nights	of	reminiscences	are	best	contemplated	in	the	abstract
—’
‘The	figurative,’	suggested	Bugg.
‘Rather	than	the	literal,	yes.	Precisely.	And	now,	my	Chancellor	and	I	will	take	the	night	air	for	a	time.	Court
musicians—you!	 Over	 there!	 Wax	 up	 those	 instruments	 or	 whatever	 you	 have	 to	 do.	 Music!	 Something
friendly!’
‘Forgiving.’
‘And	forgiving!’
‘Pacifying.’
‘Pacifying!’
‘But	not	patronizing—’


‘But	not—All	right,	that	will	do,	Bugg.’
‘Of	course,	sire.’
Shurq	 watched	 the	 two	 cowards	 flee	 the	 dining	 hall.	 Once	 the	 door	 had	 closed,	 and	 the	 dozen	 or	 so
musicians	 had	 finally	 settled	 on	 the	 same	 song,	 the	 captain	 leaned	 back	 in	 her	 chair	 and	 contemplated	 the
Queen	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘So,	what’s	all	this	about?’
‘I	had	some	guests	last	night,	ones	that	I	think	you	should	meet.’
‘All	right.	In	what	capacity?’
‘They	may	have	need	of	you	and	your	ship.	It’s	complicated.’
‘No	doubt.’
Janath	 waved	 a	 handmaiden	 over	 and	 muttered	 some	 instructions.	 The	 short,	 overweight	 woman	 with	 the
pimply	face	waddled	off.
‘You	really	don’t	trust	Tehol,	do	you?’	Shurq	asked,	watching	the	handmaiden	depart.
‘It’s	not	a	matter	of	trust.	More	a	question	of	eliminating	temptation.’
She	snorted.	‘Never	works.	You	know	that,	don’t	you?	Besides,	he’s	a	king.	He	has	royal	leave	to	exercise
kingly	excesses.	It’s	a	well-established	rule.	Your	only	reasonable	response	is	to	exercise	in	kind.’
‘Shurq,	I’m	a	scholar	and	not	much	else.	It’s	not	my	way—’
‘Make	 it	 your	 way,	 Highness.	 And	 then	 the	 pressure’s	 off	 both	 of	 you.	 No	 suspicions,	 no	 jealousies,	 no
unreasonable	expectations.	No	unworkable	prohibitions.’
‘Such	liberating	philosophy	you	have,	Captain.’
‘So	it	is.’
‘And	doomed	to	sink	into	a	most	grisly	mire	of	spite,	betrayal	and	loneliness.’
‘That’s	the	problem	with	you	living.	You’re	all	stuck	on	seeing	only	the	bad	things.	If	you	were	dead	like	me
you’d	see	how	pointless	all	that	is.	A	waste	of	precious	energy.	I	recommend	your	very	own	ootooloo—that’ll
put	your	thoughts	in	the	right	place.’
‘Between	my	legs,	you	mean.’
‘Exactly.	Our	very	own	treasure	chest,	our	pleasure	box,	the	gift	most	women	lock	up	and	swallow	the	key
to,	 and	 then	 call	 themselves	 virtuous.	 What	 value	 in	 denying	 the	 gift	 and	 all	 it	 offers?	 Madness!	 What’s	 the
value	of	a	virtue	that	makes	you	miserable	and	wretched?’
‘There	are	other	kinds	of	pleasure,	Shurq—’
‘But	none	so	readily	at	hand	for	each	and	every	one	of	us.	You	don’t	need	coin.	Errant	fend,	you	don’t	even
need	a	partner!	I	tell	you,	excess	is	the	path	to	contentment.’
‘And	have	you	found	it?	Contentment,	I	mean,	since	your	excesses	are	not	in	question.’
‘I	have	indeed.’
‘What	if	you	could	live	again?’
‘I’ve	thought	about	it.	A	lot,	lately,	in	fact,	since	there’s	a	necromancer	among	the	Malazans	who	says	he
can	attempt	a	ritual	that	might	return	me	to	life.’
‘And?’
‘I’m	undecided.	Vanity.’
‘Your	ageless	countenance.’
‘The	prospect	of	unending	pleasure,	actually.’
‘Don’t	you	think	you	might	tire	of	it	someday?’
‘I	doubt	it.’
Queen	Janath	pursed	her	lips.	‘Interesting,’	she	murmured.
	
Tehol	plucked	a	globe	of	pinkfruit	from	the	tree	beside	the	fountain.	He	studied	it.	‘That	was	harsh,’	he	said.
‘They	wanted	to	make	it	convincing,’	said	Bugg.	‘Are	you	going	to	eat	that?’
‘What?	Well,	I	thought	it	made	a	nice	gesture,	holding	it	just	so,	peering	at	it	so	thoughtfully.’
‘I	figured	as	much.’
Tehol	handed	him	the	fruit.	‘Go	ahead,	ruin	the	prosaic	beauty	of	the	scene.’
Squishy,	wet	sounds	competed	with	the	fountain’s	modest	trickle.
‘Spies	and	secret	handshakes,’	said	Tehol.	‘They’re	worse	than	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild.’
Bugg	swallowed,	licked	his	lips.	‘Who?’


‘Women?	Lovers	and	ex-lovers?	Old	acquaintances,	I	don’t	know.	Them.	They.’
‘This	 is	 a	 court,	 sire.	 The	 court	 plots	 and	 schemes	 with	 the	 same	 need	 that	 we—uh,	 you—breathe.	 A
necessity.	It’s	healthy,	in	fact.’
‘Oh	now,	really.’
‘All	right,	not	healthy,	unless	of	course	one	can	achieve	a	perfect	equilibrium,	each	faction	played	off	against
the	others.	The	true	measure	of	success	for	a	king’s	Intelligence	Wing.’
Tehol	frowned.	‘Who’s	flapping	that,	by	the	way?’
‘Your	Intelligence	Wing?’
‘That’s	the	one.’
‘I	am.’
‘Oh.	How	goes	it?’
‘I	fly	in	circles,	sire.’
‘Lame,	Bugg.’
‘As	it	must	be.’
‘We	need	to	invent	another	wing,	I	think.’
‘Do	we	now?’
Tehol	 nodded,	 plucking	 another	 fruit	 and	 studying	 it	 contemplatively.	 ‘To	 fly	 true,	 yes.	 A	 counter-balance.
We	could	call	it	the	King’s	Stupidity	Wing.’
Bugg	took	the	fruit	and	regarded	it.	‘No	need,	we	already	have	it.’
‘We	do?’
‘Yes,	sire.’
‘Hah	hah.’
Bugg	bit	into	the	globe	and	then	spat	it	out.	‘Unripe!	You	did	that	on	purpose!’
‘How	stupid	of	me.’
Bugg	glared.
	
The	two	women	who	followed	the	spotty	handmaiden	back	into	the	dining	room	were	an	odd	study	in	contrast.
The	short,	curvy	one	dripped	and	dangled	an	astonishing	assortment	of	gaudy	jewellery.	The	clothing	she	wore
stretched	 the	 definition	 of	 the	 word.	 Shurq	 suspected	 it	 had	 taken	 half	 the	 night	 to	 squeeze	 into	 the	 studded
leggings,	and	the	upper	garment	seemed	to	consist	of	little	more	than	a	mass	of	thin	straps	that	turned	her	torso
into	a	symmetrical	display	of	dimples	and	pouts.	Her	plumpness	was,	perhaps,	a	sign	of	her	youth	as	much	as
of	soft	living,	although	there	was	plenty	of	indolence	in	her	rump-swaying,	overly	affected	manner	of	walking
—as	if	through	a	crowd	of	invisible	but	audibly	gasping	admirers—perched	so	perfectly	atop	high	spike-heeled
shoes,	 with	 one	 hand	 delicately	 raised.	 Her	 petite	 features	 reminded	 Shurq	 of	 the	 painted	 exaggeration
employed	by	stage	actors	and	weeping	orators,	with	ferociously	dark	eye	liner	flaring	to	glittering	purple	below
the	 plucked	 line	 of	 her	 eyebrows;	 white	 dust	 and	 false	 bloom	 to	 the	 rounded	 plump	 cheeks;	 pink	 and	 amber
gloss	 on	 the	 full	 lips	 in	 diagonal	 barbs	 converging	 on	 the	 corners	 of	 her	 faintly	 downturned	 mouth.	 Her	 hair,
silky	 black,	 was	 bound	 up	 in	 a	 frenzied	 array	 of	 braided	 knots	 speared	 with	 dozens	 of	 porcupine	 quills,	 each
one	tipped	with	pearls.
It	was	likely	Shurq	gaped	for	a	moment,	sufficient	to	earn	an	indulgent	smile	from	the	haughty	little	creature
as	she	flounced	closer.
A	 step	 behind	 this	 two-legged	 tome	 of	 fashion	 travesty	 walked	 the	 handmaiden—at	 least,	 that’s	 what	 the
captain	assumed	she	was.	A	head	taller	than	most	men,	burly	as	a	stevedore,	the	woman	was	dressed	in	an
embroidered	pink	gown	of	some	sort,	shrieking	femininity	with	a	desperate	air,	and	utterly	failing	to	render	the
wearer	 any	 sort	 of	 elegance	 whatsoever.	 Diamond	 studs	 glinted	 high	 on	 her	 cheeks—and	 Shurq	 frowned,
realizing	with	a	start	that	the	handmaiden’s	face	was	surprisingly	attractive:	even	features,	the	eyes	deep,	the
lips	full	and	naturally	sultry.	Her	hair	was	cut	close	to	the	scalp,	so	blonde	as	to	be	very	nearly	white.
The	 curtsy	 the	 highborn	 girl	 presented	 before	 Queen	 Janath	 was	 elaborate	 and	 perfectly	 executed.
‘Highness,	at	your	service.’
Janath	 cleared	 her	 throat.	 ‘Princess	 Felash,	 welcome.	 May	 I	 present	 Shurq	 Elalle,	 captain	 of	 Undying
Gratitude,	 a	 seaworthy	 vessel	 engaged	 in	 independent	 trade.	 Captain,	 Princess	 Felash	 is	 the	 fourteenth
daughter	to	King	Tarkulf	of	Bolkando.’


Shurq	 rose	 and	 then	 curtsied.	 ‘Princess,	 may	 I	 compliment	 you	 on	 your	 attire.	 I	 cannot	 think	 of	 many
women	who	could	so	exquisitely	present	such	a	vast	assembly	of	styles.’
The	handmaiden’s	dark	eyes	flicked	to	Shurq	and	then	away.
Felash	preened,	one	hand	returning	to	hover	an	artful	distance	to	one	side	of	her	head.	‘Most	kind,	Captain.
Few,	even	among	my	father’s	court,	possess	the	necessary	sophistication	to	appreciate	my	unique	tastes.’
‘I	have	no	doubt	of	that,	Highness.’
Another	quick	regard	from	the	handmaiden.
Janath	spoke	hastily,	‘Forgive	me,	please,	do	sit	with	us,	Princess.	Share	some	wine,	some	dainties.’
‘Thank	you,	Queen	Janath.	You	are	most	kind.	Wine	sounds	wonderful,	although	I	must	regretfully	decline
partaking	of	any	sweets.	Must	watch	my	weight,	you	know.’
Well,	that’s	good,	since	everyone	else	has	to.
‘Oh,’	Felash	then	amended	as	soon	her	veiled	eyes	fixed	upon	the	nearest	plate	heaped	with	desserts,	‘since
this	is	a	most	special	occasion,	why	not	indulge?’	And	she	reached	for	a	honey-drenched	cake	that	mocked	the
notion	 of	 dainty,	 veritably	 exuding	 its	 invitation	 to	 obesity.	 Devouring	 such	 a	 trifle	 challenged	 the	 princess’s
command	of	decorum,	but	she	was	quick,	and	in	moments	was	carefully	licking	her	fingertips.	‘Wonderful.’
‘Your	handmaiden	is	welcome—’
‘Oh	no,	Highness!	She	is	on	the	strictest	diet—why,	just	look	at	the	poor	child!’
‘Princess	Felash,’	cut	in	Shurq	Elalle—although	the	handmaiden’s	unchanged	expression	suggested	she	was
well	inured	to	her	mistress’s	callous	rudeness—‘I	must	admit	I	have	heard	nothing	of	your	visit	to	Lether—’
‘Ah,	but	that	is	because	I’m	not	here	at	all,	Captain.	Officially,	that	is.’
‘Oh.	I	see.’
‘Do	you?’	And	the	painted	brat	had	the	audacity	to	send	her	a	sly	wink.	Felash	then	nodded	towards	Janath,
even	as	she	collected	another	sweetcake.	‘Your	Malazan	allies	are	about	to	march	into	a	viper’s	nest,	you	see.
There	 is,	 in	 fact,	 the	 very	 real	 risk	 of	 a	 war.	 The	 more	 reasonable	 servants	 of	 the	 crown	 in	 Bolkando,	 of
course,	do	not	wish	such	a	thing	to	come	to	pass.	After	all,	should	such	conflict	erupt,	there	is	the	chance	that
Lether	will	become	embroiled,	and	then	no	one	will	be	happy!’
‘So	your	father	has	sent	you	here	on	a	secret	mission,	with	appropriate	assurances.’
‘My	mother,	actually,	Captain,’	Felash	corrected.	She	smacked	her	lips.	‘Alas,	more	than	assurances	were
required,	but	all	that	has	been	taken	care	of,	and	now	I	wish	to	return	home.’
Shurq	thought	about	that	for	a	moment.	‘Princess,	the	sea	lanes	that	can	draw	us	close	to	your	kingdom	are
not	particularly	safe.	Areas	are	either	uncharted	or	inaccurately	charted.	And	then	there	are	the	pirates—’
‘How	better	to	confound	such	pirates	than	have	one	of	them	commanding	our	ship?’
Shurq	Elalle	started.	‘Princess,	I’m	not—’
‘Tush!	Now	you’re	being	silly.	And	no,	Queen	Janath	has	not	babbled	any	secrets.	We	are	quite	capable	of
gathering	our	own	intelligence—’
‘Alarmingly	capable,’	muttered	Janath,	‘as	it	turns	out.’
‘Even	if	I	am	a	pirate,’	Shurq	said,	‘that	is	no	guarantee	against	being	set	upon.	The	corsairs	from	Deal—
who	 ply	 those	 waters—acknowledge	 no	 rules	 of	 honour	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 rivals.	 In	 any	 case,	 I	 am	 in	 fact
committed	to	transport	a	cargo	which,	unfortunately,	will	take	me	in	the	opposite	direction—’
‘Would	that	cargo	be	one	Ublala	Pung?’	Janath	asked.
‘Yes.’
‘And	has	he	a	destination	in	mind?’
‘Well,	admittedly,	it’s	rather	vague	at	the	moment.’
‘So,’	continued	the	Queen	thoughtfully,	‘if	you	posed	to	him	an	alternative	route	to	wherever	it	is	he’s	going,
would	he	object?’
‘Object?	He	wouldn’t	even	understand,	Highness.	He’d	just	smile	and	nod	and	try	and	tweak	one	of	my—’
‘Then	it	is	possible	you	can	accommodate	Princess	Felash	even	with	Ublala	Pung	aboard,	yes?’
Shurq	frowned	at	the	Queen,	and	then	at	Felash.	‘Is	this	a	royal	command,	Highness?’
‘Let’s	just	say	we	would	be	most	pleased.’
‘Then	let	me	just	say	that	the	pleasure	of	however	many	of	you	exist	isn’t	good	enough,	Highness.	Pay	me
and	 pay	 well.	 And	 we	 agree	 on	 a	 contract.	 And	 I	 want	 it	 in	 writing—from	 either	 you,	 Queen,	 or	 you,
Princess.’


‘But	the	whole	point	of	this	is	that	it	must	remain	unofficial.	Really,	Shurq—’
‘Really	nothing,	Janath.’
Felash	 waved	 one	 sticky	 crumb-dusted	 hand.	 ‘Agreed!	 I	 will	 have	 a	 contract	 written	 up.	 There	 is	 no
problem	 with	 the	 captain’s	 conditions.	 None	 at	 all.	 Well!	 I	 am	 delighted	 that	 everything’s	 now	 arranged	 to
everyone’s	satisfaction!’
Janath	blinked.
‘Well.	That’s	fine,	then,’	said	Shurq	Elalle.
‘Oh,	these	sweets	are	a	terror!	I	must	not—oh,	one	more	perhaps—’
	
A	short	time	later	and	the	two	Bolkando	guests	were	given	leave	to	depart.	As	soon	as	the	door	closed	behind
them,	Shurq	Elalle	fixed	a	level	gaze	upon	Janath.	‘So,	O	Queen,	what	precisely	is	the	situation	in	Bolkando?’
‘Errant	 knows,’	 Janath	 sighed,	 refilling	 her	 goblet.	 ‘A	 mess.	 There	 are	 so	 many	 factions	 in	 that	 court	 it
makes	 a	 college	 faculty	 look	 like	 a	 neighbourhood	 sandbox.	 And	 you	 may	 not	 know	 it,	 but	 that	 is	 saying
something.’
‘A	sandbox?’
‘You	know,	in	the	better-off	streets,	the	community	commons—there’s	always	a	box	of	sand	for	children	to
play	in,	where	all	the	feral	cats	go	to	defecate.’
‘You	privileged	folk	have	strange	notions	of	what	your	children	should	play	with.’
‘Ever	get	hit	on	the	head	by	a	gritty	sausage	of	scat?	Well	then,	enough	of	that	attitude,	Shurq.	We	were	as
vicious	as	any	rags-gang	you	ran	with,	let	me	tell	you.’
‘All	 right,	 sorry.	 Have	 you	 warned	 the	 Malazans	 that	 Bolkando	 is	 seething	 and	 about	 to	 go	 up	 in	 their
faces?’
‘They	know.	Their	allies	are	in	the	midst	of	it	right	now,	in	fact.’
‘So	what	was	that	princess	doing	here	in	Letheras?’
Janath	made	a	face.	‘As	far	as	I	can	tell,	annihilating	rival	spy	networks—the	ones	Bugg	left	dangling	out	of
indifference,	I	suppose.’
Shurq	grunted.	‘Felash?	She’s	no	killer.’
‘No,	but	I’d	wager	her	handmaiden	is.’
‘How	old	is	this	fourteenth	daughter,	anyway?	Sixteen,	seventeen—’
‘Fourteen,	actually.’
‘Abyss	below!	I	can’t	say	I’m	looking	forward	to	transporting	that	puffed-up	pastry-mauler	all	the	way	to
the	Akrynnai	Range.’
‘Just	go	light	on	ballast.’
Shurq’s	eyes	widened.
Janath	 scowled.	 ‘The	 pilot	 charts	 we	 possess	 indicate	 shallow	 reefs,	 Captain.	 What	 did	 you	 think	 I	 was
referring	to?’
‘No	idea,	Highness.	Honest.’
Janath	rose.	‘Let’s	go	pounce	on	the	men	in	the	garden,	shall	we?’
	
Departing	 the	 palace	 unseen	 was	 enabled	 by	 the	 Queen’s	 silent	 servants	 leading	 the	 two	 Bolkando	 women
down	a	maze	of	unused	corridors	and	passageways,	until	at	last	they	were	ushered	out	into	the	night	through	a
recessed	postern	gate.
They	walked	to	a	nearby	street	and	there	awaited	the	modest	carriage	that	would	take	them	back	to	their
rooms	in	a	hostel	of	passing	quality	down	near	the	harbourfront.
Felash	held	one	hand	in	the	air,	fingers	moving	in	slow,	sinuous	rhythm—an	affectation	of	which	she	seemed
entirely	unaware.	‘A	contract!	Ridiculous!’
Her	handmaiden	said	nothing.
‘Well,’	said	Felash,	‘if	the	captain	proves	too	troublesome—’	and	into	that	uplifted	hand	snapped	a	wedgebladed	dagger,	appearing	so	suddenly	it	might	well	have	been	conjured	out	of	the	thin	night	air.
‘Mistress,’	said	the	handmaiden	in	a	low,	smooth	and	stunningly	beautiful	voice,	‘that	will	not	work.’
Felash	frowned.	‘Oh,	grow	up,	you	silly	girl.	We	can	leave	no	trail—no	evidence	at	all.’


‘I	mean,	mistress,	that	the	captain	cannot	be	killed,	for	I	believe	she	is	already	dead.’
‘That’s	ridiculous.’
‘Even	so,	mistress.	Furthermore,	she	is	enlivened	by	an	ootooloo.’
‘Oh,	 now	 that’s	 interesting!	 And	 exciting!’	 The	 dagger	 vanished	 as	 quickly	 as	 it	 had	 appeared.	 ‘Fix	 me	 a
bowl,	will	you?	I	need	to	think.’
	
‘Here	they	come,’	murmured	Bugg.
Tehol	 turned.	 ‘Ah,	 see	 how	 they’ve	 made	 up	 and	 everything.	 How	 sweet.	 My	 darlings,	 so	 refreshing	 this
night	air,	don’t	you	think?’
‘I’m	not	your	darling,’	said	Shurq	Elalle.	‘She	is.’
‘And	isn’t	she	just?	Am	I	not	the	luckiest	man	alive?’
‘Errant	knows,	it’s	not	talent.’
‘Or	looks,’	added	Janath,	observing	her	husband	with	gauging	regard.
‘It	was	better,’	Tehol	said	to	Bugg,	‘when	they	weren’t	allies.’
‘Divide	to	conquer	the	divide,	sire,	that’s	my	motto.’
‘And	a	most	curious	one	at	that.	Has	it	ever	worked	for	you,	Bugg?’
‘I’ll	be	sure	to	let	you	know	as	soon	as	it	does.’
	
Thirty	 leagues	 north	 of	 Li	 Heng	 on	 the	 Quon	 Talian	 mainland	 was	 the	 village	 of	 Gethran,	 an	 unremarkable
clump	of	middling	drystone	homes,	workshops,	a	dilapidated	church	devoted	to	a	handful	of	local	spirits,	a	bar
and	a	gaol	blockhouse	where	the	tax-collector	lived	in	one	of	the	cells	and	was	in	the	habit	of	arresting	himself
when	he	got	too	drunk,	which	was	just	about	every	night.
Behind	 the	 squat	 temple	 with	 its	 thirty-two	 rooms	 was	 a	 tiered	 cemetery	 that	 matched	 the	 three	 most
obvious	levels	of	class	in	the	village.	The	highest	and	furthest	from	the	building	was	reserved	for	the	wealthier
families—the	tradesfolk	and	skilled	draft	workers	whose	lineages	could	claim	a	presence	in	the	town	for	more
than	 three	 generations.	 Their	 graves	 were	 marked	 by	 ornate	 sepulchres,	 tombs	 constructed	 in	 the	 fashion	 of
miniature	temples,	and	the	occasional	tholos	bricked	tomb—a	style	of	the	region	that	reached	back	centuries.
The	 second	 level	 belonged	 to	 residents	 who	 were	 not	 particularly	 well-off,	 but	 generally	 solvent	 and
upstanding.	 The	 burials	 here	 were	 naturally	 more	 modest,	 yet	 generally	 well	 maintained	 by	 relatives	 and
offspring,	characterized	by	flat-topped	shrines	and	capped,	stone-lined	pits.
Closest	to	the	temple,	and	level	with	its	foundations,	resided	the	dead	in	most	need	of	spiritual	protection	and,
perhaps,	pity.	The	drunks,	wastrels,	addicts	and	criminals,	their	bodies	stacked	in	elongated	trenches	with	pits
reopened	in	a	migratory	pattern,	up	and	down	the	row,	to	allow	sufficient	time	for	the	corpses	to	decompose
before	a	new	one	was	deposited.
A	village	no	different	from	countless	others	scattered	throughout	the	Malazan	Empire.	Entire	lives	spent	in
isolation	 from	 the	 affairs	 of	 imperial	 ambition,	 from	 the	 marching	 armies	 of	 conquest	 and	 magic-ravaged
battles.	Lives	crowded	with	local	dramas	and	every	face	a	familiar	one,	every	life	known	from	blood-slick	birth
to	blood-drained	death.
Hounded	by	four	older	sisters,	the	grubby,	half-wild	boy	who	would	one	day	be	named	Deadsmell	was	in	the
habit	 of	 hiding	 out	 with	 Old	 Scez,	 who	 might	 have	 been	 an	 uncle	 or	 maybe	 just	 one	 of	 his	 mother’s	 lovers
before	his	father	came	back	from	the	war.	Scez	was	the	village	dresser	of	the	dead,	digger	of	the	graves,	and
occasional	 mason	 for	 standing	 stones.	 With	 hands	 like	 dusty	 mallets,	 wrists	 as	 big	 around	 as	 a	 grown	 man’s
calf,	and	a	face	that	had	been	pushed	hard	to	one	side	by	a	tumbling	lintel	stone	decades	back,	he	was	not	a
man	to	draw	admiring	looks,	but	neither	was	he	short	of	friends.	Scez	did	right	by	the	dead,	after	all.	And	he
had	something—every	woman	said	as	much—he	had	something,	all	right.	A	look	in	his	eye	that	gave	comfort,
that	promised	more	if	more	was	needed.	Yes,	he	was	adored,	and	in	the	habit	of	making	breakfasts	for	women
all	over	the	village,	a	detail	young	Deadsmell	was	slow	to	understand.
Naturally,	a	husband	one	day	went	and	murdered	Old	Scez,	and	though	the	law	said	he	was	justified	in	doing
it,	well,	that	fool	sickened	and	died	a	week	later,	and	few	came	out	to	mourn	the	blue-faced,	bloated	corpse—
by	that	time,	Deadsmell	had	taken	over	as	keeper	of	the	dead,	a	seventeen-year-old	lad	everybody	said	never
would	have	followed	his	own	father—who	was	a	lame	ex-soldier	who’d	fought	in	the	Quon	Talian	civil	war	but


never	 talked	 about	 his	 experiences,	 even	 as	 he	 drank	 himself	 stupid	 with	 one	 red	 eye	 fixed	 on	 one	 of	 those
trench	graves	behind	the	temple.
Young	Deadsmell,	who’d	yet	to	find	that	name,	had	been	pretty	sure	of	his	future	once	he	had	taken	over
Scez’s	responsibilities.	It	was	respectable	enough,	all	things	considered.	A	worthy	profession,	a	worthy	life.
In	 his	 nineteenth	 year,	 he	 was	 well	 settled	 into	 the	 half-sunken	 flat-roofed	 stone	 house	 just	 outside	 the
cemetery—a	house	that	Scez	had	built	with	his	own	hands—when	word	arrived	that	Hester	Vill,	the	temple’s
priest,	had	fallen	with	a	stroke	and	was	soon	to	enter	the	embrace	of	the	spirits.	It	was	long	in	coming.	Hester
was	nearly	a	century	old,	after	all,	a	frail	thing	who—it	was	said—had	once	been	a	hulk	of	a	man.	Boar	tusks
rode	 his	 ears,	 pierced	 through	 the	 lobes	 that	 had	 stretched	 over	 the	 decades	 until	 the	 curved	 yellow	 tusks
rested	on	the	man’s	bony	shoulders.	Waves	of	fur	tattoos	framed	Vill’s	face—there	had	never	been	any	doubt
that	Hester	Vill	was	a	priest	of	Fener;	that	he	looked	upon	the	local	spirits	with	amused	condescension,	though
he	was	ever	proper	in	his	observances	on	behalf	of	the	villagers.
The	 priest’s	 approaching	 death	 was	 a	 momentous	 one	 for	 the	 village.	 The	 last	 acolyte	 had	 run	 off	 with	 a
month’s	worth	of	tithings	a	few	years	previously	(Deadsmell	remembered	the	little	shit—he	and	Scez	had	once
caught	the	brat	pissing	on	a	high-tier	tomb—they’d	beaten	the	boy	and	had	taken	pleasure	in	doing	so).	Once
Vill	 was	 gone,	the	 temple	would	stand	abandoned,	the	 spirits	unappeased.	 Someone	would	have	 to	be	found,
perhaps	even	a	stranger,	a	foreigner—word	would	have	to	be	sent	out	that	Gethran	Village	was	in	need.
It	was	the	keeper’s	task	to	sit	with	the	one	sliding	into	death,	if	no	family	was	available,	and	so	the	young
man	had	thrown	on	Old	Scez’s	Greyman’s	cloak,	and	taken	in	one	hand	his	wooden	box	of	herbs,	elixirs,	knives
and	brain-scoop,	and	crossed	the	graveyard	to	the	refectory	attached	to	one	side	of	the	temple.
He	 could	 not	 recall	 the	 last	 time	 he’d	 visited	 Vill’s	 home,	 but	 what	 he	 found	 on	 this	 night	 was	 a	 chamber
transformed.	The	lone	centre	hearth	raged,	casting	bizarre,	frightening	shadows	upon	all	the	lime-coated	walls
—shadows	 that	 inscribed	 nothing	 visible	 in	 the	 room,	 but	 skeletal	 branches	 wavering	 as	 if	 rattled	 by	 fierce
winter	 winds.	 Half-paralysed,	 Hester	 Vill	 had	 dragged	 himself	 into	 his	 house—refusing	 anyone	 else’s
assistance—and	Deadsmell	found	the	old	priest	lying	on	the	floor	beside	the	cot.	He’d	not	the	strength	to	lift
himself	to	his	bed	and	had	been	there	for	most	of	a	day.
Death	waited	in	the	hot,	dry	air,	pulsed	from	the	walls	and	swirled	round	the	high	flames.	It	was	drawn	close
with	 every	 wheezing	 gasp	 from	 Vill’s	 wrinkled	 mouth,	 feebly	 pushed	 away	 again	 in	 shallow,	 whispery
exhalations.
Deadsmell	lifted	the	frail	body	to	the	bed,	tugged	the	threadbare	blanket	over	Vill’s	emaciated	form,	and	he
then	sat,	sweating,	feeling	half-feverish,	staring	down	at	Vill’s	face.	The	strike	was	drawn	heavily	across	the
left	side	of	the	priest’s	visage,	sagging	the	withered	skin	and	ropy	muscles	beneath	it,	plucking	at	the	lids	of	the
eye.
Trickling	 water	 into	 Vill’s	 gaping	 mouth	 did	 not	 even	 trigger	 a	 reflex	 swallow,	 telling	 Deadsmell	 that	 very
little	time	remained	to	the	man.
The	hearth’s	fire	did	not	abate,	and	after	a	time	that	detail	reached	through	to	Deadsmell	and	he	turned	to
regard	 the	 stone-lined	 pit.	 He	 saw	 no	 wood	 at	 the	 roots	 of	 the	 flames.	 Not	 even	 glowing	 dusty	 coals	 or
embers.	Despite	the	raging	heat,	a	chill	crept	through	him.
Something	had	arrived,	deep	inside	that	conflagration.	Was	it	Fener?	He	thought	that	it	might	be.	Hester	Vill
had	been	a	true	priest,	an	honourable	man—insofar	as	anyone	knew—of	course	his	god	had	come	to	collect
his	soul.	This	was	the	reward	for	a	lifetime	of	service	and	sacrifice.
Of	course,	the	very	notion	of	reward	was	exclusively	human	in	origin,	bound	inside	precious	beliefs	in	efforts
noted,	 recognized,	 attributed	 value.	 That	 it	 was	 a	 language	 understood	 by	 the	 gods	 was	 not	 just	 given,	 but
incumbent—why	else	kneel	before	them?
The	god	that	reached	out	from	the	flames	to	take	Vill’s	breath,	however,	was	not	Fener.	It	was	Hood,	with
taloned	hands	of	dusty	green	and	fingertips	stained	black	with	putrescence,	and	that	reach	seemed	halfhearted,
groping	as	if	the	Lord	of	the	Slain	was	blind,	reluctant,	weary	of	this	pathetic	necessity.
Hood’s	 attention	 brushed	 Deadsmell’s	 mind,	 alien	 in	 every	 respect	 but	 a	 deep,	 almost	 shapeless	 sorrow
rising	like	bitter	mist	from	the	god’s	own	soul—a	sorrow	that	the	young	mortal	recognized.	It	was	the	grief	one
felt,	 at	 times,	 for	 the	 dying	 when	 those	 doing	 the	 dying	 were	 unknown,	 were	 in	 effect	 strangers;	 when	 their
fate	was	almost	abstract.	Impersonal	grief,	a	ghost	cloak	one	tried	on	only	to	stand	motionless,	pensive,	trying
to	convince	oneself	of	its	weight,	and	how	that	weight—when	it	ceased	being	ghostly—might	feel	some	time	in


the	future.	When	death	became	personal,	when	one	could	not	shrug	out	from	beneath	its	weight.	When	grief
ceased	being	an	idea	and	became	an	entire	world	of	suffocating	darkness.
Cold,	 alien	 eyes	 fixed	 momentarily	 upon	 Deadsmell,	 and	 a	 voice	 drifted	 into	 his	 skull.	 ‘You	 thought	 they
cared.’
‘But—he	is	Fener’s	very	own	.	.	.’
‘There	is	no	bargain	when	only	one	side	pays	attention.	There	is	no	contract	when	only	one	party	sets
a	seal	of	blood.	I	am	the	harvester	of	the	deluded,	mortal.’
‘And	this	is	why	you	grieve,	isn’t	it?	I	can	feel	it—your	sorrow—’
‘So	you	can.	Perhaps,	then,	you	are	one	of	my	own.’
‘I	dress	the	dead—’
‘Appeasing	their	delusions,	yes.	But	that	does	not	serve	me.	I	say	you	are	one	of	my	own,	but	what
does	that	mean?	Do	not	ask	me,	mortal.	I	am	not	one	to	bargain	with.	I	promise	nothing	but	loss	and
failure,	 dust	 and	 hungry	 earth.	 You	 are	 one	 of	 my	 own.	 We	 begin	 a	 game,	 you	 and	 me.	 The	 game	 of
evasion.’
‘I	have	seen	death—it	doesn’t	haunt	me.’
‘That	is	irrelevant.	The	game	is	this:	steal	their	lives—snatch	them	away	from	my	reach.	Curse	these
hands	you	now	see,	the	nails	black	with	death’s	touch.	Spit	into	this	lifeless	breath	of	mine.	Cheat	me	at
every	 turn.	 Heed	 this	 truth:	 there	 is	 no	 other	 form	 of	 service	 as	 honest	 as	 the	 one	 I	 offer	 you.	 To	 do
battle	against	me,	you	must	acknowledge	my	power.	Even	as	I	acknowledge	yours.	You	must	respect	the
fact	 that	 I	 always	 win,	 that	 you	 cannot	 help	 but	 fail.	 In	 turn,	 I	 must	 give	 to	 you	 my	 respect.	 For	 your
courage.	For	the	stubborn	refusal	that	is	a	mortal’s	greatest	strength.
‘For	all	that,	mortal,	give	me	a	good	game.’
‘And	what	do	I	get	in	return?	Never	mind	respect,	either.	What	do	I	get	back?’
‘Only	that	which	you	find.	Undeniable	truths.	Unwavering	regard	of	the	sorrows	that	plague	a	life.
The	sigh	of	acceptance.	The	end	of	fear.’
The	end	of	fear.	Even	for	such	a	young	man,	such	an	inexperienced	man,	Deadsmell	understood	the	value
of	such	a	gift.	The	end	of	fear.
‘Do	not	be	cruel	with	Hester	Vill,	I	beg	you.’
‘I	 am	 not	 one	 for	 wilful	 cruelty,	 mortal.	 Yet	 his	 soul	 will	 feel	 sorely	 abused,	 and	 for	 that	 I	 can	 do
nothing.’
‘I	understand.	It	is	Fener	who	should	be	made	to	answer	for	that	betrayal.’
He	sensed	wry	amusement	in	Hood.	‘One	day,	even	the	gods	will	answer	to	death.’
Deadsmell	blinked	in	the	sudden	gloom	as	the	fire	ebbed,	flickered,	vanished.	He	peered	at	Vill	and	saw	that
the	old	man	breathed	no	more.	His	expression	was	frozen	in	a	distraught,	broken	mask.	Four	black	spots	had
burned	his	brow.
The	world	didn’t	give	much.	And	what	it	did	give	it	usually	took	back	way	too	soon.	And	the	hands	stung
with	absence,	the	eyes	that	looked	out	were	as	hollow	as	the	places	they	found.	Sunlight	wept	down	through
drifts	of	dust,	and	a	man	could	sit	waiting	to	see	his	god,	when	waiting	was	all	he	had	left.
Deadsmell	 was	 kicking	 through	 his	 memories,	 a	 task	 best	 done	 in	 solitude.	 Drawn	 to	 this	 overgrown,
abandoned	ruin	in	the	heart	of	Letheras,	with	its	otherworldly	insects,	its	gaping	pits	and	its	root-bound	humps
of	rotted	earth,	he	wandered	as	if	lost.	The	Lord	of	Death	was	reaching	into	this	world	once	again,	swirling	a
finger	through	pools	of	mortal	blood.	But	Deadsmell	remained	blind	to	the	patterns	so	inscribed,	this	intricate
elaboration	on	the	old	game.
He	found	that	he	feared	for	his	god.	For	Hood,	his	foe,	his	friend.	The	only	damned	god	he	respected.
The	necromancer’s	game	was	one	that	others	could	not	understand.	To	them	it	was	the	old	rat	dodging	the
barn	 cat,	 a	 one-sided	 hunt	 bound	 in	 mutual	 hatred.	 It	 was	 nothing	 like	 that,	 of	 course.	 Hood	 didn’t	 despise
necromancers—the	 god	 knew	 that	 no	 one	 else	 truly	 understood	 him	 and	 his	 last-of-last	 worlds.	 Ducking	 the
black	touch,	stealing	back	souls,	mocking	life	with	the	animation	of	corpses—they	were	the	vestments	of	true
worship.	Because	true	worship	was,	in	its	very	essence,	a	game.
“	‘There	is	no	bargain	when	only	one	side	pays	attention.’	”
Moments	after	voicing	that	quote,	Deadsmell	grunted	in	sour	amusement.	Too	much	irony	in	saying	such	a
thing	to	ghosts,	especially	in	a	place	so	crowded	with	them	as	here,	less	than	a	dozen	paces	from	the	gate	to


the	Azath	House.
He	had	learned	that	Brys	Beddict	had	been	slain,	once,	only	to	be	dragged	back.	A	most	bitter	gift,	it	was	a
wonder	 the	 King’s	 brother	 hadn’t	 gone	 mad.	 When	 a	 soul	 leaves	 the	 path,	 a	 belated	 return	 has	 the	 fool
stumbling	again	and	again.	Every	step	settling	awkwardly,	as	if	the	imprint	of	one’s	own	foot	no	longer	fit	it,	as
if	the	soul	no	longer	matched	the	vessel	of	its	flesh	and	bone	and	was	left	jarred,	displaced.
And	 now	he	had	 heard	 about	a	woman	 cursed	undead.	Ruthan	Gudd	 had	gone	so	far	 as	to	hint	 that	he’d
bedded	the	woman—and	how	sick	was	that?	Deadsmell	shook	his	head.	As	bad	as	sheep,	cows,	dogs,	goats
and	fat	bhokarala.	No,	even	worse.	And	did	she	want	the	curse	unravelled?	No—at	least	with	that	he	had	to
agree.	It	does	no	good	to	come	back.	One	gets	used	to	things	staying	the	same,	more	used	to	that	than	how	a
living	soul	felt	about	its	own	sagging,	decaying	body.	Besides,	the	dead	never	come	back	all	the	way.	‘It’s	like
knowing	the	secret	to	a	trick,	the	wonder	goes	away.	They’ve	lost	all	the	delusions	that	once	comforted	them.’
‘Deadsmell!’
He	turned	to	see	Bottle	picking	his	way	round	the	heaps	and	holes.
‘Heard	you	saying	something—ghosts	never	got	anything	good	to	say,	why	bother	talking	with	them?’
‘I	wasn’t.’
The	young	mage	reached	him	and	then	stood,	staring	at	the	old	Jaghut	tower.	‘Did	you	see	the	baggage	train
forming	up	outside	the	city?	Gods,	we’ve	got	enough	stuff	to	handle	an	army	five	times	our	size.’
‘Maybe,	maybe	not.’
Bottle	grunted.	‘That’s	what	Fiddler	said.’
‘We’ll	be	marching	into	nowhere.	Resupply	will	be	hard	to	manage,	maybe	impossible.’
‘Into	nowhere,	that	seems	about	right.’
Deadsmell	pointed	at	the	Azath	House.	‘They	went	in	there,	I	think.’
‘Sinn	and	Grub?’
‘Aye.’
‘Something	snatch	them?’
‘I	don’t	think	so.	I	think	they	went	through,	the	way	Kellanved	and	Dancer	learned	how	to	do.’
‘Where?’
‘No	idea,	and	no,	I	have	no	plans	to	follow	them.	We	have	to	consider	them	lost.	Permanently.’
Bottle	glanced	at	him.	‘You	throw	that	at	the	Adjunct	yet?’
‘I	did.	She	wasn’t	happy.’
‘I	bet	she	wasn’t.’	He	scratched	at	the	scraggy	beard	he	seemed	intent	on	growing.	‘So	tell	me	why	you
think	they	went	in	there.’
Deadsmell	 grimaced.	 ‘I	 remember	 the	 day	 I	 left	 my	 home.	 A	 damned	 ram	 had	 got	 on	 to	 the	 roof	 of	 my
house—the	house	I	inherited,	I	mean.	A	big	white	bastard,	eager	to	hump	anything	with	legs.	The	look	it	gave
me	was	empty	and	full,	if	you	know	what	I	mean—’
‘No.	All	right,	yes.	When	winter’s	broken—the	season,	and	those	eyes.’
‘Empty	 and	 full,	 and	 from	 its	 perch	 up	 there	 it	 had	 a	 damned	 good	 view	 of	 the	 graveyard,	 all	 three	 tiers,
from	paupers	to	the	local	version	of	nobility.	I’d	just	gone	and	buried	the	village	priest—’
‘Hope	he	was	dead	when	you	did	it.’
‘Some	people	die	looking	peaceful.	Others	die	all	too	knowing.	Empty	and	full.	He	didn’t	know	until	he	did
his	dying,	and	that	kind	of	face	is	the	worst	kind	to	look	down	on.’	He	scowled.	‘The	worst	kind,	Bottle.’
‘Go	on.’
‘What	have	you	got	to	be	impatient	about,	soldier?’
Bottle	flinched.	‘Sorry.	Nothing.’
‘Most	impatient	people	I	meet	are	just	like	that,	once	you	kick	through	all	the	attitude.	They’re	in	a	lather,	in
a	hurry	about	nothing.	The	rush	is	in	their	heads,	and	they	expect	everyone	else	to	up	the	pace	and	get	the	fuck
on	with	it.	I	got	no	time	for	such	shits.’
‘They	make	you	impatient,	do	they?’
‘No	time,	I	said.	Meaning	the	more	they	push,	the	longer	I	take.’
Bottle	flashed	a	grin.	‘I	hear	you.’
‘Good.’	Deadsmell	paused,	working	back	round	to	his	thoughts.	‘That	ram,	looming	up	there,	well,	it	just	hit
me,	 those	 eyes.	 We	 all	 got	 them,	 I	 think,	 some	 worse	 than	 others.	 For	 the	 priest,	 they	 came	 late—but	 the


promise	was	there,	all	his	life.	Same	for	everyone.	You	see	that	it’s	empty,	and	that	revelation	fills	you	up.’
‘Wait—what’s	empty?’
‘The	whole	Hood-forsaken	mess,	Bottle.	All	of	it.’
‘Well	now,	aren’t	you	a	miserable	crudge,	Deadsmell.’
‘I’ll	grant	you,	this	particular	place	eats	on	me,	chews	up	memories	I’d	figured	were	long	buried.	Anyway,
there	I	was,	standing.	Ram	on	one	side,	the	priest’s	tomb	on	the	other—high	ridge,	highest	I	could	find—and
the	highborn	locals	were	going	to	howl	when	they	saw	that.	But	I	didn’t	care	any	longer.’
‘Because	you	left	that	day.’
‘Aye.	Down	to	Li	Heng,	first	in	line	at	the	recruiting	office.	A	soldier	leaves	the	dead	behind	and	the	ones	a
soldier	does	bury,	well,	most	of	the	time	they’re	people	that	soldier	knows.’
‘We	don’t	raise	battlefield	barrows	for	just	our	own	dead.’
‘That’s	not	what	I	mean	by	“knowing”,	Bottle.	Ever	look	down	on	an	enemy’s	face,	a	dead	one,	I	mean?’
‘A	few	times,	aye.’
‘What	did	you	see?’
Bottle	shifted	uneasily,	squinted	at	the	tower	again.	‘Point	taken.’
‘No	better	place	to	piss	on	Hood’s	face	than	in	an	army.	When	piss	is	all	you	got,	and	let’s	face	it,	it’s	all	any
of	us	has	got.’
‘I’m	waiting—patiently—to	see	how	all	this	comes	back	to	Sinn	and	Grub	and	the	Azath.’
‘Last	night,	I	went	to	the	kennels	and	got	out	Bent	and	Roach—the	lapdog’s	the	one	of	them	with	the	real
vicious	streak,	you	know.	Old	Bent,	he’s	just	a	damned	cattle-dog.	Pretty	simple,	straightforward.	I	mean,	you
know	what	he	really	wants	to	do	is	rip	out	your	throat.	But	no	games,	right?	Not	Roach,	the	simpering	fanged
demon.	Well,	I	thumped	Bent	on	the	head	which	told	him	who’s	boss.	Roach	gave	me	a	tail	wag	and	then	went
for	my	ankle—I	had	to	near	strangle	it	to	work	its	jaws	loose	from	my	boot.’
‘You	collected	the	dogs.’
‘Then	I	unleashed	them	both.	They	shot	like	siege	bolts—up	streets,	down	alleys,	round	buildings	and	right
through	screaming	crowds—right	up	to	that	door	over	there.	The	Azath.’
‘How’d	you	keep	up	with	them?’
‘I	didn’t.	I	set	a	geas	on	them	both	and	just	followed	that.	By	the	time	I	got	here,	Roach	had	been	throwing
itself	at	the	door	so	often	it	was	lying	stunned	on	the	path.	And	Bent	was	trying	to	dig	through	the	flagstones.’
‘So	why	didn’t	any	of	us	think	of	doing	something	like	that?’
‘Because	you’re	all	stupid,	that’s	why.’
‘What	did	you	do	then?’	Bottle	asked.
‘I	opened	the	door.	In	they	went.	I	heard	them	racing	up	the	stairs—and	then	.	.	.	nothing.	Silence.	The	dogs
went	after	Sinn	and	Grub,	through	a	portal	of	some	sort.’
‘You	know,’	said	Bottle,	‘if	you’d	come	to	me,	I	could	have	ridden	the	souls	of	one	of	them,	and	got	maybe
an	 idea	 of	 where	 that	 portal	 opened	 out.	 But	 then,	 since	 you’re	 a	 genius,	 Deadsmell,	 I’m	 sure	 you’ve	 got	 a
good	reason	for	not	doing	that.’
‘Hood’s	breath.	All	right,	so	I	messed	up.	Even	geniuses	can	get	stupid	on	occasion.’
‘It	was	Crump	who	delivered	your	message—I	could	barely	make	any	sense	of	it.	You	wanted	to	meet	me
here,	and	here	I	am.	But	this	tale	of	yours	you	could	have	told	me	over	a	tankard	at	Gosling’s	Tavern.’
‘I	chose	Crump	because	I	knew	that	as	soon	as	he	delivered	the	message	he’d	forget	all	about	it.	He’d	even
forget	I	talked	to	him,	and	that	he	then	talked	to	you.	He	is,	in	fact,	the	thickest	man	I	have	ever	known.’
‘So	we	meet	in	secret.	How	mysterious.	What	do	you	want	with	me,	Deadsmell?’
‘I	want	to	know	about	your	nightly	visitor,	to	start	with.	I	figured	it’d	be	something	best	done	in	private.’
Bottle	stared	at	him.
Deadsmell	frowned.	‘What?’
‘I’m	waiting	to	see	the	leer.’
‘I	don’t	want	those	kind	of	details,	idiot!	Do	you	ever	see	her	eyes?	Do	you	ever	look	into	them,	Bottle?’
‘Aye,	and	every	time	I	wish	I	didn’t.’
‘Why?’
‘There’s	so	much	.	.	.	need	in	them.’
‘Is	that	it?	Nothing	else?’


‘Plenty	else,	Deadsmell.	Pleasure,	maybe	even	love—I	don’t	know.	Everything	I	see	in	her	eyes	.	.	.	it’s	in
the	“now.”	I	don’t	know	how	else	to	explain	it.	There’s	no	past,	no	future,	only	the	present.’
‘Empty	and	full.’
Bottle’s	gaze	narrowed.	‘Like	the	ram,	aye,	the	animal	side	of	her.	It	freezes	me	in	my	tracks,	I	admit,	as	if	I
was	looking	into	a	mirror	and	seeing	my	own	eyes,	but	in	a	way	no	one	else	can	see	them.	My	eyes	with	.	.	.’
he	shivered,	‘nobody	behind	them.	Nobody	I	know.’
‘Nobody	anyone	knows,’	Deadsmell	said,	nodding.	‘Bottle,	I	once	looked	into	Hood’s	own	eyes,	and	I	saw
the	 same	 thing—I	 even	 felt	 what	 you	 just	 described.	 Me,	 but	 not	 me.	 Me,	 but	 really,	 nobody.	 And	 I	 think	 I
know	what	I	saw—what	you	keep	seeing	in	her,	as	well.	I	think	I	finally	understand	it—those	eyes,	the	empty
and	full,	the	solid	absence	in	them.’	He	faced	Bottle.	‘It’s	our	eyes	in	death.	Our	eyes	when	our	souls	have
fled	them.’
Bottle	 was	 suddenly	 pale.	 ‘Gods	 below,	 Deadsmell!	 You	 just	 poured	 cold	 worms	 down	 my	 spine.	 That—
that’s	just	horrible.	Is	that	what	comes	of	looking	into	the	eyes	of	too	many	dead	people?	Now	I	know	to	keep
my	own	eyes	averted	when	I	walk	a	killing	field—gods!’
‘The	ram	was	full	of	seed,’	said	Deadsmell,	studying	the	Azath	once	more,	‘and	needed	to	get	it	out.	Was	it
the	beast’s	last	season?	Did	it	know	it?	Does	it	believe	it	every	spring?	No	past	and	no	future.	Full	and	empty.
Just	that.	Always	that.	For	ever	that.’	He	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘I’m	out	of	moves,	Bottle.	I	can	feel	it.	I’m	out	of
moves.’
	
‘Listen,’	she	said,	‘me	puttin’	my	finiger—my	finger—in	there	does	nothing	for	me.	Don’t	you	get	that?	Bah!’
And	she	rolled	away	from	him,	thinking	to	swing	her	feet	down	and	then	maybe	stand	up,	but	someone	had	cut
the	cot	down	the	middle	and	she	thumped	on	to	the	filthy	floor.	‘Ow.	I	think.’
Skulldeath	 popped	 up	 for	 a	 look,	 his	 huge	 liquid	 woman’s	 eyes	 gleaming	 beneath	 his	 ragged	 fringe	 of	 inky
black	hair.
Hellian	had	a	sudden	bizarre	memory,	bizarre	in	that	it	reached	her	at	all	since	few	ever	did.	She’d	been	a
child,	only	a	little	drunk	(hah	hah),	stumbling	down	a	grassy	bank	to	a	trickling	creek,	and	in	the	shallows	she’d
found	this	slip	of	a	minnow,	dead	but	fresh	dead.	Taking	the	limp	thing	into	her	hand,	she	peered	down	at	it.	A
trout	of	some	kind,	a	flash	of	the	most	stunning	red	she’d	ever	seen,	and	along	its	tiny	back	ran	a	band	of	dark
iridescent	green,	the	colour	of	wet	pine	boughs.
Why	Skulldeath	reminded	her	of	that	dead	minnow	she	had	no	idea.	Wasn’t	the	colours,	because	he	wasn’t
red	or	even	green.	Wasn’t	the	deadness	because	he	didn’t	look	very	dead,	blinking	like	that.	The	slippiness?
Could	be.	That	liquid	glisten,	aye,	that	minnow	in	the	bowl	of	her	hand,	in	its	paltry	pool	of	water	wrapping	it
like	a	coffin	or	a	cocoon.	She	remembered	now,	suddenly,	the	deep	sorrow	she’d	felt.	Young	ones	struggled
so.	Lots	of	them	died,	sometimes	for	no	good	reason.	What	was	the	name	of	that	stream?	Where	the	Hood
was	it?
‘Where	did	I	grow	up?’	she	whispered,	still	lying	on	the	floor.	‘Who	was	I?	In	a	city?	Outside	a	city?	Farm?
Quarry?’
Skulldeath	slithered	to	the	cot’s	edge	and	watched	her	in	confused	hunger.
Hellian	scowled.	‘Who	am	I?	Damned	if	I	know.	And	does	it	even	matter?	Gods,	I’m	sober.	Who	did	that	to
me?’	She	glared	at	Skulldeath.	‘You?	Bastard!’
‘Not	bastard,’	he	said.	‘Prince!	King	in	waiting!	Me.	You	.	.	.	you	Queen.	My	Queen.	King	and	Queen,	we.
Two	tribes	now	together,	make	one	great	tribe.	I	rule.	You	rule.	People	kneel	and	bring	gifts.’
She	 bared	 her	 teeth	 at	 him.	 ‘Listen,	 idiot,	 if	 I	 never	 knelt	 to	 nobody	 in	 my	 life,	 there’s	 no	 way	 I’ll	 make
anybody	kneel	to	me,	unless,’	she	added,	‘we	both	got	something	else	in	mind.	Piss	on	kings	and	queens,	piss
on	’em!	All	that	pomp	is	pure	shit,	all	that	.	.	.’	she	scowled,	searching	for	the	word,	‘.	.	.	all	that	def’rence!
Listen!	I’ll	salute	an	orficer,	cos	that	crap’s	needed	in	an	army,	right?	But	that’s	because	somebody	needs	to	be
in	 charge.	 Don’t	 mean	 they’re	 better.	 Not	 purer	 of	 blood,	 not	 even	 smarter,	 you	 unnerstand	 me?	 It’s	 just—
between	 that	 orficer	 and	 me—it’s	 just	 something	 we	 agree	 between	 us.	 We	 agree	 to	 it,	 right?	 To	 make	 it
work!	Highborn,	they’re	different.	They	got	expectations.	Piss	on	that!	Who	says	they’re	better?	Don’t	care
how	fuckin’	rich	they	are—they	can	shit	gold	bricks,	it’s	still	shit,	right?’	She	jabbed	a	finger	up	at	Skulldeath.
‘You’re	a	hood-damned	soldier	and	that’s	all	you	are.	Prince!	Hah!’	And	then	she	rolled	over	and	threw	up.


	
Cuttle	and	Fiddler	stood	watching	the	row	of	heavily	padded	wagons	slowly	wend	through	the	supply	camp	to
the	tree-lined	commons	where	they	would	be	stored,	well	away	from	everything	else.	Dust	filled	the	air	above
the	massive	sprawl	of	tents,	carts,	pens,	and	parked	wagons,	and	now	as	the	day	was	ending,	thin	grey	smoke
lifted	lazily	skyward	from	countless	cookfires.
‘Y’know,’	said	Cuttle,	his	eyes	on	the	last	of	the	Moranth	munitions,	‘this	is	stupid.	We	done	what	we	could
—either	they	make	it	or	they	don’t,	and	even	this	far	away,	if	they	go	up,	we’re	probably	finished.’
‘They’ll	make	it,’	said	Fiddler.
‘Hardly	matters,	Sergeant.	Fourteen	cussers	for	a	whole	damned	army.	A	hundred	sharpers?	Two	hundred?
It’s	nothing.	If	we	get	into	trouble	out	there,	it’s	going	to	be	bad.’
‘These	 Letherii	 have	 decent	 ballistae	 and	 onagers,	 Cuttle.	 Expensive,	 but	 lack	 of	 coin	 doesn’t	 seem	 to	 be
one	 of	 Tavore’s	 shortcomings.’	 He	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then	 he	 grunted.	 ‘Let’s	 not	 talk	 about
anyone’s	shortcomings.	Sorry	I	said	it.’
‘We	got	no	idea	what	we’re	going	to	find,	Fid.	But	we	can	all	feel	it.	There’s	a	dread,	settling	down	on	all	of
us	like	a	sky	full	of	ashes.	Makes	my	skin	crawl.	We	crossed	Seven	Cities.	We	took	on	this	empire.	So	what’s
so	different	this	time?’	He	shook	himself.	‘Our	landings	here,	they	were	pretty	much	a	blind	assault—and	what
information	we	had	was	mostly	wrong.	But	it	didn’t	matter.	Not	knowing	ain’t	enough	to	drag	us	down	s’far	as
we	been	dragged	down	right	now.	I	don’t	get	it.’
Fiddler	 scratched	 at	 his	 beard,	 adjusted	 the	 strap	 beneath	 his	 chin.	 ‘Hot	 and	 sticky,	 isn’t	 it?	 Not	 dry	 like
Seven	Cities.	Sucks	all	the	energy	away,	especially	when	you’re	wearing	armour.’
‘We	 need	 that	 armour	 to	 guard	 against	 the	 Hood-damned	 mosquitoes,’	 said	 Cuttle.	 ‘Without	 it	 we’d	 be
wrinkled	sacks	filled	with	bones.	And	those	bugs	carry	diseases—the	healers	been	treating	twenty	soldiers	a
day	who	come	down	with	that	sweating	ague.’
‘The	mosquitoes	are	the	cause?’
‘So	I	heard.’
‘Well	then,	as	soon	as	we	get	deeper	into	the	wastelands,	we	won’t	have	to	worry	about	that	any	longer.’
‘How’s	that?’
‘Mosquitoes	 need	 water	 to	 breed.	 Anyway,	 these	 local	 ones,	 they’re	 small.	 We	 hit	 swarms	 in	 Blackdog
you’d	swear	were	flocks	of	hummingbirds.’
Blackdog.	 Still	 a	 name	 that	 could	 send	 chills	 through	 a	 Malazan	 soldier,	 whether	 they’d	 been	 in	 it	 or	 not.
Cuttle	 wondered	 how	 a	 place—a	 happening	 now	 years	 and	 years	 old—could	 sink	 into	 a	 people,	 like	 scars
passed	 from	 parents	 to	 child.	 Scars,	 aye,	 and	 stains,	 and	 the	 sour	 taste	 of	 horror	 and	 misery—was	 it	 even
possible?	Or	was	it	the	stories—stories	like	the	one	Fiddler	just	told?	Not	even	a	story,	was	it?	Just	a	detail.
Exaggerated,	 aye,	 but	 still	 a	 detail.	 Enough	 details,	 muttered	 here	 and	 there,	 every	 now	 and	 then,	 and
something	started	clumping	up	inside,	like	a	ball	of	wet	clay,	smearing	everything.	And	before	too	long,	there	it
is,	 compacted	 and	 hard	 as	 a	 damned	 rock,	 perfect	 to	 rattle	 around	 inside	 a	 man’s	 head,	 knocking	 about	 his
thoughts	and	confusing	him.
And	confusion	was	what	hid	behind	fear,	after	all.	Every	soldier	knew	it,	and	knew	how	deadly	it	could	be,
especially	in	the	storm	of	battle.	Confusion	led	to	mistakes,	bad	judgements,	and	sure	enough,	blind	panic	was
the	first	stinking	flower	confusion	plucked	when	it	was	time	to	dance	in	the	fields.
‘Looking	way	too	thoughtful	there,	sapper,’	said	Fiddler.	‘Bad	for	your	health.’
‘Was	thinking	about	dancing	in	the	fields.’
‘Hood’s	 breath,	 it’s	 been	 years	 since	 I	 heard	 that	 phrase.	 No	 reason	 to	 dredge	 that	 up	 just	 yet,	 Cuttle.
Besides,	the	Bonehunters	haven’t	shown	any	inclination	to	break	and	run—’
‘I	know	it	makes	sense	to	keep	us	all	dumb	and	ignorant,	Sergeant,	but	sometimes	that	can	go	too	far.’
‘Our	great	unknown	purpose.’
Cuttle	 nodded	 sharply.	 ‘If	 we’re	 mercenaries	 now	 we	 should	 be	 for	 hire.	 But	 we	 aren’t,	 and	 even	 if	 we
were,	there’s	nobody	around	wants	to	hire	us,	is	there?	And	not	likely	anybody	out	in	the	Wastelands	or	even
beyond.	 And	 now	 I	 caught	 them	 rumours	 of	 scraps	 in	 Bolkando.	 The	 Burned	 Tears,	 and	 maybe	 even	 the
Perish.	Now,	going	in	and	extricating	our	allies	is	a	good	cause,	a	decent	one—’
‘Waves	all	the	right	banners.’
‘Exactly.	But	it	wouldn’t	be	our	reasons	for	being	here	in	the	first	place,	would	it?’


‘We	kicked	down	a	mad	emperor,	sapper.	And	delivered	to	the	Letherii	a	message	about	preying	on	foreign
shores—’
‘They	didn’t	need	it.	The	Tiste	Edur	did—’
‘And	don’t	you	think	we	humbled	them	enough,	Cuttle?’
‘So	now	what?	We’re	really	getting	nothing	here,	Fid,	and	less	than	nothing.’
‘Give	it	up,’	drawled	Fiddler.	‘You	wasn’t	invited	to	the	reading.	Nothing	that	happened	then	was	for	you—
I’ve	already	told	you	so.’
‘Plenty	for	Tavore,	though,	and	hey,	look!	We	just	happen	to	be	following	her	around!’
The	 last	 of	 the	 wagons	 reached	 the	 makeshift	 depot,	 and	 the	 oxen	 were	 being	 unhitched.	 Sighing,	 Fiddler
unclipped	his	helm	and	drew	it	off.	‘Let’s	go	look	in	on	Koryk.’
Cuttle	frowned	as	he	fell	in	beside	his	sergeant.	‘Our	squad’s	all	over	the	place	these	days.’
‘Bottle	likes	wandering	off.	Nobody	else.	You	can’t	count	Koryk,	can	you?	It’s	not	like	he	camped	out	in	the
infirmary	because	of	the	décor.’
‘Bottle’s	your	problem,	Sergeant.	Ducking	out	of	stuff,	disappearing	for	days	on	end—’
‘He’s	just	bored.’
‘Who	ain’t?	I	just	got	this	feeling	we’re	going	to	fit	badly	for	a	week	or	two	once	we	start	marching.’
Fiddler	snorted.	‘We’ve	never	fit	well,	Cuttle.	You	telling	me	you’ve	never	noticed?’
‘We	done	good	in	that	Letherii	village—’
‘No	we	didn’t.	If	it	wasn’t	for	Hellian’s	and	Gesler’s	squads—and	then	Badan	Gruk’s,	why,	our	fingernails
would	 be	 riding	 flower	 buds	 right	 about	 now,	 like	 cute	 hats.	 We	 were	 all	 over	 the	 place,	 Cuttle.	 Koryk	 and
Smiles	running	off	like	two	lovestruck	hares—turned	out	Corabb	was	my	best	fist.’
‘You’re	looking	at	it	bad,	Fiddler.	All	that.	Edur	were	coming	in	on	all	sides—we	had	to	split	’em	up.’
Fiddler	 shrugged.	 ‘Maybe	 so.	 And	 granted,	 we	 did	 better	 in	 Y’Ghatan.	 I	 guess	 I	 can’t	 help	 comparing,
’times.	A	useless	habit,	I	know—stop	looking	at	me	like	that,	sapper.’
‘So	you	had	Hedge	and	Quick	Ben.	And	that	assassin—what	was	his	name	again?’
‘Kalam.’
‘Aye,	that	boar	with	knives.	Stupid,	him	getting	killed	in	Malaz	City.	Anyway,	my	point	is—’
‘We	 had	 a	 Barghast	 for	 a	 squad	 fist,	 and	 then	 there	 was	 Sorry—never	 mind	 her—and	 Whiskeyjack	 and
Hood	knows,	I’m	no	Whiskeyjack.’	Noticing	that	Cuttle	was	laughing,	Fiddler’s	scowl	deepened.	‘What’s	so
damned	funny?’
‘Only	that	it	sounds	like	your	old	Bridgeburner	squad	was	probably	just	as	bad	fitting	as	this	one	is.	Maybe
even	worse.	Look.	Corabb’s	a	solid	fist,	with	the	Lady’s	hand	down	the	front	of	his	trousers;	and	if	he	drops
then	Tarr	steps	in,	and	if	Tarr	goes,	then	Koryk.	You	had	Sorry—we	got	Smiles.’
‘And	instead	of	Hedge,’	said	Fiddler,	‘I	got	you,	which	is	a	damned	improvement,	come	to	think	on	it.’
‘I	can’t	sap	the	way	he	can—’
‘Gods,	I’m	thankful	for	that.’
Cuttle	squinted	at	his	sergeant	as	they	approached	the	enormous	hospital	tent.	‘You	really	got	something	to
pick	 with	 Hedge,	 don’t	 you?	 The	 legend	 goes	 that	 you	 two	 were	 close,	 as	 nasty	 in	 your	 own	 way	 as	 Quick
Ben	and	Kalam.	What	happened	between	you	two?’
‘When	a	friend	dies	you	got	to	put	them	away,	and	that’s	what	I	did.’
‘Only	he’s	back.’
‘Back	and	yet,	not	back.	I	can’t	say	it	any	better.’
‘So,	if	it	can’t	be	what	it	was,	make	it	something	new.’
‘It’s	worse	than	you	think.	I	see	his	face,	and	I	think	about	all	the	people	now	dead.	Our	friends.	All	dead
now.	It	was—I	hate	saying	this—it	was	easier	when	it	was	just	me.	Even	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	showing	up
sort’ve	left	me	out	of	sorts—but	we	were	all	the	survivors,	right?	The	ones	who	made	it	through,	to	that	point.
It	was	natural,	I	guess,	and	that	was	good	enough.	Now	there’s	still	Quick	but	the	Adjunct’s	got	him	and	that’s
fine.	It	was	back	to	me,	you	understand?	Back	to	just	me.’
‘Until	Hedge	shows	up.’
‘Comes	 down	 to	 what	 fits	 and	 what’s	 supposed	 to	 fit,	 I	 suppose.’	 They	 had	 paused	 outside	 the	 tent
entrance.	Fiddler	scratched	at	his	sweaty,	thinning	hair.	‘Maybe	in	time	.	.	.’
‘Aye,	that’s	how	I’d	see	it.	In	time.’


They	entered	the	ward.
Cots	 creaked	 and	 trembled	 with	 soldiers	 rattling	 about	 beneath	 sodden	 woollen	 blankets,	 soldiers	 delirious
and	soaked	in	sweat	as	they	thrashed	and	shivered.	Cutters	stumbled	from	bed	to	bed	with	dripping	cloths.	The
air	stank	of	urine.
‘Hood’s	breath!’	hissed	Cuttle.	‘It’s	looking	pretty	bad,	ain’t	it?’
There	 were	 at	 least	 two	 hundred	 cots,	 each	 and	 every	 one	 occupied	 by	 a	 gnat-bit	 victim.	 The	 drenched
cloths,	Cuttle	saw,	were	being	pushed	against	mouths	in	an	effort	to	get	some	water	into	the	stricken	soldiers.
Fiddler	 pointed.	 ‘There.	 No,	 don’t	 bother,	 he	 wouldn’t	 even	 recognize	 us	 right	 now.’	 He	 reached	 out	 and
snagged	a	passing	cutter.	‘Where’s	our	Denul	healers?’
‘The	last	one	collapsed	this	morning.	Exhaustion,	Sergeant.	All	worn	out—now,	I	got	to	keep	getting	water
in	’em,	all	right?’
Fiddler	let	go	of	the	man’s	arm.
They	retreated	outside	once	more.	‘Let’s	go	find	Brys	Beddict.’
‘He’s	no	healer,	Sergeant—’
‘I	know	that,	idiot.	But,	did	you	see	any	Letherii	carters	or	support	staff	lying	on	cots	in	there?’
‘No—’
‘Meaning	there	must	be	a	local	treatment	against	this	ague.’
‘Sometimes	local	people	are	immune	to	most	of	what	can	get	at	’em,	Fid—’
‘That’s	rubbish.	What	can	get	at	them	kills	most	of	them	so	us	foreigners	don’t	ever	see	them	in	the	first
place.	 And	 most	 of	 the	 time	 it’s	 the	 usual	 sources	 of	 contagion—leaking	 latrines,	 standing	 water,	 spoiled
foods.’
‘Oh.	So	how	come	you	know	so	much	about	all	that?’
‘Before	 Moranth	 munitions,	 Cuttle,	 us	 sappers	 did	 a	 lot	 of	 rebuilding	 work,	 following	 occupations.	 Built
sewage	 systems,	 dug	 deep	 wells,	 cold-pits—made	 the	 people	 we	 were	 killing	 a	 month	 before	 into	 smiling
happy	healthy	citizens	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	I’m	surprised	you	didn’t	do	any	of	that	yourself.’
‘I	did,	but	I	could	never	figure	out	why	we	was	doing	it	in	the	first	place.’
Fiddler	halted.	‘What	you	said	earlier	about	not	knowing	anything	.	.	.’
‘Aye?’
‘Has	it	 ever	 occurred	 to	 you,	 Cuttle,	 that	 maybe	 not	 knowing	 anything	 has	 more	 to	 do	 with	 you	 than	 with
anyone	else?’
‘No.’
Fiddler	stared	at	Cuttle,	who	stared	back,	and	then	they	continued	on,	in	search	of	Brys	Beddict.
	
The	 Malazan	 army	 was	 slowly	 decamping	 from	 the	 city,	 squads	 and	 half-squads	 trickling	 in	 to	 the	 company
forts	that	now	occupied	what	had	once	been	killing	fields.	A	lot	of	soldiers,	after	a	few	nights	in	the	tents,	were
falling	sick—like	Koryk—and	had	to	be	carted	off	to	the	hospital	compound	set	up	between	the	army	and	the
baggage	camp.
The	 war-games	 were	 over,	 but	 they’d	 done	 their	 damage.	 So	 many	 soldiers	 had	 found	 ways	 out	 of	 them,
ended	up	 scattered	all	over	the	 city,	 that	 the	army’s	cohesion—already	weakened	by	 the	invasion	where	the
marines	saw	most	of	the	messy	work—was	in	a	bad	state.
Sitting	on	a	camp	stool	outside	the	squad	tent,	Corporal	Tarr	uncoiled	another	reach	of	iron	wire	and,	using
an	 ingenious	 clipper	 some	 Malazan	 blacksmith	 had	 invented	 a	 few	 decades	 back,	 began	 cutting	 it	 into	 short
lengths.	 Chain	 armour	 took	 a	 lot	 of	 work	 to	 maintain.	 He	 could	 have	 sent	 it	 off	 to	 the	 armourers	 but	 he
preferred	doing	his	own	repairs,	not	that	he	didn’t	trust—well,	aye,	he	didn’t	trust	the	bastards,	especially	when
harried	 and	 overworked	 as	 they	 were	 these	 days.	 No,	 he’d	 use	 the	 tugger	 to	 wrap	 the	 length	 round	 a	 spar,
shuck	it	off	and	close	up	the	gaps	one	by	one.	Used	to	be	they’d	work	a	longer	length,	coiled	right	up	the	spar,
and	then	swirl-cut	across	all	the	links,	but	that	ruined	whatever	blade	was	used	to	do	the	cutting,	and	files	made
the	gaps	too	wide	and	left	ragged	edges	that	cut	an	underpad	to	ribbons.	Miserable,	frustrating	work.	No,	this
was	 easier,	 working	 each	 link,	 pinching	 the	 gaps	 to	 check	 that	 the	 crimping	 hadn’t	 left	 any	 spurs,	 and	 then
using	the	tugger	to	fix	each	link	in	place.	And	then—
‘Your	obsessions	drive	me	mad,	Tarr,	did	you	know	that?’
‘Go	find	something	to	do,	Smiles.	And	you	keep	forgetting,	I’m	your	corporal.’


‘Proving	just	how	messed-up	the	command	structure’s	got	to.’
‘Bleat	that	to	the	sergeant,	why	don’t	you?’
‘Where’s	Corabb	gone?’
Tarr	shrugged,	adjusting	the	chain	hauberk	draped	across	his	thighs.	‘Went	off	to	requisition	a	new	weapon.’
‘He	lost	another	one?’
‘Broke	it,	actually,	and	before	you	ask,	I’m	not	telling	you	how.’
‘Why	not?’
Tarr	 said	 nothing	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then	 he	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 Smiles	 scowling	 down	 at	 him,	 her	 hands
anchored	on	her	hips.	‘What	shape’s	your	kit	in,	soldier?’
‘It’s	fine.’
‘Restocked	on	quarrels?’
‘Got	one	with	your	name	on	it.	Got	plenty	others	besides.’
Corabb	 Bhilan	 Thenu’alas	 was	 coming	 up	 the	 track,	 his	 gait	 peculiar,	 each	 step	 cautious—as	 if	 he	 was
testing	thin	ice—and	pitched	slightly	to	the	outside,	as	if	he	were	straddling	a	barrel.	Slung	over	one	shoulder
was	a	Letherii-made	longsword	in	a	scabbard	still	caked	in	burlap-patterned	wax.	Tucked	under	an	arm	was	a
feather-stuffed	pillow.
Arriving	at	the	cookfire,	he	set	the	pillow	down	on	a	stool	and	then	gingerly	settled	on	to	it.
‘What	the	Hood	did	you	do?’	Smiles	demanded.	‘Pick	your	hole	with	it?’
Corabb	scowled.	‘It’s	personal.’	He	brought	his	new	sword	round	and	set	it	across	his	thighs,	and	in	his	face
was	 an	 expression	 Tarr	 had	 seen	 only	 on	 the	 faces	 of	 children	 on	 the	 Queen	 of	 Dreams’s	 Gift-Day,	 a
brightness,	flushed,	eyes	eager	to	see	what	waited	beneath	the	dyed	snakeskin	wrappings.
‘It’s	just	a	sword,	Corabb,’	said	Smiles.	‘Really.’
Tarr	 saw	 that	 wondrous	 expression	 in	 Corabb’s	 face	 fall	 away	 suddenly,	 slapped	 back	 into	 hiding.	 The
corporal	 fixed	 hard	 eyes	 on	 Smiles.	 ‘Soldier,	 go	 fill	 up	 enough	 travel	 sacks	 for	 each	 one	 of	 us	 in	 the	 squad.
You’ll	need	to	requisition	a	mule	and	cart,	unless	you’re	planning	on	more	than	one	trip.’
She	bridled.	‘Why	me?’
Because	you	cut	people	out	of	boredom.	‘Just	get	out	of	my	sight.	Now.’
‘Ain’t	you	the	friendly	one,’	she	muttered,	setting	off.
Tarr	set	down	his	tools.	‘Letherii?	Well,	Corabb,	let’s	see	the	thing,	shall	we?’
And	the	man’s	eyes	lit	up.
	
They	 had	 days	 before	 the	 official	 mustering	 for	 the	 march.	 Tarr’s	 orders	 were	 premature.	 And	 if	 she	 was
corporal,	she’d	have	known	that	and	not	made	her	go	off	for	no	good	reason.	Why,	if	she	was	corporal,	she’d
dump	stupid	tasks	all	over	Tarr	every	time	he	irritated	her,	which	would	probably	be	all	the	time.	Anyway,	she
decided	she’d	let	herself	be	distracted,	maybe	until	late	tonight.	Tarr	was	in	the	habit	of	bedding	down	early.
If	 Koryk	 weren’t	 sweating	 like	 a	 fish-trader	 in	 a	 soak-hole,	 she’d	 have	 some	 decent	 company	 right	 now.
Instead,	she	wandered	towards	a	huddle	of	heavies	gathered	round	some	sort	of	game.	The	usual	crowd,	she
saw.	Mayfly	and	Tulip,	Flashwit,	Shortnose,	Saltlick,	and	some	from	a	different	company	that	she	remembered
from	that	village	scrap—Drawfirst,	Lookback	and	Vastly	Blank.	Threading	through	the	smelly	press,	she	made
her	way	to	the	edge	of	the	ring.
No	game.	A	huge	bootprint	in	the	dust.	‘What’s	going	on?’	Smiles	demanded.	‘It’s	a	footprint,	for	Hood’s
sake!’
Huge	 faces	 peered	 at	 her	 from	 all	 sides,	 and	 then	 Mayfly	 said,	 in	 a	 tone	 of	 stunned	 reverence,	 ‘It’s	 from
him.’
‘Who?’
‘Him,	like	she	said,’	said	Shortnose.
Smiles	looked	back	down	at	the	print.	‘Really?	Not	a	chance.	How	can	you	tell?’
Flashwit	wiped	at	her	nose—which	had	been	dripping	ever	since	they	arrived	on	this	continent.	‘It	ain’t	none
of	ours.	See	that	heel?	That’s	a	marine	heel,	them	iron	studs	in	a	half	ring	like	that.’
Smiles	snorted.	‘You	idiots.	Half	the	army	wears	those!’	She	looked	round.	‘Gods	below,	you’re	all	wearing
those!’
‘Exactly,’	said	Flashwit.


And	everyone	nodded.
‘So,	let’s	just	follow	the	tracks	and	get	a	real	good	look	at	him,	then.’
‘We	thought	of	that,’	said	Shortnose.	‘Only	there’s	only	the	one,	see?’
‘What	do	you	mean?	One	print?	Just	one?	But	that’s	ridiculous!	You	must’ve	scuffed	up	the	others—’
‘No,’	said	Lookback,	thick	fingers	twisting	greasy	hair	beside	a	cabbage	ear.	‘I	was	the	first	to	come	on	it,
right,	and	it	was	all	alone.	Just	like	that.	All	alone.	Who	else	coulda	done	something	like	that,	but	him?’
‘You’re	all	idiots.	I	don’t	think	Nefarias	Bredd	even	exists.’
‘That’s	 because	 you’re	 stupid!’	 shouted	 Vastly	 Blank.	 ‘You’re	 a	 stupid,	 a	 stupid,	 uh,	 a	 stupid,	 you’re	 just
stupid.	And	I	don’t	like	you.	Drawfirst,	that’s	right,	isn’t	it?	I	don’t	like	her,	do	I?	Do	I?’
‘Do	you	know	her,	Vastly?	Know	who	she	is?’
‘No,	Drawfirst.	I	don’t.	Not	even	that.’
‘Well,	then	it’s	got	to	be	you	don’t	like	her,	then.	It’s	got	to	be.	You’re	right,	Vastly.’
‘I	knew	it.’
‘Listen,’	said	Smiles,	‘who	wants	to	play	bones?’
‘With	what?’	Mayfly	asked.
‘With	bones,	of	course!’
‘We	ain’t	got	none.’
‘But	I	do.’
‘You	do	what?’
Smiles	gave	everyone	a	bright,	happy	smile,	and	even	that	made	her	face	hurt.	She	drew	out	a	small	leather
pouch.	‘Lay	your	bets	down,	soldiers,	and	let’s	have	us	a	game.	Now	listen	carefully	while	I	explain	the	rules
—’
‘We	know	the	rules,’	said	Shortnose.
‘Not	my	rules	you	don’t.	Mine	are	different.’	She	scanned	the	suddenly	interested	faces	and	all	those	tiny
eyes	 fixed	 on	 her.	 ‘Listen	 now,	 and	 listen	 carefully,	 because	 they’re	 kind	 of	 complicated.	 Vastly,	 you	 come
stand	beside	me,	right	here,	the	way	best	friends	do,	right?’
Vastly	Blank	nodded.	‘Right!’	And,	chest	swelling,	he	pushed	through	the	others.
	
‘A	word	with	you,	Lieutenant.’
Pores	snapped	to	his	feet.	‘Aye,	sir!’
‘Follow	me.’	Captain	Kindly	walked	sharply	out	from	the	headquarters,	and	soldiers	busy	packing	equipment
ducked	desperately	out	of	the	man’s	path,	furtive	as	cats	underfoot.	There	was	a	certain	carelessness	when	it
came	to	getting	out	of	Lieutenant	Pores’s	way,	however,	forcing	him	to	kick	a	few	shins	as	he	hastened	after
the	captain.
They	 emerged	 into	 the	 parade	 square	 and	 halted	 before	 a	 ragged	 row	 of	 what	 looked	 like	 civilians	 with
nowhere	to	go	but	up,	an	even	dozen	in	all.	Seeing	the	two	at	the	far	end,	Pores’s	spirits	sank.
‘I	am	promoting	you	sideways,’	Kindly	said	to	him.	‘Master	Sergeant.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.’
‘I	do	this	out	of	recognition	of	your	true	talents,	Master	Sergeant	Pores,	in	the	area	of	recruiting	from	the
local	population.’
‘Ah,	sir,	I	assure	you	again	that	I	had	nothing	to	do	with	those	two	whores’—and	he	gestured	at	the	pair	of
immensely	obese	women	at	the	end	of	the	row—	‘showing	up	unannounced	in	your	office.’
‘Your	 modesty	 impresses	 me,	 Master	 Sergeant.	 As	 you	 can	 see	 now,	 however,	 what	 we	 have	 before	 us
here	 are	 Letherii	 recruits.	 Indebted,	 mostly,	 and,	 as	 you	 observed,	 two	 now	 retired	 from	 a	 most	 noble	 and
altruistic	profession.’	His	tone	hardened.	‘And	as	every	Malazan	soldier	knows,	a	life	before	joining	the	ranks
has	no	bearing	once	the	vows	are	sworn	and	the	kit	is	issued.	There	exist	no	barriers	to	advancement	beyond
competence—’
‘And	sometimes	not	even	that,	sir.’
‘Even	 confessions	 are	 insufficient	 cause	 to	 interrupt	 me,	 Master	 Sergeant.	 Now,	 these	 venerable	 recruits
belong	to	you.	Kit	them	out	and	then	take	them	for	a	long	hike—they	clearly	need	to	be	worked	into	fighting
trim.	We	march	in	two	days,	Master	Sergeant.’
‘Fighting	trim	in	just	two	days,	sir?’


‘Your	 recruits	 rely	 upon	 your	 competence,	 as	 do	 I,’	 said	 Kindly,	 looking	 nauseatingly	 satisfied.	 ‘Might	 I
suggest	that	your	first	task	lies	in	sobering	them	up.	Now,	I	leave	you	to	it,	Master	Sergeant.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.’	And	he	saluted.
Captain	Kindly	marched	back	into	the	headquarters.
Pores	stared	after	him.	‘This,’	he	whispered,	‘is	war.’
The	 nearest	 recruit,	 a	 scrawny	 man	 of	 forty	 or	 so	 with	 a	 huge	 stained	 moustache,	 suddenly	 brightened.
‘Can’t	wait,	sir!’
Pores	wheeled	on	him.	‘I’m	no	“sir”,	dung	beetle!	I	am	Master	Sergeant!’
‘Sorry,	Master	Sergeant!’
‘You	 don’t	 think,	 I	 trust,	 that	 my	 sideways	 promotion	 is	 not	 a	 bold	 announcement	 of	 Captain	 Kindly’s
confidence	in	me?’
‘Absolutely	not,	Master	Sergeant!’
Pores	strode	down	to	the	far	end	of	the	row	and	glared	at	the	two	whores.	‘Gods	below,	what	are	you	two
doing	here?’
The	blonde	one,	her	face	glowing	in	the	manner	of	overweight	people	the	world	over,	when	made	to	stand
for	any	length	of	time,	belched	and	said,	‘Master	Sergeant,	look	at	us!’
‘I	am	looking.’
‘We	ain’t	had	no	luck	cuttin’	the	lard,	y’see.	But	in	a	army,	well,	we	got	no	choice,	do	we?’
‘You’re	both	drunk.’
‘We	give	up	that,	too,’	said	the	black-haired	one.
‘And	the	whoring?’
‘Aw,	Master	Sergeant,	leave	us	a	little	fun!’
‘You’re	both	standing	here	out	of	breath—kitting	you	out	and	running	you	will	kill	you	both.’
‘We	don’t	mind,	Master	Sergeant.	Whatever	works!’
‘Tell	me	the	name	of	the	soldier	who	hired	you	to	visit	the	captain.’
The	women	exchanged	sly	looks,	and	then	the	blonde	said,	‘Never	gave	it	to	us.’
‘Man	or	woman?’
‘Never	said	either	way,	Master	Sergeant.’
‘It	was	dark	that	day,’	added	the	black-haired	woman.	‘Anyway,	Big	Kindly	said—’
‘I’m	sorry,	what	did	you	say?’
‘Oh,	uhm.	Captain	Kindly	is	what	I	meant,	now	that	he’s	back	in	uniform,	I	mean—’
‘And	it’s	a	nice	uniform,’	chimed	in	the	blonde.
‘And	he	said	that	you	was	the	best	and	the	hardest	working,	most	fit,	like,	and	healthy	soldier	in	the	whole
Miserable	Army—’
‘That’s	Malazan	Army.’
‘Right.	Sorry,	Master	Sergeant,	it’s	all	the	foreign	names	done	us	in.’
‘And	the	jug	of	rum,	I’d	wager.’
She	nodded.	‘And	the	jugs	of	rum.’
At	the	plural	Pores’s	two	eyes	found	a	pernicious	will	of	their	own,	and	fell	slightly	down	from	the	woman’s
face.	He	coughed	and	turned	to	study	all	the	other	recruits.	‘Running	from	debt	I	understand,’	he	said.	‘Same
for	 armies	 the	 world	 over.	 Indebted,	 criminal,	 misfit,	 pervert,	 patriot	 and	 insane,	 and	 that	 list’s	 from	 my	 very
own	 military	 application.	 And	 look	 at	 me,	 promoted	 up	 to	 Lieutenant	 and	 sideways	 to	 Master	 Sergeant.	 So,
dear	 recruits,’	 and	 Pores	 slapped	 on	 a	 broad	 smile,	 which	 was	 answered	 by	 everyone	 in	 the	 line,	 ‘nobody
knows	 better	 where	 you’re	 coming	 from,	 and	 nobody	 knows	 better	 where	 you’re	 going	 to	 end	 up,	 which	 is
probably	in	either	the	infirmary	or	the	stockade.	And	I	mean	to	get	you	there	in	no	time	flat!’
‘Yes,	Master	Sergeant!’	shouted	the	moustached	idiot.
Pores	 stamped	 up	 to	 the	 man,	 whose	 grin	 suddenly	 wavered.	 ‘In	 the	 Malazan	 Army,’	 he	 said,	 ‘old	 names
are	 tossed.	 They	 were	 bad	 names	 anyway,	 every	 one	 of	 them.	 You,	 you	 are	 now	 Twit,	 and	 you’re	 my	 first
squad	leader.’
‘Yes,	Master	Sergeant!	Thank	you,	Master	Sergeant!’
‘Now,’	Pores	continued,	hands	behind	his	back	as	he	began	strolling	up	and	down	the	row,	‘two	days	to	turn
you	 earwigs	 into	 soldiers—even	 for	 me—is	 simply	 impossible.	 No,	 what	 I	 need	 to	 do	 is	 attach	 you	 to	 a	 real


squad,	and	I	have	the	perfect	squad	in	mind.’	And	then	he	halted	and	wheeled	to	face	them.	‘But	first,	we’re
all	 going	 to	 march	 to	 the	 privy,	 where	 each	 and	 every	 one	 of	 you	 is	 going	 to—in	 perfect	 unison	 as	 befits
soldiers—shove	a	finger	down	your	throat	and	vomit	into	the	trough.	And	then	we’re	going	to	collect	uniforms
from	the	quartermaster,	and	your	training	kits.	Now,	Sergeant	Twit,	fall	’em	in	behind	you	and	follow	me.’
‘Yes,	Master	Sergeant!	We’re	off	to	war!’
And	the	others	cheered.
	
The	cookfires	were	coal-bedded	and	simmering	pots	hung	over	them	by	the	time	Master	Sergeant	Pores	led
his	sickly,	gasping	crew	up	to	the	squad	tents	of	the	3rd	Company.	‘Third	Company	Sergeants!’	he	bellowed.
‘Front	and	forward	this	instant!’
Watched	by	a	score	of	faces	half-lit	by	firelight,	Badan	Gruk,	Sinter,	and	Primly	slowly	converged	to	stand	in
front	of	Pores.
‘I	am	Master	Sergeant	Pores	and	this—’
‘Thought	you	was	Captain	Kindly,’	said	Sinter.
‘No,	that	would	be	my	twin,	who	sadly	drowned	in	a	bucket	of	his	own	puke	yesterday.	Interrupt	me	again,
Sergeant,	and	I’ve	got	a	whole	trough	of	puke	waiting	just	for	you.’
Badan	Gruk	grunted.	‘But	I	thought	he	was	Lieutenant	Pores—’
Pores	scowled	at	him.	‘My	other	twin,	now	detached	from	the	Bonehunters	and	serving	as	bodyguard	and
consort	to	Queen	Frapalava	of	the	Kidgestool	Empire.	Now,	enough	yabbering.	As	you	can	see	behind	me,	we
have	new	recruits	who	need	to	be	ready	to	march	in	two	days—’
‘March	where,	Master	Sergeant?’
Pores	sighed.	‘Why,	with	the	rest	of	us,	Sergeant	Sinter.	In	fact,	right	beside	your	three	squads,	as	they	are
now	 your	 responsibilities.’	 He	 turned	 and	 gestured	 at	 his	 row.	 Two	 recruits	 stepped	 out	 on	 cue.	 ‘Acting
Sergeants	Twit	and	Nose	Stream.’	He	gestured	again	and	two	more	emerged.	‘Acting	Corporals	Rumjugs	and
Sweetlard—I	suggest	Corporal	Kisswhere	take	them	under	her	personal	care.	Now,	you	will	note	that	they’ve
brought	 tents.	 Unfortunately,	 none	 of	 the	 recruits	 know	 how	 to	 put	 them	 up.	 Get	 them	 to	 it.	 Any	 questions?
Good.	Dismissed.’
	
A	 short	 time	 later,	 Pores	 sighted	 one	 of	 the	 newer	 tents	 in	 the	 camp	 and,	 after	 eyeing	 the	 three	 soldiers
squatting	round	the	nearest	cookfire,	he	drew	himself	up	and	marched	up	to	them.
‘Soldiers—at	ease.	Is	there	a	partition	at	the	back	of	that	tent?	I	thought	so.’
‘Sergeant	Urb’s	commandeered	that	bit,	Lieutenant—’
‘Commendable.	 Alas,	 my	 friends—and	 I	 know	 this	 is	 miserable	 news—but	 Captain	 Kindly	 is	 now
requisitioning	it	on	my	behalf.	I	argued	against	it—I	mean,	the	injustice	of	such	a	thing,	but,	well,	you	all	know
about	Captain	Kindly,	don’t	you?’	And	he	was	pleased	to	see	the	sullen	nods.	Pores	patted	a	satchel	at	his	hip.
‘Supply	lists—I	need	somewhere	private,	and	now	that	the	HQ’s	been	shut	down,	well,	you’re	to	provide	me
with	 my	 office.	 But	 listen,	 friends—and	 be	 sure	 to	 tell	 this	 to	 Sergeant	 Urb—since	 I’m	 working	 on	 supplies,
materiel	and—did	I	mention?—foodstuffs	for	the	officers,	which	of	course	includes	wines	of	passing	vintage—
well,	 even	 one	 as	 perfect	 as	 me	 can’t	 help	 but	 lose	 a	 crate	 or	 two	 from	 the	 inventory.’	 And	 see	 how	 they
smiled.
‘All	yours,	Lieutenant.’
‘Excellent.	Now,	be	sure	not	to	disturb	me.’
‘Aye,	Lieutenant.’
Pores	made	his	way	in,	stepping	over	the	bedrolls	and	kits,	and	through	the	curtain	where	he	found	a	decent
camp	cot,	clean	blankets	and	a	well-maintained	pillow.	Kicking	his	boots	off,	he	settled	down	on	the	cot,	turned
the	lantern	down,	and	drew	out	from	his	satchel	the	first	of	the	five	flasks	he’d	confiscated	from	his	recruits.
One	could	learn	a	lot	about	a	man	or	woman	by	their	alcohol	or	drug	of	choice.	Time	to	look	more	closely	at
the	Bonehunters’	latest	members,	maybe	work	up	something	like	a	profile	of	their	gumption.	He	tugged	loose
the	first	stopper.
	


‘He	made	us	puke,’	said	Rumjugs.
‘He	 makes	 all	 of	 us	 do	 that,’	 Kisswhere	 replied.	 ‘Now,	 angle	 that	 peg	 out	 a	 bit	 before	 your	 sister	 starts
pounding	it.’
‘She	ain’t	my	sister.’
‘Yes	she	is.	We	all	are,	now.	That’s	what	being	a	soldier	is	all	about.	Sisters,	brothers.’
Sweetlard	hefted	the	wooden	mallet.	‘So	the	officers,	they’re	like,	parents?’
‘Depends.’
‘On	what?’
‘Well,	if	your	parents	were	demented,	deluded,	corrupt,	useless	or	sadistic,	or	any	combination	of	those,	then
yes,	officers	are	just	like	them.’
‘That’s	not	always	so,’	said	Corporal	Pravalak	Rim,	arriving	with	a	bundle	of	groundsheets.	‘Some	officers
know	what	they’re	about.’
‘It’s	got	nothing	to	do	with	knowing	what	they’re	about,	Rim,’	said	Kisswhere.
‘You’re	right,	Kiss,	it	comes	down	to	do	you	take	their	orders	when	things	get	nasty?	That’s	what	it	comes
down	 to.’	 He	 dropped	 two	 of	 the	 rolled-up	 canvas	 sheets.	 ‘Put	 these	 inside,	 laid	 out	 nice	 and	 flat.	 Oh,	 and
check	out	if	there’s	any	slope	in	the	ground—you	want	your	heads	higher	than	your	feet	or	your	dreams	will
get	wild	and	you’ll	wake	up	with	an	exploding	headache—’
‘They’re	going	to	do	that	anyway,’	observed	Kisswhere.	‘Can’t	you	smell	’em?’
Rim	scowled	and	pulled	the	mallet	from	Sweetlard’s	hands.	‘You	lost	your	mind,	Kiss?	She	swings	this	and
she’ll	crush	the	other	one’s	hands.’
‘Well,	but	then,	one	less	dragging	us	down	on	the	march.’
‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
‘Not	really.	So	I	wasn’t	thinking.	I’m	no	good	being	in	charge	of	people.	Here,	you	take	over.	I’m	going	into
the	city	to	drag	Skulldeath	back	out	here,	out	of	Hellian’s	clutches,	I	mean.’
As	she	walked	off,	Rumjugs	licked	her	plump	lips.	‘Corporal	Rim?’
‘Aye?’
‘You	got	a	soldier	in	your	squad	named	Skulldeath?’
Rim	smiled.	‘Oh	yeah,	and	wait	till	you	meet	him.’
	
‘I	 don’t	 like	 the	 name	 he	 gave	 me,’	 muttered	 Twit.	 ‘I	 mean,	 I	 tried	 looking	 at	 all	 this	 in	 the	 right	 spirit,	 you
know?	So	it	feels	less	like	a	death	sentence.	Made	myself	look	all	eager,	and	what	does	he	do?	He	calls	me
Twit.’
Ruffle	 patted	 him	 on	 an	 arm.	 ‘Don’t	 like	 your	 name?	 That’s	 fine.	 Next	 time	 Captain	 Lieutenant	 Master
Sergeant	 Kindly	 Pores	 comes	 by,	 we’ll	 tell	 him	 that	 Sergeant	 Twit	 drowned	 in	 a	 sop	 bucket,	 but	 his	 brother
showed	up	and	his	name	is	.	.	.	well?	What	name	do	you	want?’
Twit	frowned.	He	scratched	his	head.	He	stroked	his	moustache.	He	squinted.	He	shrugged.	‘I	have	t’think
on	it,	I	think.’
Ruffle	smiled	sweetly.	‘Let’s	see	if	I	can	help	you	some.	You	an	Indebted?’
‘I	am.	And	it	wasn’t	fair	at	all,	Ruffle.	I	was	doing	fine,	you	see,	living	good,	even.	Had	a	pretty	wife	who	I
always	figured	was	on	the	thick	side,	thicker	than	me,	I	mean,	which	was	perfect,	since	it	put	me	in	charge	and
I	like	being	in	charge—’
‘Don’t	let	anybody	know	that.	Not	here.’
‘Oh,	so	I	already	messed	up,	then.’
‘No	you	didn’t.	That	was	your	drowned	brother.’
‘What?	By	the	Errant	he’s	drowned—but,	how	did	you	hear	about	that?	Hold	on,	wait!	Oh,	I	get	it.	Right.
Hah,	that’s	perfect.’
‘So	you	was	doing	fine.’
‘Huh?	 Yes,	 that’s	 just	 it.	 I	 was	 doing	 good.	 In	 fact,	 business	 was	 good	 enough	 so	 that	 I	 made	 some
investments—first	time	in	my	life,	some	real	investments.	Construction.	Not	my	area,	but—’
‘Which	was?	Your	area,	I	mean?’
‘Made	and	sold	oil	lamps,	the	big	temple	ones.	Mostly	bronze	or	copper,	sometimes	glazed	clay.’
‘And	then	you	invested	in	the	building	trade.’


‘And	it	all	went	down.	Just	before	you	all	arrived.	All	went	down.	I	lost	everything.	And	my	wife,	why,	she
told	me	she’d	only	been	waiting	around	until	somebody	better	and	richer	showed	up.	So	off	she	went,	too.’	He
wiped	at	his	face.	‘Thought	about	killing	myself,	but	I	couldn’t	figure	out	the	best	way.	And	then	it	hit	me—join
the	 army!	 But	 not	 the	 Letherii	 army,	 since	 the	 new	 King’s	 not	 looking	 to	 start	 any	 wars,	 is	 he?	 Besides,	 I’d
probably	 get	 stationed	 here	 in	 the	 city	 and	 there	 I’d	 be,	 seeing	 all	 the	 people	 I	 once	 knew	 and	 thought	 my
friends,	 and	 they’d	 be	 pretending	 I	 wasn’t	 even	 there.	 And	 then	 I	 heard	 you	 Malazans	 was	 marching	 into	 a
war—’
‘Really?	First	I’ve	heard	of	that.’
‘Well,	 something	 like	 that.	 The	 thing	 was,	 it	 hit	 me	 then	 that	 maybe	 it	 wasn’t	 a	 place	 to	 just	 up	 and	 get
myself	killed.	No,	it	was	a	place	where	I	could	start	over.	Only’—and	he	pounded	his	thigh—‘first	thing	I	do	is
mess	up.	Some	new	beginning!’
‘You’re	 fine,’	 said	 Ruffle,	 grunting	 softly	 as	 she	 climbed	 to	 her	 feet.	 ‘Twit	 was	 the	 one	 who	 messed	 up,
right?’
‘What?	Oh,	that’s	right!’
‘I	think	maybe	I	come	up	with	a	new	name	for	you,’	she	said,	looking	down	at	him	where	he	squatted	behind
his	bundled	kit.	‘How	does	Sunrise	sound	to	you?’
‘Sunrise?’
‘Aye.	Sergeant	Sunrise.	New	beginnings,	just	like	dawn	breaking	on	the	horizon.	And	every	time	you	hear	it
out	loud,	you’ll	be	reminded	of	how	you’ve	begun	again.	Fresh.	No	debts,	no	disloyal	friends,	no	cut-and-run
wives.’
He	 suddenly	 straightened	 and	 impulsively	 hugged	 her.	 ‘Thanks,	 Ruffle.	 I	 won’t	 forget	 this.	 I	 mean	 it.	 I
won’t.’
‘That’s	nice.	Now,	spill	out	your	bowl	and	spoon.	Supper	beckons.’
______
They	found	Brys	Beddict	standing	on	one	of	the	canal	bridges,	the	one	closest	to	the	river.	He	was	leaning	on
the	stone	railing,	eyes	on	the	water	flowing	beneath	the	span.
Cuttle	 tugged	 on	 Fiddler’s	 arm	 as	 they	 were	 about	 to	 step	 on	 to	 the	 bridge.	 ‘What’s	 he	 doing?’	 he
whispered.	‘Looks	like—’
‘I	know	what	it	looks	like,’	Fiddler	replied,	grimacing.	‘But	I	don’t	think	it’s	that.	Come	on.’
Brys	glanced	over	as	they	approached,	and	straightened.	‘Good	evening	to	you,	soldiers.’
‘Commander	 Beddict,’	 said	 Fiddler,	 nodding.	 ‘We’ve	 got	 ourselves	 a	 problem	 out	 in	 the	 camp,	 sir.	 That
sweating	 ague,	 from	 the	 mosquitoes—got	 people	 falling	 ill	 everywhere,	 and	 our	 healers	 are	 dropping	 from
exhaustion	and	making	no	headway.’
‘The	Shivers,	we	call	it,’	said	Brys.	‘There’s	a	well,	an	imperial	well,	about	half	a	league	north	of	your	camp.
The	water	is	drawn	up	by	a	sort	of	pump	based	on	a	mill.	One	of	Bugg’s	inventions.	In	any	case,	that	water	is
filled	with	bubbles	and	rather	tart	to	the	taste,	and	it	is	the	local	treatment	for	the	Shivers.	I	will	dispatch	teams
to	deliver	casks	to	your	camp.	How	many	of	your	fellow	soldiers	have	sickened?’
‘Two,	maybe	three	hundred.	With	more	every	day,	sir.’
‘We’ll	start	with	five	hundred	casks—you	need	to	get	everyone	drinking	from	them,	as	it	may	also	possess
some	 preventative	 properties,	 although	 no	 one	 has	 been	 able	 to	 prove	 that.	 I	 will	 also	 dispatch	 our	 military
healers	to	assist	your	own.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.	It’s	been	our	experience	that	most	of	the	time	it’s	the	locals	who	get	sick	when	foreigners
arrive	from	across	the	seas.	This	time	it’s	proved	the	other	way	round.’
Brys	 nodded.	 ‘I	 gather	 that	 the	 Malazan	 Empire	 was	 predicated	 on	 expansion,	 the	 conquering	 of	 distant
territories.’
‘Just	a	bit	more	rabid	than	your	own	Letherii	expansion,	sir.’
‘Yes.	We	proceeded	on	the	principle	of	creep	and	crawl—that’s	how	our	brother	Hull	described	it,	anyway.
Spreading	like	a	slow	stain,	until	someone	in	the	beleaguered	tribe	stood	up	and	took	notice	of	just	what	was
happening,	and	then	there’d	be	war.	A	war	we	justified	at	that	point	by	claiming	we	were	simply	protecting	our
pioneering	citizens,	our	economic	interests,	our	need	for	security.’	His	smile	was	sour.	‘The	usual	lies.’
Fiddler	leaned	on	the	railing	beside	Brys,	and	after	a	moment	Cuttle	did	the	same.	‘I	remember	a	landing	on
one	of	the	more	remote	of	the	Strike	Islands.	We	weren’t	assaulting,	just	making	contact—the	big	island	had


capitulated	by	then.	Anyway,	the	locals	could	muster	about	two	hundred	warriors,	and	there	they	were,	looking
out	on	a	fleet	of	transports	groaning	with	five	thousand	hardened	marines.	The	old	Emperor	preferred	to	win
without	bloodshed,	when	he	could.	Besides,	all	of	us,	standing	at	the	rails—sort	of	like	we’re	doing	right	now—
well,	we	just	pitied	them.’
‘What	happened?’	Cuttle	asked.
‘The	local	chief	gathered	together	a	heap	of	trinkets	on	the	beach,	basically	making	himself	look	rich	while
at	 the	 same	 time	 buying	 our	 goodwill.	 It	 was	 a	 brave	 gesture,	 because	 it	 impoverished	 him.	 I	 don’t	 think	 he
was	 expecting	 any	 reciprocal	 gesture	 from	 Admiral	 Nok.	 He	 just	 wanted	 us	 to	 take	 it	 and	 then	 go	 away.’
Fiddler	 paused,	 scratching	 at	 his	 beard,	 remembering	 those	 times.	 Neither	 Brys	 nor	 Cuttle	 prodded	 him	 to
resume,	but,	with	a	sigh,	he	went	on.	‘Nok	had	his	orders.	He	accepts	the	gift.	And	then	has	us	deliver	on	to
that	beach	a	golden	throne	for	the	chief,	and	enough	silks,	linens	and	wool	to	clothe	every	living	person	on	that
island—he	gave	the	chief	enough	to	turn	around	and	be	generous	to	his	people.	I	still	remember	his	face,	the
look	 on	 it	 .	 .	 .’	 When	 he	 wiped	 at	 his	 eyes,	 only	 Brys	 held	 his	 gaze	 on	 Fiddler.	 Cuttle	 looked	 away,	 as	 if
embarrassed.
‘That	was	a	fine	thing	to	do,’	said	Brys.
‘Seemed	that	 way.	 Until	the	 locals	 started	 getting	 sick.	 Something	 in	 the	 wool,	 maybe.	 Fleas,	 a	 contagion.
We	didn’t	even	find	out,	not	for	days—we	stayed	away,	giving	the	chief	time	and	all	that,	and	the	village	was
mostly	 behind	 a	 fringe	 of	 thick	 mangroves.	 And	 then,	 one	 afternoon,	 a	 lookout	 spied	 a	 lone	 villager,	 a	 girl,
staggering	 out	 on	 to	 the	 beach.	 She	 was	 covered	 in	 sores—that	 sweet,	 once	 smooth	 skin—’	 He	 stopped,
shoulders	hunching.	‘Nok	moved	fast.	He	threw	every	Denul	healer	we	had	on	to	that	island.	We	saved	about
two-thirds	of	them.	But	not	the	chief.	To	this	day,	I	wonder	what	he	thought	as	he	lay	dying—if	an	instant	of
calm	spread	out	to	flatten	the	storm	of	his	fever,	a	single	instant,	when	he	thought	that	he	had	been	betrayed,
deliberately	poisoned.	I	wondered	if	he	cursed	us	all	with	his	last	breath.	Had	I	been	him,	I	know	I	would	have.
Whether	we	meant	to	or	not—I	mean,	our	intentions	didn’t	mean	a	damned	thing.	Offered	no	absolution.	They
rang	hollow	then	and	they	still	do.’
After	a	long	moment,	Brys	returned	his	attention	to	the	canal	waters	below.	‘This	all	flows	out	to	the	river,
and	the	river	into	the	sea,	and	out	in	the	sea,	the	silts	collected	back	here	end	up	raining	down	to	the	bottom,
down	on	to	the	valleys	and	plains	that	know	no	light.	Sometimes,’	he	added,	‘souls	take	the	same	journey,	and
they	rain	down,	silent,	blind.	Lost.’
‘You	two	keep	this	up,’	Cuttle	said	in	a	growl,	‘and	I’ll	do	the	jumping.’
Fiddler	snorted.	‘Sapper,	listen	to	me.	It’s	easy	to	listen	and	even	easier	to	hear	wrongly,	so	pay	attention.
I’m	no	wise	man,	but	in	my	life	I’ve	learned	that	knowing	something—seeing	it	clearly—offers	no	real	excuse
for	 giving	 up	 on	 it.	 And	 when	 you	 put	 what	 you	 see	 into	 words,	 give	 ’em	 to	 somebody	 else,	 that	 ain’t	 no
invitation	 neither.	 Being	 optimistic’s	 worthless	 if	 it	 means	 ignoring	 the	 suffering	 of	 this	 world.	 Worse	 than
worthless.	It’s	bloody	evil.	And	being	pessimistic,	well,	that’s	just	the	first	step	on	the	path,	and	it’s	a	path	that
might	take	you	down	Hood’s	road,	or	it	takes	you	to	a	place	where	you	can	settle	into	doing	what	you	can,	hold
fast	in	your	fight	against	that	suffering.	And	that’s	an	honest	place,	Cuttle.’
‘It’s	the	place,	Fiddler,’	said	Brys,	‘where	heroes	are	found.’
But	the	sergeant	shook	his	head.	‘That	don’t	matter	one	way	or	the	other.	It	might	end	up	being	as	dark	as
the	deepest	valley	at	the	bottom	of	your	ocean,	Commander	Beddict.	You	do	what	you	do,	because	seeing	true
doesn’t	 always	 arrive	 in	 a	 burst	 of	 light.	 Sometimes	 what	 you	 see	 is	 black	 as	 a	 pit,	 and	 it	 just	 fools	 you	 into
thinking	that	you’re	blind.	You’re	not.	You’re	the	opposite	of	blind.’	And	he	stopped	then,	as	he	saw	that	he’d
made	both	hands	into	fists,	the	knuckles	pale	blooms	in	the	gathering	night.
Brys	Beddict	stirred.	‘I	will	see	the	crews	sent	out	to	the	imperial	well	tonight,	and	I	will	roust	my	healers	at
once.’	He	paused,	and	then	added,	‘Sergeant	Fiddler.	Thank	you.’
But	 Fiddler	 could	 find	 nothing	 to	 be	 thanked	 for.	 Not	 in	 his	 memories,	 not	 in	 the	 words	 he	 had	 spoken	 to
these	two	men.
When	 Brys	 had	 left,	 he	 swung	 round	 to	 Cuttle.	 ‘There	 you	 have	 it,	 soldier.	 Now	 maybe	 you’ll	 stop
worshipping	the	Hood-damned	ground	I	walk	on.’	And	then	he	marched	off.
Cuttle	stared	after	him,	and	then,	with	a	faint	shake	of	his	head,	followed	his	sergeant.


Chapter	Ten
Is	there	anything	more	worthless	than	excuses?
	
EM PEROR	KELLANVED

It	was	the	task	of	a	pregnant	woman’s	sister	or,	if	there	were	none,	the	nearest	woman	by	blood,	to	fashion
from	clay	a	small	figurine,	its	form	a	composite	of	spheres,	and	to	hold	it	in	waiting	for	the	child’s	birth.	Bathed
in	the	blood	and	fluids	of	the	issue,	the	human-shaped	vessel	was	then	ritually	bound	to	the	newborn,	and	that
binding	would	remain	until	death.
Fire	 was	 the	 Brother	 and	 Husband	 Life-Giver	 of	 the	 Elan,	 the	 spirit-god	 with	 its	 precious	 gifts	 of	 light,
warmth	and	protection.	Upon	dying,	the	Elan’s	figurine—now	the	sole	haven	of	his	or	her	soul—was	carried	to
the	flames	of	the	family	hearth.	The	vessel,	in	its	making,	had	been	left	faceless,	because	fire	greeted	every
soul	in	the	same	manner;	when	choosing,	it	favoured	not	by	blunt	features—which	were	ever	a	mask	to	truth
—but	upon	the	weighing	of	a	life’s	deeds.	When	the	clay	figurine—born	of	Water,	Sister	and	Wife	Life-Giver
—finally	shattered	in	 the	 heat,	 thus	 conjoining	 the	 spirit-gods,	 the	 soul	was	embraced	 by	 the	 Life-Giver,	now
the	 Life-Taker.	 If	 the	 figurine	 did	 not	 break,	 then	 the	 soul	 had	 been	 rejected,	 and	 no	 one	 would	 ever	 again
touch	that	scorched	vessel.	Mourning	would	cease.	All	memory	of	the	fallen	would	be	expunged.
Kalyth	 had	 lost	 her	 figurine—a	 crime	 so	 vast	 that	 she	 should	 have	 died	 of	 shame	 long	 ago.	 It	 was	 lying
somewhere,	half-buried	in	grasses,	perhaps,	or	swallowed	up	beneath	drifts	of	dust	or	ashes.	It	was	probably
broken,	the	binding	snapped—and	so	her	soul	would	find	no	haven	when	she	died.	Malign	spirits	would	close	in
on	her	and	devour	her	piece	by	piece.	There	would	be	no	refuge.	No	judgement	by	the	Life-Giver.
Her	people,	she	had	since	realized,	had	possessed	grand	notions	of	their	own	importance.	But	then,	she	was
sure	it	was	the	same	for	every	people,	every	tribe,	every	nation.	An	elevation	of	self,	blistering	in	its	conceit.
Believers	 in	 their	 own	 immortality,	 their	 own	 eternal	 abiding,	 until	 came	 the	 moment	 of	 sudden,	 crushing
revelation.	Seeing	the	end	of	one’s	own	people.	Identity	crumbling,	language	and	belief	and	comfort	withering
away.	Mortality	arriving	like	a	knife	to	the	heart.	A	moment	of	humbling,	the	anguish	of	humility,	all	the	truths
once	thought	unassailable	now	proved	to	be	fragile	delusions.
Kneeling	 in	 the	 dust.	 Sinking	 still	 lower.	 Lying	 prostrate	 in	 that	 dust,	 pallid	 taste	 on	 the	 tongue,	 a	 smell	 of
desiccated	 decay	 stinging	 the	 nostrils.	 Was	 it	 any	 wonder	 that	 all	 manner	 of	 beasts	 enacted	 the	 mission	 of
surrender	by	lying	prone	on	the	ground,	in	a	posture	of	vulnerability,	beseeching	mercy	from	a	merciless	nature:
the	throat-bared	submission	to	knives	and	fangs	dancing	with	the	sun’s	light?	Playing	out	the	act	of	the	victim
—she	recalled	once	seeing	a	bull	bhederin,	javelin-pierced	half	a	dozen	times,	the	shafts	clattering	and	trailing,
the	 enormous	 creature	 fighting	 to	 remain	 standing.	 As	 if	 to	 stand	 was	 all	 that	 mattered,	 all	 that	 defined	 it	 as
being	 still	 alive,	 as	 being	 worthy	 of	 life,	 and	 in	 its	 red-rimmed	 eyes	 such	 stubborn	 defiance.	 It	 knew	 that	 as
soon	as	it	fell,	its	life	was	over.
And	so	it	stood,	weeping	blood,	on	a	crest	of	land,	encircled	by	hunters	who	understood	enough	to	keep	their
distance,	 to	 simply	 wait,	 but	 it	 refused	 them,	 refused	 the	 inevitable,	 for	 an	 extraordinary	 length	 of	 time—the
hunters	 would	 tell	 this	 tale	 often	 round	 the	 flickering	 flames,	 they	 would	 leap	 upright	 to	 mimic	 its	 wounded
defiance,	wide	of	stance,	shoulders	hunched,	eyes	glaring.
Half	a	day,	and	then	the	evening,	and	come	the	next	dawn	and	there	the	beast	remained,	upright	but	finally,
at	last,	lifeless.
There	 was	 triumph	 in	 that	 beast’s	 struggle,	 something	 that	 made	 its	 death	 almost	 irrelevant,	 a	 desultory,
diminished	arrival—no	capering	glee	this	time.
She	 thought	 she	 might	 weep	 now,	 for	 that	 bhederin,	 for	 the	 power	 of	 its	 soul	 so	 cruelly	 drained	 from	 its
proud	flesh.	Even	the	hunters	had	been	silent,	crowding	close	in	the	chill	dawn	light	to	reach	out	and	touch	that
matted	hide;	and	the	gaggle	of	children	who	waited	to	help	with	the	butchering,	why,	like	Kalyth	herself,	they


sat	round-eyed,	strangely	frightened,	maybe	a	little	stained	with	guilt,	too,	come	to	that.	Or,	more	likely,	Kalyth
was	 alone	 in	 feeling	 that	 sentiment—or	 had	 she	 felt	 it	 at	 all?	 Was	 it	 not	 more	 probable	 that	 this	 guilt,	 this
shame,	belonged	to	her	now—decades	and	decades	later?	And,	in	fact,	that	the	beast	had	come	to	symbolize
something	else,	something	new	and	exclusively	her	own?
The	death	of	a	people.
And	still	she	stood.
Still	she	stood.
	
Yet	at	this	moment	they	were	all	sunk	down	into	the	grasses,	up	against	boulders,	and	her	face	was	pressed	to
the	 ground,	 smelling	 dust	 and	 her	 own	 sweat.	 The	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 seemed	 to	 have	 virtually	 vanished.
Motionless,	 reminding	 her	 of	 coiled	 serpents	 or	 lizards	 basking	 on	 flat	 rocks,	 their	 hides	 growing	 mottled	 to
mimic	their	immediate	surroundings.
They	were	all	hiding.
From	what?	What	on	this	useless,	lifeless	ruin	of	a	landscape	could	drive	them	to	such	caution?
Nothing.	Nothing	on	the	land	at	all.	No	.	.	.	we	are	hiding	from	clouds.
Clouds,	a	dozen	thunderheads	arrayed	in	a	row	on	the	horizon	to	the	southwest,	five	or	more	leagues	distant.
Kalyth	did	not	understand.	So	vast	was	her	incomprehension	that	she	could	not	even	conjure	any	questions
for	her	companions,	nothing	to	send	skirling	up	from	her	pit	of	fears	and	anxieties.	What	she	could	see	of	those
distant	storms	told	her	of	lightning,	hail	and	walls	of	impenetrable	dust—but	the	front	edged	no	closer,	not	in	all
this	time	of	waiting,	of	hiding.	She	felt	broken	by	her	own	ignorance.
Clouds.
She	 wondered	 if	 the	 winged	 Assassin	 drifted	 somewhere	 high	 overhead.	 Exposed,	 vulnerable	 to	 rushing
winds—but	down	here,	the	calm	was	uncanny.	The	very	air	seemed	to	be	cowering,	breath	held,	and	even	the
insects	had	taken	to	the	ground.
The	 earth	 trembled	 beneath	 her,	 a	 sudden	 barrage	 rolling	 in	 waves.	 She	 could	 not	 be	 certain	 if	 she	 was
hearing	 that	 thunder,	 or	 simply	 feeling	 it.	 The	 shock	 set	 her	 heart	 hammering—she	 had	 never	 before	 heard
such	 unceasing	 violence.	 Prairie	 storms	 were	 swift	 runners,	 knots	 of	 rage	 racing	 across	 the	 landscape,
flattening	grasses	and	hide	tents,	whipping	flaring	embers	into	the	air,	buffeting	the	humped	walls	of	yurts.	The
howl	rose	to	a	shriek,	and	then	died	as	quickly	as	it	had	come,	and	outside	the	lumps	of	hail	glistened	grey	in
the	strange	light	as	they	melted.	The	storms	of	her	memory	were	nothing	like	this,	and	the	metallic	taste	of	fear
bit	down	on	her	tongue.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	her	terrifying	guardians,	clung	to	the	ground	like	rush-beaten	curs.
And	the	thunder	shook	the	earth	again	and	again.	Teeth	clenched,	Kalyth	forced	herself	to	tilt	up	her	head.
Dust	had	lifted	like	mists	over	the	land.	Through	the	brown	veil	she	could	make	out	incessant	argent	flashes
beneath	the	bruised	storm	front,	but	the	clouds	themselves	remained	dark,	like	blind	motes	staining	her	eyes.
Where	were	the	spikes	of	lightning?	Every	blossom	seemed	to	erupt	from	the	ground,	and	now	she	could	see
the	sickly	glow	of	fires—the	blasted	plain	was	alight.
Gasping,	 Kalyth	 buried	 her	 head	 in	 her	 arms.	 A	 part	 of	 her	 sank	 back,	 like	 a	 bemused,	 faintly	 disgusted
witness,	 as	 the	 rest	 of	 her	 trembled	 in	 terror—were	 these	 feelings	 her	 own?	 Or	 waves	 emanating	 from	 the
K’Chain	 Che’Malle,	 from	 Gunth	 Mach	 and	 Sag’Churok	 and	 the	 others?	 But	 no,	 it	 was	 more	 likely	 that	 she
was	but	witness	to	simple	caution,	bizarre,	yes,	and	extreme—but	they	did	not	shiver	or	claw	at	the	ground,	did
they?	They	were	so	still	they	might	have	been	dead.	As	perfect	in	their	repose	as	she—
Taloned	hands	snatched	her	up.	She	shrieked—the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	suddenly	running,	low,	faster
than	she	had	thought	possible—and	she	hung	in	the	grip	of	Gunth	Mach	like	a	bhederin	flank	torn	from	a	kill.
They	fled	the	storm.	North	and	east.	For	Kalyth,	a	blurred	passage,	nightmarish	in	her	helplessness.	Tufts	of
yellow	 grass	 spun	 past	 like	 tumbled	 balls	 of	 dull	 fire.	 Sweeps	 of	 bedded	 cobbles,	 sinkholes	 of	 water-worn
gravel,	and	then	low,	flattened	hills	of	layered	slate.	Stunted,	leafless	trees,	a	scattered	knee-high	forest,	dead
and	 every	 branch	 and	 twig	 spun	 with	 spider’s	 webs.	 And	 then	 through,	 on	 to	 a	 pan	 of	 parched	 clay	 crusted
with	ridged	knuckles	of	salt.	The	heavy	thump	of	three-toed	reptilian	feet,	the	heave	and	drumming	creak	of
breaths	drawn	and	then	hissed	loose	in	whistling	gusts.
A	sudden	skidding	halt—K’ell	Hunters	weaving	outward,	pace	falling	off—they	had	ascended	a	hill,	and	had
come	face	to	face	with	the	Shi’gal	Assassin.	Towering,	wings	folded	like	spiked,	barbed	shoulders	framing	the


wide-snouted	head—the	glisten	of	eyes	above	and	below	that	needle-fanged	mouth.
Kalyth’s	breath	caught—she	could	feel	its	rage,	its	contempt.
Gunth	Mach’s	arms	sagged	down,	and	the	Destriant	twisted	to	find	purchase	with	her	feet.
Kor	Thuran	and	Rythok	stood	to	either	side,	ten	or	more	paces	distant,	heads	lowered	and	chests	heaving,
swords	dug	point-first	into	the	hard	stony	earth.	Positioned	directly	before	Gu’Rull	was	Sag’Churok,	standing
motionless,	almost	defiant.	Unashamed,	hide	gleaming	with	exuded	oils.
The	bitter	reek	of	violence	swirled	in	the	air.
Gu’Rull	 tilted	 his	 head,	 as	 if	 amused	 by	 Sag’Churok,	 but	 his	 four	 eyes	 held	 unwavering	 on	 the	 huge	 K’ell
Hunter,	as	if	not	too	proud	to	admit	to	a	measure	of	respect.	This	was,	to	Kalyth,	a	startling	concession.	The
Shi’gal	 Assassin	 was	 almost	 twice	 Sag’Churok’s	 height,	 and	 even	 without	 swords	 in	 his	 hands	 his	 reach
matched	that	of	the	K’ell	Hunter’s	weapon-extended	arms.
This	 thing	 was	 bred	 to	 kill,	 born	 to	 an	 intensity	 of	 intention	 that	 beggared	 the	 K’ell	 Hunters’,	 that	 would
make	the	Ve’Gath	Soldiers	appear	clumsy	and	thick.
She	knew	he	could	kill	them	all,	here,	now,	with	barely	a	lone	drip	of	oil	to	mar	his	sleek,	glistening	hide.	She
knew	it	in	her	soul.
Gunth	Mach	released	Kalyth,	and	she	stumbled,	needing	both	hands	before	she	managed	to	regain	her	feet.
‘Listen,’	she	said,	surprised	to	find	that	her	own	voice	was	steady,	if	a	little	raw,	‘I	knew	a	camp	dog,	once.
Could	 face	 down	 an	 okral.	 But	 at	 the	 first	 rise	 of	 wind,	 or	 the	 mutter	 of	 thunder,	 it	 was	 transformed	 into	 a
quivering	wreck.’	She	paused,	and	then	said,	‘Assassin.	They	took	me	away	from	that	storm,	at	my	command.’
She	 forced	 herself	 closer,	 and	 coming	 up	 alongside	 Sag’Churok	 she	 reached	 out	 and	 set	 a	 hand	 against	 the
Hunter’s	flank.
Sag’Churok	need	not	have	moved	to	the	shove	she	gave	him—she	did	not	possess	the	strength	for	that—but
he	stepped	aside	none	the	less,	so	that	she	now	stood	directly	in	front	of	Gu’Rull.	‘Be	the	okral,	then.’
The	head	tilted	further	as	the	Assassin	regarded	her.
She	flinched	when	his	huge	wings	snapped	open,	and	staggered	back	a	step	as	they	swept	down	to	buffet
the	air—a	minor	thunder	as	if	mocking	what	lay	far	behind	them	now—before	he	launched	himself	skyward,
tail	snaking	in	his	wake.
Swearing	under	her	breath,	Kalyth	turned	to	Gunth	Mach.	‘It’s	almost	dusk.	Let	us	camp	here—every	one
of	my	bones	feels	rattled	loose	and	my	head	aches.’	And	that	was	not	true	fear,	was	it?	Not	blind	terror.	So
I	tell	myself,	words	that	give	comfort.
And	we	know	how	useful	those	ones	are.
	
Zaravow	of	the	Snakehunter,	a	minor	sub-clan	of	the	Gadra,	was	a	huge	man,	a	warrior	of	twenty-four	years,
and	for	all	his	bulk	he	was	known	to	be	quick,	lithe	in	battle.	The	Snakehunter	had	once	been	among	the	most
powerful	political	forces,	not	just	among	the	Gadra,	but	throughout	all	the	White	Face	Clans,	until	the	war	with
the	Malazans.	Zaravow’s	own	mother	had	died	to	a	Bridgeburner’s	quarrel	in	the	One	Eye	Cat	Mountains,	in
the	chaos	of	a	turned	ambush.	The	death	had	broken	his	father,	dragged	him	down	to	a	trader	town	where	he
wallowed	 for	 six	 months,	 drinking	 himself	 into	 a	 state	 of	 such	 bedraggled	 pathos	 that	 Zaravow	 had	 with	 his
own	hands	suffocated	the	wretch.
The	Malazans	had	assailed	the	Snakehunter,	until,	its	power	among	the	Barghast	shattered,	its	encampment
was	forced	to	fend	on	its	own,	leagues	from	Stolmen’s	own.	Snakehunter	warriors	lost	mates	to	other	clans,	an
incessant	 bleeding	 away	 that	 nothing	 could	 stem.	 Even	 Zaravow,	 who	 had	 once	 claimed	 three	 wives	 from
rivals	 he’d	 slain,	 was	 now	 down	 to	 one,	 and	 she	 had	 proved	 barren	 and	 spent	 all	 her	 time	 with	 widows
complaining	about	Zaravow	and	every	other	warrior	who	had	failed	the	Snakehunter.
Rubbish	 littered	 the	 paths	 between	 rows	 of	 tents.	 The	 herds	 were	 scrawny	 and	 ill-kempt.	 Bitterness	 and
misery	were	a	plague.	Young	warriors	were	getting	drunk	every	night	on	D’ras	beer,	and	in	the	mornings	they
huddled	round	smouldering	hearths,	shivering	in	the	aftermath	of	the	yellow	bitterroot	they’d	become	addicted
to.	Even	now,	when	the	word	had	gone	out	that	the	Gadra	would	soon	unleash	war	upon	the	liars	and	cheaters
of	this	land,	the	mood	remained	sour	and	sickly.
This	 great	 journey	 across	 the	 ocean,	 through	 foul	 warrens	 with	 all	 those	 lost	 years	 heaving	 up	 one	 upon
another,	had	been	a	mistake.	A	terrible,	grievous	mistake.
Zaravow	knew	that	Warleader	Tool	had	once	been	an	ally	of	the	Malazans,	and	if	he	had	possessed	greater


influence	in	the	council,	he	would	have	insisted	that	Tool	be	rejected—and	more,	flayed	alive.	His	beget	throatslit.	His	wife	raped	and	the	toes	clipped	from	her	feet,	so	making	her	a	Hobbler,	lower	than	a	camp	cur,	forced
to	lift	her	backside	to	any	man	at	any	time	and	in	any	place.	And	all	of	that,	well,	even	then	it	would	not	be
enough.
He	 had	 been	 forced	 to	 apply	 his	 own	 deathmask	 this	 day—his	 damned	 wife	 was	 nowhere	 to	 be	 found
among	the	five	hundred	yurts	in	the	Snakehunter	camp—and	he	was	crouched	in	front	of	the	cookfire,	face
thrust	to	the	rising	heat	to	hasten	the	hardening	of	the	paint,	when	he	saw	her	appear	up	on	the	goat	trail	of	the
hill	to	the	north,	walking	loosely—maybe	she	was	drunk,	but	no,	that	gait	recalled	to	him	something	else—in	the
mornings	long	ago	now,	after	a	night	of	sex—as	if	in	spreading	her	legs	she	untied	all	the	knots	inside	her.
And	a	moment	later	he	saw,	farther	up	the	trail,	Benden	Ledag,	that	scrawny	young	warrior	with	the	quick
smile	that	always	made	Zaravow	want	to	smash	his	even	white	teeth	into	bloody	stumps.	Tall,	thin,	awkward,
with	hands	big	as	the	wooden	paddles	used	to	pattern	grain	pots.
And,	in	a	flash,	Zaravow	knew	what	those	hands	had	been	doing	a	short	time	earlier.	And	he	knew,	as	well,
the	mocking	secret	behind	the	smile	he	offered	Zaravow	every	time	their	paths	crossed.
Not	 widows	 after	 all,	 for	 his	 wife.	 She’d	 moved	 past	 complaining	 about	 her	 husband.	 She’d	 decided	 to
shame	him.
He	would	make	the	shame	hers.
This	day,	then,	he	would	challenge	Benden.	He	would	cut	the	bastard	to	pieces,	with	his	wife	right	there	in
the	crowd,	a	witness,	and	she	would	know—everyone	would	know—that	her	punishment	would	follow.	He’d
take	the	front	half	of	her	feet,	a	single	merciful	chop	of	his	cutlass,	once,	twice.	And	then	he’d	rape	her.	And
then	he’d	throw	her	out	and	all	his	friends	would	take	their	turn.	They’d	fill	her.	Her	mouth,	the	places	between
her	thighs	and	cheeks.	Three	could	take	her	all	at	once—
Breath	hissed	from	his	nostrils.	He	was	growing	hard.
No,	 there	 would	 be	 time	 for	 that	 later.	 Zaravow	 unsheathed	 his	 cutlass	 and	 worked	 a	 thumb	 crossways,
back	 and	 forth	 down	 the	 cutting	 edge.	 The	 iron	 lived	 for	 the	 blood	 it	 would	 soon	 drink.	 He’d	 never	 liked
Benden	anyway.
He	rose,	adjusting	his	patchy	bhederin	half-cloak	with	a	rippling	shrug	of	his	broad	shoulders,	and	leaned	the
cutlass	against	the	side	of	his	right	leg	as	he	worked	the	chain	gauntlets	on	to	his	hands.
His	wife,	he	saw	from	the	corner	of	his	eye,	had	seen	him,	had	halted	at	the	last	low	ridge	girdling	the	hill,
and	was	watching.	With	sudden,	icy	comprehension.	Hearing	her	shout	back	up	the	hill,	he	collected	his	cutlass
and,	mind	blackening	with	rage,	wheeled	round—no,	that	rutting	shit	wasn’t	going	to	get	away—
But	her	screams	were	not	being	flung	back	at	Benden.	And	she	was	still	facing	the	camp,	and	even	at	this
distance	Zaravow	could	see	her	terror.
Behind	him,	other	voices	rose	in	scattered	alarm.
Zaravow	spun.
The	 bank	 of	 storm	 clouds	 filled	 half	 the	 sky—he	 had	 not	 even	 seen	 their	 approach—why,	 he	 could	 have
sworn—
Dust	descended	like	the	boles	of	enormous	columns	beneath	each	of	at	least	a	dozen	distinct	thunderheads,
and	those	grey,	impenetrable	pillars	formed	a	cordon	that	was	marching	straight	for	the	camp.
Zaravow	stared,	mouth	suddenly	dry.
As	the	base	of	those	pillars	began	to	dissolve,	revealing—
	
Some	titles	were	worthy	of	pride,	and	Sekara,	wife	to	Warchief	Stolmen	and	known	to	all	as	Sekara	the	Vile,
was	proud	of	hers.	She	would	burn	to	the	touch	and	everyone	knew	it,	knew	the	acid	of	her	sweat,	the	vitriol
of	her	breath.	Wherever	she	walked,	the	path	was	clear,	and	when	the	sun’s	light	cut	upon	her,	someone	would
always	move	to	stand	so	that	blessed	shade	settled	over	her.	The	tough	gristle	that	would	make	her	gums	bleed
was	chewed	first	by	someone	else.	The	paint	she	used	to	awaken	her	husband’s	Face	of	Slaying	was	ground
from	the	finest	pigments—by	someone	else’s	hand—and	all	of	this	was	what	her	vileness	had	won	her.
Sekara’s	mother	had	taught	her	daughter	well.	The	most	rewarding	ways	of	living—rewarding	in	the	sense
of	personal	gain,	which	was	all	that	truly	counted—demanded	a	ruthlessness	in	the	manipulation	of	others.	All
that	 was	 needed	 was	 a	 honed	 intelligence	 and	 an	 eye	 that	 saw	 clearly	 every	 weakness,	 every	 possible
advantage	to	exploit.	And	a	hand	that	did	not	hesitate,	ever,	to	deliver	pain,	to	render	punishment	for	offences


real	or	fabricated.
By	how	she	was	seen,	by	all	that	she	had	made	of	herself,	she	was	a	presence	that	could	now	slink	into	the
heads	 of	 every	 Gadran,	 vicious	 as	 a	 wardog	 patrolling	 the	 perimeter	 of	 the	 camp,	 cruel	 as	 an	 adder	 in	 the
bedding.	And	this	was	power.
Her	husband’s	power	was	less	subtle,	and	because	it	was	less	subtle,	it	was	not	nearly	as	efficient	as	her
own.	 It	 could	 not	 work	 the	 language	 of	 silent	 threat	 and	 deadly	 promise.	 Besides,	 he	 was	 as	 a	 child	 in	 her
hands;	he	had	always	been,	from	the	very	first,	and	that	would	never	change.
She	 was	 regal	 in	 her	 attire,	 bedecked	 in	 gifts	 from	 the	 most	 talented	 among	 the	 tribe’s	 weavers,	 spinners,
seamstresses,	 bone	 and	 antler	 carvers,	 jewel-smiths	 and	 tanners—gifts	 that	 were	 given	 to	 win	 favour,	 or
deflect	 Sekara’s	 envy.	 When	 one	 had	 power,	 after	 all,	 envy	 ceased	 to	 be	 a	 flaw	 of	 character;	 instead,	 it
became	a	weapon,	a	threat;	and	Sekara	worked	it	well,	so	that	now	she	was	counted	among	the	wealthiest	of
all	the	White	Face	Barghast.
She	 walked,	 back	 straight,	 head	 held	 high,	 reminding	 all	 who	 saw	 her	 that	 the	 role	 of	 Barghast	 Queen
belonged	 to	 her,	 though	 that	 bitch	 Hetan	 might	 hold	 to	 that	 title—one	 that	 she	 refused,	 stupid	 woman.	 No,
Sekara	was	known	to	all	as	its	rightful	bearer.	By	virtue	of	breeding,	and	by	the	brilliance	of	her	cruelty.	And
were	her	husband	not	a	pathetic	oaf,	why,	they	would	have	long	since	wrested	control	away	from	that	bestial
Tool	and	his	insatiable	slut	of	a	wife.
The	cape	of	sewn	hides	she	wore	trailed	in	the	dust	behind	her	as	she	traversed	the	stony	path,	slipping	in
and	 out	 of	 the	 shadows	 cast	 by	 the	 X-shaped	 crucifixes	 lining	 the	 ridge.	 It	 would	 not	 do	 to	 glance	 up	 at	 the
skinless	lumps	hanging	from	the	crosses—the	now	lifeless	Akrynnai,	D’ras	and	Saphii	traders,	the	merchants
and	 horsemongers,	 their	 stupid,	 useless	 guards,	 their	 fat	 mates	 and	 dough-fleshed	 children.	 In	 this	 stately
promenade,	 Sekara	 was	 simply	 laying	 claim	 to	 the	 expression	 of	 her	 power.	 To	 walk	 this	 path,	 eyes	 fixed
straight	ahead,	was	enough	proof	of	possession.	Yes,	she	owned	the	tortured	deaths	of	these	foreigners.
She	was	Sekara	the	Vile.
Soon,	 she	 would	 see	 the	 same	 done	 to	 Tool,	 Hetan	 and	 their	 spoiled	 runts.	 So	 much	 had	 already	 been
achieved,	her	allies	in	place	and	waiting	for	her	command.
She	 thought	 back	 to	 her	 husband,	 and	 the	 soft	 ache	 between	 her	 legs	 throbbed	 with	 the	 memory	 of	 his
mouth,	 his	 tongue,	 that	 made	 obvious	 his	 abject	 servility.	 Yes,	 she	 made	 him	 work,	 scabbing	 his	 knees,	 and
gave	him	nothing	in	return.	The	insides	of	her	thighs	were	caked	in	white	paint,	and	she	had	slyly	revealed	that
detail	 to	 her	 handmaidens	 when	 they	 dressed	 her—and	 now	 word	 would	 be	 out	 once	 again	 among	 all	 the
women.	 Chatter	 and	 giggles,	 snorts	 of	 contempt.	 She’d	 left	 her	 husband	 hastily	 reapplying	 the	 paint	 on	 his
face.
She	 noted	 the	 storm	 clouds	 to	 the	 west,	 but	 they	 were	 too	 distant	 to	 be	 of	 any	 concern,	 once	 she	 had
determined	 that	 they	 were	 not	 drawing	 any	 closer.	 And	 through	 the	 thick	 soles	 of	 her	 beaded	 bhederin
moccasins,	she	felt	nothing	of	the	thunder.	And	when	a	pack	of	camp	dogs	cut	across	just	ahead,	she	saw	in
their	cowering	gaits	nothing	more	than	their	natural	fear	of	her,	and	was	content.
______
Hetan	 lounged	 in	 the	 yurt,	 watching	 her	 fat	 imp	 of	 a	 son	 scrabbling	 about	 on	 the	 huge	 wardog	 lying	 on	 the
cheap	Akryn	rug	they	had	traded	for	when	it	finally	became	obvious	that	child	and	dog	had	adopted	each	other.
She	was	ever	amazed	at	the	dog’s	forbearance	beneath	the	siege	of	grubby,	tugging,	poking	and	yanking	hands
—the	beast	was	big	even	by	Barghast	standards,	eight	or	nine	years	old	and	scarred	with	the	vicious	scraps
for	dominance	among	the	pack—no	other	dog	risked	its	ire	these	days.	Even	so,	permitting	the	rank	creature
into	the	confines	of	the	yurt	was	virtually	unheard	of—another	one	of	her	husband’s	strange	indulgences.	Well,
it	 could	 foul	 up	 that	 ugly	 foreign	 rug,	 and	 it	 seemed	 it	 knew	 the	 range	 of	 this	 unnatural	 gift	 and	 would	 push
things	no	further.
‘Yes,’	she	muttered	to	it,	and	saw	how	its	ears	tilted	in	her	direction,	‘a	fist	to	your	damned	head	if	you	try
for	 any	 real	 bedding.’	 Of	 course,	 if	 she	 raised	 a	 hand	 to	 the	 dog,	 her	 son	 would	 be	 the	 one	 doing	 all	 the
howling.
Hetan	glanced	over	as	the	hide	flap	was	tugged	aside	and	Tool,	ducking	to	clear	the	entrance,	entered	the
yurt.	‘Look	at	your	son,’	she	accused.	‘He’s	going	to	poke	out	the	damn	thing’s	eyes.	And	get	a	hand	bitten
off,	or	worse.’
Her	husband	squinted	down	at	the	squirming	toddler,	but	it	was	clear	he	was	too	distracted	to	offer	anything


in	the	way	of	comment.	Instead,	he	crossed	the	chamber	and	collected	up	his	fur-bound	flint	sword.
Hetan	sat	straighter.	‘What’s	happened?’
‘I	am	not	sure,’	he	replied.	‘On	this	day,	Barghast	blood	has	been	spilled.’
She	 was	 on	 her	 feet—noting	 that	 the	 hound	 lifted	 its	 head	 at	 the	 sudden	 tension—and,	 taking	 her
scabbarded	cutlasses,	she	followed	Tool	outside.
She	saw	nothing	awry,	barring	the	growing	attention	her	husband	garnered	as	he	set	out	purposefully	up	the
main	avenue	that	bisected	the	encampment,	heading	westward.	He	still	possessed	some	of	the	sensitivities	of
the	T’lan	Imass	he	had	once	been—Hetan	did	not	doubt	his	assertion.	Moving	up	alongside	him,	acutely	aware
of	 other	 warriors	 falling	 into	 their	 wake,	 she	 shot	 him	 a	 searching	 look,	 saw	 his	 sorrow	 stung	 afresh,	 his
weariness	furrowing	deep	lines	on	his	brow	and	face.
‘One	of	the	outlying	clans?’
He	 grimaced.	 ‘There	 is	 no	 place	 on	 this	 earth,	 Hetan,	 where	 the	 Imass	 have	 not	 walked.	 That	 presence
greets	my	eyes	thick	as	fog,	a	reminder	of	ancient	things,	no	matter	where	I	look.’
‘Does	it	blind	you?’
‘It	is	my	belief,’	he	replied,	‘that	it	blinds	all	of	us.’
She	frowned,	unsure	of	his	meaning.	‘To	what?’
‘That	we	were	not	the	first	to	do	so.’
His	response	chilled	her	down	in	her	bones.	‘Tool,	have	we	found	our	enemy?’
The	question	seemed	to	startle	him.	‘Perhaps.	But	.	.	.’
‘What?’
‘I	hope	not.’
By	the	time	they	reached	the	encampment’s	western	edge,	at	least	three	hundred	warriors	were	following
them,	silent	and	expectant,	perhaps	even	eager	although	they	could	know	nothing	of	their	Warleader’s	intent.
The	sword	in	Tool’s	hands	had	been	transformed	into	a	standard,	a	brandished	sigil	held	so	loosely,	in	a	manner
suggesting	 careless	 indifference,	 that	 it	 acquired	 the	 gravity	 of	 an	 icon—Onos	 Toolan’s	 deadly	 slayer,	 drawn
forth	with	such	reluctance—the	promise	of	blood	and	war.
The	far	horizon	was	a	black	band	soon	to	swallow	the	sun.
Tool	stood	staring	at	it.
Behind	them	the	crowd	waited	amidst	the	rustle	of	weapons,	but	no	one	spoke	a	word.
‘That	storm,’	she	asked	him	quietly,	‘is	it	sorcery,	husband?’
He	was	long	in	replying.	‘No,	Hetan.’
‘And	yet	.	.	.’
‘Yes.	And	yet.’
‘Will	you	tell	me	nothing?’
He	 glanced	 at	 her	 and	 she	 was	 shocked	 at	 his	 ravaged	 expression.	 ‘What	 shall	 I	 say?’	 he	 demanded	 in
sudden	anger.	‘Half	a	thousand	Barghast	are	dead.	Killed	in	twenty	heartbeats.	What	do	you	want	me	to	say
to	you?’
She	 almost	 recoiled	 at	 his	 tone.	 Trembling,	 she	 broke	 contact	 with	 his	 hard	 glare.	 ‘You	 have	 seen	 this
before,	haven’t	you?	Onos	Toolan—say	it	plain!’
‘I	will	not.’
So	many	bonds	forged	between	them,	years	of	passion	and	the	deepest	of	loves,	all	snapped	with	his	denial.
She	reeled	inside,	felt	tears	spring	to	her	eyes.	‘All	that	we	have—you	and	me—all	of	it,	does	it	mean	nothing,
then?’
‘It	means	everything.	And	so	if	I	must,	I	will	cut	my	tongue	from	my	mouth,	rather	than	reveal	to	you	what	I
now	know.’
‘We	have	our	war,	then.’
‘Beloved.’	His	voice	cracked	on	the	word	and	he	shook	his	head.	‘Dearest	wife,	forge	of	my	heart,	I	want
to	run.	With	you,	with	our	children.	Run,	do	you	hear	me?	An	end	to	this	rule—I	do	not	want	to	be	the	one	to
lead	the	Barghast	into	this—do	you	understand?’	The	sword	fell	at	his	feet	and	a	shocked	groan	erupted	from
the	mob	behind	them.
She	so	wanted	to	take	him	into	her	arms.	To	protect	him,	from	all	this,	from	the	knowledge	devouring	him
from	the	inside	out.	But	he	gave	her	no	opening,	no	pathway	back	to	him.	‘I	will	stand	with	you,’	she	said,	as


the	tears	spilled	loose	and	tracked	down	her	cheeks.	‘I	will	always	do	so,	husband,	but	you	have	taken	away	all
my	strength.	Give	me	something,	please,	anything.	Anything.’
He	reached	up	to	his	own	face	and	seemed	moments	from	clawing	deep	gouges	down	its	length.	‘If—if	I
am	to	refuse	them.	Your	people,	Hetan.	If	I	am	to	lead	them	away	from	here,	from	this	prophesied	fate	you
are	all	so	desperate	to	embrace,	do	you	truly	believe	they	will	follow	me?’
No.	They	will	kill	you.	And	our	children.	And	for	me,	something	far	worse.	In	a	low	whisper	she	then
asked,	‘Shall	we	flee,	then?	In	the	night,	unseen	by	anyone?’
He	lowered	his	hands	and,	eyes	on	the	storm,	offered	up	a	bleak	smile	that	lanced	her	heart.	‘I	am	to	be	the
coward	I	so	want	to	be?	And	I	do,	beloved,	I	so	want	to	be	a	coward.	For	you,	for	our	children.	Gods	below,
for	myself.’
How	many	admissions	could	so	crush	a	man	like	this?	It	seemed	that	in	these	past	few	moments	she	had
seen	them	all.
‘What	will	you	do?’	she	asked,	for	it	seemed	that	her	role	in	all	of	this	had	vanished.
‘Select	for	me	a	hundred	warriors,	Hetan.	My	worst	critics,	my	fiercest	rivals.’
‘If	you	will	lead	a	war-party,	why	just	a	hundred?	Why	so	few?’
‘We	will	not	find	the	enemy,	only	what	they	have	left	behind.’
‘You	will	set	fire	to	their	rage.	And	so	bind	them	to	you.’
He	flinched.	‘Ah,	beloved,	you	misunderstand.	I	mean	to	set	fire	not	to	rage,	but	fear.’
‘Am	I	permitted	to	accompany	you,	husband?’
‘And	leave	the	children?	No.	Also,	Cafal	will	return	soon,	with	Talamandas.	You	must	keep	them	here,	to
await	our	return.’
Without	another	word,	she	turned	about	and	walked	down	to	the	throng.	Rivals	and	critics,	yes,	there	were
plenty	of	those.	She	would	have	no	difficulty	in	choosing	a	hundred.	Or,	indeed,	a	thousand.
	
With	the	smoke	of	cookfires	spreading	like	grey	shrouds	through	the	dusk,	Onos	Toolan	led	a	hundred	warriors
of	the	White	Face	Barghast	out	from	the	camp,	the	head	of	the	column	quickly	disappearing	in	the	darkness
beyond.
Hetan	had	chosen	a	raised	ridge	to	watch	them	leave.	Off	to	her	right	a	massive	herd	of	bhederin	milled,
crowded	together	as	was	their	habit	when	night	descended.	She	could	feel	the	heat	from	their	bodies,	saw	the
plume	of	their	breaths	drifting	in	streams.	The	herds	had	lost	their	caution	with	an	ease	that	left	Hetan	faintly
surprised.	 Perhaps	 some	 ancient	 memory	 had	 been	 stirred	 to	 life,	 the	 muddled	 comprehension	 that	 such
proximity	to	the	two-legged	creatures	kept	away	wolves	and	other	predators.	The	Barghast	knew	to	exercise
tact	in	culling	the	herd,	quietly	separating	the	beasts	they	would	slay	from	all	the	others.
So	 too,	 she	 realized,	 were	 the	 Barghast	 scattered,	 pulled	 apart,	 but	 not	 by	 the	 malevolent	 intent	 of	 some
outside	force.	No,	they	had	done	this	to	themselves.	Peace	delivered	a	most	virulent	poison	to	those	trained	as
warriors.	Some	fell	into	indolence;	others	found	enemies	closer	to	hand.	‘Warrior,	fix	your	gaze	outward.’	An
ancient	saying	among	the	Barghast.	An	admonition	born	of	bitter	experience,	no	doubt.	Reminding	her	that	little
had	changed	among	her	people.
She	looked	away	from	the	bhederin—but	the	column	was	well	and	truly	gone,	swallowed	by	the	night.	Tool
had	 not	 waited	 long	 to	 set	 the	 league-devouring	 pace	 that	 made	 Barghast	 war-parties	 so	 dangerous	 to
complacent	enemies.	Even	in	that,	she	knew	her	husband	could	run	those	warriors	into	the	ground.	Now	that
would	humble	those	rivals.
Her	 thoughts	 about	 her	 own	 people,	 as	 the	 two	 thousand	 or	 so	 bhederin	 stood	 massed	 and	 motionless	 a
stone’s	throw	away,	had	left	her	depressed,	and	the	squabbling	of	the	twins	in	the	yurt	only	awaited	her	return
before	 commencing	 once	 again,	 since	 the	 girls	 adored	 an	 audience.	 She	 was	 not	 quite	 ready	 for	 them.	 Too
fragile	with	the	battering	she	had	received.
She	missed	the	company	of	her	brother	with	an	intensity	that	ached	in	her	chest.
The	 faintly	 lurid	 glow	 of	 the	 Jade	 Slashes	 drew	 her	 eyes	 to	 the	 south	 horizon.	 Lifting	 skyward	 to	 claw
furrows	 across	 the	 breadth	 of	 the	 night—too	 easy	 to	 find	 omens	 beneath	 such	 heavenly	 violence;	 the	 elders
had	been	bleating	warnings	for	months	now—and	she	suddenly	wondered,	with	a	faint	catch	of	breath,	if	it	had
been	too	convenient	to	dismiss	their	dire	mutterings	as	the	usual	disgruntled	rubbish	voiced	by	aching	old	men
the	world	over.	Change	as	the	harbinger	of	disaster	was	an	attitude	destined	to	live	for	ever,	feeding	off	the


inevitable	as	it	did	and	woefully	blind	to	its	own	irony.
But	some	omens	were	just	that.	True	omens.	And	some	changes	proved	to	be	genuine	disasters,	and	to	stir
sands	already	settled	yielded	shallow	satisfaction.
When	 ruin	 is	 coming,	 we	 choose	 not	 to	 see	 it.	 We	 shift	 our	 focus,	 blurring	 the	 facts,	 the	 evidence
before	 us.	 And	 we	 ready	 our	 masks	 of	 surprise,	 along	 with	 those	 of	 suffering	 and	 self-pity,	 and	 keep
our	fingers	nimble	for	that	oh-so-predictable	cascade	of	innocence,	that	victim’s	charade.
Before	reaching	for	the	sword.	Because	someone’s	to	blame.	Someone	is	always	to	blame.
She	spat	into	the	gloom.	She	wanted	to	lie	with	a	man	this	night.	It	almost	did	not	matter	who	that	man	might
be.	She	wanted	her	own	method	of	escaping	grim	realities.
One	thing	she	would	never	play,	however,	was	that	game	of	masks.	No,	she	would	meet	the	future	with	a
knowing	 look	 in	 her	 eye,	 unapologetic,	 yet	 defying	 the	 prospect	 of	 her	 own	 innocence.	 No,	 be	 as	 guilty	 as
everyone	else,	but	announce	the	admission	with	bold	courage.	She	would	point	no	fingers.	She	would	not	reach
for	her	weapons	blazing	with	the	lie	of	retribution.
Hetan	found	she	was	glaring	at	those	celestial	tears	in	the	sky.
Her	 husband	 wanted	 to	 be	 a	 coward.	 So	 weakened	 by	 his	 love	 for	 her,	 for	 the	 children	 they	 shared,	 he
would	break	himself	to	save	them.	He	had,	she	realized,	virtually	begged	her	for	permission	to	do	just	that.	She
had	not	been	ready	for	him.	She	had	failed	in	understanding	what	he	sought	from	her.
Instead,	 I	 just	 kept	 asking	 stupid	 questions.	 Not	 understanding	 how	 each	 one	 tore	 out	 the	 ground
beneath	him.	How	he	stumbled,	how	he	fell	again	and	again.	My	idiotic	questions,	my	own	selfish	need
to	find	something	solid	under	my	own	feet—before	deciding,	before	making	bold	judgement.
She	 had	 unknowingly	 cornered	 him.	 Refused	 his	 cowardice.	 She	 had,	 in	 fact,	 forced	 him	 out	 into	 that
darkness,	 into	 leading	 his	 warriors	 to	 a	 place	 of	 truths—where	 he	 would	 seek	 to	 frighten	 them	 but	 already
knowing—as	she	did—that	he	would	fail.
And	so	we	have	our	wish.	We	go	to	war.
And	our	Warleader	stands	alone	in	the	knowledge	that	we	will	lose.	That	victory	is	impossible.	Will	he
command	with	any	less	vigour?	Will	he	slow	the	sword	in	his	hands,	knowing	all	that	he	knows?
Hetan	bared	her	teeth	with	fierce,	savage	pride,	and	spoke	to	the	jade	talons	in	the	sky.	‘He	will	not.’
______
They	 emerged	 in	 darkness,	 and	 a	 moment	 later	 relief	 flooded	 through	 Setoc.	 The	 blurred,	 swollen	 moon,	 the
faint	green	taint	limning	the	features	of	Torrent	and	Cafal,	casting	that	now	familiar	sickly	sheen	on	the	metal
fittings	of	the	horse’s	bit	and	saddle.	Yet	the	skirl	of	stars	overhead	seemed	twisted,	subtly	pushed—and	it	was
a	few	heartbeats	before	she	recognized	constellations.
‘We	are	far	to	the	north	and	east,’	said	Cafal.	‘But	not	insurmountably	so.’
The	ghosts	from	the	other	realm	had	flooded	the	plain,	flowing	outward	and	growing	ever	more	ephemeral,
finally	 vanishing	 entirely	 from	 her	 senses.	 She	 felt	 that	 absence	 with	 a	 deepening	 anguish,	 a	 sense	 of	 loss
warring	with	pleasure	at	their	salvation.	Living	kin	awaited	many	of	them,	but	not,	she	was	certain,	all.	There
had	 been	 creatures	 in	 that	 other	 world’s	 past	 unlike	 anything	 she	 had	 seen	 or	 even	 heard	 of—limited	 as	 her
experience	was,	to	be	sure—and	they	would	find	themselves	as	lost	in	this	world	as	in	the	one	they	had	fled.
A	vast	empty	plain	surrounded	them,	flat	as	an	ancient	seabed.
Torrent	swung	himself	back	into	the	saddle.	She	heard	him	sigh.	‘Tell	me,	Cafal,	what	do	you	see?’
‘It’s	night—I	can’t	see	much.	We	are	on	the	northern	edge	of	the	Wastelands,	I	think.	And	so,	around	us,
there	is	nothing.’
Torrent	grunted,	clearly	amused	by	something	in	the	Barghast’s	reply.
Cafal	nosed	the	bait.	‘What	makes	you	laugh?	What	do	you	see,	Torrent?’
‘At	the	risk	of	melodrama,’	he	said,	‘I	see	the	landscape	of	my	soul.’
‘It	is	an	ancient	one,’	Setoc	mused,	‘which	makes	you	old	inside,	Torrent.’
‘The	 Awl	 dwelt	 here	 hundreds	 of	 generations	 ago.	 My	 ancestors	 looked	 out	 upon	 this	 very	 plain,	 beneath
these	same	stars.’
‘I	am	sure	they	did,’	acknowledged	Cafal.	‘As	did	mine.’
‘We	have	no	memory	of	you	Barghast,	but	no	matter,	I	will	not	gainsay	your	claims.’	He	paused	for	a	time,
and	then	spoke	again,	‘it	would	not	have	been	so	empty	back	then,	I	imagine.	More	animals,	wandering	about.
Great	beasts	that	trembled	the	ground.’	He	laughed	again,	but	this	time	it	was	bitter.	‘We	emptied	it	and	called


that	success.	Fucking	unbelievable.’
With	that	he	reached	down	to	Setoc.
She	hesitated.	‘Torrent,	where	will	you	ride	from	here?’
‘Does	it	matter?’
‘It	didn’t	before.	But	I	believe	it	does	now.’
‘Why?’
She	 shook	 her	 head.	 ‘Not	 for	 you—I	 see	 nothing	 of	 the	 path	 awaiting	 you.	 No.	 For	 me.	 For	 the	 ghosts	 I
have	brought	to	this	world.	I	am	not	yet	quit	of	them.	Their	journey	remains	incomplete.’
He	lowered	his	hand	and	studied	her	in	the	gloom.	‘You	hold	yourself	responsible	for	their	fate.’
She	nodded.
‘I	will	miss	you,	I	think.’
‘Hold	a	moment,’	said	Cafal,	‘both	of	you.	Setoc,	you	cannot	wander	off	all	alone—’
‘Have	no	fear,’	she	cut	in,	‘for	I	will	accompany	you.’
‘But	I	must	return	to	my	people.’
‘Yes.’	But	she	would	say	no	more.	She	was	home	to	a	thousand	hearts,	and	that	blood	still	ran	sizzling	like
acid	in	her	soul.
‘I	shall	run	at	a	pace	you	cannot	hope	to	match—’
Setoc	 laughed.	 ‘Let	 us	 play	 this	 game,	 Cafal.	 When	 you	 catch	 up	 to	 me,	 we	 shall	 rest.’	 She	 turned	 to
Torrent.	 ‘I	 shall	 miss	 you	 as	 well,	 warrior,	 last	 of	 the	 Awl.	 Tell	 me,	 of	 all	 the	 women	 who	 hunted	 you,	 was
there	one	you	would	have	let	snare	Torrent	of	the	Awl?’
‘None	other	than	you,	Setoc	.	.	.	in	about	five	years	from	now.’
Flashing	a	bright	smile	at	Cafal,	she	set	off,	fleet	as	a	hare.
The	Barghast	grunted.	‘She	cannot	maintain	such	a	pace	for	long.’
Torrent	gathered	his	reins.	‘The	wolves	howl	for	her,	Warlock.	Chase	her	down,	if	you	can.’
Cafal	eyed	the	warrior.	‘Your	last	words	to	her,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘No	matter,
I	should	not	have	asked.’
‘But	you	didn’t,’	Torrent	replied.
He	watched	Cafal	find	his	loping	jog,	long	legs	taking	him	swiftly	into	Setoc’s	wake.
	
The	city	seethed.	Unseen	armies	struggled	against	the	ravages	of	decay,	gathered	in	unimaginable	numbers	to
wage	 pitched	 battles	 with	 neglect.	 Leaderless	 and	 desperate,	 legions	 massing	 barely	 a	 mote	 of	 dust	 sent	 out
scouts	 ranging	 far	 from	 the	 well-travelled	 tracks,	 into	 the	 narrowest	 of	 capillaries	 threading	 senseless	 stone.
One	such	scout	found	a	Sleeper,	curled	and	motionless—almost	lifeless—in	a	long	abandoned	rest	chamber	in
the	beneath-the-floor	level	of	Feed.	A	drone,	forgotten,	mind	so	somnolent	that	the	Shi’gal	Assassin	that	had
last	stalked	Kalse	Rooted	had	not	sensed	its	presence,	thus	sparing	it	from	the	slaughter	that	had	drenched	so
many	other	levels.
The	scout	summoned	kin	and	in	a	short	time	a	hundred	thousand	soldiers	swarmed	the	drone,	forming	sheets
of	glistening	oil	upon	its	scaled	hide,	seeping	potent	nectars	into	the	creature’s	body.
A	 drone	 was	 a	 paltry	 construct,	 difficult	 to	 work	 with,	 an	 appalling	 challenge	 to	 physically	 transform,	 to
awaken	 with	 the	 necessary	 intelligence	 required	 to	 take	 command.	 A	 hundred	 thousand	 quickly	 became	 a
million,	and	then	a	hundred	million,	soldiers	dying	once	used	up,	hastily	devoured	by	kin	that	then	birthed	anew,
in	new	shapes	with	altered	functions.
The	 drone’s	 original	 purpose	 had	 been	 as	 an	 excretor,	 producing	 an	 array	 of	 flavours	 to	 feed	 newborn
Ve’Gath	to	increase	muscle	mass	and	bone	density.	It	was	fed	in	turn	by	armies	serving	the	Matron	as	they
delivered	her	commands—but	this	Matron	had	been	late	in	the	breeding	of	Ve’Gath.	She	had	produced	fewer
than	 three	 hundred	 before	 the	 enemy	 manifested	 and	 battle	 was	 joined.	 The	 drone,	 therefore,	 was	 far	 from
exhausted.	This	potential	alone	gave	purpose	to	the	efforts	of	the	unseen	armies,	but	the	desperation	belonged
to	another	cause—exotic	flavours	now	marred	Kalse	Rooted.	Strangers	had	invaded	and	had	thus	far	proved
insensible	to	all	efforts	at	conjoining.
At	long	last	the	drone	stirred.	Two	newborn	eyes	opened,	seven	distinct	lids	peeling	back	in	each	one,	and	a
mind	that	had	known	only	darkness—for	excretors	had	no	need	for	sight—suddenly	looked	upon	a	realm	both
familiar	and	unknown.	Old	senses	merged	with	the	new	ones,	quickly	reconfiguring	the	world.	Lids	flickered


up	 and	 down,	 constructing	 an	 ever	 more	 complete	 comprehension—heat,	 current,	 charge,	 composition—and
many	more,	few	of	which	the	ghost	understood	beyond	vague,	almost	formless	notions.
The	ghost,	who	did	not	even	know	his	own	name,	had	been	drawn	away	from	his	mortal	companions,	swept
along	 on	 currents	 that	 none	 of	 them	 could	 sense—currents	 that	 defied	 his	 own	 efforts	 at	 description.	 In
helpless	frustration,	he	settled	upon	the	familiar	concepts	of	armies,	legions,	scouts,	battles	and	war,	though	he
knew	 that	 none	 of	 these	 was	 correct.	 Even	 to	 attribute	 life	 to	 such	 minuscule	 entities	 was	 quite	 probably
wrong;	and	yet	they	conveyed	meaning	to	him,	or	perhaps	he	was	simply	capable	of	stealing	knowledge	from
the	 clamouring	 host	 of	 instructions	 that	 raced	 through	 all	 of	 Kalse	 Rooted	 in	 a	 humming	 buzz	 too	 faint	 for
mortal	ears.
And	now	he	found	himself	looking	down	upon	a	drone,	a	K’Chain	Che’Malle	unlike	any	he	had	ever	seen
before.	No	taller	than	a	grown	male	human,	thin-limbed,	with	a	mass	of	tentacles	instead	of	fingers	at	the	ends
of	those	arms.	The	broad	head	bulged	behind	the	eyes,	and	at	the	base	of	the	skull.	The	slash	of	a	mouth	was
that	of	a	lizard,	lined	with	multiple	rows	of	fine,	sharp	fangs.	The	colour	of	the	two	large,	oversized	eyes	was	a
soft	brown.
He	watched	it	twitch	for	a	time,	knowing	the	creature	was	simply	exploring	the	extent	of	its	transformation,
unfurling	 its	 ungainly	 limbs,	 turning	 its	 head	 from	 side	 to	 side	 in	 rapid	 flickers	 as	 it	 caught	 new	 and	 strange
flavours.	He	saw	then	its	growing	agitation,	its	fear.
The	smell	of	unknown	invaders.	The	drone	was	able	to	gather,	enclose	and	then	discard	the	information	that
belonged	 to	 feral	 orthen	 and	 grishol;	 and	 this	 permitted	 it	 to	 isolate	 the	 location	 of	 the	 invaders.	 Alive,	 yes.
Distant,	discordant	sounds,	multiple	breaths,	soft	feet	on	the	floor,	fingers	brushing	mechanisms.
The	flavours	the	drone	had	once	fed	to	Ve’Gath	were	now	turned	upon	itself.	In	time,	it	would	increase	in
size	and	strength.	If	the	strangers	had	not	departed	by	then,	the	drone	would	have	to	kill	them.
The	ghost	struggled	against	panic.	He	could	not	warn	them.	This	creature,	so	flush	now	with	necessities	and
enormous	tasks—the	great	war	against	the	deterioration	of	Kalse	Rooted,	the	ghost	assumed—could	not	but
see	the	clumsy	explorations	of	Taxilian,	Rautos	and	the	others	as	a	threat.	To	be	eradicated.
The	 drone,	 named	 Sulkit—this	 being	 a	 name	 derived	 from	 birth-month	 and	 status,	 indeed	 a	 name	 once
shared	by	two	hundred	 identical	drones—now	 rose	on	its	hind	limbs,	thin,	prehensile	 tail	slithering	across	 the
floor.	Oils	dripped	from	its	slate-grey	hide,	pooled	and	then	quickly	vanished	as	the	unseen	army,	emboldened,
purified	and	enlivened	by	the	commander	it	had	itself	created,	dispersed	to	renew	its	war.
And	the	ghost	withdrew,	raced	back	to	his	companions.
	
‘If	 this	 was	 a	 mind,’	 said	 Taxilian,	 ‘it	 has	 died.’	 He	 ran	 his	 hand	 along	 the	 sleek	 carapace,	 frowning	 at	 the
ribbons	of	flexible,	clear	glass	rippling	out	from	the	iron	dome.	Was	something	flowing	through	that	glass?	He
could	not	be	certain.
Rautos	rubbed	his	chin.	‘Truly,	I	do	not	see	how	you	can	tell,’	he	said.
‘There	should	be	heat,	vibration.	Something.’
‘Why?’
Taxilian	scowled.	‘Because	that	would	tell	us	it’s	working.’
Breath	 barked	 a	 laugh	 behind	 them.	 ‘Does	 a	 knife	 talk?	 Does	 a	 shield	 drum?	 You’ve	 lost	 your	 mind,
Taxilian.	A	city	only	lives	when	people	are	in	it,	and	even	then	it’s	the	people	doing	the	living,	not	the	city.’
In	the	chamber	they	had	just	left,	Sheb	and	Nappet	bickered	as	they	cleared	rubbish	from	the	floor,	making
room	for	everyone	to	sleep.	They	had	climbed	level	after	level	and,	even	now,	still	more	waited	above	them.
But	everyone	was	exhausted.	A	dozen	levels	below,	Last	had	managed	to	kill	a	nest	of	orthen,	which	he	had
skinned	 and	 gutted,	 and	 he	 was	 now	 arranging	 the	 six	 scrawny	 carcasses	 on	 skewers,	 while	 off	 to	 one	 side
bhederin	 dung	 burned	 in	 a	 stone	 quern,	 the	 fire’s	 heat	 slowly	 driving	 back	 the	 chilly,	 lifeless	 air.	 Asane	 was
preparing	herbs	to	feed	into	a	tin	pot	filled	with	fresh	water.
Bewildered,	the	ghost	drifted	among	them.
Breath	strode	back	into	the	chamber,	eyes	scanning	the	floor.	‘Time,’	she	said,	‘for	a	casting	of	the	Tiles.’
Anticipation	fluttered	through	the	ghost,	or	perhaps	it	was	terror.	He	felt	himself	drawn	closer,	staring	avidly
as	 she	 drew	 out	 her	 collection	 of	 Tiles.	 Polished	 bone?	 Ivory?	 Glazed	 clay?	 All	 kinds,	 he	 realized,	 shifting
before	his	eyes.
Breath	whispered,	‘See?	Still	young.	So	much,	so	much	to	decide.’	She	licked	her	lips,	her	hands	twitching.


The	others	drew	closer,	barring	Taxilian	who	had	remained	in	the	other	room.
‘I	don’t	recognize	none	of	them,’	said	Sheb.
‘Because	 they’re	 new,’	 snapped	 Breath.	 ‘The	 old	 ones	 are	 dead.	 Useless.	 These’—she	 gestured—‘they
belong	to	us,	just	us.	For	now.	And	the	time	has	come	to	give	them	their	names.’	She	raked	them	together	in	a
clatter,	scooped	them	up	and	held	the	Tiles	in	the	enclosed	bowl	of	her	hands.
The	ghost	could	see	her	flushed	face,	the	sudden	colour	making	her	skin	almost	translucent,	so	that	he	could
discern	the	faint	cage	of	bones	beneath.	He	saw	her	pulse	through	the	finest	vessels	in	her	flesh,	the	rush	and
swish	of	blood	in	their	eager	circuit.	He	saw	the	sweat	beading	on	her	high	brow,	and	the	creatures	swimming
within	it.
‘First,’	she	said,	‘I	need	to	remake	some	old	ones.	Give	them	new	faces.	The	names	may	sound	like	ones
you’ve	heard	before,	but	these	are	new	anyway.’
‘How?’	demanded	Sheb,	still	scowling.	‘How	are	they	new?’
‘They	just	are.’	She	sent	the	Tiles	on	to	the	floor.	‘No	Holds,	you	see?	Each	one	is	unaligned,	all	of	them	are
unaligned.	That’s	the	first	difference.’	She	pointed.	‘Chance—Knuckles—but	see	how	it’s	at	war	with	itself?
That’s	 the	 truth	 of	 Chance	 right	 there.	 Fortune	 and	 Misfortune	 are	 mortal	 enemies.	 And	 that	 one:	 Rule—no
throne,	thrones	are	too	obvious.’	She	flipped	that	Tile.	‘And	Ambition	on	the	other	side—they	kill	each	other,
you	 see?’	 She	 began	 flipping	 more	 Tiles.	 ‘Life	 and	 Death,	 Light	 and	 Dark,	 Fire	 and	 Water,	 Air	 and	 Stone.
Those	 are	 the	 old	 ones,	 remade.’	 She	 swept	 those	 aside,	 leaving	 three	 remaining	 Tiles.	 ‘These	 are	 the	 most
potent.	Fury,	and	on	its	opposite	side,	Starwheel.	 Fury	 is	 just	 what	 it	 says.	 Blind,	 a	 destroyer	 of	 everything.
Starwheel,	that’s	Time,	but	unravelled—’
‘Meaning	what?’	Rautos	asked,	his	voice	strangely	tight,	his	face	pale.
Breath	shrugged.	‘Before	and	after	are	meaningless.	Ahead	and	behind,	then	and	soon,	none	of	them	mean
anything.	 All	 those	 words	 that	 try	 to	 force	 order	 and,	 uh,	 sequence.’	 She	 shrugged	 again.	 ‘You	 won’t	 see
Starwheel	in	the	castings.	You’ll	just	see	Fury.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
Her	smile	was	chilling.	‘I	just	do.’	She	pointed	at	the	second	to	last	Tile.	‘Root,	and	on	the	other	side,	Ice
Haunt—they	 both	 seek	 the	 same	 thing.	 You	 get	 one	 or	 the	 other,	 never	 both.	 This	 last	 one,	 Blueiron	 there,
that’s	the	sorcery	that	gives	life	to	machines—it’s	still	strong	in	this	place,	I	can	feel	it.’	She	turned	the	Tile	on
to	 its	 other	 side.	 ‘Oblivion.	 Ware	 this	 one,	 it’s	 a	 curse.	 A	 demon.	 It	 eats	 you	 from	 the	 inside	 out.	 Your
memories,	your	self.’	She	licked	her	lips	once	more,	this	time	nervously.	‘It’s	very	strong	right	now.	And	getting
stronger	.	.	.	someone’s	coming,	someone’s	coming	to	find	us.’	She	hissed	suddenly	and	swept	up	the	last	Tiles.
‘We	need—we	need	to	feed	Blueiron.	Feed	it!’
Taxilian	spoke	from	the	doorway.	‘I	know,	Breath.	It	is	what	I	am	trying	to	do.’
She	faced	him,	teeth	bared.	‘Can	you	taste	this	place?’
‘I	can.’
From	one	side	Asane	whimpered,	and	then	flinched	as	Nappet	lashed	out	a	foot	to	kick	her.	He	would	have
done	more	but	Last	interposed	himself	between	the	two,	arms	crossed,	eyes	flat.	Nappet	sneered	and	turned
away.
‘I	don’t	understand,’	said	Rautos.	‘I	taste	nothing—nothing	but	dust.’
‘It	wants	our	help,’	Taxilian	announced.
Breath	nodded.
‘Only	I	don’t	know	how.’
Breath	held	up	a	knife.	‘Open	your	flesh.	Let	the	taste	inside,	Taxilian.	Let	it	inside.’
Was	this	madness,	or	the	only	path	to	salvation?	The	ghost	did	not	know.	But	he	sensed	a	new	flavour	in	the
air.	Excitement?	Hunger?	He	could	not	be	certain.
But	Sulkit	was	on	its	way.	Still	gaunt,	still	weak.	On	its	way,	then,	not	to	deliver	slaughter.
The	flavour,	the	ghost	realized,	was	hope.
______
Some	roads,	once	set	out	upon,	reveal	no	possible	path	but	forward.	Every	other	track	is	blocked	by	snarls	of
thorns,	steaming	fissures	or	rearing	walls	of	stone.	What	waits	at	the	far	end	of	the	forward	path	is	unknown,
and	since	knowledge	itself	may	prove	a	curse,	the	best	course	is	simply	to	place	one	foot	in	front	of	the	other,
and	think	not	at	all	of	fate	or	the	cruel	currents	of	destiny.


The	 seven	 or	 eight	 thousand	 refugees	 trudging	 in	 Twilight’s	 wake	 were	 content	 with	 ignorance,	 even	 as
darkness	closed	in	as	inexorable	as	a	tide,	even	as	the	world	to	either	side	of	the	Road	of	Gallan	seemed	to
lose	all	substance,	fragments	drifting	away	like	discarded	memories.	Linked	one	to	another	by	ropes,	strands	of
netting,	 torn	 strips	 of	 cloth	 and	 hide—exhausted	 but	 still	 alive,	 far	 from	 terrible	 flames	 and	 coils	 of	 smoke—
they	need	only	follow	their	Queen.
Most	faith	was	born	of	desperation,	Yan	Tovis	understood	that	much.	Let	them	see	her	bold,	sure	strides	on
this	stony	road.	Let	them	believe	she	had	walked	this	path	before,	or	that	by	virtue	of	noble	birth	and	title,	she
was	cloaked	with	warm,	comforting	knowledge	of	the	journey	they	had	all	begun,	this	flowing	river	of	blood.
My	blood.
She	 would	 give	 them	 that	 comfort.	 And	 hold	 tight	 to	 the	 truth	 that	 was	 her	 growing	 terror,	 her	 surges	 of
panic	that	left	her	undergarments	soaked	with	chill	sweat,	her	heart	pounding	like	the	hoofs	of	a	fleeing	horse
—no,	they	would	see	none	of	that.	Nothing	to	drive	stark	fear	into	them,	lest	in	blind	horror	the	human	river
spill	out,	pushed	off	the	road,	and	in	screams	of	agony	find	itself	shredded	apart	by	the	cold	claws	of	oblivion.
No,	best	they	know	nothing.
She	was	lost.	The	notion	of	finding	a	way	off	this	road,	of	returning	to	their	own	world,	now	struck	her	as
pathetically	 naïve.	 Her	 blood	 had	 created	 a	 gate,	 and	 now	 its	 power	 was	 thinning;	 with	 each	 step	 she	 grew
weaker,	 mind	 wandering	 as	 if	 stained	 with	 fever,	 and	 even	 the	 babble	 of	 Pully	 and	 Skwish	 behind	 her	 was
drifting	away—their	wonder,	their	pleasure	at	the	gifts	of	Twilight’s	blood	had	grown	too	bitter	to	bear.
Old	hags	no	longer.	Youth	snatched	back,	the	sloughing	away	of	wrinkles,	dread	aches,	frail	bones—the	last
two	 witches	 of	 the	 Shake	 danced	 and	 sung	 as	 if	 snake-bitten,	 too	 filled	 with	 life	 to	 even	 take	 note	 of	 the
dissolution	closing	in	on	all	sides,	nor	their	Queen’s	slowing	pace,	her	drunken	weaving	on	the	road.	They	were
too	busy	drinking	her	sweet	blood.
Forward.	Just	walk.	Yedan	warned	you,	but	you	were	too	proud	to	listen.	You	thought	only	of	your
shame.	Your	brother,	Witchslayer.	And,	do	not	forget,	your	guilt.	At	the	brutal	reprieve	he	gave	you.	His
perfect,	logical	solution	to	all	of	your	problems.
The	Watch	is	as	he	must	be.	Yet	see	how	you	hated	his	strength—but	it	was	nothing	more	than	hating
your	own	weakness.	Nothing	more	than	that.
Walk,	Yan	Tovis.	It’s	all	you	need	do—
	
With	 the	 sound	 of	 a	 sundered	 sail,	 the	 world	 tore	 itself	 wide	 open.	 The	 road	 dropped	 from	 beneath	 the	 two
witches,	 then	 thundered	 and	 cracked	 like	 a	 massive	 spine	 as	 it	 slammed	 down	 atop	 rolling	 hills.	 Dust	 shot
skyward,	and	sudden	sunlight	blazed	down	with	blinding	fire.
Pully	staggered	to	where	Twilight	had	collapsed,	seeing	the	spatters	of	blood	brown	and	dull	on	the	road’s
cracked,	broken	surface.	‘Skwish,	y’damned	fool!	We	was	drunk!	Drunk	on	’er	an	now	ye	look!’
Skwish	dragged	herself	loose	from	the	half-dozen	Shake	who	had	tumbled	into	her.	‘Oh’s	we	in	turble	now
—this	anna	Gallan!	It’s	the	unnerside	a	Gallan!	The	unnerside!	Iz	she	yor	an	dead,	Pully?	Iz	she?’
‘Nearby,	Skwish,	nearby—she	went	on	too	long—we	shoulda	paid	attention.	Kept	an	eye	on	’er.’
‘Get	’er	back,	Pully!	We	can’t	be	’ere.	We	can’t!’
As	the	two	now	young	women	knelt	by	Yan	Tovis,	the	mass	of	refugees	was	embroiled	in	its	own	chaotic
recovery.	 Broken	 limbs,	 scattered	 bundles	 of	 possessions,	 panicked	 beasts.	 The	 hills	 flanking	 the	 road	 were
denuded,	studded	with	sharp	outcrops.	Not	a	tree	in	sight.	Through	the	haze	of	dust,	now	drifting	on	the	wind,
the	sky	was	cloudless—and	there	were	three	suns.
	
Yedan	 Derryg	 scanned	 his	 troop	 of	 soldiers,	 was	 satisfied	 that	 none	 had	 suffered	 more	 than	 bruises	 and
scrapes.	‘Sergeant,	attend	to	the	wounded—and	stay	on	the	road—no	one	is	to	leave	it.’
‘Sir.’
He	then	set	out,	picking	his	way	round	huddled	refugees—wide-eyed	islanders	silent	with	fear,	heads	lifting
and	 turning	 to	 track	 his	 passage.	 Yedan	 found	 the	 two	 captains,	 Pithy	 and	 Brevity,	 directing	 one	 of	 their
makeshift	squads	in	the	righting	of	a	toppled	cart.
‘Captains,	pass	on	the	command	for	everyone	to	stay	on	the	road—not	a	single	step	off	it,	understood?’
The	two	women	exchanged	glances,	and	then	Pithy	shrugged.	‘We	can	do	that.	What’s	happened?’


‘It	was	already	looking	bad,’	Brevity	said,	‘wasn’t	it?’
‘And	now,’	added	Pithy,	‘it’s	even	worse.	Three	suns,	for	Errant’s	sake!’
Yedan	grimaced.	‘I	must	make	my	way	to	the	front	of	the	column.	I	must	speak	with	my	sister.	I	will	know
more	when	I	return.’
He	continued	on.
The	 journey	 was	 cruel,	 as	 the	 Watch	 could	 not	 help	 but	 observe	 the	 wretched	 state	 of	 the	 refugees,
islanders	and	Shake	alike.	He	well	comprehended	the	necessity	of	leaving	the	shore,	and	the	islands.	The	sea
respected	them	no	longer,	not	the	land,	not	the	people	clinging	to	it.	His	sister	had	no	choice	but	to	take	them
away.	But	she	was	also	leading	them.	Ancient	prophecies	haunted	her,	demanding	dread	sacrifices—but	her
Shake	 were	 poor	 creatures	 for	 the	 most	 part.	 They	 did	 not	 belong	 in	 legends,	 in	 tales	 of	 hard	 courage	 and
resolute	defiance—he’d	seen	as	much	in	the	faces	of	the	witches	and	warlocks	he’d	cut	down.	And	he	saw
the	same	here,	as	he	threaded	through	the	crowds.	The	Shake	were	a	diminished	people,	in	numbers,	in	spirit.
Generation	upon	generation,	they	had	made	themselves	small,	 as	 if	 meekness	 was	 the	 only	 survival	 strategy
they	understood.
Yedan	Derryg	did	not	know	if	they	were	capable	of	rising	again.
The	islanders,	he	mused,	might	well	prove	more	competent	than	the	Shake,	if	Pithy	and	Brevity	were	any
measure.	He	could	use	them.	Letherii	understood	the	value	of	adaptability,	after	all.	And	since	these	were	the
ones	who	had	chosen	Yan	Tovis	as	their	Queen,	he	could	exploit	that	loyalty.
They	needed	an	army.	The	two	captains	were	right.	And	they	were	looking	to	him	to	lead	it.	That	seemed
plain	enough.	His	task	now	was	to	convince	his	sister.
Of	course,	their	paramount	need	at	the	moment	was	to	leave	this	place.	Before	its	residents	found	them.
Pushing	clear	of	the	last	huddle	of	refugees	he	saw	that	a	perimeter	of	sorts	had	been	established	by—he
noted	with	a	frown—two	young	women	and	a	half-dozen	Shake	youths	armed	with	fishing	spears.	The	women
were	busy	scratching	furrows	in	the	road	with	antler	picks,	spirals	and	wavy	circles—fashioning	wards,	Yedan
realized	with	a	start—in	the	gap	between	the	guards	and	a	small	tent	surrounded	by	a	rough	palisade	of	carved
poles.
Witching	poles.	Yedan	Derryg	walked	up	to	the	guards,	who	parted	to	let	him	pass—saving	him	the	effort	of
beating	the	fools	senseless—and	halted	before	the	women.	‘Do	you	know	what	you’re	doing?’	he	demanded.
‘Such	rituals	belong	to	Elder	Witches,	not	their	apprentices—where	is	my	sister?	In	the	tent?	Why?’
The	woman	closest	to	him,	curvaceous	beneath	her	rags,	her	black	hair	glistening	in	the	sunlight,	placed	two
fingers	 beneath	 her	 large,	 dark	 eyes,	 and	 then	 smiled.	 ‘The	 Watch	 sees	 but	 remains	 blind,	 an	 yer	 blind	 an
blind.’	Then	she	laughed.
Yedan	narrowed	his	gaze,	and	then	shot	the	other	woman	a	second	look.
This	one	straightened	from	etching	the	road.	She	lifted	her	arms	as	if	to	display	herself—the	tears	and	holes
in	 her	 shirt	 revealing	 smooth	 flesh,	 the	 round	 fullness	 of	 her	 breasts.	 ‘Hungry,	 Witchslayer?’	 She	 ran	 a	 hand
through	her	auburn	hair	and	then	smiled	invitingly.
‘See	what	her	blood	done	t’us?’	the	first	one	exclaimed.	‘Ya	didn’t	nearby	kill	us.	Leff	the	two	a	us,	an	that
made	us	rich	wi’	’er	power,	and	see	what	it	done?’
Yedan	Derryg	slowly	scowled.	‘Pully.	Skwish.’
Both	women	pranced	the	opening	steps	to	the	Shake	Maiden	Dance.
Growling	 under	 his	 breath,	 he	 walked	 between	 them,	 taking	 care	 not	 to	 scrape	 the	 patterns	 cut	 into	 the
packed	earth	of	the	road.
The	one	he	took	to	be	Pully	hurried	up	to	his	side.	‘Careful,	ya	fat	walrus,	these	are	highest—’
‘Wards.	Yes.	You’ve	surrounded	my	sister	with	them.	Why?’
‘She’s	sleepin—don’t	asturb	’er.’
‘I	am	the	Watch.	We	need	to	speak.’
‘Sleeps!’
He	halted,	stared	at	the	witch.	‘Do	you	know	where	we	are?’
‘Do	you?’
Yedan	 stared	 at	 her.	 Saw	 the	 tremor	 behind	 her	 eyes.	 ‘If	 not,’	 he	 said,	 ‘the	 hold	 of	 the	 Liosan,	 then	 a
neighbouring	realm	within	their	demesne.’
Pully	flinched.	‘The	Watch	sees	and	is	not	blind,’	she	whispered.


As	he	moved	to	continue	to	the	tent	the	witch	snapped	out	a	hand	to	stay	him.	‘Lissen.	Not	sleep.	Nearby	a
coma—she	didn’t	know	to	slow	’er	own	blood,	just	let	it	pour	out—nearby	killt	’er.’
He	ground	his	teeth,	chewed	silently	for	a	moment,	and	then	asked,	‘You	bound	her	wounds?’
‘We	did,’	answered	Skwish	behind	them.	‘But	mebbe	we	was	too	late—’
‘Too	busy	dancing.’
Neither	woman	replied.
‘I	will	look	upon	my	sister.’
‘An	then	stay	close,’	said	Pully,	‘an	bring	up	your	soljers.’
Yedan	pointed	to	one	of	the	Shake	guards.	‘Send	that	one	back	to	Captains	Pithy	and	Brevity.	They	are	to
take	command	of	the	rearguard	with	their	company.	Then	have	your	lad	lead	my	troop	back	here.’
Skwish	turned	away	to	comply	with	his	commands.
They	 were	 flush,	 yes,	 these	 two	 witches.	 And	 frightened.	 Two	 forces	 he	 could	 use	 to	 ensure	 their
cooperation.	That	and	the	guilt	they	must	now	be	feeling,	having	drunk	deep	when—if	not	for	Yedan’s	slaying
of	the	others—they	would	have	but	managed	a	sip	with	the	rest	shared	out	among	scores	of	parched	rivals.	He
would	keep	them	down	from	now	on,	he	vowed.	Serving	the	Royal	Family.	‘Pully,’	he	now	said.	‘If	I	discover
you	 ever	 again	 withholding	 information	 from	 me—or	 my	 sister—I	 will	 see	 you	 burned	 alive.	 Am	 I
understood?’
She	paled	and	almost	stepped	back.
He	stepped	closer,	permitting	her	no	retreat.	‘I	am	the	Watch.’
‘Aye.	You	are	the	Watch.’
‘And	until	the	Queen	recovers,	I	command	this	column—including	you	and	Skwish.’
She	nodded.
‘Make	certain	your	sister	witch	understands.’
‘I	will.’
He	turned	and	made	his	way	to	the	tent.	Crouched	at	the	entrance.	He	hesitated,	thinking,	and	then	reached
out	to	tug	aside	the	hide	flap—enough	to	give	him	a	view	inside.	Hot,	pungent	air	gusted	out.	She	was	lying	like
a	corpse,	arms	at	her	sides,	palms	up.	He	could	just	make	out	the	black-gut	stitchwork	seaming	the	knife	cuts.
Reaching	in,	he	took	one	of	her	bare	feet	in	his	hand.	Cold,	but	he	could	detect	the	faintest	of	pulses.	He	set
the	foot	down,	closed	the	flap,	and	straightened.
‘Pully.’
She	was	standing	where	he’d	left	her.	‘Yes.’
‘She	might	not	recover	left	just	as	she	is.’
‘Na,	she	might	not.’
‘She	needs	sustenance.	Wine,	meat.	Can	you	force	that	into	her	without	choking	her?’
Pully	nodded.	‘Need	us	a	snake	tube.’
‘Find	one.’
‘Skwish!’
‘I	heard.’
Yedan	made	his	way	back	through	the	wards.	Four	horses	were	tethered	to	his	sister’s	supply	wagon.	He
selected	 the	 biggest	 one,	 a	 black	 gelding	 with	 a	 white	 blaze	 on	 its	 forehead.	 The	 beast	 was	 unsaddled	 but
bridled.	He	drew	it	out	from	the	others	and	then	vaulted	on	to	its	back.
Pully	was	watching	him.	‘Can’t	ride	through	the	wards!’
‘I	don’t	mean	to,’	he	replied,	gathering	the	reins.
The	witch	stared,	baffled.	‘Then	where?’
Yedan	chewed	for	a	time,	and	then	brought	his	horse	round	to	face	the	nearest	hills.
Pully	shrieked	and	then	leapt	to	block	his	path.	‘Not	off	the	road,	ya	fool!’
‘When	I	return,’	he	said,	‘you	will	have	her	awake.’
‘Don’t	be	stupid!	They	might	not	find	us	at	all!’
He	thought	about	dismounting,	walking	up	and	cuffing	her.	Instead,	he	simply	stared	down	at	her,	and	then
said	 in	 a	 low	 voice,	 ‘Now	 who	 is	 being	 the	 fool,	 witch?	 I	 go	 to	 meet	 them,	 and	 if	 need	 be,	 I	 will	 slow	 them
down.	Long	enough	for	you	to	get	my	sister	back	on	her	feet.’
‘And	then	we	wait	for	you?’


‘No.	 As	 soon	 as	 she	 is	 able,	 you	 will	 leave	 this	 realm.	 This	 time,’	 he	 added,	 ‘you	 will	 help	 her.	 You	 and
Skwish.’
‘Of	course!	We	was	just	careless.’
‘When	my	troop	arrives,	inform	my	sergeant	that	they	are	to	defend	the	Queen.	Detail	them	to	surround	the
tent—do	not	overcrowd	them	with	your	wards,	witch.’
‘Hold	to	yourself,	Witchslayer,’	said	Pully.	‘Hold	tight—if	your	mind	wanders,	for	e’en	an	instant—’
‘I	know,’	Yedan	replied.
She	moved	to	one	side,	then	stepped	close	and	set	a	hand	upon	the	gelding’s	head.	‘This	one	should	do,’	she
muttered	with	eyes	closed.	‘Wilful,	fearless.	Keep	it	collected—’
‘Of	that	I	know	far	more	than	you,	witch.’
Sighing,	she	edged	back.	‘A	commander	does	not	leave	his	command.	A	prince	does	not	leave	his	people.’
‘This	one	does.’
He	kicked	his	horse	into	motion.	Hoofs	thumped	on	to	the	hard-packed	ground	beyond	the	road.
This	 was	 dependent	 on	 his	 sister	 reviving—enough	 to	 lead	 them	 away	 from	 this	 infernal	 place—a	 prince
must	choose	when	he	is	expendable.	Yedan	understood	the	risk.	If	she	did	not	awaken.	If	she	died,	then	well
and	truly	his	leaving	had	damned	his	people—but	then,	if	his	sister	did	not	recover,	and	quickly,	then	the	entire
column	 was	 doomed	 anyway.	 Yes,	 he	 could	 let	 his	 own	 blood,	 and	 the	 witches	 could	 take	 hold	 of	 it	 and	 do
what	must	be	done—but	they	would	also	try	to	enslave	him—they	could	not	help	it,	he	knew.	He	was	a	man
and	they	were	women.	Such	things	simply	were.	The	greater	danger	was	that	they	would	lose	control	of	the
power	 in	 their	 hands—two	 witches,	 even	 ancient,	 formidable	 ones,	 were	 not	 enough.	 Ten	 or	 twenty	 were
needed	in	the	absence	of	a	Queen	to	fashion	a	simulacrum	of	the	necessary	focus	demanded	upon	the	Road	of
Gallan.	No,	he	could	not	rely	on	Pully	and	Skwish.
	
Skwish	 came	 up	 alongside	 her	 sister	 witch.	 They	 watched	 Yedan	 Derryg	 riding	 up	 the	 slope	 of	 the	 first	 hill.
‘That’s	bad,	Pully.	A	prince	does	not—’
‘This	one	does.	Listen,	Skwish,	we	got	to	be	careful	now.’
Skwish	held	up	the	snake	tube.	‘If	we	left	her	t’	jus	live	or	die	like	we	planned	afirst—’
‘He’ll	know—he	will	cut	her	open	an	check.’
‘He	ain’t	comin’	back—’
‘Then	we	do	need	’er	alive,	don	we?	We	can’t	use	’im	like	we	planned—he’s	too	ken—he	won’t	let	us	take
’im—I	lookt	up	inta	his	eyes,	him	on	that	’orse,	Skwish.	His	eyes	an	his	eyes,	an	so	I	tell	ya,	he’s	gonna	be	bad
turble	if	he	comes	back.’
‘He	won’t.	An’	we	can	keep	’er	weak,	weak	enough,	I	mean—’
‘Too	risky.	She	needs	t’get	us	out.	We	can	try	something	later,	once	we’re	all	safe—we	can	take	’em	down
then.	The	one	left	or	e’en	both.	But	not	this	time,	Skwish.	Now,	best	go	an	feed	’er	something.	Start	with	wine,
that’ll	loosen	’er	throat.’
‘I	know	what	I’m	about,	Pully,	leave	off.’
	
The	 gelding	 had	 a	 broad	 back,	 making	 for	 a	 comfortable	 ride.	 Yedan	 rode	 at	 a	 canter.	 Ahead,	 the	 hills
thickened	with	scrub,	and	beyond	was	a	forest	of	white	trees,	branches	like	twisted	bones,	leaves	so	dark	as	to
be	almost	black.	Just	before	them	and	running	the	length	of	the	wooded	fringe	rose	dolmens	of	grey	granite,
their	edges	grooved	and	faces	pitted	with	cup-shaped,	ground-out	depressions.	Each	stone	was	massive,	twice
the	height	of	a	grown	man,	and	crowding	the	foot	of	each	one	that	he	could	see	were	skulls.
He	 slowed	 his	 mount,	 reined	 in	 a	 half-dozen	 paces	 from	 the	 nearest	 standing	 stone.	 Sat	 motionless,	 flies
buzzing	round	the	horse’s	flickering	ears,	and	studied	those	grisly	offerings.	Cold	judgement	was	never	short	of
pilgrims.	 Alas,	 true	 justice	 had	 no	 reason	 to	 respect	 secrets,	 as	 those	 close-fisted	 pilgrims	 had	 clearly
discovered.	A	final	and	fatal	revelation.
Minute	popping	sounds	in	the	air	announced	the	approach	of	dread	power,	as	the	buzzing	flies	ignited	in	midflight,	black	bodies	bursting	like	acorns	in	a	fire.	The	horse	shied	slightly,	muscles	growing	taut	beneath	Yedan,
and	then	snorted	in	sudden	fear.
‘Hold,’	Yedan	murmured,	his	voice	calming	the	beast.


Those	of	the	royal	line	among	the	 Shake	 possessed	ancient	knowledge,	memories	thick	 as	blood.	 Tales	of
ancient	foes,	sworn	enemies	of	the	uncertain	Shore.	More	perhaps	than	most,	the	Shake	rulers	understood	that
a	 thing	 could	 be	 both	 one	 and	 the	 other,	 or	 indeed	 neither.	 Sides	 possessed	 undersides	 and	 even	 those	 terms
were	suspect.	Language	itself	stuttered	in	the	face	of	such	complexities,	such	rampant	subtleties	of	nature.
In	this	place,	however,	the	blended	flavours	of	compassion	were	anathema	to	the	powers	that	ruled.
Yet	the	lone	figure	that	strode	out	from	the	forest	was	so	unexpected	that	Yedan	Derryg	grunted	as	if	he
had	been	punched	in	the	chest.	‘This	realm	is	not	yours,’	he	said,	fighting	to	control	his	horse.
‘This	 land	 is	 consecrated	 for	 adjudication,’	 the	 Forkrul	 Assail	 said.	 ‘I	 am	 named	 Repose.	 Give	 me	 your
name,	seeker,	that	I	may	know	you—’
‘Before	delivering	judgement	upon	me?’
The	 tall,	 ungainly	 creature,	 naked	 and	 weaponless,	 cocked	 his	 head.	 ‘You	 are	 not	 alone.	 You	 and	 your
followers	have	brought	discord	to	this	land.	Do	not	delay	me—you	cannot	evade	what	hides	within	you.	I	shall
be	your	truth.’
‘I	am	Yedan	Derryg.’
The	Forkrul	Assail	frowned.	‘This	yields	me	no	ingress—why	is	that?	How	is	it	you	block	me,	mortal?’
‘I	will	give	you	that	answer,’	Yedan	replied,	slipping	down	from	the	horse.	He	drew	his	sword.
Repose	stared	at	him.	‘Your	defiance	is	useless.’
Yedan	advanced	on	him.	‘Is	it?	But,	how	can	you	know	for	certain?	My	name	yields	you	no	purchase	upon
my	soul.	Why	is	that?’
‘Explain	this,	mortal.’
‘My	name	is	meaningless.	It	is	my	title	that	holds	my	truth.	My	title,	and	my	blood.’
The	Forkrul	Assail	shifted	his	stance,	lifting	his	hands.	‘One	way	or	another,	I	will	know	you,	mortal.’
‘Yes,	you	will.’
Repose	attacked,	his	hands	a	blur.	But	those	deadly	weapons	cut	empty	air,	as	Yedan	was	suddenly	behind
the	Forkrul	Assail,	sword	chopping	into	the	back	of	the	creature’s	elongated	legs,	the	iron	edge	cutting	between
each	leg’s	two	hinged	knees,	severing	the	buried	tendons—Repose	toppled	forward,	arms	flailing.
Yedan	 chopped	 down	 a	 second	 time,	 cutting	 off	 the	 Assail’s	 left	 arm.	 Blue,	 thin	 blood	 sprayed	 on	 to	 the
ground.
‘I	am	Shake,’	Yedan	said,	raising	his	sword	once	more.	‘I	am	the	Watch.’
The	 sudden	 hiss	 from	 Repose	 was	 shortlived,	 as	 Yedan’s	 sword	 took	 off	 the	 top	 of	 the	 Forkrul	 Assail’s
head.
He	wasted	little	time.	He	could	hear	the	pounding	of	hoofs.	Vaulting	on	to	his	horse’s	back,	he	collected	the
reins	in	one	hand	and,	still,	gripping	his	blue-stained	sword,	wheeled	the	beast	round.
Five	Tiste	Liosan	were	charging	towards	him,	lances	levelled.
Yedan	Derryg	drove	his	horse	straight	for	them.
These	were	scouts,	he	knew.	They	would	take	him	down	and	then	send	one	rider	back	to	gather	a	punitive
army—they	 would	 then	 ride	 to	 the	 column.	 Where	 they	 would	 slaughter	 everyone.	 These	 were	 the	 ones	 he
had	been	expecting.
The	line	of	standing	stones	lay	to	Yedan’s	left.	At	the	last	moment	before	the	gap	between	him	and	the	Tiste
Liosan	closed,	Yedan	dragged	his	horse	in	between	two	of	the	stones.	He	heard	a	lance	shatter	and	then	snarls
of	frustration	as	the	troop	thundered	past.	The	gelding	responded	with	alacrity	as	he	guided	it	back	through	the
line,	 wheeling	 to	 come	 up	 behind	 the	 nearest	 Tiste	 Liosan—the	 one	 who’d	 snapped	 his	 lance	 on	 one	 of	 the
dolmens	and	who	was	now	reaching	for	his	sword	even	as	he	reined	in.
Yedan’s	 sword	 caught	 beneath	 the	 rim	 of	 his	 enamelled	 helm,	 slicing	 clean	 through	 his	 neck.	 The
decapitated	head	spun	to	one	side,	cracking	against	a	dolmen.
The	Watch	slapped	the	flat	of	his	blade	on	the	white	horse’s	rump,	launching	it	forward	in	a	lunge,	and	then,
driving	his	heels	into	his	own	horse’s	flanks,	he	pulled	into	the	other	horse’s	wake.
The	remaining	four	Liosan	had	wheeled	in	formation,	out	and	away	from	the	standing	stones,	and	were	now
gathering	for	a	second	charge.
Their	fallen	comrade’s	horse	galloped	straight	for	them,	forcing	the	riders	to	scatter	once	more.
Yedan	chose	the	Liosan	nearest	the	dolmens,	catching	the	man	before	he	could	right	his	lance.	A	crossways
slash	 severed	 the	 scout’s	 right	 arm	 halfway	 between	 the	 shoulder	 and	 elbow,	 the	 edge	 cutting	 into	 and


snapping	ribs	as	Yedan’s	horse	carried	him	past	the	shrieking	warrior.
A	 savage	 yank	 on	 the	 reins	 brought	 him	 up	 alongside	 another	 scout.	 He	 saw	 the	 woman’s	 eyes	 as	 she
twisted	round	in	her	saddle,	heard	her	snarled	curse,	before	he	drove	the	point	of	his	sword	into	the	small	of
her	back,	punching	between	the	armour’s	plates	along	the	laced	seam.
His	 arm	 was	 twisted	 painfully	 as	 in	 her	 death	 roll	 she	 momentarily	 trapped	 his	 sword,	 but	 he	 managed	 to
tear	the	weapon	free.
The	other	two	riders	were	shouting	to	each	other,	and	one	pulled	hard	away	from	the	fight,	setting	heels	to
his	horse.	The	last	warrior	brought	his	mount	round	and	lowered	his	lance.
Yedan	urged	his	gelding	into	a	thundering	charge,	but	at	an	angle	away	from	his	attacker—in	the	direction	of
the	 fleeing	 scout.	 An	 instant’s	 assessment	 told	 him	 he	 would	 not	 catch	 the	 man.	 Instead	 he	 lifted	 himself
upward,	knees	anchored	tight	to	either	side	of	the	gelding’s	spine.	Drew	back	his	arm	and	threw	his	sword.
The	 point	 slammed	 up	 and	 under	 the	 rider’s	 right	 arm,	 driven	 a	 hand’s	 breadth	 between	 his	 ribs,	 deep
enough	to	sink	into	the	lung.	He	toppled	from	his	horse.
The	last	rider	arrived,	coming	at	Yedan	from	an	angle.	Yedan	twisted	to	hammer	aside	the	lashing	blade	of
the	lance,	feeling	it	cleave	through	his	vambrace	and	then	score	deep	into	the	bones	of	his	wrist.	Pain	seared
up	his	arm.
He	dragged	his	horse	into	the	rider’s	wake—the	Liosan	was	pulling	up.	A	mistake.	Yedan	caught	up	to	him
and	flung	himself	on	to	the	man’s	back,	dragging	him	from	the	saddle.
There	was	a	satisfying	snap	of	a	bone	as	the	Watch	landed	atop	the	warrior.	He	brought	his	good	hand	up
and	round	to	the	Liosan’s	face,	thumb	digging	into	one	eye	socket	and	fingers	closing	like	talons	on	the	upper
lip	and	nose.	He	jammed	his	wounded	arm	with	its	loosened	vambrace	into	the	man’s	mouth,	forcing	open	the
jaws.
Hands	 tore	 at	 him,	 but	 feebly,	 as	 Yedan	 forced	 his	 thumb	 deeper,	 in	 as	 far	 as	 it	 could	 go,	 then	 angled	 it
upwards—but	 he	 failed	 to	 reach	 the	 brain.	 He	 got	 on	 to	 his	 knees,	 lifting	 the	 Liosan’s	 head	 by	 hooking	 his
embedded	thumb	under	the	ridge	of	the	brow.	And	then	he	forced	it	round,	twisting	even	as	he	pressed	down
with	 his	 bloodied,	 armoured	 arm	 jammed	 across	 the	 man’s	 mouth.	 Joints	 popped,	 the	 jaw	 swung	 loose,	 and
then,	as	the	Liosan’s	body	thrashed	in	a	frenzy,	the	vertebrae	parted	and	the	warrior	went	limp	beneath	him.
Yedan	struggled	to	his	feet.
He	 saw	 the	 scout	 with	 the	 punctured	 lung	 attempting	 to	 clamber	 back	 on	 to	 his	 horse.	 Collecting	 a	 lance,
Yedan	 strode	 over.	 He	 used	 the	 haft	 to	 knock	 the	 warrior	 away	 from	 the	 horse,	 sending	 the	 man	 sprawling,
and	then	stepped	up	and	set	the	point	against	the	Liosan’s	chest.	Staring	down	into	the	man’s	terror-filled	eyes,
he	 pushed	 down	 on	 the	 lance,	 using	 all	 his	 weight.	 The	 armour’s	 enamel	 surface	 crazed,	 and	 then	 the	 point
punched	through.
Yedan	pushed	harder,	twisting	and	grinding	the	serrated	blade	into	the	Liosan’s	chest.
Until	he	saw	the	light	leave	the	warrior’s	eyes.
	
After	 making	 certain	 the	 others	 were	 dead,	 he	 bound	 his	 wounded	 arm,	 retrieved	 his	 sword	 and	 then	 the
surviving	 lances	 and	 long-knives	 from	 the	 corpses,	 along	 with	 the	 helms.	 Rounding	 up	 the	 horses	 and	 tying
them	to	a	staggered	lead,	he	set	out	at	a	canter	back	the	way	he	had	come.
He	was	a	prince	of	the	Shake,	with	memories	in	the	blood.
	
Yan	Tovis	opened	her	eyes.	Shadowed	figures	slid	back	and	forth	above	her	and	to	the	sides—she	could	make
no	sense	of	them,	nor	of	the	muted	voices	surrounding	her—voices	that	seemed	to	come	from	the	still	air	itself.
She	was	sheathed	in	sweat.
Tent	walls—ah,	and	the	shadows	were	nothing	more	than	silhouettes.	The	voices	came	from	outside.	She
struggled	 to	 sit	 up,	 the	 wounds	 on	 her	 wrists	 stinging	 as	 the	 sutures	 stretched.	 She	 frowned	 down	 at	 them,
trying	to	recall	.	.	.	things.	Important	things.
The	taste	of	blood,	stale,	the	smell	of	fever—she	was	weak,	lightheaded,	and	there	was	.	.	.	danger.
Heart	thudding,	she	forced	her	way	through	the	entrance,	on	her	hands	and	knees,	the	world	spinning	round
her.	Bright,	blinding	sunlight,	scorching	fires	in	the	sky—two,	three,	four—four	suns!
‘Highness!’


She	sat	back	on	her	haunches,	squinted	up	as	a	figure	loomed	close.	‘Who?’
‘Sergeant	Trope,	Highness,	in	Yedan’s	company.	Please,	crawl	no	further,	the	witches—there’re	wards,	all
round,	Highness.	All	round	you.	A	moment,	the	witches	are	on	their	way.’
‘Help	me	up.	Where’s	my	brother?’
‘He	rode	out,	Highness.	Some	time	ago.	Before	the	fourth	sun	rose—and	now	we’re	burning	alive—’
She	took	his	proffered	arm	and	pulled	herself	on	to	her	feet.	‘Not	suns,	Sergeant.	Attacks.’
He	was	a	scarred	man,	face	bludgeoned	by	decades	of	hard	living.	‘Highness?’
‘We	are	under	attack—we	need	to	leave	here.	We	need	to	leave	now!’
‘O	 Queen!’	 Pully	 was	 dancing	 her	 way	 closer,	 evading	 the	 scored	 lines	 of	 the	 wards	 encircling	 the	 tent.
‘He’s	coming	back!	Witchslayer!	We	must	ready	ourselves—drip	drip	drip	some	blood,	Highness.	We	brought
ya	back,	me	an	Skwish	an	we	did.	Leave	off	her,	you	oaf,	let	’er	stand!’
But	 Yan	 Tovis	 held	 on	 to	 the	 sergeant’s	 wrist—solid	 as	 a	 rooted	 tree,	 and	 she	 needed	 that.	 She	 glared	 at
Pully.	‘Drank	deep,	I	see.’
The	 witch	 flinched.	 ‘Careless,	 an	 us	 all,	 Queen.	 But	 see,	 the	 Watch	 comes—with	 spare	 horses,	 white
horses!’
Yan	 Tovis	 said	 to	 Trope,	 ‘Guide	 me	 out	 of	 these	 wards,	 Sergeant.’	 And	 get	 this	 pretty	 witch	 out	 of	 my
face.
She	 could	 hear	 the	 horses	 drawing	 closer,	 and,	 from	 the	 road,	 the	 suffering	 of	 thousands	 of	 people	 swept
over	her	in	an	inundating	tide—she	almost	gagged	beneath	that	deluge.
‘Clear,	Highness—’
She	straightened.	A	fifth	sun	was	flaring	to	life	on	the	horizon.	The	iron	fastenings	of	Trope’s	armour	were
searing	hot	and	she	winced	at	their	touch,	but	still	would	not	let	go	of	his	arm.	She	felt	her	skin	tightening—
We’re	being	roasted	alive.
Her	brother,	one	arm	bound	in	blood-soaked	rags,	reined	in	at	the	side	of	the	road.	Yan	Tovis	stared	at	the
trailing	 horses.	 Liosan	 horses,	 yes.	 That	 clutch	 of	 lances,	 the	 sheathed	 long-knives	 and	 cluster	 of	 helms.
Liosan.
Skwish	and	Pully	were	suddenly	there,	on	the	very	edge	of	the	road.	Pully	cackled	a	laugh.
Yan	Tovis	studied	her	brother’s	face.	‘How	soon?’	she	asked.
She	 watched	 his	 bearded	 jaw	 bunch	 as	 he	 chewed	 on	 his	 answer,	 before	 squinting	 and	 saying,	 ‘We	 have
time,	Queen.’
‘Good,’	she	snapped.	‘Witches,	attend	to	me.	We	begin—not	in	haste,	but	we	begin.’
Two	young	women,	scampering	and	bobbing	their	heads	like	the	hags	they	once	were.	New	ambitions,	yes,
but	old,	old	fears.
Yan	Tovis	met	Yedan’s	eyes	once	more,	and	saw	that	he	knew.	And	was	prepared.	Witchslayer,	mayhap
you’re	not	done	with	that,	before	this	is	all	over.


Chapter	Eleven
In	the	 first	 five	 years	 of	 King	 Tehol	the	 Only’s	reign,	there	were	no	assassination	attempts,	no
insurrections,	 no	 conspiracies	 of	 such	 magnitude	 as	 to	 endanger	 the	 crown;	 no	 conflicts	 with
neighbouring	 realms	 or	 border	 tribes.	 The	 kingdom	 was	 wealthy,	 justice	 prevailed,	 the	 common
people	found	prosperity	and	unprecedented	mobility.
That	all	of	this	was	achieved	with	but	a	handful	of	modest	proclamations	and	edicts	makes	the
situation	all	the	more	remarkable.
Needless	 to	 say,	 dissatisfaction	 haunted	 Lether.	 Misery	 spread	 like	 a	 plague.	 No	 one	 was
happy,	the	list	of	complaints	as	heard	on	the	crowded,	bustling	streets	grew	longer	with	each	day
that	passed.
Clearly,	something	had	to	be	done	.	.	.
LIFE	OF	TEHOL
JANATH

‘Clearly,’	said	King	Tehol,	‘there’s	nothing	to	be	done.’	He	held	up	the	Akrynnai	gift	and	peered	at	it	for	a	time,
and	then	sighed.
‘No	suggestions,	sire?’	Bugg	asked.
‘I’m	at	a	loss.	I	give	up.	I	keep	trying,	but	I	must	admit:	it’s	hopeless.	Darling	wife?’
‘Don’t	ask	me.’
‘Some	help	you	are.	Where’s	Brys?’
‘With	his	legions,	husband.	Preparing	to	march.’
‘The	man’s	priorities	are	a	mess.	I	remember	how	our	mother	despaired.’
‘Of	Brys?’	Janath	asked,	surprised.
‘Well,	no.	Me,	mostly.	Never	mind.	The	issue	here	is	that	we’re	facing	a	disaster.	One	that	could	scar	this
nation	 for	 generations	 to	 come.	 I	 need	 help,	 and	 see	 how	 none	 of	 you	 here	 can	 manage	 a	 single	 useful
suggestion.	 My	 advisors	 are	 even	 more	 pathetic	 than	 the	 man	 they	 purport	 to	 advise.	 The	 situation	 is
intolerable.’	He	paused,	and	then	frowned	over	at	Bugg.	‘What’s	the	protocol?	Find	me	that	diplomat	so	I	can
chase	him	out	of	here	again—no,	wait,	send	for	the	emissary.’
‘Are	you	sure,	sire?’
‘Why	wouldn’t	I	be?’
Bugg	 gestured	 at	 the	 gift	 in	 the	 King’s	 hands.	 ‘Because	 we’re	 no	 closer	 to	 finding	 a	 suitable	 gift	 in
reciprocation.’
Tehol	leaned	forward.	‘And	why,	dear	Chancellor,	is	that?’
‘Because	none	of	us	has	a	clue	what	that	thing	is,	sire.’
Tehol	grimaced.	‘How	can	this	thing	defeat	the	greatest	minds	of	the	kingdom?’
‘I	didn’t	know	we’d	tried	them	yet,’	murmured	Janath.
‘It’s	bone,	antler,	inlaid	pearl	and	it	has	two	handles.’	Tehol	waited,	but	no	one	had	anything	to	add	to	that
succinct	description.	‘At	least,	I	think	they’re	handles	.	.	.’
Janath’s	breath	caught,	and	then	she	said,	‘Oh.’
King	Tehol	scratched	his	jaw.	‘Best	the	emissary	wait	a	little	longer,	I	think.’
‘Sound	decision,	sire.’
‘Such	opinions,	Bugg,	are	invaluable.	Now,	dear	wife,	shall	we	retire	to	our	private	chambers	to	further	our
exploration	of	this,	uhm,	offering?’
‘You	must	be	mad.	Find	Shurq	Elalle.	Or	Rucket.’
‘Finally,	proper	advice!’
‘And	I’ll	buy	myself	a	new	dagger.’


‘That	hints	of	high	emotions,	my	beloved.	Jealous	rage	does	not	become	you.’
‘It	doesn’t	become	anyone,	husband.	You	didn’t	really	think	I	wanted	you	to	follow	my	suggestion?’
‘Well,	it’s	true	that	it’s	easy	to	make	suggestions	when	you	know	they	won’t	be	heeded.’
‘Yes	it	is.	Now,	you	will	find	a	small	room	with	a	stout	door	and	multiple	locks,	and	once	the	emissary	has
departed,	 in	 goes	 that	 gift,	 never	 again	 to	 see	 the	 light	 of	 day.’	 And	 she	 settled	 back	 on	 the	 throne,	 arms
crossed.
Tehol	eyed	the	gift	forlornly,	and	then	sighed	once	more.	‘Send	for	the	emissary,	Bugg.’
‘At	once,	sire.’	He	gestured	to	a	servant	waiting	at	the	far	end	of	the	throne	room.
‘While	we’re	waiting,	is	there	any	kingly	business	we	need	to	mull	over?’
‘Your	repatriation	proclamation,	sire—that’s	going	to	cause	trouble.’
Tehol	thumped	the	arm	of	his	throne	with	a	fist.	‘And	trouble	is	precisely	what	I	want!	Indignation!	Outrage!
Protests!	Let	the	people	rail	and	shake	their	knobby	fists!	Let	us,	yes,	stir	this	steaming	stew,	wave	the	ladle
about,	spattering	all	the	walls	and	worse.’
Janath	turned	to	eye	him	speculatively.
Bugg	grunted.	‘Should	work.	I	mean,	you’re	taking	land	away	from	some	very	wealthy	families.	You	could
well	foment	a	general	insurrection.	Assuming	that	would	be	useful.’
‘Useful?’	demanded	Janath.	‘In	what	context	could	insurrection	be	useful?	Tehol,	I	warned	you	about	that
edict—’
‘Proclamation—’
‘—and	the	rage	you’ll	incite.	But	did	you	listen?’
‘I	most	certainly	did,	my	Queen.	But	let	me	ask	you,	are	my	reasons	any	less	just?’
‘No,	it	was	stolen	land	to	begin	with,	but	that’s	beside	the	point.	The	losers	won’t	see	it	that	way.’
‘And	 that,	 my	 love,	 is	 precisely	 my	 point.	 Justice	 bites.	 With	 snippy	 sharp	 teeth.	 If	 it	 doesn’t,	 then	 the
common	 folk	 will	 perceive	 it	 as	 unbalanced,	 forever	 favouring	 the	 wealthy	 and	 influential.	 When	 robbed,	 the
rich	 cry	 out	 for	 protection	 and	 prosecution.	 When	 stealing,	 they	 expect	 the	 judiciary	 to	 look	 the	 other	 way.
Well,	consider	this	a	royal	punch	in	the	face.	Let	them	smart.’
‘You	truly	expect	to	purge	cynicism	from	the	common	people,	Tehol?’
‘Well,	wife,	in	this	instance	it’s	more	the	sweet	taste	of	vengeance,	but	a	deeper	lesson	is	being	delivered,	I
assure	 you.	 Ah,	 enough	 prattling	 about	 inconsequential	 things—the	 noble	 Akrynnai	 emissary	 arrives!
Approach,	my	friend!’
The	huge	man	with	the	wolf-skin	cloak	strode	forward,	showing	his	fiercest	scowl.
Smiling,	 King	 Tehol	 said,	 ‘We	 delight	 in	 this	 wondrous	 gift	 and	 please	 do	 convey	 our	 pleasure	 to	 Sceptre
Irkullas,	and	assure	him	we	will	endeavour	to	make	use	of	it	as	soon	as	an	opportunity	.	.	.	arises.’
The	warrior’s	scowl	deepened.	‘Make	use?	What	kind	of	use?	It’s	a	damned	piece	of	art,	sire.	Stick	it	on	a
damned	wall	and	forget	about	it—that’s	what	I	would	do	were	I	you.	A	closet	wall,	in	fact.’
‘Ah,	I	see.	Forgive	me.’	Tehol	frowned	down	at	the	object.	‘Art,	yes.	Of	course.’
‘It	wasn’t	even	the	Sceptre’s	idea,’	the	emissary	grumbled.	‘Some	ancient	agreement,	wasn’t	it?	Between
our	 peoples?	 An	 exchange	 of	 meaningless	 objects.	 Irkullas	 has	 a	 whole	 wagon	 stuffed	 with	 similar	 rubbish
from	you	Letherii.	Trundles	around	after	us	like	an	arthritic	dog.’
‘The	wagon’s	pulled	by	an	arthritic	dog?’
The	man	grunted.	‘I	wish.	Now,	I	have	something	to	discuss.	Can	we	get	on	with	it?’
Tehol	smiled.	‘By	all	means.	This	has	proved	most	fascinating.’
‘What	has?	I	haven’t	started	yet.’
‘Just	so.	Proceed,	then,	sir.’
‘We	 think	 our	 traders	 have	 been	 murdered	 by	 the	 Barghast.	 In	 fact,	 we	 think	 the	 painted	 savages	 have
declared	 war	 on	 us.	 And	 so	 we	 call	 upon	 our	 loyal	 neighbours,	 the	 Letherii,	 for	 assistance	 in	 this	 unwanted
war.’	And	he	crossed	his	arms,	glowering.
‘Is	there	precedent	for	our	assistance	in	such	conflicts?’	Tehol	asked,	settling	his	chin	in	one	hand.
‘There	is.	We	ask,	you	say	“no”,	and	we	go	home.	Sometimes,’	he	added,	‘you	say,	“Of	course,	but	first	let
us	have	half	a	thousand	brokes	of	pasture	land	and	twenty	ranks	of	tanned	hides,	oh,	and	renounce	sovereignty
of	 the	 Kryn	 Freetrade	 Lands	 and	 maybe	 a	 royal	 hostage	 or	 two.”	 To	 which	 we	 make	 a	 rude	 gesture	 and
march	home.’


‘Are	there	no	other	alternatives?’	Tehol	asked.	‘Chancellor,	what	has	so	irritated	the—what	are	they	called
again—the	Barnasties?’
‘Barghast,’	corrected	Bugg.	‘White	Face	Clans—they	claim	most	of	the	plains	as	their	ancestral	homeland.
I	suspect	this	is	the	reason	for	their	setting	out	to	conquer	the	Akrynnai.’
Tehol	turned	to	Janath	and	raised	an	eyebrow.	‘Repatriation	issues,	see	how	they	plague	peoples?	Bugg,	are
these	Barghast	in	truth	from	those	lands?’
The	Chancellor	shrugged.
‘What	kind	of	answer	is	that?’	Tehol	demanded.
‘The	 only	 honest	 kind,	 sire.	 The	 problem	 is	 this:	 migratory	 tribes	 move	 around,	 that’s	 what	 makes	 them
migratory.	They	flow	in	waves,	this	way	and	that.	The	Barghast	may	well	have	dwelt	on	the	plains	and	much
of	the	Wastelands	once,	long,	long	ago.	But	what	of	it?	Tarthenal	once	lived	there,	too,	and	Imass,	and	Jheck—
a	well-trammelled	land,	by	any	count.	Who’s	to	say	which	claim	is	more	legitimate	than	the	next?’
The	 emissary	 barked	 a	 laugh.	 ‘But	 who	 lives	 there	 now?	 We	 do.	 The	 only	 answer	 that	 matters.	 We	 will
destroy	 these	 Barghast.	 Irkullas	 calls	 to	 the	 Kryn	 and	 their	 mercenary	 Warleader	 Zavast.	 He	 calls	 to
Saphinand	and	to	the	D’rhasilhani.	And	he	sends	me	to	you	Letherii,	to	take	the	measure	of	your	new	King.’
‘If	you	will	crush	the	Barghast	with	the	assistance	of	your	allies,’	said	Tehol,	‘why	come	here	at	all?	What
measure	do	you	seek	from	me?’
‘Will	you	pounce	when	our	backs	are	turned?	Our	spies	tell	us	your	commander	is	in	the	field	with	an	army
—’
‘We	can	tell	you	that,’	Tehol	said.	‘There’s	no	need	for	spies—’
‘We	prefer	spies.’
‘Right.	Well.	Yes,	Brys	Beddict	leads	a	Letherii	army—’
‘Into	the	Wastelands—through	our	territory,	in	fact.’
‘Actually,’	said	Bugg,	‘we	will	be	mostly	skirting	your	territories,	sir.’
‘And	 what	 of	 these	 foreigners	 you	 march	 with?’	 the	 emissary	 asked,	 adding	 an	 impressive	 snarl	 after	 the
question.
Tehol	held	up	a	hand.	‘A	moment,	before	this	paranoia	gets	out	of	hand.	Deliver	the	following	message	to
Sceptre	Irkullas,	from	King	Tehol	of	Lether.	He	is	free	to	prosecute	his	war	against	the	Barghast—in	defence
of	his	territory	and	such—without	fear	of	Letherii	aggression.	Nor,	I	add,	that	of	the	Malazans,	the	foreigners,	I
mean.’
‘You	cannot	speak	for	the	foreigners.’
‘No,	but	Brys	Beddict	and	his	army	will	be	escorting	them,	and	so	guarantee	that	nothing	treacherous	will
take	place—’
‘Hah!	Bolkando	is	already	warring	with	the	foreigners’	allies!’
Bugg	 snorted.	 ‘Thus	 revealing	 to	 you	 that	 the	 much	 acclaimed	 Bolkando	 Alliance	 has	 a	 straw	 spine,’	 he
pointed	out.	‘Leave	the	Bolkando	to	sort	out	their	own	mess.	As	for	the	Malazans,	assure	Irkullas,	they	are	not
interested	in	you	or	your	lands.’
The	 emissary’s	 eyes	 had	 narrowed,	 his	 expression	 one	 of	 deep,	 probably	 pathological	 suspicion.	 ‘I	 shall
convey	your	words.	Now,	what	gift	must	I	take	back	to	Irkullas?’
Tehol	rubbed	his	chin.	‘How	does	a	wagonload	of	silks,	linens,	quality	iron	bars	and	a	hundred	or	so	silver
ingots	sound,	sir?’
The	man	blinked.
‘Outmoded	traditions	are	best	left	behind,	I’m	sure	Sceptre	Irkullas	will	agree.	Go,	then,	with	our	blessing.’
The	man	bowed	and	then	walked	off,	weaving	as	if	drunk.
Tehol	turned	to	Janath	and	smiled.
She	 rolled	 her	 eyes.	 ‘Now	 the	 poor	 bastard	 has	 to	 reciprocate	 in	 kind—which	 will	 likely	 impoverish	 him.
Those	old	traditions	survived	for	a	reason,	husband.’
‘He	won’t	be	impoverished	with	the	haul	I	just	sent	his	way.’
‘But	he’ll	need	to	divide	it	up	among	his	warleaders,	to	buy	their	loyalty.’
‘He	 would	 have	 done	 that	 anyway,’	 said	 Tehol.	 ‘And	 where	 did	 this	 insane	 notion	 of	 buying	 loyalty	 come
from?	It’s	a	contradiction	in	terms.’
‘The	currency	is	obligation,’	said	Bugg.	‘Gifts	force	honour	upon	the	receiver.	Sire,	I	must	speak	with	you


now	as	the	Ceda.	The	journey	Brys	intends	is	more	fraught	than	we	had	initially	thought.	I	fear	for	his	fate	and
that	of	his	legions.’
‘This	relates,	I	assume,’	said	Janath,	‘to	the	unknown	motives	of	the	Malazans.	But	Brys	is	not	compelled	to
accompany	 them	 beyond	 the	 Wastelands,	 is	 he?	 Indeed,	 is	 it	 not	 his	 intention	 to	 return	 once	 that	 expanse	 is
successfully	crossed?’
Bugg	 nodded.	 ‘Alas,	 I	 now	 believe	 that	 the	 Wastelands	 are	 where	 the	 greatest	 peril	 waits.’	 He	 hesitated,
and	then	said,	‘Blood	has	been	spilled	on	those	ancient	soils.	There	will	be	more	to	come.’
Tehol	rose	from	the	throne,	the	Akrynnai	gift	in	his	hands.	He	held	it	out	to	one	side	and	a	servant	hurried
forward	to	take	it.	‘I	do	not	believe	my	brother	is	as	unaware	of	such	dangers	as	you	think,	Bugg.	His	sojourn
in	 the	 realm	 of	 the	 dead—or	 wherever	 it	 was—has	 changed	 him.	 Not	 surprising,	 I	 suppose.	 In	 any	 case,	 I
don’t	think	he	returned	to	the	realm	of	the	living	just	to	keep	me	company.’
‘I	 suspect	 you	 are	 right,’	 said	 Bugg.	 ‘But	 I	 can	 tell	 you	 nothing	 of	 the	 path	 he	 has	 taken.	 In	 a	 sense,	 he
stands	 outside	 of	 .	 .	 .	 well,	 everything.	 As	 a	 force,	 one	 might	 view	 him	 as	 unaligned,	 and	 therefore
unpredictable.’
‘Which	is	why	the	Errant	sought	to	kill	him,’	said	Janath.
‘Yes,’	replied	Bugg.	‘One	thing	I	can	say:	while	in	close	company	with	the	Malazans,	Brys	is	perhaps	safer
from	the	Errant	than	he	would	be	anywhere	else.’
‘And	on	the	return	journey?’	Tehol	asked.
‘I	expect	the	Errant	to	be	rather	preoccupied	by	then,	sire.’
‘Why	is	that?’
Bugg	 was	 long	 in	 replying,	 and	 on	 his	 blunt	 face	 could	 be	 seen	 a	 reluctant	 weighing	 of	 risks,	 ending	 in	 a
grimace	and	then	a	sigh.	‘He	compels	me.	In	my	most	ancient	capacity,	he	compels	me.	Sire,	by	the	time	Brys
begins	his	return	to	the	kingdom,	the	Errant	will	be	busy	.	.	.	contending	with	me.’
The	iron	beneath	Bugg’s	words	silenced	the	two	others	in	the	throne	room,	for	a	time.
Tehol	then	spoke,	looking	at	neither	his	wife	nor	his	closest	friend.	‘I	will	take	a	walk	in	the	garden.’
They	watched	him	leave.
Janath	said,	‘Brys	is	his	brother,	after	all.	And	to	have	lost	him	once	.	.	.’
Bugg	nodded.
‘Is	there	anything	more	you	can	do?’	she	asked	him.	‘To	protect	him?’
‘Who,	Brys	or	Tehol?’
‘In	this	matter,	I	think,	they	are	one	and	the	same.’
‘Some	 possibilities	 exist,’	 Bugg	 allowed.	 ‘Unfortunately,	 in	 such	 circumstances	 as	 these,	 often	 the	 gesture
proves	deadlier	than	the	original	threat.’	He	held	up	a	hand	to	forestall	her.	‘Of	course	I	will	do	what	I	can.’
She	looked	away.	‘I	know	you	will.	So,	friend,	you	are	compelled—when	will	you	leave	us?’
‘Soon.	Some	things	cannot	be	resisted	for	long—I	am	making	him	sweat.’	He	then	grunted	and	added,	‘and
that’s	making	me	sweat.’
‘Is	this	a	“binding	of	blood”?’	she	asked.
He	started,	eyed	her	curiously.	‘I	keep	forgetting	you	are	a	scholar,	my	Queen.	That	ancient	phrase	holds
many	layers	of	meaning,	and	almost	as	many	secrets.	Every	family	begins	with	a	birth,	but	there	can	never	be
just	one,	can	there?’
‘Solitude	is	simple.	Society	isn’t.’
‘Just	so,	Janath.’	He	studied	her	for	a	moment.	She	sat	on	the	throne,	leaning	to	one	side,	head	resting	on
one	hand.	‘Did	you	know	you	are	with	child?’
‘Of	course.’
‘Does	Tehol?’
‘Probably	not.	It’s	early	yet—Bugg,	I	suffered	greatly	in	the	hands	of	the	Patriotists,	didn’t	I?	I	see	scars	on
my	body	but	have	no	memory	of	how	they	came	to	be	there.	I	feel	pains	inside	and	so	I	believe	there	are	scars
within,	 as	 well.	 I	 suspect	 your	 hand	 in	 my	 strange	 ignorance—you	 have	 scoured	 away	 the	 worst	 of	 what	 I
experienced.	I	don’t	know	if	I	should	thank	you	or	curse	you.’
‘An	even	measure	of	both,	I	should	think.’
She	regarded	him	levelly.	‘Yes,	you	understand	the	necessity	of	balance,	don’t	you?	Well,	I	think	I	will	give	it
a	few	more	weeks	before	I	terrify	my	husband.’


‘The	 child	 is	 healthy,	 Janath,	 and	 I	 sense	 no	 risks—those	 pains	 are	 phantom	 ones—I	 was	 thorough	 in	 my
healing.’
‘That’s	a	relief.’	She	rose.	‘Tell	me,	was	it	simply	a	question	of	my	twisted	imagination,	or	did	that	Akrynnai
artist	have	something	disreputable	in	mind?’
‘My	 Queen,	 neither	 mortal	 nor	 immortal	 can	 fathom	 the	 mind	 of	 an	 artist.	 But	 as	 a	 general	 rule,	 between
two	possible	answers,	choose	the	more	sordid	one.’
‘Of	course.	How	silly	of	me.’
	
‘Draconus	 is	 lost	 within	 Dragnipur.	 Nightchill’s	 soul	 is	 scattered	 to	 the	 winds.	 Grizzin	 Farl	 vanished	 millennia
ago.	And	Edgewalker	might	well	deny	any	compulsion	out	of	sheer	obstinacy	or,	possibly,	a	righteous	claim	to
disassociation.’	Knuckles	managed	a	twisted	smile,	and	then	shrugged.	‘If	there	is	one	presence	I	would	find
unwelcome	above	all	others,	Errastas,	it	is	Olar	Ethil.’
‘She	is	dead—’
‘And	 supremely	 indifferent	 to	 that	 condition—she	 embraced	 the	 Ritual	 of	 Tellann	 without	 hesitation,	 the
opportunistic	bitch—’
‘And	so	bound	herself	to	the	fate	of	the	T’lan	Imass,’	said	the	Errant,	as	he	eyed	 Kilmandaros.	 The	 huge
creature	had	dragged	a	massive	trunk	to	the	centre	of	the	chamber,	snapping	the	lock	with	one	hand	and	then
flinging	back	the	lid;	and	now	she	was	pulling	out	various	pieces	of	green-stained	armour,	muttering	under	her
breath.	On	the	walls	on	all	sides,	seawater	was	streaming	in	through	widening	cracks,	swirling	ankle-deep	and
rising	to	engulf	the	fire	in	the	hearth.	The	air	was	growing	bitter	cold.
‘Not	as	bound	as	you	might	hope	for,’	said	Sechul	Lath.	‘We	have	discussed	K’rul,	but	there	is	one	other,
Errastas.	An	entity	most	skilled	at	remaining	a	mystery	to	us	all—’
‘Ardata.	 But	 she	 is	 not	 the	 only	 one.	 I	 always	 sensed,	 Setch,	 that	 there	 were	 more	 of	 us	 than	 any	 of	 us
imagined.	Even	with	my	power,	my	command	of	the	Tiles,	I	was	convinced	there	were	ghosts,	hovering	at	the
edge	of	my	vision,	my	awareness.	Ghosts,	as	ancient	and	as	formidable	as	any	of	us.’
‘Defying	your	rule,’	said	Sechul	slyly,	swirling	the	amber	wine	in	his	crystal	goblet.
‘Afraid	to	commit	themselves,’	the	Errant	said,	sneering.	‘Hiding	from	each	other	too,	no	doubt.	Singly,	not
one	poses	a	threat.	In	any	case,	it	is	different	now.’
‘Is	it?’
‘Yes.	The	rewards	we	can	reap	are	vast—whatever	has	gone	before	is	as	nothing.	Think	on	it.	All	that	was
stolen	 from	 us	 returned	 once	 more	 into	 our	 hands.	 The	 ghosts,	 the	 ones	 in	 hiding—they	 would	 be	 fools	 to
hesitate.	No,	the	wise	course	is	to	step	out	from	the	shadows.’
Knuckles	took	a	mouthful	of	wine.	The	water	was	soaking	the	seat	of	the	chair	beneath	him.	‘The	House	is
eager	to	wash	us	out.’
Kilmandaros	had	shrugged	her	way	into	a	sopping	hauberk	of	chain.	She	reached	down	to	the	submerged
floor	and	lifted	from	the	foaming	swirl	a	huge	gauntlet	through	which	water	gushed	in	a	deluge.	She	dragged
the	gauntlet	over	one	gnarled	fist,	and	then	reached	down	to	find	the	other	one.
‘She’s	pleased,’	said	Errastas.
‘No	 she	 isn’t,’	 countered	 Knuckles.	 ‘You	 have	 awakened	 her	 anger,	 and	 now	 she	 must	 find	 an	 enemy
worthy	of	it.	Sometimes—even	for	you—control	is	a	delusion,	a	conceit.	What	you	unleash	here—’
‘Is	long	overdue.	Cease	your	efforts	to	undermine	me,	Setch—you	only	reveal	your	own	weaknesses.’
‘Weaknesses	I	have	never	run	from,	Errastas.	Can	you	say	the	same?’
The	Errant	bared	his	teeth.	‘You	are	cast.	It	cannot	be	undone.	We	must	take	our	fate	into	our	own	hands—
look	to	Kilmandaros—she	will	show	us	how	it	must	be.	Discard	your	fears—they	sting	like	poison.’
‘I	am	ready.’
At	 her	 words	 both	 men	 turned.	 She	 was	 clad	 for	 war	 and	 stood	 like	 a	 bestial	 statue,	 a	 hoary	 apparition
enwreathed	 in	 seaweed.	 Algae	 mottled	 her	 hauberk.	 Verdigris	 mapped	 her	 helm’s	 skullcap.	 The	 broad,	 lowslung,	grilled	cheek-guards	looked	like	iron	chelae,	the	bridge	gleaming	like	a	scorpion’s	pincer.	Her	gauntleted
hands	were	closed	into	fists,	like	giant	mauls	at	the	ends	of	her	apish,	multi-jointed	arms.
‘So	you	are,’	said	Errastas,	smiling.
‘I	have	never	trusted	you,’	Kilmandaros	said	in	a	growl.
He	rose,	still	smiling.	‘Why	should	I	be	unique?	Now,	who	among	us	will	open	the	portal?	Knuckles,	show	us


your	power.’
The	gaunt	man	flinched.
The	water	had	reached	hip-level—not	Kilmandaros’s	hips,	of	course.	The	Errant	gestured	in	Sechul	Lath’s
direction.	‘Let	us	see	you	as	you	should	be.	This	is	my	first	gift,	Setch.’	Power	blossomed.
The	 ancient	 figure	 blurred,	 straightened,	 revealing	 at	 last	 a	 tall,	 youthful	 Forkrul	 Assail—who	 reeled,	 face
darkening.	He	flung	away	his	goblet.	‘How	dare	you!	Leave	me	as	I	was,	damn	you!’
‘My	gift,’	snapped	Errastas.	‘To	be	accepted	in	the	spirit	in	which	it	is	given.’
Sechul	held	his	elongated	hands	up	over	his	face.	‘How	could	you	think,’	he	rasped,	‘I	ever	regretted	what	I
left	behind?’	He	pulled	his	hands	away,	glaring.	‘Give	me	back	all	that	I	have	earned!’
‘You	are	a	fool—’
‘We	will	leave	now,’	cut	in	Kilmandaros,	loud	enough	to	thunder	in	the	chamber.
‘Errastas!’
‘No!	It	is	done!’
A	 second	 gesture,	 and	 a	 portal	 opened,	 swallowing	 an	 entire	 wall	 of	 the	 House.	 Kilmandaros	 lumbered
through,	vanishing	from	sight.
The	Errant	faced	Knuckles.
His	old	friend’s	eyes	were	filled	with	such	wretched	distress	that	Errastas	snarled,	‘Oh,	have	it	your	way,
then—’	 and	 cruelly	 tore	 the	 blessing	 from	 the	 man,	 watched	 with	 satisfaction	 as	 the	 man	 bowed,	 gasping	 in
sudden	pain.
‘There,	wear	your	pathos,	Setch,	since	it	fits	so	damned	well.	What	is	this?	You	do	not	welcome	its	return?’
‘It	 pleases	 you	 to	 deliver	 pain,	 does	 it?	 I	 see	 that	 you	 are	 unchanged	 .	 .	 .	 in	 the	 essential	 details	 of	 your
nature.’	Groaning,	Sechul	conjured	a	staff	and	leaned	heavily	upon	it.	‘Lead	on	then,	Errastas.’
‘Why	must	you	sour	this	moment	of	triumph?’
‘Perhaps	I	but	remind	you	of	what	awaits	us	all.’
The	 Errant	 struggled	 not	 to	 strike	 Knuckles,	 not	 to	 knock	 that	 staff	 away	 with	 a	 kick	 and	 watch	 the	 old
creature	totter,	possibly	even	fall.	A	shortlived	pleasure.	Unworthy	to	be	sure.	He	faced	the	portal.	‘Stay	close
—this	gate	will	slam	shut	behind	us,	I	suspect.’
‘It’s	had	its	fill,	aye.’
	
Moments	 later,	 water	 roared	 in	 to	 reclaim	 the	 chamber,	 darkness	 devoured	 every	 room,	 every	 hall.	 Currents
rushed,	and	then	settled,	until	all	was	motionless	once	more.
The	House	was	at	peace.
For	a	time.
______
Captain	Ruthan	Gudd	was	in	the	habit	of	grooming	his	beard	with	his	fingers,	an	affectation	that	Shurq	Elalle
found	irritating.	Thoughtful	repose	was	all	very	well,	as	far	as	poses	went,	but	the	man	was	so	terse	she	had
begun	to	suspect	his	genius	was	of	the	ineffable	kind;	in	other	words,	it	might	be	the	man	was	thick	but	just
clever	 enough	 to	 assume	 the	 guise	 of	 wisdom	 and	 depth.	 The	 silly	 thing	 was	 how	 damned	 successful	 and
alluring	the	whole	thing	was—that	hint	of	mystery,	the	dark	veil	of	his	eyes,	his	potent	silences.
‘Errant’s	sake,	get	out	of	here.’
He	started,	and	then	reached	for	his	sword	belt.	‘I	will	miss	you.’
‘Everyone	says	that	to	me	sooner	or	later.’
‘A	curious	observation.’
‘Is	it?	The	simple	truth	is,	I	wear	men	out.	In	any	case,	I’m	about	to	sail,	so	all	in	all	it’s	just	as	well.’
He	grunted.	‘I’d	rather	be	standing	on	a	deck,	letting	the	sails	do	all	the	work,	than	marching.’
‘Then	why	did	you	become	a	soldier?’
He	raked	through	his	beard,	frowned,	and	then	said,	‘Habit.’	As	he	made	his	way	to	the	door	he	paused,	and
squinted	down	at	an	urn	sitting	against	one	wall.	‘Where	did	you	get	this?’
‘That	thing?	I’m	a	pirate,	Ruthan.	I	come	by	things.’
‘Not	purchased	at	a	market	stall	in	the	city,	then.’
‘Of	course	not.	Why?’


‘The	crows	caught	my	eye.	Seven	Cities,	that	pot.’
‘It’s	an	urn,	not	a	pot.’
‘Fall	of	Coltaine.	You	preyed	on	a	Malazan	ship—’	he	turned	and	eyed	her.	‘Has	to	have	been	recently.	Did
you	pounce	on	one	of	our	ships?	There	were	storms,	the	fleet	was	scattered	more	than	once.	A	few	were	lost,
in	fact.’
She	returned	his	stare	flatly.	‘And	what	if	I	had?	It’s	not	like	I	knew	anything	about	you,	is	it?’
He	shrugged.	‘I	suppose	not.	Though	the	idea	that	you	put	some	fellow	Malazans	to	the	sword	doesn’t	sit
well.’
‘I	didn’t,’	she	replied.	‘I	pounced	on	a	Tiste	Edur	ship.’
After	a	moment	he	nodded.	‘That	makes	sense.	We	first	encountered	them	outside	Ehrlitan.’
‘Well,	that’s	a	relief.’
His	eyes	hardened.	‘You	are	a	cold	woman,	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘I’ve	heard	that	before,	too.’
He	left	without	another	word.	It	was	always	better	this	way,	find	something	annoying	to	sour	the	moment,	a
brief	 exchange	 of	 lashing	 words,	 and	 then	 it	 was	 done	 with.	 Yearning	 goodbyes,	 dripping	 with	 soppy
sentimentalities,	were	never	quite	as	satisfying	as	one	would	like.
She	 quickly	 collected	 the	 last	 of	 her	 gear—most	 of	 her	 stuff	 was	 already	 stowed	 aboard	 Undying
Gratitude.	Skorgen	Kaban	the	Pretty	had	taken	charge	of	things,	more	or	less,	down	at	the	harbour.	Clearing
up	berth	fees,	sobering	up	the	crew	 and	 whatnot.	 Her	 two	 Bolkando	 guests	 were	 safely	 stowed	 in	 the	 main
cabin;	and	if	Ublala	Pung	still	hadn’t	shown	up	by	the	time	she	arrived,	that	was	just	too	bad—the	oaf	had	the
memory	of	a	moth.
He	probably	got	confused	and	tried	to	walk	to	the	islands.
She	buckled	her	rapier	to	her	hip,	slung	a	modest	duffel	bag	over	one	shoulder,	and	left,	not	bothering	to	lock
the	door—the	 room	 was	 rented	and	besides,	the	 first	thief	inside	was	welcome	to	 everything,	 especially	that
stupid	urn.
A	 pleasant	 and	 promising	 offshore	 breeze	 accompanied	 her	 down	 to	 the	 docks.	 She	 was	 satisfied	 to	 see
plenty	 of	 activity	 aboard	 her	 ship	 as	 she	 strode	 to	 the	 gangplank.	 Stevedores	 were	 loading	 the	 last	 of	 the
supplies,	suffering	under	cruel	commentary	from	the	gaggle	of	whores	who’d	come	down	to	send	off	the	crew,
said	whores	shooting	her	withering	looks	as	she	swept	past	them.	Hardly	deserved,	she	felt,	since	she	hadn’t
been	competing	with	them	for	months	and	besides,	wasn’t	she	now	leaving?
She	stepped	down	on	to	the	main	deck.	‘Pretty,	where	did	you	get	that	nose?’
Her	First	Mate	clumped	over.	‘Snapper	beak,’	he	said,	‘stuffed	with	cotton	to	hold	back	on	the	drip,	Captain.
I	bought	it	at	the	Tides	Market.’
She	squinted	at	him.	The	strings	holding	the	beak	in	place	looked	painfully	tight.	‘Best	loosen	it	up	some,’	she
advised,	dropping	the	bag	down	to	one	side	and	then	setting	her	fists	on	her	hips	as	she	surveyed	the	others	on
deck.	‘No	Pung?’
‘Not	yet.’
‘Well,	I	want	to	take	advantage	of	this	wind.’
‘Good,	Captain,	the	giant’s	an	ill	omen	besides—’
‘None	of	that,’	she	snapped.	‘He	made	a	fine	pirate	in	his	days	with	us,	and	there	was	nothing	ill-omened
about	him.’	Kaban	was	jealous,	of	course.	But	the	nose	looked	ridiculous.	‘Get	these	dock	rats	off	my	ship	and
crew	the	lines.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
She	watched	him	limp	off,	nodded	severely	when	he	roared	into	the	ear	of	a	lounging	sailor.	Walking	to	the
landward	rail	up	near	the	bow,	she	scanned	the	crowds	on	the	waterfront.	No	sign	of	Ublala	Pung.	‘Idiot.’
	
Captain	Ruthan	Gudd	collected	his	horse	at	the	stables	and	set	out	northward	along	the	main	avenue	running
partway	alongside	the	central	canal.	He	saw	no	other	Malazans	among	the	crowds—he	could	well	be	the	last
left	in	the	city.	This	suited	him	fine,	and	better	still	if	Tavore	and	her	Bonehunters	were	to	pull	stakes	before	he
arrived,	leaving	him	behind.
He’d	 never	 wanted	 to	 be	 made	 a	 captain	 since	 it	 meant	 too	 many	 people	 paid	 attention	 to	 him.	 Given	 a
choice,	Ruthan	would	be	pleased	to	spend	his	entire	life	not	being	noticed	by	anyone.	Except	for	the	occasional


woman,	of	course.	He	had	considered,	rather	often	lately,	deserting	the	army.	If	he	had	been	a	regular	footsoldier,	he	might	well	have	done	just	that.	But	a	missing	officer	meant	mages	joining	in	the	search,	and	the	last
thing	he	wanted	was	to	be	sniffed	down	by	a	magicker.	Of	course	Tavore	wouldn’t	hold	back	on	the	army’s
march	just	to	await	his	appearance—but	there	might	well	be	a	mage	or	two	riding	for	him	right	now.
Either	way,	Fist	Blistig	was	probably	rehearsing	the	tongue-lashing	he’d	be	delivering	to	Ruthan	as	soon	as
the	captain	showed.
Under	normal	circumstances,	it	was	easy	to	hide	in	an	army,	even	as	an	officer.	Volunteer	for	nothing,	offer
no	 suggestions,	 stay	 in	 the	 back	 at	 briefings,	 or	 better	 still,	 miss	 them	 altogether.	 Most	 command	 structures
made	allowances	for	useless	officers—no	different	from	the	allowances	made	for	useless	soldiers	in	the	field.
‘Take	 a	 thousand	 soldiers.	 Four	 hundred	 will	 stand	 in	 a	 fight	 but	 do	 nothing.	 Two	 hundred	 will	 run
given	the	chance.	Another	hundred	will	get	confused.	That	leaves	three	hundred	you	can	count	on.	Your
task	in	commanding	that	thousand	is	all	down	to	knowing	where	to	put	that	three	hundred.’	Not	Malazan
doctrine,	that.	Some	Theftian	general,	he	suspected.	Not	Korelri,	that	was	certain.	Korelri	would	just	keep	the
three	hundred	and	execute	the	rest.
Greymane?	 No,	 don’t	 be	 stupid,	 Ruthan.	 Be	 lucky	 to	 get	 five	 words	 a	 year	 out	 of	 that	 man.	 Then
again,	who	needs	words	when	you	can	fight	like	that?	Hood	keep	you	warm,	Greymane.
In	 any	 case,	 Ruthan	 counted	 himself	 among	 the	 useless	 seven	 hundred,	 capable	 of	 doing	 nothing,	 getting
confused,	or	routed	at	the	first	clash	of	weapons.	Thus	far,	however,	he’d	not	had	a	chance	to	attempt	any	of
those	options.	The	scraps	he’d	found	himself	in—relatively	few,	all	things	considered—had	forced	him	to	fight
like	a	rabid	wolf	to	stay	alive.	There	was	nothing	worse	in	the	world	than	being	noticed	by	someone	trying	to
kill	you—seeing	that	sudden	sharp	focus	in	a	stranger’s	eyes—
The	captain	shook	himself.	The	north	gate	waited	ahead.
Back	into	the	army.	Done	with	the	soft	bed	and	soft	but	oddly	cool	feminine	flesh;	with	the	decent	(if	rather
tart)	Letherii	wines.	Done	with	the	delicious	ease	of	doing	nothing.	Attention	was	coming	his	way	and	there
was	nothing	to	be	done	about	it.
You	told	me	to	keep	my	head	low,	Greymane.	I’ve	been	trying.	It’s	not	working.	But	then,	something	in
your	eyes	told	me	you	knew	it	wouldn’t,	because	it	wasn’t	working	for	you	either.
Ruthan	Gudd	clawed	at	his	bead,	reminding	himself	of	the	stranger’s	face	he	now	wore.
Let’s	face	it,	old	friend.	In	this	world	it’s	only	the	dead	who	don’t	get	noticed.
	
The	place	of	sacrifice	held	an	air	of	something	broken.	Ruined.	It	was	a	misery	being	there,	but	Ublala	Pung
had	no	choice.	Old	Hunch	Arbat’s	rasping	voice	was	in	his	head,	chasing	him	this	way	and	that,	and	the	thing
about	a	skull—even	one	as	big	as	his—was	how	it	was	never	big	enough	to	run	all	the	way	away,	even	when	it
was	a	dead	old	man	doing	the	chasing.
‘I	did	what	you	said,’	he	said.	‘So	leave	me	alone.	I	got	to	get	to	the	ship.	So	Shurq	and	me	can	sex.	You’re
just	jealous.’
He	 was	 the	 only	 living	 thing	 in	 the	 cemetery.	 It	 wasn’t	 being	 used	 much	 any	 more,	 ever	 since	 parts	 of	 it
started	sinking.	Sepulchres	tilted	and	sagged	and	then	broke	open.	Big	stone	urns	fell	over.	Trees	got	struck	by
lightning	and	marsh	gases	wandered	round	looking	like	floating	heads.	And	all	the	bones	were	pushing	up	from
the	ground	like	stones	in	a	farmer’s	field.	He’d	picked	one	up,	a	leg	bone,	to	give	his	hands	something	to	play
with	while	he	waited	for	Arbat’s	ghost.
Scuffling	sounds	behind	him—Ublala	turned.	‘Oh,	you.	What	do	you	want?’
‘I	 was	 coming	 to	 scare	 you,’	 said	 the	 rotted,	 half-naked	 corpse,	 and	 it	 raised	 bony	 hands	 sporting	 long,
jagged	fingernails.	‘Aaaagh!’
‘You’re	stupid.	Go	away.’
Harlest	Eberict	sagged.	‘Nothing’s	working	any	more.	Look	at	me.	I’m	falling	apart.’
‘Go	to	Selush.	She’ll	sew	you	back	up.’
‘I	can’t.	This	stupid	ghost	won’t	let	me.’
‘What	ghost?’
Harlest	tapped	his	head,	breaking	a	nail	in	the	process.	‘Oh,	see	that?	It’s	all	going	wrong!’
‘What	ghost?’
‘The	 one	 that	 wants	 to	 talk	 to	 you,	 and	 give	 you	 stuff.	 The	 one	 you	 killed.	 Murderer.	 I	 wanted	 to	 be	 a


murderer,	 too,	 you	 know.	 Tear	 people	 to	 pieces	 and	 then	 eat	 the	 pieces.	 But	 there’s	 no	 point	 in	 having
ambitions—it	all	comes	to	naught.	I	was	reaching	too	high,	asking	for	too	much.	I	lost	my	head.’
‘No	you	didn’t.	It’s	still	there.’
‘Listen,	the	sooner	we	get	this	done	the	sooner	that	ghost	will	leave	me	so	I	can	get	back	to	doing	nothing.
Follow	me.’
Harlest	 led	 Ublala	 through	 the	 grounds	 until	 they	 came	 to	 a	 sunken	 pit,	 three	 paces	 across	 and	 twice	 as
deep.	 Bones	 jutted	 from	 the	 sides	 all	 the	 way	 down.	 The	 corpse	 pointed.	 ‘An	 underground	 stream	 shifted
course,	moved	under	this	cemetery.	That’s	why	it’s	slumping	everywhere.	What	are	you	doing	with	that	bone?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Get	rid	of	it—you’re	making	me	nervous.’
‘I	want	to	talk	to	the	ghost.	To	Old	Hunch.’
‘You	can’t.	Except	in	your	head	and	the	ghost	isn’t	powerful	enough	to	do	that	while	it’s	using	me.	You’re
stuck	with	me.	Now,	right	at	the	bottom	there’s	Tarthenal	bones,	some	of	the	oldest	burials	in	the	area.	You
want	to	clear	all	that	away,	until	you	get	to	a	big	stone	slab.	You	then	need	to	pull	that	up	or	push	it	to	one	side.
What	you	need	is	under	that.’
‘I	don’t	need	anything.’
‘Yes	you	do.	You’re	not	going	to	get	back	to	your	kin	for	a	while.	Sorry,	I	know	you’ve	got	plans,	but	there’s
nothing	to	be	done	for	it.	Karsa	Orlong	will	just	have	to	wait.’
Ublala	scowled	into	the	pit.	‘I’m	going	to	miss	my	ship—Shurq’s	going	to	be	so	mad.	And	I’m	supposed	to
collect	 all	 the	 Tarthenal—that’s	 what	 Karsa	 wants	 me	 to	 do.	 Old	 Hunch,	 you’re	 ruining	 everything!’	 He
clutched	his	head,	hitting	himself	with	the	bone	in	the	process.	‘Ow,	see	what	you	made	me	do?’
‘That’s	only	because	you	keep	confusing	things,	Ublala	Pung.	Now	get	digging.’
‘I	should	never	have	killed	you.	The	ghost,	I	mean.’
‘You	had	no	choice.’
‘I	hate	the	way	I	never	get	no	choice.’
‘Just	climb	into	the	hole,	Ublala	Pung.’
Wiping	his	eyes,	the	Tarthenal	clambered	down	into	the	pit	and	began	tossing	out	clumps	of	earth	and	bones.
	
Some	 time	 later	 Harlest	 heard	 the	 grinding	 crunch	 of	 shifting	 stone	 and	 drew	 closer	 to	 the	 edge	 and	 looked
down.	‘Good,	you	found	it.	That’s	it,	get	your	hands	under	that	edge	and	tilt	it	up.	Go	on,	put	your	back	into	it.’
For	all	his	empty	encouragement,	Harlest	was	surprised	to	see	that	the	giant	oaf	actually	managed	to	lift	that
enormous	slab	of	solid	stone	and	push	it	against	one	of	the	pit’s	walls.
The	 body	 interred	 within	 the	 sarcophagus	 had	 once	 been	 as	 massive	 as	 Ublala’s	 own,	 but	 it	 had	 mostly
rotted	away	to	dust,	leaving	nothing	but	the	armour	and	weapons.
‘The	 ghost	 says	 there’s	 a	 name	 for	 that	 armour,’	 said	 Harlest,	 ‘even	 as	 the	 mace	 is	 named.	 First	 Heroes
were	 wont	 to	 such	 affectations.	 This	 particular	 one,	 a	 Thelomen,	 hailed	 from	 a	 region	 bordering	 the	 First
Empire—in	a	land	very	distant—the	same	land	the	first	Letherii	came	from,	in	fact.	A	belligerent	bastard—his
name	is	forgotten	and	best	left	that	way.	Take	that	armour,	and	the	mace.’
‘It	smells,’	complained	Ublala	Pung.
‘Dragon	 scales	 sometimes	 do,	 especially	 those	 from	 the	 neck	 and	 flanges,	 where	 there	 are	 glands—and
that’s	where	those	ones	came	from.	This	particular	dragon	was	firstborn	to	Alkend.	The	armour’s	name	is	Dra
Alkeleint—basically	Thelomen	for	“I	killed	the	dragon	Dralk.”	He	used	that	mace	to	do	it,	and	its	name	is	Rilk,
which	is	Thelomen	for	“Crush”.	Or	“Smash”	or	something	similar.’
‘I	don’t	want	any	of	this	stuff,’	said	Ublala.	‘I	don’t	even	know	how	to	use	a	mace.’
Harlest	examined	his	broken	nail.	‘Fear	not—Rilk	knows	how	to	use	you.	Now,	drag	it	all	up	here	and	I	can
help	you	get	that	armour	on—provided	you	kneel,	that	is.’
Ublala	 brought	 up	 the	 mace	 first.	 Two-handed,	 the	 haft	 a	 thick,	 slightly	 bent	 shaft	 of	 bone,	 horn	 or	 antler,
polished	amber	by	antiquity.	A	gnarled	socket	of	bronze	capped	its	base.	The	head	was	vaguely	shaped	to	form
four	battered	bulbs—the	ore	was	marled	mercurial	and	deep	blue.
‘Skyfall,’	said	Harlest,	‘that	metal.	Harder	than	iron.	You	held	it	easily,	Ublala,	while	I	doubt	I	could	even	lift
the	damned	thing.	Rilk	is	pleased.’
Ublala	scowled	up	at	him,	and	then	ducked	down	once	again.


The	 armour	 consisted	 of	 shoulder	 plates,	 with	 the	 chest	 and	 back	 pieces	 in	 separate	 halves.	 A	 thick	 belt
joined	 the	 upper	 parts	 to	 a	 waisted	 skirt.	 Smaller	 dragon	 scales	 formed	 the	 thigh-guards,	 with	 knee	 bosses
made	 of	 dew-claws	 forming	 deadly	 spikes.	 Beneath	 the	 knees,	 a	 single	 moulded	 scale	 protected	 each	 shin.
Vambraces	of	matching	construction	protected	the	wrists,	with	suppler	hide	covering	the	upper	arms.	Gauntlets
of	bone	strips	sheathed	the	hands.
Time’s	assault	had	failed—the	scales	were	solid,	the	gut	ties	and	leather	straps	supple	as	if	new.	The	armour
probably	weighed	as	much	as	a	grown	human.
Last	came	the	helm.	Hundreds	of	bone	fragments—probably	from	the	dragon’s	skull	and	jaws—had	been
drilled	and	fastened	together	to	form	an	overlapping	skull	cap,	brow-	and	cheek-guards,	and	articulated	lobster
tail	covering	the	back	of	the	neck.	The	effect	was	both	ghastly	and	terrifying.
‘Climb	out	and	let’s	get	you	properly	attired.’
‘I	don’t	want	to.’
‘You	want	to	stay	in	that	hole?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well,	that’s	not	allowed.	The	ghost	insists.’
‘I	don’t	like	Old	Hunch	any	more.	I’m	glad	I	killed	him.’
‘So	is	he.’
‘I	change	my	mind	then.	I’m	not	glad.	I	wish	I’d	left	him	alive	for	ever.’
‘Then	he	would	be	the	one	standing	here	talking	to	you	instead	of	me.	There’s	no	winning,	Ublala	Pung.	The
ghost	wants	you	in	this	stuff,	carrying	the	mace.	You	can	leave	off	the	helm	for	now,	at	least	until	you’re	out	of
the	city.’
‘Where	am	I	going?’
‘The	Wastelands.’
‘I	don’t	like	the	sound	of	that	place.’
‘You	have	a	very	important	task,	Ublala	Pung.	In	fact,	you’ll	like	it,	I	suspect.	No,	you	will.	Come	up	here
and	I’ll	tell	you	all	about	it	while	we’re	getting	that	armour	on	you.’
‘Tell	me	now.’
‘No.	It’s	a	secret	unless	you	climb	out.’
‘You’re	going	to	tell	me	it	if	I	come	up	there?’
‘And	get	into	the	armour,	yes.’
‘I	like	people	telling	me	secrets,’	said	Ublala	Pung.
‘I	know,’	said	Harlest.
‘Okay.’
‘Wonderful.’	 Harlest	 looked	 away.	 Maybe	 he’d	 go	 to	 Selush	 after	 all.	 Not	 until	 night	 arrived,	 though.	 The
last	time	he’d	attempted	the	city	streets	in	daytime	a	mob	of	scrawny	urchins	threw	stones	at	him.	What	was
the	world	coming	to?	Why,	if	he	was	in	better	shape,	he	could	run	after	them	and	rip	limbs	from	bodies	and
that’d	be	the	end	of	the	teasing	and	laughing,	wouldn’t	it?
Children	needed	lessons,	yes	they	did.	Why,	when	he	was	a	child	.	.	.
	
Brys	 Beddict	 dismissed	 his	 officers	 and	 then	 his	 aides,	 waiting	 until	 everyone	 had	 left	 the	 tent	 before	 sitting
down	 on	 the	 camp	 stool.	 He	 leaned	 forward	 and	 stared	 at	 his	 hands.	 They	 felt	 cold,	 as	 they	 had	 done	 ever
since	his	return,	as	if	the	memory	of	icy	water	and	fierce	pressure	still	haunted	them.	Gazing	upon	the	eager
faces	 of	 his	 officers	 was	 proving	 increasingly	 difficult—something	 was	 growing	 within	 him,	 a	 kind	 of	 abject
sorrow	that	seemed	to	broaden	the	distance	between	himself	and	everyone	else.
He	 had	 looked	 at	 these	 animated	 faces	 but	 had	 seen	 in	 each	 the	 shadow	 of	 death,	 a	 ghostly	 face	 just
beneath	the	outward	one.	Had	he	simply	gained	some	new,	wretched,	insight	into	mortality?	Sanity	was	best
served	when	one	dealt	with	the	here	and	now,	with	reality’s	physical	presence—its	hard	insistence.	That	brush
of	otherness	scratched	at	his	self-control.
If	consciousness	was	but	a	spark,	doomed	to	go	out,	fade	into	oblivion,	then	what	value	all	this	struggle?	He
held	within	him	the	names	of	countless	long-dead	gods.	He	alone	kept	them	alive,	or	at	least	as	near	alive	as
was	possible	for	such	forgotten	entities.	To	what	end?
There	 was,	 he	 decided,	 much	 to	 envy	 in	 his	 brother.	 No	 one	 delighted	 more	 in	 the	 blessed	 absurdity	 of


human	endeavours.	What	better	answer	to	despair?
Of	the	legions	accompanying	him,	he	had	restructured	all	but	one,	the	Harridict,	and	he	had	only	spared	that
brigade	at	the	request	of	the	Malazan	soldiers	who’d	worked	with	them.	Doing	away	with	the	old	battalion	and
brigade	 organization,	 he’d	 created	 five	 distinct	 legions,	 four	 of	 them	 consisting	 of	 two	 thousand	 soldiers	 and
support	 elements.	 The	 fifth	 legion	 encompassed	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 supply	 train	 as	 well	 as	 the	 mobile	 hospital,
livestock,	 drovers	 and	 sundry	 personnel,	 including	 five	 hundred	 horse	 troops	 that	 employed	 the	 new	 fixed
stirrups	and	were	swiftly	gaining	competence	under	the	tutelage	of	the	Malazans.
Each	of	the	combat	legions,	including	the	Harridict,	now	housed	its	own	kitchen,	smithy,	armourers,	triage,
mounted	 scouts	 and	 messengers,	 as	 well	 as	 heavy	 assault	 weapons.	 More	 than	 ever,	 there	 was	 greater
reliance	upon	the	legion	commanders	and	their	staff—Brys	wanted	competence	and	self-reliance	and	he	had
selected	 his	 officers	 based	 on	 these	 qualities.	 The	 disadvantage	 to	 such	 personalities	 was	 evinced	 in	 every
staff	 briefing,	 as	 egos	 clashed.	 Once	 on	 the	 march,	 Brys	 suspected,	 the	 inherent	 rivalries	 would	 shift	 from
internal	 belligerence	 to	 competition	 with	 the	 foreign	 army	 marching	 on	 their	 flank,	 and	 that	 was	 just	 as	 well.
The	Letherii	had	 something	to	 prove,	 or,	if	not	prove,	 then	reinvent—the	 Malazans	had,	quite	simply,	 trashed
them	in	the	invasion.
For	too	long	the	Letherii	military	had	faced	less	sophisticated	enemies—even	the	Tiste	Edur	qualified,	given
their	unstructured,	barbaric	approach	to	combat.	The	few	battles	with	the	Bolkando	legions,	a	decade	ago,	had
proved	bloody	and	indecisive—but	those	potential	lessons	had	been	ignored.
Few	military	forces	were	by	nature	introspective.	Conservatism	was	bound	to	tradition,	like	knots	in	a	rope.
Brys	 sought	 something	 new	 in	 his	 army.	 Malleable,	 quick	 to	 adapt,	 fearless	 in	 challenging	 old	 ways	 of	 doing
things.	At	the	same	time,	he	understood	the	value	of	tradition,	and	the	legion	structure	was	in	fact	a	return	to
the	history	of	the	First	Empire.
He	clenched	his	hands,	watched	the	blood	leave	his	knuckles.
This	would	be	no	simple,	uneventful	march.
He	looked	upon	his	soldiers	and	saw	death	in	their	faces.	Prophecy	or	legacy?	He	wished	he	knew.
______
Reliko	saw	the	Falari	heavies,	Lookback,	Shoaly	and	Drawfirst—all	of	them	closing	up	their	kit	bags	near	the
six-squad	wagon—and	walked	over.	‘Listen,’	he	said.	Three	dark	faces	lifted	to	squint	at	him,	and	they	didn’t
have	 to	 lift	 much,	 even	 though	 they	 were	 kneeling.	 ‘It’s	 this.	 That	 heavy,	 Shortnose—you	 know,	 the	 guy
missing	most	of	his	nose?	Was	married	to	Hanno	who	died.’
The	three	cousins	exchanged	glances.	Drawfirst	shrugged,	wiped	sweat	from	her	forehead	and	said,	‘Him,
yeah.	Following	Flashwit	around	these	days—’
‘That’s	the	biggest	woman	I	ever	seen,’	said	Shoaly,	licking	his	lips.
Lookback	nodded.	‘It’s	her	green	eyes—’
‘No	it	ain’t,	Lookie,’	retorted	Shoaly.	‘It’s	her	big	everything	else.’
Drawfirst	snorted.	‘You	want	big	’uns,	look	at	me,	Shoaly.	On	second	thoughts,	don’t.	I	know	you	too	good,
don’t	I?’
Reliko	scowled.	‘I	was	talking	about	Shortnose,	remember?	Anyway,	I	seem	to	recall	he	only	had	one	ear
that	time	he	got	into	that	scrap	and	got	his	other	ear	bitten	off.’
‘Yeah,’	said	Drawfirst.	‘What	about	it?’
‘You	look	at	him	lately?	He’s	still	got	one	ear.	So	what	happened?	Did	it	grow	back?’
The	three	soldiers	said	nothing,	their	expressions	blank.	After	a	moment	they	returned	to	readying	their	kits.
Muttering	under	his	breath,	Reliko	stomped	off.	This	army	had	secrets,	that	it	did.	Shortnose	and	his	damned
ear.	Nefarias	Bredd	and	his	one	giant	foot.	That	squad	mage	and	his	pet	rats.	Vastly	Blank	who	had	no	brain	at
all	 but	 could	 fight	 like	 a	 demon.	 Lieutenant	 Pores	 and	 his	 evil,	 now	 dead,	 twin.	 Bald	 Kindly	 and	 his	 comb
collection—in	fact,	Reliko	decided	as	he	returned	to	his	squad,	just	about	everyone	here,	barring	maybe	himself
and	his	sergeant,	was	completely	mad.
It’s	 what	 no	 one	 outside	 an	 army	 understood.	 They	 just	 saw	 the	 uniforms	 and	 weapons,	 the	 helms	 and
visors,	the	marching	in	time.	And	if	they	ever	did	realize	the	truth,	why,	they’d	be	even	more	scared.	They’d
run	screaming.
‘Ee	cham	penuttle,	Erlko.’
‘Shut	up,	Nep.	Where’s	Badan?’


‘Ee’n	ere,	y’poffle	floob!’
‘I	can	see	that—so	where	did	he	go	is	what	I	want	to	know?’
The	mage’s	wrinkled	prune	of	a	face	puckered	into	something	indescribable.	‘Anay,	ijit.’
‘Ruffle!	You	seen	the	sergeant?’
The	squad	corporal	sat	leaning	against	a	wagon	wheel,	one	of	those	fat	rustleaf	rollers	jammed	between	her
fat	lips,	smoke	puffing	out	from	everywhere,	maybe	even	her	ears.
‘Doo	sheen	see	inny	ting	tru	at	smick!’	barked	Nep	Furrow.
Despite	himself	Reliko	grunted	a	laugh.	‘Y’got	that	one	right,	Nep—Ruffle,	you	got	something	wrong	with
air?’
She	lifted	one	hand	languidly	and	plucked	the	thing	from	her	mouth.	‘You	fool.	This	is	keeping	those	nasty
mosquitoes	away.’
‘Hey,	now	that’s	clever—where	can	I	get	me	some?’
‘I	brought	about	a	thousand	of	’em.	But	I	warn	you,	Reliko,	they’ll	make	you	green	the	first	few	days.	But
pretty	soon	you	start	sweating	it	outa	your	pores	and	not	a	bug	will	want	you.’
‘Huh.	Anyway,	where’s	Badan?’
‘Having	a	chat	with	some	other	sergeants,	Fiddler	and	them.’	Ruffle	puffed	some	more,	and	then	added,	‘I
think	Badan’s	decided	we	should	stick	with	them—we	all	worked	good	enough	before.’
‘I	 suppose.’	 But	 Reliko	 didn’t	 like	 the	 idea.	 Those	 squads	 were	 lodestones	 to	 trouble.	 ‘What’s	 Sinter	 say
about	that?’
‘Seems	all	right	with	it,	I	guess.’
‘Hey,	where’s	our	useless	recruits?’
‘Some	Letherii	came	by	and	scooped	them	up.’
‘Who	said	he	could	do	that?’
Ruffle	shrugged.	‘Didn’t	ask.’
Reliko	rubbed	the	back	of	his	neck—not	much	to	rub,	he	didn’t	have	much	of	a	neck,	but	he	liked	rubbing	it,
especially	along	the	ridge	of	calluses	where	his	helm’s	flare	usually	rested.	He	saw	Skim’s	booted	feet	sticking
out	from	under	the	wagon,	wondered	if	she	was	dead.	‘I’m	going	to	get	Vastly.	Squad	should	be	together	for
when	Badan	gets	back.’
‘Aye,	good	idea,’	said	Ruffle.
‘You’re	the	laziest	damned	corporal	I	ever	seen.’
‘Privilege	of	rank,’	she	said	around	her	roller.
‘You	won’t	last	a	day	on	the	march,’	observed	Reliko.	‘You’re	fatter	than	the	last	time	I	seen	you.’
‘No	I’m	not.	In	fact,	I’m	losing	weight.	I	can	feel	it.’
‘Kennai	felp	too?’
‘Don’t	even	think	it,	Nep,	you	dried-up	toad,’	drawled	Ruffle.
Reliko	set	off	to	find	Vastly	Blank.	Him	and	Badan	and	that	was	it.	The	rest	.	.	.	not	even	close.
	
Fiddler	tugged	free	the	stopper	on	the	jug	and	then	paused	to	survey	the	others.	Gesler	had	caught	a	lizard	by
the	 tail	 and	 was	 letting	 it	 bite	 his	 thumb.	 Balm	 sat	 crosslegged,	 frowning	 at	 the	 furious	 lizard.	 Cord	 stood
leaning	against	the	bole	of	a	tree—something	he’d	likely	regret	as	it	was	leaking	sap,	but	he	was	making	such
an	effort	with	the	pose	no	one	was	going	to	warn	him	off.	Thom	Tissy	had	brought	up	a	salted	slab	of	some
local	beast’s	flank	and	was	carving	it	into	slices.	Hellian	was	staring	fixedly	at	the	jug	in	Fiddler’s	hands	and
Urb	was	staring	fixedly	at	Hellian.	The	three	others,	the	two	South	Dal	Honese—Badan	Gruk	and	Sinter—and
Primly,	were	showing	old	loyalties	by	sitting	close	together	on	an	old	boom	log	and	eyeing	everyone	else.
Fiddler	wanted	maybe	five	more	sergeants	here	but	finding	anyone	in	the	chaotic	sprawl	that	was	a	camp
about	to	march	was	just	about	impossible.	He	lifted	the	jug.	‘Cups	ready,	everyone,’	and	he	set	out	to	make	the
round.	‘You	only	get	half,	Hellian,’	he	said	when	he	came	opposite	her,	‘since	I	can	see	you’re	already	well	on
your	way.’
‘On	my	way	where?	Fillitup	and	don’	be	cheap	neither.’
Fiddler	poured.	‘You	know,	you	ain’t	treating	Beak’s	gift	with	much	respect.’
‘What	giff?	He	never	give	me	nothing	but	white	hair	and	thank	the	gods	that’s	gone.’
When	he	had	filled	the	other	cups	he	returned	to	the	rotted	tree-stump	and	sat	down	once	more.	Fifty	paces


directly	 opposite	 was	 the	 river,	 the	 air	 above	 it	 swirling	 with	 swallows.	 After	 a	 moment	 he	 dropped	 his	 gaze
and	 studied	 the	 soldiers	 arrayed	 round	 the	 old	 fisher’s	 campfire.	 ‘Now,’	 he	 said,	 ‘this	 is	 the	 kind	 of	 meeting
sergeants	used	to	do	back	in	the	days	of	the	Bridgeburners.	It	was	a	useful	tradition	and	I’m	thinking	it’s	time	it
was	brought	back.	Next	time	we’ll	get	the	rest	of	the	company’s	sergeants.’
‘What’s	the	point	of	it?’	Sinter	asked.
‘Every	squad	has	its	own	skills—we	need	to	know	what	the	others	can	do,	and	how	they’re	likely	to	do	it.
We	work	through	all	this	and	hopefully	there	won’t	be	any	fatal	surprises	in	a	scrap.’
After	a	moment,	Sinter	nodded.	‘Makes	sense.’
Cord	asked,	‘You’re	expecting	us	to	run	into	trouble	any	time	soon,	Fid?	That	what	your	deck	told	you?	Has
this	trouble	got	a	face?’
‘He’s	not	saying,’	said	Gesler.	‘But	it’s	a	fair	guess	that	we’ll	know	it	when	we	see	it.’
‘Bolkando,’	suggested	Badan	Gruk.	‘That’s	the	rumour	anyway.’
Fiddler	nodded.	‘Aye,	we	might	have	a	bump	or	two	with	them,	unless	the	Burned	Tears	and	the	Perish	slap
them	into	submission	first.	The	Saphii	seem	to	be	the	only	ones	happy	to	have	us	pay	a	visit.’
‘It’s	 pretty	 isolated,	 ringed	 in	 mountains,’	 said	 Cord,	 crossing	 his	 arms.	 ‘Probably	 starving	 for	 a	 few	 fresh
faces,	even	ones	as	ugly	as	ours.’
‘Thing	is,	I	don’t	know	if	we’re	even	heading	into	Saphinand,’	Fiddler	pointed	out.	‘From	the	maps	I’ve	seen
it’s	well	to	the	north	of	the	obvious	route	across	the	Wastelands.’
Cord	 grunted.	 ‘Crossing	 any	 place	 named	 the	 Wastelands	 seems	 like	 a	 bad	 idea.	 What’s	 in	 this	 Kolanse
anyway?	What’s	driving	the	Adjunct?	Are	we	heading	into	another	war	to	right	some	insult	delivered	on	the
Malazan	Empire?	Why	not	just	leave	it	to	Laseen—it’s	not	like	we	owe	the	Empress	a	damned	thing.’
Fiddler	 sighed.	 ‘I’m	 not	 here	 to	 chew	 on	 the	 Adjunct’s	 motives,	 Cord.	 Speculation’s	 useless.	 We’re	 her
army.	Where	she	leads,	we	follow—’
‘Why?’	Sinter	almost	barked	the	word.	‘Listen.	Me	and	my	sister	half	starved	in	a	Letherii	cell	waiting	on
execution.	 Now,	 maybe	 the	 rest	 of	 you	 thought	 it	 was	 all	 fucking	 worth	 it	 taking	 down	 these	 Tiste	 Edur	 and
their	mad	Emperor,	but	a	lot	of	marines	died	and	the	rest	of	us	are	lucky	to	be	here.	If	it	wasn’t	for	that	Beak
you’d	all	be	dead—but	he’s	gone.	And	so	is	Sinn.	We	got	one	High	Mage	and	that’s	it,	and	how	good	is	he?
Fiddler—can	Quick	Ben	do	what	Beak	did?’
Fiddler	 unstrapped	 his	 helm	 and	 drew	 it	 off.	 He	 scratched	 at	 his	 sweat-matted	 hair.	 ‘Quick	 Ben	 doesn’t
work	that	way.	Used	to	be	he	was	more	behind-the-scenes,	but	Hedge	tells	me	it’s	been	different	lately,	maybe
ever	since	Black	Coral—’
‘Oh	great,’	cut	in	Cord,	‘where	the	Bridgeburners	were	wiped	out.’
‘That	wasn’t	his	fault.	Anyway,	we	all	saw	what	he	could	do	against	the	Edur	mages	off	the	coast	of	Seven
Cities—he	made	them	back	down.	And	then,	in	Letheras,	he	chased	off	a	damned	dragon—’
‘I’m	sure	the	cussers	stuffed	up	its	nose	helped,’	Cord	muttered.
Gesler	grunted	a	sour	laugh.	‘Well,	Fid,	Bridgeburner	sergeants	we	ain’t,	and	I	guess	that’s	pretty	obvious.
Can	you	imagine	Whiskeyjack	and	Brackle	and	Picker	and	the	rest	moaning	over	every	damned	thing	the	way
you	got	here?	I	can’t	and	I	never	even	met	them.’
Fiddler	 shrugged.	 ‘I	 wasn’t	 a	 sergeant	 back	 then,	 so	 I	 really	 can’t	 say.	 But	 something	 tells	 me	 they	 did
plenty	of	chewing.	Don’t	forget	from	about	Blackdog	all	the	way	down	to	Darujhistan	somebody	in	the	empire
wanted	them	dead.	Now,	maybe	they	never	had	much	to	complain	about	when	it	came	to	Dujek	Onearm,	but
at	the	same	time	it’s	not	like	they	knew	what	their	High	Fist	was	up	to—it	wasn’t	their	business.’
‘Even	when	that	business	killed	soldiers?’	Sinter	asked.
Fiddler’s	laugh	was	harsh	and	cutting.	‘If	that	isn’t	a	commander’s	business,	what	is?	The	Adjunct’s	not	our
Hood-damned	mother,	Sinter.	She’s	the	will	behind	the	fist	and	we’re	the	fist.	And	sometimes	we	get	bloodied,
but	that’s	what	comes	when	you’re	hammering	an	enemy	in	the	face.’
‘It’s	all	those	teeth,’	added	Gesler,	‘and	I	should	know.’
But	Sinter	wasn’t	letting	go.	‘If	we	know	what	we’re	getting	into,	we’ve	got	a	better	chance	of	surviving.’
Fiddler	rose,	his	right	hand	slamming	the	helm	on	to	the	ground	where	it	bounced	and	rolled	into	the	firepit’s
ashes.	‘Don’t	you	get	it?	Surviving	isn’t	what	all	this	is	about!’
As	those	words	shot	out	bitter	as	a	dying	man’s	spit,	the	gathered	sergeants	flinched	back.	Even	Gesler’s
eyes	widened.	The	lizard	took	that	moment	to	pull	free	and	scamper	away.


In	the	shocked	silence	Fiddler	half-snarled	and	clawed	at	his	beard,	unwilling	to	meet	anyone’s	eyes.	Hood’s
breath,	 Fid—you’re	 a	 damned	 fool.	 You	 let	 her	 get	 to	 you.	 That	 look	 in	 her	 eyes—she’s	 no	 natural
soldier—what	 in	 Fener’s	 name	 is	 she	 even	 doing	 here?	 And	 how	 many	 more	 like	 her	 are	 there	 in	 this
army?
‘Well,’	said	Cord	in	a	flat	voice,	‘that	must	have	been	one	Hood’s	piss	of	a	reading.’
Fiddler	forced	out	a	ragged	breath.	‘Not	a	piss,	Cord,	a	fucking	deluge.’
And	then	Sinter	surprised	them	all.	‘Glad	that’s	cleared	up.	Now,	let’s	talk	about	how	we’re	going	to	work
together	to	make	us	the	meanest	Hood-shitting	fist	the	Adjunct’s	got.’
	
Lying	flat	behind	a	tangle	of	brush,	Throatslitter	struggled	to	swallow.	His	mouth	and	throat	were	suddenly	so
dry	and	hot	he	thought	he	might	cough	flames.	He	cursed	himself	for	being	so	damned	nosy.	He	spied	to	feed
his	 curiosity	 and—he	 had	 to	 admit—to	 give	 himself	 an	 advantage	 on	 his	 fellow	 soldiers,	 reason	 for	 his	 sly
expression	and	sardonic,	knowing	smile,	and	a	man	like	him	wasn’t	satisfied	if	it	was	all	just	for	show.
Well,	now	he	knew.
Fid’s	been	dragged	low.	He	says	he	doesn’t	know	Tavore’s	business	but	he	just	showed	them	he	was
lying.	 He	 knows	 and	 he’s	 not	 telling.	 Aye,	 he’s	 not	 telling	 but	 he	 just	 told	 them	 anyway.	 Who	 needs
details	when	we’re	all	ending	up	crow	meat?
He	might	cough	flames,	aye,	or	laugh	out	a	cloud	of	ashes.	He	needed	to	talk	to	Deadsmell,	and	he	needed
to	 find	 that	 other	 Talon	 hiding	 among	 the	 marines—there’d	 been	 markers,	 every	 now	 and	 then,	 calls	 for
contact	only	a	fellow	Talon	would	recognize.	He’d	done	a	few	of	his	own,	but	it	seemed	they	were	dancing
round	each	other—and	that	had	been	fine,	until	now.	If	we’re	heading	for	Hood’s	grey	gate,	I	want	allies.
Deadsmell	for	certain.	And	whoever	my	hidden	dancer	happens	to	be.
The	sergeants	were	talking	back	and	forth	now,	cool	and	calm	as	if	Fiddler	hadn’t	just	sentenced	them	all,
and	Throatslitter	wasn’t	paying	much	attention	until	he	heard	his	name.
‘He	can	guard	our	backs	if	we	need	it,’	Balm	was	saying,	not	a	hint	of	confusion	in	his	voice.
‘I	don’t	think	we	will,’	Fiddler	said.	‘When	I	spoke	of	betrayal	I	wasn’t	meaning	within	our	ranks.’
Betrayal?	What	betrayal?	Gods,	what	have	I	missed?
‘Our	allies?’	Cord	asked.	‘I	can’t	believe	it,	not	from	the	Perish	or	the	Burned	Tears.	Who	else	is	there?’
‘There’s	the	Letherii,’	said	Sinter.	‘Our	oversized	escort.’
‘I	 can’t	 be	 any	 more	 specific,’	 Fiddler	 responded.	 ‘Just	 make	 sure	 we	 keep	 our	 noses	 in	 the	 air.	 Badan
Gruk,	what’s	your	mage	capable	of?’
‘Nep	Furrow?	Well,	he’s	a	bush	warlock,	mostly.	Good	at	curses.’	He	shrugged.	‘I’ve	not	seen	much	else,
though	 he	 once	 conjured	 up	 a	 seething	 ball	 of	 spiders	 and	 threw	 it	 at	 Skim—they	 looked	 real	 and	 bit	 hard
enough	to	make	Skim	shriek.’
‘Could	still	have	been	an	illusion,	though,’	Sinter	said.	‘Sometimes,	Dal	Honese	curses	edge	close	to	Mockra
—that’s	how	it	sneaks	into	the	victim’s	thoughts.’
‘You	seem	to	know	something	about	all	that,’	observed	Gesler.
‘I’m	not	a	mage,’	she	replied.	‘But	I	can	smell	magics.’
‘Who’s	our	nastiest	all-weapons-out	fighter?’	Cord	asked.
‘Skulldeath,’	said	Sinter	and	Badan	Gruk	simultaneously.
Fiddler	 grunted	 and	 added,	 ‘Koryk	 and	 Smiles	 would	 agree	 with	 you.	 Maybe	 reluctantly	 from	 Koryk,	 but
that’s	just	jealousy.’
Hellian	laughed.	‘Glad	t’hear	he’s	good	f’something,’	and	she	drank	from	her	cup	and	then	wiped	her	mouth.
When	it	became	obvious	she	wasn’t	going	to	elaborate,	Fiddler	resumed.	‘We	can	throw	forward	a	solid	line
of	heavies	if	we	need	to.	While	we’re	not	short	on	sappers	we	are	on	munitions,	but	there’s	nothing	to	be	done
for	 that.	 They’re	 good	 for	 night	 work,	 though.	 And	 they	 can	 crew	 the	 heavier	 weapons	 we	 got	 from	 the
Letherii.’
The	 discussion	 went	 on,	 but	 Throatslitter	 was	 distracted	 by	 a	 faint	 scuffling	 sound	 beside	 his	 head.	 He
turned	to	find	himself	eye	to	eye	with	a	rat.
One	of	Bottle’s.	That	bastard.
But	that’s	a	point,	isn’t	it?	Fiddler’s	not	talked	about	him.	He’s	holding	him	back.
Now,	that’s	interesting.


He	bared	his	teeth	at	the	rat.
It	returned	the	favour.
	
Riding	 along	 the	 well-beaten	 track	 leading	 to	 the	 Bonehunter	 encampment,	 Ruthan	 Gudd	 saw	 five	 other
captains,	all	mounted,	cantering	to	a	rise	between	the	Malazan	and	Letherii	contingents.	Grimacing,	he	angled
his	horse	to	join	them.	Palavers	of	this	sort	always	depressed	him.	Captains	got	stuck	from	both	ends,	not	privy
to	 what	 the	 Fists	 knew	 and	 despised	 by	 their	 underlings.	 Lieutenants	 were	 usually	 either	 ambitious
backstabbers	or	butt-licking	fools.	The	only	exception	he’d	heard	about	was	Pores.	Kindly	was	lucky	having	a
rival	like	that,	someone	to	match	wits	with,	someone	with	enough	malicious	evil	going	on	in	his	head	to	keep	his
captain	 entertained.	 Ruthan’s	 own	 lieutenant	 was	 a	 sullen	 Napan	 woman	 named	 Raband,	 who	 might	 be
incompetent	or	potentially	murderous.	He’d	lost	his	other	two	in	Y’Ghatan.
The	 others	 had	 reined	 in	 and	 were	 eyeing	 Ruthan	 as	 he	 rode	 up,	 an	 array	 of	 expressions	 unified	 in	 their
disapproval.	 Seniority	 put	 Kindly	 in	 charge.	 Below	 him	 was	 a	 black-haired	 Kanese,	 Skanarow,	 a	 woman	 of
about	forty,	uncharacteristically	tall	and	lean-limbed	for	a	Kanese—probably	from	the	southern	shore-folk	who
had	 originally	 been	 a	 distinct	 tribe.	 Her	 features	 were	 harsh,	 seamed	 in	 scars	 as	 if	 she’d	 suckled	 among
wildcats	as	a	child.
Next	 was	 Faradan	 Sort,	 who’d	 served	 all	 over	 the	 place	 and	 maybe	 even	 stood	 the	 Stormwall—Ruthan,
who	knew	more	about	that	than	most,	suspected	it	was	true.	She	held	herself	like	someone	who’d	known	the
worst	and	never	wanted	to	know	it	again.	But	there	were	experiences	that	a	person	could	never	leave	behind,
could	never,	ever	forget.	Besides,	Ruthan	had	seen	the	etching	on	Sort’s	sword,	and	that	kind	of	damage	could
only	come	from	the	deadly	touch	of	wand-magic.
Ruthan	was	next,	followed	by	the	two	in-field	promotions,	a	Hengian	named	Fast	who	was	already	taking
aim	on	 a	 fisthood,	 and	 an	 island-born	ferret	 of	 a	 man	 named	 Untilly	Rum,	 who’d	 been	 busted	 over	 from	 the
marines	 after	 his	 soldiers	 had	 set	 a	 deathmark	 on	 him—for	 reasons	 unknown	 to	 any	 but	 them.	 Despite	 his
background,	 Untilly	 could	 ride	 a	 horse	 like	 a	 damned	 Wickan,	 and	 so	 he	 was	 now	 commanding	 the	 light
lancers.
‘Considerate	of	you	to	show	up,’	said	Kindly.
‘Thank	 you,	 Captain,’	 Ruthan	 replied,	 combing	 fingers	 through	 his	 beard	 as	 he	 studied	 the	 chaos	 that	 was
the	Malazan	encampment.	‘We’ll	be	lucky	to	get	away	by	tomorrow.’
‘My	company’s	ready,’	said	Fast.
‘Maybe	the	last	time	you	saw	them,’	Skanarow	said	with	a	tight	smile.	‘Probably	scattered	to	a	dozen	whore
tents	by	now.’
Fast’s	pinched	face	darkened.	‘Sit	and	wait,	was	my	order,	so	that’s	what	they’re	doing.	My	lieutenants	are
making	sure	of	it.’
‘If	they’re	any	good	then	I	doubt	it,’	Skanarow	replied.	‘They’ve	been	watching	the	soldiers	getting	bored,
listening	to	the	bickering	get	worse	and	worse,	and	maybe	pulling	a	few	off	each	other.	If	they	got	any	wits	in
them,	they’ll	have	cut	them	loose	by	now.’
‘Skanarow’s	point,	Captain	Fast,’	said	Faradan	Sort,	‘is	this:	it	doesn’t	pay	to	get	your	squads	up	and	ready
too	early.	You’d	do	well	to	heed	the	advice	of	those	of	us	with	more	experience.’
Fast	bit	down	on	a	retort,	managed	a	stiff	nod.
Ruthan	 Gudd	 twisted	 in	 his	 saddle	 to	 observe	 the	 Letherii	 legions.	 Well-ordered	 bastards,	 that	 much	 was
clear.	Brys	Beddict	had	them	all	close	hobbled	and	waiting	on	the	Malazans,	patient	as	old	women	waiting	for
their	husbands	to	die.
Kindly	spoke:	‘Skanarow,	Fast,	you	and	the	rest	of	the	officers	under	Fist	Blistig’s	command	must	be	seeing
firsthand	 the	 problem	 we’re	 all	 facing.	 Fist	 Keneb	 is	 being	 pulled	 every	 which	 way	 when	 he	 should	 be
worrying	about	his	own	companies	and	nothing	else.	He’s	shouldering	the	logistics	for	Blistig’s	companies	and
we’re	suffering	for	it.’
‘There’s	no	lighting	fires	under	Blistig	these	days,’	said	Skanarow.
‘Can	you	take	up	the	slack?’
She	 blinked.	 ‘The	 only	 reason	 I’m	 a	 captain,	 Kindly,	 is	 that	 I	 know	 how	 to	 lead	 soldiers	 into	 battle	 and	 I
know	what	to	do	with	them	once	there.	I’ve	no	head	for	organization.’	She	shrugged.	‘I’ve	a	pair	of	decent
lieutenants	who	keep	the	rows	tallied	and	nobody	issued	two	left	boots	to	march	in.	Without	them	I’d	be	as	bad


as	Blistig.’
‘Logistics	is	no	problem	for	me,’	opined	Fast.
No	one	responded	to	that.
Kindly	arched	his	back	and	winced.	‘It	was	said,	back	when	he	was	commanding	the	Aren	Garrison,	that
Blistig	was	a	sharp,	competent	officer.’
‘Witnessing	 the	 slaughter	 of	 the	 Seventh	 and	 then	 Pormqual’s	 army	 broke	 him,’	 Faradan	 Sort	 said.	 ‘I	 am
surprised	the	Adjunct	doesn’t	see	that.’
‘The	one	thing	we	can	address,’	said	Kindly,	‘is	how	we	can	help	Keneb—we	need	the	best	Fist	we	have,
captains,	not	exhausted,	not	overwhelmed.’
‘We	can’t	do	a	thing	without	the	squad	sergeants,’	Faradan	Sort	said.	‘I	suggest	we	corral	our	respective
noncoms	into	the	effort.’
‘Risky,’	said	Kindly.
Ruthan	grunted—an	unintentional	response	that	drew	unwelcome	attention.
‘Pray,	explain	that,’	Kindly	asked	in	a	drawl.
He	shrugged.	‘Maybe	it	suits	us	officers	to	think	we’re	the	only	ones	capable	of	seeing	how	High	Command
is	falling	apart.’	He	met	Kindly’s	gaze.	‘The	sergeants	see	better	than	we	do.	Pulling	them	in	sacrifices	nothing
and	may	even	relieve	them,	since	it’ll	show	we’re	not	all	a	bunch	of	blind	twits,	which	is	probably	what	they’re
thinking	right	now.’	Having	said	his	piece	he	subsided	once	more.
‘	“Who	speaks	little	says	a	lot,”	’	Faradan	Sort	said,	presumably	quoting	someone.
Kindly	collected	his	reins.	‘It’s	decided,	then.	Draw	in	the	sergeants.	Get	them	to	straighten	out	their	squads
—Hood	knows	what	Brys	must	be	thinking	right	now,	but	I’m	damned	sure	it’s	not	complimentary.’
As	Kindly	and	the	others	rode	away,	Skanarow	angled	her	mount	in	front	of	Ruthan’s,	forcing	him	to	halt.
He	squinted	at	her.
She	 surprised	 him	 with	 a	 grin	 and	 it	 transformed	 her	 face.	 ‘The	 old	 ones	 among	 my	 people	 say	 that
sometimes	you	find	a	person	with	the	roar	of	a	sea	squall	in	their	eyes,	and	those	ones,	they	say,	have	swum
the	deepest	waters.	In	you,	Ruthan	Gudd,	I	now	understand	what	they	meant.	But	in	you	I	see	not	a	squall.	I
see	a	damned	typhoon.’
He	quickly	looked	away,	ran	fingers	through	his	beard.	‘Just	a	spell	of	gas,	Skanarow.’
She	barked	a	laugh.	‘Have	it	your	way,	then.	Avoid	raw	vegetables,	Captain.’
He	watched	her	ride	off.	Fisherfolk.	You,	Skanarow	with	the	lovely	smile,	I	need	to	avoid.	Too	bad.
Greymane,	 you	 always	 said	 that	 between	 the	 two	 of	 us	 I	 was	 the	 luckier	 one.	 Wrong,	 and	 if	 your
ghost	hearkens	to	its	name,	spare	me	any	echo	of	laughter.
He	paused,	but	all	he	could	hear	was	the	wind,	and	there	was	no	humour	in	that	moan.
‘Walk	on,	horse.’
	
Koryk	 looked	 a	 mess,	 trembling	 and	 wild-eyed,	 as	 he	 tottered	 back	 to	 the	 squad	 camp.	 Tarr	 frowned.	 ‘You
remind	me	of	a	pathetic	d’bayang	addict,	soldier.’
‘If	paranoia	comes	with	them	shakes,’	said	Cuttle,	‘he	might	as	well	be	just	that.	Sit	down,	Koryk.	There’s
room	in	the	wagon	for	ya	come	tomorrow.’
‘I	was	just	sick,’	Koryk	said	in	a	weak	growl.	‘I	seen	d’bayang	addicts	at	the	trader	forts	and	I	don’t	like
being	compared	to	them.	I	made	a	vow,	long	ago,	to	never	be	that	stupid.	I	was	just	sick.	Give	me	a	few	days
and	I’ll	be	right	enough	to	stick	my	fist	in	the	next	face	gabbling	about	d’bayang.’
‘That	sounds	better,’	said	Smiles.	‘Welcome	back.’
Corabb	 appeared	 from	 a	 tent	 carrying	 Koryk’s	 weapon	 belt.	 ‘Honed	 and	 oiled	 your	 blade,	 Koryk.	 But	 it
looks	like	the	belt	will	need	another	notch.	You	need	to	get	some	meat	back	on	your	bones.’
‘Thanks,	Mother,	just	don’t	offer	me	a	tit,	all	right?’	Sitting	down	on	an	old	munitions	box,	he	stared	at	the
fire.	The	walk,	Tarr	judged,	had	exhausted	the	man.	That	boded	ill	for	all	the	other	soldiers	who’d	come	down
with	 the	 same	 thing.	 The	 tart	 water	 had	 worked,	 but	 the	 victims	 who’d	 recovered	 were	 wasted	 one	 and	 all,
with	a	haunted	look	in	their	eyes.
‘Where’s	Fid?’	Koryk	asked.
Bottle	 stirred	 from	 where	 he	 had	 been	 lying,	 head	 on	 a	 bedroll	 and	 a	 cloth	 over	 his	 eyes.	 Blinking	 in	 the
afternoon	light	he	said,	‘Fid’s	been	listing	all	our	faults.	One	of	those	secret	meetings	of	all	the	sergeants.’


Tarr	grunted.	‘Glad	to	hear	it’s	secret.’
‘We	 ain’t	 got	 any	 faults,’	 said	 Smiles.	 ‘Except	 for	 you,	 Corporal.	 Hey	 Bottle,	 what	 else	 were	 they	 talking
about?’
‘Nothing.’
That	snatched	everyone’s	attention.	Even	Corabb	looked	up	from	the	new	hole	he	was	driving	through	the
thick	leather	belt—he’d	jammed	the	awl	into	the	palm	of	his	left	hand	but	didn’t	seem	to	have	noticed	yet.
‘Hood	knows	you’re	the	worst	liar	I	ever	heard,’	said	Cuttle.
‘Fid’s	expecting	a	fight,	and	maybe	soon.	He’s	tightening	the	squads.	All	right?	There.	Chew	on	that	for	a
while.’
‘How	hard	is	he	working	on	that?’	the	sapper	asked,	eyes	narrowed	down	to	slits.
Bottle	looked	ready	to	spit	out	something	foul.	‘Hard.’
‘Shit,’	said	Koryk.	‘Look	at	me.	Shit.’
‘Take	the	wagon	bed	tomorrow	and	maybe	the	next	day,’	said	Tarr.	‘And	then	spell	yourself	for	a	few	days
after	that.	We’ve	that	long	at	least	until	we’re	into	possibly	hostile	territory.	And	eat,	Koryk.	A	lot.’
‘Ow,’	said	Corabb,	lifting	the	hand	with	the	awl	dangling	from	the	palm.
‘Pull	it	and	see	if	you	bleed,’	said	Smiles.	‘If	you	don’t,	go	see	a	healer	quick.’	Noticing	the	others	looking	at
her	she	scowled.	‘Fish	hooks.	The,	uh,	fisherfolk	who	used	to	work	for	my	family—well,	I’ve	seen	it	go	bad,	is
all.	Punctures	that	don’t	bleed,	I	mean.	Oh,	piss	off,	then.’
‘I’m	going	for	a	walk,’	said	Bottle.
Tarr	watched	the	mage	wander	off,	and	then	glanced	over	and	found	Cuttle	staring	at	him.	Aye,	it’s	looking
bad.
Corabb	plucked	out	the	awl	and	managed	to	squeeze	out	a	few	drops	of	blood.	He	gave	Smiles	a	triumphant
grin,	then	returned	to	working	on	the	belt.
	
Bottle	wandered	through	the	encampment,	avoiding	the	disorganized	mobs	besieging	the	quartermaster’s	HQ,
the	 armourer	 compound,	 the	 leather	 and	 cordage	 workshops,	 and	 a	 host	 of	 other	 areas	 crowded	 with
miserable,	 overworked	 specialists.	 Even	 outside	 the	 whore	 tents	 soldiers	 were	 getting	 into	 scraps.	 Gods,
where	 are	 all	 the	 officers?	 We	 need	 military	 police—this	 is	 what	 happens	 when	 there’s	 no	 imperial
oversight,	no	Claws,	no	adjutants	or	commissars.
Adjunct,	why	aren’t	you	doing	anything	about	this?	Hold	on,	Bottle—it	ain’t	your	problem.	You’ve	got
other	problems	to	worry	about.	He	found	he	was	standing	in	the	centre	of	a	throughway,	one	hand	clutching
his	hair.	A	storm	of	images	warred	in	his	head—all	his	rats	were	out,	crouched	in	hiding	in	strategic	places—
but	 the	 one	 in	 Tavore’s	 command	 tent	 was	 being	 assailed	 by	 folds	 of	 burlap—someone	 had	 bagged	 it!	 He
forced	 the	 other	 ones	 out	 of	 his	 head.	 You!	 Little	 Koryk!	 Pay	 attention!	 Start	 chewing	 as	 if	 your	 life
depended	on	it—because	maybe	it	does—get	out	of	that	sack!
‘You.	You’re	in	Fiddler’s	squad,	right?’
Blinking,	Bottle	focused	on	the	man	standing	in	front	of	him.	‘Hedge.	What	do	you	want?’
The	 man	 smiled,	 and	 given	 the	 wayward	 glint	 in	 the	 man’s	 mud-grey	 eyes	 that	 was	 a	 rather	 frightening
expression.	‘Quick	Ben	sent	me	to	you.’
‘Really?	Why?	What’s	he	want?’
‘Never	could	answer	that	one—but	you’re	the	one,	Bottle,	isn’t	it?’
‘Look,	I’m	busy—’
Hedge	lifted	up	a	sack.	‘This	is	for	you.’
‘Bastard!’	Bottle	snatched	the	bag.	A	quick	look	inside.	Oh,	stop	your	chewing	now,	Koryk.	Relax.
‘It	was	moving,’	said	Hedge.
‘What?’
‘The	sack.	Got	something	alive	in	there?	It	was	jumping	around	in	my	hand—’	He	grunted	then	as	someone
collided	with	him.
An	armoured	regular,	big	as	a	bear,	lumbered	past.
‘Watch	where	you’re	walking,	y’damned	ox!’
At	Hedge’s	 snarl,	 the	 man	 turned.	 His	broad,	 flat	 face	 assumed	 the	 hue	 of	 a	 beet.	 He	 stomped	 back,	 lips
twisting.


Seeing	the	man’s	huge	hands	closing	into	fists,	Bottle	stepped	back	in	alarm.	Hedge	simply	laughed.
The	beet	looked	ready	to	explode.
Even	as	the	first	fist	flew,	Hedge	was	ducking	under	it,	closing	tight	up	against	the	man.	The	sapper’s	hands
shot	between	the	soldier’s	legs,	grabbed,	squeezed	and	yanked.
With	a	piercing	shriek,	the	soldier	doubled	over.
Hedge	added	a	knee	to	his	jaw,	flinging	the	head	back	upward.	Then	he	drove	an	elbow	into	a	cheekbone,
audibly	shattering	it.
The	huge	man	crumpled.	Hedge	stood	directly	over	him.	‘You	just	went	for	the	last	living	Bridgeburner.	I’m
guessing	you	won’t	do	that	again,	huh?’	Hedge	then	turned	back	to	Bottle	and	smiled	a	second	time.	‘Quick
Ben	wants	to	talk	with	you.	Follow	me.’
A	few	paces	along,	Bottle	said,	‘You’re	not,	you	know.’
‘Not	what?’
‘The	last	living	Bridgeburner.	There’s	Fiddler	and	Quick	Ben,	and	I	even	heard	about	some	survivors	from
Black	Coral	hiding	out	in	Darujhistan—’
‘Retired	or	moved	on	every	one	of	them.	Fid	said	I	should	do	the	same	and	I	thought	about	it,	I	really	did.	A
new	 start	 and	 all	 that.’	 He	 tugged	 at	 his	 leather	 cap.	 ‘But	 then	 I	 thought,	 what	 for?	 What’s	 so	 good	 about
starting	all	over	again?	All	that	ground	you	covered	the	first	time,	why	do	it	a	second	time,	right?	No—’	and	he
tapped	the	Bridgeburner	sigil	sewn	on	to	his	ratty	rain-cape.	‘This	is	what	I	am,	and	it	still	means	something.’
‘I	expect	that	regular	back	there	agrees	with	you.’
‘Aye,	a	good	start.	And	even	better,	I	had	me	a	talk	with	Lieutenant	Pores,	and	he’s	giving	me	command	of
a	squad	of	new	recruits.	The	Bridgeburners	ain’t	dead	after	all.	And	I	hooked	up	with	a	Letherii	alchemist,	to
see	 if	 we	 can	 come	 up	 with	 replacements	 for	 the	 Moranth	 munitions—he’s	 got	 this	 amazing	 powder,	 which
I’m	calling	Blue.	You	mix	it	and	then	get	it	inside	a	clay	ball	which	you	seal	right	away.	In	about	half	a	day	the
mix	is	seasoned	and	set.’
Bottle	wasn’t	much	interested,	but	he	asked	anyway.	‘Burns	good,	does	it?’
‘Don’t	 burn	 at	 all.	 That’s	 the	 beauty	 of	 Blue,	 my	 friend.’	 Hedge	 laughed.	 ‘Not	 a	 flicker	 of	 flame,	 not	 a
whisper	of	smoke.	We’re	working	on	others,	too.	Eaters,	Sliders,	Smarters.	And	I	got	two	assault	weapons—a
local	arbalest	and	an	onager—we’re	fitting	clay	heads	on	the	quarrels.	And	I	got	me	a	new	lobber,	too.’	He
was	 almost	 jumping	 with	 excitement	 as	 he	 led	 Bottle	 through	 the	 camp.	 ‘My	 first	 squad’s	 going	 to	 be	 all
sappers	along	with	whatever	other	talents	they	got.	I	was	thinking—imagine	a	whole	Bridgeburner	army,	say,
five	 thousand,	 all	 trained	 as	 marines,	 of	 course.	 With	 heavies,	 mages,	 sneaks	 and	 healers,	 but	 every	 one	 of
them	is	also	trained	as	a	sapper,	an	engineer,	right?’
‘Sounds	terrifying.’
‘Aye,	doesn’t	it?	There.’	He	pointed.	‘That	tent.	Quick’s	in	there.	Or	he	said	he	would	be,	once	he	got	back
from	the	command	tent.	Anyway,	I	got	to	go	collect	my	squad.’
Hedge	walked	off.
Bottle	 tried	 to	 imagine	 five	 thousand	 Hedges,	 with	 the	 real	 Hedge	 in	 charge.	 Hood’s	 breath,	 I’d	 want	 a
continent	between	me	and	them.	Maybe	two.	 He	 repressed	 a	 shiver,	 and	 then	 headed	 to	 the	 tent.	 ‘Quick?
You	in	there?’
The	flap	rippled.
Scowling,	Bottle	crouched	and	ducked	inside.
‘Stop	spying	on	the	Adjunct	and	me,’	the	wizard	said.	He	was	sitting	at	the	far	end,	crosslegged.	In	front	of
him	and	crowding	the	earthen	floor	in	the	tent’s	centre	was	a	heap	of	what	looked	like	children’s	dolls.
Bottle	sat	down.	‘Can	I	play?’
‘Funny.	Trust	me,	these	things	you	don’t	want	to	play	with.’
‘Oh,	I	don’t	know.	My	grandmother—’
‘I’m	tying	threads,	Bottle.	You	want	to	get	yourself	tangled	in	that?’
Bottle	shrank	back.	‘Ugh,	no	thanks.’
Quick	Ben	bared	his	smallish	teeth,	a	neat	white	row.	‘The	mystery	is,	there’s	at	least	three	in	there	I	can’t
even	identify.	A	woman,	a	girl	and	some	bearded	bastard	who	feels	close	enough	to	spit	on.’
‘Who	are	they	tied	to?’
The	wizard	nodded.	‘Your	granny	taught	you	way	too	much,	Bottle.	I	already	told	Fiddler	to	treat	you	as	our


shaved	knuckle.	Aye,	I’ve	been	trying	to	work	that	out,	but	the	skein’s	still	a	bit	of	a	mess,	as	you	can	see.’
‘You’re	rushing	it	too	much,’	Bottle	said.	‘Leave	them	to	shake	loose	on	their	own.’
‘Maybe	so.’
‘So,	what	have	you	and	the	Adjunct	got	to	be	so	secret	about?	If	I	really	am	your	shaved	knuckle,	I	need	to
know	things	like	that,	so	I	know	what	to	do	when	it	needs	doing.’
‘Maybe	it’s	her,’	mused	Quick	Ben,	‘or	more	likely	it	was	T’amber.	They’ve	sniffed	me	out,	Bottle.	They’ve
edged	closer	than	anybody’s	ever	done,	and	that	includes	Whiskeyjack.’	He	paused,	frowning.	‘Maybe	Kallor.
Maybe	Rake—yes,	Rake	probably	saw	clear	enough—was	it	any	wonder	I	avoided	him?	Well,	Gothos,	sure,
but—’
‘High	Mage,’	cut	in	Bottle,	‘what	are	you	going	on	about?’
Quick	Ben	started,	and	then	glared.	‘Distracted,	sorry.	You	don’t	need	to	spy	on	her—Lostara	saw	the	rat
and	 nearly	 chopped	 it	 in	 half.	 I	 managed	 to	 intervene,	 made	 up	 some	 story	 about	 using	 it	 for	 an	 augury.	 If
anything	vital	comes	up,	I	will	let	you	know.’
‘A	whisper	in	my	skull.’
‘We’re	 heading	 into	 a	 maze,	 Bottle.	 The	 Adjunct’s	 ageing	 in	 front	 of	 my	 eyes,	 trying	 to	 figure	 out	 a	 way
through	 the	 Wastelands.	 Have	 you	 tried	 soul-riding	 anything	 into	 it?	 It’s	 a	 snarl	 of	 potent	 energies,	 massive
blind-spots,	and	a	thousand	layers	of	warring	rituals,	sanctified	grounds,	curse-holes,	blood-pits,	skin-sinks.	I	try
and	just	reel	back,	head	ready	to	split,	tasting	blood	in	my	mouth.’
‘The	ghost	of	a	gate,’	said	Bottle.
Quick	Ben’s	eyes	glittered	in	the	gloom.	‘An	area	of	influence,	yes,	but	that	ghost	gate,	it’s	wandered—it’s
not	even	there	any	more,	in	the	Wastelands,	I	mean.’
‘East	of	the	Wastelands,’	said	Bottle.	‘That’s	where	we’ll	find	it,	and	that’s	where	we’re	going,	isn’t	it?’
Quick	Ben	nodded.	‘Better	the	ghost	than	the	real	thing.’
‘Familiar	with	the	real	one,	are	you,	High	Mage?’
He	glanced	away.	‘She’s	worked	that	one	out	all	on	her	own.	Too	canny,	too	damned	unknowable.’
‘Do	you	think	she’s	in	communication	with	her	brother?’
‘I	don’t	dare	ask,’	Quick	Ben	admitted.	‘She’s	like	Dujek	that	way.	Some	things	you	just	don’t	bring	up.	But,
you	know,	that	might	explain	a	lot	of	things.’
‘But	then	ask	yourself	this,’	said	Bottle.	‘What	if	she	isn’t?’
The	wizard	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	Then	he	sighed.	‘If	not	Paran,	then	who?’
‘Right.’
‘That’s	a	nasty	question.’
‘I	don’t	spy	on	the	Adjunct	just	when	she	has	you	for	company,	Quick	Ben.	Most	of	the	time	I	watch	her,
it’s	when	she’s	alone.’
‘That’s	pathetic—’
‘Fuck	the	jokes,	High	Mage.	Our	Adjunct	knows	things.	And	I	want	to	know	how.	I	want	to	know	if	she	has
company	none	of	us	know	a	thing	about.	Now,	if	you	want	me	to	stop	doing	that,	give	me	a	solid	reason.	You
say	she’s	got	close	to	you.	Have	you	returned	the	favour?’
‘I	 would,	 if	 I	 knew	 how.	 That	 otataral	 sword	 pushes	 me	 away—it’s	 what	 they’re	 made	 to	 do,	 isn’t	 it.’
Seeing	the	sceptical	expression	opposite	him,	he	scowled.	‘What?’
‘It	doesn’t	push	you	as	hard	as	you	like	to	pretend	it	does.	The	risk	is	that	the	harder	and	deeper	you	push
through	the	otataral,	the	more	of	yourself	you	potentially	expose—and	if	she	catches	sight	of	you,	she	won’t
just	be	close	to	knowing	you,	she’ll	be	certain.’	He	jabbed	a	finger	at	Quick	Ben.	‘And	that	is	what	you	don’t
want	to	happen,	and	it’s	the	real	reason	why	you	don’t	dare	push	through.	So,	your	only	chance	is	me.	Do	I
resume	spying	or	not?’
‘Lostara’s	suspicious—’
‘When	the	Adjunct	is	presumably	alone.’
The	High	Mage	hesitated,	and	then	nodded.	‘Found	anything	yet?’
‘No.	She’s	not	in	the	habit	of	thinking	out	loud,	that	much	is	obvious.	She	doesn’t	pray,	and	I’ve	yet	to	hear	a
one-sided	conversation.’
‘Could	you	be	blinded?’
‘I	could,	yes,	but	I’d	sense	the	gaps	of	awareness.	I	think.	Depending	on	how	good	the	geas	is.’


‘If	it’s	a	geas	directed	specifically	at	your	extra	eyes?’
‘It	would	have	to	be.	But	you’re	right,	something	specific,	Mockra	maybe,	that	slips	into	the	rat’s	tiny	brain
and	paints	a	pretty	picture	of	nothing	happening.	If	that’s	the	case,	then	I	don’t	know	how	I	could	do	anything
about	it,	because	with	the	local	effect	of	the	otataral,	the	source	of	that	sorcery	would	be	an	appallingly	high
level—a	damned	god’s	level,	I	mean.’
‘Or	an	Elder’s.’
‘These	 waters	 are	 too	 deep	 for	 a	 mortal	 like	 me,	 Quick	 Ben.	 My	 spying	 only	 works	 because	 it’s	 passive.
Strictly	speaking,	riding	a	soul	isn’t	magic,	not	in	the	common	sense.’
‘Then	seek	out	something	on	the	Wastelands,	Bottle.	See	what	you	can	see,	because	I	can’t	get	close	and
neither,	I	think,	can	the	Adjunct.	Find	a	wolf,	or	a	coyote—they	like	to	hang	round	armies	and	such.	Who’s	out
there?’
‘I’ll	try.	But	if	it’s	that	risky,	you	might	lose	me.	I	might	lose	me,	which	is	even	worse.’
Quick	Ben	smiled	his	little	smile	and	reached	into	the	heap	of	dolls.	‘That’s	why	I’ve	tied	this	thread	to	this
particular	doll.’
Bottle	hissed.	‘You	miserable	shit.’
‘Stop	complaining.	I’ll	pull	you	back	if	you	get	into	trouble.	That’s	a	promise.’
‘I’ll	think	about	it,’	said	Bottle,	rising.
The	High	Mage	looked	up	in	surprise.	‘What’s	to	think	about?’
‘Quick	Ben,	if	it’s	that	dangerous	in	the	Wastelands,	hasn’t	it	occurred	to	you	that	if	I’m	grabbed,	you	may
not	be	the	one	doing	the	pulling	on	that	thread?	With	you	suddenly	drooling	and	playing	with	dolls	for	real,	the
Adjunct	and,	more	importantly,	her	army,	are	well	and	truly	doomed.’
‘I	can	hold	my	own,’	Quick	Ben	growled.
‘How	do	you	know	you	can?	You	don’t	even	know	what’s	out	there.	And	why	would	I	want	to	put	myself
in	the	middle	of	a	tugging	contest?	I	might	well	get	torn	to	pieces.’
‘Since	that	wasn’t	the	first	thing	you	brought	up,’	said	Quick	Ben,	with	a	sly	look,	‘I	expect	you	have	a	few
contingency	plans	to	deal	with	the	possibility.’
‘I	said	I’d	think	about	it.’
‘Don’t	wait	too	long	deciding,	Bottle.’
	
‘Two	full	crates	of	that	smoked	sausage,	aye.	Fist	Keneb’s	orders.’
‘Will	do,	Master	Sergeant.’
‘Strap	 them	 tight,	 remember,’	 Pores	 reminded	 the	 spotty-faced	 young	 man	 and	 was	 pleased	 at	 the	 eager
nod.	 Quartermaster	 division	 always	 pulled	 in	 the	 soldiers	 who	 couldn’t	 fight	 their	 way	 out	 of	 a	 school
playground,	and	they	had	two	ways	of	going	once	they’d	got	settled—either	puppies	who	jumped	at	the	snap	of
an	officer’s	fingers	or	the	ones	who	built	impregnable	fortresses	out	of	regulations	and	then	hoarded	supplies
somewhere	inside—as	if	to	give	anything	up	drew	blood	and	worse.	Those	ones	Pores	had	made	a	career	out
of	crushing;	but	at	times	like	this,	the	puppies	were	the	ones	he	wanted.
He	 cast	 a	 surreptitious	 glance	 around,	 but	 the	 chaos	 swirled	 unabated	 on	 all	 sides	 and	 no	 one	 was	 paying
him	 any	 attention.	 And	 the	 puppy	 was	 happy	 at	 being	 collared,	 so	 when	 accosted	 he	 could	 shake	 his	 head,
duck	 down	 and	 use	 the	 various	 lines	 Pores	 himself	 used.	 ‘Fist	 Keneb’s	 orders,	 take	 it	 up	 with	 him.’	 And
‘Master	Sergeant’s	got	recruits	to	outfit,	fifty	of	’em,	and	Captain	Kindly	said	to	do	it	quick.’	Keneb	was
safe	enough	since	at	the	moment	nobody	apart	from	his	personal	adjutants	could	even	get	close	to	him;	and	as
for	Kindly,	well,	the	name	itself	usually	sucked	the	blood	from	even	the	heartiest	faces.
It	was	a	minor	and	mostly	irrelevant	detail	that	Pores	had	somehow	lost	his	recruits.	Snatched	away	from
the	marine	squads	by	someone	nobody	knew	anything	about.	If	trouble	arrived	Pores	could	look	innocent	and
point	 fingers	 at	 the	 squad	 sergeants.	 Never	 make	 a	 roadblock	 of	 yourself	 on	 trouble’s	 road.	 No,	 make
yourself	a	bridge	instead,	with	stones	slick	as	grease.
I	 should	 compose	 a	 mid-level	 officer’s	 guide	 to	 continued	 health,	 indolence	 and	 undeserved
prosperity.	But	then,	if	I	did	that,	I’d	have	to	be	out	of	the	battle,	no	longer	in	competition,	as	it	were.
Say,	 retired	 somewhere	 nice.	 Like	 a	 palace	 nobody	 was	 using.	 And	 that	 would	 be	 my	 crowning	 feat—
requisitioning	a	palace.
‘Queen	 Frabalav’s	 orders,	 sir.	 If	 you	 got	 a	 problem,	 you	 can	 always	 discuss	 it	 with	 her	 one-eyed


torturer.’
But	for	now,	fine	Letherii	smoked	sausages,	three	crates	of	excellent	wine,	a	cask	of	cane	syrup,	all	for	Fist
Keneb	 (not	 that	 he’d	 ever	 see	 any	 of	 that);	 and	 extra	 blankets,	 extra	 rations,	 officer	 boots	 including	 cavalry
high-steppers,	 rank	 sigils	 and	 torcs	 for	 corporals,	 sergeants,	 and	 lieutenants,	 all	 for	 his	 fifty	 or	 was	 it	 sixty
vanished	recruits—which	translated	into	Pores’s	very	own	private	stock	for	those	soldiers	on	the	march	who
lost	things	but	didn’t	want	to	be	officially	docked	for	replacements.
He’d	already	commandeered	three	wagons	with	decent	teams,	under	guard	at	the	moment	by	soldiers	from
Primly’s	squad.	It	occurred	to	him	he	might	have	to	draw	those	three	squads	in	as	partners	in	his	black-market
operation,	but	that	shouldn’t	be	too	hard.	Envy	diminished	the	more	one	shared	the	rewards,	after	all,	and	with
something	at	stake	those	soldiers	would	have	the	proper	incentive	when	it	came	to	security	and	whatnot.
All	in	all,	things	were	shaping	up	nicely.
‘Hey	there,	what’s	in	that	box?’
‘Combs,	sir—’
‘Ah,	for	Captain	Kindly	then.’
‘Aye,	sir.	Personal	requisition—’
‘Excellent.	I’ll	take	those	to	him	myself.’
‘Well,	uhm—’
‘Not	only	is	the	captain	my	immediate	superior,	soldier,	I	also	happen	to	be	his	barber.’
‘Oh,	right.	Here	you	go,	sir—just	a	signature	here—that	wax	bar,	yes	sir,	that’s	the	one.’
Smiling,	Pores	drew	out	his	reasonable	counterfeit	of	Kindly’s	own	seal	and	pressed	it	firmly	down	on	the
wax	bar.	‘Smart	lad,	keeping	things	proper	is	what	makes	an	army	work.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
	
Hedge’s	 pleasure	 at	 seeing	 that	 his	 Letherii	 alchemist	 had	 rounded	 up	 the	 new	 recruits	 as	 he	 had	 ordered
quickly	drained	away	when	he	cast	a	gauging	eye	on	the	forty	would-be	soldiers	sitting	not	fifteen	paces	from
the	company	latrine	trench.	When	he	first	approached	the	bivouac	he’d	thought	they	were	waving	at	him,	but
turned	out	it	was	just	the	swarming	flies.
‘Bavedict!’	he	called	to	his	alchemist,	‘get	’em	on	their	feet!’
The	alchemist	gathered	up	his	long	braid	and	with	a	practised	twist	spun	it	into	a	coil	atop	his	head,	where
the	grease	held	it	fast,	and	then	rose	from	the	peculiar	spike-stool	he’d	set	up	outside	his	hide	tent.	‘Captain
Hedge,	the	last	mix	is	ready	to	set	and	the	special	rain-capes	were	delivered	by	my	brother	half	a	bell	ago.	I
have	what	I	need	to	do	some	painting.’
‘That’s	great.	This	is	all	of	them?’	he	asked,	nodding	towards	the	recruits.
Bavedict’s	thin	lips	tightened	in	a	grimace.	‘Yes,	sir.’
‘How	long	have	they	been	sitting	in	that	stench?’
‘A	 while.	 Not	 ready	 to	 do	 any	 thinking	 for	 themselves	 yet—but	 that’s	 what’s	 to	 be	 expected	 from	 us
Letherii.	Soldiers	do	what	they’re	told	to	do	and	that’s	that.’
Hedge	sighed.
‘There’s	two	acting	sergeants,’	Bavedict	added.	‘The	ones	with	their	backs	to	us.’
‘Names?’
‘Sunrise—he’s	the	one	with	the	moustache.	And	Nose	Stream.’
‘Well	now,’	Hedge	said,	‘who	named	them?’
‘Some	Master	Sergeant	named	Pores.’
‘I	take	it	he	wasn’t	around	when	you	snatched	them.’
‘They’d	 been	 tied	 to	 some	 squads	 and	 those	 squads	 were	 none	 too	 pleased	 about	 it	 anyway.	 So	 it	 wasn’t
hard	cutting	them	loose.’
‘Good.’	Hedge	glanced	over	at	Bavedict’s	carriage,	a	huge,	solid-looking	thing	of	black	varnished	wood	and
brass	 fittings;	 he	 then	 squinted	 at	 the	 four	 black	 horses	 waiting	 in	 their	 harnesses.	 ‘You	 was	 making	 a	 good
living,	Bavedict,	leading	me	to	wonder	all	over	again	what	you’re	doing	here.’
‘Like	I	said,	I	got	too	close	a	look	at	what	one	of	those	cussers	of	yours	can	do—to	a	damned	dragon,	no
less.	My	shop’s	nothing	but	kindling.’	He	paused	and	balanced	himself	on	one	foot,	the	other	one	set	against
the	leg	just	below	the	knee.	‘But	mostly	professional	curiosity,	Captain,	ever	a	boon	and	a	bane	both.	So,	you


just	 keep	 telling	 me	 anything	 and	 everything	 you	 recall	 about	 the	 characteristics	 of	 the	 various	 Moranth
alchemies,	and	I’ll	keep	inventing	my	own	brand	of	munitions	for	your	sappers.’
‘My	sappers,	aye.	Now	I	better	go	and	meet—’
‘Here	come	two	of	’em	now,	Captain.’
He	turned	and	almost	stepped	back.	Two	enormous,	sweaty	women	had	fixed	small	eyes	on	him	and	were
closing	in.
They	 saluted	 and	 the	 blonde	 one	 said,	 ‘Corporal	 Sweetlard,	 sir,	 and	 this	 is	 Corporal	 Rumjugs.	 We	 got	 a
request,	sir.’
‘Go	on.’
‘We	want	to	move	from	where	we	was	put	down.	Too	many	flies,	sir.’
‘An	 army	 never	 marches	 or	 camps	 alone,	 Corporal,’	 said	 Hedge.	 ‘We	 got	 rats,	 we	 got	 mice,	 we	 got
capemoths	and	crows,	ravens	and	rhizan.	And	we	got	flies.’
‘That’s	 true	 enough,	 sir,’	 said	 the	 black-haired	 one,	 Rumjugs,	 ‘but	 even	 over	 here	 there	 ain’t	 so	 many	 of
’em.	Ten	more	paces	between	us	and	the	trench	there,	sir,	is	all	we’re	asking.’
‘Your	first	lesson,’	said	Hedge.	‘If	the	choice	is	between	comfortable	and	miserable,	choose	comfortable—
don’t	wait	for	any	damned	orders	neither.	Distracted	and	irritated	makes	you	more	tired.	Tired	gets	you	killed.
If	it’s	hot	look	for	shade.	If	it’s	cold	bundle	t’gether	when	not	on	post.	If	you’re	in	a	bad	spot	for	flies,	find	a
better	one	close	by	and	move.	Now,	I	got	a	question	for	you	two.	Why	are	you	bringing	me	this	request	and
not	your	sergeants?’
‘They	 was	 going	 to,’	 said	 Rumjugs,	 ‘but	 then	 me	 and	 Sweet	 here,	 we	 pointed	 out	 that	 you’re	 a	 man	 and
we’re	 whores	 or	 used	 to	 be,	 and	 you	 was	 more	 likely	 to	 be	 nice	 to	 us	 than	 to	 them.	 Assuming	 you	 prefer
women	an’	not	men.’
‘Good	assumption	and	smart	thinking.	Now,	go	back	there	and	get	everybody	on	their	feet	and	over	here.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
He	returned	their	salute	and	watched	them	wheeze	and	waddle	back	to	the	others.
Bavedict	moved	up	beside	him.	‘Maybe	there’s	hope	for	them	after	all.’
‘Just	needs	teasing	out,	that’s	all,’	said	Hedge.	‘Now,	find	a	wax	tablet	or	something—I	need	a	list	of	their
names	made	up—my	memory	is	bad	these	days,	ever	since	I	died	and	came	back,	in	fact.’
The	alchemist	blinked,	and	then	recovered.	‘Right	away,	Captain.’
All	in	all,	Hedge	concluded,	a	decent	start.
	
Lostara	slammed	the	knife	back	into	its	sheath,	then	walked	to	examine	an	array	of	tribal	trophies	lining	one
wall	of	the	presence	chamber.	‘Fist	Keneb	is	not	at	his	best,’	she	said.	Behind	her	in	the	centre	of	the	room,
the	 Adjunct	 said	 nothing.	 After	 a	 moment	 Lostara	 went	 on.	 ‘Grub’s	 disappearance	 hit	 him	 hard.	 And	 the
thought	that	he	might	have	been	swallowed	up	by	an	Azath	is	enough	to	curdle	anyone’s	toes.	It’s	not	helping
that	Fist	Blistig	seems	to	have	decided	he’s	already	good	as	dead.’
She	turned	to	see	the	Adjunct	slowly	drawing	off	her	gauntlets.	Tavore’s	face	was	pale,	a	taut	web	of	lines
trapping	 her	 eyes.	 She’d	 lost	 weight,	 further	 reducing	 the	 few	 feminine	 traits	 she	 possessed.	 Beyond	 grief
waited	emptiness,	a	place	where	loneliness	haunted	in	mocking	company,	and	memories	were	entombed	in	cold
stone.	The	woman	that	was	the	Adjunct	had	decided	that	no	one	would	ever	take	T’amber’s	place.	Tavore’s
last	tie	to	the	gentler	gifts	of	humanity	had	been	severed.	Now	there	was	nothing	left.	Nothing	but	her	army,
which	looked	ready	to	unravel	all	on	its	own—and	even	to	this	she	seemed	indifferent.
‘It’s	not	like	the	King	to	keep	us	waiting,’	Lostara	muttered,	reaching	to	unsheathe	her	knife.
‘Leave	it,’	the	Adjunct	snapped.
‘Of	course.	My	apologies,	Adjunct.’	She	dropped	her	hand	and	resumed	her	uninterested	examination	of	the
artifacts.	‘These	Letherii	devoured	a	lot	of	tribes.’
‘Empires	will,	Lieutenant.’
‘I	imagine	this	Kolanse	did	the	same.	It	is	an	empire,	is	it	not?’
‘I	do	not	know,’	the	Adjunct	replied,	then	added,	‘it	does	not	matter.’
‘It	doesn’t?’
But	with	her	next	words	it	was	clear	that	the	Adjunct	was	not	interested	in	elaborating.	‘My	predecessor,	a
woman	 named	 Lorn,	 was	 murdered	 in	 a	 street	 in	 Darujhistan.	 She	 had,	 by	 that	 point,	 completed	 her	 tasks,


insofar	as	anyone	can	tell.	Her	death	seemed	to	be	little	more	than	ill	luck,	a	mugging	or	something	similar.	Her
corpse	was	deposited	in	a	pauper’s	pit.’
‘Forgive	me,	Adjunct,	but	what	is	this	story	in	aid	of?’
‘Legacies	are	never	what	one	would	hope	for,	are	they,	Captain?	In	the	end,	it	does	not	matter	what	was
achieved.	Fate	holds	no	tally	of	past	triumphs,	courageous	deeds,	or	moments	of	profound	integrity.’
‘I	suppose	not,	Adjunct.’
‘Conversely,	 there	 is	 no	 grim	 list	 of	 failures,	 moments	 of	 cowardice	 or	 dishonour.	 The	 wax	 is	 smooth,	 the
past	 melted	 away—if	 it	 ever	 existed	 at	 all.’	 Those	 snared	 eyes	 fixed	 briefly	 on	 Lostara	 before	 sliding	 away
once	more.	‘She	died	on	a	street,	just	one	more	victim	of	mischance.	A	death	devoid	of	magic.’
Lostara’s	attention	dropped	down	to	the	sword	strapped	at	Tavore’s	hip.	‘Most	deaths	are,	Adjunct.’
Tavore	nodded.	‘The	wax	melts.	There	is,	I	think,	some	comfort	to	be	found	in	that.	A	small	measure	of	.	.	.
release.’
Is	that	the	best	you	can	hope	for,	Tavore?	Gods	below.	‘Lorn	was	not	there	to	gauge	the	worth	of	her
legacy,	if	that	is	what	you	mean,	Adjunct.	Which	was	probably	a	mercy.’
‘I	sometimes	think	that	fate	and	mercy	are	often	one	and	the	same.’
The	notion	chilled	Lostara.
‘The	army,’	continued	the	Adjunct,	‘will	sort	itself	out	once	on	the	march.	I	give	them	this	touch	of	chaos,	of
near	anarchy.	As	I	do	for	Fists	Keneb	and	Blistig.	I	have	my	reasons.’
‘Yes,	Adjunct.’
‘In	the	King’s	presence,	Captain,	I	expect	you	to	refrain	from	any	undue	attention	to	the	knife	at	your	side.’
‘As	you	command,	Adjunct.’
Moments	later	an	inner	door	swung	open	and	King	Tehol	strode	in,	trailed	by	the	Chancellor.	‘My	sincerest
apologies,	Adjunct.	It’s	all	my	Ceda’s	fault,	not	that	you	need	to	know	that,	but	then’—and	he	smiled	as	he	sat
down	on	the	raised	chair—‘now	you	do,	and	I	don’t	mind	telling	what	a	relief	that	is.’
‘You	summoned	us,	Majesty,’	said	Adjunct.
‘Did	 I?	 Oh	 yes,	 so	 I	 did.	 Relax,	 there’s	 no	 crisis—well,	 none	 that	 concerns	 you	 directly.	 Well,	 not	 in
Letheras,	anyway.	Not	at	the	moment,	I	mean.	Ceda,	step	forward	there	now!	Adjunct	Tavore,	we	have	a	gift
for	you.	In	expression	of	our	deepest	gratitude.’
Queen	Janath	had	arrived	as	well,	moving	up	to	stand	to	one	side	of	her	husband,	one	hand	resting	on	the
chair’s	high	back.
Bugg	was	holding	a	small	hand-polished	wooden	case,	which	he	now	set	into	the	Adjunct’s	hands.
The	chamber	was	silent	as	Tavore	unlatched	the	lid	and	tilted	it	back	to	reveal	a	water-etched	dagger.	The
grip	 and	 pommel	 were	 both	 plain,	 functional,	 and	 as	 far	 as	 Lostara	 could	 see,	 the	 blade	 itself,	 barring	 the
etched	swirls,	was	unspectacular.	After	a	moment’s	examination,	the	Adjunct	shut	the	lid	and	looked	up	at	the
King.	‘Thank	you,	sire.	I	shall	treasure	this—’
‘Hold	on,’	said	Tehol,	rising	and	walking	over.	‘Let’s	see	that	thing—’	and	he	lifted	the	lid	once	more,	and
then	 faced	 Bugg.	 ‘Couldn’t	 you	 have	 selected	 something	 prettier	 than	 that,	 Ceda?	 Why,	 I	 imagine	 the
Chancellor	is	mortified	now	that	he’s	seen	it!’
‘He	is,	sire.	Alas,	the	Ceda	was	under	certain	constraints—’
‘Excuse	me,’	said	the	Adjunct,	‘am	I	to	understand	that	this	weapon	is	ensorcelled?	I	am	afraid	that	such
piquancy	will	be	lost	in	my	presence.’
The	 old	 man	 smiled.	 ‘I	 have	 done	 what	 I	 can,	 Tavore	 of	 House	 Paran.	 When	 you	 face	 your	 most	 dire
necessity,	look	to	this	weapon.’
The	 Adjunct	 almost	 stepped	 back	 and	 Lostara	 saw	 what	 little	 colour	 there	 had	 been	 in	 her	 face	 suddenly
drain	away.	‘My	most	.	.	.	dire	.	.	.	necessity?	Ceda—’
‘As	I	said,	Adjunct,’	Bugg	replied,	his	gaze	unwavering.	‘When	blood	is	required.	When	blood	is	needed.	In
the	name	of	survival,	and	in	that	name	alone.’
Lostara	saw	that	Tavore	was	at	a	loss	for	words—and	she	had	no	idea	why.	Unless	the	Adjunct	already
knows	what	that	necessity	will	be.	Knows,	and	is	horrified	by	this	gift.	Bowing,	Adjunct	closed	the	lid	a
second	time	and	stepped	back.
Tehol	 was	 frowning	 at	 Bugg.	 After	 a	 moment	 he	 returned	 to	 the	 modest	 chair	 and	 sat	 down	 once	 more.
‘Fare	you	well	on	your	journey,	Adjunct.	And	you	as	well,	Lostara	Yil.	Do	not	neglect	my	brother,	he	has	many


talents.	A	lot	more	than	me,	that’s	for	certain—’	and	at	seeing	Bugg’s	nod	he	scowled.
Janath	reached	down	and	patted	his	shoulder.
Tehol’s	 scowl	 deepened.	 ‘Look	 to	 Brys	 Beddict	 during	 your	 traverse	 of	 Bolkando	 Kingdom.	 We	 are	 very
familiar	with	our	neighbours,	and	his	advice	should	prove	valuable.’
‘I	shall,	sire,’	the	Adjunct	said.
And	suddenly	it	was	time	to	go.
	
Moments	after	the	Malazans	had	departed,	Tehol	glanced	over	at	Bugg.	‘My,	you	look	miserable.’
‘I	dislike	departures,	sire.	There	is	ever	a	hint	of	.	.	.	finality.’
Janath	came	round	and	sat	on	one	of	the	flanking	benches.	‘You	do	not	expect	to	see	the	Malazans	again?’
He	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘No.’
‘What	of	Brys?’	Tehol	asked.
Bugg	blinked	and	opened	his	mouth	to	reply	but	the	King	raised	a	hand.	‘No,	that	question	should	not	have
been	asked.	I’m	sorry,	old	friend.’
‘Sire,	your	brother	possesses	unexplored	.	.	.	depths.	Fortitude,	unassailable	fidelity	to	honour—and,	as	you
well	 know,	 he	 carries	 within	 him	 a	 certain	 legacy,	 and	 while	 I	 cannot	 gauge	 the	 measure	 of	 that	 legacy,	 I
believe	it	has	the	potential	to	be	vast.’
‘You	danced	carefully	there,’	Janath	observed.
‘I	did.’
Sighing,	 Tehol	 leaned	 back	 on	 the	 chair.	 ‘This	 seems	 a	 messy	 conclusion	 to	 things,	 doesn’t	 it?	 Little	 that
amuses,	even	less	that	entertains.	You	must	know	I	prefer	to	leap	from	one	delightful	absurdity	to	another.	My
last	 gesture	 on	 the	 Malazan	 stage	 should	 have	 been	 the	 highest	 of	 dramas	 is	 my	 feeling.	 Instead,	 I	 taste
something	very	much	like	ashes	in	my	mouth	and	that	is	most	unpleasant.’
‘Perhaps	some	wine	will	wash	things	clean,’	suggested	Bugg.
‘Won’t	hurt.	Pour	us	some,	please.	You,	guard,	come	and	join	us—standing	there	doing	nothing	must	be	a
dreadful	bore.	No	need	to	gape	like	that,	I	assure	you.	Doff	that	 helm	and	 relax—there’s	 another	 guard	 just
like	 you	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 that	 door,	 after	 all.	 Let	 him	 bear	 the	 added	 burden	 of	 diligence.	 Tell	 us	 about
yourself.	Family,	friends,	hobbies,	scandals—’
‘Sire,’	warned	Bugg.
‘Or	 just	 join	 us	 in	 a	 drink	 and	 feel	 under	 no	 pressure	 to	 say	 anything	 at	 all.	 This	 shall	 be	 one	 of	 those
interludes	swiftly	glossed	over	in	the	portentous	histories	of	great	and	mediocre	kings.	We	sit	in	the	desultory
aftermath,	 oblivious	 to	 omens	 and	 whatever	 storm	 waits	 behind	 yonder	 horizon.	 Ah,	 thank	 you,	 Bugg—my
Queen,	accept	that	goblet	and	come	sit	on	my	knee—oh,	don’t	make	that	kind	of	face,	we	need	to	compose
the	proper	scene.	I	insist	and	since	I’m	King	I	can	do	that,	or	so	I	read	somewhere.	Now,	let’s	see	.	.	.	yes,
Bugg,	stand	right	over	there—oh,	massaging	your	brow	is	the	perfect	pose.	And	you,	dearest	guard—how	did
you	manage	to	hide	all	that	hair?	And	how	come	I	never	knew	you	were	a	woman?	Never	mind,	you’re	an
unexpected	delight—ow,	calm	down,	wife—oh,	that’s	me	who	needs	to	calm	down.	Sorry.	Women	in	uniforms
and	all	that.	Guard,	that	dangling	helm	is	exquisite	by	the	way,	take	a	mouthful	and	do	pass	judgement	on	the
vintage,	yes,	like	that,	oh,	most	perfect!
‘Now,	 it’s	 just	 occurred	 to	 me	 that	 we’re	 missing	 something	 crucial.	 Ah,	 yes,	 an	 artist.	 Bugg,	 have	 we	 a
court	artist?	We	need	an	artist!	Find	us	an	artist!	Nobody	move!’


Chapter	Twelve
The	sea	is	blind	to	the	road
And	the	road	is	blind	to	the	rain
The	road	welcomes	no	footfalls
The	blind	are	an	ocean’s	flood
On	the	road’s	shore
	
Walk	then	unseeing
Like	children	with	hands	outstretched
Down	to	valleys	of	blinding	darkness
The	road	leads	down	through	shadows
Of	weeping	gods
	
This	sea	knows	but	one	tide	flowing
Into	sorrow’s	depthless	chambers
The	sea	is	shore	to	the	road
And	the	road	is	the	sea’s	river
To	the	blind
	
When	I	hear	the	first	footfalls
I	know	the	end	has	come
And	the	rain	shall	rise
Like	children	with	hands
Outstretched
	
I	am	the	road	fleeing	the	sun
And	the	road	is	blind	to	the	sea
And	the	sea	is	blind	to	the	shore
And	the	shore	is	blind
To	the	sea
	
The	sea	is	blind	.	.	.
	
RIDDLE	OF	THE	ROAD	OF	GALLAN
SHAKE	CHANT

	
When	leading	his	warriors,	warchief	maral	eb	of	the	Barahn	White	Face	Barghast	liked	to	imagine	himself	as
the	 tip	 of	 a	 barbed	 spearhead,	 hungry	 to	 wound,	 unerring	 in	 its	 drive.	 Slashes	 of	 red	 ochre	 cut	 through	 the
white	paint	of	his	death-face,	ran	jagged	tracks	down	his	arms.	His	bronze	brigandine	hauberk	and	scaled	skirt
bore	the	muted	tones	of	blood	long	dead,	and	the	red-tipped	porcupine	quills	jutting	from	the	spikes	of	his	black,
greased	hair	clattered	as	he	trotted	in	front	of	four	thousand	seasoned	warriors.
The	stink	from	the	severed	heads	swinging	from	the	iron-sheathed	standards	crowding	behind	the	warchief
left	a	familiar	sting	in	the	back	of	his	broad,	flattened	nose,	a	cloying	presence	at	the	close	of	his	throat,	and	he
was	pleased.	Pleased,	especially,	that	his	two	younger	brothers	carried	a	pair	of	those	standards.
They’d	 stumbled	 upon	 the	 Akrynnai	 caravan	 late	 yesterday	 afternoon.	 A	 pathetic	 half-dozen	 guards,	 five


drovers,	the	merchant	and	her	family.	It	had	been	quick	work,	yet	no	less	delicious	for	its	brevity,	tainted	only
when	the	merchant	took	a	knife	to	her	daughters	and	then	slit	her	own	throat—gestures	of	impressive	courage
that	cheated	his	warriors	of	their	fun.	The	puny	horses	in	the	herd	they	had	slaughtered	and	feasted	upon	that
night.
Beneath	 a	 cloudless	 sky,	 the	 war-party	 was	 cutting	 westward.	 A	 week’s	 travel	 would	 find	 it	 in	 the	 Kryn
Freetrade,	 the	 centre	 of	 all	 eastern	 commerce	 with	 Lether.	 Maral	 Eb	 would	 slaughter	 everyone	 and	 then
assume	 control	 of	 the	 caravanserai	 and	 all	 the	 trader	 forts.	 He	 would	 make	 himself	 rich	 and	 his	 people
powerful.	 His	 triumph	 would	 elevate	 the	 Barahn	 to	 the	 position	 they	 rightfully	 deserved	 among	 the	 White
Faces.	Onos	Toolan	would	be	deposed	and	the	other	clans	would	flock	to	join	Maral.	He	would	carve	out	an
empire,	selling	Akrynnai	and	D’ras	slaves	until	the	vast	plains	belonged	to	the	Barghast	and	no	one	else.	He
would	set	heavy	tariffs	on	the	Saphii	and	Bolkando,	and	he	would	build	a	vast	city	in	Kryn,	raising	a	palace	and
establishing	impregnable	fortresses	along	the	borderlands.
His	 allies	 among	 the	 Senan	 had	 already	 been	 instructed	 to	 steal	 for	 him	 the	 twin	 daughters	 of	 Hetan.	 He
would	 bring	 them	 into	 his	 own	 household	 and	 when	 they	 reached	 blooding	 age	 he	 would	 take	 them	 as	 his
wives.	Hetan’s	fate	he	left	to	others.	There	was	the	young	boy,	the	true	son	of	the	Imass,	and	he	would	have
to	be	killed,	of	course.	Along	with	Cafal,	to	end	once	and	for	all	Humbrall	Taur’s	line.
His	 musings	 on	 the	 glory	 awaiting	 him	 were	 interrupted	 by	 the	 sudden	 appearance	 ahead	 of	 two	 of	 his
scouts,	carrying	a	body	between	them.
Another	Barghast—but	not	one	of	his	own.
Maral	Eb	held	up	one	hand,	halting	his	war-party,	and	then	jogged	forward	to	meet	the	scouts.
The	 Barghast	 was	 a	 mess.	 His	 left	 arm	 was	 gone	 below	 the	 elbow	 and	 the	 stump	 seethed	 with	 maggots.
Fires	had	melted	away	half	his	face	and	fragments	of	his	armour	of	tin	coinage	glittered	amidst	the	weltered
ruin	of	skin	and	meat	on	his	chest.	By	the	fetishes	dangling	from	his	belt	Maral	knew	him	to	be	a	Snakehunter,
one	of	the	smaller	clans.
He	scowled	and	waved	at	the	flies.	‘Does	he	live?’
One	of	the	scouts	nodded	and	then	added,	‘Not	for	much	longer,	Warchief.’
‘Set	him	down,	gently	now.’	Maral	Eb	moved	up	and	knelt	beside	the	young	warrior.	He	swallowed	down
his	disgust	and	said,	‘Snakehunter,	open	your	eyes.	I	am	Maral	Eb	of	the	Barahn.	Speak	to	me,	give	me	your
last	words.	What	has	befallen	you?’
The	one	surviving	eye	that	opened	was	thick	with	mucus,	a	dirty	yellow	rimmed	in	cracked,	swollen	flesh.
The	mouth	worked	for	a	moment,	and	then	raw	words	broke	loose.	‘I	am	Benden	Ledag,	son	of	Karavt	and
Elor.	Remember	me.	I	alone	survived.	I	am	the	last	Snakehunter,	the	last.’
‘Does	an	Akrynnai	army	await	me?’
‘I	do	not	know	what	awaits	you,	Maral	Eb.	But	I	know	what	awaits	me—damnation.’	The	face	twisted	with
pain.
‘Open	your	eye—look	at	me,	warrior!	Speak	to	me	of	your	slayer!’
‘Damnation,	yes.	For	I	fled.	I	did	not	stand,	did	not	die	with	my	kin.	I	ran.	A	terrified	hare,	a	leap-mouse	in
the	grass.’	Speech	was	drying	out	the	last	fluids	within	him	and	his	breath	grated.	‘Run,	Maral	Eb.	Show	me
how	.	.	.	how	cowards	live.’
Maral	 Eb	 made	 a	 fist	 to	 strike	 the	 babbling	 fool,	 and	 then	 forced	 himself	 to	 relax.	 ‘The	 Barahn	 fear	 no
enemy.	 We	 shall	 avenge	 you,	 Benden	 Ledag.	 We	 shall	 avenge	 the	 Snakehunter.	 And	 may	 the	 souls	 of	 your
fallen	kin	hunt	you	down.’
The	dying	fool	somehow	managed	a	smile.	‘I	will	wait	for	them.	I	will	have	a	joke,	yes,	one	that	will	make
them	 smile—as	 was	 my	 way.	 Zaravow,	 though,	 he	 has	 no	 reason	 to	 laugh,	 for	 I	 stole	 his	 wife—I	 stole	 her
pleasure—’	 he	 hacked	 out	 a	 laugh.	 ‘It	 is	 what	 weak	 men	 do	 .	 .	 .	 have	 always	 done.’	 The	 eye	 suddenly
sharpened,	fixed	on	Maral	Eb.	‘And	you,	Barahn,	I	will	wait	for	you,	too.’	The	smile	faltered,	the	face	lost	its
clenched	pain,	and	the	wind’s	air	flowed	unclaimed	through	the	gape	of	his	mouth.
Maral	Eb	stared	down	into	that	unseeing	eye	for	a	moment.	Then	he	cursed	and	straightened.	‘Leave	him	to
the	crows,’	he	said.	‘Sound	the	horns—draw	in	the	forward	scouts.	We	shall	camp	here	and	ready	ourselves—
there	is	vengeance	in	our	future,	and	it	shall	be	sweet.’
	
Two	 of	 the	 six	 women	 dragged	 what	 was	 left	 of	 the	 horse	 trader	 to	 the	 gully	 cutting	 down	 the	 hillside	 and


rolled	 him	 into	 it.	 Hearing	 snakes	 slithering	 in	 the	 thick	 brush	 of	 the	 gully,	 they	 quickly	 backed	 away	 and
returned	to	the	others.
Hessanrala,	warleader	of	this	troop	of	Skincuts,	glanced	over	from	the	makeshift	bridle	she	was	fixing	to	her
new	horse,	grinned	as	both	women	tugged	fistfuls	of	grass	to	clean	the	blood	and	semen	from	their	hands,	and
said,	‘See	to	your	horses.’
The	one	closest	to	her	flung	the	stained	grasses	to	one	side.	‘A	nest	of	vipers,’	she	said.	‘Every	clump	of
sagebrush	and	rillfire	swarms	with	them.’
‘Such	omens	haunt	us,’	the	other	one	muttered.
Hessanrala	 scowled.	 ‘A	 knife	 to	 your	 words,	 Ralata.’	 She	 waved	 one	 hand.	 ‘Look	 at	 this	 good	 fortune.
Horses	 for	 each	 of	 us	 and	 three	 more	 to	 spare,	 a	 bag	 of	 coins	 and	 mint-soaked	 bhederin	 and	 three	 skins	 of
water—and	did	we	not	amuse	ourselves	with	the	pathetic	creature?	Did	we	not	teach	him	the	gifts	of	pain?’
‘This	 is	 all	 true,’	 said	 Ralata,	 ‘but	 I	 have	 felt	 shadows	 in	 the	 night,	 and	 the	 whisper	 of	 dread	 wings.
Something	stalks	us,	Hessanrala.’
In	reply	the	warleader	snarled	and	turned	away.	She	vaulted	on	to	her	horse.	‘We	are	Ahkrata	Barghast.
Skincuts—and	who	does	not	fear	the	women	slayers	of	the	Ahkrata?’	She	glared	at	the	others,	as	if	seeking
the	proper	acknowledgement,	and	seemed	satisfied	as	they	drew	their	mounts	round	to	face	her.
Ralata	 spat	 into	 her	 hands	 and	 took	 charge	 of	 the	 only	 saddled	 horse—the	 Akrynnai	 trader’s	 very	 own,
which	she	had	claimed	by	right	of	being	the	first	to	touch	her	blade	to	the	man’s	flesh.	She	set	a	boot	into	the
stirrup	and	swung	on	to	the	beast’s	back.	Hessanrala	was	young.	This	was	her	first	time	as	warleader,	and	she
was	trying	too	hard.	It	was	custom	that	a	seasoned	warrior	volunteer	to	accompany	a	new	warleader’s	troop,
lest	matters	go	awry.	But	Hessanrala	was	not	interested	in	heeding	Ralata,	seeing	wisdom	as	fear,	caution	as
cowardice.
She	adjusted	the	fragments	of	Moranth	chitin	that	served	as	armour	among	the	Ahkrata,	and	made	sure	the
chest-plate	 of	 Gold	 was	 properly	 centred.	 Then	 took	 a	 moment	 to	 resettle	 into	 her	 nostrils	 the	 broad	 hollow
bone	plugs	that	made	Ahkrata	women	the	most	beautiful	among	all	the	White	Face	Barghast.	She	swung	her
horse	to	face	Hessanrala.
‘This	 trader,’	 said	 the	 warleader	 with	 a	 faint	 snarl	 directed	 at	 Ralata,	 ‘was	 returning	 to	 his	 kin	 as	 we	 all
know,	having	chased	him	from	our	camp.	We	can	see	the	ancient	trail	he	was	using.	We	shall	follow	it,	find	the
Akrynnai	huts,	and	kill	everyone	we	find.’
‘The	path	leads	north,’	said	Ralata.	‘We	know	nothing	of	what	lies	in	that	direction—we	might	ride	into	a
camp	of	a	thousand	Akrynnai	warriors.’
‘Ralata	bleats	like	a	newborn	kid,	but	I	hear	no	pierce-cry	of	a	hawk.’	Hessanrala	looked	to	the	others.	‘Do
any	of	you	hear	the	winged	hunter?	No,	only	Ralata.’
Sighing,	Ralata	made	a	gesture	of	release.	‘I	am	done	with	you,	Hessanrala.	I	return	to	our	camp,	and	how
many	 women	 will	 come	 to	 my	 Skincut	 cry?	 Not	 five.	 No,	 I	 shall	 be	 warleader	 to	 a	 hundred,	 perhaps	 more.
You,	Hessanrala,	shall	not	live	long—’	and	she	looked	to	the	others,	was	dismayed	to	see	their	expressions	of
disgust	and	contempt—but	they	too	were	young.	‘Follow	her	into	the	north,	warriors,	and	you	may	not	return.
Those	who	would	join	me,	do	so	now.’
When	none	made	a	move,	Ralata	shrugged	and	swung	her	horse	round.	She	set	off,	southward.
Once	 past	 a	 rise	 and	 out	 of	 sight	 of	 the	 troop—which	 had	 cantered	 off	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction—Ralata
reined	in.	She	would	have	the	blood	of	five	foolish	girls	on	her	hands.	Most	would	understand	her	reasons	for
leaving.	They	knew	Hessanrala,	after	all.	But	the	families	that	lost	daughters	would	turn	away.
There	 was	 a	 hawk	 out	 there.	 She	 knew	 it	 with	 certainty.	 And	 the	 five	 kids	 had	 no	 shepherd,	 no	 hound	 to
guard	 them.	 Well,	 she	 would	 be	 that	 hound,	 low	 in	 the	 grasses	 on	 their	 trail,	 ever	 watchful.	 And,	 should	 the
hawk	strike,	she	would	save	as	many	as	she	could.
She	set	out	to	follow	them.
______
The	 low	 cairns	 set	 in	 a	 row	 across	 the	 hill’s	 summit	 and	 leading	 down	 the	 slope	 were	 almost	 entirely
overgrown.	Windblown	soils	had	heaped	up	along	one	side,	providing	purchase	for	rillfire	trees,	their	gnarled,
low	branches	spreading	out	in	swaths	of	sharp	thorns.	High	grasses	knotted	the	other	sides.	But	Tool	knew	the
piles	 of	 stone	 for	 what	 they	 were—ancient	 blinds	 and	 runs	 built	 by	 Imass	 hunters—and	 so	 he	 was	 not
surprised	when	they	reached	the	end	of	the	slope	and	found	themselves	at	the	edge	of	a	precipice.	Below	was


a	 sinkhole,	 its	 base	 thick	 with	 skalberry	 trees.	 Buried	 beneath	 that	 soil,	 he	 knew,	 there	 were	 bones,	 stacked
thick,	two	or	even	three	times	the	height	of	a	grown	man.	In	this	place,	Imass	had	driven	herds	to	their	deaths
in	great	seasonal	hunts.	If	one	were	to	dig	beneath	the	skalberry	trees,	one	would	find	the	remains	of	bhed	and
tenag:	their	bones	and	shattered	horns,	tusks,	and	embedded	spear-points	of	grey	chert;	one	would	find,	here
and	there,	the	skeletons	of	ay	that	had	been	dragged	over	the	cliff’s	edge	in	their	zeal—the	wolves’	canines
filed	 down	 to	 mark	 them	 as	 pups	 found	 in	 the	 wild,	 too	 fierce	 to	 have	 their	 massive	 fangs	 left	 in	 place;	 and
perhaps	the	occasional	okral,	for	the	plains	bears	often	tracked	the	bhed	herds	and	found	themselves	caught	up
in	the	stampedes,	especially	when	fire	was	used.
Generation	upon	generation	of	deadly	hunts	mapped	out	in	those	layers,	until	all	the	tenag	were	gone,	and
with	 them	 the	 okral,	 and	 indeed	 the	 ay—and	 the	 wind	 was	 hollow	 and	 empty	 of	 life,	 no	 howls,	 no	 shrill
trumpeting	 from	 bull	 tenag,	 and	 even	 the	 bhed	 had	 given	 way	 to	 their	 smaller	 cousins,	 the	 bhederin—who
would	have	vanished	too,	had	their	two-legged	hunters	thrived.
But	they	did	not	thrive,	and	Onos	T’oolan	knew	the	reason	for	that.
He	 stood	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 sinkhole,	 anguish	 deep	 in	 his	 soul,	 and	 he	 longed	 for	 the	 return	 of	 the	 great
beasts	of	his	youth.	Eyes	scanning	the	lie	of	the	land	to	the	sides	of	the	pit,	he	could	see	where	the	harvest	had
been	processed—the	slabs	of	meat	brought	up	to	the	women	who	waited	beside	smaller,	skin-lined	pits	filled
with	water	that	steamed	as	heated	stones	built	it	to	boiling—and	yes,	he	could	see	the	rumpled	ground	evincing
those	cooking	pits,	and	clumps	of	greenery	marking	hearths—and	there,	to	one	side,	a	huge	flattened	boulder,
its	slightly	concave	surface	pocked	where	longbones	had	been	split	to	extract	the	marrow.
He	could	almost	smell	the	reek,	could	almost	hear	the	droning	chants	and	buzzing	insects.	Coyotes	out	on
the	fringes,	awaiting	their	turn.	Carrion	birds	scolding	in	the	sky	overhead,	the	flit	of	rhizan	and	the	whisper	of
capemoths.	Drifts	of	smoke	redolent	with	sizzling	fat	and	scorched	hair.
There	had	been	a	last	hunt,	a	last	season,	a	last	night	of	contented	songs	round	fires.	The	following	year	saw
no	 one	 in	 this	 place.	 The	 wind	 wandered	 alone,	 the	 half-butchered	 carcasses	 grew	 tough	 as	 leather	 in	 the
sinkhole,	and	flowers	fluttered	where	blood	had	once	pooled.
Did	the	wind	mourn	with	no	song	to	carry	on	its	breath?	Or	did	it	hover,	waiting	in	terror	for	the	first	cries	of
bestial	 pain	 and	 fear,	 only	 to	 find	 that	 they	 never	 came?	 Did	 the	 land	 yearn	 for	 the	 tremble	 of	 thousands	 of
hoofs	and	the	padded	feet	of	tenag?	Did	it	hunger	for	that	flood	of	nutrients	to	feed	its	children?	Or	was	the
silence	it	found	a	blessed	peace	to	its	tortured	skin?
There	 had	 been	 seasons	 when	 the	 herds	 came	 late.	 And	 then,	 with	 greater	 frequency,	 seasons	 when	 the
herds	did	not	come	at	all.	And	the	Imass	went	hungry.	Starved,	forced	into	new	lands	in	a	desperate	search	for
food.
The	Ritual	of	Tellann	had	circumvented	the	natural,	inevitable	demise	of	the	Imass.	Had	eluded	the	rightful
consequences	of	their	profligacy,	their	shortsightedness.
He	wondered	if,	among	the	uppermost	level	of	bones,	one	might	find,	here	and	there,	the	scattered	skeletons
of	Imass.	A	handful	that	had	come	to	this	place	to	see	what	could	be	salvaged	from	the	previous	year’s	hunt,
down	 beneath	 the	 picked	 carcasses—a	 few	 desiccated	 strips	 of	 meat	 and	 hide,	 the	 tacky	 gel	 of	 hoofs.	 Did
they	kneel	in	helpless	confusion?	Did	the	hollow	in	their	bellies	call	out	to	the	hollow	wind	outside,	joined	in	the
truth	that	the	two	empty	silences	belonged	to	one	another?
If	 not	 for	 Tellann,	 the	 Imass	 would	 have	 known	 regret—not	 as	 a	 ghost	 memory—but	 as	 a	 cruel	 hunter
tracking	them	down	to	their	very	last,	staggering	steps.	And	that,	Tool	told	himself,	would	have	been	just.
‘Vultures	in	the	sky,’	said	the	Barghast	warrior	at	his	side.
Tool	grimaced.	‘Yes,	Bakal,	we	are	close.’
‘It	is	as	you	have	said,	then.	Barghast	have	died.’	The	Senan	paused,	and	then	said,	‘yet	our	shouldermen
sensed	nothing.	You	are	not	of	our	blood.	How	did	you	know,	Onos	Toolan?’
The	 suspicion	 never	 went	 away,	 Tool	 reflected.	 This	 gauging,	 uneasy	 regard	 of	 the	 foreigner	 who	 would
lead	 the	 mighty	 White	 Faces	 to	 what	 all	 believed	 was	 a	 righteous,	 indeed	 a	 holy	 war.	 ‘This	 is	 a	 place	 of
endings,	Bakal.	Yet,	if	you	know	where	to	look—if	you	know	how	to	see—you	find	that	some	endings	never
end.	The	very	absence	howls	like	a	wounded	beast.’
Bakal	uttered	a	sceptical	grunt,	and	then	said,	‘Every	death-cry	finds	a	place	to	die,	until	only	silence	waits
beyond.	You	speak	of	echoes	that	cannot	be.’
‘And	 you	 speak	 with	 the	 conviction	 of	 a	 deaf	 man	 insisting	 that	 what	 you	 do	 not	 hear	 does	 not	 exist—in


such	 thinking	 you	 will	 find	 yourself	 besieged,	 Bakal.’	 He	 finally	 faced	 the	 Barghast	 warrior.	 ‘When	 will	 you
people	discover	that	your	will	does	not	rule	the	world?’
‘I	ask	how	you	knew,’	Bakal	said,	expression	darkening,	‘and	you	answer	with	insults?’
‘It	is	curious	what	you	choose	to	take	offence	to,’	Tool	replied.
‘It	is	your	cowardice	that	offends	us,	Warleader.’
‘I	refuse	your	challenge,	Bakal.	As	I	did	that	of	Riggis,	and	as	I	will	all	others	that	come	my	way—until	our
return	to	our	camp.’
‘And	once	there?	A	hundred	warriors	shall	vie	to	be	first	to	spill	your	blood.	A	thousand.	Do	you	imagine
you	can	withstand	them	all?’
Tool	was	silent	for	a	moment.	‘Bakal,	have	you	seen	me	fight?’
The	warrior	bared	his	filed	teeth.	‘None	of	us	have.	Again	you	evade	my	questions!’
Behind	them,	close	to	a	hundred	disgruntled	Senan	warriors	listened	to	their	every	word.	But	Tool	would	not
face	them.	He	found	he	could	not	look	away	from	the	sinkhole.	I	could	have	drawn	my	sword.	With	shouts
and	 fierce	 faces,	 enough	 to	 terrify	 them	 all.	 And	 I	 could	 have	 driven	 them	 before	 me,	 chased	 them,
shrieking	at	seeing	them	run,	seeing	their	direction	shift,	as	the	ancient	rows	of	cairns	channelled	them
unwittingly	on	to	the	proper	path—
—and	then	see	them	tumble	over	the	cliff ’s	edge.	Cries	of	fear,	screams	of	pain—the	snap	of	bones,
the	thunder	of	crushed	bodies—oh,	listen	to	the	echoes	of	all	that!
‘I	have	a	question	for	you,	Bakal.’
‘Ah!	Yes,	ask	it	and	hear	how	a	Barghast	answers	what	is	asked	of	him!’
‘Can	the	Senan	afford	to	lose	a	thousand	warriors?’
Bakal	snorted.
‘Can	the	Warleader	of	the	White	Face	Barghast	justify	killing	a	thousand	of	his	own	warriors?	Just	to	make
a	point?’
‘You	will	not	survive	one,	never	mind	a	thousand!’
Tool	nodded.	‘See	how	difficult	it	is,	Bakal,	to	answer	questions?’
He	 set	 out,	 skirting	 the	 sinkhole’s	 edge,	 and	 made	 his	 way	 down	 the	 slope	 to	 the	 left—a	 much	 gentler
descent	into	the	valley,	and	had	the	beasts	been	clever,	they	would	have	used	it.	But	fear	drove	them	on,	and
on.	Blinding	them,	deafening	them.	Fear	led	them	to	the	cliff’s	edge.	Fear	chased	them	into	death.
Look	on,	my	warriors,	and	see	me	run.
But	it	is	not	you	that	I	fear.	A	detail	without	relevance,	because,	you	see,	the	cliff	edge	does	not	care.
	
‘Which	damned	tribe	is	this	one?’	Sceptre	Irkullas	asked.
The	 scout	 frowned.	 ‘The	 traders	 call	 them	 the	 Nith’rithal—the	 blue	 streaks	 in	 their	 white	 face	 paint
distinguish	them.’
The	 Akrynnai	 warleader	 twisted	 to	 ease	 the	 muscles	 of	 his	 lower	 back.	 He	 had	 thought	 such	 days	 were
past	him—a	damned	war!	Had	he	not	seen	enough	to	earn	some	respite?	When	all	he	sought	was	a	quiet	life
in	his	clan,	playing	bear	to	his	grandchildren,	growling	as	they	swarmed	all	over	him	with	squeals	and	leather
knives	stabbing	everywhere	they	could	reach.	He	so	enjoyed	his	lengthy	death-throes,	always	saving	one	last
shocking	lunge	when	all	were	convinced	the	giant	bear	was	well	and	truly	dead.	They’d	shriek	and	scatter	and
he	would	lie	back,	laughing	until	he	struggled	to	catch	his	breath.
By	the	host	of	spirits,	he	had	earned	peace.	Instead,	he	had	.	.	.	this.	‘How	many	yurts	did	you	say	again?’
His	memory	leaked	like	a	worm-holed	bladder	these	days.
‘Six,	maybe	seven	thousand,	Sceptre.’
Irkullas	 grunted.	 ‘No	 wonder	 they’ve	 devoured	 half	 that	 bhederin	 herd	 in	 the	 month	 since	 they	 corralled
them.’	He	considered	for	a	time,	scratching	the	white	bristles	on	his	chin.	‘Twenty	thousand	inhabitants	then.
Would	you	say	that	a	fair	count?’
‘There’s	the	track	of	a	large	war-party	that	headed	out—eastward—a	day	or	so	ago.’
‘Thus	 diminishing	 the	 number	 of	 combatants	 even	 more—tracks,	 you	 say?	 These	 Barghast	 have	 grown
careless,	then.’
‘Arrogant,	Sceptre—after	all,	they’ve	slaughtered	hundreds	of	Akrynnai	already—’
‘Poorly	 armed	 and	 ill-guarded	 merchants!	 And	 that	 makes	 them	 strut?	 Well,	 this	 time	 they	 shall	 face	 true


warriors	of	the	Akrynnai—descendants	of	warriors	who	crushed	invaders	from	Awl,	Lether	and	D’rhasilhani!’
He	 collected	 his	 reins	 and	 twisted	 round	 towards	 his	 second	 in	 command.	 ‘Gavat!	 Prepare	 the	 wings	 to	 the
canter—as	soon	as	their	pickets	see	us,	sound	the	Gathering.	Upon	sighting	the	encampment,	we	charge.’
There	 were	 enough	 warriors	 nearby	 to	 hear	 his	 commands	 and	 a	 low,	 ominous	 hhunn	 chant	 rumbled
through	the	ranks.
Irkullas	squinted	at	the	scout.	‘Ride	back	out	to	your	wing,	Ildas—ride	down	their	pickets	if	you	can.’
‘It’s	said	the	Barghast	women	are	as	dangerous	as	the	men.’
‘No	 doubt.	 We	 kill	 every	 adult	 and	 every	 youth	 near	 blooding—the	 children	 we	 will	 make	 Akrynnai	 and
those	who	resist	we	will	sell	as	slaves	to	the	Bolkando.	Now,	enough	talking—loosen	the	arrows	in	your	quiver,
Ildas—we	have	kin	to	avenge!’
Sceptre	Irkullas	liked	playing	the	bear	to	his	grandchildren.	He	was	well	suited	to	the	role.	Stubborn,	slow	to
anger,	but	as	the	Letherii	and	others	had	discovered,	ware	the	flash	of	red	in	his	eyes—he	had	led	the	warriors
of	the	Akrynnai	for	three	decades,	at	the	head	of	the	most-feared	cavalry	on	the	plains,	and	not	once	had	he
been	defeated.
A	commander	needed	more	than	ferocity,	of	course.	A	dozen	dead	Letherii	generals	had	made	the	mistake
of	underestimating	the	Sceptre’s	cunning.
The	Barghast	had	lashed	out	to	slay	traders	and	drovers.	Irkullas	was	not	interested	in	chasing	the	damned
raiding	parties	this	way	and	that—not	yet,	in	any	case.	No,	he	would	strike	at	the	very	homes	of	these	White
Face	Barghast—and	leave	in	his	wake	nothing	but	bones	and	ashes.
Twenty	 thousand.	 Seven	 to	 ten	 thousand	 combatants	 is	 probably	 a	 high	 estimate—although	 it’s	 said
they’ve	few	old	and	lame,	for	their	journey	into	these	lands	was	evidently	a	hard	one.
These	Barghast	were	formidable	warriors;	of	that	Irkullas	had	no	doubt.	But	they	thought	like	thieves	and
rapists,	with	the	belligerence	and	arrogance	of	bullies.	Eager	for	war,	were	they?	Then	Sceptre	Irkullas	shall
bring	them	war.
Formidable	warriors,	yes,	these	White	Faces.
He	wondered	how	long	they	would	last.
	
Kamz’tryld	 despised	 picket	 duty.	 Tripping	 over	 bhederin	 dung—and	 more	 than	 a	 few	 bones	 of	 late,	 as	 the
slaughter	to	ready	for	winter	had	begun—while	biting	flies	chased	him	about	and	the	wind	drove	grit	and	sand
into	his	face	so	that	by	day’s	end	his	white	deathmask	was	somewhere	between	grey	and	brown.	Besides,	he
was	 not	 so	 old	 that	 he	 could	 not	 have	 trotted	 out	 with	 Talt’s	 war-party	 yesterday—not	 that	 Talt	 agreed,	 the
one-fanged	bastard.
Kamz	 was	 reaching	 an	 age	 when	 loot	 became	 less	 a	 luxury	 than	 a	 need.	 He	 had	 a	 legacy	 to	 build,
something	to	leave	his	kin—he	should	not	be	wasting	his	last	years	of	prowess	here,	so	far	from—
Thunder?
No.	Horses.
He	was	on	a	ridge	that	faced	a	yet	higher	one	just	to	the	north—he	probably	should	have	walked	out	to	that
one,	 but	 he’d	 decided	 it	 was	 too	 far—and	 as	 he	 turned	 to	 squint	 in	 that	 direction	 he	 caught	 sight	 of	 the	 first
outriders.
Akrynnai.	A	raid—ah,	we	shall	have	plenty	of	blood	to	spill	after	all!	He	snapped	out	a	command	and
his	three	wardogs	spun	and	bolted	for	the	camp.	Kamz	voiced	a	cry	and	saw	that	his	fellow	sentinels,	two	off
to	his	left,	three	to	his	right,	had	all	seen	and	heard	the	enemy,	and	dogs	were	tearing	down	towards	the	camp
—where	he	discerned	a	sudden	flurry	of	activity—
Yes,	these	Akrynnai	had	made	a	terrible	mistake.
He	 shifted	 grip	 on	 his	 lance,	 as	 he	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 riders	 charging	 directly	 for	 him.	 A	 fine	 horse:	 it	 would
make	his	first	trophy	of	this	day.
And	then,	along	the	ridge	behind	the	first	scatter	of	riders,	a	mass	of	peaked	helms—a	blinding	glare	rising
like	the	crest	of	an	iron	wave,	and	then	the	flash	of	scaled	armour—
Kamz	involuntarily	stepped	back,	the	rider	closing	on	him	forgotten	in	his	shock.
He	was	a	seasoned	warrior.	He	could	gauge	numbers	in	an	instant,	and	he	counted	as	he	watched	the	ranks
roll	down	the	slope.	Spirits	below!	Twenty—no,	thirty	thousand—and	still	more!	I	need	to—
The	first	arrow	took	him	high	between	his	neck	and	right	shoulder.	Staggered	by	the	blow,	he	recovered	and


looked	up	only	to	greet	the	second	arrow,	tearing	like	fire	into	his	throat.
As	blood	spurted	down	his	chest,	the	biting	flies	rushed	in.
	
Warleader	Talt	probed	with	his	tongue	his	single	remaining	upper	canine	and	then	glared	at	the	distant	horsewarriors.	‘They	lead	us	ever	on,	and	not	once	do	they	turn	and	fight!	We	are	in	a	land	of	cowards!’
‘So	we	must	scrape	it	clean,’	said	Bedit	in	a	growl.
Talt	nodded.	‘Your	words	ring	like	swords	on	shields,	old	friend.	These	Akrynnai	start	and	dance	away	like
antelope,	but	their	villages	are	not	so	fleet,	are	they?	When	we	are	killing	their	children	and	raping	their	young
ones,	when	we	are	burning	their	huts	and	slaughtering	their	puny	horses,	then	they	will	fight	us!’
‘Or	 run	 in	 terror,	 Warleader.	 Torture	 kills	 them	 quick—we’ve	 seen	 that.	 They	 are	 spineless.’	 He	 pointed
with	the	tip	of	his	spear.	‘We	must	choose	our	own	path	here,	I	think,	for	it	is	likely	they	seek	to	lead	us	away
from	their	village.’
Talt	studied	the	distant	riders.	No	more	than	thirty—they	had	spied	them	at	dawn,	waiting,	it	seemed,	on	a
distant	rise.	Talt	had	half-exhausted	his	warriors	attempting	to	chase	them	down.	A	few	scattered	arrows	sent
their	 way	 was	 the	 extent	 of	 their	 belligerence.	 It	 was	 pathetic.	 The	 warleader	 glanced	 back	 at	 his	 warriors.
Eight	hundred	men	and	women,	their	white	paint	streaked	now	with	sweat,	most	of	them	sitting,	hunched	over
in	the	heat.	‘We	shall	rest	for	a	time,’	he	said.
‘I	shall	remain	here,’	Bedit	said,	lowering	himself	into	a	crouch.
‘If	they	move	sound	the	call.’
‘Yes,	Warleader.’
Talt	hesitated,	turning	to	squint	at	a	mountainous	mass	of	storm	clouds	to	the	southwest.	Closer,	yes.
Bedit	must	have	followed	his	gaze.	‘We	are	in	its	path.	It	will	do	much	to	cool	us	down,	I	think.’
‘Be	sure	to	leave	this	hilltop	before	it	arrives,’	Talt	advised.	‘And	hold	that	spear	to	the	ground.’
Nodding,	 Bedit	 grinned	 and	 tapped	 the	 side	 of	 his	 bone	 and	 horn	 helm.	 ‘Tell	 the	 fools	 below	 who	 are
wearing	iron	peaks.’
‘I	will,	although	it’s	the	Akrynnai	who	should	be	worried.’
Bedit	barked	a	laugh.
Talt	turned	and	trotted	back	down	to	his	warriors.
	
Inthalas,	third	daughter	of	Sceptre	Irkullas,	leaned	forward	on	her	saddle.
Beside	her,	Sagant	shook	himself	and	said,	‘They’re	done,	I	think.’
She	nodded,	but	somewhat	distractedly.	She	had	lived	her	entire	life	on	these	plains.	She	had	weathered	the
fiercest	 prairie	 storms—she	 recalled,	 once,	 seeing	 a	 hundred	 dead	 bhederin	 on	 a	 slope,	 each	 one	 killed	 by
lightning—but	she	had	never	before	seen	clouds	like	these	ones.
Her	horse	was	trembling	beneath	her.
Sagant	gusted	out	a	breath.	‘We	have	time,	I	think,	if	we	strike	now.	Get	it	over	with	quickly	and	then	try	to
outride	the	storm.’
After	a	moment,	Inthalas	nodded.
	
Sagant	laughed	and	swung	his	horse	round,	leaving	the	small	troop	of	outriders	to	ride	down	to	where	waited—
unseen	 by	 any	 Barghast—three	 wings	 of	 Akrynnai	 horse-archers	 and	 lancers,	 along	 with	 nine	 hundred
armoured,	 axe-wielding	 shock	 troops:	 in	 all,	 almost	 three	 thousand	 warriors.	 As	 he	 drew	 closer,	 he	 gestured
with	his	free	hand,	saw	with	pleasure	the	alacrity	with	which	his	troops	responded.
The	Sceptre’s	great	success	had	been	founded,	in	part,	on	the	clever	adoption	of	the	better	qualities	of	the
Letherii	 military—foot-soldiers	 capable	 of	 maintaining	 tight,	 disciplined	 ranks,	 for	 one,	 and	 an	 adherence	 to	 a
doctrine	of	formations,	as	well	as	dictating	the	field	of	battle	in	situations	of	their	own	choosing.
Leading	the	Barghast	ever	onward,	until	they	were	exhausted—leading	them	straight	to	their	waiting	heavy
infantry,	to	a	battle	in	which	the	White	Faces	could	not	hope	to	triumph—Inthalas	had	learned	well	from	her
father.
This	would	be	a	fine	day	of	slaughter.	He	laughed	again.


______
Inthalas	had	done	her	part.	Now	it	was	time	for	Sagant.	They	would	finish	with	these	Barghast	quickly—she
glanced	 again	 at	 the	 storm-front—yes,	 it	 would	 have	 to	 be	 quickly.	 The	 blackened	 bellies	 of	 those	 clouds
seemed	to	be	scraping	the	ground,	reminding	her	of	smoke—but	she	could	not	smell	anything	like	a	grass	fire
—no,	this	was	uncanny,	troubling.	Still	a	league	or	more	distant,	but	fast	closing.
She	shook	herself,	faced	her	fellow	outriders.	‘We	will	ride	to	find	a	better	vantage	point	once	the	battle	is
engaged—and	should	any	Barghast	break	free,	I	give	you	leave	to	chase	them	down.	You	have	done	well—
the	 fools	 are	 spent,	 unsuspecting,	 and	 even	 now	 the	 great	 village	 they	 left	 behind	 is	 likely	 burning	 to	 the
Sceptre’s	touch.’
At	that	she	saw	cold	smiles.
‘Perhaps,’	 she	 added,	 ‘we	 can	 capture	 a	 few	 here,	 and	 visit	 upon	 them	 the	 horrors	 they	 so	 callously
delivered	upon	our	innocent	kin.’
This	pleased	them	even	more.
	
Bedit	had	watched	one	of	the	riders	disappear	down	the	other	side	of	the	ridge,	and	this	struck	him	with	a	faint
unease.	What	reason	for	that,	except	to	join	another	troop—hidden	in	the	hollow	beyond?	Then	again,	it	might
be	that	the	entire	village	waited	there,	crowded	with	hundreds	of	terrified	fools.
He	slowly	straightened—and	then	felt	the	first	rumble	beneath	his	feet.
Bedit	 turned	 to	 face	 the	 storm,	 and	 his	 eyes	 widened.	 The	 enormous,	 swollen	 clouds	 were	 suddenly
churning,	 lifting.	 Walls	 of	 dust	 or	 rain	 spanned	 the	 distance	 between	 them	 and	 the	 ground,	 but	 not—as	 one
would	expect—a	single	front;	rather,	countless	walls,	shifting	like	curtains	in	a	broken	row	of	bizarre	angles—
and	he	could	now	see	something	like	white	foam	tumbling	out	from	the	base	of	those	walls.
Hail.
But	if	that	was	true,	then	those	hailstones	must	be	the	size	of	fists—even	larger—else	he	would	not	be	able
to	see	anything	of	them	at	this	distance.	The	drumming	beneath	him	shook	the	entire	hill.	He	shot	the	Akrynnai
a	glance	and	saw	them	riding	straight	for	him.
Beneath	hail	and	lightning	then!	He	tilted	his	head	back	and	shrieked	his	warning	to	Talt	and	the	others,	then
collected	up	his	spear	and	ran	down	to	join	them.
He	 had	 just	 reached	 the	 ranks	 when	 Akrynnai	 horse-warriors	 appeared	 behind	 the	 Barghast,	 and	 then	 on
both	sides,	reining	up	and	closing	at	the	ends	to	form	a	three-sided	encirclement.	Cursing,	Bedit	spun	to	face
the	hill	he	had	just	descended.	The	scouts	were	there,	but	well	off	to	one	side,	and	as	he	stared—half-hearing
the	shouts	of	dismay	from	his	fellow	warriors	through	the	tumult	of	thunder—he	saw	the	first	ranks	of	footsoldiers	 appear	 above	 the	 crest.	 Rectangular	 shields,	 spiked	 axes,	 iron	 helms	 with	 visors	 and	 nose-guards,
presenting	a	solid	line	advancing	in	step.	Rank	after	rank	topped	the	rise.
We	have	the	battle	we	so	lusted	after.	But	it	shall	be	our	last	battle.	He	howled	his	defiance,	and	at	his
side—stunned,	appalled,	young	Talt	visibly	flinched	at	Bedit’s	cry.
Then	Talt	straightened,	drawing	his	sword.	‘We	shall	show	them	how	true	warriors	fight!’	He	pointed	at	the
closing	foot-soldiers.	‘Nith’rithal!	Charge!’
	
Inthalas	gasped,	eyes	widening.	The	Barghast	were	rushing	the	foot-soldiers	in	a	ragged	mass,	uphill.	 True,
they	were	bigger,	but	against	that	disciplined	line	they	would	meet	nothing	but	an	iron	wall	and	descending	axe
blades.
She	expected	them	to	break,	reel	back—and	the	Akrynnai	ranks	would	then	advance,	pressing	the	savages
until	they	routed—and	as	they	fled,	the	cavalry	would	sweep	in	from	the	flanks,	arrows	sleeting,	while	at	the
far	end	of	the	basin	the	lancers	would	level	their	weapons	and	then	roll	down	in	a	charge	into	the	very	face	of
those	fleeing	Barghast.
No	one	would	escape.
Thunder,	flashes	of	lightning,	a	terrible	growing	roar—yet	her	eyes	held	frozen	on	the	charging	Barghast.
They	hammered	into	the	Akryn	ranks,	and	Inthalas	shouted	in	shock	as	the	first	line	seemed	to	simply	vanish
beneath	a	crazed	flurry	of	huge	Barghast	warriors,	swords	slashing	down.	Shield	edges	crumpled.	Fragments


of	shattered	helms	spat	into	the	air.	The	three	front	rows	were	driven	back	by	the	concussion.	The	chop	and
clash	rose	amidst	screams	of	pain	and	rage,	and	she	saw	the	Akryn	legion	bow	inward	as	the	remainder	of	the
Barghast	 pushed	 their	 own	 front	 ranks	 ever	 deeper	 into	 the	 formation.	 It	 was	 moments	 from	 being	 driven
apart,	split	in	half.
Sagant	must	have	seen	the	same	from	where	he	waited	with	the	lancers.	In	actual	numbers,	the	Barghast
almost	matched	the	foot-soldiers,	and	their	ferocity	was	appalling.	Darkness	was	swallowing	the	day,	and	the
flashes	of	lightning	from	the	west	provided	moments	of	frozen	clarity	as	the	battle	was	joined	now	on	all	sides
—arrows	lashing	into	the	Barghast	flanks	in	wave	after	wave.	The	plunging	descent	of	Sagant	and	his	lancers
closed	 fast	 on	 the	 rearmost	 enemy	 warriors—who	 seemed	 indifferent	 to	 the	 threat	 at	 their	 backs	 as	 they
pushed	their	comrades	in	front	of	them,	clawing	forward	in	a	frenzy.
But	 that	 made	 sense—carve	 apart	 the	 Akryn	 legion	 and	 a	 way	 would	 be	 suddenly	 open	 before	 the
Barghast,	and	in	the	ensuing	chaos	of	the	breakout	the	lancers	would	end	up	snarled	with	the	foot-soldiers,	and
the	 archers	 would	 hunt	 uselessly	 in	 the	 gloom	 to	 make	 out	 foe	 from	 friend.	 All	 order,	 and	 with	 it	 command,
would	be	lost.
She	stared,	still	half-disbelieving,	as	the	legion	buckled.	The	Barghast	had	now	formed	a	wedge,	and	it	drove
ever	deeper.
Should	the	enemy	push	through	and	come	clear,	momentarily	uncontested,	they	could	wheel	round	and	set
weapons—they	could	even	counter-attack,	slaughtering	disordered	foot-soldiers	and	tangled	lancers.
Inthalas	turned	to	her	thirty-odd	scouts.	‘Ride	with	me!’	And	she	led	them	down	the	back	slope	of	the	ridge,
cantering	and	then	galloping,	to	bring	her	troop	round	opposite	the	likely	fissure	in	the	legion.
‘When	the	Barghast	fight	clear—we	charge,	do	you	understand?	Arrows	and	then	sabres—into	the	tip	of
the	wedge.	We	tumble	them,	we	slow	them,	we	bind	them—if	with	our	own	dead	horses	and	our	own	dying
bodies,	we	bind	them!’
She	 could	 see	 a	 third	 of	 a	 wing	 of	 horse-archers	 pulling	 clear	 to	 the	 east—they	 were	 responding	 to	 the
threat,	but	they	might	not	be	ready	in	time.
Damn	these	barbarians!
Inthalas,	third	daughter	of	the	Sceptre,	rose	on	her	stirrups,	gaze	fixed	on	the	writhing	ranks	of	the	legion.
My	children,	your	mother	will	not	be	returning	home.	Never	again	to	see	your	faces.	Never—
A	sudden	impact	sent	the	horses	staggering.	The	ground	erupted—and	she	saw	figures	wheeling	through	the
air,	flung	to	one	side	as	the	storm	struck	the	flank	of	the	hills	to	the	west,	struck	and	tumbled	over	those	hills,
swallowing	 them	 whole.	 Inthalas,	 struggling	 to	 stay	 on	 her	 mount,	 stared	 in	 horror	 as	 a	 seething	 crest	 of
enormous	boulders	and	jagged	rocks	lifted	over	the	nearest	ridge—
Something	huge	and	solid	loomed	within	the	nearest	cloud—towering	to	fill	half	the	sky.	And	its	base	was
carving	a	bow-wave	before	it,	as	if	tearing	up	the	earth	itself.	The	avalanche	poured	over	the	crest	and	down
the	slope	of	the	basin	in	a	roaring	wave.
An	entire	wing	of	horse-archers	was	simply	engulfed	beneath	the	onslaught,	and	then	the	first	of	the	broken
boulders—many	bigger	than	a	trader’s	wagon—crashed	into	the	milling	mass	of	Barghast	and	Akryn.	As	the
rocks	rolled	and	bounced	through	the	press,	pieces	of	crushed,	smeared	bodies	spun	into	the	air.
At	that	moment	the	lightning	struck.	Lashing,	actinic	blades	ripping	out	from	the	dark,	heaving	cloud,	cutting
blackened	 paths	 through	 Sagant’s	 lancers	 and	 the	 clumps	 of	 reeling	 foot-soldiers.	 The	 air	 was	 filled	 with
burning	 fragments—bodies	 lit	 like	 torches—men,	 women,	 horses—lightning	 danced	 from	 iron	 to	 iron	 in	 a
crazed,	terrifying	web	of	charred	destruction.	Flesh	burst	in	explosions	of	boiling	fluid.	Hair	ignited	like	rushes
—
Someone	 was	 shrieking	in	her	ear.	 Inthalas	turned,	 and	then	 gestured—they	had	to	get	away.	Away	from
the	storm,	away	from	the	slaughter—they	had	to—
Deafening	white	light.	Agony,	and	then—
	
As	 if	 a	 god’s	 sword	 had	 slashed	 across	 the	 hills	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 valley,	 not	 a	 single	 ridge	 remained.
Something	vast	and	inexorable	had	pushed	those	summits	down	into	the	valley,	burying	the	Snakehunter	camp
in	 a	 mass	 of	 deadly	 rubble.	 Here	 and	 there,	 Tool	 could	 see,	 remnants	 were	 visible	 among	 the	 shattered
boulders—torn	sections	of	canvas	and	hide,	snarled	shreds	of	clothing,	guy-rope	fetishes	and	feather-bundles,
splintered	 shafts	 of	 ridge-poles—and	 there	 had	 been	 mangled	 flesh	 once,	 too,	 although	 now	 only	 bleached


bones	remained,	broken,	crushed,	jutting—yet	worse,	to	Tool’s	mind,	was	the	black	hair,	torn	loose	from	flaps
of	scalp	by	the	beaks	of	crows,	and	now	wind-blown	over	the	entire	slope	before	them.
Riggis	had	shouldered	aside	a	speechless	Bakal	and	now	glared	down	into	that	nightmarish	scene.	After	a
moment	he	shook	his	huge	frame	and	spat.	‘This	is	our	enemy,	Warleader?	Bah!	An	earthquake!	Shall	we	war
against	the	rocks	and	soil,	then?	Stab	the	hills?	Bleed	the	rivers?	You	have	led	us	to	this?	Hoping	for	what?
That	we	beg	you	to	take	us	away	from	an	angry	earth?’	He	drew	his	tulwar.	‘Enough	wasting	our	time.	Face
me,	Onos	T’oolan—I	challenge	your	right	to	lead	the	White	Face	Barghast!’
Tool	sighed.	‘Use	your	eyes,	Riggis.	What	shifting	of	the	earth	leaves	no	cracks?	Pushes	to	one	side	hilltops
without	touching	their	roots?	Drives	three—possibly	more—furrows	across	the	plain,	each	one	converging	on
this	valley,	each	one	striking	for	the	heart	of	the	Snakehunter	camp?’	He	pointed	to	the	north	channel	of	the
valley.	‘What	earthquake	cuts	down	fleeing	Barghast	in	the	hundreds?	See	them,	Riggis—that	road	of	bones?’
‘Akryn	raiders,	taking	advantage	of	the	broken	state	of	the	survivors.	Answer	my	challenge,	coward!’
Tool	studied	the	enormous	warrior.	Not	yet	thirty,	his	belt	crowded	with	trophies.	He	turned	to	the	others	and
raised	his	voice,	‘Do	any	of	you	challenge	Riggis	and	his	desire	to	be	Warleader	of	the	White	Face	Barghast?’
‘He	is	not	yet	Warleader,’	growled	Bakal.
Tool	nodded.	‘And	should	I	kill	Riggis	here,	now,	will	you	draw	your	weapon	and	voice	your	challenge	to	me,
Bakal?’	He	scanned	the	others.	‘How	many	of	you	will	seek	the	same?	Shall	we	stand	here	over	the	broken
graveyard	of	the	Snakehunter	clan	and	spill	yet	more	Barghast	blood?	Is	this	how	you	will	honour	your	fallen
White	Faces?’
‘They	will	not	follow	you,’	Riggis	said,	his	eyes	bright.	‘Unless	you	answer	my	challenge.’
‘Ah,	and	so,	if	I	do	answer	you,	Riggis,	they	will	then	follow	me?’
The	Senan	warrior’s	laugh	was	derisive.	‘I	am	not	yet	ready	to	speak	for	them—’
‘You	just	did.’
‘Spar	 no	 more	 with	 empty	 words,	 Onos	 Toolan.’	 He	 widened	 his	 stance	 and	 readied	 his	 heavy-bladed
weapon,	teeth	gleaming	amidst	his	braided	beard.
‘Were	you	Warleader,	Riggis,’	Tool	said,	still	standing	relaxed,	hands	at	his	sides,	‘would	you	slay	your	best
warriors	simply	to	prove	your	right	to	rule?’
‘Any	who	dared	oppose	me,	yes!’
‘Then,	you	would	command	out	of	a	lust	for	power,	not	out	of	a	duty	to	your	people.’
‘My	finest	warriors,’	Riggis	replied,	‘would	find	no	cause	to	challenge	me	in	the	first	place.’
‘They	would,	as	soon	as	they	decided	to	disagree	with	you,	Riggis.	And	this	would	haunt	you,	in	the	back	of
your	 mind.	 With	 every	 decision	 you	 made,	 you	 would	 find	 yourself	 weighing	 the	 risks,	 and	 before	 long	 you
would	gather	to	yourself	an	entourage	of	cohorts—the	ones	whose	loyalty	you	have	purchased	with	favours—
and	you	would	sit	like	a	spider	in	the	centre	of	your	web,	starting	at	every	tremble	of	the	silk.	How	well	can
you	trust	your	friends,	knowing	how	you	yourself	bought	them?	How	soon	before	you	find	yourself	swaying	to
every	gust	of	desire	among	your	people?	Suddenly,	that	power	you	so	hungered	for	proves	to	be	a	prison.	You
seek	to	please	everyone	and	so	please	no	one.	You	search	the	eyes	of	those	closest	to	you,	wondering	if	you
can	trust	them,	wondering	if	their	smiles	are	but	lying	masks,	wondering	what	they	say	behind	your	back—’
‘Enough!’	Riggis	roared,	and	then	charged.
The	flint	sword	appeared	as	if	conjured	in	Tool’s	hands.	It	seemed	to	flicker.
Riggis	 staggered	 to	 one	 side,	 down	 on	 to	 one	 knee.	 His	 broken	 tulwar	 thumped	 to	 the	 ground	 four	 paces
away,	the	warrior’s	hand	still	wrapped	tight	about	the	grip.	He	blinked	down	at	his	own	chest,	as	if	looking	for
something,	and	blood	ran	from	the	stump	of	his	wrist—ran,	but	the	flow	was	ebbing.	With	his	remaining	hand
he	 reached	 up	 to	 touch	 an	 elongated	 slit	 in	 his	 boiled-leather	 hauberk,	 from	 which	 the	 faint	 glisten	 of	 blood
slowly	welled.	A	slit	directly	above	his	heart.
He	looked	up	at	Tool,	perplexed,	and	then	sat	back.
A	moment	later,	Riggis	fell	on	to	his	side,	and	no	further	movement	came	from	him.
Tool	 faced	 Bakal.	 ‘Do	 you	 seek	 to	 be	 Warleader,	 Bakal?	 If	 so,	 you	 can	 have	 it.	 I	 yield	 command	 of	 the
White	Face	Barghast.	To	you’—he	turned	to	the	others—‘to	any	of	you.	I	will	be	the	coward	you	want	me	to
be.	 For	 what	 now	 comes,	 someone	 else	 shall	 be	 responsible—not	 me,	 not	 any	 more.	 In	 my	 last	 words	 as
Warleader,	I	say	this:	gather	the	White	Face	Barghast,	gather	all	the	clans,	and	march	to	the	Lether	Empire.
Seek	sanctuary.	A	deadly	enemy	has	returned	to	these	plains,	an	ancient	enemy.	You	are	in	a	war	you	cannot


win.	Leave	this	land	and	save	your	people.	Or	remain,	and	the	White	Faces	shall	all	die.’	He	ran	the	tip	of	his
sword	through	a	tuft	of	grass,	and	then	slung	it	back	into	the	sheath	beneath	his	left	arm.	‘A	worthy	warrior
lies	 dead.	 The	 Senan	 has	 suffered	 a	 loss	 this	 day.	 The	 fault	 is	 mine.	 Now,	 Bakal,	 you	 and	 the	 others	 can
squabble	over	the	prize,	and	those	who	fall	shall	not	have	me	to	blame.’
‘I	do	not	challenge	you,	Onos	Toolan,’	said	Bakal,	licking	dry	lips.
Tool	flinched.
In	the	silence	following	that,	not	one	of	the	other	warriors	spoke.
Damn	you,	Bakal.	I	was	almost	.	.	.	free.
Bakal	spoke	again,	‘Warleader,	I	suggest	we	examine	the	dead	at	the	end	of	the	valley,	to	determine	what
manner	of	weapon	cut	them	down.’
‘I	will	lead	the	Barghast	from	this	plain,’	Tool	said.
‘Clans	will	break	away,	Warleader.’
‘They	already	are	doing	so.’
‘You	will	have	only	the	Senan.’
‘I	will?’
Bakal	shrugged.	‘There	is	no	value	in	you	killing	a	thousand	Senan	warriors.	There	is	no	value	in	challenging
you—I	have	never	seen	a	blade	sing	so	fast.	We	shall	be	furious	with	you,	but	we	shall	follow.’
‘Even	if	I	am	a	leader	with	no	favours	to	grant,	Bakal,	no	loyalty	I	would	purchase	from	any	of	you?’
‘Perhaps	that	has	been	true,	Onos	Toolan.	In	that,	you	have	been	.	.	.	fair.	But	it	need	not	remain	so	.	.	.
empty.	Please,	you	must	tell	us	what	you	know	of	this	enemy—who	slays	with	rocks	and	dirt.	We	are	not	fools
who	will	blindly	oppose	what	we	cannot	hope	to	defeat—’
‘What	of	the	prophecies,	Bakal?’	Tool	then	smiled	wryly	at	the	warrior’s	scowl.
‘Ever	open	to	interpretation,	Warleader.	Will	you	speak	to	us	now?’
Tool	gestured	at	the	valley	below.	‘Is	this	not	eloquent	enough?’
‘Buy	our	loyalty	with	the	truth,	Onos	Toolan.	Gift	us	all	with	an	even	measure.’	Yes,	this	is	how	one	leads.
Anything	 else	 is	 suspect.	 Every	 other	 road	 proves	 a	 maze	 of	 deceit	 and	 cynicism.	 After	 a	 moment,	 he
nodded.	‘Let	us	look	upon	the	fallen	Snakehunters.’
	
The	 sun	 was	 low	 on	 the	 horizon	 when	 the	 two	 scouts	 were	 brought	 into	 Maral	 Eb’s	 presence	 where	 he	 sat
beside	a	dung	fire	over	which	skewers	of	horse	meat	sizzled.	The	scouts	were	both	young	and	he	did	not	know
their	 names,	 but	 the	 excitement	 he	 observed	 in	 their	 faces	 awakened	 his	 attention.	 He	 pointed	 to	 one.	 ‘You
shall	speak,	and	quickly	now—I	am	about	to	eat.’
‘A	Senan	war-party,’	the	scout	said.
‘Where?’
‘We	 were	 the	 ones	 backtracking	 the	 Snakehunters’	 trail,	 Warchief.	 They	 are	 camped	 in	 a	 hollow	 not	 a
league	from	here.’
‘How	many?’
‘A	hundred,	no	more	than	that.	But,	Warchief,	there	is	something	else—’
‘Out	with	it!’
‘Onos	Toolan	is	with	them.’
Maral	Eb	straightened.	‘Are	you	certain?	Escorted	by	a	mere	hundred?	The	fool!’
His	two	younger	brothers	came	running	at	his	words	and	Maral	Eb	grinned	at	them.	‘Stir	the	warriors—we
eat	on	the	march.’
‘Are	you	sure	of	this,	Maral?’	his	youngest	brother	asked.
‘We	strike,’	the	warchief	snarled.	‘In	darkness.	We	kill	them	all.	But	be	certain	every	warrior	understands—
no	 one	 is	 to	 slay	 Tool.	 Wound	 him,	 yes,	 but	 not	 unto	 death—if	 anyone	 gets	 careless	 I	 will	 have	 him	 or	 her
skinned	alive	and	roasted	over	a	fire.	Now,	quickly—the	gods	smile	down	upon	us!’
	
The	Barahn	warchief	led	his	four	thousand	warriors	across	the	rolling	plains	at	a	ground-devouring	trot.	One	of
the	two	scouts	padded	twenty	paces	directly	ahead,	keeping	them	to	the	trail,	whilst	others	ranged	further	out
on	the	flanks.	The	moon	had	yet	to	rise,	and	even	when	it	did,	it	would	be	weak,	shrouded	in	perpetual	haze—


these	nights,	the	brightest	illumination	came	from	the	jade	streaks	to	the	south,	and	that	was	barely	enough	to
cast	shadows.
The	perfect	setting	for	an	ambush.	None	of	the	other	tribes	would	ever	know	the	truth—after	all,	with	Tool
and	a	hundred	no	doubt	elite	warriors	dead	the	Senan	would	be	crippled,	and	the	Barahn	Clan	would	achieve
swift	ascendancy	once	Maral	Eb	attained	the	status	of	Warleader	over	all	the	White	Face	Barghast.	And	was
it	not	in	every	Barahn	warrior’s	interest	to	hide	the	truth?	The	situation	was	ideal.
Weapons	and	armour	were	bound,	muffled	against	inadvertent	noise,	and	the	army	moved	in	near	silence.
Before	long,	the	lead	scout	hurried	back	to	the	main	column.	Maral	Eb	gestured	and	his	warriors	halted	behind
him.
‘The	hollow	is	two	hundred	paces	ahead,	Warchief.	Fires	are	lit.	There	will	be	pickets—’
‘Don’t	tell	me	my	business,’	Maral	Eb	growled.	He	drew	his	brothers	closer.	‘Sagal,	take	your	Skullsplitters
north.	Kashat,	you	lead	your	thousand	south.	Stay	a	hundred	paces	back	from	the	pickets,	low	to	the	ground,
and	form	into	a	six-deep	crescent.	There	is	no	way	we	can	kill	those	sentinels	silently,	so	the	surprise	will	not
be	absolute,	but	we	have	overwhelming	numbers,	so	that	will	not	matter.	I	will	lead	my	two	thousand	straight
in.	When	you	hear	my	war-cry,	brothers,	rise	and	close.	No	one	must	escape,	so	leave	a	half	hundred	spread
wide	 in	 your	 wake.	 It	 may	 be	 we	 will	 drive	 them	 west	 for	 a	 time,	 so	 be	 sure	 to	 be	 ready	 to	 wheel	 your
crescents	to	close	that	route.’	He	paused.	‘Listen	well	to	this.	Tonight,	we	break	the	most	sacred	law	of	the
White	 Faces—but	 necessity	 forces	 our	 hand.	 Onos	 Toolan	 has	 betrayed	 the	 Barghast.	 He	 dishonours	 us.	 I
hereby	pledge	to	reunite	the	clans,	to	lead	us	to	glory.’
The	faces	arrayed	before	him	were	sober,	but	he	could	see	the	gleam	in	their	eyes.	They	were	with	him.
‘This	night	shall	stain	our	souls	black,	my	brothers,	but	we	will	spend	the	rest	of	our	lives	cleansing	them.	Now,
go!’
	
Onos	Toolan	sat	beside	the	dying	fire.	The	camp	was	quiet,	as	his	words	of	truth	now	sank	into	hearts	like	the
flames,	flaring	and	winking	out.
The	 stretch	 of	 ages	 could	 humble	 the	 greatest	 of	 peoples,	 once	 all	 the	 self-delusions	 were	 stripped	 away.
Pride	 had	 its	 place,	 but	 not	 at	 the	 expense	 of	 sober	 truth.	 Even	 back	 on	 Genabackis,	 the	 White	 Faces	 had
strutted	 about	 as	 if	 unaware	 that	 their	 culture	 was	 drawing	 to	 an	 end;	 that	 they	 had	 been	 pushed	 into
inhospitable	lands;	that	farms	and	then	cities	rose	upon	ground	they	once	held	to	be	sacred,	or	rightly	theirs	as
hunting	 grounds	 or	 pasture	 lands.	 All	 around	 them,	 the	 future	 showed	 faces	 ghastlier	 and	 more	 deadly	 than
anything	white	paint	could	achieve—when	Humbrall	Taur	had	led	them	here,	to	this	continent,	he	had	done	so
in	fullest	comprehension	of	the	extinction	awaiting	his	Barghast	should	they	remain	on	Genabackis,	besieged	by
progress.
Prophecies	never	touched	on	such	matters.	By	nature,	they	were	proclamations	of	egotism,	rife	with	pride
and	bold	fates.	Humbrall	Taur	had,	however,	managed	a	clever	twist	or	two	in	making	use	of	them.
Too	bad	he	is	gone—I	would	rather	have	stood	at	his	side	than	in	his	place.	I	would	rather—
Tool’s	breath	caught	and	he	lifted	his	head.	He	reached	out	and	settled	one	hand	down	on	the	packed	earth,
and	then	slowly	closed	his	eyes.	Ah,	Hetan	.	.	.	my	children	.	.	.	forgive	me.
The	Imass	rose,	turned	to	the	nearest	other	fire.	‘Bakal.’
The	warrior	looked	over.	‘Warleader?’
‘Draw	your	dagger,	Bakal,	and	come	to	me.’
The	 warrior	 did	 not	 move	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then	 he	 rose,	 sliding	 the	 gutting	 knife	 from	 its	 scabbard.	 He
walked	over,	cautious,	uncertain.
My	warriors	.	.	.	enough	blood	has	been	shed.	‘Drive	the	knife	deep,	directly	under	my	heart.	When	I
fall,	 begin	 shouting	 these	 words—as	 loud	 as	 you	 can.	 Shout	 “Tool	 is	 dead!	 Onos	 Toolan	 lies	 slain!	 Our
Warleader	lies	dead!”	Do	you	understand	me,	Bakal?’
The	 warrior,	 eyes	 wide,	 slowly	 backed	 away.	 Others	 had	 caught	 the	 words	 and	 were	 now	 rising,
converging.
Tool	closed	on	Bakal	once	again.	‘Be	quick,	Bakal—if	you	value	your	life	and	the	lives	of	every	one	of	your
kin	here.	You	must	slay	me—now!’
‘Warleader!	I	will	not—’
Tool’s	hands	snapped	out,	closed	on	Bakal’s	right	hand	and	wrist.


The	warrior	gasped,	struggled	to	tug	free,	but	against	Tool’s	strength,	he	was	helpless.	The	Imass	pulled	him
close.	‘Remember—shout	out	my	death,	it	is	your	only	hope—’
Bakal	sought	to	loosen	his	grip	on	his	knife,	but	Tool’s	huge,	spatulate	hand	wrapped	his	own	as	would	an
adult’s	a	child’s.	The	other,	closed	round	his	wrist,	dragged	him	inexorably	forward.
The	blade’s	tip	touched	Tool’s	leather	armour.
Whimpering,	 Bakal	 sought	 to	 throw	 himself	 backward—but	 the	 imprisoned	 arm	 did	 not	 move.	 He	 tried	 to
drop	to	his	knees,	and	his	elbow	dislocated	with	a	pop.	He	howled	in	pain.
The	other	warriors—who	had	stood	frozen—suddenly	rushed	in.
But	Tool	gave	them	no	time.	He	drove	the	dagger	into	his	chest.
Sudden,	blinding	pain.	Releasing	Bakal’s	wrist,	he	staggered	back,	stared	down	at	the	knife	buried	to	its	hilt
in	his	chest.
Hetan,	my	love,	forgive	me.
There	 was	 shouting	 all	 round	 him	 now—horror,	 terrible	 confusion,	 and	 then,	 on	 his	 knees,	 Bakal	 lifted	 his
head	and	met	Tool’s	gaze.
The	Imass	had	lost	his	voice,	but	he	sought	to	implore	the	man	with	his	eyes.	Shout	out	my	death!	Spirits
take	me—shout	it	out	loud!	He	stumbled,	lost	his	footing,	and	fell	heavily	on	to	his	back.
Death—he	had	forgotten	its	bitter	kiss.	So	long	.	.	.	so	long.
But	I	knew	a	gift.	I	tasted	the	air	in	my	lungs	.	.	.	after	so	long	.	.	.	after	ages	of	dust.	The	sweet	air	of
love	.	.	.	but	now	.	.	.
Night-stained	faces	crowded	above	him,	paint	white	as	bone.
Skulls?	Ah,	my	brothers	.	.	.	we	are	dust—
Dust,	and	nothing	but—
	
He	could	hear	shouting,	alarms	rising	from	the	Senan	encampment.	Cursing,	Maral	Eb	straightened,	saw	the
sentinels	clearly	now—all	running	back	into	the	camp.
‘Damn	the	gods!	We	must	charge—’
‘Listen!’	cried	the	scout.	‘Warchief—listen	to	the	words!’
‘What?’
And	then	he	did.	His	 eyes	slowly	widened.	 Could	 it	 be	 true?	 Have	 the	 Senan	 taken	 matters	 into	 their
own	hands?
Of	course	they	have!	They	are	Barghast!	White	Faces!	He	raised	his	sword	high	in	the	air.	‘Barahn!’	he
roared.	‘Hear	the	words	of	your	warchief!	Sheathe	your	weapons!	The	betrayer	is	slain!	Onos	Toolan	is	slain!
Let	us	go	down	to	meet	our	brothers!’
Voices	howled	in	answer.
They	 will	 have	 someone	 to	 set	 forward—they	 will	 not	 relinquish	 dominance	 so	 easily—I	 might	 well
draw	blood	this	night	after	all.	But	none	will	stand	long	before	me.	I	am	Maral	Eb,	slayer	of	hundreds.
The	way	lies	open.
It	lies	open.
The	Barahn	warchief	led	his	warriors	down	into	the	hollow.
To	claim	his	prize.
	
Hetan	woke	in	the	night.	She	stared	upward,	eyes	wide	but	unseeing,	until	they	filled	with	tears.	The	air	in	the
yurt	 was	 stale,	 darkness	 heavy	 and	 suffocating	 as	 a	 shroud.	 My	 husband,	 I	 dreamed	 the	 flight	 of	 your
soul	.	.	.	I	dreamed	its	brush	upon	my	lips.	A	moment,	only	a	moment,	and	then	it	was	as	if	a	vast	wind
swept	you	away.
I	heard	your	cry,	husband.
Oh,	such	a	cruel	dream,	beloved.
And	now	.	.	.	I	smell	dust	in	the	air.	Rotted	furs.	The	dry	taste	of	ancient	death.
Her	 heart	 pounded	 like	 a	 mourner’s	 drum	 in	 her	 chest,	 loud,	 heavy,	 the	 beat	 stretching	 with	 each	 deep
breath	she	took.	That	taste,	that	smell.	She	reached	up	to	touch	her	own	lips.	And	felt	something	like	grit	upon
them.


O	beloved,	what	has	happened?
What	has	happened—
To	my	husband—to	the	father	of	my	children—what	has	happened?
She	let	out	a	ragged	sigh,	forcing	out	the	unseemly	fear.	Such	a	cruel	dream.
From	the	outer	room,	the	dog	whined	softly,	and	a	moment	later	their	son	suddenly	sobbed,	and	then	bawled.
And	she	knew	the	truth.	Such	a	cruel	truth.
	
Ralata	crouched	in	the	high	grasses	and	studied	the	figures	gathered	round	the	distant	fire.	None	had	stirred	in
the	 time	 she	 had	 been	 watching.	 But	 the	 horses	 were	 tugging	 at	 their	 stakes	 and	 even	 from	 here	 she	 could
smell	their	terror—and	she	did	not	understand,	for	she	could	see	nothing—no	threat	in	any	direction.
Even	so,	it	was	strange	that	none	of	her	sisters	had	awakened.	In	fact,	they	did	not	move	at	all.
Her	confusion	was	replaced	by	unease.	Something	was	wrong.
She	 glanced	 back	 at	 the	 hollow	 where	 waited	 her	 horse.	 The	 animal	 seemed	 calm	 enough.	 Collecting	 her
weapons,	Ralata	rose	and	padded	forward.
Hessanrala	might	be	a	headstrong	young	fool,	but	she	knew	her	trade	as	well	as	any	Ahkrata	warrior—she
should	 be	 on	 her	 feet	 by	 now,	 drawing	 the	 others	 in	 with	 silent	hand	 gestures—was	 it	 just	 a	 snake	 slithering
among	the	horses’	hoofs?	A	scent	on	the	wind?
No,	something	was	very	wrong.
As	she	drew	within	ten	paces,	she	could	smell	bile,	spilled	wastes,	and	blood.	Mouth	dry,	Ralata	crept	closer.
They	were	dead.	She	knew	that	now.	She	had	failed	to	protect	them—but	how?	What	manner	of	slayer	could
creep	up	on	five	Barghast	warriors?	As	soon	as	night	had	fallen,	she	had	drawn	near	enough	to	watch	them
preparing	 camp.	 She	 had	 watched	 them	 rub	 down	 the	 horses;	 had	 watched	 them	 eat	 and	 drink	 beer	 from
Hessanrala’s	 skin.	 They	 had	 set	 no	 watch	 among	 themselves,	 clearly	 relying	 upon	 the	 horses	 should	 danger
draw	near.	But	Ralata	had	remained	wakeful,	had	even	seen	when	the	horses	first	wakened	to	alarm.
Beneath	 the	 stench	 of	 death	 there	 was	 something	 else,	 an	 oily	 bitterness	 reminding	 her	 of	 serpents.	 She
studied	the	movements	of	the	Akryn	mounts—no,	they	were	not	shying	from	any	snake	in	the	grasses.	Heads
tossed,	ears	cocking	in	one	direction	after	another,	eyes	rolling.
Ralata	edged	towards	the	firelight.	Once	lit,	dried	dung	burned	hot	but	not	bright,	quick	to	sink	into	bricks	of
pulsating	ashes;	in	the	low,	lurid	reflection,	she	could	see	fresh	blood,	glistening	meat	from	split	corpses.
No	 quick	 knife	 thrusts	 here.	 No,	 these	 were	 the	 wounds	 delivered	 by	 the	 talons	 of	 a	 huge	 beast.	 Bear?
Barbed	cat?	If	so,	why	not	drag	at	least	one	body	away	.	.	.	to	feed	upon?	Why	ignore	the	horses?	And	how
was	it	that	Ralata	had	seen	nothing;	that	not	one	of	her	kin	had	managed	to	utter	a	death-cry?
Gutted,	throat-slit,	chests	ripped	open—she	saw	the	stubs	of	ribs	cut	clean	through.	Talons	sharp	as	swords
—or	swords	in	truth?	All	at	once	she	recalled,	years	ago,	on	the	distant	continent	they	had	once	called	home,
visions	 of	 giant	 undead,	 two-legged	 lizards.	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle,	 arrayed	 in	 silent	 ranks	 in	 front	 of	 the	 city
called	 Coral.	 Swords	 at	 the	 end	 of	 their	 wrists	 instead	 of	 hands—but	 no,	 the	 wounds	 she	 looked	 upon	 here
were	different.	What	then	had	triggered	that	memory?
Ralata	 slowly	 inhaled	 once	 more,	 deeply,	 steadily,	 running	 the	 acrid	 flavours	 through	 her.	 Yes,	 the	 smell.
Although,	long	ago,	it	was	more	.	.	.	stale,	rank	with	death.
But	the	kiss	upon	the	tongue—it	is	the	same.
The	horses	ducked	and	fanned	out,	heads	snapping	back	as	they	reached	the	ends	of	their	tethers.	A	faint
downdraught	of	wind—the	whish	of	wings—
Ralata	 threw	 herself	 flat,	 rolled,	 making	 for	 the	 legs	 of	 the	 horses—anything	 to	 put	 between	 her	 and
whatever	hovered	above.
Thuds	in	the	air,	leathery	hissing—she	stared	up	into	the	night,	caught	a	vast	winged	silhouette	that	devoured
a	sweep	of	stars.	A	flash,	and	then	it	was	gone.
Hoofs	kicked	at	her,	and	then	settled.
She	 heard	 laughter	 in	 her	 head—not	 her	 own,	 something	 cold,	 contemptuous,	 fading	 now	 into	 some	 inner
distance,	until	even	the	echoes	were	gone.
Ralata	rose	to	her	feet.	The	thing	had	flown	northeastward.	Of	course,	there	could	be	no	tracking	such	a
creature,	but	at	least	she	had	a	direction.
She	had	failed	to	protect	her	kin.	Perhaps,	however,	she	could	avenge	them.


	
The	Wastelands	were	well	named,	but	Torrent	had	always	known	that.	He	had	last	found	water	two	days	past,
and	the	skins	strapped	to	his	saddle	would	suffice	him	no	more	than	another	day.	Travelling	at	night	was	the
only	 option,	 now	 that	 the	 full	 heat	 of	 summer	 had	 arrived,	 but	 his	 horse	 was	 growing	 gaunt,	 and	 all	 that	 he
could	see	before	them	beneath	dull	moonlight	was	a	vast,	flat	stretch	of	sunbaked	clay	and	shards	of	broken
stone.
The	 first	 night	 following	 the	 gate	 and	 his	 parting	 ways	 with	 Cafal	 and	 Setoc,	 he	 had	 come	 upon	 a	 ruined
tower,	 ragged	 as	 a	 rotten	 fang,	 the	 walls	 of	 which	 seemed	 to	 have	 melted	 under	 enormous	 heat.	 The
destruction	 was	 so	 thorough	 not	 a	 single	 window	 or	 dressed	 facing	 survived,	 and	 much	 of	 the	 structure’s
skeleton	 was	 visible	 as	 sagging	 latticework	 snarled	 with	 twisted	 ropes	 of	 rusting	 metal	 wire.	 He	 had	 never
before	seen	anything	remotely	like	it,	and	superstitious	fear	kept	him	from	riding	closer.
Since	then,	Torrent	had	seen	nothing	of	interest,	nothing	to	break	the	monotony	of	the	blasted	landscape.	No
mounds,	no	hills,	not	even	ancient	remnants	of	myrid,	rodara	and	goat	pens,	as	one	often	found	on	the	Awl’dan.
It	was	nearing	dawn	when	he	made	out	a	humped	shape	ahead,	directly	in	his	path,	barely	rising	above	the
cracked	 rock.	 The	 ripple	 of	 furs—a	 torn,	 frayed	 hide	 riding	 hunched,	 narrow	 shoulders.	 Thin,	 grey	 hair
seeming	to	float	up	from	the	head	in	the	faint,	sighing	wind.	A	girdled	skirt	of	rotted	strips	of	snakeskin	flared
out	from	the	seated	form.	He	drew	closer.	The	figure’s	back	was	to	Torrent,	and	beyond	the	wind-tugged	hair
and	accoutrements,	it	remained	motionless	as	he	walked	his	horse	up	and	halted	five	paces	behind	it.
A	corpse?	From	the	weathered	pate	beneath	the	sparse	hair,	it	was	likely.	But	who	would	have	simply	left
one	of	their	own	out	on	this	lifeless	pan?
When	the	figure	spoke,	Torrent’s	horse	started	back,	nostrils	flaring.	‘The	fool.	I	needed	him.’
The	voice	was	rough	as	sand,	hollow	as	a	wind-sculpted	cave.	He	could	not	tell	if	it	belonged	to	a	man	or	a
woman.
It	uttered	something	between	a	sigh	and	a	hissing	snarl,	and	then	asked,	‘What	am	I	to	do	now?’
The	 Awl	 warrior	 hesitated,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘You	 speak	 the	 language	 of	 my	 people.	 Are	 you	 Awl?	 No,	 you
cannot	be.	I	am	the	last—and	what	you	wear—’
‘You	have	no	answer,	then.	I	am	used	to	disappointment.	Indeed,	surprise	is	an	emotion	I	have	not	known
for	so	long,	I	believe	I	have	forgotten	its	taste.	Be	on	your	way	then—this	world	and	its	needs	are	too	vast	for
one	such	as	you.	He	would	have	fared	better,	of	course,	but	now	he’s	dead.	I	am	so	.	.	.	irritated.’
Torrent	dismounted,	collecting	one	of	his	waterskins.	‘You	must	be	thirsty,	old	one.’
‘Yes,	my	throat	is	parched,	but	there	is	nothing	you	can	do	for	that.’
‘I	have	some	water—’
‘Which	you	need	more	than	I	do.	Still,	it	is	a	kind	gesture.	Foolish,	but	most	kind	gestures	are.’
When	 he	 walked	 round	 to	 face	 the	 elder,	 he	 frowned.	 Much	 of	 the	 face	 was	 hidden	 in	 the	 shadow	 of
protruding	brows,	but	it	seemed	it	was	adorned	in	rough	strings	of	beads	or	threads.	He	caught	the	dull	gleam
of	teeth	and	a	shiver	whispered	through	him.	Involuntarily	he	made	a	warding	gesture	with	his	free	hand.
Rasping	 laughter.	 ‘Your	 spirits	 of	 wind	 and	 earth,	 warrior,	 are	 my	 children.	 And	 you	 imagine	 such	 fends
work	 on	 me?	 But	 wait,	 there	 is	 this,	 isn’t	 there?	 The	 long	 thread	 of	 shared	 blood	 between	 us.	 I	 might	 be
foolish,	to	think	such	things,	but	if	anyone	has	earned	the	right	to	be	a	fool,	it	must	surely	be	me.	Thus	yielding
this	.	.	.	gesture.’
The	 figure	 rose	 in	 a	 clatter	 of	 bones	 grating	 in	 dry	 sockets.	 Torrent	 saw	 the	 long	 tubes	 of	 bare,	 withered
breasts,	the	skin	patched	and	rotted;	a	sagging	belly	cut	and	slashed,	the	edges	of	the	wounds	dry	and	hanging,
and	 in	 the	 gashes	 themselves	 there	 was	 impenetrable	 darkness—as	 if	 this	 woman	 was	 as	 dried	 up	 inside	 as
she	was	on	the	outside.
Torrent	licked	parched	lips,	struggled	to	swallow,	and	then	spoke	in	a	hushed	tone,	‘Woman,	are	you	dead?’
‘Life	and	death	is	such	an	old	game.	I’m	too	old	to	play.	Did	you	know,	these	lips	once	touched	those	of	the
Son	of	Darkness?	In	our	days	of	youth,	in	a	world	far	from	this	one—far,	yes,	but	little	different	in	the	end.	But
what	value	such	grim	lessons?	We	see	and	we	do,	but	we	know	nothing.’	A	desiccated	hand	made	a	fluttering
gesture.	‘The	fool	presses	a	knife	to	his	chest.	He	thinks	it	is	done.	He	too	knows	nothing,	because,	you	see,	I
will	not	let	go.’
The	words,	confusing	as	they	were,	chilled	Torrent	nonetheless.	The	waterskin	dangled	in	his	hand,	and	its
pathetic	weight	now	mocked	him.


The	 head	 lifted,	 and	 beneath	 those	 jutting	 brow	 ridges	 Torrent	 saw	 a	 face	 of	 dead	 skin	 stretched	 across
prominent	 bones.	 Black	 pits	 regarded	 him	 above	 a	 permanent	 grin.	 The	 beaded	 threads	 he	 had	 thought	 he’d
seen	turned	out	to	be	strips	of	flesh—as	if	some	clawed	beast	had	raked	talons	down	the	old	woman’s	face.
‘You	need	water.	Your	horse	needs	fodder.	Come,	I	will	lead	you	and	so	save	your	useless	lives.	Then,	if	you
are	lucky,	I	will	eventually	find	a	reason	to	keep	you	alive.’
Something	told	Torrent	that	refusing	her	was	impossible.	‘I	am	named	Torrent,’	he	said.
‘I	know	your	name.	The	one-eyed	Herald	begged	me	on	your	behalf.’	She	snorted.	‘As	if	I	am	known	for
mercy.’
‘The	one-eyed	Herald?’
‘The	Dead	Rider,	out	from	Hood’s	Hollow.	He	knows	little	respite	of	late.	An	omen	harsh	as	a	crow’s	laugh,
thus	comes	Toc	the	Younger—but	do	I	not	cherish	the	privacy	of	my	dreams?	He	is	rude.’
‘He	haunts	my	dreams	as	well,	Old	One—’
‘Stop	calling	me	that.	It	is	.	.	.	inaccurate.	Call	me	by	my	name,	and	that	name	is	Olar	Ethil.’
‘Olar	Ethil,’	said	Torrent,	‘will	he	come	again?’
She	cocked	her	head,	was	silent	a	moment.	‘As	they	shall,	to	their	regret,	soon	discover,	the	answer	is	yes.’
	
Sunlight	spilled	over	a	grotesque	scene.	Cradling	his	injured	arm,	Bakal	stood	with	a	half-dozen	other	Senan.
Behind	 them,	 the	 new	 self-acclaimed	 Warleader	 of	 the	 White	 Faces,	 Maral	 Eb,	 was	 cajoling	 his	 warriors	 to
wakefulness.	The	night	had	been	long.	The	air	smelled	of	spilled	beer	and	puke.	The	Barahn	were	rising	rough
and	loud,	unwilling	to	relinquish	their	abandon.
Before	 Bakal	 and	 the	 others	 was	 the	 flat	 where	 their	 encampment	 had	 been—not	 a	 tent	 remained,	 not	 a
single	cookfire	still	smouldered.	The	Senan,	silent,	grim-faced,	were	ready	to	begin	the	march	back	home.	A
reluctant	escort	to	the	new	Warleader.	They	sat	on	the	ground	to	one	side,	watching	the	Barahn.
Flies	were	awakening.	Crows	circled	overhead	and	would	soon	land	to	feed.
Onos	 Toolan’s	 body	 had	 been	 torn	 apart,	 the	 flesh	 deboned	 and	 pieces	 of	 him	 scattered	 everywhere.	 His
bones	 had	 been	 systematically	 shattered,	 the	 fragments	 strewn	 about.	 His	 skull	 had	 been	 crushed.	 Eight
Barahn	 warriors	 had	 tried	 to	 break	 the	 flint	 sword	 and	 had	 failed.	 In	 the	 end,	 it	 was	 pushed	 into	 a	 fire	 built
from	 dung	 and	 Tool’s	 furs	 and	 clothing,	 and	 then,	 when	 everything	 had	 burned	 down,	 scores	 of	 Barahn
warriors	 pissed	 on	 the	 blackened	 stone,	 seeking	 to	 shatter	 it.	 They	 had	 failed,	 but	 the	 desecration	 was
complete.
Deep	inside	Bakal,	rage	seethed	black	and	biting	as	acid	upon	his	soul.	Yet	for	all	its	virulence,	it	could	not
destroy	the	knot	of	guilt	at	the	very	centre	of	his	being.	He	could	still	feel	the	handle	of	his	dagger	in	his	hand,
could	swear	that	the	wire	impressions	remained	on	his	palm,	seared	like	a	brand.	He	felt	sick.
‘He	 has	 agents	 in	 our	 camp,’	 said	 the	 warrior	 beside	 him,	 his	 voice	 barely	 a	 murmur.	 ‘Barahn	 women
married	 into	 the	 Senan.	 And	 others.	 Stolmen’s	 wife,	 her	 mother.	 We	 know	 what	 Hetan’s	 fate	 will	 be—and
Maral	Eb	will	not	permit	us	to	travel	ahead	of	him—he	does	not	trust	us.’
‘Nor	should	he,	Strahl,’	replied	Bakal.
‘If	there	were	more	of	us	and	less	of	them.’
‘I	know.’
‘Bakal,	do	we	tell	the	Warleader?	Of	the	enemy	Onos	Toolan	described?’
‘No.’
‘Then	he	will	lead	us	all	to	our	deaths.’
Bakal	glared	across	at	the	warrior.	‘Not	the	Senan.’	He	studied	the	array	of	faces	before	him,	gauging	the
effect	of	his	words,	and	then	nodded.	‘We	must	cut	ourselves	loose.’
‘Into	 the	 Lether	 Empire,’	 said	 Strahl,	 ‘as	 Tool	 said.	 Negotiate	 settlement	 treaties,	 make	 peace	 with	 the
Akrynnai.’
‘Yes.’
They	 fell	 silent	 again,	 and,	 inevitably,	 eyes	 turned	 once	 more	 to	 the	 scene	 before	 them.	 Their	 rendered
Warleader,	the	endless	signs	of	vicious	blasphemy.	This	dull,	discredited	morning.	This	foul,	accursed	land.	The
crows	had	landed	and	were	now	hopping	about,	beaks	darting	down.
‘They	 will	 hobble	 her	 and	 kill	 the	 spawn,’	 said	 Strahl,	 who	 then	 spat	 to	 clear	 the	 foulness	 of	 the	 words.
‘Yesterday,	Bakal,	we	would	have	joined	in.	We	would	have	each	taken	her.	One	of	our	own	knives	might	well


have	tasted	the	soft	throats	of	the	children.	And	now,	look	at	us.	Ashes	in	our	mouths,	dust	in	our	hearts.	What
has	happened?	What	has	he	done	to	us?’
‘He	showed	us	the	burden	of	an	honourable	man,	Strahl.	And	yes,	it	stings.’
‘He	used	you	cruelly,	Bakal.’
The	warrior	stared	down	at	his	swollen	hand,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘I	failed	him.	I	did	not	understand.’
‘If	you	failed	him,’	growled	Strahl,	‘then	we	all	have.’
In	Bakal’s	mind,	there	was	no	disputing	that.	‘To	think,’	he	muttered,	‘we	called	him	coward.’
Before	them	and	behind	them,	the	crows	danced.
	
Some	roads	were	easier	to	leave	than	others.	Many	walked	to	seek	the	future,	but	found	only	the	past.	Others
sought	 the	 past,	 to	 make	 it	 new	 once	 more,	 and	 discovered	 that	 the	 past	 was	 nothing	 like	 the	 one	 they’d
imagined.	One	could	walk	in	search	of	friends,	and	find	naught	but	strangers.	One	could	yearn	for	company
but	find	little	but	cruel	solitude.
A	few	roads	offered	the	gift	of	pilgrimage,	a	place	to	find	somewhere	ahead	and	somewhere	in	the	heart,
both	to	be	found	at	the	road’s	end.
It	 was	 true,	 as	 well,	 that	 some	 roads	 never	 ended	 at	 all,	 and	 that	 pilgrimage	 could	 prove	 a	 flight	 from
salvation,	and	all	the	burdens	one	carried	one	must	now	carry	back	to	the	place	whence	they	came.
Drop	by	drop,	the	blood	built	worn	stone	and	dirt.	Drop	by	drop,	the	way	of	the	Road	to	Gallan	was	opened.
Weak,	 ever	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 fever,	 Yan	 Tovis,	 Queen	 of	 the	 Shake,	 commander	 of	 thousands	 of	 the	 dispirited
and	 the	 lost,	 led	 the	 wretched	 fools	 ever	 onward.	 To	 the	 sides,	 shadows	 thickened	 to	 darkness,	 and	 still	 she
walked.
Hunger	 assailed	 her	 people.	 Thirst	 haunted	 them.	 Livestock	 lowed	 in	 abject	 confusion,	 stumbled	 and	 then
died.	 She	 had	 forgotten	 that	 this	 ancient	 path	 was	 one	 she	 had	 chosen	 to	 ease	 the	 journey,	 to	 slip	 unseen
through	the	breadth	of	the	Letherii	Kingdom.	She	had	forgotten	that	they	must	leave	it—and	now	it	was	too
late.
The	road	was	more	than	a	road.	It	was	a	river	and	its	current	was	tightening,	holding	fast	all	that	it	carried,
and	 the	 pace	 quickened,	 ever	 quickened.	 She	 could	 fight—they	 all	 could	 fight—and	 achieve	 nothing	 but
drowning.
Drop	by	drop,	she	fed	the	river,	and	the	road	rushed	them	forward.
We	are	going	home.	Did	I	want	this?	Did	I	want	to	know	all	that	we	had	abandoned?	Did	I	want	the
truth,	an	end	to	the	mysteries	of	our	beginnings?
Was	this	a	pilgrimage?	A	migration?	Will	we	find	salvation?
She	 had	 never	 even	 believed	 in	 such	 things.	 Sudden	 benediction,	 blessed	 release—these	 were	 momentary
intoxications,	as	addictive	as	any	drug,	until	one	so	hungered	for	the	escape	that	the	living,	mindful	world	paled
in	comparison,	bleached	of	all	life,	all	wonder.
She	 was	 not	 a	 prophet.	 But	 they	 wanted	 a	 prophet.	 She	 was	 not	 holy.	 But	 they	 begged	 her	 blessing.	 Her
path	did	not	promise	a	road	to	glory.	Yet	they	followed	unquestioningly.
Her	blood	was	not	a	river,	but	how	it	flowed!
No	sense	left	for	time.	No	passage	of	light	to	mark	dawn,	noon	and	dusk.	Darkness	all	around	them,	before
and	 behind,	 darkness	 breeding	 in	 swirls	 of	 stale	 air,	 the	 taste	 of	 ashes,	 the	 stench	 of	 charred	 wood	 and	 firecracked	stone.	How	long?	She	had	no	idea.
But	people	behind	her	were	falling.	Dying.
Where	is	home?	It	lies	ahead.	Where	is	home?	Lost	far	behind	us.
Where	is	home?	It	is	within,	gutted	and	hollow,	waiting	to	be	filled	once	more.
Where	is	Gallan?
At	this	road’s	end.
What	is	Gallan’s	promise?	It	is	home.	I—I	need	to	work	through	this.	Round	and	round—madness	to
let	it	run,	madness.	Will	the	light	never	return?	Is	the	joke	this:	that	salvation	is	all	around	us,	even	as
we	remain	for	ever	blind	to	it?
Because	we	believe	.	.	.	there	must	be	a	road.	A	journey,	an	ordeal,	a	place	to	find.
We	believe	in	the	road.	And	in	believing	we	build	it,	stone	by	stone,	drop	by	drop.	We	bleed	for	our
belief,	and	as	the	blood	flows,	the	darkness	closes	in—


‘The	Road	to	Gallan	is	not	a	road.	Some	roads	.	.	.	are	not	roads	at	all.	Gallan’s	promise	is	not	from	here	to
there.	It	is	from	now	to	then.	The	darkness	.	.	.	the	darkness	comes	from	within.’
A	truth,	and	most	truths	were	revelations.
She	opened	her	eyes.
Behind	her,	parched	throats	opened	in	a	moaning	chorus.	Thousands,	the	sound	rising	to	challenge	the	rush
of	black	water	on	stony	shores,	to	waft	out	and	run	between	the	charred	tree-stumps	climbing	the	hillsides	to
the	left.
Yan	Tovis	stood	at	the	shore,	not	seeing	the	river	sweeping	past	the	toes	of	her	boots.	Her	gaze	had	lifted,
vision	cutting	through	the	mottled	atmosphere,	to	look	upon	the	silent,	unlit	ruins	of	a	vast	city.
The	city.
Kharkanas.
The	Shake	have	come	home.
Are	we	.	.	.	are	we	home?
The	air	belonged	in	a	tomb,	a	forgotten	crypt.
And	she	could	see,	and	she	knew.	Kharkanas	is	dead.
The	city	is	dead.
Blind	Gallan—you	lied	to	us.
Yan	Tovis	howled.	She	fell	to	her	knees,	into	the	numbing	water	of	River	Eryn.	‘You	lied!	You	lied!’	Tears
ran	from	her	eyes,	streamed	down	her	cheeks.	Salty	beads	spun	and	glittered	as	they	plunged	into	the	lifeless
river.
Drop	by	drop.
To	feed	the	river.
	
Yedan	 Derryg	 led	 his	 horse	 forward,	 hoofs	 crunching	 on	 the	 stones,	 and	 relaxed	 the	 reins	 so	 that	 the	 beast
could	drink.	He	cradled	his	wounded	arm	and	said	nothing	as	he	looked	to	the	right	and	studied	the	kneeling,
bent-over	form	of	his	sister.
The	muscles	of	his	jaw	bunched	beneath	his	beard,	and	he	straightened	to	squint	at	the	distant	ruins.
Pully	stumped	up	beside	him.	Her	young	face	looked	bruised	with	shock.	‘We	.	.	.	walked	.	.	.	to	this?’
‘Blind	Gallan	gave	us	a	road,’	said	Yedan	Derryg.	‘But	what	do	the	blind	hold	to	more	than	anything	else?
Only	 that	 which	 was	 sweet	 in	 their	 eyes—the	 last	 visions	 they	 beheld.	 We	 followed	 the	 road	 into	 his
memories.’	 After	 a	 moment,	 he	 shrugged,	 chewed	 for	 a	 time,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘What	 in	 the	 Errant’s	 name	 did
you	expect,	witch?’
His	horse	had	drunk	enough.	Gathering	up	the	reins,	he	backed	the	mount	from	the	shore’s	edge	and	then
wheeled	it	round.	‘Sergeant!	Spread	the	soldiers	out—the	journey	has	ended.	See	to	the	raising	of	a	camp.’	He
faced	the	two	witches.	‘You	two,	bind	Twilight’s	wounds	and	feed	her.	I	will	be	back	shortly—’
‘Where	are	you	going?’
Yedan	 Derryg	 stared	 at	 Pully	 for	 a	 time,	 and	 then	 he	 set	 heels	 to	 his	 horse	 and	 rode	 past	 the	 witch,
downstream	along	the	shoreline.
A	 thousand	 paces	 further	 on,	 a	 stone	 bridge	 spanned	 the	 river,	 and	 beyond	 it	 wound	 a	 solid,	 broad	 road
leading	to	the	city.	Beneath	that	bridge,	he	saw,	there	was	some	kind	of	logjam,	so	solid	as	to	form	a	latticed
barrier	sufficient	to	push	the	river	out	to	the	sides,	creating	elongated	swampland	skirting	this	side	of	the	raised
road.
As	he	drew	closer	he	saw	that	most	of	the	logjam	seemed	to	consist	of	twisted	metal	bars	and	cables.
He	was	forced	to	slow	his	mount,	picking	his	way	across	the	silted	channel,	but	at	last	managed	to	drive	the
beast	up	the	bank	and	on	to	the	road.
Hoofs	 kicked	 loose	 lumps	 of	 muck	 as	 he	 rode	 across	 the	 bridge.	 Downstream	 of	 the	 barrier	 the	 river	 ran
still,	 slightly	 diminished	 and	 cutting	 a	 narrower,	 faster	 channel.	 On	 the	 flats	 to	 either	 side	 there	 was	 more
rusted,	unidentifiable	wreckage.
Once	 on	 the	 road,	 he	 fixed	 his	 gaze	 on	 the	 towering	 gate	 ahead,	 but	 something	 in	 its	 strange,	 alien
architecture	 made	 his	 head	 spin,	 so	 he	 studied	 the	 horizon	 to	 the	 right—where	 massive	 towers	 rose	 from
sprawling,	low	buildings.	He	was	not	certain,	but	he	thought	he	could	detect	thin,	ragged	streamers	of	smoke
from	the	tops	of	those	towers.	After	a	time,	he	decided	that	what	he	was	seeing	was	the	effect	 of	 the	 wind


and	updraughts	from	those	chimneys	pulling	loose	ashes	from	deep	pits	at	the	base	of	the	smokestacks.
On	the	road	before	him,	here	and	there,	he	saw	faint	heaps	of	corroded	metal,	and	the	wink	of	jewellery—
corpses	had	once	crowded	this	approach,	but	the	bones	had	long	since	crumbled	to	dust.
The	 mottled	 light	 cast	 sickly	 sheens	 on	 the	 outer	 walls	 of	 the	 city—and	 those	 stones,	 he	 could	 now	 see,
were	blackened	with	soot,	a	thick	crust	that	glittered	like	obsidian.
Yedan	Derryg	halted	before	the	gate.	The	way	was	open—no	sign	of	barriers	remained	beyond	torn	hinges
reduced	 to	 corroded	 lumps.	 He	 could	 see	 a	 broad	 street	 beyond	 the	 arch,	 and	 dust	 on	 the	 cobbles	 black	 as
crushed	coal.
‘Walk	on,	horse.’
And	Prince	Yedan	Derryg	rode	into	Kharkanas.


Book	Three

Only	the	Dust
Will	Dance


	
	
	
The	dead	have	found	me	in	my	dreams
Fishing	beside	lakes	and	in	strange	houses
That	could	be	homes	for	lost	families
In	all	the	pleasures	of	completeness
And	I	wander	through	their	natural	company
In	the	soft	comforts	of	contentment.
The	dead	greet	me	with	knowing	ease
And	regard	nothing	the	forsaken	awakening
That	abandons	me	in	this	new	solitude
Of	eyes	flickering	open	and	curtains	drawing.
When	the	dead	find	me	in	my	dreams
I	see	them	living	in	the	hidden	places
Unanchored	in	time	and	ageless	as	wishes.
The	woman	lying	at	my	side	hears	my	sigh
Following	the	morning	chime	and	asks
After	me	as	I	lie	in	the	wake	of	sorrow’s	concert,
But	I	will	not	speak	of	life’s	loneliness
Or	the	empty	shorelines	where	fishermen	belong
And	the	houses	never	lived	in	never	again
That	stand	in	necessary	configurations
To	build	us	familiar	places	for	the	dead.
One	day	I	will	journey	into	her	dreams
But	I	say	nothing	of	this	behind	my	smile
And	she	will	see	me	hunting	the	dark	waters
For	the	flit	of	trout	and	we	will	travel
Strange	landscapes	in	the	forever	instant
Until	she	leaves	me	for	the	living	day
But	as	the	dead	well	know	the	art	of	fishing
Finds	its	reward	in	brilliant	joyous	hope
And	eternal	loving	patience,	and	it	is	my
Thought	now	that	such	gods	that	exist
Are	the	makers	of	dreams	and	this	is	their	gift
This	blessed	river	of	sleep	and	dreams
Where	in	wonder	we	may	greet	our	dead
And	sages	and	priests	are	wise	when	they	say
Death	is	but	sleep	and	we	are	forever	alive
In	the	dreams	of	the	living,	for	I	have	seen
My	dead	on	nightly	journeys	and	I	tell	you	this:
They	are	well.
S ONG	OF	DREAMING
FISHER


Chapter	Thirteen
They	came	late	to	the	empty	land	and	looked	with	bitterness	upon	the	six	wolves	watching	them
from	the	horizon’s	rim.	With	them	was	a	herd	of	goats	and	a	dozen	black	sheep.	They	took	no
account	 of	 the	 wolves’	 possession	 of	 this	 place,	 for	 in	 their	 minds	 ownership	 was	 the	 human
crown	 that	 none	 other	 had	 the	 right	 to	 wear.	 The	 beasts	 were	 content	 to	 share	 in	 survival’s
struggle,	 in	 hunt	 and	 quarry,	 and	 the	 braying	 goats	 and	 bawling	 sheep	 had	 soft	 throats	 and
carelessness	was	a	common	enough	flaw	among	herds;	and	they	had	not	yet	learned	the	manner
of	 these	 two-legged	 intruders.	 Herds	 were	 fed	 upon	 by	 many	 creatures.	 Often	 the	 wolves
shared	their	meals	with	crows	and	coyotes,	and	had	occasion	to	argue	with	lumbering	bears	over
a	delectable	prize.
When	I	came	upon	the	herders	and	their	long	house	on	a	flat	above	the	valley,	I	found	six	wolf
skulls	spiked	above	the	main	door.	In	my	travels	as	a	minstrel	I	knew	enough	that	I	had	no	need
to	ask—this	was	a	tale	woven	into	our	kind,	after	all.	No	words,	either,	for	the	bear	skins	on	the
walls,	the	antelope	hides	and	elk	racks.	Not	a	brow	lifted	for	the	mound	of	bhederin	bones	in	the
refuse	pit,	or	the	vultures	killed	by	the	poison-baited	meat	left	for	the	coyotes.
That	night	I	sang	and	spun	tales	for	my	keep.	Songs	of	heroes	and	great	deeds	and	they	were
pleased	enough	and	the	beer	was	passing	and	the	shank	stew	palatable.
Poets	 are	 sembling	 creatures,	 capable	 of	 shrugging	 into	 the	 skin	 of	 man,	 woman,	 child	 and
beast.	There	are	some	among	them	secretly	marked,	sworn	to	the	cults	of	the	wilderness.	And
that	 night	 I	 shared	 out	 my	 poison	 and	 in	 the	 morning	 I	 left	 a	 lifeless	 house	 where	 not	 a	 dog
remained	 to	 cry,	 and	 I	 sat	 upon	 a	 hill	 with	 my	 pipe,	 summoning	 once	 more	 the	 wild	 beasts.	 I
defend	their	ownership	when	they	cannot,	and	make	no	defence	against	the	charge	of	murder;
but	temper	your	horror,	friends:	there	is	no	universal	law	that	places	a	greater	value	upon	human
life	over	that	of	a	wild	beast.	Why	would	you	ever	imagine	otherwise?
CONFESSIONS	OF	TWO	HUNDRED
TWENTY-THREE	COUNTS	OF	JUSTICE
WELTHAN	THE	MINSTREL	(AKA	SINGER	MAD)

He	came	to	us	in	the	guise	of	a	duke	from	an	outlying	border	fastness—a	place	remote	enough	that	none	of	us
even	 thought	 to	 suspect	 him.	 And	 in	 his	 manner,	 his	 hard	 countenance	 and	 few	 words,	 he	 matched	 well	 our
lazy	preconceptions	of	such	a	man.	None	of	us	could	argue	that	there	was	something	about	him,	a	kind	of	selfassurance	rarely	seen	at	court.	In	his	eyes,	like	wolves	straining	at	chains,	there	was	a	hint	of	the	feral—the
priestesses	positively	dripped.
‘But,	they	would	find,	his	was	a	most	potent	seed.	And	it	was	not	Tiste	Andii.’
Silchas	Ruin	poked	at	the	fire	with	a	stick,	reawakening	flames.	Sparks	fled	up	into	the	dark.	Rud	watched
the	warrior’s	cadaverous	face,	the	mottled	play	of	orange	light	that	seemed	to	paint	brief	moments	of	life	in	it.
After	 a	 time,	 Silchas	 Ruin	 settled	 back	 and	 resumed.	 ‘Power	 was	 drawn	 to	 him	 like	 slivers	 of	 iron	 to	 a
lodestone	 .	 .	 .	 it	 all	 seemed	 so	 .	 .	 .	 natural.	 His	 distant	 origins	 invited	 the	 notion	 of	 neutrality,	 and	 one	 might
argue,	in	hindsight,	that	Draconus	was	indeed	neutral.	He	would	use	any	and	every	Tiste	Andii	to	further	his
ambitions,	and	how	were	we	to	imagine	that,	at	the	very	core	of	his	desire,	there	was	love?’
Rud’s	gaze	slid	away	from	Silchas	Ruin,	up	and	over	the	Tiste	Andii’s	right	shoulder,	to	the	terrible	slashes
of	jade	in	the	night	sky.	He	tried	to	think	of	something	to	say,	a	comment	of	any	sort:	something	wry,	perhaps,
or	knowing,	or	cynical.	But	what	did	he	know	of	the	love	such	as	Silchas	Ruin	was	describing?	What,	indeed,
did	he	know	of	anything	in	this	or	any	other	world?
‘Consort	to	Mother	Dark—he	laid	claim	to	that	title,	eventually,	as	if	it	was	a	role	he	had	lost	and	had	vowed
to	 reacquire.’	 The	 white-skinned	 warrior	 snorted,	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 flickering	 flames.	 ‘Who	 were	 we	 to


challenge	that	assertion?	Mother’s	children	had	by	then	ceased	to	speak	with	her.	No	matter.	What	son	would
not	challenge	his	mother’s	lover—new	lover,	old	lover,	whatever—’	and	he	looked	up,	offering	Rud	a	faint	grin.
‘Perhaps	you’ve	some	understanding	of	that,	at	least.	After	all,	Udinaas	was	not	Menandore’s	first	and	only
love.’
Rud	looked	away	again.	‘I	am	not	certain	love	was	involved.’
‘Perhaps	not.	Do	you	wish	more	tea,	Rud	Elalle?’
‘No,	thank	you.	It	is	a	potent	brew.’
‘Necessary,	for	the	journey	to	come.’
Rud	frowned.	‘I	do	not	understand.’
‘This	night,	we	shall	travel.	There	are	things	you	must	see.	It	is	not	enough	that	I	simply	lead	you	this	way
and	that—I	do	not	expect	a	loyal	hound	at	my	heel,	I	expect	a	comrade	standing	at	my	side.	To	witness	is	to
approach	comprehension,	and	you	will	need	that,	when	you	decide.’
‘Decide	what?’
‘The	side	you	will	take	in	the	war	awaiting	us,	among	other	things.’
‘Other	things.	Such	as?’
‘Where	to	make	your	stand,	and	when.	Your	mother	chose	a	mortal	for	your	father	for	a	good	reason,	Rud.
Unexpected	strengths	come	from	such	mating:	the	offspring	often	exhibit	the	best	traits	from	both.’
Rud	started	as	a	stone	cracked	in	the	fire.	‘You	say	you	will	lead	me	to	places,	Silchas	Ruin,	for	you	have
no	wish	that	I	be	naught	but	a	loyal,	mindless	hound.	Yet	it	may	be	that	I	shall	not,	in	the	end,	choose	to	stand
beside	you	at	all.	What	then?	What	if	I	find	myself	opposite	you	in	this	war?’
‘Then	one	of	us	will	die.’
‘My	father	left	me	in	your	care—and	this	is	how	you	betray	his	trust?’
Silchas	Ruin	bared	his	teeth	in	a	humourless	smile.	‘Rud	Elalle,	your	father	gave	you	to	my	care	not	out	of
trust—he	knows	me	too	well	for	that.	Consider	this	your	first	lesson.	He	shares	your	love	for	the	Imass	of	the
Refugium.	That	realm—and	every	living	thing	within	it—is	in	danger	of	annihilation,	should	the	war	be	lost—’
‘Starvald	Demelain—but	the	gate	was	sealed!’
‘No	seal	is	perfect.	Will	and	desire	gnaw	like	acid.	Well.	Hunger	and	ambition	are	perhaps	more	accurate
descriptions	of	that	which	assails	the	gate.’	He	collected	the	blackened	pot	from	beside	the	coals	and	poured
Rud’s	cup	full	once	more.	‘Drink.	We	have	strayed	from	the	path.	I	was	speaking	of	the	ancient	forces—your
kin,	if	you	like.	Among	them,	the	Eleint.	Was	Draconus	a	true	Eleint?	Or	was	he	something	else?	All	I	can	say
is,	he	wore	the	skin	of	a	Tiste	Andii	for	a	time,	perhaps	as	a	sour	joke,	mocking	our	self-importance—who	can
know?	In	any	case,	it	was	inevitable	that	Anomander,	my	brother,	would	step	into	the	Consort’s	path,	and	all
those	opportunities	for	knowledge	and	truth	came	to	a	swift	end.	To	this	day,’	he	added,	sighing,	‘I	wonder	if
Anomander	regrets	killing	Draconus.’
Rud	started.	His	mind	was	awhirl.	‘What	of	the	Imass?	This	war—’
‘I	told	you,’	Silchas	Ruin	snapped,	face	betraying	his	irritation.	‘Wars	are	indifferent	to	the	choice	of	victims.
Innocence,	 guilt,	 such	 notions	 are	 irrelevant.	 Grasp	 hold	 of	 your	 thoughts	 and	 catch	 up.	 I	 wondered	 if
Anomander	has	regrets.	I	know	that	I	do	not.	Draconus	was	a	cold,	cold	bastard—and	with	the	awakening	of
Father	Light,	ah,	well,	we	saw	then	the	truth	of	his	jealous	rage.	The	Consort	cast	aside,	see	the	malice	of	the
spurned	ignite	a	black	fire	in	his	eyes!	When	we	speak	of	ancient	times,	Rud	Elalle,	we	find	in	our	words	things
far	nearer	to	hand,	and	all	those	emotions	we	imagined	new,	blazing	with	our	own	youth,	we	find	to	be	ancient
beyond	imagining.’	He	spat	into	the	coals.	‘And	this	is	why	poets	never	starve	for	things	to	sing	about,	though
rare	is	the	one	who	grows	fat	upon	them.’
‘I	will	defend	the	Refugium,’	said	Rud,	hands	clenching	into	fists.
‘We	know	that,	and	that	is	why	you	are	here—’
‘But	that	makes	no	sense!	I	should	be	there,	standing	before	the	gate!’
‘Another	lesson.	Your	father	may	love	the	Imass,	but	he	loves	you	more.’
Rud	surged	to	his	feet.	‘I	will	return—’
‘No.	Sit	down.	You	have	a	better	chance	of	saving	them	all	by	accompanying	me.’
‘How?’
Silchas	Ruin	leaned	forward	and	reached	into	the	fire.	He	scooped	up	two	handfuls	of	coals	and	embers.	He
held	 them	 up.	 ‘Tell	 me	 what	 you	 see,	 Rud	 Elalle,	 Ryadd	 Eleis—do	 you	 know	 those	 words,	 your	 true	 name?


They	are	Tiste	Andii—do	you	know	what	they	mean?’
‘No.’
Silchas	Ruin	studied	the	embers	cupped	in	his	hands.	‘Just	this.	Your	true	name,	Ryadd	Eleis,	means	“Hands
of	 Fire”.	 Your	 mother	 looked	 into	 the	 soul	 of	 her	 son,	 and	 saw	 all	 there	 was	 to	 see.	 She	 may	 well	 have
cherished	you,	but	she	also	feared	you.’
‘She	died	because	she	chose	betrayal.’
‘She	was	true	to	the	Eleint	blood	within	her—but	you	also	possess	the	blood	of	your	father,	a	mortal,	and	he
is	a	man	I	came	to	know	well,	to	understand	as	much	as	anyone	could.	A	man	I	came	to	respect.	He	was	the
first	 to	 comprehend	 the	 girl’s	 purpose,	 the	 first	 to	 realize	 the	 task	 awaiting	 me—and	 he	 knew	 that	 I	 did	 not
welcome	the	blood	that	would	stain	my	hands.	He	chose	not	to	stand	in	my	way—I	am	not	yet	certain	what
happened	at	the	gate,	the	clash	with	Wither,	and	poor	Fear	Sengar’s	misplaced	need	to	stand	in	Scabandari’s
stead—but	through	it	all,	Kettle’s	fate	was	sealed.	She	was	the	seed	of	the	Azath,	and	a	seed	must	find	fertile
soil.’	He	dropped	the	embers—now	cooled—back	on	to	the	fire.	‘She	is	young	yet.	She	needs	time,	and	unless
we	stand	against	the	chaos	to	come,	she	will	not	have	that	time—and	the	Imass	will	die.	Your	father	will	die.
They	will	all	die.’	He	rose	and	faced	Rud.	‘We	leave	now.	Korabas	awaits.’
‘What	is	Korabas?’
‘For	 this	 we	 must	 veer.	 Kallor’s	 dead	 warren	 should	 suffice.	 Korabas	 is	 an	 Eleint,	 Ryadd.	 She	 is	 the
Otataral	Dragon.	There	is	chaos	in	a	human	soul—it	is	your	mortal	gift,	but	be	aware—like	fire	it	can	turn	in
your	hands.’
‘Even	to	one	named	“Hands	of	Fire”?’
The	Tiste	Andii’s	red	eyes	seemed	to	flatten.	‘My	warning	was	precise.’
‘What	do	we	seek	in	meeting	this	Korabas?’
Silchas	slapped	the	ashes	from	his	palms.	‘They	will	free	her,	and	that	we	cannot	stop.	I	mean	to	convince
you	that	we	should	not	even	try.’
Rud	found	his	fists	were	still	clenched	tight,	aching	at	the	ends	of	his	arms.	‘You	give	me	too	little.’
‘Better	than	too	much,	Ryadd.’
‘Because	like	my	mother,	you	fear	me.’
‘Yes.’
‘Between	you	and	your	brothers,	Silchas	Ruin,	who	was	the	most	honest?’
The	Tiste	Andii	cocked	his	head,	and	then	smiled.
A	short	time	later,	two	dragons	lifted	into	the	darkness,	one	gleaming	polished	gold	that	slid	in	and	out	of	the
gloom	in	lurid	smears;	the	other	was	bone	white,	the	pallor	of	a	corpse	in	the	night—save	for	the	twin	embers
of	its	eyes.
They	rose	high	and	higher	still	above	the	Wastelands,	and	then	vanished	from	the	world.
In	 their	 wake,	 in	 a	 nest	 of	 rocks,	 the	 small	 fire	 glowed	 fitfully	 in	 its	 bed	 of	 ashes,	 eating	 the	 last	 of	 itself.
Until	nothing	was	left.
	
Sandalath	 Drukorlat	 gave	 the	 hapless	 man	 one	 last	 shake	 that	 sent	 spittle	 whipping	 from	 his	 lips,	 and	 then
threw	 him	 further	 up	 the	 shoreline.	 He	 scrambled	 to	 his	 feet,	 fell	 over,	 got	 up	 a	 second	 time	 and	 stumbled
unsteadily	away.
Withal	cleared	his	throat.	‘Sweetness,	you	seem	a	little	short	of	temper	lately.’
‘Challenge	yourself,	husband.	Find	something	to	improve	my	mood.’
He	glanced	out	at	the	crashing	waves,	licked	salt	from	around	his	mouth.	The	three	Nachts	were	sending
the	scrawny	refugee	off	with	hurled	shells	and	dead	crabs,	although	not	a	single	missile	managed	to	strike	the
fleeing	man.	‘The	horses	have	recovered,	at	least.’
‘Their	misery	has	just	begun.’
‘I	couldn’t	quite	make	out	what	happened,	but	I	take	it	the	Shake	vanished	through	a	gate.	And,	I	suppose,
we’re	going	to	chase	after	them.’
‘And	before	they	left,	one	of	their	own	went	and	slaughtered	almost	all	of	the	witches	and	warlocks—the
very	people	I	wanted	to	question!’
‘We	could	always	go	to	Bluerose.’
She	stood	straight,	almost	visibly	quivering.	He’d	heard,	once,	that	lightning	went	from	the	ground	up	and	not


the	 other	 way	 round.	 Sandalath	 looked	 ready	 to	 ignite	 and	 split	 the	 heavy	 clouds	 overhead.	 Or	 cut	 a
devastating	path	through	the	ramshackle,	stretched-out	camp	of	those	islanders	Yan	Tovis	had	left	behind—the
poor	fools	lived	in	squalid	driftwood	huts	and	wind-torn	tents,	all	along	the	highwater	line	like	so	much	wavetossed	detritus.	And	though	the	water	was	ever	rising,	so	that	the	spray	of	the	tumultuous	seas	now	drenched
them,	not	one	had	the	wherewithal	to	move.
Not	that	they	had	anywhere	to	go.	The	forest	was	a	blackened	wasteland	of	stumps	and	ash	for	as	far	as	he
could	see.
Just	outside	Letheras,	Sandalath	had	cut	open	a	way	into	a	warren,	a	place	she	called	Rashan,	and	the	ride
through	 it	 had	 begun	 in	 terrifying	 darkness	 that	 quickly	 dulled	 to	 torrid	 monotony.	 Until	 it	 began	 falling	 apart.
Chaos,	she	said.	Inclusions,	she	said.	Whatever	that	means.	And	the	horses	went	mad.
They	 had	 emerged	 into	 the	 proper	 world	 on	 the	 slope	 facing	 this	 strand,	 the	 horses’	 hoofs	 pounding	 up
clouds	of	ash	and	cinders,	his	wife	howling	in	frustration.
Things	had	eased	up	since	then.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	smiling	about?’
Withal	shook	his	head.	‘Smiling?	Not	me,	beloved.’
‘Blind	Gallan,’	she	said.
There	had	been	more	and	more	of	this	lately.	Incomprehensible	expostulations,	invisible	sources	of	irritation
and	blistering	fury.	Face	it,	Withal,	the	honeymoon’s	over.
‘In	 the	 habit	 of	 popping	 up	 like	 a	 nefarious	 weed.	 Spouting	 arcane	 nonsense	 impressing	 the	 locals.	 Never
trust	a	nostalgic	old	man—or	old	woman,	I	suppose.	Every	tale	they	spin	has	a	hidden	agenda,	a	secret	malice
for	 the	 present.	 They	 make	 the	 past—their	 version	 of	 it—into	 a	 kind	 of	 magic	 potion.	 “Sip	 this,	 friends,	 and
return	to	the	old	times,	when	everything	was	perfect.”	Bah!	If	it’d	been	me	doing	the	blinding,	I	wouldn’t	have
stopped	there.	I	would	have	scooped	out	his	entire	skull.’
‘Wife,	who	is	this	Gallan?’
She	bridled,	jabbed	a	finger	at	him.	‘Did	you	think	I	hadn’t	lived	before	meeting	you?	Oh,	pity	poor	Gallan!
And	if	he	left	a	string	of	women	in	the	wake	of	his	wanderings,	why,	be	so	good	as	to	indulge	the	sad	creature
—well,	this	is	what	comes	of	it,	isn’t	it?’
Withal	scratched	his	head.	See	what	happens	when	you	marry	an	older	woman?	And	face	it,	it	doesn’t
take	 a	 Tiste	 Andii	 to	 have	 about	 a	 hundred	 thousand	 years	 of	 history	 behind	 her.	 ‘All	 right,’	 he	 said
slowly,	‘what	now,	then?’
She	gestured	after	the	refugee	she’d	sent	scampering.	‘He	doesn’t	know	if	Nimander	and	the	others	were
with	 the	 Shake—there	 were	 thousands—the	 only	 time	 he	 saw	 Yan	 Tovis	 was	 at	 the	 landing,	 and	 she	 was
three	thousand	paces	away.	But,	then,	who	else	could	have	managed	to	open	the	gate?	And	then	keep	it	open
to	admit	ten	thousand	people?	Only	Andii	blood	can	open	the	Road,	and	only	royal	Andii	blood	could	keep	it
open!	By	the	Abyss,	they	must	have	bled	one	of	their	own	dry!’
‘This	road,	Sand,	where	does	it	lead?’
‘Nowhere.	Oh,	I	should	never	have	left	Nimander	and	his	kin!	The	Shake	not	only	listened	to	Blind	Gallan,
they	then	went	and	believed	him!’	She	stepped	closer	and	raised	a	hand,	as	if	to	strike	him.
Withal	backed	up	a	step.
‘Oh,	gods,	just	get	the	horses,	Withal.’
As	he	set	off,	he	glanced—with	odd	longing—after	the	still-running	refugee.
	
A	 short	 time	 later	 they	 sat	 mounted,	 pack-horses	 behind	 them,	 while	 Sandalath,	 motionless,	 seemed	 to	 study
something	in	front	of	them	that	only	she	could	see.	The	waves	thrashed	to	their	left,	the	burnt	forest	stank	on
their	right.	The	Nachts	fought	over	a	thick,	massive	length	of	driftwood	that	probably	weighed	more	than	all
three	 put	 together.	 That’d	 make	 a	 good	 club	 .	 .	 .	 for	 a	 damned	 Toblakai.	 Sink	 brace	 plugs,	 wrap	 the
knobby	end	in	hammered	iron.	Stud	with	beaten	bronze	rivets	and	maybe	a	spike	or	three.	Draw	wire
down	the	length	of	the	shaft,	and	then	sink	a	deep	and	heavy	counterweight	butt—
‘It’s	healing,	but	the	skin	is	thin.’	She	suddenly	had	a	knife	in	her	hand.	‘I	can	get	us	through,	I	think.’
‘Do	you	have	royal	blood	then?’
‘Snap	 shut	 that	 trap	 or	 I’ll	 do	 it	 for	 you.	 I	 told	 you,	 it’s	 a	 huge	 wound—barely	 mended.	 In	 fact,	 it	 seems
weaker	 on	 the	 other	 side,	 which	 isn’t	 good,	 isn’t	 right,	 in	 fact.	 Did	 they	 stay	 on	 the	 Road?	 They	 must	 have


known	that	much	at	least.	Withal,	listen	well.	Ready	a	weapon—’
‘A	weapon?	What	kind	of	weapon?’
‘Wrong	choice.	Find	another	one.’
‘What?’
‘Stupidity	won’t	work.	Try	that	mace	on	your	belt.’
‘That’s	a	smith’s	hammer—’
‘And	you’re	a	smith,	so	presumably	you	know	how	to	use	it.’
‘So	long	as	my	victim	lays	his	head	on	an	anvil,	aye.’
‘Can’t	you	fight	at	all?	What	kind	of	husband	are	you?	You	Meckros—always	fighting	off	pirates	and	such,
or	so	you	always	said—’	Her	eyes	narrowed.	‘Unless	they	were	just	big	fat	lies,	trying	to	impress	your	new
woman.’
‘I	haven’t	used	a	weapon	in	decades—I	just	make	the	damned	things!	And	why	do	I	need	to	anyway?	If
you	wanted	a	bodyguard	you	should	have	said	so	in	the	first	place,	and	I	could	have	hired	on	to	the	first	ship
out	of	Lether	Harbour!’
‘Abandon	me,	you	mean!	I	knew	it!’
He	 reached	 up	 to	 tear	 at	 his	 hair	 and	 then	 recalled	 that	 he	 didn’t	 have	 enough	 of	 it.	 Gods,	 life	 can	 be
damned	frustrating,	can’t	it	just?	‘Fine.’	He	tugged	loose	the	hammer.	‘I’m	ready.’
‘Now,	remember,	I	died	the	first	time	because	I	don’t	know	anything	about	fighting,	and	I	don’t	want	to	die	a
second	time—’
‘What’s	all	this	talk	about	fighting	and	dying?	It’s	just	a	gate,	isn’t	it?	What	in	Hood’s	name	is	on	the	other
side?’
‘I	don’t	know,	you	idiot!	Just	be	ready!’
‘For	what?’
‘For	anything!’
Withal	slipped	his	left	foot	out	of	its	stirrup	and	swung	down	to	the	littered	sand.
Sandalath	stared.	‘What	are	you	doing?’
‘I’m	going	to	piss,	and	maybe	whatever	else	I	can	manage.	If	we’re	going	to	end	up	in	a	hoary	mess,	I	don’t
want	fouled	breeches,	not	stuck	in	a	saddle,	not	riding	with	a	horde	of	shrieking	demons	on	my	tail.	Besides,	I
probably	only	have	a	few	moments	of	living	left	to	me.	When	I	go	I	plan	on	doing	it	clean.’
‘Just	blood	and	guts.’
‘Right.’
‘That’s	pathetic.	As	if	you’ll	care.’
He	went	off	to	find	somewhere	private.
‘Don’t	take	too	long!’	she	shouted	after	him.
There	was	a	time,	aye,	when	I	could	take	as	damned	well	long	as	I	pleased.
	
He	returned	and	would	have	climbed	back	into	the	saddle,	but	Sandalath	insisted	he	wash	his	hands	in	the	sea.
Once	this	was	done,	he	collected	up	the	hammer,	brushed	sand	from	it,	and	then	mounted	the	horse.
‘Anything	else	needing	doing?’	she	asked.	‘A	shave,	perchance?	Buff	your	boots,	maybe?’
‘Good	suggestions.	I’ll	just—’
With	a	snarl	she	slashed	her	left	palm.	The	air	split	open	before	them,	gaping	red	as	the	wound	in	her	hand.
‘Ride!’	she	yelled,	kicking	her	horse	into	a	lunge.
Cursing,	Withal	followed.
They	emerged	on	to	a	blinding,	blasted	plain,	the	road	beneath	them	glittering	like	crushed	glass.
Sandalath’s	horse	squealed,	hoofs	skidding,	slewing	sideways	as	she	sawed	on	the	reins.	Withal’s	own	beast
made	 a	 strange	 grunting	 sound,	 then	 its	 head	 seemed	 to	 drop	 out	 of	 sight,	 front	 legs	 folding	 with	 sickening
snaps—
Withal	 caught	 a	 glimpse	 of	 a	 pallid,	 overlong	 hand,	 slashing	 through	 the	 path	 where	 his	 horse’s	 head	 had
been	a	moment	earlier,	and	then	a	curtain	of	blood	lifted	before	him,	wrapped	hot	and	thick	over	his	face,	neck
and	 chest.	 Blinded,	 flaying	 empty	 air	 with	 his	 mace,	 he	 pitched	 forward,	 leaving	 the	 saddle,	 and	 struck	 the
road’s	savage	surface.	The	cloth	of	his	jerkin	disintegrated,	and	the	skin	of	his	chest	followed	suit.	The	breath
was	knocked	from	his	lungs.	He	vaguely	heard	the	hammer	bounce	and	skitter	down	the	road.


Sudden	 bellowing	 roars,	 the	 impact	 of	 something	 huge	 against	 bare	 flesh	 and	 bone.	 Splintering	 blows
drumming	the	road	beneath	him—the	hot	splash	of	something	drenching	his	back—he	clawed	the	blood	from
his	eyes,	managed	to	lift	himself	to	his	hands	and	knees—coughing,	spewing	vomit.
The	thundering	concussions	continued,	and	then	Sandalath	was	kneeling	beside	him.	‘Withal!	My	love!	Are
you	hurt—oh,	Abyss	take	me!	Too	much	blood—I’m	sorry,	oh,	I’m	sorry,	my	love!’
‘My	horse.’
‘What?’
He	spat	to	clear	his	mouth.	‘Someone	chopped	off	my	horse’s	head.	With	his	hand.’
‘What?	That’s	your	horse’s	blood?	All	over	you?	You’re	not	even	hurt?’	The	hands	that	had	been	caressing
him	now	shoved	him	away.	‘Don’t	you	dare	do	that	again!’
Withal	spat	a	second	time,	and	then	pushed	himself	to	his	feet,	eyes	fixing	on	Sandalath.	‘This	is	enough.’	As
she	opened	her	mouth	for	a	retort	he	stepped	close	and	set	a	filthy	finger	against	her	lips.	‘If	I	was	a	different
kind	of	man,	I’d	be	beating	you	senseless	right	about	now—no,	don’t	give	me	that	shocked	look.	I’m	not	here
to	be	kicked	around	whenever	your	mood	happens	to	turn	foul.	A	little	measure	of	respect—’
‘But	you	can’t	even	fight!’
‘Maybe	 not,	 and	 neither	 can	 you.	 What	 I	 can	 do,	 though,	 is	 make	 things.	 And	 something	 else,	 too,	 I	 can
decide,	at	any	time,	when	I’ve	had	enough.	And	I	will	tell	you	this	right	now,	I’m	damned	close.’	He	stepped
back.	‘Now,	what	in	Hood’s	name	just—gods	below!’
This	shout	burst	from	him	in	shock—three	enormous,	hulking,	black-skinned	demons	were	on	the	road	just
beyond	the	dead	horse.	One	of	them	held	a	club	of	driftwood	that	looked	like	a	drummer’s	baton	in	its	huge
hands,	and	was	using	it	to	pound	down	some	more	on	a	mangled,	crushed	corpse.	The	other	two	followed	the
blows	as	if	gauging	the	effects	of	each	and	every	crushing	impact.	Bluish	blood	had	sprayed	out	on	the	road,
along	with	other	less	identifiable	discharges	from	the	pulped	ruin	of	their	victim’s	body.
In	 a	 low	 voice	 Sandalath	 said,	 ‘Your	 Nachts—the	 Jaghut	 were	 inveterate	 jokers.	 Hah	 hah.	 That	 was	 a
Forkrul	Assail.	It	seems	the	Shake	stirred	things	up	somewhat—they’re	probably	all	dead,	in	fact,	and	this	one
was	 backtracking	 with	 the	 intention	 of	 cleaning	 up	 any	 stragglers—out	 through	 the	 gate,	 probably,	 to	 murder
every	refugee	on	that	shoreline	we’ve	just	left	behind.	Instead,	he	ran	into	us—and	your	Venath	demons.’
Withal	 wiped	 blood	 from	 his	 eyes.	 ‘I’m,	 uh,	 starting	 to	 see	 the	 resemblances—they	 were	 ensorcelled
before?’
‘In	 a	 manner	 of	 speaking.	 A	 geas,	 I	 suspect.	 They’re	 Soletaken	 .	 .	 .	 or	 maybe	 D’ivers.	 Either	 way,	 this
particular	realm	forced	a	veering—or	a	sembling—who	can	say	which	species	is	the	original,	after	all?’
‘Then	what	do	the	Jaghut	have	to	do	with	any	of	this?’
‘They	created	the	Nachts.	Or	so	I	gathered—the	mage	Obo	in	Malaz	City	seemed	to	be	certain	of	that.	Of
course,	if	he’s	right	and	they	did,	then	what	they	managed	to	do	was	something	no	one	else	has	ever	managed
—they	 found	 a	 way	 to	 chain	 the	 wild	 forces	 of	 Soletaken	 and	 D’ivers.	 Now,	 husband,	 get	 cleaned	 up	 and
saddle	 a	 new	 horse—we	 can’t	 stay	 here	 long.	 We	 ride	 as	 far	 as	 we	 need	 to	 on	 this	 road	 to	 confirm	 the
slaughter	of	the	Shake,	and	then	we	ride	back	out	the	way	we	came.’	She	paused.	‘Even	with	these	Venath,
we’ll	be	in	danger—if	there’s	one	Forkrul	Assail,	there’s	bound	to	be	more.’
The	Venath	demons	had	evidently	decided	they	were	done	with	the	destruction	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	as	they
now	 bounded	 up	 the	 road	 a	 few	 paces	 to	 then	 huddle	 round	 the	 club	 and	 examine	 the	 damage	 to	 their	 lone
weapon.
Gods,	they’re	still	stupid	Nachts.	Only	bigger.
What	a	horrid	thought.
‘Withal.’
He	faced	her	again.
‘I’m	sorry.’
Withal	shrugged.	‘It	will	be	all	right,	Sand,	if	you	don’t	expect	me	to	be	what	I’m	not.’
‘I	may	have	found	them	infuriating,	but	I	fear	for	Nimander,	Aranatha,	Desra,	all	of	them.	I	fear	for	them
so.’
He	grimaced,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘You	underestimate	them,	I	think,	Sand.’	And	 may	 Phaed’s	 ghost
forgive	us	all	for	that.
‘I	hope	so.’


He	 went	 to	 work	 loose	 the	 saddle,	 paused	 to	 pat	 the	 animal’s	 gore-soaked	 neck.	 ‘Should’ve	 given	 you	 a
name,	at	least.	You	deserved	that	much.’
	
Her	mind	was	free.	It	could	slip	down	among	the	sharp	knuckles	of	quartz	studding	the	plain,	where	nothing
lived	 on	 the	 surface.	 It	 could	 slide	 beneath	 the	 stone-hard	 clay	 to	 where	 the	 diamonds,	 rubies	 and	 opals	 hid
from	 the	 cruel	 heat.	 All	 this	 land’s	 wealth.	 And	 deep	 into	 the	 crumbling	 marrow	 of	 living	 bones	 wrapped	 in
withered	meat,	crouched	in	fever	worlds	where	blood	boiled.	In	the	moments	before	the	very	end,	she	could
hover	behind	hot,	bright	eyes—the	brightness	that	was	the	final	looking	upon	all	the	surrounding	things—all	the
precious	 vistas—that	 announced	 saying	 goodbye.	 That	 look,	 she	 now	 knew,	 did	 not	 shine	 forth	 solely	 among
old	people,	though	perhaps	they	were	the	only	ones	to	whom	it	belonged.	No,	here,	in	this	gaunt,	slow,	slithery
snake,	it	was	the	beacon	blazing	in	the	eyes	of	children.
But	 she	 could	 fly	 away	 from	 such	 things.	 She	 could	 wing	 high	 and	 higher	 still,	 to	 ride	 the	 fuzzy	 backs	 of
capemoths,	 or	 the	 feathered	 tips	 of	 vultures’	 wings.	 And	 look	 down	 wheeling	 round	 and	 round	 the	 crawling,
dying	worm	far	below,	that	red,	scorched	string	winking	with	dull	motion.	Thread	of	food,	knots	of	promise,	the
countless	strands	of	salvation—and	see	all	the	bits	and	pieces	falling	off,	left	in	its	wake,	and	down	and	down
low	and	lower	still,	to	eat	and	pick	at	leather	skin,	pluck	the	brightness	from	eyes.
Her	mind	was	free.	Free	to	make	beauty	with	a	host	of	beautiful,	terrible	words.	She	could	swim	through
the	cool	language	of	loss,	rising	to	touch	precious	surfaces,	diving	into	midnight	depths	where	broken	thoughts
fluttered	down,	where	the	floor	fashioned	vast,	intricate	tales.
Tales,	yes,	of	the	fallen.
There	was	no	pain	in	this	place.	Her	untethered	will	recalled	no	aching	joints,	no	crusting	flies	upon	split,	raw
lips;	no	blackened,	lacerated	feet.	It	was	free	to	float	and	then	sing	across	hungry	winds,	and	comfort	was	a
most	natural	thing,	reasonable,	a	proper	state	of	being.	Worries	dwindled,	the	future	threatened	no	alteration	to
what	was	and	one	could	easily	believe	that	what	was	would	always	be.
She	 could	 be	 an	 adult	 here,	 splashing	 water	 on	 to	 pretty	 flowers,	 dipping	 fingers	 into	 dreaming	 fountains,
damming	 up	 rivers	 and	 devouring	 trees.	 Filling	 lakes	 and	 ponds	 with	 poison	 rubbish.	 Thickening	 the	 air	 with
bitter	smoke.	And	nothing	would	ever	change	and	what	changes	came	would	never	touch	her	adultness,	her
perfect	 preoccupation	 with	 petty	 extravagances	 and	 indulgences.	 The	 adults	 knew	 such	 a	 nice	 world,	 didn’t
they?
And	 if	 the	 bony	 snake	 of	 their	 children	 now	 wandered	 dying	 in	 a	 glass	 wilderness,	 what	 of	 it?	 The	 adults
don’t	 care.	 Even	 the	 moaners	 among	 them—their	 caring	 had	 sharp	 borders,	 not	 far,	 only	 a	 few	 steps	 away,
patrolled	 borders	 with	 thick	 walls	 and	 bristling	 towers	 and	 on	 the	 outside	 there	 was	 agonizing	 sacrifice	 and
inside	there	was	convenience.	Adults	knew	what	to	guard	and	they	knew,	too,	how	far	to	think,	which	wasn’t
far,	not	far,	not	far	at	all.
Even	 words,	 especially	 words,	 could	 not	 penetrate	 those	 walls,	 could	 not	 overwhelm	 those	 towers.	 Words
bounced	 off	 obstinate	 stupidity,	 brainless	 stupidity,	 breathtaking,	 appalling	 stupidity.	 Against	 the	 blank	 gaze,
words	are	useless.
Her	mind	was	free	to	luxuriate	in	adulthood,	knowing	as	it	did	that	she	would	never	in	truth	reach	it.	And	this
was	 her	 own	 preoccupation,	 a	 modest	 one,	 not	 very	 extravagant,	 not	 much	 of	 an	 indulgence,	 but	 her	 own
which	meant	that	she	owned	it.
She	 wondered	 what	 adults	 owned,	 these	 days.	 Apart	 from	 this	 murderous	 legacy,	 of	 course.	 Great
inventions	beneath	layers	of	sand	and	dust.	Proud	monuments	that	not	even	spiders	could	map,	palaces	empty
as	caves,	sculptures	announcing	immortality	to	grinning	white	skulls,	tapestries	displaying	grand	moments	to	fill
the	guts	of	moths.	All	this,	such	a	bold,	joyous	legacy.
Flying	high,	among	the	capemoths	and	vultures	and	rhinazan	and	swarms	of	Shards,	she	was	free.	And	to
look	down	was	to	see	the	disordered	patterns	writ	large	across	the	glass	plain.	Ancient	causeways,	avenues,
enclosures,	 all	 marked	 out	 by	 nothing	 more	 than	 faint	 stains—and	 the	 broken	 glass	 was	 all	 that	 remained	 of
some	unknown	civilization’s	most	wondrous	chalice.
At	the	snake’s	head	and	in	front	of	it,	the	tiny	flickering	tongue	that	was	Rutt	and	the	baby	he	named	Held	in
his	arms.
She	could	descend,	plummeting	like	truth,	to	shake	the	tiny	swaddled	form	in	Rutt’s	twig-arms,	force	open
the	bright	eyes	to	the	glorious	panorama	of	rotted	cloth	and	layers	of	filtered	sunlight,	the	blazing	rippling	heat


from	Rutt’s	chest.	Final	visions	to	take	into	death—this	was	the	meaning	behind	that	brightness,	after	all.
Words	held	the	magic	of	the	breathless.	But	adults	turn	away.
They	have	no	room	in	their	heads	for	a	suffering	column	of	dying	children,	nor	the	heroes	among	them.
‘So	many	fallen,’	she	said	to	Saddic	who	remembered	everything.	‘I	could	list	them.	I	could	make	them	into
a	book	ten	thousand	pages	long.	And	people	will	read	it,	but	only	so	far	as	their	own	private	borders,	and	that’s
not	far.	Only	a	few	steps.	Only	a	few	steps.’
Saddic,	 who	 remembered	 everything,	 he	 nodded	 and	 he	 said,	 ‘One	 long	 scream	 of	 horror,	 Badalle.	 Ten
thousand	pages	long.	No	one	will	hear	it.’
‘No,’	she	agreed.	‘No	one	will	hear	it.’
‘But	you	will	write	it	anyway,	won’t	you?’
‘I	am	Badalle,	and	all	I	have	is	words.’
‘May	the	world	choke	on	them,’	said	Saddic,	who	remembered	everything.
Her	mind	was	free.	Free	to	invent	conversations.	Free	to	assemble	sharp	knuckles	of	quartz	into	small	boys
walking	beside	her	endless	selves.	Free	to	trap	light	and	fold	it	in	and	in	and	in,	until	all	the	colours	became	one,
and	that	one	was	so	bright	it	blinded	everyone	and	everything.
The	last	colour	is	the	word.	See	it	burn	bright:	that	is	what	there	is	to	see	in	a	dying	child’s	eyes.
‘Badalle,	your	indulgence	was	too	extravagant.	They	won’t	listen,	they	won’t	want	to	know.’
‘Well,	now,	isn’t	that	convenient?’
‘Badalle,	do	you	still	feel	free?’
‘Saddic,	I	still	feel	free.	Freer	than	ever	before.’
‘Rutt	holds	Held	and	he	will	deliver	Held.’
‘Yes,	Saddic.’
‘He	will	deliver	Held	into	an	adult’s	arms.’
‘Yes,	Saddic.’
The	last	colour	is	the	word.	See	it	burn	bright	in	a	dying	child’s	eyes.	See	it,	just	this	once,	before	you	turn
away.
‘I	will,	Badalle,	when	I	am	grown	up.	But	not	until	then.’
‘No,	Saddic,	not	until	then.’
‘When	I’ve	done	away	with	these	things.’
‘When	you’ve	done	away	with	these	things.’
‘And	freedom	ends,	Badalle.’
‘Yes,	Saddic,	when	freedom	ends.’
	
Kalyth	dreamed	she	was	in	a	place	she	had	not	yet	reached.	Overhead	was	a	low	ceiling	of	grey,	turgid	clouds,
the	kind	that	she	had	seen	above	the	plains	of	the	Elan,	when	the	first	snows	came	down	from	the	north.	The
wind	 howled,	 cold	 as	 ice,	 but	 it	 was	 dry	 as	 a	 frozen	 tomb.	 Across	 the	 taiga,	 stunted	 trees	 rose	 from	 the
permafrost	like	skeletal	hands,	and	she	could	see	sinkholes,	here	and	there,	in	which	dozens	of	some	kind	of
four-legged	 beast	 had	 become	 mired,	 dying	 and	 freezing	 solid,	 and	 the	 wind	 tugged	 and	 tore	 at	 their	 matted
hides,	and	frost	painted	white	their	curved	horns	and	ringed	the	hollow	pits	of	their	eyes.
In	the	myths	of	the	Elan,	this	vista	belonged	to	the	underworld	of	death;	it	was	also	the	distant	past,	the	very
beginning	place,	where	the	heat	of	life	first	pushed	back	the	bitter	cold.	The	world	began	in	darkness,	devoid	of
warmth.	It	awakened,	in	time,	to	an	ember	that	flared,	ever	so	brief,	before	one	day	returning	to	where	it	had
begun.	 And	 so,	 what	 she	 was	 seeing	 here	 before	 her	 could	 also	 belong	 to	 the	 future.	 Past	 or	 in	 the	 age	 to
come,	it	was	where	life	ceased.
But	she	was	not	alone.
A	score	of	figures	sat	on	gaunt	horses	along	a	ridge	a	hundred	paces	distant.	Wrapped	in	black	rain-capes,
armoured	 and	 helmed,	 they	 seemed	 to	 be	 watching	 her,	 waiting	 for	 her.	 But	 terror	 held	 Kalyth	 rooted,	 as	 if
knee-deep	in	frozen	mud.
She	wore	a	thin	tunic,	torn	and	half-rotted,	and	the	cold	was	like	the	Reaper’s	own	hand,	closing	about	her
from	 all	 sides.	 She	 could	 not	 move	 within	 its	 intransigent	 grip,	 even	 had	 she	 wanted	 to.	 She	 would	 will	 the
strangers	away;	she	would	scream	at	them,	unleash	sorcery	to	send	them	scattering.	She	would	banish	them
utterly.	But	no	such	powers	belonged	to	her.	Kalyth	felt	as	useless	here	as	she	felt	in	her	own	world.	A	vessel


empty,	longing	to	be	filled	by	a	hero’s	bold	fortitude.
The	 wind	 ripped	 at	 the	 grim	 figures,	 and	 now	 at	 last	 the	 snow	 came,	 cutting	 like	 shards	 of	 ice	 from	 the
heavy	clouds.
The	 riders	 stirred.	 The	 horses	 lifted	 their	 heads,	 and	 all	 at	 once	 they	 were	 descending	 the	 slope,	 hoofs
cracking	hard	the	frozen	ground.
Kalyth	 huddled,	 arms	 tight	 about	 herself.	 The	 frost-rimed	 riders	 drew	 closer,	 and	 she	 could	 just	 make	 out
that	 array	 of	 faces	 behind	 the	 serpentine	 nose-guards	 of	 their	 helms—deathly	 pale,	 bearing	 slashes	 gaping
deep	crimson	but	bloodless.	They	wore	surcoats	over	chain,	uniforms,	she	realized,	to	mark	allegiance	to	some
foreign	 army,	 grey	 and	 magenta	 beneath	 frozen	 bloodstains	 and	 crusted	 gore.	 One,	 she	 saw,	 was	 tattooed,
bedecked	with	fetishes	of	claws,	feathers	and	beads—huge,	barbaric,	perhaps	not	even	human.	But	the	others,
they	were	of	her	own	kind—she	was	certain	of	that.
They	reined	in	before	her	and	something	drew	Kalyth’s	wide	stare	to	one	rider	in	particular,	grey-bearded
beneath	 the	 dangling	 crystals	 of	 ice,	 his	 grey	 eyes,	 set	 deep	 in	 shadowed	 sockets,	 reminding	 her	 of	 a	 bird’s
fixed	regard—cold	and	raptorial,	bereft	of	all	compassion.
When	 he	 spoke,	 in	 the	 language	 of	 the	 Elan,	 no	 breath	 plumed	 from	 his	 mouth.	 ‘Your	 Reaper’s	 time	 is
coming	to	an	end.	Death	shall	surrender	his	face—’
‘Never	was	a	welcoming	one,’	cut	in	the	heavy,	round-faced	soldier	on	the	man’s	right.
‘Enough	of	that,	Mallet,’	snapped	another	horseman,	one-armed,	hunched	with	age.	‘You	don’t	even	belong
here	yet.	We’re	waiting	for	the	world	to	catch	up—such	are	dreams	and	visions—they	are	indifferent	to	the
ten	thousand	unerring	steps	in	any	given	mortal’s	life,	much	less	the	millions	of	useless	ones.	Learn	patience,
healer.’
‘Where	one	yields,’	continued	the	bearded	soldier,	‘we	shall	stand	in	his	stead.’
‘In	times	of	war,’	growled	the	barbaric	warrior—who	seemed	preoccupied	with	braiding	the	ratty	tatters	of
his	dead	horse’s	mane.
‘Life	itself	is	a	war,	one	it	is	doomed	to	lose,’	retorted	the	bearded	man.	‘Do	not	think,	Trotts,	that	our	rest
will	come	soon.’
‘He	was	a	god!’	barked	another	soldier,	baring	teeth	above	a	jet-black	forked	beard.	‘We’re	just	a	company
of	chewed-up	marines!’
Trotts	laughed.	‘See	how	high	you’ve	climbed,	Cage?	At	least	you	got	your	head	back—I	remember	burying
you	in	Black	Dog—we	looked	for	half	the	night	and	never	found	it.’
‘Got	ett	by	a	frog,’	another	suggested.
The	dead	soldiers	laughed,	even	Cage.
Kalyth	 saw	 the	 grey-bearded	 soldier’s	 faint	 smile	 and	 it	 transformed	 his	 falcon’s	 eyes	 into	 something	 that
seemed	 capable	 of	 holding,	 without	 flinching,	 the	 compassion	 of	 an	 entire	 world.	 He	 leaned	 forward	 on	 his
saddle,	the	horn	creaking	as	it	bent	on	its	hinge.	‘Aye,	we’re	no	gods,	and	we’re	not	going	to	attempt	to	replace
him	beneath	that	rotted	cowl.	We’re	Bridgeburners,	and	we’ve	been	posted	to	Hood’s	Gate—one	last	posting
—’
‘When	did	we	agree	to	that?’	Mallet	demanded,	eyes	wide.
‘It’s	 coming.	 In	 any	 case,	 I	 was	 saying—and	 gods	 below	 you’re	 all	 getting	 damned	 insubordinate	 in	 your
hoary	 deadness—we’re	 Bridgeburners.	 Why	 are	 any	 of	 you	 surprised	 to	 find	 that	 you’re	 still	 saluting?	 Still
taking	orders?	Still	marching	out	in	every	miserable	kind	of	weather	you	can	imagine?’	He	glared	left	and	right,
but	it	was	softened	by	the	wry	twist	of	his	lips.	‘Hood	knows,	it’s	what	we	do.’
Kalyth	could	hold	back	no	longer.	‘What	do	you	want	with	me?’
The	grey	eyes	settled	on	her	once	more.	‘Destriant,	by	that	title	alone	you	must	now	consort	with	the	likes
of	us—in	Hood’s—your	Reaper’s—stead.	You	see	us	as	Guardians	of	the	Gate,	but	we	are	more	than	that.
We	 are—or	 will	 become—the	 new	 arbiters,	 for	 as	 long	 as	 is	 necessary.	 Among	 us	 there	 are	 fists,	 mailed
gauntlets	 of	 hard	 violence.	 And	 healers,	 and	 mages.	 Assassins	 and	 skulkers,	 sappers	 and	 horse-archers,
lancers	 and	 trackers.	 Cowards	 and	 brave,	 stolid	 warriors.’	 He	 hitched	 a	 half-smile.	 ‘And	 we’ve	 found	 all
manner	of	unexpected	.	.	.	allies.	In	all	our	guises,	Destriant,	we	shall	be	more	than	the	Reaper	ever	was.	We
are	 not	 distant.	 Not	 indifferent.	 You	 see,	 unlike	 Hood,	 we	 remember	 what	 it	 was	 to	 be	 alive.	 We	 remember
each	and	every	moment	of	yearning,	of	desperate	need,	the	anguish	that	comes	when	no	amount	of	beseeching
earns	a	single	instant’s	reprieve,	no	pleading	yields	a	moment’s	mercy.	We	are	here,	Destriant.	When	no	other


choice	remains,	call	upon	us.’
The	ice	of	this	realm	seemed	to	shatter	all	around	Kalyth	and	she	staggered	as	warmth	flooded	through	her.
Blessed—no,	the	blessing	of	warmth.	Gasping,	she	stared	up	at	the	unnamed	soldier	as	tears	filled	her	eyes.
‘This	.	.	.	this	is	not	the	death	I	imagined.’
‘No,	and	I	give	you	this.	We	are	the	Bridgeburners.	We	shall	sustain.	But	not	because	we	were	greater	in
life	than	anyone	else.	Because,	Destriant,	we	were	no	different.	Now,	answer	me	as	a	Destriant,	 Kalyth	of
Ampelas	Rooted,	do	we	suffice?’
Does	anything	suffice?	No,	that	is	too	easy.	Think	on	your	answer,	woman.	He	deserves	that	much	at
least.	‘It	is	a	natural	thing	to	fear	death,’	she	said.
‘It	is.’
‘And	so	it	should	be,’	grunted	the	one	named	Cage.	‘It’s	miserable—look	at	my	company—I	can’t	get	rid	of
these	ugly	dogs.	The	ones	you	leave	behind,	woman,	they’re	waiting	for	you.’
‘But	without	judgement,’	said	the	grey-eyed	soldier.
The	one-armed	one	was	nodding,	and	he	added,	‘Just	don’t	expect	any	of	’em	to	have	lost	their	bad	habits
—like	Cage	and	his	eternally	sour	bile.	It’s	all	what	you	knew—who	you	knew,	I	mean.	It’s	all	that	and	nothing
more.’
Kalyth	did	not	know	these	people,	yet	already	they	felt	closer	to	her	than	anyone	she	had	ever	known.	‘I	am
becoming	a	Destriant	in	truth,’	she	said	in	wonder.	And	I	no	longer	feel	so	.	.	.	alone.	 ‘I	 fear	 death	 still,	 I
think,	but	not	as	much	as	I	once	did.’	And	I	once	flirted	with	suicide,	but	I	have	left	that	behind,	for	ever.	I
am	 not	 ready	 to	 embrace	 an	 end	 to	 things.	 I	 am	 the	 last	 Elan.	 And	 my	 people	 are	 waiting	 for	 me,	 not
caring	if	I	come	now	or	a	hundred	years	from	now—it	is	no	different	to	them.
The	dead—my	dead—will	indulge	me.
For	as	long	as	I	need.	For	as	long	as	I	have.
The	soldier	gathered	his	reins.	‘You	shall	find	your	Mortal	Sword	and	your	Shield	Anvil,	Kalyth.	Against	the
cold	that	slays,	you	must	answer	with	fire.	There	will	come	to	you	a	moment	when	you	must	cease	following
the	K’Chain	Che’Malle;	when	you	must	lead	them.	In	you	lies	their	last	hope	for	survival.’
But	are	they	worth	preserving?
‘That	judgement	does	not	belong	to	you.’
‘No—no,	I’m	sorry.	They	are	so	.	.	.	alien—’
‘As	you	are	to	them.’
‘Of	course.	I	am	sorry.’
The	warmth	was	fading,	the	snow	closing	in.
The	riders	wheeled	their	lifeless	mounts.
She	watched	them	ride	off,	watched	them	vanish	in	the	swirling	white.
The	white,	how	it	burns	the	eyes,	how	it	insists—
	
Kalyth	 opened	 her	 eyes	 to	 bright,	 blinding	 sunlight.	 I	 am	 having	 such	 strange	 dreams.	 But	 I	 still	 see	 their
faces,	each	one.	I	see	the	barbarian	with	his	filed	teeth.	I	see	scowling	Cage,	whom	I	adore	because	he
could	laugh	at	himself.	And	the	one	named	Mallet,	a	healer,	yes—it	is	easy	to	see	the	truth	of	that.	The
one-armed	one,	too.
And	 the	 one	 with	 the	 falcon’s	 eyes,	 my	 iron	 prophet,	 yes.	 I	 did	 not	 even	 learn	 his	 name.	 A
Bridgeburner—such	a	strange	name	for	soldiers,	and	yet	.	.	.	so	perfect	there	in	the	chasm	between	the
living	and	the	dead.
Death’s	guardians.	Human	faces	in	place	of	the	Reaper’s	shadowed	skull.	Oh,	what	a	thought!	What
a	relief!
She	wiped	her	eyes	and	sat	up.	And	a	flood	of	memories	returned.	Her	breath	caught	and	she	twisted	about,
finding	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Sag’Churok,	Rythok,	Gunth	Mach	.	.	.	‘O	spirits	bless	us.’
Yes,	 she	 would	 not	 find	 Kor	 Thuran,	 the	 K’ell	 Hunter’s	 stolid,	 impervious	 presence.	 The	 space	 beside
Rythok	howled	its	emptiness,	shrieked	his	absence.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	was	dead.
Scouting	far	to	the	west,	out	of	sight—but	they	all	felt	the	sudden	explosive	clash.	Kor	Thuran’s	snarls	filled
their	 skulls,	 his	 rage	 and	 baffled	 defiance—his	 pain.	 She	 found	 she	 was	 shivering,	 as	 bitter	 recollections
assailed	her.	He	died.	We	could	not	see	who	killed	him.


Our	winged	Assassin	has	vanished.	Was	it	Gu’Rull?	Had	Kor	Thuran	committed	a	transgression?	Was
the	Hunter	fleeing	us	all	and	did	the	Assassin	punish	him?	No,	Kor	Thuran	did	not	flee.	He	fought	and
he	died	guarding	our	flank.
Enemies	now	hunt	us.	They	know	we	are	close.	They	mean	to	find	us.
She	 rubbed	 at	 her	 face,	 forced	 out	 a	 broken	 sigh,	 the	 echoes	 of	 the	 K’ell	 Hunter’s	 terrible	 death	 still
crowding	her	mind,	leaving	her	feeling	exhausted.	And	this	day	has	only	begun.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	faced	her,	motionless,	waiting.	There	would	be	no	cookfire	this	morning.	They	had
carried	her	through	most	of	the	night,	and	in	her	exhaustion	she	had	slept	like	a	fevered	child	in	Gunth	Mach’s
arms.	She	wondered	why	they	had	set	her	down,	why	they	had	not	kept	going.	She	could	feel	their	nervous
impatience	to	be	off—away—the	disaster	of	failure	stalked	this	quest	now,	closer	than	ever	before.	As	huge
and	imposing	as	they	were,	she	now	saw	them	as	vulnerable,	insufficient	to	this	task.
There	are	deadlier	things	out	there.	They	brought	down	a	K’ell	Hunter	in	a	score	of	heartbeats.
Yet,	 as	 she	 rose	 to	 her	 feet,	 a	 new	 assurance	 filled	 her—gift	 of	 her	 dreams,	 and	 though	 they	 might	 be
nothing	 more	 than	 fanciful	 conjurations,	 false	 benedictions,	 they	 seemed	 to	 give	 her	 something	 solid,	 and	 she
could	feel	her	frailty	falling	away	from	her	soul	like	a	cracked	seed	husk.	Her	eyes	hardened	as	she	regarded
the	three	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
‘If	they	find	us,	they	find	us.	We	cannot	run	from	.	.	.	from	ghosts.	Nor	can	we	trust	in	the	protection	of
Gu’Rull.	So,	we	drive	south—straight	as	a	lance.	Gunth	Mach,	give	me	your	back	to	ride.	This	will	be	a	long
day—there	 is	 so	 much,	 so	 much	 we	 must	 now	 leave	 behind	 us.’	 She	 looked	 to	 Rythok.	 ‘Brother,	 I	 mean	 to
honour	Kor	Thuran—we	all	must—by	succeeding	in	our	quest.’
The	K’ell	Hunter’s	reptilian	eyes	remained	fixed	on	her,	cold,	unyielding.
Sag’Churok	and	Gunth	Mach	rarely	spoke	to	her	these	days,	and	when	they	did	it	seemed	their	voices	were
more	distant,	harder	to	make	out.	She	did	not	think	the	fault	was	theirs.	I	am	dwindling	within	myself.	The
world	narrows—but	how	is	it	I	even	know	this?	What	part	within	me	is	aware	of	its	own	measure?
No	matter.	We	must	do	this.
‘It	is	time.’
	
Sag’Churok	watched	Gunth	Mach	force	her	own	body	into	the	configuration	necessary	to	accommodate	the
Destriant.	 The	 heady,	 spice-drenched	 scents	 roiled	 from	 her	 in	 tendrils	 that	 spread	 like	 branches	 on	 the
currents	of	air,	and	they	carried	to	the	K’ell	Hunter	echoes	of	Kor	Thuran’s	last	moments	of	agony.
When	 the	 hunter	 became	 the	 hunted,	 every	 retort	 was	 reduced	 to	 a	 defiant	 snarl,	 a	 few	 primitive	 threat
postures,	and	the	body	existed	to	absorb	damage—to	weather	and	withstand	all	it	could	as	the	soul	that	dwelt
within	it	sought,	if	not	escape,	then	a	kind	of	comprehension.	A	recognition.	That	even	the	hunter	must	know
fear.	No	matter	how	powerful,	no	matter	how	superior,	how	supreme,	sooner	or	later	forces	it	could	not	defeat
or	flee	from	would	find	it.
Domination	was	an	illusion.	Its	coherence	could	only	hold	for	so	long.
This	 lesson	 was	 a	 seared	 brand	 upon	 the	 memories	 of	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 Its	 bitter	 taste	 soured	 the
dust	of	the	Wastelands,	and	eastward,	on	the	vast	plain	that	had	once	known	great	cities	and	the	whisper	of
hundreds	of	thousands	of	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	now	there	was	nothing	but	melted	and	crushed	fragments,	and
what	the	winds	sought	they	could	not	find,	and	so	wandered	for	ever	lost.
Kor	 Thuran	 had	 been	 young.	 No	 other	 crime	 belonged	 to	 the	 K’ell	 Hunter.	 He	 had	 made	 no	 foolish
decisions.	 Had	 not	 fallen	 victim	 to	 his	 own	 arrogance	 or	 sense	 of	 invulnerability.	 He	 had	 simply	 been	 in	 the
wrong	 place	 at	 the	 wrong	 time.	 And	 now	 so	 much	 was	 lost.	 And	 for	 all	 the	 Destriant’s	 noble	 words—her
sudden,	 unwarranted	 confidence	 and	 determination—Sag’Churok,	 along	 with	 Rythok	 and	 Gunth	 Mach,	 knew
that	the	quest	had	failed.	Indeed,	it	was	not	likely	that	they	would	survive	the	day.
Sag’Churok	 shifted	 his	 gaze	 from	 Gunth	 Mach	 as	 she	 suffered	 her	 transformation	 in	 runnels	 of	 oil	 that
dripped	like	blood.
Gu’Rull	 was	 gone,	 probably	 dead.	 Every	 effort	 to	 brush	 his	 thoughts	 had	 failed.	 Of	 course,	 the	 Shi’gal
Assassin	could	shield	his	mind,	but	he	had	no	reason	to	do	so.	No,	two	of	the	five	protectors	were	gone.	And
still	this	puny	human	stood,	her	soft	face	set	in	an	expression	Sag’Churok	had	come	to	know	as	defiant,	weak
eyes	fixed	on	the	undulating	horizon	to	the	south	as	if	her	will	alone	could	conjure	into	being	her	precious	Shield
Anvil	and	Mortal	Sword.	It	was	brave.	It	was	.	.	.	unexpected.	For	all	that	the	Matron’s	gifts	were	fading	from


the	woman,	she	had	indeed	found	some	kind	of	inner	strength.
All	for	naught.	They	would	die,	and	soon.	Their	torn	and	broken	bodies	would	lie	scattered,	lost,	their	great
ambitions	unheralded.
Sag’Churok	 lifted	 his	 head,	 drank	 in	 the	 air,	 and	 caught	 the	 taint	 of	 the	 enemy.	 Close.	 Drawing	 closer.
Threat	 oils	 rising	 between	 his	 scales,	 he	 scanned	 the	 horizon,	 and	 finally	 settled	 on	 the	 west—where	 Kor
Thuran	had	fallen.
Rythok	had	done	the	same,	and	even	Gunth	Mach’s	head	had	swivelled	round.
The	Destriant	was	not	blind	to	their	sudden	fixation.	She	bared	her	teeth.	‘Guardians,’	she	said.	‘It	seems
we	 need	 your	 help—not	 some	 time	 in	 the	 future,	 but	 now.	 What	 can	 you	 send	 to	 us?	 Who	 among	 you	 can
stand	against	that	which	my	companions	will	not	let	me	even	see?’
Sag’Churok	 did	 not	 understand	 her	 meaning.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 whom	 she	 was	 addressing.	 Was	 this	 the
Matron’s	madness,	or	Kalyth’s	very	own?
The	Destriant’s	gait	was	stiff	with	fear	as	she	walked	up	to	Gunth	Mach,	who	helped	the	woman	on	to	the
gnarled	saddle	of	scales	behind	her	shoulders.
Sag’Churok	faced	Rythok.	Hunter.	Slow	them	down.
Rythok	stretched	his	jaws	until	they	creaked,	and	then	drew	the	edges	of	his	blades	against	each	other	in	a
singing	rasp.	Tail	lashing—spraying	thick	droplets	of	oil	that	pattered	the	ground—the	K’ell	Hunter	set	off	at	a
run,	head	dipping	in	the	attack	posture.	Westward.
‘Where	is	he	going?’	Kalyth	shouted.	‘Call	him	back!	Sag’Churok—’
But	he	and	Gunth	Mach	sprang	into	motion,	side	by	side,	legs	scything	the	air,	taloned	feet	snapping	as	they
kicked	them	forward,	ever	swifter,	the	pace	building	until	the	broken	ground	blurred	beneath	them.	South.
The	 Destriant	 shrieked—her	 mask	 of	 determination	 shattered	 and	 in	 its	 place	 the	 raw	 truth	 of
comprehension	and	all	the	horror	that	followed.	Her	puny	fists	beat	at	Gunth	Mach’s	neck	and	shoulders,	and
for	an	instant	it	looked	as	if	Kalyth	would	throw	herself	from	the	First	Daughter’s	back—but	their	speed	was
too	great,	the	risk	of	broken	limbs,	or	indeed,	a	broken	neck,	defeated	the	impulse	and	forced	her	to	hold	tightly
to	Gunth	Mach’s	neck.
They	had	gone	a	third	of	a	league	when	Rythok’s	savage	hiss	burst	into	their	skulls—the	blistering	acid	of
sudden,	frenzied	battle.	Blades	striking	home,	impacts	reverberating	like	thunder.	A	crackling,	terrifying	sound,
and	all	at	once	blood	was	gushing	from	the	K’ell	Hunter.	A	piercing	cry,	a	weaving	stagger,	burning	pain	and
then	baffled	anguish	as	Rythok’s	legs	gave	way.
Ribs	 cracked	 as	 he	 struck	 the	 ground.	 Sharp	 rocks	 tore	 and	 stabbed	 the	 softer	 hide	 of	 his	 belly	 as	 he
skidded.
But	Rythok	was	not	yet	done.	Dying	would	have	to	wait.
He	rolled,	twisted	round,	blade	lashing	back	into	his	wake.	The	edge	struck	armour,	chopped	through	it,	and
bit	deep	into	flesh.
Phlegm	 and	 blood	 spattered,	 stung	 like	 fire	 in	 Rythok’s	 eyes—a	 sudden	 image,	 brutal	 in	 its	 clarity,	 as	 a
massive	axe	swung	down,	filling	the	Hunter’s	vision	on	his	left	side.
An	explosion	of	white.
And	death	made	the	two	fleeing	K’Chain	Che’Malle	stagger.	A	moment,	and	then,	with	unyielding	will,	they
recovered.	Glistening	with	grief,	rank	with	battle	oils.
The	Destriant	was	weeping—shedding	her	own	oil,	thin,	salty,	all	that	she	could	muster.
She	humbled	Sag’Churok.	Had	his	hide	grown	slick	with	sorrow	when	he	killed	Redmask?	No,	it	had	not.
Bitter	with	disappointment,	yes,	he	had	known	that.	But	greater	the	icy	grip	of	intransigent	judgement.	He	and
Gunth	 Mach	 had	 been	 witness	 to	 humans	 slaughtering	 each	 other.	 The	 fire	 of	 battle	 had	 raged	 on	 all	 sides.
Human	 life	 was,	 it	 was	 clear,	 of	 little	 value—even	 to	 the	 humans	 themselves.	 When	 the	 world	 is	 swarming
with	a	hundred	million	orthen,	what	loss	a	few	tens	of	thousands?
Yet,	this	frail	alien	creature	wept.	For	Rythok.
In	moments	he	would	wheel.	He	would	do	as	Rythok	had	done.	But	not	precisely	so.	There	was	little	point
in	attempting	to	kill.	Maiming	was	a	more	useful	tactic.	He	would	wound	as	many	as	he	could	and	so	diminish
the	numbers	capable	of	pursuing	Gunth	Mach	and	the	Destriant.
He	 would	 employ	 skills	 Rythok	 had	 not	 yet	 learned	 and	 now	 never	 would.	 Sag’Churok	 might	 not	 be	 a
Ve’Gath	Soldier,	but	he	would	surprise	them	nonetheless.


Gunth	Mach.
‘Yes,	beloved.’
Sag’Churok	whetted	his	blades.
‘No!’	Kalyth	shrieked.	‘Do	not	dare	leave	us!	Sag’Churok—I	forbid	it!’
Destriant.	I	shall	succeed	where	Rythok	failed.	My	life	shall	purchase	you	a	day,	perhaps	two,	and
you	must	make	it	enough.
‘Stop!	I	have	prayed!	Do	you	not	understand?	They	said	they	would	answer!’
I	do	not	know	of	whom	you	speak,	Destriant.	Listen	well	to	my	words.	Acyl	Nest	shall	die.	The	Matron
is	doomed,	and	all	those	within	the	Rooted.	Gunth	Mach	carries	my	seed.	She	shall	be	a	new	Matron.
Find	your	Shield	Anvil	and	your	Mortal	Sword—the	three	of	you	shall	be	Gunth	Mach’s	J’an	Sentinels,
until	such	time	as	she	breeds	her	own.
Then	Gunth	Mach	shall	free	you.
This	is	not	your	war.	This	is	not	your	end—it	is	ours.
‘Stop!’
Sag’Churok	prepared	to	speak	to	her	once	more,	despite	the	growing	effort	it	entailed.	He	would	tell	her	of
his	admiration.	And	his	faith	in	her—and	of	his	own	astonishment	at	feeling	such	emotions	for	a	human.	They
were	paltry	things,	too	weak	to	be	considered	gifts	of	any	sort,	but	he	would—
Figures	in	the	distance	ahead.	Not	the	enemy.	Not	born	and	bred	of	matrons	either.	And	not,	Sag’Churok
realized,	human.
Standing,	readying	an	array	of	weapons.
Fourteen	 in	 all.	 Details	 assembling	 as	 Sag’Churok	 and	 Gunth	 Mach	 raced	 ever	 closer.	 Gaunt	 despite	 the
blackened,	gnarled	armour	encasing	their	torsos	and	limbs.	Strange	helms	with	down-swept	cheek-guards	that
projected	below	their	chins.	Ragged	camails	of	black	chain.	Thick,	tattered	and	stained	cloaks	that	had	once
been	dyed	an	intense,	deep	yellow,	trimmed	in	silver	fur.
Sag’Churok	 saw	 that	 seven	 of	 the	 strangers	 held	 in	 their	 gauntleted	 hands	 long,	 narrow-bladed	 swords	 of
blued	steel,	basket-hilted	with	half-moon	knuckle-guards,	and	ornate	bucklers.	He	saw	two	others	with	heavier
single-edged	 axes	 and	 embossed	 round	 shields	 covered	 in	 mottled	 hides.	 Three	 with	 broad-headed,	 ironsheathed	spears.	And	two	more,	standing	behind	the	rest,	preparing	slings.
And,	surrounding	them	all,	spreading	down	from	the	faint	rise	on	which	they	waited,	frost	sparkled	on	earth
and	stone.
Disbelief	struck	Sag’Churok	like	a	hammer-blow.
This	was	not	possible.	This	was	.	.	.	without	precedent.	Impossible—what	cast	these	strangers?	Foes	or
allies?	But	no,	they	cannot	be	allies.
Besides,	as	all	know,	Jaghut	stand	alone.
‘There!’	shouted	Kalyth,	pointing.	‘I	prayed!	There—run	to	them—quickly!	Guardians	of	the	Gate!’
Destriant—hear	me.	These	ones	will	not	help	us.	They	will	do	nothing.
‘You’re	wrong!’
Destriant.	They	are	Jaghut.	They	are	.	.	.
.	.	.	impossible.
But	Gunth	Mach	had	altered	her	course,	was	closing	directly	upon	the	waiting	warriors.	Sag’Churok	fell	in
beside	her,	still	shocked,	still	confused,	uncomprehending—
And	then	he	and	Gunth	Mach	caught	the	stench	wafting	from	the	Jaghut,	gusting	out	from	the	frozen	ground
encircling	them.
Destriant,	beware!	They	are	undead!
‘I	know	what	they	are,’	snapped	Kalyth.	‘Stop,	Gunth	Mach—stop	retreating—right	here,	don’t	move.’	And
then	she	slipped	down	from	the	Daughter’s	back.
Destriant,	we	do	not	have	time—
‘We	do.	Tell	me,	how	many	pursue	us?	Tell	me!’
A	 Caste.	 Fifty.	 Forty-nine	 now.	 Four	 wield	 Kep’rah,	 weapons	 of	 sorcery.	 A	 Crown	 commands	 them,
they	flow	as	one.
She	looked	to	the	northwest.	‘How	far	away?’
Your	eyes	shall	find	them	shortly.	They	are	.	.	.	mounted.


‘On	what?’
Sag’Churok	 would	 have	 sent	 her	 an	 image,	 but	 she	 was	 beyond	 such	 things	 now.	 She	 was	 closed	 and
closing.	Wrought	.	.	.	legs.	To	match	our	own.	Tireless.
He	watched	as	the	Destriant	absorbed	this	information,	and	then	she	faced	the	Jaghut.
‘Guardians.	I	thought	to	see	.	.	.	familiar	faces.’
One	of	the	spear-wielders	stepped	forward.	‘Hood	would	not	want	us.’
‘If	he	had,’	said	the	swordswoman	beside	him,	‘he	would	have	summoned	us.’
‘He	would	not	choose	that,’	resumed	the	first	Jaghut,	‘for	he	knew	we	would	not	likely	accede.’
‘Hood	 abused	 our	 goodwill,’	 the	 swordswoman	 said,	 tusks	 gleaming	 with	 frost,	 ‘at	 the	 first	 chaining.	 He
knew	enough	to	face	away	from	us	at	the	next	one.’	An	iron-sheathed	finger	pointed	at	the	Destriant.	‘Instead,
he	abused	you,	child	of	the	Imass.	And	made	of	one	his	deadliest	enemy.	We	yield	him	no	sorrow.’
‘No	commiseration,’	said	the	spear-wielder.
‘No	sympathy,’	added	one	of	the	slingers.
‘He	will	stand	alone,’	the	swordswoman	said	in	a	rasp.	‘A	Jaghut	in	solitude.’
Sag’Churok	twisted	round,	studied	the	glint	of	metal	to	the	northwest.	Not	long	now.
The	 swordswoman	 continued.	 ‘Human,	 you	 keep	 strange	 company.	 They	 will	 teach	 you	 nothing	 of	 value,
these	 Che’Malle.	 It	 is	 their	 curse	 to	 repeat	 their	 mistakes,	 again	 and	 again,	 until	 they	 have	 destroyed
themselves	and	everyone	else.	They	have	no	gifts	for	you.’
‘It	seems,’	said	Kalyth	of	the	Elan,	‘we	humans	have	already	learned	all	they	could	teach	us,	whether	we
ever	knew	it	or	not.’
A	chilling	sound,	the	rattling	laughter	of	fourteen	undead	Jaghut.
Then	the	spear-wielder	spoke.	‘Flee.	Your	hunters	shall	know	the	privilege	of	meeting	the	last	soldiers	of	the
only	army	the	Jaghut	ever	possessed.’
‘The	last	to	die,’	one	added	in	a	growl.
‘And	should	you	see	Hood,’	said	the	swordswoman,	‘remind	him	of	how	his	soldiers	never	faltered.	Even	in
his	moment	of	betrayal.	We	never	faltered.’
More	laughter.
Pale,	trembling,	the	Destriant	returned	to	Gunth	Mach.	‘We	go.	Leave	them	to	this.’
Sag’Churok	hesitated.	They	are	too	few,	Destriant.	I	will	stay	with	them.
Fourteen	pairs	of	cold,	lifeless	eyes	fixed	on	the	K’ell	Hunter,	and,	smiling,	the	swordswoman	spoke.	‘There
are	enough	of	us.	Kep’rah	never	amounted	to	much	of	a	threat	against	Omtose	Phellack.	Still,	you	may	stay.
We	 appreciate	 an	 audience,	 because	 we	 are	 an	 arrogant	 people.’	 The	 ghastly	 grin	 broadened.	 ‘Almost	 as
arrogant	as	you,	Che’Malle.’
‘I	think,’	observed	the	spear-wielder,	‘this	one	is	.	.	.	humbled.’
His	 companion	 shrugged.	 ‘Into	 the	 twilight	 of	 a	 species	 comes	 humility,	 like	 an	 old	 woman	 who	 has	 just
remembered	 she’s	 still	 a	 virgin.	 Too	 late	 to	 count	 for	 anything.	 I	 am	 not	 impressed.’	 And	 the	 swordswoman
attempted	to	spit,	failed,	and	quietly	cursed.
‘Sag’Churok,’	said	the	Destriant	from	Gunth	Mach’s	saddled	back,	‘do	not	die	here.	Do	you	understand	me?
I	need	you	still.	Watch,	if	you	must.	See	what	there	is	to	be	seen,	and	then	return	to	us.’
Very	well,	Kalyth	of	the	Elan.
The	K’ell	Hunter	watched	his	beloved	carry	the	human	away.
Battered	armour	rustled	and	clanked	as	the	Jaghut	warriors	readied	themselves,	fanning	out	along	the	crest
of	the	hill.	As	they	did	so,	the	frigid	air	crackled	around	them.
Sag’Churok	 spoke:	 Proud	 soldiers,	 do	 not	 fear	 they	 will	 pass	 you	 by.	 They	 pass	 by	 nothing	 they
believe	they	can	slay,	or	destroy.
‘We	have	observed	your	folly	countless	times,’	replied	the	swordswoman.	‘Nothing	of	what	we	are	about	to
face	will	catch	us	unawares.’	She	turned	to	her	companions.	‘Is	not	Iskar	Jarak	a	worthy	leader?’
‘He	is,’	answered	a	chorus	of	rough	voices.
‘And	what	did	he	say	to	us,	before	he	sent	us	here?’
And	thirteen	Jaghut	voices	answered:	“	‘Pretend	they	are	T’lan	Imass.’	”
The	last	survivors	of	the	only	army	of	the	Jaghut,	who	had	not	survived	at	all,	then	laughed	once	more.	And
that	laughter	clattered	on,	to	greet	the	Caste,	and	on,	through	the	entire	vicious,	stunning	battle	that	followed.


Sag’Churok,	watching	from	a	hundred	paces	away,	felt	the	oil	sheathing	his	hide	thicken	in	the	bitter	gusts	of
Omtose	 Phellack,	 as	 the	 ancient	 Hold	 of	 Ice	 trembled	 to	 the	 impacts	 of	 Kep’rah,	 as	 it	 in	 turn	 lashed	 out—
bursting	flesh,	sending	frozen	pieces	and	fragments	flying.
In	the	midst	of	the	conflagration,	iron	spoke	with	iron	in	that	oldest	of	tongues.
Sag’Churok	 watched.	 And	 listened.	 And	 when	 he	 had	 seen	 and	 heard	 enough,	 he	 did	 as	 the	 Destriant
commanded.	 He	 left	 the	 battle	 behind.	 Knowing	 the	 outcome,	 knowing	 a	 yet	 deeper,	 still	 sharper	 bite	 of
humility.
Jaghut.	Though	we	shared	your	world,	we	never	saw	you	as	our	foe.	Jaghut,	the	T’lan	Imass	never
understood—some	people	are	simply	too	noble	to	be	rivals.	But	then,	perhaps	it	was	that	very	nobility
they	so	despised.
Iskar	Jarak,	you	who	commanded	them	.	.	.	what	manner	of	thing	are	you?	And	how	did	you	know?	I
wish	you	could	answer	me	that	one	question.	How	did	you	know	precisely	what	to	say	to	your	soldiers?
Sag’Churok	would	never	forget	that	laughter.	The	sound	was	carved	into	his	very	hide;	it	rode	the	swirls	of
his	soul,	danced	light	on	the	heady	flavours	of	his	relief	and	wonder.	Such	knowing	amusement,	both	wry	and
sweet,	such	a	cruel,	breathtaking	sound.
I	have	heard	the	dead	laugh.
He	knew	he	would	ride	that	laughter	through	the	course	of	his	life.	It	would	hold	him	up.	Give	him	strength.
Now	I	understand,	Kalyth	of	the	Elan,	what	made	your	eyes	so	bright	on	this	day.
Behind	him,	the	earth	shook.	And	the	song	of	laughter	went	on	and	on.
	
The	swollen	trunks	of	segmented	trees	rose	from	the	shallows	of	the	swamp,	so	bloated	that	Grub	thought	they
might	split	open	at	any	moment,	disgorging	.	.	.	what?	He	had	no	idea,	but	considering	the	horrific	creatures
they	 had	 seen	 thus	 far—mercifully	 from	 a	 distance—it	 was	 likely	 to	 be	 so	 ghastly	 it	 would	 haunt	 his
nightmares	for	the	rest	of	his	life.	He	swatted	at	a	gnat	chewing	on	his	knee	and	crouched	further	down	behind
the	bushes.
The	buzz	and	whine	of	insects,	the	slow	lap	of	water	on	the	sodden	shoreline,	and	the	deep,	even	breathing
of	something	massive,	each	exhalation	a	sharp	whistle	that	went	on	.	.	.	and	on.
Grub	licked	sweat	from	his	lips.	‘It’s	big,’	he	whispered.
Kneeling	at	his	side,	Sinn	had	found	a	black	leech	and	let	each	of	its	two	suckers	fasten	on	to	the	tip	of	a
finger.	 She	 spread	 the	 fingers	 and	 watched	 how	 the	 slimy	 thing	 stretched.	 But	 it	 was	 getting	 fatter.	 ‘It’s	 a
lizard,’	she	said.
‘A	dragon.’
‘Dragons	 don’t	 breathe,	 not	 like	 we	 do,	 anyway.	 That’s	 why	 they	 can	 travel	 between	 worlds.	 No,	 it’s	 a
lizard.’
‘We	lost	the	path—’
‘There	never	was	a	path,	Grub,’	Sinn	replied.	‘There	was	a	trail,	and	we’re	still	on	it.’
‘I	preferred	the	desert.’
‘Times	change,’	she	said,	and	then	grinned.	‘That’s	a	joke,	by	the	way.’
‘I	don’t	get	it.’
She	made	a	face.	‘Time	doesn’t	change,	Grub,	just	the	things	in	it.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘This	trail,	of	course.	It’s	as	if	we’re	walking	the	track	of	someone’s	life,	and	it	was	a	long	life.’	She	waved
with	her	free	hand.	‘All	this,	it’s	what’s	given	shape	to	the	mess	at	the	far	end—which	was	where	we	started
from.’
‘Then	we’re	going	back	in	time?’
‘No.	That	would	be	the	wrong	direction,	wouldn’t	it?’
‘Get	that	thing	off	your	fingers	before	it	sucks	you	dry.’
She	held	it	out	and	he	tugged	it	loose,	which	wasn’t	as	easy	as	he	would	have	liked.	The	puckered	wounds
at	the	ends	of	Sinn’s	fingers	bled	freely.	Grub	tossed	the	creature	away.
‘Think	he’ll	smell	it?’	Sinn	asked.
‘He	who?’
‘The	lizard.	My	blood.’


‘Gods	below!’
Her	eyes	were	bright.	‘Do	you	like	this	place?	The	air,	it	makes	you	drunk,	doesn’t	it?	We’re	back	in	the
age	when	everything	was	raw.	Unsettled.	But	maybe	not,	maybe	we’re	from	the	raw	times.	But	here,	I	think,
you	could	stay	for	ten	thousand	years	and	nothing	would	change,	nothing	at	all.	Long	ago,	time	was	slower.’
‘I	thought	you	said—’
‘All	right,	change	was	slower.	Not	that	anything	living	would	sense	that.	Everything	living	just	knows	what	it
knows,	and	that	never	changes.’
She	was	easier	when	she	never	said	anything,	Grub	decided,	but	he	kept	that	thought	to	himself.	Something
was	stirring,	out	in	the	swamp,	and	Grub’s	eyes	widened	when	he	studied	the	waterline	and	realized	that	it	had
crept	 up	 by	 a	 full	 hand’s	 span.	 Whatever	 it	 was,	 it	 had	 just	 displaced	 a	 whole	 lot	 of	 water.	 ‘It’s	 coming,’	 he
said.
‘Which	flickering	eye,’	Sinn	mused,	‘is	us?’
‘Sinn—we	got	to	get	out	of	here—’
‘If	we’re	not	even	here,’	she	continued,	‘where	did	we	come	from,	except	from	something	that	is	here?	You
can’t	just	say,	“Oh,	we	come	through	a	gate,”	because,	then,	the	question	just	shows	up	all	over	again.’
The	breathing	had	stopped.
‘It’s	coming!’
‘But	 you	 can	 breed	 horses—and	 you	 can	 see	 how	 they	 change—longer	 legs,	 even	 a	 different	 gait.	 Like
turning	a	desert	wolf	into	a	hunting	dog—it	doesn’t	take	as	long	as	you’d	think.	Did	someone	breed	us	to	make
us	like	we	are?’
‘If	they	did,’	hissed	Grub,	‘they	should’ve	given	one	of	us	more	brains!’	Snatching	her	by	the	arm,	he	pulled
her	upright.
She	laughed	as	they	ran.
Behind	 them,	 water	 exploded,	 enormous	 jaws	 snapped	 on	 empty	 air,	 breath	 shrieking,	 and	 the	 ground
trembled.
Grub	did	not	look	behind	them—he	could	hear	the	monstrous	thrash	and	whip	of	the	huge	lizard	as	it	surged
through	the	undergrowth,	closing	fast.
Then	Sinn	tore	herself	free.
His	heels	skidded	on	wet	clay.	Spinning	round,	he	caught	an	instant’s	glimpse	of	Sinn—her	back	to	him—
facing	 a	 lizard	 big	 as	 a	 Quon	 galley,	 its	 elongated	 jaws	 bristling	 with	 dagger-sized	 fangs.	 Opening	 wide	 and
wider	still.
Fire	erupted.	A	conflagration	that	blinded	Grub,	made	him	reel	away	as	a	solid	wall	of	heat	struck	him.	He
stumbled	to	his	knees.	It	was	raining—no,	that	was	hail—no,	bits	of	flesh,	hide	and	bone.	Blinking,	gasping,
he	slowly	lifted	his	head.
A	crater	gaped	before	Sinn,	steaming.
He	climbed	to	his	feet	and	walked	unevenly	to	her	side.	The	pit	was	twenty	or	more	paces	across,	deep	as	a
man	 was	 tall.	 Murky	 water	 gurgled,	 filling	 the	 basin.	 In	 that	 basin,	 a	 piece	 of	 the	 lizard’s	 tail	 thrashed	 and
twitched.	Mouth	dry,	Grub	asked,	‘Did	you	enjoy	that,	Sinn?’
‘None	of	it’s	real,	Grub.’
‘Looked	real	enough	to	me!’
She	snorted.	‘Just	a	memory.’
‘Whose?’
‘Maybe	 mine.’	 Sinn	 shrugged.	 ‘Maybe	 yours.	 Something	 buried	 so	 deep	 inside	 us,	 we	 would	 never	 have
ever	known	about	it,	if	we	weren’t	here.’
‘That	makes	no	sense.’
Sinn	held	up	her	hands.	The	one	that	had	been	streaming	blood	looked	scorched.	‘My	blood,’	she	whispered,
‘is	on	fire.’
	
They	 skirted	 the	 swamp,	 watched	 by	 a	 herd	 of	 scaly,	 long-necked	 beasts	 with	 flattened	 snouts.	 Bigger	 than
any	bhederin,	but	with	the	same	dull,	bovine	eyes.	Tiny	winged	lizards	patrolled	their	ridged	backs,	picking	at
ticks	and	lice.
Beyond	 the	 swamp	 the	 land	 sloped	 upward,	 festooned	 with	 snake-leafed	 trees	 with	 pebbled	 boles	 and


feathery	crowns.	There	was	no	obvious	way	around	the	strange	forest,	so	they	entered	it.	In	the	humid	shade
beneath	the	canopy,	iridescent-winged	moths	fluttered	about	like	bats,	and	the	soft,	damp	ground	was	crawling
with	toads	that	could	swallow	a	man’s	fist	and	seemed	disinclined	to	move	aside,	forcing	Grub	to	step	carefully
and	Sinn	to	lash	out	with	her	bare	feet,	laughing	with	every	meaty	impact.
The	 slope	 levelled	 out	 and	 the	 trees	 grew	 denser,	 gloom	 closing	 in	 like	 a	 shroud.	 ‘This	 was	 a	 mistake,’
muttered	Grub.
‘What	was?’
‘All	of	it.	The	Azath	House,	the	portal—Keneb	must	be	worried	sick.	It	wasn’t	fair,	us	just	leaving	like	that,
telling	no	one.	If	I’d	known	it	was	going	to	take	this	long	to	find	whatever	it	was	you	think	we	need	to	find,	I’d
probably	have	said	“no”	to	the	whole	idea.’	He	eyed	the	girl	beside	him.	‘You	knew	from	the	very	start,	didn’t
you?’
‘We’re	 on	 the	 trail—we	 can’t	 leave	 it	 now.	 Besides,	 I	 need	 an	 ally.	 I	 need	 someone	 who	 can	 guard	 my
back.’
‘With	what,	this	stupid	eat-knife	in	my	belt?’
She	made	a	face.	‘Tell	me	the	truth.	Where	did	you	come	from?’
‘I	was	a	foundling	in	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	The	Imperial	Historian	Duiker	saved	me.	He	picked	me	up	outside
Aren’s	gate	and	put	me	into	Keneb’s	arms.’
‘Do	you	actually	remember	all	of	that?’
‘Of	course.’
Her	eyes	had	sharpened	their	study.	‘You	remember	walking	in	the	Chain	of	Dogs?’
He	nodded.	‘Walking,	running.	Being	scared,	hungry,	thirsty.	Seeing	so	many	people	die.	I	even	remember
seeing	Coltaine	once,	although	the	only	thing	I	can	see	in	my	head	now,	when	I	think	of	him,	is	crow-feathers.
At	least,’	he	added,	‘I	didn’t	see	him	die.’
‘What	city	did	you	come	from?’
‘That	I	can’t	remember.’	He	shrugged.	‘Anything	before	the	Chain	.	.	.	is	gone,	like	it	never	existed.’
‘It	didn’t.’
‘What?’
‘The	Chain	of	Dogs	made	you,	Grub.	It	built	you	up	out	of	dirt	and	sticks	and	rocks,	and	then	it	filled	you
with	 everything	 that	 happened.	 The	 heroes	 who	 fought	 and	 then	 died,	 the	 people	 who	 loved,	 then	 lost.	 The
ones	that	starved	and	died	of	thirst.	The	ones	whose	hearts	burst	with	terror.	The	ones	that	drowned,	the	ones
that	swallowed	an	arrow	or	a	sword.	The	ones	who	rode	spears.	It	took	all	of	that	and	that	became	your	soul.’
‘That’s	ridiculous.	There	were	lots	of	orphans.	Some	of	us	made	it,	some	of	us	didn’t.	That’s	all.’
‘You	 were	 what,	 three	 years	 old?	 Four?	 Nobody	 remembers	 much	 from	 when	 they	 were	 that	 young.	 A
handful	of	scenes,	maybe.	That’s	it.	But	you	remember	the	Chain	of	Dogs,	Grub,	because	you’re	its	get.’
‘I	had	parents.	A	real	father,	a	real	mother!’
‘But	you	can’t	remember	them.’
‘Because	they	died	before	the	Chain	even	started!’
‘How	do	you	know?’
‘Because	what	you’re	saying	makes	no	sense!’
‘Grub,	I	know	because	you’re	just	like	me.’
‘What?	You	got	a	real	family—you	even	got	a	brother!’
‘Who	looks	at	me	and	doesn’t	know	who	or	what	he’s	looking	at.	I’ll	tell	you	who	made	me.	An	assassin
named	 Kalam.	 He	 found	 me	 hiding	 with	 a	 bunch	 of	 bandits	 who	 were	 pretending	 to	 be	 rebels.	 He	 carved
things	on	to	my	soul,	and	then	he	left.	And	then	I	was	made	a	second	time—I	was	added	on	to.	At	Y’Ghatan,
where	I	found	the	fire	that	I	took	inside	me,	that	now	burns	on	and	on	like	my	very	own	sun.	And	after,	there
was	Captain	Faradan	Sort,	because	she	knew	that	I	knew	they	were	still	alive—and	I	knew	because	the	fire
never	went	out—it	was	under	the	city,	burning	and	burning.	I	knew—I	could	feel	it.’	She	stopped	then,	panting
to	catch	her	breath,	her	eyes	wild	as	a	wasp-stung	cat’s.
Grub	stared	at	her,	not	knowing	whether	he	wanted	to	hug	her	or	hit	her.	‘You	were	born	to	a	mother,	just
like	I	was.’
‘Then	why	are	we	so	different?’
Moths	fled	at	her	shout,	and	sounds	fell	away	on	all	sides.


‘I	 don’t	 know,’	 he	 replied	 in	 a	 soft	 voice.	 ‘Maybe	 .	 .	 .	 maybe	 you	 did	 find	 something	 in	 Y’Ghatan.	 But
nothing	like	that	ever	happened	to	me—’
‘Malaz	City.	You	jumped	ship.	You	went	to	find	the	Nachts.	Why?’
‘I	don’t	know!’
She	leapt	away	from	him,	rushed	off	into	the	wood.	In	moments	he	had	lost	sight	of	her.	‘Sinn?	What	are
you	doing?	Where	are	you	going?’
The	gloom	vanished.	Fifty	paces	away	a	seething	sphere	of	flames	blossomed.	Trees	exploded	in	its	path	as
it	rolled	straight	towards	Grub.
He	opened	his	mouth	to	scream,	but	no	sound	emerged.
The	blistering	ball	of	fire	heaved	closer,	huge,	bristling—
Grub	gestured.	The	ground	lifted	suddenly	into	the	fire’s	path,	in	a	mass	of	roots,	humus	and	mud,	surging
upward,	toppling	trees	to	the	sides.	A	thousand	twisted	brown	arms	snaked	out	from	the	churning	earth.	The
writhing	wall	engulfed	the	rolling	sphere	of	fire,	slapped	it	down	as	would	a	booted	heel	crush	the	life	from	a
wayward	ember.	Thunder	shook.	The	earth	subsided,	the	arms	vanishing,	leaving	nothing	more	than	a	slowly
settling,	chewed-up	mound.	Clouds	of	steam	billowed	and	then	drifted,	thinning	as	the	darkness	returned	once
more.
He	saw	her	walking	calmly	towards	him,	stepping	over	shattered	trunks,	brushing	dirt	from	her	plain	tunic.
Sinn	halted	directly	before	him.	‘It	doesn’t	matter,	Grub,’	she	said.	‘You	and	me—we’re	different.’
She	set	off,	and	after	a	moment	he	stumbled	after	her.
Never	argue	with	a	girl.
	
It	was	a	day	for	strangers.	One	was	beyond	his	reach,	the	other	he	knew	well.	Taxilian	and	Rautos	had	prised
loose	a	panel	to	reveal	a	confused	mass	of	metal	coils,	tubes	and	wire-wrapped	cables.	Muttering	about	finding
the	necessary	hinge	spells	needed	to	unleash	sorcerous	power,	thus	awakening	the	city’s	brain,	Taxilian	began
poking	and	prodding	the	workings.	Crowding	behind	him,	sweat	beading	his	brow,	Rautos	ran	through	a	litany
of	cautions,	none	of	which	Taxilian	heeded.
Last	 had	 devised	 a	 trap	 for	 the	 lizard-rats—the	 orthen—and	 had	 headed	 off	 to	 check	 it,	 Asane
accompanying	him.
At	the	top	of	a	ramp	and	in	a	long	but	shallow	antechamber,	Nappet	and	Sheb	had	found	a	sealed	door	and
were	pounding	at	it	with	iron-headed	sledges,	each	blow	ringing	like	a	tortured	bell.	Most	of	the	damage	they
likely	inflicted	was	to	their	ears,	but	since	neither	had	anything	to	say	to	the	other,	they’d	yet	to	discover	it.
Breath	 was	 exploring	 the	 Nest	 itself,	 the	 now	 empty,	 abandoned	 abode	 of	 the	 Matron,	 finding	 nothing	 of
interest,	 although	 unbeknownst	 to	 her	 residual	 flavours	 flowed	 in	 through	 her	 lungs	 and	 formed	 glistening
minute	 droplets	 on	 her	 exposed	 skin.	 Vague	 dreams	 of	 producing	 children	 dogged	 her,	 successive	 scenes	 of
labour	and	birth,	tumbling	one	upon	the	next	like	a	runaway	nightmare.	What	had	begun	as	a	diffuse	irritation
was	quickly	building	to	an	indefinable	rage.
Breath	 had	 been	 living	 inside	 the	 Tiles	 since	 creating	 them,	 but	 even	 she	 could	 not	 find	 the	 meaning	 she
sought	in	them.	And	now	the	outside	world	was	seeping	into	her.	Confusion	swarmed.
And	then	there	was	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	drone.	Climbing,	drawing	ever	closer	to	this	hapless	collection
of	humans.
The	 ghost	 drifted	 amongst	 his	 family,	 haunted	 by	 a	 growing	 trepidation.	 His	 people	 were	 failing.	 In	 some
ineffable,	fundamental	way,	they	were	pulling	apart.	Even	as	he	had	wondered	at	their	purpose,	now	each	one
—barring	 perhaps	 Taxilian—was	 doing	 the	 same.	 A	 crisis	 was	 upon	 them,	 and	 he	 could	 feel	 the	 growing
turbulence.	They	would	not	be	ready	for	Sulkit.	They	might	even	kill	the	drone.	And	then	all	would	be	lost.
He	 recalled—once,	 a	 thousand	 times?—standing	 on	 the	 deck	 of	 a	 ship,	 witness	 to	 the	 sea’s	 surface
spreading	out	smooth	as	vitreous	glass	on	all	sides,	a	strange	quality	suffusing	the	still	air,	the	light	becoming
uncanny,	febrile.	And	around	him	faceless	sailors	scrambling,	pale	as	motes—bloody	propitiations	to	the	Elder
God,	the	bawling	bleat	of	goats	brought	up	from	the	hold,	the	flash	of	sea-dipped	blades	and	twisted	blankets	of
blood	 floating	 on	 the	 seas—all	 around	 him,	 such	 rising	 fear.	 And	 in	 answer	 to	 all	 of	 this,	 he	 heard	 his	 own
laughter.	Cruel	as	a	demon’s,	and	wide	eyes	fixed	on	him,	for	they	had	found	a	monster	in	their	midst.	And	he
was	that	monster.
I	 called	 storms,	 didn’t	 I?	 Just	 to	 see	 the	 violence,	 to	 draw	 it	 round	 me	 like	 the	 warmest	 cloak.	 And


even	the	cries	of	drowning	mortals	could	not	break	my	amusement.
Are	these	memories	mine?	What	manner	of	beast	was	I?
The	blood	tasted	.	.	.	good.	Propitiation?	The	fools—they	simply	fed	my	power.
I	remember	a	tribe,	corpses	cooling	beneath	furs	and	blankets,	and	the	stains	of	spite	on	my	hands.	I
remember	the	empty	hole	I	found	myself	in,	the	pit	that	was	my	crime.	Too	late	to	howl	at	its	depth,	its
lifeless	air,	the	deadness	inside.
Betrayed	by	a	wife.	Everyone	laughing	behind	my	back.	For	that,	all	would	die.	So	it	must	be,	and	so
it	was.	And	I	fled	that	place,	the	home	I	destroyed	in	the	span	of	a	single	night.	But	some	holes	cannot
be	 climbed	 out	 of.	 I	 ran	 and	 ran,	 and	 each	 night,	 lying	 exhausted,	 I	 fell	 back	 into	 that	 hole,	 and	 I
looked	up	at	that	mouth	of	light	far	above,	and	I	watched	it	ever	recede.	Until	it	winked	out.
When	you	 see	 my	 eyes	 now,	 all	 you	 see	 is	 that	 deadness.	 You	 see	 the	 black,	 smooth	 walls.	 And	 you
know	that,	though	I	look	back	at	you,	I	see	nothing	that	makes	me	feel	.	.	.	anything.
I	am	walking	still,	alone	on	the	empty	plain,	and	the	edifice	I	approach	looms	ever	bigger,	a	thing	of
stone	and	dried	blood,	a	thing	eager	to	awaken	once	more.
Come	find	me.
Asane	came	staggering	back	into	the	chamber	where	Taxilian	and	Rautos	still	crouched	at	the	gutted	wall.
Gasping,	frightened,	she	struggled	to	find	her	breath,	as	Rautos	turned	round.
‘Asane?	What	is	it?	Where	is	Last?’
‘A	demon!	One	lives!	It	found	us!’
They	could	hear	sounds	now	on	the	ramp,	leather	soles	and	something	else—the	click	of	claws,	the	flicking
hiss	of	a	tail	brushing	stone.
Asane	backed	to	the	far	wall.	Rautos	hissed,	‘Taxilian!	Get	Nappet	and	Sheb!	Quickly!’
‘What?’	the	man	glanced	back	over	his	shoulder.	‘What	is	it?’
Last	appeared,	looking	faintly	bewildered,	but	otherwise	unharmed.	Two	dead	orthen	hung	from	a	string	at
his	belt.	Moments	later,	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	loomed	into	view.	Gaunt,	but	no	taller	than	a	man,	thin-limbed,
a	tail	that	lashed	about	as	if	possessing	its	own	will.
The	 ghost	 felt	 the	 fear,	 in	 Asane	 and	 Rautos.	 But	 in	 Taxilian,	 who	 slowly	 straightened	 from	 the	 exposed
machinery,	there	was	wonder,	curiosity.	And	then	.	.	.	excitement.	He	stepped	forward.
The	drone	was	studying	the	chamber,	as	if	searching	for	something.	At	the	incessant	clanging	from	above,	it
cocked	its	head.	A	moment	later	there	were	shouts	of	triumph	from	Nappet	and	Sheb—the	door	had	opened,
but	 the	 ghost	 knew	 that	 the	 surrender	 of	 that	 barrier	 had	 not	 come	 beneath	 their	 sledges.	 Sulkit	 had	 simply
unlocked	it.	A	moment	later,	he	wondered	how	he	knew	this.
Breath	 reappeared	 from	 a	 side	 passage.	 ‘Blueiron,’	 she	 whispered,	 staring	 at	 the	 drone.	 ‘Like	 a	 .	 .	 .	 a
Fulcrum.	Taxilian,	go	to	it—we	need	it.’
‘I	know,’	he	replied,	licking	dry	lips.	‘Rautos,	go	up	to	Sheb	and	Nappet—keep	them	occupied	up	there.	I
don’t	want	them	charging	down	here	with	swords	out.	Make	them	understand—’
‘Understand	what?’	Rautos	demanded.
‘That	we’ve	found	an	ally.’
Rautos’s	eyes	widened.	He	wiped	sweat	from	his	face.	A	moment	later,	he	backed	up,	then	turned	and	set
off	up	the	ramp.
Taxilian	spoke	to	the	drone.	‘Can	you	understand	me?	Nothing	works.	We	need	to	fix	it.	We	need	your	help
—no,	perhaps	it’s	the	other	way	round.	We’d	like	to	help	you	bring	all	of	this	back	to	life.’
Silence.	 The	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle	 seemed	 to	 be	 ignoring	 everyone	 in	 the	 chamber,	 its	 tentacled	 fingers
writhing	like	seagrass	at	the	ends	of	its	arms.	The	rows	of	fangs	glistened	in	its	broad	slash	of	a	mouth.	After	a
moment,	 the	 drone	 blinked.	 Once,	 twice,	 three	 times,	 each	 lid	 distinct.	 Then	 it	 walked	 in	 a	 hitching	 gait	 to
where	 Taxilian	 had	 been	 working.	 It	 picked	 up	 the	 panel	 and	 deftly	 replaced	 it.	 Straightening,	 it	 turned	 and
faced	the	ghost,	eyes	fixing	on	his.
You	can	see	me.	The	realization	stunned	him.	And	all	at	once	he	could	feel	something—my	own	body—and
with	it	jarring	pain	in	his	hands,	the	ache	of	abuse.	He	could	taste	his	own	sweat,	the	acrid	exhaustion	of	his
muscles.	And	then	it	was	gone.
He	cried	out.
Help	me!


Sulkit’s	 reptilian	 eyes	 blinked	 again,	 and	 then	 the	 drone	 set	 off,	 quickly	 crossing	 the	 room	 and	 vanishing
down	the	ramp	that	led	to	the	domed	carapace—the	chamber	that	housed	this	city’s	mind.
Taxilian	barked	a	laugh.	‘Follow	it!’	He	hurried	after	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Breath	fell	in	behind	him.
Once	the	three	were	gone,	Asane	ran	to	Last	and	he	took	her	in	his	arms.
Rautos,	Sheb	and	Nappet	arrived.	‘We	got	the	door	open,’	said	Sheb,	his	voice	overloud.	‘It	just	slid	to	one
side.	It	leads	outside,	to	a	balcony—gods,	we’re	high	up!’
‘Never	mind	that,’	growled	Nappet.	‘We	saw	someone,	way	out	on	the	plain.	Walking.	Seems	we’ve	found
another	wanderer.’
‘Maybe,’	said	Rautos,	‘maybe	he’ll	know.’
‘Know	what?’	snapped	Sheb,	baring	his	teeth.
Rautos	gestured	helplessly.
Nappet	was	glaring	round,	hefting	the	sledge	in	his	hands.	‘So	where’s	the	fucking	demon?’
‘It	means	no	harm,’	said	Last.
‘Too	bad	for	it.’
‘Don’t	hurt	it,	Nappet.’
Nappet	advanced	on	Last.	‘Look	at	the	stupid	farmer—found	an	animal	to	pet,	did	you?	She’s	not	much—
Breath	looks	a	damned	sight	better.’
‘The	demon	isn’t	even	armed,’	said	Last.
‘Then	it’s	stupid.	Because	if	I	was	it,	I’d	be	swinging	the	biggest	damned	axe	I	could	find.	I’d	start	by	killing
you	and	that	hag	you’re	holding.	Then	fat,	useless	Rautos	there,	with	the	stupid	questions.’
‘The	first	one	it’d	kill	would	be	you,	Nappet,’	laughed	Sheb.
‘Because	I’m	the	most	dangerous	one	here,	aye,	it’d	try.	But	I’d	smash	its	skull	in.’
‘Not	the	most	dangerous,’	corrected	Sheb,	‘just	the	stupidest.	It’d	kill	you	out	of	pity.’
‘Let’s	go	and	prepare	the	meal,’	Last	said	to	Asane,	still	guarding	her	with	one	thick,	muscled	arm.	‘Sorry,
Nappet,	there’s	not	enough	for	you.’
The	man	stepped	closer.	‘Try	and	stop	me—’
Last	spun.	His	fist	hammered	into	Nappet’s	face,	shattering	the	man’s	nose.	In	a	welter	of	blood	he	reeled
back.	 Teeth	 bounced	 on	 the	 floor.	 The	 sledge	 fell	 from	 his	 hands.	 After	 a	 moment	 he	 fell	 down,	 and	 then
curled	up,	covering	his	broken	face.
The	others	stared	at	Last.
Then	Sheb	laughed,	but	it	was	a	weak	laugh.
‘Come	on,’	said	Last	to	Asane.
They	left	the	chamber.
After	a	moment,	Sheb	said,	‘I’m	heading	back	up	to	the	balcony.’
Rautos	went	to	his	pack	and	rummaged	within	it	until	he	found	some	rags	and	a	flask.	He	then	went	over	to
crouch,	grunting,	beside	Nappet.	‘Let’s	see	what	we	can	do	here,	Nappet.’
Betrayal	 could	 lie	 dead,	 a	 cold	 heap	 of	 ashes,	 only	 to	 blaze	 alight	 in	 an	 instant.	 What	 drove	 me	 to
such	 slaughter?	 They	 were	 kin.	 Companions.	 Loved	 ones.	 How	 could	 I	 have	 done	 that	 to	 them?	 My
wife,	she	wanted	to	hurt	me—why?	What	had	I	done?	Gorim’s	sister?	That	was	nothing.	Meaningless.
Not	worth	all	the	screaming,	she	had	to	have	seen	that.
Hurting	me	like	she	did,	but	I	won’t	ever	forget	the	look	in	her	eyes—her	face—when	I	took	her	life.
And	 I’ll	 never	 understand	 why	 she	 looked	 like	 the	 one	 betrayed.	 Not	 me.	 Gorim’s	 sister,	 that	 wasn’t
anything	to	do	with	her.	I	wasn’t	out	to	hurt	her.	It	just	happened.	But	what	she	did,	that	was	like	a	knife
stabbed	into	my	heart.
She	had	to	know	I	wasn’t	the	kind	of	man	to	let	that	pass.	I	got	my	pride.	And	that’s	why	they	all	had
to	die,	all	of	them	who	knew	and	laughed	behind	my	back.	I	needed	to	deliver	a	lesson,	but	then,	after
it	was	all	done,	why,	there	was	no	one	left	to	heed	it.	Just	me,	which	didn’t	work,	because	it	made	it	into
a	different	lesson.	Didn’t	it?
The	 dragon	 waits	 on	 the	 plain.	 It	 doesn’t	 even	 blink.	 It	 did,	 once,	 and	 everything	 disappeared.
Everything	and	everyone.	It	won’t	ever	do	that	again.
You	blink,	you	lose	that	time	for	ever.	You	can’t	even	be	sure	how	long	that	blink	lasted.	A	moment,	a
thousand	 years.	 You	 can’t	 even	 know	 for	 sure	 that	 what	 you	 see	 now	 is	 the	 same	 as	 what	 you	 saw


before.	You	can’t.	You	think	it	is.	You	tell	yourself	that,	convince	yourself	of	that.	Just	a	continuation	of
everything	you	knew	before.	What	you	see	is	still	there.	That’s	what	you	tell	yourself.	That’s	the	game	of
reassurance	your	mind	plays.	To	keep	things	sane.
But	 think	 on	 that	 one	 blink—you’ve	 all	 known	 it—when	 all	 that	 you	 thought	 was	 real	 suddenly
changes.	 From	 one	 side	 of	 the	 blink	 to	 the	 other	 side.	 It	 comes	 with	 bad	 news.	 It	 comes	 with	 soulplummeting	horror	and	grief.	How	long	was	that	blink?
Gods	below,	it	was	fucking	eternity.


Chapter	Fourteen
Turn	this	dark	maddening	charge
All	you	I	once	knew	snagged	like	moths
In	the	still	web	of	younger	days
Rise	up	from	the	fresh	white	foam
In	the	face	of	my	seaward	plunge
Howl	against	my	wild	run	and	these	wild
Blazing	eyes—but	I	hear	the	call
Of	how	life	once	had	been	and	such	heat
In	the	crushed	chirr	of	locusts	rubbing
The	high	grasses	of	a	child’s	road
And	the	summer	was	unending
The	days	refused	to	close	and	I	played
Savage	and	warrior,	the	heroic	nail
Upon	which	worlds	pitched	and	wobbled
Blue	as	newborn	iron	and	these	salt-winds
Were	yet	to	blow	and	sink	corrosive	teeth
Into	my	stolid	spine	and	my	stiffened	ribs
That	could	take	the	golden	weight
Of	a	thousand	destinies
Where	are	you	now,	my	unlined	faces
On	those	rich	sighing	summers
When	we	gods	ruled	feral	the	wilding
World?	Hollow	husks	turning	on
Threads	of	tired	silk	so	lost	in	my	wake,
And	you	that	run	with	me	in	the	blind
Stampede—this	charge	we	cannot	turn
And	the	sea	awaiting	us	waits	with	its
Promise	of	dissolution,	the	fraying	of
Youthful	days,	the	broken	nails,	the	sagging
Ribs—the	summers	drifting	away	and	away
And	forever	away.
BROKEN	NAIL’S	LAMENT
FISHER

Someone	was	screaming	in	agony,	but	that	was	a	sound	warleader	Gall	had	grown	used	to.	Eyes	stinging	in	the
drifting	 smoke,	 he	 swung	 his	 horse	 round	 on	 the	 dirt	 track	 and	 unleashed	 a	 stream	 of	 curses.	 At	 least	 three
raids	were	swarming	out	from	the	village	in	the	valley,	lances	held	high,	grisly	trophies	bobbing	and	weaving.
‘Coltaine	take	those	fools	and	crush	them	under	his	heel!	Jarabb—ride	down	to	that	commander.	He’s	to	form
up	his	troop	and	resume	scouting	to	the	south—no	more	attacks—tell	the	fool,	I’ll	have	his	loot,	his	wives	and
his	daughters,	all	of	it,	if	he	disobeys	me	again.’
Jarabb	was	squinting.	‘That	is	Shelemasa,	Warleader.’
‘Fine.	Her	husband	and	her	sons—I’ll	take	them	as	slaves	and	then	sell	them	to	a	D’ras.	Bult’s	broken	nose,
she	needs	better	control	of	her	warriors!’
‘They’re	just	following	her	lead,’	Jarabb	said.	‘She’s	worse	than	a	rabid	she-wolf.’
‘Stop	chewing	my	ear,’	Gall	said,	wanting	to	pull	a	foot	out	of	the	stirrup	and	drive	it	into	the	man’s	chest—


too	familiar	of	late,	too	smug,	too	many	Hood-damned	words	and	too	many	knowing	looks.	After	Shelemasa
was	dealt	with,	he’d	send	the	pup	yelping	and	turn	a	blind	eye	to	all	the	wounded	looks	sure	to	follow.
Jarabb	tried	a	smile	which	faltered	as	Gall’s	scowl	deepened.	A	moment	later	the	young	Tear	Runner	kicked
his	horse	into	motion	and	rode	hard	for	the	shouting,	yipping	raids.
Above	the	sickly	smears	of	smoke	the	sky	was	cloudless,	a	canopy	of	saturated	blue	and	a	baleful	sun	that
seemed	to	boil	in	the	sky.	Flocks	of	long-tailed	birds	swooped	and	cut	in	erratic	patterns,	too	terrified	to	land	as
Khundryl	 warriors	 swarmed	 the	 ground	 in	 all	 directions.	 Fat,	 finger-long	 locusts	 crawled	 through	 the	 ruined
fields.
The	 advance	 scout	 troop	 was	 returning	 from	 up	 the	 road,	 and	 Gall	 was	 pleased	 to	 see	 their	 disciplined,
collected	 canter,	 lances	 shod	 and	 upright.	 Which	 officer	 was	 that	 one?	 Making	 out	 the	 leather-wound	 hoop
dangling	from	the	man’s	weapon,	he	knew	who	it	was.	Vedith,	who	had	crushed	a	town	garrison	early	on	in	the
campaign.	Heavy	losses	to	his	raid,	but	then,	hardly	surprising.	Young,	in	that	stupid,	foolhardy	way,	but	worth
taking	note	of—since	he	clearly	had	firm	command	of	his	warriors.
A	gesture	while	they	were	still	some	distance	away	halted	all	the	riders	behind	Vedith,	who	then	rode	up	to
Gall	and	reined	in.	‘Warleader.	A	Bolkando	army	awaits	us,	two	leagues	distant.	Ten	thousand,	two	full	legions,
with	a	supply	camp	crawling	with	three	times	that	number.	Every	stand	of	trees	within	a	league	of	them	has
been	cut	down.	I’d	wager	they’ve	been	in	place	for	three	or	four	days.’
‘Stupid	Bolkando.	What	value	fielding	an	army	that	crawls	like	a	bhederin	with	its	legs	cut	off?	We	could
dance	 round	 it	 and	 strike	 straight	 for	 the	 capital.	 I	 could	 drag	 that	 King	 off	 his	 throne	 and	 plant	 myself	 in	 it
sloppy	as	a	drunk,	and	that	would	be	that.’	He	snorted.	‘Generals	and	commanders	understand	nothing.	They
think	a	battle	answers	everything,	like	fists	in	an	alley.	Coltaine	knew	better—war	is	the	means,	not	the	end—
the	goal	is	not	to	wage	slaughter—it	is	to	achieve	domination	in	the	bargaining	that	follows.’
Another	scout	was	riding	down	from	the	north,	her	horse’s	hoofs	kicking	up	clods	of	dirt	from	the	trampled
plough-furrows.	Hares	scattered	from	her	path	as	she	cut	through	the	trampled	crops.	Gall	squinted	at	her	for
a	moment,	and	then	shifted	round	in	his	saddle	to	glare	southward.	Yes,	there,	another	rider,	in	foaming	gallop,
shouting	as	he	wove	through	Shelemasa’s	whooping	mob.	The	Warleader	grunted.
Vedith	had	taken	note	of	both	riders.	‘We	are	flanked,’	he	said.
‘What	of	it?’	Gall	asked,	eyes	narrowing	once	more	on	this	young,	clever	warrior.
The	man	shrugged.	‘Even	should	a	fourth	element	march	up	our	backsides,	Warleader,	we	can	slip	through
the	gaps—they’re	all	on	foot,	after	all.’
‘Like	a	slink	between	the	claws	of	a	hawk.	But	nothing	here	can	even	hope	to	pluck	our	tail.	Vedith,	I	give
you	 command	 of	 a	 thousand—yes,	 fifty	 raids.	 Take	 the	 north	 army—they’ll	 be	 on	 the	 march,	 dog-tired	 and
choking	on	dust,	likely	in	column.	Give	them	no	time.	Sweep	and	cut,	leave	them	in	disarray,	and	then	ride	on	to
their	baggage	train.	Take	everything	you	can	carry	and	burn	the	rest.	Do	not	lose	control	of	your	warriors.	Just
cut	off	the	enemy’s	toes	and	leave	them	there,	am	I	understood?’
Grinning,	Vedith	nodded.	‘I	would	hear	from	that	scout,’	he	said	after	a	moment.
‘Of	course	you	would.’
Gall	saw	that	Jarabb	had	caught	Shelemasa	and	both	were	now	riding	in	the	wake	of	the	south	scout.	He
spat	to	get	the	taste	of	the	smoke	out	of	his	mouth.	‘Duiker’s	eyes,	what	a	sorry	mess.	No	one	ever	learns,	do
they?’
‘Warleader?’
‘Would	the	Bolkando	have	been	content	if	we	had	treated	them	as	badly	as	they	treated	us?	No.	Of	course
not.	So,	how	in	their	minds	did	they	justify	such	abuse?’
‘They	thought	they	could	get	away	with	it.’
Gall	nodded.	‘Do	you	see	the	flaw	in	that	thinking,	warrior?’
‘It’s	not	hard,	Warleader.’
‘Have	you	noticed	that	it’s	the	ones	who	think	themselves	so	very	clever	that	are	the	stupidest	of	the	lot?’
He	tilted	in	his	saddle	and	loosed	a	loud,	gassy	fart.	‘Gods	below,	the	spices	they	use	round	here	have	raised	a
typhoon	in	my	bowels.’
The	scout	from	the	north	arrived,	the	sweat	on	her	face	and	forearms	coated	in	dust.	‘Warleader!’
Gall	unslung	his	own	waterskin	and	tossed	it	to	her.	‘How	many	and	how	far	away?’
She	 paused	 to	 drink	 down	 a	 few	 mouthfuls,	 and	 then	 said	 above	 the	 heavy	 blows	 of	 her	 horse’s	 breath,


‘Perhaps	two	thousand,	half	of	them	levies,	lightly	armoured	and	ill-equipped.	Two	leagues	away,	in	column	on
a	too-narrow	road.’
‘Baggage	train?’
She	smiled	through	all	the	grit.	‘Not	in	the	middle	and	not	flanked,	Warleader.	The	rearguard’s	about	three
hundred,	mixed	infantry—looks	like	the	ones	with	the	worst	blisters	on	their	feet.’
‘And	they	saw	you?’
‘No,	Warleader,	I	don’t	think	so.	Their	mounted	scouts	clung	close,	on	the	flat	farmland	to	either	side	of	the
track.	They	know	there’s	raids	out	in	the	countryside	and	don’t	want	to	get	stung.’
‘Very	good.	Change	mounts	and	get	yourself	ready	to	lead	Vedith	and	his	wing	to	them.’
Her	dark	eyes	flicked	to	Vedith	in	open	appraisal.
‘Something	wrong?’	Gall	asked.
‘No,	Warleader.’
‘But	he’s	young,	isn’t	he?’
She	shrugged.
‘Dismissed,’	Gall	said.
The	scout	tossed	the	waterskin	back	and	then	rode	off.
Gall	and	Vedith	now	awaited	the	riders	from	the	south.
Vedith	twisted	to	ease	his	back,	and	then	said,	‘Warleader,	who	will	lead	the	force	against	the	southern	jaw
of	this	trap?’
‘Shelemasa.’
Seeing	the	young	warrior’s	brows	lift,	Gall	said,	‘She	needs	her	chance	to	mend	her	reputation—or	do	you
question	my	generosity?’
‘I	would	not	think	to	do	that—’
‘You	 should,	 Vedith.	 That’s	 what	 the	 Malazans	 have	 taught	 us,	 if	 they’ve	 taught	 us	 anything.	 A	 smith’s
hammer	in	the	hand,	or	a	sword—it’s	all	business,	and	each	and	every	one	of	us	is	in	it.	The	side	with	the	most
people	using	their	brains	is	the	side	that	wins.’
‘Unless	they	are	betrayed.’
Gall	grimaced.	‘Even	then,	Vedith,	the	crows—’
‘—give	 answer,’	 Vedith	 finished.	 And	 both	 men	 made	 the	 gesture	 of	 the	 black	 wing,	 silently	 honouring
Coltaine’s	name,	his	deeds	and	his	resolute	stand	against	the	worst	that	humans	could	do.
A	moment	later,	Gall	swung	his	horse	round	to	face	the	scout	riding	in	from	the	south,	and	the	two	warriors
pelting	to	catch	up	behind	him.	‘Shit	of	the	Foolish	Dog,	look	at	those	two.’
‘Are	you	done	with	me,	Warleader?’
‘Yes.	Go	collect	your	raids.’	And	he	leaned	out	one	more	time	to	make	wind.	‘Gods	below.’
	
Still	stinging	from	the	Warleader’s	tirade,	Shelemasa	rode	hard	at	the	head	of	her	wing.	Shouts	from	behind	her
measured	 out	 the	 raid	 sergeants	 struggling	 to	 collect	 their	 warriors	 as	 the	 ground	 grew	 ever	 more	 uneven.
Deep	 furrows	 scarred	 the	 stony	 hills,	 and	 many	 of	 those	 hills	 had	 been	 gouged	 out—the	 Bolkando	 had	 been
mining	here,	for	what	Shelemasa	had	no	idea.	They	skirted	steep-sided	pits	half-filled	with	tepid	water	mottled
with	 algae	 blooms,	 narrow	 edges	 thick	 with	 reeds	 and	 rushes.	 Bucket	 winches	 slumped	 above	 overgrown
trenches,	 their	 wooden	 frames	 grey	 and	 bowing	 and	 strangled	 in	 vines.	 Hummingbirds	 darted	 above	 the	 lush
crimson	flowers	dangling	from	those	vines,	and	everywhere	iridescent	six-winged	insects	spun	and	whirled.
She	hated	this	place.	The	cruel	colours	made	her	think	of	poisons—after	all,	on	the	Khundryl	Odhan	it	was
the	brightest	snakes	and	lizards	that	were	the	deadliest.	She	had	seen	a	jet-black,	purple-eyed	spider	as	big	as
her	damned	foot	only	the	day	before.	It	had	been	eating	a	hare.	Nekeh	had	woken	to	find	the	skin	of	one	leg,
hip	 to	 ankle,	 completely	 peeled	 away	 by	 huge	 amber	 ants—she	 hadn’t	 felt	 a	 thing,	 and	 now	 she	 was	 raving
with	fever	in	the	loot	train.	She’d	heard	that	someone	had	smelled	a	flower	only	to	have	his	nose	rot	off.	No,
they	needed	to	be	done	with	this,	all	of	it.	Marching	with	the	Bonehunters	was	all	very	well,	but	the	Adjunct
wasn’t	Coltaine,	was	she?	She	wasn’t	Bult	either,	not	even	Duiker.
Shelemasa	 had	 heard	 about	 the	 goring	 the	 marines	 had	 suffered	 during	 the	 invasion.	 Like	 a	 desert	 cat
thrown	into	a	pit	of	starving	wolves,	if	the	tales	were	accurate.	It	was	no	wonder	they’d	been	squatting	in	the
capital	for	so	long.	The	Adjunct	had	Mincer’s	luck,	that	she	did,	and	Shelemasa	wanted	no	part	of	it.


They	were	coming	up	out	of	the	mining	works,	and	to	the	south	the	land	levelled	out	in	a	floodplain,	broken
up	by	blockish	stands	of	bamboo	bordered	by	water-filled	ditches	and	raised	tracks.	Beyond	this	ran	another
row	of	serried	hills,	these	ones	flat-topped	and	fortified	by	stone-walled	redoubts.	Between	the	fortifications	a
Bolkando	army	was	forming	up,	but	in	obvious	disorganization.	They’d	expected	to	be	one	of	the	trap’s	jaws,
arriving	 upon	 a	 battle	 already	 engaged,	 the	 Khundryl	 muzzle	 to	 muzzle	 with	 the	 main	 force.	 They’d	 been
planning	on	driving	into	an	exposed	flank.
For	 all	 that,	 she	 could	 see	 they’d	 be	 hard	 to	 dislodge	 from	 those	 hills,	 especially	 with	 the	 enfilading	 forts.
Even	worse,	she	was	outnumbered	by	at	least	two	to	one.
Shelemasa	slowed	her	horse,	and	then	reined	in	on	the	edge	of	the	bamboo	plantation.	She	waited	for	her
officers	to	close	on	her.
Jarabb—who	 had	 been	 verbally	 flayed	 almost	 as	 fiercely	 as	 Shelemasa—was	 the	 first	 to	 arrive.
‘Commander,	we	won’t	knock	them	off	that,	will	we?’
Damned	puffed-up	messenger-boy.	‘When	did	you	last	ride	to	battle?’
She	saw	him	flinch.
‘If	 you	 were	 my	 son,’	 she	 said,	 ‘I	 would’ve	 dragged	 you	 out	 of	 the	 women’s	 huts	 long	 ago.	 I’ve	 got	 no
problem	with	you	wearing	whatever	it	is	you	wear	under	that	armour,	it’s	the	fact	that	Gall	cast	a	soft	eye	on
you,	Jarabb,	and	that’s	not	served	you	well.	We	are	at	war,	you	simpering	coodle-ape.’	She	turned	as	her	six
sub-wing	 captains	 rode	 up.	 ‘Hanab,’	 she	 called	 to	 one,	 a	 veteran	 warrior	 whose	 bronze	 helm	 was	 a	 stylized
crow’s	head,	‘tell	me	what	you	see?’
‘An	 old	 border	 is	 what	 I	 see,’	 the	 man	 said.	 ‘But	 the	 forts	 got	 dismantled	 everywhere	 but	 on	 those	 tels
there.	So	long	as	the	army	stays	where	they	are,	they’re	stuck	like	a	knuckle	under	a	rug.	All	we	need	to	do	is
keep	them	put.’
Shelemasa	looked	to	another	captain,	a	tall,	hunch-shouldered	man	with	a	vulpine	face.	‘And	how,	Kastra,
do	we	do	that?’
The	man	slowly	blinked.	‘We	scare	them	so	badly	the	hills	they’re	on	start	running	brown.’
‘Draw	up	the	horse-archers,’	Shelemasa	ordered.	‘On	to	the	slopes.	Start	bristling	the	fools.	We’ll	spend	the
day	harrying	them	and	piling	up	wounded—until	those	forts	are	nothing	more	than	hospitals.	Come	the	night,
we	send	raids	into	their	baggage	camps,	and	maybe	a	few	to	fire	the	forts	since	those	roofs	I	see	inside	are
thatched.’	She	scanned	her	officers.	‘Is	anyone	here	satisfied	with	just	pinning	the	idiots	in	place?’
Jarabb	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 ‘The	 Warleader	 wants	 the	 threat	 delayed	 long	 enough	 to	 stop	 being	 a	 threat,
Commander.’
‘Half	the	army	up	there	are	levies,’	said	Hanab.	‘Skirmishers.	Deploying	them	against	light	cavalry	would	be
suicide.	Yet,’	he	added	with	a	sneer,	‘look	at	how	they’re	arrayed—five	deep	in	front	of	the	precious	heavy
infantry.’
‘To	absorb	our	arrows,	yes,’	Shelemasa	said.
Kastra	snorted.	‘The	heavies	don’t	want	to	dirty	their	pretty	armour.’
‘Bloody	 those	 skirmishers	 enough	 and	 they’ll	 break,’	 Hanab	 predicted.	 ‘Then	 we	 can	 chew	 and	 nip	 the
heavies	for	as	long	as	we	like.’
Shelemasa	 turned	 to	 regard	 Jarabb.	 ‘You	 stay	 at	 my	 side.	 When	 we	 return	 to	 the	 Warleader,	 you	 will	 be
carrying	the	Bolkando	commander’s	head	on	your	spear.’
Jarabb	managed	a	sickly	smile.
‘Look	down	there,’	Hanab	pointed.
Sliming	 up	 from	 the	 ditch	 and	 on	 to	 the	 raised	 track	 was	 a	 yellow	 and	 black	 banded	 centipede,	 wide	 as	 a
hand	 and	 as	 long	 as	 a	 sword.	 They	 watched	 it	 snake	 to	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 track	 and	 then	 vanish	 into	 the
stand	of	bamboo.
Shelemasa	spat	and	then	said,	‘Hood	take	this	hole	and	shit	in	it.’	After	a	moment	she	added,	‘But	only	after
we	leave.’
	
A	 thousand	 warriors	 at	 his	 back,	 and	 Vedith	 did	 not	 want	 to	 lose	 a	 single	 one	 of	 them.	 Memories	 of	 the
garrison	 attack	 still	 dogged	 him.	 A	 triumphant	 victory,	 yes,	 but	 now	 he	 had	 but	 a	 handful	 of	 companions	 left
with	whom	he’d	shared	it,	every	blistering	moment—and	even	now,	should	he	meet	the	eyes	of	one	of	those
warriors,	he	would	see	in	them	the	perfect	reflection	of	his	own	faint	disbelief,	his	own	sense	of	guilt.


The	crows	alone	chose	who	lived	and	who	fell.	Prayers	meant	nothing,	deeds	and	vows,	honour	and	dignity,
not	one	weighed	more	than	a	mote	of	dust	on	fate’s	scales.	He	even	had	his	doubts	about	courage.	Friends	had
fallen,	 one	 moment	 in	 his	 life	 and	 the	 next	 out	 of	 it,	 reduced	 to	 what	 memories	 he	 could	 conjure,	 all	 the
incidental	moments	that	had	held	little	meaning	until	now.
Vedith	didn’t	know	what	to	make	of	it.	But	he	now	knew	one	thing.	The	warrior’s	life	was	in	its	essence	a
lonely	 one,	 and	 the	 loneliness	 only	 got	 worse,	 as	 one	 came	 to	 realize	 that	 it	 was	 best	 to	 hold	 back,	 to	 never
draw	too	close	to	a	companion.	Yes,	he	would	still	give	his	life	to	save	any	one	of	them,	whether	he	knew	that
warrior’s	face	or	not,	but	he	would	also	simply	walk	away	should	one	fall.	He	would	move	on,	and	in	his	eyes
the	barest	hint	of	lost	worlds.
A	 thousand	 warriors	 behind	 him.	 He	 would	 send	 them	 into	 battle,	 and	 some	 would	 die,	 and	 he	 hated	 that
knowledge,	 he	 railed	 against	 it,	 but	 for	 all	 that	 he	 knew	 he	 would	 not	 hesitate.	 Among	 all	 warriors,	 the
commander	was	the	loneliest	by	far,	and	he	could	feel	that	isolation	thickening	around	him,	hard	as	armour,	cold
as	iron.
Gall.	Adjunct	Tavore.	Coltaine	of	the	Crow	Clan.	Even	that	Bolkando	fool	leading	his	or	her	unsuspecting
column	towards	an	afternoon	of	nightmarish	horror.	This	is	what	we	share.	And	it	tastes	bitter	as	blood	on
the	tongue.
He	wondered	if	the	Bolkando	King	now	regretted	inviting	this	war.	He	wondered	if	the	bastard	even	cared
that	his	subjects	were	dying.	Or	was	it	just	the	wound	of	lost	revenues	from	wasted	farms,	devoured	livestock
and	the	stolen	hoards	of	wealth	that	stung	him	now?	And	the	next	strangers	to	camp	on	his	borders?	Would	he
treat	them	any	differently?	Would	his	successor	heed	the	lessons	carved	out	here	in	bone	and	flesh?
The	Chain	of	Dogs	had	fallen	at	the	foot	of	Aren.	Pormqual’s	ten	thousand	danced	on	trees.	Leoman’s	rebel
army	was	destroyed	at	Y’Ghatan.	It	was	clear—it	could	not	be	clearer—that	for	all	there	was	to	learn,	no	one
ever	bothered.	Each	new	fool	and	tyrant	to	rise	up	from	the	mob	simply	set	about	repeating	the	whole	fiasco,
convinced	that	they	were	different,	better,	smarter.	Until	the	earth	drinks	deep	again.
He	could	see	the	scout	riding	back	towards	him.
It	was	about	to	begin.	And,	suddenly,	each	breath	filling	his	lungs	tasted	sweeter	than	the	last,	and	all	that	his
eyes	fixed	upon	seemed	to	throb	with	life.	He	looked	upon	things	and	thought	that	he	had	never	before	seen
such	 colours,	 such	 textures—the	 world	 was	 made	 anew	 on	 all	 sides,	 but	 had	 he	 come	 too	 late	 to	 it?	 Only
moments	left	to	savour	this	gift	of	glory?
The	day’s	end	would	answer	that	question.
Vedith	 prepared	 to	 lead	 his	 first	 army	 into	 battle,	 and	 in	 that	 moment	 he	 hated	 Warleader	 Gall,	 who	 had
forced	this	upon	him.	He	did	not	want	to	command	a	thousand	warriors.	He	did	not	want	the	weight	of	their
gazes,	the	crushing	awareness	of	their	faith	in	him.
He	wished	he	had	the	courage	to	flee.
But	he	did	not.
For	Gall	had	chosen	well.
	
Parasols	 in	 their	 thousands,	 fan-wielding	 slaves	 in	 their	 tens	 of	 thousands,	 none	 of	 this	 could	 keep	 the	 sweat
from	 the	 face	 of	 Chancellor	 Rava.	 He	 felt	 as	 if	 he	 was	 melting	 in	 the	 cauldron	 of	 history,	 one	 of	 his	 own
making,	alas,	a	realization	that	came	to	him	again	and	again	like	a	fresh	heap	of	coals.	He	huddled	shivering
beneath	 sodden	 silks	 as	 the	 palanquin	 he	 was	 in	 tipped	 precipitously,	 the	 bearers	 struggling	 to	 descend	 this
confounded	goat	track.
Dust	had	seeped	in	to	coat	every	surface,	dulling	all	the	ornate	gilt	edging	and	deadening	the	vibrant	colours
of	 the	 plush	 padding.	 Dust	 mingled	 with	 the	 taste	 of	 his	 own	 sweat	 in	 his	 mouth.	 He	 even	 pissed	 grit,	 and
worse.	‘Not	there,	you	stupid	woman,’	he	snapped.
The	D’rhasilhani	slave	flinched	back,	ducking	her	head.
There	would	be	no	stirring	awake	down	below,	not	today.	He	understood	her	desperation	to	please,	and	this
knowledge	made	things	all	the	more	irritating.	Whatever	happened	to	proper,	old-fashioned	affection?	But	no,
he’d	done	away	with	that	long	ago,	as	soon	as	he	realized	that,	as	much	as	he	wanted	it,	he	wasn’t	prepared	to
repay	it	with	all	that	was	expected	in	such	an	arrangement.	Things	such	as	loyalty,	consideration,	generosity.
Those	 vile	 details	 that	 comprised	 the	 pathetic	 stupidity	 called	 reciprocity.	 He	 so	 disliked	 the	 notion	 of
expectations—not	 the	 ones	 he	 held	 of	 others	 doing	 as	 they	 were	 supposed	 to	 do,	 but	 the	 expectations	 those


others	shackled	upon	Rava.	Appalling,	the	nerve	of	some	people.
The	greatest	skill	one	could	achieve	lay	in	evading	such	traps.	He	was	Chancellor	to	the	Realm,	ostensibly	in
service	to	the	King	and	(heavens	forbid!)	the	Queen;	but	overriding	even	this,	he	stood	to	serve	the	kingdom
itself,	 its	 myriad	 sources	 of	 wealth,	 prosperity	 and	 so	 on,	 not	 to	 mention	 its	 smelly,	 crab-faced	 masses	 of
ignorant	humanity.	Of	course,	he	knew	that	in	truth	such	notions	held	all	the	gravity	and	import	of	a	toddler’s
birthday	 celebration,	 when	 all	 the	 effort	 going	 into	 it	 wouldn’t	 even	 be	 remembered	 by	 the	 child	 so	 indulged,
and	what	of	the	mess	afterward?
Never	mind	that	Felash	had	made	all	the	slaves	drunk	on	suspiciously	spiked	punch,	and	that	the	chamber
door’s	lock	was	jammed,	and	he—Chancellor	of	Bolkando!—found	himself	trapped	inside	with	no	choice	but
to	clear	up	the	mess—if	only	to	find	somewhere	to	stand.	And	never	mind	that—
Rava	scowled.	What	had	he	been	thinking	about?	Ah,	yes,	the	paucity	of	sincerity	that	was,	ultimately,	at	the
very	 heart	 of	 political	 triumph.	 He	 had	 long	 ago	 discovered	 that	 brazen	 lies	 could	 be	 uttered	 with	 impunity,
because	nothing	would	come	of	exposure—should	that	unlikely	consequence	ever	occur—for	even	when	such
lies	 were	 indeed	 exposed,	 why,	 in	 a	 month	 or	 two	 the	 finger-pointers	 would	 wander	 off,	 distracted	 by
something	 or	 someone	 else	 worthy	 of	 their	 facile	 outrage.	 A	 mien	 of	 proper	 belligerence	 could	 weather
virtually	anything	his	accusers	might	throw	at	him.	As	with	so	many	battles	on	a	multitude	of	fields,	it	was	all	a
matter	of	nerve.
And,	 dammit,	 here	 and	 now—against	 this	 monstrous	 woman	 Krughava—it	 was	 Rava’s	 nerve	 that	 was
failing,	not	hers.
Bested	by	a	knuckle-browed	barbarian!	Outrageous!
But	 what	 had	 he	 been	 thinking	 about?	 His	 gaze	 fell	 on	 the	 slave	 woman	 who	 still	 crouched	 at	 his	 feet,
wiping	 her	 chin,	 eyes	 downcast.	 Yes,	 love.	 And	 that	 obnoxious	 creature,	 Felash,	 to	 have	 so	 contemptuously
spurned	 his	 advances,	 well	 now,	 she	 would	 pay	 for	 that.	 For	 the	 rest	 of	 her	 life,	 if	 Rava	 had	 his	 way—and,
ultimately,	he	always	did.	Yes,	he’d	have	her	kneeling	just	the	way	this	slave	did,	but	the	difference	between
the	two	would	be	the	most	delicious	reward.	Felash	would	not	wear	any	visible	shackles,	after	all.	She	would
have	 enslaved	 herself.	 To	 him,	 to	 Rava,	 and	 she	 would	 find	 her	 only	 pleasure	 in	 servicing	 him,	 all	 his	 needs,
every	one	of	his	desires.	Now	that	was	love.
Groans	of	relief	from	outside,	and	the	palanquin	levelled	out.	Rava	drew	a	handkerchief	and	mopped	at	his
face,	and	then	tugged	on	the	bell	cord.	The	contrivance	lurched	to	a	merciful	halt.	‘Open	the	damned	door!	Be
quick!’	He	tugged	up	his	pantaloons	and	knotted	the	ties,	and	then	half-rose,	pushing	the	D’ras	slave	away.
Outside,	he	saw	pretty	much	what	he	had	expected	to	see.	They	were	down	from	the	pass.	Before	them
spread	 somewhat	 more	 level	 land,	 strips	 and	 stands	 of	 deciduous	 forest	 broken	 up	 by	 meadows	 used	 for
pasture	 by	 the	 local	 savages.	 This	 region	 had	 served	 as	 a	 buffer	 between	 the	 miserable	 hill	 tribes	 and
Bolkando’s	civilized	population,	but	the	buffer	was	shrinking,	as	the	locals	drifted	away	in	both	directions,	into
the	 cities	 or	 taking	 up	 banditry	 among	 the	 rock-dwellers.	 There	 would	 come	 a	 time,	 Rava	 knew,	 when	 his
kingdom	 would	 simply	 engulf	 the	 region,	 which	 meant	 establishing	 forts	 and	 border	 posts	 and	 maintaining
garrisons	 and	 patrols	 to	 hold	 back	 the	 blue-skinned	 savages,	 all	 of	 which	 would	 devour	 yet	 more	 of	 the
treasury.	Well,	Rava	considered,	there’d	be	income	from	cutting	down	all	the	trees,	at	least	to	begin	with,	and
thereafter	from	whatever	crops	the	soil	could	yield.
Such	thoughts	comforted	him,	righted	the	world	beneath	his	pinched	feet.	Wiping	sweat	from	his	face	again,
he	cast	about	for	signs	of	Conquestor	Avalt	and	his	entourage	of	messengers,	lackeys,	and	so-called	advisors.
The	military	was	a	miserable	necessity,	despite	all	its	inherent	pitfalls.	Put	a	sword	in	a	person’s	hands—and	a
few	 thousand	 others	 at	 their	 backs—and	 sooner	 or	 later	 the	 tip	 of	 that	 sword	 was	 going	 to	 lift	 to	 prick	 the
necks	of	people	like	Rava.	The	Chancellor	scowled,	reminding	himself	to	keep	Avalt	tightly	bound	to	his	belt,
by	way	of	that	tangled	skein	of	mutually	rewarding	interests	he	worked	so	hard	to	maintain.
Surrounding	him,	the	column	of	the	Bolkando	Guard	was	spilling	out,	shaking	loose	over	the	swards	to	either
side	of	the	track.	Oxen	lowed,	straining	to	reach	the	lush	grasses,	and	from	somewhere	in	the	seething	mob
pigs	were	squealing.	The	air	stank	of	human	sweat	and	beastly	dung	and	piss.	This	was	worse	than	a	D’ras
trader	camp.
After	a	moment	Rava	succeeded	in	picking	out	Avalt’s	pennon,	two	hundred	or	so	paces	down	the	trail.	He
beckoned	to	one	of	his	servants,	pointing	to	the	wavering	standard.	‘I	wish	to	speak	with	the	Conquestor.	Bring
him	to	me.’


The	old	man	plunged	into	the	crowd.
This	army	was	exhausted,	desperate	to	camp	right	here	though	the	day	was	barely	two-thirds	done.	And	as
far	as	the	Chancellor	could	tell,	Avalt	had	halted	the	entire	column.	Rava	craned	but	he	could	not	even	see	the
Perish	 legions—somewhere	 far	 ahead,	 marching	 brainless	 as	 millstones—they	 should	 have	 ambushed	 these
fools	after	all—what	army	could	fight	after	such	a	pace?	In	full	armour	barring	shields,	too,	if	that	report	held
any	truth.	Ridiculous.
It	was	some	time	before	he	saw	commotion	in	the	crowd	on	the	track,	figures	hastily	shifting	to	either	side;
moments	later	Conquestor	Avalt	appeared,	his	face	set	in	an	uncharacteristic	scowl.	The	gaze	he	fixed	upon
Rava	as	he	drew	nearer	was	something	of	a	shock.
Even	 as	 the	 Chancellor	 opened	 his	 mouth	 to	 speak,	 Avalt	 stepped	 close	 and	 rasped,	 ‘Do	 you	 think	 I	 exist
only	 to	 scuttle	 at	 your	 beck	 and	 call,	 Chancellor?	 If	 you	 haven’t	 noticed,	 my	 whole	 damned	 army	 here	 has
fallen	 apart.	 I’ve	 had	 officers	 deserting,	 by	 the	 twenty	 pricks	 of	 Bellat.	 And	 now	 you	 want	 what?	 Another
smug	exchange	of	platitudes	and	reassurances?’
Rava’s	 eyes	 narrowed.	 ‘Careful,	 Conquestor.	 Be	 assured,	 when	 I	 summon	 you	 it	 is	 with	 good	 reason.	 I
require	an	update,	for	as	you	can	see	my	bearers	were	unable	to	maintain	your	vanguard’s	pace.	And	now	you
have	halted	the	entire	army,	and	I	want	to	know	why.’
Avalt	 blinked,	 as	 if	 disbelieving.	 ‘Didn’t	 you	 just	 hear	 me,	 Rava?	 Half	 my	 legions	 can	 barely	 walk—their
boots	 fell	 apart	 under	 them.	 The	 under-rigging	 for	 their	 breastplates	 has	 sawn	 into	 their	 shoulders—the
manufacturers	didn’t	bother	softening	the	leather.	Bedrolls	rot	as	soon	as	they	get	damp.	Half	the	staples	have
gone	 foul	 and	 we’re	 out	 of	 salt.	 And	 if	 all	 of	 that	 is	 not	 enough,	 then	 I	 should	 add	 this:	 we	 are	 at	 least	 five
leagues	 behind	 the	 Perish,	 and	 as	 for	 the	 army	 we’d	 left	 here	 to	 greet	 them,	 one	 messenger	 remained—to
inform	me	that	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	are,	as	of	three	days	ago,	within	seven	leagues	of	the	capital.	Now,’
he	 added	 in	 a	 snarl,	 ‘how	 many	 other	 blithe	 assumptions	 we	 made	 weeks	 back	 are	 about	 to	 turn	 out	 fatally
askew?’	He	pointed	a	gauntleted	finger	at	the	palanquin.	‘Climb	back	inside,	Chancellor,	and	leave	me	to	my
business—’
‘A	business	you	appear	to	be	failing	at,	Conquestor,’	snapped	Rava.
‘You	 want	 my	 resignation?	 You	 have	 it.	 Take	 over	 by	 all	 means,	 Chancellor.	 I’ll	 ride	 back	 up	 into	 the
mountains	and	toss	in	with	the	hill	bandits—at	least	they	don’t	pretend	the	world	is	just	how	they	want	it	to	be.’
‘Calm	 down,	 Conquestor—you	 are	 understandably	 overwrought.	 I	 have	 no	 wish	 to	 assume	 the	 burden	 of
your	responsibility.	I	am	not	a	military	man,	after	all.	Thus,	I	do	not	accept	your	resignation.	Repair	this	army,
Avalt,	and	take	as	long	doing	so	as	is	needed.	If	the	army	we	left	here	has	departed,	clearly	it	is	to	meet	the
threat	of	the	Khundryl.	Presumably	the	threat	has	by	now	been	taken	care	of,	and	either	way,	we	here	are	in
no	position	to	affect	the	outcome,	are	we?’
‘I	would	imagine	we’ve	had	enough	of	our	affecting	matters,	don’t	you	think,	Chancellor?’
‘Return	to	your	command,	Conquestor.	We	can	speak	again	once	safely	ensconced	in	the	palace.’	Where	I
can	correct	your	misapprehensions	about	who	serves	whom.
Avalt	stared	at	him	long	enough	to	make	plain	his	disrespect,	and	then	turned	to	retrace	his	route.
Rava	watched	him	march	back	into	the	crowd,	and	then	gestured	for	his	servant—who	had	unwisely	stood
less	than	half	a	dozen	paces	away	during	the	course	of	the	Chancellor’s	conversation	with	Avalt.	‘Find	us	a
place	to	camp.	Raise	the	tent—the	smaller	one—tonight	I	will	maintain	the	minimum	number	of	providers,	no
more	 than	 twenty.	 And	 find	 me	 some	 new	 women	 from	 the	 train—and	 no	 D’ras,	 I	 am	 done	 with	 their
haphazard	attentions.	Go,	quickly—and	get	me	some	wine!’
Head	bobbing,	the	servant	scurried	off.	Rava	looked	round	until	he	found	one	of	his	assassins.	The	man	was
staring	directly	at	him.	The	Chancellor	flicked	his	eyes	in	the	direction	of	the	servant.	The	assassin	nodded.
See	 what	 you	 have	 done,	 Conquestor?	 You	 have	 killed	 the	 poor	 old	 man.	 And	 I	 shall	 send	 you	 his
salted	head,	so	that	we	clearly	understand	one	another.
______
Shield	 Anvil	 Tanakalian	 stepped	 into	 the	 tent	 and	 drew	 off	 his	 gloves.	 ‘I	 just	 took	 a	 look	 for	 myself,	 Mortal
Sword.	They	are	indeed	done.	I	doubt	they	will	even	manage	a	march	tomorrow,	much	less	a	fight	any	time	in
the	next	week	or	two.’
Krughava	was	intent	on	oiling	her	sword	and	did	not	look	up	from	where	she	sat	on	the	camp	cot.	‘That	was
easier	than	expected.	There	is	water	atop	the	chest—help	yourself.’


Tanakalian	stepped	over	to	the	salt-stained	trunk.	‘I	have	more	news.	We	captured	a	Bolkando	scout	riding
back	through	the	dregs	of	the	army	that	had	been	awaiting	us.	It	would	appear	that	Warleader	Gall	has	done
precisely	what	we	anticipated,	sir.	He	is	probably	even	now	within	sight	of	the	kingdom’s	capital.’
The	woman	grunted.	‘Do	we	wait	for	the	Chancellor	to	catch	up,	then,	to	inform	him	of	the	altered	situation,
or	do	we	maintain	our	pace?	As	much	as	the	Khundryl	Warleader	might	wish	to	besiege	the	capital,	he	has	but
horse-soldiers	 at	 his	 disposal.	 One	 must	 assume	 that	 he	 will	 do	 nothing	 until	 we	 arrive.	 And	 that	 is	 at	 least
three	days	from	now.’
Tanakalian	drank	deep	from	the	clay	jug,	then	set	it	back	down	on	the	pitted	lid	of	the	chest.	‘Do	you	expect
a	fight,	Mortal	Sword?’
She	 grimaced.	 ‘Regardless	 of	 the	 unlikelihood	 that	 matters	 will	 deteriorate	 to	 that	 extreme,	 sir,	 we	 must
anticipate	every	possibility.	Even	so,’	and	she	rose,	seeming	to	fill	the	confines	of	the	tent,	‘we	will	add	a	halfnight	 march.	 There	 are	 times	 when	 achieving	 the	 unexpected	 well	 serves.	 I	 would	 rather	 we	 intimidate	 the
King	into	submission.	The	very	notion	of	losing	a	single	brother	or	sister	to	this	meaningless	conflict	with	the
Bolkando	galls	me.	But	we	shall	present	to	King	Tarkulf	a	certain	measure	of	short-tempered	belligerence,	as	I
am	certain	the	Warleader	has	already	done.’
Tanakalian	 considered	 her	 words,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘Khundryl	 warriors	 have	 no	 doubt	 fallen	 in	 this	 uninvited
war,	Mortal	Sword.’
‘Sometimes	respect	must	be	earned	the	hard	way,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘I	expect	the	Bolkando	have	had	little	choice	but	to	reassess	their	contempt	for	the	Burned	Tears.’
She	faced	him,	teeth	bared,	‘Shield	Anvil,	they	choke	on	it	still.	And	we	will	ensure	they	continue	to	do	so
for	a	while	longer.	Tell	me,	have	we	availed	ourselves	of	the	supplies	left	behind	by	the	fleeing	army?’
‘We	have,	Mortal	Sword.	Their	haste	is	our	gain.’
She	 sheathed	 her	 sword	 and	 strapped	 it	 on.	 ‘Such	 are	 the	 spoils	 of	 war,	 sir.	 Now,	 let	 us	 make	 ourselves
available	 to	 our	 sisters	 and	 brothers.	 They	 have	 done	 well	 and	 we	 should	 remind	 them	 of	 the	 measure	 of
respect	we	hold	for	them.’
But	Tanakalian	hesitated.	‘Mortal	Sword,	are	you	any	closer	to	your	selection	of	a	new	Destriant?’
Something	 flickered	 in	 her	 hard	 eyes	 before	 she	 turned	 to	 the	 tent-flap.	 ‘Such	 matters	 will	 have	 to	 wait,
Shield	Anvil.’
He	 followed	 her	 out	 into	 the	 well-ordered,	 quiet	 camp.	 Cookfires	 were	 lit	 in	 rows,	 spaced	 between
companies.	 Tents	 covered	 the	 clearings	 in	 precise,	 measured-out	 regularity.	 The	 heady	 scent	 of	 brewing	 tea
filled	the	air.
As	Tanakalian	walked	a	step	behind	and	to	Krughava’s	left,	he	gave	thought	to	the	suspicions	assembling	in
his	mind.	The	Mortal	Sword	was,	perhaps,	content	to	stand	virtually	alone.	The	triumvirate	of	the	Grey	Helms’
high	 command	 was,	 structurally,	 both	 incomplete	 and	 unbalanced.	 After	 all,	 Tanakalian	 was	 a	 very	 young
Shield	Anvil,	and	none	would	see	him	as	the	Mortal	Sword’s	equal.	In	essence,	his	responsibility	was	passive,
whilst	 hers	 was	 front	 and	 foremost.	 She	 was	 both	 fist	 and	 gauntlet,	 and	 he	 could	 do	 naught	 but	 trail	 in	 her
wake—as	he	was	physically	doing	here,	now.
How	 could	 this	 not	 please	 her?	 Let	 the	 legends	 born	 of	 this	 mythic	 quest	 find	 sharpest	 focus	 upon
Krughava;	 she	 could	 afford	 to	 be	 magnanimous	 to	 those	 she	 would	 permit	 to	 stand	 in	 her	 shadow.	 Standing
tallest	of	them	all,	her	face	would	be	first	to	receive	the	sun’s	light,	etching	every	detail	of	her	heroic	resolve.
But	remember	the	words	of	Shield	Anvil	Exas	a	century	ago.	‘Even	the	fiercest	mask	can	crack	in	the
heat.’	 So,	 I	 will	 watch	 you,	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava,	 and	 yield	 you	 sole	 possession	 of	 this	 lofty	 dais.
History	 waits	 for	 us,	 and	 all	 the	 creatures	 of	 our	 youth	 stand	 in	 our	 wake,	 to	 witness	 what	 their
sacrifice	has	won.
And	at	that	moment,	it	is	the	Shield	Anvil	who	must	stride	to	the	fore,	alone	in	the	harsh	glare	of	the
sun,	feeling	the	raw	flames	and	flinching	not.	I	shall	be	judgement’s	crucible,	and	even	Krughava	must
step	back	and	await	my	pronouncement.
She	was	generous	with	her	time	and	attention	this	evening,	addressing	every	sister	and	brother	as	equals,	but
Tanakalian	could	see	the	cold	deliberation	in	all	this.	He	could	see	her	knitting	every	strand	of	her	own	personal
epic,	 could	 see	 those	 threads	 trailing	 out	 in	 her	 wake	 as	 she	 moved	 from	 one	 knot	 of	 soldiers	 to	 the	 next.	 It
took	a	thousand	eyes	to	weave	a	hero,	a	thousand	tongues	to	fill	out	the	songs	of	worth.	It	took,	in	short,	the
calculated	gift	of	witnessing	to	work	every	detail	of	every	scene	upon	this	vast,	sprawling	tapestry	that	was


the	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	of	the	Perish	Grey	Helms.
And	he	walked	a	step	behind	her,	playing	his	part.
Because	we	are	all	creators	of	private	hangings,	depicting	our	own	heroic	existences.	Alas,	only	the
maddest	 among	 us	 weave	 in	 nothing	 but	 gold	 thread—while	 others	 among	 us,	 unafraid	 of	 truth,	 will
work	 the	 fullest	 palette,	 the	 darker	 skeins,	 the	 shadows,	 the	 places	 where	 the	 bright	 light	 can	 never
reach,	where	grow	all	the	incondite	things.
It	is	tragic,	indeed,	how	few	we	are,	we	who	are	unafraid	of	truth.
In	 any	 crowd,	 he	 suspected,	 no	 matter	 how	 large,	 how	 teeming,	 if	 he	 looked	 hard	 enough,	 he	 would	 see
naught	but	golden	fires	on	all	sides,	so	bright,	so	blazing	in	self-deception	and	wildest	ego,	until	he	alone	stood
with	eyes	burned	blind,	sockets	gaping.
But	will	any	of	you	hear	my	warning?	I	am	the	Shield	Anvil.	Once,	my	kind	were	cursed	to	embrace
all—the	lies	with	the	truth—but	I	shall	not	be	as	the	ones	before	me.	I	will	take	your	pain,	yes,	each	and
every	one	of	you,	but	in	so	doing,	I	will	drag	you	into	this	crucible	with	me,	until	the	fires	scour	your
souls	clean.	And	consider	this	one	truth	.	.	.	of	iron,	silver,	bronze	and	gold,	it	is	the	gold	that	melts	first.
She	 walked	 ahead	 of	 him,	 sharing	 laughter	 and	 jests,	 teasing	 and	 teased	 in	 the	 manner	 of	 all	 beloved
commanders,	and	the	legend	took	shape,	step	by	step.
And	 he	 walked,	 silent,	 smiling,	 so	 generous	 of	 regard,	 so	 seemingly	 at	 peace,	 so	 content	 to	 share	 the
rewards	of	her	indulgence.
Some	masks	broke	in	the	sun	and	the	heat.	But	his	mask	was	neither	fierce	nor	hard.	It	could,	in	fact,	take
any	shape	he	pleased,	soft	as	clay,	slick	and	clear	as	the	finest	of	pressed	oils.	Some	masks,	indeed,	broke,	but
his	would	not,	for	he	understood	the	real	meaning	beneath	that	long-dead	Shield	Anvil’s	words.
It	is	not	heat	that	breaks	the	mask,	it	is	the	face	beneath	it,	when	that	mask	no	longer	fits.
Remember	well	this	day,	Tanakalian.	You	are	witness	to	the	manufacture	of	delusion,	the	shaping	of	a
time	of	heroes.	Generations	to	come	will	sing	of	these	lies	built	here,	and	there	will	be	such	fire	in	their
eyes	that	all	doubt	is	banished.	They	will	hold	up	the	masks	of	the	past	with	dramatic	fervour,	and	then
bewail	their	present	fallen	state.
For	this	is	the	weapon	of	history	when	born	of	twisted	roots.	These	are	the	lies	that	we	are	living,	and
they	 are	 all	 we	 will	 give	 to	 our	 children,	 to	 be	 passed	 down	 the	 generations,	 every	 catching	 edge	 of
disbelief	worn	smooth	as	they	move	from	hand	to	hand.
In	the	lie	Krughava	walks	among	her	brothers	and	sisters,	binding	them	with	love	to	the	fate	awaiting
them	all.	In	the	lie,	this	moment	of	history	is	pure,	caged	in	the	language	of	heroes.	There	is	nothing	to
doubt	here.
We	heroes,	after	all,	know	when	to	don	our	masks.	We	know	when	the	eyes	of	the	unborn	are	upon
us.
Show	them	the	lies,	all	of	you.
And	 so	 Shield	 Anvil	 Tanakalian	 smiled,	 and	 all	 the	 cynicism	 behind	 that	 smile	 stayed	 hidden	 from	 his
brothers	and	sisters.	It	was	not	yet	time	for	him.	Not	yet,	but	soon.
	
Warleader	Gall	drew	his	black	feather	cloak	about	his	shoulders,	and	then	strapped	on	his	crow-beaked	helm.
He	adjusted	his	over-weighted	tulwar	on	to	the	point	of	his	left	hip	as	he	strode	to	his	horse.	Insects	whirred	in
the	crepuscular	air	like	flecks	of	winged	dust.	Gall	hacked	and	spat	out	a	lump	of	phlegm	before	swinging	into
the	saddle.
‘Why	does	war	always	bring	smoke?’
The	two	young	Tear	Runners	facing	him	exchanged	looks	of	incomprehension.
‘And	not	just	regular	smoke	either,’	the	Warleader	continued,	kicking	his	mount	forward	to	ride	between	the
two	warriors.	‘No,	it’s	the	foul	kind.	Cloth.	Hair.	Sits	like	tar	on	the	tongue,	eats	into	the	back	of	your	throat.
It’s	a	Fall-damned	mess,	is	what	it	is.’
Flanked	now	by	the	Tear	Runners,	Gall	rode	up	the	track.	‘Yelk,	you	say	there	are	Barghast	among	them?’
The	scout	on	his	left	nodded.	‘Two,	maybe	three	legions,	Warleader.	They	hold	the	left	flank.’
Gall	grunted.	‘I’ve	never	fought	Barghast	before—there	weren’t	many	left	in	Seven	Cities,	and	those	ones
were	far	to	the	north	and	east	of	our	homelands,	or	so	I	recall.	Do	they	seem	formidable?’
‘Undisciplined	is	what	they	seemed,’	said	Yelk.	‘Squatter	than	I’d	expected,	and	wearing	armour	that	looks


as	if	it’s	made	of	turtle	shells.	Their	hair	stands	straight	up,	wedge-shaped,	and	with	all	the	face	paint	they	look
half	mad.’
Gall	glanced	over	at	the	Tear	Runner.	‘Do	you	know	why	you	two	are	accompanying	me	to	this	parley,	and
not	any	of	my	officers?’
Yelk	nodded.	‘We’re	expendable,	Warleader.’
‘As	am	I.’
‘There	we	do	not	agree	with	you.’
‘Glad	to	hear	it.	So,	should	they	shit	on	the	flag	of	peace,	what	will	you	and	Ganap	here	do?’
‘We	shall	offer	our	bodies	between	you	and	their	weapons,	Warleader,	and	fight	until	you	can	win	clear.’
‘Failing	to	save	my	life,	what	then?’
‘We	kill	their	commander.’
‘Arrows?’
‘Knives.’
‘Good,’	said	Gall,	well	pleased.	‘The	young	are	fast.	And	you	two	are	faster	than	most,	which	is	why	you’re
Tear	Runners.	Perhaps,’	he	added,	‘they	will	think	you	two	my	children,	eh?’
The	track	lifted	and	then	wound	down	over	the	ridge	to	converge	with	a	broad	cobbled	road.	At	the	junction
three	squat,	square	granaries	plumed	columns	of	black	smoke.	A	waste—the	locals	had	lit	their	own	harvest
rather	than	yield	it	to	the	Khundryl.	Pernicious	attitudes	annoyed	Gall,	as	if	war	was	an	excuse	for	anything.
He	recalled	a	story	he’d	heard	from	a	Malazan—Fist	Keneb,	he	believed—about	a	company	of	royal	guard	in
the	city	of	Bloor	on	Quon	Tali,	who,	surrounded	in	a	square,	had	used	children	as	shields	against	the	Emperor’s
archers.	Dassem	Ultor’s	face	had	darkened	with	disgust,	and	he’d	had	siege	weapons	brought	in	to	fling	nets
instead	of	bolts,	and	once	all	the	soldiers	were	tangled	and	brought	down,	the	First	Sword	had	sent	in	troops	to
extricate	 the	 children	 from	 their	 clutches.	 Among	 all	 the	 enemies	 of	 the	 Empire	 during	 Dassem	 Ultor’s
command,	 those	 guards	 had	 been	 the	 only	 ones	 ever	 impaled	 and	 left	 to	 die	 slowly,	 in	 terrible	 agony.	 Some
things	were	inexcusable.	Gall	would	have	skinned	the	bastards	first.
Destroying	 perfectly	 good	 food	 wasn’t	 quite	 as	 atrocious,	 but	 the	 sentiment	 behind	 the	 gesture	 was	 little
different	from	that	of	those	Bloorian	guards,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned.	Without	the	crimes	that	had	launched
this	war,	the	Khundryl	would	have	paid	good	gold	for	that	grain.	This	was	how	things	fell	apart	when	stupidity
stole	the	crown.	War	was	the	ultimate	disintegration	of	civility,	and,	for	that	matter,	simple	logic.
At	 the	 far	 end	 of	 the	 plain,	 perhaps	 a	 fifth	 of	 a	 league	 distant,	 the	 Bolkando	 army	 was	 arrayed	 across	 a
rumpled	range	of	low	hills.	Commanding	the	centre,	straddling	the	road,	was	a	legion	of	perhaps	three	thousand
heavy	 infantry,	 their	 armour	 black	 but	 glinting	 with	 gold,	 matching	 the	 facing	 on	 their	 rectangular	 shields.	 A
small	forest	of	standards	rose	from	the	centre	of	this	legion.
‘Ganap,	 your	 eyes	 are	 said	 to	 be	 sharpest	 among	 all	 Tear	 Runners—tell	 me	 what	 you	 see	 on	 those
standards.’
The	woman	took	a	moment	to	dislodge	the	wad	of	rustleaf	bulging	one	cheek,	sent	out	a	stream	of	brown
juice,	and	then	said,	‘I	see	a	crown.’
Gall	nodded.	‘So.’
The	Barghast	were	presented	on	the	left	flank,	as	Yelk	had	noted.	The	ranks	were	uneven,	with	some	of	the
mercenaries	 sitting,	 helms	 doffed	 and	 shields	 down.	 The	 tall	 standards	 rising	 above	 their	 companies	 were	 all
adorned	with	human	skulls	and	braids	of	hair.
Right	of	the	centre	legion	earthworks	mottled	the	crest	and	slope	of	the	hills,	and	pikes	were	visible	jutting
above	the	trenches.	Probably	regulars,	Gall	surmised.	Slippery	discipline,	ill-trained,	but	in	numbers	sufficient	to
fix	any	enemy	they	faced,	long	enough	for	the	centre	and	left	to	wheel	round	after	breaking	whatever	charge
Gall	might	throw	at	them.
Behind	all	three	elements	and	spilling	out	to	the	wings	were	archers	and	skirmishers.
‘Yelk,	tell	me	how	you	would	engage	what	you	see	here.’
‘I	wouldn’t,	Warleader.’
Gall	 glanced	 over,	 his	 eyes	 brightening.	 ‘Go	 on.	 Would	 you	 flap	 your	 tail	 in	 flight?	 Surrender?	 Cower	 in
bulging	breeches	and	sue	for	peace?	Spill	out	endless	concessions	until	the	shackles	close	round	the	ankles	of
every	living	Khundryl?’
‘I’d	present	our	own	wings	and	face	them	for	most	of	a	day,	Warleader.’


‘And	then?’
‘With	dusk,	we	would	retire	from	the	field.	Wait	until	the	sun	was	fully	down,	and	then	peel	out	to	either	side
and	ride	round	the	enemy	army.	We’d	strike	just	before	dawn,	from	behind,	with	flaming	arrows	and	madness.
We’d	 burn	 their	 baggage	 camp,	 scatter	 their	 archers,	 and	 then	 chew	 up	 the	 backsides	 of	 the	 legions.	 We’d
attack	in	waves,	with	half	a	bell	between	them.	By	noon	we	would	be	gone.’
‘Leaving	them	to	crawl	bloodied	back	to	their	city—’
‘We	would	hit	them	again	and	again	on	that	retreat—’
‘And	use	up	all	your	arrows?’
‘Yes.	As	if	we	had	millions	of	them,	Warleader,	an	unending	supply.	And	once	we’ve	chased	them	through
the	city	gate,	they	would	be	ready	to	beg	for	peace.’
‘The	Khundryl	are	Coltaine’s	children	indeed!	Hah!	Well	done,	Yelk!	Now,	let	us	meet	this	Bolkando	King,
and	gauge	well	the	chagrin	in	his	eyes!’
	
Six	 slaves	 brought	 out	 the	 weapons	 and	 armour.	 The	 gold	 filigree	 on	 the	 black	 iron	 scales	 of	 the	 breastplate
gleamed	 like	 runnels	 of	 sun-fire.	 The	 helm’s	 matching	 bowl	 displayed	 writhing	 serpents	 with	 jaws	 stretched,
while	 the	 elongated	 lobster	 tail	 was	 polished	 bright	 silver.	 The	 hinged	 cheek-guards,	 when	 swung	 forward,
would	click	and	lock	against	the	iron	nasal	septum.	The	Bolkando	Royal	Crest	adorned	the	vambraces,	while
the	greaves	were	scaled	black.	The	broad,	straight-bladed,	blunt-tipped	sword	rested	in	a	lacquered	scabbard
of	exquisite	workmanship,	belying	the	plain	functionality	of	the	weapon	it	embraced.
Every	item	was	positioned	with	care	upon	a	thick	magenta	carpet	rolled	out	on	the	road,	the	slaves	kneeling
and	waiting	on	three	of	the	four	sides.
Queen	Abrastal	walked	up	on	the	fourth	side	and	stared	down	at	the	assemblage.	After	a	moment	she	said,
‘This	is	ridiculous.	Give	me	the	helm,	sword-belt	and	those	gauntlets—if	I	have	to	wear	the	rest	I	won’t	even
be	 able	 to	 move,	 much	 less	 fight.	 Besides,’	 she	 added,	 with	 a	 glare	 to	 her	 cadre	 of	 pallid	 advisors,	 ‘it	 hardly
seems	likely	they’re	planning	betrayal—the	presumed	warleader	and	two	pups	.	.	.	against	my	bodyguard	of
ten.	They’d	have	to	be	suicidal	and	they’ve	not	shown	such	failings	thus	far,	have	they?’
Hethry,	her	third	daughter,	stepped	forward	and	said,	‘It	is	your	life	that	matters,	Mother—’
‘Oh,	eat	my	shit.	If	you	could	pull	off	the	perfect	disguise	of	a	Khundryl	to	get	a	knife	in	my	back,	there’d
be	four	of	’em	riding	up	to	our	parley,	not	three.	Go	play	with	your	brother,	and	tell	me	nothing	about	what	you
get	up	to	with	him.	I’d	like	to	keep	my	food	down	for	a	change.’	She	held	out	her	arms	and	slaves	worked	the
gauntlets	 on.	 Another	 slave	 cinched	 the	 weapon	 belt	 round	 her	 solid,	 meaty	 hips,	 whilst	 a	 fourth	 one	 waited
cradling	the	helm	in	gloved	hands.
As	 Hethry	 retreated,	 after	 a	 few	 venomous	 darts	 at	 her	 mother,	 the	 Queen	 turned	 to	 the	 Gilk	 Warchief.
‘You	coming	along	to	see	if	they	make	you	a	better	offer,	Spax?’
The	Barghast	grinned,	revealed	filed	teeth.	‘The	Khundryl	probably	hold	more	of	your	treasury	than	you	do,
Firehair.	But	no,	the	Gilk	are	true	to	their	word.’
Abastral	grunted.	‘I	imagine	the	one	you	call	Tool	might	piss	in	laughter	at	hearing	that.’
The	Gilk’s	broad,	flat	face	lost	all	traces	of	humour.	‘If	you	were	not	a	queen,	woman,	I’d	have	you	hobbled
for	that.’
She	 stepped	 up	 to	 the	 warrior	 and	 slapped	 him	 on	 one	 shell-armoured	 shoulder.	 ‘Let’s	 see	 those	 pointies
again,	Spax,	while	you	walk	beside	me	and	tell	me	all	about	this	hobbling	thing.	If	it’s	as	ugly	as	I	suspect,	I
might	adopt	it	for	some	of	my	daughters.	Well,	most	of	them,	actually.’
Snagging	the	helm	from	the	slave,	she	set	out	down	the	road,	her	bodyguard	scrabbling	to	catch	up	and	then
flank	her	and	Spax.
‘Your	daughters	need	a	whipping,’	the	Gilk	Warchief	said.	‘Those	I	have	met,	anyway.’
‘Even	Spultatha?	You’ve	been	dimpling	her	thighs	the	last	three	nights	straight—some	kind	of	record	for	her,
by	the	way.	Must	be	she	likes	your	barbarian	ways.’
‘Especially	 her,	 Firehair.	 Wilful,	 demanding—any	 Barghast	 but	 a	 Gilk	 would	 have	 died	 of	 exhaustion	 by
now.’	He	barked	a	laugh.	‘I	like	you,	and	so	I	would	never	want	to	see	you	hobbled.’
‘But	the	wound	that	is	named	Tool	is	still	raw,	is	it?’
He	nodded.	‘Disappointment	is	a	cancer,	Queen.’
‘Tell	me	about	it,’	she	responded,	thinking	of	her	husband,	and	a	few	other	things	besides.


‘A	woman	hobbled	has	her	feet	chopped	and	can	refuse	no	man	or	woman	or,	indeed,	camp	dog.’
‘I	see.	Use	that	word	in	the	same	sentence	as	my	name	again,	Spax,	and	I’ll	chop	your	cock	off	and	feed	it
to	my	favourite	corpse-rat.’
He	grinned.	‘See	these	teeth?’
‘That’s	better.’
The	 three	 Khundryl	 were	 waiting	 on	 the	 road,	 still	 in	 their	 saddles,	 but	 as	 the	 Bolkando	 contingent
approached,	the	feather-cloaked	warrior	in	the	centre	swung	down	and	left	his	horse	behind	him	as	he	stepped
forward	three	paces.	A	moment	later	his	two	companions	did	the	same.
‘Look	at	that,’	Abrastal	observed	under	her	breath.	‘Show	me	a	Bolkando	horse	that	just	stands	there	once
its	reins	are	dropped.’
‘Horse-warriors,’	 said	 Spax.	 ‘They	 are	 closer	 to	 their	 horses	 than	 they	 are	 to	 their	 wives,	 husbands	 and
children.	They	are	infuriating	to	fight	against,	Queen.	Why,	I	recall	the	Rhivi—’
‘Not	now,	Spax.	And	stay	back,	among	my	soldiers.	Watch.	Listen.	Say	nothing.’
The	Gilk	shrugged.	‘As	you	like,	Firehair.’
Despite	 herself,	 Abrastal	 was	 forced	 to	 admit	 that	 her	 first	 impression	 of	 Warleader	 Gall	 of	 the	 Burned
Tears	left	her	uneasy.	He	had	the	sharp,	avid	eyes	of	a	hunting	bird.	He	was	well	into	his	sixth	decade,	she
judged,	 but	 he	 had	 the	 physique	 of	 a	 blacksmith.	 The	 black	 tattoos	 of	 tears	 tracked	 down	 his	 gaunt	 cheeks,
vanishing	 into	 an	 iron-shot	 beard.	 The	 vast	 crow-feather	 cape	 was	 too	 heavy	 to	 ride	 out	 behind	 him	 as	 he
strode	 towards	 her,	 instead	 flaring	 to	 the	 sides	 until	 it	 seemed	 he	 was	 perpetually	 emerging	 from	 a	 cavern
mouth.	 The	 scales	 of	 his	 black-stained	 hauberk	 were	 tear-shaped	 across	 his	 broad	 chest,	 elongating	 into
layered	feathers	on	his	shoulders.
His	two	bodyguards	looked	barely	out	of	their	teens,	but	they	had	the	same	predatory	glint	in	their	dark	eyes.
Abrastal	had	a	sudden	vision	of	taking	the	young	men	to	her	bed,	and	something	delicious	squirmed	below	her
rounded	 belly.	 The	 young	 ones	 were	 best,	 not	 yet	 sunk	 into	 self-serving	 habits	 and	 whatnot,	 pliable	 to	 her
domination,	 her	 measured	 techniques	 of	 training	 that	 some	 might	 call	 corruption.	 Well,	 her	 lovers	 never
complained,	did	they?
The	 Queen	 blinked	 away	 the	 distraction	 and	 focused	 once	 more	 upon	 the	 Warleader.	 She	 had	 learned
something	of	the	cult	binding	these	Khundryl.	Struck	to	awe	and	then	worship	upon	witnessing	an	enemy	on
the	field	of	battle—an	extraordinary	notion,	she	had	trouble	believing	it.	So	.	.	.	foreign.	In	any	case,	whoever
that	 commander	 was—who,	 in	 death,	 had	 found	 worshippers	 among	 his	 enemies—he	 must	 have	 possessed
unusual	virtues.	One	thing	was	undeniable,	these	savages	had	been	fatally	underestimated.
‘Warleader	Gall,’	she	said	as	the	warrior	halted	two	paces	in	front	of	her,	‘I	am	Abrastal,	commander	of	the
Evertine	Legion	and	Queen	of	the	Bolkando.’
There	was	amusement	in	his	eyes	as	they	flicked	to	scan	the	heavily	armoured	legion	bodyguards	arrayed
behind	 her.	 ‘And	 these	 are	 the	 soldiers	 you	 command,	 Highness?	 These	 .	 .	 .	 tent-pegs.	 When	 the	 Khundryl
whirlwind	finds	them,	will	they	hold	fast?’
‘You	are	welcome	to	find	out,	Warleader.’
He	grunted,	and	then	said:	‘They	will	hold,	I’m	sure,	even	as	the	tent	you	call	a	kingdom	is	torn	to	shreds
behind	them.’	He	shrugged.	‘We’ll	take	care	not	to	stumble	upon	them	when	we	leave.	No	matter,	it	pleases
me	that	the	first	title	you	gave	yourself	was	that	of	commander.	That	you	are	also	the	Queen	had	the	flavour
of	an	afterthought.	By	this,	am	I	to	assume	that	this	parley	is	to	be	between	commanders?’
‘Not	entirely,’	Abrastal	replied.
‘So	what	you	have	to	say	this	afternoon	binds	the	kingdom	itself,	including	your	husband,	the	King?’
‘It	does.’
He	nodded.	‘Good.’
‘I	will	hear	from	you	your	list	of	grievances,	Warleader.’
His	bushy	brows	lifted.	‘Why?	Are	we	to	badger	each	other	with	matters	of	interpretation?	Your	merchants
practised	extortion	on	the	Khundryl	and	clearly	had	the	backing	of	the	military.	We	took	their	contempt	for	us
and	rammed	it	up	their	backsides,	and	now	we	are	but	a	day	from	the	walls	of	your	capital.	And	here	you	are,
seeking	to	bar	the	way.	Do	we	fight,	or	do	you	seek	peace	between	us?’
Abrastal	studied	the	man.	‘The	city	behind	me	has	walls	and	fortifications,	Warleader.	Your	horse-warriors
cannot	hope	to	take	it.	What	then	is	left	to	you?	Why,	to	ravage	the	countryside	until	there	is	nothing	left.’


‘Easier	to	feed	my	warriors	than	for	you	to	feed	a	city	packed	with	tens	of	thousands	of	refugees.’
‘You	would	seek	to	starve	us	out?’
Gall	 shrugged.	 ‘Highness,	 Bolkando	 has	 lost	 this	 war.	 If	 we	 were	 so	 inclined,	 we	 could	 simply	 take	 over.
Throw	you	and	all	of	your	bloodline	into	the	nearest	well	and	seal	it	up.’
Abrastal	smiled.	‘Oh,	dear.	Now	you	show	your	hut-dwelling	roots,	Warleader	Gall.	Before	I	tell	you	of	the
overwhelming	logistics	of	ruling	a	kingdom	whose	citizens	consider	conspiracy	a	religion,	I	need	to	avail	you	of
some	 other	 details.	 Yes,	 your	 fleet	 warriors	 have	 given	 us	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 trouble,	 but	 we	 are	 far	 from
defeated.	 My	 Evertine	 Legion—yes,	 it	 belongs	 to	 me,	 not	 to	 the	 King,	 not	 to	 the	 kingdom—has	 never	 been
defeated.	Indeed,	it	has	never	retreated	a	single	step	in	battle.	By	all	means,	fling	your	braves	against	our	iron
wall;	 we	 will	 heap	 the	 dead	 two	 storeys	 high	 around	 us.	 But	 I	 do	 not	 think	 you	 will	 have	 the	 chance,	 alas.
Should	 we	 come	 to	 battle	 here,	 Warleader,	 you	 will	 be	 annihilated.	 The	 Khundryl	 Burned	 Tears	 shall	 have
ceased	to	exist,	reduced	to	a	few	thousand	slaves	with	quaint	tattoos.’
After	 a	 moment,	 Gall	 hacked	 up	 phlegm,	 turned	 and	 spat.	 Then	 he	 wiped	 his	 mouth	 and	 said,	 ‘Highness,
even	as	we	stand	here,	your	two	flanking	pincers	are	being	filed	down	to	stumps.	Even	should	we	lock	jaws
with	your	army,	we’ll	hardly	remain	so	locked	until	such	time	as	any	other	relieving	force	you	manage	to	cough
up	arrives.’	He	made	a	dismissive	gesture	with	one	scarred	hand.	‘This	posturing	is	pointless.	How	many	days
away	 are	 the	 Perish?	 They	 will	 take	 your	 Evertine	 Legion	 and	 melt	 it	 down	 for	 all	 the	 fancy	 gold	 on	 that
armour.’	As	she	made	to	speak	he	held	up	his	hand	to	forestall	her.	‘I	have	yet	to	mention	the	worst	you	will
face—the	Bonehunters.	Among	my	people,	arguments	and	opinions	are	unending	as	to	who	are	the	greatest
soldiers	the	world	has	ever	known—ah,	I	see	in	your	face	that	you	think	we	strut	about	as	one	of	those	two,
but	we	do	not.	No,	we	speak	of	the	Wickans	of	Coltaine,	versus	the	marines	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’	His	teeth
appeared	 in	 a	 hard	 smile.	 ‘Lucky	 for	 you	 that	 there	 are	 no	 longer	 any	 Wickans	 among	 the	 Bonehunters,	 but
alas,	there	are	plenty	of	marines.’
A	long	moment	of	silence	followed	his	words.	Eventually,	Abrastal	sighed.	‘What	are	your	demands?’
‘We	 already	 have	 enough	 loot,	 Highness,	 so	 now	 we’re	 prepared	 to	 sell	 it	 back	 to	 you—for	 food,	 water,
livestock	and	feed.	But,	for	the	cost	of	my	warriors	killed	or	maimed	in	this	war,	we	will	pay	no	more	than	a
third	of	the	true	value	of	those	supplies.	Once	these	arrangements	are	completed	to	our	satisfaction,	and	once
we	are	reunited	with	the	Perish	Grey	Helms,	we	shall	leave	your	kingdom.	For	ever.’
‘That	is	it?’
Gall	made	a	face.	‘We	don’t	want	your	kingdom.	We	never	did.’
She	 knew	 she	 should	 feel	 offended	 by	 that,	 but	 the	 time	 for	 such	 indulgences	 would	 have	 to	 wait.
‘Warleader,	understand.	The	pernicious	acts	of	the	merchant	houses	which	led	to	this	war	were	in	themselves
abuses	of	the	King’s	official	policy—’
‘We	made	certain	those	thieves	were	the	first	to	die,	Highness.’
‘The	 ones	 you	 killed	 were	 but	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 poisoned	 knife.’	 She	 half-turned	 and	 nodded	 to	 one	 of	 her
guards.	 This	 officer	 led	 four	 other	 soldiers	 out	 from	 the	 squad,	 these	 ones	 carrying	 between	 them	 a	 leather
satchel	large	enough	to	hold	a	Khundryl	tipi.	They	set	it	down	and	untied	the	bound	corners,	and	then	pulled	flat
the	edges.
A	half-dozen	bodies	were	revealed,	although	not	much	was	left	of	them.
‘These	are	the	principal	agents,’	said	Abrastal,	‘believing	themselves	safely	ensconced	in	the	capital.	As	you
can	 see,	 only	 their	 skins	 remain—our	 Punishers	 are	 skilled	 in	 such	 matters.	 Consider	 them	 evidence	 of	 our
acknowledgement	of	the	injustices	set	upon	you.	They	are	yours	if	you	want	them.’
Gall’s	raptor	eyes	fixed	on	her.	‘I	am	tempted,’	he	said	slowly,	‘to	renege	on	my	avowed	lack	of	interest	in
taking	over	your	kingdom,	if	only	out	of	compassion	for	your	people,	Highness.’
‘We	 hold	 to	 justice,’	 Abrastal	 snapped,	 ‘in	 our	 own	 way.	 I	 am	 frankly	 surprised	 at	 your	 sensitivity,
Warleader.	The	stories	I	have	heard	about	the	habits	of	savages	when	it	comes	to	inventing	cruel	tortures—’
‘Do	 not	 apply	 to	 us,’	 Gall	 cut	 in,	 his	 voice	 hard	 as	 iron.	 After	 a	 moment	 he	 seemed	 to	 suddenly	 relax.
‘Unless	 we	 happen	 to	 get	 very	 angry.	 In	 any	 case,	 you	 misunderstood	 me,	 Highness.	 That	 your	 kingdom	 is
home	 to	 citizens	 of	 any	 stripe	 who	 know	 no	 self-constraint—no,	 even	 worse,	 that	 they	 would	 treat	 with
foreigners	unmindful	of	the	fact	that	they	stand	as	representatives	of	their	own	people—and	their	kingdom—
speaks	to	me	of	your	self-hatred.’
‘Self-hatred.	I	see.	And	if	you	were	the	King	of	Bolkando,	Warleader,	what	would	you	do?’


‘I	would	make	lying	the	greatest	crime	of	all.’
‘Interesting	notion.	Unfortunately,	usually	the	biggest	liars	of	all	are	the	people	at	the	top—it’s	how	they	stay
there,	after	all.’
‘Ah,	then	I	am	not	to	believe	a	word	you	say?’
‘You	can	believe	me,	for	I	can	think	of	no	lies	that	would	win	me	anything.’
‘Because	my	sword	hovers	over	your	throat.’
‘Precisely.	But	the	lies	I	was	speaking	of	are	the	ones	the	elite	use	to	maintain	the	necessary	distinctions,	if
you	see	my	point.’
‘I	do,’	and	now	he	regarded	her	with	keen	interest.	‘Highness,	this	has	proved	most	interesting.	But	I	must
ask	you	one	other	thing—why	are	you	here	and	not	your	husband	the	King?’
‘The	role	of	my	Evertine	Legion	is	to	be	arbiter	of	control	within	the	kingdom—and	its	own	populace—as
much	as	to	confront	external	threats.’
He	nodded.	‘Thus,	your	presence	here	serves	dual	purpose.’
‘And	 the	 message	 presented	 to	 our	 rivals	 in	 the	 palace	 is—and	 do	 not	 be	 offended	 by	 this—the	 more
important	of	the	two.’	And	then	she	smiled	and	added,	‘Unless,	of	course,	you	were	seeking	actual	conquest.’
‘Your	husband	holds	great	faith	in	you,	Highness.’
He	has	no	choice.	‘He	does,	and	with	reason.’
‘Do	you	accept	our	demands?’
‘I	do,	Warleader,	with	some	modifications.’
His	eyes	narrowed.	‘Name	them.’
‘The	water	we	provide	you	will	be	doubled,	and	it	will	be	freely	given.	We	shall	also	double	the	forage	you
require	 for	 your	 beasts,	 for	 we	 know	 far	 more	 about	 the	 Wastelands	 than	 you	 do,	 and	 we	 have	 no	 wish	 to
make	you	into	liars	when	you	say	you	will	never	return	to	Bolkando.’	She	paused,	cocked	her	head.	‘Beyond
the	Wastelands	you	will	find	the	dozen	or	so	kingdoms	of	Kolanse.	Warleader,	I	imagine	you	will	not	heed	my
advice,	but	I	will	give	it	anyway.	You	will	find	nothing	of	worth	there.	You	will,	in	fact,	find	something	terrible
beyond	imagining.’
‘Will	you	tell	me	more,	Highness?’
‘If	you	like.’
‘Then	 may	 I	 request	 that	 you	 do	 not	 do	 so	 until	 such	 time	 as	 either	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava	 or	 the
Adjunct	Tavore	is	present.’
‘Those	you	have	named,	they	are	both	women,	yes?’
‘They	are.’
‘Will	you	feel	.	.	.	out	of	place,	then?’
‘I	will,	but	not	for	the	reasons	you	might	think,	Highness.’
‘I	shall	then	await	this	potent	gathering	with	anticipation,	Warleader.’
And	for	the	first	time,	Gall	bowed	to	her.	‘Queen	Abrastal,	it	has	been	a	pleasure.’
‘I	am	sure	you	feel	so,	and	I	do	not	begrudge	you	that.	Are	we	now	at	peace?’
‘We	are.’
She	glanced	down	at	the	skins	on	the	leather	tarp.	‘And	these?’
‘Oh,’	said	Gall,	‘we’ll	take	them.	My	warriors	will	need	to	see	them,	to	ease	their	rage.	And	for	some,	to
soothe	their	grief	over	fallen	kin.’
As	he	bowed	again	and	turned	away,	Abrastal	called	out,	‘Warleader.’
He	faced	her	again,	a	question	in	his	eyes.
The	Queen	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘When	you	spoke	of	your	people’s	opinions	.	.	.	of	these	marines	of	the
Malazan	Empire,	was	there	truth	to	your	words?’
He	straightened.	‘Highness,	although	the	great	Coltaine	of	the	Crow	Clan	had	many	Wickans	with	him,	he
also	 possessed	 marines.	 Together,	 they	 escorted	 thirty	 thousand	 refugees	 across	 a	 third	 of	 a	 continent,	 and
each	step	of	the	journey	was	war.’
‘Have	I	misunderstood	then,	Warleader?	Did	not	Coltaine	fail?	Did	he	not	die?	And	everyone	with	him?’
The	warrior’s	eyes	were	suddenly	old.	‘He	did.	They	all	died—the	Wickans,	the	marines.’
‘Then	I	do	not—’
‘They	died,	Highness,	even	as	they	delivered	those	thirty	thousand	refugees	to	safety.	They	died,	but	they


won.’
When	she	had	nothing	more	to	say,	Gall	nodded	and	resumed	his	march	back	to	his	horse.	The	two	young
bodyguards	moved	to	edge	past	her	to	help	with	the	defleshed	and	de-boned	merchants.	Abrastal	caught	the
eye	 of	 the	 boy	 and	 winked.	 If	 he	 had	 been	 a	 Bolkando,	 his	 eyes	 would	 have	 widened	 in	 return.	 Instead,	 he
grinned.
That	dark	thing	came	alive	in	her	once	again.
Spax	 was	 suddenly	 at	 her	 side,	 watching	 as	 Gall	 swung	 himself	 on	 to	 his	 horse	 and	 then	 sat	 motionless,
presumably	waiting	for	his	two	charges	and	the	legionaries.	‘I	well	remember	Malazan	marines,’	he	muttered.
‘And?’
‘Gall	spoke	true.	A	more	stubborn	lot	this	world	has	never	seen.’
Abrastal	thought	of	Kolanse.	‘They	will	need	it.’
‘Firehair,	will	you	escort	them	to	the	border?’
‘Who?’
‘All	of	them.	The	Khundryl,	the	Perish,	the	Bonehunters.’
‘I	wasn’t	even	aware	the	Bonehunters	were	entering	our	territory.’
‘Perhaps	they	won’t	now	that	the	need	is	gone.’
‘The	Evertine	Legion	shall	accompany	these	Khundryl	and	the	Perish.	It	seems,	however,	that	some	form	of
meeting	of	at	least	two	of	the	three	commanders	is	planned—and	Gall	seems	to	think	it	will	be	soon.	I	would
like	to	speak	with	them.	Accordingly,	you	and	your	Gilk	will	now	attach	to	me—and	if	we	have	to	march	past
the	border,	we	shall.’
Spax	showed	his	filed	teeth.	‘You	can	make	a	request	to	the	Warleader,	Queen.’
‘I	think	I’ve	already	been	invited—’
‘Not	that.’	He	jerked	with	his	chin.	‘The	pup.’
She	scowled.
The	Gilk	Warchief	grunted	a	laugh.	‘You	told	to	me	watch	carefully,	Firehair.’
Abrastal	swung	about	and	began	marching	back	to	her	legion.	‘Rava	is	going	to	pay	for	all	of	this.’
‘He	already	has,	I	gather.’
‘Not	enough.	I’ll	keep	shaking	him	till	he’s	old	and	grey	and	shedding	teeth	and	whiskers.’
‘Gall	is	disgusted	by	your	people.’
‘So	am	I,	Spax.’
He	laughed	again.
‘Stop	sounding	so	smug,’	she	said.	‘Hundreds,	maybe	thousands	of	Bolkando	soldiers	have	died	today.	I	had
actually	considered	using	your	Gilk	for	one	of	the	pincers—you	would	not	be	so	pleased	with	yourself	if	I	had.’
‘We	would	have	just	kept	on	marching,	Firehair.’
‘Studded	with	arrows.’
‘Oh,	 we’d	 leave	a	trail	 of	 our	own,	yes,	 but	we	would	 have	arrived	when	we	 were	supposed	 to,	ready	to
deliver	vengeance.’
She	considered	that,	and	concluded	he	was	not	simply	full	of	himself.	We	should	have	heeded	what	befell
the	Lether	Empire.	Dear	Bolkando,	the	world	beyond	is	very	large	indeed.	And	the	sooner	we	send	it	on
its	way	again	the	sooner	we	can	get	back	to	our	orgy	of	sniping	and	backstabbing.
‘You’ve	a	nostalgic	look	in	your	eye,	Firehair.’
‘Stop	seeing	so	much,	Spax.’
His	third	laugh	made	her	want	to	punch	her	fist	through	the	man’s	ugly	face.
	
Impatient,	 Gall	 left	 his	 two	 Tear	 Runners	 to	 deal	 with	 the	 gift	 of	 skins	 and	 rode	 back	 to	 the	 camp	 alone.	 A
formidable	woman,	this	Queen.	Thick,	long	hair	the	hue	of	flames.	Clever	eyes,	brown	so	deep	as	to	be	almost
black.	Stolid	enough	to	give	Krughava	a	tangle	in	the	spit-circle	with	some	lucky	man	the	prize.	And	I’d	like	to
see	that	match—why,	they’re	both	enough	to	make	me	uncertain	whether	I	was	in	bed	with	a	woman	or
a	man.	The	thought	enlivened	him	and	he	shifted	in	the	saddle.	Bult’s	balls,	never	mind	that,	you	old	fool.
They	would	not	be	quit	of	Abrastal	and	her	Evertine	Legion	any	time	soon,	he	suspected.	All	the	way	to	the
border	and	perhaps	even	beyond.	But	he	did	not	anticipate	betrayal—the	Khundryl	had	done	enough	to	keep
the	fools	honest—honest	in	that	frightened,	over-eager	way	that	Gall	so	appreciated.	Sometimes	war	did	what


was	needed.	Always	easier—and	lucrative—dealing	with	a	reeling	foe,	after	all.
He	 was	 well	 enough	 pleased	 with	 how	 the	 parley	 had	 played	 out,	 although	 some	 unease	 remained,	 like	 a
yurt	rat	chewing	on	his	toes.	Kolanse.	What	do	you	know,	Adjunct?	What	is	it	you	are	not	telling	us?
You’re	moaning	like	an	old	man	shivering	under	furs,	Gall.	The	Khundryl,	the	Perish	Grey	Helms	and
the	 Bonehunters.	 No	 army	 can	 hope	 to	 stand	 against	 the	 three	 of	 us	 combined.	 Bolkando	 is	 small.
Queen	Abrastal	rules	a	tiny,	insignificant	realm.	And	the	only	empire	she	knows	is	the	one	the	marines
shattered.
No,	we	have	nothing	to	fear.	Still,	it	will	be	good	to	learn	what	the	Queen	knows.
A	cadre	of	wing	and	sub-wing	officers	awaited	him	at	the	edge	of	the	encampment.	He	scowled	at	them	as
he	rode	up.	‘Seems	they	want	to	keep	their	kingdom	after	all.	Send	out	word—hostilities	are	at	an	end.	Recall
all	the	raids.’
‘What	of	the	wings	attacking	the	flanking	armies?’	one	of	the	warriors	asked.
‘Too	late	to	do	anything	about	that,	but	send	Runners	in	case	they’re	still	fighting.	Order	them	to	withdraw	to
the	main	camp—and	no	looting	on	the	way!’
‘Warleader,’	said	another	warrior,	‘your	wife	has	arrived	and	awaits	you	in	your	tent.’
Gall	grunted,	kicking	his	horse	onward.
He	found	her	sprawled	on	his	cot,	naked	and	heavy	as	only	a	pregnant	woman	could	be.	Eyeing	her	as	he
drew	off	his	cape,	he	said,	‘Wife.’
She	glanced	up	with	lidded	eyes.	‘Husband.	How	goes	the	killing?’
‘Over	with,	for	now.’
‘Oh.	How	sad	for	you.’
‘I	should	have	drowned	you	in	a	river	long	ago.’
‘You’d	rather	have	my	ghost	haunting	you	than	this	all	too	solid	flesh?’
‘Would	you	have?	Haunted	me?’
‘Not	for	long.	I’d	get	bored.’
Gall	began	unstrapping	his	armour.	‘You	still	won’t	tell	whose	it	is?’
‘Does	it	matter?’
‘So	it	could	still	be	mine.’
She	 blinked,	 and	 a	 sharper	 focus	 came	 to	 her	 regard.	 ‘Gall	 Inshikalan,	 you	 are	 fifty-six	 years	 old.	 You’ve
been	crushing	your	balls	on	a	horse’s	back	for	four	and	a	half	decades—no	Khundryl	man	your	age	can	seed	a
woman.’
He	sighed.	‘That’s	the	problem.	Everyone	knows	that.’
‘Are	you	humiliated,	husband?	I	did	not	think	that	was	possible.’
Humiliation.	Well,	though	he’d	never	wanted	it,	he’d	done	his	share	of	humiliating	this	woman,	who	had	been
his	wife	for	most	of	his	life.	He	had	been	fifteen.	She	had	been	ten.	In	the	old	days	they	would	not	lie	together
even	when	married,	until	she’d	had	her	first	bleed.	He	remembered	the	women’s	celebration	when	that	time
finally	arrived	for	his	wife—they	bundled	the	pale	girl	away	for	a	night	of	secret	truths,	and	what	had	been	a
frightened	 child	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 that	 night	 came	 back	 to	 him	 the	 following	 dawn	 with	 a	 look	 of	 such
knowing	in	her	eyes	that	he	was	left	.	.	.	uncertain,	feeling	foolish	for	no	reason,	and	from	that	day	onward,
that	 he	 was	 five	 years	 older	 than	 her	 had	 ceased	 to	 be	 relevant;	 in	 fact,	 it	 seemed	 as	 if	 she	 was	 the	 elder
between	them.	Wiser,	sure	of	herself,	and	stronger	in	every	way.
He	had	worshipped	that	truth	in	all	the	years	they	had	been	together.	In	fact,	he	realized	with	a	sudden	flush,
he	still	did.
Gall	stood,	looking	down	at	his	wife,	trying	to	think	of	the	words	he	lacked	to	tell	her	this.	And	other	things
besides.
In	her	eyes,	as	she	studied	him	in	turn	.	.	.	something—
A	shout	from	outside	the	tent.
She	looked	away.	‘The	Warleader	is	summoned.’
Just	like	that,	the	moment	was	gone,	closed	up	tight.	He	turned	away,	stepped	back	outside.
The	scout—the	woman—he	had	sent	with	Vedith	stood	before	him.	Spattered	in	dried	blood,	dust,	slick	gore,
stinking	like	a	carcass.	Gall	frowned.	‘So	soon?’
‘We	crushed	them,	Warleader.	But	Vedith	is	dead.’


‘Did	you	take	command?’
‘I	did.’
He	tried	to	recall	her	name,	glancing	away	as	she	went	on.
‘Warleader,	 he	 was	 leading	 the	 first	 charge—we	 were	 arrayed	 perfectly.	 His	 horse	 stepped	 into	 a	 snake
hole,	went	down.	Vedith	was	thrown.	He	landed	poorly,	breaking	his	neck.	We	saw	how	his	body	flopped	as	he
rolled	and	we	knew.’
Gall	 was	 nodding.	 Such	 things	 happened,	 yes.	 Unexpected,	 impossible	 to	 plan	 around.	 That	 hoof,	 those
shadows	on	the	uneven	ground,	the	eyes	of	the	horse,	that	hole,	all	converging	into	a	single	fatal	moment.	To
think	too	much	of	such	things	could	drive	one	mad,	could	tip	one	into	an	all-consuming	rage.	At	the	games	of
chance,	the	cruel,	bitter	games.
‘Warleader,’	 the	 scout	 continued	 after	 a	 moment,	 ‘Vedith’s	 command	 of	 the	 ambush	 was	 absolute.	 Every
raid	set	about	its	task	though	we	all	knew	he	had	fallen—we	did	this	for	him,	to	honour	him	as	we	must.	The
enemy	was	broken.	Fourteen	hundred	dead	Bolkando,	the	rest	weaponless	and	in	flight	across	the	countryside.
We	have	nineteen	dead	and	fifty-one	wounded.’
His	gaze	returned	to	her.	‘Thank	you,	Rafala.	The	wing	is	now	yours.’
‘It	shall	be	named	Vedith.’
He	nodded.	‘See	to	your	wounded.’
Gall	stepped	back	inside	the	tent.	He	stood,	not	sure	what	to	do	next,	where	to	go.	Not	sure	why	he	was
here	at	all.
‘I	heard,’	said	his	wife	in	a	low	tone.	‘Vedith	must	have	been	a	good	warrior,	a	good	commander.’
‘He	was	young,’	said	Gall,	as	though	that	made	a	difference—as	though	saying	it	made	a	difference—but	it
didn’t.
‘Malak’s	cousin	Tharat	has	a	son	named	Vedith.’
‘Not	any	more.’
‘He	used	to	play	with	our	Kyth	Anar.’
‘Yes,’	Gall	said	suddenly,	eyes	bright	as	he	looked	upon	her.	‘That	is	right.	How	could	I	have	forgotten?’
‘Because	that	was	fifteen	years	ago,	husband.	Because	Kyth	did	not	live	past	his	seventh	birthday.	Because
we	agreed	to	bury	our	memories	of	him,	our	wondrous	first	son.’
‘I	said	no	such	thing	and	neither	did	you!’
‘No.	We	didn’t	need	to.	An	agreement?	More	like	a	blood	vow.’	She	sighed.	‘Warriors	die.	Children	die—’
‘Stop	it!’
She	 sat	 up,	 groaning	 with	 the	 effort.	 Seeing	 the	 tears	 he	 could	 not	 wipe	 away	 she	 reached	 out	 one	 hand.
‘Come	here,	husband.’
But	he	could	not	move.	His	legs	were	rooted	tree-trunks	beneath	him.
She	said,	‘Something	new	comes	squalling	into	the	world	every	moment	of	every	day.	Opening	eyes	that	can
barely	see.	And	as	they	come,	other	things	leave.’
‘I	gave	him	that	command.	I	did	it	myself.’
‘Such	is	a	Warleader’s	burden,	husband.’
He	fought	back	a	sob.	‘I	feel	so	alone.’
She	 was	 at	 his	 side,	 taking	 one	 of	 his	 hands.	 ‘That	 is	 the	 truth	 we	 all	 face,’	 she	 said.	 ‘I	 have	 had	 seven
children	since	then,	and	yes,	most	of	them	are	yours.	Do	you	ever	wonder	why	I	cannot	give	up?	What	it	is
that	drives	women	to	suffer	this	time	and	again?	Listen	well	to	this	secret,	Gall,	it	is	because	to	carry	a	child	is
to	be	not	alone.	And	to	lose	a	child	is	to	be	so	wretchedly	alone	that	no	man	can	know	the	same	.	.	.	except
perhaps	the	heart	of	a	ruler,	a	leader	of	warriors,	a	Warleader.’
He	found	he	could	meet	her	eyes	once	again.	‘You	remind	me,’	he	said,	voice	rough.
She	understood.	‘And	you	me,	Gall.	We	forget	too	easily	and	too	often	these	days.’
Yes.	He	felt	her	callused	hand	in	his,	and	something	of	that	loneliness	crumbled	away.	Then	he	guided	their
hands	down	on	to	her	rounded	belly.	‘What	awaits	this	one?’	he	wondered	aloud.
‘That	we	cannot	say,	husband.’
‘Tonight,’	he	said,	‘we	shall	call	all	our	children	together.	We	shall	eat	as	a	family—what	do	you	think?’
She	laughed.	‘I	can	almost	see	their	faces,	all	around	us—the	looks	so	dumbfounded,	so	confused.	What	will
they	make	of	such	a	thing?’


Gall	shrugged,	a	sudden	looseness	to	his	limbs,	the	tightness	of	his	chest	vanishing	in	a	single	breath.	‘We
call	them	not	for	them	but	for	us,	for	you	and	me,	Hanavat.’
‘Tonight,’	she	said,	nodding.	‘Vedith	plays	with	our	son	once	more.	I	can	hear	them	shouting	and	laughing,
and	the	sky	is	before	them	and	it	does	not	end.’
With	genuine	feeling—the	first	time	in	years—Gall	took	his	wife	into	his	arms.


Chapter	Fifteen
People	will	not	know	the	guilt
they	cannot	deny,	cannot	escape.
Blind	the	gods	and	fix	their	scales
with	binding	chains	and	pull	them
down	like	the	truths	we	hate.
We	puzzle	over	the	bones	of
strangers	and	wonder	at	the	world
when	they	danced	free	of	us
blessedly	long	ago	and	we	are
different	now,	but	even	to	speak
of	the	men	and	women	we	were
then,	tempts	the	whirlwind	ghosts
of	our	victims	and	this	will	not	do
as	we	treasure	the	calm	and	the
smooth	of	pretend—what	cruel
weapons	of	nature	and	time
struck	down	all	these	strangers
of	long	ago,	when	we	were
witness	in	a	hapless	if	smug	way?
We	dodged	the	spear-thrusts	of
mischance	where	they	stumbled
too	oafish	too	clumsy	and	altogether
inferior—and	their	bones	you	will
find	in	mountain	caves	and	river	clay,
in	white	spider	crevasses	above
white	beaches,	in	forest	shelters	of
rock	and	all	the	places	in	between,
so	many	that	one	slayer,	we	say,
cannot	be	responsible;	but	many
the	weapons	of	nature—and	the
skittish	thing	in	our	eyes	as	they
slide	away,	perhaps	mutters,	to	a
sharp	ear,	the	one	constant	shadow
behind	all	those	deaths—why,	that
would	be	us,	silent	in	guilt,	undeserving
recipients	of	the	solitary	gift
that	leaves	us	nothing	but	the	bones
of	strangers	to	tumble	and	roll
beneath	our	arguments.
They	are	wordless	in	repose	but
still	unwelcome,	for	they	speak
as	only	bones	can,	and	still	we	will
not	listen.	Show	me	the	bones	of
strangers,	and	I	become	disconsolate.
	
UNWELCOM E	LAM ENT


GEDESP,	FIRST 	EM PIRE

He	 saw	 a	 different	 past.	 One	 that	 rolled	 out	 after	 choices	 not	 made.	 He	 saw	 the	 familiar	 trapped	 inside
strangeness.	Huddling	round	fires	as	winds	howled	and	new	things	moved	in	the	darkness	beyond.	The	failure
of	 opportunities	 haunted	 him	 and	 his	 kind.	 A	 dogged	 rival	 slipped	 serpent-like	 into	 the	 mossy	 cathedrals	 of
needled	 forests,	 sliding	 along	 shadow	 streams,	 and	 life	 became	 a	 time	 of	 picking	 through	 long-dead	 kills,
frowning	at	broken	tools	of	stone	different	from	anything	ever	seen	before.	This—all	of	this—he	realized,	was
the	slow	failure	that,	in	his	own	past,	had	been	evaded.
By	 the	 Ritual	 of	 Tellann.	 The	 sealing	 of	 living	 souls	 inside	 lifeless	 bone	 and	 flesh,	 the	 trapping	 of	 sparks
inside	withered	eyes.
Here,	in	this	other	past,	in	that	other	place,	there	had	been	no	ritual.	And	the	ice	that	was	in	his	own	realm
the	 plaything	 of	 the	 Jaghut	 here	 lifted	 barriers	 unbidden.	 Everywhere	 the	 world	 shrank.	 Of	 course,	 such
challenges	had	been	faced	before.	People	suffered,	many	died,	but	they	struggled	through	and	they	survived.
This	time,	however,	it	was	different.
This	time,	there	were	strangers.
He	did	not	know	why	he	was	being	shown	this.	Some	absurdly	detailed	false	history	to	torment	him?	Too
elaborate,	 too	 strained	 in	 its	 conceptualization.	 He	 had	 real	 wounds	 that	 could	 be	 torn	 open.	 Yes,	 the	 vision
mocked	him,	but	on	a	scale	broader	than	that	of	his	own	personal	failures.	He	was	being	shown	the	inherent
weakness	 of	 his	 own	 kind—he	 was	 feeling	 the	 feelings	 of	 those	 last	 survivors	 in	 that	 other,	 bitter	 world,	 the
muddy	 knowledge	 of	 things	 coming	 to	 an	 end.	 The	 end	 of	 families,	 the	 end	 of	 friends,	 the	 end	 of	 children.
Nothing	to	follow.
The	end,	in	fact,	of	the	one	thing	never	before	questioned.	Continuation.	We	tell	ourselves	that	each	of	us
must	pass,	but	that	our	kind	will	live	on.	This	is	the	deeply	buried	taproot	feeding	our	very	will	to	live.
Cut	that	root,	and	living	fades.	Bleeding	dry	and	colourless,	it	fades.
He	was	invited	to	weep	one	last	time.	To	weep	not	for	himself,	but	for	his	species.
When	 fell	 the	 last	 salty	 tear	 of	 the	 Imass?	 Did	 the	 soil	 that	 received	 it	 taste	 its	 difference	 from	 all
those	that	came	before?	Was	it	bitterer?	Was	it	sweeter?	Did	it	sting	the	ground	like	acid?
He	could	see	that	tear,	its	deathly	drop	dragged	into	infinity,	a	journey	too	slow	to	measure.	But	he	knew	that
what	 he	 was	 seeing	 was	 a	 conceit.	 The	 last	 to	 die	 had	 been	 dry-eyed—Onos	 Toolan	 had	 witnessed	 the
moment	 here	 in	 this	 false	 past—the	 wretched	 brave	 lying	 bound	 and	 bleeding	 and	 awaiting	 the	 flint-toothed
ivory	 blade	 in	 a	 stranger’s	 hand.	 They	 too	 were	 hungry,	 desperate,	 those	 strangers.	 And	 they	 would	 kill	 the
Imass,	the	last	of	his	kind,	and	they	would	eat	him.	Leave	his	cracked	and	cut	bones	scattered	on	the	floor	of
this	cave,	with	all	the	others,	and	then,	in	sudden	superstitious	terror,	the	strangers	would	flee	this	place,	leaving
nothing	behind	of	themselves,	lest	wronged	ghosts	find	them	on	the	paths	of	haunting.
In	that	other	world,	the	end	of	Tool’s	kind	came	at	the	cut	of	a	knife.
Someone	was	howling,	flesh	stretched	to	bursting	by	a	surge	of	rage.
The	children	of	the	Imass,	who	were	not	children	at	all,	but	inheritors	nevertheless,	had	flooded	the	world
with	 the	 taste	 of	 Imass	 blood	 on	 their	 tongues.	 Just	 one	 more	 quarry	 hunted	 into	 oblivion,	 with	 nothing	 more
than	a	vague	unease	lodged	deep	inside,	the	mark	of	sin,	the	horror	of	a	first	crime.
The	son	devours	the	father,	heart	of	a	thousand	myths,	a	thousand	half-forgotten	tales.
Empathy	was	excoriated	from	him.	The	howl	he	heard	was	rising	from	his	own	throat.	The	rage	battered
like	fists	inside	his	body,	a	demonic	thing	eager	to	get	out.
They	will	pay—
But	no.	 Onos	 Toolan	 staggered	 onward,	 hide-bound	 feet	 crunching	 on	 frozen	 moss	 and	 lichen.	 He	 would
walk	out	of	this	damning,	vicious	fate.	Back	to	his	own	world’s	paradise	beyond	death,	where	rituals	delivered
curse	and	salvation	both.	He	would	not	turn.	He	was	blind	as	a	beast	driven	to	the	cliff’s	edge,	but	it	did	not
matter;	what	awaited	him	was	a	death	better	than	this	death—
He	saw	a	rider	ahead,	a	figure	hunched	and	cowled	as	it	waited	astride	a	gaunt,	grey	horse	from	which	no
breath	 plumed.	 He	 saw	 a	 recurved	 Rhivi	 bow	 gripped	 in	 one	 bony	 hand,	 and	 Onos	 Toolan	 realized	 that	 he
knew	this	rider.
This	inheritor.


Tool	halted	twenty	paces	away.	‘You	cannot	be	here.’
The	head	tilted	slightly	and	the	glitter	of	a	single	eye	broke	the	blackness	beneath	the	cowl.	‘Nor	you,	old
friend,	yet	here	we	are.’
‘Move	aside,	Toc	the	Younger.	Let	me	pass.	What	waits	beyond	is	what	I	have	earned.	What	I	will	return
to—it	is	mine.	I	will	see	the	herds	again,	the	great	ay	and	the	ranag,	the	okral	and	agkor.	I	will	see	my	kin	and
run	in	the	shadow	of	the	tusked	tenag.	I	will	throw	a	laughing	child	upon	my	knee.	I	will	show	the	children	their
future,	and	tell	them	how	all	that	we	are	shall	continue,	unending,	for	here	I	will	find	an	eternity	of	wishes,	for
ever	fulfilled.
‘Toc,	 my	 friend,	 do	 not	 take	 this	 from	 me.	 Do	 not	 take	 this,	 too,	 when	 you	 and	 your	 kind	 have	 taken
everything	else.’
‘I	cannot	let	you	pass,	Tool.’
Tool’s	scarred,	battered	hands	closed	into	fists.	‘For	the	love	between	us,	Toc	the	Younger,	do	not	do	this.’
An	arrow	appeared	in	Toc’s	other	hand,	biting	the	bowstring	and,	faster	than	Tool	could	register,	the	barbed
missile	flashed	out	and	stabbed	the	ground	at	his	feet.
‘I	am	dead,’	said	Tool.	‘You	cannot	hurt	me.’
‘We’re	both	dead,’	Toc	replied,	his	voice	cold	as	a	stranger’s.	‘I	will	take	your	legs	out	from	under	you	and
the	wounds	will	be	real—I	will	leave	you	bleeding,	crippled,	in	terrible	pain.	You	will	not	pass.’
Tool	took	a	step	forward.	‘Why?’
‘The	rage	burns	bright	within	you,	doesn’t	it?’
‘Abyss	take	it—I	am	done	with	fighting!	I	am	done	with	all	of	it!’
‘On	my	tongue,	Onos	Toolan,	is	the	taste	of	Imass	blood.’
‘You	 want	 me	 to	 fight	 you?	 I	 will—do	 you	 imagine	 your	 puny	 arrows	 can	 take	 down	 an	 Imass?	 I	 have
snapped	the	neck	of	a	bull	ranag.	I	have	been	gored.	Mauled	by	an	okral.	When	my	kind	hunt,	we	bring	down
our	quarry	with	our	own	hands,	and	that	triumph	is	purchased	in	broken	bones	and	pain.’
A	second	arrow	thudded	into	the	ground.
‘Toc—why	are	you	doing	this?’
‘You	must	not	pass.’
‘I—I	gifted	you	with	an	Imass	name.	Did	you	not	realize	the	measure	of	that	honour?	Did	you	not	know	that
no	other	of	your	kind	has	ever	been	given	such	a	thing?	I	called	you	friend.	When	you	died,	I	wept.’
‘I	see	you	now,	in	flesh,	all	that	once	rode	the	bone.’
‘You	have	seen	this	before,	Toc	the	Younger.’
‘I	do	not—’
‘You	did	not	recognize	me.	Outside	the	walls	of	Black	Coral.	I	found	you,	but	even	your	face	was	not	your
own.	 We	 were	 changed,	 the	 both	 of	 us.	 Could	 I	 go	 back	 .	 .	 .’	 He	 faltered,	 and	 then	 continued,	 ‘Could	 I	 go
back,	I	would	not	have	let	you	pass	me	by.	I	would	have	made	you	realize.’
‘It	does	not	matter.’
Something	broke	inside	Onos	Toolan.	He	looked	away.	‘No,	perhaps	it	doesn’t.’
‘On	the	Awl’dan	plain,	you	saw	me	fall.’
Tool	staggered	back	as	if	struck	a	blow.	‘I	did	not	know—’
‘Nor	me,	Tool.	And	so	truths	come	round,	full	circle,	with	all	the	elegance	of	a	curse.	I	did	not	know	you
outside	 Black	 Coral.	 You	 did	 not	 know	 me	 on	 the	 plain.	 Fates	 have	 a	 way	 of	 .	 .	 .	 of	 fitting	together.’	 Toc
paused,	and	then	hissed	a	bitter	laugh.	‘And	do	you	recall	when	we	met	at	the	foot	of	Morn?	Look	upon	us
now.	 I	 am	 the	 withered	 corpse,	 and	 you—’	 He	 seemed	 to	 tremble,	 as	 if	 struck	 an	 invisible	 blow,	 and	 then
recovered.	‘On	the	plain,	Onos	Toolan.	What	did	I	give	my	life	for?	Do	you	recall?’
The	bitterness	in	Tool’s	mouth	was	unbearable.	He	wanted	to	shriek,	he	wanted	to	tear	out	his	own	eyes.
‘The	lives	of	children.’
‘Can	you	do	the	same?’
Deeper	than	any	arrows,	Toc	struck	with	his	terrible	words.	‘You	know	I	cannot,’	Tool	said	in	a	rasp.
‘You	will	not,	you	mean.’
‘They	are	not	my	children!’
‘You	 have	 found	 the	 rage	 of	 the	 Imass—the	 rage	 they	 escaped,	 Tool,	 with	 the	 Ritual.	 You	 have	 seen	 the
truth	of	other	pasts.	And	now	you	would	flee—flee	it	all.	Do	you	really	believe,	Onos	Toolan,	that	you	will	find


peace?	Peace	in	self-deception?	This	world	behind	me,	the	one	you	so	seek,	you	will	infect	with	the	lies	you
tell	yourself.	Every	child’s	laugh	will	sound	hollow,	and	the	look	in	every	beast’s	eye	will	tell	you	they	see	you
truly.’
The	third	arrow	struck	his	left	shoulder,	spun	him	round	but	did	not	knock	him	down.	Righting	himself,	Tool
reached	 to	 grip	 the	 shaft.	 He	 snapped	 it	 and	 drew	 out	 the	 fletched	 end.	 Behind	 him,	 the	 flint	 point	 and	 a
hand’s-width	of	shaft	fell	to	the	ground.	‘What—what	do	you	want	of	me?’
‘You	must	not	pass.’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘I	want	nothing,	Tool.	I	want	nothing.’	And	he	nocked	another	arrow.
‘Then	kill	me.’
‘We’re	dead,’	Toc	said.	‘That	I	cannot	do.	But	I	can	stop	you.	Turn	round,	Onos	Toolan.	Go	back.’
‘To	what?’
Toc	 the	 Younger	 hesitated,	 as	 if	 uncertain	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 this	 brutal	 meeting.	 ‘We	 are	 guilty,’	 he	 said
slowly,	‘of	so	many	pasts.	Will	we	ever	be	made	to	answer	for	any	of	them?	I	wait,	you	see,	for	the	fates	to	fit
together.	I	wait	for	the	poisonous	beauty.’
‘You	want	me	to	forgive	you—your	kind,	Toc	the	Younger?’
‘Once,	in	the	city	of	Mott,	I	wandered	into	a	market	and	found	myself	in	front	of	row	upon	row	of	squall
apes,	the	swamp	dwellers.	I	looked	into	their	eyes,	Tool,	and	I	saw	their	suffering,	their	longing,	their	terrible
crime	 of	 living.	 And	 for	 all	 that,	 I	 knew	 that	 they	 were	 simply	 not	 intelligent	 enough.	 To	 refuse	 forgiveness.
You	Imass,	you	are.	So.	Do	not	forgive	us.	Never	forgive	us!’
‘Am	I	to	be	the	weapon	of	your	self-hatred?’
‘I	wish	I	knew.’
In	those	four	words,	Tool	heard	his	friend,	a	man	trapped,	struggling	to	recall	himself.
Toc	 resumed.	 ‘After	 the	 Ritual,	 well,	 you	 chose	 the	 wrong	 enemy	 for	 your	 endless	 war	 of	 vengeance.	 It
would	have	been	more	just,	don’t	you	think,	to	proclaim	a	war	against	us	humans.	Perhaps,	one	day,	Silverfox
will	come	to	realize	that,	and	choose	for	her	undead	armies	a	new	enemy.’	He	then	shrugged.	‘If	I	believed	in
justice,	that	is	.	.	.	if	I	imagined	that	she	was	capable	of	seeing	clearly	enough.	That	you	and	you	alone,	T’lan
Imass,	are	in	the	position	to	take	on	the	necessary	act	of	retribution—for	those	squall	apes,	for	all	the	so-called
lesser	creatures	that	have	fallen	and	ever	fall	to	our	slick	desires.’
He	speaks	the	words	of	the	dead.	His	heart	is	cold.	His	single	eye	sees	and	does	not	shy	away.	He
is	.	.	.	tormented.	‘Is	this	what	you	expected,’	Tool	asked,	‘when	you	died?	What	of	Hood’s	Gate?’
Teeth	gleamed.	‘Locked.’
‘How	can	that	be?’
The	next	arrow	split	his	right	knee-cap.	Bellowing	in	agony,	Tool	collapsed.	He	writhed,	fire	tearing	up	his
leg.	Pain	.	.	.	in	so	many	layers,	folding	round	and	round—the	wound,	the	murder	of	a	friendship,	the	death	of
love,	history	skirling	up	in	a	plume	of	ashes.
Horse	hoofs	slowly	thumped	closer.
Blinking	tears	from	his	eyes,	Tool	stared	up	at	the	ravaged,	half-rotted	face	of	his	old	friend.
‘Onos	Toolan,	I	am	the	lock.’
The	 pain	 was	 overwhelming.	 He	 could	 not	 speak.	 Sweat	 stung	 his	 eyes,	 more	 bitter	 than	 any	 tears.	 My
friend.	The	one	thing	left	in	me—it	is	slain.	You	have	murdered	it.
‘Go	back,’	said	Toc	in	a	tone	of	immeasurable	weariness.
‘I—I	cannot	walk—’
‘That	will	ease,	once	you	turn	around.	Once	you	retrace	your	route,	the	farther	you	get	away	.	.	.	from	me.’
With	blood-smeared	hands,	Tool	prised	loose	the	arrow	jutting	from	his	knee.	He	almost	passed	out	in	the
wave	of	agony	that	followed,	and	lay	gasping.
‘Find	your	children,	Onos	Toolan.	Not	of	the	blood.	Of	the	spirit.’
There	are	none,	you	bastard.	As	you	said,	you	and	your	kind	killed	them	all.	Weeping,	he	struggled	to
stand,	 twisting	 as	 he	 turned	 to	 face	 the	 way	 he	 had	 come.	 Rock-studded,	 rolling	 hills,	 a	 grey	 lowering	 sky.
You’ve	taken	it	all—
‘And	we’re	far	from	finished,’	said	Toc	behind	him.
I	now	cast	away	love.	I	embrace	hate.


Toc	said	nothing	to	that.
Dragging	his	maimed	leg,	Tool	set	out.
	
Toc	 the	 Younger,	 who	 had	 once	 been	 Anaster	 First	 Born	 of	 the	 Dead	 Seed,	 who	 had	 once	 been	 a	 Malazan
soldier,	one-eyed	and	a	son	to	a	vanished	father,	sat	on	his	undead	horse	and	watched	the	broken	warrior	limp
to	the	distant	range	of	hills.
When,	at	long	last,	Tool	edged	over	a	ridge	and	then	disappeared	behind	it,	Toc	dropped	his	gaze.	His	lone
eye	roved	over	the	matted	stains	of	blood	on	the	dead	grasses,	the	glistening	arrows,	one	broken,	the	other	not,
and	those	jutting	from	the	half-frozen	earth.	Arrows	fashioned	by	Tool’s	own	hands,	so	long	ago	on	a	distant
plain.
He	 suddenly	 pitched	 forward,	 curling	 up	 like	 a	 gut-stabbed	 child.	 A	 moment	 later	 a	 wretched	 sob	 broke
loose.	His	body	trembled,	bones	creaking	in	dried	sockets,	as	he	wept,	tearless,	leaking	nothing	but	the	sounds
pushing	past	his	withered	throat.
A	 voice	 broke	 through	 from	 a	 few	 paces	 away,	 ‘Compelling	 you	 to	 such	 things,	 Herald,	 leaves	 me	 no
pleasure.’
Collecting	 himself	 with	 a	 groan,	 Toc	 the	 Younger	 straightened	 in	 the	 saddle	 and	 fixed	 his	 eye	 upon	 the
ancient	bonecaster	standing	now	in	the	place	where	Tool	had	been.	He	bared	dull,	dry	teeth.	‘Your	hand	was
colder	than	Hood’s	own,	witch.	Do	you	imagine	Hood	is	pleased	at	you	stealing	his	Herald?	At	your	using	him
as	you	will?	This	will	not	go	unanswered—’
‘I	have	no	reason	to	fear	Hood—’
‘But	you	have	reason	to	fear	me,	Olar	Ethil!’
‘And	 how	 will	 you	 find	 me,	 Dead	 Rider?	 I	 stand	 here,	 yet	 not	 here.	 No,	 in	 the	 living	 world	 I	 am	 huddled
beneath	furs,	sleeping	under	bright	stars—’
‘You	have	no	need	of	sleep.’
She	 laughed.	 ‘Guarded	 well	 by	 a	 young	 warrior—one	 you	 knew	 well,	 yes?	 One	 you	 chase	 at	 night,	 there
behind	his	eyes—and	yes,	when	I	saw	the	truth	of	that,	why,	he	proved	my	path	to	you.	And	you	spoke	to	me,
begging	for	his	life,	which	I	accepted	into	my	care.	It	has	all	led	.	.	.	to	this.’
‘And	here,’	Toc	muttered,	‘I’d	given	up	believing	in	evil.	How	many	others	do	you	plan	to	abuse?’
‘As	many	as	I	need,	Herald.’
‘I	will	find	you.	When	my	other	tasks	are	finally	done,	I	swear,	I	will	find	you.’
‘To	achieve	what?	Onos	Toolan	is	severed	from	you.	And,	more	importantly,	from	your	kind.’	She	paused,
and	 then	 added	 with	 a	 half-snarl,	 ‘I	 don’t	 know	 what	 you	 meant	 by	 that	 rubbish	 you	 managed	 to	 force	 out,
about	Tool	finding	his	children.	I	need	him	for	other	things.’
‘I	was	fighting	free	of	you,	bonecaster.	He	saw—he	heard—’
‘And	failed	to	understand.	Onos	Toolan	hates	you	now—think	on	that,	think	on	the	deepness	of	his	love,	and
know	that	for	an	Imass	hatred	runs	deeper	 still.	Ask	 the	 Jaghut!	It	 is	 done,	 and	 can	never	be	mended.	 Ride
away	from	this,	Herald.	I	now	release	you.’
‘I	look	forward,’	said	Toc,	gathering	the	reins,	‘to	the	next	time	we	meet,	Olar	Ethil.’
	
Torrent’s	eyes	snapped	open.	Stars	in	blurred,	jade-tinged	smears	spun	overhead.	He	drew	a	deep	but	ragged
breath,	shivered	beneath	his	furs.
Olar	Ethil’s	crackling	voice	cut	through	the	darkness.	‘Did	he	catch	you?’
He	was	in	no	hurry	to	reply	to	that.	Not	this	time.	He	could	still	smell	the	dry,	musty	aura	of	death,	could	still
hear	the	drumbeat	of	hoofs.
The	witch	continued,	‘Less	than	half	the	night	is	done.	Sleep.	I	will	keep	him	from	you	now.’
He	sat	up.	‘Why	would	you	do	that,	Olar	Ethil?	Besides,’	he	added,	‘my	dreams	belong	to	me,	not	you.’
Rasping	laughter	drifted	across	to	him.	‘Do	you	see	his	lone	eye?	How	it	glitters	in	darkness	like	a	star?	Do
you	hear	the	howl	of	wolves	echoing	out	from	the	empty	pit	of	the	one	he	lost?	What	do	the	beasts	want	with
him?	Perhaps	he	will	tell	you,	when	at	last	he	rides	you	down.’
Torrent	bit	down	one	reply,	chose	another:	‘I	escape.	I	always	do.’
She	grunted.	‘Good.	He	is	filled	with	lies.	He	would	use	you,	as	the	dead	are	wont	to	do	to	mortals.’


In	the	night	Torrent	bared	his	teeth.	‘Like	you?’
‘Like	 me,	 yes.	 There	 is	 no	 reason	 to	 deny	 it.	 But	 listen	 well,	 I	 must	 leave	 your	 side	 for	 a	 time.	 Continue
southward	on	your	journey.	I	have	awakened	ancient	springs—your	horse	will	find	them.	I	will	return	to	you.’
‘What	is	it	you	want,	Olar	Ethil?	I	am	nothing.	My	people	are	gone.	I	wander	without	purpose,	caring	not	if	I
live	or	die.	And	I	will	not	serve	you—nothing	you	can	say	can	compel	me.’
‘Do	you	believe	me	a	Tyrant?	I	am	not.	I	am	a	bonecaster—do	you	know	what	that	is?’
‘No.	A	witch.’
‘Yes,	that	will	do,	for	a	start.	Tell	me,	do	you	know	what	a	Soletaken	is?	A	D’ivers?’
‘No.’
‘What	do	you	know	of	Elder	Gods?’
‘Nothing.’
He	heard	something	like	a	snarl,	and	then	she	said,	‘How	can	your	kind	live,	so	steeped	in	ignorance?	What
is	 history	 to	 you,	 warrior	 of	 the	 Awl’dan?	 A	 host	 of	 lies	 to	 win	 you	 glory.	 Why	 do	 you	 so	 fear	 the	 truth	 of
things?	 The	 darker	 moments	 of	 your	 past—you,	 your	 tribe,	 all	 of	 humanity?	 There	 were	 thousands	 of	 my
people	who	did	not	join	the	Ritual	of	Tellann—what	happened	to	them?	Why,	you	did.	No	matter	where	they
hid,	you	found	them.	Oh,	on	rare	occasions	there	was	breeding,	a	fell	admixture	of	blood,	but	most	of	the	time
such	 meetings	 ended	 in	 slaughter.	 You	 saw	 in	 our	 faces	 the	 strange	 and	 the	 familiar—which	 of	 the	 two
frightened	you	the	most?	When	you	cut	us	down,	when	you	carved	the	meat	from	our	bones?’
‘You	speak	nonsense,’	Torrent	said.	‘You	tell	me	you	are	Imass,	as	if	I	should	know	what	that	means.	I	do
not.	Nor	do	I	care.	Peoples	die.	They	vanish	from	the	world.	It	is	as	it	was	and	ever	will	be.’
‘You	 are	 a	 fool.	 From	 my	 ancient	 blood	 ran	 every	 stream	 of	 Soletaken	 and	 D’ivers.	 And	 my	 blood,	 ah,	 it
was	but	half	Imass,	perhaps	even	less.	I	am	old	beyond	your	imagining,	warrior.	Older	than	this	world.	I	lived
in	 darkness,	 I	 walked	 in	 purest	 light,	 I	 cast	 curses	 upon	 shadow.	 My	 hands	 were	 chipped	 stone,	 my	 eyes
spawned	the	first	fires	to	huddle	round,	my	legs	spread	to	the	first	mortal	child.	I	am	known	by	so	many	names
even	I	have	forgotten	most	of	them.’
She	 rose,	 her	 squat	 frame	 dangling	 rotted	 furs,	 her	 hair	 lifting	 like	 an	 aura	 of	 madness	 to	 surround	 her
withered	face,	and	advanced	to	stand	over	him.
A	sudden	chill	gripped	Torrent.	He	could	not	move.	He	struggled	to	breathe.
She	spoke.	‘Parts	of	me	sleep,	tormented	by	sickness.	Others	rail	in	the	fury	of	summer	storms.	I	am	the
drinker	of	birth	waters.	And	blood.	And	the	rain	of	weeping	and	the	oil	of	ordeal.	I	did	not	lie,	mortal,	when	I
told	you	that	the	spirits	you	worship	are	my	children.	I	am	the	bringer	of	a	land’s	bounty.	I	am	the	cruel	thief	of
want,	the	sower	of	suffering.
‘So	 many	 names	 .	 .	 .	 Eran’ishal,	 Mother	 to	 the	 Eres’al—my	 first	 and	 most	 sentimental	 of	 choices.’	 She
seemed	to	flinch.	‘Rath	Evain	to	the	Forkrul	Assail.	Stone	Bitch	to	the	Jaghut.	I	have	had	a	face	in	darkness,	a
son	 in	 shadow,	 a	 bastard	 in	 light.	 I	 have	 been	 named	 the	 Mother	 Beneath	 the	 Mountain,	 Ayala	 Alalle	 who
tends	the	Gardens	of	the	Moon,	for	ever	awaiting	her	lover.	I	am	Burn	the	Sleeping	Goddess,	in	whose	dreams
life	 flowers	 unending,	 even	 as	 those	 dreams	 twist	 into	 nightmares.	 I	 am	 scattered	 to	 the	 very	 edge	 of	 the
Abyss,	possessor	of	more	faces	than	any	other	Elder.’	She	snapped	out	a	withered,	bony	hand,	the	nails	long
and	splintered,	and	slowly	curled	her	fingers.	‘And	he	thinks	to	hunt	me	down!’	Her	head	tilted	back	to	the	sky.
‘Chain	down	your	servants,	Hood!’	She	fixed	him	once	more	with	her	eyes.	‘Tell	me,	mortal!	Did	he	catch
you?’
Torrent	 stared	 up	 at	 her.	 An	 old	 hag	 crackling	 with	 venom	 and	 rage.	 Her	 dead	 breath	 reeked	 of	 serpents
among	the	rocks.	The	onyx	knuckles	of	her	eyes	glistened	with	the	mockery	of	life.	‘Perhaps,’	he	said,	‘you
were	 once	 all	 those	 things,	 Olar	 Ethil.	 But	 not	 any	 more.	 It’s	 all	 torn	 away	 from	 you,	 isn’t	 it?	 Scattered	 and
lost,	when	you	gave	up	life—when	you	chose	to	become	this	thing	of	bones—’
That	hand	lunged	down,	closed	about	his	neck.	He	was	lifted	from	the	ground	as	if	he	weighed	less	than	an
orthen,	 flung	 away.	 Slamming	 hard	 down	 on	 one	 shoulder,	 breath	 whooshing	 from	 his	 lungs,	 half-blinded	 and
unable	to	move.
She	 appeared	 above	 him,	 rotted	 teeth	 glittering	 like	 stumps	 of	 smoky	 quartz.	 ‘I	 am	 promised!	 The	 Stone
Bitch	shall	awaken	once	more,	in	plague	winds	and	devouring	locusts,	in	wildfires	and	drowning	dust	and	sand!
And	you	will	fall	upon	each	other,	rending	flesh	with	teeth	and	nails!	You	will	choose	evil	in	fullest	knowledge
of	 what	 you	 do—I	 am	 coming,	 mortal,	 the	 earth	 awakened	 to	 judgement!	 And	 you	 shall	 kneel,	 pleading,


begging—your	kind,	human,	shall	make	pathos	your	epitaph,	for	I	will	give	you	nothing,	yield	not	a	single	instant
of	mercy!’	She	was	gasping	now,	a	pointless	bellows	of	unwarmed	breath.	She	trembled	in	terrible	rage.	‘Did
he	speak	to	you?’
Torrent	sat	up.	‘No,’	he	said	through	gritted	teeth.	He	reached	up	to	the	swollen	bruises	on	his	throat.
‘Good.’	And	 Olar	 Ethil	 turned	 away.	 ‘Sleep,	 then.	 You	 will	 awaken	 alone.	 But	 do	 not	 think	 you	 are	 rid	 of
me,	do	not	think	that.’	A	pause,	and	then,	‘He	is	filled	with	lies.	Beware	him.’
Torrent	hunched	forward,	staring	at	the	dew-speckled	ground	between	his	crooked	legs.	He	closed	his	eyes.
I	will	do	as	you	ask.	When	the	time	comes,	I	will	do	as	you	ask.
	
She	awoke	to	the	howling	of	wolves.	Setoc	slowly	sat	up,	ran	a	hand	through	the	tangles	of	her	matted	hair,
and	then	drew	her	bedroll	closer	about	her	body.	False	dawn	was	ebbing,	almost	drowned	out	by	the	glare	of
the	jade	slashes.	As	the	echoes	of	those	howls	faded,	Setoc	cocked	her	head—had	something	else	stirred	her
awake?	She	could	not	be	certain.	The	stillness	of	night	embraced	them—she	glanced	across	to	the	motionless
form	of	Cafal.	She’d	run	him	into	exhaustion.	Each	night	since	they’d	begun	this	journey	he’d	fallen	into	deep
sleep	as	soon	as	their	paltry	evening	meal	was	done.
As	her	eyes	adjusted,	she	could	make	out	his	face.	It	had	grown	gaunt,	aged	by	deprivation.	She	knew	he’d
not	yet	reached	his	thirtieth	year	of	life,	but	he	seemed	decades	older.	He	lay	like	a	dead	man,	yet	she	sensed
from	him	troubled	dreams.	He	was	desperate	to	return	to	his	tribe.
‘Something	terrible	is	about	to	happen.’	These	words	had	ground	out	from	him	again	and	again,	a	litany
of	dread,	a	chant	riding	out	his	tortured	breaths	as	he	ran.
She	caught	a	scent,	a	sudden	mustiness	in	the	cool,	dry	air.	Visions	of	strange	fecundity	fluttered	across	her
eyes,	as	if	the	present	was	peeling	away,	revealing	this	landscape	in	ancient	times.
An	 oasis,	 a	 natural	 garden	 rich	 with	 colour	 and	 life.	 Iridescent	 birds	 sang	 among	 palm	 fronds.	 Monkeys
scampered,	 mouths	 stained	 with	 succulent	 fruit.	 A	 tiny	 world,	 but	 a	 complete	 one,	 seemingly	 changeless,
untouched	by	her	kind.
When	she	saw	the	grey	cloud	drifting	closer,	inexplicable	bleak	despair	struck	her	and	she	gasped	aloud.	She
saw	the	dust	settling	like	rain,	a	dull	patina	coating	the	leaves,	the	globes	of	fruit,	the	once-clear	pool	of	water.
And	everything	began	to	die.
In	 moments	 there	 was	 nothing	 but	 blackened	 rot,	 dripping	 down	 the	 boles	 of	 the	 palms.	 The	 monkeys,
covered	in	oozing	sores,	their	hair	falling	away,	curled	up	and	died.	The	birds	sought	to	flee	but	ended	up	on	the
grey	ground,	flapping	and	twitching,	then	falling	still.
The	 oasis	 dried	 up.	 The	 winds	 blew	 away	 what	 was	 left	 and	 sands	 closed	 about	 the	 spring	 until	 it	 too
vanished.
Setoc	wept.
What	had	done	this?	Some	natural	force?	Did	some	mountain	erupt	to	fill	the	sky	with	poison	ash?	Or	was	it
a	 god’s	 bitter	 breath?	 Had	 some	 wretched	 city	 burned,	 spewing	 acidic	 alchemies	 into	 the	 air?	 Was	 this
desecration	an	accident,	or	was	it	deliberate?	She	had	no	answer	to	such	questions;	she	had	only	their	cruel
yield	of	grief.
Until	a	suspicion	lifted	from	beneath	her	sorrow,	grisly	and	ghastly.	It	.	.	.	it	was	a	weapon.	But	who	wages
war	 upon	 all	 living	 things?	 Upon	 the	 very	 earth	 itself?	 What	 could	 possibly	 be	 won?	 Was	 it	 just	 .	 .	 .
stupidity?	Setoc	shook	herself.	She	did	not	like	such	thoughts.
But	this	anger	I	feel,	does	it	belong	to	the	wolves?	To	the	beasts	on	their	forgotten	thrones?	No,	not
just	them.	It	is	the	rage	of	every	unintended	victim.	It	is	the	fury	of	the	innocents.	The	god	whose	face	is
not	human,	but	life	itself.
She	is	coming	.	.	.
Setoc	caught	a	host	of	vague	shapes	in	the	darkness	now,	circling,	edging	closer.	Curious	in	the	manner	of
all	wolves,	yet	cautious.	Old	memories	left	scars	upon	their	souls,	and	they	knew	what	the	presence	of	these
two-legged	intruders	meant	for	them,	for	their	kind.
They	could	smell	her	tears.	Their	child	was	in	pain,	and	so	the	wolves	spun	their	spiral	ever	tighter.	Bringing
their	heat,	the	solid	truth	of	their	existence—and	they	would	bare	fangs	to	any	and	every	threat.	They	would,	if
needed,	die	in	her	stead.
And	she	knew	she	deserved	none	of	this.


How	 did	 you	 find	 me?	 After	 this	 long?	 I	 see	 you,	 grey-nosed	 mother—was	 I	 the	 last	 one	 to	 suckle
from	your	teats?	Did	I	drink	in	all	your	strength	until	you	were	left	with	aching	bones,	failing	muscles?
I	see	the	clouds	in	your	eyes,	but	they	cannot	hide	your	love—and	it	is	that	love	that	breaks	my	heart.
Still,	she	held	out	her	hand.
Moments	later	she	felt	that	broad	head	rise	beneath	it.
The	warm,	familiar	smells	of	old	assailed	her,	stinging	her	eyes.	‘You	must	not	stay,’	she	whispered.	‘Where
I	go	.	.	.	you	will	be	hunted	down.	Killed.	Listen	to	me.	Find	the	last	of	the	wild	places—hide	there	for	ever
more.	Be	free,	my	sweet	ones	.	.	.’
She	heard	Cafal	awaken,	heard	his	muffled	grunt	of	shock.	Seven	wolves	crowded	their	small	camp,	shy	as
uninvited	children.
Her	 mother	 moved	 up	 closer,	 fur	 sliding	 the	 length	 of	 Setoc’s	 arm.	 ‘You	 must	 go,’	 she	 whispered	 to	 the
beast.	‘Please.’
‘Setoc,’	said	Cafal.	‘They	bring	magic.’
‘What?’
‘Can’t	you	feel	the	power—so	harsh,	so	untamed—but	I	think,	yes,	I	can	use	it.	A	warren,	close	enough	the
barrier	feels	thin	as	a	leaf.	Listen,	if	we	run	within	it,	I	think—’
‘I	 know,’	 she	 said	 in	 a	 croak,	 leaning	 her	 weight	 against	 the	 she-wolf,	 so	 solid,	 so	 real,	 so	 sure.	 ‘I	 know,
Cafal,	the	gift	they	bring.’
‘Perhaps,’	he	said	in	growing	excitement	as	he	tugged	aside	his	blankets,	‘we	can	get	there	in	time.	We	can
save—’
‘Cafal,	none	of	this	is	for	you.	Don’t	you	understand	anything?	It’s	not	for	you!’
He	met	her	glare	unblinking—the	dawn	was	finally	paling	the	sky—and	then	nodded.	‘Where	will	they	lead
you,	then?	Do	you	know?’
She	 turned	 away	 from	 his	 despair.	 ‘Oh,	 Cafal,	 you	 really	 are	 a	 fool.	 Of	 course	 we’re	 returning	 to	 your
tribe’s	camp.	No	other	path	is	possible,	not	any	more.’
‘I—I	don’t	understand.’
‘I	know.	Never	mind.	It’s	time	to	leave.’
	
Destriant	Kalyth	scanned	the	south	horizon,	the	blasted,	unrelieved	emptiness	revealed	in	the	toneless	light	of
the	 rising	 sun.	 ‘Where	 then,’	 she	 muttered,	 ‘are	 my	 hands	 of	 fire?’	 She	 turned	 to	 her	 two	 exhausted
companions.	‘You	understand,	don’t	you?	I	cannot	do	this	alone.	To	lead	your	kind,	I	need	my	own	kind.	I	need
to	look	into	eyes	little	different	from	my	own.	I	need	to	see	their	aches	come	the	dawn,	the	sleep	still	in	their
faces—spirits	fend,	I	need	to	see	them	cough	the	night	loose	and	then	piss	a	steaming	river!’
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	regarded	her	with	their	reptilian	eyes,	unblinking,	unhuman.
Kalyth’s	beseeching	frustration	trickled	away,	and	she	fixed	her	attention	on	Sag’Churok,	wondering	what
he	 had	 seen—those	 fourteen	 undead	 Jaghut,	 the	 battle	 that,	 it	 was	 now	 clear,	 completely	 eradicated	 their
pursuers.	This	time,	anyway.	Was	there	something	different	in	the	K’ell	Hunter?	Something	that	might	be	.	.	.
unease?
‘You	 wanted	 a	 Destriant,’	 she	 snapped.	 ‘If	 you	 thought	 that	 meant	 a	 doe-eyed	 rodara,	 it	 must	 finally	 be
clear	 just	 how	 wrong	 you	 were.	 What	 I	 am	 given,	 I	 intend	 to	 use—do	 you	 understand?’	 Still,	 for	 all	 the
bravado,	she	wished	she	had	the	power	to	bind	those	Jaghut	to	her	will.	She	wished	they	were	with	them	right
now.	Still	not	human,	but,	well,	closer.	Yes,	getting	closer.	She	snorted	and	turned	back	to	study	the	south.
‘No	point	in	waiting	round	here,	is	there?	We	continue	on.’
‘Destriant,’	 Sag’Churok	 whispered	 in	 her	 mind,	 ‘we	 are	 running	 out	 of	 time.	 Our	 enemy	 draws	 ever
closer—no,	not	hunting	the	three	of	us.	They	hunt	the	Rooted,	our	final	refuge	in	this	world.’
‘We’re	 all	 the	 last	 of	 our	 kind,’	 she	 said,	 ‘and	 you	 must	 have	 realized	 by	 now,	 in	 this	 world	 and	 in	 every
other,	there	is	no	such	thing	as	refuge.’	The	world	finds	you.	The	world	hunts	you	down.
Time,	once	more,	to	ride	Gunth	Mach	as	if	she	were	nothing	more	than	a	beast,	Sag’Churok	lumbering	at
their	side,	massive	iron	blades	catching	glares	from	the	sun	in	blinding	spasms.	To	watch	small	creatures	start
from	 the	 knotted	 grasses	 and	 bound	 away	 in	 panic.	 Plunging	 through	 clouds	 of	 midges	 driven	 apart	 by	 the
prows	of	reptilian	heads	and	broad	heaving	chests.
To	feel	the	wind’s	touch	as	if	it	was	a	stranger’s	caress,	startling	in	its	unwelcome	familiarity,	reminding	her


again	and	again	that	she	still	lived,	that	she	was	part	of	the	world’s	meat,	forever	fighting	the	decay	dogging	its
trail.	None	of	it	seemed	real,	as	if	she	was	simply	waiting	for	reality	to	catch	up	to	her.	Each	day	delivered	the
same	message,	and	each	day	she	met	it	with	the	same	bemused	confusion	and	diffident	wariness.
These	K’Chain	Che’Malle	felt	none	of	that,	she	believed.	They	did	not	think	as	she	did.	Everything	was	a
taste,	a	smell—thoughts	and	feelings,	the	sun’s	very	light,	all	flowing	in	a	swarm	of	currents.	Existence	was	an
ocean.	One	could	skate	upon	the	surface,	clinging	to	the	shallows,	or	one	could	plunge	into	the	depths,	until	the
skull	 creaked	 with	 the	 pressure.	 She	 knew	they	 saw	 her	 and	 her	 kind	 as	 timid,	 frightened	 by	 the	 mystery	 of
unplumbed	depths.	Creatures	floundering	in	fears,	terrified	of	drowning	knee-deep	in	truths.
But	your	Matron	wants	you	to	slide	into	the	shallows,	to	find	my	world	of	vulnerabilities—to	find	out
what	we	do	to	defeat	them.	You	seek	new	strategies	for	living,	you	seek	our	secret	of	success.	But	you
don’t	 understand,	 do	 you?	 Our	 secret	 is	 annihilation.	 We	 annihilate	 everyone	 else	 until	 none	 are	 left,
and	then	we	annihilate	each	other.	Until	we	too	are	gone.
Such	 a	 wondrous	 secret.	 Well,	 she	 would	 give	 it	 to	 them,	 if	 she	 could.	 Her	 grand	 lessons	 of	 survival,	 and
only	she	would	hear	the	clamouring	howl	of	the	ghosts	storming	her	soul.
Riding	Gunth	Mach’s	back,	Kalyth’s	hands	itched.	Destinies	were	drawing	close.	I	will	find	my	hands	of
fire,	and	we	will	use	you,	Sag’Churok.	You	and	Gunth	Mach	and	all	your	kind.	We	will	show	you	the
horrors	of	the	modern	world	you	so	want	to	be	a	part	of.
She	 thought	 of	 their	 dread	 enemy,	 the	 faceless	 killers	 of	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 She	 wondered	 at	 this
genocidal	war,	and	suspected	it	was,	in	its	essence,	no	different	from	the	war	humans	had	been	engaged	in	for
all	time.	It	is	the	same,	but	it	is	also	different.	It	is	.	.	.	naïve.
With	what	was	coming,	with	what	she	would	bring	.	.	.	Kalyth	felt	a	deep,	sickening	stab.
Of	pity.
	
In	an	unbroken	line	from	each	mother	to	every	daughter,	memory	survived,	perpetuating	a	continuous	history	of
experience.	Gunth	Mach	held	in	her	mind	generations	of	lives	trapped	in	a	succession	of	settings	that	portrayed
the	 inexorable	 collapse,	 the	 decay,	 the	 failure	 of	 their	 civilization.	 This	 was	 unbearable.	 Knowledge	 was	 an
unceasing	scream	in	her	soul.
Every	 Matron	 was	 eventually	 driven	 insane:	 no	 daughter,	 upon	 ascension	 to	 the	 role,	 could	 long	 withstand
the	deluge.	Male	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	no	comprehension	of	this;	their	lives	were	perfectly	contained,	the
flavours	of	their	selves	truncated	and	unsubtle.	Their	unswerving	loyalty	was	sustained	in	ignorance.
She	had	sought	to	break	this	pattern,	with	Sag’Churok,	and	in	so	doing	was	betraying	the	inviolate	isolation
of	the	Matrons.	But	she	did	not	care.	All	that	had	gone	before	had	not	worked.
She	 remembered	 half	 a	 continent	 pounded	 level	 and	 then	 made	 smooth	 as	 a	 frozen	 lake,	 on	 which	 cities
sprawled	in	a	scale	distorted	even	to	K’Chain	Che’Malle	eyes,	as	if	grandeur	and	madness	were	one	and	the
same.	 Domes	 large	 enough	 to	 swallow	 islands,	 curling	 towers	 and	 spires	 like	 the	 spikes	 riding	 the	 backs	 of
dhenrabi.	Buildings	with	single	rooms	so	huge	that	clouds	formed	beneath	the	ceiling,	and	birds	dwelt	there	in
their	thousands,	oblivious	to	the	cage	that	held	them.	She	remembered	entire	mountain	ranges	preserved	as	if
they	were	works	of	art,	at	least	until	their	value	as	quarries	for	sky	keeps	was	realized,	in	the	times	of	the	civil
wars—when	those	mountains	were	carved	down	to	stumps.	She	remembered	looking	upon	her	kind	in	leaguewide	columns	twenty	leagues	long	as	they	set	out	to	found	new	colonies.	She	stood,	creaking	beneath	her	own
weight,	and	watched	as	fifty	legions	of	Ve’Gath	Soldiers—each	one	five	thousand	strong—marched	to	wage
war	against	the	Tartheno	Tel	Akai.	And	she	was	there	when	they	returned,	decimated,	leaving	a	trail	of	their
own	dead	that	stretched	across	the	entire	continent.
She	recalled	the	birth	pains	of	the	Nah’ruk,	and	then	the	searing	agony	of	their	betrayal.	Burning	cities	and
corpses	 three-deep	 on	 vast	 fields	 of	 battle.	 Chaos	 and	 terror	 within	 the	 nests,	 the	 shriek	 of	 desperate	 births.
And	the	sly	mockery	of	the	waves	on	the	shores	as	a	dying	Matron	loosed	her	eggs	into	the	surf	in	the	mad
hope	that	something	new	would	be	made—a	hybrid	of	virtues	with	all	the	flaws	discarded.
And	so	much	more	.	.	.	fleeing	through	darkness	and	blinding	smoke	.	.	.	the	slash	of	an	Assassin’s	talons.
Cold,	sudden	adjudication.	Life	draining	away,	the	blessed	relief	that	followed.	Flavours	awakening	cruel	and
bitter	in	the	daughter	who	followed—for	nothing	was	lost,	nothing	was	ever	lost.
There	was	a	goddess	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Immortal,	omniscient	as	such	things	were	supposed	to	be.
The	goddess	was	the	Matron,	mahybe	of	the	eternal	oil.	Once,	that	oil	had	been	of	such	strength	and	volume


that	hundreds	of	Matrons	were	needed	as	holy	vessels.
Now	there	was	but	one.
She	could	remember	the	pride,	the	power	of	what	had	once	been.	And	the	futile	wars	waged	to	give	proof
to	that	pride	and	that	power,	until	both	had	been	utterly	obliterated.	Cities	gone.	The	birth	of	wastelands	across
half	the	world.
Gunth	 Mach	 knew	 that	 Gu’Rull	 still	 lived.	 She	 knew,	 too,	 that	 the	 Shi’gal	 Assassin	 was	 her	 adjudicator.
Beyond	this	quest,	there	waited	the	moment	of	inheritance,	when	Acyl	finally	surrendered	to	death.	Was	Gunth
Mach	a	worthy	successor?	The	Shi’gal	would	decide.	Even	the	enemy	upon	the	Rooted,	slaughter	unleashed	in
the	 corridors	 and	 chambers,	 would	 have	 no	 bearing	 upon	 matters.	 She	 would	 surge	 through	 the	 panicked
crowds,	seeking	somewhere	to	hide,	with	three	Assassins	stalking	her.
The	will	to	live	was	the	sweetest	flavour	of	all.
She	carried	the	Destriant	on	her	back,	a	woman	who	weighed	virtually	nothing,	and	Gunth	Mach	could	feel
the	tension	in	her	small	muscles,	her	frail	frame	of	bones.	Even	an	orthen	bares	its	fangs	in	its	last	moments	of
life.
Failure	in	this	quest	was	unacceptable,	but	in	Gunth	Mach’s	mind,	it	was	also	inevitable.
She	would	be	the	last	Matron,	and	with	her	death	so	too	would	die	the	goddess	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
The	oil	would	drain	into	the	dust,	and	all	memory	would	be	lost.
It	was	just	as	well.
	
Spirits	of	stone,	what	happened	here?
Sceptre	Irkullas	slowly	dismounted,	staring	aghast	at	the	half-buried	battlefield.	As	if	the	ground	had	lifted	up
to	 swallow	 them	 all,	 Barghast	 and	 Akrynnai	 both.	 Crushed	 bodies,	 broken	 limbs,	 faces	 scoured	 away	 as	 if
blasted	 by	 a	 sandstorm.	 Others	 looked	 bloated,	 skin	 split	 and	 cracked	 open,	 as	 if	 the	 poor	 soldiers	 had	 been
cooked	from	within.
Crows	 and	 vultures	 scampered	 about	 in	 frustrated	 cacophony,	 picking	 clean	 what	 wasn’t	 buried,	 whilst
Akrynnai	warriors	wandered	the	buried	valley,	tugging	free	the	corpses	of	dead	kin.
Irkullas	knew	his	daughter’s	body	was	here,	somewhere.	The	thought	clenched	in	his	stomach	like	a	sickly
knot	leaching	poison,	weakening	his	limbs,	tightening	the	breath	in	his	throat.	He	dreaded	the	notion	of	sleep	at
this	 day’s	 end,	 the	 stalking	 return	 of	 anguish	 and	 despair.	 He	 would	 lie	 chilled	 beneath	 furs,	 chest	 aching,
rushes	of	nausea	squirming	through	him,	his	every	breath	harsh	and	strained—close	to	the	clutch	of	panic.
Something	 unexpected,	 something	 unknown,	 had	 come	 to	 this	 petty	 war.	 As	 if	 the	 spirits	 of	 the	 earth	 and
rock	were	convulsing	in	rage	and,	perhaps,	disgust.	Demanding	peace.	Yes,	this	is	what	the	spirits	have	told
me,	with	this	here—this	.	.	.	horror.	They	have	had	enough	of	our	stupid	bloodletting.
We	must	make	peace	with	the	Barghast.
He	felt	old,	exhausted.
A	day	ago	vengeance	seemed	bright	and	pure.	Retribution	was	sharp	as	a	freshly	honed	knife.	Four	major
battles,	four	successive	victories.	The	Barghast	clans	were	scattered,	fleeing.	Indeed,	only	one	remained,	the
southernmost,	largest	clan,	the	Senan.	Ruled	by	the	one	named	Onos	Toolan.	The	Akrynnai	had	three	armies
converging	upon	the	Warleader	and	his	encampment.
We	 have	 wagons	 creaking	 beneath	 Barghast	 weapons	 and	 armour.	 Chests	 filled	 with	 foreign	 coins.
Heaps	of	strange	furs.	Trinkets,	jewellery,	woven	rugs,	gourd	bowls	and	clumsy	pots	of	barely	tempered
clay.	We	have	everything	the	Barghast	possessed.	Just	the	bodies	that	owned	them	have	been	removed.
Barring	a	score	of	broken	prisoners.
We	are	a	travelling	museum	of	a	people	about	to	become	extinct.
And	yet	I	will	plead	for	peace.
Upon	hearing	this,	his	officers	would	frown	behind	his	back,	thinking	him	an	old	man	with	a	broken	heart,
and	they	would	be	right	to	think	that.	They	would	accept	his	commands,	but	this	would	be	the	last	time.	Once
they	rode	home	Sceptre	Irkullas	would	be	seen—would	be	known	to	all—as	a	‘ruler	in	his	grey	dusk’.	A	man
with	 no	 light	 of	 the	 future	 in	 his	 eyes,	 a	 man	 awaiting	 death.	 But	 it	 comes	 to	 us	 all.	 Everything	 we	 fear
comes	to	us	all.
Gafalk,	who	had	been	among	the	advance	party,	rode	up	and	reined	in	near	the	Sceptre’s	own	horse.	The
warrior	dismounted	and	walked	to	stand	in	front	of	Irkullas.	‘Sceptre,	we	have	examined	the	western	ridge	of


the	 valley—or	 what’s	 left	 of	 it.	 Old	 Yara,’	 he	 continued,	 speaking	 of	 the	 Barghast	 spokesperson	 among	 the
prisoners,	 ‘says	 he	 once	 fought	 outside	 some	 place	 called	 One-Eye	 Cat.	 He	 says	 the	 craters	 remind	 him	 of
something	called	Moranth	munitions,	but	not	when	those	munitions	are	dropped	from	the	sky	as	was	done	by
the	Moranth.	Instead,	the	craters	look	like	those	made	when	the	munitions	are	used	by	the	Malazans.	Buried	in
the	ground,	arranged	to	ignite	all	at	once.	Thus	lifting	the	ground	itself.	Some	kind	of	grenado.	He	called	them
cussers—’
‘We	 know	 there	 is	 a	 Malazan	 army	 in	 Lether,’	 Irkullas	 said,	 musing.	 Then	he	 shook	 his	 head.	 ‘Give	 me	 a
reason	for	their	being	here—joining	in	a	battle	not	of	their	making?	Killing	both	Akrynnai	and	Barghast—’
‘The	Barghast	were	once	enemies	of	these	Malazans,	Sceptre.	So	claims	Yara.’
‘Yet,	have	our	scouts	seen	signs	of	their	forces?	Do	any	trails	lead	from	this	place?	No.	Are	the	Malazans
ghosts,	Gafalk?’
The	warrior	spread	his	hands	in	helpless	dismay.	‘Then	what	struck	here,	Sceptre?’
The	rage	of	gods.	‘Sorcery.’
A	sudden	flicker	in	Gafalk’s	eyes.	‘Letherii—’
‘Who	might	well	be	pleased	to	see	the	Akrynnai	and	Barghast	destroy	each	other.’
‘It	is	said	the	Malazans	left	them	few	mages,	Sceptre.	And	their	new	Ceda	is	an	old	man	who	is	also	the
Chancellor—not	one	to	lead	an	army—’
But	 Irkullas	 was	 already	 shaking	 his	 head	 at	 his	 own	 suggestions.	 ‘Even	 a	 Letherii	 Ceda	 cannot	 hide	 an
entire	army.	You	are	right	to	be	sceptical,	Gafalk.’
A	conversation	doomed	to	circle	round	and	devour	its	own	tail.	Irkullas	stepped	past	the	warrior	and	looked
upon	the	obliterated	valley	once	more.	‘Dig	out	as	many	of	our	warriors	as	you	can.	At	dusk	we	cease	all	such
efforts—leaving	the	rest	to	the	earth.	We	shall	drive	back	the	night	with	the	pyre	of	our	dead.	And	I	shall	stand
vigil.’
‘Yes,	Sceptre.’
The	warrior	returned	to	his	horse.
Vigil,	yes,	that	will	do.	A	night	without	sleep—he	would	let	the	bright	flames	drive	back	the	sickness	in	his
soul.
It	would	be	best,	he	decided,	if	he	did	not	survive	to	return	home.	An	uncle	or	cousin	could	play	the	bear	to
his	 grandchildren—someone	 else,	 in	 any	 case.	 Better,	 indeed,	 if	 he	 was	 denied	 the	 chance	 of	 sleep	 until	 the
very	instant	of	his	death.
One	 final	 battle—against	 the	 Senan	 camp?	 Kill	 them	 all,	 and	 then	 fall	 myself.	 Bleed	 out	 in	 the	 red
mud.	And	once	dead,	I	can	make	my	peace	.	.	.	with	their	ghosts.	Hardly	worth	continuing	this	damned
war	on	the	ash	plains	of	death,	this	stupid	thing.
Dear	 daughter,	 you	 will	 not	 wander	 alone	 for	 long.	 I	 swear	 it.	 I	 will	 find	 your	 ghost,	 and	 I	 will
protect	you	for	ever	more.	As	penance	for	my	failure,	and	as	proof	of	my	love.
He	glared	about,	as	if	in	the	day’s	fading	light	he	might	see	her	floating	spirit,	a	wraith	with	a	dirt-smeared
face	and	disbelieving	eyes.	No,	eyes	with	the	patience	of	the	eternally	freed.	Freed	from	all	this.	Freed	.	.	.
from	everything.	In	a	new	place.	Where	no	sickness	grows	inside,	where	the	body	does	not	clench	and
writhe,	flinching	at	the	siren	calls	of	every	twinge,	every	ache.
Spirits	of	stone,	give	me	peace!
	
Maral	Eb’s	army	had	doubled	in	size,	as	survivors	from	shattered	encampments	staggered	in	from	all	directions
—shame-faced	 at	 living	 when	 wives,	 husbands	 and	 children	 had	 died	 beneath	 the	 iron	 of	 the	 treacherous
Akrynnai.	 Many	 arrived	 bearing	 no	 weapons,	 shorn	 of	 armour,	 proof	 that	 they	 had	 been	 routed,	 had	 fled	 in
waves	of	wide-eyed	cowardice.	Cold	waters	were	known	to	wash	upon	warriors	in	the	midst	of	battle,	even
Barghast	 warriors,	 and	 the	 tug	 of	 currents	 could	 lift	 into	 a	 raging	 flood	 where	 all	 reason	 drowned,	 where
escape	was	a	need	that	overwhelmed	duty	and	honour.	Cold	waters	left	the	faces	of	the	survivors	grey	and
bloated,	stinking	of	guilt.
But	 Maral	 Eb	 had	 been	 sobered	 enough	 by	 the	 news	 of	 the	 defeats	 to	 cast	 no	 righteous	 judgement	 upon
these	refugees	with	their	skittish	 eyes.	Clearly,	he	 understood	he	would	 need	every	warrior	he	could	muster,
although	 Bakal	 knew	 as	 well	 as	 anyone	 how	 such	 warriors,	 once	 drowned	 beneath	 panic,	 were	 now	 broken
inside—worse,	in	the	instant	when	a	battle	tottered	on	the	fulcrum’s	point,	their	terror	could	return.	They	could


doom	the	battle,	as	their	panic	flooded	out	and	infected	everyone	else.
No	word	had	come	from	the	Senan.	It	seemed	that,	thus	far	at	least,	the	Akrynnai	had	yet	to	descend	upon
Bakal’s	own	clan.	Soon,	Maral	Eb	would	grasp	hold	of	the	Senan	army	and	claim	it	for	himself.	And	then	he
would	lead	them	all	against	the	deceitful	Sceptre	Irkullas.
A	thousand	curses	rode	the	breaths	of	the	mass	of	warriors.	It	was	obvious	now	that	the	Akryn	had	been
planning	 this	 war	 for	 some	 time,	 trickling	 in	 and	 out	 their	 so-called	 merchants	 as	 spies,	 working	 towards	 the
perfect	moment	for	betrayal.	How	else	could	the	Sceptre	assemble	such	forces	so	quickly?	For	every	refugee
insisted	that	the	enemy	numbered	in	the	tens	of	thousands.
Bakal	believed	none	of	it.	This	was	the	war	Onos	Toolan	did	not	want.	The	wrong	war.	Maral	Eb	walked
flanked	by	his	two	brothers,	and	surrounding	these	three	was	a	mob	of	strutting	idiots,	each	one	vying	to	find
the	 perfect	 words	 to	 please	 their	 new	 Warleader	 and	 his	 two	 hood-eyed,	 murderous	 siblings.	 Arguments
sending	 the	 arrow	 of	 blame	 winging	 away.	 Onos	 Toolan	 was	 no	 longer	 alive	 and	 so	 less	 useful	 as	 a	 target,
although	some	murky	residue	remained,	like	handfuls	of	shit	awaiting	any	rivals	among	the	Senan.	Now	it	was
the	Akrynnai—Irkullas	and	his	lying,	cheating,	spying	horsemongers.
By	the	time	this	army	arrived	at	the	Senan	camp,	they	would	be	blazing	with	the	righteous	fury	of	innocent
victims.
‘whatever	 he	 needs,’	 Strahl	 had	 said	 at	 the	 noon	 break.	 ‘Falsehoods	 cease	 being	 false	 when	 enough
people	believe	them,	Bakal.	Instead,	they	blaze	like	eternal	truths,	and	woe	to	the	fool	who	tries	pissing
a	stream	on	that.	They’ll	tear	you	to	pieces.’
Strahl’s	words	were	sound,	ringing	clear	and	true	upon	the	anvil,	leaving	Bakal’s	disgust	to	chew	him	on	the
inside	with	no	way	out.	That	ache	warred	with	the	one	in	his	barely	mended	elbow,	making	his	stride	stiff	and
awkward.	But	neither	one	could	assail	the	shame	and	self-hatred	that	closed	a	fist	round	his	soul.	Murderer	of
Onos	Toolan.	So	fierce	the	thrust	that	he	broke	his	arm.	Look	upon	him,	friends,	and	see	a	true	White
Face	Barghast!	He	had	heard	as	much	from	Maral	Eb’s	cronies.	While	behind	him	trudged	his	fellow	Senan
warriors,	 nothing	 like	 the	 triumphant	 slayers	 of	 Onos	 Toolan	 they	 pretended	 to	 be.	 Silent,	 grim	 as
shoulderwomen	at	a	funeral.	Because	we	share	this	crime.	He	made	us	kill	him	to	save	our	own	lives.	He
made	us	cowards.	He	made	me	a	coward.
Bakal	 felt	 like	 an	 old	 man,	 and	 each	 time	 his	 gaze	 caught	 upon	 those	 three	 broad	 backs	 arrayed	 like
bonepicker	birds	at	the	head	of	the	trail,	it	was	another	white-hot	stone	tossed	into	the	cauldron.	Soon	to	boil,
yes,	raging	until	the	blackened	pot	boiled	dry.	All	that	useless	steam.
What	will	you	do	with	my	people,	Maral	Eb?	When	Irkullas	shatters	us	again,	where	will	we	run	to?
He	needed	to	think.	He	needed	to	find	a	way	out	of	this.	Could	he	and	his	warriors	convince	the	rest	of	the
clan	to	refuse	Maral	Eb?	Refuse	this	suicidal	war?	Teeth	grating,	Bakal	began	to	understand	the	burdens	under
which	Onos	Toolan	had	laboured.	The	impossibility	of	things.
The	real	war	is	against	stupidity.	How	could	I	not	have	understood	that?	Oh,	an	easy	answer	to	that
question.	I	was	among	the	stupidest	of	the	lot.	And	yet,	Onos	Toolan,	you	stood	before	me	and	met	my
eyes—you	gave	me	what	I	did	not	deserve.
And	look	at	me	now.	When	Maral	Eb	stands	before	me,	I	choke	at	the	very	sight	of	him.	His	flush	of
triumph,	his	smirk,	the	drunken	eyes.	I	am	ready	to	spew	into	his	face—and	if	I	had	any	food	in	my	guts
I	would	probably	do	just	that,	unable	to	help	myself.
Onos	 Toolan,	 you	 should	 have	 killed	 us—every	 warrior	 you	 brought	 with	 you.	 Be	 done	 with	 the
stupid	ones,	be	done	with	us	all—instead,	you	leave	us	with	the	perfect	legacy	of	our	idiocy.	Maral	Eb.
Precisely	the	leader	we	deserve.
And	for	our	misplaced	faith,	he	will	kill	everyone.
Bakal	bared	his	teeth	until	the	wind	dried	them	like	sun-baked	stones.	He	would	do	nothing.	He	would	defy
even	 Strahl	 and	 his	 companions	 here.	 There	 would	 be	 justice	 after	 all.	 An	 ocean	 of	 it	 to	 feed	 the	 thirsty
ground.	So	long	as	he	did	nothing,	said	nothing.
Lead	us,	Maral	Eb—you	are	become	the	standard	of	Tool’s	truth.	You	are	his	warning	to	us,	which	we
refused	to	heed.	So,	warrior	of	the	Imass,	you	shall	have	your	vengeance	after	all.
Strahl	 spoke	 at	 his	 side.	 ‘I	 have	 seen	 such	 smiles,	 friend,	 upon	 the	 warrior	 I	 am	 about	 to	 slay—the	 brave
ones	who	face	their	deaths	unflinching.	I	see	.	.	.	crazed	contempt,	as	if	they	say	to	me:	“Do	what	you	must.
You	cannot	reach	me—my	flesh,	yes,	my	life,	but	not	my	soul.	Drive	home	your	blade,	warrior!	The	final	joke


is	on	you!’	”	His	laugh	was	a	low	snarl.	‘And	so	it	is,	because	it	is	a	joke	I	will	not	get	until	I	am	in	their	place,
facing	down	my	own	death.’
‘Then,’	said	Bakal,	‘you	will	have	to	wait.’	But	not	for	long.	And	when	the	time	comes	I	too	will	laugh	at
this	perfect	jest.
	
The	place	belonged	to	Stolmen,	but	it	was	his	wife	who	walked	at	the	head	of	the	Gadra	column.	And	it	was	to
Sekara	 the	 Vile	 that	 the	 scouts	 reported	 during	 the	 long	 march	 to	 the	 Senan	 encampment—which	 was	 now
less	than	half	a	league	away.
Her	husband’s	face	was	set	in	a	scowl	as	he	trudged	three	paces	behind	her.	The	expression	did	not	belong
to	 offended	 fury,	 however.	 Confusion	 and	 fear	 were	 the	 sources	 of	 his	 anger,	 the	 befuddled	 misery	 of	 the
unintelligent	 man.	 Things	 were	 moving	 too	 fast.	 Essential	 details	 were	 being	 kept	 from	 him.	 He	 did	 not
understand	 and	 this	 made	 him	 frightened.	 He	 had	 right	 to	 be.	 Sekara	 was	 beginning	 to	 realize	 that	 his
usefulness	 was	 coming	 to	 an	 end—oh,	 there	 were	 advantages	 to	 ruling	 through	 him,	 should	 that	 opportunity
arise	 in	 the	 aftermath	 of	 the	 imminent	 power	 struggle,	 but	 better	 a	 husband	 who	 actually	 comprehended	 his
titular	function—assuming	it	was	even	necessary,	since	many	a	past	warleader	had	been	a	woman.	Although,
truth	be	said,	such	women	were	invariably	warriors,	possessing	the	status	of	experienced	campaigners.
Sekara	had	fought	many	battles,	of	course,	in	her	own	style.	She	had	laid	sieges,	in	tents	and	in	yurts.	She
had	 drawn	 blood	 beneath	 the	 furs	 in	 the	 armour	 of	 night,	 had	 driven	 knives—figurative	 and	 literal—into	 the
hearts	of	scores	of	lovers.	She	had	unleashed	precision	ambushes	with	utter	ruthlessness,	and	had	stared	down
seemingly	insurmountable	odds.	Her	list	of	triumphs	was	well	nigh	unending.	But	few	would	countenance	any
of	 that.	 They	 held	 to	 out-of-fashion	 notions	 of	 prowess	 and	 glory,	 and	 for	 Sekara	 this	 had	 proved	 and	 would
ever	prove	the	greatest	obstacle	to	her	ascension.
No,	for	now,	she	would	need	a	man	to	prop	up	in	front	of	her.	Not	that	anyone	would	be	fooled,	but	so	long
as	propriety	was	observed,	they	would	abide.
There	were	challenges	ahead.	Stolmen	was	not	ready	to	be	the	Warleader	of	the	White	Faces.	Not	while	in
the	throes	of	a	vicious	war.	No,	at	the	moment,	the	greatest	need	was	to	ensure	the	survival	of	the	Barghast,
and	 that	 demanded	 a	 capable	 commander.	 Someone	 clever	 in	 the	 ways	 of	 tactics	 and	 whatnot.	 Someone
swollen	 with	 ambition,	 eager	 to	 be	 quickly	 pushed	 to	 the	 fore,	 arriving	 breathless	 and	 flush—quickly,	 yes,	 so
that	he’d	no	opportunity	to	grow	wary,	to	begin	to	recognize	the	flimsy	supports	beneath	him,	the	clever	traps
awaiting	his	first	misstep.
Sekara	had	long	pondered	prospective	candidates.	And	she	had	to	admit	that	she	was	not	entirely	satisfied
with	her	final	choice,	but	the	bones	were	cast.	Alone,	in	the	chill	night	at	that	first	secret	meeting,	in	the	wake
of	a	tumultuous	gathering	of	warchiefs,	Maral	Eb	had	seemed	perfect.	His	contempt	for	Onos	Toolan	had	filled
him	with	 hatred	 that	 she	 slyly	 fed	 until	 it	 became	 a	 kind	 of	fevered	 madness.	 Nothing	 difficult	 there,	 and	 his
willingness	to	bind	himself	to	her	conspiracy	had	struck	her,	at	the	time,	as	almost	comical.	Like	a	puppy	eager
to	lick	whatever	she	offered.
He	had	been	alone.	And	perhaps,	in	that,	she	had	been	careless.	She	had	not	considered,	for	even	an	instant,
Maral	Eb’s	two	brothers.
Three	 were	 harder	 to	 manage	 than	 one.	 Almost	 impossible,	 in	 fact.	 If	 they	 were	 left	 to	 consolidate	 their
domination	 once	 the	 war	 was	 over,	 Sekara	 knew	 that	 her	 chance	 would	 be	 for	 ever	 lost.	 She	 knew,	 indeed,
that	Maral	Eb	would	see	her	murdered,	to	silence	all	that	she	knew.
Well,	 his	 brothers	 would	 just	 have	 to	 die.	 In	 battle,	 to	 a	 stray	 arrow—these	 things,	 she	 had	 been	 told,
happened	all	the	time.	Or	some	bad	food,	improperly	cured,	to	strike	with	swift	fever	and	terrible	convulsions,
until	the	heart	burst.	A	lover’s	tryst	gone	awry,	some	enraged	rival.	Charges	of	rape,	a	trial	of	shaming	and	a
sentence	of	castration.	Oh,	the	possibilities	were	countless.
For	 the	 moment,	 of	 course,	 such	 delights	 would	 have	 to	 wait.	 The	 Akrynnai	 must	 be	 defeated	 first,	 or	 at
least	driven	back—one	more	battle	awaited	them,	and	this	time	Sceptre	Irkullas	would	be	facing	the	combined
might	of	the	Senan,	Barahn	and	Gadra	clans.
Two	Barahn	scouts	had	found	her	three	days	past,	carrying	with	them	the	stunning	news	of	Onos	Toolan’s
murder.	The	Gadra	had	already	been	on	the	march.	Sekara	had	made	certain	that	her	people—a	small	clan,
isolated	and	perilously	close	to	Akryn	lands—had	not	awaited	the	descent	of	thousands	of	enraged	Akrynnai
horsewarriors.	Instead,	Stolmen	had	announced	the	breaking	of	camp	and	this	fast-paced	retreat	to	the	safety


of	the	Senan,	almost	as	soon	as	news	of	the	war	reached	them.
Since	then,	Gadra	scouts	had	twice	sighted	distant	riders	observing	them,	but	nothing	more;	and	as	Sekara
learned	 from	 an	 alarmingly	 steady	 arrival	 of	 refugees	 from	 other	 clans,	 a	 half-dozen	 battles	 had	 left	 the
Barghast	reeling.	The	sudden	coyness	of	the	victorious	Akrynnai	was	disturbing.	Unless	they	too	sought	one
final	clash.	One	that	they	were	content	to	let	the	Gadra	lead	them	to	at	a	steady	dogtrot.
Stolmen	complained	that	his	warriors	were	weary,	barely	fit	for	battle.	Their	nerves	were	twisted	into	taut
knots	by	constant	vigilance	and	a	sickening	sense	of	vulnerability.	They	were	a	small	clan,	after	all.	It	made	no
tactical	sense	for	the	Sceptre	to	let	them	reach	the	Senan.	The	Akrynnai	horde	should	have	washed	over	them
by	now.
Well,	that	was	for	Maral	Eb	to	worry	about.	Sekara	had	just	this	morning	sent	her	own	agents	ahead	to	the
Senan.	Onos	Toolan	was	dead.	But	his	wife	was	not,	nor	his	children,	bloodkin	and	otherwise.	The	time	had
come	for	Sekara	to	unleash	her	long-awaited	vengeance.
The	day’s	light	was	fading.	Though	she	had	exhorted	her	people	with	relentless	impatience,	they	would	not
reach	the	Senan	any	time	before	midnight.
And	by	then	the	blood	spilled	would	be	as	cold	as	the	ground	beneath	it.
	
Stavi	made	a	face.	‘He	has	a	secret	name,’	she	said.	‘An	Imass	name.’
Storii’s	brow	knitted	as	she	looked	down	upon	the	drooling	toddler	playing	in	the	dirt.	She	twisted	round	on
the	stone	she	was	sitting	on.	‘But	we	can’t	get	it,	can	we?	I	mean,	he	doesn’t	know	it,	that	name,	how	can	he?
He	can’t	talk.’
‘Not	true!	I	heard	him	talk!’
‘He	says	“blallablallablalla”	and	that’s	all	he	says.	That	doesn’t	sound	Imass	to	me.’
Stavi	tugged	at	the	knots	in	her	hair,	unmindful	of	the	midges	swarming	round	her	head.	‘But	I	heard	Father
talking—’
Storii’s	head	snapped	up,	eyes	accusing.	‘When?	You	snuck	off	to	be	with	him—without	me!	I	knew	it!’
Stavi	grinned.	‘You	were	squatting	over	a	hole.	Besides,	he	wasn’t	talking	to	me.	He	was	talking	to	himself.
Praying,	maybe—’
‘Father	never	prays.’
‘Who	else	would	he	be	talking	to,	except	some	five-headed	Imass	god?’
‘Really,	which	head?’
‘What?’
‘Which	head	was	he	talking	to?’
‘How	should	I	know?	The	one	listening.	It	had	ears	on	stalks	and	they	turned.	And	then	it	popped	out	one
eye	and	swallowed	it—’
Storii	leapt	to	her	feet.	‘So	it	could	look	out	its	hole!’
‘Only	way	gods	know	how	to	aim.’
Storii	squealed	with	laughter.
The	dirt-faced	runt	looked	up	from	his	playing,	eyes	wide,	and	then	he	smiled	and	said,	‘Blallablallablalla!’
‘That’s	the	god’s	name!’
‘But	which	head?’	Stavi	asked.
‘The	one	with	poop	in	his	ears,	of	course.	Listen,	if	we	can	really	find	out	his	secret	name,	we	can	curse
him	for	ever	and	ever.’
‘That’s	 what	 I	 was	 saying.	 What	 kind	 of	 curses?’	 ‘Good	 ones.	 He	 can	 only	 walk	 on	 his	 hands.	 He	 starts
every	sentence	with	blallablallablalla.	Even	when	he’s	twenty	years	old!	As	old	as	that,	and	even	older.’
‘That’s	pretty	old.	That’s	grey-haired	old.	Let’s	think	of	more	curses.’
	
Sitting	oblivious	on	the	ground,	the	son	of	Onos	Toolan	and	Hetan	made	curling	patterns	in	the	soft	dust	with
one	 finger.	 Four	 squiggles	 in	 one	 particular	 pattern,	 trying	 again	 and	 again	 to	 get	 it	 just	 right.	 It	 was	 getting
dark.	Shadows	walked	out	from	stones.	The	shadows	were	part	of	the	pattern.
The	Imass	possessed	no	written	language.	Something	far	more	ancient	was	buried	deep	within	them.	It	was
liquid.	 It	 was	 stain	 on	 skin.	 It	 was	 the	 magic	 of	 shadows	 cast	 by	 nothing—nothing	 real.	 It	 was	 the	 gift	 of


discord,	the	deception	of	unnatural	things	slipped	into	a	natural	world.	It	was	cause	in	search	of	effect.	When
the	sun	was	gone	from	the	sky,	fire	rose	in	its	stead,	and	fire	was	the	maker	of	shadows,	revealer	of	secrets.
The	child	had	a	secret	name,	and	it	was	written	in	elusive,	impermanent	games	of	light	and	dark,	a	thing	that
could	flicker	into	and	out	of	existence	in	the	dancing	of	flames,	or,	as	now,	at	the	moment	of	the	sun’s	death,
with	the	air	itself	crumbling	to	grainy	dust.
Absi	Kire,	a	name	gifted	by	a	father	struck	with	unexpected	hope,	long	after	the	death	of	hopeful	youth.	It
was	a	name	striving	for	faith,	when	faith	had	departed	the	man’s	world.	It	whispered	like	a	chill	wind,	rising	up
from	the	Cavern	of	the	Worm.	Absi	Kire.	Its	breath	was	dry,	plucking	at	eyes	that	had	forgotten	how	to	close.
Born	of	love,	it	was	a	cry	of	desperation.
Patterns	in	the	dirt,	fast	sinking	into	formless	gloom.
Absi	Kire.
Autumn	Promise.
	
Storii	held	up	a	hand,	cutting	short	a	list	of	curses	grown	past	breathless,	and	cocked	her	head.	‘Some	news,’
she	said.
Nodding,	 Stavi	 reached	 down	 and	 snatched	 up	 the	 boy.	 He	 struggled,	 tilting	 his	 head	 back	 until	 it	 pressed
hard	 against	 her	 chest.	 She	 blew	 down,	 stirring	 the	 hair	 atop	 his	 slightly	 elongated	 head,	 and	 he	 instantly
settled.
‘Excited	voices.’
‘Not	happy	excited.’
‘No,’	 Stavi	 agreed,	 turning	 to	 look	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 camp—just	 beyond	 a	 sweep	 of	 tilted	 rock
outcroppings.	The	glow	of	fires	was	rising	beneath	a	layer	of	woodsmoke.
‘We	should	get	back.’
	
Hetan	cursed	under	her	breath.	The	girls	had	kidnapped	their	half-brother	yet	again,	and	no	one	had	seen	their
escape.	 When	 they	 were	 out	 of	 her	 sight,	 the	 vast	 pit	 of	 her	 solitude	 opened	 its	 maw	 beneath	 her,	 and	 she
could	feel	herself	tumbling	and	spinning	as	she	fell	.	.	.	and	fell.	So	much	darkness,	so	little	hope	that	the	plunge
would	end	in	a	merciful	snap	of	bones,	the	sudden	bliss	of	oblivion.
Without	her	children,	she	was	nothing.	Sitting	motionless,	wandering	inside	her	skull,	dull-eyed	and	weaving
like	 a	 hoof-kicked	 dog.	 Nose	 sniffing,	 claws	 scratching,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 way	 out.	 Without	 her	 children,	 the
future	 vanished,	 a	 moth	 plunging	 into	 the	 fire.	 She	 blinked	 motes	 from	 her	 eyes,	 hands	 drawn	 together	 and
thumbnails	picking	at	the	scabs	and	oozing	slices	left	behind	by	the	last	assault	on	the	ends	of	her	fingers,	the
tender	skin	round	the	nails.
Frozen	in	place,	sunken,	in	endless	retreat.
Another	bowl	of	rustleaf?	Durhang?	A	resin	bud	of	d’bayang?	D’ras	beer?	Too	much	effort,	every	one	of
them.	If	she	sat	perfectly	still,	time	would	vanish.
Until	the	girls	brought	him	back.	Until	she	saw	the	twins	pretending	to	smile	but	skittish	and	worried	behind
their	 eyes.	 And	 he	 would	 squirm	 in	 a	 girl’s	 arms,	 reaching	 for	 Hetan,	 who	 would	 see	 those	 strangely	 large,
wide	 hands	 with	 their	 stubby	 fingers,	 clutching,	 straining,	 and	 a	 howl	 would	 rise	 within	 her,	 lifting	 out	 of	 that
black	maw,	blazing	like	a	skystone	returning	to	the	sky.
She	 would	 take	 him	 into	 a	 suffocating	 embrace,	 desperate	 sparks	 igniting	 within	 her,	 forcing	 her	 into
animation.
Strings	on	the	ends	of	those	pudgy	fingers,	plucking	her	to	life.
And	she	howled	and	she	howled.
Heavy	footsteps	rushed	past	the	entrance	to	the	tent.	Voices,	a	few	shouts.	A	runner	had	entered	the	camp.
The	word	was	delivered,	and	the	word	was	dead.
	
How	could	imagination	hope	to	achieve	the	wonders	of	reality?	The	broken,	deathly	landscape	stretched	out	on
all	 sides,	 but	 the	 vista	 was	 shrinking	 as	 the	 day’s	 light	 faded.	 Yet	 more	 than	 darkness	 embraced	 the
transformation.	 Domes	 of	 cracked	 bedrock	 appeared,	 skinned	 in	 lichen	 and	 moss.	 Shin-high	 trees	 with	 thick,


twisted	boles,	branches	fluttering	with	the	last	of	the	autumn	leaves,	like	blackened	layers	of	peeled	skin.	Bitter
arctic	wind	rushing	down	from	the	northwest	to	herald	winter’s	eager	arrival.
Cafal	and	Setoc	ran	through	this	new	world.	The	frigid	air	bit	in	their	lungs,	yet	it	was	richer	and	sweeter
than	anything	they	had	breathed	in	their	own	realm,	their	own	time.
How	to	describe	the	noise	of	a	hundred	thousand	wolves	running	across	the	land?	It	filled	Cafal’s	skull	with
the	 immensity	 of	 an	 ocean.	 Padded	 footfalls	 delivered	 a	 pitch	 and	 rhythm	 unlike	 that	 of	 spaded	 hoofs.	 The
brush	of	fur	as	shoulders	rubbed	was	a	seething	whisper.	The	heat	rising	from	bodies	was	thick	as	mist,	the
animal	smell	overwhelming—the	smell	of	a	world	without	cities,	forges,	charcoal	burners,	without	battlefields,
trenches	filled	with	waste,	without	human	sweat	and	perfumes,	the	smoke	of	rustleaf	and	durhang,	the	dust	of
frantic	destruction.
Wolves.	Before	humans	waged	war	upon	them,	before	the	millennia-long	campaign	of	slaughter.	Before	the
lands	emptied.
He	 could	 almost	 see	 them.	 Every	 sense	 but	 sight	 was	 alive	 with	 the	 creatures.	 And	 he	 and	 Setoc	 were
carried	along	on	the	ghostly	tide.
All	that	was	gone	had	returned.	All	this	history,	seeking	a	home.
They	 would	 not	 find	 it	 among	 his	 people.	 He	 did	 not	 understand	 why	 Setoc	 was	 leading	 them	 to	 the
Barghast.	He	could	hear	her	singing,	but	the	words	she	used	belonged	to	some	other	language.	The	tone	was
strangely	fraught,	as	if	warring	forces	were	bound	together.	Curiosity	and	wariness,	congress	and	terror—he
could	almost	see	the	glint	of	bestial	eyes	as	they	watched	the	first	band	of	humans	from	a	distance.	Did	these
two-legged	strangers	promise	friendship?	Cooperation?	A	recognition	of	brother-	and	sisterhood?	Yes,	to	all	of
that.	But	this	was	no	family	at	peace;	this	was	a	thing	writhing	with	deceit,	betrayal,	black	malice	and	cruelty.
The	wolves	were	innocents.	They	stood	no	chance.
Flee	the	Barghast.	Please,	I	beg	you—
But	 his	 pleading	 rang	 hollow	 even	 to	 Cafal.	 He	 needed	 them—he	 needed	 this	 swift	 passage.	 Night	 had
fallen.	A	wind	was	rising	to	tear	at	the	torches	and	hearth-fires	in	the	Senan	camp.	Rain	spat	with	stinging	fury
and	lightning	ignited	the	horizon.
Eyes	gleamed,	iron	licked	the	darkness—
The	gods	were	showing	him	was	what	coming.
And	he	would	not	get	there	in	time.	Because,	as	has	ever	been	known,	the	Barghast	gods	were	bastards.
	
Heart	 thudding	 with	 anticipation,	 Sathand	 Gril	 slipped	 out	 from	 the	 light	 of	 the	 wind-whipped	 fires.	 He	 had
watched	the	children	and	their	furtive	flight	into	the	shattered	hills	northeast	of	the	camp	when	the	sun	was	still
a	 hand’s	 breadth	 above	 the	 horizon.	 This	 had	 been	 his	 singular	 responsibility	 for	 weeks	 now—spying	 on	 the
horrid	little	creatures—all	leading	to	this	moment,	this	reward.
He	had	killed	the	boy’s	dog	and	now	he	would	kill	the	boy.	Plunging	his	knife	into	his	belly	with	a	hand	over
his	mouth	to	stifle	the	shrieks.	A	large	rock	to	crush	the	skull	and	destroy	the	face,	because	no	one	welcomed
the	face	of	a	dead	child,	especially	one	frozen	in	twisted	pain.	He	had	no	desire	to	look	upon	the	half-lidded
eyes	that	saw	nothing,	that	had	gone	flat	with	the	soul’s	absence.	No,	he	would	destroy	the	thing	utterly,	and
then	fling	it	into	a	defile.
The	twins	were	destined	for	something	far	more	elaborate.	He’d	break	their	legs.	Then	tie	their	hands.	He’d
blood	 them	 both,	 but	 not	 cruelly,	 for	 Sathand	 was	 not	 one	 of	 those	 who	 hungered	 to	 rape,	 not	 women,	 not
children.	But	he	would	give	them	his	seed	to	carry	to	the	gods.
This	night	of	murder,	it	was	for	the	Barghast.	The	righting	of	wrongs.	The	end	of	the	usurper’s	line	and	the
eradication	 of	 Hetan’s	 shame.	 Onos	 Toolan	 was	 not	 of	 the	 clans	 of	 the	 White	 Face.	 He	 was	 not	 even
Barghast.
No	matter.	Word	had	come.	Onos	Toolan	was	dead—murdered	by	Bakal,	who	had	broken	his	own	arm	with
the	force	of	the	knife-thrust	he	had	driven	into	the	Warleader’s	heart.	A	power	struggle	was	coming—Sathand
Gril	 well	 knew	 that	 Sekara	 had	 decided	 on	 the	 Barahn	 warchief,	 Maral	 Eb.	 But	 to	 Sathand’s	 eyes—and	 to
those	 of	 many	 others	 among	 the	 Senan—Bakal	 could	 make	 a	 surer	 claim,	 and	 that	 was	 one	 Sathand	 would
back.	More	blood	to	be	spilled	before	things	settled	out.	Most	were	agreed	on	that.
Sekara	the	Vile.	Her	idiot	husband,	Stolmen.	Maral	Eb	and	his	vicious	brothers.	The	new	Warleader	would
be	Senan—no	other	clan	was	as	powerful,	after	all,	not	even	the	Barahn.


It	would	have	to	be	quick—all	of	it.	The	cursed	Akrynnai	army	was	on	its	way.
Sathand	 Gril	 padded	 through	 the	 darkness—the	 brats	 should	 be	 on	 their	 way	 back	 by	 now.	 Even	 they
weren’t	 stupid	 enough	 to	 stay	 out	 once	 the	 sun	 set,	 what	 with	 both	 half-starved	 wolves	 and	 Akrynnai
marauders	on	the	hunt.	So	.	.	.	where	were	they?
From	the	camp	behind	him,	someone	shrieked.
It	had	begun.
	
Three	 women	 entered	 the	 tent,	 and	 Hetan	 knew	 them	 all.	 She	 watched	 them	 advance	 on	 her,	 and	 suddenly
everything	became	perfectly	clear,	perfectly	understandable.	Mysteries	flitting	away	like	veils	of	smoke	on	the
wind.	Now	I	join	you,	husband.	 She	 reached	 for	 her	 knife	 and	 found	 only	 the	 sheath	 at	 her	 hip—her	 eyes
snapped	to	the	flat-stone	on	which	sat	the	remnants	of	her	last	meal,	and	there	waited	the	knife—and	Hetan
lunged	for	the	weapon.
She	 did	 not	 reach	 it	 in	 time.	 A	 knee	 slammed	 into	 her	 jaw,	 whipped	 her	 head	 round,	 blood	 spinning	 in
threads.	Hands	snagged	her	wrists,	dragged	her	round	and	pushed	her	to	the	ground.
Fists	pummelled	her	face.	Flares	of	light	exploded	behind	her	eyes.	Stunned,	suddenly	too	weak	to	struggle,
she	felt	herself	rolled	on	to	her	stomach.	Rawhide	bound	her	arms	behind	her.	Fingers	snarled	a	fist’s	worth	of
hair	and	lifted	her	head	up.
Balamit’s	foul	breath	whispered	across	her	cheek.	‘No	easy	way	for	you,	whore.	No,	it’s	hobbling	for	Hetan
—and	 what’s	 so	 different	 about	 that?	 You’d	 rut	 with	 a	 dog	 if	 it	 knew	 how	 to	 kiss!	 May	 you	 live	 a	 hundred
years!’
She	 was	 thrown	 on	 to	 her	 back,	 and	 then	 lifted	 up	 from	 behind,	 Jayviss’s	 nails	 digging	 deep	 into	 Hetan’s
armpits.
Hega,	burly,	miserable	Hega,	swung	the	hatchet	down.
Hetan	shrieked	as	the	front	half	of	her	right	foot	was	chopped	off.	The	leg	jumped,	spraying	blood.	She	tried
to	 pull	 the	 other	 one	 away,	 but	 a	 crack	 of	 the	 hatchet’s	 iron	 ball	 against	 her	 kneecap	 numbed	 the	 leg.	 The
hatchet	swung	down	again.
The	pain	rushed	in	a	black	flood.	Balamit	giggled.
Hetan	passed	out.
	
Krin,	whose	niece	had	married	a	Gadra	warrior	and	was	swollen	with	child,	watched	as	Sekara’s	bitch	dogs
dragged	 Hetan	 out	 from	 the	 tent.	 The	 whore	 was	 unconscious.	 Her	 stumped	 feet	 trailed	 wet	 streaks	 that
seemed	to	flare	as	lightning	flashed	in	the	night.
They	 brought	 her	 to	 the	 nearest	 hearth-fire.	 Little	 Yedin	 was	 tending	 to	 the	 flat	 blade	 and	 it	 was	 pale	 hot
when	she	lifted	it	from	the	coals.	Meat	sizzled	and	popped	as	the	blade	was	pushed	against	Hetan’s	left	foot.
The	woman’s	body	jerked,	her	eyes	starting	open	in	shock.	A	second	shriek	shattered	the	air.
Nine-year-old	Yedin	stared,	and	then	at	an	impatient	snap	from	one	of	the	bitches,	she	flipped	the	blade	and
seared	Hetan’s	other	foot.
Krin	hurried	forward,	scowling	at	the	way	Hetan’s	eyes	had	rolled	up,	head	lolling.	‘Wake	her	up,	Hega.	I’m
first.’
His	sister	grinned,	still	holding	the	bloodied	hatchet.	‘Your	son?’
Krin	looked	away,	disgusted.	He	was	barely	half	her	age.	Then	he	jerked	a	nod.	‘Tonight’s	the	night	for	it,’
he	said.
‘Widow’s	gift!’	Hega	cried	in	glee.
Jayviss	brought	over	a	gourd	of	water	and	threw	its	contents	into	Hetan’s	bruised	face.
She	sputtered,	coughed.
Krin	advanced	on	her,	mindful	and	delighted	at	how	many	people	had	gathered,	and	at	how	other	men	were
arguing	their	place.	‘Keep	her	hands	tied,’	he	said.	‘For	the	first	dozen	or	so.	After	that,	there	won’t	be	any
need.’
It	 was	 true—no	 Barghast	 woman	 resisted	 by	 that	 point.	 And	 in	 a	 few	 days,	 she’d	 drop	 to	 her	 hands	 and
knees	at	a	glance,	backside	upthrust	and	ready.
‘Might	be	two	dozen,’	someone	in	the	crowd	observed.	‘Hetan	was	a	warrior,	after	all.’


Hega	stepped	up	and	kicked	Hetan	in	the	ribs.	Spittle	flew	from	the	widow’s	lips	as	she	snarled	and	said,
‘What’s	a	warrior	without	a	weapon?	Bah,	she’ll	be	licking	her	lips	after	five	or	so,	you’ll	see!’
Krin	said	nothing;	nor	did	anyone	else.	The	warriors	knew	their	own,	after	all.	Hega	was	an	idiot,	to	think
Hetan	 would	 break	 so	 easily.	 I	 remember	 you,	 Hega.	 My	 sister,	 too	 fat	 to	 fight.	 And	 who	 was	 the	 one
licking	 her	 lips	 five	 times	 a	 day?	 Oh,	 we	 see	 where	 your	 hate	 lives—gods,	 I	 am	 giving	 my	 son	 to	 this
thing?	Well,	just	for	one	night.	And	I’ll	give	him	my	own	knife,	with	leave	to	use	it.	No	one	will	miss	you,
Hega.	And	no	one	will	call	out	my	boy,	either.
The	wind	was	howling—a	storm	had	found	them	on	this	fateful	night—he	could	hear	rain	in	the	distance.
Guy	ropes	quivered	and	hummed.	Hide	walls	thumped	and	rippled—Barghast	warriors	were	pouring	into	the
encampment	as	if	the	wild	drumming	had	summoned	them,	and	Krin	caught	word	that	Maral	Eb	had	arrived,
along	 with	 the	 Senan	 warriors	 Tool	 had	 taken	 with	 him.	 Bakal	 among	 them.	 Slayer,	 liberator	 of	 all	 the
Barghast.	Who	would	forget	this	night?
Who	would	forget,	too,	that	it	was	Krin,	firstborn	son	of	Humbrall	Taur’s	own	uncle,	who	was	the	first	to
fuck	Hetan?
The	thought	hardened	him.	He	stood	above	her,	waiting	until	her	wild	eyes	slanted	across	his	own,	and	when
that	fevered	gaze	stuttered	and	then	returned	to	lock	with	his,	Krin	smiled.	He	saw	the	shock,	and	then	the	hurt
that	 was	 betrayal,	 and	 he	 nodded.	 ‘Allies,	 Hetan?	 You	 lost	 them	 all.	 When	 you	 proclaimed	 him	 as	 your
husband.	When	you	championed	your	father’s	madness.’
Hega	pushed	back	in.	‘Where	are	your	children,	Hetan?	Shall	I	tell	you?	Dead	and	cold	in	the	darkness—’
Krin	backhanded	her	across	the	face.	‘Your	time	with	her	is	over,	widow!	Go!	Run	and	hide	in	your	hut!’
Hega	wiped	blood	from	her	lips,	and	then,	eyes	flashing,	she	wheeled,	shouting,	‘Bavalt	son	of	Krin!	Tonight
you	are	mine!’
Krin	almost	sent	a	knife	her	way	as	she	pushed	through	the	crowd.	A	knife,	son,	long	before	she	wraps
round	you,	long	before	you	sink	into	that	spider’s	hole.
As	 the	 significance	 of	 Hega’s	 words	 worked	 through,	 there	 was	 laughter,	 and	 Krin	 was	 stung	 by	 the
contempt	he	heard	all	round	him.	He	looked	down	at	Hetan—she	was	still	staring	up	at	him,	eyes	unwavering.
Shame	flooded	through	him,	stealing	his	hardness	fast	as	a	mother’s	kiss.
‘Don’t	think	you	can	watch,’	he	said	in	a	growl,	crouching	to	pull	her	on	to	her	stomach.	As	he	tugged	down
her	leathers,	excitement	returned—awakened	by	anger	as	much	as	anything	else.	Oh,	and	triumph,	for	many
men	 among	 the	 Senan	 had	 looked	 upon	 her	 with	 lust	 and	 desire,	 and	 they	 were	 even	 now	 arguing	 their	 turn
with	her.	But	I	am	the	first.	I	will	make	you	forget	Onos	Toolan.	I	will	remind	you	of	the	manhood	of	the
Barghast.	He	knelt,	pushing	with	his	knees	to	splay	wide	her	legs.	‘Lift	up	to	me,	whore.	Show	them	all	how
you	accept	your	fate.’
	
Pain	was	a	distant	roar.	Something	cold	and	sharp	now	filled	her	skull,	fixed	like	spears	to	her	eyes,	and	every
face	she	had	looked	upon	since	awakening	once	more	had	pierced	her	like	lightning,	arcing	in	from	her	eyes,
igniting	her	brain.	Faces—those	expressions	and	all	that	they	revealed—they	were	burned	upon	her	soul	now.
She	had	played	with	Hega’s	younger	sister—they	had	been	so	close—but	that	woman	was	somewhere	in
the	 crowd	 now,	 flat-eyed,	 walled-off.	 Jayviss	 had	 spun	 a	 fine	 horse	 blanket	 as	 a	 wedding	 gift,	 and	 Hetan
remembered	her	bright,	proud	smile	when	Hetan	singled	her	out	in	giving	public	thanks.	Balamit,	daughter	of	a
shoulderwoman,	had	been	her	keeper	on	the	Night	of	First	Blood,	when	Hetan	was	barely	twelve	years	old.
She’d	sat	awake,	holding	her	hand,	until	sleep	finally	took	the	child	now	a	woman.
Yedin	often	played	with	the	twins—
Husband,	I	have	betrayed	you!	In	my	misery,	in	my	pathetic	self-pity—I	knew,	I	knew	this	was	coming,
how	could	it	not?	My	children—I	have	abandoned	them.
They	killed	them,	husband.	They	killed	our	children!
‘Lift	up	to	meet	me,	whore.’
Krin,	 I	 used	 to	 laugh	 at	 your	 hunger	 for	 me,	 sick	 as	 it	 was.	 Does	 my	 father’s	 ghost	 wait	 for	 you,
Krin?	Does	he	witness	this,	and	what	you	demand	of	me?
Does	he	understand	my	shame?
Krin	 now	 punishes	 me.	 He	 is	 only	 the	 first,	 but	 no	 matter	 how	 many	 there	 are,	 the	 punishment	 will
never	be	enough.


Now	.	.	.	now	I	understand	the	mind	of	a	hobbled	woman.	I	understand.
And	she	lifted	up	to	meet	him.
	
The	wretches	saw	him	before	he	saw	them,	and	they	saw,	too,	the	heavy	knife	in	his	hand.
None	 would	 deny	 that	 the	 twins	 were	 clever,	 nasty	 creatures,	 in	 the	 manner	 of	 newborn	 snakes,	 and	 so
when	they	spun	round	and	fled,	Sathand	Gril	was	not	surprised.	But	one	of	them	was	burdened	with	a	child,
and	that	child	was	now	screaming.
Oh,	 they	 might	 silence	 him	 in	 the	 only	 way	 possible—a	 suffocating	 hand	 over	 his	 mouth	 and	 nose,	 thus
sparing	Sathand	the	blood	on	his	own	hands—and	he	waited	for	that	as	he	plunged	in	pursuit,	but	the	shrieks
went	on.
He	could	run	them	down,	and	so	he	would,	eventually.	He	was	sure	they	knew	that	they	were	already	dead.
Well,	 if	 they	 would	 make	 it	 a	 game,	 he	 would	 play.	 One	 last	 gesture	 of	 childhood,	 before	 he	 took	 childhood
away.	 Would	 they	 squeal	 when	 he	 caught	 them?	 An	 interesting	 question.	 If	 not	 immediately,	 then	 later,	 yes,
later	they	would	squeal	indeed.
Scrabbling	sounds	ahead,	at	the	slumped	end	of	a	rock-walled	defile,	and	Sathand	lumbered	forward—yes,
there	was	one	of	them,	with	that	boy	in	her	arms,	trying	to	climb	up	the	scree—
The	boulder	very	nearly	killed	him,	dropping	down	to	hammer	into	his	shoulder.	He	howled	in	pain,	stumbled
—caught	 the	 flash	 of	 the	 other	 twin	 up	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 wall	 to	 his	 left.	 ‘You	 rotted	 piece	 of	 dung!’	 he
snarled.	‘You	will	pay	for	that!’
No	 longer	 a	 game.	 He	 would	 give	 them	 hurt	 for	 hurt,	 and	 then	 more.	 He	 would	 make	 them	 regret	 such
stupid	attempts.
Ahead,	the	girl	with	the	boy	had	given	up	trying	to	climb	the	fan	of	sand	and	gravel,	and	had	instead	dropped
down	and	to	the	right,	vanishing	into	a	crevasse.	A	moment	later	the	other	girl	darted	in	after	her	sister.
The	whole	thing	had	been	an	act.	A	trap.	So	clever,	weren’t	they?
Mind	blackening	with	fury,	he	bolted	after	them.
	
Setoc	was	tugging	at	his	arms.	‘Cafal!	Get	up!’
It	was	too	late.	He	was	seeing	all	there	was	to	see.	Cursed	by	his	own	gods.	Could	 he	 close	hands	 about
their	necks,	one	by	one,	and	choke	the	life	from	them,	he	vowed	he	would.
His	beloved	sister—he	had	screamed	as	the	hatchet	chopped	down.	He	had	fallen	to	his	knees	when	Krin
stepped	 up	 to	 her,	 and	 now	 he	 sought	 to	 claw	 out	 his	 own	 eyes—although	 the	 visions	 behind	 them	 proved
indifferent	to	the	damage	done	to	them.	Blood	ran	with	tears—he	would	dig	and	dig	until	never	again	would	he
look	upon	the	world—but	it	seemed	that	blindness	would	for	ever	elude	him.
He	 watched	 Krin	 rape	 his	 bloodkin.	 He	 heard	 the	 exhortations	 from	 the	 hundreds	 of	 warriors	 gathered
round.	He	saw	Bakal,	gaunt	and	his	eyes	luminous,	stumble	into	view,	saw	the	man’s	horror	as	all	the	blood	left
his	 face,	 saw	 as	 the	 great	 slayer	 of	 Onos	 Toolan	 twisted	 round	 and	 fled,	 as	 if	 the	 Warleader’s	 ghostly	 hand
was	 reaching	 for	 him.	 But	 it	 was	 just	 the	 rape	 of	 a	 hobbled	 woman—not	 even	 considered	 rape,	 in	 fact.
Just	.	.	.	using.
And	Sathand	Gril,	whom	he	had	hunted	beside	in	years	past,	was	now	hunting	Stavi	and	Storii,	and	Absi	who
flailed	in	Stavi’s	arms	as	if	in	full	awareness	that	this	new	world	he	had	found	was	crumbling	around	him,	that
death	 was	 coming	 to	 take	 him	 before	 he	 could	 as	 much	 as	 taste	 it.	 And	 the	 boy	 was	 outraged,	 indignant,
defiant.	Confused.	Terrified.
Too	much.	No	heart	could	withstand	such	visions.
Setoc	tugged	at	his	arms,	fought	to	keep	his	hands	from	his	face.	‘We	must	keep	going!	The	wolves—’
‘Hood	take	the	wolves!’
‘But	he	won’t,	you	fool!	He	won’t—but	someone	will!	We	must	hurry,	Cafal—’
His	hand	lashed	out,	caught	her	flush	on	the	side	of	her	head.	The	way	her	neck	twisted	round	as	she	fell
horrified	him.	Crying	out,	he	crawled	to	her.
The	 wolves	 were	 ghosts	 no	 longer.	 Blood	 clouded	 his	 eyes,	 dripped	 down	 in	 a	 mockery	 of	 tears.	 ‘Setoc!’
She	was	still	a	child,	still	so	young,	so	thin—
The	 wolves	 howled,	 a	 chorus	 that	 deafened	 him,	 that	 drove	 him	 face-first	 into	 the	 frozen	 dirt.	 Gods,	 my


head!	Stop!	Stop,	I	beg	you!	If	he	screamed,	he	could	not	hear	it.	The	beasts	surged	on	all	sides,	closing	in
and	in—they	wanted	him.
They	wanted	his	blood.
From	somewhere	sounded	a	hunter’s	horn.
Cafal	leapt	to	his	feet	and	ran.	Ran	from	the	world.
	
When	 her	 sister	 passed	 the	 wailing	 boy	 over,	 Stavi	 clutched	 him	 to	 her	 chest.	 Storii	 moved	 past	 her	 as	 they
emerged	 from	 the	 fissure,	 grasping	 handfuls	 of	 tawny	 grasses	 to	 pull	 her	 way	 up	 the	 slope.	 This	 range	 of
broken	hills	was	narrow,	an	island	of	scoured	limestone,	and	beyond	it	the	land	levelled	out,	flat,	with	nowhere
to	hide.	She	struggled	up	the	tattered	slope,	gasping,	the	boy	beating	at	her	face	with	his	tiny	fists.
They	were	going	to	die.	She	knew	that	now.	Their	life	in	all	its	loose	joy,	its	perfect	security,	was	suddenly
gone.	She	longed	for	yesterday,	she	longed	for	the	solid	presence	that	was	her	adopted	father.	Once	more	the
sight	of	his	face,	a	face	wide	and	weathered,	with	every	feature	exaggerated,	oversized,	his	soft	eyes	that	had
only	 ever	 looked	 upon	 his	 children	 with	 love—against	 the	 twins,	 it	 had	 seemed	 anger	 was	 impossible.	 Even
disapproval	wavered	in	a	heartbeat.	They	had	worked	him	like	river	clay,	but	they	had	known	that	beneath	that
clay	there	was	a	thing	of	iron,	a	thing	of	great	power.	He	was	a	truth,	resolute,	unbreakable.	They	worked	him
because	they	knew	that	truth.
Where	was	he	now?	What	had	happened	to	their	mother?	Why	was	Sathand	Gril	hunting	them?	Why	was
he	going	to	kill	them?
Storii	ran	ahead,	darting	like	a	hare	seeking	cover,	but	there	was	none	to	be	found.	Ghoulish	light	painted	the
plain	as	the	Slashes	etched	the	night.	A	cruel	wind	cut	into	their	faces,	and	the	mass	of	storm	clouds	blotted	out
the	north	sky.	The	sight	of	her	sister’s	panic	was	like	a	knife	in	Stavi’s	chest—the	world	was	as	broken	as	the
hills	behind	them,	as	broken	as	the	vicious	look	in	Sathand’s	eyes.	She	could	have	dropped	that	rock	on	his	skull
—she	should	have—but	the	thought	of	hurting	him	that	much	had	horrified	her.	A	part	of	her	had	wanted	to
believe	 that	 if	 she	 could	 manage	 to	 break	 his	 shoulder,	 he	 would	 give	 up,	 he	 would	 return	 to	 the	 camp.	 She
knew	now,	bleak	with	despair,	that	such	faith—that	all	of	this	could	be	so	easily	righted—was	ridiculous.	Her
error	in	judgement	was	going	to	see	them	all	killed.
Hearing	Sathand	climb	out	of	the	fissure,	Stavi	cried	out,	running	as	fast	as	her	legs	could	carry	her.	All	at
once	the	boy	she	held	went	quiet,	and	his	arms	wrapped	tight	round	her	neck,	hands	clutching	her	hair.
He	understood	as	well.	Motionless	as	a	doe	in	the	grasses	not	ten	paces	from	a	hunting	cat,	his	eyes	wide,
his	breath	panting	and	hot	against	the	side	of	her	neck.
Tears	streamed	down	her	cheeks—he	clutched	her	in	the	belief	that	she	could	protect	him,	that	she	could
defend	his	life.	But	she	knew	she	couldn’t.	She	wasn’t	old	enough.	She	wasn’t	fierce	enough.
She	saw	Storii	look	back	over	a	shoulder,	saw	her	falter—
Sathand’s	heavy	footfalls	were	closing	fast.
‘Go!’	Stavi	shrieked	at	her	sister.	‘Just	go!’
Instead,	Storii	bent	down,	scooped	up	a	rock,	and	then	sprinted	back	towards	them.
Fierce	sister,	brave	sister.	You	fool.
They	would	die	together	then.
Stavi	 stumbled,	 fell	 to	 her	 knees,	 skinning	 them	 on	 the	 grasses.	 The	 burning	 pain	 loosed	 more	 tears,	 and
everything	blurred.	The	boy	kicked	himself	free—now	he	would	run,	fast	as	his	short	legs	could	take	him—
Instead,	 he	 stood	 and	 faced	 the	 charging	 warrior.	 The	 man	 was	 not	 a	 stranger,	 was	 he?	 No,	 he	 was	 kin.
And	in	the	shadow	of	a	kinsman	there	was	safety.
Stavi	whispered,	‘Not	this	time.’
	
Sathand	readied	the	knife	in	his	hand,	slowing	now	that	the	chase	had	come	to	an	end—nowhere	for	them	to
go,	was	there?
His	shoulder	throbbed,	and	sharp	bolts	of	pain	shot	out	from	his	collar	bone—he	couldn’t	even	lift	that	arm
—she’d	broken	it.
But	 the	 warrior’s	 rage	 was	 fading.	 They	 did	 not	 choose	 their	 parents—who	 does?	 They’re	 just	 .	 .	 .
unlucky.	But	that	is	the	way	of	the	world.	Spawn	of	rulers	inherit	more	than	power—they	inherit	what


happens	when	that	power	collapses.	When	a	night	of	blood	is	unleashed,	and	ambition	floods	black	as
locust	ink.
He	saw	the	stone	gripped	by	one	of	the	girls	and	nodded,	pleased	with	her	defiance.	Only	half	her	blood	was
Barghast,	but	it	had	awakened	for	this.	He	would	have	to	take	her	down	first.
‘What	has	happened?’	asked	the	girl	standing	beside	the	boy.	‘Sathand?’
He	bared	his	teeth.	The	right	words	now	could	take	the	fight	out	of	them.	‘You	are	orphans,’	he	said.	‘Your
par—’
The	stone	was	a	blur,	catching	him	a	glancing	blow	above	his	left	eye.	He	cursed	in	pain	and	surprise,	and
then	 shook	 his	 head.	 Blood	 ran	 down	 into	 the	 eye,	 blinding	 it.	 ‘Spirits	 haunt	 you!’	 He	 laughed.	 ‘I’ve	 taken
fewer	wounds	in	battle!	But	.	.	.	one	eye	is	enough.	One	working	arm,	too.’	Sathand	edged	forward.
The	boy’s	eyes	were	wide,	uncomprehending.	He	suddenly	smiled	and	held	out	his	arms.
Sathand	faltered.	Yes,	I’ve	taken	you	up	and	swung	you	in	the	air.	I’ve	tickled	you	until	you	shrieked.
But	that	is	done	now.	He	lifted	the	knife.
The	 twins	 stared,	 unmoving.	 Would	 they	 protect	 the	 boy?	 He	 suspected	 they	 would.	 With	 teeth	 and	 nails,
they	would.
We	are	as	we	are.	‘I	am	proud	of	you,’	he	said.	‘Proud	of	you	all.	But	this	must	be.’
The	boy	cried	out	as	if	in	joy.
Something	slammed	into	his	back.	He	staggered.	The	knife	fell	from	his	hand.	Sathand	frowned	down	at	it.
Why	would	he	drop	his	weapon?	Why	was	his	strength	draining	away?	On	his	knees,	his	lone	eye	finding	the
boy’s,	level	at	last.	No,	he’s	not	looking	at	me.	He’s	looking	past	me.	Confusion,	a	roar	of	something	rushing
deep	in	his	skull.	The	warrior	twisted	round.
The	second	arrow	took	him	in	the	forehead,	dead	centre,	punching	through	the	bone	and	ploughing	into	the
brain.
He	never	saw	where	it	came	from.
	
Stavi	sank	down	on	watery	legs.	Her	sister	ran	to	their	brother	and	snatched	him	up.	He	yelped	in	delight.
In	the	greenish	gloom,	she	could	see	the	silhouette	of	a	warrior	astride	a	horse,	sixty	or	more	paces	away.
Something	in	that	seemed	unreal,	and	she	struggled	to	track	it	down,	and	then	gasped.	That	arrow.	Sathand
was	 turning	 round—in	 motion—and	 yet	 .	 .	 .	 sixty	 paces	 away!	 In	 this	 wind!	 Her	 gaze	 fell	 to	 Sathand’s
corpse.	She	squinted	at	that	arrow.	I’ve	seen	the	like	before.	I’ve—Stavi	moaned	and	crawled	forward	until
she	could	close	a	hand	about	the	arrow’s	shaft.	‘Father	made	this.’
The	rider	was	closing	at	a	loose	canter.
Behind	Stavi,	her	sister	said,	‘That’s	not	Father.’
‘No—but	look	at	the	arrows!’
Storii	set	the	boy	down	once	more.	‘I	see	them.	I	see	them,	Stavi.’
As	 the	 warrior	 drew	 closer,	 they	 could	 see	 that	 something	 was	 wrong	 with	 him—and	 with	 his	 horse.	 The
beast	 was	 too	 gaunt,	 its	 hide	 worn	 away	 in	 patches,	 its	 long,	 stained	 teeth	 gleaming,	 the	 holes	 of	 its	 eyes
lightless,	lifeless.
The	rider	was	no	better.	But	he	held	a	horn	bow,	and	within	a	saddle	quiver	a	dozen	or	so	of	Onos	Toolan’s
arrows	 were	 visible.	 A	 cowl	 was	 draped	 over	 the	 warrior’s	 head,	 hiding	 what	 was	 left	 of	 his	 face	 and
seemingly	 impervious	 to	 the	 gale.	 He	 let	 his	 horse	 slow	 to	 a	 walk,	 and	 then	 halted	 it	 ten	 paces	 away	 with	 a
twitch	of	the	reins.
He	seemed	to	study	them,	and	Stavi	caught	an	instant’s	blurred	spark	of	a	single	eye.	‘The	boy,	yes,’	he	said
in	Daru—but	it	was	Daru	with	a	Malazan	accent.	‘But	not	you	two.’
A	chill	crept	over	Stavi,	and	she	felt	her	twin’s	hand	slip	into	hers.
‘That,’	he	said	after	a	moment,	‘perhaps	came	out	wrong.	What	I	meant	was,	I	see	him	in	the	boy,	but	not	in
you	two.’
‘You	knew	him,’	Storii	accused.	She	pointed	at	the	quiver.	‘He	made	those!	You	stole	them!’
‘He	made	them,	yes,	as	a	gift	to	me.	But	that	was	long	ago.	Before	you	were	born.’
‘Toc	the	Younger,’	whispered	Stavi.
‘He	spoke	of	me?’
That	 this	 warrior	 was	 undead	 did	 not	 matter.	 Both	 girls	 rushed	 forward,	 one	 to	 either	 side,	 to	 hug	 his


withered	thighs.	At	their	touch,	he	might	have	flinched,	but	then	he	reached	out	with	his	hands.	Hesitated,	only
to	settle	them	on	the	heads	of	the	girls.
As	they	wept	in	relief.
The	son	of	Onos	Toolan	had	not	moved,	but	he	watched,	and	he	was	still	smiling.
	
Setoc’s	 eyes	 fluttered	 open.	 The	 instant	 she	 moved	 her	 head,	 blinding	 agony	 lanced	 through	 her	 skull.	 She
groaned.	 The	 night	 was	 luminous,	 the	 familiar	 green	 tinge	 of	 her	 own	 world.	 She	 could	 feel	 the	 wolves,	 no
longer	as	solid	beasts	surrounding	her,	but	as	ghosts	once	more.	Ephemeral,	hovering,	pensive.
A	cold	wind	was	blowing,	lightning	flashing	to	the	north.	Shivering,	nauseated,	Setoc	forced	herself	on	to	her
knees.	The	dark	plain	spun	round	her.	She	tried	to	recall	what	had	happened.	Had	she	fallen?
‘Cafal?’
As	if	in	answer	thunder	rumbled.
Blinking,	she	sat	back	on	her	haunches,	looked	round	through	bleared	eyes.	She	found	herself	in	the	centre
of	 a	 ring	 of	 half-buried	 boulders,	 the	 jade	 glow	 from	 the	 south	 adding	 a	 green	 hint	 to	 their	 silvery	 sheen.
Whatever	patterns	had	been	carved	upon	them	had	long	since	weathered	away	to	the	barest	of	indentations.
But	there	was	power	here.	Old.	As	old	as	anything	on	this	plain.	Whispering	sorrow	to	the	empty	land	as	the
wind	curled	between	the	bleached	humps.
The	wolf	ghosts	slowly	circled,	as	if	drawn	inward	to	this	ring	of	stones	and	its	mournful	dirge.
There	was	no	sign	of	Cafal.	Had	he	been	lost	in	the	realm	of	the	Beast	Hold?	If	so,	then	he	was	lost	for
ever,	falling	back	and	back	through	the	centuries,	into	times	so	ancient	not	a	single	human	walked	the	world,
where	 no	 blood-line	 was	 drawn	 to	 divide	 the	 hunter	 from	 the	 hunted—animals	 all.	 He	 would	 fall	 victim
eventually,	 prey	 to	 some	 sharp-eyed	 predator.	 His	 death	 would	 be	 a	 lonely	 one,	 so	 lonely	 she	 suspected	 he
would	welcome	it.
Even	 the	 will	 of	 the	 wolves	 in	 their	 hundreds	 of	 thousands	 could	 barely	 brush	 the	 immensity	 of	 the	 lost
Hold’s	power.
She	huddled	against	the	cold	and	the	ache	in	her	head.
The	rain	arrived	with	the	rage	of	hornets.
	
Whipped	by	the	wind	and	lashed	by	the	rain,	Cafal	reached	the	edge	of	the	encampment.	Hearth-fires	flared
and	 dipped	 beneath	 the	 deluge,	 but	 even	 in	 the	 fitful	 light	 he	 could	 see	 huddled	 crowds	 and	 the	 smaller
makeshift	camps	of	the	Barahn	clustered	round	the	edges.	Figures	hurried	between	the	rows,	hunched	against
the	weather.	He	could	see	pickets	here	and	there,	haphazardly	arranged	with	some	of	the	posts	abandoned.
When	lightning	lit	the	scene	it	seemed	to	seethe	before	his	eyes.
Somewhere	 in	 there	 was	 his	 sister.	 Being	 used	 again	 and	 again.	 Warriors	 he	 had	 known	 all	 his	 life	 were
pushing	bloody	paths	into	her,	eager	to	join	in	the	breaking	of	this	once	proud,	beautiful	and	powerful	woman.
Cafal	and	Tool	had	spoken	often	of	outlawing	the	tradition	of	hobbling,	but	too	many	resisted	the	casting	away
of	traditions,	even	those	as	vicious	as	this	one.
He	could	not	change	what	had	happened,	all	the	damage	already	done,	but	he	could	steal	her	away,	he	could
save	her	the	months,	even	years,	of	horror	that	awaited	her.
Cafal	crouched,	studying	the	Barghast	camp.
	
Swathed	in	furs,	Balamit	made	her	way	back	to	her	yurt.	Such	a	night!	Too	many	years	bowing	to	that	bitch,
too	many	years	stepping	from	her	path,	eyes	downcast	as	was	demanded	by	Hetan’s	position	as	wife	to	the
Warleader.	Well,	the	whore	was	paying	the	soul’s	coin	for	that	now,	wasn’t	she?
Balamit	 ran	 through	 her	 mind	 once	 more	 the	 fateful	 moment	 when	 Hega’s	 hatchet	 descended.	 The	 way
Hetan’s	 whole	 body	 contorted	 in	 pain	 and	 shock,	 the	 deafening	 shriek	 cutting	 like	 a	 knife	 in	 the	 air.	 Some
people	lived	as	if	privilege	was	something	they	were	born	to,	as	if	everyone	else	was	a	lesser	being,	as	if	their
domination	 was	 a	 natural	 truth.	 Well,	 there	 were	 other	 truths	 in	 nature,	 weren’t	 there?	 The	 gathering	 of	 the
pack	could	bring	down	the	fiercest	wolf.
Balamit	 grinned	 as	 the	 rain	 spat	 icy	 against	 her	 face.	 Not	 just	 a	 pack,	 but	 a	 thousand	 of	 her	 kind!	 The


pushed-down,	the	murky	shapes	that	made	up	the	common	crowd,	the	ignored	subjects	of	contempt.	No,	this
was	a	worldly	lesson,	was	it	not?	And,	sweetest	truth	of	all,	we	are	far	from	finished.
Maral	Eb	was	a	fool,	just	another	one	of	those	superior	bastards	who	thought	their	damned	farts	could	buy	a
crown.	Bakal	was	a	much	better	choice—a	Senan	for	one,	and	the	Barahn	were	no	match	for	her	tribe—to
think	they	could	just	step	into	the	stirrup,	when	they’d	not	even	had	a	hand	in	killing	Onos	Toolan,	why,	it	was
—
A	huge	shape	stepped	out	from	between	two	tarp-covered	dung-piles,	bulled	into	her	hard	enough	to	make
her	stagger.	The	figure	reached	out	to	right	her	even	as	she	hissed	a	curse,	and	then	the	hand	clutched	tighter
and	snatched	her	close.	A	knife-blade	sank	between	her	ribs,	the	point	slicing	her	heart	in	half.
Blinking	in	the	sudden	darkness,	Balamit’s	legs	gave	out	beneath	her,	and	she	fell	to	the	mud.
Her	killer	left	her	there	without	a	backward	glance.
	
Jayviss	finally	rose	from	her	place	close	to	the	fire,	as	the	flames	had	at	last	guttered	out	beneath	the	rain.	Her
bones	ached	terribly	when	the	weather	turned	cold,	and	the	injustice	of	that	galled	her.	She	was	barely	into	her
fifth	 decade,	 after	 all—but	 now	 that	 she	 was	 among	 the	 powerful,	 she	 could	 demand	 a	 ritual	 of	 healing	 to
scour	clean	the	rot	in	her	joints,	and	she	would	have	to	pay	nothing,	nothing	at	all.
Sekara	had	promised.	And	Sekara	knew	the	importance	of	favouring	her	allies.
Life	would	be	good	once	again,	as	it	had	been	in	her	youth.	She	could	take	as	many	men	as	she	wanted.	She
could	take	for	herself	the	finest	furs	to	stay	warm	at	night.	She	might	even	buy	a	D’ras	slave	or	two,	to	work
oils	into	her	skin	and	make	her	supple	once	more.	She’d	heard	they	could	take	away	stretch	marks	and	make
sagging	 breasts	 taut.	 They	 could	 smooth	 the	 wrinkles	 from	 her	 face,	 even	 the	 deep	 bird-track	 between	 her
brows,	where	had	gathered	a	lifetime	of	injustice	and	anger.
Seeing	the	last	of	the	coals	blacken	at	her	feet,	she	turned	away.
Two	warriors	stood	before	her.	Barahn—one	of	them	Kashat,	Maral	Eb’s	brother.	The	other	warrior	she	did
not	recognize.
‘What	do	you	want?’	Jayviss	demanded	in	sudden	fear.
‘Just	this,’	Kashat	said,	and	he	lashed	out.
She	 caught	 the	 gleam	 of	 an	 etched	 blade.	 A	 sting	 against	 her	 throat,	 and	 suddenly	 heat	 poured	 down	 the
front	of	her	chest.
The	ache	in	her	bones	vanished,	and	after	a	time	the	knot	in	her	brow	slowly	relaxed,	making	her	face,	as
the	rain	kissed	it,	almost	young	again.
	
Little	Yedin	crouched	beside	the	body	of	Hega,	staring	at	the	pool	of	blood	that	still	steamed	even	as	raindrops
pounded	 its	 surface.	 The	 nightmare	 would	 not	 end,	 and	 she	 could	 still	 feel	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 iron	 paddle	 she’d
used	to	cauterize	Hetan’s	 feet.	It	pulsed	like	 fever	 up	 her	 arms,	but	could	 not	reach	 the	 sickly	chill	wrapped
about	her	heart.
So	 terrible	 a	 thing,	 and	 Hega	 had	 made	 her	 do	 it,	 because	 Hega	 had	 a	 way	 of	 making	 people	 do	 things,
especially	young	people.	She’d	show	them	the	dangerous	thing	in	her	eyes	and	nothing	more	would	be	needed.
But	 Hetan	 had	 never	 been	 mean,	 had	 never	 been	 anything	 but	 nice,	 gentle,	 always	 ready	 with	 a	 wink.	 And
Stavi	and	Storii,	too.	Always	making	Yedin	laugh,	the	acts	they	put	on,	all	their	crazy	ideas	and	plans.
The	world	ahead	was	suddenly	dark,	unknowable.	And	look	here,	someone	had	gone	and	killed	Hega.	The
dangerous	thing	in	her	eyes	hadn’t	been	enough,	but	then,	what	was?
What	those	men	did	to	Hetan—
A	hand	grabbed	the	back	of	her	collar	and	she	was	lifted	from	the	ground.
A	stranger’s	face	stared	at	her	own.
From	one	side	another	voice	spoke,	‘She	won’t	remember	much	of	this,	Sagal.’
‘One	of	Hega’s	imps.’
‘Even	so—’
Sagal	set	her	down	and	she	tottered	on	wobbly	legs.	He	put	his	huge	hands	against	the	sides	of	her	head.
Their	eyes	met	and	Yedin	saw	a	darkness	come	to	life	there,	a	dangerous	thing—
Sagal	snapped	her	neck,	dropped	the	body	on	to	Hega’s.	‘Find	Befka.	One	more	to	go	this	night.	For	you.’


‘What	of	Sekara	and	Stolmen?’
Sagal	grinned.	‘Kashat	and	me—we’re	saving	the	best	for	last.	Now	go,	Corit.’
The	warrior	nodded.	‘And	then	I	get	my	turn	with	Hetan.’
‘She’s	worth	it,	the	way	she	squirms	in	the	mud.’
	
Once	Strahl	had	left,	Bakal	sat	alone	in	his	yurt.	His	wife	would	not	return	this	night,	he	knew,	and	he	admitted
he	would	be	not	too	upset	if	she	did	not	return	at	all.	Amazing,	that	surprises	could	come	to	a	marriage	after	so
many	 years.	 The	 skein	 of	 rules	 was	 torn	 apart	 this	 night,	 strands	 winging	 on	 the	 black	 wind.	 A	 thousand
possibilities	awakened	in	people’s	souls.	Long-buried	feuds	clawed	up	out	of	the	ground	and	knives	dripped.	A
warrior	could	look	into	a	friend’s	eyes	and	see	a	stranger,	could	look	into	a	mate’s	eyes	and	see	the	flare	of
wicked	desires.
She	wanted	another	man	but	Bakal	was	in	the	way.	That	man	wanted	her	in	turn,	but	his	wife	was	in	the
way.	Bakal’s	wife	had	stood	before	him,	a	half-smile	playing	on	her	face,	a	living	thing	pleased	to	deliver	pain
—if	pain	was	possible,	which	he’d	found,	to	his	own	bemusement,	it	was	not.	The	moment	she’d	realized	that,
her	visage	had	transformed	into	hatred.
When	she	left,	she	was	holding	her	knife.	Between	her	and	her	new	lover,	a	woman	would	die	tonight.
Would	he	stop	them?
He	had	not	yet	decided.	Nothing	raged	inside	him.	Nothing	smouldered	an	instant’s	breath	from	bursting	into
flame.	Even	the	effort	of	thinking	exhausted	him.
‘Blood	runs	down.’	An	ancient	saying	among	the	Barghast.	When	a	ruler	is	murdered,	a	thousand	blades
are	drawn,	and	the	weak	become	savage.	We	are	in	our	night	of	madness.	An	enemy	marches	to	find	us,
and	we	are	locked	in	a	frenzy	of	senseless	slaughter,	killing	our	own.	He	could	hear	faint	screams	cutting
through	the	howling	wind.
The	image	of	his	wife’s	face,	so	ugly	in	its	wants,	rose	before	him.
No,	I	will	not	let	it	be.	He	rose,	cast	about	until	he	found	his	coin-scaled	hauberk.	If	he	was	too	late	to	save
the	woman,	he	would	kill	both	his	wife	and	her	lover.	An	act,	he	decided,	devoid	of	madness.
	
‘Find	him!’	exhorted	Sekara.	‘His	brothers	are	out—killing	our	allies!	Maral	Eb	is	alone—’
‘He	is	not,’	said	Stolmen.	‘On	this	night,	that	would	be	insane.’
She	glared	at	him.	Huge	in	his	armour,	a	heavy	hook-knife	in	one	gauntleted	hand,	a	miserable	look	on	his
stolid	face.	‘Tell	him	you	would	discuss	the	alliance	of	the	Gadra	Clan—just	find	a	reason.	Once	you	cut	his
throat—’
‘His	brothers	will	hunt	me	down	and	kill	me.	Listen,	woman,	you	told	me	you	wanted	Maral	Eb	to	command
the	warriors—’
‘I	did	not	expect	him	to	move	on	us	this	very	night!	Hega	is	dead!	Jayviss	is	nowhere	to	be	found.	Nor	is
Balamit.	Don’t	you	understand	what’s	happening?’
‘It	seems	you	don’t.	If	they’re	all	dead,	then	we	are	next.’
‘He’ll	not	dare	touch	us!	I	have	a	hundred	slayers—I	have	spies	in	every	clan!	No,	he	still	needs	us—’
‘He	won’t	think	that	way	when	I	try	and	kill	him.’
‘Don’t	just	try,	husband.	Do	it	and	be	sure	of	it.	Leave	his	fool	brothers	to	me.’
The	 rain	 was	 hammering	 down	 on	 the	 thick	 hides	 humped	 over	 the	 sapling	 frame	 of	 the	 yurt’s	 ceiling.
Someone	shrieked	nearby.	Stolmen’s	face	was	ashen.
Spirits	below,	he	doesn’t	even	need	the	paint	tonight.	‘Must	I	do	this,	too?	Are	you	worth	anything	 to
me?’
‘Sekara,	I	stand	here	ready	to	give	up	my	life—to	protect	you.	Once	this	night	is	done,	the	madness	will	end.
We	need	only	survive—’
‘I’m	not	interested	in	just	surviving!’
He	 stared	 at	 her,	 as	 if	 seeing	 her	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 Something	 in	 that	 look,	 so	 strange	 on	 his	 face,	 sent	 a
tendril	of	disquiet	through	Sekara.	She	stepped	closer,	set	a	hand	on	his	scaled	chest.	‘I	understand,	husband.
Know	that	I	value	what	you	are	doing.	I	just	don’t	think	it’s	necessary,	that’s	all.	Please,	do	this	for	me.	Find
Maral	Eb—and	if	you	see	that	he	is	surrounded	by	bodyguards,	then	return	here.	We	will	know	that	he	fears


for	his	life—we	will	have	struck	our	first	blow	against	him	without	even	raising	a	hand.’
He	sighed,	turned	to	the	entrance.
The	wind	gusted	round	him	when	he	pushed	aside	the	flap	and	stepped	outside.
Sekara	backed	away	from	the	chill.
A	moment	later	she	heard	a	heavy	thump,	and	then	something	rolled	into	the	tent	wall	before	sliding	to	the
ground.
Heart	in	her	throat,	hands	to	her	mouth,	Sekara	froze.
Sagal	was	the	first	to	enter	the	yurt.	His	brother	Kashat	came	in	behind	him,	a	tulwar	in	one	hand,	the	blade
slick	with	watery	blood.
‘Sekara	the	Vile,’	said	Sagal,	smiling.	‘’Tis	a	cruel	night.’
‘I’m	 glad	 he’s	 dead,’	 she	 replied,	 nodding	 to	 the	 dripping	 blade.	 ‘Useless.	 A	 burden	 upon	 my	 every
ambition.’
‘Ambitions,	yes,’	muttered	Kashat,	looking	round.	‘You’ve	done	yourself	well,	I	see.’
‘I	have	many,	many	friends.’
‘We	know,’	said	Sagal.	‘We’ve	met	with	some	of	them	this	night.’
‘Maral	Eb	needs	me—he	needs	what	I	know.	My	spies,	my	assassins.	As	a	widow,	I	am	no	threat	to	you,
any	of	you.	Your	brother	shall	be	Warleader,	and	I	will	make	certain	he	is	unassailed.’
Sagal	shrugged.	‘We’ll	think	on	it.’
Licking	her	lips,	she	nodded.	‘Tell	Maral	Eb,	I	will	come	to	him	tomorrow.	We	have	much	to	discuss.	There
will	 be	 rivals—what	 of	 Bakal?	 Have	 you	 thought	 of	 him?	 I	 can	 lead	 you	 straight	 to	 his	 yurt,	 let	 me	 get	 my
cloak—’
‘No	 need	 for	 that,’	 Sagal	 said.	 ‘Bakal	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 threat.	 A	 shame,	 the	 slayer	 of	 Onos	 Toolan	 dying	 so
suddenly.’	He	glanced	across	at	Kashat.	‘Choked	on	something,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Something,’	Kashat	replied.
Sekara	said,	‘There	will	be	others—ones	that	I	know	about	that	you	don’t.	Among	the	Senan	and	even	my
own	people.’
‘Yes	yes,	you’ll	sell	them	all,	woman.’
‘I	serve	the	Warleader.’
‘We’ll	see,	won’t	we?’	At	that	Sagal	swung	round,	left	the	yurt.	Kashat	paused	to	clean	her	husband’s	blood
from	 his	 tulwar,	 using	 a	 priceless	 banner	 hanging	 from	 the	 ridge-pole.	 He	 paused	 at	 the	 entrance,	 grinned	 at
her,	and	then	followed	his	brother.
Sekara	staggered	back	a	step,	sank	down	on	to	a	travel	chest.	Shivering	gripped	her,	shook	her,	rattled	her
very	bones.	She	struggled	to	swallow,	but	her	mouth	and	throat	were	too	dry.	She	laced	together	her	hands	on
her	lap,	but	they	slipped	free	of	each	other—she	could	not	take	hold	.	.	.	of	anything.
The	wind	buffeted	the	hide	walls,	cold	air	lancing	in	from	the	entrance	flap,	which	had	not	settled	properly
back	into	place.	She	should	get	up,	fix	that.	Instead,	she	sat,	shaking,	fighting	her	slippery	hands.	‘Stolmen,’	she
whispered.	‘Husband.	You	left	me.	Abandoned	me.	I	almost’—she	gasped—‘I	almost	died!’
She	looked	to	where	he	had	been	standing,	so	big,	so	solid,	and	her	eyes	strayed	to	the	banner	and	its	horrid,
wet	stain.	‘Ruined	it,’	she	said	in	a	mutter.	‘Ruined	it.’	She	used	to	run	it	through	her	hands.	That	silk.	Through
and	through,	like	a	stream	of	wealth	that	never	wetted	her	palms.	But	no	more.	She	would	feel	the	crust	of	his
blood,	the	dust	speckling	her	hands.
‘He	should	have	seen	it	coming.	He	should	have.’
	
______
	
Bakal	had	just	cinched	on	his	weapon	belt	while	sitting	down,	struggling	one-handed	with	the	clasp,	when	the
two	Barahn	warriors	rushed	in.	He	surged	upright.	The	hookblade	hissed	free	of	its	scabbard	and	he	caught
the	heavy	slash	of	a	descending	tulwar.	His	lighter	weapon’s	blade	snapped	clean	just	above	the	hilt.
He	leapt	close	and	drove	the	jagged	stub	into	the	warrior’s	throat.	Blood	poured	on	to	his	hand.
The	other	was	coming	round	the	brazier.
Bakal	 back-stepped	 from	 the	 warrior	 drowning	 in	 his	 own	 blood.	 He	 had	 nothing	 with	 which	 to	 defend
himself.


Wife,	it	seems	you	win—
A	shape	loomed	behind	the	Barahn	who	was	readying	his	tulwar	for	a	decapitating	cut.	Hookblades	licked
both	sides	of	his	throat.	The	brazier	hissed	and	crackled	as	spatters	struck	it.	Reeling,	the	Barahn	stumbled	to
one	side,	fell	over	the	armour	chest,	leaving	one	twitching	foot	visible	from	where	stood	Bakal.
Gasping,	his	arm	in	agony,	he	swung	his	gaze	to	the	newcomer.
‘Cafal.’
‘I	dreamed	it,’	the	priest	said,	face	twisting.	‘Your	hand,	your	knife—into	his	heart—’
‘Did	you	dream	as	well,	Cafal,	who	delivered	that	blow?’
The	burly	warrior	sagged,	stepped	clumsily	away	from	the	entrance,	his	eyes	dropping	to	the	weapons	in	his
hands.	‘I’ve	come	for	her.’
‘Not	tonight.’
The	hookblades	snapped	back	into	fighting	position	and	Cafal	made	to	advance	on	him,	but	Bakal	raised	his
hand.
‘I	 will	 help	 you,	 but	 not	 tonight—she	 fell	 unconscious—two	 dozen	 men,	 maybe	 more,	 had	 used	 her.	 Any
more	 and	 she	 would	 die	 and	 they	 won’t	 let	 that	 happen.	 The	 women	 have	 her,	 Cafal.	 They	 will	 tend	 to	 her,
cackling	 like	 starlings—you	 know	 of	 what	 I	 speak.	 Until	 her	 flesh	 is	 healed—you	 cannot	 get	 into	 that	 hut.
Those	women	will	tear	you	to	pieces.	My—my	wife	went	there	first,	before	her	other	.	.	.	tasks.	To	see,	to	join
in—she,	she	laughed	at	me.	At	my	horror.	Cafal,	she	laughed.’
The	 priest’s	 visage	 was	 furrowed	 in	 cuts—he	 had	 been	 clawing	 at	 his	 own	 face,	 Bakal	 realized.	 ‘Your
dreams,’	he	whispered,	eyes	widening.	‘You	saw.’
‘I	saw.’
‘Cafal	.	.	.’
‘But	 it’s	 not	 over.	 They	 don’t	 know	 that—none	 of	 them	 know	 that.	 Our	 gods	 are	 howling.	 In	 terror.’	 He
fixed	wild	eyes	on	Bakal.	‘Did	they	think	they	could	get	away	with	that?	Did	they	forget	what	he	was?	Where
he	came	from?	He	will	take	them	into	his	hands	and	he	will	crush	them!’	He	bared	his	teeth.	‘And	I	will	stand
back—do	you	hear	me?	I	will	stand	back,	Bakal,	and	do	nothing.’
‘Your	sister—’
He	started,	as	if	Bakal	had	slapped	him.	‘Yes.	I	will	wait—’
‘You	can’t	hide	here,	Cafal.	More	of	Maral	Eb’s	assassins	will	come	for	me—’
‘This	 night	 is	 almost	 spent,’	 the	 priest	 said.	 ‘The	 madness	 is	 already	 blowing	 itself	 out.	 Find	 your	 allies,
Bakal,	gather	them	close.’
‘Come	back	in	three	days,’	Bakal	said.	‘I	will	help	you.	We’ll	get	her	out—away.	But	.	.	.	Cafal,	you	must
know—’
The	man	flinched.	‘It	will	be	too	late,’	he	said	in	a	wretched	tone.	‘Yes,	I	know.	I	know.’
‘Go	with	the	last	of	the	night,’	Bakal	said.	He	went	to	find	one	of	his	older	weapons,	and	then	paused,	stared
down	at	the	two	corpses	crumpled	on	the	floor.	‘I	must	do	something	now.	One	last	thing.’	He	lifted	bleak	eyes
to	the	priest.	‘It	seems	the	madness	is	not	quite	blown	out.’
	
The	 rider	 emerged	 from	 the	 night	 with	 a	 child	 before	 him	 on	 the	 saddle.	 Two	 young	 girls	 flanked	 the	 horse,
staggering	with	exhaustion.
As	the	storm’s	ragged	tail	scudded	south,	taking	the	rain	with	it,	Setoc	watched	the	strangers	approach.	The
man,	she	knew,	was	a	revenant,	an	undead	soldier	of	the	Reaper.	But,	seated	as	she	was	in	the	centre	of	this
ring	of	stones,	she	knew	she	had	nothing	to	fear.	This	ancient	power	defied	the	hunger	for	blood—it	was,	she
knew	now,	made	for	that	very	purpose.	Against	Elder	Gods	and	their	ceaseless	thirst,	it	was	a	sanctuary,	and
was	and	would	ever	remain	so.
He	drew	rein	just	outside	the	ring,	as	she	knew	he	must.
Setoc	rose	to	her	feet,	eyeing	the	girls.	Dressed	as	Barghast,	but	neither	was	purely	of	that	blood.	Twins.
Eyes	dull	with	fading	shock,	and	a	kind	of	fearless	calm	rising	in	its	place.	The	small	boy,	she	saw,	was	smiling
at	her.
The	revenant	lifted	the	child	with	one	hand,	to	which	the	boy	clung	like	a	Bolkando	ape,	and	carefully	set
him	down	on	the	ground.
‘Take	 them,’	 the	 revenant	 said	 to	 Setoc,	 and	 the	 undead	 eyes	 he	 fixed	 upon	 her	 blazed—one	 human	 and


wrinkled	in	death,	the	other	bright	and	amber—the	eye	of	a	wolf.
Setoc	gasped.	‘You	are	not	the	Reaper’s	servant!’
‘It’s	my	flaw,’	he	replied.
‘What	is?’
‘Cursed	by	.	.	.	indecision.	Take	them,	camp	within	the	circle.	Wait.’
‘For	what?’
The	 rider	 collected	 the	 reins	 and	 drew	 the	 beast	 round.	 ‘For	 his	 war	 to	 end,	 Destriant.’	 He	 hesitated,	 and
then	said,	‘We	leave	when	I	return.’
She	watched	him	ride	away,	westward,	as	if	fleeing	the	rising	sun.	The	two	girls	closed	on	the	boy	and	each
took	one	of	his	hands.	They	edged	warily	closer.
Setoc	sighed.	‘You	are	Hetan’s	get?’
Nods.
‘I	am	a	friend	of	your	uncle.	Cafal.	No,’	she	added	wearily,	‘I	do	not	know	where	he	has	gone.	Perhaps,’
she	added,	thinking	of	the	revenant’s	last	words,	‘he	will	return.	For	now,	come	closer,	I	will	make	a	fire.	You
can	eat,	and	then	rest.’
Once	inside	the	circle,	the	boy	pulled	loose	from	his	sisters’	hands	and	walked	to	the	southwestern	edge	of
the	 ring,	 where	 he	 stared	 at	 seemingly	 nothing	 on	 the	 dark	 horizon,	 and	 then	 he	 began	 a	 strange,	 rhythmic
babbling.	Almost	a	song.
At	the	 sound,	 Setoc	 shivered.	 When	 she	 turned	 to	 the	 twins,	 she	 saw	 that	 they	 had	 found	 her	 bedroll	 and
were	now	wrapped	together	in	its	folds.	Fast	asleep.
Must	have	been	a	long	walk.
	
The	carrion	eaters	had	picked	away	the	last	strip	of	meat.	Jackals	had	chewed	on	the	bones	but	found	even
their	powerful	jaws	could	not	crush	them	sufficiently	to	swallow	the	splinters	down,	nor	could	they	grind	the
ends	as	was	their	habit.	In	the	end,	they	left	the	fragments	scattered	in	the	trampled	grasses.	Besides,	there
was	more	to	be	found,	not	only	in	this	place,	but	in	numerous	others	across	the	plain.	It	was	proving	a	season
for	fly-swarmed	muzzles	and	full	bellies.
After	a	few	days	all	the	scavengers	had	left,	abandoning	the	scene	to	the	sun,	wind	and	stars.	The	blades	of
grasses	prickled	free	of	dried-up	blood,	the	roots	thickened	on	enriched	soil,	and	insects	crawled	like	the	teeth
of	the	earth,	devouring	all	they	could.
On	a	night	with	a	storm	raging	to	the	east	and	south,	a	night	when	foreign	gods	howled	and	ghost	wolves
raced	like	a	tidal	flood	across	an	unseen	landscape,	when	the	campfires	of	armies	whipped	and	stuttered,	and
the	 jackals	 ran	 first	 one	 way	 and	 then	 another,	 as	 the	 stench	 of	 spilled	 blood	 brushed	 them	 on	 all	 sides,	 the
buried	valley	with	its	sprawl	of	boulders	and	bones	and	its	ash	heap	of	burnt	remains	began	to	move,	here	and
there.	Fragments	drawing	together.	Forming	into	ribs,	phalanges,	leg	bones,	vertebrae—as	if	imbued	with	iron
seeking	a	lodestone,	they	slid	and	rolled	in	fits	and	starts.
The	wind	that	had	begun	in	the	southeast	now	rushed	over	the	land,	a	gale	like	a	hundred	thousand	voices
rising,	 ever	 rising.	 Grasses	 whipped	 into	 frenzied	 motion.	 Dust	 swirled	 up	 and	 round	 and	 spun,	 filling	 the	 air
with	grit.
In	the	still	cloudless	sky	overhead,	the	Slashes	seemed	to	pulse	and	waver,	as	if	seen	through	waves	of	heat.
Bones	clattered	together.	From	beneath	the	mass	of	boulders	and	crumpled	armour	in	the	valley,	pieces	of
rotting	 flesh	 pulled	 free,	 tendons	 writhing	 like	 serpents,	 ligaments	 wriggling	 like	 worms,	 climbing	 free	 and
crawling	closer	to	the	heap	of	bones—which	were	edging	into	a	pattern,	re-forming	a	recognizable	shape—a
skeleton,	loosely	assembled,	but	the	bones	were	neither	Akrynnai	nor	Barghast.	These	were	thicker,	with	high
ridges	 where	 heavy	 muscles	 once	 gripped	 tight.	 The	 skull	 that	 had	 been	 crushed	 was	 now	 complete	 once
more,	battered	and	scorched.	It	sat	motionless,	upper	teeth	on	the	ground,	until	the	mandible	clicked	up	against
it,	and	then	pushed	beneath	it,	tilting	the	skull	back,	until	the	jaw’s	hinges	slipped	into	their	joints.
Flesh	 and	 desiccated	 skin,	 random	 clumps	 of	 filthy	 hair.	 Ligaments	 gripped	 long	 bones,	 ends	 fusing	 to	 join
them	into	limbs.	Twisted	coils	of	muscle	found	tendons	and	were	pulled	flat	as	the	tendons	grew	taut.	An	arm
was	knitted	together,	scores	of	finger	bones	clumping	at	the	end	of	the	wrist.
Rotting	 meat	 bound	 the	 vertebrae	 into	 a	 serpentine	 curl.	 Ribs	 sank	 into	 indentations	 on	 the	 sides	 of	 the
sternum	and	lifted	it	clear	of	the	ground.


When	the	Slashes	were	gouging	the	horizon	to	the	southeast,	and	the	wind	was	dying	in	fitful	gusts,	a	body
lay	on	the	grasses.	Fragments	of	skin	joined	to	enclose	it,	each	seam	knitting	like	a	scar.	Strands	of	hair	found
root	on	the	pate	of	the	skull.
As	the	wind	fell	away,	there	was	the	distant	sound	of	singing.	An	old	woman’s	rough,	enfeebled	voice,	and
in	the	music	of	that	song	there	were	fists	closed	into	tight	knots,	there	was	muscle	building	to	terrible	violence,
and	 faces	 immune	 to	 the	 sun’s	 heat	 and	 life’s	 pity.	 The	 voice	 ensorcelled,	 drawing	 power	 from	 the	 land’s
deepest	memories.
Dawn	crept	to	the	horizon,	bled	colour	into	the	sky.
And	 a	 T’lan	 Imass	 rose	 from	 the	 ground.	 Walked,	 with	 slow,	 unsteady	 strides,	 to	 the	 fire-annealed	 flint
sword	left	lying	close	to	the	Barghast	pyre.	A	withered	but	oversized	hand	reached	down	and	closed	about	the
grip,	lifting	the	weapon	clear.
Onos	T’oolan	faced	southeast.	And	then	set	out.
He	had	a	people	to	kill.


Chapter	Sixteen
	
Sower	of	words	out	from	the	hungry	shade
The	seeds	in	your	wake	drink	the	sun
And	the	roots	burst	from	their	shells—
This	is	a	wilderness	of	your	own	making,
Green	chaos	too	real	to	countenance
Your	words	unravel	the	paths	and	blind	the	trail
With	crowding	boles	and	the	future	is	lost
To	the	world	of	possibilities	you	so	nurtured
In	that	hungry	shade—sower	of	words
Heed	the	truth	they	will	make,	for	all	they
Need	is	a	rain	of	tears	and	the	light	of	day
	
THE	EASE	OF	S HADOWS	(SIMPLE	WORDS)
BEVELA	DELIK
	
	
Desecration’s	gift	was	silence.	The	once-blessed	boulder,	massive	as	a	wagon,	was	shattered.	Nearby	was	a
sinkhole	at	the	base	of	which	a	spring	struggled	to	feed	a	small	pool	of	black	water.	The	bones	of	gazelle	and
rodents	studded	the	grasses	and	the	stones	of	the	old	stream	bed	that	stretched	down	from	the	sinkhole’s	edge,
testament	to	the	water’s	poison.
This	silence	was	crowded	with	truths,	most	of	them	so	horrid	in	nature	as	to	leave	Sechul	Lath	trembling.
Shoulders	hunched,	arms	wrapped	about	his	torso,	he	stared	at	the	rising	sun.	Kilmandaros	was	picking	through
the	 broken	 rock,	 as	 if	 pleased	 to	 examine	 her	 own	 handiwork	 of	 millennia	 past.	 Errastas	 had	 collected	 a
handful	 of	 pebbles	 and	 was	 tossing	 them	 into	 the	 pool	 one	 by	 one—each	 stone	 vanished	 without	 a	 sound,
leaving	no	ripples.	These	details	seemed	to	amuse	the	Errant,	if	the	half-smile	on	his	face	was	any	indication.
Sechul	Lath	knew	enough	to	not	trust	appearances	when	it	came	to	an	Elder	God	infamous	for	misdirection.
He	 might	 be	 contemplating	 his	 satisfaction	 at	 the	 undeniable	 imperative	 of	 his	 summons,	 or	 he	 might	 be
anticipating	crushing	the	throat	of	an	upstart	god.	Or	someone	less	deserving.	He	was	the	Errant,	after	all.	His
temple	was	betrayal,	his	altar	mocking	mischance,	and	in	that	temple	and	upon	that	altar	he	sacrificed	mortal
souls,	motivated	solely	by	whim.	And,	perhaps,	boredom.	It	was	the	luxury	of	his	power	that	he	so	cherished,
that	he	so	wanted	back.
But	it’s	done.	Can’t	you	see	that?	Our	time	is	over	with.	We	cannot	play	that	game	again.	The	children
have	 inherited	 this	 world,	 and	 all	 the	 others	 we	 once	 terrorized.	 We	 squandered	 all	 we	 had—we
believed	in	our	own	omnipotence.	This	world—Errastas,	you	cannot	get	back	what	no	longer	exists.
‘I	 will	 have	 my	 throne,’	 you	 said.	 And	 the	 thousand	 faces	 laying	 claim	 to	 it,	 each	 one	 momentarily
bright	and	then	fading,	they	all	just	blur	together.	Entire	lives	lost	in	an	instant’s	blink.	If	you	win,	you
will	have	your	throne,	Errastas,	and	you	will	stand	behind	it,	as	you	once	did,	and	your	presence	will
give	 the	 lie	 to	 mortal	 ambitions	 and	 dreams,	 to	 every	 aspiration	 of	 just	 rule,	 of	 equity.	 Of	 peace	 and
prosperity.
You	will	turn	it	all	into	dust—every	dream,	nothing	but	dust,	sifting	down	through	their	hands.
But,	 Elder	 God,	 these	 humans—they	 have	 left	 you	 behind.	 They	 don’t	 need	 you	 to	 turn	 to	 dust	 all
their	dreams.	They	don’t	need	anyone	else	to	do	that.	‘This,’	he	said,	facing	Errastas,	‘is	what	we	should
intend.’
The	Errant’s	brows	rose,	his	solitary	eye	bright.	‘What,	pray	tell?’


‘To	stand	before	our	children—the	young	gods—and	tell	them	the	truth.’
‘Which	is?’
‘Everything	they	claim	as	their	own	can	be	found	in	the	mortal	soul.	Those	gods,	Errastas,	are	not	needed.
Like	us,	they	have	no	purpose.	None	at	all.	Like	us,	they	are	a	waste	of	space.	Irrelevant.’
The	 Errant’s	 hands	 twitched.	 He	 flung	 away	 the	 pebbles.	 ‘Is	 misery	 all	 we	 get	 from	 you,	 Knuckles?	 We
have	not	yet	launched	our	war	and	you’ve	already	surrendered.’
‘I	have,’	agreed	Sechul	Lath,	‘but	that	is	a	notion	you	do	not	fully	understand.	There	is	more	than	one	kind
of	surrender—’
‘Indeed,’	snapped	the	Errant,	‘yet	the	face	of	each	one	is	the	same—a	coward’s	face!’
Knuckles	eyed	him,	amused.
Errastas	made	a	fist.	‘What,’	he	said	in	a	low	rasp,	‘is	so	funny?’
‘The	one	who	surrenders	to	his	own	delusions	is,	by	your	terms,	no	less	a	coward	than	any	other.’
Kilmandaros	straightened.	She	had	taken	upon	herself	the	body	of	a	Tel	Akai,	still	towering	above	them	but
not	 quite	 as	 massively	 as	 before.	 She	 smiled	 without	 humour	 at	 the	 Errant.	 ‘Play	 no	 games	 with	 this	 one,
Errastas.	Not	bones,	not	words.	He	will	tie	your	brain	in	knots	and	make	your	head	ache.’
Errastas	glared	at	her.	‘Do	you	think	me	a	simpleton?’
The	smile	vanished.	‘Clearly,	you	think	that	of	me.’
‘When	you	think	with	your	fists,	don’t	complain	when	you	appear	to	others	as	witless.’
‘But	I	complain	with	my	fists	as	well,’	she	replied.	‘And	when	I	do,	even	you	have	no	choice	but	to	listen,
Errastas.	Now,	best	be	careful,	for	I	feel	in	the	mood	for	complaining.	We	have	stood	here	all	night,	whilst	the
ether	beyond	this	place	has	stirred	something	to	life—my	nerves	are	on	fire,	even	here,	where	all	lies	in	lifeless
ruin.	You	say	you	have	summoned	the	others.	Where	are	they?’
‘Coming,’	the	Errant	replied.
‘How	many?’
‘Enough.’
Knuckles	started.	‘Who	defies	you?’
‘It	is	not	defiance!	Rather—must	I	explain	myself?’
‘It	might	help,’	said	Sechul	Lath.
‘I	am	not	defied	by	choice.	Draconus—within	Dragnipur	it’s	not	likely	he	hears	anything.	Grizzin	Farl	is,	I
think,	 dead.	 His	 corporeal	 flesh	 is	 no	 more.’	 He	 hesitated,	 and	 then	 added	 with	 a	 scowl,	 ‘Ardata	 alone	 has
managed	to	evade	me,	but	she	was	never	of	much	use	anyway,	was	she?’
‘Then	where—’
‘I	see	 one,’	 Kilmandaros	 said,	 pointing	 to	 the	 north.	 ‘Taste	 of	 the	 blood,	 she	 was	 wise	 to	 take	 that	 shape!
But	oh,	I	can	smell	the	stench	of	Eleint	upon	her!’
‘Restrain	yourself,’	Errastas	said.	‘She’s	been	dead	too	long	for	you	to	smell	anything.’
‘I	said—’
‘You	imagine,	nothing	more.	Tiam’s	daughter	did	not	outlive	her	mother—this	thing	has	embraced	the	Ritual
of	Tellann—she	is	less	than	she	once	was.’
‘Less,’	said	Knuckles,	‘and	more,	I	think.’
Errastas	snorted,	unaware	of	Sechul	Lath’s	deliberate	mockery.
Kilmandaros	 was	 visibly	 shaking	 with	 her	 fury.	 ‘It	 was	 her,’	 she	 hissed.	 ‘Last	 night.	 That	 singing—she
awakened	the	ancient	power!	Olar	Ethil!’
Sechul	Lath	could	see	sudden	worry	on	the	Errant’s	face.	Already,	things	were	spiralling	out	of	his	control.
A	voice	spoke	behind	them.	‘I	too	felt	as	much.’
They	turned	to	see	Mael	standing	beside	the	sinkhole.	He	had	an	old	man’s	body	and	an	old	man’s	face	and
the	watery	eyes	he	fixed	on	the	Errant	were	cold.	‘This	is	already	unravelling,	Errant.	War	is	like	that—all	the
players	lose	control.	“Chaos	takes	the	sword.’	”
Errastas	 snorted	 a	 second	 time.	 ‘Quoting	 Anomander	 Rake?	 Really,	 Mael.	 Besides	 he	 spoke	 that	 in
prophecy.	The	other	resonances	came	later.’
‘Yes,’	muttered	Mael,	‘about	that	prophecy	.	.	.’
Sechul	 Lath	 waited	 for	 him	 to	 continue	 but	 Mael	 fell	 silent,	 squinting	 now	 at	 Olar	 Ethil.	 She	 had	 long	 ago
chosen	 the	 body	 of	 an	 Imass	 woman,	 wide-hipped,	 heavy-breasted.	 When	 Knuckles	 had	 last	 seen	 her,	 he


recalled,	 she	 was	 still	 mortal.	 He	 remembered	 the	 strange	 headgear	 she	 had	 worn,	 for	 all	 the	 world	 like	 a
woven	corded	basket.	With	no	holes	for	her	eyes,	or	her	mouth.	Matron	of	all	the	bonecasters,	mother	to	an
entire	race.	But	even	mothers	have	secrets.
She	no	longer	wore	the	mask.	Nor	much	in	the	way	of	flesh.	Desiccated,	little	more	than	sinews	and	bone.
A	T’lan	Imass.	Snakeskin	webbing	hung	from	her	shoulders,	to	which	various	mysterious	objects	had	been	tied
—holed	 pebbles,	 nuggets	 of	 uncut	 gems,	 bone	 tubes	 that	 might	 be	 whistles	 or	 curse-traps,	 soul-catchers	 of
hollowed	antler,	a	knotted	bundle	of	tiny	dead	birds.	A	roughly	made	obsidian	knife	was	tucked	in	her	cord	belt.
Her	smile	was	an	inadvertent	thing,	the	teeth	oversized	and	stained	deep	amber.	Nothing	glittered	from	the
sockets	of	her	eyes.
‘How	 did	 it	 go	 again?’	 Sechul	 asked	 her.	 ‘Your	 mother’s	 lover	 and	 child	 both?	 Just	 how	 did	 you	 beget
yourself,	Olar	Ethil?’
‘Eleint!’	growled	Kilmandaros.
Olar	Ethil	spoke:	‘I	have	travelled	in	the	realm	of	birth-fires.	I	have	sailed	the	dead	sky	of	Kallor’s	Curse.	I
have	seen	all	I	needed	to	see.’	Her	neck	creaked	and	made	grinding	noises	as	she	turned	her	head	until	she
faced	 the	 Errant.	 ‘You	 were	 nowhere	 to	 be	 found.	 You	 hid	 behind	 your	 pathetic	 throne,	 ever	 proving	 the
illusion	of	power—the	world	has	long	ago	grasped	your	message,	though	by	nature	it	will	not	ever	heed	it.	You,
Errastas,	are	wasting	your	time.’
Sechul	Lath	was	startled	that	her	words	so	closely	matched	his	own	thoughts.	Save	it,	Olar	Ethil.	He	does
not	listen.
She	then	turned	to	Mael.	‘Your	daughters	run	wild.’
The	 old	 man	 shrugged.	 ‘Daughters	 will	 do	 that.	 Rather,	 they	 should	 do	 that.	 I	 would	 be	 disappointed
otherwise.	 It’s	 a	 poor	 father	 who	 does	 not	 nudge	 and	 then	 cut	 loose—as	 I	 am	 sure	 the	 Errant	 will	 eagerly
chime,	once	he	gathers	what	wits	he	has	left.	When	that	witch	stole	your	eye,	what	else	spilled	out?’
Olar	Ethil	cackled.
Errastas	straightened.	‘I	have	summoned	you.	You	could	not	deny	me,	not	one	of	you!’
‘Saved	 me	 hunting	 you	 down,’	 said	 Mael.	 ‘You	 have	 much	 to	 answer	 for,	 Errant.	 Your	 eagerness	 to	 ruin
mortal	lives—’
‘It	is	what	I	do!	What	I	have	always	done—and	you	should	talk,	Mael!	How	many	millions	of	souls	have
you	drowned?	Hundreds	of	millions,	all	to	feed	your	power.	No,	old	man,	do	not	dare	chide	me.’
‘What	do	you	want?’	Mael	asked.	‘You	don’t	really	think	we	can	win	this	war,	do	you?’
‘You	have	not	been	paying	attention,’	Errastas	replied.	‘The	gods	are	gathering.	Against	the	Fallen	One—
they	don’t	want	to	share	this	world—’
‘Nor,	it	seems,	do	you.’
‘We	never	denied	any	ascendant	a	place	in	our	pantheon,	Mael.’
‘Really?’
The	Errant	bared	his	teeth.	‘Was	there	ever	the	risk	of	running	out	of	mortal	blood?	Our	children	betrayed
us,	 by	 turning	 away	 from	 that	 source	 of	 power,	 by	 accepting	 what	 K’rul	 offered	 them.	 And	 in	 turn,	 they
denied	us	our	rightful	place.’
‘So	where	is	he,	then?’	Sechul	asked.	‘Brother	K’rul?	And	the	Sister	of	Cold	Nights?	What	of	the	Wolves,
who	ruled	this	realm	before	humans	even	arrived?	Errastas,	did	you	reach	some	private	decision	to	not	invite
them?’
‘K’rul	 deserves	 the	 fate	 awaiting	 the	 gods—his	 was	 the	 cruellest	 betrayal	 of	 all.’	 The	 Errant	 gestured
dismissively,	 ‘One	 could	 never	 reason	 with	 the	 Wolves—I	 have	 long	 given	 up	 trying.	 Leave	 them	 the	 Beast
Throne,	it’s	where	they	belong.’
‘And,’	Mael	added	dryly,	‘ambition	does	not	beset	them.	Lucky	for	you.’
‘For	us.’
At	the	Errant’s	correction,	Mael	simply	shrugged.
Olar	Ethil	cackled	again,	and	then	said,	‘None	of	you	understand	anything.	Too	long	hiding	from	the	world.
Things	 are	 coming	 back.	 Rising.	 The	 stupid	 humans	 have	 not	 even	 noticed.’	 She	 paused,	 now	 that	 she	 had
everyone’s	 attention,	 and	 something	 like	 breath	 rattled	 from	 her.	 ‘Kallor	 understood—he	 saw	 Silverfox	 for
what	 she	 was.	 Is.	 Do	 any	 of	 you	 really	 think	 the	 time	 of	 the	 T’lan	 Imass	 is	 over?	 And	 though	 she	 made	 a
youthful	error	in	releasing	the	First	Sword,	I	have	forgiven	her.	Indeed,	I	have	seen	to	his	return.


‘And	what	of	the	Jaghut?	Popping	up	like	poison	mushrooms!	So	comforting	to	believe	they	are	incapable	of
working	 together—but	 then,	 lies	 can	 prove	 very	 comforting.	 What	 if	 I	 told	 you	 that	 in	 the	 Wastelands	 but	 a
handful	 of	 days	 ago,	 fourteen	 undead	 Jaghut	 annihilated	 a	 hundred	 Nah’ruk?	 What	 if	 I	 told	 you	 that	 five
thousand	humans	carrying	the	blood	of	the	Tiste	Andii	have	walked	the	Road	of	Gallan?	That	one	with	Royal
Andiian	blood	has	ridden	through	the	gates	of	dead	Kharkanas?	And	the	Road	of	Gallan?	Why,	upon	that	path
of	blood	hunt	the	Tiste	Liosan.	And,’	her	head	 creaked	as	she	regarded	Kilmandaros,	‘something	far	worse.
No,	you	are	all	blind.	The	Crippled	God?	He	is	nothing.	Among	the	gods,	his	allies	break	and	scatter.	Among
the	mortals,	corruption	devours	his	cult,	and	his	followers	are	the	wasted	and	the	lost—Kaminsod	has	no	army
to	summon	to	his	defence.	His	body	lies	in	pieces	scattered	across	seven	continents.	He	is	as	good	as	dead.’
She	 jabbed	 a	 bony	 finger	 at	 the	 Errant.	 ‘Even	 the	 Deck	 of	 Dragons	 has	 a	 new	 Master,	 and	 I	 tell	 you	 this,
Errastas.	You	cannot	stand	against	him.	You’re	not	enough.’
The	wind	moaned	in	the	wake	of	her	words.
None	spoke.	Even	Errastas	stood	as	one	stunned.
Bones	 clattering,	 Olar	 Ethil	 walked	 to	 the	 shattered	 boulder.	 ‘Kilmandaros,’	 she	 said,	 ‘you	 are	 a	 cow.	 A
miserable,	 brainless	 cow.	 The	 Imass	 made	 this	 sanctuary	 in	 an	 act	 of	 love,	 as	 a	 place	 where	 not	 one	 of	 us
could	reach	in	to	poison	their	souls.’
Kilmandaros	clenched	her	fists,	staring	blankly	at	the	old	woman.	‘I	don’t	care,’	she	said.
‘I	can	destroy	the	young	gods,’	Errastas	suddenly	said.	‘Every	one	of	them.’
‘And	 have	 you	 told	 Kilmandaros	 about	 your	 secret	 killer?’	 Olar	 Ethil	 inquired.	 ‘Oh	 yes,	 I	 knew	 you	 were
there.	I	understand	what	you’ve	done.	What	you	intend.’
Sechul	 Lath	 frowned.	 He’d	 lost	 this	 trail.	 Too	 soon	 after	 Olar	 Ethil’s	 speech,	 from	 which	 he	 still	 reeled.
Secret	killer?
‘Tell	her,’	Olar	Ethil	went	on,	‘of	the	Eleint.’
‘When	the	slayer	has	been	unleashed,	when	it	has	done	what	it	must,’	Errastas	smiled,	‘then	Kilmandaros
shall	receive	a	gift.’
‘She	slays	the	slayer.’
‘So	 that,	 when	 all	 is	 done,	 we	 alone	 are	 left	 standing.	 Olar	 Ethil,	 all	 those	 things	 you	 spoke	 of,	 they	 are
irrelevant.	The	Jaghut	are	too	few,	living	or	undead,	to	pose	any	sort	of	threat.	The	dust	of	the	T’lan	Imass	has
crossed	the	ocean	and	even	now	closes	upon	the	shores	of	Assail,	and	we	all	know	what	awaits	them	there.
And	Kharkanas	is	dead,	as	you	say.	What	matter	that	one	of	Royal	Andiian	blood	has	returned	to	it?	Mother
Dark	 is	 turned	 away	 from	 her	 children.	 As	 for	 the	 Tiste	 Liosan,	 they	 are	 leaderless	 and	 do	 any	 of	 us	 here
actually	think	Osserc	will	go	back	to	them?’
Sechul	Lath	hugged	himself	tighter.	He	would	not	look	at	Kilmandaros.	Neither	Olar	Ethil	nor	Errastas	had
spoken	 of	 the	 Forkrul	 Assail.	 Were	 they	 ignorant?	 Was	 the	 knowledge	 that	 Sechul	 held	 within	 him—that
Kilmandaros	 possessed,	 as	 well—truly	 a	 secret?	 Olar	 Ethil,	 we	 cannot	 trust	 you.	 Errastas	 should	 never
have	invited	you	here.	You	are	worse	than	K’rul.	More	of	a	threat	to	us	than	Draconus,	or	Edgewalker.
You	are	Eleint	and	you	are	T’lan	Imass,	and	both	were	ever	beyond	our	control.
‘The	Master	of	the	Deck,’	said	Mael,	‘has	an	ally.	One	that	even	you,	Olar	Ethil,	seem	unaware	of,	and	she
is	 more	 of	 a	 wild	 knuckle	 than	 anything	 Sechul	 Lath	 was	 ever	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 casting.’	 His	 cold	 eyes	 settled
upon	the	Errant.	‘You	would	devour	our	children,	but	even	that	desire	proves	that	you	have	lost	touch,	that	you
—we,	all	of	us	here—are	nothing	more	than	the	spent	forces	of	history.	Errant,	our	children	have	grown	up.
Do	you	understand	the	significance	of	that?’
‘What	stupidity	are	you—’
‘Old	enough,’	cut	in	Sechul	Lath,	all	at	once	comprehending,	‘to	have	children	of	their	own.’	Abyss	below!
Errastas	blinked,	and	then	gathered	himself,	waving	a	hand	in	dismissal.	‘Easily	crushed	once	we	have	dealt
with	their	parents,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Crushed.	As	we	were?’
Errastas	glared	at	Mael.
Sechul	Lath	barked	a	wry	laugh.	‘I	see	your	point,	Mael.	Our	killing	the	gods	could	simply	clear	the	way	for
their	children.’
‘This	is	ridiculous,’	said	Errastas.	‘I	have	sensed	nothing	of	.	.	.	grandchildren.	Nothing	at	all.’
‘Hood	summons	the	dead,’	Olar	Ethil	said,	as	if	Mael’s	words	had	launched	her	down	a	track	only	she	could


see.	 ‘The	 fourteen	 undead	 Jaghut—they	 did	 not	 belong	 to	 him.	 He	 has	 no	 control	 over	 them.	 They	 were
summoned	 by	 an	 ascendant	 who	 had	 been	 mortal	 only	 a	 few	 years	 ago.’	 She	 faced	 Mael.	 ‘I	 have	 seen	 the
dead.	They	march,	not	as	some	mindless	mob,	but	as	would	an	army.	It	is	as	if	the	world	on	the	lifeless	side	of
Hood’s	Gates	has	changed.’
Mael	nodded.	‘Prompting	the	question,	what	is	Hood	up	to?	He	was	once	a	Jaghut.	Since	when	do	Jaghut
delegate?	Olar	Ethil,	who	was	this	recent	ascendant?’
‘Twice	 brought	 into	 the	 world	 of	 worship.	 Once,	 by	 a	 tribal	 people,	 and	 named	 Iskar	 Jarak.	 A	 bringer	 of
wisdom,	a	saviour.	And	the	other	time,	as	the	commander	of	a	company	of	soldiers—promised	to	ascension	by
a	song	woven	by	a	Tanno	Spiritwalker.	Yes,	the	entire	company	ascended	upon	death.’
‘Soldiers?’	Errastas	was	frowning.	‘Ascended?’	Confused.	Frightened	by	the	notion.
‘And	what	name	did	he	possess	among	these	ascended	soldiers?’	Mael	asked.
‘Whiskeyjack.	He	was	a	Malazan.’
‘A	 Malazan.’	 Mael	 nodded.	 ‘So	 too	 is	 the	 Master	 of	 the	 Deck.	 And	 so	 too	 is	 the	 Master’s	 unpredictable,
unknowable	ally—the	Adjunct	Tavore,	who	leads	a	Malazan	army	east,	across	the	Wastelands.	Leads	them,’
he	turned	to	Sechul	Lath,	‘into	Kolanse.’
The	bastard	knows!	He	understands	the	game	we’re	playing!	It	was	a	struggle	not	to	betray	everything
with	a	glance	to	Kilmandaros.	Seeing	the	quiet	knowledge	in	Mael’s	eyes	chilled	him.
Olar	Ethil	bestowed	on	them	a	third	cackle,	a	gift	no	one	welcomed.
Errastas	was	no	fool.	Suspicion	glittered	from	his	eye	as	he	studied	Sechul	Lath.	‘Well	now,’	he	said	in	a	low
tone,	‘all	those	nights	tossing	the	bones	for	Kilmandaros	here	.	.	.	I	suppose	you	found	plenty	of	things	to	talk
about,	 killing	 time	 as	 it	 were.	 Some	 plans,	 perhaps,	 Setch?	 Foolish	 of	 me,	 I	 see	 now,	 to	 imagine	 you	 were
content	with	simply	wasting	away,	leaving	it	all	behind.	It	seems,’	and	the	smile	he	gave	was	dangerous,	‘you
played	me.	Using	all	of	your	most	impressive	talents.’
‘This	meeting,’	drawled	Mael,	‘was	premature.	Errant,	consider	yourself	banished	from	Letheras.	If	I	sense
your	return,	I	will	hunt	you	down	and	drown	you	as	easily	as	you	did	Feather	Witch.’
He	walked	to	the	spring,	descended	into	the	sinkhole	and	vanished	from	sight.
Olar	Ethil	pointed	a	 finger	at	Kilmandaros,	waggled	it	 warningly,	and	then	 set	 off,	northward.	 A	 miserable
collection	of	skin	and	bones.	The	three	remaining	Elder	Gods	watched	her	walk	away.	When	the	T’lan	Imass
was	perhaps	fifty	paces	distant,	she	veered	into	her	draconic	form,	dust	billowing,	and	then	lifted	skyward.
A	low	growl	came	from	Kilmandaros.
Sechul	Lath	rubbed	at	his	face.	He	sighed.	‘The	power	you	seek	to	bleed	dry,	Errastas,’	he	said,	facing	the
Errant,	‘well,	it	turns	out	we	were	all	working	to	similar	ends.’
‘You	anticipated	me.’
Sechul	shrugged.	‘We	had	no	expectation	that	you	would	just	show	up	at	the	door.’
‘I	do	not	appreciate	being	played,	Setch.	Do	you	see	no	value	to	my	alliance?’
‘You	have	irrevocably	altered	the	strategy.	As	Mael	pointed	out,	though	perhaps	for	different	reasons,	this
meeting	 was	 premature.	 Now	 our	 enemies	 are	 awakened	 to	 us.’	 He	 sighed	 again.	 ‘Had	 you	 stayed	 away,
stayed	quiet,	why,	Mother	and	I—we’d	have	stolen	that	power	from	beneath	their	very	noses.’
‘To	share	solely	between	the	two	of	you.’
‘To	the	victors	the	spoils.’	But	none	of	this	mad	usurpation,	this	desire	to	return	to	what	once	was.	‘But,
I	dare	say,	had	you	come	begging,	we	might	well	have	proved	magnanimous	.	.	.	for	old	times’	sake.’
‘I	see.’
Kilmandaros	faced	him.	‘Do	you,	Master	of	the	Holds?	You	summoned	us	here,	only	to	find	that	you	are	the
weakest,	the	most	ignorant	among	us.	You	forced	us	all—Sechul,	Mael,	Olar	Ethil,	to	put	you	in	your	place.	To
make	 you	 realize	 that	 you	 alone	 have	 been	 wallowing	 in	 self-pity	 and	 wasting	 away	 doing	 nothing.	 Perhaps
Mael	 thinks	 our	 time	 is	 done,	 but	 then,	 why	 has	 he	 ensured	 that	 his	 worship	 is	 on	 the	 ascent?	 That	 a	 Jhistal
Priest	of	Mael	now	rises	to	take	the	throne	of	the	most	powerful	empire	this	world	has	seen	since	the	time	of
Kallor	and	Dessimbelackis?	Who	among	us	has	proved	the	witless	one	this	day?’
With	a	snarl,	Errastas	swung	away	from	them.
Sechul	turned	to	his	mother.	‘Mael	was	warning	us,	I	think.	This	Adjunct	Tavore	he	spoke	of.	These	infernal
Malazans.’
‘And	the	children	of	the	gods.	Yes,	many	warnings,	Sechul.	From	Olar	Ethil	as	well.	Jaghut,	T’lan	Imass,


Tiste	Andii—bah!’
‘All	subtlety	is	lost,’	agreed	Sechul	Lath.	‘Errastas,	return	to	us,	we	have	much	to	discuss.	Come	now,	I	will
tell	 you	 of	 the	 path	 we	 have	 already	 prepared.	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 just	 how	 close	 we	 are	 to	 achieving	 all	 that	 we
desire.	And	you,	in	turn,	can	tell	us	how	you	intend	to	release	the	Otataral	Eleint.	Such	exchanges	are	the	heart
of	an	alliance,	yes?’
His	 poor	 friend	 had	 been	 humiliated.	 Well,	 there	 was	 value	 in	 lessons.	 So	 long	 as	 it’s	 someone	 else
receiving	them.
Kilmandaros	 spoke:	 ‘Time	 has	 come	 to	 build	 anew	 the	 bridge,	 Errastas.	 Let	 us	 ensure	 that	 it	 is	 strong,
immune	to	fire	and	all	manner	of	threat.	Tell	me	of	how	I	will	kill	the	Otataral	Eleint—for	that	promise	alone	I
will	stand	with	you.’
He	returned	to	them,	eventually,	as	they	had	known	he	would.
	
‘They	never	burned	the	bridge	behind	them	before	finishing	the	one	in	front	of	them.	But	there	then	came	a
day	when	the	bridges	ran	out.	Nowhere	ahead.	The	road’s	end.’	Cuttle	reached	out	and	a	clay	jug	was	pressed
into	his	hand.	He	drank	down	another	mouthful,	and	would	not	look	at	the	young	soldiers	with	whom	he	shared
the	brazier.	The	rush	of	water	under	the	flat-bottomed	hull	was	an	incessant	wet	scrape,	far	too	close	beneath
the	sapper	for	his	liking.	Silly,	he	reflected,	being	a	marine	who	hated	water.	Rivers,	lakes,	seas	and	rain,	he
despised	them	all.
‘Black	Coral,’	someone	said	in	a	low,	almost	reverent	tone.
‘Like	the	ten	thousand	veins	in	a	hand,’	Cuttle	said	sourly,	‘stories	spread	out.	Not	a	single	Malazan	army
out	 there	 doesn’t	 know	 about	 them.	 The	 Chain	 of	 Dogs,	 the	 Fall.	 The	 Aren	 Way.	 Blackdog.	 Pale.	 And	 .	 .	 .
Black	Coral,	where	died	the	Bridgeburners.’
‘They	didn’t	all	die,’	objected	that	same	soldier.
It	was	too	dark	to	make	out	the	speaker,	and	Cuttle	didn’t	recognize	the	voice.	He	shrugged.	‘High	Mage
Quick	Ben.	Dead	Hedge—but	he	died	there	and	that’s	why	we	call	him	Dead	Hedge,	so	that’s	one	who	didn’t
make	it.	Maybe	a	handful	of	others	did.	But	the	Bridgeburners	were	finished	and	that’s	how	the	histories	will
tell	it.	Destroyed	at	Black	Coral,	at	the	close	of	the	Pannion	War.	The	few	who	crawl	out	of	such	things,	well,
they	vanish	like	the	last	wisps	of	smoke.’	He	drank	down	another	mouthful.	‘It’s	how	things	are.’
‘It’s	said	they	were	dropped	into	the	city	by	the	Black	Moranth,’	another	soldier	said.	‘And	they	went	and
took	the	palace—went	straight	for	the	Pannion	Domin	himself.	Was	Whiskeyjack	dead	by	then?	Does	anyone
know?	Why	wasn’t	he	leading	them?	If	he’d	done	that,	maybe	they	wouldn’t	have—’
‘Stupid,	that	kind	of	thinking.’	Cuttle	shook	his	head.	He	could	hear	the	faint	sweeps	from	the	other	barges
—the	damned	river	was	packed	with	them,	with	Letherii	crews	struggling	day	and	night	to	avoid	collisions	and
tangled	lines.	Bonehunters	and	Commander	Brys’s	escort—almost	twenty	thousand	soldiers,	support	elements,
pack	animals—the	whole	lot,	riding	this	river	south.	Better	than	walking.	Better,	and	worse,	reminding	him	of
past	landings,	marines	struggling	beneath	the	hail	of	arrows	and	slingstones,	dying	and	drowning.	Barges	raging
with	flames,	the	shrieks	of	burning	men	and	women.
Not	that	they	would	be	landing	under	fire.	Not	this	time.	This	was	a	leisurely	journey,	surrounded	by	allies.	It
was	all	so	civilized,	so	peaceful,	that	Cuttle’s	nerves	were	shredded.	‘It’s	just	how	it	played	out.	Choices	are
made,	accidents	happen,	the	fates	fall.	Remember	that,	when	our	own	falls	on	us.’
‘Nobody’s	 going	 to	 sing	 songs	 about	 us,’	 the	 hidden	 speaker	 said.	 ‘We’re	 not	 the	 Bridgeburners.	 Not	 the
Grey	Swords.	Not	Coltaine’s	Seventh.	She	said	as	much,	the	Adjunct	did.’
‘Open	that	last	jug,’	someone	advised.
Cuttle	 finished	 the	 one	 in	 his	 hand.	 Three	 fast	 swallows.	 He	 sent	 the	 empty	 vessel	 over	 the	 side.	 ‘
“Bonehunters”,’	 he	 said.	 ‘Was	 that	 Fiddler’s	 idea?	 Maybe.	 Can’t	 really	 remember.’	 I	 just	 remember	 the
desperation.	 I	 remember	 the	 Adjunct.	 And	 Aren’s	 quiet	 streets	 and	 empty	 walls.	 I	 remember	 being
broken,	 and	 now	 I’m	 wondering	 if	 anything’s	 changed,	 anything	 at	 all.	 ‘Histories,	 they’re	 just	 what’s
survived.	 But	 they’re	 not	 the	 whole	 story,	 because	 the	 whole	 story	 can	 never	 be	 known.	 Think	 of	 all	 the
histories	we’ve	gone	and	lost.	Not	just	kingdoms	and	empires,	but	the	histories	inside	every	one	of	us,	every
person	who	ever	lived.’	As	the	new	jug	of	peach	rum	came	within	reach	Cuttle’s	hand	snapped	out	to	snare	it.
‘What	do	you	want?	Any	of	you?	You	want	the	fame	of	the	Bridgeburners?	Why?	They’re	all	dead.	You	want
a	great	cause	to	fight	for?	To	die	for?	Show	me	something	worth	that.’


He	finally	looked	up,	glared	at	the	half-circle	of	coal-lit	faces,	so	young,	so	bleak	now.
And	 from	 behind	 him,	 a	 new	 voice	 spoke.	 ‘Showing’s	 not	 enough,	 Cuttle.	 You	 need	 to	 see,	 you	 need	 to
know.	I’m	standing	here,	listening	to	you,	and	I’m	hearing	the	rum;	it’s	running	through	a	soldier	who	thinks
he’s	at	his	end.’
Cuttle	took	another	drink.	‘Just	talk,	Sergeant	Gesler.	That’s	all.’
‘Bad	 talk,’	 Gesler	 said,	 pushing	 in.	 Soldiers	 moved	 aside	 to	 make	 room	 as	 he	 settled	 down	 opposite	 the
sapper.	‘They	wanted	stories,	Cuttle.	Not	a	reason	to	throw	themselves	over	the	side.	Those	are	the	cheapest
reasons	of	all—you	should	know	that.’
‘Speaking	freely	here,	Sergeant,	that’s	how	it	was.’
‘I	know.	This	ain’t	no	official	dressing	down.	That’s	for	your	own	sergeant	to	do,	and	if	he	was	here,	he’d
be	tacking	up	your	hide	right	about	now.	No,	you	and	me,	we’re	just	two	old	soldiers	here.’
Cuttle	gave	a	sharp	nod.	‘Fine,	then.	I	was	just	saying—’
‘I	know.	I	heard.	Glory’s	expensive.’
‘Exactly.’
‘And	it’s	not	worth	it.’
‘Right.’
‘But	that’s	where	you’re	wrong,	Cuttle.’
There	was	speaking	freely	and	that’s	what	this	was,	but	Cuttle	wasn’t	a	fool.	‘If	you	say	so.’
‘All	those	choices	you	complained	about,	the	ones	that	take	you	to	the	place	you	can’t	avoid,	the	place	none
of	us	can	escape.	You	say	it’s	not	worth	it,	Cuttle,	that’s	a	choice,	too.	It’s	the	one	you’ve	decided	to	make.
And	maybe	you	want	company,	and	that’s	what	all	this	is	about.	Personally,	I	think	you’re	a	damned	liability—
not	because	you	ain’t	a	good	soldier.	You	are.	And	I	know	for	a	fact	that	when	the	iron	sings,	having	you	at
my	back	makes	no	itch.	But	you	keep	pissing	on	the	coals,	Cuttle,	and	then	complaining	about	the	smell.’
‘I’m	a	sapper	with	a	handful	of	munitions,	Gesler.	When	they’re	gone,	then	I	step	into	the	crossbow	ranks,
and	I	ain’t	as	fast	a	loader	as	I	used	to	be.’
‘I	already	said	it’s	not	your	soldiering	that	worries	me.	Maybe	you	reload	slower,	but	your	shots	will	count
and	don’t	try	saying	otherwise.’
Cuttle	answered	with	a	gruff	nod.	He’d	asked	for	this,	this	dressing	down	that	wasn’t	supposed	to	happen.
This	speaking	freely	that	was	now	nailing	him	like	a	rusty	nail	to	the	wooden	deck.	In	front	of	a	bunch	of	pups.
‘There	 were	 sappers,’	 Gesler	 continued,	 ‘long	 before	 the	 munitions	 came	 along.	 In	 fact,	 the	 sappers	 will
need	veterans	like	you,	the	ones	who	remember	those	days.’	He	paused,	and	then	said,	‘I	got	you	a	question,
Cuttle.’
‘Go	on.’
‘Tell	me	the	one	thing	that	can	rot	an	army.’
‘Time	with	nothing	to	do.’
‘Nothing	to	do	but	talk.	Why	is	it	the	people	with	the	least	useful	things	to	say	do	most	of	the	talking?’
The	 unseen	 speaker	 from	 earlier	 spoke	 up	 behind	 Gesler,	 ‘Because	 their	 pile	 of	 shit	 never	 gets	 smaller,
Sergeant.	In	fact,	just	keeps	getting	bigger.’
Cuttle	heard	the	relief	in	the	laughter	that	followed.	His	face	was	burning,	but	that	might	just	be	the	coals,	or
the	 rum,	 or	 both.	 Could	 be	 he	 was	 just	 drunk.	 ‘All	 this	 talk	 of	 piss	 and	 shit,’	 he	 muttered,	 forcing	 himself
upright.	He	weaved,	managed	to	find	his	balance,	and	then	turned	about	and	stumbled	off	in	the	direction	of	the
stern.
	
As	the	sapper	staggered	away,	Gesler	said,	‘You	that	spoke,	behind	me—that	you,	Widdershins?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	Was	wandering	past	when	I	heard	the	bleating.’
‘Go	after	him,	make	sure	he	doesn’t	topple	o’er	the	rail.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	And,	uh,	thanks,	he	was	dragging	even	me	down.’
Gesler	 rubbed	 at	 his	 face.	 His	 skin	 felt	 loose	 and	 slack,	 all	 suppleness	 long	 gone.	 Getting	 old,	 he	 decided,
was	miserable.	‘Needs	a	shaking	awake,’	he	said	under	his	breath.	‘And	don’t	we	all.	Here,	give	me	that	jug,
I’ve	worked	up	a	thirst.’
He	didn’t	recognize	any	of	the	faces	he	could	make	out	round	the	brazier.	They	were	young,	foot-soldiers,
the	ones	who’d	barely	known	a	fight	since	joining	up.	They’d	watched	the	marines	assault	Y’Ghatan,	and	fight


on	 the	 landing	 in	 Malaz	 City.	 They’d	 watched	 those	 marines	 set	 off	 to	 invade	 the	 Letherii	 mainland.	 They’d
done	 a	 lot	 of	 watching.	 And	 no	 amount	 of	 marching,	 or	 drilling,	 or	 war-games	 could	 make	 a	 young	 soldier
hungrier	for	glory	than	did	all	that	watching.
He	 knew	 how	 they	 looked	 upon	 the	 marines.	 He	 knew	 how	 they	 bandied	 the	 names	 back	 and	 forth,	 the
legends	 in	 the	 making.	 Throatslitter,	 Deadsmell,	 Hellian,	 Masan	 Gilani,	 Crump,	 Mayfly	 and	 all	 the	 rest.	 He
knew	how	they	damn-near	worshipped	Sergeant	Fiddler.	And	gods	forbid	anything	bad	should	happen	to
him.
Maybe	Cuttle	had	a	point	with	all	that	pushing	down.	On	things	like	glory,	the	making	of	legends.	Maybe	he
was	 undermining	 all	 those	 romantic	 notions	 for	 a	 good	 reason.	 Don’t	 hold	 to	 any	 faith.	 Even	 legends	 die.
Gesler	shivered,	drank	down	a	mouthful	of	rum.
Tasted	like	shit.
	
Bottle	 slipped	 away.	 He’d	 listened	 to	 Cuttle.	 He’d	 watched	 Gesler	 slide	 morosely	 into	 the	 sapper’s	 place,
settling	in	for	a	night	of	drinking.
The	entire	army	lounged	on	the	open	decks.	Getting	bored	and	lazy.	After	the	eastward	trek	from	Letheras,
they’d	crossed	River	Lether	and	marched	through	the	rich	lands	to	the	south,	finally	reaching	this	river,	known
as	 the	 Gress.	 No	 shortage	 of	 food,	 drink,	 or	 whores	 the	 whole	 damned	 way.	 A	 sidling	 pace,	 a	 march	 that
barely	raised	a	sweat.	League	upon	league	of	bickering,	nasty	hangovers	and	nobody	having	a	clue	what	they
were	up	to,	where	they	were	going,	and	what	was	waiting	for	them.
A	joke	ran	through	the	ranks	that,	after	this	river	journey	ended	at	the	city	of	Gress	on	the	Dracons	Sea,	the
entire	army	would	simply	swing	back	westward,	come	up	round	to	Letheras	again,	and	start	the	whole	thing
over,	round	and	round,	and	round.	Nobody	laughed	much.	It	was	the	kind	of	joke	that	wouldn’t	go	away,	and
when	 it	 no	 longer	 fitted	 the	 circumstances,	 why,	 it	 would	 twist	 a	 tad	 and	 start	 its	 run	 all	 over	 again.	 Like
dysentery.
The	 forty-two	 barges	 that	 had	 been	 awaiting	 them	 south	 of	 the	 Bluerose	 Range,	 just	 beyond	 the	 Gress’s
cataracts,	 were	 all	 new,	 built	 specifically	 for	 transporting	 the	 army	 downstream.	 Once	 at	 the	 journey’s	 end,
with	 all	 the	 soldiers	 and	 supplies	 off-loaded,	 the	 barges	 would	 be	 dismantled	 and	 carried	 with	 the	 army
overland	to	the	West	Kryn	River,	where	they’d	be	rebuilt	and	sent	on	their	way	down	to	the	Inside	Hyacinth
Reach,	 and	 from	 there	 on	 to	 the	 D’rhasilhani—who	 had	 purchased	 the	 wood.	 The	 Letherii	 were	 clever	 that
way.	If	you	could	take	something	and	make	a	profit	from	it	once,	why	not	twice?	It	was,	Bottle	supposed,	an
admirable	trait.	Maybe.	He	could	imagine	that	such	predilections	could	become	a	fever,	a	poison	in	the	soul.
He	walked	to	the	nearest	unoccupied	rail	and	stared	out	over	the	jade-lit	water.	The	hulk	of	another	barge
blocked	the	shoreline	opposite.	The	night	air	was	filled	with	flitting	bats.	He	could	make	out	a	figure	over	there,
doing	what	Bottle	was	doing,	and	he	wondered	if	he	knew	him,	or	her.	The	squads	were	scattered.	Probably
someone’s	 bright	 idea	 about	 knitting	 new	 ties	 and	 friendships	 among	 the	 soldiery.	 Or,	 the	 even	 brighter
realization	that	 the	 squads	 needed	 a	 break	 from	 staring	 at	 each	 other’s	 ugly	faces.	 Mix	 ’em	 up	 to	 keep	 ’em
from	 killing	 each	 other.	 Hood	 knew,	 he	 wasn’t	 missing	 Koryk	 or	 even	 Smiles.	 Just	 damned	 bad	 luck	 finding
himself	on	the	same	deck	as	Cuttle.
The	man	was	a	walking	plague	of	the	spirit.	Almost	as	bad	as	Fist	Blistig.	But	then,	what	army	didn’t	have
them?	Sour,	stone-eyed,	using	their	every	breath	to	bitch.	He	used	to	admire	soldiers	like	that,	the	ones	who’d
seen	 it	 all	 and	 were	 still	 waiting	 to	 be	 impressed.	 The	 ones	 who	 looked	 at	 a	 recruit’s	 face	 as	 if	 studying	 a
death-mask.	Now,	he	realized,	he	despised	such	soldiers.
Could	be	that	was	unfair,	though.	The	misery	and	horror	that	got	them	to	that	cold,	lifeless	place	was	nothing
to	long	for	in	one’s	own	life.	Was	it?	What	he	and	all	the	other	younger	soldiers	had	to	live	with,	then,	was	the
curse	of	the	survivors,	the	veteran’s	brand	leaking	like	a	septic	wound.	It	stained.	It	fouled.	It	killed	dreams.
He	wasn’t	one	of	them.	Had	no	desire	to	join	their	ranks.	And	could	not	imagine	an	entire	army	consisting
of	 such	 twisted,	 scarred	 creatures.	 But	 that	 was	 the	 Bridgeburners.	 That	 was	 Coltaine’s,	 by	 the	 end,
anyway.	 Onearm’s	 Host.	 Greymane’s	 Stone.	 Dassem’s	 First	 Sword.	 Nothing	 but	 the	 dead-eyed.	 He
shivered,	drawing	his	rain-cape	tighter.	The	Bonehunters	was	another	army	headed	that	way—if	it	didn’t	tear
itself	apart	first.
But	 wait,	 Bottle.	 You’ve	 forgotten	 Fiddler.	 He’s	 nothing	 like	 the	 rest.	 He	 still	 cares	 .	 .	 .	 doesn’t	 he?
Even	the	question	troubled	him.	His	sergeant	had	been	growing	ever	more	distant	of	late.	A	generational	thing?


Maybe.	 The	 burden	 of	 rank?	 Possibly,	 since	 when	 he’d	 been	 a	 Bridgeburner,	 he’d	 had	 no	 responsibilities
beyond	that	of	a	regular	soldier.	A	sapper,	in	fact,	and	sappers	were	notorious	for	the	threat	they	presented	to
their	own	comrades,	never	mind	the	enemy.	So,	not	just	a	regular	but	an	irresponsible	one	at	that.	But	now	Fid
was	 a	 sergeant,	 and	 a	 whole	 lot	 more.	 Reader	 of	 the	 Deck	 of	 Dragons.	 Legendary	 survivor	 of	 the
Bridgeburners.	He	was	the	iron	stake	driven	deep	into	the	ground,	and	no	matter	how	fierce	the	raging	winds,
he	held	fast—and	everyone	in	turn	clung	to	him,	the	whole	damned	army,	it	seemed.	We	hold	tight.	Not	to	the
Adjunct.	Not	to	Quick	Ben	or	Fist	Keneb.	We	hold	tight	to	Fiddler,	a	damned	sergeant.
Hood’s	 breath.	 This	 sounds	 bad.	 I	 shouldn’t	 be	 thinking	 of	 things	 this	 way.	 Fid	 deserves	 better.	 He
deserves	to	have	his	life	back.
No	wonder	he	ran	when	she	wanted	the	reading.
The	black	water	swirled	past,	oblivious	to	the	maelstrom	of	his	thoughts,	carrying	what	it	could	down	to	the
distant	sea.	Cold	with	the	memories	of	snow	and	ice	in	the	high	mountains,	slowing	with	the	silts	of	overturned
earth	and	stones	worn	down	to	dust.	Huge	turtles	slid	through	the	muck	far	below.	Blood-drinking	eels—little
more	 than	 jaws	 and	 tail—slithered	 in	 the	 currents,	 seeking	 the	 soft	 bellies	 of	 massive	 carp	 and	 catfish.	 Silt
blooms	 billowed	 and	 rolled	 over	 rounded	 stones	 and	 gravel	 banks.	 Bedded	 in	 muck,	 amphorae	 of	 fired	 clay,
fragments	of	corroded	metal—tools,	fittings,	weapons—and	the	smooth,	vaguely	furry	long	bones	of	countless
animals—the	floor	of	this	river	was	crowded	indeed,	unfurled	like	a	scroll,	writing	a	history	down	to	the	sea.
He	 had	 already	 freed	 his	 mind	 to	 wander,	 sliding	 from	 spark	 to	 spark	 among	 the	 multitude	 of	 creatures
beneath	 the	 spinning	 surface.	 It	 had	 become	 something	 of	 a	 habit.	 Wherever	 he	 found	 himself,	 he	 sent	 out
tendrils,	spreading	like	roots	to	expand	his	skein	of	awareness.	Without	it,	he	felt	lost.	And	yet,	such	sensitivity
was	not	always	a	gift.	Even	as	he	came	to	comprehend	the	vast	interconnectedness	of	things,	so	too	grew	the
suspicion	that	each	life	possessed	its	circle,	closed-in,	virtually	blind	to	all	that	lay	outside.	No	matter	the	scale,
no	matter	the	pretensions	of	the	things	within	that	circle,	no	matter	even	their	beliefs,	they	travelled	in	profound
ignorance	of	the	vastness	of	the	universe	beyond.
The	mind	could	do	no	better.	It	wasn’t	built	for	profundity,	and	each	time	it	touched	upon	the	wondrous,	it
slid	away,	unable	to	find	purchase.	No,	we	do	fine	with	wood-chips	flying	from	the	axe’s	bite,	the	dowels
we	drive	home,	the	seeds	we	scatter,	the	taste	of	ale	in	our	mouths,	the	touch	of	love	and	desire	at	our
fingertips.	Comfort	doesn’t	lie	in	the	mystery	of	the	unknown	and	the	unknowable.	It	lies	in	the	home	we
dwell	in,	the	faces	we	recognize,	the	past	in	our	wake	and	the	future	we	want	for	ourselves.
All	this	is	what	is	solid.	All	this	is	what	we	grasp	hold	of.	Even	as	we	long	for	the	other.
Was	 the	 definition	 of	 religion	 as	 simple	 as	 that?	 Longing	 for	 the	 other?	 Fuelling	 that	 wish	 with	 faith,
emulating	desires	through	rituals?	That	what	we	wish	to	be	therefore	is.	That	what	we	seek	in	truth	exists.
That	in	believing	we	create,	and	in	creating	we	find.
By	that	argument,	is	not	the	opposite	equally	true?	That	what	we	reject	ceases.	That	‘truth’	is	born	in
what	we	seek.	That	we	create	in	order	to	believe.	That	we	find	only	what	we	have	created.
That	wonder	does	not	exist	outside	ourselves?
By	 our	 belief,	 we	 create	 the	 gods.	 And	 so,	 in	 turn,	 we	 can	 destroy	 them.	 With	 a	 single	 thought.	 A
moment’s	refusal,	an	instant’s	denial.
Is	this	the	real	face	of	the	war	to	come?
Chilled	 by	 the	 notion,	 Bottle	 contracted	 his	 senses,	 fled	 the	 indifferent	 sparks	 swirling	 through	 the	 river’s
depths.	He	needed	something	.	.	.	closer.	Something	human.	He	needed	his	rats	in	the	hold.
	
Deadsmell	coughed,	and	then	dropped	two	coins	into	the	trough.	‘You	won’t	get	your	cage,	Throatslitter.	You
watch	as	four	comes	back	to	me.’	He	looked	up	and	scowled.	‘What’s	wrong?	Throw	the	bones,	fool.’
‘You	must	be	kidding.	Ebron?’
‘Aye,	he	glamoured	the	trough.’
Throatslitter	 leaned	 forward.	 ‘You	 got	 yourself	 a	 problem,	 Deadsmell—and	 heed	 this	 too,	 Ebron,	 since
you’re	a	mage	and	all—’
‘Hey!	I	just	told	you—’
‘And	kindly,	aye,	you	did.	But	listen	anyway.	Deadsmell,	might	be	it’s	a	safe	thing	to	be	magicking	the	casts
and	whatnot,	so	long	as	you’re	playing	nitwits	or	fellow	spooks	or	both.	But,	see,	I’m	Throatslitter,	remember?
I	kill	people	for	a	living,	in	ways	no	reasonable,	sane	soldier	could	hope	to	imagine.	Am	I	getting	through	here?


You	bring	your	talents	to	this	game,	maybe	so	will	I.’
‘Gods	below,’	Deadsmell	said,	‘no	need	to	get	all	riled.’
‘You	cheated.’
‘So?’
‘With	sorcery!’
‘I’m	not	quick	enough	for	the	other	stuff,	not	any	more.	So	maybe	I	was	desperate.’
‘Maybe?	 Ebron—you	 got	 to	 agree	 here—a	 clean	 cheat,	 well,	 that’s	 expected.	 But	 a	 magicked	 one,	 that’s
not	acceptable.	That’s	knife-kissing	stuff,	and	if	I	wasn’t	so	damned	magnanimous,	not	to	mention	being	sober
enough	to	know	that	killing	the	squad	healer’s	probably	not	a	good	idea,	why,	there’d	be	blood	running	a’tween
the	boards	right	now.’
‘He’s	got	a	point,	Deadsmell.	Here	I	figured	on	joining	this	game	all	clean	like—’
Deadsmell’s	snort	cut	him	off.	‘You	threw	a	web	over	the	whole	field	when	you	sat	down,	Ebron.	I	was	just
giving	it	a	twist.’
Throatslitter	 stared,	 and	 then	 held	 up	 the	 first	 polished	 bone.	 ‘See	 this,	 Ebron?	 Since	 you’re	 so	 happy	 to
magic	everything,	let’s	see	how	you	do	eating	this.	And	the	next	one.	In	fact,	how	’bout	you	eat	them	all?’
‘Not	a	chance—’
Throatslitter	lunged	over	the	chalked-out	field	on	the	deck.	Ebron	shrieked.
Things	got	ugly,	and	Bottle’s	rat	was	lucky	to	escape	unscathed.
	
Skulldeath	sat	huddled	beneath	blankets,	staring	morosely	at	the	unconscious	form	of	Hellian.	She	had	passed
out	 halfway	 through	 their	 love-making,	 which	 probably	 wasn’t	 unusual.	 Another	 soldier	 was	 sitting	 nearby,
studying	the	Seven	Cities	prince	with	a	knowing	expression	on	his	face.
The	young	man’s	need	for	comfort	and	all	the	rest	was	not	doomed	this	night,	and	in	a	short	time	he	would
slide	over.	It	was	a	good	thing	that	the	only	thing	Hellian	was	possessive	about	was	her	rum	and	whatnot.	She
eyed	a	jug	in	someone	else’s	hand	with	all	the	fiery	jealousy	of	a	jilted	lover.	In	any	case,	a	drunk	she	might	be,
but	she	was	no	fool	when	it	came	to	Skulldeath’s	confused	desires.
No,	 the	 real	 fool	 in	 the	 equation	 was	 sitting	 off	 to	 one	 side.	 Sergeant	 Urb,	 whose	 love	 for	 the	 woman
glittered	like	the	troubled	waters	of	a	spring,	fed	unceasingly	from	the	bedrock	of	his	childlike	faith.	A	faith	in
the	belief	that	one	day	her	thoughts	would	clear,	enough	for	her	to	see	what	was	standing	right	in	front	of	her.
That	the	seduction	of	alcohol	would	suddenly	sour.
The	man	was	an	idiot.	But	there	were	idiots	aplenty	in	the	world.	An	unending	supply,	in	fact.
When	Skulldeath	finally	stirred,	Bottle	edged	out	of	the	rat’s	mind.	Watching	things	like	that—love-making—
was	too	creepy.	Besides,	hadn’t	his	grandmother	pounded	into	him	the	risk	of	deadly	perversions	offered	by	his
talents?	Oh,	she	had,	she	had	indeed.
	
Skanarow	moved	up	to	stand	alongside	Captain	Ruthan	Gudd	where	he	leaned	on	the	rail.
‘Dark	waters,’	she	murmured.
‘It’s	night.’
‘You	like	keeping	things	simple,	don’t	you?’
‘It’s	 because	 things	 are,	 Skanarow.	 All	 the	 complications	 we	 suffer	 through	 are	 hatched	 inside	 our	 own
skulls.’
‘Really?	Doesn’t	make	them	any	less	real,	though.	Does	it?’
He	shrugged.	‘Something	you	want?’
‘Many	things,	Ruthan	Gudd.’
He	looked	across	at	her—seemed	startled	to	find	how	close	she	stood,	almost	as	tall	as	he	was,	her	Kanese
eyes	dark	and	gleaming—and	then	away	again.	‘And	what	makes	you	think	I	can	help	you	with	any	of	them?’
She	smiled,	though	the	captain	was	not	paying	attention,	and	it	was	a	lovely	smile.	‘Who	promoted	you?’	she
asked.
‘A	raving	lunatic.’
‘Where?’
He	raked	fingers	through	his	beard,	scowled.	‘And	all	this	is	in	aid	of	what,	precisely?’


‘Kindly	was	right,	you	know.	We	need	to	work	together.	You,	I	want	to	know	more	about,	Ruthan	Gudd.’
‘It’s	not	worth	it.’
She	 leaned	 on	 the	 railing.	 ‘You’re	 hiding,	 Captain.	 But	 that’s	 all	 right.	 I’m	 good	 at	 finding	 things	 out.	 You
were	 among	 the	 first	 list	 of	 officers	 for	 the	 Fourteenth.	 Meaning	 you	 were	 in	 Malaz	 City,	 already
commissioned	 and	 awaiting	 attachment.	 Now,	 which	 armies	 washed	 up	 on	 Malaz	 Island	 too	 torn	 up	 to	 keep
intact?	The	Eighth.	The	Thirteenth.	Both	from	the	Korelri	Campaign.	Now,	the	Eighth	arrived	at	about	the	time
the	Fourteenth	shipped	out,	but	given	the	slow	pace	of	the	military	ink-scratchers,	it’s	not	likely	you	were	from
the	 Eighth—besides,	 Faradan	 Sort	 was,	 and	 she	 doesn’t	 know	 you.	 I	 asked.	 So,	 that	 leaves	 the	 Thirteenth.
Which	is	rather	.	.	.	interesting.	You	served	under	Greymane—’
‘I’m	afraid	you	got	it	all	wrong,’	Ruthan	Gudd	cut	in.	‘I	came	in	on	a	transfer	from	Nok’s	fleet,	Skanarow.
Wasn’t	even	a	marine—’
‘Which	ship	did	you	serve	on?’
‘The	Dhenrabi—’
‘Which	sank	off	the	Strike	Bight—’
‘Aye—’
‘About	eighty	years	ago.’
He	eyed	her	for	a	long	moment.	‘Now,	that	kind	of	recall	verges	on	the	obsessive,	don’t	you	think?’
‘As	opposed	to	pathological	lying,	Captain?’
‘That	was	the	first	Dhenrabi.	The	second	one	slammed	into	the	Wall	at	five	knots.	Of	the	two	hundred	and
seventy-two	on	board,	five	of	us	were	dragged	out	by	the	Stormguard.’
‘You	stood	the	Wall?’
‘No,	I	was	handed	over	in	a	prisoner	exchange.’
‘Into	the	Thirteenth?’
‘Straight	back	to	the	fleet,	Skanarow.	We’d	managed	to	capture	four	Mare	triremes	loaded	with	volunteers
for	 the	 Wall—aye,	 hard	 to	 believe	 anyone	 would	 volunteer	 for	 that.	 In	 any	 case,	 the	 Stormguard	 were
desperate	 for	 the	 new	 blood.	 So,	 you	 can	 put	 all	 your	 suspicions	 to	 rest,	 Captain.	 My	 history	 is	 dull	 and
uneventful	and	far	from	heroic.	Some	mysteries,	Skanarow,	aren’t	worth	knowing.’
‘All	sounds	very	convincing,	I’ll	grant	you	that.’
‘But?’
She	gave	him	another	bright	smile,	and	this	one	he	saw.	‘I	still	think	you’re	a	liar.’
He	pushed	himself	away	from	the	railing.	‘Lots	of	rats	on	these	barges,	I’ve	noticed.’
‘We	could	go	hunting.’
Ruthan	Gudd	paused,	combed	his	beard,	and	then	shrugged.	‘Hardly	worth	the	trouble,	I	should	think.’
When	he	walked	off,	the	Kanese	woman	hesitated,	and	then	followed.
	
‘Gods	below,’	Bottle	muttered,	‘everyone’s	getting	it	this	night.’	He	felt	a	stab	somewhere	deep	within	him,	an
old,	familiar	one.	He’d	not	been	the	kind	of	man	that	women	chased	down.	He’d	had	friends	who	rolled	from
one	bed	to	the	next,	every	one	of	those	beds	soft	and	warm.	He’d	had	no	such	fortune.	The	irony	of	the	thing
that	visited	him	in	his	dreams	was	that	much	sharper,	in	how	it	mocked	the	truths	of	his	life.
Not	that	she’d	been	appearing	of	late,	not	for	a	month.	Maybe	she’d	grown	tired	of	him.	Maybe	she’d	taken
all	she	needed,	whatever	that	was.	But	those	last	few	times	had	been	frightening	in	their	desperation,	the	fear
in	her	unhuman	eyes.	He’d	awaken	to	the	stench	of	grass	fires	on	the	savannah,	the	sting	of	smoke	in	his	eyes
and	 the	 thunder	 of	 fleeing	 herds	 ringing	 in	 his	 skull.	 Sickened	 by	 the	 overwhelming	 sense	 of	 dislocation,	 he
would	lie	shivering	beneath	his	threadbare	blankets	like	a	fevered	child.
A	month	of	peace,	but	why	then	did	her	absence	fill	him	with	foreboding?
The	barge	opposite	had	slipped	ahead,	riding	some	vagary	of	the	current,	and	he	could	now	see	the	eastern
shore	of	the	river.	A	low	bank	of	boulders	and	reeds	and	beyond	that	rolling	plains	lit	a	luminous	green	by	the
jade	slashes	in	the	southern	sky.	Those	grasslands	should	have	been	teeming	with	wildlife.	Instead,	they	were
empty.
This	continent	felt	older	than	Quon	Tali,	older	than	Seven	Cities.	It	was	a	land	that	had	been	fed	on	for	too
long.
On	the	western	shore,	farmland	formed	narrow	strips	with	one	end	reaching	down	to	the	river	and	the	other,


a	third	of	a	league	inland,	debouching	on	to	the	network	of	roads	crisscrossing	the	region.	Without	these	farms,
the	Letherii	would	starve.	Yet	Bottle	was	troubled	by	the	dilapidated	condition	of	many	of	the	homesteads,	the
sagging	barns	and	weed-ringed	silos.	Not	a	single	stand	of	trees	remained;	even	the	stumps	had	been	pulled
from	the	withered	earth.	The	alder	and	aspen	windbreaks	surrounding	the	farm	buildings	looked	skeletal,	not
parched	 but	 perhaps	 diseased.	 Broad	 fans	 of	 topsoil	 formed	 muddy	 islands	 just	 beyond	 drainage	 channels,
making	that	side	of	the	river	treacherous.	The	rich	earth	was	drifting	away.
Better	indeed,	then,	to	be	facing	the	eastern	shoreline,	desolate	as	it	was.
Some	soldier	had	been	making	the	circuit,	pacing	the	barge	as	if	it	was	a	cage,	and	he’d	heard	the	footsteps
pass	behind	him	twice	since	he’d	first	settled	at	the	railing.	This	time,	those	boots	came	opposite	him,	hesitated,
and	then	clumped	closer.
A	midnight-skinned	woman	arrived	on	his	left,	setting	hands	down	on	the	rail.
Bottle	 searched	 frantically	 for	 her	 name,	 gave	 up	 and	 sighed.	 ‘You’re	 one	 of	 those	 Badan	 Gruk	 thought
drowned,	right?’
She	glanced	over.	‘Sergeant	Sinter.’
‘With	the	beautiful	sister—oh,	not	that	you’re	not—’
‘With	the	beautiful	sister,	aye.	Her	name’s	Kisswhere,	which	is	a	kind	of	knowing	wink	all	on	its	own,	isn’t
it?	Sometimes	names	find	you,	not	the	other	way	round.	So	it	was	with	my	sister.’
‘Not	her	original	name,	I	take	it.’
‘You’re	Bottle.	Fiddler’s	mage,	the	one	he	doesn’t	talk	about—why’s	that?’
‘Why	doesn’t	he	talk	about	me?	How	should	I	know?	What	all	you	sergeants	yak	about	is	no	business	of
mine	anyway—so	if	you’re	curious	about	something	Fid’s	saying	or	not	saying,	why	don’t	you	just	ask	him?’
‘I	would,	only	he’s	not	on	this	barge,	is	he?’
‘Bad	luck.’
‘Bad	 luck,	 but	 then,	 there’s	 you.	 When	 Fiddler	 lists	 his,	 uh,	 assets,	 it’s	 like	 you	 don’t	 even	 exist.	 So,	 I’m
wondering,	is	it	that	he	doesn’t	trust	us?	Or	maybe	it’s	you	he	doesn’t	trust?	Two	possibilities,	two	directions—
unless	you	can	think	of	another	one?’
‘Fid’s	been	my	only	sergeant,’	Bottle	said.	‘If	he	didn’t	trust	me,	he’d	have	long	since	got	rid	of	me,	don’t
you	think?’
‘So	it’s	us	he	doesn’t	trust.’
‘I	don’t	think	trust	has	anything	to	do	with	it,	Sergeant.’
‘Shaved	knuckle,	are	you?’
‘Not	much	of	one,	I’m	afraid.	But	I	suppose	I’m	all	he’s	got.	In	his	squad,	I	mean.’
She’d	chopped	short	her	hair,	probably	to	cut	down	on	the	lice	and	whatnot—spending	a	few	months	in	a
foul	 cell	 had	 a	 way	 of	 making	 survivors	 neurotic	 about	 hygiene—and	 she	 now	 ran	 the	 fingers	 of	 both	 hands
across	her	scalp.	Her	profile,	Bottle	noted	with	a	start,	was	pretty	much	.	.	.	perfect.
‘Anyway,’	 Bottle	 said,	 even	 as	 his	 throat	 tightened,	 ‘when	 you	 first	 showed	 up,	 I	 thought	 you	 were	 your
sister.’	And	then	he	waited.
After	a	moment,	she	snorted.	‘Well	now,	that	took	some	work,	I’d	wager.	Feeling	lonely,	huh?’
He	 tried	 to	 think	 of	 something	 to	 say	 that	 wouldn’t	 sound	 pathetic.	 Came	 up	 with	 nothing.	 It	 all	 sounded
pathetic.
Sinter	leaned	back	down	on	the	rail.	She	sighed.	‘The	first	raiding	parties	us	Dal	Honese	assembled—long
before	we	were	conquered—were	always	a	mess.	Suicidal,	in	fact.	You	see,	no	way	was	a	woman	going	to
give	 up	 the	 chance	 to	 join	 in,	 so	 it	 was	 always	 both	 men	 and	 women	 forming	 the	 group.	 But	 then,	 all	 the
marriages	and	betrothals	started	making	for	trouble—husbands	and	wives	didn’t	always	join	the	same	parties;
sometimes	 one	 of	 them	 didn’t	 even	 go.	 But	 a	 week	 or	 two	 on	 a	 raid,	 well,	 fighting	 and	 lust	 suckle	 from	 the
same	tit,	right?	So,	rather	than	the	whole	village	tearing	itself	apart	in	feuds,	jealous	rages	and	all	that,	it	was
decided	that	once	a	warrior—male	or	female,	married	or	betrothed—left	the	village	on	a	raid,	all	pre-existing
ties	no	longer	applied.’
‘Ah.	Seems	a	reasonable	solution,	I	suppose.’
‘That	 depends.	 Before	 you	 knew	 it,	 ten	 or	 twelve	 raiding	 parties	 would	 set	 out	 all	 at	 once.	 Leaving	 the
village	mostly	empty.	With	the	choice	between	living	inside	rules—even	comfortable	ones—and	escaping	them
for	 a	 time,	 well,	 what	 would	 you	 choose?	 And	 even	 worse,	 once	 word	 reached	 the	 other	 tribes	 and	 they	 all


adopted	the	same	practice,	well,	all	those	raiding	parties	started	bumping	into	each	other.	We	had	our	first	fullscale	war	on	our	hands.	Why	be	a	miserable	farmer	or	herder	with	one	wife	or	one	husband,	when	you	can	be
a	warrior	drumming	a	new	partner	every	night?	The	entire	Dal	Hon	confederacy	almost	self-destructed.’
‘What	saved	it?’
‘Two	 things.	 Exhaustion—oh,	 well,	 three	 things,	 now	 that	 I	 think	 on	 it.	 Exhaustion.	 Another	 was	 the	 ugly
fact	 that	 even	 free	 stuff	 isn’t	 for	 free.	 And	 finally,	 apart	 from	 imminent	 starvation,	 there	 were	 all	 those
squalling	babies	showing	up	nine	months	later—a	population	explosion,	in	fact.’
Bottle	was	frowning.	‘Sinter,	you	could	have	just	said	“no”,	you	know.	It’s	not	the	first	time	I’ve	heard	that
word.’
‘I	gave	up	the	Dal	Honese	life,	Bottle,	when	I	joined	the	Malazan	marines.’
‘Are	you	deliberately	trying	to	confuse	me?’
‘No.	Just	saying	that	I’m	being	tugged	two	ways—I	already	got	a	man	chasing	me,	but	he’s	a	bad	swimmer
and	who	knows	which	barge	he’s	on	right	now.	And	I	don’t	think	I	made	any	special	promises.	But	then,	back
at	the	stern—where	all	the	fun	is—there’s	this	soldier,	a	heavy,	who	looks	like	a	marble	statue—you	know,	the
ones	that	show	up	at	low	tide	off	the	Kanese	coast.	Like	a	god,	but	without	all	the	seaweed—’
‘All	right,	Sergeant,	I	see	where	you’re	going,	or	going	back	to,	I	mean.	I’m	no	match	for	that,	and	if	he’s
offering—’
‘He	is,	but	then,	a	drum	with	him	might	complicate	things.	I	mean,	I	might	get	possessive.’
‘But	that’s	not	likely	with	me.’
‘Just	my	thinking.’
Bottle	eyed	the	dark	waters	roiling	past	below,	wondering	how	fast	he’d	sink,	and	how	long	it	took	to	drown
when	one	wasn’t	fighting	it.
‘Oh,’	she	murmured,	‘I	guess	that	was	a	rather	deflating	invitation,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Well	put,	Sergeant.’
‘Okay,	there’s	more.’
‘More	of	what?’	He	could	always	open	his	wrists	before	plunging	in.	Cut	down	on	the	panic	and	such.
‘I	got	senses	about	things,	and	sometimes	people,	too.	Feelings.	Curiosity.	And	I’ve	learned	it	pays	to	follow
up	 on	 that	 when	 I	 can.	 So,	 with	 you,	 I’m	 thinking	 it’s	 worth	 my	 while	 to	 get	 to	 know	 you	 better.	 Because
you’re	more	than	you	first	seem,	and	that’s	why	Fid’s	not	talking.’
‘Very	generous,	Sergeant.	Tell	you	what,	how	about	we	share	a	meal	or	two	over	the	next	few	days,	and
leave	it	at	that.	At	least	for	now.’
‘I’ve	made	a	mess	of	this,	haven’t	I?	All	right,	we’ve	got	lots	of	time.	See	you	later,	Bottle.’
Paralt	poison,	maybe	a	vial’s	worth,	and	then	a	knife	to	the	heart	to	go	with	the	slitted	wrists,	and	then	the
drop	over	the	side.	Drowning?	Nothing	to	it.	He	listened	to	the	boots	clump	off,	wondering	if	she’d	pause	at
some	point	to	wipe	off	what	was	left	of	him	from	her	soles.
Some	women	were	just	out	of	reach.	It	was	a	fact.	There	were	ones	a	man	could	get	to,	and	then	others	he
could	only	look	at.	And	they	in	turn	could	do	the	calculations	in	the	span	of	the	barest	flutter	of	an	eye—walk
up	or	walk	over,	or,	if	need	be,	run	away	from.
Apes	 did	 the	 same	 damned	 thing.	 And	 monkeys	 and	 parrots	 and	 flare	 snakes:	 the	 world	 was	 nothing	 but
matches	and	mismatches,	posturing	and	poses,	the	endless	weighing	of	fitness.	It’s	a	wonder	the	useless	ones
among	us	ever	breed	at	all.
	
A	roofed	enclosure	provided	accommodation	for	the	Adjunct	and	her	staff	of	one,	Lostara	Yil,	as	well	as	her
dubious	guest,	the	once-priest	Banaschar.	Screened	from	the	insects,	cool	in	the	heat	of	the	day	and	warm	at
night	 when	 the	 mists	 lifted	 from	 the	 water.	 One	 room	 functioned	 as	 a	 mobile	 headquarters,	 although	 in	 truth
there	 was	 little	 need	 for	 administration	 whilst	 the	 army	 traversed	 the	 river.	 The	 single	 table	 bore	 the	 tacked
maps—sketchy	 as	 they	 were—for	 the	 Wastelands	 and	 a	 few	 scraps	 marking	 out	 the	 scattered	 territories	 of
Kolanse.	These	latter	ones	were	renditions	of	coastlines	for	the	most	part,	pilot	surveys	made	in	the	interests
of	trade.	The	vast	gap	in	knowledge	lay	between	the	Wastelands	and	those	distant	coasts.
Banaschar	made	a	point	of	studying	the	maps	when	no	one	else	was	in	the	room.	He	wasn’t	interested	in
company,	 and	 conversations	 simply	 left	 him	 weary,	 often	 despondent.	 He	 could	 see	 the	 Adjunct’s	 growing
impatience,	 the	 flicker	 in	 her	 eyes	 that	 might	 be	 desperation.	 She	 was	 in	 a	 hurry,	 and	 Banaschar	 thought	 he


knew	 why,	 but	 sympathy	 was	 too	 rich	 a	 sentiment	 to	 muster,	 even	 for	 her	 and	 the	 Bonehunters	 who	 blindly
followed	her.	Lostara	Yil	was	perhaps	more	interesting.	Certainly	physically,	not	that	he	had	any	chance	there.
But	it	was	the	haunted	shadow	in	her	face	that	drew	him	to	her,	the	stains	of	old	guilt,	the	bitter	flavours	of
regret	 and	 grievous	 loss.	 Such	 desires,	 of	 course,	 brought	 him	 face	 to	 face	 with	 his	 own	 perversions,	 his
attraction	 to	 dissolution,	 the	 allure	 of	 the	 fallen.	 He	 would	 then	 tell	 himself	 that	 there	 was	 value	 in	 selfrecognition.	The	challenge	then	was	in	measuring	that	value.	A	stack	of	gold	coins?	Three	stacks?	A	handful
of	 gems?	 A	 dusty	 burlap	 sack	 filled	 with	 dung?	 Value	 indeed,	 these	 unblinking	 eyes	 and	 their	 not-too-steady
regard.
Fortunately,	Lostara	had	little	interest	in	him,	relegating	his	hidden	hungers	to	harmless	imaginings,	where	the
illusions	served	to	gloss	over	the	wretched	realities.	Dissolution	palled	in	the	details,	even	as	blazing	health	and
vigour	could	not	but	make	a	realist—like	him—choke	on	irony.	Death,	after	all,	played	against	the	odds	with	a
cheating	 hand.	 It	 was	 a	 serious	 struggle	 to	 find	 righteous	 moralities	 in	 who	 lived	 and	 who	 died.	 He	 often
thought	 of	 the	 bottle	 he	 reached	 for,	 and	 told	 himself:	 Well,	 at	 least	 I	 know	 what	 will	 kill	 me.	 What	 about
that	paragon	of	perfect	living,	cut	down	by	a	mole	on	his	back	he	couldn’t	even	see?	What	about	the
glorious	young	giant	who	trips	on	his	own	sword	in	his	first	battle,	bleeding	out	from	a	cut	artery	still
thirty	paces	from	the	enemy?	The	idiot	who	falls	down	the	stairs?	Odds,	don’t	talk	to	me	about	odds—
take	a	good	look	at	the	Hounds’	Toll	if	you	don’t	believe	me.
Still,	 she	 wasn’t	 eager	 for	 his	 company	 so	 that	 conversation	 would	 have	 to	 wait.	 Her	 aversion	 was
disappointing	and	somewhat	baffling.	He	was	educated,	wasn’t	he?	And	erudite,	when	sober	and	sometimes
even	when	not	sober.	As	capable	of	a	good	laugh	as	any	defrocked	priest	with	no	future.	And	as	for	his	own
dissolution,	well,	he	wasn’t	so	far	along	as	to	have	lost	the	roguish	qualities	that	accompanied	that	dissolution,
was	he?
He	could	walk	the	decks,	he	supposed,	but	then	he	would	have	no	choice	but	to	let	the	miasma	of	the	living
swirl	 over	 him	 with	 all	 the	 rank	 insistence	 that	 too	 many	 sweaty,	 unwashed	 bodies	 could	 achieve.	 Not	 to
mention	 the	 snatches	 of	 miserable	 conversation	 assailing	 him	 as	 he	 threaded	 through	 the	 prostrate,	 steaming
forms—nothing	was	uglier,	in	fact,	than	soldiers	at	rest.	Nothing	was	more	insipid,	more	degenerate,	or	more
honest.	Who	needed	reminding	that	most	people	were	either	stupid,	lazy	or	both?
No,	ever	since	the	sudden	disappearance	of	Telorast	and	Curdle—almost	a	month	ago,	now—he	was	better
off	with	these	maps,	especially	the	blank	places	that	so	beckoned	him.	They	should	be	feeding	his	imagination,
even	his	sense	of	wonder,	but	that	wasn’t	why	they	so	obsessed	him.	The	unmarked	spans	of	parchment	and
hide	were	like	empty	promises.	The	end	of	questions,	the	failure	of	the	pursuit	of	knowledge.	They	were	like
forgotten	dreams,	ambitions	abandoned	to	the	pyres	so	long	ago	not	a	single	fleck	of	ash	remained.
He	 so	 wanted	 such	 blank	 spaces,	 spreading	 through	 the	 maps	 of	 his	 own	 history,	 the	 maps	 pinned	 to	 that
curling	 table	 of	 bone	 that	 was	 the	 inside	 of	 his	 skull,	 the	 cave	 walls	 of	 his	 soul.	 Here	 be	 thy	 failures.	 Of
resonance	and	mystery	and	truth.	Here	be	the	mountains	vanishing	in	the	mists,	never	to	return.	Here	be
the	rivers	sinking	into	the	sands,	and	these	are	the	sands	that	never	rest.	And	the	sky	that	looks	down
and	sees	nothing.	Here,	aye,	is	the	world	behind	me,	for	I	was	never	much	of	a	map-maker,	never	much
the	surveyor	of	deeds.
Bleach	out	the	faces,	scour	away	the	lives,	scrape	down	the	betrayals.	Soak	these	maps	until	all	the
inks	blur	and	float	and	wash	away.
It	is	the	task	of	priests	to	offer	absolution,	after	all.	And	I	shall	begin	by	absolving	myself.
It’s	the	lure,	you	see,	of	dissolution.
And	so	he	studied	the	maps,	all	those	empty	spaces.
	
The	river	was	a	promise.	That	it	could	take	the	knife	from	Lostara’s	hand.	A	glimmering	flash	and	gone,	for
ever	 gone.	 The	 silts	 could	 then	 swallow	 everything	 up,	 making	 preservation	 and	 rot	 one	 and	 the	 same.	 The
weight	 of	 the	 weapon	 would	 defy	 the	 current—that	 was	 the	 important	 thing,	 the	 way	 it	 would	 refuse	 to	 be
carried	along.	Some	things	could	do	that.	Some	things	possessed	the	necessary	weight	to	acquire	a	will	of	their
own.
She	could	follow	the	knife	into	the	stream,	but	she	knew	she’d	be	tugged	and	pulled,	spun	and	rolled	onward,
because	no	one	was	a	knife,	no	one	could	stay	in	one	place,	no	matter	how	hard	they	tried.
Lately,	she	had	been	thinking	about	the	Red	Blades,	the	faces	and	the	life	she	had	once	known.	It	was	clear


to	 her	 now	 that	 what	 was	 past	 had	 stopped	 moving,	 but	 the	 sense	 of	 distance	 ever	 growing	 behind	 her	 was
proving	an	illusion.	Eddies	drew	her	back,	and	all	those	mired	memories	waited	to	catch	her	like	hidden	snags.
A	knife	in	hand,	then,	was	sound	wisdom.	Best	not	surrender	it	to	these	troubled	waters.
The	Red	Blades.	She	wondered	if	that	elite	company	of	fanatics	still	served	the	Empress.	Who	would	have
taken	command?	Well,	there	were	plenty,	enough	of	them	to	make	the	accession	a	bloody	one.	Had	she	been
there,	 she	 too	 would	 have	 made	 a	 try.	 A	 knife	 in	 hand,	 then,	 was	 an	 answer	 to	 many	 things.	 The	 Adjunct’s
irritation	with	it	bordered	on	obsession,	but	she	didn’t	understand.	A	weapon	needs	to	be	maintained,	after	all.
Honed,	 oiled,	 sliding	 quickly	 from	 the	 sheath.	 With	 that	 knife,	 Lostara	 could	 cut	 herself	 loose	 whenever	 she
liked.
A	little	earlier,	she	had	sat	at	the	evening	meal	with	Tavore,	a	ritual	of	theirs	since	leaving	Letheras.	Food
and	 wine	 and	 not	 much	 in	 the	 way	 of	 conversation.	 Every	 effort	 Lostara	 made	 to	 draw	 the	 Adjunct	 out,	 to
come	to	know	her	better—on	a	more	personal	level—had	failed.	For	a	long	time,	Lostara	had	concluded	that
the	woman	in	command	of	the	Bonehunters	was	simply	incapable	of	revealing	her	vulnerable	side.	A	flaw	in
her	 personality,	 as	 impossible	 to	 reject	 or	 change	 as	 the	 colour	 of	 one’s	 eyes.	 But	 Lostara	 was	 coming	 to
believe	that	Tavore	was	afflicted	with	something	else.	She	behaved	as	would	a	widow,	the	kind	that	then	made
mourning	a	way	of	life,	a	ritualized	assembly	of	habits.	The	light	of	day	had	become	a	thing	to	turn	away	from.
A	gesture	of	invitation	was	answered	with	muttered	regrets.	And	the	sorrowing	mask	never	left	her	face.
A	 widow	 should	 not	 be	 commanding	 an	 army,	 and	 the	 thought	 of	 Adjunct	 Tavore	 leading	 that	 army	 into	 a
war	 left	 Lostara	 both	 disturbed	 and	 frightened.	 To	 wear	 the	 mask	 of	 the	 widow	 was	 to	 reject	 life	 itself,
scattering	ashes	into	one’s	own	path	ahead,	making	the	future	as	grey	as	the	past.	It	was	as	if	a	pyre	awaited
them	 all,	 and	 at	 the	 moment	 of	 standing	 on	 the	 threshold	 of	 those	 murderous	 flames,	 she	 saw	 Tavore	 Paran
stride	forward,	bold	and	resolute.	And	the	army	at	her	back	would	simply	follow.
Two	 people	 seated	 across	 from	 one	 another,	 silent	 and	 trapped	 inside	 the	 world	 of	 their	 unspoken,	 private
thoughts.	The	waters	never	blended,	and	the	currents	of	the	other	were	for	ever	strange	and	forbidding.	There
was	no	comfort	in	these	suppers.	They	were,	in	fact,	excruciating.
She	 quickly	 made	 her	 escape.	 Each	 night,	 retreating	 to	 the	 silk-walled	 chamber	 that	 was	 her	 bedroom.
Where	she	sharpened	and	oiled	her	knife	to	drive	away	the	red	stain.	Solitude	could	be	an	unwelcome	place,
but	even	the	unwelcome	could	become	habit.
Lostara	had	heard	Banaschar’s	footsteps	as	he	headed	for	his	temple	of	maps.	They	were	steady	this	night,
those	 footsteps,	 which	 meant	 he	 was	 more	 or	 less	 sober.	 Not	 often	 the	 case,	 alas,	 which	 was	 too	 bad—or
perhaps	 not.	 Sometimes—his	 clear,	 sober	 times—the	 bleak	 horror	 in	 his	 eyes	 could	 overwhelm.	 What	 had	 it
been	like,	worshipping	the	Worm	of	Autumn,	that	pale	bitch	of	decay?	It	would	take	a	particular	person	to	be
drawn	 to	 such	 a	 thing.	 One	 for	 whom	 abject	 terror	 meant	 facing	 the	 nightmare.	 Or,	 conversely,	 one	 who
hungered	 for	 what	 could	 not	 be	 avoided,	 the	 breaking	 down	 of	 flesh	 and	 dreams,	 the	 knowledge	 of	 the
multitude	of	carrion	eaters	that	waited	for	him	at	life’s	end.
But	the	Worm	had	cast	him	out.	She	had	embraced	all	her	other	lovers,	but	not	Banaschar.	What	did	that
mean	 to	 the	 man?	 The	 eaters	 would	 have	 to	 wait.	 The	 nightmare	 was	 not	 yet	 ready	 to	 meet	 his	 eyes.
Obeisance	to	the	inevitable	was	denied.	Go	away.
So,	he	would	begin	the	rotting	from	the	inside	out.	Spilling	libations	to	drown	the	altar	of	his	own	soul.	It	was
not	desecration,	it	was	worship.
The	knife-edge	went	snick	against	the	whetstone,	steady	as	a	heartbeat,	each	side	in	counter-beat	as	she
flipped	the	blade	in	perfect	rhythm.	Snick	snick	snick	.	.	.
Here	 in	 this	 cloth	 house,	 the	 others	 had	 their	 rituals.	 While	 she—she	 had	 her	 tasks	 of	 maintenance	 and
preparedness.	As	befitted	a	soldier.
	
Stormy	sat,	back	against	the	stepped	rail	that	served	as	the	barge’s	gunwale,	positioned	just	so.	Opposite,	the
jade	slashes	loomed	in	the	south	sky,	fierce	and	ominous,	and	to	his	eyes	it	seemed	the	heavens	were	coming
for	him,	a	personal	and	most	private	vendetta.	He	tried	to	think	of	a	guilt	worthy	of	the	magnitude.	That	pouch
of	coins	he’d	once	lifted	from	a	drunk	noble	in	Falar?	He’d	been	able	to	buy	a	decent	knife	with	that.	How	old
had	he	been?	Ten?	Twelve?
Maybe	that	passed-out	woman	he’d	groped?	That	friend	of	his	aunt’s,	easily	twice	his	age—her	tits	had	felt
huge	 in	 his	 hands,	 heavy	 and	 wayward,	 and	 she’d	 moaned	 when	 he	 pinched	 her	 nipples,	 legs	 shifting	 and


opening	up—and	what	would	a	fifteen-year-old	boy	do	with	that?	Well,	the	obvious,	he	supposed.	In	went	his
finger,	and	then	a	few	more.
At	some	point	she’d	opened	her	eyes,	frowned	up	at	him,	as	if	trying	to	place	him.	And	then	she’d	sighed,
the	way	a	mother	sighed	when	a	wide-eyed	son	pressed	her	with	awkward	questions.	And	she	took	hold	of
that	hand	with	all	its	probing	fingers—he’d	expected	her	to	pull	him	out.	Instead,	she	pushed	the	whole	hand
inside.	He	didn’t	even	think	that	was	possible.
Drunk	women	still	held	a	certain	fascination	for	Stormy,	but	he	never	went	after	them,	in	case	he	heard	that
sigh	 again,	 the	 one	 that	 could	 turn	 him	 back	 into	 a	 nervous,	 lip-licking	 fifteen-year-old.	 Guilt,	 aye,	 it	 was	 a
terrible	thing.	The	world	tilted,	came	back,	eager	to	crush	him	flat.	Because	doing	something	wrong	pushed	it
the	 other	 way,	 didn’t	 it?	 Keep	 pushing	 until	 you	 lose	 your	 footing	 and	 then	 wait	 for	 the	 sudden	 shadow,	 the
huge	 thing	 blotting	 out	 the	 sky.	 Splat	 was	 another	 word	 for	 justice,	 as	 far	 as	 he	 was	 concerned.	 When	 it	 all
comes	back,	aye.
He’d	 thrown	 his	 sister	 into	 a	 pond,	 once.	 But	 then,	 she’d	 been	 doing	 that	 to	 him	 for	 years,	 until	 that	 day
when	he	realized	he	was	bigger	and	stronger	than	she	was.	She’d	hissed	and	spat	her	way	back	out,	a	look	of
outrage	on	her	face.	Recalling	that,	Stormy	smiled.	Justice	by	his	own	hand—no	reason	for	feeling	guilty	about
that	one.
He’d	killed	plenty	of	people,	of	course,	but	only	because	they’d	been	trying	to	kill	him	and	would	have	done
just	that	if	he’d	let	them.	So	that	didn’t	count.	It	was	the	soldier’s	pact,	after	all,	and	for	all	the	right	decisions
that	kept	one	alive,	a	thousand	things	one	could	do	nothing	about	could	take	a	fool	down.	The	enemy	wasn’t
just	 the	 one	 in	 front	 of	 you—it	 was	 the	 uncertain	 ground	 underfoot,	 the	 stray	 arrow,	 the	 flash	 of	 blinding
sunlight,	the	gust	of	grit	in	the	eye,	the	sudden	muscle	cramp	or	the	snapped	blade.	A	soldier	fought	against	a
world	of	enemies	each	and	every	time,	and	walking	free	of	that	was	a	glory	to	make	the	gods	jealous.	Maybe
the	guilt	showed	up,	but	that	was	later,	like	an	aftertaste	when	you	can’t	even	remember	the	taste	itself.	It	was
thin,	not	quite	real,	and	to	chew	on	it	too	long	was	just	self-indulgence,	as	bad	as	probing	a	loose	tooth.
He	glared	at	the	southern	night	sky.	This	celestial	arbiter	was	indifferent	to	everything	but	the	punishment	it
would	deliver.	Cut	sharp	as	a	gem,	five	jade	swords	were	swinging	down.
Of	 course	 they	 weren’t	 all	 aiming	 at	 him.	 It	 just	 felt	 that	 way,	 on	 this	 steamy	 night	 with	 the	 river	 full	 of
glinting	 eyes	 from	 those	 damned	 crocodiles—and	 they	 wanted	 him	 too.	 He’d	 heard	 from	 the	 barge	 hands
about	 how	 they’d	 tip	 a	 boat	 if	 they	 could	 and	 then	 swarm	 the	 hapless	 victims,	 tearing	 them	 to	 pieces.	 He
shivered.
‘There’s	a	glamour	about	you,	Adjutant.’
Stormy	looked	up.	‘I’m	a	corporal,	High	Mage.’
‘And	I’m	a	squad	mage,	aye.’
‘You	was	a	squad	mage,	just	like	I	was	maybe	once	an	Adjutant,	but	now	you’re	a	High	Mage	and	I’m	a
corporal.’
Quick	 Ben	 shrugged	 beneath	 his	 rain-cape,	 which	 he’d	 drawn	 tight.	 ‘At	 first	 I	 thought	 it	 was	 just	 the
Slashes,	giving	you	that	glow.	But	then,	I	saw	how	it	flickered—like	flames	under	your	skin,	Stormy.’
‘You’re	seeing	things.	Go	scare	someone	else.’
‘Where’s	Gesler?’
‘How	should	I	know?	On	some	other	barge.’
‘Fires	are	burning	on	the	Wastelands.’
Stormy	started,	scowled	up	at	Quick	Ben.	‘What’s	that?’
‘Sorry?’
‘What	was	that	you	were	saying?	About	fires?’
‘The	ones	under	your	skin?’
‘No,	the	Wastelands.’
‘No	idea,	Adjutant.’	Quick	Ben	turned	away,	strangely	ghostly,	and	then	wandered	off.
Stormy	stared	after	him,	chewing	at	his	lower	lip,	and	from	the	whiskers	there	he	tasted	bits	of	stew.	His
stomach	rumbled.
	
They	 weren’t	 on	 any	 official	 list,	 which	 meant	 no	 ink-stained	 clerk	 had	 a	 chance	 to	 break	 them	 up	 for	 this
voyage.	 Sergeant	 Sunrise	 thrice-blessed	 the	 Errant	 for	 that.	 He	 lounged	 on	 a	 mass	 of	 spare	 bedrolls,	 feeling


half-drunk	with	all	this	freedom.	And	the	camaraderie.	He	already	loved	all	the	soldiers	in	this	company,	and
the	 thought	 that	 it	 was	 a	 continuation	 of	 a	 famous	 Malazan	 company	 made	 him	 proud	 and	 eager	 to	 prove
himself,	and	he	knew	he	wasn’t	alone	in	that.
Dead	Hedge	was	the	perfect	commander,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned.	A	man	 brimming	with	enthusiasm
and	boundless	energy.	Happy	to	be	back,	Sunrise	surmised.	From	that	dead	place	where	the	dead	went	after
they	were	dead.	It	had	been	a	long	walk,	or	so	Hedge	had	said	when	he’d	been	cajoling	them	all	on	the	long
march	to	the	river.	‘You	think	this	is	bad?	Try	walking	on	a	plain	of	bones	that	stretches	to	the	damned
horizon!	 Try	 being	 chased	 by	 Deragoth’—whatever	 they	 were,	 they	 sounded	 bad—‘and	 stalked	 by	 an
evil	T’lan	Imass!’	Sunrise	wasn’t	sure	what	T’lan	Imass	were	either,	but	Hedge	had	said	they	were	evil	so	he
was	glad	never	to	have	met	one.
‘Death,	 dear	 soldiers,	 is	 just	 another	 warren.	 Any	 of	 you	 know	 what	 a	 warren	 is?	 .	 .	 .	 Gods,	 you
might	as	well	be	living	in	mud	huts!	A	warren,	friends,	is	like	a	row	of	jugs	on	a	shelf	behind	the	bar.
Pick	one,	pull	the	stopper,	and	drink.	That’s	what	mages	do.	Drink	too	much	and	it	kills	you.	But	just
enough	 and	 you	 can	 use	 it	 to	 do	 magic.	 It’s	 fuel,	 but	 each	 jug	 is	 different—tastes	 different,	 does
different	magic.	Now,	there’s	a	few	out	there,	like	our	High	Mage,	who	can	drink	from	’em	all,	but	that’s
because	he’s	insane.’
Sunrise	 wondered	 where	 that	 bar	 was,	 because	 he’d	 like	 to	 try	 some	 of	 those	 jugs.	 But	 he	 was	 afraid	 to
ask.	You	probably	needed	special	permission	to	get	in	there.	Of	course,	drinking	always	caused	him	trouble,	so
maybe	it	was	just	as	well	that	the	Warrens	Bar	was	in	some	city	in	faraway	Malaz.	Besides,	it’d	be	crowded
with	mages,	and	mages	made	Sunrise	nervous.	Especially	High	Mage	Quick	Ben,	who	seemed	to	be	mad	at
Dead	Hedge	for	some	reason.	Mad?	More	like	furious.	But	Dead	Hedge	just	laughed	it	off,	because	nothing
could	put	him	in	a	bad	mood	for	very	long.
Corporal	 Rumjugs	 waddled	 into	 view,	 sighing	 heavily	 as	 she	 seated	 herself	 on	 a	 bale.	 ‘What	 a	 workout!
You’d	think	these	soldiers	never	before	held	a	decent	woman.’
‘A	good	night	then?’	Sunrise	asked.
‘My	money	purse	is	bulging,	Sunny,	and	I’m	leaking	every	which	way.’
She’d	lost	some	weight,	just	like	her	friend,	Sweetlard.	That	march	had	almost	done	them	both	in.	But	they
were	still	big,	big	in	that	way	of	swallowing	a	man	up	and	it	sure	seemed	there	were	lots	of	men	who	liked	that
just	fine.	For	himself,	he	preferred	to	make	out	 a	bit	more	of	 an	actual	body	under	 all	that	fat.	Another	few
months	of	marching	and	they’d	be	perfect.
‘I’m	going	to	start	charging	them	ones	who	like	to	watch,	too.	Why	should	that	be	free?’
‘You’re	right	in	that,	Rumjugs.	Ain’t	nothing	should	be	for	free.	But	that’s	where	us	Letherii	are	different
from	the	Malazans.	We	see	the	truth	of	that	and	it’s	no	problem.	Malazans,	they	just	complain.’
‘Worse	 is	 all	 the	 marriage	 offers	 I’m	 getting.	 They	 don’t	 want	 me	 to	 stop	 working,	 those	 ones,	 they	 just
want	to	be	married	to	me.	Open-minded,	I’ll	grant	you	that.	With	Malazans,	pretty	much	anything	goes.	It’s	no
wonder	they	conquered	half	the	world.’
Sweetlard	joined	them	from	the	other	side	of	the	deck.	‘Errant’s	shrivelled	cock,	I	can	barely	walk!’
‘Rest	the	slabs,	sweetie,’	Rumjugs	offered,	waving	a	plump	hand	at	a	nearby	bale	close	to	the	lantern.
‘Where’s	 Nose	 Stream?’	 Sweetlard	 asked.	 ‘I’d	 heard	 he	 was	 going	 to	 talk	 to	 the	 Boss.	 About	 us	 trying
some	of	them	new	missions—’
‘Munitions,’	corrected	Rumjugs.
‘Right,	 munitions.	 I	 mean,	 that	 sword	 I	 got,	 what	 am	 I	 supposed	 to	 do	 with	 it?	 I	 was	 collared	 to	 clear	 an
overgrown	lot	once	when	I	was	little,	and	I	took	one	look	at	them	machetes	and	I	threw	up	all	over	the	Penal
Mistress.	 Sharp	 edges	 give	 me	 the	 shakes—I	 got	 too	 much	 that	 looks	 too	 easy	 to	 cut,	 if	 you	 know	 what	 I
mean.’
‘We	 can’t	 do	 nothing	 with	 the	 ones	 Bavedict’s	 made	 up,’	 said	 Sunrise.	 ‘Not	 until	 we’re	 off	 these	 barges.
And	even	then,	we	got	to	work	in	secret.	Boss	doesn’t	want	anybody	else	knowing	anything	about	them,	you
see?’
‘But	why?’	Sweetlard	demanded.
‘Cos,	love,’	drawled	Rumjugs,	‘there’s	other	sappers,	right?	In	the	Bonehunters.	They	see	what	Bavedict’s
come	up	with	and	everyone	will	want	’em,	and	before	you	know	it,	all	the	powders	and	potions	are	used	up
and	we	got	us	nothing.’


‘The	greedy	bastards!’
‘So	make	sure	you	say	nothing,	right?	Even	when	you’re	working,	I	mean.’
‘I	hear	you,	Rummy	Cups.	No	worries	in	that	regard—I	can’t	get	a	word	in	with	all	the	marriage	proposals.’
‘You	too?	Why’s	they	all	so	desperate,	I	wonder?’
‘Children,’	said	Sunrise.	‘They	want	children	and	they	want	’em	quick.’
‘Why	would	they	all	want	that?’	Sweetlard	asked.
The	only	answer	that	came	to	Sunrise	was	a	grim	one,	and	he	hesitated.
After	a	moment	Rumjugs	gusted	out	a	loud	sigh.	‘Errant’s	balls.	They’re	all	expectin’	to	die.’
‘Not	 the	 best	 attitude,’	 mused	 Sweetlard,	 as	 she	 pulled	 out	 a	 leaf	 stick	 and	 leaned	 in	 to	 the	 lantern	 slung
close	to	her	left	shoulder.	Once	the	end	was	smouldering,	she	drew	it	to	a	bright	coal	and	then	settled	back.
‘Spirits	below,	I’m	chafing.’
‘When	did	you	last	have	a	drink?’	Rumjugs	asked	her.
‘Weeks	now.	You?’
‘Same.	Funny	how	things	kind	of	clear	up.’
‘Funny,	aye.’
Sunrise	smiled	to	himself	at	hearing	Sweetlard	try	out	that	Malazan	way	of	talking.	‘Aye.’	It’s	a	good	word,
I	think.	More	a	whole	attitude	than	a	word,	really.	With	lots	of	meaning	in	it,	too.	A	bit	of	‘yes’	and	a	bit
of	‘well,	fuck’	and	maybe	some	‘we’re	all	in	this	mess	together’.	So,	a	word	to	sum	up	the	Malazans.	He
uttered	his	own	sigh	and	settled	his	head	back.	‘Aye,’	he	said.
And	the	others	nodded.	He	knew	they	did,	and	he	didn’t	even	have	to	look.
We’re	tightening	up.	Just	like	Dead	Hedge	said	we	would.	Just	like	that,	aye.
	
‘Idle	hands,	soldier.	Take	hold	of	that	chest	there	and	follow	me.’
‘I	got	an	idea	about	what	you	can	t-take	hold	of,	Master	Sergeant,	and	you	don’t	n-need	my	help	at	all.’
Pores	wheeled	on	the	man.	‘Impudence?	Insubordination?	Mutiny?’
‘K-keep	going,	sir,	and	we	can	end	on	r-r-r-regicide.’
‘Well	 now,’	 Pores	 said,	 advancing	 to	 stand	 in	 front	 of	 the	 solid,	 scowling	 bastard.	 ‘I	 didn’t	 take	 you	 for	 a
mouthy	one,	Corporal.	What	squad	and	who’s	your	sergeant?’
The	man’s	right	cheek	bulged	with	something	foul—the	Malazans	were	picking	up	disgusting	local	habits—
and	 he	 worked	 it	 for	 a	 moment	 before	 saying,	 ‘Eighth	 Legion,	 Ninth	 c-c-c-company,	 Fourth	 su-su-squad.
Sergeant	F-F-F-Fiddler.	Corporal	Tarr,	na-na-na-not	at	your	service,	Master	Sergeant.’
‘Think	you	got	spine,	Corporal?’
‘Spine?	I’m	a	f-f-f-fucking	tree,	and	you	ain’t	the	wind	to	b-b-b-blow	me	down.	Now,	as	you	can	s-s-s-see,
I’m	trying	to	wake	up	here,	since	I’m	c-c-c-coming	on	my	watch.	You	want	some	fool	to	t-t-tote	your	ill-gotten
spoils,	find	someone	else.’
‘What’s	that	in	your	mouth?’
‘Rylig,	it’s	c-c-c-called.	D’ras.	You	use	it	to	wake	you	up	shuh-shuh-shuh-sharp.’
Pores	studied	the	man’s	now	glittering	eyes,	the	sudden	cascade	of	jumpy	twitches	on	his	face.	‘You	sure
you’re	supposed	to	chew	the	whole	wad,	Corporal?’
‘You	m-may	huh-huh-have	a	p-p-p-point	theh-theh-there.’
‘Spit	that	ow-ow-out,	Corporal,	before	your	head	explodes.’
‘Ccccandoat,	Mas-Mas-mmmmfuckface.	Spenspenspensive—’
The	idiot	was	starting	to	pop	like	a	seed	on	a	hot	rock.	Pores	took	Tarr	by	the	throat	and	forced	him	half
over	the	rail.	‘Spit	it	out,	you	fool!’
He	heard	gagging,	and	then	ragged	coughing.	The	corporal’s	knees	gave	out,	and	Pores	pulled	hard	to	keep
the	man	upright.	He	stared	a	long	moment	into	Tarr’s	eyes.	‘Next	time,	Corporal,	be	sure	to	listen	when	the
locals	tell	you	how	to	use	it,	right?’
‘H-H-Hood’s	B-B-Breath!’
Pores	stepped	back	as	Tarr	straightened,	the	corporal’s	head	snapping	round	at	every	sound.	‘Go	on,	then,
do	 your	 twenty	 rounds	 for	 every	 two	 your	 partner	 does.	 But	 before	 you	 do,’	 he	 added,	 ‘why	 not	 carry	 that
chest	for	me.’
‘Aye	sir,	easy,	easy.	Watch.’


Fools	 who	 messed	 up	 their	 own	 heads,	 Pores	 reflected,	 were	 the	 easiest	 marks	 of	 all.	 Might	 be	 worth
buying	an	interest	in	this	Rylig	stuff.
	
The	two	half-blood	D’ras	hands	lounged	near	the	starboard	tiller.
‘The	whole	load?’	one	asked,	eyes	wide	with	disbelief.
‘The	whole	load,’	the	other	confirmed.	‘Just	jammed	it	into	his	mouth	and	walked	off.’
‘So	where	is	he	now?’
‘Probably	bailing	the	barge	with	a	tin	cup.	The	leaks	ain’t	got	a	hope	of	keeping	up.’
They	both	laughed.
They	were	still	laughing	when	Corporal	Tarr	found	them.	Coming	up	from	behind.	One	hand	to	each	man’s
belt.	They	wailed	as	they	were	yanked	from	their	feet,	and	wailed	a	second	time	as	they	went	over	the	stern
rail.	Loud	splashes,	followed	by	shrieking.
Clear	 to	 Tarr’s	 unnaturally	 bright	 vision,	 the	 V	 wakes	 of	 maybe	 a	 dozen	 crocodiles	 fast	 closing	 in.	 He’d
forgotten	about	those	things.	Too	bad.	He’d	think	about	it	later.
The	alarms	rang	for	a	time,	big	brass	bells	that	soon	slowed	their	frantic	call	and	settled	into	something	more
like	a	mourning	dirge,	before	echoing	to	silence	once	again.
Life	on	the	river	was	a	nasty	business,	nasty	as	nasty	could	get	but	that’s	just	how	it	was.	The	giant	lizards
were	horrible	enough	with	all	those	toothy	jaws	but	then	the	local	hands	started	talking	about	the	river	cows
waiting	downstream,	not	that	river	cows	sounded	particularly	frightening	as	far	as	Tarr	was	concerned,	even
ones	 with	 huge	 tusks	 and	 pig	 eyes.	 He’d	 heard	 a	 score	 of	 confusing	 descriptions	 on	 his	 rounds,	 but	 only
fragmentary	ones,	as	he	was	quickly	past	and	into	the	next	bizarre,	disjointed	conversation,	quick	as	breaths,
quick	as	the	blur	of	his	boots	drumming	the	deck.	Vigilant	patrol,	aye,	no	time	for	lingering,	no	time	for	all	that
unimportant	stuff.	Walk	the	rail	and	walk	the	rail,	round	and	round,	and	this	was	decent	exercise	but	he	should
have	 worn	 his	 chain	 and	 kit	 bag	 and	 maybe	 his	 folding	 shovel,	 and	 double	 time	 might	 be	 required,	 just	 so	 he
could	get	to	know	all	these	sudden	faces	jumping	up	in	front	of	him,	know	them	inside	and	out	and	their	names,
too,	and	whether	they	liked	smoked	fish	and	chilled	beer	or	proper	piss-warm	ale	and	so	many	bare	feet	what
if	someone	attacked	right	here	and	now?	they’d	all	have	nails	stuck	in	their	tender	soles	and	he’d	be	all	alone
leading	the	charge	but	that’d	be	fine	since	he	could	kill	anything	right	now,	even	bats	because	they	weren’t	so
fast	were	they?	not	as	fast	as	those	little	burning	sparks	racing	everywhere	into	his	brain	and	back	out	again
and	in	one	ear	out	the	other	two	and	look	at	this!	Marching	on	his	knees,	it	was	easy!	Good	thing	since	he’d
worn	his	legs	down	to	stumps	and	now	the	deck	was	coming	up	fast	to	knock	on	his	nose	and	see	if	anyone
was	home	but	was	anyone	home?	only	the	bats—
	
‘He	going	to	live?’	Badan	Gruk	asked.
‘Eh?	Egit	primbly	so,	lurky	bhagger.’
‘Good.	Keep	him	under	those	blankets—I	never	seen	a	man	sweat	like	that,	he’s	bound	to	chill	himself	to
the	bone,	and	keep	forcing	water	down	him.’
‘Dentellit	meen	bazness,	Sornt!	Eenit	known	eeler,	eh?’
‘Fine	then,	just	make	sure	you	heal	him.	Sergeant	Fiddler	will	not	be	pleased	to	hear	his	corporal	went	and
died	in	your	care.’
‘Fabbler	kint	shit	ding!	Ee	nair	feered	im!’
‘Really?	Then	you’re	an	idiot,	Nep.’
Badan	 Gruk	 frowned	 down	 at	 Tarr.	 Some	 new	 fever	 to	 chase	 them	 down?	 He	 hoped	 not.	 It	 looked
particularly	 unpleasant,	 reminding	 him	 of	 the	 shaking	 fever,	 only	 worse.	 This	 place	 had	 almost	 as	 many
miserable	diseases	and	parasites	as	in	the	jungles	of	Dal	Hon.
Feeling	nostalgic,	the	sergeant	left	Tarr	to	Nep	Furrow’s	ministrations.	He	would	have	been	happier	if	he’d
been	on	the	same	barge	as	Sinter,	even	Kisswhere.	Corporal	Ruffle	was	around,	but	she’d	discovered	a	bones
and	trough	game	with	a	few	heavies	and	was	either	heading	for	a	sharp	rise	in	her	income	or	a	serious	beating.
No	matter	what,	she’d	make	enemies.	Ruffle	was	like	that.
He	still	didn’t	know	what	to	make	of	this	army,	these	Bonehunters.	He	could	find	nothing—no	detail—that
made	them	what	they	were.	What	we	are.	I’m	one	of	them	now.	There	were	no	great	glories	in	the	history	of


these	 legions—he’d	 been	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 the	 conquest	 of	 Lether	 and	 it	 had	 been	 a	 sordid	 thing.	 When	 the
tooth’s	rotten	right	down	to	its	root,	it’s	no	feat	to	tug	it	out.	Maybe	it	was	a	just	war.	Maybe	it	wasn’t.	Did	it
make	any	difference?	A	soldier	takes	orders	and	a	soldier	fights.	The	enemy	wore	a	thousand	masks	but	they
all	turned	out	the	same.	Just	people	determined	to	stand	in	their	way.	This	was	supposed	to	be	enough.	Was	it?
He	didn’t	know.
Surrounded	 by	 foreigners,	 friendly	 or	 otherwise,	 settled	 a	 kind	 of	 pressure	 on	 every	 Malazan	 soldier	 here.
Demanding	a	shape	to	this	army,	and	yet	something	was	resisting	it,	something	within	the	Bonehunters,	as	if
hidden	forces	pushed	back	against	that	pressure.	We	are	and	we	aren’t,	we	will	and	we	won’t.	Are	we	just
hollow	at	the	core?	Does	it	start	and	end	with	the	Adjunct?	That	notion	felt	uncharitable.	People	were	just
restless,	uneasy	with	all	this	not	knowing.
Who	was	the	enemy	awaiting	them?	What	sort	of	mask	would	they	see	this	time?
Badan	Gruk	could	not	remember	ever	knowing	a	person	who	deliberately	chose	to	do	the	wrong	thing,	the
evil	 thing—no	 doubt	 such	 people	 existed,	 the	 ones	 who	 simply	 didn’t	 care,	 and	 ones	 who,	 for	 all	 he	 knew,
enjoyed	wearing	the	dark	trappings	of	malice.	Armies	served	and	sometimes	they	served	tyrants—bloodthirsty
bastards—and	they	fought	against	decent,	right-minded	folk	out	of	fear	and	in	the	interests	of	self-preservation,
and	 out	 of	 greed,	 too,	 come	 to	 that.	 Did	 they	 see	 themselves	 as	 evil?	 How	 could	 they	 not?	 But	 then,	 how
many	campaigns	could	you	fight,	if	you	were	in	that	army?	How	many	before	you	started	feeling	sick
inside?	In	your	gut.	In	your	head.	When	the	momentum	of	all	those	conquests	starts	to	falter,	aye,	what
then?
Or	when	your	tyrant	Empress	betrays	you?
No	one	talked	much	about	that,	and	yet	Badan	Gruk	suspected	it	was	the	sliver	of	jagged	iron	lodged	in	the
heart	of	the	Bonehunters,	and	the	bleeding	never	slowed.	We	did	everything	she	asked	of	us.	The	Adjunct
followed	her	orders	and	got	it	done.	The	rebellion	crushed,	the	leaders	dead	or	scattered.	Seven	Cities
brought	under	the	imperial	heel	once	again.	In	the	name	of	order	and	law	and	smiling	merchants.	But
none	of	it	mattered.	The	Empress	twitched	a	finger	and	the	spikes	were	readied	for	our	heads.
Anger	burned	for	only	so	long.	Enough	to	cut	a	messy	path	through	the	Empire	of	Lether.	And	then	it	was
done.	That	‘then’	was	now.	What	did	they	have	to	take	anger’s	place?	We	are	to	be	Unwitnessed,	she	said.
We	must	fight	for	each	other	and	ourselves	and	no	one	else.	We	must	fight	for	survival,	but	that	cannot
hold	us	together—it’s	just	as	likely	to	tear	us	apart.
The	Adjunct	held	to	an	irrational	faith—in	her	soldiers,	in	their	resolve.	We’re	a	fragile	army	and	there	are
enough	reasons	for	that	being	true.	That	sliver	needs	to	be	pulled,	the	wound	needs	to	knit.
We’re	 far	 from	 the	 Malazan	 Empire	 now,	 but	 we	 carry	 its	 name	 with	 us.	 It’s	 even	 what	 we	 call
ourselves.	Malazans.	Gods	below,	there’s	no	way	out	of	this,	is	there?
He	turned	away	from	the	inky	river	carrying	them	along,	scanned	the	huddled,	sleeping	forms	of	his	fellow
soldiers.	Covering	every	available	space	on	the	deck,	motionless	as	corpses.
Badan	Gruk	fought	off	a	shiver	and	turned	back	to	the	river,	where	nothing	could	resist	the	current	for	long.
	
It	 was	 an	 old	 fancy,	 so	 old	 he’d	 almost	 forgotten	 it.	 A	 grandfather—it	 hardly	 mattered	 whether	 he’d	 been	 a
real	 one	 or	 some	 old	 man	 who’d	 thrown	 on	 that	 hat	 for	 the	 duration	 of	 the	 memory—had	 taken	 him	 to	 the
Malaz	docks,	where	they’d	spent	a	sunny	afternoon	fishing	for	collar-gills	and	blue-tube	eels.	‘Take	a	care	on
keeping	the	bait	small,	lad.	There’s	a	demon	at	the	bottom	of	this	harbour.	Sometimes	it	gets	hungry	or
maybe	just	annoyed.	I	heard	of	fishers	snapped	right	off	this	dock,	so	keep	the	bait	small	and	keep	an
eye	on	the	water.’	Old	men	lived	for	stories	like	that.	Putting	the	fright	into	wide-eyed	runts	who	sat	with	their
little	legs	dangling	off	the	edge	of	the	pier,	runts	with	all	the	hopes	children	have	and	wasn’t	that	what	fishing
was	all	about?
Fiddler	 couldn’t	 remember	 if	 they’d	 caught	 anything	 that	 day.	 Hopes	 had	 a	 way	 of	 sinking	 fast	 once	 you
stepped	out	of	childhood.	In	any	case,	escaping	this	motley	throng	of	soldiers,	he’d	scrounged	a	decent	line	and
a	catfish-spine	hook.	Using	a	sliver	of	salted	bhederin	for	bait	and	a	bent,	holed	coin	buffed	to	flash,	he	trailed
the	 line	 out	 behind	 the	 barge.	 There	 was	 always	 the	 chance	 of	 snagging	 something	 ugly,	 like	 one	 of	 those
crocodiles,	but	he	didn’t	think	it	likely.	He	did,	however,	make	a	point	of	not	dangling	his	legs	over	the	edge.
Wrong	bait.
Balm	wandered	up	after	a	time	and	sat	down	beside	him.	‘Catch	anything?’


‘Make	one	of	two	guesses	and	you’ll	be	there,’	Fiddler	replied.
‘Funny	though,	Fid,	seen	plenty	jumping	earlier.’
‘That	was	dusk—tomorrow	round	that	time	I’ll	float	something	looking	like	a	fly.	Find	any	of	your	squad?’
‘No,	not	one.	Feels	like	someone	cut	off	my	fingers.	I’m	actually	looking	forward	to	getting	back	on	land.’
‘You	always	were	a	lousy	marine,	Balm.’
The	Dal	Honese	nodded.	‘And	a	worse	soldier.’
‘Now	I	didn’t	say—’
‘Oh	but	I	am.	I	lose	myself.	I	get	confused.’
‘You	just	need	pointing	in	the	right	direction,	and	then	you’re	fine,	Balm.	A	mean	scrapper,	in	fact.’
‘Aye,	fighting	my	way	clear	of	all	that	fug.	You	was	always	lucky,	Fid.	You	got	that	cold	iron	that	makes
thinking	fast	and	clear	easy	for	you.	I	ain’t	neither	hot	or	cold,	you	see.	I’m	more	like	lead	or	something.’
‘No	one	in	your	squad	has	ever	complained,	Balm.’
‘Well,	I	like	them	and	all,	but	I	can’t	say	that	they’re	the	smartest	people	I	know.’
‘Throatslitter?	Deadsmell?	They	seem	to	have	plenty	of	wits.’
‘Wits,	aye.	Smart,	no.	I	remember	when	I	was	a	young	boy.	In	the	village	there	was	another	boy,	about	my
age.	 Was	 always	 smiling,	 even	 when	 there	 was	 nothing	 to	 smile	 about.	 And	 always	 getting	 into	 trouble—
couldn’t	keep	his	nose	out	of	anything.	Some	of	the	older	boys	would	pick	on	him—I	saw	him	punched	in	the
face	once,	and	he	stood	there	bleeding,	that	damned	smile	on	his	face.	Anyway,	one	day	he	stuck	his	nose	into
the	wrong	thing—no	one	ever	talked	about	what	it	was,	but	we	found	that	boy	lying	dead	behind	a	hut.	Every
bone	broken.	And	on	his	face,	all	speckled	in	blood,	there	was	that	smile.’
‘Ever	see	a	caged	ape,	Balm?	You	must	have.	That	smile	you	kept	seeing	was	fear.’
‘I	know	it	now,	Fid,	you	don’t	need	to	tell	me.	The	point	is,	Throatslitter	and	Deadsmell,	they	make	me	think
of	that	boy,	the	way	he	always	got	into	things	he	shouldn’t	have.	Wits	enough	to	be	curious,	not	smart	enough
to	be	cautious.’
Fiddler	grunted.	‘I’m	trying	to	think	of	any	soldier	in	my	squad	who	fits	that	description.	It	occurs	to	me	that
wits	might	be	hard	to	find	among	’em,	barring	maybe	Bottle—but	he’s	smart	enough	to	keep	his	head	down.	I
think.	So	far,	anyway.	As	for	the	rest	of	them,	they	like	it	simple	and	if	it	ain’t	simple,	why,	they	just	get	mad
and	break	something.’
‘You	got	yourself	a	good	squad	there,	Fid.’
‘They’ll	do.’
A	sudden	tug.	He	began	hitching	the	line	back	in.	‘Not	much	of	a	fight,	can’t	be	very	big.’	Moments	later	he
drew	the	hook	into	view.	They	stared	down	at	a	fish	not	much	bigger	than	the	bait,	but	it	had	lots	of	teeth.
Balm	snorted.	‘Look,	it’s	smiling!’
	
It	was	late	and	Brys	Beddict	was	ready	for	bed,	but	the	aide’s	face	was	set,	as	if	the	young	man	had	already
weathered	a	tirade.	‘Very	well,	send	her	in.’
The	 aide	 bowed	 and	 backed	 away	 with	 evident	 relief,	 turning	 smartly	 at	 the	 silk	 curtain,	 slipping	 past	 to
make	his	way	to	the	outer	midship	deck.	A	short	time	later	Brys	heard	boots	thumping	from	bare	boards	to	the
rug-strewn	corridor	leading	to	his	private	chamber.	Sighing,	he	rose	from	his	camp	chair	and	adjusted	his	cloak.
Atri-Ceda	Aranict	edged	aside	the	curtain	and	stepped	within.	She	was	tall,	somewhere	in	her	late	thirties,
though	 the	 deep	 creases	 framing	 her	 mouth—from	 a	 lifetime	 of	 rustleaf—made	 her	 look	 older;	 although
something	about	those	lines	suited	her	well.	Her	sun-faded	brown	hair	was	straight	and	hung	loose,	down	to
either	side	of	her	breasts.	The	uniform	of	her	rank	seemed	an	ill	fit,	as	if	she	was	yet	to	become	accustomed	to
this	new	career.	Bugg	had	found	her	in	the	most	recent	troll	for	potential	cedas.	She	had	been	employed	as	a
midwife	in	a	household	in	the	city	of	Trate,	which	had	suffered	terribly	at	the	beginning	of	the	Edur	invasion.
Her	greatest	talents	were	in	healing,	although	Bugg	had	assured	Brys	that	she	possessed	the	potential	for	other
magics.
To	date,	his	impression	of	her	was	as	a	singularly	dour	and	uncommunicative	woman,	so	despite	the	lateness
he	found	himself	regarding	her	with	genuine	interest.	‘Atri-Ceda,	what	is	it	that	is	so	urgent?’
She	seemed	momentarily	at	a	loss,	as	if	she	had	not	expected	to	succeed	in	receiving	this	audience.	She	met
his	 eyes	 in	 the	 briefest	 flicker,	 which	 seemed	 to	 fluster	 her	 even	 more,	 and	 then	 she	 cleared	 her	 throat.
‘Commander,	it	is	best—I	mean,	you	need	to	see	for	yourself.	Will	you	permit	me,	sir?’


Bemused,	Brys	nodded.
‘I	have	been	exploring	the	warrens—the	Malazan	way	of	sorcery.	It’s	so	much	more	.	.	.	elegant.’	As	she
was	speaking	she	was	rummaging	inside	the	small	leather	pouch	tied	to	her	belt.	She	withdrew	her	hand	and
opened	it,	revealing	a	small	amount	of	grainy	dirt.	‘Do	you	see,	sir?’
Brys	tilted	forward.	‘That	would	be	dirt,	Aranict?’
A	quick	frown	of	irritation	that	delighted	him.	‘Look	more	carefully,	sir.’
He	did.	Watching	it	settle,	and	then	settle	some	more—no,	the	soil	was	in	motion.	 ‘You	 have	 ensorcelled
this	handful	of	earth?	Er,	well	done,	Atri-Ceda.’
The	woman	snorted,	and	then	her	breath	caught.	‘My	apologies,	Commander.	It’s	obvious	I’ve	not	explained
myself—’
‘As	of	yet	you’ve	not	explained	anything.’
‘Sorry	sir.	I	thought,	if	I	didn’t	show	you,	you’d	have	no	reason	to	believe	me—’
‘Aranict,	you	are	my	Atri-Ceda.	You	would	not	serve	me	well	if	I	viewed	you	with	scepticism.	Please,	go
on,	and	please	relax—I	did	not	mean	to	sound	impatient.	In	truth,	this	restless	soil	is	most	remarkable.’
‘No	sir,	not	in	itself.	Any	Malazan	mage	could	manage	this	with	barely	the	twitch	of	a	finger.	The	fact	is,
I’m	not	the	source	of	this.’
‘Oh,	then	who	is?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Before	we	boarded,	sir,	I	was	standing	down	at	the	water’s	edge—there’d	been	a	hatching
of	 watersnakes,	 and	 I	 was	 watching	 the	 little	 ones	 slither	 into	 the	 reeds—creatures	 interest	 me,	 sir.	 And	 I
noticed	something	in	the	mud	where	the	serpents	had	crawled.	Parts	of	it	were	moving,	shifting	about,	as	you
see	here.	Naturally,	I	suspected	that	some	insect	or	mollusc	was	beneath	the	surface,	so	I	probed—’
‘Bare-handed?	Was	that	wise?’
‘Probably	 not,	 as	 the	 whole	 bank	 was	 full	 of	 mud-urchins,	 but	 I	 could	 see	 that	 this	 was	 different.	 In	 any
case,	sir,	I	found	nothing.	But	the	mud	in	my	hand	fairly	seethed,	as	if	it	possessed	a	life	of	its	own.’
Brys	peered	at	the	dirt	cupped	in	her	palm	once	more.	‘And	is	this	the	offending	material?’
‘Yes,	sir.	And	that’s	where	the	Malazan	warrens	come	into	this.	It’s	called	sympathetic	linkage.	Rather,	with
this	bit	of	dirt,	I	can	find	others	just	like	it.’
‘Along	the	river?’
Her	eyes	met	his	again,	and	once	more	they	flitted	away—and	with	a	start	Brys	realized	that	Aranict	was
shy.	The	notion	endeared	her	to	him	and	he	felt	a	wave	of	sympathy,	warm	as	a	caress.	‘Sir,	it	started	there—
since	 I’m	 new	 to	 working	 this	 kind	 of	 magic—but	 then	 it	 spread,	 inland,	 and	 I	 could	 sense	 the	 places	 of	 its
greatest	 manifestation—this	 swarming	 power	 in	 the	 ground,	 I	 mean.	 In	 mud,	 in	 sands,	 the	 range,	 sir,	 is	 vast.
But	where	you’ll	find	more	than	anywhere	else,	Commander,	is	in	the	Wastelands.’
‘I	see.	What,	do	you	think,	do	these	modest	disturbances	signify?’
‘That	something’s	just	beginning,	sir.	But,	I	need	to	talk	to	some	Malazan	mages—they	know	so	much	more
than	I	do.	They	can	take	it	farther	than	I	have	managed.’
‘Atri-Ceda,	you	have	only	begun	your	explorations	of	the	Malazan	warrens,	and	yet	you	have	extended	your
sensitivity	 all	 the	 way	 to	 the	 Wastelands.	 I	 see	 now	 why	 the	 Ceda	 held	 you	 in	 such	 high	 regard.	 However,
come	the	morning	we	shall	send	you	in	a	launch	to	a	Malazan	barge.’
‘Perhaps	the	one	where	Ebron	will	be	found,	or	Widdershins—’
‘Squad	 mages?	 No,	 Atri-Ceda.	 Like	 it	 or	 not,	 you	 are	 my	 equivalent	 of	 High	 Mage.	 Accordingly,	 your
appropriate	contact	among	the	Bonehunters	is	their	High	Mage,	Adaephon	Ben	Delat.’
All	colour	drained	from	her	face.	Her	knees	buckled.
Brys	had	to	move	quickly	to	take	her	weight	as	she	slumped	in	a	dead	faint.	‘Granthos!	Get	me	a	healer!’
He	heard	some	muffled	response	in	reply	from	the	outer	chamber.
The	 dirt	had	 scattered	 on	to	 the	 rug	 and	 Brys	 caught	motion	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 his	eye.	 It	 was	gathering
together,	forming	a	roiling	heap.	He	thought	he	could	almost	make	out	shapes	within	it,	before	everything	fell
away,	only	to	re-form	once	more.
She	 was	 heavier	 than	 he’d	 expected.	 He	 looked	 down	 at	 her	 face,	 the	 parted	 lips,	 and	 then	 away	 again.
‘Granthos!	Where	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	you?’


Chapter	Seventeen
I	have	reached	an	age	when	youth	itself	is	beauty.
	
A	BRIEF	ASSEMBLY	OF	UGLY	THOUGHTS	(INTERLUDE)
GOTHOS’	FOLLY

	
The	bones	of	the	rythen	rested	on	a	bed	of	glittering	scales,	as	if	in	dying	it	had	shed	its	carpet	of	reptilian	skin,
unfolding	it	upon	the	hard	crystals	of	the	Glass	Desert’s	lifeless	floor:	a	place	to	lie	down,	the	last	nest	of	its
last	 night.	 The	 lizard-wolf	 had	 died	 alone,	 and	 the	 stars	 that	 looked	 down	 upon	 the	 scene	 of	 this	 solitary
surrender	did	not	blink.	Not	once.
No	wind	had	come	to	scatter	the	scales,	and	the	relentless	sun	had	eaten	away	the	toxic	meat	from	around
the	 bones,	 and	 had	 then	 bleached	 and	 polished	 those	 bones	 to	 a	 fine	 golden	 lustre.	 There	 was	 something
dangerous	 about	 them,	 and	 Badalle	 stood	 staring	 down	 at	 the	 hapless	 remains	 for	 some	 time,	 her	 only
movement	 coming	 when	 she	 blew	 the	 flies	 away	 from	 the	 sores	 clustering	 her	 mouth.	 Bones	 like	 gold,	 a
treasure	 assuredly	 cursed.	 ‘Greed	 invites	 death,’	 she	 whispered,	 but	 the	 voice	 broke	 up	 and	 the	 sounds	 that
came	out	were	likely	unintelligible,	even	to	Saddic	who	stood	close	by	her	side.
Her	wings	were	shrivelled,	burnt	down	to	stumps.	Flying	was	but	a	memory	finely	dusted	with	ash,	and	she
found	nothing	inside	to	justify	brushing	it	clean.	Past	glories	dwindled	in	the	distance.	Behind	her,	behind	them,
behind	 them	 all.	 But	 her	 descent	 was	 not	 over.	 Soon,	 she	 knew,	 she	 would	 crawl.	 And	 finally	 slither	 like	 a
drying	worm,	writhing	ineffectually,	making	grand	gestures	that	won	her	nothing.	Then	would	come	the	stillness
of	exhaustion.
She	 must	 have	 seen	 such	 a	 worm	 once.	 She	 must	 have	 knelt	 down	 beside	 it	 as	 children	 did,	 to	 better
observe	 its	 pathetic	 struggles.	 Dragged	 up	 from	 its	 dark	 comforting	 world,	 by	 some	 cruel	 beak	 perhaps,	 and
then	lost	on	the	fly,	striking	a	hard	and	unyielding	surface—a	flagstone,	yes—one	making	up	the	winding	path
in	the	garden.	Injured,	blind	in	the	blazing	sunlight,	it	could	only	pray	to	whatever	gods	it	wanted	to	exist.	The
blessing	of	water,	a	stream	to	swim	back	into	the	soft	soil,	a	sudden	handful	of	sweet	earth	descending	upon	it,
or	the	hand	of	some	merciful	godling	reaching	down,	the	pluck	of	salvation.
She	 had	 watched	 it	 struggle,	 she	 was	 certain	 she	 had.	 But	 she	 could	 not	 recall	 if	 she	 had	 done	 anything
other	 than	 watch.	 Children	 understood	 at	 a	 very	 young	 age	 that	 doing	 nothing	 was	 an	 expression	 of	 power.
Doing	nothing	was	a	choice	swollen	with	omnipotence.	It	was,	in	fact,	godly.
And	this,	she	now	realized,	was	the	reason	why	the	gods	did	nothing.	Proof	of	their	omniscience.	After	all,
to	act	was	to	announce	awful	limitations,	for	it	revealed	that	chance	acted	first,	the	accidents	were	just	that—
events	 beyond	 the	 will	 of	 the	 gods—and	 all	 they	 could	 do	 in	 answer	 was	 to	 attempt	 to	 remedy	 the
consequences,	to	alter	natural	ends.	To	act,	then,	was	an	admission	of	fallibility.
Such	ideas	were	complicated,	but	they	were	clean,	too.	Sharp	as	the	crystals	jutting	from	the	ground	at	her
feet.	 They	 were	 decisive	 in	 catching	 the	 rays	 of	 the	 sun	 and	 cutting	 them	 into	 perfect	 slices,	 proving	 that
rainbows	were	not	bridges	in	the	sky.	And	that	no	salvation	was	forthcoming.	The	Snake	had	become	a	worm,
and	the	worm	was	writhing	on	the	hot	stone.
Children	 withheld.	 Pretending	 to	 be	 gods.	 Fathers	 did	 the	 same,	 unblinking	 when	 the	 children	 begged	 for
food,	for	water.	They	knew	moments	of	nostalgia	and	so	did	nothing,	and	there	was	no	food	and	no	water	and
the	sweet	cool	earth	was	a	memory	finely	dusted	with	ash.
Brayderal	 had	 said	 that	 morning	 that	 she	 had	 seen	 tall	 strangers	 standing	 beneath	 the	 rising	 sun,	 standing,
she	 said,	 on	 the	 ribby	 snake’s	 tail.	 But	 to	 look	 in	 that	 direction	 was	 to	 go	 blind.	 People	 could	 either	 believe
Brayderal	 or	 not	 believe	 her.	 Badalle	 chose	 not	 to	 believe	 her.	 None	 of	 the	 Quitters	 had	 chased	 after	 them,
even	the	Fathers	were	long	gone,	as	were	the	ribbers	and	all	the	eaters	of	dead	and	dying	meat	except	for	the


Shards—who	could	fly	in	from	leagues	away.	No,	the	ribby	snake	was	alone	on	the	Glass	Desert,	and	the	gods
watched	down	and	did	nothing,	to	show	just	how	powerful	they	really	were.
But	she	could	answer	with	her	own	power.	That	was	the	delicious	truth.	She	could	see	them	writhing	in	the
sky,	shrivelling	in	the	sun.	And	she	chose	not	to	pray	to	them.	She	chose	to	say	nothing	at	all.	When	she	had
winged	through	the	heavens,	she	had	sailed	close	to	those	gods,	fresh	and	free	as	a	hatchling.	She	had	seen	the
deep	lines	bracketing	their	worried	eyes.	She	had	seen	the	weathered	tracks	of	their	growing	fear	and	dismay.
But	none	of	these	sentiments	was	a	gift	to	their	worshippers.	The	faces	and	their	expressions	were	the	faces
of	 the	 self-obsessed.	 Such	 knowledge	 was	 fire.	 Feathers	 ignited.	 She	 had	 spiralled	 in	 a	 half-wild	 descent,
unravelling	 smoke	 in	 her	 wake.	 Flashes	 of	 pain,	 truths	 searing	 her	 flesh.	 She	 had	 plunged	 through	 clouds	 of
Shards,	deafened	by	the	hissing	roar	of	wings.	She	had	seen	the	ribby	snake	stretched	out	across	a	glittering
sea,	had	seen—with	a	shock—how	short	and	thin	it	had	grown.
She	thought	again	of	the	gods	now	high	above	her.	Those	faces	were	no	different	from	her	own	face.	The
gods	were	as	broken	as	she	was	broken,	inside	and	out.	Like	her,	they	wandered	a	wasteland	with	nowhere	to
go.
The	Fathers	drove	us	out.	They	were	done	with	children.	Now	she	believed	the	fathers	and	mothers	of
the	gods	had	driven	them	out	as	well,	pushed	them	out	into	the	empty	sky.	And	all	the	while	and	far	below	the
people	crawled	in	their	circles	and	from	high	up	no	one	could	make	sense	of	the	patterns.	The	gods	that	sought
to	make	sense	of	them	were	driven	mad.
‘Badalle.’
She	blinked	in	an	effort	to	clear	her	eyes	of	the	cloudy	skins	that	floated	in	them,	but	they	just	swam	back.
Even	the	gods,	she	now	knew,	were	half-blinded	by	the	clouds.	‘Rutt.’
His	 face	 was	 an	 old	 man’s	 face,	 cracked	 lines	 through	 caked	 dust.	 Held	 was	 wrapped	 tight	 within	 the
mottled	 blanket.	 Rutt’s	 eyes,	 which	 had	 been	 dull	 for	 so	 long	 that	 Badalle	 thought	 they	 had	 always	 been	 so,
were	suddenly	glistening.	As	if	someone	had	licked	them.	‘Many	died	today,’	she	said.	‘We	can	eat.’
‘Badalle.’
She	blew	at	flies.	‘I	have	a	poem.’
But	he	shook	his	head.	‘I—I	can’t	go	on.’
‘Quitters	never	quit,
And	that	is	the	lie	we	live	with
Now	they	walk	us
To	the	end.
Eating	our	tail.
But	we	are	shadows	on	glass
And	the	sun	drags	us	onward.
The	Quitters	have	questions
But	we	are	the	eaters
Of	answers.’
He	stared	at	her.	‘She	was	right,	then.’
‘Brayderal	was	right.	She	has	threads	in	her	blood.	Rutt,	she	will	kill	us	all	if	we	let	her.’
He	looked	away,	and	she	could	see	he	was	about	to	cry.	‘No,	Rutt.	Don’t.’
His	face	crumpled.
She	took	him	as	he	sagged,	took	him	and	somehow	found	the	strength	to	hold	him	up	as	he	shuddered	with
sobs.
Now	 he	 too	 was	 broken.	 But	 they	 couldn’t	 let	 that	 happen.	 She	 couldn’t,	 because	 if	 he	 broke	 then	 the
Quitters	would	get	them	all.	‘Rutt.	Without	you,	Held	is	nothing.	Listen.	I	have	flown	high—I	had	wings,	like
the	gods.	I	went	so	high	I	could	see	how	the	world	curves,	like	the	old	women	used	to	tell	us,	and	I	saw—Rutt,
listen—I	saw	the	end	of	the	Glass	Desert.’
But	he	shook	his	head.
‘And	I	saw	something	else.	A	city,	Rutt.	A	city	of	glass—we	will	find	it	tomorrow.	The	Quitters	won’t	go
there—they	 are	 afraid	 of	 it.	 The	 city,	 it’s	 a	 city	 they	 know	 from	 their	 legends—but	 they’d	 stopped	 believing
those	legends.	And	now	it’s	invisible	to	them—we	can	escape	them,	Rutt.’


‘Badalle—’	his	voice	was	muffled	against	the	skin	and	bone	of	her	neck.	‘Don’t	give	up	on	me.	If	you	give
up,	I	won’t—I	can’t—’
She	had	given	up	long	ago,	but	she	wouldn’t	tell	him	that.	‘I’m	here,	Rutt.’
‘No.	No,	I	mean’—he	pulled	back,	stared	fixedly	into	her	eyes—‘don’t	go	mad.	Please.’
‘Rutt,	I	can’t	fly	any	more.	My	wings	burned	off.	It’s	all	right.’
‘Please.	Promise	me,	Badalle.	Promise!’
‘I	promise,	but	only	if	you	promise	not	to	give	up.’
His	nod	was	shaky.	His	control,	she	could	see,	was	thin	and	cracked	as	burnt	skin.	I	won’t	go	mad,	Rutt.
Don’t	you	see?	I	have	the	power	to	do	nothing.	I	have	all	the	powers	of	a	god.
This	ribby	snake	 will	not	die.	We	don’t	 have	to	do	anything	 at	all,	just	keep	going.	I	have	flown	to
where	the	sun	sets,	and	I	tell	you,	Rutt,	we	are	marching	into	fire.	Beautiful,	perfect	fire.	‘You’ll	see,’	she
said	to	him.
Beside	them	stood	Saddic,	watching,	remembering.	His	enemy	was	dust.
	
What	is,	was.	Illusions	of	change	gathered	windblown	into	hollows	in	hillsides,	among	stones	and	the	exposed
roots	 of	 long-dead	 trees.	 History	 swept	 along	 as	 it	 had	 always	 done,	 and	 all	 that	 is	 new	 finds	 shapes	 of	 old.
Where	stood	towering	masses	of	ice	now	waited	scars	in	the	earth.	Valleys	carried	the	currents	of	ghost	rivers
and	the	wind	wandered	paths	of	heat	and	cold	to	deliver	the	turn	of	every	season.
Such	knowledge	was	agony,	like	a	molten	blade	thrust	to	the	heart.	Birth	was	but	a	repetition	of	what	had
gone	 before.	 Sudden	 light	 was	 a	 revisitation	 of	 the	 moment	 of	 death.	 The	 madness	 of	 struggle	 was	 without
beginning	and	without	end.
Awakening	to	such	things	loosed	a	rasping	sob	from	the	wretched,	rotted	figure	that	clambered	out	from	the
roots	 of	 a	 toppled	 cottonwood	 tree	 sprawled	 across	 an	 old	 oxbow.	 Lifting	 itself	 upright,	 it	 looked	 round,	 the
grey	 hollows	 beneath	 the	 brow-ridges	 gathering	 the	 grainy	 details	 into	 shapes	 of	 meaning.	 A	 broad,	 shallow
valley,	distant	ridges	of	sage	and	firebrush.	Grey-winged	birds	darting	down	the	slopes.
The	 air	 smelled	 of	 smoke	 and	 tasted	 of	 slaughter.	 Perhaps	 a	 herd	 had	 been	 driven	 over	 a	 bluff.	 Perhaps
heaps	 of	 carcasses	 spawned	 maggots	 and	 flies	 and	 this	 was	 the	 source	 of	 the	 dreadful,	 incessant	 buzzing
sound.	Or	was	this	something	sweeter?	Had	the	world	won	the	argument?	Was	she	now	a	ghost	returned	to
mock	the	rightful	failure	of	her	kind?	Would	she	find	somewhere	nearby	the	last	putrid	remnants	of	her	people?
She	dearly	hoped	so.
She	was	named	Bitterspring	in	the	language	of	the	Brold	clan,	Lera	Epar,	a	name	she	had	well	earned	for
the	terrible	crimes	she	had	committed.	She	had	been	the	one	flower	among	all	the	field’s	flowers	whose	scent
had	 been	 deadly.	 Men	 had	 cast	 away	 their	 own	 women	 to	 clutch	 her	 as	 their	 own.	 Each	 time,	 she	 had
permitted	herself	to	be	plucked—seeing	in	his	eyes	what	she	had	wanted	to	see,	that	he	valued	her	above	all
others—even	and	especially	the	mate	he	had	abandoned—and	so	their	love	would	be	unassailable.	Before	it
went	wrong,	before	it	proved	the	weakest	binding	of	all.	And	then	another	man	would	appear,	with	that	same
hungry	fire	in	his	eyes,	and	she	would	think,	This	time,	it	is	different.	This	time,	I	am	certain,	our	love	is	a
thing	of	great	power.
Everyone	had	agreed	that	she	was	the	cleverest	person	in	all	the	clans	of	the	Brold	Gathering.	She	was	not
a	thing	of	the	shallows,	no,	her	mind	plunged	unlit	depths.	She	was	the	delver	into	life’s	perils,	who	spoke	of	the
curse	that	was	the	alighting	of	reason’s	spark.	She	found	divination	not	in	the	fire-cracked	shoulder-blades	of
caribou,	but	in	the	watery	reflections	of	faces	in	pools,	springs	and	gourd	bowls—faces	she	knew	well	as	kin.
As	kin,	yes,	and	more.	Such	details	as	made	one	distinct	from	all	others,	she	knew	these	to	be	illusions,	serving
for	quick	recognition	but	little	else.	Beneath	those	details,	she	understood,	they	were	all	the	same.	Their	needs.
Their	wants,	their	fears.
She	had	been	regarded	as	a	formidable	seer,	a	possessor	of	spirit-gifted	power.	But	the	truth	was,	and	this
she	 knew	 with	 absolute	 certainty,	 there	 was	 no	 magic	 in	 her	 percipience.	 Reason’s	 spark	 did	 not	 arise
spontaneously	amidst	the	dark	waters	of	base	emotion.	No,	and	nor	was	each	spark	isolated	from	the	others.
Bitterspring	understood	all	too	well	that	the	sparks	were	born	of	hidden	fires—the	soul’s	own	array	of	hearthfires,	each	one	devoted	to	simple,	immutable	truths.	One	for	every	need.	One	for	every	want.	One	for	every
fear.
Once	this	revelation	found	her,	reading	the	futures	of	her	kin	was	an	easy	task.	Reason	delivered	the	illusion


of	complexity,	but	behind	it	all,	we	are	as	simple	as	bhederin,	simple	as	ay,	as	ranag.	We	rut	and	bare	our
teeth	and	expose	our	throats.	Behind	our	eyes	our	thoughts	can	burn	bright	with	love	or	blacken	with
jealous	 rot.	 We	 seek	 company	 to	 find	 our	 place	 in	 it,	 and	 unless	 that	 place	 is	 at	 the	 top,	 all	 we	 find
dissatisfies	us,	poisons	our	hearts.
In	company,	we	are	capable	of	anything.	Murder,	betrayal.	In	company,	we	invent	rituals	to	quench
every	 spark,	 to	 ride	 the	 murky	 tide	 of	 emotion,	 to	 be	 once	 again	 as	 unseeing	 and	 uncaring	 as	 the
beasts.
I	was	hated.	I	was	worshipped.	And,	in	the	end,	I	am	sure,	I	was	murdered.
Lera	Epar,	why	are	you	awake	once	more?	Why	have	you	returned?
I	was	the	dust	in	the	hollows,	I	was	the	memories	lost.
I	did	terrible	things,	once.	Now	I	stand	here,	ready	to	do	them	all	again.
She	was	Bitterspring,	of	the	Brold	Imass,	and	her	world	of	ice	and	white-furred	creatures	was	gone.	She	set
out,	 a	 chert	 and	 jawbone	 mace	 dangling	 from	 one	 hand,	 the	 yellowed	 skin	 of	 the	 white-furred	 bear	 trailing
down	from	her	shoulders.
She	had	been	too	beautiful,	once.	But	history	was	never	kind.
	
He	rose	from	the	mud	ringing	the	waterhole,	shedding	black	roots,	fish	scales	and	misshapen	cakes	of	clay	and
coarse	 sand.	 Mouth	 open,	 jaws	 stretched	 wide,	 he	 howled	 without	 sound.	 He	 had	 been	 running	 straight	 for
them.	Three	K’ell	Hunters,	whose	heads	turned	to	regard	him.	They	had	been	standing	over	the	corpses	of	his
wife,	his	two	children.	The	bodies	would	join	the	gutted	carcasses	of	other	beasts	brought	down	on	their	hunt.
An	antelope,	a	mule	deer.	The	mates	of	the	felled	beasts	had	not	challenged	the	slayers.	No,	they	had	fled.	But
this	one,	this	male	Imass	roaring	out	his	battle-cry	and	rushing	them	with	spear	readied,	he	was	clearly	mad.
He	would	give	his	life	for	nothing.
The	K’ell	Hunters	did	not	understand.
They	had	met	his	charge	with	the	flat	of	their	blades.	They	had	broken	the	spear	and	had	then	beaten	him
unconscious.	They	didn’t	want	his	meat,	tainted	as	it	was	with	madness.
Thus	ended	his	first	life.	In	rebirth,	he	was	a	man	emptied	of	love.	And	he	had	been	among	the	first	to	step
into	 the	 embrace	 of	 the	 Ritual	 of	 Tellann.	 To	 expunge	 the	 memories	 of	 past	 lives.	 Such	 was	 the	 gift,	 so
precious,	so	perfect.
He	 had	 lifted	 himself	 from	 the	 mud,	 summoned	 once	 more—but	 this	 time	 was	 different.	 This	 time,	 he
remembered	everything.
Kalt	Urmanal	of	the	Orshayn	T’lan	Imass	stood	shin-deep	in	mud,	head	tilted	back,	howling	without	sound.
Rystalle	Ev	crouched	on	a	mound	of	damp	clay	twenty	paces	from	Kalt.	Understanding	him,	understanding
all	that	assailed	him.	She	too	had	awakened,	possessor	of	all	that	she	had	thought	long	lost,	and	so	she	looked
upon	Kalt,	whom	she	loved	and	had	always	loved,	even	in	the	times	when	he	walked	as	would	a	dead	man,	the
ashes	of	his	loss	grey	and	thick	upon	his	face;	and	in	the	times	before,	when	she	harboured	jealous	hatred	for
his	wife,	when	she	prayed	to	all	the	spirits	for	the	woman’s	death.
It	was	possible	that	his	scream	would	never	cease.	It	was	possible	that,	as	they	all	rose	and	gathered	in	their
disbelief	at	their	resurrection—as	they	sought	out	the	one	who	so	cruelly	summoned	the	Orshayn—she	would
have	to	leave	him	here.
Though	his	howl	was	without	voice,	it	deafened	her	mind.	If	he	did	not	cease,	his	madness	would	infect	all
the	others.
The	last	time	the	Orshayn	had	walked	the	earth	had	been	in	a	place	far	away	from	this	one.	With	but	three
broken	clans	remaining—a	mere	six	hundred	and	twelve	warriors	left—and	three	damaged	bonecasters,	they
had	fled	the	Spires	and	fallen	to	dust.	That	dust	had	been	lifted	high	on	the	winds,	carried	half	a	world	away—
there	had	been	no	thought	of	a	return	to	bone	and	withered	flesh—to	finally	settle	in	a	scattered	swath	across
scores	of	leagues.
This	land,	Rystalle	Ev	knew,	was	no	stranger	to	the	Imass.	Nor—and	Kalt’s	torment	made	this	plain—was	it
unknown	to	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	What	were	they	doing	here?
Kalt	 Urmanal	 fell	 to	 his	 knees,	 his	 cry	 dying	 away,	 leaving	 a	 ringing	 echo	 in	 her	 skull.	 She	 straightened,
leaning	heavily	on	the	solid	comfort	of	her	spear’s	shaft	of	petrified	wood.	This	return	was	unconscionable—a
judgement	she	knew	she	would	not	have	made	without	her	memories—to	that	time	of	raw,	wondrous	mortality


replete	with	its	terrible	crimes	of	love	and	desire.	She	could	feel	her	own	rage,	rising	like	the	molten	blood	of
the	earth.
Beyond	 the	 waterhole	 she	 spied	 three	 figures	 approaching.	 T’lan	 Imass	 of	 the	 Orshayn.	 Bonecasters.
Perhaps	now	they	would	glean	some	answers.
Brolos	Haran	had	always	been	a	broad	man,	and	even	the	bones	of	his	frame,	so	visible	beneath	the	taut,
desiccated	skin,	looked	abnormally	robust.	The	clear,	almost	crystalline	blue	eyes	that	gave	him	his	name	were,
of	course,	long	gone;	and	in	their	place	were	the	knotted	remnants,	gnarled	and	blackened	and	lifeless.	His	red
hair	 drifted	 like	 bloodstained	 cobwebs	 out	 over	 the	 dun-hued	 emlava	 fur	 riding	 his	 shoulders.	 His	 lips	 had
peeled	back	to	reveal	flat,	thick	teeth	the	colour	of	raw	copper.
To	 his	 left	 was	 Ilm	 Absinos,	 her	 narrow,	 tall	 frame	 sheathed	 in	 the	 grey	 scales	 of	 the	 enkar’al,	 her	 long
black	hair	knotted	with	snake-skins.	The	serpent	staff	in	her	bony	hands	seemed	to	writhe.	She	walked	with	a
hitched	gait,	remnant	of	an	injury	to	her	hip.
Ulag	Togtil	was	as	wide	as	Brolos	Haran	yet	taller	than	Ilm	Absinos.	He	had	ever	been	an	outsider	among
the	Orshayn	clans.	Born	as	a	half-breed	among	the	first	tribes	of	the	Trell,	he	had	wandered	into	the	camp	of
Kebralle	Korish,	the	object	of	intense	curiosity,	especially	among	the	women.	It	was	the	way	of	the	Imass	that
strangers	 could	 come	 among	 them,	 and,	 if	 life	 was	 embraced	 and	 no	 violence	 was	 stirred	 awake,	 such
strangers	could	make	for	themselves	a	home	among	the	people,	and	so	cease	to	be	strangers.	So	it	had	been
with	Ulag.
In	 the	 wars	 with	 the	 Order	 of	 the	 Red	 Sash,	 he	 had	 proved	 the	 most	 formidable	 among	 all	 the	 Orshayn
bonecasters.	Seeing	him	now,	Rystalle	Ev	felt	comforted,	reassured—as	if	he	alone	could	make	things	as	they
once	were.
He	could	not.	He	was	as	trapped	within	the	Ritual	as	was	everyone	else.
Ulag	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Rystalle	Ev,	Kalt	Urmanal.	I	am	privileged	to	find	two	of	my	own	clan	at	last.’
A	huge	hand	gestured	slightly.	‘Since	dawn	I	have	laboured	mightily	beneath	the	assault	of	these	two	clouddancers—their	incessant	joy	has	proved	a	terrible	burden.’
Could	 she	 have	 smiled,	 Rystalle	 would	 have.	 The	 image	 of	 cloud-dancers	 was	 such	 an	 absurd	 fit	 to	 these
two	dour	creatures,	she	might	well	have	laughed.	But	she	had	forgotten	how.	‘Ulag,	do	you	know	the	truth	of
this?’
‘A	most	elusive	hare.	How	it	leaps	and	darts,	skips	free	of	every	slingstone.	How	it	sails	over	the	snares	and
twitches	an	ear	to	every	footfall.	I	have	run	in	enough	circles,	failing	to	take	the	creature	into	my	hands,	to	feel
its	pattering	heart,	its	terrified	trembling.’
Ilm	Absinos	spoke.	‘Inistral	Ovan	awaits	us.	We	shall	gather	more	on	our	return	journey.	It	has	not	been	so
long	since	we	last	walked.	Few,	if	any,	will	have	lost	themselves.’
Brolos	 Haran	 seemed	 to	 be	 staring	 into	 the	 south.	 Now	 he	 said,	 ‘The	 Ritual	 is	 broken.	 Yet	 we	 are	 not
released.	In	this,	I	smell	the	foul	breath	of	Olar	Ethil.’
‘So	 you	 have	 said	 before,’	 snapped	 Ilm	 Absinos.	 ‘And	 still,	 for	 all	 your	 chewing	 the	 same	 words,	 there
remains	no	proof.’
‘We	do	not	know,’	sighed	Ulag,	‘who	has	summoned	us.	It	is	curious,	but	we	are	closed	to	her,	or	him.	As	if
a	wall	of	power	stands	between	us,	one	that	can	only	be	breached	from	the	other	side.	The	summoner	must
choose.	Until	such	time,	we	must	simply	wait.’
Kalt	Urmanal	spoke	for	the	first	time.	‘None	of	you	understand	anything.	The	waters	are	.	.	.	crowded.’
To	this,	silence	was	the	only	reply.
Kalt	snarled,	as	if	impatient	with	them	all.	He	was	still	kneeling	and	it	seemed	he	had	little	interest	in	moving.
Instead,	he	pointed.	‘There.	Another	approaches.’
Rystalle	and	the	others	turned.
The	sudden	disquiet	was	almost	palpable.
She	wore	the	yellow	and	white	fur	of	the	brold,	the	bear	of	the	snows	and	ice.	Her	hair	was	black	as	pitch,
her	 face	 wide	 and	 flat,	 the	 skin	 stained	 deep	 amber.	 The	 pits	 of	 her	 eyes	 were	 angled,	 tilted	 at	 the	 outer
corners.	The	talons	of	some	small	creature	had	been	threaded	through	her	cheeks.
T’lan	Imass,	yes.	But	.	.	.	not	of	our	clans.
Three	 barbed	 harpoons	 were	 strapped	 to	 her	 back.	 The	 mace	 she	 carried	 in	 one	 hand	 was	 fashioned	 of
some	animal’s	thighbone,	inset	with	jagged	blades	of	green	rhyolite	and	white	chert.


She	halted	fifteen	paces	away.
Ilm	Absinos	gestured	with	her	staff.	‘You	are	a	bonecaster,	but	I	do	not	know	you.	How	can	this	be?	Our
minds	were	joined	at	the	Ritual.	Our	blood	wove	a	thousand-upon-a-thousand	threads.	The	Ritual	claims	you
as	kin,	as	T’lan	Imass.	What	is	your	clan?’
‘I	am	Nom	Kala—’
Brolos	Haran	cut	in,	‘We	do	not	know	those	words.’
That	very	admission	was	a	shock	to	the	Orshayn.	It	was,	in	fact,	impossible.	Our	language	is	as	dead	as
we	are.
Nom	 Kala	 cocked	 her	 head,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘You	 speak	 the	 Old	 Tongue,	 the	 secret	 language	 of	 the
bonecasters.	I	am	of	the	Brold	T’lan	Imass—’
‘There	is	no	clan	chief	who	claimed	the	name	of	the	brold!’
She	seemed	to	study	Brolos	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘There	was	no	clan	chief	bearing	the	name	of	the
brold.	 There	 was,	 indeed,	 no	 clan	 chief	 at	 all.	 Our	 people	 were	 ruled	 by	 the	 bonecasters.	 The	 Brold	 clans
surrendered	the	Dark	War.	We	Gathered.	There	was	a	Ritual—’
‘What!’	Ilm	Absinos	lurched	forward,	almost	stumbling	until	her	staff	brought	her	up	short.	‘Another	Ritual
of	Tellann?’
‘We	 failed.	 We	 were	 camped	 beneath	 a	 wall	 of	 ice,	 a	 wall	 that	 reached	 to	 the	 very	 heavens.	 We	 were
assailed—’
‘By	the	Jaghut?’	Brolos	asked.
‘No—’
‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle?’
Once	more	she	cocked	her	head	and	was	silent.
The	wind	moaned.
A	 grey	 fox	 wandered	 into	 their	 midst,	 stepping	 cautiously,	 nose	 testing	 the	 air.	 After	 a	 moment,	 it	 trotted
down	to	the	water’s	edge.	Pink	tongue	unfurled	and	the	sounds	of	lapping	water	tickled	the	air.
Watching	 the	 fox,	 Kalt	 Urmanal	 put	 his	 hands	 to	 his	 face,	 covering	 his	 eyes.	 Seeing	 this,	 Rystalle	 turned
away.
Nom	 Kala	 said,	 ‘No.	 The	 dominion	 of	 both	 was	 long	 past.’	 She	 hesitated,	 and	 then	 added,	 ‘It	 was	 held
among	many	of	us	that	the	enemy	assailing	our	people	were	humans—our	inheritors,	our	rivals	in	the	ways	of
living.	 We	 bonecasters—the	 three	 of	 us	 who	 remained—knew	 that	 to	 be	 no	 more	 than	 a	 half-truth.	 No,	 we
were	assailed	by	ourselves.	By	the	lies	we	told	each	other,	by	the	false	comforts	of	our	legends,	our	stories,
our	very	beliefs.’
‘Why,	then,’	asked	Ulag,	‘did	you	attempt	the	Ritual	of	Tellann?’
‘With	but	three	bonecasters	left,	how	could	you	have	hoped	to	succeed?’	Ilm	Absinos	demanded,	her	voice
brittle	with	outrage.
Nom	 Kala	 fixed	 her	 attention	 upon	 Ulag.	 ‘Trell-blood,	 you	 are	 welcome	 to	 my	 eyes.	 To	 answer	 your
question:	it	is	said	that	no	memory	survives	the	Ritual.	We	deemed	this	just.	It	is	said,	as	well,	that	the	Ritual
delivers	the	curse	of	immortality.	We	saw	this,	too,	as	just.’
‘Then	against	whom	did	you	wage	war?’
‘No	one.	We	were	done	with	fighting,	Trell-blood.’
‘Then	why	not	simply	choose	death?’
‘We	severed	all	allegiance	to	the	spirits—we	had	been	lying	to	them	for	too	long.’
The	fox	lifted	its	head,	eyes	suddenly	wide,	ears	pricked.	It	then	trotted	in	its	light-footed	way	along	the	rim
of	the	pool.	Slipped	beneath	some	firebrush,	and	vanished	inside	a	den.
How	 much	 time	 passed	 before	 another	 word	 was	 spoken?	 Rystalle	 could	 not	 be	 certain,	 but	 the	 fox
reappeared,	a	marmot	in	its	jaws,	and	bounded	away,	passing	so	close	to	Rystalle	that	she	could	have	brushed
its	back	with	her	hand.	A	flock	of	tiny	birds	descended	to	prance	along	the	muddy	verge.	Somewhere	in	the
shallows	ruddered	a	carp.
Ilm	Absinos	said,	in	a	whisper,	‘The	spirits	died	when	we	died.’
‘A	thing	that	dies	to	us	is	not	necessarily	dead,’	Nom	Kala	replied.	‘We	do	not	have	that	power.’
‘What	does	your	name	mean?’	Ulag	asked.
‘Knife	Drip.’


‘How	did	the	ritual	fail?’
‘The	wall	of	ice	fell	on	us.	We	were	all	killed	instantly.	The	Ritual	was	therefore	uncompleted.’	She	paused,
and	 then	 added,	 ‘Given	 the	 oblivion	 that	 followed,	 failure	 seemed	 a	 safe	 assumption—were	 we	 capable	 of
making	assumptions.	But	now,	it	appears,	we	were	in	error.’
‘How	long	ago?’	Ulag	asked	her.	‘Do	you	know?’
She	shrugged.	‘The	Jaghut	were	gone	a	hundred	generations.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	journeyed	to	the
eastern	 lands	 two	 hundred	 generations	 previously.	 We	 traded	 with	 the	 Jheck,	 and	 then	 with	 the	 Krynan	 Awl
and	the	colonists	of	the	Empire	of	Dessimbelackis.	We	followed	the	ice	in	its	last	retreat.’
‘How	many	of	you	will	return,	Knife	Drip?’
‘The	 other	 two	 bonecasters	 have	 awakened	 and	 even	 now	 approach	 us.	 Lid	 Ger—Sourstone.	 And	 Lera
Epar—Bitterspring.	Of	our	people,	we	cannot	yet	say.	Maybe	all.	Perhaps	none.’
‘Who	summoned	us?’
One	more	time	she	cocked	her	head.	‘Trell-blood,	this	is	our	land.	We	have	heard	clear	his	cry.	You	cannot?
We	are	summoned,	T’lan	Imass,	by	the	First	Sword.	A	legend	among	the	Brold	that,	it	seems,	was	not	a	lie.’
Ulag	was	rocked	back	as	if	struck	a	blow.	‘Onos	T’oolan?	But	.	.	.	why?’
‘He	summons	us	beneath	the	banner	of	vengeance,’	she	replied,	‘and	in	the	name	of	death.	My	new	friends,
the	T’lan	Imass	are	going	to	war.’
The	birds	launched	into	the	air	like	a	tent	torn	loose	of	its	tethers,	leaving	upon	the	soft	clays	nothing	but	a
scattering	of	tiny	tracks.
	
Bitterspring	 walked	 towards	 the	 other	 T’lan	 Imass.	 The	 emptiness	 of	 the	 land	 was	 a	 suffocating	 pressure.
When	 everything	 goes,	 it	 is	 fitting	 that	 we	 are	 cursed	 to	 return,	 lifeless	 as	 the	 world	 we	 have	 made.
Still	.	.	.	am	I	beyond	betrayal?	Have	I	ceased	to	be	a	slave	to	hope?	Will	I	once	again	tread	the	old,
worn	trails?
Life	is	done,	but	the	lessons	remain.	Life	is	done,	but	the	trap	still	holds	me	tight.	This	is	the	meaning
of	legacy.	This	is	the	meaning	of	justice.
What	was,	is.
	
The	 wind	 was	 insistent,	 tugging	 at	 worn	 strips	 of	 cloth,	 the	 shredded	 ends	 of	 leather	 straps,	 loose	 strands	 of
hair.	It	moaned	as	if	in	search	of	a	voice.	But	the	lifeless	thing	that	was	Toc	the	Younger	held	its	silence,	its
immutability	in	the	midst	of	the	life	surrounding	it.
Setoc	 settled	 down	 on	 aching	 legs	 and	 waited.	 The	 two	 girls	 and	 the	 strange	 boy	 had	 huddled	 together
nearby	and	were	fast	asleep.
Their	saviour	had	carried	them	leagues	from	the	territory	of	the	Senan	Barghast,	north	and	east	across	the
undulating	prairie.	The	horse	under	them	had	made	none	of	the	normal	sounds	a	horse	should	make.	None	of
the	grunting	breaths,	the	snorts.	It	had	not	once	sawed	at	the	bit	or	dipped	its	head	seeking	a	mouthful	of	grass.
Its	tattered	hide	remained	dry,	not	once	twitching	to	the	frustrated	deerflies,	even	as	its	ropy	muscles	worked
steadily	and	its	hoofs	drummed	the	hard	ground.	Now	it	stood	motionless	beneath	its	motionless	rider.
She	rubbed	at	her	face.	They	needed	water.	They	needed	food.	She	didn’t	know	where	they	were.	Close	to
the	Wastelands?	Perhaps.	She	thought	she	could	make	out	a	range	of	hills	or	mountains	far	to	the	east,	a	dusty
grimace	of	rock	shimmering	through	the	waves	of	heat.	Lolling	in	the	saddle	behind	Toc,	she	had	been	slipping
into	and	out	of	strange	dreams,	fragmented	visions	of	a	squalid	farmstead,	the	rank	sweat	of	herds	and	small
boys	 shouting.	 One	 boy	 with	 a	 face	 she	 thought	 she	 knew,	 but	 it	 was	 twisted	 with	 fear,	 and	 then	 hard	 with
sudden	resolve.	A	face	that	had	transformed	in	an	instant	to	one	that	awaited	death.	In	one	so	young,	nothing
was	more	horrifying.	Dreaming	of	children,	but	not	these	children	here,	not	even	Barghast	children.	At	times,
she	found	herself	wheeling	high	above	this	lone	warrior	who	rode	with	a	girl	in	front,	a	girl	behind,	a	girl	and	a
boy	in	the	crooks	of	his	arms.	She	could	smell	scorched	feathers,	and	all	at	once	the	land	far	below	was	a	sea
of	diamonds,	cut	in	two	by	a	thin,	wavering	line.
She	was	fevered,	or	so	she	concluded	now	as	she	sat,	mouth	dry,	eyes	stinging	with	grit.	Was	this	meant	to
be	a	rest?	Something	in	her	was	resisting	sleep.	They	needed	water.	They	needed	to	eat.
A	mound	a	short	distance	away	caught	her	eye.	Groaning,	she	stood,	dragged	herself	closer.


A	cairn,	almost	lost	in	the	knee-high	grasses.	A	wedge-shaped	stone	set	atop	a	thinner	slab,	and	beneath	that
a	mound	of	angled	rocks.	The	wedge	was	carved	on	its	sides.	Etching	the	eyes	of	a	wolf.	Mouth	open	with	the
slab	forming	the	lower	jaw,	the	scratchings	of	fangs	and	teeth.	Worn	down	by	centuries	of	wind	and	rain.	She
reached	out	a	trembling	hand,	set	her	palm	against	the	rough,	warm	stone.
‘We	are	being	hunted.’
The	rasping	pronouncement	drew	her	round.	She	saw	Toc	stringing	his	bow,	heard	the	wind	hum	against	the
taut	gut.	A	new	voice	in	the	air.	She	joined	him,	gazed	westward.	A	dozen	or	more	riders.	‘Akrynnai,’	she	said.
‘They	 will	 see	 our	 Barghast	 clothing.	 They	 will	 seek	 to	 kill	 us.	 Then	 again,’	 she	 added,	 ‘if	 you	 ride	 to	 them,
they	may	change	their	minds.’
‘And	why	would	that	be?’	he	asked,	even	as	he	kicked	his	horse	forward.
She	saw	the	Akrynnai	horse-warriors	fan	out,	saw	lances	being	readied.
Toc	rode	straight	for	them,	an	arrow	nocked	to	the	bowstring.
As	they	drew	closer,	Setoc	saw	the	Akrynnai	falter,	even	as	their	lances	lifted	defensively.	Moments	later
the	 warriors	 scattered,	 horses	 bucking	 beneath	 them.	 Within	 a	 few	 more	 heartbeats,	 all	 were	 in	 flight.	 Toc
slowly	wheeled	his	mount	and	rode	back	to	where	she	stood.
‘It	seems	you	were	right.’
‘Their	horses	knew	before	they	did.’
He	halted	his	mount,	returned	the	arrow	to	its	quiver	and	deftly	unstrung	the	bow.
‘Actually,	you’ll	need	those,’	Setoc	said.	‘We	need	food.	We	need	water,	too.’
It	seemed	he’d	stopped	listening,	and	his	head	was	turned	to	the	east.
‘What	is	it?’	she	asked.	‘More	hunters?’
‘She	wasn’t	satisfied,’	he	muttered.	‘Of	course	not.	What	can	one	do	better	than	an	army	can?	Not	much.
But	he	won’t	like	it.	He	never	did.	In	fact,	he	may	turn	them	all	away.	Well	now,	Bonecaster,	what	would	you
do	about	that?	If	he	releases	them?’
‘I	don’t	know	what	you’re	talking	about.	She?	Him?	What	army?’
His	head	turned	to	look	past	her.	She	swung	round.	The	boy	was	on	his	feet,	walking	over	to	the	wolf	cairn.
He	sang,	‘Blalalalalalala	.	.	.’
‘I	wish	he’d	stop	doing	that,’	she	said.
‘You	are	not	alone	in	that,	Setoc	of	the	Wolves.’
She	started,	turned	back	to	eye	the	undead	warrior.	‘I	see	you	now,	Toc	Anaster,	and	it	seems	you	have	but
one	eye—dead	as	it	is.	But	that	first	night,	I	saw—’
‘What?	What	did	you	see?’
The	eye	of	a	wolf.	She	waved	towards	the	cairn.	‘You	brought	us	here.’
‘No.	I	took	you	away.	Tell	me,	Setoc,	are	the	beasts	innocent?’
‘Innocent?	Of	what?’
‘Did	they	deserve	their	fate?’
‘No.’
‘Did	it	matter?	Whether	they	deserved	it	or	not?’
‘No.’
‘Setoc,	what	do	the	Wolves	want?’
She	 knew	 by	 his	 intonation	 that	 he	 meant	 the	 god	 and	 the	 goddess—she	 knew	 they	 existed,	 even	 if	 she
didn’t	know	their	names,	or	if	they	even	had	ones.	‘They	want	us	all	to	go	away.	To	leave	them	alone.	Them
and	their	children.’
‘Will	we?’
‘No.’
‘Why	not?’
She	struggled	for	an	answer.
‘Because,	Setoc,	to	live	is	to	wage	war.	And	it	just	happens	that	no	other	thing	is	as	good	at	waging	war	as
we	are.’
‘I	don’t	believe	you!	Wolves	don’t	wage	war	against	anything!’
‘A	pack	marks	out	its	territory	and	that	pack	will	drive	off	any	other	pack	that	seeks	to	encroach	upon	it.
The	pack	defends	its	claim—to	the	land,	and	to	the	animals	it	preys	upon	in	that	land.’


‘But	that’s	not	war!’
He	shrugged.	‘Mostly,	it’s	just	the	threat	of	war,	until	threat	alone	proves	insufficient.	Every	creature	strives
for	dominance,	among	its	own	kind	and	within	its	territory.	Even	a	pack	of	dogs	will	find	its	king,	its	queen,	and
they	will	rule	by	virtue	of	their	strength	and	the	threat	their	strength	implies,	until	they	are	usurped	by	the	next
in	line.	What	can	we	make	of	this?	That	politics	belong	to	all	social	creatures?	So	it	would	seem.	Setoc,	could
the	Wolves	kill	us	humans,	every	one	of	us,	would	they?’
‘If	they	understood	it	was	them	or	us,	yes!	Why	shouldn’t	they?’
‘I	was	but	asking	questions,’	Toc	replied.	‘I	once	knew	a	woman	who	could	flatten	a	city	with	the	arch	of	a
single	perfect	eyebrow.’
‘Did	she?’	Setoc	asked,	pleased	to	be	the	one	asking	questions.
‘Occasionally.	But,	not	every	city,	not	every	time.’
‘Why	not?’
The	undead	warrior	smiled,	the	expression	chilling	her.	‘She	liked	a	decent	bath	every	now	and	then.’
	
After	Toc	had	set	off	in	search	of	food,	Setoc	set	about	building	a	hearth	with	whatever	stones	she	could	find.
The	boy	was	sitting	in	front	of	the	cairn,	still	singing	his	song.	The	twins	had	awakened	but	neither	seemed	to
have	anything	to	say.	Their	eyes	were	glazed	and	Setoc	knew	it	for	shock.
‘Toc’ll	be	back	soon,’	she	told	them.	‘Listen,	can	you	make	him	stop	that	babbling?	Please?	It’s	making	my
skin	crawl.	I	mean,	has	he	lost	his	mind,	the	little	one?	Or	are	they	all	like	that?	Barghast	children	aren’t,	at
least	not	that	I	remember.	They	stay	quiet,	just	like	you	two	are	doing	right	now.’
Neither	girl	replied.	They	simply	watched	her.
The	boy	suddenly	shouted.
At	the	cry	the	ground	erupted	twenty	paces	beyond	the	cairn.	Stones	spat	through	a	cloud	of	dust.
And	something	clambered	forth.
The	twins	shrieked.	But	the	boy	was	laughing.	Setoc	stared.	A	huge	wolf,	long-limbed,	with	a	long,	flat	head
and	 heavy	 jaws	 bristling	 with	 fangs,	 stepped	 out	 from	 the	 dust,	 and	 then	 paused	 to	 shake	 its	 matted,	 tangled
coat.	The	gesture	cut	away	the	last	threads	of	fear	in	Setoc.
From	the	boy,	a	new	song.	‘Ay	ay	ay	ayayayayayayay!’
At	its	hunched	shoulders,	the	creature	was	taller	than	Setoc.	And	it	had	died	long,	long	ago.
Her	eyes	snapped	to	the	boy.	He	summoned	it.	With	that	nonsense	song,	he	summoned	it.
Can—can	I	do	the	same?	What	is	the	boy	to	me?	What	is	being	made	here?
One	 of	 the	 twins	 spoke:	 ‘He	 needs	 Toc.	 At	 his	 side.	 At	 our	 brother’s	 side.	 He	 needs	 Tool’s	 only	 friend.
They	have	to	be	together.’
And	the	other	girl,	her	gaze	levelled	on	Setoc,	said,	‘And	they	need	you.	But	we	have	nothing.	Nothing.’
‘I	don’t	understand	you,’	Setoc	said,	irritated	by	the	stab	of	irrational	guilt	she’d	felt	at	the	girl’s	words.
‘What	will	happen,’	the	girl	asked,	‘when	you	raise	one	of	your	perfect	eyebrows?’
‘What?’
‘	“Wherever	you	walk,	someone’s	stepped	before	you.”	Our	father	used	to	say	that.’
The	enormous	wolf	stood	close	to	the	boy.	Dust	still	streamed	down	its	flanks.	She	had	a	sudden	vision	of
this	beast	tearing	out	the	throat	of	a	horse.	I	saw	these	ones,	but	as	ghosts.	Ghosts	of	living	things,	not	all
rotted	skin	and	bones.	They	kept	their	distance.	They	were	never	sure	of	me.	Yet	.	.	.	I	wept	for	them.
I	can’t	level	cities.
Can	I?
	
The	apparitions	rose	suddenly,	forming	a	circle	around	Toc.	He	slowly	straightened	from	gutting	the	antelope
he’d	killed	with	an	arrow	to	the	heart.	‘If	only	Hood’s	realm	was	smaller,’	he	said,	‘I	might	know	you	all.	But	it
isn’t	and	I	don’t.	What	do	you	want?’
One	of	the	undead	Jaghut	answered:	‘Nothing.’
The	thirteen	others	laughed.
‘Nothing	 from	 you,’	 the	 speaker	 amended.	 She	 had	 been	 female,	 once—when	 such	 distinctions	 meant
something.


‘Then	why	have	you	surrounded	me?’	Toc	asked.	‘It	can’t	be	that	you’re	hungry—’
More	laughter,	and	weapons	rattled	back	into	sheaths	and	belt-loops.	The	woman	approached.	‘A	fine	shot
with	that	arrow,	Herald.	All	the	more	remarkable	for	the	lone	eye	you	have	left.’
Toc	glared	at	the	others.	‘Will	you	stop	laughing,	for	Hood’s	sake!’
The	guffaws	redoubled.
‘The	wrong	 invocation,	 Herald,’	 said	 the	woman.	‘I	am	 named	Varandas.	We	 do	 not	 serve	 Hood.	 We	 did
Iskar	Jarak	a	favour,	and	now	we	are	free	to	do	as	we	please.’
‘And	what	pleases	you?’
Laughter	from	all	sides.
Toc	crouched	back	down,	resumed	gutting	the	antelope.	Flies	spun	and	buzzed.	In	the	corner	of	his	vision	he
could	 see	 one	 of	 the	 animal’s	 eyes,	 still	 liquid,	 still	 full,	 staring	 out	 at	 nothing.	 Iskar	 Jarak,	 when	 will	 you
summon	 me?	 Soon,	 I	 think.	 It	 all	 draws	 in—but	 none	 of	 that	 belongs	 to	 the	 Wolves.	 Their	 interests	 lie
elsewhere.	 What	 will	 happen?	 Will	 I	 simply	 tear	 in	 half?	 He	 paused,	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 the	 Jaghut	 still
encircling	him.	‘What	are	you	doing	here?’
‘Wandering,’	Varandas	replied.
Another	added	in	a	deep	voice,	‘Looking	for	something	to	kill.’
Toc	glanced	again	at	the	antelope’s	sightless	eye.	‘You	picked	the	wrong	continent.	The	T’lan	Imass	have
awakened.’
All	at	once,	the	amusement	surrounding	him	seemed	to	vanish,	and	a	sudden	chill	gripped	the	air.
Toc	set	down	his	knife	and	dragged	loose	the	antelope’s	guts.
‘We	never	faced	them,’	said	Varandas.	‘We	were	dead	long	before	their	ritual	of	eternal	un-life.’
A	different	Jaghut	spoke.	‘K’Chain	Nah’ruk,	and	now	T’lan	Imass.	Doesn’t	anyone	ever	go	away?’
After	a	moment,	all	began	laughing	again.
Through	the	merriment	Varandas	stepped	close	to	Toc	and	said,	‘Why	have	you	killed	this	thing?	You	cannot
eat	it.	And	since	that	is	true,	I	conclude	that	you	must	therefore	hunt	for	others.	Where	are	they?’
‘Not	far,’	he	replied,	‘and	none	are	any	threat	to	you.’
‘Too	bad.’
‘Nah’ruk—were	they	Iskar	Jarak’s	favour?’
‘They	were.’
‘What	were	they	after?’
‘Not	“what”.	Who.	But	ask	nothing	more	of	that—we	have	discussed	the	matter	and	can	make	no	sense	of
it.	The	world	has	lost	its	simplicity.’
‘The	world	was	never	simple,	Jaghut,	and	if	you	believe	it	was,	you’re	deluding	yourself.’
‘What	would	you	know	of	the	ancient	times?’
He	shrugged.	‘I	only	know	recent	times,	but	why	should	the	ancient	ones	be	any	different?	Our	memories
lie.	 We	 call	 it	 nostalgia	 and	 smile.	 But	 every	 lie	 has	 a	 purpose.	 And	 that	 includes	 falsifying	 our	 sense	 of	 the
past—’
‘And	what	purpose	would	that	serve,	Herald?’
He	wiped	clean	his	knife	in	the	grasses.	‘You	shouldn’t	need	to	ask.’
‘But	I	do	ask.’
‘We	lie	about	our	past	to	make	peace	with	the	present.	If	we	accepted	the	truth	of	our	history,	we	would
find	no	peace—our	consciences	would	not	permit	it.	Nor	would	our	rage.’
Varandas	 was	 clearly	 amused.	 ‘Are	 you	 consumed	 with	 anger,	 Herald?	 Do	 you	 see	 too	 clearly	 with	 that
lonely	eye?	Strong	emotions	are	ever	a	barrier	to	perception,	and	this	must	be	true	of	you.’
‘Meaning?’
‘You	failed	to	detect	my	mocking	tone	when	I	spoke	of	the	world’s	loss	of	simplicity.’
‘I	must	 have	 lost	 its	 distinction	 in	the	 midst	 of	 the	 irony	 suffusing	everything	 else	 you	 said.	 How	 stupid	 of
me.	 Now,	 I	 am	 done	 with	 this	 beast.’	 He	 sheathed	 his	 knife	 and	 lifted	 the	 carcass	 to	 settle	 it	 across	 his
shoulders.	‘I	could	wish	you	all	luck	in	finding	something	to	kill,’	he	said,	‘but	you	don’t	need	it.’
‘Do	you	think	the	T’lan	Imass	will	be	eager	to	challenge	us,	Herald?’
He	levered	the	antelope	on	to	the	rump	of	his	horse.	The	eyes,	he	saw,	now	swarmed	with	flies.	Toc	set	a
boot	 in	 the	 stirrup	 and,	 lifting	 wide	 with	 his	 leg	 to	 clear	 the	 carcass,	 lowered	 himself	 into	 the	 saddle.	 He


gathered	the	reins.	‘I	knew	a	T’lan	Imass	once,’	he	said.	‘I	taught	him	how	to	make	jokes.’
‘He	needed	teaching?’
‘More	like	reminding,	I	think.	Being	un-alive	for	as	long	as	he	was	will	do	that	to	the	best	of	us,	I	suspect.	In
any	case,	I’m	sure	the	T’lan	Imass	will	find	you	very	comforting,	in	all	that	dark	armour	and	whatnot,	even	as
they	chop	you	to	pieces.	Unfortunately,	and	at	the	risk	of	deflating	your	bloated	egos,	they’re	not	here	for	you.’
‘Neither	were	the	Nah’ruk.	But,’	and	Varandas	cocked	her	helmed	head,	‘what	do	you	mean	they	will	find
us	“comforting”?’
Toc	 studied	 her,	 and	 then	 scanned	 the	 others.	 Lifeless	 faces,	 so	 eager	 to	 laugh.	 Damned	 Jaghut.	 He
shrugged,	and	then	said,	‘Nostalgia.’
	
After	 the	 Herald	 and	 the	 lifeless	 antelope	 had	 ridden	 away	 on	 the	 lifeless	 horse,	 Varandas	 turned	 to	 her
companions.	‘What	think	you,	Haut?’
The	thick-limbed	warrior	with	the	heavy	voice	shifted,	armour	clanking	and	shedding	red	dust,	and	then	said,
‘I	think,	Captain,	we	need	to	make	ourselves	scarce.’
Suvalas	snorted.	‘The	Imass	were	pitiful—I	doubt	even	un-living	ones	could	cause	us	much	trouble.	Captain,
let	us	find	some	of	them	and	destroy	them.	I’d	forgotten	how	much	fun	killing	is.’
Varandas	turned	to	one	of	her	lieutenants.	‘Burrugast?’
‘A	thought	has	occurred	to	me,	Captain.’
She	smiled.	‘Go	on.’
‘If	the	T’lan	Imass	who	waged	war	against	the	Jaghut	were	as	pitiful	as	Suvalas	suggests,	why	are	there	no
Jaghut	left?’
No	one	arrived	at	an	answer.	Moments	passed.
‘We	need	to	make	ourselves	scarce,’	Haut	repeated.	And	then	he	laughed.
The	others	joined	in.	Even	Suvalas.
Captain	Varandas	nodded.	So	many	things	were	a	delight,	weren’t	they?	All	these	awkward	emotions,	such
as	 humility,	 confusion	 and	 unease.	 To	 feel	 them	 again,	 to	 laugh	 at	 their	 inherent	 absurdity,	 mocking	 every
survival	instinct—as	if	she	and	her	companions	still	lived.	As	if	they	still	had	something	to	lose.	As	if	the	past
was	worth	recreating	here	in	the	present.	‘As	if,’	she	added	mostly	to	herself,	‘old	grudges	were	worth	holding
on	to.’	She	grunted,	and	then	said,	‘We	shall	march	east.’
‘Why	east?’	Gedoran	demanded.
‘Because	I	feel	like	it,	lieutenant.	Into	the	birth	of	the	sun,	the	shadows	on	our	trail,	a	new	day	ever	ahead.’
She	tilted	back	her	head.	‘Hah	hah	hah	hah	hah!’
	
Toc	the	Younger	saw	the	gaunt	ay	from	some	distance	away.	Standing	with	the	boy	clinging	to	one	foreleg.	If
Toc	 had	 possessed	 a	 living	 heart,	 it	 would	 have	 beaten	 faster.	 If	 he	 could	 draw	 breath,	 it	 would	 have
quickened.	If	his	eye	were	swimming	in	a	pool	of	tears,	as	living	eyes	did,	he	would	weep.
Of	course,	it	was	not	Baaljagg.	The	giant	wolf	was	not—he	realized	as	he	rode	closer—even	alive.	It	had
been	summoned.	Not	from	Hood’s	Realm,	for	the	souls	of	such	beasts	did	not	reside	there.	The	Beast	Hold,
gift	 of	 the	 Wolves.	 An	 ay,	 to	 walk	 the	 mortal	 world	 once	 again,	 to	 guard	 the	 boy.	 And	 their	 chosen
daughter.
Setoc,	was	this	by	your	hand?
One-eyed	he	might	be,	but	he	was	not	blind	to	the	patterns	taking	shape.	Nor,	in	the	dry	dust	of	his	mind,
was	 he	 insensitive	 to	 the	 twisted	 nuances	 within	 those	 patterns,	 as	 if	 the	 distant	 forces	 of	 fate	 took	 ghastly
pleasure	in	mocking	all	that	he	treasured—the	memories	he	held	on	to	as	would	a	drowning	man	hold	on	to	the
last	breath	in	his	lungs.
I	see	you	in	his	face,	Tool.	As	if	I	could	travel	back	to	the	times	before	the	Ritual	of	Tellann,	as	if	I
could	whisper	in	like	a	ghost	to	that	small	camp	where	you	were	born,	and	see	you	at	but	a	few	years	of
age,	bundled	against	the	cold,	your	breath	pluming	and	your	cheeks	bright	red—I	had	not	thought	such
a	journey	possible.
But	it	is.	I	need	only	look	upon	your	son,	and	I	see	you.
We	are	broken,	you	and	me.	I	had	to	turn	you	away.	I	had	to	deny	you	what	you	wanted	most.	But,


what	I	could	not	do	for	you,	I	will	do	for	your	son.
He	knew	he	was	a	fool	to	make	such	vows.	He	was	the	Herald	of	Death.	And	soon	Hood	would	summon
him.	He	would	be	torn	from	the	boy’s	side.	Unless	the	Wolves	want	me	to	stay.	But	no	one	can	know	what
they	want.	They	do	not	think	anything	like	us.	I	have	no	control	.	.	.	over	anything.
He	reached	the	camp.	Setoc	had	built	a	small	fire.	The	twins	had	not	moved	from	where	they’d	been	earlier,
but	their	eyes	were	fixed	on	Toc	now,	as	if	he	could	hold	all	their	hopes	in	his	arms.	But	I	cannot.	My	life	is
gone,	and	what	remains	does	not	belong	to	me.
I	dream	I	can	hold	to	my	vows.	I	dream	I	can	be	Toc	the	Younger,	who	knew	how	to	smile,	and	love.
Who	 knew	 what	 it	 was	 to	 desire	 a	 woman	 forever	 beyond	 his	 reach—gods,	 such	 delicious	 anguish!
When	the	self	would	curl	up,	when	longing	overwhelmed	with	the	sweetest	flood.
Remember!	You	once	wrote	poems!	You	once	crawled	into	your	every	thought,	your	every	feeling,	to
see	 and	 touch	 and	 dismantle	 and,	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 putting	 it	 all	 back	 together,	 feel	 wonder.	 Awed,
humbled	 by	 complexity,	 assailed	 by	 compassion.	 Uncomprehending	 in	 the	 face	 of	 cruelty,	 of
indifference.
Remember	 how	 you	 thought:	 How	 can	 people	 think	 this	 way?	 How	 can	 they	 be	 so	 thoughtless,	 so
vicious,	so	worshipful	of	death,	so	dismissive	of	suffering	and	misery?
He	stared	at	the	wolf.	Baaljagg,	not	Baaljagg.	A	mocking	reflection,	a	crafted	simulacrum.	A	Hairlock.	He
met	 Setoc’s	 slightly	 wide	 eyes	 and	 saw	 that	 she	 had	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 this	 summoning.	 The	 boy.	 Of
course.	Tool	made	me	arrows.	His	son	finds	me	a	companion	as	dead	as	I	am.	‘It	is	named	Baaljagg—’
‘Balalalalalalalalala!’
	
Sceptre	 Irkullas	 sat,	 shoulders	 hunched,	 barricaded	 from	 the	 world	 by	 his	 grief.	 His	 officers	 beseeched	 him,
battering	 at	 the	 high	 walls.	 The	 enemy	 was	 within	 reach,	 the	 enemy	 was	 on	 the	 move—an	 entire	 people,
suddenly	 on	 the	 march.	 Their	 outriders	 had	 discovered	 the	 Akrynnai	 forces.	 The	 giant	 many-headed	 beasts
were	jockeying	for	position,	hackles	raised,	and	soon	would	snap	the	jaws,	soon	the	fangs	would	sink	deep,	and
fate	would	fill	the	mouth	bitter	as	iron.
A	conviction	had	burrowed	deep	into	his	soul.	He	was	about	to	tear	out	the	throat	of	the	wrong	enemy.	But
there	were	no	thorns	to	prick	his	conscience,	nothing	to	stir	to	life	the	trembling	dance	of	reason.	Before	too
long,	 loved	 ones	 would	 weep.	 Children	 would	 voice	 cries	 unanswered.	 And	 ripples	 would	 spread	 outward,
agitated,	in	a	tumult,	and	nothing	would	be	the	same	as	it	once	was.
There	were	times	when	history	curled	into	a	fist,	breaking	all	it	held.	He	waited	for	the	crushing	embrace
with	all	the	hunger	of	a	lover.	His	officers	did	not	understand.	When	he	rose,	gesturing	for	his	armour,	he	saw
the	 relief	 in	 their	 eyes,	 as	 if	 a	 belligerent	 stream	 had	 once	 more	 found	 its	 destined	 path.	 But	 he	 knew	 they
thought	 nothing	 of	 the	 crimson	 sea	 they	 now	 rushed	 towards.	 Their	 relief	 was	 found	 in	 the	 comfort	 of	 the
familiar,	these	studied	patterns	preceding	dread	mayhem.	They	would	face	the	time	of	blood	when	it	arrived.
Used	to	be	he	envied	the	young.	At	this	moment,	as	the	sun’s	bright	morning	light	scythed	the	dust	swirling
above	the	restless	horses,	he	looked	upon	those	he	could	see—weapons	flashing	like	winks	from	a	thousand
skulls—and	he	felt	nothing	but	pity.
Great	warleaders	were,	one	and	all,	insane.	They	might	stand	as	he	was	standing,	here	in	the	midst	of	the
awakening	machine,	and	see	nothing	but	blades	to	cut	a	true	path	to	his	or	her	desire,	as	if	desire	alone	was	a
virtue,	 a	 thing	 so	 pure	 and	 so	 righteous	 it	 could	 not	 be	 questioned,	 could	 not	 be	 challenged.	 This	 great
warleader	could	throw	a	thousand	warriors	to	their	deaths	and	the	oily	surface	of	his	or	her	conscience	would
reveal	not	the	faintest	swirl.
He	had	been	a	great	warleader,	once,	his	mouth	full	of	iron	shards,	flames	licking	his	fingertips.	His	chest
swollen	with	unquestioned	virtues.
‘If	we	pursue,	Sceptre,	we	can	meet	them	by	dusk.	Do	you	think	they	will	want	to	close	then?	Or	will	they
wait	for	next	dawn?	If	we	are	swift	.	.	.’
‘I	will	clench	my	jaws	one	more	time,’	Irkullas	said.	‘I	will	keep	them	fast	and	think	nothing	of	the	bite,	the
warm	flow.	You’d	be	surprised	at	what	a	man	can	swallow.’
They	looked	on,	uncomprehending.
The	Akrynnai	army	shook	loose	the	camp	of	the	night	just	past.	It	lifted	itself	up,	broke	into	eager	streams
flowing	into	the	wake	of	the	wounded	foe,	and	spread	in	a	flood	quickened	to	purpose.


The	morning	lost	its	gleam.	Strange	clouds	gathered,	and	across	the	sky,	flights	of	birds	fled	into	the	north.
Sceptre	Irkullas	rode	straight-backed	on	his	horse,	riding	the	sweaty	palm,	as	the	fist	began	to	close.
	
‘Gatherer	of	skulls,	where	is	the	fool	taking	us?’
Strahl,	 Bakal	 observed,	 was	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 repeating	 himself,	 as	 if	 his	 questions	 were	 a	 siege	 weapon,
flinging	stones	at	what	he	hoped	was	a	weak	point	in	the	solid	wall	of	his	ignorance.	Sooner	or	later,	through
the	dust	and	patter	of	crumbling	mortar,	he	would	catch	his	first	glimpse	of	the	answers	he	sought.
Bakal	 had	 no	 time	 for	 such	 things.	 If	 he	 had	 questions,	 he	 burned	 them	 to	 the	 ground	 where	 they	 stood,
smiling	through	the	drifting	ashes.	The	wall	awaiting	them	all	would	come	toppling	down	before	too	long.	To
our	regret.
‘We’ve	left	a	bloody	trail,’	Strahl	then	added,	and	Bakal	knew	the	warrior’s	eyes	were	fixed	upon	Hetan’s
back,	 as	 she	 limped,	 tottered	 and	 stumbled	 a	 short	 distance	 ahead	 of	 them	 in	 the	 column.	 Early	 in	 the	 day,
when	the	warriors	were	still	fresh,	their	breaths	acrid	with	the	anticipation	of	battle—perhaps	only	a	day	away
—one	 would	 drag	 her	 from	 the	 line	 and	 take	 her	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 path,	 with	 others	 shouting	 their
encouragement.	A	dozen	times	since	dawn,	this	had	occurred.	Now,	everyone	walked	as	slowly	as	she,	and	no
one	had	the	energy	to	use	her.	Of	food	there	was	plenty;	their	lack	was	water.	This	wretched	land	was	an	old
hag,	her	tits	dry	and	withered.	Bakal	could	almost	see	her	toothless	grin	through	the	waves	of	heat	rising	above
the	yellow	grasses	on	all	sides,	the	nubbed	horizon	with	its	rotten	stumps	of	bedrock	protruding	here	and	there.
The	bloody	trail	Strahl	spoke	of	marked	the	brutal	consolidation	of	power	by	Warchief	Maral	Eb	and	his	two
brothers,	 Sagal	 and	 Kashat.	 And	 the	 widow,	 Sekara	 the	 Vile.	 What	 a	 cosy	 family	 they	 made!	 He	 turned	 his
head	and	spat,	since	he	found	the	mere	thought	of	them	fouled	the	taste	on	his	tongue.
There	 had	 been	 two	 more	 attempts	 on	 his	 life.	 If	 not	 for	 Strahl	 and	 the	 half-dozen	 other	 Senan	 who’d
elected	 themselves	 his	 guardians,	 he	 would	 now	 be	 as	 dead	 as	 his	 wife	 and	 her	 would-be	 lover.	 A	 widow
walked	a	few	steps	behind	him.	Estaral	would	have	died	by	her	husband’s	hand	if	not	for	Bakal.	Yet	the	truth
was,	 his	 saving	 her	 life	 had	 been	 an	 accidental	 by-product	 of	 his	 bloodlust,	 even	 though	 he	 had	 told	 her
otherwise.	That	night	of	storms	had	been	like	a	fever	coursing	through	the	Barghast	people.	Such	a	night	had
been	denied	them	all	when	Onos	Toolan	assumed	command	after	Humbrall	Taur’s	drowning—he	had	drawn
his	stone	sword	before	all	the	gathered	clan	chiefs	and	said,	‘The	first	murder	this	night	will	be	answered	by
me.	Take	hold	of	your	wants,	your	imagined	needs,	and	crush	the	life	from	them.’	His	will	was	not	tested.
As	it	turned	out,	too	much	was	held	back,	and	this	time	everyone	had	lunged	into	madness.
‘They	won’t	rest	until	you’re	dead,	you	know.’
‘Then	they’d	best	be	quick,’	Bakal	replied.	‘For	tomorrow	we	do	battle	with	the	Akrynnai.’
Strahl	grunted.	‘It’s	said	they	have	D’ras	with	them.	And	legions	of	Saphii	Spears.’
‘Maral	Eb	will	choose	the	place.	That	alone	can	decide	the	battle.	Unlike	our	enemy,	we	are	denied	retreat.
Either	we	win,	or	we	fall.’
‘They	think	to	take	slaves.’
‘The	 Barghast	 kneel	 to	 no	 one.	 The	 grandmothers	 will	 slide	 knives	 across	 the	 throats	 of	 our	 children,	 and
then	sever	the	taproot	of	their	own	hearts.’
‘Our	gods	shall	sing	and	so	summon	us	all	through	the	veil.’
Bakal	bared	his	teeth.	‘Our	gods	would	be	wise	to	wear	all	the	armour	they	own.’
	
Three	paces	behind	the	two	warriors,	Estaral	stared	at	Bakal,	the	man	who	had	killed	her	husband,	the	man
who	 had	 saved	 her	 life.	 At	 times	 she	 felt	 as	 if	 she	 was	 walking	 the	 narrowest	 bridge	 over	 a	 depthless
crevasse,	a	bridge	reeled	out	behind	Bakal.	At	other	moments	the	world	suddenly	opened	before	her,	vast	as	a
flooding	ocean,	and	she	flailed	in	panic,	even	as,	in	a	rush	of	breathless	astonishment,	she	comprehended	the
truth	of	her	freedom.	Finding	herself	alone	made	raw	the	twin	births	of	fear	and	excitement,	and	both	sizzled	to
the	touch.	Estaral	alternated	between	cursing	and	blessing	the	warrior	striding	before	her.	He	was	her	shield,
yes,	 behind	 which	 she	 could	 hide.	 He	 also	 haunted	 her	 with	 the	 memory	 of	 that	 terrible	 night	 when	 she’d
looked	into	her	husband’s	eyes	and	saw	only	contempt—and	then	the	dark	desire	to	murder	her.
Had	 she	 really	 been	 that	 useless	 to	 him?	 That	 disgusting?	 He	 could	 not	 have	 always	 seen	 her	 so,	 else	 he
would	never	have	married	her—she	remembered	seeing	smiles	on	his	face,	years	ago	now,	it	was	true,	but	she


could	have	sworn	there	had	been	no	guile	in	his	eyes.	She	measured	out	the	seasons	since	those	bright,	rushing
days,	seeking	signs	of	her	failure,	struggling	to	find	the	fatal	threshold	she	had	so	unwittingly	crossed.	But	the
memories	swirled	round	like	a	vortex,	drawing	her	in,	and	everything	blurred,	spun	past,	and	the	only	thing	she
could	focus	on	was	her	recollection	of	his	two	faces:	the	smiling	one,	the	one	ugly	with	malice,	flitting	back	and
forth.
She	was	too	old	to	be	desired	ever	again,	and	even	if	she	had	not	been	so,	it	was	clear	now	that	she	could
not	keep	a	man’s	love	alive.	Weak,	foolish,	blind,	and	now	widow	to	a	husband	who’d	sought	to	kill	her.
Bakal	 had	 not	 hesitated.	 He’d	 killed	 her	 man	 as	 she	 might	 wring	 the	 neck	 of	 a	 yurt	 rat.	 And	 then	 he	 had
turned	 to	 his	 wife—she	 had	 stood	 defiant	 until	 his	 first	 step	 towards	 her,	 and	 then	 she	 had	 collapsed	 to	 her
knees,	begging	for	her	life.	But	that	night	had	been	the	night	of	Hetan’s	hobbling.	The	beast	of	mercy	had	been
gutted	and	its	bloody	skin	staked	to	the	ground.	She’d	begged	even	as	he	opened	her	throat.
Blood	flows	down.	I	saw	it	doing	just	that.	Down	their	bodies,	down	and	down.	I	thought	he	would
turn	to	me	then	and	do	the	same—I	witnessed	his	shame,	his	rage.	And	he	knew,	if	I	had	been	a	better
wife,	my	husband	would	never	have	fixed	his	eyes	upon	his	wife.	And	so,	the	failure	and	the	crime	was
mine	as	well.
I	would	not	have	begged.
Instead,	he	had	cleaned	his	knife	and	sheathed	it.	And	when	he	looked	upon	her,	she	saw	his	fury	fall	away,
and	his	eyes	glistened.	‘I	wish	you	had	not	seen	this,	Estaral.’
‘You	wish	he’d	already	killed	me?’
‘No—I	came	here	to	stop	them	doing	that.’
That	had	confused	her.	‘But	I	am	nothing	to	you,	Bakal.’
‘But	you	are,’	he	said.	‘Without	you,	I	would	have	no	choice	but	to	see	this	night—to	see	what	I	have	done
here—as	black	vengeance.	As	the	rage	of	a	jealous	man—but	you	see,	I	really	didn’t	care.	She	was	welcome
to	whoever	she	wanted.	But	she	had	no	right—nor	your	husband	there—they	had	no	right	to	kill	you.’
‘You	are	the	slayer	of	Onos	Toolan.’	She	still	did	not	know	why	she	had	said	that	then.	Had	she	meant	that
the	night	of	blood	was	his	and	his	alone?
He	had	flinched,	and	his	face	had	drained.	She’d	thought	then	that	he	regretted	sparing	her	life;	indeed,	that
he	might	even	change	his	mind.	Instead,	he	turned	away	and	an	instant	later	he	was	gone.
Did	she	know	that	her	words	would	wound	him?	Why	should	they?	Was	he	not	proud	of	his	glorious	deed?
Of	course,	Bakal	had	since	failed	to	become	the	leader	of	the	Barghast.	Perhaps	he	had	already	seen	the
power	slipping	from	his	grasp,	that	night.	So	she	followed	him	now.	Had	tethered	herself	to	him,	all	with	the
intention	of	taking	back	her	words,	and	yet	not	one	step	she	took	in	pursuit	found	her	any	closer.	Days	now,
nights	of	hovering	like	a	ghost	beyond	the	edge	of	his	hearth-fire.	She	had	witnessed	the	attempt	on	him	by	the
first	 assassin,	 a	 Barahn	 warrior	 desperate	 for	 status—Strahl	 had	 cut	 him	 down	 five	 strides	 from	 Bakal.	 The
next	time	it	had	been	an	arrow	sent	through	the	darkness,	missing	Bakal’s	head	by	less	than	a	hand’s-width.
Strahl	and	three	other	warriors	had	rushed	off	after	the	archer	but	they	had	lost	the	would-be	killer.
Upon	 returning,	 Strahl	 had	 muttered	 about	 Estaral’s	 spectral	 presence—calling	 her	 the	 Reaper’s	 eyes,
wondering	if	she	stayed	close	in	order	to	witness	Bakal’s	death.	It	seemed	Strahl	believed	she	hated	Bakal	for
killing	her	husband.	But	the	notion	of	hate	had	never	even	occurred	to	her,	not	for	him,	anyway.
She	 wanted	 to	 speak	 with	 Bakal.	 She	 wanted	 to	 explain	 and	 if	 she	 could	 understand	 her	 own	 motivations
from	 that	 night,	 why,	 she	 would	 do	 just	 that.	 Salve	 the	 wound,	 perhaps	 heal	 it	 completely.	 They	 shared
something,	the	two	of	them,	didn’t	they?	He	must	have	understood,	even	if	Strahl	didn’t.
But	now	they	spoke	of	a	battle	with	the	Akrynnai,	a	final	clash	to	decide	who	would	rule	this	land.	Maral	Eb
would	lead	the	Barghast,	warriors	in	their	tens	of	thousands.	It	had	been	one	thing	for	the	Akrynnai	to	strike
clan	camps—now	at	last	all	of	the	White	Face	Barghast	were	assembled	and	no	tribe	in	the	world	could	defeat
such	an	army.	Even	so,	Bakal	might	die	in	the	battle—he	would	be	commanding	the	Senan	after	all,	and	it	was
inconceivable	 to	 imagine	 Maral	 Eb	 being	 so	 arrogant	 as	 not	 to	 position	 the	 most	 powerful	 clan	 in	 the	 line’s
centre.	No,	the	Senan	would	form	the	jagged	wedge	and	it	would	cut	savage	and	deep.
She	 should	 approach	 him	 soon,	 perhaps	 this	 very	 night.	 If	 only	 to	 take	 back	 my	 words.	 He	 struck	 them
down	to	save	my	life,	after	all.	He	said	so.	Even	though	I	was	the	cause	of	so	much—
She	 had	 missed	 something,	 and	 now	 Bakal	 had	 sent	 Strahl	 away	 and	 was	 dropping	 back	 to	 her	 side.
Suddenly	her	mouth	was	dry.


‘Estaral,	I	must	ask	of	you	a	favour.’
Something	in	his	tone	whispered	darkness.	No	more	death.	Please.	If	she	had	other	lovers—
‘Hetan,’	he	said	under	his	breath.	‘You	are	among	the	women	who	guard	her	at	night.’
She	blinked.	‘Not	for	much	longer,	Bakal,’	she	said.	‘She	is	past	the	time	of	fleeing.	There	is	nothing	in	her
eyes.	She	is	hobbled.	Last	night	there	were	but	two	of	us.’
‘And	tonight	there	will	be	one.’
‘Perhaps	not	even	that.	Warriors	will	use	her,	likely	through	the	night.’
‘Gods’	shit,	I	didn’t	think	of	that!’
‘If	you	want	her—’
‘I	do	not.	Listen,	with	the	sun’s	fall,	as	warriors	gather	for	their	meals,	can	you	be	the	one	to	feed	her?’
‘The	food	just	falls	from	her	mouth,’	Estaral	said.	‘We	let	the	children	do	that—it	entertains	them,	forcing	it
down	as	if	she	was	a	babe.’
‘Not	tonight.	Take	it	on	yourself.’
‘Why?’	I	want	to	speak	with	you.	Take	things	back.	I	want	to	lie	with	you,	Bakal,	and	take	back	so
much	more.
He	fixed	his	eyes	upon	her	own,	searching	for	something—she	quickly	glanced	away,	in	case	he	discovered
her	thoughts.	‘I	don’t	understand,’	he	said.	‘Why	are	you	women	so	eager	to	hobble	another	woman?’
‘I	had	no	hand	in	that.’
‘That	is	not	what	I	asked.’
She	had	never	before	considered	such	a	thing.	It	was	what	was	done.	It	had	always	been	so.	‘Women	have
claws.’
‘I	know—I’ve	seen	it	often	enough.	I’ve	seen	it	in	battle.	But	hobbling—that’s	different.	Isn’t	it?’
She	 refused	 to	 meet	 his	 eyes.	 ‘You	 don’t	 understand.	 I	 didn’t	 mean	 the	 claws	 of	 a	 warrior.	 I	 meant	 the
claws	we	keep	hidden,	the	ones	we	use	only	against	other	women.’
‘But	why?’
‘You	speak	now	in	the	way	Onos	Toolan	did—all	his	questions	about	the	things	we’ve	always	done.	Was	it
not	this	that	saw	him	killed,	Bakal?	He	kept	questioning	things	that	he	had	no	right	to	question.’
She	saw	as	he	lifted	his	right	hand.	He	seemed	to	be	studying	it.
His	knife	hand.
‘His	blood,’	he	whispered,	‘has	poisoned	me.’
‘When	we	turn	on	our	own,’	she	said,	struggling	to	put	her	thoughts	into	words,	‘it	is	as	water	in	a	skin	finds
a	hole.	There	is	so	much	.	.	.	weight—’
‘Pressure.’
‘Yes,	that	is	the	word.	We	turn	on	our	own,	to	ease	the	pressure.	All	eyes	are	on	her,	not	us.	All	desire—’
she	stopped	then,	stifling	a	gasp.
But	he’d	caught	it—he’d	caught	it	all.	‘Are	men	the	reason	then?	Is	that	what	you’re	saying?’
She	felt	a	flush	of	anger,	like	knuckles	rapping	up	her	spine.	‘Answer	me	this,	Bakal’—and	she	met	his	wide
eyes	 unflinchingly—‘how	 many	 times	 was	 your	 touch	 truly	 tender?	 Upon	 your	 wife?	 Tell	 me,	 how	 often	 did
you	laugh	with	your	friends	when	you	saw	a	woman	emerge	from	her	home	with	blood	crusting	her	lip,	a	welt
beneath	an	eye?	“Oh,	the	wild	wolf	rutted	last	night!”	And	then	you	grin	and	you	laugh—do	you	think	we	do
not	hear?	Do	you	think	we	do	not	see?	Hobble	her!	Take	her,	all	of	you!	And,	for	as	long	as	she	lifts	to	you,
you	leave	us	alone!’
Heads	 had	 turned	 at	 her	 venomous	 tone—even	 if	 they	 could	 not	 quite	 make	 out	 her	 words,	 as	 she	 had
delivered	them	low,	like	the	hiss	of	a	dog-snake	as	it	wraps	tight	the	crushed	body	in	its	embrace.	She	saw	a
few	mocking	smiles,	saw	the	muted	swirls	of	unheard	jests.	‘Bound	tight	in	murder,	those	two,	and	already
they	spit	at	each	other!’	‘No	wonder	their	mates	leapt	into	each	other’s	arms!’
Bakal	 managed	 to	 hold	 her	 glare	 a	 moment	 longer,	 as	 if	 he	 could	 hold	 back	 her	 furious,	 bitter	 words,	 and
then	he	looked	ahead	once	more.	A	rough	sigh	escaped	him.	‘I	remember	his	nonsense—or	so	I	thought	it	at
the	time.	His	tales	of	the	Imass—he	said	the	greatest	proof	of	strength	a	male	warrior	could	display	was	found
in	not	once	touching	his	mate	with	anything	but	tenderness.’
‘And	you	sneered.’
‘I	saw	women	sneer	at	that,	too.’


‘And	if	we	hadn’t,	Bakal?	If	you’d	seen	us	with	something	else	in	our	eyes?’
He	grimaced	and	then	nodded.	‘A	night	or	two	of	the	wild	wolf—’
‘To	beat	out	such	treasonous	ideas,	yes.	You	did	not	understand—none	of	you	did.	If	you	hadn’t	killed	him,
he	would	have	changed	us	all.’
‘And	women	such	as	Sekara	the	Vile?’
She	curled	her	lip.	‘What	of	them?’
He	grunted.	‘Of	course.	Greed	and	power	are	her	only	lovers—in	that,	she	is	no	different	from	us	men.’
‘What	do	you	want	with	Hetan?’
‘Nothing.	Never	mind.’
‘You	no	longer	trust	me.	Perhaps	you	never	did.	It	was	only	the	pool	of	blood	we’re	both	standing	in.’
‘You	follow	me.	You	stand	just	beyond	the	firelight	every	night.’
I	am	alone.	Can’t	you	see	that?	‘Why	did	you	murder	him?	I	will	tell	you.	It’s	because	you	saw	him	as	a
threat,	and	he	was	surely	that,	wasn’t	he?’
‘I—I	did	not—’	He	halted,	shook	his	head.	‘I	want	to	steal	her	away.	I	want	it	to	end.’
‘It’s	too	late.	Hetan	is	dead	inside.	Long	dead.	You	took	away	her	husband.	You	took	away	her	children.
And	then	you—we—took	away	her	body.	A	flower	cut	from	its	root	quickly	dies.’
‘Estaral.’
He	was	holding	on	to	a	secret,	she	realized.
Bakal	glanced	at	her.	‘Cafal.’
She	felt	her	throat	tighten—was	it	panic?	Or	the	promise	of	vengeance?	Retribution?	Even	if	it	meant	her
own	death?	Oh,	I	see	now.	We’re	still	falling.
‘He	is	close,’	Bakal	went	on	under	his	breath.	‘He	wants	her	back.	He	wants	me	to	steal	her	away.	Estaral,
I	need	your	help—’
She	searched	his	face.	‘You	would	do	this	for	him?	Do	you	hate	him	that	much,	Bakal?’
She	might	as	well	have	struck	him	in	the	face.
‘He—he	is	a	shaman,	a	healer—’
‘No	Barghast	shaman	has	ever	healed	one	of	the	hobbled.’
‘None	has	tried!’
‘Perhaps	it	is	as	you	say,	Bakal.	I	see	that	you	do	not	want	to	wound	Cafal.	You	would	do	this	to	give	to	him
what	he	seeks.’
He	nodded	once,	as	if	unable	to	speak.
‘I	 will	 take	 her	 from	 the	 children,’	 Estaral	 said.	 ‘I	 will	 lead	 her	 to	 the	 west	 end	 of	 the	 camp.	 But,	 Bakal,
there	will	be	pickets—we	are	at	the	eve	of	battle—’
‘I	know.	Leave	the	warriors	to	me.’
She	 didn’t	 know	 why	 she	 was	 doing	 this.	 Nor	 did	 she	 understand	 the	 man	 walking	 at	 her	 side.	 But	 what
difference	 did	 knowing	 make?	 Just	 as	 easy	 to	 live	 in	 ignorance,	 scraped	 clean	 of	 expectation,	 emptied	 of
beliefs	and	faith,	even	hopes.	Hetan	is	hobbled.	No	different	in	the	end	from	every	other	woman	suffering
the	same	fate.	She’s	been	cut	down	inside,	and	the	stem	lies	bruised	and	lifeless.	She	was	once	a	great
warrior.	She	was	once	proud,	her	wit	sharp	as	a	thorn,	ever	quick	to	laugh	but	never	with	cruelty.	She
was	indeed	a	host	of	virtues,	but	they	had	availed	her	nothing.	No	strength	of	will	survives	hobbling.	Not	a
single	virtue.	This	is	the	secret	of	humiliation:	the	deadliest	weapon	the	Barghast	have.
She	could	see	Hetan	up	ahead,	her	matted	hair,	her	stumbles	brought	up	by	the	crooked	staff	the	hobbled
were	permitted	when	on	the	march.	The	daughter	of	Humbrall	Taur	was	barely	recognizable.	Did	her	father’s
spirit	stand	witness,	there	in	the	Reaper’s	shadow?	Or	had	he	turned	away?
No,	he	rides	his	last	son’s	soul.	That	must	be	what	has	so	maddened	Cafal.
Well,	to	honour	Hetan’s	father,	she	would	do	this.	When	the	Barghast	came	to	rest	at	this	day’s	end.	She
was	tired.	She	was	thirsty.	She	hoped	it	would	be	soon.
______
Kashat	pointed.	‘See	there,	brother.	The	ridge	forms	half	a	circle.’
‘Not	much	of	a	slope,’	Sagal	muttered.
‘Look	 around,’	 Kashat	 said,	 snorting.	 ‘It’s	 about	 the	 best	 we	 can	 manage.	 This	 land	 is	 pocked,	 but	 those
pocks	 are	 old	 and	 worn	 down.	 Anyway,	 that	 ridge	 marks	 the	 biggest	 of	 those	 pocks—you	 can	 see	 that	 for


yourself.	And	the	slope	is	rocky—they	would	lose	horses	charging	up	that.’
‘So	they	flank	us	instead.’
‘We	 make	 strongpoints	 at	 both	 ends,	 with	 crescents	 of	 archers	 positioned	 behind	 them	 to	 take	 any	 riders
attempting	an	encirclement.’
‘With	the	rear	barricaded	by	the	wagons.’
‘Held	by	mixed	archers	and	pike-wielders,	yes,	exactly.	Listen,	Sagal,	by	this	time	tomorrow	we’ll	be	picking
loot	 from	 heaps	 of	 corpses.	 The	 Akrynnai	 army	 will	 be	 shattered,	 their	 villages	 undefended—we	 can	 march
into	the	heart	of	their	territory	and	claim	it	for	ourselves.’
‘An	end	to	the	Warleader,	the	rise	of	the	first	Barghast	King.’
Kashat	 nodded.	 ‘And	 we	 shall	 be	 princes,	 and	 the	 King	 shall	 grant	 us	 provinces	 to	 rule.	 Our	 very	 own
herds.	Horses,	bhederin,	rodara.	We	shall	have	Akrynnai	slaves,	as	many	of	their	young	women	as	we	want,
and	we	shall	live	in	keeps—do	you	remember,	Sagal?	When	we	were	young,	our	first	war,	marching	down	to
Capustan—we	saw	the	great	stone	keeps	all	in	ruin	along	the	river.	We	shall	build	ourselves	those,	one	each.’
Sagal	grinned	at	his	brother.	‘Let	us	return	to	the	host,	and	see	if	our	great	King	is	in	any	better	mood	than
when	we	left	him.’
They	turned	back,	slinging	their	spears	over	their	shoulders	and	jogging	to	rejoin	the	vanguard	of	the	column.
The	 sun	 glared	 through	 the	 dust	 above	 the	 glittering	 forest	 of	 barbed	 iron,	 transforming	 the	 cloud	 into	 a
penumbra	of	gold.	Vultures	rode	the	deepening	sky	to	either	side.	Barely	two	turns	of	the	beaker	before	dusk
arrived—the	night	ahead	promised	to	be	busy.
	
The	half-dozen	Akryn	scouts	rode	between	the	narrow,	twisting	gullies	and	out	on	to	the	flats	where	the	dust
still	drifted	above	the	rubbish	left	behind	by	the	Barghast.	They	cut	across	that	churned-up	trail	and	cantered
southward.	The	sun	had	just	left	the	sky,	dropping	behind	a	bank	of	clouds	dark	as	a	shadowed	cliff-face	on
the	western	horizon,	and	dusk	bled	into	the	air.
When	 the	 drum	 of	 horse	 hoofs	 finally	 faded,	 Cafal	 edged	 out	 from	 the	 deeper	 of	 the	 two	 gullies.	 The
bastards	had	held	him	back	too	long—the	great	cauldrons	would	be	steaming	in	the	Barghast	camp,	the	foul
reek	of	six	parts	animal	blood	to	two	parts	water	and	sour	wine,	and	all	the	uncured	meat	still	rank	with	the
taste	 of	 slaughter.	 Squads	 would	 be	 shaking	 out,	 amidst	 curses	 that	 they	 would	 have	 to	 eat	 salted	 strips	 of
smoked	 bhederin,	 sharing	 a	 skin	 of	 warm	 water	 on	 their	 patrols	 between	 the	 pickets.	 The	 Barghast
encampment	would	be	seething	with	activity.
One	 of	 Bakal’s	 warriors	 had	 found	 him	 a	 short	 time	 earlier,	 delivering	 the	 details	 of	 the	 plan.	 It	 would
probably	fail,	but	Cafal	did	not	care.	If	he	died	attempting	to	steal	her	back,	then	this	torment	would	end.	For
one	of	them,	at	least.	It	was	a	selfish	desire,	but	selfish	desires	were	all	he	had	left.
I	am	the	last	of	Father’s	children,	the	last	not	dead	or	broken.	Father,	you	so	struggled	to	become	the
great	leader	of	the	White	Faces.	And	now	I	wonder,	if	you	had	turned	away	from	the	attempt,	if	you	had
quenched	 your	 ambition,	 where	 would	 you	 and	 your	 children	 be	 right	 now?	 Spirits	 reborn,	 would	 we
even	be	here,	on	this	cursed	continent?
I	know	for	a	fact	that	Onos	Toolan	wanted	a	peaceful	life,	his	head	down	beneath	the	winds	that	had
once	 ravaged	 his	 soul.	 He	 was	 flesh,	 he	 was	 life—after	 so	 long—and	 what	 have	 we	 done?	 Did	 we
embrace	him?	Did	the	White	Face	Barghast	welcome	him	as	a	guest?	Were	we	the	honourable	hosts	we
proclaim	to	be?	Ah,	such	lies	we	tell	ourselves.	Our	every	comfort	proves	false	in	the	end.
He	moved	cautiously	along	the	battered	trail.	Already	the	glow	from	the	cookfires	stained	the	way	ahead.
He	could	not	see	the	picket	stations	or	the	patrols—coming	in	from	the	west	had	disadvantaged	him,	but	soon
the	darkness	would	paint	them	as	silhouettes	against	the	camp’s	hearths.	In	any	case,	he	did	not	have	to	draw
too	close.	Bakal	would	deliver	her,	or	so	he	claimed.
The	face	of	Setoc	rose	in	his	mind,	and	behind	it	flashed	the	horrible	scene	of	her	body	spinning	away	from
his	blow,	the	looseness	of	her	neck—had	he	heard	a	snap?	He	didn’t	know.	But	the	way	she	fell.	Her	flopping
limbs—yes,	there	was	a	crack,	a	sickening	sound	of	bones	breaking,	a	sound	driving	like	a	spike	into	his	skull.
He	had	heard	it	and	he’d	refused	to	hear	it,	but	such	refusal	failed	and	so	its	dread	echo	reverberated	through
him.	He	had	killed	her.	How	could	he	face	that?
He	could	not.
Hetan.	Think	of	Hetan.	You	can	save	this	one.	The	same	hand	that	killed	Setoc	can	save	Hetan.	Can


you	make	that	be	enough,	Cafal?	Can	you?
His	contempt	for	himself	was	matched	only	by	his	contempt	for	the	Barghast	gods—he	knew	they	were	the
cause	behind	all	of	this—another	gift	by	my	own	hand.	They	had	despised	Onos	Toolan.	Unable	to	reach	into
his	 foreign	 blood,	 his	 foreign	 ideas,	 they	 had	 poisoned	 the	 hearts	 of	 every	 Barghast	 warrior	 against	 the
Warleader.	 And	 now	 they	 held	 their	 mortal	 children	 in	 their	 hands,	 and	 every	 strange	 face	 was	 an	 enemy’s
face,	every	unfamiliar	notion	was	a	deadly	threat	to	the	Barghast	and	their	way	of	life.
But	the	only	people	safe	from	change	are	the	ones	lying	inside	sealed	tombs.	You	drowned	your	fear
in	ambition	and	see	where	you’ve	brought	us?	This	is	the	eve	of	our	annihilation.
I	have	seen	the	Akrynnai	army,	and	I	will	voice	no	warning.	I	will	not	rush	into	the	camp	and	exhort
Maral	Eb	to	seek	peace.	I	will	do	nothing	to	save	any	of	them,	not	even	Bakal.	He	knows	what	comes,	if
not	the	details,	and	he	does	not	flinch.
Remember	 him,	 Cafal.	 He	 will	 die	 true	 to	 the	 pure	 virtues	 so	 quickly	 abused	 by	 those	 who	 possess
none	of	them.	He	will	be	used	as	his	kind	have	been	used	for	thousands	of	years,	among	thousands	of
civilizations.	 He	 is	 one	 among	 the	 bloody	 fodder	 for	 empty	 tyrants	 and	 their	 pathetic	 wants.	 Without
him,	the	great	scything	blade	of	history	sings	through	nothing	but	air.
Would	 that	 such	 virtue	 could	 face	 down	 the	 tyrants.	 That	 the	 weapon	 turn	 in	 their	 sweaty	 hands.
Would	that	the	only	blood	spilled	belonged	to	them	and	them	alone.
Go	on,	Maral	Eb.	Walk	out	on	to	the	plain	and	cross	swords	with	Irkullas.	Kill	each	other	and	then
the	 rest	 of	 us	 can	 just	 walk	 away.	 Swords?	 Why	 such	 formality?	 Why	 not	 just	 bare	 hands	 and	 teeth?
Tear	 each	 other	 to	 pieces!	 Like	 two	 wolves	 fighting	 to	 rule	 the	 pack—whichever	 one	 limps	 away
triumphant	will	be	eyed	by	the	next	one	in	line.	And	on	it	goes,	and	really,	do	any	of	the	rest	of	us	give	a
fuck?	At	least	wolves	don’t	make	other	wolves	fight	their	battles	for	them.	No,	our	tyrants	are	smarter
than	wolves,	aren’t	they?
He	halted	and	crouched	down.	He	was	in	the	place	he	was	supposed	to	be.
The	 jade	 talons	 raked	 up	 from	 the	 southern	 horizon,	 and	 from	 the	 plain	 to	 the	 west	 a	 fox	 loosed	 an	 eerie,
piercing	cry.	Night	had	arrived.
	
Estaral	grasped	the	girl	by	her	braid	and	flung	her	back.	They	had	been	trying	to	force	goat	shit	into	Hetan’s
mouth—her	face	was	smeared	from	the	cheeks	down.
Spitting	in	rage,	the	girl	scrambled	to	her	feet,	her	cohorts	closing	round	her.	Eyes	blazed.	‘My	father	will
see	you	hobbled	for	that!’
‘I	doubt	it,’	Estaral	replied.	‘What	man	wants	to	take	a	woman	stinking	of	shit?	You’ll	be	lucky	to	keep	your
hide,	Faranda.	Now,	all	of	you,	get	away	from	here—I	know	you	all,	and	I’ve	not	yet	decided	whether	to	tell
your	fathers	about	this.’
They	bolted.
Estaral	knelt	before	Hetan,	pulling	up	handfuls	of	grass	to	wipe	her	mouth	and	chin.	‘Even	the	bad	rules	are
breaking,’	 she	 said.	 ‘We	 keep	 falling	 and	 falling,	 Hetan.	 Be	 glad	 you	 cannot	 see	 what	 has	 become	 of	 your
people.’
But	those	words	rang	false.	Be	glad?	Be	glad	they	chopped	off	the	fronts	of	your	feet?	Be	glad	they
raped	you	so	many	times	you	couldn’t	feel	a	damned	bhederin	pounding	into	you	by	now?	No.	And	if
the	Akrynnai	chop	off	our	feet	and	rape	us	come	tomorrow,	who	will	weep	for	the	White	Faces?
Not	Cafal.	‘Not	you,	either,	Hetan.’	She	flung	the	soiled	grasses	away	and	helped	Hetan	to	stand.	‘Here,
your	staff,	lean	on	it.’	She	grasped	a	handful	of	filthy	shirt	and	began	guiding	the	woman	through	the	camp.
‘Don’t	keep	her	too	long!’	She	glanced	back	to	see	a	warrior	behind	them—he	had	been	coming	to	take	her
and	now	stood	with	a	grin	that	hovered	on	the	edge	of	something	dark	and	cruel.
‘They	fed	her	shit—I’m	taking	her	to	get	properly	cleaned	up.’
A	flicker	of	disgust.	‘The	children?	Who	were	they?	A	solid	beating—’
‘They	ran	before	I	got	close	enough.	Ask	around.’
Estaral	tugged	Hetan	into	motion	once	again.
The	warrior	did	not	pursue,	but	she	heard	him	cursing	as	he	wandered	off.	She	didn’t	think	she’d	run	into
many	 more	 like	 him—everyone	 was	 crowding	 around	 their	 clan	 cookfires,	 hungry	 and	 parched	 and	 shorttempered	as	they	jostled	and	fought	for	position.	There’d	be	a	few	flick-blade	duels	this	night,	she	expected.


There	always	were,	night	before	battle.	Stupid,	of	course.	Pointless.	But,	as	Onos	Toolan	 might	 say,	 the	 real
meaning	of	‘tradition’	was	.	.	.	what	had	he	called	it?	‘Stupidity	on	purpose’,	that’s	what	he	said.	I	think.	I
never	much	listened.
I	should	have.	We	all	should	have.
They	 neared	 the	 western	 edge	 of	 the	 camp,	 where	 the	 wagons	 were	 already	 being	 positioned	 to	 form	 a
defensive	barricade.	Just	beyond,	drovers	were	busy	slaughtering	stock,	and	the	bleating	cries	of	hundreds	of
animals	filled	the	night.	The	first	bonfires	for	offal	had	been	lit	using	rotted	cloth,	bound	rushes,	dung	and	liberal
splashes	of	lamp	oil.	The	flames	lit	up	terrified	eyes	from	within	crowded	pens.	Chaos	and	horror	had	come	to
the	beasts	and	the	air	was	thick	with	death.
She	almost	halted.	She’d	never	before	seen	things	in	such	a	way;	she’d	never	before	felt	the	echo	of	misery
and	 suffering	 assailing	 her	 from	 all	 directions—every	 scene	 painted	 into	 life	 by	 the	 fires	 was	 like	 a	 vision	 of
madness.	We	do	this.	We	do	this	all	the	time.	To	all	these	creatures	who	look	to	us	for	protection.	We	do
this	and	think	nothing	of	it.
We	 say	 we	 are	 great	 thinkers,	 but	 I	 think	 now,	 that	 most	 of	 what	 we	 do	 each	 and	 every	 day—and
night—is	in	fact	thoughtless.	We	will	ourselves	empty	to	numb	us	to	our	cruelty.	We	stiffen	our	faces	and
say	 we	 have	 needs.	 But	 to	 be	 empty	 is	 to	 have	 no	 purchase,	 nothing	 to	 grasp	 on	 to,	 and	 so	 in	 the
emptiness	we	slide	and	we	slide.
We	fall.
Oh,	when	will	it	end?
She	 pulled	 Hetan	 to	 a	 position	 behind	 a	 wagon,	 the	 plains	 stretching	 westward	 before	 them.	 Thirty	 paces
ahead,	limned	by	the	deepening	remnants	of	the	sunset,	three	warriors	were	busy	digging	a	picket.	‘Sit	down—
no,	don’t	lift.	Just	sit.’
	
‘Listen,	Strahl—you	have	done	enough.	Leave	this	night	to	me.’
‘Bakal—’
‘Please,	old	friend.	This	is	all	by	my	hand—I	stood	alone	before	Onos	Toolan.	There	must	be	the	hope	.	.	.
the	hope	for	balance.	In	my	soul.	Leave	me	this,	I	beg	you.’
Strahl	 looked	 away	 and	 it	 was	 clear	 to	 Bakal	 that	 his	 words	 had	 been	 too	 honest,	 too	 raw.	 The	 warrior
shifted	nervously,	his	discomfort	plain	to	see.
‘Go,	 Strahl.	 Go	 lie	 in	 your	 wife’s	 arms	 this	 night.	 Look	 past	 everything	 else—none	 of	 it	 matters.	 Find	 the
faces	of	the	ones	you	love.	Your	children,	your	wife.’
The	man	managed	a	nod,	not	meeting	Bakal’s	eyes,	and	then	set	off.
Bakal	watched	him	leave,	and	then	checked	his	weapons	one	last	time,	before	setting	off	through	the	camp.
Belligerence	was	building,	sizzling	beneath	the	harsh	voices.	It	lit	fires	inside	the	strutting	warriors	as	they
bellowed	out	their	oaths	among	the	hearth	circles.	It	bared	teeth	in	the	midst	of	every	harsh	laugh.	War	was
the	face	to	be	stared	into,	or	fled	from,	but	the	camp	on	a	night	such	as	this	one	was	a	cage,	a	prison	to	them
all.	The	darkness	hid	the	ones	with	skittish	eyes	and	twitching	hands;	the	bold	postures	and	wild	glares	masked
icy	terror.	Fear	and	excitement	had	closed	jaws	upon	each	other’s	throat	and	neither	dared	let	go.
This	was	the	ancient	dance,	this	ritualized	spitting	into	the	eyes	of	fate,	stoking	the	dark	addiction.	He	had
seen	elders,	warriors	too	old,	too	decrepit	to	do	anything	but	sit	or	stand	crooked	over	staffs,	and	he	had	seen
their	blazing	eyes,	had	heard	their	cracking	exhortations—but	most	of	all,	he	had	seen	in	their	eyes	the	pain	of
their	loss,	as	if	they’d	been	forced	to	surrender	their	most	precious	love.	It	was	no	quaint	conceit	that	warriors
prayed	 to	 the	 spirits	 for	 the	 privilege	 of	 dying	 in	 battle.	 Thoughts	 of	 useless	 years	 stretching	 beyond	 the
warrior’s	life	could	freeze	the	heart	of	the	bravest	of	the	brave.
The	 Barghast	 were	 not	 soldiers,	 not	 like	 the	 Malazans	 or	 the	 Crimson	 Guard.	 A	 profession	 could	 be	 left
behind,	a	new	future	found.	But	for	the	warrior,	war	was	everything,	the	very	reason	to	live.	It	was	the	maker
of	heroes	and	cowards,	the	one	force	that	tested	a	soul	in	ways	that	could	not	be	bargained	round,	that	could
not	 be	 corrupted	 by	 a	 handful	 of	 silver.	 War	 forged	 bonds	 closer	 knit	 than	 those	 of	 bloodkin.	 It	 painted	 the
crypt’s	wall	behind	every	set	of	eyes—those	of	foe	and	friend	both.	It	was,	indeed,	the	purest,	truest	cult	of	all.
What	need	for	wonder,	then,	that	so	many	youths	so	longed	for	such	a	life?
Bakal	 understood	 all	 this,	 for	 he	 was	 indeed	 a	 warrior.	 He	 understood,	 and	 yet	 his	 heart	 was	 bitter	 with
disgust.	No	longer	did	he	dream	of	inviting	his	sons	and	daughters	into	such	a	world.	Embracing	this	addiction


devoured	too	much,	inside	and	out.
He—and	so	many	others—had	looked	into	the	face	of	Onos	Toolan	and	had	seen	his	compassion,	had	seen
it	so	clearly	that	the	only	response	was	to	recoil.	The	Imass	had	been	an	eternal	warrior.	He	had	fought	with
the	warrior’s	blessing	of	immortality,	given	the	gift	of	battles	unending,	and	then	he	had	willingly	surrendered	it.
How	could	such	a	man,	even	one	reborn,	find	so	much	of	his	humanity	still	alive	within	him?
I	 could	 not	 have.	 Even	 after	 but	 three	 decades	 of	 war	 .	 .	 .	 if	 I	 was	 this	 moment	 reborn,	 I	 could	 not
find	in	myself	.	.	.	what?	A	battered	tin	cup	half-filled	with	compassion,	not	enough	to	splash	a	dozen
people	closest	to	me.
Yet	.	.	.	yet	he	was	a	flood,	an	unending	flood—how	can	that	be?
Who	 did	 I	 kill?	 Shy	 from	 that	 question	 if	 you	 must,	 Bakal.	 But	 one	 truth	 you	 cannot	 deny:	 his
compassion	took	hold	of	your	arm,	your	knife,	and	showed	you	the	strength	of	its	will.
His	steps	slowed.	He	looked	round,	blearily.	I	am	lost.	Where	am	I?	I	don’t	understand.	Where	am	I?	And
what	are	all	these	broken	things	in	my	hands?	Still	crashing	down—the	roar	is	deafening!	‘Save	her,’	he
muttered.	‘Yes.	Save	her—the	only	one	worth	saving.	May	she	live	a	thousand	years,	proof	to	all	who	see	her,
proof	of	who	and	what	the	Barghast	were.	The	White	Faces.’	We	hobble	ourselves	and	call	it	glory.	We	lift
to	meet	drooling	old	men	eager	to	fill	us	to	bursting	with	their	bitter	poisons.	Old	men?	No,	warleaders
and	warchiefs.	And	our	precious	tradition	of	senseless	self-destruction.	Watch	it	fuck	us	dry.
He	was	railing,	but	it	was	in	silence.	Who	would	want	to	hear	such	things?	See	what	happened	to	the	last
one	 who	 held	 out	 a	 compassionate	 hand?	 He	 imagined	 himself	 walking	 between	 heaving	 rows	 of	 his	 fellow
warriors.	 He	 walked,	 trailing	 the	 gutted	 ropes	 of	 his	 messy	 arguments,	 and	 from	 both	 sides	 spit	 and	 curses
rained	down.
Truths	 bore	 the	 frightened	 mind.	 Are	 we	 bored?	 Yes!	 Where	 is	 the	 blood?	 Where	 are	 the	 flashing
knives?	 Give	 us	 the	 unthinking	 dance!	 Charge	 our	 jaded	 hearts,	 you	 weeping	 slave!	 Piss	 on	 your
difficult	 thoughts,	 your	 grim	 recognitions.	 Lift	 up	 your	 backside,	 fool,	 while	 I	 seek	 to	 pound	 feeling
back	into	me.
Stand	still	while	I	hobble	you—let’s	see	you	walk	now!
Bakal	staggered	out	from	the	camp’s	edge.	Halting	ten	paces	beyond	the	wagons,	he	tugged	loose	the	straps
binding	the	lance	to	his	back.	Rolled	the	shaft	into	his	right	hand.	His	shoulder	ached—the	tears	of	tendon	and
muscle	were	not	yet	mended.	The	pain	would	wake	him	up.
Ahead	 was	 the	 banked	 berm	 of	 the	 picket’s	 trench.	 Three	 helmed	 heads	 were	 visible	 as	 lumps	 projecting
above	the	reddish	heap	of	earth.
Bakal	broke	into	a	trot,	silent	on	the	grasses	as	he	closed	the	distance.
He	launched	the	lance	from	twelve	paces	behind	the	three	warriors.	Saw	the	iron	point	drive	between	the
shoulders	 of	 the	 one	 on	 his	 left,	 punching	 the	 man’s	 body	 against	 the	 trench	 wall.	 As	 the	 other	 two	 jerked,
heads	snapping	in	that	direction,	he	reached	the	trench—blades	in	hands—and	leapt	down	between	them.	His
cutlass	bit	through	bronze	skull-cap,	split	half	the	woman’s	skull,	and	jammed	there.	The	knife	in	his	left	hand
slashed	 the	 back	 of	 the	 last	 warrior’s	 neck—but	 the	 man	 had	 twisted,	 enough	 to	 save	 his	 spinal	 cord,	 and
spinning,	he	slammed	a	dagger	deep	into	Bakal’s	chest,	just	under	his	left	arm.
Intimately	 close	 with	 his	 enemy	 in	 the	 cramped	 trench,	 he	 saw	 the	 warrior	 open	 his	 mouth	 to	 cry	 out	 the
alarm.	Bakal’s	back-slash	with	his	knife	ripped	out	the	man’s	throat,	even	as	the	dagger	sank	a	second	time,
the	blade	snapping	as	it	snagged	between	two	ribs.
Blood	 rushed	 up	 to	 fill	 Bakal’s	 throat	 and	 he	 fell	 against	 the	 dying	 warrior,	 coughing	 into	 the	 wool	 of	 the
man’s	cloak.
He	was	feeling	so	very	tired	now,	but	there	were	things	still	to	be	done.	Find	her.	Save	her.	 He	 crawled
from	the	trench.	He	was	having	trouble	breathing.	A	memory	that	had	been	lost	for	decades	returned	to	him
suddenly:	 the	 last	 time	 he’d	 been	 near	 death—the	 Drowning	 Fever	 had	 struck	 him	 down,	 his	 lungs	 filling	 up
with	 phlegm.	 The	 thick	 poultices	 encasing	 his	 chest,	 the	 eye-stinging	 smell	 of	 ground	 mustard	 seeds—his
mother’s	face,	a	blurred	thing,	hovering,	dread	hardening	to	resignation	behind	her	eyes.	Crypt	walls.	We	all
have	 them,	 there	 inside—you	 don’t	 go	 there	 often,	 do	 you?	 It’s	 where	 you	 keep	 your	 dead.	 Dead
relatives,	dead	dreams,	dead	promises.	Dead	selves,	so	many	of	those,	so	many.	When	you	loot,	you	only
take	the	best	things.	The	things	you	can	use,	the	things	you	can	sell.	And	when	you	seal	it	all	up	again,
the	darkness	remains.


It	remains.	Ah,	Mother,	it	remains.
My	crypt.	My	crypt	walls.
He	 thought	 to	 regain	 his	 feet.	 Instead,	 he	 was	 lying	 on	 the	 ground,	 the	 trench	 pit	 almost	 within	 reach.
Mother?	Are	you	there?	Father?	Desorban,	my	son,	oh	precious	son—I	put	that	sword	into	your	hand.	I
pretended	to	be	proud,	even	as	fear	curled	black	talons	round	my	heart.	Later,	when	I	looked	down	at
your	 so-still	 face,	 when	 all	 the	 others	 were	 singing	 the	 glory	 of	 your	 brave	 moments—only	 moments,
yes,	all	you	had—I	pretended	that	the	music	eased	the	hurt	in	my	soul.	I	pretended,	because	to	pretend
was	to	comfort	them	in	turn,	for	the	time	when	they	stood	in	my	place,	looking	down	on	the	face	of	their
own	beloved.
Son?	Are	you	there?
Crypt	walls.	Scenes	and	faces.
In	the	dark,	you	can’t	even	see	the	paint.
	
Estaral	 struggled	 in	 the	 gloom	 to	 see	 that	 distant	 picket.	 Had	 something	 happened	 there?	 She	 wasn’t	 sure.
From	the	camp	behind	the	row	of	wagons	at	her	back,	she	could	hear	a	child	shouting,	something	vicious	and
eager	in	the	voice.	A	tremor	of	unease	ran	through	her	and	she	shot	Hetan	a	glance.	Sitting,	staring	at	nothing.
This	 was	 taking	 too	 long.	 Warriors	 would	 be	 looking	 for	 their	 hobbled	 prize.	 Words	 would	 break	 loose—
Estaral	had	been	seen,	dragging	Hetan	through	the	camp.	Westward,	yes.	Out	past	the	light	of	the	fires.
She	reached	down	and	pulled	Hetan	to	her	feet.	Took	up	the	staff	and	pushed	it	into	the	woman’s	hands.
‘Come!’
Estaral	dragged	her	towards	the	picket.	No	movement	from	there.	Something	lying	on	this	side,	something
that	hadn’t	been	there	earlier.	Mouth	dry,	heart	in	her	throat,	she	led	Hetan	closer.
The	stench	of	faeces	and	urine	and	blood	reached	her.	That	shape—a	body,	lying	still	in	death.
‘Bakal?’	she	whispered.
Nothing.	 From	 the	 trench	 itself,	 a	 heavy	 silence.	 She	 crouched	 at	 the	 body,	 pulled	 it	 on	 to	 its	 back.	 She
stared	down	at	Bakal’s	face:	the	frothy	streaks	of	blood	smearing	his	chin,	the	expression	as	of	one	lost,	and
finally,	his	staring,	sightless	eyes.
Another	shout	from	the	camp,	closer	this	time.	That’s	Faranda—and	that	one,	that’s	Sekara.	Spirits	shit
on	them	both!
Terror	rushed	through	her.	She	crouched,	like	a	hare	with	no	cover	in	sight.
Hetan	made	to	sink	to	her	knees.	‘No!’	she	hissed.	‘Stay	up,	damn	you!’	 She	 grasped	 the	 woman’s	 shirt
again,	tugged	her	stumbling	round	one	end	of	the	trench,	out	on	to	the	plain.
Jade	 licked	 the	 grasses—a	 hundred	 paces	 ahead	 the	 ground	 rose,	 showing	 pieces	 of	 a	 ridge.	 The	 column
had	skirted	round	that,	she	recalled.	‘Hetan!	Listen	to	me!	Walk	to	that	ridge—do	you	see	it?	Walk	there.	Just
walk,	do	you	understand?	A	man	waits	for	you	there—he’s	impatient.	He’s	angry.	Hurry	to	him	or	you’ll	regret
it.	Hurry!’	She	shoved	her	forward.
Hetan	 staggered,	 righted	 herself.	 For	 one	 terrible	 moment	 she	 simply	 stood	 where	 she	 was,	 and	 then	 the
hobbled	lurched	into	motion.
Estaral	watched	 her	 for	a	dozen	heartbeats—to	be	 certain—and	 then	 she	spun	 and	 ran	 back	 towards	 the
camp.	She	could	slip	in	unseen.	Yes,	she’d	cleaned	up	Hetan’s	face,	and	then	had	simply	left	her,	close	to	the
wagons—the	bitch	was	dead	behind	the	eyes,	anyone	could	see	that.	She	fled	out	on	to	the	plain?	Ridiculous,
but	if	you	want	to	go	look,	out	where	the	Akrynnai	are	waiting,	go	right	ahead.
She	 found	 shadows	 between	 two	 wagons,	 squeezed	 in.	 Figures	 were	 moving	 in	 and	 out	 of	 firelight.	 The
shouts	had	stopped.	If	she	avoided	the	hearths,	she	could	thread	her	way	back	to	where	Strahl	and	the	others
were	 camped.	 She	 would	 have	 to	 tell	 him	 of	 Bakal’s	 death.	 Who	 would	 lead	 the	 Senan	 tomorrow?	 It	 would
have	to	be	Strahl.	He	would	need	to	know,	so	he	could	ready	his	mind	to	command,	to	the	weight	of	his	clan’s
destiny.
She	edged	forward.
Thirty	paces	on,	they	found	her.	Six	women	led	by	Sekara,	with	Faranda	hovering	in	the	background.	Estaral
saw	 them	 rushing	 to	 close	 and	 she	 drew	 her	 knife.	 She	 knew	 what	 they	 would	 do	 to	 her;	 she	 knew	 they
weren’t	interested	in	asking	questions,	weren’t	interested	in	explanations.	No,	 they	 will	 do	 to	 me	 what	 they
did	to	Hetan.	Bakal	was	gone,	her	protector	was	gone.	There	were,	she	realized,	so	many	ways	to	be	alone.


They	saw	her	weapon.	Avid	desire	lit	their	eyes—yes,	they	wanted	blood.	‘I	killed	her!’	Estaral	shrieked.
‘Bakal	was	using	her—I	killed	them	both!’
She	lunged	into	their	midst.
Blades	 flickered.	 Estaral	 staggered,	 spun	 even	 as	 she	 sank	 to	 her	 knees.	 Gleeful	 faces	 on	 all	 sides.	 Such
bright	 hunger—oh,	 how	 alive	 they	 feel!	 She	 was	 bleeding	 out,	 four,	 maybe	 five	 wounds,	 heat	 leaking	 out
from	her	body.
So	stupid.	All	of	it	.	.	.	so	stupid.	And	with	that	thought	she	laughed	out	her	last	breath.
	
The	massive	bank	of	clouds	on	the	western	horizon	now	filled	half	the	night	sky,	impenetrable	and	solid	as	a
wall,	building	block	by	block	to	shut	out	the	stars	and	the	slashes	of	jade.	Wind	rustled	the	grasses,	pulled	from
the	 east	 as	 if	 the	 storm	 was	 drawing	 breath.	 Yet	 no	 flashes	 lit	 the	 clouds,	 and	 not	 once	 had	 Cafal	 heard
thunder.	Despite	this,	his	trepidation	grew	with	every	glance	at	the	towering	blackness.
Where	was	Bakal?	Where	was	Hetan?
The	 bound	 grip	 of	 the	 hook-blade	 was	 slick	 in	 his	 hand.	 He	 had	 begun	 to	 shiver	 as	 the	 temperature
plummeted.
He	 could	 save	 her.	 He	 was	 certain	 of	 it.	 He	 would	 demand	 the	 power	 from	 the	 Barghast	 gods.	 If	 they
refused	him,	he	vowed	he	would	destroy	them.	No	games,	no	bargains.	I	know	it	was	your	lust	for	blood
that	led	to	this.	And	I	will	make	you	pay.
Cafal	 dreaded	 the	 moment	 he	 first	 saw	 his	 sister,	 this	 mocking,	 twisted	 semblance	 of	 the	 woman	 he	 had
known	all	his	life.	Would	she	even	recognize	him?	Of	course	she	would.	She	would	lunge	into	his	arms—an
end	to	the	torment,	the	rebirth	of	hope.	Dread,	yes,	and	then	he	would	make	it	good	again,	all	of	it.	They	would
flee	west—all	the	way	to	Lether—
A	faint	sound	behind	him.	Cafal	whirled	round.
The	mace	clipped	him	on	his	left	temple.	He	reeled	to	the	right,	attempted	to	pivot	and	slash	his	weapon	into
the	path	of	his	attacker.	 A	punch	in	the	 chest	lifted	him	from	 his	feet.	He	was	twisted	in	the	air,	 hook-blade
flying	from	his	hand,	and	it	seemed	the	fist	on	his	chest	followed	him	down,	driving	deeper	when	he	landed	on
his	back.	Bones	grated,	splintered.
He	saw,	uncomprehending,	the	shaft	of	the	spear,	upright	as	a	standard,	its	head	buried	in	his	chest.
Shadowy	shapes	above	him.	The	gauntleted	hands	gripping	the	spear	now	twisted	and	pushed	down	hard.
The	point	thrust	through	into	the	earth	beneath	him.
He	struggled	to	make	sense	of	things,	but	everything	slipped	through	his	nerveless	fingers.	Three,	now	four
shapes	looming	over	him,	but	not	a	word	was	spoken.
They	watch	me	die.	I’ve	done	the	same.	Why	do	we	do	that?	Why	are	we	so	fascinated	by	this	failure?
Because,	I	think,	we	see	how	easy	it	is.
	
The	 Akrynnai	 warrior	 holding	 the	 man	 down	 with	 his	 spear	 now	 relaxed.	 ‘He’s	 done,’	 he	 said,	 tugging	 his
weapon	loose.
‘If	he	was	scouting	our	camp,’	the	mace-wielder	said,	‘why	was	he	facing	the	wrong	way?’
‘Barghast,’	muttered	a	third	man,	and	the	others	nodded.	There	was	no	sense	to	these	damned	savages.
‘Tomorrow,’	said	the	warrior	now	cleaning	his	spear,	‘we	kill	the	rest	of	them.’
	
She	stumbled	onward,	eyes	on	the	black	wall	facing	her,	which	seemed	to	lurch	close	only	to	recoil	again,	as	if
the	world	pulsed.	The	wind	pushed	her	along	now,	solid	as	a	hand	at	her	back,	and	the	thud	of	the	staff’s	heel
thumped	on	and	on.
When	four	Akrynnai	warriors	cut	across	her	field	of	vision,	she	slowed	and	then	halted,	waiting	for	them	to
take	 her.	 But	 they	 didn’t.	 Instead,	 they	 made	 warding	 gestures	 and	 quickly	 vanished	 into	 the	 gloom.	 After	 a
time,	she	set	out	once	more,	tottering,	her	breath	coming	in	thick	gasps	now.	The	blisters	on	her	hands	broke
and	made	the	staff	slick.
She	 walked	 until	 the	 world	 lost	 its	 strength,	 and	 then	 she	 sat	 down	 on	 the	 damp	 grasses	 beside	 a	 lichenskinned	 boulder.	 The	 wind	 whipped	 at	 her	 shredded	 shirt.	 She	 stared	 unseeing,	 the	 staff	 sliding	 out	 from	 her


hands.	After	a	time	she	sank	down	on	to	her	side,	drawing	her	legs	up.
And	waited	for	the	blackness	to	swallow	the	world.
	
It	 was	 as	 if	 night	 in	 all	 its	 natural	 order	 had	 been	 stolen	 away.	 Strahl	 watched	 as	 the	 White	 Faces	 fed	 their
fires	with	anything	that	would	burn,	crying	out	to	their	gods.	See	us!	Find	us!	We	are	your	children!	 Goats
were	 dragged	 to	makeshift	altars	 and	 their	 throats	 slashed	 open.	 Blood	 splashed	 and	 hoofed	 legs	 kicked	 and
then	 fell	 to	 feeble	 trembling.	 Dogs	 fled	 the	 sudden,	 inexplicable	 slash	 of	 cutlass	 blades.	 Terror	 and	 madness
whipped	like	the	smoke	and	sparks	and	ashes	from	the	bonfires.	By	dawn,	he	knew,	not	a	single	animal	would
be	left	alive.
If	dawn	ever	comes.
He	had	heard	about	Estaral’s	death.	He	had	heard	about	what	she	had	claimed	to	have	done.	None	of	that
made	 sense.	 Bakal	 would	 not	 have	 used	 Hetan—clearly,	 Estaral	had	believed	she	would	be	with	 Bakal,	 that
she	would	be	his	wife,	and	when	she	saw	him	with	Hetan	her	insanity	had	painted	the	scene	with	the	drenched
colours	of	lust.	She	had	murdered	them	both	in	a	jealous	rage.
Strahl	cursed	himself.	He	should	have	driven	the	widow	away	days	ago.	He	should	have	made	it	plain	that
Bakal	had	no	interest	in	her.	Spirits	below,	if	he’d	seen	even	a	hint	of	the	mad	light	in	her	eyes,	he	would	have
killed	her	outright.
Now	 command	 of	 the	 Senan	 in	 the	 battle	 this	 dawn	 fell	 to	 him.	 He	 had	 been	 handed	 his	 most	 hidden
ambition—when	he	had	in	fact	already	willingly	surrendered	it	to	stand	in	Bakal’s	shadow.	But	desire,	once	it
reached	the	mouth,	never	tasted	as	sweet	as	it	did	in	anticipation.	In	fact,	he	was	already	choking	on	it.
Bakal	 had	 discussed	 the	 engagement	 with	 him.	 Had	 told	 him	 what	 he	 intended.	 Strahl	 had	 that	 much	 at
least.	And	when	the	Senan	gathered	at	dawn,	he	would	summon	the	chiefs	of	the	clan,	and	he	would	give	him
Bakal’s	words	as	if	they	were	his	own.	Would	they	listen?
He	would	know	soon	enough.
	
The	 sun	 opened	 its	 eye	 in	 the	 east	 and	 seemed	 to	 flinch	 in	 the	 face	 of	 the	 massive	 wall	 of	 dark	 clouds
devouring	half	the	sky.	On	the	vast	plain	at	the	very	edge	of	what	had	once	been	the	lands	of	the	Awl,	two
armies	 stirred.	 Bestial	 standards	 of	 the	 Barghast	 clans	 lifted	 like	 uneasy	 masts	 above	 the	 wind-flattened
grasses,	as	ash	from	the	enormous	bonfires	spun	and	swirled	in	the	air	thick	as	snow.	Approaching	from	the
southwest	 was	 a	 vast	 crescent,	 warriors	 mounted	 and	 on	 foot.	 Pennons	 snapped	 above	 legions	 of	 Saphii
soldiers	 marching	 in	 phalanx,	 shields	 tilted	 to	 cut	 the	 wind,	 long	 spears	 blazing	 with	 the	 dawn’s	 fires.
Companies	 of	 D’ras	 skirmishers	 and	 archers	 filled	 the	 gaps	 and	 ranged	 ahead	 of	 the	 main	 force	 in	 loose
formations.	Mounted	archers	advanced	on	the	tips	of	the	bhederin’s	horns,	backed	by	the	heavier	lancers.	The
horses	were	skittish	beneath	the	Akrynnai	warriors,	and	every	now	and	then	one	reared	or	bolted	and	fellow
riders	would	close	to	help	calm	the	animal.
Along	the	summit	of	the	ridge,	Warleader	Maral	Eb	had	positioned	the	Senan	in	the	centre,	framed	by	the
lesser	clans.	His	own	Barahn	he	had	divided	between	his	brothers,	anchoring	the	outer	flanks.
As	the	day	awakened,	the	crescent	approached	the	Barghast	position,	swinging	south	as	scouts	rode	back	to
report	on	the	field	of	battle.
All	 at	 once	 the	 wind	 fell	 off,	 and	 in	 its	 place	 frigid	 cold	 gripped	 the	 air.	 It	 was	 the	 heart	 of	 summer,	 yet
breaths	plumed	and	steam	rose	from	the	backs	of	thousands	of	horses.	Warriors	shivered,	half	with	chill	and
half	with	sudden	dread.
Was	this	a	battle	between	gods?	Were	the	Akrynnai	spirits	about	to	manifest	like	fangs	in	snapping	jaws?
Were	the	undead	ancestor	gods	of	the	White	Faces	only	moments	from	clambering	up	from	the	hard,	frozen
earth,	chanting	an	ancient	dirge	of	blood?	Were	mortal	men	and	women	destined	to	cower	beneath	the	terrible
clash	 of	 ascendants?	 Above	 them	 all,	 the	 sky	 was	 split	 in	 two,	 the	 brittle	 light	 of	 morning	 to	 the	 east,	 the
unyielding	darkness	of	night	in	the	west.	None—not	Barghast,	not	Akrynnai,	not	Saphii	nor	D’ras—had	ever
before	seen	such	a	sky.	It	filled	them	with	terror.
Frost	 sheathed	 the	 grasses	 and	 glistened	 on	 iron	 and	 bronze	 as	 icy	 cold	 air	 flowed	 out	 from	 beneath	 the
storm	 front.	 Among	 the	 two	 armies,	 no	 fierce	 songs	 or	 chants	 rang	 out	 in	 challenge.	 An	 unnatural	 silence
gripped	the	forces,	even	at	the	moment	when	the	two	masses	of	humanity	came	within	sight	of	each	other.


Not	a	single	bird	rode	the	febrile	sky.
Yet	the	Akrynnai	army	marched	closer	to	its	hated	enemy;	and	the	enemy	stood	motionless	awaiting	them.
	
A	thousand	paces	west	of	the	Barghast	position	lay	the	body	of	a	woman,	curled	in	the	frozen	grasses	with	her
back	 against	 a	 lichen-skinned	 boulder.	 A	 place	 to	 lie	 down,	 the	 last	 nest	 of	 her	 last	 night.	 Frost	 glittered	 like
diamond	scales	upon	her	pale	skin.
She	 had	 died	 alone,	 forty	 paces	 from	 the	 corpse	 of	 her	 brother.	 But	 this	 death	 belonged	 to	 the	 flesh.	 The
woman	that	had	been	Hetan,	wife	to	Onos	Toolan,	mother	of	Absi,	Stavi	and	Storii,	had	died	some	time	earlier.
The	body	will	totter	past	the	dead	husk	of	its	soul,	sometimes	for	days,	sometimes	for	years.
She	lay	on	frozen	ground,	complete	in	her	scene	of	solitary	surrender.	Did	the	sky	above	blink	in	witness?
Not	even	once?	When	a	sky	blinks,	how	long	does	it	take	between	the	sweep	of	darkness	and	the	rebirth	of
light?
The	ghosts,	their	wings	burnt	down	to	black	stumps,	waited	to	tell	her	the	answers	to	those	questions.
Saddic,	are	you	still	alive?	I	have	dreamed	a	thing.	This	thing	was	a	vision,	the	death	of	a	lizard-wolf
lying	 curled	 on	 its	 side,	 the	 danger	 of	 bones	 beneath	 the	 sun.	 Listen	 to	 my	 dream,	 Saddic,	 and
remember.
Greed	is	the	knife	in	the	sheath	of	ambition.	You	see	the	wicked	gleam	when	you’ve	drawn	too	close.
Too	close	to	get	away,	and	as	I	told	you:	greed	invites	death,	and	now	death	takes	her	twice.	This	thing
was	a	vision.	She	died	not	forty	paces	from	her	brother,	and	above	her	two	armies	war	in	the	heavens,
and	beasts	that	are	brothers	are	about	to	lock	jaws	upon	each	other’s	throat.	Strange	names,	strange
faces.	Painted	white	like	the	Quitters.	A	man	with	sad	eyes	whose	name	is	Sceptre	Irkullas.
Such	a	sky,	such	a	sky!
Greed	and	ambition,	Saddic.	Greed	and	treachery.	Greed	and	justice.	These	are	the	reasons	of	fate,
and	every	reason	is	a	lie.
She	was	dead	before	dawn.	I	held	her	broken	soul	in	my	hands.	I	hold	it	still.	As	Rutt	holds	Held.
I	knew	a	boy.
Absi,	where	are	you?
Saddic	listened,	and	then	he	said,	‘Badalle,	I	am	cold.	Tell	me	again	about	the	fires.	The	wonderful	fires.’
But	these	fires	were	burned	down	to	cinders	and	ash.	The	cold	was	the	cold	of	another	world.
Saddic,	listen.	I	have	seen	a	door.	Opening.


Chapter	Eighteen
	
What	feeds	you	is	rent
With	the	claws	of	your	need.
But	needs	dwell	half	in	light
And	half	in	darkness.
And	virtue	folds	in	the	seam.
If	the	demand	of	need	is	life
Then	suffering	and	death	hold	purpose.
But	if	we	speak	of	want	and	petty	desire
The	seam	folds	into	darkness
And	no	virtue	holds	the	ground.
Needs	and	wants	make	for	a	grey	world.
But	nature	yields	no	privilege.
And	what	is	righteous	will	soon
Feed	itself	with	the	claws
Of	your	need,	as	life	demands.
	
QUALITIES	OF	LIFE
SAEGEN
	
	
Weak	 and	 exhausted,	 Yan	 Tovis	 had	 followed	 her	 brother	 through	 the	 gates	 and	 into	 the	 dead	 city	 of
Kharkanas.	The	secret	legends	possessed	by	her	bloodline	had	virtually	carved	into	her	soul	the	details	before
her.	When	she’d	walked	the	bridge,	the	echo	of	the	stones	underfoot	embraced	her,	as	familiar	and	steeped	in
sorrow	 as	 a	 dead	 grandmother’s	 cloak.	 Passing	 beneath	 the	 storeyed	 arch,	 she	 felt	 as	 if	 she	 had	 returned
home—but	this	home	was	a	forgotten	place,	as	if	she	had	inherited	someone	else’s	nostalgia.	Her	discomfort
turned	 to	 distress	 as	 she	 emerged	 from	 the	 cool	 darkness	 and	 saw	 before	 her	 a	 silent,	 lifeless	 vista	 of	 tall,
smoke-stained	 buildings,	 smeared	 towers	 and	 disfigured	 statues.	 Tiered	 gardens	 had	 grown	 past	 weeds	 and
were	 now	 thick	 with	 twisted	 trees,	 the	 roots	 of	 which	 had	 burst	 the	 retaining	 walls,	 snaking	 down	 walls	 and
buckling	pavestones.	Birds	nested	on	ledges	above	walls	painted	white	in	guano.	Heaps	of	wind-blown	leaves
mouldered	in	corners,	and	plants	had	pushed	up	between	flagstones.
She	could	feel	the	ancient	magic,	like	something	fluttering	at	the	edge	of	her	vision.	The	city	had	survived
the	eons	 far	 better	 than	 it	 rightly	 should	 have.	 And	 the	 sorcery	 still	 resisted	 the	 relentless	 siege	 of	 time.	 She
looked	upon	a	scene	that	might	have	been	abandoned	little	more	than	a	generation	ago,	when	in	truth	it	was
ancient	beyond	imagining.
Mothers	will	hold	children	close
Until	the	world	itself	crumbles
So	 wrote	 some	 poet	 from	 this	 very	 city,	 and	 Yan	 Tovis	 understood	 it	 well	 enough.	 The	 child	 and	 the	 home
shall	 never	 change,	 if	 that	 child’s	 mother	 has	 any	 say	 over	 the	 matter.	 But	 explanations	 make	 truths
mundane.	The	poet	seeks	to	awaken	in	the	listener	all	that	is	known	yet	unspoken.	Words	to	conjure	an
absence	of	words.	But	children	will	grow	up,	and	time	will	drive	spears	through	the	thickest	walls.	And
sometimes	the	walls	are	breached	from	within.
It	 had	 always	 been	 her	 habit—and	 she	 knew	 it	 well	 enough—to	 sow	 uncertainty.	 In	 her	 mind,	 indecision


was	a	way	of	life.	Her	brother,	of	course,	was	the	very	opposite.	They	stood	facing	one	another	in	extremity,
across	a	gulf	that	could	not	be	bridged.	When	Yedan	Derryg	stepped	beyond	challenge,	his	will	was	a	brutal
thing,	a	terrible	force	that	destroyed	lives.	When	she	did	not	have	him	facing	her—his	hands	dripping	blood	and
his	eyes	hard	as	stone—she	came	to	believe	that	indecisiveness	was	the	natural	order	of	the	world,	a	state	of
mind	 that	 waited	 until	 acted	 upon,	 doomed	 to	 react	 and	 never	 initiate,	 a	 mind	 that	 simply	 held	 itself	 in	 place,
passive,	resigned	to	whatever	the	fates	delivered.
They	 were	 meant	 to	 stand	 together,	 meant	 to	 fix	 pressure	 each	 upon	 the	 other	 like	 the	 counterweights	 at
either	end	of	the	bridge,	and	in	that	tense	balance	they	might	find	the	wisdom	to	rule,	they	might	make	solid	and
sure	the	stones	beneath	the	feet	of	their	people.
He	 had	 murdered	 her	 witches	 and	 warlocks,	 and	 it	 had	 not	 been	 a	 matter	 of	 stepping	 round	 her	 to	 get	 to
them,	for	she	had	proved	no	obstacle	to	him.	No,	she	had	been	frozen	in	place.	Awaiting	the	knife	 of	 fate.
Yedan’s	knife.
I	forgot.	And	so	I	failed.	I	need	him	back.	I	need	my	Witchslayer.
Behind	her	trooped	the	vanguard	of	her	people.	Pully	and	Skwish,	plump	and	rosy	as	maidens,	their	faces
growing	 slack	 as	 the	 residual	 magic	 bled	 through	 their	 meagre	 defences.	 The	 two	 officers	 commanding	 the
Watch’s	 company,	 Brevity	 and	 Pithy,	 had	 already	 begun	 sending	 squads	 on	 to	 the	 side	 streets,	 to	 scout	 out
places	 to	 accommodate	 the	 refugees.	 Their	 calm,	 drawling	 instructions	 were	 like	 a	 farrier’s	 file	 over	 the
uneven	edge	of	fear	and	panic.
She	could	not	see	Yedan,	nor	his	horse,	but	ahead,	close	to	the	centre	of	the	city,	rose	a	massive	edifice,	part
temple,	part	palace	and	keep,	from	which	five	towers	rose	to	spear	the	heavy	gloom	of	the	sky.	The	Citadel.	It
occupied	an	island	encircled	by	a	gorge	that	could	be	crossed	by	but	one	bridge,	and	that	bridge	was	reached
by	this	main	avenue.
Yan	 Tovis	 glanced	 back,	 found	 Pithy.	 ‘Settle	 the	 people	 as	 best	 you	 can—but	 don’t	 spread	 them	 out	 too
much.	 Oh,	 and	 tell	 the	 witches	 they	 won’t	 be	 able	 to	 think	 straight	 until	 they’ve	 worked	 a	 protective	 circle
around	themselves.’
At	the	woman’s	nod,	Yan	faced	the	heart	of	the	city	again,	and	then	set	out.
He	rode	to	the	Citadel.	Of	course	he	did.	He	was	Yedan	Derryg.	And	he	wants	to	see	for	himself	where
all	the	blood	was	spilled.
	
Some	 enormous	 concussion	 had	 cracked	 the	 marble	 pillars	 flanking	 the	 Great	 Hall.	 Fissures	 gaped,	 many	 of
the	columns	bowed	or	tilted	precariously,	and	a	fine	scattering	of	white	dust	coated	the	mosaic	floor.	In	places
that	dust	had	congealed	into	muddy	stains.
Indifferent	to	the	rubbish,	Yedan	crossed	the	vast	chamber.	He	could	feel	a	warmth	coursing	through	him,
as	 if	 he	 was	 about	 to	 wade	 into	 a	 battle.	 Currents	 of	 power	 still	 drifted	 in	 this	 place,	 thick	 with	 discordant
emotions.	Horror,	grief,	black	rage	and	terrible	agony.	Madness	had	descended	upon	this	citadel,	and	blood	had
drenched	the	world.
He	found	a	side	corridor	just	beyond	the	Great	Hall,	its	entranceway	ornate	with	arcane	carvings:	women
marching	 in	 solemn	 procession.	 Tall,	 midnight-skinned	 women.	 Once	 within	 the	 passage,	 the	 images	 on	 the
walls	 to	 either	 side	 transformed	 into	 carnal	 scenes,	 growing	 ever	 more	 elaborate	 as	 he	 proceeded	 to	 the	 far
end.	 After	 a	 series	 of	 cloisters,	 the	 function	 of	 which	 was	 in	 no	 way	 ambiguous,	 Yedan	 entered	 a	 domed
chamber.	The	Terondai—was	that	the	word?	Who	could	say	how	time	had	twisted	it?	The	sacred	eye	in	the
darkness,	the	witness	to	all	things.
There	was	a	time,	the	secret	legends	told,	when	light	did	not	visit	this	world,	and	the	darkness	was	absolute.
But	 only	 the	 true	 children	 of	 the	 Mother	 could	 survive	 in	 such	 a	 realm,	 and	 no	 blood	 remains	 for	 ever	 pure.
More,	there	were	other	beings	dwelling	in	Night.	Some	saw	truly,	others	did	not.
Light	was	what	seeped	in	with	the	wounding	of	the	Mother—a	wounding	she	chose	to	permit,	a	wounding
and	then	the	birthing	that	came	of	it.	‘All	children,’	she	said,	‘must	be	able	to	see.	We	gift	the	living	with
light	and	darkness	and	shadow.	The	truth	of	our	natures	cannot	be	found	in	the	absence	of	that	which
we	 are	 not.	 Walk	 from	 darkness,	 walk	 into	 shadow,	 walk	 beyond	 into	 light.	 These	 are	 the	 truths	 of
being.	“Without	ground,	there	can	be	no	sky.”	So	spoke	the	Azathanai	in	the	dust	of	their	quarries.’
Secret	 legends,	 likely	 little	 more	 than	 nonsense.	 Words	 to	 give	 meaning	 to	 what	 already	 existed,	 to	 what
existed	with	or	without	the	guiding	hand	of	sentient	beings.	To	this	rock,	to	that	river,	to	the	molten	fires	from


below	and	the	frozen	rain	from	above.	He	wasn’t	much	impressed	with	things	like	that.
The	Terondai	was	smeared	in	ashes	and	cluttered	with	dried	leaves.	Shapeless	ridges	of	white	dust	were	all
that	remained	of	bodies	left	lying	where	they	fell.	There	was	no	sign	of	weapons	or	jewellery,	leading	Yedan	to
surmise	 that	 looters	 had	 been	 through	 the	 chamber—and	 everywhere	 else	 in	 the	 Citadel,	 he	 suspected.	 Odd
that	his	bloodline’s	secret	legends	made	no	mention	of	those	flitting	thieves.	Yet,	weren’t	we	here	at	the	grisly
end?	 Not	 wielding	 weapons.	 Not	 making	 heroic	 stands.	 Just	 .	 .	 .	 what?	 Watching?	 Prompting	 the
question:	who	in	the	name	of	the	Shore	were	we?	Their	damned	servants?	Their	slaves?
Secret	legends,	tell	us	your	secret	truths.
And	what	of	this	ancient	claim	to	some	kind	of	royal	bloodline?	Rulers	of	what?	The	woodshed?	The	garden
island	in	the	river?	Yes,	he	would	trot	out	the	righteous	assertions	that	he	and	his	sister	were	fit	to	command,	if
that	was	what	was	needed	to	bend	others	to	his	will.	They	had	titles,	didn’t	they?	Twilight.	The	Watch.	And
Yan	 Tovis	 had	 done	 much	 the	 same,	 taking	 upon	 herself	 the	 role	 of	 Queen	 of	 the	 Shake.	 The	 burden	 of
privilege—see	how	we	bow	beneath	its	weight.
Jaws	bunched,	he	scanned	the	chamber	once	more,	now	with	greater	care.
‘You	damned	fool.’
He	twisted	round,	eyed	his	sister.
‘You’re	in	the	temple,	idiot—get	off	the	damned	horse.’
‘There	are	raised	gardens,’	he	said.	‘Find	some	farmers	among	your	lot	and	get	them	to	start	clearing.	I’ll
send	others	down	to	the	river—we’ve	got	plenty	of	nets.’
‘You	want	us	to	occupy	the	city?’
‘Why	not?’
She	seemed	at	a	loss	for	words.
Yedan	drew	his	horse	round	until	he	faced	her.	‘Twilight,	you	took	us	on	to	the	Road	of	Gallan.	The	Blind
Man’s	 Road.	 Now	 we	 are	 in	 the	 Realm	 of	 Darkness.	 But	 the	 realm	 is	 dead.	 It	 is	 preserved	 in	 death	 by
sorcery.	If	this	was	once	our	home,	we	can	make	it	so	again.	Was	that	not	our	destiny?’
‘Destiny?	 Errant’s	 balls,	 why	 does	 speaking	 that	 word	 sound	 like	 the	 unsheathing	 of	 a	 sword?	 Yedan,
perhaps	we	knew	this	city	once.	Perhaps	our	family	line	reaches	back	and	every	story	we	learned	was	true.
The	 glory	 of	 Kharkanas.	 But	 not	 one	 of	 those	 stories	 tells	 us	 we	 ruled	 here.	 In	 this	 city.	 We	 were	 not	 this
realm’s	master.’
He	studied	her	for	a	time.	‘We	move	on,	then.’
‘Yes.’
‘To	where?’
‘The	 forest	 beyond	 the	 river.	 Through	 it	 and	 out	 to	 the	 other	 side.	 Yedan,	 we	 have	 come	 this	 far.	 Let	 us
make	the	journey	to	the	place	where	it	started.	Our	true	home.	The	First	Shore.’
‘We	don’t	even	know	what	that	means.’
‘So	we	find	out.’
‘The	river	is	still	worth	a	look,’	he	said.	‘We’re	short	of	food.’
‘Of	course.	Now,	in	honour	of	those	who	fell	here,	brother,	get	off	that	damned	horse!’
	
Moments	after	the	two	had	left	the	chamber,	the	stillness	that	had	existed	for	millennia	was	broken.	A	stirring
of	 dead	 leaves,	 spinning	 as	 if	 lifted	 by	 small	 whirlwinds.	 Dust	 hazed	 the	 air,	 and	 the	 strange	 muted	 gloom—
where	light	itself	seemed	an	unwelcome	stranger—suddenly	wavered.
And	something	like	a	long,	drawn	breath	slowly	filled	the	chamber.	It	echoed	wretched	as	a	sob.
______
Brevity	followed	Pithy	to	the	mouth	of	the	alley.	They	carried	lanterns,	shadows	rocking	on	walls	as	they	made
their	way	down	half	the	narrow	thoroughfare’s	length.
She	halted	beside	her	friend	and	together	they	stared	down	at	the	bodies.
‘Dead?’	Brevity	asked.
‘No,	sweetie.	In	the	realm	of	dreams,	the	both	of	them.’
‘When	did	this	happen?’
‘Couldn’t	a	been	too	long	ago,’	Pithy	replied.	‘I	seen	the	two	wander	in	here	to	do	that	ritual	or	whatever.


Little	later	I	chanced	to	peek	in	and	saw	their	torches	had	gone	out.	So	I	come	for	a	look.’
Brevity	settled	into	a	crouch	and	set	the	lantern	to	one	side.	She	grasped	the	witch	nearest	her	and	pulled
the	woman	over,	peering	down	at	the	face.	‘Pully,	I	think.	They	look	like	twins	as	it	is.’
‘Gettin’	more	so,	too,’	Pithy	noted,	‘or	so	I	noticed.’
‘Eyelids	fluttering	like	mad.’
‘Realm	of	dreams,	didn’t	I	say	so?’
Brevity	pushed	back	an	eyelid.	‘Rolled	right	up.	Maybe	the	ritual	turned	on	’em.’
‘Could	be.	What	should	we	do?’
‘I’m	tempted	to	bury	them.’
‘But	they	ain’t	dead.’
‘I	know.	But	opportunities	like	this	don’t	come	every	day.’
	
‘What’s	broken	cannot	be	mended.	You	broke	us,	but	that	is	not	all—see	what	you	have	done.’
Gallan	had	been	horrified.	He	could	not	abide	this	new	world.	He	wanted	a	return	to	darkness	and,	when
he’d	done	gouging	out	his	own	eyes,	he	found	it.	Sandalath,	her	son’s	tiny	hand	held	tight	within	her	solid	grip,
stood	looking	down	on	the	madman,	seeing	but	not	registering	all	the	blood	on	his	face	and	smeared	across	the
floor—the	impossibility	of	it	here	at	the	very	threshold	to	the	Terondai.	He	wept,	choking	on	something	again
and	 again—yet	 whatever	 was	 in	 his	 mouth	 he	 would	 not	 spit	 out—and	 his	 lips	 were	 glistening	 crimson,	 his
teeth	red	as	cedar	chips.
‘Mother,’	said	her	son,	‘what’s	happened?’
The	world	changes.	Gallan,	you	fool.	What	you’ve	done	does	not	change	it	back.	‘An	accident,’	she
replied.	‘We	must	find	someone	to	help—’
‘But	why	is	he	eating	his	eyes?’
‘Go	now,	find	a	priestess—quickly,	Orfantal!’
Gallan	choked,	trying	to	swallow	his	eyeballs	only	to	hack	them	back	into	his	mouth.	The	holes	in	his	head
wept	bloody	tears.
Ever	the	poetic	statement,	Gallan.	The	grandiose	symbol,	artfully	positioned	at	the	temple	door.	You
will	lie	here	until	someone	important	comes,	and	then	you’ll	swallow	those	damned	things	down.	Even
the	masterpiece	is	servant	to	timing.
Will	Mother	Dark	be	struck	in	the	heart	by	this,	Gallan?	Or	simply	disgusted?	‘It’s	done,	old	man,’	she
said.	‘No	going	back.’
He	clearly	misunderstood	her,	as	he	began	laughing.
She	saw	one	of	the	eyes	in	his	mouth	roll	into	view,	and	for	one	insane	moment	it	seemed	to	look	up	at	her.
‘What’s	broken	cannot	be	mended.	You	broke	us,	but	that	is	not	all—see	what	you	have	done.’
Sandalath	 hissed	 as	 that	 echo	 intruded	 a	 second	 time	 into	 her	 memories.	 It	 didn’t	 belong	 in	 the	 scene	 she
had	resurrected.	It	belonged	somewhere	else,	with	someone	else.	With	someone	else,	not	to.	 Of	 course	 that
was	 the	 horrid	 thing	 about	 it.	 She	 heard	 those	 words	 spoken	 and	 they	 indeed	 came	 from	 her,	 arriving	 in	 her
own	voice,	and	that	voice	was	from	a	woman	who	truly	understood	what	it	was	to	be	broken.
And	that	is	the	bitter	truth.	I	have	not	mended.	After	all	this	time	.	.	.
‘You	asleep?’	Withal	asked	from	where	he	lay	behind	her.
She	contemplated	the	merits	of	a	response,	decided	against	them	and	remained	silent.
‘Talking	 in	 your	 sleep	 again,’	 he	 muttered,	 shifting	 beneath	 the	 furs.	 ‘But	 what	 I	 want	 to	 know	 is,	 what
broke?’
She	sat	up	as	if	stung	by	a	scorpion.	‘What?’
‘Awake	after	all—’
‘What	did	you	just	say?’
‘Whatever	it	was,	it’s	put	my	heart	in	my	throat	and	you	poised	to	tear	it	out.	I	suppose	you	could	beat	me
senseless—’
Snarling,	she	flung	the	furs	back	and	rose	to	her	feet.	The	three	Venath	demons	were,	inexplicably,	digging	a
huge	 hole	 a	 short	 distance	 down	 from	 the	 road.	 Mape	 was	 in	 the	 bottom,	 heaving	 enormous	 boulders	 into
Rind’s	arms	where	the	demon	crouched	at	the	edge.	Rind	then	swung	round	to	transfer	the	rock	to	Pule,	who
pitched	it	away.	What	in	Hood’s	name	are	they	doing?	Never	mind.	She	rubbed	at	her	face.


Talking	in	my	sleep?	Not	those	words.	Please,	not	those	words.
She	walked	some	way	up	the	Road,	eager	to	be	off.	But	Withal	needed	some	sleep.	Humans	were	absurdly
frail.	Their	every	achievement	proved	similarly	fragile.	If	there	weren’t	so	damned	many	of	them,	and	if	they
didn’t	 display	 the	 occasional	 ant-nest	 frenzy	 of	 creativity,	 why,	 they’d	 have	 died	 out	 long	 ago.	 More	 to	 the
point,	if	the	rest	of	us	hadn’t	sneered	in	our	idle	witnessing	of	their	pathetic	efforts—if	we’d	wised	up,	in
fact,	 one	 or	 all	 of	 us	 would	 have	 wiped	 them	 out	 long	 ago.	 Tiste	 Andii,	 Jaghut,	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle,
Forkrul	 Assail.	 Gods,	 Tiste	 Edur,	 even.	 Scabandari,	 you	 slaughtered	 the	 wrong	 enemy.	 Even	 you,
Anomander—you	play	with	them	as	if	they’re	pets.	But	these	pets	will	turn	on	you.	Sooner	or	later.
She	knew	she	was	avoiding	the	scaly	beast	gnawing	at	the	roots	of	her	mind.	Urging	her	thoughts	to	wander
away,	 away	 from	 the	 place	 where	 kindred	 blood	 still	 glistened.	 But	 it	 was	 no	 use.	 Words	 had	 been	 spoken.
Violence	had	given	answer,	and	the	rise	and	fall	of	chests	faded	into	eternal	stillness.	And	that	beast,	well,	it
had	the	sharpest	teeth.
Sandalath	 sighed.	 Kharkanas.	 The	 city	 awaited	 her.	 Not	 so	 far	 away	 now,	 her	 ancient	 home,	 her	 own
private	crypt,	its	confines	crammed	solid	with	the	worthless	keepsakes	of	a	young	woman’s	life.
Watch	me	chase	my	dreams
In	the	transit	of	dust
Snorting,	 she	 swung	 round,	 retracing	 her	 path	 to	 where	 her	 husband	 slept.	 The	 demons—Venath,	 who’d
once	been	allies	of	the	Jaghut.	Who	gave	of	their	blood	to	the	Trell—and	what	a	fell	mix	that	turned	out
to	be—the	demons	had	all	vanished	into	the	hole	they’d	dug.	Why	had	the	damned	things	attached	themselves
to	 Withal?	 He	 said	 he’d	 found	 them	 on	 the	 island	 where	 he’d	 been	 imprisoned	 by	 the	 Crippled	 God.	 Which
suggested	 that	 the	 Crippled	 God	 had	 summoned	 and	 bound	 the	 demons.	 But	 later,	 the	 Nachts	 had	 abetted
Withal’s	escape	and	seemed	instead	to	be	in	league	with	Mael.	And	now	.	.	.	they’re	digging	a	hole.
‘Never	mind,’	said	Withal,	rolling	over	and	sitting	up.	‘You’re	worse	than	a	mosquito	in	a	room.	If	you’re	in
such	a	hurry,	let’s	just	go	until	we	get	there.	I	can	rest	then.’
‘You’re	exhausted.’
He	eyed	her.	‘It	ain’t	the	walking	that’s	exhausting	me,	beloved.’
‘You’d	better	explain	that.’
‘I	will.	But	not	right	now.’
She	saw	the	defiance	in	his	eyes.	I	could	make	him	talk.	But	that	look	in	his	eyes	.	.	.	it’s	cute.	‘Gather
up	your	gear	then,	husband.	And	while	you	do,	I	will	explain	something	to	you.	We	are	following	the	road	that
leads	to	the	city	where	I	was	born.	Now,	that’s	stressful	enough.	But	it’s	something	I	can	handle.	Not	happily,
mind	you,	but	even	so.	No,	there	is	something	else.’
He’d	tied	up	his	bedroll	and	had	it	tucked	under	an	arm.	‘Go	on.’
‘Imagine	 a	 pool	 of	 black	 water.	 Depthless,	 hidden	 within	 a	 cave	 where	 no	 air	 stirs	 and	 nothing	 drips.	 The
pool’s	surface	has	not	known	a	single	ripple	in	tens	of	thousands	of	years.	You’ve	come	to	kneel	beside	it—all
your	life—but	what	you	see	never	changes.’
‘All	right.’
‘I	 still	 see	 nothing	 to	 change	 that,	 Withal.	 But	 .	 .	 .	 somewhere	 far	 below	 the	 surface,	 in	 depths
unimaginable	.	.	.	something	moves.’
‘Sounds	like	we	should	be	running	the	other	way.’
‘You’re	probably	right,	but	I	can’t.’
‘This	 old	 life	 of	 yours,	 Sand—you’ve	 said	 you	 were	 not	 a	 fighter—you	 knew	 nothing	 of	 weapons	 or
warfare.	So,	what	were	you	in	this	city	home	of	yours?’
‘There	were	factions—a	power	struggle.’	She	looked	away,	up	the	Road.	‘It	went	on	for	generations—yes,
that	may	be	hard	to	believe.	Generations	among	the	Tiste	Andii.	You’d	think	that	after	the	centuries	they’d	be
entrenched,	and	maybe	 they	 were,	 for	 a	 time.	 Even	 a	 long	 time.	 But	 then	 everything	 changed—in	 my	 life,	 I
knew	 nothing	 but	 turmoil.	 Alliances,	 betrayals,	 war	 pacts,	 treacheries.	 You	 cannot	 imagine	 how	 such	 things
twisted	our	civilization,	our	culture.’
‘Sand.’
‘I	was	a	hostage,	Withal.	Valued	but	expendable.’
‘But	that’s	a	not	a	life!	That’s	an	interruption	in	a	life!’


‘Everything	was	breaking	down.’	We	were	supposed	to	be	sacrosanct.	Precious.	‘It	doesn’t	matter	now,’
she	added.	‘It’s	not	a	career	I	can	pick	up	again,	is	it?’
He	was	staring	at	her.	‘Would	you?	If	you	could?’
‘A	ridiculous	question.’	‘What’s	broken	cannot	be	mended.	You	broke	us,	but	that	is	not	all—see	what
you	have	done.’
‘Sand.’
‘Of	course	not.	Now,	saddle	up.’
	
‘But	why	is	he	eating	his	eyes?’
‘Once,	 long	 ago,	 my	 son,	 there	 was	 nothing	 but	 darkness.	 And	 that	 nothing,	 Orfantal,	 was
everything.’
‘But	why—’
‘He	is	old.	He’s	seen	too	much.’
‘He	could	have	just	closed	them.’
‘Yes,	he	could	have	at	that.’
‘Mother?’
‘Yes,	Orfantal?’
‘Don’t	eat	your	eyes.’
‘Don’t	worry.	I	am	like	most	people.	I	can	keep	my	eyes	and	still	see	nothing.’
Now,	 woman,	 you	 said	 no	 such	 thing.	 And	 be	 thankful	 for	 that.	 The	 other	 rule	 applies.	 Mouth
working,	 nothing	 said.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 ease	 we	 find	 for	 ourselves.	 After	 all,	 if	 we	 said	 everything	 we
could	say	to	each	other,	we’d	have	all	killed	each	other	long	ago.
Gallan,	you	were	a	poet.	You	should	have	swallowed	your	tongue.
	
He	had	hurt	someone,	once.	And	he	had	known	he	had	done	so,	and	knowing	led	him	into	feeling	bad.	But	no
one	enjoys	feeling	bad.	Better	to	replace	the	guilt	and	shame	with	something	turned	outward.	Something	that
burned	 all	 within	 reach,	 something	 that	 would	 harness	 all	 his	 energies	 and	 direct	 them	 away	 from	 himself.
Something	called	anger.	By	the	time	he	was	done—by	the	time	his	rage	had	run	its	course—he	found	himself
surrounded	in	ashes,	and	the	life	he	had	known	was	for	ever	gone.
Introspection	was	an	act	of	supreme	courage,	one	that	few	could	manage.	But	when	all	one	had	left	to	stir
was	 a	 heap	 of	 crumbled	 bones,	 there	 was	 nothing	 else	 one	 could	 do.	 Fleeing	 the	 scene	 only	 prolonged	 the
ordeal.	Memories	clung	to	the	horrors	in	his	wake,	and	the	only	true	escape	was	a	plunge	into	madness—and
madness	 was	 not	 a	 thing	 he	 could	 simply	 choose	 for	 himself.	 More’s	 the	 pity.	 No,	 the	 sharper	 the	 inner
landscape,	the	fiercer	the	sanity.
He	 believed	 that	 his	 family	 name	 was	 Veed.	 He	 had	 been	 a	 Gral,	 a	 warrior	 and	 a	 husband.	 He	 had	 done
terrible	 things.	 There	 was	 blood	 on	 his	 hands,	 and	 the	 salty,	 bitter	 taste	 of	 lies	 on	 his	 tongue.	 The	 stench	 of
scorched	cloth	still	filled	his	head.
I	have	slain.	In	this	admission,	he	had	a	place	to	begin.
Then,	all	these	truths	assembled	themselves	into	the	frame	of	his	future.	Leading	to	his	next	thought.
I	will	slay	again.
Not	 one	 among	 those	 he	 now	 hunted	 could	 hope	 to	 stand	 before	 him.	 Their	 petty	 kingdom	 was	 no	 more
formidable	than	a	termite	mound,	but	to	the	insects	themselves	it	was	majesty	and	it	was	permanence	and	it
was	these	things	that	made	them	giants	in	their	own	realm.	Veed	was	the	boot,	the	bronze-sheathed	toe	that
sent	walls	crashing	down,	delivering	utter	ruin.	It	is	what	I	am	made	to	do.
His	path	was	unerring.	Into	the	sunken	pit	and	through	the	entrance,	finding	himself	in	a	chamber	crowded
with	reptilian	corpses	that	swarmed	with	orthen	and	maggots.	He	crossed	the	room	and	halted	before	the	inner
portal.
They	 were	 somewhere	 far	 above—they	 had	 seen	 him,	 he	 was	 sure	 of	 it.	 Watched	 him	 from	 the	 eyes	 or
mouth	of	the	dragon.	They	did	not	know	who	he	was,	and	so	they	had	no	reason	to	fear	him.	Even	so,	he	knew
that	 they	 would	 be	 cautious.	 If	 he	 simply	 lunged	 into	 their	 midst,	 blades	 flashing,	 some	 might	 escape.	 Some
might	 fight	 back.	 A	 lucky	 swing	 .	 .	 .	 no,	 he	 would	 need	 his	 charm,	 his	 ability	 to	 put	 them	 all	 at	 ease.	 It	 is


possible	that	this	cannot	be	rushed.	I	see	that	now.	But	I	have	shown	patience	before,	haven’t	I?	I	have
shown	a	true	talent	for	deceit.
Empty	huts	are	not	my	only	legacy,	after	all.
He	sheathed	his	weapons.
Spat	into	the	palms	of	his	hands,	and	slicked	back	his	hair.	Then	set	off	on	the	long	ascent.
	
He	could	howl	into	their	faces,	and	they	would	hear	nothing.	He	could	close	invisible	hands	about	their	throats
and	they	would	not	even	shrug.	A	slayer	has	come!	The	one	below—I	have	sailed	the	storm	of	his	desires
—he	seeks	to	murder	you	all!	His	wretched	family	remained	oblivious.	Yes,	they	had	seen	the	stranger.	They
had	 seen	 his	 deliberate	 path	 to	 the	 great	 stone	 edifice	 they	 had	 claimed	 as	 their	 own.	 And	 they	 had	 then
resumed	their	mundane	activities,	as	if	suffering	beneath	a	geas	of	careless	indifference.
Taxilian,	Rautos	and	Breath	followed	Sulkit	as	the	K’Chain	drone	laboured	over	countless	mechanisms.	The
creature	seemed	immune	to	exhaustion,	as	if	the	purpose	driving	it	surpassed	the	needs	of	the	flesh.	Not	even
Taxilian	 could	 determine	 if	 the	 drone’s	 efforts	 yielded	 any	 measurable	 effect.	 Nothing	 sprang	 to	 sudden	 life.
No	 hidden	 gears	 churned	 into	 rumbling	 action.	 Darkness	 still	 commanded	 every	 corridor;	 feral	 creatures	 still
scurried	in	chambers	and	made	nests	in	the	rubbish.
Last	and	Asane	were	busy	constructing	a	nest	of	their	own,	when	they	weren’t	hunting	orthen	or	collecting
water	 from	 the	 dripping	 pipes.	 Sheb	 maintained	 vigil	 over	 the	 empty	 wastes	 from	 a	 perch	 that	 he	 called	 the
Crown,	while	Nappet	wandered	without	purpose,	muttering	under	his	breath	and	cursing	his	ill	luck	at	finding
himself	in	such	pathetic	company.
Blind	fools,	every	one	of	them!
The	ghost,	who	once	gloried	in	his	omniscience,	fled	the	singular	mind	of	the	Gral	named	Veed	and	set	out	to
find	the	ones	accompanying	Sulkit.	The	witch	Breath	was	an	adept,	sensitive	to	sorcery.	If	any	of	them	could
be	reached,	awakened	to	the	extremity	of	his	need,	it	would	be	her.
He	found	them	in	the	circular	chamber	behind	Eyes,	but	the	vast	domicile	of	the	now-dead	Matron	was	a
realm	transformed.	The	ceiling	and	walls	dripped	with	bitter	slime.	Viscid	pools	sheathed	the	floor	beneath	the
raised	dais	and	the	air	roiled	with	pungent	vapours.	The	vast,	sprawling	bed	that	had	once	commanded	the	dais
now	 looked	 diseased,	 twisted	 as	 the	 roots	 of	 a	 toppled	 tree.	 Tendrils	 hung	 loose,	 ends	 dripping,	 and	 the
atmosphere	 shrouding	 the	 malformed	 nightmare	 on	 the	 dais	 was	 so	 thick	 that	 all	 within	 it	 was	 blurred,
uncertain,	as	if	in	that	place	reality	itself	was	smudged.
Sulkit	stood	immobile	as	a	statue	in	front	of	the	dais,	its	scales	streaming	fluids—as	if	it	was	melting	before
their	eyes—and	strange	guttural	sounds	issuing	from	its	throat.
‘—awakening	behind	every	wall,’	Taxilian	was	saying.	‘I’m	sure	of	it.’
‘But	nothing	like	this!’	Rautos	said,	gesturing	at	Sulkit.	‘Gods	below,	this	air—I	can	barely	breathe!’
‘You’re	both	fools,’	Breath	snapped.	‘This	is	a	ritual.	This	is	the	oldest	sorcery	of	all—the	magic	of	sweat
and	scent	and	tears—against	this,	we’re	helpless	as	children!	Kill	it,	I	say!	Drive	a	knife	into	its	back—slash
open	its	throat!	Before	it’s	too	late—’
‘No!’	 retorted	 Taxilian.	 ‘We	 must	 let	 this	 happen—I	 feel	 it—in	 what	 the	 drone	 does	 we	 will	 find	 our
salvation.’
‘Delusions!’
Rautos	had	positioned	himself	between	the	two,	but	his	expression	was	taut	with	fear	and	confusion.	‘There
is	a	pattern,’	he	said,	addressing	neither	of	them.	‘Everything	the	drone	has	done—everywhere	else—it	has	led
to	this	moment.	The	pattern—I	can	almost	see	it.	I	want—I	want	.	.	.’
But	he	didn’t	know	what	he	wanted.	The	ghost	spun	wild	in	the	currents	of	the	man’s	ineffable	needs.
‘There	will	be	answers,’	said	Taxilian.
Yes!	the	ghost	cried.	And	it	comes	with	knives	in	its	hands!	It	comes	to	kill	you	all!
	
Beneath	the	level	of	the	Womb,	Nappet	stood	beside	a	strange	pipe	running	the	length	of	the	corridor.	He	had
been	 following	 alongside	 it	 for	 some	 time	 before	 becoming	 aware	 that	 the	 waist-high	 sheath	 of	 bronze	 had
begun	emanating	heat.	Dripping	sweat,	he	hesitated.	Retrace	his	route?	He	might	melt	before	he	reached	the
stairs	he	had	come	down.	In	the	gloom	ahead,	he	could	make	out	nothing	to	indicate	side	passages.	The	hot,


brittle	air	burned	in	his	lungs.	He	was	near	panic.
Something	 swirled	 within	 the	 pipe,	 rushing	 down	 its	 length.	 A	 whimper	 escaped	 him—he	 could	 die	 here!
‘Move,	you	fool.	But	which	way?	Hurry.	Think!’	Finally,	he	forced	himself	forward	in	a	stagger—somewhere
ahead,	there	would	be	salvation.	There	had	to	be.	He	was	sure	of	it.
The	air	crackled,	sparks	arcing	from	the	surface	of	the	pipe.	He	shrieked,	broke	into	a	run.	Flashes	blinded
him	as	lightning	ignited	in	the	corridor.	Argent	roots	snapped	out,	lanced	through	him.	Agony	lit	his	nerves—his
screams	 punched	 from	 his	 chest,	 tearing	 his	 throat—and	 he	 flailed	 with	 his	 hands.	 Arcs	 leapt	 between	 his
fingers.	Something	was	roaring—just	ahead—bristling	with	fire.
The	wrong	way!	I	went—
Sudden	darkness.	Silence.
Nappet	halted,	gasping.	He	drew	a	breath	and	held	it.
Desultory	trickling	sounds	from	within	the	pipe,	draining	away	even	as	he	listened.
He	sighed	unsteadily.
The	 air	 reeked	 of	 something	 strange	 and	 bitter,	 stinging	 his	 eyes.	 What	 had	 just	 happened?	 He	 had	 been
convinced	 that	 he	 was	 going	 to	 die,	 cooked	 like	 a	 lightning-struck	 dog.	 He	 had	 felt	 those	 energies	 coursing
through	him,	as	if	acid	filled	his	veins.	Sweat	cooling	on	his	skin,	he	shivered.
He	heard	footsteps	and	turned.	Someone	was	coming	up	behind	him.	No	lantern	illuminated	the	corridor.	He
heard	the	scrape	of	iron.	‘Sheb?	That	you?	Last?	You	damned	oaf,	light	a	lantern!’
The	figure	made	no	reply.
Nappet	licked	his	lips.	‘Who	is	that?	Say	something!’
The	ghost	watched	in	horror	as	Veed	strode	up	to	Nappet.	A	single-bladed	axe	swung	in	a	savage	arc	that
bit	 into	 Nappet’s	 neck.	 Spittle	 flew	 from	 the	 man’s	 mouth	 as	 he	 rocked	 with	 the	 blow.	 Bone	 grated	 and
crunched	as	Veed	tugged	his	weapon	free.	Blood	gouted	from	the	wound	and	Nappet	reached	up	to	press	his
palm	against	his	neck,	his	eyes	still	wide,	still	filled	with	disbelief.
The	second	blow	came	from	the	opposite	side.	His	head	fell	impossibly	on	its	side,	rested	a	moment	on	his
left	shoulder,	and	then	rolled	off	the	man’s	back.	The	headless	body	toppled.
‘No	point	in	wasting	time,’	muttered	Veed,	crouching	to	clean	the	blade.	Then	he	rose	and	faced	the	ghost.
‘Stop	screaming.	Who	do	you	think	summoned	me	in	the	first	place?’
The	ghost	recoiled.	I—I	did	not—
‘Now	lead	me	to	the	others,	Lifestealer.’
The	ghost	howled,	fled	from	the	abomination.	He	had	to	warn	the	others!
Grinning,	Veed	followed.
	
Stepping	down,	he	crushed	the	last	cinders	of	the	paltry	hearth,	feeling	the	nuggets	roll	under	his	heel,	and	then
turned	to	face	the	lifeless	hag.	He	glared	at	her	scaled	back,	as	if	silent	accusation	could	cut	her	down	where
she	 stood.	 But	 what	 Torrent	 willed,	 he	 knew,	 was	 weaker	 than	 rain.	 ‘Those	 are	 the	 spires	 of	 my	 people’s
legends—the	fangs	of	the	Wastelands.	You	stole	the	stars,	witch.	You	deceived	me—’
Olar	Ethil	snorted,	but	did	not	turn	round.	She	was	staring	south—at	least,	he	thought	of	it	as	south,	but	such
certainties,	 which	 he	 had	 once	 believed	 to	 be	 unassailable,	 had	 now	 proved	 as	 vulnerable	 to	 the	 deathless
woman’s	magic	as	the	very	stones	she	lit	aflame	every	night.	As	vulnerable	as	the	bundles	of	dead	grass	from
which	she	conjured	slabs	of	dripping	meat,	and	the	bedrock	that	bled	water	with	the	rap	of	one	bony	knuckle.
Torrent	scratched	at	his	sparse	beard.	He’d	used	up	the	last	of	the	oils	young	Awl	warriors	applied	to	burn
off	the	bristle	until	such	time	that	a	true	beard	was	possible—he	must	look	a	fool,	but	nothing	could	be	done	for
it.	Not	that	anyone	cared	anyway.	There	were	no	giggling	maidens	with	veiled	eyes,	no	coy	dances	from	his
path	as	he	strutted	the	length	of	the	village.	All	those	old	ways	were	gone	now.	So	were	the	futures	they	had
promised	him.
He	pictured	a	Letherii	soldier	standing	atop	a	heap	of	bones—a	mountain	of	white	that	was	all	that	remained
of	Torrent’s	people.	Beneath	the	rim	of	his	helm,	the	soldier’s	face	was	nothing	but	bone,	leaving	a	smile	that
never	wavered.
Torrent	 realized	 that	 he	 had	 found	 a	 lover,	 and	 her	 name	 was	 hate.	 The	 Letherii	 details	 were	 almost
irrelevant—it	could	be	any	soldier,	any	stranger.	Any	symbol	of	greed	and	oppression.	The	grasping	hand,	the
gleam	of	avid	hunger	in	the	eyes,	the	spirit	that	took	all	it	could	by	virtue	of	the	strength	and	might	it	possessed.


Torrent	dreamed	of	destruction.	Vast,	sweeping,	leaving	behind	nothing	but	bones.
He	glanced	again	at	Olar	Ethil.	Why	do	you	want	me,	witch?	What	will	you	give	me?	This	is	an	age	of
promises,	isn’t	it?	It	must	be,	else	I	exist	without	reason.
‘When	you	find	your	voice,’	she	said	without	turning,	‘speak	to	me,	warrior.’
‘Why?	What	will	you	answer?’
Her	laugh	was	a	hollowed-out	cackle.	‘When	I	do,	mountains	shall	crumble.	The	seas	shall	boil.	The	air	shall
thicken	 with	 poison.	 My	 answer,	 warrior,	 shall	 deafen	 the	 heavens.’	 She	 spun	 amidst	 flapping	 rags.	 ‘Do	 you
feel	 it?	 The	 gate—it	 cracks	 open	 and	 the	 road	 will	 welcome	 what	 comes	 through.	 And	 such	 a	 road!’	 She
laughed	again.
‘My	hate	is	silent,’	Torrent	said.	‘It	has	nothing	to	say.’
‘But	I	have	been	feeding	it	nonetheless.’
His	eyes	widened.	‘This	fever	comes	from	you,	witch?’
‘No,	it	ever	lurked	in	your	soul,	like	a	viper	in	the	night.	I	but	awakened	it	to	righteousness.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	it	amuses	me.	Saddle	your	horse,	warrior.	We	ride	to	the	spires	of	your	legends.’
‘Legends	that	have	outlived	the	people	telling	them.’
She	cocked	her	head	in	his	direction.	‘Not	yet.	Not	yet.’	And	she	laughed	again.
	
‘Where	is	he?’	Stavi	screamed,	her	small	fists	lifted,	as	if	moments	from	striking	her.
Setoc	held	her	ground.	‘I	don’t	know,’	she	replied	levelly.	‘He	always	returned	before.’
‘But	it’s	been	days	and	days!	Where	is	he?	Where	is	Toc?’
‘He	serves	more	than	one	master,	Stavi.	It	was	a	miracle	he	was	able	to	stay	with	us	as	long	as	he	did.’
Stavi’s	 sister	 looked	 close	 to	 tears,	 but	 she’d	 yet	 to	 speak.	 The	 boy	 sat	 with	 his	 back	 against	 the	 lifeless
flank	 of	 Baaljagg	 where	 the	 huge	 beast	 lay	 as	 if	 asleep,	 nose	 down	 between	 its	 front	 paws.	 Playing	 with	 a
handful	of	stones,	the	boy	seemed	oblivious	to	his	sisters’	distress.	She	wondered	if	perhaps	he	was	simple	in
the	head.	Sighing,	Setoc	said,	‘He	turned	us	into	the	east—and	so	that	is	the	direction	we	shall	take—’
‘But	there’s	nothing	out	there!’
‘I	know,	Stavi.	I	don’t	know	why	he	wants	us	to	go	there.	He	wouldn’t	explain.	But,	would	you	go	against
his	wishes?’	It	was	an	unfair	tactic,	she	knew,	the	kind	meant	to	extort	compliance	from	children.
It	worked,	but	as	every	adult	knew,	not	for	long.
Setoc	 gestured.	 The	 ay	 lifted	 to	 its	 feet	 and	 trotted	 ahead,	 while	 Setoc	 picked	 up	 the	 boy	 and	 cajoled	 the
twins	into	her	wake.	They	set	out,	leaving	behind	their	measly	camp.
She	wondered	if	Toc	would	ever	return.	She	wondered	if	he’d	any	purpose	behind	his	taking	care	of	them,
or	 had	 it	 been	 some	 residue	 of	 guilt	 or	 sense	 of	 responsibility	 for	 the	 children	 of	 his	 friend?	 He	 had	 left	 life
behind	and	could	not	be	held	to	its	ways,	or	the	demands	it	made	upon	a	mortal	soul—no,	there	could	be	no
human	motivation	to	what	such	a	creature	did.
And	the	eye	he’d	fixed	upon	her	had	belonged	to	a	wolf.	But	even	among	such	beasts,	the	closeness	of	the
pack	 was	 a	 tense	 game	 of	 submission	 and	 dominance.	 The	 bliss	 of	 brother-	 and	 sisterhood	 hid	 political
machinations	 and	 ruthless	 judgements.	 Cruelty	 needed	 only	 opportunity.	 So,	 he	 had	 led	 this	 paltry	 pack	 of
theirs,	and	his	lordship	had	been	uncontested—after	all,	he	could	hardly	be	threatened	with	death,	could	he?
She	understood,	finally,	that	she	could	not	trust	him.	And	that	her	relief	at	his	taking	command	had	been	the
response	of	a	child,	a	creature	eager	to	cower	in	the	shadow	of	an	adult,	praying	for	protection,	willing	itself
blind	to	the	possibility	that	the	true	threat	was	found	in	the	man—or	woman—standing	over	it.	Of	course,	the
twins	had	lost	everything.	Their	desperate	loyalty	to	a	dead	man,	who	had	once	been	their	father’s	friend,	was
reasonable	under	the	circumstances.	Stavi	and	Storii	wanted	him	back.	Of	course	they	did,	and	they	had	begun
to	look	upon	Setoc	with	something	like	resentment,	as	if	she	was	to	blame	for	his	absence.
Nonsense,	 but	 the	 twins	 saw	 no	 salvation	 in	 Setoc.	 They	 saw	 no	 protector	 in	 her.	 They’d	 rather	 she	 had
been	the	one	to	vanish.
The	boy	had	his	giant	wolf.	Would	it	protect	them	as	well?	Not	a	notion	to	rely	upon.
And	I	have	power,	though	I	can’t	yet	make	out	its	shape,	or	even	its	purpose.	Who	in	their	dreams	is
not	omnipotent?	 If	 in	 sleep	 I	 grow	 wings	 and	 fly	 high	 above	 the	 land,	 it	 does	 not	 mean	 I	 will	 awaken
cloaked	in	feathers.	We	are	gods	in	our	dreams.	Disaster	strikes	when	we	come	to	believe	the	same	is


true	in	our	real	lives.
I	wish	Torrent	was	here.	I	wish	he’d	never	left	me.	I	see	him	in	my	mind	even	now.	I	see	him	standing
atop	a	mountain	of	bones,	his	eyes	dark	beneath	the	rim	of	his	helm.
Torrent,	where	are	you?
	
‘They	looked	near	death,’	Yedan	Derryg	said.
Riding	 beside	 her	 brother,	 Yan	 Tovis	 grimaced.	 ‘They	 must	 have	 awakened	 something—I	 told	 them	 to
protect	themselves,	now	I’m	thinking	I	may	have	killed	them	both.’
‘They	may	look	and	act	like	two	giggling	girls,	Twilight,	but	they	aren’t.	You	killed	no	one.’
She	 twisted	 in	 her	 saddle	 and	 looked	 back	 down	 the	 road.	 The	 light	 of	 torches	 and	 lanterns	 formed	 a
refulgent	 island	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 buildings	 at	 the	 far	 end	 of	 the	 city.	 The	 light	 looked	 like	 a	 wound.	 She	 faced
forward	again.	Darkness,	and	yet	a	darkness	through	which	she	could	see—every	detail	precise,	every	hint	of
colour	and	tone	looking	strangely	opaque,	solid	before	her	eyes.	As	if	the	vision	she	had	possessed	all	her	life
—in	that	now	distant,	remote	world—was	in	truth	a	feeble,	truncated	thing.	And	yet,	this	did	not	feel	like	a	gift
—a	pressure	was	building	behind	her	eyes.
‘Besides,’	Yedan	added,	‘they’re	not	yet	dead.’
They	rode	on	at	a	canter	as	the	road	climbed	out	of	the	valley,	leaving	behind	the	weed-snarled	fields	and
brush-crowded	 farm	 buildings.	 Ahead	 was	 the	 wall	 of	 trees	 that	 marked	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 forest	 called
Ashayn.	If	the	tales	were	true,	Ashayn	had	fallen—every	last	tree—to	the	manic	industry	of	the	city,	and	in
the	leagues	beyond	that	wasteland	great	fires	had	destroyed	the	rest.	But	the	forest	had	returned,	and	the	boles
of	blackwood	could	not	be	spanned	by	a	dozen	men	with	hands	linked.	There	was	no	sign	of	a	road	or	bridle
path,	but	the	floor	beneath	the	high	canopy	was	clear	of	undergrowth.
The	gloom	thickened	once	they	rode	beneath	the	towering	trees.	Among	the	blackwood	she	could	now	see
other	 species,	 equally	 as	 massive,	 smooth-barked	 down	 to	 the	 serpentine	 roots.	 High	 above,	 some	 kind	 of
parasitic	 plant	 created	 islands	 of	 moss,	 serrated	 leaves	 and	 black	 blossoms,	 like	 huge	 nests,	 depending	 from
thick	tangles	of	vines.	The	air	was	chill,	musty,	smelling	of	wet	charcoal	and	sap.
A	third	of	a	league,	then	half,	the	horses’	hoofs	thumping,	hauberks	rustling	and	clasps	clicking,	but	from	the
forest	itself	only	silence.
The	pressure	had	sharpened	to	pain,	as	if	a	spike	had	been	driven	into	her	forehead.	The	motion	of	the	horse
was	making	her	nauseated.	Gasping,	leaning	forward,	she	reined	in.	A	hand	to	her	face	revealed	bright	blood
from	her	nostrils.	‘Yedan—’
‘I	know,’	he	said	in	a	growl.	‘Never	mind.	Memories	return.	There’s	something	ahead.’
‘I	don’t	think—’
‘You	said	you	wanted	to	see	the	First	Shore.’
‘Not	if	it	makes	my	head	explode!’
‘Retreat	is	not	possible,’	he	said,	spitting	to	one	side.	‘What	assails	us,	Yan,	does	not	come	from	what	awaits
us.’
What?	She	managed	to	lift	her	head,	looked	across	at	him.
Her	brother	was	weeping	blood.	He	spat	again,	a	bright	red	gout,	and	then	said,	‘Kharkanas	.	.	.	the	empty
darkness’—he	met	her	eyes—‘is	empty	no	longer.’
She	thought	back	to	the	two	unconscious	witches	in	the	city	behind	them.	They	will	not	survive	this.	They
cannot.	I	brought	them	all	this	way,	only	to	kill	them.	‘I	must	go	back—’
‘You	cannot.	Not	yet.	Ride	that	way,	Twilight,	and	you	will	die.’	And	he	kicked	his	horse	forward.
After	a	moment	she	followed.
Goddess	of	Darkness,	have	you	returned?	Are	you	awakened	in	rage?	Will	you	slay	all	you	touch?
The	black	pillars	marched	past,	a	cathedral	abandoned	in	some	timeless	realm,	and	now	they	could	hear	a
sound,	coming	from	just	beyond	the	broken	black	wall	ahead.	Something	like	the	crashing	of	waves.
The	First	Shore.
Where	we	began—
A	glimmer	between	the	boles,	flashes	of	white—
Brother	and	sister	rode	clear	of	the	forest.	The	horses	beneath	them	slowed,	halted	as	the	reins	grew	slack,
lifeless.


With	red-smeared	vision,	silence	like	a	wound,	they	stared,	uncomprehending.
The	First	Shore.
	
The	clouds	in	the	west	had	blackened	and	fused	into	an	impenetrable	wall.	The	ground	was	silver	with	frost
and	 the	 grasses	 crunched	 and	 broke	 underfoot.	 Hunched	 beneath	 furs,	 Strahl	 watched	 the	 enemy	 forces
forming	up	on	the	gentle	slope	of	the	valley	opposite	them.	Two	hundred	paces	to	his	right	Maral	Eb	stood	in	a
vanguard	of	chosen	Barahn	warriors,	behind	him	the	mixed	units	of	four	lesser	clans—he	had	taken	command
of	those	warriors	who	had	tasted	the	humiliation	of	defeat.	A	courageous	decision,	enough	to	grind	away	some
of	the	burrs	in	Strahl’s	eyes.	Some,	but	not	all.
Breaths	 plumed	 in	 white	 streams.	 Warriors	 stamped	 to	 jolt	 feeling	 back	 into	 their	 feet.	 Blew	 on	 hands
gripping	 weapons.	 Across	 the	 way,	 horses	 bucked	 and	 reared	 amidst	 the	 ranks	 of	 mounted	 archers	 and
lancers.	Pennons	hung	grey	and	dull,	standards	stiff	as	planed	boards.
The	iron	taste	of	panic	was	in	the	bitter	air,	and	eyes	lifted	again	and	again	to	stare	at	the	terrifying	sky—to
the	west,	the	black,	seething	wall;	to	the	east	the	cerulean	blue	sparkling	with	crystals	and	the	sun	burnished
white	as	snow	and	flanked	by	baleful	sun-dogs.	Directly	above,	a	ragged	seam	bound	the	two.	The	blackness
was	winning	the	battle,	Strahl	could	see,	as	tendrils	snaked	out	like	roots,	bleeding	into	the	morning.
Now	on	the	valley	floor	phalanxes	of	kite-shielded	Saphii	held	to	the	centre,	their	long	spears	anchored	in	the
hinged	sockets	at	the	hip.	D’ras	skirmishers	spilled	out	around	the	bristling	squares,	among	them	archers	with
arrows	 nocked,	 edging	 ever	 closer.	 The	 Akrynnai	 cavalry	 held	 to	 the	 wings,	 struggling	 to	 keep	 formation	 as
they	advanced	at	the	walk.
Sceptre	Irkullas	was	wasting	no	time.	No	personal	challenges	on	the	field,	no	rousing	exhortations	before	his
troops.	The	Akrynnai	wanted	this	battle	joined,	the	slaughter	unleashed,	as	if	the	chorus	of	clashing	weapons
and	the	screams	of	the	dying	and	wounded	could	wrench	the	world	back	to	its	normal	state,	could	right	the	sky
overhead,	could	send	the	cold	and	darkness	reeling	away.
Blood	to	pay,	blood	to	appease.	Is	that	what	you	believe,	Akrynnai?
Strahl	 stirred	 into	 motion,	 stepping	 forward	 until	 he	 was	 five	 paces	 in	 front	 of	 the	 Senan	 line.	 He	 swung
round,	studied	the	nearest	faces.
Belligerence	like	bruises	beneath	the	sheen	of	fear.	Hard	eyes	fixing	on	his,	then	shifting	away,	then	back
again.	 White-painted	 faces	 cracking	 in	 the	 cold.	 In	 turn,	 his	 officers	 stung	 him	 with	 their	 acuity,	 as	 if	 they
sought	the	first	sign	of	uncertainty,	the	first	waver	of	doubt	in	his	face.	He	gave	them	nothing.
Strange	crackling	from	the	silvered	sky,	as	of	a	frozen	lake	breaking	in	the	first	thaw,	and	warriors	ducked
as	 if	 fearing	 the	 descent	 of	 shards	 of	 ice.	 But	 nothing	 came	 of	 the	 eerie	 sounds.	 The	 fists	 of	 the	 gods	 are
pounding	 against	 the	 glass	 of	 the	 sky.	 Cracks	 craze	 the	 scene.	 It’s	 all	 moments	 from	 shattering.	 Well
may	you	duck,	my	friends.	As	if	that	will	do	any	good.
‘Bakal,’	 Strahl	 said,	 loudly	 enough	 to	 startle	 the	 figures	 he	 faced,	 and	 he	 saw	 how	 the	 lone	 word	 rippled
back	through	the	ranks,	stirring	them	to	life.	‘And	before	Bakal,	Onos	Toolan.	Before	him,	Humbrall	Taur.	We
came	in	search	of	an	enemy.	We	came	seeking	a	war.’
He	waited,	and	saw	in	the	nearest	faces	a	host	of	private	wars	unleashed.	He	beheld	in	those	expressions
the	fiercest	battles	of	will.	He	saw	the	spreading	stain	of	shame.	And	nodded.
‘Here	we	stand,	Senan.’	Behind	him	he	could	hear	and	feel	the	sudden	thunder	of	soldiers	on	the	advance,
of	waves	of	riders	sweeping	out	from	the	flanks.	‘And	I	am	before	you,	alone.	And	I	shall	speak	the	words	of
those	before	me.’	He	held	high	in	his	right	hand	his	tulwar,	and	in	his	left	the	weapon’s	scabbard.
‘Not	this	enemy!	Not	this	war!’
Strahl	sheathed	the	sword,	slamming	the	weapon	hard	to	lock	it	and	then	holding	it	high	with	both	hands.
Weapons	flashed.	Iron	vanished.	Barked	commands	from	the	rear	and	the	Senan	forces	wheeled	round.
And	now,	we	leave.
You	wanted	this,	Maral	Eb?	Then	take	it.
	
Someone	 was	 shouting,	 but	 Maral	 Eb’s	 eyes	 remained	 fixed	 on	 the	 enemy	 as	 it	 advanced.	 The	 first	 arrows
hissed	 through	 the	 glittering	 air—almost	 unseen	 in	 the	 gathering	 gloom.	 The	 phalanxes	 were	 readying	 for	 a
charge,	 long	 spears	 levelled	 in	 the	 first	 three	 ranks.	 On	 the	 outer	 wings	 horse-archers	 were	 fast	 closing,


moments	from	loosing	arrows	and	then	wheeling	to	rake	the	front	Barghast	lines	with	subsequent	salvos.
Bastards	fought	like	babies.	Once	those	Saphii	closed,	everything	would	change—
The	shouting	was	suddenly	louder	and	then	a	hand	gripped	his	shoulder	and	yanked	him	round.	He	glared
into	the	face	of	one	of	his	bodyguards—but	the	man	was	pointing,	spittle	flying	as	he	shrieked.	What	was	he
saying?	The	damned	idiot—what—
Then	he	saw	the	growing	gap	that	was	his	line’s	centre.
What?	Did	they	charge—no—I	see	nothing—but—
‘They’ve	withdrawn!	Warleader!	The	Senan!’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool!’	He	pushed	his	way	through	his	milling	guards	until	his	view	was	unobstructed.	The	Senan
were	 gone.	 The	 most	 powerful	 of	 the	 Barghast	 White	 Faces—routed!	 ‘Get	 them	 back!’	 he	 shrieked.	 ‘Get
them	back!’
	
Sceptre	 Irkullas	 reined	 in,	 a	 deep	 frown	 knitting	 his	 features	 beneath	 the	 helm’s	 flaring	 rim.	 What	 was	 the
centre	 doing?	 Do	 you	 invite	 us	 to	 march	 into	 that	 maw?	 Do	 you	 really	 think	 that	 will	 work?	 Damned
barbarians,	have	you	never	before	faced	a	phalanx?	‘Rider!	Inform	the	Saphii	commander	to	be	certain	to
hold	 their	 squares—if	 the	 Barghast	 want	 to	 bite	 down	 on	 that	 mouthful	 of	 spikes,	 they’re	 welcome	 to.’	 He
twisted	round	until	he	spotted	a	second	messenger.	‘Have	the	lancers	draw	in	closer	to	our	centre	and	await
my	orders	to	charge.	Go!’
Another	 messenger	 who	 had	 been	 among	 the	 skirmishers	 rode	 up,	 saluting.	 ‘Sceptre!	 The	 centre	 clan	 is
withdrawing	from	battle!’
‘It’s	a	feint—’
‘My	 pardon,	 Sceptre,	 but	 their	 leader	 was	 seen	 facing	 his	 warriors—he	 sheathed	 his	 weapon	 and	 held	 it
high,	sir.	And	they	did	the	same	back,	and	then	turned	round	and	left	the	line!’
Errant’s	 pull!	 ‘Sound	 the	 Saphii	 advance	 to	 close!	 Before	 the	 bastards	 can	 plug	 the	 hole—ride,	 soldier!
Signallers!	To	me!’
	
Sekara	the	Vile	pushed	her	way	through	the	press	for	a	better	look	at	the	treachery.	She	was	in	command	of
the	rearguard,	the	elders,	unblooded	youths	and	their	mothers,	along	with	eight	hundred	warriors	still	recovering
from	wounds.	Their	task	was	to	hold	the	line	of	wagons	should	the	Akrynnai	encircle	or	pull	round	to	strike	for
the	belly.	But	with	the	front	centre	gone,	they	would	have	nothing	but	enemy	at	their	backs.
She	 spat	 out	 a	 string	 of	 curses	 at	 the	 retreating	 warriors.	 ‘Cowards!	 I	 will	 wait	 for	 you	 at	 the	 Gate,	 for
every	one	of	you!’	She	ran	out	a	half-dozen	strides—the	last	ranks	of	the	Senan	were	almost	within	reach.	Not
of	her	claws—that	would	be	too	risky—but	she	could	spit	as	well	as	any	Barghast	woman,	and	now—
Someone	moved	up	beside	her.	She	twisted	round,	teeth	bared.
A	gauntleted	hand	hammered	her	face.	Light	exploded	behind	her	eyes.	Legs	giving	out,	she	collapsed	in	a
heap.	Her	mouth	was	full	of	shards	of	teeth.
Strahl’s	 voice	 spoke	 from	 directly	 over	 her.	 ‘Sekara,	 wait	 at	 the	 Gate	 all	 you	 want.	 But	 remember,	 your
husband’s	 already	 there.	 Waiting	 just	 for	 you.	 The	 dead	 will	 say	 what	 they	 dared	 not	 say	 in	 life.	 Oh,	 don’t
forget	to	take	your	hoard	with	you.’
She	heard	his	moccasins	crunching	on	the	grasses	as	he	set	off	in	the	wake	of	his	clan.
My	husband?	Whenever	did	he	not	cower	before	me?	She	spat	out	a	mouthful	of	slimy	blood.
We’ll	 stand	 side	 by	 side,	 Strahl,	 to	 welcome	 you.	 To	 tear	 you	 to	 pieces!	 A	 curse	 upon	 the	 Senan!
Choose	what	you	will,	you	shall	not	see	the	fangs	until	it	is	too	late!
The	 ground	 shook.	 A	 shock	 wave	 thundered	 through	 the	 Barghast.	 Screams	 battered	 the	 frozen	 air.	 The
battle	was	joined.
Sekara	 regained	 her	 feet,	 her	 face	 already	 swollen	 and	 hot.	 ‘Other	 side	 of	 the	 wagons!’	 she	 shouted.
‘Everyone—through!	And	then	form	up!’
She	saw	them	lurch	into	motion.
Yes,	hold	for	a	time.	Time	enough	for	me	to	run.	Darkness,	such	a	blessing!	She	staggered	towards	the
wagons.


	
Another	sleet	of	arrows	and	Sagal	ducked	behind	his	hide	shield.	Two	thuds	bit	into	the	thickly	matted	reeds
and	 he	 flinched	 as	 his	 forearm	 was	 pricked.	 Warm	 blood	 trickled	 beneath	 his	 vambrace.	 He	 cursed.	 His
brother	 had	 done	 the	 best	 he	 could	 in	 selecting	 this	 site,	 but	 to	 deal	 with	 these	 Akrynnai	 horse-archers	 most
effectively	they	would	have	done	better	to	find	broken	ground.	A	proper	range	of	hills,	plenty	of	rock,	gullies
and	draws.
Instead,	 the	 bastards	 didn’t	 even	 have	 to	 close—at	 least	 for	 as	 long	 as	 they	 had	 arrows—and	 Barghast
were	 dying	 without	 even	 the	 honour	 of	 clashing	 blades	 with	 the	 enemy.	 The	 rattling	 pass	 of	 the	 horses
continued	its	deadly	sweep.
The	 next	 time,	 Sagal	 would	 straighten	 and	 lead	 a	 charge—right	 into	 the	 path	 of	 the	 riders—see	 how	 you
will	fare	with	three	thousand	White	Faces	in	your	midst!
The	descent	of	arrows	fell	off	and	Sagal	waited	a	moment	longer—he	could	still	hear	those	horse	hoofs—
but	sound	was	doing	strange	things	this	morning.	Yet,	they	seemed	.	.	.	heavier	than	before.	He	lowered	his
shield	and	straightened.	Blinking,	struggling	to	make	out	details	in	the	infernal	gloom.
Crazed	motion	rising	up	from	the	valley,	the	entire	hillside	trembling—
Three	chevrons	of	lancers	had	come	in	behind	the	screen	of	archers.	There	was	no	time	to	close	ranks,	to
lift	and	settle	pikes.	He	stared,	furious,	and	then	unsheathed	his	tulwar.	‘They	come!	They	come!’
The	 Barghast	 seemed	 to	 grunt	 like	 some	 massive	 beast	 stirring	 awake.	 As	 thousands	 of	 levelled	 lances
churned	 up	 the	 slope,	 the	 White	 Faces	 answered	 with	 a	 roar,	 and	 at	 the	 last	 instant,	 the	 mass	 of	 Barahn
warriors	 heaved	 into	 the	 iron	 fangs.	 The	 front	 lines	 vanished,	 ducking	 beneath	 the	 lanceheads,	 heavy	 blades
chopping	into	horses’	forelegs.	Beasts	shrieked,	went	down,	and	all	at	once	the	charge	ground	to	a	halt	against
a	seething	wall	of	carnage,	the	points	of	the	chevrons	flattening	out	in	wild,	vicious	maelstrom.
Deluged	in	the	fluids	of	a	gutted	horse,	Sagal	surged	back	to	his	feet,	howling	like	a	demon.	Time	to	deliver
slaughter!	The	fools	closed—the	fools	charged!	They	could	have	held	back	all	day	until	the	Barahn	on
this	 flank	 were	 nothing	 but	 a	 heap	 of	 arrow-studded	 meat—but	 their	 impatience	 betrayed	 them!
Laughing,	 he	 hacked	 at	 everything	 in	 sight.	 Cut	 deep	 into	 thighs,	 slashed	 through	 wrists,	 chopped	 at	 the
stamping	legs	of	the	horses.
He	 could	 feel	 the	 cavalry	 attempting	 to	 withdraw,	 a	 giant	 snagged	 weapon,	 its	 edges	 nicked	 and	 blunted.
Bellowing,	he	pushed	deeper	into	the	press,	knowing	his	fellow	warriors	were	all	doing	the	same.	They	would
not	let	go	easily,	no,	they	would	not	do	that.
Half	the	Free	Cities	of	Genabackis	have	flung	their	cavalry	at	us—and	we	destroyed	them	all!
	
Sceptre	 Irkullas	 stared	 as	 the	 heavy	 lancers	 fought	 to	 extricate	 themselves	 from	 the	 outer	 flanks	 of	 the
Barghast	position.	Scores	of	fine	warriors	and	superbly	trained	mounts	were	going	down	with	every	breath	he
drew	 into	 his	 aching	 lungs,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 help	 for	 it.	 He	 needed	 that	 retreat	 as	 ugly	 as	 it	 could	 be,	 slow
enough	to	draw	more	and	more	of	the	enemy	down	the	slope.	He	needed	to	see	that	entire	flank	committed	to
the	 slaughter,	 before	 he	 could	 command	 the	 horse-archers	 in	 behind	 the	 Barghast,	 followed	 quickly	 by	 his
skirmishers	and	then	a	phalanx	of	Saphii	to	ensure	the	entire	flank	was	thoroughly	cut	off	and	exposed	on	the
hillside.	Then	he	would	send	the	bulk	of	his	lancers	and	mounted	axe-wielders,	the	hammer	to	the	Saphii	anvil.
The	other	flank	was	not	going	as	well,	he	saw,	as	the	commander	there	had	managed	to	lock	shields	and	lift
pikes	to	ward	off	the	cavalry	charge,	and	now	the	horse-archers	were	resuming	their	sweeps	across	the	face
of	the	line—this	was	a	game	of	attrition	that	served	the	Akrynnai	well	enough,	but	it	took	longer.	How	many
arrows	could	the	Barghast	suffer?
His	final	regard	he	fixed	on	the	centre,	and	a	surge	of	pleasure	washed	up	against	the	chill	of	the	day.	The
Saphii	phalanxes	had	driven	deep	into	the	gap,	effectively	bisecting	the	enemy	line.	On	the	far	side,	the	isolated
enemy	was	locked	in	a	bloody,	fighting	withdrawal	back	towards	the	outside	flank—those	Barghast	knew	how
to	 fight	 on	 foot—better	 than	 any	 other	 soldiers	 he’d	 ever	 seen,	 but	 they	 were	 losing	 cohesion,	 pitching
wayward	 as	 Saphii	 spears	 drove	 them	 back,	 and	 back;	 as	 the	 Saphii	 kaesanderai—the	 jalak-wielding	 infighters—shot	forward	into	every	gap,	their	curved	shortswords	slashing	and	hacking.
Elements	of	the	lead	phalanx	had	pushed	into	the	rearguard,	and	flames	were	rising	from	the	wagons—likely
fired	 by	 the	 Barghast	 after	 they’d	 broken	 and	 fled	 through	 the	 barrier.	 That	 phalanx	 was	 falling	 out	 into	 a
curling	line	to	close	any	hope	of	retreat	by	the	far	flank.


The	savages	had	found	their	last	day,	and	they	were	welcome	to	it.
Irkullas	lifted	his	gaze	and	studied	the	sky.	The	sight	horrified	him.	Day	was	dying	before	his	eyes.	Ragged
black	arteries,	like	slow	lightning,	had	arced	through	the	morning	sky	until	it	seemed	nothing	but	fragments	of
blue	remained.	It	shatters.	The	day—it	shatters!
He	could	see	something	now,	a	darkness	descending,	falling	and	falling	closer	still.
What	is	happening?	The	air—so	cold,	so	empty—Errant	defend	us—what—
	
Kashat	reached	over	his	shoulder	and	tore	the	arrow	loose.	Someone	cried	out	behind	him,	but	he	had	no	time
for	 that.	 ‘We	 hold!’	 he	 screamed,	 then	 stumbled	 as	 fresh	 blood	 rushed	 down	 his	 back.	 His	 right	 arm	 was
suddenly	useless,	hanging	at	his	side,	and	now	the	leg	it	thumped	against	was	growing	numb.	Spirits	below,	it
was	but	a	prick—a	damned	puny	arrow—I	don’t	understand.	‘We	hold!’	The	shout	filled	his	mind,	but	this
time	it	came	out	weak	as	a	whisper.
The	army	was	split	in	two.	No	doubt	the	Sceptre	believed	that	that	would	prove	the	death	of	the	Barghast.
The	fool	was	in	for	a	surprise.	The	White	Faces	had	fought	as	clans	for	generations.	Even	a	damned	family
could	stand	on	its	own.	The	real	bloodbath	had	yet	to	begin.
He	struggled	to	straighten.	‘Stupid	arrow.	Stupid	fuck—’
A	second	arrow	punched	through	his	left	cheek,	just	under	the	bone	and	deep	into	his	nasal	passage.	The
impact	knocked	his	head	back.	Blood	filled	his	vision.	Blood	poured	down	his	throat.	He	reached	up	with	his
one	working	hand	and	tore	the	bolt	from	his	face.	‘—ing	arrows!’	But	his	voice	was	a	thick,	spattering	gargle.
He	struggled	to	find	cover	behind	his	shield	as	more	arrows	hissed	down.	The	ground	beneath	him	was	wet
with	blood—his	own—and	he	stared	down	at	that	black	pool.	The	stuff	filling	his	mouth	he	swallowed	down	as
fast	as	he	could,	but	he	was	beginning	to	choke	and	his	belly	felt	heavy	as	a	grain	sack.
Try	another	charge,	you	cowards.	We	will	lock	jaws	on	your	throat.	We	will	tear	the	life	from	you.	We
shall	stand	on	a	mountain	of	your	bodies.
An	 arrow	 caught	 a	 warrior’s	 helmet—almost	 close	 enough	 to	 be	 within	 reach—and	 Kashat	 saw	 the	 bolt
shatter	as	if	it	was	the	thinnest	sliver	of	ice.	Then	he	saw	the	helmet	slide	in	two	pieces	from	the	man’s	head.
Reeling,	the	warrior	stared	a	moment	at	Kashat—with	eyes	burst	and	crazed	with	frost—before	he	collapsed.
Arrows	 were	 exploding	 everywhere.	 The	 screams	 of	 warriors	 cut	 short	 with	 a	 suddenness	 that	 curled
horror	round	Kashat’s	soul.	Another	impact	on	his	shield	and	the	rattan	beneath	the	hide	broke	like	glass.
What	is	happening?	 The	 agony	 of	 his	 wounds	 had	 ceased.	 He	 felt	 strangely	 warm,	 a	 sensation	 that	 left
him	elated.
Horses	were	falling	just	beyond	the	line.	Bowstrings	shivered	into	sparkling	dust,	the	laminated	ribs	snapping
as	 glues	 gave	 out.	 He	 saw	 Akrynnai	 soldiers—their	 faces	 twisted	 and	 blue—tumbling	 from	 saddles.	 The
enemy	was	a	mass	of	confusion.
Charge!	 We	 must	 charge!	 Kashat	 forced	 himself	 upright.	 Flinging	 away	 the	 remnants	 of	 his	 shield,	 he
tugged	 his	 sword	 into	 his	 left	 hand.	 Pushing	 forward,	 as	 if	 clawing	 through	 a	 deadly	 current,	 he	 raised	 his
weapon.
Behind	him,	hundreds	followed,	moving	slow	as	if	in	a	dream.
	
Maral	Eb,	a	mass	of	mixed	clans	behind	him,	led	yet	another	charge	into	the	bristling	wall	of	Saphii.	He	could
see	the	terror	in	their	eyes,	their	disbelief	at	the	sheer	ferocity	of	the	White	Faces.	The	shattered	stumps	of
spears	 marred	 the	 entire	 side,	 but	 thus	 far	 they	 had	 held,	 pounded	 and	 at	 times	 close	 to	 buckling,	 as	 the
savagery	of	the	Warleader’s	assaults	drove	like	a	mailed	fist	into	the	square.
The	 air	 felt	 inexplicably	 thick,	 unyielding,	 and	 night	 was	 falling—had	 they	 been	 fighting	 that	 long?	 It	 was
possible,	yes—see	the	ranks	of	dead	on	all	sides!	Saphii	and	Barghast,	and	there,	on	the	slope,	mounds	of	dead
riders	and	horses—had	the	Senan	returned?	They	must	have!
Such	slaughter!
The	 fierce	 charge	 slammed	 into	 the	 wall	 of	 flesh,	 leather,	 wood	 and	 iron.	 The	 sound	 was	 a	 meaty	 crunch
beneath	snapping	spear	shafts.	Lunging	close,	tulwar	lashing	down,	Maral	Eb	saw	a	dark-skinned	face	before
him,	saw	the	frozen	mask	of	the	fool’s	failed	courage,	and	he	laughed	as	he	swung	his	weapon—
The	iron	blade	struck	dead	centre	on	the	peaked	helm.


Sword,	 helm	 and	 head	 exploded.	 Maral	 Eb	 staggered	 as	 his	 sword-arm	 jumped	 out	 to	 the	 side,	 impossibly
light.	 His	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 stump	 of	 his	 wrist,	 from	 which	 frozen	 pellets	 of	 his	 blood	 sprayed	 like	 seeds.
Something	struck	his	shoulder,	careened	off,	and	then	two	commingled	bodies	fell	on	to	the	ground—the	impact
had	 driven	 them	 together	 and	 Maral	 Eb	 stared,	 uncomprehending,	 at	 their	 fused	 flesh,	 the	 exposed	 roots	 of
blood	and	muscle	beneath	split	skin.
He	could	hear	dread	groaning	on	all	sides,	pierced	by	brief	shrieks.
On	his	knees,	the	Warleader	sought	to	rise,	but	the	armoured	caps	of	his	greaves	were	frozen	to	the	ground.
Leather	buckles	broke	like	twigs.	He	lifted	his	head—a	reddish	mist	had	swallowed	the	world.	What	was	this?
Sorcery?	Some	poisonous	vapour	to	steal	all	their	strength?
Spirits,	no—the	mist	is	blood—blood	from	burst	bodies,	ruptured	eyeballs—
He	understood.	The	stump	of	his	wrist,	the	complete	absence	of	pain—even	the	breaths	he	dragged	into	his
lungs—the	cold,	the	darkness—
______
He	 had	 been	 thrown	 to	 the	 ground.	 A	 horse,	 one	 foreleg	 stamping	 down,	 the	 bones	 shearing	 just	 above	 the
fetlock,	 twin	 spikes	 of	 jagged	 bone	 plunging	 through	 his	 hauberk,	 his	 chest,	 and	 pinning	 him	 to	 the	 earth.
Screaming,	 the	 huge	 beast	 fell	 on	 to	 its	 side,	 flinging	 the	 lifeless	 hulk	 of	 its	 rider	 from	 the	 saddle,	 the	 man’s
body	breaking	like	crockery.
The	 scything	 foreleg	 tossed	 Sagal	 a	 few	 paces	 away,	 and	 he	 landed	 again,	 feeling	 his	 hip	 crumple	 as	 if	 it
were	 no	 more	 than	 a	 reed	 basket.	 Blinking,	 he	 watched	 the	 cold	 burn	 the	 hide	 from	 the	 thrashing,	 blinded
beast.	He	found	its	confusion	amusing	at	first,	but	then	sadness	overwhelmed	him—not	for	the	hapless	animal
—he’d	 never	 much	 liked	 horses—but	 for	 everyone	 on	 this	 hillside.	 Cheated	 of	 this	 battle,	 of	 the	 glory	 of	 a
rightful	victory,	the	honour	of	a	noble	defeat.
The	gods	were	cruel.	But	then,	he’d	always	known	that.
He	settled	his	head	back,	stared	up	at	the	red-stained	darkness.	A	pressure	was	descending.	He	could	feel	it
on	 his	 chest,	 in	 his	 skull.	 The	 Reaper	 stood	 above	 him,	 one	 heel	 pressing	 down.	 Sagal	 grunted	 as	 his	 ribs
snapped,	the	collapse	jerking	his	limbs.
The	slingstone	caught	the	hare	and	spun	it	round	in	the	air.	My	heart	was	in	my	throat	as	I	ran,	light
as	a	whisper,	to	the	grasses	where	it	had	fallen.	And	I	stood,	looking	down	on	the	creature,	its	panting
chest,	 the	 tiny	 droplets	 of	 blood	 spotting	 its	 nose.	 Its	 spine	 had	 broken	 and	 the	 long	 back	 legs	 were
perfectly	still.	But	the	front	paws,	they	twitched.
My	first	kill.
I	stood,	a	giant,	a	god,	watching	as	the	life	left	the	hare.	Watching,	as	the	depths	in	the	eyes	cleared,
revealing	themselves	to	be	shallow	things.
My	mother,	walking	up,	her	face	showing	none	of	the	joy	she	should	have	shown,	none	of	the	pride.
I	told	her	about	the	shallowness	that	I	had	seen.
She	 said,	 ‘It	 is	 easy	 to	 believe	 the	 well	 of	 life	 is	 bottomless,	 and	 that	 none	 but	 the	 spirits	 can	 see
through	to	the	far	end	of	the	eyes.	To	the	end	that	is	the	soul.	Yet	we	spend	all	our	lives	trying	to	peer
through.	 But	 we	 soon	 discover	 that	 when	 the	 soul	 flees	 the	 flesh,	 it	 takes	 the	 depth	 with	 it.	 In	 that
creature,	Sagal,	you	have	simply	seen	the	truth.	And	you	will	see	it	again	and	again.	In	every	beast	you
slay.	In	the	eyes	of	every	enemy	you	cut	down.’
She’d	been	poor	with	words,	her	voice	ever	flat	and	cruel.	Poor	with	most	things,	in	fact,	as	if	everything
worth	 anything	 in	 the	 world	 wasn’t	 worth	 talking	 about.	 He’d	 even	 forgotten	 she’d	 spoken	 that	 day,	 or	 that
she’d	been	his	teacher	in	the	ways	of	the	hunt.
He	realized	that	he	still	didn’t	understand	her.
No	matter.	The	shallowness	was	coming	up	to	meet	him.
	
Sceptre	Irkullas	crawled,	dragging	one	leg,	from	the	carcass	of	his	horse.	He	could	bear	its	shrieks	no	longer,
and	so	he	had	opened	its	throat	with	his	knife.	Of	course,	he	should	have	done	that	after	dismounting,	instead
of	simply	leaning	over	his	saddle,	but	his	mind	had	become	fogged,	sluggish	and	stupid.
And	 now	 he	 crawled,	 with	 the	 splintered	 stub	 of	 a	 thigh	 bone	 jutting	 from	 the	 leather	 of	 his	 trouser	 leg.
Painless,	at	least.	‘Brush	lips	with	your	blessings’,	as	the	saying	went.	I	used	to	hate	sayings.	No,	I	still


do,	especially	when	you	find	how	well	they	fit	the	occasion.
But	 that	 just	 reminds	 us	 that	 it’s	 an	 old	 track	 we’re	 walking.	 And	 all	 the	 newness	 is	 just	 our	 own
personal	banner	of	ignorance.	Watch	us	wave	it	high	as	if	it	glitters	with	profound	revelation.	Ha.
The	field	of	battle	was	almost	motionless	now.	Thousands	of	warriors	frozen	in	the	clinches	of	murder,	as	if
a	mad	artist	had	sought	to	paint	rage,	in	all	its	frayed	shrouds	of	senseless	destruction.	He	thought	back	on	that
towering	 host	 of	 conceits	 he	 had	 constructed,	 every	 one	 of	 which	 had	 led	 to	 this	 battle.	 Cracked,	 grinding,
descending	in	chaotic	collapse—he	so	wanted	to	laugh,	but	the	breaths	weren’t	coming	easy,	the	air	was	like	a
striking	serpent	in	his	throat.
He	bumped	up	against	another	dead	horse,	and	sought	to	pull	himself	atop	the	blistered,	brittle	beast.	One
last	look,	one	final	sweep	of	this	wretched	panorama.	The	valley	locked	in	its	preternatural	darkness,	the	falling
sky	with	its	dread	weight	crushing	everything	in	sight.
Grimacing,	he	forced	himself	into	a	sitting	position,	one	leg	held	out	stiff	and	dead.
And	beheld	the	scene.
Tens	 of	 thousands	 of	 bodies,	 a	 rotting	 forest	 of	 shapeless	 stumps,	 all	 sheathed	 in	 deathly	 frost.	 Nothing
moved,	nothing	at	all.	Flakes	of	ash	were	raining	down	from	the	starless,	impenetrable	heavens.
‘End	it,	then,’	he	croaked.	‘They’re	all	gone	.	.	.	but	me.	End	it,	please,	I	beg	you	.	.	.’
He	slid	down,	no	longer	able	to	hold	himself	up.	Closed	his	eyes.
Was	 someone	 coming?	 The	 cold	 collector	 of	 souls?	 Did	 he	 hear	 the	 crunch	 of	 boots,	 lone	 steps,	 drawing
closer—a	figure,	emerging	from	the	darkness	in	his	mind?	My	eyes	are	closed.	That	must	mean	something.
Was	something	coming?	He	dared	not	look.
	
He	had	once	been	a	farmer.	He	was	certain	of	that	much,	but	trouble	had	befallen	him.	Debt?	Perhaps,	but	the
word	was	stingless,	as	far	as	Last	was	concerned,	suggesting	that	it	was	not	a	haunting	presence	in	his	mind,
and	when	memories	were	as	few	and	as	sketchy	as	were	his,	that	must	count	for	something.
Instead,	 he	 had	 this:	 the	 stench	 of	 bonfires,	 that	 ashy	 smear	 of	 cleared	 land,	 everything	 raw	 and	 torn	 and
nothing	in	its	proper	place.	High	branches	stacked	in	chaotic	heaps,	moss	knotted	on	every	twig.	Roots	dripping
in	 inverted	 postures.	 Enormous	 boles	 lying	 flat	 and	 stripped	 down,	 great	 swaths	 of	 bark	 prised	 loose.	 Redstained	wood	and	black	gritty	rocks	pulled	from	the	flecked	soil.
The	earth	could	heave	and	make	such	a	mess,	but	it	had	not.	 It	had	but	trembled,	 and	not	from	any	deep
stirring	or	restlessness,	but	from	the	toppling	of	trees,	the	bellowing	of	oxen	straining	at	stumps,	the	footfalls	of
mindful	men.
Shatter	all	you	see.	It’s	what	makes	you	feel.	Feel	.	.	.	anything.
He	 remembered	 his	 hands	 deep	 in	 the	 rich	 warm	 earth.	 He	 remembered	 closing	 his	 eyes—for	 just	 a
moment—and	feeling	that	pulse	of	life,	of	promise	and	purpose.	They	would	plant	crops,	nurture	a	bounty	for
their	future	lives.	This	was	just.	This	was	righteous.	The	hand	that	shapes	is	the	hand	that	reaps.	This,	he	told
himself,	was	pure.	Sighing,	a	sure	smile	curving	his	lips,	he	opened	his	eyes	once	more.	Smoke,	mists	here	and
there	amidst	the	ruination.	Still	smiling,	he	then	withdrew	his	hands	from	the	warm	earth.
To	find	them	covered	in	blood.
He	never	counted	himself	a	clever	man.	He	knew	enough	to	know	that	and	not	much	else.	But	the	world
had	its	layers.	To	the	simple	it	offered	simplicity.	To	the	wise	it	offered	profundity.	And	the	only	measure	of
courage	worth	acknowledging	was	found	in	accepting	where	one	stood	in	that	scheme—in	hard,	unwavering
honesty,	no	matter	how	humbling.
He	stared	down	at	his	hands	and	knew	it	for	a	memory	not	his	own.	It	was,	in	fact,	an	invention,	the	blunt,
almost	 clumsy	 imposition	 of	 something	 profound.	 Devoid	 of	 subtlety	 and	 deliberately	 so,	 which	 then	 made	 it
more	complicated	than	it	at	first	seemed.
Even	these	thoughts	were	alien.	Last	was	not	a	thoughtful	man.
The	heart	knows	need,	and	the	mind	finds	reason	to	justify.	It	says:	destruction	leads	to	creation,	so
the	 world	 has	 shown	 us.	 But	 the	 world	 shows	 us	 more	 than	 that.	 Sometimes,	 destruction	 leads	 to
oblivion.	Extinction.	But	then,	what’s	so	bad	about	that?	If	stupidity	does	not	deserve	extinction,	what
does?	The	mind	is	never	so	clever	as	to	deceive	anyone	and	anything	but	itself	and	its	own	kind.
Last	decided	that	he	was	not	afraid	of	justice,	and	so	he	stood	unmoving,	unflinching,	as	the	slayer	appeared
at	the	far	end	of	the	corridor.	Asane’s	shrieks	had	run	down	to	silence.	He	knew	she	was	dead.	All	her	fears


come	home	at	last,	and	in	oblivion	there	was,	for	her,	relief.	Peace.
Murder	could	wear	such	pleasant	masks.
The	slayer	met	his	eyes	and	at	that	final	moment	they	shared	their	understanding.	The	necessity	of	things.
And	Last	fell	to	the	sword	without	a	sound.
There	had	been	blood	on	his	hands.	Reason	enough.	Justice	delivered.
Forgive	me?
	
Sheb	couldn’t	remember	who	he	had	been.	Indebted,	a	prisoner,	a	man	contemptuous	of	the	law,	these	things,
yes,	but	where	were	the	details?	Everything	had	flitted	away	in	his	growing	panic.	He’d	heard	Asane’s	death
echoing	down	the	corridor.	He	knew	that	a	murderer	now	stalked	him.	There	was	no	reason	for	it.	He’d	done
nothing	to	deserve	this.
Unless,	of	course,	one	counted	a	lifetime	of	treachery.	But	he’d	always	had	good	cause	for	doing	the	things
he	did.	He	was	sure	of	it.	Evading	imprisonment—well,	who	sought	the	loss	of	freedom?	No	one	but	an	idiot,
and	Sheb	 was	no	idiot.	Escaping	responsibility?	 Of	course.	 Bullies	earn	little	 sympathy,	 while	the	 victims	are
coddled	and	cooed	over	at	every	turn.	Better	to	be	the	victim	than	the	bully,	provided	the	mess	is	over	with,	all
threat	of	danger	past	and	it’s	time	for	explanations,	tales	of	self-defence	and	excuses	and	the	truth	of	it	was,
none	of	it	mattered	and	if	you	could	convince	yourself	with	your	excuses,	all	the	better.	Easy	sleeping	at	night,
easier	 still	 standing	 tall	 atop	 heaps	 of	 righteous	 indignation.	 No	 one	 is	 more	 pious	 than	 the	 guilty.	 And	 I
should	know.
And	no	one	is	a	better	liar	than	the	culpable.	So	he’d	done	nothing	to	deserve	any	of	this.	He’d	only	ever
done	what	he	needed	to	do	to	get	by,	to	slip	round	and	slide	through.	To	go	on	living,	feeding	all	his	habits,	all
his	wants	and	needs.	The	killer	had	no	reason!
Gasping,	he	ran	down	corridor	after	corridor,	through	strange	rooms,	on	to	spiralling	ascents	and	descents.
He	told	himself	that	he	was	so	lost	no	one	would	ever	find	him.
Lost	 in	 my	 maze	 of	 excuses—stop!	 I	 didn’t	 think	 that.	 I	 never	 said	 that.	 Has	 he	 found	 me?	 Has	 the
bastard	found	me?
He’d	 somehow	 misplaced	 his	 weapons,	 every	 one	 of	 them—how	 did	 that	 happen?	 Whimpering,	 Sheb
rushed	onward—ahead	was	a	bridge	of	some	sort,	crossing	a	cavernous	expanse	that	seemed	to	be	filling	with
clouds.
All	my	life,	I	tried	to	keep	my	head	down.	I	never	wanted	to	be	noticed.	Just	grab	what	I	can	and	get
out,	get	free,	until	the	next	thing	I	need	comes	up.	It	was	simple.	It	made	sense.	No	one	should	kill	me
for	that.
He	had	no	idea	how	thinking	could	be	so	exhausting.	Staggering	on	to	the	bridge,	iron	grating	under	his	boots
—what	 was	 wrong	 with	 damned	 wood?	 Coughing	 in	 the	 foul	 vapours	 of	 the	 clouds,	 eyes	 stinging,	 nose
burning,	he	stumbled	to	a	halt.
He’d	gone	far	enough.	Everything	he	did,	he’d	done	for	a	reason.	As	simple	as	that.
But	so	many	were	hurt,	Sheb.
‘Not	my	fault	they	couldn’t	get	out	of	the	way.	If	they’d	any	brains	they’d	have	seen	me	coming.’
The	way	you	lived	forced	others	into	lives	of	misery,	Sheb.
‘I	can’t	help	it	if	they	couldn’t	do	no	better!’
They	couldn’t.	They	weren’t	even	people.
‘What?’	He	looked	up,	into	the	killer’s	eyes.	‘No,	it’s	not	fair.’
‘That’s	right,	Sheb.	It	isn’t,	and	it	never	was.’
The	blade	lashed	out.
	
The	 ghost	 shrieked.	 Suddenly	 trapped	 in	 the	 Matron’s	 chamber.	 Mists	 roiled.	 Rautos	 was	 on	 his	 knees,
weeping	uncontrollably.	Breath	was	casting	her	tiles,	which	were	no	longer	tiles,	but	coins,	glittering	and	bright
—yet	every	pattern	she	scanned	elicited	a	snarl	from	her,	and	she	swept	them	up	yet	again—the	manic	snap
and	bounce	of	coins	filled	the	air.
‘No	answers,’	she	hissed.	‘No	answers!	No	answers!’
Taxilian	 stood	 before	 the	 enormous	 throne,	 muttering	 under	 his	 breath.	 ‘Sulkit	 transformed	 it—and	 now	 it


waits—everything	waits.	I	don’t	understand.’
Sulkit	 stood	 nearby.	 Its	 entire	 body	 had	 changed	 shape,	 elongating,	 shoulders	 hunched,	 its	 snout
foreshortened	and	broader,	fangs	gleaming	wet	with	oils.	Grey	reptilian	eyes	held	fixed,	unblinking—the	drone
was	a	drone	no	longer.	Now	a	J’an	Sentinel,	he	stood	facing	the	ghost.
The	unhuman	regard	was	unbearable.
Veed	strode	into	the	chamber	and	halted.	Sword	blade	dripping	gore,	the	front	of	his	studded	vest	spattered
and	streaked.	His	face	was	lifeless.	His	eyes	were	the	eyes	of	a	blind	man.	‘Hello,	old	friend,’	he	said.	‘Where
should	I	start?’
The	ghost	recoiled.
	
Rautos	stood	facing	his	wife.	Another	evening	spent	in	silence,	but	now	there	was	something	raw	in	the	air.
She	was	searching	his	face	and	her	expression	was	strange	and	bleak.	‘Have	you	no	pity,	husband?’
‘Pity,’	he’d	replied,	‘is	all	I	have.’
She’d	looked	away.	‘I	see.’
‘You	surrendered	long	ago,’	he	said.	‘I	never	understood	that.’
‘Not	everyone	surrenders	willingly,	Rautos.’
He	 studied	 her.	 ‘But	 where	 did	 you	 find	 your	 joy,	 Eskil?	 Day	 after	 day,	 night	 after	 night,	 where	 was	 your
pleasure	in	living?’
‘You	stopped	looking	for	that	long	ago.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘You	found	your	hobbies.	The	only	time	your	eyes	came	alive.	My	joy,	husband,	was	in	you.	Until	you	went
away.’
Yes,	he	remembered	this	now.	One	night,	one	single	night.	‘That	was	wrong,’	he’d	said,	his	voice	hoarse.
‘To	put	all	that	.	.	.	in	someone	else.’
Her	shrug	horrified	him.	‘Overwhelmed,	were	you?	But	Rautos,	that’s	just	not	so,	is	it?	After	all,	you	can’t
be	overwhelmed	by	something	you	don’t	even	bother	to	notice.’
‘I	noticed.’
‘And	so	you	turned	away	from	me.	Until,	as	you	say,	here	you	stand	with	nothing	in	your	heart	but	pity.	You
once	said	you	loved	me.’
‘I	once	did.’
‘Rautos	Hivanar,	what	are	these	things	you	are	digging	up	from	the	river	bank?’
‘Mechanisms.	I	think.’
‘What	so	fascinates	you	about	them?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	cannot	glean	their	purpose,	their	function—why	are	we	talking	about	this?’
‘Rautos,	listen.	They’re	just	pieces.	The	machine,	whatever	it	was,	whatever	it	did,	it’s	broken.’
‘Eskil,	go	to	bed.’
And	so	she	did,	ending	the	last	real	conversation	between	them.	He	remembered	sitting	down,	his	hands	to
his	face,	outwardly	silent	and	motionless	yet	inside	he	was	wracked	with	sobs.	Yes,	it	was	broken.	He	knew
that.	And	not	a	single	piece	left	made	any	sense.	And	all	his	pity,	well,	turned	out	it	was	all	he	had	for	himself,
too.
Rautos	felt	the	bite	of	the	blade	and	in	the	moment	before	the	pain	rushed	in,	he	managed	a	smile.
	
Veed	stood	over	the	corpse,	and	then	swung	his	gaze	to	Taxilian.	Held	there	for	a	moment,	before	his	attention
drifted	to	Breath.	She	was	on	her	knees,	scraping	coins	into	her	hands.
‘No	 solutions.	 No	 answers.	 They	 should	 be	 here,	 in	 these!	 These	 fix	 everything—everyone	 knows	 that!
Where	is	the	magic?’
‘Illusions,	you	mean,’	Veed	said,	grinning.
‘The	best	kind!	And	now	the	water’s	rising—I	can’t	breathe!’
‘He	 should	 never	 have	 accepted	 you,	 Feather	 Witch.	 You	 understand	 that,	 don’t	 you?	 Yes,	 they	 were	 all
mistakes,	all	fragments	of	lives	he	took	inside	like	so	much	smoke	and	dust,	but	you	were	the	worst	of	them.
The	Errant	drowned	you—and	then	walked	away	from	your	soul.	He	should	not	have	done	that,	for	you	were


too	potent,	too	dangerous.	You	ate	his	damned	eye.’
Her	head	snapped	up,	a	crazed	grin	smeared	across	her	face.	‘Elder	blood!	I	hold	his	debt!’
Veed	glanced	at	the	ghost.	‘He	sought	to	do	what	K’rul	did	so	long	ago,’	he	said,	‘but	Icarium	is	not	an	Elder
God.’	He	regarded	Feather	Witch	again.	‘He	wanted	warrens	of	his	own,	enough	to	trap	him	in	one	place,	as	if
it	was	a	web.	Trap	him	in	place.	Trap	him	in	time.’
‘The	debt	is	mine!’	Feather	Witch	shrieked.
‘Not	any	more,’	said	Veed.	‘It	is	now	Icarium	Lifestealer’s.’
‘He’s	broken!’
‘Yes.’
‘It’s	not	his	fault!’
‘No,	it	isn’t,	and	no,	it’s	not	fair	either.	But	there	is	blood	on	his	hands,	and	terror	in	his	heart.	It	seems	we
must	 all	 feed	 him	 something,	 doesn’t	 it?	 Or	 perhaps	 it	 was	 the	 other	 way	 round.	 But	 the	 ghost	 is	 here	 now,
with	us.	Icarium	is	here.	Time	to	die,	Feather	Witch.	Taxilian.’
‘And	you?’	Taxilian	asked.
Veed	smiled.	‘Me,	too.’
‘Why?’	Taxilian	demanded.	‘Why	now?’
‘Because	Lifestealer	is	where	he	must	be.	At	this	moment,	he	is	in	place.	And	we	must	all	step	aside.’	And
Veed	 turned	 to	 face	 the	 ghost.	 ‘The	 J’an	 sees	 only	 you,	 Icarium.	 The	 Nest	 is	 ready,	 the	 flavours	 altered	 to
your	 .	 .	 .	 tastes.’	 He	 gestured	 and	 the	 ghost	 saw	 that	 both	 Feather	 Witch	 and	 Taxilian	 had	 vanished.	 ‘Don’t
think	you	are	quite	rid	of	us—we’re	just	back	inside	you,	old	friend.	We’re	the	stains	on	your	soul.’
The	ghost	looked	down	and	saw	grey-green	skin,	long-fingered,	scarred	hands.	He	lifted	them	to	touch	his
face,	fingers	brushing	the	tusks	jutting	from	his	lower	jaw.	‘What	must	I	do?’
But	Veed	was	gone.	He	was	alone	in	the	chamber.
The	J’an	Sentinel,	Sulkit,	stood	watching	him.	Waiting.
Icarium	 faced	 the	 throne.	 A	 machine.	 A	 thing	 of	 veins	 and	 arteries	 and	 bitter	 oils.	 A	 binder	 of	 time,	 the
maker	of	certainty.
The	flavours	swirled	round	him.	The	entire	towering	city	of	stone	and	iron	trembled.
I	am	awake—no.	I	am	.	.	.	reborn.
Icarium	Lifestealer	walked	forward	to	take	his	throne.
	
The	shore	formed	a	ragged	line,	the	bleak	sweep	of	darkness	manifested	in	all	the	natural	ways—the	sward
leading	to	the	bank	that	then	dropped	to	the	beach	itself,	the	sky	directly	overhead	onyx	as	a	starless	night	yet
smeared	 with	 pewter	 clouds—the	 realm	 behind	 them,	 then,	 a	 vast	 promise	 of	 purity	 at	 their	 backs.	 But	 the
strand	 glowed,	 and	 as	 Yan	 Tovis	 dismounted	 and	 walked	 down	 her	 boots	 sank	 into	 the	 incandescent	 sand.
Reaching	down—not	yet	ready	to	fix	her	gaze	on	what	was	beyond	the	shoreline—she	scooped	up	a	handful.
Cool,	surprisingly	light—she	squinted.
Not	crumbled	coral.	Not	stone.
‘It’s	bone,’	said	Yedan	Derryg,	standing	a	few	paces	to	her	left.	‘See	that	driftwood?	Long	bones,	mostly.
Those	cobbles,	they’re—’
‘Yes,’	she	snapped.	‘I	know.’	She	flung	away	the	handful	of	bone	fragments.
‘It	was	easier,’	he	continued,	‘from	back	there.	We’re	too	close—’
‘Be	quiet,	will	you?’
Suddenly	defiant,	she	willed	herself	to	look—and	reeled	back	a	step,	breath	hissing	from	between	her	teeth.
A	sea	indeed,	yet	one	that	rose	like	a	wall,	its	waves	rolling	down	to	foam	at	the	waterline.	She	grunted.	But
this	was	not	water	at	all.	It	was	.	.	.	light.
Behind	her,	Yedan	Derryg	said,	‘Memories	return.	When	they	walked	out	from	the	Light,	their	purity	blinded
us.	We	thought	that	a	blessing,	when	in	truth	it	was	an	attack.	When	we	shielded	our	eyes,	we	freed	them	to
indulge	their	treacherous	ways.’
‘Yedan,	the	story	is	known	to	me—’
‘Differently.’
She	came	near	to	gasping	in	relief	as	she	turned	from	the	vast	falling	wall	to	face	her	brother.	‘What	do	you
mean?’


‘The	Watch	serves	the	Shore	in	its	own	way.’
‘Then,	in	turn,	I	must	possess	knowledge	that	you	don’t—is	that	what	you’re	saying,	brother?’
‘The	Queen	is	Twilight,	because	she	can	be	no	other.	She	holds	the	falling	of	night.	She	is	the	first	defender
against	the	legions	of	light	that	would	destroy	darkness	itself.	But	we	did	not	ask	for	this.	Mother	Dark	yielded,
and	so,	to	mark	that	yielding,	Twilight	relives	it.’
‘Again	and	again.	For	ever.’
Yedan’s	 bearded	 jaws	 bunched,	 his	 face	 still	 stained	 with	 blood.	 Then	 he	 shook	 his	 head.	 ‘Nothing’s	 for
ever,	sister.’
‘Did	we	really	lack	sophistication,	Yedan?	Back	then?	Were	we	really	that	superstitious,	that	ignorant?’
His	brows	lifted.
She	 gestured	 at	 the	 seething	 realm	 behind	 her.	 ‘This	 is	 the	 true	 border	 of	 Thyrllan.	 It’s	 that	 and	 nothing
more.	 The	 First	 Shore	 is	 the	 shore	 between	 Darkness	 and	 Light.	 We	 thought	 we	 were	 born	 on	 this	 shore—
right	 here—but	that	 cannot	 be	true!	 This	 shore	 destroys—can	 you	 not	 feel	 it?	 Where	 do	 you	 think	 all	 these
bones	came	from?’
‘This	was	a	gift	to	no	one,’	Yedan	replied.	‘Look	into	the	water,	sister.	Look	deep	into	it.’
But	she	would	not.	She	had	already	seen	what	he	had	seen.	‘They	cannot	be	drowning—no	matter	what	it
looks	like—’
‘You	are	wrong.	Tell	me,	why	are	there	so	few	Liosan?	Why	is	the	power	that	is	Light	so	weak	in	all	the
other	worlds?’
‘If	it	wasn’t	we	would	all	die—there’d	be	no	life	anywhere	at	all!’
He	 shrugged.	 ‘I	 have	 no	 answer	 to	 that,	 sister.	 But	 I	 think	 that	 Mother	 Dark	 and	 Father	 Light,	 in	 binding
themselves	to	each	other,	in	turn	bound	their	fates.	And	when	she	turned	away,	so	did	he.	He	had	no	choice—
they	had	become	forces	intertwined,	perfect	reflections.	Father	Light	abandoned	his	children	and	they	became
a	people	lost—and	lost	they	remain.’
She	was	trembling.	Yedan’s	vision	was	monstrous.	‘It	cannot	be.	The	Tiste	Andii	weren’t	trapped.	They	got
away.’
‘They	found	a	way	out,	yes.’
‘How?’
He	cocked	his	head.	‘Us,	of	course.’
‘What	are	you	saying?’
“In	Twilight	was	born	Shadow.”
‘I	was	told	none	of	this!	I	don’t	believe	you!	What	you’re	saying	makes	no	sense,	Yedan.	Shadow	was	the
bastard	get	of	Dark	and	Light—commanded	by	neither—’
‘Twilight,	Shadow	is	everything	we	have	ever	known.	Indeed,	it	is	everywhere.’
‘But	it	was	destroyed!’
‘Shattered,	yes.	Look	at	the	beach.	Those	bones—they	belong	to	the	Shake.	We	were	assailed	from	both
sides—we	didn’t	stand	a	chance—that	any	of	us	survived	at	all	is	a	miracle.	Shadow	was	first	shattered	by	the
legions	of	Andii	and	the	legions	of	Liosan.	Purity	cannot	abide	imperfection.	In	the	eyes	of	purity,	it	becomes
an	abomination.’
She	 was	 shaking	 her	 head.	 ‘Shadow	 was	 the	 realm	 of	 the	 Edur—it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 us,	 with	 the
Shake.’
Yedan	 smiled—she	 could	 not	 even	 recall	 the	 last	 time	 he	 had	 done	 that	 and	 the	 sight	 of	 it	 jolted	 her.	 He
nodded.	‘Our	very	own	bastard	get.’
She	sank	down	to	her	knees	in	the	bed	of	crumbled	bone.	She	could	hear	the	sea	now,	could	hear	the	waves
rolling	down—and	beneath	all	of	that	she	could	hear	the	deluged	voices	of	the	doomed	behind	the	surface.	He
turned	away	when	she	did.	But	his	children	had	no	way	out.	We	held	against	them,	here.	We	stood	and
we	died	defending	our	realm.	‘Our	blood	was	royal,’	she	whispered.
Her	brother	was	beside	her	now,	and	one	hand	rested	on	her	shoulder.	‘Scar	Bandaris,	the	last	prince	of	the
Edur.	King,	I	suppose,	by	then.	He	saw	in	us	the	sins	not	of	the	father,	but	of	the	mother.	He	left	us	and	took
all	the	Edur	with	him.	He	told	us	to	hold,	to	ensure	his	escape.	He	said	it	was	all	we	deserved,	for	we	were	our
mother’s	children,	and	was	she	not	the	seducer	and	the	father	the	seduced?’	He	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and
then	he	grunted	and	said,	‘I	wonder	if	the	last	of	us	left	set	out	on	his	trail	with	vengeance	in	mind,	or	was	it


because	 we	 had	 nowhere	 else	 to	 go?	 By	 then,	 after	 all,	 Shadow	 had	 become	 the	 battlefield	 of	 every	 Elder
force,	not	just	the	Tiste—it	was	being	torn	apart,	with	blood-soaked	forces	dividing	every	spoil,	every	territory
—what	 were	 they	 called	 again?	 Yes,	 warrens.	 Every	 world	 was	 made	 an	 island,	 isolated	 in	 an	 ocean	 of
chaos.’
Her	 eyes	 felt	 raw,	 but	 not	 a	 single	 tear	 sprang	 loose.	 ‘We	 could	 not	 have	 survived	 that,’	 she	 said.	 ‘That
assault	you	described.	You	called	it	a	miracle	that	we	survived,	but	I	know	how—though	I	never	understood	its
meaning—not	until	your	words	today.’
Yedan	said,	‘The	Watch	commanded	the	legions,	and	we	held	until	we	were	told	to	withdraw.	It’s	said	there
were	 but	 a	 handful	 of	 us	 left	 by	 then,	 elite	 officers	 one	 and	 all.	 They	 were	 the	 Watch.	 The	 Road	 was	 open
then—we	but	marched.’
‘It	was	open	because	of	Blind	Gallan.’
‘Yes.’
‘Because,’	she	looked	up	at	him,	‘he	was	told	to	save	us.’
‘Gallan	was	a	poet—’
‘And	Seneschal	of	the	Court	of	Mages	in	Kharkanas.’
He	chewed	on	this	for	a	while,	glanced	away,	studying	the	swirling	wall	of	light	and	the	ceaseless	sweep	of
figures	in	the	depths,	faces	stretched	in	muted	screams—an	entire	civilization	trapped	in	eternal	torment—but
she	saw	not	a	flicker	of	emotion	touch	his	face.	‘A	great	power,	then.’
‘Yes.’
‘There	was	civil	war.	Who	could	have	commanded	him	to	do	anything?’
‘One	possessing	the	Blood	of	T’iam,	and	a	prince	of	Kharkanas.’
She	 watched	 his	 eyes	 slowly	 widen,	 but	 still	 he	 stared	 at	 the	 wall.	 ‘Now	 why,’	 he	 asked,	 ‘would	 an	 Andii
prince	have	done	that?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘It’s	said	he	strode	down	to	the	First	Shore,	terribly	wounded,	sheathed	in	blood.	It’s
said	he	looked	upon	the	Shake,	at	how	few	of	us	were	left,	and	at	the	ruin	surrounding	us—the	death	of	the
forests,	the	charred	wreckage	of	our	homes.	He	held	a	broken	sword	in	one	hand,	a	Hust	sword,	and	it	was
seen	to	fall	from	his	grip.	He	left	it	here.’
‘That’s	all?	Then	how	do	you	know	he	commanded	Gallan	to	do	anything?’
‘When	 Gallan	 arrived	 he	 told	 the	 Twilight—he	 had	 torn	 out	 his	 eyes	 by	 then	 and	 was	 accompanied	 by	 an
Andii	 woman	 who	 led	 him	 by	 an	 arm	 down	 from	 the	 shattered	 forest—he	 came	 down	 like	 a	 man	 dying	 of
fever	but	when	he	spoke,	his	voice	was	clear	and	pure	as	music.	He	said	to	her	these	words:
“There	is	no	grief	in	Darkness.
It	has	taken	to	the	skies.
It	leaves	a	world	of	ashes	and	failure.
It	sets	out	to	find	new	worlds,	as	grief	must.
Winged	grief	commands	me:
Make	a	road	for	the	survivors	on	the	Shore
To	walk	the	paths	of	sorrow
And	charge	them	the	remembrance
Of	this	broken	day
As	it	shall	one	day	be	seen:
As	the	birth	of	worlds	unending
Where	grief	waits	for	us	all
In	the	soul’s	darkness.”	’
She	slipped	out	from	the	weight	of	his	hand	and	straightened,	brushing	bone	dust	from	her	knees.	‘He	was
asked,	 then,	 who	 was	 this	 Winged	 Grief?	 And	 Gallan	 said,	 “There	 is	 but	 one	 left	 who	 would	 dare	 command
me.	One	who	would	not	weep	and	yet	had	taken	into	his	soul	a	people’s	sorrow,	a	realm’s	sorrow.	His	name
was	Silchas	Ruin.”	’
Yedan	scanned	the	beach.	‘What	happened	to	the	broken	sword?’
She	started,	recovered.	Why,	after	all	this	time,	could	her	brother	still	surprise	her?	‘The	woman	with	Gallan
picked	it	up	and	threw	it	into	the	sea.’


His	head	snapped	round.	‘Why	would	she	do	that?’
Yan	Tovis	held	up	her	hands.	‘She	never	explained.’
Yedan	faced	the	refulgent	wall	again,	as	if	seeking	to	pierce	its	depths,	as	if	looking	for	the	damned	sword.
‘It	was	just	a	broken	sword—’
‘A	Hust	sword—you	said	so.’
‘I	don’t	even	know	what	that	means,	except	it’s	the	name	for	Ruin’s	weapon.’
He	grimaced.	‘It	should	have	healed	by	now,’	he	muttered,	walking	out	on	to	the	strand,	eyes	scanning	the
pallid	beach.	‘Light	would	reject	it,	cast	it	up.’
She	stared	after	him.	Healed?	‘Yedan!’
He	glanced	back.	‘What?’
‘We	cannot	live	here.’
‘No,	of	course	not.’
‘But	something	is	happening	in	Kharkanas—I	don’t	know	if	I	can	even	go	back	there.’
‘Once	she’s	fully	returned,’	Yedan	said,	swinging	back,	‘the	power	should	ease.’
‘She?	Who?’
‘Don’t	 be	 obtuse,	 sister.	 Mother	 Dark.	 Who	 else	 arrives	 like	 a	 fist	 in	 our	 skulls?’	 He	 resumed	 his	 search
along	the	First	Shore.
	
‘Errastas,’	she	whispered,	‘whatever	will	you	do	now?’
Torrent	scowled	at	the	hag.	‘Aren’t	you	even	listening?’
Olar	Ethil	straightened,	gathering	up	her	rotted	cape	of	furs	and	scaled	hide.	‘Such	a	lovely	carpet,	such	a
riot	of	richness,	all	those	supine	colours!’
The	 withered	 nut	 of	 this	 witch’s	 brain	 has	 finally	 cracked.	 ‘I	 said	 these	 carriage	 tracks	 are	 fresh,
probably	not	even	a	day	old.’
Olar	Ethil	had	one	hand	raised,	as	if	about	to	wave	at	someone	on	the	horizon.	Instead,	one	taloned	finger
began	inscribing	patterns	in	the	air.	‘Go	round,	my	friends,	slow	your	steps.	Wait	for	the	one	to	pass,	through
and	out	and	onward.	No	point	in	clashing	wills,	when	none	of	it	has	purpose.	Such	a	busy	plain!	No	matter,	if
anyone	has	cause	to	quake	it’s	not	me,	hah!’
‘An	enormous	carriage,’	Torrent	resumed,	‘burdened.	But	while	that’s	interesting,	it’s	the	fact	that	the	tracks
simply	begin—as	if	from	nowhere—and	look	at	the	way	the	ground	cracked	at	the	start,	as	if	the	damned	thing
had	landed	from	the	sky,	horses	and	all.	Doesn’t	any	of	that	make	you	curious?’
‘Eh?	Oh,	soon	enough,	soon	enough.’	She	dropped	her	arm	and	then	pointed	the	same	finger	at	him.	‘The
first	 temple’s	 a	 mess.	 Besieged	 a	 decade	 ago,	 just	 a	 burnt-out	 husk,	 now.	 No	 one	 was	 spared.	 The	 Matron
took	weeks	to	die—it’s	no	easy	thing,	killing	them,	you	know.	We	have	to	move	on,	find	another.’
Snarling,	 Torrent	 mounted	 his	 horse	 and	 collected	 the	 reins.	 ‘Any	 good	 at	 running,	 witch?	 Too	 bad.’	 He
kicked	his	horse	into	motion,	setting	out	on	the	carriage’s	weaving	trail.	Let	the	thing’s	bones	clatter	into	dust	in
his	wake—the	best	solution	to	all	his	ills.	Or	she	could	just	stand	there	and	stare	at	every	horizon	one	by	one
and	babble	and	rant	all	she	wanted—as	if	the	sky	ever	answered.
A	carriage.	People.	Living	people.	That’s	what	he	needed	now.	The	return	of	sanity—hold	on,	it	dropped
out	of	the	sky,	don’t	forget.	What’s	so	normal	about	that?
‘Never	mind,’	he	muttered,	‘at	least	they’re	alive.’
	
Sandalath	made	it	to	the	bridge	before	collapsing.	Cursing,	Withal	knelt	at	her	side	and	lifted	her	head	until	it
rested	on	his	lap.	Blood	was	streaming	from	her	nose,	ears	and	the	corners	of	her	eyes.	Her	lips	glistened	as	if
painted.
The	 three	 Nachts—or	 whatever	 they	 were	 called	 in	 this	 realm—had	 vanished,	 fled,	 he	 assumed,	 from
whatever	 was	 assailing	 his	 wife.	 As	 for	 himself,	 he	 felt	 nothing.	 This	 world	 was	 desolate,	 lifeless,	 probably
leagues	 from	 any	 decent	 body	 of	 water—but	 oh	 how	 he	 wished	 he	 could	 take	 her	 and	 just	 sail	 out	 of	 this
madness.
Instead,	it	looked	as	though	his	wife	was	dying.
Crimson	froth	bubbled	from	her	mouth	as	she	began	mumbling	something—he	leaned	closer—words,	yes,	a


conversation.	Withal	leaned	back,	snorting.	When	she’d	thought	him	asleep,	she’d	said	the	same	lines	over	and
over	again.	As	if	they	were	a	prayer,	or	the	beginning	of	one.
‘What’s	broken	cannot	be	mended.	You	broke	us,	but	that	is	not	all—see	what	you	have	done.’
There	was	the	touch	of	a	lament	in	her	tone,	but	one	so	emptied	of	sentiment	it	cut	like	a	dagger.	A	lament,
yes,	 but	 infused	 with	 chill	 hatred,	 a	 knuckled	 core	 of	 ice.	 Complicated,	 aye,	 layered—unless	 he	 was	 just
imagining	things.	The	truth	could	be	as	silly	as	a	childhood	song	sung	to	a	broken	doll,	its	head	lolling	impossibly
with	those	stupid	eyes	underneath	the	nose	and	the	mouth	looking	like	a	wound	to	the	forehead—
Withal	shook	himself.	The	oldest	memories	might	be	smells,	tastes,	or	isolated	images—but	rarely	all	three	at
once—at	least	in	so	far	as	he	knew	from	his	own	experience.	Crammed	into	his	skull,	a	crowded	mess	with
everything	at	the	back	so	tightly	pressed	all	the	furniture	was	crushed,	and	to	reach	in	was	to	come	up	with	a
few	pieces	that	made	no	sense	at	all—
Gods,	he	was	tired.	And	here	she	was,	dragging	him	all	this	way,	only	to	die	in	his	lap	and	abandon	him	at
the	gates	of	a	dead	city.
‘.	.	.	see	what	you	have	done.’
Her	breathing	had	deepened.	The	blood	had	stopped	trickling	down—he	wiped	her	mouth	with	a	grimy	cuff.
She	suddenly	sighed.	He	leaned	closer.	‘Sand?	Can	you	hear	me?’
‘Nice	pillow	.	.	.	but	for	the	smell.’
‘You’re	not	going	to	die?’
‘It’s	over	now,’	she	said,	opening	her	eyes—but	only	for	a	moment	as	she	gasped	and	shut	them	again.	‘Ow,
that	hurts.’
‘I	can	get	some	water—from	the	river	here—’
‘Yes,	do	that.’
He	shifted	her	from	his	lap	and	settled	her	down	on	the	road.	‘Glad	it’s	over,	Sand.	Oh,	by	the	way,	what’s
over?’
She	sighed.	‘Mother	Dark,	she	has	returned	to	Kharkanas.’
‘Oh,	that’s	nice.’
As	 he	 made	 his	 way	 down	 the	 wreckage-cluttered	 bank,	 waterskins	 flopping	 over	 one	 shoulder,	 Withal
allowed	himself	a	savage	grimace.	‘Oh,	hello,	Mother	Dark,	glad	you	showed	up.	You	and	all	the	rest	of	you
gods	and	goddesses.	Come	back	to	fuck	with	a	thousand	million	lives	all	over	again,	huh?	Now,	I	got	an	idea
for	you	all,	aye,	I	do.
‘Get	lost.	It’s	better,	you	see,	when	we	ain’t	got	you	to	blame	for	our	mess.	Understand	me,	Mother	Dark?’
He	crouched	at	the	edge	of	black	water	and	pushed	the	first	skin	beneath	the	surface,	listening	to	the	gurgle.
‘And	as	for	my	wife,	hasn’t	she	suffered	enough?’
A	voice	filled	his	head.	‘Yes.’
The	river	swept	past,	the	bubbles	streamed	from	the	submerged	skin	until	no	bubbles	were	left.	Still,	Withal
held	it	down,	as	if	drowning	a	maimed	dog.	He	wasn’t	sure	he’d	ever	move	again.
	
The	 descent	 of	 darkness	 broke	 frozen	 bone	 and	 flesh	 across	 the	 width	 of	 the	 valley,	 spilling	 out	 beyond	 the
north	ridge,	devouring	the	last	flickering	flames	from	the	burning	heaps	that	had	once	been	Barghast	wagons.
The	vast	battlefield	glistened	and	sparkled	as	corpses	and	carcasses	shrivelled,	losing	their	last	remnants	of
moisture,	 and	 earth	 buckled,	 lurching	 upward	 in	 long	 wedges	 of	 stone-hard	 clay	 that	 jostled	 bodies.	 Iron
steamed	and	glowed	amongst	the	dead.
The	sky	above	was	devoid	of	all	light,	but	the	ashes	drifting	down	were	visible,	as	if	each	flake	was	lit	from
within.	 The	 pressure	 continued	 pushing	 everything	 closer	 to	 the	 ground,	 until	 horses	 and	 armoured	 men	 and
women	became	flattened,	rumpled	forms.	Weapons	suddenly	exploded,	white-hot	shards	hissing.
The	hillsides	groaned,	visibly	contracted	as	something	swirled	in	the	very	centre	of	the	valley,	a	darkness	so
profound	as	to	be	a	solid	thing.
A	hill	cracked	in	half	with	a	thunderous	detonation.	The	air	seemed	to	tear	open.
From	 the	 swirling	 miasma	 a	 figure	 emerged,	 first	 one	 boot	 then	 the	 other	 crunching	 down	 on	 desiccated
flesh,	hide	and	bone,	striding	out	from	the	rent,	footfalls	heavy	as	stone.
The	darkness	seethed,	pulsed.	The	figure	paused,	held	out	a	gauntleted	left	hand.
Lightning	 spanned	 the	 blackness,	 a	 thousand	 crashing	 drums.	 The	 air	 itself	 howled,	 and	 the	 darkness


streamed	down.	Withered	husks	that	had	once	been	living	things	spun	upright	as	if	reborn,	only	to	pull	free	of
the	ground	and	whirl	skyward	like	rotted	autumn	leaves.
Shrieking	wind,	torn	banners	of	darkness	spiralling	inward,	wrapping,	twisting,	binding.	Cold	air	rushed	in	like
floodwaters	through	a	crumbling	dam,	and	all	it	swept	through	burst	into	dust	that	roiled	wild	in	its	wake.
Hammering	 concussions	 shook	 the	 hills,	 sheared	 away	 slopes	 leaving	 raw	 cliffs,	 boulders	 tumbling	 and
pitching	through	the	remnants	of	carnage.	And	still	the	darkness	streamed	down,	converging,	coalescing	into	an
elongated	sliver	forming	at	the	end	of	the	figure’s	outstretched	hand.
A	final	report,	loud	as	the	snapping	of	a	dragon’s	spine,	and	then	sudden	silence.
A	sword,	bleeding	darkness,	dripping	cold.
Overhead,	late	afternoon	sunlight	burned	the	sky.
He	 slowly	 scanned	 the	 ground,	 even	 as	 desiccated	 fragments	 of	 hide	 and	 flesh	 began	 raining	 from	 the
heavens,	and	then	he	stepped	forward,	bending	down	to	retrieve	a	battered	scabbard.	He	slid	the	sword	home.
A	sultry	wind	swept	down	the	length	of	the	valley,	gathering	streamers	of	steam.
He	stood	for	a	time,	studying	the	scene	on	all	sides.
‘Ah,	my	love.	Forgive	me.’
He	set	out,	boots	crunching	on	the	dead.
Returned	to	the	world.
Draconus.


Book	Four

The	Path
Forever	Walked


	
	
	
	
When	your	penance	is	done
Come	find	me
When	all	the	judges	cloaked	in	stone
Have	faced	away
Seek	the	rill	beneath	the	bowers	and	strings
Of	fine	pearls
Down	in	the	fold	of	sacred	hills
Among	the	elms
Where	animals	and	birds	find	shelter
Come	find	me
I	am	nestled	in	grasses	never	trod
By	heartbroken
Knights	and	brothers	of	kings
Not	a	single	root	torn
In	the	bard’s	trembling	grief
Seek	out	what	is	freely	given
Come	find	me
In	the	wake	of	winter’s	dark	flight
And	take	what	you	will
Of	these	blossoms
My	colours	lie	in	wait	for	you
And	none	other
	
COME	FIND	M E
FISHER


Chapter	Nineteen
In	the	midst	of	fleeing
the	unseen	enemy
I	heard	the	hollow	horrors
of	the	wretched	caught
We	collected	our	gasps
to	make	ourselves	a	song
Let	the	last	steps	be	a	dance!
Before	the	spears	strike
and	the	swords	slash
We’ll	run	with	torches
and	write	the	night
with	glutted	indulgences
Our	precious	garlands
bold	laughter	to	drown
the	slaughter	in	the	stables
of	the	lame	and	poor
Entwine	hands	and	pitch	skyward!
None	will	hear	the	dread
groans	of	the	suffering
nor	brush	with	tips
glistening	sorrow’d	cheeks
on	stilled	faces	below
Let	us	flee	in	mad	joy—
the	unseen	enemy	draws	near
behind	and	ahead
and	none	will	muster
to	this	harbinger	call
for	as	long	as	we	are	able
to	run	these	perfect	circles
confound	the	fates
all	you	clever	killers!
I	am	with	you!
	
UNSEEN	ENEMY
EFLIT 	TARN

Moving	like	one	bludgeoned,	Kilmandaros	slowly,	by	degrees,	picked	herself	up	from	the	ground.	She	leaned	to
one	 side	 and	 spat	 red	 phlegm,	 and	 then	 glanced	 over	 to	 see	 Errastas	 lying	 curled	 on	 the	 dead	 grasses,
motionless	 as	 a	 stillborn	 calf.	 Off	 to	 one	 side	 stood	 Sechul	 Lath,	 arms	 wrapped	 tightly	 about	 his	 torso,	 face
bleached	of	all	warmth.
She	spat	again.	‘It’s	him.’
‘A	 summoning	 beyond	 all	 expectation,’	 Sechul	 said.	 ‘Odd,	 Errastas	 looks	 less	 than	 pleased	 at	 his	 own
efficacy.’
Kilmandaros	 levered	 herself	 upright,	 stood	 unsteadily.	 ‘He	 could	 be	 subtle	 when	 he	 wanted,’	 she	 said,	 in
some	irritation.	‘Instead,	he	made	sure	to	let	us	know.’


‘Not	just	us,’	Sechul	replied.	‘Nothing	so	crass,’	he	added,	‘as	careless.’
‘Is	it	anger,	do	you	think?’
He	 rubbed	 at	 his	 face	 with	 both	 hands.	 ‘The	 last	 time	 Draconus	 was	 wakened	 to	 anger,	 Mother,	 nothing
survived	intact.	Nothing.’	He	hesitated,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘Not	anger,	not	yet,	anyway.	He	just	wanted
everyone	to	know.	He	wanted	to	send	us	all	spinning.’
Kilmandaros	grunted.	‘Rude	bastard.’
They	stood	at	the	end	of	a	long	row	of	standing	stones	that	had	taken	them	round	a	broad,	sweeping	cursus.
The	avenue	opened	out	in	front	of	them,	with	scores	of	lesser	stones	spiralling	the	path	inward	to	a	flat-topped
altar,	 its	 surface	 stained	 black.	 Little	 of	 this	 remained	 in	 the	 real	 world,	 of	 course.	 A	 few	 toppled	 menhirs,
rumpled	 tussocks	 and	 ruts	 made	 by	 wandering	 bhederin.	 Errastas	 had	 drawn	 them	 ever	 closer	 to	 a	 place
where	time	itself	dissolved	into	confusion.	Assailed	by	chaos,	straining	beneath	the	threats	of	oblivion,	even	the
ground	underfoot	felt	porous,	at	risk	of	crumbling	under	their	weight.
The	builders	of	this	holy	shrine	were	long	gone.	Resonance	remained,	however,	tingling	her	skin,	but	it	was
an	 itch	 she	 could	 not	 scratch	 away.	 The	 sensation	 further	 fouled	 her	 mood.	 Glaring	 down	 at	 Errastas,	 she
asked,	‘Will	he	recover?	Or	will	we	have	to	drag	him	behind	us	by	one	foot.’
‘A	satisfying	image,’	Sechul	conceded,	‘but	he’s	already	coming	round.	After	the	shock,	the	mind	races.’	He
walked	 up	 to	 where	 the	 Errant	 lay.	 ‘Enough,	 Errastas.	 On	 your	 feet.	 We	 have	 a	 task	 to	 complete	 and	 now
more	than	ever,	it	needs	doing.’
‘She	took	an	eye,’	rasped	the	figure	lying	on	the	grasses.	‘With	it,	I	would	have	seen—’
‘Only	what	you	wanted	to	see,’	Sechul	finished.	‘Never	mind	that,	now.	There	is	no	going	back.	We	won’t
know	what	Draconus	intends	until	he	shows	us—or,	Abyss	forbid,	he	finds	us.’	He	shrugged.	‘He’s	thrown	his
gauntlet	down—’
Errastas	snorted.	‘Gauntlet?	That,	Setch,	was	his	fist.’
‘So	punch	back,’	Sechul	snapped.
Kilmandaros	laughed.	‘I’ve	taught	him	well,	haven’t	I?’
The	Errant	uncurled,	and	then	sat	up.	He	stared	bleakly	at	the	altar	stone.	‘We	cannot	just	ignore	him.	Or
what	his	arrival	tells	us.	He	is	freed.	The	sword	Dragnipur	is	shattered—there	was	no	other	way	out.	If	the
sword	is	shattered,	then—’
‘Rake	is	dead,’	said	Kilmandaros.
Silence	 for	 a	 time.	 She	 could	 see	 in	 the	 faces	 of	 the	 two	 men	 sweeping	 cascades	 of	 emotion	 as	 they
contemplated	 the	 raw	 fact	 of	 Anomander	 Rake’s	 death.	 Disbelief,	 denial,	 wonder,	 satisfaction	 and	 pleasure.
And	then	.	.	.	fear.	‘Yes,’	she	said.	‘Great	changes,	terrible	changes.’
‘But,’	 Errastas	 looked	 up	 at	 her,	 ‘how	 was	 it	 possible?	 Who	 could	 have	 done	 such	 a	 thing?	 Has	 Osserc
returned—no,	we	would	have	sensed	that.’	He	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Something	has	gone	wrong.	I	can	feel	it.’
Sechul	faced	him.	‘Master	of	the	Holds,	show	us	your	mastery.	You	need	to	look	to	your	own	hands,	and
the	power	within	them.’
‘Listen	to	my	son,’	said	Kilmandaros.	‘Seek	the	truth	in	the	Holds,	Errastas.	We	must	know	where	things
stand.	Who	struck	him	down?	Why?	And	how	did	the	sword	break?’
‘There	is	irony	in	this,’	Sechul	said	with	a	wry	smile.	‘The	removal	of	Anomander	Rake	is	like	kicking	down
a	gate—in	an	instant	the	path	beyond	runs	straight	and	clear.	Only	to	have	Draconus	step	into	the	breach.	As
deadly	 as	 Rake	 ever	 was,	 but	 a	 whole	 lot	 crueller,	 that	 much	 closer	 to	 chaos.	 His	 appearance	 is,	 I	 think,	 a
harbinger	 of	 the	 madness	 to	 come.	 Squint	 that	 lone	 eye,	 Errastas,	 and	 tell	 me	 you	 see	 other	 than	 ruination
ahead.’
But	 the	 Errant	 was	 shaking	 his	 head.	 ‘I	 can	 tell	 you	 now	 who	 broke	 Dragnipur.	 There	 could	 be	 no	 other.
The	Warlord.’
Breath	hissed	from	Kilmandaros.	‘Brood.	Yes,	I	see	that.	The	weapon	he	holds—none	other.	But	that	only
confuses	 things	 all	 the	 more.	 Rake	 would	 not	 have	 willingly	 surrendered	 that	 weapon,	 not	 even	 to	 Caladan
Brood.’	 She	 eyed	 the	 others.	 ‘We	 are	 agreed	 that	 the	 Son	 of	 Darkness	 is	 dead?	 Yet	 his	 slayer	 did	 not	 take
Dragnipur.	Can	it	be	that	the	Warlord	killed	him?’
Sechul	Lath	snorted.	‘Centuries	of	speculation—who	was	the	deadlier	of	the	two?	Have	we	our	answer?
This	 is	 absurd—can	 any	 of	 us	 even	 imagine	 a	 cause	 that	 would	 so	 divide	 those	 two?	 With	 the	 history	 they
shared?’


‘Perhaps	the	cause	was	Dragnipur	itself—’
Kilmandaros	 grunted.	 ‘Think	 clearly,	 Errastas.	 Brood	 had	 to	 know	 that	 shattering	 the	 sword	 would	 free
Draconus,	 and	 a	 thousand	 other	 ascendants—’	 her	 hands	 closed	 into	 fists—‘and	 Eleint.	 He	 would	 not	 have
done	 it	 if	 he’d	 had	 a	 choice.	 Nothing	 could	 have	 so	 fractured	 that	 ancient	 alliance,	 for	 it	 was	 more	 than	 an
alliance.	It	was	friendship.’	She	sighed	heavily	and	looked	away.	‘We	clashed,	yes,	but	even	me—no,	I	would
not	have	murdered	Anomander	Rake	if	the	possibility	was	presented	to	me.	I	would	not.	His	existence	.	.	.	had
purpose.	 He	 was	 one	 you	 could	 rely	 upon,	 when	 justice	 needed	 a	 blade’s	 certain	 edge.’	 She	 passed	 a	 hand
over	her	eyes.	‘The	world	has	lost	some	of	its	colour,	I	think.’
‘Wrong,’	said	Sechul.	‘Draconus	has	returned.	But	listen	to	us.	We	swirl	round	and	round	this	dread	pit	of
truth.	Errastas,	will	you	stand	there	frozen	as	a	hare?	Think	you	not	the	Master	of	the	Deck	is	bleeding	from
the	ears	right	now?	Strike	quickly,	friend—he	will	be	in	no	condition	to	intercept	you.	Indeed,	make	him	fear
we	planned	this—all	of	it—make	him	believe	we	have	fashioned	the	Consort’s	escape	from	Dragnipur.’
Kilmandaros’s	eyes	were	wide	on	her	son.
Errastas	slowly	nodded.	‘A	detour,	of	sorts.	Fortunately,	a	modest	one.	Attend	me.’
‘I	shall	remain	here,’	announced	Kilmandaros.	 At	the	surprise	and	suspicion	she	 saw	in	the	Errant’s	face,
she	 raised	 her	 fists.	 ‘There	 was	 the	 danger—so	 close	 to	 the	 Eleint—that	 I	 lose	 control.	 Surely,’	 she	 added,
‘you	did	not	intend	me	to	join	you	when	you	walked	through	that	last	gate.	No,	leave	me	here.	Return	when	it’s
done.’
Errastas	looked	round	at	the	shrine’s	standing	stones.	‘I	would	not	think	this	place	suited	you,	Kilmandaros.’
‘The	fabric	is	thin.	My	presence	weakens	it	more—this	pleases	me.’
‘Why	such	hatred	for	humans,	Kilmandaros?’
Her	brows	rose.	‘Errastas,	really.	Who	among	all	the	races	is	quickest	to	claim	the	right	to	judgement?	Over
everyone	 and	 everything?	 Who	 holds	 that	 such	 right	 belongs	 to	 them	 and	 them	 alone?	 A	 woodcutter	 walks
deep	into	the	forest,	where	he	is	attacked	and	eaten	by	a	striped	cat—what	do	his	fellows	say?	They	say:	“The
cat	is	evil	and	must	be	punished.	The	cat	must	answer	for	its	crime,	and	it	and	all	its	kind	must	answer	to	our
hate.”	Before	too	long,	there	are	no	cats	left	in	that	forest.	And	humans	consider	that	just.	Righteous.	Could	I,
Errastas,	I	would	gather	all	the	humans	of	the	world,	and	I	would	gift	them	with	my	justice—and	that	justice	is
here,	in	these	two	fists.’
Errastas	reached	up	to	probe	his	eye	socket,	and	he	managed	a	faint	smile.	‘Well	answered,	Kilmandaros.’
He	turned	to	Sechul	Lath.	‘Arm	yourself,	friend.	The	Holds	have	grown	feral.’
‘Which	one	will	you	seek	first?’
‘The	one	under	a	Jaghut	stone,	of	course.’
She	watched	as	blurry	darkness	swallowed	them.	With	the	Errant’s	departure,	the	ephemeral	fragility	of	the
ancient	 shrine	 slowly	 dissolved,	 revealing	 the	 stolid	 ruins	 of	 its	 abandonment.	 A	 slew	 of	 toppled,	 shattered
stones,	 pecked	 facings	 hacked	 and	 chipped—the	 images	 obliterated.	 She	 walked	 closer	 to	 the	 altar	 stone.	 It
had	been	deliberately	chiselled,	cut	in	two.	Harsh	breaths	and	sweat-slick	muscles,	a	serious	determination	to
despoil	this	place.
She	 knew	 all	 about	 desecration.	 It	 was	 her	 hobby,	 after	 all,	 an	 obsessive	 lure	 that	 tugged	 her	 again	 and
again,	with	all	the	senseless	power	of	a	lodestone.
A	 few	 thousand	 years	 ago,	 people	 had	 gathered	 to	 build	 their	 shrine.	 Someone	 had	 achieved	 the	 glorious
rank	 of	 tyrant,	 able	 to	 threaten	 life	 and	 soul,	 and	 so	 was	 able	 to	 compel	 hundreds	 to	 his	 or	 her	 bidding.	 To
quarry	 enormous	 stones,	 drag	 them	 to	 this	 place,	 tilt	 them	 upright	 like	 so	 many	 damned	 penises.	 And	 who
among	those	followers	truly	believed	that	tyrant’s	calling?	Voice	of	the	gods	in	the	sky,	the	groaning	bitches	in
the	 earth,	 the	 horses	 of	 the	 heavens	 racing	 the	 seasons,	 the	 mythologies	 of	 identity—all	 those	 conceits,	 all
those	 delusions.	 People	 of	 ancient	 times	 were	 no	 more	 fools	 than	 those	 of	 the	 present,	 and	 ignorance	 was
never	a	comfortable	state	of	being.
So	 they	 had	 built	 this	 temple,	 work-gangs	 of	 clear-eyed	 cynics	 sacrificing	 their	 labour	 to	 the	 glory	 of	 the
gods	but	it	wasn’t	gods	basking	in	that	glory—it	was	the	damned	tyrant,	who	needed	to	show	off	his	power	to
coerce,	who	sought	to	symbolize	his	power	for	all	eternity.
Kilmandaros	could	comprehend	the	collective	rage	that	had	destroyed	this	place.	Every	tyrant	reaches	the
same	 cliff-edge,	 aged	 into	 infirmity,	 or	 eyeing	 the	 strutting	 of	 heirs	 and	 recognizing	 the	 hungry	 looks	 in	 their
regard.	That	edge	was	death,	and	with	it	all	glory	fell	to	dust.	Even	stone	cannot	withstand	the	fury	of	mortals


when	fuelled	by	abnegation.
Nature	was	indifferent	to	temples,	to	sacred	sites.	It	did	not	withhold	its	gnawing	winds	and	dissolute	rains.
It	devoured	such	places	with	the	same	remorseless	will	that	annihilated	palaces	and	city	walls,	squalid	huts	and
vast	aqueducts.	But	carve	a	face	into	stone	and	someone	is	bound	to	destroy	it	long	before	nature	works	its
measured	erosion.
She	understood	that	compulsion,	the	bitter	necessity	of	refuting	monumental	achievements,	whether	they	be
dressed	in	stone	or	in	the	raiment	of	poetry.	Power	possessed	a	thousand	faces	and	one	would	be	hard	pressed
to	find	a	beautiful	one	among	them.	No,	they	were	ugly	one	and	all,	and	if	they	managed	to	create	something
wondrous,	then	the	memory	of	its	maker	must	be	made	to	suffer	all	the	more	for	it.
‘For	every	soul	sweeping	away	the	dust,’	said	a	voice	behind	her,	‘there	are	a	thousand	scattering	it	by	the
handful.’
Kilmandaros	did	not	turn	round,	but	bared	her	teeth	nonetheless.	‘I	was	growing	impatient.’
‘It’s	 not	 rained	 here	 for	 some	 time.	 Only	 the	 roots	 of	 the	 stones	 still	 hold	 moisture.	 I	 have	 followed	 your
journey	 in	 the	 morning	 mists,	 in	 the	 damp	 breaths	 of	 the	 beasts.’	 After	 a	 moment,	 Mael	 moved	 up	 to	 stand
beside	her,	his	eyes	settling	on	the	desecrated	altar	stone.	‘Not	your	handiwork,	I	see.	Feeling	cheated?’
‘I	despise	conceit,’	she	said.
‘And	so	every	mortal	creation	is	to	be	crushed	by	your	fists.	Yes,	the	presumption	of	all	those	fools.’
‘Do	you	know	where	they	have	gone,	Mael?’
He	sighed.	‘The	Holds	are	not	as	they	once	were.	Have	you	considered,	they	may	not	return?’
‘Errastas	is	their	Master—’
‘Was,	actually.	The	Holds	have	not	had	a	master	for	tens	of	thousands	of	years,	Kilmandaros.	Do	you	know,
you	 forced	 the	 Errant’s	 retreat	 from	 the	 Holds.	 He	 feared	 you	 were	 coming	 for	 him,	 to	 destroy	 him	 and	 his
precious	creations.’
‘He	was	right.	I	was.’
‘See	how	things	have	turned	out.	His	summoning	compelled	none	of	us—you	must	realize	that.’
‘That	is	no	matter—’
‘Because	deceiving	him	continues	to	serve	your	purposes.	And	now	Knuckles	walks	at	his	side.	Or,	more
accurately,	a	step	behind.	When	will	the	knife	strike?’
‘My	son	understands	the	art	of	subtlety.’
‘It’s	 not	 an	 art,	 Kilmandaros,	 it’s	 just	 one	 among	 many	 tactics	 to	 get	 what	 you	 want.	 The	 best	 subtlety	 is
when	no	one	even	notices	what	you’ve	done,	ever.	Can	Sechul	Lath	achieve	that?’
‘Can	you?’	she	retorted.
Mael	smiled.	‘I	know	of	only	a	few	capable	of	such	a	thing.	One	is	mortal	and	my	closest	friend.	The	other
wasn’t	mortal,	but	is	now	dead.	And	then,	of	course,	there	is	Draconus.’
She	fixed	a	glare	upon	him.	‘Him?	You	must	be	mad!’
Mael	shrugged.	‘Try	this	for	a	consideration.	Draconus	needed	to	get	something	done.	And,	it	now	seems,
he	 achieved	 it.	 Without	 lifting	 a	 hand.	 Without	 anyone	 even	 noticing	 his	 involvement.	 Only	 one	 man	 ever
defeated	him.	Only	one	man	could	possess	Dragnipur	but	never	kneel	before	it.	Only	one	man	could	oversee
the	weapon’s	destruction—no	matter	the	cost.	Only	one	man	could	force	an	end	to	Mother	Dark’s	denial.	And
only	one	man	could	stand	in	the	face	of	chaos	and	not	blink.’
Breath	gusted	from	her	in	a	growl.	‘And	now	that	man	is	dead.’
‘And	Draconus	walks	free.	Draconus	has	broken	Kallor’s	curse	on	him.	He	holds	Darkness	in	a	blade	of
annihilation.	No	longer	chained,	no	longer	on	the	run,	no	longer	haunted	by	the	terrible	error	in	judgement	that
was	Dragnipur.’
‘All	this	by	his	hand?	I	do	not	believe	it,	Mael.’
‘But	 that	 is	 precisely	 my	 point,	 Kilmandaros.	 About	 true	 subtlety.	 Will	 we	 ever	 know	 if	 what	 I	 have	 just
described	was	all	by	the	Consort’s	hand?	No.’
‘Unless	he	admits	it.’
‘But	who	wouldn’t?’
‘I	hate	your	words,	Mael.	They	gnaw	like	the	waves	you	love	so	much.’
‘We	are	all	vulnerable,	Kilmandaros.	Don’t	think	Draconus	is	about	to	build	a	little	farm	in	some	mountain
valley	and	spend	the	rest	of	his	days	whittling	whistles	while	birds	nest	in	his	hair.	He	knows	we’re	here.	He


knows	we’re	up	to	something.	Either	he’s	already	figured	it	out,	in	which	case	he	will	come	to	find	us,	or	he	is
even	now	setting	out	to	pull	loose	all	our	secret	ambitions.’
‘Who	killed	Anomander	Rake?’
‘Dessembrae,	wielding	a	sword	forged	by	Rake’s	own	hand.’
She	was	rocked	by	that.	Her	mind	raced.	‘Vengeance?’
‘None	other.’
‘That	weapon	always	terrified	me,’	she	said.	‘I	could	never	understand	why	he	set	it	aside.’
‘Really?	 The	 hand	 that	 holds	 it	 must	 be	 pure	 in	 its	 desire.	 Kilmandaros,	 Rake	 yielded	 it	 to	 his	 brother
because	his	heart	was	already	broken,	while	Andarist	.	.	.	well,	we	know	that	tale.’
As	 the	 significance	 of	 Mael’s	 words	 struck	 home,	 Kilmandaros	 found	 she	 was	 trembling.	 ‘Andarist,’	 she
whispered.	‘That	.	.	.	that	.	.	.’	but	she	had	no	words	to	describe	her	feeling.	Instead,	her	hands	rose	to	her
face	again.	‘He	is	gone,’	she	said,	voice	catching	in	a	sob.	‘Anomander	Rake	is	gone!’
Mael	spoke,	his	tone	suddenly	harsh.	‘Leave	Dessembrae	alone.	He	was	as	much	a	victim	as	anyone	else
involved.	Worse,	he	has	been	cheated,	and	used,	and	now	his	suffering	is	immeasurable.’
She	shook	her	head,	the	muscles	of	her	jaws	creaking.	‘I	was	not	thinking	of	Dessembrae.’
‘Kilmandaros,	 listen	 well.	 My	 thoughts	 on	 Draconus—my	 musings	 on	 his	 possible	 culpability—they	 are
unproven.	Speculations,	nothing	more.	If	you	seek	a	confrontation	with	Draconus—if	you	seek	vengeance—
you	will	die.	And	it	may	well	be	for	naught,	for	perhaps	Draconus	is	innocent	of	all	charges.’
‘You	do	not	believe	that.’
‘I	was	but	reminding	you	of	the	danger	he	presents	to	us.	How	long	was	he	trapped	within	Dragnipur?	What
did	 that	 do	 to	 him?	 To	 his	 mind?	 Is	 he	 even	 sane	 any	 more?	 One	 other	 thing,	 and	 think	 on	 this	 carefully,
Kilmandaros.	Would	Rake	have	willingly	freed	a	mad	Draconus?	Has	he	ever	shown	a	thoughtless	side	to	his
decisions?	Ever?’
Her	eyes	narrowed.	‘He	had	a	purpose.’
Mael’s	smile	was	wry.	‘Even	though	he	is	dead,	we	find	ourselves	holding	to	faith	in	him.	Extraordinary,	isn’t
it?’
‘Mother	Dark—’
‘No	longer	faces	away,	and	as	with	Darkness,	so	too	it	is	with—’
‘Light.	Gods	below,	Mael.	What	has	he	forced	upon	us?’
‘A	final	accounting,	I’d	wager.	An	end	to	the	stupid	games.	He	might	as	well	have	locked	us	all	in	one	room
—and	no	one	leaves	until	we	settle	things	once	and	for	all.’
‘Bastard!’
‘Your	grief	was	rather	shortlived,	Kilmandaros.’
‘Because	what	you	say	rings	true—yes!	Rake	would	think	that	way,	wouldn’t	he?’
‘Else	he	could	not	permit	his	own	death—his	removal	from	the	stage.	More	than	just	ending	Mother	Dark’s
obstreperous	pique,	he	now	forces	our	hands—we	are	all	stirred	awake,	Elders	and	children	both,	mortal	and
immortal.’
‘To	what	end?’	she	demanded.	‘More	blood?	A	damned	ocean’s	worth?’
‘Not	if	there’s	a	way	around	it,’	Mael	replied.	‘To	what	end,	you	ask.	This,	I	think:	he	wants	us	to	deal	with
the	Crippled	God.’
‘That	pathetic	creature?	You	cannot	be	serious,	Mael.’
‘The	wound	ever	festers,	the	poison	spreads.	That	alien	god’s	power	is	anathema.	We	need	to	fix	it—before
we	seek	anything	else.	Before	we	lose	K’rul’s	gift	for	ever.’
‘Errastas	had	other	ideas.’
‘So	do	you	and	Setch.	So	does	Olar	Ethil.	And	Ardata.’
‘And	Draconus	too,	I	would	think.’
‘We	cannot	know	if	Anomander	Rake	and	Draconus	spoke—was	a	bargain	reached	between	them	within
Dragnipur?	“I	will	free	you,	Draconus,	if	.	.	.”’
‘They	 could	 not	 have	 spoken,’	 said	 Kilmandaros.	 ‘For	 Rake	 was	 killed	 by	 Vengeance.	 You	 said	 so
yourself.’
Mael	walked	over	to	sit	down	on	one	of	the	blocks	of	the	altar	stone.	‘Ah,	well.	There	is	more	to	say	on
that.	Among	other	things.	Tell	me,	Kilmandaros,	what	Hold	did	Errastas	choose?’


She	blinked.	‘Why,	the	obvious	one.	Death.’
‘Then	 I	 will	 begin	 with	 this	 curious	 detail—for	 I	 wish	 to	 know	 your	 thoughts	 on	 the,	 uh,	 implications.’	 He
looked	up	and	something	glinted	in	his	eyes.	‘Before	Rake	met	Dessembrae,	he	met	Hood.	Met	him,	and	killed
him.	With	Dragnipur.’
She	stared.
Mael	continued:	‘Two	gods	were	in	attendance,	that	I	know	of.’
‘Who?’	the	word	came	out	in	a	dry	rasp.
‘Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion.’
Oh,	how	she	wished	for	a	tall,	imposing	standing	stone—within	her	reach—a	proud	pinnacle	of	conceit—just
there,	at	the	very	end	of	her	fist	as	it	swung	out	its	path	of	ferocious	destruction.
‘Them!’
	
Mael	 watched	 her	 flail	 and	 stamp	 about,	 watched	 as	 she	 descended	 on	 one	 toppled	 menhir	 after	 another,
pounding	each	one	into	rubble.	He	scratched	at	the	bristles	on	his	chin.
Oh,	you	are	indeed	clever,	Kilmandaros.	It	all	falls	home,	doesn’t	it?
It	all	falls	home.
He’d	wanted	her	to	consider	the	implications.	So	much	for	being	subtle.
	
Suffering	could	be	borne.	When	the	blood	was	pure,	purged	of	injustices.	Brayderal	was	not	like	the	others,	not
the	same	 as	 Rutt,	 or	 pernicious	 Badalle	 with	 Saddic	 ever	 at	 her	 side.	She	 alone	 possessed	 the	 legacy	 of	 the
Inquisitors,	shining	bright	beneath	her	almost	translucent	skin.	And	among	all	the	others,	only	Badalle	suspected
the	truth.	I	am	a	child	of	the	Quitters.	I	am	here	to	complete	their	work.
She	had	finally	seen	her	kin	on	their	trail,	and	now	wondered	why	they	did	not	simply	stride	into	the	midst	of
the	Chal	Managal,	to	take	up	the	last	of	these	pathetic	lives.
I	want	to	go	home.	Back	to	Estobanse.	Please,	come	and	get	me,	before	it’s	too	late.
Suffering	 could	 be	 borne.	 But	 even	 her	 unhuman	 flesh	 was	 failing.	 Each	 morning,	 she	 looked	 upon	 the
survivors	of	yet	another	night	and	trembled	with	disbelief.	She	watched	them	drag	the	corpses	close	and	she
watched	them	pick	the	bones	clean	and	then	split	them	to	greedily	suck	at	the	marrow.
‘Children	 are	 quickest	 to	 necessity.	 They	 can	 make	 any	 world	 normal.	 Be	 careful,	 daughter,	 with
these	humans.	To	live,	they	will	do	anything.’
She	 looked	 upon	 Rutt’s	 world	 and	 saw	 the	 truth	 in	 her	 father’s	 words.	 With	 Held	 cradled	 in	 his	 arms,	 he
called	 the	 stronger	 ones	 to	 him	 and	 examined	 the	 floppy	 bags	 of	 human	 skin	 they	 now	 used	 to	 trap	 Shards
whenever	 a	 swarm	 found	 the	 ribby	 snake.	 These	 fleshless,	 de-boned	 bodies,	 flung	 into	 the	 air	 as	 the	 locusts
descended,	 drew	 the	 creatures	 as	 flames	 drew	 moths,	 and	 when	 the	 seething	 mass	 struck	 the	 ground	 the
children	 pounced,	 stuffing	 locusts	 into	 their	 mouths	 by	 the	 handful.	 Rutt	 had	 found	 a	 way	 to	 turn	 the	 war	 of
attrition,	to	hunt	the	hunters	of	this	glass	wasteland.
His	 followers	 were	 hardened	 now,	 all	 angles	 and	 flat	 eyes.	 Badalle’s	 poems	 had	 turned	 cruel,	 savage.
Abandonment	 honed	 sure	 edges;	 sun	 and	 heat	 and	 crystal	 horizons	 had	 forged	 a	 terrible	 weapon.	 Brayderal
wanted	to	scream	to	her	kin,	there	in	the	blurred	haze	of	their	wake.	She	wanted	to	warn	them.	She	wanted	to
say	Hurry!	See	these	survivors!	Hurry!	Before	it’s	too	late!
But	she	dared	not	slink	away—not	even	in	the	deepest	of	night	beneath	the	jade	spears.	They	would	find
out.	Badalle	had	made	certain	that	she	was	watched.	Badalle	knew.
She	has	to	die.	I	have	to	kill	her.	It	would	be	easy.	I	am	so	much	stronger	than	them.	I	could	snap	her
neck.	I	could	unleash	my	Holy	Voice	for	the	first	time	ever	and	so	force	my	kin	to	come	to	my	aid	when
Rutt	and	Saddic	and	all	the	others	close	on	me.	I	could	end	this,	all	of	it.
Yet,	 the	 Inquisitors	 kept	 their	 distance.	 They	 must	 have	 a	 reason.	 Any	 precipitate	 act	 by	 Brayderal	 could
ruin	everything.	She	needed	to	be	patient.
Huddled	beneath	layers	of	rags,	ever	careful	to	stand	in	the	way	that	humans	stood—so	limited,	so	bound	by
physical	 imperfections—she	 watched	 as	 Rutt	 walked	 out	 ahead	 of	 the	 snake’s	 head,	 the	 flicking	 tongue,
Badalle	would	say,	before	snapping	open	her	mouth	and	sucking	in	flies,	which	she	then	crunched	with	obvious
relish.


The	 city	 that	 awaited	 them	 did	 not	 look	 real.	 Every	 glimmering	 line	 and	 angle	 seemed	 to	 bite	 Brayderal’s
eyes—she	could	barely	look	in	that	direction,	so	powerful	was	her	sense	of	wrongness.	Was	it	in	ruin?	It	did
not	seem	so.	Was	it	lifeless?	It	must	be.	There	were	no	farms,	no	trees,	no	rivers.	The	sky	above	it	was	clear,
dustless,	smokeless.	Why	then	this	horror	and	dread?
The	humans	did	not	feel	as	she	did.	Instead,	they	eyed	the	distant	towers	and	open	faces	of	buildings	as	they
would	the	arrival	of	a	new	torment—diamonds	and	rubies,	gems	and	shards—and	she	could	see	the	gauging
regard	in	their	eyes,	as	if	they	silently	asked:	Will	 this	 attack	 us?	 Can	 we	 eat	 it?	 Is	 its	 need	 greater	 than
ours?	Is	any	need	greater	than	ours?
Sickened,	Brayderal	watched	Rutt	walk	ever	closer	to	the	faintly	raised	track	encircling	the	unwalled	city.
He	has	decided.	We	are	going	in.	And	I	can	do	nothing	to	stop	it.
	
‘In	knowing,’	Badalle	whispered,	‘I	am	in	knowing,	always.	See	her,	Saddic?	She	hates	this.	She	fears	this.	We
are	not	as	weak	as	she	hopes.	Saddic,	listen,	we	have	a	prisoner	in	the	ribby	snake.	She	is	chained	to	us,	even
as	she	pretends	her	freedom	under	those	rags.	See	how	she	holds	herself.	Her	control	is	failing.	The	Quitter
awakens.’
Kill	her	then,	Saddic	pleaded	with	his	eyes.
But	 Badalle	 shook	 her	 head.	 ‘She	 would	 take	 too	 many	 of	 us	 down.	 And	 the	 others	 would	 help	 her.
Remember	 how	 the	 Quitters	 command?	 The	 voice	 that	 can	 drive	 a	 man	 to	 his	 knees?	 No,	 leave	 her	 to	 the
desert—and	 the	 city,	 yes,	 the	 city.’	 But	 is	 this	 even	 true?	 I	 could—I	 could	 .	 .	 .	 She	 had	 fled	 the	 Quitters,
made	them	a	thing	of	her	past,	and	the	past	was	ever	dead.	It	had	no	hold,	no	claim	upon	her.	Yet,	none	of	this
had	proved	true.	The	past	stalked	them.	The	past	was	fast	closing	in.
Torn	 fragments	 floated	 through	 her	 mind,	 island	 memories	 surrounded	 in	 the	 depthless	 seas	 of	 fear.	 Tall
gaunt	figures,	words	of	slaying,	the	screams	of	slaughter.	Quitters.
She	caught	a	fly,	crunched	it	down.	‘The	secret	is	in	his	arms,’	she	said.	‘Held.	Held	is	the	secret.	One	day,
everyone	will	understand.	Do	you	think	it	matters,	Saddic?	Things	will	be	born,	life	will	catch	fire.’
Badalle	could	see	that	he	did	not	understand,	not	yet.	But	he	was	like	all	the	others.	Their	time	was	coming.
The	city	called	to	us.	Only	those	it	chooses	can	find	it.	Once,	giants	walked	the	world.	The	sun’s	rays
were	snared	in	their	eyes.	They	found	this	city	and	made	it	a	temple.	Not	a	place	in	which	to	live.	It	was
made	to	exist	for	itself.
She	 had	 learned	 so	 much.	 When	 she’d	 had	 wings	 and	 had	 journeyed	 across	 the	 world.	 Stealing	 thoughts,
snatching	ideas.	Madness	was	a	gift.	Even	as	memories	were	a	curse.	She	needed	to	find	power.	But	all	she
could	find	within	herself	was	a	knotted	host	of	words.	Poems	were	not	swords.	Were	they?
‘Remember	 temples?’	 she	 asked	 the	 boy	 beside	 her.	 ‘Fathers	 in	 robes,	 the	 bowls	 filling	 with	 coins	 no	 one
could	eat.	And	on	the	walls	gems	winked	like	drops	of	blood.	Those	temples,	they	were	like	giant	fists	built	to
batter	us	down,	to	take	our	spirits	and	chain	them	to	worldly	fears.	We	were	supposed	to	shred	the	skin	from
our	souls	and	accept	the	pain	and	punishment	as	just.	The	temples	told	us	we	were	flawed	and	then	promised
to	heal	us.	All	we	needed	to	do	was	pay	and	pray.	Coin	for	absolution	and	calluses	on	the	knees,	but	remember
how	splendid	those	robes	were!	That’s	what	we	paid	for.’
And	the	Quitters	came	among	us,	down	from	the	north.	They	walked	like	the	broken,	and	when	they
spoke,	souls	crumpled	like	eggshells.	They	came	with	white	hands	and	left	with	red	hands.
Words	have	power.
She	lifted	a	hand	and	pointed	at	the	city.	‘But	this	temple	is	different.	It	was	not	built	for	adoration.	It	was
built	to	warn	us.	Remember	the	cities,	Saddic?	Cities	exist	to	gather	the	suffering	beneath	the	killer’s	sword.
Swords—more	 than	 anyone	 could	 even	 count.	 So	 many	 swords.	 In	 the	 hands	 of	 priests	 and	 Quitters	 and
merchant	houses	and	noble	warriors	and	slavers	and	debt-holders	and	keepers	of	food	and	water—so	many.
Cities	are	mouths,	Saddic,	filled	with	sharp	teeth.’	She	snapped	another	fly	from	the	air.	Chewed.	Swallowed.
‘Lead	 them	 now,’	 she	 said	 to	 the	 boy	 beside	 her.	 ‘Follow	 Rutt.	 And	 keep	 an	 eye	 on	 Brayderal.	 Danger
comes.	The	time	of	the	Quitters	has	arrived.	Go,	lead	them	after	Rutt.	Begin!’
He	looked	upon	her	with	alarm,	but	she	waved	him	away,	and	set	out	for	the	snake’s	tattered	tail.
The	Quitters	were	coming.
To	begin	the	last	slaughter.


	
Inquisitor	 Sever	 stood	 looking	 down	 on	 the	 body	 of	 Brother	 Beleague,	 seeing	 as	 if	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the
emaciated	 travesty	 of	 the	 young	 man	 she	 had	 once	 known	 and	 loved.	 On	 her	 left	 was	 Brother	 Adroit,
breathing	 fast	 and	 shallow,	 hunched	 and	 wracked	 with	 tremors.	 The	 bones	 of	 his	 spine	 and	 shoulders	 were
bowed	 like	 an	 old	 man’s,	 legacy	 of	 this	 journey’s	 terrible	 deficiencies.	 His	 nose	 was	 rotting,	 a	 raw	 wound
glistening	and	crawling	with	flies.
To	her	right	was	Sister	Rail,	her	gaunt	face	thin	as	a	hatchet,	her	eyes	rimmed	in	dull,	dry	red.	She	had	little
hair	left—that	lustrous	mane	was	long	gone,	and	with	it	the	last	vestiges	of	the	beauty	she	had	once	possessed.
Sister	 Scorn	 had	 collected	 Beleague’s	 staff	 and	 now	 leant	 upon	 it	 as	 would	 a	 cripple.	 The	 joints	 of	 her
elbows,	high-wrists	and	wrists	were	inflamed	and	swollen	with	fluids,	but	Sever	knew	that	strength	remained
within	her.	Scorn	was	the	last	Adjudicator	among	them.
When	 they	 had	 set	 out	 to	 deliver	 peace	 upon	 the	 last	 of	 the	 south-dwellers—these	 children—they	 had
numbered	 twelve.	 Among	 them,	 three	 of	 the	 original	 five	 women	 still	 lived,	 and	 but	 one	 of	 the	 seven	 men.
Inquisitor	Sever	accepted	responsibility	for	this	tragic	error	in	judgement.	Of	course,	who	could	have	imagined
that	thousands	of	helpless	children	could	march	league	upon	league	through	this	tortured	land,	bereft	of	shelter,
their	hands	empty?	Outlasting	the	wild	dogs,	the	cannibal	raiders	among	the	last	of	the	surviving	adults,	and	the
wretched	 parasites	 swarming	 the	 ground	 and	 the	 skies	 above—no,	 not	 one	 Inquisitor	 could	 have	 anticipated
this	terrible	will	to	survive.
Surrender	was	the	easy	choice,	the	simplest	decision	of	all.	They	should	have	given	up	long	ago.
And	we	would	now	be	home.	And	my	mate	could	stand	before	his	daughter	and	feel	such	pride	at	her
courage	and	purity—that	she	chose	to	walk	with	the	human	children,	that	she	chose	to	guide	her	kin	to
the	delivery	of	peace.
And	I	would	not	now	be	standing	above	the	body	of	my	dead	son.
It	 was	 understood—it	 had	 always	 been	 understood—that	 no	 human	 was	 an	 equal	 to	 the	 Forkrul	 Assail.
Proof	 was	 delivered	 a	 thousand	 times	 a	 day—and	 towards	 the	 end,	 ten	 thousand,	 as	 the	 pacification	 of	 the
south	 kingdoms	 reached	 its	 blessed	 conclusion.	 Not	 once	 had	 the	 Shriven	 refused	 their	 submission;	 not	 once
had	a	single	pathetic	human	straightened	in	challenge.	The	hierarchy	was	unassailable.
But	these	children	did	not	accept	that	righteous	truth.	In	ignorance	they	found	strength.	In	foolishness	they
found	defiance.
‘The	city,’	said	Scorn,	her	voice	a	broken	thing.	‘We	cannot	permit	it.’
Sever	nodded.	‘The	investment	is	absolute,	yes.	We	cannot	hope	to	storm	it.’
Adroit	said,	‘Its	own	beauty,	yes.	To	challenge	would	be	suicide.’
The	women	turned	at	that	and	he	flinched	back	a	step.	‘Deny	me?	The	clarity	of	my	vision?’
Sever	sighed,	gaze	dropping	once	more	to	her	dead	son.	‘We	cannot.	It	is	absolute.	It	shines.’
‘And	now	the	boy	with	the	baby	leads	them	to	it,’	said	Sister	Rail.	‘Unacceptable.’
‘Agreed,’	said	Sever.	‘We	may	fail	to	return,	but	we	shall	not	fail	in	what	we	set	out	to	do.	Adjudicator,	will
you	lead	us	into	peace?’
‘I	am	ready,’	Scorn	replied,	straightening	and	holding	out	the	staff.	‘Wield	this,	Inquisitor,	my	need	for	it	has
ended.’
She	 longed	 to	 turn	 away,	 to	 reject	 Scorn’s	 offer.	 My	 son’s	 weapon.	 Fashioned	 by	 my	 own	 hands	 and
then	surrendered	to	him.	I	should	never	have	touched	it	again.
‘Honour	him,’	Scorn	said.
‘I	shall.’	She	took	the	iron-shod	staff,	and	then	faced	the	others.	‘Gather	up	the	last	of	your	strength.	I	judge
four	thousand	remain—a	long	day	of	slaughter	awaits	us.’
‘They	are	unarmed,’	said	Rail.	‘Weak.’
‘Yes.	In	the	delivering	of	peace,	we	will	remind	them	of	that	truth.’
Scorn	set	out.	Sever	and	the	others	fell	in	behind	the	Adjudicator.	When	they	drew	closer,	they	would	fan
out,	to	make	room	for	the	violence	they	would	unleash.
Not	 one	 Shriven	 would	 ever	 reach	 the	 city.	 And	 the	 boy	 with	 the	 baby	 would	 die	 last.	 By	 my	 husband’s
daughter’s	hand.	Because	she	lives,	she	still	lives.
	
Something	like	panic	gripped	the	children,	dragging	Brayderal	along	in	a	rushing	tide.	Swearing,	she	tried	to	pull


loose,	but	hands	reached	out,	clutched	tight,	pushed	her	onwards.	She	should	have	been	able	to	defy	them	all,
but	she	had	overestimated	her	reserves	of	strength—she	was	more	damaged	than	she	had	believed.
She	saw	Saddic,	leading	this	charge.	Plunging	after	Rutt,	who	was	now	almost	at	the	city’s	threshold.	But	of
Badalle	there	was	no	sign.	This	detail	frightened	her.	There	is	something	about	her.	She	is	transformed,	but
I	do	not	know	how.	She	is	somehow	.	.	.	quickened.
Her	kin	had	finally	comprehended	the	danger.	They	waited	no	longer.
Scuffed,	tugged	and	pushed,	she	waited	for	the	first	screams	behind	her.
	
Words.	 I	 have	 nothing	 but	 words.	 I	 cast	 away	 many	 of	 them,	 only	 to	 have	 others	 find	 me.	 What	 can
words	achieve?	Here	in	this	hard,	real	place?	But	doubts	themselves	are	nothing	but	words,	a	troubled
song	in	my	head.	When	I	speak,	the	snakes	listen.	Their	eyes	are	wide.	But	what	happens	to	all	I	say,
once	the	words	slip	into	them?	Alchemies.	Sometimes	the	mixture	froths	and	bubbles.	Sometimes	it	boils.
Sometimes,	 nothing	 stirs	 and	 the	 potion	 lies	 dead,	 cold	 and	 grey	 as	 mud.	 Who	 can	 know?	 Who	 can
predict?
I	speak	softly	when	all	that	I	say	is	a	howl.	I	pound	upon	bone	with	my	fists,	and	they	hear	naught
but	whispers.	Savage	words	will	thud	against	dead	flesh.	But	the	slow	drip	of	blood,	ah,	then	they	are
content	as	cats	at	a	stream.
Badalle	 hurried	 along,	 and	 it	 seemed	 the	 snake	 parted,	 as	 if	 her	 passage	 was	 ripping	 it	 in	 two.	 She	 saw
skeletal	faces,	shining	eyes,	limbs	wrapped	in	skin	dry	as	leather.	She	saw	thigh	bones	from	ribbers	picked	up
on	the	trail—held	like	weapons—but	what	good	would	they	do	against	the	Quitters?
I	have	words	and	nothing	else.	And,	in	these	words,	I	have	no	faith.	They	cannot	topple	walls.	They
cannot	crush	mountains	down	to	dust.	The	faces	swam	past	her.	She	knew	them	all,	and	they	were	nothing
but	blurs,	each	one	smeared	inside	tears.
But	what	else	is	there?	What	else	can	I	use	against	them?	They	are	Quitters.	They	claim	power	in	their
voice.	The	islands	in	her	mind	were	drowning.
I	too	seek	power	in	my	words.
Have	I	learned	from	them?	This	is	how	it	seems.	Is	this	how	it	is?
Stragglers.	The	sickened,	the	weakened,	and	then	she	was	past	them	all,	standing	alone	on	the	glass	plain.
The	sun	made	the	world	white,	bitter	with	purity.	This	was	the	perfection	so	cherished	by	the	Quitters.	But	it
was	not	the	Quitters	who	cut	down	our	world.	They	only	came	in	answer	to	the	death	of	our	gods—our
faith—when	 the	 rains	 stopped,	 when	 the	 last	 green	 withered	 and	 died.	 They	 came	 in	 answer	 to	 our
prayers.	Save	us!	Save	us	from	ourselves!
Emerging	from	the	heat	shimmer,	four	figures,	fast	closing.	Like	wind-rocked	puppets,	every	limb	snapped
back	until	broken,	wheeling	loose,	and	death	surrounded	them	in	whirlwinds.	Monstrous,	clambering	out	of	her
memories.	Swirls	of	power—she	saw	mouths	open—
‘YIELD!’
The	 command	 rushed	 through	 Badalle,	 hammered	 children	 to	 the	 ground	 behind	 her.	 Voices	 crying	 out,
helpless	with	dread.	She	felt	it	rage	against	her	will,	weakening	her	knees.	She	felt	a	snap,	as	if	a	tether	had
broken,	 and	 all	 at	 once	 she	 lifted	 free—she	 saw	 the	 ribby	 snake,	 the	 sinuous	 length	 stretched	 out	 as	 if	 in
yearning.	But,	segment	by	segment,	it	writhed	in	pain.
As	 that	 command	 thundered	 from	 bone	 to	 bone,	 Badalle	 found	 her	 voice.	 Power	 in	 the	 word,	 but	 I	 can
answer	it.
‘—to	the	assault	of	wonder
Humility	takes	you	in	hand—’
She	spun	back	down	to	lock	herself	behind	her	own	eyes.	She	saw	energies	whirl	away,	ignite	in	flashes.
‘HALT!’
Cracking	like	a	fist.	Lips	split,	blood	threading	down.	Badalle	spat,	pushed	forward.	One	step,	only	one.
‘—in	softest	silence
Enfold	the	creeping	doubt—’
She	saw	her	words	strike	them.	Stagger	them.	Almost	close	enough,	at	last,	to	see	their	ravaged	faces,	the


disbelief,	 the	 bafflement	 and	 growing	 distress.	 The	 indignation.	 And	 yes,	 that	 she	 understood.	 Games	 of
meaning	in	evasion.	Deceit	of	intent	in	sleight	of	hand.
Badalle	took	another	step.
‘Yield	all	these	destinations
Unbidden	jostle	to	your	bones
Halt	in	the	shadow	thrown
Beneath	the	yoke	of	dismay—’
She	felt	fire	in	her	limbs,	saw	blinding	incandescence	erupt	from	her	hands.	Truth	was	such	a	rare	weapon,
and	all	the	more	deadly	for	it.
‘Do	not	give	me	your	words!
They	are	dead	with	the	squalor
Of	your	empty	virtues
YIELD	to	your	own	lies!
HALT	in	the	breathless	moment
Your	lungs	scream
And	silence	answers
Your	heart	drums
Brittle	surfaces
BLEED!’
They	 staggered	 back	 as	 if	 blinded.	 Blue	 fluids	 spurted	 from	 ruptured	 joints,	 gushed	 down	 from	 gaping
mouths.	Agony	twisted	their	angled	faces.	One	fell,	thrashing,	kicking	on	the	ground.	Another,	a	woman	closer
to	 Badalle	 than	 the	 others,	 dropped	 down	 on	 to	 her	 knees,	 and	 their	 impact	 with	 the	 crystalline	 ground	 was
marked	by	two	bursts	of	bluish	blood—the	Quitter	shrieked.	The	remaining	two,	a	man	and	a	woman,	reeling
as	if	buffeted	by	invisible	fists,	had	begun	retreating—stumbling,	half-running.
The	fires	within	Badalle	flared,	and	then	died.
The	 Quitters	 deserved	 worse—but	 she	 did	 not	 have	 it	 in	 her	 to	 deliver	 such	 hard	 punishment.	 They	 had
given	her	but	two	words.	Not	enough.	Two	words.	Obedience	to	the	privilege	of	dying.	Accept	your	fate.
But	.	.	.	we	will	not.	We	refuse.	We	have	been	refusing	things	for	a	long	time,	now.	We	are	believers	in
refusal.
They	will	not	come	close	now.	Not	for	a	long	time.	Maybe,	for	these	ones,	never	again.	I	have	hurt
them.	I	took	their	words	and	made	them	my	own.	I	made	the	power	turn	in	their	hands	and	cut	them.	It
will	have	to	do.
She	 turned	 round.	 The	 ribby	 snake	 had	 begun	 moving	 again,	 strangely	 mindless,	 as	 if	 beaten	 by	 drovers,
senseless	as	a	herd	of	cattle	crossing	a	.	.	.	a	river?	But,	when	have	I	seen	a	river?
She	blinked.	Licked	salty	blood	from	her	lips.	Flies	danced.
The	city	awaited	them.
‘It	is	what	we	can	bear,’	she	whispered.	‘But	there	is	more	to	life	than	suffering.’
Now	we	must	find	it.
	
Darkness	 passed,	 and	 yet	 it	 remained.	 A	 splinter	 pure,	 promising	 annihilation.	 Onos	 T’oolan	 could	 sense	 it,
somewhere	ahead,	a	flickering,	wavering	presence.	His	stride,	unbroken	for	so	long,	now	faltered.	The	bitter
rage	within	him	seemed	to	stagger,	sapped	of	all	strength.	Depression	rose	like	flood	waters,	engulfing	all	sense
of	purpose.	The	tip	of	his	sword	bit	the	ground.
Vengeance	meant	nothing,	even	when	the	impulse	was	all-consuming.	It	was	a	path	that,	once	started	upon,
could	 conceivably	 stretch	 on	 for	 ever.	 The	 culpable	 could	 stand	 in	 a	 line	 reaching	 past	 the	 horizon.	 An
avenger’s	march	was	endless.	So	it	had	been	with	the	vengeance	sought	against	the	Jaghut,	and	Onos	T’oolan
had	 never	 been	 blind	 to	 the	 futility	 of	 that.	 Was	 he	 nothing	 but	 an	 automaton,	 stung	 into	 motion	 that	 would
never	slow	in	step?


He	felt	a	sudden	pressure	wash	over	him	from	behind.
Baffled,	all	at	once	frightened,	his	weapon’s	stone	tip	carving	a	furrow	in	the	dry	soil,	the	First	Sword	slowly
swung	round.
He	could	deny.	He	could	refuse.	But	these	choices	would	not	lead	him	to	the	knowledge	he	sought.	He	had
been	 forced	 back	 from	 the	 realms	 of	 death.	 The	 blood	 ties	 he	 had	 chosen	 had	 been	 severed.	 No	 longer	 a
husband,	a	father,	a	brother.	He	had	been	given	vengeance,	but	what	vengeance	could	he	find	sifting	through	a
valley	 heaped	 with	 corpses?	 There	 were	 other	 purposes,	 other	 reasons	 for	 walking	 this	 pathetic	 world	 once
again.	Onos	T’oolan	had	been	denied	his	rightful	end—he	intended	to	find	out	why.
Not	one	among	the	thousand	or	so	T’lan	Imass	approaching	him	had	yet	touched	his	thoughts.	They	walked
enshrouded	in	silence,	ghosts,	kin	reduced	to	strangers.
He	waited.
Children	 of	 the	 Ritual,	 yes,	 but	 his	 sense	 of	 many	 of	 them	 told	 him	 otherwise.	 There	 was	 mystery	 here.
T’lan	Imass,	and	yet	.	.	.
When	all	the	others	halted	their	steps,	six	bonecasters	emerged,	continuing	their	approach.
He	 knew	 three.	 Brolos	 Haran,	 Ulag	 Togtil,	 Ilm	 Absinos.	 Bonecasters	 of	 the	 Orshayn	 T’lan	 Imass.	 The
Orshayn	 had	 failed	 to	 appear	 at	 Silverfox’s	 Gathering.	 Such	 failure	 invited	 presumptions	 of	 loss.	 Extinction.
Fates	to	match	those	of	the	Ifayle,	the	Bentract,	the	Kerluhm.	The	presumption	had	been	erroneous.
The	remaining	three	were	wrong	in	other	ways.	They	were	clothed	in	the	furs	of	the	white	bear—a	beast
that	had	come	late	in	the	age	of	the	Imass—and	their	faces	were	flatter,	the	underlying	structure	more	delicate
than	that	of	true	Imass.	Their	weapons	were	mostly	bone,	ivory,	tusk	or	antler,	with	finely	chipped	chert	and
flint	 insets.	 Weapons	 defying	 the	 notion	 of	 finesse:	 intricate	 in	 their	 construction	 and	 yet	 the	 violence	 they
would	deliver	promised	an	almost	primitive	brutality.
Bonecaster	Ulag	Togtil	spoke.	‘First	Sword.	Who	knew	dust	could	be	so	interesting?’
There	was	a	frustrated	hiss	from	Brolos	Haran.	‘He	insists	on	speaking	for	us,	and	yet	he	never	says	what
we	wish	him	to	say.	Why	we	ever	acquiesce	is	a	mystery.’
‘I	have	my	own	paths,’	Ulag	said	easily,	‘and	I	do	not	imagine	the	First	Sword	lacks	patience.’
‘Not	patience,’	snapped	Brolos,	‘but	what	about	tolerance?’
‘Bone	bends	before	it	breaks,	Brolos	Haran.	Now,	I	would	say	more	to	the	First	Sword,	before	we	all	await
the	profundity	of	his	words.	May	I?’
Brolos	Haran	half-turned	to	Ilm	Absinos,	one	hand	lifting	in	an	odd	gesture	that	baffled	Onos	T’oolan—for	a
moment—before	he	understood.
Helplessness.
‘First	Sword,’	Ulag	resumed,	‘we	do	not	reach	to	you	in	the	manner	of	Tellann,	because	we	make	no	claim
upon	you.	We	are	summoned,	yes,	but	it	was—we	have	come	to	believe—not	by	your	hand.	You	may	refuse
us.	It	is	not	in	our	hearts	to	force	ourselves	upon	the	will	of	another.’
Onos	T’oolan	said,	‘Who	are	these	strangers?’
‘Profound	 indeed,’	 Ulag	 said.	 ‘First	 Sword,	 they	 are	 T’lan	 Imass	 of	 a	 second	 Ritual.	 The	 descendants	 of
those	 who	 sought	 to	 follow	 Kilava	 Onass	 when	 she	 rejected	 the	 first	 Ritual.	 It	 was	 their	 failure	 not	 to
determine	beforehand	Kilava’s	attitude	to	being	accompanied.	But	when	there	is	but	one	hole	in	the	ice,	then
all	must	use	it	to	breathe.’
‘My	sister	invited	no	one.’
‘Alas.	And	so	it	comes	to	this.	These	three	are	bonecasters	of	the	Brold	T’lan	Imass.	Lid	Ger,	Lera	Epar
and	Nom	Kala.	The	Brold	number	two	thousand	seven	hundred	and	twelve.	The	majority	of	these	remain	in
the	dust	of	our	wake.	Our	own	Orshayn	number	six	hundred	and	twelve—you	see	them	here.	If	you	need	us,
we	shall	serve.’
	
Nom	Kala	studied	the	First	Sword,	this	warrior	she	had	once	believed	was	nothing	but	an	invention,	a	myth.
Better,	she	concluded,	had	he	remained	so.	His	bones	were	latticed,	as	if	he	had	been	pounded	into	fragments
—and	some	of	those	bones	were	not	even	his	own.
The	First	Sword	was	not	the	giant	of	the	legends.	He	did	not	wear	a	cloak	of	ice.	Caribou	antlers	did	not
sprout	from	his	head.	He	did	not	possess	breath	that	gave	the	gift	of	fire.	Nor	did	he	seem	the	kind	of	warrior
to	recount	his	exploits	for	three	days	and	four	nights	to	belittle	an	overly	proud	hero.	She	began	to	suspect	few


of	those	ancient	tales	belonged	to	this	figure	at	all.	Dancing	across	the	sea	on	the	backs	of	whales?	Crossing
swords	with	demon	walruses	in	their	underwater	towers?	The	secret	seducer	of	wives	left	alone	at	night?
How	many	children	among	her	clan,	generation	upon	generation,	bore	some	variation	of	the	name	Onos,	to
account	for	impossible	pregnancies?
The	sudden	shocked	gulp	that	erupted	from	her	drew	everyone’s	attention.
Brolos	 Haran	 had	 been	 speaking—about	 what	 Nom	 Kala	 had	 no	 idea—and	 he	 was	 not	 pleased	 with	 the
interruption.	‘Nom	Kala,	what	is	it	about	the	Fall	at	the	Red	Spires	that	so	amuses	you?’
‘Nothing,’	she	replied,	‘unless	it	was	meant	to.	I	apologize,	Brolos	Haran.	A	stray	thought.	Well,	a	few	stray
thoughts.’
The	others	waited.
She	elected	to	refrain	from	elaborating.
The	wind	moaned,	whispered	through	remnants	of	fur.
Onos	T’oolan	spoke.	‘Orshayn.	Brold.	I	have	forsworn	the	Jaghut	Wars.	I	seek	no	battle.	I	do	not	invite	you
to	join	me,	for	what	I	seek	is	an	accounting.	Like	you,	I	am	summoned	from	the	dust,	and	it	is	to	dust	that	I
wish	to	return.	But	first,	I	will	find	the	one	who	has	so	punished	me	with	resurrection.	The	bonecaster	of	the
Logros	T’lan	Imass,	Olar	Ethil.’
Ulag	said,	‘Can	you	be	certain	it	is	her,	First	Sword?’
Onos	T’oolan	cocked	his	head.	‘Ulag	Togtil,	after	all	this	time,	do	you	still	hold	to	the	virtue	of	certainty?’
‘We	fought	no	war	against	the	Jaghut,’	Nom	Kala	said.
The	bonecasters	of	the	Orshayn	reacted	with	a	chill	wave	of	disapproval.	She	ignored	it.
Onos	T’oolan	said,	‘Ulag.	I	see	the	Orshayn	Warleader	standing	with	your	kin.	Why	does	Inistral	Ovan	not
come	forward?’
‘He	is	shamed,	First	Sword.	The	losses	at	the	Red	Spire	.	.	.’
‘Nom	Kala,’	Onos	then	said,	‘have	you	no	ruler	of	the	Brold	Clan?’
‘Only	 us,’	 she	 replied.	 ‘Even	 the	 war	 we	 fought	 against	 the	 humans	 was	 not	 a	 war	 that	 demanded	 a
warleader.	It	was	clear	that	we	could	not	defeat	them	on	a	field	of	battle.	There	were	too	many.’
‘Then	how	did	you	fight?’
‘By	 keeping	 alive	 our	 stories,	 our	 ways	 of	 living.	 And	 by	 hiding,	 for	 in	 hiding,	 we	 survived.	 We	 persisted.
This	is	itself	a	victory.’
‘And	 yet,’	 cut	 in	 Ilm	 Absinos,	 ‘you	 failed	 in	 the	 end.	 Else	 you	 would	 not	 have	 attempted	 the	 Ritual	 of
Tellann.’
‘That	is	true,’	she	replied.	‘We	ran	out	of	places	to	hide.’
Ulag	spoke.	‘First	Sword,	we	would	accompany	you	nonetheless.	Like	you,	we	wish	to	know	the	purpose	of
our	return.’
‘If	you	join	my	quest,’	said	Onos	T’oolan,	‘then	you	bow	to	Olar	Ethil’s	desires.’
‘That	perception	may	lead	to	carelessness	on	her	part,’	Ulag	replied.
	
Standing	amidst	the	other	T’lan	Imass,	Rystalle	Ev	watched,	listened,	and	imagined	a	world	taut	with	purpose.
It	 had	 once	 been	 such	 a	 world,	 for	 her,	 for	 all	 of	 her	 kin.	 But	 that	 had	 vanished	 long	 ago.	 Perhaps	 the	 First
Sword	could	bind	them	all	to	this	quest	of	his.	Perhaps	answers	could	relieve	the	burden	of	despair.	Reasons	to
stand,	reasons	to	stand	against.
But	 the	 dust	 beckoned	 with	 its	 promise	 of	 oblivion.	 The	 trail	 to	 the	 end	 of	 things	 had	 been	 hacked	 clear,
pounded	level.	She	yearned	to	walk	it.
Beside	her,	Kalt	Urmanal	said,	‘See	the	sword	he	carries.	See	how	its	tip	pins	the	earth.	This	Onos	T’oolan,
he	is	not	one	for	poses.	He	never	was.	I	remember	when	I	last	saw	him.	He	had	defeated	his	challenger.	He
had	shown	such	skill	that	ten	thousand	Imass	stood	silent	with	awe.	Yet,	he	stood	as	one	defeated.’
‘Weary,’	Rystalle	murmured.
‘Yes,	but	not	from	the	fighting.	He	was	weary,	Rystalle	Ev,	of	its	necessity.’
She	considered	that,	and	then	nodded.
Kalt	then	added,	‘This	warrior	I	will	follow.’
‘Yes.’


	
She	sat	on	a	pyramid	of	three	stacked	canvas	bolts,	huddled	beneath	her	night-cloak.	The	shivering	would	not
go	 away.	 She	 watched	 the	 glowing	 tip	 of	 her	 smoker	 dancing	 like	 a	 firefly	 close	 to	 her	 fingers.	 Atri-Ceda
Aranict	 listened	 to	 the	 muted	 sounds	 of	 the	 Malazan	 encampment.	 Subdued,	 weary	 and	 shaken.	 She
understood	 that	 well	 enough.	 Soldiers	 had	 fallen	 out	 from	 the	 column,	 staggering	 as	 if	 reeling	 from	 blows.
Collapsing	 senseless,	 or	 falling	 to	 their	 knees	 spitting	 blood.	 Panic	 rippling	 through	 the	 ranks—was	 this	 an
attack?
Not	as	such.
Those	stricken	soldiers	had	been,	one	and	all,	mages.	And	the	enemy,	blind	and	indifferent,	had	been	power.
Her	nausea	was	fading.	Mind	slowly	awakening—wandering	like	a	hungover	reveller,	desultorily	sweeping
aside	the	ashes—she	thought	back	to	her	first	meeting	with	High	Mage	Ben	Adaephon	Delat.	She	had	been
pathetic.	It	was	bad	enough	fainting	in	a	heap	in	front	of	Commander	Brys	Beddict;	she	had	barely	recovered
from	that	before	she	was	led	into	Quick	Ben’s	presence.
And	now,	weeks	later,	only	fragments	of	the	conversation	that	followed	remained	with	her.	He	had	been	a
distracted	 man,	 but	 when	 he	 had	 seen	 the	 enlivened	 earth	 cupped	 in	 Aranict’s	 hand,	 his	 dark	 eyes	 had
sharpened,	hardened	as	if	transformed	into	onyx.
He	had	cursed,	and	she	remembered	that	curse.
‘Hood’s	frantic	balls	on	the	fire.’
She	 had	 since	 discovered	 that	 Hood	 was	 the	 god	 of	 death,	 and	 that	 if	 any	 god	 deserved	 its	 name	 being
uttered	 in	 bitter	 curses,	 then	 he	 was	 the	 one.	 At	 the	 time,	 however,	 she	 had	 taken	 the	 High	 Mage’s
expostulation	somewhat	more	literally.
Fire,	she’d	thought.	Yes,	fire	in	the	earth,	heat	cupped	in	my	hand.
Her	eyes	had	widened	on	the	High	Mage,	astonished	at	his	instant	percipience,	convinced	in	that	moment	of
his	profound	genius.	She	had	no	place	in	his	company.	Her	mind	moved	in	a	slow	crawl	at	the	best	of	times,
especially	 in	 the	 early	 morning	 before	 she’d	 drawn	 alive	 the	 coal	 of	 her	 first	 smoker.	 Quickness	 of	 thought
(and	there,	she’d	assumed,	must	be	the	reason	for	his	name)	was	in	itself	a	thing	of	magic,	a	subtle	sorcery,
which	she	could	only	view	with	superstitious	awe.
Such	 lofty	 opinion	 could	 persist	 only	 in	 the	 realm	 of	 mystery,	 however,	 and	 mystery	 rarely	 survived
familiarity.	The	High	Mage	had	formally	requested	that	she	be	temporarily	attached	to	his	cadre.	Since	then,
she’d	heard	plenty	of	curses	from	Ben	Adaephon	Delat,	and	had	come	to	conclude	that	his	quickness	was	less
sorcerous	than	quixotic.
Oh,	 he	 was	 indeed	 brilliant.	 He	 was	 also	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 muttering	 to	 himself	 in	 a	 host	 of	 entirely	 distinct
voices,	and	playing	with	dolls	and	lengths	of	string.	And	as	for	the	company	he	kept	.	.	.
She	 pulled	 fiercely	 on	 her	 smoker,	 watching	 a	 figure	 approach—walking	 like	 a	 drunk,	 his	 ill-fitting,	 cheap
clothing	caked	in	dust.	Bottle’s	strangely	childlike	face	looked	swollen,	almost	dissolute.
Here	 we	 go.	 Yet	 another	 incomprehensible	 conversation	 between	 them.	 And	 oh,	 he	 doesn’t	 like	 me
being	there	for	it,	either.	That	makes	two	of	us.
‘Is	he	breathing?’	the	Malazan	soldier	asked	as	he	halted	in	front	of	the	tent.
She	glanced	at	the	drawn	flap	to	her	left.	‘He	sent	me	out,’	she	said.
‘He’ll	want	to	see	me.’
‘He	wants	to	know	how	Fiddler	fared.’
Bottle	grimaced,	looked	away	briefly,	then	back	down	to	her,	seeming	to	study	her.	‘You’ve	got	sensitivity,
Atri-Ceda.	A	draught	of	rum	will	soothe	your	nerves.’
‘I’ve	already	had	one.’
He	nodded,	as	if	unsurprised.	‘Fiddler’s	still	losing	what’s	left	of	his	supper.	He’ll	need	a	new	tent.’
‘But	he’s	not	even	a	mage.’
‘No,	he	isn’t.’
She	fixed	her	eyes	on	him.	‘Are	all	you	Malazans	this	cagey?’
He	smiled.	‘And	we’re	getting	worse,	Atri-Ceda.’
‘Why	is	that?’
The	smile	dropped	away,	like	it	never	really	fitted	in	the	first	place.	‘It’s	simple	enough.	The	less	we	know,
the	less	we	say.	Pretty	soon,	I	expect,	we’ll	be	an	army	of	mutes.’


I	can’t	wait.	Sighing,	she	flicked	away	the	smoker,	slowly	rose.
The	stars	were	returning	to	the	sky	in	the	northeast.	At	least	that	was	something.	But	someone’s	out	there.
Holding	a	weapon	.	.	.	gods,	such	a	weapon!	‘Errant’s	bouncing	eye,’	she	said,	‘he’s	the	High	Mage.	He
can’t	hide	for	ever.’
Bottle’s	eyes	were	wide	on	her.	‘Never	heard	that	curse	before,’	he	said.
‘I	just	made	it	up.’
‘Seems	oddly	irreverent	coming	from	a	Letherii.	I’m	slightly	shocked,	in	fact.’
‘It’s	 all	 your	 bad	 habits,	 I	 suppose.’	 She	 stepped	 to	 the	 tent-flap	 and	 rapped	 the	 hide	 with	 her	 knuckles.
‘We’re	coming	in.’
‘Fine!’	came	the	snapped	reply.
The	 cramped	 interior	 was	 steamy,	 as	 scented	 candles	 flickered	 from	 the	 floor	 in	 a	 circle	 surrounding	 a
crosslegged	 Quick	 Ben.	 The	 High	 Mage	 dripped	 with	 sweat.	 ‘Bastard’s	 reaching	 out	 to	 me,’	 he	 said,	 voice
grating.	 ‘Do	 I	 want	 a	 conversation?	 No,	 I	 do	 not.	 What’s	 to	 say?	 Anomander	 killed	 Hood,	 Dassem	 killed
Anomander,	 Brood	 shattered	 Dragnipur,	 and	 now	 Draconus	 walks	 free.	 Burn	 trembles,	 the	 Gate	 of	 Starvald
Demelain	rages	with	fire,	and	cruel	twisted	warrens	the	like	of	which	we’ve	never	before	seen	now	lie	in	wait
—when	will	they	awaken?	What	will	they	deliver?
‘And	 there’s	 more.	 Do	 you	 realize	 that?	 There’s	 more—stop	 staring,	 just	 listen.	 Who	 brokered	 the	 whole
damned	mess?	Bottle?’
‘Sorry,	I	was	listening,	not	thinking.	How	should	I	know?	No,	wait—’
‘Aye.	 Shadowthrone	 and	 Cotillion.	 Does	 the	 Adjunct	 really	 believe	 she	 chooses	 her	 own	 path?	 Our	 path?
She’s	 been	 driving	 us	 hard,	 ever	 since	 we	 landed—sure,	 it’s	 all	 a	 matter	 of	 logistics.	 It’s	 not	 like	 the	 Akryn
traders	are	happily	handing	over	everything	they	have,	is	it?	It’s	not	like	things	won’t	get	worse	the	further	east
we	march—the	Wastelands	are	well	named.’
‘Quick	Ben—’
‘Of	course	I’m	babbling!	Listen!	There	are	T’lan	Imass	out	there!’	His	wild	gaze	fixed	with	sudden	intensity
on	Aranict.	‘The	dust	will	dance!	Who	commands	them?	What	do	they	want?	Do	you	know	what	I	want	to	do
with	that	dirt?	I	want	to	throw	it	away.	Who	wants	to	know?	Not	me!’
‘The	T’lan	Imass,’	said	Bottle,	‘knelt	to	the	Emperor.	He	took	the	First	Throne	and	never	relinquished	it.’
‘Exactly!’
‘We’re	being	set	up.	We	need	to	speak	with	Tavore.	Now.’
But	the	High	Mage	was	shaking	his	head.	‘It’s	no	use.	She’s	made	up	her	mind.’
‘About	what?’	Bottle	demanded,	his	voice	rising.
‘She	thinks	she	can	cheat	them.	Did	you	know	she	was	the	pre-eminent	scholar	of	the	lives	of	Kellanved,
Dancer	 and	 Dassem?	 You	 didn’t,	 did	 you?	 Before	 she	 was	 made	 Adjunct.	 Even	 before	 she	 inherited
command	of	House	Paran.	A	student	of	war—imperial	war.	The	Conquests—not	just	tactics	on	the	field,	but
the	motivations	of	the	Emperor	and	his	mad	cohorts.	The	lives	of	them	all.	Crust,	Toc	the	Elder,	Urko,	Ameron,
Admiral	Nok,	Surly,	even	Tayschrenn—why	do	you	think	she	keeps	Banaschar	around?	That	drunk	fool	is	her
potential	emissary	should	Tayschrenn	finally	decide	to	do	something.’
But	 Bottle	 was	 clearly	 stuck	 at	 Quick	 Ben’s	 first	 revelation.	 ‘Cheat	 them?	 Cheat	 the	 Lords	 of	 Shadow?
Cheat	them	of	what?’
Quick	Ben’s	bared	teeth	glimmered	like	gold	in	the	flickering	candlelight.	‘I	dare	not	say.’
‘You	don’t	trust	us	to	keep	our	mouths	shut?’
‘No.	Why	would	I?’	He	pointed	a	long	finger	at	Bottle.	‘You’d	be	the	first	one	running	for	the	hills.’
‘If	it’s	that	bad,	why	are	you	still	here?’
‘Because	Draconus	changes	everything,	and	I’m	the	only	one	who	can	stand	against	him.’
Bottle	gaped,	and	then	a	thin	word	creaked	out:	‘You?’
‘But	don’t	think	for	a	moment	that	I’m	doing	it	for	Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion.	And	don’t	think	I’m	even
doing	this	for	the	Adjunct.	All	that	time	inside	Dragnipur—it’s	changed	him.	He	was	never	so	subtle	before—
imagine,	 a	 gentle	 invitation	 to	 converse—does	 he	 think	 we’re	 idiots?	 But	 wait’—and	 he	 waved	 his	 hands
—‘it’d	only	be	subtle	if	it	wasn’t	so	obvious!	Why	didn’t	we	think	of	that?’
‘Because	it	makes	no	sense,	you	damned	fool!’
But	 the	 High	 Mage	 did	 not	 react	 to	 Bottle’s	 outburst.	 ‘No,	 he	 really	 wants	 to	 talk!	 Now	 that’s	 subtle	 for


you!	Well,	we	can	match	that,	can’t	we?	Talk?	Not	a	chance!	No,	and	let’s	see	what	he	makes	of	it,	let’s	just
see!’
Aranict	ran	both	hands	through	the	thick	hair	on	her	scalp,	and	then	rummaged	in	her	belt-bag	for	a	smoker.
She	 crouched	 and	 snatched	 up	 one	 of	 Quick	 Ben’s	 candles.	 As	 she	 was	 lighting	 up	 she	 happened	 to	 glance
across	at	the	High	Mage	and	saw	him	staring,	his	expression	frozen.
Bottle	 grunted	 a	 laugh.	 ‘She	 ain’t	 so	 shy	 any	 more,	 is	 she?	 Good.	 Now	 we’ll	 find	 out	 the	 real	 Atri-Ceda.
Just	like	Brys	wanted.’
Behind	a	veil	of	swirling	smoke,	Aranict’s	gaze	narrowed	on	Quick	Ben.	She	slowly	returned	the	candle	to
its	pool	of	melted	wax	on	the	hide	floor.	Brys?	Is	that	what	all	this	is	about?
The	High	Mage	shot	Bottle	a	disdainful	look.	‘It’s	ignorance,	not	bravado.’
‘Bravado	usually	is	ignorance,’	Bottle	snapped	back.
‘I’ll	 grant	 you	 that,’	 Quick	 Ben	 conceded.	 ‘And	 you’re	 right,’	 he	 added,	 sighing,	 ‘we	 could	 do	 with	 a	 little
more	of	the	unflappable	around	here.’
Aranict	snorted.	‘Unflappable?	You’re	not	describing	me.’
‘Maybe	 not,’	 the	 High	 Mage	 replied,	 ‘but	 you	 manage	 a	 convincing	 pose.	 That	 candle	 you	 took	 from	 the
circle	of	protection—you	opened	a	pathway	to	Draconus.	He	sensed	it	immediately.	And	yet—’
‘He	didn’t	use	it,’	Bottle	said.
‘He	didn’t	use	it.’
‘Subtle.’
‘Ha	 ha,	 Bottle,	 but	 you’re	 more	 right	 than	 you	 know.	 The	 point	 is,	 she	 made	 us	 address	 that	 so	 fiercely
burning	question,	didn’t	she?’
‘Unknowingly.’
Quick	Ben	glanced	up	at	her,	curious,	thoughtful.
Aranict	shrugged.	‘I	needed	the	flame.’
The	reply	seemed	to	please	them	both,	in	rather	different	ways.	She	decided	to	leave	it	at	that.	What	point
was	 there	 in	 explaining	 that	 she’d	 no	 idea	 what	 they’d	 been	 talking	 about.	 All	 those	 names	 Quick	 Ben
mentioned—even	Draconus—they	meant	nothing	to	her.	Well,	almost	nothing.	Draconus.	He	is	the	one	who
arrived	 in	 darkness,	 who	 made	 a	 gate	 that	 stole	 half	 the	 sky,	 who	 holds	 in	 his	 hand	 a	 weapon	 of
darkness	and	cold,	of	blackest	ice.
And	Quick	Ben	means	to	stand	in	his	path.
Errant’s	mangled	nuts,	I	only	joined	because	I’m	lusting	after	Brys	Beddict.	Me	and	a	thousand	other
women.
Quick	Ben	said,	‘Atri-Ceda,	your	commander,	Brys—’
She	started	guiltily.	Had	he	read	her	thoughts?
‘He	died	once,	didn’t	he?’
‘What?	Yes,	so	it	is	said.	I	mean,	yes,	he	did.’
The	High	Mage	nodded.	‘Best	go	see	him,	then—he	may	have	need	of	you	right	now.’
‘Me?	Why?’
‘Because	Hood	is	gone,’	said	Bottle.
‘What	does	that	mean	to	Commander	Beddict?’	she	asked.
She	saw	Bottle	meet	Quick	Ben’s	eyes,	and	then	the	soldier	nodded	and	said,	‘The	dead	never	quite	come
back	all	the	way,	Aranict.	Not	while	there	was	a	god	of	death.	It	may	be	that	Brys	is	now	.	.	.	awakened.	To
everything	he	once	was.	He	will	have	things	to	say	to	his	Atri-Ceda.’
‘We’ll	see	you	again,’	Quick	Ben	added.	‘Or	not.’
They	dismiss	me.	Oh	well.	She	turned	and	exited	the	tent.	Paused	in	the	sultry	darkness	of	the	camp.	Drew
deep	on	her	smoker,	and	then	set	out	for	the	distant	Letherii	encampment.
Brys	wants	me.	What	a	lovely	thought.
	
Smiles	 threw	 herself	 down	 by	 the	 fire.	 ‘Stupid	 patrols,’	 she	 said.	 ‘There’s	 no	 one	 out	 there.	 Those	 Akryn
traders—all	 creaking	 old	 or	 snot-nosed	 runts.’	 She	 glanced	 at	 the	 others	 sitting	 round	 the	 hearth.	 ‘See	 that
village	we	passed	yesterday?	Looked	half	empty.’
‘No	warriors,’	said	Cuttle.	‘All	off	fighting	the	White	Faces.	The	Akryn	can’t	maintain	control	of	this	Kryn


Free	Trade	right	now,	which	also	explains	all	those	D’ras	traders	coming	up	from	the	south.’
Tarr	grunted.	‘Heard	from	some	outriders	about	a	Barghast	camp	they	came	on—site	of	a	big	battle,	and
looks	like	the	White	Faces	got	bloodied.	Might	be	they’re	on	the	run	just	like	the	Akryn	are	saying.’
‘Hard	to	believe	that,’	Cuttle	countered.	‘I’ve	fought	Barghast	and	it’s	no	fun	at	all,	and	the	White	Faces	are
said	to	be	the	toughest	of	the	lot.’
Smiles	unstrapped	her	helm	and	pulled	it	off.	‘Where’s	Koryk	then?’	she	asked.
‘Wandered	off,’	Tarr	answered,	tossing	another	dung	chip	on	to	the	fire.	‘Again,’	he	added.
Smiles	hissed.	‘That	fever,	it	marked	him.	In	the	head.’
‘Just	needs	a	good	scrap,’	Cuttle	ventured.	‘That’ll	settle	him	right	enough.’
‘Could	be	a	long	wait,’	Tarr	said.	‘We’ve	got	weeks	and	weeks	of	travel	ahead	of	us,	through	mostly	empty
territory.	 Aye,	 we’re	 covering	 ground	 awfully	 fast,	 but	 once	 we’re	 done	 with	 the	 territories	 of	 these	 plains
tribes,	 it’ll	 be	 the	 Wastelands.	 No	 one	 can	 even	 agree	 how	 far	 across	 it	 is,	 or	 what’s	 on	 the	 other	 end.’	 He
shrugged.	‘An	army’s	deadliest	enemy	is	boredom,	and	we’re	under	siege	these	days.’
‘Corabb	not	back	yet?’	Smiles	shook	her	head.	‘He	had	two	heavies	with	him	on	the	round.	They	might’ve
got	lost.’
‘Someone	will	find	’em,’	Cuttle	said,	climbing	to	his	feet.	‘I’ll	check	in	on	the	sergeant	again.’
Smiles	watched	him	step	out	of	the	firelight.	She	sighed.	‘Ain’t	had	me	a	knife	fight	in	months.	That	stay	in
Letheras	made	us	soft,	and	them	barges	was	even	worse.’	She	stretched	her	boots	closer	to	the	fire.	‘I	don’t
mind	the	marching,	now	the	blisters	are	gone.	At	least	we’re	squads	again.’
‘We	need	us	a	new	scam,’	Tarr	said.	‘You	see	any	scorpions?’
‘Sure,	plenty,’	Smile	replied,	‘but	only	two	kinds.	The	little	nasty	ones	and	the	big	black	ones.	Besides,	we	try
that	again	and	people	will	get	suspicious—even	if	we	could	find	a	good	cheat.’	She	mulled	on	the	notion	for	a
time,	and	then	shook	her	head.	‘It’s	no	good,	Tarr.	The	mood’s	all	wrong.’
He	 squinted	 across	 at	 her.	 ‘Sharp.	 You’re	 right.	 It’s	 like	 we’re	 past	 all	 that,	 and	 it’ll	 never	 come	 again.
Amazing,	that	I	should	feel	nostalgic	about	Seven	Cities	and	that	miserable,	useless	march.	We	were	raw,	aye,
but	what	we	were	trying	to	do,	it	made	sense.	That’s	the	difference.	It	made	sense.’
Smiles	snorted.	‘Hood’s	breath,	Tarr.’
‘What?’
‘Cuttle’s	right.	None	of	it	made	sense.	Never	did,	never	will.	Look	at	us.	We	march	around	and	cut	up	other
people,	and	they	do	the	same	to	us—if	they	can.	Look	at	Lether—aye,	it’s	now	got	a	decent	King	and	people
can	breathe	easy	and	go	about	their	lives—but	what’s	in	those	lives?	Scraping	for	the	next	bag	of	coins,	the
next	meal.	Scrubbing	bowls,	praying	to	the	damned	gods	for	the	next	catch	and	calm	seas.	It	ain’t	for	nothing,
Tarr,	and	that’s	the	truth.	It	ain’t	for	nothing.’
‘That	fishing	village	you	come	from	was	a	real	hole,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Leave	it.’
‘I	didn’t	bring	it	up,	soldier.	You	did.’
‘It	was	no	different	from	anywhere	else,	that’s	my	point.	I	bet	you	wasn’t	sorry	to	get	out	from	wherever
you	come	from,	either.	If	it	was	all	you	wanted,	you	wouldn’t	be	here,	would	you?’
‘Some	people	don’t	go	through	their	lives	searching,	Smiles.	I’m	not	looking,	because	I’m	not	expecting	to
find	 anything.	 You	 want	 meaning?	 Make	 it	 up.	 You	 want	 truth?	 Invent	 it.	 Makes	 no	 difference,	 to	 anything.
Sun	comes	up,	sun	goes	down.	We	see	one,	maybe	we	don’t	see	the	other,	but	the	sun	doesn’t	care,	does	it?’
‘Right,’	she	said,	‘so	we’re	in	agreement.’
‘Not	 quite.	 I’m	 not	 saying	 it’s	 not	 worth	 it.	 I’m	 saying	 the	 opposite.	 You	 make	 worlds,	 worlds	 inside	 your
head	and	worlds	outside,	but	only	the	one	inside	counts	for	anything.	It’s	where	you	find	peace,	acceptance.
Worth.	 You,	 you’re	 just	 talking	 about	 everything	 being	 useless.	 Starting	 with	 yourself.	 That’s	 a	 bad	 attitude,
Smiles.	Worse	than	Cuttle’s.’
‘Where	are	we	marching	to,	then?’
‘Fate’s	got	a	face,	and	we’re	going	to	meet	it	eye	to	eye.	The	rest	I	don’t	care	about.’
‘So	you’ll	follow	the	Adjunct.	Anywhere.	Like	a	dog	on	a	master’s	heel.’
‘Why	not?	It’s	all	the	same	to	me.’
‘I	don’t	get	you.’
‘There’s	nothing	to	get.	I’m	a	soldier	and	so	are	you.	What	more	do	you	want?’


‘I	want	a	damned	war!’
‘It’s	coming.’
‘What	makes	you	so	sure	of	that?’
‘Because	we’re	an	army	on	the	march.	If	the	Adjunct	didn’t	need	an	army,	she’d	have	dissolved	the	whole
thing	in	Lether.’
‘Maybe,	maybe	not.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’	he	asked.
‘I	mean,	maybe	she’s	just	selfish.’
The	dung	burned	down	to	layered	glowing	chips.	Moths	spun	round	the	licking	flames.	Silence	descended	on
the	two	soldiers,	who	had	nothing	more	to	say	to	each	other.	At	least	for	this	night.
	
Cuttle	found	his	sergeant	lying	on	the	floor.	A	jug	of	rum	lay	on	its	side	close	by.	The	confined	space	reeked	of
puke	with	the	rum’s	heady	layer	settling	on	it	like	sweet	sap.
‘Dammit,	Fid,	that	won’t	help	your	gut.’
‘I	ain’t	got	a	gut	no	more,’	Fiddler	replied	in	a	slur.	‘I	tossed	it	up	a	bell	ago.’
‘Come	the	morning,	your	skull’s	gonna	crack	open.’
‘Too	late.	Go	’way,	Cu’ll.’
The	sapper	drew	one	edge	of	the	cot	closer	and	settled	down.	‘Who	was	it,	then?’
‘Iz	all	changed,	Cu’ll.	Iz	all	goin’	bad.’
‘That’s	 news	 to	 me?	 Listen,	 this	 fast	 march—I’ve	 already	 worn	 out	 one	 pair	 of	 boots—but	 it’s	 got	 to	 tell
you	something.	The	Adjunct,	she’s	got	a	nose—she	can	sniff	things	out	better	than	you,	I	think.	Ever	since	the
barges,	we’ve	been	damned	near	on	the	run.	And	even	before	what	happened	tonight,	you’ve	been	a	haunted
man.’	He	rubbed	at	the	bristle	on	his	cheeks.	‘I’ll	follow	you,	Fid,	you	know	that.	I’ve	got	your	back,	always.’
‘Don’	mind	me,	Cu’ll.	It’s	the	young	ones,	y’got	to	guard	their	backs,	not	mine.’
‘You’re	seeing	a	lot	of	dead	faces,	aren’t	you?’
‘I	ain’t	no	seer.’
Cuttle	grunted.	‘It’s	a	precious	day,	you	ain’t	talking	it	up.	Squad’s	the	thing,	you	keep	tellin’	’em.	The	soldier
at	your	side,	the	one	whose	sweat	stink	you	smell	every	damned	day.	We’re	family,	you	say.	Sergeant,	you’re
making	us	nervous.’
Fiddler	slowly	sat	up,	clutched	at	his	head.	‘Fishing,’	he	said.
‘What?’
‘There’s	a	demon	in	the	deep.	Sly	eyes	.	.	.	watchin’	the	bait,	y’see?	Jus’	watchin.	Quick	Ben,	he’s	got	to
show	himself.	Finally.	We	need	’em,	we	need	’em	all.’
‘Fid,	you’re	drunk.’
‘Darkness’	got	an	edge.	Sharp,	the	blackest	ice—cold	like	you	never	imagined.	You	don’t	get	it.	Here	we
was,	all	yippin’	and	dancin’,	but	now	the	biggest	wolf	of	all	has	returned.	Games	are	over,	Cuttle.’
‘What	about	the	Adjunct?	Fiddler?’
He	looked	up	with	red,	bleary	eyes.	‘She	don’t	stand	a	chance.	Gods	below,	not	a	chance.’
	
‘Is	that	the	camp?	It’s	got	to	be.’	Corabb	looked	at	his	companions.	Three	blank	faces	stared	back	at	him.	‘It’s
all	lit	up,	too	big	for	a	caravanserai.	Let’s	go.’
He	led	the	way	down	the	grassy	slope,	waving	as	a	cloud	of	midges	rose	to	engulf	them.	‘We	should	never
have	followed	that	rabbit—this	is	no	place	to	get	lost	in,	didn’t	I	say	that?	The	land	rolls	too	much.	You	could
hide	whole	armies	in	these	valleys.’
‘Maybe	 that’s	 what	 they	 did,’	 Saltlick	 said.	 ‘Hey,	 Corabb,	 did	 you	 think	 of	 that?	 They’s	 playing	 a	 trick	 on
us.’
‘The	whole	Bonehunter	army?	That’s	stupid.’
‘It	was	a	big	rabbit,’	said	Drawfirst.
‘It	wasn’t	a	rabbit	at	all,’	Saltlick	insisted.	‘It	was	a	wolf.	Rabbits	ain’t	got	glowing	eyes	and	a	bloody	muzzle
and	they	don’t	snarl	neither.’
‘It	got	a	bloody	muzzle	biting	you,’	Drawfirst	pointed	out.


‘Passed	right	by	me—who	wouldn’t	jump	on	it	being	so	close?	It’s	dark	out	here,	you	know.	But	I	jumped
on	rabbits	before,	and	that	was	no	rabbit.’
‘Beasts	are	different	here,’	Drawfirst	said.	‘We	keep	hearing	howling,	but	that	could	be	rabbits,	how	do	we
know?	Did	you	see	those	lizard	hides	them	D’ras	was	selling?	Those	lizards	was	even	bigger	than	the	ones	we
saw	from	the	barge.	Those	lizards	could	eat	a	horse.’
‘That’s	how	they	catch	’em	down	south,	that’s	what	the	trader	said.	They	stick	a	big	hook	through	a	horse
and	throw	it	in	the	river—’
‘That	won’t	work	unless	you	tie	a	rope	to	the	hook.’
‘He	didn’t	mention	that,	but	it	makes	sense.’
They	were	drawing	closer	to	the	sea	of	campfires—well,	Corabb	amended,	maybe	not	a	sea.	More	like	a
big	lake.	But	an	awfully	big	lake.	He	glanced	over	at	Flashwit,	who	wasn’t	saying	much,	but	then	she	rarely
did.	All	she	did	was	smile	and	wasn’t	it	a	lovely	smile?	It	was.
‘If	we	hooked	a	rabbit,’	said	Saltlick,	‘we	could	catch	wolves.’
‘Hook	a	horse	and	we’d	get	an	even	bigger	wolf,	I	bet.’
‘We	 got	 horses,	 too.	 That’s	 an	 idea,	 Drawfirst,	 it	 surely	 is.	 Hey,	 Corabb,	 we’re	 gonna	 jump	 the	 next	 big
lizard	we	see.	For	its	skin.	You	want	in?’
‘No.’
A	distant	howl	sounded,	drifting	mournfully	through	the	night.
‘Hear	that?’	Saltlick	asked.	‘More	rabbits—keep	an	eye	out,	Drawfirst.	You	too,	Flashwit.’
‘That	sounded	more	like	a	hooked	horse,’	Drawfirst	muttered.
Corabb	halted.	‘Cut	it	out,	all	of	you.	I’m	Fid’s	heavy,	right?	I	stand	just	like	you	do.’	He	pointed	at	Flashwit.
‘Don’t	even	think	of	winking.	I	spent	half	my	life	making	mistakes	about	people,	and	I	vowed	I’d	never	do	that
again.	So	I	keep	my	peace,	but	I	pay	attention,	right?	I’m	a	heavy,	too.	So	stop	it.’
‘We	was	jus’	havin’	fun,	Corabb,’	Saltlick	said.	‘You	could	always	join	in.’
‘I	don’t	believe	in	funny	things.	Now,	come	on,	we	done	enough	walking.’
They	 walked	 a	 further	 twenty	 paces	 before	 a	 sentry	 in	 the	 gloom	 ahead	 barked	 something—in	 Letherii.
‘Hood’s	breath,’	hissed	Corabb.	‘We	done	found	the	other	army.’
‘Nobody	can	hide	from	the	Bonehunters,’	intoned	Drawfirst.
	
Koryk	stood	in	darkness,	a	hundred	paces	out	from	the	nearest	picket.	He	had	a	memory	that	might	be	real	or
invented—he	 could	 not	 be	 certain.	 A	 dozen	 youths	 commandeered	 to	 dig	 a	 latrine	 trench	 for	 some	 garrison
troop	out	on	manoeuvres.	Seti	and	Seti	half-bloods,	back	when	they	were	young	enough	to	see	no	difference
between	the	two,	no	reason	yet	for	contempt,	envy	and	all	the	rest.
He’d	been	one	of	the	runts,	and	so	his	friends	set	him	against	a	boulder	at	the	far	end	of	the	pit,	where	he
could	strain	and	sweat	and	fail.	Blistered	hands	struggling	with	the	oversized	pick,	he	had	worked	the	whole
morning	trying	to	dislodge	that	damned	boulder—with	the	others	looking	over	every	now	and	then	with	jeers
and	laughter.
Failure	 wasn’t	 a	 pleasant	 notion.	 It	 stung.	 It	 burned	 like	 acid.	 On	 that	 day,	 he	 now	 believed,	 young	 Koryk
had	decided	he	would	never	again	accept	failure.	He’d	dislodged	that	boulder	in	the	end,	with	dusk	fast	coming
on,	the	other	boys	long	gone	and	that	troop	of	riders—their	little	exercise	in	independence	done—riding	off	in	a
cloud	that	hung	like	a	god’s	mocking	breath	of	gold	dust.
That	 rock	 had	 been	 firmly	 lodged	 in	 place.	 It	 had	 hidden	 a	 cache	 of	 coins.	 As	 twilight	 crept	 in,	 he	 found
himself	on	his	knees	at	one	end	of	the	trench,	with	a	vast	treasure	cupped	in	his	hands.	Mostly	silver,	a	few
tiny	gold	clips,	not	one	recognizable	to	Koryk’s	pathetically	limited	experience—this	was	a	spirit	hoard,	straight
out	from	 Seti	legends.	 ‘Under	 any	 stone,	 lad	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 Yes,	 the	 whores	 who’d	 raised	 him	 had	 plenty	 of	 tales.
Could	be	the	whole	memory	was	just	one	of	those	tales.	A	pathetic	story,	but	.	.	.
He’d	found	a	treasure,	that	was	the	meaning	of	it.	Something	precious,	wonderful,	rare.
And	what	did	he	do	with	his	spirit	hoard?
Squandered	it.	Every	last	fucking	coin.	Gone,	and	what	was	left	to	show	for	it?
Whores	are	warm	to	the	touch,	but	they	hide	their	souls	inside	a	cold	keep.	It’s	when	you	surrender	to
that	world	that	you	know	you	are	truly	lost,	you	are	finally	.	.	.	alone.
It’s	all	cold	to	the	touch	these	days.	Everything.	And	now	I	spend	the	rest	of	my	years	blaming	every


damned	coin.
But	nobody’s	fooled.	Except	me.	Always	me.	Forever	me.
He	longed	to	draw	his	sword,	to	vanish	into	the	mad	mayhem	of	battle.	He	could	then	cut	in	two	every	face
on	every	coin,	howling	that	it	made	a	difference,	that	a	life	wasn’t	empty	if	it	was	filled	with	detritus.	He	could
scream	and	curse	and	see	not	a	single	friend—only	enemies.	Justifying	every	slice,	every	lash	of	blood.	At	the
very	least,	he	vowed,	he’d	be	the	last	one	standing.
Smiles	said	the	fever	had	scarred	him.	Perhaps	it	had.	Perhaps	it	would	from	now	on.	It	had	done	one	thing
for	certain:	it	had	shown	him	the	truth	of	solitude.	And	that	truth	was	seared	into	his	soul.	He	listened	to	Fiddler
going	 on	 and	 on	 about	 this	 so-called	 family	 of	 companions,	 and	 he	 believed	 none	 of	 it.	 Betrayals	 stalked	 the
future—he	felt	it	in	his	bones.	There	was	coming	a	time	when	everything	would	cut	clear,	and	he	could	stand
before	 them	 all	 and	 speak	 aloud	 the	 fullest	 measure	 of	 his	 distrust.	 We	 are	 each	 of	 us	 alone.	 We	 always
were.	I	am	done	with	all	your	lies.	Now,	save	yourselves.	As	I	intend	to	do	for	myself.
He	 wasn’t	 interested	 in	 any	 last	 stands.	 The	 Adjunct	 asked	 for	 faith,	 loyalty.	 She	 asked	 for	 honesty,	 no
matter	how	brutal,	how	incriminating.	She	asked	for	too	much.	Besides,	she	gave	them	nothing	in	return,	did
she?
Koryk	stood,	facing	the	empty	land	in	the	empty	night,	and	contemplated	deserting.
Everything	they	gave	me	was	a	lie,	a	betrayal.	It	was	the	spirit	hoard,	you	see.	Those	coins.	Someone
put	them	there	to	lure	me	in,	to	trap	me.	They	poisoned	me—not	my	fault,	how	could	it	be?
‘Look	at	him	under	that	boulder!	Careful,	Koryk,	playing	under	there	will	get	you	crushed!’
Too	late.	It	was	all	those	fucking	coins	that	did	me	in.	You	can’t	fill	a	boy’s	hands	like	that.	You	just
can’t.
It	was	a	memory.	Maybe	real,	maybe	not.
The	whores,	they	just	wink.
	
Skanarow’s	 lithe	 form	 rippled	 with	 shadows	 as	 someone	 outside	 the	 tent	 walked	 past	 bearing	 a	 lantern.	 The
light	coming	through	the	canvas	was	cool,	giving	her	sleeping	form	a	deathly	hue.	Chilled	by	the	vision,	Ruthan
Gudd	looked	away.	He	sat	up,	moving	slowly	to	keep	her	from	waking.
The	sweat	that	had	sheathed	him	earlier	was	drying	on	his	skin.
He	 had	 no	 interest	 in	 revisiting	 the	 cause	 of	 his	 extremity—it	 wasn’t	 the	 love-making,	 Hood	 knew.	 As
pleasing	as	she	was—with	that	sudden	smile	of	hers	that	could	melt	mountains	of	ice—Skanarow	didn’t	have	it
in	 her	 to	 send	 his	 heart	 thundering	 the	 way	 it	 had	 not	 long	 ago.	 She	 could	 delight,	 she	 could	 steal	 him	 away
from	his	thoughts,	his	memories	of	a	grim	and	eventful	life;	she	could,	in	bright,	stunning	flashes,	give	him	back
his	life.
But	 this	 night	 darkness	 had	 opened	 its	 flower,	 with	 a	 scent	 that	 could	 freeze	 a	 god’s	 soul.	 Still	 alive,
Greymane?	 Did	 you	 feel	 it?	 I	 think,	 your	 bones	 could	 be	 rotting	 in	 the	 ground	 right	 now,	 old	 friend,
and	still	you’d	have	felt	it.
Draconus.
Fuck.
He	combed	through	the	damp	snarl	of	his	beard.
The	world	shook.	Balls	of	fire	descending,	the	terrible	light	filling	the	sky.	Fists	hammering	the	world.
Wish	I’d	seen	it.
But	he	remembered	the	Azath’s	deathcry.	He	remembered	the	gnarled	trees	engulfed	 in	 pillars	 of	 flames,
the	bitter	heat	of	the	soil	he’d	clawed	through.	He	remembered	staggering	free	beneath	a	crazed	sky	of	lurid
smoke,	 lightning	 and	 a	 deluge	 of	 ashes.	 He	 remembered	 his	 first	 thought,	 riding	 that	 breath	 of	 impossible
freedom.
Jacuruku,	you’ve	changed.
One	found	loyalty	under	the	strangest	circumstances.	Penitence	and	gratitude,	arms	entwined,	a	moment’s
lustful	 exultation	 mistaken	 for	 worship.	 His	 gaze	 flicked	 back	 to	 Skanarow.	 The	 shadows	 and	 ill	 hue	 were
gone.	She	slept,	beauty	in	repose.	Innocence	was	so	precious.	But	do	not	think	of	me	with	love,	woman.	Do
not	force	upon	me	a	moment	of	confession,	the	truth	of	foolish	vows	uttered	a	lifetime	ago.
Let	us	play	this	game	of	blissful	oblivion	a	little	while	longer.
‘It’s	better	this	way,	Draconus.’


‘This	is	Kallor’s	empire,	friend.	Will	you	not	reconsider?’
Reconsider.	Yes,	there	is	that.	‘The	shore	seems	welcoming	enough.	If	I	mind	my	own	business	.	.	.’
He’d	smiled	at	that.
And	I	smiled	back.
Draconus	returned	to	that	continent—I	felt	his	footfalls,	there	inside	my	seemingly	eternal	prison.	He
returned	to	see	for	himself	the	madness	of	Kallor.
You	were	right,	Draconus.	I	should	have	minded	my	own	business.	For	once.
Can	you	hear	me	now?	Draconus?	Are	you	listening?
I	have	reconsidered.	At	long	last.	And	so	I	give	you	this.	Find	me,	and	one	of	us	will	die.
	
‘It’s	the	swirl	in	the	dog’s	fur.’
Balm	stared.	‘What?’
Widdershins	scowled.	‘You	want	this	divination	or	not?’
‘I	ain’t	so	sure	no	more.’
The	mage	stared	down	at	the	mangy	creature	he	held	by	the	scruff	of	the	neck,	and	then	snarled	and	sent	it
winging	through	the	air.
Deadsmell	 and	 Balm	 and	 Throatslitter	 watched	 the	 thing	 twist	 smartly	 in	 the	 air	 and	 manage	 in	 the	 last
possible	 instant	 to	 land	 splayed	 out	 wide	 on	 its	 four	 paws,	 whereupon	 with	 a	 flick	 of	 its	 bushy	 tail	 it	 bolted,
vanishing	into	the	night.
‘Just	like	a	damned	cat,’	Throatslitter	said.
‘Wasn’t	even	a	dog,’	Deadsmell	said.
Widdershins	threw	up	a	hand	in	dismissal.	‘Dog,	fox,	what’s	the	difference?	Now	I’ll	need	to	find	something
else.’
‘How	about	a	sheepskin?’	Balm	asked.
‘Is	a	sheepskin	alive?	No.	Won’t	work.	Needs	to	be	breathing.’
‘Because	breathing	fluffs	the	swirls,’	Balm	said,	nodding.	‘I	get	it.’
Widdershins	cast	a	helpless	look	upon	Deadsmell,	who	shrugged	and	then	said,	‘This	whole	thing’s	a	waste
of	 time	 anyway.	 Every	 seer	 and	 diviner	 in	 the	 whole	 damned	 world’s	 got	 scrambled	 brains	 right	 now.’	 He
gingerly	 touched	 his	 own	 neck.	 ‘I	 swear	 I	 felt	 that	 sword’s	 bite.	 What	 was	 Hood	 thinking?	 It’s	 insane.	 The
whole	thing—’
‘Never	mind	Hood,’	snapped	Widdershins.	‘Wasn’t	him	made	me	wet	my	trousers.’
Balm	stared	with	huge	eyes.	‘Did	you	really?	Gods	below.’
Throatslitter	burst	out	a	sudden,	piping	laugh.	Then	ducked.	‘Sorry.	Just	.	.	.	well,	never	mind.’
Widdershins	spat	on	the	ground.	‘None	of	this	is	funny,	Throatslitter.	You	don’t	get	it.	That	.	.	.	that	thing.	It
didn’t	show	up	on	the	other	side	of	the	world.	It	showed	up	here.’
Balm	started,	looked	round.	‘Where?	Get	me	my	armour—who—what—’
‘Relax,	Sergeant,’	Deadsmell	said.	‘He	didn’t	mean	“here”	as	in	right	here.	He	meant	it	as	.	.	.	Wid,	what
did	you	mean,	exactly?’
‘What’s	with	the	jokes?	You’re	as	bad	as	Throatslitter.	I	don’t	know	why	I’m	talking	to	any	of	you.’
‘We	 wanted	 a	 divination,’	 said	 Throatslitter.	 ‘I’m	 changing	 my	 mind.	 It	 was	 a	 stupid	 idea.	 You	 think	 Fid’s
playing	with	the	Deck	right	now?	Not	a	chance.	Forget	it,	I’m	going	to	bed.	Not	that	I’ll	get	any	sleep.	In	fact
—’
Balm	stepped	up	and	punched	Widdershins.	The	man	fell	in	a	heap.
Throatslitter	yelped	again.	‘Sergeant!	What	did	you	do	that	for?’
Frowning,	Balm	rubbed	at	his	knuckles.	‘He	said	he	wasn’t	gonna	get	any	sleep.	He’s	asleep	now.	You	two,
drag	him	to	his	tent.	It’s	time	to	take	charge	of	things	and	that’s	what	I’m	doing.	Once	you	get	him	tucked	in,
why,	we	can	go	find	Ebron.	We’ll	get	a	divination	tonight	if	it	kills	us.’
	
‘I	need	more	corporals,’	Hellian	announced	to	the	night	sky.	She’d	been	sitting	by	the	hearth,	staring	into	the
flames.	 But	 now	 she	 was	 on	 her	 back,	 beneath	 spinning	 stars.	 The	 world	 could	 change	 in	 an	 instant.	 Who
decided	things	like	that?	‘One	ain’t	enough.	Ballsgird,	you’re	now	a	corporal.	You	too,	Probbly.’


‘It’s	Maybe.’
‘No,	I	made	up	my	mind.’
‘And	Balgrid.’
‘Tha’s	what	I	said.	As	soon	as	the	earthquake’s	over,	we’ll	get	right	on	it.	Who	am	I	missing?	How	many	in
my	squad?	Four	of	ya,	right?	That	last	one,	he’s	a	corporal	now,	too.	I	want	four	corporals,	t’take	my	orders.’
‘What	orders?’
‘The	ones	I	come	up	with.	Firs’	off,	you’re	all	my	bodyguards—I’m	done	with	Skulldumb—keep	him	away
from	me.’
‘He’s	convinced	you’re	royalty,	Sergeant.’
‘An’	I	am,	Iffy,	so	you	got	to	do	what	I	say.	Where	my	’riginal	corporal?	Touchy	Breath?	You	here?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Yes,	Sergeant.’
‘I	can’t	be	looking	at	this	mess	any	longer.	Take	me	to	my	tent—no,	quit	that,	don’t	help	me	up,	you	idiots.
Take	my	feet.	Nice	an’	slow	now—ow,	who	put	rocks	under	me?	Corperl	Marble,	clear	them	rocks,	will	ya?
Gods,	where’s	my	tent?	Letheras?’
‘We’re	looking,	Sergeant—didn’t	you	put	it	up?’
‘Me?	You’re	my	corperl,	that	was	your	job.’
‘Hold	on,	Sergeant.	Just	rest	here—we’re	on	it.’
‘So	I	should	think.	Derliction	of	duty.	Gi’me	a	wax	and	a	stick,	someone,	got	to	write	you	up.	I’m	bustin’	you
down,	to	.	.	.	to,	uh,	undercorperl.	What’s	that	pounding?’
‘Putting	the	stakes	down,	Sergeant.	Not	long	now.’
‘Hey!	Look	at	those	green	things!	In	the	sky!	Who	put	those	there—get	rid	of	’em!’
‘Wish	I	could,	Sergeant.’
‘You’re	now	an	unnerunnercorperl—for	disobeying	unners.	Orners.	Oars.	Udders.	Hold	on.’	She	rolled	on
to	 her	 side	 and	 was	 sick,	 but	 in	 a	 lazy	 way.	 ‘Orders.	 Hah.	 Hey,	 where	 you	 dragging	 me	 to?	 I	 wasn’t	 done
there.	 Something’s	 in	 the	 sky—I	 saw	 it—cut	 right	 across	 those	 greens.	 Saw	 it,	 corperls,	 you	 lissinin’?	 Big
wings—I	saw	.	.	.	oh,	whatever.	Someone’s	in	turble,	but	it	ain’t	me.	Check	that	tent	now—no	spiders	allowed
—stupid	stars,	how’d	they	get	in	here?’
	
Gesler	 brought	 the	 lantern	 close.	 ‘Look	 at	 that,	 will	 you?	 One	 of	 Bottle’s	 rats	 did	 that,	 I	 bet.	 Chewed	 right
through	the	Hood-damned	strap.	If	I	catch	’im,	I’m	going	to	twist	his	tiny	head	right	off.’
‘The	rat	or	Bottle?’	Stormy	asked.
‘Either.	Both.	I	knew	it	was	hanging	funny,	down	on	one	shoulder—’
‘Aye,’	Stormy	said,	‘you	looked	ridiculous.	Lopsided.	Like	some	green	recruit	ain’t	figured	out	how	to	wear
the	slingwork.’
Gesler	glared	across	at	his	corporal.	‘And	you	didn’t	say	nothing	all	day—some	friend	you	are.	What	if	I	got
snot	smeared	across	half	my	face—you	just	going	to	stand	there?’
‘Count	on	it,’	Stormy	said,	‘assuming	I	can	keep	a	straight	face.’
‘Next	time	I	see	you	with	bark-hair	hanging	from	your	back	end,	I	ain’t	saying	a	thing.’
‘Pays	to	check	twice—I	learned	that	much.	Think	we	should	go	find	Flashwit?	She’s	way	overdue.’
‘Send	Mayfly	and	Shortnose.’
‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
Gesler	paused	in	his	tugging	loose	the	chewed-through	strap.	‘Huh.	Right.	Off	you	go,	then.’
‘Sure	you	don’t	need	any	help	there?’
‘Naw,	you	done	too	much	already.’
‘That’s	 just	 it—I’m	 all	 wore	 out,	 Ges.	 I’m	 too	 old	 to	 march	 the	 way	 we’re	 marching	 right	 now.	 I’ll	 be
walking	on	stumpy	knees	if	this	goes	on	much	longer.’
‘Thus	matching	your	intellectual	height.	Know	what	your	problem	is,	Stormy?	You’ve	gone	all	edgy.’
The	huge	Falari	snorted.	‘Ges,	we	just	saw	a	hundred	or	so	squad	mages	fall	out	of	line,	leaking	every	which
way,	 eyes	 rolling	 up	 inside	 their	 skulls,	 kicking	 and	 gagging.	 And	 our	 scary	 High	 Mage	 reeled	 like	 a	 damned
drunk	and	nearly	brained	himself	on	a	wagon’s	edge.	Fid	lost	his	last	five	meals.’
‘None	of	that’s	got	anything	to	do	with	you	going	round	saying	someone’s	spyin’	on	us,	Stormy.’


‘I’m	 just	 telling	 you	 what	 I’m	 feeling,	 that’s	 all.	 Like	 an	 itch	 between	 my	 shoulder-blades,	 you	 know	 the
kind.	And	it’s	only	got	worse	since	whatever	happened	.	.	.	happened.’
‘Fid	said	you’re	just	imagining	things—’
‘No	he	didn’t.	He	didn’t	say	anything—he	wouldn’t	even	meet	my	eyes—you	were	there,	you	saw.’
‘Well,	maybe	he	didn’t	say	anything,	but	then,	he	didn’t	have	to.’
‘I	been	having	strange	dreams,	Ges.’
‘So?’
‘Stuff	 falling	 out	 of	 the	 sky.	 I	 look	 up	 and	 I’m	 right	 under	 it	 and	 there’s	 no	 way	 to	 escape.	 Can’t	 run	 far
enough	or	fast	enough,	can’t	do	anything,	except	watch	it	come	down	on	me.’	He	leaned	forward	and	slapped
his	hand	on	the	ground,	making	Gesler	jump.	‘Like	that.	You’d	think	I’d	wake	up	then.	But	I	don’t.	I	just	lie
there,	crushed,	feeling	all	that	weight.	Can’t	move	a	muscle,	can’t	even	breathe.’
Gesler	tossed	down	his	hauberk	and	harness.	‘Stand	up,	Stormy,	you’re	coming	with	me.’
‘Where?’
‘Walk,	Corporal,	it’s	an	order.’
Gesler	led	Stormy	through	the	camp,	passing	cookfires	with	their	huddled,	muttering	circles	of	soldiers.	They
threaded	 through	 the	 cutters’	 station,	 where	 weary	 healers	 worked	 on	 soldiers	 suffering	 blistered	 feet,	 ankle
sprains	 and	 whatnot,	 and	 then	 out	 past	 the	 first	 of	 the	 horse	 corrals.	 Ahead	 was	 a	 trio	 of	 laden	 wagons,	 an
oversized	carriage,	and	fifteen	or	so	tents.
Gesler	called	out	as	they	approached.	‘Hedge?’
A	 figure	 came	 round	 one	 end	 of	 the	 carriage	 and	 walked	 over.	 ‘Gesler?	 You	 deserting	 the	 Bonehunters?
Come	 to	 join	 the	 Bridgeburners?	 Smart	 lads—the	 legend’s	 right	 here	 and	 nowhere	 else.	 I	 got	 these	 soldiers
stepping	smart,	but	they	could	do	with	your	learnin’	and	that’s	a	fact.’
‘Enough	of	the	rubbish,’	Gesler	said.	‘Where’s	your	two	beauties?’
‘Aw,	Gesler,	they’re	beat,	honest—’
‘Wake	’em	up,	both	of	them.	Stormy	here’s	got	a	need.’
‘You	got	a	need,	you	mean—’
‘No,	both	of	them	for	him.	By	the	time	I	come	to	collect	my	corporal,	I	want	this	man’s	rope	so	stretched
it’s	 tangled	 round	 his	 ankles.	 I	 want	 to	 see	 bludgeoned	 bliss	 in	 his	 tiny	 blue	 eyes	 and	 curly	 black	 hairs	 in	 his
beard.	Tell	the	lovelies	I’ll	pay	triple	the	going	rate.’
‘Fine,	only	you	got	to	consider	what	I	said.	About	deserting,	I	mean.’
‘Capital	offence,	Hedge.’
‘Unofficial	transfer,	then.’
‘Keneb	would	never	allow	it.’
‘Fine,	then	just	march	with	my	squads	for	a	week	or	so,	alongside	like,	right?	Give	’em	advice	and	stuff—’
‘Advice?’	 Gesler	 snorted.	 ‘Like	 what?	 “Don’t	 die,	 soldiers.”	 “First	 hint	 of	 trouble,	 strap	 on	 and	 belt	 up.”
“Your	weapon’s	the	thing	strapped	to	your	web.”	How’s	that?’
‘That’s	perfect!’
‘Hedge,	what	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	doing	here?’
The	sapper	glanced	round,	and	then	grasped	Stormy	by	an	arm.	‘See	those	tents,	those	big	ones	there?	Go
on,	Corporal,	tell	the	lasses	it’s	a	special	order.’
Stormy	scowled	across	at	Gesler,	who	scowled	back.
‘I	never	rolled	with	real	fat	women	before—’
‘Nothing	like	it,’	Hedge	said.	‘Get	one	under	ya	and	one	over	ya	and	it’s	all	pillows.	Go	on,	Stormy,	me	and
Ges	got	to	talk.’
‘Pillows,	huh?’
‘Aye.	Nice	warm	pillows.	Step	smartly	now,	Corporal.	There	you	go.’
As	 the	 Falari	 trundled	 off,	 Hedge	 looked	 round	 suspiciously	 once	 more,	 and	 then	 gestured	 for	 Gesler	 to
follow.
‘Bottle’s	using	bats,’	Hedge	muttered	as	they	walked	away	from	the	firelight.	‘Almost	skewered	one	of	his
rats,	y’see,	so	now	he’s	gone	more	cagey.’
‘What’re	you	up	to	that’s	got	him	so	curious,	Hedge?’
‘Nothing.	Honest.’


‘Gods	below,	you’re	a	bad	liar.’
‘Just	comes	from	being	a	legend,	Ges,	all	that	fawning	and	spying.	Y’get	used	to	it,	so	the	precautions,	they
come	natural	now.	All	right,	this	will	do.’
They	had	walked	a	dozen	or	so	paces	past	the	ornate	carriage,	out	beyond	the	faint	glows	from	the	fires,
and	then	Hedge	had	led	him	into	a	circle	of	low	stones	which	Gesler	assumed	was	an	old	tipi	ring.	They	now
stood	within	it.
‘Bottle	could	use	anything	out	here,	Hedge—’
‘No	he	can’t.	I	got	my	company	mage	to	seal	this	circle.	We	do	this	every	night,	for	our	staff	meetings.’
‘Your	what?’
‘Me,	my	sergeants,	corporals	and	Bavedict.	Daily	reports,	right?	To	stay	on	top	of	things.’
‘What	things?’
‘Things.	Now,	listen,	you	heard	anything	yet	about	what	happened	earlier?’
Gesler	shrugged.	‘Some.	There	was	a	gate	and	someone	came	through	it.	Someone	stinking	with	power.’
Hedge	was	nodding	and	then	he	changed	it	to	shaking	his	head.	‘That’s	nothing—so	some	nasty’s	shown	up
—that	means	he’s	here,	in	the	real	world.	Anyone	here	in	the	real	world	can	die	from	a	damned	rotten	tooth,
or	a	knife,	or	whatever.	I	ain’t	shaking	in	my	boots,	and	if	I	have	to,	I’ll	kiss	a	quarrel’s	point	and	whisper	the
fool’s	name.	A	bolt	in	the	eye	can	fuck	up	even	a	god’s	day.	No,	what	really	matters	is	what	happened	before
he	showed	up.’
‘Go	on.’
‘It’s	Hood.’
‘What	about	him?	Oh,	right,	you	and	he	are	best	friends	these	days—or	bitter	enemies—how	does	he	take
you	coming	back,	anyway?’
‘Probably	not	well,	but	it	don’t	matter	any	more.	I	won.’
‘You	won	what?’
‘I	 won!	 The	 Harrower’s	 gone	 and	 gotten	 killed!	 The	 God	 of	 Death	 is	 dead!	 Head	 chopped	 right	 off!	 A
carcass	but	no	grin,	a	bouncer	down	the	hill,	a	roll	and	wobble	and	blink,	a	mouth	mover,	a	hat	stand—’
‘Hold	on,	Hedge!	What—who—but	that	doesn’t	make	sense!	How—’
‘I	don’t	know	and	I	don’t	care!	Details?	Squat	and	shit	on	’em!	Hood’s	dead!	Gone!’
‘But	then,	who’s	taking	the	Throne?’
‘Nobody	and	everybody!’
Gesler’s	right	hand	twitched.	Gods,	how	he	wanted	to	punch	this	grinning	fool!	But	that	nose	had	seen	a	few
dozen	 breaks	 already—he	 doubted	 Hedge	 would	 even	 notice.	 ‘What,’	 he	 said	 carefully,	 ‘do	 you	 mean,
Hedge?’
‘I	 mean,	 there’s	 a	 whole	 crew	 of	 ’em.	 Holding	 the	 gate.	 Nothing’s	 shaken	 out	 yet.	 It’s	 all	 hazy.	 But	 one
thing	I	can	tell	you—and	you	can	ask	Fid	if	you	want—he	won’t	say	any	different	unless	he	lies	to	you.	One
thing,	Ges.	I	can	feel	them.	I	can	feel	him.’
Gesler	stared	at	the	man’s	glittering	eyes.	‘Who?’
‘The	 Fallen	 Bridgeburners,	 Ges.	 And	 aye,	 Whiskeyjack.	 It’s	 him—I’d	 know	 that	 sour	 look	 anywhere,	 no
matter	how	dark	it	is	around	him.	He’s	astride	a	horse.	He’s	in	the	Gate,	Gesler.’
‘Wait.	That’s	who	stepped	through?’
‘Naw,	never	mind	that	one.	That	one	ain’t	got	a	thought	that	ain’t	ten	thousand	years	outa	touch.	Different
gate,	anyway.	I’m	talking	about	Whiskeyjack.	Go	and	die,	Ges,	and	who’d	you	rather	meet	at	the	Gate?	Hood
or	Whiskeyjack?’
‘So	why	ain’t	you	cut	your	own	throat,	if	you’re	so	excited	about	it	all?’
Hedge	frowned.	‘No	reason	t’get	all	edgy.	I	was	a	sapper,	remember.	Sappers	understand	the	importance	of
patience.’
Gesler	choked	back	a	laugh.	From	the	tents	someone	squealed.	He	couldn’t	tell	who.
‘Laugh	all	you	want.	You’ll	be	thankful	enough	when	it’s	your	head	rolling	up	to	that	gate.’
‘I	thought	you	hated	worshipping	anyone,	Hedge.’
‘This	is	different.’
‘If	you	say	so.	Now,	anything	else	you	wanted	to	tell	me	about?’
‘Nothing	you’d	care	about	either	way.	You	can	hand	over	the	coins	now,	though.	Triple	the	going	rate,	right?


Dig	it	out,	Ges,	it’s	getting	late.’
______
Commander	 Brys	 threw	 on	 his	 cloak	 and	 fastened	 the	 breast	 clasp.	 ‘I	 walk	 through	 camp	 before	 settling	 in,
Atri-Ceda.	Join	me,	if	you	please.’
‘Honoured,	my	Prince.’
He	 stepped	 out	 of	 the	 command	 tent	 and	 she	 followed.	 They	 set	 out	 for	 the	 nearest	 row	 of	 legionaries’
tents.	‘That	title	just	won’t	sit	comfortably,	Atri-Ceda,’	he	said	after	a	moment.	‘	“Commander”	or	“sir”	will
do.	In	fact,	when	it’s	just	the	two	of	us,	“Brys”	’.
She	 wondered	 if	 he	 caught	 her	 faint	 gasp,	 or	 noted	 the	 momentary	 wobble	 in	 her	 knees	 as	 she	 moved	 up
alongside	him.
‘Assuming,’	he	continued,	‘you	will	permit	me	to	call	you	Aranict.’
‘Of	 course,	 sir.’	 She	 hesitated,	 could	 feel	 him	 waiting,	 and	 then	 said,	 ‘Brys.’	 A	 wave	 of	 lightheadedness
followed,	as	if	she’d	quaffed	a	tumbler	of	brandy.	Her	mind	spun	wildly	for	a	moment	and	she	drew	a	deep
breath	to	calm	herself.
This	 was	 ridiculous.	 Embarrassing.	 Infuriating.	 She	 itched	 to	 light	 a	 smoker,	 but	 that	 would	 likely	 breach
protocol.
‘At	ease,	Aranict.’
‘Sir?’
‘Relax.	Please—you’re	starting	to	make	me	jumpy.	I	don’t	bite.’
Try	the	right	nipple.	Oh	gods,	shut	up,	woman.	‘Sorry.’
‘I	was	hoping	your	stay	with	the	Malazan	High	Mage	might	have	calmed	you	some.’
‘Oh,	it	has,	sir.	I	mean,	I’m	better.’
‘No	more	fainting?’
‘No.	Well,	almost	once.’
‘What	happened?’
‘At	day’s	end,	I	made	the	mistake	of	being	in	his	tent	when	he	pulled	off	his	boots.’
‘Ah.’	And	then	he	shot	her	a	startled	look,	his	face	lighting	in	a	sudden	smile.	‘Remind	me	to	send	you	out
before	I	do	the	same.’
‘Oh,	sir,	I’m	sure	you	don’t—uh,	that	is,	it’s	not	the	same—’
But	 he	 was	 laughing.	 She	 saw	 soldiers	 round	 campfires	 turn,	 looking	 over	 at	 the	 two	 of	 them.	 She	 saw	 a
few	mutter	jests	and	there	were	grins	and	nods.	Her	face	burned	hot	as	coals.
‘Aranict,	 I	 assure	 you,	 after	 a	 day’s	 fast	 march	 as	 we’ve	 been	 experiencing	 since	 the	 landing,	 my	 socks
could	stun	a	horse.	None	of	us	are	any	different	in	such	matters.’
‘Because	you	choose	to	march	alongside	your	soldiers,	Brys.	When	you	could	ride	or	even	sit	in	one	of	the
grand	carriages,	and	no	one	would	think	ill	of	you—’
‘You	would	be	wrong	in	that,	Aranict.	Oh,	they	might	not	seem	any	different,	outwardly,	saluting	as	smartly
as	 ever	 and	 all	 the	 rest.	 Certain	 to	 follow	 every	 order	 I	 give,	 yes.	 But	 somewhere	 deep	 inside	 every	 one	 of
them,	there’s	a	stone	of	loyalty—when	it	comes	to	most	of	those	giving	them	orders,	that	stone	stays	smooth
and	nothing	sticks,	it	all	washes	off.	And	so	it	would	be	with	me	as	well,	were	I	to	take	any	other	path	than	the
one	 they	 happen	 to	 be	 on.	 But,	 you	 see,	 there	 may	 come	 a	 time	 when	 I	 must	 demand	 of	 my	 soldiers
something	 .	 .	 .	 impossible.	 If	 the	 stone	 was	 still	 smooth—if	 it	 did	 not	 have	 my	 name	 carved	 deep	 into	 it—I
could	lose	them.’
‘Sir,	they	would	never	mutiny—’
‘Not	 as	 such.	 But	 in	 asking	 for	 the	 impossible,	 I	 would	 intend	 that	 they	 succeed	 in	 achieving	 it.	 The
impossible	is	not	the	same	as	sending	them	to	their	deaths.	That	I	would	never	do.	But	if	I	am	to	ask	more	of
them	than	any	commander	has	even	the	right	to	ask	of	his	or	her	soldiers,	then	I	must	be	with	them,	and	be
seen	to	be	with	them.
‘Tonight,’	he	continued,	‘you	must	become	my	Atri-Ceda	again	for	a	time,	and	I	your	commander.	When	we
speak	with	our	soldiers.	When	we	ask	them	how	they	fared	on	this	day.	When	we	endeavour	to	answer	their
questions	 and	 concerns,	 as	 best	 we	 can.’	 He	 paused,	 his	 steps	 slowing.	 They	 were	 in	 a	 gap	 of	 relative
darkness	 between	 two	 cookfires.	 ‘Especially	 on	 this	 night,’	 he	 said,	 his	 tone	 low.	 ‘They	 are	 shaken—word’s
come	of	the	affliction	striking	the	Malazan	mages.’


‘Yes,	Commander.	I	understand.	In	fact,	High	Mage	Delat	wondered,	er,	rather,	he	asked	me.	About	you.
Said	that	you	may	seem	.	.	.	different	now	.	.	.	sir.’
‘And	what	will	you	tell	him,	when	next	you	two	meet?’
‘I—I	am	not	sure,	sir.	I	think	so.	Maybe	.	.	.’
‘He	is	a	clever	man,’	Brys	said.	‘This	evening,	Aranict,	I	felt	as	if	.	.	.	well,	as	if	I	had	awakened,	stepped
out	 from	 a	 dark,	 cold	 place.	 A	 place	 I’d	 thought	 was	 the	 real	 world,	 the	 honest	 world—the	 coldness,	 I’d
thought,	 was	 simply	 what	 I	 had	 never	 before	 noticed—before	 my	 death	 and	 resurrection,	 I	 mean.	 But	 I
understand,	now,	that	the	cold	and	darkness	were	within	me,	death’s	own	touch	upon	my	soul.’
She	stared	at	him,	adoring,	eyes	bright.	‘And	it	is	gone	now,	sir?’
His	returning	smile	was	all	the	answer	she	needed.
‘Now,	Atri-Ceda,	let	us	speak	with	our	soldiers.’
‘Carving	the	stone,	sir.’
‘Just	that.’
No	need	to	worry	about	mine.	I	am	yours.	That	stone,	it’s	all	melted,	reshaped—Errant	save	me,	it’s
got	your	face	now.	Oh,	and	about	that	biting—
	
As	 they	 stepped	 into	 the	 firelight,	 Brys	 chanced	 to	 glance	 across	 at	 his	 Atri-Ceda,	 and	 what	 he	 saw	 in	 her
expression—quickly	veiled	but	not	quickly	enough—almost	took	his	breath	away.
Lascivious	 hunger,	 a	 half-smile	 upon	 her	 lips,	 a	 fancy	 snared	 in	 the	 reflecting	 flames	 in	 her	 eyes.	 For	 an
instant,	 he	 was	 at	 a	 loss	 for	 words,	 and	 could	 only	 smile	 his	 greeting	 as	 the	 soldiers	 turned	 and	 voiced	 their
heartfelt	welcome.
Aranict.	 I	 truly	 was	 half-dead	 inside,	 to	 have	 so	 thoroughly	 missed	 what	 is	 now	 so	 obvious.	 The
question	now	is,	what	am	I	to	do	about	it?	About	you?
That	look,	there	was	a	darkness	upon	it—not	cold	as	I	found	in	myself—but	hot	as	a	burning	ember.
Is	it	any	wonder	I	so	often	see	you	standing	inside	swirls	of	smoke?
Atri-Ceda,	what	am	I	to	do?
But	he	knew	he	would	have	no	answer	to	that	question,	not	until	he	knew	his	own	feelings.	It	all	seemed	so
new,	 so	 peculiar,	 so	 unfamiliar.	 All	 at	 once—and	 he	 felt	 the	 shift	 with	 a	 grinding	 lurch—she	 was	 the	 one
standing	so	self-possessed	and	content	inside	her	own	inner	world’s	visions—whatever	they	happened	to	be—
while	he	stood	awkwardly	at	her	side,	flustered,	dumbstruck.
Ridiculous.	Set	it	aside	for	later,	Brys.
	
This	soldiering	business	was	getting	easier,	Sunrise	decided.	Plenty	of	marching,	and	marching	fast	at	that,	but
the	soles	of	his	feet	had	toughened,	he’d	got	his	wind	back,	and	even	carrying	his	armour,	shield	and	weapons
wasn’t	 proving	 so	 hard	 any	 more.	 They’d	 even	 found	 time	 for	 some	 sword	 practice.	 Duck	 and	 stab,	 duck
and	 stab—hold	 the	 shield	 up,	 soldier!	 Hold	 the	 line—no	 one	 breaks	 in	 the	 Bridgeburners.	 You	 stand
and	take	the	shock	and	then	you	step	forward.	Stand,	take,	step—it’s	like	felling	a	forest,	soldiers,	tree
by	tree.	Duck	and	stab!
Couldn’t	help	but	be	a	bit	of	a	challenge,	of	course,	living	up	to	the	legend	that	was	the	Bridgeburners,	but
then	 they	 had	 themselves	 a	 real	 one	 looking	 on,	 all	 sharp-eyed	 and	 stern,	 and	 that	 kept	 everyone	 trying	 and
trying	hard.	High	standards,	aye,	the	highest.
The	Bridgeburners	had	singlehandedly	won	the	Blackdog	Campaign.	Sent	the	Crimson	Guard	and	the	Mott
and	Genabarii	legions	reeling	in	retreat.	Kicked	in	the	front	gates	of	a	dozen	cities	from	Nathilog	to	One	Eye
Cat.	And	 before	 that,	 they’d	 conquered	 all	 of	 Seven	 Cities.	 He’d	 never	 heard	of	 any	 of	 these	 places	 but	 he
liked	the	names.	Seven	Cities	sounded	simple	and	obvious.	Place	got	seven	cities?	Call	it	Seven	Cities.	Straight
thinking,	 that	 was.	 And	 all	 that	 Genabackan	 stuff,	 well,	 those	 names	 were	 amazing	 and	 exotic.	 Cities	 called
Pale	 and	 Greydog,	 Tulips	 and	 Bulge.	 And	 then	 there	 were	 the	 wonderful	 beasts	 in	 those	 distant	 lands.
Dragonflies	big	enough	to	ride—imagine	whizzing	through	the	clouds,	looking	down	on	everything!	Seeing	how
beautiful	it	all	was,	and	then	dropping	hundreds	of	bombs	on	it.
And	 the	 Bridgeburners	 had	 done	 all	 that	 and,	 more	 importantly,	 they	 weren’t	 done	 yet.	 More	 adventures
were	 coming.	 Glories	 and	 heroic	 defences,	 monsters	 in	 the	 sky	 and	 flooded	 deserts	 and	 ghosts	 with	 sharp


swords	and	warriors	made	of	dust.	Moranth	and	Barghast	and	Tiste	Andii	and	Jaghut	tyrants	and	all	the	rest.
Sunrise	couldn’t	wait,	couldn’t	wait	to	get	to	the	legendary	stuff.	It’s	what	he	was	meant	for,	what	his	whole
life	was	heading	towards—as	if	he’d	only	been	waiting	for	these	foreign	soldiers	to	arrive.	To	sweep	him	up
and	 carry	 him	 along	 and	 now	 he	 was	 one	 of	 them.	 And	 he	 knew	 the	 others	 felt	 the	 same.	 We’re
Bridgeburners	 now.	 They’ll	 look	 to	 us	 when	 things	 get	 desperate,	 too	 desperate	 for	 the	 others	 to
handle.	 We’ll	 march	 forward,	 shields	 locked,	 faces	 cold	 and	 with	 hearts	 of	 iron.	 We’ll	 prove	 we’re
worthy	of	the	legend.
Wait	and	see,	just	wait	and	see.
	
Two	women	stood	well	away	from	the	fires,	waiting	for	a	third.
There	was	nothing	sure	in	this.	In	fact,	Sinter	reminded	herself,	it	was	almost	guaranteeing	trouble.	There
wasn’t	much	sisterhood	among	the	Dal	Honese.	Scarce	any	brotherhood	either,	come	to	that.	Tribes	get	left
behind,	and	with	them	ties	of	the	blood,	feuds	and	all	the	rest.	That	was	how	it	should	be	and	mostly	they	held
to	it,	 since	 to	 do	 otherwise	 could	rip	 a	 company	 apart.	 Squad’s	 the	 new	 kin,	 company’s	 the	 tribe,	 army’s	 the
people—the	kingdom,	the	damned	empire.	What	are	you,	soldier?
Marine,	Fourth	Squad,	Third	Company,	Bonehunters,	sir.
Not	Dal	Honese?
No,	sir.
Malazan?
No,	sir.	Bonehunters,	sir.
Now,	if	only	she	believed	all	that—there,	in	that	gnarled	hard	thing	at	the	centre	of	her	being.	Step	up,	aye,
and	mark	it	out	with	all	the	right	attitudes.	Diligence,	discipline,	loyalty.	Don’t	blink	at	any	damned	order	given,
no	matter	how	stupid	or	pointless.	The	tribe	lived	to	keep	itself	alive,	and	keeping	itself	alive	meant	making	sure
everything	 was	 in	 order	 and	 working	 the	 way	 it	 should.	 Made	 sense	 to	 her.	 And	 it	 was	 worthy	 enough	 to
believe	in,	especially	when	there	was	nothing	else	in	sight	looking	any	better.
So,	she’d	wanted	to	believe.	For	herself	and	for	her	wayward,	flighty	sister.	Steady	enough	for	the	both	of
them,	 aye.	 Kisswhere	 was	 going	 to	 stray—she	 was	 like	 that,	 it	 was	 in	 her	 nature.	 People	 like	 her	 needed
understanding	 kin,	 the	 kind	 of	 kin	 who’d	 step	 in	 and	 clean	 up	 and	 set	 right	 what	 needed	 setting	 right.	 And
Sinter	had	always	held	to	that	role.	Kisswhere	bends,	I	stand	firm.	She	slips	out,	I	fill	the	gap.	She	makes	a
mess,	I	clean	and	set	right.	She	lets	people	down,	I	pick	them	back	up.
Sometimes,	however,	she	chafed	under	the	strictures	of	being	ever	reliable,	solid	and	practical.	Of	being	so
utterly	 capable.	 Just	 once,	 Kisswhere	 could	 take	 Sinter’s	 cloak	 and	 hold	 fast,	 and	 Sinter	 could	 snag	 her
sister’s	and	go	out	and	play.	Stealing	husbands,	jilting	lovers,	signing	on,	fucking	off.	Why	not?	Why	did	all	the
expectation	have	to	settle	on	her	shoulders,	every	damned	time?
She	was,	she	realized,	still	waiting	to	start	living.
Badan	Gruk	wanted	her,	loved	her.	But	she	.	.	.	she	didn’t	know.	If	she	wanted	to	be	loved,	or	even	chased
after.	She	played	it	out,	aye,	as	if	it	was	all	real.	She	even	spent	time	telling	herself	it	was	the	way	it	looked.
But	the	truth	was,	she	didn’t	know	what	she	felt,	not	about	him,	not	about	anything.	And	wasn’t	that	the	real
joke	in	all	this?	Everyone	saw	her	as	such	a	capable	person,	and	all	the	while	she	asked	herself:	capable	of
what?	Will	I	ever	find	out?
When	is	it	my	turn?
She	had	no	idea	what	this	army	was	doing,	and	that	frightened	her.	Not	that	she’d	ever	give	away	her	true
feelings.	 Sinter	 saw	 how	 the	 others	 relied	 on	 her.	 Even	 the	 other	 sergeants.	 Primly,	 Badan	 Gruk,	 even	 that
cow-eyed	fool,	Urb.	No,	she	needed	to	keep	playing	the	unimaginative	soldier,	biting	her	tongue	and	with	that
solid	look	in	her	eyes	not	once	wavering,	not	for	an	instant	giving	away	the	crazed	storm	in	her	head.
She	needed	help.	They	were	marching	into	blackness,	a	future	profoundly	unknown	barring	the	simple,	raw
truth	that	at	some	point	they	would	all	draw	their	weapons,	they	would	all	stand	facing	an	enemy	that	sought
their	annihilation.	They	would	be	told	to	fight,	to	kill.	But	will	we?	Can	we?	If	you	could	show	us	a	cause,
Adjunct.	A	reason,	just	a	handful	of	worth,	we’d	do	as	you	ask.	I	know	we	would.
She	glanced	across	at	her	sister.	Kisswhere	stood,	a	faint	smile	on	her	face	to	mark	whatever	inner	peace
and	satisfaction	she	found	so	easy	to	indulge,	her	eyes	on	the	blurry	stars	in	the	northern	sky.	Amused	patience
and	 the	 promise	 of	 derision:	 that	 was	 her	 most	 favoured	 expression,	 there	 on	 those	 deceptively	 sweet	 and


innocent	features.	Yes,	she	was	breathtaking	in	her	natural	beauty	and	charm,	and	there	was	that	wild	edge—
sticky	as	honey—that	so	drew	to	her	otherwise	reasonable	men.	She	froze	lives	and	loves	in	amber,	and	her
hoard	was	vast	indeed.
Could	 I	 be	 like	 her?	 Could	 I	 live	 as	 she	 does?	 Look	 at	 that	 half-smile.	 So	 contented.	 Gods,	 how	 I
wish	.	.	.
	
There	had	to	be	a	way	out	of	this,	and	her	sister	had	better	find	it	soon.	Else	Kisswhere	feared	she	would	go
mad.	She’d	joined	the	Malazan	marines,	for	Hood’s	sake,	not	some	renegade	army	marching	up	some	damned
god’s	ass.	She’d	joined	knowing	she	could	hand	it	all	back	to	them	once	boredom	forced	the	situation.	Well,	not
that	they’d	happily	let	her	go,	of	course,	but	disappearing	wasn’t	so	hard,	not	in	a	civilized	land	like	the	Malazan
Empire.	 So	 many	 people,	 so	 many	 places	 to	 go,	 so	 many	 possible	 lives	 to	 assume.	 And	 even	 in	 the	 military
itself,	who	really	cared	which	face	was	which	beneath	the	rim	of	the	helm?	Could	be	anyone,	so	long	as	they
took	orders	and	could	march	in	step.
She	could	have	slept	her	way	into	some	soft	posting.	In	Unta,	or	Li	Heng,	or	Quon	itself.	Even	Genabackis
would	 have	 been	 fine.	 If	 only	 her	 sister	 hadn’t	 jammed	 her	 nose	 into	 things.	 Always	 trying	 to	 take	 charge,
constantly	stepping	into	Kisswhere’s	path	and	causing	grief.	Complicating	everything	and	that	had	always	been
the	 problem.	 But	 Sinter	 hadn’t	 figured	 it	 out	 yet—Kisswhere	 had	 run	 to	 the	 marines	 to	 escape	 her	 sister’s
infuriating	interference	in	her	life.	Among	other	things.
But	she	followed,	didn’t	she?	She	followed	and	so	did	Badan	Gruk.	It’s	not	my	choice,	not	my	fault	at
all.	I’m	not	responsible	for	them—they’re	all	grown	up,	aren’t	they?
So	if	I	want	to	desert	now,	before	we	head	into	someplace	where	I	can’t,	well,	that’s	my	business,	isn’t
it?
But	now	Sinter	had	dragged	her	out	from	the	cosy	fire,	and	here	they	were,	waiting	for	one	of	Urb’s	soldiers
and	what	was	all	this	about,	anyway?
Running.	Is	that	it,	finally?	I	hope	so,	sister.	I	hope	you’ve	finally	come	to	your	senses.	This	time,	I’m
with	you.
But	why	this	woman	we	hardly	even	know?	Why	not	Badan	Gruk?
We	got	to	get	out,	and	now.	I	got	to	get	out.	And	I	don’t	need	anyone’s	help	to	do	it.	Stow	away	with	a
D’ras	trader.	Easy,	nothing	to	it.	Two	of	us	could	do	it,	even	three.	But	four?	Now	that’s	a	stretch.	It’s
logistics,	sister,	plain	and	simple.	The	kind	you	like	so	much.	Straightforward.	Too	many	and	we’ll	get
caught.	You’ll	want	Badan,	too.	And	four’s	too	many.
She’d	wait,	however.	She’d	see	what	Sinter	had	in	mind	here,	with	this	meeting.	She	could	work	on	Sinter
later,	 but	 nothing	 direct,	 since	 that	 never	 worked.	 Sinter	 was	 stubborn.	 She	 could	 dig	 in	 deeper	 than	 anyone
Kisswhere	knew.	No,	Kisswhere	would	have	to	twist	carefully,	so	that	the	decision,	when	it	finally	went	the
right	way,	would	seem	to	be	coming	from	Sinter	herself.
It	wasn’t	easy,	but	then	Kisswhere	had	had	a	lifetime	of	practice.	She	knew	she	could	do	it.
Sinter	 softly	 grunted	 and	 she	 turned	 to	 see	 a	 figure	 approaching	 from	 the	 camp.	 Swaying	 hips,	 and
everywhere	a	whole	lot	of	what	men	liked.	A	Dal	Honese	for	sure,	which	was	why	Sinter	had	invited	her	in
the	first	place.	But	since	when	did	three	Dal	Honese	women	agree	about	anything?
Madness.	 Sinter,	 this	 won’t	 work.	 You	 remember	 the	 histories.	 It’s	 us	 women	 who	 start	 most	 of	 the
wars.	 Snaring	 the	 wrong	 men,	 using	 them	 up,	 humiliating	 them.	 Throwing	 one	 against	 another.
Whispering	blood	vengeance	beneath	the	furs	at	night.	A	sly	comment	here,	a	look	there.	We’ve	been	in
charge	a	long	time,	us	women	of	Dal	Hon,	and	we’re	nothing	but	trouble.
Masan	 Gilani	 was	 from	 a	 savannah	 tribe.	 She	 was	 tall,	 making	 her	 curvaceous	 form	 all	 the	 more
intimidating.	 She	 had	 the	 look	 of	 a	 woman	 who	 was	 too	 much	 for	 any	 man,	 and	 should	 a	 man	 get	 her	 he’d
spend	 his	 whole	 life	 convinced	 he	 could	 never	 hold	 on	 to	 her.	 She	 was	 a	 monster	 of	 sensuality,	 and	 if	 she’d
stayed	in	her	tribe	the	whole	north	half	of	Dal	Hon	would	be	in	the	midst	of	a	decades-long	civil	war	by	now.
Every	Dal	Honese	god	and	mud	spirit	tossed	in	on	this	one,	didn’t	they?	She’s	got	pieces	of	them	all.
And	here	I	thought	I	was	dangerous.
‘Sinter,’	she	said	under	her	breath,	‘you	have	lost	your	mind.’
Her	sister	heard	her.	‘This	one	is	far	on	the	inside,	Kiss,	way	farther	in	than	anyone	we	know.’
‘What	of	it?’


Sinter	did	not	reply.	Masan	Gilani	had	drawn	too	close	for	any	exchange	now,	no	matter	how	muted.
Her	elongated	eyes	flitted	between	the	sisters,	curious,	and	then	amused.
Bitch.	I	hate	her	already.
‘Southerners,’	she	said.	‘I’ve	always	liked	southerners.	Your	sweat	smells	of	the	jungle.	And	you’re	never
as	gangly	and	awkward	as	us	northerners.	Did	you	know,	I	have	to	special-order	all	my	armour	and	clothes—
I’m	no	standard	fit	anywhere,	except	maybe	among	the	Fenn	and	that’s	no	good	because	they’re	extinct.’
Kisswhere	snorted.	‘You	ain’t	that	big,’	and	then	she	looked	away,	as	she	realized	how	petty	that	sounded.
But	Gilani’s	smile	had	simply	broadened.	‘The	only	real	problem	with	you	southerners	is	that	you’re	barely
passable	on	horseback.	I’d	not	count	on	you	to	ride	hard	as	me,	ever.	So	it’s	a	good	thing	you’re	marines.	Me,
I	could	be	either	and	to	be	honest,	I’d	have	jumped	over	to	the	scouts	long	ago—’
‘So	why	didn’t	you?’	Kisswhere	asked.
She	shrugged.	‘Scouting’s	boring.	Besides,	I’m	not	interested	in	always	being	the	one	delivering	bad	news.’
‘Expecting	bad	news?’
‘Always.’	And	her	teeth	gleamed.
Kisswhere	turned	away.	She	was	done	with	this	conversation.	Sinter	was	welcome	to	it.
‘So,’	Masan	Gilani	said	after	a	moment,	‘Sergeant	Sinter.	Rumour	has	it	you’re	a	natural,	a	talent.	Tell	me	if
that’s	true	or	not,	since	it’s	the	only	thing	that	brought	me	out	here—the	chance	that	you	are,	I	mean.	If	you’re
not,	then	this	meeting	is	over.’
‘Listen	to	her!’	Kisswhere	sneered.	‘The	Empress	commands!’
Masan	blinked.	‘You	still	here?	Thought	you	went	to	pick	flowers.’
Kisswhere	reached	for	her	knife	but	Sinter’s	hand	snapped	out	and	closed	on	her	wrist.	Hissing,	Kisswhere
yielded,	but	her	eyes	remained	fixed	on	Gilani’s.
‘Oh,	it’s	all	so	amusing	to	you,	isn’t	it?’
‘Kisswhere,	yes?	That’s	your	name?	I’ll	say	this	once.	I	don’t	know	what’s	got	the	stoat	in	your	breeches
so	riled,	since	as	far	as	I	know	I	ain’t	never	done	anything	to	cross	you.	Leaves	me	no	choice	but	to	assume
it’s	just	some	kind	of	bizarre	bigotry—what	happened,	lose	a	lover	to	a	willowy	northerner?	Well,	it	wasn’t	me.
So,	why	not	drop	the	hackles?	Here,	will	this	help?’	And	she	drew	out	a	Dal	Honese	wineskin.	‘Not	wild	grape
from	our	homeland,	alas—’
‘It	ain’t	that	rice	piss	from	Lether,	is	it?’
‘No.	 It’s	 Bluerose—an	 Andiian	 brew,	 originally,	 or	 so	 the	 trader	 claimed.’	 She	 shrugged	 and	 held	 out	 the
skin.	‘It’s	drinkable	enough.’
Kisswhere	accepted	the	skin.	She	knew	overtures	when	they	arrived,	and	she	knew	that	Masan	had	given
her	a	way	through	without	too	much	damage	to	her	pride,	so	it’d	be	stupid	not	to	take	that	path.	She	tugged
loose	 the	 gum	 stopper	 and	 took	 a	 mouthful.	 Swallowed	 and	 then	 gasped.	 ‘That’ll	 do,’	 she	 said	 in	 a	 suddenly
husky	voice.
Sinter	finally	spoke:	‘Everyone’s	claws	retracted?	Good.	Masan,	you	want	to	know	if	I’m	a	talent.	Well,	not
in	the	way	of	Dal	Honese	witches.	But	I’ve	got	something,	I	suppose.’
‘All	right.	So	what’s	that	“something”	telling	you?’
Sinter	hesitated,	and	then	reached	out	to	intercept	the	wineskin.	She	took	two	deep	draughts.	‘Aye,	you’re	a
northerner	 and	 we’re	 not,	 but	 we’re	 all	 still	 Dal	 Honese.	 So	 we	 understand	 each	 other,	 and	 when	 I	 say	 I’m
going	to	give	you	something	I	don’t	need	to	add	that	I	expect	something	back.’
Masan	Gilani	laughed,	but	it	was	not	a	mocking	laugh.	Not	quite.	‘You	just	did.’
‘You	 been	 a	 soldier	 longer	 than	 us,’	 Sinter	 countered,	 ‘so	 I	 was	 just	 reminding	 you	 of	 the	 ways	 you’ve
maybe	forgotten,	or	at	least	not	used	in	a	while.’
‘Go	on,	then.’
‘I	 get	 senses	 of	 things	 about	 to	 happen,	 or	 maybe	 could	 happen—if	 we	 don’t	 do	 something	 to	 make	 sure
they	don’t.’
‘You’re	a	seer.’
But	Sinter	shook	her	head.	‘Not	so	clear	as	that.’
‘What	is	about	to	happen	to	us,	Sergeant?’
‘We’re	about	to	be	abandoned.’
Kisswhere	 joined	Masan	Gilani	 in	regarding	 Sinter	 with	alarm.	What	was	 all	 this?	‘Sister,’	 she	 said,	 ‘what


does	that	mean?	Abandoned?	By	who?	Do	you	mean	just	us?	Or	the	Bonehunters?’
‘Yes,’	answered	Sinter.	‘Bonehunters.	All	of	us,	the	Adjunct	included.’
Masan	Gilani	was	frowning.	‘You’re	talking	about	the	Burned	Tears?	The	Perish?	Or	the	Letherii	escort?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	Maybe	all	of	them.’
‘So	wherever	we	end	up,’	Masan	said	slowly,	‘we’ll	be	fighting	on	our	own.	No	one	guarding	our	backs,	no
one	on	our	flanks.	Like	that?’
‘I	think	so.’
Masan	 rubbed	 at	 her	 neck.	 When	 Kisswhere	 offered	 her	 the	 skin	 she	 shook	 her	 head.	 ‘Hard	 to	 know,
Sinter,	how	much	shit	should	be	freezing	with	that,	since	nobody	has	a	clue	about	who	we’ll	be	fighting.	What
if	it’s	some	noseplug	savages	cowering	behind	a	bamboo	palisade	throwing	rocks	at	us?	We’d	hardly	need	help
knocking	on	that	door,	would	we?’
‘But	you	know	we’re	not	heading	for	anything	so	easy,’	Sinter	said.
Masan’s	lovely	eyes	narrowed.	‘This	is	what	you	want	back	from	me?	You	think	I’ve	got	my	ear	against
the	Adjunct’s	tent?’
‘I	know	you	know	more	than	we	do.’
‘And	if	I	do?	What	difference	would	it	make	to	you?’
Kisswhere’s	 breath	 caught	 as	 she	 saw	 her	 sister’s	 hands	 clench	 into	 fists	 at	 her	 sides.	 ‘I	 need	 a	 reason,
Masan	Gilani.	I	need	to	know	it’s	all	worth	it.’
‘And	you	think	what	little	I	know	can	give	you	that?	You	must	be	desperate—’
‘Yes!	I	am!’
‘Why?’
Sinter’s	mouth	shut,	her	jaw	setting.
Masan	Gilani	looked	over	at	Kisswhere,	as	if	to	ask:	What’s	her	problem	here?	What’s	so	hard	to	say?
But	Kisswhere	had	no	answers.	Well,	not	satisfying	ones.	‘My	sister,’	she	said,	‘is	a	very	loyal	person.	But
she	holds	that	loyalty	in	highest	regard.	She’ll	give	it,	I	mean—’
‘But,’	cut	in	Masan	Gilani,	‘whatever	or	whoever	she’s	giving	it	to	had	better	be	worthy	of	it.	Right.	I	think
I’m	beginning	to	understand	this.	Only,	Kisswhere,	you	should	look	to	your	own	feelings	about	that.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	mean,	you	sounded	pretty	bitter	right	there.	As	if	loyalty	is	a	curse	and	not	one	you	want	any	part	of.	I’d
wager	your	sister	dragged	you	here	as	much	to	convince	you	of	something	as	to	convince	me.	Sinter,	would
that	be	a	good	guess?’
‘That’s	between	me	and	her,’	Sinter	replied.
Kisswhere	glared	at	her	sister.
‘All	 right,’	 said	 Masan	 Gilani,	 ‘I’ll	 give	 you	 what	 little	 I	 know.	 What	 Ebron	 and	 Bottle	 and	 Deadsmell	 and
Widdershins	 have	 put	 together.	 Maybe	 it’ll	 help,	 maybe	 it	 won’t.	 That’s	 for	 you	 to	 decide.	 Here’s	 what	 we
think.’	She	paused,	reached	for	the	skin.
Kisswhere	handed	it	to	her.
Masan	drank,	 then	 squatted	 before	 them—taking	the	pose	 of	 the	 teller	 of	 tales,	one	they	 knew	well—and
both	sisters	followed	suit.
‘He	 didn’t	 ask	 for	 it.	 But	 he’s	 been	 making	 trouble	 ever	 since.	 Quick	 Ben	 met	 him	 face	 to	 face.	 So,	 we
worked	out,	did	that	Meckros	weaponsmith,	Withal.	He’s	poison	and	he	knows	it	and	he	can’t	help	it,	because
he	doesn’t	belong	here.	There	are	pieces	of	him	scattered	over	half	the	world,	but	the	biggest	one	is	sitting	in
this	place	called	Kolanse—and	it’s	being	.	.	.	used.’
‘We’re	going	to	kill	the	Crippled	God.’
Kisswhere	shot	her	sister	a	wild	look.	‘But	who’d	want	to	stop	us	doing	that?’
Sinter	shook	her	head.	Her	face	was	wretched	with	confusion.
Masan	was	eyeing	them	and	when	she	spoke	her	voice	was	flat,	‘You	jumped	the	wrong	way,	Sinter,	like	a
one-eyed	mongoose.’	She	drank	again,	sloshed	the	skin	and	then	scowled.	‘Should’ve	brought	two.	We	don’t
think	we’re	off	to	kill	the	Chained	One.	In	fact,	it’s	those	chains	we’re	after.	Well,	the	Adjunct,	I	mean.	What
she’s	 after.’	 She	 lifted	 her	 head	 and	 fixed	 on	 Sinter’s	 eyes,	 and	 then	 Kisswhere’s.	 ‘We’re	 going	 to	 set	 the
bastard	free.’
Kisswhere	barked	a	savage	laugh.	‘No	wonder	they’ll	all	abandon	us!	And	I’m	the	first	in	line	to	join	them!’


‘Be	 quiet,’	 Sinter	 said	 through	 the	 hands	 she’d	 lifted	 to	 her	 face.	 She	 was	 trembling,	 no,	 shuddering,	 and
Kisswhere	saw	the	glitter	of	tears	trickle	to	the	heels	of	her	sister’s	palms.
Masan	Gilani’s	face	was	grave,	patient.
Kisswhere	rounded	on	Sinter.	‘You	cannot!	No!	This	is	impossible!	What	if	they’re	wrong?	They	must	be—
even	the	Adjunct’s	not	that	stupid!	Every	god	and	ascendant	in	the	world	will	be	coming	against	us,	never	mind
those	idiots	in	Kolanse!	She’s	lost	her	mind!	Our	commander’s	insane	and	there’s	no	damned	law	anywhere
says	we	have	to	follow	her!’
Sinter	drew	a	deep	breath	and	then	lowered	her	hands.	Something	solid	filled	her	face,	as	if	implacable	stone
was	replacing	the	soft	tissues	beneath	her	onyx	skin.	The	bleakness	drained	from	her	eyes	as	they	settled	on
Kisswhere.	‘It	will	do,’	she	said.	‘I	think,’	she	added,	‘nothing	else	would	have.’
‘What—’
‘It	is	just,	sister.	Just.’
‘They’ll	all	turn	on	us,’	Kisswhere	retorted.	‘You	said	so	yourself—’
‘If	we	do	nothing,	yes.	They	will	turn	on	us.	And	what	little	chance	we	had	to	succeed	will	go	with	them.
We	need	to	change	their	minds.’
‘How?’	asked	Masan	Gilani.
‘I	will	tell	you	how,’	said	Sinter.	‘And	it	begins	with	you,	Kisswhere.’
‘I	didn’t	say	I	was	going	to	help—’
‘You’re	going	to	desert.’
‘Wha—what?’
‘That’s	how	this	starts.	It’s	the	only	way.	Now,	it’s	what	you	want	and	don’t	tell	me	any	different.	You’re
deserting	the	Bonehunters,	and	you’re	doing	it	tonight—on	the	fastest	horse	Masan	Gilani	can	find	you.’
But	Masan	Gilani	held	up	a	staying	hand.	‘Hold	on.	I	need	to	talk	this	over	with—’
‘Of	course,’	cut	in	Sinter,	‘but	it	changes	nothing.	Now,	you	need	to	hear	the	rest,	because	I	need	you	to	do
the	same—’
‘Desert?	Me?’
Sinter	nodded.	‘But	you’ll	ride	in	a	different	direction,	Masan	Gilani.	Different	from	Kisswhere.	With	luck,
you’ll	both	return.’
‘And	get	hanged?	No	thanks,	sister—’
‘You	won’t.	The	Adjunct	is	cold	iron—the	coldest	there	ever	was.	She’ll	work	it	out,	fast	as	lightning,	she’ll
work	it	out.’
‘Then	why	don’t	we	just	go	tell	her?’	asked	Masan	Gilani.	‘We	figured	it	all	out	but	there’s	a	problem,	only
you	got	an	idea	on	how	to	fix	it.’
Sinter	 smiled,	 and	 it	 was	 a	 smile	 that	 would	 have	 fitted	 well	 on	 the	 Adjunct’s	 own	 face.	 ‘I	 will	 do	 just
that	.	.	.	once	you	two	are	gone.’
‘She	might	just	chase	us	down	anyway.’
‘She	won’t.	I	said	she’s	quick.’
‘So	why	wait	until	we	leave?’
Sinter	 rubbed	 at	 her	 face,	 wiping	 away	 the	 last	 of	 the	 tears.	 ‘You	 don’t	 get	 it.	 She’s	 locked	 in	 a	 room,	 a
prison	 of	 her	 own	 making.	 In	 there,	 she	 hears	 nothing,	 sees	 nothing.	 In	 there,	 she	 is	 absolutely	 alone.	 And
holding	on	with	white	knuckles.	It’s	her	burden	and	she	won’t	dump	it	on	anyone	else,	not	even	her	Fists,	not
even	 on	 her	 High	 Mage—though	 he’s	 probably	 worked	 it	 out	 by	 now.	 She’s	 put	 herself	 between	 us	 and	 the
truth—but	it’s	killing	her.’
‘So,’	said	Masan	Gilani,	‘you	got	to	show	her	she	ain’t	alone,	and	that	we’re	not	all	fools,	that	maybe	we’re
ready	for	that	truth.	We	not	only	worked	it	out,	we’re	with	her.	There	to	help,	whether	she	asks	for	it	or	not.’
‘That’s	it,’	said	Sinter.
Masan	Gilani	sighed,	and	then	flashed	Kisswhere	a	grin.	‘You	won’t	surprise	anyone.	Me,	that’s	a	different
story.’
‘The	Adjunct	will	hint	something	to	put	your	reputation	square,’	said	Sinter.	‘Otherwise,	you	going	might	tip
the	balance	for	a	whole	mass	of	wavering	soldiers	in	the	ranks.	Kisswhere,	well,	sister,	nobody	will	be	much
surprised	by	you,	will	they?’
‘Thank	you.	So	long	as	people	understand	I’m	no	coward—’


Masan	 Gilani	 grunted,	 ‘But	 they’ll	 see	 it	 that	 way.	 Nothing	 you	 can	 do	 about	 it,	 either,	 Kisswhere.	 We’re
marching	to	a	war,	and	you	went	and	ran	off.	Me	too.	So	Sinter	and	the	Adjunct	work	it	out	so	it	sounds	like	I
was	sent	on	some	kind	of	mission—’
‘Which	is	true,’	cut	in	Sinter.
‘Which	 helps,	 aye.	 Thing	 is,	 people	 already	 thinking	 of	 maybe	 deserting	 might	 just	 take	 it	 as	 the	 perfect
push.	That’s	the	risk	that	the	Adjunct	might	find	unacceptable,	no	matter	what	you	say	to	her,	Sinter.’
‘I’m	no	coward,’	Kisswhere	repeated.	‘I’m	just	not	one	for	this	whole	family	thing.	Armies	ain’t	families,	no
matter	how	many	times	you	try	to	tell	me	different.	It’s	rubbish.	It’s	the	lie	commanders	and	kings	need	so	they
always	got	us	ready	to	do	shit	for	them.’
‘Right,’	snapped	Masan	Gilani,	‘and	I	guess	in	that	snarly	jungle	where	you	grew	up	you	never	heard	any
stories	 about	 what	 happens	 when	 armies	 mutiny.	 Kill	 their	 commanders.	 Depose	 their	 country’s	 ruler.	 Take
over—’
‘What’s	that	got	to	do	with	the	whole	“we’re	family”	business?’
‘I’m	 saying	 some	 people	 run	 things	 and	 the	 rest	 should	 just	 stay	 out	 of	 it.	 That’s	 all.	 Just	 like	 in	 a	 family.
Somebody’s	in	charge,	not	everybody.	Usurpers	never	been	anything	better,	or	even	different,	from	whoever
they	killed.	Usually,	they	make	it	worse.	That	whole	“family”	thing,	it’s	about	fighting	to	survive.	You	stand	fast
for	kin,	not	strangers.	Don’t	you	get	that?’
‘And	the	ones	in	charge	exploit	it.	Use	us	up.	They	ain’t	interested	in	being	kin	to	the	rest	of	us,	and	you
know	it.’
‘You	two,’	Sinter	said,	‘could	go	at	this	all	night.	But	we	don’t	have	the	time.	Kisswhere,	since	when	did	you
care	 what	 the	 people	 you	 leave	 behind	 think	 of	 you?	 Unless,	 of	 course,	 you’ve	 found	 some	 pride	 as	 a
Bonehunter—’
‘Do	you	want	me	to	help	you	or	not?’
‘All	right.	Peace,	then.	The	point	is,	it’s	only	looking	like	you’re	deserting.	The	way	Faradan	Sort	did	outside
Y’Ghatan.’
‘I	ride	south.’
Sinter	nodded.
‘I	go	find	the	Perish	and	the	Khundryl.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	say	what?’
‘You	convince	them	not	to	abandon	us.’
‘How	in	Hood’s	name	do	I	do	that?’
Sinter’s	look	was	wry.	‘Try	using	your	charms,	sister.’
Masan	Gilani	spoke.	‘Sergeant,	if	she’s	going	after	both	of	them,	where	am	I	going?’
‘That’s	not	so	easy	to	say,’	Sinter	admitted	haltingly.
Masan	snorted.	‘Work	on	that	answer,	Sinter.	Meanwhile,	let’s	go	steal	some	horses.’
	
‘Ah,	Lieutenant,	found	you	at	last.’
‘Master	Sergeant	now,	sir.’
‘Of	course,	and	where	are	your	charges,	Master	Sergeant?’
‘Dispensed	with,	sir.’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘Rather,	dispersed,	sir.	Inserted	seamlessly	into	the	ranks,	not	a	stitch	out	of	place.’
‘Why,	that	is	simply	superb,	Master	Sergeant.	You	would	deserve	a	commendation	if	you	deserved	anything.
Alas,	having	perused	the	latest	roster	updates,	I	have	discovered	that	not	a	single	one	of	those	recruits	can	be
found	anywhere	in	the	army.’
‘Yes,	sir,	they	are	well	trained.’
‘At	what,	Master	Sergeant?	Disappearing?’
‘Well	now,	sir,	I	am	reminded	of	a	story	from	my	youth.	May	I?’
‘Please,	do	go	on.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.	Ah,	my	youth.	A	sudden	zeal	afflicted	young	Aramstos	Pores—’
‘Aramstos?’


‘Yes,	sir—’
‘That’s	your	other	name?’
‘It	is	indeed,	sir.	May	I	continue	my	tale,	sir?’
‘Proceed.’
‘A	sudden	zeal,	sir,	to	dig	me	a	pond.’
‘A	pond.’
‘Just	behind	the	heap	of	broken	bricks,	sir,	close	to	the	lot’s	back	wall.	I	often	played	there	when	my	parents
had	gone	from	fighting	with	words	to	fighting	with	knives,	or	the	hovel	caught	fire	as	it	was	wont	to	do.	On	my
hands	and	knees	among	the	broken	shards	of	pots	and	shattered	dog	teeth—’
‘Dog	teeth.’
‘My	father’s	failures	with	pets,	but	that,	sir,	is	another	story,	perhaps	for	another	time.	A	pond,	sir,	one	into
which	I	could	transplant	the	tiny	minnows	I	was	rescuing	from	the	fouled	river	down	past	the	sewage	outlets—
where	we	used	to	swim	on	cold	days,	warming	up	as	it	were,	sir.	Minnows,	then,	into	my	pond.	Imagine	my
excitement—’
‘It	is	suddenly	vivid	in	my	mind’s	eye,	Master	Sergeant.’
‘Wonderful.	 And	 yet,	 having	 deposited,	 oh,	 fifty	 of	 the	 tiny	 silver	 things,	 just	 the	 day	 before,	 imagine	 my
horror	and	bafflement	upon	returning	the	very	next	morning	to	find	not	a	single	minnow	in	my	pond.	Why,	what
had	happened	to	them?	Some	voracious	bird,	perhaps?	The	old	woman	from	down	the	alley	who	kept	her	hair
in	 a	 net?	 Are	 there	 perchance	 now	 glinting	 minnows	 adorning	 her	 coiffure?	 Insects?	 Rats?	 Unlikely	 to	 be
either	of	those	two,	as	they	generally	made	up	our	nightly	repast	at	the	dinner	table	and	so	accordingly	were
scarce	round	our	home.	Well,	sir,	a	mystery	it	was	and	a	mystery	it	remains.	To	this	very	day	and,	I	am	certain,
for	the	entirety	of	the	rest	of	my	life.	Fifty	minnows.	Gone.	Poof!	Hard	to	believe,	sir,	and	most	crushing	for
that	bright-eyed,	zealous	lad.’
‘And	 now,	 if	 I	 am	 to	 understand	 you,	 Master	 Sergeant,	 once	 more	 you	 find	 yourself	 victimized	 by
inexplicable	mystery.’
‘All	those	recruits,	sir.	Dispersed	into	the	ranks.	And	then	.	.	.’
‘Poof.’
‘As	you	say	and	say	well,	sir.’
‘Whatever	happened	to	your	pond,	Master	Sergeant?’
‘Well,	 my	 pet	 water	 snake	 thrived	 for	 a	 while	 longer,	 until	 the	 pond	 dried	 up.	 Children	 have	 such	 grand
dreams,	don’t	they?’
‘That	they	do,	Master	Sergeant.	Until	it	all	goes	wrong.’
‘Indeed,	sir.’
‘Until	we	meet	again,	Master	Sergeant	Pores.’
‘And	a	good	night	to	you,	too,	Captain	Kindly.’
	
It	 was	 him.	 I	 was	 fooling	 myself	 ever	 thinking	 otherwise.	 Who	 can	 explain	 love	 anyway?	 She	 slid	 the
knife	 back	 into	 its	 sheath	 and	 pushed	 through	 the	 loose	 flaps	 of	 the	 tent,	 stepping	 outside	 and	 suddenly
shivering	as	something	cold	slithered	through	the	faint	breeze.
The	dark	north	flicks	its	tongue.	Echoes	of	some	unwanted	rebirth—glad	I’m	not	a	mage.	They	had
nothing	to	dance	about	this	afternoon.
Lostara	moved	away	from	the	command	tent.	The	Adjunct	sending	her	away	this	late	at	night	was	unusual
—I	was	ready	for	bed,	dammit—	but	having	the	guards	roust	and	drive	out	a	drunken	Banaschar	wasn’t	just
sweet	entertainment.	It	was,	on	another	level,	alarming.
What	 did	 Quick	 Ben	 and	 Bottle	 tell	 you	 this	 night,	 Tavore?	 Is	 there	 any	 end	 to	 your	 secrets?	 Any
breach	 in	 your	 wall	 of	 privacy?	 What’s	 so	 satisfying	 about	 being	 alone?	 Your	 love	 is	 a	 ghost.	 The
empire	you	served	has	betrayed	you.	Your	officers	have	stopped	talking,	even	to	each	other.
O	serpent	of	the	north,	your	tongue	does	not	lie.	Draw	closer.	We’re	barely	breathing.
She	 was	 forced	 to	 halt	 as	 Banaschar	 reeled	 across	 her	 path.	 Seeing	 her,	 he	 managed	 to	 stop,	 tottering	 a
moment	before	straightening.	‘Captain	Yil,’	he	said	genially,	taking	a	deep	breath	and	then	letting	it	loose	in	the
way	that	drunks	did	when	mustering	sodden	thoughts.	‘Pleasant	evening,	yes?’
‘No.	It’s	cold.	I’m	tired.	I	don’t	know	why	the	Adjunct	cleared	everyone	out—it’s	not	as	if	she	needs	the


extra	room.	For	what?’
‘For	what,	indeed,’	he	agreed,	smiling	as	if	his	purse	was	full	of	sweets.	‘It’s	the	wardrobe,	you	see.’
‘What?’
He	weaved	back	and	forth.	‘Wardrobe.	Yes,	that’s	the	word?	I	think	so.	Not	makes	for	easy	travel,	though.
Doesn’t,	rather.	But	.	.	.	sometimes	.	.	.	where	was	I?	Oh,	sometimes	the	wardrobe’s	so	big	the	girl,	she	just
runs	away	from	it,	fast	and	long	as	she	can.	Is	that	what	I	mean?	Did	I	say	it	right?’
‘Wardrobe.’
Banaschar	pointed	at	her,	nodding.	‘Precisely.’
‘Who	runs	away	from	a	wardrobe?	Girls	don’t	do	that—’
‘But	women	do.’
‘I	don’t	understand.’
‘All	those	choices,	right?	What	to	put	on.	And	when,	and	when	not.	If	it’s	this,	but	not	if	it’s	that.	What	to
put	on,	Captain	Yil.	Choices.	Surrounding	you.	Closing	in.	Creeping.	Girl’s	got	to	run,	and	let’s	hope	she	makes
it.’
Sniffing,	Lostara	stepped	round	the	fool	and	continued	on	between	the	tent	rows.
It	was	him.	But	you	let	him	go.	Maybe	you	thought	he’d	come	back,	or	you’d	just	find	him	again.	You
thought	you	had	the	time.	But	the	world’s	always	armed	and	all	it	takes	is	a	misstep,	a	wrong	decision.
And	 suddenly	 you’re	 cut,	 you’re	 bleeding,	 bleeding	 right	 out.	 Suddenly	 he’s	 gasping	 his	 last	 breaths
and	it’s	time	to	put	him	away,	just	close	him	up,	like	a	scroll	bearing	bad	news.
What	else	can	you	do?
It	was	him,	but	he’s	gone	and	he’s	not	coming	back.
Her	pace	slowed.	She	frowned.	Where	am	I	going?	Ah,	that’s	right.	‘New	whetstone,	that’s	it.’
The	world’s	armed,	Adjunct,	so	be	careful.	Kick	open	that	wardrobe,	girl,	and	start	throwing	on	that
armour.	 The	 days	 of	 fetes	 are	 over,	 all	 those	 nights	 among	 the	 glittering	 smirks	 of	 privilege	 and
entitlement.
‘You	idiot,	Banaschar,	there’s	only	one	item	in	her	wardrobe.	What’s	to	choose?’
She	almost	heard	him	reply,	‘And	still	she’s	running	away.’
No,	this	conversation	wasn’t	even	real,	and	it	made	no	sense	anyway.	Resuming	her	journey	to	the	smiths’
compound,	she	encountered	a	marine	coming	up	the	other	way.	A	quick	exchange	of	salutes,	and	then	past.
A	sergeant.	Marine.	Dal	Honese.	Where	in	Hood’s	name	is	she	going	this	time	of	night?	Never	mind.
Whetstone.	 They	 keep	 wearing	 out.	 And	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 iron	 licking	 back	 and	 forth,	 the	 way	 it	 just
perfectly	echoes	the	word	in	my	head—amazing.	Perfect.
It	was	him.	It	was	him.
It	was	him.
	
Most	of	the	ties	and	fittings	on	his	armour	had	loosened	or	come	undone.	The	heavy	dragon-scale	breast-	and
back-plates	hung	askew	from	his	broad	shoulders.	The	clawed	bosses	on	his	knees	rested	on	the	ground	as	he
knelt	in	the	wet	grasses.	He’d	pulled	off	the	bone-strip	gauntlets	to	better	wipe	the	tears	from	his	cheeks	and
the	 thick	 smears	 of	 snot	 running	 from	 his	 nose.	 The	 massive	 bone-handled	 battleaxe	 rested	 on	 the	 ground
beside	him.
He’d	bawled	through	half	the	night,	until	his	throat	was	raw	and	his	head	felt	packed	solid	with	sand.	Where
was	everyone?	He	was	alone	and	it	seemed	he’d	been	alone	for	years	now,	wandering	lost	on	this	empty	land.
He’d	seen	old	camps,	abandoned	villages.	He’d	seen	a	valley	filled	with	bones	and	rubble.	He’d	seen	a	limping
crow	that	laughed	at	him	only	to	beg	for	mercy	when	he	caught	it.	Stupid!	His	heart	had	gone	all	soft	and	he
foolishly	released	it,	only	to	have	the	horrid	thing	start	laughing	at	him	all	over	again	as	it	limped	away.	It	only
stopped	laughing	when	the	boulder	landed	on	it.	And	now	he	missed	that	laughing	crow	and	its	funny	hopping
—at	least	it	had	been	keeping	him	company.	Stupid	boulder!
The	day	had	run	away	and	then	come	back	and	it	wasn’t	nearly	as	cold	as	it’d	been	earlier.	The	ghost	of
Old	Hunch	Arbat	had	blown	away	like	dust	and	was	that	fair?	It	wasn’t.	So	he	was	lost,	looking	for	something
but	he’d	forgotten	what	it	was	and	he	wanted	to	be	home	in	Letheras,	having	fun	with	King	Tehol	and	sexing
with	Shurq	Elalle	and	breaking	the	arms	of	his	fellow	guards	in	the	palace.	Oh,	where	were	all	his	friends?
His	 bleary,	 raw	 eyes	 settled	 on	 the	 battleaxe	 and	 he	 scowled.	 It	 wasn’t	 even	 pretty,	 was	 it.	 ‘Smash,’	 he


mumbled.	 ‘Crush.	 Its	 name	 is	 Rilk,	 but	 it	 never	 says	 anything.	 How’d	 it	 tell	 anybody	 its	 name?	 I’m	 alone.
Everybody	 must	 be	 dead.	 Sorry,	 crow,	 you	 were	 last	 other	 thing	 left	 alive!	 In	 the	 whole	 world!	 And	 I	 killed
you!’
‘Sorry	I	missed	it,’	said	a	voice	behind	him.
Ublala	Pung	climbed	to	his	feet	and	turned	round.	‘Life!’
‘I	share	your	exultation,	friend.’
‘It’s	all	cold	around	you,’	Ublala	said.
‘That	will	pass.’
‘Are	you	a	god?’
‘More	or	less,	Toblakai.	Does	that	frighten	you?’
Ublala	Pung	shook	his	head.	‘I’ve	met	gods	before.	They	collect	chickens.’
‘We	possess	mysterious	ways	indeed.’
‘I	know.’	Ublala	Pung	fidgeted	and	then	said,	‘I’m	supposed	to	save	the	world.’
The	stranger	cocked	his	head.	‘And	here	I	was	contemplating	killing	it.’
‘Then	I’d	be	all	alone	again!’	Ublala	wailed,	tears	springing	back	to	his	puffy	eyes.
‘Be	at	ease,	Toblakai.	You	are	reminding	me	that	some	things	in	this	world	remain	worthwhile.	If	you	would
save	 the	 world,	 friend,	 that	 Draconean	 armour	 is	 fine	 preparation,	 as	 is	 that	 weapon	 at	 your	 feet—indeed,	 I
believe	I	recognize	both.’
‘I	don’t	know,’	Ublala	said.	‘I	don’t	know	where	to	go	to	save	the	world.	I	don’t	know	anything.’
‘Let	us	journey	together,	then.’
‘Gods	make	good	friends,’	nodded	Ublala	Pung,	pleased	at	this	turn	of	events.
‘And	spiteful	enemies,’	the	stranger	said,	‘but	we	shall	not	be	enemies,	so	that	need	not	concern	us.	Wielder
of	Rilk,	Wearer	of	Dra	Alkeleint,	what	is	your	name?’
He	swelled	his	chest.	He	liked	being	called	Wielder	and	Wearer	of	things.	‘Ublala	Pung.	Who	are	you?’
The	stranger	smiled.	‘We	will	walk	east,	Ublala	Pung.	I	am	named	Draconus.’
‘Oh,	funny.’
‘What	is?’
‘That’s	the	word	Old	Hunch	Arbat’s	ghost	screamed,	before	the	black	wind	tore	him	to	pieces.’
‘You	must	tell	me	how	you	came	to	be	here,	Ublala	Pung.’
‘I’m	no	good	with	questions	like	that,	Draconus.’
The	god	sighed.	‘Then	we	have	found	something	in	common,	friend.	Now,	collect	up	Rilk	there	and	permit
me	to	refasten	your	straps.’
‘Oh,	thank	you.	I	don’t	like	knots.’
‘No	one	does,	I	should	think.’
‘But	not	as	bad	as	chains,	though.’
The	strangers	hands	hesitated	on	the	fittings,	and	then	resumed.	‘True	enough,	friend.’
Ublala	Pung	wiped	clean	his	face.	He	felt	light	on	his	feet	and	the	sun	was	coming	up	and,	he	decided,	he
felt	good	again.
Everybody	needs	a	friend.


Chapter	Twenty
Let	the	sun	warm	the	day.
If	light	holds	all	the	colours
then	see	the	union	as	pure
and	free	of	compromise.
Walk	the	stone	and	burden	of	earth
with	its	manes	like	cats	lying	in	wait
as	the	wind	slips	silken
and	slides	round	the	curl
of	your	sure	vision.
	
Let	the	sun	warm	this	day
armoured	against	all	argument,
solid	in	sanctity	to	opinion.
The	hue	does	not	deceive
and	the	blur	hides	no	thought
to	partake	of	grey	masses	in	the	sky
lowering	horizon’s	rim
where	each	step	is	balanced
on	the	day’s	birth.
	
Wake	to	the	warmth	of	the	sun.
It	knew	other	loves	past
and	stole	all	the	colours
from	eternal	promises.
The	dust	only	flows	to	life
in	the	lost-treasure	golds	of	light.
Hold	to	nothing	new
for	even	the	new	is	old
and	burden-worn.
	
Let	the	sun	bring	forth	the	day.
You	have	walked	this	way	before
amid	hunters	in	the	grasses
and	wheeling	lovers	of	death
crowning	every	sky.
The	armies	have	pursued	anon;
riders	risen	along	the	ridge.
Maids	and	courtiers	abide
in	future’s	perfect	shadows
until	what	is	lost	returns.
	
LAY	OF	WOUNDED	LOVE
FISHER

‘It’s	no	simple	thing,’	he	said,	frowning	as	he	worked	through	his	thoughts,	‘but	in	the	world—among	people,


that	 is.	 Society,	 culture,	 nation—in	 the	 world,	 then,	 there	 are	 attackers	 and	 there	 are	 defenders.	 Most	 of	 us
possess	within	ourselves	elements	of	both,	but	in	a	general	sense	a	person	falls	to	one	camp	or	the	other,	as
befits	their	nature.’
The	wind	swept	round	the	chiselled	stone.	What	guano	remained	to	stain	the	dark,	pitted	surfaces	had	been
rubbed	thin	and	patchy,	like	faded	splashes	of	old	paint.	Around	them	was	the	smell	of	heat	lifting	from	rock,
caught	up,	spun	and	plucked	away	with	each	gust	of	the	breeze.	But	the	sun	did	not	relent	its	battle,	and	for
that,	Ryadd	Eleis	was	thankful.
Silchas	 Ruin’s	 eyes	 were	 fixed	 on	 something	 to	 the	 northwest,	 but	 an	 outcrop	 of	 shaped	 stone	 blocked
Ryadd’s	 line	 of	 sight	 in	 that	 direction.	 He	 was	 curious,	 but	 not	 unduly	 so.	 Instead,	 he	 waited	 for	 Silchas	 to
continue,	knowing	how	the	white-skinned	Tiste	Andii	sometimes	struggled	to	speak	his	mind.	When	it	did	come,
it	often	arrived	all	at	once	and	at	length,	a	reasoned,	detailed	argument	that	Ryadd	received	mostly	in	silence.
There	was	so	much	to	learn.
‘This	is	not	to	say	that	aggression	belongs	only	to	those	who	are	attackers,’	Silchas	resumed.	‘Far	from	it,	in
fact.	 In	 my	 talent	 with	 the	 sword,	 for	 example,	 I	 am	 for	 the	 most	 part	 a	 defender.	 I	 rely	 upon	 timing	 and
counter-attack—I	 take	 advantage	 of	 the	 attacker’s	 forward	 predilections,	 the	 singularity	 of	 their	 intent.
Counterattack	is,	of	course,	aggression	in	its	own	way.	Do	you	see	the	distinction?’
Ryadd	nodded.	‘I	think	so.’
‘Aggression	takes	many	forms.	Active,	passive,	direct,	indirect.	Sudden	as	a	blow,	or	sustained	as	a	siege	of
will.	Often,	it	refuses	to	stand	still,	but	launches	upon	you	from	all	possible	sides.	If	one	tactic	fails,	another	is
tried,	and	so	on.’
Smiling,	Ryadd	said,	‘Yes.	I	played	often	enough	among	the	Imass	children.	What	you	describe	every	child
learns,	at	the	hands	of	the	bully	and	the	rival.’
‘Excellent.	 Of	 course	 you	 are	 right.	 But	 bear	 in	 mind,	 none	 of	 this	 belongs	 solely	 within	 the	 realm	 of
childhood.	It	persists	and	thrives	in	adult	society.	What	must	be	understood	is	this:	attackers	attack	as	a	form	of
defence.	It	is	their	instinctive	response	to	threat,	real	or	perceived.	It	may	be	desperate	or	it	may	be	habit,	or
both,	when	desperation	becomes	a	way	of	life.	Behind	the	assault	hides	a	fragile	person.’
He	was	silent	then,	and	Ryadd	understood	that	Silchas	sought	to	invite	some	contemplation	of	the	things	just
said.	Weighing	of	self-judgement,	perhaps.	Was	he	an	attacker	or	a	defender?	He	had	done	both,	he	knew,	and
there	had	been	times	when	he	had	attacked	when	he	should	have	defended,	and	so	too	the	other	way	round.	I
do	 not	 know	 which	 of	 the	 two	 I	 am.	 Not	 yet.	 But,	 I	 think,	 I	 know	 this	 much:	 when	 I	 feel	 threatened,	 I
attack.
‘Cultures	 tend	 to	 invite	 the	 dominance	 of	 one	 over	 the	 other,	 as	 a	 means	 by	 which	 an	 individual	 succeeds
and	advances	or,	conversely,	fails	and	falls.	A	culture	dominated	by	attackers—and	one	in	which	the	qualities
of	attacking	are	admired,	often	overtly	encouraged—tends	to	breed	people	with	a	thick	skin,	which	nonetheless
still	 serves	 to	 protect	 a	 most	 brittle	 self.	 Thus	 the	 wounds	 bleed	 but	 stay	 well	 hidden	 beneath	 the	 surface.
Cultures	favouring	the	defender	promote	thin	skin	and	quickness	to	take	offence—its	own	kind	of	aggression,	I
am	sure	you	see.	The	culture	of	attackers	seeks	submission	and	demands	evidence	of	that	submission	as	proof
of	 superiority	 over	 the	 subdued.	 The	 culture	 of	 defenders	 seeks	 compliance	 through	 conformity,	 punishing
dissenters	and	so	gaining	the	smug	superiority	of	enforcing	silence,	and	from	silence,	complicity.’
The	pause	that	followed	was	a	long	one	and	Ryadd	was	pleased	that	it	was	so,	for	Silchas	had	given	him
much	to	consider.	The	Imass?	Ah,	defenders,	I	think.	Yes.	Always	exceptions,	of	course,	but	he	said	there
would	 be.	 Examples	 of	 both,	 but	 in	 general	 .	 .	 .	 yes,	 defenders.	 Think	 of	 Onrack’s	 fate,	 his	 love	 for
Kilava,	the	crimes	that	love	forced	upon	him.	He	defied	conformity.	He	was	punished.
It	 was	 more	 difficult	 to	 think	 of	 a	 culture	 dominated	 by	 attackers.	 The	 Letherii?	 He	 thought	 of	 his	 father,
Udinaas.	 He	 defends	 when	 in	 himself.	 But	 attacks	 with	 derision,	 yet	 even	 then,	 he	 does	 not	 hide	 his
vulnerability.	‘Is	there	no	third	way	of	being,	Silchas?’
The	warrior	smiled.	‘In	my	long	life,	Ryadd,	I	have	seen	many	variations—configurations—of	behaviour	and
attitude,	 and	 I	 have	 seen	 a	 person	 change	 from	 one	 to	 the	 other—when	 experience	 has	 proved	 damaging
enough,	or	when	the	inherent	weaknesses	of	one	are	recognized,	leading	to	a	wholesale	rejection	of	it.	Though,
in	 turn,	 weaknesses	 of	 different	 sorts	 exist	 in	 the	 other,	 and	 often	 these	 prove	 fatal	 pitfalls.	 We	 are	 complex
creatures,	to	be	sure.	The	key,	I	think,	is	to	hold	true	to	your	own	aesthetics,	that	which	you	value,	and	yield	to
no	one	the	power	to	become	the	arbiter	of	your	tastes.	You	must	also	learn	to	devise	strategies	for	fending	off


both	 attackers	 and	 defenders.	 Exploit	 aggression,	 but	 only	 in	 self-defence,	 the	 kind	 of	 self-defence	 that
announces	 to	 all	 the	 implacability	 of	 your	 armour,	 your	 self-assurance,	 and	 affirms	 the	 sanctity	 of	 your	 selfesteem.	Attack	when	you	must,	but	not	in	arrogance.	Defend	when	your	values	are	challenged,	but	never	with
the	 wild	 fire	 of	 anger.	 Against	 attackers,	 your	 surest	 defence	 is	 cold	 iron.	 Against	 defenders,	 often	 the	 best
tactic	is	to	sheathe	your	weapon	and	refuse	the	game.	Reserve	contempt	for	those	who	have	truly	earned	it,
but	see	the	contempt	you	permit	yourself	to	feel	not	as	a	weapon,	but	as	armour	against	their	assaults.	Finally,
be	ready	to	disarm	with	a	smile,	even	as	you	cut	deep	with	words.’
‘Passive.’
‘Of	 a	 sort,	 yes.	 It	 is	 more	 a	 matter	 of	 warning	 off	 potential	 adversaries.	 In	 effect,	 you	 are	 saying:	 Be
careful	how	close	you	tread.	You	cannot	hurt	me,	but	if	I	am	pushed	hard	enough,	I	will	wound	you.	In
some	things	you	must	never	yield,	but	these	things	are	not	eternally	changeless	or	explicitly	inflexible;	rather,
they	are	yours	to	decide	upon,	yours	to	reshape	if	you	deem	it	prudent.	They	are	immune	to	 the	 pressure	 of
others,	but	not	indifferent	to	their	arguments.	Weigh	and	gauge	at	all	times,	and	decide	for	yourself	value	and
worth.	 But	 when	 you	 sense	 that	 a	 line	 has	 been	 crossed	 by	 the	 other	 person,	 when	 you	 sense	 that	 what	 is
under	attack	is,	in	fact,	your	self-esteem,	then	gird	yourself	and	stand	firm.’
Ryadd	rubbed	at	the	fine	hairs	downing	his	cheeks.	‘Would	these	words	of	yours	have	come	from	my	father,
had	I	remained	at	home?’
‘In	his	own	way,	yes.	Udinaas	is	a	man	of	great	strength—’
‘But—’
‘Great	strength,	Ryadd.	He	is	strong	enough	to	stand	exposed,	revealing	all	that	is	vulnerable	within	him.	He
is	brave	enough	to	invite	you	ever	closer.	If	you	hurt	him,	he	will	withdraw,	as	he	must,	and	that	path	to	him	will
be	thereafter	for	ever	sealed.	But	he	begins	with	the	gift	of	himself.	What	the	other	does	with	it	defines	the
future	of	that	particular	relationship.’
‘What	of	trust?’
The	red	eyes	flicked	to	his	and	then	away	again.	‘I	kept	them	safe	for	a	long	time,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.
‘Evading	the	Letherii	mages	and	soldiers.	None	of	that	was	necessary.’
‘My	father	knew.’
‘I	believe	Fear	Sengar	did	as	well.’
‘So	neither	then	trusted	you.’
‘On	the	contrary.	They	trusted	me	to	hold	to	my	resolve.’
Now	it	was	Ryadd’s	turn	to	look	away.	‘Did	she	really	have	to	die?’
‘She	 was	 never	 really	 alive,	 Ryadd.	 She	 was	 sent	 forth	 as	 potential.	 I	 ensured	 that	 it	 was	 realized.	 Are
seeds	filled	with	hope?	We	might	think	so.	But	in	truth	hope	belongs	to	the	creator	of	that	seed,	and	to	those
who	choose	to	plant	it.’
‘She	was	still	a	child	to	everyone’s	eyes.’
‘The	Azath	used	what	it	found.’
‘Is	she	still	alive	then?’
Silchas	Ruin	shrugged.	‘Perhaps	more	now	than	ever	before.	Alive,	but	young.	And	very	vulnerable.’
‘And	 so	 now,’	 Ryadd	 said,	 ‘my	 father	 yearns	 for	 the	 survival	 of	 the	 Azath,	 and	 he	 hopes	 too	 for	 your
continued	resolve.	But	maybe	“hope”	is	the	wrong	word.	Instead,	it’s	trust.’
‘If	so,	then	you	have	answered	your	own	question.’
But	what	of	my	resolve?	Do	you	trust	in	that,	Silchas	Ruin?
‘They	 draw	 nearer,’	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 said,	 rising	 from	 his	 perch	 on	 the	 stone.	 Then	 he	 paused.	 ‘Be	 wary,
Ryadd,	she	is	most	formidable,	and	I	cannot	predict	the	outcome	of	this	parley.’
‘What	will	she	make	of	me?’	he	asked,	also	straightening.
‘That	is	what	we	shall	discover.’
	
His	horse	had	stepped	on	a	particularly	vicious	fist	of	cactus.	Torrent	dismounted,	cursing	under	his	breath.	He
went	round	and	lifted	the	beast’s	hoof	and	began	plucking	spines.
Olar	Ethil	stood	to	one	side,	watching.
It	 had	 turned	 out	 that	 escaping	 the	 hoary	 old	 witch	 wasn’t	 simply	 a	 matter	 of	 riding	 hard	 and	 leaving	 her
behind.	 She	 kept	 reappearing	 in	 swirls	 of	 dust,	 with	 that	 ever-present	 skull	 grin	 that	 needed	 no	 laugh	 to	 add


sting	to	its	mockery.
Following	the	heavy	wagon	tracks,	he	had	ridden	past	two	more	dragon	towers,	both	as	lifeless	and	ruined
as	 the	 first	 one.	 And	 now	 here	 they	 were,	 approaching	 yet	 another.	 Arcane	 machinery	 had	 spilled	 out	 from
rents	in	the	stone,	lying	scattered,	spreading	outward	from	the	foot	of	the	edifice	a	hundred	or	more	paces	on
all	sides.	Crumpled	pieces	of	armour	and	broken	weapons	lay	amidst	the	wreckage,	as	well	as	grizzled	strips
and	slabs	of	scaled	hide.	The	violence	committed	at	this	particular	tower	remained,	intrusive	as	bitter	smoke.
Torrent	 tugged	 loose	 the	 last	 thorn	 and,	 collecting	 the	 reins,	 led	 the	 horse	 forward	 a	 few	 steps.	 ‘Those
damned	things,’	he	said,	‘were	they	poisoned?’
‘I	think	not,’	Olar	Ethil	replied.	‘Just	painful.	Local	bhederin	know	to	avoid	stepping	on	them.’
‘There	are	no	local	bhederin,’	snapped	Torrent.	‘These	are	the	Wastelands	and	well	named.’
‘Once,	long	ago,	warrior,	the	spirits	of	the	earth	and	wind	thrived	in	this	place.’
‘So	what	happened?’
Her	shrug	creaked.	‘When	it	is	easy	to	feed,	one	grows	fat.’
What	 the	 fuck	 does	 that	 mean?	 He	 faced	 the	 tower.	 ‘We’ll	 walk	 for—’	 Motion	 in	 the	 sky	 caught	 his
attention,	as	two	massive	shapes	lifted	from	the	enormous	carved	head	of	the	stone	dragon.	‘Spirits	below!’
A	pair	of	dragons—real	ones.	The	one	on	the	left	was	the	hue	of	bone,	eyes	blazing	bright	red,	and	though
larger	than	its	companion,	it	was	gaunter,	perhaps	older.	The	other	dragon	was	a	stunning	white	deepening	to
gold	along	its	shoulders	and	serrated	back.	Wings	snapping,	sailing	in	a	curving	descent,	the	two	landed	directly
in	their	path,	halfway	between	them	and	the	tower.	The	earth	trembled	at	the	twin	impacts.
Torrent	 glanced	 at	 Olar	 Ethil.	 She	 was	 standing	 still	 as	 a	 statue.	 I	 thought	 you	 knew	 everything,	 witch,
and	now	I	think	you	thought	the	same.	Look	at	you,	still	as	a	hare	under	the	cat’s	eyes.
He	 looked	 back	 in	 time	 to	 see	 both	 dragons	 shimmer,	 and	 then	 blur,	 as	 if	 nothing	 more	 than	 mirages.	 A
moment	later,	two	men	stood	in	place	of	the	giant	creatures.	Neither	moved.
Even	at	this	distance,	Torrent	could	see	how	the	dragons	had	so	perfectly	expressed	the	essences	of	these
two	figures.	The	one	on	the	left	was	tall,	gaunt,	his	skin	the	shade	of	bleached	bone;	the	other	was	younger	by
far,	thickly	muscled	yet	nearing	his	companion’s	height.	His	hair,	hanging	loose,	was	gold	and	bronze,	his	skin
burnished	by	the	sun,	and	he	stood	with	the	ease	of	the	innocent.
Saying	nothing,	Olar	Ethil	set	out	to	meet	them,	and	to	Torrent’s	eyes	she	was	suddenly	diminished,	the	raw
primitiveness	of	her	form	looking	clumsy	and	rough.	The	scaled	hide	of	her	cloak	now	looked	to	be	a	faintly
sordid	affectation.
Tugging	his	skittish	horse	along	behind	him,	he	followed.	There	was	no	escaping	these	warriors,	should	they
desire	him	harm.	If	Olar	Ethil	was	prepared	to	brave	it	out,	then	he	would	follow	her	lead.	But	this	day	I	have
seen	true	power.	And	now	I	will	look	it	in	the	eye.
I	have	travelled	far	from	my	village.	The	small	world	of	my	people	gets	smaller	still.
As	he	drew	closer,	he	was	surprised	to	see	that	the	two	swords	belted	to	the	gaunt,	older	warrior	were	both
Letherii	in	design.	Blue	steel.	I	remember	seeing	a	knife	once,	traded	into	the	chief ’s	hands,	and	how	it
sang	when	struck.	The	younger	one	bore	weapons	of	flaked	stone.	He	was	dressed	in	strange,	rough	hides.
‘You	are	not	welcome,	Silchas,’	said	Olar	Ethil.	And	then	she	stabbed	a	gnarled	finger	at	the	younger	man.
‘And	this	one,	who	so	mocks	my	own	people.	This	is	not	his	world.	Silchas	Ruin,	have	you	bargained	open	the
Gate	to	Starvald	Demelain?’
‘He	 is	 Menandore’s	 son,’	 replied	 the	 white-skinned	 warrior.	 ‘You	 know	 the	 payment	 for	 such	 a	 bargain,
Olar	Ethil.	Do	you	think	I	am	prepared	to	pay	it?’
‘I	do	not	know	what	you	are	prepared	to	do,	Silchas.	I	never	did.’
‘He	is	named	Ryadd	Eleis,	and	he	is	under	my	protection.’
She	snorted.	‘You	think	too	highly	of	yourself	if	you	think	he	requires	your	protection.	No,’	and	she	cocked
her	head,	‘I	see	the	truth.	You	keep	him	close	in	order	to	control	him.	But,	since	he	is	Menandore’s	spawn,	you
will	 fail.	 Silchas	 Ruin,	 you	 never	 learn.	 The	 blood	 of	 Eleint	 can	 never	 flow	 close	 to	 its	 own.	 There	 will	 be
betrayal.	 There	 is	 always	 betrayal.	 Why	 does	 she	 possess	 a	 hundred	 heads?	 It	 is	 to	 mock	 an	 impossible
concord.’	 She	 shifted	 slightly	 to	 face	 Ryadd	 Eleis.	 ‘He	 will	 strike	 first	 if	 he	 can.	 When	 he	 sees	 you	 surpass
him,	he	will	seek	to	kill	you.’
The	young	golden	warrior	seemed	unperturbed	by	her	warning.	‘He	will	see	no	such	thing,	bonecaster.’
She	started,	and	then	hissed.	‘A	bold	claim.	How	can	you	be	so	certain?’


‘Because,’	Ryadd	replied,	‘I	already	have.’
All	at	once	everything	shifted.	Torrent	saw	Silchas	Ruin	step	away	from	his	companion,	both	hands	stealing
closer	to	the	grips	of	his	swords.
Olar	Ethil	cackled.
‘Bonecaster,’	Ryadd	said,	adding	a	faint	bow	to	the	title,	‘I	know	your	name.	I	know	you	are	the	Maker	of
the	Ritual	of	Tellann.	That	without	you	all	the	will	of	the	Imass	would	have	achieved	nothing.	The	One	Voice
was	yours.	You	took	a	people	and	stole	from	them	death	itself.’
‘You	have	dwelt	among	T’lan	Imass?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Imass.	But	I	know	one	who	was	once	a	T’lan	Imass.	Onrack	the	Broken.	And	I	know
his	wife,	Kilava.’
‘Kilava,	that	sweet	bitch.	His	wife	now?	She	almost	undid	me.	Is	she	well?	Tell	her	I	forgive	her.	And	tell
Onrack	the	Broken	of	the	Logros,	I	shall	not	reclaim	him.	His	life	is	his,	now,	and	for	all	time.’
‘It	is	well	you	said	so,’	Ryadd	said.	‘For	I	have	vowed	that	no	harm	come	to	them.’
‘Ryadd	Eleis,	I	have	chosen:	I	am	not	your	enemy	and	be	glad	for	that.	If	I	had	chosen	otherwise,	that	bold
vow	would	have	killed	you.’
He	 shrugged.	 ‘Perhaps	 between	 the	 two	 of	 us,	 you	 would	 prevail.	 But	 against	 me	 and	 Kilava	 both,	 the
outcome	might	prove	the	opposite.’
‘Is	she	close?	No!	I	sense	nothing!’
‘She	is	the	oldest	true	bonecaster	of	all,	Olar	Ethil.	The	others	ceased	to	grow	once	they	surrendered	to	the
Ritual.	And	look	at	yourself—the	same	is	true.	You	are	only	what	you	once	were,	that	and	nothing	more.	If
Kilava	wishes	to	remain	undetected,	so	it	shall	be.	You	do	not	rule	this	world,	Olar	Ethil.	You	surrendered	that
privilege	long	ago,	with	your	very	own	Ritual.’
Olar	Ethil	swung	to	Silchas	Ruin.	‘See	what	you	have	invited	into	your	shadow?	You	fool!	And	now,	best
you	beg	me	for	an	alliance—quickly!’
But	 Silchas	 Ruin	 let	 his	 hands	 fall	 away	 from	 his	 weapons.	 ‘It	 may	 be	 that	 I	 have	 kept	 him	 close	 for	 the
reasons	you	say,	Olar	Ethil,	but	there	are	other	reasons—and	these	are	proving	far	more	compelling	the	more	I
come	to	know	this	son	of	Menandore.	If	he	has	indeed	surpassed	me,	I	will	yield	my	leadership	of	the	pair	of
us.	As	for	an	alliance	with	you,	frankly,	I’d	rather	bed	an	enkar’al.’
Torrent	laughed,	as	much	to	release	the	tension	and	fear	building	within	him	as	at	the	notion	of	this	warrior
bedding	something	with	the	ugly	name	of	enkar’al.	The	sound,	unfortunately,	drew	everyone’s	attention.
Ryadd	addressed	him.	‘Warrior,	are	you	indebted	to	this	bonecaster?’
He	frowned.	‘I’d	not	thought	of	that.	Possibly,	but	I	do	not	know	the	coin,	nor	its	value.	I	am	Torrent	of	the
Awl,	but	the	Awl	are	no	more.	Instead,	I	keep	company	with	bones.’
The	youth	smiled,	as	if	unexpectedly	pleased	with	the	answer.
Silchas	said,	‘Torrent	of	the	Awl.	I	grieve	for	the	passing	of	your	people.	Their	memory	rests	with	you	now.
Cherish	it	but	do	not	let	it	destroy	you.’
‘An	interesting	distinction,’	Torrent	said	after	a	moment’s	thought.	‘But	I	am	past	such	things,	since	I	now
cherish	destruction.	I	would	slay	my	slayers.	I	would	end	the	lives	of	those	who	have	ended	mine.’	He	glanced
across	at	Olar	Ethil.	‘Perhaps	this	is	the	coin	between	me	and	this	undead	witch.’
Sorrow	tinged	Ruin’s	face	but	he	said	nothing.
Ryadd’s	 smile	 was	 gone.	 ‘Look	 around	 then,	 warrior.	 This	 is	 the	 home	 you	 would	 make	 for	 your	 enemies
and	for	yourself.	Does	it	please	you?’
‘I	think	it	does,	Ryadd	Eleis.’
The	young	man’s	displeasure	and	disappointment	at	that	answer	was	plain	to	see.
A	 short	 span	 of	 silence,	 and	 then	 Olar	 Ethil	 spoke.	 ‘You	 have	 waited	 to	 spring	 this	 ambush,	 Silchas	 Ruin.
Were	the	words	we	have	exchanged	all	you	sought,	or	is	there	something	else?’
‘My	curiosity	is	satisfied,’	Silchas	said	to	the	bonecaster.	‘But	I	will	give	you	this	as	a	gesture,	if	you	will,	as
evidence	that	I	wish	no	enmity	between	us.	Two	undead	dragons	are	seeking	you.	I	know	them	of	old.	They
will	bow	and	scrape	and	swear	fealty.	But	in	their	hearts	they	are	vile.’
Olar	Ethil	sniffed.	‘I	thought	I	sensed	.	.	.	something.	On	our	trail.	You	say	you	know	them,	while	I	do	not.	I
find	that	odd,	given	the	world	you	and	I	once	shared.’
‘From	 when	 the	 Eleint	 were	 unleashed,	 out	 through	 the	 Gate,	 seeking	 to	 claim	 realms	 to	 rule	 amidst	 the


shattered	remains	of	Kurald	Emurlahn.’	He	paused,	and	then	added,	‘My	own	encounter	with	them	was	brief,
but	violent.	They	are	true	spawn	of	T’iam.’
‘Yet	they	travel	together.	Why	has	neither	one	committed	treachery	upon	the	other?’
‘I	believe	they	are	twins,	Olar	Ethil,	hatched	from	a	single	egg	as	it	were.	Among	all	the	Eleint	during	the
Wars	of	Shadow,	they	came	closest	to	victory.	It	was	the	last	time	I	stood	beside	my	brother,	the	last	time	he
held	my	flank	and	I	his.	For	a	time,	then	.	.	.’	and	his	voice	fell	away,	‘we	were	happy.’
Though	Torrent	knew	nothing	of	these	Wars	of	Shadow,	nor	the	other	players	involved,	he	could	not	but	hear
the	sorrow	in	Ruin’s	voice,	and	it	stung	him	deep	inside.	Fucking	regrets.	We	all	have	them,	don’t	we.	Live
long	enough	and	maybe	it’s	all	we	have,	all	we	keep	alive	in	our	minds.	Spirits	below,	what	a	miserable
thought.
But	 Olar	 Ethil	 had	 no	 room	 in	her	 bag	 of	 bones	 for	 sentiment.	 She	 hacked	 out	 a	 laugh.	 ‘Happy	 delivering
death!	 Oh,	 you	 were	 all	 such	 righteous	 fools	 back	 then!	 And	 now	 among	 you	 and	 your	 brothers,	 only	 you
remain,	 like	 a	 thorn	 no	 one	 can	 dig	 loose!	 Tell	 me	 the	 great	 cause	 you	 have	 espoused	 for	 yourself	 this	 time,
Silchas	Ruin.	Tell	me	about	all	the	regrettable	but	necessary	deaths	to	shore	up	your	grisly	road!	Do	not	think	I
won’t	 cheer	 you	 on—nor	 this	 mortal	 beside	 me	 either,	 if	 one	 would	 purchase	 truth	 from	 his	 words.	 You	 are
welcome	 to	 mayhem,	 Silchas	 Ruin!	 You	 and	 this	 flawed	 fire	 of	 a	 child	 at	 your	 side,	 and	 Kilava	 too,	 for	 that
matter!’
At	her	outburst,	Silchas	frowned.	‘Speak	what	you	are	hiding,	bonecaster.’
‘Gesture	for	gesture?	Very	well.	Errastas	has	summoned	the	Elders.	Sechul	Lath,	Kilmandaros,	Mael—and
now	 Draconus—yes!	 When	 you	 hide	 yourselves	 so	 well	 you	 yield	 your	 touch	 on	 this	 trembling	 world—you
become	 blind.	 Your	 brother	 is	 dead,	 Silchas	 Ruin.	 Dragnipur	 is	 shattered.	 Draconus	 is	 loose	 upon	 the	 realm,
Darkness	in	his	hands—and	what	does	his	old	lover	see	now	that	she	sets	eyes	upon	us	all	once	more?	Have
you	greeted	your	mother	yet,	Silchas?	Have	you	felt	her	touch	upon	your	brow?	I	thought	not.	She	grieves	for
the	son	she	cherished	the	most,	I	think.	In	whom	the	black	flames	of	her	love	burned	brightest.	She	reserves
true	spite	and	contempt	for—’
Torrent’s	backhanded	swing	caught	her	full	in	the	face,	hard	enough	to	knock	her	from	her	feet,	falling	in	a
clatter	of	bones.	As	he	loomed	over	her,	he	found	he’d	drawn	his	sword.	‘Spite,	witch?	Well,	you’d	know	of	it
better	than	anyone.	Now	shut	that	bony	jaw	and	keep	it	shut.’
Her	black	pitted	eyes	seemed	to	fix	upon	his	own	as	if	bearing	claws,	but	he	did	not	flinch.	Destruction?
You	scrawny	bitch,	I	fear	only	its	escape.	He	stepped	back	and	shot	Silchas	a	glance.
The	man	looked	so	wounded	it	was	a	wonder	he	was	still	standing.	He	had	wrapped	his	arms	about	his	own
torso,	 curled	 in	 and	 shrunken.	 The	 liquid	 that	 leaked	 down	 from	 his	 eyes	 traced	 crimson	 glints	 down	 his
hollowed	cheeks.	Torrent	saw	Ryadd,	his	face	ravaged	with	distress,	take	a	step	towards	his	companion,	and
then	he	wheeled	to	advance	on	Olar	Ethil.
Torrent	stepped	into	his	path.	‘Go	back,’	he	said.	‘Now	is	not	the	time.	Console	your	friend,	Ryadd.	I	will
lead	her	away	from	here.’
The	young	warrior	trembled,	his	eyes	incandescent	with	fury.	‘She	will	not—’
‘Heed	me?	She	will.	Ryadd,	the	attacks	are	over—’
He	started,	eyes	widening.	‘Attacks.’	Then	he	nodded.	‘Yes,	I	see.	Yes.’	He	nodded	again,	and	then	turned
round,	ready	to	give	his	youthful	strength	to	an	old	man	suddenly	broken.
And	so	he	surpasses,	and	leadership	now	belongs	to	him.	Simple	as	that.	Torrent	 sheathed	his	 sword
and	swung	up	on	to	his	horse.	He	gathered	the	reins,	shot	one	last	withering	look	upon	Olar	Ethil—who’d	yet
to	move—and	then	kicked	his	mount	into	motion.
On	to	the	trail	of	the	wagon,	east	and	south.	He	did	not	look	back,	but	after	a	time	he	saw	a	spinning	cloud
of	dust	lift	from	a	nearby	rise.	She	was	with	him.	I	see	you,	sweet	as	crotch	rot,	but	will	you	even	admit	I
probably	just	saved	your	sorry	sack?
Didn’t	think	so.
	
As	the	sun	painted	gold	the	brutal	facing	of	the	stone	tower,	a	figure	of	gold	and	bronze	stood	above	another
who	knelt,	bowed	forward	over	his	thighs	with	his	face	in	his	hands.
Neither	moved	until	long	after	the	sun	set	and	darkness	claimed	the	sky.


	
There	had	been	an	old	man	among	the	Barghast,	brain-addled	and	prone	to	drag	on	to	his	shoulders	a	tattered,
mangy	wolf	hide,	and	then	fall	to	his	hands	and	knees,	as	if	at	last	he	had	found	his	true	self.	A	beast	incapable
of	 speech	 beyond	 yips	 and	 howls,	 he	 would	 rush	 in	 amongst	 the	 camp	 dogs,	 growling,	 until	 he	 had	 subdued
every	 bewildered,	 cowering	 animal.	 He	 had	 sought	 to	 do	 other	 things	 as	 well,	 but	 Setoc	 found	 even	 the
memory	of	those	to	be	too	pitiful	and	painfully	pathetic	to	revisit.
The	giant	plains	wolf,	Baaljagg,	reminded	her	of	that	old	man.	Hide	patched	and	rotted,	in	places	hanging	in
mangled	strips.	Its	muzzle	was	perpetually	peeled	back,	revealing	the	massive	oak-hued	teeth	and	fangs,	as	if
the	entire	world	deserved	an	eternal	challenge.	The	creature’s	black	pitted	eyeholes	haunted	her,	speaking	to
her	in	eloquent	silence:	I	am	death,	they	said.	I	am	your	fate	and	the	fate	of	all	living	things.	I	am	what	is
left	behind.	Departed	from	the	world,	I	leave	you	only	this.
She	wondered	what	had	happened	to	that	old	man,	to	make	him	want	to	be	a	wolf.	What	wound	stuck	in	his
mind	made	him	lose	all	sense	of	his	true	self?	And	why	was	there	no	going	back,	no	finding	that	lost	self?	The
mind	held	too	many	secrets.	The	brain	was	a	sack	of	truths	and	their	power,	hiding	there	inside,	was	absolute.
Twist	one	truth	into	a	lie,	and	a	man	became	a	wolf.	His	flesh	and	bones	could	only	follow,	straining	to	reshape
themselves.	Two	legs	to	four,	teeth	to	fangs:	new	forms	and	new	purposes	to	give	proof	to	the	falsehood.
But	 such	 lies	 need	 not	 be	 so	 obvious	 as	 that	 old	 man	 with	 his	 broken	 brain,	 need	 they?	 The	 self	 could
become	 lost	 in	 more	 subtle	 ways,	 could	 it	 not?	 Today	 I	 am	 this	 person.	 Tomorrow	 I	 am	 another.	 See	 the
truths	of	me?	Not	one	is	tethered.	I	am	bound	to	no	single	self,	but	unleashed	into	a	multitude	of	selves.
Does	this	make	me	ill?	Broken?
Is	this	why	I	can	find	no	peace?
The	 twins	 walked	 five	 paces	 in	 front	 of	 her.	 They	 were	 one	 split	 in	 two.	 Sharp-eyed	 round	 faces	 peering
into	the	mirror,	where	nothing	could	hide.	Truths	could	bend	but	not	twist.
I	willingly	followed	Toc	Anaster,	even	as	I	resented	it.	I	have	my	very	own	addiction	and	it	is	called
dissatisfaction.	 And	 each	 time	 it	 returns,	 everyone	 pays.	 Cafal,	 I	 let	 you	 down.	 I	 cried	 out	 my	 own
failure	of	faith—I	forced	you	to	flee	me.	Where	are	you	now,	my	soft-eyed	priest?
Baaljagg’s	dead	eyes	fixed	on	her	again	and	again	as	they	walked.	She	lagged	behind	the	twins.	The	boy’s
weight	was	making	the	muscles	of	her	arms	burn.	She	would	have	to	set	him	down	again,	and	so	their	pace
would	suddenly	slow	to	a	crawl.	Everyone	was	hungry—even	an	undead	wolf	could	find	little	to	chase	down
out	 here.	 The	 withered	 grasses	 of	 the	 plains	 were	 long	 behind	 them	 now.	 Soil	 had	 given	 way	 to	 stones	 and
hard-packed	clay.	Thorny	shrubs	clung	here	and	there,	their	ancient	trunks	emerging	from	beds	of	cacti.	Worn
watercourses	 revealed	 desiccated	 pieces	 of	 driftwood,	 mostly	 no	 more	 substantial	 than	 the	 bones	 of	 her
forearm;	but	occasionally	they	came	upon	something	far	larger,	long	and	thick	as	a	leg,	and	though	she	could
not	be	certain	she	thought	that	they	showed	signs	of	having	been	worked.	Boreholes	large	enough	to	insert	a
thumb—though	of	course	to	do	so	would	invite	a	spider’s	bite	or	a	scorpion’s	sting—and	the	faint	scaly	signs
of	adze	marks.	But	none	of	these	ancient	streams	could	have	borne	a	boat	of	any	kind,	not	even	a	skiff	or	raft.
She	could	make	no	sense	of	any	of	it.
The	north	horizon	hinted	at	high	towers	of	stone,	like	mountains	gnawed	through	from	every	side,	leaving	the
peaks	tottering	on	narrow	spires.	They	made	her	uneasy,	as	if	warning	her	of	something.	You	are	 in	a	 land
that	gives	nothing.	It	will	devour	you,	and	there	is	no	end	to	its	vast	hunger.
They	had	made	a	terrible	mistake.	No,	she’d	made	it.	He	was	leading	us	east,	so	we	will	go	east.	Why
was	he	leading	us	in	that	direction?	Stavi,	I	have	no	idea.
But	 here	 is	 a	 truth	 I	 have	 found	 inside	 myself.	 All	 that	 dissatisfaction?	 It’s	 not	 at	 Toc.	 It’s	 not	 at
anyone.	It’s	with	me.	My	inability	to	find	peace,	to	trust	it	when	I	do	find	it,	and	to	hold	on	to	it.
This	addiction	feeds	itself.	It	may	be	incurable.
Another	rutted	watercourse	ahead—no	.	.	.	Setoc’s	eyes	narrowed.	Two	ruts,	churned	up	by	horse	hoofs.	A
track.	The	twins	had	seen	the	same,	for	they	suddenly	ran	ahead,	halting	and	looking	down.	Setoc	didn’t	catch
their	words	but	both	turned	as	she	arrived,	and	in	their	faces	they	saw	a	hardening	determination.
Storii	pointed.	‘It	goes	that	way.	It	goes	that	way,	Setoc.’
‘So	will	we,’	Stavi	added.
Southeast,	but	curving	ahead,	she	saw.	Eastward.	What	is	out	there?	What	are	we	supposed	to	find?
‘Blablablabla!’	cried	the	boy,	his	loud	voice—so	close	to	one	ear—making	her	flinch.


Baaljagg	trotted	out	to	sniff	the	trail.	Probably	just	instinct.	The	damned	thing	hasn’t	even	got	a	working
nose	.	.	.	has	it?	Maybe	it	smells	different	things.	Life,	or	something	else.
When	 the	 twins	 set	 out	 on	 the	 path,	 the	 huge	 beast	 followed.	 The	 boy	 twisted	 in	 Setoc’s	 arms	 and	 she
lowered	him	to	the	ground.	He	ran	to	join	his	sisters.
Some	leader	I	am.
At	the	turn	she	saw	skid	marks,	where	the	wagon’s	wheels	had	spun	and	juddered	out	to	the	side,	tearing	at
the	 ground.	 Here,	 the	 horse	 hoofs	 had	 gouged	 deep.	 But	 she	 could	 see	 no	 obstacle	 that	 would	 have	 forced
such	a	manoeuvre.	The	way	ahead	ran	straight	for	a	hundred	paces	before	jagging	south	again,	only	to	twist
east	and	then	northeast.
At	 this	 Setoc	 snorted.	 ‘They	 were	 out	 of	 control,’	 she	 said.	 ‘They	 went	 where	 the	 horses	 dragged	 them.
This	is	pointless—’
Stavi	spun.	‘We	don’t	care	where	they’re	going!’	she	shouted.	‘It	doesn’t	matter!’
‘But	how	can	they	help	us	if	they	can’t	even	help	themselves?’	Setoc	asked.
‘What’s	so	different	about	that?’
The	bitchy	little	runt	has	a	point.	‘Look	at	those	marks—they	were	riding	wild,	crazy	fast.	How	do	you
expect	we’ll	ever	catch	them?’
‘Because	horses	get	tired.’
They	resumed	their	journey.	Tracking	the	aimless	with	purpose.	Just	like	growing	up.
Stones	 crunched	 underfoot,	 the	 bridling	 heat	 making	 the	 gnarled	 stalks	 of	 the	 shrubs	 tick	 and	 creak.	 They
were	low	on	water.	The	meat	of	the	lizards	they’d	eaten	this	morning	felt	dry	and	sour	in	Setoc’s	stomach.	Not
a	single	cloud	in	the	sky	to	give	them	a	moment’s	respite.	She	couldn’t	recall	the	last	time	she’d	seen	a	bird.
Noon	passed,	the	afternoon	stretching	as	listless	as	the	wasteland	spreading	out	on	all	sides.	The	track	had
finally	 straightened	 out	 on	 an	 easterly	 setting.	 Even	 the	 twins	 were	 slowing	 down.	 All	 of	 their	 shadows	 had
pitched	round	and	were	lengthening	when	Storii	cried	out	and	pointed.
A	 lone	 horse.	 South	 of	 the	 trail	 by	 two	 hundred	 or	 so	 paces.	 Remnants	 of	 traces	 dangled	 down	 from	 its
head.	It	stood	on	weak	legs,	nuzzling	the	lifeless	ground,	and	its	ebon	flanks	were	white	with	crusted	lather.
Setoc	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘Keep	Baaljagg	here.	I	want	to	see	if	I	can	catch	it.’
For	once	the	twins	had	no	complaint.
The	animal	was	facing	away	but	it	caught	some	noise	or	scent	when	Setoc	was	still	a	hundred	paces	off	and
it	shifted	round	to	regard	her.	Its	eyes,	she	saw,	were	strange,	as	if	swallowed	in	something	both	lurid	and	dark.
At	least	the	animal	didn’t	bolt.
Ghost	wolves,	stay	away	from	me	now.	We	need	this	beast.
Cautiously,	she	edged	closer.
The	horse	watched.	It	had	been	eating	cactus,	she	saw,	and	scores	of	spines	were	embedded	in	its	muzzle,
dripping	blood.
Hungry.	Starving.	She	spoke	in	low,	soothing	tones:	‘How	long	have	you	been	out	here,	friend?	All	alone,
your	 companions	 gone.	 Do	 you	 welcome	 our	 company?	 I’m	 sure	 you	 do.	 As	 for	 those	 spines,	 we’ll	 do
something	about	that.	I	promise.’
And	then	she	was	close	enough	to	reach	out	and	touch	the	animal.	But	its	eyes	held	her	back.	They	didn’t
belong	to	a	horse.	They	looked	.	.	.	demonic.
It’s	been	eating	cactus—how	much?	She	looked	to	where	she	had	seen	it	cropping	the	ground.	Oh,	spirits
below.	If	all	that	is	now	in	your	stomach,	you	are	in	trouble.	Did	it	look	to	be	in	pain?	How	could	she	tell?
It	was	clearly	weary,	yes,	but	it	drew	a	steady	and	deep	breath,	ears	flicking	curiously	as	it	in	turn	studied	her.
Finally,	 Setoc	 slowly	 reached	 out	 to	 take	 the	 frayed	 leather	 traces.	 When	 she	 gathered	 them	 up	 the	 animal
lifted	its	head,	as	if	about	to	prod	her	with	its	wounded	muzzle.
Setoc	wrapped	the	reins	about	her	left	hand	and	gingerly	took	hold	of	one	of	the	spines.	She	tugged	it	loose.
The	horse	flinched.	That	and	nothing	more.	Sighing,	she	began	plucking.
If	she	licked	the	blood	from	the	spines?	What	would	the	beast	think	of	that?	She	decided	not	to	find	out.	Oh,
but	I	dearly	do	want	to	lick	this	blood.	My	mouth	yearns	for	that	taste.	I	can	smell	its	warm	life.
Old	man,	give	me	your	skin.
When	she’d	removed	the	last	spine	she	reached	up	and	settled	a	hand	on	its	blazoned	brow.	‘Better?	I	hope
so,	friend.’


‘Mercy,’	said	a	thin	voice	in	accented	trader	tongue,	‘I’d	forgotten	about	that.’
Setoc	stepped	round	the	horse	and	saw,	lying	in	a	careless	sprawl	on	the	ground,	a	corpse.	For	an	instant	her
breath	caught—‘Toc?’
‘Who?	No.	Saw	him,	though,	once.	Funny	eyes.’
‘Does	nothing	dead	ever	go	away	around	here?’	Setoc	demanded,	fear	giving	way	to	anger.
‘I	don’t	know,	but	can	you	even	hope	to	imagine	the	anguish	people	like	me	feel	when	seeing	one	such	as
you?	Young,	flush,	with	such	clear	and	bright	eyes.	You	make	me	miserable.’
Setoc	drew	the	horse	round.
‘Wait!	Help	me	up—I’m	snagged	on	something.	I	don’t	mind	being	miserable,	so	long	as	I	have	someone	to
talk	to.	Being	miserable	without	anyone	to	talk	to	is	far	worse.’
Really.	Setoc	walked	over.	Studied	the	corpse.	‘You	have	a	stake	through	your	chest,’	she	said.
‘A	stake?	Oh,	a	spoke,	you	mean.	That	explains	it.’
‘Does	it?’
‘Well,	 no.	 Things	 got	 confused.	 I	 believe,	 however,	 I	 am	 lying	 on	 a	 fragment	 of	 the	 hub,	 with	 perhaps
another	fragment	of	spoke	buried	deep	in	the	earth.	This	is	what	happens	when	a	carriage	gets	picked	up	and
then	 dropped	 back	 down.	 I	 wonder	 if	 horses	 have	 much	 memory.	 Probably	 not,	 else	 this	 one	 would	 still	 be
running.	So,	beautiful	child,	will	you	help	me?’
She	reached	down.	‘Take	my	arm,	then—can	you	manage	that	much?	Good,	now	hold	tight	while	I	try	and
lift	you	clear.’
It	was	easier	than	she’d	expected.	Skin	and	bones	don’t	weigh	much,	do	they?
‘I	am	named	Cartographer,’	said	the	corpse,	ineffectually	trying	to	brush	dust	from	his	rags.
‘Setoc.’
‘So	very	pleased	to	meet	you.’
‘I	thought	I	made	you	miserable.’
‘I	delight	in	misery.’
She	grunted.	‘You’ll	fit	right	in.	Come	with	me.’
‘Wonderful,	where	are	you	going?’
‘We’re	going	after	your	carriage—tell	me,	is	everyone	in	it	dead	like	you?’
Cartographer	seemed	to	ponder	the	question,	and	then	he	said,	‘Probably.	But	let’s	find	out,	shall	we?’
The	children	of	Onos	Toolan	and	Hetan	seemed	unaffected	by	the	arrival	of	yet	another	animated	corpse.
When	Cartographer	saw	Baaljagg	he	halted	and	pointed,	but	said	nothing.
Setoc	took	the	boy’s	hand	and	led	him	close	to	the	horse.	She	vaulted	on	to	the	animal’s	back	and	reached
down	and	lifted	up	the	boy.
The	twins	set	out	once	more	on	the	trail.	Baaljagg	fell	in	with	them.
‘Did	you	know,’	Cartographer	said,	‘the	dead	still	dream?’
‘No,’	said	Setoc,	‘I	didn’t	know	that.’
‘Sometimes	I	dream	that	a	dog	will	find	me.’
‘A	dog?’
‘Yes.	A	big	one,	as	big	as	that	one.’
‘Well,	it	seems	your	dream	has	come	true.’
‘I	hope	not.’
She	glanced	down	at	him	as	he	trudged	beside	the	horse.	‘Why?’
‘Because,	in	my	dream,	the	dog	buries	me.’
Thinking	back	 to	 her	 vision	 of	 Baaljagg	clawing	 free	 of	 the	 ground,	 she	 smiled.	 ‘I	 don’t	 think	 you	 have	 to
worry	about	that,	not	with	this	dog,	Cartographer.’
‘I	hope	you	are	right.	I	do	have	one	question,	however.’
She	sighed.	A	corpse	that	won’t	shut	up.	‘Go	on.’
‘Where	are	we?’
‘The	Wastelands.’
‘Ah,	that	explains	it,	then.’
‘Explains	what?’
‘Why,	all	this	.	.	.	waste.’


‘Have	you	ever	heard	of	the	Wastelands,	Cartographer?’
‘No.’
‘So	let	me	ask	you	something.	Where	did	your	carriage	come	from,	and	how	is	it	you	don’t	even	know	the
land	you	were	travelling	in?’
‘Given	my	name,	it	is	indeed	pathetic	that	I	know	so	little.	Of	course,	this	land	was	once	an	inland	sea,	but
then	 one	 might	 say	 that	 of	 countless	 basins	 on	 any	 number	 of	 continents.	 So	 that	 hardly	 amounts	 to	 brilliant
affirmation	of	my	profession.	Alas,	since	dying,	I	have	been	forced	to	radically	reassess	all	my	most	cherished
notions.’
‘Are	you	ever	going	to	answer	my	questions?’
‘Our	arrival	was	sudden,	but	Master	Quell	judged	it	propitious.	The	client	expressed	satisfaction	and	indeed
no	 small	 amount	 of	 astonishment.	 Far	 better	 this	 wretched	 land	 than	 the	 realm	 within	 a	 cursed	 sword,	 and	 I
would	hardly	be	one	to	dispute	that,	would	I?	Maps	being	what	they	are	and	such.	Naturally,	it	was	inevitable
that	we	let	down	our	guard.	Ah,	see	ahead.	Ample	evidence	of	that.’
The	 tracks	 seemed	 to	 vanish	 for	 fifteen	 or	 twenty	 paces.	 Where	 they	 resumed	 wreckage	 lay	 scattered
about,	including	half	an	axle.
A	lost	horse	and	a	lost	wheel	behind	them,	half	an	axle	here—how	had	the	thing	managed	to	keep	going?
And	what	was	it	doing	in	that	gap?	Flying?
‘Spirits	 below,	 Cartographer—’	 and	 then	 she	 stopped.	 From	 her	 height	 astride	 the	 horse,	 she	 could	 make
something	out	ahead.	Daylight	was	fading,	but	still	.	.	.	‘I	see	it.’
Two	 more	 stretches	 without	 tracks,	 then	 where	 they	 resumed	 various	 parts	 of	 ornate	 carriage	 lay	 strewn
about.	She	saw	one	large	section	of	painted	wood,	possibly	from	the	roof,	bearing	deep	gouges	scored	through
it,	as	if	some	massive	hand	had	been	tearing	the	carriage	to	pieces.	Some	distance	ahead	rested	the	carriage
itself,	or	what	was	left	of	it.	The	humped	forms	of	dead	horses	lay	thrown	about	to	the	sides.
‘Cartographer—’
‘It	struck	from	the	sky,’	the	corpse	replied.	‘Was	it	a	dragon?	It	most	assuredly	was	not.	An	enkar’al?	What
enkar’al	could	boldly	lift	from	the	ground	the	entire	carriage	and	all	its	horses?	No,	not	an	enkar’al.	Mind	you,
I	was	witness	only	to	the	first	attack—tell	me,	Setoc,	do	you	see	anyone?’
‘Not	yet,’	she	replied.	‘Stavi,	Storii!	Hold	up	there.’	She	lifted	the	boy	and	set	him	down	on	the	ground.	‘I
will	 ride	 ahead.	 I	 know	 it’s	 getting	 dark,	 but	 keep	 your	 eyes	 on	 the	 sky—there’s	 something	 up	 there.’
Somewhere.	Hopefully	not	close.
The	horse	was	nervous	beneath	her,	reluctant	to	draw	nearer	to	the	carriage,	but	she	coaxed	it	on.
Its	fellow	beasts	had	been	torn	apart,	bones	splintered,	gouges	of	flesh	missing.	Everywhere	those	same	thin
but	deep	slashes.	Talons.	Enormous	and	deadly	sharp.
She	found	the	first	corpse,	a	man.	He	had	wrapped	the	ends	of	the	traces	about	his	forearms	and	both	arms
were	 horribly	 dislocated,	 almost	 pulled	 free	 of	 the	 shoulders.	 Something	 had	 slashed	 through	 his	 head
diagonally,	 from	 above,	 she	 judged.	 Through	 his	 skullcap	 helm,	 down	 along	 one	 side	 of	 the	 nose	 and	 out
beneath	 the	 jaw,	 leaving	 him	 with	 half	 a	 face.	 Just	 beyond	 him	 was	 another	 man,	 neatly	 decapitated—she
couldn’t	see	the	head	anywhere	close	by.
She	 halted	 her	 mount	 a	 few	 paces	 from	 the	 destroyed	 carriage.	 It	 had	 been	 huge,	 six-wheeled,	 likely
weighing	 as	 much	 as	 a	 clan	 yurt	 with	 the	 entire	 family	 shoved	 inside.	 The	 attacker	 had	 systematically
dismantled	it	from	one	flank,	as	if	eager	to	get	within.	Blood	stained	the	edges	of	the	gaping	hole	it	had	made.
Setoc	clambered	up	to	peer	inside.	No	body.	But	a	mass	of	something	was	heaped	on	the	side	that	was	now
the	 floor,	 gleaming	 wet	 in	 the	 gloom.	 She	 waited	 for	 her	 eyes	 to	 adjust.	 Then,	 in	 revulsion,	 she	 pulled	 back.
Entrails.	An	occupant	had	been	eviscerated.	Where	was	the	rest	of	the	poor	victim?	She	perched	herself	on
the	carriage	and	scanned	the	area.
There.	Half	of	him,	anyway.	The	upper	half.
And	then	she	saw	tracks,	the	ground	scuffed,	three	or	four	paths	converging	to	form	a	broader	one,	and	that
one	 led	 away	 from	 the	 wreckage,	 eastward.	 Survivors.	 But	 they	 must	 have	 been	 on	 the	 run,	 else	 they
would	have	done	more	for	their	dead.	Still,	a	few	made	it	.	.	.	for	a	little	while	longer,	anyway.
She	 descended	 from	 the	 carriage	 and	 mounted	 the	 horse.	 ‘Sorry,	 friend,	 but	 it	 looks	 like	 you’re	 the	 last.’
Swinging	the	horse	round,	she	rode	back	to	the	others.
‘How	many	bodies?’	Cartographer	asked	when	she	arrived.


‘Three	for	certain.	Tracks	lead	away.’
‘Three,	you	say?’
‘That	I	saw.	Two	on	the	ground,	one	in	the	carriage—or,	rather,	bits	of	him	left	in	the	carriage.’
‘A	man?	A	man	in	the	carriage?’
‘Yes.’
‘Oh,	dear.	That	is	very	bad	indeed.’
Returning	to	the	wreckage,	Cartographer	moved	to	stand	over	each	victim,	shaking	his	head	and	muttering
in	 low	 tones—possibly	 a	 prayer—Setoc	 wasn’t	 close	 enough	 to	 hear	 his	 words.	 He	 rejoined	 her	 once	 they
were	past.
‘I	find	myself	in	some	conflict,’	he	said.	‘On	the	one	hand,	I	wish	I’d	been	here	to	witness	that	dread	clash,
to	see	Trake’s	Mortal	Sword	truly	awakened.	To	see	the	Trell’s	rage	rise	from	the	deepness	of	his	soul.	On	the
other	 hand,	 witnessing	 the	 gruesome	 deaths	 of	 those	 I	 had	 come	 to	 know	 as	 friends,	 well,	 that	 would	 have
been	terrible.	As	much	as	it	grieves	me	to	say,	there	are	times	when	getting	what	one	wants	yields	nothing	but
confusion.	 It	 turns	 out	 that	 what	 one	 wants	 is	 in	 fact	 not	 at	 all	 what	 one	 wants.	 Worse	 is	 when	 you	 simply
don’t	know	what	you	want.	You’d	think	death	would	discard	such	trials.	If	only	it	did.’
‘There’s	blood	on	this	trail,’	said	Setoc.
‘I	 wish	 that	 surprised	 me.	 Still,	 they	 must	 have	 succeeded	 in	 driving	 the	 demon	 away,	 in	 itself	 an
extraordinary	feat.’
‘How	long	ago	did	all	this	happen?’
‘Not	long.	I	was	lying	on	the	ground	from	midmorning.	I	imagine	we’ll	find	them—’
‘We	already	have,’	she	said.	‘They’ve	camped.’
She	could	see	the	faint	glow	of	a	small	fire,	and	now	figures	straightening,	turning	to	study	them.	The	sun
was	almost	down	behind	Setoc	and	her	companions,	so	she	 knew	 the	 strangers	 were	 seeing	 little	 more	 than
silhouettes.	She	raised	a	hand	in	greeting,	urging	her	mount	forward	with	a	gentle	tap	of	her	heels.
Two	of	the	figures	were	imposing:	one	broad	and	bestial,	his	skin	the	hue	of	burnished	mahogany,	his	black
braided	hair	hanging	in	greasy	coils.	He	was	holding	a	two-handed	mace.	The	other	was	taller,	his	skin	tattooed
in	the	stripes	of	a	tiger,	and	as	Setoc	drew	closer,	she	saw	a	feline	cast	to	his	features,	including	amber	eyes
bisected	by	vertical	pupils.	The	two	heavy-bladed	swords	in	his	hands	matched	the	barbed	patterns	of	his	skin.
Three	 others	 were	 visible,	 two	 women	 and	 a	 tall,	 young	 man.	 He	 was	 long-jawed	 and	 long-necked,	 with
blood-matted	hair.	A	knotted	frown	marred	his	high	forehead,	above	dark,	angry	eyes.	He	stood	slightly	apart
from	all	the	others.
Setoc’s	eyes	returned	to	the	two	women.	Both	short	and	plump,	neither	one	much	older	than	Setoc	herself.
But	their	eyes	looked	aged:	bleak,	dulled	with	shock.
Two	more	survivors	were	lying	close	to	the	fire,	asleep	or	unconscious.
The	bestial	man	was	the	first	to	speak,	addressing	Cartographer	but	not	in	a	language	that	Setoc	recognized.
The	undead	man	replied	in	the	same	tongue,	and	then	turned	to	Setoc.
‘Mappo	Runt	welcomes	you	with	a	warning.	They	are	being	hunted.’
‘I	know,’	she	said.	‘Cartographer,	you	seem	to	have	a	talent	for	languages—’
‘Hood’s	gift,	for	the	tasks	he	set	upon	me.	Mappo	addresses	me	in	a	Daru	dialect,	a	trader’s	cant.	He	does
so	to	enable	his	companions	to	understand	his	words,	as	they	are	Genabackan,	while	he	is	not.’
‘What	is	he,	then?’
‘Trell,	Setoc—’
‘And	the	striped	one—what	manner	of	creature	is	he?’
‘Trake’s	Mortal	Sword—’
‘Meaning	what?’
‘Ah.	Trake	is	the	Tiger	of	Summer,	a	foreign	god.	Gruntle	is	the	god’s	chosen	mortal	weapon.’
The	 one	 Cartographer	 had	 named	 Gruntle	 now	 spoke,	 his	 eerie	 eyes	 fixed	 upon	 Setoc.	 She	 noted	 that	 he
had	not	sheathed	his	swords,	whilst	the	Trell	had	set	down	his	mace.
‘Setoc,’	 said	 Cartographer	 after	 Gruntle	 had	 finally	 finished,	 ‘the	 Mortal	 Sword	 names	 you	 Destriant	 of
Fanderay	and	Togg,	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	You	are,	in	a	sense,	kin.	Another	servant	of	war.	Yet,	though	Trake
may	view	you	and	your	Lady	and	Lord	as	mortal	enemies,	Gruntle	does	not.	Indeed,	he	says,	he	holds	his	own
god	in	no	high	esteem,	nor	is	he	pleased	with	.	.	.	er,	well,	he	calls	it	a	curse.	Accordingly,	you	are	welcome


and	 need	 not	 fear	 him.	 Conversely,’	 Cartographer	 then	 added,	 ‘if	 you	 seek	 violence	 then	 he	 will	 oblige	 your
wish.’
Setoc	found	her	heart	was	pounding	hard	and	rapid	in	her	chest.	Her	mouth	was	suddenly	dry.	Destriant.
Have	 I	 heard	 that	 word	 before?	 Did	 Toc	 so	 name	 me?	 Or	 was	 it	 someone	 else?	 ‘I	 am	 not	 interested	 in
violence,’	she	said.
When	Cartographer	relayed	her	reply,	Gruntle	glanced	once	at	the	undead	wolf	standing	between	the	twins
—Baaljagg’s	 bristled	 back	 was	 unmistakable—and	 then	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 momentarily	 bared	 impressive
fangs,	 before	 nodding	 once	 and	 sheathing	 his	 weapons.	 And	 then	 he	 froze,	 as	 the	 twins’	 brother	 toddled
forward,	seemingly	heading	straight	for	Gruntle.
‘Klavklavklavklav!’
Setoc	 saw	 the	 Trell	 start	 at	 that,	 turning	 to	 study	 the	 boy	 who	 now	 stood	 directly	 in	 front	 of	 Gruntle	 with
arms	outspread.
‘He	wants	Gruntle	to	pick	him	up,’	Setoc	said.
‘I’m	sure	Gruntle	can	see	that,’	said	Cartographer.	‘A	most	fearless	child.	The	word	he	seeks	is	Imass.	I	did
not	think	such	things	even	existed.	Imass	children,	I	mean.’
Gruntle	snatched	up	the	boy,	who	yelped	in	delight,	filling	the	night	air	with	laughter.
Setoc	 heard	 Baaljagg’s	 low	 growl	 and	 glanced	 over.	 Although	 the	 undead	 beast	 made	 no	 move,	 the	 black
pits	of	its	eyes	were	fixed—as	much	as	could	be	determined—upon	the	Mortal	Sword	and	the	child	he	held.
‘Getting	killed	once	wasn’t	enough?’	she	asked	the	giant	wolf.	‘The	pup	needs	no	help.’
The	twins	had	edged	closer	to	Setoc,	who	now	dismounted.	‘It’s	all	right,’	she	said	to	them.
‘Mother	said	cats	were	teeth	and	claws	without	brains,’	said	Storii.	She	pointed	at	Gruntle.	‘He	looks	like	his
mother	slept	with	a	cat.’
‘Your	brother	isn’t	afraid.’
‘Too	stupid	to	be	scared,’	said	Stavi.
‘These	 ones,’	 said	 Setoc,	 ‘fought	 off	 the	 sky	 demon,	 but	 they	 didn’t	 kill	 it,	 else	 we	 would	 have	 found	 the
carcass.	Would	we	be	safer	with	or	without	them?’
‘I	wish	Toc	was	here.’
‘So	do	I,	Storii.’
‘Where	were	they	going,	anyway?	There’s	nothing	in	the	Wastelands.’
At	Storii’s	question	Setoc	shrugged.	‘I	can’t	quite	get	an	answer	to	that	yet,	but	I	will	keep	trying.’
The	two	women	had	returned	to	tending	their	wounded	companions.	The	tall	young	man	remained	off	to	one
side,	looking	agitated.	Setoc	stepped	closer	to	Cartographer.	‘What	is	wrong	with	that	man?’
‘It	is,	I	am	told,	ever	a	misjudgement	to	view	a	Bole	of	the	Mott	Irregulars	with	contempt.	Amby	is	angry
and	that	anger	is	slow	to	fade.	His	brother	is	sorely	wounded,	near	death,	in	fact.’
‘Does	he	blame	Gruntle	or	Mappo	for	that?’
‘Hardly.	Oh,	I	gather	that	both	of	those	you	speak	of	fought	valiantly	against	the	sky	demon—certainly,	the
Mortal	Sword	is	made	for	such	encounters.	But	neither	Gruntle	nor	Mappo	succeeded	in	driving	the	creature
away.	The	Boles	despise	such	things	as	demons	and	the	like.	And	once	awakened	to	anger,	they	prove	deadly
against	such	foes.	Precious	Thimble	calls	it	a	fever.	But	Master	Quell	suggested	that	the	Boles	themselves	are
the	spawn	of	sorcery,	perhaps	a	Jaghut	creation	gone	awry.	Would	that	explain	the	Boles’	extravagant	hatred
for	Jaghut?	Possibly.	In	any	case,	it	was	Amby	and	Jula	Bole	who	sent	the	demon	fleeing.	But	the	residue	of
that	fury	remains	in	Amby,	suggesting	that	he	maintains	his	readiness	should	the	demon	be	foolish	enough	to
return.’
Setoc	studied	the	man	with	renewed	interest,	and	more	than	a	little	disbelief.	What	did	he	do	to	it,	bite	it
with	those	huge	front	teeth?
Cartographer	then	said,	‘Earlier,	you	mentioned	Toc.	We	here	all	know	him.	Indeed,	it	was	Toc	who	guided
us	from	the	realm	of	Dragnipur.	And	Gruntle,	why,	he	once	got	drunk	with	Toc	Anaster—that	would	be	before
Toc	got	himself	killed,	one	presumes.’
The	 twins	 were	 listening	 to	 this,	 and	 Setoc	 saw	 relief	 in	 their	 eyes.	 More	 friends	 of	 Toc.	 Will	 that	 do,
girls?	Seemed	it	would.
‘Cartographer,	what	is	a	Destriant?’
‘Ah.	Well.	A	Destriant	is	one	who	is	chosen	from	among	all	mortals	to	wear	the	skin	of	a	god.’


‘The—the	skin?’
‘Too	poetic?	Let	me	think,	then.	Look	into	the	eyes	of	a	thousand	priests.	If	there	is	a	Destriant	among	that
thousand,	you	will	find	him	or	her.	How?	The	truth	is	in	their	eyes,	for	you	shall,	in	looking	into	those	eyes,	find
yourself	looking	upon	the	god’s	own.’
‘Toc	bears	a	wolf’s	eye.’
‘Because	he	is	the	Herald	of	War.’
The	title	chilled	her.	‘Then	why	is	his	other	eye	not	a	wolf’s	eye,	too?’
‘It	was	human,	I’m	sure.’
‘Exactly.	Why?’
Cartographer	 made	 the	 mistake	 of	 scratching	 his	 temple,	 and	 came	 away	 with	 a	 swath	 of	 crinkled	 skin
impaled	on	his	fingernails.	He	fluttered	his	fingers	to	send	it	drifting	away	into	the	night.	‘Because,	I	imagine,
humans	are	the	true	heralds	of	war,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Maybe.’	But	she	wasn’t	so	sure.	‘Toc	was	leading	us	into	the	east.	If	he’s	the	Herald	of	War,	as	you	say,
then	.	.	.’
Cartographer	nodded.	‘I	should	think	so,	Setoc.	He	was	leading	you	to	a	place	and	a	time	where	you	will	be
needed.’
As	 Destriant	 to	 the	 Wolves	 of	 Winter.	 To	 gods	 of	 war.	 She	 looked	 over	 to	 where	 Baaljagg	 stood,	 just
beyond	the	firelight.	Deathly	and	deathly	still,	the	huge	teeth	for	ever	bared,	the	eyes	for	ever	empty.
The	skin	of	war.
And	I	am	to	wear	it.	Her	attention	snapped	over	to	Gruntle.	‘Cartographer.’
‘Yes?’
‘He	said	he	holds	his	god	in	no	high	esteem.	He	said	he	calls	what	he	is	a	curse.’
‘That	is	true.’
‘I	need	to	talk	to	him.’
‘Of	course,	Setoc.’
The	Mortal	Sword	had	sat	down	by	the	fire,	with	the	boy	perched	on	one	bouncing	knee.	The	barbed	tattoos
seemed	to	have	inexplicably	faded,	as	had	the	feline	traits	of	his	features.	The	man	looked	almost	human	now,
barring	the	eyes.	There	was	quiet	pleasure	in	the	face.
What	 would	 Onos	 Toolan	 have	 made	 of	 this?	 Toc,	 were	 you	 bringing	 us	 to	 these	 ones?	 She	 sighed.
The	skin	of	war.	The	Wolves	want	me	to	wear	it.
But	I	do	not.
‘Take	me	to	him,	please.’
	
Mappo	 glanced	 over	 to	 see	 the	 young	 woman	 crouching	 opposite	 Gruntle,	 with	 Cartographer	 providing
translations.	No	doubt	they	had	much	to	discuss.	An	unknown	war	in	the	offing,	a	clash	of	desperate	mortals
and,	 perhaps,	 desperate	 gods.	 And	 Icarium?	 Old	 friend,	 you	 must	 have	 no	 place	 in	 what	 is	 coming.	 If
thousands	needlessly	die	by	your	hand,	what	dire	balance	would	that	tip?	What	cruel	fate	would	that
invite?	No.	I	must	find	you.	Take	you	away.	Already,	too	many	have	died	on	your	trail.
He	heard	a	ragged	sigh	to	his	left.	Angling	round,	he	studied	the	woman	lying	on	a	bedroll.	‘You	will	live,
Faint,’	he	said.
‘Then—then—’
‘You	did	not	reach	him	in	time.	If	you	had,	you	would	be	the	one	now	dead,	rather	than	Master	Quell.’
She	 reached	 up	 to	 her	 own	 face,	 dragged	 her	 nails	 to	 scrape	 away	 the	 blood	 crusting	 the	 corners	 of	 her
mouth.	‘Better	for	you	if	I	had.	Now	we	are	stranded.’
He	 might	have	 replied,	But	 we	 are	 now	 so	 close.	 I	 can	 feel	 him—we	 are	 almost	 there.	 But	 that	 was	 a
selfish	thought.	Delivering	Mappo	was	but	half	the	task.	These	poor	shareholders	needed	to	find	a	way	home,
and	now	they	had	lost	the	one	man	capable	of	achieving	that.	So,	to	Faint’s	statement,	he	had	nothing	to	say.
‘My	chest	hurts,’	she	said.
‘The	Che’Malle	struck	you,	 its	claws	scoring	 deep.	I	have	sewn	almost	three	hundred	stitches,	 from	your
right	shoulder	to	below	your	rib	cage	on	the	left.’
She	seemed	to	think	about	that	for	a	moment,	and	then	she	said,	‘So	we’ve	seen	the	last	of	Faint’s	bouncing
tits.’


‘You	did	not	lose	them,	if	that	is	what	you	fear.	They	will	still,	er,	bounce,	if	perhaps	unevenly.’
‘So	the	gods	really	do	exist.	Listen.	Precious	Thimble—is	she	still	alive?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then	we	have	a	chance.’
Mappo	winced.	‘She	is	young,	Faint,	mostly	untutored—’
‘There’s	a	chance,’	Faint	insisted.	‘Beru’s	black	nipples,	this	hurts.’
‘She	will	attempt	some	healing,	in	a	while,’	said	Mappo.	‘It	took	all	of	her	strength	just	to	keep	Jula	alive.’
Faint	grunted	and	then	gasped.	Recovering,	she	said,	‘Guilt	will	do	that.’
Mappo	 nodded.	 The	 Bole	 brothers	 had	 followed	 Precious	 Thimble	 into	 this	 Guild,	 and	 she	 had	 joined	 on	 a
whim,	 or,	 more	 likely,	 to	 see	 how	 far	 her	 two	 would-be	 lovers	 would	 go	 in	 their	 pursuit	 of	 her.	 When	 love
turned	into	a	game,	people	got	hurt,	and	Precious	Thimble	had	finally	begun	to	comprehend	the	truth	of	that.
You	took	them	too	far,	didn’t	you?
At	the	same	time	without	the	Boles	none	of	them	here	would	be	alive	right	now.	Mappo	still	found	it	difficult
to	believe	that	a	mortal	man’s	fists	could	do	the	damage	he’d	seen	from	Jula	and	Amby	Bole.	They	had	simply
launched	themselves	on	to	the	winged	Che’Malle,	and	those	oversized	knuckles	had	struck	with	more	power
than	Mappo’s	own	mace.	He	had	heard	bones	crack	beneath	those	blows,	had	heard	the	Che’Malle’s	gasps	of
shock	 and	 pain.	 When	 it	 lashed	 out,	 it	 had	 been	 in	 frantic	 self-defence,	 a	 blind	 panic	 to	 dislodge	 its	 frenzied
attackers.	The	creature’s	talons,	each	one	as	long	as	a	Semk	scimitar,	had	plunged	into	Jula’s	back,	the	four
tips	erupting	from	the	man’s	chest.	It	had	flung	the	man	away—and	at	that	moment	Amby’s	lashing	fists	found
the	 Che’Malle’s	 throat.	 Those	 impacts	 would	 have	 crushed	 the	 neck	 of	 a	 horse,	 and	 they	 proved	 damaging
enough	to	force	the	Che’Malle	into	the	air,	wings	thundering.	A	back-handed	blow	scraped	Amby	off	and	then
the	thing	was	lifting	upward.
Gruntle,	 who	 appeared	 to	 have	 been	 the	 Che’Malle’s	 original	 target—carried	 off	 in	 the	 first	 attack	 and
presumed	by	the	others	to	be	dead—had	then	returned,	an	apparition	engulfed	in	the	rage	of	his	god.	Veered
into	the	form	of	an	enormous	tiger,	its	shape	strangely	blurred	and	indistinct	except	for	the	barbs	that	writhed
like	tongues	of	black	flame,	he	had	launched	himself	into	the	air	in	an	effort	to	drag	down	the	Che’Malle.	But	it
eluded	him	and	then,	wings	hammering,	it	fled	skyward.
Mappo	subsequently	learned	from	Gruntle—once	his	fury	was	past,	something	like	his	human	form	returning
—that	 his	 first	 battle	 with	 the	 thing	 had	 been	 a	 thousand	 reaches	 above	 the	 Wastelands,	 and	 when	 the
Che’Malle	failed	to	slay	him,	it	had	simply	dropped	him	earthward.	Gruntle	had	veered	into	his	Soletaken	form
in	mid-air.	He	now	complained	of	bruised,	throbbing	joints,	but	Mappo	knew	it	was	a	fall	that	should	have	killed
him.	Trake	intervened.	No	other	possible	explanation	serves.
He	thought	again	about	that	horrifying	creature,	reiterating	his	own	conviction	that	it	was	indeed	some	breed
of	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	though	not	one	he	had	ever	seen	before,	nor	even	heard	of	from	those	more	intimate
with	the	ancient	race.	It	was	twice	the	height	of	a	K’ell	Hunter,	although	gaunter.	Its	wingspan	matched	that	of
a	middle-aged	Eleint,	yet	where	among	dragons	those	wings	served	to	aid	speed	and	direct	their	manoeuvring
in	 the	 air—with	 sorcery	 in	 effect	 carrying	 the	 dragon’s	 massive	 weight—for	 this	 Che’Malle	 all	 lift	 was
produced	 by	 those	 wings.	 And	 its	 weight	 was	 but	 a	 fraction	 of	 an	 Eleint’s.	 Gods,	 it	 was	 fast.	 And	 such
strength!	In	its	second	attack,	after	Gruntle	was	gone,	the	Che’Malle	had	simply	lifted	the	entire	carriage	into
the	air,	horses	and	all.	If	the	carriage’s	frame	had	not	splintered	in	its	grip,	the	beast	would	have	carried	them
all	 skyward,	 until	 it	 reached	 a	 height	 from	 which	 a	 fall	 would	 be	 fatal.	 Simple	 and	 effective.	 The	 Che’Malle
had	attempted	the	tactic	a	few	more	times,	before	finally	descending	to	do	battle.
To	its	regret.
And,	it	must	be	admitted,	ours	as	well.	Glanno	Tarp	was	dead.	So	too	Reccanto	Ilk.	And	of	course	Master
Quell.	When	Mappo	had	reached	the	carriage	to	pull	Precious	Thimble	from	the	interior	cabin,	she	had	been
hysterical—Quell	 had	 interposed	 himself	 between	 her	 and	 the	 attacking	 Che’Malle,	 and	 it	 had	 simply
eviscerated	him.	If	not	for	the	Boles	leaping	on	to	its	back,	it	would	have	slain	her	 as	well.	Mappo	still	bore
slashes	on	his	hands	and	wrists	from	the	woman’s	blind	terror.
The	carriage	had	proved	beyond	mundane	repair.	There	had	been	no	choice	but	to	continue	on	foot,	carrying
away	their	wounded,	with	the	threat	of	another	attack	ever	looming	over	them.
Still,	I	think	the	Boles	hurt	it.
That	 Che’Malle,	 it	 wasn’t	 out	 here	 waiting	 for	 us.	 Its	 attack	 was	 opportunistic—what	 else	 could	 it


have	 been?	 No,	 the	 creature	 has	 other	 tasks	 awaiting	 it.	 For	 all	 I	 know,	 it	 too	 is	 hunting	 Icarium,	 a
possibility	 too	 terrible	 to	 consider.	 In	 any	 case,	 let	 us	 hope	 it	 has	 now	 concluded	 we’re	 too	 much
trouble.
His	eyes	strayed	to	his	mace,	lying	on	the	ground	close	to	hand.	He	had	managed	to	strike	the	Che’Malle
one	solid	blow,	enough	to	rock	it	back	a	step.	It	had	felt	as	if	his	mace	had	collided	with	an	iron	obelisk.	His
shoulders	 still	 ached.	 The	 eye	 looks	 past	 the	 target,	 to	 where	 the	 weapon	 is	 intended	 to	 reach.	 When	 it
fails,	shock	thunders	through	the	body.	Every	muscle,	every	bone.	I	can’t	even	remember	the	last	time	it
so	utterly	failed.
‘Who	are	these	strangers?’	Faint	asked.
Mappo	sighed.	‘I	am	not	sure.	There	is	an	undead	ay	with	them.’
‘A	what?’
‘An	ancient	wolf,	from	the	age	of	the	Imass.	Their	bloodline	was	harvested	in	the	shaping	of	the	Hounds	of
Shadow	.	.	.	but	not	the	Hounds	of	Darkness.	For	those,	it	was	the	bloodline	of	a	breed	of	plains	bear.	Ty’nath
okral,	in	the	language	of	the	Bentract	Imass.’
‘An	undead	wolf?’
‘Pardon?	Oh,	yes,	called	an	ay	when	alive.	Now?	Perhaps	a	maeth	ay,	one	of	rot	or	decay.	Or	one	could
say	an	oth	ay,	referring	to	its	skeletal	state.	For	myself,	I	think	I	prefer	T’ay—a	broken	ay,	if	you	will—’
‘Mappo,	I	really	don’t	care	what	you	call	it.	It’s	an	undead	wolf,	something	to	keep	Cartographer	company
—he’s	back,	right?	I’m	sure	I	heard	him—’
‘Yes.	He	guided	these	others	to	us	and	now	interprets.’
‘They	don’t	speak	Daru?	Barbarians.’
‘Yet	 two	 of	 them—those	 twin	 girls—they	 possess	 Daru	 blood.	 I	 am	 almost	 certain	 of	 it.	 The	 boy	 now
clinging	to	Gruntle,	there	is	Imass	in	him.	More	than	half,	I	would	judge.	Therefore,	either	his	mother	or	father
was	 probably	 Barghast.	 The	 leader	 among	 them—she	 is	 named	 Setoc	 and	 proclaimed	 by	 Gruntle	 to	 be	 the
Destriant	of	the	Wolves—reminds	me	of	a	Kanese,	though	she	is	not.	Some	scenes	painted	on	the	oldest	of
tombs	on	the	north	coast	of	Seven	Cities	display	people	much	like	her	in	appearance,	from	the	time	before	the
tribes	came	out	of	the	desert,	one	presumes.’
‘You’re	trying	to	keep	me	awake,	aren’t	you?’
‘You	landed	on	your	head,	Faint.	For	a	time	there,	you	spoke	in	tongues.’
‘I	did	what?’
‘Well,	it	was	a	mix	of	languages,	sixteen	that	I	could	identify,	and	some	others	I	could	not.	An	extraordinary
display,	Faint.	There	is	a	scholar	who	states	that	we	possess	every	language,	deep	within	our	minds,	and	that
the	potential	exists	for	perhaps	ten	thousand	languages	in	all.	She	would	have	delighted	in	witnessing	your	feat.
Then	there	is	a	dystigier,	a	dissector	of	human	corpses,	living	in	Ehrlitan,	who	claims	that	the	brain	is	nothing
more	than	a	clumped	mass	of	snarled	chains.	Most	links	are	fused,	but	some	are	not.	Some	can	be	prised	open
and	fitted	anew.	Any	major	head	injury,	he	says,	can	result	in	a	link	breaking.	This	is	usually	permanent,	but	on
rare	occasions	a	new	link	is	forged.	Chains,	Faint,	packed	inside	our	skull.’
‘Only	they	don’t	look	like	chains,	do	they?’
‘No,	alas,	they	don’t.	It	is	the	curse	of	theory	disconnected	from	physical	observation.	Of	course,	Icarium
would	argue	that	one	should	not	always	test	theory	solely	on	the	basis	of	pragmatic	observation.	Sometimes,	he
would	say,	theory	needs	to	be	interpreted	more	poetically,	as	metaphor,	perhaps.’
‘I	have	a	metaphor	for	you,	Mappo.’
‘Oh?’
‘A	 woman	 lies	 on	 the	 ground,	 brain	 addled,	 listening	 to	 a	 hairy	 Trell	 with	 tusks	 discussing	 possible
interpretations	of	theory.	What	does	this	mean?’
‘I	don’t	know,	but	whatever	it	may	be,	I	doubt	it	would	qualify	as	a	metaphor.’
‘I’m	sure	you’re	right,	since	I	don’t	even	know	what	a	metaphor	is,	truth	be	told.	Try	this,	then.	The	woman
listens	to	all	that,	but	she	knows	her	brain	is	addled.	So,	just	how	addled	is	it?	Is	it	so	addled	that	she	actually
believes	she’s	listening	to	a	hairy	Trell	spouting	philosophy?’
‘Ah,	 perhaps	 a	 tautology,	 then.	 Or	 some	 other	 manner	 of	 unprovable	 proof.	 Then	 again,	 it	 might	 well	 be
something	 else	 entirely.	 Though	 I	 am	 occasionally	 philosophical,	 I	 do	 not	 claim	 to	 be	 a	 philosopher.	 The
distinction	is	important,	I’m	sure.’


‘If	you	really	want	to	keep	me	awake,	Mappo,	find	a	new	subject.’
‘Do	you	truly	believe	Precious	Thimble	is	capable	of	taking	you	back	to	Darujhistan?’
‘If	she	isn’t	we’re	stuck	and	it’s	time	to	start	learning	the	local	tongue	from	Setoc.	But	she	can’t	be	from
here	anyway,	can	she?	This	land	is	blasted.	Quell	says	it’s	used	up.	Exhausted.	No	one	can	live	here.’
‘The	cut	of	Setoc’s	clothing	is	Barghast,’	said	Mappo.	He	scratched	the	bristle	on	his	jaw.	‘And	since	that
boy	has,	I	think,	Barghast	blood	.	.	.’	He	raised	his	voice	and,	in	Barghast,	called	over	to	Setoc,	‘Do	we	share
this	language	between	us,	Destriant	Setoc?’
At	the	question	all	four	newcomers	looked	over.	And	Setoc	said,	‘It	seems	we	do.’
‘Nice	guess,’	said	Faint.
‘Observation	 and	 theory,’	 Mappo	 replied.	 ‘Now,	 you	 can	 rest	 for	 a	 short	 time.	 I	 mean	 to	 get	 the	 story	 of
these	strangers.	I	will	be	back	to	wake	you	anon.’
‘Can’t	wait,’	Faint	muttered.
	
‘If	no	solution	serves,’	ventured	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian,	‘then	what	remains	to	us?	We	must	proceed	on	the
path	we	have	always	known,	until	some	other	alternative	presents	itself.’	He	held	his	gaze	on	the	entourage	of
Queen	Abrastal	as	it	slowly	drew	closer,	the	dozen	or	so	horses	gently	cantering	across	the	uneven	ground,	the
pennons	above	the	riders	flapping	like	impaled	birds.
Beside	 him,	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava	 shifted	 heavily	 on	 her	 saddle.	 Leather	 creaked,	 iron	 scraped.	 ‘The
absence	haunts,’	she	said.	‘It	gapes	at	our	side,	sir.’
‘Then	choose	one,	Mortal	Sword.	Be	done	with	it.’
Her	expression	darkened	beneath	the	rim	of	her	helm.	‘You	truly	advise	this,	Shield	Anvil?	Am	I	to	be	so
desperate	as	to	be	careless?	Must	I	swallow	my	dissatisfaction?	I	have	done	this	once	already,	sir,	and	I	begin
to	find	regret	in	that.’
Once	 already?	 You	 miserable	 witch.	 I	 took	 that	 sour	 face	 of	 yours	 to	 be	 the	 one	 you	 always	 wear.
Now	you	tell	me	I	was	a	choice	made	without	confidence.	Did	that	old	man	talk	you	into	it,	then?	But
between	you	and	me,	woman,	only	I	was	witness	to	his	bitter	dissatisfaction	at	the	very	end.	So,	in	your
mind	he	still	argues	in	my	favour.	Well	enough.	‘It	grieves	me,	Mortal	Sword,	to	hear	you	say	this.	I	do	not
know	how	I	have	failed	you,	nor	do	I	know	what	reparation	remains	available	to	me.’
‘My	indecision,	sir,	stings	you	into	impatience.	You	urge	action	without	contemplation,	but	if	the	selection	of
a	new	Destriant	does	not	demand	contemplation,	what	possibly	can?	In	your	mind,	it	would	seem,	these	are	but
titles.	 Responsibilities	 one	 grows	 into,	 as	 it	 were.	 But	 the	 truth	 of	 it	 is,	 the	 title	 awaits	 only	 those	 who	 have
already	grown	into	a	person	worthy	of	the	responsibility.	From	you,	I	receive	all	the	irritation	of	a	young	man
convinced	of	his	own	rightness,	as	young	men	generally	are,	said	conviction	leading	you	into	rash	impulses	and
ill-considered	advice.	Now	I	ask	that	you	be	silent.	The	Queen	arrives.’
Tanakalian	 struggled	 against	 his	 fury,	 endeavouring	 to	 hold	 flat	 his	 expression	 in	 the	 face	 of	 the	 Bolkando
riders.	You	 strike	 me	 in	 the	 moment	 before	 this	 parley,	 to	 test	 my	 self-control.	 I	 know	 all	 your	 tactics,
Mortal	Sword.	You	shall	not	best	me.
Queen	Abrastal	wasted	little	time.	‘We	have	met	with	the	Saphii	emissary,	and	I	am	pleased	to	inform	you
that	resupply	is	forthcoming—at	a	reasonable	price,	I	might	add.	Generous	of	them,	all	things	considered.’
‘Indeed,	Highness,’	said	Krughava.
‘Furthermore,’	Abrastal	continued,	‘the	Malazan	columns	have	been	sighted	by	the	Saphii,	almost	due	north
of	the	Saphii	Mountains,	approaching	the	very	edge	of	the	Wastelands.	They	have	made	good	time.	Curiously,
your	allies	are	with	escort—none	other	than	Prince	Brys	Beddict,	in	command	of	a	Letherii	army.’
‘I	see,’	said	Krughava.	‘And	this	Letherii	army	now	marches	well	beyond	Lether’s	borders,	suggesting	their
role	as	escort	was	not	precautionary.’
The	Queen’s	eyes	sharpened.	‘As	I	said,	most	curious,	Mortal	Sword.’	She	paused,	and	then	said,	‘It	has
become	obvious	to	me	that,	of	all	the	luminaries	involved	in	this	escapade,	I	alone	remain	ignorant.’
‘Highness?’
‘Well,	you	are	all	marching	somewhere,	yes?	Into	the	Wastelands,	no	less.	And	through	them,	in	fact,	into
Kolanse.	 My	 warnings	 to	 you	 of	 the	 grim—no,	 horrifying—situation	 in	 that	 distant	 land	 appear	 to	 have	 gone
unheeded.’
‘On	the	contrary,	Queen	Abrastal,’	said	Krughava,	‘we	heed	them	most	assiduously,	and	hold	your	concern


in	the	highest	regard.’
‘Then	 answer	 me,	 do	 you	 march	 to	 win	 yourselves	 an	 empire?	 Kolanse,	 weakened	 so	 by	 internal	 strife,
drought	and	starvation,	must	present	to	you	an	easy	conquest.	Surely,	you	cannot	imagine	such	a	beleaguered
people	to	be	your	deadliest	enemy?	You’ve	never	even	been	there.	If,’	she	added,	‘you	were	wondering	why	I
am	still	with	you	and	the	Khundryl,	so	far	from	my	own	realm	and	still	weeks	to	go	before	our	grand	parley
with	the	Adjunct,	perhaps	now	you	can	surmise	my	reasons.’
‘Curiosity?’	Krughava	asked,	brows	lifting.
A	flash	of	irritation	lit	Abrastal’s	features.
Yes,	Queen,	I	know	how	you	feel.
‘A	more	apt	description	would	be	unease.	As	co-ruler	of	Bolkando,	it	is	my	responsibility	to	hold	tight	the
reins	of	my	people.	I	am	well	aware	of	the	human	tendency	towards	chaos	and	cruelty.	The	very	purpose	of
rule,	 as	 I	 hold	 it,	 is	 to	 enforce	 civility.	 To	 achieve	 this,	 I	 must	 begin	 with	 a	 personal	 adherence	 to	 the	 same.
Does	it	distress	me	that	I	am	perhaps	aiding	a	horde	of	rabid	conquerors?	Does	it	sit	well	with	my	conscience
that	I	am	assisting	in	the	invasion	of	a	distant	kingdom?’
‘At	 the	 earning	 of	 vast	 profits	 from	 us,’	 Krughava	 said.	 ‘One	 would	 conclude	 that	 much	 civility	 can	 be
purchased	for	yourself,	Highness,	and	for	your	people.	At	no	direct	cost	or	burden	to	you,	I	might	add.’
She	was	genuinely	angry	now,	Tanakalian	could	see,	this	hard,	clear-eyed	Queen	sitting	astride	her	horse	in
the	insignia	of	a	soldier.	A	true	ruler	of	her	people.	A	true	servant	of	the	same.
‘Mortal	Sword,	I	am	speaking	of	conscience.’
‘It	 was	 my	 understanding,	 Highness,	 that	 coin	 in	 sufficient	 quantities	 could	 salve	 anything.	 Is	 this	 not	 the
belief	dominating	Lether	and	Saphinand,	and	indeed	Bolkando?’
‘Then	you	do	in	truth	seek	to	descend	upon	the	poor	people	of	Kolanse?’
‘If	it	is	so,	Highness,	should	you	not	be	relieved?	After	all,	even	without	the	Malazans,	we	were	at	the	very
walls	of	your	capital.	To	win	ourselves	a	kingdom	.	.	.	well,	yours	was	entirely	within	our	reach.	Without	need
for	further	marching	and	all	the	hardships	that	entails.	As	for	the	Malazans,	why,	they	have	just	completed	a
successful	conquest	of	the	Empire	of	Lether.	A	most	opulent	nest,	were	they	inclined	to	settle	in	it.’
‘This	 is	 precisely	 my	 point!’	 Abrastal	 snapped,	 tugging	 her	 helm	 to	 loose	 a	 cascade	 of	 fiery,	 sweat-strung
hair.	‘Why	Kolanse?	What	in	the	Errant’s	name	do	you	want	with	Kolanse?’
‘Highness,’	 said	 Krughava,	 unperturbed	 by	 the	 Queen’s	 uncharacteristic	 outburst,	 ‘an	 answer	 to	 that
question	would	find	you	in	a	difficult	situation.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	you	speak	to	me	of	conscience.	By	withholding	explanation	of	our	purpose,	Highness,	we	leave	to
you	the	comfort	of	the	solitary	consideration	of	your	own	people.	You	are	their	Queen,	after	all,	and	therein	lies
the	 crucial	 difference	 between	 us.	 We	 Perish	 begin	 and	 end	 with	 responsibility	 only	 to	 ourselves,	 and	 to	 the
purpose	 of	 our	 existence.	 The	 same	 is	 true	 for	 Warleader	 Gall	 and	 the	 Burned	 Tears.	 And	 finally	 and	 most
importantly,	 an	 identical	 circumstance	 obtains	 among	 the	 Bonehunters.’	 She	 cocked	 her	 head	 a	 fraction.
‘Prince	 Brys,	 however,	 may	 soon	 find	 himself	 facing	 a	 difficult	 decision—to	 return	 to	 Lether	 or	 to	 continue
accompanying	the	Adjunct	and	her	allies.’
‘And	 so,’	 retorted	 Abrastal,	 ‘in	 serving	 only	 yourselves,	 you	 are	 prepared	 to	 deliver	 misery	 and	 suffering
upon	a	broken	people?’
‘While	this	is	not	our	desire,	Highness,	it	may	well	come	to	that.’
In	the	shocked	silence	that	followed,	Tanakalian	saw	the	Queen’s	eyes	flatten,	and	then	a	frown	slowly	knot
her	 brow.	 The	 skittering	 clouds	 of	 uncertainty	 edged	 into	 her	 expression.	 When	 she	 spoke	 it	 was	 a	 whisper.
‘You	will	not	explain	yourself	to	me,	will	you,	Mortal	Sword?’
‘You	have	the	truth	of	that,	Highness.’
‘You	say	you	serve	none	but	yourselves.	The	assertion	rings	false.’
‘I	am	sorry	you	think	so,’	Krughava	replied.
‘In	fact,’	Abrastal	went	on,	‘I	now	begin	to	suspect	the	very	opposite.’
The	Mortal	Sword	said	nothing.
You	have	the	truth	of	it,	Tanakalian	silently	answered,	mocking	Krughava’s	own	words.	What	we	do	is	not
in	service	to	ourselves,	but	to	all	of	you.
Can	 anything	 be	 more	 glorious?	 And	 if	 we	 must	 fall,	 if	 we	 must	 fail,	 as	 I	 believe	 we	 will,	 is	 no	 end


sweeter	than	that?	The	grandest	failure	this	world	has	ever	seen.
Yes,	 we	 all	 know	 the	 tale	 of	 Coltaine’s	 Fall	 outside	 Aren.	 But	 what	 we	 shall	 find	 at	 the	 end	 of	 our
days	will	beggar	that	tale.	We	seek	to	save	the	world,	and	the	world	will	do	all	it	can	to	stop	us.	Watch
us	lose.	Watch	us	squeeze	the	blood	from	your	stony	heart!
But	no.	There	shall	be	none	to	witness.	If	existence	 itself	 can	be	 said	 to	be	 poetic,	we	 stand	 in	 that
silence,	 unyielding	 servants	 to	 anonymity.	 None	 to	 see,	 none	 to	 even	 know.	 Not	 a	 single	 grave,	 nor
stone	lifted	to	cast	shade	upon	our	scattered	bones.	Neither	hill	nor	tomb.	We	shall	rest	in	emptiness,	not
forgotten—for	forgetting	follows	remembrance,	and	there	shall	be	no	remembrance.
His	heart	thundered	with	the	delicious	beauty	of	it—all	of	it.	The	perfect	hero	is	one	whose	heroism	none
sees.	 The	 most	 precious	 glory	 is	 the	 glory	 lost	 on	 senseless	 winds.	 The	 highest	 virtue	 is	 the	 one	 that
remains	for	ever	hidden	within	oneself.	Do	you	understand	that,	Mortal	Sword?	No,	you	do	not.
He	 watched,	 flushed	 with	 satisfaction,	 as	 Queen	 Abrastal	 gathered	 her	 reins	 and	 pitched	 her	 horse	 about
with	a	 vicious	 twist.	The	entire	entourage	hastened	 to	 follow.	 The	 gentle	 canter	 was	 gone,	 awkward	 jostling
knotting	the	troop	like	a	hand	twisting	cloth,	stretching	out	confused	behind	their	departing	Queen.
‘Gift	me	with	your	wisdom,	Shield	Anvil.’
Her	dry	request	made	him	start.	The	flush	of	heat	in	his	face	suddenly	fed	darker	feelings.	‘They	will	leave
us,	Mortal	Sword.	The	Bolkando	are	done	with	us.’
She	snorted.	‘How	long	must	I	wait?’
‘For	what,	Mortal	Sword?’
‘For	wisdom	in	my	Shield	Anvil.’
They	were	as	good	as	alone,	the	Perish	camp	settled	behind	them.	‘It	seems	I	can	say	nothing	that	pleases
you,	Mortal	Sword.’
‘Queen	 Abrastal	 needs	 to	 understand	 what	 we	 intend.	 She	 cannot	 let	 it	 go.	 Now,	 she	 will	 maintain	 her
resolve,	in	the	hope	that	the	Adjunct	Tavore	will	provide	her	with	satisfaction.’
‘And	will	she?’
‘What	do	you	think,	Shield	Anvil?’
‘I	think	Queen	Abrastal	will	be	a	very	frustrated	woman.’
‘Finally.	Yes.’
‘The	Adjunct	is	selfish,’	said	Tanakalian.
Krughava’s	head	snapped	round.	‘Excuse	me?’
‘She	 could	 invite	 others	 to	 share	 in	 this	 glory—this	 Evertine	 Legion	 of	 the	 Queen’s,	 it	 looks	 to	 be	 a
formidable	 army.	 Well-trained,	 capable	 of	 marching	 in	 step	 with	 us—unlike	 the	 Conquestor	 Avalt’s	 soldiers.
Were	they	to	stand	at	our	side	in	Kolanse—’
‘Sir,’	 cut	 in	 the	 Mortal	 Sword,	 ‘if	 the	 Adjunct	 is	 selfish—for	 what	 you	 clearly	 imagine	 to	 be	 a	 glorious
achievement—then	it	may	serve	you	better	to	consider	that	selfishness	as	one	of	unprecedented	mercy.’
‘I	am	aware	of	the	likely	outcome	of	this	venture,	Mortal	Sword.	Perhaps	more	than	even	you.	I	know	the
souls	awaiting	me—I	see	their	mortal	faces	every	day.	I	see	the	hope	they	settle	upon	me.	Nor	am	I	regretful
that	what	we	seek	shall	be	unwitnessed,	for	with	our	brothers	and	sisters,	I	am	their	witness.	When	I	spoke	of
the	 Adjunct’s	 selfishness,	 I	 did	 not	 mean	 it	 as	 a	 criticism;	 rather,	 I	 was	 indicating	 the	 privilege	 I	 feel	 in	 her
permitting	the	Grey	Helms	to	share	her	fate.’
Krughava’s	 bright	 blue	 eyes	 were	 fixed	 on	 him,	 calculating,	 thoughtful.	 ‘I	 understand,	 sir.	 You	 await	 the
death	of	the	Grey	Helms.	While	you	look	upon	them	and	see	naught	but	their	souls	soon	to	be	gifted	to	you,
what	do	they	see	in	the	eyes	of	their	Shield	Anvil?’
‘I	shall	honour	them	all,’	Tanakalian	replied.
‘Will	you?’
‘Of	course.	I	am	Shield	Anvil—’
‘Will	you	embrace	the	soul	of	every	brother	and	sister?	Free	of	judgement?	Unsullied	in	your	love	for	each
and	every	one	of	them?	And	what	of	our	enemies,	sir?	Will	you	 take	them	into	your	 arms	as	well?	Will	 you
accept	that	suffering	defies	boundaries	and	that	pain	carves	no	line	in	the	sand?’
He	 was	 silent.	 How	 could	 he	 answer	 her?	 She	 would	 see	 the	 lie.	 Tanakalian	 looked	 away.	 ‘I	 am	 Shield
Anvil	to	the	Perish	Grey	Helms.	I	serve	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	I	am	the	mortal	flesh	of	war,	not	the	sword	in	its
hand.’	He	glanced	back	at	her.	‘Do	I	crowd	your	throne,	Mortal	Sword?	Is	that	what	all	this	is	about?’


Her	eyes	widened.	‘You	have	given	me	much	to	consider,	Shield	Anvil.	Leave	me	now.’
As	he	walked	back	into	the	camp,	he	drew	a	deep	breath	and	shakily	let	it	out.	She	was	dangerous,	but	then
he’d	 always	 known	 that.	 She	 actually	 thinks	 we	 can	 win.	 Well,	 I	 suppose	 that	 is	 the	 role	 of	 the	 Mortal
Sword.	 She	 is	 welcome	 to	 the	 delusion—no	 doubt	 it	 will	 serve	 well	 our	 brothers	 and	 sisters	 when	 the
Wolves	howl.	As	for	me,	I	cannot	be	so	blind,	so	wilfully	defiant	of	the	truth.
We	 can	 manage	 this	 between	 us,	 Mortal	 Sword.	 I	 will	 follow	 your	 will	 in	 not	 choosing	 a	 Destriant.
Why	share	the	glory?	Why	muddle	things	at	all?
A	difficult,	searing	conversation,	but	he’d	survived	it	yet.	Yes,	now	we	understand	each	other.
It	is	well.
	
After	the	Shield	Anvil	was	gone,	the	Mortal	Sword	stood	for	a	time,	eyes	on	the	gloom	rising	skyward	in	the
east.	Then	she	turned	and	gestured	with	one	gauntleted	hand.	A	runner	quickly	joined	her.
‘Send	word	to	Warleader	Gall,	I	will	visit	him	this	evening,	one	bell	after	supper.’
The	soldier	bowed	and	departed.
She	studied	the	eastern	horizon	once	more.	The	mountains	surrounding	the	kingdom	of	Saphinand	formed	a
jagged	wall	to	the	north,	but	there	in	the	place	of	dark’s	birth,	there	was	no	hint	of	anything	but	level	plain.	The
Wastelands.
She	would	suggest	to	Gall	that	they	march	hard	now,	taking	up	stores	from	the	Saphii	traders	as	they	went.
It	 was	 imperative	 that	 they	 link	 up	 with	 the	 Adjunct	 as	 soon	 as	 possible.	 This	 was	 one	 of	 the	 matters	 she
wished	to	discuss	with	Gall.	There	were	others.
A	long,	sleepless	night	awaited	her.
	
The	 Gilk	 Warchief	 grinned	 as	 he	 watched	 Queen	 Abrastal	 ride	 back	 into	 the	 camp.	 Firehair	 indeed.	 Flames
were	ready	to	spit	out	from	her,	from	every	place	an	imaginative	man	might	imagine,	and	of	course	he	was	a
most	imaginative	man.	But	a	woman	like	that,	well,	far	beyond	his	reach	and	more’s	the	pity	as	far	as	he	was
concerned.
Spultatha	 had	 emerged	 from	 his	 tent	 behind	 him	 and	 now	 edged	 up	 on	 his	 right.	 Her	 eyes,	 so	 like	 her
mother’s,	narrowed	as	they	tracked	the	woman’s	approach.	‘Trouble,’	she	said.	‘Stay	away	from	her,	Spax,	for
this	night	at	least.’
His	grin	broadened.	‘Afraid	I	can’t	do	that,	wildcat.’
‘Then	you’re	a	fool.’
‘Keep	the	furs	warm,’	he	said,	setting	out	for	the	Queen’s	pavilion.	Soldiers	of	the	Evertine	Legion	watched
him	stride	past	their	posts,	and	he	was	reminded	of	a	pet	lion	he’d	once	seen	in	the	camp	of	another	clan.	It
had	 had	 the	 freedom	 of	 the	 camp	 and	 was	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 sauntering	 back	 and	 forth	 in	 front	 of	 the	 cages
crowded	 with	 hunting	 dogs.	 Those	 beasts	 were	 driven	 into	 a	 frenzy,	 flinging	 themselves	 bloody	 and	 stupid
against	the	iron	bars.	He’d	always	admired	that	lion,	its	perfect	insouciant	strut,	its	lolling	tongue	and	the	itch
that	always	made	it	pause	directly	opposite	the	cages,	for	a	leisurely	scratch	and	then	a	broad	yawn.
Let	the	eyes	track	him,	let	them	glitter	beneath	the	rims	of	their	helms.	He	knew	these	soldiers	so	wanted	to
test	themselves	against	the	White	Face	Barghast.	Against	the	Gilk,	who	were	the	match	of	any	civilized	heavy
infantry	 unit	 anywhere	 in	 the	 world.	 But	 they	 had	 little	 chance	 of	 ever	 doing	 so.	 The	 next	 best	 thing	 was	 to
stand	beside	them,	and	that	was	a	competition	the	Gilk	well	understood.
Now	 we	 shall	 see	 what	 will	 come	 to	 pass.	 Do	 we	 all	 march	 to	 a	 place	 of	 battle	 against	 an	 enemy?
Who	will	stand	fastest?	Evertine,	Grey	Helms,	Khundryl,	or	the	Gilk?	Hah.	Spax	reached	the	inner	cordon
and	 grunted	 a	 nod	 when	 the	 last	 bodyguard	 outside	 the	 pavilion	 stepped	 to	 one	 side.	 He	 strode	 into	 the	 silkwalled	 corridor	 with	 all	 its	 pale	 tones	 backlit	 by	 lanterns,	 and	 as	 always	 felt	 he	 was	 walking	 through	 colour
itself,	soft	and	dry	and	strangely	cool,	one	flavour	after	another.
One	of	her	trusted	lieutenants	stood	at	the	last	portal.	As	Spax	approached,	the	lieutenant	shook	his	head.
‘Can	it	not	wait,	Warchief?’
‘No,	Gaedis.	Why,	is	she	bathing?’
‘If	she	is,	the	water’s	long	since	boiled	away.’
What	did	that	iron	woman	say	to	Abrastal?	‘Brave	enough	to	announce	me,	Gaedis?’


‘It’s	 not	 bravery	 that	 makes	 me	 say	 yes,	 Warchief,	 but	 then	 stupidity’s	 gotten	 me	 this	 far	 and	 I’m	 a
conservative	man.’
‘The	offer	still	stands,’	Spax	said.
‘I	doubt	 my	 Queen	 would	 take	 kindly	to	 one	 of	 her	 court	 lieutenants	 shucking	 all	 this	 to	 wear	 turtle	 shells
and	dance	naked	under	the	moon.’
Spax	smiled.	‘Saw	that,	did	you?’
Gaedis	nodded.
‘It	was	a	show,	you	understand.	Don’t	you?’
‘Warchief?’
‘The	Queen’s	clutch	of	scholars—we	made	something	up	to	give	them	something	to	write	about	and	then
ponder	its	meaning	for	the	rest	of	their	dull,	useless	lives.	Spirits	below,	a	man’s	grapes	get	tiny	in	the	cold	night
—why’d	you	think	we	kept	jumping	over	the	fire?’
After	a	moment’s	gimlet	regard,	Gaedis	turned	and	slipped	through	the	drapery.
Spax	hummed	softly	to	himself.
Gaedis’s	muffled	voice	invited	him	to	enter	the	Royal	Presence.	Naked	in	the	bowl?	wondered	Spax.	Bah,
the	gods	are	never	so	kind.
She	 stood	in	 her	 underquilting,	armour	discarded,	 her	 long	 hair	still	 tousled	from	 the	 ride.	 The	 quilting	 was
tight	 against	 her	 curves.	 ‘If	 eyes	 were	 paint,’	 Abrastal	 said,	 ‘I’d	 be	 dripping	 right	 now.	 Barbaric	 bastard.
What’s	so	important	you’d	dare	my	ill	humour?’
‘Just	this,	Highness,’	Spax	replied.	‘She	struck	sparks	from	you	and	I	want	to	know	how,	and	why.’
‘Ah,	you’re	curious,	then.’
‘That’s	it,	Firehair.’
‘If	 it	 wasn’t	 that	 your	 rabid	 warriors	 might	 complain,	 I’d	 see	 you	 strangled	 with	 your	 own	 entrails	 and
perhaps—just	 perhaps—that	 would	 satisfy	 my	 desire	 in	 this	 moment.	 Arrogance	 is	 a	 strange	 thing,	 Spax.	 It
amuses	when	it	cannot	reach,	then	stings	to	rage	when	it	can.	What	in	the	Errant’s	empty	skull	convinced	you
that	I’d	yield	to	your	shit-fouled	curiosity?’
Spax	 glanced	 across	 at	 Gaedis,	 saw	 the	 man’s	 face	 and	 the	 expression	 that	 seemed	 carved	 from	 stone.
Coward.	 ‘Highness,	 I	 am	 Warchief	 of	 the	 Gilk.	 Each	 day	 I	 am	 under	 siege	 from	 the	 clan	 leaders,	 not	 to
mention	the	bolder	of	the	young	warriors—who’d	wage	war	on	the	wind	if	they	had	any	chance	of	winning.
They	don’t	complain	of	the	coin,	Highness.	But	they	want	a	fight.’
‘Bolkando	is	at	peace,’	Abrastal	replied.	‘At	least,	it	was	when	you	were	first	hired,	and	now	it	is	so	again.
If	 it	 was	 war	 you	 wanted,	 Spax,	 you	 should	 have	 stayed	 with	 the	 other	 White	 Faces,	 since	 they	 went	 and
jumped	with	both	feet	on	to	a	hornet’s	nest.’	She	faced	him	and	he	saw	all	the	places	he	could	put	his	hands,
given	 the	 chance.	 Her	 expression	 darkened.	 ‘You	 are	 Warchief,	 as	 you	 say.	 A	 proud	 title,	 one	 with
responsibility,	one	assumes.	You	are	under	siege,	Spax?	Deal	with	it.’
‘Not	many	arrows	left	in	my	quiver,	Highness.’
‘Do	I	look	like	a	fletcher?’
‘You	look	like	someone	with	something	on	her	mind.’	Spax	spread	his	broad,	scarred	hands.	‘I	don’t	know
these	Perish	Grey	Helms,	but	I	know	of	the	order,	Highness—’
‘What	order?’
‘The	 warrior	 cult	 of	 the	 Wolves.	 A	 chapter	 of	 that	 cult	 defended	 at	 the	 siege	 of	 Capustan.	 The	 Grey
Swords,	they	were	called.’
Abrastal	studied	him	for	a	time,	and	then	she	sighed.	‘Gaedis,	open	us	a	jug	of	wine—but	don’t	even	think	of
pouring	yourself	one.	I’m	still	annoyed	with	you	for	letting	this	cattle-dog	whine	his	way	into	my	presence.’
The	lieutenant	saluted	and	walked	to	the	ornate	wooden	frame	bearing	a	dozen	or	so	amphorae,	drawing	a
small	knife	as	he	scanned	the	stamps	on	the	dusty	necks.
‘Cults,	Mortal	Swords,	Shield	Anvils	and	wolf	gods,’	Abrastal	said	in	a	mutter,	shaking	her	head.	‘This	has
the	stink	of	fanaticism—and	that	well	matches	my	assessment	after	this	evening’s	parley.	Is	it	simply	war	they
seek,	Spax?	One	where	any	face	will	do?’
The	Warchief	watched	as	Gaedis	selected	a	jug	and	then,	with	an	expert	hook	and	twist	of	his	knife,	deftly
removed	 the	 cork.	 ‘Impressive,	 Lieutenant—you	 learn	 that	 between	 off-handed	 swordsmanship	 and	 riding
backwards?’


‘Pay	attention	to	me!’	barked	Abrastal.	‘I	asked	you	a	question,	you	island	of	fleas!’
Spax	tilted	his	head	in	something	between	deference	and	amused	insolence.	When	he	saw	the	flaring	of	her
eyes	he	bared	his	teeth	and	snapped	out,	‘As	long	as	you	feel	inclined	to	spit	out	insults,	Highness,	I	will	indeed
stand	as	an	island.	Let	the	seas	crash—the	stones	will	not	blink.’
‘Errant’s	shit-hole	throne—pour	that	wine,	Gaedis!’
Wine	sloshed.
Abrastal	walked	over	to	her	cot	and	sat	down.	She	rubbed	her	eyes	with	the	palms	of	her	hands,	and	then
looked	up	in	time	to	accept	a	goblet.	She	drank	deep.	‘Another,	damn	you.’	Gaedis	managed	to	get	the	second
goblet	into	Spax’s	hand	before	turning	about	to	retrace	his	steps.	‘Never	mind	the	Perish	for	now.	You	say	you
know	these	Malazans,	Spax.	What	can	you	tell	me	of	this	Adjunct	Tavore?’
‘Specifically?	Almost	nothing,	Highness.	Never	met	her,	and	the	Barghast	have	never	crossed	her	path.	No,
what	 I	 can	 do	 is	 tell	 you	 about	 the	 cant	 of	 the	 Malazan	 military—as	 it	 took	 shape	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 Dassem
Ultor,	and	the	way	the	command	structure	changed.’
‘It’s	a	start,	but	first,	what	does	her	title	mean?	Adjunct?	To	whom?	To	what?’
‘Not	 sure	 this	 time	 round,’	 the	 Warchief	 admitted	 after	 swallowing	 down	 a	 mouthful	 of	 wine.	 ‘They’re	 a
renegade	army,	after	all.	So	why	hold	on	to	the	old	title?	Because	it’s	what	her	soldiers	are	used	to,	I	suppose.
Or	is	there	more	to	it?	Highness,	the	Adjunct—as	far	as	I’ve	gathered—was	the	weapon-bearing	hand	of	the
Empress.	Her	murderer,	if	you	like.	Of	rivals	inside	the	empire,	enemies	outside	it.	Slayer	of	sorcerors—she
carries	an	otataral	weapon,	proof	against	any	and	all	manner	of	magic.’
Abrastal	 remained	 sitting	 through	 this,	 only	 to	 rise	 once	 more	 when	 he	 paused.	 She	 held	 out	 her	 empty
goblet	and	Gaedis	poured	again.	‘Elite,	then,	specially	chosen—how	many	of	these	Adjuncts	did	this	Empress
have	at	any	one	time?’
Spax	frowned.	‘I	think	.	.	.	one.’
The	Queen	halted.	‘And	this	Malazan	Empire—it	spans	three	continents?’
‘And	more,	Highness.’
‘Yet	 Tavore	 is	 a	 renegade.	 The	 measure	 of	 that	 betrayal	 .	 .	 .’	 she	 slowly	 shook	 her	 head.	 ‘How	 can	 one
trust	this	Adjunct?	It	is	impossible.	I	wonder,	did	this	Tavore	attempt	to	usurp	her	Empress?	Is	she	even	now
being	pursued?	Will	the	enemy	they	find	be	none	other	than	her	Malazan	hunters?’
Spax	shrugged.	‘I	doubt	the	Grey	Helms	would	care	much	either	way.	It’s	a	war.	As	you	said,	any	face	will
serve.	As	for	the	Khundryl,	well,	they’re	sworn	to	the	Adjunct	personally,	so	they	will	follow	her	anywhere.’
‘Yes,	and	why	would	they	do	that	to	a	betrayer?’
‘Highness,	this	is	none	of	our	concern,’	said	Spax.	‘As	much	as	my	warriors	lust	for	a	fight,	we	have	put
ourselves	 at	 a	 tactical	 disadvantage—after	 all,	 it	 would	 have	 been	 better	 to	 deal	 with	 the	 Khundryl	 and	 the
Perish	back	in	Bolkando,	and	then	take	on	the	Bonehunters	later.	Mind	you,	it’s	still	possible.	A	secret	emissary
to	the	Saphii,	a	few	tens	of	thousands	of	coins—we	could	catch	them	by	surprise—’
‘No.	After	all,	Spax,	if	it	truly	is	none	of	our	concern	as	you	say,	why	attack	them	at	all?’
‘Just	 my	 point,	 Highness.	 I	 was	 simply	 observing	 that	 our	 opportunity	 for	 a	 tactical	 advantage	 is	 fast
disappearing,	assuming	we	had	cause,	which	we	haven’t.’
‘I’m	not	prepared	to	make	any	such	assumption,	Warchief.	Thus	my	dilemma.	It	is	as	you	describe.	None	of
the	three	foreign	armies	still	poses	us	any	threat.	They	have	made	plain	their	desire	to	vanish	into	the	east.	Is	it
time	to	dust	off	our	hands	and	return	to	our	beloved	homeland?’
‘It	might	be,	Highness.’
‘But	then,’	and	her	frown	deepened.	‘Very	well,’	she	said,	‘I	have	sent	a	daughter	eastward,	by	sea,	Spax.
A	most	precious	daughter.	It	seems	you	and	I	share	the	same	curse:	curiosity.	Kolanse	has	fallen	silent.	Our
trader	ships	find	nothing	but	empty	ports,	abandoned	villages.	The	Pelasiar	Sea	is	empty	of	traffic.	Even	the
great	net-ships	have	vanished.	And	yet	.	.	.	and	yet	.	.	.	something	is	there,	perhaps	deep	inland.	A	power,	and
it’s	growing.’
Spax	studied	the	Queen.	She	was	not	dissembling.	He	saw	her	fear	for	her	daughter	(gods,	 woman,	 you
got	enough	of	them,	what’s	the	loss	of	one?)	and	it	was	genuine.	Your	heiress?	Does	it	work	that	way	in
Bolkando?	How	should	I	know,	when	I	don’t	even	care?	‘Summon	her	to	return,	Highness.’
‘Too	late,	Spax.	Too	late.’
‘Highness,’	 said	 the	 Warchief,	 ‘do	 you	 mean	 to	 tell	 me	 we’re	 going	 with	 the	 foreigners?	 Across	 the


Wastelands?’
Gaedis	 had	 frozen	 in	 place,	 two	 strides	 to	 one	 side	 where	 he	 had	 been	 about	 to	 open	 another	 jug.	 The
lieutenant’s	eyes	were	on	his	Queen.
‘I	 don’t	 know,’	 Abrastal	 said,	 eventually.	 ‘No,	 in	 fact—we	 are	 not	 equipped	 for	 such	 a	 venture,	 nor,	 I
imagine,	 would	 they	even	welcome	 us.	 Nonetheless	.	.	.	I	 will	 see	 this	Adjunct.’	She	 fixed	 Spax	with	 a	 look
that	told	him	her	tolerance	was	at	an	end,	and	she	said,	‘Chew	on	what	you’ve	heard	this	night,	Warchief,	and
if	your	stomach	still	growls,	do	not	bring	your	complaints	to	my	tent.’
Spax	dipped	his	head	and	then	handed	his	goblet	to	Gaedis.	‘I	hear	your	maids	readying	that	bath,	Highness.
A	most	restorative	conclusion	to	this	night,	I’m	sure.	Good	night	to	you,	Highness,	Lieutenant.’
Once	outside,	he	set	out,	not	back	to	his	clans,	but	to	the	encampments	of	the	Burned	Tears.	It	had	occurred
to	 him,	 when	 envisioning	 the	 grand	 parley	 to	 come,	 that	 he	 and	 Gall	 would,	 in	 all	 likelihood,	 be	 the	 only	 men
present.	An	exciting	notion.	He	wasn’t	sure	Gall	would	see	it	that	way,	of	course,	if	the	rumours	he’d	picked
up	were	true,	but	there	was	another	rumour	that,	if	accurate,	could	offer	a	common	rug	for	them	both.	Not	a
drinker	of	fancy	wines,	this	Gall.	No,	the	man	likes	his	beer,	and	if	manhood	has	any	measure,	it’s	that.
Just	my	opinion,	mind.	Now,	let’s	see,	Warleader	Gall,	if	you	share	it.
Stepping	beyond	the	legion’s	last	row	of	tents,	Spax	paused.	He	spat	to	get	that	foul	taste	from	his	mouth.
Wine’s	for	women.	Gaedis,	I	bet	that	trick	with	the	cork	has	spread	a	thousand	soft	thighs.	You’ll	have
to	teach	it	to	me	one	day.
	
She	might	as	well	have	tied	a	cask	of	ale	to	her	belly.	Her	lower	back	was	bowed,	and	every	shift	of	weight
made	the	bones	creak.	Muscles	quivered,	others	were	prostrate	with	exhaustion.	Her	breasts,	which	had	never
been	modest	or	spry,	now	sat	resting	uneasy	on	the	swell	of	that	damned	cask.	Everything	was	swollen	and
too	big—how	was	it	that	she	kept	forgetting?	Of	course,	amidst	all	these	groans	and	shuffles	and	grunts,	her
thoughts	swam	through	honey.	So	sweet,	this	drowning.	The	world	glowed.	Life	shouted.	Sang.
‘Hoary	witches	of	old,’	she	muttered	under	her	breath,	‘you’ve	a	lot	to	answer	for.’	There	was	no	possible
position	in	which	to	sit	in	comfort,	so	Hanavat,	wife	to	Gall,	had	taken	to	walking	through	the	camp	each	night.
She	was	the	wandering	moon	of	her	people’s	legends,	in	the	ages	before	her	sister	moon’s	betrayal,	when	love
was	still	pure	and	Night	lay	down	in	the	arms	of	Darkness—oh,	the	legends	were	quaint,	if	ever	tainted	with
sorrow,	 that	 inevitable	 fall	 from	 grace.	 She	 wondered	 if	 such	 creations—those	 tales	 of	 times	 lost—were
nothing	more	than	a	broken	soul’s	embrace	of	regret.	The	fall	was	in	sensibility’s	wake,	too	late	to	do	anything
about,	but	this—look	around!—this	is	what	it	made	of	us.
The	moon	had	ceased	to	wander.	Snared	in	the	webs	of	deceit,	it	could	only	slide	round	and	round	the	world
it	loved—never	to	touch,	doomed	to	tug	at	its	lover’s	tears,	that	and	nothing	more.	Until,	in	some	distant	future,
love	 died	 and	 with	 it	 all	 the	 pale	 fires	 of	 its	 wonder,	 and	 at	 last	 Night	 found	 her	 lover	 and	 in	 turn	 Darkness
swallowed	her	whole.	And	that	was	the	end	of	all	existence.
Hanavat	could	look	up	now	and	see	a	vision	that	did	not	fit	with	the	legend’s	prophecy.	No,	the	moon	had
been	struck	a	mortal	blow.	She	was	dying.	And	still	the	web	would	not	release	her,	whilst,	ever	cool,	ever	faint,
her	 sister	 moon	 watched	 on.	 Had	 she	 murdered	 her	 rival?	 Was	 she	 pleased	 to	 witness	 her	 sister’s	 death
throes?	Hanavat’s	gaze	strayed	southward	to	the	jade	lances	arcing	ever	closer.	The	heavens	were	indeed	at
war.
‘Tea,	Hanavat?’
Her	attention,	drawn	down	from	the	skies,	found	the	shapes	of	two	women	seated	round	a	small	fire	banked
against	a	steaming	pot.	‘Shelemasa.	Rafala.’
Rafala,	who’d	been	the	one	voicing	the	offer,	now	lifted	into	view	a	third	cup.	‘We	see	you	pass	each	night,
Mahib.	Your	discomfort	is	plain	to	our	eyes.	Will	you	join	us?	Rest	your	feet.’
‘I	was	fleeing	the	midwives,’	Hanavat	said.	She	hesitated,	and	then	waddled	over.	‘The	Seed	Wakeners	are
cruel—what’s	wrong	with	just	an	egg?	We	could	manage	one,	I	think,	about	the	size	of	a	palm	nut.’
Shelemasa’s	laugh	was	low	and	wry.	‘But	not	as	hard,	I’d	hope.’
‘Or	as	hairy,’	Rafala	added.
The	two	warrior	women	laughed.
Grunting,	moving	slowly,	Hanavat	sat	down,	forming	the	third	point	to	this	triangle	surrounding	the	fire.	She
accepted	the	cup,	studied	it	in	the	soft	light.	Pewter.	Bolkando.	‘So,	you	didn’t	sell	everything	back	to	them,	I


see.’
‘Only	the	useless	things,’	Rafala	said.	‘They	had	plenty	of	those.’
‘It’s	what	makes	us	so	different	from	them,’	observed	Shelemasa.	‘We	don’t	invent	useless	things,	or	make
up	needs	that	don’t	exist.	If	civilization—as	they	call	it—has	a	true	definition,	then	that	must	be	it.	Don’t	you
think,	Mahib?’
The	 ancient	 honorific	 for	 a	 pregnant	 woman	 pleased	 Hanavat.	 Though	 these	 two	 were	 young,	 they
remembered	 the	 old	 ways	 and	 all	 the	 respect	 those	 ways	 accorded	 people.	 ‘You	 may	 be	 right	 in	 that,
Shelemasa.	 But	 I	 wonder,	 perhaps	 it’s	 not	 the	 objects	 that	 so	 define	 a	 civilization—perhaps	 it’s	 the	 attitudes
that	 give	 rise	 to	 them,	 and	 to	 the	 strangely	 overwrought	 value	 attached	 to	 them.	 The	 privilege	 of	 making
useless	things	is	the	important	thing,	since	it	implies	wealth	and	abundance,	leisure	and	all	the	rest.’
‘Wise	words,’	murmured	Rafala.
‘The	tea	is	sweet	enough,’	replied	Hanavat.
The	younger	woman	smiled,	accepting	the	faint	admonishment	with	good	grace.
‘The	child	kicks,’	said	Hanavat,	‘and	so	promises	me	the	truth	of	the	years	awaiting	us.	I	must	have	been
mad.’	She	sipped	tea.	‘What	brew	is	this?’
‘Saphii,’	answered	Shelemasa.	‘It’s	said	to	calm	the	stomach,	and	with	the	foreign	food	we’ve	been	eating
of	late,	such	calm	will	be	a	welcome	respite.’
‘Perhaps,’	added	Rafala,	‘it	will	soothe	the	child	as	well.’
‘Or	kill	it	outright.	At	this	point	I	don’t	really	care	which.	Heed	this	miserable	Mahib’s	warning:	do	this	once
to	know	what	it	means,	but	leave	it	at	that.	Don’t	let	the	dream	serpents	back	into	your	thoughts,	whispering	to
you	 of	 pregnancy’s	 bliss.	 The	 snake	 lies	 to	 soften	 your	 memories.	 Until	 there	 is	 nothing	 but	 clouds	 and	 the
scent	of	blossoms	in	your	skull,	and	before	you	know	it,	you’ve	gone	and	done	it	again.’
‘Why	would	the	serpents	lie,	Mahib?	Are	not	children	women’s	greatest	gift?’
‘So	we	keep	telling	ourselves,	and	each	other.’	She	sipped	more	tea.	Her	tongue	tingled	as	if	she’d	licked	a
bell	of	pepper.	‘But	not	long	ago	my	husband	and	I	invited	our	children	to	a	family	feast,	and	my	how	we	did
feast.	 Like	 starving	 wolves	 trying	 to	 decide	 which	 among	 us	 was	 the	 stranded	 bhederin	 calf.	 All	 night	 our
children	flung	that	bloody	hide	back	and	forth,	each	of	them	cursed	to	wear	it	at	least	once,	and	finally	they	all
decided	to	drape	the	two	of	us	in	that	foul	skin.	It	was,	in	short,	a	most	memorable	reunion.’
The	two	younger	women	said	nothing.
‘Parents,’	resumed	Hanavat,	‘may	choose	to	have	children,	but	they	do	not	choose	their	children.	Nor	can
children	choose	their	parents.	And	so	there	is	love,	yes,	but	there	is	also	war.	There	is	sympathy	and	there	is
the	poison	of	envy.	There	is	peace	and	that	peace	is	the	exhausted	calm	between	struggles	for	power.	There
is,	 on	 rare	 occasions,	 true	 joy,	 but	 each	 time	 that	 precious,	 startling	 moment	 then	 dwindles,	 and	 in	 each	 face
you	see	a	hint	of	sorrow—as	if	what	was	just	found	will	now	be	for	ever	remembered	as	a	thing	lost.	Can	you
be	 nostalgic	 for	 the	 instant	 just	 past?	 Oh	 yes,	 and	 it’s	 a	 bittersweet	 taste.’	 She	 finished	 her	 tea.	 ‘That
whispering	serpent—it’s	whispered	its	last	lie	in	me.	I	strangled	the	bitch.	I	tied	it	neck	and	tail	to	two	horses.	I
collected	every	knuckled	bone	and	crushed	it	to	dust,	then	blew	that	dust	to	contrary	winds.	I	took	its	skin	and
made	it	into	a	codpiece	for	the	ugliest	dog	in	the	camp.	I	then	took	that	dog—’
Rafala	 and	 Shelemasa	 were	 laughing,	 their	 laughs	 getting	 louder	 with	 each	 antic	 of	 vengeance	 Hanavat
described.
	
Other	warriors,	round	other	small	fires,	were	all	looking	over	now,	smiling	to	see	old	pregnant	Hanavat	regaling
two	 younger	 women.	 And	 among	 the	 men	 there	 were	 stirrings	 of	 curiosity	 and	 perhaps	 a	 little	 unease,	 for
women	 possessed	 powerful	 secrets,	 and	 none	 more	 powerful	 than	 those	 possessed	 by	 a	 pregnant	 woman—
one	 need	 only	 to	 look	 into	 the	 face	 of	 a	 mahib	 to	 know	 that.	 The	 women,	 watching	 on	 but	 like	 their	 male
companions	too	distant	to	hear	Hanavat’s	words,	also	smiled.	Was	that	to	soothe	the	men	in	their	company?
Possibly,	but	if	so	the	expression	was	instinctive,	a	dissembling	born	of	habit.
No,	they	smiled	as	the	urgent	whispers	of	their	dream	serpents	filled	their	heads.	The	 child	 within.	 Such
joy!	 Such	 pleasure!	 Put	 away	 the	 swords,	 O	 creature	 of	 beauty—instead	 sing	 to	 the	 Seed	 Wakeners!
Catch	his	eye	and	watch	him	fall	in—the	darkness	beckons	and	the	night	is	warm!
Was	a	scent	released	upon	the	air?	Did	it	drift	through	the	entire	camp	of	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears?
In	 the	 Warleader’s	 campaign	 tent,	 Gall	 sat	 with	 a	 bellyful	 of	 ale	 heavy	 as	 a	 cask	 leaning	 on	 his	 belt,	 and


eyed	 with	 gauging	 regard	 the	 tall	 iron-haired	 woman	 pacing	 in	 front	 of	 him.	 Off	 to	 one	 side	 sat	 the	 Gilk
Barghast,	Spax,	even	drunker	than	Gall,	his	own	red-shot,	bleary	gaze	tracking	the	Mortal	Sword	as	she	sought
to	 prise	 from	 Gall	 every	 last	 detail	 regarding	 the	 Malazans.	 Where	 had	 this	 sudden	 uncertainty	 come	 from?
Had	not	the	Perish	sworn	to	serve	the	Adjunct?	Oh,	if	Queen	Abrastal	could	witness	what	he	was	witnessing!
But	 then	 she’d	 be	 interested	 in	 all	 the	 unimportant	 matters,	 wouldn’t	 she?	 Eager	 to	 determine	 if	 the	 great
alliance	was	weakening	.	.	.	and	all	that.
All	the	while	missing	the	point,	the	matters	that	were	truly	interesting	and	so	sharply	relevant	to	this	scene
before	him.
The	Warleader’s	wife	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	and	it	had	already	occurred	to	Spax	that	he	should	probably
leave.	Who	knew	if	or	when	Krughava	would	finally	take	note	of	the	look	in	Gall’s	eyes—and	what	might	she
do	then?	Instead,	Spax	sat	sprawled	in	the	leather	sling	of	the	three-legged	chair,	too	comfortable	to	move	and,
it	had	to	be	admitted,	too	fascinated	as	she	fired	question	after	question	into	the	increasingly	senseless	arrow
butt	 that	 was	 Gall.	 When	 would	 she	 realize	 that	 the	 man	 had	 stopped	 answering?	 That	 while	 she	 went	 on
attacking	and	attacking,	he’d	stopped	defending	long	ago?	He	so	wanted	to	see	that	moment—her	expression,
yes,	one	he	could	take	away	with	him	and	remember	for	evermore.
What	would	it	take	for	her	to	notice?	If	he	pulled	out	his	gooseneck	and	took	aim?	Would	that	do	it?	Or
just	wrestled	his	way	out	of	his	clothes?	Gods	below,	the	drooling’s	not	done	it.
He	should	leave.	But	they’d	have	to	drag	him	out	of	this	tent.	Come	on,	Krughava,	you	can	do	it.	I	know
you	can.	Take	a	second	look,	woman,	at	the	man	you’re	talking	to.	No,	he	wasn’t	going	anywhere.
Ah,	 but	 this	 was	 a	 most	 agitated	 woman.	 Something	 about	 a	 weakening	 resolve,	 or	 was	 it	 a	 failure	 of
confidence—a	 sudden	 threat	 from	 within	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 Grey	 Helms	 themselves.	 Someone	 missing	 in	 the
command	structure,	the	necessary	balance	all	awry.	A	young	man	of	frightening	ambitions—oh,	swamp	spirits
be	damned!	He	was	too	drunk	to	make	sense	of	any	of	this!
Why	am	I	sitting	here?
What	 is	 she	 saying?	 Pay	 attention,	 Krughava!	 Never	 mind	 him—can’t	 you	 see	 this	 bulge?	 No	 one
wants	the	goose	to	honk,	come	and	strangle	it,	woman!	I’ll	solve	your	agitation.	Yes,	if	only	you	women
understood	that.	Your	every	answer,	right	here	between	my	legs.
Half	the	world’s	mired	in	ignorance!
Half	the	world	.	.	.
Gooseneck.


Chapter	Twenty-One
Listen	then	these	are	the	charms
And	will	I	see	your	pleasure	stretched
An	even	dozen	they	crowd	the	tomb
You	can	read	the	dead	in	twelve	faces
And	the	winter	months	are	long
	
The	shields	are	hammered	into	splinters
Beating	war’s	time	will	never	ring	true
Fools	stir	in	the	crypt	counting	notches
And	the	snow	settles	burying	all	traces
Crows	spill	the	sky	knocked	like	ink
	
Babies	crawl	to	the	front	line
Plump	arms	shouting	proof	’gainst	harm
The	helms	rock	askew	in	pitching	tumult
And	the	brightest	blood	is	the	freshest
Round	the	well	charged	and	spatted
	
Cadavers	cherish	company’s	lonely	vigil
The	tomb’s	walls	trumpet	failures
Dressed	as	triumphs	and	glory’s	trains
And	the	fallen	are	bundled	lying	under	foot
Each	year	Spring	dies	still	newborn
	
Listen	then	these	are	the	charms
History	is	written	for	the	crows
By	children	with	red	lips	and	eyes	blinking
On	the	cocked	ends	of	their	tongues
And	it	seems	summer	will	never	end
	
HAIL	THE	S EASON	OF	WAR
GALLAN
	
City	of	darkness,	see	how	that	darkness	hides	your	ugly	face.
They	were	on	the	bridge.	She	was	leaning	heavily	on	her	husband’s	shoulder,	both	relieved	and	irritated	by
his	stolid	strength.	‘But	you	don’t	see,	do	you?’
‘Sand?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Doesn’t	matter.	The	air	is	alive.	Can	you	feel	that?	Withal,	can	you	feel	that	much	at
least?’
‘Your	goddess,’	he	said.	‘Alive,	aye,	alive	with	tears.’
That	was	true.	Mother	Dark	had	returned	with	sorrow	knotted	into	grief.	Darkness	made	helpless	fists,	like
a	widow	trying	to	hold	on	to	all	she	had	lost.	Lost,	yes,	something	has	been	lost.	She	is	no	longer	turned
away,	 but	 in	 mourning.	 Her	 eyes	 are	 averted,	 downcast.	 She	 is	 here,	 yet	 behind	 a	 veil.	 Mother,	 you
make	this	a	most	bitter	gift.
Her	 strength	 was	 slow	 in	 returning.	 Memories	 like	 wolves,	 snapping	 on	 all	 sides.	 Kharkanas.	 Sandalath
clutched	 Withal’s	 right	 arm,	 feeling	 the	 thick	 muscles,	 the	 cables	 of	 his	 will.	 He	 was	 one	 of	 those	 men	 who


were	like	a	finely	made	sword,	sheathed	in	a	hard	skin,	hiding	a	core	that	could	bend	when	it	had	to.	She	didn’t
deserve	him.	That	was	brutally	clear.	Take	me	hostage,	husband.	That	much	I	will	understand.	That	much
I	 know	 how	 to	 live	 with.	 Even	 though	 it	 too	 will	 break	 in	 the	 end—no,	 stop	 thinking	 that	 way.	 It’s	 a
memory	no	one	here	deserves.
‘There	are	fires	in	the	city.’
‘Yes.	It	is	.	.	.	occupied.’
‘Savages	in	the	ruins?’
‘Of	course	not.	These	are	the	Shake.	We’ve	found	them.’
‘So	they	made	it,	then.’
She	nodded.
He	drew	her	to	a	halt	ten	steps	from	the	bridge’s	end.	‘Sand.	Tell	me	again	why	you	wanted	to	find	them.
You	wanted	to	warn	them,	isn’t	that	right?	Against	what?’
‘Too	late	for	that.	Gallan	sent	them	out,	and	now	his	ghost	pulls	them	back.	He	cursed	them.	He	said	they
could	leave,	but	then	he	made	them	remember	enough—just	enough—to	force	them	to	return.’
Withal	sighed,	his	expression	showing	he	was	unconvinced.	‘People	need	to	know	where	they	came	from,
Sand.	Especially	if	they’ve	lived	generations	not	knowing.	They	were	a	restless	people,	weren’t	they?	What	do
you	think	made	them	restless?’
‘Then	 we’re	 all	 restless,	 Withal,	 because	 at	 the	 very	 heart,	 none	 of	 us	 know	 where	 we	 came	 from.	 Or
where	we’re	going.’
He	made	a	face.	‘Mostly,	nobody	much	cares.	Very	well,	have	it	your	way.	These	Shake	were	cursed.	You
didn’t	reach	them	in	time.	Now	what?’
‘I	don’t	know.	But	whatever	Andii	blood	remains	within	them	is	all	but	drowned	in	human	blood.	You	will
find	in	them	close	company,	and	that	is	something.’
‘I	have	all	the	company	I	need	in	you,	Sand.’
She	snorted.	‘Sweet,	but	nonsense.	See	it	this	way,	then.	I	am	of	the	land—this	land.	You	are	of	the	sea—a
distant	 sea.	 And	 the	 Shake?	 They	 are	 of	 the	 Shore.	 And	 look	 at	 us	 here,	 now,	 standing	 on	 a	 bridge.’	 She
paused	and	then	grimaced.	‘I	can	almost	see	the	blind	poet’s	face.	I	can	almost	see	him	nodding.	When	grief
was	too	much,	Withal,	we	were	in	the	habit	of	tearing	out	our	own	eyes.	What	kind	of	people	would	do	such	a
thing?’
He	shrugged.	‘I’m	not	following	you,	Sand.	You	need	simpler	thoughts.’
‘The	Shake	are	home,	and	yet	more	lost	than	they	ever	have	been.	Does	Mother	Dark	forgive	them?	Will
she	give	them	her	city?	Will	she	grant	them	the	legacy	of	the	Tiste	Andii?’
‘Then	perhaps	you	have	a	purpose	being	here,	after	all,	Sand.’
She	searched	his	eyes,	was	stung	by	his	compassion.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘You	need	to	convince	Mother	Dark	to	do	all	those	things.	For	the	Shake.’
Oh,	husband.	I	was	a	hostage,	nothing	more.	And	then,	and	then,	I	lost	even	that.	‘Mother	Dark	has
no	time	for	the	likes	of	me.’
‘Tell	me,	what	was	the	purpose	of	being	a	hostage?’
He’d	caught	her	thoughts.	She	looked	away,	studied	the	wreckage-cluttered	river	sliding	under	the	bridge.
Dark	 waters	 .	 .	 .	 ‘The	 First	 Families	 sparred.	 Power	 was	 a	 wayward	 tide.	 We	 were	 the	 coins	 they
exchanged.	So	long	as	we	were	never	spent,	so	long	as	we’—remained	unsullied—‘remained	 as	 we	 were,
the	 battles	 saw	 little	 blood.	 We	 became	 the	 currency	 of	 power.’	 But	 gold	 does	 not	 feel.	 Gold	 does	 not
dream.	Gold	does	not	long	for	a	man’s	hand	closing	about	it.	You	can	win	us,	you	can	lose	us,	but	you
can’t	 eat	 us.	 You	 can	 hide	 us	 away.	 You	 can	 polish	 us	 bright	 and	 hang	 us	 from	 a	 chain	 round	 your
neck.	You	can	bury	us,	you	can	even	carve	a	likeness	of	your	face	into	us,	but	in	the	next	season	of	fire
all	sign	of	you	vanishes.
You	can’t	eat	us,	and	you	can’t	fuck	us.	No,	you	can’t	do	that.
‘Sand?’
‘What?’
‘Were	hostages	ever	killed?’
She	 shook	 her	 head.	 ‘Not	 until	 the	 end.	 When	 everything	 .	 .	 .	 fell	 apart.	 All	 it	 needs,’	 she	 said,	 memories
clouding	her	mind,	‘is	the	breaking	of	one	rule,	one	law.	A	breaking	that	no	one	then	calls	to	account.	Once	that


happens,	once	the	shock	passes,	every	law	shatters.	Every	rule	of	conduct,	of	proper	behaviour,	it	all	vanishes.
Then	the	hounds	inside	each	and	every	one	of	us	are	unleashed.	At	that	moment,	Withal’—she	met	his	eyes,
defiant	 against	 the	 anguish	 she	 saw	 in	 them—	 ‘we	 all	 show	 our	 true	 selves.	 We	 are	 not	 beasts—we	 are
something	 far	 worse.	 There,	 deep	 inside	 us.	 You	 see	 it—the	 emptiness	 in	 the	 eyes,	 as	 horror	 upon	 horror	 is
committed,	and	no	one	feels—no	one	feels	a	thing.’
She	was	trembling	in	his	arms	now	and	he	held	her	tight—to	keep	her	from	sinking	to	her	knees.	Sandalath
pressed	 her	 face	 into	 the	 curve	 of	 his	 shoulder	 and	 neck.	 Her	 words	 muffled,	 she	 said,	 ‘She	 should	 have
stayed	turned	away.	I	will	tell	her—go	away—we	weren’t	worth	it	then,	we’re	not	worth	it	now.	I	will	tell	you
—her—’
‘Sand—’
‘No,	I	will	beg	her.	Turn	away.	I’m	begging	you,	my	love,	turn	away.’
‘Sand.	The	Shake—’
The	bridge	beneath	them	seemed	to	be	swaying.	She	held	him	as	hard	as	she	could.
‘The	Shake,	my	love.	They’ve	found	us.’
Her	eyes	closed.	I	know.	I	know.
	
‘Well?’
Brevity	adjusted	her	sword	belt.	‘Well	what?’
‘Should	we	go	and	talk	to	’em,	love?’
‘No,	let’s	just	stand	here.	Maybe	they’ll	go	away.’
Snorting,	Pithy	set	out.	‘Dark	dark	dark,’	she	muttered,	‘it’s	all	dark.	I’m	sick	of	dark.	I’m	gonna	torch	the
forest,	 or	 maybe	 a	 few	 buildings.	 Fire,	 that’s	 the	 solution.	 And	 lanterns.	 Giant	 lanterns.	 Torches.	 Oil	 lamps.
White	paint.’
‘You	going	to	go	on	like	that	all	the	way	to	’em?’	Brevity	asked,	keeping	pace	a	step	behind	her.
‘That	woman	looks	like	she	walked	outa	one	of	them	wall	paintings	in	the	temple.’
‘Maybe	she	did.’
‘Then	what?	Got	lost?	Our	lookout	watched	’em	coming	up	the	road.	Nah,	the	point	is,	her	people	built	this
city.	She’s	got	more	claim	to	it	than	the	Shake.	And	that’s	a	problem.’
‘Y’saying	 she	 won’t	 like	 the	 new	 neighbours?	 Too	 bad.	 She’s	 only	 got	 that	 one	 man.	 Besides,	 she	 looks
sick.’
Their	conversation	ended	as	they	drew	closer	to	the	two	strangers.
The	man’s	eyes	were	on	them,	even	as	he	continued	to	support	the	woman	in	his	arms.	‘Hello,’	he	said.
Trader	tongue.	Pithy	nodded.	‘And	the	same.	Meckros?’
‘Good	guess,’	he	replied.	‘I	am	named	Withal.	You’re	Letherii,	not	Shake.’
‘Good	 guess,’	 Pithy	 responded.	 ‘We’re	 the	 Queen’s	 Honour	 Guard.	 I’m	 Captain	 Pithy,	 and	 this	 is	 Captain
Brevity.	Is	your	mate	sick?’
‘She	is	Tiste	Andii,’	he	said.	‘She	was	born	in	this	city.’
‘Oh,’	said	Pithy,	and	she	shot	her	friend	a	look	that	asked:	Now	what?
Brevity	cleared	her	throat.	‘Well	then,	if	it’s	a	homecoming,	we’d	best	bring	her	in.’
At	that	the	woman	finally	looked	up.
Pithy’s	breath	caught,	and	beside	her	Brevity	started.
‘Thank	you,’	said	the	Tiste	Andii.	Tears	had	streaked	her	face.
‘Need	another	shoulder	to	lean	on?’	Pithy	asked.
‘No.’	And	she	disengaged	herself	from	Withal’s	arms.	Straightening,	she	faced	the	gate.	‘I’m	ready.’
Pithy	and	Brevity	let	her	and	Withal	take	the	lead,	at	a	pace	of	their	choosing.	As	soon	as	they’d	moved	a
half-dozen	strides	ahead,	Brevity	turned	and	plucked	Pithy’s	sleeve.
‘See	her	face?’	she	whispered.
Pithy	nodded.
‘She	ain’t	just	like	them	in	the	wall	paintings,	Pithy.	She	is	one	of	’em!	I’d	swear	it!’
‘Side	room,	first	one	on	the	left	just	inside	the	altar	room—the	only	one	without	stone	beds.	She’s	in	there.
Her	and	maybe	ten	others.	They	got	manacles	on	their	wrists.’
‘That’s	right!	One	of	them!’


No	wonder	she	ain’t	happy	about	coming	home.	Pithy	said,	‘Once	we’re	in,	you	go	get	the	witches	and
bring	’em	over.	Unless	Tovis	or	Yedan	have	come	back,	in	which	case	get	them.’
‘That’d	be	a	better	choice,’	Brevity	replied.	‘Them	witches	are	still	drunk—’
‘They	ain’t	drunk	for	real.’
‘You	 know	 what	 I	 mean.	 Eel-eyed.	 Horny.	 The	 kinda	 drunk	 that	 makes	 a	 woman	 ashamed	 of	 being	 a
woman.’
‘They	ain’t	drunk.	I	told	you.	So	get	’em,	all	right?’
‘All	right,	but	we	should	a	buried	’em	when	we	had	the	chance.’
	
The	deeper	shadow	of	the	gate’s	arch	slipped	over	them	like	a	shawl.	Sandalath	slowly	released	her	breath.
Mother	 Dark’s	 pervasive	 presence	 filled	 the	 city,	 and	 she	 felt	 her	 weariness	 drain	 away	 as	 the	 goddess’s
power	 touched	 her,	 but	 the	 benediction	 felt	 .	 .	 .	 indifferent.	 The	 grief	 was	 still	 there,	 appallingly	 fresh—a
reopened	wound,	or	something	else?	She	could	not	be	sure.	So	.	.	.	sorrow	does	not	end.	And	if	you	cannot
let	it	go,	Mother,	what	hope	do	I	have?
Something	 brushed	 her	 mind.	 An	 acknowledgement,	 a	 momentary	 recognition.	 Sympathy?	 She	 sighed.
‘Withal,	will	you	walk	with	me?’
‘Of	course—as	I	am	doing	right	now,	Sandalath.’
‘No.	The	temple,	the	Terondai.’	She	met	his	eyes.	‘Kurald	Galain.	To	the	very	foot	of	Mother	Dark.’
‘What	is	it	you	seek?’	he	asked,	searching	her	face.
She	turned	back	to	the	two	Letherii	women	standing	a	few	paces	behind.	‘You	spoke	of	a	Queen,’	she	said.
‘Twilight,’	said	Pithy.	‘Yan	Tovis.’
‘And	her	brother,’	added	Brevity.	‘Yedan	Derryg,	the	Watch.’
‘I	must	go	to	the	temple,’	Sandalath	said.
‘We	heard.’
‘But	I	would	speak	with	her.’
‘They	left	us	a	while	back,’	Pithy	said.	‘Went	into	the	forest.	When	the	witches	finally	come	round	they	said
the	two	of	’em,	Tovis	and	her	brother,	probably	rode	to	the	First	Shore.	That	was	after	they	was	in	the	temple
—the	Queen	and	the	Prince,	I	mean.	The	witches	won’t	go	anywhere	near	it,	the	temple,	I	mean.’
Sandalath	cocked	her	head.	‘Why	do	I	make	you	so	nervous,	Captain?’
‘You	ain’t	changed	much,’	blurted	Brevity.
‘I—what?	Oh.	In	the	Skeral—the	Chamber	of	Hostages.’
Pithy	nodded.	‘Only,	the	witches	said	this	city’s	been	dead	a	long,	long	time.’
‘No,’	said	Brevity,	‘a	long	time.’
‘I	said	that,’	Pithy	retorted,	scowling	at	her	companion.
‘You	didn’t	say	it	right,	is	all.	Long.	Long.’
Sandalath	 faced	 her	 husband	 again.	 ‘This	 world	 is	 born	 anew,’	 she	 said.	 ‘Mother	 Dark	 has	 returned	 and
now	faces	us.	The	Shake	have	returned	as	well.	Who	remains	missing?	The	Tiste	Andii.	My	people.	I	want	to
know	why.’
‘And	do	you	think	she’ll	answer	you?’	Withal	asked,	but	it	was	a	question	without	much	behind	it,	and	that
made	Sandalath	curious.
‘Husband.	Has	she	spoken	to	you?’
He	grimaced.	Then	reluctantly	nodded.
But	not	to	me.	Mother	Dark,	am	I	so	flawed	in	your	eyes	now?
There	 was	 no	 silent	 reply	 to	 that.	 The	 presence	 remained	 unperturbed,	 as	 if	 deaf	 to	 Sandalath,	 deaf	 and
wilfully	blind.	Not	fair.	Not	fair!
‘Sand?’
She	hissed	under	her	breath.	‘The	Terondai,	now.’
	
Beyond	the	scores	of	buildings	now	occupied	by	the	Shake	and	refugee	islanders,	Kharkanas	remained	a	place
of	ghosts.	The	witches	decided	they	liked	that.	They	had	found	an	estate	situated	on	a	terrace	overlooking	an
overgrown	park.	The	outer	wall’s	main	gate	had	been	burned	down,	leaving	ancient	soot	smears	on	the	marble


frame	and	deep	heat	cracks	latticing	the	lintel	stone.	The	garden	flanking	the	formal	approach	was	now	a	snarl
of	stunted	trees	on	both	sides,	their	roots	tilting	the	flagstones	of	the	path.
Atop	four	broad	steps	double	doors	marked	the	entrance	to	the	residence.	These	had	been	shattered	from
the	inside.	Bronze	statues	reared	on	either	side	of	the	staircase,	each	standing	on	an	ornate	marble	pedestal.	If
they	had	been	fashioned	in	the	likeness	of	living	creatures,	decided	Pully,	then	the	world	was	a	stranger	place
than	she	had	ever	imagined.	Towering,	the	statues	were	of	warriors,	human	from	the	shoulders	down,	whilst
their	necks	and	heads	belonged	to	a	hound.	Both	sentinels	bore	weapons.	A	double-bladed	axe	for	the	one	on
the	left,	a	two-handed	sword	for	the	one	on	the	right.	Verdigris	marred	the	details	of	the	beastly	visages,	but
there	was	enough	to	see	that	the	two	were	not	identical.	The	sword-wielder	was	terribly	scarred,	a	slash	that
had	cleaved	through	one	eye,	deep	enough	to	bite	bone.
Humming	under	her	breath,	Pully	set	one	knee	on	this	particular	statue’s	horizontal	penis,	and	pulled	herself
up	for	a	closer	look	at	that	face.	‘Now	them’s	big	teeth,	an’	precious	so.’
Skwish	 had	 already	 gone	 inside,	 likely	 painting	 a	 thick	 red	 line	 down	 the	 middle,	 staking	 her	 half	 of	 the
estate.	Pully	had	forgotten	how	competitive	the	cow	had	been	in	her	youth,	but	now	it	was	all	coming	back.
Wrinkles	gone,	bitch	returns!	An	what	was	I	sayin?	Right,	bitter’s	a	habit,	Skwish.	Bitter’s	a	habit.	 No
matter.	Skwish	could	have	her	half	of	the	estate	and	half	of	every	room.	But	then	half	of	everything	was	half
of	nothing.	They	could	live	here,	yes,	but	they	couldn’t	own	the	place.
She	 clambered	 down	 from	 the	 statue,	 brushed	 the	 dust	 from	 her	 hands,	 and	 then	 ascended	 the	 steps	 and
strode	 inside.	 Eight	 paces	 opposite	 her	 was	 a	 wall	 bearing	 a	 carved	 crest	 of	 some	 sort,	 arcane	 heraldry
announcing	the	family	that	had	claimed	this	place,	or	so	she	supposed.	Even	so,	one	sniff	told	her	there	was
sorcery	 in	 that	 sigil,	 latent,	 possibly	 a	 ward	 but	 too	 old	 to	 manage	 much.	 She	 could	 hear	 Skwish	 rummaging
about	in	a	room	down	the	corridor	on	the	right.	Tripped	nothing.	Dead	ward,	or	as	good	as.	Did	you	even
notice,	sister?
One	thing	was	impossible	not	to	notice.	Ever	since	they’d	crawled	out	of	that	deathly	sleep,	they’d	felt	the
presence	of	the	goddess.	Mother	Dark	had	looked	upon	them	both,	had	gathered	up	their	souls	like	a	pair	of
knuckled	dice.	A	rattle	or	two,	curious	fingertips	exploring	every	nuance,	every	pit	and	crack.	Then	the	cast.
Dismissive,	all	interest	lost.	Damned	insulting,	yes.	Infuriating.	Who	did	the	hag	think	she	was,	anyway?	Pully
snorted,	eyes	still	on	the	marble	crest.	Something	about	it	made	her	uneasy.	‘Never	mind,’	she	muttered,	and
then	raised	her	voice:	‘Skwish!’
‘Wha?’
‘We	ain’t	welcome	here.’
Skwish	 reappeared,	 stood	 in	 the	 corridor’s	 gloom.	 ‘The	 Queen	 will	 take	 the	 palace.	 Her	 and	 Witchslayer.
We	don’t	want	t’be	anywhere	close	to	’em.	There’s	power	here,	Pully.	We	can	use	it,	we	can	feed	on	it—’
‘Risky.	It	ain’t	as	quiet	as	I’d	like.’
‘It’s	memories	is	all.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Skwish	 rolled	 her	 eyes,	 approached.	 She	 halted	 directly	 in	 front	 of	 the	 crest.	 ‘Old	 symbols,’	 she	 said.	 She
pointed.	‘See	that?	That’s	the	Terondai,	and	there,	that’s	the	sigil	of	Mother	Dark	herself.’
‘Empty	throne!	This	ain’t	a	Royal	House,	is	it?’
‘Not	 quite,	 but	 as	 good	 as.	 See	 that	 mark?	 The	 one	 in	 the	 centre.	 That’s	 the	 Consort—you	 never	 was
interested	in	studying	the	Oldings.	So,	this	house,	it	belonged	to	a	man	lover	to	some	princess	or	maybe	even
the	queen	herself.	See,	that’s	his	name,	the	one	there.’
‘What	was	it?’
‘Daraconus,	something	like	that.’
They	heard	someone	in	the	courtyard	and	turned	in	time	to	see	Captain	Brevity	climbing	the	steps.
‘What?’	demanded	Pully,	her	harsh	voice	startling	the	Letherii.
‘Was	looking	for	you,’	Brevity	said,	slightly	out	of	breath.
‘What	for?’	Skwish	asked.
‘Visitors.’
‘From	where?’
‘Best	come	with	me,	you	two.	There’s	a	woman.	Tiste	Andii.’
‘Bluerose?’


‘What?	No.	She	was	born	here.’
Pully	and	Skwish	exchanged	glances.	And	then	Pully	scowled.	Bad	news.	Competition.	Rival.	‘But	she’s
not	alone?’
‘Got	a	man	with	her.	A	Meckros.’
‘Where’d	they	come	from,	then?	They	ain’t	always	been	here—we’d	a	sensed	that.	The	city	was	empty—’
‘Up	the	road,	Pully,’	said	Brevity,	‘same	as	us.’
‘We	got	here	first,’	Skwish	growled.
Brevity	blinked.	‘It’s	a	big	city,	witch.	Now,	you	coming?’
‘Where	is	she?’	Pully	asked.
‘The	temple.’
Bad	news.	The	worst.	‘Fine	then,’	she	snapped.
	
Yedan	 Derryg	 had	 walked	 a	 thousand	 or	 more	 paces	 along	 the	 ethereal	 First	 Shore,	 but	 now	 at	 last	 he	 was
returning.	And	in	one	hand,	Yan	Tovis	saw,	he	held	a	sword.	The	weapon	flashed	green	in	the	incandescent
fall	of	liquid	light.	The	blade	was	long	as	a	man’s	leg	yet	thinner	than	the	width	of	a	hand.	A	wire	basket	hilt
shielded	the	grip.	As	he	came	up	to	where	she	stood,	something	lit	his	eyes.
‘A	Hust	sword,	sister.’
‘And	it’s	healed.’
‘Yes.’
‘But	how	can	a	broken	sword	grow	back?’
‘Quenched	in	dragon’s	blood,’	he	replied.	‘Hust	weapons	are	immortal,	immune	to	all	decay.	They	can	shear
other	blades	in	two.’	He	held	up	the	sword.	‘This	is	a	five-blade	sword—tested	against	five,	cut	through	them
all.	Twilight,	there	is	no	higher	calibre	of	sword	than	the	one	you	see	here.	It	was	the	possession	of	a	Hustas,	a
Master	of	the	House	itself—only	children	of	the	Forge	could	own	such	weapons.’
‘And	the	woman	threw	it	away.’
‘It	is	a	mystery,’	Yedan	Derryg	said.
‘She	was	Gallan’s	escort—’
‘Not	that.	The	matter	of	how	a	five-blade	Hust	sword	broke	in	the	first	place.’
‘Ah.	I	see	your	point.’
He	looked	round.	‘Time	dissolves	here,	this	close	to	the	Sea	of	Light.	We	have	been	away	from	our	people
too	long—’
‘Not	my	fault,’	she	said.
‘True.	Mine.	No	matter.	It	is	time	to	go	back.’
Yan	Tovis	sighed.	‘What	am	I	to	do?’	she	asked.	‘Find	the	palace,	sink	down	on	to	whatever	throne	I	find?’
The	muscles	of	his	jaws	knotted	beneath	his	beard	and	he	glanced	away.	‘We	have	things	to	organize,’	he
eventually	said.	‘Staff	for	the	palace,	officers	for	the	guard.	Work	teams.	Is	the	river	rich	with	fish?	If	not,	we
are	in	trouble—our	stores	are	depleted.	Will	crops	grow	here?	Darkness	seems	to	somehow	feed	the	trees	and
such,	but	even	then,	we	face	a	hungry	season	before	anything	matures.’
The	list	alone	exhausted	her.
‘Leave	all	that	to	me,’	Yedan	said.
‘Indolence	for	the	Queen—I	will	go	mad	with	boredom.’
‘You	must	visit	the	temple	again,	sister.	It	is	no	longer	empty.	It	must	be	sanctified	once	more.’
‘I	am	no	priestess.’
‘Royal	blood	will	suffice.’
She	shot	him	a	look.	‘Indeed.	How	much?’
Yedan	shrugged.	‘Depends.’
‘On	what?’
‘On	how	thirsty	she	is.’
‘If	she	drains	me	dry	.	.	.’
‘The	threat	of	boredom	will	prove	unfounded.’
The	 bastard	 was	 finding	 himself	 again.	 Wit	 dry	 as	 a	 dead	 oasis,	 withered	 palm	 leaves	 rustling	 like	 the
laughter	of	locusts.	Damned	Hust	sword	and	the	illusion	of	coming	home.	Brother.	Prince.	Witchslayer.	He’d


been	waiting	for	this	all	his	life.	When	she	had	not.	I’d	believed	nothing.	Even	in	my	desperation,	I	walked
cold	 as	 a	 ghost	 doomed	 to	 repeat	 a	 lifetime’s	 path	 to	 failure.	 And	 my	 blood—gods	 below—my	 blood.
This	realm	demands	too	much	of	me.
Yedan	faced	her	again.	‘Sister,	we	have	little	time.’
She	started.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘The	Shake—the	very	impulse	that	drove	you	to	set	us	on	the	Road	of	Gallan—it	was	all	meant	to	bring	us
here.	Kharkanas,	the	First	Shore.	We	must	find	out	why.	We	must	discover	what	the	goddess	wants	of	us.’
Horror	rippled	through	Yan	Tovis.	No.	Her	eyes	lifted	past	Yedan	to	the	First	Shore,	to	that	tumultuous	wall
of	light—and	the	innumerable	vague	figures	behind	the	veil.	No,	please.	Not	again.
‘Mount	up,	sister.	It	is	time	to	return.’
	
Given	enough	time,	some	ghastly	concatenation	of	ages,	lifetimes	compressed,	crushed	down	layer	upon	layer.
Details	 smoothed	 into	 the	 indefinite.	 Deeds	 hollowed	 out	 like	 bubbles	 in	 pumice.	 Dreams	 flattened	 into
gradients	of	coloured	sands	that	crumbled	to	the	touch.	Looking	back	was	unpleasant,	and	the	vaster	that	field
of	sediment,	the	grislier	the	vista.	Sechul	Lath	had	once	chosen	a	bowed,	twisted	frame	to	carry	the	legacies	of
his	interminable	existence.	Beauty	and	handsome	repose—after	all	that	he	had	done—was,	as	far	as	he	was
concerned,	too	hypocritical	to	bear.	No,	in	form	he	would	seek	justice,	the	physicality	of	punishment.	And	this
was	what	had	so	galled	Errastas.
Sechul	was	tempted	to	find	for	himself	that	bent	body	once	again.	The	world	took	those	flat	sediments	and
twisted	 them	 into	 tortured	 shapes.	 He	 understood	 that.	 He	 favoured	 such	 pressures	 and	 the	 scarred	 visages
they	made	in	stone	and	flesh.
The	 sky	 was	 blood	 red	 and	 cloudless,	 the	 rocky	 barren	 soil	 suffused	 with	 streaks	 of	 orange	 and	 yellow
minerals	 tracking	 the	 landscape.	 Wind-sculpted	 mesas	 girdled	 the	 horizon,	 encircling	 the	 plain.	 This	 warren
possessed	no	name—none	that	he	knew,	at	any	rate.	No	matter,	it	had	been	scoured	clean	long	ago.
Kilmandaros	 strode	 at	 his	 side	 in	 a	 half-hitching	 gait,	 lest	 she	 leave	 him	 and	 Errastas	 far	 behind.	 She	 had
assumed	her	favoured	form,	bestial	and	hulking,	towering	over	her	two	companions.	He	could	hear	her	sliding
breath	 as	 it	 rolled	 in	 and	 out	 of	 four	 lungs,	 the	 rhythm	 so	 discordant	 with	 his	 own	 that	 he	 felt	 strangely
breathless.	Mother	or	not,	she	was	never	a	comforting	presence.	She	wore	violence	like	a	fur	cloak	riding	her
shoulders,	a	billowing	emanation	that	brushed	him	again	and	again.
She	 was	 a	 singular	 force	 of	 balance,	 Sechul	 knew—had	 always	 known.	 Creation	 was	 her	 personal
anathema,	 and	 the	 destruction	 in	 her	 hands	was	its	 answer.	She	 saw	 no	value	 in	 order,	 at	least	 the	 kind	that
was	imposed	by	a	sentient	will.	Such	efforts	were	an	affront.
Kilmandaros	was	worshipped	still,	in	countless	cultures,	but	there	was	nothing	benign	in	that	sensibility.	She
bore	a	thousand	names,	a	thousand	faces,	and	each	and	every	one	was	a	source	of	mortal	dread.	Destroyer,
annihilator,	devourer.	Her	fists	spoke	in	the	cruel	forces	of	nature,	in	sundered	mountains	and	drowning	floods,
in	the	ground	cracking	open	and	in	rivers	of	molten	lava.	Her	skies	were	ever	dark,	seething	and	swollen.	Her
rain	was	the	rain	of	ash	and	cinders.	Her	shadow	destroyed	lives.
The	 Forkrulian	 joints	 of	 her	 limbs	 and	 their	 impossible	 articulations	 were	 often	 seen	 as	 physical	 proof	 of
nature	gone	awry.	Broken	bones	that	nonetheless	descended	with	vast,	implacable	power.	A	body	that	could
twist	 like	 madness.	 Among	 the	 believers,	 she	 personified	 the	 loosing	 of	 rage,	 the	 surrendering	 of	 reason	 and
the	rejection	of	control.	Her	cult	was	written	in	spilled	blood,	disfigurement	and	the	virtue	of	violence.
Dear	mother,	what	lessons	do	you	have	for	your	son?
Errastas	 walked	 ahead,	 a	 man	 convinced	 he	 knew	 where	 he	 was	 going.	 The	 worlds	 awaited	 his	 guiding
hand,	 that	 nudge	 that	 all	 too	 often	 invited	 Kilmandaros	 into	 her	 swath	 of	 mindless	 destruction.	 Yet	 between
them	was	Sechul	Lath,	Lord	of	Chance	and	Mischance,	Caster	of	Knuckles.	He	could	smile	the	mockery	of
mercy,	or	he	could	spit	and	turn	away.	He	could	shape	every	moment	of	his	mother’s	violence.	Who	lives,	who
dies?	The	decision	was	his.
His	was	the	purest	worship	of	them	all.	So	it	had	always	been	and	so	it	would	always	remain.	No	matter
what	god	or	goddess	a	mortal	fool	prayed	to,	Sechul	Lath	was	the	arbiter	of	all	they	sought.	‘Save	me.’	‘Save
us.’	‘Make	us	rich.’	‘Make	us	fruitful.’	The	gods	never	even	heard	such	supplications	from	their	followers.
The	need,	the	desire,	snared	each	prayer,	spun	them	swirling	into	Sechul’s	domain.
He	could	open	himself,	even	now,	to	the	cries	of	mortals	beyond	counting,	each	and	every	one	begging	for


an	instant	of	his	time,	his	regard.	His	blessing.
But	 he’d	 stopped	 listening	 long	 ago.	 He’d	 spawned	 the	 Twins	 and	 left	 them	 to	 inherit	 the	 pathetic	 game.
How	 could	 one	 not	 grow	 weary	 of	 that	 litany	 of	 prayers?	 Each	 and	 every	 desire,	 so	 heartfelt,	 invariably
reduced	to	a	knot	of	sordidness.	To	gain	for	oneself,	someone	else	must	lose.	Joy	was	purchased	in	reams	of
sorrow.	Triumphs	stood	tall	on	heaps	of	bones.	Save	my	child?	Another	must	die.	Balance!	All	must	balance!
Can	existence	be	any	crueller	than	that?	Can	justice	be	any	emptier?	To	bless	you	with	chance,	I	must
curse	another	with	mischance.	To	this	law	even	the	gods	must	bow.	Creation,	destruction,	life,	death—
no,	I	am	done	with	it!	Done	with	it	all!
Leave	 it	 to	 my	 Oponnai.	 The	 Twins	 must	 ever	 face	 one	 another,	 lest	 existence	 unravel.	 They	 are
welcome	to	it.
No,	he’d	had	his	fill	of	mortal	blood.
But	immortal	blood,	ah,	that	was	another	matter.	With	it,	he	could	.	.	.	he	could	.	.	.	what?	I	can	break	the
fulcrum.	I	can	send	the	scales	crashing	down.	It’s	all	pointless	anyway—the	Che’Malle	saw	to	that.	We
rise	and	we	fall,	but	each	and	every	time	the	cycle	renews,	our	rise	is	never	as	high	as	the	last	time,	and
the	 fall	 in	 turn	 takes	 us	 farther	 down.	 Mortals	 are	 blind	 to	 this	 spiral.	 All	 will	 end.	 Energies	 will	 lose
their	grip,	and	all	will	fade	away.
I	have	seen	it.	I	know	what’s	coming.
Errastas	sought	a	resurrection	but	what	he	sought	was	impossible.	Each	generation	of	gods	was	weaker—
oh,	 they	 strode	 forth	 blazing	 with	 power,	 but	 that	 was	 the	 glow	 of	 youth	 and	 it	 quickly	 dissipated.	 And	 the
mortal	 worshippers,	 they	 too,	 in	 their	 tiny,	 foreshortened	 lives,	 slid	 into	 cynical	 indifference,	 and	 those	 among
them	who	held	any	faith	at	all	soon	backed	into	corners,	teeth	bared	in	their	zeal,	their	blind	fanaticism—where
blindness	was	a	virtue	and	time	could	be	dragged	to	a	halt,	and	then	pulled	backward.	Madness.	Stupidity.
None	 of	 us	 can	 go	 back.	 Errastas,	 what	 you	 seek	 will	 only	 precipitate	 your	 final	 fall,	 and	 good
riddance.	Still,	lead	on,	old	friend.	To	the	place	where	I	will	do	what	must	be	done.	Where	I	will	end	.	.	.
everything.
Ahead,	Errastas	halted,	turning	to	await	them.	His	lone	eye	studied	them,	flicking	back	and	forth.	‘We	are
close,’	he	said.	‘We	hover	directly	above	the	portal	we	seek.’
‘She	is	chained	below?’	Kilmandaros	asked.
‘She	is.’
Sechul	 Lath	 rubbed	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck,	 looked	 away.	 The	 distant	 range	 of	 stone	 fangs	 showed	 their
unnatural	 regularity.	 Among	 them	 could	 be	 seen	 stumps	 where	 entire	 mountains	 had	 been	 uprooted,	 plucked
from	the	solid	earth.	They	built	them	here.	They	were	done	with	this	world.	They’d	devoured	every	living
thing	by	then.	Such	bold	.	.	.	confidence.	He	glanced	back	at	Errastas.	‘There	will	be	wards.’
‘Demelain	wards,	yes,’	Errastas	said.
At	that,	Kilmandaros	growled.
Speak	then,	Errastas,	of	dragons.	She	is	ready.	She	is	ever	ready.
‘We	must	be	prepared,’	Errastas	continued.	‘Kilmandaros,	you	must	exercise	restraint.	It	will	do	us	no	good
to	have	you	break	her	wards	and	then	simply	kill	her.’
‘If	we	knew	why	they	imprisoned	her	in	the	first	place,’	Sechul	said,	‘we	might	have	what	we	will	need	to
bargain	with	her.’
Errastas’s	 shrug	 was	 careless.	 ‘That	 should	 be	 obvious,	 Knuckles.	 She	 was	 uncontrollable.	 She	 was	 the
poison	in	their	midst.’
She	 was	 the	 balance,	 the	 counter-weight	 to	 them	 all.	 Chaos	 within,	 is	 this	 wise?	 ‘Perhaps	 there’s
another	way.’
Errastas	scowled.	‘Let’s	hear	it,	then,’	he	said,	crossing	his	arms.
‘K’rul	 must	 have	 participated.	 He	 must	 have	 played	 a	 role	 in	 this	 chaining—after	 all,	 he	 had	 the	 most	 to
lose.	She	was	the	poison	as	you	say,	but	if	she	was	so	to	her	kin	that	was	incidental.	Her	true	poison	was	when
she	 was	 loose	 in	 K’rul’s	 blood—in	 his	 warrens.	 He	 needed	 her	 chained.	 Negated.’	 He	 paused,	 cocked	 his
head.	 ‘Don’t	 you	 think	 it	 curious	 that	 the	 Crippled	 God	 has	 now	 taken	 her	 place?	 That	 he	 is	 the	 one	 now
poisoning	K’rul?’
‘The	 diseases	 are	 not	 related,’	 Errastas	 said.	 ‘You	 spoke	 of	 another	 way.	 I’m	 still	 waiting	 to	 hear	 it,
Knuckles.’


‘I	don’t	have	one.	But	this	could	prove	a	fatal	error	on	our	part,	Errastas.’
He	gestured	dismissively.	‘If	she	will	not	cooperate,	then	Kilmandaros	can	do	what	she	does	best.	Kill	the
bitch,	here	and	now.	You	still	think	me	a	fool?	I	have	thought	this	through,	Sechul.	The	three	of	us	are	enough,
here	and	now,	to	do	whatever	is	necessary.	We	shall	offer	her	freedom—do	you	truly	imagine	she	will	reject
that?’
‘What	makes	you	so	certain	she	will	honour	whatever	bargain	she	agrees	to?’
Errastas	smiled.	‘I	have	no	worries	in	that	regard.	You	will	have	to	trust	me,	Knuckles.	Now,	I	have	been
patient	long	enough.	Shall	we	proceed?	Yes,	I	believe	we	shall.’
He	stepped	back	and	Kilmandaros	lumbered	forward.
‘Here?’	she	asked.
‘That	will	do,	yes.’
Her	 fists	 hammered	 down	 on	 to	 the	 ground.	 Hollow	 thunder	 rumbled	 beneath	 the	 plain,	 the	 reverberation
trembling	through	Sechul’s	bones.	The	fists	began	their	incessant	descent,	pounding	with	immortal	strength,	as
dust	slowly	lifted	to	obscure	the	horizons.	The	stone	beneath	the	hardened	ash	was	not	sedimentary;	it	was	the
indurated	foam	of	pumice.	Ageless,	trapped	in	the	memory	of	a	single	moment	of	destruction.	It	knew	nothing
of	eternities.
Sechul	Lath	lowered	himself	into	a	squat.	This	could	take	some	time.	Sister,	can	you	hear	us?	We	come	aknocking	.	.	.
	
‘What?’	Torrent	demanded.	‘What	did	you	just	say?’
The	haggard	witch’s	shrug	grated	bones.	‘I	tired	of	the	illusion.’
He	 looked	 round	 once	 more.	 The	 wagon’s	 track	 was	 gone.	 Vanished.	 Even	 the	 trail	 behind	 them	 had
disappeared.	‘But	I	was	following—I	saw—’
‘Stop	being	so	stupid,’	Olar	Ethil	snapped.	‘I	stole	into	your	mind,	made	you	see	things	that	weren’t	there.
You	were	going	the	wrong	way—who	cares	about	a	damned	Trygalle	carriage?	They’re	probably	all	dead	by
now.’	She	gestured	ahead.	‘I	turned	you	from	that	trail,	that’s	all.	Because	what	we	seek	is	right	there.’
‘If	I	could	kill	you,	I’d	do	it,’	said	Torrent.
‘Stupid	 as	 only	 the	 young	 can	 be,’	 she	 replied	 with	 a	 snort.	 ‘The	 only	 thing	 young	 people	 are	 capable	 of
learning	 is	 regret.	 That’s	 why	 so	 many	 of	 them	 end	 up	 dead,	 to	 the	 eternal	 regret	 of	 their	 parents.	 Now,	 if
you’ve	finished	the	histrionics,	can	we	continue	on?’
‘I	am	not	a	child.’
‘That’s	what	children	always	say,	sooner	or	later.’	With	that,	she	set	out,	trudging	past	Torrent,	whose	horse
shied	away	as	soon	as	the	bonecaster	drew	too	close.
He	steadied	the	animal,	glaring	at	Olar	Ethil’s	scaled	back.
‘—what	we	seek	is	right	there.’	His	gaze	lifted.	Another	one	of	those	damned	dragon	towers,	rising	forlorn
on	the	plain.	The	bonecaster	was	marching	towards	it	as	if	she	could	topple	it	with	a	single	kick.	No	 one	 is
more	relentless	than	a	dead	woman.	With	all	the	living	ones	I’ve	known,	I	shouldn’t	be	surprised	by	that.
The	desolate	tower	was	still	a	league	or	more	away.	He	wasn’t	looking	forward	to	visiting	it,	not	least	because
of	Olar	Ethil’s	inexplicable	interest	in	this	one	in	particular;	but	also	because	of	its	scale.	A	city	of	stone,	built
upward	instead	of	outward—what	was	the	point	of	that?
Well.	Self	defence.	But	we’ve	already	seen	how	that	didn’t	work.	And	what	if	some	lower	section	caught
fire?	 There’d	 be	 no	 escape	 for	 everyone	 trapped	 above.	 No,	 these	 were	 the	 constructs	 of	 idiots,	 and	 he
wanted	nothing	to	do	with	them.	What’s	wrong	with	a	hut?	A	hooped	tent	of	hides—you	can	pick	it	up	and
carry	it	anywhere	you	want	to	go.	Leaving	nothing	behind.	Rest	lightly	on	the	soil—so	the	elders	always
said.
But	why	did	they	say	that?	Because	it	made	running	away	easier.	Until	we	ran	out	of	places	to	run.	If
we’d	 built	 cities,	 just	 like	 the	 Letherii,	 why,	 they	 would	 have	 had	 to	 respect	 us	 and	 our	 claim	 to	 the
lands	we	lived	on.	We	would	have	had	rights.	But	with	those	huts,	with	all	that	resting	lightly,	they	never
had	to	take	us	seriously,	and	that	made	killing	us	all	that	much	easier.
Kicking	his	horse	into	motion,	he	squinted	at	that	ragged	tower.	Maybe	cities	weren’t	just	to	live	in.	Maybe
they	were	all	about	claiming	the	right	to	live	somewhere.	The	right	to	take	from	the	surrounding	land	all	they
needed	to	stay	alive.	Like	a	giant	tick,	head	burrowed	deep,	sucking	all	the	blood	it	can.	Before	it	cuts


loose	and	sets	off	for	a	fresh	sweep	of	skin.	And	another	claim	of	its	right	to	drink	deep	of	the	land.
The	 best	 way	 he’d	 found	 to	 kill	 a	 tick	 was	 with	 his	 thumbnail,	 slicing	 the	 insect	 in	 half	 on	 a	 flat	 rock.	 He
remembered	a	dog	trying	to	eat	one	once.	It	had	had	to	spit	it	out.	Ticks	tasted	foul—too	foul	even	for	dogs,
which	he’d	not	thought	possible.	Cities	probably	tasted	even	worse.
Listen	 to	 me.	 I’m	 losing	 my	 mind.	 Damned	 witch—are	 you	 still	 here?	 Inside	 my	 skull?	 Making	 my
thoughts	go	round	and	round	with	all	these	useless	ideas?
He	rode	up	beside	her.	‘Leave	me	alone.’
‘You	were	never	that	interesting	in	the	first	place,’	she	replied.
‘Funny,	I’d	decided	that	about	you	long	ago,’	said	Torrent,	‘but	you’re	still	here.’
She	halted	and	turned	round.	‘That	will	do,	then.	We’re	about	to	have	company,	warrior.’
He	twisted	in	his	saddle	and	studied	the	cloudless	sky.	‘The	ones	Silchas	Ruin	spoke	of?	I	see	nothing—’
‘They	come.’
‘To	fight?’
‘No.	They	were	fools	once,	but	one	must	assume	that	dying	has	taught	them	a	lesson.’	She	paused,	and	then
added,	‘Or	not.’
Motion	in	the	wiry	grasses	caught	his	eye.	A	lizard—no—‘Witch,	what	is	that?’
Two	skeletal	creatures—birds?—edged	into	view,	heads	ducking,	long	tails	flicking.	They	stood	on	their	hind
legs,	barely	taller	than	the	grasses.	Leather	and	gut	bindings	held	the	bones	in	place.
When	 the	 first	 one	 spoke,	 the	 voice	 formed	 words	 in	 his	 head.	 ‘Great	 One,	 we	 are	 abject.	 We	 grovel	 in
servitude—’
The	other	cut	in,	‘Does	she	believe	all	that?	Keep	trying!’
‘Be	quiet,	Telorast!	How	can	I	concentrate	on	lying	with	you	barging	in	all	the	time!	Now	shhh!	Oh,	never
mind,	it’s	too	late—look	at	them,	they	can	both	hear	us.	You,	especially.’
The	 creature	 named	 Telorast	 had	 crept	 closer	 to	 Olar	 Ethil,	 almost	 on	 all	 fours.	 ‘Servitude!	 As	 my	 sister
said.	Not	a	real	lie.	Just	a	.	.	.	a	.	.	.	a	temporary	truth!	Allegiance	of	convenience,	so	long	as	it’s	convenient.
What	could	be	more	honest?’
Olar	Ethil	grunted	and	then	said,	‘I	have	no	need	of	allies	among	the	Eleint.’
‘Not	true!’	cried	Telorast.
‘Calm	down,’	hissed	the	other	one.	‘This	is	called	bargaining.	She	 says	 we’re	useless.	We	say	 we	don’t
really	need	her	help.	She	says—well,	something.	Let’s	wait	to	hear	what	she	says,	and	then	we	say	something
back.	Eventually,	we	strike	a	deal.	You	see?	It’s	simple.’
‘I	can’t	think!’	complained	Telorast.	‘I’m	too	terrified!	Curdle,	take	over—before	my	bones	fall	apart!’
The	one	named	Curdle	snapped	its	head	back	and	forth,	as	if	seeking	somewhere	to	hide.
‘You	don’t	fool	me,’	said	Olar	Ethil.	‘You	two	almost	won	the	Throne	of	Shadow.	You	killed	a	dozen	of	your
kin	to	get	there.	Who	stopped	you?	Was	it	Anomander	Rake?	Edgewalker?	Kilmandaros?’
At	each	name	the	two	skeletons	cringed.
‘What	is	it	you	seek	now?’	the	bonecaster	asked.
‘Power,’	said	Telorast.
‘Wealth,’	said	Curdle.
‘Survival,’	said	Telorast.
Curdle	nodded,	head	bobbing.	‘Terrible	times.	Things	will	die.’
‘Lots	of	things,’	added	Telorast.	‘But	it	will	be	safe	in	your	shadow,	Great	One.’
‘Yes,’	said	Curdle.	‘Safe!’
‘In	turn,	we	will	guard	your	back.’
‘Yes!	That’s	it	exactly!’
‘Until,’	said	Olar	Ethil,	‘you	find	it	expedient	to	betray	me.	You	see	my	dilemma.	You	guard	my	back	from
other	threats,	but	who	will	guard	my	back	from	you	two?’
‘Curdle	can’t	be	trusted,’	said	Telorast.	‘I’ll	protect	you	from	her,	I	swear	it!’
‘As	will	I	from	my	sister!’	Curdle	spun	to	face	Telorast	and	snapped	her	tiny	jaws.	Clack	clack	clack!
Telorast	hissed	in	reply.
Olar	Ethil	turned	to	Torrent.	‘Eleint,’	she	said.
Eleint?	Dragons?	These	two?	‘I	always	imagined	they’d	be	bigger.’


‘Soletaken,’	said	Olar	Ethil,	and	then	she	regarded	the	two	creatures	once	more.	‘Or,	I	think,	D’ivers,	yes?
Born	as	Tiste	Andii,	one	woman,	but	two	dragons.’
‘Nonsense!’
‘Insane!’
‘Ridiculous!’
‘Impossible!’
‘Impossible,’	 conceded	 Olar	 Ethil,	 ‘for	 most—even	 among	 the	 Andii.	 Yet,	 you	 found	 a	 way,	 didn’t	 you?
How?	The	blood	of	the	Eleint	resists	the	fever	of	D’ivers.	A	ritual	would	have	been	necessary.	But	what	kind?
Not	Kurald	Galain,	nor	Kurald	Emurlahn.	No,	you	have	made	me	curious.	I	will	have	the	answer—this	is	the
bargain	I	offer.	Tell	me	your	secret,	and	you	shall	have	my	protection.	Betray	me,	and	I	will	destroy	you	both.’
Curdle	turned	to	her	companion.	‘If	we	tell	her,	we	are	undone!’
‘We’re	already	undone,	you	idiot.	We	were	never	meant	to	be	Soletaken.	It	just	happened	that	way!’
‘But	we	were	true	Eleint—’
‘Be	quiet!’
Olar	 Ethil	 suddenly	 stepped	 forward.	 ‘True	 Eleint?	 But	 that	 makes	 no	 sense!	 Two	 who	 become	 one?
Soletaken?	A	Tiste	Andii	Soletaken?	No,	you	twist	every	truth—I	cannot	believe	a	thing	you	say!’
‘Look	what	you	did,	Curdle!	Now	we—aagh!’
Telorast’s	cry	came	when	Olar	Ethil’s	bony	hand	snapped	out,	snaring	the	skeleton.	It	writhed	and	strained
in	her	grip.	She	held	it	close,	as	if	about	to	bite	its	head	off.
‘Tell	her!’	Telorast	shrieked.	‘Curdle!	Tell	her	everything!’
‘I	will	I	will!	I	promise!	Elder	One!	Listen!	I	will	speak	the	truth!’
‘Go	on,’	said	Olar	Ethil.	Telorast	now	hung	limp	in	her	hand,	as	if	lifeless,	but	Torrent	could	see	the	tip	of	its
tail	twitching	every	few	moments.
Curdle	leapt	to	a	clear	patch	of	dusty	earth.	With	one	talon	it	inscribed	a	circle	round	where	it	stood.	‘We
were	 chained,	 Elder,	 terribly,	 cruelly	 chained.	 In	 a	 fragment	 of	 Emurlahn.	 Eternal	 imprisonment	 stretched
before	us—you	could	not	imagine	the	torment,	the	torture	of	that.	So	close!	To	our	precious	prize!	But	then,
the	 three	 stood	 before	 us,	 between	 us	 and	 the	 throne.	 The	 bitch	 with	 her	 fists.	 The	 bastard	 with	 his	 dread
sword.	Edgewalker	gave	us	a	choice.	Kilmandaros	and	the	chains,	or	Anomander	and	Dragnipur.	Dragnipur!
We	knew	what	Draconus	had	done,	you	see!	We	knew	what	that	sword’s	bite	would	do.	Swallow	our	souls!
No,’	the	skeleton	visibly	shivered,	‘we	chose	Kilmandaros.’
‘Two	Eleint,’	said	Olar	Ethil.
‘Yes!	Sisters—’
‘Or	lovers,’	said	Telorast,	still	lying	as	if	dead.
‘Or	 that,	 yes.	 We	 don’t	 remember.	 Too	 long	 ago,	 too	 many	 centuries	 in	 chains—the	 madness!	 Such
madness!	But	then	a	stranger	found	us.’
‘Who?’	barked	Olar	Ethil.
‘Dessimbelackis,’	said	Curdle.	‘He	held	Chaos	in	his	hands.	He	told	us	its	secret—what	he	had	made	of	it.
He	was	desperate.	His	people—humans—were	making	a	mess	of	things.	They	stood	as	if	separate	from	all
the	 animals	 of	 the	 world.	 They	 imagined	 they	 were	 the	 rulers	 of	 nature.	 And	 cruel	 their	 tyranny,	 so	 cruel.
Slaughtering	the	animals,	making	the	lands	barren	deserts,	the	skies	empty	but	for	vultures.’
‘Soletaken,’	 said	 Olar	 Ethil.	 ‘D’ivers.	 He	 created	 a	 ritual	 out	 of	 chaos—to	 bind	 humans	 to	 the	 beasts,	 to
force	upon	them	their	animal	natures.	He	sought	to	teach	them	a	lesson.	About	themselves.’
‘Yes,	Elder.	Yes	to	all	of	that.	He	brought	the	ritual	to	his	people—oh,	it	was	an	old	ritual,	much	older	than
Dessimbelackis,	much	older	than	this	world.	He	forced	it	upon	his	subjects.’
‘This	tale	I	know	well,’	said	Olar	Ethil.	‘I	was	there,	when	we	gave	answer	to	that.	The	swords	of	the	T’lan
Imass	dripped	for	days.	But,	there	were	no	dragons,	not	there,	not	then.’
‘You’d	begun	the	slaughter,’	said	Curdle.	‘He’d	fled	even	before	then,	taking	his	D’ivers	form—’
‘The	Deragoth.’
‘Yes.	He	knew	you	were	hunting	him.	He	needed	allies.	But	we	were	chained,	and	he	could	not	break	those
chains.	So	he	offered	to	take	our	souls—and	he	brought	us	a	corpse.	A	woman.	Tiste	Andii.’
‘Where	did	he	come	by	it?’	Olar	Ethil	asked.	‘Who	was	she?’
‘He	never	told	us.	But	when	he	bound	our	souls	to	her,	we	stood—unchained.	We	thought	we	were	free.


We	vowed	to	serve	him.’
‘But	you	did	not,	did	you?’
Curdle	hesitated.
‘You	betrayed	him.’
‘No!	It	wasn’t	like	that!	Each	time	we	sought	to	semble	into	our	true	selves,	the	chains	returned!	Each	time,
we	found	ourselves	back	within	Emurlahn!	We	were	useless	to	him,	don’t	you	see?’
‘Yet,’	said	Olar	Ethil,	‘now,	you	can	find	your	true	selves—’
‘Not	for	long.	Never	for	long,’	said	Curdle.	‘If	we	hold	to	our	Eleint	selves,	the	chains	find	us.	They	steal	us
back.	 These	 bones	 you	 see	 here—we	 can	 do	 this	 much.	 We	 can	 take	 a	 body,	 one	 or	 two,	 and	 exist	 within
them.	But	that	is	all.	If	we	could	reach	the	throne,	we	could	break	our	bindings!	We	could	escape	our	prison!’
‘You	will	never	win	that	throne,’	said	Olar	Ethil.	‘And,	as	you	are,	well,	that	is	useless	to	me.’
‘Great	Elder!	You	could	break	those	chains!’
‘I	 could,’	 she	 replied.	 ‘But	 I	 have	 no	 reason	 to.	 After	 all,	 why	 risk	 the	 enmity	 of	 Edgewalker?	 Or
Kilmandaros?	 No,	 they	 chained	 you	 two	 for	 a	 reason.	 Had	 you	 not	 sought	 the	 throne,	 you	 would	 have	 lived
free.’
‘Eternal	punishment—who	deserves	that?’	Curdle	demanded.
Olar	Ethil	laughed.	‘I	have	walked	with	the	T’lan	Imass.	Do	not	speak	to	me	of	eternal	punishment.’
Torrent	was	startled	by	that.	He	faced	her,	his	mouth	twisting.	‘You	did	that	to	them,	bonecaster.	And	now
you	call	it	a	punishment?	Those	Imass.	What	had	they	done	to	you,	to	punish	them	for	all	eternity?’
She	turned	her	back	on	him.
He	stared.	‘Spirits	of	the	earth!	It	was	punishment!	Olar	Ethil—that	Ritual—you	were	cursing	them!	Look
at	you—’
She	spun	round.	‘Yes!	Look	at	me!	Do	I	not	choose	to	wear	that	curse?	My	own	body,	my	own	flesh!	What
more	can	I	do—’
‘But	 wear	 your	 remorse?’	 He	 studied	 her	 in	 horror.	 ‘You	 miserable,	 pathetic	 thing.	 What	 was	 it?	 Some
offhand	 insult?	 A	 jilted	 love?	 Did	 your	 man	 sleep	 with	 some	 other	 woman?	 Why	 did	 you	 curse	 them	 for	 all
eternity,	Olar	Ethil?	Why?’
‘You	don’t	understand—’
Telorast	chose	this	moment	to	thrash	loose	from	her	grip,	landing	lightly	on	the	ground	then	darting	a	halfdozen	paces	away,	where	Curdle	scrambled	to	join	her.	Olar	Ethil	stared	at	the	two	creatures	for	a	moment—
or	so	it	seemed.
‘Why	don’t	you	let	it	go?’	Torrent	asked.	‘Bonecaster.	Let	them	all	go.’
‘No!	 I	 have	 no	 choice	 in	 this—none!	 You	 mortals	 are	 such	 fools—you	 just	 don’t	 see	 it,	 you	 don’t	 see
anything!’
‘What	am	I	supposed	to	see?’	Torrent	shouted	back.
‘I	am	trying	to	save	your	pathetic	lives!	All	of	you!’
He	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	Her	gnarled	hands	had	closed	into	fists.	Then	he	said,	‘If	to	save	us,	Olar
Ethil,	means	holding	prisoner	the	souls	of	the	T’lan	Imass,	then,	as	a	pathetic	mortal,	I	tell	you:	it’s	too	much.
Free	them.	Leave	us	to	die.’
She	 snorted—but	 he	 could	 sense	 his	 words	 had	 shaken	 her—‘You	 would	 speak	 for	 all	 humanity,	 Torrent,
last	of	the	Awl?	You,	who	dream	only	of	an	end?’
‘Make	it	meaningful	and	I	will	not	complain.’
‘So	wish	we	all,’	she	said	in	a	rasp.
‘Besides,’	Torrent	said,	‘it’s	not	their	fight.	Not	their	responsibility.	Not	yours,	either.	You	seek	redemption,
bonecaster?	Find	another	way.	One	that	doesn’t	devour	souls.	One	that	doesn’t	close	chains	about	an	entire
people.’
‘You	 know	 so	 little,’	 she	 said,	 her	 tone	 filled	 with	 contempt.	 ‘The	 T’lan	 Imass—my	 T’lan	 Imass—do	 you
even	know	what	they	are?’
‘Not	really.	But	I’ve	put	enough	together.	All	your	conversations	with	strangers,	and	when	you	speak	to	the
darkness	at	night—thinking	me	asleep.	You	command	an	army,	and	they	are	not	far	away	from	us.	They	are
trapped	in	this	Ritual	of	yours,	Olar	Ethil.	You	treat	them	as	slaves.’
‘I	need	them.’


‘They	don’t	need	you,	though,	do	they?’
‘I	summoned	them!	Without	me	they	would	be	dust	and	nothing	more!’
‘Maybe	that’s	how	they	want	it,’	he	replied.
‘Not	yet.	Not	yet!’
Torrent	gathered	his	reins.	‘You	two,’	he	called	to	the	skeletons,	‘here’s	my	offer.	No	one,	no	matter	how
venal,	deserves	an	eternity	of	punishment.	I	will	seek	a	way	to	free	your	souls.	In	return,	you	guard	my	back.’
Curdle	hopped	forward.	‘Against	whom?’
He	glared	across	at	Olar	Ethil.	‘Her,	for	a	start.’
‘We	can	do	that!’	Telorast	cried.	‘We’re	stronger	than	she	thinks!’
Curdle	pranced	up	alongside	Torrent’s	horse.	‘Where	are	we	going,	Master?’
‘Call	me	Torrent,	and	I	am	not	your	Master.	I	make	no	claim	to	own	you.	We	are,	it	seems,	riding	to	that
tower.’
‘Rooted!’	crowed	Telorast,	‘but	which	one	is	it?	Curdle?	Which	one	is	it?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Never	been	here.’
‘Liar!’
‘So	are	you!’
The	bickering	continued	as	Torrent	urged	his	mount	forward.	A	short	time	later	he	glanced	back	to	see	Olar
Ethil	trudging	after	him.	Unbreakable,	and	yet	.	.	.	broken.	You	sour	old	woman.	Let	it	go.
	
Kebralle	 Korish	 led	 a	 clan	 of	 four	 men	 and	 three	 women,	 all	 that	 remained	 of	 the	 B’ehn	 Aralack	 Orshayn
T’lan	 Imass.	 Once,	 not	 long	 ago,	 the	 Copper	 Ashes	 Clan	 had	 numbered	 three	 thousand	 one	 hundred	 and
sixteen.	There	were	memories	of	living,	and	then	there	were	the	memories	of	death,	such	as	remained	to	those
of	the	Ritual.	In	her	memories	of	death,	the	final	battle	with	the	Order	of	the	Red	Spires	hung	blazing	in	her
mind,	a	frozen	scream,	the	abrupt	howl	of	annihilation.	She	had	stood	upon	the	edge	of	the	Abyss,	longing	to
join	her	fallen	kin	but	held	back	by	the	duty	of	her	title.	She	was	Clan	Chief,	and	so	long	as	will	remained	to
her,	she	would	be	the	last	of	the	Copper	Ashes	to	fall.
That	time	had	not	yet	come,	and	the	wake	of	the	Red	Spires	was	stretched	out	behind	her,	lifeless,	desolate,
the	echoes	of	her	scream	like	a	bony	hand	at	her	back.
The	 First	 Sword	 had,	 perversely,	 elected	 to	 retain	 his	 corporeal	 form,	 walking	 with	 the	 weight	 of	 stone
across	this	ravaged	land,	his	long-bladed	weapon	dragging	a	careless	furrow.	The	warriors	of	the	Orshayn	and
the	Brold	had	in	turn	surrendered	the	bliss	of	dust	and	now	strode	in	a	ragged,	colourless	mass	behind	him.	She
walked	among	them,	her	seven	warriors	arrayed	around	her.	They	were	battered,	permanently	scarred	by	the
sorcery	of	the	Three.	The	tattered	remnants	of	skin	and	tendon	that	remained	were	blackened,	scorched.	The
sections	 of	 exposed	 bone	 were	 burnt	 white,	 webbed	 with	 cracks.	 The	 flint	 weapons	 they	 held	 had	 lost	 their
sepia	hue,	the	reddish	brown	replaced	by	mottled	mauves	and	blue-greys.	Furs,	leather	and	hides	were	gone.
Among	all	in	her	clan,	Kebralle	Korish	alone	had	succeeded	in	drawing	close	enough	to	the	Three	to	swing
her	blade.	She	remembered,	with	vivid	clarity,	the	shock	upon	the	face	of	the	Bearded	One,	when	her	curved
weapon’s	 edge	 had	 bit	 deep,	 scoring	 the	 flesh	 deep	 and	 wide	 across	 his	 chest.	 Blood,	 the	 gleam	 of	 notched
ribs,	rings	of	mail	scattering	against	the	stones	of	the	parapet.	He	had	staggered	in	retreat	but	she	was	in	no
mood	to	relent—
His	companions	had	driven	her	back,	a	concatenation	of	magics	hammering	her	from	the	ledge.	Engulfed	in
raging	 sorcery,	 she	 had	 tumbled	 to	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 wall.	 It	 should	 have	 ended	 there,	 but	 Kebralle	 was	 Clan
Chief.	She	had	just	witnessed	the	slaughter	of	almost	her	entire	clan.	No,	she	would	not	yield	to	oblivion.	When
she	had	risen,	shrugging	off	the	terrible	chaotic	flames,	she	had	looked	up	to	see	two	of	the	Three—they	were
in	turn	peering	down	at	her.	In	their	faces,	disbelief,	the	stirrings	of	fear—
Inistral	 Ovan	 had	 sounded	 the	 withdrawal	 then.	 She	 could	 have	 defied	 him,	 but	 she	 had	 obeyed.	 For	 the
seven	who	remained	standing.	For	the	last	of	her	kin.
Yet	even	now,	her	memory	of	the	bite	of	her	blade’s	edge	was	the	sweetest	nectar	in	the	hollowed	husk	of
her	 soul.	 Kebralle	 Korish	 stood	 on	 the	 wall	 of	 the	 Fastness.	 She	 delivered	 a	 wound	 upon	 one	 of	 the
Three,	 the	 only	 T’lan	 Imass	 to	 have	 done	 so.	 Had	 he	 stood	 alone,	 she	 would	 have	 killed	 him.	 The
Bearded	One	would	have	fallen,	the	first	breach	in	the	defences	of	the	Three.	Kebralle	Korish,	who	had
made	 the	 curved	 blade	 she	 held,	 naming	 it	 Brol—Cold	 Eye—and	 see	 the	 stain	 of	 his	 blood?	 Running


black	as	night.	In	the	moment	the	war	turned,	she	was	recalled.
The	Copper	Ashes	had	fallen	for	nothing.	No	gaining	of	ground,	no	victory.	They	had	been	flung	away,	and
one	day	she	would	make	Inistral	Ovan	pay	for	that.
Enough	reason	to	persist,	this	secret	vow.	The	First	Sword	could	have	his	war,	his	search	for	answers,	his
demand	for	an	accounting	with	Olar	Ethil.	Kebralle	Korish	had	her	own	reasons	for	continuing	on.	Olar	Ethil—
who	had	summoned	them	all—was	welcome	to	her	secret	motives.	Kebralle	did	not	care.	Besides,	Olar	Ethil
had	 given	 her	 another	 chance,	 and	 for	 that	 alone	 Kebralle	 would	 do	 as	 she	 asked.	 Until	 such	 time	 that	 the
opportunity	for	vengeance	presented	itself.
Inistral	Ovan	bore	the	shame	of	defeat,	and	he	did	so	without	dissembling.	But	it	was	not	good	enough.	Not
even	close.	I	will	punish	him.	I	will	find	for	him	an	eternity	of	suffering.	Upon	the	lost	lives	of	my	kin,
this	I	do	vow.
	
It	wasn’t	smell—he	was	not	capable	of	picking	up	a	scent—but	something	that	nevertheless	reached	into	his
mind,	pungent,	redolent	of	memories	Kalt	Urmanal	weathered	as	would	an	ice	spire	a	blizzard’s	wind.	He	was
annealed	 in	 madness,	 polished	 bright	 with	 insanity.	 All	 conflict	 within	 him	 had	 been	 smoothed	 away,	 until	 he
was	nothing	more	than	the	purity	of	purpose.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	upon	this	land.	The	slayers	of	his	wife,	his	children.	Their	vile	oils	had	soaked
this	dusty	soil;	their	scales	had	whispered	through	the	dry	air.	They	were	close.
Hatred	died	with	the	Ritual	of	Tellann.	 So	 it	was	 held,	so	it	was	believed	 by	every	T’lan	 Imass.	Even	the
war	 against	 the	 Jaghut	 had	 been	 a	 cold,	 unfeeling	 prosecution.	 Kalt	 Urmanal’s	 soul	 trembled	 with	 the
realization	that	hatred	was	alive	within	him.	Blistering	hatred.	He	felt	as	if	all	his	bones	were	massed,	knotted
into	a	single	fist,	hard	as	stone,	a	fist	that	but	awaited	its	victim.
He	would	find	them.
Nothing	else	mattered.	The	First	Sword	had	not	bound	his	kin—a	dread	error,	for	Kalt	knew	that	wars	raged
within	 each	 and	 every	 one	 of	 them.	 He	 could	 feel	 as	 much,	 swirls	 of	 conflicting	 desires,	 awakened	 hungers
and	 needs.	 An	 army	 must	 kneel	 before	 a	 single	 master.	 Without	 that	 obeisance,	 each	 warrior	 stood	 alone,
tethers	loose,	and	at	the	first	instant	of	conflict	each	would	seek	his	or	her	own	path.	The	First	Sword,	in	his
refusal	to	command,	had	lost	his	army.
He	was	a	fool.	He	had	forgotten	what	it	meant	to	rule.	Whatever	he	sought,	whatever	he	found,	he	would
discover	that	he	was	alone.
First	Sword.	What	did	the	title	mean?	Skill	with	his	weapon—none	would	deny	that	Onos	T’oolan	possessed
that,	else	he	would	never	have	earned	the	title.	But	surely	there	was	more	to	it.	The	strength	to	impose	his	will.
The	qualities	of	true	leadership.	The	arrogance	of	command	and	the	expectation	that	such	commands	would	be
followed	unquestioningly.	Onos	T’oolan	possessed	none	of	these	traits.	He	had	failed	the	first	time,	had	he	not?
And	now,	he	would	fail	again.
Kalt	Urmanal	would	trail	in	the	wake	of	the	First	Sword,	but	he	would	not	follow	him.
The	Jaghut	played	games	with	us.	They	painted	themselves	in	the	guises	of	gods.	It	amused	them.	Our
indignation	 stung	 to	 life	 became	 a	 rage	 of	 unrelenting	 determination.	 But	 it	 was	 misplaced.	 In	 our
awakening	 to	 their	 games,	 they	 had	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 withdraw.	 The	 secret	 laid	 bare	 ended	 the	 game.
The	wars	were	not	necessary.	Our	pursuit	acquired	the	mien	of	true	madness,	and	in	assuming	it	we	lost
ourselves	.	.	.	for	all	time.
The	Jaghut	were	the	wrong	enemy.	The	Ritual	should	have	been	enacted	in	the	name	of	a	war	against
the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 They	 were	 the	 ones	 who	 hunted	 us.	 For	 food.	 For	 sport.	 They	 were	 the	 ones
who	 saw	 us	 as	 nothing	 more	 than	 meat.	 They	 would	 descend	 upon	 our	 camps	 sleek	 with	 the	 oils	 of
cruel,	senseless	slaughter,	and	loved	ones	died.
Indignation?	 The	 word	 is	 too	 weak	 for	 what	 I	 feel.	 For	 all	 of	 us	 who	 were	 victims	 of	 the	 K’Chain
Che’Malle.
First	Sword,	you	lead	us	nowhere—we	are	all	done	with	the	Jaghut.	We	no	longer	care.	Our	cause	is
dead,	its	useless	bones	revealed	to	each	and	every	one	of	us.	We	have	kicked	through	them	and	now	the
path	stretches	clear—but	these	paths	we	do	not	share	with	our	kin.
So,	why	do	we	follow	you	here	and	now?	Why	do	we	step	in	time	with	you?	You	tell	us	nothing.	You
do	not	even	acknowledge	our	existence.	You	are	worse	than	the	Jaghut.


He	knew	of	Olar	Ethil,	the	bonecaster	who	had	cursed	them	into	eternal	suffering.	For	her,	he	felt	nothing.
She	was	as	stupid	as	the	rest.	As	blind,	as	mistaken	as	all	the	other	bonecasters	who	folded	their	power	into
the	Ritual.	Will	you	fight	her,	First	Sword?	If	so,	then	you	will	do	it	alone.	We	are	nothing	to	you,	and	so
you	are	nothing	to	us.
Do	not	let	the	eyes	deceive.	We	are	no	army.
We	are	no	army.
	
Nom	Kala	found	the	bonecaster	Ulag	Togtil	at	her	side.	He	was,	without	question,	the	biggest	warrior	among
the	Imass	she	had	ever	seen.	Trell	blood.	She	wondered	what	he	had	looked	like	in	the	flesh.	Frightening,	no
doubt,	broad-mouthed	and	tusked,	his	eyes	small	as	an	ice	boar’s.	She	had	few	memories	of	Trell—they	were
all	but	gone	in	her	time,	among	the	first	to	be	driven	from	the	face	of	the	earth	by	the	humans.	Indeed,	she	was
not	even	certain	her	memories	were	true	ones,	rather	than	something	bled	into	her	by	the	Orshayn.
Sour	blood,	that.	A	deluge	of	vicious	sentiments,	confused	desires,	depthless	despair	and	pointless	rage.	She
felt	 under	 assault—these	 Orshayn	 were	 truly	 tortured,	 spiritually	 destroyed.	 But	 neither	 she	 nor	 her	 kin	 had
acquired	any	skill	in	fending	off	this	incessant	flood.	They	had	never	before	experienced	the	like.
From	the	First	Sword	himself,	however,	there	was	nothing.	Not	a	single	wisp	of	thought	escaped	him,	not	a
hint	of	emotion.	Was	he	simply	lifeless,	there	in	his	soul?	Or	was	his	self-command	so	absolute	that	even	her
most	determined	assaults	upon	his	thoughts	simply	slid	off,	weak	as	rain	on	stone?	The	mystery	that	was	Onos
T’oolan	dogged	her.
‘A	measure	of	mercy,’	Ulag	said,	intruding	upon	her	thoughts.
‘What	is,	Bonecaster?’
‘You	bleed	as	well,	Nom	Kala.	We	are	all	wayward.	Bone	trembles,	darkness	spins	in	what	remains	of	our
eyes.	We	believe	we	are	the	creators	of	our	thoughts,	our	feelings,	but	I	think	otherwise.’
‘Do	you?’
He	nodded.	‘We	roil	in	his	wake.	All	this	violence,	this	fury.	It	devours	us,	each	one,	and	is	shaped	by	what
it	eats.	And	so	we	believe	each	of	us	stands	alone	in	our	intent.	Most	troubling,	Nom	Kala.	How	soon	before
we	turn	upon	one	another?’
‘Then	there	is	no	measure	of	mercy,’	she	replied.
‘That	depends.’
‘On	what?’
‘On	how	subtle	is	Onos	T’oolan.’
‘Please,	explain.’
‘Nom	 Kala,	 he	 has	 said	 he	 will	 not	 compel	 us	 to	 obedience.	 He	 will	 not	 be	 as	 a	 T’lan	 Imass.	 This	 is
significant.	Is	he	aware	of	the	havoc	wrought	in	his	wake?	I	believe	he	is.’
‘Then,	what	purpose?’
‘We	will	see.’
‘Only	if	you	are	correct,	and	if	the	First	Sword	is	then	able	to	draw	us	to	him—before	it	is	too	late.	What
you	describe	holds	great	risk,	and	the	longer	he	waits,	the	less	likely	he	will	be	able	to	gather	us.’
‘That	is	true,’	he	rumbled	in	reply.
‘You	believe	in	him,	don’t	you?’
‘Faith	 is	 a	 strange	 thing—among	 the	 T’lan	 Imass,	 it	 is	 little	 more	 than	 a	 pale	 ghost	 of	 memory.	 Perhaps,
Nom	Kala,	the	First	Sword	seeks	to	awaken	it	in	us	once	more.	To	make	us	more	than	T’lan	Imass.	Thus,	he
does	not	compel	us.	Instead,	he	shows	us	the	freedom	of	mortality,	which	we’d	all	thought	long	lost.	How	do
the	living	command	their	kin?	How	can	a	mortal	army	truly	function,	given	the	chaos	within	each	soldier,	these
disparate	desires?’
‘What	value	in	showing	us	such	things?’	Nom	Kala	asked.	‘We	are	not	mortal.	We	are	T’lan	Imass.’
He	shrugged.	‘I	have	no	answer	to	that,	yet.	But,	I	think,	he	will	show	us.’
‘He	had	better	not	wait	too	long,	Bonecaster.’
‘Nom	Kala,’	Ulag	was	regarding	her,	‘I	believe	you	were	beautiful	once.’
‘Yes.	Once.’
‘Would	that	I	had	seen	you	then.’
But	she	shook	her	head.	‘Imagine	the	pain	now,	had	you	done	so.’


‘Ah,	there	is	that.	I	am	sorry.’
‘As	am	I,	Bonecaster.’
	
‘Are	we	there	yet?	My	feet	hurt.’
Draconus	halted,	turned	to	observe	the	half-blood	Toblakai.	‘Yes,	perhaps	we	can	rest	for	a	time.	Are	you
hungry?’
Ublala	nodded.	‘And	sleepy.	And	this	armour	chafes	my	shoulders.	And	the	axe	is	heavy.	And	I	miss	my
friends.’
‘There	is	a	harness	ring	for	your	axe,’	Draconus	said.	‘You	don’t	have	to	carry	it	at	the	ready.	As	you	can
see,	no	one	can	come	upon	us	without	our	seeing	them	from	some	distance	away.’
‘But	if	I	see	a	rabbit	or	a	chicken,	I	can	run	it	down	and	then	we	can	eat.’
‘That	won’t	be	necessary—you	have	already	seen	that	I	am	able	to	conjure	food,	and	water.’
Ublala	scowled.	‘I	want	to	do	my	part.’
‘I	see.	I	am	sure	you	will,	before	too	long.’
‘You	see	something?’	Ublala	straightened,	looked	round.	‘Rabbit?	Cow?	Those	two	women	over	there?’
Draconus	started,	and	then	searched	until	he	found	the	two	figures,	walking	now	towards	them	but	still	three
hundred	 or	 so	 paces	 away.	 Coming	 up	 from	 the	 south,	 both	 on	 foot.	 ‘We	 shall	 await	 them,’	 he	 said	 after	 a
moment.	‘But,	Ublala,	there	is	no	need	to	fight.’
‘No,	sex	is	better.	When	it	comes	to	women,	I	mean.	I	never	touched	that	mule.	That’s	sick	and	I	don’t	care
what	they	said.	Can	we	eat	now?’
‘Build	us	a	fire,’	Draconus	said.	‘Use	the	wood	we	gathered	yesterday.’
‘All	right.	Where	is	it?’
Draconus	gestured	and	a	modest	stack	of	broken	branches	appeared	almost	at	Ublala’s	feet.
‘Oh,	there	it	is!	Never	mind,	Draconus,	I	found	the	wood.’
The	woman	in	the	lead	was	young,	her	garb	distinctly	barbaric.	Her	eyes	shone	from	a	band	of	black	paint
that	possibly	denoted	grief,	while	the	rest	of	her	face	was	painted	white	in	the	pattern	of	a	skull.	She	was	wellmuscled,	her	long	braided	hair	the	colour	of	rust.	Three	steps	behind	her	staggered	an	old	woman,	barefoot,	her
hide	tunic	smeared	with	filth.	Rings	glittered	on	blackened	fingers,	a	jarring	detail	in	the	midst	of	her	dishevelled
state.
The	two	stopped	ten	paces	from	Draconus	and	Ublala.	The	younger	one	spoke.
Ublala	 looked	 up	 from	 the	 fire	 he’d	 just	 sparked	 to	 life.	 ‘Trader	 tongue—I	 understand	 you.	 Draconus,
they’re	hungry	and	thirsty.’
‘I	know,	Ublala.	You	will	find	food	in	that	satchel.	And	a	jug	of	ale.’
‘Really?	 What	 satchel—oh,	 never	 mind.	 Tell	 the	 pretty	 one	 I	 want	 to	 have	 sex	 with	 her,	 but	 say	 it	 more
nicely—’
‘Ublala,	you	and	I	speak	the	same	trader	tongue,	more	often	than	not.	As	we	are	doing	now.’	He	stepped
forward.	‘Welcome,	then,	we	will	share	with	you.’
The	younger	woman,	whose	right	hand	had	closed	on	a	dagger	at	her	belt	as	soon	as	Ublala	made	his	desire
plain,	 now	 shifted	 her	 attention	 back	 to	 Draconus.	 ‘I	 am	 Ralata,	 a	 Skincut	 of	 the	 Ahkrata	 White	 Face
Barghast.’
‘You	are	a	long	way	from	home,	Ralata.’
‘Yes.’
Draconus	looked	past	her	to	the	old	woman.	‘And	your	companion?’
‘I	found	her,	wandering	alone.	She	is	Sekara,	a	highborn	among	the	White	Faces.	Her	mind	is	mostly	gone.’
‘She	has	gangrenous	fingers,’	Draconus	observed.	‘They	must	be	removed,	lest	the	infection	spread.’
‘I	know,’	said	Ralata,	‘but	she	refuses	my	attentions.	It’s	the	rings,	I	think.	Her	last	claim	to	wealth.’	The
Skincut	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘My	people	are	gone.	Dead.	The	White	Face	Barghast	are	no	more.	My	clan.
Sekara’s.	Everyone.	I	do	not	know	what	happened—’
‘Dead!’	shrieked	Sekara,	holding	up	her	rotted	hands.	‘Frozen!	Frozen	dead!’
Ublala,	who’d	jumped	at	the	old	woman’s	cries,	now	edged	closer	to	Draconus.	‘That	one	smells	bad,’	he
said.	‘And	those	fingers	don’t	work—someone’s	going	to	have	to	feed	her.	Not	me.	She	says	awful	things.’
Ralata	resumed:	‘She	tells	me	this	a	hundred	times	a	day.	I	do	not	doubt	her—I	cannot—I	see	slaughter	in


her	eyes.	And	in	my	heart,	I	know	that	we	are	alone.’
‘The	infection	has	found	her	brain,’	said	Draconus.	‘Best	if	you	killed	her,	Ralata.’
‘Leaving	me	the	last	of	the	White	Faces?	I	do	not	have	the	courage	to	do	that.’
‘You	give	me	leave	to	do	so?’	Draconus	asked.
Ralata	flinched.
‘Ralata,’	said	Draconus,	‘you	two	are	not	the	last	of	your	people.	Others	still	live.’
Her	eyes	narrowed.	‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘I	saw	them.	At	a	distance,	dressed	little	different	from	you.	The	same	weapons.	They	numbered	some	five
or	six	thousand,	perhaps	more.’
‘Where,	when?’
Draconus	glanced	over	at	Ublala.	‘Before	I	found	my	Toblakai	friend	here.	Six,	seven	days	ago,	I	believe—
my	 sense	 of	 time	 is	 not	 what	 it	 used	 to	 be.	 The	 very	 change	 of	 light	 still	 startles	 me.	 Day,	 night,	 there	 is	 so
much	that	I	had	forgotten.’	He	passed	a	hand	over	his	face	and	then	sighed.	‘Ralata,	do	you	give	me	leave?	It
will	be	an	act	of	mercy,	and	I	will	be	quick.	She	will	not	suffer.’
The	 old	 woman	 was	 still	 staring	 at	 her	 blackened	 hands,	 as	 if	 willing	 them	 to	 move,	 but	 the	 swollen	 digits
were	curled	into	lifeless	hooks.	Her	face	twisted	in	frustration.
‘Will	you	help	me	raise	her	cairn?’
‘Of	course.’
Ralata	finally	nodded.
Draconus	walked	up	to	Sekara.	He	gently	lowered	the	woman’s	hands,	and	then	set	his	own	to	either	side
of	 her	 face.	 Her	 manic	 eyes	 darted	 and	 then	 suddenly	 fixed	 on	 his.	 At	 the	 last	 instant,	 he	 saw	 in	 them
something	like	recognition.	Terror,	her	mouth	opening—
A	swift	snap	to	one	side	broke	the	neck.	The	woman	slumped,	still	gaping,	eyes	holding	on	his	even	as	he
slowly	 lowered	 her	 to	 the	 ground.	 A	 few	 breaths	 later	 and	 the	 life	 left	 that	 accusing,	 horror-filled	 stare.
Straightening,	he	stepped	back,	faced	the	others.	‘It	is	done.’
‘I’ll	go	find	some	stones,’	said	Ublala.	‘I’m	good	at	graves	and	stuff.	And	then,	Ralata,	I	will	show	you	the
horse	and	you’ll	be	so	happy.’
The	woman	frowned.	‘Horse?	What	horse?’
‘What	 Stooply	 the	 Whore	 calls	 it,	 the	 thing	 between	 my	 legs.	 My	 bucking	 horse.	 The	 one-eyed	 river	 eel.
The	 Smart	 Woman’s	 Dream,	 what	 Shurq	 Elalle	 calls	 it.	 Women	 give	 it	 all	 sorts	 of	 names,	 but	 they	 all	 smile
when	they	say	them.	You	can	give	it	any	name	you	want	and	you’ll	be	smiling,	too.	You’ll	see.’
Ralata	stared	after	the	Toblakai	as	he	set	off	in	search	of	stones,	and	then	she	turned	to	Draconus.	‘He’s
but	a	child—’
‘Only	in	his	thoughts,’	Draconus	said.	‘I	have	seen	him	stripped	down.’
‘If	he	tries—if	either	of	you	tries	to	rape	me,	I’ll	kill	you.’
‘He	won’t.	Nor	will	I.	You	are	welcome	to	journey	with	us—we	are	travelling	east—the	same	direction	as
the	Barghast	I	saw.	Perhaps	indeed	we	will	catch	up	to	them,	or	at	least	cross	their	trail	once	more.’
‘What	is	that	meat	on	the	fire?’	she	asked,	drawing	closer.
‘Bhederin.’
‘There	are	none	in	the	Wastelands.’
Draconus	shrugged.
Still	she	hesitated,	and	then	she	said,	‘I	am	hunting	a	demon.	Winged.	It	murdered	my	friends.’
‘How	are	you	able	to	track	this	winged	demon,	Ralata?’
‘It	kills	everything	in	its	path.	That’s	a	trail	I	can	follow.’
‘I	have	seen	no	such	signs.’
‘Nor	I	of	late,’	she	admitted.	‘Not	for	the	past	two	days,	since	I	found	Sekara,	in	fact.	But	the	path	seems	to
be	 eastward,	 so	 I	 will	 go	 in	 that	 direction.	 If	 I	 find	 these	 other	 Barghast,	 all	 the	 better.	 If	 not,	 my	 hunt
continues.’
‘Understood,’	he	replied.	‘Now,	will	you	join	me	in	some	ale?’
She	spoke	behind	him	as	he	crouched	to	pour	the	amber	liquid	into	two	pewter	tankards.	‘I	mean	to	bury	her
with	those	rings,	Draconus.’
‘We	are	not	thieves,’	he	replied.


‘Good.’
She	accepted	the	tankard	he	lifted	to	her.
Ublala	returned	with	an	armload	of	boulders.
‘Ublala,’	said	Draconus,	‘save	showing	your	horse	for	later.’
The	huge	man’s	face	fell,	and	then	he	brightened	again.	‘All	right.	It’s	more	exciting	in	the	dark	anyway.’
	
Strahl	 had	 never	 desired	 to	 be	 Warleader	 of	 the	 Senan.	 It	 had	 been	 easier	 feeding	 himself	 ambitions	 he	 had
believed	 for	 ever	 beyond	 reach,	 a	 simple	 and	 mostly	 harmless	 bolstering	 of	 his	 own	 ego,	 giving	 him	 a	 place
alongside	the	other	warriors	opposed	to	Onos	T’oolan,	just	one	among	a	powerful,	influential	cadre	of	ranking
Barghast.	He	had	enjoyed	that	power	and	all	the	privileges	it	delivered.	He	had	especially	revelled	in	his	hoard
of	hatred,	a	currency	of	endless	value,	and	to	spend	it	cost	him	nothing,	no	matter	how	profligate	he	was.	Such
a	 warrior	 was	 swollen,	 well	 protected	 behind	 a	 shield	 of	 contempt.	 And	 when	 shields	 locked,	 the	 wall	 was
impregnable.
But	now	he	was	alone.	His	hoard	had	vanished—he’d	not	even	seen	the	scores	of	hands	reaching	in	behind
his	back.	A	warleader’s	only	wealth	was	the	value	of	his	or	her	word.	Lies	sucked	the	colour	from	gold.	Truth
was	the	hardest	and	purest	and	rarest	metal	of	all.
There	had	been	an	instant,	a	single,	blinding	instant,	when	he’d	stood	before	his	tribe,	raising	high	that	truth,
forged	by	hands	grown	cold.	He	had	claimed	it	for	his	own,	and	in	turn	his	kin	had	met	his	eyes,	and	they	had
answered	in	kind.	But	even	then,	in	his	mouth	there	had	been	the	taste	of	ashes.	Was	he	nothing	more	than	the
voice	of	the	dead?	Of	fallen	warriors	who	each	in	turn	had	been	greater	than	Strahl	could	ever	hope	to	be?	He
could	 voice	 their	 desire—and	 he	 had	 done	 precisely	 that—but	 he	 could	 not	 think	 their	 thoughts,	 and	 so	 they
could	not	help	him,	not	here,	not	now.	He	was	left	with	the	paltry	confusions	of	his	own	mind,	and	it	was	not
enough.
It	had	not	taken	long	for	his	warriors	to	discover	that.	After	all,	where	could	he	lead	them?	The	people	of
the	 settled	 lands	 behind	 them	 sought	 their	 blood.	 The	 way	 ahead	 was	 ravaged,	 lifeless.	 And,	 as	 bold	 as	 the
gesture	had	been,	the	Senan	had	fled	a	battle,	leaving	their	allies	to	die.	No	one	wanted	the	guilt	of	that.	They
gave	it	all	to	Strahl.	Had	he	not	commanded	them?	Had	he	not	ordered	their	withdrawal?
He	could	not	argue	the	point.	He	could	not	defend	himself	against	the	truths	they	spoke.	This	 belongs	 to
me.	 This	 is	 my	 crime.	 The	 others	 died	 to	 give	 it	 to	 me,	 because	 they	 stood	 where	 I	 now	 stand.	 Their
courage	was	purer.	They	led.	I	can	only	follow.	If	it	had	been	any	other	way,	I	could	have	been	their
match.
He	squatted,	facing	away	from	the	few	remaining	fires	of	the	camp	stretched	out	in	a	disorganized	sprawl
behind	 him.	 Stars	 spread	 a	 remote	 vista	 across	 the	 jade-soaked	 sky.	 The	 Talons	 themselves	 seemed	 much
closer,	as	if	moments	from	cleaving	the	heavens	and	slashing	down	to	the	earth	itself.	No	clearer	omen	could
be	 imagined.	 Death	 comes.	 An	 age	 ends,	 and	 with	 it	 so	 end	 the	 White	 Face	 Barghast,	 and	 then	 their
gods,	who	were	freed	only	to	be	abandoned,	given	life	only	to	die.	Well,	you	bastards,	now	you	know
how	it	feels.
They	were	almost	out	of	food.	The	shouldermen	and	witches	had	exhausted	themselves	drawing	water	from
this	 parched	 land.	 Soon	 the	 effort	 would	 begin	 killing	 them,	 one	 by	 one.	 The	 retreat	 had	 already	 claimed	 the
eldest	 and	 weakest	 among	 the	 Senan.	 We	 march	 east.	 Why?	 No	 enemy	 awaits	 us	 out	 there.	 The	 war	 we
sought	is	not	the	one	we	found,	and	now	glory	has	eluded	us.
Wherever	that	one	true	battle	is,	the	White	Faces	should	be	there.	Cutting	destiny	off	at	the	knees.	So
sought	 Humbrall	 Taur.	 So	 sought	 Onos	 Toolan.	 But	 the	 great	 alliance	 is	 no	 more.	 Only	 the	 Senan
remain.	And	we	falter	and	soon	will	fade.	Flesh	to	wood,	wood	to	dust.	Bone	to	stone,	stone	to	dust.	The
Barghast	 shall	 become	 a	 desert—only	 then	 will	 we	 finally	 find	 a	 land	 on	 which	 to	 settle.	 These
Wastelands,	perhaps.	When	the	wind	stirs	us	awake	with	each	dawn.
Before	long,	he	knew,	he	would	be	cut	down.	Sometimes,	after	all,	guilt	must	be	excised	with	a	knife.	He
would	not	resist.	Of	course,	as	the	last	surviving	Senan	staggered	and	fell,	the	final	curse	on	their	lips	would	be
his	name.	Strahl,	who	stole	from	us	our	glory.	Not	much	of	a	glory,	to	be	sure.	Maral	Eb	had	been	a	fool	and
Strahl	 could	 shrug	 off	 most	 of	 the	 venom	 when	 it	 came	 to	 that	 fiasco.	 Still,	 we	 could	 have	 died	 with
weapons	in	our	hands.	That	would	have	been	something.	Like	spitting	to	clear	the	taste.	Maybe	the	next
watery	mouthful	of	misery	won’t	be	as	bad.	Like	that.	Just	that	one	gesture.


Eastward	then.	Each	step	slowing.
Suicide	was	such	an	ugly	word.	But	one	could	choose	it	for	oneself.	When	it	came	to	an	entire	people	.	.	.
well,	 that	 was	 different.	 Or	 was	 it?	 I	 will	 lead	 us,	 until	 someone	 else	 does.	 I	 will	 ask	 for	 nothing.	 We
march	to	our	deaths.	But	then,	it	is	all	we	ever	do.	This	last	thought	pleased	him.	In	the	ghoulish	darkness,
he	smiled.	Against	futility,	guilt	did	not	stand	a	chance.
	
Life	is	a	desert,	but,	dear	friends,	between	my	legs	you	will	find	the	sweetest	oasis.	Being	dead,	I	can
say	this	with	not	a	hint	of	irony.	If	you	were	me,	you’d	understand.
‘You	have	a	curious	expression	on	that	painted	face,	Captain.	What	are	you	thinking?’
Shurq	 Elalle	 pulled	 her	 gaze	 from	 the	 desolate	 sweep	 of	 sullen	 grey	 waves	 and	 glanced	 over	 at	 Felash,
fourteenth	 daughter	 of	 King	 Tarkulf	 and	 Queen	 Abrastal	 of	 Bolkando.	 ‘My	 First	 Mate	 was	 complaining,
Princess,	a	short	time	ago.’
‘This	has	been	a	pleasant	enough	journey	thus	far,	if	somewhat	tedious.	What	cause	has	he	to	complain?’
‘He	 is	 a	 noseless,	 one-eyed,	 one-handed,	 one-legged	 half-deaf	 man	 with	 terrible	 breath,	 but	 I	 agree	 with
you,	Princess.	No	matter	how	bad	things	can	appear	to	be,	they	can	always	get	worse.	Such	is	life.’
‘You	speak	with	something	like	longing,	Captain.’
Shurq	 Elalle	 shrugged.	 ‘You	 may	 be	 young,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 easily	 deceived,	 Princess.	 I	 trust	 you
comprehend	my	unique	circumstances.’
Felash	pursed	her	plump	lips,	fluttering	her	fingers	dismissively.	‘It	took	some	time,	to	be	honest.	Indeed,	it
was	my	handmaiden	who	first	broached	the	possibility.	You	do	well	in	disguising	your	situation,	Captain,	a	most
admirable	achievement.’
‘Thank	you,	Highness.’
‘Still,	I	wonder	what	so	consumed	your	thoughts.	Skorgen	Kaban,	I	have	learned,	has	no	end	of	gripes,	not
least	the	plague	of	superstitions	ever	haunting	him.’
‘He	has	not	been	at	his	best,’	Shurq	admitted.	‘Ever	since	you	purchased	this	extension,	in	fact.	A	thousand
rumours	have	drifted	from	Kolanse,	not	one	of	them	pleasing.	The	crew	are	miserable,	and	to	the	First	Mate,
that	misery	feeds	his	every	fear.’
‘It	is	well	understood,	I	trust,’	said	Felash,	‘that	most	of	the	Perish	fleet	has	preceded	us.	Have	we	seen	any
indication	that	disaster	befell	them?’
‘That	 depends,’	 Shurq	 replied.	 ‘The	 absence	 of	 evidence	 of	 any	 sort	 is	 ominous	 enough,	 especially	 for
sailors—’
‘Then	they	can	never	be	satisfied,	can	they?’
‘Absolutely	true,	which	is	why	I	adore	them	so.’
‘Captain?’
She	smiled	at	the	princess.	‘Neither	can	I.	You	wondered	what	I	was	thinking,	and	that	is	my	answer.’
‘I	see.’
No,	little	girl,	you	do	not.	But	never	mind.	Give	it	time.
Felash	continued:	‘How	frustrated	you	must	be!’
‘If	it	is	frustration,	it	is	a	most	delicious	kind.’
‘I	find	you	fascinating,	Captain.’
The	plump	princess	was	wearing	a	fur-lined	cloak,	the	hood	drawn	up	against	the	sharp	offshore	wind.	Her
round,	heavily	made-up	face	looked	dusted	and	flawless.	She	clearly	worked	very	hard	at	appearing	older	than
she	in	truth	was,	but	the	effect	reminded	Shurq	of	those	porcelain	dolls	the	Shake	used	to	find	washed	up	on
the	beaches,	the	ones	they	traded	away	as	if	the	things	were	cursed.	Inhuman	in	perfection,	but	in	truth	hinting
at	deeper	flaws.	‘And	you	in	turn	interest	me,	Highness.	Is	it	the	simple	privilege	of	royalty	that	permits	you	to
commandeer	a	foreign	ship,	captain	and	crew,	and	set	out	on	a	whim	into	the	unknown?’
‘Privilege,	 Captain?	 Dear	 me,	 no.	 Burden,	 in	 fact.	 Knowledge	 is	 essential.	 The	 gathering	 of	 intelligence	 is
what	 ensures	 the	 kingdom’s	 continued	 survival.	 We	 are	 not	 a	 great	 military	 power,	 such	 as	 the	 Letherii	 who
can	hold	their	insensitive	bullying	as	if	it	was	a	virtue	of	forthright	uncomplexity.	Attitudes	of	false	provincialism
serve	a	well-honed	suspicion	of	others.	“Deal	me	straight	and	true	and	I	am	your	friend.	Deal	me	wrong	and	I
will	destroy	you.”	So	goes	the	diplomat’s	theme	of	discourse.	Of	course,	one	quickly	learns	that	all	those	poses
of	righteous	honesty	are	but	a	screen	for	self-serving	avarice.’


‘I	take	it,’	Shurq	said,	‘the	children	of	the	Bolkando	King	and	Queen	are	well	schooled	in	such	theories	of
diplomacy.’
‘Almost	from	birth,	Captain.’
Shurq	smiled	at	the	exaggeration.	‘It	seems	your	sense	of	Lether	is	somewhat	antiquated,	if	I	dare	venture
an	opinion	on	the	matter.’
But	Felash	shook	her	head.	‘King	Tehol	is	perhaps	more	subtle	than	his	predecessors.	The	disarming	charm
hides	a	most	devious	mind.’
‘Devious?	Oh	yes,	Highness.	Absolutely.’
‘Naturally,’	Felash	went	on,	‘one	would	be	a	fool	to	trust	him.	Or	believe	anything	he	says.	I	would	wager
his	Queen	is	precisely	the	same.’
‘Indeed?	 Consider	 this,	 if	 you	 will,	 Princess:	 you	 see	 two	 rulers	 of	 a	 vast	 empire	 who	 just	 so	 happen	 to
despise	 virtually	 every	 trait	 that	 empire	 possesses.	 The	 inequity,	 the	 cruel	 expression	 of	 privilege	 and	 the
oppression	of	the	dispossessed.	The	sheer	idiocy	of	a	value	system	that	raises	useless	metals	and	meaningless
writs	above	that	of	humanity	and	plain	decency.	Consider	two	rulers	who	are	trapped	in	that	world—yes,	they
would	dismantle	all	of	it,	if	they	could.	But	how?	Imagine	the	resistance.	All	those	elites	so	comfortable	with
their	 elevated	 positions	 of	 power.	 Do	 you	 truly	 believe	 such	 people	 would	 willingly	 relinquish	 that?’	 Shurq
leaned	on	the	rail	and	regarded	Felash,	whose	eyes	were	wide.
‘Well,	 Highness?	 Imagine,	 in	 fact,	 if	 they	 delivered	 upon	 you	 and	 your	 people	 a	 diplomatic	 onslaught	 of
emancipation.	 The	 end	 of	 the	 nobility	 and	 all	 the	 inherited	 rank	 and	 privilege—you	 and	 your	 entire	 family,
Princess,	out	on	your	asses.	The	end	of	money	and	its	false	strictures.	Gold?	Pretty	rings	and	baubles,	oh	yes,
but	 beyond	 that?	 Might	 as	 well	 hoard	 polished	 stones	 from	 a	 shoreline.	 Wealth	 as	 proof	 of	 superiority?
Nonsense.	Proof	only	of	the	power	to	deliver	violence.	I	see	by	your	shocked	expression,	Highness,	that	you
begin	to	comprehend,	and	so	I	will	leave	it	there.’
‘But	that	is	madness!’
Shurq	shrugged.	‘Burdens,	you	said,	Princess.’
‘Are	you	saying	Tehol	and	his	wife	revile	their	own	claim	to	power?’
‘Probably.’
‘Meaning,	in	turn,	they	hold	people	like	me	in	similar	contempt?’
‘Personally?	I	doubt	it.	Rather,	they	likely	question	your	right	to	dictate	the	lives	of	your	kingdom’s	people.
Clearly,	your	family	asserts	such	a	right,	and	you	possess	the	military	might	to	enforce	such	a	claim.	I	will	not
speak	 for	 Tehol	 or	 Janath	 with	 any	 certitude,	 Highness,	 but	 I	 suspect	 they	 deal	 with	 you	 and	 every	 other
dignitary	from	every	other	kingdom	and	whatnot,	with	an	identical	forbearance.	The	system	is	what	it	is—’
‘Someone	needs	to	rule!’
‘And,	 alas,	 most	 of	 the	 rules	 rulers	 impose	 are	 the	 ones	 that	 make	 certain	 it’s	 them	 doing	 the	 ruling	 from
now	 on,	 and	 they’ll	 co-opt	 and	 exploit	 an	 entire	 nation	 of	 people	 to	 keep	 it	 that	 way.	 Generation	 upon
generation	 and	 for	 evermore.	 Anyway,	 Highness,	 should	 you	 ever	 return	 to	 Letheras	 by	 all	 means	 debate	 it
with	Tehol	or	Janath.	They	delight	in	such	things.	As	for	me,	I	can	only	answer	as	a	ship’s	captain—’
‘Exactly!	No	ship	can	function	without	a	hierarchy!’
‘So	very	true.	I	was	but	conveying	to	you	an	interpretation	of	Tehol	and	Janath’s	position	contrary	to	the	one
you	have	been	taught	to	believe.	Such	complicated	philosophies	are	well	beyond	me.	Besides,	do	I	really	care
any	 more?	 I	 work	 within	 this	 system	 because	 that	 is	 an	 agreeable	 option,	 a	 means,	 in	 fact,	 of	 avoiding
boredom.	I	am	also	able	to	help	make	my	crew	wealthier	than	they	might	otherwise	be,	and	this	pleases	me.
For	 myself,	 of	 course,	 I	 cannot	 even	 tell	 you	 if	 I	 believe	 in	 anything—anything	 at	 all.	 Why	 should	 I?	 What
would	such	beliefs	grant	me?	Peace	of	mind?	My	mind	is	at	peace.	A	secure	future?	Since	when	is	the	future
ever	 secure?	 Worthy	 goals?	 Who	 decides	 what’s	 worthy?	 What’s	 “worth”	 all	 about	 anyway?	 Highness,
believe	me,	I	am	not	the	one	for	this	discussion.’
‘Errant	look	away,	Captain,	you	have	shocked	me	to	the	core.	I	feel	positively	faint,	assailed	from	so	many
directions	my	mind	spins.’
‘Shall	I	summon	your	handmaiden,	Highness?’
‘Dear	me,	no.	Her	seasickness	refuses	to	abate,	the	poor	thing.’
‘There	are	medicines—’
‘Not	one	of	which	do	a	thing	for	her.	Why	do	you	think	I	am	up	here	with	you,	Captain?	I	cannot	abide	her


moaning.	 Even	 more	 deplorable,	 before	 long	 when	 we	 are	 both	 in	 the	 cabin	 it	 is	 I	 who	 must	 attend	 to	 her,
rather	than	the	other	way	round.	The	impropriety	of	that	is	intolerable.’
Shurq	Elalle	nodded.	‘Impropriety,	yes,	I	see.	You	should	have	brought	the	matter	to	me	long	ago,	Highness.
I	am	happy	to	assign	a	member	of	my	crew	to	look	after	your	handmaiden.	Perhaps	indeed	we	can	have	her
transferred	to	another	berth—’
‘No	 no,	 none	 of	 that,	 Captain.	 Though	 I	 do	 thank	 you	 for	 the	 generous	 offer.	 My	 frustration	 is	 ever
shortlived.	 Besides,	 what	 better	 means	 of	 reminding	 myself	 that	 privileges	 of	 rank	 are	 but	 false	 constructs?
When	humanity	and	simple	decency	demand	the	relinquishing	of	such	things?’
‘Well	said,	Highness.’
Felash	fluttered	her	fingers.	‘And	on	that	thought,	best	I	return	below,	to	see	how	the	wretched	child	fares.’
She	smiled	up	at	Shurq	with	her	doll’s	smile.	‘Thank	you	for	a	most	invigorating	discussion,	Captain.’
‘I	too	enjoyed	it,	Princess.’
Felash	strode	away,	admirably	sure-footed	on	the	pitching	deck.	Shurq	settled	her	forearms	down	on	the	rail
and	scanned	the	distant	coastline	to	port.	Jungle	had	given	way	to	brown	hills	a	few	days	past.	The	only	trees
she’d	 seen	 since	 had	 been	 uprooted	 boles	 crowding	 the	 thin	 line	 of	 beach.	 Enormous	 trees.	 Who	 tore	 up
thousand-year-old	trees	so	indiscriminately	as	to	leave	them	to	waste?	Kolanse,	what	have	you	been	up	to?
We’ll	find	out	soon	enough.
	
Felash	entered	the	cabin.	‘Well?’
Her	 handmaid	 looked	 up	 from	 where	 she	 sat	 crosslegged	 before	 the	 small	 brazier	 of	 coals.	 ‘It	 is	 as	 we
feared,	 Highness.	 A	 vast	 emptiness	 awaits	 us.	 Desolation	 beyond	 measure.	 Upon	 landing,	 we	 shall	 have	 to
travel	north—far	north,	all	the	way	to	Estobanse	Province.’
‘Prepare	my	bowl,’	 Felash	 said,	 shrugging	 off	 her	 cloak	 and	 letting	it	 fall.	 She	 sank	 down	on	 to	a	 heap	of
pillows.	‘They	can	go	nowhere	else,	can	they?’
The	bigger	woman	rose	and	stepped	over	to	the	low	table	where	sat	an	ornate,	silver-inlaid,	glass	hookah.
She	measured	out	a	cup	of	spiced	wine	and	slowly	filled	the	bulb,	then	drew	out	the	silver	tray,	tapping	out	the
old	ashes	into	a	small	pewter	plate.	‘If	you	mean	the	Perish,	Highness,	that	is	a	fair	assumption.’
Felash	reached	under	her	silk	blouse	and	loosened	the	bindings	of	her	undershirt.	‘My	eldest	sister	did	this
too	 much,’	 she	 said,	 ‘and	 now	 her	 tits	 rest	 down	 on	 her	 belly	 like	 a	 trader’s	 bladders	 riding	 a	 mule’s	 rump.
Curse	these	things.	Why	couldn’t	I	be	more	like	Hethry?’
‘There	are	herbs—’
‘Then	they’d	not	fix	their	eyes	there,	would	they?	No,	these	damned	things	are	my	first	gifts	of	diplomacy.
Just	seeing	those	dilated	pupils	is	a	victory.’
The	 handmaid	 brought	 over	 the	 hookah.	 She’d	 already	 drawn	 it	 alight	 and	 aromatic	 smoke	 spread	 out
through	 the	 cabin.	 She	 had	 been	 doing	 this	 for	 her	 mistress	 for	 four	 years	 now.	 Each	 time,	 it	 preceded	 an
extended	period	of	intense	discussion	between	her	and	the	princess.	Plans	were	created,	tested,	every	detail
hammered	into	place	with	the	steady	tap-tap-tap	of	rounding	a	copper	bowl.
‘Hethry	views	you	with	great	envy,	Highness.’
‘She’s	an	idiot	so	that’s	no	surprise.	Have	we	heard	from	Mother’s	cedas?’
‘Still	nothing.	The	Wastelands	seethe	with	terrible	powers,	Highness,	and	it	is	clear	that	the	Queen	intends	to
remain	there—like	us,	she	seeks	answers.’
‘Then	we	are	both	fools.	All	of	this	is	so	far	beyond	Bolkando’s	borders	that	we	would	be	hard	pressed	to
extend	any	legitimate	reasons	to	pursue	the	course	we’re	on.	What	did	Kolanse	contribute	to	our	kingdom?’
‘Black	honey,	hardwoods,	fine	linens,	parchment	and	paper—’
‘In	the	past	five	years?’	Felash’s	eyes	glittered	in	a	veil	of	smoke.
‘Nothing.’
‘Precisely.	 My	 question	 was	 in	 fact	 rhetorical.	 Contact	 has	 ceased.	 We	 acquired	 nothing	 essential	 from
them	in	any	case.	As	for	the	Wastelands	and	the	motley	armies	crawling	about	on	them,	well,	they	too	have
left	our	environs.	We	dog	them	at	our	peril,	I	believe.’
‘The	 Queen	 marches	 beside	 some	 of	 those	 armies,	 Highness.	 We	 must	 assume	 she	 has	 discovered
something,	providing	a	compelling	reason	for	remaining	in	their	company.’
‘They	march	to	Kolanse.’


‘Indeed.’
‘And	we	don’t	know	why.’
The	handmaid	said	nothing.
Felash	sent	a	stream	of	smoke	ceilingward.	‘Tell	me	again	of	the	undead	in	the	Wastelands.’
‘Which	ones,	Highness?’
‘The	ones	who	move	as	dust	on	the	winds.’
The	 handmaid	 frowned.	 ‘At	 first	 I	 thought	 that	 they	 alone	 were	 responsible	 for	 the	 impenetrable	 cloud
defying	 my	 efforts.	 They	 number	 in	 the	 thousands,	 after	 all,	 and	 the	 one	 who	 leads	 them	 emanates	 such
blinding	power	that	I	dare	not	look	too	long	upon	it.	But	now	.	.	.	Highness,	there	are	others.	Not	dead	to	be
sure.	Even	so.	One	of	darkness	and	cold.	One	of	golden	fire	high	in	the	sky.	Another	at	his	side,	a	winged	knot
of	grief	harder	and	crueller	than	the	sharpest	cut	diamond.	Still	others,	hiding	in	the	howl	of	wolves—’
‘Wolves?’	Felash	cut	in.	‘Do	you	mean	the	Perish?’
‘No	and	yes,	Highness.	I	can	be	no	clearer	than	that.’
‘Wonderful.	Go	on.’
‘Yet	 another,	 fiercer	 and	 wilder	 than	 all	 the	 others.	 It	 hides	 inside	 stone.	 It	 swims	 in	 a	 sea	 thick	 with	 the
pungent	 flavours	 of	 serpents.	 It	 waits	 for	 the	 moment,	 and	 grows	 in	 its	 power,	 and	 facing	 it	 .	 .	 .	 Highness,
whatever	it	faces	is	more	dreadful	than	I	can	bear.’
‘This	clash—will	it	occur	on	the	Wastelands?’
‘I	believe	so,	yes.’
‘Do	you	think	my	mother	knows?’
The	handmaid	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘Highness,	I	cannot	imagine	her	cedas	to	be	anything	but	utterly	blind
and	thus	ignorant	of	that	threat.	It	is	only	because	I	am	able	to	see	from	this	distance,	from	the	outside,	as	it
were,	that	I	have	gleaned	as	much	as	I	have.’
‘Then	she	is	in	trouble.’
‘Yes.	I	think	so,	Highness.’
‘You	must	find	a	way,’	said	Felash,	‘to	reach	through	to	her.’
‘Highness.	There	is	one	way,	but	it	risks	much.’
‘Who	will	bear	that	risk?’
‘Everyone	aboard	this	ship.’
Felash	pulled	on	her	mouthpiece,	blew	rings	that	floated,	wavered	and	slowly	flattened	out,	drifting	to	form	a
chain	in	the	air.	Her	eyes	widened	upon	seeing	it.
The	handmaid	simply	nodded.	‘He	is	close,	yes.	My	mind	has	spoken	his	name.’
‘And	this	omen	here	before	us?’
‘Highness,	one	bargains	with	an	Elder	God	at	great	peril.	We	must	pay	in	blood.’
‘Whose	blood?’
The	handmaid	shook	her	head.
Felash	tapped	the	amber	tube	against	her	teeth,	thinking.	‘Why	is	the	sea	so	thirsty?’
Again,	there	was	no	possible	answer	to	that	question.	‘Highness?’
‘Has	the	damned	thing	a	name?	Do	you	know	it?’
‘Many	names,	of	course.	When	the	colonists	from	the	First	Empire	set	forth,	they	made	sacrifice	to	the	salty
seas	in	the	name	of	Jhistal.	The	Tiste	Edur	in	their	great	war	canoes	opened	veins	to	feed	the	foam,	and	this
red	froth	they	called	Bloodmane—in	the	Edur	language	that	word	was	Mael.	The	Jheck	who	live	upon	the	ice
call	 the	 dark	 waters	 beneath	 that	 ice	 the	 Lady	 of	 Patience,	 Barutalan.	 The	 Shake	 speak	 of	 Neral,	 the
Swallower.’
‘And	on.’
‘And	on,	Highness.’
Felash	sighed.	‘Summon	him,	and	we	shall	see	what	cost	this	bargain.’
‘As	you	command,	Highness.’
	
On	 the	 foredeck,	 Shurq	 Elalle	 straightened	 as	 the	 lookout	 cried	 out.	 She	 faced	 out	 to	 sea.	 That’s	 a	 squall.
Looks	to	be	a	bad	one.	Where	in	the	Errant’s	bung-hole	did	that	come	from?	‘Pretty!’
Skorgen	Kaban	clumped	into	view	from	amidships.	‘Seen	it,	Cap’n!’


‘Swing	 her	 out,	 Pretty.	 If	 it’s	 gonna	 bite,	 best	 we	 lock	 jaws	 with	 it.’	 The	 thought	 of	 the	 storm	 throwing
Undying	Gratitude	on	to	that	treefall	shore	wasn’t	a	pleasant	one,	not	in	the	least.
The	black	wire-wool	cloud	seemed	to	be	coming	straight	for	them.
‘Piss	in	the	boot,	this	dance	won’t	be	fun.’


Chapter	Twenty-Two
This	is	ancient	patience
belly	down	on	the	muds
lining	the	liana	shore.
Everyone	must	cross
rivers	in	high	flood.
Bright	blossoms	float
past	on	the	way	down
to	the	snake	mangroves
harbouring	the	warm	sea.
But	nothing	slides	smooth
into	the	swirling	waters
hunting	their	bold	beauty.
We	mill	uneasy	on	the	verge
awaiting	necessity’s
paroxysms—the	sudden	rush
to	cross	into	the	future.
Rivers	in	high	flood
dream	of	red	passages
and	the	lizards	will	feed
as	they	have	always	done.
We	bank	on	numbers,
the	chaotic	tumult,
the	frenzied	path	on	the	backs
of	loved	ones,	fathers	and
mothers,	the	quill-lickers
inscribing	lists	of	lives:
this	solid	stand,	that
slippage	of	desire.
Ancient	patience	swells
the	tongue,	all	the	names
written	in	tooth-row	jaws—
we	surge,	we	clamber	eyes
rolling	and	the	distant	shore
calls	to	us,	that	ribbed	future
holds	us	a	place	in	waiting.
But	the	river	scrolls	down
high	in	its	hungry	season
and	the	lizards	wallow	fat
in	the	late	afternoon	sun.
See	me	now	in	the	fleck
of	their	lazy	regard—and
now	I	wait	with	them,
for	the	coming	rains
	
THE	S EASON	OF	HIGH	FLOOD
GAM AS	ENICTEDON


	
Children	will	wander.	They	will	walk	as	if	the	future	did	not	exist.	Among	adults,	the	years	behind	one	force
focus	upon	what	waits	ahead,	but	with	children	this	is	not	so.	The	past	was	a	blur	of	befuddled	sensations,	the
future	was	white	as	the	face	of	the	sun.	Knowing	this	yielded	no	comfort.	Badalle	was	still	a	child,	should	one
imagine	her	of	a	certain	age,	but	she	walked	like	a	crone,	tottering,	hobbling.	Even	her	voice	belonged	to	an	old
woman.	And	the	dull,	fused	thing	behind	her	eyes	could	not	be	shaken	awake.
She	had	a	vague	recollection,	a	memory	or	an	invention,	of	looking	upon	an	ancient	woman,	a	grandmother
perhaps,	or	a	great	aunt.	Lying	shrunken	on	a	bed,	swaddled	in	wool	blankets.	Still	breathing,	still	blinking,	still
listening.	And	yet	those	eyes,	in	their	steady	watching,	their	grainy	observation,	showed	nothing.	The	stare	of	a
dying	person.	Eyes	spanning	a	gulf,	slowly	losing	grip	on	the	living	side	of	the	chasm,	soon	to	release	and	slide
to	the	side	of	death.	Did	those	eyes	feed	thoughts?	Or	had	things	reduced	to	mere	impressions,	blobs	of	colour,
blurred	motions—as	if	in	the	closing	of	death	one	simply	returned	to	the	way	things	had	been	for	a	newborn?
She	could	think	of	a	babe’s	eyes,	in	the	moments	and	days	after	arriving	in	the	world.	Seeing	but	not	seeing,	a
face	of	false	smiles,	the	innocence	of	not-knowing.
She	had	knelt	beside	a	nameless	boy,	there	on	the	very	edge	of	the	Crystal	City,	and	had	stared	into	his	eyes,
knowing	 he	 saw	 her,	 but	 knowing	 nothing	 else.	 He	 was	 beyond	 expression	 (oh,	 the	 horror	 of	 that,	 to	 see	 a
human	face	beyond	expression,	to	wonder	who	was	trapped	inside,	and	why	they’d	given	up	getting	out).	He’d
studied	 her	 in	 turn—she	 could	 see	 that	 much—and	 held	 her	 gaze,	 as	 if	 he’d	 wanted	 company	 in	 his	 last
moments	of	life.	She	would	not	have	turned	away,	not	for	anything.	The	gift	was	small	for	her,	but	all	she	had,
and	for	him,	perhaps	it	was	everything.
Was	 it	 as	 simple	 as	 that?	 In	 dying,	 did	 he	 offer,	 there	 in	 his	 eyes,	 a	 blank	 slate?	 Upon	 which	 she	 could
scribble	anything	she	liked,	anything	and	everything	that	eased	her	own	torment?
She’d	find	those	answers	when	her	death	drew	close.	And	she	knew	she	too	would	remain	silent,	watchful,
revealing	nothing.	And	her	eyes	would	look	both	beyond	and	within,	and	in	looking	within	she	would	find	her
private	truths.	Truths	that	belonged	to	her	and	no	one	else.	Who	cared	to	be	generous	in	those	final	moments?
She’d	be	past	easing	anyone	else’s	pain.
And	this	was	Badalle’s	deepest	fear.	To	be	so	selfish	with	the	act	of	dying.
She’d	 not	 even	 seen	 when	 the	 life	 left	 the	 boy’s	 eyes.	 Somehow,	 that	 moment	 was	 itself	 a	 most	 private
revelation.	 Recognition	 was	 slow,	 uncertainty	 growing	 leaden	 as	 she	 slowly	 comprehended	 that	 the	 eyes	 she
stared	into	gave	back	not	a	single	glimmer	of	light.	Gone.	He	is	gone.	Sunlight	cut	paths	through	the	prisms	of
crystal	walls,	giving	his	still	face	a	rainbow	mask.
He	 had	 probably	 been	 no	 more	 than	 ten	 years	 old.	 He’d	 come	 so	 far,	 only	 to	 fail	 at	 the	 very	 threshold	 of
salvation.	What	do	we	living	know	about	true	irony?	His	face	was	leather	skin	pulled	taut	over	bones.	The
huge	eyes	belonged	to	someone	else.	He’d	lost	his	eyelashes,	his	eyebrows.
Had	he	been	remembering	those	times	before	this	march?	That	other	world?	She	doubted	it.	She	was	older
and	she	remembered	very	little.	Patchy	images,	wrought	dreams	crowded	with	impossible	things.	Thick	green
leaves—a	 garden?	 Amphorae	 with	 glistening	 flanks,	 something	 wonderful	 in	 her	 mouth.	 A	 tongue	 free	 of
sores,	lips	devoid	of	splits,	a	flashing	smile—were	any	of	these	things	real?	Or	did	they	belong	to	her	fantastic
dreams	that	haunted	her	now	day	and	night?
I	grow	wings.	I	fly	across	the	world,	across	many	worlds.	I	fly	into	paradise	and	leave	desolation	in
my	 wake,	 because	 I	 feed	 on	 all	 that	 I	 see.	 I	 devour	 it	 whole.	 I	 am	 discoverer	 and	 destroyer	 both.
Somewhere	awaits	the	great	tomb,	the	final	home	of	my	soul.	I	will	find	it	yet.	Tomb,	palace,	when	you’re
dead	what’s	the	difference?	There	I	will	reside	for	ever,	embraced	by	my	insatiable	hunger.
She’d	 dreamed	 of	 children.	 Looking	 down	 from	 a	 great	 height.	 Watching	 them	 march	 in	 their	 tens	 of
thousands.	They	had	cattle,	mules	and	oxen.	Many	rode	horses.	They	glittered	blindingly	in	the	hard	sunlight,	as
if	they	bore	the	treasures	of	the	world	on	their	backs.	Children,	but	not	her	children.
And	then	the	day	ended	and	darkness	bled	to	the	earth,	and	she	dreamed	that	it	was	at	last	time	to	descend,
spiralling,	moaning	through	the	air.	She	would	strike	swiftly,	and	if	possible	unseen	by	any.	There	were	magics
below,	in	that	vast	multi-limbed	camp.	She	had	to	avoid	brushing	those.	If	need	be,	she	would	kill	to	silence,	but
this	was	not	her	true	task.
She	dreamed	her	eyes—and	she	had	more	of	those	than	she	should,	no	matter—fixed	upon	the	two	burning
spots	she	sought.	Bright	golden	hearth-flames—she	had	been	tracking	them	for	a	long	time	now,	in	service	to


the	commands	she	had	been	given.
She	was	descending	upon	the	children.
To	steal	fire.
Strange	dreams,	yes,	but	it	seemed	they	existed	for	a	reason.	The	deeds	done	within	them	had	purpose,	and
this	was	more	than	anything	real	could	manage.
The	Quitters	had	been	driven	away.	By	song,	by	poems,	by	words.	Brayderal,	the	betrayer	among	them,	had
vanished	into	the	city.	Rutt	oversaw	the	ribby	survivors,	and	everyone	slept	in	cool	rooms	in	buildings	facing	on
to	 a	 broad	 fountain	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 which	 stood	 a	 crystal	 statue	 weeping	 the	 sweetest	 water.	 It	 was	 never
quite	enough—not	for	them	all—and	the	basin	of	the	surrounding	pool	was	fissured	with	cracks	that	drank	with
endless	thirst.	But	they	were	all	managing	to	drink	just	enough	to	stay	alive.
Behind	a	glittering	building	they’d	found	an	orchard,	the	trees	of	a	type	none	had	seen	before.	Fruits	massed
on	the	branches,	each	one	long	and	sheathed	in	a	thick	skin	the	 colour	of	dirt.	The	pulp	within	was	soft	and
impossibly	 succulent.	 It	 filled	 the	 stomach	 with	 no	 pangs.	 They’d	 quickly	 eaten	 them	 all,	 but	 the	 next	 day
Saddic	had	found	another	orchard,	bigger	than	the	first	one,	and	then	yet	another.	Starvation	had	been	eluded.
For	now.
Of	 course,	 they	 continued	 to	 eat	 those	 children	 who	 for	 whatever	 reason	 still	 died—no	 one	 could	 think	 of
wasting	anything.	Never	again.
Badalle	walked	the	empty	streets	closer	to	the	city’s	heart.	A	palace	occupied	the	centre,	the	only	structure
in	the	city	that	had	been	systematically	destroyed,	smashed	down	as	if	with	giant	mallets	and	hammers.	From
the	mounds	of	shattered	crystals	Badalle	had	selected	a	shard	as	long	as	her	forearm.	Having	wrapped	rags
around	one	end	she	now	held	a	makeshift	weapon.
Brayderal	was	still	alive.	Brayderal	still	wanted	to	see	them	all	dead.	Badalle	meant	to	find	her	first,	find	her
and	kill	her.
As	she	walked,	she	whispered	her	special	poem.	Brayderal’s	poem.	Her	poem	of	killing.
	
‘Where	is	my	child	of	justice?
I	have	a	knife	that	will	speak	true
To	the	very	heart
Where	is	my	child	of	justice?
Spat	out	so	righteously
On	a	world	meant	to	kneel
In	slavery
Where	is	my	child	of	justice?
I	want	to	read	your	proof
Of	what	you	say	you	deserve
I	will	see	your	knife
Where	is	my	child	of	justice?
Let	us	lock	blades
You	claim	whatever	you	please
I	claim	no	right	but	you’
	
She	 had	 sailed	 down	 in	 her	 dreams.	 She	 had	 stolen	 fire.	 No	 blood	 had	 been	 shed,	 no	 magics	 were
awakened.	The	children	slept	on,	seeing	nothing,	peaceful	in	ignorance.	When	they	awoke,	they	would	face	the
rising	sun,	and	begin	the	day’s	march.
By	this	detail	alone	she	knew	that	these	children	were	indeed	strangers.
She’d	 looked	 upon	 the	 boy	 until	 life	 left	 him.	 Then,	 with	 Rutt	 and	 Saddic	 and	 two	 dozen	 others,	 she	 had
eaten	 him.	 Chewing	 on	 the	 stringy,	 bloody	 meat,	 she	 thought	 back	 to	 that	 look	 in	 his	 eyes.	 Knowing,	 calm,
revealing	nothing.
An	empty	gaze	cannot	accuse.	But	the	emptiness	was	itself	an	accusation.	Wasn’t	it?
	


When	Saddic	looked	upon	the	city	they’d	found	in	the	heart	of	the	Glass	Desert,	he	believed	he	was	seeing	the
structure	of	his	very	own	mind,	a	pattern	writ	on	a	colossal	scale,	but	in	its	crystalline	form	it	was	nevertheless
the	same	as	that	which	was	encased	in	his	own	skull.	Seeking	proof	of	this	notion,	he’d	left	the	others	behind,
even	Badalle,	and	set	out	to	explore,	not	from	street	to	street,	but	downward.
He	 soon	 discovered	 that	 most	 of	 the	 city	 was	 below	 ground.	 The	 crystals	 had	 settled	 deep	 roots,	 and
whatever	 light	 was	 trapped	 within	 prismatic	 walls	 up	 above	 sent	 down	 deeper,	 softer	 hues	 that	 flowed	 like
water.	 The	 air	 was	 cool,	 tasteless,	 neither	 dry	 nor	 damp.	 He	 felt	 as	 if	 he	 walked	 a	 world	 between	 breaths,
moving	through	that	momentary	pause	that	hovered,	motionless	on	all	sides,	and	not	even	the	muted	slap	of	his
bare	feet	could	break	this	sense	of	eternal	hesitation.
Vast	 caverns	 waited	 at	 the	 very	 base,	 a	 dozen	 or	 more	 levels	 down	 from	 the	 surface.	 Crystal	 walls	 and
domed	 ceilings,	 and	 as	 Saddic	 edged	 into	 the	 first	 of	 these,	 he	 understood	 the	 secret	 purpose	 of	 this	 city.	 It
wasn’t	 enough	 to	 build	 a	 place	 in	 which	 to	 live,	 a	 place	 with	 the	 comforting	 crowds	 of	 one’s	 own	 kind.	 It
wasn’t	 even	 enough	 to	 fashion	 things	 of	 beauty	 out	 of	 mundane	 necessity—the	 pretty	 fountains,	 the	 perfect
orchards	with	their	perfect	rows	of	ancient	trees,	the	rooms	of	startling	light	as	the	sun’s	glow	was	trapped	and
given	new	flavours,	the	tall	statues	of	tusked	demons	with	their	stern	yet	resolved	expressions	and	the	magical
way	the	sun	made	vertical	pupils	in	those	glittering	eyes—as	if	the	statues	watched	still,	alive	inside	the	precise
angles	of	translucent	stone.	None	of	these	were	sufficient	reason	for	building	this	city.	The	revelation	of	the
true	secret	was	down	here,	locked	away	and	destined	to	survive	until	oblivion	itself	came	to	devour	the	sun.
Above	on	the	surface,	the	buildings,	the	domes	and	spires	and	tilted	towers;	the	rooms	and	the	plazas	and
spiral	staircases:	they	each	marked	the	perfect	placement	of	a	single,	enormous	machine.	A	machine	of	light
and	colours.	But	not	just	light,	not	just	colours.
Saddic	walked	into	the	cavern,	breathless	with	wonder.
Each	 day,	 each	 moment	 he	 could	 manage,	 Saddic	 listened	 to	 the	 words	 of	 Badalle.	 He	 listened	 and	 he
watched	and	all	that	he	heard	and	all	that	he	saw	passed	through	his	surface,	shifted	and	bounced,	curled	and
bent	 until	 reaching	 the	 caverns	 of	 his	 memory,	 where	 they	 re-formed,	 precise	 and	 exact,	 destined	 to	 live	 on,
secure	in	perfection—for	as	long	as	Saddic	himself	remained	alive.
But	this	city	had	defeated	mortality	and,	he	realized,	it	had	defeated	time	as	well.
Far	above,	the	sun’s	light	fed	the	city’s	memories—all	the	life	it	had	once	held	within	its	chambers	and	halls,
on	its	streets	and	in	the	squares	with	their	fountains.	The	chaotic	angles	of	the	walls	around	him	flowed	with
scenes,	 murky	 and	 ghostly—not	 of	 Rutt	 and	 the	 children	 now	 dwelling	 above,	 but	 of	 the	 inhabitants	 of	 long,
long	ago,	persisting	here	for	all	eternity.
They	were	tall,	with	skin	the	colour	of	lichen.	Their	lower	jaws	bore	tusks	that	rose	up	to	frame	the	thinlipped	mouths.	Men	and	women	both	wore	long,	loose	clothing,	dyed	in	deep	but	vibrant	colours.	They	wore
braided	belts	of	grey	leather,	weaponless,	and	nowhere	could	Saddic	see	armour.	This	was	a	city	of	peace,	and
everywhere	 there	 was	 water.	 Flowing	 down	 building	 walls,	 swirling	 in	 pools	 surrounding	 fountains.	 Blossomfilled	gardens	bled	their	riotous	colours	into	rooms	and	down	colonnaded	hallways.
Saddic	walked	through	cavern	after	cavern,	seeing	all	that	had	once	been,	but	nowhere	could	he	find	those
moments	 that	 must	 have	 preceded	 the	 city’s	 death—or,	 rather,	 the	 fall	 of	 the	 tusked	 people	 and	 their	 rich
culture.	 Invaders?	 Desert	 savages?	 He	 could	 find	 nothing	 but	 the	 succession	 of	 seemingly	 endless	 days	 of
perfection	and	tranquillity.
The	scenes	seemed	to	seep	into	his	mind,	as	if	impressing	themselves	upon	his	own	crystalline	brain,	and	he
began	to	comprehend	details	of	things	he	had	no	way	of	knowing.	He	came	to	discover	the	city’s	name.	He
saw	 the	 likeness	 in	 the	 statues	 and	 realized	 that	 they	 all	 belonged	 to	 the	 same	 individual,	 and	 that	 variations
arose	solely	from	the	eyes	of	the	sculptors	and	their	skill	as	artists.	And,	as	he	drew	closer	to	what	he	knew
was	the	centre	of	the	city,	to	its	most	cherished	heart,	he	now	saw	other	creatures.	In	what	seemed	peaceful
co-existence,	huge	two-legged	reptiles	began	appearing	in	scenes.
These	 were	 the	 ones	 Badalle	 had	 spoken	 about.	 The	 ones	 who	 had	 found	 the	 city,	 but	 Saddic	 now	 knew
more	than	she	did.	They’d	found	it,	yes,	but	it	had	not	been	empty.	In	finding	it,	they	found	the	ones	who	dwelt
in	it,	who	called	it	their	home.
They	 were	 called	 Jaghut.	 Returned	 to	 this	 way	 of	 living,	 in	 the	 cities	 they	 had	 abandoned	 long
before.	 They	 were	 drawn	 to	 a	 humble	 man,	 a	 half-blood.	 They	 were	 drawn	 to	 his	 great	 machine	 of
memories,	this	place	he	made	by	his	own	hand.	What	he	did	not	possess	within	him,	he	built	around	him.


To	trap	all	that	he	was.
The	city	is	called	Icarias.
He	left	a	cavern,	walked	down	a	twisting	passage	murky	with	dark	hues,	and	came	upon	the	buried	heart	of
the	city.
Saddic	cried	out.
Before	him,	in	a	chamber	more	massive	than	any	of	the	others	.	.	.	Darkness.	Destruction.	The	roots	were
dead,	unfed	by	light	from	above.	Fissures	split	the	crystals.
Broken.	His	heart	is	broken.
	
Brayderal	 sat,	 knees	 drawn	 up	 and	 arms	 wrapped	 tightly	 round	 them,	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 a	 small	 room	 on	 the
fourth	 level	 of	 a	 tower.	 She	 had	 escaped	 her	 captors,	 leaving	 her	 alone	 with	 her	 grief	 and	 torment.	 She	 had
drawn	her	kin	to	their	deaths.	She	should	have	killed	Badalle	long	ago,	the	first	moment	she	sensed	the	power
of	the	girl.
Badalle	had	shattered	the	Inquisitors.	She	had	taken	their	own	words	and	thrown	them	back,	and	precious
blood	had	spilled	on	to	the	shard-studded	ground.	At	least	two	of	them	had	died,	the	other	two	retreating	with
grievous	 wounds.	 If	 they	 still	 breathed,	 somewhere	 out	 there,	 it	 would	 not	 be	 for	 much	 longer.	 They	 had	 no
food,	no	water	and	no	shelter,	and	each	day	the	sun	lit	the	sky	on	fire.
Badalle	 needed	 to	 die.	 Brayderal	 had	 raided	 an	 orchard	 not	 yet	 found	 by	 the	 others.	 She	 could	 feel	 her
strength	 returning,	 her	 belly	 full	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 months.	 But	 guilt	 and	 loneliness	 had	 stolen	 all	 her	 will.
Worse	yet,	this	city	itself	assailed	her.	Whatever	force	still	lingered	here	was	inimical	to	the	Forkrul	Assail.	A
despiser	of	justice—she	could	almost	taste	its	contempt	for	her.
Were	the	others	hunting	her?	She	believed	they	were.	And	if	they	found	her	they	would	kill	her.	They	would
rend	 her	 flesh	 from	 her	 bones	 and	 eat	 until	 their	 stomachs	 were	 swollen.	 Perhaps	 that	 was	 fitting.	 Perhaps,
indeed,	it	served	a	kind	of	justice,	the	kind	that	recognized	the	price	of	failure.
Still,	 could	 she	 kill	 Badalle	 .	 .	 .	 Rutt	 alone	 was	 not	 enough	 to	 oppose	 her.	 Saddic	 was	 nothing	 more	 than
Badalle’s	pet.	Standing	over	Badalle’s	cold	corpse,	Brayderal	could	command	the	others	to	obedience.	Yield,
kneel	.	.	.	die.	Wasn’t	it	what	they	wanted?	The	purest	peace	of	all.
She	 stiffened,	 breath	 catching,	 as	 she	 heard	 sounds	 from	 somewhere	 outside.	 Rising	 into	 a	 crouch,
Brayderal	edged	out	of	the	corner	and	approached	the	window	overlooking	the	ruins	of	the	palace.	She	peered
out.
Badalle.	Wielding	a	crystal	sword—but	not	just	any	fragment,	no,	this	was	from	the	palace.	It	blazed	in	the
girl’s	 hand,	 blinding	 enough	 to	 make	 Brayderal	 snatch	 her	 head	 back	 in	 pain.	 The	 palace	 was	 destroyed,	 yet
somehow	it	lived	on.
She	hated	this	city.
And	now	it	is	Badalle	who	hunts	me.	She	will	drive	that	shard	into	my	chest,	and	it	will	drink	deep.
She	needed	to	hide.
	
Badalle	turned	at	a	scuffing	sound	from	one	of	the	towers,	catching	a	glimpse	of	a	face	pulling	back	from	a
small	window	halfway	up.	Was	it	time,	then?	So	soon?
She	could	unleash	the	power	of	her	voice.	She	could,	she	knew,	compel	Brayderal	to	come	to	her.	She	had
been	able	to	overwhelm	four	adult	Quitters.	One	of	their	children,	weak	and	alone,	would	be	unable	to	defend
herself.
But	she	wanted	this	death	to	be	a	silent	one.	After	all,	the	battle	between	these	two	forces	of	righteousness
had	 already	 been	 decided.	 The	 peace	 that	 was	 death	 had	 been	 rejected.	 But	 of	 course	 we	 have	 been
fighting	that	war	since	the	very	beginning.	Fighting,	and	now	we	have	won.	It’s	over.
Would	 they	 live	 here	 for	 ever	 then?	 Could	 the	 orchards	 sustain	 them?	 What	 would	 they	 do?	 Was	 simple
survival	enough	reason	to	go	on	living?	What	of	dreams?	Desires?	What	kind	of	society	would	they	shape?
No,	this	is	not	enough.	We	cannot	stay	here.	It’s	not	enough.
Killing	Brayderal	will	achieve	nothing.	No.	I	have	a	better	answer.
She	raised	her	voice.	‘Child	of	justice!	This	city	is	not	for	you!	You	are	banished!	Return	to	your	kind,	if	you
can.	GO!’


She	heard	a	weak	cry	from	the	tower.	The	Quitters	had	driven	them	from	their	homes,	from	their	families.	It
was	fitting,	then,	that	she	now	drive	from	her	home	a	Quitter.	My	home,	my	family.	Not	hers,	it	was	never
hers.	This	family,	it	is	mine.	And	wherever	they	are,	they	are	my	home.
They	were	done	with	Brayderal.
Badalle	set	off	to	return	to	Rutt	and	Held	and	Saddic.	There	were	things	to	discuss.	A	new	purpose	to	find.
Something	beyond	just	surviving.	Something	we	deserve.	For	we	have	earned	the	freedom	to	choose.
She	 glanced	 down	 at	 her	 makeshift	 sword.	 It	 seemed	 unaccountably	 bright,	 as	 if	 gathering	 all	 the	 light	 it
could	 drink.	 Golden	 flames	 seemed	 to	 glitter	 in	 its	 heart.	 It	 was	 beautiful,	 yes,	 but	 there	 was	 something	 else
there.	Something	of	power	.	.	.	a	terrible	power.
She	remembered,	from	somewhere,	tales	about	weapons,	and	those	weapons	were	given	names.	Thus.	She
would	name	hers	Fire.
	
Fuck!	 Fiddler	 spun	 away	 from	 the	 three	 worried	 faces,	 the	 sets	 of	 frightened	 eyes,	 the	 twitches	 of	 incipient
panic.	 He	 scanned	 the	 ground.	 ‘Stay	 where	 you	 are,’	 he	 told	 the	 heavies.	 ‘No,	 wait.	 Shortnose,	 go	 and	 get
Bottle.	 Flashwit,	 you	 and	 Mayfly	 enforce	 a	 cordon	 round	 here,	 especially	 their	 tent.	 No	 one	 gets	 in,
understood?’
Solemn	nods	from	the	soldiers,	and	then	Shortnose	set	off	at	a	lumbering	run.
On	 all	 sides,	 the	 camp	 was	 breaking,	 tents	 dropping	 down,	 stakes	 rocked	 loose	 from	 the	 hard	 stony	 soil.
Soldiers	shouted,	complained	and	bickered.	The	smell	of	spicy	food	from	the	kitchen	tents	wafted	in	the	cool
morning	 air.	 Closer	 by,	 two	 other	 squads	 were	 looking	 over,	 uneasy,	 bereft	 of	 answers.	 They’d	 slept	 sound,
they	said.	Heard	nothing.
Fiddler’s	 gaze	 drew	 back	 to	 the	 tent.	 Slashed	 to	 ribbons.	 Inside—what	 was	 left	 of	 inside—the	 cots	 bore
rumpled	 bedding.	 But	 no	 blood.	 Fuck.	 Fuck	 and	 fire.	 His	 breath	 slowly	 hissed	 as	 he	 resumed	 studying	 the
ground,	 seeking	 tracks,	 signs	 of	 a	 scuffle,	 anything.	 Nothing	 caught	 his	 eyes.	 Too	 scared	 to	 concentrate.
Where	in	Hood’s	name	is	Bottle?
Flashwit	had	come	 to	him	 half	a	 bell	earlier.	He’d	barely	 crawled	 out	from	his	 tent	 to	find	 her	 standing	in
front	of	him,	a	look	of	dread	on	her	broad	face.
‘They’re	gone,	Sergeant.’
‘What?	Who’s	gone?’
‘Their	tent’s	all	cut	up,	but	no	bodies—’
‘Flashwit,	what	are	you	talking	about?	Whose	tent?	Who’s	gone?’
‘Our	sergeant	and	corporal.	Gone.’
‘Gesler?	Stormy?’
‘Their	tent’s	all	cut	up.’
Not	 cut	 up,	 he	 discovered,	 after	 following	 Flashwit	 back	 to	 the	 Fifth	 Squad’s	 camp.	 Slashed.	 The	 thick
canvas	was	rent	from	all	sides,	with	what	must	have	been	frenzied	zeal.	And	of	Gesler	and	Stormy	there	was
no	sign.	Their	weapons	and	armour	were	gone	as	well.	And	the	heavies	were	in	tents	to	either	side—barely
room	to	walk	between	them,	and	in	the	dark	with	all	the	guy	ropes	and	stakes	.	.	.	no,	this	doesn’t	make
sense.
He	turned	to	see	Shortnose	and	Bottle	jogging	up	to	where	stood	Mayfly—who	held	out	thick	arms	as	if	to
bar	their	passage.
‘Let	’em	through,	Mayfly—but	no	one	else.	Not	yet,	anyway.	Bottle,	get	over	here.’
‘What’s	this	I	hear	about	Gesler	and	Stormy	deserting?’
Fiddler	almost	cuffed	the	man.	Instead,	he	hissed,	‘Ain’t	nobody’s	deserted—but	now	that	rumour’s	on	its
way,	isn’t	it?	Idiot.’
‘Sorry,	Sergeant—it’s	too	damned	early	in	the	morning	for	me	to	be	thinking	straight.’
‘Better	wake	up	fast,’	Fiddler	snapped.	He	pointed	at	the	tent.	‘Look	for	signs,	all	round	it.	Someone	had	to
walk	in	to	get	that	close.	And	if	you	find	a	single	drop	of	blood	let	me	know—but	quietly,	understood?’
Licking	his	lips	as	he	eyed	the	ravaged	tent,	Bottle	nodded,	and	then	edged	past	his	sergeant.
Fiddler	 unstrapped	 and	 drew	 off	 his	 helm.	 He	 wiped	 sweat	 from	 his	 brow.	 Glared	 across	 at	 the	 nearby
squads.	‘Wake	up	your	sergeants	and	all	of	you	make	sure	we	got	a	full	cordon!’	The	soldiers	jumped.	Fiddler
knew	 that	 news	 of	 his	 sickness	 had	 gone	 through	 the	 ranks—he’d	 been	 down	 for	 days,	 stinking	 with	 fever.


Standing	close	to	Anomander	Rake	had	been	miserable	enough,	he	recalled,	but	nothing	compared	to	this.	He
didn’t	need	the	Deck	of	Dragons	to	know	what	he	knew.	Besides,	nowhere	in	the	Deck	would	he	find	a	card
called	 the	 Consort	 of	 Darkness.	 At	 least,	 not	 that	 he	 knew	 of,	 though	 sometimes	 powers	 were	 of	 such
magnitude,	 such	 insistence,	 that	 they	 could	 bleed	 the	 paint	 off	 a	 minor	 card	 and	 usurp	 it.	 Maybe	 that	 had
happened	with	his	Deck—but	he	wasn’t	about	to	shuffle	through	for	a	look.	In	any	case,	his	being	down	had
scared	people—damned	unfair,	but	there	it	was,	nothing	Fiddler	could	do	about	it.	And	now	that	he	was	back
on	his	feet,	well,	he	could	see	far	too	much	undisguised	relief	in	too	many	eyes.
The	older	he	got,	he	realized,	the	more	sensitive	his	talent—if	it	could	be	called	talent.	He	preferred	curse.
Now	Rake	went	and	got	himself	killed.	Unbelievable.	Insane.	Dragnipur	is	in	pieces.	Oh	sure,	Rake
and	 Hood	 made	 sure	 most	 of	the	 monsters	 chained	within	 it	 were	 wiped	 out—nice	deal,	 that.	 Chained
souls	 and	 Hood’s	 own	 menagerie	 of	 scary	 malcontents,	 all	 fed	 into	 Chaos.	 ‘The	 dead	 will	 sleep,	 and
sleep	for	evermore.’	Amen.
He	clawed	at	his	beard.	Barely	three	days	on	foot	again—he	still	felt	wobbly—and	now	this.	They’ve	been
snatched.	 Right	 out	 from	 the	 middle	 of	 a	 whole	 damned	 army.	 Gesler.	 Stormy.	 Why	 them?	 Oh	 don’t	 be
obtuse,	Fid.	They	were	annealed	in	the	Forge	of	Thyrllan.	Ascendants	both.
So	think	about	that.	Gesler—he	can	throw	a	punch	heavy	enough	to	stagger	a	god.	Stormy	can	swing
a	sword	through	three	bodies	if	he’s	mad	enough.	But	.	.	.	not	a	drop	of	blood—
‘Found	a	drop	of	blood,	Sergeant.’
Bottle	was	suddenly	at	his	side,	head	lowered,	voice	barely	a	whisper.
‘Just	one?’
‘Well,	maybe	two	drops	together.	A	dollop?	It’s	thick	and	it	stinks.’
Fiddler	scowled	at	the	man.	‘Stinks?’
‘Not	human	blood.’
‘Oh,	great.	Demonic?’
‘More	like	.	.	.	rhizan.’
Rhizan?	‘This	ain’t	the	time	for	jokes,	Bottle—’
‘I’m	 not.	 Listen.	 There’s	 not	 a	 trace,	 not	 a	 single	 footprint	 beyond	 the	 kind	 soldiers	 make—and	 we	 both
know	it	wasn’t	no	soldiers	jumped	the	tent	and	the	two	men	inside	it.	Unless	they	had	talons	long	as	swords,
and	it	was	talons	that	did	in	that	tent.	But	the	hands	they	belonged	to	were	huge.	It	gets	stranger,	Sergeant—’
‘Hold	on.	Let	me	think	a	moment.’	Rhizan?	Flit	around	at	night,	eating	insects,	small	bats	.	.	.	winged.
They	got	fucking	wings!	‘It	came	down	out	of	the	sky.	Of	course,	it’s	bloody	obvious	now.	That’s	why	there’s
no	tracks.	It	just	dropped	straight	down	on	to	the	tent—’
‘Then	someone	should’ve	heard	it—at	the	very	least,	Ges	and	Stormy	would’ve	been	screaming.’
‘Aye,	that	part	still	doesn’t	scry.’
‘Let	me	examine	the	tent,	Sergeant—pick	it	apart,	I	mean.’
‘Go	ahead.’	Fiddler	walked	over	to	Shortnose.	‘Another	trip	for	you.	Find	Captain	Faradan	Sort,	and	maybe
Fist	 Keneb.	 And	 Quick	 Ben—aye,	 get	 Quick	 Ben	 first	 and	 send	 him	 here.	 And	 listen,	 Shortnose,	 don’t	 say
nothing	 about	 desertions—we	 already	 got	 enough	 of	 those.	 Gesler	 and	 Stormy	 didn’t	 desert—they	 were
kidnapped.’
Shortnose	shook	his	head.	‘We	ain’t	seen	or	heard	nothing,	Sergeant—and	I’m	a	light	sleeper.	Stupid	light,	in
fact.’
‘I’m	 guessing	 some	 kind	 of	 sorcery	 silenced	 the	 whole	 thing.	 And	 the	 demon	 was	 winged.	 It	 just	 picked
them	both	up	and	flew	off	into	the	night.	Now,	go	on,	Shortnose.’
‘All	right.	Quick	Ben,	Sort	and	then	Keneb.’
‘Right.’	Turning	back,	he	saw	Bottle	on	his	hands	and	knees,	lifting	up	shreds	of	canvas.	The	soldier	looked
up,	nodded	him	over.
Fiddler	joined	him,	crouching	at	his	side.	‘What	is	it?’
‘Everything	stinks,	Sergeant.	Feel	this	cloth—it’s	oily.’
‘That’s	what	keeps	’em	waterproof—’
‘Not	this	stuff.	This	stuff	smells	like	a	lizard’s	armpit.’
Fiddler	stared	at	Bottle,	wondering	when	the	fool	last	jammed	his	nose	into	a	lizard’s	armpit,	then	decided
that	some	questions	just	should	never	be	asked.	‘Enkar’al?	Could	be,	but	it	would	have	had	to	have	been	a	big


one,	old,	probably	female.	And	somehow	it	got	its	hands	round	both	their	mouths,	or	round	their	necks.’
‘Then	Ges	and	Stormy	are	dead,’	whispered	Bottle.
‘Quiet,	I’m	still	working	through	this.	I	can’t	recall	ever	seeing	an	enkar’al	big	enough	to	fly	carrying	two
full-grown	 men.	 So,	 Locqui	 Wyval?	 Draconic	 lapdogs?	 Not	 a	 chance.	 A	 bull	 enkar’al	 masses	 more	 than	 a
wyval.	But	then,	wyval	fly	in	packs—in	clouds,	I	think	it’s	called—so	if	a	dozen	came	down,	striking	fast	.	.	.
maybe.	But	all	those	wing-beats	.	.	.	no,	somebody’d	hear	the	ruckus	for	certain.	So,	not	wyval	and	probably
not	an	enkar’al.	What’s	that	leave	us	with?’
Bottle	stared	at	him.	‘Dragon.’
‘Do	dragons	smell	like	rhizan	armpits?’
‘How	the	Hood	would	I	know?’	Bottle	demanded.
‘Calm	down,	sorry	I	asked.’
‘But	it	doesn’t	 work	anyway,’	 said	Bottle	after	a	 moment.	 ‘The	 slashed	tent—the	rents	aren’t	big	enough
for	a	dragon’s	talons,	or	teeth.	And	if	a	dragon	did	swoop	down,	wouldn’t	it	just	pick	up	the	whole	thing?	Tent,
people,	cots,	the	whole	works?’
‘Good	point.	So,	we’re	back	to	a	giant	rhizan?’
‘I	was	just	saying	what	it	smelled	like,	Sergeant.	I	didn’t	mean	a	real	rhizan,	or	even	one	of	those	slightly
bigger	ones	we	got	round	here.’
‘If	it	wasn’t	for	the	wings,’	muttered	Fiddler,	‘I	might	think	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘They	died	out	a	hundred	thousand	years	ago,	Sergeant.	Maybe	even	longer.	Even	the	ones	Hedge	went	up
against	at	Black	Coral—they	were	undead,	so	probably	stinking	of	crypts,	not	oil.’
Quick	 Ben	 arrived,	 pushing	 through	 the	 crowd	 that	 had	 gathered.	 ‘Shortnose	 said	 something	 about—shit,
they	have	a	cat	fight	or	something?’
‘Snatched,’	 said	 Fiddler.	 ‘Something	 with	 wings.	 Big	 enough	 to	 shut	 them	 both	 up—not	 a	 sound,	 Quick.
Smells	like	magic—’
‘Like	lizards,	you	mean,’	cut	in	Bottle.	‘Look	at	this,	High	Mage.’
Quick	Ben	held	out	a	hand	and	Bottle	gave	him	the	strip	of	canvas.	‘Lizards,	Bottle?’
‘Feel	the	oil?’
‘This	is	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘They	ain’t	got	wings,’	objected	Fiddler.
But	Quick	Ben	was	squinting	skyward.	Under	his	breath	he	said,	‘Some	do.’
‘But	no	one	heard	a	damned	thing,	Quick.’
‘The	 oil	 is	 like	 the	 breath	 of	 a	 dragon,	 Fid.	 Just	 not	 as	 virulent.	 It	 came	 down,	 sprayed	 the	 tent,	 took	 off
again.	 The	 stuff	 soaked	 through,	 filled	 the	 air	 in	 the	 tent,	 and	 inside	 you	 could	 have	 knocked	 their	 heads
together	 and	 neither	 one	 would’ve	 woken	 up.	 So	 it	 came	 back	 down,	 sliced	 through	 the	 tent	 to	 keep	 all	 the
guys	and	stakes	in	place,	and	took	them	both.’
‘You	can’t	know	all	this—’	Bottle	began	but	stopped	at	a	look	from	Fiddler.
Quick	 Ben.	 You	 snake-eyed	 shifty	 know-it-all	 bastard	 from	 the	 bung-hole	 of	 Seven	 Cities.	 I	 never
liked	you.	Never	trusted	you,	even	when	I	had	to.	The	things	you	know	about,	why	I—
Bottle	blurted,	‘Quick!	The	strings	you	tied!	They	weren’t	snapped?	Then	they’re	still	alive,	right?	You	tied
strings	to	them—to	Gesler	and	Stormy—you	did,	didn’t	you?’
‘Got	lazy,’	Quick	Ben	said	with	a	slow	blink.	‘Had	too	many.	It	was	hard	concentrating,	so	I	cut	down	on
them,	Bottle.	Didn’t	even	think	about	Ges	and	Stormy.’
‘You’re	lying.’
‘Head	back	to	the	squad,	Bottle,’	said	Fiddler.	‘Help	Tarr	get	us	ready	to	march.’
‘Sergeant—’
‘Get	out	of	here,	soldier.’
Bottle	hesitated,	and	then,	jabbing	a	warning	finger	at	Quick	Ben,	he	stalked	off.
‘Strings	still	humming,	Quick?’
‘Listen,	Fid.	I	cut	’em,	just	like	I	told	Bottle—’
‘Don’t	even	try.’
‘Yeah,	well,	you	ain’t	Whiskeyjack,	are	you?	I	don’t	have	to	answer	to	you.	I’m	High	Mage	now	and	that
means—’


‘It	means	do	I	have	to	talk	to	the	Adjunct	directly?	Or	are	you	gonna	keep	spinning	round	on	that	flagpole?
How	long	can	you	keep	up	the	puckered	butt,	Quick?’
‘All	right.	They’re	alive.	I	know	that	much.’
‘Close	by?’
‘No.	A	Shi’gal	Assassin	can	fly	two	hundred	leagues	in	a	single	night.’
A	what?	Never	mind.	‘Why	those	two?’
‘No	idea—’
‘I	hear	the	Adjunct’s	a	damned	dragon	herself	these	days—’
‘Fine.	I	figure	someone	needed	them.’
‘A	shigral	assassin	K’Chain	Che’Malle	needed	Gesler	and	Stormy?’
‘Shi’gal.	But	they	don’t	go	rogue,	not	this	way,	anyway.	Meaning	it	was	sent.	To	find	them.’
‘Sent	by	who?’
Quick	Ben	licked	his	lips,	looked	away	and	then	shrugged.	‘A	Matron,	obviously.’
‘A	Matron?	A	K’Chain	Che’Malle	Matron?	A	real	live	breathing	K’Chain	Che’Malle	Matron?’
‘Keep	it	down,	will	you?	People	are	looking.	We	can—’
Fiddler’s	helm	caught	the	High	Mage	flush	on	the	side	of	his	head.	Watching	the	wizard	fall	in	a	heap	was,
for	Fiddler,	the	most	satisfying	experience	he’d	known	in	years.
He	stepped	back,	glared	round.	‘High	Mage	Quick	Ben	needs	to	commune	with	his	gods.	Now,	all	of	you,
finish	breaking	your	camps—we	march	in	half	a	bell!	Go!’
Fiddler	stood,	waiting	for	the	captain	and	Fist	Keneb.	His	threats	about	the	Adjunct	had	come	back	to	sink
fangs	 deep	 into	 his	 backside.	 They’d	 need	 to	 talk	 to	 her.	 With	 Quick	 Ben	 up	 and	 awake	 and	 cornered	 with
nowhere	 to	 hide.	 She	 could	 take	 over	wresting	 answers	 from	 the	 smug	 bastard.	For	 himself	 .	 .	 .	 he	 glanced
down	at	the	unconscious	wizard	.	.	.	he’d	had	enough.
Never	 liked	 him.	 Need	 him,	 count	 on	 him,	 pray	 for	 him,	 love	 him,	 aye.	 But	 like	 him?	 Not	 a	 chance.
Goatsticker,	dollmaker,	souleater.	Probably	Soletaken	or	D’ivers,	too,	if	I’m	any	judge	of	things.
Whiskeyjack,	did	you	hear	the	sound	it	made	hitting	his	head?	This	old	helm	of	mine?	Did	it	stir	the
dead	all	around	you?	Did	you	all	sit	up,	rush	to	the	Gate?	You	looking	in	on	us	right	now,	Sarge?	Hey,
all	you	Bridgeburners.	How’d	I	do?
	
Fist	Keneb	had	ridden	out	alone	just	before	dawn,	passing	through	bleary-eyed	pickets	and	cantering	eastward
until	the	sun	broke	the	distant	horizon.	He	reined	in	on	a	slight	rise	and	sat	slumped	in	the	saddle,	steam	rising
from	his	horse,	low	mists	scudding	over	the	broken	ground	as	the	air	slowly	warmed.
The	 Wastelands	 stretched	 before	 him.	 To	 his	 right	 and	 now	 slightly	 behind	 him,	 the	 vague	 smudge	 of	 the
Saphii	Mountains	rumpled	the	southern	skyline.	He	was	exhausted,	but	insomnia	plagued	Keneb.	He	had	been
more	 or	 less	 running	 the	 Bonehunters	 since	 leaving	 Lether.	 Fist	 Blistig	 had	 done	 his	 best	 to	 evade	 the
responsibilities	of	command—he	was	in	the	habit	of	wandering	among	his	soldiers	in	the	evenings,	eager	to	tell
tales	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs	and	the	Fall	at	Aren,	as	if	no	one	had	heard	them	a	dozen	times	before.	He’d	drink
with	 them	 and	 laugh	 overloud	 and	 play	 at	 being	 a	 comrade	 of	 no	 special	 rank.	 As	 a	 consequence,	 he	 was
viewed	with	amused	contempt	by	his	soldiers.	They	had	enough	friends.	They	didn’t	need	their	Fist	spreading
his	hams	on	a	crate	at	the	fire,	passing	a	jug.	Such	nights	should	be	rare	events,	on	the	eve	of	battle,	perhaps,
but	even	then	no	one	should	ever	be	permitted	to	forget	an	officer’s	position.
Blistig	 wanted	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	 lads.	 But	 he	 was	 a	 Fist	 by	 rank,	 and	 that	 meant	 standing	 apart	 from	 his
soldiers.	Staying	watchful,	aye,	but	ever	ready	to	command	and	expecting	that	command	to	be	followed.	He
was	supposed	to	lead,	damn	him.	At	the	morning	briefing	sessions	Blistig	sat	scowling,	hungover,	thick-tongued
and	 bored.	 He	 ventured	 no	 ideas	 and	 looked	 upon	 every	 suggestion	 with	 something	 between	 disbelief	 and
outright	derision.
We	need	better	than	that.	I	need	better	than	that.
The	 Adjunct	 had	 the	 right	 to	 expect	 that	 her	 Fists	 could	 manage	 the	 army	 on	 this	 march.	 She	 had	 other
issues	 to	chew	 on,	 whatever	 they	were—and	 Keneb	 was	 nowhere	 near	 close	 enough	to	 even	imagine	 what
they	might	be;	in	fact,	no	one	was,	not	even	Lostara	Yil.
There	were	two	sub-Fists,	each	commanding	regulars—foot,	skirmishers,	scouts	and	archers—and	Keneb
found	he	was	growing	far	too	dependent	on	them	with	the	logistical	demands.	They	had	enough	of	their	own


concerns	 to	 deal	 with,	 after	 all.	 But	 both	 were	 veteran	 officers,	 seasoned	 campaigners,	 and	 Keneb	 drew
heavily	on	their	experience—though	he	often	felt	as	he	once	had	when	he’d	been	a	 young	captain	 under	 the
stubbled	 wing	 of	 a	 sergeant.	 Neither	 Hobble	 nor	 Kellant	 likely	 had	 much	 good	 to	 say	 about	 him	 behind	 his
back.
Aye,	that’s	the	truth	of	it.	I	just	managed	as	a	captain.	I’m	far	past	my	level	of	competence	here,	and
it’s	showing.
The	 Wastelands	 looked	 forbidding.	 Perhaps	 even	 more	 lifeless	 than	 the	 worst	 stretches	 of	 Seven	 Cities—
between	 Aren	 and	 Raraku,	 or	 that	 northwest	 push	 to	 the	 walls	 of	 Y’Ghatan.	 He’d	 managed	 to	 acquire	 an
honest	list	of	warlocks	and	witches	among	the	ranks,	those	possessing	magics	that	could	conjure	forth	edible
plants,	small	mammals,	insects	and	such	from	even	the	most	miserable	of	lands.	And	water,	as	well.	To	stretch
out	the	supplies	they	carried,	he	had	them	hard	at	work	supplementing	daily	rations	allotted	each	squad.
But	 the	 complaints	 had	 already	 begun.	 ‘These	 Wastelands,	 Fist,	 are	 well	 named.	 Damn	 near	 sucked
lifeless	underfoot.	Finding	stuff	is	starting	to	hurt.’
Do	what	you	can.	It’s	all	I	can	ask.
A	more	useless	response	from	an	officer	was	beyond	his	imagining,	and	what	soured	the	most	were	his	own
recollections	of	receiving	such	inane	replies	from	his	commanders	all	those	years	ago.	At	last	he	understood
the	helplessness	they	often	suffered,	when	attempting	to	deal	with	something	that	couldn’t	be	dealt	with;	with
things	and	forces	beyond	any	hope	of	control.	Just	say	what	you	can,	and	look	confident	and	reassuring
when	saying	it.	Nobody	buys	it,	and	both	sides	know	that	fact,	so	what’s	really	being	acknowledged	is
the	motions	we	both	go	through.
Indeed,	 he	 was	 beginning	 to	 truly	 understand	 the	 burdens	 of	 command,	 a	 phrase	 he	 used	 to	 scoff	 at	 and
mock	derisively.	Burden,	sir?	Try	carrying	this	kit	pack	on	your	shoulders	all	day,	up	and	down	hills	and
worse.	 What	 do	 you	 know	 about	 burdens?	 Shut	 that	 whining,	 sir,	 before	 I	 slide	 my	 knife	 across	 your
scrawny	throat.
What	did	Blistig	know	about	the	Whirlwind?	He’d	been	cosy	behind	the	walls	of	Aren,	commanding	a	bored
garrison.	But	 I	 was	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 it.	 Half-dead	 of	 wounds	 before	 Kalam	 Mekhar	 showed	 up.	 Sister,
where	 are	 you	 now?	 Was	 turning	 your	 back	 on	 him	 worth	 it?	 Keneb	 shook	 his	 head.	 His	 thoughts	 were
wandering,	exhaustion	pulling	loose	the	tethers.	What	haunts	me	now?	Yes,	now	I	remember.	The	army.
Without	 hate,	 what	 army	 could	 function?	 Unquestionably,	 other	 things	 were	 needed:	 respect,	 duty,	 the
slippery	notions	of	honour	and	courage,	and	above	all	of	those,	the	comradeship	between	soldiers	and	all	the
responsibilities	that	created.	But	hate	had	a	role,	didn’t	it?	Useless	officers,	unreasonable	orders,	the	pervasive
conviction	that	the	ones	in	overall	command	were	all	incompetent	idiots.	But	then,	all	of	that	means	we’re	all
in	this	together—we’re	all	trapped	in	this	insane	bloated	family	where	every	rule	of	behaviour	strains
near	to	snapping.
And	 we’re	 a	 family	 bred	 to	 answer	 everything	 with	 violence.	 Is	 it	 any	 wonder	 we’re	 all	 so	 badly
messed	up?
He	heard	the	pounding	of	horse	hoofs	and	twisted	round	in	his	saddle	to	see	a	soldier	from	his	staff	quickly
approaching.
Now	what?
But	then,	he	didn’t	really	want	to	know.	Any	more	desertions,	real	or	otherwise,	and	he’d	start	to	hear	the
spine	cracking,	and	he	dreaded	that	sound	more	than	anything	else,	because	it	would	mean	that	he	had	truly
failed.	The	Adjunct	set	this	one	task	upon	him,	and	he’d	proved	unequal	to	it,	and	as	a	consequence	the	entire
Bonehunters	army	was	falling	apart.
Blistig	needed	to	be	pushed	aside.	He	could	think	of	a	number	of	officers	sharp	enough	to	take	on	the	role	of
Fist.	 Faradan	 Sort,	 Raband,	 Ruthan	 Gudd.	 Kindly.	 Kindly,	 now	 there’s	 an	 idea.	 Has	 seniority.	 Instils	 a
healthy	 dose	 of	 terror	 in	 his	 soldiers.	 Brilliantly	 unreasonable.	 Aye,	 Kindly.	 Now,	 all	 I	 need	 to	 do	 is
convince	the	Adjunct—
The	 rider	 reined	 in.	 ‘Fist,	 the	 Adjunct	 requests	 your	 presence	 in	 the	 sub-camp	 of	 the	 Fifth	 Squad,	 Ninth
Company,	Eighth	Legion.	There	has	been	an	incident.’
‘What	kind	of	incident?’
‘I	don’t	know,	sir.	Captain	Yil	didn’t	say.’
Keneb	glanced	back	at	the	rising	sun,	and	then	the	stretch	below	it.	Wastelands.	Even	the	name	leaves	a


sick	feeling	in	my	gut.	‘Let’s	go	then,	Bulge.	On	the	way,	you	can	amuse	me	with	another	story	about	Master
Sergeant	Pores.’
The	scarred	man’s	round,	pocked	face	split	into	a	smile.	‘Aye,	sir.	Got	plenty.’
They	set	out	at	a	brisk	canter.
	
After	relaying	Fiddler’s	orders	to	the	squad,	Bottle	returned	to	the	Fifth	Squad’s	camp.	He	found	a	solid	cordon
round	 it	 and	 was	 forced	 to	 use	his	 sergeant’s	 name	 to	 push	 his	 way	 through.	 The	 three	 heavies	 were	 sitting
close	to	a	weak	dung	fire,	looking	morose.	Fiddler	stood	close	to	the	motionless,	prostrate	body	of	Quick	Ben.
Alarmed,	Bottle	hurried	over.
‘What	happened?	He	try	a	quest?’
‘You	back	again?	I	sent	you	away,	soldier—’
‘Not	a	good	idea,	Sergeant.	You	shouldn’t	have	let	Quick	try	anything—’
‘Why?’
Bottle	pointed	down.	‘That’s	why.	He’s	still	alive,	isn’t	he?	He’d	better	be.’
‘Aye.	Now	what’s	this	about	avoiding	any	magics,	Bottle?’
‘Small	 stuff	 is	 fine.	 Food,	 water,	 all	 that.	 But	 I	 wouldn’t	 even	 think	 of	 doing	 anything	 bigger.	 First	 off,	 the
Wastelands	might	as	well	be	dusted	in	otataral.	Attempting	sorcery	here	is	like	pulling	teeth.	Most	places,	that
is.	But	there’s	other,	uh,	places,	where	it’s	the	damned	opposite.’
‘Back	up,	soldier.	You’re	saying	there’s	areas	out	there	where	magic	comes	easy?	Why	didn’t	you	mention
this	before?	Our	warlocks	and	witches	are	half-dead	right	now—’
‘No	 no,	 it’s	 not	 like	 that,	 Sergeant.	 It’s	 not	 areas,	 it’s	 people.	 Or,	 more	 accurately,	 things.	 Ascendants,
stinking	with	power.’	Bottle	waved	one	hand	eastward.	‘Out	there,	just	.	.	.	I	don’t	know,	just	walking	around.
And	 they	 bleed,	 uh,	 energies.	 Sure,	 we	 could	 feed	 on	 them,	 Sergeant,	 but	 that	 would	 mean	 getting	 close	 to
them,	and	close	is	probably	a	bad	idea.’
Quick	Ben	groaned.
Bottle	frowned	down	at	the	High	Mage.	‘Is	that	a	welt	on	the	side	of	his	head?’
‘How	close	to	us	is	the	nearest	thing,	Bottle?’
‘I	know	the	smell	of	one	of	them.	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Really.’	The	word	was	flat,	dangerous.
‘Still	far	away,’	Bottle	hastily	added.	‘There’s	nothing	within	twenty	leagues	of	us.	That	I	know	of—some
ascendants	are	good	at	hiding—’
‘You	winging	out	there,	Bottle?	How	often?’
‘Hardly	 at	 all,	 Sergeant.	 It’s	 scary	 out	 there.	 In	 the	 dark,	 I	 mean.’	 Bottle	 was	 beginning	 to	 regret	 coming
back	here.	What’s	with	me,	anyway?	Sticking	my	nose	into	every	damned	thing,	and	if	it	stinks	real	bad
what	do	I	do?	I	go	find	something	else	to	stick	my	nose	in.	And	they	all	stink—you’d	imagine,	wouldn’t
you,	I	might	quit	the	habit.	But	no,	of	course	not.	Gods,	Bottle,	listen	to	yourself—
Quick	Ben	sat	up,	cradling	his	head.	‘What?’	he	asked.	‘What?’
‘Took	a	fall	there,	High	Mage,’	said	Fiddler.
‘A	fall?’
‘Aye,	I’m	thinking	you	was	struck	with	a	thought.’
Quick	Ben	spat,	gingerly	probing	the	side	of	his	head.	‘Must	have	been	some	thought,’	he	muttered.	‘Hit	so
hard	I	can’t	even	remember	it.’
‘Happens,’	 said	 Fiddler.	 ‘Listen,	 Bottle.	 Wasn’t	 a	 T’lan	 Imass	 who	 kidnapped	 Gesler	 and	 Stormy.	 It	 was
what	we	talked	about	before:	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘Wait,’	said	Quick	Ben.	‘Who	said	anything	about	T’lan	Imass?’
‘I	did,’	Bottle	replied.	‘You	were	the	one	talking	about	winged	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
Fiddler	snorted.	‘No	doubt	the	Adjunct	will	talk	to	us	about	the	fucking	Forkrul	Assail.	Who’s	left?	Oh,	the
Jaghut—’
‘Still	days	away—’	said	Bottle	and	Quick	Ben	in	unison,	and	then	glared	at	each	other.
Fiddler’s	 face	 reddened.	 ‘You	 bastards,’	 he	 hissed	 under	 his	 breath.	 ‘Both	 of	 you!	 We’ve	 got	 a	 Jaghut
tracking	us?’
‘Not	 one,’	 admitted	 Bottle.	 ‘I	 counted	 fourteen.	 Each	 one	 a	 walking	 armoury.	 But	 I	 don’t	 think	 they’re


actually	following	us,	Sergeant—unless	our	High	Mage	knows	more	about	it,	which	is	possible.’
Fiddler	had	buried	the	fingers	of	one	hand	in	his	beard	and	looked	ready	to	start	tearing	loose	handfuls.	‘You
reporting	all	this	to	the	Adjunct,	Quick?’
The	High	Mage	scowled	and	looked	away.	‘I’ve	given	up.	Nothing	surprises	her,	Fid.	It’s	as	if	she	already
knows.’
‘Bottle,	any	hint	of	K’Chain	Che’Malle?	Your	nightly	explorations	go	out	how	far?’
‘Depends	 on	 how	 crowded	 it	 is	 out	 there,’	 Bottle	 admitted.	 ‘But,	 thinking	 on	 it,	 there’s	 plenty	 of	 agitation
going	on,	especially	among	the	winged	stuff—the	rhinazan,	the	capemoths.	The	scaled	rats	keep	massing	and
setting	 off	 on	 wild	 paths,	 as	 if	 trying	 to	 follow	 something.	 Oh,	 and	 I’ve	 caught	 the	 occasional	 scent	 on	 the
winds,	but	I	took	those	to	be	draconic.	I	don’t	even	know	what	a	K’Chain	Che’Malle	smells	like.’
Quick	Ben	flung	the	scrap	of	canvas	at	Bottle.	‘Yes	you	do.’
It	dropped	at	Bottle’s	feet.	‘Right,’	he	said,	looking	down	at	it.	‘Oily	lizards.’
‘Draconic,’	said	Fiddler.	‘Forgot	about	those.	Anyone	we	know,	Quick?’
‘You’re	asking	me?	Bottle’s	the	one	smelling	them.’
‘I	am.	Well?’
The	wizard	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘Aye,	we	bloodied	him	at	Letheras.’
‘Can’t	 keep	 a	 fly	 from	 buzzing	 your	 shit,’	 said	 Bottle,	 earning	 hard	 looks	 from	 both	 men.	 ‘Look,	 the
Wastelands	may	be	all	wastes,	but	they	ain’t	empty,	Sergeant.	I’m	wagering	the	High	Mage	here	suspects	why
it’s	so	crowded.	In	fact,’	he	added,	‘I	think	you	know	too,	Sergeant.	That	pig	of	a	reading	you	did—and	then
what	hit	you	a	few	days	back—someone	showed	up,	and	you	probably	know	who—’
‘Bottle,’	 cut	 in	 Fiddler.	 ‘Just	 how	 much	 do	 you	 really	 want	 to	 know?	 I	 told	 you	 to	 keep	 your	 head	 down,
didn’t	I?	Now	here	you	are,	and	here	comes	the	Adjunct	and	Yil.	I	sent	you	back	to	the	squad	for	a	reason,
soldier.	You	should’ve	listened.	Now	it’s	too	late.’
	
Keneb	 sent	 Bulge	 off	 to	 finish	 striking	 his	 command	 tent	 and	 rode	 through	 the	 breaking	 camps	 of	 the	 Ninth
Company.	Soldiers	stopped	talking	to	watch	him	ride	past.	There	was	none	of	the	usual	banter,	suggesting	to
Keneb	that	the	tale	of	the	‘incident’	at	Gesler’s	camp	had	bled	out	among	the	ranks.	Whatever	had	happened,
it	looked	bad.
It’d	be	nice	to	get	some	good	news.	For	a	change.	‘The	High	Mage	has	opened	us	a	warren	that’ll
take	 us	 right	 to	 wherever	 it	 is	 the	 Adjunct	 wants	 us.	 A	 lovely	 warren,	 rolling	 fields	 of	 flowers	 and
gambolling	deer	that	fall	dead	at	our	feet	whenever	we	get	hungry.	Water?	No,	the	rivers	are	rivers	of
wine.	 Ground’s	 soft	 as	 pillows	 every	 night,	 too.	 It’s	 great!	 Oh,	 and	 when	 we	 get	 there,	 the	 enemy	 take
one	 look	 at	 us	 and	 drop	 their	 weapons	 and	 send	 for	 wagons	 loaded	 with	 the	 booty	 of	 a	 king’s	 vault.
And	the	women!	Why—’
‘Keneb!’
He	turned	in	his	saddle	to	see	Blistig	riding	up	from	a	side	avenue.	The	man	fell	in	alongside	him.
‘The	morning’s	turned	into	Hood’s	hole,	Keneb.	What	else	did	you	hear?’
‘About	what?	Got	called	to	the	Ninth,	Fifth	Squad.	That’s	all	I	know.’
‘Gesler	and	Stormy	have	deserted.’	There	was	a	glint	in	Blistig’s	eyes.
‘Ridiculous.’
‘The	word’s	gone	out,	right	out—the	whole	damned	army	knows	it	now.	She’s	losing	it,	Keneb,	and	none	too
soon	 as	 far	 as	 I’m	 concerned.	 We	 ain’t	 gonna	 hold	 for	 this	 march	 across	 the	 Wastelands.	 She’ll	 have	 to
disband	us.	I	liked	the	look	of	Letheras—how	about	you?’
‘Gesler	and	Stormy	have	not	deserted,	Blistig.’
‘You	said	you	knew	nothing—’
‘I	don’t	have	to.	I	know	those	two.	They’re	solid	as	mountains.’
‘They’re	gone,	Keneb.	Simple	as	that—’
‘You	were	summoned	to	this	meeting?’
‘Not	officially.	But	it	sounds	to	be	army’s	business.’
‘It	concerns	a	squad	in	one	of	my	companies,	Blistig.	Do	me	a	favour,	ride	the	fuck	back	to	your	Legion	and
get	them	in	order.	If	new	commands	are	going	to	come	down,	leave	it	to	the	Adjunct’s	staff.	If	she	wanted	you
she’d	have	invited	you.’


The	man’s	face	darkened.	‘You’ve	turned	into	a	real	shit,	Keneb.	Don’t	settle	in	Letheras—the	city	ain’t	big
enough	for	both	of	us.’
‘Go	away,	Blistig.’
‘Once	we’re	disbanded,	I’m	coming	looking	for	you,	Keneb.’
‘The	day	that	happens,	Blistig,	you	won’t	make	it	out	of	your	Legion’s	camp.	They’ll	cut	you	down	not	two
steps	from	your	tent.’
‘Shows	what	you	know.	I	got	rapport.	They’ll	be	at	my	back	when	I	go	for	you.’
Keneb	glanced	over,	brows	lifting.	‘Rapport?	You’re	a	joke,	Blistig.	You’re	their	joke.	Now	get	out	of	my
face—’
‘Not	a	chance.	I’m	off	to	talk	with	the	Adjunct.’
‘Talk?	About	what?’
‘My	business.’
They	 drew	 closer	 to	 a	 cordon	 of	 soldiers.	 That	 ring	 parted	 as	 they	 rode	 in.	 Within	 the	 circle	 waited	 an
ominous	gathering.	Keneb	saw	Tavore	and	Yil	along	with	Quick	Ben,	Fiddler	and	Bottle.	His	gaze	then	found
the	destroyed	tent.	That	doesn’t	look	good.	 He	 reined	 in,	 dismounted.	 A	 soldier	 from	 the	 Eighteenth	 Squad
came	forward	and	took	the	reins.	‘Thank	you,	Corporal	Rib.’	Keneb	paused.	‘Think	we	still	need	this	cordon?’
‘Only	the	inner	ring’s	doing	that,	Fist,’	Rib	replied.	‘The	rest	are	just	gawking.’
‘Get	me	your	sergeant,’	Keneb	said.
‘Aye,	sir.’
Smirking,	Blistig	moved	past,	heading	for	the	Adjunct.
The	Eighteenth’s	sergeant	pushed	through.	‘Fist.	Bad	news,	this.’
‘So	I	hear,	Gaunt-Eye.	Now,	round	up	the	other	sergeants	all	these	soldiers	belong	to.	I	want	them	out	of
here.	I	want	them	all	getting	ready	for	the	day’s	march.	Tell	them	if	I	look	up	in	a	hundred	heartbeats	and	still
see	this	mob,	Hood’s	heel	is	coming	down.	Am	I	understood,	Sergeant?’
The	Genabackan	blinked.	‘Aye,	Fist.’	He	saluted	and	then	plunged	back	into	the	crowd.	Almost	at	once,	he
started	barking	orders.
Corporal	Rib	grinned.	‘He	don’t	need	the	other	sergeants,	Fist.	I	ain’t	never	known	a	meaner	sergeant.’
‘Carry	on,	Corporal.’
‘Aye,	Fist.’
Keneb	walked	over	to	the	motley	gathering—these	damned	all-too-familiar	faces,	the	miserable	expressions,
the	Adjunct’s	flat	eyes	and	thin,	straight	mouth	as	she	stood	listening	to	whatever	Blistig	was	saying.	As	Keneb
reached	them	Tavore	lifted	a	gauntleted	hand,	cutting	Blistig	off.
‘Fist	Blistig,’	she	said,	‘is	this	the	time	to	petition	for	an	increase	in	the	rum	ration?’
‘Adjunct,	the	Eighth	Legion	may	be	about	to	crumble.	I’m	just	wanting	to	make	sure	my	own	legion—’
‘That	will	be	enough,	Blistig.	Return	to	your	legion	immediately.’
‘Very	well,	Adjunct.	Still,	who’d	have	thought	those	two	would	desert.’	He	saluted	and	was	forced	to	hold	it
while	Tavore	stood	motionless,	her	regard	level	and	lifeless.	As	the	moment	grew	uncomfortable,	the	Adjunct
returned	the	salute,	converting	it	into	a	dismissive	gesture—as	if	brushing	lint	from	her	cloak.
Face	paling,	Blistig	wheeled	and	marched	back	to	his	horse,	only	to	find	that	the	animal	had	wandered	off—
no	one	had	taken	the	reins	from	him.
As	he	hesitated,	Keneb	grunted	and	said,	‘Rapport,	aye.’
‘Not	my	legion,’	he	snapped.	‘You	might	want	a	word	or	two	about	courtesy	with	your	soldiers,	Keneb.’
‘The	Malazan	military	demands	courtesy	first	and	expects	respect	to	follow.	Lose	respect	and	the	courtesy
usually	goes	with	it.’
‘Remember,	I’ll	be	looking	for	you.’
‘Best	find	your	horse	first,	Blistig.’
The	Adjunct	gestured	Keneb	over.
‘Fist.	Our	camp	security	seems	to	have	been	breached.’
‘They	are	truly	missing,	Adjunct?’
She	nodded.
‘I	cannot	see	how	anyone	managed	to	penetrate	this	deep	into	our	camp,’	Keneb	said.	‘Unless	they	were
our	own—but	then,	where	are	the	bodies?	I	don’t	understand	this,	Adjunct.’


‘The	High	Mage	suggests	the	attacker	was	a	Shi’gal	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘A	what?’
‘Sometimes,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘those	ones	grow	wings.	They’re	the	Matron’s	own	assassins,	Fist.	And	one
dropped	down	out	of	the	night	and	stole	them	both.’
‘To	do	what	with	them?	Eat	them?	Why	did	neither	man	make	a	sound?’
‘They	were	selected,’	said	the	High	Mage,	‘and	no,	I	have	no	idea	why.’
Keneb	 struggled	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 all	 this.	 He	 glanced	 at	 Fiddler.	 The	 sergeant	 looked	 miserable.	 Well,
nothing	new	there.	‘Gesler	and	Stormy,’	he	slowly	ventured,	‘were	anything	but	average	marines.’
‘As	close	to	ascendants,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘as	anyone	in	this	army.’
‘Will	this	winged	assassin	come	back	for	more	of	us?’	Keneb	asked,	offering	the	question	to	any	one	of	the
five	soldiers	standing	opposite	him.
Fiddler	 grunted.	 ‘Damn,	 that’s	 the	 first	 time	 the	 question’s	 come	 up—you	 got	 a	 point.	 Why	 stop	 with	 just
them?’
‘The	problem	is,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘we	have	no	idea	what	the	Che’Malle	want	with	Gesler	and	Stormy.’
‘And	no	real	way	to	find	out,’	added	Bottle.
‘I	see,’	said	Keneb.	‘Well,	how	can	we	defend	against	such	future	attacks?	High	Mage?’
‘I’ll	see	what	I	can	think	up,	Fist.’
‘One	 squad	 member	 with	 a	 crossbow	 stays	 awake	 at	 all	 times	 at	 night,’	 said	 Keneb.	 ‘Maybe	 that	 won’t
help,	but	it’s	a	start.	Adjunct,	if	the	soldiers	begin	thinking	 people	 can	 go	 missing	 at	 any	 time	 and	 we	 can	 do
nothing	about	it,	we’ll	end	up	facing	a	mutiny.’
‘You	are	correct,	Fist.	I	will	see	to	it	that	the	order	goes	out.’	She	turned.	‘Captain	Yil,	ride	to	the	Letherii
camp	 and	 report	 our	 losses—you	 need	 hold	 nothing	 back	 from	 Commander	 Brys	 Beddict.	 Include	 in	 your
report	our	conjectures.’
As	Lostara	made	to	leave,	Quick	Ben	said,	‘Captain,	be	sure	that	Atri-Ceda	Aranict	is	present.’
She	nodded	and	then	departed.
The	Adjunct	stepped	close	to	Keneb.	‘Fist.	We	have	suffered	a	wound	here.	It	may	prove	deeper	and	more
serious	than	any	of	us	presently	believe.	You	may	be	assured	that	I	will	do	all	that	is	in	my	power	to	find	and
retrieve	Gesler	and	Stormy—but	understand,	we	must	continue	the	march.	We	must	hold	this	army	together.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.	To	that	end,	we	have	another	problem.	He	was	just	here,	in	fact.’
She	held	his	gaze.	‘I	am	aware	of	that,	Fist.	I	am	also	aware	of	the	additional	burdens	you	have	been	forced
to	carry	as	a	consequence.	I	will	deal	with	this	matter	shortly.	In	the	meantime,	we	need	to	make	certain	that
the	rumour	of	Gesler	and	Stormy	deserting	is	laid	to	rest.	The	truth	is	unpleasant	enough	in	its	own	right	that
none	will	think	us	dissembling.	Summon	your	officers,	Fist.’	She	then	turned	to	her	High	Mage.	‘Do	what	you
can	to	protect	us.’
‘I	will,	Adjunct.’
‘And	find	them,	Quick	Ben.’
‘Again,	whatever	I	can	do,	I	will	do	it.’
‘We	cannot	lose	any	more	veterans.’
She	did	not	need	to	add	that	without	them	the	chains	of	this	army	would	snap	at	the	first	moment	of	trouble.
Even	now,	one	more	gust	of	ill	wind	could	do	us	all	in.
Gesler	 and	 Stormy,	 you	 damned	 idiots.	 Probably	 tossing	 dice	 in	 that	 rank	 tent	 you	 shared—or
stitching	a	solid	wall	down	the	middle	to	close	another	spat.	As	bad	as	brothers,	you	two	were.	And	now
you’re	gone	and	there’s	a	huge	hole	in	my	company	of	marines,	one	I	can’t	hope	to	see	filled.
The	Adjunct	and	the	High	Mage	had	left.	Fiddler	and	Bottle	drew	close	to	their	Fist.
‘Fire,	sir.’
Keneb	frowned	at	Fiddler.	‘Excuse	me?’
‘It’s	the	fire.	The	one	they	went	through.	Thinking	on	it,	I	doubt	that	winged	lizard	will	be	back.	I	can’t	be
sure,	but	my	feeling	is	we’ve	seen	the	last	of	it.	And	the	last	of	them.’
‘You	said	this	to	the	Adjunct?’
‘Just	a	feeling,	sir.	I’m	sending	Bottle	out	tonight,	to	see	what	he	can	find.’
Bottle	looked	thrilled	at	the	prospect.
‘Let	 me	 know	 what	 he	 discovers,	 Sergeant.	 Immediately—don’t	 wait	 until	 morning.	 I’m	 not	 sleeping


anyway.’
‘I	know	the	feeling,	sir.	As	soon	as	we	get	something,	then.’
‘Good.	Go	on,	now.	I’ll	see	to	dispersing	Gesler’s	squad—hold	on,	why	not	take	one	now?	Take	your	pick,
Fid.’
‘Shortnose	will	do.	He’s	hiding	a	brain	behind	all	that	gnarly	bone	and	whatnot.’
‘Are	you	sure?’	Keneb	asked.
‘I	sent	him	to	collect	four	people	in	a	specific	sequence.	I	didn’t	need	to	repeat	myself,	sir.’
‘And	he’s	a	heavy?’
‘Aye,	sometimes	things	ain’t	what	they	seem,	you	know?’
‘I’ll	have	to	think	about	that,	Fiddler.	All	right,	take	him	and	get	going.’
	
Outrider	Henar	Vygulf	walked	up	the	main	avenue	between	the	ordered	rows	of	the	Letherii	camp.	Though	a
horseman,	the	ground	trembled	slightly	with	each	step	he	took,	and	there	was	little	debate	as	to	who	was	the
tallest,	biggest	soldier	in	Brys’s	army.	He	drew	curious	stares	as	he	made	his	way	to	HQ.	He	wasn’t	astride
his	huge	horse,	after	all,	and	not	riding	at	a	torrid	pitch	making	people	scatter	as	was	his	habit;	thus,	seeing	him
on	foot	was	shocking	in	itself,	quite	apart	from	the	fact	that	he	was	striding	into	the	heart	of	the	encampment.
Henar	Vygulf	hated	crowds.	He	probably	hated	people.	Could	be	he	hated	the	world.
Trailing	two	steps	behind	him	was	Lance	Corporal	Odenid,	who	was	attached	to	the	commander’s	staff	as	a
message-bearer.	This	was	his	sole	task	these	days:	finding	soldiers	and	dragging	them	back	to	Brys	Beddict.
The	commander	was	conducting	intensive	and	extensive	interviews,	right	through	the	whole	army.	Odenid	had
heard	 that	 for	 the	 most	 part	 Brys	 was	 asking	 about	 the	 Wastelands,	 collecting	 rumours,	 old	 tales,	 wispy
legends.	 The	 most	 extraordinary	 thing	 of	 all,	 when	 it	 came	 to	 these	 interviews,	 was	 Brys	 Beddict’s	 uncanny
ability	to	remember	names	and	faces.	At	day’s	end	he	would	call	in	a	scribe	and	recount	for	her	a	complete
and	detailed	list	of	those	soldiers	and	support	staff	he’d	spoken	with	that	day.	He	would	give	ages,	places	of
birth,	military	history,	even	family	details	such	as	he	had	gleaned,	and	he	would	add	notes	on	whatever	each
soldier	knew	or	thought	they	knew	about	the	Wastelands.
The	 Beddict	 brothers,	 Odenid	 concluded,	 were	 probably	 not	 even	 human.	 Probably	 both	 god-touched.
Hadn’t	 Brys	 returned	 from	 the	 dead?	 And	 hadn’t	 he	 been	 the	 only	 one—until	 that	 Tarthenal—to	 have
defeated	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths?
Henar	 Vygulf	 had	 been	 summoned	 for	 an	 interview,	 but	 this	 time	 there	 was	 more	 to	 it,	 or	 so	 Odenid
suspected.	 An	 officer	 from	 the	 Bonehunters	 had	 ridden	 into	 camp	 early	 this	 morning.	 Something	 had
happened.	Odenid	didn’t	rank	high	enough	to	be	able	to	lounge	around	in	the	HQ	tent,	and	the	commander’s
inner	 circle	 were	 a	 close-mouthed	 lot	 one	 and	 all.	 Whatever	 the	 news	 had	 been,	 it	 had	 stalled	 the	 march,
probably	until	noon.	And	the	Malazan	was	still	there,	in	a	private	meeting	with	Brys	and	his	Ceda—Odenid	had
seen	 them	 himself	 when	 he’d	 been	 summoned	 in	 and	 told	 to	 head	 to	 the	 outriders	 and	 bring	 back	 Henar
Vygulf.	‘Or,’	had	said	Brys,	‘I	think	he	is	so	named.	The	tall	one,	the	one	with	Bluerose	ancestry.	Has	in
his	train	about	ten	specially	bred	horses	strong	enough	to	carry	him—a	family	of	horse-breeders,	I	seem
to	recall	.	.	.’
And	the	man	slept	on	his	right	and	pissed	standing	on	one	leg,	yes,	that’s	him	all	right.
The	added	thought	made	Odenid	smile.	God-touched.	Brys	hadn’t	even	interviewed	Henar	yet.
They	reached	the	front	entrance	to	the	command	tent.	Henar	halted,	ignoring	the	lone	guard	standing	beside
the	flap	as	he	turned	to	Odenid.	‘Do	you	announce	me?’
‘No.	Just	go	in,	Outrider.’
	
Henar	 had	 to	 duck,	 something	 that	 never	 put	 him	 in	 a	 good	 mood.	 There	 were	 reasons	 for	 living	 out	 in	 the
open,	good	ones,	and	even	these	flimsy	walls	of	canvas	and	now	silk	seemed	to	push	in	on	him.	He	was	forced
to	deepen	his	breathing,	struggling	to	beat	down	the	panic	rising	within	him.
Two	other	aides	waved	him	through	to	the	inner	chambers.	He	tried	not	to	see	them	once	the	gestures	were
made.	Walls	were	miserable	enough;	people	crowded	inside	the	tight	spaces	they	made,	with	Henar	trapped	in
there	 with	 them,	 was	 even	 worse.	 They	 were	 breathing	 his	 air.	 It	 was	 all	 he	 could	 do	 not	 to	 snap	 both	 their
necks.


That	 was	 the	 problem	 with	 armies.	 Too	 many	 people.	 Even	 the	 relatively	 open	 camp	 with	 its	 berms	 and
corner	 fortlets	 and	 widely	 spaced	 tent	 rows	 could	 instil	 in	 him	 a	 wild	 desperation.	 When	 he	 delivered
dispatches	into	such	camps,	he	rode	like	a	madman,	just	to	push	through	and	deliver	the	message	and	then	get
the	damned	out	as	quickly	as	possible.
He	made	his	way	down	a	too-narrow	passage	and	stepped	through	a	cloying	slit	in	the	silks	to	find	himself	in
a	larger	room,	the	ceiling	peaked	and	morning	sunlight	making	the	air	glow.	Commander	Brys	sat	in	a	folding
chair,	 the	 Atri-Ceda	 Aranict	 standing	 on	 his	 left.	 Seated	 in	 another	 chair	 was	 the	 Malazan	 officer,	 her	 legs
folded	 showing	 him	 a	 solid,	 muscled	 thigh—his	 eyes	 followed	 the	 sweeping	 curve	 of	 its	 underside	 and	 all	 at
once	his	breathing	steadied.	A	moment	later	his	gaze	lifted	to	her	face.
	
Brys	waited	for	the	huge	man’s	attention	to	return	to	him.	It	didn’t.	Henar	Vygulf	was	staring	at	Lostara	Yil	as
if	he’d	never	before	seen	a	woman—granted,	a	beautiful	woman	in	this	instance.	Even	so	.	.	.	he	cleared	his
throat.	‘Outrider	Henar	Vygulf,	thank	you	for	coming.’
The	man’s	eyes	flicked	to	Brys	and	then	back	again.	‘As	ordered,	sir.’
‘If	I	could	have	your	attention?	Good.	You	were	attached	to	the	Drene	Garrison	during	the	Awl	Campaign,
correct?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Liaising	with	the	Bluerose	Lancers,	the	company	to	which	you	once	belonged.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
Brys	frowned.	‘Well,	this	isn’t	working.	Outrider,	may	I	introduce	to	you	Captain	Lostara	Yil,	adjutant	to	the
Adjunct	Tavore	of	the	Bonehunters.	Captain,	this	is	Outrider	Henar	Vygulf.’
In	 the	 manner	 of	 Bluerose	 court	 etiquette,	 Henar	 lowered	 himself	 on	 to	 one	 knee	 and	 bowed	 his	 head.
‘Captain,	it	is	a	pleasure.’
Yil	glanced	over	at	Brys	with	raised	brows.
He	 shook	 his	 head,	 equally	 baffled.	 As	 far	 as	 he	 knew,	 the	 captain	 wasn’t	 nobleborn,	 and	 certainly	 not
royalty.
She	hesitated,	clearly	uncomfortable,	and	then	said,	‘Please	rise,	Henar.	Next	time,	a	salute	will	suffice.’
He	straightened.	‘As	you	command,	sir.’
‘Now,’	said	Brys,	‘might	we	resume?’
Henar	pulled	his	eyes	from	Lostara	with	obvious	effort	and	then	nodded.	‘Of	course,	sir.’
‘During	the	most	recent	campaign,	a	renegade	Awl	named	Redmask	infiltrated	Drene.	Blood	was	shed,	and
in	the	pursuit	that	followed,	garrison	soldiers	were	ambushed.	Is	this	accurate	so	far?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘There	followed	reports	of	two	demonic	creatures	serving	as	bodyguards	to	this	Redmask.’
‘Yes,	 sir.	 Lizards,	 running	 on	 two	 legs,	 fast	 as	 a	 horse,	 sir.	 They	 were	 sighted	 and	 reported	 on	 in	 the
campaign	 itself.	 The	 Atri-Preda	 included	 descriptions	 in	 her	 dispatches	 up	 to	 and	 including	 the	 first	 major
battle.	Thereafter,	no	messengers	managed	to	make	it	back.’
‘Do	you	happen	to	know	a	soldier	named	Pride?’
‘No,	sir.’
‘An	 Awl	 by	 birth,	 but	 raised	 by	 a	 family	 in	 Drene.	 He	 was	 old	 enough	 when	 taken	 to	 still	 remember	 a
number	of	Awl	legends	regarding	an	ancient	war	for	the	land	with	an	army	of	demons	of	similar	description.
The	 Awl	 were	 not	 victorious,	 but	 the	 war	 ended	 when	 the	 demons	 migrated	 east	 into	 the	 Wastelands.	 Once
enemies,	then	allies?	It	is	possible.	Do	we	know	what	happened	to	Redmask?	Does	he	still	live?’
‘Sir,	it’s	assumed	he’s	dead,	since	the	Awl	are	no	more.’
‘But	no	direct	proof.’
‘No,	sir.’
‘Thank	you,	Henar	Vygulf.	You	are	dismissed.’
The	outrider	saluted,	looked	once	more	upon	Lostara	Yil,	and	then	departed.
The	Malazan	captain	blew	out	a	breath.	‘Well.’
‘Please	accept	my	apologies,’	said	Brys.	‘There	are	somewhat	fewer	women	in	my	army	than	there	are	in
yours—certainly	not	by	policy,	but	Letherii	women	seem	more	inclined	to	pursue	other	professions.	It	may	be
that	Henar	has	not—’


‘I	take	your	point,	Commander,	if	you’ll	forgive	the	interruption.	Besides,	it	must	be	said	that	he	is	a	most
impressive	man,	so	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	apologize.’	She	uncrossed	her	legs	and	rose.	‘In	any	case,	sir,
the	 lizards	 he	 mentioned	 certainly	 seem	 to	 fit	 with	 descriptions	 of	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 These	 were	 living
specimens?	Not	undead?’
‘There	was	no	evidence	to	suggest	that	they	were	anything	but	alive.	In	the	first	battle,	they	took	wounds.’
Lostara	nodded.	‘Then	Quick	Ben	is	probably	right.’
‘He	is.’	Brys	leaned	back,	regarded	the	tall	woman	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘There	was	a	god	once	.	.	.
I	know	its	name	but	that	isn’t	particularly	relevant	now.	What	is	relevant	is	where	it	dwelt:	in	the	lands	we	now
call	the	Wastelands.	It	lived	there	and	it	died	there.	Its	life	was	stolen	from	it	by	a	force,	a	power	coming	from
the	K’Chain	Che’Malle—a	civilization,	by	the	way,	that	I’d	never	heard	of,	but	in	that	god’s	memories	there
are	the	name	itself	and	scattered	.	.	.	images.’	He	shook	his	head,	and	after	a	moment	continued,	‘It	may	be
that	this	power’—and	he	glanced	over	at	Aranict	for	a	moment—‘is	one	of	these	warrens	you	Malazans	have
brought	 to	 us.	 Or	 it	 could	 have	 been	 a	 ritual	 of	 some	 sort.	 Its	 name	 was	 Ahkrast	 Korvalain.	 What	 it	 did,
Captain,	was	steal	the	life-force	of	the	land	itself.	In	fact,	it	may	well	have	created	the	Wastelands,	and	in	so
doing	it	killed	the	spirits	and	gods	dwelling	there,	and	with	them,	their	worshippers.’
‘Interesting.	The	Adjunct	needs	to	hear	all	of	this.’
‘Yes,	we	must	pool	our	knowledge	as	best	we	can.	Please,	Captain,	can	you	ride	to	the	Adjunct	and	inform
her	that	we	will	be	paying	her	a	visit.’
‘At	once,	Commander.	How	soon?’
‘Let	us	make	it	the	midday	meal.’
‘I	had	best	go,	then,	sir.’	And	she	saluted.
Brys	smiled.	‘No	need	for	that	in	here,	Captain.	Oh,	on	your	way	out,	could	you	please	tell	one	of	my	aides
to	get	in	here.’
‘Of	course.	Until	noon	then,	Commander.’
After	 she	 had	 left	 the	 chamber,	 Brys	 gestured	 to	 the	 now	 empty	 chair.	 ‘Sit	 down,	 Atri-Ceda.	 You	 look	 a
little	pale.’
She	hesitated,	and	then	relented.	He	watched	her	settle	nervously	on	the	chair’s	edge.	Well,	it’s	a	start.
There	was	a	scuffing	sound	at	the	room’s	flap	and	then	Corporal	Ginast	entered	and	stood	at	attention.
‘Corporal,	attach	Henar	Vygulf	to	my	staff.	Furthermore,	he	is	to	accompany	my	entourage	when	I	attend	a
lunch	today	at	the	Malazan	camp.	Issue	him	the	appropriate	cloak	and	inform	him	he	is	now	a	lance	corporal.’
‘Er,	excuse	me,	Commander,	but	isn’t	Vygulf	Bluerose?’
‘He	is.	What	of	it?’
‘Well,	military	regulations	state	that	no	Bluerose-born	soldier	is	eligible	for	any	officer’s	rank	in	the	regular
Letherii	 forces,	 sir.	 Only	 among	 the	 Bluerose	 Lancers	 can	 a	 Bluerose-born	 soldier	 ascend	 in	 rank,	 and	 even
there	 only	 to	 that	 of	 lieutenant.	 It	 was	 written	 into	 the	 capitulation	 agreement	 following	 the	 conquest	 of
Bluerose,	sir.’
‘The	same	agreement	that	demanded	horses	and	stirrups	from	the	Bluerose,	not	to	mention	the	creation	of
the	Lancers	themselves?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘And	the	stirrups	they	sent	us	were	rubbish,	weren’t	they?’
‘A	nasty	trick,	sir,	that	one.	I’m	surprised	the	King	has	not	insisted	on	proper	reparations.’
‘You	are	most	welcome	to	your	surprise,	Ginast,	but	not	to	your	disapproving	tone.	As	far	as	those	stirrups
are	 concerned,	 I	 admit	 to	 applauding	 the	 Bluerose	 in	 their	 deviousness.	 Revenge	 most	 deserved.	 As	 for	 the
ceiling	 on	 advancement	 in	 the	 Letherii	 army,	 I	 have	 this	 to	 say:	 from	 now	 on,	 any	 and	 every	 soldier	 in	 the
Letherii	 army,	 no	 matter	 where	 they	 originally	 come	 from,	 has	 equal	 opportunity	 for	 advancement	 based	 on
merit	and	exemplary	service	to	the	kingdom.	Bring	in	a	scribe	and	we’ll	get	that	written	up	immediately.	As	for
you,	Ginast,	best	hurry	since	you	need	to	track	Henar	down	in	time	for	him	to	return	here,	mounted	and	ready
as	my	escort,	understood?’
‘Sir,	the	highborn	officers	will	not	like—’
‘I	understand	the	Malazan	Empress	conducted	a	campaign	that	scoured	her	armies	of	those	ranks	bought	by
privilege	 and	 station.	 Do	 you	 know	 how	 she	 went	 about	 it,	 corporal?	 She	 arrested	 the	 officers	 and	 either
executed	them	or	sent	them	to	work	in	mines	for	the	rest	of	their	lives.	A	most	charming	solution,	I	think,	and


should	the	nobleborn	in	my	forces	prove	at	all	troublesome,	I	might	well	advise	my	brother	to	adopt	something
similar.	Now,	you	are	dismissed.’
The	aide	saluted	and	then	fled.
Brys	 glanced	 over	 to	 see	 shock	 on	 Aranict’s	 face.	 ‘Oh	 come	 now,	 Atri-Ceda,	 you	 don’t	 really	 think	 I’d
suggest	such	a	thing,	do	you?’
‘Sir?	No,	of	course	not.	I	mean,	it	wasn’t	that.	Well,	sorry,	sir.	Sorry.’
Brys	cocked	his	head	and	regarded	her	for	a	moment.	‘What	then?	Ah,	you	are	perhaps	surprised	that	I’d
indulge	in	a	little	matchmaking,	Atri-Ceda?’
‘Yes,	sir.	A	little.’
‘That	was	the	first	hint	of	life	I’ve	seen	in	Captain	Yil’s	face	since	I	first	met	her.	As	for	Henar,	why,	he
seems	man	enough	for	her,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Oh	yes,	sir!	I	mean—’
‘He	clearly	has	a	taste	for	the	exotic.	Do	you	think	he	stands	a	chance?’
‘Sir,	I	wouldn’t	know.’
‘As	a	woman,	rather,	what	think	you?’
Her	eyes	were	darting,	her	colour	high.	‘She	saw	him	admiring	her	legs,	sir.’
‘And	made	no	move	to	cover	up.’
‘I’d	noticed	that,	sir.’
‘Me	too.’
There	 was	 silence	 then	 in	 the	 chamber,	 as	 Brys	 studied	 Aranict	 while	 she	 in	 turn	 endeavoured	 to	 look
everywhere	but	at	her	commander.
‘For	the	Errant’s	sake,	Atri-Ceda,	make	use	of	the	rest	of	that	chair,	will	you?	Sit	back.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
	
Throatslitter’s	high-pitched	laugh	cut	across	from	behind	the	captain’s	tent.	Again.	Wincing,	Cuttle	leaned	over
and	 dragged	 close	 his	 studded	 hauberk.	 No	 point	 in	 crawling	 into	 the	 thing	 until	 they	 were	 finally	 ready	 to
march.	But	it	was	getting	patchy,	needing	some	grease.	‘Where’s	the	rend	pail?’
‘Here,’	said	Tarr,	collecting	the	small	bucket	and	passing	it	over.	‘Don’t	take	too	much,	we’re	getting	low
and	now	that	Pores	is	in	charge	of	the	quartermaster’s—’
‘The	bastard	ain’t	in	charge	of	nothing,’	Cuttle	snapped.	‘He’s	just	set	himself	up	as	a	middleman,	and	we	all
choke	our	way	through	him	to	get	anything.	Quartermaster’s	happy	since	so	few	requests	ever	reach	’im,	and
between	the	two	of	’em	they’re	hoarding	and	worse.	Someone	should	tell	Sort,	so	she	can	tell	Kindly,	so	he
can—’
‘Kindly’s	got	nothing	to	do	with	Pores	any	more,	Cuttle.’
‘So	who	does?’
‘Nobody,	s’far	as	I	can	tell.’
Smiles	and	Koryk	trudged	back	into	the	camp—which	wasn’t	much	of	a	camp	any	more,	just	a	smouldering
hearth	and	a	ring	of	kit	packs	and	gear.	‘First	bell	after	noon,’	said	Smiles,	‘and	no	sooner.’
‘Any	other	word	on	Ges	and	Stormy?’	Cuttle	asked	her.
‘Fid	can	say	what	he	wants,’	said	Koryk,	‘and	same	for	the	others.	They	probably	bolted.’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,’	retorted	Cuttle.	‘Veterans	don’t	walk.	That’s	what	makes	them	veterans.’
‘Until	they	decide	they’ve	had	enough.’
‘Go	ask	Bottle,’	said	Tarr,	his	face	darkening	as	he	glared	at	Koryk,	‘and	he’ll	tell	you	the	same.	They	got
snatched.’
‘Fine,	they	got	snatched.	Point	is,	they’re	gone.	Probably	dead	by	now.	Who’s	next?’
‘With	luck,’	said	Smiles,	slumping	down	to	lean	against	her	pack,	‘you,	Koryk.’	She	looked	over	to	Tarr.	‘His
brain	is	burnt	out—Koryk	ain’t	the	Koryk	I	once	knew,	and	I	bet	you’re	all	thinking	the	same.’	She	was	on	her
feet	again.	‘Piss	on	this,	I’m	going	for	a	walk.’
‘Take	your	time,’	said	Koryk.
Another	piping	laugh	from	Throatslitter.	Cuttle	scowled.	‘What’s	so	fucking	funny?’
Corabb	had	been	sleeping,	or	pretending	to	sleep,	and	now	he	sat	up.	‘I’ll	go	find	out,	Cuttle.	It’s	getting	on
my	nerves	too.’


‘If	he’s	being	a	bastard,	Corabb,	punch	his	face	in.’
‘Aye,	Cuttle,	count	on	it.’
Cuttle	paused	to	watch	him	tramp	off.	He	grinned	over	at	Tarr.	‘Catch	all	that?’
‘I’m	sitting	right	here.’
‘He	ain’t	on	the	outside	of	us	no	more,	is	he.	He’s	our	heavy.	That’s	good.’
‘So	he	is	and	so	it	is,’	said	Tarr.
‘I’m	this	squad’s	heavy,’	said	Koryk.
Tarr	resumed	lacing	his	boots.	Cuttle	looked	away	and	ran	a	hand	through	what	was	left	of	his	hair,	and	then
realized	that	the	hand	was	thick	with	grease.	‘Hood’s	breath!’
Tarr	looked	over	and	snorted.	‘Won’t	keep	it	from	cracking,’	he	said.
‘What?’
‘Your	skull.’
‘Funny.’
Koryk	stood	as	if	he	didn’t	know	where	to	go,	as	if	he	no	longer	belonged	anywhere.	After	a	moment	he
walked	off,	in	a	direction	opposite	to	the	one	Smiles	had	taken.
Cuttle	resumed	rubbing	down	his	hauberk.	When	he	needed	more	grease	he	collected	it	from	the	top	of	his
head.	‘He	might,	you	know.’
‘He	won’t,’	Tarr	replied.
‘Gesler	and	Stormy,	they’re	his	excuse.	That	and	Kisswhere.’
‘Kisswhere	didn’t	care	about	anybody	but	Kisswhere.’
‘And	Koryk	does?	Used	to,	maybe,	but	now	he’s	all	inside	his	own	head,	and	in	there	it’s	as	Smiles	says,
burnt	up,	nothing	but	cinders.’
‘He	won’t	run.’
‘Why	are	you	so	sure,	Tarr?’
‘Because,	somewhere	inside,	in	all	those	ashes,	something	remains.	He	still	has	something	to	prove.	Not	to
himself—he	can	convince	himself	of	anything—but	to	all	of	us.	Like	it	or	not,	admit	it	or	not,	he’s	stuck.’
‘We’ll	see,	I	guess.’
Tarr	reached	over	and	collected	some	grease	from	Cuttle’s	temple.	He	started	rubbing	down	his	boots.
‘Funny,’	said	Cuttle.
	
Corabb	walked	round	the	command	tent	to	find	Throatslitter,	Widdershins	and	Deadsmell	crouched	in	a	huddle
just	beyond	the	latrine	trench.	He	made	his	way	over.	‘Stop	that	laughing,	Throatslitter,	or	I’ll	have	to	bash	your
face	in.’
The	three	men	looked	over	guiltily.	Scowling,	Throatslitter	said,	‘Like	to	see	you	try,	soldier.’
‘No	you	wouldn’t.	What	are	you	doing?’
‘Playing	with	scaled	rats,	what’s	it	to	you?’
Corabb	edged	closer	and	peered	down.	Three	of	the	scrawny	things	were	struggling	in	the	grass,	their	tails
tied	together.	‘That’s	not	a	nice	thing	to	do.’
‘Idiot,’	 said	 Widdershins,	 ‘we’re	 going	 to	 eat	 them	 for	 lunch.	 We’re	 just	 making	 sure	 they	 don’t	 go
nowhere.’
‘You’re	torturing	them.’
‘Go	away,	Corabb,’	said	Throatslitter.
‘Not	until	you	either	untie	their	tails	or	snap	their	necks.’
Throatslitter	sighed.	‘Explain	it	to	him,	Deadsmell.’
‘They	ain’t	got	brains,	Corabb.	Just	ooze,	like	pus,	in	those	tiny	skulls.	They’re	like	termites,	or	ants.	They
can	only	do	any	thinking	if	there’s	lots	of	them.	Looks	like	three	ain’t	enough.	Besides,	they	stink	of	something.
Like	magic,	only	oilier.	Me	and	Wid,	we’re	trying	to	figure	it	out,	so	leave	us	alone,	will	you?’
‘We’re	eating	greasy	magic?’	Corabb	asked.	‘That	sounds	bad.	I’m	not	eating	those	things	any	more.’
‘Then	pretty	soon	you’re	gonna	go	hungry,’	Widdershins	said,	reaching	down	to	flip	one	of	the	scaled	rats	on
to	its	back.	The	other	two	attempted	to	drag	it	away,	but	chose	opposite	directions.	‘There’s	millions	of	these
things	out	here,	Hood	knows	what	they	live	on.	We	saw	a	swarm	of	’em	this	morning,	like	a	glittering	river.
Killed	about	fifty	before	the	rest	took	off.’	The	flipped-over	rat	managed	to	right	itself	and	once	more	the	three


were	all	pulling	in	different	directions.	‘More	and	more	of	them,	every	day.	Like	maybe	they’re	following	us.’
The	notion	chilled	Corabb,	though	he	wasn’t	sure	why.	It	wasn’t	as	though	the	rats	could	do	anything.	They
didn’t	even	seem	to	be	going	for	their	food	supplies.	‘I	heard	they	got	a	nasty	bite.’
‘If	you	let	’em,	aye,’	said	Deadsmell.
‘So,	Throatslitter,	they	stopped	being	funny?’
‘Aye,	now	go.’
‘Cos	if	I	hear	another	laugh,	I	ain’t	coming	back	to	talk.’
‘It’s	just	a	laugh,	Corabb.	People	got	’em,	right?	All	kinds—’
‘But	yours	makes	the	skin	crawl.’
‘Good,	since	it’s	how	I	sound	when	I	slit	some	bastard’s	useless	throat.’
Corabb	 stepped	 between	 Widdershins	 and	 Deadsmell,	 reached	 down	 and	 snatched	 up	 the	 three	 rats.	 In
quick	succession	he	broke	their	necks.	Then	dropped	the	tangled	bodies	between	the	three	men.
‘Next	time	you	hear	me	laugh	.	.	.’	growled	Throatslitter.
‘Fine,’	Corabb	replied,	‘only	I	don’t	need	a	single	breath	to	cut	off	your	damned	head,	Throatslitter,	so	that
laugh	will	be	your	last.’
He	 headed	 off.	 This	 was	 getting	 ugly.	 Whatever	 ever	 happened	 to	 glory?	 Used	 to	 be	 this	 army,	 for	 all	 its
miseries,	had	some	dignity.	Made	being	a	Bonehunter	mean	something,	something	worthwhile.	But	lately	it	was
just	a	mob	of	bored	bullies	and	thugs.
‘Corabb.’
He	looked	up,	found	Faradan	Sort	blocking	his	path.	‘Captain?’
‘Fiddler	back	with	you	yet?’
‘Don’t	think	so.	He	wasn’t	there	a	quarter	bell	ago.’
‘Where’s	your	squad?’
‘They	ain’t	moved,	sir.’	He	jerked	a	thumb	backward.	‘Just	over	there.’
‘Then	where	are	you	going?’
‘Somewhere,	nowhere,	sir.’
Frowning,	 she	 marched	 past	 him.	 He	 wondered	 if	 she	 expected	 him	 to	 follow—she	 was	 heading	 to	 his
squad	mates,	after	all.	But	since	she	didn’t	say	anything	and	just	continued	on,	he	shrugged	and	resumed	his
aimless	 wandering.	 Maybe	 find	 the	 heavies	 again.	 Throw	 some	 bones.	 But	 then,	 why?	 I	 always	 lose.
Corabb’s	 famous	 luck	 don’t	 run	 to	 dice.	 Typical.	 Never	 the	 important	 stuff.	 He	 rested	 his	 hand	 on	 the
pommel	of	his	new	Letherii	sword,	just	to	confirm	he	still	had	it.	And	I	ain’t	gonna	lose	it	neither.	Not	this
one.	It’s	my	sword	and	I’m	gonna	use	it	from	now	on.
He’d	 been	 thinking	 about	 Leoman	 lately.	 No	 real	 reason,	 as	 far	 as	 he	 could	 tell,	 except	 maybe	 it	 was	 the
way	Leoman	had	managed	to	lead	soldiers,	turn	them	into	fanatical	followers,	in	fact.	He’d	once	believed	that
was	a	gift,	a	talent.	But	now	he	was	no	longer	so	sure.	In	some	ways,	that	gift	was	the	kind	that	made	a	man
dangerous.	Being	a	follower	was	risky.	Especially	when	the	truth	showed	up,	that	truth	being	that	the	one	doing
the	leading	didn’t	really	care	a	whit	for	any	of	them.	Leoman	and	people	like	him	collected	fanatics	the	way	a
rich	merchant	collected	coins,	and	then	he	spent	them	without	a	moment’s	thought.
No,	 the	 Adjunct	 was	 better,	 no	 matter	 what	 everyone	 said.	 They	 talked	 as	 if	 they	 wanted	 a	 Leoman,	 but
Corabb	knew	how	that	was.	They	didn’t.	If	they	got	a	Leoman,	every	one	of	them	would	end	up	getting	killed.
He	believed	the	Adjunct	cared	about	them,	maybe	even	too	much.	But	between	the	two,	he’d	stay	with	her
every	time.
Dissatisfaction	 was	 a	 disease.	 It	 had	 ignited	 the	 Whirlwind	 and	 hundreds	 of	 thousands	 had	 died.	 Standing
over	grave	pits,	who	was	satisfied?	Nobody.	It	had	launched	the	Malazans	into	eating	their	own,	and	if	every
Wickan	was	now	dead,	who’d	be	so	foolish	as	to	believe	the	new	land	the	settlers	staked	out	for	themselves
wouldn’t	exact	its	vengeance?	Sooner	or	later,	it	would	turn	them	into	dust	and	the	wind	would	just	blow	them
away.
Even	 here,	 in	 this	 camp,	 among	 the	 Bonehunters,	 dissatisfaction	 spread	 like	 an	 infection.	 No	 reason	 but
boredom	 and	 not-knowing.	 What	 was	 so	 bad	 about	 that?	 Boredom	 meant	 nobody	 was	 getting	 chopped	 up.
Not-knowing	 was	 the	 truth	 of	 life	 itself.	 His	 heart	 could	 burst	 in	 the	 next	 step,	 or	 a	 runaway	 horse	 could
trample	him	down	at	the	intersection	just	ahead.	A	blood	vessel	in	his	skull	could	explode.	A	rock	could	come
down	 out	 of	 the	 sky.	 Everything	 was	 about	 not-knowing,	 the	 whole	 future,	 and	 who	 could	 even	 make	 sense


enough	of	the	past	to	think	they	really	knew	everything	and	so,	knowing	everything,	know	everything	to	come?
Dissatisfied?	See	if	this	punch	in	the	face	makes	you	feel	any	better.	 Aye,	 Cuttle	 was	 a	 sour	 one,	 but
Corabb	 was	 starting	 to	 like	 him.	 Maybe	 he	 complained	 a	 lot,	 but	 that	 wasn’t	 the	 same	 as	 being	 dissatisfied.
Clearly,	Cuttle	liked	being	able	to	complain.	He’d	be	lost	without	it.	That	was	why,	no	matter	what,	he	looked
comfortable.	 Rubbing	 grease	 into	 boiled	 leather,	 honing	 his	 short	 sword	 and	 the	 heads	 of	 his	 crossbow	 bolts.
Counting	and	counting	again	his	small	collection	of	sharpers	and	smokers,	his	one	cracker,	his	eyes	straying	to
Fid’s	pack	in	which	was	hidden	at	least	one	cusser.	The	man	was	happy.	You	could	tell	by	his	scowl.
I	like	Cuttle.	I	know	what	to	expect	with	him.	He	ain’t	hot	iron,	he	ain’t	cold	iron.	He’s	bitter	iron.	Me
too.	Bitter	and	getting	bitterer.	Just	try	me,	Throatslitter.
	
Captain	Kindly	ran	a	hand	through	the	last	few	threads	of	hair	on	his	head	and	leaned	back	in	his	folding	chair.
‘Skanarow,	what	can	I	do	for	you?’
‘It’s	Ruthan.’
‘Of	course	it	is.	Hardly	a	secret,	Skanarow.’
‘Not	that,	well,	some	of	that.	Thing	is,	he’s	not	what	I	think	he	is.’
‘Early	days,	isn’t	it?’
‘I	don’t	think	he’s	using	his	real	name.’
‘Who	is?	Look	at	me.	I	earned	mine	over	years	of	diligent	deliberation.	Now,	even	“Skanarow”	isn’t	what
most	people	think,	is	it?	Archaic	Kanese	for	a	female	hill-dog,	I	believe.’
‘Not	like	that,	Kindly.	He’s	hiding	something—oh,	his	story	works	out,	at	least	on	the	surface.	I	mean,	his
timeline	makes	sense—’
‘Excuse	me,	his	what?’
‘Well,	when	he	did	what	and	where	he	did	it.	A	proper	course	of	events,	but	I	figure	that	just	means	he’s
worked	it	out	to	sound	plausible.’
‘Or	it	sounds	plausible	because	it	is	in	fact	his	history.’
‘I	don’t	think	so.	That’s	just	it,	Kindly.	I	think	he’s	lying.’
‘Skanarow,	even	if	he	is,	that’s	hardly	a	crime	in	the	Malazan	military,	is	it?’
‘It	 is	 if	 there’s	 a	 price	 on	 his	 head.	 If,	 say,	 the	 Claw	 get	 wet	 dreams	 thinking	 about	 killing	 him,	 or	 the
Empress	has	a	thousand	spies	out	there	looking	for	him.’
‘For	Ruthan	Gudd?’
‘For	whoever	he	really	is.’
‘And	if	they	are?	Does	it	even	matter	now,	Skanarow?	We’re	all	renegades	these	days.’
‘The	Claw	has	a	long	memory.’
‘What’s	 left	 of	 them,	 after	 Malaz	 City.	 I	 think	 they’d	 save	 all	 their	 venom	 for	 the	 Adjunct	 and	 all	 of	 us
traitorous	 officers	 of	 significance.	 Heroic	 veterans	 such	 as	 myself,	 not	 to	 mention	 the	 Fists,	 barring	 perhaps
Blistig.	 Presumably,’	 he	 continued,	 ‘you	 are	 thinking	 in	 the	 long	 term.	 The	 two	 of	 you	 settling	 down
somewhere,	 a	 house	 overlooking	 the	 Kanese	 beaches,	 perhaps,	 with	 smoke	 rising	 from	 the	 chimney	 and	 a
brood	of	bearded	offspring	playing	with	fire-ants	and	whatnot.	For	what	it	is	worth,	Skanarow,	I	believe	you
will	face	no	challenge	in	sleeping	peacefully	at	night.’
‘I’m	 beginning	 to	 understand	 how	 Lieutenant	 Pores	 felt	 when	 serving	 under	 you,	 Kindly.	 It	 all	 slides	 past,
doesn’t	it?’
‘I’m	not	sure	I	know	what	you	mean.’
‘Right,’	 she	 drawled.	 ‘Consider	 this.	 Ruthan’s	 getting	 nervous.	 And	 it’s	 getting	 worse.	 He’s	 just	 about
combed	his	beard	off	his	chin.	He	has	troubled	dreams.	He	speaks	in	his	sleep,	in	languages	I’ve	never	heard
before.’
‘Most	curious.’
‘For	example,	have	you	ever	heard	of	Ahkrast	Korvalain?’
Kindly	frowned.	‘Can’t	say	I	have,	but	it	sounds	Tiste.	For	example,	the	Elder	Warrens	of	Kurald	Galain	and
Emurlahn.	Similar	construction,	I’d	wager.	You	might	mention	it	to	the	High	Mage.’
She	sighed,	looked	away.	‘Right.	Well,	I’d	best	get	back	to	my	squads.	The	loss	of	Gesler	and	Stormy,	so
soon	after	Masan	lit	out—and	that	other	one—well,	things	are	fragile	at	the	moment.’
‘That	they	are,	Skanarow.	On	your	way	out,	have	Corporal	Thews	bring	in	my	collection.’


‘Your	collection?’
‘Combs,	Skanarow,	combs.’
______
Master	Sergeant	Pores	sat	up,	wiping	the	blood	from	his	nose.	Strange	motes	still	floated	and	drifted	in	front	of
his	eyes,	but	he	could	see	that	his	personal	wagon	of	stores	had	been	ransacked.	The	two	oxen	harnessed	to	it
were	watching	him	as	they	gnawed	on	their	bits.	He	wondered,	briefly,	if	it	was	possible	to	train	oxen	as	guard
dogs,	but	the	image	of	the	beasts	baring	giant	square	teeth	and	moaning	in	a	threatening	fashion	struck	him	as
not	quite	frightening	enough.
As	he	was	picking	himself	up,	brushing	dirt	and	grass	from	his	clothes,	the	sound	of	approaching	footsteps
made	him	flinch	and	then	straighten,	raising	his	hands	defensively.
But	there	was	no	need.	The	newcomers	didn’t	look	particularly	threatening.	Hedge,	and	behind	him	four	of
his	Bridgeburners.	‘What	happened	to	you?’	Hedge	asked.
‘Not	sure,	I’m	afraid.	Someone	came	by	with	a	requisition	I	was,	er,	unable	to	fill.’
‘Wrong	wax	seal	on	the	request?’
‘Something	like	that.’
Hedge	eyed	the	wagon.	‘Looks	like	he	went	and	took	what	he	wanted	anyway.’
‘Capital	 offence,’	 said	 one	 of	 Hedge’s	 corporals,	 shaking	 his	 head	 and	 frowning	 as	 if	 in	 disbelief.	 ‘You
Bonehunters	lack	discipline,	Master	Sergeant.’
Pores	stared	at	the	scrawny	Letherii.	‘You	know,	I	was	just	thinking	the	same	thing,	Corporal.	It’s	anarchy
here.	 I	 truly	 feel	 under	 siege,	 a	 lone	 island	 of	 reason	 and	 order	 in	 a	 storm	 of	 rapacious	 chaos.’	 He	 gestured
behind	him	and	said	to	Hedge,	‘If	you’re	here	to	request	anything,	as	you	can	see	you	will	have	to	wait	until	I
reorganize	 things.	 Besides,	 my	 own	 supplies	 are	 not,	 strictly	 speaking,	 available	 for	 official	 restitution.	 I	 can,
however,	provide	you	with	a	writ	giving	you	an	audience	with	the	Quartermaster.’
‘Kind	of	you,’	said	Hedge.	‘Only	we	already	been	there.’
‘Without	a	writ?	You	had	no	joy,	did	you?’
‘No,	funny	that.	Seems	the	only	writs	he’s	looking	at	are	the	ones	from	you.’
‘Of	 course,’	 said	 Pores.	 ‘As	 you	 might	 imagine,	 Commander—it	 is	 “commander”,	 isn’t	 it?	 As	 you	 might
imagine,	in	the	midst	of	the	very	chaos	your	corporal	so	sharply	observed,	it	has	been	necessary	to	take	it	upon
myself	to	enforce	some	measure	of	control	on	our	dwindling	supplies.’
Hedge	was	nodding,	eyes	still	on	the	wagon.	‘Thing	is,	Master	Sergeant,	what	we’re	hearing	is	that	most	of
the	 chaos	 is	 due	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 everyone	 has	 to	 go	 through	 you.	 Now,	 I’m	 wondering	 if	 Fist	 Keneb	 is	 fully
aware	 of	 the	 situation.	 As	 a	 commander,	 you	 see,	 I	 can	 just	 go	 straight	 and	 talk	 to	 him,	 as	 equals,	 I	 mean.
None	of	your	cronies	to	try	to	get	through—aye,	I	marked	’em	in	that	unofficial	cordon	round	the	HQ	camp.
Quite	 the	 organization	 you	 put	 together,	 Master	 Sergeant.	 Makes	 me	 wonder	 who	 got	 through	 to	 rearrange
your	nose	like	that.’
‘If	 I	 had	 memory	 of	 the	 incident,	 Commander,	 I’d	 tell	 you	 who—at	 least,	 after	 I’d	 hunted	 him	 down	 and
crucified	him	for	looting.’
‘Well,’	said	Hedge,	‘I	caught	a	rumour	not	fifty	paces	from	here.	It’s	fresh	as	that	dung	behind	them	oxen.’
‘Splendid.’	Pores	waited.
‘About	that	writ,’	Hedge	said.
‘Coming	right	up—let	me	just	find	a	spare	wax	tablet—’
‘Not	 using	 parchment?	 No,	 of	 course	 not.	 Parchment	 doesn’t	 melt,	 does	 it?	 Wax	 does.	 Evidence?	 What
evidence?	Clever,	Master	Sergeant.’
Pores	found	a	tablet	and	a	stylus	from	his	small	portable	desk	close	to	the	toppled-over	folding	chair	where
he’d—presumably—been	sitting	when	the	fist	said	hello.	He	quickly	scratched	his	symbol	and	then	looked	up
expectantly.	‘What	is	it	you	want,	specifically?’
‘Specifically?	Whatever	we	decide	we	need.’
‘Right.	Excellent.	I’ll	write	that	right	here.’
‘Make	it	legible	and	all.’
‘Naturally.’
Pores	handed	the	tablet	over,	waited	while	Hedge	squinted	at	it.
Finally,	the	bastard	looked	up	and	smiled.	‘Rumour	is,	it	was	Neffarias	Bredd	who	done	cracked	you	one.’


‘Ah,	him.	Who	else	would	it	be?	How	silly	of	me.	I	don’t	suppose	you	know	what	he	looks	like?’
Hedge	shrugged.	‘Big,	I	heard.	Got	a	brow	like	a	rock	shelf,	a	hamster’s	eyes,	a	nose	spread	from	here	to
Malaz	 Island	 and	 he	 can	 crush	 rocks	 with	 his	 teeth.	 More	 hair	 than	 a	 bull	 bhederin’s	 dangly	 sack.	 Knuckles
that	can	bust	a	Master	Sergeant’s	nose—’
‘You	can	stop	there,’	said	Pores.	‘I	have	an	amazingly	precise	picture	in	my	head	now,	thank	you.’
‘Mayfly	 says	 that’s	 all	 wrong,	 though,’	 Hedge	 added.	 ‘Bredd’s	 tall	 but	 skinny,	 says	 Mayfly,	 and	 his	 whole
face	is	tiny,	like	the	bud	of	a	flower.	With	sweet	and	pleasant	eyes	and	pouty	lips—’
‘And	Mayfly	dreams	about	him	every	night,	aye.	Well,	this	has	been	a	wonderful	conversation,	Commander.
Is	our	business	finished?	As	you	can	see,	I	have	some	work	to	do	here.’
‘So	you	do,	so	you	do.’
He	and	the	oxen	watched	them	leave.	Then	he	sighed.	‘Gods,	they	really	are	Bridgeburners.’	He	glared	at
the	oxen.	‘Chew	on	that	some,	you	useless	oafs.’
	
Skulldeath,	 last	 surviving	 prince	 of	 some	 Seven	 Cities	 desert	 tribe	 and	 the	 most	 frightening	 melee	 killer
Sergeant	Sinter	had	ever	seen,	was	plaiting	Ruffle’s	hair.	The	style	was	markedly	different	from	anything	the
Dal	 Hon	 tribes	 favoured,	 but	 on	 Ruffle’s	 round	 and	 somewhat	 small	 head	 the	 effect	 was,	 to	 Sinter’s	 eyes,
somewhere	between	functional	and	terrifying.
‘Lickeet	 at,’	 muttered	 Nep	 Furrow,	 his	 blotched	 brow	 wrinkling	 into	 folds	 that	 reminded	 her	 of	 turtle	 skin,
‘Dasgusting!’
‘I	 don’t	 know,’	 interjected	 Primly.	 ‘Those	 curls	 will	 be	 all	 the	 padding	 she	 needs	 under	 her	 helm.	 Should
keep	her	a	lot	cooler	than	the	rest	of	us.’
‘Nabit,	furl!	Skeendath,	rap	izzee,	a	gurl?’
‘Nice	 rhyme,’	 offered	 Shoaly	 from	 where	 he	 lounged,	 legs	 stretched	 out	 and	 boots	 edging	 the	 still
smouldering	coals	of	the	hearth.	The	heavy’s	hands	were	laced	behind	his	head	and	his	eyes	were	closed.
Sinter	 and	 the	 other	 half-dozen	 soldiers	 seated	 close	 by	 occasionally	 glanced	 over	 to	 check	 on	 progress.
Through	 a	 flurry	 of	 hand	 signals	 bets	 had	 been	 laid	 on	 when	 Shoaly	 would	 finally	 notice	 he	 was	 cooking	 his
feet.	Corporal	Rim	was	doing	the	ten-count	and	he’d	already	reached	sixty.
Ruffle’s	now	ubiquitous	pipe	was	puffing	smoke	into	Skulldeath’s	eyes	and	he	had	to	keep	wiping	them	as
he	worked	his	wooden	plug	and	bone	hook.
Strange,	mused	Sinter,	how	it	was	misfits	always	found	each	other	in	any	crowd	or,	in	this	case,	wilderness.
Like	those	savannah	grass-spiders	that	dangled	finger-long	feelers	out	in	front	of	them	in	the	mating	season.
Catching	herself	thinking	about	spiders	again,	for	perhaps	the	fifth	time	since	the	morning,	she	looked	over	at
the	recumbent,	motionless	form	of	Sergeant	Hellian,	who’d	stumbled	into	their	camp	thinking	it	belonged	to	her
own	 squad.	 She	 was	 so	 drunk	 Rim	 kept	 her	 from	 getting	 too	 close	 to	 the	 fire,	 lest	 the	 air	 round	 her	 should
ignite.	She’d	been	running	from	the	spiders.	What	spiders?	Hellian	didn’t	explain.	Instead,	she’d	toppled.
Skulldeath	had	looked	her	over	for	a	time,	stroking	her	hair	and	making	sure	none	of	her	limbs	were	pinned
at	odd	angles,	and	when	at	last	he	fell	asleep,	it	was	curled	up	against	her.	The	mother	he	never	had.	Or	the
mother	 he	 never	 left.	 Well,	 all	 those	 lost	 princes	 in	 fairy	 tales	 ain’t	 nearly	 as	 lost	 as	 Skulldeath	 here.
What	a	sad—if	confused—story	he’d	make,	our	sweet	little	boy.
Sinter	 rubbed	 at	 her	 face.	 She	 wasn’t	 feeling	 much	 different	 from	 Hellian,	 though	 she’d	 had	 nothing	 but
weak	ale	to	drink	the	night	before.	Her	mind	felt	bludgeoned,	bruised	into	numbness.	Her	haunting	sensitivities
had	vanished,	making	her	feel	half	deaf.	I	think	I	am	.	.	.	overwhelmed.
By	something.	It’s	close.	It’s	getting	closer.	Is	that	what	this	is?
She	wondered	where	her	sister	was	by	now—how	far	away	were	the	Perish	and	Khundryl	anyway?	They
were	overdue,	weren’t	they?
Sinter	 thought	 back	 to	 her	 fateful	 audience	 with	 the	 Adjunct.	 She	 remembered	 Masan	 Gilani’s	 fierce
expression	the	moment	before	the	Adjunct	sent	her	off.	There	had	been	no	hesitation	in	Tavore’s	response	to
what	Sinter	said	what	was	needed,	and	not	a	single	objection	to	any	one	of	her	suggestions.	The	only	visible
reaction	had	preceded	all	that.	Betrayal.	Yes,	that	word	hurt	her.	It’s	the	one	thing	she	cannot	face.	The
one	thing,	I	think,	that	devours	her	courage.	What	happened	to	you,	Tavore	Paran?	Was	it	something	in
your	 childhood,	 some	 terrible	 rejection,	 a	 betrayal	 that	 stabbed	 to	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	 you,	 of	 the
innocent	child	you	once	were?


When	does	it	happen?	All	those	wounds	that	ended	up	making	us	the	adults	we	are?	A	child	starved
never	grows	tall	or	strong.	A	child	unloved	can	never	find	love	 or	 give	 it	 when	 grown.	 A	 child	 that	 does	 not
laugh	will	become	someone	who	can	find	nothing	in	the	world	to	laugh	at.	And	a	child	hurt	deeply	enough	will
spend	a	lifetime	trying	to	scab	that	wound—even	as	they	ceaselessly	pick	at	it.	She	thought	of	all	the	careless
acts	and	indifferent,	impatient	gestures	she’d	seen	among	parents	in	civilized	places,	as	if	they	had	no	time	for
their	own	children.	Too	busy,	too	full	of	themselves,	and	all	of	that	was	simply	passed	on	to	the	next	generation,
over	and	over	again.
Among	the	Dal	Honese,	in	the	villages	of	both	the	north	and	the	south,	patience	was	the	gift	returned	to	the
child	 who	 was	 itself	 a	 gift.	 Patience,	 the	 full	 weight	 of	 regard,	 the	 willingness	 to	 listen	 and	 the	 readiness	 to
teach—were	these	not	the	responsibilities	of	parenthood?	And	what	of	a	civilization	that	could	thrive	only	by
systematically	 destroying	 that	 precious	 relationship?	 Time	 to	 spend	 with	 your	 children?	 No	 time.	 Work	 to
feed	 them,	 yes,	 that	 is	 your	 responsibility.	 But	 your	 loyalty	 and	 your	 strength	 and	 your	 energy,	 they
belong	to	us.
And	we,	who	are	we?	We	are	the	despoilers	of	the	world.	Whose	world?	Yours.	Hers—the	Adjunct’s,
aye.	 And	 even	 Skulldeath’s.	 Poor,	 lost	 Skulldeath.	 And	 Hellian,	 ever	 bathed	 in	 the	 hot	 embrace	 of
alcohol.	You	and	that	wandering	ex-priest	with	his	smirk	and	broken	eyes.	Your	armies,	your	kings	and
queens,	your	gods,	and,	most	of	all,	your	children.
We	kill	their	world	before	they	even	inherit	it.	We	kill	it	before	they	grow	old	enough	to	know	what	it
is.
She	rubbed	at	her	face	again.	The	Adjunct	was	so	alone,	aye.	But	I	tried.	I	think	I	did,	anyway.	You’re
not	quite	as	alone	as	you	think,	Tavore	Paran.	Did	I	leave	you	with	that	much?	When	I	was	gone,	when
you	 stood	 there	 in	 your	 tent,	 in	 the	 silence—when	 Lostara	 Yil	 left	 and	 not	 one	 set	 of	 eyes	 was	 upon
you	.	.	.	what	did	you	do?	What	did	you	free	from	chains	inside	yourself?
If	Bottle	watched	through	the	eyes	of	one	of	his	rats,	what	did	he	see?	There	in	your	face?
Anything?	Anything	at	all?
‘What’s	burning?’
‘You	are,	Shoaly.’
The	 heavy	 made	 no	 move.	 His	 boots	 were	 now	 peeling	 off	 black	 threads	 of	 smoke.	 ‘Am	 I	 done	 yet,
Primly?’
‘Crispy	bacon,	I’d	wager.’
‘Gods,	I	love	bacon.’
‘You	gonna	move	your	feet,	Shoaly?’	Mulvan	Dreader	demanded.
‘Got	bids,	all	you	bastards?’
‘Of	course,’	said	Pravalak	Rim.
‘Who’s	counting	tens?’
‘I	am,’	said	Rim.	‘Got	an	order,	doing	rounds.	We	got	ten	in	all,	counting	Skulldeath	and	Ruffle,	though	they
ain’t	counted	in	personally,	being	busy	and	all.’
‘Sinter	bet?’
‘Aye,’	said	Sinter.
‘What	number?’
‘Seven.’
‘Rim,	where	you	at	now?’
‘Three.’
‘Out	loud.’
‘Five,	six,	se—’
Shoaly	pulled	his	feet	from	the	fire	and	sat	up.
‘Now	that’s	loyalty,’	Sinter	said,	grinning.
‘De	ain	feer!	De	ain	feer!	I	eed	farv!	Farv!	Erim,	de	ain	feer!’
‘It’s	 Shoaly’s	 feet,’	 said	 Mulvan,	 ‘he	 can	 do	 what	 he	 wants	 with	 them.	 Sinter	 wins	 the	 pot,	 cos	 she’s	 so
pretty,	right,	Shoaly?’
The	man	smiled.	‘Right.	Now,	Sint,	you	like	me?’
‘By	half,’	she	replied.


‘I’ll	need	it.	Nep	Furrow,	what’ll	a	quick	heal	cost	me?’
‘Ha!	Yar	half!	Yar	half!	Ha	ha!’
‘Half	of	my	half—’
‘Nad!	Nad!’
‘It’s	either	that	or	the	sergeant	orders	you	to	heal	me	and	you	get	nothing.’
‘Good	point,’	said	Sinter,	glancing	over	to	Badan	Gruk.	‘Got	need	for	your	healer,	Badan,	you	all	right	with
that?’
‘Of	course,’	he	replied.
‘This	was	all	a	set-up,’	Primly	muttered.	‘I’m	smelling	more	than	bacon	right	now.’
‘Arf	ad	yar	arf!	Shably!	Arf	ad	yar	arf!’
‘Be	kind	to	him,	Shoaly,	so	he	does	you	a	good	job.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant	Sinter.	Half	of	half.	Agreed.	Where’s	the	kitty?’
‘Everybody	spill	now,’	said	Rim,	collecting	a	helm.	‘In	here,	pass	it	around.’
‘Scam,’	said	Drawfirst.	‘Lookback,	we	all	been	taken.’
‘What’s	new	about	that?	Marines	never	play	fair—’
‘They	just	play	to	win,’	Drawfirst	finished,	scowling	at	the	old	Bridgeburner	adage.
Sinter	rose	and	walked	from	the	camp.	Numb	and	restless	at	the	same	time,	what	kind	of	state	was	that	to
be	in?	After	a	few	strides	she	realized	she	had	company	and	glanced	over	to	see	Badan	Gruk.
‘Sinter,	you	look	.	.	.	different.	Sick?	Listen,	Kisswhere—’
‘Never	mind	my	sister,	Badan.	I	know	her	best,	remember.’
‘Exactly.	She	was	going	to	run,	we	all	knew	it.	You	must’ve	known	it	too.	What	I	don’t	get	is	that	she	didn’t
try	to	get	us	to	go	with	her.’
Sinter	glanced	at	him.	‘Would	she	have	convinced	you,	Badan?’
‘Maybe.’
‘And	then	the	two	of	you	would	have	ganged	up	on	me,	until	I	relented.’
‘Could	be	like	that,	aye.	Point	is,	it	didn’t	happen.	And	now	she’s	somewhere	and	we’re	stuck	here.’
‘I’m	not	deserting,	Badan.’
‘Ain’t	you	thought	about	it,	though?	Going	after	Kisswhere?’
‘No.’
‘Really?’
‘She’s	all	grown	up	now.	I	should	have	seen	that	long	ago,	don’t	you	think?	I	don’t	have	to	take	care	of	her
any	more.	Wish	I’d	realized	that	the	day	she	joined	up.’
He	grimaced.	‘You	ain’t	the	only	one,	Sinter.’
Ah,	 Badan,	 what	 am	 I	 to	 do	 with	 you?	 You	 keep	 breaking	 my	 heart.	 But	 pity	 and	 love	 don’t	 live
together,	do	they?
Was	it	pity?	She	just	didn’t	know.	Instead,	she	took	his	hand	as	they	walked.
	
The	soft	wind	on	his	face	woke	him.	Groggy,	thick-tongued	and	parched,	Gesler	blinked	open	his	eyes.	Blue
sky,	 empty	 of	 birds,	 empty	 of	 everything.	 He	 groaned,	 struggling	 to	 work	 out	 the	 last	 thing	 he	 remembered.
Camp,	 aye,	 some	 damned	 argument	 with	 Stormy.	 The	 bastard	 had	 been	 dreaming	 again,	 some	 demonic	 fist
coming	down	out	of	the	dark	sky.	He’d	had	the	eyes	of	a	hunted	hare.
Did	 they	 drink?	 Smoke	 something?	 Or	 just	 fall	 back	 to	 sleep,	 him	 on	 one	 side	 of	 the	 tent,	 Stormy	 on	 the
other—one	side	neat	and	ordered,	the	other	a	stinking	mess.	Had	he	been	complaining	about	that?	He	couldn’t
remember	a	damned	thing.
No	 matter.	 The	 camp	 wasn’t	 moving	 for	 some	 reason—and	 it	 was	 strangely	 quiet,	 too,	 and	 what	 was	 he
doing	 outside?	 He	 slowly	 sat	 up.	 ‘Gods	 below,	 they	 left	 us	 behind.’	 A	 stretch	 of	 broken	 ground,	 odd	 low
mounds	in	the	distance—had	they	been	there	last	night?	And	where	were	the	hearths,	the	makeshift	berms?
He	 heard	 a	 scuffing	 sound	 behind	 him	 and	 twisted	 round—the	 motion	 rocking	 the	 brain	 in	 his	 skull	 fierce
enough	to	make	him	gasp.
A	 woman	 he’d	 never	 seen	 before	 was	 crouched	 at	 a	 small	 fire.	 Just	 to	 her	 right	 was	 Stormy,	 still	 asleep.
Weapons	and	their	gear	were	stacked	just	beyond	him.
Gesler	squinted	at	the	stranger.	Dressed	like	some	damned	savage,	all	colourless	gum-gnawed	deerhide	and


bhederin	leather.	She	wasn’t	a	young	thing	either.	Maybe	forty,	but	it	was	never	easy	to	tell	with	plainsfolk,	for
that	she	surely	was,	like	an	old-fashioned	Seti.	Her	features	were	regular	enough;	she’d	probably	been	goodlooking	once,	but	the	years	had	been	hard	since	then.	When	his	assessing	gaze	finally	lifted	to	her	dark	brown
eyes	he	found	her	studying	him	with	something	like	sorrow.
‘Better	start	talking,’	Gesler	said.	He	saw	a	waterskin	and	pointed	at	it.
She	nodded.
Gesler	reached	over,	tugged	loose	the	stopper	and	drank	down	three	quick	mouthfuls.	An	odd	flavour	came
off	his	lips	and	his	head	spun	momentarily.	‘Hood’s	knocker,	what	did	I	do	last	night?’	He	glared	at	the	woman.
‘You	understanding	me?’
‘Trader	tongue,’	she	said.
It	was	a	moment	before	he	comprehended	her	words.	Her	accent	was	one	he’d	never	heard	before.	‘Good,
there’s	that	at	least.	Where	am	I?	Who	are	you?	Where’s	my	damned	army?’
She	 gestured.	 Gone.	 And	 then	 said,	 ‘You	 are	 for	 me,	 with	 me.	 By	 me?’	 She	 shook	 her	 head,	 clearly
frustrated	with	her	limited	knowledge	of	the	language.	‘Kalyth	my	name.’	Her	eyes	shifted	away.	‘Destriant
Kalyth.’
‘Destriant?	 That’s	 not	 a	 title	 people	 just	 throw	 around.	 If	 it	 doesn’t	 belong	 to	 you,	 you	 and	 your	 whole
damned	line	are	cursed.	For	ever	more.	You	don’t	use	titles	like	that—Destriant,	to	what	god?’
‘God	no.	No	god.	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Acyl	Nest,	Matron	Gunth’an	Acyl.	Kalyth	me,	Elan—’
He	raised	a	hand.	‘Hold	it,	hold	it,	I’m	not	understanding	much	of	that.	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	aye.	You’re	a
Destriant	to	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	But	that	can’t	be.	You	got	it	wrong—’
‘Wrong	no.	I	wish,	yes.’	She	shifted	slightly	and	pointed	at	Stormy.	‘He	Shield	Anvil.’	Then	she	pointed	at
Gesler.	‘You	Mortal	Sword.’
‘We	ain’t	.	.	.’	and	Gesler	trailed	off,	gaze	straying	over	to	Stormy.	‘Someone	called	him	Shield	Anvil,	once.
I	think.	Can’t	recall	who	it	was,	though.	Actually,	maybe	it	was	Mortal	Sword,	come	to	that.’	He	glared	at	her.
‘Whoever	it	was,	though,	it	wasn’t	no	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
She	shrugged.	‘There	is	war.	You	lead.	Him	and	you.	Gunth’an	Acyl	send	me	to	find	you.	I	find	you.	You
are	fire.	Gu’Rull	see	you,	fill	my	head	with	you.	Burning.	Beacons,	you	and	him.	Blinding.	Gu’Rull	collect	you.’
Collect?	Gesler	abruptly	stood,	earning	yet	another	gasp	as	his	head	reeled.	‘You	snatched	us!’
‘Me	not—not	me.	Gu’Rull.’
‘Who	is	Gu’Rull?	Where	is	the	bastard?	I	got	to	cut	his	throat	and	maybe	yours	too.	Then	we	can	try	to	find
the	army—’
‘Gone.	 Your	 army,	 many	 leagues	 away.	 Gu’Rull	 fly	 all	 night.	 With	 you.	 All	 night.	 You	 must	 lead	 K’Chain
Che’Malle	army.	Eight	Furies,	coming	now.	Close.	There	is	war.’
Gesler	walked	over	and	kicked	Stormy.
The	big	man	grunted,	and	then	clutched	the	sides	of	his	head.	‘Go	piss	yourself,	Ges,’	he	mumbled.	‘It	ain’t
morning	yet.’
‘Really?’	Stormy	had	spoken	in	Falari	and	so	Gesler	did	the	same.
‘Bugle	wakes	me	every	time,	you	know	that.	Miserable	sh—’
‘Open	your	eyes,	soldier!	On	your	damned	feet!’
Stormy	lashed	out	with	one	bare	foot,	forcing	Gesler	back	a	step.	He’d	felt	those	kicks	before.	But	Stormy
then	sat,	eyes	open	and	widening	as	he	looked	around.	‘What	did	you	do	to	me,	Ges?	Where’s	.	.	.	where’s
everything?’
‘We	got	ourselves	kidnapped	last	night,	Stormy.’
Stormy’s	bright	blue	eyes	fixed	on	Kalyth.	‘Her?	She’s	stronger	than	she	looks—’
‘Fener’s	sake,	Stormy,	she	had	help.	Someone	named	Gu’Rull,	and	whoever	he	is,	he’s	got	wings.	And	he’s
strong	enough	to	have	carried	us	away,	all	night.’
Stormy’s	eyes	flashed.	‘What	did	I	tell	you,	Gesler!	My	dreams!	I	saw—’
‘What	 you	 said	 you	 saw	 made	 no	 sense.	 Still	 doesn’t!	 The	 point	 is,	 this	 woman	 here	 calls	 herself	 the
Destriant	to	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	and	if	that’s	not	dumb	enough,	she’s	calling	me	the	Mortal	Sword	and	you
the	Shield	Anvil.’
Stormy	flinched,	hands	up	covering	his	face.	He	spoke	behind	his	palms.	‘Where’s	my	sword?	Where’s	my
boots?	Where	the	fuck	is	breakfast?’


‘Didn’t	you	hear	me?’
‘I	heard	you,	Gesler.	Dreams.	It	was	those	damned	scaled	rats.	Every	time	I	saw	one	on	the	trail	I	got	the
shivers.’
‘Rats	ain’t	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	You	know,	if	you	had	even	half	a	brain	maybe	you	could’ve	figured	out	your
dreams,	and	maybe	we	wouldn’t	be	in	this	mess!’
Stormy	dropped	his	hands,	swung	his	shaggy	head	to	regard	Kalyth.	‘Look	at	her,’	he	muttered.
‘What	about	her?’
‘Reminds	me	of	my	mother.’
Gesler’s	hands	twitched,	closed	into	fists.	‘Don’t	even	think	it,	Stormy.’
‘Can’t	help	it.	She	does—’
‘No,	she	doesn’t.	Your	mother	had	red	hair—’
‘Not	the	point.	Around	her	eyes,	see	it?	You	should	know,	Ges,	you	went	and	bedded	her	enough	times—’
‘That	was	an	accident—’
‘A	what?’
‘I	mean,	how	did	I	know	she	went	around	seducing	your	friends?’
‘She	didn’t.	Just	you.’
‘But	you	said—’
‘So	I	lied!	I	was	just	trying	to	make	you	feel	better!	No,	fuck	that,	I	was	trying	to	make	you	feel	that	you’re
nobody	 important—your	 head’s	 swelled	 up	 bad	 enough	 as	 it	 is.	 Anyway,	 it	 don’t	 matter	 any	 more,	 does	 it?
Forget	it.	I	forgave	you,	remember—’
‘You	were	drunk	and	we’d	just	trashed	an	alley	trying	to	kill	each	other—’
‘Then	I	forgave	you.	Forget	it,	I	said.’
‘I	wish	I	could!	Now	you	go	and	say	this	one	looks	like—’
‘But	she	does!’
‘I	know	she	does!	Now	just	shut	the	fuck	up!	We	ain’t—we	ain’t—’
‘Yes,	we	are.	You	know	it,	Ges.	You	don’t	like	it,	but	you	know	it.	We	been	cut	loose.	We	got	us	a	destiny.
Right	here.	Right	now.	She’s	Destriant	and	you’re	Shield	Anvil	and	I’m	Mortal	Sword—’
‘Wrong	way	round,’	Gesler	snarled.	‘I’m	the	Mortal	Sword—’
‘Good.	Glad	we	got	that	settled.	Now	get	her	to	cook	us	something—’
‘Oh,	is	that	what	Destriants	do,	then?	Cook	for	us?’
‘I’m	hungry	and	I	got	no	food!’
‘Then	ask	her.	Politely.’
Stormy	scowled	at	Kalyth.
‘Trader	tongue,’	Gesler	said.
Instead,	Stormy	pointed	at	his	mouth	and	then	patted	his	stomach.
Kalyth	said,	‘You	eat.’
‘Hungry,	aye.’
‘Food,’	she	said,	nodding,	and	then	pointed	to	a	small	leather	satchel	to	one	side.
Gesler	laughed.
Kalyth	then	rose.	‘They	come.’
‘Who	come?’	Gesler	asked.
‘K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Army.	Soon	.	.	.	war.’
At	that	moment	Gesler	felt	the	trembling	ground	underfoot.	Stormy	did	the	same	and	as	one	they	both	turned
to	face	north.
Fener’s	holy	crotch.


Chapter	Twenty-Three
	
I	am	the	face	you	would	not	own
Though	you	carve	your	place
Hidden	in	the	crowd
	
Mine	are	the	features	you	never	saw
As	you	stack	your	thin	days
In	the	tick	of	tonight’s	straw
	
My	legion	is	the	unexpected
A	forest	turned	to	masts
Grass	blades	to	swords
	
And	this	is	the	face	you	would	not	own
A	brother	with	bad	news
Hiding	in	the	crowd
HARBINGER
FISHER
	
She’d	had	an	uncle,	a	prince	high	on	the	rungs	but,	alas,	the	wrong	ladder.	He	had	attempted	a	coup,	only	to
find	that	all	his	agents	were	someone	else’s	agents.	Was	it	this	conceit	that	had	led	to	his	death?	Which	choice
made	it	all	inevitable?	Queen	Abrastal	had	thought	many	times	on	the	man’s	fate.	The	curious	thing	was,	he’d
actually	made	his	escape,	out	from	the	city,	all	the	way	to	the	eastern	border,	in	fact.	But	on	the	morning	of	his
last	ride,	a	farmer	had	woken	with	crippling	rheumatism	in	his	legs.	This	man	was	fifty-seven	years	old	and,	for
thirty-odd	years,	each	month	through	the	summers	and	autumns	he	had	taken	the	harvest	of	his	own	family’s
plot	up	to	the	village	a	league	and	a	half	away.	And	he	had	done	this	by	pulling	a	two-wheeled	cart.
He	must	have	awoken	that	morning	in	the	turgid	miasma	of	his	own	mortality.	Wearing	down,	wearing	out.
And	studying	the	mists	wreathing	the	low	hills	and	glades	edging	the	fields,	he	must	have	held	a	silence	in	his
hands,	 and	 in	 his	 heart.	 We	 pass	 on.	 All	 that	 was	 effortless	 becomes	 an	 ordeal,	 yet	 the	 mind	 remains	 lucid,
trapped	inside	a	failing	body.	Though	the	morning	promised	a	fine	day,	night’s	cold	darkness	remained	lodged
within	him.
He	had	three	sons	but	all	were	in	the	levy	and	off	fighting	somewhere.	Rumours	of	some	uprising;	the	old
man	knew	little	about	it	and	cared	even	less.	Except	for	the	fact	that	his	sons	were	not	with	him.	In	motions
stiff	with	pain	he	had	hitched	up	the	mule	to	a	rickety	flatbed	wagon.	He	could	as	easily	have	chosen	the	cart,
but	the	one	mule	he	owned	that	wasn’t	too	old	or	lame	was	a	strangely	long-bodied	specimen,	too	long	for	the
cart’s	yoke	and	spar.
The	efforts	of	preparation,	concluding	with	loading	the	flatbed,	had	taken	most	of	the	morning,	even	with	his
half-blind	wife’s	help.	And	when	he	set	out	on	the	road,	quirting	the	beast	along,	the	mists	had	burned	off	and
the	 sun	 was	 high	 and	 strong.	 The	 stony	 track	 leading	 to	 the	 section	 road	 was	 more	 suited	 to	 a	 cart	 than	 a
wagon,	and	so	the	going	was	slow,	and	upon	reaching	the	section	track	and	drawing	close	to	the	high	road,	he
had	the	sun	in	his	eyes.
On	this	day,	in	a	heap	of	stones	in	the	corner	of	a	field	just	next	to	the	high	road,	a	civil	war	was	erupting	in
a	wild	beehive.	And	only	a	few	moments	before	the	farmer	arrived,	the	hive	swarmed.
The	old	man,	half-dozing,	had	been	listening	to	the	rapid	approach	of	a	rider,	but	there	was	room	on	the	road
—it	 had	 been	 built	 for	 moving	 armies	 to	 and	 from	 the	 border,	 after	 all—and	 so	 he	 was	 not	 particularly
concerned	as	 those	drumming	 hoofs	 drew	 ever	 closer.	 Yes,	 the	 rider	was	coming	fast.	 Likely	 some	garrison


messenger	carrying	bad	news	and	all	such	news	was	bad,	as	far	as	the	farmer	was	concerned.	He’d	had	a
moment	 of	 worry	 over	 his	 sons,	 and	 then	 the	 swarm	 lifted	 from	 the	 side	 of	 the	 road	 and	 spun	 in	 a	 frenzied
cloud	to	engulf	his	mule.
The	creature	panicked,	bolting	forward	with	a	bleat.	Such	was	its	strength,	born	of	terror,	that	the	old	man
was	flung	backward	over	the	low	seat	back,	losing	his	grip	on	the	traces.	The	wagon	jumped	under	him	and
then	slewed	to	one	side,	spilling	him	from	it.	He	struck	the	road	in	a	cloud	of	dust	and	crazed	bees.
The	rider,	on	his	third	horse	since	fleeing	the	city,	arrived	at	this	precise	moment.	Skill	and	instinct	led	him
round	the	mule	and	wagon,	but	the	sudden	appearance	of	the	farmer,	directly	in	the	horse’s	path,	occurred	so
swiftly,	 so	 unexpectedly,	 that	 neither	 he	 nor	 his	 mount	 had	 the	 time	 to	 react.	 Forelegs	 clipped	 the	 farmer,
breaking	a	collar	bone	and	striking	the	man’s	head	with	stunning	impact.	The	horse	stumbled,	slammed	down
on	to	its	chest,	and	its	rider	was	thrown	forward.
Her	 uncle	 had	 removed	 his	 helm	 some	 time	 that	 day—the	 heat	 was	 fierce,	 after	 all—and	 while	 it	 was
debatable	whether	that	made	any	difference,	Abrastal	suspected—or,	perhaps,	chose	to	believe—that	if	he’d
been	wearing	it,	he	might	well	have	survived	the	fall.	As	it	was,	his	neck	was	snapped	clean.
She	 had	 studied	 those	 events	 with	 almost	 fanatic	 obsession.	 Her	 agents	 had	 travelled	 out	 to	 that	 remote
region	 of	 the	 kingdom.	 Interviews	 with	 sons	 and	 relatives	 and	 indeed,	 the	 old	 farmer	 himself—who	 had
miraculously	 survived,	 though	 now	 prone	 to	 the	 falling	 sickness—all	 seeking	 to	 map	 out,	 with	 precision,	 the
sequence	of	events.
In	truth,	she’d	cared	neither	way	for	the	fate	of	her	uncle.	The	man	had	been	a	fool.	No,	what	fascinated
and	indeed	haunted	her	was	that	such	a	convergence	of	chance	events	could	so	perfectly	conspire	to	take	a
man’s	life.	From	this	one	example,	Abrastal	quickly	comprehended	that	such	patterns	existed	everywhere,	and
could	be	assembled	for	virtually	every	accidental	death.
People	spoke	of	ill	luck.	Mischance.	They	spoke	of	unruly	spirits	and	vengeful	gods.	And	some	spoke	of	the
most	 terrible	 truth	 of	 all—that	 the	 world	 and	 all	 life	 in	 it	 was	 nothing	 but	 a	 blind	 concatenation	 of	 random
occurrences.	 Cause	 and	 effect	 did	 nothing	 but	 map	 out	 the	 absurdity	 of	 things,	 before	 which	 even	 the	 gods
were	helpless.
Some	 truths	 could	 haunt,	 colder,	 crueller	 than	 any	 ghost.	 Some	 truths	 were	 shaped	 by	 a	 mouth	 open	 in
horror.
When	 she	 stumbled	 from	 her	 tent,	 guards	 and	 aides	 swarming	 round	 her,	 there	 had	 been	 no	 time	 for
musings,	no	time	for	thoughts	on	past	obsessions.	There	had	been	nothing	but	the	moment	itself,	red	as	blood	in
the	eyes,	loud	as	a	howl	trapped	inside	a	skull.
Her	daughter	had	found	her.	Felash,	lost	somewhere	inside	a	savage	storm	at	sea,	had	bargained	with	a	god,
and	as	the	echoes	of	cries	from	drowning	sailors	sounded	faint	and	hollow	beneath	the	shrieking	winds,	the	god
had	 opened	 a	 path.	 Ancient,	 appalling,	 brutal	 as	 a	 rape.	 In	 the	 tears	 swimming	 before	 Abrastal’s	 eyes,	 her
fourteenth	daughter’s	face	found	shape,	as	if	rising	from	unfathomable	depths;	and	Abrastal	had	tasted	the	salt
sea	on	her	tongue,	had	felt	the	numbing	cold	of	its	immortal	hunger.
Mother.	 Remember	 the	 tale	 of	 your	 uncle.	 The	 wagon	 crawls,	 the	 mule’s	 head	 nods.	 Thunder	 in	 the
distance.	 Remember	 the	 tale	 as	 you	 told	 it	 to	 me,	 as	 you	 live	 it	 each	 and	 every	 day.	 Mother,	 the	 high
road	is	the	Wastelands.	And	I	can	hear	the	swarm—I	can	hear	it!
Elder	 Gods	 were	 reluctant,	 belligerent	 oracles.	 In	 the	 grip	 of	 such	 a	 power,	 no	 mortal	 could	 speak	 in
freedom.	 Clarity	 was	 defied,	 precision	 denied.	 Only	 twisted	 words	 and	 images	 could	 come	 forth.	 Only
misdirection	played	true.
But	 Felash	 was	 clever,	 the	 cleverest	 of	 all	 her	 beloved	 daughters.	 And	 so	 Abrastal	 understood.	 She
comprehended	the	warning.
The	moment	vanished,	but	the	pain	of	that	assault	remained.	Weeping	blood-clouded	tears,	she	struggled	and
pushed	her	way	through	panicked	staff	and	bodyguards,	stumbled	outside,	naked	above	the	hips,	her	fiery	hair
snarled	 and	 matted	 with	 sweat.	 On	 her	 skin	 the	 salt	 already	 rimed	 and	 she	 stank	 as	 would	 a	 body	 pulled	 up
from	the	sea	bottom.
Arms	 held	 out	 to	 keep	 everyone	 away,	 she	 stood,	 gasping,	 head	 hanging	 down,	 struggling	 to	 recover	 her
breath.	And,	finally,	she	managed	to	speak.
‘Spax.	Get	me	Spax.	Now.’
	


Gilk	 warriors	 gathered	 in	 their	 kin	 groups,	 checking	 weapons	 and	 gear.	 Warchief	 Spax	 stood	 watching,
scratching	his	 beard,	 the	 sour	 ale	 from	the	 cask	 the	 night	 before	 swirling	 ominously	 in	 his	 belly.	 Or	 maybe	 it
was	the	goat	shank,	or	that	fist-sized	brick	of	bitter	chocolate—something	he’d	never	seen	nor	tasted	before
arriving	in	Bolkando,	but	if	the	good	gods	shat	it	was	surely	chocolate.
He	saw	Firehair’s	runner	long	before	the	man	arrived.	One	of	those	scrawny	court	mice,	all	red-faced	from
the	 exertion,	 his	 quivering	 lip	 visible	 from	 ten	 paces	 away.	 His	 own	 scouts	 had	 informed	 him	 that	 they	 were
perhaps	 a	 day	 away	 from	 the	 Bonehunters—they’d	 made	 good	 time,	 damn	 near	 impoverishing	 Saphinand’s
traders	in	the	process,	and	for	all	his	bravado	Spax	was	forced	to	admit	that	both	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears
and	 the	 Perish	 were	 as	 tough	 as	 a	 cactus-eater’s	 tongue.	 Almost	 as	 tough	 as	 his	 own	 Barghast.	 Common
opinion	had	it	that	armies	with	trains	were	slow	beasts	even	on	the	most	level	ground,	but	clearly	neither	Gall
of	the	Burned	Tears	nor	Krughava	of	the	Perish	paid	any	heed	to	common	opinion.
Glancing	 at	 his	 own	 warriors	 one	 more	 time	 before	 the	 runner	 arrived,	 he	 saw	 that	 they	 were	 showing
fatigue.	Not	enough	to	worry	him,	of	course.	One	more	day,	after	all,	and	then	Abrastal	could	have	her	parley
with	the	Malazans	and	they	could	all	turn	round	and	head	home	at	a	far	more	reasonable	pace.
‘Warchief!’
‘What’s	got	her	excited	now?’	Spax	asked,	ever	pleased	to	bait	these	fops,	but	this	time	the	young	man	did
not	react	to	the	overfamiliarity	with	the	usual	expression	of	shock.	In	fact,	he	continued	as	if	he’d	not	heard
Spax.
‘The	Queen	demands	your	presence.	At	once.’
Normally,	 even	 this	 command	 would	 have	 elicited	 a	 sarcastic	 comment	 or	 two,	 but	 Spax	 finally	 registered
the	runner’s	fear.	‘Lead	on	then,’	he	replied	in	a	growl.
	
Dressed	now	in	armour,	Queen	Abrastal	was	in	no	mood	for	banter,	and	she’d	already	said	enough	to	the	Gilk
Warchief	to	keep	him	silent	as	he	rode	at	her	side	towards	the	Perish	camp.	The	morning’s	light	was	clawing
details	down	the	furrowed	scape	of	the	mountains	to	the	west.	Dust	hung	over	the	raw	tracks	leading	to	and
from	 the	 Saphinand	 border,	 and	 already	 lines	 of	 wagons	 and	 carriages	 were	 streaming	 out	 from	 the	 three
camps,	beds	empty	barring	chests	of	coin,	merchant	guards	and	prostitutes.	They	would	be	back	out	here	and
waiting,	she	knew,	for	the	return	of	the	Evertine	Legion.
They	might	have	a	long	wait.
She	had	told	Spax	of	the	sending,	had	registered	with	little	surprise	his	scowl.	The	Barghast	knew	enough	to
have	 no	 doubt	 about	 such	 things.	 He	 had	 even	 commented	 that	 his	 own	 warlocks	 and	 witches	 had	 been
complaining	of	weakness	and	blindness—as	if	the	Barghast	gods	had	been	driven	away,	or	did	not	possess	the
strength	to	manifest	in	the	Wastelands.
As	the	horses	were	being	readied,	he’d	spoken	of	the	belief	in	convergence,	and	she	had	been	impressed	to
discover	that	behind	his	white	skull	paint	and	turtle-shelled	armour,	this	barbarian	knew	of	the	world	beyond	his
own	tribe	and	his	own	people.	The	notion	of	power	drawing	power,	however,	did	not	seem	to	draw	close	to	her
sense	of	what	was	coming.
‘You	say	that	such	forces	are	fated	to	meet,	Spax.	But	.	.	.	this	is	not	the	same.’
‘How	do	you	mean,	Highness?’
‘Is	 chance	 the	 weapon	 of	 fate?	 One	 might	 say	 so,	 I	 imagine,	 but	 what	 is	 drawing	 close	 before	 us,
Spax,	is	something	crueller.	Random,	unpredictable.	Stupid,	in	fact.	It	is	the	curse	of	being	in	the	wrong
place	at	the	wrong	time.’
He’d	chewed	on	that	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	said,	‘Will	you	seek	to	turn	them	away?	Firehair,	this
Krughava	is	rooted	like	a	mountain.	Her	path	is	the	river	of	its	melting	crown.	You	will	fail,	I	think.’
‘I	know,	Spax.	And	this	forces	upon	me	a	dire	decision,	doesn’t	it?’
But	he	would	not	see	it	that	way,	and	he	didn’t—she	was	certain	of	it,	though	he’d	said	nothing,	and	now	the
horses	were	brought	forward	and	they	mounted	up	and	kicked	the	beasts	into	a	quick	canter,	and	then,	once
beyond	the	Evertine	pickets,	into	a	gallop.	Such	a	pace	did	not	invite	conversation	beyond	a	few	terse	words	at
best.	Neither	bothered.
Perish	pickets	marked	them	and	the	banner	rising	from	the	socket	on	Abrastal’s	saddle.	They	quickly	and
efficiently	 cleared	 a	 path	 straight	 to	 the	 camp’s	 centre.	 As	 they	 rode	 into	 the	 main	 avenue	 between	 officer
tents,	 Abrastal	 and	 Spax	 found	 themselves	 the	 subject	 of	 growing	 interest,	 as	 soldiers	 formed	 lines	 to	 either


side	to	watch	them	pass.	Certain	moments,	fraught	and	crowded,	could	spread	a	chilling	fever.
A	short	time	later	they	reined	in	at	the	headquarters	of	the	Grey	Helms.	The	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	and
Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian	stood	awaiting	them,	kitted	in	full	armour	as	was	their	habit.
Abrastal	was	the	first	to	slip	down	from	her	winded	horse.	The	Gilk	followed	a	moment	later.
Krughava	bowed	with	a	tilt	of	her	head.	‘Queen,	you	are	welcome	among	the	Perish—’
‘Forget	the	formal	shit,’	Abrastal	cut	in.	‘Your	command	tent,	if	you	please.’
A	flicker	of	something	in	the	woman’s	hard	eyes,	and	then	she	gestured	to	the	tent	behind	her.
Spax	said,	‘Might	want	to	summon	Gall.’
‘Already	 done,’	 Tanakalian	 replied	 with	 a	 half-smile	 that	 did	 not	 belong	 to	 this	 moment.	 ‘It	 should	 not	 be
long.’
Abrastal	frowned	at	the	Shield	Anvil,	and	then	swept	past	him	and	the	Mortal	Sword,	trailed	a	step	behind
by	Spax.	A	few	moments	later	the	four	were	in	the	tent’s	main	chamber.	Krughava	ushered	her	aides	away
and	then	sent	the	guards	to	the	tent’s	outer	perimeter.
Drawing	off	her	gauntlets,	the	Mortal	Sword	faced	Abrastal.	‘Highness,	the	agenda	is	yours.	Will	you	await
Warleader	Gall	before	beginning?’
‘No.	He’s	a	smart	man.	He’ll	work	it	out.	Mortal	Sword,	we	find	ourselves	in	a	storm	that	can	only	be	seen
from	the	outside.	We	ourselves	as	yet	sense	nothing,	for	we	are	close	to	its	heart.’	She	glanced	to	the	Shield
Anvil,	and	then	back	to	Krughava.	‘Your	priests	and	priestesses	are	in	difficulty,	do	you	deny	it?’
‘I	do	not,’	Krughava	replied.
‘Good.	Your	allies	are	but	a	day	away—’
‘Half	a	day	if	necessary,’	Krughava	said.
‘As	you	say.’	Abrastal	hesitated.
At	 that	 moment	 Warleader	 Gall	 arrived,	 sweeping	 through	 the	 curtains	 of	 the	 doorway.	 He	 was	 breathing
hard,	broad	face	beaded	with	sweat.
‘You	intend	to	leave	us	this	day,’	Tanakalian	said,	glaring	at	the	Queen.
Abrastal	frowned.	‘I	have	said	no	such	thing,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘Forgive	my	brother,’	said	Krughava.	‘He	is	precipitate.	Highness,	what	would	you	warn	us	against?’
‘I	shall	use	the	term	Spax	has	given	me—one	you	will	understand	at	once,	or	so	I	am	led	to	believe.	The
word	is	convergence.’
Something	came	alight	in	Krughava’s	eyes,	and	Abrastal	could	almost	see	the	woman	straightening,	swelling
as	if	to	meet	this	moment.	‘So	be	it—’
‘A	 moment!’	 Tanakalian	 said,	 his	 eyes	 widening.	 ‘Highness,	 this	 is	 not	 the	 place—rather,	 you	 must	 be
wrong.	That	time	is	yet	to	arrive—it	is	far	away,	in	fact.	I	cannot	see	how—’
‘That	 will	 be	 enough,’	 Krughava	 interrupted,	 her	 face	 darkening.	 ‘Unless,	 sir,	 you	 can	 speak	 plainly	 of
knowledge	you	alone	possess.	We	await	you.’
‘You	don’t	understand—’
‘Correct.’
The	 man	 looked	 half-panicked.	 Abrastal’s	 unease	 regarding	 Tanakalian—which	 she	 had	 first	 discovered
outside	 the	 tent—now	 deepened.	 What	 hid	 within	 this	 young	 soldier-priest?	 He	 seemed	 somehow	 knocked
awry.
The	Shield	Anvil	drew	a	breath,	and	then	said,	‘My	vision	is	no	clearer	than	anyone	else’s,	not	here	in	this
place.	But	all	that	I	sense	of	the	coming	convergence	tells	me	that	it	does	not	await	us	in	the	Wastelands.’
Krughava	 seemed	 to	 be	 bristling	 with	 anger—the	 first	 time	 Abrastal	 had	 seen	 such	 a	 thing	 in	 the	 Mortal
Sword.	‘Brother	Tanakalian,	you	are	not	the	arbiter	of	destiny,	no	matter	the	vast	breadth	of	your	ambition.	On
this	day,	and	in	the	matter	before	us,	you	would	do	best	to	witness.	We	are	without	a	Destriant—we	cannot
help	 but	 be	 blind	 to	 our	 future.’	 She	 faced	 Abrastal.	 ‘The	 Grey	 Helms	 shall	 strike	 for	 the	 Bonehunters.	 We
shall	find	them	this	day.	It	may	be	that	they	will	need	our	help.	It	may	be	that	we	will	need	theirs.	After	all,	to
stand	in	the	heart	of	a	storm	is,	as	you	say,	to	be	blind	to	all	dangers	yet	safe	from	none.’
Gall	spoke	for	the	first	time.	‘The	Khundryl	shall	ride	as	the	tip	of	the	spear,	Mortal	Sword.	We	shall	send
Swifts	out	ahead,	and	so	be	the	first	to	sight	our	allies.	If	they	be	in	dire	need,	word	shall	wing	back.’
‘That	is	well	and	I	thank	you,	Warleader,’	said	Krughava.	‘Highness,	thank	you	for	your	warning—’
‘We	are	coming	with	you.’


Spax	turned,	his	face	expressing	shock.
But	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 nodded.	 ‘The	 glory	 that	 is	 within	 you,	 Highness,	 refutes	 all	 disguise.	 Yet,	 I	 humbly
suggest	 that	 you	 change	 your	 mind,	 that	 you	 heed	 the	 objections	 your	 Gilk	 commander	 is	 so	 eager	 to	 voice.
This	 is	 not	 your	 destiny,	 after	 all.	 It	 belongs	 to	 the	 Bonehunters	 and	 to	 the	 Khundryl	 and	 to	 the	 Perish	 Grey
Helms.’
‘The	Gilk,’	Abrastal	replied,	‘are	under	my	command.	I	believe	you	have	misapprehended	Warchief	Spax.
He	is	surprised,	yes,	but	so	long	as	he	and	his	Barghast	bed	themselves	in	my	coin,	they	are	mine	to	lead.’
‘It	is	so,’	said	Spax.	‘Mortal	Sword,	you	have	indeed	misapprehended	me.	The	Gilk	are	without	fear.	We	are
the	fist	of	the	White	Face	Barghast—’
‘And	if	that	fist	drives	into	a	wasps’	nest?’	Tanakalian	asked.
Abrastal	started.
Spax	bared	his	teeth.	‘We	are	not	children	who	die	at	the	sting,	Shield	Anvil.	If	we	should	stir	awake	such	a
nest,	look	to	your	own.’
‘This	is	wrong—’
‘Enough!’	snapped	Krughava.	‘Shield	Anvil,	prepare	to	embrace	all	who	may	come	to	fall	this	day.	That	is
your	task,	your	responsibility.	If	you	so	cherish	the	gleam	of	politics	then	you	should	have	stayed	in	the	kingdom
shores	of	Perish.	We	who	are	here	refused	those	games.	We	left	our	homes,	our	place	of	birth.	We	left	our
families	and	our	loved	ones.	We	left	the	intrigue	and	the	deceit	and	the	court	dances	of	death.	Will	you	now
presume	to	broach	that	bitter	wine?	Go,	sir,	harness	your	strength.’
Face	pale,	Tanakalian	bowed	to	Abrastal,	Spax	and	Gall,	and	then	left.
‘Highness,’	Krughava	said,	‘you	risk	too	much.’
‘I	know,’	she	replied.
‘And	yet?’
She	nodded.	‘And	yet.’
	
Damned	women!	It’s	all	women!
She	reined	in	her	mount	atop	a	low	hill,	eyes	scanning	the	south.	Was	there	dust	on	the	horizon?	Possibly.
Kisswhere	arched	to	ease	the	ache	in	her	lower	back.	Her	thighs	were	on	fire,	as	if	dipped	in	acid.	She	was
low	on	water,	and	the	horse	beneath	her	was	half-dead.
Fucking	Adjunct.	Lostara	Yil.	That	bitch	of	a	sister—it’s	not	fair!	She	had	been	undecided,	but	no	longer.
Oh,	 she’d	 find	 the	 fools,	 the	 pompous	 Perish	 and	 the	 rutting	 Khundryl	 who’d	 weep	 at	 a	 broken	 pot.	 She’d
deliver	 all	 the	 useless	 pleas	 for	 help	 to	 Krughava—another	 Hood-damned	 woman—and	 then	 she’d	 be	 done
with	it.	I’m	not	going	back.	I’ve	deserted,	right?	I’m	riding	right	through	them.	Saphinand.	I	can	get	lost
there,	it’s	ringed	in	with	mountains.	I	don’t	care	how	squalid	it	is,	it’ll	do.
What	else	did	they	expect	from	her?	Some	heroic	return	at	the	head	of	two	armies?	Riding	to	the	rescue,
snatching	them	all	back	from	the	very	gates	of	Hood?	That	kind	of	rubbish	belonged	to	Sinter,	or	even	Masan
Gilani,	who	was	riding	to	find	an	ally	that	might	not	even	exist—yes,	leave	the	legend	to	that	northern	slut,	she
had	all	the	necessary	traits,	after	all.
Kisswhere	 was	 carved	 from	 softer	 stuff.	 Not	 bronze.	 More	 like	 wax.	 And	 the	 world	 was	 heating	 up.
They’d	saluted	her	on	her	way.	They’d	decided	to	put	all	their	trust	and	faith	in	her.	And	I	will	find	them.	That
is	 a	 dust-cloud.	 I	 can	 see	 it	 now.	 I	 can	 reach	 them,	 say	 whatever	 I	 need	 to	 say.	 The	 Adjunct	 says,	 O
Mortal	Sword,	that	betrayal	does	not	suit	the	Perish.	Nor	the	Khundryl.	Come	to	her,	she	asks.
The	Adjunct	says	the	sword’s	for	wearing	and	wielding,	not	sitting	on.	It’s	a	weapon,	it’s	not	courage,
no	 matter	 how	 straight	 up	 it	 holds	 you.	 The	 Adjunct	 says	 there	 is	 a	 betrayer	 among	 you,	 and	 by	 that
betrayer’s	words,	you	doom	the	Bonehunters.	The	Adjunct	says	the	blood	is	on	your	hands,	you	frigid
cow.
Find	 whatever	 means,	 Sinter	 had	 said.	 Use	 whatever	 you	 need	 to	 use.	 Shame	 them,	 shit	 on	 them,	 spit	 on
them.	Or	turn	sly	and	build	up	the	fires	until	their	boots	burn.	Blind	them	by	reflecting	the	blazing	sun	of	their
own	egos.	Beg,	plead,	drop	to	your	knees	and	suck	them	dry.	Use	your	wiles,	Kisswhere,	it’s	what	you	do
best.
Gods,	she	hated	them	all.	That	knowing	look	in	their	eyes,	that	acceptance	of	everything	that	wasn’t	good
within	her.	Yes,	they	knew	she’d	not	come	back.	And	they	didn’t	care.	She	was	expendable,	whipped	like	an


arrow	and	once	it	struck,	why,	it	was	spent,	a	shattered	thing	lying	on	the	ground.
So,	a	broken	arrow	she	would	be.	Fine.	Why	not?	They	expected	nothing	more,	did	they?
Kisswhere	kicked	her	horse	into	motion.	It	answered	reluctantly.	‘Not	much	further,’	she	said	as	she	worked
it	into	a	loose	canter.	‘See	those	riders?	Khundryl.	Almost	there.’	I	don’t	need	to	convince	them	of	anything
—they’re	 on	 their	 way	 already.	 I	 just	 need	 to	 add	 a	 few	 spurs	 to	 their	 boots.	 Who	 knows,	 maybe	 it’s
what	Krughava	goes	for	anyway.	She	has	that	look	about	her,	I	think.
Here,	sweetie,	I	bring	spikes	and	whips—
	
The	riders	of	the	Vedith	Swift	drawing	towards	the	lone	soldier	were	commanded	by	Rafala,	who	held	sharp
eyes	on	the	stranger.	A	Malazan	to	be	sure,	she	could	see.	On	a	tired	horse.	She	tasted	the	excitement,	proof
that	something	was	happening,	yet	another	clench	of	history’s	jaws,	and	no	struggle	could	pull	one	free.	Gall
had	sent	them	out	ahead,	riding	hard.	Find	the	Bonehunters.	Ride	into	their	column	and	speak	to	the	Adjunct.
Tell	her	to	wait,	or	indeed	to	angle	her	march	southward.
The	 terrible	 gods	 were	 gathering—she	 could	 see	 it	 in	 the	 high	 clouds	 building	 to	 the	 southwest,	 tumbling
down	off	the	mountains.	The	armies	must	come	together	and	so	stand	as	one,	facing	down	those	gods.	Such	a
moment	 awaited	 them!	 Adjunct	 Tavore,	 commander	 of	 the	 Bonehunters;	 Gall,	 Warleader	 of	 the	 Khundryl
Burned	Tears;	Krughava,	Mortal	Sword	of	the	Wolves;	and	Abrastal,	Queen	of	Bolkando	and	commander	of
the	Evertine	Legion.	Oh,	and	the	Gilk,	too.	Those	Barghast	know	how	to	roll	in	the	furs,	don’t	they	just.	I
won’t	cringe	with	them	on	one	flank,	that’s	for	certain.
What	sought	them	in	the	Wastelands?	Some	pathetic	tribe,	no	doubt—not	much	else	could	survive	out	here.
No	secret	kingdom	or	empire,	that	was	obvious.	The	land	was	dead,	after	all.	Well,	they	would	crush	whoever
the	 fools	 were,	 and	 then	 march	 on,	 seeking	 whatever	 fate	 the	 Adjunct	 knew	 awaited	 them	 all	 in	 distant
Kolanse.	Rafala	only	hoped	she’d	get	the	chance	to	bloody	her	blade.
The	Malazan	soldier	was	slowing	her	exhausted	mount,	as	if	content	to	let	the	Khundryl	horses	do	most	of
the	 work.	 Well	 enough.	 The	 Dal	 Honese	 did	 not	 look	 very	 comfortable	 on	 that	 saddle.	 For	 decades	 the
Malazans	 had	 been	 clever	 in	 building	 their	 armies.	 They	 used	 horse-tribes	 to	 create	 their	 cavalry,	 mountaindwellers	for	their	scouts	and	skirmishers,	and	farmers	for	their	infantry.	City	folk	for	sappers	and	coastal	folk
for	marines	and	sailors.	But	things	had	since	grown	confused.	The	Dal	Honese	did	not	belong	on	horses.
No	 matter.	 I	 remember	 the	 Wickans.	 I’d	 barely	 a	 month	 of	 bleeding	 then,	 but	 I	 saw	 them.	 They
humbled	us	all.
And	now	it	is	the	Khundryls’	turn	to	do	the	same.
She	gestured	to	slow	the	riders	behind	her	and	continued	ahead	to	rein	in	before	the	Malazan.	‘I	am	Rafala
—’
‘Happy	for	you,’	the	woman	cut	in.	‘Just	take	me	to	Gall	and	Krughava—and	switch	me	to	a	fresher	horse,
this	one’s	done.’
‘How	many	days	away?’	Rafala	asked	as	one	of	her	corporals	took	charge	of	switching	mounts.
The	Malazan	dropped	down	from	her	horse	with	some	difficulty.	‘Who?	Oh,	not	far,	I	should	think.	I	got	lost
the	first	night—thought	I	could	see	the	mountains	on	my	right.	Turned	out	those	were	clouds.	I’ve	been	riding
south	and	west	for	two	days	now.	Is	that	fool	ready	yet?’
Rafala	scowled.	‘He	gives	you	his	finest	battle-horse,	soldier.’
‘Well,	I	ain’t	paying.’	Wincing,	the	woman	climbed	into	the	saddle.	‘Gods,	couldn’t	you	do	with	some	decent
padding?	I’m	sitting	on	bones	here.’
‘Not	my	fault,’	drawled	Rafala,	‘if	you	let	your	muscles	get	too	soft.	Let’s	ride	then,	soldier.’	And	see	if	you
can	keep	up	with	me.	To	her	Swift	she	said,	‘Continue	on.	I	will	provide	her	escort	and	then	return	to	you.’
And	 then	 they	 were	 off.	 The	 Swift	 resumed	 riding	 northward;	 Rafala	 and	 the	 Malazan	 struck	 southward,
and,	trailing	at	ever	greater	distance	behind	them,	the	lone	corporal	followed	on	the	spent	horse.
	
Well,	 thought	 Kisswhere	 as	 she	 and	 Rafala	 approached	 the	 vanguard,	 this	 will	 make	 it	 easy.	 A	 forest	 of
banners	 marked	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 clash—an	 old	 Malaz	 Island	 joke—of	 commanders.	 She	 could	 say	 what
needed	saying	once	and	then	be	done	with	it.
It	was	obvious	to	her	that	disaster	awaited	them	all.	Too	many	women	holding	skillets	here.	She’d	always


preferred	 men	 to	 women.	 As	 friends,	 as	 lovers,	 as	 officers.	 Men	 liked	 to	 keep	 things	 simple.	 None	 of	 that
absurd	 oversensitivity,	 reacting	 to	 every	 damned	 expression	 or	 glance	 or	 gesture.	 None	 of	 that	 stewing	 over
some	careless	passing	comment.	And,	most	importantly,	none	of	that	vicious	backstabbing	and	poison	cups	so
smilingly	given.	No,	she’d	long	since	learned	all	the	nasty	lessons	of	her	own	gender;	she’d	seen	enough	eyes
crawling	 up	 and	 down	 her	 body	 and	 judging	 the	 clothes	 she	 wore,	 the	 cut	 of	 her	 hair,	 the	 man	 at	 her	 side.
She’d	seen	women	carving	up	others	when	those	ones	weren’t	looking,	eyes	like	blades—snip	slice	snip.
And	wasn’t	it	true—beyond	all	challenge—that	women	who	preferred	the	company	of	men	were	the	most
hated	women	of	all?
Too	many	commanders	with	tits	in	this	mob.	Look	at	Gall,	he’s	under	siege	behind	those	tattooed	tears.
And	that	Barghast,	no	wonder	he’s	hiding	his	face	behind	all	that	paint.
‘You	can	go	back	now,	Rafala,’	Kisswhere	said.	‘I	won’t	get	lost.’
‘I	need	your	horse,	Malazan.’
‘So	I	am	to	walk	from	now	on?’
The	young	Khundryl	looked	surprised.	‘Walk	where?’
Kisswhere	scowled.
They	 rode	 through	 the	 scattered	 line	 of	 outriders	 and	 drew	 up	 before	 the	 vanguard—the	 mounted
commanders	made	no	concession	to	their	arrival,	continuing	on	at	a	steady	trot,	forcing	Rafala	and	Kisswhere
to	swing	round	and	fall	in	step	beside	them.	That	attitude	annoyed	Kisswhere—when	was	the	last	time	they’d
even	seen	each	other?
Rafala	spoke:	‘Warleader	Gall,	I	bring	you	a	Malazan	messenger.’	And	then	she	said	to	Kisswhere,	‘I	will
go	and	find	you	another	horse.’
‘Good.	Don’t	take	too	long.’
With	a	flat	look,	Rafala	pulled	her	mount	round	and	headed	into	the	trailing	columns.
A	 red-haired	 woman	 Kisswhere	 had	 never	 seen	 before	 was	 the	 first	 to	 address	 her,	 in	 the	 trader	 tongue.
‘Malazan,	where	are	your	kin?’
‘My	kin?’
‘Your	fellow	soldiers.’
‘Not	far,	I	think.	You	should	reach	them	today,	especially	at	this	pace.’
‘Marine,’	said	Krughava,	‘what	word	do	you	bring	us?’
Kisswhere	glanced	about,	noting	the	various	staff	officers	clumped	round	the	commanders.	‘Can	we	get	a
little	more	private	here,	Mortal	Sword?	You	and	Warleader	Gall,	I	mean—’
‘Queen	Abrastal	of	Bolkando	and	Warchief	Spax	of	the	Gilk	White	Faces	have	allied	their	forces	with	our
own,	 sir.	 This	 said,	 I	 will	 send	 our	 staffs	 a	 short	 distance	 away.’	 She	 faced	 the	 Queen.	 ‘Acceptable,
Highness?’
Abrastal’s	face	registered	distaste.	‘Oh	yes,	they’re	worse	than	flies.	Go!	All	of	you!’
Twenty	or	more	riders	pulled	away	from	the	vanguard,	leaving	only	Krughava,	Tanakalian,	Gall,	the	Queen
and	Spax.
‘Better?’	Krughava	asked.
Kisswhere	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath.	 She	 was	 too	 tired	 to	 have	 to	 work	 at	 this.	 ‘Among	 the	 seers	 serving	 the
Adjunct	.	.	.	Mortal	Sword,	I	can	say	this	no	other	way.	The	threat	of	betrayal	was	judged	to	be	very	real.	I
was	sent	to	confirm	the	alliance.’
The	 Mortal	 Sword	 went	 deathly	 pale.	 Kisswhere	 saw	 the	 foreign	 Queen	 cast	 a	 sharp	 look	 at	 the	 young
Shield	Anvil,	Tanakalian.
What?	Fuck,	they	know	more	of	this	than	I	do.	Seems	the	threat	is	real	after	all.	Sister,	you	have	eyes
that	see	what	others	do	not.	No	wonder	I’m	always	running	away	from	you.
Warleader	Gall	was	the	first	to	respond.	‘What	is	your	name,	soldier?’
‘Kisswhere.	Tenth	Squad,	Third	Company,	Eighth	Legion.’
‘Kisswhere—spirits	know,	how	you	Malazans	can	make	a	name	an	invitation	never	ceases	to	delight	me—I
will	answer	the	Adjunct’s	fear	as	the	Khundryl	must.	We	shall	advance	ahead	and	ride	with	you	with	all	haste,
and	so	rejoin	the	Bonehunters	as	soon	as	possible.’
‘Sir,’	said	Krughava,	‘there	will	be	no	betrayal	from	the	Perish.	See	the	pace	of	our	march.	We	are	apprised
of	 imminent	 danger,	 and	 so	 hasten	 to	 reach	 the	 Adjunct’s	 army.	 It	 is	 our	 added	 fortune	 that	 the	 Bolkando


Queen	leads	her	Evertine	Legion	and	the	Gilk	and	has	vowed	to	give	us	whatever	aid	we	may	require.	Tell	me,
are	the	Bonehunters	beset?	What	enemy	has	appeared	out	of	the	Wastelands	to	so	assail	them?’
You	get	around	to	asking	this	now?	‘As	of	two	days	past,	Mortal	Sword,	our	only	enemy	was	clouds	of
biting	flies,’	Kisswhere	replied.
‘Yet	you	were	dispatched	to	find	us,’	Krughava	observed.
‘I	was.’
‘Therefore,’	the	Mortal	Sword	continued,	‘some	apprehension	of	danger—beyond	that	of	possible	betrayal
—must	exist	to	justify	such	urgency.’
Kisswhere	shrugged.	‘There	is	little	more	I	can	tell	you,	Mortal	Sword.’
‘You	ride	all	this	way	seeking	nothing	but	reassurance?’
At	Gall’s	question,	Kisswhere	glanced	away	for	a	moment.	‘Yes,	it	must	seem	odd	to	you.	All	of	you.	I	have
no	answer.	The	alliance	was	perceived	to	be	in	jeopardy—that	is	all	I	know	of	the	matter.’
No	one	seemed	satisfied.	Too	bad.	What	can	I	say?	My	sister’s	got	a	bad	feeling.	Fid	keeps	throwing
up	and	the	only	high	priest	on	Tavore’s	staff	has	been	drunk	ever	since	Letheras.	And	those	flies	got	a
vicious	bite.
Rafala	 returned	 leading	 a	 saddled	 horse,	 a	 bay	 mare	 with	 a	 witless	 look	 to	 her.	 She	 led	 the	 beast	 up
alongside	Kisswhere.	‘Climb	over,	if	you	can.’
Scowling,	 Kisswhere	 kicked	 her	 boots	 free	 of	 the	 stirrups	 and	 drew	 her	 right	 leg	 over.	 Rafala	 pulled	 the
mare	a	step	ahead	and	the	Malazan	set	her	right	foot	into	the	stirrup,	rose,	reaching	for	the	Seven	Cities	saddle
horn,	and	then	pulled	herself	astride	the	broad-backed	beast.
The	 transfer	 was	 smooth	 and	 Rafala’s	 lips	 tightened,	 as	 if	 the	 notion	 of	 a	 compliment	 threatened	 nausea.
She	dropped	back	to	come	up	behind	Kisswhere,	taking	the	reins	of	her	warrior’s	battle-horse.	Moments	later
she	was	leading	that	mount	away.
Kisswhere	looked	over	to	see	Gall	grinning.	‘I	know	just	the	place,’	he	said.
The	Barghast	barked	a	laugh.
‘Ride	with	the	Khundryl	then,’	Krughava	said	to	her.	‘Lead	them	to	the	Bonehunters.’
Gods	below—	how	to	get	out	of	this?	‘I	fear	I	would	only	slow	them,	Mortal	Sword.	While	this	mount	is
fresh	I,	alas,	am	not.’
‘Ever	slept	between	two	horses?’	Gall	asked.
‘Excuse	me?’
‘A	 slung	 hammock,	 Kisswhere,	 with	 tent	 poles	 to	 keep	 the	 beasts	 apart.	 This	 is	 how	 we	 carry	 wounded
whilst	on	the	move.’
All	 these	 women,	 looking	 at	 her.	 Knowing,	 seeing	 what	 the	 men	 did	 not.	 Showing	 all	 your	 sharp	 little
teeth,	are	you?	So	delighted	to	see	me	trapped.	To	Gall	she	said,	‘If	it	comes	to	that	need,	Warleader,	I	will
tell	you.’
‘Very	good,’	the	warrior	replied.	‘Then,	let	us	ride	to	my	Burned	Tears.	Highness,	Mortal	Sword,	when	next
we	meet	it	shall	be	in	the	Adjunct’s	command	tent.	Until	then,	travel	well	and	may	the	gods	be	blinded	by	your
dust.’
Kisswhere	set	off	with	the	Warleader	and	they	cut	eastward	and	slightly	arrears	to	where	the	main	mass	of
the	horse-warriors	rode	in	loose	formations.	Once	clear	of	the	vanguard,	Gall	said,	‘My	apologies,	soldier.	I	see
that	you	have	discarded	your	uniform,	and	the	last	place	you	want	to	go	is	back	to	where	you	came	from.	But
the	Mortal	Sword	is	a	stern	woman.	Not	one	Perish	Grey	Helm	has	ever	deserted,	and	should	one	ever	try,	I
doubt	they’d	manage	to	live	long.	She	would	have	acted	on	the	Adjunct’s	behalf,	no	matter	the	consequences.
In	every	army	imaginable,	the	Bonehunters	included	I’m	sure,	desertion	is	a	death	sentence.’
Not	stupid	after	all.	‘I	was	commanded	to	give	nothing	away	whilst	riding	alone,	Warleader,	and	so	I	wore
nothing	that	could	be	construed	to	be	a	uniform.’
‘Ah,	I	see.	Then	I	must	apologize	a	second	time,	Kisswhere.’
She	 shrugged.	 ‘My	 sister	 walks	 in	 that	 column,	 Warleader.	 How	 could	 I	 not	 seek	 to	 return	 as	 quickly	 as
possible?’
‘Of	course.	I	understand	now.’
He	fell	into	something	like	an	amiable	silence	as	they	approached	the	Burned	Tears.	She	wondered	if	he’d
been	 fooled.	 True,	 simple	 wasn’t	 necessarily	 the	 same	 as	 stupid,	 after	 all.	 She’d	 given	 reasonable	 answers,


with	only	a	hint	of	affront.	Aye,	a	little	dignity	before	the	insult,	as	my	mother	used	to	say,	makes	a	fine
weapon.
‘She	will	be	delighted	to	see	you	again,	I	am	sure.’
Kisswhere	shot	the	man	a	searching	look,	but	said	nothing.
	
Columnar	 clouds	 heaped	 the	 western	 horizon	 ahead,	 and	 Masan	 Gilani	 could	 feel	 a	 cool	 breeze	 freshening
against	her	face.	She	had	taken	to	spelling	her	horse	every	three	or	so	leagues,	but	the	animal	was	wearying
nonetheless.	It	was	this	detail	that	killed	most	deserters,	she	knew.	The	pursuing	troop	would	be	leading	spare
mounts,	whilst	the	fool	on	the	fly	generally	had	nothing	but	the	lone	beast	he	or	she	was	riding.
Of	course,	no	one	was	chasing	her,	which,	oddly	enough,	did	nothing	to	assuage	her	guilt.	She	belonged	with
her	squad,	sharing	mouthfuls	of	the	same	dust,	cursing	at	the	same	whining	flies.	And,	if	things	were	as	bad	as
people	had	intimated,	she	wanted	to	be	there,	right	beside	her	friends,	to	face	whatever	arrived.	Instead,	here
she	was,	hunting	for	.	.	.	for	what?	For	the	tenth	time	this	day	she	reached	to	brush	her	hand	against	the	small
leather	 pouch	 tied	 to	 her	 belt,	 confirming	 it	 was	 still	 there.	 Lose	 it,	 she	 knew,	 and	 this	 whole	 mission	 was	 a
failure.
It	probably	already	is,	anyway.	I	can’t	find	what	I	can’t	see,	pouch	or	no	pouch.
She	 could	 see	 the	 rain	 ahead	 and	 not	 much	 else,	 grey-blue	 sheets	 angling	 down	 on	 the	 sliding	 wind,	 the
curtains	sweeping	across	the	land.	More	misery	to	add	to	this	overflowing	kitty.	This	is	pointless.	I’m	looking
for	ghosts.	Real	ghosts?	Maybe.	Maybe	not.	Maybe	just	the	ghosts	living	in	the	Adjunct’s	head,	those
old	 hoary	 hags	 of	 lost	 allegiances	 and	 forgotten	 promises.	 Tavore,	 you	 expect	 too	 much.	 You	 always
did.
Rain	spat	into	her	face,	swarmed	the	ground	until	it	seemed	the	dust	danced	like	crazed	ants.	In	moments	all
visibility	beyond	a	few	dozen	paces	vanished.	She	was	now	more	blinded	to	what	she	was	looking	for	than	at
any	other	time.
The	world	mocked.
Pointless.	I’m	going	back—
Five	 figures	 stood	 before	 her,	 grey	 as	 the	 rain,	 dull	 as	 the	 muddy	 dust,	 sudden	 as	 a	 dream.	 Cursing,	 she
reined	in,	fought	with	her	panicking	horse.	Gravel	skittered.	The	beast	snorted,	hoofs	stamping	in	the	sluicing
streams	and	puddles.
‘We	are	who	you	seek.’
She	could	not	tell	which	one	the	voice	came	from.	She	grasped	the	pouch	containing	the	seething	dirt,	gift	of
the	Atri-Ceda	Aranict,	and	gasped	at	its	sudden	heat.
They	 were	 corpses	 one	 and	 all.	 T’lan	 Imass.	 Battered,	 broken,	 limbs	 missing,	 weapons	 dangling	 from
seemingly	 senseless	 hands	 of	 bone	 wrapped	 in	 blackened	 skin.	 Long	 hair,	 dirty	 blond	 and	 rust	 red,	 was
plastered	down	round	their	desiccated	faces,	where	rainwater	ran	like	eternal	tears.
Breathing	hard,	Masan	Gilani	studied	them	for	a	time,	and	then	she	said,	‘Just	five	of	you?	No	others?’
‘We	are	who	remain.’
She	thought	the	one	speaking	was	the	one	standing	closest	to	her,	but	could	not	be	certain.	The	rain	was	a
roar	around	them	all,	the	wind	moaning	as	if	trapped	in	an	enormous	cave.	‘There	should	be	.	.	.	more,’	she
insisted.	‘There	was	a	vision—’
‘We	are	the	ones	you	seek.’
‘Are	you	summoned	then?’
‘We	are.’	And	the	lead	T’lan	Imass	pointed	to	the	pouch	at	her	hip.	‘Thenik	is	incomplete.’
‘Which	one	of	you	is	Thenik?’
The	 creature	 on	 the	 outside	 right	 stepped	 forward.	 Every	 bone	 looked	 to	 be	 shattered,	 with	 splinters	 and
chips	missing.	A	crazed	web	of	cracks	broke	up	its	face	beneath	a	helm	made	from	the	skull	of	some	unknown
beast.
Fumbling	 with	 the	 ties,	 Masan	 finally	 managed	 to	 pull	 free	 the	 pouch.	 She	 tossed	 it	 over.	 Thenik	 made	 no
move	to	catch	it.	The	pouch	landed	at	its	feet,	sank	into	a	puddle.
‘Thenik	thanks	you,’	said	the	speaker.	‘I	am	Urugal	the	Woven.	With	me	is	Thenik	 the	 Shattered,	 Beroke
Soft	 Voice,	 Kahlb	 the	 Silent	 Hunter	 and	 Halad	 the	 Giant.	 We	 are	 the	 Unbound,	 who	 once	 numbered	 seven.
Now	 we	 are	 five.	 Soon	 we	 shall	 be	 seven	 again—there	 are	 fallen	 kin	 in	 this	 land.	 Some	 refuse	 the	 enemy.


Some	will	not	follow	the	one	who	leads	nowhere.’
Frowning,	Masan	Gilani	shook	her	head.	‘You’ve	lost	me.	No	matter.	I	was	sent	to	find	you.	Now	we	must
return	to	the	Bonehunters—my	army—it’s	where—’
‘Yes,	she	is	the	hunter	of	bones	indeed,’	Urugal	said.	‘Her	hunt	is	soon	complete.	Ride	on	your	beast.	We
shall	follow.’
She	 wiped	 water	 from	 her	 eyes.	 ‘Thought	 there’d	 be	 more	 of	 you,’	 she	 muttered,	 gathering	 her	 reins	 and
dragging	her	horse	round.	‘Can	you	keep	up?’	she	asked	over	one	shoulder.
‘You	are	the	banner	before	us,	mortal.’
Masan	Gilani’s	frown	deepened.	She’d	heard	something	like	that	before	.	.	.	somewhere.
	
Four	leagues	to	the	northwest,	Onos	T’oolan	suddenly	halted,	the	first	time	in	days.	Something	not	far	away
had	brushed	his	senses,	but	now	it	was	gone.	T’lan	Imass.	Strangers.	He	hesitated,	as	the	more	distant	and
altogether	 different	 wave	 of	 compulsion	 returned,	 insistent,	 desperate.	 He	 knew	 its	 flavour,	 had	 known	 its
flavour	 for	 weeks	 now.	 This	 was	 what	 Toc	 the	 Younger	 had	 sought,	 what	 he	 had	 demanded	 of	 the	 First
Sword.
But	 he	 was	 no	 longer	 the	 friend	 Toc	 once	 knew,	 just	 as	 Toc	 was	 no	 longer	 the	 friend	 Tool	 himself
remembered.	The	past	was	both	dead	and	alive,	but	between	them	it	was	simply	dead.
The	summons	was	Malazan.	It	was	the	claim	of	alliance	as	had	been	forged	long	ago,	between	the	Emperor
and	 the	 Logros	 T’lan	 Imass.	 Somewhere	 to	 the	 east,	 a	 Malazan	 force	 waited.	 Danger	 approached,	 and	 the
T’lan	Imass	must	stand	with	allies	of	old.	Such	was	duty.	Such	was	the	ink	of	honour,	written	so	deep	as	to
stain	the	immortal	soul.
He	defied	the	command.	Duty	was	dead.	Honour	was	a	lie—see	what	the	Senan	had	done	to	his	wife,	his
children.	Mortality	was	the	realm	of	deceit;	the	 sordid	room	of	horror	hid	 in	the	house	of	the	living,	its	walls
crusted	and	streaked,	dark	stains	on	the	warped	floor.	Dust	crowded	the	corners,	dust	made	of	skin	flakes	and
snarls	of	hair,	nail	clippings	and	clots	of	phlegm.	Every	house	had	its	secret	room,	where	memories	howled	in
the	thick	silence.
He	had	once	been	of	the	Logros.	He	was	no	longer.	He	had	one	duty	now	and	it	was	truly	lifeless.	Nothing
would	 turn	 him	 aside,	 not	 the	 wishes	 of	 Toc	 the	 Younger,	 not	 the	 mad	 aspirations	 of	 Olar	 Ethil—oh	 yes,	 he
knew	she	was	close,	far	too	clever	to	come	within	his	reach,	knowing	well	that	he	would	kill	her,	destroy	her
utterly.	Demands	and	expectations	descended	like	that	distant	rain	to	the	southwest,	but	it	all	washed	from	him
and	left	no	trace.
There	had	been	a	time	when	Onos	Toolan	had	chosen	to	stand	close	to	mortal	humans;	when	he	had	turned
his	back	upon	his	own	kind,	and	in	so	doing	he	had	rediscovered	the	wonders	of	gentler	emotions,	the	sensual
pleasures	of	camaraderie	and	friendship.	The	gifts	of	humour	and	love.	And	then,	at	last,	he	had	achieved	the
rebirth	of	his	life—a	true	life.
That	man	had	taken	that	life,	for	reasons	even	he	could	barely	understand—a	flush	of	empathy,	the	fullest
cost	of	humanity	paid	out	in	the	blade	pushing	into	his	chest.	Strength	fell	away,	in	some	other	direction	than
the	one	taken	by	his	sagging	body.	He	had	looked	out	on	the	world	until	all	meaning	drained	of	colour.
They	had	done	unspeakable	things	to	his	corpse.	Desecration	was	the	wound	delivered	upon	the	dead,	and
the	living	did	so	with	careless	conceit—no,	they	would	never	lie	motionless	on	the	ground.	They	would	never
rise	from	cold	meat	and	bones	to	witness	all	that	was	done	to	the	body	that	been	the	only	home	they	had	ever
known.	It	did	not	even	occur	to	them	that	the	soul	could	suffer	from	phantom	agony,	the	body	like	a	severed
hand.
And	 his	 adopted	 kin	 had	 simply	 looked	 on,	 stone-eyed.	 Telling	 themselves	 that	 Tool’s	 soul	 was	 gone	 from
that	mangled	thing	being	dismembered	on	the	bloody	grasses;	that	the	laughter	and	mockery	could	not	reach
unseen	ears.
Could	 they	 even	 have	 guessed	 that	 love	 alone	 was	 of	 such	 power	 that	 Tool’s	 soul	 had	 also	 witnessed	 the
hobbling	of	his	wife	and	the	rapes	that	followed?	That,	unable	to	find	his	children,	he	had	at	last	set	out	for	the
underworld—to	find	his	beloved	Hetan,	his	family,	to	escape	with	finality	the	cruel	spikes	of	the	mortal	realm?
And	you	turned	me	away.	Toc.	My	friend.	You	turned	me	back	.	.	.	to	this.
He	was	not	that	man,	not	any	more.	He	was	not	the	First	Sword	either.	He	was	not	a	warrior	of	the	Logros.
He	was	none	of	these	things.


He	was	a	weapon.
Onos	T’oolan	resumed	his	march.	The	summons	meant	nothing.	Nothing	to	him,	at	any	rate.	Besides,	in	a
very	short	time	it	would	cease.	For	evermore.
	
There	 was	 no	 road	 leading	 them	 through	 the	 Wastelands;	 no	 road	 to	 take	 them	 to	 their	 destiny,	 whatever
destiny	 that	 happened	 to	 be.	 Accordingly,	 the	 companies	 marched	 in	 loose	 units	 of	 six	 squads,	 and	 each
company	 was	 separated	 from	 the	 others	 yet	 close	 enough	 to	 those	 of	 their	 own	 legion	 to	 link	 if	 need
demanded.	Groups	of	six	squads	were	arranged	as	befitted	their	function:	marines	at	the	core,	the	mixed	units
of	 heavies	 next,	 and	 outside	 of	 them	 the	 medium	 regular	 infantry,	 with	 skirmishers	 forming	 the	 outermost
curtain.
The	 massive	 column	 that	 was	 the	 supply	 train	 forged	 its	 own	 route,	 hundreds	 of	 ox-drawn	 wagons	 and
bawling	herds	of	goats,	sheep,	cattle	and	rodara	that	would	soon	begin	to	starve	in	this	lifeless	land.	Herd	dogs
loped	round	their	charges	and	beyond	them	the	riders	entrusted	with	driving	the	beasts	kept	a	watchful	eye	for
any	strays	that	might	elude	the	dogs—although	none	did.
Flanking	wings	of	lancers	and	mounted	archers	protected	the	sides	of	the	column;	units	of	scouts	rode	well
ahead	of	the	vanguard	while	others	ranged	on	the	south	flank	and	arrears,	but	not	to	the	north,	where	marched
the	 legions	 and	 brigades	 under	 command	 of	 Brys	 Beddict.	 His	 columns	 were	 arranged	 in	 tighter	 formation,
replete	 with	 its	 own	 supply	 train—almost	 as	 big	 as	 the	 Malazan	 one.	 Bluerose	 cavalry	 rode	 in	 wide	 flank,
sending	scouts	deep	into	the	wastes	in	a	constant	cycle	of	riders	and	horses.
Mounted,	Commander	Brys	Beddict	rode	to	the	inside	of	his	column,	close	to	its	head.	Off	to	his	right	at	a
distance	of	about	two	hundred	paces	were	the	Malazans.	Riding	beside	him	on	his	left	was	Aranict,	and	they
were	in	turn	trailed	by	a	half-dozen	messengers.	The	heat	was	savage,	and	the	water-wagons	were	fast	being
drained	of	their	stores.	The	Letherii	herds	of	myrid	and	rodara	could	manage	this	land	better	than	sheep	and
cattle,	 but	 before	 long	 even	 they	 would	 begin	 to	 suffer.	 The	 meals	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 this	 trek	 across	 the
Wastelands	would	be	heavy	on	meat,	Brys	knew,	but	then	things	would	change.
What	lay	beyond	this	forbidding	stretch	of	dead	ground?	From	what	he	could	glean—and	rumours	served	in
place	 of	 any	 direct	 knowledge—there	 was	 a	 desert	 of	 some	 sort,	 yet	 one	 known	 to	 possess	 caravan	 tracks,
and	beyond	that	the	plains	of	the	Elan	people,	a	possible	offshoot	of	the	Awl.	The	Elan	Plains	bordered	on	the
east	the	kingdoms	and	city-states	of	Kolanse	and	the	Pelasiar	Confederacy.
The	notion	of	taking	an	army	across	first	the	Wastelands	and	then	a	desert	struck	Brys	as	sheer	madness.
Yet,	 somehow,	 the	 very	 impossibility	 of	 it	 perversely	 appealed	 to	 him,	 and	 had	 they	 been	 at	 war	 with	 those
distant	kingdoms,	it	would	have	signified	a	bold	invasion	sure	to	achieve	legendary	status.	Of	course,	as	far	as
he	 knew,	 there	 was	 no	 war	 and	 no	 cause	 for	 war.	 There	 was	 nothing	 but	 ominous	 silence	 from	 Kolanse.
Perhaps	indeed	this	was	an	invasion,	but	if	so,	it	was	not	a	just	one.	No	known	atrocities	demanding	retribution,
nor	a	declaration	of	hostilities	from	an	advancing	empire	to	be	answered.	We	know	nothing.
What	happens	to	the	soul	of	a	soldier	who	knows	he	or	she	is	in	the	wrong?	That	they	are	the	aggressors,
the	bringers	of	savagery	and	violence?	The	notion	worried	Brys,	for	the	answers	that	arrived	were	grim	ones.
Something	breaks	inside.	Something	howls.	Something	dreams	of	suicide.	And,	as	commander,	he	would
be	to	blame.	As	much	as	his	brother,	Tehol.	For	they	were	the	leaders,	the	ones	in	charge,	the	ones	using	the
lives	of	thousands	of	people	as	mere	playing	pieces	on	some	stained	board.
It	is	one	thing	to	lead	soldiers	into	war.	And	it	is	one	thing	to	send	them	into	a	war.	But	it	is,	it	seems
to	me,	wholly	another	to	lead	and	send	them	into	a	war	that	is	itself	a	crime.	Are	we	to	be	so	indifferent
to	the	suffering	we	will	inflict	on	our	own	people	and	upon	innocent	victims	in	unknown	lands?
In	his	heart	dwelt	the	names	of	countless	lost	gods.	Many	had	broken	the	souls	of	their	worshippers.	Many
others	 had	 been	 broken	 by	 the	 mortal	 madness	 of	 senseless	 wars,	 of	 slaughter	 and	 pointless	 annihilation.	 Of
the	two,	the	former	suffered	a	torment	of	breathtaking	proportions.	There	was,	in	the	very	end—there	must	be
—judgement.	Not	upon	the	fallen,	not	upon	the	victims,	but	upon	those	who	had	orchestrated	their	fates.
Of	course,	he	did	not	know	if	such	a	thing	was	true.	Yes,	he	could	sense	the	suffering	among	those	gods
whose	 names	 he	 held	 within	 him,	 but	 perhaps	 it	 was	 his	 own	 knowledge	 that	 engendered	 such	 anguish,	 and
that	 anguish	 belonged	 to	 his	 own	 soul,	 cursed	 to	 writhe	 in	 an	 empathic	 trap.	 Perhaps	 he	 was	 doing	 nothing
more	than	forcing	his	own	sense	of	righteous	punishment	upon	those	long-dead	gods.	And	if	so,	by	what	right
could	he	do	such	a	thing?


Troubling	notions.	Yet	onward	his	legions	marched.	Seeking	answers	to	questions	the	Adjunct	alone	knew.
This	went	beyond	trust,	beyond	even	faith.	This	was	a	sharing	of	insanity,	and	in	its	maelstrom	they	were	all
snared,	no	matter	what	fate	awaited	them.
I	 should	 be	 better	 than	 this.	 Shouldn’t	 I?	 I	 lead,	 but	 can	 I	 truly	 protect?	 When	 I	 do	 not	 know	 what
awaits	us?
‘Commander.’
Startled	 from	 his	 dark	 thoughts,	 he	 straightened	 in	 his	 saddle	 and	 looked	 over	 to	 his	 Atri-Ceda.	 ‘My
apologies,	were	you	speaking?’
Aranict	wiped	sweat	from	an	oddly	pale	face,	hesitated.
‘I	believe	you	are	struck	with	heat.	Dismount,	and	I	will	send	for—’
‘No,	sir.’
‘Atri-Ceda—’
He	saw	the	wash	of	terror	and	panic	rise	into	her	face.	‘We	are	in	the	wrong	place!	Commander!	Brys!	We
have	to	get	out	of	here!	We	have	to—we	are	in	the	wrong	place!’
At	that	moment,	thunder	hammered	through	the	earth,	a	drum	roll	that	went	on,	and	on—
	
Dust	storm	or	an	army?	Keneb	squinted	in	the	bright	glare.	‘Corporal.’
‘Sir.’
‘Ride	to	the	vanguard.	I	think	we’ve	sighted	the	Khundryl	and	Perish.’
‘Yes,	sir!’
As	 the	 rider	 cantered	 off,	 Keneb	 glanced	 to	 his	 left.	 Brys’s	 columns	 had	 edged	 slightly	 ahead—the
Malazans	had	been	anything	but	spry	this	day.	Moods	were	dark,	foul,	discipline	was	crumbling.	Knots	of	acid
in	his	stomach	had	awakened	him	this	morning,	painful	enough	to	start	tears	in	his	eyes.	The	worst	of	it	had
passed,	but	he	knew	he	had	to	find	a	capable	healer	soon.
A	sudden	wind	gusted	into	his	face,	smelling	of	something	bitter.
He	saw	Blistig	riding	out	from	his	legion,	angling	towards	him.	Now	what?
	
Head	 pounding,	 Banaschar	 trudged	 alongside	 a	 heavily	 laden	 wagon.	 He	 was	 parched	 inside,	 as	 parched	 as
this	 wretched	 land.	 He	 held	 his	 gaze	 on	 the	 train	 of	 oxen	 labouring	 in	 their	 yokes,	 the	 flicking	 tails,	 the
swarming	flies,	the	fine	coat	of	dust	rising	up	their	haunches	and	flanks.	Hoofs	thumped	on	the	hard	ground.
Hearing	some	muttering	from	the	troop	marching	a	few	paces	to	his	right,	he	lifted	his	eyes.	The	sky	had
suddenly	acquired	a	sickly	hue.	Wind	buffeted	him,	tasting	of	grit,	stinging	his	eyes.
Damned	dust	storm.	She’ll	have	to	call	a	halt.	She’ll	have	to—
No,	that	colour	was	wrong.	Mouth	dry	as	stone,	he	felt	a	tightening	in	his	throat,	a	pain	in	his	chest.
Gods	no.	That	wind	is	the	breath	of	a	warren.	It’s—oh,	Worm	of	Autumn,	no.
He	staggered	as	convulsions	took	him.	Half-blinded	in	pain,	he	fell	on	to	his	knees.
	
Sergeant	Sunrise	dropped	his	kit	bag	and	hurried	over	to	the	fallen	priest’s	side.	‘Rumjugs!	Get	Bavedict!	He’s
looking	bad	here—’
‘He’s	a	drunk,’	snapped	Sweetlard.
‘No—looks	worse	than	that.	Rumjugs—’
‘I’m	going—’
Thunder	 shook	 the	 ground	 beneath	 them.	 Cries	 rose	 from	 countless	 beasts.	 Something	 seemed	 to	 ripple
through	the	ranks	of	soldiery,	an	unease,	an	instant	of	uncertainty	stung	awake.	Voices	shouted	questions	but
no	answers	came	back,	and	the	confusion	rose	yet	higher.
Sweetlard	 stumbled	 against	 Sunrise,	 almost	 knocking	 him	 over	 as	 he	 crouched	 beside	 the	 priest.	 He	 could
hear	the	old	man	mumbling,	saw	his	head	rock	as	if	buffeted	by	unseen	blows.	Something	spattered	the	back
of	Sunrise’s	left	hand	and	he	looked	down	to	see	drops	of	blood.	‘Errant’s	push!	Who	stabbed	him?	I	didn’t	see
—’
‘Someone	knifed	him?’	Sweetlard	demanded.


‘I	don’t—I	ain’t—here,	help	me	get	him	round—’
The	 thunder	 redoubled.	 Oxen	 lowed.	 Wheels	 rocked	 side	 to	 side	 with	 alarming	 creaks.	 Sunrise	 looked
skyward,	saw	nothing	but	a	solid	golden	veil	of	dust.	‘We	got	us	a	damned	storm—where’s	Bavedict?	Sweet
—go	find	’em,	will	ya?’
‘Thought	you	wanted	my	help?’
‘Wait—get	Hedge—get	the	commander—this	guy’s	sweating	blood	all	over	his	skin!	Right	out	through	the
pores!	Hurry!’
‘Something’s	happening,’	Sweetlard	said,	now	standing	directly	over	him.
Her	tone	chilled	Sunrise	to	the	core.
	
Captain	 Ruthan	 Gudd	 drew	 a	 ragged	 breath,	 savagely	 pushing	 the	 nausea	 away,	 and	 the	 terror	 that	 flooded
through	him	in	its	wake	had	him	reaching	for	his	sword.	Roots	of	the	Azath,	what	was	that?	But	he	could	see
nothing—the	dust	had	slung	an	ochre	canopy	across	the	sky,	and	on	all	sides	soldiers	were	suddenly	milling,	as
if	 they	 had	 lost	 their	 way—but	 nothing	 lay	 ahead,	 just	 empty	 stretches	 of	 land.	 Teeth	 bared,	 Ruthan	 Gudd
kicked	his	skittish	horse	forward,	rising	in	his	stirrups.	His	sword	was	in	his	hand,	steam	whirling	from	its	white,
strangely	translucent	blade.
He	caught	sight	of	it	from	the	corner	of	his	eye.	‘Hood’s	fist!’	The	skeins	of	sorcery	that	had	disguised	the
weapon—in	layers	 thick	and	tangled	with	centuries	 of	 magic—had	 been	 torn	 away.	 Deathly	 cold	 burned	 his
hand.	She	answers.	She	answers	.	.	.	what?
He	pulled	free	of	the	column.
A	seething	line	had	appeared	along	a	ridge	of	hills	to	the	southeast.
The	thunder	rolled	on,	drawing	ever	closer.	Iron	glittered	as	if	tipped	with	diamond	shards,	like	teeth	gnawing
through	the	summits	of	those	hills.	The	swarming	motion	pained	his	eyes.
He	saw	riders	peeling	out	from	the	vanguard.	Parley	flags	whipping	from	upended	spears.	Closer	to	hand,
foot-soldiers	 staring	 at	 him	 and	 his	 damned	 weapon,	 others	 stumbling	 from	 the	 bitter	 cold	 streaming	 in	 his
wake.	His	own	armour-clad	thighs	and	the	back	of	his	horse	were	rimed	in	frost.
She	answers—as	she	has	never	answered	before.	Gods	below,	spawn	of	the	Azath—I	smell—oh,	gods
no—
	
‘Form	up!	Marines	form	up!	First	line	on	the	ridge—skirmishers!	Get	out	of	there,	withdraw!’	Fiddler	wasn’t
waiting,	 not	 for	 anything.	 He	 couldn’t	 see	 the	 captain	 but	 it	 didn’t	 matter.	 He	 felt	 as	 if	 he’d	 swallowed	 a
hundred	caltrops.	The	air	stank.	Pushing	past	a	confused	Koryk	and	then	a	white-faced	Smiles,	he	caught	sight
of	the	squad	directly	ahead.
‘Balm!	Deadsmell—awaken	your	warrens!	Same	for	Widdershins—where’s	Cord,	get	Ebron—’
‘Sergeant!’
He	twisted	back,	saw	Faradan	Sort	forcing	her	horse	through	the	milling	soldiers.
‘What	 are	 you	 doing?’	 she	 demanded.	 ‘It’s	 some	 foreign	 army	 out	 there—we’ve	 sent	 emissaries.	 You’re
panicking	the	soldiers—’
Fiddler	 caught	 Tarr’s	 level	 gaze.	 ‘See	 they’re	 formed	 up—toss	 the	 word	 out	 fast	 as	 it	 can	 go,	 you
understand,	Corporal?’
‘Aye	sir—’
‘Sergeant!’
Fiddler	 pushed	 his	 way	 to	 the	 captain,	 reached	 up	 and	 dragged	 her	 down	 from	 the	 saddle.	 Cursing,	 she
flailed,	unbalanced.	As	her	full	weight	caught	him,	Fiddler	staggered	and	then	went	down,	Sort	on	top	of	him.
In	her	ear	he	said,	‘Get	the	fuck	off	that	horse	and	stay	off	it.	Those	emissaries	are	already	dead,	even	if
they	don’t	know	it.	We	need	to	dig	in,	Captain,	and	we	need	to	do	it	now.’
She	 lifted	 herself	 up,	 face	 dark	 with	anger,	 and	 then	 glared	 into	 his	eyes.	 Whatever	 she	 saw	 in	 them	 was
hard	and	sharp	as	a	slap.	Sort	rolled	to	one	side	and	rose.	‘Someone	get	this	horse	out	of	here.	Where’s	our
signaller?	Flags	up:	prepare	for	battle.	Ridge	defence.	Foot	to	dig	in,	munitions	spread	second	trench—get	on	it,
damn	you!’


	
Most	of	the	damned	soldiers	were	doing	nothing	but	get	in	the	way.	Snarling	and	cursing,	Bottle	forced	through
the	press	until	he	reached	the	closest	supply	wagon.	He	scrambled	on	to	it,	pulling	himself	by	the	rope	netting
until	he	was	atop	the	heaped	bales.	Then	he	stood.
A	half-dozen	of	the	Adjunct’s	emissaries	were	cantering	towards	that	distant	army.
The	 sky	 above	 the	 strangers	 swarmed	 with	 .	 .	 .	 birds?	 No.	 Rhinazan	 .	 .	 .	 and	 some	 bigger	 things.
Bigger	.	.	.	enkar’al?	Wyval?	He	felt	sick	enough	to	void	his	bowels.	He	knew	that	smell.	It	had	soaked	into
his	brain	ever	since	he’d	crawled	through	a	shredded	tent.	That	army	isn’t	human.	Adjunct,	your	emissaries
—
Something	 blinding	 arced	 out	 from	 the	 foremost	 line	 of	 one	 of	 the	 distant	 phalanxes.	 It	 cut	 a	 ragged	 path
above	the	ground	until	it	struck	the	mounted	emissaries.	Bodies	burst	into	flames.	Burning	horses	reeled	and
collapsed	in	clouds	of	ash.
Bottle	stared.	Hood’s	holy	shit.
	
Sinter	ran	as	fast	as	she	could,	cutting	between	ranks	of	soldiers.	They	were	finally	digging	in,	while	the	supply
train—the	wagons	herded	like	enormous	beasts	between	mounted	archers	and	lancers—had	swung	northward,
forcing,	she	saw,	the	Letherii	forces	to	divide	almost	in	half	to	permit	the	retreating	column	through	their	ranks.
That	wasn’t	good.	She	could	see	the	chaos	rippling	out	as	the	huge	wagons	plunged	into	the	narrow	avenue.
Pikes	pitched	and	wavered	to	either	side,	the	press	making	figures	stumble	and	fall.
Not	her	problem.	She	looked	ahead	once	again,	saw	the	vanguard,	saw	the	Adjunct,	Captain	Yil,	Fists	Blistig
and	Keneb	and	a	score	or	so	honour	guard	and	mounted	staff.	Tavore	was	issuing	commands	and	riders	were
winging	 out	 to	 various	 units.	 There	 wasn’t	 much	 time.	 The	 distant	 hills	 had	 been	 swallowed	 by	 marching
phalanxes,	a	dozen	in	sight	and	more	coming—and	each	formation	looked	massive.	Five	thousand?	Six?	The
thunder	 was	 the	 measure	 of	 their	 strides,	 steady,	 unceasing.	 The	 sky	 behind	 them	 was	 the	 colour	 of	 bile,
winged	creatures	swarming	above	the	rising	dust.
Those	soldiers.	They	aren’t	people.	They	aren’t	human—gods	below,	they	are	huge.
She	reached	the	vanguard.	‘Adjunct!’
Tavore’s	helmed	head	snapped	round.
‘Adjunct,	we	must	retreat!	This	is	wrong!	This	isn’t—’
‘Sergeant,’	 Tavore’s	 voice	 cut	 through	 like	 a	 blade’s	 edge.	 ‘There	 is	 no	 time.	 Furthermore,	 our	 obvious
avenue	of	retreat	happens	to	be	blocked	by	the	Letherii	legions—’
‘Send	a	rider	to	Brys—’
‘We	have	done	so,	Sergeant—’
‘They	aren’t	human!’
Flat	eyes	regarded	her.	‘No,	they	are	not.	K’Chain—’
‘They	don’t	want	us!	We’re	just	in	their	fucking	way!’
Expressionless,	the	Adjunct	said,	‘It	is	clear	they	intend	to	engage	us,	Sergeant.’
Wildly,	Sinter	turned	to	Keneb.	‘Fist,	please!	You	need	to	explain—’
‘Sinter,’	said	Tavore,	‘K’Chain	Nah’ruk.’
Keneb’s	face	had	taken	on	the	colour	of	the	sickly	sky.	‘Return	to	your	squad,	Sergeant.’
	
Quick	 Ben	 stood	 wrapped	 in	 his	 leather	 cloak,	 thirty	 paces	 on	 from	 the	 Malazan	 vanguard.	 He	 was	 alone.
Three	hundred	paces	behind	him	the	Letherii	companies	were	wheeling	to	form	a	bristling	defensive	line	along
the	 ridge	 on	 which	 the	 column	 had	 been	 marching.	 They	 had	 joined	 their	 supply	 train	 and	 herds	 to	 the
Bonehunters’	and	it	seemed	an	entire	city	and	all	its	livestock	was	wheeling	northward	in	desperate	flight.	Brys
intended	 to	 defend	 that	 retreat.	 The	 High	 Mage	 understood	 the	 logic	 of	 that.	 It	 marked,	 perhaps,	 the	 last
rational	moment	of	this	day.
Ill	luck.	Stupid,	pathetic,	miserable	mischance.	It	was	absurd.	It	was	sickening	beyond	all	belief.	Which	gods
had	 clutched	 together	 to	 spin	 this	 madness?	 He	 had	 told	 the	 Adjunct	 all	 he	 knew.	 As	 soon	 as	 the	 warren’s
mouth	had	spread	wide,	as	soon	as	the	earth	trembled	to	the	first	heavy	footfall	of	the	first	marching	phalanx.
We	saw	their	sky	keeps.	We	knew	they	weren’t	gone.	We	knew	they	were	gathering.


But	that	was	so	far	away,	and	so	long	ago	now.
The	reek	of	their	oils	was	heavy	on	the	wind	that	still	poured	out	from	the	warren.	Beyond	the	ochre	veil	he
could	see	a	deepness,	a	darkness	that	did	not	belong.
They	have	come	here,	to	the	Wastelands.
They	have	been	this	way	before.
Ambitions	 and	 desires	 spun	 like	 ash	 from	 a	 pyre.	 All	 at	 once,	 it	 was	 clear	 that	 nothing	 was	 important,
nothing	 beyond	 this	 moment	 and	 what	 was	 about	 to	 begin.	 Could	 anyone	 have	 predicted	 this?	 Could	 anyone
have	pierced	the	solid	unknown	of	the	future,	carving	through	to	this	scene?
There	were	times,	he	knew,	when	even	the	gods	staggered	back,	reeled	with	bloodied	faces.	No,	the	gods
didn’t	manage	this.	They	could	not	guess	the	Adjunct’s	heart,	that	wellspring	so	full	with	all	she	would
reveal	to	none.	We	were	ever	the	shaved	knuckle,	but	in	whose	hand	would	we	be	found?	None	knew.
None	could	even	dream	.	.	.
He	stood	alone,	warrens	awake	and	seething	within	him.	He	would	do	what	he	could,	for	as	long	as	he	was
able.	And	then	he	would	fall,	and	there	would	be	no	one	left	but	a	score	of	squad	mages	and	the	Atri-Ceda.
On	this	day,	we	shall	witness	the	death	of	friends.	On	this	day,	we	may	well	join	them.
The	High	Mage	Adaephon	Ben	Delat	drew	from	a	pouch	a	handful	of	acorns	and	flung	them	to	the	ground.
He	squinted	once	more	at	the	deepness	beyond	the	veil,	and	then	down	to	the	Nah’ruk	legions.	Monstrous	in
their	implacability—steal	one	away	and	it’s	damned	near	mindless.	Gather	them	in	their	thousands,	and
their	will	becomes	one	.	.	.	and	that	will	is	.	.	.	gods	below	.	.	.	it	is	so	very	cold	.	.	.
	
The	Nah’ruk	were	half	again	as	tall	as	a	man	and	perhaps	twice	the	weight.	Little	of	their	upper	bodies	could
be	seen,	even	as	they	drew	to	within	two	hundred	paces,	for	they	were	clad	in	sheaths	of	enamel	or	boiledleather	armour	extending	out	to	their	upper	arms	and	reaching	down	to	protect	their	forward-thrusting	thighs.
The	stubs	of	their	tails	bore	similar	armour,	but	in	finer	scales.	Wide	helms	enclosed	their	heads,	short	snouts
emerging	between	ornate	cheek-guards.	Those	in	the	front	lines	held	arcane	clubs	of	some	sort,	blunt-ended
and	wrapped	in	bundles	of	what	looked	like	wire.	For	each	dozen	or	so,	one	warrior	walked	burdened	beneath
a	massive	ceramic	pack	that	sat	high	on	its	shoulders.
Behind	this	first	line	of	warriors	the	other	ranks	carried	short-handled	halberds	or	falchions,	held	vertically.
Each	 phalanx	 presented	 a	 breadth	 of	 at	 least	 a	 hundred	 warriors,	 all	 marching	 in	 perfect	 time,	 upper	 bodies
leaning	 forward	 above	 their	 muscled,	 reptilian	 legs.	 There	 were	 no	 standards,	 no	 banners,	 and	 no	 obvious
vanguard	of	commanders.	As	far	as	Ruthan	Gudd	could	determine,	there	was	nothing	to	distinguish	one	from
another,	barring	those	wearing	the	strange	kit	bags.
Frost	glistened	from	his	entire	body	now,	and	ice	had	spread	thick	as	armour	to	encase	the	horse	beneath
him.	It	was	already	dead,	he	knew,	but	the	ice	knew	to	answer	his	commands.	He	rode	a	dozen	paces	ahead
of	 the	 front	 line	 of	 Malazans,	 knowing	 that	 countless	 eyes	 were	 upon	 him,	 knowing	 they	 were	 struggling	 to
understand	what	they	were	seeing—not	just	this	alien	army	so	clearly	intent	on	their	annihilation,	but	Ruthan
Gudd	himself,	out	here	astride	a	horse	sheathed	in	ice,	the	ice	murky	with	hints	of	the	form	it	had	engulfed.
He	 held	 the	 Stormrider	 sword	 as	 if	 it	 was	 an	 extension	 of	 his	 forearm—ice	 had	 crept	 up	 to	 his	 shoulder,
gleaming	yet	flowing	as	would	water.
Eyeing	 the	 Nah’ruk,	 he	 muttered	 under	 his	 breath.	 ‘Yes,	 you	 see	 me.	 You	 mark	 me.	 Send	 your	 fury	 my
way.	First	and	last,	strike	me	.	.	.’
Behind	 him,	 from	 haphazard	 trenches,	 an	 ominous	 hush.	 The	 Bonehunters	 crouched	 as	 if	 pinned	 to	 the
ground,	 caught	 unawares,	 so	 rocked	 by	 the	 unexpected	 impossibility	 of	 this	 that	 not	 a	 single	 defiant	 shout
sounded,	 not	 a	 single	 weapon	 hammered	 the	 rim	 of	 a	 shield.	 Though	 he	 did	 not	 turn	 round,	 he	 knew	 that	 all
motion	had	ceased.	No	more	orders	to	be	given.	None	were,	truth	be	told,	necessary.
By	his	rough	count,	over	forty	thousand	Nah’ruk	were	advancing	upon	them.	He	almost	caught	an	echo	of
the	cacophony	only	moments	away,	as	if	the	future’s	walls	were	about	to	be	shattered,	flinging	horror	back	into
the	past—to	this	moment,	to	ring	deafeningly	in	his	skull.
‘Too	bad,’	he	muttered.	‘It	was	such	a	pretty	day.’
	
‘Hood’s	breath,	who	is	that?’


Adjunct	Tavore’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘Captain	Ruthan	Gudd.’
‘That’s	what	I	thought,’	Lostara	Yil	replied.	‘What’s	happened	to	him?’
In	answer	the	Adjunct	could	only	shake	her	head.
Lostara	shifted	on	her	horse,	free	hand	drifting	to	the	knife	at	her	belt,	and	then	twitching	away.	Sword,	you
idiot.	Not	the	knife.	The	stupid	sword.	A	face	drifted	into	her	mind.	Henar	Vygulf.	He	would	be	with	Brys
right	now,	ready	to	set	off	with	orders.	The	Letherii	were	set	back,	forming	two	distinct	outside	flanks,	like	the
outer	bends	of	a	bow.	They	would	witness	the	collision	of	the	front	lines,	and	then,	she	hoped,	they’d	quickly
see	 the	suicidal	insanity	of	standing	against	 these	damned	 lizards,	 and	Brys	 would	deliberately	 rout	his	army.
Get	 the	 Hood	 out	 of	 here—leave	 all	 the	 gear	 behind—just	 flee.	 Don’t	 die	 like	 us,	 don’t	 stand	 just
because	we’re	standing.	Just	get	out,	Brys—Henar—I	pray	you.	I	beg	you.
She	 heard	 horse	 hoofs	 and	 glanced	 over	 to	 see	 Fist	 Keneb	 riding	 down	 the	 length	 of	 the	 humped	 berm,
passing	the	ranks	of	his	dug-in	soldiers.	What’s	he	doing?
He	was	riding	for	Captain	Ruthan	Gudd.
Tavore	spoke.	‘Sound	horn,	signaller—order	Fist	Keneb	to	personally	withdraw.’
A	blast	of	wails	lifted	into	the	air.
‘He’s	ignoring	it,’	Lostara	said.	‘The	fool!’
	
Quick	Ben	caught	sight	of	Ruthan	Gudd	and	he	grunted.	I’ll	be	damned.	A	Maelbit	Nerruse-whore-spawn
Stormrider.	Who	knew?
But	 what	 was	 he	 doing	 out	 front	 like	 that?	 After	 a	 moment,	 the	 High	 Mage	 swore	 under	 his	 breath.	 You
want	 ’em	 to	 take	 you	 first.	 You	 want	 to	 draw	 them	 to	 you.	 You’re	 giving	 the	 Bonehunters	 a	 dozen
heartbeats	to	realize	what	they	have	to	deal	with.	Captain	Ruthan	Gudd,	or	whoever	you	are	.	.	.	gods,
what	can	I	possibly	say?	Go	well,	Captain.
Go	well.
	
Swearing,	Keneb	savagely	drove	his	spurs	into	the	flanks	of	his	mount.	That	was	Ruthan	Gudd,	and	if	the	fool
wasn’t	what	he	pretended	to	be,	then	the	Malazans	needed	him	more	than	ever.	The	man	could	be	a	damned
god	but	single-handedly	charging	those	things	will	still	see	him	chopped	to	pieces.	Ruthan!	We	need	you
—whoever	and	whatever	you	are—we	need	you	alive!
Could	he	reach	him	in	time?
	
Captain	Skanarow	kicked	at	one	of	her	soldiers,	pushing	the	idiot	back	into	the	shallow	trench.	‘Keep	digging!’
she	snarled,	and	then	returned	her	attention	to	that	gleaming	figure	riding	out	towards	the	lizards.	You	stupid
lying	bastard!	A	Stormrider?	Impossible—they	live	in	the	damned	seas.
Ruthan,	please,	what	are	you	doing?
______
Seeing	 the	 first	 line	 of	 the	 nearest	 phalanx	 level	 their	 bizarre	 clubs,	 Ruthan	 Gudd	 gritted	 his	 teeth.	 This
Stormrider	crap	had	better	work.	But	gods	below,	it	does	hurt	to	wear.	He	wheeled	his	mount	to	face	the
Nah’ruk,	and	then	raised	high	his	sword.
Sunlight	flashed	through	the	ice.
A	rider	was	coming	up	from	behind	and	to	his	left.	Poor	bastard.	That’s	what	you	get	for	taking	orders.
Without	a	backward	glance,	he	drove	his	spurs	into	the	flanks	of	his	mount.	Sparks	flashed	from	the	ice.	The
beast	lunged	forward.
You	sorry	Malazans.	Watch	me,	and	then	ask	yourself:	How	deep	can	you	dig?
	
Fiddler	cocked	his	crossbow,	carefully	inserted	a	sharper-headed	quarrel.	Now	that	it	was	happening,	he	felt
fine.	Nothing	more	to	be	done,	was	there?	Everything	was	alight,	cut	clear,	the	colours	of	the	world	suddenly
saturated,	beautiful	beyond	belief.	He	could	taste	it.	He	could	taste	it	all.	‘Everybody	loaded?’


Grunts	and	nods	from	his	squad,	all	of	them	crouched	down	in	the	trench.
‘Keep	your	heads	right	down,’	Fiddler	told	them	again.	‘We’ll	hear	the	charge,	count	on	it.	Nobody	pokes	up
for	a	look	until	my	say	so,	understood?’
He	saw,	a	few	squads	down,	Balgrid	edging	up	for	a	look.	The	healer	shouted,	‘Gudd’s	charging	them!’
Along	the	entire	line	of	marines,	helmed	heads	sprung	up	like	mushrooms.
Fuck!
	
Crump	was	on	his	hands	and	knees,	a	clutch	of	sharpers	set	like	black-turtle	eggs	in	a	shallow	pit	pushed	into
the	stony	floor	of	the	trench.
Ebron	stared	in	horror.	‘Have	you	lost	your	mind?	Spread	’em	down	the	line,	you	idiot!’
Crump	looked	up,	eyes	widening.	‘Can’t	do	that,	mage.	They’re	mine!	All	I	got	left!’
‘Someone	could	step	on	them!’
But	Crump	was	shaking	his	head.	‘I’m	protecting	them,	mage!’
Ebron	swung	round.	‘Cord!	Sergeant!	It’s	Crump!	He’s—’
	
The	wire-bound	clubs	in	the	front	line	seemed	to	ignite	like	torches.	Lightning	arced	from	the	blunt	heads,	two
serpentine	tendrils	snaking	into	the	air.	From	each	weapon,	one	of	the	bolts	twisted	and	spun	to	sink	into	one	of
the	 strange	 ceramic	 packs—a	 dozen	 such	 arcs	 for	 each	 pack.	 The	 second	 crackling	 tongue	 of	 white	 fire
seemed	to	throb	for	an	instant,	and	then	as	one	they	lashed	out,	a	score	or	more	converging	on	the	charging,
ice-clad	rider	and	horse.
The	 detonation	 engulfed	 Ruthan	 Gudd	 and	 his	 mount,	 tore	 gouts	 of	 earth	 and	 stone	 from	 the	 ground	 in	 a
broad,	ragged	crater.
An	instant	before	the	explosion,	other	front	lines	had	awakened	their	own	weapons,	and	even	as	the	flash
erupted,	hundreds	of	bolts	snapped	out	to	strike	the	front	trench.
	
On	his	way	back	to	the	squad,	Bottle	was	thrown	down	into	the	trench,	the	impact	punching	the	breath	from
his	lungs.	Gaping,	his	head	tilted	to	one	side,	he	saw	a	row	of	bodies	lifted	into	the	air	along	the	entire	length	of
the	berm—all	those	who	had	climbed	up	to	watch	Ruthan’s	charge.	Marines,	most	of	them	headless	or	missing
everything	above	their	rib	cages,	twisted	amidst	dirt	and	rocks	and	pieces	of	armour	and	weapons.
Still	 unable	 to	 breathe,	 he	 saw	 a	 second	 wave	 of	 the	 sorcery	 lance	 directly	 over	 his	 trench.	 The	 ground
shook	as	ranks	behind	him	were	struck.	The	blue	of	the	sky	vanished	behind	thick	clouds.	Bodies	sailed	in	and
out	of	those	churning	clouds.
Bottle	writhed,	deaf,	his	lungs	howling.	He	felt	the	muted	impacts	of	sharpers,	too	close,	too	random—
A	hand	reached	down	out	of	the	sudden	gloom	and	closed	on	his	chest	harness.	He	was	dragged	out	from
the	slumped	side	of	the	collapsed	trench.
Bottle	coughed	out	a	mouthful	of	earth,	hacked	agonizing	breaths,	his	throat	afire.	Tarr’s	spattered	face	was
above	him,	shouting—but	Bottle	could	hear	nothing.	No	matter,	he	pushed	Tarr	back,	nodding.	I’m	 all	 right.
No,	honest.	I’m	fine—where’s	my	crossbow?
	
Keneb	had	come	too	close.	The	detonation	caught	him	and	his	horse	and	literally	ripped	them	both	to	pieces.
Chunks	 of	 flesh	 sprayed	 outward.	 Ebron,	 leaning	 hard	 over	 the	 berm,	 saw	 part	 of	 the	 Fist’s	 upper	 torso—a
shoulder,	a	stub	of	the	arm	and	a	few	splayed	ribs—cartwheel	skyward,	lifted	on	a	column	of	dirt.
Even	 as	 the	 mage	 stared,	 disbelieving,	 a	 sorcerous	 bolt	 caught	 him	 dead	 centre	 on	 his	 sternum.	 It	 tore
through	him,	disintegrating	his	upper	chest,	shoulders	and	head.
Limp	howled	as	one	of	Ebron’s	arms	flopped	down	across	his	thighs.
But	no	one	heard	him.
	
They	had	seen	Quick	Ben,	but	had	elected	to	ignore	him.	He	flinched	as	the	first	waves	of	lightning	ploughed


into	the	defences	along	the	ridge.	Thunder	rattled	the	ground	and	the	entire	facing	side	of	the	Bonehunter	army
vanished	inside	churning	clouds	of	dirt,	stone,	and	dismembered	bodies.
He	 saw	 the	 nodes	 recharging	 on	 the	 shoulders	 of	 the	 drones.	 How	 long?	 ‘No	 idea,’	 he	 whispered.	 ‘Little
acorns,	listen.	Go	for	the	drones—the	ones	with	the	packs.	Forget	the	rest	.	.	.	for	now.’
Then	he	set	out,	walking	down	towards	the	nearest	phalanx.
The	Nah’ruk	front	was	less	than	a	hundred	paces	away.
They	had	seen	him	and	now	they	took	note.	Lightning	blistered	all	along	the	front	line.
	
Horse	clambering	drunkenly	from	the	crater,	Ruthan	Gudd	shook	his	head,	readying	his	blazing	weapon.	Dirt
streamed	down	his	back	beneath	his	smeared,	steaming	armour.	He	spat	grit.
That	wasn’t	so	bad	now.
Directly	in	front	of	him,	twenty	paces	away,	looming	huge,	the	front	line.	Their	eyes	glittered	like	diamonds
within	the	shadows	beneath	the	rims	of	their	ornate	helms.	The	fangs	lining	their	snouts	glistened	like	shards	of
iron.
He	had	an	inkling	that	they	had	not	expected	to	see	him	again.	He	rode	over	to	say	hello.
	
‘Crossbows	at	the	ready!’	Fiddler	yelled.	‘Go	for	the	nodes!’
‘The	what?’
‘The	lumpy	ones!	That’s	where	the	magic’s	coming	from!’
Koryk	scrambled	to	crouch	beside	Fiddler.	The	man	was	sheathed	in	bloody	mud.	‘Who	pops	up	for	a	look,
Fid?’
‘I	will,’	said	Corabb,	surging	upward	and	clawing	up	the	berm.	‘Gods	below!	That	captain’s	still	alive!	He’s
in	their	ranks—’
As	Corabb	made	to	clamber	out	of	the	trench—clearly	intending	to	join	Gudd	and	charge	the	whole	damned
phalanx,	Tarr	reached	out	and	dragged	the	fool	back	down.
‘Stay	where	you	are,	soldier!	Get	that	crossbow—no,	that	one	there!	Load	the	fucker!’
‘Range,	Corabb?’	Fiddler	asked.
‘Forty	and	slowed,	Sergeant—that	captain’s	carving	right	through	’em!’
‘Won’t	matter	much.	I	don’t	care	if	he’s	got	Oponn’s	poker	up	his	ass,	he’s	only	one	man.’
‘We	should	help	him!’
‘We	 can’t,	 Corabb,’	 Fiddler	 said.	 ‘Besides,	 that’s	 the	 last	 thing	 he’d	 want—why	 d’you	 think	 he	 went	 out
there	on	his	own?	Leave	him,	soldier.	We	got	our	own	trouble	come	knocking.	Koryk,	you	take	the	next	look,
count	of	ten.	Nine,	eight,	seven—’
‘I	ain’t	getting	my	head	blasted	off!’
Fiddler	swung	his	crossbow	round	to	point	at	Koryk’s	chest.	‘Four,	three,	two,	one—up	you	go!’
Snarling,	Koryk	scrambled	upward.	Then	was	back	down	almost	instantly.	‘Shit.	Twenty-five	and	picking	up
speed!’
Fiddler	raised	his	voice.	‘Everyone	ready!	The	nodes!	Hold	it—hold	it—NOW!’
______
Hedge	led	his	Bridgeburners	just	to	the	rear	of	the	last	trenches.	‘I	don’t	care	what	Quick	thinks,	he’s	always
had	backup,	he	never	went	it	alone.	Ever.	So	that’s	us,	soldiers—keep	up	there,	Sweetlard!	Look	at	Rumjugs,
she	ain’t	even	breathing	hard—’
‘She’s	forgotten	how!’	Sweetlard	gasped.
‘Remember	what	I	said,’	Hedge	reminded	them,	‘Bridgeburners	have	faced	worse	than	a	bunch	of	stubby
lizards.	This	ain’t	nothing,	right?’
‘We	gonna	win,	Commander?’
Hedge	glanced	over	at	Sunrise.	And	grinned.	‘Count	on	it,	Sergeant.	Now,	everyone,	check	your	munitions,
and	remember	to	aim	for	the	lumpy	ones.	We’re	about	to	pull	into	the	open—’
A	concussion	shook	the	very	air,	but	it	came	from	the	Nah’ruk	lines.	A	billowing	black	cloud	rose	like	a	stain
of	spilled	ink.


‘Gods,	what	was	that?’
Hedge’s	grin	broadened.	‘That,	soldiers,	was	Quick	Ben.’
	
Lightning	arced	out	from	hundreds	of	clubs,	from	multiple	phalanxes	to	either	side	of	the	one	he	had	attacked.
The	bolts	snapped	towards	him,	then	slanted	off	as	Quick	Ben	flung	them	aside.	And	I	ain’t	Tayschrenn	and
this	ain’t	Pale.	Got	no	one	behind	me,	so	keep	throwing	them	my	way,	y’damned	geckos.	Use	it	all	up!
The	first	dozen	or	so	ranks	of	the	phalanx	he’d	struck	were	down,	a	few	writhing	or	feebly	struggling	to	rise
with	crushed	limbs	and	snapped	bones.	Most	were	motionless,	their	bodies	boiled	from	the	inside	out.	As	he
walked	towards	those	who	remained,	he	saw	them	regrouping,	forming	a	line	to	face	him	once	more.
The	huge	falchions	and	halberds	lifted	in	readiness.
Quick	Ben	extended	his	senses,	until	he	could	feel	the	very	air	around	the	creatures,	could	follow	currents	of
that	 air	 as	 they	 slipped	 through	 gills	 into	 reptilian	 lungs.	 He	 reached	 out	 to	 encompass	 as	 many	 of	 them	 as
possible.
And	then	he	set	the	air	on	fire.
	
Lightning	shunted	from	the	High	Mage,	careened	off	into	the	sky	and	out	to	the	sides.
Sergeant	Sunrise	shrieked	as	one	bolt	twisted	and	spun	straight	for	Hedge.	He	flung	himself	forward,	three
paces	that	seemed	to	tear	every	muscle	in	his	back	and	legs.	He	was	a	Bridgeburner.	He	was	the	man	he	had
always	wanted	to	be;	he’d	never	stood	taller,	never	walked	straighter.
And	all	because	of	Hedge.
See	me?	Sunrise—
He	was	smiling	as	he	flung	himself	into	the	lightning’s	path.
	
Hedge’s	 sergeant	 erupted,	 blinding	 white,	 and	 then	 where	 he	 had	 been	 was	 nothing	 but	 swirling	 ashes.	 His
soldiers	were	screaming	behind	him.	Spinning,	Hedge	shouted,	‘Everyone	down	to	the	ground!	We’ll	wait	it	out
—we	wait	it	out!’
Fuck	you,	Quick—this	ain’t	Pale,	you	know!	And	you	ain’t	Tayschrenn!
	
Ruthan	Gudd	slashed	down	to	either	side,	but	the	damned	things	were	pressing	in—they’d	halted	his	forward
progress.	 Heavy	 iron	 blades	 cracked	 and	 skittered	 against	 his	 horse,	 his	 thighs.	 The	 armour	 was	 showing
cracks,	but	after	each	blow	those	fissures	healed.	His	sword	cut	through	helms	and	skulls,	necks	and	limbs,	but
the	Nah’ruk	did	not	relent,	closing	tighter	and	tighter	about	him.
He	 heard	 concussions	 somewhere	 to	 his	 left,	 caught	 the	 stench	 of	 howling	 warrens	 being	 forced	 to	 do
unspeakable	things—Quick	Ben,	how	much	longer	can	you	hide?	Well,	Ruthan	knew	he’d	not	be	around	to
witness	 any	 revelations.	 They	 were	 taking	 him	 down	 with	 their	 sheer	 weight.	 His	 horse	 staggered,	 head
thrashing	and	flinching	with	every	savage	downward	strike	of	falchions.
The	rest	of	the	phalanx	had	moved	past	the	knot	trapping	him,	were	ascending	the	ridge,	only	moments	from
reaching	the	first	trench.	He	caught	flashes	of	other	phalanxes	marching	past.
Four	blades	struck	him	simultaneously,	lifting	him	from	the	saddle	with	a	splintering	explosion	of	ice	shards.
Cursing,	he	twisted,	lashing	out	even	as	he	plunged	into	the	maelstrom	of	reptilian	limbs	and	iron	weapons.	And
then	taloned	feet,	slashing,	stamping	down.	A	blow	to	the	face	stunned	him.	White,	and	then	blessed	darkness.
	
Twelve	 paces.	 The	 surviving	 marines	 rose	 as	 one	 from	 the	 foremost	 trench.	 Crossbows	 thudded.	 Sharpers
cracked	 and	 burners	 ignited.	 Directly	 before	 Fiddler,	 he	 saw	 his	 bolt	 glance	 off	 a	 node	 and	 then	 explode
immediately	behind	the	lizard’s	head.	The	helm	went	spinning,	whipping	fragments	of	brain	and	bone	in	a	wild
cavorting	tail	of	gore.	The	node	blackened,	and	then	exploded.
The	concussion	threw	Fiddler	back,	down	into	the	trench.	Pieces	of	hide	and	meat	rained	down.
Half-winded,	he	struggled	to	reload	his	lobber.	One	last	cusser—gotta	get	rid	of	it,	before	it	goes	up	like


those	sharpers	down	the	line—gods,	we’ve	been	chewed	up—
Shadows	swept	over	the	trench.
He	looked	up.
The	Nah’ruk	had	arrived.
	
Corabb	had	managed	to	reload.	Lifting	his	head,	he	saw	a	giant	lizard	rising	above	the	berm,	maw	tilting	down
as	if	grinning	at	him.
His	 quarrel	 vanished	 into	 its	 soft	 throat,	 punched	 out	 through	 the	 back	 of	 its	 skull.	 The	 creature	 wobbled.
Flinging	away	the	crossbow,	Corabb	drew	his	sword	and	scrambled	to	his	feet.	He	swung	at	the	nearest	shin.
The	impact	nearly	broke	his	wrist	and	the	weapon’s	edge	bit	deep	into	bone	and	jammed	there.
Still	the	creature	stood,	twitches	rippling	through	its	massive	body.
Corabb	struggled	to	pull	loose	his	sword.
To	either	side,	Nah’ruk	clambered	over	the	berm,	leapt	down	into	the	trench.
	
The	backswing	lifted	Sergeant	Primly	into	the	air,	and	he	rode	the	iron	blade,	his	blood	spilling	down	as	if	from
a	bucket.	Shrieking,	Neller	flung	himself	on	to	the	lizard’s	left	arm,	pulled	himself	higher	and	then	forced	the
sharper	down	between	the	enamel	chest-plate	and	the	greasy	hide.	Jaws	snapped,	closed	on	his	face.	Phlegm
like	acid	splashed	his	eyes	and	skin.	Howling,	Neller	tightened	his	grip	on	the	sharper	and	then	drove	the	fist	of
his	other	hand	against	the	armour,	directly	opposite	the	munition.
Mulvan	 Dreader,	 driving	 a	 spear	 into	 the	 lizard’s	 belly,	 caught	 the	 blast	 as	 the	 creature’s	 chest	 exploded.
Ceramic	shrapnel	shredded	Mulvan’s	neck,	punching	red	gore	into	the	air	behind	him.	Neller	was	flung	back,
his	right	arm	gone,	his	face	a	slashed,	melting	horror.
Primly’s	corpse	landed	five	paces	away,	a	flopping	thing	painted	crimson.
The	lizard	toppled.
Two	more	appeared	behind	it,	falchions	lifting.
Stumbling,	Drawfirst	set	her	shield	and	readied	her	sword.	As	Skulldeath	leapt	past	her,	landing	in	between
the	two	Nah’ruk.
	
A	bolt	sizzled	close	to	her	horse’s	head.	Its	muzzle	and	mane	burst	into	flame.	Skin	peeled	and	cracked	from
mouth	to	shoulders.	The	animal	collapsed.	Lostara	Yil	managed	to	roll	clear.	The	heat	had	flashed	against	her
face	and	she	could	smell	the	stench	of	scorched	hair.	Staggering	to	her	feet,	she	looked	over	to	see	a	dozen
staff	riders	down,	roasted	in	their	armour.	The	Adjunct	was	lifting	herself	from	the	carnage,	her	otataral	sword
in	one	hand.
‘Get	me	Keneb—’
‘Keneb’s	dead,	Adjunct,’	Lostara	replied,	staggering	over.	The	world	spun	and	then	steadied.
Tavore	straightened.	‘Where—’
Lostara	reached	the	woman,	pulled	her	down	to	the	ground.	‘You	shouldn’t	even	be	alive,	Tavore.	Stay	here
—you’re	in	shock.	Stay	here—I’ll	find	help—’
‘Quick	Ben—the	High	Mage—’
‘Aye.’	Lostara	stood	over	the	Adjunct,	who	was	sitting	as	would	a	child.	The	captain	looked	over	to	where
she’d	last	seen	Quick	Ben.
He’d	annihilated	an	entire	phalanx,	and	where	it	had	been	the	fires	of	superheated	flesh,	hide	and	bone	still
raged	in	an	inferno.	She	saw	him	marching	towards	another	phalanx,	above	him	the	sky	convulsing,	blackening
like	a	bruise.
Sorcery	erupted	from	the	High	Mage,	struck	the	phalanx.	Burning	corpses	lifted	into	the	air.
‘I	see	him.	Adjunct—I	can’t—’
From	the	darkness	in	the	sky	a	sudden	glow,	blinding,	and	then	an	enormous	spear	of	lightning	descended.
She	saw	the	High	Mage	look	up,	saw	him	raise	his	arms—and	then	the	bolt	struck.	The	explosion	could	have
levelled	 a	 tenement	 block.	 Even	 the	 Nah’ruk	 in	 the	 phalanx	 thirty	 or	 more	 paces	 away	 were	 flattened	 like
sheaves	of	wheat.	Flanking	units	buckled	on	the	facing	sides.


The	shock	wave	staggered	Lostara,	stole	her	breath,	deafened	her.	Hands	to	her	face,	she	slumped	down,
struck	the	ground	hard.
Pearl?
	
Skanarow	 threw	 herself	 down	 into	 the	 second	 trench	 where	 the	 heavies	 were	 waiting.	 ‘The	 marines	 are
overrun!	 Sound	 the	 fall-back—and	 make	 room	 for	 the	 survivors—let	 ’em	 through!	 Get	 ready	 to	 hold	 this
trench!’
She	 saw	 a	 messenger,	 unhorsed,	 crouching	 behind	 the	 headless	 corpse	 of	 a	 heavy.	 ‘You—find	 Captain
Kindly.	 I	 just	 saw	 the	 vanguard	 go	 down—and	 I	 don’t	 know	 where	 Blistig	 is,	 so	 as	 far	 as	 I’m	 concerned
Kindly’s	now	in	command.	Tell	him,	we	need	to	begin	a	retreat—we	can’t	hold.	Understood?’
The	young	man	nodded.
‘Go.’
	
Brys	 flinched	 as	 the	 Nah’ruk	 lines	 struck	 the	 Malazan	 defences.	 He	 saw	 the	 heavy	 falchions	 descending.
Barely	slowing,	the	lizards	swarmed	over	the	first	trench	and	began	closing	on	the	next	one.
‘Aranict—’
‘I	think	she	lives,	Commander.’
Brys	 swung	 round	 in	 his	 saddle,	 caught	 the	 eyes	 of	 his	 outriders.	 ‘We	 need	 to	 retrieve	 the	 Adjunct.
Volunteers	only.’
One	rider	pushed	through	the	others.	Henar	Vygulf.
Brys	nodded.	‘Get	your	spare	horses,	Lieutenant.’
The	huge	Bluerose	saluted.
‘When	you	have	them,’	Brys	said	before	the	man	turned	away,	‘ride	for	the	supply	train.’
The	soldier	frowned.
Brys	gritted	his	teeth.	‘I	will	not	stand	here	watching	this	slaughter.	We	will	close	with	the	enemy.’
	
They	 saw	 the	 impossibly	 thick	 bolt	 of	 lightning	 tear	 down	 from	 the	 dark	 stain	 ahead.	 As	 the	 shockwaves
drummed	 through	 the	 ground,	 Warleader	 Gall	 raised	 an	 arm	 to	 signal	 a	 halt.	 He	 faced	 Kisswhere,	 his	 face
ashen.	 ‘I	 am	 sending	 you	 to	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 Krughava—tell	 her	 the	 Malazans	 are	 assailed,	 and	 that	 the
Khundryl	ride	to	their	succour.’
She	stared	at	the	man.	‘Warleader—’
‘Ride,	soldier—you	are	not	Khundryl—you	do	not	understand	what	it	is	to	fight	from	a	horse.	Tell	Krughava
the	gods	were	cruel	this	day,	for	she	will	not	reach	the	Malazans	in	time.’
‘Who	is	their	enemy?’	Kisswhere	demanded.	‘Your	shamans—’
‘Are	blind.	We	know	less	than	you.	Ride,	Kisswhere.’
She	swung	her	horse	round.
Gall	rose	in	his	stirrups	and	faced	his	warriors.	He	drew	his	tulwar	and	held	it	high.	And	said	nothing.
In	answer,	six	thousand	weapons	were	freed	and	lifted	skyward.
Gall	pulled	his	horse	round.	‘Ride	ahead,	Rafala,	until	you	sight	the	enemy.’
The	woman	kicked	her	mount	into	a	gallop.
After	a	moment,	Gall	led	his	army	after	her,	at	a	quick	canter,	and	the	sound	of	thunder	grew	louder,	and	the
yellow	sky	deepened	to	brown	in	which	flashes	bloomed	like	wounds.
He	wondered	what	his	wife	was	doing.
	
Worse	 than	 chopping	 down	 trees.	 Fiddler	 gave	 up	 trying	 to	 hack	 through	 legs	 and	 began	 hamstringing	 the
bastards,	ducking	the	slashes	of	notched	weapons,	dodging	the	downward	swings.	The	surviving	Malazans	had
been	driven	from	the	first	trench,	were	now	struggling	to	hold	a	fighting	withdrawal	across	the	ten	paces	to	the
heavies’	trench.
Crossbow	 quarrels	 and	 arrows	 spat	 out	 from	 the	 troops	 arrayed	 behind	 the	 heavies,	 winging	 at	 heights


mercifully	 above	 the	 heads	 of	 the	 soldiers	 in	 their	 desperate	 retreat.	 Most	 missiles	 shattered	 against	 enamel,
but	a	few	were	punching	through,	finding	gaps	in	the	Nah’ruk’s	armour.	Beasts	were	toppling	here	and	there.
But	not	enough.	The	phalanx	was	a	machine,	devouring	everything	in	its	path.
Fiddler	had	lost	his	cusser	and	lobber	in	the	first	trench.	The	shortsword	felt	puny	as	a	thorn	in	his	hand.	A
glancing	blow	had	sent	his	helm	flying	and	blood	streamed	down	the	right	side	of	his	head.
He	 saw	 Koryk	 pushing	 his	 sword	 through	 a	 Nah’ruk’s	 neck;	 saw	 another	 lizard	 step	 in	 behind	 the	 man,
halberd	lifting	high.	Bolts	punched	into	both	armpits.	The	creature	fell	forward,	burying	Koryk.	Smiles	rushed
over,	diving	and	rolling	to	evade	a	lashing	falchion.
Cuttle	stumbled	up	against	Fiddler.	‘Retreat’s	sounded!’
‘I	heard—’
‘Quick	Ben’s	been	Rannalled,	Fid—that	giant	strike—’
‘I	know.	Forget	him—help	me	get	the	squad	back—the	heavies	will	hold,	enough	so	we	can	regroup.	Go	on,
I	ain’t	seen	Corabb	or	Bottle—’
	
Nah’ruk	and	human	corpses	half-buried	Bottle,	but	he	was	in	no	hurry	to	move.	He	saw	more	of	the	lizards
marching	past	on	all	sides.
We	never	even	slowed	them.
Quick,	whatever	happened	to	subtlety?
He	 could	 see	 a	 sliver	 of	 sky,	 could	 see	 the	 wyval	 wheeling	 round	 up	 there,	 eager	 to	 descend	 and	 feed.
Grandma,	you	always	said	don’t	reach	too	far.	Close	your	dead	eyes	now,	and	remember,	I	loved	you
so.
He	left	his	body,	winged	skyward.
	
Corabb	yanked	hard	and	dragged	his	sword	from	the	Nah’ruk’s	left	eye	socket,	then	he	reached	down	to	take
up	again	Shoaly’s	ankle—but	the	man	had	stopped	screaming	and	as	he	looked	he	saw	in	the	heavy’s	face	a
slackness,	a	dullness	to	the	staring	eyes.
A	 line	 of	 Nah’ruk	 was	 closing,	 only	 a	 few	 paces	 away.	 Swearing,	 Corabb	 released	 his	 grip	 and	 turned	 to
run.
The	 trench	 of	 the	 heavy	 infantry	 was	 just	 ahead.	 He	 saw	 helmed	 faces,	 weapons	 readied.	 Arrows	 and
quarrels	 hissed	 over	 them	 and	 the	 thud	 and	 snap	 of	 their	 impacts	 was	 torrential	 behind	 him.	 Corabb	 hurried
over.
Cuttle	fell	in	beside	him.	‘Seen	Tarr?’
‘Seen	him	go	down.’
‘Bottle?’
Corabb	shook	his	head.	‘Smiles?	Koryk?’
‘Fid’s	got	’em.’
‘Fiddler!	He’s—’
The	first	trench	directly	behind	the	two	marines	erupted.	Nah’ruk	ranks	simply	vanished	in	blue	clouds.
‘What—’
‘Some	bastard	stepped	on	a	cusser!’	Cuttle	said.	‘Serves	’em	right!	C’mon!’
Deathly	 pale	 faces	 beneath	 helm	 rims—but	 the	 heavies	 were	 standing,	 ready.	 Two	 parted	 and	 let	 the
marines	through.
One	shouted	over	at	Cuttle.	‘Those	clubs—’
‘Got	’em,	soldier!’	Cuttle	yelled	back.	‘Now	it’s	just	iron.’
At	once	a	shout	rose	from	the	length	of	the	trench.	‘HAIL	THE	MARINES!’
And	 the	 faces	 around	 Corabb	 suddenly	 darkened,	 teeth	 baring.	 The	 instant	 transformation	 took	 his	 breath
away.	Iron,	aye,	you	know	all	about	iron.
The	Nah’ruk	were	five	steps	behind	them.
The	heavies	rose	to	meet	them.
	


Hedge	watched	as	the	lizards	clambered	from	the	enormous	crater	where	Quick	Ben	had	been,	watched	as
they	re-formed	their	ranks	and	resumed	their	advance.	Twisting	from	where	he	was	lying,	he	then	looked	back
to	study	the	Letherii	legions	drawing	up	at	a	steady	half-trot,	pikes	set	and	slowly	angling	in	overlapping	layers.
Hedge	grunted.	Good	weapons	for	this.
‘Bridgeburners!	Listen	up!	Never	mind	the	High	Mage.	He’s	ashes	on	the	wind.	We’re	going	to	soften	up
the	 lizards	 for	 the	 Letherii.	 Ready	 your	 munitions.	 One	 salvo	 when	 I	 say	 so	 and	 then	 we	 retreat	 and	 if	 the
Letherii	are	sharp,	they’ll	make	room	for	us!	If	they	don’t,	then	swing	to	the	right—to	the	right,	got	it?	And	run
like	Hood	himself	is	on	your	heels!’
‘Commander!’	someone	cried	out.
‘What?’
‘Who’s	Hood?’
Gods	below.	‘He’s	just	the	guy	you	don’t	want	on	your	heels,	right?’
‘Oh.	Right.’
Hedge	lifted	his	head.	Shit,	these	ones	got	clubs	and	nodes.	‘Check	your	munitions!	Switch	to	Blue.	You
hear	me?	Blues!	And	aim	for	that	front	line!	Nodes,	lads	and	lasses,	those	white	lumps!’
‘Commander!’
‘Hood’s	the—’
‘I	hear	horses!	Coming	from	the	southeast—I	think—is	that	horses?’
Hedge	rose	slightly	higher.	He	saw	two	lizard	phalanxes	smartly	wheeling.	Oh	gods	.	.	.
	
Rolling	into	a	charge,	Gall	leaned	forward	on	his	horse.	Just	like	the	Malazans	to	find	the	ugliest	foes	the	whole
damned	world	had	to	offer.	And	the	scariest.	But	those	squares	had	no	pikes	to	fend	off	a	cavalry	charge—
and	they	would	pay	for	that.
When	he’d	led	his	army	up	to	where	Rafala	had	reined	in,	he’d	seen—in	the	first	dozen	heartbeats—all	he’d
needed	to	see.
The	enemy	was	devouring	the	Malazan	army,	driving	them	back,	cutting	down	hundreds	of	soldiers	if	they
were	no	more	than	children.	This	was	slaughter,	and	barely	a	third	of	the	phalanxes	had	actually	closed	with
the	Bonehunters.
He	saw	the	Letherii	moving	up	on	both	flanks,	forming	bristling	pike	walls	in	a	saw-tooth	presentation,	but
they’d	 yet	 to	 meet	 the	 enemy.	 Out	 to	 the	 far	 flanks	 mounted	 troops	 mustered,	 yet	 held	 far	 back—
unaccountably	so,	as	far	as	Gall	was	concerned.
Directly	 ahead	 of	 the	 Khundryl	 charge,	 two	 phalanxes	 were	 closing	 up	 to	 present	 a	 solid	 defensive	 line,
denying	 the	 Burned	 Tears	 the	 opportunity	 to	 drive	 between	 the	 squares,	 winging	 arrows	 on	 both	 sides.	 Gall
needed	make	no	gestures	or	call	out	commands—his	lead	warriors	knew	to	draw	up	upon	loosing	their	arrows;
they	 knew	 their	 lanes,	 through	 which	 the	 heavier	 lancers	 would	 pass	 to	 drive	 deep	 into	 the	 wounded	 front
ranks	of	the	enemy—drive	in,	and	then	withdraw.	There	would	be	no	chance	of	shattering	these	phalanxes—
the	demons	were	too	big,	too	heavily	armoured.	They	would	not	break	before	a	charge.
This	is	the	last	day	of	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears.	My	children,	do	you	ride	with	me?	I	know	you	do.	My
children,	be	brave	this	day.	See	your	father,	and	know	that	he	is	proud	of	you	all.
The	foremost	line	of	demons	began	preparing	strange	clubs.
______
Hedge	 saw	 the	 lightning	 erupt	 from	 the	 Nah’ruk	 line,	 saw	 the	 jagged	 bolts	 tear	 into	 the	 mass	 of	 Khundryl
warriors.	The	charge	seemed	to	disintegrate	inside	a	horrific	cloud	of	red	mist.
Sickened,	 he	 twisted	 on	 to	 his	 back,	 stared	 up	 at	 the	 sky.	 Didn’t	 look	 like	 sky	 at	 all.	 ‘Bridgeburners,	 get
ready!	Munitions	in	hand!	One,	two,	three—UP!’
	
Brys	had	thought	the	bodies	lying	on	the	ground	ahead	were	corpses.	They	suddenly	rose,	forty	or	fifty	in	all,
and	 flung	 objects	 at	 the	 front	 line	 of	 Nah’ruk.	 The	 small	 dark	 grenados	 splashed	 as	 they	 struck	 the	 enemy
warriors.	 An	 instant	 later,	 the	 Nah’ruk	 who	 had	 been	 struck	 began	 writhing	 as	 the	 liquid	 ate	 through	 their
armour,	and	then	their	hides.


One	of	the	nodes	exploded,	flinging	bodies	back.	Then	another	and	another.	All	at	once	the	front	ranks	of
the	phalanx	were	a	chaotic	mess.
Brys	turned	to	his	signaller.	‘Sound	the	charge!	Sound	the	charge!’
Horns	blared.
The	legions	broke	into	a	dog-trot,	pikes	levelled.
The	sappers	were	running,	swinging	to	the	left	and	out	from	the	gap	between	the	two	forces.	They	might
just	make	it	clear	in	time.
At	six	paces,	the	Letherii	ranks	surged	forward,	voices	lifting	in	a	savage	roar.
The	teeth	of	the	saw	bit	deep,	one,	three	rows,	four.	The	Nah’ruk	phalanx	buckled.	And	then	the	two	forces
ground	to	a	halt.	Pikes	were	held	in	place,	infighters	armed	with	axes	and	stabbing	swords	pushing	 between
the	front	line	to	begin	their	vicious	close	work.	Falchions	flashed	high,	and	then	descended.
Brys	gestured.	Another	messenger	came	up	alongside	him.
‘The	onager	and	arbalest	units	are	to	draw	up	on	the	hill	to	the	east.	Begin	enfilade.	Cavalry	to	provide	initial
screen	until	they	commence	firing.’
The	man	saluted	and	rode	off.
Brys	 looked	 southeastward.	 Miraculously,	 some	 remnant	 of	 the	 mounted	 horse-warriors	 had	 survived	 the
sorcerous	 salvos—he	 could	 see	 riders	 emerging	 from	 the	 dust	 and	 smoke,	 hammering	 wildly	 into	 the	 front
ranks	of	the	Nah’ruk.	They	struck	with	inhuman	ferocity	and	Brys	was	not	surprised—to	have	come	through
that	would	have	stripped	the	sanity	of	any	warrior.
He	breathed	a	soft	prayer	for	them	in	the	name	of	a	dozen	long-lost	gods.
A	messenger	reined	in	on	his	right.	‘Commander!	The	west	legions	have	engaged	the	enemy.’
‘And?’
The	man	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	face.	‘Knocked	’em	back	a	step	or	two,	but	now	.	.	.’
Seeing	that	he	could	not	go	on,	seeing	that	he	was	near	tears,	Brys	simply	nodded.	He	turned	to	study	what
he	could	see	of	the	Malazan	position.
Nothing	but	armoured	lizards,	weapons	lifting	and	descending,	blood	rising	in	a	mist.
But,	as	he	stared,	he	noticed	something.
The	Nah’ruk	were	no	longer	advancing.
You	stopped	them?	Blood	of	the	gods,	what	manner	of	soldiers	are	you?
	
The	heavy	infantry	stood.	The	heavy	infantry	held	the	trench.	Even	as	they	died,	they	backed	not	a	single	step.
The	 Nah’ruk	 clawed	 for	 purchase	 on	 the	 blood-soaked	 mud	 of	 the	 berm.	 Iron	 chewed	 into	 them.	 Halberds
slammed	 down,	 rebounded	 from	 shields.	 Reptilian	 bodies	 reeled	 back,	 blocking	 the	 advance	 of	 rear	 ranks.
Arrows	and	quarrels	poured	into	the	foe	from	positions	behind	the	trench.
And	from	above,	Locqui	Wyval	descended	by	the	score,	in	a	frenzy,	to	tear	and	rend	the	helmed	heads	of
the	lizard	warriors.	Others	quickly	closed	to	do	battle	with	their	kin,	and	the	sky	rained	blood.
	
Bottle’s	soul	leapt	from	body	to	body,	grasped	tight	the	souls	of	Locqui	Wyval,	and	flung	them	down	upon	the
Nah’ruk.	As	each	one	was	pulled	down	to	the	slaughter,	he	tore	himself	free	to	enslave	yet	another.	He	had
reached	out,	taking	as	many	as	he	could—dozens	of	the	creatures—the	stench	of	blood	and	all	that	they	saw
had	driven	them	mad.	He	needed	only	crush	the	tatters	of	their	restraint,	loose	them	upon	the	nearest	beasts
that	were	not	wyval.
When	kin	attacked,	he	did	not	resist—the	more	dead	and	dying	wyval,	the	better.
But	he	felt	himself	being	torn	apart.	He	felt	his	mind	shredding	away.	He	could	not	do	much	more	of	this.
Yet	Bottle	did	not	relent.
	
Tarr	stumbled	into	a	knot	of	marines.	Glared	round.	‘Limp—where’s	your—’
‘Dead,’	Limp	said.	‘Just	me	an’	Crump—’
‘Ruffle?’
The	round-faced	woman	shook	her	head.	‘Got	separated.	Saw	Skim	die,	that’s	all—’


‘So	what	are	you	doing	sitting	here?	On	your	feet,	marine—those	heavies	are	dying	where	they	stand.	And
we’re	going	to	join	them.	You,	Reliko!	Pull	Vastly	on	his	feet	there—you’re	all	coming	with	me!’
Silent,	without	a	single	word	of	protest,	the	marines	clambered	to	their	feet.	They	were	bleeding.	They	were
exhausted.
They	gathered	up	their	weapons,	and,	Tarr	in	the	lead,	set	out	for	the	trench.
	
Nearby,	Urb	plucked	away	the	shattered	fragments	of	his	shield.	Hellian	crouched	beside	him,	breathing	hard,
her	 face	 streaked	 with	 blood	 and	 puke,	 with	 more	 of	 both	 drenching	 her	 chest.	 She’d	 said	 she	 didn’t	 know
whose	blood	it	was.	Glancing	at	her,	he	saw	her	hard	eyes,	her	hard	expression.	Other	soldiers	were	drawn	up
behind	them.
Urb	turned.	‘We	do	what	Tarr	says,	soldiers.	Back	into	it.	Now.’
Hellian	almost	pushed	past	him	on	the	way	to	the	trench.
	
Henar	Vygulf	reined	in	beneath	the	hill—he	could	see	fallen	horses	and	sprawled,	scorched	bodies	where	the
Adjunct’s	command	post	had	been.	He	slipped	down	from	his	horse,	drew	his	two	swords	and	jogged	up	the
slope.
Reaching	the	summit,	he	saw	four	Nah’ruk	arriving	on	the	opposite	ridge.
Lostara	Yil	and	the	Adjunct	were	lying	almost	side	by	side.	Likely	dead,	but	he	needed	to	make	sure.	If	he
could.
He	charged	forward.
	
The	clash	of	iron	woke	her.	Blinking,	Lostara	stared	into	the	sky,	trying	to	recall	what	had	happened.	Her	head
ached	and	she	could	feel	dried	blood	crusting	her	nostrils,	crackling	in	her	ears.	She	turned	her	head,	saw	the
Adjunct	lying	beside	her.
Chest	slowly	rising	and	falling.
Ah,	good.
Someone	grunted	as	if	in	pain.
She	sat	up.	In	time	to	see	Henar	Vygulf	stagger	back,	blood	spraying	from	a	chest	wound.	Three	Nah’ruk
closed.
Henar	fell	on	to	his	back	almost	at	Lostara’s	feet.
She	rose,	drawing	her	blades.
He	saw	her,	and	the	anguish	in	his	eyes	took	her	breath	away.
‘I’m	sorry—’
‘You’re	going	to	live,’	she	told	him,	stepping	past.	‘Prop	yourself	up,	man—that’s	an	order!’
He	managed	to	lift	himself	on	one	elbow.	‘Captain—’
She	 glanced	 at	 the	 Nah’ruk.	 Almost	 upon	 her,	 slowed	 by	 wounds.	 Behind	 them,	 a	 dozen	 more	 appeared.
‘Just	remember,	Henar,	I	don’t	do	this	for	just	anybody!’
‘Do	what?’
She	stepped	forward,	blades	lifting.	‘Dance.’
The	 old	 forms	 returned,	 as	 if	 they	 had	 but	 been	 awaiting	 her,	 awaiting	 this	 one	 moment	 when	 at	 last	 she
awoke—possibly	one	last	time—no	matter.	For	you,	Henar.	For	you.
The	Shadow	Dance	belonged	to	this.
Here.
Now.
	
Henar	watched	her,	and	his	eyes	slowly	widened.
______
A	league	to	the	southeast,	Kisswhere	dragged	herself	from	her	fallen	horse.	A	badger	burrow,	the	den	mouth


of	a	fox,	something.	Her	horse	thrashed,	front	legs	shattered,	its	screams	shrill	in	the	air.
Kisswhere’s	left	leg	was	bent	in	four	places.	The	stub	of	bone	thrust	through	her	leggings.	She	drew	a	knife
and	twisted	round	to	study	the	horse,	eyes	fixing	on	a	pulsing	artery	in	its	neck.
Didn’t	 matter.	 They	 were	 all	 dead.	 Even	 if	 she	 could	 have	 reached	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 and	 that	 mad	 redhaired	Queen,	it	wouldn’t	have	mattered.
She	glanced	up.	The	sky	was	flesh,	and	that	flesh	was	rotting	before	her	eyes.
Sinter.	Badan.
Bonehunters—Adjunct,	are	you	happy?	You	killed	them	all.
You	killed	us	all.


Chapter	Twenty-Four
On	this	dawn	they	lined	the	banks	of	the	ancient	river,	a	whole	city	turned	out,	near	a	hundred
thousand,	as	the	sun	lifted	east	of	the	mouth	that	opened	to	the	deep	bay.	What	had	brought	them
there?	 What	 ever	 brings	 the	 multitudes	 to	 a	 moment,	 a	 place,	 an	 instant	 when	 a	 hundred
thousand	bodies	become	one	body?
As	the	red	waters	spilled	into	the	bay’s	salty	tears,	they	stood,	saying	little,	and	the	great	ship
pyre	took	hold	of	the	fires	and	the	wind	took	hold	of	the	soaked	sails,	and	the	sky	took	hold	of	the
black	column	of	smoke.
Ehrlitan’s	great	king	was	dead,	the	last	of	the	Dessimb	line,	and	the	future	was	blowing	sands,
the	storm’s	whisper	was	but	a	roar	of	strife	made	mercifully	distant,	a	thing	of	promise	drawing
ever	closer.
They	came	to	weep.	They	came	seeking	salvation,	for	in	the	end,	even	grief	masks	a	selfish
indulgence.	 We	 weep	 in	 our	 lives	 for	 the	 things	 lost	 to	 us,	 the	 worlds	 done.	 A	 great	 man	 was
dead,	but	we	cannot	follow	him—we	dare	not,	for	to	each	of	us	death	finds	a	new	path.
An	 age	 was	 dead.	 The	 new	 age	 belonged	 to	 generations	 still	 to	 come.	 In	 the	 stalls	 of	 the
market	 rounds	 the	 potters	 stacked	 bowls	 bearing	 the	 face	 of	 the	 dead	 king,	 with	 scenes	 of	 his
past	glories	circling	round	and	round,	for	ever	outside	of	time,	and	this	was	the	true	wish	of	the
multitudes.
Stop.	Stop	now.	Pray	this	day	never	ends.	Pray	the	ashes	drift	for	ever.	Pray	tomorrow
never	becomes.	It	is	a	natural	desire,	an	honest	wish.
The	tale	dies,	but	this	death	will	take	some	time.	It	is	said	the	king	lingered,	there	in	the	half
breath.	And	people	gathered	each	day	at	the	palace	gates,	to	weep,	to	dream	of	other	ends,	of
fates	denied.
The	tale	dies,	but	this	death	will	take	some	time.
And	the	river’s	red	tongue	flows	without	end.	And	the	spirit	of	the	king	said:	I	see	you.	I	see
you	all.	Can	you	not	hear	him?	Hear	him	still?
DEATH	OF	THE	GOLDEN	AGE
THENYS	BULE

Nom	Kala	stood	with	the	others,	a	silent	mass	of	warriors	who	had	forgotten	what	it	was	to	live,	as	the	wind
pulled	 at	 rotted	 furs,	 strips	 of	 hide	 and	 dry	 tangles	 of	 hair.	 Dull,	 pitted	 weapons	 hung	 like	 afterthoughts	 from
twisted	hands.	Air	pitched	into	the	bowls	of	eye	sockets	and	moaned	back	out.	They	could	be	statues,	gnawed
by	age,	withering	where	they	stood	facing	the	endless	winds,	the	senseless	rains,	the	pointless	waves	of	heat
and	cold.
There	was	 nothing	 useful	 in	 this,	 and	 she	 knew	 she	 was	 not	 alone	 in	 her	 disquiet.	 Onos	 T’oolan,	 the	 First
Sword,	crouched	down	on	one	knee	ten	paces	ahead	of	them,	hands	wrapped	round	the	grip	of	his	flint	sword,
the	 weapon’s	 point	 buried	 in	 the	 stony	 ground.	 His	 head	 was	 lowered,	 as	 if	 he	 made	 obeisance	 before	 a
master,	but	this	master	was	invisible,	little	more	than	a	smear	of	obligations	swept	aside,	but	the	stain	of	what
had	been	held	him	in	place—a	stain	only	Onos	T’oolan	could	see.	He	had	not	moved	in	some	time.
Patience	 was	 no	 trial,	 but	 she	 could	 sense	 the	 chaos	 in	 her	 kin,	 the	 pitch	 and	 cant	 of	 terrible	 desires,	 the
rocking	 rebuffs	 of	 vengeance	 waiting.	 It	 was	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 time	 before	 the	 first	 of	 them	 broke	 away,
defying	 this	 servitude,	 this	 claim	 of	 righteous	 command.	 He	 would	 not	 reach	 for	 them.	 He	 had	 yet	 to	 do	 so,
why	imagine	he	would	change—
The	First	Sword	rose,	faced	them.	‘I	am	Onos	T’oolan.	I	am	the	First	Sword	of	Tellann.	I	reject	your	need.’
The	wind	moaned	on,	like	the	flow	of	sorrow.
‘You	shall,	however,	bow	to	mine.’


She	felt	buffeted	by	those	words.	This	is	what	it	means,	then,	to	yield	before	a	First	Sword.	We	cannot
deny	him,	cannot	defy	him.	She	could	feel	his	will,	closing	like	a	fist	about	her.	We	had	our	chance—before
this.	 We	 could	 have	 drifted	 away.	 He	 gave	 us	 that.	 But	 not	 one	 T’lan	 Imass	 had	 done	 any	 such	 thing.
Instead,	we	fell	inside	ourselves,	ever	deeper,	that	endless	eating	and	spitting	out	and	eating	all	we	spat
out—this	is	the	seductive	sustenance	of	hatred	and	spite,	of	rage	and	vengeance.
He	could	have	led	us	off	a	cliff	and	we	would	not	have	noticed.
The	 three	 Orshayn	 bonecasters	 stepped	 forward.	 Ulag	 Togtil	 spoke.	 ‘First	 Sword,	 we	 await	 your
command.’
Onos	T’oolan	slowly	faced	south,	where	the	sky	above	the	horizon	seemed	to	boil	like	pitch.	And	then	he
swung	north,	where	a	distant	cloud	caught	the	sun’s	dying	light.	‘We	go	no	farther,’	the	First	Sword	said.	‘We
shall	be	dust.’
And	what	of	our	dark	dreams,	First	Sword?
Such	was	his	power	that	he	heard	her	thought	and	so	turned	to	her.	‘Nom	Kala,	hold	fast	to	your	dreams.
There	will	be	an	answer.	T’lan	Imass,	we	are	upon	a	time	of	killing.’
The	 statues	 shifted.	 Some	 straightened.	 Some	 hunched	 down	 as	 if	 beneath	 terrible	 burdens.	 The	 statues
—my	kin.	My	sisters,	my	brothers.	There	are	none	to	look	upon	us	now,	none	to	see	us,	none	to	wonder
at	who	we	once	were,	at	who	shaped	us	with	such	.	.	.	loving	hands.	As	she	watched,	they	began,	one	by
one,	falling	into	dust.
None	to	witness.	Dust	of	dreams,	dust	of	all	that	we	never	achieved.	Dust	of	what	we	might	have	been
and	what	we	cannot	help	but	be.
Statues	are	never	mute.	Their	silence	is	a	roar	of	words.	Will	you	hear?	Will	you	listen?
She	was	the	last,	alone	with	Onos	T’oolan	himself.
‘You	possess	no	rage,	Nom	Kala.’
‘No,	First	Sword,	I	do	not.’
‘What	might	you	find	to	serve	in	its	place?’
‘I	do	not	know.	The	humans	defeated	us.	They	were	better	than	we	were,	it	is	as	simple	as	that.	I	feel	only
grief,	First	Sword.’
‘And	is	there	no	anger	in	grief,	Nom	Kala?’
Yes.	It	may	be	that	there	is.	But	if	I	must	search	for	it—
‘There	is	time,’	said	Onos	T’oolan.
She	bowed	to	him,	and	released	herself.
	
Onos	T’oolan	watched	as	Nom	Kala	fell	in	a	gusting	cloud.	In	his	mind	a	figure	was	approaching,	hands	held
out	as	if	beseeching.	He	knew	that	harrowed	face,	that	lone	glittering	eye.	What	could	he	say	to	this	stranger
he	had	once	known?	He	too	was	a	stranger,	after	all.	Yes,	they	had	once	known	each	other.	But	now	look	at
us,	both	so	intimate	with	dust.
Nom	Kala’s	anguish	returned	to	him.	Her	thoughts	had	bled	with	dread	power—she	was	young.	She	was,
he	realized,	what	the	Imass	might	have	become,	had	the	Ritual	not	taken	them,	had	it	not	stolen	their	future.	A
future	of	pathos.	Sordid	surrender.	The	loss	of	dignity,	a	slow,	slow	death.
No,	Toc	the	Younger.	I	give	you	nothing	but	silence.	And	its	torrid	roar.
Will	you	hear?	Will	you	listen?
Any	of	you?
	
She	had	dwelt	like	a	parasite	deep	in	its	entrails.	She	had	seen,	all	around	her,	the	broken	remnants	of	some
long	abandoned	promise,	the	broken	clutter,	the	spilled	fluids.	But	there	had	been	heat,	and	a	pulsing	presence
as	if	the	very	stone	was	alive—she	should	have	understood	the	significance	of	such	things,	but	her	mind	had
been	wallowing	in	its	own	darkness,	a	lifeless	place	of	pointless	regrets.
Standing	 not	 six	 paces	 from	 the	 two	 gold-skinned	 foreigners,	 she	 had	 turned	 and,	 like	 them,	 looked	 with
wonder,	disbelieving.
Ampelas	Rooted.
Ampelas	Uprooted.	The	entire	city,	its	massive,	mountainous	bulk,	filled	the	northern	sky.	Its	underside	was


a	forest	of	twisted	metal	roots,	from	which	drained	rainbow	rain	as	if	even	in	pain	it	could	bleed	nothing	but
gifts.	 Yet,	 Kalyth	 could	 see	 its	 agony.	 It	 was	 canted	 to	 one	 side.	 It	 was	 surrounded	 by	 smoke	 and	 dust.
Fissures	rose	from	its	base,	like	the	broken	knuckles	of	a	god	only	moments	from	once	again	hammering	the
earth.
She	could	feel	.	.	.	something,	a	bristling	core	of	will	knotted	in	breathless	pain.	The	Matron’s?	Could	it	be
anyone	 else?	 Her	 blood	 flowed	 through	 the	 rock.	 Her	 lungs	 howled,	 winds	 shrieking	 between	 caverns.	 Her
sweat	 glistened	 and	 ran	 like	 tears.	 She	 bled	 in	 a	 thousand	 places,	 bones	 splintering	 to	 vast,	 ever	 growing
pressures.
The	Matron,	yes,	but	.	.	.	there	was	no	mind	left	inside	that	nightmare	of	oozing	flesh.
Uprooted,	this	long-dead	thing.	Uprooted,	a	thousand	upon	a	thousand	generations	of	belief,	faith,	the	solid
iron	of	once	immutable	laws.
She	defies	every	truth.	She	wills	life	into	a	corpse,	and	now	it	staggers	across	the	sky.
‘A	sky	keep,’	said	the	one	named	Gesler.	‘Moon’s	Spawn—’
‘But	this	one	is	bigger,’	said	Stormy,	clawing	at	his	beard.	‘If	Tayschrenn	could	see	this—’
‘If	Rake	had	been	commanding	one	of	these—’
Stormy	grunted.	‘Aye.	He’d	have	flattened	the	High	Mage	like	a	cockroach	under	a	thumb.	And	then	he’d
have	done	the	same	to	the	whole	Hood-damned	Malazan	Empire.’
‘But	look,’	said	Gesler.	‘It’s	in	rough	shape—not	as	ugly	as	Rake’s	rock,	but	it	looks	like	it	could	come	down
at	any	time.’
Kalyth	 could	 now	 see	 the	 Furies	 marching	 beneath	 the	 Dragon	 Tower—the	 sky	 keep,	 yes,	 that	 is	 well
named.	Ve’Gath	Soldiers	in	their	thousands.	K’ell	Hunters	well	in	advance	of	the	legions	and	ranging	out	to	the
sides	in	looser	formations.	Behind	the	ranks	of	the	Furies,	drones	struggled	to	pull	enormous	wagons	groaning
beneath	towering	loads.
‘Look	at	the	big	ones,’	Gesler	said.	‘The	heavies—gods	below,	one	of	those	could	rip	a	Kenyll’rah	demon	in
half.’
Kalyth	 spoke.	 ‘Mortal	 Sword,	 they	 are	 Ve’Gath,	 the	 soldiers	 of	 the	 K’Chain	 Che’Malle.	 No	 Matron	 has
ever	 birthed	 so	 many.	 A	 hundred	 was	 deemed	 sufficient.	 Gunth’an	 Acyl	 has	 birthed	 more	 than	 fifteen
thousand.’
The	man’s	amber	eyes	fixed	on	her.	‘If	Matrons	could	do	that,	why	didn’t	they?	They	could	be	ruling	this
world	right	now.’
‘There	was	terrible	.	.	.	pain.’	She	hesitated,	and	then	said.	‘Sanity	was	lost.’
‘Soldiers	like	those,’	Stormy	muttered,	‘what	ruler	needs	to	be	sane?’
Kalyth	 grimaced.	 These	 two	 men	 were	 irreverent.	 They	 seemed	 to	 be	 fearless.	 They	 are	 the	 ones.	 But
nothing	 insisted	 I	 must	 like	 them,	 or	 even	 understand	 them.	 No,	 they	 frighten	 me	 as	 much	 as	 the
K’Chain	Che’Malle	do.	‘She	is	dying.’
Gesler	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘No	heir?’
‘Yes.	 One	 waits.’	 She	 pointed.	 ‘There,	 the	 two	 now	 drawing	 close.	 Gunth	 Mach,	 the	 One	 Daughter.
Sag’Churok,	her	K’ell	guardian.’	Then	her	breath	caught	as	she	saw	the	one	trailing	them,	its	motions	smooth
as	 oil.	 ‘The	 one	 beyond,	 that	 is	 Bre’nigan,	 the	 Matron’s	 own	 J’an	 Sentinel—something	 is	 wrong—he	 should
not	be	here,	he	should	be	at	her	side.’
‘What	 about	 those	 Assassins?’	 Stormy	 asked,	 squinting	 skyward.	 ‘Why	 ain’t	 they	 showed—the	 one	 that
snatched	us—’
‘I	do	not	know,	Shield	Anvil.’	Something	is	wrong.
The	 two	 foreigners—they	 called	 themselves	 Malazans—backed	 away	 as	 Gunth	 Mach	 and	 Sag’Churok
drew	closer.	‘Ges,	what	if	they	don’t	like	the	look	of	us?’
‘What	do	you	think?’	Gesler	snapped.	‘We’re	dead,	that’s	what.’
‘There	is	no	danger,’	Kalyth	assured	them.	Of	course,	I	am	sure	Redmask	believed	the	same.
Sag’Churok	spoke	in	her	mind.	‘Destriant.	The	Matron	is	chained.’
What?
‘The	 two	 Shi’gal	 who	 remained	 in	 the	 Nest	 forged	 an	 alliance.	 They	 have	 eaten	 her	 forebrain	 and
now	 command	 what	 remains	 of	 her.	 Through	 her	 body,	 they	 have	 uprooted	 Ampelas.	 But	 her	 flesh
weakens—soon	Ampelas	will	fail.	We	must	find	the	enemy.	We	must	find	our	war.’


Kalyth	looked	to	Gunth	Mach.	‘Is	she	safe?’
‘She	is.’
‘But	.	.	.	why?’
‘The	Shi’gal	see	no	future.	The	battle	is	the	end.	No	future.	The	One	Daughter	is	irrelevant.’
‘And	Gu’Rull?’
‘Outlawed.	 Missing.	 Possibly	 dead—he	 sought	 to	 return,	 sought	 to	 defy,	 but	 was	 driven	 away.
Bearing	wounds.’
Gesler	cut	in:	‘You’re	speaking	with	this	thing,	aren’t	you?’
‘Yes.	I	am	sorry.	There	are	powers	awake	in	me	.	.	.	flavours.	The	One	Daughter	.	.	.	it	is	a	gift.’
Stormy	said,	‘If	we’re	to	lead	this	army	of	elephant-rapers—’
‘Stormy—hold	 on!’	 Gesler	 advanced	 on	 his	 companion,	 falling	 into	 their	 foreign	 language	 as	 he	 continued
with	a	barrage	of	protestations.
Kalyth	 did	 not	 need	 to	 understand	 the	 words,	 as	 Stormy	 visibly	 set	 his	 heels,	 face	 flushing	 as	 if	 in	 deadly
warning.	 This	 was	 a	 stubborn	 man,	 she	 could	 see,	 far	 more	 so	 than	 the	 Mortal	 Sword.	 Gesler	 railed	 at	 his
friend,	but	nothing	he	said	altered	Stormy’s	stance.	He	said	he	had	dreams.	He	has	accepted	this.	‘She	will
share	the	flavours,’	Kalyth	said	to	them.	‘It	is	necessary—’
Stormy	 faced	 her.	 ‘Those	 Ve’Gath,	 how	 fast	 are	 they?	 How	 smart?	 Can	 they	 answer	 to	 commands?
Discipline?	What	sort	of	signalling	do	they	heed?	And	who	in	Hood’s	name	is	the	enemy?’
To	these	questions,	Kalyth	shook	her	head.	‘I	have	no	answers.	No	knowledge.	I	can	say	nothing.’
‘Who	can?’
‘Damn	you,	Stormy!’
The	 big	 red-bearded	 man	 wheeled	 on	 his	 companion.	 ‘Aye!	 You’re	 the	 Mortal	 Sword—these	 are	 the
questions	you	need	to	be	asking,	not	me!	Who’s	going	to	command	here?	You	are,	you	stupid	lump	of	dhenrabi
shit!	So	stop	lapdogging	me	and	get	on	with	it!’
Gesler’s	hands	closed	into	fists	and	he	took	a	half-step	closer	to	Stormy.	‘That’s	it,’	he	growled.	‘I’m	going
to	crush	your	fat	head,	Stormy,	and	then	I’m	going	to	walk	away—’
Stormy	bared	his	teeth,	squaring	himself	to	await	Gesler’s	charge.
Sag’Churok	thumped	between	the	two	men,	sword	blades	straightening	out	to	the	sides,	the	motion	forcing
the	men	apart,	lest	those	notched	edges	find	them.	Snarling,	Gesler	spun	round	and	marched	off	a	dozen	or	so
paces.
Grinning,	Stormy	straightened.	‘Give	me	those	flavours,	lizard.	We	got	to	talk.’
‘Not	that	one,’	Kalyth	said.	‘Gunth	Mach	is	the	one	without	swords.	There—not	the	J’an,	this	one.	Go	to
her.’
‘Fine,	and	then	what?’
‘Then	.	.	.	nothing.	You	will	see.’
He	 walked	 up	 to	 stand	 directly	 in	 front	 of	 Gunth	 Mach.	 Brave	 or	 stupid—I	 think	 I	 know	 which	 way
Gesler	would	say.	But	she	saw	that	Gesler,	arms	crossed,	had	turned	to	watch.
‘Well?	Gods,	she	stinks—’	He	suddenly	recoiled.	‘Sorry,	lizard,’	he	mumbled,	‘I	didn’t	mean	it.’	He	wiped	at
his	face,	then	held	out	his	hand,	scowling.	‘I’m	covered	in	something.’
‘Flavour,’	Kalyth	said.
Gesler	snorted.	‘The	lizard	in	your	head	now,	Stormy?	I	don’t	believe	it—if	she’d	done	that	she’d	be	running
for	the	nearest	cliff.’
‘I	ain’t	the	one	staying	deliberately	stupid,	Ges.’
Gesler	glared	over	at	the	approaching	legions.	‘Fine,	tell	me	what	they	can	do.’
‘No.	Find	out	for	yourself.’
‘I	ain’t	being	nobody’s	Mortal	Sword.’
‘Whatever.	You	just	going	to	stand	there,	Ges?’
Swearing	something	under	his	breath,	the	soldier	walked	over	to	Gunth	Mach.	‘Fine,	do	your	sweat	thing,	it’s
not	like	I	just	had	a	swim	or	nothing—’	As	soon	as	he	drew	close	he	snapped	his	head	back,	and	then	rubbed
at	his	eyes.	‘Ow.’
Kalyth	sensed	a	presence	at	her	side.
Bre’nigan.	 The	 J’an	 Sentinel’s	 milky	 eyes	 caught	 the	 deepening	 blue	 of	 the	 day’s	 end.	 ‘Against	 two


Shi’gal,	I	could	do	nothing.’
The	voice	in	her	head	shocked	her.	This	ancient	Che’Malle	had	seemed	beyond	any	acknowledgement	of
her	whatsoever.	The	voice	trembled.
‘I	have	failed.’
As	you	said,	you	could	do	nothing	against	two	Shi’gal,	Bre’nigan.
‘The	Matron	is	no	more.’
That	has	been	true	for	some	time.
‘Destriant,	 the	 wisdom	 in	 your	 words	 is	 bitter,	 but	 I	 cannot	 deny	 what	 you	 say.	 Tell	 me,	 these	 two
humans—they	seem	.	.	.	wayward.	But	then,	I	know	little	of	your	kind.’
‘Wayward?	Yes.	I	know	nothing	of	these	Malazans—I	have	never	heard	of	any	tribe	by	that	name.	They
are	.	.	.	reckless.’
‘It	does	not	matter.	The	battle	shall	be	final.’
‘Then	you	think	we	are	lost,	too.	If	that	is	so,	why	fight	at	all?’	Why	force	me	and	these	two	men	to	our
deaths.	Let	us	go!
‘We	 cannot.	 You,	 Destriant,	 and	 the	 Mortal	 Sword	 and	 the	 Shield	 Anvil,	 you	 are	 what	 remains	 of
Gunth’an	Acyl’s	will.	You	are	the	legacy	of	her	mind.	Even	now,	how	can	we	say	she	was	wrong?’
‘You	put	too	much	upon	us.’
‘Yes.’
She	 heard	 Gesler	 and	 Stormy	 arguing	 again,	 in	 their	 foreign	 tongue.	 The	 Furies	 were	 drawing	 closer,	 and
now	 two	 Ve’Gath	 loped	 out	 ahead	 of	 the	 others.	 Their	 backs	 were	 strangely	 shaped.	 ‘There,’	 said	 Kalyth,
drawing	the	attention	of	the	two	Malazans.	‘Your	mounts.’
‘We’re	going	to	ride	those?’
‘Yes,	Mortal	Sword.	They	were	bred	for	you	and	for	the	Shield	Anvil.’
‘The	 one	 for	 Stormy’s	 got	 the	 saddle	 around	 the	 wrong	 way.	 How’s	 he	 going	 to	 stick	 his	 head	 up	 the
Ve’Gath’s	ass,	where	he’ll	feel	at	home?’
Kalyth’s	eyes	widened.
Stormy	laughed.	‘With	you	in	charge,	Ges,	I’ll	hide	anywhere.	You	barely	managed	a	measly	squad.	Now
you	got	thirty	thousand	lizards	expectin’	you	to	take	charge.’
Gesler	looked	sick.	‘Got	any	spare	room	up	that	butt	hole,	Stormy?’
‘I’ll	let	you	know,	but	just	so	you’re	clear	on	this,	when	I	shut	the	door	it	stays	shut.’
‘You	always	were	a	selfish	bastard.	Can’t	figure	why	we	ever	ended	up	friends.’
The	Ve’Gath	lumbered	up	to	them.
	
Gesler	glanced	at	Stormy	and	spoke	in	Falari.	‘All	right,	I	guess	this	is	it.’
‘I	can	taste	their	thoughts—all	of	them,’	said	Stormy.	‘Even	these	two.’
‘Aye.’
‘Gesler,	these	Ve’Gath—they	ain’t	nasty-looking	horses—they’re	smart.	We’re	the	beasts	of	burden	here.’
‘And	we’re	supposed	to	be	commanding	them.	The	Matron	got	it	all	wrong,	didn’t	she.’
Stormy	shook	his	head.	‘No	point	in	arguing,	though.	The	One	Daughter	told	me—’
‘Aye,	me	too.	A	bloody	coup.	I	imagine	those	Assassins	figured	out—and	rightly	so—just	how	redundant	we
are.	Kalyth	too.	Stormy,	I	can	reach	out	to	them	all.	I	can	see	through	the	eyes	of	any	one	of	them.	Except
Gunth	Mach.’
‘Aye,	 she’s	 built	 thick	 walls.	 I	 wonder	 why.	 Listen,	 Ges,	 I	 really	 have	 no	 idea	 what	 it	 is	 a	 Shield	 Anvil’s
supposed	to	do.’
‘You’re	 a	 giant	 pit	 everybody	 bleeds	 into,	 Stormy.	 Funny	 your	 dreams	 didn’t	 mention	 that	 bit.	 But	 for	 this
battle,	I	need	you	to	command	the	Ve’Gath	directly—’
‘Me?	What	about	you?’
‘The	 K’ell	 Hunters.	 They’re	 fast,	 they	 can	 get	 in	 and	 out	 and	 with	 their	 speed	 they	 will	 be	 the	 deadliest
force	on	the	field.’
‘Ges,	this	is	a	stupid	war,	you	know.	The	world’s	not	big	enough	for	Long-Tails	and	Short-Tails	both?	Stupid.
There’s	barely	any	left	as	it	is.	Like	the	last	two	scorpions	busy	killing	each	other,	when	the	desert	covers	a
whole	damned	continent.’


‘The	slaves	are	loose,’	Gesler	replied.	‘With	a	few	hundred	generations	of	repressed	hate	to	feed	off.	They
won’t	be	satisfied	until	the	last	Che’Malle	is	a	chopped-up	carcass.’
‘And	then?’
Gesler	met	the	man’s	eyes.	‘That’s	what	scares	me.’
‘We’re	next,	you	mean.’
‘Why	 not?	 What’s	 to	 stop	 them?	 They	 fucking	 breed	 like	 ants.	 They’re	 laying	 waste	 to	 warrens.	 Gods
below,	 they’re	 hunting	 down	 and	 killing	 dragons.	 Listen,	 Stormy,	 this	 is	 our	 chance.	 We’ve	 got	 to	 stop	 the
Nah’ruk.	Not	for	the	Che’Malle—I	don’t	care	a	whit	for	the	Che’Malle—but	for	everyone	else.’
Stormy	glanced	over	at	the	Che’Malle.	‘They	don’t	expect	to	survive	this	battle.’
‘Aye,	bad	attitude.’
‘So	fix	it.’
Gesler	glared,	and	then	looked	away.
The	two	Ve’Gath	waited.	Their	backs	were	malformed,	the	bones	twisted	and	lifted	taut	beneath	the	hide	to
form	high	saddles.	Something	like	elongated	fingers—or	the	stretched	wings	of	a	bat—slung	down	the	beast’s
flanks,	the	finger-ends	and	talons	curling	to	form	stirrups.	Plates	of	armour	ridged	the	shoulders.	Lobster-tail
scales	encased	the	forward-thrusting	necks.	Their	helms	wrapped	about	the	flattened	skulls,	leaving	only	the
snouts	free.	They	could	look	down	upon	a	Toblakai.	The	damned	things	were	grinning	at	their	riders.
Gesler	faced	Gunth	Mach.	‘One	Daughter.	The	last	Assassin—the	one	that	escaped—I	need	him.’
Kalyth	said,	‘We	do	not	know	if	Gu’Rull	even	lives—’
Gesler’s	eyes	remained	on	Gunth	Mach.	‘She	knows.	One	Daughter,	I	ain’t	going	to	fight	a	battle	I	can’t
win.	If	you	want	us	leading	you,	well,	one	thing	us	humans	don’t	understand,	and	that’s	giving	up.	 We	 fight
when	the	fight’s	been	thumped	out	of	us.	We	rebel	when	all	we	got	left	that’s	not	in	chains	is	inside	our	skulls.
We	defy	when	the	only	defiance	we	got	left	is	up	and	dying.	Aye,	I	seen	people	bow	their	heads,	waiting	for
the	axe.	I	seen	people	standing	in	a	row	in	front	of	fifty	crossbows,	and	doing	nothing.	But	they’ve	all	made
dying	 their	 weapon,	 the	 last	 one	 left,	 and	 they	 are	 nightmare’s	 soldiers	 for	 ever	 afterwards.	 Is	 this	 getting
through	to	you?	I’m	not	one	for	inspiring	crap.	I	need	that	Assassin,	Gunth	Mach,	because	I	need	his	eyes.	Up
there,	high	overhead.	With	those	eyes,	I	can	win	this	battle.
‘You	 say	 Matrons	 never	 produce	 more	 than	 a	 hundred	 Ve’Gath.	 But	 your	 mother	 made	 fifteen	 thousand.
Do	you	really	think	the	Nah’ruk	have	any	idea	of	what	they’re	getting	into?	You’ve	filled	my	head	with	scenes
of	 past	 battles—all	 your	 pathetic	 losses—and	 it’s	 no	 wonder	 you’re	 all	 ready	 to	 give	 up.	 But	 you’re	 wrong.
The	Matron—was	she	insane?	Maybe.	Aye.	Insane	enough	to	think	she	could	win.	And	to	plan	for	it.	Mad?
Mad	genius,	I’d	say.	Gunth	Mach,	One	Daughter,	summon	your	Shi’gal—he	is	yours	now,	isn’t	he?	Not	ready
to	give	up,	not	ready	to	surrender	to	the	fatalism	of	his	brothers.	Summon	him.’
Silence.
Gesler	stared	up	into	the	Che’Malle’s	eyes.	Like	staring	into	a	crocodile’s.	It’s	the	game	of	seeing	all	but
reacting	to	nothing.	Until	necessity	forces	the	issue.	It’s	the	game	of	cold	thoughts,	if	thoughts	there	are.
It’s	what	makes	a	man’s	balls	crawl	up	looking	for	somewhere	to	hide.
She	spoke	in	his	mind.	‘Mortal	Sword.	Your	words	have	been	heard.	By	all.	We	shall	obey.’
‘Gods	below,’	Stormy	muttered.
Kalyth	stepped	close	to	Gesler.	Her	eyes	were	wide.	‘A	darkness	lifts	from	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’	But	in
those	eyes,	beyond	the	wonder,	he	saw	a	flittering	fear.	She	sees	me	sowing	false	hope.	Gods,	woman,	what
do	you	think	a	commander	does?	 He	 walked	 up	 to	 one	 of	 the	 Ve’Gath,	 gripped	 what	 passed	 for	 a	 saddle
horn,	set	one	boot	into	a	stirrup	that	suddenly	clasped	tight	round	his	foot,	and	then	swung	himself	astride	the
enormous	beast.
‘Get	ready	to	march,’	he	said,	knowing	his	words	were	heard	by	all.	‘We’re	not	waiting	for	the	Nah’ruk	to
come	 to	 us.	 We’re	 heading	 straight	 for	 them,	 and	 straight	 down	 their	 damned	 throats.	 Kalyth!	 Does	 anyone
know—will	that	sky	keep	follow?	Will	they	fight?’
‘We	don’t	know,	Mortal	Sword.	We	think	so.	What	else	is	left?’
Stormy	was	struggling	to	climb	on	to	his	beast.	‘Trying	to	crush	my	damned	foot!’
‘Relax	into	it,’	Gesler	advised.
The	One	Daughter	spoke	in	his	mind.	‘The	Shi’gal	comes.’
‘Good.	Let’s	get	this	mess	started.’


	
Gu’Rull	tilted	his	wings,	swept	close	round	the	towering	cliff-face	of	Ampelas	Uprooted.	There	was	but	one
Shi’gal	left	inside—he’d	managed	to	deliver	fatal	wounds	to	the	other	before	he’d	been	driven	from	the	Nest,
and	then	the	city.	Deep	slashes	wept	thick	blood	down	his	chest,	but	none	of	these	threatened	his	life.	Already
he	had	begun	to	heal.
Before	 him	 on	 the	 plain	 the	 massed	 Furies	 had	 resumed	 their	 ground-eating	 march.	 Thousands	 of	 K’ell
Hunters	spread	out	to	form	a	vast	screen	in	a	crescent	as	they	struck	southward,	where	dark	clouds	boiled	on
the	horizon,	slowly	disappearing	as	the	sun	finally	sank	beneath	the	western	hills.	The	Nah’ruk	had	fed	this	day,
but	the	quarry	had	proved	deadlier	than	they	could	have	anticipated.
This	Mortal	Sword	and	his	words	impressed	Gu’Rull,	in	so	far	as	these	soft	humans	could	do	so;	but	then,
neither	the	one	named	Gesler	nor	the	one	named	Stormy	were	truly	human.	Not	any	more.	The	aura	of	their
presence	was	almost	blinding	to	the	Shi’gal’s	eyes.	Ancient	fires	had	forged	them.	Thyrllan,	Tellann,	perhaps
even	the	breath	and	blood	of	the	Eleint.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	did	not	bow	in	worship,	but	when	it	came	to	the	Eleint,	this	abhorrence	weakened.
Children	of	the	Eleint.	But	we	are	nothing	of	the	sort.	We	simply	claim	the	honour.	But	then,	is	this	not
what	 all	 mortals	 do?	 In	 grasping	 their	 gods,	 in	 carving	 the	 vicious	 rules	 of	 worship	 and	 obedience?
Children	of	the	Eleint.	We	name	our	cities	for	the	First	Born	Dragons,	those	who	once	sailed	the	skies
of	this	world.
As	if	they	cared.
As	if	they	even	noticed.
This	 Mortal	 Sword	 spoke	 of	 a	 refusal,	 a	 defiance	 of	 the	 fate	 awaiting	 them.	 He	 possessed	 courage,	 and
stubborn	will.	Laudable	conceits.	I	answer	his	summons.	I	give	him	my	eyes,	for	as	long	as	I	remain	in	the
skies.	I	do	not	warn	him	that	such	time	shall	not	long	survive	the	commencement	of	battle.	The	Nah’ruk
will	see	to	that.
Even	so.	In	Gunth’an	Acyl’s	memory,	I	shall	abide.
Doubts	swirled	round	the	red-bearded	one,	the	Shield	Anvil.	His	heart	was	vast,	it	was	true.	He	was	a	thing
of	 sentimentality	 and	 compassion,	 so	 contrary	 to	 his	 bestial	 appearance,	 his	 simian	 fire.	 But	 such	 creatures
were	vulnerable.	Their	hearts	bled	too	freely,	and	the	scars	never	knitted	true.	It	was	madness	to	embrace	the
pain	and	suffering	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle—not	even	a	Matron	would	yield	to	such	a	thing.	The	mind	would
howl.	The	mind	would	die.
No	matter,	he	was	but	one	mortal,	a	human	at	that.	He	would	take	what	he	could,	and	then	fail.	Falchions
would	descend,	an	instant	of	purest	mercy—
‘Enough	of	that—and	I	don’t	give	a	flying	fuck	for	all	your	miserable	thoughts.	Assassin,	I	am	Gesler.
Your	Mortal	Sword.	On	the	morning	to	come,	on	the	dawn	of	battle,	you	will	be	my	eyes.	You	will	not
flee.	 I	 don’t	 care	 how	 nasty	 it	 gets	 up	 there.	 If	 you	 ain’t	 looking	 like	 a	 pigeon	 that’s	 gone	 through	 a
windmill	by	the	time	we’re	all	done,	you’ll	have	failed	me—and	your	kin,	too.	So	don’t	even	think—’
I	hear	your	words,	Mortal	Sword.	You	shall	have	my	eyes,	more’s	the	pity.
‘So	long	as	we’re	understood.	Now,	what	should	I	be	expecting	when	we	sight	the	Nah’ruk?’
And	so	Gu’Rull	told	him.	The	human	interrupted	again	and	again	with	sharp,	percipient	questions.	And,	as
the	 shock	 of	 his	 power—which	 had	 so	 easily	 torn	 through	 his	 defences	 to	 plunder	 Gu’Rull’s	 mind—slowly
faded	to	a	welt	of	indignation,	the	Shi’gal’s	esteem	for	the	Mortal	Sword	grew,	grudgingly,	half	in	disbelief,	half
in	resentment.	The	Assassin	would	not	permit	himself	the	delusion	of	hope.	But,	this	man	was	a	warrior	in	the
truest	sense.
And	what	is	that	true	sense?	Why,	it	is	the	insanity	of	belief.	And	now	you	make	us	believe.	With	you.
In	you.	And	in	your	madness,	which	you	so	insist	upon	sharing.
You	taste	bitter,	human.	You	taste	of	your	world.
	
Cursing,	Stormy	forced	his	mount	up	alongside	Gesler.	‘I’m	picking	up	a	stink	of	something.	It’s	hiding	in	back
thoughts,	at	the	bottom	of	deep	pools—’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	talking	about?’	Gesler	demanded.	‘And	be	quick,	that	Assassin’s	even	now
winging	 towards	 the	 enemy—they’re	 camped,	 I	 can	 see	 them—there	 are	 fires	 and	 one	 big	 one—lots	 of
smoke.	Gods,	my	head’s	ready	to	explode—’


‘You	ain’t	listening,’	Stormy	said.	‘That	stink—they	know	something.	Gunth	Mach—she	knows	something
and	she’s	hiding	it	from	us.	I	got	this—’
Gesler	 snapped	 out	 a	 hand,	 and	 Stormy	 could	 see	 a	 distant	 look	 in	 his	 friend’s	 battered	 face,	 and	 as	 he
watched,	he	saw	horror	filling	the	man’s	eyes.	‘Beru	fend	.	.	.	Stormy.	I’m	seeing	wreckage—heaps	of	armour
and	weapons.	Stormy—’
‘Those	Nah’ruk—they—’
‘The	 Bonehunters—they	 found	 ’em,	 they	 .	 .	 .	 gods,	 there’s	 piles	 of	 bones!	 They	 fucking	 ate	 them!’	 As
Gesler	reeled	Stormy	reached	out	to	steady	him.
‘Ges!	Just	tell	me	what	you’re	seeing!’
‘What	do	you	think	I’m	doing!	Gods	below!’
	
But	 all	 at	 once	 words	 dried	 up,	 and	 Gesler	 could	 only	 stare	 downward	 as	 the	 Assassin	 wheeled	 over	 the
battlefield,	the	massive	encampment,	a	crater	that	could	swallow	a	palace,	and	the	vast	stain	of	what	looked
like	 coals	 amidst	 flame-licked	 tree-stumps—no,	 not	 stumps.	 Limbs.	 Scorched	 Nah’ruk,	 still	 burning.	 Was	 it
magic	that	hit	them?	Gesler	could	not	believe	that.	A	single	release	of	a	warren,	torching	thousands?	And	that
crater—a	hundred	cussers	maybe	.	.	.	but	we	didn’t	have	a	hundred	cussers.
He	could	hear	Stormy	shouting	at	him,	but	the	voice	seemed	impossibly	distant,	too	far	away	to	be	of	any
concern.	Trenches	ribboned	a	ridge,	some	of	them	filled	with	shattered	armour	and	weapons.	Lesser	craters
pocked	 the	 summit,	 crowded	 with	 bones.	 Off	 to	 one	 side,	 hundreds	 of	 Nah’ruk	 were	 moving	 through	 the
carcasses	 of	 horses	 and	 blackened	 bodies.	 Heavy	 wagons	 trailed	 them,	 slabs	 of	 meat	 heaped	 on	 their	 beds.
Dozens	of	Nah’ruk	were	harnessed	to	them,	straining	in	their	yokes.
That	was	a	Khundryl	charge.	Wiped	out.	At	least	some	of	the	allies	arrived	in	time—in	time	for	what?
Dying.	 Gods,	 this	 was	 the	 Lord’s	 cruellest	 push.	 They	 weren’t	 looking	 for	 a	 fight—not	 with	 damned
lizards,	anyway.	Not	here	in	the	useless	Wastelands.
The	Shi’gal	Assassin’s	voice	intruded.	‘Your	kin	have	damaged	the	Nah’ruk.	This	harvest	was	paid	for,
Mortal	Sword.	At	least	three	Furies	have	been	destroyed.’
Those	were	my	friends.	This	wasn’t	their	fight.
‘They	were	brave.	They	did	not	surrender.’
Gesler	frowned.	Was	surrender	possible?
‘I	do	not	know.	I	doubt	it.	The	matter	is	irrelevant.	Against	us,	tomorrow,	there	will	be	no	quarter.’
‘You	got	that	right,’	Gesler	said	in	a	growl.
‘Gesler!’
Blinking,	 the	 scene	 spinning	 away	 from	 his	 mind,	 he	 turned	 to	 Stormy.	 Wiping	 his	 eyes,	 he	 said,	 ‘It’s	 bad.
Bad	as	it	can	get.	The	Nah’ruk	were	marching	to	meet	these	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	They	slammed	like	a	fist
right	into	the	Bonehunters.	Stormy,	there	was	slaughter,	but	only	one	army	remains—’
Gu’Rull	 spoke	 once	 again	 in	 his	 mind.	 ‘I	 have	 found	 a	 trail,	 Mortal	 Sword.	 Signs	 of	 retreat.	 Shall	 we
pursue	it?	The	Nah’ruk	can	feel	our	approach—our	Ve’Gath	are	as	thunder	in	the	earth.	They	prepare
to	march	to	meet	us—the	sky	is	a	place	of	no	light,	there	are	alien	winds—I	cannot—’
Lightning	 flashed	 to	 the	 south,	 cracking	 through	 the	 night.	 Gesler	 grunted	 as	 the	 concussion	 reverberated
through	his	skull.	Assassin?	Where	are	you?	Answer	me—what’s	happened?
But	he	could	not	reach	out	to	the	winged	lizard;	he	could	not	find	Gu’Rull	anywhere.	Shit.
‘Is	that	a	damned	storm	cloud	up	ahead,	Gesler?	Is	that	blood	on	your	face?	Tell	me	what	the	Hood’s	going
on!’
‘You	 really	 that	 curious?’	 Gesler	 said,	 baring	 his	 teeth.	 He	 then	 spat.	 ‘The	 Nah’ruk	 have	 dropped
everything.	They’re	coming	for	us.	We’re	on	our	own.’
‘And	the	Bonehunters?’
‘We’re	on	our	own.’
	
The	 scouts	 emerged	 from	 the	 unforgiving	 darkness.	 On	 this	 night	 the	 Slashes	 had	 vanished,	 taking	 the	 stars
and	the	jade	glow	with	them.	Even	the	swollen	haze	that	was	the	moon	did	not	dare	the	sky.	Shivering	in	the
sudden	chill,	Warleader	Strahl	waited	for	the	scouts	to	reach	him.


The	 two	 Senan	 warriors	 were	 hunched	 over,	 as	 if	 fearful,	 or	 perhaps	 wounded.	 When	 they	 halted	 before
him,	both	knelt.	They	were	exhausted,	he	saw,	their	chests	heaving.
Look	at	them.	Look	at	this	darkness.	Has	the	world	ended	this	night?
He	would	not	rush	them,	demanding	words	they	would	struggle	to	feed.	The	dread	was	thick	enough	in	their
harsh	breaths.
Behind	the	Warleader	the	Senan	Barghast	waited.	Some	slept,	but	for	most	sleep	would	not	come.	Hunger.
Thirst.	 The	 famine	 of	 loss,	 a	 song	 of	 soft	 weeping.	 He	 could	 feel	 scores	 of	 eyes	 fixed	 upon	 him,	 seeing,	 he
knew,	little	more	than	a	vague,	smudged	silhouette.	Seeing	the	truth	of	him,	and	before	them	he	had	nowhere	to
hide.
One	of	the	scouts	had	recovered	his	wind.	‘Warleader.	Two	armies	on	the	plain.’
‘The	Malazans—’
‘No,	Warleader—these	are	demons—’
The	other	hissed,	‘There	are	thousands!’
‘Two	armies,	you	said.’
‘They	 march	 towards	 each	 other—through	 the	 night—we	 are	 almost	 between	 them!	 Warleader,	 we	 must
retreat—we	must	flee	from	here!’
‘Go	into	the	camp,	both	of	you.	Rest.	Leave	me.	Say	nothing.’
Once	they’d	staggered	off,	he	drew	his	furs	closer	about	his	shoulders.	This	dusk,	they’d	sighted	a	Moon’s
Spawn,	but	one	of	hard	angles	and	planes—his	sharper-eyed	warriors	claimed	it	was	carved	in	the	shape	of	a
dragon.	Two	demon	armies—what	better	place	to	clash	than	on	the	Wastelands?	Kill	each	other.	Yours	is
not	our	war.	We	mean	to	find	the	Malazans	.	.	.	do	we	not?	Our	old	enemy,	a	worthy	one.
Did	they	not	betray	the	alliance	at	Coral?	Did	they	not	try	to	cheat	Caladan	Brood	and	steal	that	city
in	 the	 name	 of	 the	 cursed	 Empress?	 If	 not	 for	 Anomander	 Rake,	 they	 would	 have	 succeeded.	 These
Bonehunters	claim	to	be	renegades,	but	then,	did	not	Dujek	Onearm	say	the	same?	No,	this	is	the	usual
nest	of	lies.	Whatever	they	seek,	whatever	they	conquer,	they	will	claim	for	the	Empress.
Onos	Toolan,	what	other	enemy	existed?	Who	else	could	you	hope	to	find?	Who	else	as	worthy	as	the
Malazans,	 conquerors,	 devourers	 of	 history?	 You	 said	 you	 once	 served	 them.	 But	 you	 left	 them.	 You
came	to	lead	the	White	Faces.	You	knew	this	enemy—you	told	us	so	much	that	we	now	need—we	were
fools,	that	we	did	not	see.
But	now	I	do.
The	demons	were	welcome	to	their	battle.
Yes,	they	would	retreat	from	this.	He	swung	round.
Dust	spun	in	the	Senan	camp,	silver	as	moonlight,	in	spirals	rising	on	all	sides.	Someone	shrieked.
Ghostly	warriors—the	gleam	of	bone,	rippling	blades	of	chert	and	flint—
Strahl	 stared,	 struggling	 to	 comprehend.	 Screams	 erupted—the	 terrible	 weapons	 lashed	 out,	 tore	 through
mortal	flesh	and	bone.	Barghast	war-cries	sounded,	iron	rang	against	stone.	Rotted	faces,	black-pitted	eyes.
A	hulking	figure	appeared	directly	in	front	of	Strahl.	The	Warleader’s	eyes	widened—as	in	the	firelight	he
saw	 the	 sword	 gripped	 in	 the	 creature’s	 bony	 hands.	 No.	No!	 ‘We	 avenged	 you!	 Onos	 Toolan,	 we	 avenged
them	all!	Do	not—you	cannot—’
The	sword	hissed	a	diagonal	slash	that	cut	through	both	of	Strahl’s	legs,	from	his	right	hip	to	below	his	left
knee.	He	slid	down	with	that	blade,	found	himself	lying	on	the	ground.	Above	him,	only	darkness.	Sickly	cold
rushed	 through	 him.	 We	 did	 all	 we	 could.	 Our	 shame.	 Our	 guilt.	 Warleader,	 please.	 There	 are	 children,
there	are	innocents—
The	downward	chop	shattered	his	skull.
	
The	Senan	died.	The	White	Face	Barghast	died.	Nom	Kala	stood	apart	from	the	slaughter.	The	T’lan	Imass
were	relentless,	and	had	she	a	heart,	it	would	have	recoiled	before	this	remorseless	horror.
The	 slayers	 of	 his	 wife,	 his	 children,	 were	 paid	 in	 kind.	 Cut	 down	 with	 implacable	 efficiency.	 She	 heard
mothers	 plead	 for	 the	 lives	 of	 their	 children.	 She	 heard	 their	 death-cries.	 She	 heard	 tiny	 wailing	 voices	 fall
suddenly	silent.
This	 was	 a	 crime	 that	 would	 poison	 every	 soul.	 She	 could	 almost	 feel	 the	 earth	 crack	 and	 bleed	 beneath
them,	as	if	spirits	writhed,	as	if	gods	stumbled.	The	rage	emanating	from	Onos	T’oolan	was	darker	than	the


sky,	 thicker	 than	 any	 cloud.	 It	 gusted	 outward	 in	 waves	 of	 his	 own	 horrified	 recognition—he	 knew,	 he	 could
see	himself,	as	if	torn	loose	and	flung	outside	his	own	body—he	saw,	and	the	very	sight	of	what	he	was	doing
was	driving	him	mad.
And	us	all.	Oh,	give	me	dust.	Give	me	a	morning	born	in	oblivion,	born	in	eternal,	blessed	oblivion.
There	were	thousands,	and	scores	were	fleeing	into	the	night,	but	so	many	were	already	dead.	This	is	what
was,	once.	Terrible	armies	of	T’lan	Imass.	We	hunted	down	the	Jaghut.	We	gave	them	what	I	see	here.
By	all	the	spirits,	is	this	our	only	voice?	A	terrible	moaning	was	rising	in	the	foul	wake	of	the	last	few	deathblows,	a	moaning	that	seemed	to	spin	and	swirl,	coming	from	the	T’lan	Imass,	from	each	warrior	splashed	in
gore,	dripping	weapons	in	their	hands.	It	was	a	sound	that	cut	through	Nom	Kala.	She	staggered	before	it	in
retreat,	as	if	begging	the	darkness	to	swallow	her	whole.
Onos	 T’oolan.	 Your	 vengeance—you	 delivered	 it	 .	 .	 .	 upon	 us,	 upon	 your	 pathetic	 followers.	 We
followed	your	lead.	We	did	as	you	did.	We	broke	our	own	chains.	We	unleashed	ourselves—how	many
millennia	of	this	anger	within	us?	Lashed	loose,	lashed	into	life.
Now,	 we	 are	 become	 slayers	 of	 children.	 We	 have	 stepped	 into	 the	 world,	 again,	 after	 all	 this	 time
spent	so	.	.	.	so	free	from	its	crimes.	Onos	T’oolan,	do	you	see?	Do	you	understand?
Now,	once	more,	we	are	born	into	history.
	
If	this	is	what	a	Shield	Anvil	feels,	then	I	don’t	want	it.	Do	you	hear	me?	I	don’t	want	it!	He	knew	Gesler,
knew	 what	 the	 man’s	 refusal	 meant.	 Through	 that	 damned	 rhizan’s	 eyes	 he’d	 seen	 the	 corpses.	 The
slaughtered	remains	of	the	Bonehunters	and	the	Letherii.	Only	two	days	ago	they’d	been	marching	with	them
—all	those	faces	he	knew,	all	those	soldiers	he	liked	to	swear	at—now	gone.	Dead.
This	was	all	wrong.	He	and	Ges	should	have	died	with	them,	died	fighting	at	their	sides.	Brotherhood	and
sisterhood	only	found	true	meaning	in	the	wash	of	death,	in	the	falling	one	after	another,	the	darkness	and	then
the	shuddering	awake	before	Hood’s	Gate.	Aye,	we’re	family	when	fighting	to	the	last,	but	the	real	family
is	 among	 the	 fallen.	 Why	 else	 do	 we	 stagger	 half-blind	 after	 every	 battle?	 Why	 else	 do	 we	 look	 upon
dead	kin	and	feel	so	abandoned?	They	left	without	us,	that’s	why.
A	soldier	knows	this.	A	soldier	saying	different	is	a	Hood-damned	liar.
Dawn	was	not	far	off.	The	last	day	was	close.	But	this	ain’t	the	family	I	knew.	It	ain’t	the	one	I	wanted.
All	I	got	is	Gesler.	We	been	through	it	all,	true,	so	at	least	we	can	die	together.	At	least	that	makes	sense.
Been	through	it	all.	Falar—gods	we	were	young!	Damned	fools,	aye.	Running	off,	swearing	ourselves
into	the	Fener	cult—it	was	the	rumours	of	the	orgies	that	did	us	in.	What	rutting	lad	wouldn’t	jump	at
the	thought?
Damned	orgies,	oh	yes.	But	we	should’ve	worked	it	out	for	ourselves.	S’damned	god	of	war,	right?
Orgies,	oh	indeed,	orgies	of	slaughter,	not	sex.	Thinking	with	the	wrong	brains,	is	what	we	did.	But,	at
that	age,	isn’t	it	how	it’s	supposed	to	be?
Only	we	never	got	out,	never	got	wise,	did	we?	We	found	ourselves	in	a	cesspool	and	then	spent	the
next	twenty	years	telling	each	other	the	smell	ain’t	so	bad.	Sweet	as	rain,	in	fact.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	going	to	die.	They	were	going	to	pour	their	blood	into	him,	souls	crowding	for
his	embrace,	whatever	that	meant.	The	Matron	who	wanted	all	this	was	dead,	but	then	.	.	.	ain’t	 dying	 the
first	and	most	obvious	path	into	ascendancy,	into	godhood?
Though	eating	the	front	of	her	skull,	that’s	just	sick.	She’ll	make	’em	pay	for	that,	now	that	she’s	a
goddess	or	whatever.
Well,	he’d	keep	the	door	barred	until	the	last	moment—he	had	an	army	to	order	around,	after	all.	A	mob	of
heavies	who’d	wheel	on	a	horse-hair	with	an	instant’s	thought.	Imagine	what	Coltaine	could’ve	done	with
these	legions.	If	he’d	had	’em,	Korbolo	Dom	wouldn’t	be	wiggling	his	finger	up	Laseen’s	backside	right
now.	In	fact—
‘Hood’s	breath,	Stormy,	you’re	leaking	the	sickest	things.’
‘So	get	outa	my	head!’
‘I	said	“leaking,”	you	oaf.	I	ain’t	in	your	head.	Listen,	stop	thinking	we’re	all	vulture	shit,	all	right?	I	don’t
know	if	these	things	got	anything	like	morale,	but	if	they	do	you’ve	just	beaten	it	into	a	pulpy	mess.’
‘Those	were	my	thoughts!’
‘So	figure	out	a	way	of	keeping	them	inside.	Just	picture	your	thick	skull—it’s	got	holes,	right.	Out	the	eyes,


the	nose,	whatever.	So,	picture	blocking	’em	all	up.	Now	you’re	safe.	Now	you	can	think	all	the	stupid	things
you	like	to	think	about.’
‘Is	that	why	I	ain’t	getting	anything	from	you?’
‘No.	Right	now,	I’m	too	witless	to	think.	Sky’s	lightening—look	at	that	cloud	to	the	south.	It’s	not	a	cloud.
It’s	a	hole	in	the	sky.	It’s	a	warren	ripped	wide	open.	Just	looking	at	it	makes	my	skin	crawl	like	a	leech	under
a	rock.’
‘Ges,	these	legions—’
‘Furies.’
‘They	ain’t	presented	for	battle,	unless	you	plan	on	us	just	marching	right	up	to	’em.	Like	the	Quon	used	to
do.’
‘You’re	right.	The	Quon	had	badly	trained	troops,	but	they	had	a	lot	of	them.	Who	needs	tactics?’
‘We	do.’
‘Right.	So,	see	if	we	can	get	’em	sawtooth—’	He	stopped	suddenly.
In	the	same	instant	something	rushed	through	Stormy	and	he	grunted,	twisting	round.
The	massive	baggage	train	had	halted.	Drones—smaller	creatures,	not	much	taller	than	a	human—swarmed
the	beds,	unshipping	rectangular	slabs	of	iron.	‘Gesler—are	those	shields?’
Gesler	had	halted	and	wheeled	his	mount.	‘Aye,	I	think	so.	I	was	wondering	at	those	hand-and-a-half	axes
the	Ve’Gath	carried.	So,	these	really	are	heavies—’
‘I	couldn’t	pick	up	one	of	those	shields,	let	alone	hang	it	from	one	arm.	The	Nah’ruk	got	missile	weapons?’
‘Unplug	your	skull,’	said	Gesler,	‘and	you’ll	get	your	answer.	Another	innovation	from	the	Matron.	She	must
have	been	something,	I	think.’
‘She	was	a	big	fat	lizard.’
‘She	 also	 broke	 ten	 thousand	 years	 of	 changing	 nothing—and	 the	 Che’Malle	 claim	 they	 never	 had	 a
religion.’
Grunting—and	not	quite	understanding	what	Gesler	had	meant—Stormy	cast	about	to	find	the	Destriant.
Twenty	 paces	 to	 the	 west,	 Kalyth	 was	 astride	 the	 back	 of	 Sag’Churok,	 but	 she	 was	 not	 watching	 the
smooth	 distribution	 of	 the	 huge	 shields	 through	 the	 Ve’Gath	 ranks.	 Instead,	 she	 was	 squinting	 south.	 Stormy
followed	her	gaze.
‘Ges,	I	see	’em.	A	line	of	legions—’
‘Furies,’	said	Gesler.
‘Five	across	making	the	facing.	And	what,	three	deep?	Hood’s	breath,	they	look	to	outnumber	us	badly.	I’m
thinking	 three	 teeth	 each	 legion,	 ranks	 no	 more	 than	 thirty	 deep.	 We	 can	 reach	 that	 high	 ground	 just	 ahead,
shield-lock	there.’
‘You’ll	screen	my	K’ell,	then,	Stormy.	Show	your	teeth	and	let	the	Nah’ruk	close	jaws	on	’em.	How	long
you	think	you	can	hold	that	ridge?’
‘How	long	do	you	need?’
‘I	 want	 most	 of	 the	 enemy	 Furies	 committed	 to	 pushing	 you	 off	 that	 ridge.	 I	 want	 you	 to	 savage	 them,
enough	to	get	them	ducking	their	heads	and	thinking	about	nothing	but	the	next	step	forward.	I	don’t	want	’em
looking	right	or	left.’
‘What’s	Ampelas	Uprooted	going	to	be	doing	during	all	this?’	Stormy	demanded.
‘Unplug	your	skull.’
‘No,	this	is	better.’
Kalyth	had	ridden	closer.	‘There	is	sorcery—defences,	weapons.’
Stormy	 wasn’t	 understanding	 something.	 He	 knew	 he	 would	 if	 he	 knocked	 down	 the	 walls	 he’d	 raised
around	 his	 thoughts,	 but	 he	 didn’t	 want	 to	 do	 that.	 Ampelas	 Uprooted—Gesler	 wasn’t	 factoring	 it	 into	 his
tactics	at	all.	Why	not?	No	matter.	‘Ges,	when	holding	isn’t	what	we	need	to	do	any	more,	what	do	you	want
from	us?’
‘Single	 wedge,	 advance	 at	 the	 walk.	 Cut	 the	 bastards	 in	 half,	 Stormy.	 One	 wing	 will	 be	 healthier	 than	 the
other.	That	one	needs	blocking—we	annihilate	the	weaker	wing.	Then	we	can	wheel	and	take	down	the	other
half.’
‘Ges,	these	Ve’Gath	never	fought	this	way	before.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	no	tactics	at	all,	from	what
I	can	see	in	my	head.’


‘That’s	 why	 they	 need	 us	 humans,’	 Kalyth	 said.	 ‘She	 understood.	 You	 two—’	 she	 shook	 her	 head.	 ‘The
Che’Malle—they	drink	down	your	confidence.	They	are	sated.	They	hear	you,	discussing	the	battle	to	come,
and	they	are	awestruck	with	wonder.	And	.	.	.	faith.’
Stormy	 scowled.	 Woman,	 if	 you	 could	 read	 me	 right	 now,	 you’d	 run	 screaming.	 Of	 course	 we	 say
we’re	doing	this	and	then	that	and	then	this	other	thing	and	it’s	all	so	perfect	and	so	logical.	We	know
it’s	all	a	joke.	We	know	that	once	the	battle	is	engaged,	it	all	turns	into	Hood’s	hoary	picnic	basket.
Me	and	Ges,	we’re	just	amateurs.	Dujek	was	damned	good	at	this,	but	Dassem	Ultor,	ah,	he	was	the
best	of	them	all.	He	could	stand	there	in	front	of	ten	thousand	soldiers,	and	he’d	take	’em	all	through
every	sword-stroke	in	the	battle	to	come.	By	the	end	of	all	that	wheeling	here,	driving	there,	breaking
through	there,	we’d	all	be	nodding	half	bored	and	ready	to	get	on	with	it.	It	was	a	done	deal	to	us,	and
the	First	Sword,	why,	he’d	just	take	us	all	in	with	his	eyes	and	give	back	one	single	nod.
Then	the	day	went	out	and	mayhem	was	a	field	of	flowers	and	by	dusk	the	enemy	was	dead	or	on	the
run.
Aye,	Gesler,	I	hear	you	echoing	him.	I	see	you	taking	on	his	matter-of-fact	tone	and	that	face	of	sunwarmed	 iron	 that	 we	 all	 knew	 would	 turn	 to	 ice	 when	 the	 time	 came.	 I’ll	 give	 you	 this,	 friend,	 you’re
stealing	from	the	best	of	’em	all,	and	doing	good.
He	clawed	through	his	beard.	‘Anyone	got	a	cask	of	ale?	I	can’t	remember	the	last	time	I	went	into	a	battle
not	belching	sour	brew.’	He	studied	Kalyth	for	a	moment,	and	then	sighed.	‘Never	mind.	Go	on,	Ges,	go	hide
your	K’ell,	I	got	it	here.’
‘See	you	when	it’s	done,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘Aye,	Mortal	Sword.’
	
Heat	 was	 building	 beneath	 Kalyth.	 Sag’Churok	 was	 flooded	 with	 flavours	 of	 violence.	 But	 she	 sat	 hunched,
chilled,	 her	 very	 bones	 feeling	 like	 sticks	 trapped	 in	 lakeshore	 ice.	 These	 two	 soldiers	 appalled	 her.	 Their
confidence	 was	 insane.	 The	 ease	 with	 which	 they	 took	 command—and	 the	 mockery	 with	 which	 they
exchanged	their	titles	moments	before	separating—left	her	reeling.
Her	people	had	met	with	traders	from	Kolanse.	She	had	seen	armoured	caravan	guards,	looking	bored	as
the	 merchants	 haggled	 with	 the	 Elan	 elders.	 Children	 had	 drawn	 close	 to	 them,	 eyes	 shining,	 but	 none	 drew
close	enough	to	touch,	as	much	as	they	might	have	wanted	to.	Killers	were	lodestones.	Their	silence	and	their
flat	eyes	fed	something	in	the	young	boys	and	girls,	and	Kalyth	could	see	their	childlike	longing,	the	whispering
romance	of	the	horizons	these	warriors	had	seen.	Such	scenes	had	frightened	her,	and	she	had	prayed	to	the
spirits	for	the	strangers	to	leave,	to	take	their	dangerous	temptations	with	them.
Looking	into	Gesler’s	eyes	moments	ago,	she	had	seen	the	same	terrible	promise.	The	world	was	ever	too
small	for	him.	The	horizon	chained	him	and	that	chain’s	pull	was	relentless.	He	didn’t	care	what	he	left	in	his
wake.	His	kind	never	did.
Yet	 I	 knew.	 Gu’Rull	 saw	 true.	 These	 were	 the	 ones	 I	 was	 seeking.	 These	 two	 men	 are	 the	 answer	 to
Gunth’an	Acyl’s	vision.	A	future	alive	with	hope.
But	they	don’t	care.	They	will	lead	us	in	this	battle,	and	if	we	all	die	they	will	either	flee	at	the	last
moment,	or	they	will	fall—it’s	no	matter	to	them.	They	are	no	different	from	Redmask.
Those	caravan	guards	still	squatting	in	her	memory,	they	were	dead	and	they	knew	it.	This	knowledge	was
the	one	lover	every	warrior	and	every	soldier	shared,	a	whore	of	monstrous	proportions.	Paid	in	blood,	pimped
by	kings	and	generals	and	fanatic	prophets.	And	it’s	all	twisted	round.	It’s	the	whore	who	does	the	raping.
You	couldn’t	catch	her	in	a	thousand	years.
One	 time,	 two	 young	 braves	 had	 vanished	 after	 a	 caravan’s	 departure.	 The	 elders	 and	 parents	 met	 to
discuss	whether	or	not	to	set	out	after	them,	to	drag	them	back	to	the	village.	In	the	end,	the	elders	wandered
off,	and	the	mothers	wept	softly	with	their	husbands	looking	on.
They	put	chains	on	and	called	it	freedom.	The	whore	stole	them.
She	wanted	Gesler	and	Stormy	to	die.	She	wanted	it	with	all	her	heart.	There	was	no	reason	for	it.	They’d
done	nothing	wrong.	In	fact,	they	were	about	to	do	precisely	what	they	were	meant	to	do.	And	they	would	not
shrink	from	their	destiny.	They	are	not	to	blame	for	my	hate	and	my	fear.
But	 I	 want	 a	 world	 without	 soldiers.	 I	 want	 to	 see	 them	 all	 kill	 each	 other.	 I	 want	 to	 see	 kings	 and
generals	 standing	 alone—not	 a	 single	 soul	 within	 reach	 of	 their	 grasping	 claws.	 No	 weapon	 to	 back


their	will,	no	blade	to	sing	their	threats.	I	want	to	see	them	revealed	for	the	weak,	miserable	creatures
they	truly	are.
What	can	bring	this	about?	How	do	I	make	such	a	world?
Spirits	bless	my	ancestors,	I	wish	I	knew.
She’d	 lost	 her	 Mahybe,	 her	 clay	 vessel	 awaiting	 her	 soul.	 For	 her,	 death	 was	 a	 nightmare	 she	 knew	 was
coming.	She	had	no	reason	to	dream	of	any	future.	In	this,	was	she	not	like	those	caravan	guards?	Was	she
not	the	same	as	Gesler	and	Stormy?	What	did	they	see	in	her	eyes?
I	 am	 Destriant.	 And	 yet	 I	 dream	 of	 betrayal.	 When	 she	 looked	 upon	 the	 Ve’Gath,	 the	 echoes	 of	 their
agony	of	birth	returned	to	her,	the	terrors	of	the	Womb.	They	did	not	deserve	what	was	coming,	and	yet	they
longed	for	it.	Could	she	steal	them	away	from	this	day	of	dying,	she	would.	She’d	lead	them,	instead,	against
her	own	kind.	A	holy	war	against	the	soldiers	of	the	world	and	their	masters.
Leaving	only	herders	and	farmers	and	fisherfolk.	Artists	and	tanners	and	potters.	Story-tellers	and	poets	and
musicians.	A	world	for	them	and	them	alone.	A	world	of	peace.
	
The	Nah’ruk	Furies	seemed	to	devour	the	broken	plain	as	they	advanced.	The	east	was	bright	with	the	sun’s
birth,	but	the	sky	above	the	enemy	legions	was	a	vast	stain,	a	bruise,	a	maw	from	which	wind	howled.
Stormy	drew	his	sword.	He	could	see	the	front	ranks	of	the	foe	preparing	clubs—weapons	of	sorcery:	the
visions	 or	 stolen	 memories	 flashed	 scenes	 of	 devastating	 magic	 through	 his	 mind.	 Ready	 your	 shields,	 and
pray	the	iron	holds.
He	glared	over	a	shoulder	to	Ampelas	Uprooted.	A	veil	of	white	smoke	enwreathed	the	sky	keep.	Clouds?
Scowling,	Stormy	turned	his	attention	to	his	Ve’Gath.	They	were	arrayed	upon	the	ridge	as	if	painted	from	his
own	 mind—they	 knew	 his	 thoughts	 now	 that	 he’d	 knocked	 down	 his	 mental	 walls.	 They	 knew	 what	 he
wanted,	 what	 he	 needed.	 And	 they	 will	 never	 break.	 Never	 flee—unless	 panic	 takes	 me,	 and	 Hood
knows,	for	all	the	shit	I	been	through,	it	ain’t	happened	yet.	And	it	won’t	today	neither.
‘So,	we	stand,	lizards.	We	stand.’
A	sudden	rustling	through	the	ranks	as	heads	lifted.
Stormy	swung	round.
From	 the	 gaping	 hole	 in	 the	 morning	 sky	 shapes	 were	 emerging.	 Towering,	 black,	 pushing	 out	 from	 the
maelstrom	foaming	out	from	the	warren.
Sky	keeps.	None	as	huge	as	the	one	behind	him,	massing	perhaps	two-thirds,	and	none	were	carved	beyond
angled	plains	of	black	stone.	And	yet	.	.	.
Three	.	.	.	five	.	.	.	eight—
‘Beru	fend!’
Ampelas	Uprooted	ignited	like	a	star	behind	him.
	
The	 deafening,	 blinding	 salvo	 of	 sorcery	 ripped	 across	 the	 sky.	 Enormous	 chunks	 of	 gouged,	 burning	 stone
erupted	from	the	nearest	three	Nah’ruk	sky	keeps.	Streaming	churning	smoke	and	rubble,	shattered	fragments
the	size	of	tenement	blocks	plunged	earthward,	slamming	into	the	ground	in	the	midst	of	the	rearmost	ranks	of
the	Nah’ruk.
Ears	 numbed	 by	 the	 concussion,	 Gesler	 rose	 high	 on	 his	 stirrups—Ampelas	 Uprooted	 had	 drawn	 closer,
looming	 almost	 directly	 overhead.	 ‘Hood’s	 breath!	 Ke’ll	 Hunters—flee	 the	 shadow!	 Get	 out	 from	 under	 it!
East	and	west—run!’
He	charged	forward	on	his	Ve’Gath.	Stormy!	Fuck	the	stand—charge	’em!	You	hear?	Charge	and	close!
He’d	heard	the	stories	of	the	Siege	of	Pale.	Moon’s	Spawn’s	rain	of	wreckage	into	the	city	had	broken	the
backs	of	the	defenders.	This	deadly	rain	of	rubble	could	shatter	his	entire	army.
More	Nah’ruk	sky	keeps	emerged	from	the	wound.
Lightning	crackled,	arced	savagely	out	from	a	half-dozen	sky	keeps,	converging	on	Ampelas	Uprooted.
The	detonations	thundered.	And	the	rain	of	slaughter	began.
The	 huge	 wagons	 and	 their	 scrambling	 drones	 vanished	 beneath	 an	 avalanche	 that	 lifted	 nearby	 K’ell
Hunters	 into	 the	 air,	 tails	 lashing	 for	 balance	 as	 they	 flailed	 about.	 Dust	 rolled	 out	 thick	 as	 a	 tidal	 wave	 to
swallow	the	spreading	horror	as	massive	chunks	of	stone	descended	from	the	battered	Uprooted.


Through	the	torrential,	billowing	smoke	and	rubble,	Ampelas	lashed	back.
	
The	saw-tooth	line	of	Ve’Gath	lifted	as	if	heaved	forward	by	the	ridge	itself,	and	all	at	once	the	huge	warriors
were	pouring	down	the	slope,	straight	for	the	lines	of	Nah’ruk.
Sorcery	arced	out	from	the	wired	clubs,	crashed	into	a	shield-locked	wall	of	iron.	The	Ve’Gath	staggered,
but	not	one	fell.
There	was	no	time	for	a	second	salvo.
The	Ve’Gath	toothed	line	hammered	into	the	Nah’ruk.	The	impact	of	the	charge	flattened	two,	then	three
ranks	 of	 the	 Short-Tails.	 Weapons	 lashed	 down	 as	 the	 Ve’Gath	 trampled	 the	 fallen	 enemy,	 closing	 with	 the
deeper	lines	still	reeling	from	the	impact.
Stormy	was	at	the	very	heart	of	the	attack.	He’d	swung	his	sword	twice,	and	both	times	his	blade	had	bitten
deep	 into	 armour—but	 his	 targets	 were	 in	 the	 act	 of	 dying	 anyway,	 for	 they	 had	 come	 within	 reach	 of	 his
mount.	He	couldn’t	close	with	anything	worth	hacking	apart.	He	roared	in	frustration.
The	Nah’ruk	warriors	were	outmatched.	They	bore	no	shields.	The	Ve’Gath	simply	chewed	through	them.
Lightning	ripped	down	from	the	sky,	ploughed	a	bloody,	burning	swath	through	the	rearmost	Ve’Gath	ranks,
slaying	hundreds	in	an	instant.
Stormy	snarled,	battered	by	those	sudden,	terrible	deaths.	Break	formation!	Close	with	the	enemy!
Another	lash	of	sorcery	scythed	down	hundreds	more.
Close!
	
Ampelas	 Rooted	 burned	 from	 a	 dozen	 gaping	 fissures.	 Massive	 pieces	 had	 shorn	 clear,	 revealing	 exposed
innards	from	which	poured	black	smoke.	The	sky	keep	shuddered	as	attack	after	attack	pounded	into	it.	The
edifice’s	forward	progress	had	halted,	and	now	it	was	being	buffeted	backward.	Still	it	spat	its	own	fury,	and
Gesler	could	see	one	of	the	Nah’ruk	keeps	leaning	far	to	one	side,	billowing	flames	and	smoke,	and	from	this
one	no	lightning	winged	out.
But	there	were	too	many	of	the	damned	things.	Three	had	drifted	out	to	the	east,	and	were	now	angling	to
draw	 up	 behind	 Ampelas	 Rooted—where	 the	 thick	 iron	 plates	 armouring	 that	 side	 of	 its	 flank	 had	 been
removed	to	fashion	shields	for	the	Ve’Gath.	In	moments,	they	would	strike	a	soft	target.
And	that’ll	kill	her.	Like	a	knife	to	the	back.
When	she’s	finished,	those	keeps	will	turn	on	us	here	below.	If	they	can.
But	I	won’t	let	them.
‘K’ell	 Hunters!	 Flanking	 charge	 from	 both	 sides.	 Cut	 in	 behind	 the	 contact—hollow	 out	 those	 engaged
legions!	Don’t	piss	around,	damn	you	all!	Charge!’
	
The	 three	 Nah’ruk	 sky	 keeps	 loosed	 raging	 arcs	 of	 lightning.	 Kalyth	 stared	 in	 horror	 as	 the	 lower	 half	 of
Ampelas	Rooted	seemed	to	bulge,	limed	in	red	glow.	The	concussion	of	the	detonation	threw	Sag’Churok	and
Gunth	Mach	down.	Kalyth	tumbled	clear	of	the	thrashing	beasts,	rocks	lacerating	her	shoulder	and	face.	She
rolled	on	to	her	back.	The	sky	was	burning,	and	flaming	stones	rained	down.
She	cried	out,	covering	her	eyes.
______
At	the	rush	of	hot	wind,	Stormy	twisted	round.	The	lower	third	of	Ampelas	Rooted	was	simply	gone,	and	what
remained	was	spilling	its	guts,	everything	burning	as	the	wreckage	plunged	earthward.	The	impact	was	driving
the	keep	on	to	its	side—or	back—exposing	the	destroyed	maw	of	its	base.
He	 swore	 as	 Ampelas	 Rooted	 somehow	 managed	 to	 return	 fire,	 two	 serpents	 of	 lightning	 writhing	 out
behind	it.
They	 must	 have	 struck,	 though	 he	 could	 not	 see	 past	 the	 Che’Malle	 keep,	 but	 the	 thunder	 of	 impacts
trembled	 the	 earth—and	 then	 he	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 Nah’ruk	 keeps	 rising	 behind	 Ampelas	 Rooted,	 climbing	 on
streamers	of	smoke.
His	eyes	widened	to	see	the	huge	thing	gaining	speed	as	it	shot	still	higher.	With	smoke	swarming	down	its


flanks,	damaged	beyond	hope	of	control,	the	keep	seemed	to	lunge	as	it	shot	into	the	sky—and	kept	going.
The	remaining	two	ignited	in	another	sorcerous	strike.
Light	engulfed	Ampelas	Uprooted—
	
The	K’ell	Hunters	plunged	into	the	buckling	flanks	of	the	Nah’ruk	Furies	that	were	locked	jaw	to	jaw	with	the
Ve’Gath.	Their	massive	blades	hacked	bloody	paths	into	the	press.	The	Nah’ruk	could	not	match	their	speed,
their	reach,	and	they	seemed	to	melt	before	the	attack.
In	his	mind,	Gesler	was	shouting	the	same	words	over	and	over,	a	mantra	of	desperation.	Close	close	close
in—close—they	won’t	fire	if—
Two	sky	keeps,	hovering	directly	above	the	battle,	sent	down	writhing	spears.	Nah’ruk,	Ve’Gath	and	K’ell
bodies	lifted	into	the	air,	blackened,	iron	shattering.
You	pieces	of	shit!
It	was	lost.	All	of	it.	He	realized	that	in	this	instant.
The	keeps	would	sterilize	the	plain	below	them,	if	that	was	what	it	took—
Off	to	the	west,	two	more	sky	keeps	were	swinging	round	to	approach	the	battle.
Gesler	glared	at	them.
And	then	both	exploded.
	
My	flesh	is	stone.	My	blood	rages	hot	as	molten	iron.	I	have	a	thousand	eyes.	A	thousand	swords.	And
one	mind.
I	have	heard	the	death-cry.	Was	she	kin?	She	said	as	much,	when	first	she	touched	me.	We	were	upon
the	ground.	Far	from	each	other,	and	yet	of	a	kind.
I	heard	her	die.
And	so	I	came	to	mourn	her,	I	came	to	find	her	body,	her	silent	tomb.
But	she	dies	still.	I	do	not	understand.	She	dies	still—and	there	are	strangers.	Cruel	strangers.	I	knew
them	once.	I	know	them	now.	I	know,	too,	that	they	will	not	yield.
Who	am	I?
What	am	I?
But	I	know	the	answers	to	these	questions.	I	believe,	at	last,	that	I	do.
Strangers,	you	bring	pain.	You	bring	suffering.	You	bring	to	so	many	dreams	the	dust	of	death.
But,	strangers,	I	am	Icarium.
And	I	bring	far	worse.
	
Kalyth’s	eyes	flickered	open,	on	a	scene	jostled	and	chaotic	with	smoke.	She	was	in	Gunth	Mach’s	clutches,
gripped	as	would	be	a	child.	The	One	Daughter	was	flanked	on	the	right	by	Sag’Churok	and	by	Bre’nigan	on
the	left,	the	three	of	them	running	at	a	steady	trot	across	the	valley	floor.
The	battle	raged	just	beyond	the	J’an	Sentinel.	The	K’ell	Hunters	had	cut	through	to	the	foremost	ranks	of
the	Ve’Gath,	but	now	the	enemy	had	begun	an	encirclement.
Lightning	lashed	down	from	the	keeps	directly	above	the	field,	tearing	ragged	paths	of	destruction	through
the	press.
Huge	drums	were	pounding	the	air	to	her	right	and	she	twisted	round	to	look	in	that	direction.	Two	Nah’ruk
keeps	were	breaking	apart,	the	fires	in	their	cores	burning	so	hot	she	saw	stone	melting	like	wax,	falling	away
from	 iron	 bones.	 The	 one	 to	 the	 north	 was	 descending	 earthward	 as	 if	 sinking	 through	 water.	 Multiple
explosions	racked	them	both.
Rising	from	behind	them,	shouldering	through	thick	pillars	of	black	smoke,	another	Uprooted.
What?	Who?	Sag’Churok—
‘Kalse	Uprooted,	Destriant.	But	there	is	no	Matron	within	it.	The	one	who	commands	.	.	.	it	has	been
a	long	time	since	he	last	walked	among	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	and	Nah’ruk.’
Sorcery	 swarmed	 round	 Kalse,	 green,	 blue	 and	 white—a	 kind	 she	 had	 never	 before	 seen—and	 then
suddenly	pulsed	out	in	a	seething	wave.	The	magic	cut	through	the	two	dying	keeps	and	Kalyth	gasped	to	see


ice	explode	out	from	fissures	in	the	ravaged	black	stone.	As	the	wave	burst	through	the	struck	keeps,	the	one
to	the	south	simply	split	in	half,	the	lower	section	dropping	like	a	mountain,	the	upper	end	lifting	and	spinning
inside	swirling	streams	of	smoke,	rubble	and	shards	of	ice.	The	other	one’s	upper	third	disintegrated	in	a	white
cloud	moments	before	it	struck	the	ground.
The	concussions	of	the	two	impacts	shook	the	earth.	The	hills	to	the	west	were	crushed	flat.	The	remnants
of	the	keeps	blew	apart	in	vast	clouds	of	dust	and	rock.
At	this	same	moment	the	wave	passed	directly	over	Kalyth	and	the	three	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	carrying	with
it	 air	 so	 cold	 it	 stunned	 her	 lungs.	 Gasping,	 agony	 convulsing	 her	 chest,	 she	 did	 not	 see	 the	 wave	 strike	 the
three	sky	keeps	above	the	battlefield.	The	explosions	deafened	her—darkness	rushed	in,	even	as	Gunth	Mach
staggered.
______
The	arrival	of	a	second	Che’Malle	keep	filled	the	sky	with	a	storm	of	violence.	Above	them,	Gesler	could	see
nothing	but	churning	clouds	and	deathly	flashes—even	the	bulks	of	the	keeps	had	vanished.	It	seemed	as	if	the
sky	itself	burned,	raining	white-hot	stones	that	snapped	as	they	shot	down	through	bitterly	cold	air.	Impossibly,
snow	swirled	down	amidst	ashes	and	rubble.
Nah’ruk	 keeps	 crowded	 the	 warren’s	 gate,	 as	 if	 seeking	 to	 break	 through	 to	 bring	 succour	 to	 those	 dying
before	 the	 stranger’s	 onslaught,	 but	 wave	 after	 wave	 slammed	 into	 them,	 and	 the	 unknown	 Uprooted	 was
bulling	ever	closer,	as	if	to	drive	down	the	very	throat	of	the	warren.	Lightning	lashed	into	it,	tore	huge	gashes
in	its	flanks.	Death	poured	down	from	the	sky.
Gesler’s	 mount	 towered	 amidst	 the	 K’ell	 Hunters	 crowded	 in	 on	 all	 sides—he	 knew	 the	 K’ell	 were
providing	 a	 cordon	 around	 them—though	 nothing	 could	 defend	 any	 of	 them	 against	 the	 deadly	 deluge	 from
above.	 He	 could	 see	 the	 rear	 Nah’ruk	 Furies	 committing	 to	 the	 battle—they	 had	 been	 and	 were	 still	 being
decimated	 by	 falling	 wreckage.	 Even	 so,	 sheer	 numbers	 alone	 were	 beginning	 to	 tell.	 Stormy’s	 Ve’Gath	 had
ceased	their	advance,	but	Gesler	could	see	his	friend,	the	battle	lust	upon	him,	his	face	red	as	his	hair,	his	eyes
blazing	with	madness.
‘Stormy!	Stormy!	Androjan	Redarr,	you	brainless	bastard!’
The	head	swung	round.	The	man	smiled.
Gods	below,	Stormy.	‘We’re	encircled!’
‘And	we’re	cutting	’em	to	pieces!’
‘We	need	to	break	out—the	sky’s	killing	us!’
‘Withdraw	your	K’ell!	Regroup	and	set	up	a	charge!’
‘Which	side?’
‘Whatever’s	behind	Kalse!’
Kalse.	I	ain’t	been	paying	attention.	‘And	you?’
‘Back-to-back	wedges—we’re	driving	out	to	the	fucking	sides!	You	watch	’em	pour	into	the	gap	and	then
you	charge	’em!	We	about	face	and	close	the	vice!’
Stormy,	you	Hood-damned	genius.	‘Agreed!’
	
The	pain	was	overwhelming.	He	bled	from	wounds	sheathing	his	body.	Blow	after	blow	hammered	into	him.
Blind,	 deafened,	 he	 struck	 back,	 not	 even	 knowing	 if	 his	 sorcery	 found	 the	 enemy.	 He	 felt	 himself	 tearing
loose,	moments	from	being	ripped	from	his	flesh	of	cracked	stone,	his	bones	of	tortured	iron.
I	shall	become	a	ghost	again.	Lost.	Where	are	my	children?	You	have	abandoned	me—there	are	too
many	of	them,	they	close	like	wolves—my	children—help	me—
‘You	must	close	the	gate.’
Breath?
‘Yes.	Feather	Witch.	The	Errant	drowned	me.	I	took	his	eye,	he	took	my	life.	Never	bargain	with	gods.
His	eye—I	give	it	to	you,	Lifestealer.	The	gate—do	you	see	it?	You	are	drawing	nearer—Lifestealer,	do
not	stop—’
Another	voice	spoke.	‘They	killed	a	dragon	for	this	power,	Icarium.’
Taxilian?
‘Its	blood	burned	this	hole—if	you	fail,	the	sky	shall	fill	with	the	enemy	machines—and	the	Nah’ruk


will	triumph	this	day.	See	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Icarium?	They	can	win	this—if	you	stop	the	Gath’ran
Citadels,	if	you	stop	them	from	entering	this	realm.	Seal	the	gate!’
He	could	see	it	now.	He	held	in	his	hand	the	eye	of	an	Elder	God.	Slick,	soft,	smeared	with	blood.
The	wound	between	the	realms	was	vast—even	Kalse	Uprooted	could	not—
‘You	must	build	a	wall—’
‘A	prison!’
Feather	Witch	hissed,	‘Root	and	Blueiron,	Lifestealer!	Ice	Haunt	is	not	enough!	You	must	awaken	the
warrens	within	you!	Root	to	the	rock	and	earth.	Blueiron	to	hold	life	in	your	machines.	Command	the
breach!’
‘I	cannot	hold.	I	am	dying.’
‘There	are	children	in	the	world,	Icarium.’
‘Asane?	You	do	not	understand.	You	are	not	enough—’
‘There	are	children	in	the	world.	The	warrens	you	have	made	from	your	own	blood—’
Feather	Witch	snarled.	‘Our	blood!’
‘And	 ours,	 yes.	 The	 warrens,	 Icarium—did	 you	 imagine	 they	 belonged	 to	 you	 and	 none	 other?	 It	 is
too	late	for	that.	This	day	is	the	day	of	fire,	Icarium.	The	children	wait.	The	children	hear.’
In	his	mind,	even	as	it	crumbled	on	all	sides,	he	could	hear	a	new	voice,	a	sweet	voice,	one	he	had	never
heard	before.
‘I	dream	we	are	three
Rutt	who	is	not	Rutt	and	Held
Who	cannot	be	held—
The	girl	knows	silence
Is	a	game
The	boy	knows	the	kiss
Of	the	Eres’al
The	mother	of	wheeling	stars
Who	seeds	all	time
Through	me	they	hear	your	need
I	am	the	voice	of	the	unborn
In	crystal	I	see	fire	and	I	see	smoke
I	see	lizards	and	Fathers
In	crystal	I	see	the	boy	and	the	girl.
Heal	the	wound,	God,
Your	children	are	close—’
Rautos	whispered—the	last	words	Icarium	would	remember.	‘Icarium,	in	the	name	of	a	blessed	wife	.	.	.
have	faith.’
Faith.	He	took	hold	of	that	word.
His	hand	closed	about	the	eye	and	he	heard	the	shriek	of	an	Elder	God,	as	he	transformed	the	eye	into	what
he	needed.	For	Root.
A	seed.
A	Finnest.
	
Kalyth	saw	Kalse	Uprooted	plunge	into	the	maw,	and	then	halt	as	a	storm	of	lightning	tore	into	it.	The	very	sky
seemed	to	tremble,	and	then	the	ground	began	to	shake,	and	as	she	stared,	she	saw	stone	burst	upward	from
the	 plain,	 directly	 beneath	 Kalse.	 The	 bedrock	 lifted	 like	 gnarled	 arms,	 as	 if	 an	 enormous	 upended	 tree	 was
flinging	roots	into	the	air.
Those	 roots	 rose	 yet	 higher,	 touched	 the	 base	 of	 Kalse	 Uprooted,	 and	 then	 spread	 in	 a	 frenzy	 outward.
Branches	 of	 rock	 twisted,	 crowded	 against	 the	 edges	 of	 the	 gate,	 where	 fires	 flared	 only	 to	 vanish.	 The
Wastelands	seemed	to	grow	ashen	on	all	sides,	as	if	the	very	last	drops	of	its	lifeblood	were	being	drawn	into
this	savage	growth.


The	 four	 surviving	 Nah’ruk	 sky	 keeps	 on	 this	 side	 of	 the	 portal	 unleashed	 a	 frenzied	 assault	 upon	 Kalse.
Stone	 exploded.	 Massive	 fissures	 ripped	 through,	 spewing	 molten	 rock—the	 entire	 city	 was	 moments	 from
bursting	apart.
The	stranger	fails—but,	such	glory!	To	see	this!	To	witness	such	courage!
The	 stone	 tree—if	 that	 was	 what	 it	 was—did	 not	 cease	 its	 mad	 growth,	 and	 she	 saw	 roots	 curl	 into	 the
wounds	 in	 the	 city’s	 flanks.	 Where	 the	 lightning	 struck	 the	 writhing	 stone,	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 impacts	 boomed
deeper	than	any	thunder,	but	everywhere	that	wounds	broke	open	stone	swarmed	in	to	heal	the	damage.
All	at	once	the	attacks	ceased.	Sudden	heat	washed	down	upon	Kalyth	and	she	cried	out	in	pain.
The	four	Nah’ruk	sky	keeps	were	engulfed	in	flames,	reeling	away	from	the	gate.	The	fires	brightened,	and
then,	 in	 a	 flash,	 burst	 incandescent	 white	 at	 their	 cores.	 As	 she	 watched,	 in	 horror,	 in	 wonder,	 the	 keeps
seemed	to	be	vaporizing	before	her	eyes.	Churning,	the	towering	pillars	of	fire	pitched	eastward,	beneath	them
the	ground	blackening	with	scorching	heat.
Gunth	Mach	spoke	in	her	mind.	‘Destriant.	See	through	my	eyes.	Do	you	see?’
‘Yes,’	she	whispered.
Two	figures	stood	upon	a	torn,	ruined	ridge	to	the	northwest.	Sorcery	poured	from	them	in	terrible	waves.
A	boy.
A	girl.
	
He	didn’t	care.	The	world	could	be	moments	from	being	swallowed	by	the	Abyss	itself,	Stormy	was	finally	in
the	midst	of	war’s	sharpest	truths	and	nothing	else—nothing—mattered.	Laughing,	he	slashed	and	hacked	at
the	 Nah’ruk	 as	 they	 pressed	 in,	 as	 the	 dead-eyed	 lizards	 sought	 to	 clamber	 over	 the	 Ve’Gath,	 sought	 by
numbers	alone	to	overwhelm	this	savage	wall	of	denial.
Gesler’s	charge	down	the	pocket	had	pierced	the	bastards	like	a	boar-sticker,	forcing	them	into	the	narrow
spaces	between	the	frenzied	K’ell	and	the	shield-locked	Ve’Gath.	They	fought	with	appalling	ferocity,	and	died
in	chilling	silence.
His	mount	was	wounded.	His	mount	was	probably	dying—who	could	tell?	All	these	lizards	fought	until	their
last	breath.	But	its	defences	had	slowed,	weakened.	There	was	blood	everywhere	and	he	could	feel	its	chest
heaving	with	shuddering	cadence.
A	short-snouted	maw	lunged	at	his	face.
Cursing,	he	pitched	back	to	avoid	the	snapping	dagger	teeth,	struggled	to	draw	close	his	short-handled	axe—
but	the	damned	Nah’ruk	surged	still	closer,	clawing	its	way	up	the	Ve’Gath’s	shoulder.	His	mount	staggered—
He	 chopped	 with	 his	 axe,	 but	 the	 range	 was	 too	 tight,	 and	 though	 the	 edge	 bit	 into	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lizard’s
head	the	wound	it	delivered	was	not	enough	to	sway	the	creature.	The	jaws	opened	wide.	The	head	snapped
forward—
Something	 snarling	 struck	 the	 Nah’ruk,	 a	 knotted	 mass	 of	 mottled,	 scar-seamed	 hide	 and	 muscle,	 savage
canines	sinking	deep	into	the	lizard’s	neck.
Disbelieving,	Stormy	kicked	his	boots	free	of	the	stirrups	to	roll	further	back—
A	fucking	dog?
Bent?
That	you?
Oh,	but	it	surely	was.
Greenish	 blood	 spilled	 from	 the	 Nah’ruk’s	 mouth.	 The	 eyes	 dulled,	 and	 a	 heartbeat	 later	 dog	 and	 lizard
pitched	down	from	the	Ve’Gath.
At	that	moment,	Stormy	saw	the	burning	sky	keeps.
And	 the	 storm	 was	 gone,	 the	 thunder	 vanished,	 the	 world	 filling	 with	 sounds	 of	 iron,	 flesh	 and	 bone.	 The
song	of	ten	thousand	battles,	made	eerily	surreal	by	there	being	not	a	single	scream,	not	a	single	cry	of	agony
or	shriek	begging	mercy.
The	Nah’ruk	were	falling.
Battle	halted.	Slaughter	commenced.
No	song	lives	upon	a	single	note.
But	 to	 a	 soldier,	 who	 had	 faced	 death	 for	 an	 eternity	 since	 the	 dawn,	 this	 grisly	 music	 was	 the	 sweetest
music	of	all.


Slaughter!	 For	 my	 brave	 Ve’Gath!	 Slaughter!	 For	 Gesler	 and	 his	 K’ell!	 Slaughter,	 for	 the
Bonehunters—my	friends—SLAUGHTER!
	
As	if	some	fulcrum	had	been	irrevocably	destroyed,	Ampelas	Uprooted	slowly	rolled	upside	down.	The	entire
edifice	was	burning	now,	spilling	sheets	of	flaming	oil	that	splashed	bright	upon	rubble,	corpses	and	wounded
drones	directly	below.
Gesler	knew	it	was	now	dead,	a	lifeless	hulk	slowly	tumbling	in	the	sky.
Two	 sky	 keeps	 still	 raged	 in	 death-throes	 behind	 it,	 leaning	 like	 drunks,	 moments	 from	 colliding	 with	 one
another.	The	smoke	column	from	a	third	was	shredding	apart	to	high	winds,	but	of	the	keep	itself	there	was	no
sign.	The	rest	were	but	ashes	on	the	black	wind.
Before	them	rose	a	mountain	of	gnarled	rock,	enclosing	the	wreckage	that	had	once	been	Kalse	Uprooted,
holding	it	up	as	if	it	was	a	gem,	or	a	giant	shattered	eye.	Something	about	the	stone	was	familiar,	but	for	the
moment,	he	could	not	place	it.	The	manifestation	reached	stunningly	high,	piercing	through	the	dust	and	smoke.
Stormy’s	hunt	for	the	last	fleeing	Nah’ruk	had	taken	him	and	a	thousand	or	so	Ve’Gath	beyond	the	hills	to
the	southeast.
Exhausted,	 numbed	 beyond	 all	 reason,	 Gesler	 leaned	 back	 in	 the	 strange	 saddle.	 Some	 damned	 dog	 was
yapping	at	his	mount’s	ankles.
He	saw	Kalyth,	Sag’Churok,	Gunth	Mach	and	the	J’an	Sentinel,	and	beyond	them,	approaching	at	a	careless
walk,	two	children.
Grub.	Sinn.
Gesler	leaned	forward	and	glared	down	at	the	yapping	dog.	‘Gods	below,	Roach,’	he	said	in	a	hoarse	voice,
‘you	returning	the	favour?’	He	drew	a	shuddering	breath.	‘Listen,	rat,	cos	I’m	only	going	to	say	this	once—I
guarantee	it.	But	right	now,	your	voice	is	the	prettiest	sound	I’ve	ever	heard.’
The	miserable	thing	snarled	up	at	him.
It	had	never	learned	how	to	smile.
	
Slipping	down	from	the	Ve’Gath,	Gesler	sagged	on	aching	legs.	Kalyth	was	kneeling,	facing	the	direction	from
which	 Sinn	 and	 Grub	 were	 approaching.	 ‘Get	 up,	 Destriant,’	 he	 said,	 finding	 himself	 leaning	 against	 the
Ve’Gath’s	hip.	‘Those	two	got	heads	so	swelled	it’s	a	wonder	a	mortal	woman	pushed	’em	out.’
She	looked	over	and	he	saw	the	muddy	streaks	of	tears	on	her	cheeks.	‘She	had	.	.	.	faith.	In	us	humans.’
The	woman	shook	her	head.	‘I	did	not.’
The	two	children	walked	up.
Gesler	scowled.	‘Stop	looking	so	smug,	Sinn.	You	two	are	in	a	lot	of	trouble.’
‘Bent	and	Roach	found	us,’	said	Grub,	scratching	in	the	wild	thatch	of	hair	on	his	head.	It	looked	as	though
neither	of	them	had	bathed	in	months.	‘We	were	safe,	Sergeant	Gesler.’
‘Happy	 for	 you,’	 he	 said	 in	 a	 growl.	 ‘But	 they	 needed	 you—both	 of	 you.	 The	 Bonehunters	 were	 in	 the
Nah’ruk’s	path—what	do	you	think	happened	to	them?’
Grub’s	eyes	widened.
Sinn	walked	up	to	the	Ve’Gath	and	set	a	hand	on	its	flank.	‘I	want	one	for	myself,’	she	said.
‘Didn’t	you	hear	me,	Sinn?	Your	brother—’
‘Is	 probably	 dead.	 We	 were	 in	 the	 warrens—the	 new	 warrens.	 We	 were	 on	 the	 path,	 we	 could	 taste	 the
blood—so	fresh,	so	strong.’	She	looked	up	at	Gesler	with	bleak	eyes.	‘The	Azath	has	sealed	the	wound.’
‘The	Azath?’
She	 shrugged,	 facing	 the	 tree	 of	 rock,	 its	 lone	 knot	 gripping	 Kalse	 Uprooted.	 She	 bared	 her	 teeth	 in
something	that	might	have	been	a	smile.
‘Who	is	in	there,	Sinn?’
‘He’s	gone.’
‘Dead	stone	can’t	seal	a	gate—not	for	long—even	an	Azath	needs	a	life	force,	a	living	soul—’
She	shot	him	a	quick	look.	‘That’s	true.’
‘So	what	seals	it—if	he’s	gone—’
‘An	eye.’


‘A	what?’
Kalyth	 spoke	 in	 the	 trader	 tongue.	 ‘Mortal	 Sword,	 the	 One	 Daughter	 is	 now	 the	 Matron	 of	 Mach	 Nest.
Bre’nigan	stands	as	her	J’an	Sentinel.	Sag’Churok	is	the	bearer	of	the	seed.	She	will	speak	to	you	now.’
He	turned	to	face	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
‘Mortal	Sword.	The	Shield	Anvil	returns.	Shall	we	await	him?’
Don’t	bother,	Matron,	it’s	not	like	he’s	smart	or	anything.
‘I	can,	even	from	this	distance,	breach	the	defences	he	has	raised.’
Do	that.	He	deserves	the	headache.
‘Mortal	 Sword.	 Shield	 Anvil.	 Destriant.	 You	 three	 stand,	 you	 three	 are	 the	 mortal	 truths	 of	 my
mother’s	faith.	New	beliefs	are	born.	What	is	an	eternity	spent	in	sleep?	What	is	this	morning	of	our	first
awakening?	 We	 honour	 the	 blood	 of	 our	 kin	 spilled	 this	 day.	 We	 honour	 too	 the	 fallen	 Nah’ruk	 and
pray	that	one	day	they	will	know	the	gift	of	forgiveness.’
You	must	have	seen	it	for	yourself,	Matron,	Gesler	said,	that	those	Nah’ruk	are	bred	down,	past	any
hope	 of	 independent	 thought.	 Those	 sky	 keeps	 were	 old.	 They	 can	 repair,	 but	 they	 cannot	 make
anything	new.	They	are	the	walking	dead,	Matron.	You	can	see	it	in	their	eyes.
Kalyth	said,	‘I	believed	I	saw	the	same	in	your	eyes,	Mortal	Sword.’
He	 grunted	 and	 then	 sighed.	 Too	 tired	 for	 this.	 I	 have	 grieving	 to	 do.	 ‘You	 might	 have	 been	 right,
Destriant.	But	we	shed	things	like	that	like	snake	skin.	You	wear	what	you	need	to	get	through,	that’s	all.’
‘Then	perhaps	we	can	hope	for	the	Nah’ruk.’
‘Hope	all	you	like.	Sinn—can	they	burn	another	gate	through?’
‘Not	for	a	long	time,’	she	replied,	reaching	down	to	collect	up	Roach.	She	cradled	the	foul	thing	in	her	arms,
scratching	it	behind	the	ears.
The	ugly	rat’s	pink	tongue	slid	in	and	out	as	it	panted.	Its	eyes	were	demonic	with	witless	malice.
Gesler	shivered.
The	Matron	spoke:	‘We	 are	 without	 a	 Nest.	 But	 the	 need	 must	 wait.	 Wounds	 must	 heal,	 flesh	 must	 be
harvested.	 Mortal	 Sword,	 we	 now	 pledge	 ourselves	 to	 you.	 We	 now	 serve.	 Among	 your	 friends,	 there
will	be	survivors.	We	shall	find	them.’
Gesler	shook	his	head.	‘We	led	your	army,	Matron.	We	had	our	battle,	but	it’s	over	now.	You	don’t	owe	us
anything.	And	whatever	your	mother	believed,	she	never	asked	us,	did	she?	Me	and	Stormy,	we’re	not	priests.
We’re	soldiers	and	nothing	more.	Those	titles	you	gave	us—well,	we’re	shedding	that	skin	too.’
Stormy’s	voice	rumbled	through	his	mind,	‘Same	for	me,	Matron.	We	can	find	our	friends	on	our	own—
you	need	a	city	to	build,	or	maybe	some	other	Rooted	you	can	find.	Besides,	we	got	Grub	and	Sinn,	and
Bent	here—gods,	he’s	almost	wagging	that	stub	of	a	tail	and	I	ain’t	never	seen	that	before.	Must	be	all
the	gore	on	his	face.’
Kalyth	 laughed,	 even	 as	 tears	 streamed	 down	 her	 lined	 cheeks.	 ‘You	 two—you	 cannot	 shed	 your	 titles.
They	are	branded	upon	your	souls—will	you	just	leave	me	here?’
‘You’re	welcome	to	come	with	us,’	said	Gesler.
‘Where?’
‘East,	I	think.’
The	woman	flinched.
‘You’re	from	there,	aren’t	you?	Kalyth?’
‘Yes,’	she	whispered.	‘Elan.	But	the	Elan	are	no	more.	I	am	the	last.	Mortal	Sword,	you	must	not	choose
that	direction.	You	will	die—all	of	you.’	She	pointed	at	Grub	and	Sinn.	‘Even	them.’
The	 Matron	 said,	 ‘Then	 we	 see	 the	 path	 before	 us.	 We	 shall	 guard	 you	 all.	 Ve’Gath.	 K’ell.	 J’an.
Gu’Rull	who	still	lives,	still	serves.	We	shall	be	your	guardians.	It	is	the	new	way	our	mother	foresaw.
The	path	of	our	rebirth.
‘Humans,	welcome	us.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	have	returned	to	the	world.’
	
Sulkit	 heard	 her	 words	 and	 something	 stirred	 within	 her.	 She	 had	 been	 a	 J’an	 Sentinel	 in	 the	 time	 of	 her
master’s	need,	but	her	master	was	gone,	and	now	she	was	a	Matron	in	her	own	right.
The	time	had	not	yet	come	when	she	would	make	herself	known.	Old	seeds	grew	within	her:	the	first	born
would	be	weak,	but	that	could	not	be	helped.	In	time,	vigour	would	return.


Her	master	was	gone.	The	throne	was	empty,	barring	a	lone	eye,	embedded	in	the	headrest.	She	was	alone
within	Kalse.
Life	was	bleeding	into	the	Rooted’s	stone.	Strange,	alien	life.	Its	flesh	and	bone	was	rock.	Its	mind	and	soul
was	the	singular	imposition	of	belief.	But	then,	what	else	are	any	of	us?	She	would	think	on	this	matter.
He	was	gone.	She	was	alone.	But	all	was	well.
	
‘I	have	lost	him.	Again.	We	were	so	close,	but	now	.	.	.	gone.’
With	these	words	the	trek	staggered	to	a	halt,	as	if	in	Mappo’s	private	loss	all	other	desires	had	withered,
blown	away.
The	 twins	 had	 closed	 on	 the	 undead	 wolf.	 Faint	 had	 a	 fear	 that	 death	 had	 somehow	 addicted	 them	 to	 its
hoary	promise.	They	spoke	of	Toc.	They	closed	small	fingers	tight	in	the	ratty	fur	of	Baaljagg.	The	boy	slept	in
Gruntle’s	arms—now	who	could	have	predicted	that	bond?	No	matter,	there	was	something	in	that	huge	man
that	made	her	think	he	should	have	been	a	father	a	hundred	times	by	now—to	the	world’s	regret,	since	he	was
not	anything	of	the	sort.
No,	 Gruntle	 had	 broken	 loves	 behind	 him.	 Hardly	 unique,	 of	 course,	 but	 in	 that	 man	 the	 loss	 belonged	 to
everyone.
Ah,	I	think	I	just	yearn	for	his	shadow.	Me	and	half	the	lasses	here.	Oh	well.	Silly	Faint.
Setoc,	who	had	been	conversing	with	Cartographer,	now	walked	over.
‘The	storm	to	the	south’s	not	getting	any	closer—we	have	that,	at	least.’
Faint	rubbed	the	back	of	her	neck	and	winced	at	the	pressure.	‘Could	have	done	with	the	rain.’
‘If	there	was	rain.’
She	glanced	at	the	girl.	‘Saw	you	meet	Gruntle’s	eyes	a	while	back.	A	look	passed	between	you	when	we
were	talking	about	that	storm.	So,	out	with	it.’
‘It	was	a	battle,	not	a	storm.	Sorcery,	and	worse.	But	now	it’s	over.’
‘Who	was	fighting,	Setoc?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘It’s	far	away.	We	don’t	have	to	go	there.’
‘Seems	like	we’re	not	going	anywhere	right	now.’
‘We	will.	For	now,	let’s	leave	him	be,’	she	said,	eyes	on	Mappo,	who	stood	a	short	distance	away,	motionless
as	a	statue—as	he	had	been	for	some	time.
Amby	 had	 been	 walking	 alongside	 the	 horse-drawn	 travois	 carrying	 his	 brother—Jula	 was	 still	 close	 to
death.	 Precious	 Thimble’s	 healing	 was	 a	 paltry	 thing.	 The	 Wastelands	 could	 not	 feed	 her	 magic,	 she	 said.
There	 was	 still	 the	 chance	 that	 Jula	 would	 die.	 Amby	 knelt,	 shading	 his	 brother’s	 face	 with	 one	 hand.	 He
suddenly	looked	very	young.
Setoc	walked	back	to	the	horse.
Sighing,	Faint	looked	around.
And	 saw	 a	 rider	 approaching.	 ‘Company,’	 she	 said,	 loud	 enough	 to	 catch	 everyone’s	 attention.	 All	 but
Mappo	reacted,	turning	or	rising	and	following	her	gaze.
From	Setoc:	‘I	know	him!	That’s	Torrent!’
More	lost	souls	to	this	pathetic	party.	Welcome.
	
A	single	flickering	fire	marked	the	camp,	and	occasionally	a	figure	passed	in	front	of	it.	The	wind	carried	no
sound	from	those	gathered	there.	Among	the	travellers,	sorrow	and	joy,	grief	and	the	soft	warmth	of	newborn
love.	So	few	mortals,	and	yet	all	of	life	was	there,	ringing	the	fire.
Faint	jade	light	limned	the	broken	ground,	as	if	darkness	itself	could	be	painted	into	a	mockery	of	life.	The
rider	who	sat	upon	a	motionless,	unbreathing	horse,	was	silent,	feeling	like	a	creature	too	vast	to	approach	any
shore—he	could	look	on	with	one	dead	eye	or	the	other	dead	eye.	He	could	remember	what	it	was	like	to	be	a
living	thing	among	other	living	things.
The	heat,	the	promise,	the	uncertainties	and	all	the	hopes	to	sweeten	the	bitterest	seas.
But	that	shore	was	for	ever	beyond	him	now.
They	could	feel	the	warmth	of	that	fire.	He	could	not.	And	never	again.
The	figure	that	rose	from	the	dust	beside	him	said	nothing	for	a	time,	and	when	she	spoke	it	was	in	the	spirit


language—her	voice	beyond	the	ears	of	the	living.	‘We	all	do	as	we	must,	Herald.’
‘What	you	have	done,	Olar	Ethil	.	.	.’
‘It	is	too	easy	to	forget.’
‘Forget	what?’
‘The	truth	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	Did	you	know,	a	fool	once	wept	for	them?’
‘I	was	there.	I	saw	the	man’s	barrow—the	gifts	.	.	.’
‘The	most	horrid	of	creatures—human	and	otherwise—are	so	easily,	so	carelessly	recast.	Mad	murderers
become	heroes.	The	insane	wear	the	crown	of	geniuses.	Fools	flower	in	endless	fields,	Herald,	where	history
once	walked.’
‘What	is	your	point,	bonecaster?’
‘The	 T’lan	 Imass.	 Slayers	 of	 Children	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.	 Too	 easy	 to	 forget.	 Even	 the	 Imass
themselves,	the	First	Sword	himself,	needed	reminding.	You	all	needed	reminding.’
‘To	what	end?’
‘Why	do	you	not	go	to	them,	Toc	the	Younger?’
‘I	cannot.’
‘No,’	she	nodded,	‘you	cannot.	The	pain	is	too	great.	The	loss	you	feel.’
‘Yes,’	he	whispered.
‘Nor	should	they	yield	love	to	you,	should	they?	Any	of	them.	The	children	.	.	.’
‘They	should	not,	no.’
‘Because,	 Toc	 the	 Younger,	 you	 are	 the	 brother	 of	 Onos	 T’oolan.	 His	 true	 brother	 now.	 And	 for	 all	 the
mercy	that	once	dwelt	in	your	mortal	heart,	only	ghosts	remain.	They	must	not	love	you.	They	must	not	believe
in	you.	For	you	are	not	the	man	you	once	were.’
‘Did	you	think	I	needed	reminding,	too,	Olar	Ethil?’
‘I	think	.	.	.	yes.’
She	was	right.	He	felt	inside	for	the	pain	he’d	thought—he’d	believed—he	had	lived	with	for	so	long.	As	if
lived	was	even	the	right	word.	When	he	found	it,	he	saw	at	last	its	terrible	truth.	A	ghost.	A	memory.	I	but
wore	its	guise.
The	dead	have	found	me.
I	have	found	the	dead.
And	we	are	the	same.
‘Where	will	you	go	now,	Toc	the	Younger?’
He	gathered	the	reins	of	his	horse	and	looked	back	at	the	distant	fire.	It	was	a	spark.	It	would	not	last	the
night.	‘Away.’
	
Snow	drifted	down,	the	sky	was	at	peace.
The	figure	on	the	throne	had	been	frozen,	lifeless,	for	a	long,	long	time.
A	fine	shedding	of	dust	from	the	corpse	marked	that	something	had	changed.	Ice	then	crackled.	Steam	rose
from	flesh	 slowly	 thickening	 with	 life.	 The	 hands,	 gripping	the	arms	of	the	throne,	 suddenly	 twitched,	fingers
uncurling.
Light	flickered	in	its	pitted	eyes.
And,	looking	out	from	mortal	flesh	once	more,	Hood,	who	had	once	been	the	Lord	of	Death,	found	arrayed
before	him	fourteen	Jaghut	warriors.	They	stood	in	the	midst	of	frozen	corpses,	weapons	out	but	lowered	or
resting	across	shoulders.
One	spoke.	‘What	was	that	war	again?’
The	others	laughed.
The	first	one	continued,	‘Who	was	that	enemy?’
The	laughter	this	time	was	louder,	longer.
‘Who	was	our	commander?’
Heads	rocked	back	and	the	thirteen	roared	with	mirth.
The	first	speaker	shouted,	‘Does	he	live?	Do	we?’
Hood	slowly	rose	from	the	throne,	melted	ice	streaming	down	his	blackened	hide.	He	stood,	and	eventually
the	laughter	fell	away.	He	took	one	step	forward,	and	then	another.


The	fourteen	warriors	did	not	move.
Hood	lowered	to	one	knee,	head	bowing.	‘I	seek	.	.	.	penance.’
A	warrior	far	to	the	right	said,	‘Gathras,	he	seeks	penance.	Do	you	hear	that?’
The	first	speaker	replied.	‘I	do,	Sanad.’
‘Shall	we	give	it,	Gathras?’	another	asked.
‘Varandas,	I	believe	we	shall.’
‘Gathras.’
‘Yes,	Haut?’
‘What	was	that	war	again?’
The	Jaghut	howled.
	
The	Errant	was	lying	on	wet	stone,	on	his	back,	unconscious,	the	socket	of	one	eye	a	pool	of	blood.
Kilmandaros,	breathing	hard,	stepped	close	to	look	down	upon	him.	‘Will	he	live?’
Sechul	Lath	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	sighed.	‘Live	is	such	a	strange	word.	We	know	nothing
else,	after	all.	Not	truly.	Not	.	.	.	intimately.’
‘But	will	he?’
Sechul	 turned	 away.	 ‘I	 suppose	 so.’	 He	 halted	 suddenly,	 cocked	 his	 head	 and	 then	 snorted.	 ‘Just	 what	 he
always	wanted.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘He’s	got	an	eye	on	a	Gate.’
Her	laughter	rumbled	in	the	cavern,	and	when	it	faded	she	turned	to	Sechul	and	said,	‘I	am	ready	to	free	the
bitch.	Beloved	son,	is	it	time	to	end	the	world?’
Face	hidden	from	her	view,	Sechul	Lath	closed	his	eyes.	Then	said,	‘Why	not?’
	
This	ends	the	Ninth	Tale
of	The	Malazan
Book	of	the	Fallen

