THE	CRIPPLED	GOD
BOOK	TEN	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	of	the	characters,	organizations,	and	events
portrayed	in	this	novel	are	either	products	of	the	author ’s	imagination	or	are
used	fictitiously.
THE	CRIPPLED	GOD:	BOOK	TEN	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

Copyright	©	2011	by	Steven	Erikson
Simultaneously	published	in	Great	Britain	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers
All	rights	reserved.
Map	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor ® 	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
eISBN	9781429969475


Many	years	ago	one	man	took	a	chance	on	an	unknown	writer	and	his	first
fantasy	novel	–	a	novel	that	had	already	gone	the	rounds	of	publishers	a	few
times	without	any	luck.	Without	him,	without	his	faith	and,	in	the	years	that
followed,	his	unswerving	commitment	to	this	vast	undertaking,	there	would	be
no	‘Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen.’	It	has	been	my	great	privilege	to	work	with	a
single	editor	from	start	to	finish,	and	so	I	humbly	dedicate	The	Crippled	God
to	my	editor	and	friend,	Simon	Taylor.



Dramatis	Personae
In	addition	to	those	in	Dust	of	Dreams
The	Malazans
Himble	Thrup
Sergeant	Gaunt-Eye
Corporal	Rib
Lap	Twirl
Sad
Burnt	Rope
The	Host
Ganoes	Paran,	High	Fist	and	Master	of	the	Deck
High	Mage	Noto	Boil
Outrider	Hurlochel
Fist	Rythe	Bude
Captain	Sweetcreek
Imperial	Artist	Ormulogun
Warleader	Mathok
Bodyguard	T’morol
Gumble
The	Khundryl
Widow	Jastara
The	Snake
Sergeant	Cellows
Corporal	Nithe
Sharl
The	T’lan	Imass:	The	Unbound
Urugal	the	Woven


Thenik	the	Shattered
Beroke	Soft	Voice
Kahlb	the	Silent	Hunter
Halad	the	Giant
The	Tiste	Andii
Nimander	Golit
Spinnock	Durav
Korlat
Skintick
Desra
Dathenar	Gowl
Nemanda
The	Jaghut:	The	Fourteen
Gathras
Sanad
Varandas
Haut
Suvalas
Aimanan
Hood
The	Forkrul	Assail:	The	Lawful	Inquisitors
Reverence
Serenity
Equity
Placid
Diligence
Abide
Aloft
Calm
Belie
Freedom
Grave


The	Watered:	The	Tiers	Of	Lesser	Assail
Amiss
Exigent
Hestand
Festian
Kessgan
Trissin	Melest
Haggraf
The	Tiste	Liosan
Kadagar	Fant
Aparal	Forge
Iparth	Erule
Gaelar	Throe
Eldat	Pressan
Others
Absi
Spultatha
K’rul
Kaminsod
Munug
Silannah
Apsal’ara
Tulas	Shorn
D’rek
Gallimada
Korabas


Book	One

‘He	Was	A	Soldier’

	


	

I	am	known
in	the	religion	of	age.
Worship	me	as	a	pool
of	blood	in	your	hands.
Drink	me	deep.
It’s	bitter	fury
that	boils	and	burns.
Your	knives	were	small
but	they	were	many.
I	am	named
in	the	religion	of	rage.
Worship	me	with	your
offhand	cuts
long	after	I	am	dead.
It’s	a	song	of	dreams
crumbled	to	ashes.
Your	wants	overflowed
but	now	gape	empty.
I	am	drowned
in	the	religion	of	rage.
Worship	me	unto
death	and	down
to	a	pile	of	bones.
The	purest	book
is	the	one	never	opened.
No	needs	left	unfulfilled
on	the	cold,	sacred	day.


I	am	found
in	the	religion	of	rage.
Worship	me	in	a
stream	of	curses.
This	fool	had	faith
and	in	dreams	he	wept.
But	we	walk	a	desert
rocked	by	accusations,
where	no	man	starves
with	hate	in	his	bones.
Poet’s	Night	i.iv
The	Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen
Fisher	kel	Tath


Chapter	One

If	you	never	knew
the	worlds	in	my	mind
your	sense	of	loss
would	be	small	pity
and	we’ll	forget	this	on	the	trail.
Take	what	you’re	given
and	turn	away	the	screwed	face.
I	do	not	deserve	it,
no	matter	how	narrow	the	strand
of	your	private	shore.
If	you	will	do	your	best
I’ll	meet	your	eye.
It’s	the	clutch	of	arrows	in	hand
that	I	do	not	trust
bent	to	the	smile	hitching	my	way.
We	aren’t	meeting	in	sorrow
or	some	other	suture
bridging	scars.
We	haven’t	danced	the	same
thin	ice
and	my	sympathy	for	your	troubles
I	give	freely	without	thought
of	reciprocity	or	scales	on	balance.
It’s	the	decent	thing,	that’s	all.
Even	if	that	thing
is	a	stranger	to	so	many.
But	there	will	be	secrets
you	never	knew
and	I	would	not	choose	any	other	way.
All	my	arrows	are	buried	and
the	sandy	reach	is	broad
and	all	that’s	private


cools	pinned	on	the	altar.
Even	the	drips	are	gone,
that	child	of	wants
with	a	mind	full	of	worlds
and	his	reddened	tears.
The	days	I	feel	mortal	I	so	hate.
The	days	in	my	worlds,
are	where	I	live	for	ever,
and	should	dawn	ever	arrive
I	will	to	its	light	awaken
as	one	reborn.
Poet’s	Night	iii.iv
The	Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen
Fisher	kel	Tath
COTILLION	DREW	TWO	DAGGERS.	HIS	GAZE	FELL	TO	THE	BLADES.

The	blackened	iron	surfaces	seemed	to	swirl,	two	pewter	rivers	oozing
across	pits	and	gouges,	the	edges	ragged	where	armour	and	bone	had	slowed
their	thrusts.	He	studied	the	sickly	sky’s	lurid	reflections	for	a	moment	longer,
and	then	said,	‘I	have	no	intention	of	explaining	a	damned	thing.’	He	looked	up,
eyes	locking.	‘Do	you	understand	me?’
The	figure	facing	him	was	incapable	of	expression.	The	tatters	of	rotted
sinew	and	strips	of	skin	were	motionless	upon	the	bones	of	temple,	cheek	and
jaw.	The	eyes	held	nothing,	nothing	at	all.
Better,	Cotillion	decided,	than	jaded	scepticism.	Oh,	how	he	was	sick	of
that.	‘Tell	me,’	he	resumed,	‘what	do	you	think	you’re	seeing	here?
Desperation?	Panic?	A	failing	of	will,	some	inevitable	decline	crumbling	to
incompetence?	Do	you	believe	in	failure,	Edgewalker?’
The	apparition	remained	silent	for	a	time,	and	then	spoke	in	a	broken,
rasping	voice.	‘You	cannot	be	so…audacious.’
‘I	asked	if	you	believed	in	failure.	Because	I	don’t.’
‘Even	should	you	succeed,	Cotillion.	Beyond	all	expectation,	beyond,	even,
all	desire.	They	will	still	speak	of	your	failure.’
He	sheathed	his	daggers.	‘And	you	know	what	they	can	do	to	themselves.’
The	head	cocked,	strands	of	hair	dangling	and	drifting.	‘Arrogance?’
‘Competence,’	Cotillion	snapped	in	reply.	‘Doubt	me	at	your	peril.’
‘They	will	not	believe	you.’
‘I	do	not	care,	Edgewalker.	This	is	what	it	is.’


When	he	set	out,	he	was	not	surprised	that	the	deathless	guardian	followed.
We	have	done	this	before.	Dust	and	ashes	puffed	with	each	step.	The	wind
moaned	as	if	trapped	in	a	crypt.	‘Almost	time,	Edgewalker.’
‘I	know.	You	cannot	win.’
Cotillion	paused,	half	turned.	He	smiled	a	ravaged	smile.	‘That	doesn’t
mean	I	have	to	lose,	does	it?’
	
Dust	lifted,	twisting,	in	her	wake.	From	her	shoulders	trailed	dozens	of	ghastly
chains:	bones	bent	and	folded	into	irregular	links,	ancient	bones	in	a	thousand
shades	between	white	and	deep	brown.	Scores	of	individuals	made	up	each
chain,	malformed	skulls	matted	with	hair,	fused	spines,	long	bones,	clacking
and	clattering.	They	drifted	out	behind	her	like	a	tyrant’s	legacy	and	left	a
tangled	skein	of	furrows	in	the	withered	earth	that	stretched	for	leagues.
Her	pace	did	not	slow,	as	steady	as	the	sun’s	own	crawl	to	the	horizon
ahead,	as	inexorable	as	the	darkness	overtaking	her.	She	was	indifferent	to
notions	of	irony,	and	the	bitter	taste	of	irreverent	mockery	that	could	so	sting
the	palate.	In	this	there	was	only	necessity,	the	hungriest	of	gods.	She	had
known	imprisonment.	The	memories	remained	fierce,	but	such	recollections
were	not	those	of	crypt	walls	and	unlit	tombs.	Darkness,	indeed,	but	also
pressure.	Terrible,	unbearable	pressure.
Madness	was	a	demon	and	it	lived	in	a	world	of	helpless	need,	a	thousand
desires	unanswered,	a	world	without	resolution.	Madness,	yes,	she	had	known
that	demon.	They	had	bargained	with	coins	of	pain,	and	those	coins	came	from
a	vault	that	never	emptied.	She’d	once	known	such	wealth.
And	still	the	darkness	pursued.
Walking,	a	thing	of	hairless	pate,	skin	the	hue	of	bleached	papyrus,
elongated	limbs	that	moved	with	uncanny	grace.	The	landscape	surrounding
her	was	empty,	flat	on	all	sides	but	ahead,	where	a	worn-down	range	of
colourless	hills	ran	a	wavering	claw	along	the	horizon.
She	had	brought	her	ancestors	with	her	and	they	rattled	a	chaotic	chorus.
She	had	not	left	a	single	one	behind.	Every	tomb	of	her	line	now	gaped	empty,
as	hollowed	out	as	the	skulls	she’d	plundered	from	their	sarcophagi.	Silence
ever	spoke	of	absence.	Silence	was	the	enemy	of	life	and	she	would	have	none
of	it.	No,	they	talked	in	mutters	and	grating	scrapes,	her	perfect	ancestors,	and
they	were	the	voices	of	her	private	song,	keeping	the	demon	at	bay.	She	was
done	with	bargains.
Long	ago,	she	knew,	the	worlds	–	pallid	islands	in	the	Abyss	–	crawled
with	creatures.	Their	thoughts	were	blunt	and	simple,	and	beyond	those


thoughts	there	was	nothing	but	murk,	an	abyss	of	ignorance	and	fear.	When	the
first	glimmers	awakened	in	that	confused	gloom,	they	quickly	flickered	alight,
burning	like	spot	fires.	But	the	mind	did	not	awaken	to	itself	on	strains	of
glory.	Not	beauty,	not	even	love.	It	did	not	stir	with	laughter	or	triumph.	Those
fires,	snapping	to	life,	all	belonged	to	one	thing	and	one	thing	only.
The	first	word	of	sentience	was	justice.	A	word	to	feed	indignation.	A	word
empowering	the	will	to	change	the	world	and	all	its	cruel	circumstances,	a
word	to	bring	righteousness	to	brutal	infamy.	Justice,	bursting	to	life	in	the
black	soil	of	indifferent	nature.	Justice,	to	bind	families,	to	build	cities,	to
invent	and	to	defend,	to	fashion	laws	and	prohibitions,	to	hammer	the	unruly
mettle	of	gods	into	religions.	All	the	prescribed	beliefs	rose	out	twisting	and
branching	from	that	single	root,	losing	themselves	in	the	blinding	sky.
But	she	and	her	kind	had	stayed	wrapped	about	the	base	of	that	vast	tree,
forgotten,	crushed	down;	and	in	their	place,	beneath	stones,	bound	in	roots	and
dark	earth,	they	were	witness	to	the	corruption	of	justice,	to	its	loss	of
meaning,	to	its	betrayal.
Gods	and	mortals,	twisting	truths,	had	in	a	host	of	deeds	stained	what	once
had	been	pure.
Well,	the	end	was	coming.	The	end,	dear	ones,	is	coming.	There	would	be
no	more	children,	rising	from	the	bones	and	rubble,	to	build	anew	all	that	had
been	lost.	Was	there	even	one	among	them,	after	all,	who	had	not	suckled	at	the
teat	of	corruption?	Oh,	they	fed	their	inner	fires,	yet	they	hoarded	the	light,	the
warmth,	as	if	justice	belonged	to	them	alone.
She	was	appalled.	She	seethed	with	contempt.	Justice	was	incandescent
within	her,	and	it	was	a	fire	growing	day	by	day,	as	the	wretched	heart	of	the
Chained	One	leaked	out	its	endless	streams	of	blood.	Twelve	Pures	remained,
feeding.	Twelve.	Perhaps	there	were	others,	lost	in	far-flung	places,	but	she
knew	nothing	of	them.	No,	these	twelve,	they	would	be	the	faces	of	the	final
storm,	and,	pre-eminent	among	them	all,	she	would	stand	at	that	storm’s	centre.
She	had	been	given	her	name	for	this	very	purpose,	long	ago	now.	The
Forkrul	Assail	were	nothing	if	not	patient.	But	patience	itself	was	yet	one	more
lost	virtue.
Chains	of	bone	trailing,	Calm	walked	across	the	plain,	as	the	day’s	light
died	behind	her.
	
‘God	failed	us.’
Trembling,	sick	to	his	stomach	as	something	cold,	foreign,	coursed
through	his	veins,	Aparal	Forge	clenched	his	jaw	to	stifle	a	retort.	This


vengeance	is	older	than	any	cause	you	care	to	invent,	and	no	matter	how	often
you	utter	those	words,	Son	of	Light,	the	lies	and	madness	open	like	flowers
beneath	the	sun.	And	before	me	I	see	nothing	but	lurid	fields	of	red,	stretching
out	on	all	sides.
This	wasn’t	their	battle,	not	their	war.	Who	fashioned	this	law	that	said	the
child	must	pick	up	the	father’s	sword?	And	dear	Father,	did	you	really	mean	this
to	be?	Did	she	not	abandon	her	consort	and	take	you	for	her	own?	Did	you	not
command	us	to	peace?	Did	you	not	say	to	us	that	we	children	must	be	as	one
beneath	the	newborn	sky	of	your	union?
What	crime	awoke	us	to	this?
I	can’t	even	remember.
‘Do	you	feel	it,	Aparal?	The	power?’
‘I	feel	it,	Kadagar.’	They’d	moved	away	from	the	others,	but	not	so	far	as
to	escape	the	agonized	cries,	the	growl	of	the	Hounds,	or,	drifting	out	over	the
broken	rocks	in	ghostly	streams,	the	blistering	breath	of	cold	upon	their	backs.
Before	them	rose	the	infernal	barrier.	A	wall	of	imprisoned	souls.	An	eternally
crashing	wave	of	despair.	He	stared	at	the	gaping	faces	through	the	mottled
veil,	studied	the	pitted	horror	in	their	eyes.	You	were	no	different,	were	you?
Awkward	with	your	inheritance,	the	heavy	blade	turning	this	way	and	that	in
your	hand.
Why	should	we	pay	for	someone	else’s	hatred?
‘What	so	troubles	you,	Aparal?’
‘We	cannot	know	the	reason	for	our	god’s	absence,	Lord.	I	fear	it	is
presumptuous	of	us	to	speak	of	his	failure.’
Kadagar	Fant	was	silent.
Aparal	closed	his	eyes.	He	should	never	have	spoken.	I	do	not	learn.	He
walked	a	bloody	path	to	rule	and	the	pools	in	the	mud	still	gleam	red.	The	air
about	Kadagar	remains	brittle.	This	flower	shivers	to	secret	winds.	He	is
dangerous,	so	very	dangerous.
‘The	Priests	spoke	of	impostors	and	tricksters,	Aparal.’	Kadagar ’s	tone
was	even,	devoid	of	inflection.	It	was	the	voice	he	used	when	furious.	‘What
god	would	permit	that?	We	are	abandoned.	The	path	before	us	now	belongs	to
no	one	else	–	it	is	ours	to	choose.’
Ours.	Yes,	you	speak	for	us	all,	even	as	we	cringe	at	our	own	confessions.
‘Forgive	my	words,	Lord.	I	am	made	ill	–	the	taste—’
‘We	had	no	choice	in	that,	Aparal.	What	sickens	you	is	the	bitter	flavour	of
its	pain.	It	passes.’	Kadagar	smiled	and	clapped	him	on	the	back.	‘I	understand
your	momentary	weakness.	We	shall	forget	your	doubts,	yes?	And	never	again
speak	of	them.	We	are	friends,	after	all,	and	I	would	be	most	distressed	to	be


forced	to	brand	you	a	traitor.	Set	upon	the	White	Wall…	I	would	kneel	and
weep,	my	friend.	I	would.’
A	spasm	of	alien	fury	hissed	through	Aparal	and	he	shivered.	Abyss!	Mane
of	Chaos,	I	feel	you!	‘My	life	is	yours	to	command,	Lord.’
‘Lord	of	Light!’
Aparal	turned,	as	did	Kadagar.
Blood	streaming	from	his	mouth,	Iparth	Erule	staggered	closer,	eyes	wide
and	fixed	upon	Kadagar.	‘My	lord,	Uhandahl,	who	was	last	to	drink,	has	just
died.	He	–	he	tore	out	his	own	throat!’
‘Then	it	is	done,’	Kadagar	replied.	‘How	many?’
Iparth	licked	his	lips,	visibly	flinched	at	the	taste,	and	then	said,	‘You	are
the	First	of	Thirteen,	Lord.’
Smiling,	Kadagar	stepped	past	Iparth.	‘Kessobahn	still	breathes?’
‘Yes.	It	is	said	it	can	bleed	for	centuries—’
‘But	the	blood	is	now	poison,’	Kadagar	said,	nodding.	‘The	wounding
must	be	fresh,	the	power	clean.	Thirteen,	you	say.	Excellent.’
Aparal	stared	at	the	dragon	staked	to	the	slope	behind	Iparth	Erule.	The
enormous	spears	pinning	it	to	the	ground	were	black	with	gore	and	dried
blood.	He	could	feel	the	Eleint’s	pain,	pouring	from	it	in	waves.	Again	and
again	it	tried	to	lift	its	head,	eyes	blazing,	jaws	snapping,	but	the	vast	trap	held.
The	four	surviving	Hounds	of	Light	circled	at	a	distance,	hackles	raised	as	they
eyed	the	dragon.	Seeing	them,	Aparal	hugged	himself.	Another	mad	gamble.
Another	bitter	failure.	Lord	of	Light,	Kadagar	Fant,	you	have	not	done	well	in
the	world	beyond.
Beyond	this	terrible	vista,	and	facing	the	vertical	ocean	of	deathless	souls
as	if	in	mocking	madness,	rose	the	White	Wall,	which	hid	the	decrepit
remnants	of	the	Liosan	city	of	Saranas.	The	faint	elongated	dark	streaks	lining
it,	descending	just	beneath	the	crenellated	battlements,	were	all	he	could	make
out	of	the	brothers	and	sisters	who	had	been	condemned	as	traitors	to	the	cause.
Below	their	withered	corpses	ran	the	stains	from	everything	their	bodies	had
drained	down	the	alabaster	facing.	You	would	kneel	and	weep,	would	you,	my
friend?
Iparth	asked,	‘My	lord,	do	we	leave	the	Eleint	as	it	is?’
‘No.	I	propose	something	far	more	fitting.	Assemble	the	others.	We	shall
veer.’
Aparal	started	but	did	not	turn.	‘Lord—’
‘We	are	Kessobahn’s	children	now,	Aparal.	A	new	father,	to	replace	the	one
who	abandoned	us.	Osserc	is	dead	in	our	eyes	and	shall	remain	so.	Even	Father
Light	kneels	broken,	useless	and	blind.’


Aparal’s	eyes	held	on	Kessobahn.	Utter	such	blasphemies	often	enough	and
they	become	banal,	and	all	shock	fades.	The	gods	lose	their	power,	and	we	rise
to	stand	in	their	stead.	The	ancient	dragon	wept	blood,	and	in	those	vast,	alien
eyes	there	was	nothing	but	rage.	Our	father.	Your	pain,	your	blood,	our	gift	to
you.	Alas,	it	is	the	only	gift	we	understand.	‘And	once	we	have	veered?’
‘Why,	Aparal,	we	shall	tear	the	Eleint	apart.’
He’d	known	what	the	answer	would	be	and	he	nodded.	Our	father.
Your	pain,	your	blood,	our	gift.	Celebrate	our	rebirth,	O	Father	Kessobahn,
with	your	death.	And	for	you,	there	shall	be	no	return.
	
‘I	have	nothing	with	which	to	bargain.	What	brings	you	to	me?	No,	I	see	that.
My	broken	servant	cannot	travel	far,	even	in	his	dreams.	Crippled,	yes,	my
precious	flesh	and	bones	upon	this	wretched	world.	Have	you	seen	his	flock?
What	blessing	can	he	bestow?	Why,	naught	but	misery	and	suffering,	and	still
they	gather,	the	mobs,	the	clamouring,	beseeching	mobs.	Oh,	I	once	looked	upon
them	with	contempt.	I	once	revelled	in	their	pathos,	their	ill	choices	and	their
sorry	luck.	Their	stupidity.
‘But	no	one	chooses	their	span	of	wits.	They	are	each	and	all	born	with
what	they	have,	that	and	nothing	more.	Through	my	servant	I	see	into	their	eyes
–	when	I	so	dare	–	and	they	give	me	a	look,	a	strange	look,	one	that	for	a	long
time	I	could	not	understand.	Hungry,	of	course,	so	brimming	with	need.	But	I
am	the	Foreign	God.	The	Chained	One.	The	Fallen	One,	and	my	holy	word	is
Pain.
‘Yet	those	eyes	implored.
‘I	now	comprehend.	What	do	they	ask	of	me?	Those	dull	fools	glittering
with	fears,	those	horrid	expressions	to	make	a	witness	cringe.	What	do	they
want?	I	will	answer	you.	They	want	my	pity.
‘They	understand,	you	see,	their	own	paltry	scant	coins	in	their	bag	of	wits.
They	know	they	lack	intelligence,	and	that	this	has	cursed	them	and	their	lives.
They	have	struggled	and	lashed	out,	from	the	very	beginning.	No,	do	not	look	at
me	that	way,	you	of	smooth	and	subtle	thought,	you	give	your	sympathy	too
quickly	and	therein	hide	your	belief	in	your	own	superiority.	I	do	not	deny	your
cleverness,	but	I	question	your	compassion.
‘They	wanted	my	pity.	They	have	it.	I	am	the	god	that	answers	prayers	–	can
you	or	any	other	god	make	that	claim?	See	how	I	have	changed.	My	pain,	which
I	held	on	to	so	selfishly,	now	reaches	out	like	a	broken	hand.	We	touch	in
understanding,	we	flinch	at	the	touch.	I	am	one	with	them	all,	now.
‘You	surprise	me.	I	had	not	believed	this	to	be	a	thing	of	value.	What	worth


compassion?	How	many	columns	of	coins	balance	the	scales?	My	servant	once
dreamed	of	wealth.	A	buried	treasure	in	the	hills.	Sitting	on	his	withered	legs,
he	pleaded	with	passers-by	in	the	street.	Now	you	look	at	me	here,	too	broken	to
move,	deep	in	the	fumes,	and	the	wind	slaps	these	tent	walls	without	rest.	No
need	to	bargain.	My	servant	and	I	have	both	lost	the	desire	to	beg.	You	want	my
pity?	I	give	it.	Freely.
‘Need	I	tell	you	of	my	pain?	I	look	in	your	eyes	and	find	the	answer.
‘It	is	my	last	play,	but	you	understand	that.	My	last.	Should	I	fail…
‘Very	well.	There	is	no	secret	to	this.	I	will	gather	the	poison,	then.	In	the
thunder	of	my	pain,	yes.	Where	else?
‘Death?	Since	when	is	death	failure?
‘Forgive	the	cough.	It	was	meant	to	be	laughter.	Go	then,	wring	your
promises	with	those	upstarts.
‘That	is	all	faith	is,	you	know.	Pity	for	our	souls.	Ask	my	servant	and	he	will
tell	you.	God	looks	into	your	eyes,	and	God	cringes.’
	
Three	dragons	chained	for	their	sins.	At	the	thought	Cotillion	sighed,	suddenly
morose.	He	stood	twenty	paces	away,	ankle	deep	in	soft	ash.	Ascendancy,	he
reflected,	was	not	quite	as	long	a	stride	from	the	mundane	as	he	would	have
liked.	His	throat	felt	tight,	as	if	his	air	passages	were	constricted.	The	muscles
of	his	shoulders	ached	and	dull	thunder	pounded	behind	his	eyes.	He	stared	at
the	imprisoned	Eleint	lying	so	gaunt	and	deathly	amidst	drifts	of	dust,
feeling…mortal.	Abyss	take	me,	but	I’m	tired.
Edgewalker	moved	up	alongside	him,	silent	and	spectral.
‘Bones	and	not	much	else,’	Cotillion	muttered.
‘Do	not	be	fooled,’	Edgewalker	warned.	‘Flesh,	skin,	they	are	raiment.
Worn	or	cast	off	as	suits	them.	See	the	chains?	They	have	been	tested.	Heads
lifting…the	scent	of	freedom.’
‘How	did	you	feel,	Edgewalker,	when	everything	you	held	fell	to	pieces	in
your	hands?	Did	failure	arrive	like	a	wall	of	fire?’	He	turned	to	regard	the
apparition.	‘Those	tatters	have	the	look	of	scorching,	come	to	think	of	it.	Do
you	remember	that	moment,	when	you	lost	everything?	Did	the	world	echo	to
your	howl?’
‘If	you	seek	to	torment	me,	Cotillion—’
‘No,	I	would	not	do	that.	Forgive	me.’
‘If	these	are	your	fears,	however…’
‘No,	not	my	fears.	Not	at	all.	They	are	my	weapons.’
Edgewalker	seemed	to	shiver,	or	perhaps	some	shift	of	the	ash	beneath	his


rotted	moccasins	sent	a	tremble	through	him,	a	brief	moment	of	imbalance.
Settling	once	more,	the	Elder	fixed	Cotillion	with	the	withered	dark	of	its	eyes.
‘You,	Lord	of	Assassins,	are	no	healer.’
No.	Someone	cut	out	my	unease,	please.	Make	clean	the	incision,	take	out
what’s	ill	and	leave	me	free	of	it.	We	are	sickened	by	the	unknown,	but
knowledge	can	prove	poisonous.	And	drifting	lost	between	the	two	is	no	better.
‘There	is	more	than	one	path	to	salvation.’
‘It	is	curious.’
‘What	is?’
‘Your	words…in	another	voice,	coming	from…someone	else,	would	leave
a	listener	calmed,	reassured.	From	you,	alas,	they	could	chill	a	mortal	soul	to
its	very	core.’
‘This	is	what	I	am,’	Cotillion	said.
Edgewalker	nodded.	‘It	is	what	you	are,	yes.’
Cotillion	advanced	another	six	paces,	eyes	on	the	nearest	dragon,	the
gleaming	bones	of	the	skull	visible	between	strips	of	rotted	hide.	‘Eloth,’	he
said,	‘I	would	hear	your	voice.’
‘Shall	we	bargain	again,	Usurper?’
The	voice	was	male,	but	such	details	were	in	the	habit	of	changing	on	a
whim.	Still,	he	frowned,	trying	to	recall	the	last	time.	‘Kalse,	Ampelas,	you	will
each	have	your	turn.	Do	I	now	speak	with	Eloth?’
‘I	am	Eloth.	What	is	it	about	my	voice	that	so	troubles	you,	Usurper?	I
sense	your	suspicion.’
‘I	needed	to	be	certain,’	Cotillion	replied.	‘And	now	I	am.	You	are	indeed
Mockra.’
A	new	draconic	voice	rumbled	laughter	through	Cotillion’s	skull,	and	then
said,	‘Be	careful,	Assassin,	she	is	the	mistress	of	deceit.’
Cotillion’s	brows	lifted.	‘Deceit?	Pray	not,	I	beg	you.	I	am	too	innocent	to
know	much	about	such	things.	Eloth,	I	see	you	here	in	chains,	and	yet	in	mortal
realms	your	voice	has	been	heard.	It	seems	you	are	not	quite	the	prisoner	you
once	were.’
‘Sleep	slips	the	cruellest	chains,	Usurper.	My	dreams	rise	on	wings	and	I
am	free.	Do	you	now	tell	me	that	such	freedom	was	more	than	delusion?	I	am
shocked	unto	disbelief.’
Cotillion	grimaced.	‘Kalse,	what	do	you	dream	of?’
‘Ice.’
Does	that	surprise	me?	‘Ampelas?’
‘The	rain	that	burns,	Lord	of	Assassins,	deep	in	shadow.	And	such	a	grisly
shadow.	Shall	we	three	whisper	divinations	now?	All	my	truths	are	chained


here,	it	is	only	the	lies	that	fly	free.	Yet	there	was	one	dream,	one	that	still	burns
fresh	in	my	mind.	Will	you	hear	my	confession?’
‘My	rope	is	not	quite	as	frayed	as	you	think,	Ampelas.	You	would	do	better
to	describe	your	dream	to	Kalse.	Consider	that	advice	my	gift.’	He	paused,
glanced	back	at	Edgewalker	for	a	moment,	and	then	faced	the	dragons	once
more.	‘Now	then,	let	us	bargain	for	real.’
‘There	is	no	value	in	that,’	Ampelas	said.	‘You	have	nothing	to	give	us.’
‘But	I	do.’
Edgewalker	suddenly	spoke	behind	him.	‘Cotillion—’
‘Freedom,’	said	Cotillion.
Silence.
He	smiled.	‘A	fine	start.	Eloth,	will	you	dream	for	me?’
‘Kalse	and	Ampelas	have	shared	your	gift.	They	looked	upon	one	another
with	faces	of	stone.	There	was	pain.	There	was	fire.	An	eye	opened	and	it	looked
upon	the	Abyss.	Lord	of	Knives,	my	kin	in	chains	are…dismayed.	Lord,	I	will
dream	for	you.	Speak	on.’
‘Listen	carefully	then,’	Cotillion	said.	‘This	is	how	it	must	be.’
	
The	depths	of	the	canyon	were	unlit,	swallowed	in	eternal	night	far	beneath	the
ocean’s	surface.	Crevasses	gaped	in	darkness,	a	world’s	death	and	decay
streaming	down	in	ceaseless	rain,	and	the	currents	whipped	in	fierce	torrents
that	stirred	sediments	into	spinning	vortices,	lifting	like	whirlwinds.	Flanked
by	the	submerged	crags	of	the	canyon’s	ravaged	cliffs,	a	flat	plain	stretched
out,	and	in	the	centre	a	lurid	red	flame	flickered	to	life,	solitary,	almost	lost	in
the	vastness.
Shifting	the	almost	weightless	burden	resting	on	one	shoulder,	Mael
paused	to	squint	at	that	improbable	fire.	Then	he	set	out,	making	straight	for	it.
Lifeless	rain	falling	to	the	depths,	savage	currents	whipping	it	back	up	into
the	light,	where	living	creatures	fed	on	the	rich	soup,	only	to	eventually	die	and
sink	back	down.	Such	an	elegant	exchange,	the	living	and	the	dead,	the	light
and	the	lightless,	the	world	above	and	the	world	below.	Almost	as	if	someone
had	planned	it.
He	could	now	make	out	the	hunched	figure	beside	the	flames,	hands	held
out	to	the	dubious	heat.	Tiny	sea	creatures	swarmed	in	the	reddish	bloom	of
light	like	moths.	The	fire	emerged	pulsing	from	a	rent	in	the	floor	of	the
canyon,	gases	bubbling	upward.
Mael	halted	before	the	figure,	shrugging	off	the	wrapped	corpse	that	had
been	balanced	on	his	shoulder.	As	it	rocked	down	to	the	silts	tiny	scavengers


rushed	towards	it,	only	to	spin	away	without	alighting.	Faint	clouds	billowed	as
the	wrapped	body	settled	in	the	mud.
The	voice	of	K’rul,	Elder	God	of	the	Warrens,	drifted	out	from	within	his
hood.	‘If	all	existence	is	a	dialogue,	how	is	it	there	is	still	so	much	left	unsaid?’
Mael	scratched	the	stubble	on	his	jaw.	‘Me	with	mine,	you	with	yours,	him
with	his,	and	yet	still	we	fail	to	convince	the	world	of	its	inherent	absurdity.’
K’rul	shrugged.	‘Him	with	his.	Yes.	Odd	that	of	all	the	gods,	he	alone
discovered	this	mad,	and	maddening,	secret.	The	dawn	to	come…shall	we
leave	it	to	him?’
‘Well,’	Mael	grunted,	‘first	we	need	to	survive	the	night.	I	have	brought	the
one	you	sought.’
‘I	see	that.	Thank	you,	old	friend.	Now	tell	me,	what	of	the	Old	Witch?’
Mael	grimaced.	‘The	same.	She	tries	again,	but	the	one	she	has	chosen…
well,	let	us	say	that	Onos	T’oolan	possesses	depths	Olar	Ethil	cannot	hope	to
comprehend,	and	she	will,	I	fear,	come	to	rue	her	choice.’
‘A	man	rides	before	him.’
Mael	nodded.	‘A	man	rides	before	him.	It	is…heartbreaking.’
‘“Against	a	broken	heart,	even	absurdity	falters.”’
‘“Because	words	fall	away.”’
Fingers	fluttered	in	the	glow.	‘“A	dialogue	of	silence.”’
‘“That	deafens.”’	Mael	looked	off	into	the	gloomy	distance.	‘Blind	Gallan
and	his	damnable	poems.’	Across	the	colourless	floor	armies	of	sightless
crabs	were	on	the	march,	drawn	to	the	alien	light	and	heat.	He	squinted	at	them.
‘Many	died.’
‘Errastas	had	his	suspicions,	and	that	is	all	the	Errant	needs.	Terrible
mischance,	or	deadly	nudge.	They	were	as	she	said	they	would	be.
Unwitnessed.’	K’rul	lifted	his	head,	the	empty	hood	now	gaping	in	Mael’s
direction.	‘Has	he	won,	then?’
Mael’s	wiry	brows	rose.	‘You	do	not	know?’
‘That	close	to	Kaminsod’s	heart,	the	warrens	are	a	mass	of	wounds	and
violence.’
Mael	glanced	down	at	the	wrapped	corpse.	‘Brys	was	there.	Through	his
tears	I	saw.’	He	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	reliving	someone	else’s
memories.	He	suddenly	hugged	himself,	released	a	ragged	breath.	‘In	the	name
of	the	Abyss,	those	Bonehunters	were	something	to	behold!’
The	vague	hints	of	a	face	seemed	to	find	shape	inside	the	hood’s	darkness,
a	gleam	of	teeth.	‘Truly?	Mael	–	truly?’
Emotion	growled	out	in	his	words.	‘This	is	not	done.	Errastas	has	made	a
terrible	mistake.	Gods,	they	all	have!’


After	a	long	moment,	K’rul	sighed,	gaze	returning	to	the	fire.	His	pallid
hands	hovered	above	the	pulsing	glow	of	burning	rock.	‘I	shall	not	remain
blind.	Two	children.	Twins.	Mael,	it	seems	we	shall	defy	the	Adjunct	Tavore
Paran’s	wish	to	be	for	ever	unknown	to	us,	unknown	to	everyone.	What	does	it
mean,	this	desire	to	be	unwitnessed?	I	do	not	understand.’
Mael	shook	his	head.	‘There	is	such	pain	in	her…no,	I	dare	not	get	close.
She	stood	before	us,	in	the	throne	room,	like	a	child	with	a	terrible	secret,	guilt
and	shame	beyond	all	measure.’
‘Perhaps	my	guest	here	will	have	the	answer.’
‘Is	this	why	you	wanted	him?	To	salve	mere	curiosity?	Is	this	to	be	a
voyeur ’s	game,	K’rul?	Into	a	woman’s	broken	heart?’
‘Partly,’	K’rul	acknowledged.	‘But	not	out	of	cruelty,	or	the	lure	of	the
forbidden.	Her	heart	must	remain	her	own,	immune	to	all	assault.’	The	god
regarded	the	wrapped	corpse.	‘No,	this	one’s	flesh	is	dead,	but	his	soul	remains
strong,	trapped	in	its	own	nightmare	of	guilt.	I	would	see	it	freed	of	that.’
‘How?’
‘Poised	to	act,	when	the	moment	comes.	Poised	to	act.	A	life	for	a	death,
and	it	will	have	to	do.’
Mael	sighed	unevenly.	‘Then	it	falls	on	her	shoulders.	A	lone	woman.	An
army	already	mauled.	With	allies	fevered	with	lust	for	the	coming	war.	An
enemy	awaiting	them	all,	unbowed,	with	inhuman	confidence,	so	eager	to
spring	the	perfect	trap.’	He	lifted	his	hands	to	his	face.	‘A	mortal	woman	who
refuses	to	speak.’
‘Yet	they	follow.’
‘They	follow.’
‘Mael,	do	they	truly	have	a	chance?’
He	looked	down	at	K’rul.	‘The	Malazan	Empire	conjured	them	out	of
nothing.	Dassem’s	First	Sword,	the	Bridgeburners,	and	now	the	Bonehunters.
What	can	I	tell	you?	It	is	as	if	they	were	born	of	another	age,	a	golden	age	lost
to	the	past,	and	the	thing	of	it	is:	they	don’t	even	know	it.	Perhaps	that	is	why
she	wishes	them	to	remain	unwitnessed	in	all	that	they	do.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘She	doesn’t	want	the	rest	of	the	world	to	be	reminded	of	what	they	once
were.’
K’rul	seemed	to	study	the	fire.	Eventually,	he	said,	‘In	these	dark	waters,
one	cannot	feel	one’s	own	tears.’
Mael’s	reply	was	bitter.	‘Why	do	you	think	I	live	here?’
	


‘If	I	have	not	challenged	myself,	if	I	have	not	striven	to	give	it	all	I	have,	then
will	I	stand	head	bowed	before	the	world’s	judgement.	But	if	I	am	to	be	accused
of	being	cleverer	than	I	am	–	and	how	is	this	even	possible?	–	or,	gods	forbid,
too	aware	of	every	echo	sent	charging	out	into	the	night,	to	bounce	and	cavort,
to	reverberate	like	a	sword’s	edge	on	a	shield	rim,	if,	in	other	words,	I	am	to	be
castigated	for	heeding	my	sensitivities,	well,	then	something	rises	like	fire
within	me.	I	am,	and	I	use	the	word	most	cogently,	incensed.’
Udinaas	snorted.	The	page	was	torn	below	this,	as	if	the	author ’s	anger	had
sent	him	or	her	into	an	apoplectic	frenzy.	He	wondered	at	this	unknown
writer ’s	detractors,	real	or	imagined,	and	he	thought	back	to	the	times,	long
ago,	when	someone’s	fist	had	answered	his	own	too-quick,	too-sharp	wits.
Children	were	skilled	at	sensing	such	things,	the	boy	too	smart	for	his	own
good,	and	they	knew	what	needed	doing	about	it.	Beat	him	down,	lads.	Serves
him	right.	So	he	was	sympathetic	to	the	spirit	of	the	long-dead	writer.
‘But	then,	you	old	fool,	they’re	dust	and	your	words	live	on.	Who	now	has
the	last	laugh?’
The	rotting	wood	surrounding	him	gave	back	no	answer.	Sighing,	Udinaas
tossed	the	fragment	aside,	watched	flakes	of	parchment	drift	down	like	ashes.
‘Oh,	what	do	I	care?	Not	much	longer,	no,	not	much	longer.’	The	oil	lamp	was
guttering	out,	used	up,	and	the	chill	had	crept	back	in.	He	couldn’t	feel	his
hands.	Old	legacies,	no	one	could	shake	them,	these	grinning	stalkers.
Ulshun	Pral	had	predicted	more	snow,	and	snow	was	something	he	had
grown	to	despise.	‘As	if	the	sky	itself	was	dying.	You	hear	that,	Fear	Sengar?
I’m	almost	ready	to	take	up	your	tale.	Who	could	have	imagined	that	legacy?’
Groaning	at	the	stiffness	in	his	limbs,	he	clambered	out	of	the	ship’s	hold,
emerged	blinking	on	the	slanted	deck,	the	wind	battering	at	his	face.	‘World	of
white,	what	are	you	telling	us?	That	all	is	not	well.	That	the	fates	have	set	a
siege	upon	us.’
He	had	taken	to	talking	to	himself.	That	way,	no	one	else	had	to	cry,	and	he
was	tired	of	those	glistening	tears	on	weathered	faces.	Yes,	he	could	thaw	them
all	with	a	handful	of	words.	But	that	heat	inside,	well,	it	had	nowhere	to	go,	did
it?	He	gave	it	to	the	cold,	empty	air	instead.	Not	a	single	frozen	tear	in	sight.
Udinaas	climbed	over	the	ship’s	side,	dropped	down	into	knee-deep	snow,
and	then	took	a	fresh	path	back	to	the	camp	in	the	shelter	of	rocks,	his	thick,
fur-lined	moccasins	forcing	him	to	waddle	as	he	ploughed	through	the	drifts.
He	could	smell	woodsmoke.
He	caught	sight	of	the	emlava	halfway	to	the	camp.	The	two	enormous	cats
stood	perched	on	high	rocks,	their	silvered	backs	blending	with	the	white	sky.
Watching	him.	‘So,	you’re	back.	That’s	not	good,	is	it?’	He	felt	their	eyes


tracking	him	as	he	went	on.	Time	was	slowing	down.	He	knew	that	was
impossible,	but	he	could	imagine	an	entire	world	buried	deep	in	snow,	a	place
devoid	of	animals,	a	place	where	seasons	froze	into	one	and	that	season	did	not
end,	ever.	He	could	imagine	the	choking	down	of	every	choice	until	not	a
single	one	was	left.
‘A	man	can	do	it.	Why	not	an	entire	world?’	The	snow	and	wind	gave	no
answer,	beyond	the	brutal	retort	that	was	indifference.
In	between	the	rocks,	now,	the	bitter	wind	falling	off,	the	smoke	stinging
awake	his	nostrils.	There	was	hunger	in	the	camp,	there	was	white	everywhere
else.	And	still	the	Imass	sang	their	songs.	‘Not	enough,’	Udinaas	muttered,
breath	pluming.	‘It’s	just	not,	my	friends.	Face	it,	she’s	dying.	Our	dear	little
child.’
He	wondered	if	Silchas	Ruin	had	known	all	along.	This	imminent	failure.
‘All	dreams	die	in	the	end.	Of	all	people	I	should	know	that.	Dreams	of	sleep,
dreams	of	the	future,	sooner	or	later	comes	the	cold,	hard	dawn.’	Walking	past
the	snow-humped	yurts,	scowling	against	the	droning	songs	drifting	out
around	the	hide	flaps,	he	made	for	the	trail	leading	to	the	cave.
Dirty	ice	crusted	the	rocky	maw,	like	frozen	froth.	Once	within	its	shelter
the	air	warmed	around	him,	damp	and	smelling	of	salts.	He	stamped	the	snow
from	his	moccasins,	and	then	strode	into	the	twisting,	stony	corridor,	hands	out
to	the	sides,	fingertips	brushing	the	wet	stone.	‘Oh,’	he	said	under	his	breath,
‘but	you’re	a	cold	womb,	aren’t	you?’
Ahead	he	heard	voices,	or,	rather,	one	voice.	Heed	your	sensitivities	now,
Udinaas.	She	stands	unbowed,	for	ever	unbowed.	This	is	what	love	can	do,	I
suppose.
The	old	stains	on	the	stone	floor	remained,	timeless	reminders	of	blood
spilled	and	lives	lost	in	this	wretched	chamber.	He	could	almost	hear	the
echoes,	sword	and	spear,	the	gasp	of	desperate	breaths.	Fear	Sengar,	I	would
swear	your	brother	stands	there	still.	Silchas	Ruin	staggering	back,	step	by
step,	his	scowl	of	disbelief	like	a	mask	he’d	never	worn	before,	and	was	it	not
ill-fitting?	It	surely	was.	Onrack	T’emlava	stood	to	the	right	of	his	wife.
Ulshun	Pral	crouched	a	few	paces	to	Kilava’s	left.	Before	them	all	reared	a
withered,	sickly	edifice.	Dying	House,	your	cauldron	is	cracked.	She	was	a
flawed	seed.
Kilava	turned	upon	his	arrival,	her	dark	animal	eyes	narrowing	as	would	a
hunting	cat’s	as	it	gathered	to	pounce.	‘Thought	you	might	have	sailed	away,
Udinaas.’
‘The	charts	lead	nowhere,	Kilava	Onass,	as	I’m	sure	the	pilot	observed
upon	arriving	in	the	middle	of	a	plain.	Is	there	anything	more	forlorn	than	a


foundered	ship,	I	wonder?’
Onrack	spoke.	‘Friend	Udinaas,	I	welcome	your	wisdom.	Kilava	speaks	of
the	awakening	of	the	Jaghut,	the	hunger	of	the	Eleint,	and	the	hand	of	the
Forkrul	Assail,	which	never	trembles.	Rud	Elalle	and	Silchas	Ruin	have
vanished	–	she	cannot	sense	them	and	she	fears	the	worst.’
‘My	son	lives.’
Kilava	stepped	closer.	‘You	cannot	know	that.’
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘He	took	more	from	his	mother	than	Menandore	ever
imagined.	When	she	faced	that	Malazan	wizard,	when	she	sought	to	draw	upon
her	power,	well,	it	was	one	of	many	fatal	surprises	that	day.’	His	gaze	fell	to
those	blackened	stains.	‘What	happened	to	our	heroic	outcome,	Fear?	To	the
salvation	you	gave	your	life	to	win?	“If	I	have	not	challenged	myself,	if	I	have
not	striven	to	give	it	all	I	have,	then	will	I	stand	head	bowed	before	the	world’s
judgement.”	But	the	world’s	judgement	is	cruel.’
‘We	contemplate	a	journey	from	this	realm,’	said	Onrack.
Udinaas	glanced	at	Ulshun	Pral.	‘Do	you	agree?’
The	warrior	freed	one	hand	to	a	flurry	of	fluid	gestures.
Udinaas	grunted.	Before	the	spoken	word,	before	song,	there	was	this.	But
the	hand	speaks	in	broken	tongue.	The	cipher	here	belongs	to	his	posture	–	a
nomad’s	squat.	No	one	fears	walking,	or	the	unfolding	of	a	new	world.	Errant
take	me,	this	innocence	stabs	the	heart.	‘You	won’t	like	what	you	will	find.	Not
the	fiercest	beast	of	this	world	stands	a	chance	against	my	kind.’	He	glared	at
Onrack.	‘What	do	you	think	that	Ritual	was	all	about?	The	one	that	stole	death
from	your	people?’
‘Hurtful	as	his	words	are,’	growled	Kilava,	‘Udinaas	speaks	the	truth.’	She
faced	the	Azath	once	more.	‘We	can	defend	this	gate.	We	can	stop	them.’
‘And	die,’	snapped	Udinaas.
‘No,’	she	retorted,	wheeling	to	face	him.	‘You	will	lead	my	children	from
here,	Udinaas.	Into	your	world.	I	will	remain.’
‘I	thought	you	said	“we”,	Kilava.’
‘Summon	your	son.’
‘No.’
Her	eyes	flared.
‘Find	someone	else	to	join	you	in	your	last	battle.’
‘I	will	stand	with	her,’	said	Onrack.
‘You	will	not,’	hissed	Kilava.	‘You	are	mortal—’
‘And	you	are	not,	my	love?’
‘I	am	a	Bonecaster.	I	bore	a	First	Hero	who	became	a	god.’	Her	face
twisted	but	there	was	anguish	in	her	eyes.	‘Husband,	I	shall	indeed	summon


allies	to	this	battle.	But	you,	you	must	go	with	our	son,	and	with	Udinaas.’	She
pointed	a	taloned	finger	at	the	Letherii.	‘Lead	them	into	your	world.	Find	a
place	for	them—’
‘A	place?	Kilava,	they	are	as	the	beasts	of	my	world	–	there	are	no	places
left!’
‘You	must	find	one.’
Do	you	hear	this,	Fear	Sengar?	I	am	not	to	be	you	after	all.	No,	I	am	to	be
Hull	Beddict,	another	doomed	brother.	‘Follow	me!	Listen	to	all	my	promises!
Die.’	‘There	is	nowhere,’	he	said,	throat	tight	with	grief,	‘In	all	the	world…
nowhere.	We	leave	nothing	well	enough	alone.	Not	ever.	The	Imass	can	make
claim	to	empty	lands,	yes,	until	someone	casts	upon	it	a	covetous	eye.	And	then
they	will	begin	killing	you.	Collecting	hides	and	scalps.	They	will	poison	your
food.	Rape	your	daughters.	All	in	the	name	of	pacification,	or	resettlement,	or
whatever	other	euphemistic	bhederin	shit	they	choose	to	spit	out.	And	the
sooner	you’re	all	dead	the	better,	so	they	can	forget	you	ever	existed	in	the	first
place.	Guilt	is	the	first	weed	we	pluck,	to	keep	the	garden	pretty	and	smelling
sweet.	That	is	what	we	do,	and	you	cannot	stop	us	–	you	never	could.	No	one
can.’
Kilava’s	expression	was	flat.	‘You	can	be	stopped.	You	will	be	stopped.’
Udinaas	shook	his	head.
‘Lead	them	into	your	world,	Udinaas.	Fight	for	them.	I	do	not	mean	to	fall
here,	and	if	you	imagine	I	am	not	capable	of	protecting	my	children,	then	you
do	not	know	me.’
‘You	condemn	me,	Kilava.’
‘Summon	your	son.’
‘No.’
‘Then	you	condemn	yourself,	Udinaas.’
‘Will	you	speak	so	coolly	when	my	fate	extends	to	your	children	as	well?’
When	it	seemed	that	no	answer	was	forthcoming,	Udinaas	sighed	and,
turning	about,	set	off	for	the	outside,	for	the	cold	and	the	snow,	and	the
whiteness	and	the	freezing	of	time	itself.	To	his	anguish,	Onrack	followed.
‘My	friend.’
‘I’m	sorry,	Onrack,	I	can’t	tell	you	anything	helpful	–	nothing	to	ease	your
mind.’
‘Yet,’	rumbled	the	warrior,	‘you	believe	you	have	an	answer.’
‘Hardly.’
‘Nonetheless.’
Errant’s	nudge,	it’s	hopeless.	Oh,	watch	me	walk	with	such	resolve.	Lead
you	all,	yes.	Bold	Hull	Beddict	has	returned,	to	repeat	his	host	of	crimes	one


more	time.
Still	hunting	for	heroes,	Fear	Sengar?	Best	turn	away,	now.
‘You	will	lead	us,	Udinaas.’
‘So	it	seems.’
Onrack	sighed.
Beyond	the	cave	mouth,	the	snow	whipped	down.
	
He	had	sought	a	way	out.	He	had	flung	himself	from	the	conflagration.	But
even	the	power	of	the	Azath	could	not	breach	Akhrast	Korvalain,	and	so	he	had
been	cast	down,	his	mind	shattered,	the	fragments	drowning	in	a	sea	of	alien
blood.	Would	he	recover?	Calm	did	not	know	for	certain,	but	she	intended	to
take	no	chances.	Besides,	the	latent	power	within	him	remained	dangerous,	a
threat	to	all	their	plans.	It	could	be	used	against	them,	and	that	was	not
acceptable.	No,	better	to	turn	this	weapon,	to	take	it	into	my	own	hand	and
wield	it	against	the	enemies	I	know	I	must	soon	face.	Or,	if	that	need	proves
unnecessary,	kill	him.
Before	either	could	ever	happen,	however,	she	would	have	to	return	here.
And	do	what	must	be	done.	I	would	do	it	now,	if	not	for	the	risk.	Should	he
awaken,	should	he	force	my	hand…no,	too	soon.	We	are	not	ready	for	that.
Calm	stood	over	the	body,	studying	him,	the	angular	features,	the	tusks,	the
faint	flush	that	hinted	of	fever.	Then	she	spoke	to	her	ancestors.	‘Take	him.
Bind	him.	Weave	your	sorcery	–	he	must	remain	unconscious.	The	risk	of	his
awakening	is	too	great.	I	will	return	before	too	long.	Take	him.	Bind	him.’	The
chains	of	bones	slithered	out	like	serpents,	plunging	into	the	hard	ground,
ensnaring	the	body’s	limbs,	round	the	neck,	across	the	torso,	stitching	him
spread-eagled	to	this	hilltop.
She	saw	the	bones	trembling.	‘Yes,	I	understand.	His	power	is	too	immense
–	that	is	why	he	must	be	kept	unconscious.	But	there	is	something	else	I	can	do.’
She	stepped	closer	and	crouched.	Her	right	hand	darted	out,	the	fingers	stiff	as
blades,	and	stabbed	a	deep	hole	in	the	man’s	side.	She	gasped	and	almost	reeled
back	–	was	it	too	much?	Had	she	awoken	him?
Blood	seeped	down	from	the	wound.
But	Icarium	did	not	move.
Calm	released	a	long,	unsteady	breath.	‘Keep	the	blood	trickling,’	she	told
her	ancestors.	‘Feed	on	his	power.’
Straightening,	she	lifted	her	gaze,	studied	the	horizon	on	all	sides.	The	old
lands	of	the	Elan.	But	they	had	done	away	with	them,	leaving	nothing	but	the
elliptical	boulders	that	once	held	down	the	sides	of	tents,	and	the	old	blinds	and


runs	from	an	even	older	time;	of	the	great	animals	that	once	dwelt	in	this	plain
not	even	a	single	herd	remained,	domestic	or	wild.	There	was,	she	observed,
admirable	perfection	in	this	new	state	of	things.	Without	criminals,	there	can	be
no	crime.	Without	crime,	no	victims.	The	wind	moaned	and	none	stood	against
it	to	give	answer.
Perfect	adjudication,	it	tasted	of	paradise.
Reborn.	Paradise	reborn.	From	this	empty	plain,	the	world.	From	this
promise,	the	future.
Soon.
She	set	out,	leaving	the	hill	behind,	and	with	it	the	body	of	Icarium,	bound
to	the	earth	in	chains	of	bone.	When	she	returned	again	to	this	place,	she	would
be	flush	with	triumph.	Or	in	desperate	need.	If	the	latter,	she	would	awaken	him.
If	the	former,	she	would	grasp	his	head	in	her	hands,	and	with	a	single,	savage
twist,	break	the	abomination’s	neck.
And	no	matter	which	decision	awaited	her,	on	that	day	her	ancestors	would
sing	with	joy.
	
Crooked	upon	the	mound	of	rubbish,	the	stronghold’s	throne	was	burning	in
the	courtyard	below.	Smoke,	grey	and	black,	rose	in	a	column	until	it	lifted
past	the	ramparts,	where	the	wind	tore	it	apart,	shreds	drifting	like	banners
high	above	the	ravaged	valley.
Half-naked	children	scampered	across	the	battlements,	their	voices	cutting
sharp	through	the	clatter	and	groan	from	the	main	gate,	where	the	masons	were
repairing	yesterday’s	damage.	A	watch	was	turning	over	and	the	High	Fist
listened	to	commands	snapping	like	flags	behind	him.	He	blinked	sweat	and
grit	from	his	eyes	and	leaned,	with	some	caution,	on	the	eroded	merlon,	his
narrowed	gaze	scanning	the	well-ordered	enemy	camp	spread	out	along	the
valley	floor.
From	the	rooftop	platform	of	the	square	tower	on	his	right	a	child	of	no
more	than	nine	or	ten	years	was	struggling	with	what	had	once	been	a	signal
kite,	straining	to	hold	it	overhead,	until	with	thudding	wing-flaps	the	tattered
silk	dragon	lifted	suddenly	into	the	air,	spinning	and	wheeling.	Ganoes	Paran
squinted	up	at	it.	The	dragon’s	long	tail	flashed	silver	in	the	midday	sunlight.
The	same	tail,	he	recalled,	that	had	been	in	the	sky	above	the	stronghold	the	day
of	the	conquest.
What	had	the	defenders	been	signalling	then?
Distress.	Help.
He	stared	up	at	the	kite,	watched	it	climb	ever	higher.	Until	the	wind-spun


smoke	devoured	it.
Hearing	a	familiar	curse,	he	turned	to	see	the	Host’s	High	Mage	struggling
past	a	knot	of	children	at	the	top	of	the	stairs,	his	face	twisted	in	disgust	as	if
navigating	a	mob	of	lepers.	The	fish	spine	clenched	between	his	teeth	jerking
up	and	down	in	agitation,	he	strode	up	to	the	High	Fist.
‘I	swear	there’re	more	of	them	than	yesterday,	and	how	is	that	possible?
They	don’t	leap	out	of	someone’s	hip	already	half	grown,	do	they?’
‘Still	creeping	out	from	the	caves,’	Ganoes	Paran	said,	fixing	his	attention
on	the	enemy	ranks	once	more.
Noto	Boil	grunted.	‘And	that’s	another	thing.	Whoever	thought	a	cave	was
a	decent	place	to	live?	Rank,	dripping,	crawling	with	vermin.	There	will	be
disease,	mark	my	words,	High	Fist,	and	the	Host	has	had	quite	enough	of	that.’
‘Instruct	Fist	Bude	to	assemble	a	clean-up	crew,’	Paran	said.	‘Which	squads
got	into	the	rum	store?’
‘Seventh,	Tenth	and	Third,	Second	Company.’
‘Captain	Sweetcreek’s	sappers.’
Noto	Boil	plucked	the	spine	from	his	mouth	and	examined	the	pink	point.
He	then	leaned	over	the	wall	and	spat	something	red.	‘Aye,	sir.	Hers.’
Paran	smiled.	‘Well	then.’
‘Aye,	serves	them	right.	So,	if	they	stir	up	more	vermin—’
‘They	are	children,	mage,	not	rats.	Orphaned	children.’
‘Really?	Those	white	bony	ones	make	my	skin	crawl,	that’s	all	I’m	saying,
sir.’	He	reinserted	the	spine	and	it	went	up	and	down.	‘Tell	me	again	how	this	is
better	than	Aren.’
‘Noto	Boil,	as	High	Fist	I	answer	only	to	the	Empress.’
The	mage	snorted.	‘Only	she’s	dead.’
‘Which	means	I	answer	to	no	one,	not	even	you.’
‘And	that’s	the	problem,	nailed	straight	to	the	tree,	sir.	Nailed	to	the	tree.’
Seemingly	satisfied	with	that	statement,	he	pointed	with	a	nod	and	jab	of	the
fish	spine	in	his	mouth.	‘Lots	of	scurrying	about	over	there.	Another	attack
coming?’
Paran	shrugged.	‘They’re	still…upset.’
‘You	know,	if	they	ever	decide	to	call	our	bluff—’
‘Who	says	I’m	bluffing,	Boil?’
The	man	bit	something	that	made	him	wince.	‘What	I	mean	is,	sir,	no	one’s
denying	you	got	talents	and	such,	but	those	two	commanders	over	there,	well,
if	they	get	tired	of	throwing	Watered	and	Shriven	against	us	–	if	they	just	up
and	march	themselves	over	here,	in	person,	well…that’s	what	I	meant,	sir.’
‘I	believe	I	gave	you	a	command	a	short	while	ago.’


Noto	scowled.	‘Fist	Bude,	aye.	The	caves.’	He	turned	to	leave	and	then
paused	and	looked	back.	‘They	see	you,	you	know.	Standing	here	day	after	day.
Taunting	them.’
‘I	wonder,’	Paran	mused	as	he	returned	his	attention	to	the	enemy	camp.
‘Sir?’
‘The	Siege	of	Pale.	Moon’s	Spawn	just	sat	over	the	city.	Months,	years.	Its
lord	never	showed	himself,	until	the	day	Tayschrenn	decided	he	was	ready	to
try	him.	But	here’s	the	thing,	what	if	he	had?	What	if,	every	damned	day,	he’d
stepped	out	on	to	that	ledge?	So	Onearm	and	all	the	rest	could	pause,	look	up,
and	see	him	standing	there?	Silver	hair	blowing,	Dragnipur	a	black	godshitting	stain	spreading	out	behind	him.’
Noto	Boil	worked	his	pick	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘What	if	he	had,
sir?’
‘Fear,	High	Mage,	takes	time.	Real	fear,	the	kind	that	eats	your	courage,
weakens	your	legs.’	He	shook	his	head	and	glanced	at	Noto	Boil.	‘Anyway,	that
was	never	his	style,	was	it?	I	miss	him,	you	know.’	He	grunted.	‘Imagine	that.’
‘Who,	Tayschrenn?’
‘Noto,	do	you	understand	anything	I	say?	Ever?’
‘I	try	not	to,	sir.	No	offence.	It’s	that	fear	thing	you	talked	about.’
‘Don’t	trample	any	children	on	your	way	down.’
‘That’s	up	to	them,	High	Fist.	Besides,	the	numbers	could	do	with	some
thinning.’
‘Noto.’
‘We’re	an	army,	not	a	crèche,	that’s	all	I’m	saying.	An	army	under	siege.
Outnumbered,	overcrowded,	confused,	bored	–	except	when	we’re	terrified.’
He	plucked	out	his	fish	spine	again,	whistled	in	a	breath	between	his	teeth.
‘Caves	filled	with	children	–	what	were	they	doing	with	them	all?	Where	are
their	parents?’
‘Noto.’
‘We	should	just	hand	them	back,	that’s	all	I’m	saying,	sir.’
‘Haven’t	you	noticed,	today’s	the	first	day	they’re	finally	behaving	like
normal	children.	What	does	that	tell	you?’
‘Doesn’t	tell	me	nothing,	sir.’
‘Fist	Rythe	Bude.	Now.’
‘Aye	sir,	on	my	way.’
Ganoes	Paran	settled	his	attention	on	the	besieging	army,	the	precise	rows
of	tents	like	bone	tesserae	on	a	buckled	floor,	the	figures	scrambling	tiny	as
fleas	over	the	trebuchets	and	Great	Wagons.	The	foul	air	of	battle	never
seemed	to	leave	this	valley.	They	look	ready	to	try	us	again.	Worth	another


sortie?	Mathok	keeps	skewering	me	with	that	hungry	look.	He	wants	at	them.
He	rubbed	at	his	face.	The	shock	of	feeling	his	beard	caught	him	yet	again,	and
he	grimaced.	No	one	likes	change	much,	do	they?	But	that’s	precisely	my	point.
The	silk	dragon	cut	across	his	vision,	diving	down	out	of	the	reams	of
smoke.	He	glanced	over	to	the	boy	on	the	tower,	saw	him	struggling	to	keep
his	footing.	A	scrawny	thing,	one	of	the	ones	from	up	south.	A	Shriven.	When
it	gets	too	much,	lad,	be	sure	to	let	go.
Seething	motion	now	in	the	distant	camp.	The	glint	of	pikes,	the	chained
slaves	marching	out	to	the	yokes	of	the	Great	Wagons,	High	Watered	emerging
surrounded	by	runners.	Dust	slowly	lifting	in	the	sky	above	the	trebuchets	as
they	were	wheeled	forward.
Aye,	they’re	still	upset	all	right.
	
‘I	knew	a	warrior	once.	Awakening	from	a	wound	to	the	head	believing	he	was	a
dog,	and	what	are	dogs	if	not	loyalty	lacking	wits?	So	here	I	stand,	woman,	and
my	eyes	are	filled	with	tears.	For	that	warrior,	who	was	my	friend,	who	died
thinking	he	was	a	dog.	Too	loyal	to	be	sent	home,	too	filled	with	faith	to	leave.
These	are	the	world’s	fallen.	When	I	dream,	I	see	them	in	their	thousands,
chewing	at	their	own	wounds.	So,	do	not	speak	to	me	of	freedom.	He	was	right
all	along.	We	live	in	chains.	Beliefs	to	shackle,	vows	to	choke	our	throats,	the
cage	of	a	mortal	life,	this	is	our	fate.	Who	do	I	blame?	I	blame	the	gods.	And
curse	them	with	fire	in	my	heart.
‘When	she	comes	to	me,	when	she	says	that	it’s	time,	I	shall	take	my	sword
in	hand.	You	say	that	I	am	a	man	of	too	few	words,	but	against	the	sea	of	needs,
words	are	weak	as	sand.	Now,	woman,	tell	me	again	of	your	boredom,	this
stretch	of	days	and	nights	outside	a	city	obsessed	with	mourning.	I	stand	before
you,	eyes	leaking	with	the	grief	of	a	dead	friend,	and	all	I	get	from	you	is	a
siege	of	silence.’
She	said,	‘You	have	a	damned	miserable	way	of	talking	your	way	into	my
bed,	Karsa	Orlong.	Fine	then,	get	in.	Just	don’t	break	me.’
‘I	only	break	what	I	do	not	want.’
‘And	if	the	days	of	this	relationship	are	numbered?’
‘They	are,’	he	replied,	and	then	he	grinned.	‘But	not	the	nights.’
Faintly,	the	distant	city’s	bells	tolled	their	grief	at	the	fall	of	darkness,	and
in	the	blue-lit	streets	and	alleys,	dogs	howled.
	


In	the	innermost	chamber	of	the	palace	of	the	city’s	lord,	she	stood	in	shadows,
watching	as	he	moved	away	from	the	hearth,	brushing	charcoal	from	his
hands.	There	was	no	mistaking	his	legacy	of	blood,	and	it	seemed	the	weight
his	father	had	borne	was	settling	like	an	old	cloak	on	his	son’s	surprisingly
broad	shoulders.	She	could	never	understand	such	creatures.	Their	willingness
to	martyrdom.	The	burdens	by	which	they	measured	self-worth.	This	embrace
of	duty.
He	settled	into	the	high-backed	chair,	stretched	out	his	legs,	the	awakening
fire’s	flickering	light	licking	the	studs	ringing	his	knee-high	leather	boots.
Resting	his	head	back,	eyes	closed,	he	spoke.	‘Hood	knows	how	you	managed
to	get	in	here,	and	I	imagine	Silanah’s	hackles	are	lifting	at	this	very	moment,
but	if	you	are	not	here	to	kill	me,	there	is	wine	on	the	table	to	your	left.	Help
yourself.’
Scowling,	she	edged	out	from	the	shadows.	All	at	once	the	chamber
seemed	too	small,	its	walls	threatening	to	snap	tight	around	her.	To	so
willingly	abandon	the	sky	in	favour	of	heavy	stone	and	blackened	timbers,	no,
she	did	not	understand	this	at	all.	‘Nothing	but	wine?’	Her	voice	cracked
slightly,	reminding	her	that	it	had	been	some	time	since	she’d	last	used	it.
His	elongated	eyes	opened	and	he	observed	her	with	unfeigned	curiosity.
‘You	prefer?’
‘Ale.’
‘Sorry.	You	will	need	to	go	to	the	kitchens	below	for	that.’
‘Mare’s	milk,	then.’
His	brows	lifted.	‘Down	to	the	palace	gate,	turn	left,	walk	half	a	thousand
leagues.	And	that	is	just	a	guess,	mind	you.’
Shrugging,	she	edged	closer	to	the	hearth.	‘The	gift	struggles.’
‘Gift?	I	do	not	understand.’
She	gestured	at	the	flames.
‘Ah,’	he	said,	nodding.	‘Well,	you	stand	in	the	breath	of	Mother	Dark—’
and	then	he	started.	‘Does	she	know	you’re	here?	But	then,’	he	settled	back
again,	‘how	could	she	not?’
‘Do	you	know	who	I	am?’	she	asked.
‘An	Imass.’
‘I	am	Apsal’ara.	His	night	within	the	Sword,	his	one	night,	he	freed	me.	He
had	the	time	for	that.	For	me.’	She	found	she	was	trembling.
He	was	still	studying	her.	‘And	so	you	have	come	here.’
She	nodded.
‘You	didn’t	expect	that	from	him,	did	you?’
‘No.	Your	father	–	he	had	no	reason	for	regret.’


He	rose	then,	walked	over	to	the	table	and	poured	himself	a	goblet	of	wine.
He	stood	with	the	cup	in	hand,	staring	down	at	it.	‘You	know,’	he	muttered,	‘I
don’t	even	want	this.	The	need…to	do	something.’	He	snorted.	‘“No	reason	for
regret”,	well…’
‘They	look	for	him	–	in	you.	Don’t	they?’
He	grunted.	‘Even	in	my	name	you	will	find	him.	Nimander.	No,	I’m	not
his	only	son.	Not	even	his	favoured	one	–	I	don’t	think	he	had	any	of	those,
come	to	think	of	it.	Yet,’	and	he	gestured	with	the	goblet,	‘there	I	sit,	in	his
chair,	before	his	fire.	This	palace	feels	like…feels	like—’
‘His	bones?’
Nimander	flinched,	looked	away.	‘Too	many	empty	rooms,	that’s	all.’
‘I	need	some	clothes,’	she	said.
He	nodded	distractedly.	‘I	noticed.’
‘Furs.	Skins.’
‘You	intend	to	stay,	Apsal’ara?’
‘At	your	side,	yes.’
He	turned	at	that,	eyes	searching	her	face.
‘But,’	she	added,	‘I	will	not	be	his	burden.’
A	wry	smile.	‘Mine,	then?’
‘Name	your	closest	advisers,	Lord.’
He	swallowed	half	the	wine,	and	then	set	the	goblet	down	on	the	table.	‘The
High	Priestess.	Chaste	now,	and	I	fear	that	does	not	serve	her	well.	Skintick,	a
brother.	Desra,	a	sister.	Korlat,	Spinnock,	my	father ’s	most	trusted	servants.’
‘Tiste	Andii.’
‘Of	course.’
‘And	the	one	below?’
‘The	one?’
‘Did	he	once	advise	you,	Lord?	Do	you	stand	at	the	bars	in	the	door ’s
window,	to	watch	him	mutter	and	pace?	Do	you	torment	him?	I	wish	to	know
the	man	I	will	serve.’
She	saw	clear	anger	in	his	face.	‘Are	you	to	be	my	jester	now?	I	have	heard
of	such	roles	in	human	courts.	Will	you	cut	the	sinews	of	my	legs	and	laugh	as
I	stumble	and	fall?’	He	bared	his	teeth.	‘If	yours	is	to	be	my	face	of	conscience,
Apsal’ara,	should	you	not	be	prettier?’
She	cocked	her	head,	made	no	reply.
Abruptly	his	fury	collapsed,	and	his	eyes	fell	away.	‘It	is	the	exile	he	has
chosen.	Did	you	test	the	lock	on	that	door?	It	is	barred	from	within.	But	then,
we	have	no	problem	forgiving	him.	Advise	me,	then.	I	am	a	lord	and	it	is	in	my
power	to	do	such	things.	To	pardon	the	condemned.	Yet	you	have	seen	the


crypts	below	us.	How	many	prisoners	cringe	beneath	my	iron	hand?’
‘One.’
‘And	I	cannot	free	him.	Surely	that	is	worth	a	joke	or	two.’
‘Is	he	mad?’
‘Clip?	Possibly.’
‘Then	no,	not	even	you	can	free	him.	Your	father	took	scores	for	the
chains	of	Dragnipur,	scores	just	like	this	Clip.’
‘I	dare	say	he	did	not	call	it	freedom.’
‘Nor	mercy,’	she	replied.	‘They	are	beyond	a	lord’s	reach,	even	that	of	a
god.’
‘Then	we	fail	them	all.	Both	lords	and	gods	–	we	fail	them,	our	broken
children.’
This,	she	realized,	would	not	be	an	easy	man	to	serve.	‘He	drew	others	to
him	–	your	father.	Others	who	were	not	Tiste	Andii.	I	remember,	in	his	court,
in	Moon’s	Spawn.’
Nimander ’s	eyes	narrowed.
She	hesitated,	unsure,	and	then	resumed.	‘Your	kind	are	blind	to	many
things.	You	need	others	close	to	you,	Lord.	Servants	who	are	not	Tiste	Andii.	I
am	not	one	of	these…jesters	you	speak	of.	Nor,	it	seems,	can	I	be	your
conscience,	ugly	as	I	am	to	your	eyes—’
He	held	up	a	hand.	‘Forgive	me	for	that,	I	beg	you.	I	sought	to	wound	and
so	spoke	an	untruth,	just	to	see	it	sting.’
‘I	believe	I	stung	you	first,	my	lord.’
He	reached	again	for	the	wine,	and	then	stood	looking	into	the	hearth’s
flames.	‘Apsal’ara,	Mistress	of	Thieves.	Will	you	now	abandon	that	life,	to
become	an	adviser	to	a	Tiste	Andii	lord?	All	because	my	father,	at	the	very	end,
showed	you	mercy?’
‘I	never	blamed	him	for	what	he	did.	I	gave	him	no	choice.	He	did	not	free
me	out	of	mercy,	Nimander.’
‘Then	why?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	don’t	know.	But	I	mean	to	find	out.’
‘And	this	pursuit	–	for	an	answer	–	has	brought	you	here,	to	Black	Coral.
To…me.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	how	long	will	you	stand	at	my	side,	Apsal’ara,	whilst	I	govern	a	city,
sign	writs,	debate	policies?	Whilst	I	slowly	rot	in	the	shadow	of	a	father	I
barely	knew	and	a	legacy	I	cannot	hope	to	fill?’
Her	eyes	widened.	‘Lord,	that	is	not	your	fate.’
He	wheeled	to	her.	‘Really?	Why	not?	Please,	advise	me.’


She	cocked	her	head	a	second	time,	studied	the	tall	warrior	with	the	bitter,
helpless	eyes.	‘For	so	long	you	Tiste	Andii	prayed	for	Mother	Dark’s	loving
regard.	For	so	long	you	yearned	to	be	reborn	to	purpose,	to	life	itself.	He	gave
it	all	back	to	you.	All	of	it.	He	did	what	he	knew	had	to	be	done,	for	your	sake.
You,	Nimander,	and	all	the	rest.	And	now	you	sit	here,	in	his	chair,	in	his	city,
among	his	children.	And	her	holy	breath,	it	embraces	you	all.	Shall	I	give	you
what	I	possess	of	wisdom?	Very	well.	Lord,	even	Mother	Dark	cannot	hold	her
breath	for	ever.’
‘She	does	not—’
‘When	a	child	is	born	it	must	cry.’
‘You—’
‘With	its	voice,	it	enters	the	world,	and	it	must	enter	the	world.	Now,’	she
crossed	her	arms,	‘will	you	continue	hiding	here	in	this	city?	I	am	the	Mistress
of	Thieves,	Lord.	I	know	every	path.	I	have	walked	them	all.	And	I	have	seen
what	there	is	to	be	seen.	If	you	and	your	people	hide	here,	Lord,	you	will	all
die.	And	so	will	Mother	Dark.	Be	her	breath.	Be	cast	out.’
‘But	we	are	in	this	world,	Apsal’ara!’
‘One	world	is	not	enough.’
‘Then	what	must	we	do?’
‘What	your	father	wanted.’
‘And	what	is	that?’
She	smiled.	‘Shall	we	find	out?’
	
‘You	have	some	nerve,	Dragon	Master.’
A	child	shrieked	from	somewhere	down	the	walkway.
Without	turning,	Ganoes	Paran	sighed	and	said,	‘You’re	frightening	the
young	ones	again.’
‘Not	nearly	enough.’	The	iron-shod	heel	of	a	cane	cracked	hard	on	the
stone.	‘Isn’t	that	always	the	way,	hee	hee!’
‘I	don’t	think	I	appreciate	the	new	title	you’re	giving	me,	Shadowthrone.’
A	vague	dark	smear,	the	god	moved	up	alongside	Paran.	The	cane’s
gleaming	head	swung	its	silver	snarl	out	over	the	valley.	‘Master	of	the	Deck
of	Dragons.	Too	much	of	a	mouthful.	It’s	your…abuses.	I	so	dislike
unpredictable	people.’	He	giggled	again.	‘People.	Ascendants.	Gods.	Thickskulled	dogs.	Children.’
‘Where	is	Cotillion,	Shadowthrone?’
‘You	should	be	tired	of	that	question	by	now.’
‘I	am	tired	of	waiting	for	an	answer.’


‘Then	stop	asking	it!’	The	god’s	manic	shriek	echoed	through	the	fortress,
rattled	wild	along	corridors	and	through	hallways	before	echoing	back	to
where	they	stood	atop	the	wall.
‘That	has	certainly	caught	their	attention,’	Paran	observed,	nodding	to	a
distant	barrow	where	two	tall,	almost	skeletal	figures	now	stood.
Shadowthrone	sniffed.	‘They	see	nothing.’	He	hissed	a	laugh.	‘Blinded	by
justice.’
Ganoes	Paran	scratched	at	his	beard.	‘What	do	you	want?’
‘Whence	comes	your	faith?’
‘Excuse	me?’
The	cane	rapped	and	skittered	on	the	stone.	‘You	sit	with	the	Host	in	Aren,
defying	every	imperial	summons.	And	then	you	assault	the	Warrens	with	this.’
He	suddenly	cackled.	‘You	should	have	seen	the	Emperor ’s	face!	And	the
names	he	called	you,	my,	even	the	court	scribers	cringed!’	He	paused.	‘Where
was	I?	Yes,	I	was	berating	you,	Dragon	Master.	Are	you	a	genius?	I	doubt	it.
Leaving	me	no	choice	but	to	conclude	that	you’re	an	idiot.’
‘Is	that	all?’
‘Is	she	out	there?’
‘You	don’t	know?’
‘Do	you?’
Paran	slowly	nodded.	‘Now	I	understand.	It’s	all	about	faith.	A	notion
unfamiliar	to	you,	I	take	it.’
‘This	siege	is	meaningless!’
‘Is	it?’
Shadowthrone	hissed,	one	ethereal	hand	reaching	out,	as	if	to	claw	at
Paran’s	face.	Instead,	it	hovered,	twisted	and	then	shrank	into	something
vaguely	fist-shaped.	‘You	don’t	understand	anything!’
‘I	understand	this,’	Paran	replied.	‘Dragons	are	creatures	of	chaos.	There
can	be	no	Dragon	Master,	making	the	title	meaningless.’
‘Exactly.’	Shadowthrone	reached	out	to	gather	up	a	tangled	snarl	of
spider ’s	web	from	beneath	the	wall’s	casing.	He	held	it	up,	apparently	studying
the	cocooned	remnant	of	a	desiccated	insect.
Miserable	turd.	‘Here	is	what	I	know,	Shadowthrone.	The	end	begins	here.
Do	you	deny	it?	No,	you	can’t,	else	you	wouldn’t	be	haunting	me—’
‘Not	even	you	can	breach	the	power	surrounding	this	keep,’	the	god	said.
‘You	have	blinded	yourself.	Open	your	gate	again,	Ganoes	Paran,	find
somewhere	else	to	lodge	your	army.	This	is	pointless.’	He	flung	the	web	away
and	gestured	with	the	head	of	his	cane.	‘You	cannot	defeat	those	two,	we	both
know	that.’


‘But	they	don’t,	do	they?’
‘They	will	test	you.	Sooner	or	later.’
‘I’m	still	waiting.’
‘Perhaps	even	today.’
‘Will	you	wager	on	that,	Shadowthrone?’
The	god	snorted.	‘You	have	nothing	I	want.’
‘Liar.’
‘Then	I	have	nothing	you	want.’
‘Actually,	as	it	happens…’
‘Do	you	see	me	holding	a	leash?	He’s	not	here.	He’s	off	doing	other
things.	We’re	allies,	do	you	understand?	An	alliance.	Not	a	damned	marriage!’
Paran	grinned.	‘Oddly	enough,	I	wasn’t	even	thinking	of	Cotillion.’
‘A	pointless	wager	in	any	case.	If	you	lose	you	die.	Or	abandon	your	army
to	die,	which	I	can’t	see	you	doing.	Besides,	you’re	nowhere	near	as	devious	as
I	am.	You	want	this	wager?	Truly?	Even	when	I	lose,	I	win.	Even	when	I	lose…
I	win!’
Paran	nodded.	‘And	that	has	ever	been	your	game,	Shadowthrone.	You	see,
I	know	you	better	than	you	think.	Yes,	I	would	wager	with	you.	They	shall	not
try	me	this	day.	We	shall	repulse	their	assault…again.	And	more	Shriven	and
Watered	will	die.	We	shall	remain	the	itch	they	cannot	scratch.’
‘All	because	you	have	faith?	Fool!’
‘Those	are	the	conditions	of	this	wager.	Agreed?’
The	god’s	form	seemed	to	shift	about,	almost	vanishing	entirely	at	one
moment	before	reappearing,	and	the	cane	head	struck	chips	from	the	merlon’s
worn	edge.	‘Agreed!’
‘If	you	win	and	I	survive,’	resumed	Paran,	‘you	get	what	you	want	from
me,	whatever	that	is,	and	assuming	it’s	in	my	power	to	grant.	If	I	win,	I	get	what
I	want	from	you.’
‘If	it’s	in	my	power—’
‘It	is.’
Shadowthrone	muttered	something	under	his	breath,	and	then	hissed.	‘Very
well,	tell	me	what	you	want.’
And	so	Paran	told	him.
The	god	cackled.	‘And	you	think	that’s	in	my	power?	You	think	Cotillion
has	no	say	in	the	matter?’
‘If	he	does,	best	you	go	and	ask	him,	then.	Unless,’	Paran	added,	‘it	turns
out	that,	as	I	suspect,	you	have	no	idea	where	your	ally	has	got	to.	In	which
case,	Lord	of	Shadows,	you	will	do	as	I	ask,	and	answer	to	him	later.’
‘I	answer	to	no	one!’	Another	shriek,	the	echoes	racing.


Paran	smiled.	‘Why,	Shadowthrone,	I	know	precisely	how	you	feel.	Now,
what	is	it	you	seek	from	me?’
‘I	seek	the	source	of	your	faith.’	The	cane	waggled.	‘That	she’s	out	there.
That	she	seeks	what	you	seek.	That,	upon	the	Plain	of	Blood	and	Chains,	you
will	find	her,	and	stand	facing	her	–	as	if	you	two	had	planned	this	all	along,
when	I	damned	well	know	you	haven’t!	You	don’t	even	like	each	other!’
‘Shadowthrone,	I	cannot	sell	you	faith.’
‘So	lie,	damn	you,	just	do	it	convincingly!’
He	could	hear	silk	wings	flapping,	the	sound	a	shredding	of	the	wind	itself.
A	boy	with	a	kite.	Dragon	Master.	Ruler	over	all	that	cannot	be	ruled.	Ride	the
howling	chaos	and	call	it	mastery	–	who	are	you	fooling?	Lad,	let	go	now.	It’s
too	much.	But	he	would	not,	he	didn’t	know	how.
The	man	with	the	greying	beard	watches,	and	can	say	nothing.
Distress.
He	glanced	to	his	left,	but	the	shadow	was	gone.
A	crash	from	the	courtyard	below	drew	him	round.	The	throne,	a	mass	of
flames,	had	broken	through	the	mound	beneath	it.	And	the	smoke	leapt
skyward,	like	a	beast	unchained.


Chapter	Two

I	look	around	at	the	living
Still	and	bound
Hands	and	knees	to	stone
By	what	we	found
Was	a	night	as	wearying
As	any	just	past?
Was	a	dawn	any	crueller
To	find	us	this	aghast?
By	your	hand	you	are	staying
And	this	is	fair
But	your	words	of	blood
Are	too	bitter	to	bear
Song	of	Sorrows	Unwitnessed
Napan	Blight
	he	observed	as	he
examined	the	desiccated,	rotted	state	of	his	limbs,	invited	despondency.	Tulas
Shorn	looked	round,	noting	with	faint	dismay	the	truncated	lines	of	sight,	an
affliction	cursing	all	who	must	walk	the	land’s	battered	surface.	Scars	he	had
looked	down	upon	from	a	great	height	only	a	short	time	earlier	now	posed
daunting	obstacles,	a	host	of	furrowed	trenches	carving	deep,	jagged	gouges
across	his	intended	path.
She	is	wounded	but	does	not	bleed.	Not	yet,	at	any	rate.	No,	I	see	now.	This
flesh	is	dead.	Yet	I	am	drawn	to	this	place.	Why?	He	walked,	haltingly,	up	to	the
edge	of	the	closest	crevasse.	Peered	down.	Darkness,	a	breath	cool	and	slightly
sour	with	decay.	And…something	else.
Tulas	Shorn	paused	for	a	moment,	and	then	stepped	out	into	space,	and
plunged	downward.
FROM	HERE	ONWARDS,	HE	COULD	NOT	TRUST	THE	SKY.	THE	ALTERNATIVE,


Threadbare	clothing	tore	loose,	whipped	wild	as	his	body	struck	rough
walls,	skidded	and	rebounded	in	a	knock	of	withered	limbs,	tumbling	amidst
hissing	grit	and	sand,	the	feathery	brush	and	then	snag	of	grass	roots,	and	now
stones	spilling	to	follow	him	down.
Bones	snapped	when	he	struck	the	boulder-studded	floor	of	the	fissure.
More	sand	poured	down	on	all	sides	with	the	sound	of	serpents.
He	did	not	move	for	a	time.	The	dust,	billowing	in	the	gloom,	slowly
settled.	Eventually,	he	sat	up.	One	leg	had	broken	just	above	the	knee.	The
lower	part	of	the	limb	remained	attached	by	little	more	than	a	few	stretches	of
skin	and	sinew.	He	set	the	break	and	waited	while	the	two	ragged	ends	slowly
fused.	The	four	ribs	that	now	thrust	broken	tips	out	from	the	right	side	of	his
chest	were	not	particularly	debilitating,	so	he	left	them,	conserving	his	power.
A	short	while	later	he	managed	to	stand,	his	shoulders	scraping	walls.	He
could	make	out	the	usual	assortment	of	splintered	bones	littering	the	uneven
floor,	but	these	were	only	of	mild	interest,	the	fragments	of	bestial	souls
clinging	to	them	writhing	like	ghostly	worms,	disturbed	by	the	new	currents	in
the	air.
He	began	walking,	following	the	odd	scent	he	had	detected	from	above.	It
was	stronger	down	here,	of	course,	and	with	each	awkward	step	along	the
winding	channel	there	arose	within	him	a	certain	anticipation,	bordering	on
excitement.	Close,	now.
The	skull	was	set	on	a	spear	shaft	of	corroded	bronze,	rising	to	chest
height	and	blocking	the	path.	In	a	heap	at	the	shaft’s	base	was	the	rest	of	the
skeleton,	every	bone	systematically	shattered.
Tulas	Shorn	halted	two	paces	from	the	skull.	‘Tartheno?’
The	voice	rumbling	through	his	head	spoke,	however,	in	the	language	of
the	Imass.	‘Bentract.	Skan	Ahl	greets	you,	Revenant.’
‘Your	bones	are	too	large	for	a	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Yes,	but	no	salvation	came	of	that.’
‘Who	did	this	to	you,	Skan	Ahl?’
‘Her	body	lies	a	few	paces	behind	me,	Revenant.’
‘If	you	so	wounded	her	in	your	battle	that	she	died,	how	was	it	that	she
could	destroy	your	body	with	such	vigour?’
‘I	did	not	say	she	was	dead.’
Tulas	Shorn	hesitated,	and	then	snorted.	‘No,	nothing	lives	here.	Either	she
is	dead	or	she	is	gone.’
‘I	can	hardly	argue	with	you,	Revenant.	Now	then,	do	this	one	thing:	look
behind	you.’
Bemused,	he	did	so.	Sunlight	fighting	its	way	down	through	dust.	‘I	see


nothing.’
‘That	is	your	privilege.’
‘I	do	not	understand.’
‘I	saw	her	step	past	me.	I	heard	her	slide	to	the	ground.	I	heard	her	cry	out
in	pain,	and	then	weep,	and	when	the	weeping	was	done,	all	that	remained	was
her	breathing,	until	that	too	slowed.	But…	I	can	still	hear	it.	The	lift	and	fall	of
her	chest,	with	each	rise	of	the	moon	–	when	its	faint	light	reaches	down	–	how
many	times?	Many.	I	have	lost	count.	Why	does	she	remain?	What	does	she
want?	She	will	not	answer.	She	never	answers.’
Saying	nothing,	Tulas	Shorn	edged	past	the	stake	and	its	dusty	skull.	Five
strides	further	on,	he	halted,	stared	down.
‘Does	she	sleep,	Revenant?’
Tulas	slowly	crouched.	He	reached	down	and	touched	the	delicate	rib	cage
lying	in	a	shallow	depression	at	his	feet.	A	newborn’s	fossilized	bones,	glued
to	the	ground	by	calcified	limestone.	Born	to	the	tide	of	the	moon,	were	you,
little	one?	Did	you	draw	even	a	single	breath?	I	think	not.	‘T’lan	Imass,	was
this	the	end	of	your	chase?’
‘She	was	formidable.’
‘A	Jaghut.	A	woman.’
‘I	was	the	last	on	her	trail.	I	failed.’
‘And	is	it	that	failure	that	torments	you,	Skan	Ahl?	Or	that	she	now	haunts
you,	here	behind	you,	for	ever	hidden	from	your	sight?’
‘Awaken	her!	Or	better	still,	slay	her,	Revenant.	Destroy	her.	For	all	we
know,	she	is	the	very	last	Jaghut.	Kill	her	and	the	war	will	be	over,	and	I	will
know	peace.’
‘There	is	little	peace	in	death,	T’lan	Imass.’	Ah,	child,	the	wind	at	night
moans	through	you,	does	it?	Night’s	very	own	breath,	to	haunt	him	for	all
eternity.
‘Revenant,	turn	my	skull.	I	would	see	her	again.’
Tulas	Shorn	straightened.	‘I	will	not	step	between	you	in	this	war.’
‘But	it	is	a	war	you	can	end!’
‘I	cannot.	Nor,	it	is	clear,	can	you.	Skan	Ahl,	I	must	leave	you	now.’	He
looked	down	at	the	tiny	bones.	‘Both	of	you.’
‘Since	my	failure,	Revenant,	I	have	entertained	not	a	single	visitor.	You	are
the	first	to	find	me.	Are	you	of	such	cruelty	as	to	condemn	me	to	an	eternity	in
this	state?	She	defeated	me.	I	accept	this.	But	I	beg	of	you,	grant	me	the	dignity
of	facing	my	slayer.’
‘You	pose	a	dilemma,’	Tulas	Shorn	said	after	a	moment’s	consideration.
‘What	you	imagine	to	be	mercy	may	not	prove	any	such	thing,	should	I


acquiesce.	And	then	there	is	this:	I	am	not	particularly	inclined	to	mercy,	Skan
Ahl.	Not	with	respect	to	you.	Do	you	begin	to	comprehend	my	difficulty?	I
could	indeed	reach	out	and	swing	your	skull	round,	and	you	may	curse	me	for
all	time.	Or	I	could	elect	to	do	nothing,	to	leave	everything	as	I	have	found	it	–
as	if	I	was	never	here	–	and	so	earn	your	darkest	resentment.	In	either	case,	you
will	see	me	as	cruel.	Now,	this	does	not	offend	me	overmuch.	As	I	said,	I	am
not	stirred	to	kindness.	The	matter	I	face	is:	how	cruel	do	I	wish	to	be?’
‘Think	on	that	privilege	I	spoke	of	earlier,	Revenant.	Your	simple	gift	of
being	able	to	turn	yourself	round,	to	see	what	hides	behind	you.	We	both
understand	that	what	is	seen	may	not	be	welcome.’
Tulas	Shorn	grunted.	‘T’lan	Imass,	I	know	all	about	looking	over	my
shoulder.’	He	walked	back	to	the	skull.	‘Shall	I	be	the	brush	of	wind,	then?	A
single	turn,	a	new	world	to	unfold.’
‘Will	she	awaken?’
‘I	think	not,’	he	replied,	reaching	out	and	settling	one	withered	fingertip
against	the	huge	skull.	‘But	you	can	try.’	A	slow	increase	in	pressure,	and	with
a	grating	squeal	the	skull	swung	round.
The	T’lan	Imass	began	howling	in	Tulas	Shorn’s	wake	as	he	walked	back
up	the	channel.
Gifts	are	never	what	they	seem.	And	the	punishing	hand?	It,	too,	is	not	what
it	seems.	Yes,	these	two	thoughts	are	worthy	of	long	echoes,	stretching	into	this
wretched	future.
As	if	anyone	will	listen.
	
Vengeance,	held	tight	like	an	iron-shod	spear	in	her	hand,	and	how	it	burned.
Ralata	could	feel	its	searing	heat,	and	the	pain	was	now	a	gift,	something	she
could	feed	upon,	like	a	hunter	crouched	over	a	fresh	kill.	She’d	lost	her	horse.
She’d	lost	her	people.	Everything	had	been	taken	away	from	her,	everything
except	this	final	gift.
The	broken	moon	was	a	blurred	smear	almost	lost	in	the	green	glow	of	the
Strangers	in	the	Sky.	The	Skincut	Barghast	stood	facing	east,	her	back	to	the
smouldering	coals	from	the	hearth,	and	looked	out	upon	a	plain	that	seemed	to
seethe	in	the	jade	and	silver	light.
Behind	her	the	black-haired	warrior	named	Draconus	spoke	in	low	tones
with	the	Teblor	giant.	They	talked	often	in	some	foreign	tongue	–	Letherii,	she
supposed,	not	that	she’d	ever	cared	to	learn	it.	Even	the	simpler	trader ’s
language	made	her	head	ache,	but	on	occasion	she	caught	some	Letherii	word
that	had	made	its	way	into	the	pidgin	cant,	so	she	knew	they	were	speaking	of


the	journey	ahead.
East.	It	was,	for	the	moment,	convenient	for	her	to	travel	in	their	company,
despite	having	to	constantly	fend	off	the	Teblor ’s	clumsy	advances.	Draconus
was	able	to	find	game	where	none	seemed	to	exist.	He	could	call	water	up	from
cracked	bedrock.	More	than	just	a	warrior.	A	shaman.	And	in	a	scabbard	of
midnight	wood	strapped	to	his	back	there	was	a	sword	of	magic.
She	wanted	it.	She	meant	to	have	it.	A	weapon	suited	to	the	vengeance	she
desired.	With	such	a	sword,	she	could	kill	the	winged	slayer	of	her	sisters.
In	her	mind	she	worked	through	scenarios.	A	knife	across	the	man’s	throat
when	he	slept,	and	then	a	stab	through	an	eye	for	the	Teblor.	Simple,	quick,	and
she	would	have	what	she	wanted.	If	not	for	the	emptiness	of	this	land.	If	not	for
the	thirst	and	starvation	that	would	follow	–	no,	for	the	time	being	Draconus
must	live.	For	Ublala,	however,	if	she	could	arrange	a	terrible	accident,	then
she	would	not	have	him	to	worry	about	on	the	night	she	went	for	the	sword.
The	dilemma	of	finding	for	the	oaf	a	fatal	demise	here	on	this	featureless	plain
still	defeated	her.	But	she	had	time.
‘Come	back	to	the	fire,	beloved,’	the	Teblor	called,	‘and	drink	some	tea.	It
has	real	leaves	in	it	and	stuff	that	smells	nice.’
Ralata	massaged	her	temples	for	a	moment,	and	then	turned	about.	‘I	am
not	your	beloved.	I	belong	to	no	one.	I	never	will.’
At	seeing	the	half-smile	on	the	face	of	Draconus	as	he	tossed	another	dung
chip	on	to	the	fire,	Ralata	scowled.	‘It	is	rude,’	she	pronounced	as	she	walked
over,	squatted	down	and	took	the	cup	Ublala	proffered,	‘to	talk	in	a	language	I
don’t	understand.	You	could	be	plotting	my	rape	and	murder	for	all	I	know.’
The	warrior ’s	brows	arched.	‘Now,	why	would	we	want	to	do	that,
Barghast?	Besides,’	he	added,	‘Ublala	is	courting	you.’
‘He	might	as	well	give	up	now.	I	don’t	want	him.’
Draconus	shrugged.	‘I	have	explained	to	him	that	most	of	what	we	call
courting	boils	down	to	just	being	there.	Every	time	you	turn,	you	see	him,	until
his	company	feels	perfectly	natural	to	you.	“Courting	is	the	art	of	growing	like
mould	on	the	one	you	want.”’	He	paused,	scratched	at	the	stubble	on	his	jaw.	‘I
can’t	lay	claim	to	that	observation,	but	I	don’t	recall	who	said	it	first.’
Ralata	spat	into	the	fire	to	announce	her	disgust.	‘We’re	not	all	like	Hetan,
you	know.	She	used	to	say	she	gauged	the	attractiveness	of	a	man	by	imagining
how	he	looked	when	she	was	staring	up	at	his	red	face	and	bulging	eyes.’	She
spat	again.	‘I	am	a	Skincut,	a	slayer,	a	collector	of	scalps.	When	I	look	upon	a
man,	I	imagine	what	he’ll	look	like	with	the	skin	of	his	face	sliced	away.’
‘She’s	not	very	nice,	is	she?’	Ublala	asked	Draconus.
‘Trying	hard,	you	mean,’	Draconus	replied.


‘Makes	me	want	to	sex	her	even	more	than	before.’
‘That’s	how	these	things	work.’
‘It’s	torture.	I	don’t	like	it.	No,	I	do.	No,	I	don’t.	I	do.	Oh,	I’m	going	to
polish	my	hammer.’
Ralata	stared	at	Ublala	as	he	surged	to	his	feet	and	thumped	off.
Low	and	in	the	language	of	the	White	Faces,	Draconus	murmured,	‘He
means	that	literally,	by	the	way.’
She	shot	him	a	look,	and	snorted.	‘I	knew	that.	He	has	no	wits	for	anything
else.’	She	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘His	armour	looks	expensive.’
‘It	cost	dearly,	aye,	Ralata.	He	wears	it	well,	better	than	one	might	have
hoped.’	He	nodded,	mostly	to	himself,	she	suspected,	and	said,	‘He	will	stand
well,	I	think,	when	the	time	comes.’
She	remembered	this	warrior	killing	Sekara	the	Vile,	snapping	the	old
woman’s	neck.	The	ease	of	the	gesture,	the	way	he	seemed	to	embrace	her	to
keep	her	from	falling,	as	if	her	lifeless	body	still	clung	to	something	like
dignity.	He	was	not	a	man	easily	understood.	‘What	are	you	two	seeking?	You
walk	into	the	east.	Why?’
‘There	are	unfortunate	things	in	the	world,	Ralata.’
She	frowned.	‘I	don’t	know	what	that	means.’
He	sighed,	studied	the	fire.	‘Have	you	ever	stepped	on	something
unintentionally?	Out	through	a	doorway,	a	sudden	crunching	underfoot.	What
was	it?	An	insect?	A	snail?	A	lizard?’	He	lifted	his	head	and	fixed	her	with	his
dark	eyes,	the	embers	gleaming	in	lurid	reflection.	‘Not	worth	a	second
thought,	was	it?	Such	are	the	vagaries	of	life.	An	ant	dreaming	of	war,	a	wasp
devouring	a	spider,	a	lizard	stalking	the	wasp.	All	these	dramas,	and	crunch	–
all	over	with.	What	to	make	of	it?	Nothing,	I	suppose.	If	you’ve	a	heart,	you
apportion	out	some	small	measure	of	guilt	and	remorse,	and	then	continue	on
your	way.’
She	shook	her	head,	baffled.	‘You	stepped	on	something?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.’	He	nudged	the	embers	and	watched	as	sparks
spun	upward.	‘No	matter.	A	few	ants	survived.	No	end	to	the	little	bastards,	in
fact.	I	could	crush	a	thousand	nests	under	heel	and	it’d	not	make	a	whit	of
difference.	That’s	the	best	way	of	thinking	about	it,	in	fact.’	He	met	her	eyes
again.	‘Does	that	make	me	cold?	What	did	I	leave	behind	in	those	chains,	I
wonder,	still	shackled	there,	a	host	of	forlorn	virtues…whatever.	I	am	having
odd	dreams	of	late.’
‘I	dream	only	of	vengeance.’
‘The	more	you	dream	of	one	particular	and	pleasing	thing,	Ralata,	the
quicker	it	palls.	The	edges	get	worn	down,	the	lustre	fades.	To	leave	such


obsessions	behind,	dream	of	them	often.’
‘You	speak	like	an	old	man,	a	Barghast	shaman.	Riddles	and	bad	advice,
Onos	Toolan	was	right	to	discount	them	all.’	She	almost	looked	to	the	west,
past	his	shoulder,	as	if	she	might	find	her	people	and	the	Warleader,	all
marching	straight	for	them.	Instead,	she	finished	the	last	of	the	tea	in	her	cup.
‘Onos	Toolan,’	Draconus	muttered,	‘an	Imass	name.	A	strange	warleader
for	the	Barghast	to	have…will	you	tell	me	the	tale	of	that,	Ralata?’
She	grunted.	‘I	have	no	skill	for	tales.	Hetan	took	him	for	a	husband.	He
was	from	the	Gathering,	when	all	the	T’lan	Imass	answered	the	summons	of
Silverfox.	She	returned	to	him	his	life,	ending	his	immortality,	and	then	Hetan
found	him.	After	the	end	of	the	Pannion	War.	Hetan’s	father	was	Humbrall
Taur,	who	had	united	the	White	Face	clans,	but	he	drowned	during	the	landing
upon	the	shores	of	this	continent—’
‘A	moment,	please.	Your	tribes	are	not	native	to	this	continent?’
She	shrugged.	‘The	Barghast	gods	were	awakened	to	some	peril.	They
filled	the	brains	of	the	shamans	with	their	panic,	like	sour	piss.	We	must	return
here,	to	our	original	homeland,	to	face	an	ancient	enemy.	So	we	were	told,	but
not	much	else.	We	thought	the	enemy	was	the	Tiste	Edur.	Then	the	Letherii,	and
then	the	Akrynnai.	But	it	wasn’t	any	of	them,	and	now	we	are	destroyed,	and	if
Sekara	spoke	truly,	then	Onos	Toolan	is	dead,	and	so	is	Hetan.	They’re	all
dead.	I	hope	the	Barghast	gods	died	with	them.’
‘Can	you	tell	me	more	about	these	T’lan	Imass?’
‘They	knelt	before	a	mortal	man.	In	the	midst	of	battle,	they	turned	their
backs	on	the	enemy.	I	will	say	no	more	of	them.’
‘Yet	you	chose	to	follow	Onos	Toolan—’
‘He	was	not	among	those.	He	stood	alone	before	Silverfox,	a	thing	of
bones,	and	demanded—’
But	Draconus	had	leaned	forward,	almost	over	the	fire.	‘“A	thing	of
bones”?	T’lan	–	Tellann!	Abyss	below!’	He	suddenly	rose,	startling	Ralata
further,	and	she	watched	as	he	paced,	and	it	seemed	black	ink	was	bleeding	out
from	the	scabbard	at	his	back,	a	stain	that	hurt	her	eyes.	‘That	bitch,’	he	said	in
a	low	growl.	‘You	selfish,	spiteful	hag!’
Ublala	heard	the	outburst	and	he	suddenly	loomed	into	the	dull	glow	of	the
fire,	his	huge	mace	leaning	over	one	shoulder.	‘What’d	she	do,	Draconus?’	He
glared	at	Ralata.	‘Should	I	kill	her?	If	she’s	being	spelfish	and	sightful	–	what’s
rape	mean,	anyway?	It’s	got	to	do	with	sex?	Can	I—’
‘Ublala,’	Draconus	cut	in,	‘I	was	not	speaking	of	Ralata.’
The	Teblor	looked	round.	‘I	don’t	see	no	one	else,	Draconus.	She’s	hiding?
Whoever	she	is,	I	hate	her,	unless	she’s	pretty.	Is	she	pretty?	Mean	is	all	right	if


they’re	pretty.’
The	warrior	was	staring	at	Ublala.	‘Best	climb	into	your	furs,	Ublala,	and
get	some	sleep.	I’ll	stand	first	watch.’
‘All	right.	I	wasn’t	tired	anyway.’	He	swung	about	and	set	off	for	his
bedroll.
‘Be	careful	with	those	curses,’	Ralata	said	in	a	hiss,	rising	to	her	feet.
‘What	if	he	strikes	first	and	then	asks	questions?’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘The	T’lan	Imass	were	undead.’
She	nodded.
‘She	never	let	them	go?’
‘Silverfox?	No.	They	asked,	I	think,	but	no.’
He	seemed	to	stagger.	And,	turning	away,	he	slowly	sank	down	on	to	one
knee,	facing	away	from	her.	The	pose	was	one	of	dismay,	or	grief	–	she	could
not	be	sure.	Confused,	Ralata	took	a	step	towards	him,	and	then	stopped.	He
was	saying	something,	but	in	a	language	she	knew	not.	A	phrase,	over	and	over
again,	his	voice	hoarse,	thick.
‘Draconus?’
His	shoulders	shook,	and	then	she	heard	the	rumble	of	laughter,	a	deathly,
humourless	sound.	‘And	I	thought	my	penance	was	long.’	Head	still	lowered,
he	said,	‘This	Onos	Toolan…is	he	now	truly	dead,	Ralata?’
‘So	Sekara	said.’
‘Then	he	is	at	peace.	At	long	last.	At	peace.’
‘I	doubt	it,’	she	said.
He	twisted	round	to	regard	her.	‘Why	do	you	say	that?’
‘They	killed	his	wife.	They	killed	his	children.	If	I	was	Onos	Toolan,	even
death	would	not	keep	me	from	my	revenge.’
He	drew	a	sharp	breath,	and	it	caught	as	if	on	a	hook,	and	once	more	he
turned	away.
The	scabbard	dripped	blackness	as	if	from	an	open	wound.
Oh,	how	I	want	that	sword.
	
Wants	and	needs	could	starve	and	die,	no	different	from	love.	All	the	grand
gestures	of	honour	and	faithful	loyalty	meant	nothing	when	the	only	witnesses
were	grass,	wind	and	empty	sky.	It	seemed	to	Mappo	that	his	nobler	virtues	had
withered	on	the	vine,	and	the	garden	of	his	soul,	once	so	verdant,	now	rattled
skeletal	branches	against	stone	walls.
Where	was	his	promise?	What	of	the	vows	he	had	uttered,	so	sober	and
grim	in	youth,	so	shiny	of	portent,	as	befitted	the	broad-shouldered	brave	he


had	once	been?	Mappo	could	feel	dread	inside,	hard	as	a	fist-sized	tumour	in
his	chest.	His	ribs	ached	with	the	pressure	of	it,	but	it	was	an	ache	he	had	lived
with	for	so	long	now,	it	had	become	a	part	of	him,	a	scar	far	larger	than	the
wound	it	covered.	And	this	is	how	words	are	made	flesh.	This	is	how	our	very
bones	become	the	rack	of	our	own	penance,	and	the	muscles	twitch	in	slick
skins	of	sweat,	the	head	hangs	loose	–	I	see	you,	Mappo	–	so	slumped	down	in
pathetic	surrender.
He	was	taken	from	you,	like	a	bauble	stolen	from	your	purse.	The	theft
stung,	it	stings	still.	You	feel	outraged.	Violated.	This	is	pride	and	indignation,
isn’t	it?	These	are	the	sigils	on	your	banner	of	war,	your	lust	for	vengeance.
Look	upon	yourself,	Mappo,	you	mouth	the	arguments	of	tyrants	now,	and	all
shrink	from	your	path.
But	I	want	him	back.	At	my	side.	I	swore	my	life	to	protecting	him,
sheltering	him.	How	can	that	be	taken	away	from	me?	Can	you	not	hear	the
empty	howl	in	my	heart?	This	is	a	pit	without	light,	and	upon	all	the	close	walls
surrounding	me	I	can	feel	nothing	but	the	gouges	my	claws	have	made.
The	green	sheen	upon	the	broken	land	was	sickly	to	his	eyes,	unnatural,	an
ominous	imposition	that	made	the	shattering	of	the	moon	seem	almost
incidental.	But	worlds	heal,	when	we	do	not.	Mustiness	clung	to	the	night	air,	as
of	distant	corpses	left	to	rot.
There	have	been	so	many	deaths	in	this	wasteland.	I	don’t	understand	it.
Was	this	by	Icarium’s	sword?	His	rage?	I	should	have	felt	that,	but	the	very
ground	barely	breathes;	like	an	old	woman	in	her	death-cot	she	can	but	tremble
to	faraway	sounds.	Thunder	and	a	darkness	upon	the	sky.
‘There	is	war.’
Mappo	grunted.	They’d	been	silent	for	so	long	he’d	almost	forgotten
Gruntle’s	presence,	standing	here	at	his	side.	‘What	do	you	know	of	it?’	he
asked,	pulling	his	gaze	away	from	the	eastern	horizon.
The	barb-tattooed	caravan	guard	shrugged.	‘What	is	there	to	know?	Deaths
beyond	counting.	Slaughter	to	make	my	mouth	water.	Hackles	rise	–	even	in
this	gloom	I	can	see	the	dismay	in	your	face,	Trell,	and	I	share	it.	War,	it	is
what	it	was	and	always	will	be.	What	else	is	there	to	say?’
‘You	yearn	to	join	the	fray?’
‘My	dreams	tell	me	different.’
Mappo	glanced	back	at	the	camp.	The	humped	forms	of	their	sleeping
companions,	the	more	regular	mound	of	the	fresh	burial	cairn.	The	desiccated
shape	of	Cartographer	seated	upon	the	stones,	a	tattered	wolf	lying	at	his	feet.
Two	horses,	the	scatter	of	packs	and	supplies.	An	air	of	death	and	sorrow.	‘If
there	is	war,’	he	said,	facing	Gruntle	again,	‘who	profits?’


The	man	rolled	his	shoulders,	a	habit	of	his,	Mappo	now	knew,	as	if
Trake’s	Mortal	Sword	sought	to	shift	a	burden	no	one	else	could	see.	‘Ever	the
question,	as	if	answers	meant	anything,	which	they	don’t.	Soldiers	are	herded
into	the	iron	maw	and	the	ground	turns	to	red	mud,	and	someone	on	a	nearby
hill	raises	a	fist	in	triumph,	while	another	flees	the	field	on	a	white	horse.’
‘I	warrant	Trake	takes	little	pleasure	in	his	chosen	warrior ’s	views	on	the
matter.’
‘Warrant	more	how	little	I	care,	Mappo.	A	Soletaken	tiger,	but	such	beasts
keep	no	company,	why	should	Trake	expect	anything	different?	We	are	solitary
hunters;	what	manner	of	war	can	we	hope	to	find?	That	is	the	irony	in	the
whole	mess:	the	Tiger	of	Summer	is	doomed	to	hunt	the	perfect	war,	but	never
find	it.	See	how	his	tail	lashes.’
No,	I	see	that.	For	the	true	visage	of	war,	best	turn	to	the	snarling	jaws	of
wolves.	‘Setoc,’	he	said	in	a	murmur.
‘She	has	dreams	of	her	own,	I’m	sure,’	Gruntle	said.
‘Traditional	wars,’	Mappo	mused,	‘are	fomented	in	the	winter,	when	the
walls	close	in	and	there	is	too	much	time	on	one’s	hands.	The	barons	brood,
the	kings	scheme,	raiders	plot	their	passages	through	borderlands.	The	wolves
howl	in	winter.	But	come	the	season’s	turn,	summer	is	born	to	the	savagery	of
blades	and	spears	–	the	savagery	of	the	tiger.’	He	shrugged.	‘I	see	no	conflict
there.	You	and	Setoc,	and	the	gods	bound	to	you,	you	all	complement	one
another—’
‘It	is	more	complicated	than	that,	Trell.	Cold	iron	belongs	to	the	Wolves.
Trake	is	hot	iron,	a	fatal	flaw	to	my	mind.	Oh,	we	do	well	in	the	bloody	press,
but	then	you	must	ask,	how	in	Hood’s	name	did	we	get	into	such	a	mess	in	the
first	place?	Because	we	don’t	think.’	Gruntle’s	tone	was	both	amused	and	bitter.
‘And	so	your	dreams	visit	visions	upon	you,	Mortal	Sword?	Troubling
ones?’
‘No	one	remembers	the	nice	ones,	do	they?	Yes,	troubling.	Old	friends
long	dead	stalk	the	jungle.	They	walk	lost,	arms	groping.	Their	mouths	work
but	no	sound	reaches	me.	I	see	a	panther,	my	mistress	of	the	hunt,	in	these
dreams,	by	the	way	–	she	lies	gored	and	bloody,	panting	fast	in	shock,	dumb
misery	in	her	eyes.’
‘Gored?’
‘Boar ’s	tusk.’
‘Fener?’
‘As	the	god	of	war,	he	was	unchallenged.	Vicious	as	any	tiger,	and	cunning
as	any	pack	of	wolves.	With	Fener	in	the	ascendant,	we	knelt	with	heads
bowed.’


‘Your	mistress	lies	dying?’
‘Dying?	Maybe.	I	see	her,	and	rage	fills	my	eyes	in	a	flood	of	crimson.
Gored,	raped,	and	someone	will	pay	for	that.	Someone	will	pay.’
Mappo	was	silent.	Raped?
Gruntle	then	growled	as	befitted	his	patron	god,	and	Mappo’s	nape-hairs
stiffened	at	the	sound.	The	Trell	said,	‘I	will	part	this	company	on	the	morrow.’
‘You	seek	the	battlefield.’
‘Which	none	of	you	need	witness,	I	think.	He	was	there,	you	see.	I	felt	him,
his	power.	I	will	find	the	trail.	I	hope.	And	you,	Gruntle?	Where	will	you	lead
this	troop?’
‘East,	a	little	south	of	your	path,	but	I	am	not	content	to	walk	at	the	side	of
the	Wolves	for	much	longer.	Setoc	speaks	of	a	child	in	a	city	of	ice—’
‘Crystal.’	Mappo	briefly	closed	his	eyes.	‘A	crystal	city.’
‘And	Precious	Thimble	believes	there	is	power	there,	something	she	might
be	able	to	use,	to	take	the	Shareholders	home.	They	have	a	destination,	but	it	is
not	mine.’
‘Do	you	seek	your	mistress?	There	are	no	jungles	east	of	here,	unless	they
exist	on	the	far	coast.’
Gruntle	started.	‘Jungles?	No.	You	think	too	literally,	Mappo.	I	seek	a	place
at	her	side,	to	fight	a	battle.	If	I	am	not	there,	she	will	indeed	die.	So	my	ghosts
tell	me	in	their	haunting.	It	is	not	enough	to	arrive	too	late,	to	see	the	wound	in
her	eyes,	to	know	that	all	that	you	can	hope	to	do	is	avenge	what	was	done	to
her.	Not	enough,	Trell.	Never	enough.’
The	wound	in	her	eyes…you	do	this	all	for	love?	Mortal	Sword,	do	your
ribs	ache?	Does	she	haunt	you,	whoever	she	was,	or	is	Trake	simply	feeding	you
the	ripest	meat?	It	is	not	enough	to	arrive	too	late.	Oh,	I	know	the	truth	of	that.
Violated.
Raped.
Now	comes	the	dark	question.	Who	profits	from	this?
	
Faint	huddled	under	her	furs,	feeling	as	if	she’d	been	dragged	behind	a
carriage	for	a	league	or	two.	There	was	nothing	worse	than	cracked	ribs.	Well,
if	she’d	sat	up	only	to	find	her	severed	head	resting	on	her	lap,	that	would	be
worse.	But	probably	painless,	all	things	considered.	Not	like	this.	Miserable
ache,	a	thousand	twinges	vying	for	attention,	until	everything	turns	white	and
then	red	and	then	purple	and	finally	blissful	black.	Where’s	the	black?	I’m
waiting,	been	waiting	all	night.
At	dusk	Setoc	had	drawn	close	to	tell	her	that	the	Trell	would	be	leaving	on


the	morrow.	How	she	knew	was	anyone’s	guess,	since	Mappo	wasn’t	in	any
mood	to	talk,	except	to	Gruntle,	who	was	one	of	those	men	it	was	too	easy	to
talk	to,	a	man	who	just	invited	confession,	as	if	giving	off	a	scent	or
something.	Hood	knew,	she	wanted	to—
A	spasm.	She	stifled	a	gasp,	waited	out	the	throbs,	and	then	sought	to	shift
position	once	more,	not	that	one	was	more	comfortable	than	any	other.	More	a
matter	of	duration.	Twenty	breaths	lying	this	way,	fifteen	that	way,	and	flat	on
her	back	was	impossible	–	she’d	never	imagined	how	the	weight	of	her	own
tits	could	crush	the	breath	from	her,	and	the	gentle	sweep	of	the	furs	threatened
to	close	like	a	vice	when	she	thought	of	settling	her	arms.	It	was	all	impossible,
and	come	the	dawn	she’d	be	ready	to	snap	off	heads.
‘Then	Gruntle	will	leave	us	too.	Not	yet.	But	he	won’t	stay.	He	can’t.’
Setoc	had	a	way	with	words,	the	heaps	of	good	news	she	stacked	like	the
coins	of	a	private	treasure.	Maybe	the	grasses	whispered	in	her	ears,	as	she	lay
there	so	gentle	and	damnably	asleep,	or	the	crickets	and	just	listen	to	them	–
no,	that	was	her	spine	crackling	away.	She	fought	back	a	moan.
So,	before	long,	it	would	be	the	Shareholders	and	the	barbarian,	Torrent,
along	with	the	three	runts	and	Setoc	herself.	She	didn’t	count	Cartographer,	the
wolf	or	the	horses.	Not	for	any	particular	reason,	even	if	only	the	horses	were
actually	alive.	I	don’t	count	them,	that’s	all.	So,	just	them,	and	who	among	them
was	tough	enough	to	fight	off	the	next	attack	from	that	winged	lizard?	Torrent?
He	looked	too	young,	with	the	eyes	of	a	hunted	hare.
And	only	one	Bole	left,	and	that’s	bad.	Poor	boy’s	miserable.	Here’s	the
deal,	let’s	not	bury	any	more	friends,	shall	we?
But	Precious	Thimble	was	adamant.	Raw	power	waited	in	the	east.	She
thought	she	could	do	something	with	it.	Open	a	warren,	get	the	Hood	out	of
here.	Can’t	argue	with	that.	Wouldn’t	want	to.	Sure,	she’s	just	a	cherry	of	a	lass
is	our	Precious.	And	if	she’s	now	regretting	her	tease,	why,	that	will	make	her
more	careful	from	now	on,	which	isn’t	a	bad	thing.
A	roll	with	Gruntle	would	be	delicious.	But	it’d	kill	me.	Besides,	I’m	all
scarred	up.	Lopsided,	hah.	Who’d	want	a	freak,	except	out	of	pity?	Be	rational,
and	don’t	shy	from	its	jagged	edge.	Your	days	of	crooking	a	finger	to	get	a
tumble	are	done.	Find	some	other	hobby,	woman.	Spinning,	maybe.	Butter
churning	–	is	that	a	hobby?	Probably	not.
You	can’t	sleep	through	this.	Face	it.	It’ll	be	months	before	a	decent	night…
sleeping.	Or	otherwise.
‘Gruntle	thinks	he’s	going	someplace	to	die.	He	doesn’t	want	us	to	die	with
him.’
That’s	nice,	Setoc,	thanks	for	that.


‘In	the	Crystal	City	there	is	a	child…beware	the	opening	of	his	eyes.’
Listen,	sweetie,	the	little	one	right	here	needs	his	butt	wiped	and	the	twins
are	pretending	not	to	notice	but	the	smell’s	getting	a	tad	rank,	right?	Take	this
handful	of	grass.
Life	was	so	much	better	on	the	carriage,	off	delivering	whatever.
Faint	grunted	and	then	flinched	at	the	pain.	Gods,	woman,	you’re	completely
insane.
Let	me	dream	of	a	tavern.	Smoky,	crowded,	a	perfect	table.	We’re	all	sitting
there,	working	out	the	shakes.	Quell	duck-walks	to	the	loo.	The	Boles	make
faces	at	each	other	and	then	laugh.	Reccanto’s	broken	a	thumb	and	he’s	putting
it	back	in	place.	Glanno	can’t	see	the	barman.	He	can’t	even	see	the	table	in
front	of	him.	Sweetest	Sufferance	is	looking	like	a	plump	cat	with	a	rat’s	tail
hanging	from	her	mouth.
Another	pitcher	arrives.
Reccanto	looks	up.	‘Who’s	paying	for	this?’	he	asks.
Faint	cautiously	lifted	one	hand,	moved	it	up	to	brush	her	cheeks.	Blissful
black,	you	seem	so	far	away.
	
In	the	false	dawn,	Torrent	opened	his	eyes.	Some	violence	still	rocked	in	his
skull	–	a	dream,	but	already	the	memory	of	its	details	faded.	Blinking,	he	sat
up.	Chill	air	stole	in	beneath	his	rodara	wool	blanket,	plucking	at	the	beads	of
sweat	on	his	chest.	He	glanced	over	at	the	horses,	but	the	beasts	stood	calm,
dozing.	In	the	camp	the	shapes	of	the	others	were	motionless	in	the	grainy	halflight.
Casting	the	blanket	aside,	he	rose.	The	greenish	glow	was	paling	to	the
east.	The	warrior	walked	over	to	his	horse,	greeted	it	with	a	low	murmur	and
settled	a	hand	upon	its	warm	neck.	Tales	of	cities	and	empires,	of	gas	that
burned	with	blue	flame,	of	secret	ways	through	the	world	that	his	eyes	could
not	see,	all	left	him	disturbed,	agitated,	though	he	was	not	sure	why.
He	knew	Toc	had	come	from	such	an	empire,	far	away	across	the	ocean,
and	his	lone	eye	had	looked	upon	scenes	Torrent	could	not	imagine.	Yet
around	the	Awl	warrior	now	was	a	more	familiar	landscape,	rougher	than	the
Awl’dan,	true,	but	just	as	open,	sweeping,	the	earth	levelled	beneath	the	vast
sky.	What	other	sort	of	place	could	an	honest	man	desire?	The	eyes	could
reach,	the	mind	could	stretch.	There	was	space	for	everything.	A	tent	or	yurt
for	nightly	shelter,	a	ring	of	stones	to	embrace	the	cookfire,	the	steam	rising
from	the	backs	of	the	herds	as	the	dawn	gently	broke.
He	longed	for	such	a	scene,	the	morning’s	greeting	one	he	had	always


known.	Dogs	rising	from	their	beds	of	grass,	the	soft	cry	of	a	hungry	babe
from	one	of	the	yurts,	the	smell	of	smoke	as	hearths	were	awakened	once
more.
Sudden	emotion	gripped	him	and	he	fought	back	a	sob.	All	gone.	Why	am	I
still	alive?	Why	do	I	cling	to	this	misery,	this	empty	life?	When	you	are	the	last,
there	is	no	reason	to	keep	living.	All	of	your	veins	are	cut,	the	blood	drains	and
drains	and	there’s	no	end	to	it.
Redmask,	you	murdered	us	all.
Did	his	kin	await	him	in	the	spirit	world?	He	wished	he	could	believe.	He
wished	his	faith	had	never	been	shattered,	crushed	under	the	heel	of	Letherii
soldiers.	If	the	Awl	spirits	had	been	stronger,	if	they	had	been	all	the	shamans
said	they	were…we	would	not	have	died.	Not	have	failed.	We	would	never	have
fallen.	But,	if	they	existed	at	all,	they	were	weak,	ignorant	and	helpless	against
change.	Balanced	on	a	bowstring,	and	when	that	string	snapped	their	world	was
done	with,	for	ever.
He	saw	Setoc	awaken,	watched	her	stand	up,	running	fingers	through	the
tangles	in	her	hair.	Wiping	at	his	eyes,	Torrent	turned	back	to	his	horse,	leaned
his	forehead	against	the	slick	coat	of	its	neck.	I	feel	you,	friend.	You	do	not
question	your	life.	You	are	in	its	midst	and	know	no	other	place,	nothing	outside
it.	How	I	envy	you.
She	approached	him,	the	faint	crunch	of	stones	underfoot,	the	slow	pulse
of	her	breathing.	She	came	up	on	his	left,	reaching	to	stroke	the	horse	in	the
softness	between	its	nostrils,	giving	it	her	scent.	‘Torrent,’	she	whispered,	‘who
is	out	there?’
He	grunted.	‘Your	wolf	ghosts	are	torn,	aren’t	they?	Curious,
frightened…’
‘They	smell	death,	and	yet	power.	So	much	power.’
The	hide	against	his	brow	was	now	damp.	‘She	calls	herself	a	Bonecaster.
A	shaman.	A	witch.	Her	name	is	Olar	Ethil,	and	no	life	burns	in	her	body.’
‘She	comes	before	the	dawn,	three	mornings	in	a	row	now.	But	draws	no
closer.	She	hides	like	a	hare,	and	when	the	sun’s	light	finally	arrives,	she
vanishes.	Like	dust.’
‘Like	dust,’	he	agreed.
‘What	does	she	want?’
He	stepped	back	from	his	horse,	ran	the	back	of	one	wrist	against	his	brow,
and	looked	away.	‘Nothing	good,	Setoc.’
She	said	nothing	for	a	time,	standing	at	his	side,	her	furs	wrapped	tight
about	her	shoulders.	Then	she	seemed	to	shiver,	and	said,	‘A	snake	writhes	in
each	of	her	hands,	but	they’re	laughing.’


Telorast.	Curdle.	They	dance	in	my	dreams.	‘They’re	dead,	too.	They’re	all
dead,	Setoc.	But	still	they	hunger…for	something.’	He	shrugged.	‘We	are	all
lost	out	here.	I	feel	this,	like	a	rot	in	my	bones.’
‘I	told	Gruntle	of	my	visions,	the	Wolves	and	the	throne	they	guard.	Do
you	know	what	he	asked	me?’
Torrent	shook	his	head.
‘He	asked	me	if	I’ve	seen	the	Wolves	lift	a	leg	against	that	throne.’
He	snorted	a	laugh,	but	the	sound	shook	him	in	an	unexpected	way.	When
did	I	last	laugh?	Spirits	below.
‘It’s	how	they	mark	territory,’	Setoc	went	on,	her	tone	wry.	‘How	they	take
possession	of	something.	I	was	shocked,	but	not	for	long.	They’re	beasts,	after
all.	So	what	is	it	we	worship	when	we	worship	them?’
‘I	worship	no	one	any	more,	Setoc.’
‘Gruntle	says	worship	is	nothing	more	than	the	surrender	to	things	beyond
our	control.	He	says	the	comfort	from	that	is	false,	because	there	is	nothing
comfortable	in	the	struggle	to	live.	He	kneels	to	no	one,	not	even	his	Tiger	of
Summer,	who	would	dare	compel	him.’	She	hesitated,	and	then	sighed	and
added,	‘I	will	miss	Gruntle.’
‘He	intends	to	leave	us?’
‘A	thousand	people	can	dream	of	war,	but	no	two	dreams	are	the	same.
Soon	he	will	be	gone,	and	Mappo,	too.	The	boy	will	be	upset.’
The	two	horses	shied	suddenly,	stumbling	in	their	hobbles.	Stepping	past
them,	Torrent	scowled.	‘This	dawn,’	he	said	in	a	growl,	‘the	hare	is	bold.’
	
Precious	Thimble	bit	back	a	shriek,	clawed	herself	awake	with	a	gasp.	Traces
of	fire	raced	along	her	nerves.	Kicking	her	bedding	aside,	she	scrambled	to
her	feet.
Torrent	and	Setoc	stood	near	the	horses,	facing	north.	Someone	was
coming.	The	ground	underfoot	seemed	to	recoil	in	waves	sweeping	past	her,
like	ripples	passing	just	beneath	the	surface.	Precious	struggled	to	slow	her
gasping	breaths.	She	set	out	to	join	the	warrior	and	the	girl,	leaning	forward	as
if	fighting	an	invisible	current.	Hearing	heavy	footfalls	behind	her,	she	glanced
back	to	see	Gruntle	and	Mappo.
‘Be	careful,	Precious,’	Gruntle	said.	‘Against	this	one…’	He	shook	his
head.	The	barbed	tattoos	covering	his	skin	were	visibly	deepening,	and	in	his
eyes	there	was	nothing	human.	He’d	yet	to	draw	his	cutlasses.
Her	gaze	flicked	to	the	Trell,	but	his	expression	revealed	nothing.
I	didn’t	kill	Jula.	It	wasn’t	my	fault.


She	spun	back,	pushed	on.
The	figure	striding	towards	them	was	withered,	a	crone	swathed	in
snakeskins.	As	she	drew	closer,	Precious	could	see	the	ravaged	state	of	her
broad	face,	the	emptiness	of	her	eye	sockets.	Behind	her	Gruntle	unleashed	a
feline	hiss.	‘T’lan	Imass.	No	weapons,	meaning	she’s	a	Bonecaster.	Precious
Thimble,	do	not	bargain	with	this	one.	She	will	offer	you	power,	to	get	what
she	wants.	Refuse	her.’
Through	gritted	teeth,	she	replied,	‘We	need	to	get	home.’
‘Not	that	way.’
She	shook	her	head.
The	crone	halted	ten	paces	away,	and	to	Precious	Thimble’s	surprise	it	was
Torrent	who	spoke	first.
‘Leave	them	alone,	Olar	Ethil.’
The	hag	cocked	her	head,	wisps	of	hair	drifting	out	like	strands	of	spider
silk.	‘There	is	only	one,	warrior.	It	is	no	concern	of	yours.	I	am	here	to	claim
my	kin.’
‘Your	what?	Witch,	there’s—’
‘You	cannot	have	him,’	Gruntle	rumbled,	edging	past	Torrent.
‘Stay	out	of	this,	whelp,’	Olar	Ethil	warned.	‘Look	to	your	god,	and	see
how	he	cowers	before	me.’	She	then	pointed	a	gnarled	finger	at	Mappo.	‘And
you,	Trell,	this	is	not	your	battle.	Stand	aside,	and	I	will	tell	you	all	you	need
know	of	the	one	you	seek.’
Mappo	seemed	to	stagger,	and	then,	his	face	twisting	in	anguish,	he	stepped
back.
Precious	gasped.
Setoc	spoke.	‘Who	is	this	kin	of	yours,	witch?’
‘He	is	named	Absi.’
‘Absi?	There	is	no—’
‘The	boy,’	snapped	Olar	Ethil.	‘The	son	of	Onos	Toolan.	Bring	him	to	me.’
Gruntle	drew	his	swords.
‘Don’t	be	a	fool!’	the	Bonecaster	snarled.	‘Your	own	god	will	stop	you!
Treach	will	not	simply	let	you	throw	away	your	life	on	this.	You	think	to	veer?
You	will	fail.	I	will	kill	you,	Mortal	Sword,	do	not	doubt	that.	The	boy.	Bring
him	to	me.’
The	rest	were	awake	now,	and	Precious	turned	round	to	see	Absi	standing
between	the	twins,	his	eyes	wide	and	bright.	Baaljagg	was	slowly	coming
forward,	closer	to	where	Setoc	stood,	its	massive	head	lowered.	Amby	Bole
remained	close	to	his	brother ’s	barrow,	closed	in	and	silent,	his	once	young
face	now	old,	and	whatever	love	there	had	been	in	his	eyes	had	vanished.


Cartographer	stood	with	one	foot	in	the	coals	of	the	hearth,	staring	at
something	to	the	east	–	perhaps	the	rising	sun	–	while	Sweetest	Sufferance	was
helping	Faint	to	her	feet.	I	need	to	try	some	more	healing	on	her.	I	can	show
Amby	I	don’t	always	fail.	I	can	–	no,	think	about	what	is	before	us	now!	She
gave	Mappo	what	he	wants,	as	easy	as	that.	She	bargains	quick,	she	speaks
true.	Precious	faced	the	Bonecaster.	‘Ancient	One,	we	in	the	Trygalle	are
stranded	here.	I	have	not	the	power	to	take	us	home.’
‘You	will	not	interfere	if	I	bless	you	with	what	you	need?’	Olar	Ethil
nodded.	‘Agreed.	Collect	the	child.’
‘Don’t	even	think	it,’	Gruntle	warned,	the	look	in	his	unhuman	eyes	halting
Precious	in	her	tracks.	The	barbs	on	his	bared	arms	seemed	to	blur	a	moment,
then	grew	sharp	once	again.
The	Bonecaster	said,	‘The	boy	is	mine,	whelp,	because	his	father	belongs
to	me.	The	First	Sword	serves	me	once	again.	Would	you	truly	desire	to
prevent	me	from	reuniting	the	son	with	the	father?’
Stavi	and	Storii	rushed	closer,	their	questions	tumbling	together.	‘Father	–
he’s	alive?	Where	is	he?’
Gruntle	barred	their	way	with	a	levelled	cutlass.	‘Hold	a	moment,	you	two.
Something	is	not	right	here.	Wait,	I	beg	you.	Guard	your	brother.’	He	turned
back	to	Olar	Ethil.	‘If	the	boy’s	father	now	serves	you,	where	is	he?’
‘Not	far.’
‘Then	bring	him	to	us,’	Gruntle	said.	‘He	can	collect	his	children	himself.’
‘The	daughters	are	not	of	his	blood,’	Olar	Ethil	replied.	‘I	have	no	use	for
them.’
‘You?	What	of	Onos	Toolan?’
‘Give	them	to	me,	then,	and	I	will	see	to	their	disposal.’
Torrent	spun	round.	‘Slitting	their	throats	is	what	she	means,	Gruntle.’
‘I	did	not	say	that,	warrior,’	the	Bonecaster	retorted.	‘I	will	take	the	three,
this	I	offer.’
Baaljagg	was	edging	closer	to	Olar	Ethil,	and	she	beckoned	to	it.	‘Blessed
Ay,	I	greet	you	and	invite	you	into	my	comp—’
The	huge	beast	lunged,	massive	jaws	crunching	as	they	closed	round	the
Bonecaster ’s	right	shoulder.	The	ay	then	spun,	whipping	Olar	Ethil	from	her
feet.	Strips	of	reptile	hide,	fetishes	of	bone	and	shell	flailed	and	snapped.	The
giant	wolf	did	not	release	its	grip,	instead	reared	a	second	time,	slamming	Olar
Ethil	hard	on	to	the	ground.	Bones	splintered	in	its	jaws,	and	the	body
struggled	feebly,	as	would	a	victim	stunned.
Baaljagg	tore	loose	its	grip	on	her	crushed	shoulder	and	closed	its	fangs
about	her	skull.	It	then	whipped	her	into	the	air.


Olar	Ethil’s	left	hand	was	suddenly	stabbing	into	the	ay’s	throat,	punching
through	withered	hide	and	closing	on	its	spinal	column.	Even	as	the	wolf	flung
her	upward,	she	caught	hold.	The	momentum	from	Baaljagg’s	surge	added
force	to	her	grip.	A	sudden,	terrible	ripping	sound	erupted	from	the	ay,	and
like	a	serpent	a	length	of	the	beast’s	spinal	column	tore	free	of	its	throat,	still
clutched	in	the	witch’s	bony	hand.
The	Bonecaster	spun	away	from	the	ay,	landing	hard	in	a	clatter	of	bones.
Baaljagg	collapsed,	head	lolling	like	a	stone	in	a	sack.
Absi	wailed.
As	Olar	Ethil	was	picking	herself	up,	Gruntle	marched	towards	her,	his
two	weapons	readied.	Seeing	him,	she	flung	the	spinal	column	to	one	side.
And	began	to	veer.
When	he	reached	her,	she	was	nothing	but	a	blur,	moments	from	expanding
into	something	huge.	He	punched	where	her	head	had	been	a	moment	earlier,
and	the	bell	hilt	of	the	cutlass	cracked	hard	against	something.	The	veering
abruptly	vanished.	Reeling	back,	her	face	crushed,	Olar	Ethil	sprawled	on	her
back.
‘Spit	on	the	tiger	god,’	Gruntle	said,	standing	directly	over	her.	‘Hood	take
your	stupid	veering,	and	mine!’	Clashing	his	blades	together,	he	brought	them
down	in	an	X	pattern	beneath	her	jaw.	‘Now,	Bonecaster,	I	happen	to	know	that
if	you	hit	even	T’lan	Imass	bones	hard	enough,	they	shatter.’
‘No	mortal—’
‘Piss	on	that.	I	will	leave	you	in	pieces,	do	you	understand	me?	Pieces.
How’s	it	done	again?	Head	in	a	niche?	On	a	pole?	The	crook	of	a	tree?	No
trees	here,	witch,	but	a	hole	in	the	ground,	that’s	easy.’
‘The	child	is	mine.’
‘He	won’t	have	you.’
‘Why	not?’
‘You	just	killed	his	dog.’
Precious	Thimble	hurried	forward,	feeling	half	fevered,	her	knees	wobbly
beneath	her.	‘Bonecaster—’
‘I	am	considering	withdrawing	my	offers,’	Olar	Ethil	said.	‘All	of	them.
Now,	Mortal	Sword,	will	you	remove	your	weapons	and	let	me	rise?’
‘I	haven’t	decided.’
‘What	must	I	promise?	To	leave	Absi	in	your	care?	Will	you	guard	his	life,
Mortal	Sword?’
Precious	saw	Gruntle	hesitate.
‘I	came	to	bargain	with	you	all,’	Olar	Ethil	continued.	‘In	faith.	The	undead
ay	was	a	slave	to	ancient	memories,	ancient	betrayals.	I	will	not	hold	it	against


any	of	you.	Mortal	Sword,	look	upon	your	friends	–	who	among	them	is
capable	of	protecting	the	children?	You	will	not.	The	Trell	waits	only	to	hear
my	words	whispering	through	his	mind,	and	then	he	will	quit	your	company.
The	Awl	warrior	is	a	pup,	and	a	disrespectful	one	at	that.	The	Jhag	Bolead
spawn	is	broken	inside.	I	mean	to	bring	to	Onos	Toolan	his	children—’
‘He’s	a	T’lan	Imass,	isn’t	he?’
The	Bonecaster	was	silent.
‘It’s	the	only	way	he	would	still	serve	you,’	Gruntle	said.	‘He	died,	just	as
his	daughters	believed,	and	you	resurrected	him.	Will	you	do	the	same	to	the
boy?	The	gift	of	your	deathly	touch?’
‘Of	course	not.	He	must	live.’
‘Why?’
She	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘Because	he	is	the	hope	of	my	people,	Mortal
Sword.	I	need	him	–	for	my	army	and	for	the	First	Sword	who	commands
them.	The	child,	Absi,	shall	be	their	cause,	their	reason	to	fight.’
Gruntle,	Precious	saw,	was	suddenly	pale.	‘A	child?	Their	cause?’
‘Their	banner,	yes.	You	do	not	understand	–	I	cannot	hold	on	to	his
anger…the	First	Sword’s.	It	is	dark,	a	beast	unchained,	a	leviathan	–	he	must
not	be	unleashed,	not	this	way.	Burn’s	dream,	Mortal	Sword,	let	me	rise!’
Gruntle	withdrew	his	weapons,	stumbled	back	a	step.	He	was	muttering
something	under	his	breath.	Precious	Thimble	caught	only	a	few	words.	In	the
Daru	tongue.	‘The	banner…child’s	tunic,	was	that	it?	The	colour…began	red,
ended…black.’
Olar	Ethil	struggled	to	her	feet.	Her	face	was	barely	recognizable,	a
crushed,	splintered	knot	of	bone	and	torn	hide.	The	gouges	from	Baaljagg’s
canines	had	scored	deep,	white	grooves	on	her	temples	and	the	base	of	her
mandible	on	both	sides.	The	ruined	shoulder	slumped,	its	arm	hanging	useless.
As	Gruntle	backed	still	further,	an	anguished	cry	came	from	Setoc.	‘Has
she	won	you	all	then?	Will	no	one	protect	him?	Please!	Please!’
The	twins	were	weeping.	Absi	was	kneeling	beside	Baaljagg’s	desiccated
body,	moaning	in	a	strange	cadence.
Cartographer	clattered	closer	to	the	boy,	one	foot	blackened	and
smouldering.	‘Make	him	stop	that.	Someone.	Make	him	stop	that.’
Precious	frowned,	but	the	others	ignored	the	undead	man’s	pleas.	What
does	he	mean	by	that?	She	turned	to	Olar	Ethil.	‘Bonecaster—’
‘East,	woman.	That	is	where	you	will	find	all	you	need.	I	have	touched
your	soul.	I	have	made	it	into	a	Mahybe,	a	vessel	that	waits.	East.’
Precious	Thimble	crossed	her	arms,	eyes	closing	for	a	moment.	She
wanted	to	look	at	Faint	and	Sweetest,	to	see	the	satisfaction,	the	relief,	in	their


eyes.	She	wanted	to,	but	knew	she	would	see	nothing	of	the	sort,	not	from	those
two.	They	were	women,	after	all,	and	three	children	were	being	surrendered.
Thrown	into	undead	arms.	They	will	thank	me	in	the	end.	When	the	memory	of
this	moment	fades,	when	we	are	all	safe	and	home	again.
Well…not	all	of	us.	But	what	can	we	do?
Setoc,	with	Torrent	at	her	side,	was	all	that	stood	between	Olar	Ethil	and
the	three	children.	Tears	streamed	down	Setoc’s	cheeks,	and	in	the	Awl
warrior ’s	stance	Precious	Thimble	saw	a	man	facing	his	execution.	He’d
drawn	his	sabre,	but	the	look	in	his	eyes	was	bleak.	Yet	he	did	not	waver.
Among	them	all,	this	young	warrior	was	the	only	one	not	to	turn	away.	Damn
you,	Setoc,	will	you	see	this	brave	boy	die?
‘We	can’t	stop	her,’	Precious	said	to	Setoc.	‘You	must	see	that.	Torrent	–
tell	her.’
‘I	gave	up	the	last	of	the	Awl	children	to	the	Barghast,’	said	Torrent.	‘And
now	they	are	all	dead.	Gone.’	He	shook	his	head.
‘Can	you	protect	these	ones	any	better?’	Precious	demanded.
It	was	as	if	he’d	been	slapped.	He	looked	away.	‘Giving	up	children	is	the
one	thing	I	seem	to	do	well.’	He	sheathed	his	weapon	and	grasped	Setoc’s
upper	arm.	‘Come	with	me.	We	will	talk	where	no	one	else	can	hear	us.’
Setoc	shot	the	warrior	a	wild	look,	started	to	struggle,	and	then	abruptly
sagged	in	his	grip.
Precious	watched	him	drag	her	away.	He	broke	like	a	frail	twig.	Are	you
proud	of	yourself	now,	Precious?
But	the	path	is	finally	clear.
Olar	Ethil	walked	with	a	hitching	gait	she’d	not	shown	before,	joints
grinding	and	snapping,	up	to	where	the	boy	knelt.	She	reached	down	with	her
good	arm	and	scooped	him	up	by	the	collar	of	his	Barghast	tunic.	Held	him	out
to	study	his	face,	and	he	in	turn	looked	steadily	back	at	her,	dry-eyed,	flat.	The
Bonecaster	grunted.	‘Your	father ’s	son	all	right,	by	the	Abyss.’
She	turned	round	and	set	off,	northward,	the	boy	hanging	from	her	grip.
After	a	moment,	the	twins	followed,	neither	one	looking	back.	There’s	no	end
to	losing	everything,	is	there?	It	just	goes	on	and	on.	Their	mother,	their	father,
their	people.	No,	they	won’t	be	looking	back.
And	why	should	they?	We	failed	them.	She	came,	she	cut	us	apart,	bought	us
like	an	empress	scattering	a	handful	of	coins.	And	they	were	what	she	bought.
Them,	and	our	turning	away.	And	it	was	easy,	because	this	is	what	we	are.
Mahybe?	What	in	Hood’s	name	is	that?
	


With	horror	in	his	heart,	Mappo	set	out	from	the	camp,	leaving	the	others,
leaving	behind	this	terrible	dawn.	He	struggled	to	keep	from	breaking	into	a
run,	as	if	that	would	help.	Besides,	if	they	all	watched	him,	they	did	so	with
consciences	as	stained	as	his	own.	Was	there	comfort	in	that?	Should	there	be?
We	are	nothing	but	our	own	needs.	She	but	showed	each	of	us	the	face	we	hide
from	ourselves	and	everyone	else.	She	shamed	us	by	exposing	our	truths.
He	fought	to	remind	himself	of	his	purpose,	of	all	that	his	vow	demanded,
and	the	horrifying	things	it	could	make	him	do.
Icarium	lives.	Remember	that.	Focus	on	it.	He	waits	for	me.	I	will	find	him.
I	will	make	it	all	right	once	again.	Our	small	world,	closed	up	and	impervious
to	everything	outside	it.	A	world	where	none	will	challenge	us,	where	none	will
question	our	deeds,	the	hateful	decisions	we	once	made.
Give	me	this	world,	please,	I	beg	you.
My	most	precious	lies	–	she	stole	them	all.	They	saw.
Setoc,	dear	gods,	the	betrayal	in	your	face!
No.	I	will	find	him.	I	will	protect	him	from	the	world.	I	will	protect	the
world	from	him.	And	from	everything	else,	from	hurt	eyes	and	broken	hearts,	I
will	protect	myself.	And	you	all	called	it	my	sacrifice,	my	heartbreaking	loyalty
–	there	on	the	Path	of	Hands,	I	took	your	breaths	away.
Bonecaster,	you	stole	my	lies.	See	me	now.
He	knew	his	ancestors	were	far,	far	away.	Their	bones	crumbled	to	dust	in
chambers	beneath	heaped	mounds	of	stone	and	earth.	He	knew	he	had	forsaken
them	long	ago.
Then	why	could	he	hear	their	howls?
Mappo	clapped	his	hands	over	his	ears,	but	that	did	not	help.	The	howling
went	on,	and	on.	And	on	this	vast	empty	plain,	he	suddenly	felt	small,	shrinking
still	further	with	each	step.	My	heart.	My	honour…shrinking,	withering	down…
with	each	step.	He’s	only	a	child.	They	all	are.	He	curled	up	in	Gruntle’s	arms.
The	girls,	they	held	on	to	Setoc’s	hands	and	sang	songs.
Is	it	not	the	one	inescapable	responsibility	of	an	adult	to	protect	and	defend
a	child?
I	am	not	as	I	once	was.	What	have	I	done?
Memories.	The	past.	All	so	precious	–	I	want	it	back,	I	want	it	all	back.
Icarium,	I	will	find	you.
Icarium,	please,	save	me.


Torrent	climbed	into	his	saddle.	He	looked	down	and	met	Setoc’s	eyes,	and
then	nodded.
He	could	see	the	fear	and	the	doubt	in	her	face,	and	wished	he	had	more
words	worth	saying,	but	he’d	used	them	all	up.	Was	it	not	enough	that	he	was
doing	this?	The	question,	asked	so	boldly	and	selfrighteously	in	his	own	mind,
almost	made	him	laugh	out	loud.	Still,	he	had	to	do	this.	He	had	to	try.	‘I	will
ward	them,	I	promise.’
‘You	owe	them	nothing,’	she	said,	hugging	herself	with	such	severity	he
thought	her	ribs	might	crack.	‘Not	your	charge,	but	mine.	Why	do	you	do
this?’
‘I	knew	Toc.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	think:	what	would	he	do?	That	is	my	answer,	Setoc.’
Tears	ran	down	her	face.	She	held	her	lips	tight,	as	if	to	speak	would	be	to
loose	her	grief,	a	wailing	demon	that	would	never	again	be	chained,	or	beaten
down.
‘I	left	children	to	die	once,’	he	continued.	‘I	let	Toc	down.	But	this	time,’	he
shrugged,	‘I	hope	to	do	better.	Besides,	she	knows	me.	She	will	use	me,	she’s
done	it	before.’	He	glanced	over	at	the	others.	The	camp	was	packed	up.	Faint
and	Sweetest	Sufferance	had	already	begun	walking,	like	two	broken	refugees.
Precious	Thimble	trailed	them	by	a	few	steps,	like	a	child	uncertain	of	her
welcome	in	their	company.	Amby	walked	on	his	own,	off	to	the	right	of	the
others,	staring	straight	ahead,	his	stride	stiff,	brittle.	And	Gruntle,	after	a	few
words	with	Cartographer	who	once	more	sat	on	Jula’s	barrow,	had	set	off,
shoulders	rounded	as	if	in	visceral	pain.	Cartographer,	it	seemed,	was	staying
behind.	It	comes	together	only	to	fall	apart.	‘Setoc,	your	wolf	ghosts	were
frightened	of	her.’
‘Terrified.’
‘You	could	do	nothing.’
Her	eyes	flashed.	‘Is	that	supposed	to	help?	Words	like	that	just	dig	big
holes	and	invite	us	to	jump.’
He	glanced	away.	‘I’m	sorry.’
‘Go,	catch	up	to	them.’
He	collected	his	reins,	swung	his	mount	round	and	tapped	its	flanks	with
his	heels.
Did	you	gamble	on	this,	too,	Olar	Ethil?	How	smug	will	you	sound	in	your
greeting?
Well	now,	enjoy	your	time,	because	it	won’t	last	for	ever.	Not	if	I	have	any
say	in	the	matter.	Do	not	worry,	Toc,	I’ve	not	forgotten.	For	you,	I	will	do	this,


or	die	in	the	effort.
He	rode	at	a	canter	across	the	empty	land,	until	he	drew	within	sight	of	the
Bonecaster	and	her	three	charges.	When	the	twins	turned	and	cried	out	in
relief,	it	very	nearly	broke	him.

Setoc	had	watched	the	young	Awl	warrior	ride	after	Olar	Ethil,	saw	when	he
reached	them.	An	exchange	of	words,	and	then	they	set	out	once	more,	walking
until	the	deceptive	folds	of	the	landscape	swallowed	them	all.	Then	she	turned,
studied	Cartographer.	‘The	boy	was	crying	in	grief.	Over	his	dead	dog.	You
told	him	to	stop.	Why?	Why	should	that	have	so	bothered	you?’
‘How	is	it,’	the	undead	man	said,	rising	from	the	barrow	and	shuffling
closer,	‘that	the	weakest	among	us	is	the	only	one	so	willing	to	give	up	his	life
protecting	those	children?	I	do	not	mean	to	wound	you	with	my	words,	Setoc.	I
but	struggle	to	understand	this.’	The	withered	face	tilted	to	one	side,	pitted	eye
sockets	seeming	to	study	her.	‘Is	it,	perhaps,	because	he	has	the	least	to	lose?’
He	continued	on	in	his	awkward	steps,	to	stand	over	the	carcass	of	the	ay.
‘Of	course	he	has,’	she	snapped.	‘As	you	said,	just	his	life.’
Cartographer	looked	down	at	the	corpse	of	Baaljagg.	‘And	this	one	had
even	less.’
‘Go	back	to	your	dead	world,	will	you?	It’s	so	much	simpler	there,	I’m
sure.	You	can	stop	wondering	about	the	things	us	pathetic	mortals	get	up	to.’
‘I	am	a	knower	of	maps,	Setoc.	Listen	to	my	words.	You	cannot	cross	the
Glass	Desert.	When	you	reach	it,	turn	southward,	on	to	the	South	Elan.	It	is	not
much	better,	but	there	should	be	enough,	at	least	to	give	you	a	chance.’
Enough	what?	Food?	Water?	Hope?	‘You	are	remaining	here.	Why?’
‘In	this	place,’	Cartographer	gestured,	‘the	world	of	the	dead	has	arrived.
Here,	you	are	the	unwelcome	stranger.’
Suddenly	shaken,	inexplicably	distraught,	Setoc	shook	her	head.	‘Gruntle
said	you	were	with	them	almost	from	the	very	beginning.	Now	you’re	just
stopping.	Here?’
‘Must	we	all	have	a	purpose?’	Cartographer	asked.	‘I	did,	once,	but	that	is
done	with.’	His	head	turned,	faced	northward.	‘Your	company	was…admirable.
But	I’d	forgotten.’	He	hesitated,	and	she	was	about	to	ask	what	he’d	forgotten
when	he	said,	‘Things	break.’
‘Yes,’	she	whispered,	not	loud	enough	for	him	to	hear.	She	reached	down
and	collected	the	bundle	of	her	gear.	Straightening,	she	set	out.	Then	paused


and	glanced	back	at	him.	‘Cartographer,	what	did	Gruntle	say	to	you,	at	the
barrow?’
‘“The	past	is	a	demon	that	not	even	death	can	shake.”’
‘What	did	he	mean	by	that?’
He	shrugged,	still	studying	Baaljagg’s	carcass.	‘I	told	him	this:	I	have
found	the	living	in	my	dreams,	and	they	are	not	well.’
She	turned	away,	began	walking.

Dust	devils	spun	and	raced	along,	tracking	her	on	either	side.	Masan	Gilani
knew	all	about	this.	She’d	heard	all	the	old	stories	of	the	Seven	Cities
campaign,	how	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass	had	a	way	of	just	vanishing,
whispering	on	the	winds	or	twisting	along	on	the	currents	of	some	river.	Easy
for	them.	Rising	from	the	ground	at	the	end	of	it	all	not	even	out	of	breath.
She	snorted.	Breath,	that	was	a	good	one.
Her	horse	was	reluctant	this	morning.	Not	enough	water,	not	enough
forage,	hadn’t	crapped	or	pissed	in	a	day	and	a	night.	Wouldn’t	last	much
longer,	she	suspected,	unless	her	companions	could	conjure	up	a	spring	and	a
heap	of	hay	or	a	bag	or	two	of	oats.	Could	they	do	things	like	that?	She	had	no
idea.
‘Be	serious,	woman.	They	looked	as	if	a	sleeping	dragon	had	rolled	over
them.	If	they	could	magic	stuff	out	of	nowhere,	well,	they’d	have	done
something	by	now.’	She	was	hungry	and	thirsty	too,	and	if	it	came	to	it	she’d
slit	her	horse’s	neck	and	feast	until	her	belly	exploded.	‘Put	that	back	together,
will	you?	Thanks.’
Not	far	now.	By	her	reckoning,	she’d	be	on	the	Bonehunters’	trail	before
noon,	and	by	dusk	she’d	have	caught	up	with	them	–	no	army	that	size	could
move	very	quickly.	They	were	carrying	enough	supplies	to	feed	a	decent-sized
town	for	half	a	year.	She	glanced	northward,	something	she	found	she	was
doing	rather	often	of	late.	No	surprise	in	that	impulse,	however.	It	wasn’t	every
day	that	a	mountain	grew	up	out	of	nowhere	in	the	course	of	a	single	day	and
night,	and	what	a	storm	accompanied	its	birth!	She	thought	to	hitch	to	one	side
for	a	spit	or	two,	to	punctuate	the	sardonic	wonder	she’d	just	chewed	on.	But
spit	was	worth	keeping.
‘Hold	back	one	throatful,’	her	mother	used	to	say,	‘for	Hood’s	own	face.’
Bless	her,	the	deranged	fat	cow.	She	must	have	given	the	ragged	reaper	a
bubbly	bath	the	day	her	time	came,	a	hair-wash,	a	cave	mouth’s	spring	run-off


of	black,	stinking	phlegm	just	gushing	out,	aye.	Big	women	had	a	way,	didn’t
they?	Especially	after	their	fourth	or	fifth	decade,	when	all	their	opinions	had
turned	to	stone	and	chipped	flinty	enough	to	draw	blood	with	a	single	glance
or	sneer.
She’d	moved	like	a	tree,	her	mother	had,	and	just	as	shocking	to	see,	too.
After	all,	trees	don’t	walk	much,	not	on	a	sober	night,	just	like	the	earth	didn’t
move	unless	Burn	was	pitching	or	the	man	was	better	than	he	knew	(and	how
rare	was	that?).	Loomed,	old	Ma	did,	like	midnight	thunder.	Death	was	a
crowded	chamber	for	women	like	her,	and	the	crowd	was	the	kind	that	parted
with	her	first	step	into	the	room:	a	miracle.
Masan	Gilani	wiped	at	her	face	–	no	sweat	left.	Bad	news,	especially	this
early	in	the	morning.	‘I	wanted	to	be	big,	Ma.	I	wanted	to	reach	that	ripe	old
age.	Fifty,	aye.	Five	bitching,	rutting,	terror-inspiring	decades.	I	wanted	to
loom.	Thunder	in	my	eyes,	thunder	in	my	voice,	a	thing	of	great	weights	and
inexorable	masses.	It	ain’t	fair,	me	withering	away	out	here.	Dal	Hon,	do	you
miss	me?
‘The	day	I	set	foot	on	that	grassy	sward,	the	day	I	shoo	the	first	mob	of
flies	from	my	lips	and	nostrils	and	eyes,	why,	that’s	the	day	all	will	be	right
with	the	world	once	again.	No,	don’t	leave	me	to	die	here,	Dal	Hon.	It	ain’t
fair.’
She	coughed,	squinted	ahead.	Something	of	a	mess	up	there,	those	two
rises,	the	valley	sprawled	in	between.	Holes	in	the	ground.	Craters?	The	slopes
seemed	to	be	swarming.	She	blinked,	wondering	if	she	was	imagining	that.
Deprivation	played	nasty	games,	after	all.	Swarming	–	it	was	swarming	all
right.	Rats?	No.	‘Orthen.’
A	field	of	battle.	She	caught	the	gleam	of	picked	bones,	took	note	of	ashy
mounds	on	the	far	ridge,	from	pyres,	no	doubt.	Sound	practice,	burning	the
dead,	she	knew.	Kept	disease	to	a	minimum.	She	kicked	her	horse	into	a	heavy
canter.	‘I	know,	I	know,	not	for	long,	sweetie.’
The	dust	devils	whirled	out	past	her	now,	spinning	towards	a	ridge
overlooking	the	valley.
Masan	Gilani	rode	after	them,	to	the	top	of	the	crest.	There	she	reined	in,
scanning	the	wreckage	filling	the	valley,	and	then	the	gaping	entrenchments
slashing	across	the	opposite	ridge,	beyond	which	rose	the	humps	of	burned
bones.	Dread	slowly	seeped	in,	stealing	all	the	day’s	heat	from	her	bones.
The	T’lan	Imass	of	the	Unbound	solidified	in	a	rough	line	on	her	right,
also	studying	the	scene.	Their	sudden	appearance	after	so	many	days	of	dust
was	strangely	comforting	to	Masan	Gilani.	She’d	only	had	her	horse	for
company	for	far	too	long	now.	‘Not	that	I’ll	kiss	any	of	you,’	she	said.


Heads	turned	to	regard	her.	None	spoke.
Thank	Hood	for	that.	‘My	horse	is	dying,’	she	announced.	‘And	whatever
happened	here	happened	to	my	Bonehunters	and	it	doesn’t	look	good.	So,’	she
added,	now	glaring	at	the	five	undead	warriors,	‘if	you	have	any	good	news	to
tell	me,	or,	gods	below,	any	explanation	at	all,	I	really	might	kiss	you.’
The	one	named	Beroke	said,	‘We	can	answer	your	horse’s	plight,	human.’
‘Good,’	she	snapped,	dismounting.	‘Get	to	it.	And	a	little	water	and	grub
for	yours	truly	wouldn’t	go	amiss	either.	I	won’t	be	eating	orthen	any	more,
just	so	you	know.	Who	ever	thought	crossing	a	lizard	with	a	rat	was	a	good
idea?’
One	of	the	other	T’lan	Imass	stepped	out	from	the	line.	She	couldn’t	recall
this	one’s	name,	but	it	was	bigger	than	the	others	and	looked	to	be	composed
of	body	parts	from	three,	maybe	four	individuals.	‘K’Chain	Nah’ruk,’	it	said	in
a	low	voice.	‘A	battle	and	a	harvest.’
‘Harvest?’
The	creature	pointed	at	the	distant	mounds.	‘They	butchered.	They	fed	upon
their	fallen	enemy.’
Masan	Gilani	shivered.	‘Cannibals?’
‘The	Nah’ruk	are	not	human.’
‘That	makes	a	difference?	To	me	it’s	cannibalism.	Only	white-skinned
barbarians	from	the	Fenn	Mountains	sink	so	low	as	to	eat	other	people.	Or	so	I
hear.’
‘They	did	not	complete	their	feeding,’	said	the	oversized	T’lan	Imass.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘See	the	newborn	mountain	to	the	north?’
‘No,’	she	drawled,	‘never	noticed	it.’
They	all	studied	her	again.
Sighing,	Masan	said,	‘Aye,	the	mountain.	The	storm.’
‘Another	battle,’	said	Beroke.	‘An	Azath	was	born.	From	this,	we	conclude
that	the	Nah’ruk	were	defeated.’
‘Oh?	We	hit	them	a	second	time?	Good.’
‘K’Chain	Che’Malle,’	said	Beroke.	‘Civil	war,	Masan	Gilani.’	The	warrior
gestured	with	a	twisted	arm.	‘Your	army…	I	do	not	think	they	all	died.	Your
commander—’
‘Tavore’s	alive	then?’
‘Her	sword	is.’
Her	sword.	Oh.	That	Otataral	blade.	‘Can	I	send	you	ahead?	Can	you	find	a
trail,	if	there	is	one?’
‘Thenik	will	scout	the	path	before	us,’	Beroke	said.	‘It	is	a	risk.	Strangers


would	not	welcome	us.’
‘I	can’t	imagine	why.’
Another	protracted	look.	Then	Beroke	said,	‘If	our	enemies	should	find	us,
Masan	Gilani,	before	the	moment	of	our	final	resurrection,	then	all	we	aspire
to	win	will	be	lost.’
‘Win?	Win	what?’
‘Why,	our	Master ’s	release.’
She	thought	about	asking	a	few	more	questions,	decided	against	it.	Gods
below,	you’re	not	who	I	was	sent	to	find,	are	you?	Still,	you	wanted	to	find	us,
didn’t	you?	Sinter,	I	wish	you	were	here,	to	explain	what’s	going	on.	But	my
gut’s	telling	me	bad	things.	Your	Master?	No,	don’t	tell	me.	‘All	right.	Let’s	ride
clear	of	this,	and	then	you	feed	us	like	you	promised.	But	decent	food,	right?
I’m	civilized.	Dal	Honese,	Malazan	Empire.	The	Emperor	himself	came	from
Dal	Hon.’
‘Masan	Gilani,’	said	Beroke,	‘we	know	nothing	of	this	empire	of	which
you	speak.’	The	T’lan	Imass	warrior	paused,	and	then	added,	‘But	the	one	who
was	once	emperor…him	we	do	know.’
‘Really?	Before	or	after	he	died?’
The	five	Imass	regarded	her	once	more.	Then	Beroke	asked,	‘Masan
Gilani,	what	is	the	relevance	of	that	question?’
She	blinked,	and	then	slowly	shook	her	head.	‘None,	none	at	all,	I	guess.’
Another	T’lan	Imass	spoke	now.	‘Masan	Gilani?’
‘What?’
‘Your	old	emperor.’
‘What	of	him?’
‘Was	he	a	liar?’
Masan	Gilani	scratched	her	head,	and	then	she	gathered	up	her	reins,
swung	back	on	to	her	horse.	‘That	depends.’
‘On	what?’
‘On	whether	you	believe	all	the	lies	people	say	about	him.	Now,	let’s	get
out	of	this,	eat	and	get	watered,	and	then	find	Tavore’s	sword,	and	if	Oponn’s
smiling	down	on	us,	she’ll	still	be	attached	to	it.’
She	was	startled	when	the	five	Imass	bowed.	Then	they	collapsed	into	dust
and	swirled	away.	‘Where’s	the	dignity	in	that?’	she	wondered,	and	then	looked
out	one	more	time	over	the	battlefield	and	its	seething	orthen.	Where’s	the
dignity	in	anything,	woman?
For	now,	keep	it	all	inside.	You	don’t	know	what	has	happened	here.	You
don’t	know	anything	for	certain.	Not	yet.	Just	hold	on.
There’s	plenty	of	dignity	in	just	holding	on.	The	way	Ma	did.


	
The	smell	of	burning	grass.	Wetness	pressed	against	one	cheek,	cold	air	upon
the	other,	the	close	sound	of	a	click	beetle.	Sunlight,	filtered	through	shut	lids.
Dusty	air,	seeping	into	his	lungs	and	then	back	out	again.	There	were	parts	of
him	lying	about.	In	pieces.	Or	so	it	felt,	but	even	the	idea	of	it	seemed
impossible,	so	he	discarded	the	notion	despite	what	his	senses	were	telling	him.
Thoughts,	nice	to	find	he	was	having	them.	A	notable	triumph.	Now,	if	he
could	just	pull	his	varied	bits	together,	the	ones	that	weren’t	there.	But	that
could	wait.	First,	he	needed	to	find	some	memories.
His	grandmother.	Well,	an	old	woman,	at	least.	Assumptions	could	be
dangerous.	One	of	her	sayings,	maybe.	What	about	parents?	What	about	them?
Try	to	remember,	how	hard	can	that	be?	His	parents.	Not	very	bright,	those
two.	Strange	in	their	dullness	–	he’d	always	wondered	if	there	wasn’t	more	to
them.	There	had	to	be,	didn’t	there?	Hidden	interests,	secret	curiosities.	Was
Mother	really	that	fascinated	by	what	Widow	Thirdly	was	wearing	today?	Was
that	the	extent	of	her	engagement	with	the	world?	The	poor	neighbour	only
owned	two	tunics	and	one	ankle-length	robe,	after	all,	and	pretty	threadbare	at
that,	as	befitted	a	woman	whose	husband	was	a	withered	corpse	in	the	sands	of
Seven	Cities	and	the	death	coin	wasn’t	much	to	live	by,	was	it?	And	that	old
man	from	down	the	street,	the	one	trying	to	court	her,	well,	he	was	just	out	of
practice,	that’s	all.	Not	worth	your	sneers,	Mother.	He’s	just	doing	his	best.
Dreaming	of	a	happier	life,	dreaming	of	waking	something	up	in	the	widow’s
sad	eyes.
It’s	an	empty	world	without	hope.
And	if	Father	had	a	way	of	puttering	about	whistling	some	endless	song
and	pausing	every	now	and	then	to	look	distracted	by	a	thought,	if	not
thoroughly	confused	by	its	very	existence,	well,	a	man	of	decent	years	had
plenty	to	think	about,	didn’t	he?	It	certainly	looked	like	that.	And	if	he	had	a
way	of	ducking	in	crowds,	of	meeting	no	one’s	eyes,	well,	there	was	a	world
of	men	who’d	forgotten	how	to	be	men.	Or	maybe	they	never	learned	in	the
first	place.	Were	these	his	parents?	Or	someone	else’s?
Revelations	landing	with	a	thud.	One,	three,	scores	of	them,	a	veritable
landslide,	how	old	had	he	been?	Fifteen?	The	streets	of	Jakata	suddenly
narrowing	before	his	eyes,	the	houses	shrinking,	the	big	men	of	the	block
dwindling	to	boastful	midgets	with	puny	eyes.
There	was	a	whole	other	world	out	there,	somewhere.
Grandma,	caught	a	glint	in	your	eyes.	You’d	beaten	the	dust	out	of	the	gold
carpet,	rolled	it	out	into	my	path.	For	these	tender	feet	of	mine.	A	whole	other


world	out	there.	Called	‘learning’.	Called	‘knowledge’.	Called	‘magic’.
Roots	and	grubs	and	tied-off	twists	of	someone’s	hair,	small	puppets	and
dolls	with	smeared	faces	of	thread.	Webs	of	gut,	bundles	of	shedding,	the
plucked	backs	of	crows.	Etching	on	the	clay	floor,	the	drip	drip	of	sweat	from
the	brow.	Mud	was	effort,	the	taste	on	the	tongue	that	of	grit	from	a	licked
stylus,	and	how	the	candles	flickered	and	the	shadows	leapt!
Grandma?	Your	gem	of	a	boy	tore	himself	apart.	He	had	fangs	in	his	flesh
and	those	fangs	were	his	own,	and	round	and	round	it	went.	Biting,	tearing,
hissing	in	agony	and	fury.	Plummeting	from	the	smoke-filled	sky.	Lifting	upward
again,	new	wings,	joints	creaking,	a	sliding	nightmare.
You	can’t	come	back	from	that.	You	can’t.
I	touched	my	own	dull	flesh,	and	it	was	buried	under	bodies,	all	that	gore
draining	down.	I	was	pickled	in	blood.	That	body,	I	mean.	What	used	to	be
mine.	You	don’t	go	back,	not	to	that.
Dead	limbs	shifting,	slack	faces	turning,	pretending	to	look	at	me	–	but	I
wasn’t	the	one	so	rude	as	to	drag	them	about.	No	need	to	accuse	me	with	those
blank	eyes.	Some	fool’s	coming	down,	down	here,	and	maybe	my	soaked	skin
feels	warm,	but	that’s	all	the	lost	heat	from	all	these	other	corpses.
I	don’t	come	back.	Not	from	that.
Father,	if	you	only	knew	the	things	I	have	seen.	Mother,	if	only	you’d
opened	your	own	heart,	enough	to	bless	that	broken	widow	next	door.
Explain	it	to	this	fool,	will	you?	It	was	a	mound	of	bodies.	They’d	gathered
us.	Friend,	you	weren’t	supposed	to	interfere.	Maybe	they	ignored	you,	though	I
can’t	figure	why.	And	your	touch	was	cold,	gods	it	was	cold!
Rats,	nuzzling	close,	they’d	snatched	fragments	of	me	out	of	the	air.	In	a
world	where	everyone	is	a	soldier,	the	ones	underfoot	don’t	get	noticed,	but
even	ants	fight	like	fiends.	My	rats.	They	worked	hard,	warm	bodies	like	nests.
They	couldn’t	get	all	of	me.	That	wasn’t	possible.	Maybe	you	pulled	me	out,
but	I	was	incomplete.
Or	not.	Grandma,	someone	tied	strings	to	me.	With	everything	coming	down
all	around	us,	he’d	knotted	strings.	To	my	Hood-damned	rats.	Oh,	clever
bastard,	Quick.	Clever,	clever	bastard.	All	there,	all	here,	I’m	all	here.	And	then
someone	dug	me	out,	carried	me	away.	And	the	Short-Tails	looked	over	every
now	and	then,	milled	as	if	contemplating	taking	objection,	but	never	did.
He	carried	me	away,	melting	as	he	went.
All	the	butchering	going	on.	They	had	a	way	of	puttering	about	whistling
some	endless	song	and	pausing	every	now	and	then	to	look	distracted	by	a
thought,	if	not	thoroughly	confused	by	its	very	existence.	Like	that.
So	he	carried	me	away,	and	where	was	everybody?


The	pieces	were	back	together,	and	Bottle	opened	his	eyes.	He	was	lying	on
the	ground,	the	sun	low	to	the	horizon,	dew	in	the	yellow	grasses	close	to	his
face,	smelling	of	the	night	just	past.	Morning.	He	sighed,	slowly	sat	up,	his
body	feeling	crazed	with	cracks.	He	looked	across	at	the	man	crouched	near	a
dung	fire.	His	touch	was	cold.	And	then	he	melted.	‘Captain	Ruthan	Gudd,	sir.’
The	man	glanced	over,	nodded,	resumed	combing	his	beard	with	his
fingers.	‘It’s	a	bird,	I	think.’
‘Sir?’
He	gestured	at	the	rounded	lump	of	scorched	meat	skewered	above	the
embers.	‘Just	sort	of	fell	out	of	the	sky.	Had	feathers	but	they’ve	burned	off.’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Had	teeth	too,	however.	Bird.	Lizard.	It’s	an	even	handful
of	straws	in	each	hand,	as	the	Strike	used	to	say.’
‘We’re	alone.’
‘For	now.	We’ve	not	been	gaining	on	them	much	–	you	start	getting	heavy
after	a	while.’
‘Sir,	you	have	been	carrying	me?’	Melting.	Drip	drip.	‘How	far?	How
many	days?’
‘Carrying	you?	What	am	I,	a	Toblakai?	No,	there’s	a	travois…behind	you.
Dragging’s	easier	than	carrying.	Somewhat.	Wish	I	had	a	dog.	When	I	was	a
child…well,	let’s	just	say	that	wishing	I	had	a	dog	has	been	an	unfamiliar
experience.	But	yesterday	I’d	have	cut	a	god’s	throat	for	one	single	dog.’
‘I	can	walk	now,	sir.’
‘But	can	you	pull	that	travois?’
Frowning,	Bottle	twisted	and	looked	at	the	conveyance.	Two	full	length
spear	shafts,	the	pieces	of	two	or	three	others.	Webbing	from	the	harnesses	of
leather	armour,	the	strips	stained	black.	‘Nothing	to	pull	in	it,	sir,	that	I	can
see.’
‘I	was	thinking	me,	marine.’
‘Well,	I	can—’
Ruthan	picked	up	the	spit	and	waved	it	about.	‘A	joke,	soldier.	Ha	ha.	Here,
this	thing	looks	ready.	Cooking	is	the	process	of	making	the	familiar
unrecognizable,	and	thus	palatable.	When	intelligence	was	first	born,	the	first
question	asked	was,	“Can	this	thing	be	cooked?”	After	all,	try	eating	a	cow’s
face	–	well,	true	enough,	people	do	–	oh,	never	mind.	You	must	be	hungry.’
Bottle	made	his	way	over.	Ruthan	plucked	the	bird	from	the	skewer	and
then	tore	it	in	half,	handing	one	section	to	the	marine.
They	ate	without	conversation.
At	last,	sucking	and	spitting	out	the	last	bone,	licking	grease	from	his
fingers,	Bottle	sighed	and	eyed	the	man	opposite	him.	‘I	saw	you	go	down,	sir,


under	about	a	hundred	Short-Tails.’
Ruthan	raked	his	beard.	‘Aye.’
Bottle	glanced	away,	tried	again.	‘Figured	you	were	dead.’
‘Couldn’t	get	through	the	armour,	but	I’m	still	a	mass	of	bruises.	Anyway,
they	pounded	me	into	the	ground	for	a	while	and	then	just,	well,	gave	up.’	He
grimaced.	‘Took	me	some	time	to	dig	free.	By	then,	apart	from	the	dead	they
were	collecting,	there	was	no	sign	of	the	Bonehunters,	or	our	allies.	The
Khundryl	looked	finished	–	never	saw	so	many	dead	horses.	And	the	trenches
had	been	overrun.	The	Letherii	had	delivered	and	taken	some	damage,	but	hard
to	guess	the	extent	of	either.’
‘I	think	I	saw	some	of	that,’	Bottle	said.
‘I	sniffed	you	out,	though,’	the	captain	said,	not	meeting	Bottle’s	eyes.
‘How?’
‘I	just	did.	You	were	barely	there,	but	enough.	So	I	pulled	you	free.’
‘And	they	just	watched.’
‘Did	they?	Never	noticed	that.’	He	wiped	his	hands	on	his	thighs	and	rose.
‘Ready	to	walk	then,	soldier?’
‘I	think	so.	Where	are	we	going,	sir?’
‘To	find	the	ones	still	left.’
‘When	was	the	battle?’
‘Four,	five	days	ago,	something	like	that.’
‘Sir,	are	you	a	Stormrider?’
‘A	rogue	wave?’
Bottle’s	frown	deepened.
‘Another	joke,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘Let’s	strip	what’s	on	the	travois	–	found
you	a	sword,	a	few	other	things	you	might	find	useful.’
‘It	was	all	a	mistake,	wasn’t	it?’
The	man	shot	him	a	look.	‘Everything	is,	soldier,	sooner	or	later.’
	
Chaos	foamed	in	a	thrashing	maelstrom	far	below.	He	stood	close	to	the	ledge,
looking	down.	Off	to	his	right	the	rock	tilted,	marking	the	end	of	the	vaguely
level	base	of	the	pinnacle,	and	at	the	far	end	the	Spar,	a	gnarled	thing	of	black
stabbing	upward	like	a	giant	finger,	seemed	to	cast	a	penumbra	of	white	mist
from	its	ragged	tip.
Eventually,	he	turned	away,	crossed	the	flat	stretch,	twelve	paces	to	a	sheer
wall	of	rock,	and	to	the	mouth	of	a	tunnel	where	shattered	boulders	had	spilled
out	to	the	sides.	He	clambered	over	the	nearest	heap	until	he	found	a	dusty
oilskin	cape	jammed	inside	a	crevasse.	Tugging	it	aside,	he	reached	down	and


withdrew	a	tattered	satchel.	It	was	so	rotted	the	base	began	splitting	at	the	seams
and	he	scrambled	quickly	to	flat	ground	before	the	contents	spilled	out.
Coins	pattered,	baubles	struck	and	clattered.	Two	larger	items,	both
wrapped	in	skins	and	each	the	length	of	a	man’s	forearm,	struck	the	bedrock
but	made	no	sound.	These	objects	were	the	only	ones	he	collected,	tucking	one
into	his	belt	and	unwrapping	the	other.
A	sceptre	of	plain	black	wood,	its	ends	capped	in	tarnished	silver.	He
examined	it	for	a	moment,	and	then	strode	to	the	base	of	the	Spar	of	Andii.
Rummaging	in	the	pouch	at	his	hip,	he	withdrew	a	knotted	clutch	of	horse	hair,
dropped	it	at	his	feet,	and	then	with	a	broad	sweeping	motion	used	the	sceptre
to	inscribe	a	circle	above	the	black	stone.	Then	he	stepped	back.
After	a	moment	his	breath	caught	and	he	half	turned.	When	he	spoke	his
tone	was	apologetic.	‘Ah,	Mother,	it’s	old	blood,	I	don’t	deny	it.	Old	and	thin.’
He	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘Tell	Father	I	make	no	apologies	for	my	choice	–
why	should	I?	No	matter.	The	two	of	us	did	the	best	I	could.’	He	grunted	in
humour.	‘And	you	might	say	the	same	thing.’
He	turned	back.
Darkness	was	knotting	into	something	solid	before	him.	He	watched	it	for
a	time,	saying	nothing,	although	her	presence	was	palpable,	vast	in	the	gloom
behind	him.	‘If	he’d	wanted	blind	obedience,	he	should	have	kept	me	chained.
And	you,	Mother,	you	should	have	kept	me	a	child	for	ever,	there	under	your
wing.’	He	sighed,	somewhat	shakily.	‘We’re	still	here,	but	then,	we	did	what
you	both	wanted.	We	almost	got	them	all.	The	one	thing	none	of	us	expected
was	how	it	would	change	us.’	He	glanced	back	again,	momentarily.	‘And	it
has.’
Within	the	circle	before	him,	the	dark	form	opened	crimson	eyes.	Hoofs
cracked	like	iron	axe-blades	on	the	stone.
He	grasped	the	apparition’s	midnight	mane	and	swung	on	to	the	beast’s
back.	‘’Ware	your	child,	Mother.’	He	drew	the	horse	round,	walked	it	along	the
ledge	a	few	strides	and	then	back	to	the	mouth	of	the	tunnel.	‘I’ve	been	among
them	for	so	long	now,	what	you	gave	me	is	the	barest	whisper	in	the	back	of
my	soul.	You	offered	scant	regard	for	humans,	and	now	it’s	all	coming	down.
But	I	give	you	this.’	He	swung	the	horse	round.	‘Now	it’s	our	turn.	Your	son
opened	the	way.	And	as	for	his	son,	well,	if	he	wants	the	Sceptre,	he’ll	have	to
come	and	take	it.’
Ben	Adaephon	Delat	tightened	his	grip	on	the	horse’s	mane.	‘You	do	your
part,	Mother.	Let	Father	do	his,	if	he’s	of	a	mind	to.	But	it	comes	down	to	us.	So
stand	back.	Shield	your	eyes,	because	I	swear	to	you,	we	will	blaze!	When	our
backs	are	against	the	wall,	Mother,	you	have	no	idea	what	we	can	do.’


He	drove	his	heels	into	the	horse’s	flanks.	The	creature	surged	forward.
Now,	sweet	haunt,	this	could	get	a	little	hairy.
The	horse	reached	the	ledge.	Then	out,	into	the	air.	And	down,	plunging
into	the	seething	maelstrom.
The	presence,	breathing	darkness,	remained	in	the	vast	chamber	for	a	time
longer.	The	strewn	scatter	of	coins	and	baubles	glittered	on	the	black	stone.
Then	came	a	tapping	of	a	cane	upon	rock.


Chapter	Three

Time	now	to	go	out	into	the	cold	night
And	that	voice	was	chill	enough
To	awaken	me	to	stillness
There	were	cries	inviting	me	into	the	sky
But	the	ground	held	me	fast	–
Well	that	was	long	ago	now
Yet	in	this	bleak	morning	the	wings
Are	shadows	hunched	on	my	shoulders
And	the	stars	feel	closer	than	ever	before
The	time	is	soon,	I	fear,	to	set	out	in	search
Of	that	voice,	and	I	will	draw	to	the	verge
Time	now	to	go	out	into	the	cold	night
Spoken	in	so	weary	a	tone
I	can	make	nothing	worthy	from	it
If	dreams	of	flying	are	the	last	hope	of	freedom
I	will	pray	for	wings	with	my	last	breath
Cold	Night
Beleager
	all	open,	shutters	locked
back,	but	the	air	did	not	stir	and	the	sweltering	heat	lapped	exposed	flesh	like	a
fevered	tongue.	Clearing	her	throat	against	a	pervasive	itchiness	in	her	upper
chest,	Felash,	Fourteenth	Daughter	of	Queen	Abrastal,	tilted	her	head	back	on
the	soft,	if	soiled	and	damp,	pillow.
Her	handmaid	set	about	refilling	the	pipe	bowl.
‘Are	you	certain	of	the	date?’	Felash	asked.
‘Yes,	Highness.’
‘Well,	I	suppose	I	should	be	excited.	I	made	it	to	my	fifteenth	year,	let	the
banners	wave.	Not	that	anything	waves	hereabouts.’	She	closed	her	eyes	for	a
moment,	and	then	blinked	them	open	again.	‘Was	that	a	swell?’
‘I	felt	nothing,	Highness.’
SMOKE	HUNG	IN	THICK	WREATHS	IN	THE	CABIN.	THE	PORTHOLES	WERE


‘It’s	the	heat	I	don’t	appreciate.	It	distracts.	It	whispers	of	mortality,
yielding	both	despondency	and	a	strange	impatience.	If	I’m	to	die	soon,	I	say,
let’s	just	get	on	with	it.’
‘Mild	congestion,	Highness.’
‘And	the	sore	lower	back?’
‘Lack	of	exercise.’
‘Dry	throat?’
‘Allergies.’
‘All	these	aches	everywhere?’
‘Highness,’	said	the	handmaid,	‘are	there	moments	when	all	these
symptoms	simply	vanish?’
‘Hmm.	Orgasm.	Or	if	I	find	myself,	er,	suddenly	busy.’
The	handmaid	drew	the	water	pipe	to	life	and	handed	the	princess	the
mouthpiece.
Felash	eyed	the	silver	spigot.	‘When	did	I	start	this?’
‘The	rustleaf,	Highness?	You	were	six.’
‘And	why,	again?’
‘It	was	that	or	chewing	your	fingernails	down	to	nothing,	as	I	recall,
Highness.’
‘Ah	yes,	childish	habits,	thank	the	gods	I’m	cured.	Now,	do	you	think	I	dare
the	deck?	I	swear	I	felt	a	swell	back	then,	which	must	yield	optimism.’
‘The	situation	is	dire,	Highness,’	the	handmaid	said.	‘The	crew	is	weary
from	working	the	pumps,	and	still	we	list	badly.	No	land	in	sight,	not	a	breath
of	wind.	There	is	a	very	serious	risk	of	sinking.’
‘We	had	no	choice,	did	we?’
‘The	captain	and	first	mate	do	not	agree	with	that	assessment,	Highness.
Lives	were	lost,	we	are	barely	afloat—’
‘Mael’s	fault,’	Felash	snapped.	‘Never	known	the	bastard	to	be	so	hungry.’
‘Highness,	we	have	never	before	struck	such	a	bargain	with	an	Elder	God
—’
‘And	never	again!	But	Mother	heard,	didn’t	she?	She	did.	How	can	that	not
be	worth	the	sacrifices?’
The	handmaid	said	nothing,	sitting	back	and	assuming	a	meditative	pose.
Felash	studied	the	older	woman	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘Fine.	Opinions	differ.
Have	cooler	heads	finally	prevailed?’
‘I	cannot	say,	Highness.	Shall	I—’
‘No.	As	you	said,	exercise	will	do	me	good.	Select	for	me	a	worthy	outfit,
something	both	lithe	and	flaunting,	as	befits	my	sudden	maturity.	Fifteen!	Gods,
the	slide	has	begun!’


	
Her	first	mate,	Shurq	Elalle	saw,	was	having	trouble	managing	the	canted	deck.
Not	enough	sound	body	parts,	she	assumed,	to	warrant	much	confidence,	but
for	all	his	awkwardness	he	moved	quickly	enough,	despite	the	winces	and
flinches	with	every	step	he	took.	Pain	was	not	a	pleasant	thing	to	live	with,	not
day	after	day,	night	upon	night,	not	with	every	damned	breath.
‘I	do	admire	you,	Skorgen.’
He	squinted	up	at	her	as	he	arrived	on	the	poop	deck.	‘Captain?’
‘You	take	it	with	a	grimace	and	not	much	else.	There	are	many	forms	of
courage,	I	believe,	most	of	which	pass	unseen	by	the	majority	of	us.	It’s	not
always	about	facing	death,	is	it?	Sometimes	it’s	about	facing	life.’
‘If	you	say	so,	Captain.’
‘What	do	you	have	to	report?’	she	asked.
‘We’re	sinking.’
Well.	She	imagined	she’d	float	for	a	while,	and	then	eventually	wander
down,	like	a	bloated	sack	of	sodden	herbs,	until	she	found	the	sea	bottom.	Then
it	would	be	walking,	but	where?	‘North,	I	think.’
‘Captain?’
‘The	Undying	Gratitude	surely	deserves	a	better	fate.	Provision	the
launches.	How	long	do	we	have?’
‘Hard	to	say.’
‘Why?’
Skorgen’s	good	eye	squinted.	‘What	I	meant	was,	I	don’t	like	saying	it.	Bad
luck,	right?’
‘Skorgen,	do	I	need	to	pack	my	trunk?’
‘You’re	taking	your	trunk?	Will	it	float?	I	mean,	if	we	tie	it	behind	the
lifeboat?	We	only	got	two	that’ll	float	and	both	are	a	bit	battered.	Twenty-nine
left	in	the	crew,	plus	you	and	me	and	our	guests.	Ten	in	a	launch	and	we’ll	be
awash	at	the	first	whitecap.	I	ain’t	good	at	numbers	but	I	think	we’re	off	some.
Could	be	people	holding	on	in	the	water.	But	not	for	long,	with	all	those	sharks
hanging	around.	Ideal	is	eight	to	a	boat.	We	should	get	down	to	that	quick
enough.	But	your	trunk,	well,	that	messes	up	my	figuring.’
‘Skorgen,	do	you	recall	loading	my	trunk?’
‘No.’
‘That’s	because	I	don’t	have	one.	It	was	a	figure	of	speech.’
‘That’s	a	relief,	then.	Besides,’	he	added,	‘you	probably	wouldn’t	have	the
time	to	pack	it	anyway.	We	could	roll	in	the	next	breath,	or	so	I’m	told.’
‘Errant	take	me,	get	our	guests	up	here!’


He	pointed	behind	her.	‘There’s	the	well-born	one	just	coming	up,	Captain.
She’ll	float	high	in	the	water,	that	she	will,	until	the—’
‘Lower	the	launches	and	round	up	the	crew,	Skorgen,’	Shurq	said,	stepping
past	him	and	making	her	way	to	the	princess.
‘Ah,	Captain,	I	really	must—’
‘No	time,	Highness.	Get	your	handmaiden	and	whatever	clothes	you’ll
need	to	stay	warm.	The	ship	is	going	down	and	we	need	to	get	to	the	launches.’
Blinking	owlishly,	Felash	looked	round.	‘That	seems	rather	extreme.’
‘Does	it?’
‘Yes.	I	would	imagine	that	abandoning	ship	is	one	of	the	very	last	things
one	would	wish	to	do,	when	at	sea.’
Shurq	Elalle	nodded.	‘Indeed,	Highness.	Especially	while	at	sea.’
‘Well,	are	there	no	alternatives?	It	is	unlike	you	to	panic.’
‘Do	I	appear	to	be	panicking?’
‘Your	crew	is—’
‘Modestly	so,	Highness,	since	we	don’t	quite	have	the	room	needed	to	take
everyone,	meaning	that	some	of	them	are	about	to	die	in	the	jaws	of	sharks.	My
understanding	is,	such	a	death	is	rather	unpleasant,	at	least	to	begin	with.’
‘Oh	dear.	Well,	what	can	be	done?’
‘I	am	open	to	suggestions,	Highness.’
‘Perhaps	a	ritual	of	salvation…’
‘A	what?’
Plump	fingers	fluttered.	‘Let	us	assess	the	situation,	shall	we?	The	storm
has	split	the	hull,	correct?’
‘We	hit	something,	Highness.	I	am	hoping	it	was	Mael’s	head.	We	cannot
effect	repairs,	and	our	pumps	have	failed	in	stemming	the	tide.	As	you	may
note,	to	starboard,	we	are	very	nearly	awash	amidships.	If	we	were	not
becalmed,	we	would	have	rolled	by	now.’
‘Presumably,	the	hold	is	full	of	water.’
‘A	fair	presumption,	Highness.’
‘It	needs	to	be—’
A	terrible	groaning	sound	reverberated	through	the	deck	at	their	feet.
Felash’s	eyes	went	wide.	‘Oh,	what	is	that?’
‘That	is	us,	Highness.	Sinking.	Now,	you	mentioned	a	ritual.	If	it	involves	a
certain	Elder	God	of	the	seas,	I	should	warn	you,	I	cannot	vouch	for	your	wellbeing	should	my	crew	learn	of	it.’
‘Really?	How	distressing.	Well,	a	ritual	such	as	the	one	I	am	suggesting
may	not	necessarily	involve	that	decidedly	unpleasant	individual.	In	fact—’
‘Forgive	me	for	interrupting,	Highness,	but	it	has	just	occurred	to	me	that


this	particular	contest	of	understatement	is	about	to	be	fatally	terminated.	While
I	have	thoroughly	enjoyed	it,	I	now	believe	you	have	been	a	truly	unwitting
participant.	How	well	can	you	swim,	since	I	believe	we	shall	not	have	time	to
reach	the	launches…’
‘For	goodness’	sake.’	Felash	turned	about,	gauging	the	scene	on	all	sides.
Then	she	gestured.
The	Undying	Gratitude	shuddered.	Water	foamed	up	from	the	hatch.
Rigging	whipped	as	if	in	a	gale,	the	stumps	of	the	shattered	masts	quivering.
The	ship	grunted	as	it	pitched	level	again.	To	either	side	the	water	swirled.
Shouts	of	fright	came	from	the	two	launches,	and	Shurq	Elalle	heard	the
screams	commanding	axes	to	the	lines.	A	moment	later	she	saw	both	lifeboats
pulling	away,	neither	one	fully	manned,	whilst	the	rest	of	her	crew,	along	with
Skorgen	Kaban,	bellowed	and	cursed	from	where	they	clung	to	the	port
gunwale.	Water	washed	across	the	mid-deck.
Princess	Felash	was	studying	the	lay	of	the	ship,	one	finger	to	her	plump,
painted	lips.	‘We	must	drain	the	hold,’	she	said,	‘before	we	dare	lift	her	higher.
Agreed,	Captain?	Lest	the	weight	of	the	water	break	the	hull	apart?’
‘What	are	you	doing?’	Shurq	demanded.
‘Why,	saving	us,	of	course.	And	your	ship,	which	we	still	need	despite	its
deplorable	condition.’
‘Deplorable?	She’s	just	fine,	damn	you!	Or	she	would	be,	if	you	hadn’t—’
‘Now	now,	Captain,	manners,	please.	I	am	nobility,	after	all.’
‘Of	course,	Highness.	Now,	please	save	my	sorry	ship,	and	once	that	is
done,	we	can	discuss	other	matters	at	our	leisure.’
‘Excellent	suggestion,	Captain.’
‘If	you	could	have	done	this	at	any	time,	Highness—’
‘Could,	yes.	Should,	most	certainly	not.	Once	more	we	bargain	with
terrible	forces.	And	once	more,	a	price	must	be	paid.	So	much	for	“never
again”!’
Shurq	Elalle	glanced	over	at	her	first	mate	and	crew.	The	deck	they	stood
upon	was	no	longer	under	water,	and	the	sound	of	a	hundred	pumps	thundered
the	length	of	the	hull.	But	we	don’t	have	a	hundred	pumps	and	besides,	no	one	is
down	there.	‘It’s	Mael	again,	isn’t	it?’
Felash	glanced	over,	lashes	fluttering.	‘Alas,	no.	The	difficulty	we’re
having	at	the	moment,	you	see,	stems	precisely	from	our	deliberate	avoidance
of	that	personage.	After	all,	this	is	his	realm,	and	he	is	not	one	to	welcome
rivals.	Therefore,	we	must	impose	a	physicality	that	resists	Mael’s	power.’
‘Highness,	is	this	the	royal	“we”?’
‘Ah,	do	you	feel	it,	Captain?’


Thick,	billowing	fog	now	rose	around	the	ship	–	the	two	lifeboats
disappeared	from	sight,	and	their	crews’	cries	were	suddenly	silenced,	as	if
those	men	and	women	ceased	to	exist.	In	the	dread	hush	that	followed,	Shurq
Elalle	saw	Skorgen	and	her	remaining	dozen	sailors	huddling	down	on	the
deck,	their	breaths	pluming,	frost	sparkling	to	life	on	all	sides.
‘Highness—’
‘What	a	relief	from	that	heat,	don’t	you	agree?	But	we	must	now	be	stern	in
our	position.	To	give	up	too	much	at	this	moment	could	well	prove	fatal.’
‘Highness,’	Shurq	tried	again,	‘who	do	we	bargain	with	now?’
‘The	Holds	are	half	forgotten	by	most,	especially	the	long	dormant	ones.
Imagine	our	surprise,	then,	when	a	frozen	corpse	should	awaken	and	rise	into
the	realm	of	life	once	more,	after	countless	centuries.	Oh,	they’re	a	hoary
bunch,	the	Jaghut,	but,	you	know,	I	still	hold	to	a	soft	regard	for	them,	despite
all	their	extravagances.	Why,	in	the	mountains	of	North	Bolkando	there	are
tombs,	and	as	for	the	Guardians,	well—’
‘Jaghut,	Highness?	Is	that	what	you	said?	Jaghut?’
‘Surely	this	must	be	panic,	Captain,	your	constant	and	increasingly	rude
interruptions—’
‘You’re	locking	us	all	in	ice?’
‘Omtose	Phellack,	Captain.	The	Throne	of	Ice,	do	you	see?	It	is	awake
once	more—’
Shurq	advanced	on	Felash.	‘What	is	the	bargain,	Princess?’
‘We	can	worry	about	that	later—’
‘No!	We	will	worry	about	it	right	now!’
‘I	cannot	say	I	appreciate	such	an	imperious	tone,	Captain	Elalle.	Observe
how	steady	settles	the	ship.	Ice	is	frozen	in	the	cracks	in	the	hull	and	the	hold	is
dry,	if	rather	cold.	The	fog,	unfortunately,	we	won’t	be	able	to	escape,	as	we
are	chilling	the	water	around	us	nigh	unto	freezing.	Now,	this	current,	I
understand,	will	carry	us	northward,	to	landfall,	in	about	three	days.	An
unoccupied	shoreline,	with	a	sound,	protected	natural	harbour,	where	we	can
make	repairs—’
‘Repairs?	I’ve	just	lost	half	my	crew!’
‘We	don’t	need	them.’
Skorgen	Kaban	clumped	over.	‘Captain!	Are	we	dead?	Is	this	Mael’s
Curse?	Do	we	travel	the	Seas	of	Death?	Is	this	the	Lifeless	River?	Skull	Ocean?
Are	we	betwixt	the	Horns	of	Dire	and	Lost?	In	the	Throes	of—’
‘Gods	below!	Is	there	no	end	to	these	euphemisms	for	being	dead?’
‘Aye,	and	the	Euphemeral	Deeps,	too!	The	crew’s	got	questions,	y’see—’
‘Tell	them	our	luck	holds,	Skorgen,	and	those	hasty	ones	in	the	boats,	well,


that’s	what	comes	of	not	believing	in	your	captain	and	first	mate.	Got	that?’
‘Oh,	they’ll	like	that	one,	Captain,	since	a	moment	ago	they	was	cursing
themselves	for	being	too	slow	off	the	mark.’
‘The	very	opposite	to	be	sure,	First	Mate.	Off	you	go,	then.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
Shurq	Elalle	faced	the	princess	again.	‘To	my	cabin	if	you	please,
Highness.	The	bargain.’
‘The	bargain?	Oh,	indeed.	That.	As	you	wish,	but	first,	well,	I	need	to
change,	lest	I	catch	a	chill.’
‘May	the	Errant	look	away,	Highness.’
‘He	is,	dear,	he	is.’
Shurq	watched	the	young	woman	walk	to	the	hatch.	‘Dear’?	Well,	maybe
she’s	older	than	she	looks.
No,	what	she	is	is	a	condescending,	pampered	princess.	Oh,	if	only	Ublala
was	on	board,	he’d	set	her	right	in	no	time.	The	thought	forced	out	a	snort	of
amusement.	‘Careful!’	she	admonished	herself,	and	then	frowned.	Oh,	I	see.
I’m	freezing	solid.	No	leakage	for	the	next	little	while,	I	guess.	Best	get	moving.
And	keep	moving.	She	looked	round,	if	somewhat	stiffly.
Yes,	the	ship	was	on	the	move,	riding	a	current	already	lumpy	with	ice.	The
fog	embraced	them,	their	very	own	private	cloud.	We	travel	blind.
‘Captain!	Crew	wants	t’know,	is	this	the	White	Road?’
	
‘Provisions.’
Destriant	Kalyth	looked	across	at	the	Shield	Anvil.	‘There	are	drones.	And
wagon	beds	where	food	grows.	Matron	Gunth	Mach	prepares	us.	We	shall
wander	as	the	great	herds	once	wandered.’
The	red-bearded	man	rose	on	the	Ve’Gath’s	stirrups	of	hide	and	bone.
‘Great	herds?	Where?’
‘Well,	they	all	died.’
Stormy	scowled.	‘Died	how?’
‘Mostly,	we	killed	them,	Shield	Anvil.	The	Elan	were	more	than	just
keepers	of	myrid	and	rodara.	We	also	hunted.	We	fought	over	possession	of
wild	herds	and	crossings,	and	when	we	lost,	why,	we’d	poison	the	beasts	to
spite	our	enemies.	Or	destroy	the	crossings,	so	that	animals	drowned	on	their
migrations.	We	were	one	with	the	land.’
From	her	other	side,	Gesler	snorted.	‘Who’s	been	opening	your	eyes,
Kalyth?’
She	shrugged.	‘Our	spirit	gods	starved.	What	did	we	do	wrong?	Nothing,


we	didn’t	change	a	thing.	We	lived	as	we’d	always	lived.	And	it	was	murderous.
The	wild	beasts	vanished.	The	land	dried	up.	We	fought	each	other,	and	then
came	the	Adjudicators.	Out	from	the	east.’
‘Who	were	they?’
Bitterness	stung	her	words.	‘Our	judgement,	Shield	Anvil.	They	looked
upon	our	deeds.	They	followed	the	course	of	our	lives,	our	endless	stupidities.
And	they	decided	that	our	reign	of	abuse	must	end.’	She	shot	the	man	a	look.	‘I
should	have	died	with	my	kin.	Instead,	I	ran	away.	I	left	them	all	to	die.	Even	my
own	children.’
‘A	terrible	thing,’	muttered	Stormy,	‘but	the	crime	was	with	those
Adjudicators.	Your	people	would	have	had	to	change	their	ways	sooner	or
later.	No,	the	blood	is	on	their	hands.’
‘Tell	us	more	about	them,’	Gesler	said.
She	was	riding	a	Ve’Gath,	as	were	her	companions.	The	thump	of	the	huge
Che’Malle’s	clawed	feet	seemed	far	below	her.	She	could	barely	feel	their
impacts	on	the	hard	ground.	The	sky	was	dull,	cloudy	over	a	grey	landscape.
Behind	them	the	two	children,	Sinn	and	Grub,	shared	another	Ve’Gath.	They
hardly	ever	spoke;	in	fact,	Kalyth	could	not	recall	ever	hearing	Sinn’s	voice,
though	Grub	had	let	on	that	her	apparent	muteness	was	habit	rather	than	an
affliction.
Creatures	of	fire.	Demonspawn.	Gesler	and	Stormy	know	them,	but	even
they	are	not	easy	in	their	company.	No,	I	do	not	like	our	two	children.
Kalyth	took	a	moment	to	gather	her	thoughts.	‘The	Adjudicators	had	risen
to	power	first	in	Kolanse,’	she	said	after	a	time.	She	didn’t	want	to	remember
them,	didn’t	want	to	think	about	any	of	that,	but	she	forced	herself	to	continue.
‘When	we	first	heard	of	them,	in	our	camps,	the	stories	came	from	caravan
guards	and	traders.	They	spoke	nervously,	with	fear	in	their	eyes.	“Not
human,”	they	said.	They	were	priests.	Their	cult	was	founded	on	the	Spire,
which	is	promontory	in	the	bay	of	Kolanse,	and	it	was	there	that	they	first
settled,	building	a	temple	and	then	a	fortress.’
‘So	they	were	foreigners?’	Gesler	asked.
‘Yes.	From	somewhere	called	the	Wretched	Coast.	All	I	have	heard	of	this
is	second-hand.	They	arrived	in	ships	of	bone.	The	Spire	was	unoccupied	–
who	would	choose	to	live	on	cursed	land?	And	to	begin	with	there	was	but	one
ship,	crewed	by	slaves,	and	twelve	or	thirteen	priests	and	priestesses.	Hardly	an
invasion,	as	far	as	the	king	of	Kolanse	was	concerned.	And	when	they	sent	an
emissary	to	his	court,	he	welcomed	her.	The	native	priesthoods	were	not	as
pleased	and	they	warned	their	king,	but	he	overruled	them.	The	audience	was
granted.	The	Adjudicator	was	arrogant.	She	spoke	of	justice	as	if	her	people


alone	were	its	iron	hand.	Indeed,	that	emissary	pointed	a	finger	upon	the	king
himself	and	pronounced	his	fall.’
‘I	bet	he	wasn’t	so	pleased	any	more,’	Stormy	said	with	a	grunt.	‘He	lopped
the	fool’s	head	off,	I	hope.’
‘He	tried,’	Kalyth	replied.	‘Soldiers	and	then	sorcery	–	the	throne	room
became	a	slaughterhouse,	and	when	the	battle	was	over	she	alone	strode	out
from	the	palace.	And	in	the	harbour	were	a	hundred	more	ships	of	bone.	This
is	how	the	horror	began.’
Gesler	twisted	in	his	saddle	and	seemed	to	study	the	two	children	for	a
moment,	before	facing	forward	again.	‘Destriant,	how	long	ago	was	this?’
She	shrugged.	‘Fifty,	sixty	years	ago.	The	Adjudicators	scoured	out	all	the
other	priesthoods.	More	and	more	of	their	own	followers	arrived,	season	after
season.	The	Watered,	they	were	called.	Those	with	human	blood	in	them.	Those
first	twelve	or	so,	they	were	the	Pures.	From	Estobanse	Province	–	the	richest
land	of	Kolanse	–	they	spread	their	power	outward,	enforcing	their	will.	They
were	not	interested	in	waging	war	upon	the	common	people,	and	by	voice
alone	they	could	make	entire	armies	kneel.	From	Kolanse	they	began	toppling
one	dynasty	after	another	–	in	all	the	south	kingdoms,	those	girdling	the
Pelasiar	Sea,	until	all	the	lands	were	under	their	control.’	She	shuddered.	‘They
were	cruel	masters.	There	was	drought.	Starvation.	They	called	it	the	Age	of
Justice,	and	left	the	people	to	die.	Those	who	objected	they	executed,	those	who
sought	to	rise	against	them,	they	annihilated.	Before	long,	they	reached	the
lands	of	my	people.	They	crushed	us	like	fleas.’
‘Ges,’	said	Stormy	after	a	time,	‘if	not	human,	then	what?’
‘Kalyth,	are	these	Adjudicators	tusked?’
‘Tusked?	No.’
‘Describe	them.’
‘They	are	tall,	gaunt.	Their	skin	is	white	as	alabaster,	and	their	limbs	do	not
move	as	do	those	of	humans.	From	their	elbows,	they	can	bend	their	lower
arms	in	all	directions.	It	is	said	their	bodies	are	hinged,	as	if	they	had	two	sets
of	hips,	one	stacked	atop	the	other.	And	they	can	stand	like	us,	or	with	legs	like
those	of	a	horse.	No	weapon	can	reach	them,	and	a	single	touch	from	their
long	fingers	can	shatter	all	the	bones	in	a	warrior ’s	body.	Sorcerous	attacks
drain	down	from	them	like	water.’
‘Is	it	the	same	for	the	Watered,’	Gesler	wanted	to	know,	‘or	just	the	Pures?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Have	you	seen	one	of	these	Adjudicators	with	your	own	eyes?’
She	hesitated,	and	then	shook	her	head.
‘But	your	tribe—’


‘We	heard	they	were	coming.	We	knew	they	would	kill	us	all.	I	ran.’
‘Hood’s	breath!’	barked	Stormy.	‘So	you	don’t	know	if	they	ever—’
‘I	snuck	back,	days	later,	Shield	Anvil.’	She	had	to	force	the	words	out,	her
mouth	dry	as	dust,	her	thoughts	cold	as	a	corpse.	‘They	were	thorough.’	I
snuck	back.	But	is	that	even	true?	Or	did	I	just	dream	that?	The	broken	faces	of
my	children,	so	still.	My	husband,	his	spine	twisted	impossibly,	his	eyes	staring.
The	dead	dogs,	the	shamans’	heads	on	poles.	And	the	blood,	everywhere	–	even
my	tears…	‘I	ran.	I	am	the	last	of	my	people.’
‘This	drought	you	mentioned,’	Gesler	said,	‘had	it	struck	before	these
Adjudicators	arrived,	or	after?’
‘Estobanse	thrives	on	springs.	A	valley	province,	with	vast	mountains	to
the	north	and	another	range	to	the	south.	The	sea	to	the	east	and	plains	to	the
west.	The	droughts	were	in	the	south	kingdoms,	and	in	the	other	Kolanse
territories.	I	do	not	know	when	they	started,	Mortal	Sword,	but	even	in	the	tales
from	my	childhood	I	seem	to	recall	grief	lying	heavy	upon	the	settled	lands.’
‘And	the	Elan	Plains?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Always	dry,	always	trouble	–	it	is	why	the	clans
fought	so	much.	We	were	running	out	of	everything.	I	was	a	child.	A	child	gets
used	to	things,	it	all	feels…normal	–	for	all	the	years	I	was	with	my	people,	it
was	like	that.’
‘So	what	brought	the	Adjudicators	to	the	place,’	Gesler	wondered,	‘if	it
was	already	suffering?’
‘Weakness,’	said	Stormy.	‘Take	any	starving	land,	and	you’ll	find	a	fat
king.	Nobody’d	weep	at	that	slaughter	in	the	throne	room.	Priests	blathering	on
about	justice.	Must	have	sounded	sweet,	at	least	to	start	with.’
‘Aye,’	Gesler	agreed.	‘Still,	that	Spire,	where	they	built	their	temple	–
Kalyth,	you	called	it	cursed.	Why?’
‘It	is	where	a	star	fell	from	the	sky,’	she	explained.
‘Recently?’
‘No,	long	ago,	but	round	the	promontory	the	seawater	is	red	as	blood	–
and	nothing	can	live	in	that	water.’
‘Did	any	of	that	change	once	the	Adjudicators	installed	their	temple?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	have	never	seen	the	place	–	please,	I	just	don’t	know.	I
don’t	even	know	why	we’re	marching	in	this	direction.	There	is	nothing	to	the
east	–	nothing	but	bones.’	She	glared	at	Gesler.	‘Where’s	your	army	of	allies?
Dead!	We	need	to	find	somewhere	else	to	go.	We	need—	’	somewhere	to	hide.
Ancestors	forgive	me.	No,	her	fears	were	all	too	close	to	the	surface.	A	score	of
questions	could	rip	through	her	thin	skin	–	it	hadn’t	taken	much,	had	it?
‘We	don’t	know	that,’	Stormy	said,	chewing	at	his	moustache	and	not


meeting	her	eyes.
I’m	sorry.	I	know.
‘When	Gu’Rull	gets	back,’	Gesler	said	in	a	low	tone,	‘we’ll	know	more.	In
the	meantime,	on	we	go,	Destriant.	No	point	in	doing	anything	else.’
She	nodded.	I	know.	Forgive	me.	Forgive	us	all.

Their	power	was	a	dark,	swirling	stain,	spinning	out	like	a	river	at	the	head	of
the	vast,	snaking	column.	Gu’Rull	studied	the	manifestation	from	above,	where
he	was	gliding	just	beneath	the	thick	overcast	which	had	spread	down	from	the
northwest.	His	wounds	were	healing,	and	he	had	travelled	far,	ranging	out	over
the	Wastelands.
He	had	observed	the	tattered	remnants	of	human	armies,	swollen	with
massive	trains.	And	south	of	them	but	drawing	closer	by	the	day	another	force,
the	ranks	disciplined	in	their	march,	unblooded	and,	as	far	as	such	things	went,
formidable.	Despite	the	commands	of	the	Mortal	Sword,	neither	force	was	of
much	interest	to	the	Shi’gal	Assassin.	No,	the	knots	of	power	he	had	sensed
elsewhere	were	far	more	fascinating,	but	of	them	all,	not	one	compared	to	that
which	emanated	from	the	two	human	children,	Sinn	and	Grub.	Travelling
there,	at	the	very	head	of	the	Gunthan	Nest.
Of	course,	it	could	be	called	‘Nest’	no	longer,	could	it?	There	was	no
room,	no	solid,	protected	roost	for	the	last	clan	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
Even	leadership	had	been	surrendered.	To	three	humans.	There	was	no
doubt	that	without	them	the	Che’Malle	would	have	been	destroyed	by	the
Nah’ruk.	Three	humans,	clad	in	strange	titles,	and	two	children,	wearing	little
more	than	rags.
So	many	lusted	after	power.	It	was	the	crushing	step	of	history,	in	every
civilization	that	had	ever	existed.	Gu’Rull	had	no	taste	for	it.	Better	that	more
of	his	kind	existed,	behind	every	throne,	to	cut	the	throat	at	the	first	hint	of	mad
ambition.	Enough	heads	rolling	down	the	ages	and	perhaps	the	lesson	would
finally	be	learned,	though	he	doubted	it.
The	assassin	must	never	die.	The	shadows	must	ever	remain.	We	hold	the
world	in	check.	We	are	the	arbiters	of	reason.	It	is	our	duty,	our	purpose.
I	have	seen	them.	I	have	seen	what	they	can	do,	and	the	joy	in	their	eyes	at
the	devastation	they	can	unleash.	But	their	throats	are	soft.	If	I	must,	I	will	rid
the	world	of	them.	The	power	was	sickly,	a	swathe	of	something	vile.	It	leaked
from	their	indifferent	minds	and	fouled	the	sweet	scents	of	his	kin	–	their	joy	at


victory,	their	gratitude	to	the	Mortal	Sword	and	the	Shield	Anvil,	their	love	for
Kalyth,	the	Destriant	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Their	faith	in	a	new	future.
But	these	children.	They	need	to	die.	Soon.
	
‘Forkrul	Assail,’	whispered	Grub	into	Sinn’s	ear.	‘The	Crystal	City	knew	them,
even	the	Watered	ones.	It	holds	the	memory	of	them.	Sinn,	they	are	at	the	centre
of	the	war	–	they’re	the	ones	the	Adjunct	is	hunting.’
‘No	more,’	she	hissed	back	at	him.	‘Don’t	talk.	What	if	they	hear	you?’
He	sniffed.	‘You	think	they	don’t	know?	Gesler	and	Stormy?	Forkrul
Assail,	Sinn,	but	now	she’s	wounded.	Badly	wounded.	We	need	to	stop	her,	or
the	Bonehunters	will	get	slaughtered—’
‘If	there’re	any	of	them	left.’
‘There	are.	Reach	with	your	mind—’
‘That’s	her	sword	–	that	barrier	that	won’t	let	us	in.	Her	Otataral	sword.’
‘Meaning	she’s	still	alive—’
‘No,	just	that	somebody’s	carrying	it.	Could	be	Brys	Beddict,	could	be
Warleader	Gall.	We	don’t	know,	we	can’t	get	close	enough	to	find	out.’
‘Gu’Rull—’
‘Wants	us	dead.’
Grub	flinched.	‘What	did	we	ever	do	to	him?	Except	save	his	hide.’
‘Him	and	all	the	other	lizards.	Doesn’t	matter.	We	might	turn	on	them	all,
and	who	could	stop	us?’
‘You	could	turn	on	’em.	I	won’t.	So	I’ll	be	the	one	stopping	you.	Don’t	try
it,	Sinn.’
‘We’re	in	this	together,’	she	said.	‘Partners.	I	was	just	saying.	It’s	why	that
assassin	hates	us.	Nobody	controls	us	but	us.	Grownups	always	hate	that.’
‘Forkrul	Assail.	Gesler	wants	to	join	this	army	to	the	Adjunct’s	–	that	has
to	be	what	he’s	planning,	isn’t	it?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Probably.’
‘So	we	will	fight	Forkrul	Assail.’
She	flashed	him	a	wicked	smile.	‘Like	flies,	I	will	pluck	their	legs	off.’
‘Who’s	the	girl?’
Sinn	rolled	her	eyes.	‘Not	again.	I’m	sick	of	talking	about	her.’
‘She’s	in	the	Crystal	City.	She’s	waiting	for	us.’
‘She’s	insane,	that’s	what	she	is.	You	felt	that,	you	had	to.	We	both	felt	it.
No,	let’s	not	talk	about	her	any	more.’
‘You’re	afraid	of	her,’	Grub	said.	‘Because	maybe	she’s	stronger	than	both
of	us.’


‘Aren’t	you?	You	should	be.’
‘At	night,’	said	Grub,	‘I	dream	of	red	eyes.	Opening.	Just	opening.	That’s
all.’
‘Never	mind	that	dream,’	she	said,	looking	away.
He	could	feel	all	her	muscles,	tight	and	wiry,	and	he	knew	that	this	was	an
embrace	he	could	not	hold	on	to	for	very	much	longer.	She’s	scarier	than	the
assassin.	You	in	the	Crystal	City,	are	you	as	frightened	as	me?
‘Stupid	dream,’	said	Sinn.

It	was	midday.	Gesler	called	a	halt.	The	vast	column	stopped	en	masse,	and	then
drones	stepped	out	to	begin	preparations	for	feeding.
Wincing	as	he	extricated	himself	from	the	scaled	saddle	of	the	Ve’Gath,
noting	with	relief	that	the	welts	on	the	beast’s	flanks	were	healing,	the	Mortal
Sword	dropped	down	to	the	ground.	‘Stormy,	let’s	stretch	our	legs—’
‘I	don’t	need	help	taking	a	piss.’
‘After	that,	idiot.’
Stretching	out	the	aches	in	his	lower	back,	he	walked	out	from	the	column,
making	a	point	of	ignoring	Sinn	and	Grub	as	they	clambered	down.	Every
damned	morning	since	the	battle,	he’d	half	expected	to	find	them	gone.	He
wasn’t	fool	enough	to	think	he	had	any	control	over	them.	Torching	sky-keeps
like	pine	cones,	Hood	save	us	all.
Stormy	appeared,	spitting	on	his	hands	to	wash	them.	‘That	fucking
assassin	doesn’t	want	to	come	down.	Bad	news?’
‘I	doubt	he’d	quake	over	delivering	that,	Stormy.	No,	he’s	just	making	a
point.’
‘Soon	as	he	comes	down,’	Stormy	growled,	‘my	fist	will	make	one	of	its
own.’
Gesler	laughed.	‘You	couldn’t	reach	its	snarly	snout,	not	even	with	a
ladder.	What	are	you	going	to	do,	punch	its	kneecap?’
‘Maybe,	why	not?	Bet	it’d	hurt	something	awful.’
Gesler	drew	off	his	helmet.	‘Forkrul	Assail,	Stormy.	Hood’s	hairy	bag.’
‘If	she’s	still	alive,	she	must	be	having	second	thoughts.	Who	knows	how
many	the	Nah’ruk	ate?	For	all	we	know,	there’s	only	a	handful	of	Bonehunters
left.’
‘I	doubt	it,’	Gesler	said.	‘There’s	standing	and	taking	it	when	that’s	what
you	have	to	do.	And	then	there’s	cutting	out	and	setting	fire	to	your	own	ass.


She	didn’t	want	that	fight.	So	they	ran	into	her.	She	would’ve	done	what	she
needed	to	do	to	pull	her	soldiers	out	of	it.	It	was	probably	messy,	but	it	wasn’t	a
complete	annihilation.’
‘If	you	say	so.’
‘Look,	it’s	a	fighting	withdrawal	until	you	can	reasonably	break.	You
narrow	your	front.	You	throw	your	heavies	into	that	wall,	and	then	you	let
yourself	get	pushed	backward,	step	after	step,	until	it’s	time	to	turn	and	run.
And	if	the	Letherii	were	worth	anything,	they’d	have	bled	off	some	pressure.
Best	case	scenario,	we	lost	about	a	thousand—’
‘Mostly	heavies	and	marines	–	the	heart	of	the	army,	Ges—’
‘So	you	find	a	new	one.	A	thousand.’
‘Worst	case?	Not	a	heavy	left,	not	a	marine	left,	with	the	regulars	broken
and	scattering	like	hares.’
Gesler	glared	at	Stormy.	‘I’m	supposed	to	be	the	pessimist	here,	not	you.’
‘Get	the	Matron	to	order	that	assassin	down	here.’
‘I	will.’
‘When?’
‘When	I	feel	like	it.’
Stormy’s	face	reddened.	‘You’re	still	a	Hood-shitting	sergeant,	you	know
that?	Mortal	Sword?	Mortal	Bunghole	is	more	like	it!	Gods,	to	think	I	been
taking	orders	from	you	for	how	long?’
‘Well,	who’s	a	better	Shield	Anvil	than	a	man	with	an	anvil	for	a	head?’
Stormy	grunted,	and	then	said,	‘I’m	hungry.’
‘Aye,’	said	Gesler.	‘Let’s	go	and	eat.’
They	set	out	for	the	feeding	area.
‘Do	you	remember,	when	we	were	young	–	too	young?	That	cliff—’
‘Don’t	go	on	about	that	damned	cliff,	Stormy.	I	still	get	nightmares	about
it.’
‘It’s	guilt	you’re	feeling.’
Gesler	halted.	‘Guilt?	You	damned	fool.	I	saved	your	life	up	there!’
‘After	nearly	killing	me!	If	that	rock	coming	down	had	hit	me	in	the	head
—’
‘But	it	didn’t,	did	it?	No,	just	your	shoulder.	A	tap,	a	bit	of	dust,	and	then	I
—’
‘The	point	is,’	Stormy	interrupted,	‘we	did	stupid	things	back	then.	We
should’ve	learned,	only	it’s	turning	out	we	never	learned	a	damned	thing.’
‘That’s	not	the	problem,’	Gesler	retorted.	‘We	got	busted	down	all	those
times	for	good	reason.	We	can’t	handle	responsibilities,	that’s	our	problem.	We
start	bickering	–	you	start	thinking	and	that’s	as	bad	as	bad	can	get.	Stop


thinking,	Stormy,	and	that’s	an	order.’
‘You	can’t	order	me,	I’m	the	Shield	Anvil,	and	if	I	want	to	think,	that’s
damn	well	what	I’ll	do.’
Gesler	set	out	again.	‘Be	sure	to	let	me	know	when	you	start.	In	the
meantime,	stop	moaning	about	everything.	It’s	tiresome.’
‘You	strutting	around	like	High	King	of	the	Universe	is	pretty	tiresome,
too.’
‘Look	there	–	more	porridge.	Hood’s	breath,	Stormy,	I’m	already	so
bunged	up	I	could	pick	my	nose	and—’
‘It	ain’t	porridge.	It’s	mould.’
‘Fungus,	idiot.’
‘What’s	the	difference?	All	I	know	is,	those	drones	are	growing	it	in	their
own	armpits.’
‘Now	you	done	it,	Stormy.	I	told	you	to	stop	complaining.’
‘Well,	once	I	think	up	a	reason	to	stop	complaining,	I	will.	But	then,	I’m
not	supposed	to	think,	am	I?	Hah!’
Gesler	scowled.	‘Gods	below,	Stormy,	but	I’m	feeling	old.’
The	red-bearded	man	paused,	and	then	nodded.	‘Aye.	It’s	bloody	miserable.
I	might	be	dead	in	a	month,	that’s	how	I	feel.	Aches	and	twinges,	all	the	rest.	I
need	a	woman.	I	need	ten	women.	Rumjugs	and	Sweetlard,	that’s	who	I	need	–
why	didn’t	that	assassin	steal	them,	too?	Then	I’d	be	happy.’
‘There’s	always	Kalyth,’	Gesler	said	under	his	breath.
‘I	can’t	roger	the	Destriant.	It’s	not	allowed.’
‘She’s	comely	enough.	Been	a	mother,	too—’
‘What’s	so	special	about	that?’
‘Their	tits	been	used,	right?	And	their	hips	are	all	looser.	That’s	a	real
woman,	Stormy.	She’ll	know	what	to	do	under	the	furs.	And	then	there’s	that
look	in	the	eye	–	stop	gawking,	you	know	what	I	mean.	A	woman	who’s
dropped	a	baby	has	got	this	look	–	they	been	through	the	worst	and	come	out
the	other	side.	So	they	do	that	up	and	down	thing	and	you	know	that	they	know
they	can	reduce	you	to	quivering	meat	if	they	wanted	to.	Mothers,	Stormy.	Give
me	a	mother	over	any	other	woman	every	time,	that’s	what	I’m	saying.’
‘You’re	sick.’
‘If	it	wasn’t	for	me	you’d	still	be	clinging	halfway	up	that	cliff,	a	clutch	of
bones	with	birds	nesting	in	your	hair	and	spiders	in	your	eye	sockets.’
‘If	it	wasn’t	for	you	I’d	never	have	tried	climbing	it.’
‘Yes	you	would.’
‘Why	do	you	say	that?’
‘Because,	Stormy,	you	never	think.’


	
He’d	gathered	things.	Small	things.	Shiny	stones,	shards	of	crystal,	twigs	from
the	fruit	trees,	and	he	carried	them	about,	and	when	he	could	he’d	sit	down	on
the	floor	and	set	them	out,	making	mysterious	patterns	or	perhaps	no	patterns,
just	random	settings.	And	then	he’d	look	at	them,	and	that	was	all.
The	whole	ritual,	now	that	she’d	witnessed	it	dozens	of	times,	deeply
disturbed	Badalle,	but	she	didn’t	know	why.
Saddic	has	things	in	a	bag
He’s	a	boy	trying	to	remember
Though	I	tell	him	not	to
Remembering’s	dead
Remembering’s	stones	and	twigs
In	a	bag	and	each	time	they	come	out
I	see	dust	on	his	hands
We	choose	not	remembering
To	keep	the	peace	inside	our	heads
We	were	young	once
But	now	we	are	ghosts	in	the	dreams
Of	the	living.
Rutt	holds	a	baby	in	a	bag
And	Held	remembers	everything
But	will	not	speak,	not	to	us.
Held	dreams	of	twigs	and	stones
And	knows	what	they	are.
She	thought	to	give	Saddic	these	words,	knowing	he	would	hide	them	in
the	story	he	was	telling	behind	his	eyes,	and	then	it	occurred	to	her	that	he
didn’t	need	to	hear	to	know,	and	the	story	he	was	telling	was	beyond	the	reach
of	anyone.	I	am	trapped	in	his	story.	I	have	flown	in	the	sky,	but	the	sky	is	the
dome	of	Saddic’s	skull,	and	there	is	no	way	out.	Look	at	him	studying	his	things,
see	the	confusion	on	his	face.	A	thin	face.	Hollowed	face.	Face	waiting	to	be
filled,	but	it	will	never	be	filled.	‘Icarias	fills	our	bellies,’	she	said,	‘and	starves
everything	else.’
Saddic	looked	up,	met	her	eyes,	and	then	looked	away.	Sounds	from	the
window,	voices	in	the	square	below.	Families	were	taking	root,	sliding	into	the
crystal	walls	and	ceilings,	the	floors	and	chambers.	Older	boys	became


pretend-fathers,	older	girls	became	pretend-mothers,	the	young	ones
scampered	but	never	for	long	–	they’d	run,	as	if	struck	with	excitement,	only	to
falter	after	a	few	steps,	faces	darkening	with	confusion	and	fear	as	they	ran
back	to	find	shelter	in	their	parents’	arms.
This	is	the	evil	of	remembering.
‘We	can’t	stay	here,’	she	said.	‘Someone	is	seeking	us.	We	need	to	go	and
find	them.	Rutt	knows.	That’s	why	he	walks	to	the	end	of	the	city	and	stares	into
the	west.	He	knows.’
Saddic	began	collecting	his	things.	Into	his	little	bag.	Like	a	boy	who’d
caught	something	out	of	the	corner	of	his	eye,	only	to	find	nothing	when	he
turned.
If	you	can’t	remember	it’s	because	you	never	had	what	it	is	you’re	trying	to
remember.	Saddic,	we’ve	run	out	of	gifts.	Don’t	lie	to	fill	up	your	past.	‘I	don’t
like	your	things,	Saddic.’
He	seemed	to	shrink	inside	himself	and	would	not	meet	her	eyes	as	he	tied
up	the	bag	and	tucked	it	inside	his	tattered	shirt.
I	don’t	like	them.	They	hurt.
‘I’m	going	to	find	Rutt.	We	need	to	get	ready.	Icarias	is	killing	us.’
	
‘I	knew	a	woman	once,	in	my	village.	Married.	Her	husband	was	a	man	you
wanted,	like	a	hot	stone	in	your	gut.	She’d	walk	with	him,	a	step	behind,	down
the	main	track	between	the	huts.	She’d	walk	and	she’d	stare	right	at	me	all	the
way.	You	know	why?	She	was	staring	at	me	to	keep	me	from	staring	at	him.	We
are	really	nothing	but	apes,	hairless	apes.	When	she’s	not	looking,	I’ll	piss	in
her	grass	nest	–	that’s	what	I	decided.	And	I’d	do	more	than	that.	I’d	seduce	her
man.	I’d	break	him.	His	honour,	his	integrity,	his	honesty.	I’d	break	him
between	my	legs.	So	when	she	walked	with	him	through	the	village,	she’d	do
anything	but	meet	my	eyes.	Anything.’
With	that,	Kisswhere	reached	for	the	jug.
The	Gilk	Warchief,	Spax,	studied	her	from	beneath	a	lowered	brow.	And
then	he	belched.	‘How	dangerous	is	love,	hey?’
‘Who	said	anything	about	love?’	she	retorted	with	a	loose	gesture	from	the
hand	holding	the	jug.	‘It’s	all	about	possession.	And	stealing.	That’s	what
makes	a	woman	wet,	what	makes	her	eyes	shine.	’Ware	the	dark	streak	in	a
woman’s	soul.’
‘Men	have	their	own,’	he	muttered.
She	drank,	and	then	swung	the	jug	back	to	his	waiting	hand.	‘Different.’
‘Mostly,	aye.	But	then,	maybe	not.’	He	swallowed	down	a	mouthful,	wiped


his	beard.	‘Possession	only	counts	for	too	much	in	a	man	afraid	of	losing
whatever	he	has.	If	he’s	settled	he	doesn’t	need	to	own,	but	then	how	many	of	us
are	settled?	Few,	I’d	wager.	We’re	restless	enough,	and	the	older	we	get,	the
more	restless	we	are.	The	misery	is,	the	one	thing	an	old	man	wants	to	possess
the	most	is	the	one	thing	he	can’t	have.’
‘What’s	that?’
‘Add	a	couple	of	decades	to	that	man	in	the	village	and	his	wife	won’t	have
to	stare	into	any	rival’s	eyes.’
She	grunted,	collected	up	her	stick	and	pushed	it	beneath	the	splints	binding
her	leg.	Scratched	vigorously.	‘Whatever	happened	to	decent	healing?’
‘They’re	saying	magic’s	damn	near	dead	in	these	lands.	How	nimble	are
you?’
‘Nimble	enough.’
‘How	drunk	are	you?’
‘Drunk	enough.’
‘Just	what	a	man	twice	her	age	wants	to	hear	from	a	woman.’
A	figure	stepped	into	the	firelight.	‘Warchief,	the	queen	summons	you.’
Sighing,	Spax	rose.	To	Kisswhere	he	said,	‘Hold	that	thought.’
‘Doesn’t	work	that	way,’	she	replied.	‘We	flowers	blossom	but	it’s	a	brief
blooming.	If	you	miss	your	chance,	well,	too	bad	for	you.	This	night,	at	least.’
‘You’re	a	damned	tease,	Malazan.’
‘Keeps	you	coming	back.’
He	thought	about	that,	and	then	snorted.	‘Maybe,	but	don’t	count	on	it.’
‘What	you	never	find	out	will	haunt	you	to	the	end	of	your	days,	Barghast.’
‘I	doubt	I’ll	miss	my	chance,	Kisswhere.	After	all,	how	fast	can	you	run?’
‘And	how	sharp	is	my	knife?’
Spax	laughed.	‘I’d	best	not	keep	her	highness	waiting.	Save	me	some	rum,
will	you?’
She	shrugged.	‘I’m	not	one	for	promises.’
	
Once	he’d	left,	Kisswhere	sat	alone.	Her	own	private	fire	out	beyond	the
useless	pickets,	her	own	promise	of	blisters	and	searing	guilt,	if	that	was	how
she	wanted	it.	Do	I?	Might	be	I	do.	So	they’re	not	all	dead.	That’s	good.	So	we
arrived	too	late.	That’s	bad,	or	not.	And	this	leg,	well,	it’s	hardly	a	coward’s
ploy,	is	it?	I	tried	riding	with	the	Khundryl,	didn’t	I?	At	least,	I	think	I	did.	At
least,	that’s	how	it	looked.	Good	enough.
She	drank	down	some	more	of	the	Bolkando	rum.
Spax	was	a	man	who	liked	women.	She’d	always	preferred	the	company	of


such	men	over	that	of	wilting,	timid	excuses	who	thought	a	shy	batting	of	the
eyes	was	–	gods	below	–	attractive.	No,	bold	was	better.	Coy	was	a	stupid	game
played	by	pathetic	cowards,	as	far	as	she	was	concerned.	All	those	stumbling
words,	the	shifting	about,	what’s	the	point?	If	you	want	me,	come	and	get	me.	I
might	even	say	yes.
More	likely,	of	course,	I’ll	just	laugh.	To	see	the	sting.
They	were	marching	towards	whatever	was	left	of	the	Bonehunters.	No	one
seemed	to	know	how	grim	it	was,	or	at	any	rate	they	weren’t	telling	her.	She’d
witnessed	the	sorcery,	tearing	up	the	horizon,	even	as	the	hobnailed	boots	of
the	Evertine	Legion	thundered	closer	behind	her.	She’d	seen	the	moonspawn	–
a	cloud-	and	fire-wreathed	mountain	in	the	sky.
Was	there	betrayal	in	this?	Was	this	what	Sinter	feared?	Sister,	are	you	even
alive?
Of	course	I	don’t	want	to	go	back.	I	don’t	want	to	know.	I	should	just	say
what	I’m	feeling.	‘Go	to	Hood,	Queen.	And	you	too,	Spax.	I’m	riding	south.’	I
don’t	want	to	see	their	faces,	those	pathetic	survivors.	Not	the	shock,	not	the
horror,	not	all	those	things	you	see	in	the	faces	of	people	who	don’t	know	why
they’re	still	alive,	when	so	many	of	their	comrades	are	dead.
Every	army	is	a	cauldron,	with	the	flames	getting	higher	and	higher	on	all
sides.	We	stew,	we	boil,	we	turn	into	grey	lumps	of	meat.	‘Queen	Abrastal,	it’s
you	and	people	like	you	whose	appetites	are	never	sated.	Your	maws	gape,	and
in	we	go,	and	it	sickens	me.’
When	the	two	Khundryl	riders	appeared,	three	days	past,	Kisswhere	had
turned	away.	In	her	mind	she	drew	a	knife	and	murdered	her	curiosity,	a	quick
slash,	a	sudden	spray	and	then	silence.	What	was	the	point	of	knowing,	when
knowing	was	nothing	more	than	the	taste	of	salt	and	iron	on	the	tongue?
She	drank	more	rum,	pleased	at	the	numbness	of	her	throat.	Eating	fire	was
easy	and	getting	easier.
A	sudden	memory.	Their	first	time	standing	in	a	ragged	line,	the	first	day
of	their	service	in	the	marines.	Some	gnarled	master	sergeant	had	walked	up	to
them,	wearing	the	smile	of	a	hyena	approaching	a	crippled	gazelle.	Sinter	had
straightened	beside	Kisswhere,	trying	to	affect	the	appropriate	attention.	Badan
Gruk,	she’d	seen	with	a	quick	sidelong	glance,	was	looking	miserable	–	with
the	face	of	a	man	who’d	just	realized	where	love	had	taken	him.
You	damned	fool.	I	can	play	their	game.	You	two	can’t,	because	for	you
there	are	no	games.	They	don’t	exist	in	your	Hood-shitting	world	of	honour	and
duty.
‘Twelve,	is	it?’	the	master	sergeant	had	said,	his	grin	broadening.	‘I’d
wager	three	of	you	are	going	to	make	it.	The	rest,	well,	we’ll	bury	half	of	’em


and	the	other	half	we’ll	send	on	to	the	regular	infantry,	where	all	the	losers
live.’
‘Which	half?’	Kisswhere	had	asked.
Lizard	eyes	fixed	on	her.	‘What’s	that,	sweet	roundworm?’
‘Which	half	of	the	one	you	cut	in	two	goes	in	the	ground,	and	which	half
goes	to	the	regulars?	The	legs	half,	well,	that	solves	the	marching	bit.	But—’
‘You’re	one	of	those,	are	ya?’
‘What?	One	who	can	count?	Three	make	it,	nine	don’t.	Nine	can’t	get	split
in	half.	Of	course,’	she	added	with	her	own	broad	smile,	‘maybe	marines	don’t
need	to	know	how	to	count,	and	maybe	master	sergeants	are	the	thickest	of	the
lot.	Which	is	what	I’m	starting	to	think,	anyway.’
She’d	never	got	close	to	completing	the	thousand	push-ups.	Arsehole.	Men
who	smile	like	that	need	a	sense	of	humour,	but	I’m	not	one	to	believe	in
miracles.
She	scratched	some	more	with	her	stick.	Should’ve	broken	him,	right	here
between	my	legs.	Aye,	save	the	last	laugh	for	Kisswhere.	She	wins	every	game.
‘Every	one	of	them,	aye,	isn’t	it	obvious?’
	
Spax	made	a	point	of	keeping	his	shell-armour	loose,	the	plates	clacking
freely,	and	with	all	the	fetishes	tied	everywhere	he	was	well	pleased	with	the
concatenation	of	sounds	when	he	walked.	Had	he	been	a	thin	runt,	the	effect
would	not	have	worked,	but	he	was	big	enough	and	loud	enough	to	be	his	own
squad,	a	martial	apparition	that	could	not	help	but	make	a	dramatic	entrance	no
matter	how	sumptuous	the	destination.
In	this	case,	the	queen’s	command	tent	was	as	close	to	a	palace	as	he	was
likely	to	find	in	these	Wastelands,	and	shouldering	in	between	the	curtains	of
silk	and	the	slap	of	his	heavy	gauntlets	on	the	map	table	gave	him	no	small
amount	of	satisfaction.	‘Highness,	I	am	here.’
Queen	Abrastal	lounged	in	her	ornate	chair,	legs	stretched	out,	watching
him	from	under	lowered	lids.	Her	red	hair	was	unbound	and	hanging	loose,
freshly	washed	and	combed	out,	and	the	Barghast’s	loins	stirred	as	he	observed
her	in	turn.
‘Wipe	off	that	damned	grin,’	Abrastal	said	in	a	growl.
His	brows	lifted.	‘Something	wrong,	Firehair?’
‘Only	everything	I	know	you’re	thinking	right	now,	Spax.’
‘Highness,	if	you’d	been	born	in	an	alley	behind	a	bar,	you’d	still	be	a
queen	in	my	eyes.	Deride	me	for	my	admiration	all	you	like,	it	changes
nothing	in	my	heart.’


She	snorted.	‘You	stink	of	rum.’
‘I	was	pursuing	a	mystery,	Highness.’
‘Oh?’
‘The	onyx-skinned	woman.	The	Malazan.’
She	rolled	her	eyes.	‘Gods	below,	you’re	worse	than	a	crocodile	in	the
mating	season.’
‘Not	that	mystery,	Firehair,	though	I’ll	chase	that	one	down	given	the
chance.	No,	what	makes	me	curious	is	her,	well,	her	lack	of	zeal.	This	is	not	the
soldier	I	would	have	expected.’
Abrastal	waved	one	hand.	‘There	is	no	mystery	there,	Spax.	The	woman’s	a
coward.	Every	army	has	them,	why	should	the	Malazan	one	be	any	different?’
‘Because	she’s	a	marine,’	he	replied.
‘So?’
‘The	marines	damn	near	singlehandedly	conquered	Lether,	Highness,	and
she	was	one	of	them.	On	Genabackis	whole	armies	would	desert	if	they	heard
they’d	be	facing	an	assault	by	Malazan	marines.	They	stank	with	magic	and
Moranth	munitions,	and	they	never	broke	–	you	needed	to	cut	them	down	to	the
last	man	and	woman.’
‘Even	the	hardest	soldier	reaches	an	end	to	their	endurance,	Spax.’
‘Well,	she’s	been	a	prisoner	to	the	Letherii,	so	perhaps	you	are	right.	Now
then,	Highness,	what	did	you	wish	of	your	loyal	warchief?’
‘I	want	you	with	me	at	the	parley.’
‘Of	course.’
‘Sober.’
‘If	you	insist,	but	I	warn	you,	what	plagues	me	also	plagues	my	warriors.
We	yearn	for	a	fight	–	we	only	hired	on	with	you	Bolkando	because	we
expected	an	invasion	or	two.	Instead,	we’re	marching	like	damned	soldiers.
Could	we	have	reached	the	Bonehunters	in	time—’
‘You’d	likely	be	regretting	it,’	Abrastal	said,	her	expression	darkening.
Spax	tried	on	a	scowl.	‘You	believe	those	Khundryl?’
‘I	do.	Especially	after	Felash’s	warning	–	though	I	am	coming	to	suspect
that	my	Fourteenth	Daughter ’s	foresight	was	focused	on	something	still
awaiting	us.’
‘More	of	these	two-legged	giant	lizards?’
She	shrugged,	and	then	shook	her	head.	‘No,	I	don’t	think	so,	but
unfortunately	it’s	only	a	gut	feeling.	We’ll	see	what	we	see	at	the	parley.’
‘The	Malazans	never	conquered	the	Gilk	Barghast,’	Spax	said.
‘Gods	below,	if	you	show	up	with	your	hackles	raised—’
‘Spirits	forbid	the	thought,	Highness.	Facing	them,	I	will	be	like	the	one


hare	the	eagle	missed.	I’m	as	likely	to	freeze	as	fill	my	breeches.’
Slowly,	Abrastal’s	eyes	widened.	‘Warchief,’	she	said	in	wonder,	‘you	are
frightened	of	them.’
He	grimaced,	and	then	nodded.
The	queen	of	the	Bolkando	abruptly	rose,	taking	a	deep	breath,	and	Spax’s
eyes	could	not	help	but	fall	to	her	swelling	chest.	‘I	will	meet	this	Adjunct,’
Abrastal	said	with	sudden	vigour.	Her	eyes	found	the	Barghast	and	pinned	him
in	place.	‘If	indeed	we	are	to	face	more	of	the	giant	two-legged	lizards	with
their	terrible	magic…Spax,	what	will	you	now	claim	of	the	courage	of	your
people?’
‘Courage,	Highness?	You	will	have	that.	But	can	we	hope	to	do	what	those
Khundryl	said	the	Malazans	did?’	He	hesitated,	and	then	shook	his	head.
‘Firehair,	I	too	will	look	hard	upon	those	soldiers,	and	I	fear	I	already	know
what	I	will	see.	They	have	known	the	crucible.’
‘And	you	do	not	wish	to	see	that	truth,	do	you?’
He	grunted.	‘Let’s	just	say	it’s	both	a	good	and	a	bad	thing	your	stores	of
rum	are	nearly	done.’
	
‘Was	this	our	betrayal?’
Tanakalian	faced	the	question,	and	the	eyes	of	the	hard,	iron	woman	who
had	just	voiced	it,	for	as	long	as	he	could	before	shying	away.	‘Mortal	Sword,
you	well	know	we	simply	could	not	reach	them	in	time.	As	such,	our	failure
was	one	of	circumstance,	not	loyalty.’
‘For	once,’	she	replied,	‘you	speak	wisely,	sir.	Tomorrow	we	ride	out	to
the	Bonehunter	camp.	Prepare	an	escort	of	fifty	of	our	brothers	and	sisters	–	I
want	healers	and	our	most	senior	veterans.’
‘I	understand,	Mortal	Sword.’
She	glanced	at	him,	studied	his	face	for	a	moment,	and	then	returned	her
gaze	to	the	jade-lit	southeastern	sky.	‘If	you	do	not,	sir,	they	will.’
You	hound	me	into	a	corner,	Mortal	Sword.	You	seem	bent	on	forcing	my
hand.	Is	there	only	room	for	one	on	that	pedestal	of	yours?	What	will	you	do
when	you	stand	face	to	face	with	the	Adjunct?	With	Brys	Beddict?
But,	more	to	the	point,	what	do	you	know	of	this	betrayal?	I	see	a	sword	in
our	future.	I	see	blood	on	its	blade.	I	see	the	Perish	standing	alone,	against
impossible	odds.
‘At	the	parley,’	Krughava	said,	‘you	will	keep	our	own	counsel,	sir.’
He	bowed.	‘As	you	wish.’
‘She	has	been	wounded,’	Krughava	went	on.	‘We	will	close	about	her	with


our	utmost	diligence	to	her	protection.’
‘Protection,	sir?’
‘In	the	manner	of	hunter	whales,	Shield	Anvil,	when	one	of	their	clan	is
unwell.’
‘Mortal	Sword,	this	shall	be	a	parley	of	comrades,	more	or	less.	Our	clan,
as	you	might	call	it,	is	unassailed.	No	sharks.	No	dhenrabi	or	gahrelit.	Against
whom	do	we	protect	her?’
‘The	darkness	of	her	own	doubts	if	nothing	else.	Though	I	cannot	be
certain,	I	fear	she	is	one	who	would	gnaw	upon	her	own	scars,	eager	to	watch
them	bleed,	thirsty	for	the	taste	of	blood	in	her	mouth.’
‘Mortal	Sword,	how	can	we	defend	her	against	herself?’
Krughava	was	silent	for	a	time,	and	then	she	sighed.	‘Make	stern	your
regard,	banish	all	shadows	from	your	mind,	anneal	in	brightest	silver	your
certainty.	We	return	to	the	path,	with	all	resolve.	Can	I	make	it	any	clearer,
Shield	Anvil?’
He	bowed	again.
‘Leave	me	now,’	she	said.
Tanakalian	swung	round	and	walked	down	from	the	rise.	The	even	rows	of
cookfires	flickered	in	the	basin	before	him,	painting	the	canvas	tents	with	light
and	shadow.	Five	thousand	paces	to	the	west	rose	another	glow	–	the	Bolkando
encampment.	A	parley	of	comrades,	a	clan.	Or	perhaps	not.	The	Bolkando	have
no	place	in	this	scheme.
They	said	she	was	concussed,	but	now	recovers.	They	said	something
impossible	happened	above	her	unconscious	form,	there	on	the	field	of	battle.
They	said	–	with	something	burning	fierce	in	their	eyes	–	that	the	Bonehunters
awakened	that	day,	and	its	heart	was	there,	before	the	Adjunct’s	senseless	body.
Already	a	legend	is	taking	birth,	and	yet	we	saw	none	of	its	making.	We
played	no	role.	The	name	of	the	Perish	Grey	Helms	is	a	gaping	absence	in	this
roll	call	of	heroes.
The	injustice	of	that	haunted	him.	He	was	Shield	Anvil,	but	his	embrace
remained	empty,	a	gaping	abyss	between	his	arms.	This	will	change.	I	will
make	it	change.	And	all	will	see.	Our	time	is	coming.
Blood,	blood	on	the	sword.	Gods,	I	can	almost	taste	it.
	
She	pulled	hard	on	the	leaf-wrapped	stick,	feeling	every	muscle	in	her	jaw	and
neck	bunch	taut.	Smoke	streaming	from	her	mouth	and	nose,	she	faced	the
darkness	of	the	north	plain.	Others,	when	they	walked	out	to	the	edge	of	the
legion’s	camp,	would	find	themselves	on	the	side	that	gave	them	a	clear	view


of	the	Malazan	encampment.	They	walked	out	and	they	stared,	no	different
from	pilgrims	facing	a	holy	shrine,	an	unexpected	edifice	on	their	path.	She
imagined	that	in	their	silence	they	struggled	to	fit	into	their	world	that	dismal
sprawl	of	dung-fires,	the	vague	shapes	moving	about,	the	glint	of	banners	like
a	small	forest	of	storm-battered	saplings.	Finding	a	place	for	all	that	should
have	been	easy.	But	it	wasn’t.
They	would	wince	at	their	own	wounds,	reminded	of	the	gaps	in	their	own
lines,	and	they	would	feel	like	shadows	cast	by	something	greater	than
anything	they	had	known	before.	There	was	a	name	for	this,	she	knew.	AtriCeda	Aranict	pulled	again	on	the	stick,	mindful	of	the	bright	swimming	glow
hovering	before	her	face.
Some	scholar	once	likened	this	to	the	mastery	fire	and	all	it	symbolized.
Huh.	Some	scholar	was	working	hard	to	justify	her	habit.	Stupid	woman.	It’s
yours,	so	just	revel	in	it	and	when	it	comes	to	justifying	what	you	do,	keep	your
mouth	shut.	Philosophy,	really.
Ask	a	soldier.	A	soldier	knows	all	about	smoke.	And	what’s	in	and	what’s
out,	and	what’s	the	fucking	difference	in	the	end.
The	Letherii	had	comported	themselves	with	honour	on	that	horrid	field	of
battle.	They	had	distracted	the	enemy.	They	had	with	blood	and	pain
successfully	effected	the	Malazan	withdrawal	–	no,	let’s	call	it	what	it	was,	a
rout.	Once	the	signals	sounded,	the	impossible	iron	wall	became	a	thing	of
reeds,	torn	loose	and	whipped	back	on	the	savage	wind.
Even	so.	Letherii	soldiers	walked	out	at	dusk,	or	in	the	moments	before
dawn,	right	out	to	the	camp’s	edge,	and	they	looked	across	the	empty	expanse
of	scrub	to	the	Malazans.	They	weren’t	thinking	of	routs,	or	withdrawals.	They
were	thinking	of	all	that	had	gone	before	that.
And	there	was	a	word	for	what	they	felt.
Humility.
‘My	dear.’	He	had	come	up	behind	her,	soft-footed,	as	uncertain	as	a	child.
Aranict	sighed.	‘I	am	forgetting	how	to	sleep.’
Brys	Beddict	came	up	to	stand	at	her	side.	‘Yes.	I	awoke	and	felt	your
absence,	and	it	made	me	think.’
Once,	she	had	been	nervous	before	this	man.	Once,	she	had	imagined	illicit
scenes,	the	way	a	person	might	conjure	up	wishes	they	knew	could	never	be
filled.	Now,	her	vanishing	from	his	bed	wakened	him	to	unease.	A	few	days,
and	the	world	changes.	‘Think	of	what?’
‘I	don’t	know	if	I	should	say.’
The	tone	was	rueful.	She	filled	her	lungs	with	smoke,	eased	it	back	out
slowly.	‘I’d	wager	it’s	too	late	for	that,	Brys.’


‘I	have	never	been	in	love	before.	Not	like	this.	I	have	never	before	felt
so…helpless.	As	if,	without	my	even	noticing,	I	gave	you	all	my	power.’
‘All	the	children’s	stories	never	talked	about	that,’	Aranict	said	after	a
moment.	‘The	prince	and	the	princess,	each	heroic	and	strong,	equals	in	the
grand	love	they	win.	The	tale	ends	in	mutual	admiration.’
‘That	tastes	a	tad	sour.’
‘That	taste	is	of	self-congratulation,’	she	said.	‘Those	tales	are	all	about
narcissism.	The	sleight	of	hand	lies	in	the	hero’s	mirror	image	–	a	princess	for
a	prince,	a	prince	for	a	princess	–	but	in	truth	it’s	all	one.	It’s	nobility’s	love	for
itself.	Heroes	win	the	most	beautiful	lovers,	it’s	the	reward	for	their	bravery
and	virtue.’
‘And	those	lovers	are	naught	but	mirrors?’
‘Shiny	silver	ones.’
She	felt	him	watching	her.
‘But,’	he	said	after	a	few	moments,	‘it’s	not	that	even	a	thing,	is	it?	You	are
not	my	mirror,	Aranict.	You	are	something	other.	I	am	not	reflected	in	you,	just
as	you	are	not	reflected	in	me.	So	what	is	this	that	we	have	found	here,	and	why
do	I	find	myself	on	my	knees	before	it?’
The	stick’s	end	glowed	like	a	newborn	sun,	only	to	ebb	in	its	instant	of	life.
‘How	should	I	know,	Brys?	It	is	as	if	I	stand	facing	you	from	an	angle	no	one
else	can	find,	and	when	I’m	there	nothing	rises	between	us	–	a	trick	of	the	light
and	your	fortifications	vanish.	So	you	feel	vulnerable.’
He	grunted.	‘But	it	is	not	that	way	with	Tehol	and	Janath.’
‘Yes,	I	have	heard	about	them,	and	it	seems	to	me	that	no	matter	which	way
each	faces,	he	or	she	faces	the	other.	He	is	her	king	and	she	is	his	queen,	and
everything	else	just	follows	on	from	there.	It	is	the	rarest	of	loves,	I	should
think.’
‘But	it	is	not	ours,	is	it,	Aranict?’
She	said	nothing.	How	can	I?	I	feel	swollen,	as	if	I	have	swallowed	you
alive,	Brys.	I	walk	with	the	weight	of	you	inside	me,	and	I	have	never	before	felt
anything	like	this.	She	flicked	the	stick-end	away.	‘You	worry	too	much,	Brys.	I
am	your	lover.	Leave	it	at	that.’
‘You	are	also	my	Atri-Ceda.’
She	smiled	in	the	darkness.	‘And	that,	Brys,	is	what	brought	me	out	here.’
‘Why?’
‘Something	hides.	It’s	all	around	us,	subtle	as	smoke.	It	has	manifested	only
once	thus	far,	and	that	was	at	the	battle,	among	the	Malazans	–	at	the	place
where	the	Adjunct	fell	unconscious.	There	is	a	hidden	hand	in	all	of	this,	Brys,
and	I	don’t	trust	it.’


‘Where	the	Adjunct	fell?	But	Aranict,	what	happened	there	saved	Tavore’s
life,	and	quite	possibly	the	lives	of	the	rest	of	the	Bonehunters.	The	Nah’ruk
reeled	from	that	place.’
‘Yet	still	I	fear	it,’	she	insisted,	plucking	out	another	rustleaf	stick.	‘Allies
should	show	themselves.’	She	drew	out	the	small	silver	box	containing	the
resin	sparker.	The	night	wind	defeated	her	efforts	to	scrape	a	flame	to	life,	so
she	stepped	close	against	Brys	and	tried	again.
‘Allies,’	he	said,	‘have	their	own	enemies.	Showing	themselves	imposes	a
risk,	I	imagine.’
A	flicker	of	flame	and	then	the	stick	was	alight.	She	took	a	half-step	back.	‘I
think	that’s	a	valid	observation.	Well,	I	suppose	we	always	suspected	that	the
Adjunct’s	war	wasn’t	a	private	one.’
‘No	matter	how	she	might	wish	it	so,’	he	said,	with	something	like
grudging	respect.
‘Tomorrow’s	parley	could	prove	most	frustrating,’	Aranict	observed,	‘if
she	refuses	to	relent.	We	need	to	know	what	she	knows.	We	need	to	understand
what	she	seeks.	More	than	all	that,	we	need	to	make	sense	of	what	happened	the
day	of	the	Nah’ruk.’
He	reached	up,	surprised	her	by	brushing	her	cheek,	and	then	leaning
closer	and	kissing	her.	She	laughed	deep	in	her	throat.	‘Danger	is	a	most
alluring	drug,	isn’t	it,	Brys?’
‘Yes,’	he	whispered,	but	then	stepped	back.	‘I	will	walk	the	perimeter	now,
Atri-Ceda,	to	witness	the	dawn	with	my	soldiers.	Will	you	be	rested	enough	for
the	parley?’
‘More	or	less.’
‘Good.	Until	later,	then.’
She	watched	him	walk	away.	Errant	take	me,	he	just	climbed	back	out.
	
‘When	it’s	stretched	it	stays	stretched,’	Hanavat	said	in	a	grumble.	‘What’s	the
point?’
Shelemasa	continued	rubbing	the	oil	into	the	woman’s	distended	belly.
‘The	point	is,	it	feels	good.’
‘Well,	I’ll	grant	you	that,	though	I	imagine	it’s	as	much	the	attention	as
anything	else.’
‘Exactly	what	men	never	understand,’	the	younger	woman	said,	finally
settling	back	and	rubbing	her	hands	together.	‘We	have	iron	in	our	souls.	How
could	we	not?’
Hanavat	glanced	away,	eyes	tightening.	‘My	last	child,’	she	said.	‘My	only


child.’
To	that	Shelemasa	was	silent.	The	charge	against	the	Nah’ruk	had	taken	all
of	Hanavat’s	children.	All	of	them.	But	if	that	was	cruel,	it	is	nothing	compared
to	sparing	Gall.	Where	the	mother	bows,	the	father	breaks.	They	are	gone.	He
led	them	all	to	their	deaths,	yet	he	survived.	Spirits,	yours	is	the	gift	of
madness.
The	charge	haunted	Shelemasa	as	well.	She	had	ridden	through	the	lancing
barrage	of	lightning,	figures	on	either	side	erupting,	bodies	exploding,
spraying	her	with	sizzling	gore.	The	screams	of	horses,	the	thunder	of
tumbling	beasts,	bones	snapping	–	even	now,	that	dread	cauldron	awakened
again	in	her	mind,	a	torrent	of	sounds	pounding	her	ears	from	the	inside	out.
She	knelt	in	Hanavat’s	tent,	trembling	with	the	memories.
The	older	woman	must	have	sensed	something,	for	she	reached	out	and
settled	a	weathered	hand	on	her	thigh.	‘It	goes,’	she	murmured.	‘I	see	it	among
all	you	survivors.	The	wave	of	remembrance,	the	horror	in	your	eyes.	But	I	tell
you,	it	goes.’
‘For	Gall,	too?’
The	hand	seemed	to	flinch.	‘No.	He	is	Warleader.	It	does	not	leave	him.
That	charge	is	not	in	the	past.	He	lives	it	again	and	again,	every	moment,	day
and	night.	I	have	lost	him,	Shelemasa.	We	have	all	lost	him.’
Eight	hundred	and	eighty	warriors	remained.	She	had	stood	among	them,
had	wandered	with	them	the	wreckage	of	the	retreat,	and	she	had	seen	what	she
had	seen.	Never	again	will	we	fight,	not	with	the	glory	and	joy	of	old.	Our
military	effectiveness,	as	the	Malazan	scribes	would	say,	has	come	to	an	end.
The	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	had	been	destroyed.	Not	a	failure	of	courage.
Something	far	worse.	We	were	made,	in	an	instant,	obsolete.	Nothing	could
break	the	spirit	as	utterly	as	that	realization	had	done.
A	new	Warleader	was	needed,	but	she	suspected	no	acclamation	was
forthcoming.	The	will	was	dead.	There	were	no	pieces	left	to	pick	up.
‘I	will	attend	the	parley,’	said	Hanavat,	‘and	I	want	you	with	me,
Shelemasa.’
‘Your	husband—’
‘Is	lying	in	his	eldest	son’s	tent.	He	takes	no	food,	no	water.	He	intends	to
waste	away.	Before	long,	we	will	burn	his	body	on	a	pyre,	but	that	will	be
nothing	but	a	formality.	My	mourning	has	already	begun.’
‘I	know…’	Shelemasa	hesitated,	‘it	was	difficult	between	you.	The	rumours
of	his	leanings—’
‘And	that	is	the	bitterest	thing	of	all,’	Hanavat	cut	in.	‘Gall,	well,	he	leaned
every	which	way.	I	long	ago	learned	to	accept	that.	What	bites	deepest	now	is


we	had	found	each	other	again.	Before	the	charge.	We	were	awakened	to	our
love	for	one	another.	There	was…there	was	happiness	again.	For	a	few
moments.’	She	stopped	then,	for	she	was	crying.
Shelemasa	drew	closer.	‘Tell	me	of	the	child	within	you,	Hanavat.	I	have
never	been	pregnant.	Tell	me	how	it	feels.	Are	you	filled	up,	is	that	how	it	is?
Does	it	stir	–	I	am	told	it	will	stir	on	occasion.’
Smiling	through	her	grief,	Hanavat	said,	‘Ah,	very	well.	How	does	it	feel?
Like	I’ve	just	eaten	a	whole	pig.	Shall	I	go	on?’
Shelemasa	laughed,	a	short,	unexpected	laugh,	and	then	nodded.	Tell	me
something	good.	To	drown	out	the	screams.
	
‘The	children	are	asleep,’	Jastara	said,	moving	to	settle	down	on	her	knees
beside	him.	She	studied	his	face.	‘I	see	how	much	of	him	came	from	you.	Your
eyes,	your	mouth—’
‘Be	quiet,	woman,’	said	Gall.	‘I	will	not	lie	with	my	son’s	widow.’
She	pulled	away.	‘Then	lie	with	someone,	for	Hood’s	sake.’
He	turned	his	head,	stared	at	the	tent	wall.
‘Why	are	you	here?’	she	demanded.	‘You	come	to	my	tent	like	the	ghost	of
everything	I	have	lost.	Am	I	not	haunted	enough?	What	do	you	want	with	me?
Look	at	me.	I	offer	you	my	body	–	let	us	share	our	grief—’
‘Stop.’
She	hissed	under	her	breath.
‘I	would	you	take	a	knife	to	me,’	Gall	said.	‘Do	that,	woman,	and	I	will
bless	you	with	my	last	breath.	A	knife.	Give	me	pain,	be	pleased	to	see	how	you
hurt	me.	Do	that,	Jastara,	in	the	name	of	my	son.’
‘You	selfish	piece	of	dung,	why	should	I	indulge	you?	Get	out.	Find	some
other	hole	to	hide	in.	Do	you	think	your	grandchildren	are	comforted	seeing
you	this	way?’
‘You	are	not	Khundryl	born,’	he	said.	‘You	are	Gilk.	You	understand
nothing	of	our	ways—’
‘The	Khundryl	were	feared	warriors.	They	still	are.	You	need	to	stand
again,	Gall.	You	need	to	gather	your	ghosts	–	all	of	them	–	and	save	your
people.’
‘We	are	not	Wickans,’	he	whispered,	reaching	up	to	claw	once	more	at	his
face.
She	spat	out	a	curse.	‘Gods	below,	do	you	really	think	Coltaine	and	his
damned	Wickans	could	have	done	better?’
‘He	would	have	found	a	way.’


‘Fool.	No	wonder	your	wife	sneers	at	you.	No	wonder	all	your	lovers	have
turned	away	from	you—’
‘Turned	away?	They’re	all	dead.’
‘So	find	some	more.’
‘Who	would	love	a	corpse?’
‘Now	finally	you	have	a	point	worth	making,	Warleader.	Who	would?	The
answer	lies	before	me,	a	stupid	old	man.	It’s	been	five	days.	You	are	Warleader.
Shake	yourself	awake,	damn	you—’
‘No.	Tomorrow	I	will	give	my	people	into	the	Adjunct’s	care.	The
Khundryl	Burned	Tears	are	no	more.	It	is	done.	I	am	done.’
The	blade	of	a	knife	hovered	before	his	eyes.	‘Is	this	what	you	want?’
‘Yes,’	he	whispered.
‘What	should	I	cut	first?’
‘You	decide.’
The	knife	vanished.	‘I	am	Gilk,	as	you	say.	What	do	I	know	of	mercy?	Find
your	own	way	to	Hood,	Gall.	The	Wickans	would	have	died,	just	as	your
warriors	died.	No	different.	Battles	are	lost.	It	is	the	world’s	way.	But	you	still
breathe.	Gather	up	your	people	–	they	look	to	you.’
‘No	longer.	Never	again	will	I	lead	warriors	into	battle.’
She	snarled	something	incomprehensible,	and	moved	off,	leaving	him
alone.
He	stared	at	the	tent	wall,	listened	to	his	own	pointless	breaths.	I	know	what
this	is.	It	is	fear.	For	all	my	life	it	has	waited	for	me,	out	in	the	cold	night.	I
have	done	terrible	things,	and	my	punishment	draws	near.	Please,	hurry.
For	this	night,	it	is	very	cold,	and	it	draws	ever	nearer.


Chapter	Four

Once	we	knew	nothing.
Now	we	know	everything.
Stay	away	from	our	eyes.
Our	eyes	are	empty.
Look	into	our	faces
and	see	us	if	you	dare.
We	are	the	skin	of	war.
We	are	the	skin	of	war.
Once	we	knew	nothing.
Now	we	know	everything.
Skin
Sejaras
	furs,	something	he	did	every
night	since	the	battle.	Jolting	awake,	drenched,	heart	pounding.	After-images
behind	his	eyes.	Keneb,	in	the	instant	before	he	was	torn	apart,	twisting	round
in	his	saddle,	fixing	Blistig	with	a	cold,	knowing	stare.	Not	ten	paces	away,
their	eyes	locking.	But	that	was	impossible.	I	know	it’s	impossible.	I	was	never
even	close.	He	didn’t	turn,	didn’t	look	back.	Didn’t	see	me.	Couldn’t.
Don’t	you	howl	at	me	from	the	dark,	Keneb.	Don’t	you	stare.	It	was	nothing
to	do	with	me.	Leave	me	alone.
But	this	damned	army	didn’t	know	how	to	break,	understood	nothing	about
routing	before	a	superior	enemy.	Every	soldier	alone,	that	was	what	routing
was	all	about.	Instead,	they	maintained	order.	‘We’re	with	you,	Fist	Blistig.	See
our	boots	pound.	It’s	north	we’re	going,	is	it?	They	ain’t	pursuing,	sir,	and	that’s
a	good	thing	–	can’t	feel	it	no	more,	sir,	you	know:	Hood’s	own	breath,	there	on
the	back	of	my	neck.	Can’t	feel	it.	We’re	in	good	order,	sir.	Good	order…’
‘Good	order,’	he	whispered	to	the	gloom	in	his	tent.	‘We	should	be
scattered	to	the	winds.	Finding	our	own	ways	back.	To	civilization.	To	sanity.’
The	sweat	was	drying,	or	the	scraped	underside	of	the	fur	skin	was	soaking
it	all	up.	He	was	still	chilled,	sick	to	his	stomach	with	fear.	What’s	happened	to
SWEAT	ENOUGH	A	MAN	COULD	DROWN	IN.	HE	SHIVERED	BENEATH	HIS


me?	They	stare.	Out	there	in	the	darkness.	They	stare.	Coltaine.	Duiker.	The
thousands	beyond	Aren’s	wall.	They	stare,	looking	down	on	me	from	their
crosses.	And	now	Keneb,	there	on	his	horse.	Ruthan	Gudd.	Quick	Ben.	The	dead
await	me.	They	wonder	why	I	am	not	with	them.	I	should	be	with	them.
They	know	I	don’t	belong	here.
Once,	he’d	been	a	fine	soldier.	A	decent	commander.	Clever	enough	to
preserve	the	lives	of	his	garrison,	the	hero	who	saved	Aren	from	the
Whirlwind.	But	then	the	Adjunct	arrived,	and	it	all	started	to	go	wrong.	She
conscripted	him,	tore	him	away	from	Aren	–	they	would	have	made	him	High
Fist,	the	City’s	Protector.	They	would	have	given	him	a	palace.
She	stole	my	future.	My	life.
Malaz	City	was	even	worse.	There,	he’d	been	shown	the	empire’s	rotted
core.	Mallick	Rel,	the	betrayer	of	Aren’s	legion,	the	murderer	of	Coltaine	and
Duiker	and	all	the	rest	–	no,	there	was	no	doubt	about	any	of	that.	Yet	there	the
Jhistal	was,	whispering	in	the	Empress’s	ear,	and	his	vengeance	against	the
Wickans	was	not	yet	done.	And	against	us.	You	took	us	into	that	nest,	Tavore,
and	more	of	us	died.	For	all	that	you	have	done,	I	will	never	forgive	you.
Standing	before	her	filled	him	with	bile.	Every	time,	he	almost	trembled	in
his	desire	to	take	her	by	the	throat,	to	crush	that	throat,	to	tell	her	what	she’d
done	to	him	even	as	the	light	left	those	dead,	flat	eyes.
I	was	a	good	officer	once.	An	honourable	soldier.
Now	I	live	in	terror.	What	will	she	do	to	us	next?	Y’Ghatan	wasn’t	enough.
Malaz	City	wasn’t	enough.	Nor	Lether	either,	never	enough.	Nah’ruk?	Not
enough.	Damn	you,	Tavore.	I	will	die	for	a	proper	cause.	But	this?
He’d	never	before	known	such	hate.	Its	poison	filled	him,	and	still	the	dead
looked	on,	from	their	places	in	the	wastes	of	Hood’s	realm.	Shall	I	kill	her?	Is
that	what	you	all	want?	Tell	me!
The	tent	walls	were	lightening.	This	day,	the	parley.	The	Adjunct,	Fists
arrayed	around	her,	the	new	ones,	the	lone	surviving	old	one.	But	who	looks	to
me?	Who	walks	a	step	behind	me?	Not	Sort.	Not	Kindly.	Not	even	Raband	or
Skanarow.	No,	the	new	Fists	and	their	senior	officers	look	right	through	me.	I
am	already	a	ghost,	already	one	of	the	forgotten.	What	have	I	done	to	deserve
that?
Keneb	was	gone.	Since	Letheras,	Keneb	had	to	all	intents	and	purposes
been	commanding	the	Bonehunters.	Managing	the	march,	keeping	it	supplied,
maintaining	discipline	and	organization.	In	short,	doing	everything.	Some
people	possessed	such	skills.	Running	a	garrison	was	easy	enough.	We	had	a
fat	quartermaster	who	had	a	hand	in	every	pocket,	a	smiling	oaf	with	a	sharp
eye,	and	our	suppliers	surrounded	us	and	whatever	needed	doing,	why,	it	was


just	a	written	request	away.	Sometimes	not	even	that,	more	a	wink,	a	nod.
The	patrols	went	out.	They	came	back.	Watches	turned,	gatekeepers
maintained	vigilance.	We	kept	the	peace	and	peace	kept	us	happy.
But	an	army	on	the	march	was	another	matter.	The	logistics	besieged	him,
staggered	his	brain.	Too	much	to	think	about,	too	much	to	worry	over.	Fine,
we’re	now	leaner	–	hah,	what	a	sweet	way	of	putting	it.	We’re	an	army	of
regulars	with	a	handful	of	heavies	and	marines.	So,	we’re	oversupplied,	if	such
a	thing	even	exists.
But	it	won’t	last.	She	wants	us	to	cross	the	Wastelands	–	and	what	waits
beyond	them?	Desert.	Emptiness.	No,	hunger	waits	for	us,	no	matter	how
heaped	our	wagons.	Hunger	and	thirst.
I	won’t	take	that	on.	I	won’t.	Don’t	ask.
But	they	wouldn’t,	would	they?	Because	he	wasn’t	Keneb.	I	really	have	no
reason	to	show	up.	I’m	worse	than	Banaschar	in	that	company.	At	least	he’s	got
the	nerve	to	turn	up	drunk,	to	smile	in	the	face	of	the	Adjunct’s	displeasure.
That’s	its	own	kind	of	courage.
Activity	in	the	camp	now,	as	dawn	approached.	Muted,	few	conversations,	a
torpid	thing	awakening	to	brutal	truths,	eyes	blinking	open,	souls	flinching.
We’re	the	walking	dead.	What	more	do	you	want	of	us,	Tavore?
Plenty.	He	knew	it	like	teeth	sinking	into	his	chest.
Growling	under	his	breath,	he	pulled	aside	the	furs	and	sat	up.	A	Fist’s	tent.
All	that	room	for	nothing,	for	the	damp	air	to	wait	around	for	his	heroic	rise,
his	gods-given	brilliance.	He	dragged	on	his	clothes,	collected	his	chill	leather
boots	and	shook	them	to	check	for	nesting	scorpions	and	spiders	and	then
forced	his	feet	into	them.	He	needed	to	take	a	piss.
I	was	a	good	officer	once.
Fist	Blistig	slipped	the	tethers	of	the	tent	flap,	and	stepped	outside.
	
Kindly	looked	round.	‘Captain	Raband.’
‘Fist?’
‘Find	me	Pores.’
‘Master	Sergeant	Pores,	sir?’
‘Or	whatever	rank	he’s	decided	on	this	morning,	yes.	You’ll	know	him	by
his	black	eyes.’	Kindly	paused,	ruminating,	and	then	said,	‘Wish	I	knew	who
broke	his	nose.	Deserves	a	medal.’
‘Yes	sir.	On	my	way,	sir.’
He	glanced	over	at	the	sound	of	boots	drawing	nearer.	Fist	Faradan	Sort
and,	trailing	a	step	behind	her,	Captain	Skanarow.	Neither	woman	looked


happy.	Kindly	scowled.	‘Are	those	the	faces	you	want	to	show	your	soldiers?’
Skanarow	looked	away	guiltily,	but	Sort’s	eyes	hardened	to	flint.	‘Your
own	soldiers	are	close	to	mutiny,	Kindly	–	I	can’t	believe	you	ordered—’
‘A	kit	inspection?	Why	not?	Forced	them	all	to	scrape	the	shit	out	of	their
breeches,	a	bit	of	tidying	that	was	long	overdue.’
Faradan	Sort	was	studying	him.	‘It’s	not	an	act,	is	it?’
‘Some	advice,’	Kindly	said.	‘The	keep	is	on	fire,	the	black	stomach	plague
is	killing	the	kitchen	staff,	the	rats	won’t	eat	your	supper	and	hearing	the	circus
is	in	the	yard	your	wife	has	oiled	the	hinges	on	the	bedroom	door.	So	I	walk	in
and	blister	your	ear	about	your	scuffy	boots.	When	I	leave,	what	are	you
thinking	about?’
Skanarow	answered.	‘I’m	thinking	up	inventive	ways	to	kill	you,	sir.’
Kindly	adjusted	his	weapon	belt.	‘The	sun	has	cracked	the	sky,	my	dears.
Time	for	my	constitutional	morning	walk.’
‘Want	a	few	bodyguards,	sir?’
‘Generous	offer,	Captain,	but	I	will	be	fine.	Oh,	if	Raband	shows	up	with
Pores	any	time	soon,	promote	the	good	captain.	Omnipotent	Overseer	of	the
Universe	should	suit.	Ladies.’
	
Watching	him	walk	off,	Faradan	Sort	sighed	and	rubbed	at	her	face.	‘All	right,’
she	muttered,	‘the	bastard	has	a	point.’
‘That’s	why	he’s	a	bastard,	sir.’
Sort	glanced	over.	‘Are	you	impugning	a	Fist’s	reputation,	Captain?’
Skanarow	straightened.	‘Absolutely	not,	Fist.	I	was	stating	a	fact.	Fist
Kindly	is	a	bastard,	sir.	He	was	one	when	he	was	captain,	lieutenant,	corporal,
and	seven-year-old	bully.	Sir.’
Faradan	Sort	studied	Skanarow	for	a	moment.	She’d	taken	the	death	of
Ruthan	Gudd	hard,	hard	enough	to	suggest	to	Sort	that	their	relationship	wasn’t
simply	one	of	comrades,	fellow	officers.	And	now	she	was	saying	‘sir ’	to
someone	who	only	days	before	had	been	a	fellow	captain.	Should	I	talk	about
it?	Should	I	tell	her	it’s	as	uncomfortable	to	me	as	it	must	be	to	her?	Is	there
any	point?	She	was	holding	up,	wasn’t	she?	Behaving	like	a	damned	soldier.
And	then	there’s	Kindly.	Fist	Kindly,	Hood	help	us	all.
‘Constitutional,’	she	said.	‘Gods	below.	Now,	I	suppose	it’s	time	to	meet
my	new	soldiers.’
‘Regular	infantry	are	simple	folk,	sir.	They	ain’t	got	that	wayward	streak
like	the	marines	got.	Should	be	no	trouble	at	all.’
‘They	broke	in	battle,	Captain.’


‘They	were	ordered	to,	sir.	And	that’s	why	they’re	still	alive,	mostly.’
‘I’m	beginning	to	see	another	reason	for	Kindly’s	kit	inspection.	How
many	dropped	their	weapons,	abandoned	their	shields?’
‘Parties	have	been	out	recovering	items	on	the	backtrail,	sir.’
‘That’s	not	the	point,’	said	Sort.	‘They	dropped	weapons.	Doing	that	is
habit-forming.	You’re	saying	they’ll	be	no	trouble,	Captain?	Maybe	not	the
kind	you’re	thinking.	It’s	the	other	kind	of	trouble	that	worries	me.’
‘Understood,	sir.	Then	we’d	better	shake	them	up.’
‘I	think	I’m	about	to	become	very	unpleasant.’
‘A	bastard?’
‘Wrong	gender.’
‘Maybe	so,	sir,	but	it’s	still	the	right	word.’
	
If	he	was	still.	If	he	struggled	past	the	fumes	and	dregs	of	the	past	night’s	wine,
and	pushed	away	the	ache	in	his	head	and	sour	taste	on	his	tongue.	If	he	held	his
breath,	lying	as	one	dead,	in	that	perfect	expression	of	surrender.	Then,	he
could	feel	her.	A	stirring	far	beneath	the	earth’s	cracked,	calloused	skin.	The
worm	stirs,	and	you	do	indeed	feel	her,	O	priest.	She	is	your	gnawing	guilt.	She
is	your	fevered	shame,	so	flushing	your	face.
His	goddess	was	drawing	closer.	A	drawn	out	endeavour,	to	be	sure.	She
had	the	meat	of	an	entire	world	to	chew	through.	Bones	to	crunch	in	her	jaws,
secrets	to	devour.	But	mountains	groaned,	tilting	and	shifting	to	her	deep
passage.	Seas	churned.	Forests	shook.	The	Worm	of	Autumn	was	coming.
‘Bless	the	falling	leaves,	bless	the	grey	skies,	bless	this	bitter	wind	and	the
beasts	that	sleep.’	Yes,	Holy	Mother,	I	remember	the	prayers,	the	Restiturge	of
Pall.	‘And	the	weary	blood	shall	feed	the	soil,	their	fleshly	bodies	cast	down
into	your	belly.	And	the	Dark	Winds	of	Autumn	shall	rush	in	hunger,	snatching
up	their	loosed	souls.	Caverns	shall	moan	with	their	voices.	The	dead	have
turned	their	backs	on	the	solid	earth,	the	stone	and	the	touch	of	the	sky.	Bless
their	onward	journey,	from	which	none	return.	The	souls	are	nothing	of	value.
Only	the	flesh	feeds	the	living.	Only	the	flesh.	Bless	our	eyes,	D’rek,	for	they
are	open.	Bless	our	eyes,	D’rek,	for	they	see.’
He	rolled	on	to	his	side.	Poison	comes	to	the	flesh	long	before	the	soul
ever	leaves	it.	She	was	the	cruel	measurer	of	time.	She	was	the	face	of
inevitable	decay.	Was	he	not	blessing	her	with	every	day	of	this	life	he’d	made?
Banaschar	coughed,	slowly	sat	up.	Invisible	knuckles	kneaded	the	inside	of
his	skull.	He	knew	they	were	in	there,	someone’s	fist	trapped	inside,	someone
wanting	out.	Out	of	my	head,	aye.	Who	can	blame	them?


He	looked	round	blearily.	The	scene	was	too	civilized,	he	concluded.
Somewhat	sloppy,	true,	sly	mutters	of	dissolution,	a	certain	carelessness.	But
not	a	hint	of	madness.	Not	a	single	whisper	of	horror.	Normal	orderliness
mocked	him.	The	tasteless	air,	the	pallid	misery	of	dawn	soaking	through	the
tent	walls,	etching	the	silhouettes	of	insects:	every	detail	howled	its	mundane
truth.
But	so	many	died.	Only	five	days	ago.	Six.	Six,	now.	I	can	still	hear	them.
Pain,	fury,	all	those	fierce	utterances	of	despair.	If	I	step	outside	this	morning,	I
should	see	them	still.	Those	marines.	Those	heavies.	Swarming	against	the	face
of	the	enemy’s	advance,	but	these	hornets	were	fighting	a	losing	battle	–	they’d
met	something	nastier	than	them,	and	one	by	one	they	were	crushed	down,
smeared	into	the	earth.
And	the	Khundryl.	Gods	below,	the	poor	Burned	Tears.
Too	civilized,	this	scene	–	the	heaps	of	clothing,	the	dusty	jugs	lying
abandoned	and	empty	on	the	ground,	the	tramped-down	grasses	struggling	in
the	absence	of	the	sun’s	clear	streams.	Would	light’s	life	ever	return,	or	were
these	grasses	doomed	now	to	wither	and	die?	Each	blade	knew	not.	For	now,
there	was	nothing	to	do	but	suffer.
‘Be	easy,’	he	muttered,	‘we	move	on.	You	will	recover	your	free	ways.	You
will	feel	the	wind’s	breath	again.	I	promise.’	Ah,	Holy	Mother,	are	these	your
words	of	comfort?	Light	returns.	Be	patient,	its	sweet	kiss	draws	ever	nearer.	A
new	day.	Be	still,	frail	one.
Banaschar	snorted,	and	set	about	seeking	out	a	jug	with	something	left	in	it.
	
Five	Khundryl	warriors	stood	before	Dead	Hedge.	They	looked	lost,	and	yet
determined,	if	such	a	thing	was	possible,	and	the	Bridgeburner	wasn’t	sure	it
was.	They	had	difficulty	meeting	his	eyes,	yet	held	their	ground.	‘What	in
Hood’s	name	am	I	supposed	to	do	with	you?’
He	glanced	back	over	a	shoulder.	His	two	new	sergeants	were	coming	up
behind	him,	other	soldiers	gathering	behind	them.	Both	women	looked	like
bags	overstuffed	with	bad	memories.	Their	faces	were	sickly	grey,	as	if	they’d
forgotten	all	of	life’s	pleasures,	as	if	they’d	seen	the	other	side.	But	lasses,	it’s
not	so	bad,	it’s	just	the	getting	there	that	stinks.
‘Commander?’	Sweetlard	enquired,	nodding	to	the	Khundryl.
‘They’re	volunteering	to	join	up,’	said	Hedge,	scowling.	‘Cashiered	outa
the	Burned	Tears,	or	something	like	that.’	He	faced	the	five	men	again.	‘I’d
wager	Gall	will	call	this	treason	and	come	for	your	heads.’
The	eldest	of	the	warriors,	his	face	almost	black	with	tear	tattoos,	seemed


to	hunch	lower	beneath	his	broad,	sloping	shoulders.	‘Gall	Inshikalan’s	soul	is
dead.	All	his	children	died	in	the	charge.	He	sees	only	the	past.	The	Khundryl
Burned	Tears	are	no	more.’	He	gestured	at	his	companions.	‘Yet	we	would
fight	on.’
‘Why	not	the	Bonehunters?’	Hedge	asked.
‘Fist	Kindly	refused	us.’
Another	warrior	growled	and	said,	‘He	called	us	savages.	And	cowards.’
‘Cowards?’	Hedge’s	scowl	deepened.	‘You	were	in	that	charge?’
‘We	were.’
‘And	you	would	fight	on?	What’s	cowardly	about	that?’
The	eldest	one	said,	‘He	sought	to	shame	us	back	to	our	people	–	but	we
are	destroyed.	We	kneel	in	Coltaine’s	shadow,	broken	by	failure.’
‘You’re	saying	all	the	others	will	just…fade	away?’
The	man	shrugged.
Alchemist	Bavedict	spoke	behind	Hedge.	‘Commander,	we	took	us	a	few
losses.	These	warriors	are	veterans.	And	survivors.’
Hedge	looked	round	again,	studied	the	Letherii.	‘Aren’t	we	all,’	he	said.
Bavedict	nodded.
Sighing,	Hedge	faced	the	warriors	once	more.	He	nodded	at	the
spokesman.	‘Your	name?’
‘Berrach.	These	are	my	sons.	Sleg,	Gent,	Pahvral	and	Rayez.’
Your	sons.	No	wonder	you	didn’t	feel	welcome	in	Gall’s	camp.	‘You’re	now
our	outriders,	scouts	and,	when	needed,	cavalry.’
‘Bridgeburners?’
Hedge	nodded.	‘Bridgeburners.’
‘We’re	not	cowards,’	hissed	the	youngest,	presumably	Rayez,	his
expression	suddenly	fierce.
‘If	you	were,’	said	Hedge,	‘I’d	have	sent	you	packing.	Berrach,	you’re	now
a	Captain	of	our	Mounted	–	have	you	spare	horses?’
‘Not	any	more,	Commander.’
‘Never	mind,	then.	My	sergeants	here	will	see	you	billeted.	Dismissed.’
In	response	the	five	warriors	drew	their	sabres	and	fashioned	a	kind	of
salute	Hedge	had	never	seen	before,	blade	edges	set	diagonally	across	each
man’s	exposed	throat.
Bavedict	grunted	behind	him.
And	if	I	now	said	‘Cut’	they’d	do	just	that,	wouldn’t	they?	Gods	below.
‘Enough	of	that,	soldiers,’	he	said.	‘We	don’t	worship	Coltaine	in	the
Bridgeburners.	He	was	just	another	Malazan	commander.	A	good	one,	to	be
sure,	and	right	now	he’s	standing	in	Dassem	Ultor ’s	shadow.	And	they	got


plenty	of	company.	And	maybe	one	day	soon	Gall	will	be	there,	too.’
Berrach	was	frowning.	‘Do	we	not	honour	their	memories,	sir?’
Hedge	bared	his	teeth	in	anything	but	a	smile.	‘Honour	whoever	you	want
in	your	spare	time,	Captain,	only	you	ain’t	got	any	spare	time	any	more,
because	you’re	now	a	Bridgeburner,	and	us	Bridgeburners	honour	only	one
thing.’
‘And	that	is,	sir?’
‘Killing	the	enemy,	Captain.’
Something	awoke	in	the	faces	of	the	warriors.	As	one	they	sheathed	their
weapons.	Berrach	seemed	to	be	struggling	to	speak,	and	finally	managed	to
ask,	‘Commander	Hedge,	how	do	the	Bridgeburners	salute?’
‘We	don’t.	And	as	for	anyone	outside	our	company,	it’s	this.’
Eyes	widened	at	Hedge’s	obscene	gesture,	and	then	Berrach	grinned.
When	Hedge	turned	to	wave	his	sergeants	forward,	he	saw	that	they
weren’t	quite	the	bloated	grey	bags	he’d	seen	only	moments	earlier.	Dread	had
been	stripped	from	their	faces,	and	now	their	exhaustion	was	plain	to	see	–	but
it	had	softened	somehow.	Sweetlard	and	Rumjugs	looked	almost	beautiful
again.
Bridgeburners	get	pounded	all	the	time.	We	just	get	back	up.	No	bluster,
just	back	up,	aye.	‘Alchemist,’	he	said	to	Bavedict,	‘show	me	that	new	invention
of	yours.’
‘Finally,’	the	Letherii	replied.	‘Funny,	isn’t	it?’
‘What	is?’
‘Oh,	how	a	handful	of	Khundryl	warriors	started	you	all	up.’
‘The	sergeants	were	in	shock—’
‘Commander,	you	looked	even	worse	than	they	did.’
Oh,	Hood	take	me,	I	doubt	I	can	argue	that.	‘So	tell	me,	what’s	the	new
cusser	do?’
‘Well	now,	sir,	you	were	telling	me	about	the	Drum—’
‘I	what?	When?’
‘You	were	drunk.	Anyway,	it	got	me	to	thinking…’
	
The	two	newcomers	walked	into	the	squads’	encampment,	and	faces	lifted,	eyes
went	flat.	No	one	wanted	any	damned	interruptions	to	all	this	private	misery.
Not	now.	Badan	Gruk	hesitated,	and	then	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.
‘Eighteenth,	isn’t	it?’
The	sergeant,	a	Genabackan,	was	eyeing	the	other	soldiers.	‘Which	one	is
what’s	left	of	the	Tenth?’


Badan	Gruk	felt	himself	go	cold.	He	could	feel	the	sudden,	sharp	attention
of	the	others	in	the	camp.	He	understood	that	regard.	He	wasn’t	a	hard	man	and
they	all	knew	it	–	so,	would	he	back	down	now?	If	I	had	anything	left,	I	would.
‘I	don’t	know	where	in	the	trenches	you	were,	but	we	met	that	first	charge.	It’s	a
damned	miracle	any	one	of	us	is	still	alive.	There’s	two	marines	left	from	the
Tenth,	and	I	guess	that’s	why	you’re	here,	since	you,	Sergeant,	and	your
corporal,	are	obviously	the	only	survivors	from	your	squad.	You	lost	all	your
soldiers.’
At	that	comment	Badan	paused,	gauging	the	effect	of	his	words.	He	saw
none.	What	does	that	tell	us?	Nothing	good.	He	half	turned	and	gestured.
‘There,	those	ones,	they’re	from	Primly’s	squad.	But	Sergeant	Primly	is	dead.
So	is	Hunt	and	so	are	Neller	and	Mulvan	Dreader,	and	Corporal	Kisswhere’s
gone…missing.	You’re	left	with	Skulldeath	and	Drawfirst.’
Trailed	by	his	corporal,	the	sergeant	walked	over.	‘On	your	feet,	marines,’
he	said.	‘I’m	Sergeant	Gaunt-Eye,	and	this	is	Corporal	Rib.	The	Tenth	is	no
more.	You’re	now	in	the	Eighteenth.’
‘What?’	demanded	Drawfirst.	‘A	squad	of	four?’
The	corporal	replied.	‘We’re	picking	up	two	more	from	the	Seventh,	and
another	two	from	Ninth	Company’s	Fifth.’
Ruffle	limped	up	beside	Badan	Gruk.	‘Sergeant,	Sinter ’s	back.’
Badan	sighed	and	turned	away.	‘Fine.	She	can	handle	this,	then.’	He’d	had
his	moment	of	spine.	Nobody	would	have	to	look	his	way	any	more,
expecting…expecting	what?	Hood	knows.	They’re	just	collecting	up	scraps
now.	Enough	to	make	a	rag.	He	returned	to	the	remnants	of	the	fire,	sat	with	his
back	to	the	others.
I’ve	seen	enough.	Not	even	marines	do	this	for	a	living.	You	can’t	die	for	a
living.	So,	sew	together	new	squads	all	you	like.	But	really,	just	how	many
marines	are	left?	Fifty?	Sixty?	No,	better	to	let	us	soak	into	the	regulars,	sour
as	old	blood.	Hood	knows,	I’m	sick	of	these	faces	here,	sick	of	not	seeing	the
ones	missing,	the	ones	I’ll	never	see	again.	Shoaly.	Strap	Mull.	Skim,	Hunt,	all
of	them.
Sinter	was	speaking	to	Gaunt-Eye,	but	the	tones	were	low,	level,	and	a	few
moments	later	she	came	over	and	squatted	down	at	his	side.	‘Rider	in	from	the
Burned	Tears.	Kisswhere’s	still	mending.	That	broken	leg	was	a	bad	one.’
‘They	took	them	away?’
‘Who?’
‘That	sergeant.’
‘Aye,	though	it’s	not	so	much	“away”	as	“just	over	there”,	Badan.	Not
enough	of	us	to	sprawl.’


Badan	found	a	stick	and	stirred	at	the	ashes.	‘What	is	she	going	to	do,
Sinter?’
‘Kisswhere?’
‘The	Adjunct.’
‘How	should	I	know?	I’ve	not	talked	to	her.	No	one	has,	as	far	as	I	can	tell
–	at	least,	the	Fists	look	to	be	in	charge	at	the	moment.’
Badan	dropped	the	stick	and	then	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘We	got	to	go	back,’
he	said.
‘That	won’t	happen,’	Sinter	replied.
He	shot	her	a	glare.	‘We	can’t	just	pick	up	and	go	on.’
‘Keep	it	down,	Badan.	We	pulled	out	more	soldiers	than	we	should	have.
We’re	not	as	mauled	as	we	could	have	been.	Ruthan	Gudd,	Quick	Ben,	and	then
what	happened	at	the	vanguard.	Those	things	checked	them.	Not	to	mention	Fid
getting	us	dug	in	–	without	those	trenches,	the	heavies	would	never	have—’
‘Died?’
‘Held.	Long	enough	for	the	Letherii	to	bleed	off	pressure.	Long	enough
for	the	rest	of	us	to	disengage—’
‘Disengage,	aye,	that’s	a	good	one.’
She	leaned	closer.	‘Listen	to	me,’	she	hissed.	‘We	didn’t	die.	Not	one	of	us
still	here—’
‘Can’t	be	more	obvious,	what	you	just	said.’
‘No,	you’re	not	getting	it.	We	got	overrun,	Badan,	but	we	clawed	through
even	that.	Aye,	maybe	it	was	the	Lady	pulling	in	a	frenzy,	maybe	it	was	all	the
others	stepping	into	the	paths	of	the	blades	coming	down	on	us.	Maybe	it	was
how	rattled	they	were	by	then	–	from	what	I	heard	Lostara	Yil	was	almost
invisible	inside	a	cloud	of	blood,	and	none	of	it	her	own.	They	had	to	check	at
that.	A	pause.	Hesitation.	Whatever,	the	plain	truth	is,	when	we	started	pulling
back—’
‘They	left	us	to	it.’
‘Point	is,	could	have	been	a	lot	worse,	Badan.	Look	at	the	Khundryl.	Six
thousand	went	in,	less	than	a	thousand	rode	back	out.	I	heard	some	survivors
have	been	wandering	into	camp.	Joining	up	with	Dead	Hedge’s	Bridgeburners.
They	say	Warleader	Gall	is	broken.	So,	you	see	what	happens	when	the
commander	breaks?	The	rest	just	crumble.’
‘Maybe	now	it’s	our	turn.’
‘I	doubt	it.	She	was	injured,	remember,	and	Denul	don’t	work	on	her.	She
needs	to	find	her	own	way	of	healing.	But	you’re	still	missing	my	point.	Don’t
break	to	pieces,	Badan.	Don’t	crawl	inside	yourself.	Your	squad	lost	Skim,	but
nobody	else.’


‘Nep	Furrow’s	sick.’
‘He’s	always	sick,	Badan.	At	least,	ever	since	we	set	foot	on	the
Wastelands.’
‘Reliko	wakes	up	screaming.’
‘He	ain’t	alone	in	that.	He	and	Vastly	stood	with	the	other	heavies,	right?
So.’
Badan	Gruk	studied	the	dead	fire,	and	then	he	sighed.	‘All	right,	Sinter.
What	do	you	want	me	to	do?	How	do	I	fix	all	this?’
‘Fix	this?	You	idiot,	stop	even	trying.	It	ain’t	up	to	us.	We	keep	our	eye	on
our	officers,	we	wait	for	their	lead.’
‘I	ain’t	seen	Captain	Sort.’
‘That’s	because	she’s	just	been	made	a	Fist	–	where	you	been?	Never	mind.
We’re	waiting	for	Fid,	that’s	the	truth	of	it.	Same	time	as	the	parley,	he’s	calling
all	of	us	together,	the	last	of	the	marines	and	heavies.’
‘He’s	still	just	a	sergeant.’
‘Wrong.	Captain	now.’
Despite	himself,	Badan	Gruk	smiled.	‘Bet	he’s	thrilled.’
‘Been	dancing	all	morning,	aye.’
‘So	we	all	gather.’	He	looked	over,	met	her	eyes.	‘And	we	listen	to	what	he
has	to	say.	And	then…’
‘Then…well,	we’ll	see.’
Badan	squinted	at	her,	his	anxiety	returning	in	a	chill	rush.	Not	the	answer	I
expected.	‘Sinter,	should	we	go	and	get	Kisswhere?’
‘Oh,	she’d	like	that.	No,	let	the	cow	stew	a	while.’
	
‘It	was	us	being	so	short,’	Ruffle	said.
‘Ey	whev?’
‘You	heard	me,	Nep.	Those	Short-Tails	were	too	tall.	Swinging	down	as
low	as	they	had	to	was	hard	–	their	armour	wouldn’t	give	enough	at	the	waist.
And	did	you	see	us?	We	learned	fast.	We	waged	war	on	their	shins.	Stabbed	up
into	their	crotches.	Hamstrung	’em.	Skewered	their	damned	feet.	We	were	an
army	of	roach	dogs,	Nep.’
‘I	een	no	eruch	dhug,	Errufel.	E’en	a	vulf,	izme.	Nep	Vulf!’
Reliko	spoke	up.	‘Think	you	got	a	point	there,	Ruffle.	We	started	fighting
damned	low,	didn’t	we?	Right	at	their	feet,	in	close,	doing	our	work.’	His	ebonskinned	face	worked	into	something	like	a	grin.
‘Just	what	I	said,’	Ruffle	nodded,	lighting	another	rustleaf	stick	to	conclude
a	breakfast	of	five	others.	Her	hands	trembled.	She’d	taken	a	slash	to	her	right


leg.	The	roughly	sewn	wound	ached.	And	so	did	everything	else.
	
Sinter	settled	down	beside	Honey.	In	a	low	voice	she	said,	‘They	had	to	take	the
arm.’
Honey’s	face	tightened.	‘Weapon	arm.’
Others	were	leaning	in	to	listen.	Sinter	frowned.	‘Aye.	Corporal	Rim’s
going	to	be	clumsy	for	a	while.’
‘So,	Sergeant,’	said	Lookback,	‘are	we	gonna	be	folded	into	another	squad,
too?	Or	maybe	swallow	up	some	other	one	with	only	a	couple	of	marines
left?’
Sinter	shrugged.	‘Still	being	worked	out.’
Honey	said,	‘Didn’t	like	what	happened	to	the	Tenth,	Sergeant.	One
moment	there,	the	next	just	gone.	Like	a	puff	of	smoke.	That’s	not	right.’
‘Gaunt-Eye’s	a	bit	of	a	bastard,’	Sinter	said.	‘No	tact.’
‘Let	all	his	soldiers	die,	too,’	pointed	out	Lookback.
‘Enough	of	that.	You	can’t	think	of	it	that	way,	not	this	time.	Heads	went	up,
heads	got	blown	off,	and	then	they	were	on	top	of	us.	It	was	every	soldier	for
herself	and	himself.’
‘Not	for	Fid,’	said	Honey.	‘Or	Corporal	Tarr.	Or	Corabb	or	Urb	or	even
Hellian.	They	rallied	marines,	Sergeant.	They	kept	their	heads	and	so	people
lived.’
Sinter	looked	away.	‘Too	much	talking	going	on	around	here,	I	think.
You’re	all	picking	scabs	and	it’s	getting	ugly.’	She	stood.	‘Need	another	word
with	Fid.’
	
Sergeant	Urb	walked	over	to	Saltlick.	‘On	your	feet,	squad.’
The	man	looked	up,	grunted	his	way	upright.
‘Collect	your	kit.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	Where	we	headed	to?’
Without	replying,	Urb	set	off,	the	heavy	dropping	in	two	steps	behind	him.
Urb	wasn’t	looking	forward	to	this.	He	knew	the	faces	of	most	of	this	army’s
marines.	In	such	matters,	his	memory	was	good.	Faces.	Easy.	The	people
hiding	behind	them,	not	easy.	Names,	not	a	chance.	Now,	of	course,	there
weren’t	many	faces	left.
The	marine	and	heavy	infantry	encampment	was	a	mess.	Disorganized,
careless.	Squads	set	up	leaving	gaps	where	other	squads	used	to	be.	Tents	hung


slack	from	slipshod	pegging.	Weapon	belts,	battered	shields	and	scarred
armour	were	left	lying	around	on	the	ground,	amidst	rodara	bones	and	the
boiled	vertebrae	of	myrid.	Shallow	holes	reeked	where	soldiers	had	thrown	up
–	people	complained	of	some	stomach	bug,	but	more	likely	it	was	just	nerves,
the	terrible	aftermath	of	battle.	The	acid	of	surviving	that	just	kept	on	burning
its	way	up	the	throat.
And	around	them	all,	the	morning	stretched	out	in	its	measured	madness,
senseless	as	ever.	Lightening	sky,	the	spin	and	whirl	of	insects,	the	muted
baying	of	animals	being	driven	to	slaughter.	One	thing	was	missing,	however.
No	one	was	saying	much	of	anything.	Soldiers	sat,	heads	down,	or	glancing	up
every	now	and	then,	eyes	empty	and	far	away.
All	under	siege.	By	the	gaps	round	the	circle,	by	the	heaps	of	tents	left
folded	and	bound	with	their	clutter	of	poles	and	bag	of	stakes.	The	dead	didn’t
have	anything	to	say,	either,	but	everyone	still	sat,	listening	for	them.
Urb	drew	up	at	the	foot	of	one	such	broken	circle	of	seated	soldiers.
They’d	set	a	pot	on	embers	and	the	smell	wafting	from	the	brew	was	heady,
alcoholic.	Urb	studied	them.	Two	women,	two	men.	‘Twenty-second	squad?’
The	elder	of	the	two	women	nodded	without	looking	up.	Urb	remembered
seeing	her.	A	lively	face,	he	recalled.	Sharp	tongue.	Malaz	City,	maybe,	or
Jakatan.	Islander	for	sure.	‘Stand	up,	all	of	you.’
He	saw	resentment	in	the	faces	lifting	to	him.	The	other	woman,	young,
dark-skinned	and	black-haired,	had	eyes	of	startling	blue,	which	now	flashed	in
outrage.	‘Fine,	Sergeant,’	she	said	in	an	accent	he’d	never	heard	before,
‘you’ve	just	filled	out	your	squad.’	Seeing	Saltlick	standing	behind	Urb,	her
expression	changed.	‘Heavy.’	She	nodded	respectfully.
The	other	woman	shot	her	companions	a	hard	look.	‘This	is	the	Thirteenth
you’re	looking	at,	boys	and	girls.	This	squad,	and	Hellian’s,	they	drank	lizard
blood	that	day.	So,	all	of	you,	stand	the	fuck	up	and	do	it	now.’	She	led	the	way.
‘Sergeant	Urb,	I’m	Clasp.	You	come	to	collect	us,	good.	We	need	collecting.’
The	others	had	clambered	to	their	feet,	but	the	younger	woman	was	still
scowling.	‘We	lost	us	a	good	sergeant—’
‘Who	didn’t	listen	when	they	said	duck,’	Clasp	retorted.
‘Always	had	his	nose	in	something,’	said	one	of	the	men,	a	Kartoolian
sporting	an	oiled	beard.
‘Curiosity,’	observed	the	other	man,	a	short,	broad	Falari	with	long	hair
the	colour	of	blood-streaked	gold.	The	tip	of	his	nose	had	been	sliced	off,
stubbing	his	face.
‘You	all	done	with	the	elegy?’	Urb	asked.	‘Good.	This	is	Saltlick.	Now,
faces	I	know,	so	I	know	all	of	yours.	Give	me	some	names.’


The	Kartoolian	said,	‘Burnt	Rope,	Sergeant.	Sapper.’
‘Lap	Twirl,’	said	the	Falari.	‘Cutter.’
‘Healing?’
‘Don’t	count	on	it,	not	on	this	ground.’
‘Sad,’	said	the	younger	woman.	‘Squad	mage.	About	as	useless	as	Lap	right
now.’
‘Still	have	your	crossbows?’	Urb	asked.
No	one	spoke.
‘First	task,	then,	off	to	the	armoury.	Then	back	here,	and	clean	up	this	sty.
The	Twenty-second	is	retired.	Welcome	to	the	Thirteenth.	Saltlick,	keep	them
company.	Clasp,	you’re	now	corporal.	Congratulations.’
When	they’d	all	trooped	off,	Urb	stood	alone,	motionless,	and	for	a	long
time,	unnoticed	by	anyone,	he	stared	at	nothing.
	
Someone	nudged	her	shoulder.	She	moaned	and	rolled	on	to	her	side.	A	second
nudge,	harder	this	time.	‘G’way.	Still	dark.’
‘Still	dark,	Sergeant,	because	you	blindfolded	yourself.’
‘I	did?	Well,	why	didn’t	you	do	the	same,	then	we’d	all	be	sleeping	still.	Go
away.’
‘It’s	morning,	Sergeant.	Captain	Fiddler	wants—’
‘He	always	wants.	Soon	as	they	turn	inta	officers,	it’s	do	this	do	that	alla
time.	Someone	gimme	a	jug.’
‘All	gone,	Sergeant.’
She	reached	up,	felt	at	the	rough	cloth	covering	her	eyes,	pulled	one	edge
down,	just	enough	to	uncover	one	eye.	‘That	can’t	be	right.	Go	find	some
more.’
‘We	will,’	Brethless	promised.	‘Soon	as	you	get	up.	Someone’s	been
through	the	squads,	doing	counts.	We	don’t	like	it.	Makes	us	nervous.’
‘Why?’	The	lone	eye	blinked.	‘I	got	me	eight	marines—’
‘Four,	Sergeant.’
‘Fifty	per	cent	losses	ain’t	too	bad,	for	a	party.’
‘A	party,	Sergeant?’
She	sat	up.	‘I	had	eight	last	night.’
‘Four.’
‘Right,	four	twice	over.’
‘There	wasn’t	no	party,	Sergeant.’
Hellian	tugged	to	expose	her	other	eye.	‘There	wasn’t,	huh?	Thas	what	you
get	for	wand’ring	off,	then,	Corporal.	Missed	the	good	times.’


‘Aye,	I	suppose	I	did.	We’re	melting	a	lump	of	chocolate	in	a	pot	–	thought
you	might	like	some.’
‘That	stuff?	I	remember	now.	Balklo	chocolate.	All	right,	get	outa	my	tent
so	I	can	get	decent.’
‘You’re	not	in	your	tent,	Sergeant,	you’re	in	our	latrine	ditch.’
She	looked	round.	‘That	explains	the	smell.’
‘None	of	us	used	it	yet,	Sergeant,	seeing	as	how	you	were	here.’
‘Oh.’
	
His	stomach	convulsed	again,	but	there	was	nothing	left	to	spit	up,	so	he	rode	it
out,	waited,	gasping,	and	then	slowly	settled	back	on	his	haunches.	‘Poliel’s
prissy	nipples!	If	I	can’t	keep	nothing	down	I’ll	waste	away!’
‘You	already	have,	Widder,’	observed	Throatslitter	from	a	few	paces
upwind,	his	voice	a	cracking	rasp.	The	old	scars	on	his	neck	were	inflamed;
he’d	taken	a	shot	to	his	chest,	hard	enough	to	dent	his	sternum	with	matted
rows	from	the	mail’s	iron	links,	and	something	from	that	trauma	had	messed
up	his	throat.
They	were	away	from	the	camp,	twenty	paces	beyond	the	eastern	picket.
Widdershins,	Throatslitter,	Deadsmell	and	Sergeant	Balm.	The	survivors	of	the
9th	Squad.	The	regulars	crouched	in	their	holes	had	watched	them	pass	with
red-shot	eyes,	saying	nothing.	Was	that	belligerence?	Pity?	The	squad	mage
didn’t	know	and	at	the	moment	was	past	caring.	Wiping	his	mouth	with	the
back	of	one	forearm,	he	looked	past	Throatslitter	to	Balm.	‘You	called	us	up
here,	Sergeant.	What	now?’
Balm	drew	off	his	helm,	scratched	vigorously	at	his	scalp.	‘Just	thought	I’d
tell	you,	we	ain’t	breaking	the	squad	up	and	we	ain’t	picking	up	any	new
bodies.	It’s	just	us,	now.’
Widdershins	grunted.	‘We	took	a	walk	for	that?’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,’	said	Deadsmell	in	a	growl.
Balm	faced	his	soldiers.	‘Talk,	all	of	you.	You	first,	Throatslitter.’
The	tall	man	seemed	to	flinch.	‘What’s	to	say?	We’re	chewed	to	pieces.	But
Kindly	hogtying	Fid	like	that,	well,	bloody	genius.	We	got	ourselves	a	captain,
now—’
‘There	wasn’t	anything	wrong	with	Sort,’	Deadsmell	interjected.
‘Not	saying	there	was.	Definite	officer,	that	woman.	But	maybe	that’s	the
point.	Fid’s	from	the	ground	up	a	marine,	through	and	through.	He	was	a
sapper.	A	sergeant.	Now	he’s	captain	of	what’s	left	of	us.	I’m	settled	with	that.’
He	shrugged,	facing	Balm.	‘Nothing	more	to	say,	Sergeant.’


‘And	when	he	says	it’s	time	to	go,	you	gonna	bleat	and	whine	about	it?’
Throatslitter ’s	brows	lifted.	‘Go?	Go	where?’
Balm	squinted	and	then	said,	‘Your	turn,	Deadsmell.’
‘Hood’s	dead.	Grey	riders	patrol	the	Gate.	In	my	dreams	I	see	faces,
blurred,	but	still.	Malazans.	Bridgeburners.	You	can’t	imagine	how	comforting
that	feels,	you	just	can’t.	They’re	all	there,	and	I	think	we	got	Dead	Hedge	to
thank	for	that.’
‘How	do	you	mean?’	Widdershins	asked.
‘Just	a	feeling.	As	if,	in	coming	back,	he	blazed	a	trail.	Six	days	ago,	well,	I
swear	they	were	close	enough	to	kiss.’
‘Because	we	all	almost	died,’	Throatslitter	snapped.
‘No,	they	were	like	wasps,	and	what	was	sweet	wasn’t	us	dying,	wasn’t	the
lizards	neither.	It	was	what	happened	at	the	vanguard.	It	was	Lostara	Yil.’	His
eyes	were	bright	as	he	looked	to	each	soldier	in	turn.	‘I	caught	a	glimpse,	you
know.	I	saw	her	dance.	She	did	what	Ruthan	Gudd	did,	only	she	didn’t	go	down
under	blades.	The	lizards	recoiled	–	they	didn’t	know	what	to	do,	they	couldn’t
get	close,	and	those	that	did,	gods,	they	were	cut	to	pieces.	I	saw	her,	and	my
heart	near	burst.’
‘She	saved	the	Adjunct’s	life,’	said	Throatslitter.	‘Was	that	such	a	good
thing?’
‘Not	for	you	to	even	ask,’	said	Balm.	‘Fid’s	calling	us	together.	He’s	got
things	to	say.	About	that,	I	expect.	The	Adjunct.	And	what’s	to	come.	We’re	still
marines.	We’re	the	marines,	and	we	got	heavies	in	our	ranks,	the	stubbornest
bulls	I	ever	seen.’
He	turned	then,	since	two	regulars	from	the	pickets	were	approaching.	In
their	arms,	two	loaves	of	bread,	a	wrapped	brick	of	cheese,	and	a	Seven	Cities
clay	bottle.
‘What’s	this?’	Deadsmell	wondered.
The	two	soldiers	halted	a	few	paces	away,	and	the	one	on	the	right	spoke.
‘Guard’s	changed,	Sergeant.	Came	out	with	some	breakfast	for	us.	We	weren’t
much	hungry.’	They	then	set	the	items	down	on	a	bare	patch	of	ground.
Nodded,	set	off	back	for	camp.
‘Hood’s	pink	belly,’	Deadsmell	muttered.
‘Save	all	that,’	Balm	said.	‘We’re	not	yet	done	here.	Widdershins.’
‘Warrens	are	sick,	Sergeant.	Well,	you	seen	what	they’re	doing	to	us
mages.	And	there’s	new	ones,	new	warrens,	I	mean,	but	they	ain’t	nice	at	all.
Still,	I	might	have	to	delve	into	them,	once	I	get	tired	of	being	completely
useless.’
‘You’re	the	best	among	us	with	a	crossbow,	Widder,	so	you	ain’t	useless


even	without	any	magic.’
‘Maybe	so,	Throatslitter,	but	it	doesn’t	feel	that	way.’
‘Deadsmell,’	said	Balm,	‘you’ve	been	doing	some	healing.’
‘I	have,	but	Widder ’s	right.	It’s	not	fun.	The	problem	–	for	me,	that	is	–	is
that	I’m	still	somehow	bound	to	Hood.	Even	though	he’s,	uh,	dead.	Don’t	know
why	that	should	be,	but	the	magic	when	it	comes	to	me,	well,	it’s	cold	as	ice.’
Widdershins	frowned	at	Deadsmell.	‘Ice.	That	makes	no	sense.’
‘Hood	was	a	damned	Jaghut,	so	yes,	it	does.	And	no,	it	doesn’t,	because
he’s…	well,	gone.’
Throatslitter	spat	and	said,	‘If	he	really	died,	like	you	say,	did	he	walk	into
his	realm?	And	didn’t	he	have	to	be	dead	in	the	first	place,	being	the	God	of
Death	and	all?	What	you’re	saying	makes	no	sense,	Deadsmell.’
The	necromancer	looked	unhappy.	‘I	know.’
‘Next	time	you	do	some	healing,’	said	Widdershins,	‘let	me	do	some
sniffing.’
‘You’ll	heave	again.’
‘So	what?’
‘What	are	you	thinking,	Widder?’	Balm	asked.
‘I’m	thinking	Deadsmell’s	not	using	Hood’s	warren	any	more.	I’m
thinking	it	must	be	Omtose	Phellack.’
‘It’s	occurred	to	me,’	Deadsmell	said	in	a	mumble.
‘One	way	to	test	it	for	sure,’	Balm	said.
Widdershins	swore.	‘Aye.	We	don’t	know	the	details,	but	the	rumour	is	that
she’s	got	some	broken	ribs,	maybe	even	spitting	up	blood,	and	is	still
concussed.	But	with	that	Otataral	in	her,	no	one	can	do	much	about	it.’
‘But	Omtose	Phellack	is	Elder.’	Deadsmell	was	nodding.	‘We	should	go,
then.	It’s	worth	a	try.’
‘We	will,’	said	Balm,	‘but	first	we	eat.’
‘And	leave	the	Adjunct	in	pain?’
‘We	eat	and	drink	here,’	said	Balm,	eyes	flat,	‘because	we’re	marines	and
we	don’t	kick	dirt	in	the	faces	of	fellow	soldiers.’
‘Exactly,’	said	Widdershins.	‘Besides,’	he	added,	‘I’m	starving.’
	
Shortnose	had	lost	the	four	fingers	of	his	shield	hand.	To	stop	the	bleeding	that
had	gone	on	even	after	the	nubs	had	been	sewn	up,	he	had	held	them	against	a
pot	left	squatting	in	a	fire.	Now	the	ends	looked	melted	and	there	were	blisters
up	to	his	knuckles.	But	the	bleeding	had	stopped.
He	had	been	about	to	profess	his	undying	love	for	Flashwit,	but	then	that


sergeant	from	the	18th	had	come	by	and	collected	up	both	Flashwit	and	Mayfly,
so	Shortnose	was	alone,	the	last	left	in	Gesler ’s	old	squad.
He’d	sat	for	a	time,	alone,	using	a	thorn	to	pop	blisters	and	then	sucking
them	dry.	When	that	was	done	he	sat	some	more,	watching	the	fire	burn	down.
At	the	battle	the	severed	finger	of	one	of	the	lizards	had	fallen	down	the	back
of	his	neck,	between	armour	and	shirt.	When	he’d	finally	retrieved	it,	he	and
Mayfly	and	Flashwit	had	cooked	and	shared	its	scant	ribbons	of	meat.	Then
they’d	separated	out	and	distributed	the	bones,	tying	them	into	their	hair.	It	was
what	Bonehunters	did.
They’d	insisted	he	get	the	longest	one,	on	account	of	getting	his	hand
chopped	up,	and	it	now	hung	beneath	his	beard,	overwhelming	the	other	finger
bones,	which	had	all	come	from	Letherii	soldiers.	It	was	heavy	and	long
enough	to	thump	against	his	chest	when	he	walked,	which	is	what	he	decided	to
do	once	he	realized	that	he	was	lonely.
Kit	packed,	slung	over	one	shoulder,	he	set	out.	Thirty-two	paces	took	him
into	Fiddler ’s	old	squad’s	camp,	where	he	found	a	place	to	set	up	his	tent,	left
his	satchel	in	that	spot,	and	then	walked	over	to	sit	down	with	the	other	soldiers.
The	pretty	little	woman	seated	on	his	right	handed	him	a	tin	cup	filled	with
steaming	something.	When	he	smiled	his	thanks	she	didn’t	smile	back,	which
was	when	he	recalled	that	her	name	was	Smiles.
This,	he	decided,	was	better	than	being	lonely.
	
‘Got	competition,	Corabb.’
‘Don’t	see	that,’	the	Seven	Cities	warrior	replied.
‘Shortnose	wants	to	be	our	new	fist,’	Cuttle	explained.
‘Making	what,	four	fists	in	this	squad?	Me,	Corporal	Tarr,	Koryk	and	now
Shortnose.’
‘I	was	a	corporal	not	a	fist,’	said	Tarr.	‘Besides,	I	don’t	punch,	I	just	take
’em.’
Cuttle	snorted.	‘Hardly.	You	went	forward,	no	different	from	any	fist	I	ever
seen.’
‘I	went	forward	to	stand	still,	sapper.’
‘Well,	that’s	a	good	point,’	Cuttle	conceded.	‘I	stand	corrected,	then.’
‘I	just	realized	something,’	said	Smiles.	‘We	got	no	sergeant	any	more.
Unless	it’s	you,	Tarr.	And	if	that’s	the	case,	then	we	need	a	new	corporal,	and
since	I’m	the	only	one	left	with	any	brains,	it’s	got	to	be	me.’
Tarr	scratched	at	his	greying	beard.	‘Was	thinking	Corabb,	actually.’
‘He	needs	his	own	private	weapons	wagon!’


‘I	kept	my	Letherii	sword,’	Corabb	retorted.	‘I	didn’t	lose	anything	this
time.’
‘Let’s	vote	on	it.’
‘Let’s	not,	Smiles,’	said	Tarr.	‘Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	you’re	now	the
Fourth	Squad’s	corporal.	Congratulations.’
‘He’s	barely	stopped	being	a	recruit!’	Smiles	scowled	at	everyone.
‘Cream	will	rise,’	said	Cuttle.
Koryk	bared	his	teeth	at	Smiles.	‘Live	with	it,	soldier.’
‘I’m	corporal	now,’	said	Corabb.	‘Did	you	hear	that,	Shortnose?	I’m
corporal	now.’
The	heavy	looked	up	from	his	cup.	‘Hear	what?’
	
Losing	Bottle	had	hurt	them.	Cuttle	could	see	that	in	their	faces.	The	squad’s
first	loss,	at	least	as	far	as	he	could	recall.	First	from	the	originals,	anyway.	But
the	loss	of	only	one	soldier	was	pretty	damned	good.	Most	squads	had	fared	a
lot	worse.	Some	squads	had	ceased	to	exist.	Some?	More	like	most	of	’em.
He	settled	back	against	a	spare	tent’s	bulky	folds,	watched	the	others
covertly.	Listened	to	their	complaints.	Koryk	was	a	shaken	man.	Whatever
spine	of	freedom	there’d	once	been	inside	him,	holding	him	up	straight,	had
broken.	Now	he	wore	chains	inside,	and	they	messed	with	his	brain,	and	maybe
that	was	now	permanent.	He	drank	from	a	well	of	fear,	and	he	kept	on	going
back	to	it.
That	scrap	back	there	had	been	horrible,	but	Koryk	had	been	stumbling
even	before	then.	Cuttle	wondered	what	was	left	of	the	warrior	he’d	once
known.	Tribals	had	a	way	of	kneeling	to	the	worst	vicissitudes	of	civilization,
and	no	matter	how	clever	the	cleverest	ones	might	be,	they	often	proved	blind
to	what	was	killing	them.
Maybe	no	different	from	regular	people,	but,	to	Cuttle’s	mind,	somehow
more	tragic.
Even	Smiles	was	slowly	prising	herself	loose	from	Koryk.
She	hadn’t	changed,	Cuttle	decided.	Not	one	whit.	As	psychotic	and
murderous	as	ever,	was	Smiles.	Her	knife	work	had	been	vicious,	down	there
beneath	the	swing	of	the	lizards’	weapons.	She’d	toppled	giants	that	day.	For	all
that,	she’d	make	a	terrible	corporal.
Tarr	had	been	Tarr.	The	same	as	he	always	was	and	always	would	be.	He’d
be	a	solid	sergeant.	Perhaps	a	tad	unimaginative,	but	this	squad	was	past	the
need	for	anything	that	might	shake	it	up.	And	we’ll	follow	him	sharp	enough.
The	man’s	a	bristling	wall,	and	when	that	helm	of	his	settles	low	over	his	brow,


not	a	herd	of	charging	bhederin	could	budge	him.	Aye,	Tarr,	you’ll	do	just	fine.
Corabb.	Corporal	Corabb.	Perfect.
And	now	Shortnose.	Sitting	like	a	tree	stump,	flattened	blisters	weeping
down	his	hand.	Drinking	that	rotgut	Smiles	had	brewed	up,	a	half-smile	on	his
battered	face.	You	ain’t	fooling	me,	Shortnose.	Been	in	the	army	way	too	long.
You	love	the	thick-skull	stuff,	you	heavies	all	do.	But	I	see	the	flick	of	those	tiny
eyes	under	those	lids.
‘Hear	what?’	Nice	one,	but	I	saw	the	spark	you	tried	to	hide.	Happy	to	be
here,	are	you?	Good.	Happy	to	have	you.
As	for	me,	what	have	I	learned?	Nothing	new.	We	got	through	it	but	we	got
plenty	more	to	get	through.	Ask	me	then.	Ask	me	then.
He	glanced	over	to	see	Fiddler	arriving.	Only	the	neck	of	his	fiddle	left,
hanging	down	his	back,	kinked	strings	sprung	like	errant	hairs.	Most	of	the	red
gone	from	his	beard.	His	short	sword’s	scabbard	was	empty	–	he’d	left	the
weapon	jutting	from	a	lizard’s	eye	socket.	The	look	in	his	blue	eyes	was	cool,
almost	cold.
‘Sergeant	Tarr,	half	a	bell,	and	then	lead	them	to	the	place.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
‘We	got	riders	coming	up	from	the	south.	Perish,	a	few	Khundryl,	and
someone	else.	A	whole	lot	of	someone	else.’
Cuttle	frowned.	‘Who?’
Fiddler	shrugged.	‘Parley.	We’ll	find	out	soon	enough.’
	
‘Told	you	you’d	live.’
Henar	Vygulf	smiled	up	at	her	from	where	he	lay	on	the	cot.	But	it	was	an
uncertain	smile.	‘I	did	what	you	asked,	Lostara.	I	watched.’
Her	gaze	faltered.
‘Who	are	you?’	he	asked.
‘Don’t	ask	me	that.	I	see	that	question	in	every	face.	They	all	look	at	me.
They	say	nothing.’	She	hesitated,	staring	down	at	her	hands.	‘It	was	the	Shadow
Dance.	It	was	every	Shadow	Dance.’	She	met	his	eyes	suddenly.	‘It	wasn’t	me.	I
just	slipped	back,	inside,	and	just	like	you,	I	watched.’
‘If	not	you,	then	who?’
‘The	Rope.	Cotillion,	the	Patron	God	of	Assassins.’	She	grimaced.	‘He
took	over.	He’s	done	things	like	that	before,	I	think.’
Henar ’s	eyes	widened.	‘A	god.’
‘A	furious	god.	I	–	I	have	never	felt	such	rage.	It	burned	right	through	me.
It	scoured	me	clean.’	She	unhooked	her	belt,	tugged	loose	her	scabbarded


knife.	She	set	it	down	on	the	blankets	covering	his	wounded	chest.	‘For	you,
my	love.	But	be	careful,	it’s	very,	very	sharp.’
‘The	haunt	is	gone	from	your	face,	Lostara,’	said	Henar.	‘You	were
beautiful	before,	but	now…’
‘An	unintended	gift,	to	be	sure,’	she	said	with	some	diffidence.	‘Gods	are
not	known	for	mercy.	Or	compassion.	But	no	mortal	could	stand	in	that	blaze,
and	not	come	through	either	burned	to	ashes,	or	reborn.’
‘Reborn,	yes.	A	good	description	indeed.	My	boldness,’	he	added	with	a
rueful	grimace,	‘retreats	before	you	now.’
‘Don’t	let	it,’	she	snapped.	‘I	don’t	take	mice	to	my	bed,	Henar	Vygulf.’
‘I	shall	try,	then,	to	find	the	man	I	was.’
‘I	will	help,	but	not	yet	–	the	healers	are	far	from	finished	with	you.’	She
rose.	‘I	must	leave	you	now.	The	Adjunct.’
‘I	think	Brys	has	forgotten	me.	Or	assumed	me	dead.’
‘Don’t	think	I’ll	be	reminding	him,’	she	said.	‘You	ride	at	my	side	from
now	on.’
‘Brys—’
‘Hardly.	A	word	in	private	with	Aranict	will	do	the	trick,	I	think.’
‘The	king’s	brother	is	collared?’
‘Next	time	you	two	meet,	you	can	compare	shackles.’
‘Thought	you	disliked	mice,	Lostara	Yil.’
‘Oh,	I	expect	you	to	struggle	and	strain	at	your	chains,	Henar.	It’s	the	ones
we	can’t	tame	that	we	keep	under	lock	and	key.’
‘I	see.’
She	turned	to	leave	the	hospital	tent,	saw	the	rows	of	faces	turned	to	her,
even	among	the	cutters.	‘Hood’s	breath,’	she	muttered.
	
Pleasantly	drunk,	Banaschar	made	his	way	towards	the	command	tent.	He	saw
Fist	Blistig	standing	outside	the	entrance,	like	a	condemned	man	at	the
torturer ’s	door.	Oh,	you	poor	man.	The	wrong	dead	hero	back	there.	You	had
your	chance,	I	suppose.	You	could	have	been	as	brainless	as	Keneb.	You	could
have	stayed	in	his	shadow	right	to	the	end,	in	fact,	since	you’d	clearly	been
finding	it	such	safe	shelter	for	the	past	few	months.
But	the	sun	finds	no	obstruction	in	painting	you	bright	now,	and	how	does	it
feel?	The	man	looked	ill.	But	you	don’t	drink,	do	you?	That’s	not	last	night’s
poison	in	your	face,	more’s	the	pity.	Sick	with	fear,	then,	and	Banaschar
dredged	up	some	real	sympathy	for	the	man.	A	stir	or	two,	clouding	the	waters,
dulling	the	sharp	edges	of	righteous	satisfaction.


‘Such	a	fine	morning,	Fist,’	he	said	upon	arriving.
‘You’ll	be	in	trouble	soon,	High	Priest.’
‘How	so?’
‘When	the	wine	runs	out.’
Banaschar	smiled.	‘The	temple’s	cellars	remain	well	stocked,	I	assure	you.’
Blistig’s	eyes	lit	with	something	avid.	‘You	can	just	go	there?	Any	time	you
want?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.’
‘So	why	do	you	remain?	Why	don’t	you	flee	this	madness?’
Because	Holy	Mother	wants	me	here.	I	am	her	last	priest.	She	has
something	in	mind	for	me,	yes	she	does.	‘I	am	dreadfully	sorry	to	tell	you	this,
Fist,	but	that	door	is	a	private	one,	an	exclusive	one.’
Blistig’s	face	darkened.	There	were	two	guards	outside	the	command	tent,
only	a	few	paces	away,	well	within	earshot.	‘I	was	suggesting	you	leave	us,
High	Priest.	You’re	a	useless	drunk,	a	bad	influence	on	this	army.	Why	the
Adjunct	insists	on	your	infernal	presence	at	these	gatherings	baffles	me.’
‘I	am	sure	it	does,	Fist.	But	I	can’t	imagine	being	such	a	dark	temptation	to
your	soldiers.	I	don’t	share	my	private	stock,	after	all.	Indeed,	I	suspect	seeing
me	turns	a	soul	away	from	the	miseries	of	alcohol.’
‘You	mean	you	disgust	them?’
‘Precisely	so,	Fist.’	But	we	really	shouldn’t	be	having	this	conversation,
should	we?	Because	we	could	swap	positions	and	apart	from	the	drink,	not	a
word	need	be	changed.	The	real	difference	is,	I	lose	nothing	by	their	disgust,
whereas	you…	‘Do	we	await	the	Letherii	contingent,	Fist?’
‘Simple	courtesy,	High	Priest.’
You	liked	that	idea,	did	you?	Enough	to	latch	on	to	it.	Fine.	‘Then	I	will
keep	you	company	for	a	time,	at	least	until	their	approach.’
‘Don’t	leave	it	too	long,’	Blistig	said.	‘You’d	give	a	bad	impression.’
‘No	doubt,	and	I	shall	not	overstay	the	moment.’
‘In	fact,’	resumed	Blistig,	‘I	see	the	other	Fists	on	their	way.	If	you	want
your	choice	of	seat	in	the	tent,	High	Priest,	best	go	in	now.’
Well	now,	I	can	happily	latch	on	to	that.	‘Tactical,	Fist.	I	shall	heed	your
advice.’	Bowing,	he	turned	and	strode	between	the	two	guards.	Catching	the	eye
of	one,	he	winked.
And	received	nothing	in	return.
	
Lostara	Yil	turned	at	the	shout	to	see	four	marines	approaching	her.	A	Dal
Honese	sergeant,	what	was	his	name?	Balm.	Three	soldiers	trailed	him,


presumably	what	was	left	of	his	squad.	‘You	want	something,	Sergeant?	Be
quick,	I’m	on	my	way	to	the	command	tent.’
‘So	are	we,’	Balm	said.	‘Got	a	healer	here	who	maybe	could	do	something
for	her.’
‘Sergeant,	it	doesn’t	work	that	way—’
‘It	might,’	said	the	tall	soldier	with	the	scarred	neck,	his	voice	thin,	the
sound	of	stone	whetting	iron.
‘Explain.’
Another	soldier	said,	‘We’re	thinking	he’s	using	an	Elder	Warren,
Captain.’
‘A	what?	How	in	Hood’s	name	can	that	be?’
The	healer	seemed	to	choke	on	something,	and	then	he	stepped	forward.
‘It’s	worth	my	trying,	sir.	I	think	Widdershins	is	right	this	time,	for	a	change.’
Lostara	considered	for	a	moment,	before	nodding.	‘Follow	me.’
Marines	weren’t	in	the	habit	of	wasting	people’s	time,	and	asking	to	step
into	the	presence	of	the	Adjunct	was,	for	most	of	them,	far	from	a	feverish
ambition.	So	they	think	they’ve	worked	something	out.	It’d	be	worth	seeing	if
they’re	right.	Her	headaches	are	getting	worse	–	you	can	see	it.
The	command	tent	came	into	view,	and	she	saw	the	Fists	gathered	at	the
entrance.	They	noted	her	approach	and	whatever	desultory	conversation	had
been	going	on	a	moment	earlier	fell	away.	Fine	then,	even	you.	Go	ahead.
‘Fists,’	she	said,	‘if	you	would	be	so	good	as	to	clear	a	path.	These	marines
have	an	appointment	with	the	Adjunct.’
‘First	I’ve	heard	of	it,’	said	Kindly.
‘Well,	as	I	recall,’	said	Lostara,	‘the	remaining	heavies	and	marines	are
now	under	the	command	of	Captain	Fiddler,	and	he	answers	only	to	the
Adjunct.’
‘I	mean	to	address	that	with	the	Adjunct,’	said	Kindly.
There’s	no	point.	‘That	will	have	to	wait	until	after	the	parley,	Fist.’
Gesturing,	she	led	the	marines	between	the	company	commanders.	And	will
you	all	stop	staring?	Their	attention	tightened	the	muscles	of	her	neck	as	she
walked	past,	and	it	was	a	relief	to	duck	into	the	tent’s	shadowed	entranceway.
Most	of	the	interior	canvas	walls	had	been	removed,	making	the	space
seem	vast.	Only	at	the	far	end	was	some	privacy	maintained	for	the	Adjunct’s
sleeping	area,	with	a	series	of	weighted	curtains	stretching	from	one	side	to	the
other.	The	only	occupant	Lostara	could	see	was	Banaschar,	sitting	on	a	long
bench	with	his	back	to	the	outer	wall,	arms	crossed	and	seemingly	dozing.
There	was	a	long	table	and	two	more	benches,	and	nothing	else,	not	even	a
lantern.	No,	no	lantern.	The	light	stabs	her	like	a	knife.


As	the	squad	drew	up	behind	Lostara,	one	of	the	curtains	was	drawn	back.
Adjunct	Tavore	stepped	into	view.
Even	from	a	distance	of	close	to	ten	paces	Lostara	could	see	the	sheen	of
sweat	on	that	pallid	brow.	Gods,	if	the	army	saw	this,	they’d	melt	like	snow	in
the	fire.	Vanish	on	the	wind.
‘What	are	these	marines	doing	here,	Captain?’	The	words	were	weak,	the
tone	wandering.	‘We	await	formal	guests.’
‘This	squad’s	healer	thinks	he	can	do	something	for	you,	Adjunct.’
‘Then	he	is	a	fool.’
The	soldier	in	question	stepped	forward.	‘Adjunct.	I	am	Corporal
Deadsmell,	Ninth	Squad.	My	warren	was	Hood’s.’
Her	bleached	eyes	fluttered.	‘If	I	understand	the	situation,	Corporal,	then
you	have	my	sympathy.’
He	seemed	taken	aback.	‘Well,	thank	you,	Adjunct.	The	thing	is…’	He	held
up	his	hands	and	Lostara	gasped	as	a	flood	of	icy	air	billowed	out	around	the
healer.	Frost	limned	the	peaked	ceiling.	Deadsmell’s	breaths	flowed	in	white
streams.
The	mage,	Widdershins,	said,	‘Omtose	Phellack,	Adjunct.	Elder.’
Tavore	was	perfectly	still,	as	if	frozen	in	place.	Her	eyes	narrowed	on	the
healer.	‘You	have	found	a	Jaghut	for	a	patron,	Deadsmell?’
To	that	question	the	man	seemed	at	a	loss	for	an	answer.
‘The	God	of	Death	is	no	more,’	Widdershins	said,	his	teeth	chattering	as
the	temperature	in	the	chamber	plummeted.	‘But	it	may	be	that	Hood	himself
ain’t	quite	as	dead	as	we	all	thought	he	was.’
‘We	thought	that,	did	we?’	Tavore’s	lips	thinned	as	she	regarded
Deadsmell.	‘Healer,	approach.’
	
One	hand	twisting	tight	to	keep	the	man	upright,	Balm	guided	Deadsmell	back
outside.	Throatslitter	and	Widdershins	closed	in	from	either	side,	the	looks	on
their	faces	fierce,	as	if	they	were	moments	from	drawing	weapons	should
anyone	come	close.
The	Fists	backed	away	as	one,	and	the	sergeant	scowled	at	them	all.	‘Make
room	if	you	please,	sirs.	Oh,	and	she’ll	see	you	now.’	Without	waiting	a	reply,
Balm	tugged	Deadsmell	forward,	the	healer	staggering	–	his	clothes	sodden	as
frost	and	ice	melted	in	the	morning	heat.	Twenty	paces	away,	behind	a	sagging
supply	tent,	the	sergeant	finally	halted.	‘Sit	down,	Deadsmell.	Gods	below,	tell
me	this’ll	pass.’
The	healer	slumped	to	the	ground.	His	head	sank	and	the	others	waited	for


the	man	to	be	sick.	Instead,	they	heard	something	like	a	sob.	Balm	stared	at
Throatslitter,	and	then	at	Widdershins,	but	by	their	expressions	they	were	as
baffled	as	he	was.	He	crouched	down,	one	hand	resting	lightly	on	Deadsmell’s
back	–	he	could	feel	the	shudders	pushing	through.
The	healer	wept	for	some	time.
No	one	spoke.
When	the	sobs	began	to	subside,	Balm	leaned	closer.	‘Corporal,	what	in
Togg’s	name	is	going	on	with	you?’
‘I	–	I	can’t	explain,	Sergeant.’
‘The	healing	worked,’	said	Balm.	‘We	all	saw	it.’
He	nodded,	still	not	lifting	his	head.
‘So…what?’
‘She	let	down	her	defences,	just	for	a	moment.	Let	me	in,	Sergeant.	She	had
to,	so	I	could	heal	the	damage	–	and	gods,	was	there	damage!	Stepping	into
view	–	that	must	have	taken	everything	she	had.	Standing,	talking…’	he	shook
his	head.	‘I	saw	inside.	I	saw—’
He	broke	down	all	over	again,	shaking	with	vast,	overwhelming	sobs.
Balm	remained	crouched	at	his	side.	Widdershins	and	Throatslitter	stood
forming	a	kind	of	barrier	facing	outward.	There	was	nothing	to	do	but	wait.
	
In	the	moments	before	the	Fists	trooped	inside,	Lostara	Yil	stood	facing
Tavore.	She	struggled	to	keep	her	voice	steady,	calm.	‘Welcome	back,
Adjunct.’
Tavore	slowly	drew	a	deep	breath.	‘Your	thoughts,	High	Priest?’
To	one	side,	Banaschar	lifted	his	head.	‘I’m	too	cold	to	think,	Adjunct.’
‘Omtose	Phellack.	Have	you	felt	the	footfalls	of	the	Jaghut,	Banaschar?’
The	ex-priest	shrugged.	‘So	Hood	had	a	back	door.	Should	we	really	be
surprised?	That	devious	shit	of	a	god	was	never	one	for	playing	straight.’
‘Disingenuous,	High	Priest.’
His	face	twisted.	‘Think	hard	on	where	your	gifts	come	from,	Adjunct.’
‘At	last,’	she	retorted,	‘some	sound	advice	from	you,	High	Priest.
Almost…sober.’
If	he	planned	on	a	reply,	he	bit	it	off	when	Kindly,	Sort	and	Blistig	entered
the	chamber.
There	was	a	stretch	of	silence,	and	then	Faradan	Sort	snorted	and	said,
‘And	here	I	always	believed	a	chilly	reception	was	just	a—’
‘I	am	informed,’	cut	in	the	Adjunct,	‘that	our	guests	are	on	their	way.
Before	they	arrive,	I	wish	each	of	you	to	report	on	the	disposition	of	your


soldiers.	Succinctly,	please.’
The	Fists	stared.
Lostara	Yil	glanced	over	at	Banaschar,	and	saw	something	flickering	in	his
eyes	as	he	studied	the	Adjunct.
	
Their	approach	took	them	down	the	north	avenue	of	the	Malazan	encampment,
winding	down	the	crooked	track	between	abattoir	tents,	where	the	stench	of
butchered	animals	was	rank	in	the	fly-swarmed	air.	Atri-Ceda	Aranict	rode	in
silence	beside	Commander	Brys,	hunched	against	the	bleating	of	myrid	and
lowing	of	rodara,	the	squeal	of	terrified	pigs	and	the	moaning	of	cattle.
Creatures	facing	slaughter	well	understood	their	fate,	and	the	sound	of	their
voices	crowding	the	air	was	a	torment.
‘Ill	chosen,’	muttered	Brys,	‘this	route.	My	apologies,	Atri-Ceda.’
Two	soldiers	crossed	their	path,	wearing	heavy	blood-drenched	aprons.
Their	faces	were	flat,	expressionless.	Their	hands	dripped	gore.
‘Armies	bathe	in	blood,’	said	Aranict.	‘That	is	the	truth	of	it,	isn’t	it,
Commander?’
‘I	fear	we	all	bathe	in	it,’	he	replied.	‘Cities	permit	us	to	hide	from	that
bleak	truth,	I	think.’
‘What	would	it	be	like,	I	wonder,	if	we	all	ate	only	vegetables?’
‘We’d	break	all	the	land	and	the	wild	animals	would	have	nowhere	to	live,’
Brys	replied.
‘So	we	should	see	these	domesticated	beasts	as	sacrifices	in	the	name	of
wildness.’
‘You	could,’	he	said,	‘if	it	helps.’
‘I’m	not	sure	it	does.’
‘Nor	am	I.’
‘I	think	I	am	too	soft	for	all	this,’	she	concluded.	‘I	have	a	sentimental
streak.	Maybe	you	can	hide	from	the	slaughter	itself,	but	if	you	possess	any
imagination	at	all,	well,	there’s	no	real	hiding,	is	there?’
They	drew	closer	to	a	broad	intersection,	and	opposite	them	a	sizeable
troop	of	riders	was	converging	on	the	same	place,	coming	up	from	the	south
track.	‘Well	now,’	said	Brys,	‘are	those	Bolkando	royal	standards?’
‘Seems	the	queen	has	taken	her	escort	duties	well	beyond	her	kingdom’s
borders.’
‘Yes,	most	curious.	Shall	we	await	them?’
‘Why	not?’
They	reined	in	at	the	intersection.


The	queen’s	entourage	was	oversized,	yet	as	it	drew	closer	Brys	frowned.
‘Those	are	Evertine	regulars,	I	think,’	he	said.	‘Not	an	officer	among	them.’
In	addition	to	these	hardened	soldiers,	three	Barghast	warriors	rode	close
to	Abrastal,	while	off	to	the	right	rode	two	Khundryl	women,	one	of	them
seven	or	eight	months	pregnant.	On	the	left	was	a	pair	of	armoured	foreigners
–	the	Perish?	Aranict	drew	a	sharp	breath.	‘That	must	be	Mortal	Sword
Krughava.	She	alone	could	command	a	palace	tapestry.’
Brys	grunted.	‘I	know	what	you	mean.	I	have	seen	a	few	hard	women	in	my
time,	but	that	one…formidable	indeed.’
‘I	doubt	I	could	even	lift	that	sword	at	her	belt.’
With	a	gesture	Queen	Abrastal	halted	the	entire	troop.	She	said	something
to	one	of	her	soldiers,	and	suddenly	the	veterans	were	all	dismounting,	lifting
satchels	from	their	saddle	horns	and	setting	out	into	the	Malazan	camp.	Aranict
watched	the	soldiers	fanning	out,	apparently	seeking	squad	camps.	‘What	are
they	doing?’
Brys	shook	his	head.	‘I’m	not	sure.’
‘They’ve	brought…bottles.’
Brys	Beddict	grunted,	and	then	tapped	his	horse’s	flanks.	Aranict	followed
suit.
‘Commander	Brys	Beddict,’	said	Queen	Abrastal,	settling	back	in	her
saddle.	‘We	finally	meet.	Tell	me,	does	your	brother	know	where	you	are?’
‘Highness,	does	your	husband?’
Her	teeth	flashed.	‘I	doubt	it.	But	isn’t	this	better	than	our	meeting	in
anger?’
‘Agreed,	Highness.’
‘Now,	barring	this	Gilk	oaf	at	my	side	and	of	course	you,	it	seems	this	will
be	a	gathering	of	women.	Do	you	quake	in	your	boots,	Prince?’
‘If	I	am,	I	am	man	enough	to	not	admit	it,	Highness.	Will	you	be	so	kind	as
to	perform	introductions?’
Abrastal	removed	her	heavy	gauntlets	and	gestured	to	her	right.	‘From	the
Khundryl,	Hanavat,	wife	to	Warleader	Gall,	and	with	her	Shelemasa,
bodyguard	and	One	of	the	Charge.’
Brys	tilted	his	head	to	both	women.	‘Hanavat.	We	were	witness	to	the
Charge.’	His	gaze	momentarily	flicked	to	Shelemasa,	then	back	to	Hanavat.
‘Please,	if	you	will,	inform	your	husband	that	I	was	shamed	by	his	courage	and
that	of	the	Burned	Tears.	Seeing	the	Khundryl	stung	me	to	action.	I	would	he
understand	that	all	that	the	Letherii	were	subsequently	able	to	achieve	in
relieving	the	Bonehunters	is	set	in	humble	gratitude	at	the	Warleader ’s	feet.’
Hanavat’s	broad,	fleshy	face	remained	expressionless.	‘Most	generous


words,	Prince.	My	husband	shall	be	told.’
The	awkwardness	of	that	reply	hung	in	the	dusty	air	for	a	moment,	and
then	Queen	Abrastal	gestured	to	the	Perish.	‘Mortal	Sword	Krughava	and
Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian,	of	the	Grey	Helms.’
Once	again	Brys	tilted	his	head.	‘Mortal	Sword.	Shield	Anvil.’
‘You	stood	in	our	place	six	days	ago,’	said	Krughava,	her	tone	almost
harsh.	‘This	is	now	an	open	wound	upon	the	souls	of	my	brothers	and	sisters.
We	grieve	at	the	sacrifice	you	suffered	in	our	stead.	This	is	not	your	war,	after
all,	yet	you	stood	firm.	You	fought	with	valour.	Should	the	opportunity	ever
arise,	sir,	we	shall	in	turn	stand	in	your	place.	This	the	Perish	Grey	Helms
avow.’
Brys	Beddict	seemed	at	a	loss.
Aranict	cleared	her	throat	and	said,	‘You	have	humbled	the	prince,	Mortal
Sword.	Shall	we	now	present	ourselves	to	the	Adjunct?’
Queen	Abrastal	collected	up	her	reins	and	swung	her	mount	on	to	the	track
leading	to	the	camp’s	centre.	‘Will	you	ride	at	my	side,	Prince?’
‘Thank	you,’	Brys	managed.
Aranict	dropped	her	mount	just	behind	the	two,	and	found	herself	riding
alongside	the	‘Gilk	oaf’.
He	glanced	across	at	her	and	his	broad,	scarified	face	was	solemn.	‘That
Mortal	Sword,’	he	muttered	low,	‘she	comes	across	with	all	the	soft	sweetness
of	a	mouthful	of	quartz.	Well	done	to	your	commander	for	recovering.’
‘Thank	you.’
‘Don’t	turn	round,	but	if	you	did	you	would	see	tears	on	the	face	of
Hanavat.	I	think	I	like	your	commander.	I	am	Spax,	Warchief	of	the	Gilk
Barghast.’
‘Atri-Ceda	Aranict.’
‘That	means	High	Mage	Aranict,	yes?’
‘I	suppose	it	does.	Warchief,	those	Evertine	soldiers	who	have	gone	out
among	the	Malazans	–	what	are	they	doing?’
Spax	reached	up	and	made	a	clawing	gesture	beneath	his	eyes.	‘What	are
they	doing,	Atri-Ceda?	Spirits	below,	they	are	being	human.’


Book	Two

All	The	Takers	Of	My	Days

	


	

Well	enough	she	faces	away
Walking	past	these	dripping	thrones
No	one	knows	where	the	next	foot
Falls
When	we	stumble	in	the	shadows
Our	standards	bow	to	wizened	winds
I	saw	that	look	beneath	the	rim
Of	blistered	iron
And	it	howled	to	the	men	kneeling
In	the	square	and	the	dogs	sleep	on
In	the	cool	foot	of	the	wall,	no	fools	there
She	was	ever	looking	elsewhere
Like	a	disenchanted	damsel
A	shift	of	her	shoulder
Sprawls	corpses	into	her	wake
No	matter
There	was	a	child	dream	once
You	remember	well
Was	she	the	mother	or	did	that	tit
Seep	seduction?
All	these	thrones	I	built	with	my	own
Hands
Labours	of	love	thin	over	ragged	nails
I	wanted	benediction,	or	the	slip	away	Of	clothes,	whichever	bends
my	way
Behind	her	back
Oh	we	were	guards	then,	stern	sentinels,
And	these	grilled	masks	smelling	of	blood
Now	sweat	something	old
We	never	knew	what	we	were	guarding


We	never	do	and	never	will
But	I	swear	to	you	all:
I	will	die	at	its	feet	before	I	take	a	step	inside
Call	me	duty	and	be	done	with	it
Or	roll	from	your	tongue	that	sweet	curl
That	is	valour
While	the	dogs	twitch	in	dream
Like	children	left	lying
Underfoot
Adjunct
Hare	Ravage


Chapter	Five

She	was	dying	but	we	carried	her	down	to	the	shore.	There	was	light
stretched	like	skin	over	her	pain,	but	it	was	thin	and	fast	fraying.	None
of	us	dared	note	in	any	whisper	of	irony,	how	she	who	was	named
Awakening	Dawn	was	now	fading	in	this	morning’s	wretched	rise.
Her	weak	gestures	had	brought	her	down	here,	where	the	silver
waves	fell	like	rain	and	the	froth	at	the	curling	foot	was	flecked
crimson.	Bodies	bloated	and	pale	fanned	limbs	in	the	shallows,	and	we
wondered	at	the	fitness	of	her	last	command.
Is	it	suit	to	face	your	slayer?	Soon	enough	I	will	answer	that	for
myself.	We	can	hear	the	legions	mustering	again	behind	the	flowing
wall,	and	the	others	are	drawing	back	to	ready	their	rough	line.	So	few
left.	Perhaps	this	is	what	she	came	to	see,	before	the	killing	light	dried
her	eyes.
Shake	fragment,	Kharkanas,	Author	unknown
	skidded,	rather	than	rolled,
diagonally	across	the	corridor.	It	struck	the	base	of	the	marble	banister	at	the
top	of	the	stairs,	and	the	crack	echoed	sharp	as	a	split	skull	before	the	huge
vessel	tilted	and	pitched	down	the	steps.	Shattering,	it	flung	its	shards	in	a
glistening	spray	down	the	stone	flight	all	the	way	to	the	main	floor.	Sparkling
dust	spun	and	twisted	for	a	time,	before	settling	like	flecks	of	frost.
Withal	walked	over	to	the	edge	of	the	steps	and	looked	down.	‘That,’	he
said	under	his	breath,	‘was	rather	spectacular.’	He	turned	at	a	sound	behind
him.
Captain	Brevity	was	leaning	out	from	the	doorway,	glancing	round	until
she	spotted	Withal.	‘You’d	better	come	in,’	she	said.
‘I	was	doing	just	that,’	he	replied.	‘Five	strides	closer	and	she’d	be	a
widow.’
Brevity	made	a	face	he	couldn’t	quite	read,	and	then	edged	to	one	side	to
let	him	pass.
The	throne	room	was	still	a	chamber	of	ghosts.	Black	stone	and	black
THE	BLACK	LACQUERED	AMPHORA	EMERGED	FROM	THE	SIDE	DOOR	AND


wood,	the	crimson	and	onyx	mosaic	of	the	floor	dulled	with	dust	and	dried
leaves	that	had	wandered	in	from	some	high	window.	It	seemed	to	hold	nothing
of	the	now	brimming	power	of	the	Teronderai,	the	holy	sepulchre	of	Mother
Dark,	yet	for	all	that	Withal	felt	diminished	as	he	stepped	through	the	side
entrance	and	edged	out	towards	the	centre	of	the	room.
The	throne	was	on	his	right,	raised	on	a	knee-high	dais	that	was,	he
realized,	the	vast	stump	of	a	blackwood	tree.	Roots	snaked	down	to	sink	into
the	surrounding	floor.	The	throne	itself	had	been	carved	from	the	bole,	a
simple,	almost	ascetic	chair.	Perhaps	it	had	once	been	plush,	padded	and	bold
in	rich	fabrics,	but	not	even	the	tacks	remained.
His	wife	stood	just	to	the	other	side	of	the	throne,	her	arms	crossed,	now
dragging	her	glare	from	Yan	Tovis	–	who	stood	facing	the	throne	as	would	a
supplicant	–	to	Withal.	‘Finally,’	she	snapped,	‘my	escort.	Take	me	out	of	here,
husband.’
Yan	Tovis,	queen	of	the	Shake,	cleared	her	throat.	‘Leaving	solves	nothing
—’
‘Wrong.	It	solves	everything.’
The	woman	facing	her	sighed.	‘This	is	the	throne	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	and
Kharkanas	is	the	capital	of	the	Hold	of	Darkness.	You	are	home,	Highness—’
‘Stop	calling	me	that!’
‘But	I	must,	for	you	are	of	royal	blood—’
‘We	were	all	of	royal	blood	in	this	infernal	city!’	Sandalath	Drukorlat
pointed	a	finger	at	Yan	Tovis.	‘As	were	the	Shake!’
‘But	our	realm	was	and	is	the	Shore,	Highness,	whereas	Kharkanas	is
yours.	But	if	it	must	be	that	there	be	only	one	queen,	then	I	freely	abdicate—’
‘You	will	not.	They	are	your	people!	You	led	them	here,	Yan	Tovis.	You
are	their	queen.’
‘Upon	this	throne,	Highness,	only	one	of	royal	Tiste	Andii	blood	can	make
a	true	claim.	And,	as	we	both	well	know,	there	is	only	one	Tiste	Andii	in	this
entire	realm,	and	that	is	you.’
‘Fine,	and	over	whom	do	I	rule?	Heaps	of	dust?	Mouldy	bones?	Blood
stains	on	the	floor?	And	where	is	my	High	Priestess,	in	whose	eyes	Mother
Dark	shines?	Where	is	my	Blind	Gallan,	my	brilliant,	tortured	court	fool?
Where	are	my	rivals,	my	hostages,	my	servants	and	soldiers?	Handmaidens
and—	Oh,	never	mind.	This	is	pointless.	I	don’t	want	that	throne.’
‘Nonetheless,’	said	Yan	Tovis.
‘Very	well,	I	accept	it,	and	my	first	act	is	to	abdicate	and	yield	the	throne
and	all	of	Wise	Kharkanas	to	you,	Queen	Yan	Tovis.	Captain	Brevity,	find	us	a
royal	seal	–	there	must	be	one	lying	around	here	somewhere	–	and	parchment


and	ink	and	wax.’
The	queen	of	the	Shake	was	smiling,	but	it	was	a	sad	smile.	‘“Wise
Kharkanas.”	I	had	forgotten	that	honorific.	Queen	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	I
respectfully	decline	your	offer.	My	duties	are	upon	the	Shore.’	She	nodded	to
Brevity.	‘Until	such	time	that	other	Tiste	Andii	return	to	Kharkanas,	I	humbly
submit	Captain	Brevity	here	to	act	as	your	Chancellor,	Palace	Guard
Commander,	and	whatever	other	duties	of	organization	as	are	required	to
return	this	palace	to	its	former	glory.’
Sandalath	snorted.	‘Oh,	clever.	And	I	suppose	a	few	hundred	of	your	Shake
are	waiting	outside	with	mops	and	buckets.’
‘Letherii,	actually.	Islanders	and	other	refugees.	They	have	known	great
privation,	Highness,	and	will	view	the	privilege	of	palace	employment	with
humility	and	gratitude.’
‘And	if	I	turn	them	all	away?	Oh	yes,	I	see	the	traps	you’ve	set	around	me,
Yan	Tovis.	You	intend	to	guilt	me	on	to	that	accursed	throne.	But	what	if	I	am	a
harder	woman	than	you?’
‘The	burden	of	rule	hardens	us	both,	Highness.’
Sandalath	cast	Withal	a	beseeching	look.	‘Talk	her	out	of	this,	husband.’
‘I	would	if	I	thought	I	had	any	chance	of	swaying	her,	beloved.’	He	strode
to	the	base	of	the	dais,	eyeing	the	throne.	‘Needs	a	cushion	or	two,	I	should
think,	before	you	could	hope	to	sit	there	for	any	length	of	time.’
‘And	you	as	my	consort?	Gods,	don’t	you	think	I	could	do	better?’
‘Undoubtedly,’	he	replied.	‘For	the	moment,	however,	you	are	stuck	with
me,	and,’	he	added	with	a	wave	at	the	throne,	‘with	this.	So	sit	down	and	make	it
official,	Sand,	so	Yan	Tovis	can	kneel	or	curtsey	or	whatever	it	is	she	has	to
do,	and	Brevity	can	get	on	with	scrubbing	the	floors	and	beating	the	tapestries.’
The	Tiste	Andii	woman	cast	about,	as	if	seeking	another	amphora,	but	the
nearest	one	stood	perched	on	a	stone	cup	near	the	side	door	–	now	an	orphan,
Withal	saw,	noting	the	unoccupied	stone	base	on	the	entrance’s	other	side.	He
waited	to	see	if	she’d	make	the	fierce	march	to	repeat	her	gesture	of	frustration
and	anger,	but	all	at	once	his	wife	seemed	to	subside.	Thank	Mael.	That	would
have	made	her	look	ridiculous.	Decorum,	beloved,	as	befits	the	Queen	of
Darkness.	Aye,	some	things	you	can’t	run	from.
‘There	will	be	two	queens	in	this	realm,’	Sandalath	said,	coming	round	to
slump	down	in	the	throne.	‘Don’t	even	think	of	curtseying,	Tovis.’	She	eyed	the
Shake	woman	with	something	close	to	a	glower.	‘Other	Tiste	Andii,	you	said.’
‘Surely	they	have	sensed	Mother	Dark’s	return,’	Yan	Tovis	replied.
‘Surely,	they	too	understand	that	the	diaspora	is	at	last	at	an	end.’
‘Just	how	many	Tiste	Andii	do	you	imagine	are	left?’


‘I	don’t	know.	But	I	do	know	this:	those	who	live	shall	return	here.	Just	as
the	Shake	have	done.	Just	as	you	have	done.’
‘Good.	First	one	gets	here	can	have	this	throne	and	all	that	goes	with	it.
Husband,	start	building	us	a	cottage	in	the	woods.	Make	it	remote.	No,	make	it
impossible	to	reach.	And	tell	none	but	me	where	it	is.’
‘A	cottage.’
‘Yes.	With	a	drawbridge	and	a	moat,	and	pitfalls	and	sprawl-traps.’
‘I’ll	start	drawing	up	plans.’
Yan	Tovis	said,	‘Queen	Sandalath,	I	beg	your	leave.’
‘Yes.	Sooner	the	better.’
The	ex-Letherii	officer	tilted	her	head,	wheeled	and	strode	from	the
chamber.
Captain	Brevity	stepped	forward	to	face	the	throne	and	settled	on	one	knee.
‘Highness,	shall	I	summon	the	palace	staff?’
‘In	here?	Abyss	take	me,	no.	Start	with	all	the	other	rooms.	Go	on.	You	are,
er,	dismissed.	Husband!	Don’t	even	think	of	leaving.’
‘The	thought	had	not	even	occurred	to	me.’	And	he	managed	to	hold	his
neutral	expression	against	her	withering	scepticism.
As	soon	as	they	were	alone,	Sandalath	sprang	from	the	throne	as	if	she’d
just	found	one	of	those	ancient	tacks.	‘That	bitch!’
Withal	flinched.	‘Yan—’
‘No,	not	her	–	she’s	right,	the	cow.	I’m	stuck	with	this,	for	the	moment.
Besides,	why	should	she	be	the	only	one	to	suffer	the	burden	of	rule,	as	she	so
quaintly	put	it?’
‘Well,	put	it	that	way,	and	I	can	see	how	she	might	be	in	need	of	a	friend.’
‘An	equal	of	sorts,	yes.	The	problem	is,	I	don’t	fit.	I’m	not	her	equal.	I
didn’t	lead	ten	thousand	people	to	this	realm.	I	barely	got	you	here.’
He	shrugged.	‘But	here	we	are.’
‘And	she	knew.’
‘Who?’
‘That	bitch	Tavore.	Somehow,	she	knew	this	would	happen—’
‘There’s	no	proof	of	that,	Sand,’	Withal	replied.	‘It	was	Fiddler ’s	reading,
not	hers.’
She	made	a	dismissive	gesture.	‘Technicalities,	Withal.	She	trapped	me	is
what	she	did.	I	should	never	have	been	there.	No,	she	knew	there	was	a	card
waiting	for	me.	There’s	no	other	explanation.’
‘But	that’s	no	explanation	at	all,	Sand.’
The	look	she	threw	him	was	miserable.	‘You	think	I	don’t	know	that?’
Withal	hesitated.	‘Listen,’	he	said,	‘your	kin	are	coming.	Are	you	really


certain	you	want	me	standing	there	at	your	side	when	they	do?’
Her	eyes	narrowed.	‘What	you’re	really	saying	is:	do	I	want	to	be	standing
at	her	side	when	they	arrive?	A	mere	human,	a	shortlived	plaything	to	the
Queen	of	Darkness.	That’s	how	you	think	they’ll	see	you,	isn’t	it?’
‘Well…’
‘You’re	wrong.	It	will	be	the	opposite	and	that	might	be	just	as	bad.	They’ll
see	you	for	what	you	are:	a	threat.’
‘A	what?’
She	regarded	him	archly.	‘Your	kind	are	the	inheritors	–	of	everything.
And	here	you	are,	along	with	all	those	Letherii	and	blood-thin	Shake,	squatting
in	Kharkanas.	Is	there	anywhere	you	damned	bastards	don’t	end	up	sooner	or
later?	That’s	what	they’ll	be	thinking.’
‘Mael	knows,	they’ve	got	a	point,’	he	said,	looking	away,	down	the	length
of	the	throne	room,	imagining	a	score	or	more	regal	Tiste	Andii	standing
there,	eyes	hard,	faces	like	stone.	‘I’d	better	leave.’
‘No	you	won’t.	Mother	Dark—’	Abruptly	she	shut	her	mouth.
He	turned	his	head,	studied	her.	‘Your	goddess	is	whispering	in	your	ear,
Sand?	About	me?’
‘You’ll	be	needed,’	she	said,	once	more	eyeing	the	lone	amphora.	‘All	of
you.	The	Letherii	refugees.	The	Shake.	And	it’s	not	fair.	It’s	not	fair!’
He	took	her	arm	as	she	moved	to	assault	the	crockery.	Pulled	her	round
until	she	was	in	his	arms.	Startled,	terrified,	he	held	her	as	she	wept.	Mael!
What	awaits	us	here?
But	there	was	no	answer,	and	his	god	had	never	felt	so	far	away.
	
Yedan	Derryg	dragged	the	tip	of	the	Hust	sword,	making	a	line	in	the	crumbled
bones	of	the	Shore.	The	cascading	wall	of	light	flowed	in	reflection	along	the
length	of	the	ancient	blade,	like	tears	of	milk.	‘We	are	children	here,’	he
muttered.
Captain	Pithy	hawked	phlegm,	stepped	forward	and	spat	into	the	wall,	and
then	turned	to	face	him.	‘Something	tells	me	we’d	better	grow	up	fast,	Watch.’
Yedan	clenched	his	teeth,	chewed	on	a	half-dozen	possible	responses	to	her
grim	observation,	before	saying,	‘Yes.’
‘The	faces	in	the	wash,’	said	Pithy,	nodding	at	the	eternally	descending	rain
of	light	rearing	before	them,	‘there’s	more	of	’em.	And	seems	they’re	getting
closer,	as	if	clawing	their	way	through.	I’m	expecting	t’see	an	arm	thrust	out
any	time	now.’	She	hitched	her	thumbs	in	her	weapon	belt.	‘Thing	is,	sir,	what
happens	then?’


He	stared	into	the	Lightfall.	Tried	remembering	memories	that	weren’t	his
own.	The	grinding	of	molars	sounded	like	distant	thunder	in	his	head.	‘We
fight.’
‘And	that’s	why	you’ve	recruited	everyone	with	arms	and	legs	into	this
army	of	yours.’
‘Not	everyone.	The	Letherii	islanders—’
‘Can	smell	trouble	better	than	anyone.	Convicted	criminals,	almost	the
whole	lot.	It’s	a	case	of	the	nerves	all	around,	sir,	and	soon	as	they	figure
things	out,	they’ll	start	stepping	up.’
He	eyed	the	woman.	‘What	makes	you	so	sure,	Captain?’
‘Soon	as	they	figure	things	out,	I	said.’
‘What	things?’
‘That	there’s	nowhere	to	run	to,	for	one,’	she	replied.	‘And	that	there	won’t
be	any	bystanders,	no	–	what’s	the	word?	Non-combatants.	We	got	us	a	fight
for	our	very	lives	ahead.	Do	you	deny	it?’
He	shook	his	head,	studied	the	play	of	light	on	the	blade	again.	‘We	will
stand	on	the	bones	of	our	ancestors.’	He	glanced	at	Pithy.	‘We	have	a	queen	to
protect.’
‘Don’t	you	think	your	sister	will	be	right	here	in	the	front	line?’
‘My	sister?	No,	not	her.	The	queen	of	Kharkanas.’
‘It’s	her	we’re	gonna	die	protecting?	I	don’t	get	it,	sir.	Why	her?’
He	grimaced,	lifted	the	sword	and	slowly	sheathed	it.	‘We	are	of	the	Shore.
The	bones	at	our	feet	are	us.	Our	history.	Our	meaning.	Here	we	will	stand.	It	is
our	purpose.’	Memories	not	his	own,	yet	still	they	stirred.	‘Our	purpose.’
‘Yours	maybe.	The	rest	of	us	just	want	to	live	another	day.	Get	on	with
things.	Making	babies,	tilling	the	ground,	getting	rich,	whatever.’
He	shrugged,	eyes	now	on	the	wall.	‘Privileges,	Captain,	we	cannot	at	the
moment	afford	to	entertain.’
‘I	ain’t	happy	about	the	thought	of	dying	for	some	Tiste	Andii	queen,’	Pithy
said,	‘and	I	doubt	I’m	alone	in	that.	So	maybe	I	take	back	what	I	said	earlier.
There	could	be	trouble	ahead.’
‘No.	There	won’t.’
‘Plan	on	cutting	off	a	few	heads?’
‘If	necessary.’
She	muttered	a	curse.	‘I	hope	not.	Like	I	said	before,	so	long	as	they	all
realize	there’s	nowhere	to	go.	Should	be	enough,	shouldn’t	it?’	When	no
answer	was	forthcoming	she	cleared	her	throat	and	said,	‘Well,	it	comes	down
to	saying	the	right	things	at	the	right	time.	Now,	Watch	Derryg,	you	might	be
an	Errant-shitting	warrior,	and	a	decent	soldier,	too,	but	you’re	lacking	the


subtleties	of	command—’
‘There	are	no	subtleties	in	command,	Captain.	Neither	my	sister	nor	me	is
one	for	rousing	speeches.	We	make	our	expectations	plain	and	we	expect	them
to	be	met.	Without	complaint.	Without	hesitation.	It’s	not	enough	to	fight	to	stay
alive.	We	must	fight	determined	to	win.’
‘People	ain’t	stupid	–	well,	forget	I	said	that.	Plenty	of	’em	are.	But
something	tells	me	there’s	a	difference	between	fighting	to	stay	alive	and
fighting	for	a	cause	bigger	than	your	own	life,	or	even	the	lives	of	your	loved
ones,	or	your	comrades.	A	difference,	but	for	the	life	of	me	I	couldn’t	say	what
it	is.’
‘You	were	always	a	soldier,	Captain?’
Pithy	snorted.	‘Not	me.	I	was	a	thief	who	thought	she	was	smarter	than	she
really	was.’
Yedan	considered	that	for	a	time.	Before	him,	blurred	faces	pushed
through	the	light,	mouths	opening,	expressions	twisting	into	masks	of	rage.
Hands	stretched	to	find	his	throat,	clutched	empty.	He	could	reach	out	and	touch
the	wall,	if	he	so	chose.	Instead,	he	observed	the	enemy	before	him.	‘What
cause,	Captain,	would	you	fight	for?	In	the	manner	you	describe	–	beyond
one’s	own	life	or	those	of	loved	ones?’
‘Now	that’s	the	question,	isn’t	it?	For	us	Letherii,	this	ain’t	our	home.
Maybe	we	could	come	to	want	it	to	be,	in	time,	a	few	generations	soaking	our
blood	into	the	land.	But	there	won’t	be	any	time.	Not	enough	for	that.’
‘If	that	is	your	answer—’
‘No	it	ain’t.	I’m	working	on	it,	sir.	It’s	called	thinking	things	through.	A
cause,	then.	Can’t	be	some	Tiste	Andii	queen	or	her	damned	throne,	or	even
her	damned	city.	Can’t	be	Yan	Tovis,	even	though	she	brought	’em	all	through
and	so	saved	their	lives.	Memories	die	like	beached	fish	and	soon	enough	just
the	smell	will	do	t’drive	’em	away.	Can’t	be	you	neither.’
‘Captain,’	said	Yedan	Derryg,	‘if	the	enemy	destroy	us,	they	will	march
down	the	Road	of	Gallan.	Unobstructed,	they	will	breach	the	gate	to	your	own
world,	and	they	will	lay	waste	to	every	human	civilization,	until	nothing
remains	but	ash.	And	then	they	will	slay	the	gods	themselves.	Your	gods.’
‘If	they’re	that	nasty,	how	can	we	hope	to	hold	’em	here?’
Yedan	nodded	at	the	Lightfall.	‘Because,	Captain,	there	is	only	one	way
through.	This	stretch	of	beach.	A	thousand	paces	wide.	Only	here	is	the	wall
scarred	and	thin	from	past	wounds.	Only	here	can	they	hope	to	break	the
barrier.	We	bar	this	door,	Captain,	and	we	save	your	world.’
‘And	just	how	long	are	we	supposed	to	hold	’em	back?’
He	ruminated	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	said,	‘As	long	as	needed,	Captain.’


She	rubbed	at	the	back	of	her	neck,	squinted	at	Yedan	for	a	time,	and	then
looked	away.	‘How	can	you	do	that,	sir?’
‘Do	what?’
‘Stand	there,	so	close,	just	watching	them	–	can’t	you	see	their	faces?	Can’t
you	feel	their	hatred?	What	they	want	to	do	to	you?’
‘Of	course.’
‘Yet	there	you	stand.’
‘They	serve	to	remind	me,	Captain.’
‘Of	what?’
‘Of	why	I	exist.’
She	hissed	between	her	teeth.	‘You	just	sent	a	chill	right	through	me.’
‘I	asked	about	a	worthy	cause.’
‘Yeah,	saving	the	world.	That	might	work.’
He	shot	her	a	look.	‘Might?’
‘True,	you’d	think	saving	your	world	is	a	good	enough	reason	for	doing
anything	and	everything,	wouldn’t	you?’
‘Isn’t	it?’
‘People	being	what	people	are…we’ll	see.’
‘You	lack	faith,	Captain.’
‘What	I	lack	is	proof	to	the	contrary,	sir.	I	ain’t	seen	it	yet,	in	all	my	years.
What	do	you	think	makes	criminals	in	the	first	place?’
‘Stupidity	and	greed.’
‘Besides	those?	I’ll	tell	you.	It’s	looking	around,	real	carefully.	It’s	seeing
what’s	really	there,	and	who	wins	every	time,	and	it’s	deciding	that	despair
tastes	like	shit.	It’s	deciding	to	do	whatever	it	takes	to	sneak	through,	to	win
what	you	can	for	yourself.	It’s	also	condemning	your	fellow	humans	to
whatever	misery	finds	them	–	even	if	that	misery	is	by	your	own	hand.	To	hurt
another	human	being	is	to	announce	your	hatred	of	humanity	–	but	mostly	your
thinking	is	about	hating	back	what	already	hates	you.	A	thief	steals	telling
herself	she’s	evening	out	crooked	scales.	That’s	how	we	sleep	at	night,	y’see.’
‘A	fine	speech,	Captain.’
‘Tried	making	it	short	as	I	could,	sir.’
‘So	indeed	you	are	without	faith.’
‘I	have	faith	that	what’s	worst	in	humanity	isn’t	hard	to	find	–	it’s	all
around	us,	sour	as	a	leaking	bladder,	day	after	day.	It’s	the	stink	we	all	get	used
to.	As	for	what’s	best…maybe,	but	I	wouldn’t	push	all	my	stacks	of	coin	into
the	centre	of	the	table	on	that	bet.’	She	paused	and	then	said,	‘Thinking	on	it,
there’s	one	thing	you	could	do	to	buy	their	souls.’
‘And	that	is?’


‘Empty	out	the	palace	treasury	and	bury	it	ten	paces	up	the	beach.	And
make	a	show	of	it.	Maybe	even	announce	that	it’s,	you	know,	the	Sword’s	Gold.
To	be	divided	up	at	day’s	end.’
‘And	would	they	fight	to	save	the	soldier	beside	them?	I	doubt	it.’
‘Hmm,	good	point.	Then	announce	a	fixed	amount	–	and	whatever	is
unclaimed	on	account	of	the	soldier	being	dead	goes	back	into	the	treasury.’
‘Well,	Captain,	you	could	petition	the	Queen	of	Darkness.’
‘Oh,	I	can	do	better.	Sister	Brevity’s	the	treasurer	now.’
‘You	are	a	cynical	woman,	Captain	Pithy.’
‘In	case	saving	the	world	don’t	work,	that’s	all.	Make	getting	rich	the
reward	and	they’ll	eat	their	own	children	before	backing	a	single	step.’
‘And	which	of	the	two	causes	would	you	more	readily	give	your	life	for,
Captain?’
‘Neither,	sir.’
His	brows	lifted.
She	spat	again.	‘I	was	a	thief	once.	Plenty	of	hatred	then,	both	ways.	But
then	I	walked	a	step	behind	your	sister	and	watched	her	bleed	for	us	all.	And
then	there	was	you,	too,	for	that	matter.	That	rearguard	action	that	saved	all	our
skins.	So	now,’	she	scowled	at	the	Lightfall,	‘well,	I’ll	stand	here,	and	I’ll	fight
until	the	fight’s	left	them	or	it’s	left	me.’
Yedan	studied	her	in	earnest	now.	‘And	why	would	you	do	that,	Pithy
Islander?’
‘Because	it’s	the	right	thing	to	do,	Yedan	Derryg.’
	
Rightness.	The	word	was	lodged	in	Yan	Tovis’s	throat	like	shards	of	glass.	She
could	taste	blood	in	her	mouth,	and	all	that	had	seeped	down	into	her	stomach
seemed	to	have	solidified	into	something	fist-sized,	heavy	as	stone.
The	Shore	invited	her,	reached	out	and	clawed	at	her	with	its	need.	A	need
it	yearned	to	share	with	her.	You	stand	with	me,	Queen.	As	you	once	did,	as	you
shall	do	again.	You	are	the	Shake	and	the	Shake	are	of	the	Shore,	and	I	have
tasted	your	blood	all	my	life.
Queen,	I	thirst	again.	Against	this	enemy,	there	shall	be	Rightness	upon	the
Shore,	and	you	will	stand,	and	you	will	yield	not	a	step.
But	there	was	betrayal,	long	ago.	How	could	the	Liosan	forget?	How	could
they	set	it	aside?	Judgement,	the	coarse,	thorn-studded	brambles	of	retribution,
they	could	snag	an	entire	people,	and	as	the	blood	streamed	down	each	body
was	lifted	higher,	lifted	from	the	ground.	The	vicious	snare	carried	them	into
the	righteous	sky.


Reason	could	not	reach	that	high,	and	in	the	heavens	madness	spun
untamed.
Rightness	rages	on	both	sides	of	the	wall.	Who	can	hope	to	halt	what	is
coming?	Not	the	Queen	of	Darkness,	not	the	queen	of	the	Shake.	Not	Yedan
Derryg	–	oh	no,	my	brother	strains	for	that	moment.	He	draws	his	wretched
sword	again	and	again.	He	smiles	at	the	Lightfall’s	lurid	play	on	the	blade.	He
stands	before	the	silent	shrieking	insanity	of	hatred	made	manifest,	and	he	does
not	flinch.
But,	and	this	was	the	impossible	contradiction,	her	brother	had	not	once	in
his	life	felt	a	single	spasm	of	hatred	–	his	soul	was	implacably	incapable	of
such	an	emotion.	He	could	stand	in	the	fire	and	not	burn.	He	could	stand	before
those	deformed	faces,	those	grasping	hands,	and…and…nothing.
Oh,	Yedan,	what	waits	within	you?	Have	you	surrendered	completely	to	the
need	of	the	Shore?	Are	you	one	with	it?	Do	you	know	a	single	moment	of	doubt?
Does	it?	She	could	understand	the	seductive	lure	of	that	invitation.	Absolution
through	surrender,	the	utter	abjection	of	the	self.	She	understood	it,	yes,	but	she
did	not	trust	it.
When	that	which	offers	blessing	predicates	such	on	the	absolute	obeisance
of	the	supplicant…demands,	in	fact,	the	soul’s	willing	enslavement	–	no,	how
could	such	a	force	stand	tall	in	moral	probity?
The	Shore	demands	our	surrender	to	it.	Demands	our	enslavement	in	the
glory	of	its	love,	the	sweet	purity	of	its	eternal	blessing.
There	is	something	wrong	with	that.	Something…monstrous.	You	offer	us	the
freedom	of	choice,	yet	avow	that	to	turn	away	is	to	lose	all	hope	of	glory,	of
salvation.	What	sort	of	freedom	is	that?
She	had	held	that	her	faith	in	the	Shore	set	her	above	other	worshippers,
those	quivering	mortals	kneeling	before	fickle	carnate	gods.	The	Shore	was
without	a	face.	The	Shore	was	not	a	god,	but	an	idea,	the	eternal	conversation
of	elemental	forces.	Changeable,	yet	for	ever	unchangeable,	the	binding	of	life
and	death	itself.	Not	something	to	be	bargained	with,	not	a	thing	with
personality,	mercurial	and	prone	to	spite.	The	Shore,	she	had	believed,	made
no	demands.
But	now	here	she	was,	feeling	the	desiccated	wind	rising	up	from	the	bone
strand,	watching	her	brother	speaking	to	Pithy,	seeing	her	brother	less	than	a
stride	away	from	Lightfall’s	terrible	fury,	drawing	his	sword	again	and	again.
And	the	First	Shore	howled	in	her	soul.
Here!	Blessed	Daughter,	I	am	here	and	with	me	you	belong!	See	this	wound.
You	and	I	shall	close	it.	My	bones,	your	blood.	The	death	underfoot,	the	life
with	sword	in	hand.	You	shall	be	my	flesh.	I	shall	be	your	bone.	Together	we	will


stand.	Changeable	and	unchangeable.
Free	and	enslaved.
A	figure	edged	up	on	her	right,	and	then	another	on	her	left.	She	looked	to
neither.
The	one	on	the	right	crooned	something	melodic	and	wordless,	and	then
said,	‘Ween	decided,	Queen.	Skwish	to	stand	with	the	Watch,	an	mine	to	stand
with	you.’
‘An	the	Shore	an	the	day,’	added	Skwish.	‘Lissen	to	it	sing!’
Pully	moaned	again.	‘Y’ain	knelled	afore	the	Shore,	Highness.	Y’ain	done
it	yet.	An	be	sure	y’need	to,	afore	the	breach	comes.’
‘Een	the	queen’s	got	to	srender,’	said	Skwish.	‘T’the	Shore.’
Crumbled	bones	into	chains.	Freedom	into	slavery.	Why	did	we	ever	agree
to	this	bargain?	It	was	never	equal.	The	blood	was	ours,	not	the	Shore’s.	Errant
fend,	even	the	bones	came	from	us!
Empty	Throne,	my	certainty	is…gone.	My	faith…crumbles.
‘Don’t	my	people	deserve	better?’
Pully	snorted.	‘Single	droppa	Shake	inem,	they	hear	the	song.	They	yearn
t’come,	t’stand—’
‘To	fight,’	finished	Skwish.
‘But…’	they	deserve	better.
‘Go	down	t’the	Shore,	Highness.	Een	you	tain’t	above	the	First	Shore.’
Yan	Tovis	grimaced.	‘You	think	to	force	me,	Pully?	Skwish?’
‘If	yer	brother—’
‘Hadn’t	killed	all	your	allies,’	Yan	Tovis	said,	nodding.	‘Yes.	Oddly
enough,	I	don’t	think	he	fully	comprehended	the	consequences.	Did	he?	A
hundred	and	more	witches	and	warlocks…yes,	they	could	compel	me,	perhaps.
But	you	two?	No.’
‘Is	a	mistake,	Highness.’
‘Didn’t	stop	you	feeding	on	my	blood,	did	it?	Made	young	again,	and	now
you	roll	like	sluts	in	every	man’s	tent.’
‘Een	Witchslayer	says—’
‘Yes,	you	all	say.	“Kneel,	O	Queen.”	“Surrender	to	the	Shore,	sister.”	You
know,	the	only	person	here	who	comes	close	to	understanding	me	isn’t	even
human.	And	what	did	I	do?	I	destroyed	the	friendship	growing	between	us	by
forcing	her	on	to	the	Throne	of	Dark.	I	fear	she	will	never	forgive	me.’	Yan
Tovis	gestured	suddenly.	‘Both	of	you,	leave	me	now.’
‘As	witches	we	got	to	warn	yee—’
‘And	so	you	have,	Pully.	Now	go,	before	I	call	Yedan	up	here	to	finish
what	he	started	all	those	months	ago.’


She	listened	to	their	footfalls	in	the	sand,	and	then	through	the	grasses.
Below,	on	the	Shore,	Captain	Pithy	was	departing,	moving	off	to	the	left,
probably	making	her	way	to	the	Letherii	encampment.	Her	brother	remained,
though	now	he	began	walking	the	length	of	the	strand.	Like	a	caged	cat.
But	remember,	dear	brother.	The	Hust	sword	broke.
She	lifted	her	gaze,	studied	the	hissing	storm	of	light,	high	above	the
blurred	shapes	of	Liosan	warriors.	She	was	not	sure,	but	at	times	lately	she’d
thought	she’d	seen	vast	shapes	wheeling	up	there.
Clouds.	Thunderheads.
Rightness	was	a	vicious	word.	Is	it	right	to	demand	this	of	us?	Is	it	right	to
invite	us	in	one	breath	and	threaten	us	in	the	next?	Am	I	not	queen	of	the
Shake?	Are	these	not	my	subjects?	You	would	I	simply	give	them	to	you?	Their
blood,	their	lives?
Errant’s	nudge,	how	I	envy	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	the	Queen	with	no
subjects.
The	liquid	sky	of	Lightfall	was	a	thick,	opaque	swirl.	No	thunderheads
today.	Seeing	that	should	have	relieved	her,	but	it	didn’t.
	
Upon	the	Great	Spire	overlooking	Kolanse	Bay,	five	Pures	ascended	the	steep
stairs	carved	into	the	crater ’s	ravaged	flank.	To	their	right,	as	they	climbed
towards	the	Altar	of	Judgement,	the	slope	fell	away	to	a	sheer	cliff,	and	far
below	the	seas	thrashed,	the	waters	raging	into	foaming	spume	the	colour	of
mare’s	milk.	Centuries	of	pounding	fury	had	gnawed	into	the	Spire,	down	to	its
very	roots,	apart	from	a	narrow,	treacherous	isthmus	on	the	inland	side.
From	above,	foul	winds	bled	down,	pulled	towards	the	waves	in	endless
streams.	At	times	Shriven	had	been	poisoned	in	their	pilgrimage,	here	on	the
weathered	pumice	steps,	but	the	Pures	could	withstand	such	vicissitudes,	and
when	they	passed	the	shrivelled	corpses	huddled	against	the	stairs	they	simply
stepped	over	them.
The	Pure	who	was	named	Reverence	led	the	way.	She	was	Eldest	among
those	who	remained	in	close	proximity	to	the	Great	Spire.	Tall	even	for	a
Forkrul	Assail,	she	was	exceedingly	gaunt,	almost	skeletal.	Thousands	of	years
upon	this	world	had	turned	her	once	white	skin	a	sickly	grey,	worn	through	to
bruised	tones	around	her	joints,	including	those	of	her	double-hinged	jaw	and
the	vertical	epiphysis	that	bisected	her	face	from	chin	to	forehead.	One	eye	had
been	blinded	centuries	past	in	a	battle	with	a	Jaghut,	a	tusk	slash	as	they
struggled	to	tear	out	each	other ’s	throat,	and	the	ferocity	of	that	bite	had	dented
the	bones	of	the	socket,	collapsing	the	brow	ridge	on	that	side.


She	favoured	her	right	leg,	as	the	effort	of	the	ascent	shot	lancing	pain
through	her	left	hip.	A	T’lan	Imass	sword-thrust	had	very	nearly
disembowelled	her	on	another	rise	of	stone	steps,	on	a	distant	continent	and
long,	long	ago.	Even	as	the	flint	weapon	stabbed	into	her,	she	had	torn	the
warrior ’s	head	from	its	shoulders.	The	demands	of	adjudication	are	not	for	the
weak,	she	would	say	from	time	to	time,	whispered	as	something	akin	to	a
mantra,	tempering	true	once	more	the	iron	of	her	will.
Yes,	the	climb	had	been	a	long	one,	for	them	all,	but	soon	the	summit
would	heave	into	view,	pure	and	bristling,	and	the	final	death-blows	would	be
delivered.	Judgement	upon	humanity.	Judgement	upon	this	broken,	wounded
world.	We	shall	cleanse.	It	is	not	what	we	chose	for	ourselves.	This	burden	in
truth	does	not	belong	to	us,	but	who	will	stand	to	defend	this	world?	Who	but
the	Forkrul	Assail	can	destroy	all	the	humans	in	this	realm?	Who	but	the
Forkrul	Assail	can	slay	their	venal	gods?
The	oldest	justice	of	all	is	the	justice	of	the	possible.	Hunter	and	prey,
death	or	escape,	to	feed	or	to	starve.	Each	plays	to	what	is	possible	and	the
victims	strive	to	answer	their	needs,	and	that	is	all	there	is.	All	there	ever	need
be.
I	remember	grasses	in	the	wind.	I	remember	skies	filling	with	birds	from
horizon	to	horizon.	I	remember	weeping	at	the	silence	in	the	years	that
followed,	when	these	furtive	killers	edged	out	into	the	world	and	killed	all	they
could.	When	they	walked	ancient	shorelines	and	thrust	their	greed	like	bone
knives	into	new	lands.
We	watched.	We	grieved.	We	grew	into	the	iron	of	anger,	and	then	rage.	And
now.	Now,	we	are	cold	and	certain.	There	will	be	death.
Steady	breaths	behind	her,	a	source	of	strength,	succour	for	her	will	to
complete	this	climb,	to	push	away	the	aches,	the	labours	of	a	body	as	battered
as	the	earth	itself.	She	could	remember	the	day	peace	was	declared	dead.	The
day	the	Forkrul	Assail	stood	tall,	for	the	first	time,	and	saw	before	them	the
future,	and	the	necessity	they	must	answer.
Since	then…so	many	unanticipated	allies.
Above,	seven	steps	away,	the	edge	of	the	altar,	the	platform’s	white
quartzite	glistening	in	the	thin	light.	Drawing	upon	her	strength	for	this	last
effort,	she	pushed	herself	upward.	And	then,	at	last,	she	stepped	on	to	the
windswept	expanse.	The	Altar	of	Judgement,	white	as	freshly	fallen	snow,	the
carved	sunburst	of	blood	channels	leading	out	from	the	centre,	cut	deep,
shadowed	into	darkness.
Reverence	strode	forward,	loosening	her	thick	cloak	as	the	heat	bloomed
up	and	out	from	the	crater ’s	mouth	surrounding	the	Spire,	rank	with	sulphurs.


Behind	her,	the	four	other	Pures	spread	out,	finding	their	own	paths	to	the
centre-stone.
Her	lone	eye	fell	to	that	blackened,	rotted	abomination,	the	boulder	that
was	–	or,	perhaps,	encased	–	the	heart	of	an	alien	god.	She	could	see	no	rise
and	fall	from	its	mottled	form,	yet	to	set	hand	upon	it	was	to	feel	its	stubborn
life.	The	sky	tore	him	apart.	Flung	across	half	the	world	the	flaming	debris	that
was	his	body,	and	pieces	fell	and	fell,	upon	one	continent	and	then	another.	Into
the	shocked	seas.	Ah,	if	there	had	been	more.	If	there	had	been	enough	to
annihilate	every	human	on	this	world,	not	just	the	ones	whose	hubris	was	so
brazen,	whose	madness	reached	across	the	Abyss,	to	take	this	wretched	thing.
Soon,	they	would	pierce	the	centre-stone,	the	Heart,	and	that	alien	god’s
blood	would	flow,	and	the	power	would…feed	us.	With	that	power	they	could
fully	open	the	gate	of	Akhrast	Korvalain;	they	could	unleash	the	cleansing
storm,	and	it	would	sweep	the	world.	Drown	on	your	hubris,	humans.	It	is	all
you	deserve.	Indeed,	it	would	finish	what	the	Summoners	in	their	insanity	had
begun.
You	chain	what	you	can	use.	As	the	gods	have	done	to	him.	But	when	its
usefulness	is	at	an	end…what	then?	Do	you	simply	kill?	Or	do	you	squeeze	the
last	possible	drop	of	blood	from	the	carcass?	Fill	your	belly?
Is	there	a	use	for	endless	pain?	Let	us	see,	shall	we?
‘Sister	Reverence.’
She	turned,	studied	the	younger	woman	facing	her.	In	the	few	paces
between	them	there	was	a	gulf	so	vast	there	was	no	hope	of	ever	spanning	it.
‘Sister	Calm.’
‘If	we	are	to	hear	naught	but	reports	on	the	disposition	of	our	armies,
Sister,	was	there	need	for	this	ascent?’
‘“Need.”	Now	that	is	an	interesting	word,	is	it	not?’
Calm’s	eyes	remained	flat,	unwilling	to	rise.	‘The	siege	belabours	us,
Sister.	The	Watered	who	command	are	insufficient	to	the	task.’
‘Whom	do	you	suggest	we	send,	Sister	Calm?’
‘Brother	Diligence.’
Ah,	next	to	me	in	seniority.	My	closest	ally.	Of	course.	She	turned	to	the
slope-shouldered	man	standing	nearest	the	Heart.	‘Brother	Diligence?’
He	glanced	over,	his	pale	eyes	cold	as	the	seas	behind	him.	‘I	will	break	the
defenders,	Sister	Reverence.	None	there	can	hope	to	stand	against	me.’
‘It	remains	an	option,’	murmured	Reverence.
Again,	Calm	did	not	react.
Reverence	looked	to	the	others.	‘Brother	Abide?’
‘It	is	known	where	blood	soaks	the	sands,’	the	Mystic	said,	‘that	other


forces	are	arraying	against	us.	Beyond	the	Glass	Desert.’
‘We	have	other	armies,’	said	Calm.	‘Enough	to	meet	and	defeat	each	one.’
‘Sister	Calm	is	correct,’	added	Sister	Equity.	‘Brother	Diligence	can
destroy	the	humans	who	by	treachery	gained	the	North	Keep,	and	indeed	he	can
return	in	time	for	us	to	meet	the	new	threats	from	the	west.’
‘But	only	if	we	do	not	linger	too	long	in	reaching	a	decision,’	said	Calm.
And	so	it	divides.	‘Brother	Diligence?’
‘The	risk	remains,’	the	warrior	said,	‘that	we	have	underestimated	the
commander	of	those	invaders.	After	all,	they	appeared	as	if	from	nowhere,	and
their	successes	to	date	have	been…impressive.’
‘From	nowhere,	yes,’	muttered	Brother	Abide.	‘Cause	for	dismay.	A
warren?	Most	certainly.	But	to	guide	an	entire	army	through?	Sister	Calm	and
Sister	Equity,	we	cannot	discount	the	possibility	of	those	in	the	keep	simply
leaving	the	way	they	came,	should	matters	prove	too	precipitous.	In	which
case,	when	and	where	will	they	reappear?’
‘A	valid	point,’	said	Diligence.	‘For	as	long	as	they	are	held	in	place,	they
are	no	threat	to	us.’
‘Even	so,’	countered	Calm,	‘your	presence	and	command	of	our	besieging
army	will	ensure	that	you	can	respond	to	anything	unexpected.	There	will
come	a	time	–	there	must	come	a	time	–	when	it	is	expedient	to	drive	them
from	the	keep	and,	if	possible,	annihilate	them.’
‘Indeed	there	will,’	agreed	Reverence.	‘But	as	Brother	Abide	has	noted
before,	we	are	not	yet	certain	that	we	have	accounted	for	all	the	threats
assembling	against	us.’	She	gestured.	‘The	Great	Spire,	the	Altar	of	Judgement,
this	is	where	we	remain	the	most	vulnerable.	Diligence	in	command	of	the
Spire	Army	ensures	the	Spire	and	the	Heart	hold	inviolate.’	She	paused,	fixed
her	single	eye	upon	Sister	Calm.	‘Our	remaining	Pures	command	the	outlying
armies	inland.	Do	you	suggest	that,	in	the	end,	they	shall	prove	unequal	to	the
task?	Sister	Belie?	Sister	Freedom?	Brothers	Grave,	Serenity	and	Aloft?
Which	of	them	falters	in	your	regard?’
Calm	glanced	away.	‘I	hold	that	it	is	best	to	eliminate	each	threat	as	it
arises,	Sister	Reverence.’
Reverence	frowned.	‘And	should	the	enemy	in	the	keep	vanish	as
mysteriously	as	it	arrived?	Only	to,	perhaps,	reappear	here,	at	the	very	foot	of
the	Great	Spire?	With	Brother	Diligence	stranded	at	the	far	end	of	Estobanse
Valley?	What	then?’	she	asked.	Yes,	best	we	argue	here,	alone,	beyond	the
hearing	of	our	Watered	and	Shriven	servants.	She	resumed,	this	time	taking	in
all	the	others.	‘All	of	Kolanse	has	been	cleansed	–	how	could	we	have	done
otherwise,	when,	upon	reaching	these	shores,	we	witnessed	the	terrible	damage


done	to	this	land?	Estobanse	remains,	because	for	the	moment	we	require	that
it	do	so.	To	feed	the	Shriven	and	Watered.	When	the	Heart	is	sacrificed	upon
this	altar,	brothers	and	sisters,	even	our	need	for	human	armies	will	be	at	an
end.	The	end	of	the	human	world	begins	here	–	we	must	protect	this	place
above	all	others,	even	Estobanse.	Do	any	of	you	deny	this?’
Silence.
Reverence	met	Calm’s	gaze.	‘Sister	Calm,	in	the	name	of	your	ancestors,
patience.’	At	that	there	was	finally	a	response.	Calm’s	face	tightened,	and	she
rocked	as	if	struck.	Satisfied,	Reverence	blithely	continued.	‘All	that	is	required
is	in	motion,	even	as	we	speak.	There	will	be	rain	before	the	storm.	There	must
be.	I	ask	that	you	set	out	once	more,	upon	the	dead	lands,	that	you	be	our	eyes
so	set	as	to	forewarn	us	should	any	threat	emerge	from	an	unexpected	quarter.’
She	gestured.	‘Indeed,	take	Sister	Equity	with	you.’
‘Sound	tactic,’	said	Brother	Diligence,	with	a	dry	smile.
Calm	bowed	stiffly.	‘As	you	wish,	Sister	Reverence.’
Catching	something	avid	in	the	younger	woman’s	eyes,	Reverence
frowned,	suddenly	uneasy.	Ah,	have	I	been	anticipated	here?	Have	I	stepped
blind	into	a	trap?	You	wish	to	be	sent	out	into	the	Wastes,	Calm.	Why?	What	am
I	unleashing?
‘Our	disposition,	Sister	Reverence?’
Curious,	she	nodded.	‘As	you	desire.’
‘Sister	Equity	shall	take	the	south	lands,	then,	while	I	journey	into	the	west.’
Again?	And	what	did	you	do	there	the	first	time	out?	What	did	you	find?
‘Very	well,’	Reverence	said.	‘Now,	we	stand	upon	the	Altar	of	Judgement,	once
more	united	in	our	endeavours.	With	humility—’
‘Blessed	Pures!’
The	shout	came	from	the	edge	of	the	stairs,	and	they	turned	to	see	Watered
Amiss,	his	face	flame-flashed	with	exertion.	They	had	left	him	at	the	Third
Landing,	against	the	eastern	flank	of	the	Spire.
Reverence	strode	towards	him.	‘Brother,	what	word	do	you	bring	us	with
such	haste?’
He	stumbled	on	to	the	altar	and	pointed	to	the	east.	‘Blessed	Pures!	In	the
harbour	–	ships!	Many,	many	ships!’
Reverence	noted	the	alarm	and	consternation	in	the	faces	of	her	kin,	and
felt	a	surge	of	satisfaction.	Yes,	unseen	threats	assail	you	all	now.	‘Brother
Diligence,	assemble	the	Defenders	and	awaken	our	warren	in	the	Watered	subcommanders.	Akhrast	Korvalain	shall	be	our	bristling	wall	this	day.’	And	Sister
Reverence?	Ah,	well,	perhaps	she	will	be	the	Gate.
Calm	and	Equity	had	rushed	to	the	eastern	edge	of	the	altar.	Both	stared	for


a	moment	before	Equity	turned	round.	‘Ships	of	war,	kin.	Grey	as	wolves	upon
the	water.’
‘Shall	we	descend	and	greet	them?’	Reverence	asked.
Brother	Diligence’s	smile	was	cruel	and	hard.
	
He	knelt	in	the	midst	of	Chaos.	Pressures	descended	upon	him,	seeking	to
crack	his	bones.	Torrid	winds	clawed	at	him,	hungry	to	shred	his	soul.	But	he
had	walked	here	of	his	own	accord.	In	his	heart,	such	savage	challenge	as	to
face	down	the	Abyss	itself.
All	is	not	bound	to	fate.	It	must	not	be.
All	is	not	carved	in	stone,	buried	deep	and	for	ever	beyond	mortal	sight.
There	must	be	more.	In	all	the	worlds,	the	solid	laws	are	a	prison	–	and	I
will	see	us	freed!
He	had	met	Chaos	with	fury	in	his	being,	a	bristling	armour	of	rage	proof
against	all	it	flung	at	him.	He	had	walked	into	the	maelstrom	seas	of	madness,
and	held	tight	to	his	own	sanity.	And	then,	at	last,	he	had	stood,	unbowed,	alone,
and	argued	against	the	universe	itself.	The	laws	that	were	lies,	the	proofs	that
were	false.	Stone	a	hand	could	pass	through.	Water	that	could	be	breathed.	Air
as	impenetrable	as	a	wall.	Fire	to	quench	the	deadliest	thirst.	Light	that	blinded,
darkness	that	revealed.	The	beast	within	that	was	the	heart	of	dignity,	the
sentient	self	that	was	purest	savagery.	In	life	the	secret	codes	of	death.	In	death
the	seeds	of	life.
He	had	spoken	with	the	elemental	forces	of	nature.	Argued	without	relent.
He	had	defended	his	right	to	an	existence	torn	loose	from	these	dread,
unknowable	horrors.
For	his	efforts,	the	blind	uncertainty	of	Chaos	had	besieged	him.	How
long?	Centuries?	Millennia?	Now	he	knelt,	battered,	his	armour	shattered,
wounds	bleeding.	And	still	it	assailed	him,	sought	to	tear	him	apart.
The	fissure	that	erupted	from	him	first	emerged	from	the	centre	of	his
head,	a	blast	of	argent	fire	in	which	he	heard	manic	laughter.	With	terrible
ripping	sounds,	the	rent	worked	its	way	down	his	body,	unfolding	his	throat,
peeling	back	each	side.	His	breastbone	cracked	in	two,	ribs	bursting	free.	His
stomach	opened,	spilling	bitter	fluids.
Then	there	was	nothing.	For	how	long,	he	never	knew.	When	cognizance
returned	to	him,	he	was	standing	where	he	had	stood	before,	and	before	him
two	naked	figures	knelt,	heads	bowed.	A	man,	a	woman.
My	children,	born	of	anguish	and	need.	My	ever	facile	twins.	My	wretched
faces	of	freedom.	Chaos	answers	with	its	most	delicious	joke.	Pull	and	prod,


you	godlings,	you	will	never	know	what	I	lost	in	making	you,	this	vicious
bargain	with	uncertainty.
I	will	give	you	worlds.	Yet	not	one	shall	be	your	home.	You	are	cursed	to
wander	through	them,	trapped	in	your	eternal	games.	Lord	and	Lady	of	Chance.
In	the	language	of	the	Azathanai,	Oponn.
My	children,	you	shall	never	forgive	me.	Nor	do	I	deserve	forgiveness.	The
laws	are	not	what	they	seem.	Order	is	an	illusion.	It	hides	its	lies	in	your	very
eyes,	deceiving	all	they	see.	Because	to	see	is	to	change	that	which	is	seen.
No,	none	of	us	will	ever	see	true.	We	cannot.	It	is	impossible.	I	give	you	a
life	without	answers,	my	children.	Walk	the	realms,	spread	the	word	in	your
illimitable	way,	Oponn.	Some	will	welcome	you.	Others	will	not.	And	that,	dear
ones,	is	the	joke	on	them.	And	on	us.
I	had	a	thought.
Now	see	what	it	made.
‘Is	this	senility?’
The	cavern	shed	its	fluids,	an	incessant	trickle	and	drizzle.	The	air	stank	of
pain.
Sechul	Lath	glanced	over.	‘You	spoke,	Errastas?’
‘You	were	far	away.	Memories	haunting	you,	Setch?’
They	sat	on	boulders,	the	two	of	them,	the	plumes	of	their	breaths	drifting
like	smoke.	From	somewhere	in	the	cavern’s	depths	came	the	sound	of	rushing
water.
‘Hardly.	After	all,	as	you	are	ever	quick	to	point	out,	I	am	a	man	of	modest
achievements.’
‘Not	a	man.	A	god.	Making	your	pathetic	deeds	even	more	embarrassing.’
‘Yes,’	Sechul	Lath	agreed,	nodding.	‘I	have	many	regrets.’
‘Only	fools	know	regret,’	Errastas	said,	only	to	undermine	his	assertion	as
he	unconsciously	reached	up	towards	his	gaping	eye	socket.	The	brush	of	his
fingers,	the	flinch	of	muscles	in	his	cheek.
Hiding	a	smile,	Sechul	Lath	looked	away.
Kilmandaros	still	sat	hunched,	almost	folded	over,	in	the	dripping	blood
rain	of	the	Otataral	Dragon.	When	exhaustion	took	her,	the	period	of	recovery
could	be	long,	interminably	so	in	the	eyes	of	the	Errant.	Even	worse,	she	was
not	yet	done	with	this.	Lifting	his	gaze,	Sechul	Lath	studied	the	dragon,
Korabas.	She	is	the	one	law	amidst	the	chaos	of	the	Eleint.	She	is	the	denial	of
their	power.	She	is	the	will	set	free.	It’s	not	enough	to	bleed	her.	She	needs	to
die.
And	not	even	Kilmandaros	can	do	that.	Not	with	this	one.	At	least,	not	now,
while	the	gate	is	still	sealed.	She	needs	to	die,	but	she	must	first	be	freed.


Against	the	madness	of	such	contradictions,	I	wagered	my	very	life.	I
walked	into	the	heart	of	Chaos	to	challenge	the	absurdity	of	existence.	And	for
that,	I	was	torn	in	two.
My	modest	achievement.
‘The	Forkrul	Assail,’	he	muttered,	glancing	back	at	Errastas.	‘They	cannot
be	permitted	to	actually	succeed	in	what	they	seek	to	do.	You	must	know	that.
The	Assail	do	not	kneel	before	gods,	not	even	Elder	Ones.’
‘Their	arrogance	is	boundless,’	the	Errant	said,	baring	his	teeth.	‘We	will
exploit	that,	dear	Knuckles.	Mayhap	they	will	slit	the	throats	of	the	gods.	But	we
are	another	matter.’
‘We	will	need	K’rul	before	this	ends,	I	think.’
‘Of	us	all,	he	best	understands	expedience,’	Errastas	agreed.
Expedience?	‘And	Mael.	And	Olar—’
‘That	hag	has	her	own	plans,	but	she	will	fail.’
‘With	a	nudge?’
‘It	won’t	be	hard,’	the	Errant	replied.	‘A	nudge?	More	like	a	tap,	the
gentlest	of	prods.’
‘Don’t	be	premature	in	that.	She’ll	serve	well	as	a	distraction,	for	as	long
as	possible.’
He	was	touching	his	socket	again.	Seeking	benediction?	Unlikely.
‘Azath,’	said	Sechul	Lath.	‘That	was	unexpected.	How	deep	is	your	wound,
Errastas?’
‘More	indignation	than	blood,’	the	Errant	answered,	grimacing.	‘I	was
sorely	used.	Someone	will	pay	for	that.’
‘Lifestealer?’
‘Ah,	Knuckles,	do	you	think	me	a	fool?	Challenge	that	one?	No.	Besides,
there	were	children	involved.	Human	children.’
‘Easier	targets,	then.’
Errastas	must	have	caught	something	in	Sechul’s	tone,	for	his	face
darkened.	‘Don’t	you	dare	think	them	innocent!’
‘I	don’t,’	Sechul	replied,	thinking	of	his	own	unholy	spawn.	‘But	it	was
Feather	Witch	who	swallowed	your	eye,	was	it	not?	And	you	say	that	you	killed
her,	with	your	own	hands.	How	then—’
‘Icarium’s	stupid	gambit	in	Letheras.	It’s	why	I	never	found	her	soul.	No,
she	carried	my	eye	straight	to	him,	the	rotting	bitch.	And	now	he’s	spat	out
fledgling	warrens,	and	made	of	my	eye	a	Finnest	for	an	Azath.	He	remains	the
single	force	of	true	unpredictability	in	this	scheme.’
‘Calm	assures	us	otherwise.’
‘I	don’t	trust	her.’


Finally,	friend,	you	begin	to	think	clearly	again.	‘Just	so,’	he	said.
Errastas	glanced	over	at	Kilmandaros.	‘Can	we	not	feed	her	or	something?
Hasten	this	healing?’
‘No.	The	wards	Rake	and	the	others	set	were	profound.	Tearing	them	down
damaged	her	deeply,	in	ways	no	sorcerous	healing	can	reach.	Leave	her	in
peace.’
Errastas	hissed.
‘Besides,’	Sechul	Lath	continued,	‘they’re	not	all	in	place	yet.	You	know
that.’
‘I	have	waited	so	long	for	this.	I	want	us	to	be	ready	when	the	time	comes.’
‘And	so	we	shall,	Errastas.’
The	Errant’s	single	eye	fixed	on	Sechul	Lath.	‘Calm	is	not	the	only	one	I
do	not	trust.’
‘There	will	be	ashes	and	death,	but	survivors	will	emerge.	They	always	do.
They	will	understand	the	necessity	of	blood.	We	shall	be	unchallenged,
Errastas.’
‘Yet	you	sought	to	betray	me.	You	and	Kilmandaros.’
‘Betray?	No.’	We	dismissed	you.
‘That	is	how	I	see	it.	How	can	I	not?’
‘What	you	fail	to	understand,	old	friend,’	said	Sechul	Lath,	‘is	that	I	don’t
care	about	being	unchallenged.	I	don’t	care	about	a	new	world	rising	from	the
wreckage	of	this	one.	I	am	happy	enough	to	wander	the	ruins.	To	mock	those
mortals	who	would	try	again.’	He	gestured.	‘Leave	the	world	to	its	wild
ignorance	–	at	least	life	was	simple	then.	I	turned	my	back	on	worshippers
because	I	was	done	with	them.	Disgusted	with	them.	I	don’t	want	what	we	had,
Errastas.’
‘But	I	do,	Setch.’
‘And	you	are	welcome	to	it.’
‘What	of	your	children?’
‘What	of	them?’
‘Where	do	you	see	Oponn	in	the	world	to	come?’
‘I	don’t	see	them	anywhere,’	Sechul	Lath	said.
Errastas	drew	a	sharp	breath.	‘You	will	kill	them?’
‘What	I	made	I	can	unmake.’
‘Your	words	please	me,	Knuckles.	Indeed,	I	am	relieved.’
It	wasn’t	much	of	a	life,	my	children,	was	it?	I	doubt	you	will	object
overmuch.	Prod	and	pull,	yes,	but	in	the	end	–	after	thousands	and	thousands	of
years	of	that	pathetic	game	–	what	is	achieved?	Learned?	By	anyone?
Chance	is	a	miserable	bitch,	a	hard	bastard.	It	shows	a	smile,	but	it	is	a


wolf ’s	smile.	What	is	learned?	Only	that	every	ambition	must	kneel	to	that
which	cannot	be	anticipated.	And	you	can	duck	and	dodge	for	only	so	long.	It’ll
take	you	down	in	the	end.
A	man	slips	the	noose.	A	civilization	steps	from	the	path	of	its	own	hubris.
Once.	Twice.	Thrice	even.	But	what	of	the	twentieth	time?	The	fiftieth?	Triumph
falters.	It	always	does.	There	was	never	a	balance.
After	all,	common	sense	will	tell	you,	it’s	far	easier	to	push	than	it	is	to
pull.
‘How	does	Kilmandaros	feel,’	Errastas	asked,	‘about	killing	her	own
children?’
Sechul	Lath	glanced	over	at	his	mother,	and	then	back	at	his	companion.
‘Don’t	you	understand	anything,	Errastas?	She	doesn’t	feel	anything.’
After	a	moment,	the	lone	eye	shied	away.
Now	I	think	you	understand.
	
What	does	the	child	want,	that	you	did	not	have	first?	What	do	you	own	that	the
child	does	not	want?	Badalle	had	awoken	this	morning	with	these	questions
echoing	in	her	head.	The	voice	was	a	woman’s,	and	then	a	man’s.	Both
delivered	in	the	same	abject	tones	of	despair.
She	sat	in	the	sun’s	light	as	it	bled	in	from	the	window,	banishing	the	chill
in	her	bones	as	would	a	lizard	or	a	serpent,	and	struggled	to	understand	the
night’s	visions,	the	dark,	disturbing	voices	of	strangers	saying	such	terrible
things.
It	is	what	is	passed	on,	I	suppose.	I	think	I	see	that.
She	glanced	over	to	where	Saddic	sat	on	the	floor,	his	collection	of	useless
objects	arrayed	around	him,	a	lost	look	on	his	oddly	wrinkled	face.	Like	an	old
man	with	his	life’s	treasure.	Only	he’s	forgotten	how	to	count.
But	what	they	owned,	what	they	had,	was	not	necessarily	a	good	thing,	a
thing	of	virtue.	Sometimes,	what	they	had	was	poison,	and	the	child’s	hunger
knew	no	different.	How	could	it?	And	so	the	crimes	passed	on,	from	one
generation	to	the	next.	Until	they	destroy	us.	Yes,	I	see	that	now.	My	dreams	are
wise,	wiser	than	me.	My	dreams	sing	the	songs	of	the	Quitters,	clever	in
argument,	subtle	in	persuasion.
My	dreams	are	warning	me.
She	turned	away	from	the	sun’s	light	and	faced	the	chamber.	‘Is	everyone
ready?’
Saddic	looked	up	guiltily,	and	then	nodded.
Badalle	twisted	back	and	leaned	out	on	the	window	ledge,	craning	round	in


order	to	see	the	western	end	of	the	plaza.	Rutt	was	there,	with	Held	in	his	arms.
Others	waited	in	the	shadows	of	the	surrounding	buildings,	as	if	figures	on
friezes	had	stepped	out	from	their	stone	worlds.
It	was	just	as	well.	They’d	eaten	all	the	fruit	on	the	city’s	trees.
And	the	crystal	was	stealing	our	souls.
‘Then	it	is	time.	Leave	those	things	behind,	Saddic.’
Instead,	he	began	gathering	them	up.
A	flash	of	anger	hissed	through	Badalle,	followed	by	fear.	She	didn’t
understand	either.	Sighing,	she	dropped	down	from	the	ledge.	‘There	will	be
Shards.	Diamonds,	Rubies	and	Opals.	We	will	begin	dying	again.’
The	boy	looked	at	her	with	knowing	eyes.
She	sighed	a	second	time.	‘There	are	fathers	among	us	now.	We	must
watch	them	carefully,	Saddic,	in	case	they	find	father	thoughts.’
To	that	he	shook	his	head,	as	if	to	deny	her	words.	‘No,	Badalle,’	he	said	in
his	broken	voice.	‘They	just	care	for	the	young	ones.’
So	few	words	from	you,	Saddic.	I’d	thought	you	mute.	What	other	things
awaken	in	you,	behind	those	old	man’s	eyes,	that	old	man’s	face?
She	left	the	room.	Saddic	followed,	his	bag	of	useless	things	in	his	arms
like	a	newborn	babe.	Down	the	sharp-edged	steps,	through	the	cool	air	of	the
hidden	corridors,	and	then	outside,	into	the	blinding	heat.	Badalle	walked
without	hesitation	to	where	stood	Rutt,	who	now	watched	her	approach	with
hooded	eyes.	As	she	drew	closer,	the	other	children	edged	into	the	sunlight,
clumped	in	their	makeshift	families.	Hands	were	held,	rag-ends	clutched,	legs
embraced.	She	paused	in	her	journey.	She	had	forgotten	how	many	still	lived.
Forcing	herself	on,	she	walked	until	she	stood	before	Rutt,	and	then	she
spun	round	and	raised	her	arms	out	to	the	sides.
‘The	city	spits	us	out
We	are	sour	and	we	are	bitter
To	taste.
The	blind	feeders-on-us	turn	away
As	they	gorge
As	they	devour	all	that	was	meant	for	us
All	we	thought	to	inherit
Because	we	wanted	what	they	had
Because	we	thought	it	belonged	to	us
Just	as	it	did	to	them
They	looked	away	as	they	ate	our	future


And	now	the	city’s	walls
Steal	our	wants
And	spit	out	what	remains
It’s	not	much
Just	something	sour,	something	bitter
To	taste.
And	this	is	what	you	taste
In	your	mouths.
Something	sour,	something	bitter.’
Rutt	stared	at	her	for	a	long	moment,	and	then	he	nodded,	and	set	out	along
the	wide	central	avenue.	Westward,	into	the	Glass	Desert.	Behind	him,	the
Snake	uncoiled	itself	from	its	months-long	slumber.
This	was	something	the	Snake	understood,	and	Badalle	could	see	it.	In	the
steady,	unhurried	strides	of	the	children	trooping	past,	in	their	set	faces,
bleakness	settling	with	familiarity	in	thin,	wan	features.	We	know	this.	We	have
learned	to	love	this.
To	walk.	To	slither	beneath	the	fists	of	the	world.
We	are	the	Snake	reborn.
In	time,	they	reached	the	city’s	edge,	and	looked	out	on	the	flat	glittering
wastes.
Suffering’s	comfort.	Like	a	dead	mother’s	embrace.


Chapter	Six

‘Dominant	among	the	ancient	races	we	can	observe	four:	the	Imass,	the
Jaghut,	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	and	the	Forkrul	Assail.	While	others
were	present	in	the	eldritch	times,	either	their	numbers	were	scant	or
their	legacies	have	all	but	vanished	from	the	world.
As	for	us	humans,	we	were	the	rats	in	the	walls	and	crawlspaces,
those	few	of	us	that	existed.
But	is	not	domination	our	birthright?	Are	we	not	the	likenesses	of
carved	idols	and	prophets?	Do	these	idols	not	serve	us?	Do	these
prophets	not	prophesy	our	dominion	over	all	other	creatures?
Perhaps	you	might	note,	with	a	sly	wink,	that	the	hands	that	carved
the	idols	were	our	own;	and	that	those	blessed	prophets	so	bold	in	their
claims	of	righteous	glory,	each	emerged	from	the	common	human
press.	You	might	note,	then,	that	our	fierce	assertions	cannot	help	but
be	blatantly	self-serving,	indeed,	self-justifying.
And	if	you	did,	well,	you	are	no	friend	of	ours.	And	for	you	we
have	this	dagger,	this	pyre,	this	iron	tongue	of	torture.	Retract	your
claims	to	our	unexceptional	selves,	our	gross	banality	of	the	profane.
As	a	species,	we	are	displeased	by	notions	of	a	mundane	disconnect
from	destiny,	and	we	shall	hold	to	our	deadly	displeasure	until	we
humans	have	crumbled	to	ash	and	dust.
For,	as	the	Elder	Races	would	tell	you,	were	they	around	to	do	so,
the	world	has	its	own	dagger,	its	own	iron	tongue,	its	own	pyre.	And
from	its	flames,	there	is	nowhere	to	hide.’
Fragment	purportedly	from	a	translator ’s	note	to	a	lost
edition	of	Gothos’	Folly,	Genabaris,	835	Burn’s	Sleep
	bodies.	The	blood	and	gore
dried	on	their	tattered	furs,	their	weapons.	Their	only	motion	came	from	the
wind	plucking	at	strands	of	hair	and	rawhide	strips.
The	carrion	birds,	lizards	and	capemoths	that	descended	upon	the	field	of
slaughter	fed	undisturbed,	leisurely	in	their	feasting	on	rotting	flesh.	The
THREE	DAYS	AND	TWO	NIGHTS	THEY	HAD	STOOD	AMONG	THE	DEAD


figures	standing	motionless	in	their	midst	were	too	desiccated	for	their
attentions;	they	might	as	well	as	have	been	the	stumps	of	long-dead	trees,	windtorn	and	lifeless.
The	small	creatures	were	entirely	unaware	of	the	silent	howls	erupting
from	the	souls	of	the	slayers,	the	unending	waves	of	grief	that	battered	at	these
withered	apparitions,	the	horror	churning	beneath	layers	of	blackened,	dried
blood.	They	could	not	feel	the	storm	raging	behind	skin-stretched	faces,	in	the
caverns	of	skulls,	in	the	shrunken	pits	of	eye	sockets.
With	the	sun	fleeing	beneath	the	horizon	on	the	third	night,	First	Sword
Onos	T’oolan	faced	southeast	and,	with	heavy	but	even	strides,	set	out,	the
sword	in	his	hand	dragging	a	path	through	the	knotted	grasses.
The	others	followed,	an	army	of	destitute,	bereft	T’lan	Imass,	their	souls
utterly	destroyed.
Slayers	of	the	innocent.	Murderers	of	children.	The	stone	weapons	lifted
and	the	stone	weapons	fell.	Faces	wrote	knotted	tales	of	horror.	Small	skulls
cracked	open	like	ostrich	eggs.	Spirits	fled	like	tiny	birds.
When	the	others	left,	two	remained	behind.	Kalt	Urmanal	of	the	Orshayn
T’lan	Imass	ignored	the	command	of	his	clan,	the	pressure	of	its	will.
Trembling,	he	held	himself	against	the	sweep	of	that	dread	tide	pulling	so
insistently	into	the	First	Sword’s	shadow.
He	would	not	bow	to	Onos	T’oolan.	And	much	as	he	yearned	to	fall	to
insensate	dust,	releasing	for	ever	his	tortured	spirit,	instead	he	held	his	place,
surrounded	by	half-devoured	corpses	–	eye	sockets	plucked	clean,	soft	lips	and
cheeks	stripped	away	by	eager	beaks	–	and	grasped	in	both	hands	the
crumbling	madness	of	all	that	life	–	and	death	–	had	delivered	to	him.
But	he	knew	with	desolation	as	abject	as	anything	he	had	felt	before	that
there	would	be	no	gift	of	peace,	not	for	him	nor	for	any	of	the	others,	and	that
even	dissolution	might	prove	unequal	to	the	task	of	cleansing	his	soul.
The	flint	sword	in	his	hand	was	heavy,	as	if	caked	in	mud.	If	only	it	was.
His	bones,	hardened	to	stone,	wrapped	round	him	like	a	cage	of	vast,	crushing
weight.
As	dawn	rose	on	the	fourth	day,	as	the	screams	in	his	skull	broke	like	sand
before	the	wind,	he	lifted	his	head	and	looked	across	to	the	one	other	who	had
not	yielded	to	the	First	Sword’s	ineffable	summons.
A	Bonecaster	of	the	Brold	clan.	Of	the	Second	Ritual,	the	Failed	Ritual.	And
if	only	it	had	failed.	Knife	Drip,	such	a	sweet	name,	such	a	prophetic	name.
‘This,’	said	Kalt	Urmanal,	‘is	the	Ritual	you	sought,	Nom	Kala.	This	is	the
escape	you	desired.’	He	gestured	with	his	free	hand.	‘Your	escape	from	these…
children.	Who	would,	in	years	to	come	–	years	they	no	longer	have	awaiting


them	–	who	would,	then,	have	hunted	down	your	kin.	Your	mate,	your	children.
They	would	have	killed	you	all	without	a	moment’s	thought.	In	their	eyes,	you
were	beasts.	You	were	less	than	they	were,	and	so	you	deserved	less.’
‘The	beast,’	she	said,	‘that	dies	at	the	hand	of	a	human	remains	innocent.’
‘While	that	human	cannot	make	the	same	claim.’
‘Can	they	not?’
Kalt	Urmanal	tilted	his	head,	studied	the	white-fur-clad	woman.	‘The
hunter	finds	justification.’
‘Need	suffices.’
‘And	the	murderer?’
‘Need	suffices.’
‘Then	we	are	all	cursed	to	commit	endless	crimes,	and	this	is	our	eternal
fate.	And	it	is	our	gift	to	justify	all	that	we	do.’	But	this	is	no	gift.	‘Tell	me,
Nom	Kala,	do	you	feel	innocent?’
‘I	feel	nothing.’
‘I	do	not	believe	you.’
‘I	feel	nothing	because	there	is	nothing	left.’
‘Very	well.	Now	I	believe	you,	Nom	Kala.’	He	scanned	the	field	of
slaughter.	‘It	was	my	thought	to	stand	here	until	their	very	bones	vanished
beneath	the	thin	soil,	hid	inside	brush	and	grasses.	Until	nothing	remained	of
what	has	happened	here.’	He	paused,	and	then	said	again,	‘It	was	my	thought.’
‘You	will	find	no	penance,	Kalt	Urmanal.’
‘Ah.	Yes,	that	was	the	word	I	sought.	I	had	forgotten	it.’
‘As	you	would.’
‘As	I	would.’
Neither	spoke	again	until	the	sun	had	once	more	vanished,	yielding	the	sky
to	the	Jade	Strangers	and	the	broken	moon	that	was	rising	fitfully	in	the
northeast.	Then	Kalt	Urmanal	hefted	his	weapon.	‘I	smell	blood.’
Nom	Kala	stirred.	‘Yes,’	she	said.
‘Immortal	blood,	not	yet	spilled,	but…soon.’
‘Yes.’
‘In	moments	of	murder,’	said	Kalt	Urmanal,	‘the	world	laughs.’
‘Your	thoughts	are	harsh,’	replied	Nom	Kala,	settling	her	hair-matted	mace
in	its	sling	draped	across	her	back.	She	collected	her	harpoons.
‘Are	they?	Nom	Kala,	have	you	ever	known	a	world	at	peace?	I	know	the
answer.	I	have	existed	far	longer	than	you,	and	in	that	time	there	was	no	peace.
Ever.’
‘I	have	known	moments	of	peace,’	she	said,	facing	him.	‘It	is	foolish	to
expect	more	than	that,	Kalt	Urmanal.’


‘Do	you	seek	such	a	moment	now?’
She	hesitated	and	then	said,	‘Perhaps.’
‘Then	I	shall	accompany	you.	We	shall	journey	to	find	it.	That	single,	most
precious	moment.’
‘Do	not	cling	to	hope.’
‘No,	I	shall	cling	to	you,	Nom	Kala.’
She	flinched.	‘Do	not	do	that,’	she	whispered.
‘I	can	see	you	were	beautiful	once.	And	now,	for	the	yearning	in	your
empty	heart,	you	are	beautiful	again.’
‘Will	you	so	torment	me?	If	so,	do	not	journey	with	me,	I	beg	you.’
‘I	shall	be	silent	at	your	side,	unless	you	choose	otherwise,	Nom	Kala.
Look	at	us,	we	two	remain.	Deathless,	and	so	well	suited	to	this	search	for	a
moment	of	peace.	Shall	we	begin?’
Saying	nothing,	she	began	walking.
As	did	he.
	
Do	you	remember,	how	those	flowers	danced	in	the	wind?	Three	women	knelt	in
soft	clays	beside	the	stream,	taking	cupped	handfuls	of	clear	water	to	sprinkle
upon	the	softened	pran’ag	hides	before	binding	them.	The	migrations	were
under	way,	velvet	upon	the	antlers,	and	the	insects	spun	in	iridescent	clouds,
flitting	like	delicious	thoughts.
The	sun	was	warm	that	day.	Do	you	remember?
Greasy	stones	were	lifted	from	the	sacks,	rolled	in	hands	around	the	circle
of	laughing	youths,	while	the	cooked	meat	was	drawn	forth	and	everyone
gathered	to	feast.	It	was,	with	these	gentle	scenes,	a	day	like	any	other.
The	call	from	the	edge	of	camp	was	not	unduly	alarming.	Three	strangers
approaching	from	the	south.
One	of	the	other	clans,	familiar	faces,	smiles	to	greet	kin.
The	second	shout	froze	everyone.
I	went	out	with	the	others.	I	held	my	finest	spear	in	my	hand,	and	with	my
warriors	all	about	me	I	felt	sure	and	bold.	Those	who	drew	near	were	not	kin.
True	strangers.	If	necessary,	we	would	drive	them	off.
There	was	this	moment	–	please,	you	must	remember	with	me.	We	stood	in	a
row,	as	they	came	to	within	six	paces	of	us,	and	we	looked	into	their	faces.
We	saw	ourselves,	yet	not.	Subtle	the	alterations.	They	were	taller,	thinnerboned.	Strewn	with	fetishes	and	shells	and	beads	of	amber.	Their	faces	did	not
possess	the	rounded	comfort	of	Imass	faces.	Features	had	sharpened,	narrowed.
The	bones	of	their	jaw	beneath	the	mouth	jutted	under	dark	beards.	We	saw


their	weapons	and	they	confused	us.	We	saw	the	fineness	of	their	skins	and	furs
and	leggings,	and	we	felt	diminished.
Their	eyes	were	arrogant,	the	colour	of	earth,	not	sky.
With	gestures,	these	three	sought	to	drive	us	away.	This	was	their	land	to
hunt	now.	We	were	the	intruders.	Do	you	remember	how	that	felt?	I	looked	into
their	faces,	into	their	eyes,	and	I	saw	the	truth.
To	these	tall	strangers,	we	were	ranag,	we	were	bhederin,	we	were	pran’ag.
Killing	them	made	no	difference,	and	the	blood	on	our	weapons	weakened
us	with	horror.	Please,	I	am	begging	you,	remember	this.	It	was	the	day	the
world	began	to	die.	Our	world.
Tell	me	what	you	remember,	you	who	stood	facing	these	roughened	savages
with	their	blunt	faces,	their	squat	selves,	their	hair	of	red	and	blond.	Tell	me
what	you	felt,	your	indignation	when	we	did	not	cower,	your	outrage	when	we
cut	you	down.
You	knew	you	would	come	again,	in	numbers	beyond	imagining.	And	you
would	hunt	us,	chase	us	down,	drive	us	into	cold	valleys	and	cliff	caves	above
crashing	seas.	Until	we	were	all	gone.	And	then,	of	course,	you	would	turn	on
each	other.
If	you	dare	to	remember	this,	then	you	will	understand.	I	am	the	slayer	of
children	–	your	children	–	no!	Show	me	no	horror!	Your	hands	are	red	with	the
blood	of	my	children!	You	cannot	kill	us	any	more,	but	we	can	kill	you,	and	so
we	shall.	We	are	the	sword	of	ancient	memories.	Memories	of	fire,	memories	of
ice,	memories	of	the	pain	you	delivered	upon	us.	I	shall	answer	your	crime.	I
shall	be	the	hand	of	your	utter	annihilation.	Every	last	child.
I	am	Onos	T’oolan	and	once,	I	was	an	Imass.	Once,	I	looked	upon	flowers
dancing	in	the	wind.
See	my	army?	It	has	come	to	kill	you.	Seek	out	the	cold	valleys.	Seek	out	the
caves	in	the	cliffs	over	crashing	seas.	It	will	not	matter.	As	these	shelters	failed
us,	so	they	will	fail	you.
I	see	well	this	truth:	you	never	expected	our	return.
Too	bad.
Yes,	he	would	have	liked	these	thoughts,	this	blistering,	righteous
pronouncement	that	vengeance	was	deserved	and	so	meted	out.	And	that	the
innocence	of	the	young	was	a	lie,	when	they	become	the	inheritors,	when	they
grow	fat	on	the	evil	deeds	of	their	ancestors.
They	were,	he	knew,	the	thoughts	of	Olar	Ethil,	whispered	into	the	secret
places	of	his	soul.	He	well	understood	her.	He	always	had.
The	Barghast	deserved	their	fate.	They	had	slain	his	wife,	his	children.	And
he	remembered	the	arrogance	in	the	eyes	of	his	family’s	slayers	–	but	how	had


he	seen	that?	It	was	impossible.	He’d	already	been	dead.
She	creeps	inside	me.	Olar	Ethil,	you	are	not	welcome.	You	want	me	to	serve
you.	You	want	–	yes,	I	know	what	you	want,	and	you	dare	to	call	it	healing.
There	is	a	dead	seedling	in	you,	Bonecaster.	A	shrunken,	lifeless	thing.	In
others,	it	lives	on,	sometimes	frail	and	starving,	sometimes	thriving	with	sweet
anguish.	That	seedling,	Olar	Ethil,	has	a	name,	and	even	the	name	would	twist
sour	upon	your	lips.	The	name	is	compassion.
One	day	I	will	stand	before	you,	and	I	will	kiss	you,	Olar	Ethil,	and	give
you	a	taste	of	what	you	never	possessed.	And	I	will	see	you	choke.	Spit	in	bitter
fury.	And	even	then,	to	show	you	its	meaning,	I	will	weep	for	you.
We	have	fled	from	it	for	too	long.	Our	people,	our	blessed,	doomed	people.
Can	you	not	shed	a	tear	for	them,	Bonecaster?	Your	putative	children?	They
lived	well	in	their	slow	failing,	well	enough	–	show	me	the	scene	I	never	saw,
the	moment	I	never	knew,	when	I	stood	before	the	first	humans.	Tell	me	of	the
blood	I	spilled,	to	echo	my	latest	crime,	to	fuse	the	two	together,	as	if
righteousness	was	a	mask	to	be	worn	again	and	again.
Do	you	think	me	a	fool?
Toc,	my	brother,	sent	me	away.	But	I	think,	now,	he	was	compelled.	I	think
now,	Olar	Ethil,	you	held	him	fast.	I	have	lost	a	brother	and	I	know	he	will
never	return.	For	his	fate,	I	would	weep.
If	I	only	could.
Forces	were	gathering,	to	a	place	in	the	east.	The	ancient	warren	of	Tellann
was	a	thing	of	raging	fire,	like	the	plains	lit	in	flames	on	every	horizon.	He
could	feel	the	heat,	could	taste	the	bitter	smoke.	Elsewhere	–	not	far	–	Omtose
Phellack	churned	awake	with	the	thunder	of	riven	ice.	Seas	cracked	and	valleys
groaned.	And	closer	to	hand,	the	stench	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	rode	the
winds	pungent	as	a	serpent’s	belly.	And	now…yes.	Akhrast	Korvalain.	The	pale
ghosts	of	old	once	more	walk	the	land.	The	Elder	Warrens	rise	again.	By	all	the
spirits	of	earth	and	water,	what	has	begun	here?
Olar	Ethil,	in	what	comes,	the	T’lan	Imass	shall	be	as	motes	of	dust	in	a
maelstrom.	And	what	you	seek	–	no,	the	price	is	too	high.	It	is	too	high.
Yet	he	marched,	as	if	destiny	still	existed	for	his	people,	as	if	death	itself
was	no	barrier	to	the	glory	awaiting	them.	We	have	lost	our	minds.	Toc	Younger,
what	is	this	winter	tide	that	so	carries	us	forward?	Ride	to	me,	let	us	speak
again,	as	we	did	once.	Toc	Younger,	I	forgive	you.	For	the	wounds	you	delivered,
for	all	that	you	denied	me,	I	cannot	but	forgive	you.
One	last	journey	into	the	storm,	then.	He	would	lead.	His	lost	kin	would
follow.	He	understood	that	much.	Less	than	dust	motes	they	might	be,	but	the
T’lan	Imass	would	be	there.	We	shall	not	be	forgotten.	We	deserve	better	than


that.
We	were	you	before	you	were	born.	Do	not	forget	us.	And	in	your	memory,	I
beg	of	you,	let	us	stand	tall	and	proud.	Leave	to	us	our	footprints	in	the	sand,
there	to	mark	the	trail	you	now	tread,	so	that	you	understand	–	wherever	you
go,	we	were	there	first.
	
In	the	wake	of	Onos	T’oolan,	three	thousand	T’lan	Imass	followed.	Orshayn,
Brold,	and	a	score	more	forgotten	clans	–	those	that	fell	in	the	Wars,	those	that
surrendered	to	despair.
It	was	likely,	Rystalle	Ev	suspected,	that	Onos	T’oolan	was	unaware	that	he
had	opened	his	mind	to	them,	that	the	terrible	emotions	warring	in	his	soul
rushed	out	to	engulf	them	all.	The	ancient	barriers	had	been	torn	down,	and	she
and	all	the	others	weathered	the	storm	in	silence,	wretched,	beaten	into
numbness.
At	the	field	of	slaughter,	his	howls	had	echoed	their	own,	but	now	the	First
Sword	was	binding	them	in	grisly	chains.
They	would	stand	with	him.	They	had	no	choice.	And	when	at	last	he	fell,
as	he	must,	so	too	would	they.
This	was…acceptable.	It	was,	in	fact,	just.	Slayers	of	children	deserve	no
glory.	The	caves	are	emptied	now,	but	we	cannot	dwell	there.	The	air	is	thick
with	the	blood	we	spilled.	Even	the	flames	from	the	hearth	cannot	warm	us.
She	sensed	that	Kalt	Urmanal	was	no	longer	with	them.	She	was	not
surprised,	and	although	her	own	anguish	at	his	absence	clawed	at	her,	the	pain
felt	distant,	drowned	beneath	the	torments	of	the	First	Sword.	Her	love	had
always	been	a	lost	thing,	and	he	had	ever	been	blind	to	it.
All	the	jealousy	she	had	once	felt	lingered,	a	poison	suffusing	her	being,
tainting	her	love	for	him.	He	had	been	broken	by	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	long
ago,	when	they	had	slain	his	wife	and	children.	Her	love	was	for	a	memory,
and	the	memory	was	flawed.
No,	it	is	best	that	he	is	gone.	That	he	decided	he	could	not	go	on.	The	truth
is,	I	admire	the	strength	of	his	will,	that	he	could	so	defy	the	First	Sword’s
power.	Had	others	remained	behind?	She	did	not	know,	but	if	they	had,	she
prayed	their	presence	would	comfort	Kalt	Urmanal.
What	is	it,	to	lose	a	love	you	never	had?
	
Ulag	Togtil,	who	had	come	among	the	Orshayn	Imass	as	a	stranger,	whose


blood	was	thickened	with	that	of	the	Trellan	Telakai,	now	reeled	in	the	First
Sword’s	wake,	as	if	his	limbs	were	under	siege.	There	was	a	harshness	to	the
Trellan	that	had	stood	him	well	on	the	day	of	the	slaughter,	but	now	it
floundered	in	the	depthless	well	that	was	the	emotional	torrent	of	the	Imass.
To	feel	too	deeply,	oh,	how	the	callous	would	mock	this.	Their	regard,	flat
and	gauging	as	a	vulture’s	upon	a	dying	man.	Something	to	amuse,	but	even
trees	will	tremble	to	cold	winds;	are	you	so	bereft,	friend,	that	you	dare	not	do
the	same?
Onos	T’oolan	gives	us	his	pain.	He	is	unaware	of	the	gift,	yet	gift	it	is.	We
obeyed	the	command	of	the	First	Sword,	knowing	nothing	of	his	soul.	We’d
thought	we	had	found	in	him	a	tyrant	to	beggar	the	Jaghut	themselves.	Instead,
he	was	lost	as	we	are.
But	if	there	be	unseen	witnesses	to	this	moment,	if	there	be	callous	ones
among	them,	ah,	what	is	it	that	you	fear	to	reveal?	There	in	that	tear,	that	low
sob?	You	smile	in	superiority,	but	what	is	the	nature	of	this	triumph	of	yours?	I
wish	to	know.	Your	self-made	chains	draped	so	tight	about	you	are	nothing	to	be
proud	of.	Your	inability	to	feel	is	not	a	virtue.
And	your	smile	has	cracks.
Ulag	had	played	this	game	all	his	life,	and	now	he	did	so	again,	in	the	ashes
of	Tellann,	in	the	swirling	mad	river	of	the	First	Sword’s	path.	Imagining	his
invisible	audience,	a	sea	of	blurred	faces,	a	host	of	unknown	thoughts	behind
the	veil	of	their	eyes.
And	he	would	speak	to	them,	from	time	to	time.
I	am	the	wolf	that	would	die	of	loneliness	if	cast	from	the	pack.	And	so,	even
when	I	am	alone,	I	choose	to	believe	otherwise.
There	was	no	true	unity	in	the	T’lan	Imass,	for	we	had	surrendered	the
memories	of	our	lives.	Yet	even	then,	I	refused	to	be	alone.	Ah,	I	am	a	fool.	My
audience	belongs	to	future’s	judgement,	and	harsh	it	shall	be,	and	when	at	last
it	speaks	in	that	multitude	of	voices,	I	shall	not	be	there	to	hear	it.
Can	you	be	at	ease	with	that,	Ulag?	Can	you	hear	the	dry	laughter	of	the
Trellan?	The	jeering	of	humans?
But	see	how	it	bows	you,	even	now.	See	how	it	batters	you	down.
Against	the	future,	Ulag,	you	are	helpless	as	a	babe	lying	on	a	rock.	And	the
eagle’s	shadow	slides	across	the	tear-filled	eyes,	the	soft	face.	The	babe	falls
silent,	knowing	danger	is	near.	But,	alas,	it	has	not	even	learned	to	crawl.	And
Mother’s	hands	are	long	gone.
For	this	fate,	Onos	T’oolan,	we	would	all	weep.	If	we	could.
	


Shield	Anvil	Stormy	picked	himself	up	off	the	ground,	blinking	water	from	his
eyes	and	probing	his	split	cheek.	‘All	right,’	he	said,	spitting	blood,	‘I	suppose
I	deserved	that.	At	least,’	and	he	glared	at	Gesler,	‘that’s	what	you’re	going	to
tell	me	right	now.	It	is,	isn’t	it?	Tell	me	it	is,	or	so	help	me,	Ges,	I’m	going	to
rip	your	head	right	off	and	throw	it	in	the	nearest	cesspit	I	find.’
‘I	needed	to	get	your	attention,’	the	Mortal	Sword	replied.	‘With	you,	subtle
don’t	work.’
‘How	would	you	know?	You	ain’t	tried	it	yet.	Not	once,	in	all	the	years	I’ve
been	cursed	by	your	company.’
‘Well,’	said	Gesler,	squinting	at	the	mass	of	Che’Malle	Furies	thumping
past,	‘turns	out	I	got	a	solution	for	that.	An	end	to	your	curse.’
‘You	can’t	run	away!	You	can’t	leave	me	here—’
‘No,	it’s	you	I’m	sending	away,	Stormy.’
‘What?’
‘I’m	the	Mortal	Sword.	I	can	do	things	like	that.’
‘Send	me	where?’
‘To	her,	to	what’s	left	of	her.’
Stormy	looked	away,	south	across	the	empty,	dismal	plain.	He	spat	again.
‘You	really	don’t	like	me	much,	do	you?’
‘We	have	to	find	out,	Stormy.	Aye,	I	could	go	myself,	but	you’re	the	Shield
Anvil.	There	will	be	the	souls	of	friends,	hanging	around	like	a	bad	smell.	Will
you	just	leave	the	ghosts	to	wander,	Stormy?’
‘What	am	I	supposed	to	do	with	them?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Bless	them,	I	suppose,	or	whatever	it	is	you	have	to
do.’
Destriant	Kalyth	was	riding	back	to	where	they’d	dismounted.	She	was
looking	at	each	of	them	in	turn,	back	and	forth,	frowning	at	the	red	welt	and
split	cheek	under	Stormy’s	left	eye.	She	drew	up	her	Ve’Gath	mount.	‘Don’t
you	two	ever	just	talk?	Spirits	below,	men	are	all	the	same.	What	has
happened?’
‘Nothing,’	Stormy	replied.	‘I	have	to	leave.’
‘Leave?’
‘It’s	temporary,’	said	Gesler,	swinging	himself	back	into	the	bone	and	scale
saddle	that	was	his	mount’s	back.	‘Like	a	mangy	pup,	he’ll	show	up	again
before	too	long.’
‘Where	is	he	going?’	Kalyth	demanded.
‘Back	to	where	we	came	from,’	Gesler	replied.	‘Back	to	the	Bonehunters.
They	got	hurt	bad.	We	need	to	find	out	how	bad.’
‘Why?’


Stormy	glared	up	at	Gesler,	waiting	for	the	bastard	to	come	up	with	an
answer	to	that	question,	but	the	Mortal	Sword	simply	growled	under	his	breath
and	kicked	his	charger	into	motion.
As	he	rode	away,	Kalyth	fixed	her	attention	on	Stormy.	‘Well?’
He	shrugged.	‘When	there’s	trouble	ahead,	Destriant,	it’s	good	to	know
how	your	allies	are	faring.’
His	reply	clearly	disturbed	her,	though	she	seemed	unable	to	explain	why.
‘You	will	need	an	escort.’
‘No,	I	won’t.’
‘Yes	you	will,	Shield	Anvil.	Your	Ve’Gath	needs	to	eat.	I	will	have
Sag’Churok	assign	three	K’ell	Hunters	to	you,	and	two	drones.	When	do	you
leave?’
He	walked	to	his	mount.	‘Now.’
She	hissed	some	Elan	curse	and	kicked	her	Ve’Gath	into	motion.
Grinning,	Stormy	mounted	up	and	set	out.	Classic	Malazan	military
structure	at	work	here,	woman.	Short,	violent	discussion	and	that’s	it.	We	don’t
wait	around.	And	Gesler?	I’m	gonna	bust	your	jaw.
	
Grub	watched	Stormy’s	departure	and	scowled.	‘Something’s	up.’
Sinn	snorted.	‘Thanks.	I	was	just	falling	asleep,	and	now	you’ve	woke	me
up	again.	Who	cares	where	Stormy’s	going?’
‘I	do.’
‘They’re	mostly	dead,’	she	said.	‘And	he’s	going	to	confirm	that.	You	want
to	go	with	him,	Grub?	Want	to	look	at	Keneb’s	corpse?	Should	I	go	with	you?
So	I	can	see	what	the	vultures	have	done	to	my	brother?	The	truth	is	in	your
heart,	Grub.	You	feel	it	just	like	I	do.	They’re	dead.’
At	her	harsh	words	Grub	hunched	down,	looked	away.	Rows	of	Che’Malle,
Ve’Gath	soldiers,	their	massive	elongated	heads	moving	in	smooth	rhythm,
their	hides	coated	in	dust	that	dulled	the	burnished	gold	of	the	scales	on	their
necks	and	backs.	Weapons	slung	down	from	harnesses	of	drone-hide,	swinging
and	rustling.	Ornate	helms	hiding	the	soldiers’	eyes.	But	every	soldier’s	eyes
look	the	same.	Seen	too	much	and	more’s	coming	and	they	know	it.
Uncle	Keneb,	it’s	all	over	for	you	now.	Finally.	And	you	never	really	wanted
any	of	it	anyway,	did	you?	Your	wife	left	you.	All	you	had	was	the	army,	and	you
died	with	it.	Did	you	ever	want	anything	else?
But	he	didn’t	know	the	truth	of	any	of	that.	He	hadn’t	lived	enough	of	his
own	life.	He	tried	getting	into	the	heads	of	people	like	Keneb	–	the	ones	with	so
many	years	behind	them	–	and	he	couldn’t.	He	could	recite	what	he	knew	of


them.	Whirlwind.	Slaughter	and	flight.	Loves	lost,	but	what	do	I	know	about
that?
Keneb,	you’re	gone.	I’ll	never	see	your	face	again	–	your	exasperation
when	you	looked	at	me,	and	even	then	I	knew	you’d	never	abandon	me.	You	just
couldn’t,	and	I	knew	it.	And	that	is	what	I	have	lost,	isn’t	it?	I	don’t	even	have	a
name	for	it,	but	it’s	gone	now,	for	ever	gone.
He	glanced	over	at	Sinn.	Her	eyes	were	closed	and	she	rolled	in	the
Ve’Gath’s	gait,	chin	settling	on	her	breast	bone.	Your	brother	has	died,	Sinn.
And	you	just	sleep.	The	magic’s	carved	everything	out	of	you,	hasn’t	it?	You’re
just	wearing	that	girl’s	face,	her	skin,	and	whatever	you	are,	there	inside,	it	isn’t
human	at	all	any	more,	is	it?
And	you	want	me	to	join	you.
Well,	if	it	means	an	end	to	feeling	pain,	then	I	will.
Keneb,	why	did	you	leave	me?

Eyes	closed,	her	mind	wandered	into	a	place	of	dust	and	sand,	where	the	sun’s
fading	light	turned	the	cliffs	into	fire.	She	knew	this	world.	She	had	seen	it
many	times,	had	walked	it.	And	somewhere	in	the	hazy	distances	there	were
familiar	faces.	Figures	seething	in	the	hot	markets	of	G’danisban,	cooled
corridors	and	the	slap	of	bared	feet.	And	then	terror,	servants	with	bloodied
knives,	a	night	of	smoke	and	flames.	And	all	through	the	city,	screams	pierced
the	madness.
Stumbling	into	a	room,	a	most	precious	room	–	was	that	her	mother?
Sister?	Or	just	some	guest?	The	two	stable	boys	and	a	handmaiden	–	who	was
always	laughing,	she	recalled,	and	was	laughing	again,	with	her	fist	and	most
of	her	forearm	pushed	up	inside	Mother,	while	the	boys	held	the	battered
woman	down.	Whatever	the	laughing	girl	was	reaching	for,	she	couldn’t	seem
to	find	it.
Blurred	panic,	flight,	one	of	the	boys	setting	off	after	her.
Bared	feet	slapping	on	stone,	the	ragged	beat	of	hard	breaths.	He	caught
her	in	the	corridor,	and	in	the	cool	shadow	he	used	something	other	than	his
fist	on	her,	in	the	same	place,	and	by	his	cries	he	found	whatever	it	was	he’d
been	looking	for,	a	moment	before	a	strange	barrier	inside	her	head	was	torn
through,	and	sorcery	rushed	out	to	lift	the	boy	straight	up,	until	he	was	pressed
awkwardly	against	the	arched	ceiling	of	the	corridor.	His	eyes	were	bulging,
face	darkening,	the	thing	between	his	legs	shrivelling	and	turning	black	as


blood	vessels	began	bursting	inside	him.
She’d	stared	up,	fixing	on	his	swollen	eyes,	watched	them	begin	spraying
blood	in	fine	jets.	And	still	she	pushed.	His	bones	cracked,	fluids	spurted,	his
wastes	splashing	down	on	to	her	legs	to	mix	with	the	blood	pooling	there.	As
he	flattened,	he	spread	out,	until	it	seemed	he	was	part	of	the	stone,	a	ghastly
image	of	something	vaguely	human,	made	of	skin	and	plaster	and	oozing	mud.
By	then,	she	suspected,	he’d	been	dead	for	some	time.
Crawling	away,	feeling	broken	inside,	as	if	he	was	still	there	and	would
always	be	there,	as	if	she	had	nothing	of	herself,	nothing	pure	or	untouched	by
someone	else.
Then,	much	later,	an	assassin’s	face,	a	night	of	caves	and	demons	and
murder.	She’d	been	dreaming	of	poison,	yes,	and	there	had	been	bloated
bodies,	but	nothing	cleaned	her	out,	no	matter	what	she	tried.
Outside	a	city,	watching	the	flames	ever	rising.	Soldiers	were	dying.	The
world	was	a	trap	and	they	all	seemed	surprised	by	that,	even	though	it	was
something	she’d	always	known.	The	fire	wanted	her	and	it	so	wanted	her,	why,
she	let	it	inside.	To	burn	her	empty.
She’d	wanted	to	believe	that	it	had	worked.	That	she	was	at	last	clean.	But
before	too	long	she	could	feel	that	boy	return,	deep,	deep	inside	her.	She
needed	more.	More	fire,	because	fire	delivered	death.	And	in	the	midst	of
conflagration,	time	and	again,	a	voice	whispered	to	her.
‘You	are	my	child.	The	Virgin	of	Death	is	never	what	they	think	it	is.	What
dies	is	the	virgin	herself,	the	purity	of	her	soul.	Or	his.	Why	always	assume	the
Virgin	is	a	girl?	So	I	show	you	what	you	were,	but	now	I	show	you	what	you	are.
Feel	my	heat	–	it	is	the	pleasure	you	have	for	ever	lost.	Feel	my	kiss	upon	your
lips:	this	is	the	love	you	will	never	know.	See	my	hunger,	it	is	your	yearning	for
a	peace	you	will	never	find.
‘You	are	my	child.	You	killed	him	before	he	left	you.	You	crushed	his	brain
to	pulp.	The	rest	was	just	for	show.	He	was	still	inside	you,	a	dead	boy,	and	this
was	Hood’s	path	to	your	soul,	and	the	Lord	of	Death’s	touch	steals	life.	You
killed	the	boy,	but	the	boy	killed	you,	too,	Sinn.	What	do	you	feel	deep	in	you?
Give	it	any	shape	you	want,	any	name,	it	doesn’t	matter.	What	matters	is	this:	it
is	dead,	and	it	waits	for	you,	and	will	wait	for	you	until	your	last	breath	leaves
your	body.
‘When	your	death	is	already	inside	you,	there	is	nowhere	to	run,	no	escape
possible.	When	your	death	is	already	inside	you,	Sinn,	you	have	nothing	to
lose.’
She	had	nothing	to	lose.	This	was	true.	About	everything.	No	family,	no
brother,	no	one	at	all.	Even	Grub,	her	sweet	Virgin,	well,	he	would	never	reach


her,	just	as	she	would	never,	ever,	reach	inside	him,	to	dirty	what	was	pure.	My
precious	possession,	dear	Grub,	and	him	I	will	keep	safe	from	harm.	No	one	will
ever	touch	him.	No	slap	of	bared	feet,	no	harsh	breaths.	I	am	your	fire,	Grub,
and	I	will	burn	to	ash	anything	and	anyone	who	dares	gets	close	to	you.
That	is	why	I	rode	the	lizard’s	lightning,	that	brilliant	fire.	I	rode	it	straight
for	Keneb.	I	didn’t	guide	it,	I	didn’t	choose	it,	but	I	understood	the	necessity	of
it,	the	rightness	of	taking	away	the	one	person	left	who	loved	you.
Do	not	grieve.	You	have	me,	Grub.	We	have	each	other,	and	what	could	be
more	perfect	than	that?
Familiar	faces	in	the	distant	haze.	Her	mind	wandered	the	desert,	as	the
night	drew	in,	and	somewhere	down	on	the	flats	small	fires	lit	awake,	and	she
smiled.	We	are	the	dead	thing	in	the	womb	of	the	world,	and	we	and	we	alone
light	the	darkness	with	fire.	By	that	you	will	know	us.	By	those	flames	alone,	the
earth	shall	tremble.
What	is	it	to	be	raped?	I	am	silent	as	the	world	and	we	will	say	nothing.
What	is	it	to	be	the	rapist?
The	desert	at	night	was	a	cold	place,	except	for	the	fires.	Dark	too,	except
for	the	fires.
	
‘It	plagues	the	young,	this	need	to	find	reasons	for	things.’
Rud	Elalle	huddled,	robes	drawn	tight	around	him,	and	edged	closer	to	the
fire.	The	wind	up	in	these	crags	was	fierce,	the	air	thin	and	icy.	Far	below,	low
on	the	slopes	of	the	mountainsides,	the	edge	of	the	tree	line	was	visible	as	a
black	mass,	thinning	at	the	highest	reaches	–	which	seemed	very	far	away.	He
shivered.	‘Couldn’t	we	at	least	find	a	cave	or	something?’
Silchas	Ruin	stood	facing	the	high	passes	to	the	north,	seemingly	immune
to	the	cold.	‘Very	well,	come	the	morrow,	we	shall	do	that.	Had	we	remained
Eleint,	of	course—’
‘I	would	be	comfortable,	yes.	I	know.’	Rud	stared	at	the	feeble	flames	as
they	devoured	the	last	of	the	wood	he	had	carried	up	from	below.	In	draconic
form,	the	raging	chaos	within	him	would	have	kept	him	warm,	inured	to	the
elements.	But	his	thoughts	twisted	wild	when	he	was	veered,	when	the	blood	of
the	Eleint	coursed	dominant	in	his	veins.	He	began	to	lose	his	sense	of	himself
as	a	creature	of	reasoning,	of	rational	thought	and	clear	purpose.	Not	that	he
had	a	clear	purpose,	of	course.	Not	yet.	But	it	wasn’t	healthy	to	be	a	dragon	–
he	knew	that	much.
Mother,	how	could	you	have	lived	with	this?	For	so	long?	No	wonder	you
went	mad.	No	wonder	you	all	did.	He	glanced	over	at	Silchas	Ruin,	but	the


figure	had	not	moved.	How	much	longer?	he	wanted	to	ask.	Still…the	Tiste
Andii	needed	no	further	invitation	to	view	him	as	little	more	than	a	child.	A
child	of	terrible	power,	true,	but	still	a	child.
And,	Rud	allowed,	he	would	not	be	far	wrong,	would	he?	There	was	no
sense	to	what	they	intended	to	do.	So	much	was	out	of	their	hands.	They
hovered	like	swords,	but	whose	gauntleted	grasp	would	close	on	them	when
the	time	came?	There	didn’t	seem	to	be	an	answer	to	that	question,	at	least	not
one	Silchas	Ruin	was	willing	to	share.
And	what	of	this	Tiste	Andii,	standing	there	as	if	carved	from	alabaster,
rubies	for	eyes,	moaning	blades	crossing	his	back?	He	had	lost	his	last
surviving	brother.	He	was	utterly	alone,	bereft.	Olar	Ethil	had	broken	him	for
no	purpose	Rud	could	see,	barring	that	of	spite.	But	Silchas	Ruin	had	finally
straightened,	biting	on	that	wound	in	the	manner	of	a	speared	wolf,	and	he’d
been	limping	ever	since	–	at	least	in	his	sembled	state.	It	was	quite	possible	–
and	indeed	likely	–	that	Silchas	Ruin	preferred	to	remain	in	an	Eleint	form,	if
only	to	cauterize	the	pain	with	the	soulfire	of	chaos.	Yet	there	he	stood.
Because	I	am	too	weak	to	resist.	Draconean	ambitions	taste	bitter	as	poison.
They	want	my	surrender,	they	want	to	hear	me	howl	with	desire.
‘Once	we	find	a	cave,’	resumed	Silchas	Ruin,	‘I	will	leave	you	for	a	time.
Those	stone	weapons	of	yours	are	insufficient	for	what	comes.	While	it	is	true
that	we	may	have	no	need	for	swords	and	the	like,	I	believe	it	is	time	for	you	to
take	to	hand	a	proper	blade.’
‘You	want	to	go	and	find	me	a	sword.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	where	do	you	look	for	something	like	that?’	Rud	asked.	‘A
weaponsmith’s	in	Letheras?	A	trader ’s	camp	near	a	recent	battlefield?’
‘None	of	those,’	he	replied.	‘For	you,	I	have	something	more	ambitious	in
mind.’
Rud’s	gaze	returned	to	the	flames.	‘How	long	will	you	be	gone?’
‘Not	long,	I	should	think.’
‘Well	then,’	Rud	snapped,	‘what	are	you	waiting	for?	I	can	find	my	own
cave.’
He	felt	Silchas	Ruin’s	regard	upon	him,	and	then	it	was	gone	and	when	he
turned,	so	was	the	Tiste	Andii	–	he	had	plummeted	from	the	ledge.	Moments
later	a	buffet	of	wind	struck	him,	and	he	saw	the	dragon	lifting	skyward,	up
above	the	ravaged	peaks,	blotting	out	stars.
‘Ah,	Silchas,	I	am	sorry.’
Despondent,	he	held	his	hands	out	over	the	coals.	He	missed	his	father.
Udinaas	would	have	a	wry	grin	for	this	moment,	a	few	cutting	words	–	not	too


deep,	of	course,	but	enough	to	awaken	in	Rud	a	measure	of	self-regard,
something	he	suspected	he	needed.	Spirits	of	the	stream,	it’s	just	that	I’m	lonely.
I	miss	home.	The	sweet	songs	of	the	Imass,	the	fiery	lure	of	Kilava	–	oh,	Onrack,
do	you	know	how	lucky	you	are?
And	where	is	my	love?	Where	does	she	hide?	He	glared	around,	at	the	bare
rock,	the	flight	of	sparks,	the	frail	shelter	in	this	crook	of	stone.	Not	here,	that’s
for	sure.
Well,	if	any	man	needed	a	woman	more	than	he	did,	it	was	his	father.	In	a
way,	he	is	as	alone	among	the	Imass	as	I	am	here.	He	was	a	slave.	A	sailor.	A
Letherii.	His	home	was	civilized.	Crowded	with	so	many	conveniences	one
could	go	mad	trying	to	choose	among	them.	And	now	he	lives	in	a	hut	of	hide
and	tenag	bones.	With	winter	closing	in	–	oh,	the	Imass	knew	a	harsh	world.
No,	none	of	that	was	fair	on	Udinaas,	who	saw	himself	as	so	unexceptional	he
was	beneath	notice.	Unexceptional?	Will	it	take	a	woman	to	convince	you
otherwise?	You	can’t	find	one	there	–	you	need	to	go	home,	Father.
He	could	try	a	sending.	A	conjuration	of	will	and	power	–	was	it	possible
to	reach	that	far?	‘Worth	a	try,’	he	muttered.	‘Tomorrow	morning.’	For	now,
Rud	Elalle	would	try	to	sleep.	If	that	failed,	well,	there	was	the	blood	of	the
Eleint,	and	its	deadly,	sultry	call.
He	lifted	his	head,	looked	south.	At	the	far	side	of	the	range,	he	knew,	there
was	a	vast	green	valley,	slopes	ribboned	with	terraces	verdant	with	growth.
There	were	towns	and	villages	and	forts	and	high	towers	guarding	the	bridges
spanning	the	rivers.	There	were	tens	of	thousands	working	those	narrow	fields.
They	had	flown	so	high	above	all	of	this,	to	a	human	eye	they	would	have
been	virtually	invisible.	When	they	drew	nearer	to	the	rearing	range	north	of
the	valley,	close	to	its	westernmost	end,	they	had	seen	an	encamped	army,
laying	siege	to	a	fastness	carved	into	the	first	of	the	mountains.	Rud	had
wondered	at	that.	Civil	war?	But	Silchas	Ruin	had	shown	no	curiosity.	‘Humans
can	do	whatever	they	please,	and	they	will.	Count	on	it,	Ryadd.’
Still,	he	imagined	it	was	warm	inside	that	keep	right	now.
Assuming	it	still	held	against	the	enemy.	For	some	reason,	he	was	sure	that
it	did.	Aye,	humans	will	do	whatever	they	please,	Silchas	Ruin,	and	they’ll	be
damned	stubborn	about	it,	too.
He	settled	down	against	the	cold	night.
	
His	thoughts	were	earth,	and	the	blood	moved	slowly	through	it,	seeping	like	a
summer ’s	rain.	He	saw	how	the	others	looked	at	him,	when	they’d	thought	his
attention	elsewhere.	So	much	larger	than	any	of	them	was	he,	bedecked	in	the


armour	of	Dalk’s	hide,	his	Ethilian	mace	showing	a	face	to	each	of	the	cardinal
directions,	as	befitted	the	Witch’s	gift	from	the	sky.
Listening	to	them	readying	their	weapons,	adjusting	the	straps	of	their
armour,	locking	the	grilled	cheek-guards	in	place	on	their	blackened	helms,	he
knew	that,	in	the	past	weeks,	he	had	become	the	mountain	they	huddled	against,
the	stone	at	their	backs,	on	their	flanks,	at	the	point	of	the	spear	–	wherever	he
was	needed	most,	there	he	would	be.
How	many	of	the	foe	had	he	killed?	He	had	no	idea.	Scores.	Hundreds.
They	were	the	Fangs	of	Death,	their	numbers	were	endless	and	that,	he	well
knew,	was	no	exaggeration.
His	fellow	invaders,	who	once	numbered	in	their	tens	of	thousands,	had
dwindled	now.	It	might	be	that	other	fragments	still	pushed	on,	somewhere	to
the	south	or	north,	but	then	they	did	not	have	a	Thel	Akai	warrior	in	their
company.	They	did	not	have	a	dragon-killer.	They	do	not	have	me.
Earth	was	slow	in	dying.	The	soil	was	a	black	realm	of	countless	mouths,
ceaseless	hungers.	In	a	single	handful	raged	a	million	wars.	Death	was	ever	the
enemy,	yet	death	was	also	the	source	of	sustenance.	It	took	a	ferocious	will	to
murder	earth.
One	by	one,	his	companions	–	barely	a	score	left	now	–	announced
themselves	ready,	in	rising	to	their	feet,	in	testing	their	gauntleted	grips	on
their	notched,	battered	weapons.	And	such	weapons!	Each	one	worth	a	dozen
epic	songs	of	glory	and	pain,	triumph	and	loss.	If	he	looked	up	from	the
ground	at	this	moment,	he	would	see	faces	swallowed	in	the	barred	shadows	of
their	cheek-guards;	he	would	see	these	proud	warriors	standing,	eyes	fixed
eastward,	and,	slowly,	those	grimly	set	mouths	and	the	thin,	tattered	lips	would
twist	with	wry	amusement.
A	war	they	could	not	win.
An	epic	march	from	which	not	one	great	hero	would	ever	return.
The	earth	within	him	surged	with	sudden	fire,	and	he	rose,	the	mace	lifting
in	his	huge	hands.	We	shall	have	lived	as	none	other	has	lived.	We	shall	die	as
no	other	has	died.	Can	you	taste	this	moment?	By	the	Witch	but	I	can!
He	faced	his	companions,	and	gave	them	his	own	grin.
Tusked	mouths	opened	like	split	flesh,	and	cold	laughter	filled	the	air.
	
Groaning,	Ublala	Pung	opened	his	eyes.	More	dreams!	More	terrible	visions!
He	rolled	on	to	his	side	and	blinked	across	the	makeshift	camp	at	the	huddled
form	of	the	Barghast	woman.	His	love.	His	adored	one.	It	wasn’t	fair	that	she
hated	him.	He	reached	out	and	drew	close	the	strange	mace	with	its	four	blue-


iron	heads.	It	looked	as	if	it	should	be	heavy,	and	perhaps	to	some	people	it
was.	And	it	had	a	name,	its	very	own	name.	But	he’d	forgotten	it.	A	dozen	and
four	epic	songs.	Songs	of	glore	and	painty,	turnips	and	lust.
Perhaps	she	was	just	pretending	to	sleep.	And	she’d	try	to	kill	him	again.
The	last	time	Draconus	had	stopped	her,	appearing	as	if	out	of	nowhere	to
grasp	her	wrist,	staying	the	dagger ’s	point	a	finger ’s	breadth	from	Ublala’s
right	eye.	He’d	then	slapped	the	woman,	hard	enough	to	send	her	sprawling.
‘Best	we	kill	her	now,	Ublala.’
Rubbing	the	sleep	from	his	face.	‘No,	please,	don’t	do	that.	I	love	her.	It’s
just	a	spat	of	some	sort,	Draconus,	and	as	soon	as	I	figure	out	what	we’re
arguing	about	I’ll	fix	it,	I	swear.’
‘Ublala—’
‘Please!	We’re	just	disagreeing	about	something.’
‘She	means	to	kill	and	then	rob	us.’
‘She	had	cruel	parents,	and	was	bullied	as	a	child,	Draconus.	Other	girls
pulled	her	braids	and	spat	in	her	ears.	It’s	all	a	misunderstanding!’
‘One	more	chance,	then.	My	advice	is	to	beat	her	senseless,	Ublala.	It’s
likely	that’s	how	Barghast	men	treat	murderous	women,	as	necessity	demands.’
‘I	can’t	do	that,	Draconus.	But	I’ll	comb	her	hair.’
Which	was	what	he	had	been	doing	when	she’d	finally	come	round.
Lacking	a	comb,	he’d	been	using	a	thorny	twig,	which	probably	wasn’t	ideal,
especially	on	her	fine	eyebrows,	but	they’d	since	taken	care	of	the	infections
and	she	was	looking	almost	normal	again.
So	maybe	she	really	was	asleep,	and	now	that	she	had	no	weapons	left,
why,	she	was	as	harmless	as	a	twill-mouse,	except	for	the	big	rocks	she	kept
close	at	hand	every	night.
At	least	she	had	stopped	complaining.
Ublala	twisted	to	see	if	he	could	find	Draconus	–	the	man	never	seemed	to
sleep	at	all,	though	he’d	lie	down	on	occasion,	which	is	what	he’d	been	doing
when	Ralata	had	tried	knifing	Ublala.	Wasn’t	she	surprised!
The	man	was	standing	facing	north,	something	he	had	been	doing	a	lot	of,
lately.
People	like	him	had	too	many	thoughts,	Ublala	decided.	So	many	he
couldn’t	even	rest	from	himself,	and	that	had	to	be	a	hard	thing	to	live	with.
No,	it	was	better	to	have	hardly	any	thoughts	at	all.	Like	earth.	Yes,	that’s	it	all
right.	Dirt.
But	those	tusks	were	scary,	and	that	laughing	was	even	worse!
	


A	new	scent	on	the	cool	breath	drifting	in	from	the	west.	Perhaps	some	ancient
memories	were	stirred	by	it,	something	that	left	the	pack	agitated.	She	watched
the	lord	stretching	and	then	padding	up	to	the	rise.	He	possessed	such	power,	as
did	all	lords	–	he	could	stand	on	a	high	place,	exposed	to	all	four	winds,	and
feel	no	fear.
The	others	remained	in	the	high	grasses	of	the	slope,	the	young	males
pacing,	the	females	in	the	shadow	of	the	trees,	where	pups	crawled	and
tumbled.
Bellies	were	full,	but	the	herds	wending	up	from	the	plains	to	the	south
were	smaller	this	season,	and	there	was	a	harried	air	to	their	long	flight	from
thirst	and	heat,	as	if	pursued	by	fire	or	worse.	Hunting	the	beasts	had	been	easy
–	the	animal	they’d	brought	down	had	already	been	exhausted,	and	the	taste	of
old	terror	was	in	its	blood.
The	lord	stood	on	the	ridge.	His	ears	sharpened	and	the	others	quickly	rose
–	even	the	games	of	the	pups	ceased.
The	lord	staggered.	Three	sticks	were	jutting	from	it	now,	and	from	the
slope	beyond	came	strange	excited	barks.	Blood	threaded	down	from	the	sticks
as	the	lord	sank	down,	head	twisting	in	a	vain	effort	to	reach	the	shafts.	Then	it
fell	on	its	side	and	stopped	moving.
There	was	motion	on	all	sides	now,	and	more	sticks	whipped	through
foliage	and	grasses,	sinking	into	flesh.	The	pack	erupted	in	snarls	of	pain.
The	figures	that	rushed	in	moved	on	their	hind	legs.	Their	skins	gleamed
with	oil	and	their	smell	was	that	of	crushed	plants	over	something	else.	They
flung	more	sticks.	There	was	white	around	their	eyes	and	they	had	small
mouths	from	which	came	their	wild	barking.
She	gasped	as	fire	tore	into	her	flank.	Blood	filled	her	throat,	sprayed	out
from	her	nostrils	and	then	poured	from	her	jaws.	She	saw	an	attacker	reach
down	and	grasp	a	pup	by	its	tail.	He	swung	it	and	then	slammed	the	little	one
against	the	bole	of	a	tree.
An	old	scent.	They	are	among	us	again.	There	is	nowhere	to	hide.	Now	we
die.
Vision	blurred,	Setoc	withdrew	her	hand	from	the	bleached	wolf’s	skull
they’d	found	in	the	crotch	of	the	gnarled	tree	growing	from	the	edge	of	the
dried-up	spring.	The	rough,	tortured	bark	had	almost	devoured	the	bleached
bone.
The	first	tree	they’d	found	in	weeks.	She	wiped	at	her	eyes.	And	this.
It	wasn’t	enough	to	grieve.	She	saw	that	now.	Not	enough	to	wallow	in	the
anguish	of	blood	on	the	hands.	It	wasn’t	enough	to	fight	for	mercy,	to	plead	for
a	new	way	of	walking	the	world.	It	wasn’t	enough	to	feel	guilt.


She	turned	to	study	the	camp.	Faint,	Precious	Thimble,	Sweetest	Sufferance
and	Amby	Bole,	all	looking	for	a	way	home.	A	place	of	comfort,	all	threats
diminished,	all	dangers	locked	away.	Where	patrols	kept	the	streets	safe,	where
the	fields	ran	in	rows	and	so	did	trees.	Or	so	she	imagined	–	strange	scenes	that
couldn’t	be	memory,	because	she	had	no	memory	beyond	the	plains	and	the
wild	lands.	But	in	those	cities	the	only	animals	nearby	were	slaves	or	food,	and
those	that	weren’t	lived	in	cages,	or	their	skins	adorned	the	shoulders	of	fine
ladies	and	bold	nobles,	or	their	bones	waited	in	heaps	for	the	grinders,	to	be
fed	into	the	planted	fields.
That	was	their	world,	the	one	they	wanted	back.
You	can	have	it.	There	is	no	place	for	me	in	it,	is	there?	Very	well.	The
sorrow	within	her	now	seemed	infinite.	She	walked	from	the	camp,	out	into	the
darkness.	The	Bonecaster	had	taken	the	children,	and	Torrent	with	them.
Destinies	had	taken	the	Trell	and	Gruntle.	Death	had	taken	the	others.	But	I	owe
you	nothing.	In	your	company,	my	ghost	wolves	stay	away.	They	drift	like
distant	desires.	I	am	forgetting	what	it	is	to	run	free.
I	am	forgetting	why	I	am	here.
They	would	not	miss	her.	They	had	their	own	haunts,	after	all.	I	do	not
belong	with	you.	I	think	–	I	think…	I	am	what	you	left	behind.	Long	ago.	She
wondered	if	she	too	was	in	search	of	a	destiny,	the	same	as	Mappo	and	Gruntle,
but	it	seemed	they	were	so	much	more	than	her,	and	that	even	the	idea	of	a
destiny	for	Setoc	was	ridiculous.	But	the	ghost	wolves	–	and	all	the	other	fallen
beasts	–	they	look	to	me.	For	something.	I	just	don’t	know	what	it	is.	And	I	need
to	find	out.
Is	that	what	destiny	is?	Is	that	all	it	is?
It	was	surprisingly	easy	to	leave	them	behind,	the	ones	she’d	walked	with
for	so	long	now.	She	could	have	turned	back	right	then,	to	face	the	city	–	all	the
cities	and	all	the	broken	lands	that	fed	them.	She	could	have	chosen	to	accept
her	humanness.	Instead…look	at	me.	Here	I	walk.
Let	the	Wolves	cleanse	this	world.	Let	the	beasts	return.	Above	all,	let	the
senseless	killing	end:	we	are	tired	of	running,	tired	of	dying.	You	must	see	that.
You	must	feel	something	for	that.	Just	how	cold	is	your	soul?
You	empty	the	land.	You	break	the	earth	and	use	it	until	it	dies,	and	then
your	children	starve.	Do	not	blame	me.	Do	not	blame	any	of	us	for	that.
Her	breath	caught	and	she	hesitated.	A	sudden	dark	thought	had	flared	in
her	mind.	A	knife	in	her	hand.	Throats	opening	to	the	night.	Four	more	of	the
murderers	dead.	In	a	war	that	she	knew	might	never	end.	But	what	difference
does	that	make	–	we’ve	been	losing	for	so	long,	I	doubt	we’d	know	the	taste	of
victory	even	as	it	filled	our	mouths.	Even	as	it	drowned	us	in	its	glory.


Could	she	kill	them?	Could	she	turn	around,	here	and	now,	and	creep	back
into	the	camp?	No	pup	skulls	to	crack	open,	but	still.	The	dead-inside	have	to
work	hard	at	their	pleasures.	That	burst	of	shock.	Disbelief.	The	sudden	laugh.
So	hard,	to	feel	anything	at	all,	isn’t	it?
The	thoughts	were	delicious,	but	she	resumed	her	journey.	It	was	not,	she
decided,	her	destiny	to	kill	one	here,	another	there.	No,	if	she	could,	she	would
kill	them	all.	This	is	the	war	the	Wolves	have	sought.	The	Hold	shall	be	reborn.
Am	I	to	be	their	leader?	Am	I	to	stand	alone	at	the	head	of	some	vast	army	of
retribution?
All	at	once,	the	ghost	wolves	were	surrounding	her,	brushing	close,	and
she	began	a	loping	run,	effortlessly,	her	heart	surging	with	strength.	Freedom
–	she	understood	now	–	was	something	so	long	lost	among	humans	that	they
had	forgotten	what	it	felt	like.	Bend	to	your	labours!	Grasp	those	coins!	Keep
the	doors	locked	and	fires	raging	to	empty	the	shadows	behind	you!	Make	your
brothers	and	sisters	kneel	before	you,	to	serve	your	pleasures.	Are	you	free?	You
don’t	remember	the	truth	of	what	once	was	–	of	what	you	all	so	willingly
surrendered.
I	will	show	you	freedom.	So	I	vow:	I	will	show	you	what	it	is	to	be	free.
On	all	sides,	the	ghost	wolves	howled.
	
‘She’s	gone.’
Faint	opened	her	eyes,	blinked	at	the	bright	morning	sun.	‘What?	Who?’
‘The	girl.	Setoc,	with	the	wolf	eyes.	Gone.’
She	stared	up	at	Amby,	frowning.	And	then	said,	‘Oh.’
‘I	don’t	think	she’s	coming	back.’
‘No,	Amby,	I	don’t	either.’
He	moved	back	as	she	sat	up.	Her	chest	ached,	her	ragged	scars	itched.	She
was	filthy	and	the	taste	in	her	mouth	was	thick	with	the	rancid	meat	they’d	eaten
the	night	before.	Amby	stood	like	a	man	lost	in	the	company	of	anyone	but	his
brother	–	just	a	glance	nearly	broke	her	heart.
She	looked	past	him.	Sweetest	Sufferance	was	still	asleep,	her	rounded
form	swathed	in	blankets.	Precious	Thimble	sat	near	the	ashes	of	the	night’s
fire,	eyes	fixed	dully	on	Amby.
She’d	heard	tales	of	horror,	amongst	the	shareholders	who’d	signed	out
and	now	sat	in	taverns	waiting	to	die.	They’d	drink	and	tell	of	missions	that	had
ended	in	disaster.	A	dead	mage,	lost	in	unknown	lands,	no	way	home.	The	few
lucky	ones	would	find	a	place	to	book	passage,	or	perhaps	another	Trygalle
carriage	would	find	them,	half	starved	and	half	mad,	and	these	ones	would


come	home	broken,	their	eyes	empty.
She	stared	up	at	the	morning	sky.	Was	the	flying	lizard	still	up	there?	Did	it
mock	them	with	its	cold	eyes?	She	doubted	it.	If	we	make	it	out	of	this,	it	will	be
a	miracle.	The	longest	tug	of	the	Lady’s	luck	this	world	has	ever	seen.	And	let’s
face	it,	things	don’t	work	out	that	way.	They	never	do.
‘I	smelled	smoke,’	said	Amby.
‘When?’
He	shrugged.	‘Dawn.	The	wind	had	yet	to	turn.	Was	running	before	the
sun.’
East.	She	stood,	studied	the	rumpled	wastes.	Was	that	a	faint	haze?	No,	that
veil	was	too	big.	A	cloud.	‘Well,’	she	said,	‘it’s	where	we	were	headed,	more	or
less.’
If	the	man	wanted	to	smell	things,	fine.	Made	no	difference.
‘We	need	water,’	Amby	said.
Sighing,	Faint	turned	and	approached	Precious	Thimble.	The	young	witch
would	not	meet	her	eyes.	Faint	waited	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘Can	you
conjure	water?’
‘I	told	you—’
‘Yes,	the	land’s	mostly	dead.	Still.	Can	you?’
‘There’s	no	point	in	trying.’
‘Try	anyway.’
Her	eyes	flashed.	‘Who	left	you	in	charge?’
‘You’re	a	shareholder	in	the	Trygalle.	I	have	seniority	here,	Precious.’
‘But	I’m—’
‘So	far,’	Faint	cut	in,	‘you’re	nothing.	Show	us	some	magery	and	that
might	drag	you	up	a	notch	or	two.	Open	us	a	gate	home	and	I’ll	personally
crown	you	empress.	But	until	then,	Precious,	I’m	in	charge.’
‘It	hurts.’
‘What	does?	Listen.	People	die.’
But	she	shook	her	head.	‘Magic.	Here.	The	ground…flinches.’
‘Precious,	I	don’t	care	if	it	howls.	Just	get	us	some	water.’
‘It	doesn’t	want	us	here.	It	doesn’t	want	anyone	here.’
‘Too	bad.’
Precious	shivered.	‘There’s	something…	If	it’s	a	spirit	–	even	the	ghost	of
one.	Maybe…’
‘Get	started	on	it.’	Faint	walked	over	to	Sweetest	Sufferance.	‘Hood’s
breath,	wake	up.’
‘I’m	awake,	cow.’
Well,	turned	out	everyone	felt	as	miserable	as	she	did.


‘Hungry,’	said	Precious	Thimble.
Gods	below.	Faint	looked	to	the	east	again.	Cloud	or	smoke?	Nearby,
Amby	made	a	groaning	sound.	She	glanced	over.	Something	was	wrong	with
his	face	–	mud	streaks?	Tears?	No,	too	dark.	She	stepped	closer.	What,	is	that
blood?
Nearby,	the	packhorse	tore	free	of	the	stake	tethering	it	and	lunged	away,
hoofs	thundering.
A	rattling	sound	erupted	from	Sweetest	Sufferance.	Faint	spun.	‘Sweetie?’
The	blanket-swathed	form	was	twitching.
‘Hungry,’	said	Precious	Thimble	again.
Spasms	surged	through	Sweetest	Sufferance,	her	limbs	jumping.	She
kicked	her	way	clear	of	the	blankets,	rolled	on	to	her	back.	Her	eyes	were
opened	wide,	filling	with	blood.	Her	face	was	visibly	swelling.	Flesh	split.
‘In	here?’	asked	Precious	Thimble.
Faint	whirled	to	the	witch	–	saw	the	strange	tilt	to	her	head,	the	drool
slicking	her	chin.	Her	eyes	were	glazed.	She	rushed	over.	‘Get	it	out!	Precious!
Send	it	away!’
Sweetest	Sufferance	jerked	upright,	blood	draining	down	from	her
fingertips.	Bony	projections	had	pushed	through	her	face,	closing	the	space	for
her	eyes,	her	mouth.	Her	entire	body	shook	as	if	something	was	inside,	trying
to	escape.	Tearing	sounds	burst	from	under	her	clothing	as	more	bones	thrust
past	skin,	pushed	at	her	sodden	clothing.
The	ground	beneath	the	woman	seemed	to	be	cracking	open.
Numb	with	horror,	Faint	backed	up	a	step.	Shock	stole	her	will.	‘Precious	–
please—’
Amby	suddenly	howled	and	the	cry	was	so	raw	it	jolted	Faint	awake.
Twisting	round	once	more,	she	rushed	to	Precious	Thimble.	Struck	the	woman
in	the	face,	a	vicious	slap,	as	hard	as	she	could	manage.	The	young	witch’s
head	rocked.	Amby	screamed	again.
Faint	glanced	back	at	Sweetest	Sufferance	–	but	the	woman	was	mostly
gone,	and	in	her	place,	rising	up	from	the	broken	earth	below,	was	a	stained
wrist	thick	as	the	bole	of	an	ancient	tree.	The	hand	had	pushed	its	fingers
through	the	woman’s	body,	as	if	fighting	free	of	an	ill-fitting	glove.	Gorestreaked	nails	clawed	at	the	air.
The	ground	tilted	beneath	Faint,	almost	pitching	her	from	her	feet.
Amby	staggered	up	to	Precious	Thimble	–	his	face	a	mask	of	blood	–	and
when	his	fist	struck	her	face	her	entire	head	snapped	back.	She	toppled.
Bawling,	he	took	her	in	his	arms	and	began	running.
The	arm	was	reaching	higher,	the	remnants	of	Sweetest	Sufferance’s	body


still	clinging	to	the	grasping	hand.	Blood	was	burning	away,	blackening,
shedding	in	flakes,	revealing	a	limb	of	purest	jade.
Faint	staggered	back.	A	mound	was	rising	–	an	entire	hill	–	splitting	the
hard	ground.	The	tree	at	the	spring	thrashed,	and	on	its	long-dead	branches
green	suddenly	sprouted,	writhing	like	worms.	Jade	fruit	bulged,	burgeoned	in
clusters	to	pull	the	branches	down.
Rock	exploded	from	a	ridge	fifty	paces	to	the	south.	High	grasses	waved
like	jade	flames.	A	vast,	gleaming	boulder	rocked	into	view	–	a	forehead	–	oh,
gods	below,	oh,	Hood.	Beru	–	please—
	
Draconus	turned	round,	his	eyes	black	as	pools	of	ink.	‘Wait	here,’	he	said.
Ublala	opened	his	mouth,	but	the	ground	was	shaking,	rolling	like	waves
rushing	in	from	somewhere	to	the	north,	and	he	forgot	what	he	wanted	to	ask.
He	turned	to	his	beloved.
Ralata	was	awake,	crouched	low	on	the	balls	of	her	feet.	Terror	filled	her
face	as	she	stared	past	Ublala.
He	turned	back	in	time	to	see	Draconus	drawing	his	sword.	Blackness
poured	from	the	long	blade	like	wind-whipped	shrouds,	billowing	out,	twisting
to	close	around	the	man	like	folding	wings.	Draconus	disappeared	inside	the
darkness,	and	the	inky	cloud	spiralled	higher,	growing	in	size.	In	moments	it
towered	over	them,	and	then	those	black	wings	unfolded	once	more.
The	apparition	rose	into	the	sky,	enormous	wings	of	inky	smoke
thundering	the	air.
Ublala	stared	after	it.	His	mace	was	in	his	hands	for	some	reason,	and	the
skystone	head	steamed	as	if	dipped	in	a	forge.
He	watched	the	huge	thing	fly	away,	northward.	Not	a	dragon.	Winged
darkness.	Just	that.	Winged	darkness.
He	licked	his	lips.	‘Draconus?’
	
The	brow	ridges	lifted	clear	of	the	shattered	bedrock.	Eyes	blazed	like	emerald
beacons.	A	second	hand	had	thrust	free,	thirty	paces	to	the	west.	Faint	stood	as
if	rooted	to	the	shaking	ground,	as	trapped	as	the	rattling	tree.	Her	thoughts	had
fled.	A	pressure	was	building	inside	her	skull.	She	could	hear	voices,
thousands,	tens	of	thousands	of	voices,	all	speaking	in	a	language	she	could
not	understand.	They	were	rising	in	alarm,	in	fear,	in	panic.	She	clapped	her
hands	to	her	ears,	but	it	was	no	use.


They	want	out.
They	asked.	But	no	answers	came.	They	begged.	Pleaded.	The	world	gave
them	silence.	How	do	I	know	this?	Their	hearts	–	the	beating	–	I	can	feel	them.
Feel	them	breaking.
Anguish	tore	at	her	soul.	She	could	not	survive	this.	It	was	too	much,	the
pain	too	vast.
Icy	air	swept	over	her	from	behind.	An	enormous	shadow	swirled	across
the	earth	to	her	left.	Something	enshrouded	in	darkness,	borne	on	vast	ethereal
wings,	descended	to	where	the	jade	head	was	emerging.
Faint	saw	the	flash	of	something	long	and	black,	a	gleaming	edge,	and	as
the	darkness	slammed	like	a	tidal	wave	against	the	brow	of	the	giant	that
splinter	was	driven	forward,	piercing	the	centre	of	the	forehead.
Thunder	cracked.	Faint	was	thrown	from	her	feet	by	the	concussion.	The
impossible	chorus	of	voices	cried	out	–	in	pain,	in	shock,	and	something	else.
Beneath	her	the	earth	seemed	to	moan.	Staggering	upright	once	more,	Faint
coughed	out	the	blood	filling	her	mouth.
Those	cries?	Relief?	At	last.	At	last,	an	answer.
The	forearm	directly	in	front	of	her	and	the	hand	off	to	the	west	were
suddenly	motionless,	the	jade	luminescence	fading	as	if	sheathed	in	dust.	The
tree,	tilted	precariously	to	one	side,	slowed	its	manic	shivering,	its	branches
now	burdened	with	leaves	of	jade	and	the	huge	globes	of	fruit.
Up	on	the	hill,	the	darkness	coalesced,	like	a	slowly	indrawn	breath,	and	in
its	place	stood	a	tall,	broad-shouldered	man.	His	hands	were	clasped	about	the
grip	of	a	two-handed	sword	bleeding	black	streams	that	spun	lazily	in	the	air.
She	saw	him	struggle	to	pull	the	weapon	from	the	jade	forehead	that	reared
like	a	stone	wall	in	front	of	him.
He	grunted	when	he	finally	succeeded.	The	sword	slid	into	the	scabbard
slung	under	his	left	arm.	He	turned	round,	walked	towards	Faint.	Pale	skin,
chiselled	features,	black	hair,	depthless	eyes.	As	he	neared	her,	he	spoke	in
Daru.	‘Where	he	came	from,	every	god	is	a	Shield	Anvil.	Woman,	have	you
lost	your	mind?’
She	opened	her	mouth	for	a	denial,	a	rush	of	protest,	but	then	he	was
walking	past	her.	She	turned,	stared	after	him.	South?	What’s	down	there?
Where	are	you	going?	No,	never	mind,	Faint.
Gods	below,	what	have	I	just	witnessed?
Her	gaze	returned	to	the	sundered	forehead	surmounting	the	hill.	The
wound	in	its	centre	was	visible	even	from	this	distance.	It	had	nearly	split	the
giant	skull	in	half.
She	slowly	sank	to	her	knees.	A	god.	That	was	a	god.	Were	they	both	gods?


Did	one	just	murder	the	other?	She	realized	that	she	had	wet	herself.	One	more
reek	to	clash	with	all	the	others.	Drawing	a	shaky	breath,	she	lowered	her	head.
‘Sweetest	Sufferance,	I’m	sorry.	She	warned	me	against	it.	I’m	sorry,	Sweetie.
Please	forgive	me.’
She	would,	in	a	while,	set	out	to	find	Amby	and	Precious	Thimble.
But	not	yet.	Not	quite	yet.

Ublala	watched	her	tying	up	her	bedroll.	‘Where	are	you	going?	We	should
wait.	He	said	to	wait.’
She	bared	her	teeth	but	did	not	look	at	him.	‘He	is	a	demon.	When	he	runs
out	of	things	to	hunt,	he’ll	kill	and	eat	us.’
‘No	he	won’t.	He’s	nice.	Draconus	is	nice,	my	love—’
‘Don’t	call	me	that.’
‘But—’
‘Be	quiet.	Give	me	back	my	knife.’
‘I	can’t.	You	might	stab	me.’
‘I	won’t.	I’m	leaving	you	both.	I’m	going	home.’
‘Home?	Where	is	that?	Can	I	come?’
‘Only	if	you	can	swim,’	she	said.	‘Now,	at	least	the	knife.	And	if	you	love
me	the	way	you	say	you	do,	you’ll	give	me	the	rest	of	my	weapons	too.’
‘I’m	not	supposed	to.’
Venom	blazed	in	her	eyes.	‘You’re	awake.	You’re	holding	that	club.	I	can’t
hurt	you.	Unless	you’re	a	coward,	Ublala.	I	can’t	love	cowards	–	they	disgust
me.’
He	hunched	down.	‘Just	because	I’m	scared	of	you	don’t	mean	I’m	a
coward.	I	once	fought	five	Teblor	gods.’
‘Of	course	you	did.	Cowards	always	lie.’
‘And	I	fought	against	the	Fangs	of	Death	and	all	those	tusked	warriors
liked	me	–	no,	that	wasn’t	me.	At	least,	I	don’t	think	it	was.’	He	stared	at	the
mace.	‘But	I	killed	Dalk.	I	killed	a	dragon.	It	was	easy	–	no,	it	wasn’t.	It	was
hard,	I	think.	I	can’t	remember.’
‘No	end	to	all	the	lies.’
‘You’re	right,’	he	said,	suddenly	glum.	‘No	end	to	them.’
‘Give	me	my	weapons.’
‘If	I	do	you’ll	die.’
‘What?’


‘You’ll	leave	us,	and	there’s	no	food	out	here	unless	Draconus	gets	it	for
us.	You’ll	starve.	I	can’t.’
‘Am	I	your	prisoner?	Is	that	how	you	like	it,	Ublala?	You	want	a	slave?’
He	looked	up	at	her.	‘Can	I	sex	you	any	time	if	you’re	my	slave?’
‘That’s	not	love,’	she	said.
‘It’s	been	so	long,’	he	replied,	‘I	suppose	I’ll	take	sex	instead	of	love.	See
what’s	happened	to	me?’
‘Fine.	I’ll	lie	with	you,	if	you	give	me	my	weapons	afterwards.’
Ublala	clutched	his	head.	‘Oh,	you’re	confusing	me!’
She	advanced	on	him.	‘Agree	to	my	offer,	Ublala,	and	I’m	yours—’	She
stopped	abruptly,	turned	away.
He	stared	after	her.	‘What’s	wrong?	I	agree!	I	agree!’
‘Too	late,’	she	said.	‘Your	friend’s	back.’
Ublala	twisted	round	to	see	Draconus	approaching.	‘He’s	no	friend	of
mine,’	he	muttered.	‘Not	any	more.’
	
‘Too	crowded,	these	Wastelands,’	she	said.
‘Then	leave	us,’	Torrent	replied.	‘We	won’t	miss	you.’
In	answer,	Olar	Ethil	picked	up	Absi	once	more,	by	the	scruff	of	his	neck.
‘We	have	rested	enough,’	she	said.
‘Stop	carrying	him	like	that,’	said	Torrent.	‘He	can	ride	with	me.’
Her	neck	creaked	as	she	turned	to	regard	him.	‘Attempt	to	flee	and	I	will
catch	you,	pup.’
Torrent	glanced	across	at	the	twins,	who	huddled	together	near	the	ring	of
stones	where	they	had	tried	making	a	fire	the	night	before.	‘I	won’t	do	that,’	he
said.
‘Sentimentality	will	see	the	death	of	you,’	said	the	Bonecaster.	‘Come	here.
Take	the	child.’
He	strode	over.	When	he	reached	for	the	boy,	Olar	Ethil’s	skeletal	hand
snapped	out.	Torrent	was	dragged	close,	pulled	up	until	his	eyes	were	less	than
a	hand’s	breadth	from	her	broken	face.
‘Call	upon	no	gods	in	this	place,’	she	hissed.	‘Everything’s	too	close	to	the
surface.	Do	you	understand	me?	Even	the	ghost	of	Toc	Younger	cannot
withstand	a	summons	–	and	he	will	not	arrive	alone.’	She	pushed	him	back.
‘You	have	been	warned	–	my	only	warning.	I	catch	you	whispering	a	prayer,
Torrent	of	the	Awl,	and	I	will	kill	you.’
He	stepped	back,	scowling.	‘That	threat’s	getting	as	old	as	you,	hag.’	He
took	Absi’s	hand	and	led	him	slowly	to	where	his	horse	waited.	‘And	we	need


food	–	remember	what	that	is,	Olar	Ethil?	And	water.’
He	looked	round	but	could	see	no	sign	of	Telorast	and	Curdle	–	when	had
he	last	seen	them?	He	could	not	recall.	Sighing,	he	beckoned	to	the	twins.	Stavi
and	Storii	leapt	to	their	feet	and	joined	him.	‘Can	you	walk	for	a	time?’	he
asked	them.	‘Later,	you	can	ride,	a	little	longer	than	you	did	yesterday.	I	don’t
mind	walking.’
‘Did	you	hear	that	thunder?’	Stavi	asked.
‘Just	thunder.’
‘Is	our	father	still	alive?’	Storii	asked.	‘Is	he	really?’
‘I	won’t	lie,’	Torrent	said.	‘If	his	spirit	walks	the	land	again,	he	is	the	same
as	Olar	Ethil.	A	T’lan	Imass.	I	fear	there	will	be	little	that	you	will	recognize
—’
‘Except	what’s	inside	him,’	said	Storii.	‘That	won’t	have	changed.’
Torrent	glanced	away.	‘I	hope	you’re	right,	for	all	our	sakes.’	He	hesitated,
and	then	said,	‘After	all,	if	anyone	can	stand	up	to	this	Bonecaster,	it	will	be
your	father.’
‘He’ll	take	us	back,’	said	Stavi.	‘All	three	of	us.	You’ll	see.’
He	nodded.	‘Ready,	then?’
No,	he	wouldn’t	lie	to	them,	not	about	their	father.	But	some	suspicions	he
would	keep	to	himself.	He	did	not	expect	Olar	Ethil	to	take	them	to	Onos
T’oolan.	Absi,	and	perhaps	even	the	twins,	had	become	her	currency	when
forcing	the	First	Sword’s	hand,	and	she	would	not	permit	a	situation	where	he
could	directly	challenge	her	over	possession	of	them.	No,	these	coins	of	flesh
she	would	keep	well	hidden.
Torrent	collected	up	Absi,	his	heart	clenching	as	the	boy’s	arms	went
round	his	neck.	The	young	were	quick	to	adapt,	he	knew,	but	even	then	there
were	hurts	that	slipped	through	awareness	leaving	not	a	ripple,	and	they	sank
deep.	And	many	years	later,	why,	they’d	shaped	an	entire	life.	Abandon	the
child	and	all	the	man’s	tethers	will	be	weak.	Take	away	the	child’s	love	and	the
woman	will	be	a	leaf	on	every	stream.	So	the	older	ones	said.	Always	full	of
warnings,	telling	us	all	that	life	was	a	treacherous	journey.	That	a	path	once
begun	could	not	easily	be	evaded,	or	twisted	anew	by	wish	or	will.
With	a	grinning	Absi	settled	on	the	saddle,	his	small	hands	gripping	the
horn,	Torrent	collected	the	reins.	The	twins	falling	in	beside	him,	he	set	off
after	Olar	Ethil.
The	thunder	had	stopped	as	quickly	as	it	had	begun,	and	the	cloudless	sky
was	unchanged.	Terrible	forces	were	in	play	in	these	Wastelands,	enough	to
shake	even	the	deathless	witch	striding	so	purposefully	ahead	of	them.	‘Call
upon	no	gods	in	this	place.’	A	curious	warning.	Had	someone	prayed?	He


snorted.	When	did	praying	achieve	anything	but	silence?	Anything	but	the
pathetic	absence	filling	the	air,	building	like	a	bubble	of	nothingness	in	the
soul?	Since	when	didn’t	a	prayer	leave	only	empty	yearning,	where	wishes
burned	and	longing	was	a	knife	twisting	in	the	chest?
Call	upon	no	gods	in	this	place.	Summon	not	Toc	Anaster,	my	one-eyed
guardian	who	can	ride	through	the	veil,	who	can	speak	with	the	voice	of	death
itself.	Why	do	you	so	fear	him,	Olar	Ethil?	What	can	he	do	to	you?
But	I	know	the	answer	to	that,	don’t	I?
Ahead,	the	Bonecaster	hesitated,	turning	to	stare	at	Torrent.
When	he	smiled,	she	faced	forward	again	and	resumed	her	walk.
Yes,	Olar	Ethil.	These	Wastelands	are	very	crowded	indeed.	Step	lightly,
hag,	as	if	that	will	do	any	good.
Absi	made	a	strange	grunting	sound,	and	then	sang,	‘Tollallallallalla!
Tollallallalla!’
Every	word	from	a	child	is	itself	a	prayer.	A	blessing.	Dare	we	answer?
Beware	little	Absi,	Olar	Ethil.	There	are	hurts	that	slip	through.	You	killed	his
dog.
You	killed	his	dog.
	
The	fabric	between	the	warrens	was	shredded.	Gaping	holes	yawned	on	all
sides.	As	befitted	his	veered	form,	Gruntle	moved	in	the	shadows,	a	creature	of
stealth,	muscles	rolling	beneath	his	barbed	hide,	eyes	flaring	like	embers	in	the
night.	But	purchase	under	his	padded	paws	was	uncertain.	Vistas	shifted	wildly
before	his	fixed	gaze.	Only	desperation	–	and	perhaps	madness	–	had	taken	him
on	these	paths.
One	moment	flowing	down	a	bitter	cold	scree	of	moss-backed	boulders,
the	next	moving	like	a	ghost	through	a	cathedral	forest	cloaked	in	fetid	gloom.
In	yet	another,	the	air	was	foul	with	poisons,	and	he	found	himself	forced	to
swim	a	river,	the	waters	thick	and	crusted	with	brown	foam.	Up	on	to	the	bank
and	into	a	village	of	cut	stone	crowded	with	carriages,	passing	through	a
graveyard,	a	fox	pitching	an	eerie	cry	upon	catching	his	scent.
He	stumbled	upon	two	figures	–	their	sudden	appearance	so	startling	him
that	alarm	unleashed	his	instincts	–	a	snarl,	sudden	rush,	claws	and	then	fangs.
Screams	tore	the	night	air.	His	jaws	crunched	down	through	the	bones	of	a
human	neck.	A	lash	of	one	clawed	paw	ripped	one	side	from	a	dog,	flinging
the	dying	beast	into	the	brush.	And	then	through,	away	from	that	world	and	into
a	sodden	jungle	lit	by	flashes	of	lightning	–	the	reek	of	sulphur	heavy	in	the	air.
Down	a	bank	of	mud,	into	a	charnel	pit	of	rotting	corpses,	the	bloated


bodies	of	men	and	horses,	someone	singing	plaintively	in	the	distance.
A	burning	forest.
The	corridor	of	a	palace	or	temple	–	dozens	of	robed	people	fleeing	with
shrieks	–	and	once	more	he	tore	through	them.	Human	blood	filling	his	mouth,
the	taste	appallingly	sweet.	Dragging	bodies	down	from	behind,	crunching
through	skulls	–	weak	fists	thumping	into	his	flanks—
Somewhere	deep	inside	him,	he	loosed	a	sob,	tearing	himself	free	–	and
once	more	the	world	shifted,	a	barren	tundra	now,	someone	kneeling	beside	a
boulder,	head	lifting,	eyes	meeting	his.
‘Stop	this.	Now.	Child	of	Treach,	you	lose	yourself	to	the	beast’s	blood.’
A	woman,	her	long	black	hair	thick	and	glossy	as	a	panther ’s	hide,	her	face
broad,	the	cheekbones	high	and	flaring,	her	amber	eyes	filled	with	knowing.	A
few	rags	of	caribou	skin	for	clothes,	despite	the	frigid	air.
‘When	you	find	me,’	she	continued,	‘it	will	not	be	as	you	imagine.	We	shall
not	meet	as	lovers.	We	shall	not	desire	the	same	things.	It	may	be	we	shall	fight,
you	and	me.’
He	crouched,	sides	heaving,	muscles	trembling,	but	the	blind	rage	was
fading.
She	made	an	odd	gesture	with	one	hand.	‘A	cat	leaps,	takes	the	life	of	a
bird.	Another	takes	the	life	of	a	child	playing	in	the	garden.	This	is	what	a	cat
does,	do	you	deny	this?	Is	there	a	crime	in	these	scenes?	Perhaps.	For	the	bird,
the	crime	of	carelessness,	incaution.	The	child?	An	inattentive	parent?	An	illchosen	place	to	dwell	in?
‘The	chicks	in	their	nest	cry	out	for	a	mother	who	will	not	return.	Her	death
is	their	deaths.	The	mother	grieves	her	loss,	but	perhaps	there	will	be	another
child,	a	new	life	to	replace	the	one	lost.	Tell	me,	Gruntle,	how	does	one	measure
these	things?	How	does	one	decide	which	life	is	the	more	precious?	Are	feelings
apportioned	according	to	intelligence	and	self-awareness?	Does	a	tiny	creature
grieve	less	deeply	than	one	of	greater…stature?
‘But	is	it	not	natural	to	rage	for	vengeance,	for	retribution?	Does	the	dead
bird’s	mate	dream	of	murder?
‘Child	of	Treach,	you	have	taken	more	than	just	children,	on	this	hard	path
of	yours.	In	your	wake,	much	grief	now	swirls.	Your	arrival	was	inexplicable	to
their	senses,	but	the	proof	of	your	presence	lay	in	pools	of	blood.
‘Be	the	weapon	of	random	chance	if	you	must.	Be	the	unimaginable	force
that	strikes	down	with	no	reason,	no	purpose.	Be	the	taker	of	lives.
‘I	will	await	you,	at	the	end	of	this	path.	Will	we	discuss	vengeance?	With
fang	and	claw?’
At	the	threat	a	low	growl	rumbled	from	his	chest.


Her	smile	was	sad.	She	gestured	again—
Blinking,	Gruntle	found	himself	on	his	hands	and	knees,	stony	ground
under	him.	He	coughed	and	then	spat	to	clear	gobs	of	thick	blood	from	his
mouth,	reached	up	and	wiped	his	wet	lips	–	on	the	back	of	his	hand	a	red	smear
and	strands	of	human	hair.	‘Gods	below,’	he	muttered.	‘That	was	a	mistake.’
The	warrens	were	falling	apart.	Where	was	I	going?	What	was	I	running
from?	But	he	remembered.	Betrayals.	Weaknesses.	The	flaws	of	being	human	–
he’d	sought	an	escape.	A	headlong	plunge	into	mindlessness,	fleeing	from	all
manner	of	remorse	and	recrimination.	Running	away.
‘But	what	is	the	point?’	he	said	under	his	breath.	To	forget	is	to	forget
myself.	Who	I	am,	and	that	I	must	not	surrender.	If	I	do,	I	will	have	nothing	left.
Ah,	but	still…to	be	blameless.	A	cat	above	the	tiny	carcass	of	a	bird.	Above
the	corpse	of	a	child.
Blameless.
But	the	bastards	hunting	me	down	don’t	care	about	that.	A	child	has	died.
Mothers	bow	in	wretched	grief.	Weapons	are	taken	in	hand.	The	world	is	a
dangerous	place;	they	mean	to	make	it	less	so.	They	yearn	to	die	ancient	and
withered	in	straw	beds,	at	the	end	of	a	long	life,	with	skins	upon	their	walls
proclaiming	their	bravery.
Well	then,	come	to	me	if	you	must.	To	your	eyes	I	am	a	monstrous	tiger.	But
in	my	mind,	I	have	a	man’s	cunning.	And	yes,	I	know	all	about	vengeance.
He	could	see	now	where	his	path	was	taking	him.	Trake’s	deadly	gift	was
turning	in	his	hands,	finding	a	new,	terrible	shape.	‘You	would	set	yourselves
apart,	then?	Not	animal.	Something	other.	Very	well,	then	there	will	be	war.’
Brushing	at	his	eyes,	he	climbed	slowly	to	his	feet.	Admire	the	beast.	He	is
brave.	Even	as	he	charges	your	spear.	And	should	you	then	stand	above	my
corpse,	note	well	your	own	bravery,	but	in	my	lifeless	eyes	see	this	truth:	what
we	have	shared	in	this	clash	of	courage,	friend,	was	not	a	thing	of	sentience	or
intelligence.	Skill	and	luck	may	be	triumphant,	but	these	are	nature’s	gifts.
Confuse	this	at	your	peril.
‘Treach,	hear	me.	I	will	fight	this	war.	I	see	its…inevitability.	I	will	charge
the	spear.’	Because	I	have	no	choice.	He	bared	his	teeth.	‘Just	make	my	death
worthwhile.’
Somewhere	ahead,	she	awaited	him.	He	still	did	not	know	what	that	meant.
The	veil	between	human	and	beast	was	shredded,	and	he	found	himself
looking	out	from	both	sides.	Desperation	and	madness.	Oh,	Stonny,	I	cannot
keep	my	promise.	I	am	sorry.	If	I	could	but	set	my	eyes	upon	your	face	one	more
time.	He	sighed.	‘Yes,	woman,	to	answer	your	cruel	question,	the	bird’s	mate
dreams	of	murder.’


	
The	tears	kept	returning.	Blurring	his	vision,	streaming	down	his	scarred,
pitted	cheeks.	But	Mappo	forced	himself	onward,	fighting	each	step	he	took.
Two	wills	were	locked	in	battle.	The	need	to	find	his	friend.	The	need	to	flee
his	shame.	The	war	was	now	a	thing	of	pain	–	there	had	been	a	time,	so	long
ago	now,	when	he	had	not	shied	from	self-regard;	when,	for	all	the	deceits
guiding	his	life,	he	had	understood	the	necessity,	the	sharp	clarity	of	his
purpose.
He	stood	between	the	world	and	Icarium.	Why?	Because	the	world	was
worth	saving.	Because	there	was	love,	and	moments	of	peace.	Because
compassion	existed,	like	a	blossom	in	a	crack	of	stone,	a	fulsome	truth,	a
breathtaking	miracle.	And	Icarium	was	a	weapon	of	destruction,	senseless,
blind.	Mappo	had	given	his	life	to	keeping	that	weapon	in	its	scabbard,	peacestrapped,	forgotten.
In	the	name	of	compassion,	and	love.
Which	he	had	just	walked	away	from.	Turning	his	back	upon	children,	so
as	to	not	see	the	hurt	in	their	eyes,	that	hardening	flatness	as	yet	another
betrayal	beset	their	brief	lives.	Because,	he	told	himself,	their	future	was
uncertain,	yet	still	alive	with	possibilities.	But	if	Icarium	should	awaken,	and	no
one	is	there	to	stop	him,	those	possibilities	will	come	to	an	end.	Does	this	not
make	sense?	Oh	yes,	indeed	it	made	sense.
And	still,	it	was	wrong.	I	know	it.	I	feel	it.	I	can’t	hide	from	it.	If	I	harden
myself	to	compassion,	then	what	am	I	trying	to	save?
And	so	he	wept.	For	himself.	In	the	face	of	shame,	grief	burned	away.	In	the
face	of	shame,	he	began	to	lose	who	he	was,	who	he	had	always	believed
himself	to	be.	Duty,	pride	in	his	vow,	his	sacrifice	–	it	all	crumbled.	He	tried	to
imagine	finding	Icarium,	his	oldest	friend.	He	tried	to	envision	a	return	to	the
old	ways,	to	his	words	of	deception	in	the	name	of	love,	to	the	gentle	games	of
feint	and	sleight	of	hand	that	they	played	to	keep	horrifying	truths	at	bay.
Everything	as	it	once	was,	and	at	the	core	of	it	all	Mappo’s	willingness	to
surrender	his	own	life	rather	than	see	the	Lifestealer ’s	eyes	catch	flame.
He	did	not	know	if	he	could	do	that	any	more.	A	man’s	heart	must	be	pure
for	such	a	thing,	cleansed	of	all	doubts,	sufficient	to	make	death	itself	a	worthy
sacrifice.	But	the	solid	beliefs	of	years	past	had	now	broken	down.
He	felt	hunched	down	inside	himself,	as	if	folding	round	an	old	wound,
leaving	his	bones	feeling	frail,	a	cage	that	could	crumple	at	the	first	hint	of
pressure.
The	wasted	land	passed	him	by	on	all	sides,	barely	observed.	The	day’s


heat	faltered	before	the	conflagration	in	his	skull.
Mappo	forced	himself	onward.	He	had	to	find	Icarium	now,	more	than
ever.	To	beg	forgiveness.	And	to	end	it.
My	friend.	I	am	not	enough	any	more.	I	am	not	the	warrior	you	once	knew.	I
am	not	the	wall	to	lean	your	weary	self	against.	I	have	betrayed	children,
Icarium.	Look	into	my	eyes	and	see	the	truth	of	this.
I	beg	a	release.
‘End	it,	Icarium.	Please,	end	this.’
	
Stormy	thought	he	could	make	out	a	pall	of	dust	to	the	southeast.	No	telling
how	far	–	the	horizons	played	tricks	in	this	place.	The	lizard	he	rode	devoured
leagues.	It	never	seemed	to	tire.	Glancing	back,	he	glowered	at	the	drones
plodding	in	his	wake.	K’ell	Hunters	ranged	on	his	flanks,	sometimes	visible,
but	mostly	not,	lost	somewhere	in	the	deceptive	folds	and	creases	of	the
landscape.
I’m	riding	a	damned	Ve’Gath.	The	nastiest	weapon	of	war	I’ve	ever	seen.	I
don’t	need	a	damned	escort.	All	right,	so	it	needed	to	be	fed	come	evening.
There	was	that	to	consider.	But	I’m	a	man.	I	hate	the	need	to	consider	anything.
It’s	not	a	problem	either.	Mostly.
He	preferred	being	just	a	corporal.	This	Shield	Anvil	business	left	a	sour
taste	in	his	mouth.	Aye,	there’s	a	sentimental	streak	in	me.	I	don’t	deny	it,	and
maybe	it’s	wide	as	an	ocean	like	Ges	says.	But	I	didn’t	ask	for	it.	I	cried	for	a
dying	mouse	once	–	dying	because	I	tried	to	catch	it	only	my	hand	was	too
clumsy	and	something	got	broken	inside.	Lying	there	in	my	palm,	breaths
coming	so	fast,	but	the	tiny	limbs’d	stopped	moving,	and	then	the	breaths
slowed.
I	knelt	on	the	stones	and	watched	it	slowly	die.	There	in	my	hand.	Gods,	it’s
enough	to	make	me	bawl	all	over	again,	just	remembering.	How	old	was	I?
Twenty?
He	leaned	to	one	side	and	cleared	his	nose,	one	nostril	and	then	the	other.
Then	cleaned	his	moustache	with	his	fingers,	wiping	them	on	his	leg.	Dust
cloud	any	closer?	Hard	to	say.
Clearing	a	rise,	he	cursed	and	silently	ordered	his	mount	to	a	halt.	The
basin	below	stretched	out	three	hundred	or	more	paces,	and	half	that	distance
out	a	dozen	or	so	figures	were	standing	or	sitting	in	a	rough	circle.	As	soon	as
he	came	into	view	the	ones	standing	turned	to	face	him,	while	the	ones	sitting
slowly	climbed	upright	and	did	the	same.
They	were	tall,	gaunt,	and	armoured	in	black	chain,	black	scales	and	black


leather.
The	Ke’ll	Hunters	had	appeared	suddenly	to	Stormy’s	right	and	left	and
were	closing	up	at	a	swift	lope,	their	massive	cutlasses	held	out	to	the	sides.
Stormy	could	taste	something	oily	and	bitter.
‘Calm	down,	lizards,’	he	said	under	his	breath,	kicking	the	Ve’Gath	into
motion.	‘They	ain’t	drawing.’
Dark	narrow	faces	beneath	ornate	helms	tracked	Stormy’s	approach.
Withered	faces.	Those	bastards	are	tusked.	Jaghut?	Must	be	–	that	old	bust	of
Gothos	in	Aren’s	Grey	Temple	had	tusks	like	those.	But	then,	these	fellows	ain’t
looking	too	good.	T’lan?	Did	the	Jaghut	have	T’lan?	Oh,	never	mind	these
questions,	idiot.	Just	ask	’em.	Or	not.	Ten	paces	between	them,	Stormy	reined
in.	The	Hunters	halted	a	few	paces	back,	settled	and	planted	the	tips	of	their
cutlasses	in	the	hard	earth.
He	studied	the	warriors	before	him.	‘Ugly,’	he	muttered.
One	spoke,	though	Stormy	wasn’t	immediately	certain	from	which	one	the
voice	came.	‘Do	you	see	this,	Bolirium?’
‘I	see,’	another	answered.
‘A	human	–	well,	mostly	human.	Hard	to	tell	behind	all	that	hair.	But	let	us
be	generous.	A	human,	with	K’Chain	as	pets.	And	only	a	few	moments	ago,
Bolirium,	you	had	the	nerve	to	suggest	that	the	world	was	a	better	place	than
when	we’d	last	left	it.’
‘I	did,’	Bolirium	admitted,	and	then	added,	‘I	was	an	idiot.’
Low	laughter.
A	third	Jaghut	then	said,	‘K’Chain	and	termites,	Gedoran.	Find	one…’
‘And	you	know	there’s	a	hundred	thousand	more	in	the	woodwork.	As	you
say,	Varandas.’
‘And	with	that	other	smell…’
‘Just	so,’	Gedoran	said	–	and	Stormy	found	him	by	the	nod	accompanying
the	words.	‘Dust.’
‘Dreams	and	nightmares,	Gedoran,	hide	in	the	same	pit.	Reach	down	and
you’re	blind	to	what	you	pull	out.’
They	were	all	speaking	Falari,	which	was	ridiculous.	Stormy	snorted,	and
then	said,	‘Listen.	You’re	in	my	way.’
Gedoran	stepped	forward.	‘You	did	not	come	in	search	of	us?’
‘Do	I	really	look	that	stupid?	No.	Why,	should	I	have?’
‘He	is	impertinent.’
‘Daryft,	a	human	riding	a	Ve’Gath	can	be	as	impertinent	as	he	likes,’	said
Bolirium.
Hard	laughter,	heads	rocking	back.


Stormy	said,	‘You’re	in	the	middle	of	nowhere.	What	are	you	up	to?’
‘Ah,’	said	Gedoran,	‘now	that	is	a	pertinent	query.	We	have	sent	our
commander	on	a	quest,	and	now	await	his	return.’
‘You	order	your	commander	around?’
‘Yes,	isn’t	that	wonderful?’
The	Jaghut	laughed	again,	a	habit,	Stormy	decided	as	it	went	on,	and	on,
that	could	prove	maddening.	‘Well,	I’ll	leave	you	to	it,	then.’
The	fourteen	Jaghut	bowed,	and	Gedoran	said,	‘Until	we	meet	again,
Shield	Anvil.’
‘I	don’t	intend	to	ride	back	the	way	I	came	in.’
‘Wisdom	is	not	yet	dead,’	said	Bolirium.	‘Did	I	not	suggest	this	to	you	all?’
‘Amidst	a	host	of	idiotic	assertions,	perhaps	you	did.’
‘Varandas,	there	must	be	a	balance	in	the	world.	On	one	side	a	morsel	of
weighty	wisdom,	offsetting	a	gastric	avalanche	of	brainless	stupidity.	Is	that	not
the	way	of	things?’
‘But	Bolirium,	a	drop	of	perfume	cannot	defeat	a	heap	of	shit.’
‘That	depends,	Varandas,	on	where	you	put	your	nose.’
Gedoran	said,	‘Be	sure	to	inform	us,	Varandas,	when	you	finally	smell
something	sweet.’
‘Don’t	hold	your	breath,	Gedoran.’
To	raucous	laughter,	Stormy	kicked	the	Ve’Gath	into	motion,	steering	the
creature	to	the	left	to	ride	round	the	Jaghut.	Once	past	he	urged	his	mount	into
a	loping	trot.	A	short	while	later	the	K’ell	Hunters	drew	in	closer.
He	could	smell	their	unease.	‘Aye,’	he	muttered.
He	wondered	who	the	commander	was.	Must	be	a	damned	idiot.	But	then,
anything	to	escape	that	laughing.	Aye,	now	that	makes	sense.	Why,	I’d	probably
ride	straight	up	Hood’s	arsehole	to	get	away	from	that	lot.
And	as	soon	as	I	smell	something	sweet,	boys	and	girls,	why,	I’ll	ride
straight	back	and	tell	you.
That	dust	cloud	looked	closer.	Maybe.


Chapter	Seven

‘Awaiting	Restitution’
Epigraph	on	gravestone,	Lether
	hands	of	three	women?’
Atri-Ceda	Aranict	drew	one	more	time	on	the	stick	and	then	flicked	the
stub	into	the	fire.	Into	flames…	She	held	the	smoke	in	her	lungs	as	long	as	she
could,	as	if	in	refusing	to	breathe	out	she	could	hold	back	time	itself.	I	saw
caverns.	I	saw	darkness…and	the	rain,	gods	below,	the	rain…	Finally,	she
sighed.	If	there	was	any	smoke	left	she	didn’t	see	it.	‘Not	three	women	alone,’
she	said.	‘There	is	one	man.	You.’
They	sat	undisturbed	before	the	fire.	Soldiers	slept.	The	bawling	of
animals	awaiting	slaughter	had	died	down	for	the	night.	Cookfires	dwindled	as
the	swirling	wind	ate	the	last	dung,	and	the	air	was	filled	with	ashes.	Come	the
dawn…we	leave.	Broken	apart,	each	our	separate	ways.	Could	I	have	imagined
this?	Did	she	know?	She	must	have.	By	her	sword	we	are	shattered.
‘It	was	necessary,’	said	Brys.
‘You	sound	as	if	you	are	trying	convince	yourself,’	she	observed,	drawing
a	taper	from	her	belt	sheath	and	reaching	to	set	one	end	into	the	flames.
Watched	as	it	caught.	Brought	the	lurid	fire	closer	to	her	face	to	light	yet
another	stick.
‘I	understood	her,	I	think.’	He	grunted.	‘Well,	as	much	as	anyone	could.’
She	nodded.	‘The	look	on	the	faces	of	her	officers.’
‘Stunned.	Yes.’
She	thought	of	Fist	Blistig.	‘Appalled.’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘I	worried	for	you,	my	love.	Abrastal’s	daughter
—’
‘A	potent	child	indeed,	to	find	us	from	so	far	away.’	She	pulled	on	the	stick.
‘I	was	unprepared.	The	visions	made	no	sense.	They	overwhelmed	me.’
‘Are	you	able	to	make	sense	of	them	now?’
‘No.’
‘Will	you	describe	them	to	me,	Aranict?’
‘IS	IT	AS	I	SEE?’	BRYS	BEDDICT	ASKED.	‘THE	FATE	OF	THE	WORLD	IN	THE


She	dropped	her	gaze.
‘Forgive	me	for	asking,’	he	said.	‘I	did	not	think	–	you	should	not	have	to
relive	such	trauma.	Ah,	I	am	tired	and	tomorrow	will	be	a	long	day.’
She	heard	the	invitation	in	his	words,	but	the	flames	of	the	hearth	held	her
in	place.	Something.	A	promise.	A	warning.	I	need	to	think	on	this.	‘I	will	join
you,	love,	soon.’
‘Of	course.	If	you	find	me	dead	to	the	world…’
She	flinched,	recovered	and	said,	‘I	shall	be	careful	not	to	wake	you.’
He	leaned	close	and	she	turned	to	meet	his	lips	with	hers.	Saw	the
tenderness	of	his	smile	as	he	pulled	away.
Then	she	was	alone,	and	her	gaze	returned	again	to	the	flames.	A	parley.	A
meeting	of	minds.	Well.
It	had	begun	simply	enough.	Regal	riders	reining	before	the	command	tent,
soldiers	appearing	to	take	the	horses.	Greetings	exchanged	with	the	Malazan
officers	awaiting	these	distinguished	guests.	The	Adjunct	was	within,	yes.	Her
wounds?	She	has	recovered,	thankfully.	We’re	afraid	there	will	be	little
formality	in	all	this,	Highness	–	is	it	not	best	that	we	each	make	our	own
introductions?	Mortal	Sword,	Shield	Anvil,	it	is	good	to	see	you	both…
Fist	Faradan	Sort	had	held	to	her	own	standard	of	formality,	Aranict
supposed.	Both	comfortable	and	respectful.	Whereas	Fists	Kindly	and	Blistig
had	said	nothing,	the	tension	between	the	two	men	palpable.
She’d	stood	close	to	Commander	Brys.	It	was	difficult	to	know	where	to
look.	The	Khundryl	women,	Hanavat	and	Shelemasa,	held	back	from	the
others,	as	if	uncertain	of	their	own	worth.	As	words	were	exchanged	between
Sort	and	Krughava	and	Abrastal	on	the	matter	of	who	should	enter	first	–	a
clash	of	deference,	of	all	things	–	Aranict	edged	back	a	step	and	made	her	way
over	to	the	Khundryl.
They	observed	her	approach	with	evident	trepidation.	Aranict	stopped,
drew	out	her	pouch	and	counted	out	three	sticks	of	rustleaf.	She	held	them	up
with	brows	raised.	Sudden	smiles	answered	her.
She	stood	and	smoked	with	them,	a	few	paces	back	from	all	the	others,	and
Aranict	caught	Brys’s	eye	and	was	pleased	by	the	pride	she	saw	in	her	lover ’s
regard.
It	was	finally	determined	that	Queen	Abrastal	would	be	the	first	to	enter,
accompanied	by	the	Barghast	Warchief	Spax,	followed	by	the	Perish.	When
faces	turned	to	the	Khundryl	women,	Hanavat	gestured	with	one	hand	–	clearly,
now	that	she	had	something	to	do,	she	was	content	to	wait.	Shelemasa	seemed
even	more	relieved.
Brys	approached.	‘Atri-Ceda	Aranict,	if	you	please,	would	you	escort	the


Khundryl	inside	once	you	are…er,	done	here.’
‘Of	course,’	she	replied.	‘It	will	be	my	pleasure.’
Moments	later	the	three	women	were	alone	apart	from	the	two	soldiers
flanking	the	tent’s	entrance.
Hanavat	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘I	am	tempted	to	go	back	to	my	people.	I	do
not	belong	in	such	company.’
‘You	stand	in	your	husband’s	stead,’	said	Aranict.
She	grimaced.	‘It	is	not	what	I	would	choose.’
‘No	one	is	blind	to	that,’	Aranict	said,	as	gently	as	she	could.	‘But,	if	you
like,	I	can	invent	an	excuse…’
‘No,’	Hanavat	said.	‘Even	my	husband	struggled	in	this	particular	duty.	The
Burned	Tears	are	sworn	to	the	field	of	battle,	in	the	memory	of	Coltaine	of	the
Crow	clan.’	She	released	a	harsh	stream	of	smoke.	‘But	it	seems	failure	finds
us	no	matter	where	we	turn.’	She	nodded	to	the	tent.	‘I	will	stand	before	their
disappointment	since	my	husband	dares	not.	My	midwives	tell	me	again	and
again	that	a	woman’s	spirit	is	stronger	than	a	man’s.	This	day	I	mean	to	prove
it.’
‘If	you	like,	I	shall	introduce	you,	Hanavat.’
‘I	expect	no	such	formalities,	Atri-Ceda.	The	Adjunct	has	more	important
matters	to	attend	to	in	there.’
‘My	head	is	spinning,’	said	Shelemasa.
‘It	passes,’	said	Aranict.
A	short	time	later	they	were	done.	Hanavat	gestured	for	Aranict	to	precede
them.	The	Atri-Ceda	turned	to	the	tent	entrance,	but	then	Hanavat	said,
‘Aranict.’
‘Yes?’
‘Thank	you.’
‘My	commander	spoke	from	the	heart	with	the	words	he	gave	you	earlier,
Hanavat.	The	Khundryl	have	nothing	to	be	ashamed	of.	Indeed,	the	very
opposite	is	true.’	She	led	them	into	the	command	tent.
In	the	outer	chamber	were	the	two	Malazan	captains,	Raband	and
Skanarow.	Muted	voices	came	from	the	other	side	of	the	curtain.
Skanarow	gave	them	all	a	strained	smile.	‘We	decided	we	didn’t	want	to
crowd	the	room.’
When	Shelemasa	hesitated,	Hanavat	took	the	younger	woman	by	the	arm.
Aranict	drew	the	entrance	curtain	to	one	side.	The	Khundryl	women
entered	the	chamber.
Conversation	fell	away.
As	Aranict	stepped	in	she	sensed	the	tension.	Mortal	Sword	Krughava’s


face	was	dark	with	anger	–	or	shame.	A	pace	behind	her	was	the	Shield	Anvil,
pale,	clearly	rattled.	Brys	stood	to	the	right,	his	back	almost	brushing	the
curtain	wall.	Alarm	was	writ	plain	on	his	face.	To	the	left	stood	the	queen,	taut
and	watchful	as	her	sharp	eyes	tracked	from	Krughava	to	the	Adjunct	and	back
again.	Who	had	just	been	speaking?	Aranict	wasn’t	sure.
The	Fists	stood	to	the	Adjunct’s	left,	close	to	the	corner	of	the	chamber.
Banaschar	leaned	against	a	support	pole	on	the	other	side,	his	arms	crossed
and	his	eyelids	half	lowered.	Close	by,	as	if	ready	to	catch	the	ex-priest	should
he	collapse,	was	Lostara	Yil.
Adjunct	Tavore	looked	hale,	her	expression	severe,	holding	Krughava’s
glare	unflinchingly.
Upon	the	arrival	of	the	Khundryl,	Fist	Faradan	Sort	cleared	her	throat	and
said,	‘Adjunct,	it	pleases	me	to	introduce—’
‘No	need,’	Tavore	replied,	setting	her	regard	upon	Shelemasa.	The	Adjunct
stepped	forward,	forcing	apart	the	Mortal	Sword	and	the	queen.	‘I	assume	you
are	Shelemasa,	who	succeeded	in	rallying	the	survivors	of	the	Charge,	guiding
the	retreat	and	so	saving	many	lives.	It	is	said	you	were	the	last	to	leave	the
field.	Your	presence	here	honours	us	all.’	She	paused,	and	then	turned	to
Hanavat.	‘Precious	mother,’	she	said,	‘I	grieve	for	your	terrible	losses.	It
grieves	me	too	that,	in	this	time,	your	husband	dwells	only	upon	his	own
losses.	It	is	my	hope	that	he	soon	awakens	to	the	gifts	remaining	in	his	life.’
Tavore	looked	at	the	others.	‘Hanavat	and	Shelemasa	are	Khundryl	Burned
Tears,	our	longest-standing	allies.	Their	sacrifice	on	the	day	of	the	Nah’ruk
saved	the	lives	of	thousands.	On	this	day,	as	upon	every	other,	I	value	their
counsel.	Fist	Kindly,	find	a	chair	for	Hanavat	–	it	is	not	proper	that	she	stand
with	her	child	so	near.’
Aranict	saw	Hanavat	fighting	back	tears,	welling	up	behind	her
astonishment,	and	if	the	two	women	now	stood	taller	than	they	had	a	moment
earlier…	Adjunct	Tavore,	you	continue	to	surprise	us.
Tavore	returned	to	her	original	position.	‘The	Bonehunters,’	she	said,
‘have	had	enough	time	to	lick	their	wounds.	Now	we	must	march	in	earnest.’
Krughava’s	voice	was	harsh	with	suppressed	emotion.	‘We	are	sworn	to—’
‘Serve	me,’	the	Adjunct	snapped.	‘You	have	sworn	to	serve	me,	and	that	I
need	to	remind	you	of	this	pains	me,	Mortal	Sword.’
‘You	do	not,’	Krughava	said	in	a	tone	like	honed	iron.	‘Your	army	is
damaged,	Adjunct.	We	stand	before	you	–	all	of	us	here	–	and	would	pledge
ourselves	to	your	cause—’
‘Not	quite,’	cut	in	Queen	Abrastal,	‘since	I	don’t	yet	understand	that	cause,
and	by	the	look	on	the	face	of	Prince	Brys	I	suspect	he	shares	my	unease.’


Krughava	hissed	a	curse	in	her	own	language,	and	then	tried	again.
‘Adjunct.	Now	is	the	time	to	coalesce	our	respective	forces,	thus	bolstering	our
strength—’
‘No.’
The	word	struck	like	a	knife	driven	into	the	floor	between	them.
The	colour	left	Krughava’s	face.	‘If	you	doubt	our	loyalty	or	courage—’
‘I	do	not,’	Tavore	replied.	‘In	fact,	I	am	depending	on	it.’
‘But	this	makes	no	sense!’
The	Adjunct	turned	to	Abrastal.	‘Highness,	your	presence	here	is	most
unexpected,	but	welcome.	Your	kingdom,	even	more	than	that	of	King	Tehol,
has	had	long-term	contact	with	those	territories	of	Kolanse	and	the	South
Kingdoms	of	the	Pelasiar	Sea.’
‘That	is	true,	Adjunct.’
‘What	can	you	tell	us	of	the	situation	there?’
The	queen’s	brows	lifted.	‘I	assumed	you	were	entirely	aware	of	where	you
are	headed,	Adjunct.	If	that	is	not	the	case,	then	I	am	baffled.	What	manner	of
war	do	you	seek?	What	is	the	cause	for	this	belligerence	of	yours?’
It	seemed	that	Tavore	was	unwilling	to	answer.	Silence	stretched.
The	one	who	finally	spoke	startled	them	all.	‘The	Worm	will	feed.’
Banaschar	slowly	lifted	his	head.	‘She	will	gorge	on	the	slaughter	to	come.’
His	bleary	gaze	wandered	among	them,	settled	on	the	Bolkando	queen.	‘What
are	you	worth?	Any	of	you?’	He	nodded	to	the	Adjunct.	‘She	thinks…enough.
Enough	worth	to	fight	an	impossible	war.	For	you,	Highness.	And	you,	Prince
Brys.	And,’	he	faltered	for	a	moment,	as	if	about	to	be	sick,	‘even	me.’
‘I	don’t	understand,’	said	Abrastal,	‘but	I	will	let	the	matter	rest	for	now.	To
answer	you,	Adjunct,	I	must	weave	a	tale.	And,’	she	added,	‘my	throat	grows
parched.’
Sort	walked	to	the	curtain	entrance,	leaned	out	and	ordered	her	captains	to
find	some	ale.
The	queen	snorted	and	then	said,	‘Well,	I	suppose	ale	better	suits	a	story
told	than	does	wine.	Very	well,	I	shall	begin.	They	came	from	the	sea.	Isn’t	that
always	the	way?	No	matter.	There	was	trouble	in	the	lands	long	before	that	day,
however.	Decades	of	drought.	Uprisings,	civil	wars,	usurpations,	a	host	of
once	wealthy	nations	now	verging	on	utter	collapse.
‘In	such	times,	prophets	are	known	to	rise.	Bold	revolutions,	the	heads	of
kings	and	queens	on	spear	points,	blood	in	the	streets.	But	against	a	sky	empty
of	rain	no	cause	triumphs,	no	great	leader	from	the	masses	can	offer	salvation,
and	before	long	even	their	heads	adorn	spikes.’
Sort	arrived	with	a	cask	of	ale	and	a	dozen	or	so	tin	cups.	She	set	about


serving	drinks,	beginning	with	the	queen.
Abrastal	swallowed	down	a	quick	mouthful,	sighed,	and	resumed,	‘One	can
imagine	how	it	must	have	felt.	The	world	was	ending.	Civilization	itself	had
failed,	revealing	its	terrible	fragilities	–	that	clutter	of	thin	sticks	holding	it	all
upright.	In	place	of	rain,	despair	settled	upon	the	lands.	In	Kolanse,	only	the
province	of	Estobanse	thrived.	Fed	by	glacial	streams	and	rivers,	sheltered
from	the	hot	winds	of	the	south,	by	this	one	province	all	of	Kolanse	struggled
on	–	but	there	were	too	many	mouths	to	feed	and	the	strain	was	taking	its	toll.	If
there	was	a	solution	to	this	strait,	it	was	too	cruel	to	contemplate.
‘The	strangers	from	the	sea	had	no	such	qualms,	and	when	they	cast	down
the	rulers	of	Kolanse	they	did	what	they	deemed	necessary—’
‘A	cull,’	said	the	Adjunct,	and	that	word	seemed	to	take	the	life	from
Tavore’s	eyes.
Abrastal	regarded	Tavore	a	moment	over	the	rim	of	her	cup,	drank,	and
then	nodded.	‘Just	so.	In	the	first	year,	they	reduced	the	population	of	Kolanse
by	fifty	per	cent.	The	least	fit,	the	elderly,	the	sickly.	Another	ten	per	cent	the
next	year,	and	then,	with	more	of	their	own	kind	coming	in	great	ships,	they
sent	armies	into	the	South	Kingdoms.	Adjudication,	they	called	it.	They	titled
themselves	Inquisitors,	in	their	hands	they	held	the	justice	of	the	land	itself	–
and	that	justice	proved	harsh	indeed.’
Abrastal	hesitated,	and	then	shrugged.	‘That	was	pretty	much	the	end	of	our
trade	with	the	east.	As	we	are	people	of	the	land,	not	the	sea,	we	sent	out
merchant	caravans	along	the	old	south	routes,	but	those	few	that	returned	told
tales	of	nothing	but	desolation.	The	merchant	ships	we	then	hired	ventured	into
the	Pelasiar	Sea,	and	found	silted-in	ports	and	abandoned	cities	all	along	the
coasts.	They	could	find	no	one	left	with	whom	to	trade.’
‘Did	they	travel	onward	to	Kolanse?’	Tavore	asked.
‘Only	the	first	few.	With	reason.	The	Inquisitors	did	not	welcome	visitors.’
She	drained	her	cup	and	held	it	out	for	a	refill.	‘We	considered	war,	Adjunct.
Though	the	ships	were	not	our	own,	we’d	given	them	royal	charter,	and	we
were	most	displeased	by	the	slaughter	of	innocents.’	She	glanced	over	at	her
Barghast	Warchief.	‘We	even	hired	ourselves	a	mercenary	army.’
‘Yet	you	declared	no	war,’	observed	Brys.
‘No.	I	sent	an	agent,	my	Eleventh	Daughter.	She	did	not	survive,	yet	was
able	to	send	me…a	message.	These	Inquisitors	were	not	human	at	all.’
‘Justice,’	said	Banaschar,	pulling	a	small	jug	from	his	cloak,	‘the	sweet
contradiction	they	took	to,	like…’	he	regarded	the	jug,	‘like	wine.	There	is	no
true	justice,	they	will	say,	without	the	most	basic	right	that	is	retribution.
Exploit	the	world	at	your	peril,	dear	friends.	One	day	someone	will	decide	to


speak	for	that	world.	One	day,	someone	will	come	calling.’	He	snorted.	‘But
Forkrul	Assail?	Gods	below,	even	the	Liosan	would’ve	done	better.’	He	tilted
the	jug	back,	drank,	and	then	sighed.	‘There	were	temples	to	D’rek	once.	In
Kolanse.’	He	grinned	at	Tavore.	‘Woe	to	all	a	priest’s	confessions,	eh,
Adjunct?’
‘Not	human,’	repeated	Abrastal.	‘Their	power	was	unassailable,	and	it
seemed	to	be	growing.	We	declared	no	war,’	and	she	looked	up	into	the
Adjunct’s	eyes,	‘but	here	we	are.’
Adjunct	Tavore	faced	Brys	Beddict.	‘Prince,	I	have	not	had	the	opportunity
to	thank	you	for	your	intervention	on	the	day	of	the	Nah’ruk.	That	the
Bonehunters	still	exist	is	due	to	your	bravery	and	that	of	your	soldiers.	Without
you	and	the	Khundryl,	we	would	never	have	extricated	ourselves	from	that
engagement.’
‘I	fear,	Adjunct,’	said	Brys,	‘that	we	were	not	enough,	and	I	am	sure
Warleader	Gall,	and	indeed	Hanavat	here,	feel	the	same.	Your	army	is	hurt.	The
stand	by	the	heavy	infantry	and	the	marines	took	from	you	the	very	soldiers
you	need	the	most.’	He	glanced	at	Krughava	briefly,	and	then	continued,
‘Adjunct,	I	share	the	Mortal	Sword’s	dismay	at	what	you	now	propose.’
‘The	Bonehunters,’	said	Tavore,	‘will	march	alone.’
‘Do	you	say	then,’	Brys	asked,	‘that	you	have	no	further	need	of	us?’
‘No,	my	need	for	you	has	never	been	greater.’
Queen	Abrastal	held	out	her	cup,	and	as	Sort	refilled	it	she	said,	‘Then	you
have	misled	me,	Adjunct.	Clearly,	you	know	more	of	the	enemy	–	these
Forkrul	Assail	–	and	their	aims	than	do	any	of	us.	Or,’	she	corrected,	‘you
think	you	do.	I	would	point	out	that	the	Inquisitors	no	longer	appear	to	hold	to
expansionist	intentions	–	the	Errant	knows,	they’ve	had	enough	time	to	prove
otherwise.’
Banaschar ’s	laugh	was	soft	yet	grating.	‘The	Bonehunters	march	alone,
leaking	blood	with	every	step.	Fists,	captains	and	cooks	all	ask	the	same	thing:
what	does	she	know?	How	does	she	know	it?	Who	speaks	to	this	hard	woman
with	the	flat	eyes,	this	Otataral	sword	stolen	from	the	Empress’s	scabbard?	Was
it	Quick	Ben,	our	mysterious	High	Mage	who	no	longer	walks	with	us?	Was	it
Fist	Keneb?	Or	perhaps	the	Empress	is	not	the	mistress	of	betrayal	as	we	all
believe	and	the	Empire’s	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	now	creeps	in	step	with	us,	a
shadow	no	one	casts.’	He	toasted	with	his	jug.	‘Or	has	she	simply	gone	mad?
But	no,	none	of	us	think	so,	do	we?	She	knows.	Something.	But	what?	And
how?’	He	drank,	weaved	a	moment	as	if	about	to	fall,	then	steadied	himself
before	Lostara	Yil	reached	him.	Noticing	her,	he	offered	the	woman	a	loose
smile.


‘Or	is	the	ex-priest	whispering	in	her	ear?’	The	question	was	asked	by	Fist
Blistig,	his	tone	strained	and	cold.
Banaschar ’s	brows	lifted.	‘The	last	priest	of	D’rek	has	no	time	for
whispering,	my	dear	boneless	Fist	Blistig—’
The	Fist	grunted	an	oath	and	would	have	stepped	forward	if	Kindly	had	not
edged	deftly	into	his	path.
Smiling,	Banaschar	went	on.	‘All	the	chewing	deafens	him,	anyway.
Gnawing,	on	all	sides.	The	dog	has	wounds	–	don’t	touch!’	He	waved	with	his
jug	in	the	Adjunct’s	direction.	‘The	Bonehunters	march	alone,	oh	yes,	more
alone	than	anyone	could	imagine.	But	look	to	Tavore	now	–	look	carefully,
friends.	This	solitude	she	insists	upon,	why,	it’s	not	complicated	at	all.	Are	you
not	all	commanders?	Friends,	this	is	simple.	It’s	called…tactics.’
Aranict	looked	to	Brys	in	the	odd	silence	that	followed,	and	she	saw	the
glint	of	something	awaken	in	his	eyes,	as	if	an	unknown	language	had	suddenly
become	comprehensible.	‘Adjunct,’	he	said,	‘against	the	Lether	Empire,	you
struck	both	overland	and	by	sea.	We	reeled	from	one	direction	and	then
another.’
‘You	say	you	need	us	more	than	ever,’	said	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	then,
‘because	we	are	to	invade	on	more	than	one	front.	Adjunct?’
‘Directly	east	of	us	waits	the	Glass	Desert,’	Tavore	said.	‘While	it	offers
the	shortest	route	into	the	territories	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	this	path	is	not	only
reputedly	treacherous	but	by	all	accounts	impossible	for	an	army	to	traverse.’
She	studied	the	Perish.	‘That	is	the	path	the	Bonehunters	will	take.	Mortal
Sword,	you	cannot	accompany	us,	because	we	cannot	feed	you,	nor	supply	you
with	water.	Beyond	the	Glass	Desert,	by	Queen	Abrastal’s	own	account,	the
land	scarcely	improves.’
‘A	moment,	please.’	The	Bolkando	queen	was	staring	at	the	Adjunct.	‘The
only	viable	overland	routes	are	the	southern	caravan	tracks.	The	Glass	Desert
is	truly	impassable.	If	you	take	your	army	into	it	you	will	destroy	what’s	left	of
the	Bonehunters	–	not	one	of	you	will	emerge.’
‘We	shall	cross	the	Glass	Desert,’	said	the	Adjunct,	‘emerging	to	the
southwest	of	Estobanse	Province.	And	we	mean	to	be	seen	by	the	enemy	at	the
earliest	opportunity.	And	they	shall	gather	their	forces	to	meet	us,	and	a	battle
shall	be	fought.	One	battle.’
Something	in	Tavore’s	tone	made	Aranict	gasp	and	she	felt	herself	grow
cold	with	horror.
‘What	of	the	Grey	Helms?’	Krughava	demanded.
‘In	the	Bay	of	Kolanse	there	rises	a	natural	edifice	known	as	the	Spire.
Atop	this	fastness	there	is	a	temple.	Within	this	temple	something	is	trapped.


Something	wounded,	something	that	needs	to	be	freed.	The	Bonehunters	shall
be	the	lodestone	to	the	forces	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	Mortal	Sword,	but	it	is	the
Perish	who	will	strike	the	death	blow	against	the	enemy.’
Aranict	saw	Krughava’s	iron	eyes	narrowing.	‘We	are	to	take	the	south
route.’
‘Yes.’
A	battle.	One	battle.	She	means	to	sacrifice	herself	and	her	soldiers.	Oh,	by
all	the	Holds,	she	cannot—
‘You	invite	mutiny,’	said	Fist	Blistig,	his	face	flushed	dark.	‘Tavore	–	you
cannot	ask	this	of	us.’
And	she	faced	her	Fists	then,	and	said	in	a	whisper,	‘But	I	must.’
‘Unwitnessed,’	said	Faradan	Sort,	ghost-pale,	dry-lipped.	‘Adjunct,	this
battle	you	seek.	If	we	face	an	enemy	believing	only	in	our	own	deaths—’
Banaschar	spoke,	and	Aranict	was	shocked	to	see	tears	streaming	down	his
cheeks.	‘To	the	executioner ’s	axe	there	are	those	who	kneel,	head	bowed,	and
await	their	fate.	Then	there	are	those	who	fight,	who	strain,	who	cry	out	their
defiance	even	as	the	blade	descends.’	He	pointed	a	finger	at	Blistig.	‘Now	you
will	speak	true,	Fist:	which	one	is	Adjunct	Tavore?’
‘A	drunken	fool	speaks	for	our	commander?’	Blistig’s	voice	was	vicious.
He	bared	his	teeth.	‘How	damned	appropriate!	Will	you	stand	there	with	us	on
that	day,	Banaschar?’
‘I	shall.’
‘Drunk.’	The	word	was	a	sneer.
The	man’s	answering	smile	was	terrible.	‘No.	Stone	sober,	Blistig.	As
befits	your	one	–	your	only	–	witness.’
‘Hood	take	your	damned	executioner!	I	will	have	none	of	this!’	Blistig
appealed	to	his	fellow	Fists.	‘Knowing	what	you	now	know,	will	you	lead	your
soldiers	to	their	deaths?	If	this	Glass	Desert	doesn’t	kill	us,	the	Assail	will.	And
all	for	what?	A	feint?	A	fucking	feint?’	He	spun	to	the	Adjunct.	‘Is	that	all	we’re
worth,	woman?	A	rusty	dagger	for	one	last	thrust	and	if	the	blade	snaps,	what
of	it?’
Krughava	spoke.	‘Adjunct	Tavore.	This	thing	that	is	wounded,	this	thing	in
the	temple	upon	the	Spire	–	what	is	it	that	you	wish	freed?’
‘The	heart	of	the	Crippled	God,’	Tavore	replied.
The	Mortal	Sword	seemed	visibly	rocked	by	that.	Behind	her,	with	eyes
shining,	Tanakalian	asked,	‘Why?’
‘The	Forkrul	Assail	draw	upon	its	blood,	Shield	Anvil.	They	seek	to	open
the	Gates	of	Justice	upon	this	world.	Akhrast	Korvalain.	To	unleash	the	fullest
measure	of	power,	they	intend	to	drive	a	blade	through	that	heart	when	the	time


is	right—’
‘And	when	is	that?’	Abrastal	demanded.
‘When	the	Spears	of	Jade	arrive,	Highness.	Less	than	three	months	from
now,	if	Banaschar ’s	calculations	are	correct.’
The	ex-priest	grunted.	‘D’rek	is	coiled	about	time	itself,	friends.’
Clearing	his	throat,	Brys	asked,	‘The	Jade	Spears,	Adjunct.	What	are	they?’
‘The	souls	of	his	worshippers,	Prince.	His	beloved	believers.	They	are
coming	for	their	god.’
Chills	tracked	Aranict’s	spine.
‘If	the	heart	is	freed,’	said	Krughava,	‘then…he	can	return	to	them.’
‘Yes.’
‘He	will	leave	pieces	behind	no	matter	what,’	said	Banaschar.	‘Pulling	him
down	tore	him	apart.	But	there	should	be	enough.	As	for	the	rest,	well,	“for	the
rotted	flesh,	the	Worm	sings”.’	His	laugh	was	bitter.	He	stared	at	Tavore.	‘See
her?	Look	well,	all	of	you.	She	is	the	madness	of	ambition,	friends.	From
beneath	the	hands	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	and	those	of	the	gods	themselves,	she
means	to	steal	the	Crippled	God’s	heart.’
Queen	Abrastal	gusted	out	a	breath.	‘My	Fourteenth	Daughter	is	even	now
approaching	the	South	Kingdoms.	She	is	a	sorceress	of	considerable	talent.	If
we	are	to	continue	this	discussion	of	tactics,	I	will	seek	to	open	a	path	to	her—’
The	Adjunct	cut	in.	‘Highness,	this	is	not	your	war.’
‘Forgive	me,	Adjunct	Tavore,	but	I	believe	it	is.’	She	turned	to	her
Barghast	Warchief.	‘Spax,	your	warriors	hunger	for	a	scrap	–	what	say	you?’
‘Where	you	lead,	Highness,	the	White	Face	Gilk	shall	follow.’
‘The	Otataral	sword	I	wear—’
‘Forgive	me	again,	Adjunct,	but	the	power	my	daughter	is	drawing	upon
now	happens	to	be	Elder.	Omtose	Phellack.’
Tavore	blinked.	‘I	see.’
Brys	Beddict	then	spoke.	‘Mortal	Sword	Krughava,	if	you	will	accept	the
alliance	of	Queen	Abrastal,	will	you	accept	mine?’
The	grey-haired	woman	bowed.	‘Prince	–	and	Highness	–	the	Perish	are
honoured.	But…’	she	hesitated,	then	continued,	‘I	must	tell	you	all,	I	shall	be
harsh	company.	Knowing	what	the	Bonehunters	face…knowing	that	they	will
face	it	alone,	as	wounded	as	the	very	heart	they	would	see	freed…ah,	my	mood
is	grim	indeed,	and	I	do	not	expect	that	to	change.	When	at	last	I	strike	for	the
Spire,	you	will	be	hard	pressed	to	match	my	determination.’
Brys	smiled.	‘A	worthy	challenge,	Mortal	Sword.’
The	Adjunct	walked	to	stand	once	more	before	Hanavat.	‘Mother,’	she	said,
‘I	would	ask	this	of	you:	will	the	Khundryl	march	with	the	Bonehunters?’


Hanavat	seemed	to	struggle	finding	her	voice.	‘Adjunct,	we	are	few.’
‘Nonetheless.’
‘Then…yes,	we	shall	march	with	you.’
Queen	Abrastal	asked,	‘Adjunct?	Shall	I	call	upon	Felash,	my	Fourteenth
Daughter?	There	are	matters	of	tactics	and	logistics	awaiting	us	this	day.	By
your	leave,	I—’
‘I	am	done	with	this!’	Blistig	shouted,	turning	to	leave.
‘Stand	where	you	are,	Fist,’	Tavore	said	in	a	voice	like	bared	steel.
‘I	resign—’
‘I	forbid	it.’
He	stared	at	her,	mouth	open	in	shock.
‘Fists	Blistig,	Kindly	and	Faradan	Sort,	our	companies	need	to	be	readied
for	tomorrow’s	march.	I	shall	call	upon	you	all	at	dusk	to	hear	reports	of	our
status.	Until	then,	you	are	dismissed.’
Kindly	grasped	Blistig	by	one	arm	and	marched	him	out,	Sort	following
with	a	wry	smile.
‘Omtose	Phellack,’	muttered	Banaschar	once	they’d	left.	‘Adjunct,	I	was
chilled	enough	the	last	time.	Will	you	excuse	me?’
Tavore	nodded.	‘Captain	Yil,	please	escort	our	priest	to	his	tent,	lest	he	get
lost.’	She	then	shot	Aranict	a	glance,	as	if	to	ask	Are	you	ready	for	this?	To
which	Aranict	nodded.
Abrastal	sighed.	‘Very	well,	shall	we	begin?’
	
Aranict	saw	that	the	dung	had	burned	down	to	dull	ashes.	She	flicked	away	the
gutted	butt	of	her	last	stick,	and	then	stood,	lifting	her	gaze	to	the	Spears	of
Jade.
We’ll	do	what	we	can.	Today,	we	promised	as	much.	What	we	can.
One	battle.	Oh,	Tavore…
Sick	and	shaken	as	she	had	been,	her	hardest	journey	this	day	had	been
back	through	the	Bonehunter	camp.	The	soldiers,	their	faces,	the	low
conversations	and	the	occasional	laugh	–	each	and	every	scene,	each	and	every
sound,	struck	her	heart	like	a	dagger ’s	point.	I	am	looking	upon	dead	men,	dead
women.	They	don’t	know	it	yet.	They	don’t	know	what’s	awaiting	them,	what	she
means	to	do	with	them.
Or	maybe	they	do.
Unwitnessed.	I’ve	heard	about	this,	about	what	she	told	them.
Unwitnessed…is	what	happens	when	nobody	survives.


	
He’d	intended	to	call	them	all	together	during	the	Adjunct’s	parley,	but	reforming	the	squads	had	taken	longer	than	he’d	thought	it	would	–	a	notion
which,	he	decided,	had	been	foolishly	optimistic.	Even	with	spaces	in	each
campfire’s	circle	yawning	like	silent	howls,	marines	and	heavies	might	as	well
have	been	rooted	to	the	ground.	They’d	needed	pulling,	kicking,	dragging	out
of	their	old	places.
To	fit	into	a	new	thing	you	had	to	leave	the	old	thing	behind,	and	that
wasn’t	as	easy	as	it	sounded,	since	it	meant	accepting	that	the	old	thing	was
dead,	for	ever	gone,	no	matter	where	you	tried	standing	or	how	stubbornly	you
held	fast.
Fiddler	knew	he’d	been	no	different.	As	bad	as	Hedge	in	that	regard,	in
fact.	The	heavies	and	the	marines	were	a	chewed-up	mess.	Standing	over	them,
like	some	cutter	above	a	mauled	patient,	trying	to	work	out	exactly	what	he	was
looking	at	–	desperate	for	something	even	remotely	recognizable	–	he’d
watched	them	trickle	slowly	into	the	basin	he’d	chosen	for	this	meeting.	As	the
sun	waned	in	the	sky,	as	pairs	of	squad-mates	set	out	to	find	some	missing
comrade,	eventually	returning	with	a	scowling	companion	in	tow	–	aye,	this
was	a	rough	scene,	resentment	thickening	in	the	dusty	air.
He’d	waited,	weathering	their	impatience,	until	at	last,	with	dusk	fast
rushing	in,	the	final	recalcitrant	soldier	walked	into	the	crowd	–	Koryk.
Well.	You	can	try	all	the	browbeating	you	want,	when	the	skull’s	turned	into
a	solid	stone	wall	there’s	no	getting	in.
‘So,’	Fiddler	said,	‘I’m	captain	to	you	lot	now.’	He	stared	at	the	faces	–
only	half	of	which	seemed	to	be	paying	him	any	attention.	‘If	Whiskeyjack
could	see	me	right	now,	he’d	probably	choke	–	I	was	never	cut	out	for	anything
more	than	what	I	was	in	the	beginning.	A	sapper—’
‘So	what	is	it,’	a	voice	called	out,	‘you	want	us	to	feel	sorry	for	you?’
‘No,	Gaunt-Eye.	With	you	all	feeling	so	sorry	for	yourselves	I	wouldn’t
stand	a	chance,	would	I?	I	look	out	at	you	now	and	you	know	what	I’m
thinking?	I’m	thinking:	you	ain’t	Bridgeburners.	You	ain’t	even	close.’
Even	the	gloom	wasn’t	enough	to	hide	the	hard	hostility	fixed	on	him	now.
‘Aye,’	he	said.	‘You	see,	it	was	back	in	Blackdog	that	it	finally	clunked	home
that	we	were	the	walking	dead.	Someone	wanted	us	in	the	ground,	and	damn	if
we	didn’t	mostly	end	up	there.	In	the	tunnels	of	Pale,	the	tombs	of	the
Bridgeburners.	Tombs	they	dug	for	themselves.	Heard	a	few	stragglers	hung
on	until	Black	Coral,	and	those	bodies	ended	up	in	Moon’s	Spawn	the	day	it
was	abandoned	by	the	Tiste	Andii.	An	end	to	the	tale,	but	like	I	said,	we	saw	that


end	coming	from	a	long	way	off.’
He	fell	silent	then,	momentarily	lost	in	his	own	memories,	the	million
losses	that	added	up	to	what	he	felt	now.	Then	he	shook	himself	and	looked	up
once	more.	‘But	you	lot.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘You’re	too	stupid	to	know	what’s
been	beating	you	on	the	heads	ever	since	Y’Ghatan.	Wide-eyed	stupid.’
Cuttle	spoke	up.	‘We’re	the	walking	dead.’
‘Thanks	for	the	good	news,	Fid,’	someone	said,	his	voice	muffled.
A	few	laughs,	but	they	were	bitter.
Fiddler	continued.	‘Those	lizards	took	a	nasty	bite	out	of	us.	In	fact,	they
pretty	much	did	us	in.	Look	around.	We’re	what’s	left.	The	smoke	over	Pale’s
thinning,	and	here	we	are.	Aye,	it’s	my	past	pulling	me	right	round	till	I’m
facing	the	wrong	way.	You	think	you	feel	like	shits	–	try	standing	in	my	boots,
boys	and	girls.’
‘Thought	we	were	going	to	decide	what	to	do.’
Fiddler	found	Gaunt-Eye	in	the	crowd.	‘Is	that	what	you	thought,	Sergeant?
Is	that	really	what	you	thought	we’d	be	doing	here?	What,	we	gonna	vote	on
something?	We	gonna	stick	up	our	little	hands	after	arguing	ourselves	blue?
After	digging	our	little	holes	and	crouching	in	’em	like	mummy’s	womb?	Tell
me,	Sergeant,	exactly	what	have	we	got	to	argue	about?’
‘Pulling	out.’
‘Someone	rustle	up	a	burial	detail,	we	got	us	a	sergeant	to	plant.’
‘You	called	this	damned	meeting,	Captain—’
‘Aye,	I	did.	But	not	to	hold	hands.	The	Adjunct	wants	something	special
from	us.	Once	we	get	t’other	side	of	the	Glass	Desert.	And	here	I	am	letting
you	know,	we’re	going	to	be	our	own	little	army.	Nobody	wanders	off,	is	that
understood?	On	the	march,	you	all	stay	tight.	Keep	your	weapons,	keep	sharp,
and	wait	for	my	word.’
‘You	call	this	an	army,	Captain?’
‘It’ll	have	to	do,	won’t	it?’
‘So	what	is	it	we’re	supposed	to	do?’
‘You’ll	find	out,	I’m	sure.’
A	few	more	laughs.
‘More	lizards	waiting	for	us,	Cap’n?’
‘No,	Reliko,	we	took	care	of	them	already,	remember?’
‘Damn	me,	I	miss	something?’
‘No	lizards,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Something	even	uglier	and	nastier,	in	fact.’
‘All	right	then,’	said	Reliko,	‘s’long	as	it’s	not	lizards.’
‘Hold	on,’	said	Corporal	Rib.	‘Captain,	y’had	us	sitting	here	all	afternoon?
Just	to	tell	us	that?’


‘Not	my	fault	we	had	stragglers,	Corporal.	I	need	some	lessons	from	Sort,
or	maybe	Kindly.	A	captain	orders,	soldiers	obey.	At	least	it’s	supposed	to
work	that	way.	But	then,	you’re	all	different	now…special	cases,	right?	You’ll
follow	an	order	only	if	you	feel	like	it.	You	earned	that,	or	something.	How?
By	living	when	your	buddies	died.	Why’d	they	die?	Right.	They	were
following	orders	–	whether	they	liked	’em	or	not.	Fancy	that.	Deciding	whether
or	not	to	show	up	here,	what	was	that?	Must’ve	been	honouring	your	fallen
comrades,	I	suppose,	the	ones	who	died	in	your	place.’
‘Maybe	we’re	broken.’
Again,	that	voice	he	couldn’t	quite	place.	Fiddler	scratched	his	beard	and
shook	his	head.	‘You’re	not	broken.	The	walking	dead	don’t	break.	Still
waiting	for	that	to	clunk	home,	are	ya?	We’re	going	to	be	the	Adjunct’s	little
army.	But	too	little	–	anyone	can	see	that.	Now,	it’s	not	that	she	wants	us	dead.
She	doesn’t.	In	fact,	it	might	even	be	that	she’s	trying	to	save	our	lives	–	after
all,	where’s	she	taking	the	regulars?	Chances	are,	wherever	that	is,	you	don’t
want	to	be	there.
‘So	maybe	she	thinks	we’ve	earned	a	break.	Or	maybe	not.	Who	knows
what	the	Adjunct	thinks,	about	anything.	She	wants	what’s	left	of	the	heavies
and	the	marines	in	one	company.	Simple	enough.’
‘You	know	more	than	you’re	saying,	Fiddler.’
‘Do	I,	Koryk?’
‘Aye.	You’ve	got	the	Deck	of	Dragons.’
‘What	I	know	is	this.	Next	time	I	give	you	all	an	order,	I	don’t	expect	to
have	to	wait	all	day	to	see	you	follow	it.	Next	soldier	tries	that	with	me	gets
tossed	to	the	regulars.	Outa	the	special	club,	for	good.’
‘We	dismissed,	Captain?’
‘I	ain’t	decided	yet.	In	fact,	I’m	tempted	to	make	you	sit	here	all	night.	Just
to	make	a	point,	right?	The	one	about	discipline,	the	one	your	friends	died	for.’
‘We	took	that	point	the	first	time,	Captain.’
‘Maybe	you	did,	Cuttle.	Ready	to	say	the	same	for	the	rest	of	’em?’
‘No.’
Fiddler	sat	down	on	a	boulder	at	the	edge	of	the	basin	and	settled	until	he
was	comfortable.	He	looked	into	the	night	sky.	‘Ain’t	that	jade	light	pretty?’
	
Things	were	simple,	really.	There’s	only	so	much	a	soldier	can	do,	only	so
much	a	soldier	needs	to	think	about	at	any	one	time.	Pile	on	too	much	and	their
knees	start	shaking,	their	eyes	glaze	over,	and	they	start	looking	around	for
something	to	kill.	Because	killing	simplifies.	It’s	called	an	elimination	of


distractions.
Her	horse	was	content,	watered	and	fed	enough	to	send	the	occasional
stream	down	and	plant	an	island	or	two	in	their	wake.	Happy	horse,	happy
Masan	Gilani.	Simple.	Her	companions	were	once	more	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Sour	company	besides;	she	hardly	missed	them.
And	she	herself	wasn’t	feeling	as	saggy	and	slack	as	she’d	been	only	a	day
earlier.	Who	knew	where	the	T’lan	Imass	had	found	the	smoked	antelope	meat,
the	tanned	bladders	filled	to	bursting	with	clean,	cold	water,	the	loaves	of	hard
bread	and	the	rancid	jar	of	buttery	cheese.	Probably	the	same	place	as	the
forage	for	her	horse.	And	wherever	that	was,	it	was	a	hundred	leagues	away
from	here	–	oh,	speak	it	plain,	Masan.	It	was	through	some	infernal	warren.
Aye,	I	seen	them	fall	into	dust,	but	maybe	that’s	not	what	it	seems.	Maybe	they
just	step	into	another	place.
Somewhere	nice.	Where	at	the	point	of	a	stone	sword	farmers	hand	over
victuals	with	a	beaming	smile	and	good	hale	to	you	all.
Dusk	was	darkening	the	sky.	She’d	have	to	stop	soon.
They	must	have	heard	her	coming,	for	the	two	men	stood	waiting	at	the	far
end	of	the	slope,	staring	up	at	her	the	instant	she’d	cleared	the	rise.	Masan
reined	in,	squinted	for	a	moment,	and	then	nudged	her	mount	forward.
‘You’re	not	all	that’s	left,’	she	said	as	she	drew	nearer.	‘You	can’t	be.’
Captain	Ruthan	Gudd	shook	his	head.	‘We’re	not	far	from	them.	A	league
or	two,	I’d	wager.’
‘We’d	thought	to	just	push	on,’	added	Bottle.
‘Do	you	know	how	bad	it	was?’
‘Not	yet,’	said	the	captain,	eyeing	her	horse.	‘That	beast	looks	too	fit,
Masan	Gilani.’
‘No	such	thing,’	she	replied,	dismounting,	‘as	a	too-fit	horse,	sir.’
He	made	a	face.	‘Meaning	you’re	not	going	to	explain	yourself.’
‘Didn’t	you	desert?’	Bottle	asked.	‘If	you	did,	Masan,	you’re	riding	the
wrong	way,	unless	you’re	happy	with	being	strung	up.’
‘She	didn’t	desert,’	Ruthan	Gudd	said,	turning	to	resume	walking.	‘Special
mission	for	the	Adjunct.’
‘How	do	you	know	anything	about	it,	sir?’	Masan	asked,	falling	in	step
with	the	two	men.
‘I	don’t.	I’m	just	guessing.’	He	combed	at	his	beard.	‘I	have	a	talent	for
that.’
‘Has	plenty	of	talents	does	our	captain	here,’	Bottle	muttered.
Whatever	was	going	on	between	these	two,	she	had	to	admit	to	herself	that
she	was	happy	to	see	them.	‘So	how	did	you	two	get	separated	from	the	army?’


she	asked.	‘By	the	way,	you	both	look	a	mess.	Bottle,	you	bathe	in	blood	or
something?	I	barely	recognized	you.’
‘You’d	look	the	same,’	he	retorted,	‘buried	under	fifty	corpses	for	half	a
day.’
‘Not	quite	that	long,’	the	captain	corrected.
Her	breath	caught.	‘So	you	were	at	the	battle,’	she	said.	‘What	battle?	What
in	Hood’s	name	happened?’
‘Bits	are	missing,’	Bottle	replied,	shrugging.
‘Bits?’
He	seemed	ready	to	say	something,	changed	his	mind	and	instead	said,	‘I
didn’t	quite	catch	it	all.	Especially	the,	er,	second	half.	But	you	know,	Masan,
all	the	stories	about	high	attrition	among	officers	in	the	Malazan	military?’	He
jerked	a	thumb	at	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘It	ain’t	so	with	him.’
The	captain	said,	‘If	you	hear	a	certain	resentment	in	his	tone,	it’s	because	I
saved	his	life.’
‘And	as	for	the	smugness	in	the	captain’s	tone—’
‘Fine,’	she	snapped.	‘Aye,	the	Adjunct	sent	me	to	find	some	people.’
‘Which	you	evidently	failed	to	do,’	observed	Bottle.
‘No	she	didn’t,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd.
‘So	all	this	crawling	skin	I’m	feeling	isn’t	fleas?’
Ruthan	Gudd	bared	his	teeth	in	a	hard	grin.	‘Well	no,	it	probably	is,	soldier.
Frankly,	I’d	be	surprised	if	you	did	feel	something	–	oh,	I	know,	you’re	a
mage.	Fid’s	shaved	knuckle,	right?	Even	so,	these	bastards	know	how	to	hide.’
‘Let	me	guess:	they’re	inside	the	horse.	Isn’t	there	some	legend	about—’
‘The	moral	of	which,’	Rudd	interjected,	‘is	consistently	misapprehended.
It’s	nothing	to	do	with	what	you	think	it’s	to	do	with.	The	fact	is,	that	tale’s
moral	is	“don’t	trust	horses”.	Sometimes	people	look	way	too	hard	into	such
things.	Other	times,	of	course,	they	don’t	look	hard	enough.	But	most	of	the
time	by	far,	they	don’t	look	at	all.’
‘If	you	want,’	said	Masan	Gilani,	‘I	can	ask	them	to	show	themselves.’
‘I’ve	absolutely	no	interest	in—’
‘I	do,’	Bottle	cut	him	off.	‘Your	pardon,	sir,	for	interrupting.’
‘An	apology	I’m	not	prepared	to	accept,	soldier.	As	for	these	guests,
Masan	Gilani,	your	offer	is	categorically—’
Swirls	of	dust	on	all	sides.
Moments	later	five	T’lan	Imass	encircled	them.
‘Gods	below,’	Ruthan	Gudd	muttered.
As	one,	the	undead	warriors	bowed	to	the	captain.	One	spoke.	‘We	greet
you,	Elder.’


Gudd’s	second	curse	was	in	a	language	Masan	Gilani	had	never	heard
before.
	
‘It’s	not	what	you	think,’	he’d	said	with	those	hoary	things	bowing	before	him.
And	he’d	not	said	much	else.	The	T’lan	Imass	vanished	again	a	short	time	later
and	the	three	soldiers	continued	on	as	the	night	deepened	around	them.
Bottle	wanted	to	scream.	The	captain’s	company	over	the	past	few	days	had
been	an	exercise	in	patience	and	frustration.	He	wasn’t	a	man	for	words.
Ruthan	Gudd.	Or	whatever	your	name	really	is.	It’s	not	what	I	think?	How	do
you	know	what	I	think?	Besides,	it’s	exactly	what	I	think.	Fid	has	his	shaved
knuckle,	and	it	seems	the	Adjunct	has	one,	too.
A	Hood-damned	Elder	God	–	after	all,	what	other	kind	of	‘Elder ’	would
T’lan	Imass	bow	before?	And	since	when	did	they	bow	before	anything?
Masan	Gilani’s	barrage	of	questions	had	withered	the	T’lan	Imass	to	dust
with,	Bottle	thought,	a	harried	haste.	But	things	from	the	past	had	a	way	of
refusing	illumination.	As	bad	as	standing	stones,	they	held	all	their	secrets
buried	deep	inside.	It	wasn’t	even	a	question	of	irritating	coyness.	They	just
don’t	give	a	shit.	Explanations?	What’s	the	point?	Who	cares	what	you	think
you	need	to	know,	anyway?	If	I’m	a	stone,	lean	against	me.	If	I’m	a	ruin,	rest
your	weary	arse	on	the	rubble.	And	if	I’m	an	Elder	God,	well,	Abyss	take	you,
don’t	look	to	me	for	anything.
But	he’d	ridden	out	against	the	Nah’ruk,	when	he	could	have	ridden	the
other	way.	He	went	and	made	a	stand.	Which	made	him	what?	Another	one	in
mysterious	service	to	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran	of	Unta?	But	why?	Even	the
Empress	didn’t	want	her	in	the	end.	T’amber,	Quick	Ben,	even	Fiddler	–	they
stood	with	her,	even	when	it	cost	them	their	lives.
Soldiers	muttered	she	didn’t	inspire	a	damned	thing	in	them.	Soldiers
grumbled	that	she	was	no	Dujek	Onearm,	no	Coltaine,	no	Crust,	no	Dassem
Ultor.	They	didn’t	know	what	she	was.	None	of	us	do,	come	to	that.	But	look	at
us,	right	here,	right	now,	walking	back	to	her.	A	Dal	Honese	horsewoman	who
can	ride	like	the	wind	–	well,	a	heavy	wind,	then.	An	Elder	God…and	me.	Gods
below,	I’ve	lost	my	mind.
Not	quite.	I	tore	it	apart.	Only	to	have	Quick	Ben	make	sure	most	of	it	came
back.	Do	I	feel	different?	Am	I	changed?	How	would	I	even	know?
But	I	miss	the	Bonehunters.	I	miss	my	miserable	squad.	I	miss	the	damned
Adjunct.
We’re	nothing	but	the	sword	in	her	hand,	but	we’re	a	comfortable	grip.	Use
us,	then.	Just	do	it	in	style.


‘Camp	glow	ahead,’	said	Masan	Gilani,	who	once	more	rode	her	horse.
‘Looks	damned	big.’
‘Her	allies	have	arrived,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd,	then	added,	‘I	expect.’
Bottle	snorted.	‘Does	she	know	you’re	alive,	Captain?’
‘Why	should	she?’
‘Well,	because…’
‘I’m	a	captain,	soldier.’
‘Who	rode	alone	into	the	face	of	a	Nah’ruk	legion!	Armoured	in	ice!	With
a	sword	of	ice!	A	horse—’
‘Oh,	enough,	Bottle.	You	have	no	idea	how	much	I	regret	doing	what	I	did.
It’s	nice	not	being	noticed.	Maybe	one	day	you	humans	will	finally	understand
that,	and	do	away	with	all	your	mad	ambitions,	your	insipid	self-delusional
megalomania.	You	weren’t	shat	out	by	some	god	on	high.	You	weren’t	painted
in	the	flesh	of	the	divine	–	at	least,	not	any	more	than	anyone	or	anything	else.
What’s	with	you	all,	anyway?	You	jam	a	stick	up	your	own	arse	then	preen	at
how	tall	and	straight	you’re	standing.	Soldier,	you	think	you	put	your	crawling
days	behind	the	day	you	left	your	mother ’s	tit?	Take	it	from	me	–	you’re	still
crawling,	lad.	Probably	always	will.’
Bludgeoned	by	the	tirade,	Bottle	was	silent.
‘You	two	go	on,’	said	Masan	Gilani.	‘I	need	to	piss.’
‘That	last	time	was	the	horse	then?’	Rudd	asked.
‘Oh,	funny	man	–	or	whatever.’	She	reined	in.
‘So	they	bowed	to	you,’	Bottle	said	as	he	and	the	captain	continued	on.
‘Why	take	it	out	on	me?’
‘I	didn’t	–	ah,	never	mind.	To	answer	you,	no,	the	Adjunct	knows	nothing
about	me.	But	as	you	say,	my	precious	anonymity	is	over	–	or	it	is	assuming
the	moment	we’re	in	camp	you	go	running	off	to	your	sergeant.’
‘I’m	sure	I	will,’	Bottle	replied.	‘But	not,	if	you	like,	to	babble	about	you
being	an	Elder	God.’
‘God?	Not	a	god,	Bottle.	I	told	you:	it’s	not	what	you	think.’
‘I’ll	keep	your	ugly	little	secret,	sir,	if	that’s	how	you	want	it.	But	that	won’t
change	what	we	all	saw	that	day,	will	it?’
‘Stormrider	magic,	yes.	That.’
‘That.’
‘I	borrowed	it.’
‘Borrowed?’
‘Yes,’	he	snapped	in	reply.	‘I	don’t	steal,	Bottle.’
‘Of	course	not,	sir.	Why	would	you	need	to?’
‘Exactly.’


Bottle	nodded	in	the	gloom,	listening	as	Masan	rode	back	up	to	them.
‘Borrowed.’
‘A	misunderstood	people,	the	Stormriders.’
‘No	doubt.	Abject	terror	leaves	little	room	for	much	else.’
‘Interestingly,’	Ruthan	Gudd	said	in	a	murmur,	‘needs	have	converged
somewhat.	And	I’m	too	old	to	believe	in	coincidence.	No	matter.	We	do	what
we	do	and	that’s	that.’
‘Sounds	like	something	Fiddler	would	say.’
‘Fiddler ’s	a	wise	man,	Bottle.	He’s	also	the	best	of	you,	though	I	doubt
many	would	see	that,	at	least	not	as	clearly	as	I	do.’
‘Fiddler,	is	it?	Not	the	Adjunct,	Captain?’
He	heard	Ruthan	Gudd’s	sigh,	and	it	was	a	sound	filled	with	sorrow.	‘I	see
pickets.’
‘So	do	I,’	said	Masan	Gilani.	‘Not	Malazan.	Perish.’
‘Our	allies,’	said	Bottle,	glaring	at	Ruthan	Gudd,	but	of	course	it	was	too
dark	for	him	to	see	that.	Then	again,	what’s	darkness	to	a	Hood-cursed	icewielding	Imass-kneeling	Elder	God?
Who	then	spoke.	‘It	was	a	guess,	Bottle.	Truly.’
	
‘You	took	my	anger.’
The	voice	came	out	of	the	shadows.	Blinking,	Lostara	Yil	slowly	sat	up,	the
furs	sliding	down,	the	chill	air	sweeping	around	her	bared	breasts,	back	and
belly.	A	figure	was	sitting	on	the	tent’s	lone	camp	stool	to	her	left,	cloaked,
hooded	in	grey	wool.	The	two	hands,	hanging	down	past	the	bend	of	his	knees,
were	pale	as	bone.
Lostara’s	heart	thudded	hard	in	her	chest.	‘I	felt	it,’	she	said.	‘Rising	like	a
flood.’	She	shivered,	whispered,	‘And	I	drowned.’
‘Your	love	summoned	me,	Lostara	Yil.’
She	scowled.	‘I	have	no	love	for	you,	Cotillion.’
The	hooded	head	dipped	slightly.	‘The	man	you	chose	to	defend.’
His	tone	startled	her.	Weary,	yes,	but	more	than	that.	Lonely.	This	god	is
lonely.
‘You	danced	for	him	and	none	other,’	Cotillion	went	on.	‘Not	even	the
Adjunct.’
‘I	expected	to	die.’
‘I	know.’
She	waited.	Faint	voices	from	the	camp	beyond	the	flimsy	walls,	the
occasional	glow	of	a	hooded	lantern	swinging	past,	the	thud	of	boots.


The	silence	stretched.
‘You	saved	us,’	she	finally	said.	‘For	that,	I	suppose	I	have	to	thank	you.’
‘No,	Lostara	Yil,	you	do	not.	I	possessed	you,	after	all.	You	didn’t	ask	for
that,	but	then,	even	all	those	years	ago,	the	grace	of	your	dance	was…
breathtaking.’
Her	breath	caught.	Something	was	happening	here.	She	didn’t	understand	it.
‘If	you	did	not	wish	my	gratitude,	Cotillion,	why	are	you	here?’	Even	as	she
spoke,	she	flinched	at	her	own	tone’s	harshness.	That	came	out	all	wrong—
His	face	remained	hidden.	‘Those	were	early	days,	weren’t	they.	Our	flesh
was	real,	our	breaths…real.	It	was	all	there,	in	reach,	and	we	took	it	without	a
moment’s	thought	as	to	how	precious	it	all	was.	Our	youth,	the	brightness	of
the	sun,	the	heat	that	seemed	to	stretch	ahead	for	ever.’
She	realized	then	that	he	was	weeping.	Felt	helpless	before	it.	What	is	this
about?	‘I	took	your	anger,	you	said.’	And	yes,	she	could	remember	it,	the	way
the	power	filled	her.	The	skill	with	the	swords	was	entirely	her	own,	but	the
swiftness	–	the	profound	awareness	–	that	had	belonged	to	him.	‘I	took	your
anger.	Cotillion,	what	did	you	take	from	me?’
He	seemed	to	shake	his	head.	‘I	think	I’m	done	with	possessing	women.’
‘What	did	you	take?	You	took	that	love,	didn’t	you?	It	drowned	you,	just	as
your	anger	drowned	me.’
He	sighed.	‘Always	an	even	exchange.’
‘Can	a	god	not	love?’
‘A	god…forgets.’
She	was	appalled.	‘But	then,	what	keeps	you	going?	Cotillion,	why	do	you
fight	on?’
Abruptly	he	stood.	‘You	are	chilled.	I	have	disturbed	your	rest—’
‘Possess	me	again.’
‘What?’
‘The	love	that	I	feel.	You	need	it,	Cotillion.	That	need	is	what	brought	you
here,	wasn’t	it?	You	want	to…to	drown	again.’
His	reply	was	a	frail	whisper.	‘I	cannot.’
‘Why	not?	I	offer	this	to	you.	As	a	true	measure	of	my	gratitude.	When	a
mortal	communes	with	her	god,	is	not	the	language	love	itself?’
‘My	worshippers	love	me	not,	Lostara	Yil.	Besides,	I	have	nothing	worthy
to	give	in	exchange.	I	appreciate	your	offer—’
‘Listen,	you	shit,	I’m	trying	to	give	you	some	of	your	humanity	back.
You’re	a	damned	god	–	if	you	lose	your	passion	where	does	that	leave	us?’
The	question	clearly	rocked	him.	‘I	do	not	doubt	the	path	awaiting	me,
Lostara	Yil.	I	am	strong	enough	for	it,	right	to	the	bitter	end—’


‘I	don’t	doubt	any	of	that.	I	felt	you,	remember?	Listen,	whatever	that	end
you	see	coming…what	I’m	offering	is	to	take	away	some	of	its	bitterness.
Don’t	you	see	that?’
He	was	shaking	his	head.	‘You	don’t	understand.	The	blood	on	my	hands
—’
‘Is	now	on	my	hands,	too,	or	have	you	forgotten	that?’
‘No.	I	possessed	you—’
‘You	think	that	makes	a	difference?’
‘I	should	not	have	come	here.’
‘Probably	not,	but	here	you	are,	and	that	hood	doesn’t	hide	everything.
Very	well,	refuse	my	offer,	but	do	you	really	think	it’s	just	women	who	feel
love?	If	you	decide	never	again	to	feel…anything,	then	best	you	swear	off
possession	entirely,	Cotillion.	Steal	into	us	mortals	and	we’ll	take	what	we	need
from	you,	and	we’ll	give	in	return	whatever	we	own.	If	you’re	lucky,	it’ll	be
love.	If	you’re	not	lucky,	well,	Hood	knows	what	you’ll	get.’
‘I	am	aware	of	this.’
‘Yes,	you	must	be.	I’m	sorry.	But,	Cotillion,	you	gave	me	more	than	your
anger.	Don’t	you	see	that?	The	man	I	love	does	not	now	grieve	for	me.	His
love	is	not	for	a	ghost,	a	brief	moment	in	his	life	that	he	can	never	recapture.
You	gave	us	both	a	chance	to	live,	and	to	love	–	it	doesn’t	matter	for	how	much
longer.’
‘I	also	spared	the	Adjunct,	and	by	extension	this	entire	army.’
She	cocked	her	head,	momentarily	disoriented.	‘Do	you	regret	that?’
He	hesitated,	and	that	silence	rippled	like	ice-water	through	Lostara	Yil.
‘While	she	lives,’	he	said,	‘the	path	awaiting	you,	and	this	beleaguered,
half-damned	army,	is	as	bitter	as	my	own.	To	the	suffering	to	come…ah,	there
are	no	gifts	in	any	of	this.’
‘There	must	be,	Cotillion.	They	exist.	They	always	do.’
‘Will	you	all	die	in	the	name	of	love?’	The	question	seemed	torn	from
something	inside	him.
‘If	die	we	must,	what	better	reason?’
He	studied	her	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	and	then	said,	‘I	have	been
considering…amends.’
‘Amends?	I	don’t	understand.’
‘Our	youth,’	he	murmured,	as	if	he	had	not	heard	her,	‘the	brightness	of	the
sun.	She	chose	to	leave	him.	Because,	I	fear,	of	me,	of	what	I	did	to	her.	It	was
wrong.	All	of	it,	so	terribly	wrong.	Love…	I’d	forgotten.’
The	shadows	deepened,	and	a	moment	later	she	was	alone	in	her	tent.	She?
Cotillion,	listen	to	my	prayer.	For	all	your	fears,	love	is	not	something	you	can


forget.	But	you	can	turn	your	back	on	it.	Do	not	do	that.	A	god	had	sought	her
out.	A	god	suffering	desperate	need.	But	she	couldn’t	give	him	what	he	desired
–	perhaps,	she	saw	now,	he’d	been	wise	in	rejecting	what	she’d	offered.	The
first	time,	it	was	anger	for	love.	But	I	saw	no	anger	left	in	him.
Always	an	even	exchange.	If	I	opened	my	love	to	him…whatever	he	had	left
inside	himself,	he	didn’t	want	to	give	it	to	me.	And	that,	she	now	comprehended,
had	been	an	act	of	mercy.
The	things	said	and	the	things	not	said.	In	the	space	in	between,	a	thousand
worlds.	A	thousand	worlds.
	
The	Perish	escort	of	two	armoured,	helmed	and	taciturn	soldiers	halted.	The
one	on	the	left	pointed	and	said	to	Bottle,	‘There,	marine,	you	will	find	your
comrades.	They	have	gathered	at	the	summons	of	their	captain.’	To	Masan
Gilani	and	Ruthan	Gudd,	the	soldier	continued,	‘The	Adjunct’s	command	tent
lies	elsewhere,	but	as	we	have	come	to	the	edge	of	the	Bonehunter
encampment,	I	expect	you	will	have	little	difficulty	in	finding	your	own	way.’
‘Much	as	we	will	miss	your	company,’	Ruthan	Gudd	said,	‘I	am	sure	you
are	correct.	Thank	you	for	guiding	us	this	far,	sirs.’
The	figures	–	Bottle	wasn’t	even	sure	if	they	were	men	or	women,	and	the
voice	of	the	one	who’d	spoken	gave	no	hint	whatsoever	–	bowed,	and	then
turned	about	to	retrace	their	routes.
Bottle	faced	his	companions.	‘We	part	here,	then.	Masan,	I	expect	I’ll	see
you	soon	enough.	Captain.’	He	saluted	smartly.
The	man	scowled	in	reply.	Gesturing	to	Masan,	he	set	off	for	the	heart	of
the	camp.
Bottle	faced	the	direction	the	guard	had	indicated.	What’s	Sort	got	to	say	to
them,	then?	Guess	I’m	about	to	find	out.
They’d	set	no	pickets.	A	small	mass	of	soldiers	were	seated	or	standing	in
a	basin,	and	at	the	far	end,	hunched	down	on	a	boulder…is	that	Fiddler?	Gods
below,	don’t	tell	me	this	is	all	that’s	left!	Tentatively,	he	approached.
	
They	made	their	own	way	through	a	relatively	quiet	camp.	It	was	late,	and
Masan	was	not	looking	forward	to	rousing	the	Adjunct,	but	she	knew	Tavore
would	not	abide	any	delays	to	any	of	this.	Though	my	report	probably	won’t
impress	her.	Five	beat-up	T’lan	Imass	is	all	I’ve	got	to	show.	No,	it	was	Ruthan
Gudd	who	was	marching	into	a	serious	mess.	She	hoped	she’d	be	witness	to	at


least	some	of	that	exchange,	if	only	to	revel	in	the	captain’s	discomfort.
Elder!	Well,	I	won’t	tell.	But	all	the	rest	you	did,	Captain,	now	that	sounded
interesting.	Too	bad	I	missed	it.
They	passed	through	a	few	groups	here	and	there,	and	Masan	sensed	a
heightening	attention	from	those	faces	turned	their	way,	but	no	one	accosted
them.	No	one	said	a	damned	thing.	Strange	and	stranger	still.
They	came	to	within	sight	of	the	command	tent.	Two	guards	were	stationed
at	the	flap,	and	the	glow	of	lantern	light	painted	the	canvas	walls.
‘Does	she	ever	sleep?’	Ruthan	Gudd	wondered	in	a	drawl.
‘In	her	boots,’	Masan	replied,	‘I	doubt	I	would.’
The	eyes	of	the	guards	were	now	on	them,	and	both	slowly	straightened,
their	shadowed	gazes	clearly	fixing	on	the	captain.	Both	saluted	when	he	halted
before	them.
‘She	probably	wants	to	see	us,’	Ruthan	said.
‘You	have	leave	to	enter,	sir,’	one	of	them	said.
As	the	captain	moved	to	the	entrance	the	same	guard	said,	‘Sir?’
‘Yes?’
‘Welcome	back.’
Masan	followed	him	inside.
‘Of	all	the	luck,’	muttered	Ruthan	Gudd	upon	seeing	a	dozing	Skanarow.
He	held	a	hand	to	stay	Masan.	‘Please,’	he	whispered,	‘don’t	wake	her.’
‘Coward,’	she	mouthed	in	reply.
Grimacing,	he	edged	past	the	sleeping	woman.	As	she	neared,	Masan’s
gaze	fell	to	one	wayward	booted	foot,	and	she	gave	it	a	kick.
Skanarow	bolted	upright.	‘Adj—	Gods	below!’
That	shout	rang	loud	as	a	hammered	cauldron.
At	the	very	threshold	to	the	inner	chamber,	Ruthan	Gudd	wheeled.
Whatever	he	intended	to	say,	he	had	no	chance,	as	Skanarow	was	upon	him	in
an	instant.	Such	was	the	force	of	her	lunge	and	embrace	that	he	staggered	back,
splitting	the	curtain,	into	the	Adjunct’s	presence.
Skanarow	held	her	kiss	as	if	glued	to	the	captain’s	mouth.
Grinning,	Masan	Gilani	edged	in	behind	them,	caught	the	Adjunct’s
astonished	gaze.
Tavore	was	standing	beside	a	small	folding	map	table.	She	was	otherwise
alone,	accounting	for	her	half-dressed	state	–	only	the	quilted	undergarment	of
her	armour	covered	her	torso,	and	below	that	nothing	but	loose	linen	trousers,
the	knees	so	stained	they’d	have	embarrassed	a	farmer.	Her	face	was	strangely
streaked	in	the	half-light	of	a	single	oil	lamp.
‘Adjunct,’	Masan	Gilani	said,	saluting.	‘On	my	return	journey,	I	happened


upon	the	captain	here,	and	a	marine	named	Bottle,	from	Fiddler ’s	squad—’
‘Skanarow!’	The	word	was	sharp	as	a	blade.	‘Disengage	yourself	from	the
captain.	I	believe	he	has	come	here	to	speak	to	me	–	as	for	the	rest,	it	will	have
to	wait.’
Skanarow	pulled	herself	from	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘M-my	apologies,	Adjunct.	I	–
with	your	leave,	I	will	wait	outside—’
‘You	will	not.	You	will	return	to	your	tent	and	wait	there.	I	trust	the	captain
will	find	it	without	much	trouble?’
Skanarow	blinked,	and	then,	fighting	a	smile,	she	saluted	a	second	time
and,	with	one	last	glance	at	Ruthan	–	a	look	that	was	either	a	glare	or	a	dark
promise	–	she	was	gone.
Ruthan	Gudd	straightened	before	the	Adjunct	and	cleared	his	throat.
‘Adjunct.’
‘Your	act,	Captain,	on	the	day	of	the	Nah’ruk,	broke	enough	military
conventions	to	warrant	a	court-martial.	You	abandoned	your	soldiers	and
disobeyed	orders.’
‘Yes,	Adjunct.’
‘And	quite	possibly	saved	all	our	lives.’	She	seemed	to	become	cognizant
of	her	attire,	for	she	turned	to	the	tent’s	centre	pole,	where	a	robe	hung	from	a
hook.	Shrugging	into	the	woollen	garment	she	faced	Ruthan	again.	‘Entire
tomes	have	been	devoted	to	a	discussion	of	these	particular	incidents	in
military	campaigns.	Disobedience	on	the	one	hand	and	extraordinary	valour	on
the	other.	What	is	to	be	done	with	such	a	soldier?’
‘Rank	and	discipline	must	ever	take	precedence,	Adjunct.’
Her	gaze	sharpened	on	him.	‘Is	that	your	learned	opinion	on	the	matter,
Captain?	Content,	are	you,	with	distilling	all	those	tomes	in	a	handful	of
words?’
‘Frankly,	Adjunct?	Yes.’
‘I	see.	Then	what	do	you	suggest	I	do	with	you?’
‘At	the	very	least,	Adjunct,	reduce	my	rank.	For	you	are	accurate	and
proper	in	noting	my	dereliction	of	responsibility	regarding	the	soldiers	under
my	command.’
‘Of	course	I	am,	you	fool.’	She	ran	a	hand	through	her	short	hair,	and
caught	Masan’s	gaze.	The	Dal	Honese	could	not	help	but	see	the	faint	gleam	in
those	unremarkable	–	and	clearly	tired	–	eyes.	‘Very	well,	Ruthan	Gudd.	You
have	lost	your	command.	Your	rank,	however,	shall	remain	unchanged,	but
from	this	day	forward	you	are	attached	to	my	staff.	And	if	you	imagine	this	to
be	some	sort	of	promotion,	well,	I	suggest	you	sit	down	with	Lostara	Yil	some
time	soon.’	She	paused,	eyes	narrowing	on	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘Why,	Captain,	you


seem	displeased.	Good.	Now,	as	to	other	matters	that	we	should	discuss,
perhaps	they	can	wait.	There	is	one	woman	in	this	camp,	however,	who	cannot.
Dismissed.’
His	salute	was	somewhat	shaky.
When	he	was	gone,	the	Adjunct	sighed	and	sat	down	by	her	map	table.
‘Forgive	me,	marine,	for	my	improper	state.	It	has	been	a	long	day.’
‘No	need	to	apologize,	Adjunct.’
Tavore’s	eyes	travelled	up	and	down	Masan,	sending	a	faint	tremor
through	her	spine	–	oh,	I	know	that	kind	of	look.	‘You	look	surprisingly	hale,
soldier.’
‘Modest	gifts	from	our	new	allies,	Adjunct.’
Brows	lifted.	‘Indeed?’
‘Alas,	there’re	only	five	of	them.’
‘Five?’
‘T’lan	Imass,	Adjunct.	I	don’t	know	if	they	were	the	allies	you	sought.	In
fact,	they	found	me,	not	the	other	way	round,	and	it	is	their	opinion	that	my
bringing	them	here	was	the	right	thing	to	do.’
The	Adjunct	continued	studying	her.	Masan	felt	trickles	of	sweat	wending
down	the	small	of	her	back.	I	don’t	know.	She’s	a	damned	skinny	one…
‘Summon	them.’
The	figures	rose	from	the	dirt	floor.	Dust	to	bones,	dust	to	withered	flesh,
dust	to	chipped	weapons	of	stone.	The	T’lan	Imass	bowed	to	the	Adjunct.
The	one	named	Beroke	then	spoke.	‘Adjunct	Tavore	Paran,	we	are	the
Unbound.	We	bring	you	greeting,	Adjunct,	from	the	Crippled	God.’
And	at	that	something	seemed	to	crumple	inside	Tavore,	for	she	leaned
forward,	set	her	hands	to	her	face,	and	said,	‘Thank	you.	I	thought…out	of
time…too	late.	Oh	gods,	thank	you.’
	
He’d	stood	unnoticed	for	some	time,	just	one	more	marine,	there	on	the	edge
of	the	crowd.	Holding	back,	unsure	of	what	he	was	witnessing	here.	Fiddler
wasn’t	saying	anything.	In	fact,	the	bastard	might	well	be	sleeping,	with	his
head	sunk	down	like	that.	As	for	the	soldiers	in	the	basin,	some	muttered	back
and	forth,	a	few	tried	to	sleep	but	were	kicked	awake	by	their	companions.
When	Fiddler	lifted	his	gaze,	the	marines	and	heavies	fell	silent,	suddenly
attentive.	The	sergeant	was	rummaging	in	his	kit	bag.	He	drew	something	out
but	it	was	impossible	to	see	what.	Peered	at	it	for	a	long	moment,	and	then
returned	it	to	his	satchel.	‘Cuttle!’
‘Aye?’


‘He’s	here.	Go	find	him.’
The	sapper	rose	and	slowly	turned.	‘All	right,	then,’	he	growled,	‘I	ain’t
got	the	eyes	of	a	rat.	So	show	yourself,	damn	you.’
A	slow	heat	prickled	through	Bottle.	He	looked	round.
Fiddler	said,	‘Aye,	Bottle.	You.	Don’t	be	so	thick.’
‘Here,’	Bottle	said.
Figures	close	to	him	swung	round	then.	A	few	muffled	curses,	and	all	at
once	a	space	opened	around	him.	Cuttle	was	making	his	way	over,	and	even	in
the	gloom	his	expression	was	severe.
‘I	think	Smiles	sold	off	your	kit,	Bottle,’	he	said	as	he	arrived	to	stand
before	him.	‘At	least	you	scrounged	up	some	weapons,	which	is	saying
something.’
‘You	all	knew?’
‘Knew	what?	That	you	survived?	Gods	no.	We	all	figured	you	dead	and
gone.	You	think	Smiles	would’ve	sold	off	your	stuff	if	we	didn’t?’
He	could	see	the	rest	of	the	squad	drawing	up	behind	Cuttle.	‘Well,	yes.’
The	sapper	grunted.	‘Got	a	point	there,	soldier.	Anyway,	we	didn’t	know	a
damned	thing.	He	just	made	us	sit	here	and	wait,	is	what	he	did—’
‘I	thought	this	was	Faradan	Sort’s	meeting—’
‘Fid’s	cap’n	now,	Bottle.’
‘Oh.’
‘And	since	he’s	now	a	captain,	official	and	everything,	he’s	got	decorum
t’follow.’
‘Right.	Of	course.	I	mean—’
‘So	instead	of	him	doing	this,	it’s	me.’	And	with	that	the	veteran	stepped
close	and	embraced	him,	hard	enough	to	make	Bottle’s	bones	ache.	Cuttle’s
breath	was	harsh	in	his	ear.	‘Kept	looking	at	a	card,	y’see?	Kept	looking	at	it.
Welcome	back,	Bottle.	Gods	below,	welcome	home.’
	
Stormy	halted	the	Ve’Gath.	Grainy-eyed,	aching,	he	stared	at	the	massed	army
seething	in	motion	on	the	flats	below	as	the	dawn	sliced	open	the	eastern
horizon.	Bonehunter	standards	to	the	left,	companies	jostling	to	form	up	for
the	march	–	far	too	few	companies	for	Stormy’s	liking.	Already	assembled	and
facing	southeast,	the	Letherii	legions,	and	with	them	Perish	ranks,	and	the	gilt
standards	of	some	other	army.	Scowling,	he	swung	his	gaze	back	to	the
Bonehunters.	Positioned	to	march	due	east.	‘Gods	below.’
A	scattering	of	Khundryl	outriders	had	spotted	him,	two	setting	off	back	to
the	vanguard	while	a	half-dozen,	bows	drawn	and	arrows	nocked,	rode	swiftly


in	his	direction.	Seeing	their	growing	confusion	as	they	approached,	Stormy
grinned.	He	lifted	one	hand	in	greeting.	They	pulled	up	thirty	paces	away.
The	ranks	of	the	Bonehunters	were	all	halted	now,	facing	in	his	direction.
He	saw	the	Adjunct	and	a	handful	of	officers	emerging	from	the	swirling	dust
near	the	column’s	head	to	ride	towards	him.
He	considered	meeting	them	halfway,	decided	not	to.	Twisting	round,	he
looked	back	at	his	K’ell	Hunter	escort	and	the	drones.	Weapon	points	were
buried	in	the	hard	ground.	The	drones	had	settled	on	their	tails,	tiny	birds
dancing	on	their	hides	and	feeding	on	ticks	and	mites.	From	them	all,	a	scent	of
calm	repose.	‘Good.	Stay	there,	all	of	you.	And	don’t	do	anything…
unnerving.’
Horses	shied	on	the	approach,	and	it	was	quickly	apparent	that	none	of	the
mounts	would	draw	within	twenty	long	strides	of	the	Ve’Gath.	Across	the	gap,
Stormy	met	the	Adjunct’s	eyes.	‘I’d	dismount,’	he	said,	‘but	I	think	my	legs
died	some	time	in	the	night.	Adjunct,	I	bring	greetings	from	Mortal	Sword
Gesler,	Destriant	Kalyth,	and	the	Gunthan	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
She	slipped	down	from	her	mount	and	walked	towards	him,	slowly
drawing	off	her	leather	gloves.	‘The	Nah’ruk,	Corporal,	were	seeking	their
kin,	correct?’
‘Aye.	Estranged	kin,	I’d	say.	Saw	no	hugs	when	we	all	met.’
‘If	Sergeant	Gesler	is	now	Mortal	Sword,	Corporal,	what	does	that	make
you?’
‘Shield	Anvil.’
‘I	see.	And	the	god	you	serve?’
‘Damned	if	I	know,	Adjunct.’
Tucking	the	gloves	in	her	belt,	she	drew	off	her	helm	and	ran	a	hand
through	her	hair.	‘Your	battle	with	the	Nah’ruk…’
‘Malazan	tactics,	Adjunct,	along	with	these	beasts,	gave	us	the	upper	hand.
We	annihilated	the	bastards.’
Something	changed	in	her	face,	but	nothing	he	could	work	out.	She
glanced	back	at	her	officers,	or	perhaps	the	army	waiting	beyond,	and	then
once	more	fixed	her	gaze	upon	him.	‘Shield	Anvil	Stormy,	this	creature	you
ride—’
‘Ve’Gath	Soldier,	Adjunct.	Only	three	bear	these…saddles.’
‘And	your	K’Chain	Che’Malle	army	–	I	see	Hunters	behind	you	as	well.
There	are	more	of	these	Ve’Gath?’
My	K’Chain	Che’Malle	army.	‘Aye,	lots.	We	got	a	bit	mauled,	to	be	sure.
Those	sky	keeps	gave	us	trouble,	but	some	unexpected	allies	arrived	to	take
’em	down.	That’s	what	I’m	here	to	tell	you,	Adjunct.	Sinn	and	Grub	found	us.


There	was	someone	else,	too.	Never	figured	out	who,	but	no	matter,	nobody
climbed	down	out	of	the	Azath	when	it	was	all	done	with,	so	I	doubt	they	made
it.’
He’d	just	thrown	enough	at	her	to	confuse	a	damned	ascendant.	Instead,	she
simply	studied	him,	and	then	asked,	‘Shield	Anvil,	you	now	command	an	army
of	K’Chain	Che’Malle?’
‘Aye,	and	our	two	runts	are	saying	they	have	to	stay	with	us,	unless	you
order	’em	back	to	you—’
‘No.’
Stormy	cursed	under	his	breath.	‘You	sure?	They’re	handy,	don’t	eat	much,
clean	up	after	themselves…mostly	–	well,	occasionally	–	but	with	plenty	of
back-of-the-hand	training,	why,	they’d	shape	up—’
‘Fist	Keneb	is	dead,’	she	cut	in.	‘We	have	also	lost	Quick	Ben,	and	most	of
the	marines	and	the	heavies.’
He	winced.	‘Them	Short-Tails	was	bleeding	when	they	found	us.	But	what
you’re	saying	tells	me	you	could	do	with	the	runts—’
‘No.	You	will	need	them	more	than	we	will.’
‘We	will?	Adjunct,	where	do	you	think	we’re	going?’
‘To	war.’
‘Against	who?’
‘“Whom”,	Shield	Anvil.	You	intend	to	wage	war	against	the	Forkrul
Assail.’
He	grimaced,	glanced	at	the	Fist	and	captains	positioned	behind	the
Adjunct.	Blistig,	Lostara	Yil,	Ruthan	Gudd.	That	miserable	ex-priest,	half
slumped	over	his	saddle.	His	attention	returned	to	the	Adjunct.	‘Now,	why
would	we	declare	war	on	the	Forkrul	Assail?’
‘Ask	the	runts.’
Stormy	sagged.	‘We	did	that.	They	ain’t	good	on	explanations,	those	two.
Grub’s	the	only	one	between	’em	who’ll	say	anything	to	us	at	all.	Oh,	Sinn
talks	just	fine,	when	it	suits	her.	Me	and	Ges,	we	was	hoping	you’d	be	more…
uh,	forthcoming.’
A	snort	from	Blistig.
Tavore	said,	‘Shield	Anvil,	inform	Mortal	Sword	Gesler	of	the	following.
The	Perish,	Letherii	and	Bolkando	armies	are	marching	on	the	Spire.	It	is	my
fear	that	even	such	a	formidable	force…will	not	be	enough.	The	sorcery	of	the
Assail	is	powerful	and	insidious,	especially	on	the	field	of	battle—’
‘Is	it	now,	Adjunct?’
She	blinked,	and	then	said,	‘I	have	spent	three	years	amidst	the	archives	of
Unta,	Stormy.	Reading	the	oldest	and	obscurest	histories	drawn	to	the	capital


from	the	further	reaches	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	I	have	interviewed	the	finest
scholars	I	could	find,	including	Heboric	Light-Touch,	on	matters	of
fragmented	references	to	the	Forkrul	Assail.’	She	hesitated,	and	then	continued.
‘I	know	what	awaits	us	all,	Shield	Anvil.	The	three	human	armies	you	now	see
marching	into	the	southeast	are…vulnerable.’
‘Where	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	are	not.’
She	shrugged.	‘Could	we	conjure	before	us,	here	and	now,	a	Forkrul
Assail,	do	you	imagine	it	could	command	your	Ve’Gath	to	surrender	its
weapons?	To	kneel?’
Stormy	grunted.	‘I’d	like	to	see	it	try.	But	what	of	the	runts?’
‘Safer	in	your	company	than	in	ours.’
He	narrowed	his	gaze	on	her.	‘What	is	it	you	mean	to	do	with	your
Bonehunters,	Adjunct?’
‘Split	the	enemy	forces,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘You	have	taken	a	savaging,	Adjunct—’
‘And	have	been	avenged	by	you	and	your	Che’Malle.’	She	took	a	step
closer,	dropping	her	voice.	‘Stormy,	when	news	of	your	victory	spreads
through	my	army,	much	that	haunts	it	now	will	fall	silent.	There	will	be	no
cheers	–	I	am	not	such	a	fool	as	to	expect	anything	like	that.	But,	at	the	very
least,	there	will	be	satisfaction.	Do	you	understand	me?’
‘Is	Fiddler—’
‘He	lives.’
‘Good.’	He	squinted	at	her.	‘You’ve	a	way	of	gathering	allies,	haven’t	you,
Adjunct?’
‘It	is	not	me,	Stormy,	it	is	the	cause	itself.’
‘I’d	agree	if	I	could	figure	out	what	that	cause	is	all	about.’
‘You	mentioned	a	Destriant—’
‘Aye,	I	did.’
‘Then	ask	that	one.’
‘We	did,	but	she	knows	even	less	than	we	do.’
Tavore	cocked	her	head.	‘Are	you	sure?’
‘Well,	she	gets	little	sleep.	Nightmares	every	night.’	He	clawed	fingers
through	his	beard,	‘Aw,	Hood	take	me…’
‘She	sees	the	fate	awaiting	us	all	should	we	fail,	Shield	Anvil.’
He	was	silent,	thinking	back,	crossing	a	thousand	leagues	of	memory	and
time.	Days	in	Aren,	ranks	milling,	recalcitrant	faces,	a	desperate	need	for
cohesion.	Armies	are	unruly	beasts.	You	took	us,	you	made	us	into	something,
but	none	of	us	knows	what,	or	even	what	for.	And	now	here	she	stood,	a	thin,
plain	woman.	Not	tall.	Not	imposing	in	any	way	at	all.	Except	for	the	cold	iron


in	her	bones.	‘Why	did	you	take	this	on,	Adjunct?’
She	settled	the	helm	back	on	her	head	and	fixed	the	clasps.	‘That’s	my
business.’
‘This	path	of	yours,’	he	asked,	resisting	her	dismissal,	‘where	did	it	start?
That	first	step,	when	was	it?	You	can	answer	me	that	one,	at	least.’
She	regarded	him.	‘Can	I?’
‘I’m	about	to	ride	back	to	Gesler,	Adjunct.	And	I	got	to	make	a	report.	I	got
to	tell	him	what	I	think	about	all	this.	So…give	me	something.’
She	looked	away,	studied	the	formed-up	ranks	of	her	army.	‘My	first	step?
Very	well.’
He	waited.
She	stood	as	if	carved	from	flawed	marble,	a	thing	in	profile	weeping	dust
–	but	no,	that	sense	was	emerging	from	deep	inside	his	own	soul,	as	if	he’d
found	a	mirror ’s	reflection	of	the	nondescript	woman	standing	before	him,
and	in	that	reflection	a	thousand	hidden	truths.
She	faced	him	again,	her	eyes	swallowed	by	the	shadow	of	the	helm’s	rim.
‘The	day,	Adjunct,	the	Paran	family	lost	its	only	son.’
The	answer	was	so	unexpected,	so	jarring,	that	Stormy	could	say	nothing.
Gods	below,	Tavore.	He	struggled	to	find	words,	any	words.	‘I	–	I	did	not	know
your	brother	had	died,	Adjunct—’
‘He	hasn’t,’	she	snapped,	turning	away.
Stormy	silently	cursed.	He’d	said	the	wrong	thing.	He’d	shown	his	own
stupidity,	his	own	lack	of	understanding.	Fine!	Maybe	I’m	not	Gesler!	Maybe	I
don’t	get	it—	A	gelid	breath	seemed	to	flow	through	him	then.	‘Adjunct!’	His
shout	drew	her	round.
‘What	is	it?’
He	drew	a	deep	breath,	and	then	said,	‘When	we	join	up	with	the	Perish	and
the	others,	who’s	in	overall	command?’
She	studied	him	briefly	before	replying,	‘There	will	be	a	Prince	of	Lether.
A	Mortal	Sword	of	the	Grey	Helms,	and	the	queen	of	Bolkando.’
‘Hood’s	breath!	I	don’t—’
‘Who	will	be	in	command,	Shield	Anvil?	You	and	Gesler.’
He	stared	at	her,	aghast,	and	then	bellowed,	‘Don’t	you	think	his	head’s
swelled	big	enough	yet?	You	ain’t	had	to	live	with	him!’
Her	tone	was	hard	and	cold.	‘Bear	in	mind	what	I	said	about	vulnerability,
Shield	Anvil,	and	be	sure	to	guard	your	own	back.’
‘Guard	–	what?’
‘One	last	thing,	Stormy.	Extend	my	condolences	to	Grub.	Inform	him,	if
you	think	it	will	help,	that	Fist	Keneb’s	death	was	one	of…singular	heroism.’


He	thought	he	heard	a	careful	choosing	of	words	in	that	statement.	No
matter.	Might	help,	as	much	as	such	shit	can,	with	that	stuff.	Worth	a	try,	I
suppose.	‘Adjunct?’
She	had	gathered	the	reins	of	her	horse	and	had	one	foot	in	the	stirrup.
‘Yes?’
‘Shall	we	meet	again?’
Tavore	Paran	hesitated,	and	what	might	have	been	a	faint	smile	curved	her
thin	lips.	She	swung	astride	her	horse.	‘Fare	you	well,	Shield	Anvil.’	A	pause,
and	then,	‘Stormy,	should	you	one	day	meet	my	brother…no,	never	mind.’
With	that	she	drew	her	horse	round	and	set	off	for	the	head	of	the	column.
Blistig	wheeled	in	behind	her,	as	did	Ruthan	Gudd	and	then	the	ex-priest	–
although	perhaps	with	him	it	was	more	a	matter	of	a	mount	content	to	follow
the	others.	Leaving	only	Lostara	Yil.
‘Stormy.’
‘Lostara.’
‘Quick	Ben	was	sure	you	and	Gesler	lived.’
‘Was	he	now?’
‘But	now	we’ve	lost	him.’
He	thought	about	that,	and	then	grinned.	‘Take	this	for	what	it’s	worth,
Lostara	Yil.	He	figured	we	were	alive	and	well.	He	was	right.	Now,	I’ve	got	this
feeling	he	ain’t	so	lost	as	you	might	think.	He’s	a	snake.	Always	was,	always
will	be.’
The	smile	she	flashed	him	almost	made	him	hesitate,	but	before	he	could
call	out	something	inviting	and	possibly	improper	she	was	riding	after	the
others.
Damn!	Smiles	like	that	don’t	land	on	me	every	day.
Scowling,	he	ordered	his	Ve’Gath	round	and	then	set	off	on	the	back	trail.
The	Hunters	and	drones	fell	into	his	wake.
One	of	the	tiny	birds	tried	landing	in	Stormy’s	beard.	His	curse	sent	it
screeching	away.


Book	Three

To	Charge	The	Spear

	


	

And	now	the	bold	historian
Wields	into	play	that	tome
Of	blistering	worth
Where	the	stern	monks
Cower	under	the	lash
And	through	the	high	window
The	ashes	of	heretics	drift
Down	in	purity’s	rain
See	the	truths	stitched	in	thread
Of	gold	across	hapless	skin
I	am	the	arbiter	of	lies
Who	will	cleanse	his	hand
In	copper	bowls	and	white	sand
But	the	spittle	on	his	lips
Gathers	the	host	to	another	tale
I	was	never	so	blind
To	not	feel	the	deep	tremble
Of	hidden	rivers	in	churning	torrent	Or	the	prickly	tear	of	quill’s
jab
I	will	tell	you	the	manner
Of	all	things	in	sure	proof
This	order’d	stone	row	–
Oh	spare	me	now	the	speckled	fists	This	princeps’	purge	and	prattle
I	live	in	mists	and	seething	cloud
And	the	breaths	of	the	unseen
Give	warmth	and	comfort	to	better	The	bleakest	days	to	come
And	I	will	carry	on	in	my
Uncertainty,	cowl’d	in	a	peace
Such	as	you	could	not	imagine
A	Life	in	Mists
Gothos	(?)


Chapter	Eight

Whatever	we’re	left	with
can	only	be	enough,
if	in	the	measure	of	things
nothing	is	cast	off,
discarded	on	the	wayside
in	the	strides	that	take	us	clear
beyond	the	smoke	and	grief
into	a	world	of	shocked	birth
opening	eyes	upon	a	sudden	light.
And	to	whirl	then	in	a	breath
to	see	all	that	we	have	done,
where	the	tombs	on	the	trail
lie	sealed	like	jewelled	memories
in	the	dusk	of	a	good	life’s	end,
and	not	one	footprint	beckons
upon	the	soft	snow	ahead,
but	feel	this	sweet	wind	caress.
A	season	crawls	from	earth
beneath	mantled	folds.
I	have	caught	a	glimpse,
a	hint	of	flared	mystery,
shapes	in	the	liquid	glare.
They	will	take	from	us
all	that	we	cradle	in	our	arms
and	the	burden	yielded
makes	feathers	of	my	hands,
and	the	voices	drifting	down
are	all	that	we’re	left	with
and	shall	for	ever	be	enough
You	Will	Take	My	Days
Fisher	kel	Tath


TO	SLITHER	BENEATH	THE	FISTS	OF	THE	WORLD.

Her	name	was	Thorl.	A	quiet	one,	with	watchful,	sad	eyes.
Bursting	from	the	cloud	of	Shards,	her	screams	sounded	like	laughter.	The
devouring	insects	clustered	where	her	eyes	had	been.	They	lunged	into	her
gaping	mouth,	the	welters	of	blood	from	shredded	lips	drawing	hundreds
more.
Saddic	cried	out	his	horror,	staggered	back	as	if	about	to	flee,	but	Badalle
snapped	out	one	hand	and	held	him	fast.	Panic	was	what	the	Shards	loved	most,
what	they	waited	for,	and	panic	was	what	had	taken	Thorl,	and	now	the	Shards
were	taking	her.
Blind,	the	girl	ran,	stumbling	on	the	jagged	crystals	that	tore	her	bared	feet.
Children	edged	closer	to	her,	and	Badalle	could	see	the	flatness	in	their
eyes	and	she	understood.
Strike	down,	fists,	still	we	slide	and	slither.	You	cannot	kill	us,	you	cannot
kill	the	memory	of	us.	We	remain,	to	remind	you	of	the	future	you	gave	us.	We
remain,	because	we	are	the	proof	of	your	crime.
Let	the	eaters	crowd	your	eyes.	Welcome	your	own	blindness,	as	if	it	was	a
gift	of	mercy.	And	that	could	well	be	laughter.	Dear	child,	you	could	well	be
laughing,	a	voice	of	memory.	Of	history,	even.	In	that	laugh,	all	the	ills	of	the
world.	In	that	laugh,	all	the	proofs	of	your	guilt.
Children	are	dying.	Still	dying.	For	ever	dying.
Thorl	fell,	her	screams	deadening	to	choking,	hacking	sounds	as	Shards
crawled	down	her	throat.	She	writhed,	and	then	twitched,	and	the	swarm	grew
sluggish,	feeding,	fattening.
Badalle	watched	the	children	close	in,	watched	their	hands	lunge	out,
snatching	wallowing	insects,	stuffing	them	into	eager	mouths.	We	go	round	and
round	and	this	is	the	story	of	the	world.	Do	not	flee	us.	Do	not	flee	this	moment,
this	scene.	Do	not	confuse	dislike	and	abhorrence	with	angry	denial	of	truths
you	do	not	wish	to	see.	I	accept	your	horror	and	expect	no	forgiveness.	But	if
you	deny,	I	name	you	coward.
And	I	have	had	my	fill	of	cowards.
She	blew	flies	from	her	lips,	and	glanced	at	Rutt.	He	clutched	Held,
weeping	without	tears.	Beyond	him	stretched	out	the	terrible	flat	waste	of	the
Glass	Desert.	Badalle	then	turned	back	to	study	the	Snake,	eyes	narrowing.
Torpor	unsuited	to	the	heat,	the	brightness	of	the	sky.	This	was	the	sluggish
motion	of	the	exhausted.	Your	fists	beat	us	senseless.	Your	fists	explode	with
reasons.	You	beat	us	out	of	fear.	Out	of	self-loathing.	You	beat	us	because	it
feels	good,	it	feels	good	to	pretend	and	to	forget,	and	every	time	your	fist	comes
down,	you	crush	a	little	more	guilt.


In	that	old	place	where	we	once	lived,	you	decried	those	who	beat	their
children.	Yet	see	what	you	have	done	to	the	world.
You	are	all	beaters	of	children.
‘Badalle,’	said	Rutt.
‘Yes,	Rutt.’	She	did	not	face	him	again,	not	yet.
‘We	have	few	days	left.	The	holes	of	water	are	gone.	We	cannot	even	go
back	–	we	will	never	make	it	back.	Badalle,	I	think	I	give	up	–	I	–	I’m	ready	to
give	up.’
Give	up.	‘Will	you	leave	Held	to	the	Shards?	To	the	Opals?’
She	heard	him	draw	a	sharp	breath.
‘They	will	not	touch	Held,’	he	whispered.
No,	they	won’t,	will	they.	‘Before	Held	became	Held,’	she	said,	‘Held	had
another	name,	and	that	name	was	Born.	Born	came	from	between	the	legs	of	a
woman,	a	mother.	Born	came	into	this	world	with	eyes	of	blue,	blue	as	this	sky,
and	blue	they	remain.	We	must	go	on,	Rutt.	We	must	live	to	see	the	day	when	a
new	colour	finds	Held’s	eyes,	when	Held	goes	back	to	being	Born.’
‘Badalle,’	he	whispered	behind	her.
‘You	don’t	have	to	understand,’	she	said.	‘We	don’t	know	who	that	mother
was.	We	don’t	know	who	the	new	mother	will	be.’
‘I’ve	seen,	at	night…’	he	faltered	then.	‘Badalle—’
‘The	older	ones,	yes,’	she	replied.	‘Our	own	mothers	and	fathers,	lying
together,	trying	to	make	babies.	We	can	only	go	back	to	what	we	knew,	to
whatever	we	remember	from	the	old	days.	We	make	it	all	happen	again,	even
though	we	know	it	didn’t	work	the	first	time,	it’s	all	we	know	to	do.’
‘Do	you	still	fly	in	your	dreams,	Badalle?’
‘We	have	to	go	on,	Rutt,	until	Held	stops	being	Held	and	becomes	Born.’
‘I	hear	her	crying	at	night.’
Her.	This	is	her	story:	Born	becomes	Held,	Held	becomes	Mother,	Mother
makes	Born,	Born	is	Held…	And	the	boys	who	are	now	fathers,	they	try	to	go
back,	back	inside,	every	night,	they	try	and	try.
Rutt,	we	all	cry	at	night.
‘We	need	to	walk,’	she	said,	turning	to	face	him	at	last.
His	visage	was	crumpled,	a	thing	of	slack	skin	and	ringed	eyes.	Broken
lips,	the	forehead	of	a	priest	who	doubts	his	own	faith.	His	hair	was	falling	out,
his	hands	looked	huge.
‘Held	says,	west,	Rutt.	West.’
‘There	is	nothing	there.’
There	is	a	great	family,	and	they	are	rich	in	all	things.	In	food.	In	water.
They	seek	us,	to	bless	us,	to	show	us	that	the	future	still	lives.	They	will	promise


to	us	that	future.	I	have	seen,	I	have	seen	it	all.	And	there	is	a	mother	who	leads
them,	and	all	her	children	she	holds	in	her	arms,	though	she	has	never	made	a
Born.	There	is	a	mother,	Rutt,	just	like	you.	And	soon,	the	child	in	her	arms	will
open	its	eyes.	‘I	dreamed	of	Held	last	night,	Rutt.’
‘You	did?’
‘Yes.	She	had	wings,	and	she	was	flying	away.	I	heard	her	voice	on	the
wind.’
‘Her	voice,	Badalle?	What	was	she	saying?	What	was	Held	saying?’
‘She	wasn’t	saying	anything,	Rutt.	She	was	laughing.’
	
Frost	limned	the	driftwood	heaped	along	the	strand,	and	the	chunks	of	ice	in
the	shallow	waters	of	the	bay	crunched	and	ground	as	the	rolling	waves	jostled
them.	Felash	hacked	out	the	last	of	her	morning	cough	and	then,	drawing	her
fur-lined	cloak	about	her	shoulders,	she	straightened	and	walked	over	to	where
her	handmaid	was	building	up	the	fire.	‘Have	you	prepared	my	breakfast?’
The	older	woman	gestured	to	the	strange	disc	of	sawn	tree	trunk	they	were
using	as	a	table,	where	waited	a	mug	of	herbal	tea	and	a	lit	hookah.
‘Excellent.	I	tell	you,	my	head	aches.	Mother ’s	sendings	are	clumsy	and
brutal.	Or	perhaps	it’s	just	Omtose	Phellack	that	is	so	harsh	–	like	this	infernal
ice	and	chill	plaguing	us.’	She	glanced	over	at	the	other	camp,	thirty	paces
along	the	beach,	and	frowned.	‘And	all	this	superstition!	Tipped	well	over	the
edge	into	blatant	rudeness,	in	my	opinion.’
‘The	sorcery	frightens	them,	Highness.’
‘Pah!	That	sorcery	saved	their	lives!	You	would	think	gratitude	should
trump	petty	terrors	and	imagined	bugaboos.	Dear	me,	what	a	pathetic	gaggle	of
hens	they	all	are.’	She	settled	down	on	a	log,	careful	to	avoid	the	strange	iron
bolts	jutting	from	it.	Sipped	some	tea,	and	then	reached	for	the	hookah’s
artfully	carved	ivory	mouthpiece.	Puffing	contentedly,	she	twisted	to	eye	the
ship	frozen	in	the	bay.	‘Look	at	that.	The	only	thing	keeping	it	afloat	is	the
iceberg	it’s	nesting	in.’
‘Alas,	Highness,	that	is	probably	the	very	source	of	their	present
discontent.	They	are	sailors	stranded	on	land.	Even	the	captain	and	her	first
mate	are	showing	their	despondency.’
‘Well,’	Felash	sniffed,	‘we	must	make	do	with	what	we	have,	mustn’t	we?
In	any	case,	there’s	nothing	to	be	done	for	it,	is	there?	That	ship	is	finished.	We
must	now	trek	overland,	and	how	my	feet	will	survive	this	I	dare	not
contemplate.’
She	turned	in	her	seat	to	see	Shurq	Elalle	and	Skorgen	Kaban	approaching,


the	first	mate	cursing	as	he	stumbled	in	the	sand.
‘Captain!	Join	me	in	some	tea.	You	too,	Skorgen,	please.’	She	faced	her
handmaid.	‘Fetch	us	more	cups,	will	you?	Excellent.’
‘Beru	bless	us,’	Skorgen	hissed.	‘Ten	paces	away	and	the	heat’s	melting	us
where	we	stand,	but	here—’
‘That	will	fade,	I	am	sure,’	said	Felash.	‘The	sorcery	of	yesterday	was,
shall	we	say,	rather	intense.	And	before	you	complain	overmuch,	I	shall
observe	that	my	maid	and	I	are	no	less	discomforted	by	this	wretched	cold.
Perhaps	the	Jaghut	were	delighted	to	dwell	within	such	a	climate,	but	as	you
can	well	see,	we	are	not	Jaghut.’
Shurq	Elalle	said,	‘Highness,	about	my	ship…’
Felash	drew	deeply	on	her	mouthpiece,	‘Yes,’	she	sighed.	‘That.	I	believe	I
have	apologized	already,	have	I	not?	It	is	perhaps	a	consequence	of	insufficient
education,	but	I	truly	was	unaware	that	all	ships	carry	in	their	bellies	a	certain
amount	of	water,	considered	acceptable	for	voyaging.	And	that	the	freezing
thereof	would	result	in	disaster,	in	the	manner	of	split	boards	and	so	forth.
Besides,	was	not	your	crew	working	the	pumps?’
‘As	you	say,’	Shurq	said.	‘But	a	hundred	hands	below	deck	could	not	have
pumped	fast	enough,	given	the	speed	of	that	freezing.	But	that	was	not	my	point
–	as	you	noted,	we	have	been	through	all	that.	Bad	luck,	plain	and	simple.	No,
what	I	wished	to	discuss	was	the	matter	of	repairs.’
Felash	regarded	the	pale-skinned	woman,	and	slowly	tapped	the
mouthpiece	against	her	teeth.	‘In	the	midst	of	your	histrionics	two	days	ago,
Captain,	I	had	assumed	that	all	was	lost	in	the	matter	of	the	Undying	Gratitude.
Have	you	reconsidered?’
‘Yes.	No.	Rather,	we	have	walked	this	beach.	The	driftwood	is	useless.	The
few	logs	we	found	were	heavy	as	granite	–	Mael	knows	what	they	used	that
damned	stuff	for,	but	it	sure	doesn’t	float.	In	fact,	it	appears	to	have	neutral
buoyancy—’
‘Excuse	me,	what?’
‘Push	that	wood	to	any	depth	you	like,	there	it	stays.	Never	before	seen	the
like.	We	have	a	ex-joiner	with	us	who	says	it’s	to	do	with	the	minerals	the	wood
has	absorbed,	and	the	soil	the	tree	grew	in.	In	any	case,	we	see	no	forests	inland
–	no	trees	at	all,	anywhere.’
‘Meaning	you	have	no	wood	with	which	to	effect	repairs.	Yes,	Captain,	was
this	not	your	prediction	two	days	ago?’
‘Aye,	it	was,	and	so	it	has	proved,	Highness.	And	as	my	crew	can’t	survive
on	a	frozen	ship,	on	the	surface	of	it	we	seem	to	indeed	be	stranded.’
Skorgen	kicked	sand	with	his	good	foot.	‘What’s	worse,	Highness,	there’s


hardly	any	shellfish	an’	the	like	in	the	shallows.	Picked	clean	long	ago,	I’d
wager.	We	couldn’t	even	walk	up	the	coast	t’get	where	you	want	us	to	go.’
‘Most	disturbing,’	Felash	murmured,	still	eyeing	Shurq	Elalle.	‘Yet	you
have	an	idea,	haven’t	you,	Captain?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Please,	proceed.	I	am	not	by	nature	averse	to	adventure	and
experimentation.’
‘Aye,	Highness.’	Still,	the	woman	hesitated.
Felash	sent	a	stream	of	smoke	whirling	away.	‘Come	now,	Captain,	your
first	mate	is	turning	blue.’
‘Very	well.	Omtose	Phellack,	Highness	–	is	it	a	true	Hold?’
‘I	am	not	sure	what	you	mean	by	that	question.’
‘A	Hold.	A	place,	a	world	unlike	this	one—’
‘Where,’	added	Skorgen,	‘we	might	find,	er,	trees.	Or	something.	Unless
it’s	all	ice	and	snow,	of	course,	or	worse.’
‘Ah,	I	see.’	She	tapped	some	more,	thinking.	‘The	Hold	of	Ice,	well,
precisely.	The	sorcery	–	as	we	have	all	discovered	–	is	certainly…cold.
Forbidding,	even.	But	if	my	education	suffers	in	matters	of	ship	building	and
the	like,	it	is	rather	more	comprehensive	when	it	comes	to	the	Holds.’	She
smiled.	‘Naturally.’
‘Naturally,’	said	Shurq	Elalle,	to	cut	off	whatever	Skorgen	had	been	about
to	say.
‘The	commonest	manifestation	of	Omtose	Phellack	is	precisely	as	we	have
experienced.	Ice.	Bitter	cold,	desiccating,	enervating.	But	it	must	be	understood,
said	sorcery	was	shaped	as	a	defensive	weapon,	if	you	will.	The	Jaghut	were	at
war	with	an	implacable	enemy,	and	they	were	losing	that	war.	They	sought	to
surround	themselves	in	vast	sheets	of	ice,	to	make	of	it	an	impassable	barrier.
And	as	often	as	not	they	succeeded…for	a	time.	Of	course,	as	my	mother	used
to	delight	in	pointing	out,	war	drives	invention,	and	as	soon	as	one	side
improves	its	tactical	position,	the	other	quickly	adapts	to	negate	the	advantage
–	assuming	they	have	the	time	to	do	so.	Interestingly,	one	could	argue	it	was
the	Jaghut’s	very	own	flaws	that	ensured	their	demise.	For,	had	they	considered
ice	not	as	a	defensive	measure,	but	as	an	offensive	one	–	had	they	made	it	a	true
weapon,	a	force	of	attack	and	assault	–	why,	they	might	well	have	annihilated
their	enemy	before	it	could	adapt.	And	while	details	regarding	that	enemy	are
murky—’
‘Forgive	me,	Highness,’	interrupted	the	captain.	‘But,	as	you	noted	earlier,
my	first	mate	is	truly	suffering.	If	I	am	understanding	you,	the	ice	and	cold	of
Omtose	Phellack	are	mere	aspects,	or,	I	suppose,	applications	of	a	force.	And,


as	such,	they	are	not	that	force’s	sole	characteristic.’
Felash	clapped	her	hands.	‘Precisely,	Captain!	Excellent!’
‘Very	well,	Highness.	I	am	so	relieved.	Now,	as	to	those	other	aspects	of
the	Hold,	what	can	you	tell	me?’
Felash	blinked	up	at	the	woman.	‘Why,	nothing.’
‘Nothing?’
‘Not	a	thing,	Captain.	The	only	manifestation	of	Omtose	Phellack	this
world	has	seen	has	been	ice-aspected.’
‘Then	how	do	you	know	there’s	more	to	it?’
‘Captain,	it	only	stands	to	reason.’
‘So,	this	notion	of	there	being	more,	it’s	merely…theoretical?’
‘Dearest,	that	term	is	not	pejorative,	no	matter	the	tone	you	have	just
employed.’
Teeth	chattering,	Skorgen	Kaban	said,	‘So	I	stood	here	for	that?	You	ain’t
got	a	Mael-spitting	clue?’
‘Hardly	accurate,	First	Mate,’	Felash	said.	‘It	would	hardly	have	served	any
of	us	if	I’d	simply	said,	“I	don’t	know”,	would	it?	Instead,	what	I	have	actually
said	is,	“I	don’t	know,	but	I	believe	this	to	be	a	path	worth	pursuing.”’
‘So	why	didn’t	you?’	he	demanded.
‘But	I	did!’
Shurq	Elalle	turned	to	Skorgen.	‘That’s	enough,	Pretty.	Go	back	to	the
others.’
‘An’	tell	’em	what?’
‘We’re…exploring	possibilities.’
Felash	waved	one	plump	hand.	‘A	moment,	please.	I	suggest	that	you	both
return	to	your	fellows.	The	explorations	that	will	occupy	me	on	this	day	are
best	done	alone,	for	I	cannot	guarantee	the	safety	of	anyone	in	close	proximity.
In	fact,	I	suggest	you	move	your	camp	perhaps	twice	its	present	distance	from
us.’
‘Very	well,	Highness,’	said	Shurq	Elalle.	‘We	shall	do	that.’
As	they	marched	off,	Felash	turned	to	her	handmaid.	‘My	dear,’	she
murmured,	‘a	journey	awaits	you.’
‘Yes,	Highness.’
‘Gird	yourself	well,’	Felash	advised.	‘Prepare	the	armour	and	take	the
throwing	axes.	And	you	will	need	to	swim	out	to	the	ship,	for	a	splinter	of
wood.	But	before	all	that,	I	wish	a	new	pot	of	tea,	and	more	rustleaf	for	this
bowl.’
‘At	once,	Highness.’


	
‘Gods	below,’	Shurq	Elalle	muttered	as	they	neared	the	crew’s	camp,	‘but	she
has	spectacular	tits.	It	ever	amazes	me	the	extraordinary	variation	blessing	us
all.’	She	glanced	at	her	first	mate.	‘Or	cursing	us,	as	the	case	may	be.’
‘I	wanted	to	stick	a	damned	knife	in	her	skull,	Cap’n.’
‘Belay	such	notions,	and	stow	them	deep	and	dark	–	if	one	of	the	mates
hears	you,	well,	I	don’t	want	that	kind	of	trouble.’
‘Of	course,	Cap’n.	Was	just	an	impulse,	anyway,	like	a	tic	under	the	eye.
Anyway,	how	could	you	see	her	tits	at	all,	under	all	those	warm	furs	and	such?’
‘I	could	see	just	fine,’	Shurq	replied.	‘It’s	called	imagination,	Pretty.’
‘Wish	I	had	some	of	that.’
‘In	the	meantime,	we	need	to	allay	some	fears,	and	I	expect	moving	us
farther	down	the	strand	will	put	us	in	good	stead	right	from	the	start.’
‘Aye,	it	will.’	He	scratched	at	the	scars	puckering	his	neck.	‘You	know,
Cap’n,	I	got	me	a	smell	that’s	saying	that	handmaiden	of	hers	ain’t	as	useless	as
she’s	made	out	to	look,	you	know?’
‘Brewing	pots	and	lighting	pipe	bowls	doesn’t	count	for	anything	with
you,	Pretty?	I	tell	you,	I’m	considering	finding	my	own	handmaiden	once	we
get	home.	Of	course,’	she	added,	‘there’s	no	rule	says	it	has	to	be	a	woman,	is
there?’
A	flush	crept	up	the	man’s	misshapen	face.
Shurq	clapped	him	on	the	back.	‘You’re	right	about	her,	Pretty.	I’m
thinking	she’s	as	mean	a	sorceress	as	the	Princess	herself,	and	probably	a	lot
more	besides.	That	woman	hides	herself	well,	but	one	glimpse	of	her	wrists…
well,	unless	she’s	throwing	bales	of	hay	around	when	no	one’s	looking	–	and
given	the	scars	on	her	hands	those	bales	got	knives	in	them	–	well,	aye,	she’s
more	than	she	seems.’
‘What’s	her	name	anyway?’
‘No	idea.’	Shurq	grunted.	The	sailors	at	the	camp	were	watching	them	now.
‘All	right,	Pretty,	let	me	do	the	talking.’
‘Aye,	Cap’n,	better	you’n	me.’
‘And	if	I	mess	up,	you	can	beat	on	some	heads.’
‘T’bring	’em	round,	like.’
‘Exactly.’
	
Cool	beneath	the	umbrella,	Felash	watched	her	handmaid	crawl	up	from	the
water.	‘You	need	more	fat	on	you,	dear,’	she	observed.	‘I’m	sure	the	sun	will


warm	you	up	soon	enough,	as	it	has	done	me.	In	any	case,’	she	gestured	with
the	mouthpiece,	‘the	passage	awaits	you.’
Gasping,	the	older	woman	slowly	worked	her	way	well	clear	of	the	water
line.	In	her	right	hand	was	a	splinter	of	wood,	black	against	her	bluish
knuckles.	Behind	her,	in	the	shallows,	the	ice	was	fast	melting	as	the	last
remnants	of	Omtose	Phellack	faded.	At	the	bay’s	outer	edge,	where	the	shelf
fell	away	to	deeper	water,	the	Undying	Gratitude	was	settling	lower	into	her
glittering,	weeping	nest.
Once	the	handmaid	had	recovered	enough	to	begin	moving,	she	dressed
herself	in	quilted	undergarments	and	then	the	heavy	scaled	armour	retrieved
from	bundles	of	waxed	canvas.	Taking	up	the	paired	throwing	axes,	a	leathersheathed	short	sword,	an	underarm	holster	of	four	throwing	knives,	and	her
helm,	she	completed	her	attire	by	tucking	the	wood	splinter	into	her	belt.
‘Highness,	I	am	ready.’
‘Well	said.	My	patience	was	wearing	ominously	thin.’	Sighing,	Felash	set
the	mouthpiece	down	and	rose.	‘Where	did	you	put	the	last	of	the	sweets?’
‘Beside	the	brick	of	rustleaf,	Highness.’
‘Ah,	I	see.	Wonderful.	See	how	thin	I’m	getting?	It’s	an	outrage.	Do	you
recall	your	own	childhood,	dear,	when	your	chest	was	flat	and	all	your	bones
jutted	every	which	way?’
‘No,	Highness,	I	was	never	boy-thin,	thank	the	Errant’s	nudge.’
‘Nor	me.	I	have	always	been	suspicious	of	grown	men	who	seem	to	like
that	in	their	women.	What’s	wrong	with	little	boys	if	they’re	into	pallid	bony
wraiths?’
‘Perhaps	it	appeals	to	their	protective	natures,	Highness.’
‘Protecting	is	one	thing,	diddling	is	entirely	another.	Now,	where	was	I?
Oh	yes,	throwing	you	into	the	Hold	of	Ice.	Best	unsheathe	at	least	a	few	of	your
weapons,	dear.	Who	knows	what	you’ll	land	in.’
The	handmaid	drew	her	axes.	‘I	am	ready.’
	
‘…that	condescending,	patronizing	cow	doesn’t	deserve	tits	like	that,	or	that
soft	blemish-free	skin	and	lustrous	hair.	And	the	way	those	hips	swing,	why,
I’m	amazed	she	doesn’t	throw	out	her	back	with	every	step,	and	those	damned
luscious	lips	look	ready	made	to	wrap	themselves	round—	Gods,	what	was
that?’
The	thunderclap	shivered	the	water	in	the	bay,	set	the	sand	to	blurry
trembling.	Shurq	Elalle	turned	to	see	an	enormous	white	cloud	billowing	out
and	up	from	Felash’s	camp.	The	sailors	–	well	out	of	earshot	behind	her	–	were


now	on	their	feet,	shouting	in	alarm.
‘Stay	here,	Skorgen.	And	calm	those	fools	down!’	She	set	off	at	a	run.
The	camp	was	a	mess,	gear	flung	about	as	if	a	whirlwind	had	erupted	in	its
midst.	Princess	Felash	was	slowly	picking	herself	up	from	the	blasted	sand.
Her	hair	was	awry,	her	clothes	dishevelled.	Her	face	was	red,	as	if	she’d	been
repeatedly	slapped.
‘Highness,	are	you	all	right?’
The	girl	coughed.	‘I	believe	the	theory	has	proved	itself,	Captain.	It	seems
there	is	far	more	to	Omtose	Phellack	than	a	few	chunks	of	ice.	The	passage	I
found,	well,	it’s	hard	to	say	where	precisely	it	led—’
‘Where	is	your	handmaiden,	Highness?’
‘Well,	let	us	hope	she	is	exploring	in	wonder	and	delight.’
‘You	sent	her	through?’
A	flash	from	her	stunning	eyes.	‘Of	course	I	sent	her	through!	Did	you	not
insist	on	the	necessity,	given	our	terrible	plight?	Can	you	begin	to	imagine	my
sacrifice,	the	appalling	extremity	of	the	service	we	are	providing	here?’
Shurq	Elalle	studied	the	plump	girl.	‘What	if	she	doesn’t	come	back?’
‘I	shall	be	most	displeased.	At	the	same	time,	we	shall	have	before	us
evidence	to	support	certain	other	theories	about	Omtose	Phellack.’
‘Excuse	me,	what	other	theories?’
‘Why,	the	ones	about	shrieking	demons,	clouds	of	madness,	flesh-eating
plants,	treacherous	voles	and	a	hundred	other	nightmares	in	a	similar	vein.
Now,	please	be	so	kind	as	to	rebuild	my	fire	here,	will	you?’
	
She	reached	for	her	last	throwing	knife,	found	the	sheath	empty.	Cursing,	she
ducked	beneath	the	scything	slash	and	threw	herself	to	the	left,	shoulder-rolling
until	she	came	up	against	the	bulk	of	the	first	fiend	she’d	slain.	Her	hands
scrabbled	up	its	muricated	hide,	found	the	wedge	of	one	of	her	axes.	Grunting
as	she	tugged	it	free,	she	rolled	over	the	body	–	it	quivered	as	six	swords
punched	into	it	in	the	spot	where	she’d	been	a	moment	earlier	–	and	regained
her	feet	in	time	to	send	the	axe	flying.
It	crunched	into	the	demon’s	brow,	rocking	its	head	back.
She	lunged	for	it,	tugging	away	one	of	the	heavy	swords	gripped	by	the
closest	hand,	which	was	twitching	as	the	huge	beast	sagged	on	to	its	knees.
Blade	clashing	as	she	beat	away	the	swords	flailing	about	at	the	ends	of	the	five
other	arms,	she	chopped	into	its	thick	neck,	once,	twice,	three	times,	until	the
head	rolled	free.
Spinning,	she	looked	for	more	of	the	damned	things.	Five	corpses	and


nothing	more.	Apart	from	her	heavy	breaths,	the	glade	was	silent.
From	one	fire	straight	into	another	–	she’d	landed	in	the	middle	of	a	camp
–	and	it	was	her	luck	that	she’d	been	ready	when	they	clearly	were	not.	The	fire
burned	on	here	and	there,	where	the	hottest	embers	had	scattered.	If	she	was	not
careful,	she’d	end	up	burning	down	the	forest	–	and	all	the	wood	the	captain
and	her	crew	sorely	needed.
The	handmaid	retrieved	her	weapons,	and	then	stamped	out	the
smouldering	flames.
She	cursed	as	something	bit	into	the	back	of	her	neck.	Scrabbling	with	one
hand,	she	closed	her	fist	about	something	small	and	furry,	brought	it	round	for
a	closer	look.	A	vole,	with	a	mouthful	of	her	flesh.	Snorting,	she	flung	the
thing	away.
‘Well,	Highness,’	she	muttered,	‘seems	I’ve	found	some	trees.’
Some	beast	shrieked	close	by,	and	the	cry	was	echoed	by	a	half-dozen
more,	surrounding	the	glade,	drawing	closer.
‘Errant’s	bunghole,	those	things	sound	vicious.’
Pointless	hanging	around	here,	she	decided.	Choosing	a	direction	at
random,	she	ducked	into	the	forest.
Absurdly	dark,	and	the	air	was	damp	and	cold.	Plunging	forward,	she	held
her	axes	at	the	ready.	A	shriek	sounded	directly	behind	her	and	she	whirled
round.	Something	skittered	on	the	forest	floor.	Another	damned	vole.	She
watched	it	pause,	tilt	its	head	back,	and	loose	another	curdling	shriek.
A	short	time	later	she’d	left	the	voracious	things	behind.	The	huge	boles	of
the	trees	thinned	out,	with	more	undergrowth	now	impeding	her	way.	She
caught	glimpses	of	the	sky,	a	sweep	of	stars,	no	moon.	A	dozen	paces	ahead	the
ground	fell	away.	She	came	to	the	edge,	looked	down	into	a	ravine	crowded
with	treefall,	the	trunks	grey	as	bones.
Clumps	of	low	fog	wandered	the	length	of	the	channel,	glowing	like
swamp	gas.
The	channel	was	the	product	of	flash	flooding,	and	those	trees	had	been
savagely	uprooted,	flung	down	and	carried	along	in	the	tumult.	Studying	the
wreckage,	she	caught	a	shape	in	the	ravine’s	gloom,	twenty	or	so	paces
downstream.	At	first	she’d	assumed	it	was	a	barrier	of	knotted	branches	and
trees,	but	that	detritus	had	fetched	up	against	something	else…a	hull.
She	drew	out	the	splinter	of	wood	in	her	belt.	It	seemed	to	be	sweating	in
her	hand.
Boots	skidding,	she	half	slid,	half	stumbled	down	the	steep	bank	of	the
ravine.	Avoiding	the	fog	as	best	she	could,	she	clambered	and	climbed	her	way
closer	to	the	ship.	How	it	has	made	it	this	far	down	this	treacherous,	winding


channel	without	being	torn	to	pieces	was	something	of	a	mystery,	but	she	knew
enough	to	trust	this	sorcerous	link.	Whatever	shape	it	was	in,	there	would	be
enough	of	it	to	be	of	some	use.
At	last	she	reached	the	hull,	set	her	hand	against	it.	Not	rotten.	She	thumped
it,	was	rewarded	with	a	faint	hollow	sound.	Five	arm-spans	above	her	was	an
ornately	carved	gunnel,	the	heavy	rail	formed	in	the	shape	of	entwining
serpents	running	the	length	of	the	ship	–	which	she	judged	to	be	somewhere
between	fifteen	and	twenty	paces.
She	glanced	down	then,	to	see	the	fog	rising	up	to	swallow	her	knees.	And
in	that	fog,	small	clawed	hands	reached	out	to	grasp	her	thighs,	the	talons
stabbing	deep,	the	limbs	writhing	like	worms.	Gasping	at	the	pain,	she	pulled
out	her	sword	and	began	hacking.
Her	thighs	were	shredded	and	streaming	blood	by	the	time	she	cut	herself
loose	and	worked	her	way	up	the	side	of	the	hull,	using	the	clutter	of	trees	and
branches	for	foot-	and	handholds.	Gasping,	she	lifted	herself	over	the	gunnel
and	thumped	down	on	the	slanted	deck.
And	found	herself	in	the	midst	of	a	squall	of	black-haired,	scaled	apes.
Howling,	the	dog-sized	creatures	bared	dagger-long	fangs,	eyes	flashing	lurid
yellow,	and	raised	their	knotted	clubs.	Then	they	rushed	her.
From	somewhere	up	the	length	of	ravine,	there	came	a	deep,	rumbling
roar.	But	she	had	no	time	to	think	about	that.

‘My	ootooloo	thinks	this	is	sex	–	how	strange.’
Felash	glanced	sidelong	at	the	captain,	her	lids	slowly	settling	in	a	lazy
blink.	‘Back	in	the	palace,	there	are	exquisite	mouthpieces	carved	in	the
semblance	of	a	penis.’	She	gestured	with	one	hand.	‘All	part	of	a	princess’s
education—’
Shurq	set	the	mouthpiece	down.	‘Enough	of	that,	I	think,	Highness.	I	leave
you	to	your…devices.’
‘Adventure	arrives	in	all	manner	of	guises,	Captain.	Had	your	ootooloo	a
brain,	I	am	sure	it	would	most	avidly	concur.’
‘But	that’s	the	whole	point	about,	er,	desire.	It’s	mostly	brainless.	Most	of
the	world’s	tragedy	is	found	in	this	one	misunderstanding.	We	tie	too	much	to
it,	you	see.	Things	like	loyalty	and	precious	intimacy,	love	and	possession,	and
sooner	or	later	it	all	goes	wrong.	Why,	I	knew	men	–	and	I	do	mean	“knew”	–
who’d	come	to	me	twice	a	week	hungry	for	the	brainless	stuff,	and	afterwards


they’d	babble	on	about	their	wives.’
‘What	would	they	tell	you?	Please,	I	must	know.’
‘Starved	for	gossip,	are	you?’
‘The	palace	seems	terribly	far	away	at	the	moment.’
‘Just	so,	Highness.	Well.	Some	would	tell	me	about	all	the	sorcery	of	love
being	gone	between	them,	the	embers	of	desire	cold	as	stone	now.	Others
would	complain	about	how	complicated	it	had	all	become,	or	how	rote,	or	how
fraught.	And	still	more	would	talk	of	their	wives	as	if	they	were	possessions,	to
be	used	when	it	suited	the	men	and	otherwise	left	alone,	but	the	very	notion	of
those	wives	perhaps	doing	what	the	husband	happened	to	be	doing	–	there	with
me	–	well,	that	could	light	a	murderous	rage	in	their	eyes.’
‘So,	while	being	with	you,	most	of	them	still	missed	the	point?’
‘Very	astute,	Highness.	Yes,	they	missed	the	point	entirely.’
‘Because	what	you	offered	was	sex	without	complications.’
‘Exactly.’
‘Brainless.’
‘Yes.	And	that	freed	them,	and	freedom	made	them	happy	–	or	anyway
forgetful	–	at	least	for	a	short	time.	But	once	the	flush	was	past,	well,	that	old
world	and	all	its	chains	just	came	rattling	back	down.	They’d	leave	as	if	they
were	condemned	to	swim	the	canal.’
‘You	have	led	a	varied	and	extraordinary	life,	Captain.’
‘Life?	Wrong	word,	Highness.’
‘Oh,	one	doesn’t	have	to	be	breathing	to	be	alive	–	and	before	you
comment	on	how	ridiculously	obvious	that	statement	seems,	I	do	implore	you
to	give	it	a	second	consideration,	as	I	was	not	referring	to	your	condition.’
‘Then	I	am	indeed	curious	as	to	what	you	might	mean,	Highness.’
‘In	my	years	of	education,	I	have—’
A	roar	drowned	out	her	next	words,	and	they	swung	round	to	see	a	torrent
of	muddy,	foaming	water	pounding	into	the	bay	just	beyond	the	shallows.
Rushing	from	a	gaping	wound	almost	swallowed	in	gouts	of	steam,	the	flood
thundered	aside	the	slabs	of	floating	ice,	clearing	a	broad	swathe.	A	moment
later	what	seemed	half	a	forest	exploded	out	from	the	wound,	snapped
branches	and	sundered	trees,	and	then	the	prow	of	a	ship	lunged	into	view,
outward	like	a	thrust	fist,	and	then	plunging	down	to	the	bay’s	churning	waters.
The	raucous	flow	drove	the	ship	straight	for	the	reef.
‘Errant’s	bitch!’	swore	Shurq	Elalle.
Abruptly,	in	wallows	of	spume	and	steam,	the	ship	heeled,	came	about,	and
they	saw	a	figure	at	the	stern	rudder,	pushing	hard	against	the	current.
The	wound	thundered	shut,	cutting	off	the	wild	flow.	Branches	and	logs


skirled	in	the	spinning	water.
Felash	watched	the	captain	run	into	the	shallows.
The	strange	ship	had	crunched	briefly	against	the	coral	shelf	before
pulling	clear.	It	was	fortunate,	the	princess	decided,	that	the	seas	were	calm,	but
it	was	obvious	that	one	woman	alone	could	not	manage	the	craft,	and	that
disaster	still	loomed.	Glancing	to	the	right,	she	saw	the	crew	pelting	along	the
strand,	clearly	intent	on	joining	the	captain.
Felash	looked	back	to	the	ship.	‘Dearie,	couldn’t	you	have	found	a	prettier
one?’
	
Spitting	out	silty	water,	Shurq	Elalle	pulled	herself	on	to	the	deck.	Something
slimy	beneath	her	boots	sent	her	down	on	to	her	backside	with	a	thump.	She
held	up	one	palm.	Blood.	Lots	and	lots	of	blood.	Swearing,	she	regained	her
feet	and	made	for	the	bow.	‘Is	there	an	anchor?’	she	shouted.	‘Where’s	the
damned	anchor?’
From	the	stern,	the	handmaid	yelled	back,	‘How	should	I	know?’
Shurq	saw	her	crew	now	plunging	into	the	shallows.	Good.
‘We’re	drifting	back	to	that	reef,’	the	handmaiden	cried.	‘How	do	I	stop	it
doing	that?’
‘With	a	damned	anchor,	you	stupid	cow!’
Failing	to	find	anything,	and	feeling	somewhat	bad	about	her	outburst,
Shurq	turned	about	and	began	making	her	way	back	to	the	stern.	One	clear
look	at	the	handmaiden	stopped	her	in	her	tracks.	‘Gods,	woman,	what
happened	to	you?’
‘It’s	the	damned	voles,’	she	snarled.	‘This	–	that	thing	–	is	that	what	you
call	a	sea-anchor?’
Shurq	forced	her	eyes	away	from	the	woman	to	where	she	was	pointing.
‘Mael’s	kiss,	aye,	it	is!’	Five	quick	steps	along	she	halted	yet	again.	‘Is	that
water	I’m	hearing	below?	Are	we	taking	on	water?’
The	handmaiden	leaned	on	the	rudder ’s	handle	and	looked	over	with	redshot,	exhausted	eyes.	‘You’re	asking	me,	Captain?’
Shurq	whirled,	reached	the	landward	gunnel.	Glared	down	at	her	thrashing
crew.	‘Get	aboard,	you	lazy	pigs!	Man	the	pumps!	Fast!’
Back	on	shore,	Felash	settled	down	on	the	log,	careful	once	more	to	avoid
the	iron	spikes.	Drawing	on	her	hookah,	she	watched	the	antics	with	some
contentment.	As	she	exhaled	a	stream	of	smoke,	she	heard	and	felt	a	rattle	in
her	throat.
Almost	time	for	her	afternoon	cough.


	
He	kicked	his	way	through	the	clutter,	the	crumpled	helms,	the	crushed	iron
scales,	the	bones	that	crumbled	into	dust	and	lifted	grey	clouds	to	swirl	about
his	legs.	Ahead,	across	an	expanse	of	level	land	buried	in	corpses,	was	a
mound	of	the	same	twisted	bodies,	and	from	the	top	of	that	mound	rose	the
trunks	of	two	trees,	bound	at	the	centre	to	form	an	upright	X.	The	remnants	of
a	body	hung	from	it,	flesh	in	shreds,	black	hair	hanging	down	over	the
desiccated	face.
Silchas	Ruin	could	see,	even	from	this	distance,	the	long-shafted	arrow
buried	in	the	figure’s	forehead.
Here,	in	this	place,	realms	folded	one	upon	another.	Chaos	and	madness	in
such	profusion	as	to	stain	time	itself,	holding	horror	in	an	implacable	grip.
Here,	the	skin	of	a	hundred	worlds	bore	the	same	seared	brand.	He	did	not
know	what	had	happened	at	this	battle	–	this	slaughter	–	to	leave	such	a	legacy,
nor	even	the	particular	world	in	which	the	actual	event	had	taken	place.
He	slowly	crossed	the	killing	field,	towards	the	mound	and	its	grisly
shrine.
Other	figures	moved	about,	walking	as	if	lost,	as	if	seeking	friends	amidst
the	faceless	thousands.	At	first	he’d	thought	them	ghosts,	but	they	were	not
ghosts.	They	were	gods.
His	passage	caught	the	attention	of	one,	and	then	another,	and	then	still
more.	Some	simply	looked	away	again,	resuming	whatever	it	was	they	were
doing.	A	few	set	out	to	intercept	him.	As	they	drew	closer,	he	heard	their
voices,	their	thoughts.
‘A	stranger.	Interloper.	This	is	not	his	world,	this	is	not	his	curse,	this	is
nothing	to	him.’
‘He	comes	to	mock	us,	the	fragments	of	us	snared	here.’
‘He	does	not	even	hear	the	cries	that	so	deafen	us,	all	these	chains	of
desire…’
‘And	despair,	Shedenul,	so	much	despair…’
Silchas	Ruin	reached	the	base	of	the	mound,	studied	the	twisted	bodies
before	him,	a	steep	slope	of	solid	bone,	leathery	flesh,	armour	and	shattered
weapons.
A	half-dozen	gods	gathered	around	him.
‘Tiste	Liosan?’
‘No,	Beru.	Tiste	Andii.	His	white	skin	mocks	the	darkness	within	him.’
‘Does	he	belong	in	the	war?	He	is	dangerous.	We	don’t	want	him	anywhere
near	us	when	we	slay	the	Fallen	One.	When	we	feed	and	so	free	ourselves—’


‘Free?’	growled	one	in	a	thick,	heavy	voice.	‘Mowri,	from	the	legacy	of	our
followers	we	shall	never	be	free.	This	is	the	bargain	we	made—’
‘I	made	no	such	bargain,	Dessembrae!’
‘Nevertheless,	Beru.	Mortal	desire	gave	us	shape.	Mortal	desire	dragged	us
into	all	their	realms.	It	was	not	enough	that	we	ascended,	not	enough	that	we
should	seek	out	our	own	destinies.	I	tell	you,	though	most	of	me	still	walks	a
distant	world	–	and	his	howls	of	betrayal	deafen	me	–	in	curse	and	prayer	I	am
knotted	here	like	a	fist.	Do	I	desire	worship?	I	do	not.	Do	I	seek	ever	greater
power?	I	have	been	shown	its	futility,	and	now	all	my	purpose	settles	like	ash
upon	my	soul.	Here,	we	are	trapped,	and	so	we	shall	remain—’
‘Because	that	fool	Master	sanctified	Kaminsod’s	theft!	The	Fallen	One	was
wounded.	Made	useless	with	pain.	And	with	that	Master’s	cursed	blessing	he
raised	the	House	of	Chains,	and	with	those	chains	he	bound	us	all!’
Dessembrae	snorted.	‘Long	before	the	first	rattle	of	those	chains,	we	were
in	shackles	–	though	we	amused	ourselves	by	pretending	that	they	did	not	exist.
The	Master	of	the	Deck	and	the	Fallen	One	dispelled	the	illusion	–	no,	they
dispelled	our	delusions	–	and	with	them	all	their	sweet,	precious	convenience.’
‘I	do	not	need	an	upstart	like	you	telling	me	all	I	already	know!’
‘You	do,	when	you	would	feed	your	reason	with	false	indignation.	We	shall
soon	gather	in	another	place	little	different	from	this	one,	and	there	we	shall
commit	murder.	Cold,	brutal	murder.	We	shall	slay	a	fellow	god.	Before	his
heart	is	sundered,	before	the	Unknowable	Woman	can	ever	reach	the	Fallen
One,	or	attempt	whatever	it	is	she	intends,	we	shall	kill	him.’
‘Do	not	so	easily	discard	that	woman,	Dessembrae,’	said	a	new	voice,	a
woman’s,	thin	and	crackling.	‘She	is	sibling	to	the	Master	of	the	Deck	–	a
Master	who	hides	himself	from	us	all.	How	can	this	be?	How	has	he	managed	to
blind	us	to	his	whereabouts?	I	tell	you,	he	hovers	over	all	of	this,	as
unknowable	as	his	sister.	This	wretched	family	from	that	wretched	empire—’
A	cane	cracked	against	bones,	splintering	them,	and	Silchas	turned	to	see
that	a	new	god	had	arrived.	Indistinct,	a	smear	of	shadow.	‘Dessembrae,’	this
one	hissed,	‘and	dearest	Jhess.	Beru,	Shedenul,	Mowri.	Beckra,	Thilanda,	see
how	you	crowd	this	Tiste	Andii?	This	brother	of	Anomander	Rake?	Do	you
imagine	he	cannot	hear	you?’	The	cane	jabbed	at	Dessembrae.	‘Look	at	us,	so
fey	in	reflection	of	our	once-mortal	selves.	The	Empire,	yes!	Our	empire,
Dessembrae,	or	have	you	forgotten?	That	wretched	family?	Our	very	own
children!’
‘Oh,	look	around,	Shadowthrone,’	snarled	Jhess,	her	face	of	skeined	wool,
cotton,	hemp	and	silk	twisting	and	knotting	as	she	bared	web-shrouded	teeth.
‘D’rek	has	come	and	gone	from	this	place.	She	knows	and	makes	for	us	a	true


path.	Your	damned	children	cannot	hope	to	defeat	us.	Leave	them	to	the	Forkrul
Assail!	May	they	devour	each	other!’
Shadowthrone	giggled.	‘Tell	me,	Jhess,	do	you	see	your	cousin	anywhere
near?	Where	is	the	Queen	of	Dreams	in	this	place	of	death?’
‘She	hides—’
‘She	is	not	here,	Jhess,’	said	Shadowthrone,	‘because	she	is	awake.	Awake!
Do	you	understand	me?	Not	sleeping,	not	dreaming	herself	here,	not	plucking
all	your	mad	tails,	Jhess,	to	confuse	mortal	minds.	You	are	all	blind	fools!’
‘You	mean	to	betray	us!’	shrieked	Shedenul.
‘I	care	nothing	for	any	of	you,’	Shadowthrone	replied,	with	a	laconic
gesture	of	one	ethereal	hand.	‘Betray?	Too	much	effort	over	too	little	of	worth.’
‘You	come	here	only	to	mock	us?’
‘I	am	here,	Beru,	because	I	am	curious.	Not	about	any	of	you.	You’re
nothing	but	gods,	and	if	the	Assail	succeed	you	will	all	vanish	like	farts	in	the
wind.	No,	my	curiosity	is	with	our	unexpected	guest,	our	Tiste	Andii.’	The	cane
waved	at	Silchas	Ruin.	‘O	brother	of	heroes,	why	do	you	bless	Coltaine’s
Eternal	Fall	with	your	presence?’
‘I	seek	a	weapon.’
‘The	two	you	carry	are	not	enough?’
‘For	a	companion.	This	battle	you	all	seem	so	eager	to	join,	I	could	warn
you	against	it,	but	I	admit	that	I	see	little	use	in	that.	You	are	all	determined	to
join	the	fray,	leaving	me	to	wonder.’
‘Wonder	what?’	demanded	Beru.
‘When	the	dust	settles,	how	many	of	your	corpses	will	I	see	upon	that
field?’	Silchas	Ruin	shrugged.	‘Do	as	you	will.’
‘Your	brother	slew	our	strongest	ally.’
‘He	did?	And	of	what	significance	is	that	to	me,	Beru?’
‘You	are	as	infuriating	as	he	was!	May	you	share	his	fate!’
‘We	shall	all	share	his	fate,’	Silchas	Ruin	replied.
Shadowthrone	giggled.	‘I	have	found	you	a	weapon,	but	only	if	the	one	who
wields	it	is	worthy.’
Silchas	Ruin	looked	round.	‘From	this	place?’
‘No,	not	from	here.	There	is	nothing	to	the	weapons	here	but	memories	of
failure.’	A	sword	appeared	from	the	shadows	swirling	round	the	god	and
clattered	at	the	Tiste	Andii’s	feet.
Looking	down,	he	drew	a	sharp	breath.	‘Where	did	you	come	by	this?’
‘Recognize	it?’
‘A	Hust…but	no.’	He	hesitated.	‘I	feel	that	I	should,	knowing	well	that
sacred	forge.	The	draconic	theme	is…distinctive.	But	the	ferrules	remind	me


of	Hust’s	earliest	period	of	manufacture,	and	I	thought	I	knew	all	of	those	so
made.	Where	did	you	come	by	this?’
‘Of	little	relevance,	Prince.	You	note	the	draconic	theme,	do	you?	What	is
the	term?	Pattern	weld?	So	you	might	think,	to	see	those	scales	glittering	so
prettily	along	the	length	of	the	blade.’	He	giggled.	‘So	you	might	think.’
‘This	weapon	is	too	good	for	the	one	I	intended	to	arm.’
‘Indeed?	How…unfortunate.	Perhaps	you	could	convince	your	friend	to
take	the	ones	you	now	wield?	And	for	yourself,	this	singular	weapon.	Consider
it	a	gift	to	you,	from	Shadowthrone.’
‘And	why	should	you	so	gift	me?’	Silchas	Ruin	asked.
‘Perhaps	the	others	here	bemoan	the	loss	of	Hood.	I	do	not.	He	was	hoary
and	humourless,	and	ugly	besides.	Thus.	If	I	cannot	convey	my	best	wishes	to
Hood’s	noble	slayer,	then	his	brother	shall	have	to	do.’
Silchas	Ruin	looked	back	down	at	the	Hust	sword.	‘When	we	were
children,’	he	muttered,	‘he	used	to	steal	my	things	all	the	time,	because	he	liked
to	see	me	lose	my	temper.’	He	paused,	remembering,	and	then	sighed.	‘Even
then,	he	was	fearless.’
Shadowthrone	was	silent.	The	other	gods	simply	watched.
‘And	then,’	Silchas	Ruin	whispered,	‘he	stole	my	grief.	And	now,	what	is
there,	I	wonder…what	is	there	left	to	feel?’
‘If	I	suggested	“gratitude”,	would	that	be	insensitive?’
Silchas	Ruin	shot	the	god	a	sharp	look,	and	then	said,	‘I	accept	the	gift,
Shadowthrone,	and	in	return	I	offer	you	this.’	He	waved	at	the	other	gods.	‘This
mob	ill	suits	you.	Leave	them	to	their	devices,	Shadowthrone.’
The	god	cackled.	‘If	I	was	blood	kin	to	this	family,	I’d	be	the	uncle	slumped
drunk	and	senseless	in	the	corner.	Luckily	–	dare	I	risk	that	word?	–	I	am	not
kin	to	any	of	them.	Rest	assured	I	will	humbly	heed	your	advice,	Prince.’
Silchas	Ruin	picked	up	the	weapon.	He	looked	at	the	gods,	his	crimson
eyes	slowly	moving	from	one	ghastly	face	to	the	next.	And	then	he	vanished.
	
Dessembrae	wheeled	on	Shadowthrone.	‘What	was	all	that?	What	scheme	are
you	playing	at?’
Shadowthrone’s	cane	snapped	out,	caught	the	Lord	of	Tragedy	flush	across
the	bridge	of	his	nose.	He	stumbled	back,	fell	on	to	his	backside.
Shadowthrone	hissed,	and	then	said,	‘The	best	part	of	you	wanders	the
mortal	world,	old	friend.	Long	ago,	he	surrendered	that	emptiness	called	pride.
At	last,	I	see	where	it	fetched	up.	Well,	it	seems	one	more	lesson	in	humility
shall	find	you.’	He	glared	at	the	others.	‘All	of	you,	in	fact.’


Beru	growled.	‘You	snivelling	little	upstart…’
But	then	his	voice	fell	away,	for	the	Lord	of	Shadows	was	gone.
	
‘Busy	busy	busy.’
Cotillion	paused	on	the	road.	‘It’s	done?’
‘Of	course	it’s	done!’	Shadowthrone	snapped,	and	then	grunted.	‘Here?
What	are	we	doing	here?’
‘Recognize	the	place,	then.’
‘Pah!	Not	more	regrets	from	you.	I’m	sick	of	them!’
‘I	am	marking	this	site	one	more	time—’
‘What,	like	a	Hound	pissing	against	a	fence	post?’
Cotillion	nodded.	‘Crude,	but	apt.’
‘What	of	you?’	Shadowthrone	demanded.	‘Did	you	return	to	Shadowkeep?
Did	you	send	her	off?	Did	she	need	a	few	slaps?	A	punch	in	the	nose,	a	quick
roger	behind	the	keep?’
‘She	needed	only	my	invitation,	Ammanas.’
‘Truly?’
‘Of	all	the	wolves	on	one’s	own	trail,’	Cotillion	said,	‘there	is	always	one,
the	pack’s	leader.	Cruel	and	relentless.	Show	me	a	god	or	a	mortal	with	no
wolves	on	their	heels—’
‘Enough	talk	of	wolves.	This	is	me,	after	all.	Fanged,	eyes	of	fire,	foul	fur
and	endless	hunger,	a	hundred	beasts,	each	one	named	Regret.’
‘Just	so.’	Cotillion	nodded.
‘So	you	put	her	on	a	horse	and	gave	her	a	blade,	and	sent	her	back	down
her	own	trail.’
‘To	kill	the	biggest,	meanest	one,	aye.’
Shadowthrone	grunted	again.	‘Bet	she	was	smiling.’
‘Find	me	a	fool	who’ll	take	that	bet,’	Cotillion	replied,	smiling	himself.
The	Lord	of	Shadows	looked	round.	‘See	none	hereabouts.	Too	bad.’
The	air	filled	with	the	cries	of	gulls.
	
Tiste	Liosan.	The	Children	of	Father	Light.	A	star	is	born	in	the	dark,	and	the
heavens	are	revealed	to	all.	Withal	ran	his	hand	along	the	pitted	plaster,
fragments	of	damp	moss	falling	away	where	his	fingers	scraped	it	loose.	The
painted	scene	was	in	a	primitive,	awkward	style,	yet	he	suspected	it	was	more
recent	than	those	glorious	works	in	the	city’s	palace.	Light	like	blood,	corpses


on	the	strand,	faces	shining	beneath	helms.	A	sky	igniting…
A	few	survived	the	chaos,	the	civil	wars.	They	cowered	here	in	this	forest.	In
coloured	plaster	and	paint,	they	sought	to	make	eternal	their	memories.	He
wondered	why	people	did	such	things.	He	wondered	at	their	need	to	leave
behind	a	record	of	the	great	events	witnessed,	and	lived	through.
Sure	enough,	a	discovery	like	this	–	here	in	the	forest	above	the	Shore,	at
the	base	of	a	vast	sinkhole	his	errant	step	had	inadvertently	discovered	–	well,
it	led	to	questions,	and	mystery,	and,	like	the	missing	patches	and	the	thick
clumps	of	moss,	he	found	a	need	to	fill	in	the	gaps.
For	we	are	all	bound	in	stories,	and	as	the	years	pile	up	they	turn	to	stone,
layer	upon	layer,	building	our	lives.	You	can	stand	on	them	and	stare	out	at
future’s	horizon,	or	you	can	be	crushed	beneath	their	weight.	You	can	take	a
pick	in	hand	and	break	them	all	apart,	until	you’re	left	with	nothing	but	rubble.
You	can	crush	that	down	into	dust	and	watch	the	wind	blow	it	away.	Or	you	can
worship	those	wretched	stories,	carving	idols	and	fascinating	lies	to	lift	your
gaze	ever	higher,	and	all	those	falsehoods	make	hollow	and	thin	the	ground	you
stand	on.
Stories.	They	are	the	clutter	in	our	lives,	the	conveniences	we	lean	upon
and	hide	behind.	But	what	of	it?	Change	them	at	will	–	it’s	only	a	game	in	the
skull,	shaking	the	bones	in	the	cup	to	see	if	something	new	shows	up.	Aye,	I
imagine	such	games	are	liberating,	and	the	sense	of	leaving	oneself	behind	is
akin	to	moving	house.	A	fresh	start	beckons.	A	new	life,	a	new	host	of	stories,	a
new	mountain	to	build	stone	by	stone.
‘What	makes	you	happy,	Withal?’
Long	stretches	of	time,	Sand,	free	of	alarm.
‘Nothing	else?’
Oh,	beauty,	I	suppose.	Pleasure	to	caress	the	senses.
‘You	play	at	being	a	solid	and	simple	man,	Withal,	but	I	think	it	is	all	an
act.	In	fact,	I	think	you	think	too	much,	about	too	many	things.	You’re	worse
than	me.	And	before	long,	all	that	chaos	gets	so	thick	it	starts	looking	solid,	and
simple.’
Woman,	you	make	my	head	ache.	I’m	going	for	a	walk.
Rubbing	at	his	bruised	hip,	he	brushed	twigs	and	mud	from	his	clothes,	and
then	carefully	made	his	way	up	the	sinkhole’s	side,	grasping	roots,	finding
footholds	from	the	blocks	of	cut	stone	hiding	in	the	gloom.	Pulling	himself
clear,	he	resumed	his	journey	down	to	the	Shore.
Twenty	or	more	paces	up	from	the	strand,	the	forest	edge	had	been
transformed.	Trees	cut	down,	trenches	dug	in	banked	ripples	facing	the
imminent	breach	in	Lightfall.	Figures	swarming	everywhere.	Weapons	in


heaps	–	swords,	spears	and	pikes	–	with	Shake	and	Letherii	crews	busy
scrubbing	the	rust	from	the	ancient	iron,	rolling	new	grips	from	strips	of
soaked	leather.	The	wood	of	the	hafted	weapons	seemed	to	have	been
unaffected	by	the	passage	of	time,	the	black	shafts	as	strong	as	ever.	Hundreds
of	helms	formed	vaguely	disturbing	mounds	here	and	there,	awaiting	oil	and
refitting.
Working	his	way	past	all	this,	Withal	reached	the	strand.	He	paused,
searching	among	the	crowds.	But	he	could	not	find	the	one	he	sought.	Seeing	a
familiar	face	ahead,	he	called	out,	‘Captain	Pithy!’
The	woman	looked	up.
‘Where	is	he?’	Withal	asked.
She	straightened	from	the	leather	map	she’d	laid	out	on	the	sand,	wiped
sweat	from	her	face,	and	then	pointed.
Withal	looked	in	that	direction.	Saw	a	lone	figure	seated	atop	an	old
midden,	facing	Lightfall.	With	a	wave	to	Pithy,	he	set	off	in	that	direction.
Yedan	Derryg	was	taking	bites	from	a	lump	of	cheese,	his	jaws	working
steadily	as	he	studied	the	cascading	light.	He	glanced	over	as	Withal
approached,	but	only	briefly.	Boots	crunching	on	the	ghastly	white	bone
fragments	of	the	beach,	and	then	the	slope	of	the	midden,	where	amidst	larger
pieces	of	bone	there	were	husks	of	some	forest	nut,	more	recent	gourds	and
pieces	of	pottery,	Withal	reached	the	prince’s	side,	whereupon	he	sat	down.	‘I
didn’t	know	we	had	any	cheese	left.’
Yedan	plopped	the	last	bit	into	his	mouth,	chewed	a	moment,	swallowed
and	then	said,	‘We	don’t.’
Withal	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘I	expect	to	feel	the	salt,	the	freshened	sea
breezes.	Instead,	the	air	feels	as	close	as	the	hold	of	a	ship.’	He	nodded	to
Lightfall.	‘There	is	no	breath	from	this,	none	at	all.’
Yedan	grunted.	‘There	will	be	soon	enough.’
‘The	queen	was	wondering	about	that.’
‘Wondering?’
‘All	right.	Fretting.	Well,	more	like	a	cornered	cat,	come	to	think	of	it,	so
not	fretting	at	all.	Snarling,	all	claws	out,	fear	blazing	in	her	eyes.’
Yedan’s	jaws	bunched,	as	if	he	was	still	chewing	cheese,	and	then	he	said,
‘Is	that	what	you	wake	up	to	every	morning,	Withal?’
He	sighed,	squinted	at	Lightfall.	‘Never	been	married,	have	you?	I	can	tell.’
‘Not	much	interested.’
‘In	any	of	that?’
‘In	women.’
‘Ah.	Well,	among	the	Meckros,	men	marry	each	other	all	the	time.	I	figure


they	see	how	men	and	women	do	it,	and	want	that	for	themselves.’
‘Want	what,	exactly?’
‘Someone	to	be	the	cat,	someone	to	be	the	dog,	I	suppose.	But	all	official
like.’
‘And	here	I	thought	you’d	go	on	about	love	and	commitment,	Withal.’
‘No,	it’s	all	down	to	who	lifts	a	leg	and	who	squats.	And	if	you’re	lucky,
that	goes	back	and	forth.	If	you’re	unlucky,	you	end	up	trapped	in	one	or	the
other	and	life’s	miserable.’
‘Your	winning	description	of	marriage,	Withal,	has	fallen	somewhat	short
for	me.’
‘Sorry	to	hear	that,	Yedan.’
‘Something	to	do,	I	suspect,	with	the	lack	of	sincerity.’
Withal	grinned.	‘Anyway,	the	queen	is	eager	for	reassurance.	Do	you	feel
ready?	And	how…how	soon?’
‘There	is	no	true	measure	of	readiness	until	we	are	engaged,	Withal,	until	I
can	see	what	my	army	can	do,	or	is	willing	to	do.	Of	the	two,	I	will	take	the
latter	and	hope	for	the	former.	As	for	how	soon…’	He	paused,	and	then	pointed
at	Lightfall.	‘There,	do	you	see	that?’
A	strange	dull	spot	formed	in	the	descending	streams	of	light.	It	bled
outward	like	a	stain,	reaching	down	to	the	very	base,	before	the	brighter	edges
began	soaking	back	in.	‘What	was	that?’
‘Dragons,	Withal.’
‘What?’
‘Soletaken,	or	allies.	The	sorcery	of	the	Eleint	that	some	call	their	breath.
They	assail	the	barrier	with	that	chaotic	power,	and	with	each	breath	the	ancient
wound	thins,	the	skin	weakens.’
‘Mael	save	us,	Yedan	–	you	mean	to	stand	against	dragons?	How?’
‘When	the	wound	opens,	it	will	be	at	the	base	–	to	open	the	way	for	their
foot	soldiers.	A	beachhead	will	need	to	be	established	–	we	need	to	be	driven
back	from	the	wound.	For	a	dragon	to	physically	come	through	the	breach	will
take	all	of	its	power,	and	when	it	does	it	will	be	on	the	ground,	not	in	the	air.
And	when	a	dragon	is	on	the	ground,	it	is	vulnerable.’
‘But	if	the	beachhead	has	driven	you	back—’
‘We	must	in	turn	overrun	them.’
‘To	reach	that	first	dragon.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	kill	it.’
‘Ideally,	halfway	through	the	wound.	And	not	killed,	but	dying.	At	that
moment,	my	sister	and	the	witches	need	to…pounce.	To	take	that	draconic	life


force—’
‘And	seal	the	breach.’
Yedan	Derryg	nodded.
Withal	stared	at	the	man,	his	angled	profile,	his	dark,	calm	eyes	fixed	so
steadily	upon	Lightfall.	Beru’s	sweet	piss,	does	nothing	rattle	him?	Prince
Yedan	Derryg,	your	soldiers	will	look	to	you,	and	now	at	last	I	begin	to	see
what	they	will	see.	You	are	their	own	wall,	their	own	Lightfall.
But	are	you	wounded,	too?
‘Yedan,	can	it	be	done?	What	you	describe?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘My	sister	refuses	to	kneel	before	the	First	Shore.	It	is
the	act	that	sanctifies	the	queen	of	the	Shake,	and	she	will	not	do	it.’
‘Why	ever	not?’
His	teeth	bared	in	a	brief	grin,	Yedan	said,	‘We	are	a	contrary	lot,	us
royals.	A	queen	who	defies	sanctification,	a	prince	who	will	never	produce	an
heir,	and	what	of	Awakening	Dawn?	What	of	our	Sister	of	Night?	Gone,	for
ever	gone.	Yan	Tovis	and	me,	we	are	all	that’s	left.	Have	you	ever	been	in	a
Letherii	city,	Withal?’
‘Well,	yes.’
‘Have	you	ever	seen	a	Shake	walk	through	a	Letherii	crowd?’
‘No,	I	don’t	think	so.’
‘They	keep	their	eyes	on	the	cobbles.	They	shift	and	slide	from	anyone	in
their	path.	They	do	not	walk	as	would	you,	tall,	filling	the	space	you	need.’
‘I	believe	that	has	changed,	Yedan	–	what	you	and	your	sister	have	done
here—’
‘And	sticking	a	sword	in	their	hand	and	telling	them	to	stand	here,	to	fight
and	to	die	without	a	single	backward	step,	will	turn	mice	into	snarling
leopards?	We	shall	find	out	the	answer	to	that	soon	enough.’
Withal	thought	for	a	time	on	all	that	the	prince	had	said,	and	then	he	shook
his	head.	‘Is	it	just	your	royal	blood,	then,	that	makes	you	and	your	sister	the
exceptions	to	the	image	you	paint	of	the	Shake?	You	are	not	mice.’
‘We	trained	as	officers	in	the	Letherii	military	–	we	considered	that	a	duty,
not	to	the	king	of	Lether,	but	to	the	Shake.	To	lead	we	must	be	seen	to	lead,	but
more	than	that	we	needed	to	learn	how	to	lead.	This	was	the	Letherii	military’s
gift	to	us,	but	it	was	a	dangerous	one,	for	it	very	nearly	swallowed	up	Yan
Tovis	–	perhaps	it	has,	given	the	reluctance	she	now	displays.’
‘If	she	does	not	kneel	to	the	Shore,’	asked	Withal,	‘can	the	witches	alone
seal	the	wound?’
‘No.’
‘And	if	there	were	more	of	them?’


Yedan	glanced	over.	‘If	I	hadn’t	murdered	them,	you	mean?’	He	seemed	to
find	something	left	over	in	his	mouth,	worked	it	loose	with	his	tongue,	chewed
and	swallowed.	‘Hard	to	say.	Possibly.	Possibly	not.	Venal	rivalries	plagued
them.	It’s	more	likely	they	would	have	usurped	my	sister,	or	even	killed	her.
And	then	they’d	set	about	killing	each	other.’
‘But	couldn’t	you	have	stopped	them?’
‘I	did.’
Withal	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	said,	‘Surely	she	understands
the	danger?’
‘I	imagine	so.’
‘You’ve	not	tried	to	persuade	her?’
‘In	her	own	way,	my	sister	is	as	stubborn	as	I	am.’
‘Another	wall,’	Withal	muttered.
‘What?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Nothing	of	import.’
‘There.	Another	pass	comes	–	look—’
A	dark	shape	was	descending	behind	Lightfall,	a	thing	huge	and	blurred.
Lunging	to	sweep	past	the	heart	of	the	wound.	Something	struck	the	barrier
like	a	massive	fist.	Light	sprayed	like	blood.	Red	cracks	spread	out	from	the
dark	stain.
Yedan	stood.	‘Go	back	to	the	queen	of	Kharkanas,	Withal,’	he	said,
drawing	his	sword.	‘One	more	pass,	if	that,	and	then	this	begins.’
‘Begins?’	Withal	asked,	as	if	struck	dumb.
He	saw	Pithy	and	Brevity	running	up	the	strand.	A	sudden	chill	flooded
through	him.	Terrible	memories.	Of	his	younger	days,	of	battles	upon	the
decks	of	the	Meckros.	Fear	weakened	his	legs.
‘Tell	her,’	continued	Yedan,	his	tone	as	steady	as	ever,	‘we	will	hold	as
long	as	we	can.	Tell	her,	Withal,	that	once	more	the	Shake	stand	upon	the
Shore.’
Spear	points	thrust	out	from	the	wound,	a	shivering,	bristling	horror	–	he
could	see	figures,	pushing,	crowding,	could	almost	hear	their	howls.	Light
spurted	like	ropes	of	gore.	Light	flooded	out	on	to	the	strand,	illuminating	the
crushed	bones.	Light	lit	faces	beneath	helms.
Tiste	Liosan.	The	Children	of	Father	Light.	A	star	is	born	in	the	dark,	and
the	heavens	are	revealed	to	all.
‘Go,	Withal.	We	are	breached.’
	
We	can	hold	against	nothing.	We	can	only	crumble,	like	sand	before	the


devouring	wave.	Yedan	calls	to	his	officers,	his	officers	rush	and	shout,	ranks
form	up,	these	would-be	soldiers	struggle	and	steady	themselves.	The	Shake	–
my	Shake	–	stand	pale,	eyes	wide,	straining	to	see	what’s	happening	at	the
breach,	where	the	Letherii,	dreaming	of	riches,	meet	the	thrusting	spears.
Screams	now	rise	from	the	wound.	There	are	Tiste	Liosan,	their	faces
broken	masks	of	fury,	and	all	the	madness	of	war	is	down	there,	at	the	breach.
Life’s	blood	even	now	spilling	down.
We	cannot	hold.	Look	at	my	people,	how	their	eyes	track	my	brother	now,
but	he’s	only	one	man,	and	even	he	cannot	defeat	this	enemy.	Long	ago,	there
were	enough	of	us,	enough	to	hold,	enough	to	last	and	to	die	to	save	this	realm.
But	no	longer.
Pully	and	Skwish	loomed	in	front	of	her.	They	were	shouting,	screaming,
but	she	was	deaf	to	them.	The	clash	of	weapons	grew	desperate,	like	a	thousand
knives	upon	a	single	whetstone.	But	you	are	flesh,	my	brother.	Not	a	whetstone.
Flesh.
‘You	must	kneel!’
Yan	Tovis	frowned	at	the	young	woman	before	her.	‘Is	it	blood	you	want?’
Eyes	widened.
She	held	out	her	wrists.	‘This?’
‘You	need	to	kneel	before	the	Shore!’
‘No,’	she	growled.	‘Not	yet.	Go	away,	I’m	done	with	you.	The	islanders	are
fighting	–	go	down	to	them,	kneel	yourselves.	In	the	sand	beside	the	wounded
and	the	dying	–	both	of	you.	Look	in	their	faces,	and	tell	them	it	was	all	worth
it.’	Yan	Tovis	lunged	forward,	pushing	them	so	that	they	staggered.	‘Go!	Tell
them!’
You	want	me	to	kneel?	To	sanctify	all	of	this?	Shall	I	be	yet	one	more	ruler
to	urge	my	subjects	to	their	deaths?	Shall	I	stand	tall	and	bold,	shouting	fierce
promises	of	glory?	How	many	lies	can	this	scene	withstand?	Just	how	empty
can	words	be?
‘Kneel,’	she	whispered.	‘Yes.	Everyone.	Kneel.’


Chapter	Nine

I	am	fallen	prey
There	was	a	time
When	fangs	sank	deep
My	body	dragged
And	flesh	howled
Fear ’s	face	was	cold
With	instinct’s	need
There	was	a	time
When	strangers	took	me
And	the	unfamiliar
Whispered	terror
And	the	shock	of	desires
We	could	not	expect
Lit	eyes	so	like	our	own
There	was	a	time
When	a	friend	twisted
Before	my	eyes
And	all	my	solid	faiths
Washed	free	underfoot
Unknowing	the	world
With	new	and	cruel	design
There	was	a	time
When	kin	drew	the	knife
To	sever	sacred	law
With	red	envy
And	red	malice
The	horror	visits
The	heart	of	home
Do	you	see	this	journey?
What	began	in	shadows
And	dark	distance
Has	drawn	ever	closer


Now	I	am	fallen	prey
To	the	demon	in	my	soul
And	the	face	twisting
Is	my	own
Railing	at	failures
Of	flesh	and	bone
The	spirit	withers
And	I	fall	prey
We	have	listed
A	world	of	enemies
And	now	we	fall	prey
We	fall	prey
Faces	of	Fear
Fisher	kel	Tath
	spirit	wings	away	in	flight

BROKEN	AT	LAST,	THE	BODY	SLUMPS	AND	THE	SPIRIT	PULLS	FREE,	THE

and	the	sound	of	its	wings	is	a	sigh.
But	this,	he	knew,	was	not	always	the	case.	There	were	times	when	the	spirit
staggered	loose	with	a	howl,	as	broken	as	the	body	left	behind.	Too	long	inside
tortured	flesh,	too	long	a	sordid	lover	of	punishing	pain.
The	sound	of	his	horse’s	hoofs	was	hollow,	the	creak	of	its	tendons	like	the
settling	of	an	old,	familiar	chair,	and	he	thought	of	a	warm	room,	a	place
heady	with	memories	threaded	through	with	love	and	grief,	with	joy	and
suffering.	But	there	was	no	pocket	within	him	to	hold	tears,	nothing	he	could
squeeze	in	one	fist	just	to	feel	the	wet	trickling	down	between	his	fingers.	No
gestures	left	to	remind	himself	of	who	he	had	once	been.
He	found	her	rotted	corpse,	huddled	in	the	lee	of	a	boulder.	There	were	red
glints	in	her	hair,	beneath	wind-blown	dust.	Her	face	was	tucked	down,	sunken
cheeks	pressed	against	the	knees.	As	if	in	her	last	moments	she	sat,	curled	up,
staring	down	at	the	stumps	of	her	feet.
It	was	all	too	far	gone,	he	told	himself.	Even	this	felt	mechanical,	but
disjointed,	on	the	edge	of	failure;	a	measure	of	stumbling	steps,	like	a	man
blind	and	lost,	trying	to	find	his	way	home.	Dismounting,	boots	rocking	as	the
bones	inside	them	shifted	and	scraped,	he	walked	to	her,	slowly	sat	down	on	the
boulder,	amidst	the	creaks	of	tendon,	bone	and	armour.
Broken-winged,	the	spirit	had	staggered	from	this	place.	Lost	even	to	itself.
How	could	he	hope	to	track	it?	Leaning	forward,	he	settled	his	face	into	his
hands,	and	–	though	it	made	no	difference	–	he	closed	his	one	eye.


Who	I	am	no	longer	matters.	A	chair,	creaking.	A	small	room,	acrid	with
woodsmoke.	Crows	in	the	rafters	–	what	mad	woman	would	invite	them	into	this
place?	The	hunters	have	thundered	past	and	the	wolf	no	longer	howls.	She	has
no	breath	for	such	things,	not	now,	not	running	as	she	must.	Running	–	gods,
running!
She	knows	it’s	no	use.	She	knows	they	will	corner	her,	spit	her	with	spears.
She	knows	all	about	hunting,	and	the	kill,	for	these	were	the	forces	of	law	in	her
nature.	So	too,	it	seems,	for	the	ones	pursuing	her.
And	the	woman	in	the	chair,	her	eyes	are	smarting,	her	vision	blurs.	The
chimney	needs	cleaning,	and	besides,	the	wild	is	dead,	for	ever	dead.	And	when
next	the	hunters	thunder	past,	their	quarry	will	be	on	two	legs,	not	four.
Just	so.
Do	you	dream	of	me,	old	woman?	Do	you	dream	of	a	single	eye,	flaring	in
the	night,	one	last	look	of	the	wild	upon	your	face,	your	world?	Gods	below,	I
am	tearing	apart.	I	can	feel	it.
The	horns	sound	their	triumph.	Slain,	the	beast’s	heart	stills	its	mad	race.
In	her	creaking	chair,	the	old	woman	reaches	up	one	hand,	and	gouges	out
one	of	her	eyes.	It	rests	bloody	in	her	palm	while	she	gasps	with	pain.	And	then
she	lifts	her	head	and	fixes	her	one	remaining	eye	upon	him.	‘Even	the	blind
know	how	to	weep.’
He	shakes	his	head,	not	in	denial,	but	because	he	does	not	understand.
The	old	woman	throws	the	eye	into	the	fire.	‘To	the	wild,	to	the	wild,	all
gone.	Gone.	Loose	the	wolf	within	you,	Ghost.	Loose	the	beast	upon	the	trail,
and	one	day	you	shall	find	her.’
‘Who	are	you?’
‘Smell	that?	Wax	in	the	fire.	Wax	in	the	fire.’
‘What	place	is	this?’
‘This?’	The	chair	creaks.	She	reaches	up	to	her	other	eye.	‘Love	lives	here,
Ghost.	The	Hold	you	have	forgotten,	the	Hold	you	all	yearn	to	find	again.	But
you	forget	more	than	that.’	She	pushed	her	nails	into	her	other	eye.	‘Where
there	is	love,	there	is	pain.’
‘No,’	he	whispered,	‘there	must	be	more	to	it	than	that.’	He	lifted	his	head,
and	opened	his	eye.	Wretched	wasteland,	a	boulder,	a	huddled	form.	‘But	she
threw	it	into	the	flames.’	Wax.	Wax	in	the	fire.
Looking	down,	he	studied	the	corpse	beside	him,	and	then	he	rocked	to	his
feet,	walked	over	to	his	lifeless	horse,	and	pulled	from	the	saddle	a	roll	of
sacking.	Laying	it	out,	he	went	back	to	her,	lifted	her	gently	from	her	snarled
nest	of	greening	grasses.	On	to	the	cloth,	drawing	up	the	edges	and	binding
them	tight,	and	then	gathering	the	sack	and	slinging	it	across	the	horse’s	rump


just	behind	the	saddle,	before	climbing	astride	the	motionless	mount.
Collecting	up	the	reins,	Toc	closed	his	remaining	eye.
Then	opened	the	missing	one.
	
The	day’s	light	vanished	abruptly,	the	mass	of	bruised	clouds	climbing,
billowing	outward.	A	savage	gust	of	wind	bowed	back	the	trees	lining	the	north
ridge	and	a	moment	later	rushed	down	the	slope	and	up	on	to	the	road.	Her
horse	shied	and	then	quivered	to	the	impact,	and	she	hunched	down	over	the
saddle	as	the	gale	threatened	to	lift	her	from	the	animal’s	back.	Driving	her
heels	into	its	flanks,	she	urged	her	mount	onward.
She	was	still	half	a	day	from	the	city	–	the	warrens	had	a	way	of	wandering,
and	gates	could	never	be	counted	on,	and	this	particular	gate	had	opened	a
long,	long	way	from	where	it	had	begun.	Exhausted,	filled	with	doubts	and
trepidation,	she	pushed	on,	her	horse’s	hoofs	cracking	sparks	on	the	cobbles.
Some	things	could	haunt	a	soul;	some	things	needed	undoing.	The	toe	of	a
boot	searching	ashes	–	but	no,	she’d	gone	beyond	that.	She	was	here,	regrets
like	hounds	at	her	heels.
Thunder	pounded;	lightning	flashed	and	sent	jagged	fissures	of	argent	light
splitting	the	black	clouds.	Somewhere	behind	her	a	strike	detonated	on	the	road
and	her	horse	stumbled.	She	steadied	it	with	a	firm	rein.	The	gusts	of	wind	felt
like	fists	pummelling	the	left	side	of	her	face,	and	all	down	that	side	of	her
body.	She	swore,	but	could	barely	hear	her	own	voice.
The	darkness	had	swallowed	the	world	now	and	she	rode	half	blind,
trusting	her	mount	to	stay	on	the	road.	And	still	the	rain	held	back	–	she	could
taste	it	on	the	air,	bitter	with	the	salt	whipped	up	from	the	seas	beyond	the
ridge.
Her	cloak	pulled	loose	from	the	thigh	strings	and	snapped	out	wild	as	a
torn	sail	behind	her.	She	shouted	a	curse	as	she	was	nearly	yanked	from	the
saddle.	Teeth	grinding,	she	forced	her	upper	body	forward	once	again,	one	hand
holding	tight	on	the	hinged	saddle	horn.
She’d	ridden	into	the	face	of	sandstorms	–	gods,	she’d	damned	near	spat
into	the	face	of	the	Whirlwind	itself	–	but	nothing	like	this.	The	air	crackled,
groaned.	The	road	shook	to	the	thunderous	reverberations,	like	the	hoofs	of	a
god	descending.
Howling	now,	giving	voice	to	her	fury,	she	drove	her	horse	into	a	churning
gallop,	and	the	beast’s	breaths	snorted	like	drums	in	the	rain	–	but	the	air	was
charnel	hot,	tomb-dry	–	another	blinding	flash,	another	deafening	detonation	–
her	horse	wavered	and	then,	muscles	bunching,	bones	straining,	it	regained	its


purchase	on	the	road	–
–	and	someone	was	now	riding	beside	her,	on	a	huge,	gaunt	horse	black	as
the	sky	overhead.
She	twisted	round	to	glare	at	him.	‘This	is	you?’
A	flash	of	a	grin,	and	then,	‘Sorry!’
‘When	will	it	end?’
‘How	should	I	know?	When	the	damned	gate	closes!’
He	then	added	something	more,	but	thunder	smashed	to	splinters	whatever
he’d	said,	and	she	shook	her	head	at	him.
He	leaned	closer,	shouted,	‘It’s	good	to	see	you	again!’
‘You	idiot!	Does	he	even	know	you’re	here?’
And	to	that	question,	his	only	answer	was	another	grin.
Where	had	he	been?	The	man	had	ever	infuriated	her.	And	now	here	he	was,
at	her	side,	reminding	her	of	all	the	reasons	she’d	had	the	first	time	round	for
doing…for	doing	what	she	did.	Growling	another	curse,	she	shot	him	a	glare.
‘Will	this	get	any	worse?’
‘Only	when	we	leave!’
Gods	below,	the	things	I’ll	do	for	love.
	
‘North,’	the	withered	hag	had	said,	her	bent	and	broken	visage	reminding
Torrent	of	an	uncle	who’d	taken	a	hoof	to	the	side	of	his	face,	crushing	jaws
and	cheekbone.	For	the	rest	of	his	days,	he’d	shown	to	the	world	the	imprint	of
that	hoof,	and	with	a	twisted,	toothless	grin,	he’d	laugh	and	say,	‘My	best	friend
did	this.	What’s	the	world	come	to	when	you	can’t	even	trust	your	best	friends?’
And	if	the	horse	had	outlived	him,	if	his	wife	had	not	wept	at	his	byre	as	a
widow	should,	instead	standing	dry-eyed	and	expressionless,	if	he’d	not	begun
chasing	little	girls…	Torrent	shook	his	head.	Any	rider	who	called	his	horse
his	best	friend	already	had	a	few	stones	knocked	loose	in	his	skull.
For	all	that,	Torrent	found	himself	tending	to	his	mount	with	a	care
bordering	on	obsession.	And	he	grieved	to	see	it	suffer.	Poor	forage,	not
enough	water,	the	absence	of	its	own	kind.	Solitude	weakened	a	horse’s	spirit,
for	they	were	herd	animals	as	much	as	humans	were,	and	loneliness	dulled	the
eye.
‘The	desert	glitters	with	death,’	continued	Olar	Ethil.	‘We	must	go	round	it.
North.’
Torrent	glanced	over	at	the	children.	Absi	had	ventured	a	few	strides	on	to
the	plain,	returning	with	a	shard	of	crystal	that	painted	prisms	up	his	bared	arm.
He	held	up	his	trophy,	waved	it	back	and	forth	as	if	it	was	a	sword,	and	then	he


laughed.	The	twins	looked	on,	their	wan	faces	empty	of	expression.
He	had	no	skills	when	it	came	to	children.	Redmask	had	set	him	to	care	for
the	Awl	children,	that	day	long	ago,	knowing	well	his	awkwardness,	his
discomfort.	Redmask	had	been	punishing	him	for	something	–	Torrent	could
no	longer	remember	what,	not	that	it	mattered	any	more.	From	where	he	had
been,	he’d	seen	the	fall	of	the	great	leader.	From	where	he	had	been,	he’d
witnessed	the	death	of	Toc	Anaster.
It	was	a	measure	of	human	madness,	he	realized,	that	children	should	be
made	to	see	such	things.	The	pain	of	the	dying,	the	violence	of	the	slayer,	the
cruelty	of	the	victor.	He	wondered	what	the	twins	had	seen,	since	that	night	of
betrayal.	Even	Absi	must	bear	scars,	though	he	seemed	oddly	immune	to	long
bouts	of	sorrow.
No,	none	of	this	was	right.	But	then,	maybe	it	had	never	been	right.	Did
there	not	come	to	every	child	that	moment	when	the	mother,	the	father,	loses
that	god-like	status,	that	supreme	competence	in	all	things,	when	they	are
revealed	to	be	as	weak,	as	flawed	and	as	lost	as	the	child	looking	on?	How	that
moment	crushes!	All	at	once	the	world	becomes	a	threatening	place,	and	in	the
unknown	waits	all	manner	of	danger,	and	the	child	wonders	if	there	is	any
place	left	in	which	to	hide,	to	find	refuge.
‘North,’	said	Olar	Ethil	again,	and	she	set	off,	limping,	pieces	hanging
from	her	battered	form.	The	two	skeletal	lizards	scampered	into	her	wake	–
he’d	wondered	where	they’d	been,	since	it	had	been	days	since	he’d	last	seen
them,	but	now	the	damned	things	were	back.
Torrent	turned	from	his	horse	and	walked	over	to	the	children.	‘Absi	and
Stavi	this	time,’	he	said.	Stavi	rose	and	took	her	brother ’s	hand	–	the	one	not
gripping	the	shard	–	and	led	him	over	to	the	horse.	She	clambered	into	the
saddle,	and	then	reached	down	to	Absi.
Watching	her	lift	the	boy	from	the	ground	and	set	him	down	on	the	saddle
in	front	of	her	reminded	Torrent	of	how	these	children	had	changed.	Wiry,	all
fat	burned	away,	their	skins	darkened	by	the	sun.	A	newly	honed	edge	of
competence.
Redmask	left	me	to	guard	the	children.	But	they	are	gone,	now.	All	of	them.
Gone.	So	I	promised	Setoc	to	ward	these	ones.	So	bold,	that	vow.	And	I	don’t
even	like	children.	If	I	fail	again,	these	three	will	die.
Storii’s	calloused	hand	slipped	into	his	own.	He	looked	down	to	meet	her
eyes,	and	what	he	saw	in	them	made	his	stomach	twist.	No,	I	am	not	your
unflawed	protector,	not	your	guardian	god.	No,	do	not	look	at	me	like	that.
‘Let’s	go,’	he	said	gruffly.


	
She	could	feel	her	power	growing,	her	senses	reaching	out	through	stony
ground,	along	the	sodden	sands	of	buried	streams.	Again	and	again,	she
touched	the	signs	of	her	chosen	children,	the	Imass,	and	even	those	from	the
Eres’al	–	who	dwelt	in	the	times	before	the	Imass.	And	she	could	hear	the
echoes	of	their	voices,	songs	lost	to	ancient	winds	now,	there	on	the	banks	of
extinct	rivers,	in	the	lees	of	hills	long	since	worn	down	and	eaten	away.
The	tools	were	crude,	it	was	true,	the	stone	of	poor	quality,	but	no	matter.
They	had	lived	in	this	place;	they	had	wandered	these	lands.	And	they	shall	do
so	once	again.	Onos	T’oolan,	you	refuse	to	understand	what	I	seek	for	you,	for
you	and	all	your	kin.	Silverfox	has	led	so	many	away,	far	beyond	my	reach,	but
First	Sword,	those	who	follow	you	shall	find	salvation.
Heed	not	the	summons	of	the	First	Throne	–	she	may	be	a	child	of	the
Emperor,	she	may	even	stand	in	the	shadow	of	secrets	–	but	her	power	over	you
is	an	illusion.	What	urges	you	to	obey	is	the	stain	of	Logros,	the	madness	of	his
desperation.	Yes,	you	knelt	before	the	First	Throne,	there	with	all	the	others,	but
the	Emperor	is	dead.	The	Emperor	is	dead!
Listen	to	me,	Onos	T’oolan!	Turn	your	people	back	–	the	path	you	are	on
shall	see	you	all	destroyed.	Find	me	–	let	us	end	this	war	of	wills.	First	Sword,
see	through	my	eyes	–	I	have	your	son.
I	have	your	son.
But	still	he	pushed	her	away,	still	his	own	power	seethed	and	roiled	around
him,	raw	with	the	force	of	Tellann.	She	sought	to	force	her	way	through,	but
his	strength	defied	her.	You	damned	fool!	I	have	your	son!
She	snarled,	paused	to	glare	back	at	the	humans	trailing	her.	And	what	of
your	daughters,	Onos?	Shall	I	open	their	throats?	Will	that	compel	you?	How
dare	you	defy	me!	Answer	me!
Nothing	but	the	moaning	wind.
Must	I	abandon	them?	Must	I	find	you	myself?	Tell	me,	is	your	power
sufficient	to	rebuff	a	dragon?	I	will	come	to	you,	First	Sword,	in	the	raging	fire
of	Telas—
‘If	you	harm	them,	Olar	Ethil,	a	thousand	worlds	of	Telas	fire	shall	not	keep
you	safe	from	me.’
She	laughed.	‘Ah,	now	you	speak.’
‘Do	I?’
The	Bonecaster	hissed	in	fury.	‘You?	Begone,	you	one-eyed	corpse!	Go
back	to	your	pathetic	army	of	worthless	soldiers!’
‘Reach	so	with	your	powers,	Olar	Ethil,	and	there	is	no	telling	whom	you


might	find.	In	fact,	consider	this	a	warning.	You	are	far	from	alone	in	this	land.
There	are	wings	in	the	darkness,	and	the	morning	frost	holds	in	every	droplet	a
thousand	eyes.	On	the	wind,	scents	and	flavours,	and	the	breath	of	ice—’
‘Oh,	be	quiet!	I	see	what	you’re	doing!	Do	you	imagine	me	unable	to
hide?’
‘You	failed	in	hiding	from	me,	a	one-eyed	corpse.’
‘The	longer	you	linger,’	she	said,	‘the	more	you	lose	of	yourself.	That	is
my	warning	to	you.	You	fall	away,	Toc	Anaster.	Do	you	understand	me?	You
fall	away.’
‘I	shall	hold	on	long	enough.’
‘To	do	what?’
‘What’s	needed.’
It	proved	easy	for	her	will	to	evade	him,	slipping	to	rush	past,	thundering
like	a	flash	flood.	Pouring,	like	water,	like	fire.	She	would	assail	the	First
Sword’s	Tellann.	She	would	shatter	the	barrier.	She	would	take	him	by	the
throat—
Ahead,	a	line	of	horse	soldiers	across	her	path,	silent	and	dark	upon	the
plain.	Dirty,	limp	banners,	torn	standards,	helms	above	gaunt,	withered	faces.
Her	power	hammered	into	them,	crashed	and	broke	apart	like	waves
against	a	cliff.	Olar	Ethil	felt	her	mind	reeling	back.	She	was	stunned	by	the
will	of	these	revenants,	these	usurpers	of	the	Throne	of	Death.	As	she
staggered	back,	one	guided	his	horse	out	from	the	line.
The	grey	of	his	beard	was	spun	iron,	the	cast	of	his	eyes	was	stone.	He
reined	in	before	her,	leaned	forward	on	his	saddle.	‘You	are	treading	foreign
land,	Bonecaster.’
‘You	dare	challenge	me?’
‘Anywhere,	any	time.’
‘He	is	mine!’
‘Olar	Ethil,’	he	said,	drawing	his	sword,	‘when	you	argue	with	death,	you
always	lose.’
Shrieking	her	fury,	she	fled.
	
Torrent	walked	to	stand	beside	the	kneeling	creature.	‘You	nearly	deafened	us,’
he	said.	‘Is	something	wrong?’
She	slowly	straightened,	then	lashed	out	an	arm	across	the	front	of	his
chest.	Thrown	back,	he	was	flung	through	the	air.	He	struck	the	ground	hard,
the	breath	driven	from	his	lungs.
Olar	Ethil	walked	to	him,	reached	down	and	closed	a	hand	round	his	throat.


She	pulled	him	upright,	thrust	her	mangled	face	forward,	and	in	the	sockets	of
her	eyes	he	could	see	fires	raging.	‘If	I	kill	them	all,’	she	hissed,	‘here	and
now…what	use	are	you?	Tell	me,	pup,	what	use	are	you?’
He	gasped,	trying	to	regain	his	breath.	Snarling,	she	thrust	him	away.	‘Do
not	mock	me	again,	Awl.’
Torrent	staggered,	dropped	to	one	knee.
Close	by,	the	two	skeletal	reptiles	laughed.
Storii	ran	to	his	side.	‘Don’t,’	she	pleaded,	her	face	tear-streaked.	‘Don’t,
please.	Don’t	leave	us!’
He	shook	his	head,	his	throat	too	bruised	for	words.
His	horse	moved	up	behind	them,	nudged	Torrent’s	shoulder.
Spirits	below.
	
It	had	been	a	long	time	since	he’d	last	unleashed	the	full	power	of	Tellann,
dragging	his	hold	on	the	Warren	with	him	with	each	heavy,	scraping	step.
Within	its	deadened	heart,	nothing	could	reach	Onos	T’oolan;	even	the	furious
assault	of	Olar	Ethil	felt	muted,	a	muffled	rage	made	indistinct	by	layer	upon
layer	of	the	First	Sword’s	will.
He	recalled	a	desert,	a	salt	flat’s	verge	of	sharp	stones.	There	were	rents	in
the	line.	There	were	clans	with	but	a	few	warriors	left	to	stand,	there	on	that
cold,	still	morning.	He	stood	before	Logros,	bereft	of	his	kin,	and	all	that	held
him	there	was	the	binding	of	duty,	the	knotted	webs	of	loyalty.	He	was	the	First
Sword,	after	all.
The	last	Jaghut	in	the	Odhan	had	been	hunted	down,	butchered.	The	time
had	come	to	return	to	the	Malazan	Empire,	to	the	Emperor	who	had	seated
himself	on	the	First	Throne.	And	Onos	T’oolan	knew	he	would	soon	return	to
the	side	of	Dassem	Ultor,	his	mortal	shadow	who	had	taken	for	himself	–	and
for	his	closest	followers	–	the	title	of	First	Sword.	Prophetic	inspiration,	for
they	would	soon	all	be	dead	–	as	dead	as	Onos	T’oolan,	as	dead	as	the	T’lan
Imass.	Or	if	not	dead,	then…destroyed.
Instead,	Logros	had	lifted	one	hand,	a	splay	of	gnarled	fingers	all	pointing
at	Onos.	‘You	were	once	our	First	Sword,’	he	said.	‘When	we	return	to	the
mortal	empire,	we	shall	avow	service	to	Dassem	Ultor,	for	he	is	your	heir	to
the	title.	You	shall	surrender	the	name	of	First	Sword.’
Onos	T’oolan	considered	that	for	a	time.	Surrender	the	title?	Cut	through
the	bindings?	Sever	the	knots?	Know	freedom	once	more?	‘He	is	mortal,
Logros.	He	does	not	know	what	he	has	done	in	taking	for	himself	the	title	of
First	Sword.’


‘In	service,’	Logros	replied,	‘the	T’lan	Imass	sanctify	him—’
‘You	would	make	of	him	a	god?’
‘We	are	warriors.	Our	blessing	shall—’
‘Damn	him	for	eternity!’
‘Onos	T’oolan,	you	are	of	no	use	to	us.’
‘Do	you	imagine’	–	and	he	recalled	the	timbre	of	his	voice,	the	seething
outrage,	and	the	horror	of	what	Logros	sought	to	do…to	a	mortal	man,	to	a
man	destined	to	face	his	own	death,	and	that	is	something	we	have	never	done,
no,	we	ever	ran	from	that	moment	of	reckoning	–	Logros,	the	Lord	of	Death
shall	strike	at	the	T’lan	Imass,	through	him.	Hood	shall	make	him	pay.	For	our
crime,	for	our	defiance	–	‘Do	you	imagine,’	he’d	said,	‘that	your	blessing
could	be	anything	but	a	curse?	You	would	make	him	a	god	of	sorrow,	and
failure,	a	god	with	a	face	doomed	to	weep,	to	twist	in	anguish—’
‘Onos	T’oolan,	we	cast	you	out.’
‘I	shall	speak	to	Dassem	Ultor—’
‘You	do	not	understand.	It	is	too	late.’
Too	late.
The	Adjunct	Lorn	had	believed	that	it	was	the	murder	of	the	Emperor	that
had	broken	the	human	empire’s	alliance	with	Logros	T’lan	Imass.	She	had
been	wrong.	The	spilled	blood	you	should	have	heeded	was	Dassem	Ultor’s,	not
Kellanved’s.	And	for	all	that	neither	man	truly	died,	but	only	one	bore	the
deadly	kiss	of	Hood	in	all	the	days	that	followed.	Only	one	stood	before	Hood
himself,	and	learned	of	the	terrible	thing	Logros	had	done	to	him.
They	said	Hood	was	his	patron	god.	They	said	he	had	avowed	service	to	the
Lord	of	Death.	They	said	that	Hood	then	betrayed	him.	They	understood
nothing.	Dassem	and	his	daughter,	they	were	Hood’s	knives,	striking	at	us.	What
is	it,	to	be	the	weapon	of	a	god?
Where	are	you	now,	Logros?	Do	you	feel	me,	so	fiercely	reborn?	My	heir	–
your	chosen	child	–	has	rejected	the	role.	His	footfalls	now	mark	the	passing	of
tragedy.	You	have	made	him	the	God	of	Tears,	and	now	that	Hood	is	gone	he
must	hunt	down	the	next	one	who	made	him	what	he	was.	Do	you	tremble,
Logros?	Dassem	is	coming	for	you.	He	is	coming	for	you.
No,	the	world	could	not	reach	through	to	Onos	T’oolan.	Not	a	tremor	of
pain,	not	a	tremble	of	grief.	He	knew	nothing	of	rage.	He	was	immune	to	every
betrayal	delivered	upon	him,	and	upon	those	whom	he	had	loved	with	all	his
once-mortal	heart.	He	had	no	desire	for	vengeance;	he	had	no	hope	of
salvation.
I	am	the	First	Sword.	I	am	the	weapon	of	the	godless,	and	upon	the	day	I	am
unsheathed,	dust	shall	take	your	every	dream.	Logros,	you	fool,	did	you	think


you	and	all	the	T’lan	Imass	were	proof	against	your	new	god’s	deadly	kiss?	Ask
Kron.	Ask	Silverfox.	Look	upon	me	now,	see	how	Olar	Ethil	seeks	to	wrest	me
away	from	Dassem’s	curse	–	but	she	cannot.	You	gave	him	mastery	over	us,	and
these	chains	no	Bonecaster	can	shatter.
We	march	to	our	annihilation.	The	First	Sword	is	torn	in	two,	one	half
mortal	and	cruel	in	denial,	the	other	half	immortal	and	crueller	still.	Be	glad
Dassem	has	not	found	me.	Be	glad	he	seeks	his	own	path,	and	that	he	will	be	far
from	the	place	where	I	shall	stand.
And	here	is	my	secret.	Heed	this	well.	The	weapon	of	the	godless	needs	no
hand	to	wield	it.	The	weapon	of	the	godless	wields	itself.	It	is	without	fear.	It	is
empty	of	guilt	and	disdainful	of	retribution.	It	is	all	that	and	more,	but	one
thing	it	is	not:	a	liar.	No	slaying	in	the	name	of	a	higher	power,	no	promises	of
redemption.	It	will	not	cloak	brutality	in	the	zeal	that	justifies,	that	absolves.
And	this	is	why	it	is	the	most	horrifying	weapon	of	all.
No	one	could	reach	him,	and	he	could	feel	his	power	seething,	emanating
from	him	in	radiating	waves	–	and	beyond	it	the	world	trembled.	He	was	no
longer	interested	in	hiding.	No	longer	concerned	with	stratagems	of	deceit.
Let	his	enemies	find	him.	Let	them	dare	his	wrath.
Was	this	not	better?	Was	this	not	more	comforting	than	if	he’d	ignited	his
rage?	Tellann	did	not	demand	ferocious	fires,	engulfing	the	lands,	devouring
the	sky.	Tellann	could	hide	in	a	single	spark,	or	the	faint	gleam	in	an	ember ’s
soul.	It	could	hide	in	the	patience	of	a	warrior	immune	to	doubt,	armoured	in
pure	righteousness.
And	if	that	righteousness	then	blazed,	if	it	scorched	all	who	dared	assail	it,
well,	was	that	not	just?
	
Ulag	Togtil	bowed	under	the	assault	of	the	First	Sword’s	thoughts,	this	searing
flood	of	bright	horror.	He	could	feel	the	waves	of	anguish	erupting	from	his
fellow	warriors,	swirling	like	newborn	eels	in	the	maelstrom	of	their	leader ’s
rage.
Was	this	destroying	them	all?	Would	Onos	T’oolan	at	last	find	his	place	to
embrace	annihilation,	only	to	turn	round	and	discover	nothing	but	ashes	in	his
wake?	His	followers	incinerated	by	all	that	roiled	out	from	him?	Or	will	this
anneal	us?	Will	this	forge	us	all	into	his	weapons	of	the	godless?
We	felt	you,	Olar	Ethil,	and	we	too	reject	you	and	all	that	you	promise.	Our
time	is	over.	The	First	Sword	understands	this.	You	do	not.
Go	away.	The	blood	you	demand	from	this	world	is	too	terrible,	and	to	spill
it	in	our	name	is	to	give	final	proof	to	this	theme	of	tragedy,	the	dread	curse


born	of	the	mortal	named	Dassem	Ultor.
Logros,	could	I	find	you	now,	I	would	tear	your	limbs	off.	I	would	twist	your
skull	until	your	neck	snapped.	And	I	would	bury	that	skull	in	the	deepest,
darkest	pit,	so	that	you	witness	naught	but	an	eternity	of	decay.
Yes,	we	understand	the	First	Sword	now.
We	understand,	and	we	cannot	bear	it.
	
Rystalle	Ev	struggled	to	reach	Ulag’s	side.	She	needed	his	strength.	The	First
Sword	was	devouring	himself,	his	thoughts	both	gaping,	snapping	maw	and
mangled,	bloody	tail.	He	was	a	serpent	of	fire,	wheeling	inexorably	forward.
The	current	swept	his	warriors	after	him;	they	staggered,	blind	in	the	deluge	of
terrible	power.
Ulag,	please	–	are	we	not	done	with	weapons?	Is	peace	nothing	but	a	lie?
First	Sword	–	you	vow	to	shatter	us	all,	but	what	will	it	win	us?	Is	this	the
only	legacy	we	can	offer	to	all	who	follow?	We	die,	tokens	of	useless	defiance.
The	kings	will	still	stride	the	earth,	the	slaves	will	still	bow	in	chains,	the
hunters	will	hunt	and	the	hunted	will	die.	Mothers	will	weep	for	lost	children	–
First	Sword,	can	you	offer	us	nothing	but	this?
But	there	was	no	room	in	the	thoughts	of	Onos	T’oolan	to	heed	the	fears
of	his	followers.	He	was	not	even	listening,	chewing	on	the	pathetic	game	of
implacability	–	this	mad	diffidence	and	the	absurdity	of	the	unaffected.	No,
none	of	them	could	reach	him.
But	we	follow.	We	can	do	nothing	else.
She	stumbled	against	Ulag.	He	reached	out,	steadied	her.
‘Ulag?’
‘Hold	on,	Rystalle	Ev.	Find	something.	A	memory	you	can	hold	on	to.	A
time	of	joy,	of	love	even.	When	the	moment	comes…’	he	paused,	as	if
struggling	with	his	words,	‘when	the	time	comes,	and	you	are	driven	to	your
knees,	when	the	world	turns	its	face	from	you	on	all	sides,	when	you	fall	inside
yourself,	and	fall,	and	fall,	find	your	moment,	your	dream	of	peace.’
‘There	is	none,’	she	whispered.	‘I	remember	only	grief.’
‘Find	it,’	he	hissed.	‘You	must!’
‘He	will	see	us	all	destroyed	–	that	is	the	only	peace	I	now	dream	of,	Ulag.’
She	saw	him	turn	away	then,	and	sorrow	filled	her.	See	us?	We	are	the
T’lan	Imass.	We	are	the	glory	of	immortality.	When	oblivion	comes,	I	shall	kiss
it.	And	in	my	mind,	I	shall	ride	into	the	void	on	a	river	of	tears.	On	a	river	of
tears.


	
Gruntle	followed	a	trail	old	beyond	imagination,	skirting	sheer	cliffs,	the
tumbled	wreckage	of	sharp	rocks	and	shattered	boulders.	In	this	place	of
dreams	the	air	was	hot,	smelling	of	salt	marshes	and	vast	tidal	flats.	It	was	a
trail	of	the	dead	and	the	dying,	a	trail	of	clenched	jaws	and	neck	muscles	taut	as
bands	of	iron.	Limbs	scraped,	knocked	against	stone,	and	that	deep,	warm
miasma	that	so	bound	the	minds	of	the	hunted,	the	victims,	filled	the	air	like	the
breath	of	ghosts	trapped	for	ever	in	this	travail.
He	reached	the	cave,	paused	just	outside	it,	head	lifted,	testing	the	air.
But	all	this	was	long	past,	generation	folded	upon	generation,	a	procession
that	promised	to	repeat	again	and	again,	for	all	time.
An	illusion,	he	well	knew.	The	last	giant	cat	that	had	dragged	its	prey	into
this	cave	was	bones	and	dust,	so	scattered	by	the	centuries	that	he	could	not
identify	its	scent.	A	leopard,	a	tiger,	a	cave	lion	–	what	did	it	matter,	the	damned
thing	was	dead.	The	cycle	of	hunting,	breeding	and	rearing	had	long	ago
snapped	clean.
He	edged	into	the	cave,	knowing	what	he	would	find.
Bones.	Gnawed	skulls.	Eres’al	skulls,	and	those	of	other	apes,	and	here	and
there	a	human	child,	a	woman.	This	was	proof	of	a	time	when	the	world’s
future	tyrants	were	nothing	but	victims,	cowering,	eyes	wide	at	the	flash	of
feline	eyes	in	the	darkness.	They	fell	to	savage	fangs,	to	talons.	They	hung
slack	by	the	neck	from	the	jaws	of	the	great	tawny	beasts	haunting	their	world.
Tyranny	was	but	a	gleam	in	the	eye	back	then,	and	each	day	the	sun	lifted	to
light	a	world	of	ignorance.	How	sweet	must	that	have	been.
Gruntle	snorted.	Where	was	the	mind	that	dreamed	of	unimagined
possibilities	–	like	hands	groping	in	the	dark?	Groping	–	was	that	a	flare	of
distant	light?	Was	that	a	promise	of	something,	something…wonderful?	In	the
moment	before	the	low	growl	–	hackles	snapping	–	and	the	sudden	lunge.
Better	to	die	reaching	for	dreams	than	reaching	for…for	what?	That	tick	under
the	armpit	of	the	smelly	creature	huddled	against	you?
I	have	heard	that	rock	apes	gather	on	the	cliff	edges	to	watch	the	sun	set
and	rise.	What	are	they	thinking?	What	are	they	dreaming?	Is	that	a	moment	of
prayer?	A	time	to	give	thanks	for	the	glory	of	life?
A	prayer?	Aye:	‘May	all	these	two-legged	hunters	chew	straight	up	their
own	arses.	Give	us	spears	of	fire	and	lightning	to	turn	this	battle	–	just	once,	we
beg	you.	Just	once!’
He	reached	out	a	massive	barbed	paw	and	slapped	at	a	small	skull,	watched
it	skid	and	then	slowly	spin	in	place.	Got	you,	I	see.	Fangs	went	crunch,	dreams


went	away.	Done.	With	a	low	growl,	he	slipped	past	the	heaps	of	bones	until	he
found	the	place	where	the	ancient	cats	had	slept,	bellies	full,	running	through
the	wild	grasses	of	their	dream	worlds	–	which	were	no	different	from	this
one.	Imagine	dreaming	of	a	paradise	no	different	from	the	one	in	which	you
happen	to	live.	What	moral	might	hide	in	that?
All	these	worlds,	all	these	fraught	warrens,	mocked	him	with	their	perfect
banality.	Patterns	without	revelation,	repetitions	without	meaning.	It	was	not
enough	to	imagine	worlds	without	humans	or	other	sentient	fools;	the	simple
act	of	imagining	placed	his	all-too-human	sensibility	upon	the	scene,	his	very
own	eyes	to	witness	the	idyllic	perfection	of	his	absolute	absence.	For	all	that,
it	was	easy	to	harbour	such	contradictions	–	when	I	hold	on	to	this	humanity
within	me.	When	I	refuse	the	sweet	bliss	of	the	tiger’s	world.
No	wonder	you	forgot	everything,	Trake.	No	wonder	you	weren’t	ready	for
godhood.	In	the	jungles	of	ancient	days,	the	tigers	were	gods.	Until	the	new
gods	arrived.	And	they	were	far	thirstier	for	blood	than	the	tigers	ever	were,
and	now	the	jungle	is	silent.
This	night,	he	knew,	here	in	this	cave,	he	would	dream	of	the	hunt,	the
perfect	stalking	of	the	perfect	prey,	and	dragging	his	victim	up	the	trail	and
into	this	cave,	away	from	the	hyenas	and	jackals.
As	dreams	went,	it	wasn’t	that	bad.	As	dreams	went.
Black	fur,	the	taste	of	blood	in	my	mouth…
	
He	had	found	him	outside	the	walls	of	a	dead	city.	Kneeling	on	a	dusty	road,
collecting	the	shattered	remnants	of	an	old	pot,	but	it	was	not	just	one	pot	that
had	broken	apart,	it	was	hundreds.	A	panicked	flight,	smoke	and	flames	rising
to	blacken	the	limestone	cliffs	against	which	the	city	had	cowered,	the	blurred
passing	of	wretched	faces,	like	broken	husks	and	flotsam	in	a	river.	Things
fell,	things	fell	apart.
He	was	trying	to	put	the	pieces	back	together,	and	as	Mappo	drew	nearer	he
looked	up,	but	only	briefly,	before	returning	to	his	task.	‘Good	sir,’	he	said,
with	one	finger	pushing	shards	back	and	forth,	endlessly	rearranging,	seeking
patterns,	‘Good	sir,	have	you	by	chance	some	glue?’
The	rage	was	gone,	and	with	it	all	memory.	Icarium	knelt	with	his	back	to	a
city	he	had	destroyed.
Sighing,	Mappo	set	his	heavy	satchel	down,	and	then	crouched.	‘Too	many
broke	here,’	he	said,	‘for	you	to	repair.	It	would	take	weeks,	maybe	even
months.’
‘But	I	have	time.’


Mappo	flinched,	looked	away	–	but	not	at	the	city,	where	capemoths
crowded	window	sills	in	the	slope-walled	buildings	leaning	against	the	cliff
walls,	where	the	scorch	marks	streaked	the	stone	like	slashes	into	night.	Not	at
the	city,	with	its	narrow	streets	filled	with	rubble	and	corpses,	and	the	rhizan
lizards	swarming	the	cold,	rotting	flesh,	and	the	bhok’arala	clambering	down
to	lick	sticky	stains	for	the	salt	and	snatching	up	bundles	of	clothing	with	which
to	make	nests.	And	not	at	the	gate,	the	doors	blasted	apart,	the	heaps	of	dead
soldiers	swelling	inside	their	armour	as	the	day’s	heat	burgeoned.
He	stared	instead	southward,	to	the	old	caravan	camps	marked	only	by	low
stone	foundations	and	pens	for	sheep	and	goats.	Never	again	would	the	desert
traders	travel	to	this	place;	never	again	would	merchants	from	distant	cities
come	seeking	the	famous	Redworm	Silks	of	Shikimesh.
‘I	thought,	friend,’	Mappo	said,	and	then	he	shook	his	head.	‘Only
yesterday	you	spoke	of	journeying.	Northeast,	you	said,	to	the	coast.’
Icarium	looked	up,	frowned.	‘I	did?’
‘Seeking	the	Tanno,	the	Spiritwalkers.	They	are	said	to	have	collected
ancient	records	from	as	far	back	as	the	First	Empire.’
‘Yes.’	Icarium	nodded.	‘I	have	heard	that	said,	too.	Think	of	all	that	secret
knowledge!	Tell	me,	do	you	think	the	priests	will	permit	me	entry	to	their
libraries?	There	is	so	much	I	need	to	learn	–	why	would	they	stop	me?	Do	you
think	they	will	be	kind,	friend?	Kind	to	me?’
Mappo	studied	the	shards	on	the	road.	‘The	Tanno	are	said	to	be	very	wise,
Icarium.	I	do	not	imagine	they	would	bar	their	doors	to	you.’
‘Good.	That’s	good.’
The	Trell	scratched	at	the	bristle	on	his	jaw.	‘So,	it	shall	be	Icarium	and
Mappo,	walking	across	the	wastes,	all	the	way	to	the	coast,	there	to	take	ship	to
the	island,	to	the	home	of	the	Spiritwalkers.’
‘Icarium	and	Mappo,’	the	Jhag	repeated,	and	then	he	smiled.	‘Mappo,	my
friend,	this	seems	a	most	promising	day,	does	it	not?’
‘I	shall	draw	water	from	the	caravan	wells,	and	then	we	can	be	on	our	way.’
‘Water,’	said	Icarium.	‘Yes,	so	I	can	wash	this	mud	off	–	I	seem	to	have
bathed	in	it.’
‘You	slid	down	a	bank	yesterday	evening.’
‘Just	so,	Mappo.	Clumsy	of	me.’	He	slowly	straightened,	cupped	in	his
hands	a	score	of	fragments.	‘See	the	beautiful	blue	glaze?	Like	the	sky	itself	–
they	must	have	been	beautiful,	these	vessels.	It	is	such	a	loss,	when	precious
things	break,	isn’t	it?’
‘Yes,	Icarium,	a	terrible	loss.’
‘Mappo?’	He	lifted	eyes	sharp	with	anguish.	‘In	the	city,	I	think,	something


happened.	Thousands	have	died	–	thousands	lie	dead	in	that	city	–	it’s	true,	isn’t
it?’
‘Yes,	Icarium,	a	most	tragic	end.’
‘What	awful	curse	was	visited	upon	it,	do	you	think?’
Mappo	shook	his	head.
Icarium	studied	the	shards	in	his	hands.	‘If	I	could	put	it	all	back	together,	I
would.	You	know	that,	don’t	you?	You	understand	that	–	please,	say	that	you
understand.’
‘I	do,	friend.’
‘To	take	what’s	broken.	To	mend	it.’
‘Yes,’	Mappo	whispered.
‘Must	everything	break	in	the	end?’
‘No,	Icarium,	not	everything.’
‘Not	everything?	What	will	not	break	in	the	end?	Tell	me,	Mappo.’
‘Why,’	and	the	Trell	forced	a	smile,	‘you	need	not	look	far.	Are	we	not
friends,	Icarium?	Have	we	not	always	been	friends?’
A	sudden	light	in	the	Jhag’s	grey	eyes.	‘Shall	I	help	you	with	the	water?’
‘I	would	like	that.’
Icarium	stared	at	the	shards	in	his	hands	and	hesitated.
Mappo	dragged	his	satchel	over.	‘In	here,	if	you	like.	We	can	try	to	put
them	together	later.’
‘But	there’s	more	on	the	road,	all	about	–	I	would	need—’
‘Leave	the	water	to	me,	then,	Icarium.	Fill	the	satchel,	if	you	like,	as	many
as	you	can	gather.’
‘But	the	weight	–	no,	I	think	it	would	prove	too	heavy	a	burden,	friend,	this
obsession	of	mine.’
‘Don’t	worry	on	that	account,	friend.	Go	on.	I	will	be	back	shortly.’
‘You	are	certain?’
‘Go	on.’
With	a	smile,	Icarium	knelt	once	again.	His	gaze	caught	on	his	sword,
lying	on	the	verge	a	few	paces	to	his	right,	and	Mappo	saw	him	frown.
‘I	cleaned	the	mud	from	it	last	night,’	Mappo	said.
‘Ah.	That	was	kind	of	you,	friend.’
	
Shikimesh	and	the	Redworm	Silks.	An	age	ago,	a	thousand	lies	ago,	and	the
biggest	lie	of	all.	A	friendship	that	could	never	break.	He	sat	in	the	gloom,
encircled	by	a	ring	of	stones	he	had	rolled	together	–	an	old	Trell	ritual	–	with
the	gap	opening	to	the	east,	to	where	the	sun	would	rise.	In	his	hands	a	dozen	or


so	dusty,	pale	blue	potsherds.
We	never	got	round	to	putting	them	back	together.	He’d	forgotten	by	the
afternoon,	and	I	made	no	effort	to	remind	him	–	and	was	that	not	my	task?	To
feed	him	only	those	memories	I	judged	useful,	to	starve	all	the	others	until	they
vanished.
Kneeling	that	day,	he	had	been	like	a	child,	with	all	his	games	in	waiting
before	him	–	waiting	for	someone	like	me	to	come	along.	Before	that,	he	was
content	with	the	company	of	his	own	toys	and	nothing	more.	Is	that	not	a
precious	gift?	Is	that	not	the	wonder	of	a	child?	The	way	they	have	of	building
their	own	worlds,	of	living	in	them,	and	finding	joy	in	the	living	itself?
Who	would	break	that?	Who	would	crush	and	destroy	such	a	wondrous
thing?
Will	I	find	you	kneeling	in	the	dust,	Icarium?	Will	I	find	you	puzzling	over
the	wreckage	surrounding	you?	Will	we	speak	of	holy	libraries	and	secret
histories?
Shall	we	sit	and	build	us	a	pot?
With	gentle	care,	Mappo	returned	the	shards	to	his	satchel.	He	lay	down,	set
his	back	to	the	gap	in	the	ring	of	stones,	and	tried	to	sleep.
	
Faint	scanned	the	area.	‘They	split	here,’	she	announced.	‘One	army	went	due
east,	but	it’s	the	narrower	trail.’	She	pointed	southeast.	‘Two,	maybe	three
forces	–	big	ones	–	went	that	way.	So,	we	have	us	a	choice	to	make.’	She	faced
her	companions,	gaze	settling	on	Precious	Thimble.
The	young	woman	seemed	to	have	aged	decades	since	Jula’s	death.	She
stood	in	obvious	pain,	the	soles	of	her	feet	probably	blistered,	cracked	and
weeping.	Just	like	mine.	‘Well?	You	said	there	was	power…out	here,
somewhere.	Tell	us,	which	army	do	we	follow?’
Precious	Thimble	hugged	herself.	‘If	they’re	armies,	there	must	be	a	war.’
Faint	said,	‘Well,	there	was	a	battle,	yes.	We	found	what	was	left.	But	maybe
that	battle	was	the	only	one.	Maybe	the	war ’s	over	and	everyone’s	going
home.’
‘I	meant,	why	do	we	have	to	follow	any	of	them?’
‘Because	we’re	starving	and	dying	of	thirst—’
The	young	woman’s	eyes	flashed.	‘I’m	doing	the	best	I	can!’
Faint	said,	‘I	know,	but	it’s	not	enough,	Precious.	If	we	don’t	catch	up	with
somebody,	we’re	all	going	to	die.’
‘East,	then	–	no,	wait.’	She	hesitated.
‘Out	with	it,’	growled	Faint.


‘There’s	something	terrible	that	way.	I	–	I	don’t	want	to	get	close.	I	reach
out,	and	then	I	flee	–	I	don’t	know	why.	I	don’t	know	anything!’
Amby	was	staring	at	her	as	if	studying	a	strange	piece	of	wood,	or	a
broken	idol.	He	seemed	moments	from	spitting	at	its	feet.
Faint	ran	her	hands	through	her	greasy	hair	–	it	was	getting	long	but	she
welcomed	that.	Anything	to	fend	off	the	infernal	heat.	Her	chest	ached	and	the
pain	was	a	constant	companion	now.	She	dreamed	of	getting	drunk.	Falling
insensate	in	some	alley,	or	some	squalid	room	in	an	inn.	Disappearing	from
herself,	for	one	night,	just	one	night.	And	let	me	wake	up	to	a	new	body,	a	new
world.	With	Sweetest	Sufferance	alive	and	sitting	beside	me.	With	no	warring
gods	and	swords	through	foreheads.	‘What	about	to	the	southeast,	Sorceress?
Any	bad	feelings	in	that	direction?’
Precious	Thimble	shook	her	head,	and	then	shrugged.
‘What	does	that	mean?’	Faint	hissed	in	exasperation.	‘Is	it	as	nasty	as	what’s
east	of	us,	or	isn’t	it?’
‘No	–	but…’
‘But	what?’
‘It	tastes	of	blood!	There!	How’s	that,	then?	It	all	tastes	of	blood!’
‘Are	they	spilling	it	or	drinking	it?’
Precious	Thimble	stared	at	Faint	as	if	she’d	gone	mad.	Gods,	maybe	I	have,
asking	a	question	like	that.	‘Which	way	will	kill	us	quickest?’
A	deep,	shuddering	breath.	‘East.	That	army	–	they’re	all	going	to	die.’
‘Of	what?’	Faint	demanded.
‘I	don’t	know	–	thirst,	maybe.	Yes,	thirst.’	Her	eyes	widened.	‘There’s	no
water,	no	water	at	all	–	I	see	ground,	glittering	ground,	blinding,	sharp	as
daggers.	And	bones	–	endless	fields	of	bones.	I	see	men	and	women	driven
mad	by	the	heat.	I	see	children	–	oh	gods	–	they	come	walking	up	like
nightmares,	like	proof	of	all	the	crimes	we	have	ever	committed.’	Abruptly,
horrifyingly,	she	howled,	her	hands	to	her	face,	and	then	staggered	back	and
would	have	fallen	if	not	for	Amby,	who	stepped	close	to	take	her	weight.	She
twisted	round	and	buried	herself	in	his	embrace.	Over	her	head,	he	stared	at
Faint,	and	gave	her	a	jarring	smile.
Madness?	Too	late,	Precious	Thimble	–	and	thank	the	gods	you	can’t	see
what	we’re	seeing.	Shivering,	Faint	turned	to	the	southeast.	‘That	way,	then.’
Children.	Don’t	remind	me.	Some	crimes	cut	close	to	the	bone,	too	close.	No,
don’t	remind	me.
In	her	mind	she	saw	Sweetest	Sufferance,	a	face	splitting	into	a	smile.
‘Finally,’	she	muttered,	‘a	decision.	Get	on	with	it,	Faint.’
Faint	nodded	for	Amby	to	follow	with	the	sorceress,	and	then	she	set	out


with	her	hobbling,	wincing	gait.	If	they’ve	gone	too	far,	we	won’t	make	it.	If	we
get	much	worse…blood.	We’ll	either	spill	it	or	drink	it.
She	wondered	at	the	armies	ahead.	Who	in	Hood’s	name	were	they,	and
why	go	this	deep	into	the	Wastelands	just	to	fight	a	stupid	battle?	And	why	then
split	up?	And	you	poor	fools	marching	east.	Just	a	glimpse	of	where	you’re
headed	tears	at	her	sanity.	I	pray	you	turn	back	before	you	leave	too	many	lying
lifeless	on	the	ground.
Wherever	you’re	going,	it	can’t	be	worth	it.	Nothing	in	this	world	is	worth
it,	and	you’d	be	hard	pressed	to	convince	me	otherwise.
She	heard	a	grunt	and	glanced	back.
Amby	was	carrying	Precious	Thimble	in	his	arms,	the	smile	on	his	face
stretched	into	a	rictus	travesty	of	satisfaction,	as	if	in	finding	his	heart’s	desire
he	was	forcing	himself	to	take	its	fullest	pleasure.	Precious	Thimble’s	head
lolled	against	his	upper	arm,	her	eyes	closed,	her	mouth	half	open.
‘What’s	wrong	with	her?’
Amby	said,	‘Fainted…	Faint.’
‘Oh,	sod	off,	you	lump	of	lard.’
	
Ten	thousand	furred	backs,	black,	silver	and	grey,	the	bodies	lean	and	long.
Like	iron	swords,	ten	thousand	iron	swords.	They	seethed	before	Setoc’s	eyes,
they	blurred	like	the	honed	edges	of	waves	on	an	angry	sea.	She	was	carried
along,	driven	to	rearing	cliffs,	to	up-thrust	fangs	of	rotted	rock.
The	wind	roared	in	her	ears,	roared	in	and	through	her,	trembling	like
thunder	through	every	bone	of	her	being.	She	felt	the	beasts	crashing	ashore,
felt	their	fury	assailing	insensate	stone	and	all	the	brutal	laws	that	held	it	in
place.	They	bared	teeth	at	the	sky,	they	bit	and	chewed	shafts	of	sunlight	as	if
speared	through.	They	howled	against	the	coming	of	night	and	in	the	hunt	they
stalked	their	own	senseless	savagery.
We	are	what	we	are,	and	facing	this	enemy	what	we	are	is	helpless.
Who	will	fight	for	us?	Who	will	peel	lips	back	to	reveal	swords	of	sharp
iron?
The	cliffs	ahead	reverberated	to	the	onslaught	–	she	drew	ever	closer.
Wolves	of	Winter,	do	you	see	me?	Blessed	Lord,	Proud	Lady,	is	this	your
summons?	Does	there	await	a	cave	in	that	ravaged	wall?	And	inside,	a	Hold	of
Thrones?
There	is	a	smell	to	the	wild,	a	smell	that	makes	the	hairs	stand	on	end,	that
rushes	like	ice	through	human	veins.	There	are	trails	crossing	the	path,	secret
passages	beneath	the	canopy.	Mice	dance	on	the	beaten	floor	in	the	instant


before	we	arrive,	and	we	are	blind	to	it	all.
And	all	the	spaces	carved	out	by	our	fires	and	our	weapons	and	our	axes
and	our	ploughs,	we	must	then	fill	with	that	sweating,	bitter	flood	that	is	pride.
In	the	wastelands	of	our	making	we	will	ourselves	to	stand	as	would	one	exalted
and	triumphant.
Thrones	of	the	Wild,	thrones	of	bones	and	hides	and	lifeless	eyes.	Tall	as
mountains,	these	Beast	Thrones.
Who	assails	us?	Who	hunts	us?	Who	slays	us?
Everyone.
She	raced	for	the	jagged	rocks.	Annihilation,	if	it	came,	would	arrive	as	a
blessing.	The	heat	of	the	beasts	carrying	her	was	sweet	as	a	loving	kiss,	a	safe
embrace,	a	promise	of	salvation.	I	am	the	Destriant	of	the	Wolves.	I	hold	in	my
chest	the	souls	of	the	all	the	slain	beasts,	of	this	and	every	other	world.
But	I	cannot	hold	them	for	ever.
I	need	a	sword.	I	need	absolution.
Absolution,	yes,	and	a	sword.	Ten	thousand	iron	swords.	In	the	name	of	the
Wolves	of	Winter,	in	the	name	of	the	Wild.
	
Sister	Equity	walked	across	lifeless	sand,	far	to	the	south	of	the	Spire,	far	away
from	the	eyes	of	everyone.	She	had	once	dreamed	of	peace.	She	had	lived	in	a
world	where	questions	were	rare,	and	there	had	been	comfort	in	that.	If	there
was	a	cause	worthy	enough	to	which	she	could	devote	her	life,	it	was	to
journey	from	birth	to	death	without	confrontation.	Nothing	to	stir	her	unease,
nothing	to	deliver	pain	or	to	receive	it.	Although	the	Forkrul	Assail	had	long
ago	lost	their	god,	had	long	ago	suffered	the	terrible	grief	of	that	god’s	violent
end	–	the	murder	for	which	no	penance	was	possible	–	she	had	come	to
harbour	in	her	own	soul	a	childish	hope	that	a	new	god	could	be	made.
Assembled	like	the	setting	of	bones,	the	moulded	clay	of	muscles,	the	smooth
caress	of	a	face	given	form,	given	life	by	her	own	loving	hands.	And	this	god
she	would	call	Harmony.
In	the	world	of	this	god	life	would	not	demand	a	death.	There	would	be	no
need	to	kill	in	order	to	eat.	There	would	be	no	cruel	fate	or	random	tragedy	to
take	one	before	her	time,	and	the	forests	and	plains	would	seethe	with	animals,
the	skies	with	birds,	the	seas,	lakes	and	rivers	with	fish.
The	wishes	of	a	child	were	fragile	things,	and	she	now	knew	that	none	ever
survived	the	hard,	jostling	indifference	that	came	with	the	bitter	imperatives	of
adulthood:	the	stone-eyed	rush	to	find	elusive	proofs	of	worth,	or	to	reach	at
last	the	swollen	satiation	that	was	satisfaction.	Virtues	changed;	the	clays	found


new	forms	and	hardened	to	stone,	and	adults	took	weapons	in	hand	and	killed
each	other	over	them.	And	in	that	new	world	she	had	found	herself	growing
into	there	was	no	place	–	no	place	at	all	–	for	peace.
She	recalled	walking	from	the	ship	into	the	city,	into	the	midst	of	these
clamouring	humans	with	the	frightened	eyes.	On	all	sides,	she	could	see	how
they	dwelt	in	war,	each	one	an	exhausted	soldier	battling	demons	real	and
imagined.	They	fought	for	status,	they	fought	for	dignity,	and	they	fought	to
wrest	both	away	from	their	neighbours,	their	mates,	their	kin.	In	fact,	the	very
necessity	that	held	families	together,	and	neighbourhoods,	provinces	and
kingdoms,	was	fraught	with	desperation	and	fear,	barricaded	against	the
unknown,	the	strange	and	the	threatening.
The	Forkrul	Assail	had	been	right	in	shattering	it	all.	There	would	be
peace,	but	in	the	making	of	peace	there	must	be	judgement,	and	retribution.	The
people	of	Kolanse	and	the	kingdoms	to	the	south	must	all	be	returned	to	their
childlike	state,	and	then	built	anew.	They	could	not,	would	not,	do	it	for
themselves	–	too	many	things	got	in	the	way,	after	all.	They	always	did.
It	was	unfortunate	that	to	achieve	a	sustainable	balance	many	thousands	had
to	die,	but	when	the	alternative	was	the	death	of	everyone,	who	could	argue
against	the	choice	made?	Populations	had	been	dismantled,	selectively	culled.
Entire	regions	laid	waste,	not	a	single	human	left,	to	free	the	land	to	heal.
Those	who	were	permitted	to	live	were	forced	into	a	new	way	of	living,	under
the	implacable	guidance	of	the	Forkrul	Assail.
If	this	had	been	the	extent	of	the	redress,	Equity	would	have	been	content.
Things	could	be	made	viable,	a	balance	could	be	achieved,	and	perhaps	even	a
new	god	would	arise,	born	of	sober	faith	in	reality	and	its	very	real	limitations,
born	of	honest	humility	and	the	desire	for	peace.	A	faith	to	spread	across	the
world,	adjudicated	by	the	Pures	and	then	the	Watered.
If	not	for	the	Heart,	if	not	for	that	fist	of	torment	dredged	up	from	the
depths	of	the	bay.	All	that	power,	so	raw,	so	alien,	so	perfect	in	its	denial.	Our
god	was	slain,	but	we	had	already	found	a	path	to	vengeance	–	the	Nah’ruk,
who	had	broken	their	chains	and	now	thirsted	for	the	blood	of	their	masters.	So
much	was	already	within	our	reach.
But	for	the	Heart,	so	firing	Reverence,	Serenity	and	the	other	elders,	so
poisoning	their	souls.	No	balance	could	be	perfect	–	we	all	knew	that	–	but	now
a	new	solution	burned	bright,	so	bright	it	blinded	them	to	all	else.	The	Gate,
wrested	away	from	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	cleansed	of	that	foul,	ancient	curse.
Akhrast	Korvalain,	returned	once	more	to	the	Forkrul	Assail,	and	from	that	gate
–	from	the	power	of	the	Heart	–	we	could	resurrect	our	god.
We	could	be	made	children	once	again.


Sacrifices?	Oh	yes,	but	everything	of	worth	demanded	that.	Balance?	Why,
we	shall	do	away	with	the	one	force	eternally	intent	on	destroying	that	balance
–	humanity.
Our	answer	is	annihilation.	Our	cull	shall	be	absolute.	Our	cull	shall	be	the
excision	of	an	entire	species.
‘Raise	up	the	Heart!	Hold	it	high	so	that	its	dread	beat	is	heard	by	all!
Against	the	depredations	of	humanity,	think	you	not	that	we	shall	find	allies?’
Allies.	Yes,	Reverence,	we	have	found	allies.
And	I	tell	myself	that	I	see	peace	in	the	future	–	the	peace	of	my	childhood,
the	peace	of	harmony,	the	peace	of	a	silent	world.	All	we	need	to	reach	it,	is	a
little	blood.	A	little	blood.
But,	Sister	Reverence,	then	I	look	into	your	ancient	eyes,	and	I	see	how	the
hunger	of	our	allies	has	infected	you.	The	Tiste	Liosan,	the	Eleint,	the	Lord	and
Lady	of	the	Beast	Hold	–	but	all	they	desire	is	chaos,	anarchy,	destruction,	the
end	of	the	Age	of	Gods	and	the	Age	of	Humans.	Like	you,	they	thirst	for	blood,
but	not	a	little	blood.	No.	Oceans,	oceans	of	blood.
Sister	Reverence,	we	shall	defy	you	when	the	time	comes.	Calm	has	found	a
weapon,	a	weapon	to	end	your	insane	ambitions.
Her	footfalls	were	a	whisper	in	the	sand,	but	in	her	mind	the	ground
trembled	beneath	her	tread.	The	sun’s	heat	was	fierce	on	her	white	face,	but	the
fire	of	her	thoughts	was	hotter	still.	And	the	voices	from	the	beach,	not	far
ahead	now,	should	fall	in	futility	before	her	hard	intransigence,	yet	in	them	she
found…hope.
‘Balance,’	she	said	under	her	breath.	‘Sister	Reverence,	you	force	this	upon
us.	In	your	extremity,	we	must	counter	you.	Calm	has	found	the	weapon	we
need.	Reach	for	your	fiercest	madness,	we	shall	match	it	–	and	more.’
In	truth,	she	cared	nothing	for	the	fate	of	humanity.	If	they	all	perished,	so
be	it.	No,	what	was	important,	here	and	now	and	in	the	future	to	come,	was
principle.	Balance	has	an	eternal	enemy,	and	its	name	is	ambition.	You	have
forgotten	this,	Sister	Reverence,	and	it	falls	to	us	to	remind	you.	And	so	we
shall.
She	climbed	the	high	bank	above	the	beach.	Below,	fifteen	paces	away,	a
dozen	humans	had	gathered,	and	it	seemed	an	argument	was	under	way.	In	the
bay	beyond	sat	a	ship,	its	arcane	lines	sending	a	sudden	chill	through	Equity.
Jaghut.	The	fools!
She	marched	down	on	to	the	beach.
The	first	two	sailors	who	saw	her	both	shrieked.	Weapons	flashed,	and	all
at	once	the	humans	were	rushing	towards	her.
‘I	would	speak—’


A	cutlass	lashed	out	for	her	face.	She	edged	aside,	caught	the	wrist	and
clenched	until	bones	split.	The	man	howled,	and	she	closed,	driving	her	fingers
into	his	throat.	Blood	sprayed	from	his	gaping	mouth,	his	eyes	bulging	as	he
fell	back.	A	knife-thrust	sought	her	stomach.	Her	mid-section	bent	to	one	side,
evading	the	attack.	She	sent	one	hand	snapping	out	to	grasp	the	woman’s
forehead	and	crushed	it	like	the	shell	of	an	egg.
A	cutlass	struck	her	left	shoulder,	rebounded	as	if	from	dense	wood.
Hissing,	Equity	twisted	round.	Two	swift	blows	broke	the	man’s	neck.
Scowling	now,	she	waded	forward.	Bodies	spun	to	her	lashing	hands.	The
screams	were	deafening—
And	then	the	survivors	were	fleeing	along	the	beach,	their	weapons	flung
away,	and	down	by	the	water,	thirty	paces	distant,	stood	four	figures:	a	man,
three	women.	Equity	marched	towards	them.
Sorcery	erupted	from	the	shortest	of	the	women.	A	wave	of	blistering	cold
crashed	into	the	Forkrul	Assail,	driving	her	back	a	step.
One	of	the	other	women	had	drawn	two	short-hafted	throwing	axes	and
was	fast	closing.
Sweet	kiss	of	the	Abyss,	are	they	all	suicidal?	‘Cease	your	attack!’
One	axe	flew	straight	for	her.	She	slipped	from	its	path,	only	to	grunt	as
the	second	axe	struck	her	in	the	chest,	its	iron	blade	lodged	in	her	breast	bone.
Agony	ripped	through	her.	The	second	wave	of	Omtose	Phellack	lifted	her
from	the	sand,	flung	her	five	paces	back.	She	landed	hard	on	her	back,	rolled,
and	then	regained	her	feet.	The	bones	of	her	chest	plate	convulsed,	rejecting
the	axe	blade,	and	she	straightened	in	time	to	meet	the	attack	of	the	axethrowing	woman.
Long-bladed	knives,	a	blur	of	hissing	blades.
Equity	blocked	the	attacks,	one	after	another,	but	was	driven	back,	one	step,
two.
She	awakened	her	voice.	‘STOP!’
The	woman	staggered,	and	then,	with	a	growl,	she	pushed	forward.
‘STOP	THIS!’
Blood	spattered	from	her	attacker ’s	nose.	Blood	blossomed	in	her	eyes.
She	stumbled,	then	lifted	her	weapons	once	more.
Snarling,	Equity	stepped	close	and	slapped	the	woman,	hard	enough	to
snap	her	head	round.	She	collapsed	in	a	heap.	The	Forkrul	Assail	stood	over
her,	contemplating	driving	a	heel	into	the	human’s	throat.
An	arrow	glanced	across	her	left	temple,	scoring	a	red	slash.	‘CEASE	ALL
ATTACKS!’
The	woman	at	her	feet	moaned,	tried	to	rise.	Exasperated,	Equity	reached


down,	picked	her	up	and	threw	her	into	the	sea	ten	paces	to	her	right.	She
stabbed	a	long	finger	at	the	sorceress.	‘I	will	speak	to	you!’
The	other	woman	with	her	shouted,	‘Then	stop	killing	my	crew!’
Equity	ran	a	finger	along	the	gash	in	her	temple	–	the	wound	was	already
mending.	She	sighed.	Her	chest	ached,	but	the	bones	had	begun	healing	and	the
pain	was	fading	to	an	itch.	‘They	attacked	me,’	she	said.	‘I	simply	defended
myself.	Indeed,’	she	added,	cautiously	approaching,	‘if	I	desired	to	kill	them
all,	I	would	have	done	so.’
‘I	see	five	bodies	over	there—’
‘As	I	said,	I	would	have	killed	them	all.’
The	woman	thrashing	in	the	shallows	was	climbing	unsteadily	to	her	feet.
Equity	regarded	her	for	a	moment.	‘If	she	comes	at	me	again,	I	will	kill	her.’
She	faced	the	sorceress.	‘Make	that	plain	to	her	–	she	belongs	to	you,	does	she
not?’
The	short,	plump	mage	made	a	strange	wiggle	with	the	fingers	of	one
hand.	‘I	am	hard	pressed	to	keep	her	from	carving	your	head	from	your	rather
bony	shoulders.	You	certainly	have	a	way	with	words,	Inquisitor,	but	that	will
not	work	a	second	time.’
Equity	narrowed	her	attention	on	the	other	woman	in	the	group.	She
snorted.	‘It	is	said	the	Realm	of	Death	is	sundered.	Do	your	kind	now	plague
the	world?’
‘I	carry	no	plague,’	the	woman	replied.
The	Forkrul	Assail	frowned.	Was	she	a	simpleton?	Often,	she	well	knew,
the	brain	decayed	irreparably	in	such	creatures.
The	man	standing	beside	the	undead	woman	was	now	staring	at	her	with
his	one	working	eye.	‘Did	she	say	y’got	the	plague,	Cap’n?’
‘No,	Pretty,	she	said	you’re	an	idiot.	Now	be	quiet	–	better	yet,	gather	up
the	crew,	now	that	they’ve	scattered	every	which	way,	and	detail	a	burial	party,
and	all	that	other	stuff.	Go	on.’
‘Aye,	Cap’n.’	Then	he	hesitated,	and	said	in	a	hoarse	whisper	that	all	could
hear,	‘It’s	just,	this	one,	she	looks	like	she’s	got	a	plague,	don’t	she?	All	white
and	all	those	veins	on	her	arms,	and—’
‘Go,	Kaban.	Now.’
Nodding,	the	man	limped	off.
Equity	watched	the	woman	who’d	attacked	her	set	about	retrieving	her
weapons.
‘Inquisitor,’	said	the	sorceress,	‘we	have	no	interest	in	suffering	your…
adjudication.	Indeed,	we	proclaim	you	our	enemy.’
‘Is	blind	hatred	your	only	recourse?’	Equity	demanded.	‘You	name	me


“Inquisitor”,	telling	me	that	you	know	certain	details	of	local	significance.	Yet
that	title	is	a	presumption.	You	assume	that	all	Forkrul	Assail	are	Inquisitors,
and	this	is	ignorant.	Indeed,	most	of	the	Inquisitors	we	set	upon	the	peoples	of
this	land	were	Watered	–	as	much	human	blood	in	their	veins	as	Assail.	We
discovered	a	rather	sweet	irony	in	observing	their	zeal,	by	the	way.’
‘Nevertheless,’	the	sorceress	retorted,	even	as	she	made	imperative
gestures	towards	her	servant,	‘we	must	view	you	as	our	enemy.’
‘You	still	do	not	understand,	do	you?	Your	enemies	are	the	Elders	among
the	Pures,	who	seek	the	utter	destruction	of	you	and	your	kind,	not	just	on	this
continent,	but	across	the	entire	world.’
‘I	am	sure	you	understood	why	we	might	object	to	such	desires,’	the
sorceress	said,	and	now	her	servant	arrived,	delivering	into	the	young
woman’s	plump	hand	a	clay	pipe.	She	puffed	for	a	moment,	and	then	continued,
‘And	while	you	appear	to	be	suggesting	that	you	do	not	share	the	zeal	of	your
Elder	Pures,	I	cannot	help	but	wonder	what	has	brought	you	here,	to	me.’
‘You	have	bargained	with	the	Jaghut,’	said	Equity.
‘They	share	our	aversion	to	your	notions	of	justice.’
Frowning,	Equity	said,	‘I	cannot	understand	what	value	the	Jaghut	see	in
you,	a	silly	little	girl	playing	at	deadly	magics,	and	beside	you	a	lifeless
abomination	harbouring	a	parasite.’	She	fixed	her	gaze	upon	the	servant.	‘Is
there	a	glamour	about	this	one?	If	so,	it	is	too	subtle	for	me.	Tell	me,
Sorceress,	is	she	Jaghut?’
‘My	handmaid?	Goodness,	no!’
Equity’s	eyes	settled	upon	the	ship	in	the	bay.	‘Is	he	there?’
‘Who?’
‘Your	ally	–	I	would	speak	to	him.	Or	her.’
Smoke	billowed	and	streamed.	‘I’m	sorry,	what	ally?’
‘Where	hides	the	Jaghut?’	Equity	demanded.
‘Ah,	I	see.	You	misapprehend.	I	struck	no	bargain	with	any	particular
Jaghut.	I	merely	sacrificed	some	blood	for	the	privilege	of	Omtose	Phellack
—’
The	undead	captain	turned	on	the	sorceress.	‘You	did	what?	Errant’s	nudge
–	that	storm!	You	can’t—’
‘Necessity,	Captain	Elalle.	Now	please,	cogitate	in	silence	for	the	moment,
will	you?’
‘I	am	astonished,’	admitted	Equity.	‘I	did	not	imagine	you	to	be	so…thick.’
‘Thorns	and	rocks—’
‘You	cannot	bargain	with	Omtose	Phellack	–	you	are	not	Jaghut.	No,	you
need	a	blessing,	or	personal	intervention,	and	this	is	as	true	of	a	mortal	as	it	is


of	an	Elder	God.	That	ship	is	Jaghut	–	its	kind	has	not	sailed	the	seas	of	this
world	for	millennia.	Where	has	it	come	from?’
‘From	the	realm	of	Omtose	Phellack	itself,’	said	the	sorceress.
‘No,	that	is	not	possible.	Unless	a	Jaghut	has	journeyed	into	the	warren	–
but	no,	there	is	naught	but	ice	–	yonder	ship	was	built	in	this	world.	Do	you	see
now	why	this	makes	no	sense?’
‘Not	just	ice,	apparently.’
‘You	have	seen	Omtose	Phellack?’
‘My	handmaid,’	said	the	sorceress.	‘It	was	she	who	journeyed	through	the
gate.	It	was	she	who	entered	Omtose	Phellack	and	returned	with	the	ship.’
Equity	studied	the	woman	with	the	bruised	eyes.	‘Describe	the	place	where
you	were,	please.’
‘Enlighten	her,’	ordered	the	sorceress	when	the	handmaid	hesitated.
A	shrug,	and	then,	‘Forest.	Demons.	Ravines.	Vicious	apes.’
‘You	did	not	journey	to	Omtose	Phellack,’	Equity	pronounced.	‘The	gate
opened	upon	another	realm,	a	different	warren.’
‘That	cannot	be,’	objected	the	sorceress.	‘My	ritual	fed	on	the	power	of
Omtose	Phellack.’
‘Enough	of	all	this,’	drawled	the	captain,	crossing	her	arms.	‘This	Forkrul
Assail	has	come	here	to	negotiate.	She	seeks	to	betray	her	Elders.	Obviously,
she’s	come	looking	for	allies,	though	why	she	would	seek	us	out	remains
something	of	a	mystery,	since	she	clearly	knew	nothing	about	your	making	use
of	Omtose	Phellack,	Princess.	So,	unless	your	skills	in	sorcery	are	such	that
even	the	gods	tremble,	I	admit	to	having	some	trouble	understanding	what	she
wants	from	us.’
Equity	sighed.	‘We	felt	the	touch	of	an	Elder	Warren,	but	could	not
determine	which	one.’
‘Then	it	was	the	Elder	Pures	who	dispatched	you?’
‘No,	those	who	remain	close	to	the	Spire	are	mostly	blind	to	distant
powers.	When	I	spoke	of	“we”	I	meant	myself	and	my	comrades;	we	have
journeyed	many	times	well	beyond	the	influence	of	the	power	emanating	from
the	Spire,	else	we	would	not	have	detected	these…intrusions.’
‘And	now	you	want	to	forge	some	kind	of	alliance,’	said	the	captain.
‘You	seek	the	Spire,	and	that	which	lies	upon	its	altar—’
‘Not	precisely,’	interjected	the	sorceress,	pausing	to	pull	hard	on	her	pipe
before	adding,	‘we	seek	to	prevent	whatever	it	is	you’re	all	planning.’
‘And	how	do	you	expect	to	do	that?’
‘I	believe	the	term	you	have	already	used	will	suffice:	allies.’
‘If	you	–	and	your	allies	–	would	have	any	hope	of	succeeding,	you	will


need	our	help.’
‘And	if	we	do	not	trust	you?’	the	captain	asked.
‘This	is	proving	a	waste	of	time,’	said	Equity.	‘I	will	speak	to	the	Jaghut
now.’
‘There	isn’t	one,’	said	the	sorceress,	behind	a	veil	of	smoke.
‘Then	he	or	she	is	hiding	even	from	you.	Open	the	gate,	Princess	–	the	one
you	used	for	your	servant.	The	presence	is	very	close	–	I	can	feel	it.	I	felt	it
when	you	unleashed	Omtose	Phellack	against	me.	Open	the	gate,	and	let	us	all
see	who	has	come	among	us.’
Hissing,	the	sorceress	held	out	her	pipe.	The	handmaid	took	it.	‘Very	well.
It	will	be	a	feeble	gate;	indeed,	I	might	well	fail—’
‘It	won’t.’
The	sorceress	walked	a	short	distance	away,	her	rounded	hips	swaying.	She
lifted	her	hands,	fingers	moving	as	if	plucking	invisible	strings.
Bitter	cold	flooded	out,	the	sand	crackling	as	if	lit	by	lightning,	and	the
gate	that	erupted	was	massive,	yawning,	towering.	Through	the	billowing	icy
air	flowed	out	a	sweeter,	rank	smell.	The	smell	of	death.
A	figure	stood	on	the	threshold	of	the	gate.	Tall,	hunched,	a	withered,
lifeless	face	of	greenish	grey,	yellowed	tusks	thrusting	up	from	the	lower	jaw.
Pitted	eyes	regarded	them	from	beneath	a	tattered	woollen	cowl.
The	power	cascading	from	this	apparition	sent	Equity	stumbling	back.
Abyss!	A	Jaghut,	yes,	but	not	just	any	Jaghut!	Calm	–	can	you	hear	me?
Through	this	howl?	Can	you	hear	me?	An	ally	stands	before	me	–	an	ally	of
ancient	–	so	ancient	–	power!	This	one	could	have	been	an	Elder	God.	This	one
could	have	been…anything!	Gasping,	fighting	to	keep	from	falling	to	one
knee,	from	bowing	before	this	terrible	creature,	Equity	forced	herself	to	lift
her	gaze,	to	meet	the	empty	hollows	of	his	eyes.
‘I	know	you,’	she	said.	‘You	are	Hood.’
The	Jaghut	stepped	forward,	the	gate	swirling	closed	behind	him.	Hood
paused,	regarding	each	witness	in	turn,	and	then	walked	towards	Equity.
‘They	made	you	their	king,’	she	whispered.	‘They	who	followed	no	one
chose	to	follow	you.	They	who	refused	every	war	fought	your	war.	And	what
you	did	then	–	what	you	did—’
As	he	reached	her,	his	desiccated	hands	caught	her.	He	lifted	her	from	her
feet,	and	then,	mouth	stretching,	he	bit	into	the	side	of	her	face.	The	tusks	drove
up	beneath	her	cheek	bone,	burst	the	eye	on	that	side.	In	a	welter	of	blood,	he
tore	away	half	of	her	face,	and	then	bit	a	second	time,	up	under	the	orbitals,	the
tusks	driving	into	her	brain.
Equity	hung	in	his	grip,	feeling	her	life	drain	away.	Her	head	felt	strangely


unbalanced.	She	seemed	to	be	weeping	from	only	one	eye,	and	from	her	throat
no	words	were	possible.	I	once	dreamed	of	peace.	As	a	child,	I	dreamed	of—
	
Shurq	Elalle	stared	in	horror	as	the	Jaghut	flung	the	corpse	away.	From	his
gore-drenched	mouth	fell	fragments	of	scalp	and	skull.
Then	Hood	faced	them,	and	in	a	dry,	toneless	voice	he	said,	‘I	have	never
much	liked	Forkrul	Assail.’
No	one	spoke.	Felash	stood	trembling,	her	face	pale	as	death	itself.	Beside
her,	the	handmaid	had	set	her	hands	upon	the	axes	at	her	belt,	but	seemed
unable	to	move	beyond	that	futile,	diffident	gesture.
Shurq	Elalle	gathered	herself,	and	said,	‘You	have	a	singular	way	of
ending	a	discussion,	Jaghut.’
The	empty	pits	seemed	to	find	her,	somehow,	and	Hood	said,	‘We	have	no
need	of	allies.	Besides,	I	recently	learned	a	lesson	in	brevity,	Shurq	Elalle,
which	I	have	taken	to	heart.’
‘A	lesson?	Really?	Who	taught	you	that?’
The	Jaghut	looked	away,	across	the	water.	‘Ah,	my	Death	Ship.	I	admit,	it
was	a	quaint	affectation.	Nonetheless,	one	cannot	help	but	admire	its	lines.’
Princess	Felash,	Fourteenth	Daughter	of	Bolkando,	fell	to	her	knees	and
was	sick	in	the	sand.


Chapter	Ten

What	is	it	about	this	world
That	so	causes	you	trouble?
Why	avow	in	your	tone
This	victim	role?
And	the	plaintive	hurt
Painting	your	eyes
Bemoans	a	life’s	struggle
Ever	paying	a	grievous	toll
We	gathered	in	one	place
Under	the	selfsame	sun
And	the	bronze	woman
Holding	the	basin,
Her	breasts	settled	in	the	bowl,
Looked	down	with	pity
Or	was	it	contempt?
She	is	a	queen	of	dreams
And	her	gift	is	yours	to	take
Pity	if	you	choose	it
Or	contempt	behind	the	veil
I	would	have	polished	those	eyes
For	a	better	look
I	would	have	caressed	those	roses
For	a	sweeter	taste
When	we	drink	from	the	same	cup
And	you	make	bitter	recoil
I	wonder	at	the	tongue	in	waiting
And	your	deadening	flavours
So	eager	to	now	despoil
What	is	it	about	this	world
That	so	causes	you	trouble?


What	could	I	say	to	change
Your	wounded	regard?
If	my	cold	kiss	must	fail
And	my	milk	run	sour
Beneath	the	temple	bell
That	so	blights	your	reward?
Ten	thousand	hang	from	trees
Their	limbs	bared	roots
Starved	of	hope	in	the	sun
And	the	wood-cutters	are	long	gone
Up	to	where	the	road	gives	way
To	trails	in	the	dust
That	spiral	and	curl
Like	the	smoke	of	fires
They	are	blazing	beacons
In	the	desert	night.
It	was	said	by	the	lepers
Huddled	against	the	hill
That	a	man	with	no	hands
Who	could	stare	only
As	could	the	blind
Upon	the	horrors	of	argument
Did	with	one	hand	gone
Reach	into	the	dark	sky
And	with	the	other	too	gone
He	led	me	home
Wood-Cutters
Tablets	II	&	III
Hethra	of	Aren
	boulders,	for	all	the	world
like	an	ancient	shoreline.	Aranict	could	not	pull	her	gaze	from	it.	She	sat
slumped	in	the	saddle	of	her	wearily	plodding	horse,	a	hood	drawn	over
against	the	blistering	sun,	off	to	one	side	of	the	main	column.	Prince	Brys	rode
somewhere	ahead,	near	the	vanguard,	leaving	her	alone.
The	desert’s	vast,	flat	stretch	was	blinding,	the	glare	painful	and	strangely
THE	EDGE	OF	THE	GLASS	DESERT	WAS	A	BROKEN	LINE	OF	CRYSTALS	AND


discordant,	as	if	she	was	witnessing	an	ongoing	crime,	the	raw	lacerations	of	a
curse	upon	the	land	itself.	Stones	melted	to	glass,	shards	of	crystal	jutting	like
spears,	others	that	grew	like	bushes,	every	branch	and	twig	glittering	as	if
made	of	ice.
Rolled	up	against	the	verge	there	were	bones,	heaped	like	driftwood.	Most
were	shattered,	reduced	to	splinters,	as	if	whatever	had	befallen	the	land	had
taken	in	a	massive	fist	each	creature	and	crushed	the	life	from	it	–	it	felt	like	a
deliberate	act,	an	exercise	in	unbelievable	malice.	She	thought	she	could	still
taste	the	evil,	could	still	feel	its	rotted	breath	on	the	wind.
Waves	of	nausea	spread	out	from	her	stomach	again	and	again,	slow	as	a
creeping	tide,	and	when	it	washed	its	way	back,	when	it	retreated,	it	left	a
residue	in	her	own	bones.	This	place,	it	wants	to	kill	me.	I	can	feel	it.	Her	skin
was	clammy	and	cool	beneath	her	cloak.	It	wants	inside.	Eager	as	an	infection.
Who	could	have	done	this?	Why?	What	terrible	conflict	led	to	this?
She	imagined	that	if	she	listened	carefully	enough,	if	all	the	sounds	of
thousands	of	soldiers	marching	and	hundreds	of	wagons	rolling	were	to
suddenly	fall	away,	if	even	the	wind	moaned	into	silence,	she	might	hear	still
the	droning	words	of	the	ritual	that	had	ignited	the	fires,	creating	the
desecrating	cruelty	that	would	become	the	Glass	Desert.
This	is	what	despair	leads	to,	the	kind	of	despair	that	steals	light	from	the
world,	that	mocks	life’s	own	struggle	to	exist,	to	persist.	Denying	our	desire	to
heal,	to	mend	all	that	we	break.	Refusing	hope	itself.
If	despair	has	a	ritual,	it	was	spoken	here.
Riding	this	close	to	the	glistening	edge,	to	the	banks	of	bones	and	cracked
boulders,	she	felt	as	if	she	was	taking	it	inside	herself,	as	if	deadly	crystals	had
begun	growing	within	her,	whispering	awake	in	the	echoes	of	ancient	words.
When	all	you	are	is	made	wrong.	This	is	how	it	feels.
Brys	Beddict’s	army	was	many	days	behind	the	other	two,	for	the	prince
had	made	certain	he	was	the	last	to	leave	the	Bonehunters.	They	had	marched
with	them	to	the	desert’s	very	edge.	Eight	days	through	an	increasingly	parched
and	forbidding	land.	She	wondered	if	he’d	been	hoping	to	change	the	Adjunct’s
mind,	to	convince	her	of	the	madness	of	her	determination	to	cross	the	Glass
Desert.	Or	perhaps	he	had	been	considering	accompanying	that	doomed	force.
For	the	first	time	since	they	had	become	lovers,	Brys	had	closed	himself	to	her.
And	not	just	me.	To	everyone.
And	on	the	day	we	parted	from	them,	he	stood	near	Tavore,	but	he	said
nothing.	Nor	as	we	all	watched	the	Bonehunters	form	up	and	set	out,	crossing
that	ghastly	midden	of	crystals	and	bones,	into	the	harsh	glare	beyond;	we	all
watched,	and	not	one	of	us	–	not	one	in	the	entire	mass	of	soldiers	–	had	a	thing


to	say.
When	the	last	burdened	wagon	rocked	over	the	berm,	and	the	last	of	the
dust	swirled	away	in	the	Malazans’	wake;	when	the	column	wavered	and
smeared	in	the	fierce	glare	and	rising	heat,	Brys	had	turned	to	face	her.
The	look	in	his	face	shocked	her,	cut	through	her	every	defence.	Whatever
he	had	thought	to	do	to	dissuade	the	Adjunct,	the	moment	had	passed.	No,	a
thousand	moments.	Eight	days’	worth,	and	not	one	grasped,	not	one	taken	in
hand	like	a	weapon.	The	brittle	wall	of	silence	had	defeated	him,	defeated	them
all.	That	look…
Helpless.	Filled	with…	Abyss	below,	filled	with	despair.
She	was	a	singular	woman,	was	Tavore	Paran.	They	could	all	see	that.
They	had	all	witnessed	the	terrible	majesty	of	her	will.
And	her	soldiers	followed	–	that	had	been	for	Aranict	the	hardest	thing	to
witness.	The	squads	fell	in,	the	companies	formed	up,	and	as	they	marched	past
Prince	Brys	they	offered	him	a	sharp,	perfect	salute.	As	if	on	a	parade	ground.
Eyes	hidden	in	the	shadow	of	their	helms,	that	closed	fist	on	the	chest,
expressions	chiselled	from	stone	–	gods,	I	will	never	forget	that,	any	of	it.	Those
faces.	Horrifying	in	their	emptiness.	Those	soldiers:	veterans	of	something	far
beyond	battles,	far	beyond	shields	locked	and	swords	bared,	beyond	even	the
screams	of	dying	comrades	and	the	desolation	of	loss.
Veterans	of	a	lifetime	of	impossible	decisions,	of	all	that	is	unbearable	and
all	that	is	without	reconciliation.
Brys	Beddict	rode	to	the	head	of	the	column	then,	to	lead	his	soldiers
south,	along	the	very	edge	of	the	Glass	Desert.	It	was	clear	that	as	soon	as	they
reached	its	southernmost	end,	he	would	swing	the	army	eastward,	and	the	pace
would	become	savage.	They	were	a	week	or	more	behind	the	Perish	and	the
Evertine	Legion.
Aranict	lit	another	stick	of	rustleaf.	Her	neck	ached,	as	she	found	it
impossible	to	face	forward,	to	look	ahead.	The	Glass	Desert	held	her.
They’re	out	there.	Do	they	reel	beneath	its	onslaught?	Has	its	madness
infected	them?	Are	they	even	now	killing	each	other,	frenzied	with	fever?	It	has
been	three	days.	They	might	already	be	dead,	every	one	of	them.	More	bones	to
crush,	to	push	towards	the	shoreline	–	the	only	retreat	left	to	them.	She	looked
again	at	the	bleached	splinters.	Did	you	all	try	to	cross	the	desert?
The	very	notion	chilled	her.	Shivering	beneath	her	cloak,	she	forced	her
gaze	away	from	the	horror	on	her	left,	only	to	see	its	mangled	verge	stretching
ahead,	southward	alongside	the	column,	until	the	two	seemed	to	merge	in	the
hazy	distance.
Brys,	my	love,	from	all	of	us	what	will	you	now	forge?	We	Letherii	have


known	too	many	defeats	of	late.	And	we	tasted	our	own	blood	yet	again,	against
the	Nah’ruk.	Not	so	bitter	that	time,	for	we	saved	the	Bonehunters.	Still,	we
pale	beside	our	allies.	In	their	shadow	we	are	diminished.
And	yet…they	saluted	us.
She	could	not	get	that	moment	out	of	her	mind.	The	faces	haunted	her	and
she	feared	they	would	do	so	for	the	rest	of	her	life.
Whose	army	are	they?	These	Bonehunters.	What	is	their	cause?	And	the
strength	within	them,	where	does	it	come	from?	Is	it	held	in	the	soul	of	the
Adjunct?	No	–	at	least,	I	don’t	think	so.	Oh,	she	is	the	focus	for	them	all,	but
they	have	no	love	for	her.	They	see	her,	if	at	all,	as	no	different	from	a	mountain,
a	column	of	storm	clouds,	a	bitter	grey	sea	–	they	see	her	as	part	of	the	natural
world,	a	thing	to	be	borne,	to	be	weathered.
I	saw	in	their	faces	the	erosion	of	her	will,	and	they	bore	it.	They	bore	it	as
they	did	all	else.	These	Malazans,	they	shame	the	gods	themselves.
	
‘Coming	up	on	us	fast,	Highness,	out	of	the	northwest.’
Brys	nodded.	‘Draw	in	the	flying	wing,	Preda.	I	will	take	out	our	standardbearer	and	my	Atri-Ceda	–	when	you	see	us	ride	out	from	the	column,	fall	the
wing	in	behind	us.’
‘Yes,	Highness.’
Brys	listened	to	the	Preda	dispatching	riders,	one	out	to	the	flanking	wing
of	light	cavalry,	another	to	retrieve	Aranict	from	down	the	column.	The
standard-bearer	rode	up	beside	the	prince,	his	face	pale	and	drawn.	‘No	need
for	alarm,	soldier,’	Brys	said	to	the	young	man.	‘This	shall	be	a	meeting	of
allies.’
‘But…lizards,	sir!’
‘K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Not	Short-Tails	–	I	am	sure	you	have	heard,	the	army
now	approaching	us	subsequently	defeated	the	Nah’ruk.’
The	young	man	nodded,	nervously	licking	his	lips.
Brys	studied	him.	‘Soldier,	our	clash	with	the	Nah’ruk	–	was	that	your	first
taste	of	battle?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘You	bore	this	standard?’
‘No,	sir.	Well,	I	was	the	third	to	take	it	up	that	day,	and	by	then	we	were	in
full	retreat—’
‘Withdrawal,’	Brys	corrected.	‘Trust	me,	a	full	retreat	is	a	far	messier
thing	than	what	we	managed.’
‘Yes,	sir.’


Brys	glanced	up	at	the	standard	and	fought	down	a	groan,	reminded	once
again	of	his	brother ’s	perverse	humour.	Not	a	legion’s	standard.	No,	the
Imperial	Standard,	no	less.	Depending	from	a	cross-bridge	of	iron,	the	cloth
was	a	tattered	rectangle	of	colourless	wool	–	it	was,	in	fact,	a	fair	copy	of
Tehol’s	blanket,	almost	to	scale.	And	where	one	might	expect	some	elegant	or
proud	heraldic	crest	at	centre,	there	was	instead	the	new	royal	sigil	of	King
Tehol	the	Only	of	Lether:	a	three-quarter-on	rendition	of	his	brother ’s	rooftop	bed,	and	if	one	looked	carefully	one	would	see	cowering	beneath	that	bed	a
row	of	six	plucked	–	but	living	–	hens.	Eyeing	it,	Brys	recalled	his	meeting
with	Tehol	upon	the	unveiling.
‘You	would	have	our	armies	fight	under	that?’
‘Well,	I	did.	The	bed,	I	mean.	And	so	did	the	chickens	–	can	you	imagine	the
extent	of	their	holy	dread,	knowing	that	God	wanted	to	cook	them?	All	right,	not
their	god,	not	precisely.	Though	we	cannot	actually	be	sure	of	that,	can	we?
Bugg,	are	you	worshipped	by	hens	and	cocks?’
‘Not	both	at	the	same	time,	sire.’
‘Thank	you.	Most	enlightening.’
‘My	very	reason	to	exist,	sire.	You	are	welcome.’
‘Tehol—’
‘Yes,	Brys?’
‘I	understand	your	notion	that	dignity	cannot	be	found	in	the…er,	material
–	not	a	throne,	not	a	crown,	not	even	a	fine	estate	or	whatnot	–	but	when	it
comes	to	the	military—’
‘Oh,	that’s	all	I	ever	hear	from	you,	brother!	“It’s	not	that	way	in	the
military,	Tehol”,	“The	enlisted	won’t	go	for	that,	Tehol”,	“They	don’t	like	pink,
Tehol”.	The	pathetic	conservatism	of	that	hoary	institution	is,	frankly,
embarrassing.’
‘I	don’t	recall	any	mention	of	pink,	sire.’
‘There	wasn’t,	Bugg.	I	was	being	illustrative.’
‘What	kind	of	illustration	did	you	have	in	mind?	Shall	I	summon	the	court
artist	again?’
‘Abyss	no!	After	that	debacle	with	my	wife	and	that	pretty	guard—’
‘Ex-guard,	sire.’
‘Really?	By	whose	order?	I	demand	to	know!’
‘Your	wife,	the	queen,	sire.’
‘That	interfering	cow…oh,	don’t	look	at	me	like	that,	beloved	–	I	was	but
referring	to	you	in	your	official	capacity.	Thus,	while	I	rail	at	the	queen,	my
love	for	my	beautiful	wife	remains	in	its	usual	beaming	manner	for	ever
untarnished—’


‘Too	bad	the	same	cannot	be	said	for	that	poor	young	woman,	husband.’
‘I	never	tarnished	her	–	not	once!’
‘Tehol,	have	you	seen	that	damned	painting?’
‘Only	once,	dearest,	since	you	went	and	burned	the	only	copy.	And	–	that’s
right,	you	look	well	at	this	wagging	finger	–	that	artist	has	been	depressed	ever
since—’
‘More	like	running	scared,’	suggested	Bugg.
‘Tehol,	about	this	Imperial	Standard—’
‘Not	again,	Brys.	I	thought	we	were	past	all	that.	It’s	lovely	and	most	apt—’
‘But	who	will	rally	under	it?’
‘Brys,	if	an	army	must	rally,	one	must	presume	it	is	in	dire	straits,	yes?	Well
then,	where	better	to	hide	than	under	the	king’s	bed?’
‘With	all	the	other	chickens,’	added	Bugg.	‘Well	now,	sire,	that’s	clever.’
‘Hold	on,’	said	the	queen,	‘What	did	you	mean	by	“the	only	copy”?’
‘Brys!	Rally	the	troops!’
Sweating	under	the	bright	sun,	the	king’s	brother	snorted	–	but	how	he
missed	those	days	now.	The	chaotic	palace	of	King	Tehol	seemed	very	far
away.	He	squinted	up	at	the	standard,	and	smiled.
Aranict	arrived,	reining	in.	‘Prince,	it	pleases	me	to	see	you	smiling.	What
so	amuses	you?’
‘Nothing,	Atri-Ceda.	That	is,	nothing	of	import.	We	have	been	found	by	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle	–	such	a	motley	collection	of	allies	we	make,	don’t	you
think?	No	matter.	Ride	with	me.	I	would	become	acquainted	with	our	new
commanders.’
The	woman	frowned.	‘Are	they	not	two	common	marines,	sire?	Anyone
can	acquire	a	title	–	it	hardly	makes	them	fit	to	demand	the	obedience	of	a
prince,	not	to	mention	the	queen	of	the	Bolkando.’
‘Gesler	and	Stormy	are	far	more	than	just	Malazan	marines,	Aranict.	And	I
am	not	referring	to	their	new	titles.’
‘I	don’t	recall	meeting	them.’
‘I	will	be	pleased	to	introduce	you,	if	you	like.’
With	the	standard-bearer	twenty	paces	ahead,	they	set	out	side	by	side,
horse	hoofs	thumping	as	if	on	hollow	ground.	‘Brys,	do	you	hear	that?’
‘We	ride	across	an	ancient	lake	bed,’	he	said.	‘Often	the	lake	remains,	but
only	beneath	the	surface,	and	I	think	that	must	have	been	the	case	here,	once.
But	now…’
‘The	water ’s	gone.’
‘Yes.	Gone.’
‘Might	we	all	fall	through?’


He	shrugged.
‘So	now	even	the	ground	under	us	is	uncertain.’
‘I	am	sorry,	Aranict.	I	have	been	neglecting	you.’
‘Yes,	you	have.’
The	flying	wing	was	swinging	in	behind	them,	thirty	Bluerose	lancers	in
perfect	formation.	Brys	thought	about	the	soldier	he’d	lost	–	to	love,	no	less.
Henar	Vygulf	now	marched	with	the	Bonehunters.	And	if	I	have	sent	him	to	his
death…I	do	not	think	he	will	curse	my	name.	‘I	am	not	very	good	with	grief,
Aranict.	When	our	parents	died,	well,	without	Tehol	and	Hull	I	don’t	think	I
would	have	made	it	through.	Kuru	Qan	once	told	me	that	grieving	had	nothing
to	do	with	the	ones	gone,	and	everything	to	do	with	the	ones	left	behind.	We
feel	the	absences	in	our	life	like	open	wounds,	and	they	never	really	close,	no
matter	how	many	years	pass.’
‘Do	you	grieve	then	for	the	Adjunct	and	the	Bonehunters?’
‘It	makes	no	sense,	does	it?	She…well…she	is	a	difficult	woman	to	like.
She	views	a	human	gesture	as	if	it	was	some	kind	of	surrender,	a	weakness.
Her	responsibilities	consume	her,	because	she	will	allow	herself	nothing	else.’
‘It	was	said	she	had	a	lover,’	said	Aranict.	‘She	died	saving	Tavore’s	life.’
‘Imagine	the	wound	that	made.’
‘No	one	wants	to	be	un-liked,	Brys.	But	if	it	must	be	so,	one	can	strive	for
other	things.	Like	respect.	Or	even	fear.	Choices	fall	away,	without	you	even
noticing,	until	there	are	very	few	left,	and	you	realize	that	you	are	nothing	but
what	you	are.’
Brys	thought	about	that,	and	then	sighed.	‘I	should	have	liked	her.	I	should
have	found	something	–	beyond	her	competence,	beyond	even	her
stubbornness.	Something…’
‘Brys,	what	is	it	that	you	grieve	over?	Is	it	your	own	failure	to	find	in
Tavore	the	reasons	you	need	for	following	her?’
He	grunted.	‘I	should	have	talked	to	you	days	ago.’
‘You	were	too	busy	saying	nothing.’
‘I	stayed	close,	as	long	as	I	could.	Like	a	man	dying	of	thirst	–	was	she	my
salvation?	Or	just	a	mirage?’	He	shook	his	head.
‘We	won’t	turn	back,	will	we?’
‘No,	we	won’t.’
‘We’ll	see	this	through.’
‘Yes,	and	so	I	must	hide	my	uncertainty	–	from	my	officers,	from	my
soldiers—’
‘But	not	from	me,	Brys.’
He	turned	to	study	her	face,	was	shocked	to	see	tears	streaking	her	dusty


cheeks.	‘Aranict?’
‘Never	mind	this,’	she	said,	as	if	angry	with	herself.	‘Do	you	want	to	be
like	her,	Brys?	Do	you	want	your	responsibilities	to	consume	you?’
‘Of	course	not.’
‘And	since	we	began	marching	with	the	Bonehunters,	what	has	the	Adjunct
given	you?’
‘Not	much—’
‘Nothing,’	she	snapped.	‘Nothing	but	silence.	Every	time	you	needed
something	else,	she	gave	you	silence.	Brys,	you’ve	said	little	to	anyone	for
days.	Don’t	take	on	someone	else’s	wounds.	Don’t.’
Chastened,	he	looked	ahead.	The	dark	stain	of	legions	in	the	hazy	distance,
and	a	nearer	group,	humans	and	lizards	both,	drawing	closer.
When	the	Guardian	of	the	Names	came	for	me,	the	sea	ran	from	him	like
tears.	But	I	was	dead	by	then.	I	saw	none	of	that.	Only	upon	my	rebirth	did
these	visions	find	me.	I	see	poor	Rhulad	Sengar	lying	cut	and	broken	on	the
blood-spattered	floor,	crying	out	to	his	brothers.	I	see	them	turn	away.	I	see	my
body	slumping	down	against	the	dais.	I	see	my	king	sitting	lifeless	on	his
throne.
Could	we	but	have	left	him	there,	so	useless	to	resist	the	puppet-masters
who	ever	gather	to	symbols	of	power	–	are	they	all	so	blind	as	to	not	see	the
absurdity	of	their	ambitions?	The	pathetic	venality	of	all	their	petty	scheming?
Grasp	those	dead	limbs,	then,	and	make	him	do	your	will.
I	have	dreamed	the	names	of	a	thousand	lost	gods.	Will	I	ever	speak	them?
Will	I	break	upon	this	world	one	last	time	those	names	of	the	fallen?	Is	that
enough,	to	give	remembrance	to	the	dead?	A	name	upon	my	breath,	spoken	out
loud,	a	whisper,	a	bold	shout	–	will	a	distant	soul	stir?	Find	itself	once	more?
In	speaking	a	god’s	name,	do	we	conjure	it	into	being?
‘Brys.’
‘Aranict?’
‘Did	you	hear	me?’
‘I	did,	and	I	will	heed	your	warning,	my	love.	But	you	should	bear	in	mind
that,	sometimes,	solitude	is	the	only	refuge	left.	Solitude…and	silence.’
He	saw	how	his	words	left	her	shaken,	and	was	sorry.	Shall	I	by	name
resurrect	a	god?	Force	its	eyes	to	open	once	more?	To	see	what	lies	all	about
us,	to	see	the	devastation	we	have	wrought?
Am	I	that	cruel?	That	selfish?
Silence.	Tavore,	I	think	I	begin	to	understand	you.	Must	the	fallen	be	made
to	see	what	they	died	for,	to	see	their	sacrifice	so	squandered?	Is	this	what	you
mean	–	what	you	have	always	meant	–	by	‘unwitnessed’?


‘Now	it	is	you	who	weep	–	Errant’s	shove,	Brys,	what	a	wretched	pair	we
make.	Gather	yourself,	please	–	we	are	almost	upon	them.’
He	drew	a	shaky	breath	and	straightened	in	his	saddle.	‘I	could	not	have
stopped	her,	Aranict.’
‘Did	you	really	expect	to?’
‘I	don’t	know.	But	I	think	I	have	figured	something	out.	She	gives	us
silence	because	she	dares	not	give	us	anything	else.	What	we	see	as	cold	and
indifferent	is	in	fact	the	deepest	compassion	imaginable.’
‘Do	you	think	that	is	true?’
‘I	choose	to	believe	it,	Aranict.’
‘Well	enough,	then.’
Brys	raised	his	voice.	‘Bearer!’
The	young	man	reined	in	and	swung	his	mount	out	to	the	right.	Brys	and
Aranict	drew	up	alongside	him.
The	two	marines	had	dismounted,	joining	a	woman,	a	boy	and	a	girl.	The
woman	was	middle-aged,	possibly	an	Awl	by	birth.	The	children	were
Malazans,	though	clearly	unrelated.	Had	he	seen	these	two	before?	In	the
palace?	Possibly.	Behind	them	all	stood	a	half-dozen	K’Chain	Che’Malle,
including	three	of	the	saddled	creatures.	Two	of	the	remaining	lizards	were	not
as	robust,	yet	bore	huge	blades	instead	of	hands,	while	the	third	one	was
broader	of	snout,	heavier	of	girth,	and	unarmed.	Two	ragged-looking	dogs
wandered	out	from	between	the	legs	of	the	lizards.	The	humans	approached.
‘Aranict,’	said	Brys	under	his	breath,	‘tell	me	what	you	see.’
‘Not	now,’	she	said,	her	voice	hoarse.
He	glanced	across	to	see	her	setting	alight	a	stick	of	rustleaf,	her	hands
shaking.	‘Tell	me	this	at	least.	Shall	a	prince	of	Lether	relinquish	command	to
these	ones?’
Smoke	hissed	out,	and	then,	‘The	marines…yes,	for	one	simple	reason.’
‘Which	is?’
‘Better	them	than	those	two	children.’
I	see.
At	five	paces	away	they	halted,	and	the	clean-shaven	marine	was	the	first	to
speak.	His	eyes	on	the	standard,	he	said,	‘So	it’s	true.’
Brys	cleared	his	throat.	‘My	brother	the	king—’
‘Has	no	respect	at	all	for	the	institutions	of	the	military,’	said	the	marine,
nodding.	‘Hood	take	me,	for	that	reason	alone	I’d	follow	him	anywhere.	What
think	you,	Stormy?’
The	man	scowled,	scratched	his	red	beard,	and	then	grunted.	‘Do	I	have
to?’


‘Do	what?	You	oaf,	I	was	saying—’
‘And	I	wasn’t	listening,	so	how	do	I	know	what	you	was	saying,	Gesler?
And	do	I	even	care?	If	I	did,	I’d	probably	have	listened,	wouldn’t	I?’
Gesler	muttered	something,	and	then	said	to	Brys,	‘Prince,	I’d	beg	you	to
excuse	my	companion’s	boorish	manners,	but	then	he	ain’t	five	years	old	and	I
ain’t	his	dada,	so	feel	welcome	to	regard	him	with	disgust.	We	do,	all	of	us
here,	ain’t	that	right,	Stormy?’
‘I	ain’t	listening.’
‘Prince	Brys,	about	the	chain	of	command	the	Adjunct	wants—’
‘I	am	content,	Mortal	Sword	Gesler,	to	accede	to	her	wishes.’
‘Well,	we	ain’t.’
‘Y’got	that	right,’	Stormy	growled.	‘It’s	all	right	Ges	handling	the
Che’Malle	–	it’s	all	down	to	smells,	y’see?	All	he	needs	to	do	is	fart	or
whatever	and	all	the	swords	come	out,	which	come	to	think	of	it,	is	just	like	old
times.	In	the	barracks,	why—’
‘It’s	down	to	trust,’	said	the	boy.	The	bigger	of	the	two	dogs	had	drawn	up
next	to	him.	Belligerent	eyes	glared	out	from	a	mangled	face.
No	one	spoke.	The	silence	stretched.
‘You’d	better	explain	that,	Grub,’	said	Gesler,	his	expression	dark.
Brys	started	to	speak	but	Aranict	stayed	him	with	a	hand	on	his	arm.
‘It’s	down	to	the	people	she	knows	best,’	Grub	continued.	‘That’s	all.’
‘We	saved	their	lives!’	blurted	the	standard-bearer,	his	face	flushed.
‘That’s	enough,	soldier,’	said	Brys.	‘What	the	boy	says	makes	sense,
Gesler.	After	all,	what	can	she	make	of	our	motives?	This	is	her	war,	it	always
has	been.	Why	are	we	here?	Why	does	Queen	Abrastal	seem	intent	on	making
this	her	cause	as	well?	The	Bonehunters	brought	the	Letherii	to	their	knees	–
might	we	not	harbour	resentment	over	that?	Might	we	not	contemplate
betrayal?	As	for	Bolkando,	well,	from	all	accounts	the	Khundryl	laid	waste	to
vast	regions	in	that	kingdom,	and	spilled	the	blood	of	the	queen’s	subjects.
Together	with	the	Perish,	they	effectively	subjected	Bolkando	to	outright
extortion.’
‘So	why	should	she	have	any	better	reason	to	trust	us?’	Gesler	demanded.
‘We	got	snatched,	and	now	we’re	commanding	our	own	damned	army	of
lizards.	The	fact	is,	we	deserted	the—’
‘I	ain’t	deserted	nothing!’	Stormy	shouted.	The	smaller	of	the	two	dogs
barked.
Brys	noted	the	growing	alarm	on	the	face	of	the	Awl	woman.	He	caught
her	eye	and	said,	‘You	are	the	Destriant?’
‘I	am	Kalyth,’	she	said.	‘I	do	not	understand	what	is	going	on.	The	way	you


use	the	trader ’s	tongue	–	there	are	words	I	don’t	know.	I	am	sorry.’	She	faced
Gesler.	‘He	is	Mortal	Sword	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	He	is	defender	of
Matron	Gunth	Mach.	We	must	fight	to	stay	alive.	There	are	old	wounds…old…
crimes.	We	cannot	escape.	Gunth	Mach	cannot	escape.	We	fight,	will	fight.’
‘And	somehow,’	Brys	mused,	‘the	Adjunct	understands	the	truth	of	that.
How?’
Kalyth	shook	her	head.	‘I	do	not	know	her.	But’	–	and	she	pointed	at	the
girl	standing	near	Grub	–	‘where	this	one	goes,	there	will	be	fire.’
Gesler	rubbed	at	his	face	with	both	hands.	‘Our…Ceda.	Sinn.	Without	her
sorcery,	and	Grub’s,	the	Nah’ruk	would	have	defeated	us.	Not	on	the	ground,
but	from	the	sky	keeps.	So,’	he	sighed,	‘Sinn	and	Grub	saved	us	all.	The
Adjunct	said	we’d	need	them—’
‘No,’	corrected	Stormy,	‘she	said	they’d	be	safer	with	us	than	with	her.’
Gesler	said	to	Brys,	‘We’ve	been	thinking	of	going	after	them	–	into	that
desert.’
‘She	will	not	be	swayed,’	said	Brys.	‘And	she	wants	none	of	us	to	follow
her.	It	is	her	conviction	that	we	will	be	needed	elsewhere.’
‘I	can’t	assume	command,’	said	Gesler.	‘I’m	a	Hood-damned	marine,	a
fucking	sergeant.’
‘You	was	a	damned	Fist,	Gesler!’	Stormy	said.
‘For	three	days—’
‘Till	they	busted	you	down,	aye!	And	why	was	you	busted	down?	No,	you
don’t	want	to	say,	do	you?’
‘Leave	it—’
‘I	won’t!’	Stormy	jabbed	a	finger	at	his	companion.	‘You	went	and	thought
you	could	be	another	Dassem!	You	went	and	got	us	all	to	swear	our	souls	to	a
damned	god!	This	ain’t	your	first	time	as	a	Mortal	Sword,	is	it?’
Gesler	wheeled	on	Stormy.	‘How	should	I	know?	It’s	not	like	Fener
reached	down	and	patted	me	on	the	head,	is	it?	And	what	about	you,	Adjutant?
You	lied	to	the	damned	Empress!’
‘I	did	what	Cartheron	and	Urko	asked	me	to	do!’
‘You	betrayed	the	Empire!’
Ceda	Sinn	was	laughing,	but	it	was	a	cold,	cruel	laugh.
Kalyth	had	gone	white	and	had	backed	up	a	step,	her	eyes	wide	as	she
looked	from	Gesler	to	Stormy	and	back	again.
Sinn	said	to	Gesler.	‘That’s	why	you’ll	be	needed.	But	you	won’t	like	it.
Hah!	You	won’t	like	any	of	it!’
Gesler	made	to	advance	on	the	girl	but	Stormy	stepped	into	his	path	and
shoved	him	back.


‘Will	all	of	you	stop	it!’
Aranict’s	shout	halted	everyone.
Swearing	under	his	breath,	Gesler	turned	away	from	Stormy’s	challenging
glare.	‘Prince,	this	ain’t	what	I	was	looking	for.	I	wanted	you	to	take	overall
command	–	you	or	Krughava.	Gods,	even	that	queen	you	talked	about.	I	don’t
want	any	of	this.’
‘The	matter,’	said	Brys,	‘has	proved	far	more	complicated	than	even	I	had
thought.	But	I	mean	to	hold	to	my	agreement	with	the	Adjunct.	Nor	do	I	expect
Queen	Abrastal	to	change	her	mind,	either.	Our	royal	titles	are	nothing	but	a
product	of	circumstance.	They	confer	no	special	talent	or	ability,	and	we	are
both	aware	of	that.	Mortal	Sword	Gesler,	it	is	undeniable	that	you	are	in
command	of	the	most	formidable	army	in	this	alliance,	and	as	such,	the	full
weight	of	command	must	fall	on	you.’
The	man	looked	miserable.
Snarling,	Stormy	swung	round	and	stamped	back	to	the	waiting	K’Chain
Che’Malle.	The	small	hairy	dog	followed.
Gesler	shrugged.	‘We	liked	it	the	way	we’d	made	it	–	gods,	so	long	ago
now.	Hiding	in	some	foul	garrison	in	a	smelly	fishing	village.	We’d	ducked
down	so	far	it	looked	like	the	world	had	forgotten	us,	and	that	was	just	how	we
wanted	it.	And	now	look	at	us.	Gods	below.’
Brys	cocked	his	head.	‘You	have	been	with	the	Adjunct	ever	since	that
time?’
‘Not	quite.	We	got	pulled	in	with	the	Whirlwind	–	a	mutiny.	We	blame	the
Imperial	Historian,	that’s	who	we	blame.	Never	mind,	none	of	it’s	worth
knowing	–	it’s	just	a	sordid	tale	of	us	staggering	and	stumbling	this	way	and
that	across	half	the	damned	world.	We	did	nothing	of	note,	except	maybe
staying	alive,	and	see	where	it’s	got	us.’
‘If	you	and	your	friend	are	feeling	so	trapped,’	said	Brys,	‘why	not	just
leave?	Did	you	not	already	call	yourself	and	Stormy	deserters?’
‘Wish	I	could.	I	really	do.	But	we	can’t,	and	we	know	it.’
‘But…why?’
Gesler	looked	down	abjectly	at	Grub.	‘Because,’	he	whispered	like	a	man
condemned,	‘she	trusts	us.’
	
‘Now	didn’t	that	go	well,’	said	Aranict	as	they	rode	back	towards	the	column	at
a	slow	trot.
Brys	regarded	her.	‘There	was	considerable	alarm	in	your	voice,	Aranict,
when	you	so	startled	us	all.’


‘Where	do	gods	come	from,	Brys?	Do	you	know?’
He	shook	his	head,	unwilling	to	stir	awake	his	memories	of	the	seabed,	the
forgotten	menhirs	so	bearded	in	slime.	He	had	lost	a	lifetime	wandering	the
muddy,	wasted	depths.	I	slept,	and	so	wanted	to	sleep	–	for	ever.	And	if	this	is
not	the	death	others	find,	it	was	the	death	that	found	me.	Such	weariness,	I’d
lost	the	will	to	drag	myself	free.
‘Gesler	and	Stormy,’	said	Aranict,	‘they	are	almost	within	reach.’
‘I’m	sorry,	what?’
‘Of	godhood.’
‘You	speak	of	things	Kuru	Qan	used	to	talk	about.	The	ancient	First	Empire
notion	of	ascendancy.’
‘The	Destriant	spoke	of	fire.’
He	struggled	to	stay	on	the	path	she	seemed	to	be	taking.	‘The	girl,	Sinn…’
Aranict	snorted.	‘Yes,	her.	Fire	at	its	most	destructive,	at	its	most	senseless
–	she	could	have	burned	us	all	to	ash	and	given	it	not	a	moment’s	thought.
When	you	hold	such	power	inside	you,	it	burns	away	all	that	is	human.	You	feel
nothing.	But	Brys,	you	don’t	understand	–	the	Adjunct	wants	Sinn	with	them.’
‘As	far	away	from	her	as	possible?	I	don’t	think	Tavore	would—’
‘No	no,	that	wasn’t	her	reason,	Brys.	It’s	Gesler	and	Stormy.’
‘You	are	right	in	saying	that	I	don’t	understand.’
‘Those	two	men	have	walked	in	the	Hold	of	Fire,	in	what	the	sages	of	the
First	Empire	called	Telas.	Tavore	wants	Sinn	with	them	because	no	one	else
can	stand	against	that	child,	no	one	else	could	hope	to	survive	her	power,	for
when	Sinn	awakens	that	power,	as	Kalyth	said,	there	will	be	fire.’
‘The	Adjunct	warned	of	betrayal—’
‘Brys,	Gesler	and	Stormy	are	on	the	edge	of	ascendancy,	and	they	can	feel
it.	They’re	both	holding	on	for	dear	life—’
‘Holding	on	to	what?’
‘To	their	humanity,’	she	replied.	‘Their	fingers	are	numb,	the	muscles	of
their	arms	are	screaming.	Their	nails	are	cracked	and	bleeding.	Did	you	see
how	the	boy	watched	them?	The	one	named	Grub?	He	stands	beside	Sinn	like
her	conscience	made	manifest	–	it	is	truly	outside	her	now.	She	could	push	it
away,	she	could	crush	the	life	from	it	–	I	don’t	know	why	she	hasn’t	already.
For	all	the	fire	in	her	hands,	her	heart	is	cold	as	ice.’
‘Are	you	saying	the	boy	has	no	power	of	his	own?’
She	shot	him	a	look.	‘Did	the	Adjunct	speak	of	him?	The	boy?’
Warily,	he	nodded.
‘What	did	she	say?’
‘She	said	he	was	the	hope	of	us	all,	and	that	in	the	end	his	power	would	–


could	–	prove	our	salvation.’
She	searched	his	face.	‘Then,	Brys,	we	are	in	trouble.’
Betrayal.	When	the	face	before	us	proves	a	lie,	when	the	eyes	deceive	and
hide	the	truths	behind	them.	Will	there	be	no	end	to	such	things?
He	thought	back	to	the	seabed,	as	he	knew	he	would.	I	have	these	names,
deep	inside	me.	The	names	of	the	fallen.	I	can	hear	each	one,	there	with	its	own,
unique	voice.	Yet	so	many	sound	the	same,	a	cry	of	pain.	Of…betrayal.	So	many,
and	so	many	times.	‘She	trusts	those	two	marines,’	he	said.	‘She	trusts	them	not
to	betray	her.	It’s	all	she	has.	It’s	all	she	can	hope	for.’
‘Yes,’	said	Aranict.	‘And,	worse	than	that,	that	Awl	woman	–	Kalyth	–	who
said	she	didn’t	understand	anything,	well,	she	understands	all	too	well.	Like	it
or	not,	she	holds	the	fate	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	in	her	hands.	She	is	the
Destriant	to	the	Matron	–	do	you	imagine	she	trusts	Sinn?	With	all	their	lives?
With	the	Matron’s	and	all	the	other	K’Chain	Che’Malle?	Hardly.	She	is	in	the
same	position	as	we	are	–	it’s	all	down	to	Gesler	and	Stormy,	and	she	is
watching	those	two	men	fight	for	everything.’
‘It	must	be	breaking	her	heart.’
‘She’s	terrified,	Brys.	And	so	alone,	so	alone.	With	all	that.’
He	rubbed	at	his	face.	Their	horses	had	slowed	to	a	slow	amble,
directionless.	Unaware,	the	standard-bearer	had	ridden	on	and	was	now	closing
on	the	column.	At	this	distance,	the	standard	looked	like	a	white	flag.	‘Aranict,
what	can	we	do?’
‘No	matter	what	happens,’	she	said,	‘we	must	stand	with	them.	With	Gesler
and	Stormy,	and	Kalyth	and	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	But	if	it	comes	down	to
who	can	we	save,	if	we’re	left	with	that	awful	choice,	then…it	must	be	the	boy.’
‘Those	two	men	are	at	each	other ’s	throat	–	there	must	be—’
‘Oh,	that.	Brys,	they	are	like	brothers,	those	two.	They’ll	snap	at	each
other,	even	come	to	blows.	They’ll	shout	each	other	down,	but	things	would	be
a	lot	worse	if	none	of	that	was	happening.	What	we	saw	was	their	humanity	–
the	very	thing	they’re	desperate	to	keep.	That	was	all	like…like	a	ritual.	Of
caring.	Love,	even.’
‘As	if	married…’
‘Brothers,	I’d	say.	Bound	by	blood,	bound	by	history.	When	we	witness
them	argue,	we	only	hear	what’s	said	out	loud	–	we	don’t	hear	all	the	rest,	the
important	stuff.	Kalyth	is	only	beginning	to	understand	that	–	when	she	does,
some	of	her	terror	and	anxiety	will	go	away.’
‘I	hope	you	are	right.’	Brys	reined	in,	and	then	dismounted.	He	turned	to
observe	the	Bluerose	lancers,	waved	them	back	to	their	flanking	patrol.	To
Aranict	he	said,	‘Let	us	walk.	The	vanguard	will	survive	without	me	a	while


longer,	I’m	sure.’
He	could	see	her	curiosity,	but	she	shrugged	and	slipped	down	from	her
horse.	Leading	their	mounts,	they	began	walking,	parallel	to	the	column.
‘My	love,’	said	Brys,	‘I	have	known	a	silence	deeper	–	and	more	crushing
–	than	anyone	could	imagine.’
‘You	need	not	speak	of	it—’
‘No,	you	are	wrong.	But	what	I	must	tell	you	is	more	than	finding	a	new
intimacy	between	us,	though	that	will	be	part	of	it.	What	I	will	describe	is
important	–	it	bears	on	what	you	have	just	said,	and	–	with	your	help	–	I	hope	it
will	guide	us	to	a	course	of	action.	Tell	me,	what	do	you	know	of	my	death?’
She	paused	to	light	a	new	stick	from	the	stub	of	the	old	one.	‘Poison.	An
accident.’
‘And	my	corpse?’
‘A	revenant	stole	it.’
‘Stole?	Perhaps	it	seemed	that	way.	In	truth,	I	was	retrieved.	I	was	carried
back	to	a	place	I	had	been	to	before.	My	very	name	was	carved	upon	a	standing
stone.	Joined	to	countless	others.’
She	frowned,	seemed	to	study	the	wiry	grasses	on	the	ground	before	them.
‘Is	this	what	happens,	then?	To	all	of	us?	Our	names	set	in	stone?	From	death
to	life	and	then	back	again?	As	some	sages	have	claimed?’
‘I	do	not	know	what	happens,	in	truth.	Whether	what	I	experienced	was
fundamentally	different	from	what	others	go	through.	But	I	sense	there	was
something	to	it	that	was…unique.	If	I	was	inclined	to	blame	anyone,	it	would
have	to	be	Kuru	Qan.	He	invoked	a	ritual,	sending	me	to	a	distant	place,	a
realm,	perhaps	–	a	world	upon	the	floor	of	the	ocean	–	and	it	was	there	that	I
first	met	the…revenant.	The	Guardian	of	the	Names	–	or	so	I	now	call	it.’
‘And	this	was	the	one	who	came	for	you?	In	the	throne	room?’
He	nodded.
‘Because	he	possessed	your	name?’
‘Perhaps	–	but	perhaps	not.	We	met	in	the	clash	of	blades.	I	bested	him	in
combat…’
‘He	failed	in	his	guardianship.’
‘Yes.’
‘When	he	came	for	you,’	said	Aranict,	‘it	was	to	set	you	in	his	stead.’
‘You	have	the	truth	of	it,	I	think.’	Or	so	it	seemed.
‘The	“names”	you	speak	of,	Brys	–	does	no	one	guard	them	now?’
‘Ah,	thus	leading	us	to	my	resurrection.	What	do	you	know	of	the	details
surrounding	it?’
Aranict	shook	her	head.	‘Nothing.	But	then,	almost	no	one	does.’


‘As	you	might	imagine,	I	think	about	this	often.	In	my	dreams	there	are
memories	of	things	I	have	never	done,	or	seen.	Most	troubling,	at	least	at	first.
Like	you,	I	have	no	real	knowledge	of	my	return	to	the	realm	of	the	living.
Was	there	an	invitation?	A	sundering	of	chains?	I	just	don’t	know.’
‘The	power	to	achieve	such	a	thing	must	have	been	immense.’
‘Something	tells	me,’	he	said	with	a	wry	smile,	‘even	an	Elder	God’s
power	would	not	have	been	enough.	The	desires	of	the	living	–	for	the	return
of	the	ones	they	have	lost	–	cannot	unravel	the	laws	of	death.	This	is	not	a
journey	one	is	meant	to	ever	take,	and	all	that	we	were	when	alive	we	are	not
now.	I	am	not	the	same	man,	for	that	man	died	in	the	throne	room,	at	the	very
feet	of	his	king.’
She	was	studying	him	now,	with	fear	in	her	eyes.
‘For	a	long	time,’	Brys	said,	‘I	did	not	think	I	was	capable	of	finding
anything	–	not	even	an	echo	of	who	I	had	once	been.	But	then…you.’	He	shook
his	head.	‘Now,	what	can	I	tell	you?	What	value	does	any	of	this	have,	beyond
the	truths	we	have	now	shared?	It	is,	I	think,	this:	I	was	released…to	do
something.	Here,	in	this	world.	I	think	I	now	know	what	that	thing	is.	I	don’t
know,	however,	what	will	be	achieved.	I	don’t	know	why	it	is	so…important.
The	Guardian	has	sent	me	back,	for	I	am	his	hope.’	He	shot	her	a	look.	‘When
you	spoke	of	Tavore’s	belief	in	the	boy,	I	caught	a	glimmer…like	the
flickering	of	a	distant	candle,	as	if	through	murky	water…of	someone	in	the
gloom.	And	I	realized	that	I	have	seen	this	scene	before,	in	a	dream.’
‘Someone,’	murmured	Aranict.	‘Your	Guardian?’
‘No.	But	I	have	felt	that	stranger ’s	thoughts	–	I	have	dreamed	his
memories.	An	ancient	house,	where	once	I	stood,	but	now	it	was	empty.
Flooded,	dark.	Like	so	much	upon	the	bed	of	the	oceans,	its	time	was	past,	its
purpose…lost.	He	walked	inside	it,	wanting	to	find	it	as	he	once	found	it,
wanting,	above	all,	the	comfort	of	company.	But	they’re	gone.’
‘“They”?	People	dwelt	in	that	house?’
‘No	longer.	He	left	it	and	now	walks,	bearing	a	lantern	–	I	see	him	like	a
figure	of	myth,	the	last	soul	in	the	deep.	The	lone,	dull	glow	of	all	he	has	left	to
offer	anyone.	A	moment	of’	–	he	reached	up	to	his	face,	wiped	at	the	tears	–
‘of…light.	Relief.	From	the	terrible	pressures,	the	burdens,	the	darkness.’
They	had	halted.	She	stood	facing	him,	her	eyes	filled	with	sorrow.	She
whispered,	‘Does	he	beckon	you?	Does	he	beg	your	company,	Brys?’
He	blinked,	shook	his	head.	‘I	–	I	don’t	know.	He…waits	for	me.	I	see	the
lantern’s	light,	I	see	his	shadow.	All	a	thing	of	myth,	a	conjuration.	Does	he
wait	for	the	souls	of	the	drowned?	It	seems	he	must.	When	we	flounder,	when
we	lose	the	sense	of	what	is	up	and	what	is	down	–	is	that	not	what	often


happens	when	one	drowns?	And	we	see	a	lightness	in	the	murk,	and	we	believe
it	to	be	the	surface.	Instead…his	lantern	calls	us.	Down,	and	down…’
‘Brys,	what	must	you	do?’
‘There	is	a	voice	within	me,’	he	said,	his	throat	suddenly	hoarse,	thick	with
emotion.	‘All	that	the	seas	have	taken	–	the	gods	and	mortals	–	all	the…the
Unwitnessed.’	He	lifted	his	gaze	to	meet	her	wide	eyes.	‘I	am	as	bound	as	the
Adjunct,	as	driven	on	to…something…as	she.	Was	I	resurrected	to	be	brother
to	a	king?	A	commander	of	armies?	Am	I	here	in	answer	to	a	brother ’s	grief,
to	a	wish	for	how	things	once	were?	Am	I	here	to	feel	once	more	what	it	is	to
be	human,	to	be	alive?	No.	There	is	more,	my	love.	There	is	more.’
She	reached	up	one	hand,	brushed	his	cheek.	‘Must	I	lose	you,	Brys?’
I	don’t	know.
Aranict	must	have	seen	his	answer	though	he	spoke	it	not,	for	she	leaned
against	him,	like	one	falling,	and	he	closed	an	arm	round	her.
Dear	voice.	Dear	thing	that	waits	inside	me	–	words	cannot	change	a	world.
They	never	could.	Would	you	stir	a	thousand	souls?	A	million?	The	mud	kicked
up	and	taken	on	the	senseless	currents?	Only	to	settle	again,	somewhere	else.
Your	shadow,	friend,	feels	like	my	own.
Your	light,	so	fitful,	so	faint	–	we	all	stir	in	the	dark,	from	the	moment	of
birth	to	the	moment	of	death.	But	you	dream	of	finding	us,	because,	like	each	of
us,	you	are	alone.	There	is	more.	There	must	be	more.
By	all	the	love	in	my	veins,	please,	there	must	be	more.
	
‘Do	not	lecture	me,	sir,	on	the	covenants	of	our	faith.’
So	much	had	been	given	to	the	silence,	as	if	it	was	a	precious	repository,	a
vault	that	could	transform	all	it	held,	and	make	of	the	fears	a	host	of	bold
virtues.	But	these	fears	are	unchanged.	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian	stood	before
Krughava.	The	sounds	of	five	thousand	brothers	and	sisters	preparing	camp
surrounded	them.
Sweat	trickled	under	his	garments.	He	could	smell	his	own	body,	rank	and
acrid	with	his	wool	gambeson’s	lanolin.	The	day’s	march	felt	heavy	on	his
shoulders.	His	eyes	stung;	his	mouth	was	dry.
Was	he	ready	for	this	moment?	He	could	not	be	sure	–	he	had	his	own	fears
with	which	he	had	to	contend,	after	all.	But	then,	how	long	must	I	wait?	And
what	moment,	among	all	the	moments,	can	I	judge	safest?	The	breath	before	the
war	cry?	Hardly.
I	will	do	this	now,	and	may	all	who	witness	understand	–	it	has	been	a	long
time	in	coming,	and	the	silence	surrounding	me	was	not	my	own	–	it	was	where


she	had	driven	me.	Where	she	would	force	us	all,	against	the	cliff	wall,	into
cracks	in	the	stone.
Iron,	what	are	your	virtues?	The	honed	edge	kisses	and	sparks	rain	down.
Blood	rides	the	ferule	and	splashes	on	the	white	snow.	This	is	how	you	mark
every	trail.	Tanakalian	looked	away.	Seething	motion,	tents	rising,	tendrils	of
smoke	curling	up	on	the	wind.	‘Without	a	Destriant,’	he	said,	‘we	cannot	know
their	fate.’	He	glanced	back	at	her,	eyes	narrowing.
Mortal	Sword	Krughava	stood	watching	seven	brothers	and	sisters
assembling	her	command	tent.	The	skin	of	her	thick	forearms,	where	they	were
crossed	over	her	breasts,	had	deepened	to	bronze,	a	hue	that	seemed	as	dusty	as
the	patches	of	bared	earth	all	around	them.	The	sun	had	bleached	the	strands	of
hair	that	escaped	her	helm,	and	they	drifted	out	like	webs	on	the	hot	wind.	If	she
bore	wounds	from	the	parley	with	the	Adjunct,	she	would	not	show	them.	‘Sir,’
she	said,	‘Commander	Erekala	is	not	one	for	indecision.	This	is	precisely	why
I	chose	him	to	command	the	fleet.	You	invite	uncertainty	and	think	that	this	is
the	time	for	such	things	–	when	so	much	has	been	challenged.’
But,	you	damned	fool,	Run’Thurvian	saw	what	was	coming.	We	shall	betray
our	vow.	And	I	see	no	way	out.	‘Mortal	Sword,’	he	began,	struggling	to	keep
the	anger	from	his	voice,	‘we	are	sworn	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	In	our	iron
we	bare	the	fangs	of	war.’
She	grunted.	‘And	there	shall	indeed	be	war,	Shield	Anvil.’
When	you	stood	before	the	Adjunct,	when	you	avowed	service	to	her	and
her	alone,	it	was	the	glory	of	that	moment	that	so	seduced	you,	wasn’t	it?
Madness!	‘We	could	not	have	anticipated	what	the	Adjunct	intended,’	he	said.
‘We	could	not	have	known	she	would	so	deceive	us—’
She	turned	then.	‘Sir,	must	I	censure	you?’
Tanakalian’s	eyes	widened.	He	straightened	before	her.	‘Mortal	Sword,	I
am	the	Shield	Anvil	of	the	Perish	Grey	Helms—’
‘You	are	a	fool,	Tanakalian.	You	are,	indeed,	my	greatest	regret.’
This	time,	he	vowed,	he	would	not	retreat	before	her	disdain.	He	would	not
walk	away,	feeling	diminished,	battered.	‘And	you,	Mortal	Sword,	stand	before
me	as	the	greatest	threat	the	Grey	Helms	have	ever	known.’
The	brothers	and	sisters	at	the	tent	had	halted	all	activity.	Others	were
joining	them	in	witnessing	this	clash.	Look	at	you	all!	You	knew	it	was	coming!
Tanakalian’s	heart	was	thundering	in	his	chest.
Krughava	had	gone	white.	‘Explain	that,	Shield	Anvil.’	Her	voice	was
harsh,	grating.	‘On	your	life,	explain	that.’
Oh,	how	he	had	longed	for	this	moment,	how	he	had	conjured	this	scene,
where	stood	the	Shield	Anvil,	face	to	face	with	Krughava.	Witnessed	and	so


remembered.	This	precise	scene.	And	in	his	mind	he	had	spoken	all	he	would
now	say,	his	voice	hard	and	bold,	solid	and	unwavering	before	this	wretched
tyrant’s	ire.	Tanakalian	drew	a	slow	breath,	watched	the	Mortal	Sword	tremble
with	rage,	and	was	not	cowed.	‘Adjunct	Tavore	is	one	woman.	A	mortal
woman	–	that	and	nothing	more.	It	was	not	your	place	to	avow	service	to	her.
We	are	Children	of	the	Wolves,	not	that	damned	woman!	And	now	see	what	has
happened!	She	sets	our	course	and	it	stabs	at	the	very	heart	of	our	faith!’
‘The	Fallen	God—’
‘Hood	take	the	Fallen	God!	“When	the	bhederin	is	wounded	and	weak,	the
wolves	shall	close	in!”	So	it	is	written!	In	the	name	of	our	gods,	Mortal	Sword,
he	should	die	by	our	hand!	But	none	of	that	matters	–	do	you	truly	imagine
Tavore	gives	a	damn	about	our	faith?	Does	she	kneel	before	the	Wolves?	She
does	not.’
‘We	march	to	the	final	war,	sir,	and	such	a	war	demands	us.	The	Perish.
The	Grey	Helms	–	without	us,	there	can	be	no	final	war!	And	I	will	not	abide
—’
‘A	final	war?	Don’t	be	ridiculous.	There’s	no	such	thing	as	a	final	war!
When	the	last	human	falls,	when	the	last	god	breathes	his	last	breath,	the
vermin	shall	lock	jaws	over	the	carcasses.	There	is	no	end	–	not	to	anything,
you	mad,	vain	fool!	This	was	all	about	you	standing	on	a	heap	of	corpses,	your
sword	red	as	the	sunset.	This	was	all	about	Krughava	and	her	insane	visions	of
glory!’	He	gestured	furiously	at	the	soldiers	gathered	round	them.	‘And	if	we
must	all	die	for	your	precious,	shining	moment,	why,	is	it	not	the	Shield	Anvil
who	stands	ready	to	embrace	the	souls?’
‘That	is	your	role!’
‘To	bless	your	wilful	murder	of	our	brothers	and	sisters?	You	want	me	to
sanctify	their	sacrifice?’
Her	left	hand	was	on	the	grip	of	her	sword,	the	blade	was	half	drawn.	She
had	gone	from	white	to	bright	red.	The	berserk	rage	is	almost	upon	her.	She	is
moments	from	killing	me.	By	the	Wolves,	see	what	she	is!	‘The	Shield	Anvil,	sir,
shall	not	question—’
‘I	will	bless	us,	Mortal	Sword,	in	the	name	of	a	just	cause.	Make	your
cause	just.	I	plead	with	you,	before	all	these	witnesses	–	before	our	brothers
and	sisters	–	make	this	cause	just!’
The	sword	scraped.	The	iron	sank	down,	vanished	into	the	scabbard.	The
fires	in	her	eyes	suddenly	ebbed.	‘So	we	are	divided,’	she	said.	‘We	are	driven
apart.	The	crisis	I	have	feared	is	finally	upon	us.	The	Adjunct	spoke	of
betrayal.’	Her	cold	eyes	scanned	the	crowd.	‘My	children,	what	has	befallen
us?’


Captain	Ikarl,	one	of	the	last	veterans	among	them,	spoke.	‘Mortal	Sword.
Two	sides	of	an	argument	can	make	the	complicated	seem	simple,	when	it	is
anything	but	simple.	A	third	voice	can	offer	reason,	and	indeed	wisdom.	We
must	acclaim	a	Destriant.	To	bridge	this	divide,	to	mend	this	wound.’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘Sir,	do	you	voice	the	doubt	of	many?	Do	my
brothers	and	sisters	question	my	leadership?’
He	shook	his	head,	but	there	was	no	telling	what	that	negation	referred	to.
‘Mortal	Sword,	we	are	sworn	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter	–	but	without	a	Destriant
we	cannot	reach	them.	We	are	severed	from	our	gods	and	so	we	suffer.
Krughava,	daughter	of	Nakalat,	do	you	not	see	how	we	suffer?’
Shaken,	her	eyes	bleak,	she	regarded	Tanakalian	once	more.	‘Shield	Anvil,
do	you	counsel	betrayal	of	the	Adjunct	Tavore?’
And	so	it	is	laid	bare.	At	last,	it	is	laid	bare.	He	raised	his	voice,	forcing
himself	to	remain	firm,	calm,	revealing	no	hint	of	triumph.	‘The	Wolves	howl
in	the	name	of	war.	Our	worship	was	born	in	the	snows	of	our	homeland,	in	the
winter ’s	cruel,	icy	breath.	We	came	to	honour	and	respect	the	beasts	of	the
wild,	the	wolves	who	shared	the	mountain	fastnesses,	the	dark	forests,	with	our
kind.	Even	as,	in	our	early	days,	we	hunted	those	very	beasts.	We	understood
them,	or	so	we	liked	to	believe—’
‘These	words	are	unnecessary—’
‘No,	Mortal	Sword.	They	are	necessary.	They	are,	in	fact,	vital.’	He	eyed
the	others	–	all	had	gathered	now,	a	silent	mass.	Five	thousand.	Brothers,
sisters	all.	You	hear	me.	You	will	hear	me.	You	must	hear	me.	‘We	find
ourselves	divided,	but	this	crisis	has	waited	for	us,	and	we	must	face	it.	A	crisis
created	by	the	Mortal	Sword’s	vow	to	the	Adjunct.	We	shall	face	it.	Here.	Now.
Brothers,	sisters,	we	have	looked	into	the	eyes	of	the	beast	–	our	chosen
wildness	–	and	in	bold	presumption,	we	proclaimed	them	our	brothers,	our
sisters,	our	kin.’
Voices	cried	out	–	angry,	harsh	with	denial.	Tanakalian	raised	his	hands,
held	them	high	until	silence	returned.	‘A	presumption,’	he	repeated.	‘We	cannot
know	the	mind	of	a	wolf,	no	more	than	we	can	know	the	mind	of	a	dog,	or	a
dhenrabi	of	the	north	seas.	Yet	we	took	upon	ourselves	the	most	ancient	of
gods	–	the	Lord	and	Lady	of	the	frozen	winter,	of	all	the	beasts,	of	the	world’s
wildness.	We	vowed	ourselves	to	a	House	–	a	Hold	–	where	we	do	not	belong
—’
The	protests	were	louder	this	time,	reluctant	to	die	away.	Tanakalian
waited.	‘But	war,	ah,	we	knew	that	well.	We	understood	it,	in	a	manner	no	wolf
of	the	forest	could.	Was	this	to	be	our	cause,	then?	Were	we	to	be	the	sword	of
the	wilds,	the	defender	of	wolves	and	all	the	beasts	of	forest,	sea,	plain	and


mountain?’	He	faced	Krughava.	‘Mortal	Sword?’
‘The	earliest	sentiments	whispered	of	such	things,’	she	replied,	‘as	we	all
know.	And	we	have	not	gone	astray,	sir.	We	have	not.’
‘We	have,	Mortal	Sword,	if	we	continue	to	follow	the	Adjunct,	if	we	stand
beside	her	in	this	war	she	seeks.	At	last,	it	is	time	for	me	to	speak	of	Destriant
Run’Thurvian’s	final	warning,	uttered	to	me	moments	before	his	death,	hard
words,	accusing	words,	even	as	he	denied	my	embrace.’
The	shock	was	palpable,	like	thunder	so	distant	it	was	not	heard,	but	felt.	A
tremble	in	the	very	bones.	And	all	that	comes,	all	that	now	rushes	towards	us…
Krughava’s	eyes	were	wide	and	he	could	see	her	confusion.	‘Tanakalian	–
he	refused	you?’
‘He	did.	He	never	approved	of	me	–	but	you	could	hardly	have	been
unaware	of	that.	He	must	have	worked	on	you,	I	think,	day	and	night,
undermining	your	decision	to	make	me	the	Shield	Anvil.	And	when	he	died,	his
fears	and	doubts	took	root	in	you.’
The	look	she	was	giving	him	was	one	he’d	never	seen	before.
Ikarl	asked,	‘Shield	Anvil,	tell	us	of	the	Destriant’s	warning.’
‘Betrayal.	He	said	she	would	force	us	to	betray	our	gods	–	I	could	not	be
certain	of	whom	he	spoke.	The	Adjunct?’	He	faced	Krughava.	‘Or	our	very
own	Mortal	Sword?	It	was	difficult,	you	see,	for	his	dislike	of	me	proved	an
obstacle.	That,	and	the	fact	that	he	was	dying	before	my	very	eyes.’
‘You	speak	truth,’	Krughava	said,	as	if	astonished.
‘Mortal	Sword,	do	not	think	I	do	not	love	my	brothers	and	sisters.	Do	not
think	I	would	stand	here	and	lie.	I	am	the	Shield	Anvil,	and	for	all
Run’Thurvian’s	doubts	–	for	all	your	doubts,	Krughava	–	I	hold	to	my	duty.	We
are	divided,	yes.	But	what	divides	us	is	so	fundamental	that	to	put	it	into	words
could	strike	one	as	absurd.	Upon	the	side	of	the	Adjunct,	we	are	offered	a	place
among	mortals,	among	humans	–	flawed,	weak,	uncertain	in	their	cause.	Upon
the	other	side,	our	covenant	of	faith.	The	Wolves	of	Winter,	the	Wolves	of	War.
The	Lord	and	the	Lady	of	the	Beast	Hold.	And	in	this	faith	we	choose	to	stand
alongside	the	beasts.	We	avow	our	swords	in	the	name	of	their	freedom,	their
right	to	live,	to	share	this	and	every	other	world.	The	question	–	so	absurd	–	is
this:	are	we	to	be	human,	or	are	we	to	be	humanity’s	slayers?	And	if	the	latter,
then	what	will	come	of	us	should	we	win?	Should	we	somehow	lead	a	rebellion
of	the	wilds,	and	so	destroy	every	last	human	on	this	world?	Must	we	then	fall
upon	our	own	swords?’
He	paused	then,	suddenly	drained,	and	met	Krughava’s	eyes.
‘Run’Thurvian	was	right.	There	will	be	betrayal.	In	fact,	in	choosing	one	side,
we	cannot	but	betray	the	other.	Mortal	Sword,	you	set	your	sword	down	before


the	Adjunct.	But	long	before	that	moment	you	pledged	that	selfsame	weapon	in
the	name	of	our	gods.	No	matter	how	strong	the	sword’s	forging,’	he	said,	‘no
weapon	can	long	withstand	contrary	pressures.	It	weakens.	It	shatters.	No
weapon	has	ever	bridged	a	divide,	and	once	drawn,	a	sword	can	only	cut.	For
all	the	virtues	of	iron,	Mortal	Sword,	we	are	flesh	and	blood.	What	awaits	us,
Krughava?	Which	path	shall	you	lead	us	upon?	Shall	it	be	to	your	personal
glory,	there	at	the	Adjunct’s	side?	Or	shall	it	be	in	the	name	of	the	gods	we	are
sworn	to	serve?’
She	reeled	at	his	words,	seemed	unable	to	speak.
The	virtue	of	iron,	woman,	is	that	when	it	strikes,	it	strikes	true!	He	faced
the	crowd.	‘Sisters!	Brothers	of	the	Grey	Helms!	There	are	many	gods	of	war
–	we	have	crossed	half	this	world	and	we	cannot	deny	the	thousand	faces	–	the
thousand	masks	worn	by	that	grim	bringer	of	strife.	We	have	seen	mortals
kneel	before	idols	and	statues	–	before	the	likeness	of	a	boar,	a	striped	tiger,	or
two	wolves.	We	have	heard	the	cries	upon	the	battlefield.’	He	paused	and	half
smiled,	as	if	remembering.	‘The	field	of	battle,	yes.	By	those	beseeching	cries
alone,	we	might	imagine	that	the	greatest	god	of	war	is	named	Mother.’	He
held	up	his	hands	again	to	stay	his	listeners.	‘I	meant	no	disrespect,	dear	kin.	I
speak	only	to	find	what	sets	us	apart	–	from	all	those	other	blood-soaked	cults.
What	do	they	seek,	there	in	violent	battle,	those	savage	faiths?	Why,	they	seek
death	–	the	death	of	their	enemies	–	and	if	death	must	come	to	themselves,	then
they	pray	it	is	a	brave	one,	a	glorious	one.’
He	strode	past	Krughava,	was	pleased	to	see	her	step	aside,	and	faced	Ikarl
and	the	others:	scores	of	faces,	eyes	fixed	upon	him	now,	eyes	that	slipped	over
the	Mortal	Sword	as	if	she	had	ceased	to	exist.	He	could	not	believe	the
suddenness,	the	sheer	immensity	of	this	usurpation.
She	was	fatally	weakened.	There	in	the	Adjunct’s	command	tent.	She	sought
to	show	none	of	it,	and	hid	it	well	indeed.	Yet	all	I	needed	to	do	was	prod,	just
once.	And	see	what	has	happened.
Tavore,	your	denial	broke	Krughava,	and	Krughava	was	a	woman	for	whom
trust	was	everything.	How	could	I	have	not	heard	the	splintering	of	her	spine?
Right	then	and	there?	How	could	I	not	have	understood	the	moment	when	she
grasped	the	notion	of	strategy,	of	tactics,	and	made	bold	her	renewed	zeal?	It
was…desperate.	No	matter.	‘But	we	are	not	the	same	as	the	others.	We	are	not
simply	one	cult	of	war	among	many.	It	is	not	glory	we	seek	–	not	in	our	name,
at	least.	It	is	not	even	the	death	of	our	enemies	that	so	gladdens	us,	filling	our
drunken	nights	with	bravado.	We	are	too	sombre	for	such	things.	It	is	not	in	us
to	swagger	and	bluster.	War,	my	brothers,	my	sisters,	is	the	only	weapon	we
have	left.


‘To	defend	the	wilds.	I	tell	you,	I	would	defy	Run’Thurvian’s	last	words!
Betray	the	Wolves?	No!	Never!	And	the	day	of	our	battle,	when	we	stand	free
upon	the	corpses	of	our	fellow	humans,	when	we	have	delivered	once	more	the
wildness	upon	all	the	world,	well,	then	I	shall	bow	to	the	Wolves.	And	I	shall
with	humility	step	aside.	For	it	is	not	our	glory	that	we	seek.’	He	swung	to	stare
at	Krughava.	‘It	never	was.’	Facing	the	others	again.	‘Must	we	then	fall	upon
our	own	swords?	No,	for	as	I	said	earlier,	there	is	no	such	thing	as	a	final	war.
One	day	we	shall	be	called	upon	again	–	that	is	the	only	certainty	we	need	to
recognize.
‘Brothers,	sisters!	Are	you	sworn	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter?’
The	roar	that	answered	his	question	rocked	him	back	a	step.	Recovering,
he	spun	round,	marched	up	to	Krughava.	‘Mortal	Sword,	I	sought	you	out	to
ask	you	about	Commander	Erekala	and	the	fleet.	You	chose	him,	but	I	must
know,	is	he	a	loyal	servant	to	the	Wolves?	Or	does	he	worship	you?’
He	might	as	well	have	slapped	her.	Yes,	I	do	this	before	witnesses.	All	the
public	slights	you	visited	upon	me	–	at	last	I	can	deliver	the	same	to	you.	How
does	it	feel?
Krughava	straightened.	‘Erekala	is	most	devout,	sir.’
‘The	fleet	should	have	arrived,’	he	said.	‘Blockading	the	harbour	and	so
isolating	the	Spire.	Yes?’
She	nodded.
‘And	there	they	await	us.’
‘Yes,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘Mortal	Sword,	will	you	return	to	the	fold?	Will	you	lead	us	in	the	war	to
come?	Our	need	for	you—’
She	lifted	her	eyes,	silenced	him	with	their	icy	regard.	A	sneer	curled	her
lips.	‘Is	clearly	past,	Shield	Anvil.’	She	turned	to	the	crowd.	‘I	relinquish	the
title	of	Mortal	Sword	to	the	Wolves.	In	my	vow	to	the	Adjunct,	I	seem	to	have
betrayed	you	all.	So	be	it,	sirs.	Let	it	be	written	that	the	betrayal	–	so
forewarned	by	Destriant	Run’Thurvian	–	belonged	not	to	the	Perish	Grey
Helms,	but	to	Mortal	Sword	Krughava.	The	crime	is	mine	and	mine	alone.’
Gods,	the	supreme	egoism	of	this	creature!	Even	in	defeat,	she	will	stand
upon	the	mound,	alone.	I	divest	her	of	everything	–	I	drive	the	knife	into	her
very	heart	–	and	now	she	is	suddenly	transformed	into	a	figure	of	breathtaking
tragedy!	How	does	she	manage	it?	Every	time!	‘How	it	shall	be	written,’	he	said
in	a	loud	voice,	‘remains	to	be	decided.	Should	you	rediscover	your	faith,
Krughava—’
She	bared	her	teeth.	‘Should	you	discover	your	humanity,	Tanakalian,
should	you	find	the	courage	–	Hood	knows	where	–	to	see	the	crisis	in	your


own	soul,	then	do	come	to	me.	Until	then,	I	shall	ride	alone.’
He	snorted.	‘And	will	you	raise	your	own	tent,	too?	Cook	your	own
breakfast?’
‘I	have	ever	given	thanks	to	my	brothers	and	sisters,	Shield	Anvil,	for	such
kindnesses	as	they	volunteer.’	She	cocked	her	head.	‘I	wonder…how	long
before	doing	the	same	slips	from	your	mind,	Tanakalian?’
As	she	walked	away,	he	turned	to	the	tent.	‘Here,	my	children,	shall	I	help
you	with	that?’
	
‘Usurpation?’
Krughava	swept	past	Spax,	flung	her	helm	into	a	corner	of	the	tent,	and
followed	it	with	her	gauntlets.	‘I	would	drink,	Highness.’
Abrastal	gestured	savagely	and	Spax	shook	himself,	went	over	to	collect	a
jug.	‘Woman,	you	have	the	right	of	it.	Get	drunk,	and	then	come	to	my	bed.	I
vow	to	make	you	forget	all	your	ills.’
The	stern	woman	regarded	the	Barghast	with	a	measuring	stare,	as	if
contemplating	his	offer.	Spax	felt	sudden	sweat	upon	the	small	of	his	back.	He
quickly	poured	out	a	goblet	and	handed	it	to	her.
Queen	Abrastal	sank	back	into	the	heap	of	cushions.	‘Well,	that	didn’t	take
long.’
Krughava’s	eyes	flashed.	‘If	I	am	too	shameful	in	your	eyes,	Highness—’
‘Oh	be	quiet	and	drink	that	down.	Spax,	be	ready	to	pour	her	another.	I	was
but	musing	out	loud,	Mortal	Sword,	on	my	sense	of	the	Adjunct’s—’
‘Her?	And	if	it	pleases,	I	am	no	longer	Mortal	Sword.	No,	none	of	this	can
be	cast	at	Tavore’s	feet—’
‘By	all	the	river	gods,	woman,	sit	down	and	drink	–	in	other	words,	be
quiet!	Leave	me	to	do	all	the	talking.’
‘What	of	me,	Firehair?’
‘Should	the	miraculous	moment	ever	arrive	when	you	can	say	something
of	value,	Spax	of	the	Gilk,	be	sure	to	leap	right	in.	Meanwhile,	I	return	to	my
point.	The	Adjunct.	I	can’t	even	guess	at	the	manner	of	it,	but	clearly	she
somehow	managed	to	bind	you	all	to	her	–	until	the	day	of	the	parley,	when	she
went	and	tore	it	all	apart.	Thus,	not	long	–	do	you	see?	What	she	made	she	then
un-made,	and	I	do	wonder	at	her	appalling	sense	of	timing.’
Krughava’s	eyes	were	level	above	the	rim	of	the	goblet.	‘Highness,	what
did	you	make	of	her?’
‘Spax,	hand	me	that	damned	jug	if	all	you	can	do	is	stare	–	no,	give	it	to
me.	Throw	yourself	down	by	the	curtain	–	we	might	need	to	wipe	our	feet	by


the	time	the	night’s	done.	Now,	the	Adjunct.	Krughava	–	I	swear,	I	will	have	you
weeping,	or	whatever	else	I	can	wring	from	you.	To	hold	it	all	inside	as	I	see
you	doing	will	kill	you.’
‘Tavore	Paran,	Highness.’
Abrastal	sighed,	watching	Spax	settle	down	near	the	curtain.	‘I	miss	the
Khundryl,’	she	muttered.	She	blinked	and	then	looked	away,	seemed	to	study
one	of	the	thick	tapestries	hanging	from	the	tent	frame.	Spax	squinted	at	it.
Some	faded	coronation	scene,	figures	stiff	as	statues,	the	kind	of	formality	that
spoke	of	artistic	incompetence	or	the	absurdity	of	genius.	He	could	never	make
up	his	mind	over	such	things.	It’s	just	a	stupid	circlet	of	gold	and	silver	and
whatnot.	It’s	just	a	stupid	proclamation	of	superiority	–	look	at	all	the	bowed
heads!	Where’s	the	real	message	here?	Why,	it’s	with	those	guards	lining	the
walls,	and	the	swords	under	their	hands.
‘It	is	difficult,’	Abrastal	said,	frowning	still	at	the	tapestry.	‘Where	does
loyalty	come	from?	What	causes	it	to	be	born?	What	lifts	one	person	above	all
the	others,	so	that	one	chooses	to	follow	her,	or	him?	Is	it	nothing	but	our	own
desperation?	Is	it,	as	the	Khundryl	say,	that	vast	crow’s	wing	stretching	over
us?	Do	we	yearn	for	the	shelter	of	competence	–	real	or	imagined,	true	or
delusional?’
Spax	cleared	his	throat.	‘In	times	of	crisis,	Firehair,	even	the	smallest
group	of	people	will	turn	their	heads,	finding	one	among	them.	When	we	have
no	answers,	we	look	to	one	who	might	–	and	that	hope	is	born	of	qualities
observed:	of	clearest	thought,	of	wisdom	or	bold	courage	–	all	that	each	of	us
wishes	to	reflect.’
Krughava	shifted	to	regard	Spax,	but	said	nothing.
‘Reflect,	is	it?’	Abrastal	grunted,	drank	down	a	mouthful	of	wine.	‘Is	this
queen	a	mirror?	Is	that	all	I	am?	Is	that	all	you	are,	Warchief	Spax?	A	mirror
for	your	people?’
‘In	many	ways,	yes.	But	in	looking	into	that	mirror	they	ever	choose,	I
think,	to	see	only	what	they	want	to	see.’
‘Sir,’	rumbled	Krughava	to	Spax,	‘you	invite	an	untenable	position,	for	all
who	would	command,	who	would	take	the	lead,	from	the	smallest	band	of
warriors	to	the	vastest	empire.’	She	scowled	at	her	goblet	and	held	it	out	to
Abrastal,	who	leaned	forward	to	refill	it.	‘Among	the	Perish,	upon	nights
overcast	and	moonless,	twenty	hunters	each	would	take	to	rath’avars	and	row
out	beyond	the	fiords.	They	would	light	bright	lanterns,	suspending	them	on
poles	out	over	the	black,	icy	waters,	and	by	that	light	they	would	call	from	the
deeps	the	three-jawed	nitals	–	a	terrible	fish	that	in	vast	numbers	hunt	the
dhenrabi,	and	are	able	to	strip	those	leviathan	creatures	down	to	the	bones	in	a


single	sounding.	The	nitals,	you	see,	hunt	by	the	moon’s	glow.	And	when	they
rose	to	the	light,	the	hunters	would	spear	them.’	She	fell	silent,	lids	lowering
for	a	time.
Spax	scratched	at	the	bristle	on	his	jaw,	trying	to	work	out	the	significance
of	that	tale.	He	glanced	at	Abrastal,	but	the	queen	seemed	fixated	on	the	old
tapestry.
‘Those	fish	would	rise	to	the	surface,’	Krughava	said	in	a	voice	like	gravel
under	a	boot	heel,	‘and	the	light	would	blind	them,	freeze	them.	There	was	no
bravery	in	slaying	them	–	it	was	nothing	but	slaughter,	and	would	only	end
when	the	arms	and	shoulders	of	the	hunters	burned	like	fire,	when	they	could
no	longer	lift	their	harpoons.’
Spax	snorted,	nodding.	‘Yes,	it	does	feel	like	that,	at	times.’
‘When	I	think	of	the	wilds,’	she	continued	as	if	not	hearing	him,	‘I	think	of
the	nitals.	We	humans	stand	as	the	brightest	light,	and	before	us	every	living
beast	of	this	world	freezes	in	place.	My	Shield	Anvil	has	reawakened	all	the
rage	in	my	people,	a	rage	confounded	with	guilt.	We	are	to	be	the	slaughterers
defending	the	slaughtered.’
‘The	Wolves	of	War—’
‘It	is	a	damned	cult!’	snapped	Krughava,	and	then	she	shook	her	head.	‘The
savagery	of	the	wolf	inspired	us	–	is	that	so	surprising?’
‘But	there	must	be	tenets	of	your	faith,’	Spax	persisted,	‘that	do	indeed	cry
out	for	retribution.’
‘Delusions,	sir.	Highness,	speak	of	the	Adjunct.	Please.’
‘A	most	driven	woman,	Krughava.	Desperation.	And	terrible	need.	But	is
she	a	mirror?	And	if	so,	what	are	we	all	meant	to	see?’
Krughava	looked	up,	studied	Abrastal.	‘The	thought	alone	makes	me	want
to	weep,	but	I	know	not	why.’
‘To	reflect,’	said	Spax,	‘a	mirror	is	made	hard,	polished,	unflawed.’
‘Find	us	more	wine,	Spax,’	Abrastal	growled,	‘this	one	is	done.	Krughava
–	you	swore	allegiance	to	the	Adjunct.	Why?’
‘We	were	troubled.	Questions	had	begun	to	plague	us,	especially	the
Destriant	and	his	highest	seneschals	–	those	who	had	given	their	lives	to	the
philosophy	of	our	religion.	We	trained	to	be	the	weapons	of	war,	you	see,	but
we	had	begun	to	wonder	if	the	only	gesture	of	humanity	was	the	one	that
delivered	violence.	Destruction.	We	wondered	at	the	seemingly	insurmountable
might	of	vengeance,	retribution	and	righteous	punishment.’	Her	eyes	were
bleak.	‘Is	that	all	we	possess?	Is	there	nothing	else	that	might	challenge	such
weapons?’
‘Then,’	ventured	Abrastal,	‘you	must	have	seen	something.	In	her.	In


Tavore	Paran—’
But	Krughava	shook	her	head.	‘All	that	I	knew	of	her,	in	that	moment	when
I	pledged	my	service	and	that	of	the	Grey	Helms	–	all	that	I	knew,	well,	it	came
from	the	visions	of	the	seneschals.	The	Fallen	God	was	damaged.	In	terrible
pain.	Like	a	beast	–	like	any	of	us	–	he	lashed	out	at	his	tormentors.	In	that,	he
was	more	the	wolf	than	we	were.	Or	could	ever	hope	to	be.	Highness,	a	knife	to
his	throat	would	be	a	mercy,	for	so	many	–	you	must	understand	this	–	so	many
had	now	gathered	to	feed	on	his	pain,	to	drink	the	sweet	venom	of	his	fevered
blood.	More	than	that,	in	witnessing	his	imprisonment,	and	his	agony,	they	felt
themselves	elevated	–	it	made	them	feel	powerful,	and	in	that	power	the	only
currency	was	cruelty.	After	all,	is	that	not	always	our	way?’
‘The	dreams	of	the	seneschals,	Krughava?	What	did	they	offer?’
The	iron-haired	woman	nodded.	‘An	alternative.	A	way	out.	In	those
dreams	stood	a	woman,	a	mortal	woman,	immune	to	all	magics,	immune	to	the
seduction	of	the	Fallen	God’s	eternal	suffering.	And	she	held	something	in	her
hand	–	it	was	small,	indeed,	so	small	that	our	dreamers	could	not	discern	its
nature,	but	it	haunted	them	–	oh,	how	it	haunted	them!’
‘What	was	she	holding?’	Abrastal	demanded,	leaning	forward.	‘You	must
have	an	idea.’
‘An	idea?	Oh,	hundreds	of	those,	Highness.	What	she	held	had	the	power	to
free	the	Fallen	God.	It	had	the	power	to	defy	the	gods	of	war	–	and	every	other
god.	It	was	a	power	to	crush	the	life	from	vengeance,	from	retribution,	from
righteous	punishment.	The	power	to	burn	away	the	seduction	of	suffering
itself.’	Her	eyes	glittered	in	the	lantern	light.	‘Can	you	imagine	such	a	thing?’
Spax	leaned	back.	‘I	have	seen	her	enough	times.	I	see	nothing	in	her	hand.’
Krughava	had	set	the	cup	down.	She	now	sat,	her	left	hand	held	out,	palm
up,	resting	on	her	knee.	She	gazed	down	at	it,	as	if	seeking	to	conjure	all	that
she	needed.	‘That,’	she	whispered,	‘is	not	a	mirror.	But…oh,	how	I	wish	it	to	be
one.’
‘Krughava,’	Abrastal	said	in	a	low,	almost	tentative	voice.	‘In	the	moment
you	stood	before	her,	was	there	not	doubt?	Was	there	not	even	a	single	instant
of…uncertainty?’
‘I	thought	–	in	her	eyes,	so	flat…something.	And	now	I	wonder	–	I	cannot
help	but	wonder	now	if	all	that	I	thought	I	saw	was	nothing	more	than	what	I
wanted	to	see.’	The	hand	slowly	curled,	closed	like	a	dying	flower.	‘The	mirror
lies.’
Those	last	words	shook	Spax	to	his	very	core.	He	climbed	to	his	feet,
feeling	blood	rushing	into	his	face.	‘Then	why	didn’t	you	accept	your	Shield
Anvil’s	argument?	Krughava!	Why	are	you	even	here?’


With	desolate	eyes,	she	looked	up	at	him.	‘I	wanted	a	just	war.	I	wanted	it	to
be	the	last	war	of	all	wars.	I	wanted	an	end.	One	day	the	wolves	will	run	only	in
our	memories,	our	dreams.	I	do	not	want	to	live	to	see	that	day.’
‘There	was	something	there,’	Abrastal	insisted.	‘In	her	hand	–	your	seers
saw	it,	Krughava.	They	saw	it.	You	must	find	out	what	it	was	–	for	all	of	us	to
do	this,	to	do	as	she	bids	–	for	us,	Krughava,	you	must	find	it!’
‘But	I	know	what	it	is,	Highness.	In	this	moment,	I	have	found	my	answer.
And	I	see	now	how	I	have	watched	it	weaken.	How	I	have	watched	its	light	fade
from	the	world.	You	see	the	Adjunct’s	desperation	–	oh	yes,	she	is	desperate.
We	are	too	few.	We	are	failing.	That	precious	thing	she	found,	she	paid	a	price
for	it,	and	that	price	is	now	proving	too	high.	For	her,	for	the	Bonehunters,	for
us.’
Spax	bared	his	teeth.	‘Then	the	mirror	did	not	lie.’
‘The	lie	is	in	the	faith,	sir.	The	faith	that	it	can	win,	that	it	can	even	survive
at	all.	You	see,	she	is	indeed	but	one	woman,	a	mortal,	and	her	strength	is	no
greater	than	anyone	else’s.	She	has	been	at	war	–	I	now	think	–	all	of	her	life.	Is
it	any	wonder	she	now	stumbles?’
Spax	thought	back	to	that	parley,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘From
somewhere,	Krughava,	she	is	finding	strength.	I	saw	it	–	we	all	did,	damn	you
—’
‘She	turned	me	away.’
Abrastal	snorted.	‘You	feel	slighted?	Is	that	where	all	this	has	come	from?’
‘Highness.’	Krughava’s	tone	hardened.	‘From	the	very	beginning,	I	saw
myself	as	the	reflection	of	her	faith.	I	would	be	her	one	unshakeable	ally	–
sworn	to	her	and	her	alone,	no	matter	where	she	would	lead	us.	And	I	knew	that
we	understood	each	other.	And	that	as	much	as	I	needed	her	–	and	what	she	held
inside	–	she	in	turn	needed	me.	Do	you	grasp	any	of	this?	I	was	the	source	of
her	strength.	When	her	faith	faltered,	she	needed	only	to	look	at	me.’	Krughava
held	her	palms	against	her	face,	covering	her	eyes,	and	slowly	leaned	forward.
Muffled,	she	said,	‘She	turned	me	away.’
Spax	looked	over	at	Abrastal	and	met	the	queen’s	steady	gaze.	The	Gilk
Warchief	slowly	nodded.
‘You	leave	me	in	a	difficult	position,’	Abrastal	said.	‘Krughava.	If	I
understand	you	correctly,	it	is	now	your	thought	that	in	denying	you,	the
Adjunct	has	in	effect	lost	her	faith.	Yet	was	this	not	a	matter	of	disposition?
Two	objectives,	not	one,	and	so	we	are	to	be	divided	in	strength.	And	given	the
nature	of	the	Glass	Desert—’
But	Krughava	was	shaking	her	head	behind	her	hands.	‘Do	you	truly
imagine	that	she	believes	she	can	cross	it?	With	her	army?’


Spax	loosed	a	stream	of	Barghast	curses,	and	then	said,	‘What	would	be	the
point	of	that?	If	she	intends	suicide	–	no,	her	ego	cannot	be	so	diabolically
monstrous	that	she’d	take	all	her	soldiers	with	her!’
‘You	are	yet,	I	think,’	and	Krughava’s	hands	fell	away	as	she	looked	up	at
him,	‘to	acquaint	yourself	with	the	third	voice	in	this	eternal	argument.’
‘What	do	you	speak	of?’
‘I	speak	of	despair,	sir.	Yes,	she	would	will	herself	and	her	army	across	the
Glass	Desert,	but	she	does	so	without	faith.	It	is	gone,	driven	away—’
Abrastal	said,	‘Sincerely	as	you	may	have	seen	yourself	as	the	true	and
unshakeable	reflection	of	Tavore’s	faith,	I	believe	your	conviction	that	Tavore
saw	you	the	same	way	–	in	those	precise	terms	–	is	itself	an	article	of	faith.
This	place	of	despair	where	you	now	find	yourself	is	entirely	of	your	own
making.’
Krughava	shook	her	head.	‘I	have	watched	it	weaken.	I	have	watched	its
light	fade	from	the	world.	And	I	have	seen	her	desperation.	We	are	too	few.	We
are	failing.	That	shining	thing,	there	in	her	hand,	is	dying.’
‘Tell	me	its	name,’	Abrastal	whispered.	‘This	argument	of	yours.	You
name	one	side	faith	and	another	despair.	Speak	to	me	of	what	she	holds.	This
failing,	dying	thing.’
Spax	turned	to	Abrastal	in	surprise.	‘Why,	Firehair,	you	do	not	yet	know?
That	which	fades	from	the	world?	Its	name	is	compassion.	This	is	what	she
holds	for	the	Fallen	God.	What	she	holds	for	us	all.’
‘And	it	is	not	enough,’	Krughava	whispered.	‘Gods	below,	it	is	not	enough.’


Book	Four

The	Fists	of	The	World

	


	

If	there	was	a	better	place
Would	you	seek	it	out?
If	peace	was	at	hand
Would	you	reach	for	it?
And	on	this	road	stand	thousands
Weeping	for	all	that	is	past
The	journey’s	at	an	end
We	are	done	with	our	old	ways
But	they	are	not	done	with	us
There	is	no	air	left
In	this	closed	fist
The	last	breath	has	been	taken
And	now	awaits	release
Where	the	children	sit	waiting
For	the	legacy	of	waste
Buried	in	the	gifts	we	made
I	have	seen	a	better	place
I	have	known	peace	like	sleep
It	lies	at	road’s	end
Where	the	silts	have	gathered
And	voices	moan	like	music
In	this	moment	of	reaching
The	stone	took	my	flesh
And	held	me	fast
With	eyes	unseeing
Breath	bound	within
A	fist	closed	on	darkness
A	hand	outstretched
And	now	you	march	past
Tossing	coins	at	my	feet
In	my	story	I	sought	a	better	place
And	yearned	so	for	peace


But	it	is	a	tale	untold
And	a	life	unfinished
Wood-Cutters
Tablet	IV
Hethra	of	Aren


Chapter	Eleven

On	that	day	I	watched	them	lift	high
In	the	tallness	of	being	they	shouldered	years
And	stood	as	who	they	would	become
There	was	sweat	on	their	arms	and	mad	jackals
Went	slinking	from	their	bright	eyes
I	see	a	knowledge	sliding	beneath	this	door
Where	I	lean	barred	and	gasping	in	horror
And	for	all	that	I	have	flung	my	back	against	it
They	are	the	milling	proofs	of	revelation
Crowding	the	street	beyond	like	roosting	prophets
And	as	the	children	wandered	off	in	the	way	of	gods
The	small	shape	was	unmoving	at	suffering’s	end
On	this	day	I	watched	them	lift	high
Tomorrow’s	wretched	pantheon	around	stains
On	the	stone	where	a	lame	dog	had	been	trapped
In	a	forest	of	thin	legs	and	the	sticks	and	bricks
Went	up	and	down	like	builders	of	monuments
Where	the	bowls	are	bronze	and	overflowing
And	marble	statues	brood	like	pigeons
Have	you	seen	all	these	faces	of	God?
Lifted	so	high	to	show	us	the	perfection
Of	our	own	holy	faces	but	their	hands	are	empty
Of	bricks	and	sticks	now	that	they’re	grown
Is	there	no	faith	to	scour	away	the	cruelty	of	children?
Will	no	god	shield	the	crying	dog	on	the	stone
From	his	lesser	versions	caging	the	helpless
And	the	lame?	If	we	are	made	as	we	would	be
Then	the	makers	are	us.	And	if	there	stands
A	god	moulding	all	he	is	in	what	we	are
Then	we	are	that	god	and	the	children
Beating	to	death	a	small	dog	outside	my	door
Are	the	small	measures	of	his	will	considered


And	in	tasting	either	spat	out	or	consumed
In	the	ecstasy	of	the	omnipotent
Children	Like	Gods
Fisher	kel	Tath
	on	the	ropes.	Columns	of
black	marble,	rising	in	a	ring	around	the	glittering	mound.	The	dust	in	Spindle’s
mouth	tasted	like	hope,	the	ache	in	his	shoulders	and	lower	back	felt	like	the
promise	of	salvation.
He	had	seen	her	this	day	and	she	had	been…better.	Still	a	child,	really,	a
sorely	used	one,	and	only	a	bastard	would	say	it	had	all	been	for	the	good.	That
the	finding	of	faith	could	only	come	from	terrible	suffering.	That	wisdom	was
borne	on	scars.	Just	a	child,	dammit,	scoured	clean	of	foul	addictions,	but	that
look	remained,	there	in	her	ancient	eyes.	Knowledge	of	deadly	flavours,	a
recognition	of	the	self,	lying	trapped	in	chains	of	weakness	and	desire.
She	was	the	Redeemer’s	High	Priestess.	He	had	taken	her	in	his	embrace,
and	she	was	the	last	ever	to	have	known	that	gift.
The	digging	around	the	mound	had	scurried	up	offerings	by	the	bucketload.
T’lan	Imass,	mostly.	Bits	of	polished	bone,	shells	and	amber	beads	had	a	way	of
wandering	down	the	sides	of	the	barrow.	The	great	plaster	friezes	they	were
working	on	in	Coral	now	held	those	quaint,	curious	gifts,	there	in	the	elaborate
borders	surrounding	the	Nine	Sacred	Scenes.
Spindle	leaned	against	the	water	wagon,	awaiting	his	turn	with	a	battered
tin	cup	in	one	cracked,	calloused	hand.
He’d	been	a	marine	once.	A	Bridgeburner.	He’d	trained	in	military
engineering,	as	much	as	any	Malazan	marine	had.	And	now,	three	months	since
his	return	from	Darujhistan	(and	what	a	mess	that	had	been!)	he’d	been	made	a
pit	captain,	but	as	in	his	soldiering	days	he	wasn’t	one	to	sit	back	and	let
everyone	else	do	all	the	hard	work.	No,	all	of	this	felt…good.	Honest.
He’d	not	had	a	murderous	thought	in	weeks.	Well,	days	then.
The	sun	was	bright,	blistering	down	on	the	flood	plain.	On	the	west	road
huge	wagons	were	wending	up	and	down	from	the	quarries.	And	as	for	the	city
to	the	south…he	turned,	squinted.	Glorious	light.	Kurald	Galain	was	gone.
Black	Coral	was	black	no	longer.
Gone.	The	Tiste	Andii	had	vanished,	that	red	dragon	with	them,	leaving
everything	else	behind.	Books,	treasures,	everything.	Not	a	word	to	anyone,	not
a	single	hint.	Damned	mysterious,	but	then	what	was	odd	about	that?	They
weren’t	human.	They	didn’t	think	like	humans.	In	fact—
THE	RAMPS	HAD	BEEN	LAID	OUT,	THE	CREWS	SINGING	AS	THEY	HEAVED


‘Gods	below!’
From	the	high	palace,	from	the	towers,	a	sudden	conflagration,	swirling
darkness	that	spread	out	in	roiling	clouds,	and	then	broke	into	pieces.
Shouts	from	the	crews.	Fear,	alarm.	Dread.
Distant	cries…raining	down.
Spindle	was	on	his	knees,	the	tin	cup	rolling	away	from	trembling	hands.
The	last	time…gods!	The	last	time	he’d	seen—
Great	Ravens	filled	the	sky.	Thousands,	spinning,	climbing,	a	raucous	roar.
The	sun	momentarily	vanished	behind	their	vast	cloud.
Shivering,	his	peace	shattered,	he	could	feel	old	tears	rising	from	some
deep	well	inside.	He’d	thought	it	sealed.	Forgotten.	But	no.	‘My	friends,’	he
whispered.	‘The	tunnels…oh,	my	heart,	my	heart…’
Great	Ravens,	pouring	out	from	the	high	places	of	the	city,	winging	ever
higher,	massing,	drifting	out	over	the	bay.
‘Leaving.	They’re	leaving.’
And	as	they	swarmed	above	the	city,	as	they	boiled	out	over	the	sea	to	the
east,	a	hundred	horrid,	crushing	memories	wheeled	into	Spindle,	and	there	took
roost.
Only	a	bastard	would	say	it	had	all	been	for	the	good.	That	the	finding	of
faith	could	only	come	from	terrible	suffering.	That	wisdom	was	borne	on	scars.
Only	a	bastard.
He	knelt.
And	as	only	a	soldier	could,	he	wept.
	
Something	had	drawn	Banaschar	to	the	small	crowd	of	soldiers.	It	might	have
been	curiosity;	at	least,	that	was	how	it	must	have	looked,	but	the	truth	was	that
his	every	motion	now,	from	one	place	to	next,	was	his	way	of	fleeing.	Fleeing
the	itch.	The	itch	of	temple	cellars,	of	all	that	had	been	within	my	reach.	If	I
could	have	known.	Could	have	guessed.
The	Glass	Desert	defied	him.	That	perfect	luxury	that	was	a	drunk’s
paradise,	all	that	endless	wine	that	cost	him	not	a	single	coin,	was	gone.	I	am
damned	now.	As	I	swore	to	Blistig,	as	I	said	to	them	all,	sobriety	has	come	to
pass	for	poor	old	Banaschar.	Not	a	drop	in	his	veins,	not	a	hint	upon	his	fevered
breath.	Nothing	of	the	man	he	was.
Except	for	the	itch.
The	soldiers	–	regulars,	he	thought	–	were	gathered	about	an	overturned
boulder.	They’d	been	rolling	it	to	pin	down	a	corner	of	the	kitchen	tent.
There’d	been	something	hiding	under	it.


Banaschar	edged	in	for	a	look.
A	worm,	coiled	in	sleep,	though	it	had	begun	to	stir,	lifting	a	blind	head.
Long	as	an	eel	from	Malaz	Harbour,	but	there	the	similarity	ended.	This	one
had	mouths	all	over	it.
‘Can’t	say	I	like	the	look	of	that	thing,’	one	of	the	soldiers	was	saying.
‘Looks	slow,’	observed	another.
‘You	just	woke	it	up.	It	crawls	by	day,	is	my	guess.	All	those	hungry
mouths…	Hood’s	breath,	we	better	turn	all	the	rocks	in	camp.	The	thought	of
lying	down	to	sleep	with	them	out	hunting	whatever…’
Someone	glanced	up	and	noticed	Banaschar.	‘Look,	that	useless	priest	of
D’rek’s	here.	What,	come	for	a	look	at	your	baby?’
‘Myriad	are	the	forms	of	the	Autumn	Worm—’
‘What’s	that?	A	myrid	worm,	y’say?’
‘I’ve	seen	the	like,’	Banaschar	said,	silencing	them	all.	In	my	dreams.	When
the	itch	turns	to	something	that	bites.	That	chews	and	gnaws	and	I	can’t	see	it,
can’t	find	it.	When	I	scream	in	the	night.	‘That	was	good	advice,’	he	added.
‘Scour	the	camp	–	spread	the	word.	Find	them.	Kill	them	all.’
A	boot	heel	slammed	down.
The	worm	writhed,	and	then	uncoiled	and	lifted	its	head	as	would	a	spitting
serpent.
Soldiers	backed	away,	swearing.
Banaschar	was	jostled	to	one	side.	Iron	flashed,	a	sword	blade	descending,
slicing	the	worm	in	two.	He	looked	up	to	see	Faradan	Sort.	She	glowered	at	the
ring	of	soldiers.	‘Stop	wasting	time,’	she	snapped.	‘The	day	grows	hotter,
soldiers.	Get	this	done	and	then	find	some	shade.’
The	two	sections	of	the	worm	had	squirmed	until	contacting	one	another,	at
which	point	they	constricted	in	mortal	battle.
Someone	threw	a	coin	down,	puffing	dust.	‘The	shorter	myrid.’
‘I’ll	see	you	on	that.’	A	second	coin	landed	near	the	first	one.
Faradan	Sort’s	sword	lashed	down,	again	and	again,	until	bits	of	worm	lay
scattered	glistening	in	the	white	dust.	‘Now,’	she	said,	‘the	next	bet	I	hear	placed
–	on	anything	–	will	see	the	fool	hauling	water	from	here	to	the	Eastern	Ocean.
Am	I	understood?	Good.	Now	get	to	work,	all	of	you.’
As	they	hurried	off,	the	Fist	turned	to	Banaschar,	studied	him	critically.
‘You	look	worse	than	usual,	Priest.	Find	some	shade—’
‘Oh,	the	sun	is	my	friend,	Fist.’
‘Only	a	man	with	no	friends	would	say	that,’	she	replied,	eyes	narrowed.
‘You’re	scorched.	There	will	be	pain	–	I	suggest	you	seek	out	a	healer.’
‘I	appreciate	your	advice,	Fist.	Do	I	anticipate	pain	today?	I	do.	In	fact,	I


think	I	welcome	it.’
He	saw	a	flash	of	disgust.	‘Gods	below,	you’re	better	than	that.’
‘Am	I?	Nice	of	you	to	say	so.’
Faradan	Sort	hesitated,	as	if	about	to	say	something	more,	but	then	she
turned	away.
He	watched	her	making	her	way	deeper	into	the	camp	of	the	regulars,
where	soldiers	now	hurried	about,	dislodging	rocks	with	knives	and	short
swords	in	hand.	Blades	flashed	and	curses	sounded.
The	exhaustion	of	this	place	left	him	appalled.	Shards	of	crystal	born	in
screams	of	pressure,	somewhere	far	below,	perhaps,	and	then	driven	upward,
slicing	through	the	skin	of	the	earth.	Looking	round,	he	imagined	the	pain	of
all	that,	the	unyielding	will	behind	such	forces.	He	lifted	his	gaze,	stared	into
the	east	where	the	sun	edged	open	like	a	lizard’s	eye.	‘Something,’	he
whispered,	‘died	here.	Someone…’	The	shock	had	torn	through	this	land.	And
the	power	unleashed,	in	that	wild	death,	had	delivered	such	a	wound	upon	the
Sleeping	Goddess	that	she	must	have	cried	out	in	her	sleep.	They	killed	her
flesh.	We	walk	upon	her	dead	flesh.	Crystals	like	cancer	growing	on	all	sides.
He	resumed	his	wandering,	the	itch	biting	at	his	heels.
	
Fist	Blistig	pushed	his	way	past	the	crowd	and	entered	the	tent.	Gods	below.
‘Everyone	out.	Except	for	the	quartermaster.’	The	mob	besieging	Pores,	where
he	sat	behind	a	folding	table,	quickly	departed,	with	more	than	one	venomous
look	cast	at	the	clean-shaven	man	now	leaning	back	on	his	stool.	Brows	lifting,
he	regarded	Blistig.
The	Fist	turned	and	dropped	the	tent	flap.	He	faced	Pores.	‘Lieutenant.
Master-Sergeant.	Quartermaster.	Just	how	many	ranks	and	titles	do	you	need?’
‘Why,	Fist	Blistig,	I	go	where	necessity	finds	me.	Now,	what	can	I	do	for
you,	sir?’
‘How	much	water	did	we	go	through	last	night?’
‘Too	much,	sir.	The	oxen	and	horses	alone—’
‘By	your	reckoning,	how	many	days	can	we	go	without	resupply?’
‘Well	now,	Fist,	that	depends.’
Blistig	scowled.	‘All	the	soldiers	who	were	in	here,	Pores	–	what	were	they
doing?’
‘Petitioning,	sir.	Needless	to	say,	I	have	had	to	refuse	them	all.	It	is	quickly
becoming	apparent	that	water	is	acquiring	a	value	that	beggars	gold	and
diamonds.	It	has,	in	short,	become	the	currency	of	survival.	And	on	that	matter,
I	am	glad	you’re	here,	Fist	Blistig.	I	foresee	a	time	–	not	far	off	–	when


begging	turns	to	anger,	and	anger	to	violence.	I	would	like	to	request	more
guards	on	the	water	wagons—’
‘Are	you	rationing?’
‘Of	course,	sir.	But	it’s	difficult,	since	we	don’t	seem	to	have	any	reliable
information	on	how	many	days	it	will	take	to	cross	this	desert.	Or,	rather,
nights.’	Pores	hesitated,	and	then	he	leaned	forward.	‘Sir,	if	you	were	to
approach	the	Adjunct.	The	rumour	is,	she	has	a	map.	She	knows	how	wide	this
damned	desert	is,	and	she’s	not	telling.	Why	is	she	not	telling?	Because—’
‘Because	it’s	too	far,’	Blistig	growled.
Lifting	his	hands	in	a	just-so	gesture,	Pores	leaned	back.	‘My	carefree	days
are	over,	sir.	This	is	now	in	deadly	earnest.’
‘You	have	the	right	of	that.’
‘Did	the	Adjunct	send	you,	Fist?	Have	you	been	requested	to	make	a	report
on	our	provisions?	If	so,	I	have	a	tally	here—’
‘How	many	days	before	we’re	out	of	water?’	Blistig	demanded.
‘At	fullest	rationing,	and	allowing	for	the	beasts	of	burden,	about	five.’
‘And	without	the	animals?’
‘Without	the	oxen	at	least,	we’d	end	up	having	to	pull	the	wagons	ourselves
–	hard	work,	thirsty	work.	I	cannot	be	certain,	but	I	suspect	any	gains	would	be
offset	by	the	increased	consumption	among	the	pull-crews—’
‘But	that	would	diminish	over	time,	would	it	not?	As	the	barrels	emptied.’
‘True.	Fist,	is	this	the	Adjunct’s	command?	Do	we	slaughter	the	oxen?	The
horses?’
‘When	that	order	comes,	soldier,	it	will	not	be	going	through	you.	I	am
prepared	to	strengthen	the	guard	around	the	wagons,	Pores.’
‘Excellent—’
‘Reliable	guards,’	Blistig	cut	in,	fixing	Pores	with	his	eyes.
‘Of	course,	sir.	How	soon—’
‘You	are	to	set	aside	a	company’s	supply	of	water,	Quartermaster.	Initial
the	barrels	with	my	sigil.	They	are	to	be	breached	only	upon	my	personal
command,	and	the	portions	will	be	allotted	to	the	names	on	the	list	you	will	be
given.	No	deviation.’
Pores’s	gaze	had	narrowed.	‘A	company’s	allotment,	Fist?’
‘Yes.’
‘And	should	I	assume,	sir,	that	your	extra	guards	will	be	taking	extra	care
in	guarding	those	barrels?’
‘Are	my	instructions	clear,	Quartermaster?’
‘Aye,	Fist.	Perfectly	clear.	Now,	as	to	disposition.	How	many	extra	guards
will	you	be	assigning?’


‘Ten	should	do,	I	think.’
‘Ten?	In	a	single	shift	of	rounds	they’d	be	hard	pressed	to	keep	an	eye	on
five	wagons,	sir,	much	less	the	scores	and	scores—’
‘Redistribute	your	other	guards	accordingly,	then.’
‘Yes	sir.	Very	good,	sir.’
‘I	am	trusting	to	your	competence,	Pores,	and	your	discretion.	Are	we
understood?’
‘We	are,	Fist	Blistig.’
Satisfied,	he	left	the	tent,	paused	outside	the	flap	to	glower	at	the	dozen	or
so	soldiers	still	lingering.	‘First	soldier	caught	trying	to	buy	water	gets	tried
for	treason,	and	then	executed.	Now,	you	still	got	a	reason	to	see	the
quartermaster?	No,	didn’t	think	so.’
Blistig	set	out	for	his	tent.	The	heat	was	building.	She’s	not	going	to	kill	me.
I	ain’t	here	to	die	for	her,	or	any	other	fucking	glory.	The	real	‘unwitnessed’	are
the	ones	who	survive,	who	come	walking	out	of	the	dust	when	all	the	heroes	are
dead.	They	did	what	they	needed	to	live.
Pores	understands.	He’s	cut	from	the	same	cloth	as	me.	Hood	himself	knows
that	crook’s	got	his	own	private	store	squirrelled	away	somewhere.	Well,	he’s
not	the	only	smart	bastard	in	this	army.
You	ain’t	getting	me,	Tavore.	You	ain’t.
	
Frowning,	Pores	rose	and	began	pacing,	circling	the	folding	table	and	the
three-legged	stool.	Thrice	round	and	then	he	grunted,	paused	and	called	out,
‘Himble	Thrup,	you	out	there?’
A	short,	round-faced	but	scrawny	soldier	slipped	in.	‘Been	waiting	for
your	call,	sir.’
‘What	a	fine	clerk	you’ve	become,	Himble.	Is	the	list	ready?’
‘Aye,	sir.	What	did	Lord	Knock-knees	want,	anyway?’
‘We’ll	get	to	that.	Let’s	see	your	genius,	Himble	–	oh,	here,	let	me	unfold	it.
You	know,	it’s	amazing	you	can	write	at	all.’
Grinning,	Himble	held	up	his	hands.	The	fingers	had	been	chopped	clean
off	at	the	knuckles,	on	both	hands.	‘It’s	easy,	sir.	Why,	I	never	been	a	better
scriber	than	I	am	now.’
‘You	still	have	your	thumbs.’
‘And	that’s	it,	sir,	that’s	it	indeed.’
Pores	scanned	the	parchment,	glanced	at	his	clerk.	‘You	certain	of	this?’
‘I	am,	sir.	It’s	bad.	Eight	days	at	the	stretch.	Ten	days	in	pain.	Which	way	do
we	go?’


‘That’s	for	the	Adjunct	to	decide.’	He	folded	up	the	parchment	and	handed
it	back	to	Himble.	‘No,	don’t	deliver	it	just	yet.	The	Fist	is	sending	us	ten
handpicked	thugs	to	stand	guard	over	his	private	claim	–	a	company’s	supply	–
and	before	you	ask,	no,	I	don’t	think	he	means	to	share	it	with	anyone,	not	even
his	lackeys.’
‘Just	like	y’said,	sir.	That	it	weren’t	gonna	be	just	regulars	snivelling	for	a
sip.	Is	he	the	first?’
‘And	only,	I	should	think,	at	least	of	that	rank.	We’ll	get	a	few	lieutenants	in
here,	I	expect.	Maybe	even	a	captain	or	two,	looking	out	for	the	soldiers	under
them.	How	are	the	piss-bottles	going?’
‘Being	d’sturbeted	right	now,	sir.	You’d	think	they’d	make	faces,	but	they
don’t.’
‘Because	they’re	not	fools,	Himble.	The	fools	are	dead.	Just	the	wise	ones
left.’
‘Wise,	sir,	like	you	’n’	me.’
‘Precisely.	Now,	sit	yourself	down	here	and	get	ready	to	scribe.	Tell	me
when	you’re	set.’	Pores	resumed	pacing.
Himble	drew	out	his	field	box	of	stylus,	wax	tablets	and	wick	lamp.	From	a
sparker	he	lit	the	lamp	and	warmed	the	tip	of	the	stylus.	When	this	was	done	he
said,	‘Ready,	sir.’
‘Write	the	following:	“Private	missive,	from	Lieutenant	Master-Sergeant
Field	Quartermaster	Pores,	to	Fist	Kindly.	Warmest	salutations	and
congratulations	on	your	promotion,	sir.	As	one	might	observe	from	your
advancement	and,	indeed,	mine,	cream	doth	rise,	etc.	In	as	much	as	I	am	ever
delighted	in	corresponding	with	you,	discussing	all	manner	of	subjects	in	all
possible	idioms,	alas,	this	subject	is	rather	more	official	in	nature.	In	short,	we
are	faced	with	a	crisis	of	the	highest	order.	Accordingly,	I	humbly	seek	your
advice	and	would	suggest	we	arrange	a	most	private	meeting	at	the	earliest
convenience.	Yours	affectionately,	Pores.”	Got	that,	Himble?’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘Please	read	it	back	to	me.’
Himble	cleared	his	throat,	squinted	at	the	tablet.	‘“Pores	to	Kindly	meet	in
secret	when?”’
‘Excellent.	Dispatch	that	at	once,	Himble.’
‘Before	or	after	the	one	to	the	Adjunct?’
‘Hmm,	before,	I	think.	Did	I	not	say	“a	crisis	of	the	highest	order”?’
Himble	squinted	again	at	the	tablet	and	nodded.	‘So	you	did,	sir.’
‘Right,	then.	Be	off	with	you,	Corporal.’
Himble	packed	up	his	kit,	humming	under	his	breath.


Pores	observed	him.	‘Happy	to	be	drummed	out	of	the	heavies,	Himble?’
The	man	paused,	cocked	his	head	and	considered.	‘Happy,	sir?	No,	not
happy,	but	then,	get	your	fingers	chopped	off	an’	what	can	y’do?’
‘I	have	heard	of	one	of	your	companions	getting	a	special	leather	harness
made—’
‘Only	one	hand	was	done	with	’im,	sir.	I	lost	the	shield	side	in	the	first
stand,	and	then	the	sword	one	in	the	fourth	push.’
‘And	now	you’re	a	clerk.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Pores	studied	him	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘On	your	way,	Himble.’
Once	he’d	left,	Pores	continued	pacing.	‘Note	to	self,’	he	muttered,	‘talk	to
the	armourer	and	weaponsmith.	See	if	we	can	rig	up	something.	Something
tells	me	Himble’s	old	talents	will	become	necessary	before	too	long.	With
respect	to	the	well-being	and	continued	existence	of	one	Pores,	humble,	most
obedient	officer	of	the	Bonehunters.’	He	frowned.	Eight	at	the	stretch.	Ten	in
pain.	May	the	gods	above	help	us	all.
	
Fist	Kindly	ran	a	hand	over	his	head	as	if	smoothing	down	hair.	For	a	brief
instant	Lostara	Yil	found	the	gesture	endearing.	The	moment	passed	when	she
reminded	herself	of	his	reputation.	In	any	case,	the	man’s	worried	expression
was	troubling,	and	she	could	see	quiet	dismay	in	his	eyes.
Faradan	Sort	set	down	her	gauntlets.	‘Adjunct,	that	was	a	difficult	march.
This	broken	ground	is	pounding	the	wagons,	and	then	there’re	the	oxen	and
horses.	Seven	draught	animals	have	come	up	lame	and	need	slaughtering.	Two
horses	among	the	Khundryl	and	another	from	the	command	herd.’
‘It’s	only	going	to	get	worse,’	muttered	Kindly.	‘This	Glass	Desert	is	well
named.	Adjunct,’	and	he	glanced	at	Faradan	Sort	and	then	Ruthan	Gudd,	‘we
would	speak	to	you	of	our	misgivings.	This	course	of	action	could	well	shatter
us.	Even	should	we	manage	to	cross	this	wretched	land,	our	effectiveness	as	a
fighting	force	will	be	severely	compromised.’
Faradan	Sort	added,	‘The	mages	are	united	in	their	opinion	that	no	water	is
available,	unless	we	were	to	halt	for	a	few	days	and	try	sinking	some	deep
wells.	Very	deep	wells,	Adjunct.	And	even	then,	well,	the	problem	is	that	the
mages	have	nothing	to	draw	on.	They’re	powerless.	Not	a	single	warren	is
available	to	them,	meaning	they	don’t	know	if	there’s	water	far	down	under	us,
or	not.’	She	paused,	and	then	sighed.	‘I	wish	I	had	some	good	news	–	we	could
do	with	it.’
The	Adjunct	stood	over	her	map	table.	She	seemed	to	be	studying	the	lands


of	Kolanse,	as	marked	on	oiled	hide	by	some	Bolkando	merchant	fifty	years
ago,	the	notes	etched	in	a	language	none	here	could	read.	‘We	shall	have	to
cross	a	range	of	hills,	or	buttes,	here’	–	she	pointed	–	‘before	we	can	enter	the
valley	province	of	Estobanse.	It’s	my	suspicion,	however,	that	the	enemy	will
reach	us	before	then.	Either	from	the	passes	or	from	the	east.	Or	both.
Obviously,	I’d	rather	we	did	not	have	to	fight	on	two	fronts.	The	passes	will	be
key	to	all	this.	The	threat	from	Estobanse	is	the	greater	of	the	two.	Fist	Kindly,
kill	all	the	command	horses	but	one.	Request	the	Khundryl	to	cull	their	herd
down	to	one	mount	per	warrior	with	ten	to	spare.	Fist	Sort,	begin	selecting
crew	to	pull	the	supply	wagons	–	those	oxen	won’t	last	many	more	nights.’
Kindly	ran	a	hand	over	his	scalp	again.	‘Adjunct,	it	seems	that	time	is
against	us.	In	this	crossing,	I	mean.	I	wonder,	could	we	push	the	duration	of
each	night’s	march?	Up	past	two	bells	after	dawn,	and	a	bell	or	more	before	the
sun	sets.	It’ll	wear	on	us,	to	be	certain,	but	then	we	are	facing	that	anyway.’
‘Those	wagons	that	empty	of	provisions,’	Faradan	Sort	added,	‘could	take
the	soldiers’	armour	and	melee	weapons,	relieving	some	of	their	burden.	We
could	also	begin	divesting	the	train	of	extraneous	materiel.	Reduce	the
armourers	and	weaponsmiths.	All	of	that	is	more	or	less	in	decent	repair	–	the
soldiers	didn’t	waste	much	time	getting	stuff	mended	or	replaced.	If	we
dropped	seventy	per	cent	of	the	raw	iron,	most	of	the	forges,	and	the	coal,	we
could	redistribute	the	food	and	water	on	to	more	wagons,	at	least	to	start,
which	will	relieve	the	oxen	and	the	crews,	not	to	mention	reducing	the	damage
to	the	wagons,	since	they’ll	ride	lighter.’
‘We	could	triple	soldiers	up	in	the	squad	tents,’	Kindly	said.
‘We	keep	all	the	tents	and	cloth,’	the	Adjunct	said	without	looking	up.	‘As
for	your	suggestions,	Faradan,	see	to	them.	And,	Fist	Kindly,	the	longer
marches	begin,	starting	this	evening.’
‘Adjunct,’	said	Kindly,	‘this	is	going	to	be…brutal.	Morale	being	what	it	is,
we	could	face	trouble,	soon.’
‘The	news	of	the	Nah’ruk	defeat	helped,’	Sort	said,	‘but	the	half-day	and
full	night	we’ve	just	walked	have	sapped	the	zeal.	Adjunct,	the	soldiers	need
something	more	to	hold	on	to.	Something.	Anything.’
At	last,	Tavore	raised	her	head.	She	gazed	levelly	at	Faradan	Sort	with	redrimmed	eyes.	‘And	what,	Fist,’	she	asked	in	a	dull	voice,	‘would	you	have	me
give	them?’
‘I	don’t	know,	Adjunct.	The	rumours	are	chewing	us	to	pieces—’
‘Which	rumours	would	those	be?’
Faradan	Sort	hesitated,	looked	away.
‘Kindly,’	said	Tavore,	‘your	fellow	Fist	seems	to	have	lost	her	voice.’


‘Adjunct.’	Kindly	nodded.	‘The	rumours,	well.	Some	are	wild.	Others
strike	rather	close	to	the	bone.’
Ruthan	Gudd	spoke	up.	‘We’re	in	league	with	the	Elder	Gods,	and	you
mean	to	spill	the	blood	of	your	soldiers	in	a	grand,	final	sacrifice	–	all	of	them
–	to	achieve	your	own	ascendancy.	There’s	another	one,	that	you’ve	made	a
secret	pact	with	the	High	Houses	and	the	younger	gods.	You	will	bargain	with
them	using	the	Crippled	God	–	that’s	why	we	intend	to	snatch	him,	to	steal
what’s	left	of	him	away	from	the	Forkrul	Assail.	There	are	plenty	more,
Adjunct.’
‘You	possess	hidden	knowledge,’	said	Kindly,	‘acquired	from	who	knows
where.	And	because	no	one	knows	where,	they	all	invent	their	own
explanations.’
‘But	in	each,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd,	now	eyeing	Tavore,	‘you	are	kneeling
before	a	god.	And,	well,	what	Malazan	soldier	doesn’t	get	a	bitter	taste	from
that?	What	Malazan	soldier	doesn’t	know	the	story	of	Dassem	Ultor?	Homage
to	a	god	by	a	commander	is	ever	served	by	the	blood	of	those	under	his	or	her
command.	Look	around,	Adjunct.	We’re	not	serving	the	Malazan	Empire	any
more.	We’re	serving	you.’
In	a	voice	little	more	than	whisper,	the	Adjunct	said,	‘You	are	all	serving
me,	are	you?	You	are	all	about	to	risk	your	lives	for	me?	Please,	any	of	you
here,	tell	me,	what	have	I	done	to	deserve	that?’
The	tone	of	her	question	left	a	shocked	silence.
Tavore	Paran	looked	from	one	to	the	next,	and	in	her	eyes	there	was	no
anger,	no	outrage,	no	indignation.	Rather,	in	her	eyes	Lostara	Yil	saw
something	helpless.	Confused.
After	a	long,	brittle	moment,	Kindly	said,	‘Adjunct,	we	march	to	save	the
Crippled	God.	The	problem	is,	as	far	as	gods	go,	he’s	not	much	liked.	You
won’t	find	a	single	worshipper	of	him	in	the	Bonehunters.’
‘Indeed?’	Suddenly	her	voice	was	harsh.	‘And	not	one	soldier	in	this	army
–	in	this	tent	–	has	not	suffered?	Not	one	here	has	not	broken,	not	even	once?
Not	wept?	Not	grieved?’
‘But	we	will	not	worship	that!’	Kindly	retorted.	‘We	will	not	kneel	to	such
things!’
‘I	am	relieved	to	hear	you	say	so,’	she	replied,	as	if	the	fires	inside	had
died	down	as	quickly	as	they	had	flared.	Eyes	on	the	map,	trying	to	find	a	way
through.	‘So	look	across,	then,	across	that	vast	divide.	Look	into	that	god’s
eyes,	Fist	Kindly,	and	make	your	thoughts	hard.	Make	them	cold.	Unfeeling.
Make	them	all	the	things	you	need	to	in	order	to	feel	not	a	single	pang,	not	a
lone	tremor.	Look	into	his	eyes,	Kindly,	before	you	choose	to	turn	away.	Will


you	do	that?’
‘I	cannot,	Adjunct,’	Kindly	replied,	in	a	shaken	voice.	‘For	he	does	not
stand	before	me.’
And	Tavore	met	his	eyes	once	more.	‘Doesn’t	he?’
One	heartbeat,	and	then	two,	before	Kindly	rocked	back.	Only	to	turn	away.
Lostara	Yil	gasped.	As	you	said	he	would.
But	Tavore	would	not	let	him	go.	‘Do	you	need	a	temple,	Kindly?	A	graven
image?	Do	you	need	priests?	Sacred	texts?	Do	you	need	to	close	your	eyes	to
see	a	god?	So	noble	on	his	throne,	so	lofty	in	his	regard,	and	oh,	let’s	not
forget,	that	hand	of	mercy,	ever	reaching	down.	Do	you	need	all	of	that,
Kindly?	You	others?	Do	you	all	need	it	in	order	to	be	blessed	with	the	truth?’
The	tent	flap	was	roughly	pulled	aside	and	Banaschar	entered.	‘Was	I
summoned?’	And	the	grin	he	gave	them	was	a	thing	of	horror,	a	slash	opening
to	them	all	the	turmoil	inside	the	man,	the	torment	of	his	life.	‘I	caught	some	of
that,	just	outside.	Too	much,	in	fact.’	He	looked	to	the	Adjunct.	‘“Blessed	with
the	truth.”	My	dear	Adjunct,	you	must	know	by	now.	Truth	blesses	no	one.
Truth	can	only	curse.’
The	Adjunct	seemed	to	sag	inside.	Gaze	dropping	back	down	to	the	map	on
the	table,	she	said,	‘Then	please,	Septarch,	do	curse	us	with	a	few	words	of
truth.’
‘I	rather	doubt	there’s	need,’	he	replied.	‘We	have	walked	it	this	night,	and
will	again,	beneath	the	glow	of	the	Jade	Strangers.’	He	paused	and	frowned	at
those	gathered.	‘Adjunct,	were	you	under	siege?	And	have	I,	by	some	unwitting
miracle,	broken	it?’
Kindly	reached	for	his	helm.	‘I	must	assemble	my	officers,’	he	said.	He
waited,	standing	at	attention,	until	Tavore	lifted	a	hand	in	dismissal,	her	eyes
still	on	the	map.
Faradan	Sort	followed	him	out.
Lostara	Yil	caught	Ruthan	Gudd’s	eye,	and	gestured	him	to	accompany	her.
‘Adjunct,	we	shall	be	outside	the	tent.’
‘Rest,	both	of	you,’	said	Tavore.
‘Aye,	Adjunct,	if	you	will.’
From	the	plain	woman,	a	faint	smile.	‘Soon.	Go.’
Lostara	saw	Banaschar	settling	on	to	the	leather	saddle	of	a	stool.	Gods,
with	company	like	his,	is	it	any	wonder	she	is	as	she	is?
The	High	Priest	pointed	a	finger	at	Ruthan	Gudd	as	he	stepped	past,	and
made	a	strange	gesture,	as	if	inscribing	in	the	air.
Ruthan	Gudd	hesitated	for	a	moment,	and	then,	with	a	wry	expression,	he
combed	one	hand	through	his	beard,	and	went	out	of	the	tent.	Lostara	fell	in


behind	him.
	
‘Are	you	all	right?’	Faradan	Sort	asked.
Kindly’s	expression	darkened.	‘Of	course	I’m	not	all	right.’
‘Listen,’	she	said.	‘We	tried—’
‘You	can’t	ask	soldiers	to	open	their	hearts.	If	they	did	they’d	never	take
another	life.’	He	faced	her.	‘How	can	she	not	understand	that?	We	need	to
harden	ourselves	–	to	all	that	we	have	to	do.	We	need	to	make	ourselves	harder
than	our	enemy.	Instead,	she	wants	us	to	go	soft.	To	feel.’	He	shook	his	head,
and	she	saw	that	he	was	trembling	–	with	fury	or	frustration.
She	turned	as	Ruthan	Gudd	and	Lostara	Yil	emerged	from	the	command
tent.
Kindly	looked	at	Ruthan.	‘Whoever	you	really	are,	Captain,	you’d	better
talk	some	sense	into	her	–	because	it’s	turning	out	that	no	one	else	can.’
Ruthan	Gudd	frowned.	‘What	sense	would	that	be,	Fist?’
‘We	kill	people	for	a	living,’	Kindly	growled.
‘I	don’t	think	she	wants	that	to	change,’	the	captain	replied.
‘She	wants	us	to	bleed	for	the	Crippled	God!’
‘Keep	it	down,	Kindly,’	warned	Faradan	Sort.	‘Better	yet,	let’s	walk	a	little
way	beyond	camp.’
They	set	out.	Ruthan	hesitated,	but	was	nudged	along	by	Lostara	Yil.	No
one	spoke	until	they’d	left	the	haphazard	picket	stations	well	behind.	Out	under
the	sun,	the	heat	swarmed	against	them,	the	glare	blinding	their	eyes.
‘It	won’t	work,’	announced	Kindly,	crossing	his	arms.	‘There	will	be
mutiny,	and	then	fighting	–	over	the	water	–	and	before	it’s	all	done	most	of	us
will	be	dead.	Not	even	the	damned	marines	and	heavies	at	full	strength	could
keep	this	army	together—’
‘You	clearly	don’t	think	highly	of	my	regulars,’	said	Faradan	Sort.
‘Just	how	many	volunteered,	Sort?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Malazan	policy	is	to	take	the	eager	ones	and	make	’em	marines	or
heavies.	The	convicts	and	the	destitute	and	the	press-ganged,	they	all	end	up	as
regulars.	Faradan,	are	you	really	certain	of	your	soldiers?	Be	honest	–	no	one
here	is	likely	to	indulge	in	gossip.’
She	looked	away,	squinted.	‘The	only	odd	thing	about	them	that	I	have
noticed,	Kindly,	is	that	they	don’t	say	much.	About	anything.	You’d	have	to
twist	an	arm	to	force	out	an	opinion.’	She	shrugged.	‘They	know	they’re
faceless.	They	always	have	been,	most	of	them,	long	before	they	ended	up	in


the	military.	This	–	this	is	just	more	of	the	same.’
‘Maybe	they	say	nothing	within	range	of	your	hearing,	Sort,’	Kindly
muttered,	‘but	I’d	wager	they	have	plenty	to	say	to	each	other,	when	no	one	else
is	around.’
‘I’m	not	sure	about	that.’
‘Have	you	forgotten	your	own	days	as	a	lowly	soldier?’
She	flinched,	and	then	said,	‘No,	Kindly,	I	have	not	forgotten.	But	I	can
stand	fifty	paces	from	a	campfire,	close	enough	to	see	mouths	moving,	to	see
the	gestures	that	accompany	argument	–	and	there’s	none	of	it.	I	admit,	it’s
uncanny,	but	my	soldiers	seem	to	have	nothing	to	say,	not	even	to	each	other.’
No	one	spoke	for	a	time.
Ruthan	Gudd	stood	combing	his	beard	with	his	fingers,	his	expression
thoughtful	yet	somehow	abstracted,	as	if	he’d	not	been	listening,	as	if	he	was
wrestling	with	something	a	thousand	leagues	away.	Or	maybe	a	thousand	years.
Faradan	Sort	sighed.	‘Mutiny.	That’s	an	ugly	word,	Kindly.	You	seem	ready
to	throw	it	at	the	feet	of	my	regulars.’
‘It’s	what	I	fear,	Faradan.	I	am	not	questioning	your	command	–	you	do
know	that,	don’t	you?’
She	thought	about	that,	and	then	grunted.	‘Well,	actually,	that’s	precisely
what	you’re	questioning.	I’m	not	Fist	Blistig,	and	I	dare	say	my	reputation	is
decent	enough	among	my	soldiers.	Aye,	I	might	be	hated,	but	it’s	not	a
murderous	hate.’	She	regarded	Kindly.	‘Didn’t	you	once	speak	about	making	a
point	of	being	hated	by	your	soldiers?	We	are	to	be	their	lodestones,	and	when
they	see	us	bear	it,	when	they	see	how	none	of	it	can	buckle	us,	they	are	in	turn
strengthened.	Or	did	I	misunderstand	you?’
‘You	didn’t.	But	we’re	not	being	looked	at	like	that	any	more,	Sort.	Now,
they’re	seeing	us	as	potential	allies.	Against	her.’
Ruthan	Gudd’s	voice	was	dry,	‘Ready	to	lead	a	revolt,	Kindly?’
‘Ask	that	again	and	I’ll	do	my	level	best	to	kill	you,	Captain.’
Ruthan	Gudd’s	grin	was	cold.	‘Sorry,	I’m	not	here	to	give	you	an	easy	way
out,	Fist.’
‘No,	you’re	not	giving	any	of	us	anything.’
‘What	would	you	have	me	say?	She	doesn’t	want	her	soldiers	weeping	or
bleeding	out	all	over	the	ground	because	they’ve	gone	soft.	She	wants	them	to
be	the	opposite.	Not	just	hard.’	He	eyed	the	three	of	them.	‘Savage.	Unyielding.
Stubborn	as	cliffs	against	the	sea.’
‘In	the	command	tent—’
‘You	missed	the	point,’	Ruthan	cut	in.	‘I	now	think	you	all	did.	She	said	to
look	across,	into	the	eyes	of	the	Crippled	God.	To	look,	and	to	feel.	But	you


couldn’t	do	it,	Kindly,	could	you?	Could	you,	Fist	Sort?	Lostara?	Any	of	you?’
‘And	what	of	you?’	Kindly	snapped.
‘Not	a	chance.’
‘So	she	knocked	us	all	down	–	what	was	the	point	of	that?’
‘Why	shouldn’t	she?’	Ruthan	Gudd	retorted.	‘You	asked	for	more	from
her.	And	then	I	nailed	her	to	a	damned	tree	with	that	madness	about	serving	her.
She	struck	back,	and	that,	friends,	was	the	most	human	moment	from	the
Adjunct	I’ve	yet	seen.’	He	faced	them.	‘Until	then,	I	was	undecided.	Would	I	stay
on?	Would	I	ride	out,	away	from	all	this?	And	if	I	left,	well,	it’s	not	as	though
anyone	could	stop	me,	is	it?’
‘But,’	said	Faradan	Sort,	‘here	you	are.’
‘Yes.	I’m	with	her	now	for	as	long	as	she	needs	me.’
Fist	Kindly	raised	one	hand,	as	if	to	strike	out	at	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘But	why?’
‘You	still	don’t	get	it.	None	of	you.	Listen.	We	don’t	dare	look	across	into
the	eyes	of	a	suffering	god.	But,	Kindly,	she	dares.	You	asked	for	more	from
her	–	gods	below,	what	more	can	she	give?	She’ll	feel	all	the	compassion	none
of	you	can	afford	to	feel.	Behind	that	cold	iron,	she	will	feel	what	we	can’t.’
His	eyes	went	flat	on	Kindly.	‘And	you	asked	for	more.’
The	stones	ticked	in	the	heat.	A	few	insects	spun	on	glittering	wings.
Ruthan	Gudd	turned	to	Faradan	Sort.	‘Your	regulars	are	not	saying
anything?	Be	relieved,	Fist.	Maybe	they’re	finally	realizing,	on	some
instinctive	level,	what	she’s	taken	from	them.	What	she’s	holding	inside,	for
safekeeping.	The	best	they	have.’
Faradan	Sort	shook	her	head.	‘Now	who	is	the	one	with	too	much	faith,
Ruthan	Gudd?’
He	shrugged.	‘It’s	hot	out	here.’
They	watched	as	he	headed	off,	a	lone	figure	trudging	back	to	the	pickets,
and	to	the	camp	beyond.	There	was	no	dust	in	the	air	–	this	desert	didn’t	make
dust.
Eventually,	Kindly	turned	to	Lostara	Yil.	‘Did	you	suspect	he	was	about	to
bolt?’
‘What?	No.	The	man’s	a	damned	cipher,	Fist.’
‘How,’	asked	Faradan,	‘is	this	going	to	work?	When	I	need	to	stiffen	the
spines	of	my	soldiers,	what	in	Hood’s	name	can	I	say	to	them?’
After	a	moment,	Lostara	Yil	cleared	her	throat	and	said,	‘I	don’t	think	you
have	to	tell	them	anything,	Fist.’
‘What	do	you	mean?	And	don’t	go	spewing	out	Ruthan’s	words	–	he	places
far	too	much	in	the	hearts	and	minds	of	the	common	soldier.	Just	because	your
life	is	devoted	to	killing,	it	doesn’t	accord	you	any	special	wisdom.’


‘I	don’t	agree	with	that,’	Lostara	said.	‘Look,	just	by	standing	with	her,	with
the	Adjunct,	you’re	saying	all	that	needs	saying.	The	real	threat	to	this	army	is
Fist	Blistig,	who’s	hardly	kept	secret	his	opposition	to	the	Adjunct,	and	by
extension	to	all	of	you.	If	he	starts	gathering	followers…well,	that’s	when	the
trouble	will	start.’
Kindly	reached	up	and	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	brow.	‘There	is	wisdom,
Faradan.	The	wisdom	that	comes	with	knowing	–	right	to	the	very	core	of	your
soul	–	just	how	fragile	life	really	is.	You	earn	that	wisdom	when	you	take
someone	else’s	life.’
‘And	what	about	the	ones	who	don’t	think	twice	about	it?	Wisdom?	Hardly.
More	like…a	growing	taste	for	it.	That	dark	rush	of	pleasure	that’s	so…
addictive.’	She	looked	away.	I	know.	I	stood	the	Wall.
Lostara	pointed.	‘There’s	a	runner	coming…for	one	of	us.’
They	waited	until	the	thin,	round-faced	soldier	arrived.	A	soldier	with
mutilated	hands.	He	saluted	with	the	right	one	and	proffered	Kindly	a	wax
tablet	with	the	other.	‘Compl’ments	of	Lieutenant	Master-Sergeant
Quartermaster	Pores,	sir.’
Kindly	took	the	tablet	and	studied	it.	‘Soldier,’	he	said.
‘Sir?’
‘The	sun’s	heat	has	melted	the	wax.	I	do	hope	you	committed	the	message
to	memory.’
‘Sir,	I	have.’
‘Let’s	hear	it.’
‘Sir,	the	missive	was	private.’
‘From	Pores?	I	really	don’t	have	time	for	this.	We’re	past	all	the	duelling.
Spit	it	out,	soldier.’
‘Sir.	To	quote:	“Private	missive,	from	Lieutenant	Master-Sergeant	Field
Quartermaster	Pores,	to	Fist	Kindly.	Warmest	salutations	and	congratulations
on	your	promotion,	sir.	As	one	might	observe	from	your	advancement	and,
indeed,	mine,	cream	doth	rise,	etc.	In	as	much	as	I	am	ever	delighted	in
corresponding	with	you,	discussing	all	manner	of	subjects	in	all	possible
idioms,	alas,	this	subject	is	rather	more	official	in	nature.	In	short,	we	are	faced
with	a	crisis	of	the	highest	order.	Accordingly,	I	humbly	seek	your	advice	and
would	suggest	we	arrange	a	most	private	meeting	at	the	earliest	convenience.
Yours	affectionately,	Pores.”’	The	soldier	then	saluted	again	and	said,	‘I’m
t’wait	yer	answer,	sir.’
In	the	bemused	silence	that	followed,	Faradan	Sort	narrowed	her	eyes	on
the	soldier.	‘You	were	heavy	infantry,	weren’t	you?’
‘Corporal	Himble	Thrup,	Fist.’


‘How	stands	the	rank	and	file,	soldier?’
‘Standin’	true,	Fist.’
‘Do	the	enlisted	say	much	about	the	Adjunct,	soldier?	Off	the	record	here.’
The	watery	eyes	flicked	momentarily	to	her,	then	away	again.
‘Occasionally,	sir.’
‘And	what	do	they	say?’
‘Not	much,	sir.	Mostly,	it’s	all	them	rumours.’
‘You	discuss	them.’
‘No	sir.	We	chew	’em	up	till	there’s	nothing	left.	And	then	invent	new	ones,
sir.’
‘To	sow	dissension?’
Brows	lifted	beneath	the	rim	of	the	helm.	‘No,	Fist.	It’s…er…
entertainment.	Beats	boredom,	sir.	Boredom	leads	to	laziness,	sir,	and	laziness
can	get	a	soldier	up	and	killt.	Or	the	one	beside	’im,	which	is	e’en	worse.	We
hate	being	bored,	sir,	that’s	all.’
Kindly	said,	‘Tell	Pores	to	find	me	at	my	command	tent,	whenever	he
likes.’
‘Sir.’
‘Dismissed,	soldier.’
The	man	saluted	a	third	time,	wheeled	and	set	off.
Kindly	grunted.
‘That’s	a	heavy	for	you,’	Faradan	Sort	muttered,	and	then	snorted.
‘Inventing	nasty	rumours	for	fun.’
‘They’re	only	nasty,	I	suppose,	once	someone	decides	one’s	for	real.’
‘If	you	say	so,	Kindly.	As	for	my	regulars,	well,	now	I	know	where	the
barrage	is	coming	from.’
‘Even	if	it	is	coming	down	on	them,’	observed	Lostara	Yil,	‘from	what	you
said	it’s	not	stirring	up	much	dust.’
Faradan	met	Kindly’s	eyes.	‘Are	we	panicking	over	nothing,	Kindly?’
‘To	be	honest,’	he	admitted,	‘I	don’t	really	know	any	more.’

Ruthan	Gudd	drew	off	his	gambeson	and	paused	to	luxuriate	in	the	sudden
escape	from	unbearable	heat	as	his	sweat-slicked	skin	cooled.
‘Well,’	said	Skanarow	from	her	cot,	‘that	woke	me	up.’
‘My	godlike	physique?’
‘The	smell,	Ruthan.’


‘Ah,	thank	you,	woman,	you’ve	left	me	positively	glowing.’	He	unclipped
his	sword	belt	and	let	it	fall	to	the	ground,	then	slumped	down	on	the	edge	of
his	cot	and	settled	his	head	in	his	hands.
Skanarow	sat	up.	‘Another	one?’
Through	his	fingers	he	said,	‘Not	sure	how	many	more	of	those	she	can
weather.’
‘We’re	barely	two	days	into	the	desert,	Ruthan	–	I	hope	she’s	tougher	than
you	think.’
He	let	his	hands	fall	and	glanced	at	her.	‘So	do	I.’	He	studied	her	for	a
moment	and	then	said,	‘I	should	probably	tell	you,	I	was	considering…
leaving.’
‘Oh.’
‘Not	you.	This	army.’
‘Ruthan,	I’m	in	this	army.’
‘I	planned	on	kidnapping	you.’
‘I	see.’
He	sighed.	‘Today,	she	changed	my	mind.	So,	my	love,	we’re	in	this	till	the
bitter	end.’
‘If	that’s	a	marriage	proposal…	I	kind	of	like	it.’
He	studied	her.	Gods,	I’d	forgotten…
	
Loud	clattering	came	from	behind	the	cook	tents,	where	the	scullions	were
scrubbing	pots	with	handfuls	of	rocks	and	pebbles.	Cuttle	cinched	tight	a	strap
on	his	kit	bag.	Straightening,	he	arched	his	back	and	winced.	‘Gods,	it’s	a
young	un’s	game,	ain’t	it	just.	Koryk,	you	giving	up	on	those?’
The	Seti	half-blood	had	thrown	his	military	issue	hobnailed	boots	to	one
side,	and	was	using	a	rounded	stone	to	work	out	the	creases	in	a	pair	of	worn,
tribal	moccasins.	‘Too	hot,’	he	said.
‘Won’t	those	get	cut	to	shreds?’	Smiles	asked	from	where	she	sat	on	her
pack.	‘You	start	limping,	Koryk,	don’t	look	to	me	for	help.’
‘Toss	the	boots	on	to	the	wagon,’	Cuttle	said.	‘Just	in	case,	Koryk.’
The	man	shrugged.
Sergeant	Tarr	returned	from	the	company	command	tent.	‘Finish	loading
up,’	he	said.	‘We’re	getting	a	quick	start	here.’	He	paused.	‘Anybody	managed
to	sleep?’
Silence	answered	him.
Tarr	grunted.	‘Right.	I	doubt	it’ll	be	the	same	come	tomorrow.	It’s	a	long
haul	ahead	of	us.	Weapons	fit	to	use?	Everybody?	Shortnose?’


The	heavy	looked	up,	small	eyes	glittering	in	the	gloom.	‘Yah.’
‘Corabb?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	Can	still	hear	her	moaning	from	the	whetstone—’
‘It	ain’t	a	woman,’	said	Smiles.	‘It’s	a	sword.’
‘Then	why’s	she	moaning?’
‘You	never	heard	a	woman	moan	in	your	life,	so	how	would	you	know?’
‘Sounds	like	a	woman.’
‘I	don’t	hear	any	moaning	anyway,’	she	replied,	drawing	out	a	brace	of
fighting	knives.	‘Weapons	good,	Sergeant.	Just	give	me	some	sweet	flesh	to
stick	’em	in.’
‘Hold	the	thought,’	Tarr	advised.
‘For,	like,	five	months,	Smiles.’	Koryk	looked	up,	studied	her	from	under
his	unbound	hair.	‘Can	you	do	that?’
She	sneered.	‘If	it’s	going	to	take	five	months	to	cross	this	desert,	idiot,
we’re	deader	than	dead.’	She	rapped	one	blade	against	the	clay	jug	slung	by
braided	webbing	on	her	pack.	‘And	I	ain’t	drinking	my	own	piss	neither.’
‘Want	mine?’	Bottle	asked	from	where	he	was	lying,	eyes	closed,	hands
behind	his	head.
‘Is	that	an	offer	to	swap?	Gods,	Bottle,	you’re	sick,	you	know	that?’
‘Listen,	if	I	have	to	drink	it,	better	it	be	a	woman’s,	because	then,	if	I	work
real	hard,	I	might	be	able	to	pretend	I	like	it.	Or	something.’	When	no	one	said
anything,	Bottle	opened	his	eyes,	sat	up.	‘What?’
Cuttle	made	to	spit,	checked	himself,	and	turned	to	Tarr.	‘Fid	have	anything
new	to	say,	Sergeant?’
‘No.	Why,	should	he	have?’
‘Well,	I	mean,	he	figures	we’re	going	to	make	it	across,	right?’
Tarr	shrugged.	‘I	suppose	so.’
‘Can’t	do	that	mission	if	we	don’t.’
‘That’s	a	fair	point,	sapper.’
‘He	say	anything	about	all	this	drinking	our	own	piss?’
Tarr	frowned.
Koryk	spoke	up,	‘Sure	he	did,	Cuttle.	It’s	all	in	that	Deck	of	Dragons	of	his.
New	card.	Piss	Drinker,	High	House.’
‘High	House	what?’	Smiles	asked.
Koryk	simply	grinned,	and	then	looked	up	at	Cuttle	and	the	smile	became
cold.	‘Card’s	got	your	face	on	it,	Cuttle,	big	as	life.’
Cuttle	studied	the	half-blood,	the	ritual	scarring	and	tattoos,	all	in	the	glyph
language	of	the	Seti	that	Koryk	probably	only	half	understood.	The	ridiculous
moccasins.	His	view	was	suddenly	blocked,	and	his	gaze	flicked	up	to	meet


Tarr ’s	dark,	deceptively	calm	eyes.
‘Just	leave	it,’	the	sergeant	said	in	a	low	mutter.
‘Thought	I	was	gonna	do	something?’
‘Cuttle…’
‘Thought	I	was	going	to	rip	a	few	new	arseholes	in	him?	Shove	my	last
sharper	up	inside	and	then	throw	him	into	yonder	wagon?	Something	like	that,
Sergeant?’
From	behind	Tarr,	Koryk	snorted.
‘Load	your	pack	on	the	wagon,	Cuttle.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Rest	of	you,	get	your	gear	up	and	get	ready	–	the	night	beckons	and	all
that.’
‘I	might	sell	my	piss,’	said	Smiles.
‘Yeah,’	said	Koryk,	‘all	that	silver	and	gold,	only	it	won’t	go	on	the	wagon,
Smiles.	We	need	to	keep	the	bed	clear	for	all	the	booty	we’re	going	to	scoop
up.	No,	soldier,	you	got	to	carry	it.’	He	pulled	on	the	first	moccasin,	tugged	the
laces.	Both	strings	of	leather	snapped	in	his	hands.	He	swore.
Cuttle	heaved	his	pack	on	to	the	wagon’s	bed,	and	then	stepped	back	as
Corabb	followed	suit	with	his	own	gear,	the	others	lining	up,	Koryk	coming
last	wearing	two	untied	moccasins.	The	sapper	stepped	past	the	corporal,
Bottle,	and	then	Smiles.
His	fist	caught	Koryk	flush	on	the	side	of	the	man’s	head.	The	crack	was
loud	enough	to	make	the	oxen	start.	The	half-blood	thumped	hard	on	the
ground,	and	did	not	move.
‘Well	now,’	Tarr	said,	glowering	at	Cuttle,	‘come	the	fight	and	this	soldier
beside	you,	sapper,	you	going	to	step	sure	then?’
‘Makes	no	difference	what	I	done	just	now,’	Cuttle	replied.	‘Beside	him,	in
the	next	battle,	I	ain’t	gonna	step	sure	at	all.	He	mouthed	off	in	the	trench	–	to
Fiddler	himself.	And	he’s	been	mopin’	around	ever	since.	Y’can	have	all	the
courage	you	want	on	the	outside,	but	it	ain’t	worth	shit,	Sergeant,	when	what’s
inside	can’t	even	see	straight.’	The	speech	had	dried	out	his	mouth.	He	lifted	his
right	hand.	‘Gotta	see	a	cutter	now,	Sergeant.	I	broke	the	fucker.’
‘You	stupid…go	on,	get	out	of	my	sight.	Corabb,	Bottle,	get	Koryk	on	to
the	wagon.	Wait.	Is	he	even	alive?	All	right,	into	the	wagon.	He	probably	won’t
wake	up	till	the	night’s	march	is	done.’
‘Just	his	luck,’	muttered	Smiles.
	
Horns	sounded.	The	Bonehunters	stirred,	shook	out,	fell	back	into	column,	and


the	march	was	under	way.	Bottle	slipped	in	behind	Corabb,	with	Smiles	on	his
left.	Three	strides	in	their	wake	walked	Shortnose.	Bottle’s	pack	was	light	–
most	of	his	kit	had	gone	into	general	resupply,	and	as	was	true	of	armies	the
world	over,	there	was	no	such	thing	as	oversupply,	at	least	not	when	it	came	to
useful	gear.	Useless	stuff,	well,	that’s	different.	If	we	were	back	in	Malaz,	or
Seven	Cities,	we’d	have	plenty	of	that.	Quills	and	no	ink,	clasps	but	not	a
sewing	kit	to	be	found,	wicks	and	no	wax	–	still,	wouldn’t	it	be	nice	to	be	back
in	Malaz?	Stop	that,	Bottle.	Things	are	bad	enough	without	adding	pointless
nostalgia	to	the	unruly	mess.	In	any	case,	he’d	lost	most	of	his	useful	gear.
Only	to	discover	that	he	really	didn’t	need	it	after	all.
The	clay	jug	rolled	in	its	webbing	alongside	his	hip,	swinging	with	each
stride.	Well,	it	made	sense	to	me	anyway.	I	could	always	ask…	I	don’t	know.
Flashwit.	Or…gods	below,	Masan	Gilani!	I’m	sure	she’d—
‘Get	up	here	beside	me,	Bottle.’
‘Sergeant?’
‘Fid	wanted	me	to	ask	you	some	questions.’
‘We	already	went	over	what	I	remembered—’
‘Not	that.	Ancient	history,	Bottle.	What	battle	was	that	again?	Never	mind.
Drop	back	there,	Corabb.	No,	you’re	still	corporal.	Relax.	Just	need	some
words	with	Bottle	here	–	our	squad	mage,	right?’
‘I’ll	be	right	behind	you	then,	Sergeant.’
‘Thanks,	Corporal,	and	I	can’t	tell	you	how	reassuring	it	is	to	feel	your
breath	on	the	back	of	my	neck,	too.’
‘I	ain’t	drunk	no	piss	yet,	Sergeant.’
Once	past	the	corporal,	Bottle	scowled	back	at	him	over	a	shoulder.
‘Corabb,	why	are	you	talking	like	Cuttle’s	dumber	brother	these	days?’
‘I’m	a	marine,	soldier,	and	that’s	what	I	am	and	this	is	how	us	marines	talk.
Like	the	sergeant	says,	what	battle	was	that	again?	Ancient	history.	We	fight
somebody?	When?	Like	that,	you	see?’
‘The	best	marines	of	all,	Corporal,’	Tarr	drawled,	‘are	the	ones	who	don’t
say	a	damned	thing.’
…
‘Corporal	Corabb?’
‘Sorry,	what,	Sergeant?	Like	that?’
‘Perfect.’
Bottle	could	see	Balm	and	his	squad	a	dozen	paces	ahead.	Throatslitter.
Deadsmell.	Widdershins.	That’s	it?	That’s	all	that’s	left	of	them?
‘No	warrens	around	here,	right?’
‘Sergeant?	Oh,	aye.	None	at	all.	These	Fid’s	questions?’


‘So	it’s	dead	as	dead	can	be.’
‘Aye.	Like	a	sucked	bone.’
‘Meaning,’	Tarr	resumed,	‘no	one	can	find	us	out	here.	Right?’
Bottle	blinked,	and	then	scratched	at	the	stubble	on	his	jaw.	His	nails	came
away	flecked	with	burnt	skin	and	something	that	looked	like	salt	crystals.	He
frowned.	‘Well,	I	suppose	so.	Unless,	of	course,	they’ve	got	eyes.	Or	wings,’
and	he	nodded	upward.
Breath	gusted	from	Tarr ’s	nostrils,	making	a	faint	whistling	sound.	‘For
that,	they’d	have	to	be	out	here,	doing	what	we’re	doing.	But	this	desert’s
supposed	to	be	impassable.	No	one	in	their	right	minds	would	ever	try	and
cross	it.	That’s	the	view,	isn’t	it?’
The	view?	It	ain’t	opinion,	Tarr.	It’s	a	fact.	No	one	in	their	right	minds
would	try	and	cross	it.	‘Is	there	someone	in	particular,	Sergeant,	who	might	be
trying	to	find	us?’
Tarr	shook	his	head.	‘Captain’s	the	one	with	the	Deck,	not	me.’
‘But	they’ll	be	cold	here,	those	cards.	Lifeless.	So,	what	we’re	talking
about	is	a	reading	he	did	before	we	crossed	over.	Was	someone	closing	in,
Sergeant?’
‘No	point	in	asking	me	that,	Bottle.’
‘Listen,	this	is	ridiculous.	If	Fiddler	wants	to	ask	me	stuff,	he	can	just	hump
down	here	and	do	it.	That	way,	I	can	ask	stuff	back.’
‘Are	they	blind,	Bottle,	is	what	Fid	wanted	to	know.	Not	us.	Them.’
Them.	‘Aye.	Wide-Eyed	Blind.’
Tarr	grunted.	‘Good.’
‘Sergeant…can	you	remember	who	came	up	with	our	name?
Bonehunters?’
‘Might	have	been	the	Adjunct	herself.	The	first	time	I	heard	it	was	from
her.	I	think.’
But	this	is	impossible.	Aren.	She	couldn’t	have	known.	Not	then.
‘Why,	Bottle?’
‘No	reason,	just	wondering.	Is	that	it?	Can	me	and	the	corporal	switch
round	again?’
‘One	more	question.	Is	Quick	Ben	alive?’
‘I	already	told	Fid—’
‘This	question	ain’t	his,	Bottle.	It’s	mine.’
‘Listen,	I	don’t	know	–	and	I	told	Fid	the	same	thing.	I	got	no	sense	with
those	people—’
‘Which	people?’
‘Bridgeburners.	Those	people.	Dead	Hedge,	Quick	Ben	–	even	Fiddler


himself.	They	aren’t	the	same	as	us.	As	you	and	me,	Sergeant,	or	Corabb	back
there.	Don’t	ask	me	to	explain	what	I	mean.	The	point	is,	I	can’t	read	them,
can’t	scry	for	them.	Sometimes,	it’s	like	they’re	…I	don’t	know…ghosts.	You
poke	and	you	go	right	through.	Other	times,	they’re	like	a	solid	mountain,	so
big	the	sun	itself	can’t	climb	over	them.	So	I	don’t	know,	is	my	answer.’
Tarr	was	squinting	across	at	him.	‘You	say	all	that	to	the	captain?’
‘I	don’t	know	if	Quick	Ben’s	dead	or	alive,	Sergeant,	but	if	I	was	to	wager
on	it,	well,	I	can	think	of	a	few	hundred	Bonehunters	happy	to	go	against	me,
more	than	a	few	hundred,	in	fact.	But	if	I	was	to	take	that	bet	to	Hedge,	or
Fiddler…’	Bottle	shook	his	head,	slapped	at	something	biting	his	neck.
‘You’re	wagering	that	he’s	dead?’
‘No,	I’m	betting	he’s	alive.	And	I’m	betting	more	than	that.	I’m	betting	he’s
still	in	this	game.’
The	sergeant	suddenly	grinned.	‘Great	to	have	you	back,	Mage.’
‘Not	so	fast,	Tarr	–	Sergeant,	I	mean.	Don’t	forget,	I	didn’t	see	him	at	the
end	there.	And	from	what	I’ve	heard,	it	was	ugly.’
‘The	ugliest.’
‘So…that’s	why	I’m	not	making	any	wagers.’
‘Hood	knows	what	Fid	ever	saw	in	you,	soldier.	Go	on,	get	out	of	my
sight.’
When	he’d	exchanged	places	in	the	line	with	Corabb,	Cuttle	fell	in	on	his
left.	‘Listen—’
‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	am	I	these	days,	Fisher	himself?’
‘What?	No.	It’s	something	Koryk	said—’
‘Which	thing?	The	thing	about	the	Piss	Drinker?	Fid	doesn’t	make	his	own
cards,	Cuttle.	He’s	not	that	kind	of	Deck	monger.	So—’
‘About	booty,	soldier.	That	thing	about	booty.’
‘I	think	that	was	sarcasm.’
On	his	right,	Smiles	grunted,	but	offered	nothing	more.
‘That’s	just	it,’	Cuttle	said.	‘Now,	it	was	Dassem	Ultor	who	really	came
down	on	the	whole	pillaging	stuff—’
‘We	were	conquering,	not	raiding.	When	you	occupy	a	city,	it’s	bad
practice	to	loot	and	rape	the	citizens.	Riles	them,	and	before	you	know	it	your
occupying	garrison	soldiers	start	getting	murdered	on	night	patrol.’
‘So,	we	weren’t	in	the	habit	of	it	anyway,	but	even	then	we	still	had	a
chance	to	get	rich.	Every	company	got	itself	a	scribe	and	everything	was
portioned	out.	Collected	weapons	and	armour.	Horses,	all	that.	Winning	a	battle
meant	bonuses.’
‘All	very	well,	Cuttle,’	nodded	Bottle.	‘But	we	here	got	us	a	temple


treasury.	The	pay	rolls	are	still	being	maintained.	The	fact	is,	sapper,	we’re	all
stinking	rich.’
‘Assuming	we	live	to	get	it.’
‘That’s	always	how	it	is.	I	don’t	see	your	point.’
The	sapper ’s	small	eyes	glittered.	‘Tell	me,’	he	said	in	a	rough	voice,	‘do
you	give	a	Nacht’s	ass	about	it?	Do	you,	Bottle?’
He	considered.	Four,	five,	seven	strides.	‘No,’	he	admitted,	‘but	then,	I
never	did	care	much.	Not	in	it	for	wealth.’
‘You’re	young,	aye.	It’s	the	adventure	that	tugs	you	along.	But	you	see,	get
to	a	certain	age,	seen	enough	of	all	that’s	out	there,	and	you	start	thinking	about
your	life	when	it’s	all	done	with.	Y’start	thinking	about	some	cosy	cottage,	or
maybe	a	decent	room	above	a	decent	tavern.	Aye,	you	know	it’ll	probably
never	be,	but	you	dream	about	it	anyway.	And	that’s	where	all	the	coin	comes
in.’
‘And?’
His	voice	dropped	lower.	‘Bottle,	I	ain’t	thinking	past	next	week.	I	ain’t
thought	about	my	pay	in	months.	You	hearing	me?	No	cottage,	no	tavern.	No
nice	little	fisher	boat	or,	gods	forbid,	a	garden.	None	of	it.’
‘That’s	because	we’re	the	walking	dead,	right?’
‘I	thought	so,	what	with	what	Fid	said	the	other	night,	but	now	I	don’t.’
Curious,	Bottle	eyed	the	sapper.	‘Go	on,	then.’
Cuttle	shrugged,	as	if	suddenly	uncomfortable.	‘Something’s	happened	to
us,	that’s	all.	The	Bonehunters.	Maybe	it	was	invading	Lether.	Maybe	it	was
Malaz	City,	or	even	Y’Ghatan,	I	don’t	know.	Look	at	us.	We’re	an	army	not
thinking	about	loot.	Why	do	you	think	Koryk	went	and	mocked	Smiles	here
about	charging	for	her	piss?’
‘Because	he’s	broke,’	Smiles	answered.	‘And	jealous.’
‘It’s	because	no	one	cares	about	silver	and	gold,	or	buying	stinking	estates,
or	breeding	horses	or	taking	up	sea	trades.	We’re	probably	the	only	army	in
the	world	that	doesn’t.’
Smiles	snorted.	‘Hold	on,	sapper.	You	don’t	think	that	when	we’ve	chopped
up	whoever	and	we’re	standing	there	on	that	battlefield	–	don’t	you	think	we’re
gonna	start	cutting	off	fingers	and	all	the	rest?	Loading	up	on	torcs	and	rings
and	decent	swords	and	whatever?’
‘No.	I	don’t,	Smiles.’
‘I	think	I	agree	with	Cuttle	on	this	one,’	said	Bottle.	‘Then	again,	maybe
you	will—’
‘Why	should	I?’	she	retorted.	‘I	wasn’t	talking	about	me	at	all—’
‘Another	first,’	Bottle	muttered.


‘Oh,	I’m	gonna	walk	around	checking	bodies,	aye,’	she	said,	nodding.
‘Find	one	still	breathing,	and	slit	goes	the	throat.	Rings	and	shit?	Forget	it.’
‘Just	what	I	been	saying,’	Cuttle	said,	and	he	fixed	wide	eyes	upon	Bottle.
‘It’s	exactly	it,	Bottle.	This	army	has	gone	insane.’
	
‘Fid’s	captain	now,’	Balm	growled.	‘What	more	do	you	need	to	know?	He’ll	do
us	right.	He	was	a	Bridgeburner,	wasn’t	he?	Look	at	his	old	squad,	lads	–	didn’t
lose	a	damned	one	of	them.	If	that	ain’t	the	kind	eye	of	a	god	looking	down,
what	is?’
Widdershins	crowded	up	behind	Throatslitter,	Deadsmell	and	the	sergeant.
‘Did	any	of	you	hear	Bottle	back	there?	That	stuff	about	our	name?’
Throatslitter	scowled.	‘What?’
‘He	was	asking	about	how	we	got	our	name.’
‘So?’
‘So,	I	just	think…well…	I	think	it’s	important.	I	think	Bottle	knows
something,	but	he’s	keeping	it	quiet—’
‘Bottled	up?’	Deadsmell	asked.
Throatslitter ’s	high-pitched	laugh	triggered	curses	up	and	down	the	line.
The	assassin	hissed	under	his	breath.	‘Sorry,	that	just	came	out.’
‘So	give	him	a	shake,	Wid,’	pressed	Deadsmell,	‘until	it	all	gushes	out.
He’s	got	a	cork	somewhere,	go	and	find	it.’
Throatslitter	snorted,	and	then	choked	as	he	held	down	another	squeal.
‘Stop	that,	Deadsmell,’	Balm	ordered.	‘I	mean	it.’
‘But	I’ve	just	scratched	the	surface	of	possibilities,	Sergeant—’
‘You	saw	what	Cuttle	went	and	did	to	Koryk?	I’ll	lay	you	out,	Deadsmell
—’
‘You	can’t	do	that	–	you’re	our	sergeant!’
‘Meaning	I	can	do	it,	idiot.’
Widdershins	said,	‘Bottle’s	a	mage,	just	like	me.	We	got	us	a	common
bond.	Think	I	might	talk	to	him	after	all.	There’s	something	he’s	not	saying.	I
know	it.’
‘Well,’	mused	Deadsmell,	‘the	man	did	somehow	survive	the	Nah’ruk
kitchen	tent,	so	that’s	kind	of	impressive.’
‘And	he	came	in	with	Captain	Ruthan	Gudd.	There’s	an	inner	circle,	you
see.	I	suspected	it	from	way	back.’
‘Widdershins,	you	may	have	hit	on	something	there,’	said	Deadsmell.
‘People	in	the	know.	Knowing…something.’
‘More	than	us,	right.’


‘Probably	got	it	all	mapped	out,	too.	Even	how	we’re	going	to	get	across
this	desert,	and	then	take	down	another	empire	just	like	we	took	down	Lether.’
‘Just	like	we	crushed	the	Whirlwind,	too.	And	got	ourselves	out	of	Malaz
City.	So	now	you	ain’t	making	fun	of	me	no	more,	Deadsmell,	are	ya?’
As	one,	the	four	marines	twisted	round	to	glare	at	the	squad	trudging
behind	them.	Sergeant	Tarr ’s	brows	lifted.
‘You	hearing	this,	Tarr?’	Balm	called	back.
‘Not	a	word	of	it,	Balm.’
‘Good.’
Facing	forward	again,	Widdershins	tried	to	press	even	closer.	‘Listen,’	he
whispered,	‘we	can	work	out	who’s	in	the	know.	Fid,	and	Ruthan	Gudd—’
‘And	Bottle,’	said	Deadsmell,	‘because	he’s	Fid’s	shaved	knuckle.’
‘Masan	Gilani—’
‘What?	Really?’
‘Another	one	attached	to	the	Adjunct’s	retinue	–	they	didn’t	kill	her	horse,
did	you	know	that?	They	kept	her	two	of	’em,	in	fact.’	Widdershins	rubbed	at
his	face.	‘Gets	cold	with	the	sun	down,	don’t	it?	Then	there’s	Lostara	Yil,	who
did	that	Shadow	Dance	–	that	one	for	sure.	Who	else?’
‘Keneb	but	he’s	dead,’	said	Balm.	‘Quick	Ben,	too.’
Widdershins	barked	a	low	laugh.	‘I’m	with	Bottle	on	that	one.	He’s	out
there,	somewhere.	Maybe	with	Gesler	and	Stormy—’
‘Of	course!’	Balm	cut	in.	‘Ges	and	Stormy!	And	don’t	they	have	the	runts
with	them?’
‘Sinn	and	Grub,	aye.’
Widdershins	nodded.	‘Could	be	the	whole	conspiracy	right	there,	then.	The
inner	circle	I	was	talking	about—’
‘The	conniving	cabal,’	said	Deadsmell.
‘Aye—’
‘The	secret	sneaks.’
‘Just	so.’
‘The	shifty-eyed	sentinels	of	truth—’
Throatslitter ’s	laugh	pierced	the	night.
	
Sinter	winced	at	the	cry	behind	them.	‘Gods,	I	wish	he’d	stop	doing	that.’
‘Nothing	very	funny	about	this,’	Badan	Gruk	agreed.	‘But	then	it’s
Throatslitter,	isn’t	it?	That	man	would	laugh	over	his	dying	sister.’	He	shook
his	head.	‘I	don’t	get	people	like	him.	Taking	pleasure	in	misery,	in	torture,	all
that.	What’s	to	laugh	about?	Talk	about	a	messed-up	mind.’


She	glanced	at	him	curiously.	His	face	was	lit	in	the	green	glow	of	the	Jade
Spears.	Ghoulish.	Ethereal.	‘What’s	eating	you,	Badan?’
‘That	conspiracy	of	Wid’s.’	He	shot	her	a	suspicious	look.	‘It’s	got	to
include	you,	Sinter,	don’t	it?’
‘Like	Hood	it	does.’
‘You	had	a	chat	with	Masan	Gilani	–	and’	–	he	nodded	towards	the	wagon
rocking	and	creaking	just	ahead	of	them	–	‘your	sister.’
‘We	was	just	trying	to	work	out	stuff	to	help	the	Adjunct—’
‘Because	you	knew	something.	Those	feelings	you	get.	You	knew	we	were
in	trouble,	long	before	the	lizards	showed	up.’
‘Little	good	it	did	us.	Don’t	you	see?	I	knew	but	I	didn’t	know.	Do	you	have
any	idea	how	helpless	that	made	me	feel?’
‘So	what’s	coming,	Sinter?’
‘No	idea	–	and	that’s	just	how	I	want	it.’	She	tapped	her	helm.	‘All	quiet,	not
a	whisper.	You	think	I’m	in	some	inner	circle?	You’re	wrong.’
‘Fine,’	he	said.	‘Forget	it.’
The	silence	stretched	between	them,	and	to	Sinter	it	felt	like	a	cocoon,	or	a
web	they	were	snared	in.	Struggling	just	made	it	worse.	In	the	hills	high	above
the	savanna	of	her	homeland	there	were	ancient	tombs	carved	into	cliff	faces.
Barely	past	her	first	blooding,	she’d	journeyed	with	her	sister	and	two	others
to	explore	those	mysterious	caves.
Nothing	but	dust.	The	stone	sarcophagi	were	stacked	a	dozen	to	each
chamber,	and	Sinter	remembered	standing	in	the	relative	chill,	one	hand
holding	a	makeshift	torch,	and	in	the	flickering,	wavering	orange	light	staring
at	the	lowest	coffin	in	a	stack	rising	before	her.	Other	peoples	buried	their
dead,	instead	of	gifting	the	corpse	to	the	vulture	goddess	and	her	get.	Or	sealed
them	beneath	heavy	lids	of	stone.	And	she	remembered	thinking,	with	a	chill
rippling	through	her:	but	what	if	they	got	it	wrong?	What	if	you	weren’t	dead?
In	the	years	since,	she’d	heard	horrifying	tales	of	hapless	people	buried
alive,	trapped	within	coffins	of	stone	or	wood.	Life	in	the	barracks	was	rife
with	stories	intended	to	make	one	shiver.	Worse	than	the	haranguing	threats
from	priests	behind	a	pulpit	–	and	everyone	knew	those	ones	were	doing	it	for
the	coin.	And	all	that	delicious	sharing	out	of	fear.
And	now…now,	I	feel	as	if	I’m	about	to	wake	up.	From	a	long	sleep.	From
my	mouth,	a	sighing	breath	–	but	all	I	see	is	darkness,	all	I	hear	is	a	strange
dull	echo	all	around	me.	And	I	reach	up,	and	find	cold,	damp	stone.	It	was	the
drops	that	awakened	me.	The	condensation	of	my	own	breathing.
I	am	about	to	wake	up,	to	find	that	I	have	been	buried	alive.
The	terror	would	not	let	her	go.	This	desert	belongs	to	the	dead.	Its	song	is


the	song	of	dying.
In	the	wagon	lumbering	a	few	strides	ahead	sat	her	sister.	Head	lolling	as	if
asleep.	Was	it	that	easy	for	her?	That	leg	was	slow	in	mending,	and	now	that
they	were	in	this	lifeless	place	no	healer	could	help	her.	She	must	be	in	pain.
Yet	she	slept.
While	we	march.
The	deserter	never	deserted	after	all.	Who	could	have	guessed	she’d	find
something	inside,	something	that	reached	out	beyond,	outside	her	damned	self?
We	can	never	know,	can	we?	Can	never	know	someone	else,	even	one	of	our	own
blood.
Kisswhere.	You	should	have	run.	Limped.	Done	whatever	you	needed	to	do.
I	could	manage	all	of	this,	I	could.	If	I	knew	you	were	safe	–	far	away.
She	thought	back	to	when	her	sister	had	appeared,	in	the	company	of	the
Khundryl	–	that	ragged,	wretched	huddle	of	survivors.	Young	mothers,	old
mothers,	crippled	warriors,	unblooded	children.	Elders	tottering	like	the
harbingers	of	shattered	faith.	And	there	she	was,	struggling	with	a	makeshift
crutch	–	the	kind	one	saw	among	broken	veterans	on	foreign	streets	as	they
begged	for	alms.	Gods	below,	at	least	the	Malazan	Empire	knew	how	to	honour
their	veterans.	You	don’t	just	up	and	forget	them.	Ignore	them.	Step	over	them	in
the	gutters.	You	honour	them.	Even	the	kin	of	the	lost	get	coin	and	a	holyday	in
their	honour…
There	were,	she	knew,	all	kinds	of	coffins.	All	kinds	of	ways	of	finding	out
you’ve	been	buried	alive.	How	many	people	dreaded	opening	their	eyes?
Opening	them	for	real?	How	many	were	terrified	of	what	they	would	find?
That	stone	box.	That	solid	darkness.	The	immovable	walls	and	lid	and	the
impossible	weight.
Her	sister	would	not	meet	her	eye.	Would	not	even	speak	to	her.	Not	since
Kisswhere’s	return	to	the	ranks.	But	return	she	did.	And	soldiers	saw	that.	Saw,
and	realized	that	she’d	gone	to	get	the	Khundryl,	to	find	help	for	that	awful	day.
They	understood,	too,	how	Kisswhere	must	feel,	there	in	that	ruined	haggle
of	survivors.	Aye,	she’d	sent	the	rest	of	them	to	their	deaths.	Enough	to	destroy
the	strongest	among	them,	aye.	But	look	at	her.	Seems	able	to	bear	it.	The
broken	leg?	She	was	riding	Hood-bent	for	leather,	friends	–	would’ve	been	in
that	fatal	charge,	too,	if	not	for	her	horse	going	down.
No,	they	now	looked	on	Kisswhere	with	a	seriousness	to	their	regard	that
spoke	tomes	about	finally	belonging,	that	spoke	of	seeing	on	her	the	fresh
scars	from	the	only	rite	of	passage	worth	respecting	–	surviving,	with	the	coin
paid	in	full	for	the	privilege.
Well.	That	is	my	sister,	isn’t	it?	No	matter	what,	she	will	shine.	She	will


shine.
	
Kisswhere	could	feel	her	teeth	grinding,	on	the	edge	of	cracking,	as	the	wagon
clunked	over	yet	another	rock,	and	with	breath	held	she	waited	for	the	rush	of
stunning	pain.	Up	from	the	bones	of	her	leg,	spreading	like	bright	flowers
through	her	hips,	rising	through	her	torso	like	a	tree	with	a	thousand	stabbing
branches	and	ten	thousand	needled	twigs.	Higher	still,	the	mad	serrated	leaves
unfurling	in	her	skull,	lacerating	her	brain.
She	rode	the	manic	surge,	the	insane	growth	of	agony,	and	then,	as	it
pulsed	back	down,	as	it	ebbed,	she	slowly	released	her	sour	breath.	She	stank
of	suffering;	she	could	taste	it	on	her	swollen	tongue.	She	leaked	it	out	on	the
grimy	boards	beneath	her.
They	should	have	left	her	behind.	A	lone	tent	in	the	rubbish	of	the
abandoned	camp.	That	would	have	been	an	act	of	mercy.	But	since	when	did
armies	think	about	that?	Their	whole	business	was	the	denial	of	mercy,	and	like
a	water	mill	the	huge	stone	wheel	of	destruction	rolled	on,	and	on.	No	one
allowed	to	get	off,	on…on	what?	She	found	herself	grinning.	On	pain	of	death,
that’s	what.
Staring	at	her	own	knees,	at	the	thick	bundling	of	myrid	skins	surrounding
her	splinted	leg.	Hair	hanging	down,	hiding	from	her	eyes	Badan	Gruk,	Sinter
and	all	the	rest,	so	useless	in	their	clumping	along,	so	bitter	in	all	the	ghosts
they	now	carried,	the	weight	bowing	them	down.
Was	it	Pores	or	Kindly?	Yes,	Pores.	‘Grow	that	hair,	woman!’	Or	was	it	‘Cut
it’?	I	can’t	remember	–	how	can	I	not	remember?	Was	it	that	long	ago?
Pores,	pretending	to	be	Kindly.	Where	does	that	kind	of	courage	come
from?	That…audacity?	That	knowing	look	will	be	in	his	eye	right	up	until	he’s
shoved	through	Hood’s	Gate.	It	will,	won’t	it?
How	I	admire	people	like	that.	How	I	wanted	to	be	like	them.
Badan	Gruk,	take	a	lesson	from	Pores,	I	beg	you.	No	more	of	the	sad	eyes,
the	hurt	look.	I	see	it	and	I	want	to	stab	deeper.	Lash	out.	I	want	to	make	true
all	your	miserable	worries,	all	those	wounds	upon	your	heart.	Let’s	see	them
bleed!
The	wagon	jarred	beneath	her.	She	gasped.	Flowers	and	trees,	leaves	of
fire	igniting	behind	her	eyes.	No	time	to	think.	Every	thought	tried	running,
only	to	explode	in	the	forest.	Bursting	awake	all	the	leaves,	high	in	the	canopy,
and	every	thought	wings	away.	Like	birds	into	the	sky.
The	leg	was	infected.	There	was	fever,	and	nothing	anyone	could	do	about
it.	Herbs	fought	the	good	war,	or	they	would	if	there	were	any.	If	she	asked	for


them.	If	she	told	someone.	Pastes	and	poultices,	elixirs	and	unguents,	all	the
ranks	of	grim-faced	soldiers,	banners	waving,	marching	into	disease’s
grinning	face.
No	one’s	allowed	to	get	off.	On	pain	of	death,	aye.
Stay	right	here,	this	rocking	wagon,	the	rank	sweat	of	the	oxen	so	sweet	in
our	nostrils.	We	got	us	a	war,	comrades.	Can’t	stop	and	chat.	We	got	us	a	war,
and	no	one’s	allowed	to	get	off.	No	one’s	allowed	to	get	off.	No	one’s	allowed	to
—
	
Badan	grunted	and	looked	up.
‘Shit,’	said	Sinter,	starting	forward.
Kisswhere	had	been	leaning	forward	over	her	thighs,	one	leg	dangling	off
the	wooden	tail,	the	other	splinted	straight,	thrust	out	at	an	angle.	She’d	just
fallen	back,	head	cracking	as	it	bounced	on	the	slats.
Sinter	clambered	on	to	the	wagon.	‘Gods	below,	she’s	on	fire.	Badan	–	get
us	a	cutter,	fast.’	Straightening,	she	faced	forward	and	leaned	over	the	bundles
of	gear.	‘Ruffle!	Pull	this	thing	over	to	one	side	–	hurry!	Out	of	the	line!’
‘Aye,	Sergeant!’
	
‘They’re	pulling	outa	line,	Sergeant.	Should	we	go	back	and	see	what’s	up?’
Hellian	scowled.	‘Just	march,	Corporal.’
It	was	dark	but	not	so	dark	as	it	maybe	should	be.	People	glowed	green,	but
then,	could	be	that	was	how	it	always	was,	when	she	didn’t	drink.	No	wonder	I
drink.	‘Listen,	all	of	you,’	she	said,	‘keep	an	eye	out.’
‘For	what?’	Breathy	asked.
‘For	a	tavern,	of	course.	Idiot.’
They’d	gotten	two	transfers.	From	the	Seventh	Squad.	A	pair	of	swords,
one	of	them	with	a	bad	knee	and	the	other	one	with	the	face	of	a	gut-sick	horse.
Limp’s	the	name	of	one	of	them.	But	which	one?	That	other	one…	Crump.	A
sapper?	Is	Crump	the	sapper?	But	sappers	ain’t	worth	much	now,	are	they?	Big
enough	to	be	a	sword,	though,	unless	Crump	is	the	one	with	the	bad	knee.
Imagine,	a	sapper	with	a	bad	knee.	Set	the	charge	and	run!	Well,	hobble.	Fast
as	you	can.	Guess	you	looking	like	a	horse	was	some	kind	of	joke,	huh?
Sappers.	Nothing	but	a	bad	idea	that	stayed	bad.	Bust	up	one	leg	on	all	of
’em,	that’d	make	the	breed	extinct	quick	enough.
Aye,	Limp’s	the	sapper.	Crump’s	the	other	one.	Crump	goes	the	knee.	Limp


goes	the	sapper.	But	wait,	which	one’s	got	the	bad	knee	again?	I	could	turn
round.	I	suppose.	Turn	round	and,	say,	take	a	look.	Which	one’s	limping?	Get
the	limper	sorted	and	I	got	Crump,	meaning	the	sapper’s	the	other	one,	with	the
bad	knee.	Limp,	then.	He’s	named	Limp	on	account	of	the	bad	knee	of	his
buddy’s,	since	he	has	to	help	the	fool	along	all	the	time.	But	then,	if	he	got	that
name	at	the	start,	why,	he’d	not	make	it	as	a	soldier	at	all.	He’d	of	been
drummed	out,	or	planted	behind	a	desk.	So,	the	sapper	didn’t	run	fast	enough
from	some	fuse,	that’s	how	he	earned	his	name.	Got	the	name	Crump,	on
account	of	a	crumpling	knee.	Now	I	get	it.	Whew.
But	what’s	the	point	of	a	horse	with	a	bad	knee?
‘’S	getting	cold,	Sergeant.’
Hellian’s	scowl	deepened.	‘What	do	you	want	me	to	do	about	it,	fart	in
your	face?’
‘No.	Was	just	saying.	Oh,	and	Limp’s	lagging	–	we	should’ve	stuck	’im	on
the	wagon.’
‘Who	are	you	again?’
‘I’m	Maybe,	Sergeant.	Been	with	you	since	the	beginning.’
‘Which	door?’
‘What?’
‘The	street	we	lived	on	in	Kartool	City.	Which	door	was	you	in?’
‘I	ain’t	from	Kartool,	Sergeant.	I	meant,	the	beginning	of	the	squad.	That’s
what	I	meant.	Aren.	Seven	Cities.	The	first	time	we	marched	across	a	Hoodrotting	desert.’
‘Back	to	Y’Ghatan?	No	wonder	I’m	so	thirsty.	Got	water	in	that	jug	there,
soldier?’
‘Just	my	piss,	Sergeant.’
‘Lucky	you	ain’t	a	woman.	Try	pissing	into	a	bottle	when	you’re	a	woman.
Y’Ghatan.	Gods	below,	how	many	times	do	we	got	to	take	that	place?’
‘We	ain’t	marching	to	Y’Ghatan,	Sergeant.	We’re	–	oh,	never	mind.	It’s	a
desert	for	sure,	though.	Cold.’
‘Corporal	Touchless!’
‘Sergeant?’
‘What	you	got	in	that	jug	there?’
‘Piss.’
‘Who’s	selling	that	stuff	anyway?	Bloody	genius.’
Maybe	said,	‘Heard	the	quartermaster	was	tying	bladders	on	the	Khundryl
stallions.’
Hellian	frowned.	‘They’d	explode.	Why	would	he	do	that?	And	more	to	the
point,	how?	Stick	your	hand	up	its—’


‘Not	the	horse’s	bladder,	Sergeant.	Waterskins,	right?	Cow	bladders.	Tied
to	the	stallion’s	cock.’
‘Duck,	you	mean.’
‘What?’
‘Horses	hate	cocks,	but	they	don’t	mind	ducks.	But	that	bladder	would	slow
’em	down	something	awful.	Quite	the	farm	where	you	grew	up,	Maybe.’
‘I	ain’t	fooled,	you	know,’	said	Maybe,	leaning	close.	‘But	I	see	the	point,
right?	You’re	keeping	us	entertained.	It’s	like	a	game,	pieces	jumping	every
which	way.’
She	eyed	him.	‘Oh,	I’m	just	fooling	with	ya,	am	I?’
He	met	her	gaze,	and	then	his	eyes	shied	away.	‘Sorry,	Sergeant.	Feeling	it,
huh?’
Hellian	said	nothing.	Glowing	green,	aye.	And	all	those	rocks	and	shards
out	there,	where	the	spiders	are.	Tiny	eyes	all	heaped	up,	all	watching	me	pass.
I’m	sober.	Can’t	pretend	they’re	not	there,	not	any	more.
And	not	a	tavern	in	sight.
This	is	going	to	be	bad.	Very	bad.	‘Hear	that?’	she	asked.	‘That	was	a
damned	hyena.’
‘That	was	Throatslitter,	Sergeant.’
‘He	killed	a	hyena?	Good	for	him.	Where’s	Balgrid	anyway?’
‘Dead.’
‘Damned	slacker.	I’m	going	to	sleep.	Corporal,	you’re	in	charge—’
‘Can’t	sleep	now,’	Brethless	objected.	‘We’re	walking,	Sergeant—’
‘Best	time	for	it,	then.	Wake	me	when	the	sun	comes	up.’
	
‘Now	that	ain’t	fair	how	she	does	that.’
Brethless	grunted.	‘You	hear	about	them	all	the	time,	though.	Those
veterans	who	can	sleep	on	the	march.’	He	mused,	and	then	grunted	a	second
time.	‘Didn’t	know	she	was	one	of	them.’
‘Sober	now,’	Maybe	muttered.	‘That’s	what’s	new	with	her.’
‘Did	you	see	her	and	Urb	and	Tarr	heading	back	into	the	trench?	I’d	just
about	given	up,	and	then	I	saw	her,	and	she	pulled	me	along	as	if	I	was	wearing
chains	round	my	neck.	I	had	nothing	left	–	me	and	Touchy	–	remember,
Touchy?’
‘Aye.	What	of	it?’
‘We	were	finished.	When	I	saw	Quick	Ben	go	down,	it	was	like	someone
carved	out	my	gut.	I	went	all	hollow	inside.	Suddenly,	I	knew	it	was	time	to
die.’


‘You	were	wrong,’	said	Maybe	in	a	growl.
‘We	got	us	a	good	sergeant,	is	what	I’m	saying.’
Maybe	nodded,	and	glanced	back	at	Crump.	‘You	listening,	soldier?	Don’t
mess	it	up.’
The	tall,	long-faced	man	with	the	strangely	wide-spaced	eyes	blinked
confusedly.	‘They	stepped	on	my	cussers,’	he	said.	‘Now	I	ain’t	got	any	more.’
‘Can	you	use	that	sword	on	your	belt,	sapper?’
‘What?	This?	No,	why	would	I	want	to	do	that?	We’re	just	marching.’
Lagging	behind,	breath	coming	in	harsh	gasps,	Limp	said,	‘Crump	had	a
bag	of	munitions.	Stuck	his	brain	in	there,	too.	For,	uh,	safekeeping.	It	all	went
up,	throwing	Nah’ruk	everywhere.	He’s	just	an	empty	skull	now,	Maybe.’
‘So	he	can’t	fight?	What	about	using	a	crossbow?’
‘Never	seen	him	try	one	of	those.	But	fight?	Crump	fights,	don’t	worry
about	that.’
‘Well,	with	what,	then?	That	stupid	bush	knife?’
‘He	uses	his	hands,	Maybe.’
‘Well,	that’s	just	great	then.’
‘We’re	just	marching,’	said	Crump	again,	and	then	he	laughed.
	
Urb	glanced	back	at	the	squad	trudging	five	paces	behind	his	own.	She	had
nothing	to	drink	now.	She	was	waking	up.	To	who	she	really	was.	And	maybe
she	didn’t	like	what	she	saw.	Wasn’t	that	what	drinking	was	all	about	to	begin
with?	He	rubbed	the	back	of	his	neck,	faced	forward	again.
Sober	now.	Eyes	clear.	Clear	enough	to	see…well,	it	wasn’t	like	she’d
really	shown	any	interest.	And	besides,	did	he	really	want	to	get	tangled	with
someone	like	that?	Standing	up	only	to	probably	fall	down	again.	It	was	a
narrow	path	for	people	like	her,	and	they	needed	to	want	to	walk	it.	If	they
didn’t,	off	they	went	again,	sooner	or	later.	Every	time.
Of	course,	if	what	Fid	had	said	was	true,	what	did	any	of	it	even	matter?
They	were	the	walking	dead,	looking	for	a	place	to	finish	up	with	all	the
walking.	So	in	the	meantime,	if	there	was	a	chance	at	anything,	why	not	take	it?
She’d	not	be	serious	about	it,	though,	would	she?	She’d	just	mock	the	whole
idea	of	love,	of	what	he	would	end	up	cutting	out	and	slapping	down	wet	and
red	on	the	table	between	them	–	she’d	just	laugh.
He	wasn’t	brave	enough	for	that.	In	fact,	he	wasn’t	brave	at	all,	about
anything.	Not	fighting	Nah’ruk,	or	Letherii,	or	Whirlwind	fanatics.	Every	time
he	had	to	draw	his	sword,	he	went	cold	as	ice	inside.	Loose,	quaking,	dread
shivering	out	from	his	stomach	to	steal	the	heat	from	his	limbs.	He	drew	his


sword	expecting	to	die,	and	die	poorly.
But	he’d	do	what	he	could	to	keep	her	alive.	Always	had.	Always	would.
Usually	she	was	too	drunk	to	even	see	it,	or	maybe	she	was	so	used	to	him
being	there	when	it	counted	that	he	was	no	different	from	a	stone	wall	for	her
to	throw	her	back	against.	But	wasn’t	even	that	enough	for	him?
It	would	have	to	be,	because	he	didn’t	have	the	courage	for	anything	more.
Being	the	walking	dead	didn’t	have	a	thing	to	do	with	bravery.	It	was	just	a	way
of	looking	at	the	time	left,	of	ducking	down	and	pushing	on	and	not
complaining.	He	could	do	that.	He’d	been	doing	that	all	his	life,	in	fact.
I’ve	been	the	walking	dead	all	along,	and	I	didn’t	even	know	it.	The	thought
left	him	weakened,	as	if	some	hidden	knife	had	just	pushed	deep	inside,
piercing	his	soul.	I’ve	been	telling	myself	this	was	being	alive.	This	here.
This…hiding.	Wishing.	Dreaming.	Wanting.	And	all	the	while,	what	does	anyone
else	see	when	they	look	at	me?
Quiet	Urb.	Not	much	going	on	in	there,	is	there?	But	a	fair	soldier.
Adequate.	Made	sergeant,	sure,	but	don’t	ever	think	he’ll	go	higher.	Hasn’t	got
it	inside,	you	see.	It’s	quiet	as	a	cave	in	there,	but	you	got	to,	well,	admire	him.
He’s	a	man	without	troubles.	He’s	a	man	who	lives	it	easy,	if	you	know	what	I
mean.
That’s	Sergeant	Urb.	He’ll	do	until	a	better	sergeant	comes	along.
Hiding	ain’t	living.	Hiding’s	just	walking	dead.
He	looked	up	into	the	jade-lit	night	sky,	studied	those	grim	slashes
cleaving	the	darkness.	Huge	now,	seeming	ready	to	slice	into	the	face	of	this
very	world.	Urb	shivered.	But	if	I’m	the	walking	dead,	why	am	I	still	so	afraid?
	
Corporal	Clasp	dropped	back	from	her	position	alongside	Urb,	until	Saltlick,
who’d	been	taking	up	the	rear,	reached	her,	and	she	fell	in	beside	him.	‘Can	I
have	a	quiet	word	with	you?’	she	asked.
He	glanced	over,	blinked.	‘I	can	be	quiet.’
‘I’d	noticed,	Saltlick.	Is	that	how	it	is	in	this	squad?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
She	nodded	ahead.	‘Sergeant	Urb.	You	and	him	are	the	same.	You	don’t	say
anything,	don’t	give	yourselves	away.	You	know,	we	all	knew	there	was	a…
well,	a	kind	of	elite	group.	Squads	and	a	few	heavies.	Somehow	all	closer	to
Fiddler,	back	when	he	was	a	sergeant.	Closer	than	the	rest	of	us.	We	knew	it.	We
could	see	it.	Fiddler,	and	round	him	Gesler	and	Stormy,	Balm	and	Hellian,
Cord	and	Shard.	And	Urb.	With	Quick	Ben	dropping	in,	and	then	Hedge.	And
finally,	some	of	you	heavies.	Shortnose,	Mayfly,	Flashwit.	You.	I	know,	it	was


all	about	Fiddler,	and	the	ones	he	drew	in	around	him.	The	ones	he	picked.’
Saltlick	was	staring	at	her	now.
Clasp	grimaced.	‘Look	at	my	soldiers,’	she	said	under	her	breath.	‘Look	at
Sad.	You	know	what	she	is?	A	damned	Semk	witch.	Semk.	You	know	what	she
does	when	she	gets	ready	for	a	fight?	Never	mind.	You’ll	see	for	yourself,
assuming	we	survive	this	desert.	Then	there’s	Burnt	Rope.	Sapper.	But	he
surprised	me	at	the	trench.	So	did	our	cutter	–	you	know,	he	once	went	and
sought	out	Gesler	and	Stormy	–	fellow	Falaris,	right?	We	sent	him.	We	sent
Lap	Twirl	to	Ges	and	Stormy,	to	test	them	out.	To	see	if	we	could	get	in.’
‘Get	in?’
‘To	those	elites.	To	the	insiders,	right?	Well,	he	didn’t	get	anywhere.	They
were	friendly	enough,	and	the	three	of	them	got	drunk	–	it	was	in	Letheras.	Got
beastly	drunk,	and	hired	up	a	whole	whorehouse	of	women.	But	Lap	kept	a	bit
of	himself	cold	sober,	and	when	he	judged	it	right	he	just	went	and	asked.
Asked	in.	You	know	what	Gesler	said?’
Saltlick	shook	his	head.
‘The	bastard	denied	it	to	Lap’s	face.	Said	it	didn’t	exist.	Lied	to	Lap’s	face.
That’s	how	we	know	there’s	no	getting	in.’
Saltlick	continued	studying	her.	‘So,’	he	said	after	a	few	strides,	‘why	are
you	telling	me?’
‘Urb’s	one	of	the	finest	sergeants	we	marines	got	left	to	us.	We	know	that.
In	fact,	it’s	got	us	pissing	in	our	boots.	The	pressure’s	getting	unbearable,
Saltlick.	We	can’t	get	a	word	outa	him.	And	you	can	see	in	his	eyes	–	he’s
damned	disappointed	to	be	saddled	with	us.’
‘All	right,’	said	Saltlick.
She	frowned	up	at	him.	‘All	right	what?’
‘You’re	in,	Corporal.	You	and	your	soldiers.	You’re	all	in.’
‘Really?	You	sure?’
‘You’re	in.’
Smiling,	she	moved	ahead	again,	paused	to	glance	back	and	nod.	He
nodded	back,	saw	the	lightness	in	her	step.	Watched	as	she	leaned	in	close	to
Lap	Twirl,	and	the	two	soldiers	spoke	in	whispers	and	gestures,	and	a	moment
later	Sad	and	Burnt	Rope	closed	up	to	listen	in.	Faces	turned,	looked	back	at
him.
He	waved.
I	can’t	wait	till	Flashwit	hears	this	one.
Saltlick	shifted	uncomfortably.	He’d	sweated	a	lot	in	his	tent,	and	now	his
sack	was	chafing.	He	could	almost	feel	the	skin	peeling	off.	Fuck,	that	stings.
Better	air	out	my	balls	tomorrow.


	
The	sergeant	was	glaring	at	her,	gesturing.	Flashwit	frowned.
Mayfly	nudged	her.	‘Wants	to	talk	to	you.’
‘Why?’
‘He	has	seven	questions.	How	would	I	know?	Go	on,	Princess.	The	idiot
lost	his	whole	squad.	He	probably	wants	to	try	and	explain.	So	he	doesn’t	get	a
knife	in	his	back.’
‘I	wouldn’t	stick	a	knife	in	his	back,’	Flashwit	said,	shaking	her	head.	‘No
matter	what	he	did.’
‘Really?’
‘If	he	killed	them	all	and	told	me	about	it,	I’d	just	break	his	neck.	A	knife	in
the	back,	that’s	cowardly.’
‘No	it	ain’t,’	Mayfly	objected.	‘It’s	making	a	point.	Victim’s	not	worth	a
look	in	the	eye	when	y’kill	him.	Victim’s	not	s’posed	to	know	what	ended	it,
just	that	it	ended,	and	there’s	Hood’s	Gate	calling	’im.’
‘But	sometimes	you	miss.’
‘Better	go,	he’s	gettin’	cross.’
Grunting,	Flashwit	made	her	way	up	to	Sergeant	Gaunt-Eye.	Wasn’t	a
friendly	face,	that	one.	But	a	face	a	person	would	remember	anyway.	For	all	the
wrong	things	in	it.	‘Sergeant?’
‘You	don’t	know	the	hand-talk,	soldier?’
‘What	talk?	Oh,	that.	Yah,	I	know	it.	Mostly.	Advance.	Stop.	Hit	the	ground.
Fight.	Go	fuck	yourself.	Like	that.’
‘A	marine	should	know	how	to	put	together	whole	sentences,	Flashwit.’
‘Yah?	I’m	a	heavy,	Sergeant.’
‘Tell	me	about	the	girly	one.’
‘Using	my	hands?	Can’t,	Sergeant.	I	mean,	I’d	have	to	try	and	ask,	“What
girly	one?”	and	I	don’t	know	how	to	do	that.’
‘Skulldeath.	Talk	to	me,	soldier.	With	words	–	but	keep	your	voice	down.’
‘I	ain’t	never	raised	my	voice,	not	once,	Sergeant,	in	my	whole	life.’
‘Skulldeath.’
‘What	about	him?’
‘Why’s	he	so	girly,	for	one?’
‘He’s	a	prince,	Sergeant.	From	some	tribe	in	Seven	Cities.	He’s	the	heir,	in
fact—’
‘Then	what	in	Hood’s	name	is	he	doing	here?’
She	shrugged.	‘They	sent	him	to	grow	up	somewhere	else.	With	us.	T’see
the	world	and	all	that.’


Gaunt-Eye	bared	crooked	teeth.	‘Bet	he’s	regretting	that.’
‘No	reason	why,’	Flashwit	said.	‘Not	yet,	anyway.’
‘So,	he	grew	up	all	pampered	and	perfumed,	then.’
‘I	suppose.’
‘So	how	did	he	get	that	stupid	name?’
Flashwit	squinted	at	the	sergeant.	‘Beggin’	yer	pardon,	Sergeant,	but	where
was	you	and	your	squad?	Back	at	the	Trench,	I	mean.’
He	shot	her	a	vicious	look.	‘What	difference	does	that	make?’
‘Well,	you	couldn’t	have	not	seen	him	then.	Skulldeath.	He	jumps	high,
y’see.	He	was	the	only	one	of	us	cutting	Nah’ruk	throats,	right?	Jumps	high,
like	I	said.	See	those	eight	notches	on	his	left	wrist?’
‘Those	burns?’
‘Aye.	One	for	each	Nah’ruk	he	personally	throat-cut.’
Gaunt-Eye	snorted.	‘A	liar,	too,	then.	About	what	I	figured.’
‘But	he	never	counted,	Sergeant.	Never	does.	Eight	is	what	we	saw	him	do,
those	who	saw	him	at	all,	I	mean.	We	talked	about	it,	comparing	and	all	that.
Eight.	So	we	told	him	and	he	burned	those	marks	on	his	wrist.	When	we	asked
him	how	many	he	gutted,	he	said	he	didn’t	know.	When	we	asked	him	how
many	he	hamstrung,	he	didn’t	know	that	either.	The	rest	of	us	couldn’t	come	up
with	numbers	on	those.	Lot	more	than	eight,	though.	But	since	we	seen	him
burn	himself,	we	decided	not	to	tell	him	how	many.	He’d	be	one	big	burn	now,
right?	And	since	he’s	so	pretty,	well,	that’d	be	a	shame.’
She	fell	silent	then,	to	catch	her	breath.	She’d	broken	three	or	so	ribs	in	the
fight,	so	talking	hurt.	More	than	breathing,	which	hurt	bad	enough.	Talking	was
worse.	That	had	been	the	most	words	she’d	used	all	at	once	since	the	battle.
‘Drawfirst	and	Mayfly,’	said	Gaunt-Eye,	‘and	you.	All	heavies.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Get	back	in	line,	Flashwit.’
She	gave	him	a	bright	smile	that	seemed	to	startle	him,	and	then	fell	back,
past	one-armed	Corporal	Rib	–	who	eyed	her	with	something	like	suspicion	–
and	then	Drawfirst	and	Skulldeath,	before	positioning	herself	beside	Mayfly.
‘Well?’	Mayfly	asked.
‘You	was	wrong,’	Flashwit	said	with	deep	satisfaction.
‘About	what?’
‘Hah.	He	only	asked	six	questions!’
Gaunt-Eye	was	throwing	more	looks	back	at	his	squad.
‘Who’s	he	want	now?’	Mayfly	wondered.
And	then	the	sergeant	pointed	at	Skulldeath.	‘You	blow	me	one	more	kiss,
soldier,	and	I’ll	wrap	your	guts	round	your	Hood-damned	neck!’


‘Well	now,’	Flashwit	muttered.
Mayfly	nodded.	‘The	prince	ain’t	missed	yet,	has	he?’

Hedge	could	hear	howling	laughter	behind	him,	and	the	breath	gusted	from
him.	‘Listen	to	that,	Bavedict!	Fid	slapped	’em	up	and	down	all	right	–	I	knew
it!’
The	Letherii	alchemist	tugged	again	on	the	ox	lead.	‘Alas,	Commander,	I
don’t	know	what	you	mean	by	that.’
‘Bet	he	gave	’em	the	old	“Walking	Dead”	speech.	It’s	like	cutting	shackles,
that	one.	There	was	a	night,	you	see,	when	Dujek	Onearm	himself	came	into
the	Bridgeburners’	camp.	We	was	working	Pale	then,	the	tunnels	–	I	never
shifted	so	many	boulders	in	my	life.	He	came	in,	right,	and	told	us	what	we
already	knew.’	Hedge	drew	off	his	scorched	leather	cap	and	scratched	at	his
fresh-shaven	scalp.	‘We	was	the	walking	dead.	Then	he	left.	Left	us	to	figure
out	what	we	were	going	to	do	about	it.’
‘What	did	you	do?’
Hedge	tugged	on	the	cap	again.	‘Well,	most	of	us,	er,	died.	Before	we	even
had	a	chance.	But	Whiskeyjack,	he	wasn’t	going	to	turn	his	back	on	any	of	it.
And	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam,	gods,	they	just	wanted	to	start	the	killing.	Y’ain’t
got	nothing	to	lose	once	you’re	the	walking	dead.’
‘I	do	admit,	Commander,	that	I	don’t	much	like	being	described	in	that
manner.’
‘Got	cold	feet	now?’
‘I	always	appreciate	your	wit,	sir,’	said	Bavedict.	‘But	cold	feet	are
precisely	what	I	don’t	want,	if	you	understand	me.’
‘So	buck	up,	then.	Besides,	what	Fid	had	to	say	to	his	Bonehunters,	well,
that’s	up	to	him.	Got	nothing	to	do	with	us	Bridgeburners—’
‘Presumably	because	the	Bridgeburners	have	been	walking	dead	since,	er,
Pale.’
Hedge	slapped	him	on	the	back.	‘Exactly.	It’s	not	like	it’s	an	exclusive	club,
right?’
‘Sir,’	ventured	Bavedict,	‘was	it	just	this	afternoon	that	you	were
complaining	how	your	old	friend	had	turned	his	back	on	you?	That	you	were
feeling	like	a	leper—’
‘Things	are	easier	when	you’re	dead.	I	mean,	for	him.	He	could	put	me
away,	on	some	shelf	in	his	skull,	and	leave	me	there.’	Hedge	gestured


carelessly	with	one	hand.	‘I	get	it.	I	always	did.	I	just	don’t	like	it.	I	feel
insulted.	I	mean,	I’m	back.	Anyone	can	see	that.	Fid	should	be	happy.	And
Quick	Ben	–	well,	you	saw	what	he	did	at	the	battle,	before	he	skipped	out.
Went	and	did	a	Tayschrenn	on	us.	Next	time	we	meet,	him	and	me	are	going	to
have	some	words,	we	are.’
‘My	point,	sir,	was	that	Fiddler	has	actually	drawn	himself	closer	to	you,	if
indeed	he	spoke	of	his	soldiers	being	among	the	walking	dead.’
‘You	might	think	that,’	Hedge	said,	nodding.	‘But	you’d	be	wrong.	When
you’re	dead,	Bavedict,	you	ain’t	got	no	brothers.	Nothing	holds	ya	together.	At
least,	not	that	I	ever	seen.	Aye,	the	dead	Bridgeburners	are	all	together,	but
that’s	just	old	memories,	chaining	’em	all	to	each	other.	It’s	just	ghostly
echoes,	from	back	when	they	were	alive.	I’m	telling	you,	Alchemist,	keep
doing	all	you	can	to	stay	alive,	for	as	long	as	you	can.	Because	the	dead	got	no
friends.’
Bavedict	sighed.	‘I	do	hope	you’re	wrong,	Commander.	Did	you	not	say
the	Realm	of	Death	has	changed	–	that	the	Reaper	himself	surrendered	the
Unliving	Throne?	And	that	this	Whiskeyjack—’
‘You	never	knew	him.	Whiskeyjack,	I	mean.	So	you’ll	just	have	to	take	me
at	my	word,	he’s	a	stubborn	bastard.	Probably	the	stubbornest	bastard	ever	to
walk	this	world.	So,	maybe	you	got	a	point.	Maybe	he	can	make	it	all	different.
If	anyone	can,	it’s	him.’	Another	slap	on	Bavedict’s	shoulder.	‘You	gave	me
something	to	think	about	there.	Fid	never	did	that,	you	know.	In	fact,	I	can’t
remember	what	he	ever	did	for	me.	I’m	thinking	now,	I	never	really	liked	him
at	all.’
‘How	unfortunate.	Did	you	like	Whiskeyjack?’
‘Aye,	we	was	the	best	of	friends.	Plenty	there	to	like,	basically.	In	both	of
us.	Fid	was	the	odd	one	out,	come	to	think	on	it.’
‘And	now	Whiskeyjack	rides	among	the	dead.’
‘Tragic,	Bavedict.	A	damned	shame.’
‘And	you	loved	him	deeply.’
‘So	I	did.	So	I	did.’
‘But	Fiddler	is	still	alive.’
‘Aye—’
‘And	you	never	really	liked	him.’
‘Just	so—’
‘In	fact,	you	love	all	the	dead	Bridgeburners.’
‘Of	course	I	do!’
‘Just	not	the	last	one	left	alive.’
Hedge	glared,	and	then	slapped	the	man	on	the	side	of	the	head.	‘Why	am	I


talking	to	you?	You	don’t	understand	nothing!’
Off	he	marched,	up	to	where	his	company	trudged.
Bavedict	drew	out	a	small	jar.	Porcelain	and	studded	jewels.	He	unscrewed
the	top,	dipped	one	fingertip	in,	drew	it	back	and	examined	it,	and	then	rubbed
it	across	his	gums.	‘Die?’	he	whispered.	‘But	I	have	no	intention	of	dying.	Not
ever.’
	
Jastara	finally	found	them,	up	near	the	head	of	the	Khundryl	column.	It	was
impressive,	how	Hanavat	managed	to	keep	up	this	pace,	the	way	she	waddled
with	all	that	extra	weight.	It	was	never	easy	being	pregnant.	Sick	to	start,	and
then	hungry	all	the	time,	and	finally	big	as	a	bloated	bhederin,	until	it	all	ends
in	excruciating	pain.	She	recalled	her	first	time,	going	through	all	that	so
bright-eyed	and	flushed,	only	to	lose	the	damned	thing	as	soon	as	it	came	out.
‘The	child	did	what	she	had	to	do,	Jastara.	Showed	you	the	journey	you	will
know	again,	and	again.	She	did	what	she	had	to	do,	and	is	now	returned	to	the
black	waters.’
But	other	mothers	didn’t	have	to	go	through	that,	did	they?	It	was	hardly	as
if	Jastara	was	blessed	with	a	life	of	greatness,	was	it?	‘Married	Gall’s	favourite
son,	though,	didn’t	she?	That	woman	has	ambitions,	if	not	for	herself,	then	for
her	get.’	Ambitions.	That	word	now	dangled	like	a	bedraggled	crow	from	a
spear	point,	a	rotted,	withered	clutch	of	shredded	feathers	and	old	blood.
‘Watch	out	for	widows.	See	how	she	took	Gall	in?	What	are	they	doing	at	night,
when	the	children	are	asleep?	Hanavat	had	better	beware,	especially	as
vulnerable	as	she	is	now,	with	a	child	about	to	drop,	and	her	husband	fled	from
her	side.	No,	look	hard	at	that	Gilk,	Widow	Jastara.’
There	were	measures	of	disgust,	and	they	came	close	and	one	recoiled,	and
then	they	came	back	a	second	time,	and	one	didn’t	recoil	quite	so	far.	And	when
they	crept	back	a	third	time,	and	a	fourth,	when	the	hand	reached	out	from	the
darkness	to	caress	her	bared	thigh,	to	probe	under	the	furs…well,	sometimes
disgust	was	like	a	mourner ’s	shroud,	suddenly	too	heavy	to	wear	any	more.
‘Look	hard	at	her	now.	You	can	see	it	in	her	eyes.’
Comfort	a	broken	man	and	you	take	the	breaking	inside.	What	woman
didn’t	know	that?	The	cracks	spread	outward,	whispering	into	everything
within	reach.	It	was	the	curse	of	drunks	and	d’bayang	addicts,	and	womanizers
and	sluts.	The	curse	of	men	who	spoiled	young	boys	and	girls	–	their	own	get,
sometimes.	Spoiled	them	for	ever.
Accusations	and	proof	and	then	all	that	shame,	kneeling	in	the	dirt	with
hands	over	his	eyes.	Or	her	eyes.	And	suddenly	all	the	disgust	comes	back,


only	now	it	tastes	familiar.	No,	more	than	familiar.	It	tastes	intimate.
Do	I	feel	soiled?	Do	I	dare	look	into	Hanavat’s	eyes?	The	question	held	her
back,	not	ten	paces	behind	Gall’s	wife.	My	mother-in-law.	Oh	yes,	look	at
Jastara	now.	But	you	forget,	she	lost	the	man	she	loved.	She	too	was	wounded.
Maybe	even	broken.	Of	course,	she	couldn’t	show	it,	couldn’t	indulge	in	it,
because	while	wife	she	may	no	longer	be,	mother	she	remains.
What	of	me?	My	pain?	His	arms	are	the	wrong	arms,	but	the	embrace	is
still	warm,	and	strong.	His	shoulder	has	taken	my	tears.	What	am	I	to	do?
So	she	held	back,	and	the	others	looked	at	her,	and	whispered	things	to
each	other.
	
‘Her	courage	has	failed	her,’	murmured	Shelemasa.
Hanavat	sighed.	‘Perhaps	tomorrow,	then.’
‘I	don’t	know	what	she	thinks	she	can	say,’	the	younger	woman	said.	‘To
make	this	right.	Cast	him	out	is	what	she	should	do.’
Hanavat	glanced	across	at	Shelemasa.	‘So	that	is	what	everyone	is	saying,
is	it?	That	hard	tone,	those	hard	words.	The	most	plentiful	coin,	spent	so	freely,
is	also	the	most	worthless	one.’
Shelemasa	frowned.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘When	you	are	judgemental,	all	the	paint	in	the	world	cannot	hide	the
ugliness	of	your	face.	The	viciousness	inside	pushes	through	and	twists	every
feature.’
‘I	–	I	am	sorry,	Hanavat.	I	was	thinking	of	you—’
‘And	you	would	take	what	you	imagine	to	be	my	feelings	and	speak	them
back	to	me.	You	proclaim	yourself	the	warrior	at	my	side,	the	line	standing
firm,	to	give	comfort	to	me	–	I	understand	all	that,	Shelemasa.	Yet	what	I	hear
from	you	–	what	I	see	in	the	eyes	of	the	others	–	has	nothing	to	do	with	me.
Have	I	asked	for	pity?	Have	I	asked	for	allies	in	this	hidden	war?	Is	there	even
any	war	at	all?	You	presume	much.’
‘She	will	not	speak	to	you—’
‘And	how	brave	would	you	be	in	her	stead?	Her	father-in-law	has	seduced
her,	taken	her	to	his	bed.	Or	she	him,	either	way	makes	no	difference.	Do	you
think	I	do	not	know	my	own	husband?	He	is	difficult	to	resist	in	the	best	of
times,	and	now	in	his	pain	and	his	need…well,	not	a	woman	or	man	here	could
defeat	his	will.	But	you	see,	you	are	all	safe.	From	him.	Freeing	you	to	cast
judgement	upon	the	one	woman	now	in	his	snare.	Not	upon	my	husband,
however	–	for	what	might	that	say	about	me?	Do	not	speak	to	me	of	sides	in
this.	There	are	none.	There	are	but	people.	People	of	all	sorts,	each	doing	what


they	can	to	get	by.’
‘And	if	what	they	do	hurts	others?	Hanavat,	will	you	martyr	yourself?	Will
you	weep	for	Jastara,	too,	who	hides	every	day	in	his	arms?’
‘Ah,	see	how	I	have	stung	you?	You	in	your	cruel	judgement.	My	husband
in	his	need.	Jastara	in	her	weakness.	They	are	one	and	all	acts	of	selfishness.
Acts	of	pushing	away.’
‘How	can	you	say	that?	I	despise	what	they’ve	done	to	you!’
‘And	it	tastes	sweet,	yes?	Listen	to	me.	I	too	am	a	widow,	now.	And	a
mother	who	has	lost	her	children.	Have	I	need	for	an	embrace?	A	stolen
moment	of	love?	Should	I	feel	hatred	for	Gall	and	Jastara,	for	finding	what	I
cannot?’
Shelemasa’s	expression	was	appalled.	Tears	streaked	down	through	the
white	paint	on	her	face.	‘Is	it	not	your	husband	you	should	look	to	for	that?’
‘While	he	still	faces	away	from	me,	I	cannot.’
‘Then	he’s	the	coward!’
‘To	look	into	my	eyes,’	Hanavat	said,	‘is	to	see	all	that	we	once	shared,	and
have	now	lost.	It	is	too	much	to	bear,	and	not	just	for	my	husband.	Yes,’	she
added,	‘I	carry	his	last	child,	and	if	that	child	is	not	his,	well,	that	is	for	me	to
know,	in	my	heart,	but	never	to	be	spoken.	For	now,	I	have	that	much	–	I	have
what	I	need	to	hold	on,	Shelemasa.	And	now,	so	does	Gall.’
The	younger	woman	shook	her	head.	‘Then	you	stand	alone,	Mother.	He
has	taken	his	son’s	widow.	That	is	unforgivable.’
‘Better,	Shelemasa.	Much	better.	You	see,	Jastara	does	not	deserve	your
hate.	Not	those	looks,	those	whispers	behind	her	back.	No,	instead,	to	be	true
sisters	to	her,	you	must	go	to	her.	Comfort	her.	And	when	you	have	done	that	–
when	all	of	you	have	done	that	–	then	I	shall	go	to	her,	and	take	her	into	my
arms.’
	
Henar	Vygulf	remembered	the	day	he	acquired	his	first	horse.	His	father,
whose	shattered	hip	five	years	earlier	had	ended	his	riding	days,	had	limped	at
his	side,	using	his	cane,	as	they	made	their	way	out	to	the	pasture.	A	new	herd
had	been	culled	from	the	wild	herds	of	the	high	mountain	plateaus,	and	twentythree	of	the	magnificent	beasts	now	moved	restlessly	about	in	the	enclosure.
The	sun	was	high,	shrinking	shadows	underfoot,	and	the	wind	swept	steady
down	the	slopes,	combing	the	high	grasses,	warm	and	sweet	with	the	flavours
of	early	autumn.	Henar	was	nine	years	old.
‘Will	one	see	me?’	he’d	asked	his	father.	‘Will	one	choose	me?’
The	tall	Bluerose	horse-breeder	looked	down,	dark	brows	rising.	‘It’s	that


new	maid,	isn’t	it?	The	one	with	the	watermelon	tits	and	wide	eyes.	From	the
coast,	yes?	Filling	your	head	with	all	sorts	of	rubbish.’
‘But—’
‘There’s	not	a	horse	in	the	wide	world,	Henar,	happy	to	choose	a	rider.	Not
one	beast	eager	to	serve.	Not	one	is	delighted	at	being	broken,	its	will	beaten
down.	Are	they	any	different	from	you,	or	me?’
‘But	dogs—’
‘By	the	Black-Winged	Lord,	Henar,	dogs	are	bred	to	be	four-legged	slaves.
Ever	seen	a	wolf	smile?	Trust	me,	you	don’t	want	to.	Ever.	They	smile	right
before	they	lunge	for	your	throat.	Never	mind	dogs.’	He	pointed	with	his	cane.
‘Those	animals	are	wild.	They	have	lived	in	utter	freedom.	So,	see	one	you
like?’
‘That	piebald	one,	off	to	the	left	on	its	own.’
His	father	grunted.	‘A	young	stallion.	Not	yet	strong	enough	to	contest	the
ranks.	Not	bad,	Henar.	But	I’m…well,	surprised.	Even	from	here,	one	animal
stands	out.	Really	stands	out.	You’re	old	enough,	have	been	around	me	enough,
too.	I	would’ve	thought	you’d	see	straight	off—’
‘I	did,	Father.’
‘What	is	it,	then?	Do	you	feel	you	do	not	deserve	the	best	out	there?’
‘Not	if	it	means	breaking	them.’
His	father ’s	head	had	rocked	back	then,	and	he’d	laughed.	Loud	enough	to
startle	the	herd.
Recalling	that	moment	of	his	youth,	the	huge	warrior	smiled.	Remember
that	day,	Father?	I	bet	you	do.	And	if	you	could	see	me	now.	See	the	woman
walking	at	my	side.	Why,	I	can	almost	hear	that	beautiful	roar	of	your	laughter.
One	day,	Father,	I	will	bring	her	to	you.	This	wild,	free	woman.	We’ll	step
on	to	that	long	white	road,	walk	between	the	trees	–	they	must	be	big	by	now	–
and	up	through	the	estate	gate.
I’ll	see	you	standing	by	the	front	entrance,	like	a	statue	commanding	the
stone	itself.	New	lines	on	your	face,	but	that	hooked	grin	still	there,	in	a	beard
now	gone	grey.	You’re	leaning	on	your	cane,	and	I	can	smell	horses	–	like	a
flower’s	heady	scent	on	the	air,	and	that	scent	will	tell	me	that	I’ve	come	home.
I’ll	see	you	studying	her,	noting	her	height,	her	lithe	confidence,	the
boldness	in	her	eyes.	And	you’ll	wonder	if	she’s	broken	me	–	not	the	other	way
round	–	you	can	see	that.	Not	the	other	way	round.	But	then	you’ll	look	into	my
eyes,	and	your	smile	will	broaden.
And	you’ll	tilt	back	that	majestic	head.	And	laugh	to	the	heavens.
It	will	be	the	sweetest	sound	in	the	world.	It	will	be	the	voice	of	our
triumph.	All	of	us.	You,	me,	her.


Father,	I	do	miss	you.
Lostara’s	calloused	hand	found	his	own,	and	he	took	some	of	her	weight	as
she	leaned	one	shoulder	against	him.	‘Bless	Brys	Beddict,’	she	said	under	her
breath.
Henar	nodded.	‘I	suspect	a	streak	of	the	sentimental	in	my	commander.’
‘Be	glad	of	it.	I	am.’
‘It	was…unexpected.’
‘Why?	I	fought	for	you,	Henar.	Not	the	Adjunct.	You.	He	understood—’
‘No,	not	all	that,	beloved.	All…this.	Where	we	have	found	ourselves.	And
how	we	have	found	each	other,	for	that	matter.’
She	looked	up	at	the	Strangers	in	the	night	sky.	‘So,	he	gives	us	what	time
there’s	left	to	us.	Less	sentimental,	then,	more…pity.	You’ve	a	dour	streak,
Henar	–	I	think	I	prefer	Brys’s	sentimental	one.	Maybe	I’ll	get	rid	of	you	and
ride	back	to	him.’
‘You’d	have	to	fight	Aranict	for	him,	I	should	think.’
‘Oh,	you’re	right,	and	I	couldn’t	do	that.	Wouldn’t.	I	like	her	far	too	much.
Well	then,	seems	I’m	saddled	with	you.’
He	smiled.	Saddled.	Hah.
‘Henar.’
‘Yes?’
‘I	fear	we	won’t	be	coming	back	from	this	journey.’
He	nodded,	not	because	he	agreed	with	her,	but	because	he	knew	what	she
feared.
‘We’re	going	to	die,’	she	said.	‘In	fact,	we	may	not	even	make	it	across	this
desert.’
‘There	is	that	risk.’
‘It’s	hardly	fair.’
‘I	had	a	maid,	once,	at	the	country	estate.	Watermelon	tits	and	big	eyes—’
‘What?’
‘My	father	is	terrible	with	names.	So	he	came	up	with,	er,	memorable
descriptions.	Anyway,	she	used	to	tell	me	stories	at	night.	Long,	rambling	tales
of	heroes.	Loves	lost,	loves	won.	She’d	make	every	ending	sweet.	To	make	the
night’s	dreams	the	same,	you	see?’
‘Just	what	a	child	needs.’
‘I	suppose.	But	those	stories	weren’t	for	me.	They	were	for	her.	She	was
from	the	coast,	and	she’d	left	behind	a	man	she	loved	–	this	was	Lether,	don’t
forget,	and	her	whole	community	was	trapped	in	the	Indebted	way	of	life.	It’s
why	she	came	to	work	for	our	family.	As	for	the	young	man,	well,	he	was	sent
to	sea.’	He	was	silent	for	a	moment,	remembering,	and	then	he	said,	‘Every


night,	she	told	me	how	she	wanted	her	life	to	turn	out	–	though	of	course	I
didn’t	realize	that	at	the	time.	But	the	truth	of	it	was,	she	wanted	that	happy
ending.	She	needed	to	believe	in	it.	For	her,	and	for	everyone	else.’
Lostara	sighed.	‘What	happened	to	her?’
‘As	far	as	I	know,	she’s	still	there,	at	the	country	estate.’
‘Are	you	trying	to	break	my	heart,	Henar?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘My	father	worked	the	system	as	best	he	could,	and	he
was	not	unkind	with	his	Indebted.	About	a	year	before	I	left	to	train	with	the
Lancers,	watermelon	tits	with	big	eyes	married	the	son	of	one	of	our	horsetrainers.	My	last	vision	of	her,	her	belly	was	out	to	here	and	those	tits	were
even	bigger.’
‘She’d	given	up	on	her	man	from	the	sea,	then.	Well,	probably	wise,	I
suppose.	Part	of	growing	up.’
Henar	eyed	her,	and	then	away,	out	over	the	rocky	landscape.	‘I	think	about
her,	every	now	and	then.’	He	grinned.	‘I	even	used	to	fantasize	about	her,	yes,
in	the	way	young	men	will	do.’	The	grin	faded.	‘But	mostly	I	see	her	sitting	on
the	edge	of	the	bed,	her	hands	flying	and	her	eyes	getting	wider,	and	in	that	bed
is	her	own	child.	A	boy.	Who	will	dream	sweet	dreams.	And	when	the	lantern	is
turned	down,	when	she’s	standing	by	the	door	to	his	room,	that’s	when	the	tears
will	run	down	her	cheeks.	And	she’ll	remember	a	young	man	on	the	edge	of
the	sea.’	Lostara’s	breathing	had	changed,	somehow,	and	her	face	was	hidden
from	his	view.	‘My	love?’
Her	reply	was	muffled.	‘It’s	all	right.	Henar,	you	keep	surprising	me.
That’s	all.’
‘We’ll	survive	this,	Lostara	Yil,’	he	said.	‘And	one	day	I	will	lead	you	by
the	hand	up	to	my	father ’s	house.	And	we’ll	see	him,	standing	there,	waiting
for	us.	And	he	will	laugh.’
She	looked	up,	wiping	at	her	cheeks.	‘Laugh?’
‘There	are	pleasures	in	the	world,	Lostara	Yil,	that	go	beyond	words.’	I
heard	one	of	those	pleasures	once.	And	I	will	hear	it	again.	I	will.
	
‘Before	I	reached	the	lofty	position	of	inexhaustible	masturbation	that	is
Demidrek	Septarch	of	the	Great	Temple,’	Banaschar	was	saying,	‘I	had	to
follow	the	same	rituals	as	everyone	else.	And	one	of	those	rituals	was	to
counsel	commoners	–	who	knows	why	they’d	ever	seek	out	a	priest	of	the
Autumn	Worm,	but	then,	the	truth	of	it	is,	the	real	and	true	function	of	priests
of	all	colours	is	simply	that	of	listening	to	a	litany	of	moans,	fears	and
confessions,	all	for	the	betterment	of	someone’s	soul	–	never	could	figure	out


whose,	but	no	matter.’	He	paused.	‘Are	you	actually	listening,	Adjunct?’
‘It	appears	that	I	have	little	choice,’	she	replied.
The	Glass	Desert	stretched	ahead	of	them.	A	small	flanking	troop,	scouts,
he	assumed,	were	slightly	ahead	and	to	the	left	–	north	–	of	the	vanguard,
moving	on	foot	as	was	everyone	else.	But	directly	before	Banaschar	and	the
Adjunct	there	stretched	nothing	but	a	broken	plain	studded	with	crystals,
beneath	a	ghoulish	sky.
The	ex-priest	shrugged.	‘Now	isn’t	this	an	interesting	turn.	Blessed	woman,
will	you	hear	my	tales	of	mortal	woe?	Will	you	give	counsel?’
The	look	she	cast	at	him	was	unreadable	and	it	occurred	to	him,	an	instant
later,	that	it	was	just	as	well.
He	cleared	his	throat.	‘Occasionally,	one	of	them	would	complain.	About
me.	Or,	rather,	about	us	sanctimonious	shits	in	these	ridiculous	robes	and
whatnot.	You	know	what	they’d	be	so	irritated	about?	I’ll	tell	you.	Love.	That’s
what.’
A	second	glance,	even	briefer	than	the	first	one.
He	nodded.	‘Precisely.	They	asked:	“You,	priest	–	you,	with	that	hand
beneath	the	vestments	–	what	in	Hood’s	name	do	you	know	about	love?	More
to	the	point,	what	do	you	know	about	romance?”	You	see,	most	people	end	up
moaning	about	relationships.	More	than	being	poor,	or	lame	or	sick,	more
than	any	other	topic	you	could	imagine.	Lovers,	husbands,	wives,	strangers,
sisters	–	endless	confessions	and	desires	and	betrayals	and	all	the	rest.	That’s
why	the	question	would	eventually	come	round	–	being	priests	we’d	excused
ourselves	from	the	whole	mess.	Hardly	a	strong	position	from	which	to
dispense	inane	truisms	passing	as	advice.	Do	you	follow	me	so	far,	Adjunct?’
‘Have	you	nothing	to	drink,	Banaschar?’
He	kicked	at	a	cluster	of	crystals,	expecting	them	to	break.	They	didn’t.
Cursing	in	pain	under	his	breath,	he	hobbled	for	a	few	strides.	‘What	did	I
know	about	romance?	Nothing.	But,	after	enough	years	of	listening	to	every
possible	iteration	on	the	subject,	ah,	eventually	things	start	getting	clearer.’
‘Do	they	now?’
‘They	do,	Adjunct.	Shall	I	expound	on	love	and	romance?’
‘I’d	rather	you—’
‘It’s	actually	a	mathematical	exercise,’	he	said.	‘Romance	is	the	negotiation
of	possibilities,	towards	that	elusive	prize	called	love.	There,	you	see?	I	wager
you	expected	me	to	go	on	and	on,	didn’t	you?	But	I’m	done.	Done	discussing
love	and	romance.’
‘Your	description	lacks	something,	Banaschar.’
‘It	lacks	everything,	Adjunct.	All	that	confuses	and	clouds,	that	makes


murky	what	is	in	fact	both	simple	and	stupidly	elegant.	Or	elegantly	stupid,
depending	on	your	attitude	to	the	subject.’
They	continued	on,	neither	speaking,	for	some	time.	The	clatter	and	groan
of	the	column	behind	them	was	incessant,	but	apart	from	a	lone	burst	of
laughter	a	while	back	there	was	none	of	the	ribald	songs	and	chants,	the
running	jests	or	arguments.	While	it	was	true	that	the	Adjunct	had	set	a	stiff
pace,	Banaschar	knew	that	these	soldiers	were	hardened	enough	to	think	little
of	it.	The	quiet	was	unnerving.
Got	a	desert	to	cross.	It’s	cold	and	it’s	not	nearly	as	dark	as	it	should	be.
And	that	alien	glow	whispers	down	on	us.	If	I	listen	carefully	enough,	I	can
hear	words.	Drifting	down.	In	all	the	languages	of	the	world	–	but	not	this
world,	of	course.	Some	other	one,	where	faces	lift	hopefully	to	the	heavens.	‘Are
you	there?’	they	ask.	And	the	sky	answers	not.
While	here	I	walk.	Here	I	look	up	and	I	ask:	‘Are	you	there?’	and	down
come	the	voices.	‘Yes.	We	are	here.	Just…reach.’
‘I	was	a	sober	priest	back	then,’	he	said.	‘A	serious	one.	I	listened.	I
counselled.’
Eventually,	she	looked	over,	but	said	nothing.
	
Fiddler	glanced	to	the	right.	Southward,	forty	paces	distant,	the	head	of	the
column.	The	Adjunct.	Beside	her	the	priest.	Behind	the	two	of	them,	a	pair	of
Fists.
Eight	Khundryl	youths	walked	with	Fiddler,	ushered	out	from	under	their
mother ’s	skirts.	They’d	spotted	him	walking	alone	and	had	drawn	closer.
Curious,	maybe.	Or	wanting	to	be	doing	something	that	might	be	important.
Scouting,	guarding	the	flank.
He	didn’t	send	them	away.	Too	many	had	that	lost,	hopeful	look	in	their
eyes.	Dead	fathers,	brothers,	mothers,	sisters.	Massive	absences	through	which
winds	howled.	Now	they	hovered,	flanking	him	as	if	he	was	the	column	itself.
Fiddler	was	silent	–	and	they’d	taken	up	that	silence	as	if	it	would	make
them	older	–	so	the	only	sounds	were	the	stones	shifting	underfoot,	the	scuff	of
moccasins,	the	thump	of	his	boots.	And	the	grind	of	the	column.
He’d	seen	the	map.	He	knew	what	lay	ahead.	Only	the	impossible.	Without
water,	we	will	never	leave	this	desert.	Without	water,	all	of	her	plans	die	here.
And	the	gods	will	close	like	jackals,	and	then	the	Elder	Gods	will	show	their
hand,	and	blood	will	spill.
The	Crippled	God	will	suffer	terribly	–	all	the	pain	and	anguish	he	has
known	up	to	now	will	be	nothing	but	prelude.	They	will	feed	on	his	agony	and


they	will	feed	for	a	long,	long	time.
On	your	agony,	Fallen	One.	You	are	in	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Your	House	is
sanctified.	If	we	fail,	that	decision	will	prove	your	gravest	error.	It	will	trap	you
here.	It	will	make	suffering	your	holy	writ	–	oh,	many	will	flock	to	you.	No	one
likes	to	suffer	in	isolation,	and	no	one	likes	to	suffer	for	no	reason.	You	will
answer	both,	and	make	of	them	an	illness.	Of	body,	of	spirit.	Even	as	the
torturing	of	your	soul	goes	on,	and	on.
I	never	said	I’d	like	you,	Fallen	One.	But	then,	you	never	said	I	had	to.	Not
me,	not	the	Adjunct,	not	any	of	us.	You	just	asked	us	to	do	what’s	right.	We	said
yes.	And	it’s	done.	But	bear	in	mind,	we’re	mortal,	and	in	this	war	to	come,
we’re	fragile	–	among	all	the	players,	we’re	the	most	vulnerable.
Maybe	that	fits.	Maybe	it’s	only	right	that	we	should	be	the	ones	to	raise
your	standard,	Fallen	One.	And	ignorant	historians	will	write	of	us,	in	the	guise
of	knowledge.	They	will	argue	over	our	purpose	–	the	things	we	sought	to	do.
They	will	overturn	every	boulder,	every	barrow	stone,	seeking	our	motives.
Looking	for	hints	of	ambition.
They	will	compose	a	Book	of	the	Fallen.
And	then	argue	over	its	significance.	In	the	guise	of	knowledge	–	but	truly,
what	will	they	know?	Of	each	of	us?	From	that	distance,	from	that	cold,	cold
distance	–	you’d	have	to	squint.	You’d	have	to	look	hard.
Because	we’re	thin	on	the	ground.
So	very…thin.
Children	always	made	him	feel	awkward.	Choices	he’d	put	aside,	futures
he’d	long	ago	surrendered.	And	looking	at	them	left	him	feeling	guilty.	They
were	crimes	of	necessity,	each	time	I	turned	away.	Each	time	we	all	did.
Whiskeyjack,	remember	once	when	we	stood	on	the	ramparts	at	Mock’s	Hold?
Laseen	had	just	stepped	out	from…the	shadows.	There	was	a	child,	some	son	of
some	merchant.	He	was	bold.	You	told	him	something,	Whiskeyjack.	Some
advice.	What	was	it?	I	can’t	recall.	I	don’t	even	know	why	I’m	remembering	any
of	it.
Mothers	were	looking	on	from	that	column	–	their	eyes	were	on	their
children,	these	young	legacies,	and	would	grip	tight	as	talons	if	they	could.	But
spaces	now	gape,	and	the	children	edge	ever	closer	to	them,	to	fill	what	has
been	lost.	And	the	mothers	tell	themselves	it	will	be	enough,	it	must	be	enough.
Just	as	I	tell	you	now,	Fallen	One,	whatever	we	manage	to	do,	it	will	have
to	be	enough.	We	will	bring	this	book	to	an	end,	one	way	or	another.
And	one	more	thing.	Something	I	only	realized	today,	when	I	chanced	to
glance	across	and	see	her,	standing	there,	moments	from	signalling	the
beginning	of	this	march.	From	the	very	first,	we	have	lived	the	tale	of	the


Adjunct.	First	it	was	Lorn,	back	in	Darujhistan.	And	now	it	is	Tavore	Paran.
The	Adjunct	never	stands	in	the	centre.	She	stands	to	one	side.	Always.	The
truth	of	that	is	right	there,	in	her	title	–	which	she	will	not	relinquish.	So,	what
does	it	mean?	Ah,	Fallen	One,	it	means	this:	she	will	do	what	she	has	to	do,	but
your	life	is	not	in	her	hands.
I	see	that	now.
Fallen	One,	your	life	is	in	the	hands	of	a	murderer	of	Malazan	marines	and
heavies.
Your	life	is	in	my	hands.
And	soon	she	will	send	us	on	our	way.
In	that	Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen,	the	historians	will	write	of	our
suffering,	and	they	will	speak	of	it	as	the	suffering	of	those	who	served	the
Crippled	God.	As	something…fitting.	And	for	our	seeming	fanaticism	they	will
dismiss	all	that	we	were,	and	think	only	of	what	we	achieved.	Or	failed	to
achieve.
And	in	so	doing,	they	will	miss	the	whole	fucking	point.
Fallen	One,	we	are	all	your	children.


Chapter	Twelve

Word	came,	and	in	the	ashes	I	finally	straightened	and	looked	upon
those	few	of	my	children	left	standing.	The	Throne	of	Shadows	was	no
more	and	out	from	the	twilight	flew	dragons,	filling	the	air	with	cries
of	rage	and	frustration.
I	knew	then	that	he	had	done	it.	He	had	cheated	them	all,	but	at	what
cost?	I	looked	at	the	heaps	of	corpses,	a	monstrous	high	water	mark
upon	this	cursed	strand.	Blood	ran	in	streams	down	the	slope	to	where
crimson-streaked	light	cascaded,	where	all	the	wounds	still	gaped.
Another	wave	was	coming.	We	could	not	hold.
Down	from	the	forest,	at	that	moment	of	deepest	despair,	came	a
trio	of	figures.	I	faced	them,	and	from	my	ravaged	soul	there	was	born
hope’s	glimmer…
Excerpt	
Book	Eleven	
Throne,	Sceptre	and	Crown	
Rise	Hara
(Coral	Trove)
	of	the	strand	shocked	her,
tilting	and	rocking	before	her	eyes.	She	fell	to	her	knees,	and	then	on	to	her
side.	She	let	go	of	her	sword	but	the	grip	clung	to	her	hand	a	moment	longer,
before	sobbing	loose.	With	her	other	hand	she	tugged	off	her	helm.	The	blade
cut	was	a	slit	scoring	right	through	the	dented	iron.	Strands	of	bloody	hair	and
the	tufted	padding	of	her	under-helm	filled	the	gap.
She	let	her	head	drop	back,	the	terrible	sounds	of	battle	fading.	Overhead
the	sky	spun.	Torn	fragments	of	light	drifted	in	the	gloom.	Ah,	Brev.	He	warned
us.	In	that	way	of	his,	he	warned	us.	Back	and	forth	he	walked,	drawing	and
sheathing	and	drawing	that	damned	sword.	Over	and	over	again.
You	can	think	about	what’s	to	come.	You	can	try	and	picture	it	in	your	mind.
What	warriors	did.	What	soldiers	walked	into.	But	none	of	it	readies	you.	None
of	it.
PITHY	STAGGERED	CLEAR,	SHEATHED	IN	BLOOD.	THE	BLISTERING	WHITE


The	screaming	seemed	far	away	now.	The	surge	and	terrible	clatter,	the
maw	of	the	breach	a	mass	of	blades,	spear	and	sword,	knife	and	axe,	and	all
that	mouth	did	was	chew	people	to	bloody	bits,	those	iron	fangs	clashing	and
grinding	–	there	was	no	end	to	its	appetite.
So	long	as	there’re	more	people	to	shove	into	it.
Her	body	felt	hot,	the	sweaty	gambeson	chafing	under	her	arms.	She	could
smell	her	own	reek.
So	we	called	ourselves	captains,	did	we,	Brev?	Good	at	giving	orders.	Good
at	standing	around	looking	important.	There	with	the	prince.	With	his	knot	of
elite	soldiers	he	now	calls	his	Watch.	Me	and	you,	Brevity,	we	were	officers.
In	an	army	of	fools.
Blood	ran	warm	to	pool	in	her	ears,	first	the	one	on	the	left,	then	the	one
on	the	right.	Other	sounds	were	drowned	in	the	deluge.	Is	that	the	ocean	I’m
hearing?	An	ocean	of	blood?	Is	this,	I	wonder,	the	last	thing	we	ever	hear?
Dear	ocean,	then,	call	my	soul.	I	would	swim	the	waters	again.	Let	me	swim	the
waters	again.
Something	trembled	the	sands	beneath	her.	No,	they	won’t	quit.	They	want
through.	Just	like	he	said.
She	was	no	captain.	She	knew	nothing	about	what	being	a	real	captain
meant.	From	that	first	moment,	when	the	breach	opened,	when	light	flared	out
like	a	tongue	of	fire,	and	all	those	voices	from	beyond	the	barrier	ripped
through…
	
She	saw	Yedan	Derryg	marching	down	to	the	breach.	His	Watch	had	been
arrayed,	positioned	as	squad	leaders	in	the	forward	line	of	Letherii	volunteers.
And	there	was	Withal,	moving	quickly	back	up	the	ravaged	slope,	into	the
forest.	Word	to	the	queen	of	Kharkanas:	the	battle	begins.
Pithy’s	attention	returned	to	the	breach.	Stick	the	mercenaries	to	the	front,
in	a	place	where	there’s	no	retreat	except	through	your	more	loyal	soldiers.
They’re	there	for	the	loot	to	come.	But	loot	never	held	any	man	or	woman,	not
for	long,	not	when	it	all	rips	open.	These	Letherii	islanders	–	they’re	my	people.
Mine.
She	took	up	her	sword	as	she	ran	down	to	that	first	high	berm.	The	weapon
in	her	hand	never	felt	right.	It	frightened	her,	in	fact.	She	dreaded	spitting
herself	as	much	as	she	did	some	snarling	enemy’s	spear	thrust.	Where	was
Brevity?	Somewhere	in	the	rush	–	we’re	like	a	kicked-over	nest	of	termites.
Someone	was	wailing	–	a	mother	whose	child	has	just	pulled	loose	from
her	embrace,	has	just	vanished	into	the	press	with	a	sword	and	shield,	a	spear


or	a	pike.	It’s	a	scene	of	the	world.	Every	world.	On	the	other	side	of	the
barrier,	some	mother	screams	her	fear,	loses	sight	of	her	cherished	one.	She
stumbled,	dropped	to	one	knee,	vomited	into	the	crushed	bones	of	the	beach.
Coughing,	spitting,	feeling	a	strange	hollowness	inside,	blossoming	outward,
until	it	felt	as	if	her	brain	was	attached	to	nothing,	floating	free	of	her	body.
She	could	hear	a	roar.	The	sound	of	battle	–	no,	she’d	never	heard	it
before,	not	like	this.	The	flight	from	the	coast	back	in	Lether	had	been	nothing
like	this.	Back	then,	the	voices	and	the	will	had	come	from	pain	and	fear,	from
broken	needs.	It	had	possessed	a	plaintive	timbre.	Against	the	discipline	of
Yedan	Derryg	and	his	elites,	those	wretched	foes	had	not	stood	a	chance.
This	was	different.	The	sound	that	erupted	from	the	breach	was	by	itself
enough	to	drive	the	defenders	back	a	step.	Triumph	and	rage	–	they	were
through!	At	last,	through!	And	the	hated	enemy	would	not	stop	them,	would	not
even	slow	them.	With	the	mass	of	their	comrades	driving	them	from	behind,
with	the	slashing	spear	points	dropping	horizontal	before	them,	the	Tiste
Liosan	poured	from	the	wound.
Pithy	forced	herself	back	on	to	her	feet,	forced	herself	forward.	She	was
still	floating	free,	but	her	vision	seemed	impossibly	sharp.	She	saw	the	front
line	of	Letherii	lifting	bizarrely	into	the	air,	saw	their	heads	tilting	back,	their
mouths	wide	open.	Lifted	on	the	spears	of	the	enemy.
The	sword	slipped	from	her	hand.	Numbed,	confused,	she	spun	to	retrieve
it.	Someone	collided	with	her,	knocked	her	down.	She	coughed	on	a	lungful	of
dusty	sand.	Where	was	her	sword?	There.	She	crawled	over	to	it.	The	grip	was
gritty,	biting	into	her	palm.	Pithy	wiped	at	her	hand.	Looked	over	at	the	breach.
Somehow,	the	Letherii	line	was	still	there.	They	were	fighting	back.	They
were	holding	the	Liosan	on	the	berm’s	slope.	The	press	from	their	own	side
was	vicious,	pushing	to	hold	and	then	pushing	to	advance.	Gaps	opened	here
and	there	and	torn	bodies	were	carried	back	out,	limbs	dragging.
The	two	witches	were	now	among	the	wounded.	Each	held	a	dagger	in	one
hand.	Pithy	watched	Skwish	kneel	beside	an	injured	woman,	leaning	close	to
examine	a	wound.	With	a	shake	of	her	head	she	slid	the	knife	into	the	Letherii’s
chest,	straight	into	her	heart,	then	moved	on	to	the	next	casualty.
You	fucking	murderers.
Pully	was	stuffing	bandages	into	a	hole	in	a	man’s	side,	shouting	for
stretcher-bearers.	A	second	station	for	the	wounded	was	forming	higher	up	the
strand,	where	cutters	worked	to	staunch	bleeding,	stitch	gashes	and	saw	off
ruined	limbs.	Nearby	was	a	pit	dug	into	the	sand,	for	those	severed	limbs	and
for	those	wounded	no	one	could	save.
It’s…organized.	They	planned	for	this.	Yes,	I	remember	now.	We	all	planned


for	this.	For	what’s	happening	right	now.
Pithy	scrambled	forward	again.	‘They’re	holding,’	she	gasped.	‘They’re
holding!’
‘Captain!’
A	boy	ran	up	to	her.	She’d	never	seen	him	before.	He	was	frighteningly
thin,	with	sores	crusting	his	mouth.	A	Letherii.	‘Who	sent	you?’	she	demanded.
‘Corporal	Nithe	of	the	Watch,	right	anchor,	has	been	wounded	and	pulled
from	the	line,	sir.	The	prince	needs	you	to	immediately	take	up	command	of
those	flank	squads,	sir.’
Errant’s	push.	She	licked	her	lips.	Her	bladder	was	stinging	as	if
everything	it	held	had	turned	into	acid.	She	looked	down	at	her	sword.
‘Sir?’
The	damned	boy	was	staring	at	her.	Those	weeping	sores	around	his
mouth,	the	smears	on	his	face.	She	could	see	that	he	was	terrified.	An	orphan
whose	new	family	was	being	killed	before	his	very	eyes.	He	had	carried	the
prince’s	words.	He	had	found	her,	done	what	Yedan	had	asked	of	him.	He	was
doing	what	he	was	supposed	to	be	doing.	Following	orders.	Holding	on	to	duty,
as	desperate	as	the	rest	of	us.	Stop	looking	at	me	like	that.	‘Lead	me	through,’
she	said.
And	like	a	boy	eager	for	the	beach,	he	took	her	hand	and	led	her	forward.
	
The	smell	of	the	heaving	press	made	her	choke.	The	sweat	and	spewed	vomit,
the	fear	and	the	shit	and	the	piss.	How	could	anyone	fight	in	this?	Pithy	almost
pulled	herself	loose	from	the	boy’s	cold	grip.	But	now	hands	were	pushing	at
her	from	behind.	Faces	lunged	close,	shouting	things.	Eyes	met	her	own,	filled
with	pleading.	Panic	roiled	in	like	a	grey,	grainy	cloud.
Her	knees	found	a	figure	down	on	all	fours.	As	she	struggled	to	step	over
him,	she	looked	down.	Unwounded	by	any	weapon	but	terror	itself.	The
realization	triggered	a	surge	of	fury.	She	halted	and	twisted	round.	‘Get	up,	you
worthless	pile	of	shit!	They’re	dying	up	there!	For	you!	On	your	feet!’	And	this
time	she	managed	to	prise	her	hand	loose	from	the	boy’s.	Reaching	down,	she
took	the	man	by	the	hair.	‘Stand	up!	You’re	with	me	–	let’s	go!’
Those	close	by	were	watching.	Staring.	She	saw	things	harden	in	their	eyes
and	wondered	what	that	was	about.	‘Lead	on,	lad!	Front	line,	quick!	You,
soldier,	don’t	even	think	of	pullin’	back!’
Listen	to	me!	Like	I	know	what	I’m	doing.	Like	I	done	this	before.
She	heard	voices	around	her	now.
‘Look,	Captain’s	here—’


‘Cap’n	Pithy	–	see	her?	There—’
‘She	choked	a	coward—’
‘Killed	him!’
‘Pithy	killed	a	coward	–	right	in	front	of	my	eyes!’
‘Gods	below,’	she	muttered.	The	boy	glanced	back	at	her	as	he	struggled	to
push	between	two	Letherii	men.	His	eyes	were	suddenly	bright.
And	then,	all	at	once,	she	could	see	spear	points,	flashing	as	they	rocked	up
from	impacts	with	shields,	lashing	out,	clashing	with	swords	and	Andiian
pikes.	For	the	first	time,	she	caught	a	glimpse	of	a	Liosan	face.	Long,	narrow,
stretched	–	but	–	Errant!	They	look	like	the	Andii!	They	look	just	like	them!
White-skinned	instead	of	black-skinned.	Is	that	it?	Is	that	the	only	fucking
difference?
Those	eyes	locked	on	her	own,	pale	blue	and	frighteningly	young,	above
the	struggling	press	between	them.	And	she	saw	his	fear.	His	terrible,
horrifying	fear.	‘No,’	she	murmured.	Don’t	do	this.	Go	back.	Please—
An	axe	blade	slammed	into	the	side	of	the	Liosan’s	head.	Bones	folded	in
around	sundered	flesh.	Blood	sprayed	from	eye,	nose	and	mouth.	The	lone
visible	eye	still	staring	at	her	suddenly	went	blank,	sightless,	and	he	fell	down,
out	of	her	sight.
Pithy	moaned.	Tears	rose	inside	her.	Her	sinuses	closed	up,	forcing	her
breaths	to	her	mouth	–	she	couldn’t	get	enough	air.	She	could	barely	see
through	the	blur.	And	the	light	was	pouring	down,	mottled	by	shadows.
Pouring	down	and	down—
A	Letherii	woman	reached	back	and	closed	a	bloody	grip	on	her	wrist.
Pulling	her	forward.	‘Corporal	Nithe	said	he’d	be	back	soon,	sir.’
Was	this	going	to	be	a	conversation?	She	could	see	the	fighting	–	right
there,	almost	within	reach.	Where	had	the	boy	gone?	Nowhere	in	sight.	Her
coward?	There,	suddenly	in	the	front	line	and	screaming	as	he	brought	a	shield
round	to	block	a	savage	thrust.	‘What	happened	to	him?’
‘Captain?’
‘Nithe!	What	happened	to	him?’
‘Got	a	hand	cut	off,	sir.	Went	to	get	it	scabbed	–	said	he’d	be	back	soon.’
The	woman	faced	front	again,	raised	her	voice.	‘Captain	Pithy’s	in	command!’
No	one	seemed	to	heed	that	announcement.
And	then	Pithy	felt	the	air	change,	as	if	her	ears	had	popped.	Something
seethed,	up	around	her,	and	then	outward.	From	nowhere	and	everywhere	there
came	a	roar,	and	the	flank	lurched,	heaved	into	the	face	of	the	Liosan	front.
As	if	caught	in	a	current,	Pithy	was	pulled	forward.
She	stepped	on	something	that	rolled	underfoot.	Looked	down.


The	boy	stared	up	at	her.	But	no,	he	was	staring	up	at	nothing.	Around	his
gaping	mouth,	the	sores	were	black	with	dirt.
No,	clean	those	up—
And	then	the	bodies	underfoot	were	Liosan,	twisted,	curled	round	welters
of	blood	and	gaping	wounds.	Broken	spear	shafts,	soiled	clothing.	Empty
faces.
She	could	hear	other	roars,	and	she	knew	–	she	knew	–	that	the	entire
Letherii	line	was	driving	forward,	one	section	after	another.	Go	back	to	your
hole,	you	poor	miserable	dogs!	‘Go	back!’	she	shouted.	‘Back!	This	is	ours!
This	is	ours!’
And	all	at	once,	that	cry	was	taken	up.
She	saw	the	Liosan	reel	before	it,	saw	the	enemy	ranks	buckling	as	the
Letherii	surged	into	them,	again	and	again.
A	sudden	gap	before	her.	A	Liosan,	settling	on	one	knee,	one	shoulder
sliced	open,	down	through	the	joint,	the	arm	hanging.	Seeing	her,	he	struggled
to	rise.	He	was	old,	his	face	lined,	and	the	look	in	his	eyes	was	bleak.
Pithy’s	sword	swing	was	awkward,	but	all	of	her	strength	was	behind	it.
She	clipped	the	edge	of	his	jaw	before	the	blade	cut	deep	into	his	neck.	Blood
spurted,	gushed	all	over	her.	Shocked	by	the	hot	deluge,	she	stepped	back—
And	that	one	step	saved	her	life.	A	spear	thrust	caught	her	head,	bit	into	her
helm.	She	felt	the	blade	edge	cut	into	her	scalp,	grind	along	the	bone	of	her
skull	–	and	then	she	was	pulled	away.
A	burly	man	dragged	her	close.	‘Never	mind	that	–	y’still	got	your	head,
don’t	you?	Seen	my	sword?’	he	asked.	‘I	dropped	the	fucker	–	you’ll	know	it
’cause	it’s	still	in	my	hand	–	never	mind—’	He	bent	down	and	came	up	with	a
wood-cutter ’s	axe.	‘Errant’s	horse-humped	earhole,	what	the	fuck	is	this?
Never	mind	–	to	the	back	line	with	you,	Captain	Pithy.	I	started	this	and	I	mean
to	finish	it	up.’
Nithe?	Never	Mind	Nithe?	Is	that	what	they	call	you?
‘This	is	ours!’	The	chant	went	on	and	on.
Hands	took	hold	of	her.	She	was	being	pulled	out.	Her	first	engagement
against	the	Liosan.	Her	first	taste	–	of	everything.	The	slaughter.	The	hurt.	The
anger.	The	falling	light.	All	of	it.	All	of	it.	Oh,	gods,	all	of	it!
Suddenly	she	stumbled	clear.
Winced	at	the	blinding	glare	of	the	strand,	as	tendrils	of	agonizing	light
writhed	overhead.	Down,	on	to	her	knees.	Down,	on	to	her	side.	Sword	and
helmet	away.	Sounds,	dimming,	fading…
Someone	drove	a	pair	of	knees	against	her	left	hip.	Blinking,	she	looked
up	at	Skwish,	saw	the	knife	in	the	witch’s	gore-drenched	left	hand.	‘Don’t	even


think	it,’	Pithy	said	in	a	growl.
The	witch	grinned.
Then	was	gone.
	
The	last	end	of	the	rout,	a	scattering	of	Liosan,	converging	as	they	dragged
wounded	comrades	back	through	the	breach,	vanishing	into	blinding	light.
Yedan	Derryg’s	sword	was	unaccountably	heavy	in	his	hand,	so	he	let	the	tip
crunch	down	into	the	soaked	strand.
‘Prince!’
‘Address	that	front	line,	Sergeant	–	get	our	wounded	and	dead	out	of	there.’
He	glared	at	the	breach.	The	blackened,	weeping	mar	in	Lightfall.	Too
damaged	to	do	anything	as	miraculous	as	heal	before	his	eyes,	but	the	first
probe	of	the	enemy	had	been	denied.
The	Liosan	had	taken	as	many	of	their	dead	and	dying	with	them	as	they
could,	but	there	were	still	scores	and	scores,	bodies	heaped	up	at	the	base	of	the
first	berm.	‘Get	a	crew	to	start	piling	them	up,	against	the	breach.	Make	a	wall,
but	tell	them	to	be	careful	–	make	sure	the	fallen	are	actually	dead	or	near
enough	as	to	make	no	difference.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
He	lifted	his	gaze	as	a	shadow	crossed	the	Lightfall,	just	above	the	wound.
Bared	his	teeth.
A	new	voice	spoke	beside	him.	‘That	was	closer	than	I	liked,	Prince.’
He	turned.	‘Bedac.	Was	it	you	behind	that	last	push?’
‘Far	right	flank,’	the	woman	said.
‘Nithe?	Could’ve	sworn	that	was	a	woman’s	shout.’
‘Nithe	got	his	hand	chopped	off.	Didn’t	bleed	out,	thankfully.	Captain	Pithy
took	that	flank	command,	sire.	Nithe	made	it	back	in	time	to	drive	a	wood-axe
into	the	skull	of	one	of	the	last	Liosan	on	that	side.	Hard	enough	to	break	the
handle.’
Yedan	frowned.	‘What’s	a	wood-axe	doing	in	our	ranks?	My	orders	on
weapon	choices	were	clear	enough.	That	reminds	me	–	Sergeant!	Collect	up
the	better	Liosan	weapons,	will	you?’
‘Got	plans	with	your	trophy,	Prince?’
‘What	trophy?’
She	nodded	down	at	his	sword.
He	glanced	at	it.	A	Liosan	head	was	impaled	on	the	blade,	from	the	top	of
the	skull	down	and	out	through	the	neck,	which	had	already	been	half	severed.
He	grunted.	‘No	wonder	it	felt	heavy.’


	
Yan	Tovis	stood	at	the	forest	verge.	Watching	them	dragging	bodies	clear,
watching	others	tossing	limbs	and	rolling	corpses	into	the	pit.	None	of	it
seemed	real.	The	triumphant	and	suddenly	exhausted	Letherii	ranks	along	the
berm	were	settling	to	catch	their	breaths,	to	check	on	weapons	and	armour,	to
take	the	skins	of	water	from	the	youths	now	threading	through	the	ranks.	They
think	they’ve	won.
Without	Yedan	and	his	Watch,	that	front	line	would	have	quickly	crumpled.
Instead,	the	survivors	now	felt	bold,	filled	to	bursting.	In	this	one	clash,
something	had	been	tempered.	She	knew	what	she	was	seeing.	A	fighting	force
cannot	be	simply	assembled.	It	needed	that	brutal	forge	and	it	needed	all	its
fires	quenched	in	the	blood	of	battle.	Her	brother	was	making	something	here.
But	it	would	not	be	enough.
She	could	see	how	her	own	Shake	were	looking	on,	no	different	from	Yan
Tovis	herself.	Yedan	was	not	about	to	expend	the	Letherii	ranks	as	if	they	were
useless	skirmishers,	not	with	what	he’d	now	made	of	them.	He	would	pull	them
back,	holding	them	in	reserve	during	the	next	battle.
They	probed	to	test	our	mettle.	Next	time,	we	will	see	their	true	fury.	And	if
that	beachhead	is	established,	then	the	first	dragon	will	come	through.
Her	Shake	watched,	yes,	and	thought	about	their	own	time	to	come,	their
own	stand	against	the	Liosan.	Few	of	the	Letherii	were	trained	as	soldiers,	and
that	was	no	different	from	the	Shake.	But	Yedan’s	Watch	would	be	there,	solid
as	standing	stones.	Until	they	start	falling.	They	can	only	do	so	much.	They’re
Yedan’s	most	precious	resource,	but	he	must	risk	them	each	time.	And,	as	they
begin	to	fall,	why,	he’ll	have	a	new	crop	of	veterans	to	draw	upon.	These	very
Letherii	here,	and	then	from	among	our	own	Shake.
It’s	so	very…logical.	But,	dear	brother,	it’s	what	you	do	best,	isn’t	it?
How	can	I	kneel	to	this?	By	doing	so,	do	I	not	make	it	all…inevitable?	No.
That	I	will	not	do.	But	I	will	take	my	place	among	my	people,	on	that	berm.	I
know	how	to	fight.	I	might	not	be	Yedan’s	equal	in	that,	but	I’m	damned	close.
It’s	carved	into	the	souls	of	the	royal	line.	To	stand	here,	upon	the	First
Shore.	To	stand	here,	and	to	die.
They	were	stacking	Liosan	corpses,	making	a	wall	across	the	breach.	The
contempt	of	that	gesture	was	as	calculated	as	everything	else	Yedan	did.	Rage	is
the	enemy.	Beware	that,	Liosan.	He	will	make	your	rage	your	downfall,	if	he
can.
You	cannot	make	my	brother	angry.	He’s	not	like	you.	He’s	not	like	any	of
us.	And	his	army	will	follow	his	lead.	They	will	look	to	him	and	take	inside	what


he	gives.	It’s	cold.	Lifeless.	They’ll	take	it	in	and	it	will	change	them	all.
Your	army,	brother.	My	people.	I	can’t	win	this,	but	neither	can	you.
She	collected	her	sword	belt	from	the	stump	of	a	felled	tree,	strapped	it	on.
Settled	the	helm	on	her	head	and	fastened	the	clasp.	Tugged	on	her	gauntlets.
Her	people	took	note.	They	faced	her	now,	and	watched	as	their	queen
prepared	to	fight.
But	what	are	they	thinking?
Why	do	they	even	look	to	us?	My	brother?	Me?	See	where	our	love	for	them
has	taken	them.	See	all	those	limp,	lifeless	bodies	tumbling	into	the	pit.
They	watched	this	calm,	silent	woman	readying	for	battle.
They	didn’t	know,	of	course,	about	all	the	howling	going	on	in	her	head,
the	anguished	screams	and	the	poisoned	helplessness	eating	at	every	hidden
edge.	No,	they	knew	nothing	about	any	of	that.
She	saw	her	brother.	Gesturing,	giving	orders.
He	turned	then,	and	across	the	distance	he	faced	her.
Should	she	lift	a	hand?	Acknowledge	his	achievement?	This	first	triumph?
Should	she	draw	her	sword,	perhaps,	and	lift	it	high?	Would	he	respond	in
kind?
Not	a	chance.	But	then,	look	at	me.	We	see	each	other,	yes,	and	neither	of	us
does	a	thing	to	reach	across.	How	can	we?	We	are	coconspirators	in	the
slaughter	of	all	these	people.	Yan	Tovis	turned,	found	one	of	her	messengers.
‘Aras,	deliver	the	news	to	Queen	Drukorlat.	The	breach	was	repelled.
Acceptable	losses.	We	await	their	next	attack.’
The	young	girl	bowed	and	then	hurried	off,	into	the	forest.
When	Twilight	looked	back	down	to	the	strand,	her	brother	was	nowhere
in	sight.
	
It	was	now	a	road,	of	sorts.	The	white	dust	soaked	in	blood,	churned	into
reddish-brown	mud,	straight	as	a	spear	shaft	between	Saranas’	Wedding	Gate
and	the	Breach.	Shivering,	Aparal	Forge	watched	the	wagons	burdened	with	the
wounded	drawing	closer.	To	either	side	of	the	narrow	track	the	massed	legions
prepared	for	the	real	assault.	Heads	turned	to	watch	the	broken	remnants	of	the
Forlorn	Hope	file	past.
Well,	that	was	proof	enough,	was	it	not?	Kharkanas	was	occupied	once
more.	The	infernal	Shake	had	returned,	or	someone	much	like	them,	and	were
determined	to	contest	the	breach.	Madness,	all	of	it.	Glancing	up,	he	saw	four
of	the	Thirteen	still	veered,	their	vast	wings	flashing	gold	in	the	ceaseless	light.
The	Draconean	blood	had	finally	taken	them,	he	knew.	They	had	surrendered


for	ever	to	the	chaos.	Among	them	was	Iparth	Erule,	who	had	once	been	a
friend.	‘Son	of	Light,’	he	whispered,	‘beware	your	chosen,	now	that	the	blood
of	the	Eleint	rises,	to	drown	all	that	we	once	were.’
The	door	behind	him	swung	open,	cracking	against	the	stone	wall.	Aparal
flinched,	but	did	not	turn	round.
‘If	you	had	followed,	brother—’
‘But	I	did,	Son	of	Light.’
Kadagar	Fant	swore,	was	suddenly	beside	Aparal,	hands	settling	on	the
alabaster	merlon.	‘That	last	pass	–	we	were	almost	through!	See	my	children
still	on	the	wing?	Where	are	the	others?’
‘Lord,	the	Mane	of	Chaos	frightens	them.	If	they	surrender	to	it	for	too
long…	Son	of	Light,	you	could	lose	control	of	them—’
‘When	I	am	veered	they	well	comprehend	my	power	–	my	domination.
What	more	is	needed	to	bend	them	to	my	will?	Do	you	truly	believe	that	I	do
not	understand	the	nature	of	the	Eleint?’
‘The	risk,	Lord—’
‘It	frightens	you,	does	it,	brother?’
‘I	fear	we	might	lose	control	of	our	own	people,	Lord,	and	not	through
any	flaw	in	our	purpose,	or	leadership.	Iparth	Erule	and	his	sisters	no	longer
semble.	The	blood	of	the	Eleint	has	taken	them,	it	has	stolen	their	minds.	When
they	cease	to	be	Tiste	Liosan,	how	soon	before	our	cause	becomes
meaningless?	How	soon	before	they	find	their	own	ambitions?’
Kadagar	Fant	said	nothing	for	some	time.	Then	he	leaned	forward	over	the
wall	and	looked	straight	down.	‘It	has	been	some	time,’	he	said	in	a	musing
tone,	‘since	we	last	set	a	traitor	upon	the	White	Wall.	Brother,	do	you	think	my
people	begin	to	forget?	Must	I	remind	them	again?’
Aparal	Forge	thought	about	it.	‘If	you	feel	it	necessary,	Lord.’	He	held	his
gaze	on	the	column	crawling	towards	the	Wedding	Gate.
‘This	is	new,’	the	Son	of	Light	said.
‘Lord?’
‘I	see	no	answering	fear	in	you,	brother.’
The	Mane	of	Chaos,	you	fool.	It	devours	fear	like	bloody	meat.	‘I	am	as
ever	your	servant,	Lord.’
‘So	much	so,	I	now	see,	that	you	would	risk	your	own	life	to	speak	your
mind.’
‘Perhaps.’	As	I	once	did,	long	ago,	when	we	were	different	people,	not	yet
who	we	are	now.	‘If	so,	then	I	will	add	this.	The	day	you	cease	to	hear	me	will
be	the	day	that	we	will	have	lost.’
Kadagar ’s	voice	was	so	quiet	that	Aparal	barely	made	out	what	he	was


saying.	‘Are	you	that	important,	brother?’
‘I	am	now,	Lord.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	I	am	the	last	among	your	people	to	whom	you	still	listen,	Lord.
You	look	down	upon	this	cursed	wall	and	what	do	you	see?	Brave	warriors
who	disagreed	with	you.	The	rotting	remnants	of	our	priesthood—’
Kadagar	whispered,	‘They	opposed	the	path	of	the	Eleint.’
‘They	did,	Lord,	and	now	they	are	dead.	And	four	of	the	Thirteen	will	not
return.’
‘I	can	command	them.’
‘As	it	pleases	them	to	appear	loyal,	so	that	shall	remain,	Lord.’
Veiled	eyes	lifted	to	meet	his	gaze.	‘You	draw	close,	brother	Aparal	Forge,
so	very	close.’
‘If	my	counsel	is	treason,	then	condemn	me,	Lord.	But	you	will	not	see
fear,	not	in	me.	Not	any	more	and	never	again.’
Kadagar	Fant	snarled	and	then	said,	‘There	is	not	time	for	this.	The	legions
are	ready,	and	I	need	you	down	there,	commanding	the	assault.	The	enemy
beyond	the	breach	was	surprisingly	weak—’
‘Weak,	Lord?’
‘I	will	accept	bold	words	from	you,	brother,	but	not	outright	rudeness.’
‘Sorry,	Lord.’
‘Weak.	Indeed,	it	seems	they	are	not	even	true	Shake.	Devoid	of	Tiste	blood
entirely.	It	is	my	thought	that	they	are	mercenaries,	hired	because	the	Andii
now	in	Kharkanas	are	too	few	to	personally	oppose	us.	In	fact,	I	now	believe
that	the	Shake	are	no	more.	Gone,	like	a	nightmare	before	the	dawn.’
‘They	fought	surprisingly	well	for	mercenaries,	Lord.’
‘Humans	are	like	that,	brother.	Decide	on	something	and	there’s	no	moving
them.	You	have	to	cut	down	every	last	one	of	them.	Until	not	one	is	left
breathing.’
‘The	surest	way	to	win	an	argument,’	Aparal	commented.
Kadagar	reached	over	and	gripped	his	upper	arm.	‘Better!	Return	to	the
living,	old	friend!	Today,	we	shall	gain	the	Shore.	Tonight,	we	shall	dine	in	the
High	Palace	of	Kharkanas!’
‘Lord,	may	I	descend	to	take	command	of	the	legions?’
‘Go,	brother!	You	shall	see	me	soon	enough,	flying	above	you.’
Aparal	hesitated.	‘Lord,	might	I	speak	one	last	word	of	advice?’
Kadagar ’s	face	clouded,	but	he	nodded.
‘Do	not	be	the	first	of	our	Thirteen	through	the	breach.	Leave	that	to	Iparth
Erule,	or	one	of	his	sisters.’


‘But	why?’
‘Because	the	enemy	knows	that	we	are	here.	Soletaken	or	true	Eleint.	They
will	have	plans	to	deal	with	our	eventual	arrival,	Lord.	Use	Erule	to	discover	it.
We	cannot	risk	losing	you,	Son	of	Light.’
Kadagar ’s	pale	eyes	searched	his,	and	then	he	smiled.	‘Friend,	it	shall	be	as
you	say.	Go	now.’
	
Father	Light,	is	this	what	you	want?	What	was	in	your	mind	when	you	walked
out	from	the	city,	through	the	gate	that	would	be	named	for	the	day	of	your
wedding,	for	your	procession’s	path	into	the	realm	of	Dark?	Did	you	ever
imagine	that	you	would	bring	about	the	end	of	the	world?
Take	the	Sceptre	in	hand.	Walk	to	the	Throne.	There	is	an	old	saying:	every
crown	leaves	a	circle	of	blood.	I	always	wondered	what	it	meant.	Where	was
that	circle?	Surrounding	the	one	now	ruling,	or	closer	still,	like	razors	against
the	brow?
Aparal	Forge	walked	along	one	verge	of	the	blood	path.	He	could	have
veered	into	his	dragon	form.	He	could	have	wheeled	out	from	the	high	wall
and	in	moments	settled	before	the	breach,	those	old	scattered	stones	of	the
toppled	edifice,	with	all	the	joyous	carvings.	But	what	would	that	be	saying	to
his	warriors?	You	are	indeed	led	by	dragons,	by	the	blood-tainted,	by	the
devourers	of	Kessobahn.	But	was	he	not	Tiste	Liosan?	I	am.	For	now,	for	as
long	as	I	can	hold	on.	And	I’d	rather	show	them	that.	I’d	rather	they	see	me,
here,	walking.
The	soldiers	were	ready.	He	could	see	as	much.	He	sought	to	draw	strength
from	them,	reassurance,	all	the	confidence	he	would	need	to	in	turn	command
them.	As	they	in	turn	did	when	seeing	him.
I	must	speak	to	them.	Fashion	words.	What	shall	I	say?	Mercenaries	await
us.	Humans.	They	can	be	broken,	for	their	will	has	been	bought,	and	if	it	is	to	be
something	to	bargain	with,	like	a	comforting	robe,	then	that	will	cannot	be
worth	much,	when	all	comfort	vanishes.	No,	make	it	simpler.	Tell	them	that	coin
cannot	purchase	righteousness.	Against	our	will	the	humans	shall	falter.
We	must	simply	push	hard	enough	for	long	enough.
Speak	with	confidence,	yes.
And	then	I	will	think	of	loves	lost,	to	empty	out	all	the	places	inside	me.
Ready	to	be	filled	with	fury	and	desire.
The	Liosan	knew	enough	about	humans.	Through	the	piercing	of	the	veil
such	as	a	priest	or	mage	occasionally	achieved,	they	had	ventured	into	human
worlds.	‘Testing	the	notions	of	justice’,	as	one	old	scout	had	once	said.	Small


parties,	of	aimless	purpose	or	singular	intent.	Journeying	often	enough	for
these	explorers	to	return	with	knowledge	of	the	strange,	weak	but	profligate
human	creatures.	Short-lived	and	truncated	of	thought.	Incapable	of	planning
ahead	beyond	a	few	years	at	most,	and	more	commonly	barely	capable	of
thinking	past	a	mere	stretch	of	days.
There	were	always	exceptions,	of	course.	Great	leaders,	visionaries.
Tyrants.	But	even	among	them,	the	legacy	they	sought	was	more	often	than	not
a	selfish	one,	the	private	glory	of	immortal	notoriety	or	fame.
Pathetic.
As	he	approached	the	breach,	Aparal	wondered	whether	there	was	a	great
leader	among	these	humans,	these	mercenaries.	It	was	of	course	possible,	but
he	doubted	it.
The	once	glorious	gate	had	been	shattered	long	ago.	It	had	commemorated
a	marriage	that	had	spilled	more	blood	than	could	be	imagined.	Shattered	three
civilizations.	Destroyed	an	entire	realm.	Father	Light,	could	you	but	have
known,	would	you	have	turned	away?	Would	you	have	sacrificed	your	happiness
for	the	sake	of	your	people?	And	hers?
I	like	to	think	you	would	have.	Yes.	You	would	have	sacrificed	yourself,
because	you	were	better	than	all	of	us.
And	now	your	children	yearn	to	avenge	your	failure.	But	nothing	we	can	do,
nothing	we	can	ever	do,	will	make	it	better.	No	matter.	We’re	not	interested	in
healing	old	wounds	–	look	at	that	gate	for	proof	of	that!
A	space	had	been	left	clear	before	the	breach.	Of	the	wound	itself,	there
was	naught	to	be	seen	but	stacked	corpses,	dim	and	ethereal	through	Lightfall’s
incessant	bleeding.	Seeing	those	bodies,	Aparal	scowled,	and	from	deep	inside
him	surged	a	rush	of	rage.	Liosan.	Draconean.
He	stepped	into	the	space,	turned	towards	his	kin.	‘Brothers!	Sisters!	See
what	these	humans	have	done	to	our	fallen!	They	choose	not	to	honour	us	as
worthy	foes.	They	imagine	this	dread	wall	will	wound	us!
‘The	Son	of	Light	looks	down	upon	us	from	the	White	Wall’s	rampart.	The
Son	of	Light	has	said	that	on	this	day	we	shall	conquer	the	Realm	of	Dark!	We
shall	conquer	Kharkanas!	We	know	they	are	waiting.	Shall	we	seek	them	out?
Brothers!	Sisters!	Shall	we	seek	them	out?’
The	roar	that	answered	him	felt	like	a	physical	blow,	but	he	welcomed	it.
Their	anger	is	without	measure.	Their	justness	is	unassailable.	Kadagar	is
right.	We	shall	win	through.
He	faced	the	ruined	gate,	glared	at	the	breach.	Drawing	his	sword,	he	held
it	high.	‘Seventh	Legion,	Arrow	Formation!	Who	leads?’
A	harsh	voice	called	out	behind	him.	‘I	lead,	Aparal	Forge!	Gaelar	Throe


shall	lead!’
Gaelar.	I	should	have	known.	‘Gaelar.	There	is	a	commander	among	the
humans.	Find	him.	Kill	him.’
‘I	so	vow,	Aparal	Forge!	I	so	vow!’
The	power	massing	behind	him	made	Aparal	tremble.	This	assault	would
sweep	aside	the	humans.	Up	and	into	the	forest	beyond.	To	the	city	itself.	The
palace	splashed	in	blood.	The	Son	of	Light	triumphant	upon	the	Throne,
Sceptre	in	hand.
And	if	Mother	Dark	dwelt	in	the	temple,	they	would	kill	her.
We	will	not	be	stopped.	Not	this	time.
Shadows	from	above.	He	looked	up.	Three	dragons,	and	then	a	fourth.	So
eager.	Iparth	Erule.	I	think	you	want	that	throne.	I	think	you	mean	to	take	it.
‘Liosan!	Seventh	Legion,	level	spears!’	He	turned,	moved	to	the	right.
Gaelar	was	ready.	They	were	all	ready,	bristling,	straining	for	the	signal,
desperate	to	lunge	forward.	Burst	through	the	wall	of	corpses,	burst	out	on	to
the	Shore.
And	begin	the	slaughter.
Silent,	Aparal	Forge	swung	down	the	sword.
	
Sandalath	Drukorlat,	Queen	of	High	House	Dark,	ruler	of	Kharkanas,	walked
alone	in	the	palace,	wondering	where	all	the	ghosts	had	gone.	They	should	be
crowding	these	ancient	halls,	whispering	along	the	corridors	and	passages,
lurking	in	recesses	and	doorways.	Struggling	to	recall	what	needed	doing,
calling	out	for	loved	ones	in	faint,	echoing	voices.	She	ran	her	hand	along	a
wall	as	she	walked,	feeling	the	hard,	polished	stone.	She	was	far	beyond	the
rounds	of	the	paltry	staff	now	resident	in	the	palace.
Hunting	ghosts.	Stone	like	skin,	but	the	skin	is	cold.
She	could	remember	when	it	was	different.	Alive.	Guards	and	guests,
petitioners	and	servants,	priestesses	and	midwives,	retainers	and	scholars.
Hostages.	Swirling	in	their	own	precious	currents,	each	and	every	one	of	them,
like	blood	in	a	beating	heart.
Her	worn	boots	echoed	as	she	made	her	way	down	a	narrow	corridor.
Smaller	now,	this	passage,	and	the	steps	she	reached	were	shallow	and	worn,
wending	up	in	a	tight	spiral.	She	halted,	gasping	as	a	faint	draught	came	down
from	above.	I	remember	this.	The	downdraught.	I	remember	it.	Against	my	face,
my	neck.	Down	round	my	bared	ankles	–	I	used	to	run	–	when	was	that?	I	must
have	been	a	child.	Yes,	a	child.	When	was	that?	Her	right	shoulder	brushed
against	the	wall	again	and	again	as	she	climbed.	The	sloped	stone	over	her


head	felt	oppressively	close.
Why	did	I	run?
Perhaps	some	inkling	of	the	future.	But	for	that	child,	there	was	no	refuge.
How	could	there	be?	Here	she	was,	and	the	centuries	upon	centuries	in	between
were	now	carved	solid	as	this	stone.	Stop	running,	child.	It’s	done.	Stop
running,	even	the	memory	hurts.
Sandalath	reached	the	top	floor,	a	small	flagstone	landing,	a	blackwood
door	set	into	an	archway.	The	iron	handle	was	shaped	from	three	lengths	of
linked	chains	entwined,	stiff	enough	to	form	a	ring.	She	stared	at	it,
remembering	how	at	first	she’d	had	to	reach	up	to	grasp	it,	and	tug	hard	to
swing	back	the	door.	Hostage	Room.	Born	into	it,	imprisoned	within	it,	until	the
day	you	are	sent	away.	The	day	someone	comes	and	takes	you.	Hostage	Room,
child.	You	didn’t	even	know	what	that	meant.	No,	it	was	your	home.
Reaching	out,	she	grasped	the	ring.	A	single	tug	and	something	broke	on
the	other	side,	fell	with	a	clunk.	Oh…no,	no,	no—
She	opened	the	door.
The	bed	had	partially	collapsed.	Insects	had	chewed	the	covers	until	they
fell	to	dust.	Thousands	of	generations	of	those	insects	had	dwelt	in	the
mattress,	until	it	too	crumbled	to	nothing.	The	creatures	had	eaten	the	wax
candles	in	the	silver	sticks	still	standing	on	the	solid	blackwood	dresser.	Above
the	dresser,	the	polished	mirror	was	mottled	with	midnight	stains.	The	broad
windows	had	been	shuttered	tight;	now	little	of	that	remained	but	heaps	of
fittings	on	the	floor.
Sandalath	stepped	inside.	She	could	not	see	it	yet,	but	she	knew	it	was	there.
Locked	from	the	inside.
In	the	passageway	leading	to	the	Tutor	Chamber	she	found	the	small,	frail
bones	of	this	room’s	last	hostage.	The	mice	had	eaten	most	of	the	child,	until
little	more	than	grey	stains	marked	its	position	–	a	body	sprawled	between	the
two	chambers.	Teeth	lay	scattered	like	the	beads	of	a	broken	necklace.
I	know	how	it	was	for	you.	I	know.	Slaughter	in	the	citadel,	screams	rising
from	below,	the	smell	of	smoke.	The	world	was	ending.	Mother	Dark	turned
away.	Anomander’s	dreams	of	unification	fell	like	dust	through	his	fingers.	The
people	were	fleeing	–	fleeing	Kurald	Galain	itself.	The	end	of	the	world.
She	crouched	down	in	the	narrow	corridor,	stared	down	at	the	remnants.
Child?	Are	you	me?	No.	I	was	long	gone	from	here	by	then.	Sent	off	to	serve	my
purpose,	but	that	purpose	failed.	I	was	among	a	mass	of	refugees	on	Gallan’s
Road.	Blind	Gallan	shall	lead	us	to	freedom.	We	need	only	follow	the	sightless
seer.	We	need	only	trust	in	his	vision.	Oh	yes,	child,	the	madness	of	that	was,
well,	plain	to	see.	But	Darkness	was	never	so	cold	as	on	that	day.


And	on	that	day,	we	were	all	blind.
The	child	hostage	would	not	have	left	this	room.	She	had	learned
obedience	before	all	else.	Told	to	stay,	she	had	set	the	flimsy	lock	that	she	had
believed	would	bar	the	outer	door	–	we	all	believed	it,	each	in	our	turn.	It	was
our	comfort.	Our	symbol	of	independence.	It	was	a	lock	a	grown	Andii	could
break	in	one	hand.
But	no	one	came	to	challenge	your	delusion	of	safety.
The	lock	was	proof	against	everything	going	on	outside	this	room.	It	was,	in
fact,	the	strongest	barrier	of	all.
She	sank	down	further,	leaned	one	shoulder	against	the	passage	wall.
I	am	queen	and	I	am	hostage	both.	No	one	can	take	me.	Until	they	decide	to.
No	one	can	break	my	lock.	Until	they	need	to.	In	the	meantime,	see	me	sitting	so
regal	on	my	throne.	Frozen	like	an	image	in	a	frieze.	But	she	would	not	weep,
not	for	herself.	All	that	running	had	taken	her	precisely	to	this	place,	this
moment	in	time.	All	that	running.
After	some	time,	she	climbed	to	her	feet,	went	back	into	the	outer	room.
Stared	at	what	remained	of	herself	in	the	mottled	mirror.	Fragments,	pieces,	an
incomplete	map.	Look	at	me.	Are	you	looking	at	me,	now,	at	last?	I	sense	the
stirring	in	your	mind.	Impatience,	the	wanting	to	be	away,	off	somewhere	else	–
anywhere	but	in	this	skull,	anywhere	but	behind	these	eyes.	What	in	your	life
has	so	chilled	your	heart,	that	you	so	quickly	refuse	another’s	pain,	another’s
loss?
Run,	then.	Go	on.	Run	away,	skip	down	the	passage,	find	all	the	places	that
stab	deep	enough	to	make	you	feel.
Sandalath	turned	away.	Back	to	the	door,	down	the	spiralling	descent.	One
didn’t	need	ghosts,	she	decided.	Not	a	single	ethereal	glimpse	was	necessary.
Empty	corridors	and	echoing	chambers	were	in	themselves	ghosts,	emerging
in	the	instant	of	her	arrival,	only	to	fade	away	once	she	was	past.	Like	the
rooms	of	memory.	Step	inside,	conjure	what	you	see,	wonder	at	what	you	feel,
and	then	leave.	But	you	take	something	with	you.	You	always	take	something
with	you.	Swirling,	raising	up	dust.	She	wanted	to	howl.
‘Mother	Dark,	I	understand	now.	Once	again,	I	am	a	hostage.’	She	had	died
–	drowned?	–	in	the	rolling	surf	of	a	distant	shore.	The	end	of	a	long,
harrowing	journey,	such	an	ignoble,	pathetic	end.	Thrashing	in	darkness,
shocking	cold	filling	her	lungs	–	was	that	how	it	was?	It	must	have	been.
Silchas	Ruin	came	to	us	upon	that	road.	Wounded,	stricken,	he	said	he	had
forged	an	alliance.	With	an	Edur	prince	–	or	was	he	king?	If	so,	not	for	long.
Emurlahn	was	destroyed,	torn	apart.	He	too	was	on	the	run.
An	alliance	of	the	defeated,	of	the	fleeing.	They	would	open	a	gate	leading


into	another	realm.	They	would	find	a	place	of	peace,	of	healing.	No	throne	to
fight	over,	no	sceptre	to	wield,	no	crown	to	cut	the	brow.	They	would	take	us
there.
Salvation.
She	was	in	the	habit,	she	realized,	of	rolling	ashore,	only	to	be	dragged
back	into	deeper	waters.	A	place	to	drown,	a	place	of	peace,	an	end	to	the
running.	Was	it	coming	again?	Then,	Mother	Dark,	I	pray	to	you,	make	this
time	final.	Grant	me	blessed	oblivion,	a	place	without	war.
Messengers	found	her	in	the	hallway.	Urged	her	to	return	to	the	throne
room.	There	was	news	of	the	breach.	Withal	awaited	her.	She	walked	as	one
dulled	by	d’bayang,	panelled	scenes	marching	past	on	either	side,	as	mottled	as
the	mirror	she	had	stared	into	so	long	ago	now.	Centuries	ago.	Draconean
blood	proved	a	dark	tomb,	didn’t	it	See	how	my	thoughts	wander?	See	how	these
memories	haunt?	Do	you	truly	dream	of	resurrection?	Alas,	I	cannot
recommend	it.
Her	husband’s	eyes	studied	her.	‘Sand—’
‘I	was	exploring,’	she	said,	walking	directly	to	seat	herself	on	the	throne.
‘How	bad,	then?’
‘The	first	assault	was	denied,’	he	replied.	‘Yedan’s	Letherii	line	held,	and
then	pushed	the	Liosan	back	through	the	wound.	The	Watch—’
‘The	Watch,	yes.’	I	remember	now.	It	was	already	in	me.	Growing.	Wanting
my	love.	But	how	could	I	love?	‘The	Shake	have	held,	Lord.	The	Watch
commanded.	They	have	driven	the	Liosan	back	through	the	wound.	The
priestesses	believe	they	have	devised	a	means	of	sealing	the	rent,	Lord—’
‘Then	they	had	better	set	about	achieving	that,	Kellaras,	for	the	Liosan
shall	launch	another	assault	soon.	And	then	another,	and	another.	They	will
keep	coming	until	they	are	through,	or	until	they	are	all	dead.’
‘Lord,	is	such	the	fury	of	Osseric	against	you	that—’
‘Commander	Kellaras,	this	is	not	Osseric’s	doing.	It	is	not	even	Father
Light’s.	No,	these	are	children	who	will	have	their	way.	Unless	the	wound	is
healed,	there	will	be	no	end	to	their	efforts.’	And	then	Anomander’s	eyes	found
her.	‘Hostage,’	he	murmured,	gesturing	all	the	others	to	leave.	He	rose	from	the
throne.	‘I	did	not	see	you	there.	He	released	you	then	–	I	did	not	think—’
‘No,	Lord,’	she	said,	‘he	did	not	release	me.	He…abandoned	me.’
‘Hostage	Drukorlat—’
‘I	am	a	hostage	no	longer,	Lord.	I	am	nothing.’
‘What	did	he	do	to	you?’
But	she	would	not	answer	that.	Could	not.	He	had	enough	troubles,	did	he
not?	Wars	upon	all	sides,	armies	advancing	on	Kharkanas.	It	was	dying,	all	of


it.	Dying,	and	in	his	eyes	she	could	see	that	he	knew	it.
‘Sandalath	Drukorlat.’	And	with	her	name	he	reached	out,	settled	a	cool
hand	upon	her	brow.	And	took	from	her	the	knowledge	he	sought.	‘No,’	he
whispered,	‘this	cannot	be.’
She	pulled	away	then,	unable	to	meet	his	eyes,	unwilling	to	acknowledge
the	fury	now	emanating	from	him.
‘I	will	avenge	you.’
Those	words	could	well	have	driven	a	spear	through	her,	for	the	impact	they
made.	She	reeled,	with	pain	a	raging	fire	within	her.	Shaking	her	head,	she
staggered	away.	Avenge?	I	will	have	my	own	vengeance.	I	swear	it.
He	called	out	to	her,	but	she	fled	the	throne	room.	And	ran.
Shallow	steps	climbing…a	wooden	door.	A	lock.
‘Sandalath?’
‘The	priestesses	can	heal	the	wound.’
‘What	priestesses?’
‘The	Liosan	won’t	stop.	Nothing	can	make	them	stop.	The	Watch	knows	–
all	the	Shake	do.	They	have	accepted	it.	They	are	going	to	die	for	us.	Every	last
one	of	them.	We	cannot	permit	that.	Where	is	Gallan?	Where	is	Silchas?	Where
is	my	brother—’
Then	Withal’s	arms	were	about	her,	lifting	her	from	the	throne,	holding
her	tight.	She	felt	weak	as	a	child,	but	he	was	strong	–	stronger	than	she’d	ever
imagined	was	possible	for	a	human.	She	felt	something	crumble	within	her	and
let	out	a	soft	gasp.
‘I	went	looking	for	ghosts,’	she	said.	‘I	–	I	found	them,	I	think.	Mother	help
me.	Save	me	–	it’s	too	much—’
‘Sand.’	The	word	was	a	sob.
‘We	need	to	run,’	she	said.	‘That’s	all	we	need	to	do,	my	love.	Run.	Tell
Twilight	–	raise	a	flag	of	truce	–	I	will	yield	Kharkanas	to	the	Liosan.	They	can
have	it,	and	I	hope	they	burn	it	to	the	fucking	ground!’
‘Sand	–	this	is	Yedan’s	battle	now,	and	he	will	not	parley	with	the	Liosan.
He	is	a	Shake	prince.	He	wields	a	Hust	blade	–	it	was	the	witches	who	explained
to	me	what	that	meant—’
‘Hust?	A	Hust	sword?’	Did	I	know	that?	I	must	have.	Did	I?
‘Forged	to	slay	Eleint	–	without	them	the	Andii	could	never	have	killed	all
those	dragons	at	the	Sundering.	They	could	never	have	fought	back.	Yedan’s
sword	knows	what’s	coming—’
‘Stop	it!’
‘It’s	too	late—’
‘Yedan—’


‘He	knows,	Sand.	Of	course	he	knows.	The	witches	are	desperate	–	Yan
Tovis	accepts	none	of	this—’
‘Because	she’s	not	a	fool!’	Sandalath	pushed	Withal	back.	‘We	need	to	run!’
He	shook	his	head.
She	glared	round.	Guards	looked	away.	Servants	ducked	their	heads.	She
bared	her	teeth.	‘You	must	think	me	mad.	Do	you?	But	I’m	not.	I	see	now,	as
clearly	as	Yan	Tovis	does.	Is	this	all	the	Shake	are	to	be	to	us?	Wretched	fodder
doomed	to	fail?	How	dare	we	ask	them	to	fight?’	She	spun,	glared	at	the	domed
ceiling.	‘Mother	Dark!	How	dare	you?’
The	shout	echoed,	her	only	reply.
‘The	Shake	will	fight,’	said	Withal	into	the	silence	that	followed.	‘Not	for
you,	Sand.	Not	for	the	Queen	of	High	House	Dark.	Not	even	for	Kharkanas.
They	will	fight	for	their	right	to	live.	This	once,	after	generations	of
retreating,	of	kneeling	to	masters.	Sand	–	this	is	their	fight.’
‘Their	deaths,	you	mean.	Don’t	you?	Their	deaths!’
‘And	they	will	choose	where	it	is	to	be,	Sand.	Not	me.	Not	you.’
What	makes	us	do	this?	What	makes	us	set	aside	the	comforts	of	peace?
‘Sand,’	Withal	said	in	a	quiet	voice,	‘this	is	their	freedom.	This	one	thing.
Their	freedom.’
‘Go	back	to	them,	then,’	she	croaked,	turning	away.	‘Be	their	witness,
Withal.	They’ve	earned	that	much	at	least.	Remember	all	that	you	see,	for	as
long	as	there’s	life	left	to	you.’
‘My	love—’
‘No.’	She	shook	her	head,	walking	from	the	throne	room.
Hostages.	We	are	all	hostages.
	
Yedan	Derryg	leaned	the	blade	of	his	sword	against	his	shoulder,	his	jaws
bunching	rhythmically,	his	eyes	narrowing	as	he	studied	the	breach.	‘Signal	the
front	lines.	They’re	coming.’
The	blurred	shapes	of	the	dragons	skittered	like	wind-torn	clouds	behind
the	veil	of	Lightfall.	He	counted	five	in	all,	but	suspected	there	were	more.	‘It
will	be	in	strength	this	time,’	he	said.	‘They	will	seek	to	advance	ten	paces	to
start,	and	then	form	a	crescent	as	the	ranks	behind	them	spill	out,	spread	out.
Our	flanks	need	to	deny	that.	Push	in	along	the	Lightfall	itself,	sever	the
vanguard.’
‘That’s	asking	a	lot,’	muttered	Brevity	beside	him.
Yedan	nodded.
‘Maybe	too	much,’	she	continued.	‘We’re	none	of	us	trained	as	soldiers.


We	don’t	know	what	we’re	doing.’
‘Captain,	the	Liosan	are	no	different.	Helmed	and	armed	doesn’t	make	an
army.	They	are	conscripts	–	I	could	see	as	much	the	first	time.’	He	chewed	on
the	thought	and	then	added,	‘Soft.’
‘You	saying	they	don’t	want	any	of	this?’
‘Like	us,’	he	replied,	‘they	have	no	choice.	We’re	in	a	war	that	began	long
ago,	and	it	has	never	ended,	Captain.’
‘Pithy	says	they	look	no	different	from	the	Tiste	Andii,	barring	their
snowy	skin.’
He	shrugged.	‘Why	should	that	matter?	It’s	all	down	to	disagreeing	about
how	things	should	be.’
‘We	can’t	win,	can	we?’
He	glanced	at	her.	‘Among	mortals,	every	victory	is	temporary.	In	the	end,
we	all	lose.’
She	spat	on	to	the	white	sand.	‘You	ain’t	cheering	me	at	all,	sir.	If	we	ain’t
got	no	hope	of	winning	against	’em,	what’s	the	point?’
‘Ever	won	a	scrap,	Captain?	Ever	stood	over	the	corpses	of	your	enemy?
No?	When	you	do,	come	find	me.	Come	tell	me	how	sweet	victory	tastes.’	He
lifted	the	sword	and	pointed	down	to	the	breach.	‘You	can	win	even	when	you
lose.	Because,	even	in	losing,	you	might	still	succeed	in	making	your	point.	In
saying	that	you	refuse	the	way	they	want	it.’
‘Well	now,	that	makes	me	feel	better.’
‘I	can’t	do	the	rousing	speeches,	Captain.’
‘I	noticed.’
‘Those	words	sound	hollow,	all	of	them.	In	fact,	I	do	not	believe	that	I	have
ever	heard	a	commander	or	ruler	say	anything	to	straighten	me	up.	Or	make
me	want	to	do	for	them	what	they	wanted	done.	So,’	he	said	amiably,	‘if	I	won’t
die	for	someone	else,	how	can	I	ask	anyone	else	to	do	so?’
‘Then	what’re	we	gonna	die	for	here?’
‘For	yourselves,	Captain.	Each	and	every	one	of	you.	What	could	be	more
honest	than	that?’
After	a	time,	she	grunted.	‘I	thought	it	was	all	about	fighting	for	the	soldier
beside	you.	And	all	that.	Not	wanting	to	let	them	down,	I	mean.’
‘What	you	seek	not	to	let	down,	Captain,	is	your	sense	of	yourself.	How
you	see	yourself,	even	when	you	see	yourself	through	the	eyes	of	the	people
around	you.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘I	won’t	argue	against	that.	So	much	comes
down	to	pride,	after	all.’
‘So,	we’re	to	hold	against	the	Liosan	–	we’re	to	hold	the	First	Shore	–	out
of	some	kind	of	feeling	of	pride?’


‘I	would	like	to	hear	a	truly	rousing	speech,	one	day,’	Yedan	mused.	‘Just
once.’	Then	he	sighed.	‘No	matter.	One	can’t	have	everything,	can	one?’
‘I	see	’em	–	coming	through!’
Yedan	started	walking	down	the	slope.	‘Hold	back	the	Letherii	until	I	need
them,	Captain.’
‘Yes	sir!’
The	Liosan	vanguard	burst	through	the	breach	with	a	roar.
	
Seeing	the	shadows	wheeling	above	the	Liosan,	Brevity	flinched.	Dragons.
That	ain’t	fair.	Just	ain’t.	She	turned	and	made	her	way	down	to	the	Letherii
legion.
They	were	like	Pithy	now.	They	had	that	thing	in	their	eyes	–	Brevity	could
not	find	words	to	describe	it.	They’d	fought	for	their	lives,	but	not	in	that	daily
struggle	to	put	food	on	the	table,	not	in	those	quiet	moments	when	the	body
surrendered	to	some	illness.	This	was	a	sudden	thing,	a	savage	thing.	That	look
she	saw	now,	she	didn’t	know	what	it	was.
But	she	wanted	some	of	it.
Errant’s	nudge,	I	must	be	mad.

Sharl	had	always	been	the	older	sister,	the	capable	one.	When	her	mother	had
wandered	off	in	the	way	drunks	did,	leaving	them	on	their	own,	Sharl	had
reached	out	to	take	in	her	two	younger	brothers.
The	Shake	understood	the	two	sides	of	the	Shore.	The	drawing	close,	the
falling	apart.	Those	sides	lived	in	their	blood,	and	in	all	the	ghettos	where
dwelt	the	remnants	of	her	people	the	fates	washed	back	and	forth,	and
sometimes	it	was	all	one	could	do	to	simply	hang	on.
She	had	led	them	out	of	childhood.	But	more	than	that,	she	had	tried	to	lead
them	away	from	something	else,	something	far	crueller.	The	sense	of	failure
that	hung	thick	in	the	neighbourhood,	the	kind	of	failure	that	slunk	through
alleys	with	drawn	knives,	that	stepped	over	bodies	lying	in	the	rubbish.	The
kind	of	failure	that	unleashed	hatred	upon	those	who	would	seek	a	better	life,
those	who	would	dare	rise	above	their	wretched	station.
She	had	seen	a	clever	boy	beaten	to	death	outside	her	shelter.	By	his
cousins.
Letherii	missions	sent	people	into	the	communities.	Building	roads	out,


roads	to	take	the	Shake	away	from	their	misery.	It	was	pointless.	Sharl	had	seen
as	much,	again	and	again.	Outsiders	never	understood	how	a	people	could	eat
themselves	from	the	inside	out.
She	was	thinking	about	that	as	she	set	her	boots	in	the	sand	and	adjusted	the
heavy	pike	in	her	hands.	Flanked	by	her	brothers,	with	all	of	the	Shake	formed
up	to	face	this	enemy	of	strangers.	They	stood	on	the	First	Shore,	bathed	in	the
eerie	rain	of	Lightfall,	and	she	wondered	if	this	was	to	be	the	last	moment	for
her	and	the	boys.	How	quickly	would	her	family	vanish	from	the	world	of	the
living?	Which	of	them	would	be	the	first	to	fall?	Which	the	last?
I’m	scared.	By	the	deeps,	I	am	scared.
Capable	Sharl,	oh,	see	how	that	lie	shines	on	this	day.	I	will	try	to	keep
them	alive.	I	will	do	all	I	can.
Mother,	they	said	they	found	your	body	in	a	ditch	outside	the	town.	Where
were	you	going?	What	road	were	you	building?
‘Casel,	Oruth,	I	love	you	both.’
She	felt	their	eyes	as	they	looked	upon	her,	but	she	held	her	gaze	fixed	on
the	breach.
Someone	shouted,	‘Here	they	come!’	But	the	cry	was	unnecessary,	as	the
wound	split	to	the	first	spear	points,	and	the	Liosan	surged	out	with	terrifying
howls.	A	tall	warrior	was	in	the	lead.	His	face	twisted,	his	eyes	lit	like	fire,	his
mouth	stretched	open	as	he	brought	up	his	spear.
He	was	staring	at	Sharl,	who	stood	opposite	as	he	lunged	forward.
She	would	have	run	if	a	path	were	open	to	her.	She	would	have	fallen	to
her	knees	if	mercy	were	possible.	She	would	have	shouted,	pleaded	for	an	end
to	this	terrible	need	to	fight,	to	kill.	She	would	have	done	anything	to	end	this.
Her	brothers	screamed,	and	those	cries	were	so	raw	with	terror	that	Sharl
felt	buffeted,	battered	by	this	instant	of	utter,	horrifying	vulnerability—
Mother,	weaving,	stumbling	down	the	road.	Her	clothes	reeking,	her	breaths
a	wet	rattle.
The	Shake	cannot	run	from	themselves.
‘Sharl!’
She	lifted	the	pike	at	the	last	moment.	The	warrior	had	not	even	noticed	the
weapon,	or	its	deadly	length.	Even	as	he	lifted	his	spear,	the	broad	iron	head
took	him	just	beneath	his	sternum.
The	impact	rocked	her	back,	thundered	through	her	bones.
The	surprise	in	his	face	made	her	want	to	weep,	so	childlike,	so	helpless.
His	sagging	weight	pulled	the	pike	down.	She	tore	it	free,	her	breaths
coming	so	fast	the	world	was	spinning.	He	didn’t	see	it.	How	could	he	not	have
seen	it?


All	at	once	there	was	fighting	along	the	line,	spreading	out	from	the	centre.
The	Liosan	were	trying	to	push	them	back.	Their	fury	deafened	her.	They
fought	like	rabid	dogs.	She	stabbed	out	again	and	again	with	the	pike.	The	point
scored	off	shields,	was	batted	aside	by	bronzesheathed	shafts.	Liosan	ducked
past	it,	only	to	be	met	by	the	hacking	swords	of	her	brothers.
Piss	drenched	the	inside	of	her	left	thigh	–	shame,	oh,	shame!
They	yielded	a	step	–	the	entire	line	–	as	if	by	command.	But	she	heard
nothing	beyond	the	roar	engulfing	her,	the	clash	of	weapons,	the	grunts	and
gasps.	This	was	a	tide,	driving	them	back,	and	like	the	sand	beneath	them	the
Shake	were	crumbling.
The	pike’s	long	shaft	was	slick	with	blood.	The	point	was	wrapped	in	gore.
The	muscles	of	her	forearms	and	shoulders	burning,	she	raised	the	weapon
once	more,	saw	a	face,	and	stabbed	into	it.	Edge	grating	past	teeth,	biting	into
the	back	of	a	mouth,	the	flaring	flanges	slicing	through	cheeks.	Blood	poured
from	the	Liosan’s	nose,	misted	up	into	his	eyes.	He	snapped	his	head	back,
choking,	dropping	his	weapons	as	he	fell	to	his	knees.	His	hands	went	to	his
shattered	mouth,	seeking	to	hold	in	place	the	dangling	lower	jaw,	the	flaps	of
tongue.
Casel	lunged	low	and	pushed	his	sword’s	point	into	the	Liosan’s	neck.
And	then	her	brother	was	falling.	An	animal	cry	came	from	his	throat	and
he	twisted	as	a	Liosan	advanced	to	stand	over	him,	grinding	her	spear	point
down	through	Casel,	who	writhed	like	a	pinned	eel.
Sharl	swung	the	pike,	and	she	screamed	as	the	point	slashed	the	Liosan	just
under	her	chin,	opening	her	windpipe.
Hands	took	Casel’s	ankles	and	dragged	him	back.	A	stranger	came	up	to
take	her	brother ’s	place.
No	–	not	a	stranger—
A	marled	sword	blade	swung	past	her,	caught	a	Liosan	closing	on	her.
Sliced	through	him	from	shoulder	to	hip.	The	backswing	sent	the	top	half	of	a
head	and	helm	spinning	away.	A	third	swing	severed	two	hands	gripping	a
spear.	Three	fallen	Liosan,	opening	a	gap.
‘Follow	me,’	Yedan	Derryg	said,	stepping	forward.
And	around	Sharl	and	Oruth,	the	Watch	drew	up,	huge	soldiers	in	heavy
armour,	blackened	shields	like	an	expanding	wall,	long-bladed	swords	lashing
out.
As	they	advanced,	they	carried	Sharl	and	her	brother	with	them.
Into	the	face	of	the	Liosan.
	


Pithy	reached	Brevity.	Her	face	was	flushed,	slick	with	sweat,	and	there	was
blood	on	her	sword.	Gasping,	she	said,	‘Two	companies	of	Letherii,	sister	–	to
relieve	the	centre	of	the	Shake	line.	They’ve	been	savaged.’
‘He’s	pushing	straight	for	the	wound,’	Brevity	said.	‘Is	that	right?	That’s
Yedan	down	there,	isn’t	it?	Him	and	half	his	Watch	–	gods,	it’s	as	if	the	Liosan
are	melting	away.’
‘Two	companies,	Brev!	We’re	going	to	split	the	enemy	on	this	side,	but
that	means	we	need	to	push	right	up	to	the	fuckin’	hole,	right?	And	then	hold	it
for	as	long	as	we	need	to	cut	’em	all	down	on	the	flanks.’
Licking	dry	lips,	Brevity	nodded.	‘I’ll	lead	them.’
‘Yes,	I’m	relieving	ya	here,	love	–	I’m	ready	to	drop.	So,	what’re	you
waitin’	for?	Go!’
Pithy	watched	Brev	lead	a	hundred	Letherii	down	to	the	berm.	Her	heart
was	finally	slowing	its	mad	jackrabbit	dance.	Jamming	the	point	of	her	sword
in	the	sand,	she	turned	to	regard	the	remaining	Letherii.
Nods	answered	her.	They	were	ready.	They’d	tasted	it	and	they	wanted	to
taste	it	again.	Yes,	I	know.	It	terrifies	us.	It	makes	us	sick	inside.	But	it’s	like
painting	the	world	in	gold	and	diamonds.
From	the	breach	the	roar	was	unceasing,	savage	as	a	storm	against	cliffs.
Dear	ocean,	then,	call	my	soul.	I	would	swim	the	waters	again.	Let	me	swim
the	waters	again.


Chapter	Thirteen

There	was	a	love	once
I	shaped	it	with	my	hands
Until	in	its	forms
I	saw	sunlight	and	streams
And	earthy	verges	sweet	with	grass
It	fit	easily	into	my	pack
And	made	peaceful
The	years	of	wandering
Through	forests	in	retreat
And	down	the	river ’s	tragic	flow
On	the	day	we	broke
Upon	the	shore	of	a	distant	land
I	fled	cold	and	bereft
Fighting	curtains	of	ash
Up	through	the	snows	of	the	pass
In	the	heaps	of	spoil
Among	an	enemy	victorious
My	love	floundered
In	the	cracked	company	of	kin
Broken	down	blow	upon	blow
And	now	as	my	days	lower
Into	the	sleep	of	regret
I	dream	of	fresh	clay
Finding	these	old	hands
Where	the	wind	sings	of	love
Forests	in	Retreat


Fisher	kel	Tath
	through	the	thin	grasses,	lifting

THE	PASSAGE	OF	THOUSANDS	OF	HOBNAILED	BOOTS	HAD	WORN

into	the	air	vast	clouds	of	dust.
The	breeze	had	fallen	off	and,	coming	down	from	the	north,	tracked	the
columns	at	virtually	the	same	turgid	pace,	blinding	them	to	the	world.
The	horses	were	growing	gaunt,	their	heads	hanging,	their	eyes	dull.	When
Aranict	turned	her	mount	to	follow	Brys,	the	beast	felt	sluggish	beneath	her,
slow	to	canter.	They	rode	out	to	the	west	side	of	the	marching	troops	and	made
their	way	back	down	the	line’s	ragged	length.	Dusty	faces	lifted	here	and	there
to	watch	them	pass,	but	mostly	the	soldiers	kept	their	gazes	on	the	ground
before	them,	too	weary	to	answer	any	stir	of	curiosity.
She	knew	how	they	felt.	She	had	done	her	share	of	plodding	on	foot,
although	without	the	added	burden	of	a	pack	heavy	with	armour	and	weapons.
They	had	marched	hard	to	draw	up	close	to	the	Bolkando	Evertine	Legion,
who	in	turn	had	already	fallen	a	third	of	a	day	behind	the	Perish.	Shield	Anvil
Tanakalian	was	if	anything	proving	harsher	than	Krughava	in	driving	the	Grey
Helms.	Their	pace	was	punishing,	sparing	no	thought	for	their	putative	allies.
Brys	was	worried,	and	so	was	Queen	Abrastal.	Was	this	nothing	more	than
the	lust	for	glory,	the	fierce	zeal	of	fanatics?	Or	was	something	more
unpleasant	at	work	here?	Aranict	had	her	suspicions,	but	she	was	not	yet
willing	to	voice	them,	not	even	to	Brys.	Tanakalian	had	not	been	pleased	with
the	Adjunct’s	insistence	that	Gesler	take	overall	command.	Perhaps	he	intended
to	make	the	position	irrelevant,	at	least	in	so	far	as	regards	the	Perish.	But	if	so,
why	would	he	do	that?
They	pulled	free	of	the	last	block	of	wagons	and	through	the	drifting	dust
they	saw	the	rearguard,	a	dozen	Bluerose	lancers,	drawn	up	around	three
figures	on	foot.	Aranict	rose	in	her	saddle	and	looked	westward	–	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle	were	out	there,	she	knew.	Out	of	sight	yet	still	moving	in	parallel
with	the	Letherii.	She	wondered	when	next	Gesler,	Stormy	and	Kalyth	would
visit	them.	More	arguments,	more	confusion	thicker	than	these	clouds	of	dust.
She	shook	her	head.	Never	mind	all	that.	Since	the	morning	strangers	had
been	tracking	them.	And	they’ve	just	bitten	our	tail.	Aranict	returned	her
attention	to	the	three	dishevelled	newcomers.	Two	women	and	one	man.
They’d	arrived	with	little	evident	gear	or	supplies,	and	as	Aranict	drew	closer
she	could	see	their	sorry	state.
But	they	were	not	wearing	uniforms.	Not	Malazan	deserters,	then.	Or
worse:	survivors.


Brys	slowed	his	horse,	glanced	back	at	her,	and,	seeing	his	relief,	she
nodded.	He’d	feared	the	same.	But	in	some	ways,	she	realized,	this	was	even
more	disturbing,	as	if	the	Bonehunters	had	truly	vanished,	their	fate	unknown
and	possibly	unknowable.	Like	ghosts.
She	had	to	struggle	against	thinking	of	them	as	being	already	dead.	In	her
mind	rose	visions	of	hollowed	eye	sockets,	withered	skin	splitting	over	bones
–	the	image	was	horrifying,	yet	it	haunted	her.	She	could	see	the	edge	of	the
Glass	Desert	off	to	the	east,	heat	shimmering	in	a	wall,	rising	like	a	barrier
beyond	which	the	soil	lost	all	life.
They	reined	in.	Brys	studied	the	three	strangers	for	a	moment,	and	then
said,	‘Welcome.’
The	woman	in	the	front	turned	her	head	and	spoke	to	her	comrades.
‘Gesros	Latherii	stigan	thal.	Ur	leszt.’
The	other	woman,	short	and	plump	but	with	the	blotchy,	sagging	cheeks
that	denoted	dehydration,	frowned	and	said,	‘Hegoran	stig	Daru?’
‘Ur	hedon	ap,’	replied	the	first	woman.	She	was	taller	than	the	other	one,
with	shoulder-length	dark	brown	hair.	She	had	the	eyes	of	someone	used	to
pain.	Facing	Brys	again,	she	said,	‘Latherii	Ehrlii?	Are	you	Ehrlii	speak?	Are
you	speak	Latherii?’
‘Letherii,’	Brys	corrected.	‘The	language	of	the	First	Empire.’
‘First	Empire,’	the	woman	repeated,	matching	perfectly	Brys’s	intonation.
‘Slums	–	er,	lowborn	stig—dialect.	Ehrlitan.’
The	plump	woman	snapped,	‘Turul	berys?	Turul	berys?’
The	first	woman	sighed.	‘Please.	Water?’
Brys	gestured	to	the	preda	commanding	the	lancers.	‘Give	them	something
to	drink.	They’re	in	a	bad	way.’
‘Commander,	our	own	supplies—’
‘Do	it,	Preda.	Three	more	in	our	army	won’t	make	much	difference	either
way.	And	find	a	cutter	–	the	sun	has	roasted	them.’	He	nodded	to	the	first
woman.	‘I	am	Commander	Brys	Beddict.	We	march	to	war,	I’m	afraid.	You	are
welcome	to	travel	with	us	for	as	long	as	you	desire,	but	once	we	enter	enemy
territory,	unless	you	remain	with	us,	I	cannot	guarantee	your	safety.’
Of	course	he	didn’t	call	himself	a	prince.	Just	a	commander.	Noble	titles
still	sat	uneasily	with	him.
The	woman	was	slowly	nodding.	‘You	march	south.’
‘For	now,’	he	replied.
‘And	then?’
‘East.’
She	turned	to	the	other	woman.	‘Gesra	ilit.’


‘Ilit?	Korl	mestr	al’ahamd.’
The	woman	faced	Brys.	‘I	named	Faint.	We	go	with	you,	tu—please.	Ilit.
East.’
Aranict	cleared	her	throat.	The	inside	of	her	mouth	was	stinging,	had	been
for	days.	She	was	itchy	beneath	her	soiled	garments.	She	spent	a	moment
lighting	a	stick	of	rustleaf,	knowing	that	Brys	had	twisted	in	his	saddle	and	was
now	observing	her.	Through	a	brief	veil	of	smoke	she	met	his	eyes	and	said,
‘The	younger	one’s	a	mage.	The	man	–	there’s	something	odd	about	him,	as	if
he’s	only	in	the	guise	of	a	human,	but	it’s	a	guise	that	is	partly	torn	away.
Behind	it…’	She	shrugged,	drew	on	her	stick.	‘Like	a	wolf	pretending	to	sleep.
He	has	iron	in	his	hands.’
Brys	glanced	over,	frowned.
‘In	the	bones,’	she	amended.	‘He	could	probably	punch	his	way	through	a
keep	wall.’
‘Iron,	Atri-Ceda?	Are	you	sure?	How	can	that	be?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	might	even	be	wrong.	But	you	can	see,	he	carries	no
weapons,	and	those	knuckles	are	badly	scarred.	There’s	a	taint	of	the	demonic
about	him—’	She	cut	herself	off,	as	Faint	was	now	speaking	quickly	to	the
young	mage.
‘Hed	henap	vil	nen?	Ul	stig	“Atri-Ceda”.	Ceda	ges	kerallu.	Ust	kellan
varad	harada	unan	y?	Thekel	edu.’
Eyes	fixed	on	Aranict	and	everyone	was	silent	for	a	moment.
With	narrowed	gaze	the	young	sorceress	addressed	Faint.	‘Kellan	varad.
V’ap	gerule	y	mest.’
Whatever	she’d	said	did	not	seem	to	warrant	a	reply	from	Faint,	who	now
spoke	to	Aranict.	‘We	are	lost.	Seek	Holds.	Way	home.	Darujhistan.	Do	you
kerall—	er,	are	you,	ah,	caster	magic?	Kellan	Varad?	High	Mage?’
Aranict	glanced	at	Brys,	who	now	answered	her	earlier	shrug	with	one	of
his	own.	She	was	silent	for	a	moment,	thinking,	and	then	she	said,	‘Yes,	Faint.
Atri-Ceda.	High	Mage.	I	am	named	Aranict.’	She	cocked	her	head	and	asked,
‘The	Letherii	you	speak,	it	is	high	diction,	is	it	not?	Where	did	you	learn	it?’
Faint	shook	her	head.	‘City.	Seven	Cities.	Ehrlitan.	Lowborn	tongue,	in
slums.	You	speak	like	whore.’
Aranict	pulled	hard	on	her	rustleaf,	and	then	smiled.	‘This	should	be	fun.’
	
The	ghost	of	Sweetest	Sufferance	held	up	her	clay	pipe,	squinted	at	the	curls	of
smoke	rising	from	it.	‘See	that,	Faint?	That’s	the	perfect	breath	of	every	lifegiving	god	there	ever	was.	Holier	than	incense.	Why,	if	priests	filled	their


braziers	with	rustleaf,	the	temples	would	be	packed,	worshippers	like	salted
fish	in	a	barrel—’
‘Worshippers?’	Faint	snorted.	‘Addicts,	you	mean.’
‘Variations	on	a	theme,	darling.	You’ve	stopped	wincing	with	every	breath,
I	see.’
Faint	leaned	back	on	the	heap	of	blankets.	‘You	heard	Precious.	That
Aranict	is	tapping	Elder	magic—’
‘And	something	else,	too,	she	said.	Newborn,	she	called	it	–	what	in	Hood’s
name	is	that	supposed	to	mean?’
‘I	don’t	care.	All	I	know	is	I’ve	stopped	aching	everywhere.’
‘Me	too.’
Sweetest	puffed	contentedly	for	a	time,	and	then	said,	‘They	were	nervous
round	Amby	though,	weren’t	they?’	She	glanced	over	at	the	silent	man	where	he
sat	close	to	the	tent’s	entrance.	‘Like	they	never	seen	a	Bole	before,	right,
Amby?’
The	man	gave	no	sign	of	having	heard	her,	which	Faint	found	something
of	a	relief.	He	must	think	I’ve	gone	mad,	having	a	one-way	conversation	like
this.	Then	again,	he	might	be	right.	Something	snapped	in	me,	I	suppose.
Sweetest	Sufferance	rolled	her	eyes	at	Faint.
‘Did	you	see	the	tack	on	that	commander ’s	horse,’	Faint	asked	in	a	low
voice.	‘A	different	rig	from	what	the	lancers	had.	The	set-up	was	different,	I
mean.	That	over-tug	inside	the	horn.	The	stirrup	angle—’
‘What’re	you	going	on	about,	Faint?’
‘The	prince’s	horse,	idiot.	He	had	his	tack	worked	in	the	Malazan	style.’
Sweetest	Sufferance	frowned	at	Faint.	‘Coincidence?’	She	waved	a	hand.
‘Sorry,	pretend	I	didn’t	say	that.	So,	that	is	strange,	isn’t	it?	Can’t	think	the
Malazans	ever	got	this	far.	But	maybe	they	did.	Oh,	well,	they	must	have,	since
you	saw	what	you	saw—’
‘Your	head’s	spinning,	isn’t	it?’
‘I	might	crawl	out	and	throw	up	soon,’	she	replied.	‘Amby,	don’t	be
blocking	that	flap,	right?	Now,	Malazan	tack.	What	do	you	think	that	means?’
‘If	Precious	and	Aranict	can	work	out	a	way	of	talking	to	each	other,	we
might	find	out.’
‘We	ever	use	the	Holds,	Faint?’
‘Not	on	purpose.	No.	Master	Quell	had	some	stories,	though.	The	early
days,	when	things	were	a	lot	wilder	than	what	we	go	through	–	when	they
didn’t	know	how	to	control	or	even	pick	their	gates.	Every	now	and	then,	one
of	the	carriages	would	plunge	into	some	world	nobody	even	knew	existed.	Got
into	lots	of	trouble,	too.	Quell	once	told	me	about	one	realm	where	there	was


virtually	no	magic	at	all.	The	shareholders	who	ended	up	there	had	a	Hood’s
hole	of	a	time	getting	back.’
‘Yeah,	we	had	it	easy,	didn’t	we?’
‘Until	our	master	got	eviscerated,	yes,	Sweetie.’
‘You	know,	I	doubt	Precious	is	going	to	get	much	that’s	useful	from	that
High	Mage.’
‘Why	do	you	say	that?’
Sweetest	shrugged.	‘It’s	not	like	we	got	anything	to	offer	them,	is	it?	Not
like	we	can	bargain	or	make	a	deal.’
‘Sure	we	can.	Get	us	back	home	and	the	Trygalle	will	offer	’em	a	free
delivery.	Anything,	anywhere.’
‘You	think	so?	Why?	I	can’t	think	we’re	that	important,	Faint.’
‘You	ain’t	read	all	the	articles,	have	you?	If	we’re	in	trouble,	we	can
bargain	with	the	full	backing	of	the	Guild,	and	they	will	honour	those	bargains
to	the	letter.’
‘Really?	Well	now,	they	know	how	to	take	care	of	their	shareholders.	I’m
impressed.’
‘You	have	to	hand	it	to	them,’	Faint	agreed.	‘I	mean,	excepting	when	we’re
torn	off	the	carriage	on	a	run	and	left	behind	to	get	ripped	apart	and	eaten.	Or
cut	down	in	a	deal	that	goes	sour.	Or	we	run	up	a	whopping	tab	in	the	local	pit.
Or	some	alien	disease	takes	us	down.	Or	we	lose	a	limb	or	three,	get	head-bash
addled,	or—’
‘Giant	lizards	drop	outa	the	sky	and	kill	us,	yes.	Be	quiet,	Faint.	You’re	not
helping	things	at	all.’
‘What	I’m	doing,’	Faint	said,	closing	her	eyes,	‘is	trying	not	to	think	about
those	runts,	and	the	hag	that	took	them.’
‘It’s	not	like	they	were	shareholders,	dearie.’
Ah,	now	that’s	my	Sweetest.	‘True	enough.	Still.	We	got	stretched	out	plain
to	see	that	day,	Sweetest,	and	the	rack’s	tightening	still,	at	least	in	my	mind.	I
just	don’t	feel	good	about	it.’
‘Think	I’ll	head	out	and	throw	up	now,’	Sweetest	said.
Slipping	past	Amby	was	easy,	Faint	saw,	for	a	ghost.
	
Precious	Thimble	rubbed	at	her	face,	which	had	gone	slightly	numb.	‘How	are
you	doing	this?’	she	asked.	‘You’re	pushing	words	into	my	head.’
‘The	Empty	Hold	is	awake	once	more,’	Aranict	replied.	‘It	is	the	Hold	of
the	Unseen,	the	realms	of	the	mind.	Perception,	knowledge,	illusion,	delusion.
Faith,	despair,	curiosity,	fear.	Its	weapon	is	the	false	belief	in	chance,	in


random	fate.’
Precious	was	shaking	her	head.	‘Listen.	Chance	is	real.	You	can’t	say	it
isn’t.	And	mischance,	too.	You	said	your	army	got	caught	in	a	fight	nobody
was	looking	for	–	what	was	that?’
‘I	dread	to	think,’	Aranict	replied.	‘But	I	assure	you	it	was	not	blind	chance.
In	any	case,	your	vocabulary	has	improved	dramatically.	Your	comprehension
is	sound—’
‘So	you	can	stop	shoving	stuff	in,	right?’
Aranict	nodded.	‘Drink.	Rest	now.’
‘I	have	too	many	questions	for	that,	Atri-Ceda.	Why	is	the	Hold	empty?’
‘Because	it	is	home	to	all	which	cannot	be	possessed,	cannot	be	owned.
And	so	too	is	the	throne	within	the	Hold	empty,	left	eternally	vacant.	Because
the	very	nature	of	rule	is	itself	an	illusion,	a	conceit	and	the	product	of	a	grand
conspiracy.	To	have	a	ruler	one	must	choose	to	be	ruled	over,	and	that	forces
notions	of	inequity	to	the	fore,	until	they	become,	well,	formalized.	Made
central	to	education,	made	essential	as	a	binding	force	in	society,	until
everything	exists	to	prop	up	those	in	power.	The	Empty	Throne	reminds	us	of
all	that.	Well,	some	of	us,	anyway.’
Precious	Thimble	frowned.	‘What	did	you	mean	when	you	said	the	Hold
was	awake	once	more?’
‘The	Wastelands	are	so	called	because	they	are	damaged—’
‘I	know	that	–	I	can’t	do	a	damned	thing	here.’
‘Nor	could	I,	until	recently.’	The	Atri-Ceda	plucked	out	a	stick	of	rolled
rustleaf	and	quickly	lit	it.	Smoke	thickened	the	air	in	the	tent.	‘Imagine	a	house
burning	down,’	she	said,	‘leaving	nothing	but	heaps	of	ash.	That’s	what
happened	to	magic	in	the	Wastelands.	Will	it	ever	come	back?	Ever	heal?
Maybe	that’s	what	we’re	seeing	here,	but	the	power	doesn’t	just	show	up.	It
grows,	and	I	think	now	it	has	to	start	in	a	certain	way.	Beginning	with…
wandering.	And	then	come	the	Holds,	like	plants	taking	root.’	Aranict	gestured.
‘Much	wandering	in	these	Wastelands	of	late,	yes?	Powerful	forces,	so	much
violence,	so	much	will.’
‘And	from	Holds	to	warrens,’	muttered	Precious,	nodding	to	herself.
‘Ah,	the	Malazans	speak	of	this,	too.	These	warrens.	If	they	are	destined	to
appear	here,	they	have	yet	to	do	so,	Precious	Thimble.	And	is	there	not	concern
that	they	are	ill?’
‘Malazans,’	Precious	hissed.	‘You’d	think	they	invented	warrens,	the	way
they	go	on.	Things	got	sickly	for	a	time,	sure,	but	then	that	went	away.’
‘The	Holds	have	always	been	the	source	of	magical	power	on	this
continent,’	Aranict	said,	shrugging.	‘In	many	ways,	we	Letherii	are	very


conservative,	but	I	am	beginning	to	think	there	are	other	reasons	for	why	there
has	been	no	change	here.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	remain.	And	the	Forkrul
Assail	dominate	the	lands	to	the	east.	Even	the	creatures	known	as	the	T’lan
Imass	are	among	us	now,	and	without	question	the	Hold	of	Ice	is	in	the
ascendant,	meaning	the	Jaghut	have	returned.’	She	shook	her	head.	‘The
Malazans	speak	of	war	among	the	gods.	I	fear	that	what	is	coming	will	prove
more	terrible	than	any	of	us	can	imagine.’
Precious	licked	her	lips,	glanced	away.	The	tent	seemed	to	have	closed
round	her,	like	a	death-shroud	being	drawn	tight.	She	shivered.	‘We	just	want	to
go	home.’
‘I	do	not	know	how	I	can	help	you,’	Aranict	said.	‘The	Holds	are	not
realms	one	willingly	travels	through.	Even	drawing	upon	their	power	invites
chaos	and	madness.	They	are	places	of	treachery,	of	deadly	traps	and	pits
leading	down	into	unknown	realms.	Worse,	the	more	powerful	rituals	demand
blood.’
Precious	gathered	herself,	met	the	Atri-Ceda’s	gaze.	‘In	the	east,’	she	said.
‘Something’s	there	–	I	can	feel	it.	A	thing	of	vast	power.’
‘Yes,’	Aranict	said,	nodding.
‘It	is	where	you	are	going,	isn’t	it?	This	army	and	the	war	to	come.	You	are
going	to	fight	for	that	power,	to	take	it	for	yourself.’
‘Not	quite,	Precious	Thimble.	That	power	–	we	mean	to	set	it	free.’
‘And	if	you	do?	What	happens	then?’
‘We	don’t	know.’
‘You	keep	speaking	of	the	Malazans.	Are	they	here?	Are	they	one	of	the
armies	marching	to	this	war?’
Aranict	seemed	about	to	say	one	thing,	then	changed	her	mind	and	said,
‘Yes.’
Precious	sat	back	on	her	haunches.	‘I	am	from	One-Eye	Cat,	a	city	of
Genabackis.	We	were	conquered	by	the	Malazans.	Winning	is	all	that	matters	to
them,	Atri-Ceda.	They	will	lie.	They	will	backstab.	Whatever	you	see	on	the
surface,	don’t	believe	it.	Don’t.	With	them,	nothing	is	as	it	seems,	not	ever.’
‘They	are	a	complicated	people—’
Precious	snorted.	‘Their	first	emperor	was	where	it	all	started.	The	sleight
of	hand,	the	deadly	misdirection	–	everything	the	Malazan	Empire	became
infamous	for	started	with	him.	And	though	he’s	now	dead	and	gone,	nothing
has	changed.	Tell	your	commander,	Aranict.	Tell	him.	The	Malazans	–	they’ll
betray	you.	They’ll	betray	you.’
	


Brys	glanced	up	as	she	entered	the	tent.	‘You	were	able	to	speak	to	her?’
‘I	was,	after	some	curious	work	–	it’s	as	I	said,	the	power	of	the	Holds	ever
grows.	I	was	never	before	able	to	manipulate	the	Empty	Hold	the	way	I	did	this
night.	In	fact	–’	she	settled	down	on	the	bed	mat,	started	pulling	off	her	boots	–
‘I	don’t	feel	very	good	about	what	I	had	to	do.	By	the	time	I	was	done	not	even
her	innermost	thoughts	were	hidden	from	me.	I	feel…sullied.’
He	moved	closer,	slipped	an	arm	round	her.	‘Was	there	no	other	way?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Maybe.	But	this	was	the	quickest.	She	had	some	interesting
opinions	on	the	Malazans.’
‘Oh?’
‘Doesn’t	trust	them.	Her	people	didn’t	fare	well	during	the	Malazan
conquest	of	Genabackis.	Yet	for	all	that	resentment,	a	part	of	her	recognizes
that	some	good	came	of	it	in	the	end.	The	enforcement	of	laws	and	justice,	and
so	on.	Hasn’t	dulled	her	hatred,	though.’
‘Trust,’	Brys	mused.	‘Always	a	difficult	issue.’
‘Well,’	Aranict	said,	‘Tavore	is	hiding	something.’
‘I	believe	what	she	is	hiding	is	her	awareness	of	just	how	wretched	her
chances	are,	Aranict.’
‘But	that’s	just	it,’	Aranict	said.	‘From	what	I	gleaned	from	Precious
Thimble,	the	Malazans	never	do	something	at	which	they’re	likely	to	fail.	So	if
Tavore’s	chances	look	as	bad	as	we	all	seem	to	think,	what	are	we	missing?’
‘Now	that	is	an	interesting	question,’	Brys	admitted.
‘Anyway,’	Aranict	said,	‘they’ll	be	coming	with	us	to	Kolanse.’
‘Very	well.	Can	we	trust	them?’
Aranict	settled	back	on	the	mat	with	a	heavy	sigh.	‘No.’
‘Ah.	Will	that	prove	a	problem?’
‘I	doubt	it.	If	Precious	Thimble	attempts	to	draw	upon	a	Hold,	she’ll	get	her
head	ripped	off	by	all	that	raw	power.	Too	young,	and	doesn’t	know	what	she’s
doing.’
‘Hmm.	Could	such	a	personal	disaster	put	anyone	else	at	risk?’
‘It	could,	Brys.	Good	thing	you	brought	me	along,	isn’t	it?’
He	lay	down	beside	her.	‘Whatever	happened	to	the	shy,	nervous	woman	I
made	my	Atri-Ceda?’
‘You	seduced	her,	you	fool.’
	
‘Errant’s	push!’	She	sank	down	on	to	her	knees,	head	hanging,	her	breath
coming	in	gasps.
Spax	drew	up	his	leggings,	stepped	away	from	where	she	knelt	close	to	the


tent’s	back	wall.	‘Best	dessert	there	is,’	he	said.	‘Better	run	off	now.	I	have	to
see	your	mother,	and	if	she	catches	a	glimpse	of	you	anywhere	near	here,
she’ll	know.’
‘What	if	she	does?’	Spultatha	snapped.	‘It’s	not	as	if	she’s	opened	her	legs
to	you,	is	it?’
He	snorted.	‘Like	a	royal	vault,	she	is.’
‘You’re	not	good-looking	enough.	And	you	smell.’
‘I	smell	like	a	Gilk	White	Face	Barghast,	woman,	and	you’ve	hardly
complained.’
She	rose,	straightening	her	tunic.	‘I	am	now.’
‘Your	mother	is	growing	ever	more	protective	of	her	daughters,’	he	said,
scratching	with	both	hands	at	his	beard.	‘Spirits	below,	this	dust	gets
everywhere.’
Spultatha	slipped	past	him	without	another	word.	He	watched	her	head	off
into	the	night,	and	then	made	his	way	round	the	royal	train’s	equipment	tent.
Opposite	waited	the	queen’s	tent,	two	guards	stationed	out	front.
‘Is	she	ready	for	me?’	Spax	asked	as	he	approached.
‘Too	late	for	that,’	one	replied,	and	the	other	grunted	a	laugh.	They	stepped
clear	to	allow	him	passage.	He	went	inside,	and	then	through	to	the	inner
chamber.
‘Can	she	walk?’
‘Highness?’
Abrastal	drank	down	the	last	of	her	wine,	lifted	up	the	goblet.	‘My	third	in
a	row.	I’m	not	looking	forward	to	this,	and	having	to	listen	to	one	of	my	own
daughters	squeal	like	a	myrid	with	a	herder ’s	hand	up	its	arse	has	hardly
improved	my	mood.’
‘She’s	untutored	in	the	ways	of	real	men,’	Spax	responded.	‘Where	do	you
want	me	for	this?’
Abrastal	gestured	to	one	side	of	the	tent.	‘There.	Weapons	drawn.’
The	Warchief	raised	his	brows,	but	said	nothing	as	he	walked	over	to
where	she	had	indicated.
‘This	will	be	a	kind	of	gate,’	Abrastal	said,	folding	her	legs	as	she	settled
back	in	her	chair.	‘Things	could	come	through,	and	to	make	matters	worse	it’ll
be	hard	to	make	out	what	we’re	seeing	–	there	will	be	a	veil	between	us.	If	the
situation	sours,	it	can	be	torn,	either	by	whatever	is	on	the	other	side,	or	by	you
going	through.’
‘Going	through?	Highness—’
‘Be	quiet.	You	are	in	my	employ	and	you	will	do	what	you’re	told.’
Swamp	shit,	we	really	did	put	her	in	a	foul	mood.	Oh	well.	He	drew	his	long


knives	and	crouched	down.	‘If	I’d	known	I	would	have	brought	my	axes.’
‘What	do	your	shamans	tell	you,	Spax,	about	your	Barghast	gods?’
He	blinked.	‘Why,	nothing,	Firehair.	Why	should	they?	I’m	the	Warchief.	I
deal	in	matters	of	war.	All	that	other	rubbish	is	for	them	to	worry	over.’
‘And	are	they?’
‘Are	they	what?’
‘Worried.’
‘They’re	warlocks,	they’re	always	worried.’
‘Spax.’
He	grimaced.	‘The	Barghast	gods	are	idiots.	Like	sixteen	children	locked
in	a	small	room.	For	days.	They’ll	start	eating	each	other	next.’
‘So	there	are	sixteen	of	them?’
‘What?	No.	That	was	a	just	a	number	I	threw	out	–	spirits	below,	Firehair,
you	keep	taking	me	literally	–	I’m	Spax,	remember?	I	make	things	up,	to
entertain	myself.	You	want	me	to	talk	about	my	gods?	Well,	they’re	worse	than
me.	They	probably	made	themselves	up.’
‘What	do	your	shamans	say?’
Spax	scowled.	‘I	don’t	care	what	they	say!’
‘Is	it	that	bad?’
He	shrugged.	‘Could	be	our	gods	suddenly	get	smart.	Could	be	they	realize
that	their	best	chance	of	surviving	what’s	to	come	is	to	keep	their	heads	down.
Could	be	they	can	cure	the	world’s	ills	with	one	sweet	kiss,	too.’	He	held	up	his
knives.	‘But	I	ain’t	holding	my	breath.’
‘Don’t	pray	to	them,	Spax.	Not	tonight,	not	now.	Do	you	understand	me?’
‘I	can’t	even	remember	the	last	time	I	prayed	to	them,	Highness.’
Abrastal	poured	herself	another	goblet	of	wine.	‘Grab	those	furs	over
there.	You’ll	need	them.’
Furs?	‘Firehair,	I—’
A	stain	darkened	the	space	in	the	centre	of	chamber,	and	an	instant	later
bitter	cold	air	spilled	out,	frosting	everything	in	sight.	The	Warchief’s	lungs
burned	with	every	breath.	Pottery	stacked	against	one	wall	cracked,	then
shattered,	and	what	it	contained	fell	out	in	frozen	lumps.
Through	pained	eyes,	Spax	saw	shapes	take	form	within	the	gelid	stain.	In
the	forefront,	facing	Abrastal,	was	a	short,	curvaceous	woman	–	young,	he
thought,	though	it	was	difficult	to	be	sure.	Felash.	Is	that	her?	Yes,	must	be	her,
who	else	would	it	be?	Upon	her	left	stood	a	taller	woman,	though	the	only
detail	he	could	make	out	was	what	appeared	to	be	a	glittering	diamond	set	in
her	brow,	from	which	extraordinary	colours	now	flowed.
Then	a	shape	coalesced	to	the	Fourteenth	Daughter ’s	right.	Unnaturally


tall,	dressed	in	black,	the	hint	of	chain	armour	beneath	the	slashed	cloak.	A
hood	was	drawn	back,	revealing	a	gaunt,	demonic	face.	Stained	tusks	rose
from	the	lower	jaw,	thrusting	outward	like	curved	knives.	The	pits	of	its	eyes
were	dark.	A	damned	Jaghut.	Leaving	me	to	wonder	just	how	many	more	of	my
childhood	terrors	are	real?
The	Jaghut	seemed	to	study	Abrastal	for	a	time,	and	then	the	head	turned
and	Spax	found	himself	staring	into	those	lifeless	pits.	Withered	lips	peeled
back,	and	the	apparition	spoke.	‘Barghast.’	Voiced	as	if	it	was	an	insult.
Spax	growled	a	low	curse.	Said,	‘I	am	Gilk.	We	have	many	enemies,	all	of
whom	fear	us.	You	are	welcome	to	be	one	of	them,	Jaghut.’
‘Mother,’	said	the	daughter.	‘I	see	you	are	well.’
Abrastal	tipped	her	goblet.	A	solid	lump	of	wine	fell	out.	‘Is	this	really
necessary?	I	think	I	am	frozen	to	my	chair.’
‘Omtose	Phellack,	Mother	–	the	Hold’s	ancient	king	has	returned.	He
stands	beside	me.’
‘He’s	dead.’
The	Jaghut	faced	the	queen	again.	‘I	have	heard	better	insults	from	my	pets,
mortal.’	He	then	pointed	at	Spax.	‘Speaking	of	pets,	what	do	you	intend	to	do
with	yours?’
‘A	precaution,’	Abrastal	said,	shrugging.
The	other	woman,	the	one	Spax	did	not	know,	then	spoke.	‘Highness,	only
a	few	days	ago	this	Jaghut	here	bit	off	the	face	of	a	Forkrul	Assail.’	She	edged
a	step	back	to	take	in	the	Barghast.	‘Do	not	clash	those	blades,	warrior	–	they
will	shatter.’
Felash	said,	‘Mother,	we	have	found	a	new	ally	in	our…endeavours.	The
king	of	the	Hold	of	Ice	now	stands	with	us.’
‘Why?’
The	other	woman	said,	‘I	don’t	think	they	like	the	Forkrul	Assail,
Highness.’
‘You	must	be	Captain	Shurq	Elalle,’	the	queen	said.	‘I	have	heard
interesting	things	about	you,	but	that	will	have	to	wait	until	another	time.
Fourteenth	Daughter,	are	you	once	again	upon	the	seas?’
‘We	are.	On	a	Ship	of	the	Dead.	You	think	you’re	cold?’	One	hand	fluttered.
‘We’re	less	than	two	weeks	from	the	Teeth.’
‘What	of	the	Perish	fleet?’
Felash	shook	her	head.	‘No	sign.	We	must	assume	they	have	arrived	–
whether	a	blockade	now	exists…’	she	shrugged.	‘Mother,	be	careful.	The
Forkrul	Assail	know	we	are	coming	–	all	of	us.	They	know.’
‘Can	we	maintain	this	line	of	communication?’


‘Not	much	longer,’	Felash	replied.	‘Once	we	draw	closer	to	the	Assail’s
demesne,	their	Hold	will	dominate.’
Spax	snorted.	‘Even	against	the	king	of	the	Hold	of	Ice?	Now,	how	pathetic
is	that?’
The	Jaghut	faced	him	once	more.	‘When	Draconus	stepped	on	to	this
world,	he	missed	a	few	of	your	kind	underfoot.	He	has	grown	careless	in	his
old	age.	When	next	you	and	I	meet,	Barghast,	we	shall	have	words	on	the
matter.’
‘Have	you	a	name,	Jaghut?’	Spax	asked.	‘I	want	to	know	who	to	curse.	I
want	the	name	of	this	miserable	rotting	carcass	I’m	looking	at	right	now.’
The	mouth	stretched	once	more.	‘Can	you	not	guess,	Barghast?	As	you
squat	shivering	in	my	breath?’
Felash	said,	‘Mother,	are	you	sure	you	want	to	go	on	with	this?	Against	the
forces	now	gathering,	we’re	nothing.’
‘I	think,’	said	Abrastal,	‘the	time	has	come	to	be	more	forthright	regarding
our	allies	here	in	the	Wastelands.	We	seem	to	have	acquired	a	force	of,	well,
lizards.	Large,	powerful,	well	armed.	They	call	themselves	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle,	and	they	are	commanded	by	two	Malazans—’
She	stopped	them,	since	the	Jaghut	had	begun	laughing.
The	sound	reached	into	Spax’s	bones	until	he	felt	them	rattling	like	frozen
sticks.	His	glare,	fixed	upon	the	Jaghut,	suddenly	widened.	His	breath?	But	how
–	no,	yes,	see	that	cloak,	see	that	cowl.	He	straightened,	chest	swelling.	‘I	have
never	feared	you,’	he	said.
Hood	ceased	laughing,	regarded	the	Barghast.	‘Of	course	not,	Warchief
Spax	of	the	Gilk.	But	then,	once	I	am	known	to	you,	fear	is	irrelevant,	isn’t	it?’
‘Especially	when	you’re	already	dead!’
One	long,	bony	finger	lifted	into	view,	wagged	at	the	Warchief.	‘Ah,	but
how	would	you	know?	Imagine	dying,	and	then	finding	yourself	asking,	“What
now?”	The	day	you	stand	on	the	wrong	side	of	death,	Spax,	come	and	find	me,
and	in	the	bitter	truth	of	equals	you	and	I	shall	discuss	real	fear.’	Hood	laughed
a	second	time.
Moments	later	all	three	apparitions	were	gone.	The	biting	chill	remained,
mists	roiling	in	the	chamber.	Queen	Abrastal	fixed	Spax	with	a	hard	stare.
‘What	was	all	that	about,	Warchief?’
He	scowled.	‘I	don’t	for	an	instant	doubt	that	captain’s	claim.	Bit	off	an
Assail’s	face,	did	he?	I’m	surprised	it	wasn’t	its	whole	damned	head.’	Spax
fought	off	another	shiver.	‘Too	many	swords	in	the	fire,	Highness.	Things	are
going	to	break.	Badly.’
‘Second	thoughts?’


‘More	than	I	dare	to	count.’	Breath	gusted	from	his	nostrils.	‘It’s	time	to
offer	counsel,	whether	you	like	it	or	not.	I	know	you	are	committed	to	this
venture,	and	nothing	I	can	say	will	dissuade	you	–	we’re	about	to	wage	war
against	the	Forkrul	Assail.’	He	studied	her	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘You’ve	wanted
that	for	some	time.	I	see	the	truth	of	that.	But	listen,	there	are	times	when	a
course	decided	upon	gathers	a	power	of	its	own.	A	momentum	that	sweeps	us
all	along.	Firehair,	this	river	we’re	on	seems	calm	enough	for	now.	But	the
current	grows	and	grows,	and	soon	even	if	we	seek	the	safety	of	shore,	it	will
be	too	late.’
‘A	fine	speech,	Spax.	The	Gilk	Warchief	advises	caution.	So	noted.’
Abruptly	she	rose.	‘My	Fourteenth	Daughter	is	not	one	you	could	tumble
behind	the	equipment	tent.	That	said,	I	do	not	think	she	invited	that	undead
Jaghut	into	our	alliance	–	rather,	I	suspect	she	had	little	say	in	the	matter.’
‘And	the	current	grows	bold.’
She	eyed	him.	‘Journey	to	the	Letherii	camp.	Inform	Prince	Brys	of	this
turn	of	events.’
‘Now?’
‘Now.’
‘What	of	the	Perish?’
The	queen	frowned,	and	then	shook	her	head.	‘I	will	not	see	one	of	our	few
fit	horses	run	to	death	just	to	bring	word	to	the	Grey	Helms.	I	don’t	know	what
they’re	trying	to	prove	with	that	torrid	pace—’
‘I	do.’
‘Indeed?	Very	well,	Spax,	let’s	hear	it.’
‘They	seek	to	make	us	irrelevant,	Firehair.	You,	Brys,	and	especially	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘They	want	the	glory	for	themselves?’
‘Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian,’	he	said,	adding	a	disgusted	grunt.	‘He’s	young,
with	too	much	to	prove.	But	that	is	not	what	is	bothering	me,	Highness.	I	no
longer	trust	his	motives	–	I	cannot	say	if	the	goal	he	seeks	is	at	all	related	to	the
Adjunct’s.	These	Grey	Helms,	they	are	the	avatars	of	war,	but	it	is	not	the	war
between	peoples	that	they	serve,	it	is	the	war	of	nature	against	humans.’
‘Then	he	is	a	greater	fool	than	we	can	even	imagine,’	Abrastal	said.	‘He
cannot	win	that	war.	Nature	cannot	win	–	it	never	could.’
Spax	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	in	a	low	voice	he	said,	‘I	believe
that	it	is	the	other	way	round,	Highness.	This	is	a	war	we	cannot	win.	All	of	our
victories	are	temporary	–	no,	illusory.	In	the	end	we	lose,	because,	even	in
winning,	we	still	lose.’
Abrastal	walked	from	the	chamber.	Brows	lifting,	Spax	followed	her.


Outside,	under	the	green-lit	night	sky,	past	the	two	guards.
She	continued	down	the	centre	aisle	between	the	officers’	tents,	out	past	the
kitchen	camps,	the	offal	pits,	the	latrine	rows.	Like	peeling	back	the	orderly
façade,	down	now	among	the	foul	rubbish	of	our	leavings.	Ah,	Firehair,	I	am	not
so	blind	as	to	miss	the	meaning	of	this	journey.
When	at	last	she	halted,	they	were	beyond	the	northeast	pickets.	For	Spax	to
make	his	way	to	the	distant	Letherii	encampment,	he	need	only	strike	out
northward,	angling	slightly	to	the	west.	He	could	see	the	fitful	glow	from	the
prince’s	position.	Like	us,	they’re	running	out	of	things	to	burn.
Abrastal	faced	east,	to	where	just	beyond	a	ribbon	of	white	bones	the	Glass
Desert	was	a	sea	of	sharp,	glittering	stars	lying	as	if	scattered	in	death,	bathed
in	emerald	light.	‘The	Wastelands,’	she	murmured.
‘Highness?’
‘Who	won	here,	Spax?’
‘As	we	can	see.	No	one	won.’
‘And	in	the	Glass	Desert?’
He	squinted.	‘It	hurts	the	eye,	Firehair.	Blood	was	spilled	there,	I	think.
Immortal	blood.’
‘Would	you	throw	the	crime	at	the	feet	of	humans?’
He	grunted.	‘Now	you	split	reeds,	Highness.	It	is	the	wilful	mind	that	is
Nature’s	enemy,	for	out	of	that	wilfulness	comes	arrogance—’
‘And	contempt.	Warchief,	it	seems	we	will	all	face	a	terrible	choice,	then.
Are	we	worth	saving?	You?	Me?	My	children?	My	people?’
‘Do	you	now	waver	in	your	resolve?’
She	faced	him.	‘Do	you?’
Spax	scratched	his	beard	with	both	hands.	‘All	that	Krughava	said	when	she
was	ousted.	I	have	considered	it,	again	and	again.’	He	grimaced.	‘Now	it	seems
that	even	Spax	of	the	Gilk	can	revise	his	views.	A	time	of	miracles	to	be	sure.	I
will,	I	think,	choose	to	see	it	this	way:	if	nature	must	win	in	the	end,	then	let	the
death	of	our	kind	be	sweet	and	slow.	So	sweet,	so	slow,	that	we	do	not	even
notice.	Let	us	fade	and	dwindle	in	our	tyranny,	from	world	to	continent,	from
continent	to	country,	from	country	to	city,	city	to	neighbourhood,	to	home,	to
the	ground	under	our	feet,	and	finally	down	to	the	pointless	triumphs	inside
each	of	our	skulls.’
‘These	are	not	the	words	of	a	warrior.’
He	heard	the	harsh	emotion	in	her	tone	and	nodded	in	the	darkness.	‘If	it	is
true	and	the	Grey	Helms	seek	to	be	the	swords	of	nature’s	vengeance,	then	the
Shield	Anvil	has	missed	the	point.	Since	when	is	nature	interested	in	revenge?
Look	around.’	He	waved	a	hand.	‘The	grass	grows	back	where	it	can.	The	birds


nest	where	they	can.	The	soil	breathes	when	it	can.	It	just	goes	on,	Highness,	the
only	way	it	knows	how	to	–	with	what’s	left.’
‘The	same	as	us,’	she	said.
‘Maybe	this	is	what	Krughava	could	see	so	clearly,	and	Tanakalian	can’t.
When	we	war	against	nature,	we	war	against	ourselves.	There	is	no	distinction,
no	dividing	line,	no	enemy.	We	devour	everything	in	a	lust	for	self-destruction.
As	if	that	is	intelligence’s	only	gift.’
‘Only	curse,	you	mean.’
He	shrugged.	‘I	suppose	there	is	a	gift	is	in	being	able	to	see	what	we’re
doing,	even	as	we	do	it.	And	in	seeing,	we	come	to	understand.’
‘Knowledge	we	choose	not	to	use,	Spax.’
‘I	have	no	answer	to	that,	Firehair.	Before	our	inaction,	I	am	as	helpless	as
the	next	man.	But	it	may	be	that	we	all	feel	that	way.	Smart	as	we	are
individually,	together	we	become	stupid,	appallingly	stupid.’	He	shrugged
again.	‘Even	the	gods	cannot	find	a	way	through	this.	And	even	if	they	had,
we’d	not	listen,	would	we?’
‘I	see	her	face,	Spax.’
Her	face.	Yes.	‘It’s	not	much	of	a	face,	is	it?	So	plain,	so…lifeless.’
Abrastal	flinched.	‘Find	another	word,	please.’
‘Bleak,	then.	But	she	makes	no	effort,	does	she?	Nothing	regal	in	her
clothes.	Not	a	single	item	of	jewellery.	No	paint	on	her	face,	or	her	lips,	and
her	hair	–	so	short,	so…ah,	Highness,	why	does	any	of	that	even	bother	me?
But	it	does,	and	I	don’t	know	why.’
‘Nothing…regal,’	Abrastal	mused.	‘If	what	you	say	is	true	–	and	yes,	so	it
seems	to	me	as	well	–	then	why,	when	I	look	upon	her,	do	I	see…well,
something…’
That	I	did	not	see	before.	Or	that	I	did	not	understand.	She	ever	grows	in
my	mind,	this	Adjunct	Tavore.	‘Noble,’	he	said.
She	gasped.	‘Yes!’
‘She	doesn’t	fight	against	nature,	does	she?’
‘Is	it	just	that?	Is	that	all	it	is?’
Spax	shook	his	head.	‘Highness,	you	say	you	keep	seeing	her	face.	It	is	the
same	for	me.	I	am	haunted	and	I	do	not	know	why.	It	floats	behind	my	eyes	and
I	fix	upon	it	again	and	again,	as	if	I’m	waiting.	Waiting	to	see	the	expression	it
will	assume,	that	one	expression	of	truth.	It’s	coming.	I	know	it	is,	and	so	I	look
upon	her	and	I	cannot	stop	looking	upon	her.’
‘She	has	made	us	all	lost,’	Abrastal	said.	‘I	did	not	anticipate	I	would	feel
so	troubled,	Spax.	It’s	not	in	my	nature.	Like	some	prophet	of	old,	she	has
indeed	led	us	out	into	the	wilderness.’


‘Until	she	leads	us	home.’
Abrastal	turned	and	stepped	closer,	her	eyes	glittering.	‘And	will	she?’
‘In	that	nobility,	Firehair,’	he	replied	in	a	whisper,	‘I	find	faith.’	Against	the
despair.	As	did	Krughava.	And	in	the	Adjunct’s	small	hand,	like	a	wispy	seed,
there	is	compassion.
He	watched	her	eyes	widen,	and	then	her	hand	was	behind	his	head,	pulling
him	close.	One	hard	kiss,	and	then	she	pushed	him	away.	‘It’s	getting	cold,’	she
said,	setting	off	for	camp.	Over	a	shoulder	she	added,	‘You	should	be	able	to
reach	the	Letherii	before	dawn.’
Spax	stared	after	her.	Very	well,	it	seems	we	will	do	this,	after	all.	Hood,	the
Lord	of	Death,	stood	before	me	and	spoke	of	fear.	The	fear	of	the	dead.	But	if
the	dead	know	fear,	what	hope	do	we	have?
Tavore,	does	a	god	stand	in	your	shadow?	Ready	to	offer	us	a	gift,	for	the
sacrifices	we	will	make?	Is	this	your	secret,	the	thing	that	takes	away	all	your
fear?	Please,	lean	close,	and	whisper	it	to	me.
But	that	face,	there	behind	his	eyes,	might	have	been	as	far	away	as	the
moon.	And	if	the	gods	came	at	last	to	crowd	round	her,	would	they	too	look
down,	in	perilous	wonder,	at	that	frail	magic	in	the	palm	of	her	hand?	Would	it
frighten	them?
When	it	so	frightens	the	rest	of	us?
He	looked	out	over	the	Glass	Desert’s	offering	of	dead	stars.	Tavore,	do
you	now	shine	bright	among	them,	just	one	more	of	the	fallen?	And	would	there
come	a	time	when	her	bones	came	crawling	to	this	shore	to	join	all	the	others?
Spax,	Warchief	of	the	Gilk	Barghast,	shivered	like	a	child	left	naked	in	the
night,	and	the	question	pursued	him	as	he	set	out	for	the	Letherii	camp.
	
She	had	always	considered	the	notion	of	penance	to	be	pathetic	selfindulgence,	and	those	that	set	out	upon	such	a	course,	choosing	isolation	and
abnegation	in	some	remote	cave	or	weathered	hut,	were	to	her	mind	little	more
than	cowards.	The	ethics	of	the	world	belonged	to	society,	to	that	fraught
maelstrom	of	relationships,	where	argument	and	fierce	emotions	waged
eternal	war.
Yet	here	she	sat,	alone	beneath	a	green-limned	sky,	with	a	slumbering
horse	her	only	company,	and	all	her	private	arguments	were	slowly	drifting
away,	as	if	she	walked	through	one	room	after	another,	leaving	ever	further
behind	some	regal	chamber	echoing	with	raucous	debate.	The	irritation	that
was	futility	was	finally	gone,	and	in	the	silence	ahead	she	sensed	the	gift	of
peace.


Krughava	snorted.	Perhaps	all	those	hermits	and	aesthetes	were	wiser	than
she	had	ever	suspected.	Tanakalian	now	stood	in	her	place,	there	at	the	head	of
the	Grey	Helms,	and	he	would	lead	them	where	he	willed.	She	had	been	caught
out	by	the	logic	of	his	argument,	and,	like	a	wolf	brought	to	bay	by	hounds,
she	had	found	herself	assailed	as	he	closed	in.
Contradiction.	In	the	rational	realm,	the	word	was	a	blistering
condemnation.	Proof	of	flawed	logic.	To	expose	it	in	an	adversary’s	position
was	akin	to	delivering	a	deathblow,	and	she	well	recalled	the	triumphant	gleam
in	his	eyes	in	the	instant	he	struck.	But,	she	wondered	now,	where	was	the	crime
in	that	most	human	of	capacities:	to	carry	in	one’s	heart	a	contradiction,	to
leave	it	unchallenged,	immune	to	reconciliation;	indeed,	to	be	two	people	at
once,	each	true	to	herself,	and	neither	denying	the	presence	of	the	other?	What
vast	laws	of	cosmology	were	broken	by	this	human	talent?	Did	the	universe
split	asunder?	Did	reality	lose	its	way?
No.	In	fact,	it	seemed	that	the	only	realm	wherein	contradiction	had	any
power	at	all	was	the	realm	of	rational	argument.	And,	Krughava	admitted,	she
had	begun	to	doubt	that	realm’s	self-proclaimed	virtue.	Of	course,	Tanakalian
would	argue	that	her	terrible	crime	had	led	the	Perish	Grey	Helms	into	crisis.
Upon	whose	side	would	they	stand?	How	could	they	serve	more	than	one
master?	‘Will	we	not	fight	for	the	Wolves?	Will	we	not	fight	for	the	Wild?	Or
shall	we	commit	sacrilege	by	kneeling	before	a	mere	mortal	woman?	This	crisis,
Krughava,	is	of	your	own	making.’	Or	words	to	that	effect.
Perhaps	it	was	at	that	–	of	her	own	making.	And	yet…	Within	her	there	had
been	no	conflict,	no	brewing	storm	awaiting	them.	She	had	chosen	to	walk	at
Tavore	Paran’s	side.	Together	they	had	crossed	half	a	world.	And,	Krughava
had	been	certain,	at	the	very	end	they	would	have	remained	side	by	side,	two
women	against	a	raging	conflagration.	In	that	moment,	success	or	failure
would	lose	all	relevance.	The	triumph	was	in	the	stance.	In	the	defiance.
Because	this	is	the	essence	of	life	itself.	Human	and	wild,	in	that	moment	we	are
all	the	same.	Contradiction,	Tanakalian?	No.	I	would	show	you	this	final	gift.
Human	and	wild,	we	are	the	same.	I	would	have	shown	the	wolf	gods	the	truth
of	this.	Whether	they	liked	it	or	not.
And	this	contradiction	of	yours,	Shield	Anvil,	would	have	vanished	like	a
puff	of	smoke.
What	did	I	seek	in	our	faith?	I	sought	to	mend	the	impossible	crisis	that	is
our	worship	of	the	Wild,	our	worship	of	all	that	we	have	left	behind	and	to
which	we	can	never	return.	I	sought	reconciliation.	An	acceptance	of	the	brutal
contradiction	of	our	human	lives.
But	then	the	Adjunct	had	rejected	her.	There	was	an	old	saying	among	the


Perish	that	a	room	full	of	women	was	a	knife-seller ’s	vision	of	paradise.
‘There	will	be	betrayal.’	Oh	yes	indeed.	Betrayal.	So	unexpected,	so	hurtful	that
Tavore	might	as	well	have	slit	open	Krughava’s	throat,	watched	her	bleed	out
on	the	floor	of	the	command	tent.
And	now	the	Mortal	Sword	was	lost.
Contradiction.	You	would	choose	only	the	worthy	to	embrace,	Shield	Anvil?
Then	what	you	do	is	not	an	embrace,	sir.	It	is	a	reward.	And	if	you	are	to	taste
the	flavour	of	naught	but	virtuous	souls,	how	will	you	ever	find	the	strength	to
best	the	flaws	within	your	own	soul?	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian,	you	are	headed
into	difficult	times.
She	sat	alone,	head	lowered,	her	fur	cloak	drawn	tight	about	her.	Weapons
laid	out	to	one	side,	hobbled	horse	behind	her.	Run’Thurvian,	are	you	there,	old
friend?	You	refused	his	embrace.	Your	soul	is	left	to	wander	where	it	will.	Have
you	walked	with	me?	Can	you	not	hear	my	prayer?
I	was	betrayed,	and	then	betrayed	a	second	time.	If	I	am	cruel,	then	your
untimely	death	could	mark	the	first	of	three.	And	all	about	me	I	see…
contradiction.	You	were	the	Destriant.	From	you	comes	the	voice	of	our	gods.
But	now	the	gods	can	tell	us	nothing,	for	you	are	silent.	The	Grey	Helms	are	led
by	a	Shield	Anvil	who	has	elected	himself	the	sole	arbiter	of	righteousness.	I
avowed	service	to	the	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran,	only	to	have	her	send	me	away.
Nothing	is	as	it	seems	–
Her	breath	caught.	Ice	upon	the	surface	of	the	lake	seems	solid,	and	we
might	slide	quickly	from	place	to	place.	But	the	ice	is	thin	and	that	is	the
danger,	the	price	of	carelessness.	Did	I	not	question	the	contradiction’s
criminality?
She	rose	and	faced	the	Glass	Desert.	‘Adjunct	Tavore,’	she	whispered.
‘Have	I	skidded	too	sure	upon	the	ice?	If	I	am	untroubled	by	my	own
contradictions,	why	do	I	choose	to	see	yours	as	a	crime?	As	betrayal?’
That	Gilk	Warchief	–	was	it	he	who	spoke	of	Tavore’s	surrender	to	despair?
Her	expectation	of	failure?	Her	desire	to	spare	us	the	witnessing	of	that
failure?
Or	was	it	all	nothing	more	than	what	she	said	it	was:	a	tactical	necessity?
‘Destriant	–	old	friend.	Shall	it	be	my	own	people	who	become	the
betrayers?	Are	we	to	be	the	knife	that	fatally	strikes	Tavore	Paran	and	her
Malazans?	Run’Thurvian,	what	must	I	do?’
You	could	ride	back	to	the	camp,	woman,	and	slide	an	arm’s	length	of	cold
iron	through	the	bastard.
She	shook	her	head.	The	Grey	Helms	were	bound	to	strict	laws	and	would
not	permit	themselves	to	be	led	by	a	murderer.	No,	they	would	execute	her.	But


at	least	there	would	be	no	Tanakalian.	Who	would	take	command?	Heveth,
Lambat?	But	then,	would	they	not	feel	bound	to	their	last	commander’s
intentions?
Listen	to	yourself,	Krughava!	Actually	considering	outright	murder	of	a
fellow	Grey	Helm!
No,	that	was	the	wrong	direction,	the	wrong	path.	She	would	have	to	leave
the	Perish	to	whatever	fate	Tanakalian	found	for	them.	But	the	betrayal	–	well,
that	would	not	be	set	at	her	feet.
Krughava	faced	the	Glass	Desert.	I	will	ride	to	her.	I	will	warn	her.
And	I	will	stand	at	her	side	until	the	very	end.
All	doubt	vanished	from	her	mind.	She	collected	up	her	weapons.	See	how
clear	the	ice	has	become,	Run’Thurvian?	I	can	see	its	thickness.	Upon	this,	an
entire	army	could	march	without	fear.
Krughava	drew	a	deep	breath	of	cold	night	air,	and	then	turned	to	her
horse.	‘Ah,	friend,	I	have	one	thing	left	to	ask	of	you…’
	
The	Ve’Gath	stood	with	their	heads	tilted	downward,	as	if	contemplating	the
lifeless	earth	at	their	feet,	but	Gesler	knew	it	was	simply	the	way	they	slept	–	or,
rather,	rested,	since	as	far	as	he	could	tell	the	huge	reptilian	warriors	never
closed	their	eyes.	It	was	unnerving,	leading	an	army	like	this.	Like	commanding
ten	thousand	hounds.	But	they’re	smarter	than	hounds,	which	makes	it	even
worse.	The	wings	of	K’ell	Hunters	remained	well	beyond	the	encampment,
seemingly	immune	to	the	vicissitudes	of	food,	water	and	rest	–	their	endurance
made	him	feel	soft.	But	not	as	soft	as	Stormy.	Listen	to	that	bastard	snore	–	they
can	probably	hear	him	over	in	the	Letherii	camp.
He	knew	he	should	be	sleeping,	but	there	had	been	dreams.	Unpleasant
ones.	Disturbing	enough	to	drag	him	out	from	his	furs,	with	dawn	still	two
bells	away.	Now	he	stood	looking	upon	the	massed	Ve’Gath	legions.	They
were	halted	in	formation,	like	vast	assemblies	of	brooding	statues,	grey	as
dulled	iron	beneath	the	uncanny	night	sky.
He	had	been	kneeling,	as	if	broken,	and	the	dreamscape	surrounding	him
was	a	charnel	house	of	torn	bodies.	The	blood	had	soaked	up	through	his
leggings	and	now	thickened	against	the	skin	of	his	knees	and	shins.	Somewhere
fire	was	pouring	from	the	very	bedrock	and	roiling	gouts	of	deadly	gases
coiled	skyward	–	and	in	that	sky,	as	he’d	looked	up,	he’d	seen…something.
Clouds?	He	could	not	be	sure,	but	there	was	something	monstrous	about	them,
something	that	ripped	like	talons	into	his	chest.	He’d	seen	motion,	as	if	the	sky
itself	was	heaving.	A	gate?	Could	be.	But	no	gate	could	be	as	big	as	that.	It	took


the	whole	sky.	And	why	did	it	feel	as	if	I	was	to	blame	for	it?
Gesler	might	have	cried	out	then.	Enough	to	rattle	him	awake.	He’d	lain
beneath	the	furs,	sweat-soaked	and	shivering.	From	the	nearby	ranks	of
Ve’Gath	came	a	stirring	motion,	as	the	flavours	of	his	distress	agitated	the
sleeping	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Muttering	under	his	breath,	he’d	risen	to	his	feet.
An	army	encamped	without	cookfires,	without	tents,	or	roped	pens	or	the
ragged	sprawl	of	followers.	It	didn’t	seem	proper.	In	fact,	it	didn’t	seem	real.
The	Wickan	cattledog,	Bent,	had	found	him	then.	Misshapen	snout,	one
clouded	eye,	the	gleam	of	canines	and	splintered	teeth	–	he’d	never	seen	so
many	scars	on	a	single	animal.	But	as	the	beast	drew	up,	Gesler	remembered
back	to	a	late	afternoon	on	the	Aren	Way.
Hunting	survivors.	And	how	pathetic	was	that	–	two	damned	dogs.	Among
so	many	corpses	the	memory	haunts	me	to	this	day.	Two	damned	dogs.
And	then	that	Trell,	there	on	the	wagon.
All	of	us	on	the	bed,	me,	Stormy,	Truth	and	that	Trell.	Willing	two	dying
animals	back	to	life.	Truth	–	he	was	weeping,	but	we	knew	what	it	was	all	about.
We	knew	it	because	we	felt	it.	So	many	had	been	taken	from	us	that	day.
Coltaine.	Bult.	Lull.
Duiker	–	gods,	finding	him	crucified	like	that,	at	the	road’s	end,	staked	to
the	last	of	those	ghastly	trees	–	no,	we	couldn’t	tell	Truth	about	that.	It’s	what
made	the	name	we’d	given	him	sting	us	so	afterwards.	We	kept	it	from	him,	me
and	Stormy	–	but	that	Trell	saw	through	us.	And	was	good	enough	to	say
nothing.
We	saved	the	lives	of	two	dumb	dogs,	and	it	was	like	a	new	dawn.
He	looked	down	at	Bent.	‘Remember	that	day,	you	ugly	horror?’
The	wide	head	lifted,	the	motion	stretching	the	torn	lips	back	from	the
crooked	teeth,	the	misaligned	jaw	that	should	have	made	the	dog	look	comical,
but	didn’t.	No.	Instead,	it	broke	the	heart.	All	you	did	in	our	name.	Too	loyal	for
your	own	good.	Too	brave	to	know	any	different.	And	still	you	failed	to	protect
them.	Would	you	have	been	happier	if	we’d	let	you	die?	Freed	your	spirits	to
run	with	the	ones	you	loved?
Did	we	hurt	you	that	day?	Me	and	Stormy	and	Truth	and	that	Trell?	‘I	hear
you,’	he	whispered,	studying	the	dog.	‘The	way	you	wince	when	you	get	up
after	another	night	on	cold	ground.	I	see	you	limping	at	day’s	end,	Bent.’	You
and	me,	we’re	both	breaking	down.	This	journey	will	be	the	last	of	us,	won’t	it?
You	and	me,	Bent.	The	last	of	us.	‘I’ll	take	your	side	when	the	time	comes,’	he
said.	‘In	fact,	I	will	die	for	you,	dog.	It’s	the	least	I	can	do.’	The	promise
sounded	foolish,	and	he	looked	round	to	make	certain	no	one	else	was	near.
Their	only	company	was	the	other	dog,	Roach,	digging	frantically	at	some


mouse	hole.	Gesler	sighed.	But	who	says	my	life’s	worth	any	more	than	this
dog’s?	Or	that	its	life	is	worth	less	than	mine?	Who	stands	around	measuring
these	things?	The	gods?	Hah!	Good	one.	No.	We	do,	and	that’s	the	sorriest	joke
of	all.
Feeling	chilled,	he	shook	himself.
Bent	sat	down	on	his	left,	yawned	with	a	grinding,	grating	sound.
Gesler	grunted.	‘We	seen	a	lot,	ain’t	we?	All	that	grey	in	our	muzzles,
hey?’
Aren	Way.	The	sun	was	hot,	but	we	could	barely	feel	it.	Truth	brushing	the
flies	from	the	wounds.	We	don’t	like	death.	It’s	as	simple	as	that.	We	don’t	like
it.
He	heard	soft	footpads	and	turned	to	see	Destriant	Kalyth	approaching.
When	she	settled	down	on	Bent’s	other	side	and	rested	a	hand	on	the	beast’s
head,	Gesler	flinched.	But	the	dog	did	not	move.
He	grunted.	‘Never	seen	Bent	accept	that	from	anybody,	Destriant.’
‘South	of	the	Glass	Desert,’	she	said.	‘We	are	soon	to	enter	the	homeland
of	my	people.	Not	my	tribes,	but	our	kin.	The	Elan	lived	on	the	plains	that
enclose	the	Glass	Desert	on	three	sides.	My	own	clan	was	to	the	north.’
‘Then	you	can’t	be	certain	they’re	all	dead	–	these	ones	in	the	south.’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	am.	The	voice-slayers	from	Kolanse	hunted	down
the	last	of	us.	Those	that	didn’t	die	from	the	drought,	I	mean.’
‘Kalyth,	if	you	got	away,	others	did	too.’
‘I	hope	not,’	she	whispered,	and	she	set	to	massaging	the	cattledog,	along
the	shoulders,	down	the	length	of	the	beast’s	back	to	the	hips,	and	under	her
breath	she	chanted	something	in	her	own	language.	Bent’s	eyes	slowly	closed.
Gesler	watched	her,	wondering	at	the	meaning	of	her	reply.	Whispered	like
a	prayer.	‘It	seems,’	he	muttered	after	a	moment,	‘that	us	survivors	all	share	the
same	torment.’
She	glanced	up	at	him.	‘That	is	why	you	and	the	Shield	Anvil	always	argue.
It’s	like	watching	your	children	die,	isn’t	it?’
A	clutch	of	pain	inside	made	him	look	away.	‘I	don’t	know	why	the	Adjunct
wants	it	this	way,	but	I	do	know	why	she’s	keeping	it	all	inside.	She	has	no
choice.	Maybe	none	of	us	do	–	we	are	what	we	are,	and	no	amount	of	talking
or	explaining	is	going	to	make	a	difference	to	anything.’
Bent	was	lying	down	now,	breathing	slow	in	sleep.	Kalyth	slowly	withdrew
her	hands.
‘You	just	took	away	his	pain,	didn’t	you?’
She	shrugged.	‘My	people	kept	such	animals.	As	children,	we	all	learned
the	songs	of	peace.’


‘“Songs	of	peace,”’	Gesler	mused.	‘It’d	be	nice	to	hear	a	few	more	of	those
in	the	world,	wouldn’t	it?’
‘Not	any	time	soon,	I	fear.’
‘They	just	found	you,	didn’t	they?	In	their	search	for	people	to	lead	them.’
She	nodded,	straightening.	‘It	wasn’t	fair.	But	I’m	glad	of	it,	Mortal
Sword.’	She	faced	him.	‘I	am.	And	I	am	glad	of	you.	And	Stormy	–	and	these
dogs.	Even	Grub.’
But	not	Sinn.	No	one	is	glad	of	Sinn.	Poor	girl	–	she	probably	knows	it,	too.
‘Sinn	lost	her	brother,’	he	said.	‘But	she	might	have	been	unhinged	long	before
that.	She	was	caught	in	a	rebellion.’	He	glanced	down	at	Bent.	‘No	one	came
through	it	unscarred.’
‘As	you	said,	the	curse	of	surviving.’
‘Making	us	no	different	from	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,’	he	observed.	‘I’m
surprised	it	took	them	so	long	to	realize	it.’
‘Gunth	Mach’s	mother	realized	it,	and	for	that	she	was	deemed	insane.	If
we	do	not	fight	together,	we	end	up	fighting	each	other.	She	died	before	she
could	witness	the	fruits	of	her	vision.	She	died	believing	she	had	failed.’
‘Kalyth,	the	winged	assassin,	Gu’Rull,	does	it	remain	guarding	us?’
She	looked	skyward,	eyes	narrowing	at	the	Jade	Strangers.	‘I	sent	the
Shi’gal	to	scout	our	approach.’
‘Into	Kolanse?	Isn’t	that	risky?’
She	shrugged.	‘In	truth,	Gu’Rull	serves	Gunth	Mach	–	it	is	by	her
command	that	she	releases	him	to	us.	This	time,	however,	the	Matron	and	I
agreed.	Mortal	Sword,	from	the	visions	Gu’Rull	has	given	me,	I	do	not	think
the	Grey	Helms	accept	your	command.’
Gesler	snorted.	‘Pious	bores	–	I’m	glad	of	that,	truth	be	told.	Oh,	Krughava
looked	to	be	capable	and	all	that,	but	I	tell	you,	all	that	Wolf-worshipping	made
me	uneasy.’	Noting	her	raised	brow	he	shrugged	and	said,	‘Aye,	I	went	and
picked	my	own	god	of	war,	so	it’s	a	bit	much	to	be	going	on	about	the	Perish.
The	thing	is,	Kalyth,	it	makes	sense	for	a	soldier	to	choose	a	god	of	war.	It
doesn’t	make	sense	when	a	god	of	war	makes	soldiers	of	an	entire	people.	It’s
the	wrong	way	round,	right?	Well,	there’s	something	skewed	about	it	–	though
I	can’t	really	tell	you	why	I	feel	that	way.’
‘So	they	are	free	to	do	as	they	please?’
‘I	suppose	so.	I	don’t	know	much	about	this	Tanakalian,	except	that	he’d
have	done	well	in	the	Malazan	court,	if	there’s	any	truth	to	the	story	of	how	he
usurped	Krughava.	People	like	that,	Kalyth,	I	don’t	trust.	It’s	what	got	me	in	so
much	trouble	all	those	years	ago.	Anyway,	if	Tanakalian	wants	to	take	his
Perish	right	up	the	arsehole	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	well,	he’s	welcome	to	light


his	own	torch	and	go	to	it.’
‘What	are	your	thoughts	on	the	Letherii	prince,	Mortal	Sword?’
‘Him	I	like.	Aranict,	too.	Solid	people,	those	two.	From	what	I	heard	back
in	Letherii,	before	his	brother	took	the	throne,	Brys	was	some	kind	of	special
bodyguard	to	the	Letherii	emperor.	Unmatched	with	the	sword.	That	tells	me
more	about	him	than	you	think.’
‘In	what	way?’
‘Anyone	who	has	mastered	a	weapon	–	truly	mastered	it	–	is	a	humble	man
or	woman.	More	than	that,	I	know	how	he	thinks,	and	something	of	what	he
sees.	The	way	his	brain	works.	And	it	seems	that	making	him	a	prince	hasn’t
changed	him	any.	So,	Kalyth,	worry	not	about	the	Letherii.	Come	the	day,
they’ll	be	there.’
‘Leaving	only	the	Bolkando—’
‘She	defers	to	Brys,	I	think.	She	doesn’t	want	to,	but	that’s	just	how	it	is.
Besides,’	Gesler	added,	‘she	has	red	hair.’
Kalyth	frowned.	‘I	don’t	understand.’
‘Me	and	Stormy,	we’re	Falari.	Plenty	of	red-haired	people	in	Falar.	So,	I’ll
tell	you	what	Abrastal	is	like.	Deadly	temper,	glowing-hot	iron,	but	being	a
mother	she’s	learned	the	wisdom	of	knowing	what’s	in	her	control	and	what
isn’t.	She	doesn’t	like	it	but	she	lives	with	it.	Likes	her	sex,	too,	but	prone	to
jealousy	–	and	all	of	that	bluster,	why,	it’s	all	for	show.	Inside,	she’s	just
looking	for	a	man	like	me.’
She	gasped.	‘But	she’s	married!	And	to	a	king!’
Gesler	grinned.	‘Was	just	seeing	if	you	were	still	listening,	Destriant.	Saw
your	attention	drifting	there.’
‘A	Hunter	found	me	–	you’re	closed	off	and	Stormy	is	sleeping.	A	rider
was	seen,	out	from	close	to	the	Perish	camp,	riding	into	the	Glass	Desert.’
‘Any	more	detail	than	that?’
‘You	can	see	what	the	Hunter	saw,	Mortal	Sword.’
‘Right,	I	can,	can’t	I?’	He	concentrated	for	a	moment,	and	then	swore	under
his	breath.	‘Krughava.’
‘Where—’
‘To	the	Adjunct,	I’d	wager.	But	she’ll	never	make	it.’
‘What	should	we	do?’
Gesler	scratched	his	jaw,	and	then	wheeled	round.	‘Stormy!	Wake	up,	you
fat	bearded	ox!’


Book	Five

A	Hand	Upon	The	Fates

	


	

‘I	have	had	visions	of	the	future,	and	each	and	every	one	of	them	ends
up	in	the	same	place.	Don’t	ask	me	what	it	means.	I	already	know.
That’s	the	problem	with	visions	of	the	future.’
Emperor	Kellanved


Chapter	Fourteen

Where	is	the	meaning	in	this	stride	foot	following	foot?
Why	must	the	land	crawl	so	beneath	us	in	our	journey?
All	to	take	us	to	the	place	where	we	began	so	long	ago
Only	to	find	it	strange	and	unknown	and	unredeemed
Who	has	blazed	this	trail	and	how	weary	must	I	become
Before	the	rain	grows	gentle	and	soft	as	tears	on	the	brow?
Until	the	valley	unfolds	into	a	river	the	sweet	colour	of	sand
And	trees	ribbon	the	sky	overhead	with	dusty	leaves?
How	weary	must	you	become	as	you	rattle	the	chains
And	drown	in	the	banners	of	meaning	and	rueful	portent?
If	I	make	you	share	my	torment	foot	following	foot
Know	that	this	is	my	curse	of	the	swallowed	key
And	cruel	desire
And	when	our	blood	mixes	and	drains	in	the	grey	earth
When	the	faces	blur	before	our	eyes	in	these	last	of	last	days
We	shall	turn	about	to	see	the	path	of	years	we	have	made
And	wail	at	the	absence	of	answers	and	the	things	left	unseen
For	this	is	life’s	legion	of	truth	so	strange	so	unknown
So	unredeemed	and	we	cannot	know	what	we	will	live
Until	the	journey	is	done
My	beautiful	legion,	leave	me	to	rest	on	the	wayside
As	onward	you	march	to	the	circling	sun
Where	spin	shadows	tracing	the	eternal	day
Raise	stones	to	signal	my	passing
Unmarked	and	mysterious
Saying	nothing	of	me
Saying	nothing	at	all
The	legion	is	faceless	and	must	ever	remain	so
As	faceless	as	the	sky
Skull’s	Lament
Anomandaris


Fisher	kel	Tath
.	Again	and	again	their
swirling	mass	dimmed	the	sun	with	a	blessed	gift	of	shadow	that	moments	later
broke	apart,	proving	that	curses	hid	in	every	gift,	and	that	blessings	could	pass
in	the	blink	of	an	eye.
An	eye	swarming	with	flies.	Badalle	could	feel	and	indeed	see	them
clustering	at	the	corners;	she	could	feel	them	drinking	her	tears.	She	did	not
resent	their	need,	and	their	frenzied	crawl	and	buzz	felt	cool	against	her
scorched	cheeks.	Those	that	crowded	her	mouth	she	ate	when	she	could,	the
taste	bitter	when	she	crushed	them,	the	wings	like	patches	of	dry	skin	almost
impossible	to	swallow.
Since	the	Shards	had	left,	only	the	butterflies	and	the	flies	remained,	and
there	was	something	pure	in	these	last	two	forces.	One	white,	the	other	black.
Only	the	extremes	remained:	from	the	unyielding	ground	below	to	the	hollow
sky	above;	from	the	push	of	life	to	the	pull	of	death;	from	the	breath	hiding
within	to	the	last	to	leave	a	fallen	child.
The	flies	fed	upon	the	living,	but	the	butterflies	waited	for	the	dead.	There
was	nothing	in	between.	Nothing	but	this	walking,	the	torn	feet	and	the	stains
they	left	behind,	the	figures	toppling	and	then	stepped	over.
In	her	head,	Badalle	was	singing.	She	sensed	the	presence	of	others	–	not
those	ahead	of	her	or	those	behind	her,	but	ghostly	things.	Invisible	eyes	and
veiled	thoughts.	An	impatience,	a	harsh	desire	for	judgement.	As	if	the	Snake’s
very	existence	was	an	affront.	To	be	ignored.	Denied.	Fled	from.
But	she	would	not	permit	any	to	escape.	They	did	not	have	to	like	what	they
saw.	They	did	not	have	to	like	her	at	all.	Or	Rutt	or	Held	or	Saddic	or	any	of
the	bare	thousand	still	alive.	They	could	rail	at	her	thoughts,	at	the	poetry	she
found	in	the	heart	of	suffering,	as	if	it	had	no	meaning	to	them,	no	value.	No
truth.	They	could	do	all	of	that;	still	she	would	not	let	them	go.
I	am	as	true	as	anything	you	have	ever	seen.	A	dying	child,	abandoned	by
the	world.	And	I	say	this:	there	is	nothing	truer.	Nothing.
Flee	from	me	if	you	can.	I	promise	I	will	haunt	you.	This	is	my	only	purpose
now,	the	only	one	left	to	me.	I	am	history	made	alive,	holding	on	but	failing.	I
am	everything	you	would	not	think	of,	belly	filled	and	thirst	slaked,	there	in	all
your	comforts	surrounded	by	faces	you	know	and	love.
But	hear	me.	Heed	my	warning.	History	has	claws.
Saddic	still	carried	his	hoard.	He	dragged	it	behind	him.	In	a	sack	made	of
clothes	no	longer	needed	by	anyone.	His	treasure	trove.	His	…things.	What	did
WHITE	AS	BONE,	THE	BUTTERFLIES	FORMED	A	VAST	CLOUD	OVERHEAD


he	want	with	them?	What	meaning	hid	inside	that	sack?	All	those	stupid	bits,	the
shiny	stones,	the	pieces	of	wood.	And	the	way,	with	every	dusk,	when	they
could	walk	no	further,	he	would	take	them	all	out	to	look	at	them	–	why	did	that
frighten	her?
Sometimes	he	would	weep,	for	no	reason.	And	make	fists	as	if	to	crush	all
his	baubles	into	dust,	and	it	was	then	that	she	realized	that	Saddic	didn’t	know
what	they	meant	either.	But	he	wouldn’t	leave	them	behind.	That	sack	would	be
the	death	of	him.
She	imagined	the	moment	when	he	fell.	This	boy	she	would	have	liked	for
a	brother.	On	to	his	knees,	hands	all	entwined	in	the	cloth	sleeves,	falling
forward	so	that	his	face	struck	the	ground.	He’d	try	to	get	back	up,	but	he’d
fail.	And	the	flies	would	swarm	him	until	he	was	no	longer	even	visible,	just	a
seething,	glittering	blackness.	Where	Saddic	had	been.
They’d	eat	his	last	breath.	Drink	the	last	tears	from	his	eyes	which	now	just
stared.	Invade	his	open	mouth	to	make	it	dry	as	a	cave,	a	spider	hole.	And	then
the	swarm	would	explode,	rush	away	seeking	more	of	life’s	sweet	water.	And
down	would	descend	the	butterflies.	To	strip	away	his	skin,	and	the	thing	left	–
with	its	sack	–	would	no	longer	be	Saddic.
Saddic	will	be	gone.	Happy	Saddic.	Peaceful	Saddic,	a	ghost	hovering,
looking	down	at	that	sack.	I	would	have	words	for	him,	for	his	passing.	I	would
stand	over	him,	looking	down	at	all	those	fluttering	wings	so	like	leaves,	and	I
would	try,	one	more	time,	to	make	sense	of	the	sack,	the	sack	that	killed	him.
And	I	would	fail.	Making	my	words	few.	Weak.	A	song	of	unknowing.	All	I
have	for	my	brother	Saddic.
When	that	time	comes,	I	will	know	it	is	time	for	me	to	die,	too.	When	that
time	comes,	I	will	give	up.
And	so	she	sang.	A	song	of	knowing.	The	most	powerful	song	of	all.
They	had	a	day	left,	maybe	two.
Is	this	what	I	wanted?	Every	journey	must	end.	Out	here	there	is	nothing
but	ends.	No	beginnings	left.	Out	here,	I	have	nothing	but	claws.
‘Badalle.’	The	word	was	soft,	like	crumpled	cloth,	and	she	felt	it	brush	her
senses.
‘Rutt.’
‘I	can’t	do	this	any	more.’
‘But	you	are	Rutt.	The	head	of	the	Snake.	And	Held,	who	is	the	tongue.’
‘No.	I	can’t.	I	have	gone	blind.’
She	moved	up	alongside	him,	studied	his	old	man’s	face.	‘They’re
swollen,’	she	said.	‘Closed	up,	Rutt.	It’s	to	keep	them	safe.	Your	eyes.’
‘But	I	can’t	see.’


‘There’s	nothing	to	see,	Rutt.’
‘I	can’t	lead.’
‘For	this,	there	is	no	one	better.’
‘Badalle—’
‘Even	the	stones	are	gone.	Just	walk,	Rutt.	The	way	is	clear;	for	as	far	as	I
can	see,	it’s	clear.’
He	loosed	a	sob.	The	flies	poured	in	and	he	bent	over,	coughing,	retching.
He	stumbled	and	she	caught	him	before	he	fell.	Rutt	righted	himself,	clutching
Held	tight.	Badalle	heard	a	soft	whimper	rising	from	them	both.
No	water.	This	is	what	is	killing	us	now.	Squinting,	she	glanced	back.
Saddic	was	nowhere	in	sight	–	had	he	already	fallen?	If	he	had,	it	would	be	just
as	well	that	she’d	not	seen	it.	Other	faces,	vaguely	familiar,	stared	at	her	and
Rutt,	waiting	for	the	Snake	to	begin	moving	once	again.	They	stood	hunched
over,	tottering.	They	stood	with	backs	arched	and	bellies	distended	as	if	about
to	drop	a	baby.	Their	eyes	were	depthless	pools	where	the	flies	gathered	to
drink.	Sores	crusted	their	noses,	their	mouths	and	ears.	Skin	on	cheeks	and
chins	had	cracked	open	and	glistened	beneath	ribbons	of	flies.	Many	were	bald,
missing	teeth,	their	gums	bleeding.	And	Rutt	was	not	alone	in	being	blind.
Our	children.	See	what	we	have	done	to	them.	Our	mothers	and	fathers	left
us	to	this,	and	now	we	leave	them,	too,	in	our	turn.	There	is	no	end	to	the
generations	of	the	foolish.	One	after	another	after	another	and	at	some	point
we	all	started	nodding	thinking	this	is	how	it	has	to	be,	and	so	we	don’t	even	try
to	change	things.	All	we	pass	down	to	our	children	is	the	same	stupid	grin.
But	I	have	claws.	And	I	will	tear	away	that	grin.	I	swear	it.
‘Badalle.’
She	had	begun	singing	out	loud.	Wordless,	the	tone	low	and	then	building,
thickening.	Until	she	could	feel	more	than	one	voice	within	her,	and	each	in
turn	joined	her	song.	Filling	the	air.	Their	sound	was	one	of	horror,	a	terrible
thing	–	she	felt	its	power	growing.	Growing.
‘Badalle?’
I	have	claws.	I	have	claws.	I	have	claws.	Show	me	that	grin	one	more	time.
Show	it,	I’m	begging	you!	Let	me	tear	it	from	your	face.	Let	me	rip	deep,	until
my	talons	score	your	teeth!	Let	me	feel	the	blood	and	let	me	hear	the	meat
splitting	and	let	me	see	the	look	in	your	eyes	as	you	meet	mine	let	me	see	I	have
claws	I	have	claws	I	have	claws—
‘Badalle!’
Someone	struck	her,	knocked	her	down.	Stunned,	she	stared	up	into
Saddic’s	face,	his	round,	wizened	face.	And	from	his	eyes	red	tears	tracked
down	through	the	dust	on	his	leathery	cheeks.


‘Don’t	cry,’	she	whispered.	‘It’s	all	right,	Saddic.	Don’t	cry.’
Rutt	knelt	beside	her,	groped	with	one	hand	until	his	fingers	brushed	her
forehead.	‘What	have	you	done?’
His	tone	startled	her.	The	cloth	is	torn.	‘They’re	all	too	weak,’	she	said.
‘Too	weak	to	feel	anger.	So	I	felt	it	for	them	–	for	all	of	you—’	She	stopped.
Rutt’s	fingertips	leaked	blood.	She	could	feel	crystal	shards	digging	into	her
back.	What?
‘You	moved	us,’	Saddic	said.	‘It…hurt.’
She	could	hear	wailing	now.	The	Snake	was	writhing	in	pain.	‘I	went…I
went	looking.’
‘For	what?’	Rutt	demanded.	‘For	what?’
‘For	claws.’
Saddic	shook	his	head.	‘Badalle.	We’re	children.	We	don’t	have	claws.’
The	sun	dimmed	then	and	she	squinted	past	Saddic.	But	the	butterflies	were
gone.	Flies,	look	at	all	the	flies.
‘We	don’t	have	claws,	Badalle.’
‘No,	Saddic,	you’re	right.	We	don’t.	But	someone	does.’
The	power	of	the	song	still	clung	to	her,	fierce	as	a	promise.	Someone
does.	‘I’m	taking	us	there,’	she	said,	meeting	Saddic’s	wide	eyes.
He	drew	back,	leaving	her	to	stare	up	at	the	sky.	Flies,	roiling	in	a	massive
cloud,	black	as	the	Abyss.	She	clambered	to	her	feet.	‘Take	my	hand,	Rutt.	It’s
time	to	walk.’
	
She	crouched,	staring	up	at	the	gate.	Beneath	it	the	crumbling	ruin	of	Kettle
House	was	like	a	thing	crushed	under	a	heel.	Something	like	blood	oozed	out
from	its	roots	to	carve	runnels	down	the	slope.	She	believed	it	was	dead,	but	of
course	there	was	no	way	to	know	for	sure.
There	was	no	glory	in	failure.	Kilava	had	learned	that	long,	long	ago.	The
passing	of	an	age	was	always	one	of	dissolution,	a	final	sigh	of	exhaustion	and
surrender.	She	had	seen	her	kin	vanish	from	the	world	–	the	venal	mockery	that
were	the	T’lan	Imass	hardly	weighed	as	much	as	dust	upon	the	scales	of
survival	–	and	she	well	understood	the	secret	desires	of	Olar	Ethil.
Maybe	the	hag	would	succeed.	The	spirits	knew,	she	was	ripe	for
redemption.
Kilava	had	lied.	To	Onrack,	to	Udinaas,	to	Ulshun	Pral	and	his	clan.	There
had	been	no	choice.	To	remain	here	would	have	seen	them	all	slain,	and	she
would	not	have	that	on	her	conscience.
When	the	wound	was	breached,	the	Eleint	would	enter	this	world.	There


was	no	hope	of	stopping	them.	T’iam	could	not	be	denied,	not	with	what	was
coming.
The	only	unknown,	to	her	mind,	was	the	Crippled	God.	The	Forkrul	Assail
were	simple	enough,	as	bound	to	the	insanity	of	final	arguments	as	were	the
Tiste	Liosan.	Kin	in	spirit,	those	two.	And	she	believed	she	knew	what	her
brother	intended	to	do,	and	she	would	leave	him	to	it,	and	if	her	blessing	meant
anything,	well	then	he	had	it,	with	all	her	heart.	No,	the	Crippled	God	was	the
only	force	that	troubled	her.
She	remembered	the	earth’s	pain	when	he	was	brought	down	from	the	sky.
She	remembered	his	fury	and	his	agony	when	first	he	was	chained.	But	the	gods
were	hardly	done	with	him.	They	returned	again	and	again,	crushing	him	down,
destroying	his	every	attempt	to	find	a	place	for	himself.	If	he	cried	out	for
justice,	no	one	was	interested	in	listening.	If	he	howled	in	wretched	suffering,
they	but	turned	away.
But	the	Crippled	God	was	not	alone	in	that	neglect.	The	mortal	realm	was
crowded	with	those	who	were	just	as	wounded,	just	as	broken,	just	as	forgotten.
In	this	way,	all	that	he	had	become	–	his	very	place	in	the	pantheon	–	had	been
forged	by	the	gods	themselves.
And	now	they	feared	him.	Now,	they	meant	to	kill	him.
‘Because	the	gods	will	not	answer	mortal	suffering.	It	is	too	much…work.’
He	must	know	what	they	intended	–	she	was	certain	of	it.	He	must	be
desperate	in	seeking	a	way	out,	an	escape.	No	matter	what,	she	knew	he	would
not	die	without	a	fight.	Was	this	not	the	meaning	of	suffering?
Her	feline	eyes	narrowed	on	the	gate.	Starvald	Demelain	was	a	fiery	red
welt	in	the	sky,	growing,	deepening.
‘Soon,’	she	whispered.
She	would	flee	before	them.	To	remain	here	was	too	dangerous.	The
destruction	they	would	bring	to	this	world	would	beggar	the	dreams	of	even	the
Forkrul	Assail.	And	once	upon	the	mortal	realm,	so	crowded	with	pathetic
humans,	there	would	be	slaughter	on	a	colossal	scale.	Who	could	oppose	them?
She	smiled	at	the	thought.
‘There	are	a	few,	aren’t	there?	But	too	few.	No,	friends,	let	them	loose.
T’iam	must	be	reborn,	to	face	her	most	ancient	enemy.	Chaos	against	order,	as
simple	–	as	banal	–	as	that.	Do	not	stand	in	their	path	–	not	one	of	you	could
hope	to	survive	it.’
What	then	of	her	children?
‘Dear	brother,	let	us	see,	shall	we?	The	hag’s	heart	is	broken,	and	she	will
do	whatever	she	can	to	see	it	healed.	Despise	her,	Onos	–	the	spirits	know,	she
deserves	nothing	else	–	but	do	not	dismiss	her.	Do	not.’


It	seemed	very	complicated.
Kilava	Onass	looked	up	at	the	wound.
‘But	it	isn’t.	It	isn’t	anything	like	that	at	all.’
Rock	cracked	in	Kettle	House,	startling	her.	Reddish	mists	roiled	out	from
the	sundered	walls.
‘She	was	flawed,	was	Kettle.	Too	weak,	too	young.’	What	legacy	could	be
found	in	a	child	left	alone,	abandoned	to	the	fates?	How	many	truths	hid	in	the
scatter	of	small	bones?	Too	many	to	bear	thinking	about.
Another	stone	shattered,	the	sound	like	snapping	chains.
Kilava	returned	her	attention	to	the	gate.
	
Gruntle	slumped	against	a	massive	boulder,	in	the	full	sun,	and	leaned	his	head
back	against	the	warm	stone,	closing	his	eyes.	Instinct’s	a	bitch.	The	god	who
had	damned	him	was	a	burning	presence	deep	inside,	filling	him	with	an
urgency	he	could	not	understand.	His	nerves	were	frayed;	he	was	exhausted.
He	had	journeyed	through	countless	realms,	desperate	to	find	the	quickest
path	to	take	him…where?	A	gate.	A	disaster	about	to	be	unleashed.	What	is	it
you	so	fear,	Trake?	Why	can	you	not	just	tell	me,	you	miserable	rat-chewing
bastard?	Show	me	an	enemy.	Show	me	someone	I	can	kill	for	you,	since	that
seems	to	be	the	only	thing	that	pleases	you.
The	air	stank.	He	listened	to	the	flies	crawling	on	the	corpses	surrounding
him.	He	didn’t	know	where	he	was.	Broad-leafed	trees	encircled	the	glade;	he
had	heard	geese	flying	overhead.	But	this	was	not	his	world.	It	felt…different.
Like	a	place	twisted	by	sickness	–	and	not	the	sickness	that	had	taken	the	twenty
or	so	wretched	humans	lying	here	in	the	high	grasses,	marring	their	skin	with
weeping	pustules,	swelling	their	throats	and	forcing	their	tongues	past	blistered
lips.	No,	all	of	that	was	just	a	symptom	of	some	deeper	disease.
There	was	intention.	Here.	Someone	summoned	Poliel	and	set	her	upon
these	people.	I	am	being	shown	true	evil	–	is	that	what	you	wanted,	Trake?
Reminding	me	of	just	how	horrifying	we	can	be?	People	curse	you	and	the
pestilence	of	your	touch	ruins	countless	lives,	but	you	are	not	a	stranger	to	any
world.
These	people	–	someone	used	you	to	kill	them.
He	thought	he’d	seen	the	worst	of	humanity’s	flaws	back	in	Capustan,	in	the
Pannion	War.	An	entire	people	deliberately	driven	insane.	But	if	he	understood
the	truths	behind	that	war,	there	had	been	a	wounded	thing	at	the	very	core	of
the	Domin,	a	thing	that	could	only	lash	out,	claws	bared,	so	vast,	so	consuming
was	its	pain.


And	though	he	was	not	yet	ready	for	it,	a	part	of	him	understood	that
forgiveness	was	possible,	from	the	streets	of	Capustan	to	the	throne	in	Coral,
and	probably	beyond	–	there	had	been	mention	of	a	being	trapped	in	a	gate,
sealing	a	wound	with	its	own	life	force.	He	could	track	an	argument	through
all	that,	and	the	knowledge	gave	him	something	close	to	peace.	Enough	to	live
with.
But	not	here.	What	crime	did	they	commit	–	these	poor	people	–	to	earn
such	punishment?
He	could	feel	his	tears	drying	on	his	cheeks.	This	is…unforgivable.	Is	it	my
anger	you	want,	Trake?	Is	this	why	I	am	here,	to	be	reawakened?	Enough	of	the
shame,	the	grief,	the	self-recrimination,	is	that	what	you’re	telling	me?
Well	then,	it	hasn’t	worked.	All	I	see	here	is	what	we’re	capable	of	doing.
He	missed	Ganoes	Paran.	And	Itkovian.	Friends	to	whom	he	could	speak.
They	seemed	to	belong	to	a	different	life,	a	life	long	lost	to	him.	Harllo.	Ah,
you	should	see	your	namesake,	my	friend.	Oh,	how	you	would	have	loved	him	–
she’d	have	to	fight	you	off,	brick	up	the	doors	to	keep	you	from	being	his	father.
You’d	have	shown	her	what	it	meant	to	love	a	child	unconditionally.
Stonny,	do	you	miss	Harllo	as	much	as	I	do?
But	you’ve	got	the	boy.	You’ve	got	your	son.	And	I	promised	I	would	come
back.	I	promised.
‘What	would	you	do	here,	Master	of	the	Deck?’	His	question	was
swallowed	by	the	glade.	‘What	choice	would	you	make,	Paran?	We	weren’t
happy	with	our	lots,	were	we?	But	we	took	hold	of	them	anyway.	By	the	throat.
I	expect	you’ve	yet	to	relinquish	your	grip.	Me?	Ah,	gods,	how	I’ve	messed	it
up.’
In	his	dreams	he	had	seen	a	blackened	thing,	with	claws	of	red	and	fangs
dripping	gore.	Lying	panting,	dying,	on	churned-up	earth.	The	air	was	brittle
cold.	The	wind	whipped	about	as	if	warring	with	itself.	What	place	was	that?
That	place?	Gods,	it’s	where	I’m	going,	isn’t	it?	I	have	a	fight	ahead.	A
terrible	fight.	Is	she	my	ally?	My	lover?	Is	she	even	real?
It	was	time.	An	end	to	these	morbid	thoughts,	this	brush	with	selfindulgence.	He	knew	well	that	to	give	voice	to	certain	feelings,	to	expose	them
in	all	their	honesty,	made	him	vulnerable	to	derision.	‘Don’t	touch	us	with	what
you	feel.	We	don’t	believe	you.’	His	eyes	blinking	open,	he	looked	around.
Crows	on	the	branches,	but	even	they	were	not	yet	ready	to	feed.
Gruntle	climbed	to	his	feet,	walked	to	the	nearest	corpse.	A	young	man,
skin	of	burnished	bronze,	braided	hair	black	as	pitch.	Dressed	like	some	Rhivi
outlander.	Stone	tools,	a	wooden	club	at	his	waist	–	beautifully	carved,	shaped
like	a	cutlass,	the	edge	oiled	and	gleaming.	‘You	loved	that	sword,	didn’t	you?


But	it	didn’t	help	you.	Not	against	this.’
He	turned,	took	in	the	glade,	and	spread	his	arms.	‘You	died	miserable.	I
now	offer	you	something	more,	a	second	way.’
The	hair	on	the	back	of	his	neck	lifted.	Their	spirits	had	drawn	close.	‘You
were	warriors.	Come	with	me	and	be	warriors	once	again.	And	if	we	are	to	die,
then	it	shall	be	a	better	death.	I	can	offer	this	but	nothing	more.’
The	last	time	he	had	done	this,	his	followers	had	been	alive.	Until	this
moment,	he	had	not	even	known	that	this	was	possible,	this	breaching	of
death’s	barrier.	It’s	all	changing.	I	don’t	think	I	like	it.
The	spirits	drifted	back	to	their	bodies.	The	flies	scattered.
Moments	later,	limbs	twitched,	mouths	opened	to	dry	rasps.	Now,	Trake,	we
can’t	have	them	like	this,	can	we?	Heal	their	flesh,	you	piece	of	immortal	dung.
Power	filled	the	glade,	an	emanation	that	pushed	back	the	vile	curse	of	this
realm,	all	the	exultant	expressions	of	evil	that	seemed	to	thrive	unopposed	in
this	place.	Swept	away.	Refuted.
He	remembered	sitting	at	a	campfire,	listening	to	Harllo	going	on	about
something,	and	a	fragment	of	words	returned	to	him	now.	The	face	across	the
fire,	long	and	flickering.	‘War,	Gruntle.	Like	it	or	not,	it’s	the	spur	of
civilization.’	And	then	that	lopsided	grin.
‘Hear	that,	Trake?	I	just	figured	out	why	you’ve	granted	me	this	gift.	It’s	all
nothing	but	expedience	with	you.	One	hand	blesses	but	the	other	waits	for	the
coin.	And	you’ll	be	paid,	no	matter	what.	No	matter	what.’
Twenty-one	silent	warriors	now	faced	him,	their	sores	gone,	their	eyes
bright.	He	could	be	cruel	now	and	just	take	them.	‘He’ll	have	made	sure	you
can	understand	me.	He’ll	have	done	that,	I	think.’
Cautious	nods.
‘Good.	You	can	stay	here.	You	can	return	to	your	people	–	if	any	are	still
alive.	You	can	try	to	seek	vengeance	against	the	ones	who	killed	you.	But	you
know	you’ll	lose.	Against	the	evil	now	in	your	land,	you	are	doomed.
‘You’re	warriors.	When	you	run	with	me,	know	that	a	fight	awaits	us.	That
is	our	path.’	He	hesitated,	and	then	spat	to	one	side.	‘Is	there	glory	in	war?
Come	with	me	and	let’s	find	out.’
When	he	set	off,	twenty-one	warriors	followed.
And	when	he	awakened	his	power	they	rushed	closer.	This,	my	friends,	is
called	veering.	And	this,	my	friends,	is	the	body	of	a	tiger.
A	rather	big	one.
The	three	strangely	garbed	strangers	they	found	walking	on	the	trail	ahead
barely	had	time	to	lift	their	long	clubs	before	Gruntle	was	among	them.	Once
he	passed,	there	wasn’t	much	left	of	those	three	pale	men,	and	he	felt	the


pleasure	of	his	companions.	And	shared	it.	There’s	only	one	thing	to	do	with
evil.	Take	it	in	your	jaws	and	crush	it.
Then	they	were	gone	from	the	world.
	
What	place	washes	bones	up	like	driftwood?	Mappo’s	gaze	narrowed	on	the
flat,	blinding	stretch	awaiting	him.	Shards	of	quartz	and	gypsum	studded	the
colourless,	dead	ground,	like	knots	of	cacti.	The	horizon	was	level	behind
shimmering	waves	of	heat,	as	if	this	desert	reached	to	the	very	edge	of	the
world.
I	have	to	cross	it.
He	crouched,	reached	down	and	picked	up	a	long	bone,	studied	it.
Bhederin?	Maybe.	Not	yet	fully	grown.	He	collected	another.	Wolf	or	dog	jaw.
So,	this	desert	was	once	prairie.	What	happened?	The	bones	fell	with	a	clatter.
Straightening,	Mappo	drew	a	deep	breath.	I	think…	I	think	I	am	getting	tired	of
living.	Tired	of	the	whole	thing.	Nothing	is	working	like	it	used	to.	Flaws	are
appearing,	signs	of	things	breaking	down.	Inside.	The	very	core	of	my	spirit.
But	I	have	one	thing	left	to	do.	Just	one	thing	left,	and	then	I	can	be	done
with	all	this.	He	found	himself	drifting	off,	not	for	the	first	time,	finding	that
place	in	his	head	where	every	thought	rattled	like	chains,	and	he	could	only
drag	himself	in	crooked	circles,	the	weight	stealing	his	strength,	his
willingness	to	go	on.
One	thing	left.	It’s	down	to	managing	resources.	Harbouring	the	will.
Navigating	between	all	the	sour	truths.	You	can	live	that	long,	Mappo.	You	have
no	choice	but	to	live	that	long,	or	all	this	will	be	for	nothing.
I	see	the	world’s	edge.	Waiting	for	me.
He	tightened	the	straps	of	his	sack,	and	then	set	out.	At	a	steady	jog.	It’s	just
a	desert.	I’ve	run	across	a	few	in	my	day.	I	won’t	go	hungry.	I	won’t	go	thirsty,
and	whatever	exhaustion	comes	to	me,	well,	it’ll	end	when	it’s	all	over.
With	each	footfall	his	nerves	seemed	to	recoil	from	the	contact.	This	was	a
damaged	place,	one	vast	scar	upon	the	earth.	And	for	all	the	death	lining	the
desert’s	bizarre	shore	behind	him,	there	was	life	here.	Inimical,	unpleasant	life.
And	it	possessed	intent.
You	feel	me,	don’t	you?	I	offend	you.	But	it	is	not	my	desire	to	offend.	Leave
me	to	pass,	friend,	and	we	will	be	done	with	each	other.
Flies	buzzed	round	him	now.	He	had	settled	into	a	dogtrot,	his	breathing
steady	and	deep.	The	insects	kept	pace,	gathering	in	ever	greater	numbers.
Death	is	not	punishment.	It	is	release.	I	have	seen	that	all	my	life.	Though	I	did
not	wish	to,	though	I	told	myself	stories	to	pretend	otherwise.	Every	struggle


must	end.	Is	the	rest	that	follows	eternal?	I	doubt	it.	I	doubt	we’d	ever	get	off
that	easily.
Hood,	I	feel	your	absence.	I	wonder	what	it	means.	Who	now	waits	beyond
the	gate?	So	much	anguish	comes	in	knowing	that	each	of	us	must	pass	through
it	alone.	To	then	discover	that	once	through	we	remain	alone	–	no,	that	is	too
much	to	bear.
I	could	have	married.	Stayed	in	the	village.	I	could	have	fathered	children,
and	seen	in	each	child	something	of	my	wife,	something	of	me.	Is	that	enough
meaning	to	a	life?	A	cloth	of	unending	folds?
I	could	have	murdered	Icarium	–	but	then,	he	has	instincts	for	such	things.
His	madness	awakens	so	fast,	so	utterly	fast,	that	I	might	have	failed	–	and	after
killing	me	his	rage	would	have	sought	a	new	target,	and	many	others	would
have	died.
There	really	was	no	choice.	There	never	was.	Is	it	any	wonder	I	am	so	tired?
The	flies	swarmed	him	in	a	thick,	glittering	cloud.	They	sought	out	his
eyes,	but	those	had	closed	to	slits.	They	spun	round	his	mouth,	but	the	gusts	of
breath	from	his	nostrils	drove	them	off.	His	people	had	been	herders.	They
understood	flies.	He	ignored	their	seething	embrace.	It	meant	nothing,	and	on
he	ran.
But	then	my	death	would	have	made	my	loved	ones	grieve,	and	there	is
nothing	pleasant	in	grieving.	It	is	hot	and	dry	to	the	touch.	It	is	weakness	taken
inside.	It	can	rise	up	and	drown	a	life.	No,	I	am	glad	I	never	found	a	wife,	never
fathered	children.	I	could	not	bear	to	be	the	cause	of	their	sorrow.
How	can	one	give	so	freely	of	love	to	another,	when	the	final	outcome	is	one
of	betrayal?	When	one	must	leave	the	other	–	to	be	the	betrayer	who	dies,	to	be
the	betrayed	left	alive.	How	can	this	be	an	even	exchange,	with	death	waiting	at
the	end?
He	ran,	and	time	passed.	The	sun	tracked	across	half	the	sky.	The	warm
ache	in	his	legs	had	shaken	off	the	torment	of	his	thoughts	again	and	again,
leading	him	into	a	world	emptied	of	everything.	How	perfect	is	running?	This
grand	delusion	of	flight?	Away	from	our	demons,	ever	away,	until	even	the	self
sobs	loose,	spins	lost	in	our	wake.
Perfect,	oh	yes.	And	a	thing	to	despise.	No	distance	can	win	an	escape;	no
speed	can	outrun	this	self	and	all	its	host	of	troubles.	It’s	only	the	sweet
exhaustion	that	follows	that	we	so	cherish.	An	exhaustion	so	pure	it	is	as	close
to	dying	as	we	can	get	without	actually	doing	so.
Poets	could	speak	knowingly	of	metaphors;	if	life	is	walking,	then	running
is	a	life’s	entire	span	speeded	up,	and	to	act	out	birth	to	death	in	a	single	day,
over	and	over	again,	has	the	flavour	of	perfect	habit,	for	it	mimicks	undeniable


truths.	Small	deaths	paying	homage	to	the	real	one.	We	choose	them	in	myriad
forms	and	delight	in	the	ritual.	I	could	run	until	I	wear	out.	Every	joint,	every
bone	and	every	muscle.	I	could	run	until	my	heart	groans	older	than	its	years,
and	finally	bursts.
I	could	damn	the	poets	and	make	the	metaphor	real.	We	are	all	selfdestructive.	It	is	integral	to	our	nature.	And	we	will	run	even	when	there’s
nowhere	to	run	to,	and	nothing	terrible	to	run	from.	Why?	Because	to	walk	is
just	as	meaningless.	It	just	takes	longer.
Through	the	screen	of	whizzing	flies	he	saw	something	in	the	sky	ahead.	A
darker	cloud,	a	towering,	swirling	thing.	Dust	storm?	There	was	no	dust.	A
whirlwind?	Maybe.	But	the	air	was	still.	It	was	in	his	path,	although	still	some
distance	away.	He	watched	it,	to	track	its	path.
The	cloud	remained	directly	ahead.	Just	bigger.
It’s	coming	straight	at	me.
More	flies?
The	insects	surrounding	him	were	suddenly	frenzied	–	and	he	caught
something	in	their	manic	buzzing.	You’re	part	of	this,	aren’t	you?	The	finders	of
life.	And	once	found,	you…summon.
He	could	hear	that	cloud	now,	a	deeper,	more	frightening	drone	quickly
overwhelming	the	swarming	flies.
Locusts.
But	that	makes	no	sense.	There	is	nothing	for	them	to	eat.	There	is	nothing
here	at	all.
All	of	this	felt	wrong.	Mappo	slowed	his	run,	halted.	The	flies	spun	round
him	a	moment	longer,	and	then	fled.	He	stood,	breathing	deep,	eyes	on	the	vast
spinning	pillar	of	locusts.
And	then,	all	at	once,	he	understood.	‘D’ivers.’
Something	that	looked	like	white	foam	was	spreading	from	the	base	of	the
locust	cloud,	surging	in	tumultuous	waves.	Gods	below.	Butterflies.	‘You’re	all
d’ivers.	You’re	all	one	thing,	one	creature	–	the	flies,	the	locusts,	the	butterflies
–	and	this	desert	is	where	you	live.’	He	recalled	the	bones	upon	the	edge.	‘This
desert…is	what	you	made.’
The	butterflies	reached	him,	whipped	round	him	–	so	many	he	could	no
longer	see	the	ground	at	his	feet.	The	frantic	breaths	of	their	wings	stole	the
sweat	from	his	skin,	until	he	began	shivering.	‘D’ivers!	I	would	speak	to	you!
Semble!	Show	yourself	to	me!’
The	locusts	blighted	half	the	sky,	devouring	the	sun.	Spinning	overhead,
and	then,	in	a	wave	of	rage,	descending.
Mappo	dropped	to	his	knees,	buried	his	face	beneath	his	arms,	hunched


down.
They	struck	his	back	like	a	deluge	of	darts.
As	more	poured	down,	he	grunted	at	their	weight.	Bones	creaked.	He
struggled	for	breath,	clenched	his	jaws	against	the	pain.
The	locusts	stabbed	again	and	again	with	their	jaws,	driven	mad	by	the	feel
and	scent	of	living	flesh.
But	he	was	Trell,	and	his	kind	had	skin	like	leather.
The	locusts	could	not	draw	blood.	But	the	weight	grew	vast,	seeking	to
crush	him.	In	the	gap	his	arms	made	for	his	face	he	stared	at	inky	darkness,	and
his	gasps	snatched	up	dust	from	the	ground.	Deafened	by	the	futile	clack	of
bladed	jaws,	buried	in	riotous	darkness,	he	held	on.
He	could	feel	the	mind	of	the	d’ivers	now.	Its	fury	was	not	for	him	alone.
Who	stung	you	so?	Who	in	this	desert	drove	you	away?	Why	are	you	fleeing?
The	being	was	ancient.	It	had	not	sembled	in	a	long	time	–	thousands	of
years,	perhaps	more.	Lost	now	to	the	primitive	instincts	of	the	insects.	Shards
opals	diamonds	gems	leaves	drinkers	–	the	words	slithered	into	him	as	if	from
nowhere,	a	girl’s	sing-song	voice	that	now	echoed	in	his	mind.	Shards	opals
diamonds	gems	leaves	drinkers	–	go	away!
With	a	deafening	roar	the	vast	weight	on	Mappo’s	back	burst	apart,
exploded	outward.
He	sat	up,	tilted	back	his	head.	‘Shards	opals	diamonds	gems	leaves
drinkers	–	go	away.	Go	away.	Go!’
A	song	of	banishing.
The	cloud	heaved	upward,	twisted,	and	then	churned	past	him.	Another
seething	wave	of	butterflies,	and	then	they	too	were	gone.
Stunned,	Mappo	looked	round.	He	was	alone.	Child,	where	are	you?	Such
power	in	your	song	–	are	you	Forkrul	Assail?	No	matter.	Mappo	thanks	you.
He	was	covered	in	bruises.	Every	bone	ached.	But	still	alive.
‘Child,	be	careful.	This	d’ivers	was	once	a	god.	Someone	tore	it	apart,	into
so	many	pieces	it	can	never	heal.	It	can’t	even	find	itself.	All	it	knows	now	is
hunger	–	not	for	you	or	me.	For	something	else.	Life	itself,	perhaps.	Child,
your	song	has	power.	Be	careful.	What	you	banish	you	can	also	summon.’
He	heard	her	voice	again,	fainter	now,	drifting	away.	‘Like	the	flies.	Like
the	song	of	the	flies.’
Grunting,	he	climbed	to	his	feet.	Drew	his	sack	round	and	loosened	the
drawstrings,	reached	in	and	lifted	out	a	waterskin.	He	drank	deep,	sighed,
drank	a	second	time	and	then	stuffed	the	skin	back	into	the	sack.	Tightening	the
shoulder	straps	again,	he	faced	east,	and	resumed	running.
For	the	edge	of	the	world.


	
‘Nice	sword.’
‘Alas,	this	one	I	must	use.	I	will	give	my	two	Letherii	swords	to	you.’
Ryadd	Eleis	leaned	back	against	the	knobby	stone	of	the	cave	wall.	‘How
did	they	get	the	dragons	on	that	blade?’
Silchas	Ruin	continued	studying	the	weapon	he	had	unsheathed.	The	flames
of	the	hearth	danced	up	and	down	its	length.	‘There	is	something	wrong	with
this,’	he	said.	‘The	House	of	Hust	burned	to	the	ground	with	everything	else	–
not	Kharkanas	itself,	of	course,	that	city	didn’t	burn.	Not	precisely.	But	Hust,
well,	those	forges	were	a	prize,	you	see.	And	what	could	not	be	held	had	to	be
destroyed.’
Ryadd	glanced	away,	at	the	pearl	sky	beyond	the	cave	mouth.	Another	dawn
had	arrived.	He’d	been	alone	for	some	time.	Awakened	to	find	that	the	Tiste
Andii	had	returned	sometime	in	the	night,	blown	in	like	a	drift	of	snow.	‘I	don’t
understand	what	you’re	saying.’
The	white	face	took	on	an	almost	human	hue,	bathed	as	it	was	in	the
firelight.	But	those	red	eyes	were	as	unnerving	as	ever.	‘I	thought	I	knew	all	the
weapons	forged	by	the	Hust.	Even	the	obscure	ones.’
‘That	one	does	not	look	obscure,	Silchas,’	said	Ryadd.	‘It	looks	like	a
hero’s	weapon.	A	famous	weapon.	One	with	a	name.’
‘As	you	say,’	Silchas	agreed.	‘And	I	am	not	so	old	as	to	forget	the	ancient
warning	about	trusting	shadows.	No,	the	one	who	gave	me	this	sword	is
playing	a	game.’
‘Someone	gave	it	to	you?	In	return	for	what?’
‘I	wish	I	knew.’
Ryadd	smiled.	‘Never	bargain	knowing	only	the	value	of	one	side	of	the
deal.	Onrack	said	that	to	me	once.	Or	maybe	it	was	Ulshun	Pral.’
Silchas	shot	him	a	look.
Ryadd	shrugged,	lifting	himself	to	his	feet.	‘Do	we	now	resume	our
journey?’
Sheathing	the	sword,	Silchas	straightened	as	well.	‘We	have	gone	far
enough,	I	think.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	needed	to	take	you	away	from	Starvald	Demelain,	and	now	I	have	done
so.’	He	faced	Ryadd.	‘This	is	what	you	must	learn.	The	Eleint	blood	within	you
is	a	poison.	I	share	it,	of	course.	My	brother	and	I	chose	it	for	ourselves	–	we
perceived	a	necessity,	but	that	is	the	fatal	lure	of	power,	isn’t	it?	With	the	blood
of	T’iam	within	our	veins,	we	could	bring	peace	to	Kurald	Galain.	Of	course,


that	meant	crushing	every	House	opposing	us.	Regrettable,	but	that	sentiment
was	as	far	as	the	poison	would	permit	us	to	go	in	our	thoughts.	The	thousands
who	died	could	not	make	us	hesitate,	could	not	stop	us	from	continuing.
Killing	thousands	more.’
‘I	am	not	you,	Silchas	Ruin.’
‘Nor	will	you	ever	be,	if	I	can	help	it.’
Ryadd	walked	to	the	cave’s	edge,	looked	out	on	bleak,	jagged	rock	and
blinding	sweeps	of	snow	where	the	sun’s	light	marched	down	into	the	valley
below.	Elsewhere,	in	shadow,	the	snow	was	as	blue	as	the	sky.	‘What	have	you
done,	Silchas?’
Behind	him,	the	Tiste	Andii	replied,	‘What	I	deemed…necessary.	I	have	no
doubt	that	Kilava	succeeded	in	forcing	your	people	out	of	that	realm	–	they
won’t	die,	not	there,	not	then.	Udinaas	is	a	clever	man.	In	his	life,	he	has	come
to	understand	the	pragmatism	of	survival.	He	will	have	led	the	Imass	away
from	there.	And	he	will	find	them	a	home,	somewhere	to	hide	from	humans—’
‘How?’	Ryadd	demanded.	‘It’s	not	even	possible.’
‘He	will	seek	help.’
‘Who?’
‘Seren	Pedac,’	Silchas	replied.	‘Her	old	profession	makes	her	a	good
choice.’
‘Her	child	must	have	been	born	by	now.’
‘Yes.	A	child	she	knows	she	must	protect.	When	Udinaas	comes	to	her,	she
will	see	how	her	need	and	his	can	be	resolved	together.	She	will	guide	the
Imass	to	a	hidden	place,	and	in	that	place	she	too	will	hide,	with	her	child.
Protected	by	Onrack,	protected	by	the	Imass.’
‘Why	can’t	we	be	just	left	alone?’	Ryadd	heard	the	anguish	in	his	own
voice	and	closed	his	eyes	against	the	outside	glare.
‘Ryadd	Eleis,	there	is	a	kind	of	fish,	living	in	rivers,	that	when	in	small
numbers	–	two	or	perhaps	three	–	is	peaceful	enough.	But	when	the	school
grows,	when	a	certain	threshold	is	reached,	these	fish	go	mad.	They	tear	things
apart.	They	can	devour	the	life	in	a	river	for	a	league’s	length,	and	only	when
their	bellies	start	bursting	do	they	finally	scatter.’
‘What	has	that	to	do	with	anything?’	Ryadd	turned	to	glare	at	Silchas	Ruin.
The	Tiste	Andii	sighed.	‘When	the	gate	of	Starvald	Demelain	opens,	the
Eleint	will	come	through	in	vast	numbers.	Most	will	be	young,	by	themselves
little	threat,	but	among	them	there	will	be	the	last	of	the	Ancients.	Leviathans	of
appalling	power	–	but	they	are	incomplete.	They	will	arrive	hunting	their	kin.
Ryadd,	if	you	and	I	had	remained,	seeking	to	oppose	the	opening	of	that	gate,
we	would	lose	our	minds.	We	would	in	mindless	desire	join	the	Storm	of	the


Eleint.	We	would	follow	the	Ancients	–	have	you	never	wondered	why,	in	all
the	realms	but	Starvald	Demelain	itself,	one	will	never	find	more	than	five	or
six	dragons	in	one	place?	Even	that	many	demands	the	mastery	of	at	least	one
Ancient.	Indeed,	to	be	safe,	Eleint	tend	to	travel	in	threes.’	Silchas	Ruin	walked
up	to	stand	beside	Ryadd,	and	stared	out	at	the	vista.	‘We	are	the	blood	of
chaos,	Ryadd	Eleis,	and	when	too	many	of	us	gather	in	one	place,	the	blood
boils.’
‘Then,’	Ryadd	whispered,	‘the	Eleint	are	coming,	and	there’s	no	stopping
them.’
‘What	you	say	is	true.	But	here	you	are	safe.’
‘Me?	What	of	you?’
Silchas	Ruin’s	hand	found	the	grip	of	his	scabbarded	sword.	‘I	must	leave
you	now,	I	think.	I	did	not	plan	it,	and	I	am	not	pleased	at	the	thought	of
abandoning	you—’
‘And	all	that	we	spoke	of	before	was	a	lie,’	cut	in	Ryadd.	‘Our	perilous
mission	–	all	of	it,	a	lie.’
‘Your	father	understood.	I	promised	him	that	I	would	save	you,	and	I	have
done	so.’
‘Why	did	you	bother?’
‘Because	you	are	dangerous	enough	alone,	Ryadd.	In	a	Storm…no,	I	could
not	risk	that.’
‘Then	you	intend	to	fight	them	after	all!’
‘I	will	defend	my	freedom,	Ryadd—’
‘What	makes	you	think	you	can?	With	what	you	said	of	the	Ancients—’
‘Because	I	am	one,	Ryadd.	An	Ancient.’
Ryadd	stared	at	the	tall,	white-skinned	warrior.	‘Could	you	compel	me,
Silchas	Ruin?’
‘I	have	no	desire	to	even	so	much	as	attempt	it,	Ryadd.	Chaos	seduces	–	you
have	felt	it.	And	soon	you	may	witness	the	fullest	expression	of	that	curse.	But	I
have	learned	to	resist	the	seduction.’	He	smiled	suddenly,	and	in	an	ironic	tone
added,	‘We	Tiste	Andii	are	skilled	at	denying	ourselves.	We	have	had	a	long
time	to	get	it	right,	after	all.’
Ryadd	drew	his	furs	close	about	himself.	His	breath	plumed	in	the	bitter
cold.	He	concentrated	a	moment,	was	answered	by	a	billowing	of	the	hearth’s
flames	behind	him.	Heat	roiled	past.
Silchas	glanced	back	at	the	sudden	inferno.	‘You	are	indeed	your	mother ’s
son,	Ryadd.’
He	shrugged.	‘I	was	tired	of	being	chilled.’	He	then	looked	across	at
Silchas.	‘Was	she	an	Ancient	Eleint?’


‘The	first	few	generations	of	Soletaken	count	among	the	Ancients,	yes.
T’iam’s	blood	was	at	its	purest	then,	but	that	purity	is	short-lived.’
‘Are	there	others	like	you,	Silchas?	In	this	world?’
‘Ancients?’	He	hesitated,	and	then	nodded.	‘A	few.’
‘When	the	Storm	arrives,	what	will	they	do?’
‘I	don’t	know.	But	we	who	were	not	trapped	within	Starvald	Demelain	all
share	our	desire	for	independence,	for	our	freedom.’
‘So	they	will	fight,	like	you.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Then	why	can	I	not	fight	beside	you?’
‘If	I	must	defend	you	while	defending	myself	–	well,	it	is	likely	that	I	would
fail	on	both	counts.’
‘But	I	am	Menandore’s	son—’
‘And	formidable,	yes,	but	you	lack	control.	An	Ancient	will	see	you	–	will
see	all	that	you	are	–	and	it	will	take	you,	tearing	out	your	mind	and	enslaving
what	remains.’
‘If	you	did	the	same	–	to	me	–	imagine	how	powerful	you	would	then	be,
Silchas.’
‘Now	you	know	why	dragons	so	often	betray	one	another	in	the	heat	of
battle.	It	is	our	fear	that	makes	us	strike	at	our	allies	–	before	they	can	strike	at
us.	Even	in	the	Storm,	the	Ancients	will	trust	not	one	of	their	equals,	and	each
will	possess	scores	of	lesser	slaves,	as	protection	against	betrayal.’
‘It	seems	a	terrible	way	to	live.’
‘You	don’t	understand.	It	is	not	simply	that	we	are	the	blood	of	chaos,	it	is
that	we	are	eager	to	boil.	The	Eleint	revel	in	anarchy,	in	toppling	regimes
among	the	Towers,	in	unmitigated	slaughter	of	the	vanquished	and	the
innocent.	To	see	flames	on	the	horizon,	to	see	the	enkar ’l	vultures	descending
upon	a	corpse-strewn	plain	–	this	charges	our	heart	as	does	nothing	else.’
‘The	Storm	will	unleash	all	that?	On	this	world?’
Silchas	Ruin	nodded.
‘But	who	can	stop	them?’
‘My	other	swords	are	beside	your	pallet,	Ryadd	Eleis.	They	are	honourable
weapons,	if	somewhat	irritating	on	occasion.’
‘Who	can	stop	them?’
‘We’ll	see.’
‘How	long	must	I	wait	here?’
Silchas	Ruin	met	his	eyes	with	a	steady,	reptilian	stare.	‘Until	the	moment
you	realize	that	it’s	time	to	leave.	Be	well,	Ryadd.	Perhaps	we	will	meet	again.
When	next	you	see	your	father,	do	tell	him	I	did	what	I	promised.’	He	hesitated,


and	then	added,	‘Tell	him,	too,	that	with	Kettle,	I	believe	now	that	I	acted…
hastily.	And	for	that	I	am	sorry.’
‘Is	it	Olar	Ethil?’
Silchas	Ruin	frowned.	‘What?’
‘Is	she	the	one	you’re	going	to	kill,	Silchas	Ruin?’
‘Why	would	I	do	that?’
‘For	what	she	said.’
‘She	spoke	the	truth,	Ryadd.’
‘She	hurt	you.	On	purpose.’
He	shrugged.	‘What	of	it?	Only	words,	Ryadd.	Only	words.’
The	Tiste	Andii	leaned	forward	then,	over	the	cliff’s	edge,	and	slipped	out
of	sight.	A	moment	later	he	lifted	back	into	view,	a	bone-white	dragon,	white	as
the	snow	below,	where	his	winged	shadow	slipped	in	pursuit.
Ryadd	stood	a	moment	longer,	and	then	turned	away	from	the	cave	mouth.
The	fire	blazed	until	the	swords	started	singing	in	the	heat.
	
‘Look	at	you,	squatting	in	your	own	filth	like	that.	What	happened	to	Fenn’s
great	pride	–	wasn’t	that	his	name?	Fenn?	That	Teblor	warking?	So	he	died,
friend	–	doesn’t	mean	you	have	to	fall	so	low.	It’s	disgusting	is	what	it	is.	Head
back	into	the	mountains	–	oh,	hold	on	a	moment	there.	Let’s	see	that	mace	–
take	the	sheath	off,	will	you?’
He	licked	chapped,	stinging	lips.	His	whole	mouth	felt	swollen	on	the
inside.	He	needed	a	drink,	but	the	post’s	gate	had	been	locked.	He’d	slept
against	it	through	the	night,	listening	to	the	singing	in	the	tavern.
‘Show	it	to	me,	Teblor	–	could	be	we	can	make	us	a	deal	here.’
He	straightened	up	as	best	he	could.	‘I	cannot	yield	this,’	he	said.	‘It	is	an
Eleint’aral	K’eth.	With	a	secret	name	–	I	walked	the	Roads	of	the	Dead	to	win
this	weapon.	With	my	own	hands	I	broke	the	neck	of	a	Forkrul	Assail—’
But	the	guard	was	laughing.	‘Meaning	it’s	worth	four	crowns,	not	two,
right?	Harrower’s	breath,	you	people	can	spin	’em,	can’t	you?	Been	through
Death’s	Gate,	have	ya?	And	back	out	again?	Quite	a	feat	for	a	drunk	Teblor
stinking	of	pigshit.’
‘I	was	not	always	this	way—’
‘Of	course	not,	friend,	but	here	you	are	now.	Desperate	for	drink,	with	just
me	standing	between	you	and	the	tavern.	This	could	be	Death’s	Gate	all	over
again,	come	to	think	of	it,	hey?	’Cause	if	I	let	you	through,	why,	the	next	time
you	leave	it’ll	probably	be	by	the	heels.	You	want	through,	Teblor?	Gotta	pay
the	Harrower’s	coin.	That	mace	–	hand	it	over	then.’


‘I	cannot.	You	don’t	understand.	When	I	came	back…you	cannot	imagine.	I
had	seen	where	we	all	ended	up,	you	see?	When	I	came	back,	the	drink	called
me.	Helps	me	forget.	Helps	me	hide.	What	I	saw	broke	me,	that’s	all.	Please,	you
can	see	that	–	how	it	broke	me.	I’m	begging—’
‘Factor	don’t	take	to	beggars,	not	here.	Y’got	nothing	to	pay	your	way	in,
be	off	–	back	into	the	woods,	dry	as	a	hag’s	cubbyhole,	true	enough.	Now,	for
that	mace,	well,	I’ll	give	ya	three	crowns.	Even	you	couldn’t	drink	three	crowns’
worth	in	a	single	night.	Three.	See,	got	’em	right	here.	What	do	you	say?’
‘Father.’
‘Get	lost,	lad,	me	and	your	da’s	working	out	a	business	transaction	here.’
‘No	deal,	Guard,	not	for	that	weapon—’
‘It’s	your	da’s	to	do	with	as	he	pleases—’
‘You	can’t	even	lift	it.’
‘Wasn’t	planning	on	lifting	it.	But	up	on	the	wall	of	my	brother’s	tavern,
well,	that’d	make	quite	a	sight,	don’t	you	think?	Pride	of	place	for	you	Teblor,
right	over	the	hearth.’
‘Sorry,	sir.	I’m	taking	him	back	to	the	village	now.’
‘Until	tomorrow	night	–	or	next	week	–	listen,	lad,	you	can’t	save	them	that
won’t	be	saved.’
‘I	know.	But	the	dragon-killer,	that	I	can	save.’
‘Dragon-killer?	Bold	name.	Too	bad	dragons	don’t	exist.’
‘Son,	I	wasn’t	going	to	sell	it.	I	swear	that—’
‘I	heard,	Father.’
‘I	wasn’t.’
‘The	Elders	have	agreed,	Father.	The	Resting	Stone	waits.’
‘It	does?’
‘Hey	now,	you	two!	Boy,	did	you	say	Resting	Stone?’
‘Best	you	pretend	you	never	heard	that,	sir.’
‘That	vicious	shit’s	outlawed	–	king’s	command!	You	–	Da	–	your	son	says
the	Elders	are	going	to	murder	you.	Under	a	big	fucking	boulder.	You	can	claim
sanctuary—’
‘Sir,	if	you	take	him	inside	the	fort,	we	will	have	no	choice.’
‘No	choice?	No	choice	but	to	do	what?’
‘It’s	better	if	none	of	this	ever	happened,	sir.’
‘I’m	calling	the	captain—’
‘If	you	do	that,	this	will	all	come	out.	Sir,	do	you	want	to	start	the	Teblor	on
the	path	to	war?	Do	you	want	us	to	burn	your	fledgling	colony	to	the	ground?
Do	you	want	us	to	hunt	down	and	kill	every	one	of	you?	Children,	mothers,	the
old	and	wise?	What	will	the	First	Empire	think	of	a	colony	gone	silent?	Will


they	cross	the	ocean	to	investigate?	And	the	next	time	your	people	come	to	our
shore,	will	we	meet	you	not	as	friends,	but	as	enemies?’
‘Son	–	bury	the	weapon	with	me.	And	the	armour	–	please…’
The	youth	nodded.	‘Yes,	Father.’
‘This	time	when	I	die,	I	shall	not	return.’
‘That	is	true.’
‘Live	long,	son,	as	long	as	you	can.’
‘I	shall	try.	Guard?’
‘Get	out	of	my	sight,	both	of	you.’
On	to	the	forest	trail.	Away	from	the	trading	post,	the	place	where	Teblor
came	down	to	surrender	everything,	beginning	with	dignity.	He	held	his	son’s
hand	and	did	not	look	back.	‘There	is	nowhere	to	drink	in	the	realm	of	the
dead.’
‘I	am	sorry,	Father…’
‘I’m	not,	my	son.	I’m	not.’
	
Ublala	sat	up,	wiping	at	his	eyes.	‘They	killed	me!	Again!’
Ralata	stirred	beside	him,	twisting	to	lift	her	head	and	study	him	with
bleary	eyes.	A	moment	later	her	head	disappeared	again	beneath	the	furs.
Ublala	looked	round,	found	Draconus	standing	nearby,	but	the	warrior ’s
attention	remained	fixed	on	the	eastern	horizon,	where	the	sun’s	newborn	light
slowly	revealed	a	rocky,	glittering	desert.	Rubbing	at	his	face,	the	giant	stood.
‘I’m	hungry,	Draconus.	I’m	chilled,	my	feet	hurt,	I	got	dirt	under	my	nails	and
there’s	things	living	in	my	hair.	But	the	sexing	was	great.’
Draconus	glanced	over.	‘I	had	begun	to	doubt	she	would	relent,	Toblakai.’
‘She	was	bored,	you	see.	Boredom’s	a	good	reason,	don’t	you	think?	I
think	so.	I’ll	do	more	of	that	from	now	on,	with	women	I	want	to	sex.’
One	brow	arched.	‘You	will	bore	them	into	submission,	Ublala?’
‘I	will.	Soon	as	we	find	more	women.	I’ll	bore	them	right	to	the	ground.
Was	that	a	dragon	you	turned	into?	It	was	hard	to	see,	you	were	all	blurry	and
black	like	smoke.	Can	you	do	that	whenever	you	like?	You	gods	got	it	good,	I
think,	being	able	to	do	things	like	that.	Hey,	where	did	that	fire	come	from?’
‘Best	begin	cooking	your	breakfasts,	Ublala,	we	have	far	to	walk	today.
And	it	will	be	through	a	warren,	for	I	like	not	the	look	of	that	desert	ahead.’
Ublala	scratched	his	itchy	scalp.	‘If	you	can	fly,	why	don’t	you	just	go
where	you’re	going?	Me	and	my	wife,	we	can	find	someplace	else	to	go.	And	I
can	bury	the	mace	and	the	armour.	Right	here.	I	don’t	like	them.	I	don’t	like	the
dreams	they	give	me—’


‘I	will	indeed	leave	you,	Ublala,	but	not	quite	yet.	As	for	the	weapons,	I
fear	you	will	need	them	soon.	You	will	have	to	trust	me	in	this,	friend.’
‘All	right.	I’ll	make	breakfast	now	–	is	that	half	a	pig?	Where’s	the	other
half?	I	always	wonder	that,	you	know,	when	I’m	in	the	market	and	I	see	half	a
pig.	Where’s	the	other	half?	Did	it	run	away?	Haha	–	Ralata?	Did	you	hear	me
make	a	joke?	Haha.	As	if	half-pigs	can	run!	No,	they’d	have	to	kind	of	hop,
wouldn’t	they?	Hop	hop	hop.’
From	under	the	furs,	Ralata	groaned.
‘Ublala.’
‘Yes,	Draconus?’
‘Do	you	believe	in	justice?’
‘What?	Did	I	do	something	wrong?	What	did	I	do?	I	won’t	make	jokes	no
more,	I	promise.’
‘You’ve	done	nothing	wrong.	Do	you	know	when	something	is	unfair?’
Ublala	looked	round	desperately.
‘Not	at	this	moment,	friend.	I	mean,	in	general.	When	you	see	something
that	is	unjust,	that	is	unfair,	do	you	do	something	about	it?	Or	do	you	just	turn
away?	I	think	I	know	the	answer,	but	I	need	to	make	certain.’
‘I	don’t	like	bad	things,	Draconus,’	Ublala	muttered.	‘I	tried	telling	that	to
the	Toblakai	gods,	when	they	were	coming	up	out	of	the	ground,	but	they
didn’t	listen,	so	me	and	Iron	Bars,	we	had	to	kill	them.’
Draconus	studied	him	for	some	time,	and	then	he	said,	‘I	believe	I	have	just
done	something	similar.	Don’t	bury	your	weapons,	Ublala.’
	
He	had	left	his	tent	well	before	dusk,	to	walk	the	length	of	the	column,	among
the	restless	soldiers.	They	slept	badly	or	not	at	all,	and	more	than	one	set	of
red-shot,	bleary	eyes	tracked	Ruthan	Gudd	as	he	made	his	way	to	the	rear.
Thirst	was	a	spreading	plague,	and	it	grew	in	the	mind	like	a	fever.	It	pushed
away	normal	thoughts,	stretching	out	time	until	it	snapped.	Of	all	the	tortures
devised	to	break	people,	not	one	came	close	to	thirst.
Among	the	wagons	now,	where	heaps	of	dried,	smoked	meats	remained
wrapped	in	hides,	stacked	in	the	beds.	The	long	knotted	ropes	with	rigged
harnesses	were	coiled	up	in	front	of	each	wagon.	The	oxen	were	gone.	Muscle
came	from	humans	now.	Carrying	food	no	one	wanted	to	eat.	Food	that	knotted
solid	in	the	gut,	food	that	gripped	hard	with	vicious	cramps	and	drove	strong
men	to	their	knees.
Next	on	the	trail	were	the	ambulance	wagons,	burdened	with	the	broken,
the	ones	driven	half-mad	by	sun	and	dehydration.	He	saw	the	knots	of	fully


armed	guards	standing	over	the	water	barrels	used	by	the	healers,	and	the	sight
distressed	him.	Discipline	was	fraying	and	he	well	understood	what	he	was
seeing.	Simple	need	had	the	power	to	crush	entire	civilizations,	to	bring	down
all	order	in	human	affairs.	To	reduce	us	to	mindless	beasts.	And	now	it	stalks
this	camp,	these	soldiers.
This	army	was	close	to	shattering.	The	thirst	gnawed	ceaselessly.
The	sun	cut	a	slice	on	the	western	horizon,	red	as	a	bloodless	wound.	Soon
the	infernal	flies	would	stir	awake,	at	first	drowsy	in	the	unwelcome	chill,	and
then	rushing	in	to	dance	on	every	exposed	area	of	skin	–	as	if	the	night	itself
had	awakened	with	a	hundred	thousand	legs.	And	then	would	come	the
billowing	clouds	of	butterflies,	keeping	pace	overhead	like	silver	clouds	tinted
jade	green	–	they	had	first	arrived	to	feed	on	the	carcasses	of	the	last
slaughtered	oxen,	and	now	they	returned	each	evening,	eager	for	more.
He	walked	between	the	wagons	with	their	moaning	cargo,	exchanging
occasional	nods	with	the	cutters	who	moved	among	their	charges	with
moistened	cloths	to	press	against	blistered	mouths.
No	pickets	waited	beyond	the	refuse	trench	–	there	seemed	to	be	little	point
in	such	things	–	only	a	row	of	grave	mounds,	with	a	crew	of	a	dozen	diggers
working	on	a	few	more	with	picks	and	shovels.	Beneath	the	ground’s	sunbaked	surface	there	was	nothing	but	stone-hard	white	silts,	deep	as	a	man	was
tall.	At	times,	when	the	pick	broke	a	chunk	loose,	the	pressed	bones	of	fish
were	revealed,	of	types	no	one	had	ever	seen	before.	Ruthan	Gudd	had	chanced
to	see	one	example,	some	massively	jawed	monstrosity	was	etched	in	rust-red
bones	on	a	slab	of	powdery	silt.	Enormous	eye	sockets	above	rows	upon	rows
of	long	fangs.
He’d	listened	to	the	listless	conjecture	for	a	short	time,	and	then	wandered
on	without	adding	any	comment	of	his	own.	From	the	deepest	ocean	beds,	he
could	have	told	them,	but	that	would	have	slung	too	many	questions	his	way,
ones	he	had	no	desire	to	answer.	‘How	the	fuck	do	you	know	that?’
Good	question.
No.	Bad	question.
He’d	kept	silent.
Out	past	the	diggers	now,	ignoring	them	as	they	straightened	to	lean	on
shovels	and	stare	at	him.	He	walked	on	to	the	trail	the	column	had	made,	a	road
of	sorts	where	the	sharp	stones	had	been	kicked	clear	by	the	passage	of
thousands	of	boots.	Twenty	paces.	Thirty,	well	away	from	the	camp	now.	He
halted.
All	right,	then.	Show	yourselves.
He	waited,	fingers	combing	through	his	beard,	expecting	to	see	the	dust


swirl	up	from	the	path,	lift	into	the	air,	find	shape.	The	simple	act	of	setting
eyes	upon	a	T’lan	Imass	depressed	Ruthan	Gudd.	There	was	shame	in	making
the	wrong	choice	–	only	a	fool	would	deny	that.	And	just	as	one	had	to	live
with	the	choice,	so	too	was	one	forced	to	live	with	the	shame.	Well,	perhaps
live	wasn’t	the	right	word,	not	with	the	T’lan	Imass.
Poor	fools.	Make	yourselves	the	servants	of	war.	Surrender	everything	else.
Bury	your	memories.	Pretend	that	the	choice	was	a	noble	one,	and	that	this
wretched	existence	is	good	enough.	Since	when	did	vengeance	answer
anything?	Anything	of	worth?
I	know	all	about	punishment.	Retribution.	Wish	I	didn’t	but	I	do.	It	all
comes	down	to	eliminating	that	which	offends.	As	if	one	could	empty	the	world
of	bastards,	or	scour	it	clean	of	evil	acts.	Well,	that	would	be	nice.	Too	bad	it
never	works.	And	all	that	satisfaction,	well,	it	proves	short-lived.	Tasting	like…
dust.
No	poet	could	find	a	more	powerful	symbol	of	futility	than	the	T’lan
Imass.	Futility	and	obstinate	stupidity.	In	war	you	need	something	to	fight	for.
But	you	took	that	away,	didn’t	you?	All	that	you	fought	to	preserve	had	ceased
to	exist.	You	condemned	your	entire	world	to	oblivion,	extinction.	Leaving
what?	What	shining	purpose	to	drive	you	on	and	on?
Oh	yes,	I	remember	now.	Vengeance.
No	swirls	of	dust.	Just	two	figures	emerging	from	the	lurid,	dust-wreathed
west,	shambling	on	the	trail	of	the	Bonehunters.
The	male	was	huge,	battered,	hulking.	His	stone	sword,	carried	loosely	in
one	hand,	was	black	with	sun-baked	blood.	The	female	was	more	gracile	than
most	T’lan	Imass,	dressed	in	rotted	sealskins,	and	on	her	shoulder	a	small
forest	of	wood,	bone	and	ivory	harpoons.	The	two	figures	halted	five	paces
from	Ruthan	Gudd.
The	male	bowed	his	head.	‘Elder,	we	greet	you.’
Ruthan	scowled.	‘How	many	more	of	you	are	out	there?’
‘I	am	Kalt	Urmanal,	and	the	Bonecaster	at	my	side	is	Nom	Kala	of	the
Brold.	The	two	of	us	are	all	that	are	here.	We	are	deserters.’
‘Are	you	now?	Well,	among	the	Bonehunters,	desertion	is	punishable	by
death.	Tell	me,	since	that	obviously	won’t	work,	how	do	the	T’lan	Imass	punish
deserters,	Kalt?’
‘They	don’t,	Elder.	Deserting	is	punishment	enough.’
Sighing,	Ruthan	Gudd	looked	away.	‘Who	leads	the	T’lan	Imass	army,
Kalt?	The	army	you	fled?’
The	female,	Nom	Kala,	answered.	‘First	Sword	Onos	T’oolan.	Elder,	there
is	the	smell	of	ice	about	you.	Are	you	Jaghut?’


‘Jaghut?	No.	Do	I	look	like	a	Jaghut?’
‘I	do	not	know.	I	have	never	seen	one.’
Never	–	what?	‘I	haven’t	washed	in	some	time,	Nom	Kala.’	He	combed	his
beard.	‘Why	did	you	follow	us?	What	do	you	want	with	the	Bonehunters?	No,
wait,	let	us	return	to	that	later.	You	say	that	Onos	T’oolan,	the	First	Sword,
leads	an	army	of	T’lan	Imass	–	which	clans?	How	many	Bonecasters?	Do	they
walk	this	same	desert?	How	far	away?’
Kalt	Urmanal	said,	‘Far	to	the	south,	Elder.	Of	Bonecasters	there	are	few,
but	of	warriors	there	are	many.	Forgotten	clans,	remnants	of	armies	broken	on
this	continent	in	ancient	conflicts.	Onos	T’oolan	summoned	them—’
‘No,’	said	Nom	Kala,	‘the	summons	came	from	Olar	Ethil,	in	the	making
of	Onos—’
‘Shit,’	Ruthan	swore.
Both	T’lan	Imass	fell	silent.
‘This	is	turning	into	a	real	mess.’	Ruthan	clawed	again	at	his	beard,	glared
at	the	undead	warriors.	‘What	is	she	planning?	Do	you	know?’
‘She	intends	to	wield	the	First	Sword,	Elder,’	Nom	Kala	replied.	‘She
seeks…redemption.’
‘She	has	said	this	to	you,	Bonecaster?’
‘No,	Elder,	she	has	not.	She	remains	distant	from	Onos	T’oolan.	For	now.
But	I	was	born	on	this	soil.	She	cannot	walk	it	with	impunity,	nor	hide	the
power	of	her	desires.	She	journeys	eastward,	parallel	with	Onos	T’oolan.’
Nom	Kala	hesitated,	and	then	added,	‘The	First	Sword	is	also	aware	of	her,	but
he	remains	defiant.’
‘He	is	a	Childslayer,	Elder,’	said	Kalt	Urmanal.	‘A	black	river	has	drowned
his	mind,	and	those	who	chose	to	follow	him	can	no	longer	escape	its	terrible
current.	We	do	not	know	the	First	Sword’s	intent.	We	do	not	know	the	enemy	he
will	choose.	But	he	seeks	annihilation.	Theirs	or	his	own	–	he	cares	not	how
the	bones	will	fall.’
‘What	has	driven	him	to	such	a	state?’	Ruthan	Gudd	asked,	chilled	by	the
warrior ’s	words.
‘She	has,’	Nom	Kala	replied.
‘Does	he	know	that?’
‘He	does,	Elder.’
‘Then	could	Olar	Ethil	be	the	enemy	he	chooses?’
Both	T’lan	Imass	were	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	Kalt	Urmanal	said,
‘We	had	not	considered	that	possibility.’
‘It	seems	she	betrayed	him,’	Ruthan	observed.	‘Why	shouldn’t	he	return	the
favour?’


‘He	was	noble,	once,’	said	Kalt.	‘Honourable.	But	now	his	spirit	is
wounded	and	he	walks	alone	no	matter	how	many	follow	behind	him.	Elder,	we
are	creatures	inclined	to…excess.	In	our	feelings.’
‘I	had	no	idea,’	Ruthan	said	in	a	dry	tone.	‘So	while	you	have	fled	one
nightmare,	alas,	you	have	found	another.’
‘Your	wake	is	filled	with	suffering,’	Nom	Kala	said.	‘It	was	an	easy	path	to
follow.	You	cannot	cross	this	desert.	No	mortal	can.	A	god	has	died	here—’
‘I	know.’
‘But	he	is	not	gone.’
‘I	know	that,	too.	Shattered	into	a	million	fragments,	but	each	fragment
lives	on.	D’ivers.	And	there	is	no	hope	of	ever	sembling	back	into	a	single
form	–	it’s	too	late	and	has	been	for	a	long	time.’	He	waved	at	the	flies.
‘Mindless,	filled	with	pathetic	need,	understanding	nothing.’	He	cocked	his
head.	‘Not	so	different	from	you,	then.’
‘We	do	not	deny	how	far	we	have	fallen,’	said	Kalt	Urmanal.
Ruthan	Gudd’s	shoulders	sagged.	He	looked	down.	‘So	have	we	all,	T’lan
Imass.	The	suffering	here	is	contagious,	I	think.	It	seeps	into	us,	makes	bitter
our	thoughts.	I	am	sorry	for	my	words—’
‘There	is	no	need	to	apologize,	Elder.	You	spoke	the	truth.	We	have	come
to	you,	because	we	are	lost.	Yet	something	still	holds	us	here,	even	as	oblivion
beckons	us	with	the	promise	of	eternal	peace.	Perhaps,	like	you,	we	need
answers.	Perhaps,	like	you,	we	yearn	to	hope.’
He	twisted	inside	at	that,	was	forced	to	turn	away.	Pathetic!	Yield	them	no
pity!	Struggling	against	tears,	he	said,	‘You	are	not	the	first.	Permit	me	to
summon	your	kin.’
Five	warriors	rose	from	the	dust	behind	him.
Urugal	the	Woven	stepped	forward	and	said,	‘Now	we	are	seven	again.
Now,	at	last,	the	House	of	Chains	is	complete.’
Hear	that?	All	here	now,	Fallen	One.	I	didn’t	think	you	could	get	this	far.	I
really	didn’t.	How	long	have	you	been	building	this	tale,	this	relentless	book	of
yours?	Is	everyone	in	place?	Are	you	ready	for	your	final,	doomed	attempt	to
win	for	yourself…whatever	it	is	you	wish	to	win?
See	the	gods	assembling	against	you.
See	the	gates	your	poison	has	frayed,	ready	to	break	asunder	and	unleash
devastation.
See	the	ones	who	stepped	up	to	clear	this	path	ahead.	So	many	have	died.
Some	died	well.	Others	died	badly.	You	took	them	all.	Accepted	their	flaws	–	the
weak	ones,	the	fatal	ones.	Accepted	them	and	blessed	them.
And	you	weren’t	nice	about	it	either,	were	you?	But	then,	how	could	you	be?


He	knew	then,	with	abject	despair,	that	he	would	never	comprehend	the	full
extent	of	the	Crippled	God’s	preparations.	How	long	ago	had	it	all	begun?	On
what	distant	land?	By	whose	unwitting	mortal	hand?	I’ll	never	know.	No	one
will.	Win	or	fail,	no	one	will.	In	this,	he	is	as	unwitnessed	as	we	are.	Adjunct,	I
am	beginning	to	understand	you,	but	that	changes	nothing,	does	it?
The	book	shall	be	a	cipher.	For	all	time.	A	cipher.
Looking	up,	he	found	that	he	was	alone.
Behind	him,	the	army	was	struggling	to	its	feet.
‘Behold,	night	is	born.	And	we	must	walk	with	it.’	You	had	the	right	of	that,
Gallan.	He	watched	the	burial	crew	rolling	wrapped	corpses	into	the	grave	pits.
Who	were	those	poor	victims?	What	were	their	names?	Their	lives?	Does
anyone	know?	Anyone	at	all?
	
‘He’s	not	broached	a	single	cask?’
Pores	shook	his	head.	‘Not	yet.	He’s	as	bad	off	as	the	rest	of	us,	sir.’
Kindly	grunted,	glanced	over	at	Faradan	Sort.	‘Tougher	than	I’d	have
expected.’
‘There	are	levels	of	desperation,’	she	said.	‘So	he	hasn’t	reached	the	next
one	yet.	It’ll	come.	The	question	is,	what	then,	Kindly?	Expose	him?	Watch	our
soldiers	tear	him	limb	from	limb?	Does	the	Adjunct	know	about	any	of	this?’
‘I’m	going	to	need	more	guards,’	said	Pores.
‘I	will	speak	to	Captain	Fiddler,’	Kindly	said.	‘We’ll	put	the	marines	and	the
heavies	on	those	posts.	No	one	will	mess	with	them.’
Pores	scratched	something	on	his	wax	ledger,	read	over	what	he’d	written
and	then	nodded.	‘The	real	mutiny	is	brewing	with	the	haul	teams.	That	food	is
killing	us.	Sure,	chewing	on	dried	meat	works	up	some	juices,	but	it’s	like
swallowing	a	bhederin	cow’s	afterbirth	after	it’s	been	ten	days	in	the	sun.’
Faradan	Sort	made	a	choking	sound.	‘Wall’s	foot,	Pores,	couldn’t	you
paint	a	nicer	picture?’
Pores	raised	his	eyebrows.	‘But	Fist,	I	worked	on	that	one	all	day.’
Kindly	rose.	‘This	night	is	going	to	be	a	bad	one,’	he	said.	‘How	many
more	are	we	going	to	lose?	We’re	already	staggering	like	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Worse	than	a	necromancer ’s	garden	party,’	Pores	threw	in,	earning
another	scowl	from	Faradan	Sort.	His	smile	was	weak	and	he	returned	to	the
wax	tablet.
‘Keep	an	eye	on	Blistig’s	cache,	Pores.’
‘I	will,	sir.’
Kindly	left	the	tent,	one	wall	of	which	suddenly	sagged.


‘They’re	folding	me	up,’	Pores	observed,	rising	from	the	stool	and
wincing	as	he	massaged	his	lower	back.	‘I	feel	thirty	years	older.’
‘We	all	do,’	Sort	muttered,	collecting	her	gear.	‘Live	with	it.’
‘Until	I	die,	sir.’
She	paused	at	the	tent	entrance.	Another	wall	sagged.	‘You’re	thinking	all
wrong,	Pores.	There	is	a	way	through	this.	There	has	to	be.’
He	grimaced.	‘Faith	in	the	Adjunct	untarnished,	then?	I	envy	you,	Fist.’
‘I	didn’t	expect	you	to	fold	so	quickly,’	she	said,	eyeing	him.
He	stored	his	ledger	in	a	small	box	and	then	looked	up	at	her.	‘Fist,	some
time	tonight	the	haul	crew	will	drop	the	ropes.	They’ll	refuse	to	drag	those
wagons	one	more	stride,	and	we’ll	be	looking	at	marching	on	without	food,
and	when	that	happens,	do	you	understand	what	it	will	mean?	It	will	mean
we’ve	given	up	–	it’ll	mean	we	can’t	see	a	way	through	this.	Fist,	the
Bonehunters	are	about	to	announce	their	death	sentence.	That	is	what	I	will
have	to	deal	with	tonight.	Me	first,	before	any	of	you	show	up.’
‘So	stop	it	from	happening!’
He	looked	at	her	with	bleak	eyes.	‘How?’
She	found	she	was	trembling.	‘Guarding	the	water	–	can	you	do	it	with	just
the	marines?’
His	gaze	narrowed	on	her,	and	then	he	nodded.
She	left	him	there,	in	his	collapsing	tent,	and	set	out	through	the	breaking
camp.	Talk	to	the	heavies,	Fiddler.	Promise	me	we	can	do	this.	I’m	not	ready	to
give	up.	I	didn’t	survive	the	Wall	to	die	of	thirst	in	a	fucking	desert.
	
Blistig	glared	at	Shelemasa	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	fixed	his	hate-filled
eyes	on	the	Khundryl	horses.	He	could	feel	the	rage	flaring	inside	him.	You
bitch	–	look	what	you’re	doing	to	us,	all	for	some	war	we	don’t	even	want.	‘Just
kill	them,’	he	commanded.
The	young	woman	shook	her	head.
Heat	flushed	his	face.	‘We	can’t	waste	the	water	on	horses!’
‘We	aren’t,	Fist.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘The	horses	get	our	allotted	water,’	Shelemasa	said.	‘And	we	drink	from
the	horses.’
He	stared,	incredulous.	‘You	drink	their	piss?’
‘No,	Fist,	we	drink	their	blood.’
‘Gods	below.’	Is	it	any	wonder	you	all	look	half	dead?	He	rubbed	at	his
face,	turned	away.	Speak	the	truth,	Blistig.	It’s	all	you	have	left.	‘You’ve	had


your	cavalry	charge,	Khundryl,’	he	said,	watching	a	troop	of	heavies	marching
past	–	going	the	wrong	way.	‘There	won’t	be	another,	so	what’s	the	point?’
When	he	turned	back	he	saw	that	she	had	gone	white.	The	truth.	Nobody	has
to	like	it.	‘The	time	has	come	for	hard	words,’	he	said.	‘You’re	done	–	you’ve
lost	your	warleader	and	got	an	old	woman	instead,	a	pregnant	one	at	that.	You
haven’t	got	enough	warriors	left	to	scare	a	family	of	berry-pickers.	She	just
invited	you	along	out	of	pity	–	don’t	you	see	that?’
‘That’s	enough,’	snapped	another	voice.
He	turned	to	see	Hanavat	standing	behind	him.	Blistig	bared	his	teeth.	‘I’m
glad	you	heard	all	that.	It	needed	saying.	Kill	the	damned	horses.	They’re
useless.’
She	studied	him	with	flat	eyes.	‘Fist	Blistig,	while	you	hid	behind	Aren’s
precious	walls,	the	Wickans	of	the	Seventh	Army	fought	a	battle	in	a	valley,
and	in	that	battle	they	mounted	a	charge	upslope,	into	a	wall	of	the	enemy.	They
won	that	battle	when	it	seemed	they	could	not.	But	how?	I	will	tell	you.	Their
shamans	had	selected	a	single	horse,	and	with	tears	in	their	eyes	they	fed	on	its
spirit,	and	when	they	were	done	that	horse	was	dead.	But	the	impossible	had
been	achieved,	because	Coltaine	expected	no	less.’
‘I	hid	behind	a	fucking	wall,	did	I?	I	was	the	garrison	commander!	Where
else	would	I	be?’
‘The	Adjunct	has	asked	us	to	preserve	our	horses,	and	this	we	shall	do,
Fist,	because	she	expects	no	less	from	us.	If	you	must	object,	deliver	your
complaint	to	the	Adjunct.	As	for	you,	as	you	are	not	the	Fist	in	command	of	the
Khundryl,	I	tell	you	now	that	you	are	no	longer	welcome	here.’
‘Fine.	Go	ahead	and	choke	on	that	blood,	then.	I	spoke	out	of	concern,	and
in	return	you	do	nothing	but	insult	me.’
‘I	know	the	reasons	behind	your	words,	Fist	Blistig,’	Hanavat	said	levelly.
He	met	her	eyes	unflinching,	and	then,	shrugging,	he	said,	‘The	slut
speaks.’	He	turned	and	left	them.
As	the	Fist	walked	away,	Shelemasa	drew	a	shaky	breath	and	stepped	close
to	Hanavat.	‘Mother?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	am	fine,	Shelemasa.	The	fever	thirst	is	on	Fist
Blistig.	That	and	nothing	more.’
‘He	said	we	were	done.	I	will	not	be	pitied!	Not	by	anyone!	The	Khundryl
—’
‘The	Adjunct	believes	we	are	still	of	worth,	and	so	do	I.	Now,	let	us	tend	to
our	beasts.	Do	we	have	enough	fodder?’
Shelemasa	shook	herself,	and	then	nodded.	‘More	than	we	need,	in	fact.’
‘Good.	And	our	water?’


She	winced.
Hanavat	sighed,	and	then	arched	her	back	with	a	groan.	‘I’m	too	old	to
think	of	her	as	my	mother,’	she	said,	‘and	yet	I	do.	We	still	breathe,	Shelemasa.
And	we	can	still	walk.	For	now,	that	must	be	enough.’
Shelemasa	stepped	closer,	as	close	as	she	dared	to	get.	‘You	have	borne
children.	You	have	loved	a	man—’
‘Many	men,	truth	be	told.’
‘I	thought	that,	one	day,	I	could	say	the	same	for	myself.	I	thought	I	could
look	back	and	be	satisfied.’
‘You	don’t	deserve	to	die,	Shelemasa.	I	could	not	agree	with	you	more,	and
so	you	shall	not.	We	will	do	whatever	must	be	done.	We	will	live	through	this
—’	She	cut	herself	off	then	and	Shelemasa	looked	up	to	see	her	staring	back	at
the	Khundryl	camp.	She	followed	the	older	woman’s	gaze.
Gall	had	appeared,	and	at	his	side	stood	Jastara,	his	eldest	son’s	widow.
Shelemasa	moved	to	block	Hanavat	from	their	view,	and	then	walked	over.
‘Warleader,’	she	hissed,	‘how	many	times	will	you	wound	her?’
The	warrior	seemed	to	have	aged	a	dozen	years	since	she	had	last	seen
him,	but	it	did	nothing	to	cool	her	fury.	And	in	his	unwillingness	to	meet	her
eyes	she	saw	only	cowardice.
‘We	go	to	our	sons	this	night,’	he	said.	‘Tell	her	that.	I	do	not	mean	to
wound.	Tonight,	or	the	next.	Soon.’
‘Soon,’	said	Jastara,	her	tone	harsh.	‘And	I	will	see	my	husband	again.	I
will	walk	at	his	side—’
Shelemasa	felt	disgust	twisting	her	face.	‘After	sleeping	with	his	father?
Will	you,	Jastara?	Is	his	spirit	here?	Does	he	see	you?	Does	he	know	all	that
you	have	done?	Yet	you	tell	yourself	you	will	be	at	his	side	again	–	you	are
mad!’	A	hand	settled	on	her	shoulder	and	she	turned.	‘Hanavat	–	no—’
‘You	are	so	quick	to	defend	me,	Shelemasa,	and	for	that	I	am	ever	grateful.
But	I	will	speak	to	my	husband.’
Jastara	had	backed	away	at	Shelemasa’s	words,	and	a	moment	later	she
fled,	pushing	through	the	crowd	that	had	gathered.	A	few	of	the	older	women
spun	to	strike	at	her	when	she	rushed	past.	A	dozen	youths	gathered	nearby
laughed	and	one	reached	down	for	a	stone—
‘Belay	that,	scout!’
At	the	bark,	the	girl	froze.
Captain	Fiddler	was	walking	into	the	Khundryl	camp,	to	collect	his	scouts.
He	glanced	over	at	Gall,	Hanavat	and	Shelemasa	and	for	an	instant	it	seemed	he
was	simply	going	to	continue	on	to	his	charges,	but	then	he	altered	his	path	and
approached.


‘No	disrespect	intended,	Mother	Hanavat,	but	we	don’t	have	time	for	all
this	shit.	Your	histories	are	just	that	–	a	heap	of	stories	you	keep	dragging
everywhere	you	go.	Warleader	Gall,	all	that	doom	you’re	bleating	on	about	is
a	waste	of	breath.	We’re	not	blind.	None	of	us.	The	only	question	you	have	to
deal	with	now	is	how	are	you	going	to	face	that	end?	Like	a	warrior,	or	on
your	Hood-damned	knees?’	Then,	ignoring	the	crowd,	Fiddler	made	his	way
towards	his	troop.	‘We’re	on	point	this	night,	scouts.	Take	up	those	spears	and
let’s	get	moving.	The	column’s	about	to	march.’
Shelemasa	watched	the	Malazan	lead	the	youths	away.
From	Hanavat,	a	low	laugh,	and	then,	‘No	disrespect,	he	said.	And	then	he
went	and	slapped	us	all	down.’
‘Mother—’
‘No,	he	was	right,	Shelemasa.	We	stand	here,	naked	but	for	our	pride.	Yet
see	how	heavy	it	weighs.	Well,	this	night,	I	think,	I	will	try	to	step	lighter	–	after
all,	what	have	I	left	to	lose?’
Your	child.
As	if	Hanavat	had	read	her	mind,	she	reached	up	and	brushed	Shelemasa’s
cheek.	‘I	will	die	first,’	she	whispered,	‘and	the	one	within	me	shall	quickly
follow.	If	this	is	how	it	must	be,	then	I	must	accept	it.	As	must	we	all.’	She	faced
her	husband	then.	‘But	not	on	our	knees.	We	are	Khundryl.	We	are	the	Burned
Tears.’
Gall	said,	‘If	I	had	not	led	us	down	to	Aren,	our	children	would	still	be
alive.	I	have	killed	our	children,	Hanavat.	I	–	I	need	you	to	hate	me.’
‘I	know,	husband.’
Shelemasa	could	see	that	beseeching	need	in	Gall’s	reddened	eyes,	but	his
wife	gave	him	nothing	more.
He	tried	again.	‘Wife,	the	Burned	Tears	died	at	the	Charge.’
Hanavat	simply	shook	her	head,	then	took	Shelemasa’s	hand	and	led	her
into	the	camp.	It	was	time	to	leave.	They	had	to	see	to	the	horses.	Shelemasa
spared	one	glance	back	and	saw	Gall	standing	alone,	hands	covering	his	face.
‘In	grief,’	murmured	Hanavat,	‘people	will	do	anything	to	escape	what
cannot	be	escaped.	Shelemasa,	you	must	go	to	Jastara.	You	must	take	back	your
words.’
‘I	will	not.’
‘It	is	not	for	you	to	judge	–	yet	how	often	is	it	that	those	in	no	position	to
judge	are	the	first	to	do	so,	and	with	such	fire	and	venom?	Speak	to	her,
Shelemasa.	Help	her	find	some	peace.’
‘But	how	can	I,	when	just	to	think	of	her	fills	me	with	disgust?’
‘I	did	not	suggest	it	would	be	easy,	daughter.’


‘I	will	give	it	some	thought.’
‘Very	well.	Just	don’t	wait	too	long.’

The	army	lifted	into	motion	like	a	beast	mired	in	mud,	one	last	exhausted
heave	forward,	weight	dragging	it	down.	The	wagons	lurched	behind	the	teams
of	haulers	as	they	strapped	on	their	harnesses	and	took	up	the	ropes.	Scores	of
tents	were	left	standing,	along	with	a	scattering	of	cookpots	and	soiled	clothing
lying	like	trampled	flags.
Flies	roiled	in	clouds	to	swarm	the	hunched-over,	silent	soldiers,	and
overhead	the	glow	of	the	Jade	Strangers	was	brighter	than	any	moonlight,
bright	enough	for	Lostara	Yil	to	see	every	detail	on	the	painted	shields	of	the
regulars,	which	they	now	carried	to	keep	the	flies	from	their	backs.	The	lurid
green	painted	drawn,	lined	faces	with	a	ghastly	corpulent	hue,	and	made
unearthly	the	surrounding	desert.	Clouds	of	butterflies	wheeled	above	like
ever-building	storms.
Lostara	stood	with	Henar	Vygulf	at	her	side,	watching	the	Adjunct	draw	on
her	cloak,	watching	her	lifting	the	hood.	She	had	taken	to	leading	the	vanguard
herself,	five	or	six	paces	ahead	of	everyone	else,	excepting	Captain	Fiddler ’s
thirty	or	so	Khundryl	youths	who	ranged	ahead	a	hundred	paces,	scouts	with
nothing	to	scout.	Lostara’s	eyes	stayed	on	the	Adjunct.
‘In	Bluerose,’	said	Henar,	‘there	is	a	festival	of	the	Black-Winged	Lord
once	every	ten	years	on	winter ’s	longest	night.	The	High	Priestess	shrouds
herself	and	leads	a	procession	through	the	city.’
‘This	Black-Winged	Lord	is	your	god?’
‘Unofficially,	under	the	suspicious	regard	of	the	Letherii.	Highly
proscribed,	in	fact,	but	this	procession	was	one	of	the	few	that	they	did	not
outlaw.’
‘You	were	celebrating	the	year ’s	longest	night?’
‘Not	really.	Not	in	the	fashion	that	farmers	might	each	winter,	to	celebrate
the	coming	of	the	planting	season	–	very	few	farms	around	Bluerose;	we	were
mostly	seafaring.	Well,	maritime,	anyway.	It	was	meant	to	summon	our	god,	I
suppose.	I	was	not	much	for	making	sense	of	such	things.	And	as	I	said,	it	was
once	every	ten	years.’
Lostara	waited.	Henar	wasn’t	a	talkative	man	–	thank	Hood	–	but	when	he
spoke	he	always	had	something	useful	to	say.	Eventually.
‘Hooded,	she’d	walk	silent	streets,	followed	by	thousands	equally	mute,


down	to	the	water ’s	edge.	She	would	stand	just	beyond	the	reach	of	the	surf.	An
acolyte	would	come	up	to	her	carrying	a	lantern,	which	she	would	take	in	one
hand.	And	at	the	moment	of	dawn’s	first	awakening,	she	would	fling	that
lantern	into	the	water,	quenching	its	light.’
Lostara	grunted.	‘Curious	ritual.	Instead	of	the	lantern,	then,	the	sun.
Sounds	like	you	were	worshipping	the	coming	of	day	more	than	anything
else.’
‘Then	she	would	draw	a	ceremonial	dagger	and	cut	her	own	throat.’
Shaken,	Lostara	Yil	faced	him,	but	found	she	had	nothing	to	say.	No
response	seemed	possible.	Then	a	thought	struck	her.	‘And	that	was	a	festival
the	Letherii	permitted?’
‘They	would	come	down	and	watch,	picnicking	on	the	strand.’	He
shrugged.	‘For	them	it	was	one	less	irritating	High	Priestess,	I	suppose.’
Her	gaze	returned	to	the	Adjunct.	She	had	just	set	out.	A	shrouded	figure,
hidden	from	all	behind	her	by	that	plain	hood.	The	soldiers	fell	in	after	her	and
the	only	sound	that	came	from	them	was	the	dull	clatter	of	their	armour,	the
thump	of	their	boots.	Lostara	Yil	shivered	and	leaned	close	to	Henar.
‘The	hood,’	Henar	muttered.	‘It	reminded	me,	that’s	all.’
She	nodded.	But	she	dreaded	the	thought	of	that	story	coming	back	to	haunt
them.
	
‘I	can’t	believe	I	died	for	this,’	Hedge	said,	wanting	to	spit	but	there	wasn’t
enough	in	his	mouth	to	do	it,	and	of	course	he’d	have	to	be	mad	to	waste	the
water.	He	turned	and	glared	at	the	three	oxen	pulling	Bavedict’s	carriage.	‘Got
any	more	of	that	drink	you	gave	’em?	They’re	looking	damned	hale,
Alchemist	–	we	could	all	do	with	a	sip	or	three.’
‘Hardly,	Commander,’	Bavedict	said,	one	hand	on	the	hawser.	‘They’ve
been	dead	for	three	days	now.’
Hedge	squinted	at	the	nearest	beast.	‘Well	now,	I’m	impressed.	I	admit	it.
Impressed,	and	that	can’t	be	said	often	of	old	Hedge.’
‘In	Letheras,’	Bavedict	said,	‘there	are	dozens	of	people	wandering	around
who	are	in	fact	dead	and	have	been	for	some	time.	Necromantic	alchemy	is	one
of	the	most	advanced	of	the	Uneasy	Arts	among	the	Letherii.	In	fact,	of	all	the
curse	elixirs	I	sold,	the	one	achieving	everlasting	undeath	was	probably	the
most	popular	–	as	much	as	anything	costing	a	chestful	of	gold	can	be	popular.’
‘Could	you	do	this	for	a	whole	army?’
Bavedict	blanched.	‘C-commander,	such	things	are,	er,	prohibitively
difficult	to	achieve.	Preparing	a	single	curse-vial,	for	example,	involves


months	of	back-breaking	effort.	Denatured	ootooloo	spawn	–	the	primary
ingredient	–	well,	you’d	be	lucky	to	get	three	drops	a	night,	and	harvesting	is
terribly	risky,	not	to	mention	exhausting,	even	for	a	man	reputedly	as	skilled	as
myself.’
‘Ulatoo	spawn,	huh?	Never	heard	of	it.	Never	mind,	then.	It	was	just	a
notion.	But,	you	got	any	more	of	that	stuff?’
‘No	sir.	I	judged	as	greatest	the	need	of	the	Bridgeburners	for	the
munitions	in	this	carriage—’
‘Shh!	Don’t	use	that	word,	you	fool!’
‘Sorry,	sir.	Perhaps,	then,	we	should	invent	some	other	term	–	something
innocuous,	that	we	could	use	freely.’
Hedge	rubbed	at	his	whiskered	jaw.	‘Good	idea.	How	about…kittens?’
‘Kittens,	sir?	Why	not?	Now	then,	our	carriage	full	of	kittens	is	not
something	that	can	be	abandoned,	is	it,	sir?	And	I	should	tell	you,	the	entire
company	of	Bridgeburners	has	not	the	strength	to	haul	it.’
‘Really?	Well,	er,	just	how	many	kittens	you	got	stuffed	in	there?’
‘It’s	the	raw	ingredients,	sir.	Bottles	and	casks	and	vials	and…er,	tubing.
Condensers,	distillation	apparatuses.	Um,	without	two	cats	of	opposite	gender,
sir,	making	kittens	is	not	an	easy	venture.’
Hedge	stared	for	a	moment,	and	then	nodded.	‘Oh,	ah,	of	course,
Alchemist.	Just	so.’	He	glanced	to	his	right,	where	a	squad	of	marines	had	just
come	up	alongside	them,	but	their	attention	was	on	the	wagon	loaded	with	food
and	water	that	they	were	guarding,	or	so	Hedge	assumed	since	they	were
resting	hands	on	hilts	and	looking	belligerent.	‘Well,	keep	at	it	then,	Bavedict.
Never	can	have	too	many	kittens,	can	we?’
‘Precisely,	sir.’
Six	paces	behind	the	two	men,	Rumjugs	leaned	close	to	Sweetlard.	‘I	had
me	some	kittens	once,	you	know.’
Sweetlard	shot	her	an	unsurprised	look.	‘Errant	knows,	you’ll	take	coin
from	anybody,	love.’
	
He	had	a	swagger,	I	remember	that	much.	And	how	I’d	get	sick,	my	stomach
burning	like	I’d	swallowed	coals,	every	time	he	came	into	the	house.	Ma,	she
was	a	bird,	really,	the	kind	that	flits	about	as	if	no	branch	gives	comfort,	no	leaf
makes	perfect	shade.	And	her	eyes	would	leap	to	him	and	then	away	again.	But
in	that	one	look	she’d	know	if	something	bad	was	on	the	way.
If	it	was,	she’d	edge	closer	to	me.	The	jay	is	in	the	tree,	the	chick	is	in
danger.	But	there	was	nothing	she	could	do.	He	weighed	twice	as	much	as	she


did.	He	once	threw	her	through	the	shack’s	flimsy	wall.	That	time	was	something
of	a	mistake	for	old	Da,	since	it	took	outside	what	went	on	inside,	so	people	saw
the	truth	of	it	all.	My	little	family.
There	must’ve	been	a	neighbour,	someone	on	the	street,	who’d	seen	and
decided	he	didn’t	much	like	it.	A	day	later	Da	was	dragged	back	to	the	house
beaten	close	to	death,	and	there	we	were,	Ma	and	her	two	boys	–	that	was
before	my	brother	ran	away	–	there	we	were,	nursing	him	back.
How	stupid	was	that?	We	should’ve	finished	what	that	right-thinking
neighbour	had	started.
But	we	didn’t.
That	swagger,	and	Ma	darting	about.
I	remember	the	last	day	of	all	that.	I	was	seven,	almost	eight.	Quiet
Ginanse,	who	lived	up	the	street	and	worked	as	a	knife-sharpener,	had	been
found	strangled	in	the	alley	behind	his	shop.	People	were	upset.	Ginanse	had
been	solid,	an	old	veteran	of	the	Falar	Wars,	and	though	he	had	a	weakness	for
drink	he	wasn’t	a	violent	drunk.	Not	at	all.	Too	much	ale	and	he	wanted	to
seduce	every	woman	he	saw.	A	sweet	soul,	then.	That’s	what	Ma	used	to	say,
hands	fluttering	like	wings.
So	people	were	upset.	He’d	been	drunk	the	night	before.	In	no	shape	to
defend	himself.	The	rope	that	had	killed	him	was	horsehair	–	I	remember	how
people	talked	about	that,	as	if	it	was	important,	though	I	didn’t	know	why	at	the
time.	But	they’d	found	horsehairs	in	Gin’s	neck.
The	old	women	who	shared	a	house	on	the	corner,	three	of	them,	seemed	to
be	looking	at	us	again	and	again	–	we	were	outside,	listening	to	everybody
talking,	all	those	emotions	running	high.	Ma	was	white	as	plucked	down.	Da
was	on	the	bench	beside	the	shack’s	door.	He’d	gotten	a	rash	on	his	hands	and
was	slowly	melting	a	lump	of	lard	between	them.	There’d	been	a	strange	look	in
his	eye,	but	for	once	he	wasn’t	offering	any	opinion	on	the	matter.
Horsehair.	A	tradition	among	the	outliers,	the	wood-cutting	camps	east	of
the	city.	‘How	adulterers	are	hung,	aye?’	And	the	old	women	nodded.	‘But	old
Ginanse,	he	ain’t	never—’	‘No,	couldn’t,	y’see?	Got	burned	down	there	–	was	on
a	ship	that	caught	fire	when	they	took	Falar	Harbour.	He	couldn’t	do	nothing.’
The	drunk	seducer	with	nowhere	to	take	it.	How	shit-fouled	miserable	is
that?	Breaks	the	heart.
And	he’d	always	a	kind	word	for	Ma,	when	she	went	to	him	to	get	the	one
knife	we	owned	sharpened.	Hardly	charged	a	thing	either.	‘That	blade	a	mouse
couldn’t	shave	with,	hah!	Hey,	boy,	your	ma	ever	let	you	shave	a	mouse?	Good
practice	for	when	one	shows	up	under	yer	nose!	Few	years	yet,	though.’
‘So,’	said	someone	in	the	crowd,	‘a	jealous	man	–	no,	make	it	a	jealous,


stupid	man.	With	wood	for	brains.’	And	a	few	people	laughed,	but	they	weren’t
pleasant	laughs.	People	were	working	up	to	something.	People	knew	something.
People	were	figuring	it	out.
Like	a	bird	in	a	thorn	bush,	Ma	slipped	inside	without	a	sound.	I	followed
her,	thinking	about	poor	old	Ginanse	and	wondering	who	was	gonna	sharpen
Ma’s	knife	now.	But	Da	got	up	right	then	and	went	in	a	step	before	me.	His
hands	were	dripping	melted	fat.
I	don’t	remember	exactly	what	I	saw.	Just	a	flash,	really.	Up	close	to	Da’s
face,	just	under	his	huge,	bearded	jaw.	And	he	made	a	gurgling	sound	and	his
knees	bent	as	if	he	was	about	to	sit	down	–	right	on	me.	I	jumped	back,	tripped
in	the	doorway	and	landed	in	the	dust	beside	the	bench.
Da	was	making	spitting	sounds,	but	not	from	his	mouth.	From	his	neck.	And
when	he	landed	on	his	knees,	twisting	round	in	the	doorway	as	if	wanting	to
come	back	outside,	the	front	of	his	chest	was	all	wet	and	bright	red.	I	looked
into	my	father’s	eyes.	And	for	the	first	and	only	time	in	my	life	with	him,	I
actually	saw	something	alive	in	there.	A	flicker,	a	gleam,	that	went	out	for	good
as	he	slumped	on	the	threshold.
Behind	him,	Ma	stood	holding	that	little	knife	in	her	right	hand.
‘Here	y’go,	boy,	hold	it	careful	now.	It’s	sharp	enough	to	shave	a	mouse	–
Bridgeburner	magic,	what	I	can	do	with	decent	iron.	Give	us	another	smile,
sweet	Elade,	it’s	all	the	payment	I	ask,	darling.’
	
‘Well	now,	recruit,	y’ever	stand	still?	Seen	you	goin’	round	and	round	and
round.	Tell	me,	was	your	old	man	a	court	clown	or	something?’
No,	Master-Sergeant,	my	da	was	a	wood-cutter.
‘Really?	Outlier	blood?	But	you’re	a	scrawny	thing	for	a	wood-cutter’s	son.
Not	one	for	the	trade	then?’
He	died	when	I	was	seven,	Master-Sergeant.	I	was	of	no	mind	to	follow	his
ways.	I	ended	up	learning	most	from	my	ma’s	side	of	the	family	–	had	an	aunt
and	uncle	who	worked	with	animals.
‘Found	you	a	name,	lad.’
Master-Sergeant?
‘See,	I	wrote	it	right	here,	making	it	official.	Your	name	is	Widdershins,	and
you’re	now	a	marine.	Now	get	out	of	my	sight	–	and	get	someone	to	beat	those
dogs.	That	barking’s	driving	me	mad.’
	


‘How’s	the	stomach,	Wid?’
‘Burns	like	coals,	Sergeant.’
A	half-dozen	regulars	were	coming	up	alongside	them.	The	one	in	the	lead
eyed	Balm	and	said,	‘Fist	Blistig	assigned	us	t’this	one,	Sergeant.	We	got	it	in
hand—’
‘Best	under	a	blanket,	Corporal,’	said	Balm.
Throatslitter	piped	an	eerie	laugh,	and	the	squad	of	regulars	jumped	at	the
sound.
‘Your	help’s	always	welcome,’	Balm	added.	‘But	from	now	on,	these
wagons	got	details	of	marines	to	help	guard	’em.’
The	corporal	looked	nervous	enough	for	Widdershins	to	give	him	a	closer
look.	Now	that’s	an	awfully	plump	face	for	someone	on	three	tiny	cups	a	day.
The	corporal	was	stubborn	or	stupid	enough	to	try	again.	‘Fist	Blistig—’
‘Ain’t	commanding	marines,	Corporal.	But	tell	you	what,	go	to	him	and
tell	him	all	about	this	conversation,	why	don’t	you?	If	he’s	got	a	problem	he
can	come	to	me.	I’m	Sergeant	Balm,	Ninth	Squad.	Or,	if	I	rank	too	low	for	him
on	all	this,	why,	he	can	hunt	down	Captain	Fiddler,	who’s	up	ahead,	on	point.’
Balm	cocked	his	head	and	scratched	his	jaw.	‘Seem	to	recall,	from	my	basic
training	days,	that	a	Fist	outranks	a	captain	–	hey,	Deadsmell,	is	that	right?’
‘Mostly,	Sergeant.	But	sometimes,	well,	it	depends	on	the	Fist.’
‘And	the	captain,’	added	Throatslitter,	nudging	Widdershins	with	a	sharp
elbow.
‘Now	there’s	a	point,’	Balm	mused.	‘Kinda	sticky,	like	a	hand	under	a
blanket.’
Throatslitter ’s	second	laugh	sent	them	scurrying.
‘Those	soldiers	looked	flush,’	Widdershins	muttered	once	they’d	retreated
into	the	gloom.	‘At	first,	well,	the	poor	fools	were	just	following	orders,	so	I
thought	you	was	being	unkind,	Sergeant	–	but	now	I	got	some	suspicions.’
‘That’s	an	executable	offence,’	said	Deadsmell.	‘What	you’re	suggesting
there,	Wid.’
‘It’s	going	to	happen	soon	if	it	hasn’t	already,’	Widdershins	said,
grimacing.	‘We	all	know	it.	Why	d’you	think	Fid	nailed	us	to	these	wagons?’
Throatslitter	added,	‘Heard	we	was	getting	our	heavies	for	this,	but	then	we
weren’t.’
‘Nervous,	Throaty?’	Widdershins	asked.	‘Only	the	four	of	us,	after	all.	The
scariest	thing	about	us	is	your	awful	laugh.’
‘Worked	though,	didn’t	it?’
‘They	went	to	moan	at	their	captain	or	whoever,’	Balm	said.	‘They’ll	be
back	with	reinforcements,	is	my	guess.’


Widdershins	jabbed	Throatslitter	with	his	elbow,	avenging	that	earlier
prod.	‘Scared,	Throaty?’
‘Only	of	your	breath,	Wid	–	get	away	from	me.’
‘Got	another	squad	on	the	other	side	of	these	wagons,’	Balm	pointed	out.
‘Anyone	see	which	one?’
They	all	looked	over,	but	the	three	lines	of	wretched	haulers	mostly
blocked	their	view.	Throatslitter	grunted.	‘Could	be	Whiskeyjack	himself.	If	we
get	in	trouble	they	won’t	be	able	to	get	through—’
‘What’s	your	problem?’	Balm	demanded.
Throatslitter	bared	his	teeth.	‘This	is	thirst	we’re	dealing	with	here,
Sergeant	–	no,	all	of	you!	Where	I	came	from,	droughts	hit	often,	and	the	worst
was	when	the	city	was	besieged	–	and	with	Li	Heng,	well,	during	the	scraps
with	the	Seti	that	was	pretty	much	every	summer.	So	I	know	about	thirst,	all
right?	Once	the	fever	strikes,	there’s	no	stopping	it.’
‘Well	isn’t	that	cheery?	You	can	stop	talking	now,	Throatslitter,	and	that’s
an	order.’
‘I	think	it’s	Badan	Gruk’s	squad,’	said	Deadsmell.
Balm	snorted.
Widdershins	frowned.	‘That’s	a	problem,	Sergeant?	They’re	Dal	Honese
just	like	you,	aren’t	they?’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.	They’re	from	the	southern	jungles.’
‘So	are	you,	aren’t	you?’
‘Even	if	I	was,	and	I’m	not	saying	I	wasn’t,	or	was,	that’d	make	no
difference,	you	understand	me,	Wid?’
‘No.	Tayschrenn	himself	couldn’t	have	worked	out	what	you	just	said,
Sergeant.’
‘It’s	complicated,	that’s	all.	But…Badan	Gruk.	Well,	could	be	worse,	I
suppose.	Though	like	Throaty	said,	we’d	both	have	trouble	supporting	the
other.	I	wish	Fid	ain’t	pulled	the	heavies	from	us.	What	d’you	think	he’s	done
with	’em?’
Deadsmell	said,	‘It	was	Faradan	Sort	who	come	up	after	Kindly,	to	talk	to
the	captain.	And	I	wasn’t	deliberately	eavesdropping	or	nothing.	I	just	happened
to	be	standing	close.	So	I	didn’t	catch	it	all,	but	I	think	there	might	be	some
trouble	with	the	food	haulers	on	the	back	end.	I’m	thinking	that’s	where	the
heavies	went.’
‘What,	to	lighten	the	loads?’
Throatslitter	yelped.
	


Lap	Twirl	scratched	at	the	end	of	his	nose	where	the	tip	had	once	been.
‘Kind’ve	insulting,’	he	muttered,	‘them	calling	themselves	Bridgeburners.’
Burnt	Rope	glanced	over	at	the	company	marching	on	his	left.	Squinted	at
the	three	oxen	plodding	the	way	oxen	plodded	the	world	over.	It’s	how	it	looks
when	y’get	someone	doing	something	nobody	wants	t’do.	Draught	animals.	Of
course,	it’s	all	down	to	stupidity,	isn’t	it?	Do	the	work,	get	food,	do	more	work
to	get	more	food.	Over	and	over	again.	Not	like	us	at	all.	‘I	don’t	care	what	they
call	themselves,	Lap.	They’re	marching	just	like	us.	In	the	same	mess,	and
when	we’re	all	bleached	bones,	well,	who	could	tell	the	difference	between	any
of	us?’
‘I	could,’	Lap	Twirl	said.	‘Easy.	Just	by	looking	at	the	skulls.	I	can	tell	if	it’s
a	woman	or	a	man,	young	or	old.	I	can	tell	if	it’s	a	city-born	fool	or	a	country
one.	Where	I	apprenticed,	back	in	Falar,	my	master	had	shelves	and	shelves	of
skulls.	Was	doing	a	study	–	he	could	tell	a	Napan	from	a	Quon,	a	Genabackan
from	a	Kartoolian—’
Corporal	Clasp,	walking	a	step	ahead,	snorted	loudly	and	then	half	turned,
‘And	you	believed	him,	Lap?	Let	me	guess,	that’s	how	he	made	his	living,	isn’t
it?	Wasn’t	it	you	Falari	who	had	that	thing	about	burying	relatives	in	the	walls
of	your	houses?	So	when	rival	claims	to	some	building	came	up,	why,
everyone	ran	to	the	skull-scriers.’
‘My	master	was	famous	for	settling	disputes.’
‘I	just	bet	he	was.	Listen,	working	out	a	man	or	woman,	old	or	young	–
sure,	I’ll	buy	that.	But	the	rest?	Forget	it,	Lap.’
‘Why	are	we	talking	about	skulls	again?’	Burnt	Rope	asked.	When	no	one
seemed	able	to	come	up	with	an	answer,	he	went	on,	‘Anyway,	I’m	thinking	it’s
all	right	that	we	got	them	Bridgeburners	so	close,	instead	of	’em	regulars	–	if
we	get	mobbed	at	this	wagon	here,	we	could	call	on	’em	to	help.’
‘Why	would	they	do	that?’	Lap	Twirl	demanded.
‘Can’t	say.	But	Dead	Hedge,	he’s	a	real	Bridgeburner—’
‘Yeah,’	drawled	Clasp,	‘I	heard	that,	too.	Pure	rubbish,	you	know.	They’re
all	dead.	Everyone	knows	that.’
‘Not	Fiddler…’
‘Except	Fiddler…’
‘And	Fiddler	and	Hedge	were	in	the	same	squad.	Along	with	Quick	Ben.	So
Hedge	is	for	real.’
‘All	right,	fine,	so	it	isn’t	pure	rubbish.	But	him	helping	us	is.	We	get	in
trouble	here,	we	got	no	one	else	to	look	to	for	help.	Tarr ’s	squad	is	on	the
other	side	of	the	haulers	–	no	way	t’reach	us.	So,	just	stay	sharp,	especially
when	the	midnight	bell	sounds.’


From	ahead	of	them	all,	Sergeant	Urb	glanced	back.	‘Everyone	relax,’	he
said.	‘There	won’t	be	any	trouble.’
‘What	makes	you	so	sure,	Sergeant?’
‘Because,	Corporal	Clasp,	we	got	Bridgeburners	marching	beside	us.	And
they	got	kittens.’
Burnt	Rope	joined	the	others	in	solemn	nodding.	Urb	knew	his	stuff.	They
were	lucky	to	have	him.	Even	with	Saltlick	sent	off	back-column,	they	would
be	fine.	Burnt	Rope	glanced	enviously	at	that	huge	Letherii	carriage.	‘Wish	I
had	me	some	of	them	kittens.’
	
If	anything,	letting	go	was	the	easiest	among	all	the	choices	left.	The	other
choices	crowded	together,	jostling	and	unpleasant,	and	stared	with	belligerent
expressions.	Waiting,	expectant.	And	he	so	wanted	to	turn	away	from	them	all.
He	so	wanted	to	let	go.
Instead,	the	captain	just	walked,	his	scouts	whispering	around	him	like	a
score	of	childhood	memories.	He	didn’t	want	them	around,	but	he	couldn’t	send
them	away	either.	It	was	what	he	was	stuck	with.	It’s	what	we’re	all	stuck	with.
And	so	there	was	no	letting	go,	not	from	any	of	this.	He	knew	what	the
Adjunct	wanted,	and	what	she	wanted	of	him.	And	my	marines,	and	my	heavies.
And	none	of	it’s	fair	and	we	both	know	it	and	that’s	not	fair	either.	Those	other
choices,	willing	him	to	meet	their	eye,	stood	before	him	like	an	unruly	legion.
‘Take	us,	Fiddler,	we’re	all	that	you	meant	to	say,	a	thousand	times	in	your	life
–	when	you	looked	on	and	remained	silent,	when	you	let	it	all	slide	past	instead
of	taking	a	step	right	into	the	path	of	all	that	shit,	all	that	cruel	misery.	When
you…let	it	go.	And	felt	bits	of	you	die	inside,	small	ones,	barely	a	sting,	and
then	gone.
‘But	they	add	up,	soldier.	Don’t	they?	So	she	says	don’t	let	go	this	time,
don’t	sidestep.	She	says	–	well,	you	know	what	she	says.’
Fiddler	wasn’t	surprised	that	the	chiding	voice	within	him,	the	voice	of
those	hardened	choices	ahead,	was	Whiskeyjack’s.	He	could	almost	see	his
sergeant’s	eyes,	blue	and	grey,	the	colour	of	honed	weapons,	the	colour	of
winter	skies,	fixing	upon	him	that	knowing	look,	the	one	that	said,	‘You’ll	do
right,	soldier,	because	you	don’t	know	how	to	do	anything	else.	Doing	right,
soldier,	is	the	only	thing	you’re	good	at.’	And	if	it	hurts?	‘Too	bad.	Stop	your
bitching,	Fid.	Besides,	you	ain’t	as	alone	as	you	think	you	are.’
He	grunted.	Now	where	had	that	thought	come	from?	No	matter.	It	was
starting	to	look	like	the	whole	thing	was	useless.	It	was	starting	to	look	like	this
desert	was	going	to	kill	them	all.	But	until	then,	he’d	just	go	on,	and	on,


walking.
Walking.
A	small,	grubby	hand	tugged	at	his	jerkin.	He	looked	down.
The	boy	pointed	ahead.
Walking.
Fiddler	squinted.	Shapes	in	the	distance.	Figures	appearing	out	of	the
darkness.
Walking.
‘Gods	below,’	he	whispered.
Walking.


Chapter	Fifteen

And	all	the	ages	past
Have	nothing	to	say
They	rest	easy	underfoot
Uttering	not	a	whisper
They	are	dead	as	the	eyes
That	looked	upon	them
Riding	the	dust	that	gathers
In	lost	and	forgotten	corners
You	won’t	find	them
Scratched	in	scrolls
Or	between	the	bindings
Of	leather-bound	tomes
Not	once	carved
On	stelae	and	stone	walls
They	do	not	hide
Waiting	to	be	found
Like	treasures	of	truth
Or	holy	revelation
Not	one	of	the	ages	past
Will	descend	from	the	heavens
Cupped	in	the	hand
Of	a	god	or	clutched	tight
By	a	stumbling	prophet
All	these	ages	past
Remain	for	ever	untouched
With	lessons	unlearned
By	the	fool	who	can	do	nothing
But	stare	ahead
To	where	stands	the	future
Grinning	with	empty	eyes
Helpless	Days


Fisher	kel	Tath
	waves,	back	and	forth,	awash
with	blood.	Yan	Tovis	fought	with	her	people.	She	could	match	her	brother ’s
savagery,	if	not	his	skill.	She	could	cut	down	Liosan	until	the	muscles	of	her
arm	finally	failed,	and	she’d	back	away,	dragging	her	sword	behind	her.	Until
the	rainy,	flat	blackness	unfurled	from	the	corners	of	her	vision	and	she
staggered,	chest	screaming	for	breath,	moments	from	slipping	into
unconsciousness,	but	somehow	each	time	managing	to	pull	herself	back,
pushing	clear	of	the	press	and	stumbling	among	the	wounded	and	dying.	And
then	down	on	to	her	knees,	because	another	step	was	suddenly	impossible,	and
all	around	her	swirled	the	incessant	tidal	flow	and	ebb,	the	blur	of	figures
moving	from	body	to	body,	and	the	air	was	filled	with	terrible	sound.	Shrieks
of	pain,	the	shouts	of	the	cutters	and	stretcher-bearers,	the	roar	of	endless,
eternal	battle.
She	understood	so	much	more	now.	About	the	world.	About	the	struggle	to
survive	in	that	world.	In	any	world.	But	she	could	find	words	for	none	of	it.
These	revelations	were	ineffable,	too	vast	for	the	intellect	to	conquer.	She
wanted	to	weep,	but	her	tears	were	long	gone,	and	all	that	remained	precious
could	be	found	in	the	next	breath	she	took,	and	the	one	after	that.	Each	one
stunning	her	with	its	gift.
Reaching	up	one	trembling	forearm,	she	wiped	blood	and	grime	from	her
face.	A	shadow	passed	over	her	and	she	lifted	her	head	to	see	the	close	pass	of
another	dragon	–	but	it	did	not	descend	to	the	breach,	not	this	time,	instead
lifting	high,	seeming	to	hover	a	moment	behind	the	curtain	of	Lightfall	before
backing	away	and	vanishing	into	the	glare.
Relief	came	in	a	nauseating	rush	that	had	her	leaning	forward.	Someone
came	to	her	side,	resting	a	light	arm	across	her	back.
‘Highness.	Here,	water.	Drink.’
Yan	Tovis	looked	up.	The	face	was	familiar	only	in	that	she’d	seen	this
woman	again	and	again	in	the	press,	fighting	with	an	Andiian	pike.	Grateful,
yet	sick	with	guilt,	she	nodded	and	took	the	waterskin.
‘They’ve	lost	the	will	for	it,	Highness.	Again.	It’s	the	shock.’
The	shock,	yes.	That.
Half	of	my	people	are	dead	or	too	wounded	to	fight	on.	As	many	Letherii.
And	my	brother	stands	tall	still,	as	if	it’s	all	going	to	plan.	As	if	he’s	satisfied	by
our	stubborn	insanity,	this	thing	he’s	made	of	us	all.
The	smith	will	bend	the	iron	to	his	will.	The	smith	does	not	weep	when	the
TIME	HAD	BECOME	MEANINGLESS.	THEIR	WORLD	NOW	ROLLED	LIKE


iron	struggles	and	resists,	when	it	seeks	to	find	its	own	shape,	its	own	truth.	He
hammers	the	sword,	until	he	beats	out	a	new	truth.	Edged	and	deadly.
‘Highness,	the	last	of	the	blood	has	shattered.	I	–	I	saw	souls,	trapped	within
–	breaking	apart.	Highness	–	I	saw	them	screaming,	but	I	heard	nothing.’
Yan	Tovis	straightened,	and	now	it	was	time	to	be	the	one	giving	comfort.
Yet	she’d	forgotten	how.	‘Those	lost	within,	soldier,	will	for	ever	stand	upon
the	Shore.	There	are…worse	places	to	be.’	If	she	could,	she	would	flinch	at	her
own	tone.	So	lifeless,	so	cold.
Despite	that,	she	felt	something	like	will	steal	back	into	the	young	woman.
It	seemed	impossible.	Yedan,	what	have	you	made	of	my	people?
How	long	ago	was	it?	In	a	place	where	days	could	not	be	measured,	where
the	only	tempo	was	the	wash	and	flood	of	howling	figures,	this	tide	seething
into	the	heart	of	midnight,	she	had	no	answer	to	this	simplest	of	questions.
Lifting	the	waterskin,	she	drank	deep,	and	then,	half	in	dread,	half	in	disbelief,
she	faced	Lightfall.
And	the	wound,	where	the	last	of	the	Liosan	still	alive	on	this	side	were
falling	to	Shake	swords	and	Andiian	pikes.	Her	brother	was	down	there.	He	had
been	down	there	for	what	seemed	for	ever,	impervious	to	exhaustion,	as	units
disengaged	and	others	stumbled	forward	to	relieve	them,	as	the	warriors	of	his
Watch	fell	one	by	one,	as	veterans	of	the	first	battle	stepped	to	the	fore	in	their
place,	as	they	too	began	to	fall,	and	Shake	veterans	arrived	–	like	this	woman	at
her	side.
Brother.	You	can	kill	for	ever.	But	we	cannot	keep	up	with	you.	No	one	can.
I	see	an	end	to	this,	when	you	stand	alone,	and	the	dead	shall	be	your
ground.
She	turned	to	the	soldier.	‘You	need	to	rest.	Deliver	this	news	to	Queen
Drukorlat.	The	blood	wall	has	shattered.	The	Liosan	have	retreated.	Half	of	us
remain.’
The	woman	stared.	And	then	looked	around,	as	if	only	now	realizing	the
full	extent	of	the	horror	surrounding	them,	the	heaps	of	corpses,	the	entire
strand	a	mass	of	supine	bodies	under	blood-soaked	blankets.	She	saw	her
mouth	the	word	half.
‘When	in	the	palace,	rest.	Eat.’
But	the	soldier	was	shaking	her	head.	‘Highness.	I	have	one	brother	left	to
me.	I	cannot	stay	in	the	palace	–	I	cannot	leave	his	side	for	too	long.	I	am	sorry.
I	shall	deliver	your	message	and	then	return	at	once.’
Yan	Tovis	wanted	to	rail	at	her,	but	she	bit	down	on	her	fury,	for	it	was
meant	not	for	this	woman,	but	for	Yedan	Derryg,	who	had	done	this	to	her
people.	‘Tell	me	then,	where	is	your	brother?’


The	woman	pointed	to	a	boy	sleeping	in	a	press	of	Shake	fighters	resting
nearby.
The	vision	seemed	to	stab	deep	into	Yan	Tovis	and	she	struggled	to	stifle	a
sob.	‘Be	with	him,	then	–	I	will	find	another	for	the	message.’
‘Highness!	I	can—’
She	pushed	the	waterskin	into	the	woman’s	arms.	‘When	he	awakens,	he
will	be	thirsty.’
Seeing	the	soldier ’s	wounded	expression	as	she	backed	away,	Yan	Tovis
could	only	turn	from	her,	fixing	her	eyes	once	more	upon	the	breach.	It’s	not
you	who	has	failed	me,	she	wanted	to	say	to	that	soldier,	it	is	I	who	have	failed
you.	But	then	she	was	alone	once	more	and	it	was	too	late.
Brother,	are	you	down	there?	I	cannot	see	you.	Do	you	stand	triumphant
once	more?	I	cannot	see	you.
All	I	can	see	is	what	you	did.	Yesterday.	A	thousand	years	ago.	In	the	breath
just	past.	When	there	are	none	but	ghosts	left	upon	the	Shore,	they	will	sing
your	praises.	They	will	make	of	you	a	legend	that	none	living	will	ever	hear	–
gods,	the	span	of	time	itself	must	be	crowded	with	such	legends,	for	ever	lost	yet
whispered	eternally	on	the	winds.
What	if	that	is	the	only	true	measure	of	time?	All	that	only	the	dead	have
witnessed,	all	that	only	they	can	speak	of,	though	no	mortal	life	will	ever	hear
them.	All	those	stories	for	ever	lost.
Is	it	any	wonder	we	cannot	grasp	hold	of	the	ages	past?	That	all	we	can
manage	is	what	clings	to	our	own	lives,	and	what	waits	within	reach?	To	all	the
rest,	we	are	cursed	to	deafness.
And	so,	because	she	knew	naught	else	to	do,	in	her	mind	Yan	Tovis
reached	out	–	to	that	moment	a	day	past,	or	a	breath	ago,	or	indeed	at	the	very
dawn	of	time,	when	she	saw	her	brother	lead	a	sortie	into	the	face	of	the	Liosan
centre,	and	his	Hust	sword	howled	with	slaughter,	and,	with	that	voice,
summoned	a	dragon.
	
She	tightened	the	straps	of	her	helm	and	readied	her	sword.	Down	at	the	breach
the	Liosan	were	pouring	like	foam	from	the	wound,	and	Yan	Tovis	could	see
her	Shake	buckling.	Everywhere	but	at	the	centre,	where	her	brother	hacked	his
way	forward,	and	all	the	enemy	reeling	before	him	seemed	to	be	moving	at
half	his	speed.	He	could	have	been	cutting	reeds	for	all	the	resistance	they
offered	him.	Even	from	this	distance,	blood	washed	like	a	bow	wave	before
Yedan’s	advance,	and	behind	him	Shake	fighters	followed,	and	she	could	see
how	his	deadliness	infected	them,	raised	them	into	a	state	of	frenzied	fury.


From	one	flank	two	Letherii	companies	pushed	in	to	bolster	her	people,
and	she	watched	the	line	stiffen,	watched	it	plant	its	feet	and	hold	fast.
Yan	Tovis	set	off	for	the	other	flank,	increasing	her	pace	until	she	was
jogging.	Anything	faster	would	have	instilled	panic	in	those	who	saw	her.	But
the	longer	she	took,	the	closer	that	flank	edged	towards	routing,	and	the	more
of	her	people	died	beneath	the	Liosan	attackers.	Her	heart	thundered,	and
trembling	took	possession	of	her	entire	body.
Into	the	press,	shouting	now,	forcing	her	way	through.	Her	fighters	found
her	with	wild,	frightened	eyes,	fixed	upon	her	with	sudden	hope.
But	they	needed	more	than	hope.
She	lifted	her	sword,	and	became	a	queen	going	to	war.	Unleashed,	the
battle	lust	of	her	royal	line,	the	generation	upon	generation	of	this	one
necessity,	this	nectar	of	power,	rising	within	her,	taking	away	the	words	in	her
voice,	leaving	only	a	savage	scream	that	made	those	close	to	her	flinch	and
stare.
Huddling	in	a	corner	of	her	mind	was	a	bleak	awareness,	observing	with
an	ironic	half-smile.	Do	you	hear	me,	brother?	Here	on	your	left?	Do	you	nod
in	satisfaction?	Do	you	feel	my	blood	reaching	to	meet	yours?	Rulers	of	the
Shake,	once	more	fighting	upon	the	Shore.
Oh,	we	have	never	been	as	pathetic	as	we	are	at	this	moment,	Yedan.
Pathetic	in	our	fate,	trapped	in	our	roles,	our	place	in	things.	We	were	born	to
this	scene.	Every	freedom	was	a	lie.	A	terrible,	heart-crushing	lie.
The	enemy	was	suddenly	before	her.	She	greeted	them	with	a	smile,	and
then	the	flash	of	her	sword.
To	either	side,	her	people	rallied.	Fighting	with	their	queen	–	they	could
not	let	her	stand	alone,	they	could	not	leave	her,	not	now,	and	what	took	hold	of
their	lives	then	was	something	unruly	and	huge,	a	leviathan	bristling	awake.
They	struck	back,	halting	the	Liosan	advance,	and	then	pushed	forward.
Light	exploded	like	blood	from	the	wound.
Yedan	and	his	wedge	of	Shake	fighters	vanished	in	the	gushing	wave.
She	saw	her	brother ’s	followers	flung	back,	tumbling	like	rag	dolls	in	a
hurricane.	Weapons	flew	from	hands,	helms	were	torn	loose,	limbs	flailed.
They	were	thrown	up	against	the	shins	of	their	kin	holding	the	centre	line,	even
as	it	reeled	back	to	a	howling	wind	that	erupted	from	the	wound.
In	the	fiery	gale,	Yedan	stood	suddenly	alone.
Yan	Tovis	felt	ice	in	her	veins.	Dragon	breath—
A	massive	shape	looming	in	the	breach,	filling	it,	and	then	out	from	the
fulminating	light	snapped	a	reptilian	head,	jaws	open	in	a	hissing	snarl.
Lunging	down	at	her	brother.


She	screamed.
Heard	the	jaws	impact	the	ground	like	the	fist	of	a	god	–	and	knew	that
Yedan	was	no	longer	there.	Her	own	voice	now	keening,	she	slashed	forward,
barely	seeing	those	she	cut	down.
Manic	laughter	filled	the	air	–	Hust!	Awake!
She	broke	through,	staggered,	and	saw—
The	dragon’s	head	was	lifting	in	a	spray	of	blood-soaked	sand,	the	neck
arching,	the	jaws	stretching	wide	once	more,	and	then,	as	if	from	nowhere,
Yedan	Derryg	was	directly	beneath	that	enormous	serpent	head,	and	he	was
swinging	his	laughing	sword	–	and	that	glee	rose	to	a	shriek	of	delight	as	the
blade’s	edge	chopped	deep	into	the	dragon’s	neck.
He	was	a	man	slashing	into	the	bole	of	a	centuries-old	tree.	The	impact
should	have	shattered	the	bones	of	his	arms.	The	sword	should	have
rebounded,	or	exploded	in	his	hands,	spraying	deadly	shards.
Yet	she	saw	the	weapon	tear	through	that	enormous,	armoured	neck.	She
saw	the	blood	and	gore	erupt	in	its	wake,	and	then	a	fountain	of	blood	spraying
into	the	air.
The	dragon,	its	shoulders	jammed	in	the	breach,	shook	with	the	blow.	The
long	neck	whipped	upward,	seeking	to	pull	away,	and	in	the	welling	gape	of	the
wound	in	its	throat	Yan	Tovis	saw	the	gleam	of	bone.	Yedan	had	cut	through	to
the	dragon’s	spine.
Another	gloating	shriek	announced	his	backswing.
The	dragon’s	head	and	an	arm’s	length	of	neck	jumped	away	then,	off	to
one	side,	and	the	yawning	jaws	pitched	nose	down	and	hammered	the	strand	as
if	mocking	that	first	lunge.	The	head	tilted	and	then	fell	with	a	trembling
thump,	the	eyes	staring	sightlessly.
The	headless	neck	thrashed	upward	like	a	giant	blind	worm,	spitting	blood
in	lashing	gouts,	and	on	all	sides	of	the	quivering,	decapitated	beast	black
crystals	pushed	up	from	the	drenched	sand,	drawing	together,	rising	to	form
faceted	walls	–	and	from	every	corpse	that	had	been	splashed	or	buried	in	the
deluge	ghostly	forms	now	rose,	struggling	within	that	crystal.	Mouths	opened
in	silent	screams.
Dodging	the	falling	head,	Yedan	had	simply	advanced	upon	the	trembling
body	filling	the	breach.	Using	both	hands,	he	drove	the	Hust	sword,	point	first,
deep	into	the	beast’s	chest.
The	dragon	exploded	out	from	the	wound,	scales	and	shattered	bone,	yet
even	as	Yedan	staggered	beneath	the	flood	of	gore	the	blood	washed	from	him
as	would	rain	upon	oil.
Hust.	Killer	of	dragons.	You	will	shield	your	wielder,	to	keep	your	joy	alive.


Hust,	your	terrible	laughter	reveals	the	madness	of	your	maker.
Yedan’s	desire	to	trap	the	corpse	of	a	dragon	in	the	breach	was	not	to	be	–
not	this	time	–	for	she	could	see	the	ruined	body	being	dragged	back	in
heaving	lunges	–	more	dragons	behind	this	one,	crowding	the	gate.
Will	another	come	through?	To	meet	the	fate	of	its	kin?
I	think	not.
Not	yet.
Not	for	some	time.
The	Liosan	on	this	side	of	the	wound	were	dead,	bodies	heaped	on	all
sides.	Her	Shake	stood	atop	them,	two,	three	deep	under	their	unsteady	feet,	and
she	saw	the	shock	in	their	faces	as	they	stared	upon	Yedan	Derryg,	who	stood
before	the	wound	–	close	enough	to	take	a	step	through,	if	he	so	desired,	and
take	the	battle	into	the	enemy’s	realm.	And	for	a	moment	she	thought	he	might
–	nothing	was	impossible	with	her	brother	–	but	instead	he	turned	round,	and
met	his	sister ’s	eyes.
‘If	you	had	knelt—’
‘No	time,’	she	replied,	shaking	the	blood	from	her	sword.	‘You	saw	that.
They	know	what	you	would	seek	to	do,	brother.	They	will	not	permit	it.’
‘Then	we	must	make	it	so	that	they	have	no	say	in	the	matter.’
‘They	were	impatient,’	she	said.
He	nodded,	and	then	faced	the	fighters.	‘They	will	clear	the	gate	and	reform.	Captains!	Draw	your	units	back	and	reassemble	to	the	rear.	Sound	the
call	to	the	Letherii.	Shake	–	you	have	now	stood	the	Shore,	and	you	stood	it
well.’	He	sheathed	his	weapon,	silencing	its	chilling	chuckle.	‘This	is	how	we
shall	measure	our	last	days.	Here,	on	this	border	drawn	with	the	bones	of	our
ancestors.	And	none	shall	move	us.
‘Shake!	Tell	me	when	you	have	come	home	–	tell	me	when	that	truth
finally	comes	to	you.	You	are	home.’
The	words	horrified	her,	but	more	horrifying	still	was	the	answering	roar
from	her	people.
Yedan	seemed	surprised,	and	he	turned	to	her	then,	and	she	saw	the	truth	in
his	eyes.
Brother,	you	do	not	feel	it.	You	do	not	feel	that	you	have	come	home.	You	do
not	feel	as	they	do!
A	flash	of	something	in	his	gaze,	something	private	between	them	that
shook	her	as	had	nothing	else.	Longing,	fear,	and	despair.
Oh,	Yedan.	I	did	not	know.	I	did	not	know.
	


Kadagar	Fant,	Lord	of	Light,	stood	trembling	before	the	corpse	of	Iparth
Erule.	This	was	his	third	visit	to	the	marshalling	area	before	the	gate,	his	third
time	down	from	the	high	wall	to	stand	before	the	headless	dragon	lying	on	its
side	at	the	end	of	a	curling	swathe	of	broken	black	shards.	The	golden	scales
had	dulled,	the	belly	was	bloating	with	gases,	and	capemoths	clustered	in	the
gaping	mouth	of	the	severed	neck,	a	mass	of	fluttering	white	wings	–	as	if
flowers	had	burst	from	the	corpse	in	some	manic	celebration.
Aparal	Forge	looked	away	from	his	lord,	not	ready	for	him	yet.	He	had
sent	legion	after	legion	through	the	breach,	and	with	growing	despair	watched
each	one	retreat,	torn	and	bloody.	Hundreds	of	his	soldiers	were	lying	on
dripping	cots	beneath	canopies	–	he	could	hear	their	cries	amidst	the	clatter	of
weapons	being	readied	for	the	next	assault	–	and	thrice	their	number	rested	for
ever	silent	in	neat	rows	beyond	the	cutter	trenches.	He	had	no	idea	how	many
were	lost	beyond	the	breach	–	a	thousand?	More?	The	enemy	had	no	interest	in
treating	Liosan	wounded,	and	why	would	they?	We	would	kill	their	wounded
just	as	quickly,	and	call	it	mercy.	These	are	the	mechanics	of	war.	It’s	where
logic	takes	us,	every	time.
Overhead	sailed	three	dragons.	Like	birds	startled	into	the	sky,	they	refused
to	come	down,	and	had	been	up	there	since	Iparth’s	death.	Aparal	could	feel
their	rage,	and	something	like	hunger	–	as	if	some	part	of	them,	something
reptilian	and	soulless,	wanted	to	descend	and	feed	on	that	rank	carcass.	The
remaining	seven,	sembled	since	the	morning,	had	established	discrete
encampments	on	the	barrows	to	either	side	of	the	Great	Avenue,	with	their
bespoke	legions	settled	around	them.	The	elites,	the	true	Liosan	warriors,	yet
to	draw	weapons,	yet	to	advance	upon	the	gate,	awaiting	only	Kadagar ’s
command.
When	would	it	come?	When	would	their	lord	decide	that	he’d	seen	enough
of	his	citizens	die?	Common	dwellers	of	the	city,	commanded	by	nobles
trapped	below	the	select	ranks	of	the	Soletaken,	soldiers	only	in	name,	and	oh
how	they	died!
Fury	seethed	in	him	at	the	thought.	But	I	will	not	look	to	my	lord.	I	will	not
beseech	him	yet	again.	Will	he	only	relent	when	they’re	all	dead?	For	whom,
then,	this	victory?	But	he	knew	the	answer	to	that	question.
If	Kadagar	Fant	stood	alone	at	the	end	of	all	this;	if	he	sat	in	the	gloom	of
an	empty	throne	room	in	an	empty	palace,	in	an	empty	city,	he	would	still	count
it	a	triumph.	Winning	Kharkanas	was	meaningless;	what	mattered	to	the	Lord
of	Light	was	the	absolute	annihilation	of	those	who	opposed	him.	On	both	sides
of	the	breach.
Do	you	remember,	Kadagar,	the	day	the	stranger	came	to	Saranas?	We	were


still	children	then,	still	friends,	still	open	to	possibilities.	But	even	we	shared
our	shock	at	his	nerve.	A	human,	almost	as	tall	as	a	Liosan,	wearing	beneath	a
tattered	woollen	cloak	a	coat	of	mail	that	reached	down	to	his	ankles,	a	bastard
sword	slung	under	his	left	arm.	Long	grey	hair,	snarled	with	indifference,	a
beard	stained	the	hue	of	rust	beneath	the	thin	lips.	He	had	been	smiling	–	they
all	agreed	on	that,	from	the	scouts	beyond	the	walls	to	the	guards	at	the	South
Gate,	to	those	in	the	streets	who	halted	to	watch	him	stride	towards	the	citadel
at	the	heart	of	Saranas.
And	he	was	still	smiling	when	he	stepped	into	the	throne	room,	and	your
father	leaned	forward	on	the	High	Throne,	making	the	bonewood	creak.
It	was	Haradegar	–	your	uncle	–	who	growled	and	reached	for	his	sword.
Too	much	arrogance	in	this	stranger.	Too	much	contempt	in	that	smile.
But	your	father	lifted	a	hand,	staying	his	Weaponmaster,	and	he	spoke	to
the	stranger	in	a	tone	we’d	not	heard	before.
‘Kallor,	High	King,	welcome	to	Saranas,	last	city	of	Tiste	Liosan.	I	am	Krin
Ne	Fant,	Champion	of	High	House	Light—’
‘Serap’s	son?’
Their	lord	flinched,	and	Kadagar,	I	saw	the	shame	in	your	eyes.
‘My…grandmother,	High	King.	I	did	not	know—’
‘She’d	have	no	reason	to	tell	you,	would	she?’	Kallor	looked	round.	‘She
was	virtually	a	prisoner	here	–	they	even	sent	her	handmaids	away.	Arrived	as	a
stranger,	and	as	a	stranger	you	were	determined	to	keep	her.	Is	it	any	wonder
she	fled	this	shit-bucket?’
Haradegar’s	sword	hissed	free.
Kallor	looked	over	at	the	Weaponsmith,	and	grinned,	and	whatever
Haradegar	saw	in	the	High	King’s	eyes	stole	his	courage	–	oh,	shame	upon
shame,	Kadagar!	Were	these	your	first	wounds?	I	think	now	that	they	were.
The	High	King	faced	Krin	once	more.	‘I	promised	her,	and	so	I	am	here.
Krin	Ne	Fant,	your	grandmother	Serap,	of	the	Issgin	line,	is	dead.’
Krin	slowly	settled	back	on	the	throne,	but	he	now	looked	shrunken,
withering	in	that	bonewood	cage.	‘What	–	what	happened?’
Kallor	grunted.	‘What	happened?	I	just	told	you.	She	died.	Is	that	not
enough?’
‘No.’
Shrugging,	the	High	King	said,	‘Poison.	By	her	own	hand.	I	found	her	at
dawn	on	the	first	day	of	the	Season	of	Flies,	cold	and	still	on	the	throne	I	made
for	her	with	my	own	hands.	Krin	Ne	Fant,	I	am	her	murderer.’
I	remember	the	silence	that	followed.	I	remember	how	dry	my	mouth	was,
and	how	I	could	not	look	anywhere	but	at	this	terrible,	grey	man	who	stood	as


one	without	fear,	yet	spoke	words	inviting	violence.
But	Fant	was	shaking	his	head.	‘If…you	said	“by	her	own	hand”—’
The	smile	turned	into	a	snarl.	‘Do	you	truly	believe	suicide	belongs	solely
to	the	one	taking	his	or	her	own	life?	All	that	rot	about	selfishness	and	selfhatred?	The	lies	we	tell	ourselves	to	absolve	us	of	all	blame,	of	all	the	roles	that
we	played	in	that	wretched	death?’	He	raised	one	chain-clad	hand,	pointed	a
finger	first	at	Krin	and	then	with	a	sweeping	gesture	at	all	who	stood	in	the
throne	room.	‘You	all	had	your	parts	to	play	in	her	death.	The	doors	you	kept
locked.	The	loyal	servants	and	friends	you	took	from	her.	Your	ill-disguised
whispers	behind	her	back	or	when	she	stepped	into	a	room.	But	I	have	not	come
to	avow	vengeance	on	her	behalf.	How	can	I?	The	freshest	blood	of	guilt	is	the
pool	I	now	stand	in.	I	could	not	love	her	enough.	I	can	never	love	enough.
‘I	killed	her.	One	drop	of	poison	each	day,	for	a	thousand	years.
‘By	her	wishes,	I	return	to	Saranas.	By	her	wishes,	I	bring	you	this.’	And
then	he	drew	from	beneath	his	grey	cloak	a	bedraggled	rag	doll.	Flung	it	so	that
it	slid	to	the	foot	of	the	dais.
And	in	that	time	word	had	travelled	out,	and	now	standing	inside	the	doors,
twenty	paces	behind	Kallor,	stood	your	father’s	mother.	Serap’s	daughter.
Did	Kallor	know	she	was	there?	Listening	to	his	words?	Would	it	have
changed	anything?
‘She	was	making	this	for	her	daughter,’	Kallor	said,	‘and	took	it	with	her
when	she	fled.	Unfinished.	In	fact,	little	more	than	knotted	cloth	and	wool.	And
so	it	remained,	for	all	the	centuries	I	knew	and	loved	her.	I	surmise,’	he	added,
‘she	found	it	again	by	accident.	And	decided	it	needed…finishing.	On	the	dawn
when	I	found	her,	it	was	settled	into	her	lap	like	a	newborn	child.’
Behind	him,	Krin’s	mother	made	a	wounded	sound	and	sank	to	her	knees.
Her	servants	rushed	close.
Smiling	once	more,	Kallor	unstrapped	his	weapon	harness	and	let	it	fall	to
the	tiled	floor.	The	clash	rang	hollow	in	the	chamber.	‘My	words	are	done.	I	am
the	killer	of	Serap,	and	I	await	your	kiss	of	righteous	vengeance.’	And	then	he
crossed	his	arms	and	waited.
Why	do	I	remember	this	now,	Kadagar?	Of	course,	for	all	the	miserable
tragedy	of	that	moment,	was	it	not	what	came	next	that	truly	filled	my	chest
with	ashes?
Krin,	his	hand	lifted,	fingers	pressed	against	temple,	not	even	looking	up	as
he	gestured	with	his	other	hand.	And	whispered.	‘Go,	Kallor.	Just…go.’
And	how	then	I	finally	understood	the	High	King’s	smile.	Not	a	thing	of
pleasure.	No,	this	was	the	smile	of	a	man	who	wanted	to	die.
What	did	we	do?	We	denied	him.


I	remember	how	he	reached	down	to	collect	his	sword,	how	he	turned	away,
his	back	to	the	throne	and	the	man	seated	upon	it,	and	walked	out.	I	saw	him
walk	past	the	huddle	of	retainers	and	the	woman	kneeling	in	their	midst,	and	he
paused,	looked	down	at	her.
If	he	said	anything	then,	we	did	not	hear	it.	If	he	uttered	soft	words,	none
within	range	ever	spoke	of	them.	And	then	he	was	walking	onward,	out	and
beyond	their	sight.
Four	years	later	you	swore	that	you	would	never	sire	a	child.	That	all	the
Liosan	would	be	your	children,	come	the	day	you	ascended	to	the	throne.	And	I
might	have	laughed,	too	blind	to	the	future	awaiting	us	all	these	centuries	later.
I	might	have	wounded	you,	as	children	often	do.
‘Beloved	brother.’
Aparal	turned.	‘Lord.’
‘Your	thoughts	were	far	away.	What	were	you	thinking,	that	could	so	drag
you	from	this	place?’
Was	there	longing	in	Kadagar ’s	eyes?	He	didn’t	think	so.	‘Lord,	no	more
than	weariness.	A	moment’s	rest.’	He	looked	to	the	assembled	legions.	‘They
are	ready.	Good.’
As	he	moved	to	join	his	retinue	Kadagar	stayed	him	with	one	hand	and
leaned	close	to	whisper,	‘What	were	you	thinking	about,	brother?’
A	rag	doll.	‘Old	friend,	it	was	a	moment	empty	of	dreams.	A	place	of	grey
dust.	That	and	nothing	more.’
Kadagar	let	go,	stepped	back.	‘Aparal	–	is	it	true?’
‘Lord?’
‘The	laughter—’
‘Yes,	Lord.	A	Hust	waits	for	us,	in	the	hands	of	a	Shake	warrior.’	He
pointed	at	the	carcass	of	the	dragon.	‘Two	passes	of	the	blade,	to	slice	through
Iparth	Erule’s	neck.’
‘He	must	be	killed!	This	Shake	warrior!’
‘Yes,	Lord.’
Kadagar	lifted	one	hand	to	his	brow,	reminding	Aparal	of	the	father,	of
poor,	lost	Krin	Ne	Fant.	‘But…how?’
Aparal	cocked	his	head.	‘Lord?	Why,	when	all	the	others	have	fallen,	when
he	alone	remains.	When	twelve	dragons	break	through.	Sire,	this	is	not	a
legion	of	Hust.	It	is	one	sword.’
And	Kadagar	was	nodding	now,	eyes	flooding	with	relief.	‘Just	so,
brother.’	He	glanced	back	at	the	carcass.	‘Poor	Iparth	Erule.’
‘Poor	Iparth	Erule.’
Kadagar	Fant,	Lord	of	Light,	then	licked	his	lips.	‘Such	a	terrible	waste.’


	
In	every	echo	that	reached	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	she	heard	ghosts	laughing.
Withal	sat	close,	down	on	the	stone	of	the	dais,	almost	at	her	feet,	but	it	seemed
he	was	dozing,	exhaustion	making	a	mockery	of	his	vigil.	She	did	not	mind.
Mortal	failure	was	ever	tinged	with	irony,	was	it	not?
She	closed	her	eyes,	listening,	waiting	for	the	visions	to	return.	Were	these
sendings	from	Mother	Dark?	Or	just	the	cluttered	rag-ends	of	all	those	lives
surrendered	to	these	walls	and	floors	of	stone?	Mother,	I	doubt	there	is
anything	of	you	in	these	scenes.	The	gloom	is	of	their	own	making,	and	those
hard	voices	rocking	so	back	and	forth	in	my	skull,	well,	I	know	them	all.
One	side	crimson	with	blood,	Anomander	Rake	straightening	to	face	the
Hust	Legion.	‘The	invasion	has	just	begun,’	he	told	the	waiting	warriors.	‘We
risk	being	overwhelmed.’	He	drew	a	slow,	deep	breath,	jaws	briefly	clenching
in	pain.	‘I	shall	wait	for	them	beyond	the	Rent,	to	deny	them	the	Throne	of
Shadow.	This	leaves	the	gate	itself.	Hust	Legion!	You	shall	march	to	the	gate.
You	shall	march	through	it.	You	shall	take	the	battle	to	them,	and	hold	them
there.	And,’	he	scanned	the	rows	of	helmed	faces,	‘when	the	last	five	of	you
remain,	you	must	give	your	lives	to	sealing	that	wound.	You	shall,	Hust-armed
and	Hust-armoured,	for	ever	close	Starvald	Demelain.’
Wailing	shrieks	from	blades	and	scaled	breastplates,	from	helms,	from
greaves	and	gauntlets,	a	deafening	chorus	that	shattered	into	wild	laughter.	But
within	that	insane	glee,	the	faces	of	the	Andiian	warriors	were	expressionless.
And	with	solemn	salutes	they	acknowledged	their	lord’s	command.
Hust	Legion,	we	never	saw	you	again.
But	the	Eleint	stopped	coming.
Hust	Legion,	how	many	did	you	kill	on	that	other	side?	How	many	bones	lie
in	heaps	upon	that	alien	plain?	There	at	the	gate?	I	can	almost…almost	see
them,	a	felled	forest	of	bones.
But	now	shadows	slide	over	them,	shadows	from	the	sky.
Anomander	Rake,	‘for	ever’	was	a	lie.	But	you	knew	that.	You	were	just
buying	time.	Thinking	we	would	ready	ourselves	for	the	next	invasion.	Did	we?
Did	anyone?
But	then,	a	suspicion	whispers	in	my	skull.	You	made	her	face	us	once
again.	Well,	not	us.	Me.
Killed	yourself	a	dragon,	did	you,	Yedan	Derryg?
Feel	up	to	a	thousand	more?
	


Withal	knew	he	was	dreaming.	The	Meckros	city	where	he	had	been	born	was
nothing	like	this,	a	place	of	smoky	dark	quartzite	and	walls	sheathed	in	mica
and	anthracite,	and	even	as	the	groaning	rise	and	fall	beneath	his	feet	told	him
the	city	was	indeed	floating	on	unseen	seas,	beyond	the	canted	avenue	lining
the	high	sea	wall	on	his	left	he	could	see	nothing.	No	stars	above,	no	cresting
foam	below.
Cordage	creaked,	the	only	sounds	surrounding	him.	The	city	was
abandoned,	and	he	was	alone.
‘Mortal.	She	will	not	listen.	She	is	lost	in	ages	past.’
He	looked	round,	and	then	grunted,	irritated	with	himself.	She	was	the
Goddess	of	Dark.	What	else	would	he	see	of	her,	if	not	this	empty	abyss	on	all
sides?	‘And	me,	an	island	city,	untethered	and	unanchored	and	caught	on
unknown	currents.	Mael	knows,	Withal,	even	your	dreams	lack	the	subtle
touch.’
‘Despair	is	a	curse,	Withal	of	the	Meckros.	You	must	warn	her—’
‘Forgive	me	for	interrupting,	Mother	Dark,	but	she	is	past	listening	to	me.
And	to	be	honest,	I	don’t	blame	her.	I	have	nothing	worth	saying.	You	have
made	her	the	ruler	of	an	empty	city	–	how	do	you	expect	her	to	feel?’
Too	bold,	perhaps,	for	there	came	no	reply	from	the	surrounding
darkness.
He	stumbled	forward,	unsure	of	his	destination,	but	feeling	the	need	to
reach	it.	‘I	have	lost	my	belief	in	the	seriousness	of	the	world.	Any	world.
Every	world.	You	give	me	an	empty	city,	and	I	feel	like	laughing.	It’s	not	as	if	I
don’t	believe	in	ghosts.	I	do.	How	could	I	not?	As	far	as	I’m	concerned,	we’re
all	ghosts.’	He	paused,	set	a	hand	upon	the	cold,	damp	stone	of	the	sea	wall.
‘Only	this	is	real.	Only	this	lasts	from	moment	to	moment,	stretching	on	for
years.	Centuries.	We	–	we	just	pass	through.	Filled	with	ephemeral	thoughts—’
‘You	surrender	too	much	of	yourself,	Withal.’
‘It’s	easy,’	he	replied,	‘when	nothing	I	own	is	worth	a	damned	thing.’
‘This	island	city	is	the	ghost.	Its	truth	lies	broken	on	the	seabed.	It	drifts
only	in	your	memory,	Withal.’
He	grunted.	‘The	ghost	dreams	of	ghosts	in	a	ghostly	world.	This	is	what
I’ve	come	to	understand,	Mother	Dark.	From	the	Tiste	Andii	–	and	these
Liosan.	The	way	you	can	take	a	hundred	thousand	years	and	crush	it	all	in	one
hand.	There	is	no	truth	to	time.	It’s	all	a	lie.’
‘She	agrees	with	you,	Withal.	She	was	born	a	hostage	to	secret	fates,	born	a
hostage	to	a	future	she	could	not	imagine,	much	less	defy.	In	this,	it	was
understood	by	all,	she	symbolized	every	child.’
‘But	you	took	it	too	far,’	he	said,	shaking	his	head.	‘You	never	let	her	grow


up.’
‘Yes,	we	would	keep	them	children	for	ever.’
The	Meckros	city	ended	with	a	ragged	edge,	as	if	it	had	been	torn	in	half.
Withal	continued	walking	until	his	steps	sent	him	pitching	down	through
darkness.
He	started,	head	snapping	up,	and	looked	round.	The	throne	room	of
Kharkanas,	Sandalath	on	the	throne,	hands	to	her	face,	sobbing	uncontrollably.
Swearing	under	his	breath,	he	rose,	unfolding	stiff,	aching	limbs,	and	went	up
to	take	her	into	his	arms.
‘They’re	all	dying!	Withal!	On	the	Shore	–	they’re	all	dying!’
He	held	her	tight.
Her	words	muffled	by	his	shoulder,	she	said,	‘Five	thousand	warriors.
From	the	mines,	from	the	prisons.	From	the	gutters.	Five	thousand.	The	Hust
Legion	–	I	saw	them	marching	out	from	the	burning	city.’	She	lifted	her	head,
stared	at	him	with	tortured	eyes.	‘Their	swords	howled.	Their	armour	sang	with
joy.	No	one	stood	by	and	wept.	No.	Instead,	they	ran	from	the	laughter,	they	fled
the	streets	–	those	not	already	dead.	The	sound	–	so	terrible	–	the	Hust	Legion
marched	to	their	deaths,	and	no	one	watched	them	go!’
He	slapped	her,	hard	enough	to	knock	her	to	the	floor	at	the	foot	of	the
throne.	‘Enough	of	this,	Sand.	This	palace	is	driving	you	mad.’
She	twisted	round	on	to	her	knees,	a	knife	in	her	hand,	eyes	blazing	with
rage.
‘Better,’	he	grunted,	and	then	backed	away	from	the	slashing	blade.	‘Too
many	wretched	ghosts	in	your	skull,	woman.	They	all	think	they	got	something
useful	to	tell	you,	but	they	don’t.	They’re	damned	fools,	and	you	know	how	I
know	they’re	damned	fools?	Because	they’re	still	here.’
Warily,	he	watched	her	straighten,	watched	her	lick	the	blood	from	her	lips.
Then	sheathe	the	knife.	Her	sigh	was	ragged.	‘Husband,	it’s	this	waiting.
Waiting	for	them	all	to	die,	for	the	Liosan	legions	to	enter	the	city	–	the	palace.
And	then	they	will	kill	you,	and	I	cannot	bear	it.’
‘Not	just	me,’	he	said.	‘You,	as	well.’
‘I	have	no	regret	for	that.	None.’
‘There	are	other	Tiste	Andii.	There	must	be.	They	are	coming—’
‘To	what	end?’	She	slumped	at	the	foot	of	the	throne.	‘To	avenge	me?	And
so	it	goes	on	and	on,	back	and	forth.	As	if	it	all	meant	something.’	She	looked
up.	‘Do	these	walls	care?	This	floor?	No,	but	I	will	make	it	different	this	time,
Withal.’	She	met	his	eyes	with	a	fierce	challenge.	‘I	will	burn	this	palace	down
to	the	ground	before	they	ever	get	here.	I	swear	it.’
‘Sandalath,	there	is	nothing	here	to	burn.’


‘There	are	other	ways,’	she	whispered,	‘to	summon	fire.’
	
The	killing	ground	was	once	more	clear	of	corpses,	broken	weapons	and
pieces	of	torn	flesh,	but	the	once-white	sand	was	brown	as	mud.	Captain	Pithy
studied	it	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	resumed	examining	the	grip	of	her
sword.	The	leather	cord	was	loose	–	twice	in	the	last	fight	the	weapon	had
shifted	in	her	grip.	Looking	up,	she	saw	one	of	the	Letherii	youths	Yedan	was
using	to	scavenge	decent	weapons.	‘You!	Over	here!’
The	girl	struggled	up	with	her	sled	and	stepped	to	one	side	as	Pithy	began
rummaging	through	the	blood-spattered	array	of	weapons.	‘Hear	any
chuckling	from	any	of	these,	girl?’	She	looked	up	and	winked.	‘Didn’t	think	so,
but	one	can	always	hope.’
‘You’re	Captain	Pithy.’
‘So	far,	aye.’	She	found	a	Liosan	sword	and	lifted	it	clear,	testing	its	weight
and	balance.	Then	peering	at	the	honed	edge,	before	snorting.	‘Looks	a
hundred	years	old,	and	neglected	for	half	that.’	She	returned	it	to	the	sled.	‘Why
aren’t	there	any	Letherii	weapons	here?’
‘The	Liosan	steal	them,	sir.’
‘Well,	that’s	one	way	to	beat	us	–	a	mass	exchange	of	weapons,	until	all
we’re	left	with	is	that	useless	crap	they	brought	from	the	other	side.	Better	send
word	to	the	prince	–	we	need	to	deny	them	these	particular	spoils,	and	make	a
point	of	it.’	Pithy	retrieved	her	old	sword.	‘Here,	you	got	small	fingers	–	see	if
you	can	thread	that	strip	through	on	the	end	here,	where	it’s	pulled	loose.	Just
thread	it	and	I’ll	do	the	rest.’
Instead	of	her	fingers,	the	girl	used	her	teeth,	and	in	moments	had	managed
to	tug	the	leather	strip	through.
‘Smart	lass.’	Pithy	tugged	hard	on	the	strip	and	was	pleased	to	see	the	coil
draw	tighter	to	the	wooden	handles	encasing	the	tang.	‘There,	should	do	for	the
next	fight	or	two.	Thanks	for	helping	fix	my	sword.	Now,	off	you	go	–	I	see
’em	massing	again	on	the	other	side.’
The	girl	took	up	the	ropes	and	hurried	off	with	her	sled,	the	ivory	runners
sliding	easily	across	the	strand.
Captain	Pithy	walked	to	her	place	in	the	line.	‘Now,’	she	said	in	a	loud
voice,	‘it’s	Nithe’s	day	off,	the	lazy	shit.	He	probably	thinks	he’s	earned	those
five	whores	and	the	jug	of	wine	sharing	his	bed,	but	that	was	just	me	feeling
sorry	for	him.’
‘Cap’n’s	a	pimp!’	someone	shouted	from	a	few	rows	back.
Pithy	waited	for	the	laughter	to	die	down.	‘Can’t	make	piss	on	the	coin	they


pay	officers	in	this	army,	so	don’t	begrudge	me	something	on	the	side.’
‘Never	you,	Captain!’
Horns	sounded	and	Pithy	faced	the	breach.	‘Coming	through,	soldiers!
Harden	up	now	like	a	virgin’s	dream!	Weapons	ready!’
A	vague	mass	of	shapes,	pushing	and	then	slashing	through	bruised	light
thin	as	skin.	Then	the	blades	drew	back.
What’s	this?	Something	different	–	what	are—
From	the	wound,	three	enormous	Hounds	bursting	through.	Bloodthick
sand	sprayed	as	the	creatures	skidded.	One	twisted	to	one	side,	shot	off	towards
the	Shake	line	on	Pithy’s	right,	a	white	blur,	huge	as	a	bull.	Another	charged
for	the	other	flank,	and	the	one	directly	before	Pithy	met	her	eyes	in	the	instant
before	it	lowered	its	broad	head,	and	she	felt	the	strength	leave	her	body	in	a
single,	soft	breath.	Then	the	Hound	lunged	straight	at	her.
	
As	the	jaws	stretched	wide,	revealing	canines	long	as	daggers,	Yan	Tovis
ducked	low	and	swung	her	sword.	The	blade	bit	into	the	left	of	the	beast’s	neck,
and	then	rebounded	in	a	splash	of	blood.	Beside	her,	a	Shake	warrior	shrieked,
but	the	cry	was	short-lived,	vanishing	when	the	beast	bit	down,	its	jaws
engulfing	his	head.	Bones	crunching,	the	man	was	lifted	from	his	feet	as	the
Hound	reared	back,	fangs	sawing	through	his	neck.	Gore	sprayed	as	the
headless	corpse	fell	to	the	sand	and	rolled	on	to	its	back.
Yan	Tovis	thrust	her	sword,	but	the	point	skidded	across	the	beast’s	chest.
Snarling,	it	swung	its	head.	The	impact	sent	Yan	Tovis	spinning.	Landing
hard,	she	rolled	on	to	her	side,	seeing	Liosan	ranks	plunging	through	the
breach	not	fifteen	paces	from	her.	She’d	lost	her	sword,	and	her	groping	hand
found	nothing	but	clumps	of	blood-glued	sand.	She	could	feel	her	strength
faltering,	draining	away,	pain	spreading	across	half	her	body.
Behind	her,	the	Hound	began	killing	her	people.
It	ends.	As	simple	as	that?
	
‘Pikes!’	someone	screamed	–	was	it	me?	As	the	massive	Hound	leapt	for	her,
Pithy	dropped	to	the	sand,	twisted	as	the	beast	passed	directly	over	her,	and
thrust	her	sword	into	its	belly.
The	point	was	punched	back	out	as	if	fired	from	a	crossbow,	driving	her
elbow	into	the	ground.	One	of	the	Hound’s	back	legs	lifted	her	from	the	sand,
carried	her	flailing	forward.	She	heard	the	clash	of	pike	shafts	close	in	on	all


sides.	Half	stunned,	she	curled	up	beneath	the	beast.	Its	snarls	filled	her	world,
along	with	the	crunch	of	bones	and	the	shrieks	of	dying	Letherii.	She	was
kicked	again,	this	time	spilling	her	out	to	one	side.
Teeth	grinding,	she	forced	herself	into	a	crouch.	She	still	held	her	sword,
glued	to	her	hand	now	by	streams	of	blood	–	she	was	cut	somewhere	–	and	she
made	herself	close	on	the	thrashing	demon.	Lunged.
The	blunted,	battered	tip	of	the	sword	caught	the	Hound	in	the	corner	of	its
left	eye.	With	an	almost	human	scream,	the	beast	lurched	away,	sending	figures
sprawling.	It	was	scored	with	slashes	from	countless	pike-thrusts,	white	hide
streaming	crimson,	and	more	soldiers	pressed	in,	pursuing.	The	Hound
stumbled	over	a	corpse,	twisted	round	to	face	its	attackers.
Its	left	eye	was	filled	with	blood.
Got	you,	you	heap	of	dung!
Someone	leapt	close,	swinging	a	wood-cutter ’s	axe.	The	impact	on	the
beast’s	skull	drove	it	to	its	knees.	The	axe	handle	shattered,	and	Pithy	saw	the
wedge	blade	fall	away.	The	Hound’s	skull	gleamed,	exposed	across	half	its
head,	a	torn	flap	of	skin	dangling	down	past	its	jaw.
One-handed	Nithe	flung	the	broken	handle	away,	reached	for	a	knife.
The	Hound	snapped	out,	jaws	hammering	into	the	man.	Canines	punched
through	chain,	tore	deep	into	his	chest.	As	they	ripped	free,	Nithe’s	ribs	seemed
to	explode	outward	in	their	wake.	He	spun,	landed	on	his	knees.
Pithy	shrieked.
The	Hound’s	second	bite	tore	Nithe’s	face	off	–	forehead,	cheekbones,	his
upper	jaw.	His	mandible	dropped	down,	hanging	like	a	bloody	collar.	Both	his
eyes	were	gone.	He	pitched	forward.
Weaving	drunkenly	now,	the	Hound	stumbled	back.	Behind	it,	Liosan
warriors	advanced	in	a	bristling	line,	faces	lit	with	desire.
‘Drive	them	back!’	Pithy	screamed.
Pikes	levelled,	her	Letherii	pushed	forward.
	
‘The	queen!	The	queen!’
Shake	warriors	suddenly	surrounded	Yan	Tovis.	She	heard	the	Hound
somewhere	behind	her,	snarls,	weapons	striking,	shafts	shattering,	terrible
cries	of	pain	–	a	knot	of	madness	tearing	ever	deeper	through	the	ranks.	But
protecting	her	now,	a	score	of	her	people,	forming	up	to	face	the	Liosan
soldiers.
To	defend	their	queen.	No,	please	–	don’t	do	this—
There	weren’t	enough	of	them.	They	would	die	for	nothing.


The	Liosan	arrived	like	the	crest	of	a	wave,	and	in	moments	rushed	round
to	isolate	Yan	Tovis	and	her	warriors.
Someone	crouched	to	hand	her	a	sword.
Her	throat	thick	with	nausea,	she	forced	herself	to	her	feet.
	
Seeing	the	Hound	charging	for	his	line	on	the	left	flank,	Yedan	Derryg	ran	to
meet	it.	The	Hust	sword	loosed	a	manic,	ululating	cry,	and	it	seemed	that	the
chilling	sound	checked	the	beast	–	for	the	briefest	of	instants	–	before	it
launched	itself	at	the	prince.
When	its	jaws	reached	for	him,	the	head	was	driving	down,	anticipating
that	he	would	come	in	low.	Instead,	Yedan	leapt	high,	twisted	parallel	with	the
ground,	legs	thrown	out,	and	rolled	in	the	air,	over	the	Hound’s	shoulders,	and
as	he	spun,	down	swung	the	sword.
The	Hust	blade	shrieked	as	it	bit,	athwart	the	beast’s	spine,	driving	down
through	vertebrae	and	then	spinal	cord.
He	glanced	off	its	hip	coming	down,	and	that	hip	fell	one	way	and	Yedan
the	other.	Striking	the	ground,	he	rolled	and	came	to	his	feet,	eyes	still	on	the
Hound.
Watched	as	it	toppled,	body	thumping	on	the	sand,	head	following.	Its	eyes
stared	sightlessly.	And	beyond	the	dead	beast,	rows	of	faces.	Letherii.	Shake.
Gape-mouthed	like	fools.
He	pointed	at	Brevity.	‘Captain!	Advance	the	flank	–	shallow	wedge!	Push
into	the	Liosan	and	push	hard!’
With	that	he	turned	and	ran	across	the	strand.	He’d	seen	two	more	Hounds.
Ahead,	a	wedge	formation	of	Liosan	soldiers	had	closed	with	Pithy’s
Letherii	and	neither	side	was	yielding.	Yedan	could	not	see	the	Hound	–	had
they	killed	it?	No	–	there,	trying	to	retreat	to	Lightfall’s	wound.	Should	he	let	it
go?
No.
But	to	reach	it,	he	would	have	to	carve	through	a	score	of	Liosan.
They	saw	him,	and	recoiled.
The	Hust	sword’s	laugh	was	shrill.
Yedan	cut	the	first	two	down	and	wounded	another	before	he	was
temporarily	slowed	by	the	rest	of	them.	Swords	hacked	at	him,	slashed	for	his
face.	Others	thrust	for	his	belly	and	thighs.	He	blocked,	countered.	Twisted,
pushed	forward.
Severed	arms	and	hands	spun,	releasing	the	weapons	they’d	held.	Blood
sprayed	and	spat,	bodies	reeled.	Flashes	of	wild	expressions,	mouths	opening


in	pain	and	shock.	And	then	he	was	past	them	all,	in	his	wake	carnage	and
horror.
The	Hound	was	three	strides	from	the	breach,	struggling	to	stay	upright.
He	saw	its	head	turn,	looked	into	its	eyes,	both	of	which	wept	blood.	Torn
lips	formed	ragged	black	lines	as	it	snarled	at	him,	heaving	to	meet	him—
But	not	in	time.	A	thrust.	A	slash.	The	Hound’s	guts	billowed	out	and
spilled	to	the	ground	in	a	brown	splash	of	fluids.
It	sank	down,	howling.
Yedan	leapt	on	to	its	back	–
–	in	time	to	see	a	fourth	Hound	lunge	through	the	gate.
The	prince	launched	himself	forward,	through	the	air,	sword’s	point
extended.
Into	the	Hound’s	broad	chest,	the	blade	sliding	in	with	gurgling	mirth.
The	beast’s	countering	bite	hammered	him	to	the	ground,	but	he	refused	to
let	go	of	the	sword,	dragging	it	with	him.	The	Hound	coughed	blood	in	thick,
hot	sprays,	pitched	forward,	head	lolling.
Yedan	kicked	it	in	the	throat	to	free	his	sword,	turned	then,	and	found	a
mass	of	Liosan	wheeling	to	face	him.	No	quick	way	through	–	both	flanks	had
closed	up.	Slow	work	ahead—
And	then,	from	the	wound	behind	him,	a	sudden	presence	that	lifted	the
hairs	on	the	back	of	his	neck.	Looming,	foul	with	chaotic	sorcery.
Dragon.
Swearing	under	his	breath,	Yedan	Derryg	swung	round,	and	plunged	into
Lightfall’s	wound.
Half	her	warriors	had	gone	down,	and	Yan	Tovis	could	feel	herself
weakening.	She	could	barely	lift	her	sword.	Gods,	what	is	wrong	with	me?	How
badly	was	I	injured?	I	ache	–	but…what	else?	She	staggered,	sagged	down	on
to	one	knee.	The	fighting	closed	in	around	her.	What—
Concussions	from	beyond	the	Shake	line.	The	Hound	screaming	in	fury
and	pain.
Head	spinning,	she	looked	up.
A	grey,	miasmic	wave	of	sorcery	erupted	from	the	edge	of	the	flank
closest	to	Lightfall,	the	spitting,	crackling	wave	rushing	close	to	strike	the
press	of	Liosan.	Bodies	erupted	in	red	mist.
Shouting	–	someone	had	hold	of	Yan	Tovis	under	each	arm,	was	dragging
her	back	to	the	re-formed	Shake	line	–	and	there	was	Skwish,	rushing	to	join
them.
‘Blood	of	the	queen!	Blood	of	the	queen!’	The	witch	looked	ten	years	old,	a
child	of	shining	gold.	‘Get	her	clear!	The	rest	a	you!	Advance!’


And	then,	from	the	wound,	a	reverberation	that	sent	them	all	to	their	knees.
	
Deafened	by	a	sudden,	thunderous	crack!	from	the	breach,	Aparal	Forge	saw
his	Soletaken	kin	rearing	back.	Eldat	Pressen,	the	youngest	and	boldest	of	them
all,	so	eager	to	follow	in	the	wake	of	the	Hounds	of	Light,	was	pulling	her
head	back	from	the	wound,	and	in	that	recoiling	motion	blood	fountained.
He	stared,	aghast,	as	brains	and	gore	sprayed	down	from	her	shattered
skull.
Her	body	shook	in	waves	of	savage	trembling,	her	tail	thrashing,	claws
digging	into	and	then	tearing	up	the	ground.	A	blind	sweep	of	her	tail	sent
broken	bodies	flying.
Her	huge	torso	collapsing	with	massive	shudders,	Eldat’s	neck	and	head
writhed,	and	Aparal	could	now	see	the	terrible	sword	blow	that	had	struck	her
head,	splitting	the	skull	open,	destroying	her	and	all	that	she	had	once	been	–	a
bright-eyed,	laughing	woman.	He	loosed	a	sob,	but	could	not	turn	away.	Eldat.
Playing	in	the	garden,	in	another	age.	We	were	thinking	only	of	peace	then.	But
now	I	wonder,	did	it	ever	exist?	That	age?	Or	were	we	just	holding	our	breath?
Through	all	those	years,	those	decades	–	she	grew	into	a	beautiful	woman,	we
all	saw	that.	We	witnessed	and	it	gave	us	pleasure.
And	oh	how	we	all	longed	to	bed	her.	But	she’d	set	her	heart	upon	the	only
one	of	us	who	would	take	no	woman	–	or	man	–	into	his	arms.	Kadagar	had	no
time	for	such	things,	and	if	he	broke	her	heart	again	and	again,	well,	that	was
the	price	of	serving	his	people.	As	father	to	them	all,	he	could	be	lover	to	none.
Kadagar,	you	stand	on	the	battlements	once	more.
You	look	down	upon	her	death,	and	there	is	no	swift	mercy	here,	no	sudden
stillness.	Her	mind	is	destroyed,	but	her	body	refuses	to	yield.	Kadagar	Fant,
what	meaning	do	you	dare	take	from	this?
He	struggled	to	regain	self-control.	‘Clear	the	area,’	he	said	to	his	officers,
his	voice	breaking.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	cleared	his	throat.	‘She	will	not	die
quickly.	Not	now.’
Ashen-faced,	the	soldiers	set	off	to	relay	the	commands.
Aparal	looked	back	at	the	gate.	Hust.	You	came	to	meet	her,	before	she	was
across	the	threshold.	Where,	then,	are	my	soldiers	on	the	other	side?	Where	–
gods	below	–	are	the	Hounds?
	
In	cascading	streams	of	light,	Yedan	Derryg	groped	blindly.	His	sword’s


laughter	was	slowly	dying	away.	This	was	the	real	danger.	Getting	lost	within
Lightfall.	But	he’d	seen	little	choice,	and	now	he	needed	to	return.	One	Hound
remained.	How	many	of	his	soldiers	were	dying	even	now?	Whilst	he	stumbled
blindly	in	this	infernal	light?
He	could	feel	the	wound’s	terrible	pain,	a	vicious,	biting	thing,	desperate	to
heal.
Yedan	halted.	A	wrong	step	now	could	take	him	on	to	the	Liosan	plain,
facing	tens	of	thousands	of	the	enemy.	And	more	dragons.
Heavy,	buffeting	currents	from	behind	him.	He	whirled.
Something,	coming	through—
The	Hound	exploded	from	the	light.
He	dropped	low	into	a	crouch,	blade	slashing.	Cutting	through	both	front
legs.	The	beast	stumbled	–	he	twisted	and	chopped	down	on	its	neck.	The	Hust
blade	sliced	through,	leapt	out	from	under	its	throat	with	a	delighted	yelp.	The
head	slammed	into	the	ground	at	Yedan’s	feet.
He	stood	for	a	moment,	staring	down	at	it.	Then	he	sheathed	his	sword,
reached	down.	His	back	creaked	as	he	strained	to	lift	the	head	into	his	arms.	He
faced	the	direction	the	Hound	had	been	heading	and	then,	with	a	running	start
that	spun	him	round,	he	heaved	the	head	out	into	the	light.
Facing	the	opposite	direction,	he	set	off	for	the	wound.
	
Aparal’s	eyes	had	been	on	the	gate,	and	he	was	not	alone	in	seeing	the	Hound’s
severed	head	sailing	out	to	thump	and	roll	on	the	ground.	Shouts	of	dismay	and
horror	sounded	on	all	sides.
He	stared	in	horror.
It	cannot	be	just	one	man.	It	cannot!
A	Hust	legion	waits	for	us.	Hundreds	of	the	cursed	slayers,	each	one	driven
mad	by	their	weapons.	Nothing	will	stop	them,	nothing	can	defeat	them.
We	cannot	win	this.
Unblinking,	he	stared	at	the	huge	head,	the	empty	eyes,	and	then	he	turned
to	the	dying	dragon.	It	had	lurched	up	against	the	corpse	of	Iparth	Erule.	Had
bitten	into	his	rotting	flank.	But	now	the	motions	were	slowing,	losing	that
frenzied	strength.	Eldat,	please	die.	Please.
‘Not	long	now,’	he	whispered.	Not	long	now.
	
Waves	of	sorcery	had	pursued	the	Hound	back	to	the	wound,	Pully	and	Skwish


advancing	behind	them,	clambering	over	corpses	and	torn-up	soldiers	still	in
the	process	of	dying.	Pithy	staggered	in	their	wake.	She’d	taken	a	slash	to	her
right	shoulder	and	the	bleeding	wasn’t	slowing.	Her	arm	was	sheathed	in	red,
with	thick	threads	draining	from	her	fist.	Colours	were	fast	fading	from	the
world.
She	saw	Brevity	leading	a	solid	wedge	of	Letherii,	coming	up	from	the	left
flank.	Where	was	the	prince?
And	what	was	that	thunder	in	the	breach?
Nearby	was	the	carcass	of	a	Hound,	and	nearer	the	breach	another	one	of
the	horrid,	giant	beasts,	still	alive,	still	kicking	where	it	lay	on	its	side.	Soldiers
were	closing	on	it,	readying	their	pikes.	Killing	it	was	going	to	take	some	time.
I’m	so	tired.	All	at	once	the	strength	left	her	legs	and	she	sat	down.	Bad	cut.
A	fang?	A	claw?	I	can’t	remember	–	can’t	twist	round	enough	to	see	it.	But	at
least	the	pain’s	gone.
‘Captain!’
Pithy	looked	down	at	the	sword	in	her	hand.	Smiled.	You	did	all	right.	You
didn’t	fail	me.	Where’s	that	girl?	Need	to	tell	her.
‘Someone	get	one	of	the	witches!	Quickly!’
That	voice	was	loud,	almost	right	next	to	her	ear,	but	it	seemed	muffled	all
the	same.	She	saw	Brevity	running	towards	her	now,	but	it	was	hard	work,
getting	over	all	those	bodies,	and	Pithy	wondered	if	she’d	arrive	in	time.
In	time	for	what?	Oh.	This.
She	settled,	tried	lying	down,	found	herself	cradled	in	someone’s	arms.
‘Her	back’s	bitten	half	off!	Where	are	the	witches?’
‘Spent.’
‘We	need—’
A	roaring	sound	filling	her	head,	Pithy	looked	down	at	her	hand,	the	one
holding	the	sword.	She	willed	it	to	let	go,	but	it	refused.	She	frowned.	But	a
moment	later	the	frown	faded.	I	understand.	I	am	a	soldier.	Not	a	thief.	Not	a
criminal.	A	soldier.	And	a	soldier	never	lets	go	of	the	sword.	Ever.	You	see	it	in
their	eyes.
Can	you	see	it	in	my	eyes?	I	bet	you	can.
It’s	true.	At	last,	it’s	true.	I	was	a	soldier.
	
Brevity	was	still	ten	paces	away	when	she	saw	her	friend	die.	She	cried	out,
sagged	down	amidst	the	corpses.	Crossing	this	killing	field	had	been	a
nightmare,	a	passage	of	unrelenting	horror.	Letherii,	Shake,	Liosan	–	bodies
were	bodies,	and	death	was	death,	and	names	didn’t	mean	shit.	She	was	soaked


in	what	had	been	spilled,	what	had	been	lost.	The	abattoir	reek	was	thick
enough	to	drown	in.	She	held	her	head	in	her	hands.
Pithy.
Remember	the	scams?	How	we	took	’em	for	all	they	had?	It	was	us	against
the	world	and	gods,	it	felt	good	those	times	we	won.	It	never	hurt	us,	not	once,
beating	’em	at	their	own	game.	Sure,	they	had	law	on	their	side,	making	legal
all	they	stole.	But	then,	they’d	made	up	those	laws.	That	was	the	only	difference
between	us.
We	used	to	hate	their	greed.	But	then	we	got	greedy	ourselves.	Served	us
right,	getting	caught.
Island	life,	now	that	was	boring.	Until	those	Malazans	showed	up.	It	all
started	right	then,	didn’t	it?	Leading	up	to	here.	To	now.
They	sent	us	tumbling,	didn’t	they?	Fetching	us	up	on	the	Shore.	We
could’ve	gone	off	on	our	own,	back	into	everything	we	knew	and	despised.	But
we	didn’t.	We	stayed	with	Twilight	and	the	Watch,	and	they	made	us	captains.
And	now	we	fought	us	a	war.	You	did,	Pithy.	I’m	still	fighting	it.	Still	not
knowing	what	any	of	it	means.
Ten	paces,	and	I	can’t	look	over	at	you.	I	can’t.	It’s	this	distance	between	us.
And	while	I	live,	I	can’t	cross	it.	Pithy,	how	could	you	leave	me	so	alone?
Yedan	Derryg	emerged	from	the	wound	in	Lightfall.	The	laughter	of	his
sword	chewed	the	air.	She	stared	across	at	him,	thinking	how	lost	he	looked.
But	no.	That’s	just	me.	It’s	just	me.	He	knows	what	he	needs	to	know.	He’s
worked	it	all	out.	It	comes	with	the	blood.
	
Sergeant	Cellows	stumped	up	to	Yedan.	‘Prince	–	she’s	alive,	but	unconscious.
The	witches	used	her—’
‘I	know,’	he	replied,	studying	the	killing	field.
The	sergeant,	burly	and	hulking	–	a	touch	of	Teblor	blood	in	him	–
followed	his	gaze	and	grunted.	‘They	hurt	us	this	time,	sire.	The	Hounds
mauled	the	centre	and	the	right	flank.	One	of	the	beasts	reached	the	wounded
before	Pully	drove	it	back.	But	our	losses,	sire.	They	hurt	us.	Nithe,	Aysgan,
Trapple,	Pithy—’
Yedan	shot	him	a	hard	look.	‘Pithy?’
Cellows	pointed	with	a	finger	that	had	been	cut	off	just	below	the	knuckle.
‘There.’	A	figure	slumped	in	a	weeping	soldier ’s	arms.	Brevity	kneeling
nearby,	head	lowered.
‘See	to	what	needs	to	be	done,	Sergeant.	Wounded.	Weapons.’
‘Yes,	sire	–	er,	Prince?’


‘What	is	it?’
‘Seems	I’m	the	last.’
‘The	last?’
‘From	your	original	company,	sir.	Coast	Patrol.’
Yedan	felt	something	crunch	at	the	back	of	his	mouth.	He	winced,	leaned
over	and	spat.	‘Shit,	broke	a	tooth.’	He	lifted	his	eyes,	stared	across	at	Cellows.
‘I	want	you	in	reserve.’
‘Sire?’
‘For	when	I	need	you	the	most,	Sergeant.	For	when	I	need	you	at	my	side.
Until	then,	you	are	to	remain	out	of	the	fight.’
‘Sire—’
‘But	when	I	call,	you’d	better	be	ready.’
The	man	saluted,	and	then	strode	away.
‘My	last,’	Yedan	whispered.
He	squinted	at	Brevity.	If	all	these	eyes	were	not	upon	me,	I	would	walk	to
you,	Brevity.	I	would	take	you	in	my	arms.	I	would	share	your	grief.	You	deserve
that	much.	We	both	do.	But	I	can	show	nothing	like…that.
He	hesitated,	suddenly	unsure.	Probed	his	broken	tooth	with	his	tongue.
Tasted	blood.	‘Shit.’
Brevity	looked	up	as	the	shadow	fell	over	her.	‘Prince.’	She	struggled	to
stand	but	Yedan	reached	out,	and	the	weight	of	his	hand	pushed	her	back	down.
She	waited	for	him	to	speak.	But	he	said	nothing,	though	his	eyes	were	now
on	Pithy	and	the	soldiers	gathering	around	the	fallen	woman.	She	forced
herself	to	follow	his	gaze.
They	were	lifting	her	so	gently	she	thought	her	heart	would	rupture.
‘It’s	no	easy	thing,’	murmured	Yedan,	‘to	earn	that.’
	
Aparal	Forge	saw	the	enclaves	encamped	on	the	surrounding	mounds	slowly
stirring	awake,	saw	the	soldiers	assembling.	This	will	be	the	one,	then.	When
we	throw	our	elites	through	the	gate.	Legions	of	Light.	Lord	Kadagar	Fant,	why
did	you	wait	this	long?
If	they	had	gone	through	from	the	first,	the	Shake	would	have	fallen	by	now.
Make	the	first	bite	the	deepest.	Every	commander	knows	this.	But	you	wouldn’t
listen.	You	wanted	to	bleed	your	people	first,	to	make	your	cause	theirs.
But	it	hasn’t	worked.	They	fight	because	you	give	them	no	choice.	The	potthrowers	dry	their	hands	and	the	wheel	slows	and	then	stops.	The	weavers	lock
up	their	looms.	The	wood-carvers	put	away	their	tools.	The	road-menders,	the
lamp-makers,	the	hawkers	of	songbirds	and	the	dog-skinners,	the	mothers	and


the	whores	and	the	consorts	and	the	drug-peddlers	–	they	all	set	down	the
things	they	would	do,	to	fight	this	war	of	yours.
It	all	stops,	and	for	so	many	now	will	never	start	again.
You’ve	ripped	out	the	side	of	your	people,	left	a	gaping	wound	–	a	wound
like	the	one	before	us.	And	we	flow	through	it	like	blood.	We	spill	out	and	scab
up	on	the	other	side.
The	Soletaken	were	all	sembled	now.	They	knew	what	needed	to	be	done.
And	as	the	ranks	drew	up,	Aparal	saw	his	Eleint-fouled	kin	take	position,	each
at	the	head	of	his	or	her	own	elite	soldiers.
But	a	Hust	Legion	awaits	us.	Slayers	of	Hounds	and	Dragons,	in	all	the
mad	laughter	of	war.
This	next	battle.	It	will	be	our	last.
He	looked	up	to	the	battlements,	but	Kadagar	was	not	there.	And	from	his
soldiers	resting	on	all	sides,	his	commoners	so	bloodied,	so	utterly	ruined,
Aparal	heard	the	same	words.	‘He	comes.	Our	lord	shall	lead	us.’
Our	lord.	Our	very	own	rag	doll.
	
‘Water,	Highness.	Drink.’
She	barely	had	strength	to	guide	the	mouthpiece	to	her	lips.	Like	rain	in	a
desert,	the	water	flowed	through	the	ravaged	insides	of	her	mouth.	Lacerated
tissues	stung	awake,	her	throat	opened	in	relief.	She	pulled	it	away,	gasping.
‘What’s	happening?	Where	am	I?’
‘The	witches	and	your	brother,	Queen,	they	killed	the	Hounds.’
Hounds.
What	day	is	this?	In	a	world	without	days,	what	day	is	this?
‘They’re	little	girls	now,’	her	companion	said.
Yan	Tovis	blinked	up	at	her.	A	familiar	face.	‘Your	brother?’
The	woman	looked	away.
‘I’m	sorry.’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	will	see	them	soon,	my	queen.	That’s	what	I	look
forward	to	now.’
‘Don’t	think	that	way—’
‘Forgive	me,	Highness.	I	took	care	of	them	all	my	life,	but	against	this,	I
wasn’t	enough.	I	failed.	It’s	too	much.	From	the	very	start,	it	was	too	much.’
Yan	Tovis	stared	up	at	the	woman’s	face,	the	dry	eyes,	the	absence	of
expression.	She’s	already	gone.	‘“They	await	you	on	the	Shore.”’
A	brittle	half-smile.	‘So	we	say	over	our	dead,	yes.	I	remember.’
Over	our	dead.


‘Tell	the	witches	–	if	they	do	that	to	me	again	–	if	they	use	me	like	that	–
ever	again	–	I	will	kill	them	both.’
The	woman	flinched.	‘They	look	ten	years	old,	Highness.’
‘But	they	aren’t.	They’re	two	old	women,	sour	and	bitter	and	hateful	of	the
world.	Go,	give	them	my	warning,	soldier.’
With	a	silent	nod,	the	young	woman	rose.
Yan	Tovis	settled	her	head,	felt	the	sand	grinding	against	the	back	of	her
skull.	Empty	sky.	Dreams	of	darkness.	If	I	had	knelt	to	the	Shore,	they	couldn’t
touch	me.	Instead,	they	punished	me.
‘But	if	they	hadn’t,’	she	whispered,	‘those	Hounds	would	have	killed
hundreds	more.	Which	of	us,	then,	is	sour	and	bitter?	Hateful	of	the	world?’
I	will	go	to	her.	To	Kharkanas.	I	will	beg	her	forgiveness.	Neither	of	us	can
withstand	the	weight	of	this	crown.	We	should	cast	it	off.	We	can	find	the
strength	for	that.	We	must.
Oh,	I	am	a	fool.	Yedan	will	not	yield.	The	lives	lost	must	mean	something,
even	when	they	don’t.	So,	it	seems	we	must	all	die.	It	seems	we	have	no	choice.
Not	the	Shake,	not	the	Letherii,	not	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	Queen	of	High	House
Dark.
She	reached	down	and	came	up	with	a	handful	of	white	sand	–	crumbled
bones.	‘It’s	all	here,’	she	whispered.	‘Our	entire	history,	right	here.	From
then…to	now.	To	what’s	coming.	All…here.’	And	she	watched,	as	she	closed
that	hand	into	a	fist,	as	if	to	crush	it	all.


Chapter	Sixteen

Stone	whispers
Patience
But	we	take	chisel	in	hand
Child	begs
Not	yet
But	the	sands	have	run	out
Sky	cries
Fly
But	we	hold	our	ground
Wind	sings
Free
But	roots	bind	us	down
Lover	sighs
Stay
But	we	must	be	gone
Life	pleads
Live
But	death	is	the	dream
We	beg
Not	yet
But	the	sands	have	run	out
Stone	whispers
Patience…
Incantation
Gallan	of	Kharkanas
	shall	be	all	but	forgotten.’

‘THERE	WILL	COME	A	TIME,’	VENTURED	SECHUL	LATH,	‘WHEN	WE

‘Speak	for	yourself,’	growled	Errastas.
‘And	they	shall	drink	blood.	Remember	that?	Book	of	Elders.	And	that	is
the	last	memory	of	us	that	will	remain.	As	drinkers	of	blood.	A	tyranny	of
thirst.	If	it	is	not	for	us	to	save	our	worshippers,	then	who	will	–	who	will	save


all	these	wretched	mortals?’
Behind	them,	feet	thumping	the	ground	like	a	drum	of	war,	Kilmandaros
said,	‘They	cannot	be	saved.	They	never	could.’
‘Then	what	use	are	we?	To	any	of	them?’
Errastas	spat	on	the	ground,	and	replied	with	contempt,	‘Someone	to
blame,	Setch.	For	all	the	ruin	they	themselves	commit.	On	each	other.	On
themselves.	Anyway,	enough.	We’ve	chewed	on	this	too	many	times.’
Sechul	Lath	glanced	back.	‘Are	we	far	enough,	do	you	think?’
Kilmandaros’s	eyes	were	hooded	with	exhaustion,	and	she	did	not	bother
following	his	gaze.	‘No.’
‘A	warren—’	Errastas	began.
She	cut	him	off	with	a	snort.	‘The	wounding	to	come	shall	strike	through
every	warren.	Young	and	Elder.	Our	only	hope	is	to	get	as	much	distance
between	us	and	her	as	we	can.’
Errastas	shrugged.	‘I	never	much	liked	K’rul	anyway.’
‘To	begin,’	Kilmandaros	said,	‘this	but	wounds.	If	she	is	not	slain	in	time,
then	K’rul	will	indeed	die,	and	the	world	shall	be	unmade.	The	death	of
sorcery,	and	more.’
Sechul	Lath	smiled	across	at	Errastas.	‘And	so	the	coin	is	cast,	and	it	spins,
and	spins	still.’
‘She	is	no	longer	our	problem,’	he	replied,	one	finger	probing	the	empty
socket	of	his	stolen	eye.	‘Her	sister	will	have	to	deal	with	her.	Or	someone
else.’
‘And	on	this	our	fate	rests	–	that	someone	else	cleans	up	the	mess	we	make.
I	dare	say	our	children	will	not	appreciate	the	burden.’
‘They’ll	not	live	long	enough	to	appreciate	much	of	anything,’	Errastas
said.
I	truly	see	our	problem,	friends.	We	don’t	want	the	future,	we	want	the	past.
With	a	new	name.	But	it’s	still	the	past,	that	invented	realm	of	nostalgia,	all	the
jagged	edges	smoothed	away.	Paradise…for	the	drinkers	of	blood.
‘Draconus	seeks	to	do	me	harm,’	said	Kilmandaros.	‘He	waits	for	me.’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool,’	snapped	Errastas.	‘He	will	join	with	T’iam	in	slaying	the
Otataral	Dragon.	He	may	have	vowed	eternal	war	against	chaos,	but	even	he
would	not	welcome	its	end.	Besides,	a	battle	with	you	risks	too	much	–	you
might	kill	him.	He’s	been	imprisoned	in	a	sword	for	how	long?	You	think	he’d
risk	his	freedom	so	soon?	Perhaps	indeed	he	has	old	scores	to	settle	with	you,
Kilmandaros,	but	he	is	about	to	discover	far	more	immediate	threats.’
‘Unless	he	gleans	our	purpose.’
Sechul	Lath	glanced	back	at	her.	‘Mother,	I	assure	you,	he	has	done	that.


But	I	think	Errastas	judges	rightly.	Draconus	will	see	the	threat	posed	by	the
release	of	the	Otataral	Dragon,	and	her	presence	will	be	his	lodestone.
Hopefully	a	fatal	one.’
‘Many	have	tried	to	kill	her,’	Errastas	agreed,	‘and	all	have	failed.	Even	the
imprisonment	demanded	an	elaborate	trap	–	one	that	took	centuries	for	Rake	to
devise.’
‘He	wasn’t	alone,’	rumbled	Kilmandaros.
‘And	what	was	made	you	have	now	unmade,’	Errastas	said,	nodding.	‘And
Anomander	Rake	is	dead,	and	there	remains	no	one	to	match	his	insane
obsessions—’
Kilmandaros	had	drawn	close	during	the	conversation,	and	her	hand	was	a
sudden	blur	in	the	corner	of	Sechul’s	vision,	but	the	blow	she	struck	Errastas
was	impossible	to	miss,	as	ribs	snapped	and	he	was	thrown	from	his	feet.	He
struck	the	ground,	rolled	once,	and	then	curled	up	around	the	damage	to	his
chest.
She	moved	to	stand	over	him.	‘You	will	cease	speaking	ill	of	him,’	she	said
in	a	low	voice.	‘We	did	not	always	agree.	Often	we	quarrelled.	But	the	Son	of
Darkness	was	a	man	of	integrity	and	honour.	No	longer	will	I	permit	you	to
spit	on	his	name.	He	is	dead,	and	your	voice	lives	on	like	the	cry	of	a	cowardly
crow,	Errastas.	You	were	never	his	match,	and	even	in	death	he	stands	taller
than	you	in	all	your	guises.	Do	you	think	I	do	not	hear	your	resentment?	Your
envy?	It	disgusts	me.’
Sechul	Lath	felt	a	trickle	of	power	from	Errastas,	as	the	Elder	God	healed
himself.	Slowly,	he	regained	his	feet,	and,	not	looking	at	either	of	them,
resumed	walking.
After	a	moment,	Sechul	fell	in	behind	the	Errant,	followed	by
Kilmandaros.
She	said,	loud	enough	for	both	to	hear,	‘Rake	once	said	to	me	that
Draconus	was	a	man	of	great	honour.	Before	the	betrayal.	Before	his	day	of
rage.	I	believe	him.’
Sechul	turned	and	studied	his	mother.	‘You	believe	he	will	leave	the
Otataral	Dragon	to	T’iam.	That	he	will	seek	you	out,	not	to	settle	old	scores,
but	to	punish	you	for	what	you	have	done	here.	To	punish	you	for	releasing
her.’
‘Punish	me?’	She	bared	her	tusks.	‘He	will	seek	to	kill	me,	my	son.	And	I
am	frightened.’
The	admission	was	like	ice	in	Sechul’s	veins.	Mother?	‘We	should	never
have	done	this,’	he	whispered.
‘A	common	prayer,’	she	muttered	in	reply.


‘Farther	still?’	Errastas	demanded.
Kilmandaros	glanced	behind	them.	‘Farther	still.’

The	dragon	circled	him	twice	before	descending	to	the	broken	tundra	two
hundred	paces	ahead.	As	Tulas	Shorn	walked	closer,	he	watched	it	eyeing	him
warily.	Scales	like	plates	of	ice,	milky	and	translucent	in	places,	blinding	white
where	the	sun’s	light	struck	them	full.	Eyes	red	as	blood.	With	less	than	fifty
strides	between	them,	the	dragon	sembled.
Tulas	maintained	his	steady	approach	until	ten	paces	away,	and	then	he
halted	in	alarm.	‘Is	that	a	Hust	blade	you	carry,	Silchas	Ruin?	Such	was	not
your	style.’
The	weapon	was	moaning,	sensing	the	nearness	of	one	possessing	the
blood	of	Eleint.	One	other	than	its	wielder,	that	is.
Silchas	Ruin’s	expression	was	flat.	‘It	seems	that	you	evaded	their	bargain
–	for	there	was	a	bargain,	was	there	not?	Between	my	brother	and	the	Lord	of
the	Slain.	There	had	to	have	been.’
‘I	imagine	you	are	correct.’
‘Was	your	prison	Hood’s	realm,	Prince,	or	Dragnipur?’
Tulas	straightened,	tilted	his	head.	‘You	refuse	me	my	proper	title.’
‘I	see	no	throne,	Tulas	Shorn.	Was	“prince”	not	honorific	enough?	Would
you	prefer	pretender?’
‘If	I	was	not	bound	still	–	and	eternally	so,	I	fear	–	to	this	state	of	undeath,
Silchas	Ruin,	I	might	take	offence	at	your	words.’
‘If	you	wish,	we	could	still	cross	blades,	you	sperm-clouded	abomination
of	darkness.’
Tulas	considered	the	proposition.	‘You	are	returned	to	this	world,	Silchas,
leading	me	to	the	inescapable	conclusion	that	the	Azath	do	indeed	know	how	to
shit.’
‘Tulas,’	said	Silchas	Ruin	as	he	strode	closer,	‘do	you	remember	the	night
of	the	whores?’
‘I	do.’
‘You	are	such	a	rotted	mess	now,	I	doubt	a	kingdom’s	wealth	could	buy
you	their	favour.’
‘As	I	recall,	they	blindfolded	themselves	before	lying	with	you	–	what	did
they	squeal?	Oh	yes.	“He	has	the	eyes	of	a	white	rat!”	Or	words	to	that	effect.’
They	faced	one	another.


‘Tulas,	would	a	smile	crack	what’s	left	of	your	face?’
‘Probably,	old	friend,	but	know	that	I	am	smiling	–	in	my	heart.’
Their	embrace	was	savage	with	memories	thought	for	ever	lost,	a
friendship	they’d	thought	long	dead.
‘Against	this,’	Silchas	whispered,	‘not	even	Hood	can	stand.	My	friend.’
After	a	time,	they	drew	apart.
‘Do	not	weep	for	me,’	said	Tulas	Shorn.
Silchas	made	a	careless	gesture.	‘Unexpected	joy.	But…too	bad	about	the
war.’
‘The	war	in	which	we	did	our	level	best	to	kill	each	other?	Yes,	those	were
bad	times.	We	were	each	caught	in	whirlpools,	friend,	too	vast	and	powerful
for	us	to	escape.’
‘The	day	Emurlahn	shattered,	so	too	did	my	heart.	For	you,	Tulas.	For…
everything	we	then	lost.’
‘Do	you	know,	I	do	not	even	remember	my	own	death?	For	all	I	know,	it
could	well	have	been	by	your	hand.’
Silchas	Ruin	shook	his	head.	‘It	was	not.	You	were	lost	in	the	shattering	–
so	even	I	do	not	know	what	happened	to	you.	I…	I	searched,	for	a	time.’
‘As	I	would	have	done	for	you.’
‘But	then	Scara—’
‘Curse	of	the	Eleint.’
Silchas	nodded.	‘Too	easily	embraced.’
‘But	not	you.	Not	me.’
‘It	pleases	me	to	hear	you	say	that.	Starvald	Demelain—’
‘I	know.	The	Storm	will	be	a	siren	call.’
‘Together,	we	can	resist	it.’
‘This	smile	upon	my	soul,	it	grows.	At	last,	my	heart’s	dream	–	we	shall
fight	side	by	side,	Silchas	Ruin.’
‘And	the	first	to	fall…’
‘The	other	shall	guard.’
‘Tulas.’
‘Yes?’
‘He	saw	my	grief.	He	joined	with	me	in	my	search.’
Tulas	Shorn	looked	away,	said	nothing.
‘Tulas,	Anomander—’
‘No,	friend.	Not	yet	–	I	–	I	am	not	yet	ready	to	think	of	him.	I	am	sorry.’
Silchas	Ruin’s	breath	was	ragged.	He	lifted	a	hand	to	his	face,	looked	away,
and	then	nodded.	‘As	you	wish.’	He	laughed	harshly.	‘It	matters	not,	anyway.
Not	any	more.	He	is	dead.’


‘I	know	that,’	Tulas	said,	reaching	out	to	grasp	Silchas’s	right	shoulder.
‘And	more	than	ever,	it	matters.	If	we	do	not	speak	of	your	loss	–	for	a	time	–
it	does	not	mean	I	feel	nothing	of	your	grief.	Understand	me,	please.’
‘Very	well.’
Tulas	eyed	the	Tiste	Andii.	‘Curse	of	the	Eleint,’	he	said.
But	his	friend	flinched.	Neither	spoke	for	a	time.	The	Hust	sword	at
Silchas’s	belt	was	muttering	in	its	scabbard.	Then	Silchas	looked	up.	‘Oh,	there
is	one	other	thing	–	a	spawn	of	Menandore—’
‘An	enemy?’
‘He	was	born	this	side	of	Starvald	Demelain.’
‘Ah,	then	a	potential	ally.	Three…a	good	number.	Does	this	child
command	the	power	inside	him,	does	he	rule	the	rage	within?’
‘If	he	did,	he	would	be	here	with	us	now.’
‘I	see.	Then	what	shall	be	his	fate?’
‘I	have	not	yet	decided.’
They	began	walking	north.	The	tundra	stretched	out	on	all	sides.	Small
birds	flitted	among	the	low	growth,	and	spinning	clouds	of	midges	lifted	from
the	path	they	took.	In	the	vast	distance	stretched	a	gleaming	white	line,	marking
the	edge	of	the	ice	fields.
‘I	sense	the	hand	of	Elder	Gods	in	all	this,’	Tulas	Shorn	said	after	a	time.
‘Yes.’
‘What	do	they	want?’
‘What	they	always	want.	A	return	to	power.’
‘In	the	time	of	my	deathlessness,	Silchas,	I	came	to	understand	the	truth	of
that	old	saying:	you	cannot	go	back.’
‘They	know	it,	but	it	won’t	stop	them	from	trying.	And	in	trying,	they	may
well	destroy	this	world	and	countless	others.	They	may	well	kill	K’rul
himself.’
‘A	bold	gamble,	then.’
Silchas	nodded.	‘The	boldest.’
‘Sechul	Lath,	then?’
‘And	Errastas,	yes.’
‘So,	Sechul	Lath	casts	the	die,	and	Errastas	nudges	the	last	tip	–	the	game	is
rigged,	friend.’
‘Just	the	way	they	like	it,	yes.’
‘Will	you	still	play?’
Silchas	looked	thoughtful,	and	then	he	sighed.	‘They	consider	themselves
masters	at	cheating.	But	then,	I	think	this	will	be	the	first	time	that	they	sit	at	a
table	with	mortal	humans	facing	them.	Cheating?	When	it	comes	to	that,	the


Elder	Gods	are	as	children	compared	to	humans.	Since	the	time	of	my	return,
this	much	at	least	I	have	learned.’
‘The	game	is	in	danger	of	being	turned?’
Silchas	glanced	across	at	him,	and	grinned.	‘I	think…yes:	just	watch,	Tulas.
Just	watch.’
In	the	scabbard,	the	sword	gurgled.	Laughter	or,	Tulas	mused,	choking.
‘My	friend,	how	did	you	come	by	that	weapon?’
‘A	gift.’
‘From	whom?	Are	they	mad?’
‘Shadow.’
Tulas	found	he	had	nothing	to	say.	Struck	speechless,	as	the	fire	tellers	used
to	say.	Grimacing,	he	struggled,	desperate	to	voice	a	warning	–	anything.
Silchas	glanced	over.	‘Not	Edgewalker,	Tulas.’
Edge—	No,	it	cannot	be	–	he	could	not	have	–	oh,	wonders	of	the	Abyss!	His
voice	cracked	when	at	last	he	managed	to	speak.	‘I	forgive	him.’
Silchas	frowned	across	at	him.	‘Who?’
‘Your	brother,’	Tulas	replied	in	a	broken	rasp.	‘I	forgive	him	–	for	all	of	it
–	for	my	anger,	now	proved	so…so	misplaced.	Gods	below,	Silchas!	He	spoke
true!	But	–	how?	How	did	he	manage	it?’
Silchas	was	still	frowning.	‘I	don’t	understand,	Tulas.	How	did	he	manage
what?’
Tulas	stared	at	Silchas	Ruin.	A	moment’s	disbelief,	but	then	he	shook	his
head.	He	said	nothing,	then,	not	even	to	his	beloved	brother.	He	was	true	to	his
word.	He	held	the	secret	close	and	not	once	yielded	a	single	word,	not	a	single
hint	–	else	it	would	be	known	by	now.	It	would	be	known!
‘Tulas?’
‘I	forgive	him,	Silchas.’
‘I	–	I	am	so	pleased.	I	am…humbled,	friend.	You	see,	that	day,	I	remain
convinced	that	it	was	not	as	it	seemed—’
‘Oh,	indeed,	it	was	not.’
‘Can	you	explain,	then?’
‘No.’
‘Tulas?’
They	had	halted.	The	sun	was	low	on	the	horizon,	painting	the	northern	ice
lurid	shades	of	crimson.	The	midges	whined	in	agitated	clouds.
Tulas	sighed.	‘To	tell	you,	my	friend,	would	be	to	betray	his	last	secret.	I
forgive	him,	yes,	but	I	already	fear	that	he	would	not	forgive	me,	if	he	could.
For	my	words.	My	rage.	My	stupidity.	If	I	now	yield	his	last	secret,	all	hope	for
me	is	lost.	I	beg	you	to	understand.’


Silchas	Ruin’s	smile	was	tight.	‘My	brother	had	a	secret	he	kept	even	from
me?’
‘From	everyone.’
‘Everyone	but	you.’
‘It	was	to	me	that	he	vowed	to	say	nothing,	ever.’
The	Tiste	Andii’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘A	secret	as	dangerous	as	that?’
‘Yes.’
Silchas	grunted,	but	it	was	a	despairing	sound.	‘Oh,	my	friend.	Does	it	not
occur	to	you	that,	with	a	secret	as	deadly	as	you	seem	to	suggest,	my	brother
would	do	all	he	needed	to	to	prevent	its	revelation?’
‘Yes,	that	has	occurred	to	me.’
‘Including	killing	you.’
Tulas	nodded.	‘Yes.	You	may	have	explained	my	demise.	Your	brother
murdered	me.’	And	to	complete	the	deception,	he	helped	his	brother	look	for
me.
‘But—’
‘Still,	Silchas,	I	forgive	him.	Between	your	brother	and	me,	after	all,	I	had
clearly	announced	myself	the	unreliable	one.	I	know	it	is	difficult	for	you	to
accept	that	he	would	keep	this	from	you—’
Silchas	barked	a	laugh.	‘Dawn’s	fire,	Tulas,	you	are	out	of	practice.	I	was
being	ironic.	My	brother	kept	things	from	me?	Hardly	a	revelation	to	crush	me
underfoot.	Anomander	had	many	lessons	to	give	me	about	pride,	and,	finally,	a
few	of	them	have	stuck.’
‘The	world	is	vast	yet—’
‘—truths	are	rare.	Just	so.’
‘And,’	Tulas	added,	‘as	the	whores	whispered	about	you,	a	man	of	giant
aspirations	but	tiny	capacities.’
‘Tell	me,	Prince	Puke	of	the	Eleint,	shall	I	introduce	you	to	this	Hust
blade?’
‘Best	save	that	line	for	the	next	whore	you	meet,	Silchas.’
‘Ha!	I	will!’
‘Prince	Silchas	of	the	Laughing	Cock.	Could	be	a	while	before	we	find	a
—’
‘Wrong,	friend.	We	go	to	meet	the	biggest	whore	of	them	all.’
Tulas	felt	dried	skin	rip	open	as	he	laid	bare	his	teeth.	‘T’iam.	Oh,	she
won’t	like	that	title,	not	one	bit.’
‘Mother ’s	sake,	Tulas.	Irony!’
‘Ah,’	he	nodded	after	a	moment.	‘Yes.	After	all,	if	she’s	a	whore,	then	that
makes	all	of	us	Soletaken—’


‘Makes	us	all	whorespawn!’
‘And	this	amuses	you?’
‘It	does.	Besides,	I	can	think	of	no	better	line	with	which	to	greet	her.’
‘Silchas,	a	lone	Hust	blade?	Now	you	are	too	bold.	An	entire	legion	went
out	to	do	battle	with	her,	and	did	not	return.’
‘Yes	they	died,	Tulas,	but	they	did	not	fail.’
‘You	said,	a	gift	from	Shadow?’
‘Yes.	But	not	Edgewalker.’
‘Then	who?’
‘He	is	pompous	in	his	title.	A	new	god.	Shadowthrone.’
Shadowthrone.	Ahh,	not	as	pompous	as	you	might	think.	‘Do	not
underestimate	him,	friend.’
‘You	warn	me	against	someone	you	have	never	met?’
‘I	do.’
‘What	gives	you	cause	to	do	so?’
Tulas	pointed	down	at	the	scabbarded	sword.	‘That.’
‘I	will	admit	to	some	unease,	friend.’
‘Good.’
‘Shall	I	show	you	the	dragon-patterned	welding?’
Oh	dear.
	
Father?
The	scene	was	murky,	stained	like	an	old	painting,	yet	the	figure	looked	up
from	the	chair	he	was	slumped	in.	Tired	eyes	squinted	in	the	gloom.	‘If	this	is	a
dream,	Rud…you	look	well,	and	that	is	good	enough	for	me.’
Where	are	you?
Udinaas	grimaced.	‘She’s	a	stubborn	one,	as	bad	as	me.	Well,	not	quite.’
The	home	of	Seren	Pedac.	Then…	Silchas	judged	rightly.	You	went	to	her.
For	help.
‘Desperation,	Rud.	Seems	to	be	driving	my	life	these	days.	And	you,	are	you
well?’
My	power	grows,	Father.	Blood	of	the	Eleint.	It	scares	me.	But	I	can	reach
you	now.	You	are	not	dreaming.	I	am	unharmed.
Udinaas	rubbed	at	his	face,	and	he	looked	old	to	Ryadd’s	eyes,	a	realization
that	triggered	a	pang	deep	inside.	His	father	then	nodded.	‘The	Imass	are	in
hiding,	north	of	the	city.	A	forest	abandoned	by	the	Teblor.	It	is	perilous,	but
there’s	no	choice.	I	comfort	myself	with	the	thought	of	these	ancient	people,
ancestors	of	us	all,	perhaps,	crouching	unseen	in	the	midst	of	humanity.	If	this


is	possible,	then	so	are	many	other	unlikely	possibilities,	and	perhaps	the	world
is	not	as	empty	as	we	think	we	have	made	it.’
Father,	Kilava	sent	you	away	because	she	will	not	resist	the	sundering	of
the	gate.
Udinaas	looked	away.	‘I	suspected	something	like	that.’
She’s	already	given	up	—
‘Rud,	I	think	it	was	her	desire	all	along.	In	fact,	I	do	not	think	Kettle’s
mortal	wounding	came	from	the	other	side	of	Starvald	Demelain.	The	Azath	was
young,	yes,	but	strong.	And	with	the	Finnest	of	Scabandari,	well	–	do	you
remember	our	confidence?	But	then,	suddenly,	something	changed…’
Ryadd	thought	about	that,	and	felt	a	surge	of	anger	building	within	him.
That	was	wrong,	he	said.
‘She	pushed	the	Imass	back	into	the	world	of	the	living—’
That	was	a	living	world!
‘It	was	a	dream,	doomed	to	go	round	and	round	and	never	change.	In	the
eyes	of	nature,	it	was	an	abomination.	But	listen,	Rud’	–	and	he	leaned	forward
–	‘Onrack	loves	her	still.	Do	nothing	rash.	Leave	her	be.’
And	if	you	all	die?	If	the	Imass	are	discovered	and	then	hunted	down?
‘Trust	in	Seren	Pedac.	She	will	find	a	place	for	us.	Rud	–	stay	away	from	the
dragons.	When	they	come	–	stay	as	far	away	from	them	as	you	can.’
Silchas	so	warned	me,	Father.
‘Is	he	with	you?’
No.
Udinaas	nodded.	‘I’m	not	very	free	with	my	trust,	but	he	did	as	he	promised.
I	will	give	him	that.	Still,	I’m	glad	he’s	gone.’
Father,	Seren	Pedac	must	protect	her	child	–	he’s	in	great	danger.	Offer	her
the	protection	of	the	Imass.
Udinaas	lifted	his	brows.	‘That	just	might	work.	Good	thinking,	there.’
Not	me,	Father.	Silchas	Ruin.
‘You	begin	to	fade	from	my	eyes,	Rud—’
I	grow	weary.
‘Be	safe.	I	lo—’
And	then	he	was	gone.	Ryadd	blinked	his	eyes	clear,	stared	round	at	the
grim	cave	walls.	‘A	place	to	hide,’	he	whispered.	It’s	all	we	ask.	It’s	what	we	all
would	ask,	had	we	the	voice.	Just	leave	us	alone.
	
‘She	means	to	kill	us,’	Stavi	said,	with	eyes	that	did	not	belong	to	a	young	girl.
‘Me	and	Storii.	She	only	wants	Absi.’


The	dusk	was	drawing	its	shroud.	Torrent	had	found	some	bhederin	dung,
years	old,	and	they	huddled	around	the	flickering	flames.	He	watched	the
strange	flashes	of	colour	coming	from	the	crystal	shard	Absi	was	playing	with.
‘She	won’t,’	he	assured	the	twins.	‘She	means	to	use	you	to	bend	your
father	to	her	will.’
‘She	only	needs	Absi	for	that,’	said	Storii.	‘She’ll	kill	one	of	us	first,	to	get
his	attention.	And	then	the	other,	to	leave	him	with	only	his	son.	And	then	our
father	will	kneel	before	her.	He	will	surrender.’
‘You’re	thinking	too	much	–	both	of	you.	We’re	still	a	long	way	from
anything	happening.’
‘You’re	wrong,’	Stavi	said.	‘It’s	much	closer	than	you	think,	Torrent.’
To	that	he	had	nothing	to	say.	Even	my	lies	fail	me.	He	threw	another	chip
on	to	the	fire.	‘Wrap	up	now,	in	each	other ’s	arms	–	Absi,	go	to	your	sisters.
This	night	will	be	a	cold	one.’
‘She	took	us	north.’
‘Yes,	Stavi.’
‘Why?’
‘I	don’t	know	–	we	couldn’t	cross	that	desert.’	He	looked	around.	‘This
might	be	a	Hold,	for	all	I	know.	I	do	not	recognize	the	stars	–	and	those	jade
spears	are	gone.’
‘A	warren,’	said	Storii,	with	some	impatience.	‘We	already	knew	that.	But
still	she	took	us	north.’
‘Go	to	sleep,	all	of	you.’
When	the	three	children	settled	down,	Torrent	threw	the	one	fur	skin	they
possessed	over	them,	and	then	rose	to	stretch	his	legs	and	back.	Glancing	over
at	the	witch,	huddled	fifteen	paces	away,	he	was	reminded	of	a	corpse	he’d
once	found	–	one	of	the	old	women	of	the	village,	who’d	walked	out	in	the
winter	cold	to	find	a	place	to	die	in	solitude.	A	few	of	the	old	ones	still	did	such
things,	though	for	most	the	custom	had	faded.	A	withered	creature,	rising	from
the	spring	thaw’s	deep	snows,	kneeling	in	the	fold	of	a	hillside.
Maybe	it	wasn’t	a	bad	way	to	die.	Alone,	freezing	until	all	feeling	went
away,	and	then	sleep,	offering	one	last,	warm	sigh.	The	winds	had	torn	her	up,
he	recalled,	and	ice	shards	had	broken	through	her	skin	from	the	inside,	and
the	crows	had	found	her	eyes,	lips	and	ears.	And	what	was	left…
Olar	Ethil	lifted	her	head,	regarded	him	across	the	distance.
Torrent	turned	away.
‘Do	not	wander	too	far,’	she	warned	behind	him.	‘In	this	warren,	it	is	easy
to	get	lost	–	and	I	will	not	go	looking	for	you.’
Because	we’re	almost	there,	aren’t	we?


‘If	you	choose	to	run	away,	pup,	do	not	think	I	will	take	you	back.’
He	set	out,	with	no	intention	of	going	too	far.	Don’t	leave	us,	they	begged.	I
won’t.	Promise.	Ten	paces	on,	he	glanced	back.	‘Spirits	below!’	The	camp	had
vanished	–	now,	nothing	but	flat	tundra,	stretching	away	into	the	darkness.
Then	he	caught	a	glimmer	–	the	fire.	I	was	just	looking	in	the	wrong
direction.	Torrent	ran	towards	it.	Halfway	there	he	slowed,	and	then	halted.	Too
far	away	–	I	never	walked	this	far.	I	barely	walked	at	all!
But	he	could	see	a	figure	seated	before	the	feeble	flames.	Shivering,
Torrent	slowly	approached.	Olar	Ethil?	Is	that	you?	No.
Not	unless	you’ve	been	hiding	that	red	waistcoat.
The	man	was	reaching	into	one	voluminous	sleeve,	drawing	forth	silver
wine	cups,	a	large	decanter,	and	then	a	host	of	candied	fruit	and	baked	desserts.
I	am	dreaming.	All	of	this.	I	am	sleeping	close	to	the	children	right	now,
and	my	moans	are	heard	by	none	but	the	hag.
The	man	looked	up.	His	face	was	round,	softened	by	years	of	indolence.	A
city	dweller ’s	face.	He	gestured	with	a	plump	hand.	‘Quickly,	Kruppe	gestures
–	see?	There	is	little	time.	Come.	Sit.	Before	Kruppe	awakens	to	a	miserable
and	fraught	dawn	in	his	beleaguered	city.	You	are	the	keeper	of	my	daughters?’
‘What?	I—’
‘Kruppe	would	be	there,	if	he	could.	Pah!	It	is	ever	our	excuse,	and	paltry
and	pathetic	it	is.	But	then,	Kruppe	is	famous	for	his	energetic	seed	–	why,	it
has	been	known	to	swim	a	league	upriver	to	impregnate	a	baron’s	pretty
daughter	not	three	months	before	her	scandalous	marriage.	Well,	the	marriage
proved	scandalous	six	months	later,	anyway,	and	how	that	husband	was
castigated	and,	indeed,	disowned!	Now,	if	he’d	been	as	adventurous	as	she
would	have	liked,	why,	Kruppe’s	seed	would	have	come	to	the	door	only	to
find	it	barred,	yes?	So,	the	husband	got	all	that	he	deserved,	or	so	Judge
Kruppe	pronounces.’
‘Your	daughters…spirits	take	me,	I	see	the	resemblance	–	the	eyes,	the
gestures	with	the	hands	–	but	Hetan—’
‘Delicious	Hetan,	memories	return	in	a	stew	of	desire	and	alarm	–	no
matter.	Grievous	the	fate	of	their	mother.	Perilous	the	fate	of	her	children	–	and
we	must	do	something	about	that.	Why	are	you	not	eating?	Drinking?	Baruk’s
finest	fare.’
Torrent	pointed.	‘They…vanished.’
‘Oh	my.	The	dread	curse	of	unmindfulness.	Perhaps	next	time,	my
barbarian	friend.	But	time,	it	grows	short,	but	Kruppe	is	shorter	still.’	He
fluttered	a	hand.	‘Tell	me,	what	do	you	now	see	there?’
Torrent	squinted.	‘A	bow.	Quiver.	Arrows.’


‘Rhivi.	To	this	day	they	yearly	ply	me	with	useless	gifts,	for	reasons	that,
while	obscure,	are	no	doubt	well	deserved.	In	any	case,	I	give	them	all	away	as
a	measure	of	my	extraordinary	generosity.	Are	these	not	finer	weapons	than
the	ones	you	now	possess?’
‘My	bow	split.	I	had	nothing	with	which	to	repair	it.	The	arrow	shafts	have
dried	and	warped	–	I’d	intended	to	harden	them	one	last	time	but	forgot.	The
fletching—’
‘Before	you	go	on,	good	sir,	by	your	list	Kruppe	can	conclude	that	yes,
indeed,	this	Rhivi	offering	is	superior	to	that	which	you	now	possess.’
‘I	just	said	that.’
‘Did	you?	Excellent.	Take	them	and	be	off	with	you.	Quickly.	Let	it	never
be	said	that	Kruppe	is	a	neglectful	father,	no	matter	what	that	baron’s	daughter
later	claimed	in	court.	And	if	Kruppe	had	not	dramatically	revealed	that	she
was	now	sleeping	with	her	advocate,	why,	Kruppe	would	be	a	much	thinner
man	than	the	one	you	now	see	fading	before	you,	red	waistcoat	and	all…’
‘Wait!	I’m	lost!	She	said—’
‘Behind	you,	O	wily	scout.’
New	weapons	in	hand,	Torrent	slowly	turned,	to	see,	twenty	paces	away,
the	dying	fire,	the	children	knotted	up	beneath	the	fur,	and	Olar	Ethil	slumped
on	the	far	side.	He	swung	back	to	thank	the	man,	but	he	was	gone,	and	with	him
his	modest	hearth.	He	lifted	the	weapons	for	a	closer	look.	These	are	from	no
dream.	These	are	real,	and	finely	made.	He	set	the	string	and	tested	the	draw.
Spirits!	These	Rhivi	must	be	giants!
	
Olar	Ethil	barely	stirred	when	he	returned	to	the	fire.	‘Changed	your	mind,	did
you?’
Torrent	set	the	bow	and	quiver	down	beside	him.	‘Yes,’	he	said.
‘Just	as	well,	pup.	Warrens	are	dangerous	places	for	fools	such	as	you.	If
you	would	honour	the	vow	you	made,	you	would	do	well	to	stay	close	to	me.’
Torrent	tossed	the	last	chip	of	dung	into	the	fire,	watched	sparks	lift	into
the	night.	‘I	shall,	Bonecaster.’
Her	head	settled	once	more.	He	stared	across	at	her.	When	sleep	offers	its
final	sigh,	old	hag,	I’ll	be	there	to	wake	you.
Absi	rolled	over	in	his	sleep	and	in	a	soft,	sing-song	voice,	said,
‘Kralalalala.	Yip.’
But	Torrent	could	see	that	his	eyes	were	closed,	and	on	his	face	there	was	a
contented	smile.	The	child	licked	his	lips.
Saved	them	for	him,	did	you,	Kruppe?	Well	done.


	
Onos	T’oolan	halted,	slowly	turned.	Limned	in	jade	light,	a	thousand	T’lan
Imass	stood	facing	him.	So	many?	And,	swirling	there,	the	dust	of	hundreds
more.	Strangers.	Summoned	by	the	unveiling	of	Tellann.	Is	this	what	I	want?	Is
this	what	I	need?	All	at	once	he	felt	the	weight	of	their	attention,	fixed	so
remorselessly	upon	him,	and	almost	buckled.	Needs,	wants,	they	are	irrelevant.
This	is	what	I	will.	And	by	that	power	alone,	a	world	can	be	destroyed.	Or
shaped	anew.	He	slowly	straightened,	restored	by	the	thought,	and	the	strength
that	came	with	it.
When	I	am	done,	dust	shall	be	dust.	Nothing	more.	Not	a	thing	alive	with
secrets.	Or	thick	with	grief	and	horror.	Simply	dust.	‘Do	you	understand	me?’
‘We	do,	First	Sword.’
‘I	will	free	you.’
‘Not	yet,	First	Sword.’
‘I	would	walk	alone.’
‘Then	you	shall.’
His	army	fell	in	cascading	clouds,	save	two	figures	that	had	been	standing
well	back	in	the	T’lan	legion.
Onos	considered	them	for	a	time,	and	then	beckoned.
They	approached,	and	the	female	spoke.	‘First	Sword,	I	once	walked	these
lands	–	yet	I	did	not.’
‘You	are	named	Rystalle	Ev.’
‘Yes.’
‘Your	words	make	no	sense.’
She	shrugged,	pointed	northward.	‘There.	Something…troubling.’
‘Olar	Ethil—’
‘No,	First	Sword.	This	is	closer.’
‘You	are	curious,	Rystalle	Ev?’
The	warrior	beside	her,	Ulag	Togtil,	spoke.	‘There	are	lost	memories
within	her,	First	Sword.	Perhaps	they	were	taken	from	other	Imass	–	from
those	who	once	lived	here.	Perhaps	they	are	her	own.	That	which	will	be	found
to	the	north,	it	is	like	the	awakening	of	an	old	wound,	but	one	she	cannot	see.
Only	feel.’
‘What	you	seek,’	Rystalle	Ev	said	to	Onos,	‘is	threatened.	Or	so	I	fear.	But	I
cannot	be	certain.’
Onos	T’oolan	studied	the	two	of	them.	‘You	resist	me	well	–	and	I	see	the
strength	you	find	in	each	other.	It	is…strange.’
‘First	Sword,’	said	Ulag,	‘it	is	love.’


Onos	was	silent,	struggling	to	comprehend	the	warrior ’s	statement.
‘We	did	not	discover	it	from	within	ourselves,’	Rystalle	Ev	said.	‘We	found
it—’
‘Like	a	stone	in	a	stream,’	Ulag	said.	‘Bright,	wondrous—’
‘In	the	stream,	First	Sword,	of	your	thoughts.’
‘When	the	mountains	thunder,	and	the	ice	in	the	high	passes	at	last	shatters
to	spring’s	warmth.’	Ulag	lifted	a	withered	hand,	let	it	fall	again.	‘The	stream
becomes	a	torrent,	sweeping	all	down	with	it.	Cruel	flood.	And	yet…a	stone,
glimmering.’
‘This	is	not	possible,’	said	Onos	T’oolan.	‘There	is	no	such	thing	within
me.	The	fires	of	Tellann	have	burned	hollow	my	soul.	You	delude	yourselves.
Each	other.’
Rystalle	Ev	shrugged.	‘Delusions	of	comfort	–	are	these	not	the	gifts	of
love,	First	Sword?’
Onos	regarded	the	female.	‘Go,	then,	the	two	of	you.	Find	this	threat.
Determine	its	nature,	and	then	return.’
Ulag	spoke,	‘You	ask	nothing	more	of	us,	First	Sword?’
‘Rystalle	Ev,	does	it	hunt	us?’
‘No,	First	Sword.	I	think	not.	It	simply…is.’
‘Find	this	memory	of	yours,	Rystalle	Ev.	If	it	is	indeed	a	threat	to	me,	then	I
shall	destroy	it.’
Onos	T’oolan	watched	the	two	T’lan	Imass	trudge	northward.	The	First
Sword	had	drawn	the	power	of	Tellann	close,	protective	–	wearying	of	Olar
Ethil’s	assaults,	he	had	made	it	an	impenetrable	wall.	But	there	was	risk	to	this.
The	wall	left	him	blind	to	all	that	lay	beyond	it.
Threats	to	what	I	seek,	to	the	fate	I	desire	for	us.	Olar	Ethil	stands	alone
against	me.	I	can	think	of	no	one	else.	After	all,	I	do	not	flee	destruction,	but
strive	to	meet	it.	To	find	it,	in	the	place	of	my	choosing.	Who	would	deny	me
that?
Rystalle	Ev,	memories	are	powerless	–	did	the	Ritual	not	teach	us	this?
Find	what	troubles	you,	then	come	back.
Ulag	Togtil,	in	your	language	of	flowers…	I	would	know	more	of	this
glimmering	stone,	this	wondrous	impossibility.
He	resumed	his	walk.	Now	alone	on	the	ravaged	plain,	sword	tip	striking
sparks	from	stones	lying	embedded	in	the	ground.	In	his	wake,	a	building	wall
of	dust.	Alive	with	secrets.	Thick	with	grief	and	horror.	Rising	higher.
Rystalle	Ev	glanced	back,	watched	the	First	Sword	making	his	solitary	way
eastward,	the	dust	seething	behind	him.
‘He	does	not	know,	does	he?’


‘He	is	closed	too	much	within	himself,’	Ulag	Togtil	said.
‘See	the	cloud.	We	began	as	only	a	few	hundred.	We	left	a	thousand	to
march	behind	him,	as	he	demanded.	But	he	has	awakened	Tellann.	He	has
summoned.’
‘How	many	now,	Rystalle	Ev?’
‘Five	thousand?	Ten?’
‘That	wall,	Rystalle	Ev,	it	is	vast.’
‘Yes,’	she	whispered.
Another	moment	passed,	and	then	they	turned	and	set	off	northward.
	
The	mists	cleared	and	Gruntle	found	himself	padding	through	fresh	snow.	A
thousand	paces	to	his	left	two	splintered	masts	jutted	from	a	white	mound,	the
windblown	snow	heaped	in	a	high	dune	around	the	wreckage	of	a	ship.	Directly
ahead,	rocky	outcroppings	marked	the	foot	of	a	range	of	cliffs	split	by	narrow
gorges.
At	the	flat	foot	of	the	outcroppings	a	scattering	of	skeletal	hut	frames
crouched	in	the	lee	of	the	cliffs.	The	breath	of	raw	magic	was	heavy	in	the	air.
There	was	an	answering	thunder	in	his	chest,	and	he	could	feel	the	warrior
souls	within	him	gathering	close,	awakening	their	power.	He	drew	closer.
Hearing	a	coughing	grunt,	he	halted,	and	tensed	upon	seeing	two	thickshouldered	cats	emerge	from	a	cave.	Their	hide	was	banded	grey	and	black,
like	shadows	on	stone.	Their	upper	canines	reached	down	past	their	lower
jaws.	The	beasts	eyed	him,	small	ears	flattening	back	against	their	broad	skulls,
but	made	no	other	move.
Gruntle	stretched	his	jaws	in	a	yawn.	Just	beyond	the	huts,	a	rockfall	had
made	a	crevasse	into	a	cave,	and	from	that	dark	mouth	drifted	unsettling
emanations.	Fixing	his	eyes	upon	that	passage,	he	padded	forward.
The	two	sabre-toothed	cats	loped	towards	him.
Not	Soletaken.	Not	d’ivers.	These	are	true	beasts.	Hunters.	But	they	look…
hungry.	At	the	cave	mouth,	Gruntle	hesitated,	glancing	back	as	the	big	cats
approached.	Are	you	that	fearless?	What	do	you	want	with	me?
Having	drawn	closer	until	flanked	by	the	hooped	frames	of	two	huts,	the
cats	halted,	the	one	on	the	left	sitting	down	on	its	haunches,	and	then	flopping
on	to	the	thin	snow	and	rolling	on	to	its	back.
Tension	eased	from	Gruntle.	Hungry	for	company.	He	faced	the	cave	once
more,	and	then	slipped	into	the	darkness.	Instead	of	bitter	cold,	he	felt	heat,
gusting	damp	and	fetid	from	further	within.
She	is	here.	She	is	waiting	for	me.


Oh,	how	I	have	waited	for	this	moment.	Trake,	I	never	asked	for	this.	I
never	asked	for	you.	And	when	you	chose	me,	I	told	you,	again	and	again,	it	was
a	mistake.	Stonny,	if	you	could	see	me	now,	you’d	understand.	You’d	know	the
why…of	all	of	this.
I	can	almost	see	it	–	that	one,	quick	nod	–	to	tell	me	it’s	all	right.	I	won’t	be
coming	back,	but	it’s	all	right.	We	both	know	there	are	some	places	you	can’t
come	back	from.	Not	ever.
He	considered	sembling	and	then	decided	against	it.	She	would	meet	him	as
she	chose,	but	he	was	Trake’s	Mortal	Sword	–	at	least	on	this	day.	A	voice
whispered	inside	him,	distant,	hollow,	commanding	him	to	turn	round,	to	flee
this	place,	but	he	ignored	it.
The	crevasse	narrowed,	twisting,	before	opening	out	into	a	vast,	domed
cavern.
She	stood	facing	him,	a	squat,	muscular	woman	cloaked	in	the	fur	of	a
panther,	but	otherwise	naked.	Her	hooded	eyes	held	glints	of	gold,	her	round
face	was	framed	in	thick,	long	black	hair.	Her	broad,	fulllipped	mouth	was	set,
unwelcoming.
Behind	her,	on	a	cracked	hump	of	stone,	was	the	ruin	of	a	house.	Walls	had
caved	in	and	it	seemed	that	an	ancient	tree	had	grown	up	from	beneath	the
structure,	shattering	the	foundations,	but	the	tree	was	now	dead.	Sorrow	drifted
down	from	the	broken	edifice,	bitter	to	Gruntle’s	senses.
Above	it,	just	under	the	dome,	steam	roiled,	the	clouds	lit	from	behind	–	as
if	the	cavern’s	roof	was	glowing,	hot	enough	to	melt	the	stone.	Staring	up	at
this	manifestation,	Gruntle	felt	on	the	verge	of	falling	upward	–	pulled	into	a
realm	unimaginably	vast.	Vast,	yes,	but	not	empty.
She	spoke	in	his	mind,	that	now	familiar	deep,	liquid	voice.	‘Starvald
Demelain,	Mortal	Sword,	now	commanding	this	place,	transforming	the	very
stone	itself.	No	other	gate	remains.	As	for	you…is	this	your	god’s	panic?	You
should	not	be	here.	Tell	him,	Mortal	Sword	–	tell	my	child	–	I	will	not	permit
your	interference.’
Your	child?	You	claim	to	be	Trake’s	mother,	do	you?
He	sensed	a	flash	of	irritation.	‘First	Swords,	First	Empire,	First	Heroes	–
we	were	a	people	proud	of	such	things,	for	all	the	good	it	did	us.	I	have	birthed
many	children.	Most	of	them	are	now	dead.’
So	is	Trake.
‘First	Heroes	were	chosen,	Mortal	Sword,	to	become	gods,	and	so	escape
death.	All	that	he	surrendered	that	day	on	the	Plains	of	Lamatath	was	his
mortal	flesh.	But	like	any	god,	he	cannot	risk	becoming	manifest,	and	so	he
created	you.	His	Mortal	Sword,	the	weapon	of	his	will.’


Remind	me	to	thank	him	for	that.
‘You	must	stand	aside	here,’	she	said.	‘The	Eleint	are	coming.	If	you	seek	to
oppose	them,	you	will	die,	Mortal	Sword.’
No,	what	you	fear	is	that	I	shall	succeed.
‘I	will	not	permit	that.’
Then	it	is	you	and	I	who	shall	fight	in	this	cavern,	as	I	have	seen	in	my
dreams—
‘Dreams?	You	fool.	I	was	trying	to	warn	you.’
Black	fur…blood,	a	dying	breath	–	woman,	these	were	not	your	sendings.
‘There	is	little	time	left!	Gruntle,	do	not	challenge	this!’	She	lifted	her
arms	out	to	the	sides.	‘Look	at	me!	I	am	Kilava	Onass,	a	Bonecaster	of	the
Imass.	I	defied	the	Ritual	of	Tellann,	and	my	power	beggars	that	of	your	human
gods.	What	will	occur	here	not	even	I	can	prevent	–	do	you	understand	me?	It
is…necessary…’
He	had	expected	such	words,	but	still	his	hackles	rose.	It’s	what	we	always
hear,	isn’t	it?	From	generals	and	warlords	and	miserable	tyrants.	Justifying	yet
another	nightmare	epoch	of	slaughter.	Of	suffering,	misery	and	despair.	And
what	do	we	all	do?	We	duck	down	and	weather	it.	We	tell	ourselves	that	this	is
how	it	must	be	–	I	stood	on	the	roof	of	a	building,	and	all	around	me	people
were	dying.	And	by	my	hand	–	gods!	That	building	wept	blood!
For	what?	They	all	died	–	the	whole	fucking	city	–	all	those	people	–	they
just	died	anyway!
I	told	Trake	he	chose	wrongly.	I	was	never	a	soldier	–	I	despise	war.	I	detest
all	the	sordid	lies	about	glory	and	honour	–	you,	Kilava,	if	you	have	lived	as
long	as	you	say	you	have,	if	Trake	is	your	get,	then	you	have	seen	a	child	of
yours	kneel	to	war	–	as	if	war	itself	was	a	damned	god!
But	still,	you	want	him	to	live	–	you	want	your	child-god,	your	First	fucking
Hero,	to	go	on,	and	on.	Wars	without	end.	And	the	sword	shall	swing	down	and
they	shall	fall	–	for	ever	more!
‘Gruntle,	why	are	you	here?’
He	advanced,	feeling	the	blood	within	him	rise	to	a	boil.	Haven’t	you
guessed?	I’m	going	to	fight.	I’m	going	to	bring	your	son	down	–	here	and	now.
I’m	going	to	kill	the	bastard.	An	end	to	the	god	of	slaughter,	of	horror,	of	rape—
Kilava	howled	in	sudden	rage,	vanished	inside	a	blur	of	darkness.	Veered
into	a	panther	as	huge	as	Gruntle	himself,	she	coiled	to	spring.
In	his	mind,	he	saw	a	single,	quick	nod.	Yes.	Baring	his	fangs,	Gruntle
lunged	to	meet	her.
	


Far	to	the	northeast,	something	glittered.	Mappo	stood	studying	it	for	a	long
time,	as	the	sun	swelled	the	horizon	behind	him,	and	then	slunk,	red	and	sullen,
down	past	the	edge	of	the	world.	That	distant,	flashing	fire	held	on	for	a	while
longer,	like	burning	hills.
He	drew	the	waterskin	from	his	sack,	drank	deep,	and	then	crouched	down
to	probe	his	lacerated	feet.	The	soles	of	the	boots	had	been	torn	away	by	the
fierce	assault	of	crystal	shards.	Since	noon	he	had	been	trailing	blood,	each
smear	vanishing	beneath	a	frenzied	clump	of	capemoths,	as	if	flowers	sprang
from	his	every	footprint.	Such	is	the	gift	of	life	in	this	tortured	place.	He	drew
a	deep	breath.	The	muscles	of	his	legs	were	like	clenched	fists	beneath	him.	He
could	not	push	on	for	much	longer,	not	without	a	full	night	of	rest.
But	time	is	running	out.
Mappo	drank	once	more	and	then	stored	the	waterskin.	Shouldering	the
pack,	he	set	off.	Northeast.
The	Jade	Spears	slashed	a	path	into	the	night	sky,	and	green	light	bled
down,	transforming	the	desert	floor	into	a	luminescent	sea.	As	he	jogged,
Mappo	imagined	himself	crossing	the	basin	of	an	ocean.	The	bitter	cold	air
filled	his	lungs,	biting	like	ice	with	each	indrawn	breath.	From	this	place,	he
knew,	he	would	never	surface.	The	thought	disturbed	him	and	with	a	growl	he
cast	it	from	his	mind.
As	he	ran,	shooting	stars	raced	and	flared	overhead,	growing	into	an
emerald	storm,	criss-crossing	the	heavens.	He	thought	that,	if	he	listened
carefully	enough,	he	might	hear	them,	hissing	like	steam	as	they	skipped,	and
then	igniting	with	a	crack	of	thunder	once	they	began	their	final	descent.	But
the	rasping	was	only	his	own	breath,	the	thunder	nothing	but	the	drum	of	his
own	heart.	The	sky	stayed	silent,	and	the	burning	arrows	remained	far,	far
away.
The	sorrow	in	his	soul	had	begun	to	taste	sour.	Aged	and	dissolute,
moments	from	crumbling.	He	did	not	know	what	would	come	in	its	wake.
Resignation,	as	might	find	a	fatally	ill	man	in	his	last	days?	Or	just	an	exultant
eagerness	to	see	it	all	end?	At	the	moment,	even	despair	seemed	too	much
effort.
He	drew	closer,	eyes	fixing	on	what	seemed	a	range	of	tall	crystals,	green
as	glacial	ice,	rising	to	command	the	scene	ahead.	His	exhausted	mind
struggled	to	make	sense	of	it.	Something…order,	a	pattern…
Oh,	gods,	I’ve	seen	its	like	before.	In	stone.
Icarium—
Immortal	architect,	builder	of	monuments,	you	set	out	to	challenge	the
gods,	to	defy	the	weavers	of	time.	Maker	of	what	cannot	die,	but	with	each


edifice	you	raise	the	things	that	you	need	the	most	–	the	memories	the	rest	of	us
guard	so	zealously	–	and	they	arrive	stillborn	in	your	hands.	Each	one	as	dead
as	the	one	before.
And	look	at	us,	we	who	would	pray	to	forget	so	much	–	our	regrets,	our
foolish	choices,	the	hurts	we	delivered	over	a	lifetime	–	we	think	nothing	of	this
gift,	this	freedom	we	see	as	a	cage,	and	in	our	rattling	fury	we	wish	that	we
were	just	like	you.
Raiser	of	empty	buildings.	Visionary	of	silent	cities.
But	how	many	times	could	he	remind	Icarium	of	friendship?	The	precious
comfort	of	familiar	company?	How	many	times	could	he	fill	once	more	all
those	empty	rooms?	My	friend,	my	bottomless	well.	But	should	I	tell	you	the
truth,	then	you	would	take	your	own	life.
Is	that	so	bad	a	thing?	With	all	that	you	have	done?	Is	it?
And	now	you	are	threatened.	And	helpless.	I	feel	this.	I	know	it	as	truth.	I
fear	that	you	will	be	awakened,	in	all	your	rage,	and	that	this	time	there	will	be
more	than	just	humans	within	reach	of	your	sword.	This	time	there	will	be	gods.
Someone	wants	you,	Icarium,	to	be	their	weapon.
But…if	I	reach	you	first,	I	could	awaken	you	to	who	you	are.	I	could	speak
the	truth	of	your	history,	friend.	And	when	you	set	the	point	of	the	dagger	to
your	chest,	I	could	stand	back.	Do	nothing.	I	could	honour	you	with	the	one
thing	I	still	had	–	myself.	I	could	be	the	witness	to	your	one	act	of	justice.
I	could	talk	you	into	killing	yourself.
Is	it	possible?	That	this	is	where	friendship	can	take	us?
What	would	I	do	then?
I	would	bury	you.	And	weep	over	the	stones.	For	my	loss,	as	friends	will	do.
The	city	was	his	genius	–	Mappo	could	see	that	truth	in	every	line	–	but	as
he	drew	closer,	squinting	at	the	strangely	flowing	light	and	shadows	in	the
facets	of	crystal,	he	saw	evidence	of	occupation.	His	steps	slowed.
Broken	husks	of	fruit,	fragments	of	clothing,	the	musty	smell	of	dried
faeces.
The	sun	was	beginning	to	rise	–	had	it	been	that	far?	He	approached	the
nearest,	broadest	avenue.	As	he	passed	between	two	angular	buildings,	he	froze
at	a	flicker	of	movement	–	there,	reflected	from	a	facet	projecting	from	the
wall	to	his	right.	And	as	he	stared,	he	saw	it	again.
Children.	Walking	past.
Yet	no	one	was	here	–	no	one	but	me.
They	were	wending	their	way	out	of	the	city	–	hundreds	upon	hundreds	of
children.	Stick-thin	limbs	and	bellies	swollen	with	starvation.	As	he	watched	the
procession,	he	saw	not	a	single	adult	among	them.


Mappo	walked	on,	catching	glimpses	in	the	crystals	of	their	brief
occupation,	their	squatting	presence	amidst	palatial	–	if	cold	–	splendour.
Icarium,	I	begin	to	understand.	And	yet,	cruellest	joke	of	all,	this	was	the	one
place	you	could	never	find	again.
Every	time	you	said	you	felt	close…this	city	was	the	place	you	sought.
These	crystal	machines	of	memory.	And	the	trail	you	hunted	–	it	did	not	matter
if	we	were	on	another	continent,	it	did	not	matter	if	we	were	half	a	world	away
–	that	trail	was	one	of	remembering.	Remembering	this	city.
He	went	on,	piecing	together	the	more	recent	history,	the	army	of	children,
and	many	times	he	caught	sight	of	one	girl,	her	mouth	crusted	with	sores,	her
hair	bleached	of	all	colour.	And	huge	eyes	that	seemed	to	somehow	find	his
own	–	but	that	was	impossible.	She	was	long	gone,	with	all	the	other	children.
She	could	not	be—
Ah!	This	is	the	one!	Voicing	songs	of	incantation	–	the	banisher	of	the
d’ivers.	Opals	gems	shards	–	this	is	the	child.
He	had	come	to	a	central	square.	She	was	there,	looking	out	at	him	from	a
tilted	spire	of	quartz.	He	walked	until	he	stood	in	front	of	her,	and	her	eyes
tracked	him	all	the	way.
‘You	are	just	a	memory,’	Mappo	said.	‘It	is	a	function	of	the	machine,	to
trap	the	life	passing	through	it.	You	cannot	be	looking	at	me	–	no,	someone	has
walked	my	path,	someone	has	come	to	stand	before	you	here.’	He	swung
round.
Fifteen	paces	away,	before	the	sealed	door	of	a	narrow	structure,	Mappo
saw	a	boy,	tall,	clutching	a	bundled	shape.	Their	eyes	met.
I	am	between	them.	That	is	all.	They	do	not	see	me.	They	see	each	other.
But	the	boy’s	eyes	pinned	him	like	knife	points.	And	he	spoke.	‘Do	not	turn
away.’
Mappo	staggered	as	if	struck.
Behind	him,	the	girl	said,	‘Icarias	cannot	hold	us.	The	city	is	troubled.’
He	faced	her	again.	A	boy	had	come	up	beside	her,	in	his	scrawny	arms	a
heap	of	rubbish.	He	studied	the	girl’s	profile	with	open	adoration.	She	blew
flies	from	her	lips.
‘Badalle.’	The	tall	boy’s	voice	drifted	past	him.	‘What	did	you	dream?’
The	girl	smiled.	‘No	one	wants	us,	Rutt.	Not	one	–	in	their	lives	they	won’t
change	a	thing	to	help	us.	In	their	lives	they	make	ever	more	of	us,	but	when
they	say	they	care	about	our	future,	they’re	lying.	The	words	are	empty.
Powerless.	But	I	have	seen	words	of	real	power,	Rutt,	and	each	one	is	a
weapon.	A	weapon.	That	is	why	adults	spend	a	lifetime	blunting	them.’	She
shrugged.	‘No	one	likes	getting	cut.’


When	the	boy	spoke	again,	it	was	as	if	he	stood	in	Mappo’s	place.	‘What
did	you	dream,	Badalle?’
‘In	the	end	we	take	our	language	with	us.	In	the	end,	we	leave	them	all
behind.’	She	turned	to	the	boy	beside	her	and	frowned.	‘Throw	them	away.	I
don’t	like	them.’
The	boy	shook	his	head.
‘What	did	you	dream,	Badalle?’
The	girl’s	gaze	returned,	centring	on	Mappo’s	face.	‘I	saw	a	tiger.	I	saw	an
ogre.	I	saw	men	and	women.	Then	a	witch	came	and	took	their	children	away.
And	not	one	of	them	tried	to	stop	her.’
‘It	wasn’t	like	that,’	Mappo	whispered.	But	it	was.
‘Then	one	rode	after	them	–	he	wasn’t	much	older	than	you,	Rutt.	I	think.
He	was	hard	to	see.	A	ghost	got	in	the	way.	He	was	young	enough	to	still	listen
to	his	conscience.’
‘It	wasn’t	like	that!’
‘Is	that	all?’	asked	the	boy	named	Rutt.
‘No,’	she	replied,	‘but	he’s	heard	enough.’
Mappo	cried	out,	staggered	back,	away.	He	shot	a	look	back	and	saw	her
eyes	tracking	him.	And	in	his	skull,	she	said,	‘Ogre,	I	can’t	save	you,	and	you
can’t	save	him.	Not	from	himself.	He	is	your	Held,	but	every	child	wakes	up.	In
this	world,	every	child	wakes	up	–	and	it	is	what	all	of	you	fear	the	most.	Look
at	Rutt.	He	has	Held	in	his	arms.	And	you,	you	go	to	find	your	Held,	to	fill	your
arms	once	more.	Look	at	Rutt.	He	is	terrified	of	Held	waking	up.	He’s	just	like
you.	Now	hear	my	poem.	It	is	for	you.
‘She	made	you	choose	which	child	to	save.
And	you	chose.
One	to	save,	the	others	to	surrender.
It	is	not	an	easy	choice
But	you	make	it	every	day
That	is	not	an	easy	truth
But	the	truth	is	every	day
One	of	us	among	those
You	walk	away	from
Dies
And	there	are	more	truths
In	this	world
Than	I	can	count


But	each	time	you	walk	away
The	memory	remains
And	no	matter	how	far	or	fast
You	run
The	memory	remains.’
Mappo	spun,	fled	the	square.
Echoes	pursued	him.	Carrying	her	voice.	In	Icarias,	memory	remains.	In
Icarias	waits	the	tomb	of	all	that	is	forgotten.	Where	memory	remains.	Where	he
would	have	found	his	truth.	Do	you	choose	to	save	him	now,	Ogre?	Do	you
choose	to	bring	him	to	his	city?	When	he	opens	his	own	tomb,	what	will	he
find?
What	do	any	of	us	find?
Will	you	dare	map	your	life,	Ogre,	by	each	dead	child	left	in	your	wake?
You	see,	I	dreamed	a	dream	I	cannot	tell	Rutt,	because	I	love	him.	I	dreamed	of
a	tomb,	Ogre,	filled	with	every	dead	child.
It	seems,	then,	that	we	are	all	builders	of	monuments.
Shrieking,	Mappo	ran.	And	ran,	leaving	a	trail	of	bloody	footprints,	and	on
all	sides,	his	reflection.	Forever	trapped.
Because	the	memory	remains.
	
‘Will	you	ever	tire,	Setch,	of	gloom	and	doom?’
Sechul	Lath	glanced	across	at	Errastas.	‘I	will,	the	moment	you	tire	of	all
that	blood	on	your	hands.’
Errastas	snarled.	‘And	is	it	your	task	to	ever	remind	me	of	it?’
‘To	be	honest,	I	don’t	know.	I	suppose	I	could	carve	out	my	own	eyes,	and
then	bless	my	newfound	blindness—’
‘Do	you	now	mock	my	wound?’
‘No,	forgive	me.	I	was	thinking	of	the	poet	who	one	day	decided	he’d	seen
too	much.’
Behind	them,	Kilmandaros	asked,	‘And	did	his	self-mutilation	change	the
world?’
‘Irrevocably,	Mother.’
‘How	so?’	she	asked.
‘Eyes	can	be	hard	as	armour.	They	can	be	hardened	to	see	yet	feel	nothing,
if	the	will	is	strong	enough.	You’ve	seen	such	eyes,	Mother	–	you	as	well,
Errastas.	They	lie	flat	in	the	sockets,	like	stone	walls.	They	are	capable	of


witnessing	any	and	every	atrocity.	Nothing	gets	in,	nothing	gets	out.	Now,	that
poet,	he	removed	those	stones.	Tore	away	the	veil,	permanently.	So	what	was
inside,	well,	it	all	poured	out.’
‘But,	being	blinded,	nothing	that	was	outside	could	find	a	way	in.’
‘Indeed,	Mother,	but	by	then	it	was	too	late.	It	had	to	be,	if	you	think	about
it.’
‘So	it	poured	out,’	grumbled	Errastas.	‘Then	what?’
‘I’d	hazard	it	changed	the	world.’
‘Not	for	the	better,’	Kilmandaros	muttered.
‘I	have	no	burning	need,	Errastas,’	said	Sechul	Lath,	‘to	cure	the	ills	of	the
world.	This	one	or	any	other.’
‘Yet	you	observe	critically—’
‘If	all	honest	observation	ends	up	sounding	critical,	is	it	the	honesty	you
then	reject,	or	the	act	of	observation?’
‘Why	not	both?’
‘Indeed,	why	not	both?	Abyss	knows,	it’s	easier	that	way.’
‘Why	do	you	bother,	then?’
‘Errastas,	I	am	left	with	two	choices.	I	could	weep	for	a	reason,	or	weep
for	no	reason.	In	the	latter	we	find	madness.’
‘And	is	the	former	any	different?’	Kilmandaros	asked.
‘Yes.	A	part	of	me	chooses	to	believe	that	if	I	weep	long	enough,	I’ll	weep
myself	out.	And	then,	in	the	ashes	–	in	the	aftermath	–	will	be	born	something
else.’
‘Like	what?’	Errastas	demanded.
Sechul	Lath	shrugged.	‘Hope.’
‘See	this	hole	in	my	face,	Knuckles?	I	too	weep,	but	my	tears	are	blood.’
‘My	friend,	at	last	you	have	become	the	true	god	of	all	the	living	worlds.
When	you	finally	stand	at	the	very	pinnacle	of	all	creation,	we	shall	raise
statues	marking	your	holy	wounding,	symbol	of	life’s	ceaseless	suffering.’
‘This	I	will	accept,	so	long	as	the	blood	leaking	down	my	face	isn’t	my
own.’
Kilmandaros	grunted.	‘No	doubt	your	worshippers	will	be	happy	to	bleed
for	you,	Errastas,	until	the	Abyss	swallows	us	all.’
‘And	I	shall	possess	a	thirst	to	match	their	generosity.’
‘When	we—’
But	Kilmandaros’s	hand	suddenly	gripped	Sechul’s	shoulder	and	spun	him
round.	‘Friends,’	she	said	in	a	rumble,	‘it	is	time.’
They	faced	the	way	they	had	come.
From	the	ridge	where	they	stood,	the	basin	to	the	west	stretched	out	flat,


studded	with	rocks	and	tufts	of	wiry	grass,	for	as	far	as	they	could	see.	But
now,	under	the	mid-morning	light,	the	vista	had	begun	to	change.	Spreading	in
a	vast,	curved	shadow,	the	ground	was	bleaching,	all	colour	draining	away.
From	grey	to	white,	until	it	seemed	that	the	entire	basin	was	a	thing	of	bone	and
ash,	and	in	the	distance	–	at	the	very	centre	of	this	blight	–	the	earth	had	begun
to	rise.
‘She	awakens,’	said	Kilmandaros.
‘And	now,’	whispered	Errastas,	his	lone	eyes	glittering	bright,	‘we	shall
speak	of	dragons.’
A	hill	where	no	hill	had	been	before,	lifting	to	command	the	horizon,
bulging,	swelling	–	a	mountain—
They	saw	it	explode,	a	billowing	eruption	of	earth	and	stone.
Huge	cracks	ripped	across	the	basin	floor.	The	entire	ridge	rippled	under
them	and	all	three	Elder	Gods	staggered.
As	the	column	of	dust	and	ashes	rose	skyward,	as	the	cloud	opened	like	a
mushroom	to	fill	half	the	sky,	the	sound	finally	reached	them,	solid	as	a
rushing	wall,	igniting	stunning	agony	inside	their	skulls.	Sechul	and	Errastas
were	battered	to	the	ground,	sent	tumbling.	Even	Kilmandaros	was	thrown
from	her	feet	–	Sechul	stared	across	at	her,	saw	her	mouth	opened	wide	in	a
terrible	scream	that	he	could	not	hear	amidst	the	howling	wind,	the	crushing
thunder	of	that	eruption.
Twisting	round,	he	stared	at	the	vast,	roiling	cloud.	Korabas.	You	are
returned	to	the	world.
Within	the	maelstrom	spinning	vortices	of	dirt,	dust	and	smoke	had	begun
to	form.	He	watched	them	coil,	pushed	out	to	the	sides	as	if	buffeted	by	some
unseen	column	of	rising	air	at	the	very	centre.	Sechul	frowned.
Her	wings?	Are	those	made	by	her	wings?	Elder	blood!
As	the	roar	died	away,	Sechul	Lath	heard	Errastas.	Laughing.
‘Mother?’
Kilmandaros	was	climbing	to	her	feet.	She	glanced	across	at	her	son.
‘Korabas	Otataral	iras’Eleint.	Otataral,	Sechul,	is	not	a	thing	–	it	is	a	title.’	She
turned	to	Errastas.	‘Errant!	Do	you	know	its	meaning?’
The	one-eyed	Elder	God’s	laughter	slowly	died.	He	looked	away.	‘What	do
I	care	for	ancient	titles?’	he	muttered.
‘Mother?’
She	faced	the	terrible	blight	of	earth	and	sky	to	the	west.	‘Otas’taral.	In
every	storm	there	is	an	eye,	a	place	of…stillness.	Otas’taral	means	the	Eye	of
Abnegation.	And	now,	upon	the	world,	we	have	birthed	a	storm.’
Sechul	Lath	sank	back	down,	covered	his	face	with	dust-stained	hands.	Will


I	ever	tire?	Yes.	I	have.	See	what	we	have	unleashed.	See	what	we	have	begun.
Errastas	staggered	close,	falling	to	his	knees	beside	Sechul,	who	looked	up
into	that	ravaged	face	and	saw	both	manic	glee	and	brittle	terror.	The	Errant
smiled	a	ghastly	smile.	‘Do	you	see,	Setch?	They	have	to	stop	her!	They	have
no	choice!’
Yes,	please.	Stop	her.
‘She	has	begun	to	move,’	Kilmandaros	announced.
Sechul	pushed	Errastas	to	one	side	and	sat	up.	But	the	sky	revealed	nothing:
too	much	dust,	too	much	smoke	and	ash	–	the	pall	had	devoured	two-thirds	of
the	heavens,	and	the	last	third	looked	sickly,	as	if	in	retreat.	The	unnatural
gloom	was	settling	fast.	‘Where?’	he	demanded.
His	mother	pointed.	‘Track	her	by	the	ground.	For	now,	it	is	all	we	can	do.’
Sechul	Lath	stood.
‘There,’	she	said.
A	broad	swathe	of	bleached	death,	stretching	in	a	line.	‘Northeast,’	he
whispered,	watching	the	slow,	devastating	blight	cutting	its	slash	across	the
landscape.	‘All	that	lies	beneath	her…’
‘Where	she	passes,’	said	Kilmandaros,	‘no	life	shall	ever	return.	The
stillness	of	matter	becomes	absolute.	She	is	the	Eye	of	Abnegation,	the	storm’s
centre,	where	all	must	die.’
‘Mother,	we	have	gone	too	far.	This	time—’
‘It’s	too	late!’	shrieked	Errastas.	‘She	is	the	heart	of	sorcery!	Without	the
Eye	of	Abnegation,	there	can	be	no	magic!’
‘What?’
But	Kilmandaros	was	shaking	her	head.	‘It	is	not	as	simple	as	that.’
‘What	isn’t?’	Sechul	demanded.
‘Now	that	she	is	freed,’	she	said,	‘the	Eleint	must	kill	her.	They	have	no
choice.	Their	power	is	magical,	and	Korabas	will	kill	all	that	magic	depends
upon.	And	since	she	is	immune	to	their	sorcery,	it	must	be	by	fang	and	claw,
and	that	will	demand	every	Eleint	–	every	storm,	until	T’iam	herself	is
awakened.	And	as	for	K’rul,	well,	he	can	no	longer	refuse	the	Errant’s
summons	–	he	was	the	one	who	harnessed	the	chaos	of	the	dragons	in	the	first
place.’
‘They	have	to	kill	her!’	cried	Errastas.	The	blood	leaking	from	his	eye	was
now	black	with	dust.
Kilmandaros	grunted	non-committally.	‘If	they	truly	kill	her,	Errastas,	then
the	storm	dies.’	She	faced	him.	‘But	you	knew	this	–	or	at	least	guessed	the
truth.	What	you	seek	is	the	death	of	all	sorcery	bound	to	laws	of	control.	You
seek	to	create	a	realm	where	no	mortal	can	hurt	you,	ever	again.	A	realm


where	the	blood	is	sacrificed	in	our	name,	but	in	truth	we	have	no	power	to
intervene,	even	if	we	wanted	to.	You	desire	worship,	Errastas,	but	one	where
you	need	give	nothing	in	return.	Have	I	guessed	right?’
Sechul	Lath	shook	his	head.	‘They	cannot	kill	her—’
Errastas	wheeled	on	him.	‘But	they	must!	I	told	you!	I	will	see	them	all
destroyed!	The	meddling	gods	–	I	want	our	children	dead!	K’rul	will
understand	–	he	will	see	that	there’s	no	other	way,	no	way	to	end	this	venal,
pathetic	tragedy.’	He	stabbed	a	finger	at	Sechul.	‘You	thought	this	was	a	game?
Cheating	with	the	knuckles,	and	then	a	wink	to	the	moll?	I	summoned	the	Elder
Gods!	K’rul	thinks	to	ignore	me?	No!	I	have	forced	his	hand!’	He	suddenly
cackled,	his	fingers	twitching.	‘She	is	a	blood	clot	let	loose	in	his	veins!	And
she	will	find	his	brain,	and	he	will	die!	I	am	the	Master	of	the	Holds,	and	I	will
not	be	ignored!’
Sechul	Lath	staggered	back	from	Errastas.	‘They	chained	her	the	first
time,’	he	said,	‘because	killing	her	was	not	an	option	–	not	if	they	wanted	to
keep	the	warrens	alive.’	He	whirled	on	Kilmandaros.	‘Mother	–	did	you	–
did…’
She	turned	away.	‘I	grew	tired	of	this,’	she	said.
Tired?	‘But	–	but	the	heart	of	the	Crippled	God—’
Errastas	spat.	‘What	do	we	care	about	that	dried-up	slab	of	meat?	He’ll	be
as	dead	as	the	rest	of	them	by	the	time	this	is	done!	So	will	the	Forkrul	Assail	–
and	all	the	rest	who’d	think	to	challenge	me!	You	didn’t	believe	me,	Setch	–
you	chose	to	not	take	me	seriously	–	again.’
Sechul	Lath	shook	his	head.	‘I	understand	you	now.	Your	real	enemy	is	the
Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Dragons	who	are	warrens	–	all	that	new,	raw
power.	But	you	knew	that	you	could	not	hope	to	match	that	Master	–	not	so
long	as	the	gods	and	warrens	remained	dominant.	So	you	devised	a	plan	to	kill
it	all.	The	Deck,	the	sorcery	of	the	Dragons,	the	Master	–	the	gods.	But	what
makes	you	think	that	the	Holds	will	somehow	prove	immune	to	the	Eye	of
Abnegation?’
‘Because	the	Holds	are	Elder,	you	fool.	It	was	K’rul’s	bartering	with	the
Eleint	that	made	this	whole	mess	–	that	brought	the	warrens	into	the	realms,
that	forced	order	upon	the	chaos	of	the	Old	Magic.	K’rul’s	conniving	that	saw
one	dragon	selected	among	the	Grand	Clan,	chosen	to	become	the	Negator,	the
Otataral,	while	all	the	others	would	chain	themselves	to	aspects	of	magic.	They
brought	law	to	sorcery,	and	now	I	will	shatter	that	law.	For	ever	more!’
‘K’rul	sought	peace—’
‘He	sought	to	trump	us!	And	so	he	did	–	but	that	ends	today!	Today!	Sechul
Lath,	did	you	not	agree	to	end	it	all?	By	your	words,	you	agreed!’


I	wasn’t	serious.	I’m	never	serious.	That’s	my	curse.	‘So,	Errastas,	if	you
will	not	seek	the	heart	of	the	Crippled	God,	where	will	you	go	now?’
‘That	is	my	business,’	he	snapped,	turning	to	study	the	bleached	scar
crossing	the	land.	‘Far	away.’	He	faced	Sechul	again.	‘Mael	finally
comprehends	what	we	have	done	here	–	but	tell	me,	do	you	see	him?	Does	he
charge	towards	us	now	in	all	his	fury?	He	does	not.	And	Ardata?	Know	that	she
too	now	schemes	anew.	As	does	Olar	Ethil	–	the	Elders	once	more	approach
ascension,	a	return	to	rule.	There	is	much	to	be	done.’
The	Errant	set	off,	then.	Southward.
He	flees.
Sechul	turned	to	Kilmandaros.	‘I	see	my	path	now,	Mother,	from	this
moment	onward.	Shall	I	describe	it	for	you?	I	see	myself	wandering,	lost	and
alone.	With	only	a	growing	madness	for	company.	It	is	a	vision	–	I	see	it	clear
as	day.	Well,’	and	his	laugh	was	dry,	‘every	pantheon	needs	a	fool,	drooling
and	wild-eyed.’
‘My	son,’	she	said,	‘it	is	only	a	plan.’
‘Excuse	me?	What?’
‘The	Errant.	What	we	have	unleashed	here	cannot	be	controlled.	Now,
more	than	ever,	the	future	is	unknown,	no	matter	what	he	chooses	to	believe.’
‘Can	she	be	chained	again,	Mother?’
She	shrugged.	‘Anomander	Rake	is	dead.	The	other	Eleint	who	partook	of
the	chaining,	they	too	are	now	dead.’
‘K’rul—’
‘She	is	loose	within	him.	He	can	do	nothing.	The	Eleint	who	come	will
fight	her.	They	will	seek	to	take	her	down	–	but	Korabas	has	long	ago
surrendered	her	sanity,	and	she	will	fight	them	to	the	bitter	end.	I	expect	most
will	die.’
‘Mother,	please.’
Kilmandaros	sighed.	‘You	will	not	stay	with	me,	my	son?’
‘To	witness	your	meeting	with	Draconus?	I	think	not.’
She	nodded.
‘Draconus	will	kill	you!’
She	faced	him	with	burning	eyes.	‘It	was	only	a	plan,	my	beloved	son.’


Book	Six

To	One	in	Chains

	


	

If	you	knew	where	this	path	led
Would	you	have	walked	it?
If	you	knew	the	pain	at	love’s	solemn	end
Would	you	have	awakened	it?
In	darkness	the	wheel	turns
In	darkness	the	dust	dims
In	red	fire	the	wheel	burns
In	darkness	the	sun	spins
If	you	knew	the	thought	in	your	head
Would	you	have	spoken	it?
If	by	this	one	word	you	betrayed	a	friend
Would	you	have	uttered	it?
In	darkness	the	wheel	turns
In	darkness	the	dust	dims
In	red	fire	the	wheel	burns
In	darkness	the	sun	spins
If	you	knew	the	face	of	the	dead
Would	you	have	touched	it?
If	by	this	coin	a	soul’s	journey	to	send
Would	you	have	stolen	it?
In	darkness	the	wheel	turns
In	darkness	the	dust	dims
In	red	fire	the	wheel	burns
In	darkness	the	sun	spins


Sparak	Chant
Psalm	VII	‘The	Vulture’s	Laugh’
The	Sparak	Nethem


Chapter	Seventeen

The	faces	all	in	rows	will	wait
As	I	take	each	in	my	hands
Remembering	what	it	is
To	be	who	I	am	not.
Will	all	these	struggles
Fade	into	white?
Or	melt	like	snow	on	stone
In	the	heat	of	dawn?
Do	you	feel	my	hands?
These	weathered	wings
Of	dreams	of	flight
–	stripped	–
Are	gifts	worn	down.
Still	I	hold	fast	and	climb	sure
Through	your	eyes	–
Who	waits	for	me
Away	from	the	ravaged	nests
The	scenes	of	violence
Any	searching	will	easily	find
The	broken	twigs
The	tufts	of	feather	and	hair
The	spilled	now	drying	–
Did	you	spring	alight
Swift	away	unharmed?
So	many	lies	we	leave	be
The	sweet	feeding	to	make	us	strong
But	the	rows	are	unmoving
And	we	journey	without	a	step
What	I	dare	you	to	lose
I	surrendered	long	ago
But	what	I	beg	you	to	find
Must	I	then	lose?


In	these	rows	there	are	tales
For	every	line,	every	broken	smile
Draw	close	then
And	dry	these	tears
For	I	have	a	story	to	tell
The	Unwitnessed
Fisher	kel	Tath
	from	butcher	hooks.	They
twisted	slowly,	aimlessly.	They	dripped,	but	the	drips	had	begun	to	slow.	Lying
on	her	side	atop	the	packs	of	wrapped	food,	Badalle	could	let	her	head	sink
down	on	one	side	and	see	the	rough	trail	stretching	away	behind	them.	Not
much	was	being	left	behind	now	–	barring	the	bodies	–	and	beneath	the	light	of
the	Jade	Strangers	those	pale	shapes	looked	like	toppled	statues	of	marble
lining	a	long-abandoned	road.	Things	with	their	stories	gone,	their	histories
for	ever	lost.	When	she	tired	of	that	view,	she	could	set	her	gaze	the	opposite
way,	looking	ahead,	and	from	her	vantage	point	the	column	was	like	a	swollen
worm,	with	thousands	of	heads	upon	its	elongated	back,	each	one	of	them	slave
to	the	same	crawling	body.
Every	now	and	then	the	worm	cast	off	a	part	of	it	that	had	died,	and	these
pieces	were	pushed	out	to	the	sides.	Hands	would	reach	down	from	those
walking	past,	collecting	up	fragments	of	clothing	which	would	be	used	during
the	day,	stitched	together	to	make	flies	–	gifts	of	shade	from	the	dead	–	and	by
the	time	those	discarded	pieces	came	close	to	her,	why,	they’d	be	mostly	naked,
and	they’d	have	become	marble	statues.	Because,	when	things	fail,	you	topple
the	statues.
Directly	before	her,	the	bared	backs	of	the	haulers	glistened	with	precious
sweat	as	they	strained	in	their	yokes.	And	the	thick	ropes	twisted	as	they	went
taut	and	gusted	out	breaths	of	glittering	dust	all	down	their	length.	They	call
these	soldiers	heavies.	Some	of	them	anyway.	The	ones	who	don’t	stop,	who
don’t	fall	down,	who	don’t	die.	The	ones	who	scare	the	others	and	make	them
keep	going.	Until	they	fall	over	dead.	Heavies.	These	soldiers.
She	thought	back.	The	sun	had	been	spilling	out	along	the	horizon.	The	day
was	going	away,	and	it	had	been	a	day	when	no	one	had	spoken,	when	the
Snake	had	been	silent.	She	had	been	walking	three	paces	behind	Rutt,	and	Rutt
walked	hunched	over	around	Held,	who	was	huddled	in	his	arms,	and	Held’s
eyes	were	closed	against	the	glare	–	but	then,	they	were	always	closed,	because
so	much	in	the	world	was	too	hard	to	look	at.
THESE	SOLDIERS.	THE	TWO	WORDS	HUNG	IN	HER	MIND	LIKE	MEAT


This	would	be	their	last	night.	They	knew	it	–	the	whole	Snake	knew	it.
Badalle	had	said	nothing	to	change	their	minds.	Perhaps	she	too	had	given	up	–
it	was	hard	to	know	for	certain.	Defiance	could	hold	its	shape,	even	when	it	was
made	of	nothing	but	cinders	and	ash.	Anger	could	look	hot	to	the	touch,	when
in	truth	it	was	lifeless	and	cold.	In	this	way,	the	world	could	deceive.	It	could
lie,	and	in	lying	it	invited	delusion.	It	invited	the	idea	that	what	it	was	was	true.
In	this	way,	the	world	could	make	belief	a	fatal	illness.
She	stared	down	at	the	backs	of	the	heavies,	and	remembered	more.
	
Rutt’s	steps	wavered.	Halted.	His	voice	cracked	as	it	made	a	wordless	sound,
and	then	it	cracked	a	second	time,	and	he	said,	‘Badalle.	The	flies	are	walking
now.’
She	looked	down	at	her	legs,	to	see	if	they	could	take	her	up	alongside
him,	and,	slowly,	agonizingly,	they	did.	And	far	ahead,	to	the	place	where	he
was	looking	with	his	blinded,	closed-up	eyes,	she	saw	swarming	shapes,	black
as	they	came	out	of	the	sunset’s	red	glare.	Black	and	seething.	Flies,	walking	on
two	legs,	one	clump,	then	another	and	another,	emerging	from	the	blood-light.
‘The	flies,’	said	Rutt,	‘are	walking.’
But	she	had	sent	them	away.	Her	last	command	of	power,	the	one	that	used
her	up.	And	now,	this	day,	she	had	been	blowing	nothing	but	air	from	her	lips.
Badalle	squinted.
‘I	want	to	be	blind	again,	Badalle.’
She	studied	the	puffed	masses	filling	his	sockets.	‘You	still	are,	Rutt.’
‘Then…they	are	in	my	head.	The	flies…in	my	head.’
‘No.	I	see	them	too.	But	that	seething	–	it	is	just	the	sun’s	light	behind	them.
Rutt,	they	are	people.’
He	almost	fell	then,	but	widened	his	stance	and,	with	terrible	grace,	he
straightened.	‘Fathers.’
‘No.	Yes.	No.’
‘Did	we	turn	round,	Badalle?	Did	we	somehow	turn	round?’
‘No.	See,	the	west	–	we	have	walked	into	the	sun,	every	day,	every	dusk.’
She	was	silent	then.	The	Snake	was	coiling	up	behind	the	two	of	them,	its
scrawny	body	of	bones	drawing	together,	as	if	that	could	keep	it	safe.	The
figures	from	the	sunset	were	coming	closer.	‘Rutt,	there	are…children.’
‘What	is	that,	upon	their	skin	–	their	faces?’
She	saw	the	one	father	among	them,	his	beard	grey	and	rust,	his	eyes
suffering	the	way	the	eyes	of	some	fathers	did	–	as	they	sent	their	young	ones
away	for	the	last	time.	But	the	faces	of	the	children	drew	her	attention.	Tattoos.


‘They	have	marked	themselves,	Rutt.’	Droplets,	black	tears.	No,	I	see	the	truth
of	it	now.	Not	tears.	The	tears	have	dried	up,	and	will	never	return.	These
marks,	upon	face	and	hands,	arms	and	neck,	shoulders	and	chest.	These	marks.
‘Rutt.’
‘Badalle?’
‘They	have	claws.’
A	ragged	breath	fell	out	from	him,	left	him	visibly	trembling.
‘Try	now,	Rutt.	Your	eyes.	Try	to	open	them.’
‘I	–	I	can’t—’
‘Try.	You	must.’
The	father,	along	with	his	mob	of	clawed	children,	drew	closer.	They	were
wary	–	she	could	see	that.	They	did	not	expect	us.	They	did	not	come	looking	for
us.	They	are	not	here	to	save	us.	She	could	see	their	suffering	now,	the	thirst
that	gripped	their	faces	like	taloned,	skeletal	hands.	Claws	will	make	you	suffer.
Yet	the	father,	now	standing	before	Rutt,	reached	down	to	the	waterskin
strapped	to	his	sword	belt.	There	was	little	water	in	it	–	that	was	obvious	by	its
thinness,	the	ease	with	which	he	lifted	it.	Tugging	the	stopper	free,	he	held	it
out	to	Rutt.
Who	in	turn	thrust	out	Held.	‘Her	first,’	he	said.	‘Please,	the	little	one	first.’
The	gesture	was	unambiguous	and	without	hesitation	the	father	stepped	up,
and	as	Rutt	pulled	the	cloth	from	in	front	of	Held’s	small,	wizened	face	the
bearded	man	leaned	close.
She	saw	him	recoil,	saw	him	look	up	and	stare	hard	into	Rutt’s	slitted	eyes.
Badalle	held	her	breath.	Waited.
Then	he	shifted	the	waterskin,	dipped	the	mouthpiece	over	Held’s	mouth,
and	the	water	trickled	down.
She	sighed.	‘This	father,	Rutt,	is	a	good	father.’
One	of	the	clawed	children,	a	year	or	two	older	than	Rutt,	came	up	then	and
gently	took	Held	from	Rutt’s	arms	–	he	might	have	resisted,	but	did	not	have
the	strength,	and	when	the	babe	was	in	the	cradle	of	the	strange	boy’s	arms
Rutt’s	own	arms	remained	crooked,	as	if	he	still	held	her,	and	Badalle	saw	how
the	tendons	at	his	elbows	had	shrunk,	drawn	tight.	And	she	thought	back,	trying
to	recall	when	she	had	last	seen	Rutt	not	holding	Held,	and	she	couldn’t.
The	baby	was	a	ghost	in	his	arms	now.
The	father	was	weeping	–	she	could	see	the	tracks	down	his	darkened,
pitted	cheeks	–	and	he	guided	the	mouthpiece	into	Rutt’s	mouth,	forced	it	past
the	boy’s	lips.	A	few	drops,	and	then	out	again.
Rutt	swallowed.
The	other	children	with	claws	slipped	past	them,	into	the	coiled	Snake,


each	pulling	out	their	own	waterskins.	But	there	were	not	enough	of	them.	Still
they	went.
And	now	Badalle	saw	a	new	Snake,	coming	out	of	the	sunset,	and	this	one
was	of	iron	and	chains,	and	she	knew	that	she	had	seen	it	before,	in	her	dreams.
She	had	looked	down	upon	this	glittering	serpent.	Fathers	and	mothers,	but
children	all.	And	there	–	I	see	her	–	that	is	their	one	mother	–	I	see	her.	She
comes.
People	spilled	out	around	the	woman,	with	more	waterskins.
She	halted	close	to	the	bearded	father,	her	eyes	on	Badalle,	and	when	she
spoke	it	was	in	the	language	of	Badalle’s	dreams.	‘Fiddler,	they	are	walking	the
wrong	way.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’
‘I	see	only	children.’
‘Aye.’
Standing	behind	this	woman	was	another	soldier.	‘But…	Adjunct,	who	do
they	belong	to?’
She	turned.	‘It	doesn’t	matter,	Fist,	because	they	now	belong	to	us.’
Rutt	turned	to	Badalle.	‘What	are	they	saying?’
‘They’re	saying	we	have	to	go	back.’
The	boy	mouthed	the	last	word.	Back?
Badalle	said,	‘Rutt,	you	did	not	fail.	You	guided	the	Snake,	and	your	blind
tongue	flicked	out	and	found	these	strangers	who	are	strangers	no	longer.	Rutt,
you	led	us	from	death	and	into	life.	Rutt,’	she	stepped	close,	‘you	can	rest	now.’
The	bearded	man	–	whose	name	was	Fiddler	–	managed	to	break	Rutt’s
fall,	but	both	went	down	to	their	knees.
The	Adjunct	took	a	half-step.	‘Captain?	Does	he	live?’
He	looked	up	after	a	moment.	‘If	his	heart	still	beats,	Adjunct,	I	can	neither
feel	nor	hear	it.’
Badalle	spoke	in	their	language.	‘He	lives,	Father.	He	has	just	gone	away.
For	a	time.’
The	man	Mother	had	called	Fist,	who	had	been	standing	back,	now	edged
forward	and	said,	‘Child,	how	is	it	you	speak	Malazan?	Who	are	you?’
Who	am	I?	I	don’t	know.	I’ve	never	known.	She	met	Mother ’s	eyes.	‘Rutt	led
us	to	you.	Because	you	are	the	only	ones	left.’
‘Only	ones?’
‘The	only	ones	who	will	not	turn	away	from	us.	You	are	our	mother.’
At	that	the	Adjunct	seemed	to	step	back,	her	eyes	flaring	as	if	struck	to
pain.	And	then	she	looked	away	from	Badalle,	who	then	pointed	at	Fiddler.
‘And	he	is	our	father,	and	soon	he	will	go	away	and	we	will	never	see	him


again.	It	is	the	way	of	fathers.’	That	thought	made	her	sad,	but	she	shook	her
head	against	the	feeling.	‘It	is	just	the	way.’
The	Adjunct	seemed	to	be	trembling	and	unable	to	look	upon	Badalle.
Instead,	she	turned	to	the	man	beside	her.	‘Fist,	broach	the	reserve	casks.’
‘Adjunct!	Look	at	them!	Half	will	die	before	dawn!’
‘Fist	Blistig,	I	have	given	you	an	order.’
‘We	cannot	spare	any	water!	Not	for	these	–	these…’
‘Obey	my	command,’	said	the	Adjunct	in	a	weary	tone,	‘or	I	will	have	you
executed.	Here.	Immediately.’
‘And	face	open	rebellion!	I	swear	it—’
Fiddler	had	straightened	and	now	he	walked	to	stand	in	front	of	Fist
Blistig,	so	close	that	the	Fist	took	a	step	back.	He	said	nothing,	only	smiled,	his
teeth	white	amidst	that	tangle	of	rusty	beard.
Snarling	an	oath,	Blistig	swung	round.	‘On	your	heads,	then.’
The	Adjunct	spoke.	‘Captains	Yil	and	Gudd,	accompany	Fist	Blistig.’
A	man	and	a	woman	who	had	been	hanging	back	swung	round	to	flank
Blistig	as	he	marched	back	into	the	column.
Fiddler	returned	to	where	Rutt	was	lying.	He	knelt	beside	the	boy,	settled
one	hand	to	one	side	of	the	thin	face.	Then	he	looked	up	at	Badalle.	‘He	led
you?’
She	nodded.
‘How	far?	How	long?’
She	shrugged.	‘Kolanse.’
The	man	blinked,	looked	over	at	the	Adjunct	for	an	instant,	and	then	back
to	Badalle.	‘How	many	days,	then,	to	water?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘To	Icarias,	where	there	are	wells…	I	–	I	can’t
remember.	Seven	days?	Ten?’
‘Impossible,’	said	someone	from	the	crowd	gathered	behind	the	Adjunct.
‘We	have	a	day’s	supply	left.	Without	water,	three	days	at	the	most	–	Adjunct,
we	cannot	make	it.’
Badalle	cocked	her	head.	‘Where	there	is	no	water,	there	is	blood.	Flies.
Shards.	Where	there	is	no	food,	there	are	children	who	have	died.’
Someone	said,	‘Fist	Blistig	is	right	this	time,	Adjunct.	We	can’t	do	this.’
‘Captain	Fiddler.’
‘Aye?’
‘Have	your	scouts	guide	the	ones	who	can	walk	back	to	the	food	wagons.
Ask	the	Khundryl	to	attend	to	those	who	cannot.	See	to	it	that	everyone	gets
water,	and	food	if	they	can	manage	any.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’


Badalle	watched	him	ease	his	arms	under	Rutt,	watched	him	lift	the	boy.
Rutt	is	now	Held.	He	carried	Held	until	he	could	carry	her	no	longer,	and	now
he	is	carried,	and	this	is	how	it	goes	on.
‘Adjunct,’	she	said	as	Fiddler	carried	Rutt	away,	‘I	am	named	Badalle,	and
for	you	I	have	a	poem.’
‘Child,	if	you	stand	there	unattended	to	for	much	longer,	you	are	going	to
die.	I	will	hear	your	poem,	but	not	now.’
Badalle	smiled.	‘Yes,	Mother.’
	
And	for	you	I	have	a	poem.	She	stared	at	the	straining	backs,	the	shedding
ropes,	the	toppled	statues	by	the	wayside.	Two	nights	now	since	that	meeting,
since	the	last	time	Badalle	had	seen	the	Adjunct.	Or	the	man	named	Fiddler.
And	the	water	was	now	gone,	and	still	Rutt	would	not	wake,	and	Saddic	sat	atop
the	bales	putting	his	things	in	patterns	only	to	pack	them	away	again,	until	the
next	time.
And	she	listened	to	the	arguments.	She	heard	the	fighting,	saw	the	sudden
roiling	eddies	where	fists	lashed	out,	soldiers	grappled,	knives	were	drawn.
She	watched	as	these	men	and	women	stumbled	towards	death,	because	Icarias
was	too	far	away.	They	had	nothing	left	to	drink,	and	now	those	who	drank
their	own	piss	were	starting	to	go	mad,	because	piss	was	poison	–	but	they
would	not	bleed	out	the	dead	ones.	They	just	left	them	to	lie	on	the	ground.
This	night,	she	had	counted	fifty-four.	The	night	before	there	had	been
thirty-nine,	and	on	the	day	in	between	they’d	carried	seventy-two	bodies	from
the	camp,	not	bothering	to	dig	a	trench	this	time,	simply	leaving	them	lying	in
rows.
The	children	of	the	Snake	were	on	the	food	wagons.	Their	walking	was
done,	and	they	too	were	dying.
Icarias.	I	see	your	wells.	They	were	almost	dry	when	we	left	you.	Something
is	taking	the	water	away,	even	now.	I	don’t	know	why.	But	it	doesn’t	matter.	We
will	not	reach	them.	Is	it	true,	then,	that	all	mothers	must	fail?	And	all	fathers
must	walk	away	never	to	be	seen	again?
Mother,	for	you	I	have	a	poem.	Will	you	come	to	me?	Will	you	hear	my
words?
The	wagon	rocked,	the	heavies	strained.	Soldiers	died.
	
They	were	on	a	path	now.	Fiddler ’s	scouts	had	little	trouble	following	it.	Small,


bleached	bones,	all	the	ones	who	had	fallen	behind	the	boy	named	Rutt,	the	girl
named	Badalle.	Each	modest	collection	he	stumbled	over	was	an	accusation,	a
mute	rebuke.	These	children.	They	had	done	the	impossible.	And	now	we	fail
them.
He	could	hear	the	blood	in	his	own	veins,	frantic,	rushing	through	hollow
places,	and	the	sound	it	made	was	an	incessant	howl.	Did	the	Adjunct	still
believe?	Now	that	they	were	dying	by	the	score,	did	she	still	hold	to	her	faith?
When	determination,	when	stubborn	will,	proved	not	enough,	what	then?	He
had	no	answers	to	such	questions.	If	he	sought	her	out	–	no,	she’s	had	enough	of
that.	They’re	on	her	constantly.	Fists,	captains,	the	cutters.	Besides,	talking	was
torture	–	lips	split	open,	the	swollen	tongue	struggled,	the	back	of	the	throat	–
tight	and	cracked	–	was	pained	by	every	uttered	word.
He	walked	with	his	scouts,	not	wanting	to	drop	back,	to	see	what	was
happening	in	the	column.	Not	wanting	to	witness	its	disintegration.	Were	his
heavies	still	pulling	the	wagons?	If	they	were,	they	were	fools.	Were	any	of
those	starved	children	left?	That	boy,	Rutt	–	who’d	carried	that	thing	for	so
long	his	arms	looked	permanently	crippled	–	was	he	still	in	a	coma,	or	had	he
slipped	away,	believing	he’d	saved	them	all?
That	would	be	the	best.	To	ride	the	delusion	into	oblivion.	There	are	no
ghosts	here,	not	in	this	desert.	His	soul	just	drifted	away.	Simple.	Peaceful.
Rising,	carrying	that	baby	–	because	he	will	always	carry	that	baby.	Go	well,
lad.	Go	well,	the	both	of	you.
They’d	come	looking	for	a	mother	and	a	father.	A	thousand	children,	a
thousand	orphans	–	but	he	was	beginning	to	see,	here	on	this	trail,	just	how
many	more	there	had	once	been	–	in	this	train	Badalle	had	called	the	Snake,
and	the	comprehension	of	that	twisted	like	a	knife	in	his	chest.	Kolanse,	what
have	you	done?	To	your	people?	To	your	children?	Kolanse,	had	you	no	better
answer	than	this?	Gods,	if	we	could	have	found	you	–	if	we	could	have	faced
you	across	a	killing	field.	We	would	give	answer	to	your	crimes.
Adjunct,	you	were	right	to	seek	this	war.
But	you	were	wrong	thinking	we	could	win	it.	You	cannot	wage	war	against
indifference.	Ah,	listen	to	me.	But	am	I	dead?	Not	yet.
The	previous	day,	when	the	entire	camp	was	silent,	soldiers	lying
motionless	beneath	the	flies,	he	had	reached	into	his	pack,	settled	his	hand	upon
the	Deck	of	Dragons.	And…nothing.	Lifeless.	This	desert	was	bereft	and	no
power	could	reach	them.	We	have	made	the	gods	blind	to	us.	The	gods,	and	the
enemy	ahead.	Adjunct,	I	see	your	reason	for	this.	I	did	then	and	I	do	now.	But
look	at	us	–	we’re	human.	Mortal.	No	stronger	than	anyone	else.	And	for	all
that	you	wanted	to	make	us	something	more,	something	greater,	it	seems	that	we


cannot	be	what	you	want.
We	cannot	be	what	we	want,	either.	And	this,	more	than	anything	else,	is
what	now	crushes	us.	But	still,	I	am	not	yet	dead.
He	thought	back	to	the	moment	when	they’d	found	the	children;	the	way	his
scouts	–	not	much	older	themselves	–	moved	so	solemnly	among	the	refugees,
giving	all	the	water	they	carried	–	their	entire	allotment	for	the	night’s	march
given	away,	from	one	mouth	to	the	next,	until	the	last	drops	had	been	squeezed
from	the	skins.	And	then	the	Khundryl	youths	could	only	stand,	helpless,	each
surrounded	by	children	who	reached	out	–	not	to	grasp	or	demand,	but	to
touch,	and	in	that	touch	give	thanks.	Not	for	the	water	–	that	was	gone	–	but	for
the	gesture.
How	far	must	one	fall,	to	give	thanks	for	nothing	but	desire?	Empty	intent?
The	ones	who	drove	you	away…
But	we	have	allies,	and	there	is	no	barrier	before	them,	nothing	to	slow
their	march	on	Kolanse.	Gesler,	show	Stormy	the	truth	of	this,	and	then	cut	his
leash.	Leave	him	to	voice	a	howl	to	make	the	Hounds	themselves	cower!	Let	him
loose,	Ges,	I	beg	you.
Because	I	don’t	think	we	can	make	it.
The	bones	of	his	neck	grinding,	Fiddler	looked	up,	glared	at	the	Jade
Strangers.	They	filled	the	night	sky	now,	blazing	slashes	across	heaven’s	face.
Omens	make	me	puke.	I’m	sick	of	the	miserable	things.	But…what	if	you’re
nothing	like	that,	you	up	there?	What	if	your	journey	belongs	to	you	and	you
alone,	no	destination,	no	reason	or	purpose?	What	if,	tomorrow	or	the	next	day,
you	finally	descend	–	to	wipe	out	all	of	us,	to	make	pointless	our	every	struggle,
our	every	great,	noble	cause?	What	is	it	then,	O	glorious	universe,	that	you	are
telling	us?
Destiny	is	a	lie.
But,	then,	do	I	even	care?	Look	at	these	bones	we	step	over.	We	go	as	far	as
we	can	go,	and	then	we	stop.	And	that	is	how	it	is.	That	is	all	it	is.	So…now
what?
	
‘Snakes,’	said	Banaschar,	blinking	against	the	hard	clarity	of	sober	vision.	It
was	better	when	everything	was	blurred.	Much	better.	‘That	might	have	been
my	first	fear,	the	one	that	had	me	stumbling	right	into	the	pit	of	vipers	we	so
blithely	call	the	Temple	of	D’rek.	Face	what	you	fear,	isn’t	that	the	sage	advice?
Maybe	that’s	sobriety’s	real	curse,	the	recognition	that	being	frightened	is	not
character-building	after	all,	and	that	the	advice	was	shit	and	the	world	is	full	of
liars.’


The	Adjunct	was	silent	as	she	walked	beside	him.	Not	that	he	was	expecting
a	reply,	since	he	was	no	longer	certain	that	his	words	were	actually	getting	past
his	throat.	It	was	possible,	indeed,	highly	likely,	that	everything	he’d	been
saying	for	the	past	two	days	had	been	entirely	in	his	own	mind.	But	then,	it	was
easier	that	way.
‘Rebellion.	Even	the	word	itself	makes	me…envious.	I’ve	never	felt	it	–
here,	in	my	soul.	Never	experienced	a	single	moment	of	defiant	fury,	of	the
self	demanding	its	right	to	be	just	the	way	it	wants	to	be.	Even	when	it	doesn’t
know	what	that	being	looks	like.	It	just	wants	it.
‘Of	course,	drinking	is	the	sweet	surrender.	The	sanctum	of	cowards	–	and
we’re	all	cowards,	us	drunks,	and	don’t	let	anyone	try	to	convince	you
otherwise.	It’s	the	only	thing	we’re	good	at,	mostly,	because	it’s	both	our
reason	and	the	means	by	which	we	run	away.	From	everything.	Which	is	why	a
drunk	needs	to	stay	drunk.’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	Was	she	listening?	Was	there	anything	to	listen
to?
‘Let’s	move	on	–	that	subject	makes	me…cringe.	Another	grand	notion
awaits	us,	as	soon	as	I	can	think	of	one.	Snakes,	you	ask?	Well,	of	course	it	was
a	grand	notion	–	the	girl	giving	us	names	like	that.	Theirs.	Ours.	Snakes	in	the
desert.	It’s	bold,	if	you	think	about	it.	Snakes	are	damned	hard	to	kill.	They
slide	past	underfoot.	They	hide	in	plain	sight.
‘So…hmm,	how	about	knowledge?	When	knowing	becomes	a	fall	from
grace.	When	truth	is	seen	to	condemn	rather	than	liberate.	When	enlightenment
shows	nothing	but	the	dark	pathos	of	our	endless	list	of	failures.	All	that.	But
these	attitudes,	well,	they	come	from	those	who	want	to	encourage	ignorance	–
a	vital	tactic	in	their	maintenance	of	power.	Besides,	real	knowledge	forces	one
to	act	–
‘Or	does	it?’
He	paused	then,	trying	to	think	it	through.	Only	to	feel	a	spasm	of	fear.
‘You’re	right,	let’s	move	on	yet	again.	If	there’s	one	thing	I	know	it’s	that	about
some	things	I	don’t	want	to	know	anything.	So…ah,	in	keeping	with	unexpected
guests,	shall	we	speak	of	heroism?’
	
Smiles	staggered	to	one	side	and	dropped	to	one	knee.	Bottle	took	up	position
behind	her,	guarding	her	back.	The	short	sword	in	his	hand	seemed	to	be
trembling	all	on	its	own.
He	watched	Tarr	bull	his	way	back	through	the	milling	press.	His	visage
was	darker	than	Bottle	had	ever	seen	before.	‘Koryk!’	he	snapped.


‘Here,	Sergeant.’
‘You’ll	live?’
‘Caught	a	look	in	an	eye,’	the	man	replied,	edging	into	view.	One	side	of
his	face	was	sheathed	in	blood,	but	it	wasn’t	his	own.	‘Seen	hyenas	looking
saner.’	He	pointed	with	a	bloodied	long	knife.	‘That	corporal	there	gave	’im	a
nudge…’
The	man	Koryk	indicated	was	on	his	knees.	A	regular.	Burly,	broadshouldered,	with	a	knife	handle	jutting	from	the	right	side	of	his	chest.	Blood
was	streaming	from	his	mouth	and	nostrils,	filled	with	bubbles.
Tarr	glared	round,	his	eyes	catching	Bottle.	He	walked	over.	‘Smiles	–
look	at	me,	soldier.’
She	lifted	her	head.	‘Like	Koryk	said,	Sergeant	–	we	ain’t	blind	and	we
ain’t	stupid.	Caught	the	same	nudge,	so	I	gave	him	my	knife.’
Tarr	met	Bottle’s	eyes.
Bottle	nodded.	‘Twelve	paces	between	’em,	in	the	dark,	in	a	crowd.’
The	dying	corporal	had	dropped	his	bearded	chin	to	his	chest	and	seemed
to	be	staring	at	his	knees.	Corabb	edged	closer	and	gave	the	man	a	push.	He	fell
over.	The	thudding	impact,	as	he	landed	on	the	ground,	spurted	one	last	mass
of	foam	from	his	mouth	and	nose.
‘Two	down?’	Tarr	asked.
Bottle	could	feel	the	hatred	in	the	eyes	of	the	regulars	crowding	the	scene,
and	he	flinched	when	Corabb	said,	‘Three,	Sergeant.	The	first	two	were	the
distraction	–	two	more	came	in	low	from	behind,	making	for	the	wagon.	I	got
the	first	one,	then	Cuttle	chased	the	last	one	away	–	still	after	him,	I	guess.’
‘He’s	out	there?’	Tarr	demanded.	‘Hood’s	breath!’
Smiles	straightened	and,	moving	drunkenly,	made	her	way	to	the	dead
corporal,	where	she	retrieved	her	knife.	‘It	ain’t	right,’	she	muttered.	She	faced
the	crowd.	‘We’re	guarding	empty	casks,	you	damned	fools!’
Someone	called	out,	‘Wasn’t	us,	marine.	That	was	the	Fist’s	gang.’
Bottle	scowled.	Blistig.	Gods	below.
‘Just	leave	us	alone,’	Smiles	said,	turning	away.
Cuttle	returned,	caught	Tarr ’s	eye	and	with	one	hand	casually	brushed	the
crossbow	slung	down	behind	his	left	arm.
The	sergeant	faced	the	haulers.	‘Pull	up	the	ropes,	soldiers	–	let’s	get	this
moving	again.’
Smiles	came	up	to	Bottle.	‘Killing	our	own	–	it	ain’t	right.’
‘I	know.’
‘You	had	my	back	–	thanks.’
He	nodded.


The	crowd	of	regulars	was	melting	away.	The	wagon	started	rolling,	the
squad	falling	in	alongside	it,	and	the	bodies	were	left	behind.
‘It’s	the	madness,’	said	Corabb	a	short	time	later.	‘In	Seven	Cities—’
‘You	don’t	need	to	tell	us,’	Cuttle	interrupted.	‘We	was	there,	remember?’
‘Aye.	Just	saying,	that’s	all.	The	madness	of	thirst—’
‘That	was	planned	out.’
‘The	corporal,	aye,’	Corabb	said,	‘but	not	that	fool	going	for	Koryk.’
‘And	the	ones	coming	in	from	behind?	Planned,	Corabb.	Someone’s
orders.	That	ain’t	madness.	That	ain’t	anything	of	the	sort.’
‘Mostly,	I	was	talking	about	the	rest	of	them	regulars	–	the	ones	closing	in
on	the	smell	of	blood.’
No	one	had	any	response	to	that.	Bottle	found	that	he	was	still	holding	his
short	sword.	Sighing,	he	sheathed	it.
	
Shortnose	took	the	blood-stained	shirt	and	pushed	it	beneath	the	collar	of	the
leather	yoke,	stuffing	it	across	the	width	of	his	collar	bones	where	his	skin	had
been	worn	away	and	things	were	looking	raw.	Someone	had	brought	him	the
shirt,	sopping	wet	and	warm,	but	all	that	blood	didn’t	bother	him	much	–	he
was	already	adding	to	it.
The	wagon	was	heavy.	Heavier	now	with	children	riding	atop	all	the
bundles	of	food.	But	for	all	their	numbers,	not	as	heavy	as	it	should	have	been.
That	was	because	they	were	mostly	starved	down	to	bones.	He	didn’t	like
thinking	about	that.	Back	when	he’d	been	a	child	he	remembered	hungry	times,
but	every	one	of	those	times	his	da	would	come	in	with	something	for	the
runts,	Shortnose	the	runtiest	of	them	all.	A	scrap.	Something	to	chew.	And	his
ma,	she’d	go	out	with	other	mas	and	they’d	be	busy	for	a	few	days	and	nights
and	then	she’d	come	back	in,	sometimes	bruised,	sometimes	weeping,	but
she’d	have	money	for	the	table,	and	that	money	turned	into	food.	His	da	used	to
swear	a	lot	those	times	she	did	that.
But	it	was	all	down	to	feeding	the	runts.	‘My	beautiful	runts,’	his	da	liked
saying.	And	then,	years	later,	when	the	garrison	had	up	and	left	town,	suddenly
Ma	couldn’t	get	the	money	the	way	she	used	to,	but	she	and	Da	were	happier
for	all	of	that	anyway.	Shortnose’s	older	brothers	had	all	gone	off	by	then,	two
of	’em	to	war	and	the	other	one	to	marry	Widow	Karas,	who	was	ten	years
older	than	him	and	who	Shortnose	secretly	loved	with	all	his	might,	so	it	was
probably	a	good	thing	he	ran	away	when	he	did,	since	his	brother	wouldn’t
have	taken	kindly	to	that	trouble	behind	the	barn	with	Karas	drunk,	or	maybe
not,	and	anyway	it	was	all	in	good	fun	–


He	noticed	a	boy	walking	beside	him.	Carrying	a	sack.	His	hands	were
bloody	and	he	was	licking	them	clean.
Brought	me	that	shirt,	did	you?	‘Ain’t	good,	runt,’	he	said.	‘Drinking
blood.’
The	boy	frowned	up	at	him,	and	went	on	with	his	licking	until	his	hands
were	clean.
–and	he’d	heard	later	how	one	of	his	brothers	got	killed	outside	Nathilog
and	the	other	one	came	back	with	only	one	leg,	and	then	the	pensions	came
through	and	Ma	and	Da	stopped	having	to	struggle	so,	especially	when
Shortnose	joined	up	himself	and	sent	two-thirds	of	his	pay	back	home;	half	of
that	went	home	to	Da	and	Ma;	the	other	third	went	to	his	brother	and	his	wife,
because	he	felt	guilty	about	the	baby	and	all.
Still,	it	wasn’t	good	being	hungry	so	young,	and	starving	was	worst	of	all.
His	da	used	to	say,	‘If	ya	can’t	feed	’em,	don’t	have	’em.	Hood’s	proud	pole,	it
don’t	take	a	genius	to	see	that!’	It	sure	don’t,	and	that	was	why	Shortnose	kept
paying	for	his	runt,	and	he’d	still	be	paying	for	it	if	it	wasn’t	for	them	being
fired	and	made	outlaws	and	deserters	and	all	the	other	names	the	military	came
up	with	for	not	doing	what	they	told	you	to	do.	By	now,	though,	that	runt	would
be	old	enough	to	work	all	on	its	own,	so	maybe	his	brother	would	have	called
off	the	bounty	on	his	head.	Maybe	everything	was	all	right	by	now,	the	dust
settled	and	all.
It	was	nice	to	think	so.	But	now	he’d	gone	and	fallen	in	love	with	Flashwit
and	Mayfly	and	wasn’t	that	silly,	since	there	were	two	of	them	and	only	one	of
him.	Not	that	he	saw	that	as	a	problem.	But	women	could	get	funny	about	things
like	that.	And	lots	of	other	things	too,	which	was	why	they	were	so	much
trouble.
The	hauler	on	his	right	stumbled.	Shortnose	reached	down	one-handed	and
lifted	the	woman	back	on	to	her	feet.	She	gasped	her	thanks.
Now	women.	He	could	think	about	women	all—
‘You’re	Shortnose,	aren’t	ya?’
He	glanced	down	at	her.	She	was	short,	with	big,	strong-looking	legs	–
now	that	was	bad	luck	for	her,	wasn’t	it?	The	one	thing	that	made	proper	men
drool	turned	out	getting	her	yoked	like	a	–	like	a	–	‘Yah,	that’s	me.’
‘Been	tryin	to	look,	y’see?’
‘No.’
‘I	heard	you	got	the	same	ear	bitten	off	twice.’
‘So?’
‘Well,	er,	how’s	that	possible?’
‘Don’t	ask	me.	It	was	all	Bredd’s	fault.’


‘Bredd?	Nefarias	Bredd?	You	were	fighting	him?’
‘Might	have	been.	Save	your	breath,	soldier.	See	this	runt	here?	He	ain’t
saying	a	thing,	cause	he’s	smart.’
‘It’s	because	he	doesn’t	understand	Malazan.’
‘As	good	an	excuse	as	any,	I	always	say.	Anyway,	just	keep	pulling,	and
think	about	things	you	like	to	think	about.	To	distract	ya	from	all	the	bad	stuff.’
‘What	are	you	thinking	about?’
‘Me?	Women.’
‘Right,’	she	said	in	a	strangely	cold	tone.	‘So	I	guess	I’ll	think	about
handsome,	clever	men.’
He	smiled	down	at	her.	‘You	don’t	have	to	do	that,	lass	–	you	got	one
walking	right	beside	you.’
The	boy	went	away	and	came	back	a	short	time	later	with	some	more	cloth,
which	he	gave	to	Shortnose	so	that	he	could	stop	his	bleeding	nose.
Like	his	da	used	to	say,	‘There	ain’t	no	figurin’	the	ways	of	women.’	Too
bad	too.	She	was	kinda	pretty	and,	even	better,	she	could	swear	the	hide	off	a
bhederin.	Could	there	be	a	sexier	combination?	He	didn’t	think	so.
	
‘You’d	think	I	was	some	kind	of	leper.	It	ain’t	my	fault	I	been	dead	once,	and
maybe	being	dead	once	means	things	like	getting	thirsty	don’t	hurt	as	much	–	I
don’t	know.’
‘I	have	been	condensing	everything	in	sight,’	Bavedict	said.	‘That’s	what’s
been	keeping	me	going.’
Hedge	eyed	the	alchemist	quizzically,	and	then	he	shrugged.	‘Beats	talking
all	day,	I	suppose.’
Bavedict	opened	his	mouth	and	then	shut	it	again.
‘How	are	the	kittens?’
‘The	kittens	are	just	fine,	Commander.’
‘We	got	enough	of	’em?’
‘For	more	than	one	engagement?	Hard	to	say,	sir.	I’m	comfortable	with
one	battle,	using	what	we	need	and	not	holding	back.’	He	glanced	back	at	the
carriage,	and	then	said,	‘I	have	given	some	thought	to	strategies,	sir,	with
respect	to	alchemical…er…kittens.	I	don’t	think	being	misers	with	them	works.
You	want	to	go	the	opposite	way,	in	fact.	Flood	the	field	of	battle,	hit	them	so
hard	the	shock	overwhelms	them—’
‘I	thought	you	wasn’t	going	to	talk	all	night?	Listen,	we	worked	that	out
years	ago.	Walls	and	waves,	we	called	it.	Walls	when	you	was	holding	a	line	or
position.	Waves	when	you	was	on	the	advance.	And	there	ain’t	no	point	in


holding	back	–	except	the	one	with	your	own	name	on	it,	of	course.	Because
every	sapper	will	tell	you,	if	you’re	gonna	kill	’em	they’re	gonna	kill	you	at
the	same	time,	guaranteed.	We	call	it	disincentive.’
Bavedict	glanced	back	a	second	time,	frowned	at	the	troop	stumping	along
beside	the	carriage.	The	captains	weren’t	doing	well.	Thinning	out,	but	not	in	a
good	way.	They’d	not	said	much	in	days.	Behind	them	walked	the	Khundryl,
still	leading	their	horses	–	so	I	wasn’t	quite	telling	Hedge	the	truth.	I	didn’t	just
dose	the	oxen	but	you’d	think	they’d	see—
‘Still	nervous?’	Hedge	asked	him.	‘I’d	be,	if	I	was	you.	Khundryl	like	their
horses.	A	lot.	Between	a	warrior ’s	horse	and	his	mother,	it’s	even	odds	which
one	he’d	save,	if	it	came	down	to	choosing.	Then	you	just	went	and	killed	’em.’
‘They	were	dying	anyway,	sir.	In	a	single	day,	a	horse	needs	more	water
than	four	soldiers,	and	those	Khundryl	were	running	out.	Try	bleeding	a
dehydrated	animal,	sir	–	it	isn’t	easy.’
‘Right,	so	now	they	got	undead	horses	and	still	no	water,	meaning	if	you’d
done	that	a	week	ago,	why,	all	that	sacrifice	wouldn’t	have	been	necessary.
They	want	to	kill	you,	alchemist	–	it	took	me	half	a	day	to	talk	’em	out	of	it.’
Bavedict	glared	at	Hedge.	‘You	just	said,	between	horses	and	their	mothers
—’
‘They’d	save	their	mothers,	of	course.	What	are	you,	an	idiot?’
The	alchemist	sighed.
‘Anyway,’	Hedge	continued	after	a	moment,	‘we’re	all	Bridgeburners	now.
Now	it’s	true,	we	killed	a	few	officers	every	now	and	then,	if	they	was	bad
enough.	Who	wouldn’t?	Get	a	fool	in	charge	and	they’re	likely	to	get	you	all
killed,	so	better	top	’em	first,	right?	But	you	ain’t	done	nothing	to	earn	that.
Besides,	I	need	you	and	so	do	they.	So	it’s	simple	and	all	–	nobody’s	gonna	cut
your	throat.’
‘I	am	most	relieved,	Commander.’
Hedge	moved	closer,	dropping	his	voice.	‘But	listen.	It’s	all	about	to	fall
apart	–	can	you	see	that?	The	Bonehunters	–	those	regulars	–	they’re	losing	it.’
‘Sir,	we’re	not	much	better	off.’
‘So	we	don’t	want	to	get	caught	up	in	the	slaughter,	right?	I	already	told	my
captains.	We’re	gonna	pull	out	hard	as	soon	as	it	starts	up	–	I	want	a	hundred
paces	between	us	before	they	start	looking	for	somebody	new	to	kill.’
‘Sir,	do	you	think	it	will	get	that	bad?’
Hedge	shrugged.	‘Hard	to	say.	So	far,	the	marines	are	holding	’em	all	in
check.	But	there’s	gonna	come	a	scrap,	any	time	now,	when	a	marine	gets	taken
down.	And	the	smell	of	blood	will	do	it,	mark	my	words.’
‘How	would	the	Bridgeburners	have	handled	this,	sir?	Back	in	the	day?’


‘Simple.	Sniff	out	the	yappers	and	kill	’em.	It’s	the	ones	who	can’t	stop
bitching,	talking	it	up,	egging	on	the	stupider	ones	to	do	something	stupid.
Hoping	it	all	busts	out.	Me’	–	he	nodded	to	the	column	walking	beside	them	–
‘I’d	jump	Blistig	and	drag	him	off	into	the	desert	–	and	for	a	whole	damned
day	nobody’d	be	sleeping,	’cause	of	all	the	screaming.’
‘No	wonder	you	all	got	outlawed,’	Bavedict	muttered.
	
The	sky	to	the	east	was	lightening,	the	sun	rising	to	wage	war	with	the	Jade
Strangers	before	they	plunged	beneath	the	north	horizon.	The	column	broke
down	in	sections,	clumps	of	soldiers	spilling	away	on	to	the	sides	of	the	trail.
Sinking	down,	heads	lowered,	weapons	and	armour	clashing	as	packs	dropped
to	the	ground.	The	haulers	stopped,	struggled	out	of	the	heavy	yokes.	Wailing
from	the	Khundryl	as	yet	another	horse	stumbled	and	fell	on	to	its	side	–	and
out	flashed	the	knives,	and	this	day	there	would	be	plenty	of	blood	to	drink,	but
no	one	rejoiced	among	the	Burned	Tears.
Where	the	wagons	halted,	the	marines	settled,	red-eyed	and	slackfaced	with
exhaustion.	On	all	sides,	the	soldiers	moved	like	old	men	and	women,	fighting
to	raise	tarps	and	flies,	roll	out	bedding,	pausing	to	rest	between	tasks.
Weapons	were	slowly	drawn,	the	day’s	damage	repaired	with	oiled	whetstones,
but	the	act	was	almost	mindless:	gestures	of	instinct	observed	by	dull,	sullen
eyes.
And	then	out	from	the	wagons	came	the	children,	in	ones	and	twos,	into	the
midst	of	the	soldiers.	They	came	not	to	beg	or	plead,	but	simply	to	sit,
watching	over	the	soldiers	as	they	slept.	Or	suffered	with	staring	eyes.	Or,	in
the	case	of	some,	quietly	died.
Sergeant	Sinter	observed	this	as	she	sat	leaning	against	the	wheel	of	the
wagon	they’d	been	guarding.	The	tremulous	arrival	of	a	child	into	every	knot
of	soldiers	seemed	to	have	a	strange	effect	upon	them.	Arguments	fell	away,
glaring	eyes	faded,	resentments	sank	down.	The	sleepless	rolled	on	to	their
sides	and	surrendered	to	weariness.	Pain	was	swallowed	back	and	those	who
sat	weeping	without	tears	eventually	settled	into	silence.
What	gift	was	this?	She	did	not	understand.	And	when	a	soldier	awoke	in
the	closing	of	dusk,	and	found	curled	at	his	or	her	side	a	small,	still	form,	cool
and	pale	in	the	dying	light,	she’d	seen	how	the	squad	then	gathered	to	set	shards
of	crystal	over	the	lifeless	child,	raising	a	glittering	mound.	And	the	soldiers
would	then	cut	fetishes	free	from	their	belts	and	harnesses	–	the	bones	they’d
carried	since	Aren	–	and	set	them	upon	the	pathetic	heaps	of	rock.
‘They’re	killing	us.’


She	looked	over	at	her	sister,	who	sat	against	the	back	wheel,	her	splinted
leg	stretched	out.	‘Who	is	it	this	time,	Kisswhere?’
‘They	come	and	share	the	last	moments.	Ours.	Theirs.	It’s	not	fair,	what
they	bring.’
Sinter ’s	eyes	narrowed	on	Kisswhere.	You’ve	gone	away,	sister.	Will	you
ever	come	back?	‘I	don’t	know	what	they	bring,’	she	said.
‘You	wouldn’t.’
A	dull	awakening	of	anger,	which	then	drained	away.	‘Why	do	you	say
that?’
Kisswhere	bared	her	teeth,	the	back	of	her	head	resting	between	two
spokes,	her	eyes	closed.	‘What	you	always	had,	Sinter.	What	I	never	had.	That’s
why	you	can’t	see	it.	Can’t	recognize	it.	It’d	be	like	seeing	into	your	own	soul,
and	that’s	something	nobody	can	do.	Oh,	they	say	they	can.	Talk	about
revelation,	or	truth.	All	that	shit.	But	inside	us,	something	stays	hidden.	For
ever.’
‘There’s	nothing	hiding	inside	me,	Kisswhere.’
‘But	those	children	–	sitting,	watching,	lying	close	–	it	hurts	you	to	see
them,	doesn’t	it?’
Sinter	looked	away.
‘You	fool,’	Kisswhere	sighed.	‘They	bring	dignity.	Same	as	you.	Same	as
the	Adjunct	herself	–	why	do	you	think	so	many	of	us	hate	her?	Hate	the	sight
of	her?	She	shows	us	everything	we	don’t	want	to	be	reminded	of,	because
there’s	nothing	harder	for	most	of	us	to	find	than	dignity.	Nothing.	So,	they
show	us	how	you	can	die	with	dignity	–	they	show	us	by	dying	themselves,	and
by	letting	us	die	while	being	watched	over.
‘The	Adjunct	said	unwitnessed.	These	children	don’t	agree.’
But	it’s	all	pointless	anyway.
Kisswhere	went	on,	‘Did	you	think	this	would	be	easy?	Did	you	think	our
feet	wouldn’t	start	to	drag?	We’ve	walked	across	half	a	world	to	get	here.	We
stopped	being	an	army	long	ago	–	and	no,	I	don’t	know	what	we	are	now.	I
don’t	think	there’s	a	person	in	this	world	who’d	be	able	to	give	us	a	name.’
‘We’re	not	going	to	make	it,’	Sinter	said.
‘So	what?’
Sinter	looked	across	at	her	sister.	Their	eyes	briefly	locked.	Just	past
Kisswhere,	Corporal	Rim	sat	hunched	over,	rubbing	oil	into	the	stump	of	his
right	arm.	He	made	no	sign	of	listening,	but	she	knew	he	was.	Same	for	Honey,
lying	shrouded	under	stained	linen	to	keep	the	sun	from	her	eyes.	‘So	you
don’t	care,	Kisswhere.	You	never	did.’
‘Surviving	this	ain’t	the	point,	Sinter.	It	stopped	being	the	point	some	time


ago.’
‘Right,’	she	snapped.	‘So	enlighten	me.’
‘You	already	know.	You	said	it	yourself	–	we’re	not	going	to	make	it.	And
those	children,	they	come	among	us,	like	homunculi.	Made	up	of	everything
we	surrendered	in	our	lives	–	all	that	dignity,	and	integrity,	and	truth	–	all	of	it,
and	look	at	them	–	starved	down	to	bones	and	not	much	else.	We	ain’t	been	too
good	with	the	best	in	us,	sister,	have	we?’
If	tears	had	been	possible,	Sinter	would	have	wept	them.	Instead,	she	sank
down	on	to	the	hard	ground.	‘You	should’ve	run,’	she	said.
‘I	bet	the	Adjunct	says	that	to	herself	a	thousand	times	a	day.’
The	Adjunct?	Sinter	shook	her	head.	‘She’s	not	the	running	type.’
‘No,	and	neither	are	you.	And	now,	it	turns	out,	neither	am	I.’
This	is	not	my	sister.
‘I	think,’	Kisswhere	resumed,	‘tomorrow	will	be	our	last	march.	And	you
know,	it’s	all	right.	It	was	worth	the	try.	Someone	should	tell	her	that.	It	was
worth	the	try.’
	
‘No	spiders,’	said	Hellian,	settling	her	head	back	on	the	bedroll.	‘This	is	the
best	there	is.	This	desert,	it’s	paradise.	Let	the	flies	and	capemoths	take	my
corpse.	Even	those	damned	meat-eating	locusts.	You	won’t	find	a	spider
making	a	nest	in	my	skull’s	eye	sockets	–	what	could	be	better	than	that?’
‘What	got	you	so	scared	of	’em,	Sergeant?’
She	thought	about	that.	But	then	her	mind	wandered	away,	and	she	saw
heaps	of	skulls,	all	of	them	smiling.	And	why	not?	Oh,	yes,	no	spiders.	‘My
father	tells	a	story,	especially	when	he’s	drunk.	He	thinks	it’s	damned	funny,
that	story.	Oh,	wait,	is	that	my	father?	Could	be	my	uncle.	Or	even	my
stepfather.	Might	even	be	my	brother ’s	father,	who	lives	down	the	lane.
Anyway,	it	was	a	story	and	how	he	laughed.	You	got	to	know	Kartool,	Maybe.
Spiders	big	enough	to	eat	gulls,	right?’
‘Been	there	once,	aye,	Sergeant.	Creepy	place.’
‘The	redbacks	are	the	worst.	Not	big,	not	much	poisonous	by	themselves.
One	at	a	time,	I	mean.	Thing	is,	when	they	hatch,	there’s	thousands,	and	they
stick	together	for	days,	so	they	can	kill	big	prey	and	all	of	them	feed	on	it,
right?	And	the	egg-sacs,	why,	they	can	be	hidden	anywhere.
‘So,	I	was	maybe	two.	Spent	all	day	in	a	crib,	every	day,	since	my	mother
had	another	baby	on	the	way	only	she	kept	getting	fevers	and	eventually	she
went	and	lost	it,	which	was	stupid,	since	we	had	a	good	healer	down	the	street,
but	Father	drank	up	all	the	coin	he	made.	Anyway.	I	had	this	doll—’


‘Oh	gods,	Sergeant—’
‘Aye,	they	came	out	of	its	head.	Ate	right	through	the	stuffing,	and	then	out
through	the	eyes	and	the	mouth	and	everywhere	else.	And	there	I	was:	food.	It
was	my	half-brother	who	came	in	and	found	me.	My	head	was	swollen	to	twice
its	size	–	couldn’t	even	see	my	eyes	–	and	I	was	choking.	Counted	two	hundred
bites,	maybe	more,	since	they	were	mostly	in	my	hair.	Now,	as	far	as	prey
goes,	I	was	too	big	even	for	a	thousand	redback	babies.	But	they	tried	damned
hard.’
‘And	that	story	made	him	laugh?	What	kind	of	fucked-up—’
‘Watch	it,	that’s	my	father	you’re	talking	about	there.	Or	uncle,	or
stepfather,	or	the	guy	down	the	lane.’
‘Now	I	see	it,	Sergeant,’	said	Touchy.	‘It’s	all	right.	I	see	it.	That’d	scar
anyone	for	life.’
‘The	story	ain’t	finished,	Corporal.	I	ain’t	got	to	the	whole	point	of	it.
Y’see,	I	was	eating	them	damned	spiders.	Eating	’em	like	candy.	They	said	my
belly	was	more	swollen	than	my	head,	and	that’s	why	I	was	choking	so	bad	–
they	were	biting	me	all	the	way	down.
‘So	they	brought	in	the	healer,	and	she	conjured	up	big	chunks	of	ice.	Into
my	mouth.	Back	of	the	throat.	And	all	around	my	neck,	too.	Story	goes	that	I
had	a	stroke,	from	all	that	ice.	Killed	the	part	of	my	brain	that	knows	when	it’s
time	to	stop.’	She	stared	up	at	the	brightening	sky.	‘They	say	I	stole	my	first	jug
from	my	father ’s	stash	when	I	was	six.	Got	so	drunk	they	needed	to	bring	the
healer	back	a	second	time.	And	that’s	when	she	scried	me	inside	and	said	I	was
in	for	a	life	of	trouble.’
A	hand	brushed	her	upper	arm.	‘That’s	a	heartbreaking	tale,	Sergeant.’
‘Is	it?’	I	suppose	it	is.	Of	course,	I	just	made	it	up.	Tug	those	heartstrings,
see	all	that	sweet	sympathy	in	their	sweet	little	faces.	They’ll	forgive	me
anything	now.
Why	do	I	hate	spiders?	Gods,	who	doesn’t?	What	a	stupid	question.

‘Faces	in	the	Rock,’	said	Urugal	the	Woven,	crouching	to	scrape	patterns	in	the
hard	ground.	‘Seven	of	the	Dying	Fires.	The	Unbound.	These	are	our	titles	–
we	T’lan	Imass	cast	out	from	our	clans.	We	who	failed	in	the	wars.	We	who
were	cursed	to	witness.’
Nom	Kala	shifted	to	look	back	upon	the	human	camp	–	a	dissolute	column
forming	a	jagged	line	across	the	hardpan.	All	motion	was	dying	away	there,


the	growing	heat	stealing	all	that	was	left.	The	humps	of	prostrate	bodies
stretched	long	shadows.
‘We	chose	a	Knight	of	Chains,’	Urugal	went	on,	‘and	by	his	will	we	were
freed	from	our	prison,	and	by	his	will	the	chains	shall	one	day	shatter.	Then	we
awaited	the	sanctification	of	the	House	of	Chains.’
‘This	knight,’	rumbled	Kalt	Urmanal,	‘is	he	among	us	now?’
‘No,	but	he	awaits	us,’	replied	Urugal.	‘Long	has	been	his	journey,	and
soon	the	fate	of	us	all	will	fall	at	his	feet.	But,	alas,	the	Fallen	One	does	not
command	him,	and	the	King	in	Chains	has	turned	his	back	on	our	cause	–	for
the	King	of	the	House	is	cursed,	and	his	chains	will	never	break.	It	is	our	belief
that	he	will	not	sit	long	upon	that	throne.	Thus,	we	discard	him.’
Beroke	Soft	Voice	said,	‘The	Knight	is	a	despiser	of	chains,	but
understanding	eludes	him	still.	Many	are	the	chains	that	cut	cruel,	that	enslave
with	malice.	Yet	other	chains	also	exist,	and	these	are	the	ones	we	each	choose
to	wear	–	not	out	of	fear,	or	ignorance.	These	are	the	noblest	of	chains.
Honour.	Virtue.	Loyalty.	Many	will	approach	the	House	of	Chains,	only	to
falter	upon	its	threshold,	for	it	demands	within	us	strengths	rarely	used.	When
suffering	awaits,	it	takes	great	courage	to	stride	forward,	to	enter	this
unrelenting,	unforgiving	realm.’
Urugal	had	scraped	seven	symbols	on	the	ground.	He	now	pointed	to	each
in	turn	and	said,	‘The	Consort.	She	who	is	known	to	us.	The	Reaver	–	there	are
two	faces.	One	man.	One	woman.	Knight,	we	have	spoken	of.	The	Seven	of	the
Dead	Fires,	the	Unbound	–	we	T’lan	Imass,	for	now,	but	that	will	change.
Cripple,	he	whose	mind	must	crawl	to	serve	the	sacred	life	within	him.	Leper,
that	which	is	both	living	and	dead.	Fool,	the	threat	from	within.	All,	then,	but
the	Knight	walk	among	the	mortals	in	our	keeping.	Here.	Now.’
Nom	Kala	studied	the	symbols.	‘But	Urugal,	they	are	all	dying.’
‘And	there	is	no	wind	to	carry	us,’	Beroke	said.	‘We	cannot	travel	to	what
lies	ahead.’
‘Thus,	we	cannot	give	them	hope.’
Kalt	Urmanal	grunted	at	Urugal’s	conclusion.	‘We	are	T’lan	Imass,	what
know	we	of	hope?’
‘Are	we	then	lost?’	Nom	Kala	asked.
The	others	were	silent.
‘I	have	a	thought,’	she	said.	‘It	is	as	Kalt	says	–	we	are	not	creatures	of
hope.	We	cannot	give	them	what	we	surrendered	so	long	ago.	These	mortal
humans	will	die,	if	we	cannot	save	them.	Do	any	of	you	dispute	that?’
‘We	do	not,’	said	Urugal.
‘And	so’	–	Nom	Kala	stepped	forward	and	with	one	skeletal	foot	broke	the


patterns	in	the	dirt	–	‘the	House	of	Chains	will	die.’
‘In	another	age,	it	will	awaken	once	more.’
‘If	it	must	be	us	–	and	we	do	wish	it	to	be	us,	do	we	not?	If	it	must	be	us,
Unbound,	then	we	have	no	choice.	We	must	go	to	the	Adjunct.’
‘And	say	what?’	Urugal	demanded.
‘Why,	we	must	lie	to	her.’
None	spoke	for	a	time.
Nom	Kala	studied	the	camp,	the	stretched	shadows.	‘Let	us	seek	to	steal	one
more	day.’
‘To	what	end	is	one	more	day?’
‘I	cannot	say,	Urugal	the	Woven.	Sometimes,	hope	is	born	from	a	lie.	So	be
it.	To	her,	we	shall	lie.’
	
Ruthan	Gudd’s	eyes	tracked	Lostara	Yil	as	she	approached	the	Adjunct.	The
two	women	stood	studying	the	east	as	if	to	defy	the	savage	dawn.	He	wondered
what	kept	Tavore	on	her	feet.	Each	night	she	set	out,	marching	without	rest,	and
by	her	will	alone	she	dragged	an	entire	army	in	her	wake.	If	she	would	not
stumble,	then	neither	would	the	soldiers	behind	her.	It	had	become	a	battle,	a
silent	war.	And	she’s	winning	it.	Every	body	left	behind	is	testament	to	that.
But	how	much	longer	can	she	keep	this	up?	Look	at	that	rising	run,	Adjunct,
and	the	emptiness	beneath	it.	Sometimes,	when	people	speak	of	forbidding,
deadly	places,	it’s	not	just	a	story.	Sometimes,	it’s	all	true,	and	the	warnings	are
honest	warnings.	There	are	places	that	will	kill	you.	And	we	have	found	one.
‘What	are	they	saying,	do	you	think?’	Skanarow	asked.
He	looked	down	at	her,	eyes	tightening.	‘Sleep,	my	love.’	He	watched	her
settle	her	head	back	on	the	hard	ground,	her	eyes	closing.
Not	much	longer.	And	now	it’s	too	late	–	I	can’t	save	you.	I	can’t	just	steal
you	away,	because	you	won’t	make	it.	He	wondered	if	he	would	walk	out	of	this
desert	alone.	One	survivor	left,	leaving	behind	six	thousand	corpses.	A	damned
Otataral	sword	in	one	hand,	for	the	day	when	he’d	need	it.	Aye,	Ruthan	Gudd,
he’s	been	a	one	man	army	before,	after	all.	Here	he	goes	again.	Lifting	his	gaze,
he	studied	the	two	women	standing	twenty	paces	away,	and	frowned.	Lostara	–
she’s	been	possessed	by	a	god.	Does	that	make	her	tougher	than	she	used	to	be?
Who	knows?	But	she’s	looking	in	better	shape	than	Skanarow.	Better	than	the
Adjunct,	too.
‘Please,	lie	beside	me.’
Ruthan	flinched.	He	combed	through	his	beard.	‘I	will.	In	a	moment.’
‘Beloved?’


‘A	moment.’	He	walked	over	to	Tavore	and	Lostara.
If	they	were	in	a	conversation,	it	wasn’t	one	using	words.	The	Adjunct
heard	him	approaching	and	turned	to	regard	him.	‘Captain.	The	ice	armour
you	conjured—’
‘Not	here,	Adjunct.	Nothing	works	here.’
Her	eyes	flattened.	‘But	you	will…persevere.’
Lostara	Yil	coughed,	and	then	said,	‘Ruthan,	the	T’lan	Imass	bow	to	you.
They	title	you	Elder.’
‘I	am	not	a	god,	Elder	or	otherwise,	Lostara.	I’m	sorry.	Wouldn’t	it	be	nice
to	be	one,	though?	For	each	and	every	one	of	us.	Just	to	be…outside	all	this.
The	T’lan	Imass	will	manage,	when—’
‘So	will	you,’	the	Adjunct	cut	in.	‘Yet	you	are	not	a	god.’
‘We	do	not	choose	to	whom	we	are	born.’
‘Indeed	not.	Who,	then,	are	your	parents?’
He	scratched	his	beard	vigorously.	‘Adjunct,	does	it	matter?	It	may	be	that
this	desert	doesn’t	kill	me.	It’s	equally	likely	that	it	will.’
‘You	will	reach	the	city	with	the	wells.’
‘Will	I?’	Ruthan	shook	his	head.	‘Let	me	be	honest	with	you	–	I	cannot
fathom	how	those	children	got	as	far	as	they	did.	What	did	Badalle	say?	Ten
days	away?	But	Icarias	is	two,	even	three	weeks’	march	from	here.’
‘How	do	you	know	this?’
He	grimaced.	‘I	was	once	a	guest	of	the	Jaghut	who	dwelt	in	Icarias	along
with	a	refugee	enclave	of	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	The	simple	fact	remains,	the
only	way	those	children	could	have	come	as	far	as	they	have,	Adjunct,	is	by
warren.’
Tavore	turned	to	Lostara.	‘Get	the	girl.	Bring	her	to	me.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’
When	she’d	departed,	Tavore	fixed	Ruthan	with	a	hard	stare.	‘A	warren.’
‘Which	is	impossible.	I	know.’	He	saw	a	glitter	of	hope	in	her	eyes	and
shook	his	head.	‘Do	not,	Adjunct.	The	desert	is	sucked	dry,	and	if	you’re	not
careful	things	are	likely	to	get	much	worse.’
‘Worse?	Explain	to	me	how	this	could	get	worse,	Captain.’
He	looked	away,	back	to	where	Skanarow	slept,	and	sighed.	‘Draw	your
sword,	Adjunct.’
‘What?’
‘Unsheathe	your	Otataral	blade.’
She	had	the	sword	half	out	of	the	scabbard	before	Ruthan	reached	out	and
grasped	her	wrist.	And	then,	retching,	he	fell	to	his	knees,	turning	his	head
away.


Tavore	slammed	the	weapon	back	down	and	staggered	back	a	step.	‘Gods!’
she	gasped.
Ruthan	spat,	and	then	used	the	back	of	his	wrist	to	wipe	at	his	beard.	‘It’s
what	none	of	you	ever	understood,’	he	said,	staring	down	at	his	trembling
hands,	studying	the	smears	of	blood	in	what	he’d	coughed	up.	‘It’s	not	just
some	damned	metal	that	just	happens	to	devour	magic.	Otataral	is	aspected.’
He	pushed	himself	back	on	to	his	feet.	‘The	next	time	you	draw	that	weapon,
Adjunct,	the	act	will	summon.	She	is	loose	upon	the	world	now,	the	dragon	that
is	the	source	of	all	Otataral	–	the	living	heart	of	that	which	takes	life.	She	has
been	freed.’
Tavore	took	another	step	back,	shaking	her	head.	‘What	has	been	done?’
she	demanded,	her	voice	breaking.
He	saw	panic	rising	within	her	–	vast	cracks	in	her	armour	–	and	held	out	a
hand.	‘Wait	–	listen	to	me.	Tavore	Paran,	listen!	It	will	be	answered	–
everything	is	answered.	Everything!’
And	now,	all	at	once,	it	was	as	if	a	child	was	standing	before	him.	Lost,
frightened.	The	sight	tore	at	his	heart.	‘They’re	not	interested	in	the	Crippled
God.	Do	you	understand	me?	The	ones	who	did	this	–	they	don’t	care	what
happens	to	him.	They’re	reaching	for	something	bigger	–	and	they	think	they
will	sweep	all	this	aside.	You,	the	Fallen	One,	the	Forkrul	Assail	–	all	of	it,
swept	away!
‘But	they’re	fools.	Do	you	understand	me?	Anomander	Rake	is	gone,	but
Draconus	now	walks	the	world.	Do	you	see?	Everything	is	answered.’	And	that
is	the	true	madness	of	this	–	the	Otataral	Dragon	cannot	remain	unchained.
Draconus	will	have	to	kill	it	–	him	or	the	Eleint	–	and	by	killing	it	they	will	end
all	magic.	They	will	cast	us	all	out	into	a	world	devoid	of	sorcery.
She	had	turned	away	from	him,	was	now	staring	into	the	east.	‘This	is	what
he	meant,’	she	murmured.
‘Adjunct?’
‘He	said	my	sword	would	not	be	enough	–	we	argued	that,	again	and	again.
He	said…he	said—’	She	faced	him,	eyes	suddenly	shining,	and	Ruthan	was
struck	by	a	sudden	beauty	in	her	face,	a	thing	that	seemed	to	rise	as	if	from
nowhere.	‘He	said…“it	will	be	answered.”	His	words,	the	same	as	yours.’
‘Who	are	you	talking	about?’	he	demanded.	Who’s	been	scheming	this
nightmare	all	along?	What	raving,	lunatic	idiot—
‘Ben	Adaephon	Delat.’
He	stared,	disbelieving,	thunderstruck	at	his	own	stupidity.	‘That	name…’
‘High	Mage	Quick	Ben,	Captain.	He	vowed	he	would	save	Burn,	and	that
was	one	vow	he	would	not	surrender.	He	said	the	cancer	needed	cutting	out	–


Ruthan?	What	is	wrong?’
But	he	had	turned	away,	struggling	to	hold	it	all	in.	Struggling	–	and	then
failing.	Laughter	burst	from	him.	Disbelieving,	wondrous	laughter.	‘Delat?
Adaephon	Delat?	Quick	Ben	–	oh,	by	the	Abyss!	The	bloody	nerve	of	him!	Was
it	a	glamour,	that	made	me	so	thick?	No	wonder	he	stayed	away	from	me!’
‘Captain?’
He	stared	at	her,	and	he	could	feel	his	mouth	stretched	wide	in	a	manic,
helpless	grin.	‘And	down	he	went,	in	the	battle	with	the	Short-Tails?	Like	Hood
he	did!’
Her	lips	thinned	into	a	straight	line.	‘Captain	Ruthan	Gudd,	even	you	could
not	be	so	dense.	Of	course	he	isn’t	dead.’	She	pointed	to	a	nearby	figure
perched	atop	an	outcrop	of	rock.	‘Ask	our	resident	Septarch	of	D’rek.	He	will
tell	you,	since	he	at	last	has	figured	it	out.’
As	if	commanded,	Banaschar	rose	then,	tottering	as	he	walked	to	them.	He
wagged	a	finger	at	Ruthan	Gudd,	and	through	cracked,	bleeding	lips,	he	said,
‘This	is	Quick	Ben’s	game,	O	Elder.	The	bones	are	in	his	sweaty	hands	and
they	have	been	for	some	time.	Now,	if	at	his	table	you’ll	find	the	Worm	of
Autumn,	and	the	once	Lord	of	Death,	and	Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion,	not	to
mention	the	past	players	Anomander	Rake	and	Dessembrae,	and	who	knows
who	else,	well	–	did	you	really	believe	a	few	thousand	damned	Nah’ruk	could
take	him	down?	The	thing	about	Adaephon	Delat’s	game	is	this:	he	cheats.’
He	turned	to	the	Adjunct	and	managed	a	faint	bow.	‘Lady	Tavore,	it	is	fair
to	say	that	I	will	remember	the	light	in	your	eyes	–	as	I	am	privileged	to	see	it
now	–	for	the	rest	of	my	days.	Did	I	not	speak	of	heroism?	I	believe	I	did,
though	in	your	despond	perhaps	you	were	not	listening.’
‘By	your	words,	High	Priest,	I	found	the	strength	for	the	next	step.	Forgive
me	if	I	could	give	you	nothing	in	return.’
He	cocked	his	head	and	regarded	her,	and	then	said	softly,	‘My	lady,	have
you	not	given	enough?’
Ruthan	Gudd	clawed	at	his	beard.	The	delight	was	fast	fading,	and	he
feared	stirring	the	ashes	and	finding	that	hope	had	been	nothing	but	a	lone
spark,	already	gone.	‘We	still	face	a	dilemma,	and	oh	how	I	wish	Delat	was
here,	though	I	think	even	he	would	have	no	answers	for	our	plight.	This	desert
will	have	us.’
Tavore	said,	‘Captain,	if	I	fall	–	take	up	my	sword.’
‘If	I	do,	Adjunct	–	and	if	indeed	a	time	comes	when	I	must	draw	that
weapon	–	it	will	kill	me.’
‘Then	as	you	have	said,	you	must	not	be	an	Elder	God.’
‘As	I	said,’	he	agreed	wryly.	‘But	the	matter	is	simpler	than	that.	I	have


lived	a	long	time,	and	that	is	by	magic	alone.	Without	sorcery,	I	would	be	less
than	dust.’	He	glanced	at	Banaschar.	‘Delat	is	not	the	only	one	to	have	gamed	at
the	table	of	the	gods.’
‘I	would	know	your	story	some	day,	Ruthan	Gudd,’	said	Banaschar,	with	a
sad	smile.
Ruthan	Gudd	shrugged.	‘To	be	honest,	too	sordid	to	tell.’
They	were	silent,	as	if	so	thoroughly	wrung	out	by	all	that	had	been	said	–
and	felt	–	that	nothing	remained.
Lostara	then	returned,	and	at	her	side	was	the	girl	named	Badalle,	and	a
boy	carrying	a	sack.
	
Nom	Kala	walked	through	a	silent	camp,	bodies	lying	motionless	on	all	sides,
half-closed	eyes	tracking	her	as	she	strode	past.	She	saw	suffering	on	a	scale
that	made	long-dead	emotions	tremble	inside	her,	and	she	remembered	the	fate
of	her	own	kind,	when	walls	of	ice	closed	in,	when	the	animals	died	out	or
went	away,	when	there	was	nothing	left	to	eat,	when	the	humans	hunted	them
down.
Their	answer	had	been	the	Ritual,	an	escape	that	proved	a	prison.	But	such
a	thing	was	not	available	to	these	mortals.	Another	day.	A	lie	to	give	them	that,
if	one	is	even	possible.	See	how	weak	they	are.	See	how	they	fail.	Another	day	–
but	would	that	be	a	gift?	The	marching,	the	dragging	steps,	the	ones	falling	to
the	side	to	surrender.	Will	they	thank	me	for	those	extra	moments?
Perhaps	her	desire	to	help	was	in	fact	one	of	cruelty—
‘So,	how	does	it	feel?’
At	the	faint	voice	she	halted,	looked	round,	saw	a	soldier	sitting	nearby,
studying	her.	‘How	does	what	feel?’	she	asked.
‘Being…dust.’
She	did	not	know	how	to	answer	him	and	so	was	silent.
‘We’ll	be	joining	you	soon	enough,	I	suppose.’
‘No,	you	won’t.	No	memory	will	remain,	nothing	to	draw	you	back.’
‘But	I	have	strings,	T’lan	Imass.	That’s	my	private	curse.	I	will	be	pulled
back	together	–	or	they’ll	try,	anyway.	Over	and	over	again.’
Nom	Kala	studied	the	man,	and	then	shook	her	head.	‘I	see	no	strings,
mortal.	If	they	once	existed,	now	they	are	gone.	Nothing	holds	you.	Not	the	will
of	gods,	not	the	lies	of	destiny	or	fate.	You	are	severed	from	everything	but
that	which	lives	within	you.’
‘Truly?	No	wonder	I	feel	so	lonely.’
‘Yes,’	she	said.	‘That	is	the	reason.’


‘But…you	are	not	alone,	are	you,	T’lan	Imass?’
‘No,	but	that	is	no	salvation.	Together,	we	but	share	our	loneliness.’
He	snorted.	‘Not	sure	that	makes	sense,	but	I	think	I	understand	you
anyway.	Listen,	do	us	a	favour.	Once	the	last	of	us	has	fallen,	don’t	fall	to	dust,
don’t	give	up	just	yet.	Walk	out	of	this	desert.	Walk	out	of	it.	Please,	will	you	do
that?’
‘Because	it	is	said	that	this	desert	cannot	be	crossed.	Yes,	I	understand	you,
mortal.’
‘Will	you	do	it?’
‘We	shall.’
He	settled	back	on	his	bedroll	with	an	uneven	sigh.	‘Good.	Prove	them
wrong.	It’s	good	enough,	I	think.’
Nom	Kala	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘Do	not	give	up,	soldier.	One	more
march.’
Eyes	closed,	he	asked,	‘What	would	be	the	point	of	that?’
‘Push	your	comrades	on	–	through	this	next	night.	Do	this,	please.	As	I
have	agreed	to	do	as	you	wish,	I	ask	that	you	reciprocate.’
He	opened	his	eyes,	squinted	at	her.	‘Is	it	that	important?’
‘Suffering	is	a	chasm.	But	there	is	the	other	side,	and	upon	that	side	waits
the	Fallen	God.	I	am	one	of	the	Seven	now.	I	am	one	among	the	Unbound.	The
Fallen	One	understands	suffering,	mortal.	In	that	you	are	not	alone.	In	that,
neither	are	the	T’lan	Imass	alone.’
‘Aye,	I’ll	grant	you	that	he	knows	a	thing	or	two	about	suffering.	That	you
do,	as	well.	I	just	don’t	see	the	comfort	in	that	kind	of	sharing.’
‘If	not	comfort,	then	find	strength.’
‘To	keep	bearing	that	suffering?	What	for?’
Yes,	Nom	Kala,	what	for?	Do	you	have	an	answer?	Does	anyone?	‘When
you	at	last	reach	across	that	chasm,	mortal,	and	grasp	tight	the	hand	of	the
Fallen	One,	ask	him	your	question.’
He	managed	a	sour	smile.	‘Convenient.’	And	he	closed	his	eyes	once	more.
She	continued	on,	troubled,	heavy	with	anguish.	The	T’lan	Imass	have	seen
civilizations	rise	and	fall.	We	have	seen	lands	die,	only	to	be	reborn.	We	have
seen	the	seas	rise	and	we	have	walked	ancient	seabeds.	We	have	witnessed	life’s
myriad	struggles.	From	the	lone	creature	suffering	its	last	moments	to
thousands	dying	in	a	bleak	season.
And	what	have	we	learned?
Only	that	life	is	its	own	purpose.	And	that,	where	there	is	life,	there	shall	be
suffering.	Has	it	any	meaning?	Is	existence	reason	enough?
I	am	an	Unbound.	I	am	free	to	see,	and	what	is	it	that	I	see?


I	see…nothing.
Ahead,	at	the	vanguard	of	the	column,	there	were	figures.	Standing.	Now,	I
must	find	a	worthy	lie.	And	if	my	name	is	to	be	cursed	in	the	last	breaths	of
these	humans,	so	be	it.	My	crime	was	hope.	My	punishment	is	to	see	it	fail.
But	the	T’lan	Imass	have	weathered	that	punishment	for	a	long	time,	and
the	failure	of	hope	has	a	name:	it	is	called	suffering.
	
‘Words,’	said	Badalle,	meeting	the	Adjunct’s	eyes.	‘I	found	power	in	words.
But	that	power	is	gone.	I	have	nothing	left.’
Mother	turned	to	her	companions,	but	said	nothing.	There	was	almost	no
life	left	in	her	plain	face,	her	plain	eyes,	and	seeing	that	hurt	Badalle
somewhere	inside.	I	had	a	poem	for	you.	But	it	is	gone.	Dried	up.
A	man	combed	his	beard	with	filthy	fingers	and	said,	‘Child…if	your
strength	returns	–	another	day…’
‘It	is	not	that	kind	of	strength,’	Badalle	replied.	‘It	is	gone,	perhaps	for
ever.	I	do	not	know	how	to	get	it	back.	I	think	it	has	died.’	I	am	not	your	hope.	I
cannot	be.	It	was	meant	to	be	the	other	way	round,	don’t	you	see	that?	We	are
children.	That	and	nothing	more.	‘The	god	that	died	here,	it	was	the	same.’
Mother	frowned.	‘Can	you	explain	that,	Badalle?’
She	shook	her	head.
The	other	man	–	the	one	with	the	haunted	eyes	–	then	spoke.	‘What	can	you
tell	us	of	that	god,	Badalle?’
‘He	broke	apart.’
‘Did	he	just	break	apart	or	did	someone	break	him	apart?’
‘He	was	murdered	by	his	followers.’
The	man	reacted	as	if	he’d	been	struck	in	the	face.
‘It	is	in	the	Song	of	the	Shards,’	she	continued.	‘The	god	sought	to	give	his
people	one	last	gift.	But	they	refused	it.	They	would	not	live	by	it,	and	so	they
killed	him.’	She	shrugged.	‘It	was	long	ago,	in	the	age	when	believers
murdered	their	gods	if	they	didn’t	like	what	the	god	had	to	say.	But	it’s	all
different	now,	isn’t	it?’
‘Aye,’	the	bearded	man	muttered.	‘Now	we	just	ignore	them	to	death.’
‘It’s	not	the	gods	that	we	ignore,’	said	the	woman	standing	beside	Mother,
‘just	their	gifts	of	wisdom.’
The	other	man	spoke.	‘Do	that	long	enough	and	the	gods	just	wither	and
die.	So	it	takes	longer,	but	in	the	end,	it’s	still	murder.	And	we’re	just	as	vicious
with	mortals	who	have	the	nerve	to	say	things	we	don’t	want	to	hear.’	He
cursed,	and	then	said,	‘Is	it	any	wonder	we’ve	outstayed	our	welcome?’


Mother	met	Badalle’s	eyes	and	asked,	‘This	city	–	Icarias	–	who	dwells
there?’
‘Only	ghosts,	Mother.’
Beside	her,	Saddic	had	seated	himself	on	the	ground,	taking	out	his	useless
things,	but	at	the	mention	of	Icarias	he	looked	up	and	then	pointed	at	the
bearded	man.	‘Badalle,’	he	said.	‘I	saw	this	man.	In	the	crystal	caves	beneath	the
city.’
She	considered	this,	and	then	shrugged.	‘Not	ghosts,	then.	Memories.’
‘For	ever	frozen,’	the	bearded	man	said,	eyeing	the	boy.	He	faced	Mother.
‘Adjunct,	they	cannot	help	you.	Look	at	them	–	they’re	dying	just	as	we	are.’
‘Would	that	we	could	have	done	better	by	them,’	said	the	other	man.
Mother	hesitated,	and	then	nodded,	as	if	in	defeat.
This	is	not	how	it	should	be.	What	am	I	not	seeing?	Why	do	I	feel	so
helpless?
The	bearded	man	was	still	watching	Saddic,	and	then	he	said,	‘Send	them
back	to	their	beds,	Adjunct.	This	is	all	too…cruel.	The	sun	and	heat,	I	mean.’
‘Lostara—’
‘No,	I	will	escort	them,	Adjunct.’
‘Very	well,	Captain.	Badalle,	this	man,	Ruthan	Gudd,	will	take	you	back
now.’
‘Yes,	Mother.’
The	captain	settled	into	a	crouch,	facing	Saddic.	‘Here,’	he	said	gruffly,	‘let
me	help	with	these	toys.’
Badalle	stared,	suddenly	breathless,	watching	as	Ruthan	Gudd	and	Saddic
filled	the	tattered	bag.	Something	made	Saddic	look	up	then,	his	eyes	meeting
hers.
‘Badalle?	What	is	it?	What	did	he	say?’
She	struggled	to	breathe,	struggled	to	speak.	Something	fierce	and	wild
rushed	through	her.	She	fell	to	her	knees,	snatched	the	bag	from	Saddic’s	small
hands.	She	spilled	the	objects	back	out	and	stared	down	at	them	in	wonder.
‘Badalle?’
The	captain	had	leaned	back,	startled	by	the	vehemence	in	her	gesture,	yet
he	said	nothing.
‘Badalle?’
‘Saddic	–	these	things	–	they’re	toys.’
He	looked	up	at	her,	the	colour	leaving	his	face.	Showing	her,	bared	and
raw,	wretched	astonishment.	Then	that	shattered,	and	she	could	see	that	he	was
about	to	cry.
I’m	sorry.	I’d…forgotten.


She	watched	as	Saddic’s	attention	returned	to	the	collection	of	objects
spilled	out	on	the	ground	before	him.	He	reached	out	as	if	to	touch	one	–	a
bundle	of	twine	and	feathers	–	and	then	snatched	back	his	hand.	‘Toys,’	he
whispered.	‘They’re	toys.’
The	captain	climbed	to	his	feet	and	backed	away.	His	dark	eyes	met	her
gaze,	and	she	saw	the	horror	in	them,	and	she	understood.	Yes,	this	is	what	we
lost.	‘Thank	you,	Captain,’	she	said	quietly.	‘We	will	go	back.	Just…not	yet.
Please?’
He	nodded,	and	then	led	the	other	adults	away,	and	though	it	was	obvious
that	they	were	confused,	that	they	had	questions,	not	one	of	them	said	a	word.
Badalle	moved	to	kneel	across	from	Saddic.	She	stared	down	at	the	array,
weakened	by	a	sudden	feeling	of	helplessness.	I	–	I	don’t	remember.	Yet,	when
she	reached	down	to	pick	up	the	pommel	from	a	knife	or	sword,	when	she
hesitated	and	looked	over	at	Saddic,	he	simply	nodded	his	invitation.
	
Thirty	paces	away,	hot	but	dry-skinned	in	the	burgeoning	heat,	Ruthan	Gudd
stood	watching,	his	only	company	the	Adjunct.	In	a	few	terse,	difficult	words,
he	had	explained	his	sense	of	what	had	just	happened.
Neither	spoke	for	some	time.
It	wasn’t	fair.	Of	all	the	crimes	he	had	seen	in	a	life	almost	too	long	to
comprehend…this	one	surpasses	them	all.	The	look	on	her	face.	On	the	boy’s
when	she	told	him.	That	pathetic	collection,	carried	like	a	treasure,	and	is	it	not
a	treasure?	Finally,	he	wiped	a	hand	before	his	eyes	and	said,	‘We	spoke	of
murdering	gods,	with	a	strange	diffidence,	almost	a	bluster	–	and	what	did	they
show	us?	Adjunct,	what	are	we,	when	we	murder	innocence?’
Tavore’s	sigh	was	ragged.	‘It	will	be	answered.’
He	saw	her	take	on	the	burden,	in	the	settling	of	her	shoulders,	recognized
the	breathtaking	courage	in	the	way	she	lifted	her	head,	the	way	she	refused	to
look	away	from	the	scene	–	of	two	children,	trying	to	remember	what	it	is	to
play.	Adjunct	–	do	not	do	this.	You	cannot	carry	anything	more—
Hearing	someone	behind	them,	they	both	turned.
A	T’lan	Imass.	Ruthan	Gudd	grunted.	‘One	of	our	deserters.’
‘Nom	Kala,’	the	apparition	replied.	‘Now	in	the	service	of	the	Fallen	One,
Elder.’
‘What	do	you	wish	to	tell	me?’	Tavore	asked.
‘Adjunct.	You	must	march	for	another	night	–	you	cannot	stop	here.	You
cannot	give	up.	One	more	night.’
‘I	intend	to	march	for	as	many	nights	as	we	can,	Nom	Kala.’


She	was	silent,	as	if	nonplussed.
Ruthan	Gudd	cleared	his	throat.	‘You	don’t	want	us	to	give	up	–	we
understand	that,	Nom	Kala.	We	are	the	Fallen	One’s	last	hope.’
‘Your	soldiers	fail.’
‘They’re	not	interested	in	worshipping	the	Crippled	God,’	he	said.	‘They
don’t	want	to	give	their	lives	to	a	cause	they	don’t	understand.	This	confusion
and	reluctance	weakens	their	spirit.’
‘Yes,	Elder.	Thus,	there	must	be	one	more	night	of	marching.’
‘And	then?’	the	Adjunct	demanded.	‘What	salvation	will	find	us	by
tomorrow’s	dawn?’
‘The	Seven	of	the	Dying	Fires	shall	endeavour	to	awaken	Tellann,’	Nom
Kala	replied.	‘We	have	begun	our	preparations	for	a	Ritual	of	Opening.	Once
we	have	created	a	gate	we	shall	travel	through,	to	a	place	where	there	is	fresh
water.	We	shall	fill	the	casks	once	more	and	return	to	you.	But	we	need	another
day.’
‘There	are	but	seven	of	you,’	Ruthan	said.	‘In	this	desert,	that	is	not
enough.’
‘We	shall	succeed	in	this,	Elder.’
Ruthan	cocked	his	head.	‘If	you	say	so.’
‘I	do.	Now,	please	inform	your	soldiers.	One	more	march.’
‘To	reach	salvation,’	said	the	Adjunct.
‘Yes.’
‘Very	well,	Nom	Kala.’
The	T’lan	Imass	bowed	to	them	both,	turned	and	then	strode	back	into	the
camp.
When	she	was	gone,	the	Adjunct	sighed.	‘In	your	obviously	long	life,
Captain,	did	you	ever	throw	dice	with	a	T’lan	Imass?’
‘No,	and	I	used	to	think	that	wisdom	on	my	part.’
‘And	now?’
Ruthan	Gudd	shook	his	head.	‘They	are	terrible	liars.’
‘Still,’	she	said	under	her	breath,	‘I	appreciate	the	effort.’
‘We	don’t	need	it,	Adjunct.	To	keep	us	all	going	–	we	don’t	need	it.’
‘We	don’t?’
‘No.’	And	he	pointed	to	Badalle	and	Saddic.	‘I	will	go	among	the	troops
this	day,	Adjunct,	for	I	have	a	story	to	tell.	Two	children,	a	sack	of	toys.’
She	eyed	him.	‘These	children?’
He	nodded.	‘These	children.’


Chapter	Eighteen

Down	on	the	strand	where	the	sea	meets	the	land
Where	fishermen	kneel	over	wounds	that	won’t	heal
And	the	water	weeps	at	the	end	of	the	day
In	the	mirror	you	walk	away
Among	the	red	trees	and	the	long	dead	leaves
The	axeman	wanders	but	cannot	remember
And	the	earth	runs	like	tears	and	will	not	stay
In	the	mirror	you	walk	away
In	the	silent	season	high	on	the	hill’s	bastion
In	the	burning	rain	and	the	soul’s	dark	stain
Where	the	children	lie	where	they	lay
In	the	mirror	you	walk	away
Along	the	furrows	of	his	heels	a	long	shadow	steals
Down	from	the	altar	pulled	all	the	destinies	fulfilled
Tell	the	tale	another	god	has	had	his	day
And	in	the	mirror	you	walk	away
When	on	the	grey	fields	the	troubles	fall	still
Another	soldier ’s	cause	dies	for	what	never	was
Drifting	past	the	dreams	now	gone	astray
In	the	mirror	you	walk	away
Soiled	the	sacrament	and	broken	the	monument
Sullied	the	sculpture	and	soured	the	rapture
Beauty	lives	but	brief	its	stay
And	in	the	mirror	you	walk	away


Gods	will	give	and	then	take	away
If	faith	tastes	of	blood
drink	deep	when	you	pray
Beauty	lives	but	brief	its	stay
And	when	it	all	goes	away
and	there’s	nothing	left	to	save
In	the	mirror	you	walk	away
In	the	mirror	you	walk	away
Song	of	the	Last	Prayer
(in	the	age	of	adjudication)
Sevul	of	Kolanse
	rolling	in	heavy	swells.	When
the	nudge	came	a	second	time,	he	thought	of	drunken	nights,	sprawled	beneath
a	table	with	someone’s	booted	foot	thudding	against	him.	With	the	third	nudge	–
harder	this	time,	delivered	with	irritation	or	impatience	–	he	muttered	a	curse.
But	something	had	gummed	together	his	lips,	so	the	word	came	out	as	a	moan.
He	decided	it	was	time	to	open	his	eyes.
That	too	proved	a	struggle,	lids	pulling	apart	as	if	glued,	stinging	viciously
once	he	blinked	his	way	clear.	Gloom,	blurred	shapes,	something	like	a	face
hovering	over	him.	The	air	smelled	of	decay.	The	taste	in	his	mouth	was	of	old,
old	blood.	And	something	else.	Bitter.	It	was,	he	decided,	the	taste	of	failure.
‘Get	up.’
Another	figure,	now	kneeling	beside	him.	A	soft	hand	pressing	against	the
side	of	his	face	–	but	his	beard	was	stiff	and	it	crackled	under	the	palm,	and	the
hand	slipped	away.	Only	to	come	back,	hard	enough	to	rock	his	head.
And	a	woman	said,	‘We	don’t	have	time	for	this.	The	door’s	open.	Some
people	round	here	got	a	feel	for	things	like	that.’
The	first	speaker	said,	‘Poison’s	gone	inert.	Long	ago.	But	he	ain’t	moved	in
a	while.’
‘The	guardian	should’ve—’
‘Off	wandering	the	warrens,	is	my	guess.	Lucky	us.’
‘Just	help	him	to	his	feet,	will	you?’
Hands	under	his	arms,	a	grunt,	and	he	felt	himself	leave	the	stone	floor
except	for	his	heels.	Sudden	pain	in	his	lower	back	and	his	legs	as	they	tried	to
take	his	weight.	He	couldn’t	remember	being	this	heavy	–	was	he	ever	this
heavy?
‘Stand	up,	damn	you	–	I	can’t	hold	you	up	long.’
HE	FELT	THE	NUDGE	AND	IMAGINED	HIMSELF	IN	THE	HOLD	OF	A	SHIP,


‘How	do	you	think	I	felt?’	the	woman	asked	beside	him.	‘He	made	all	my
bones	creak.’
He	swore	at	the	sharp	stabs	lancing	out	from	his	legs,	tottered—
‘There,	back	a	step	–	lean	against	the	wall.	Good,	like	that.	Now	look	at	me,
idiot.	Look	at	me	like	you	know	me.’
It	was	dark,	but	he	could	make	out	the	man’s	face	now.	Studied	the	eyes
fixing	on	his	own,	and	frowned.
‘What’s	my	name?’	the	man	demanded.
He	worked	until	he	had	some	spit	in	his	mouth,	pushed	with	his	tongue	to
force	open	his	lips.	‘I	know	you,’	he	managed	to	say.	‘Your	name…	Blob.’
‘Blob?’	The	man’s	head	turned	towards	the	woman.	‘He	says	my	name	is
Blob.’
‘Should	I	slap	him	again?’
‘Blur,’	he	now	said,	blinking	at	the	woman.	‘Blob	and	Blur.	I	remember	now.
You	got	me	drunk.	Took	advantage	of	me.	I	should	probably	kill	you	both.	Where
are	my	trousers?’
Still	leaning	against	the	wall,	still	using	it	to	prop	himself	up,	he	glared	at
the	man	and	the	woman,	watched	them	both	back	off	a	step.	They	were	all	in	a
corridor,	and	to	his	right	was	a	thick	wooden	door,	pushed	open,	revealing	a
snarled	lumpy	mess	of	a	yard	just	beyond,	and	a	cool	draught	was	slinking	in,
smelling	of	brackish	water	and	rubbish.
The	man	spoke	slowly,	as	if	to	a	child.	‘You’re	wearing	your	trousers.’
‘Of	course	I	am.	Think	I	can’t	dress	myself?	Where	are	my	knives?’
The	woman	swore	under	her	breath	and	then	said,	‘The	fool’s	lost	his	mind.
Not	hard,	since	it	wasn’t	great	to	begin	with,	but	it’s	gone	now.	He’s	useless	to
us	–	Cotillion	lied.	Just	wanted	me	out	from	underfoot,	so	he	sent	me	riding
wild	as	a	she-witch	–	all	for	nothing!’
‘I’d	agree	with	you	on	that	assessment,’	said	the	other	man,	now	crossing
his	arms,	‘except	for	one	thing.’
‘What?’
‘Blob	and	Blur?	The	bastard’s	having	us	on,	Minala.	And	he	thinks	it’s
funny,	too.	See	that	glare?	Like	every	ocean	storm’s	come	home	to	roost	on	his
forehead.	Thing	is,	Kalam	never	glares.	Almost	never	scowls.	Kalam’s	got	the
face	of	an	assassin.’
Kalam	sneered.	‘I’m	having	you	on,	am	I?	Tell	you	what,	Wizard,	am	I
having	you	on	the	way	you	had	me	on	when	I	cracked	that	acorn	and	you	never
showed?	With	about	a	hundred	Claws	closing	in	on	me?’
‘Not	my	fault.	Besides,	look	at	you.	You	came	out	the	other	end	still	walking
—’


‘Crawling,	actually,’	corrected	Minala.	‘According	to	Shadowthrone,	I
mean.	In	fact,	the	wispy	runt	had	to	drag	Kalam	up	to	the	door	here.	It’s	a
wonder	he	even	managed	it.’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘So	you	ain’t	nearly	as	good	as	you	think	you	are.	What
a	shock.	Look	at	your	clothes	and	armour	–	you’re	chopped	to	pieces,	O	mighty
assassin.	A	handful	of	Laseen’s	weasels	made	a	mess	of	you,	and	you’ve	got	the
nerve	to	blame	me.’
‘So	where	is	she?’	Kalam	demanded.
‘Who?’
‘Laseen.	I	got	to	settle	with	her	–	she	cut	Tavore	loose.	She	said	the
Wickans	have	to	be	sacrificed	–	and	Korbolo	Dom.	I	want	that	bastard’s	knobby
head	bouncing	down	every	step	from	Mock’s	Hold	to	the	mouth	of	the	sewer	–
where	the	fuck	are	my	knives?’
Minala	drew	out	a	belted	brace	and	flung	the	gear	at	his	feet.	‘So	I	come
riding	through	a	thousand	warrens,	nearly	get	blasted	by	lightning,	and	you
ain’t	got	a	single	word	for	your	Hood-damned	wife?’
‘You	threw	me	out,	remember?’
‘Remember?	I’m	remembering	why,	is	what	I’m	remembering.	This	is	all
Cotillion’s	fault.’
Quick	Ben	said,	‘She	won’t	say	it,	but	she	misses	you—’
She	rounded	on	him.	‘You	stay	out	of	this!’
‘I’d	love	to,	but	we	haven’t	got	time.	Look,	Kalam,	she’s	sincere	–	she	even
found	you	a	horse—’
‘What	do	I	need	a	horse	for?	We’re	in	Malaz	City!	If	Laseen’s	run	away,	I
don’t	need	a	horse	–	I	need	a	ship.’
‘Kalam,	listen	to	me.	Shadowthrone	delivered	you	to	the	Deadhouse.	You
were	dying.	Poisoned.	And	then	you	were	just,	er,	left	here.	Lying	there	on	the
floor.	For	some	time	–	well,	a	fair	bit	of	time,	in	fact.’
‘Did	you	kill	Laseen,	then?	Did	you	avenge	me?	And	you	have	the	nerve	to
call	yourself	my	friend	–	you	didn’t	kill	her,	did	you?	Did	you?’
‘No	I	didn’t	–	just	close	that	trap	of	yours	and	try	listening	for	a	change.
Never	mind	the	Malazan	Empire.	Never	mind	the	Regent	or	Protector	or
whatever	title	Mallick	Rel’s	come	up	with.	And	maybe	Laseen	got	killed	like
they	say	she	did,	or	maybe	she	didn’t	–	it	doesn’t	matter.	We’re	not	hanging
around,	Kalam.	We’re	needed	elsewhere.	Do	you	understand	what	I’m	saying?’
‘Not	a	word.	But	it	sounds	to	me	like	we’re	wasting	time.’	He	looked	at
Minala.	‘So	you	got	me	a	horse,	did	you?	Is	it	big	enough?	Better	not	be	a
stallion	–	you	know	how	they	get	jealous	when	I’m	around	you.’
‘I	wasn’t	picky,’	she	said.	‘But	if	I’d	thought	about	it,	I’d	have	gotten	you	a


fat	one-eared	three-legged	ass,	and	you	could	take	turns	riding	each	other.	Not
that	anybody’d	tell	the	difference.’
‘Gods	below,	you	two!’	hissed	Quick	Ben,	with	a	sharp	look	out	into	the
yard.	‘Trying	to	wake	up	the	whole	waterfront?	We’ve	got	to	go.	Now.’
Kalam	collected	the	weapon	belt,	checked	to	confirm	that	the	sheaths	held
his	long	knives.	But	his	memory	still	wasn’t	the	way	it	should	have	been,	so	he
couldn’t	be	sure.	But	they	looked	to	be	decent	weapons	anyway.	‘Fine.	Shut	up
the	both	of	you	and	let’s	get	going.’
Outside,	beneath	a	strangely	green	cloudy	night	sky,	Quick	Ben	led	the	way
down	the	winding	path	between	overgrown	mounds	and	dead	trees.	They
reached	the	gate	and	the	wizard	gestured	off	to	their	left.
The	horses	were	tethered	to	a	hitching	post	in	front	of	a	sunken	tavern
thirty	paces	away.	Rising	waters	had	flooded	the	taproom,	leaving	the	place
abandoned	and	dark.	As	they	set	off	for	them,	Kalam	narrowed	his	gaze	on	one
of	the	beasts.	His	steps	slowed.	‘Hold	on,’	he	whispered,	‘that	ain’t	a	horse.’
‘Best	I	could	do,’	Quick	Ben	muttered.	‘Don’t	worry,	it’s	mine.’
Four	paces	from	the	rail	and	a	hulking,	armoured	figure	stepped	out	from
the	tavern’s	nearest	alley.	Two	heavy	blades	clashed	together,	and	then	lifted
threateningly.
Quick	Ben	swore.	‘Look,	Temper,	I	knocked.	Nobody	home.’
The	visored	face	swung	to	study	the	Deadhouse,	and	then	a	deep	voice
rumbled	out.	‘I	might	have	to	kill	you	three	anyway.’
‘Why?’	yelped	Quick	Ben.
Temper	pointed	with	one	of	his	huge	swords.	‘You	didn’t	close	the	fucking
door.’
‘I’ll	be	right	back.’
They	watched	the	wizard	hurry	back	to	the	Deadhouse.
Temper	turned	to	Kalam.	‘He	never	fooled	me,	you	know.	I	don’t	know	what
Whiskeyjack	was	thinking.’
‘You	smell	of	Coop’s	Ale,’	said	Kalam.	‘I’m	thirsty.	Listen,	Minala	–	when
Quick	gets	back,	tell	him—’
‘Don’t	even	try,’	she	said	in	a	growl.	‘Besides,	here	he	comes.’
‘Done,’	said	Quick	Ben	when	he	returned.	His	teeth	flashed	white	as	he
smiled.
Temper	slid	his	weapons	back	into	their	sheaths.	‘I	suppose	I	don’t	really
need	to	say	this	to	any	of	you.	But…don’t	come	back.	We	like	it	sleepy	here.	I
see	any	of	you	again…’
Quick	Ben’s	smile	vanished	and	he	sighed	and	shook	his	head.	‘Temper,	you
should’ve	bolted	to	the	Bridgeburners	when	you	had	the	chance.’


‘I	hear	they’re	all	dead.’
The	wizard	swung	atop	his	ethereal	horse	and	grinned	down.	‘Exactly.’
Examining	the	natty	gelding	Minala	had	found	for	him,	Kalam	glanced
over.	‘Do	you	like	being	retired,	Temper?	No,	it’s	an	honest	question.	Do	you
like	it?’
‘Night	like	this…seeing	you	all	eager	to	ride	out…into	serious	trouble,	no
doubt…aye,	Assassin,	I	like	it.	And	if	you	want	to	do	the	same,	I’ll	stand	you	a
tankard	of	Coop’s	in	yonder	inn,	before	throwing	you	into	the	harbour.’
‘I’ll	get	back	to	you	on	that,’	Kalam	replied,	mounting	up.	He	looked	across
to	Minala,	and	then	Quick	Ben.	‘All	right,	unless	these	horses	can	run	on	water,
someone	needs	to	crack	open	a	warren.’
‘Well,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘mine	can.’
‘Smug	as	ever,	I	see.’
‘In	any	case,	warrens	are	my	business—’
‘And	how’s	business?’	Kalam	asked.
‘Awful.	But	that’s	all	about	to	change.’
‘Really?	How?’
‘Gods	below,	Kalam.	Because	I’m	back,	that’s	why.	Now	stop	talking	and
leave	me	to	it,	will	you?’
	
When	the	three	riders	were	gone,	and	the	tattered	wisps	of	foul-smelling	smoke
had	drifted	away,	Temper	swung	round,	stepped	back	into	the	gloom	of	the	alley,
and	studied	the	wraith-like	figure	standing	amidst	the	rubbish.	‘Old	loyalties,’
he	said.	‘The	only	reason	I	let	them	go.	The	Deadhouse	isn’t	a	damned	toll
booth,	Emperor.’
A	cane	cracked	its	silver	heel	hard	on	the	grimy	stones.	‘Emperor?	I	left
that	behind	long	ago.	And	as	for	the	days	when	I	gave	kindly	advice,	well,	they
never	existed.	But	for	this	once,	and	for	you	alone,	Temper,	a	word	of	caution.
Watch	how	you	talk	to	gods,	mortal,	lest	they…’	he	suddenly	giggled,	‘take
umbrage.’
Temper	grunted,	said	nothing	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	and	then:	‘Umbrage…
huh.’	He	turned	to	leave,	and	Shadowthrone	struck	the	cobbles	again.	The	huge
warrior	paused,	looked	over.
Shadowthrone	hissed.	‘Well?	Is	that	it?’
‘Is	what	it?’
‘That’s	all	you	have	to	say?	This	is	a	momentous	scene,	you	fat	fool!	This	is
where	everything	really,	truly,	finally	begins!	So	squeeze	the	ale	from	your
brain,	mortal,	and	say	something	worthy	of	your	kind.	You	stand	before	a	god!


Speak	your	eloquence	for	all	posterity.	Be	profound!’
‘Profound…huh.’	Temper	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	studying	the
cobbles	of	the	alley	mouth.	And	then	he	lifted	his	helmed	head,	faced
Shadowthrone,	and	said,	‘Fuck	off.’
	
Sister	Belie	watched	the	man	pick	his	way	carefully	through	the	mass	of	rubble
that	had	once	been	the	citadel	gate.	He	wasn’t	especially	tall.	He	had	nothing	of
the	brawn	common	to	a	veteran	soldier,	though	a	white	scar	was	visible
climbing	one	side	of	his	jaw,	up	to	a	clipped	ear	–	that	didn’t	look	like	a	sword
cut,	she	decided.	Something	bit	him.	Would	Sister	Reverence	appreciate	that?	A
Jaghut’s	tusk,	perchance?	Not	likely.	No,	there	wasn’t	much	to	this	man,
nothing	to	explain	the	source	of	his	defiance,	his	infuriating	resistance	to	the
will	and	voice	of	the	Watered.
This	was	about	to	change,	of	course.	The	enemy	commander	had	just	made
a	fatal	error	in	agreeing	to	this	parley.	For	Sister	Belie’s	blood	was	not
watered,	and	this	man	was	about	to	discover	the	power	in	the	voice	of	a	pureborn	Forkrul	Assail.
The	smoke-stained,	cracked	walls	of	the	citadel	were	proof	of	the	effort
the	Watered	commanders	had	made	in	seeking	to	conclude	this	siege;	and	the
thousand	or	so	rotting	corpses	lying	on	the	killing	ground	beneath	those	walls
marked	the	savage	determination	of	the	Shriven.	But	every	assault	thus	far	had
ended	in	defeat.
Yes,	the	enemy	has	done	well.	But	our	patience	is	at	an	end.	It	is	time	to
finish	this.
The	fool	was	unguarded.	He	came	out	alone	–	not	that	it	would	have
mattered,	for	she	would	have	used	his	own	bodyguards	to	cut	him	down.
Instead,	she	would	make	him	take	his	own	life,	here,	before	the	horrified	eyes
of	his	soldiers	lining	those	battlements.
The	enemy	commander	picked	his	way	past	the	corpses	and	then	drew	to
within	ten	paces	of	where	she	stood.	Halting,	he	eyed	her	curiously	for	a
moment,	and	then	spoke	in	passable	Kolansii.	‘A	Pure,	then.	Is	that	the	correct
term?	Not	mixed	blood	–	the	ones	you	call	Watered,	as	in	“watered	down”,
presumably.	No,	you	are	a	true	Forkrul	Assail.	Have	you	come	to…
adjudicate?’	And	he	smiled.
‘Human	arrogance	ever	takes	my	breath	away,’	Sister	Belie	observed.
‘Perhaps,	under	certain	circumstances,	it	is	justified.	For	example,	when
dealing	with	your	own	kind,	whom	you	have	made	helpless	and	at	your	mercy.
Or	in	the	matter	of	dealing	with	lesser	beasts,	when	they	presume	to	defy	your


tyranny.	In	the	palace	of	the	now	dead	king	of	Kolanse,	there	is	a	vast	chamber
crowded	with	stuffed	trophies	–	animals	slain	by	those	of	the	royal	line.
Wolves,	bears,	cats.	Eagles.	Stags,	elk,	bhederin.	They	are	given	postures	of
ferocity,	to	mark	that	final	moment	of	defiance	–	their	presumption	to	the	right
to	their	own	lives,	one	supposes.	You	are	human	–	as	human	as	was	the	king	of
Kolanse.	Can	you	explain	to	me	this	sordid	need	to	slay	animals?	Are	we	to
believe	that	each	and	every	beast	in	that	chamber	sought	to	kill	its	slayer?’
‘Well	now,’	the	man	replied,	‘I	admit	to	having	a	personal	opinion	on	such
matters,	but	you	have	to	understand,	I	never	could	comprehend	the	pleasure	of
slaughter.	Those	whom	I	have	met	who	have	enjoyed	such	activities,	well,	the
reasons	they	tend	to	give	don’t	make	much	sense	to	me.	You	could	have	simply
asked	the	king	of	Kolanse.’
‘I	did,’	Sister	Belie	said,	nodding.
His	brows	lifted.	‘And?’
‘He	said	it	made	him	feel	one	with	the	animal	he	killed.’
‘Ah.	I’ve	heard	similar.’
‘Accordingly,’	she	resumed,	‘I	killed	all	his	children	and	had	them	stuffed
and	displayed	in	the	same	chamber.	It	was	my	wish	that	he	feel	one	with	his
offspring,	too.’
‘I	imagine	that	wasn’t	very	successful.’
She	shrugged.	‘Let	us	hear	your	opinion,	then.’
‘Some	needs	are	so	pathetic	they	cannot	be	satisfied	except	by	killing.	I
don’t	mean	those	among	us	who	hunt	out	of	necessity.	That’s	just	food.	But
let’s	face	it,	as	soon	as	you	start	planting	fields	and	keeping	livestock,	you
don’t	need	to	hunt	for	food	any	more.’
‘The	king	also	said	it	was	his	means	of	worshipping	nature.’
‘By	destroying	it?’
‘Just	my	thought,	human.	But	then,	is	that	not	your	principal	means	of
worship?’
‘Now	that	is	a	perceptive,	if	slightly	painful,	observation.	But	consider	this
–	in	killing	and	stuffing	those	children,	were	you	not	expressing	the	same
detestable	arrogance	that	so	offended	you	in	the	first	place?’
‘It	was	an	experiment	to	see	if	I	too	could	feel	one	with	those	I	had	slain.
Alas,	I	did	not.	I	felt…sad.	That	I	should	have	such	power	in	my	hands,	and
should	choose	to	use	it	for	destructive	ends.	And	yet	I	discovered	something
else	–	a	truth	about	myself,	in	fact.	There	is	pleasure	in	destroying,	and	it	is	a
most	sordid	kind	of	pleasure.	I	suspect	this	is	what	is	confused	with	the	notion
of	“oneness”	by	such	chronic	slayers.’
‘You’re	probably	right.’


‘Because	they	are,	in	fact,	not	particularly	intelligent.’
‘I	assumed	you	would	arrive	at	that	opinion	sooner	or	later.’
‘Why?’
‘Well,	it	sounds	as	if	you	feel	a	need	to	justify	killing	us,	and	while	you
have	pity	for	the	lesser	beasts	of	this	world,	your	definition	of	“lesser	beasts”
does	not	include	humans.	Yet,	ironically,	your	justification	is	predicated	on	the
very	same	notion	of	arrogant	superiority	that	you	found	so	reprehensible	in
the	Kolanse	royal	family.	The	beast	that	knows	no	better	can	be	slain	with
impunity.	Of	course,	there	is	no	logic	to	that	notion	at	all,	is	there?’
Sister	Belie	sighed.	‘That	was	most	enjoyable.	Now	I	need	you	to	take	your
own	life,	so	that	we	may	end	this	pointless	battle.	I	would	like	to	be	able	to	tell
you	that	your	army	will	be	well	treated,	and	so	on.	But	the	truth	is,	I	will
command	them	–	just	as	I	command	the	Shriven.	And	with	the	power	of	my
voice	I	will	set	them	against	my	enemies,	whoever	they	may	be,	and	they	will
fight	without	fear.	They	will	fight	with	a	ferocity	the	like	of	which	has	never
been	seen	among	your	kind,	because	I	intend	to	use	them,	the	way	you	use
horses,	or	war	dogs.	In	other	words,	like	well-trained	beasts.’
‘What	a	depressing	notion,	Forkrul	Assail.	Those	pathetic	needs	I	talked
about?	They	all	come	down	to	power.	The	king	killed	those	animals	because	he
had	the	power	to	do	so,	and	expressing	that	power	made	him	feel	good.	But	it
never	lasts	long,	so	out	he	goes	to	kill	some	more.	I	find	it	pathetic.	And	all	that
you	have	just	said	to	me	here,	well,	it’s	really	the	same	old	shit.	By	your	voice
and	the	sorcery	of	Akhrast	Korvalain	you	will	seek	to	fill	that	void	in	your
soul,	the	void	that	is	the	hunger	for	control,	when	the	bitter	truth	is,	you	really
control	nothing,	and	the	universe	is	destined	to	swallow	you	up	just	as	it	does
everything	else.’
‘You	do	not	believe	in	the	power	to	do	good?	To	do	what	is	right?’
‘The	Hold	of	the	Beasts	wants	vengeance.	It	wants	to	redress	the	balance	of
slaughter.	Messy	as	that	would	be,	at	least	I	see	the	logic	of	it.	But	I	fear	it’s	too
late.	Their	age	is	past,	for	now.’
‘We	will	prove	the	lie	of	your	words,	human.’
‘No,	you	won’t.	Because,	Forkrul	Assail,	you	are	going	to	fail,	and	in
failing	you	fail	your	allies	as	well,	and	for	them	the	misery	simply	goes	on	and
on.	The	only	end	to	the	tragedy	of	the	beasts	will	come	at	the	hands	of	humans
–	and	to	the	Wolves	I	would	advise	patience.	They	need	do	nothing	more,
because	we	humans	will	destroy	ourselves.	It	may	take	a	while,	because	there’s
lots	of	us,	but	we’ll	do	it	in	the	end,	because	we	are	nothing	if	not	thorough.	As
for	you	and	your	kind	–	you’re	not	even	relevant.’
‘Draw	your	knife,	human.	Kneel.’


‘I	am	sorry,	but	I	can	barely	hear	you.’
She	blinked.	‘Draw	your	knife!’
‘Barely	a	whisper,	I’m	afraid.’	He	drew	out	a	small	wooden	card.	‘I	am
Ganoes	Paran.	I	was	a	soldier	in	the	Malazan	army,	a	marine,	to	be	precise.	But
then	I	became	the	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	I	didn’t	ask	for	the	title,	and
had	no	real	understanding	of	the	role	for	quite	some	time.	But	I’m	getting	the
hang	of	it	now.’	He	held	up	the	card.	‘This	is	where	your	voice	is	going.	It’s
another	realm,	where	the	only	things	hearing	you	–	or,	rather,	succumbing	to
your	power	–	are	insects	and	worms	in	the	mud.	They’re	confused.	They	don’t
know	what	a	knife	is.	They	don’t	even	know	how	to	kneel.’
Sister	Belie	stepped	forward.	‘Then	I	shall	break	you	with	my	hands—’
He	seemed	to	lean	back,	and	suddenly	he	was	gone.	The	card	fell,	clattered
on	the	stones.	She	reached	down,	picked	up	it.	The	image	was	little	more	than	a
scratching	of	lines,	a	rough	landscape,	a	hint	of	ground,	low	plants	–	and	there,
vague	in	the	gloom,	stood	the	man.	He	beckoned	and	in	her	mind	she	heard	his
voice.
‘Come	after	me,	Forkrul	Assail.	I	invite	you	to	do	battle	with	me	here.	No?
Well,	it	was	foolish	of	me	to	think	you	were	that	stupid.	After	all,	I	need	only
step	out	of	this	wretched	place,	leaving	you	trapped	–	and	it’d	be	a	long,	long
time	before	you	found	your	way	home.	Well.	We	have	now	met.	We	are	enemies
known	to	one	another,	as	it	should	be.
‘You	cannot	enslave	my	army.	If	you	want	to	defeat	us,	you’ll	have	to	do	it
the	hard	way.	Oh,	by	the	way,	I	enjoyed	our	little	talk.	I	think	I	now	understand
you	better	than	you	do	me,	which	is	an	advantage	I	intend	to	exploit.	Oh,	if	you
could	see	your	expression	now—’
With	a	snarl	she	snapped	the	card	in	half,	flung	the	pieces	to	the	ground.
Whirling,	she	marched	back	to	where	her	officers	waited.	‘Summon	Brother
Grave	–	assemble	the	legions.	We	shall	end	this!’
One	of	the	Watered	stepped	forward	tremulously	and	bowed.	‘Pure,	we
need	reinforcements—’
‘And	you	shall	have	them.	We	shall	sustain	this	assault	–	give	them	no	rest.
Brother	Grave	waits	with	three	legions.	I	will	have	that	human’s	hide	nailed	to
the	wall	of	this	citadel.’
The	Watered	grinned.	‘A	worthy	trophy,	Pure.’
She	faced	the	edifice	once	more.	‘I	will,’	she	whispered,	‘because	I	can.’
	
‘You	fool,’	snapped	Noto	Boil.	‘She	almost	had	you,	didn’t	she?’
Paran	wiped	at	the	mud	caked	on	his	boots.	‘Find	Fist	Bude.	Get	the


reserves	ready.	This	one’s	going	to	be	messy.	And	tell	Mathok	to	mount	up	for
a	sortie	–	before	the	bastards	get	a	chance	to	set	up.’
‘Did	she	seek	to	command	you?’
‘I	told	you,	I	had	an	answer	to	that.	But	you’re	right,	those	Forkrul	Assail
move	damned	fast.	It	was	close.	Closer	than	I	would	have	liked,	but	then,’	he
smiled	at	the	healer,	‘we’ve	stirred	them	up.	Got	two	purebloods	over	there
now	–	and	more	legions	to	boot.’
‘Let	me	guess	–	all	according	to	your	plan.’
‘Where’s	Ormulogun?	I	need	him	to	work	on	that	etching	–	in	case	we
need	to	get	the	Hood	out	of	here.’
Noto	Boil	sighed,	and	set	off	to	look	for	the	Imperial	Artist.	He	chewed	on
his	fish	spine	until	he	tasted	blood.
	
‘You	always	could	pick	them,	couldn’t	you,	woman?’	She’d	been	walking	in	her
sleep	again,	this	time	out	and	down	the	steps	into	the	cellar,	where	waited	a
dead	friend.	He	was	sitting	on	one	of	the	kegs	Antsy	called	the	Sours	–	one	of
those	that	held	bodies	of	damned	Seguleh.	Not	that	they	were	there	any	more,
but	that	pickling	concoction	was	still	one	of	the	foulest	brews	she’d	ever
smelled.
Was	it	Bluepearl	who’d	given	it	a	taste?	She	couldn’t	remember,	but…
probably.
He	was	sitting	working	a	knife	tip	under	filthy	fingernails.
‘Am	I	sleeping	again?’	Picker	asked.
‘Yeah,’	Bluepearl	replied.	‘But	I’m	telling	ya,	Pick,	getting	dragged	into
your	dreams	like	this	ain’t	much	fun.’
‘You	know	what’s	happened	to	this	city?’
He	grimaced,	frowned	at	his	nails.	‘I	voted	against	settling	here	–	do	you
remember	that?	But	the	count	didn’t	go	my	way	–	story	of	my	life.	And	then
Darujhistan	went	and	killed	me.’
‘But	you	didn’t	know	why,	did	you?	I	can	tell	you	why	now,	Bluepearl.	I
know	why	now.’
He	sheathed	his	knife	and	the	sound	the	weapon	made	as	it	locked	in	the
scabbard	was	sharp	enough	to	make	her	breath	catch.	Looked	across	at	her	and
said,	‘We	resanctified	this	place,	did	you	know	that?	Spilling	all	that	blood	–	it
was	stirring	when	we	moved	in,	but	then	we	went	and	drenched	the	stones	in
that	red	stuff.’
‘Meaning?’
He	shrugged,	drew	out	his	knife	again	and	began	cleaning	his	nails,	each


gesture	the	same	as	the	time	before.	‘In	here,	Pick,	we’re	safe.’
She	snorted.	‘Maybe	for	you.’
‘You	got	to	go	soon,	Sergeant.	Out	of	the	city.	Will	there	be	trouble,	you
doing	that?’
‘You	called	me	Sergeant.’
‘Aye,	I	did.	Because	I’m	passing	on	orders	here.	That’s	all.’
‘Whose	orders?’
He	examined	his	nails.	‘There’s	no	such	thing,	Picker,	as	retiring	from	the
Bridgeburners.’
‘Go	back	to	Hood!’
He	grunted	in	amusement,	clicked	his	knife	home,	the	sound	louder	and
more	disturbing	than	the	first	time.	‘Where	Hood’s	at	I	ain’t	going,	Pick.	We	got
us	the	right	commander	again,	the	one	we	should’ve	had	right	from	the	start.	By
whose	order,	Sergeant?’	He	drew	out	his	knife	and	set	to	his	nails	again.
‘Whiskeyjack.’
‘What’s	he	got	to	do	with	any	of	this?	I	know	who	I’m	supposed	to	find.	I
even	know	where	he’s	holed	up	–	and	staying	outa	Darujhistan	tells	me	he’s
smarter	than	he	looks.’	Lifting	an	arm,	she	caught	a	flash	of	silver.	Stared	in
horror	at	the	torcs	now	encircling	her	upper	arms.	‘Gods	below!	How	did	these
come	back!	Get	’em	off	me!’
‘Treach	needs	you	now.	Tiger	of	Summer	and	all	that.’	He	grinned	at	her.
‘It’s	all	brewing	up,	my	love.’
‘Shit!	I	just	put	’em	on	because	they	looked	nice!’
He	was	studying	her,	head	cocked.	‘Getting	fat	on	us,	Sergeant?’
She	scowled.	‘Taken	to	wearing	chain	under	everything.’
‘Even	when	you’re	asleep?	And	you	say	you	ain’t	a	Bridgeburner	no	more?’
‘What	kind	of	dream	is	this?’
He	sheathed	his	dagger.	This	time	the	click	was	sharp	enough	to	make	her
flinch.	‘The	important	kind,	Sergeant.	Look	at	it	this	way.	Hood’s	gone.	Death’s
Gate	was	just…gaping.	But	someone	sanctified	us.	We’ve	seen	more	death	than
a	sane	person	could	stand.	But	we	ain’t	sane,	are	we?	We’re	soldiers.	Veterans.
We’re	past	sane.	We’re	in	that	other	place,	where	all	the	insanity’s	been
storming	around	us	for	so	long	it	can’t	touch	us	no	more	either.	Meaning	we’re
outside	both.	What	makes	us	perfect	for	Death’s	Gate?	Simple,	Picker.	It	don’t
matter	what	we	look	at,	we	don’t	blink.’
‘I	can	get	out	of	the	city,’	she	said.	‘But	it	won’t	be	easy.’
He	began	cleaning	his	fingernails,	the	knife	blade	flashing	dull	in	the	misty
gloom.	‘Glad	to	hear	all	that	confidence	has	come	roaring	back.	Thing	is,	we
ain’t	in	the	mood	to	challenge	what’s	going	on	here.	Besides,	we’re	kinda	busy


at	the	moment.’
‘So	I’m	on	my	own,	is	that	it?’
‘Not	quite.	We	arranged	for	a	reliable…guide.’	He	rose.	The	dagger
slammed	back	into	its	scabbard—
	
The	sound	startled	her	awake.	Lying	tangled	in	sweaty	blankets,	Blend	snoring
at	her	side.	Something	was	at	the	door,	trying	to	get	in.	Cursing	under	her
breath,	Picker	collected	up	the	sword	propped	beside	the	bed.
She	saw	the	latch	flick	once	–	the	same	sound	Bluepearl’s	dagger	had	been
making.
Whoever	was	trying	to	open	that	door	wasn’t	having	much	luck.	‘What	a
fine	guide	you	sent	there,	Whiskeyjack.	Can’t	even	open	a	stupid	door.’
‘Mmm?’
‘Go	back	to	sleep,	love.’	She	rose	and	walked	to	the	door,	turned	the	latch
with	her	sword	point	and	stepped	back	to	let	the	door	swing	open.
A	mangy	cat	sat	in	the	corridor.
Mangy?	‘The	ugly	thing’s	dead.	A	Hood-damned	undead	cat	–	gods	below.’
The	creature	had	a	collar	made	of	thick	hide	or	leather,	twisted	into	a	coil.
A	tarnished	silver	coin	or	medallion	hung	from	it.	Picker	crouched,	reached	out
and	dragged	the	cat	closer,	frowning	when	it	made	no	effort	to	walk,	just	sliding
in	its	sitting	position.	‘Gods,	you	stink.’
Rotted	eye	sockets	offered	her	about	as	much	expression	as	any	living	cat
might	manage.	She	bent	closer,	took	hold	of	the	medallion.	Feeble	scratching
marred	both	sides,	a	name	in	archaic	Gadrobi	or	Rhivi.	She	frowned	at	it.
‘Tufty?’
So	Blend	and	Antsy	weren’t	just	making	stuff	up.	They	were	telling	the	truth.
They’d	found	that	Jaghut	a	damned	dead	cat.
Then	her	eyes	narrowed	on	the	collar.	Skin,	mottled	here	and	there	by	redochre	tattoos.	‘Oh,’	she	muttered,	‘let	me	guess.	T’lan	Imass?’
From	the	room	behind	her,	Blend	called	out.	‘Pick?’
‘It’s	fine,’	Picker	said,	straightening.	‘Just	the	cat.’
‘Did	you	feed	it?	I	didn’t	feed	it	–	oh,	gods,	I	can’t	remember	when	I	last	fed
the	cat!’
Picker	walked	into	the	room.	Sure	enough,	Blend	was	still	sleeping.	Having
one	of	those	dreams.	She	went	over	and	settled	down	on	the	mattress.	Leaned
closer	and	whispered.	‘It’s	true,	Blend.	You	forgot.	For	months!’
The	woman	moaned,	distress	twisting	her	features,	but	her	eyes	remained
shut.


‘You’ve	made	a	real	mess,	Blend.	That	poor	cat.	I	just	found	it,	and	Hood
knows	it	ain’t	a	pretty	sight.’
‘You	could’ve	fed	it,	Picker	–	why	didn’t	you	feed	it?’
Something	sharp	pricked	under	Picker’s	chin	and	she	froze.
‘Better	answer	me,’	Blend	said	in	a	casual	tone.	‘You	see,	I	loved	that	cat.
Got	it	for	my	sixth	birthday.	It	was	my	favourite	cat.’
‘Bluepearl?’	Picker	called	out.	‘Can	you	fix	this,	please?	Bluepearl?’
No	answer.	Picker	knew	that	if	she	tried	to	pull	away,	Blend’s	deadly
instincts	would	answer	with	a	fatal	thrust	–	up	through	her	brain.	She	thought
furiously.	‘I	was	only	joking,	love.	Tufty’s	fine.’
Blend’s	brow	wrinkled.	‘Tufty?	Who’s	Tufty?’
‘Uh,	the	cat	I	forgot	to	feed.’
The	knife	vanished	beneath	the	blankets,	and	Blend	rolled	over.	‘You	never
was	good	with	animals,’	she	mumbled,	and	then	added,	‘Bet	it	hates	you	now.
No	more	cuddles	for	you,	Pick.’	A	moment	later	she	was	snoring.
Picker’s	sigh	was	ragged.	Wiping	sweat	from	her	eyes,	she	glared	across	at
the	ugly	thing	in	the	doorway.	‘Lords	above,	I	hope	so.’
And	then	she	discovered	the	silver	torcs.
	
The	waters	calmed,	as	they	were	wont	to	do	whenever	he	came	up	from	below
deck.	Shurq	Elalle	watched	the	Jaghut	approach.	The	rest	of	her	crew	–	the	few
that	still	lived	–	sat	or	sprawled	amidships	tracking	the	tall,	ghastly	warrior
with	a	fascination	she	almost	envied.	Here	was	the	once-god	of	death	and	the
exquisite	irony	of	her	meeting	Hood	was	simply	delicious.	Back	in	Letheras,
she’d	have	wagered	her	entire	fortune	that	this	was	one	encounter	she	would
never	have.
Instead,	she	was	captaining	Hood’s	Ship	of	the	Dead,	or	whatever	it	was	he
called	it.	Vessel	of	Souls?	Death	Ship?	Something	ominous,	anyway.	Not	that
she	had	much	to	do	by	way	of	giving	orders	and	the	like.	Whatever	propelled
the	craft	wasn’t	slave	to	winds,	canvas	and	cordage.	And	not	an	oar	in	sight.
Suddenly,	the	seas	had	become	uninteresting.	As	if	all	her	skills	–	and
possibly	it	was	the	same	with	her	crew	–	all	their	skills	had	become	irrelevant.
And	for	all	the	ease	and	comfort	that	came	with	this	kind	of	sailing,	her	sense
was	one	of	tragic	loss.	At	this	moment,	her	respect	for	the	sea	wavered,	as	if
fatally	weakened,	and	she	wondered	if,	before	long,	there	would	come	to
humans	a	true	conquest	of	the	waves,	spelling	the	end	of	humility.	And	let’s
face	it,	humanity	without	humility	is	a	dangerous	force.	Don’t	know	why	I’m
thinking	as	if	I’m	seeing	the	future,	but	that’s	how	it	feels.	Some	future	time


when	sorcery	does	too	much,	when	it	solves	all	our	problems	–	only	to	invent
new	ones.	If	this	is	to	be	the	real	future,	I	don’t	want	it.
‘There	is	a	darkness	upon	your	thoughts,	Captain	Elalle.’
She	glanced	over	at	him.	Burnished	tusks,	mottled	with	unimaginable	age.
Worn,	leathery	skin	stretched	gaunt	over	sharp	bones.	Deepset	eyes,	haunted	in
shadow,	the	vertical	pupils	barely	visible	–	but	they’d	not	been	there	when	he’d
first	appeared,	so	it	seemed	that	life	was	returning	to	the	Jaghut.	‘You	can	sense
such	things,	Hood?’
‘You	are	the	captain.’
‘I	don’t	see	the	relevance	of	that	–	the	title	has	lost	all	meaning.’
‘To	the	contrary,’	Hood	replied.	‘It	is	by	the	currents	of	your	thoughts	that
we	find	our	course.’	He	pointed	ahead.
She	squinted.	A	smudge	building	on	the	horizon.	‘I’ve	conjured	up	a
storm?’
‘Out	of	witless	boredom	I	created	ships	like	this	one,	and	I	set	captains
upon	them,	choosing	those	among	the	dead	for	whom	death	has	become	an
obsession.’
‘I	imagine	you’d	have	plenty	to	choose	from.	How	can	the	dead	not	obsess
over	their	being	dead?’
‘I	am	not	responsible	for	small	minds,	Captain	Elalle.	Indeed,	I	always
possessed	a	kind	of	admiration	for	those	who	refused	their	fate,	who	struggled
to	escape	my	dreadful	realm.’
‘Enough	to	let	them	go?’
‘Go?	I	can	tell	you	that	all	those	who	have	escaped	my	realm	now	exist	in
misery.	For	their	path	ahead	is	no	longer	a	mystery,	and	for	them	hope	does
not	exist.	They	know	that	no	paradise	awaits	them,	and	that	no	amount	of
diligent	worship,	sacrifice,	or	piety	can	change	that.’
‘That	is…awful.’
‘What	it	is,	Captain,	is	inexcusable.’
She	considered	his	words,	and	then	considered	them	some	more.	‘The
gods	take,	but	give	nothing	in	return.’
‘Ah,	see	how	the	storm	dissipates?	Excellent,	Captain…oh	dear,	it	now
returns,	much	more	virulent	than	before.	Captain,	I	would	advise—’
‘Advise	me	nothing!	Couldn’t	you	have	forced	their	hand?	Done
something?’
The	strange,	terrible	eyes	fixed	on	her.	‘But	I	have.’
‘Then…was	it	necessary	for	you	to	leave	the	realm	of	death?	Is	that	why
you’re	here?	It	must	be.	You	have	set	something	in	motion.’
‘I	have	not	acted	alone,	Captain.’


‘I	would	hear	more,	Hood.	If	there	is	a	reason	for	all	this,	I	–	I	need	to
know	it.’
Hood	said	nothing	for	a	time,	studying	the	roiling	clouds	marring	the	way
ahead.	Then	he	spoke.	‘I	so	dislike	moments	of	revelation,	Captain.	One	is
invited	to	infer	all	manner	of	deliberation	leading	us	to	this	place,	this	time.
When	the	truth	of	it	is	chance	and	mischance	rule	our	every	step.’	He	sighed.
‘Very	well,	I	am	not	indifferent	to	your…needs.	This	possibility	only	gained
life	when	two	usurpers	reawakened	the	remnants	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	–	the
Realm	of	Shadow	–	and	then	set	out	to	travel	the	warrens,	and	indeed	the	Holds.
Seeking	knowledge.	Seeking	the	truth	of	things.	What	they	eventually
discovered	did	not	please	them.	And	in	the	boldness	of	their…youth,	they
decided	that	something	must	be	done.’
‘Two	new	gods,’	Shurq	Elalle	murmured.	‘They	came	to	you?’
‘Not	at	first.	Instead,	they	sought	out	loyal	allies	among	the	mortals	they
had	once	commanded.	Well,	perhaps	“mortals”	is	not	quite	accurate	in	some
instances.	No	matter.	Let	us	call	it	a	wondrous	conflagration	of	circumstance
and	character,	a	kind	of	audacity	which	made	anything	possible.	Before	long,
they	found	the	need	to	gather	additional	allies.	Shall	I	list	them	for	you?’
‘Why	not?’
‘The	Son	of	Darkness,	who	understood	the	true	burden	of	a	surrendered
future,	the	fatality	of	empty	faith.	The	Warlord	of	the	Sleeping	Goddess,	who
would	defy	the	eternal	patience	of	the	earth	itself,	and	Stonewielder,	the	One
who	stood	facing	Caladan	Brood,	ensuring	the	world’s	balance.	These	two	are
destined	to	walk	disparate	paths,	but	what	they	seek	is	much	the	same.	The
Queen	of	Dreams,	whose	pool	had	grown	still	as	death	itself.	The	Lord	of
Tragedy	–	and,	well,	a	host	of	others,	all	drawn	into	the	fold.’
‘Those	you	have	named	–	are	they	gods?’
Hood	shrugged.	‘Ascendants.	The	complexity	of	this	beggars	belief,	to	be
honest.	The	sheer	scale	of	contingencies…	well,	for	all	his	peculiarities,	let	no
one	accuse	Shadowthrone	of	failings	in	the	matter	of	intelligence.	The	same
can	be	said	for	Cotillion,	for	the	patron	of	assassins	well	comprehended	that
just	as	certain	individuals	deserve	a	knife	through	the	heart,	so	too	do	certain…
ideas.’
‘Yet	mortals	are	part	of	this	plan,	too.’
‘Indeed.’
‘The	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran?’
Hood	was	silent	for	a	moment.	‘This	congress,	Captain,	is	not	above	cruel
use	of	mortals.’
‘That	is…unfair.’


‘But	consider	what	may	be	won	here,	Shurq	Elalle.’
‘I	have	–	I	am,	Hood.	But…no.	That	is	unfair.’
‘The	storm,	Captain—’
‘Why	does	that	surprise	you?’	she	retorted.	‘Try	telling	me	something	that
doesn’t	break	my	heart,	then.	Try	telling	me	something	that	doesn’t	make	me
furious	–	at	your	arrogance.	Your	contempt.’
‘We	do	not	hold	the	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran	in	contempt.’
‘Really?’	she	asked,	the	word	dripping	with	derision.
‘Captain,	she	takes	our	arrogance	and	humbles	us.’
‘And	what’s	her	reward?’	Shurq	demanded.
Hood	looked	away,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘For	her,	there	is	none.’
‘Tell	me,’	Shurq	said	in	a	rasp,	‘tell	me	she	did	not	agree	to	this.’
‘To	that,	Captain,	I	shall	say	nothing.’	He	stepped	past	her	then	and	raised
his	hands.	‘We	cannot	survive	the	violence	your	thoughts	have	conjured,
Captain.	Thus,	I	have	no	recourse	but	to	intervene.	Fortunately,’	he	turned	to
eye	her	briefly,	‘Mael	concurs.’
‘Push	it	away,	then,’	Shurq	Elalle	snapped.	‘But	I	will	bring	it	back,	I	swear
it.	To	so	use	an	innocent	woman…’
‘You	begin	to	try	me,	Captain	Elalle.	If	you	intend	to	fight	me	for	the	rest
of	this	voyage,	I	must	find	us	another	captain.’
‘Please	do,	Hood.	I	barely	knew	the	Adjunct,	but—’
He	twisted	round.	‘Indeed,	you	barely	know	her.	I	will	tell	you	this,	then.	I
looked	out	through	her	sister ’s	eyes,	through	a	helm’s	visor	–	in	the	moment
that	she	died	–	and	I	stared	up	at	my	slayer,	the	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran.	And	the
blood	dripping	from	her	sword	was	mine.	You	will	speak	to	me	of	innocence?
There	is	no	such	thing.’
Shurq	Elalle	stared	at	Hood.	‘So,	in	using	her	now…is	this	punishment?’
‘Consider	it	so,	if	it	eases	your	conscience.’
‘She	murdered	her	sister?’
‘Yes.’
‘Is	it	guilt	that	drives	her	now,	Hood?	Does	she	seek	redemption?’
‘I	imagine	she	does.’
‘Will	she	find	it?’
Hood	shrugged.
What	is	it	you’re	not	telling	me?	I	can	sense…something.	The	sister…a
helm’s	visor.	‘Hood,	that	murder	–	was	it	an	accident?’
The	Jaghut	did	not	reply.
Shurq	stepped	closer.	‘Does	Tavore	even	know	she	killed	her	own	sister?’
‘Irrelevant,	Captain	Elalle.	It	is	the	ignorant	who	yearn	most	for


redemption.’
After	a	moment,	she	stepped	back,	went	to	the	side	rail,	stared	out	over	the
rolling	grey	swells,	what	Skorgen	called	swollen	waters.	‘If	we	had	met	in
your	realm,	Hood,’	she	said,	‘I	would	not	have	refused	my	state.	I	would	not
have	sought	to	escape.	Instead,	I	would	have	tried	to	kill	you.’
‘Many	have,	Captain.’
‘Good	for	them.’	Swollen	waters.	‘Hood,	if	she	never	discovers	the	truth	–
if	she	is	made	to	carry	that	ignorance	for	the	rest	of	her	days…do	you	even
care?’
‘Do	you	imagine	that	knowledge	would	be	a	gift?’
‘I…don’t	know.’
‘The	truth	may	hide	at	your	feet.	The	truth	may	lie	coiled	in	high	grasses.
But	it	still	has	claws,	it	still	has	fangs.	Be	careful,	Captain,	where	you	step.’
	
‘Food	reserves	are	dwindling,’	Felash	said,	and	then	sighed	and	looked	up	at
her	handmaiden.	‘Straits	are	dire	for	dear	Mother.’	She	sat	straighter,	arched
her	back	and	groaned.	‘Do	you	advise	rest?	These	journeys	through	troubled
realms,	by	Jaghut’s	cold	breath	or	not,	do	take	their	toll	upon	my	delicate	self.
But	I	must	refuse	your	concerns,	my	dear.	Necessity	demands	–	is	that	wine
you’re	pouring?	Excellent.	I’d	thought	that	long	gone.’
‘I	made	a	request,	Highness.’
‘Indeed?	Of	whom?’
‘It	seems,’	the	woman	said,	passing	over	a	cup,	‘libations	in	the	name	of
death	continue	unabated,	and	if	the	once-god	of	that	dread	underworld	is	not
above	trespassing	in	his	old…er,	haunts,	well,	far	be	it	from	us	to	complain.’
‘Just	so.	Nonetheless,	sweetie,	I	dislike	the	notion	of	you	consorting	with
that	hoary	creature.	Best	keep	a	respectful	distance,	matching	my	own	wise
caution	in	this	matter.’
‘As	you	wish.’
‘But	I	must	say,	superb	wine,	given	its	provenance	–	I	trust	you	have
acquired	a	decent	supply.’
‘Luckily,	yes,	Highness.’
‘The	other	news	is	almost	as	dire,	I’m	afraid.	We	have	cause	now	to
mistrust	the	motivations	of	the	Perish	Grey	Helms.	Most	disturbing.’
The	handmaid’s	eyes	narrowed	as	she	set	to	filling	a	bowl	of	rustleaf.	‘Are
we	not	at	this	moment	sailing	to	a	rendezvous	with	the	Perish	fleet,	Highness?’
‘Assuming	no	calamity	had	struck,	yes.	But	what	is	their	disposition?	The
answer	to	that	question	is	now	paramount.’


‘Perhaps	I	could	scry—’
‘No,	we	cannot	risk	that.	The	warren	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	waxes	full	–
hmm,	was	I	being	poetic	there,	or	succumbing	to	cliché?’
‘I	wouldn’t	know,’	murmured	the	handmaiden,	concentrating	on	lighting
the	pipe.
‘We	have	been	careless	in	your	education.	Never	mind.	Too	late	now,	for	it
is	well	known	that	a	person’s	brain	ossifies	at	a	certain	age,	becoming
incapable	of	new	acquisition,	barring	simple	matters	such	as	languages,
martial	skills	and	so	on.	There	is	a	moment	when	true	genius	is	within	the
reach	of	any	and	every	child,	and	the	gauge	of	that	moment’s	duration	is	in	fact
the	only	means	of	defining	intelligence.	Thus,	while	you	are	naturally	bright,
and	therefore	it	is	probable	that	the	time	of	your	receptivity	could	have	been
measured	in	months,	if	not	years,	we	have	done	all	we	thought	to	do	at	that
juncture,	and	the	time	for	regrets	is	past	–	my	dear,	what	was	in	this	wine?	My
mouth	seems	to	be	running	all	by	itself.	For	most	people,	of	course,	that
moment	of	receptivity	was	sadly	brief.	A	day?	Half	a	day?	And	alas,	once	gone,
it	can	never	return.’
‘Excuse	me,	Highness,	your	pipe	is	lit.’
‘Good.	Give	it	over.	About	this	wine—’
There	was	a	knock	upon	the	cabin	door,	and	a	moment	later	the	latch	lifted
and	First	Mate	Skorgen	Kaban	the	Pretty	loomed	in	the	doorway,	knuckling	his
brow.	‘Princess,	Highest	of	Highs,	beg	yer	pardon.	Got	urgent	happenings	up
top,	if	you	please.	Cap’n	requests	yer	presence.’
Felash	sighed.	‘Very	well,	assuming	I	am	able	to,	uh,	stand.	Umph,	some
assistance—’
The	handmaid	reached	out	to	steady	her.
‘Lead	on,	Skorgen,’	Felash	said	with	a	careless	wave	of	one	hand.	‘And	if
you	must	ogle	my	tits,	try	being	subtle	about	it,	will	you?’
‘Sorry,	Highness.	Only	got	the	one	good	eye,	y’know.’
They	paused	and	waited	while	the	handmaid	got	over	a	sudden	fit	of
coughing.
	
Shurq	Elalle	turned	as	her	first	mate	clumped	up	to	her.
‘Captain!	The	Squall	Witch	–	she’s	drunk!’
‘Pretty,	was	that	meant	to	be	a	whisper?	Greetings,	Highness.’
‘Drunkenness	lies	in	the	purview	of	the	lowborn.	Captain,	allow	me	to
assure	you	that	I	am	neither	drunk	nor	lowborn.	But,	I	must	ask,	where	is	our
Jaghut	guest?’


Shurq	grunted.	‘Thought	you’d	have	passed	him	on	the	way	up.	There	is
the	matter	of	keeping	at	least	one	knife	well	hidden,	you	see.’
‘No,	Captain.	I	am	afraid	I	do	not.’
‘Ah,	of	course.’	Shurq	pointed	ahead.	‘We	have	been	sighted	by	that	ship
and	it	now	bears	down	on	us.	Not	a	Throne	of	War.	Kolansian,	one	presumes.’
Somewhat	unsteadily,	the	princess	made	her	way	to	the	captain’s	side.	‘Oh
dear,’	she	said,	‘that	is	an	Assail	ship.	At	the	very	least,	a	Lesser	Watered	will
be	commanding.	Most	distressing,	of	course,	are	the	implications.’
‘As	in,’	ventured	Shurq	Elalle,	‘where	is	the	Perish	fleet?’
‘Precisely.	And	if	that	is	not	sufficiently	alarming,	I	am	afraid	that	I	have
been	engaged	in	exhausting	rituals	this	day.	If	we	must	fight,	I	will	be	of	little
use.	We	have	already	experienced	the	danger	posed	by	Forkrul	Assail,	by	both
their	physical	prowess	and	the	sorcery	of	their	voice.’
‘I	need	no	reminders,	Highness.	And	while	I	proved	immune	to	such
magics,	the	same	cannot	be	said	for	my	crew.	And	now	you	tell	me	that	you	are
unable	to	defend	us.	So	much	for	hiding	one	knife,	Highness.’
‘We	shall	see.	We	have,	after	all,	my	handmaid.’
Shurq	glanced	over	at	the	woman,	recalling	her	attacks	upon	Sister	Equity.
‘She	did	not	fare	so	well	against	a	Pure,	Highness.’
‘Well,	a	Higher	Watered’s	–	Assail	blood	is,	er,	watered	down,	and	is	not
quite	as	powerful.	In	any	case,	it	remains	to	be	seen	how	this	will	play	out.
After	all,	this	could	be	one	of	the	betrayers	among	the	Assail.	In	the	meantime,
Captain,	may	I	suggest	your	first	mate	gather	your	crew	and	make	for	the
hold.’
‘Skorgen,	take	’em	down	and	keep	’em	quiet.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
There	was	something	skeletal	about	the	Assail	ship.	Two	types	of	wood
were	visible,	one	bone	white	and	the	other	dull	black.	The	hull	was	narrow	of
beam	and	high-castled,	and	with	the	two	masts	offering	minimal	canvas,	Shurq
suspected	that	it	had	been	built	to	ply	sheltered	waters.	An	open	sea	gale	could
well	swamp	such	a	ship.	At	twice	the	mass	of	her	old	raider,	the	Undying
Gratitude,	Shurq	judged	it	to	have	a	complement	of	seventy	or	so	sailors	on
board,	along	with	twenty	or	more	marines,	and	as	the	craft	came	around	and
fell	off	before	the	wind	on	the	port	side	of	the	Death	Ship	she	stepped	to	the
rail	and	looked	across.	A	tall,	spectral	figure	was	staring	down	on	her,	flanked
by	two	helmed	guards	cloaked	in	chain	surcoats.
A	few	paces	behind	the	captain,	Princess	Felash	said,	‘Dearie,	those
marines.’
‘Yes,	Highness,’	the	handmaid	replied.


‘Captain?’
‘Highness?’
‘Why	not	ask	them	what	they	want?’
Shurq	turned	to	eye	the	princess.	Before	she	could	say	anything,	however,
there	were	shouts	from	the	Assail	ship,	and	she	swung	back	to	see	the
handmaid	scrambling	up	the	side.	Shit,	wish	I’d	seen	that	leap.	The	craft	was
wallowing	at	least	six	paces	away.	‘Princess,	what	is	that	woman	doing?’
	
The	handmaid	drew	herself	up	and	over	the	rail.	The	deck	was	an	eye-hurting
maze	of	black	and	white	wood,	like	a	shattered	mosaic.	Six	more	helmed,
chain-clad	marines	stood	near	the	main	mast,	now	drawing	heavy	cutlasses.
The	Assail	half-blood	commander	wore	a	heavy,	jewelled	cloak,	the	thick
oiled	wool	dyed	a	deep	blue.	Torcs	of	gold	collared	her	long	neck,	and	her
head	was	shaved,	emphasizing	the	angled	planes	of	her	skull.	She	was
unarmed,	and	she	now	faced	the	handmaid	with	a	look	of	amused	surprise,
lifting	a	hand	to	stay	her	soldiers.
Looking	round,	the	handmaid	saw	recent	storm	damage	–	much	of	the
rigging	had	been	torn	away,	and	mounds	of	cordage	and	shattered	stays	littered
the	deck.	There	seemed	to	be	less	than	a	score	of	hands	working	on	repairs.
‘Inform	your	captain,’	said	the	Assail	half-blood,	‘that	having	entered
territorial	waters,	she	must	abide	by	the	laws	of	High	Kolanse.	I	am	Lesser
Watered	Intransigent,	Inquisitor	of	the	Southern	Fleet.’
‘Not	much	of	a	fleet,’	the	handmaid	observed.
The	Inquisitor	blinked.	‘A	sudden	storm	has	temporarily	scattered	us.	To
resume	my	message	to	your	captain,	she	and	her	crew	–	including	all
passengers	–	must	accept	adjudication.’
‘By	“adjudication”	do	you	mean	killing?’
The	pale-skinned	woman	smiled,	the	expression	seeming	to	fold	the	two
sides	of	her	face	slightly	inward.	‘The	Proclamation	of	Restitution	has	been
sanctioned.	We	continue	the	task.’
‘And	did	this	fate	befall	the	Perish?’
‘Yours	is	not	a	Perish	ship.’	She	frowned.	‘I	sense	enmity	from	your	vessel
–	and	that	fat	little	girl	with	the	pipe,	she	is	a	mage,	is	she	not?	We	shall
adjudicate	her	first.’
The	handmaid	walked	back	to	the	rail	and	leaned	over.	‘Highness,’	she
called	down,	‘they’re	being	a	little	cagey	regarding	the	Perish.	Might	be	you
were	right.’
‘Anything	else	that	might	be	important?’	Felash	asked.


‘No,	Highness.	Only	that	they	want	to	kill	us.’
‘Very	well.	Carry	on.’
The	handmaid	turned	round.
The	Lesser	Watered	spoke,	‘Reach	not	for	your	weapons.	Kneel.	For	each
and	every	one	of	you,	the	healing	of	the	world	begins	with	your	death.	Among
all	the	reasons	to	die,	is	there	one	more	worthy	than	this?	Be	thankful	that	we
give	meaning	to	your	end.	Kneel.’
The	handmaid	shook	her	head.	‘A	Pure	already	tried	all	that.	Caught	me	off
guard…for	a	moment	or	two.	My	will	is	not	yours	to	command.’
She	moved	then,	rather	faster	than	they’d	expected,	her	hands	thrusting
outward,	striking	the	bodyguards	in	the	chest.	Both	warriors	were	lifted	from
their	feet.	Over	the	rail,	plummeting	to	the	waters	below.	She	ducked	at	that
instant,	evading	the	Lesser ’s	lashing	attack,	and	kicked	at	the	second	joint	on
the	woman’s	left	leg,	folding	it	halfway	between	the	knee	and	the	ankle.	Her
attacker	stumbled,	and	the	handmaid	slipped	past	her,	spinning	round	and	out	to
one	side	to	meet	the	six	marines.
Behind	them	others	were	coming	up	from	below,	she	saw.
She	drew	her	fighting	knives.	She	needed	bigger	weapons.	The	marine
closest	to	her	wielded	a	nice	pair	of	cutlasses.	She	would	take	those.
	
Shurq	Elalle	loosed	a	startled	oath	and	then	leaned	forward	to	watch	the	two
armoured	guards	plunge	into	the	choppy	waters	between	the	ships.	Both	men
vanished	in	a	froth	of	bubbles.	Turning	to	Felash,	she	asked,	‘Does	she	need
help	over	there?’
Plucked	brows	lifted.	‘I	certainly	hope	not!’
The	sounds	of	fighting	–	blades	clashing,	shouts	and	then	screams	–	came
from	the	deck	of	the	other	ship.	‘Princess,	this	handmaid	of	yours,	where	did
she	come	from?’
‘Ah,	now	that	is	a	mystery.’
‘Enlighten	me.’
‘Do	we	have	the	time?	Well,	I	suppose	we	do.’	She	puffed	on	her	pipe,	her
face	disappearing	briefly	behind	a	plume	of	smoke,	and	then	said,	‘My
mother ’s	account,	this.	There	were	seven	of	them.	Six	remain	–	the	seventh,
well,	there	was	some	kind	of	private	challenge	that,	um,	failed.	No	matter.	Now,
I	will	grant	you,	they	appear	young,	but	do	not	let	that	deceive	you.	My	mother
concluded	that	alchemies	constituted	a	worthwhile	investment	in	maintaining
the	vigour	of	her	six	eldest	daughters’	handmaids.	And	we	daughters	are	of
course	sworn	to	secrecy	in	all	such	matters,	perpetuating	the	illusion	that	we


have	simply	grown	up	with	our	loyal	companions,	and	so	on…’
She	paused	then	when	another	chain-clad	marine	spun	head	first	over	the
rail,	trailing	blood	over	the	side.	A	loud	splash	followed.
‘They	were	most	recalcitrant	about	divesting	themselves	of	their	horrid
masks,	but	in	the	end	my	mother ’s	will	prevailed.’
Shurq	Elalle	frowned.	Masks?
	
The	sailors	made	a	mess	of	things	as	the	Lesser	Watered,	in	her	pain	and	panic,
used	the	sorcery	of	her	voice	to	command	them,	and	it	was	some	time	before
the	handmaid	worked	her	way	through	the	howling	mob.	Frenzied	rage	had
shock	value,	and	the	crew’s	utter	lack	of	the	instinct	for	self-preservation	made
things	rather	frantic	for	a	few	moments,	but	there	was	nothing	tactical	in	their
efforts	to	bring	her	down.	When	at	last	the	handmaid	stepped	over	a	sprawl	of
bleeding	bodies	and	approached	the	Inquisitor,	she	was	breathing	hard	and
sweat	stung	her	eyes.
The	woman	facing	her	cradled	a	broken	arm,	stood	hunched	over	a
dislocated	shoulder,	and	glared	across	at	the	handmaid.	‘What	manner	of
demon	are	you?’	she	demanded	in	a	ragged	hiss.
‘For	an	answer	to	that,’	the	handmaid	replied	with	a	half-smile,	‘best	look
elsewhere.’
The	Inquisitor	scythed	out	one	leg.	The	handmaid	leapt	high,	swung	down,
and	severed	the	limb	just	above	the	knee.	As	she	came	down,	her	other	cutlass
cut	into	the	vertical	hinge	of	the	woman’s	face,	splitting	it	in	two.	A	back-swing
with	the	pommel	of	the	first	cutlass	slammed	into	the	side	of	the	Inquisitor ’s
skull,	punching	through.
Pouring	out	blood,	the	corpse	crumpled	at	her	feet.	The	handmaid	looked
round.	No	movement	among	any	of	the	other	bodies.	Just	as	Mother	taught.
She	glanced	down	at	the	cutlasses	in	her	hands,	and	then	let	them	fall	with	a
clatter.	Pieces	of	shit.	She	went	looking	for	her	knives.
	
Hood	returned	to	the	deck	once	they	were	under	way.	The	once-god	of	death
looked	back,	frowned	at	the	burning	ship	in	their	wake.
‘Would’ve	stopped	her	firing	it,’	Shurq	Elalle	muttered,	following	the
Jaghut’s	gaze,	‘if	I’d	had	the	chance.’
‘Oh?	Why	is	that,	Captain?’
‘Well,	that	column	of	smoke	can	be	seen	from	a	long	way	off.’


‘Indeed.’	And	Hood	turned	to	her	then,	and	smiled.
	
‘I	must	leave	you	now.’
Ublala	grunted.	‘I	knew	you	weren’t	my	friend.’
‘I	assure	you,’	Draconus	said,	‘that	I	am,	Ublala	Pung.	But	events	have
occurred	that	now	force	my	hand.	As	for	you,	a	different	destiny	awaits.’
‘I	hate	destiny.’
‘Do	you	understand	the	meaning	of	the	word?’
Ublala	looked	across	at	Ralata	and	scowled.	‘Of	course	I	do.	It’s	the	place
where	you	end	up.	Everyone	knows	that.’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking,	perhaps.	I	fear	you	have	mistaken	it	for
“destination”.	Ublala,	destiny	is	the	fate	you	find	for	yourself.	Many	hold	to	the
belief	that	it	is	preordained,	as	if	the	future	was	already	decided	and	there	is
nothing	you	can	do	to	escape	it.	I	do	not.	Each	of	us	is	free	to	decide.’
‘Then	I’m	going	with	you.	My	wife	can	go	somewhere	else.	She	keeps
talking	about	babies	but	I	don’t	want	babies	–	they	get	in	the	way	of	having	fun,
and	people	who	end	up	having	them	spend	all	day	talking	about	how	great	it	is,
but	they	look	miserable	even	when	they’re	smiling.	Or	worse,	there’re	those
ones	who	think	their	baby	is	the	God	of	Genius	reborn	and	even	its	poo	smells
like	flowers,	and	all	they	do	is	talk	about	them	for	ever	and	ever	and	it’s	so
boring	I	want	to	run	away,	or	break	their	necks,	or	drown	them	all	in	the	slop
bucket.’
‘A	rather	uncharitable	view,	Ublala.’
‘I	don’t	give	nothing	for	free,	that’s	for	sure.	Whole	people	disappear
when	a	baby	arrives.	Poof!	Where’d	they	go?	Oh,	I	know,	they’re	crawling
around	making	baby	noises.	It	makes	me	sick.’	He	ducked	the	rock	Ralata
threw	at	him	and	continued,	‘So	I’m	going	with	you	and	if	you	were	a	real
friend	you’d	take	me	because	if	I	make	a	baby	my	life	is	over.	Over!’
‘Can	you	fly,	Ublala?’
‘That’s	not	fair!’
‘Nevertheless,	and	no,	I	will	not	carry	you.	Now,	listen	to	me.	We	have
gone	as	far	west	as	needed	–	now	you	must	strike	northward.’
‘Why?’
Draconus	glanced	away,	eyes	narrowing,	and	then	he	sighed	and	said,
‘Your	innocence	is	a	gift,	Ublala	Pung.	A	rare	gift.	It	must	endure.	It	must	be
protected,	but	that	I	can	no	longer	do.	Walk	northward,	that	is	all	I	ask.’
‘Where	am	I	going?’
‘I	cannot	say	for	certain,’	Draconus	admitted.	‘Nothing	is	certain,


especially	now.’
‘Will	you	come	back?’
Draconus	hesitated,	and	then	he	shook	his	head.	‘I	do	not	think	we	will
meet	again,	no.	And	for	that	I	truly	grieve.’
‘Are	you	going	somewhere	to	die?’
‘Do	not	weep,	friend.	I	do	not	know	what	awaits	me.’	He	stepped	close	to
Ublala.	‘I	have	left	you	sufficient	food	and	water	for	a	week’s	travel.	Beyond
that,	well.’	He	shrugged,	and	then	held	out	a	hand.	‘Now,	let	us	clasp	arms.’
Instead,	Ublala	wrapped	the	god	in	a	fierce	hug.
After	a	moment,	Draconus	pulled	himself	free.	‘You	give	reason,	friend,
for	what	I	must	attempt.	If	sorcery	must	die,	the	magic	in	the	mortal	soul	will
persevere	–	or	so	I	choose	to	believe.’
Ralata	hissed,	‘Kill	him,	Ublala!	Kill	him	now	–	you	can	do	it!	Snap	his
neck!	Take	that	sword!’
Ublala	winced	and	then	shrugged.	‘She’s	always	going	on	like	this.	She
don’t	mean	anything	by	it,	Draconus.	Honest.’	He	wiped	at	his	eyes.	‘Goodbye.
I’ll	never	see	you	again.’	And	this	time	he	burst	into	tears,	wailing	with	his
hands	over	his	eyes.
When	Ralata	rushed	to	him,	scrabbling	to	draw	his	knife,	Ublala	batted	her
away	between	sobs.	She	was	thrown	back,	sailing	through	the	air	and	then
landing	hard,	limbs	flailing,	before	falling	still.
Frowning,	Draconus	walked	over.	Crouched	down.	‘Unconscious.	Well,
that	is	something,	I	suppose.’
Sniffling,	Ublala	said,	‘Women	always	get	jealous	about	man	friends.
Sometimes	they	say	bad	things	about	them.	Sometimes	they	try	to	knife	them.
Sometimes	they	sex	them.	Sometimes	they	run	away	with	them.	Sometimes	they
get	so	mad	they	just	up	and	die.	But	it’s	all	just	stupid.’
Draconus	straightened,	walked	a	short	distance	away,	and	then	turned	to
face	Ublala	one	more	time.	‘Be	well,	Ublala	Pung.’
‘Don’t	die,	Draconus.’
The	god	smiled.	‘I	shall	try	not	to.’
Ublala	watched	his	friend	disappear	inside	a	bloom	of	black,	ethereal
darkness,	watched	as	the	darkness	found	shape	–	spreading	wings,	a	long
serpent	neck,	a	massive	head	with	rows	of	scimitar-length	fangs,	eyes	of	lurid
yellow.
The	dragon	lifted	into	the	sky,	the	vast	wings	hissing	with	the	sound	of
cold	water	on	hot	stones	as	the	creature	wheeled	and	set	off.
With	an	uneven	sigh,	the	Teblor	collected	the	pack	containing	the	food,	and
then	the	heavy	waterskins.	Along	with	his	weapons	and	armour,	the	burden	was


enough	to	make	him	grunt	when	he	straightened.
Grasping	Ralata	by	one	ankle,	he	began	walking.
The	way	she	was	right	now,	why,	a	wife	was	as	bad	as	a	baby.
	
Brother	Diligence	arrived	well	ahead	of	the	retinue,	his	boots	echoing	as	he
strode	the	length	of	the	throne	room.	All	the	blood	stains	remained	–	splashed
and	smeared	across	the	marble	tiles,	along	the	pillars	to	either	side	and	the
walls	behind	them,	and	upon	the	throne	itself,	where	sat	Sister	Reverence.
Restitution	had	begun	here,	in	this	very	chamber,	and	it	was	proper	to
remind	all	who	would	enter.	Halting	before	Reverence	–	the	only	other	person
present	–	he	said,	‘We	must	assume	that	they	are	lost	to	us,	Sister.’
‘I	smell	smoke,	Brother.’
‘Indeed.’
‘Excellent.’	She	paused	and	then	said,	‘“Lost.”	Now	that	is	a	curious	word.
Are	they	dead,	or	are	they	now	treasonous	to	our	great	cause?’
‘If	the	former,	Sister,	we	must	then	reconsider	the	enemies	arrayed	against
us.’
‘And	if	the	latter,	then	we	must	re-evaluate	the	loyalty	among	us.’
‘The	issue	lies	with	Sister	Calm,’	said	Brother	Diligence.	‘Equity	but
follows.’
‘Not	precisely	true,	Brother.	Equity	is	the	heart	of	the	ideals	which	they
would	hold,	but	it	is	Calm	who	adheres	to	the	practical.	Her	long
imprisonment,	horrific	as	it	must	have	been,	has	greatly	damaged	her	spirit,	I
am	afraid.	We	must,	indeed,	hope	that	she	is	dead,	more	so	than	poor,
misguided	Equity.’
‘I	have	received	a	missive	from	the	siege,	Sister.	The	assault	failed.’
Reverence	sat	straighter.	‘But	how	can	this	be?’
‘Sister	Belie	informs	me	that	Akhrast	Korvalain	is	ineffectual	against	the
commander	of	the	besieged.’
‘Impossible	–	unless,	is	he	a	god?	An	ascendant?’
‘Neither,	I	am	told.	This	man	–	a	mortal	–	titles	himself	the	Master	of	the
Deck	of	Dragons.	He	commands	the	warrens,	in	ways	Sister	Belie	cannot	quite
understand.	But	what	she	describes	at	last	explains	the	sudden	appearance	of
that	army.	They	arrived	via	a	portal,	travelling	by	warren.	Incidentally,	this	is
why	they	could	not	get	closer	to	us	here	at	the	Spire,	where	our	sorcerous
influence	is	strongest.’
‘I	see.	Then	this	master ’s	power	cannot	challenge	us.’
‘He	and	his	army	represent	a	military	threat	nonetheless.	I	now	advise	we


dispatch	another	three	legions,	commanded	by	another	Pure.’
‘Ready	the	legions,	Brother,	but	do	not	send	them	to	Estobanse.	Not	yet.
The	challenge	posed	by	the	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons…intrigues	me.	I
will	think	some	more	on	how	to	deal	with	him.’
‘As	you	wish,	Sister.’
The	doors	swung	open	then	and	Diligence	turned	to	observe	the	approach
of	the	retinue.	Flanked	by	two	Pures,	the	heavily	armoured	warriors	marched
towards	the	throne,	a	full	dozen	of	the	highest-ranking	officers.
Brother	Diligence	murmured,	‘Most	formidable,	are	they	not,	Sister
Reverence?’
‘Indeed,	Brother.’
Ten	paces	from	the	dais	the	contingent	halted.
Brother	Diligence	studied	them	briefly,	and	then	said	to	one	of	the
escorting	Pures,	‘Brother	Serenity.	They	have	anchored	their	ships	in	the
harbour?’
‘They	have,	Brother.	They	are	now	servants	of	the	Restitution.’
Sister	Reverence	then	spoke.	‘Welcome,	Grey	Helms	of	the	Perish.	Your
gesture	has	left	no	doubt	in	our	minds	as	to	the	veracity	of	your	claims.’
One	of	the	commanders	tipped	his	head	and	said,	‘We	have	discussed	your
arguments	at	length,	Sister	Reverence,	and	we	are	agreed.	Our	Mortal	Sword
committed	blasphemy	in	swearing	fealty	to	the	Malazans.	Furthermore,	we	are
certain	that	our	Shield	Anvil	has	concluded	much	the	same,	and	that	he	is	now
at	odds	with	the	Mortal	Sword.’
‘And	who	will	win	this	wrestling	for	control	of	your	land-based	army?’
‘There	is	no	ambiguity,	Sister	Reverence.	The	Mortal	Sword	shall	be	made
to	accept	her	crime,	and	do	penance.	If	she	refuses,	she	will	be	divested	of	her
title	and	the	privileges	it	affords.	The	time	has	come.	The	vengeance	of	the
Wolves	of	Winter	must	now	begin.’
‘All	very	delightful,’	Sister	Reverence	purred,	and	then	she	leaned
forward.	‘Unfortunately,	the	Forkrul	Assail	demand	something	more	than	an
alliance	of	forces	that	just	happen	to	share	–	for	the	moment	at	least	–	a
common	cause.’	She	raised	her	voice.	‘Now,	you	shall	kneel.	You	shall	avow
your	service	to	the	will	of	the	Forkrul	Assail.’
Even	Brother	Diligence	felt	buffeted	by	the	power	of	Sister	Reverence’s
sorcery.	Against	this,	no	mere	human,	no	matter	how	pious	or	disciplined,
could	stand.
The	chamber	echoed	with	the	creak	and	clatter	of	armour	as	the	Perish
warriors	knelt	on	the	bloodstained	tiles	of	the	throne	room.
Diligence	turned	to	Reverence.	‘Sister,	I	look	forward	to	using	these


subjects.	And	it	pleases	me	to	know	that	yet	more	are	on	their	way.’
She	nodded,	leaning	back.	‘What	are	wolves	but	dogs	not	yet	beaten	into
submission?’
Diligence	frowned.	‘Their	cause	is	just,	Sister	Reverence.’
‘It	is	indeed,	Brother.	But	wildness	is	without	discipline.	Even	savagery
must	be	controlled,	given	direction	and	focus.	We	shall	be	the	guiding	hand.’
‘As	you	say,	Sister.’	He	regarded	the	still-kneeling	Perish.
‘You	look	thoughtful,	Brother.’
‘I	was	contemplating	setting	these	warriors	against	the	Master	of	the	Deck
of	Dragons.’
Reverence	arched	her	brows,	and	then	said,	‘Brother	Serenity,	what	think
you	of	that	notion?’
‘I	only	ask	that	I	be	granted	the	privilege	of	commanding	them,	Sister.	It	is
my	understanding	that	the	offending	army	is	composed	of	Malazans,	and	I	have
a	history	with	Malazans.’
‘Send	them,	Brother	Diligence.	Break	their	defences,	Serenity,	and	if	you
can,	drive	them	out	into	the	open.	I	dare	say	even	mastery	of	the	warrens	would
not	save	them	then.	At	that	moment,	we	shall	discover	what	other	resources	the
man	possesses,	if	any.’
‘Do	you	want	him	delivered	in	chains	before	you,	Sister?’
She	considered,	and	then	said,	‘No.	His	head	will	suffice.’
	
The	swarm	of	Shards	twisted	as	it	lifted	high	into	the	air,	blotting	out	a	third	of
the	sky.	The	shadow	it	cast	spread	across	the	ravaged,	lifeless	desert,	flowing
like	black	water.	The	scent	of	suffering	was	in	the	air,	and	the	hunger	of	the
locusts	was,	as	ever,	desperate.
The	shadow	found	the	prey,	but	even	the	sudden	cooling	of	air	was	not
enough	to	awaken	it	to	the	threat	fast	closing,	and	the	locusts	rushed	towards	it.
As	the	vast	cloud	hovered	a	moment	it	seemed	to	tremble,	and	then	out	from	its
heart	burst	a	winged	creature.	It	plummeted	down	upon	the	unconscious	form
lying	sprawled	on	the	parched	ground,	and	in	its	wake	descended	the	Shards,
their	wings	voicing	a	roar.
Taloned	hands	reached	down,	grasped	hold	of	the	body,	lifted	it
effortlessly.	Wings	thundering,	the	creature	rose	back	into	the	sky.	Behind	it,
the	locusts	spun	in	confusion.
From	the	body	he	held,	Gu’Rull	could	taste	the	flavour	of	life,	but	that
flavour	was	weakening.	He	wondered	if	he’d	end	up	delivering	a	corpse	to
Gesler	and	Stormy.	It	made	little	difference	to	the	Shi’gal	Assassin.	This	one,


this	Mortal	Sword	of	the	Grey	Helms,	had	lost	her	command,	and	such	failures
revealed	flaws	of	character	–	better	that	such	flaws	be	exposed	now	rather	than
later,	when	the	lives	of	thousands	might	be	at	stake.
A	waste	of	time,	this.	I	was	drawing	closer	to	the	enemy.	The	Destriant
should	not	have	called	me	back.
The	Shi’gal	was	looking	forward	to	the	imminent	war.	The	bitter	flavour
of	ancient	memories	remained	strong	in	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	There	could
be	no	convenient	rewriting	of	histories,	such	as	seemed	common	among
humans.	No	invented	myths	of	past	glory	and	honour	that	never	was.	The
crimes	committed	back	then	were	as	sordid	as	those	committed	now,	or	those
to	come.	And	in	the	moment	of	slaughter,	none	of	that	really	mattered.	Who
struck	the	first	blow	all	those	thousands	of	years	ago	was	without	relevance.
The	only	thing	that	counted	was	who	would	strike	the	last	blow.
This	contingent	of	Forkrul	Assail	–	these	Pures	so	twisted	away	from	their
own	history	as	to	imagine	themselves	an	entire	world’s	arbiters	–	was	perhaps
the	most	powerful	remnant	of	that	species	left.	And	could	not	the	same	be	said
for	Gunth’an	Wandering?	Are	we	not	the	last	K’Chain	Che’Malle?	Is	it	not
fitting	that	we	meet	for	one	more	battle,	a	final	clash	between	Elder	powers?
That	this	war	would	make	use	of	humans	on	both	sides	was	incidental.	That
entire	civilizations	might	fall	–	or,	indeed,	every	civilization	–	well,	Gu’Rull
would	not	shed	a	single	drop	of	oil	in	grief.	Among	humans,	every	faith	was
nothing	but	smoke,	at	times	thick	enough	to	blind	and	at	other	times	cynically
thin.	And	every	belief	was	a	fire	that	devoured	its	own	fuel,	until	nothing	but
ashes	remained.	As	far	as	Gu’Rull	could	determine,	the	only	virtue	humans
possessed	was	a	talent	for	starting	over,	with	stern	resolve	restored	in	the
sudden	glow	of	renewed	optimism,	in	complete	disregard	of	whatever	lessons
past	failures	might	offer.	And	he	had	no	choice	but	to	acknowledge	the	power
of	that	virtue.	It	is	contingent	upon	collective	amnesia,	but	as	everyone	knows,
stupidity	needs	no	excuse	to	repeat	itself.
The	body	he	carried	voiced	a	faint	moan,	and	the	assassin	looked	down	at
her	with	his	lower	eyes.	She	had	not	fared	well	in	her	idiotic	attempt	to	find	the
Bonehunters.	Gu’Rull	had	found	the	skeleton	of	her	horse	less	than	a	third	of	a
day’s	march	from	the	trail	the	army	had	made,	and	making	use	of	the
carnivorous	locusts	he’d	tracked	her	to	the	trail	itself.
He	felt	a	faint	disquiet	at	the	thought	of	the	Bonehunters.	High	in	the	sky
above	the	desert,	he	had	seen	their	churned-up,	broken	path	stretching
eastwards.	Hundreds	of	corpses	and	carcasses	left	behind,	but	he	could	see	no
end	to	that	trail.	Surely	they	must	all	have	died	by	now.
He	crossed	the	edge	of	the	desert,	banked	southward.


	
‘Reduce	the	rations	again,’	Queen	Abrastal	commanded,	and	then	watched	her
officers	bow	obeisance	and	make	their	way	back	to	their	companies.
Beside	her	Spax	turned	to	glare	for	a	moment	at	the	setting	sun,	and	then	he
grunted.	‘They’re	suffering,	Firehair.	The	Barghast	are	used	to	such
deprivations	–	for	generations	we’ve	been	pushed	to	the	poorest	regions.	We
learned	what	it	is	to	starve.’
‘Tomorrow,’	she	said,	‘we	shall	reach	the	southern	provinces	of	Kolanse.
But	I	fear	we	shall	find	no	salvation	there.’
He	silently	agreed	with	that	observation.	They	had	come	upon	the	remains
of	refugee	trains.	Camps	cluttered	with	withered	rubbish	and	desiccated
corpses.	Firepits	filled	with	human	bones,	many	of	them	belonging	to	children.
Only	yesterday	a	pack	of	emaciated	dogs	had	attacked	a	Gilk	scouting	party,
and	every	animal	had	to	be	cut	down	–	desperation	had	gnawed	away	all	fear,
all	sense	of	self-preservation.
‘We	shall	begin	killing	the	draught	animals,’	Abrastal	said.	‘Warchief,	I
think	I	now	understand	the	Adjunct’s	recognition	of	all	that	we	would	face,	and
the	manner	in	which	such	truths	wounded	her.	We	must	divest	ourselves	of	all
hope	of	ever	returning	from	this	war.’
He	scratched	at	his	beard,	considered	her	words,	and	then	said,	‘The	White
Faces	set	out	seeking	a	final	battle,	a	moment	of	perfect	glory.	Our	young	gods
stood	before	us,	blackened	faces	smeared	with	filth,	their	hair	the	colour	of
blood.	From	the	deepest	beds	of	peat	they	rose	to	confront	us.	And	from	the
ancient	burial	ships	they	brought	forth	the	finest	weapons	of	our	ancestors.
“Our	enemies	await	us,”	they	said.’
She	studied	him	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘And	yet	you	Gilk	broke	away.
Abandoned	the	destiny	that	brought	you	to	this	continent.’
‘Ah,	I	shall	tell	you	the	truth	of	that,	Highness.	When	Humbrall	Taur	died,
we	saw	the	end	of	the	White	Face	alliance.	There	was	no	flaw	in	Onos	Toolan,
who	was	raised	in	Taur ’s	place.	Indeed,	if	certain	rumours	are	to	be	believed,
that	warrior	is	older	than	our	gods,	and	of	his	prowess	with	that	flint	sword	I
have	no	doubt	at	all.	No,	he	accepted	the	title	out	of	love	–	for	Humbrall’s	only
daughter.	He	possessed	nothing	of	the	zeal	the	younger	warriors	so	desired	in
their	warleader.	His	eyes	did	not	shine	with	glory,	and	his	voice	–	no	matter
how	wise	the	words	–	held	nothing	of	fire.’
‘In	short,	he	was	no	politician.’
Spax	grimaced.	‘You’d	think	tribes	beaten	down	by	centuries	of	defeat,
clans	rotted	with	feuds	and	mutual	hatreds,	you’d	think,	wouldn’t	you,	that	we’d


listen	to	measured	wisdom	–	that	we’d	heed	his	warnings	against	selfdestruction.’
‘And	if	Humbrall	Taur	had	not	drowned—’
‘Even	Taur	was	barely	holding	the	clans	together.	I	cannot	even	say	for
certain	that	his	drowning	was	an	accident	–	I	was	not	witness	to	it.	In	any	case,
we	Gilk	saw	nothing	evil	in	Onos	Toolan,	only	in	what	was	likely	to	be	done	to
him.	Among	the	Barghast,	Firehair,	a	leader	is	not	simply	ousted,	cast	adrift.
He	is	killed.	And	so	too	his	family	–	his	entire	bloodline	is	slaughtered.	We
Gilk	would	not	be	party	to	that.’
‘And	did	you	warn	Onos	Toolan	before	you	left?’
‘No,	for	it	is	possible	that	he	would	have	sought	our	support	in	the	power
struggle	to	come.	And,	had	he	asked,	well,	how	could	I	have	looked	him	in	the
eye	and	refused?	It’s	my	thought	now	that	he	would	not	have	asked.	But	even
then,	it’s	likely	I	would	have	offered	nonetheless.’
She	was	frowning	at	him	thoughtfully.	‘You	chose	the	coward’s	path.’
‘Perhaps	you	see	it	that	way.	Perhaps	many	did,	and	still	do.	But	what	I	did,
I	did	to	save	my	people.	And	this	only	Onos	Toolan	understood	–	for	he	did
not	pursue	me,	even	when	he	had	his	chance.’
‘And	now,	perhaps	alone	among	all	the	White	Face	Barghast,	you	have
found	that	final	war	to	fight,	in	the	name	of	your	bog	gods.’
He	sighed.	‘And	nightly	I	pray	that	when	the	battle	begins,	Onos	Toolan
will	be	there.	To	lead	the	Barghast.’
‘But	it	is	not	to	be,	Spax.’
‘I	know,	Highness.	I	know.	And	the	Gilk	shall	stand	alone,	the	last	clan,	the
last	of	the	White	Faces.’
‘Will	you	call	upon	your	gods,	Spax,	upon	the	charge?’
‘I	doubt	it.’
‘Then,	what	shall	you	do?	To	inspire	your	warriors?’
He	shrugged	loose	the	tension	in	his	shoulders,	felt	weariness	draining	in
behind	it.	‘I	believe,	Highness,	I	shall	shame	them.’
	
As	Faint	swung	herself	astride	the	gaunt	horse,	she	glanced	back	to	see	the
ghost	of	Sweetest	Sufferance	standing	at	the	edge	of	the	camp.	A	shiver
whispered	through	her,	and	she	looked	across	to	Precious	Thimble.	‘Tell	me
you	don’t	see	her.’
‘I	don’t	see	her,	Faint.	Let’s	go,	else	we	lose	them	in	the	dark.’
They	set	off	at	a	canter.	Overhead,	heavy	clouds	obscured	the	Jade
Strangers,	enough	to	mute	the	green	glow	that	had	haunted	every	night	for


what	seemed	to	be	months,	if	not	years.	‘Typical,	isn’t	it?	The	one	night	we
could	do	with	that	ghoulish	light.’
‘Are	they	rain	clouds?	That’s	what	I	want	to	know.	Are	they,	Faint?’
‘What	am	I,	a	weather	scrier?	I	don’t	know.	But	I	don’t	smell	rain.	I
smell…dust.’
‘Thanks,’	snapped	Precious	Thimble.
Faint	could	just	make	out	the	two	riders	ahead.	Brys	and	Aranict.	A	K’ell
Hunter	had	arrived	with	dusk,	delivering	a	message	scratched	on	a	wax	tablet,
and	now	they	were	riding	to	the	Che’Malle	encampment.	Aranict’s	invitation
had	come	as	a	surprise,	but	Faint	was	eager	to	see	these	huge	lizard	warriors
who’d	be	fighting	at	their	side.	Fighting	–	well,	not	us	shareholders	–	we’re	just
along	for	the	ride,	yee	hah.	But	a	good	look	at	the	Letherii	allies	just	might	put
me	at	ease.	At	least	there’s	one	army	that	isn’t	starving	and	half	dying	of	thirst.
Or	so	I’ve	heard.
But	for	all	their	complaining,	and	Hood	knows	there’s	been	plenty	of	it,
seems	no	one	can	get	too	heated	up	about	it.	Not	with	that	Malazan	army	trying
to	cross	a	real	desert.	No	matter	how	bad	we’ve	got	it…
‘I	still	hate	horses,’	Precious	Thimble	said	beside	her.
‘You’ve	got	to	roll	with	the	animal	under	you,	girl.	Just	think	about	making
love.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
Faint	looked	across	at	her.	‘Gods	below,	don’t	tell	me	you’re	a	damned
virgin.’
‘Then	I	won’t	–	and	no	more	talking	about	that.	They’re	letting	us	catch	up
to	them.’
Ahead,	Brys	and	Aranict	had	slowed	their	horses	to	a	fast	trot.	‘The	mounts
are	winded,	Precious.	We’re	all	in	bad	shape.’
Before	long,	they	drew	up	alongside	the	prince	and	the	Atri-Ceda.
‘Where’s	this	army,	then?’	Faint	demanded.	‘I	thought	they	were	camped	close.’
‘They	are,	Faint,’	Aranict	replied.	‘They	simply	have	no	need	of	cookfires,
or	lanterns.’
And	now	Faint	made	out	a	darker	stain	covering	the	low	hills	before	them,
and	the	dull	gleam	here	and	there	of	iron,	or	maybe	reptilian	eyes.	Another
shiver	rippled	through	her.	‘How	confident	are	you	in	these	allies?’	She	could
see	massive,	elongated	heads	lifting	now,	eyes	fixing	upon	them.	She	could	see
serrated	rows	of	fangs.
‘They	are	commanded	by	three	humans,	Faint,	and	two	of	them	were	once
soldiers	in	the	Bonehunters.’
Precious	Thimble	muttered	something	under	her	breath,	probably	a	curse.


Aranict	glanced	at	the	young	sorceress,	and	then	over	at	Faint.	‘Do	you
share	your	colleague’s	mistrust	of	Malazans,	Faint?’
‘Well,	they	tried	conquering	Darujhistan	once.	But	then	they	turned	round
and	crushed	the	Pannion	Domin	–	and	the	Pannions	were	headed	towards
Darujhistan,	with	bad	intentions.’	She	shrugged.	‘I	don’t	see	them	as	any	better
or	worse	than	anyone	else.’	Turning	to	Precious,	she	said,	‘Besides,	I	visited
One-Eye	Cat	before	it	got	conquered,	and	that	place	was	a	hole.’
‘But	at	least	it	was	my	hole!’	Precious	snapped.
‘Did	you	just	say—’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,	will	you?	You	know	what	I	meant!’
The	prince	and	the	Atri-Ceda	said	nothing	and	managed	to	hold	their
expressions	–	at	least	as	far	as	Faint	could	discern	in	the	heavy	gloom.
Darkness	our	saviour!
Thirty	paces	ahead,	at	the	mouth	of	an	avenue	between	ranks	of	silent,
motionless	K’Chain	Che’Malle	stood	two	men	and	a	woman.	The	woman	knelt
and	lifted	the	shutters	on	an	oversized	lantern,	bathing	the	area	in	light.
As	the	riders	drew	closer,	Faint	studied	these…commanders.	The	men
were	the	soldiers,	clad	in	the	uniforms	of	Malazan	marines,	and	though	at	first
Faint	took	them	to	be	Falari	–	with	that	red	and	yellow	hair	–	there	seemed	to
be	a	strange	hue	to	their	skin,	somewhere	between	bronze	and	gold,	almost	lit
from	within.	The	woman	was	a	tribal	of	some	sort.	Like	the	Rhivi,	only
bigger-boned,	her	face	broad,	slightly	flat,	her	eyes	dark	and	glittering	like
obsidian.
Prince	Brys	dismounted,	followed	by	Aranict	and	then	Faint.	Precious
remained	seated	on	her	horse,	glowering	at	the	Malazans.
‘Sergeant	Gesler,’	Brys	began,	and	then	stopped.	‘Are	you	certain	you
prefer	that	modest	rank?	As	Mortal	Sword	to	the—’
‘Forgive	me	for	interrupting,	Commander,’	Gesler	said,	‘but	Stormy
insists.	He	won’t	even	talk	to	me	otherwise.	Leave	all	the	fancy	titles	to	other
people—’
‘He	got	busted	down	for	good	reasons,’	Stormy	cut	in.	‘And	he	ain’t	fixed
none	of	those	that	I	can	see.	In	fact,	he’s	gotten	worse.	If	he	showed	up	in	a
recruiting	line	right	now	I’d	send	him	to	the	cook	staff,	and	if	they	was	feeling
generous	they	might	let	him	scrub	a	few	pots.	As	it	is,	though,	he’s	a	sergeant,
and	I’m	a	corporal.’
‘Commanding	seven	thousand	K’Chain	Che’Malle,’	Aranict	observed,
lighting	a	stick	of	rustleaf	from	a	small	ember-box.
Stormy	shrugged.
Sighing,	Brys	resumed,	‘Sergeant	Gesler.	Your	message	–	I	take	it	she	is


awake.’
‘Aye,	and	she’s	not	particularly	happy.	Commander,	she’s	got	something	to
say,	something	she	needs	to	tell	you.’
‘I	see.	Well	then,	lead	on,	Sergeant.’
As	they	made	their	way	through	the	camp,	with	Gesler	out	front	and
Stormy	carrying	the	lantern	a	few	paces	behind,	Faint	found	herself	walking
alongside	the	tribal	woman.
‘You	are	the	Destriant.’
‘Kalyth,	once	of	the	Elan.	And	you	are	one	of	the	strangers	who	found	the
Letherii	army.’
‘Faint,	of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild.	That	miserable	girl	riding	behind	us	is
Precious	Thimble.	She	doesn’t	like	Malazans.’
‘From	her,’	Kalyth	said,	‘the	flavour	is	one	of	fear.’
‘With	good	reason,’	Precious	retorted.
‘It’s	this	war	we	can’t	make	any	sense	of,’	Faint	said.	‘The	Malazans	fight
when	and	where	it	suits	them.	They’re	a	damned	empire,	after	all.	It’s	all	about
conquest.	Expansion.	They	don’t	fight	for	noble	causes,	generally.	Even	taking
down	the	Pannions	was	politically	expedient.	So	we’re	finding	it	hard	to	work
out	what	they’re	up	to.	From	all	that	we’ve	heard,	Kolanse	is	not	worth	the
effort.	Especially	with	a	bunch	of	Forkrul	Assail	laying	claim	to	it	now.’
Those	dark	eyes	fixed	on	Faint’s.	‘What	do	you	know	of	the	Forkrul
Assail?’
‘Not	much,’	she	admitted.	‘An	ancient	race	–	back	in	Darujhistan,	where	I
come	from,	most	people	think	of	them	as,	well,	mythical.	Ruling	in	an	age
when	justice	prevailed	over	all	the	world.	We’ve	long	since	fallen	from	that
age,	of	course,	and	much	as	people	might	bemoan	our	state	no	one	wants	it
back,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.’
‘Why	not?’
‘Because	then	we’d	actually	be	taken	to	task	for	all	the	terrible	stuff	we	do.
Besides,	being	fallen	excuses	our	worst	traits.	We’re	not	what	we	once	were,
too	bad,	but	that’s	just	how	it	is.	Thank	Hood	and	all	the	rest.’
Kalyth	was	slowly	nodding.	‘Then	is	it	your	belief	that	we	can	be	no	better
than	who	and	what	we	are	now?’
‘Something	like	that.’
‘What	if	I	were	to	tell	you	that	the	Malazans	seek	to	change	that?	That	they
seek	to	rise	higher,	taller?	That,	once	fallen,	they	now	wish	to	stand?	One	more
time.	Perhaps	the	last	time.	And	not	just	for	themselves,	but	for	all	of	us.’
A	snort	from	Precious.
Faint	frowned,	and	then	shook	her	head.	‘Then	why	fight	the	Forkrul


Assail?’
‘Because	the	Forkrul	Assail	have	judged	us	–	they	came	among	my	people,
so	this	I	know	all	too	well.	And	in	that	judgement,	they	have	decided	that	we
must	all	die.	Not	just	in	Kolanse,	not	just	on	the	Plains	of	Elan.	But
everywhere.’
‘Given	our	history,	that’s	not	too	surprising.’
‘But,	Faint	of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild,	the	Forkrul	Assail	are	in	no
position	to	judge.	I	have	tasted	the	ancient	flavours	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,
and	it	is	as	if	that	history	was	now	my	own.	The	Age	of	Justice	–	and	the	time
of	the	Forkrul	Assail	–	ended	not	at	the	hand	of	enemies,	or	foreign	races,	but
at	the	hands	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	themselves.’
‘How?’
‘They	judged	their	own	god,	and	found	him	wanting.	And	for	his
imperfections,	they	finally	killed	him.’
Ahead	was	a	large	tent,	and	the	prince,	Aranict,	and	the	Malazans	entered,
taking	the	lantern’s	light	with	them.	Faint	held	back	in	the	darkness,	Kalyth	at
her	side.	Behind	them,	Precious	Thimble	reined	in,	but	still	did	not	dismount.
Kalyth	continued,	‘There	was	war.	Between	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	and	the
Assail.	The	causes	were	mundane	–	the	hunger	for	land,	mostly.	The	Forkrul
Assail	had	begun	wars	of	extermination	against	many	other	races,	but	none	had
the	strength	and	will	to	oppose	them	as	did	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	When	the
war	began	to	turn	against	the	Assail,	they	turned	on	their	own	god,	and	in	the
need	for	yet	more	power	they	wounded	him.	But	wounding	proved	not	enough.
They	took	more	and	more	from	him.
‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	nests	began	to	fall	one	by	one,	until	the	last
surviving	Matron,	in	her	desperation,	opened	a	portal	to	the	heart	of	chaos	and
set	her	back	against	it,	hiding	its	presence	from	the	advancing	Assail.	And
when	at	last	she	stood	facing	them,	when	the	tortured	god’s	power	rushed	to
annihilate	her	and	all	her	kind,	she	surrendered	her	life,	and	the	gate,	which	she
had	sealed	with	her	own	body,	her	own	life	force,	opened.	To	devour	the	Assail
god’s	soul.
‘He	was	too	wounded	to	resist.	What	remained	of	him,	in	this	realm,	was
shattered,	mindless	and	lost.’	Her	eyes	glittered.	‘You	have	seen	the	Glass
Desert.	That	is	where	all	that	remains	of	that	god	now	lives.	If	one	could	call	it
a	life.’
‘What	happened	to	the	Assail,	Kalyth?’
The	woman	shrugged.	‘Their	power	spent,	they	were	broken.	Though	they
blamed	the	Matron	for	the	loss	of	their	god,	it	was	by	their	judgement	that	he
was	wielded	as	would	one	wield	a	weapon,	a	thing	to	be	used,	a	thing	not


worthy	of	anything	else.	In	any	case,	they	had	not	the	strength	to	exterminate
the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	But	the	truth	was	the	war	had	destroyed	both	races,	and
when	other	races	appeared	through	the	cracks	of	chaos	–	which	could	now
reach	this	and	every	realm	–	neither	could	stop	the	invasions.	More	wars,
defeats,	betrayals,	until	the	age	itself	crumbled	and	was	no	more.’
‘This	has	the	sound	of	legend,	Kalyth,’	Faint	said.
‘The	memory	of	every	Matron	is	passed	down	in	the	blood,	the	oils	–	the
secretions.	Nothing	is	lost.	Gunth	Mach	has	offered	me	some	of	their	flavours.
Much	of	it	I	cannot	be	certain	of	–	there	was	a	time,	between	the	stars…	I	don’t
know.	And	it	may	be	that	I	did	not	fully	understand	the	tale	I	have	just	told.	It
may	be	that	many	truths	were	lost	to	me	–	our	senses	are	so	limited,	compared
to	those	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘You	have	given	reason	for	why	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	seek	to	fight	the
Forkrul	Assail.	Because	their	war	never	ended.’
‘We	are	each	the	last	of	our	kind.’
‘Is	there	not	room	enough	for	both	of	you?’
‘The	K’Chain	might	wish	it	so,	but	the	Assail	do	not.	Their	memory	is	just
as	long,	you	see.	And	they	do	see	their	cause	as	being	just.’
Behind	them,	Precious	spoke	in	a	dark,	gleeful	tone.	‘You’re	using	them!
The	Malazans	and	all	their	pathetic	arrogance!	You	K’Chain	Che’Malle	–
you’re	using	them!’
The	Destriant	turned.	‘Does	it	seem	that	way,	sorceress?	I	taste	in	you	the
pleasure	of	that	thought.’
‘Why	not?	It’s	all	they	deserve.’
‘If	it	is	all	that	they	deserve,	then	it	is	all	that	we	deserve.’
‘Just	use	them,	Destriant.	Use	them	up!’
For	some	reason,	Faint	was	no	longer	interested	in	entering	the	tent.	She
nodded	towards	it.	‘What’s	going	on	in	there,	Destriant?’
‘Krughava,	once	Mortal	Sword	of	the	Perish	Grey	Helms,	speaks	to	Prince
Brys	Beddict.	She	warns	him	of	betrayal.	The	Perish	vowed	to	serve	the
Adjunct	Tavore.	Instead,	they	will	draw	swords	against	us.	They	will	fight
under	the	banner	of	the	Forkrul	Assail.’
‘Gods	below	–	why	would	they	do	that?’
But	Precious	was	laughing.
Kalyth	sighed.	‘The	truth	is	this:	the	standard	of	justice	can	be	raised	by
many,	and	each	may	lay	rightful	claim	to	it.	How	are	these	claims	weighed?
Gesler	would	answer	quickly	enough.	They	are	weighed	on	the	field	of	battle.
But…	I	am	not	so	sure.	The	Perish	claim	to	worship	ancient	war	gods,	and
these—’


‘Which	war	gods?’	Faint	demanded.
‘They	are	called	Fanderay	and	Togg,	the	Wolves	of	Winter.’
Faint	turned,	stared	up	at	Precious,	and	then	back	at	Kalyth.	‘And	Krughava
was	the	Mortal	Sword.	Who	now	commands?’
‘The	Shield	Anvil,	Tanakalian.’
‘And	the	Destriant?	There	should	be	a	Destriant	among	them,	right?’
‘He	died	on	the	voyage,	I	am	told.	The	position	is	still	vacant.’
‘No	it	isn’t.’
‘Leave	it,	Faint,’	said	Precious.	‘You	don’t	know.	You	can’t	be	certain—’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.	You	saw	her	eyes	–	those	were	a	wolf’s	eyes.	And	all
her	talk	about	the	ghosts,	and	the	old	crimes,	and	all	the	rest.’
Kalyth	spoke.	‘I	do	not	understand.	Of	whom	do	you	speak?’
Shit.	Faint	turned	back	to	the	tent.	‘Seems	I	need	to	go	in	there	after	all.’
	
‘The	forgiving	embrace	must	be	earned,’	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian	said.	‘Am	I
of	such	little	worth	that	the	cowards	and	fools	among	you	can	demand	my
blessing?’	He	scanned	the	faces	before	him,	saw	their	exhaustion,	and	was
disgusted.	‘You	come	to	me	again	and	again.	You	ask,	is	this	not	the	time	to
elect	a	new	Mortal	Sword?	A	new	Destriant?	Perhaps	it	is.	Perhaps	I	am	but
waiting…for	one	of	you	to	rise	above	the	others,	to	show	us	all	your
worthiness.	Alas,	I	am	still	waiting.’
The	eyes	regarding	him	from	beneath	the	rims	of	the	helms	were	bleak,
beaten	down.	The	camp	behind	these	officers	had	lost	its	orderliness.
Discipline	had	given	way	to	bestial	indifference,	the	torrid	pace	of	the	march
their	only	excuse.	They	had	crossed	the	border	into	Central	Kolanse	two	days
past,	trudged	down	a	road	already	overgrown,	through	towns	little	more	than
burned	stains.	This	was	a	land	returning	to	the	wild,	yet	it	stank	of	death.
‘It	must	be,’	said	Tanakalian,	‘that	for	now	one	man	shall	suffer	the	burden
of	all	three	titles.	I	did	not	ask	for	this.	I	do	not	welcome	it.	Ambition	is	a
poison	–	we	all	saw	what	it	did	to	Krughava.	Must	we	now	invite	a	return	to	that
madness?	I	am	not—’
He	stopped	then,	as	a	sudden	breath	of	ice	flowed	past	him.	He	saw	the
officers	facing	him	recoil,	saw	a	stirring	ripple	through	the	ranks	assembled
behind	them.	Mists	lifted	from	the	ground,	curled	and	roiled	on	all	sides.
What	is	this?	Who	has	come	among	us?	He	started	–	something	caught	in
the	corner	of	his	eye.	A	flash	of	movement.	Then	another.	Low,	the	whisper	of
fur,	a	lurid	glint	from	burning	eyes.	Sudden	shouts	from	the	Perish,	the	ranks
losing	formation,	weapons	hissing	from	scabbards.


Tanakalian	could	feel	the	buffeting	tide	sweeping	past	him.	Invisible	forms
slid	past	his	legs,	pushed	him	off	balance.	He	spun	round,	glared	into	the
darkness.	‘Show	yourselves!’
A	figure,	coming	up	from	beyond	the	road’s	berm.	A	girl,	wearing	rags.
But	he	could	see	the	flowing	shapes	now,	the	ethereal	forms	surrounding	her.
Wolves.	She	comes	in	a	sea	of	wolves.	But	they	were	not	real.	Not	living.	Not
breathing.	These	beasts	were	long	dead.	They	bore	wounds.	Stains	in	the	fur,
gashes	in	the	hide.	The	glow	from	their	eyes	was	otherworldly,	like	holes
burned	through	a	wall	–	and	what	lay	beyond	was	rage.	Incandescent	rage.
She	drew	nearer,	and	her	eyes	were	the	same.	Torn	through	by	fury.	One
blazed	yellow,	the	other	was	quicksilver.
Horror	filled	Tanakalian	at	the	moment	of	recognition.	The	Wolves	of
Winter	–	they	are	within	her.	They	are	there,	inside	her	–	those	eyes!	They	stare
out	at	me	from	the	Beast	Throne.	Fanderay.	Togg.	Our	gods	are	among	us.
All	strength	left	his	limbs	when	those	terrible	eyes	fixed	on	him	and	sank
into	his	skull	like	fangs,	forcing	him	to	his	knees.
All	at	once	she	stood	before	him.	Those	fangs	dug	deeper,	tearing	into	his
brain,	ripping	loose	every	secret,	every	hidden	hunger.	Raping	him	with	cold
remorselessness.	As	if	he	was	carrion.	Something	washed	back,	thick	as	blood,
and	it	was	filled	with	contempt.	An	instant	later	and	he	was	dismissed,	made
irrelevant.	Her	gaze	lifted	past	him,	to	the	Grey	Helms	–	and	he	knew	that	they
too	knelt,	abject,	helpless,	their	courage	drained	away,	their	souls	made	cold
with	fear.
When	she	spoke	in	their	minds,	the	voice	was	a	multitude	of	howls,	a
sound	more	terrible	than	anything	they	had	ever	heard.
‘I	am	the	voice	of	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	Listen	well	to	these	words.	We	will
not	be	judged.’	She	looked	down	at	Tanakalian.	‘You	would	wield	my	swords,
mortal?	Are	you	the	one	to	lay	waste	to	a	thousand	realms	in	my	name?	I	think
not.	Pettiness	consumes	your	thoughts.	Vanity	commands	your	every	vision.
‘Look	well	upon	this	child.	She	is	Setoc.	Destriant.	She	is	our	voice.	She	is
our	will.’
The	girl	raised	her	eyes	once	more,	addressed	the	entire	army.	‘Your	kin
kneel	before	the	Forkrul	Assail	in	the	palace	of	Kolanse.	The	Assail	would	force
the	Perish	Grey	Helms	to	serve	them,	and	they	eagerly	await	your	arrival,	and
the	moment	when	you,	too,	must	kneel	in	obeisance.
‘This…offends	us.
‘When	Sister	Reverence	summons	Destriant	Setoc,	when	she	seeks	to	wrest
this	army	from	us,	she	shall	know	the	wrath	of	the	Wolves.’
One	of	the	officers	suddenly	found	the	courage	to	call	out,	‘Blessed


Wolves	–	do	you	wish	us	to	destroy	the	Forkrul	Assail?	Did	the	Mortal	Sword
speak	true?’
‘Around	us,	mortal,	there	are	only	enemies.	But	we	are	among	you	now,	and
in	the	moment	of	battle	the	ghosts	shall	rise,	in	numbers	beyond	counting,	and
before	us	every	army	shall	fall.	Before	us,	every	city	shall	burn.	Before	us,	there
shall	be	slaughter	to	redress	the	balance.
‘Think	on	your	faith,	my	children.	Think	well	on	the	imbalance	of	which	I
speak.	The	millennia	of	slaughter	at	your	human	hand.	We	shall	give	answer.	In
every	realm,	we	shall	give	answer!’
Before	the	power	of	his	gods,	Tanakalian	bowed	his	head.	To	hide	his	eyes.
He	was	seething,	his	time	of	glory	ripped	away	from	him,	his	dreams	of	power
stolen,	his	ascension	left	in	ruins	by	this…this	girl.
She	had	walked	past	him	now,	into	the	midst	of	his	soldiers.	But	no,	they
were	no	longer	his,	were	they?	‘It	will	not	end	this	way,’	he	whispered.	‘It	will
not	end	this	way!’
	
She	staggered	away,	blood	pouring	from	her	wounds.
Gruntle	sought	to	rise,	to	lift	his	huge	form	one	more	time,	but	will	was
not	enough.	The	pain	was	fading,	a	dullness	seeping	in,	and	in	his	bloodied
nostrils	all	he	could	smell	was	burned	fur,	scorched	flesh.	The	time
surrounding	him	now,	slowly	closing	in,	seemed	a	force	vast	beyond
countenance.	It	felt	thick,	unyielding,	and	yet	he	could	see	its	expanse,	the	way
it	stretched	behind	him	–	but	not	ahead.	No,	there,	almost	within	reach,	it
vanished	into	dark	mists.
If	he	could,	he	would	have	laughed.	The	irony	of	life’s	end	was	found	in	all
the	truths	suddenly	discovered,	when	it	was	too	late	to	do	a	damned	thing	about
them.	It	was	said	that	in	the	moments	before	death,	there	arrived	an	acceptance,
a	willingness	to	see	it	come	to	an	end,	and	an	indifference	to	the	anguish	and
grief	of	the	living.	If	I	have	let	go,	why	can’t	you?	It’s	these	truths,	you	see,	and
my	helplessness	in	answering	them.	I	would	laugh,	but	in	laughter	there	is	pain.
I	would	bless,	but	in	blessing	there	is	loss.	This	is	not	how	anyone	wants	it.	But
then,	it	never	is.
Don’t	you	see	that,	Stonny?	In	all	your	fraught	moments	–	and	isn’t	every
moment	fraught?	–	in	all	of	them,	you	miss	the	chance	of	peace.	The	calm	of	all
these	truths,	the	ones	us	dying	discover,	and	even	then	we	can	say	nothing.
Offer	nothing.
This	time.	It’s	all	past.	No.	It’s	my	past.	And	with	it,	I	can	do	nothing.
They	had	fought	with	terrible	savagery.	For	how	long	he	could	not	guess.


Two	indomitable	beasts	spilling	out	their	hot,	steaming	blood,	lashing	out	in
rage,	staggering	in	pain.	Claws	tearing,	slashing	deep.	Fangs	punching	through
hide	and	thick	muscle.	The	stone	floor	of	the	chamber	had	grown	slick,	the	air
hot	and	fetid.
And	overhead,	looming	above	the	ruined	carcass	of	the	Azath	house,	the
huge	wound	fulminated,	the	edges	burning,	sizzling	as	if	weeping	acid.
Gruntle	did	not	even	see	the	moment	the	first	of	the	dragons	came	through.
He	and	Kilava	were	locked	together,	claws	raking	each	other ’s	flanks	down	to
the	bone,	when	something	like	a	hurricane	wind	slammed	them	down	on	to	the
unyielding	ground.	Pulverized	rock	billowed	out,	filling	the	chamber	even	as
enormous	cracks	opened	on	the	rough	walls.
Stunned	by	the	thunderous	concussion,	Gruntle	pulled	away	from	Kilava.
Yet	the	rage	would	not	leave	him,	and	he	felt	his	god	howling	somewhere	deep
inside	his	chest	–	a	creature	held	back	for	too	long	by	Kilava’s	denial	–	and
now	it	clawed	its	way	free.	She	could	no	longer	resist	him,	could	no	longer
find	the	strength	to	defy	what	was	coming.
I	warned	you.
The	dragon	filled	the	chamber,	impossibly	huge,	wings	hammering	at	the
walls.	Gruntle	understood,	then,	that	the	creature	was	trapped	–	by	the	ancient,
heavy	stone	of	the	cavern	walls.	It	needed	to	unleash	its	sorcery	–	to	shatter
these	confines,	to	open	the	way	for	the	hundreds	of	other	dragons	crowding	the
gate.
He	must	strike	now.
The	roar	that	tore	out	from	his	throat	was	Trake’s	own,	a	god’s	call	to	war.
The	power	within	him	becoming	a	thing	of	agony,	Gruntle’s	limbs	coiled,
lowering	him	into	a	crouch,	and	then	he	leapt.
The	dragon’s	neck	arched,	the	head	snapped	down,	jaws	opening	wide.
He	slammed	into	the	creature’s	neck.	Claws	sinking	deep,	his	fangs
burying	themselves	in	the	dragon’s	throat.	Scales	broke	as	Gruntle’s	jaws
tightened,	closing	on	the	windpipe.
The	dragon	reared	in	shock,	and	with	the	convulsive	motion	blood	poured
into	Gruntle’s	mouth.	As	he	clung	to	the	creature’s	writhing	neck,	his	weight
began	to	pull	the	dragon	down.	Wings	cracked	on	the	stone	floor.	Talons
gouged	wounds	in	the	rock	and	then	scraped	frantically.	The	impact	when	the
dragon	struck	the	ground	almost	tore	Gruntle	loose,	but	he	managed	to	hold
on,	the	muscles	of	his	shoulders,	neck	and	jaws	bunching	until	they	creaked.	He
could	hear	the	desperate	wheezing	of	breath,	and	tightened	his	death	grip.
The	dragon	reared	a	second	time,	lifting	Gruntle	into	the	air.
And	then	Kilava	struck	him	with	all	the	force	of	a	battering	ram.	The


dragon’s	throat	was	ripped	wide	open	in	a	torrent	of	gore,	but	Gruntle	was
falling,	Kilava’s	own	fangs	scoring	deep	across	his	shoulder	blades.
They	pounded	against	the	stone	floor,	burst	apart,	Gruntle	scrabbling	to
find	his	footing,	twisting	to	find	Kilava	–	to	kill	her	once	and	for	all—
The	dying	dragon	was	not	yet	done.	Its	jaws	slammed	down	on	Gruntle.
Fangs	long	as	scimitars	impaled	him.	He	was	lifted	from	the	ground,	and	then
flung	through	the	air.
Bones	exploded	inside	his	mangled	flesh	when	he	struck	the	wall.	Leaving
a	glittering	crimson	streak,	he	slid	down	the	stone	to	slump	gasping,	too
broken	to	move.
The	dragon	staggered,	head	swinging	round,	eyes	blazing	as	they	fixed	on
him.	Jaws	opened,	and	sorcery	roiled	out	in	a	torrent.
Gruntle	heard	Trake’s	death	cry,	and	that	howl	itself	seemed	to	catch	fire	in
the	conflagration	of	draconic	magic.	It	raged	around	him,	tore	deep	into	his
ruined	body.	And	all	at	once	his	god	left	him,	stumbling	away,	away	from	this
realm.	A	trail,	another	cave,	a	place	of	darkness,	a	place	to	lie	down	and	die.
Again.	You	damned	fool.	You	never	learn.	And	now…now	it’s	too	late.
The	dragon	careened	against	the	far	wall,	sank	down,	spilling	out	the	last
of	itself.
But	above	it,	in	that	tearing	wound,	another	was	clawing	its	way	through.
The	cavern	simply	disintegrated	as	Eleint	sorcery	annihilated	the	last
barriers	surrounding	Starvald	Demelain.	Beyond,	the	deep	snows	erupted	in
clouds	of	scalding	steam.	The	ground	itself	was	torn	away,	leaving	nothing	but
swirling	chaos.
In	clouds	of	spinning	dust	and	pelting	rubble,	in	the	wild	fires	of	chaotic
magic,	the	dragons	returned	to	the	world.
	
In	my	dreams,	a	blackened	cat,	a	thing	lying	bleeding,	gasping,	dying.
Blackened.	In	my	dreams,	I	saw	not	her,	but	myself.
Dear	Kilava,	you	did	warn	me.	And	I	did	not	listen.
And	when	I	warned	Trake,	Tiger	of	Summer	and	god	of	war,	he	did	not
listen.	You	fool.	You	needed	wisdom	in	the	one	you	chose,	Trake.	Not	just
another	damned	version	of	you.	With	all	the	same,	useless,	deadly	flaws.
All	that	time,	stretching	away	behind	me	now.	Solid	as	stone,	every	shape,
every	rise	and	every	dip,	worn	away	in	these	winds	of	dying.	Stonny,	see	what	I
have	done?	Or	failed	to	do.	You	were	right	to	refuse	me.	I	always	thought	bigger
than	I	could	deliver.	I	always	wanted	what	I	could	not	hold.
And	I	saw	it	in	your	eyes	–	the	day	I	stood	before	you,	when	I	promised	that


I	would	come	back.	I	saw	in	your	eyes	you	knew	I	wouldn’t.	You	knew	you	would
never	see	me	again.	Ah,	my	love,	so	many	truths,	come	too	late.
And	this	love,	it	is	the	last	thing	I	have	left,	the	last	thing	to	hold	on	to.	All	I
ever	wanted	–	feel	it	slip	away,	slip	away.
Woman,	you	should	never	have	let	me	go.	I	should	have	given	you	that
power	over	me.	If	I	had,	you	would’ve	understood.	You	would	have	believed	my
love	for	you.	And	if	you	had	believed,	in	that	moment…	I	would	have	believed,
too.	How	could	I	not?
This	is	my	fault.	I	saw	that	then	and	I	see	it	now.	My	fault.
Stonny,	my	love,	I	am	sorry.
Time,	that	stretched	behind	him	for	ever,	that	closed	in	and	became	solid,
that	beckoned	ahead	with	a	darkness	almost	within	reach,	then	ended.
	
By	the	time	she	staggered	to	his	side,	she	saw	that	he	was	dead.	Sembled	into
her	Imass	form,	she	sat	down	weakly	beside	his	carcass,	lifted	her	gaze	to	the
empty,	dust-wreathed	sky.
The	last	of	them,	gone	now.	Out	into	the	world.	She	had	known	that	there
would	be	hundreds	of	them,	but	still,	the	sight	of	that	exodus	had	stunned	her.
Blood	pooled	beneath	her,	mixing	with	that	of	Gruntle,	this	noble	fool
lying	so	still	beside	her.	There	was	nothing	more	heartbreaking	than	to	look
upon	a	dead	beast,	a	thing	stripped	of	its	terrible	strength,	its	perfect	majesty.
And	there	was	something	still	crueller	when	that	beast	was	a	hunter,	a	predator.
A	rival.	Not	killed	for	food.	No.	Killed	for	existing,	killed	for	the	presumption
of	competition.	The	predator	fights	to	the	last.	It	refuses	to	surrender.	Hunt	it
down.	Corner	it.	See	those	bared	fangs.	Listen	to	its	fury	and	its	fear	and	its
noble	defiance.
You	understood	all	of	this,	Gruntle.	You	understood	the	inescapable,
profound	tragedy	that	is	the	beast	that	hunts,	that	dares	to	challenge	our
domination.
I	did	not	mean	to	take	your	life.
She	knew	she	was	badly	hurt.	She	knew	she	might	not	survive	this.	Even
without	the	power	of	his	god	–	whom	she	had	kept	away	until	the	dragon’s
arrival	–	he	had	been…extraordinary.	Had	he	not	turned	upon	the	Eleint…yes,
he	would	have	killed	me.
Gruntle,	I	will	remember	you.	This	I	swear.	Here,	in	the	cracks	in	my	heart.
I	will	curse	Trake	until	the	end	of	my	days,	but	you,	brother	of	the	hunt,	I	will
remember.
Hearing	a	scrabble	of	stones,	she	lifted	her	head.


The	pair	of	emlava	had	returned,	and	now	edged	towards	her.	She	sensed
their	distress.	Their	grief.	‘He	lives,’	she	whispered.	‘My	husband	lives.	For
now.	As	for	what	comes…’	I	wish	I	had	an	answer.
The	realm	was	dying	on	all	sides.	Disintegrating	into	dust,	as	all	dreams
must	do,	when	the	last	dreamer	is	gone.
When	she	leaned	back,	closed	her	eyes,	she	felt	the	world	shifting	beneath
her.	So…gentle	now,	sweet	as	the	rocking	of	a	ship.	Husband.	Was	I	wrong	to
do	this?	She	looked	over	to	see	the	two	sabre-toothed	cats	lying	down	beside
Gruntle’s	carcass.	As	if	to	give	him	warmth.
As	if	to	make	him	their	own.


Chapter	Nineteen

‘Not	even	the	dead	know	the	end	to	war.’
Iskar	Jarak
‘WHAT	ARE	YOU	DOING?’
Withal	cinched	tight	the	last	straps,	and	reached	for	the	black-scaled
gauntlets.	‘I	can’t	just	sit	here	any	more,’	he	said.	‘Since	it	seems	we’re	all
going	to	die	anyway.’	He	glanced	up	at	her,	and	shrugged.
Her	lips	were	dry,	chapped.	Her	eyes	were	ringed	in	red,	hollowed	with
exhaustion.	‘What	of	me?’	she	asked	in	a	whisper.	‘You	will	leave	me…alone?’
‘Sand,	there	are	no	chains	on	that	throne—’
‘But	there	are!’
‘No.	And	there’s	no	law	says	you	got	to	sit	there	until	the	end.	Why	give
them	the	glory	of	dragging	you	down	from	it,	their	delight	at	seeing	fresh
Andiian	blood	splashing	the	dais	steps?	Piss	on	them!	Come	with	me.	Die	with
the	ones	giving	their	lives	to	defend	you.’
She	looked	away.	‘I	do	not	know	how	to	fight.’
‘Doesn’t	matter,’	he	said,	rising	from	where	he’d	been	sitting	on	the	stone
steps	at	the	base	of	the	throne.	He	took	up	the	heavy	mace	he’d	found	–	along
with	this	arcane	armour	–	in	a	dust-thick	crypt	far	below	the	palace.	‘Look	at
me.	Too	old	for	this	by	half.’	He	picked	up	the	shield,	slipping	his	arm	through
the	straps.
She	did	look	at	him	then.	‘That’s	not	Andiian	armour.’
‘Didn’t	think	it	was,’	he	replied,	‘else	it	would	never	have	fitted	me.	Better
yet,	it’s	not	the	kind	that	needs	two	people	to	put	on.	And	the	leather	bindings	–
they	don’t	seem	to	have	aged	at	all.’
‘How	could	I	bear	it,	Withal?	Seeing	them	die.’
‘You	sit	here	fighting	your	own	war,	Sand.	If	their	dying	in	your
imagination	is	easier	for	you	to	bear,	it’s	because	you	don’t	see	the	blood.	You
don’t	hear	the	cries.	The	price	they’re	paying	you	won’t	even	deign	to	witness.’
‘Did	I	make	any	bold	claims	to	courage?’
‘You	make	plenty	of	claims,’	he	said	wearily,	‘but	none	of	them	come


close	to	courage.’
‘Go	then,’	she	hissed.	‘I	am	done	with	you.’
He	studied	her,	and	then	nodded.
Walked	from	the	throne	room.
Sandalath	Drukorlat	leaned	back	on	the	throne,	closed	her	eyes.	‘Now,’	she
muttered,	‘I	have	my	very	own	ghost.’	The	life	that	was,	the	one	she	had	just
killed.	‘There’s	courage	in	doing	that.	And	if	it	felt	easy,	well,	we	know	that’s	a
lie.	But	a	gentle	one.	Gentle	as	a	kiss	never	taken,	a	moment…slipping	past,	not
touched,	not	even	once.’
The	soldier	who	walked	in	then,	why,	she	knew	him	well.	She	could	see
through	his	armour	right	through	to	his	beating	heart,	and	such	a	large,	strong
heart.	She	could	see,	too,	all	his	bones,	scarred	with	healed	breaks,	and	beyond
that	the	floor	of	the	chamber.	Because	this	soldier ’s	arrival	had	been	a	long,
long	time	ago,	and	the	one	seated	on	this	throne,	before	whom	he	now	knelt,
was	not	Sandalath	Drukorlat.
The	soldier	was	looking	down,	and	then	he	was	laughing.	The	sound	was
warm	with	love,	softened	by	some	unknown	regret.
‘Gods	below,’	said	a	voice	from	the	throne,	seeming	to	come	from	the
dark	wood	behind	her	head.	‘How	is	it	I	cannot	even	remember	your	name?’
The	soldier	was	grinning	when	he	looked	up.	‘Lord,	when	was	the	last	time
a	Warden	of	the	Outer	Reach	visited	the	throne	room	of	Kharkanas?	Even	I
cannot	answer	that.’
But	Anomander	was	not	yet	prepared	to	excuse	himself	this	failing.	‘Have	I
not	seen	you	before?	Did	not	your	commander	at	the	Reach	speak	to	me	of
you?’
‘Perhaps,	Lord,	the	praise	was	faint,	if	it	existed	at	all.	Shall	I	ease	your
dismay,	Lord?’
Sandalath	saw	a	hand	rise	from	where	one	of	her	own	rested	on	the	arm	of
the	chair.	His	hand.	Pointing	–	no,	just	a	gesture,	just	that.	‘No	need.	Warden
Spinnock	Durav.’
The	soldier	smiled	and	nodded.	‘Upon	word	of	your	summons,	Lord,	I
have	come,	as	at	that	time	I	was	the	ranking	officer	in	the	Reach.’
‘Where	then	is	Calat	Hustain?’
‘An	event	at	the	gate,	Lord.’
‘Starvald	Demelain?	I	have	heard	nothing	of	this.’
‘It	has	been	only	a	week,	Lord,	since	he	set	out	for	it.’
‘What	manner	of	event	was	this	–	do	you	know?’
‘The	word	that	came	to	us	from	the	Watchers	did	not	suggest	urgency,	or
dire	threat,	Lord.	An	awakening	of	foreign	energies.	Modest,	but	worth	closer


examination.’
‘Very	well.	Then,	Spinnock	Durav,	it	shall	be	you.’
‘I	am	ever	at	your	call,	Lord.	What	is	it	that	you	wish	me	to	do?’
Anomander ’s	answer	stole	all	humour	from	the	soldier ’s	face.	And,	she
recalled,	it	was	never	to	return.
	
The	peace	of	the	forest	belied	the	horror	waiting	ahead.	Water	dripped	from
moss,	ran	like	tears	down	channels	in	the	lichen	covering	the	boles	of	the	trees.
Somewhere,	above	the	canopy,	heavy	clouds	had	settled,	leaking	rain.	Withal
would	have	welcomed	the	cool	drops,	the	sweet	kisses	from	heaven.	He	needed
to	be	reminded	of	things	beyond	all	this	–	the	throne	room	and	the	woman	he
had	left	behind,	and	before	him	the	First	Shore	with	its	heaps	of	corpses	and
pools	of	thickening	blood.	But	this	forest	was	too	narrow	to	hold	all	that	he
wanted,	and	to	pass	from	one	misery	to	the	next	took	little	effort,	and	it	was	not
long	before	he	could	hear	the	battle	ahead,	and	between	the	towering	trunks	of
the	ancient	trees	he	now	caught	flashes	of	shimmering	light	–	where	the	world
ends.
For	all	of	us.
He	was	done	with	her	haunting	his	dreams,	done	with	all	the	demands	that
he	make	his	love	for	Sandalath	into	some	kind	of	weapon,	a	thing	with	which
to	threaten	and	cajole.	And	Sand	had	been	right	in	rejecting	him.	No,	she	was
Mother	Dark’s	problem	now.
The	chewed-up	trail	dipped	before	climbing	to	the	ridge	overlooking	the
First	Shore,	and	as	he	scrabbled	his	way	up	the	slope	the	sounds	of	fighting
built	into	a	roar.	Two	more	steps,	a	thick	root	for	a	handhold,	and	then	he	was
on	the	ridge,	and	before	him	was	a	scene	that	stole	the	strength	from	his	legs,
that	closed	a	cold	hand	about	his	heart.
Who	then	has	seen	such	a	thing?	Before	him,	seven	thousand	bodies.
Letherii.	Shake.	And	there,	along	the	base	of	Lightfall	–	to	either	side	of	that
breach	–	how	many	dead	and	dying	Liosan?	Ten	thousand?	Fifteen?	The
numbers	seemed	incomprehensible.	The	numbers	gave	him	nothing.	In	his
mind	he	could	repeat	them,	as	if	voicing	a	mantra,	as	his	gaze	moved	from	one
horror	to	the	next,	and	then	down	to	where	the	knot	of	defenders	fought	at	the
very	mouth	of	the	wound	–	fought	to	deny	the	Liosan	a	single	foothold	upon
the	Shore	–	and	still,	none	of	it	made	sense.	Even	when	it	did.
It	is	the	last	stand.	That	is	what	this	is.	They	keep	coming.	We	keep	falling.
An	entire	people,	face	to	face	with	annihilation.
All	at	once	he	wanted	to	turn	round,	march	back	to	Kharkanas,	to	the


palace,	into	the	throne	room,	and…and	what?	It’s	not	her	fault.	There’s	nothing
here	she	ever	wanted.	Gods	below,	Sand,	I	begin	to	understand	your	madness.
No	one	here	will	accept	surrender,	no	matter	what	you	say.	You	could	open	your
own	throat	there	on	that	throne,	and	it	wouldn’t	matter.	These	people	will	die
defending	a	corpse.	A	corpse	on	a	throne,	in	a	corpse	of	a	city.	The	cause
stopped	meaning	anything	some	time	ago.
I	should	have	seen	that.
Two	girls	were	among	the	dead	and	dying,	stumbling	from	body	to	body.
They	were	painted	head	to	toe	in	crimson.	One	of	them	was	shrieking,	as	if
seeking	to	tear	her	own	voice	to	pieces,	to	destroy	it	for	all	time.	The	other
careered	among	the	corpses,	hands	over	her	ears.
There	were	no	reserves.	All	who	remained	standing	were	at	the	breach,
where	Yedan	Derryg	still	stood,	still	fought.	But	what	of	Yan	Tovis?	What	of
the	queen	of	the	Shake?	If	she	was	in	that	dreadful	press,	Withal	could	not	see
her.	If	she	had	died,	she	was	buried	beneath	her	fallen	subjects.
He	found	that	he	was	breathing	hard,	his	heart	pounding.	The	grip	of	the
mace	was	slick	in	his	hand.	He	set	it	down,	reached	for	the	ornate,	full-visored
helm	slung	from	his	knife	belt.	Fumbled	to	loosen	the	clasp	–	as	if	his	fingers
had	forgotten	how	to	work.	Finally	tugging	it	free,	he	worked	the	helm	on	to
his	head,	felt	its	weight	settle.	He	closed	the	clasp	under	his	chin,	the	iron	hoop
tearing	at	the	beard	on	his	throat.
The	sounds	of	the	battle	dulled	then,	faint	as	distant	breakers	on	some
unseen	strand.	A	louder	squeal	when	he	set	the	visor	and	locked	it	in	place,	and
the	scene	before	him	was	suddenly	split,	broken	up	by	the	chaotically	angled
bars.	His	breaths	now	filled	the	confined	space.
Withal	collected	the	mace,	straightened.	Brought	the	shield	round	to	guard
his	left	side,	and	lurched	into	motion.
Someone	else	had	wrested	control	of	his	body	–	his	legs,	now	carrying
him	down	on	to	the	strand;	his	eyes,	searching	for	a	path	through	the	pale,
motionless	bodies;	the	hand	holding	his	weapon	and	the	forearm	bearing	the
weight	of	the	shield	–	they	no	longer	belonged	to	him,	no	longer	answered	to
his	will.	You	do	not	willingly	walk	into	a	battle	like	this.	How	can	you?	No,
some	other	force	takes	you	there,	moves	you	like	a	pawn,	a	puppet.	And	you
watch	yourself	going	ever	forward,	and	you	are	baffled,	disbelieving.	And	all
that	fear,	it’s	hollowed	out	–	just	an	empty	place	now.	And	the	roar	outside	is
lost	to	the	roar	inside	–	your	own	blood,	your	breaths	–	and	now	your	mouth	is
parched	and	you	would	kill	your	own	mother	for	a	drink	of	water.	But	of	course
you	won’t,	because	that	would	be	wrong	–	and	that	thought	makes	you	want	to
laugh.	But	if	you	do,	you	know	that	you	will	lose	it,	you	know	that	if	that


laughter	starts	it	won’t	stop.
Was	this	how	it	was	in	my	first	battle?	Was	this	why	I	could	remember	so
little	–	only	frozen	moments,	those	moments	that	reach	up	and	take	you	by	the
throat?	That	make	you	see	all	that	you	don’t	want	to	see,	remember	all	that	you
pray	to	forget?
Is	this	how	it	was?
He	was	clambering	over	the	heaped	bodies	now,	the	flesh	beneath	him
cold,	taking	the	imprints	of	his	feet	and	knees	like	damp	clay	–	he	looked	back
at	the	dents	and	wondered	at	their	wrongness.	And	then	he	was	moving	on,	and
before	him	was	a	ragged	wall,	Letherii	and	Shake	on	their	knees,	or	bent	over,
or	trying	to	drag	themselves	out	from	a	forest	of	legs,	shielding	wounds	–	he
thought	he	would	see	weeping	faces,	bawling	despair,	but	the	pain-twisted	faces
were	dry,	and	every	cry	that	clawed	past	his	own	roaring	self	was	one	of	raw
pain.	Just	that.	Nothing	more.	A	sound	without	complications,	can	you	hear	it?
If	there	could	be	one	god,	with	one	voice,	this	is	the	sound	it	would	make	–
to	stop	us	in	our	endless	madness.
But	look	on,	Withal.	See	the	truth.	We	do	not	listen.
He	made	his	way	past	these	exhausted	and	wounded	comrades,	pushed	his
way	into	the	heaving	mass.	The	stench	rocked	him.	Abattoir,	sewer,	cutter ’s
floor.	Thick	enough	to	choke	him.	He	struggled	against	vomiting	–	here	inside
this	helm	–	no,	he	would	not	do	that.	Could	not.
Faces	now,	on	all	sides.	None	speaking,	and	the	look	in	their	eyes	was	flat,
flatter	than	anything	he’d	ever	seen.	And	they	were	all	straining	towards	the
front	line,	moving	up	to	take	their	places,	to	fill	the	gaps,	the	unending	gaps,	as
if	to	say	If	you	will	kill	us	all,	kill	me	next.	But	do	not	think	it	will	be	easy.
Suddenly,	he	felt	ready	for	this.	Walk	until	something	bars	your	path.	Then
stand,	until	you	fall.	Whoever	said	life	was	complicated?
The	channels	and	currents	had	carried	him	to	the	left	flank,	well	away	from
that	immovable	knot	at	the	centre,	where	a	sword’s	laughter	had	taken	for	itself
all	the	Shore’s	madness,	every	last	scrap	of	it.
He	saw	Brevity,	though	at	first	he	did	not	recognize	her	–	that	solid,
handsome	face,	the	wry	look	in	her	eyes,	all	gone.	In	their	place	a	mask	of	wet
blood	over	dried	blood,	over	blood	that	had	turned	into	black	tar.	A	slash	had
opened	one	cheek,	revealing	two	rows	of	red	molars.	There	was	nothing
sardonic	left,	but	she	commanded	that	front	line,	her	will	clenched	like	a	fist.
Off	her	shield	side,	two	Shake	fell	and	three	Liosan	pushed	in	to	widen	the
gap.
Eyes	widening	at	the	perfect,	breathtaking	simplicity	of	what	was	needed	of
him,	Withal	surged	to	meet	them.


	
This	was	something	new.	Yan	Tovis	could	feel	it.	Yedan	Derryg	had	advanced
the	line	to	the	very	edge	of	the	breach,	and	there	they	had	held	against	the
Liosan.	This	time	there	was	to	be	no	foothold.	He	would	refuse	them	a	single
step	upon	the	strand.
He	had	explained	nothing,	and	as	she	fought,	crowded	hard	against	that
wound	–	from	which	Liosan	poured	like	blood	–	she	began	to	realize	that,	this
time,	there	would	be	no	respite,	not	until	one	side	or	the	other	fell,	to	the	very
last	soldier.	What	had	begun	would	not	end	until	the	last	sword	swung	down,	or
sank	deep	in	writhing	flesh.
How	had	he	known?	What	had	he	done	on	the	other	side	of	the	gate?	What
had	he	seen?
She	caught	glimpses	of	her	brother,	there,	where	the	terrifying	pealing
laughter	went	on	and	on,	where	blood	fountained,	where	Liosan	bodies	piled
ever	higher	and	they	stood	on	them,	fighting	for	balance,	face	to	face,	weapons
flashing.	Glimpses.	A	face	she	barely	knew,	so	twisted	was	it,	the	Hust	sword
dragging	him	past	exhaustion,	past	all	reason	of	what	the	human	body	could
withstand.	Of	his	face,	she	could	see	the	white	bones	beneath	translucent	flesh,
could	see	all	the	veins	and	arteries	and	the	root-mat	of	vessels,	could	see	the
bloody	tears	that	streamed	down	from	his	eyes.
Night	had	come	to	the	Shake.	The	sand	had	measured	the	time,	in	a	kind	of
stillness,	a	kind	of	silence	that	was	beneath	all	this,	and	the	grains	slipped
down,	and	now	had	come	the	eternity	just	before	dawn,	the	time	of	the	Watch.
He	stood.	He	fought,	his	stance	wide	to	find	purchase	on	a	hill	of	bodies.
See	him.	In	the	eternity	before	dawn.	When	among	mortals	courage	is	at	its
weakest,	when	fear	sinks	talons	on	the	threshold	and	will	not	let	go.	When	one
awakens	to	such	loneliness	as	to	twist	a	moan	from	the	chest.	But	then…you	feel
it,	breath	catching.	You	feel	it.	You	are	not	alone.
The	Watch	stands	guard.
They	would	not	break,	would	not	yield	–	all	those	who	stood	now	with
him.	Instead,	at	his	sides	they	died,	and	died.
She	was	a	thing	of	ash	and	blood,	moulded	into	something	vaguely	humanshaped,	tempered	by	the	crushed	bone	of	her	ancestors,	and	she	fought	on,
because	her	brother	would	not	yield,	because	the	very	border	that	was
Lightfall,	and	the	wound,	had	now	become	the	place	where	it	would	be	decided.
And	still	the	Liosan	came,	lunging	wild-eyed	from	the	swirling	chaos	–
most	did	not	even	have	time	to	react,	to	make	sense	of	the	nightmare	world
into	which	they	had	just	stumbled,	before	a	pike	plunged	into	them,	or	a	sword


lashed	down.	And	so	they	died,	there	on	that	threshold,	fouling	those	who	came
after	them.
She	had	no	idea	how	many	of	her	people	were	left,	and	a	vision	that	had
come	upon	her	a	century	ago,	maybe	longer,	of	Yedan	Derryg	standing	alone
before	the	breach,	the	very	last	to	fall,	now	returned	to	her,	not	as	some
dreadful	imagining,	but	as	prophetic	truth.
And	all	because	I	would	not	kneel	to	the	Shore.
There	was	no	dragon	challenging	the	breach.	If	one	came,	she	now	would
not	hesitate.	She	would	fling	herself	down,	trusting	in	Yedan	to	kill	the	damned
thing,	trusting	in	the	power	of	her	own	blood	to	claim	that	dying	creature,	hold
it	fast,	grasp	hold	of	its	blood	and	lift	it,	higher,	yet	higher,	to	make	a	wall,	to
seal	this	gate.
Why	did	I	wait?	Why	did	I	resist?
Why	did	I	believe	my	freedom	was	worth	anything?	Why	did	I	imagine	that	I
had	the	right	to	choose	my	destiny?	Or	choose	to	deny	it?
Only	the	defeated	kneel.	Only	slaves,	the	ones	who	surrender	their	lives	–
into	the	hands	of	others.
But	now…	I	would	do	it.	To	save	my	people,	this	pitiful	remnant.	Come	to
me	now,	my	child-witches.	See	me	kneel.	Bleed	me	out.	I	am	ready.
A	Liosan	fell	to	her	sword,	on	to	his	knees	before	her,	as	if	mocking	her
sudden	desire,	and	over	his	head	she	saw	her	brother	–	saw	him	turn,	saw	him
find	her.	Their	gazes	locked.
Yan	Tovis	loosed	a	sob,	and	then	nodded.
Yedan	Deryyg	threw	out	his	arms	to	the	sides.	Roared,	‘Back!	Ten	paces!’
And	hail	welcome	to	the	dragon.
	
She	watched	Spinnock	Durav	enter	the	throne	room	yet	again,	and	wondered	at
the	absence	of	his	smile.	That	face	did	not	welcome	solemn	regard,	wore	it	like
an	ill-fitting	mask.	Made	it	lined	where	it	should	be	smooth,	made	the	eyes
flinch	when	he	looked	up	to	meet	the	gaze	of	the	one	seated	on	this	throne.
He	smelled	of	burnt	wood,	as	if	he	had	dragged	the	death	of	a	forest	behind
him,	and	now	the	smoke	swirled	round	his	legs,	his	kneeling	form,	like
serpents	only	she	could	see.
‘Highness,’	he	said.
‘Speak	to	me,’	said	a	strained,	half-broken	voice,	‘on	the	disposition	of	my
legions.’
‘Certain	leaders	among	us,’	Spinnock	replied,	eyes	lowering	to	fix	on	the
dais,	or	perhaps	a	pair	of	booted	feet,	‘are	in	their	souls	unleashed.	’Tis	the


scent	upon	this	wind—’
‘If	the	fire	draws	closer,	the	city	will	burn.’
‘Against	that	conflagration,	Highness,	only	you	can	stand,	for	it	is	by	your
will	–	we	see	that	now.	We	see	your	grief,	though	we	do	not	yet	understand	its
meaning.	What	pact	have	you	made	with	Silanah?	Why	does	she	lay	waste	to	all
the	land?	Why	does	she	drive	ever	closer	to	proud	Kharkanas?’
‘Proud?’	The	word	was	a	sneer.	‘I	am	now	one	ghost	among	many,	and	it	is
only	ghosts	who	belong	here.	If	we	are	to	be	forgotten,	the	city	must	fall.	If	we
are	to	be	forgiven,	the	city	must	swallow	our	crimes.	If	we	are	to	be	dust,	the
city	must	be	ash.	That	is	how	to	end	this.’
‘We	have	journeyed	long,	Highness.	From	the	Outer	Marches,	on	a
hundred	hidden	paths	only	a	thief	would	remember.	And	then	the	violence	took
our	leaders.	The	blood	of	Eleint.’
‘Cursed	blood!’
‘Highness?’
‘No!	It	poisoned	me	once	–	you	know	that,	Spinnock	Durav!	You	were
there!’
He	bowed	his	head	still	further.	‘I	saw	what	was	done,	yes.	I	saw	what	you
sought	to	hide	away.’
‘I	did	not	ask	them	to	come	back.	I	didn’t!’
He	lifted	his	gaze,	tilted	his	head.	‘I	sense…this	is	important.	Highness.
Who	did	you	not	ask	to	come	back?’
Hard,	cold	hands	closed	on	her	face.	She	felt	them	like	her	own,	felt	the
long	fingers	like	prison	bars,	smelled	the	wax	of	melted	candles.	‘Can’t	you
hear	it?’
‘Hear	what,	Highness?’
‘Their	screams.	The	dying!	Can’t	you	hear	it?’
‘Highness,	there	is	a	distant	roar.	Lightfall—’
‘Lightfall!’	Her	eyes	widened	but	she	could	not	speak,	could	not	think.
‘What	is	happening?’	he	demanded.
What	is	happening?	Everything	is	happening!	‘Are	they	in	disarray?	Your
troops?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘No,	Highness.	They	wait	on	Blind	Gallan’s	Road.’
Blind	Gallan’s	Road?	There	was	no	such	road.	Not	then.	Not	when	Spinnock
Durav	came	to	kneel	before	his	lord.	I	have	lost	my	mind.	A	sudden	whimper,
and	she	shrank	back	in	the	throne.	‘Take	off	that	mask,	Spinnock	Durav.	You
were	never	so	old.’
‘Who	did	you	ask	not	to	come	back?’
She	licked	her	lips.	‘She	should	have	taken	the	throne.	She	was	a	true


queen,	you	see.	Of	the	Shake.	And	the	Letherii,	the	ones	she	saved.	I	don’t
belong	here	–	I	told	them—’
But	Spinnock	Durav	was	on	his	feet,	a	growing	horror	on	his	face.
‘Highness!	Sandalath	Drukorlat!	What	is	that	roar?’
She	stared	at	him.	Moved	her	mouth	to	make	words.	Failed.	Tried	a	second
time.	‘The	breach.	They’ve	come	again	–	tell	Anomander	–	tell	him!	No	one
can	stop	them	but	him!	The	Shake	–	dying.	Oh,	Mother	bless	us.	DYING!’
Her	shriek	echoed	in	the	vast	room.	But	he	was	already	leaving.	Out	in	the
corridor	now,	shouting	orders	–	but	that	voice,	too	desperate,	too	frantic.	Not
like	Spinnock	Durav	at	all.
	
Lord	Nimander	Golit	Anomandaris,	firstborn	of	the	fraught	union	of	Son	of
Darkness	and	the	First	Daughter	of	Draconus,	fell	to	his	knees.	His	body
trembled	as	he	struggled	against	the	blood	of	the	Eleint	and	its	terrible	need,	its
inescapable	necessity.	Where	was	Skintick?	Desra?	Nenanda?
The	stones	of	the	river	bed	crunched	beside	him,	and	he	felt	hands	clutch
his	shoulders.	‘Resist	this,	Lord.	We’re	the	last	two	left.	Resist	the	call	of	the
Eleint!’
He	lifted	his	head,	baffled,	and	stared	into	Korlat’s	ancient	eyes.	‘What	–
who?’
‘She	has	commanded	Silanah.	She	has	summoned	the	Warren	of	Fire,	and
set	upon	the	dragon	the	madness	of	her	desire	–	do	you	understand?	She	would
burn	this	realm	to	the	ground!’
Gasping,	he	shook	his	head.	‘Who	sits	upon	the	throne?	Who	would	do	this
in	Mother	Dark’s	name?’
‘Can	you	not	smell	the	blood?	Nimander?	There	is	war	–	here	–	I	don’t
know	who.	But	souls	are	falling,	in	appalling	numbers.	And	on	the	Throne	of
Darkness	sits	a	queen	–	a	queen	in	despair.’
He	blinked.	A	queen?	‘Where	is	Apsal’ara?’
Korlat	looked	across	the	river.	‘Into	the	city,	Lord.’
‘And	Spinnock?’
‘He	has	followed	–	to	beseech	the	queen.	To	make	sense	of	this	–
Nimander,	listen	to	me.	Your	Soletaken	kin,	they	have	succumbed	to	Silanah’s
power	–	she	now	commands	a	Storm.	If	we	now	veer,	you,	myself,	Dathenar
and	Prazek	–	we	shall	be	forced	to	fight	them.	In	the	skies	above	Kharkanas,	we
shall	annihilate	each	other.	This	must	not	be.’
Nimander	forced	himself	to	his	feet.	‘No.	Silanah.	She	must	be	stopped.’
‘Only	the	Queen	can	command	her	to	stop,	Nimander.’


‘Then…take	me	to	her.’
When	Korlat	hesitated,	he	studied	her,	eyes	narrowing.	‘What	is	it,	Korlat?
Who	is	this	Queen	of	Darkness?’
‘I	fear…no	matter.	Go,	then,	Nimander.	Convince	her	to	release	Silanah.’
‘But	–	where	will	you	go?’
‘The	war.	I	will	go	with	Dathenar	and	Prazek.	Lord,	I	believe	I	know	where
the	battle	will	be	found.	I	hope	that	I	am	wrong.	But…go.	Walk	where	your
father	walked.’
	
How	long	ago	was	it?	She	could	not	remember.	She	was	young.	The	night	before
she	had	taken	a	boy	to	her	bed,	to	remind	herself	that	not	everything	was	pain.
And	if	she	later	broke	his	heart,	she’d	not	meant	to.	But	this	was	a	new	day,	and
already	the	night	just	past	seemed	centuries	away.
She’d	been	with	her	brother’s	hunting	party.	On	the	spoor	of	tenag.	The	day
was	warm,	the	sun	bright	and	pleased	with	itself.
They	heard	his	laughter	first,	a	deep	thing,	hinting	of	thunder,	and	they
followed	it	down	into	a	depression	thick	with	chokecherry	and	dogwood.	A
figure,	lying	against	a	slope.	He	was	Imass,	like	them,	but	they	did	not
recognize	him,	and	this	in	itself	was	startling.	Disturbing.
She	could	see	at	once,	when	she	and	her	kin	gathered	close,	that	his	wounds
were	fatal.	It	was	a	wonder	he	still	lived,	and	an	even	greater	wonder	that	he
could	laugh	as	he	did,	and	through	all	the	agony	in	his	eyes,	that	mirth	still
shone	when	he	looked	up	at	them.
Her	brother	was	first	to	speak,	because	that	was	his	way.	‘What	manner	of
stone	do	you	wear?’
‘Stone?’	the	dying	man	replied,	showing	a	red	smile.	‘Metal,	my	friends.
Armour.	A	Tel	Akai	gift.’
‘Where	have	you	come	from?’
‘Clanless.	I	wandered.	I	came	upon	an	army,	my	friends.’
‘There	is	no	army.’
‘Jaghut.	Tel	Akai.	Others.’
They	were	silenced	by	this.	The	Jaghut	were	despised.	Feared.	But	an	army
of	Jaghut?	Impossible.
Were	they	now	at	war?	Her	clan?	Her	people?	If	so,	then	they	would	all	die.
An	army	of	Jaghut	–	the	words	alone	opened	like	Omtose	Phellack	in	her	soul.
‘I	joined	them,’	said	the	man,	and	then,	lifting	a	mangled	hand,	he	added,
‘Set	no	crime	at	my	feet	for	that.	Because,	you	see,	I	am	the	last	left.	They	died.
All	of	them.	The	Jaghut.	The	Tel	Akai.	The	Jheck.	All…dead.’


‘What	enemy	has	come	among	us?’	her	brother	asked,	his	eyes	wide	with
fear.
‘None	but	that	has	always	been	with	us,	friends.	Think	well	on	my	words.
When	you	slay	a	beast,	when	you	hunt	as	you	do	now,	and	blood	is	spilled.
When	you	close	upon	the	beast	in	its	dying,	do	you	not	see	its	defiance?	Its
struggle	to	the	very	last	moment?	The	legs	that	kick,	the	head	that	tries	to	lift,
the	blood	frothing	from	the	nostrils?’
They	nodded.	They	had	seen.	And	each	time	they	had	felt	something	fill
their	hearts,	choke	in	their	throats.	One	needed	to	bite	back	on	that.	Things
were	as	they	were.
‘Bless	the	Jaghut,’	the	stranger	said,	his	head	falling	back.	He	laughed,	but
it	was	short,	frail.	‘Why	defy	death,	when	you	cannot	help	but	fail?	They	would
tell	you	why.	No.	They	would	show	you	why	–	if	only	you	had	the	courage	to	see,
to	stand	with	them,	to	understand	the	true	enemy	of	all	life.’	His	eyes	found	her,
her	alone,	and	once	more	he	managed	a	smile.	‘Now	I	will	die.	I	will…fail.	But	I
beg	of	you,’	and	his	eyes	glistened,	and	she	saw	that	they	were	beautiful	eyes,
especially	now,	‘a	kiss.	Many	a	woman	cursed	me	in	my	youth.	Even	as	they
loved	me.	It	was…glorious.’
She	saw	the	life	draining	from	those	eyes,	and	so	she	leaned	forward,	to
catch	its	leaving.	With	a	soft	kiss.	His	breath	was	of	blood.	His	lips	were
cracked,	but	they	were	warm.
She	held	that	kiss,	as	that	warmth	left.	Held	it,	to	give	him	as	much	of	her
as	she	could.
Her	brother	pulled	her	away,	held	her	in	his	arms	the	way	he	used	to,	when
she	was	much	younger,	when	she	was	not	so	guarded	with	her	own	body.
They	took	the	armour,	before	leaving	his	body	to	the	wild.	And	she	claimed
that	armour	for	her	own.	For	that	kiss.
And	now,	she	wanted	it	back.	Hissing	in	frustration,	Apsal’ara	scanned	the
empty	chamber.	She	was	far	beneath	the	ground	floor	of	the	palace.	She	was
where	they’d	put	her	armour	and	her	mace,	the	first	time	she’d	been	captured
in	their	midst.	They’d	been	amused	by	her	–	it	was	always	that	way,	as	if
Kharkanas	held	nothing	worth	stealing,	as	if	the	very	idea	of	theft	was	too
absurd	to	countenance.
But	someone	had	stolen	her	armour!
Seething	with	outrage	and	indignation,	she	set	out	in	search	of	it.
	
All	reason	had	left	the	face	of	their	lord.	Froth	foamed	the	corners	of	his
mouth	as	he	screamed	his	rage,	driving	the	ranks	into	the	maw	of	the	gate,	and


it	was	indeed	a	maw	–	Aparal	Forge	could	see	the	truth	of	that.	The	fangs
descended	again	and	again.	They	chewed	his	people	to	bloody	shreds	and
splintered	bones.	And	this	was	an	appetite	without	end.
They	could	not	push	past,	not	a	single	damned	step	–	denying	the	legions	a
foothold,	a	place	into	which	their	Soletaken	masters	could	come,	could	veer
and,	in	veering,	at	last	shatter	the	opposition.
The	commander	on	the	other	side	had	anticipated	them.	Somehow,	he	had
known	the	precise	moment	at	which	to	modify	his	tactics.
Aparal	watched	the	mangled	bodies	being	pulled	from	the	swirling
maelstrom	of	the	gate,	watched	the	way	those	bodies	floundered	like	wreckage,
bobbing	on	human	hands	and	shoulders,	out	to	the	deep	trenches	already
heaped	high	with	the	dead.	Apart	from	the	elite	companies,	hardly	any	soldiers
remained.	This	iron	mouth	has	devoured	the	population	of	an	entire	city.	Look
well,	my	Soletaken	kin,	and	ask	yourself:	whom	will	you	lord	it	over	now?	Who
will	serve	you	in	your	estates?	Who	will	raise	the	food,	who	will	serve	it,	who
will	make	your	fine	clothes,	who	will	clean	your	shit-buckets?
None	of	this	was	real.	Not	any	more.	And	all	the	ordered	precision	of
existence	was	now	in	shambles,	a	bloodied	mess.	There	was	nothing	to	discuss,
no	arguments	to	fling	back	and	forth,	no	pauses	in	time	to	step	back	and	study
old	tapestries	on	the	walls	and	pray	for	the	guidance	of	heroic	ancestors.
Saranas	was	destroyed,	and	when	this	was	done	it	would	be	as	empty,	as
filled	with	ghosts,	as	Kharkanas.	Light	finds	the	face	of	Darkness,	and	lo,	it	is
its	own.	Is	this	not	what	you	wanted,	Kadagar?	But,	when	you	finally	possess
what	you	wanted,	who,	O	Lord	of	Ghosts,	who	will	sweep	the	floors?
And	now,	at	last,	the	elite	ranks	were	pushing	up	against	the	gate	–	all	the
fodder	had	been	used	up.	Now,	then,	arrived	the	final	battle.
Aparal	made	his	way	down	to	where	the	wounded	were	being	left,
abandoned,	alongside	the	trenches.	The	chorus	of	their	cries	was	horrible
beyond	measure	–	to	enter	this	place	was	an	invitation	to	madness,	and	he
almost	welcomed	that	possibility.	He	pushed	past	the	staggering,	dead-eyed
cutters	and	healers,	searching	until	he	found	one	man,	sitting	cradling	the
stump	of	his	left	arm,	the	severed	end	of	which	trailed	wisps	of	smoke.	A	man
not	screaming,	not	weeping,	not	yet	reduced	to	a	piteous	wretch.
‘Soldier.	Look	at	me.’
The	head	lifted.	A	shudder	seemed	to	run	through	the	man.
‘You	have	been	through	the	gate?’
A	shaky	nod.
‘How	many	left	–	among	the	enemy?	How	many	left?’
‘I	–	could	not	be	sure,	Lord.	But…	I	think…few.’


‘This	is	what	we	keep	hearing,	but	what	does	that	mean?	Fifty?	Five
thousand?’
The	soldier	shook	his	head.	‘Few,	Lord.	And,	Lord,	there	is	laughter!’
‘Hust	weapons,	soldier.	Possessed	blades.	Tell	me	what	is	few?’
The	man	suddenly	bared	his	teeth,	and	then,	with	deliberation,	he	spat	at
Aparal’s	feet.
All	who	return	from	the	other	side	are	subjects	no	longer.	Mark	this,
Kadagar.	Aparal	pointed	at	the	legions	now	crowding	the	gate.	‘More	than
them?	Look,	damn	you!’
Dull	eyes	shifted,	squinted.
‘That,	soldier,	is	seven	thousand,	maybe	eight.	On	the	other	side,	as	many?
More?	Less?’	When	the	man	simply	returned	his	stare,	Aparal	drew	his	sword.
‘You	have	been	through	the	gate.	You	have	seen	–	assess	the	enemy’s	strength!’
The	man	grinned,	eyes	now	on	the	weapon	in	Aparal’s	hand.	‘Go	ahead.’
‘No,	not	you,	soldier.’	He	waved	with	the	blade	of	the	sword,	the	gesture
encompassing	a	score	of	other	wounded.	‘I	will	kill	them,	one	after	another,
until	you	answer	me.’
‘Do	you	not	see,	Lord,	why	we	refuse	you?	You	have	already	killed	us.	All
of	us.	Surviving	these	wounds	will	not	change	that.	Look	at	me.	I	am	already
dead.	To	you.	To	all	the	world.	Now	fuck	off.	No,	better	yet	–	take	yourself
through	to	the	other	side.	See	for—’
Aparal	did	not	know	where	the	rage	came	from,	but	the	savage	strength	of
his	blow	lifted	the	soldier ’s	head	from	his	neck,	sent	it	spinning,	and	then
bouncing,	until	it	fetched	up	against	another	wounded	soldier	–	who	turned	her
head,	regarded	it	for	a	moment,	then	looked	away	again.
Trembling,	horrified	by	what	he	had	done,	Aparal	Forge	backed	away.
From	one	side	he	heard	a	weary	chuckle,	and	then,	‘Barely	a	thousand	left,
Lord.	They’re	done.’
He	twisted	round,	sought	out	the	one	who	spoke.	Before	him	was	the
trench,	piled	with	corpses.	‘Is	it	the	dead	who	now	speak?’
‘As	good	as,’	came	the	reply.	‘You	don’t	understand,	do	you?	We	don’t	tell
you	because	we	honour	our	enemy	–	they’re	not	Tiste	Andii.	They’re	humans	–
who	fight	like	demons.’
He	saw	the	man	now.	Only	the	upper	half	of	his	body	was	visible,	the	rest
buried	under	bodies.	Someone	had	judged	him	dead.	Someone	had	made	a
mistake.	But	then	Aparal	saw	that	half	his	skull	was	gone,	exposing	the	brain.
‘The	Hust	Legion—’
‘Oh,	you’d	like	that,	wouldn’t	you?	But	there’s	no	Hust	Legion.	There’s
one	man.	One	Hust	sword.	Slayer	of	dragons	and	slayer	of	hounds,	slayer	of	a


thousand	Liosan…one	man.	And	when	you	finally	break	through,	Lord,	may	he
cut	you	down	–	you	Soletaken,	you	betrayers.	Every	one	of	you.’
If	you	stood	here,	Kadagar	Fant…if	you	stood	here,	you	would	finally	see
what	we	have	done.
Aparal	retreated,	made	his	way	towards	the	gate.	Yes,	he	would	push
through.	He	would	step	out	on	to	that	foreign	shore.	And,	if	he	could,	he	would
destroy	this	lone	warrior.	And	then	it	will	be	over.	Because	that	is	all	I	want,
now,	for	this	to	be	over.
He	spied	a	messenger	corps,	a	dozen	or	so	runners	standing	just	beyond
the	nearest	legion.	‘Words	to	my	kin!’	he	barked.	‘Less	than	a	thousand	remain
on	the	other	side.	And	there	is	but	one	man	with	a	Hust	sword.	Inform	our	lord
–	the	time	is	now.’
An	end.	Bless	me,	an	end.
Sheathing	his	bloody	sword,	he	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	gate.	‘There,’	he
whispered.	‘Now.’
	
Halfway	across	the	bridge,	Nimander	paused,	stared	at	the	keep’s	massive
gates.	The	air	was	filling	with	smoke,	and	he	could	now	hear	the	detonations.
The	sorcery	of	dragons,	the	Eleint	doing	what	they	did	best.	Destroying
everything	in	their	path.
The	return	of	the	Tiste	Andii	should	not	have	been	like	this.	In	flames,	in
annihilation.	He	had	felt	his	kin	being	torn	away	from	him.	They	had	veered
over	the	Outer	Marches:	they	had	been	flying	in	the	company	of	Silanah.	To
honour	her,	of	all	things.	She	was	of	the	royal	household	now,	or	so	Nimander
had	wanted	–	another	foolish	conceit.	In	Draconic	form,	she	was	my	father’s
lover	–	but	that	was	long	ago.	But	Anomander	Rake’s	hunger	for	awakening
the	blood	of	the	Eleint	within	him	had	waned.	Even	when	faced	with	the
ruination	of	Moon’s	Spawn,	he	had	not	surrendered	to	it.
Nimander	could	not	even	imagine	the	will	that	had	denied	such	a…gift.
Above	Pale,	he	could	have	killed	Tayschrenn	–	Korlat	had	said	as	much.	He
could	have	flown	down	from	Moon’s	Spawn,	Silanah	at	his	side,	and	brought
fire	and	devastation	to	the	Malazans.	The	sudden	descent	of	terror	from	the
skies,	scattering	the	enemy,	shattering	the	opposition	arrayed	against	him.
Instead,	he	waited,	and	when	at	last	he	veered	into	his	Draconic	form,	it
was	to	save	a	different	city.
‘He	would	have	done	so	for	Pale,	if	not	for	the	betrayal.’
‘But,	Korlat,	it	was	only	the	mages	who	broke	their	vow.	Not	the	people	of
the	city.’


She	had	nodded	then,	and	looked	across	to	her	two	companions.	Prazek
Goul,	who	had	once	been	Orfantal’s	swordmaster.	And	Dathenar	Fandoris,
abandoned	spawn	from	a	High	Priestess	and	then,	much	later,	Korlat’s	own
Mistress	of	Assassination.	The	three	of	them,	all	that	remained	of	his	father ’s
cadre	of	Soletaken	dragons.
Prazek	had	said,	‘No	matter	what,	there	would	have	been	terrible
destruction	visited	upon	Pale.	Had	Anomander	Rake	veered	into	a	dragon,
Tayschrenn	would	have	had	no	choice	but	to	turn	his	fullest	powers	upon	him.
By	the	time	the	two	were	done,	all	of	Pale	would	have	been	ashes.	Instead,	our
lord	descended	into	the	city,	and	hunted	down	those	wizards,	taking	them	one	by
one.	So,	in	truth,	he	did	indeed	save	Pale.’
‘Although,’	added	Dathenar,	‘he	could	not	have	anticipated	the	revenge	of
the	Moranth	upon	Pale’s	citizens.’
‘The	Malazans	could	have	stopped	that,’	countered	Prazek.
And	the	three	had	nodded.
Blinking,	Nimander	drew	a	deep	breath,	pushing	away	that	gnawing
hunger	within	him	–	to	veer,	to	rise	up,	to	join	the	Storm.	Then	he	made	his
way	across	the	bridge,	and	into	the	palace.
From	the	shadows	of	the	entrance,	Apsal’ara	stepped	out	to	block	his	path.
‘Lord	Nimander,	there	is	a	Tiste	Andii	woman	upon	the	throne.’
‘So	Korlat	told	me.	She	has	bound	Silanah	–	I	must	convince	her—’
‘She	is	Korlat’s	mother,	Lord.	Once	a	Hostage,	now	the	Queen	of	High
House	Dark.	But	madness	has	taken	her.	It	may	be,	Lord,	that	you	will	have	to
kill	her.’
‘What?	Where	is	Spinnock?’
‘Returned	to	your	legions.	There	is	war	upon	the	First	Shore.	The	Tiste
Liosan	seek	to	invade,	and	those	who	oppose	them	are	few.’
‘There	are	other	Tiste	Andii?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘No.	They	are	Shake.’
Shake?	The	island	prison	–	gods,	no.	He	stood,	his	desire	suddenly	torn	in
two	directions.
‘Make	the	Queen	yield,	Lord,’	said	Apsal’ara.	‘Spinnock	will	lead	your
people	in	battle.’	She	stepped	closer,	reached	up	and	brushed	Nimander ’s
cheek.	‘My	love,	do	this.’
‘I	will	not	usurp	the	Queen	of	High	House	Dark!	Do	we	return,	only	to
spill	Andiian	blood	all	over	again?’	He	shook	his	head	in	horrified	denial.	‘No,
I	cannot!’
‘Then	convince	her	to	release	Silanah	–	the	Storm	will	be	needed.	To	save
Kharkanas	–	to	save	the	Shake.’


‘Come	with	me.’
‘No,	Nimander.	I	will	go	to	the	First	Shore.	I	will	fight.	Find	me	there.’	Her
hand	slipped	behind	his	head	now	and	drew	his	face	down	to	her	own.	She
kissed	him	hard,	and	then	pushed	him	away,	and	was	past	him,	out	on	to	the
bridge.
The	thunder	of	Silanah’s	rage	was	drawing	closer.
Nimander	rushed	inside.
	
The	elders	and	the	young	remained	camped	near	the	bank	of	the	river,	though
Spinnock	knew	that	before	long	they	would	have	to	retreat	into	the	city.	If
Silanah	could	not	be	stopped.	Glancing	back,	up	the	road,	it	seemed	that	half
the	sky	was	aflame.	Forests	were	burning,	the	ground	itself	erupting	into
fountains	of	molten	rock.	He	caught	a	dark	shape	sailing	amidst	the	smoke.
Drawing	on	his	gauntlets,	he	faced	his	warriors,	and	saw	that	all	eyes	were
upon	him.	At	Spinnock’s	back	was	the	forest,	and	beyond	it	waited	the	First
Shore.	They	understood	what	was	to	come.	He	need	tell	them	nothing.
And	yet…
Anomander,	old	friend.	Do	you	now	sit	at	your	mother’s	side?	Do	you	now
look	down	upon	us?	Are	you	helpless,	unable	to	reach	across,	to	still	Silanah’s
savage	fury?	Or	have	you	ceased	to	care?
And	yet.
‘Anomander,	old	friend.	Do	you	now	sit	at	your	mother’s	side?	Do	you	now
look	down	upon	us?	Are	you	helpless,	unable	to	reach	across,	to	still	Silanah’s
savage	fury?	Or	have	you	ceased	to	care?
Spinnock	straightened,	scanned	the	helmed	faces	before	him.	And	then	he
drew	his	sword.	Caught	the	eye	of	Captain	Irind,	gestured	the	burly	man
forward.	‘Face	to	me	your	shield,	Captain,	and	hold	well	your	stance.’
The	man’s	eyes	narrowed	slightly,	and	then	he	took	position,	raising	the
shield	between	them	and	settling	his	shoulder	beneath	its	rim,	head	turned
away.
Spinnock	half	turned,	as	if	dismissing	Irind,	and	then	he	whirled.	The
sword	cracked	hard	against	the	shield,	staggering	the	captain.	The
reverberation	echoed,	out	into	the	forest,	and	then	fell	back	like	rain	among	the
troops.
‘When	he	led	you	and	your	ancestors	from	this	place,’	Spinnock	said,
pitching	his	voice	loud	enough	to	carry	–	though	in	truth	a	sudden	silence	had
taken	the	scene,	and	it	seemed	not	even	the	Storm	could	reach	through,	‘from
smoke,	from	fire,	from	ruin,	Mother	Dark	had	turned	away.	Before	you,


before	your	lord	Anomander	Rake,	there	was…nothing.’
Again	his	sword	struck.	Again	Irind	staggered	but	held	his	ground.
‘Prepare	to	advance.	We	will	not	form	up	once	clear	of	the	forest.’	He
bared	his	teeth.	‘There	is	no	time	for	that.	Captain	Irind,	stay	at	my	side.’
Spinnock	led	the	way	into	the	ancient	wood.	Behind	him	the	ranks	spilled
out,	order	almost	immediately	broken	by	the	boles	of	trees,	by	sinkholes	and
tree-falls.	The	air	was	heavy	with	mists.	Water	streamed	down	every	trunk,
every	branch,	every	dark-veined	leaf.
He	raised	his	voice	as	he	advanced,	knowing	that	they	would	hear	him,
knowing	that	Mother	Dark	had	given	him	this.	For	her	people.	For	this	day,
this	most	fraught	day.	‘Lord	Nimander	has	gone	to	the	palace.	He	seeks	to	turn
Silanah	from	her	path.	What	value	winning	the	battle	if	we	lose	the	war?	If	not
for	that,	he	would	be	here.	He	would	be	speaking	to	you.	But	he	is	not.	And…
this	time,	this	one	time,	it	is	well	–	for	like	many	of	you,	I	was	born	in	this
realm.’
Irind	was	beside	him,	ready	for	the	blow.	The	sword	hammered	the	shield,
the	sound	a	shout	of	iron.
‘Lord	Anomander	Rake	led	you	to	another	world.	He	fought	to	give	you
purpose	–	a	reason	to	live.	And	for	many,	in	that	he	failed.	But	those	of	you
here	–	for	you,	he	did	not	fail.’
He	swung	the	sword	again,	the	impact	shivering	up	his	arm.
‘He	asked	you	to	fight	wars	that	were	not	yours	to	fight.	He	asked	you	to
bow	to	causes	not	your	own.	A	hundred	banners,	a	hundred	cities	–	allies	who
welcomed	you	and	allies	who	did	not.	Allies	who	blessed	you	and	allies	who
feared	you.	And	your	kin	died,	oh,	how	they	died	–	they	gave	up	their	lives	in
causes	not	their	own.’
The	sword	cracked	again,	and	this	time	Irind	almost	buckled	beneath	the
blow.	Spinnock	could	hear	his	harsh	breaths.
‘They	were	all	different,	and	they	were	all	the	same.	But	the	cause	–	the
true	cause	he	offered	you	–	did	not	change.’
The	blow	sent	Irind	to	his	knees.
Another	soldier	moved	up,	readying	his	own	shield.	Bodily	dragged	Irind
back,	and	then	took	his	place.	The	sounds	from	the	advancing	warriors	behind
Spinnock	was	a	susurration	–	breaths,	armour,	boots	scrabbling	for	purchase.
‘Your	lord	was	thinking	–	each	and	every	time	–	he	was	thinking…of	this
moment.’
Again	flashed	the	sword.
‘Each	time,	every	time.	The	cause	was	just.’
Crack!


‘He	needed	to	keep	reminding	you.	For	this	day!’
Crack!
‘Today,	this	is	not	foreign	soil!	Today,	this	cause	is	your	own!’
Crack!
‘Today,	the	Tiste	Andii	fight	for	themselves!’
And	this	time	other	weapons	found	the	rims	of	shields.
CRACK!
‘Your	home!’
CRACK!
‘Your	kin!’
CRACK!
The	sword	shivered	in	his	hand.	The	soldier	stumbling	beside	him	fell
away,	his	shield	split.
Gasping,	Spinnock	Durav	pushed	on.	Anomander	Rake	–	do	you	witness
this?	Do	you	look	into	these	faces	–	all	these	faces	behind	me?
‘This	time!	Strangers	fight	in	your	name!	Strangers	die	for	you!	Your	cause
–	not	theirs!’
CRACK!
The	reverberation	shoved	him	forward,	shivered	through	him	like
something	holy.	‘Children	of	Dark,	humans	are	dying	in	your	name!’
CRACK!
The	very	air	trembled	with	that	concussion.	A	torrent	of	water	–	clinging	to
high	branches,	to	needles	and	leaves	–	shook	loose	and	rained	down	in	an
answering	hiss.
Ahead,	Spinnock	could	hear	fighting.
Do	you	see,	Anomander?	Old	friend,	do	you	see?
This	is	our	war.
CRACK!
Through	the	boles	a	glimmer	of	falling	light.	A	vast	shape	lifting	high.	The
sudden	roar	of	a	dragon.
Gods,	no,	what	have	they	done?
CRACK!
	
Anomander	Rake	entered	the	throne	room.	Sandalath	Drukorlat	stared	at	him,
watching	as	he	strode	towards	her.
His	voice	held	a	hint	of	thunder	outside.	‘Release	Silanah.’
‘Where	is	your	sword?’
The	Son	of	Darkness	drew	up	momentarily,	brow	clouding.	One	hand


brushed	the	grip	of	the	weapon	slung	at	his	belt.
‘Not	that	one,’	she	said.	‘The	slayer	of	Draconus.	Show	me.	Show	me	his
sword!’
‘Highness—’
‘Stop	that!	This	throne	is	not	mine.	It	is	yours.	Do	not	mock	me,	Lord.
They	said	you	killed	him.	They	said	you	cut	him	down.’
‘I	have	done	no	such	thing,	Highness.’
A	sudden	thought	struck	her.	‘Where	is	Orfantal?	You	took	him	to	stand	at
your	side.	Where	is	my	son?	My	beloved	son?	Tell	me!’
He	drew	closer.	He	looked	so	young,	so	vulnerable.	And	that	was	all…
wrong.	Ah,	this	is	much	earlier.	He	has	not	yet	killed	the	Consort.	But	then…
who	am	I?
‘Release	Silanah,	Sandalath	Drukorlat.	The	Storm	must	be	freed	–	the
destruction	of	Kharkanas	will	make	all	the	deaths	meaningless.’
‘Meaningless!	Yes!	It	is	what	I	have	been	saying	all	along!	It’s	all
meaningless!	And	I	am	proving	it!’
He	was	standing	before	her	now,	his	eyes	level	with	her	own.	‘Korlat—’
A	shriek	shattered	his	next	words.	Sandalath	recoiled,	and	only	then
realized	that	the	cry	had	been	torn	from	her	own	throat.	‘Not	yet!	Where	is
Orfantal?	Where	is	my	beloved	son?’
She	saw	something	in	his	face	then,	an	anguish	he	could	not	hide.	She	had
never	known	him	to	be	so…weak.	So	pathetically	unguarded.	She	sneered.
‘Kneel,	Anomander,	Son	of	Darkness.	Kneel	before	this	Hostage.’
When	he	lowered	himself	to	one	knee,	a	sudden	laugh	burst	from	her.
Disbelief.	Shock.	Delight.	‘I	proclaim	my	beloved	son	Knight	of	Darkness	–
you,	I	cast	out!	You’re	kneeling!	Now,’	and	she	leaned	forward,	‘grovel.’
‘Release	Silanah,	Highness,	or	there	can	be	no	Knight	of	Darkness.’
‘Why	not?’
‘Because	you’re	destroying	Kharkanas!’
She	stabbed	a	finger	at	him.	‘As	you	did!	When	you	made	Mother	Dark
turn	away!	But	don’t	you	see?	I	can	save	you	from	all	that!	I	can	do	it	first!’	She
bared	her	teeth	at	him.	‘Now	who	is	the	hostage?’
He	rose	then,	and	she	shrank	back	in	the	throne.	She	had	gone	too	far	–	she
could	see	it	in	his	eyes.	His	trembling	hands.	He	seemed	to	be	struggling	to
speak.
‘Just	tell	me,’	Sandalath	whispered.	‘The	truth.	Where	is	my	son?’
It	was	as	if	the	question	delivered	a	mortal	wound.	Anomander	Rake
staggered	to	one	side,	like	a	broken	man.	Shaking	his	head,	he	sank	down,	one
hand	groping	for	the	edge	of	the	dais.


And	she	knew	then.	She	had	won.
	
Back	ten	paces.
In	the	space	left	by	their	retreat	from	the	breach,	bodies	made	a	floor	of
trampled,	bloody	flesh,	shattered	spears,	broken	swords.	Here	and	there,	limbs
moved,	hands	reaching,	feet	kicking,	legs	twitching.	Mouths	in	smeared	faces
opened	like	holes	into	the	Abyss,	eyes	staring	out	from	places	of	horror,	pain,
or	fading	resignation.
Sharl,	who	had	failed	in	keeping	her	brothers	alive,	and	who	had,	thus	far,
failed	in	joining	them,	stood	beside	Captain	Brevity.	She	held	a	sword,	the
point	dug	into	a	corpse	under	her	feet,	and	knew	she	would	not	be	able	to	lift	it,
not	again.	There	was	nothing	left,	nothing	but	raging	agony	in	her	joints,	her
muscles,	her	spine.	Thirst	clawed	at	her	throat,	and	every	desperate	breath	she
drew	deep	into	her	lungs	was	foul	with	the	stench	of	the	dead	and	the	dying.
‘Stiffen	up,	lads	and	lasses,’	growled	Brevity.	‘They’re	suspicious,	is	my
guess.	Not	sure.	But	count	on	this:	they’re	coming.’
Someone	moved	past	them	then,	burly,	heavy	in	armour.	Sergeant	Cellows,
the	last	of	the	prince’s	own	soldiers.
He	made	his	way	to	position	himself	on	Yedan	Derryg’s	left,	drawing
round	and	setting	his	shield,	readying	the	heavy-bladed	sword	in	his	other
hand.	For	some	reason,	his	arrival,	so	solemn,	so	solitary,	chilled	Sharl	to	the
core.	She	looked	to	her	left	and	saw	Yan	Tovis.	Standing,	watching,	a	queen
covered	in	blood	–	and	how	much	of	it	belonged	to	her	own	subjects?	But	no,
the	question	no	longer	mattered.	Nor	the	fact	that	she	had	led	them	to	this	end.
‘We	all	end	somewhere,’	she	whispered.
Brevity	heard	and	glanced	over,	spat	blood,	and	then	said,	‘That’s	the	truth
of	it,	all	right.	The	only	truth	there	is.’
Sharl	nodded,	and	somehow	raised	once	more	the	sword	in	her	hand.	‘I	am
ready,	Captain.’
‘We	all	are,	soldier.’
Behind	them	Sharl	heard	a	low	murmuring,	the	words	we	all	end
somewhere	rippling	out,	taking	hold,	and	soldiers	slowly	straightened,	drawing
up	their	weapons.
When	the	words	followed	the	curve	of	waiting	soldiers	and	at	last	reached
Yan	Tovis,	Sharl	saw	her	flinch	as	if	struck,	and	she	turned	to	look	upon	her
people,	saw	them	straightening,	readying,	saw	the	look	on	their	battle-aged
faces.
Their	queen	stepped	back,	then,	into	the	gap.	One	stride,	and	then	another,


and	all	at	once	all	eyes	were	upon	her.	Lightfall	streamed	down	behind	her.	It
could	have	been	a	thing	of	beauty	and	wonder.	It	could	have	been	something
other	than	a	manifestation	of	terror	and	grief.	But	it	was	as	if	it	ceased	to	exist
for	Yan	Tovis	as	she	scanned	the	faces,	as	she	fixed	her	eyes	upon	the	last
thousand	subjects	of	her	realm.
And	then,	with	even	her	brother	looking	on,	the	queen	knelt.	Not	to	the
First	Shore	–	not	to	this	horror	–	but	to	her	people.
In	the	swirling	wound	eight	paces	behind	her,	a	row	of	spear	points	lashed
out,	scything	empty	air.	And	then,	pushing	through	the	miasma,	fully	armoured
soldiers.
‘Shit,’	muttered	Brevity.	‘That’s	heavy	infantry.’
Yan	Tovis	rose,	swung	to	face	her	ancient	foe.	For	a	moment	she	seemed
deaf	to	her	soldiers,	shouting	for	her	to	rejoin	the	line.	For	a	moment,	Sharl
thought	she	might	instead	advance	to	meet	them,	and	she	saw	the	flank	behind
bristling	up,	as	if	to	rush	to	join	her	–	one	last,	suicidal	rush.	To	die	beside
their	queen.	And	oh,	how	Sharl	longed	to	join	them.
Then	Yan	Tovis	turned	her	back	on	the	enemy,	re-joined	her	soldiers.
The	first	row	of	Liosan	stepped	clear	of	the	wound,	another	following.
They	were	shouting	something,	those	Liosan,	shouting	in	triumph	a	single
word	–	but	Sharl	could	not	make	it	out.
Yedan	Derryg’s	voice	rang	out	above	their	cries.	‘All	lines!	Advance	five!’
And	there,	four	rows	back	of	the	Liosan	front	rank,	a	knot	of	officers,	a
single	figure	among	them	waving	his	sword	–	as	if	to	cut	down	his	own	people
–	and	they	pressed	back	on	all	sides.	And	there,	off	to	the	right,	another
widening	swirl	of	humanity,	making	space	–	and	there,	upon	the	left,	the	same.
Sharl	stared,	unable	to	understand	what	they	were—
The	three	isolated	warriors	then	dissolved	into	blinding	white	light	–	and
the	light	burgeoned,	and	inside	that	light,	massive,	scaled	shapes,	taking	form.
The	flash	of	blazing	eyes.	Wings	snapping	out	like	galley	sails.
And	the	dragon	at	the	centre	then	rose	into	the	air.
We	all	end	somewhere.
We	all	end	here.

As	the	centre	ranks	rose	up	to	collide	with	the	Liosan	front	line,	Yedan	Derryg,
with	Sergeant	Cellows	at	his	side,	pushed	forward.	Five	lines	between	him	and
that	veering	dragon.	His	only	obstacle.	But	these	were	the	elites,	heavily


armoured,	perfectly	disciplined.
He	saw	the	other	two	Soletaken,	one	on	each	side,	but	there	was	nothing	he
could	do	about	them.	Not	yet.
The	Hust	sword	howled	as	he	slammed	into	the	front	line.	The	blade	was
gorged	on	draconic	blood.	It	had	drunk	deep	the	red	wine	of	Hounds’	blood.	It
had	bathed	in	the	life-ends	of	a	thousand	Liosan	soldiers.	Now	it	shook	off	the
chains	of	constraint.
So	swiftly	did	it	slash	that	Yedan	almost	lost	his	grip.	He	grunted	to	see	the
soldier	before	him	cut	through,	shield,	sword,	chain,	flesh	and	bone,
diagonally	down	his	torso,	gore	exploding	out	to	the	sides.	A	back	swing	split
open	the	chests	of	the	man	to	either	side.	Like	a	cestus,	Yedan	and	the	soldiers
closest	to	him	drove	into	the	Liosan	ranks.
The	Hust	sword	spun,	lashed	out	in	blurs,	blood	sprayed.	Yedan	was	tugged
after	it,	stumbling,	at	times	almost	lifted	from	his	feet	as	the	weapon	shrieked
its	glee,	slaughtering	all	that	dared	stand	before	it.
All	at	once,	there	was	no	one	between	him	and	the	Soletaken.	The	wreaths
of	white	fire	were	pouring	off	the	shining	scales,	the	solid	bulk	of	the	dragon
rising	to	fill	Yedan	Derryg’s	vision.
Shit.	Miscalculated.	It’s	going	to	get	clear.	Sister	–	I’m	sorry.	I’m	too	late.
The	head	lunged.
He	leapt.
The	sword	sank	deep	into	the	dragon’s	chest.	The	creature	roared	in	shock
and	pain,	and	then	the	wings	hammered	at	its	sides,	scattering	Liosan	and	Shake
alike,	and	the	Soletaken	lifted	into	the	air.
Hanging	from	his	sword,	Yedan	scrambled,	fought	his	way	on	to	the
dragon’s	shoulders.	He	tore	his	weapon	free.	Cut	two-handed	into	its	neck.
Twenty	reaches	above	the	melee,	the	creature	pitched,	canted	hard	and
slammed	into	Lightfall.
The	concussion	thundered.
Yedan	Derryg	slid	down	over	the	dragon’s	right	shoulder,	down	between	it
and	Lightfall.
The	dragon’s	neck	bowed	and	the	jaws	plunged	down	to	engulf	him.
As	they	closed,	the	Hust	sword	burst	from	the	top	of	the	dragon’s	snout.
Wings	smashing	the	wall	of	light,	the	giant	reptile	reared	its	head	back,	Yedan
tumbling	free,	still	gripping	the	sword.
He	was	caught	by	the	talons	of	the	Soletaken’s	left	foot,	the	massive	claws
convulsively	clenching.	Blood	sprayed	from	the	body	it	held.
Again	the	dragon	careered	into	Lightfall,	and	this	time	a	wing	collapsed
under	the	impact.	Twisting,	pitching	head	first,	the	creature	slid	downward.


Slammed	into	the	ground.
Yedan	Derryg	was	thrown	clear,	his	body	a	shattered	mess,	and	where	he
fell,	he	did	not	move.	At	his	side,	the	Hust	sword	howled	its	rage.
	
The	journey	through	the	forest	by	Rake’s	last	three	Soletaken	–	Korlat,	Prazek
Goul	and	Dathenar	Fandoris	–	had	been	as	savage	as	fighting	a	riptide.	Silanah
was	among	the	most	ancient	of	all	living	Eleint.	Her	will	tore	at	them,	drove
them	to	their	knees	again	and	again.	Silanah	called	upon	them,	called	them	by
name,	sought	her	own	summoning.	Still,	they	managed	to	resist,	but	Korlat
knew	that	to	shift	into	draconic	form	would	simply	make	it	worse,	the	blood	of
the	Eleint	awakening	in	each	of	them,	chaos	unfurling	in	their	souls	like	the
deadliest	flower.	At	the	same	time,	she	knew	that	there	were	Soletaken	at	the
First	Shore.	She	could	feel	them.	And	what	could	the	Shake	do	against	such
creatures?
Only	die.
The	Liosan	Soletaken	would	be	able	to	resist	Silanah	–	at	least	for	a	time	–
or	perhaps	indeed	they	could	even	defy	her,	if	their	own	Storm,	when	it	broke
upon	this	world,	was	strong	enough.	And	she	feared	it	would	be.	This	is	not	the
taste	of	one	or	two	Soletaken.	No	–	gods,	how	many	are	there?
‘Korlat!’	gasped	Dathenar.
‘I	know.	But	we	have	no	choice,	do	we?’
Prazek	spat	behind	her	and	said.	‘Better	to	die	in	Kharkanas	than	anywhere
else.’
Korlat	agreed.
As	they	reached	the	rise,	they	saw	a	frenzied	battle	at	the	wound	in
Lightfall,	and	the	Liosan	soldiers	now	pouring	from	that	breach	vastly
outnumbered	the	defenders.	They	saw	a	man	do	battle	with	a	dragon	rising
skyward.	Saw	two	Liosan	warriors	veering	to	join	their	winged	kin.
They	did	not	hesitate.	Darkness	bloomed,	erupted	like	black	smoke	under
water,	and	three	black	dragons	rose	above	the	strand.
As	they	closed,	eight	more	Liosan	veered,	and	the	air	filled	with	the	roars
of	dragons.
	
Yan	Tovis	dragged	herself	over	corpses,	trying	to	reach	her	brother ’s
horrifyingly	motionless	form.	The	two	witches	were	taking	the	last	from	her	–
she	felt	each	sorcerous	wave	they	lashed	into	the	flanking	dragons,	heard	the


Soletaken	screaming	in	pain	and	outrage,	and	knew	that	all	of	it	was	not
enough.
But	they	were	stealing	from	her	this	one	last	act	–	this	journey	of	love	and
grief	–	and	the	unfairness	of	that	howled	in	her	heart.
Soldiers	fought	around	her,	sought	to	protect	their	fallen	queen.	Bodies	fell
to	either	side.	It	seemed	that	the	Liosan	were	now	everywhere	–	the	Shake	and
Letherii	lines	had	buckled,	companies	driven	apart,	hacked	at	from	all	sides.
And	still	he	seemed	a	thousand	leagues	away.
Draconic	sorcery	detonated.	The	bed	of	bodies	beneath	her	lifted	as	one,
and	then	fell	back	with	a	sound	like	a	drum.	And	Yan	Tovis	felt	a	sudden
absence.	Skwish.	She’s	dead.
A	trickle	of	strength	returned	to	her,	and	she	resumed	pulling	herself
along.
Her	bones	were	rattling	to	some	distant	sound	–	or	was	it	inside	her?	Yes,
inside,	yet	still…distant.	As	far	away	as	hope.	And	that	is	a	shore	I	will	never
reach.	It	shook	through	her.	Shook	even	the	corpses	beneath	her,	and	those	to
the	sides.
Two	stood	to	either	side	of	her,	two	of	her	own,	the	last	two,	fighting.
She	did	not	have	to	look	to	know	who	they	were.	The	love	filling	all	the
empty	spaces	inside	her	now	could	take	them	in,	like	flavours.	Brevity,	who
imagined	that	her	friend	Pithy	was	still	with	her,	still	fighting	for	the	dignity
they	had	always	wanted,	the	dignity	they’d	once	thought	they	could	cheat	and
steal	their	way	to	find.	Sharl	–	sweet,	young,	ancient	Sharl,	who	knew	nothing
of	fighting,	who	knew	only	that	she	had	failed	to	save	her	brothers,	and	would
not	fail	again.
There	were	all	kinds	of	love,	and,	with	wonder,	she	realized	that	she	now
knew	them	all.
Before	her,	five	simple	paces	away	–	could	she	walk	–	lay	the	body	of	her
brother.
Another	concussion.
Pully.	I	am	sorry.
There	is	no	glory	in	dying	young,	unless	you	were	old	first.
No	witches	now	to	steal	her	strength.	She	lifted	herself	up,	on	to	her	hands
and	knees,	and	made	for	Yedan.	As	she	drew	up	alongside,	she	saw	the	hand
nearer	her	move.
Pulled	herself	up,	knelt	at	his	side,	looked	down	into	his	face,	the	only	part
of	him	that	had	not	been	chewed	and	crushed	beyond	recognition.	She	saw	his
lips	moving,	leaned	close.
‘Beloved	brother,’	she	whispered,	‘it	is	Yan.’


‘I	see	it,’	he	whispered.
‘What	do	you	see?’
‘I	see	it.	Yan.	It’s	there,	right	before	me.’	His	broken	lips	smiled.
‘Yedan?’
‘At	last,’	he	sighed,	‘I	am…home.’

Their	queen	and	the	body	of	their	prince,	they	were	now	an	island	upon	the	sea,
and	the	last	of	them	gathered	round,	to	hold	its	ever	shrinking	shoreline.	And,
above	it	all,	three	black	dragons	warred	with	ten	white	dragons,	and	then	there
were	only	two	against	ten.
Surrounding	the	island	and	its	shore,	the	Liosan	pushed	in	on	waves	of
steel	and	fury.	Theirs	was	the	hunger	of	the	ocean,	and	that	was	a	hunger
without	end.
But	the	ground	trembled.	It	shivered.	And	the	source	of	that	steady,
drumming	thunder	was	coming	ever	closer.
	
Leaning	like	a	drunk	on	the	dais,	Nimander	struggled	for	a	way	through	this.	It
would	seem	that	he	had	to	veer,	and	soon,	and	then	he	would	have	to	somehow
resist	Silanah’s	will.	He	would	have	to	fight	her,	try	to	kill	her.	But	he	knew	he
would	fail.	She	would	send	his	own	kin	against	him,	and	the	horror	of	the
blood	that	would	then	spill	was	too	much	to	bear.
Sandalath	Drukorlat	still	sat	on	the	throne,	muttering	under	her	breath.	I
could	kill	her.	After	all,	do	I	not	already	have	Tiste	Andii	blood	on	my	hands?
And	then,	should	we	by	some	miracle	prevail	here,	why,	a	usurper	could	take
this	throne.	That,	too,	has	been	done	before.
And	the	new	kingdom	of	Kharkanas	shall	be	born	in	the	ashes	of	murder.
Yes,	I	could	do	that.	But	look	upon	her,	Nimander	–	she	does	not	even	remember
you.	In	her	madness,	I	am	my	father.	Sandalath,	do	you	truly	not	remember?
Withal	and	I	–	we	lied	to	you.	A	terrible	accident,	the	suicide	that	never	was.
Shall	I	lie	to	you	again?
No,	I	cannot.
There	were	ghosts	in	this	palace	–	in	this	very	room.	He	had	never	before
felt	such	palpable	presence,	as	if	countless	ages	had	awakened	to	this	moment.
As	if	all	of	the	fallen	had	returned,	to	witness	the	end	of	every	dream.
‘Apsal’ara,’	he	whispered.	‘I	need	you.’


Came	an	answering	whisper,	‘It’s	not	her	you	need.’
	
Smiling	down	on	the	broken	form	of	Anomander	Rake,	Sandalath	slowly	drew
her	dagger.	But	he	doesn’t	have	the	sword.	He	hasn’t	done	what	he	vowed	to	do.
How	can	I	kill	him	now?
Look	at	him,	though!	This…thing.	Against	mighty	Draconus?	Impossible.	I
suspected	it,	back	on	the	island.	That	broken	window,	the	body	lying	on	the
cobbles.	How	few	his	followers	then,	how	pathetic	his	lack	of	control.
A	new	voice	spoke.	‘Orfantal	will	die	if	you	do	not	release	Sila	nah.’
Sandalath	looked	up.	Her	eyes	widened.	A	ghost	stood	before	her,	where
Anomander	–	in	that	bold,	deceitful	moment	of	bluster	–	had	been	a	moment
earlier.	A	woman,	young,	and	she	knew	her	–	no,	I	do	not.	I	will	not.	I	refuse.
How	can	my	thoughts	summon?
Silanah?	Who	was	speaking	of	her?	Was	it	me?
To	the	ghost	standing	before	her,	she	growled,	‘I	do	not	know	you.’
Smiling,	the	ghost	said,	‘But	you	do.	You	knew	me	all	too	well,	as	I	recall.
I	am	Phaed.	My	brother,’	and	she	gestured	down	to	Anomander,	‘is	of	such
honour	that	he	would	rather	give	you	your	end,	here	and	now,	than	hurt	you
further.	Nor	will	he	threaten	you	with	what	he	cannot	do	in	any	case	–	no	matter
what	the	cost	–	to	his	people,	to	those	doomed	humans	upon	the	First	Shore.’
‘I	only	want	my	son,’	Sandalath	whispered.	‘He	took	him,	and	I	want	him
back!’
‘This	is	not	Anomander	Rake,’	Phaed	said.	‘This	is	his	son.	How	can	you
not	remember,	Sandalath	Drukorlat?	Upon	the	islands,	across	the	vast	seas	–
you	took	us	in,	as	if	we	were	your	children.	Now	Nimander	is	here,	begging
you	to	release	Silanah	–	to	end	the	destruction	of	Kharkanas.’
Sandalath	sneered.	‘I	can	taste	lies	–	they	fill	this	room.	Ten	thousand	lies
built	this	keep,	stone	by	stone.	Remember	what	Gallan	said?	“At	the	roots	of
every	great	empire	you	will	find	ten	thousand	lies.”	But	he	was	not	blind	then,
was	he?	I	never	trusted	you,	Phaed.’
‘But	you	trusted	Nimander.’
She	blinked.	Nimander?	‘You	are	right	–	he	does	not	lie.	What	a	damned
fool,	just	like	his	father,	and	see	where	it	has	got	us.’
‘Your	son	Orfantal	will	die,	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	unless	you	release
Silanah.’
‘Orfantal!	Bring	him	to	me.’
‘I	will,	once	you	relinquish	the	throne	and	all	the	power	it	grants	you.	Once
you	free	Silanah	from	your	will.’


She	licked	her	lips,	studied	the	ghost’s	strangely	flat	eyes.	I	remember	those
eyes,	the	knowing	in	them.	Knowing	that	I	knew	the	truth	of	her.	Phaed.	Venal,
conscienceless.	‘You	are	the	liar	among	us!’
Phaed	cocked	her	head,	smiled.	‘I	never	liked	you,	it’s	true.	But	I	never	lied
to	you.	Now,	do	you	want	to	see	your	son	or	not?	This	is	what	I	offer.’
She	stared	at	the	ghost,	and	then	looked	down	at	Anoman	—	no,	Nimander.
‘You	have	never	lied	to	me,	Nimander.	Does	your	sister	speak	true?’
‘Do	not	ask	him!’	Phaed	snapped.	‘This	negotiation	is	between	you	and	me.
Sandalath,	you	of	all	people	should	understand	what	is	going	on	here.	You
know	the	way	of	Hostages.’
‘Orfantal	is	not	a	Hostage!’
‘Events	have	changed	things	–	there	are	new	powers	here.’
‘That	is	not	fair!’
Phaed’s	laugh	stabbed	like	a	knife.	‘The	Hostage	whimpers	at	the
unfairness	of	it	all.’
‘Don’t.’
‘Oh,	shall	I	show	some	mercy,	then?’
‘Stop	it!’
‘Very	well,’	said	Phaed,	‘I	will	give	you	this…gift.	Retire	to	the	chamber	in
the	tower,	Sandalath.	You	know	the	one.	Lock	the	door	from	within,	so	that	no
one	else	may	enter.	Remain	there.	Await	your	son.	And	when	he	comes,	why,
then	you	can	unlock	your	door.	To	take	him	into	your	arms.’
My	room.	My	sweet,	perfect	room.	If	I	wait	there.	If	I	hide	there,	everything
will	be	all	right.	Tears	streamed	down	Sandalath’s	face.	‘Yes,’	she	whispered.
‘My	son.’
‘Will	you	yield	the	throne?’	Phaed	asked.	‘It	must	be	now.	Once	you	have
done	that,	then	you	can	go	to	your	room,	Sandalath.	Where	you	will	be	safe,
and	where	you	can	wait	for	him.’
There	was	no	end,	it	seemed,	to	what	could	spill	down	from	her	eyes.	She
rose,	the	dagger	falling	to	clatter	on	the	stones.	My	room,	yes.	It’s	safe	there.	I
have	the	lock,	there	at	the	door.	The	lock,	to	keep	me	safe.
Silanah	–	hear	me.	I	will	see	my	son!	They	will	bring	him	to	me!	But	first,	I
must	release	you.	Eleint,	you	are	free.
And	soon,	we	will	all	be	free.	All	of	us	hostages.	We	will	finally	be	free.
After	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	making	sounds	like	an	excited	child,	had	rushed
from	the	throne	room,	Nimander	looked	across	at	the	ghost	of	Phaed.
Who	stared	back,	expressionless.	‘I	vowed	to	haunt	you.	My	brother.	My
killer.	To	torment	you	for	the	rest	of	your	days.	Instead,	you	deliver	me…
home.’


His	eyes	narrowed	on	her,	suspicious	–	as	he	knew	he	would	always	be,
with	this	one.
‘Join	your	kin,	Nimander.	There	is	little	time.’
‘What	of	you?’	he	demanded.
Phaed	seemed	to	soften	before	his	eyes.	‘A	mother	will	sit	in	a	tower,
awaiting	her	son.	She	will	keep	the	door	locked.	She	will	wait	for	the	sound	of
boots	upon	the	stairs.	I	go	to	keep	her	company.’
‘Phaed.’
The	ghost	smiled.	‘Shall	we	call	this	penance,	brother?’
	
Blows	rang,	skittered	off	his	armour,	and	beneath	the	banded	ribbons	of	iron,
the	scales	and	the	chain,	his	flesh	was	bruised,	split	and	crushed.	Withal	swung
his	mace,	even	as	a	spear	point	gouged	a	score	above	the	rim	of	his	helm,
twisting	his	head	round.	He	felt	a	shield	shatter	beneath	his	attacking	blow,	and
someone	cried	out	in	pain.	Half	blinded	–	blood	was	now	streaming	down	the
inside	of	his	helm,	clouding	the	vision	of	his	left	eye	–	he	pushed	forward	to
finish	the	Liosan.
Instead,	he	was	shield-bashed	from	the	side.	Stumbling,	tripping	in	a	tangle
of	dead	limbs,	Withal	fell.	Now	I’m	in	trouble.
A	Liosan	loomed	over	him,	thrust	down	with	his	sword.
A	strange	black	flash,	blocking	the	blow	–	a	blur,	and	the	Liosan	howled	in
agony,	toppling	back.
Crouching	now	over	Withal,	a	half-naked	woman,	her	muscles	sheathed	in
sweat,	an	obsidian	knife	in	one	hand,	dripping	blood.	She	leaned	close,	her
face	pressing	against	the	visor ’s	bars.
‘Thief!’
‘What?	I	–	what?’
‘My	armour!	Your	stole	it!’
‘I	didn’t	know—’
‘But	you	stood	long	–	and	there’s	more	standing	ahead,	so	get	off	your
arse!’
She	grasped	him	by	the	collar	of	his	hauberk,	and	with	one	hand	pulled
him	to	his	feet.	Withal	staggered	for	balance.	Brought	his	shield	round	and
readied	the	mace.
They	were	surrounded.	Fighting	to	the	last.
Overhead,	two	black	dragons	–	where	in	Hood’s	name	did	they	come	from?
–	were	at	the	centre	of	a	storm	of	white-	and	gold-hued	dragons.	They	were
torn,	shredded,	hissing	like	gutted	cats,	lashing	out	in	fury	even	as	they	were


being	driven	down,	and	down.
The	half-naked	woman	fought	beside	him	with	serpentine	grace,	her
ridiculous	obsidian	knives	whispering	out	like	black	tongues,	returning	wet
with	blood.
Confusion	roared	through	Withal.	This	woman	was	a	stranger	–	but	that
was	impossible.	Through	the	grille	of	his	visor,	he	shouted,	‘Who	in	Hood’s
name	are	you?’
	
Sharl	sank	back,	knees	folding,	and	suddenly	she	was	lying	on	the	ground.
Figures	crowded	above	her,	twisted	faces,	thrusting	spear	shafts,	feet	fighting
for	purchase.	She’d	lost	her	sword,	and	blood	was	welling	from	somewhere
below	her	rib	cage.	Her	fumbling	fingers	probed,	found	a	puncture	that	went
in,	and	in.
‘Ah,	I	am	slain.’
‘Can	you	breathe?	Take	a	breath,	woman!	A	deep	breath,	and	that’s	an
order!’
‘C-captain?’
‘You	heard	me!’
Sharl	couldn’t	see	her	–	somewhere	behind	her	head	–	and	her	voice	was
barely	recognizable,	but	who	else	would	it	be?	Who	else	could	it	be?	The
ground	trembled	beneath	her.	Where	was	that	trembling	coming	from?	Like	a
thousand	iron	hearts.	Beating.	Beating.	She	drew	fetid	air	into	her	lungs.
Deeper,	and	deeper	still.	‘Captain!	I	can	breathe!’
‘Then	you’ll	live!	Get	up!	I	want	you	with	me	–	till	the	end,	y’understand?’
Sharl	tried	to	sit	up,	sank	back	in	gasping	pain.	‘Been	stabbed,	Captain—’
‘That’s	how	y’get	into	this	damned	club!	Stand	up,	damn	you!’
She	rolled	on	to	her	side	–	easier	this	way	to	draw	up	her	legs,	to	make	her
way	to	her	hands	and	knees.
Brevity	was	gasping	out	words.	‘Girl	without	a	friend…Nothing	worse!
Know	what	happens	when	a	girl’s	got	no	friend?’
‘No,	Captain.’
‘They	get	married!’
Sharl	saw	a	sword	nearby	–	a	corpse	was	gripping	it.	She	reached	out	and
prised	the	weapon	free.	‘All	right,	Captain,’	she	said,	‘I’ll	be	your	friend.’
‘Till	the	end?’
‘Till	the	end.’
‘Swear	it!’
‘I	swear!	I	swear!’


A	hand	reached	under	an	armpit,	lifted	her	up.	‘Steady	now,	love.	Let’s	go
kill	us	some	men.’
	
Zevgan	Drouls	had	killed	his	debt-holder,	and	then	the	bastard’s	whole	family.
Then	he	had	burned	down	the	estate	and	with	it	all	the	records	of	the	hundreds
of	families	swindled	into	indebtedness	by	a	man	who	thought	he	had	the	right
to	do	whatever	he	damn	well	pleased	with	as	many	lives	as	he	could	chain	and
shackle.	Zevgan	had	gone	on	to	burn	down	the	bank,	and	then	the	Hall	of
Records	–	well,	only	half	of	it,	to	be	sure,	but	the	right	half.
Not	that	anyone	could	prove	a	single	thing,	because	he	was	no	fool.	Still,
enough	suspicions	ended	up	crowding	his	feet,	enough	to	get	him	sent	to	the
prison	islands.	Where	he’d	spent	the	last	twenty-one	years	of	his	life	–	until	the
exodus.	Until	the	march.	Until	this	damned	shore.
Too	old	to	fight	in	the	ranks,	he	now	knelt	on	the	berm	overlooking	the
First	Shore,	alongside	a	dozen	or	so	others	in	the	Children’s	Guard.	The	lame,
the	ancient,	the	half	blind	and	the	half	deaf.	Behind	them,	huddled	in	the	gloom
of	the	forest	edge,	all	the	young	’uns	and	the	pregnant	women,	and	those	too
old	or,	of	late,	too	badly	wounded	to	do	any	more	fighting	–	and	there	were
lots	of	those.
Zevgan	and	his	crew	–	and	the	ten	or	so	other	squads	–	waited	to	give	their
lives	defending	the	children	of	the	Shake	and	the	Letherii	islanders,	the
children	and	those	others,	but	it	was	the	children	Zevgan	kept	thinking	about.
Well,	it	wouldn’t	be	much	of	a	defence,	he	knew	–	they	all	knew	it,	in	fact	–
but	that	didn’t	matter.	Why	should	it?	Those	are	children	behind	us,	looking	up
to	us	with	those	scared	eyes.	What	else	counts?
Mixter	Frill	pushed	up	closer	beside	him,	wiping	at	his	nose.	‘So	you’re
confessing,	are	ya?’
‘Y’heard	me,’	Zevgan	replied.	‘I	did	it.	All	of	it.	And	I’d	do	it	again,	too.	In
fact,	if	they	hadn’t	a	stuck	me	on	that	island,	I	would	never	have	stopped.	I
woulda	burned	down	all	the	banks,	all	the	Halls	of	Records,	all	the	fat	estates
with	their	fat	lenders	and	their	fat	wives	and	husbands	and	fat	whatevers.’
‘You	murdered	innocents,	Zev,	is	what	you	did.	They	shoulda	hung	you.’
‘Hung.	Tortured,	turned	me	inside	out,	roasted	my	balls	and	diced	up	my
cock,	aye,	Mix.	Errant	knows,	messing	with	how	things	are	made	up	for	the
people	in	power	–	why,	there’s	no	more	heinous	crime	than	that,	and	they’d	be
the	first	to	tell	you,	too.’
‘Look	at	’em	dying	out	there,	Zev.’
‘I’m	looking,	Mix.’


‘And	we’re	next.’
‘We’re	next,	aye.	And	that’s	why	I’m	confessing.	Y’see,	it’s	my	last	laugh.
At	’em	all,	right?	Ain’t	strangled,	ain’t	inside	out,	ain’t	ballroasted,	ain’t	dickdiced.’
Mix	said	something	but	with	all	the	noise	Zev	couldn’t	make	it	out.	He
twisted	to	ask	but	then	he	saw,	on	all	sides,	figures	rushing	past.	And	there	were
swords,	and	that	raging	forest	behind	them,	with	all	that	deafening	noise	that
had	been	getting	closer	and	closer,	and	now	was	here.
Mix	was	shouting,	but	Zev	just	stared.
Skin	black	as	ink.	Tall	buggers,	all	manner	of	weapons	out,	hammering	the
rims	of	shields,	and	the	look	in	their	faces	–	as	they	threaded	through	the	camp
where	all	the	children	huddled	and	stared,	where	the	pregnant	women	flinched
and	shied	–	the	look	on	their	faces	–	I	know	that	look.	I	saw	it	in	the	mirror,	I
saw	it	in	the	mirror.
The	night	I	took	’em	all	down.
	
The	two	black	dragons	would	not	last	much	longer	–	it	was	a	wonder	they	still
lived,	still	fought	on.	Leaving	them	to	his	kin,	Kadagar	Fant	descended	to	fly
low	over	the	Shore.	He	could	see	the	last	of	the	hated	enemy	going	down	to	the
swords	and	spears	of	the	elites	–	they	were	surrounded,	those	wretched
murderers,	stupidly	protecting	their	leaders	–	the	dead	one	and	the	woman
kneeling	at	his	side.
Soon	he	would	land.	He	would	semble.	Kadagar	wanted	to	be	there	when
that	woman	was	the	only	one	left.	He	wanted	to	cut	her	head	off	with	his	own
hands.	Was	she	the	queen?	Of	all	Kharkanas?	He	believed	she	was.	He	had	to
acknowledge	her	bravery	–	to	come	down	to	the	First	Shore,	to	fight	alongside
her	people.
But	not	all	bravery	was	worthy	of	reward,	or	even	acknowledgement,	and
the	only	reward	he	intended	for	this	woman	was	a	quick	death.	But	a	squalid
one.	Maybe	I’ll	just	choke	the	life	from	her.
This	realm	was	thick	with	smoke,	distant	forests	alight,	and	Kadagar
wondered	if	the	enemy	sought	to	deny	him	the	throne	by	perniciously	burning
the	city	to	the	ground.	He	could	easily	imagine	such	perfidy	from	this	sort.	But
I	will	rebuild.	And	I	will	loose	the	light	upon	this	realm.	Scour	away	the
darkness,	the	infernal	shadows.	Something	new	will	be	born	of	this.	An	age	of
peace.	Blessed	peace!
He	saw	one	of	the	black	dragons	spin	past,	pursued	by	two	of	his	kin.	That
one,	he	knew,	was	moments	from	death.


Aparal,	you	should	never	have	gone	through	first.	You	knew	he	would	be
waiting	for	you.	But	his	brother,	his	most	loyal	servant	and	friend,	was	now
sembled,	a	lone,	motionless	body	lying	at	the	foot	of	Lightfall.	From	this
height,	pathetically	small,	insignificant.	And	this	was	improper	–	he	would
raise	a	monument	to	Aparal’s	sacrifice,	to	the	glory	of	his	slaying	the	wielder
of	the	Hust	sword.	There,	at	the	base	of	Lightfall	itself,	he	would—
Black	as	midnight,	a	tide	was	flooding	out	from	the	forest	edge	below.
Kadagar	stared	in	horror	as	it	rushed	across	the	strand	and	slammed	into	his
Liosan	legions.
Tiste	Andii!
He	wheeled,	crooked	his	wings,	awakening	the	sorcery	within	him,	and
sped	down	towards	his	hated	foes.	I	will	kill	them.	I	will	kill	them	all!
Something	spun	past	him	in	a	welter	of	blood	and	gore	–	one	of	his	kin	–
torn	to	shreds.	Kadagar	screamed,	twisted	his	neck	and	glared	upward.
To	see	a	red	dragon	–	a	true	Eleint,	twice	the	size	of	his	kin	–	close	upon	a
brother	Soletaken.	Fire	poured	from	it	in	a	savage	wave,	struck	the	white
dragon.	The	body	exploded	in	a	fireball,	torn	chunks	of	meat	spinning	away
trailing	smoke.	And	now,	more	black	dragons	sailed	down	from	the	sky.
He	saw	two	descend	on	the	kin	that	had	been	pursuing	the	lone	dragon,	saw
them	crash	down	on	them	in	a	deluge	of	fangs	and	claws.
The	lone	hunter	below	them	banked	then,	and,	wings	thundering	the	air,
rose	towards	Kadagar.
Against	him,	she	would	not	last.	Too	wounded,	too	weakened	–	he	would
destroy	her	quickly,	and	then	return	to	aid	his	kin.	This	cannot	end	this	way!	It
must	not!
Like	a	fist	of	stone,	something	hammered	down	on	him.	He	shrieked	in
agony	and	rage	as	enormous	talons	tore	ragged	furrows	deep	across	his	back.
Jaws	snapped	down,	crushed	one	of	his	wings.	Helpless,	Kadagar	plunged
earthward.
He	struck	the	strand	in	a	shower	of	crushed	white	bone,	skidding	and	then
rolling,	slamming	up	against	the	unyielding	wall	of	Lightfall.	The	sand	pelted
down,	filling	his	ragged	wounds.	Far	overhead,	the	death	cries	of	his	kin.	A
thousand	paces	away,	the	battle	at	the	breach.	He	was	alone,	hurt,	broken.
Kadagar	sembled.	Dragged	himself	into	a	sitting	position,	setting	his	back
to	Lightfall,	and	watched	the	black	dragon	that	had	been	rising	to	meet	him
now	landing	thirty	paces	away,	shedding	blood	like	rain.
High	overhead,	the	red	Eleint	killed	another	of	his	Soletaken	kin	–	taking
hold	of	it	like	a	small	bird,	ripping	its	limbs	off,	crushing	its	skull	in	its
massive	jaws.


Before	him,	she	had	sembled,	and	now	she	walked	towards	him.
Kadagar	closed	his	eyes.	My	people.	My	people.	The	sound	of	her	boots.
He	looked	up.	She	had	a	knife	in	one	hand.
‘My	people,’	he	said.
She	showed	him	a	red	smile.	‘Your	people.’
He	stared	up	at	her.
‘Give	me	your	name,	Liosan.’
‘I	am	Kadagar	Fant,	Lord	of	Light.’
‘Lord	of	Light.’
‘I	call	upon	the	ancient	custom	of	Hostage.’
‘We	have	no	need	of	hostages.	Your	army	is	destroyed,	Lord.’
‘I	will	speak	for	the	Liosan.	There	shall	be	peace.’
The	woman	nodded.	‘Yes,	there	shall	be	peace.	Lord	Kadagar	Fant,	on
behalf	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	welcome	to	Darkness.’	The	knife	flashed	up	towards
his	eye.
A	sudden	sting	of	pain	and	then…
	
Korlat	stared	down	at	the	dead	man,	at	her	knife,	pushed	to	the	hilt	in	his	right
eye	socket,	and	then	she	stepped	back,	turned	away.
At	the	breach,	her	Tiste	Andii	kin	were	slaughtering	the	last	of	the	Liosan.
They	had	driven	them	back	to	the	wound	itself,	and	when	the	enemy	retreated
into	the	miasma	she	saw	ranks	of	Andii	follow.	There	would	be	an	end	to	this.
An	end.
Overhead,	Nimander	and	his	kin	were	descending,	along	with	Prazek.
Dathenar	had	fallen	earlier.	Korlat	had	felt	her	death	cry	and	its	howl	still
echoed	in	her	soul.	Silanah	remained	high	overhead,	wheeling	like	a	huntress.
Not	one	of	the	Liosan	Soletaken	remained.
She	looked	down	the	strand,	eyes	narrowing	at	the	motley	remnants	of	the
Shake	–	three,	four	hundred	at	the	most	–	now	hunched	over,	slumping,	some
falling,	in	a	ragged	circle	surrounding	a	kneeling	figure.	Her	gaze	drifted
momentarily	from	this	company	of	survivors,	travelled	over	the	solid	carpet
of	bodies	spreading	out	on	all	sides.	And,	slowly,	the	magnitude	of	the
slaughter,	here	upon	the	First	Shore,	found	resolution.
Gods	below.
She	set	out	for	those	survivors.	A	woman	dripping	blood	from	too	many
wounds	to	count,	and	beneath	her	feet,	in	a	steady	drizzle,	crimson	rain.
	


Impossibly,	the	sound	was	gone,	and	the	silence	now	surrounding	them	had
thickened.	Withal	knelt,	bent	over,	struggling	to	find	his	breath,	but	some	blow
had	broken	ribs,	and	he	was	afraid	to	move,	afraid	to	inhale	too	deeply.
The	half-naked	woman	settled	down	beside	him,	tortured	him	by	leaning
against	him.	‘Now	that	was	a	fight,	thief.	And	for	you,	maybe	not	over.’
He	was	having	trouble	with	his	eyes	–	the	blood	was	drying,	seeking	to
close	them	up.	‘Not	over?’
‘If	you	don’t	give	that	armour	back,	I	will	have	to	kill	you.’
He	reached	up,	dragged	his	helm	free	and	let	it	tumble	from	his	hands.	‘It’s
yours.	I	never	want	to	see	it	again.’
‘Ill	words,’	she	chided.	‘It	saved	your	life	a	dozen	times	this	day.’
She	was	right	in	that.	Still.	‘I	don’t	care.’
‘Look	up,	man.	It’s	the	least	you	can	do.’
But	that	was	too	hard.	‘No.	You	did	not	see	them	here	from	the	beginning.
You	did	not	see	them	die.	How	long	have	they	been	fighting?	Weeks?	Months?
For	ever?’
‘I	can	see	the	truth	of	that.’
‘They	weren’t	soldiers—’
‘I	beg	to	differ.’
‘They	weren’t	soldiers!’
‘Look	up,	old	man.	In	the	name	of	the	Fallen,	look	up.’
And	so	he	did.
He	and	the	Shake,	the	Letherii,	the	Queen	Yan	Tovis,	Twilight	–	these	few
hundred	–	were	surrounded	once	more.	But	this	time	those	facing	them	were
Tiste	Andii,	in	their	thousands.
And	not	one	was	standing.
Instead,	they	knelt,	heads	bowed.
Withal	twisted	round,	made	to	rise.	‘I’m	not	the	one	needs	to	see	this—’
But	the	woman	beside	him	caught	his	arm,	forcibly	pulled	him	back	down.
‘No,’	she	said,	like	him	looking	across	to	Yan	Tovis	–	who	still	knelt	over	the
body	of	her	brother,	and	who	still	held	shut	her	eyes,	as	if	she	could	hold	back
all	the	truths	before	her.	‘Not	yet.’
He	saw	Sergeant	Cellows	sitting	near	the	queen,	the	Hust	sword	balanced
across	his	thighs.	He	too	seemed	unable	to	look	up,	to	see	anything	beyond	his
inner	grief.
And	all	the	others,	blind	to	all	that	surrounded	them.	Oh,	will	not	one	of	you
look	up?	Look	up	and	see	those	who	have	witnessed	all	that	you	have	done?	See
how	they	honour	you…but	no,	they	are	past	such	things	now.	Past	them.
A	group	of	Tiste	Andii	approached	from	up	the	strand.	Something	familiar


there	–	Withal’s	eyes	narrowed,	and	then	he	hissed	a	curse	and	climbed	to	his
feet.	Nimander.	Skintick.	Desra.	Nenanda.	But	these	were	not	the	frail	creatures
he	had	once	known	–	if	they	ever	were	what	I	thought	they	were.	If	it	was	all
hidden	away	back	then,	it	is	hidden	no	more.	But…	Aranatha?	Kedeviss?
‘Withal,’	said	Nimander,	his	voice	hoarse,	almost	broken.
‘You	found	your	people,’	Withal	said.
The	head	cocked.	‘And	you	yours.’
But	that	notion	hurt	him	deep	inside,	and	he	would	not	consider	it.	Shaking
his	head,	he	said,	‘The	Shake	and	the	Letherii	islanders,	Nimander	–	see	what
they	have	done.’
‘They	held	the	First	Shore.’
And	Withal	now	understood	that	hoarseness,	all	the	broken	edges	of
Nimander ’s	voice.	Tears	were	streaming	down	his	cheeks.	For	all	that	he	had
seen	–	that	he	must	have	seen,	for	surely	he	numbered	among	the	black
dragons	–	of	this	strand,	this	battle.
Nimander	turned	as	another	Tiste	Andii	staggered	close.	A	woman,	half
her	clothes	torn	away,	her	flesh	flensed	and	gashed.	‘Korlat.	She	did	what	was
needed.	She…saw	reason.	Will	you	go	to	your	mother	now?’
‘I	will	not.’
Withal	saw	Nimander ’s	sudden	frown.	‘She	sits	upon	the	throne	of
Kharkanas,	Korlat.	She	must	be	made	to	know	that	her	daughter	has	returned	to
her.’
Korlat’s	eyes	shifted	slowly,	fixed	upon	the	kneeling	form	of	Yan	Tovis.
‘Her	son	was	the	only	child	that	ever	mattered	to	my	mother,	Nimander.	And	I
failed	to	protect	him.	She	set	that	one	charge	upon	me.	To	protect	her	son.’
‘But	you	are	her	daughter!’
Korlat	raised	her	voice,	‘Twlight,	queen	of	the	Shake!	Look	upon	me.’
Slowly,	Yan	Tovis	lifted	her	gaze.
Korlat	spoke.	‘I	have	no	place	in	the	palace	of	my	mother,	the	queen	of
Kharkanas.	In	ancient	times,	Highness,	there	stood	at	your	side	a	Sister	of
Night.	Will	you	take	me	–	will	you	take	Korlat,	daughter	of	Sandalath
Drukorlat?’
Yan	Tovis	frowned.	Her	gaze	wandered	from	the	Tiste	Andii	woman
standing	before	her,	wandered	out	to	the	kneeling	Tiste	Andii,	and	then,	at	last,
to	the	huddle	of	her	own	people,	her	so	few	survivors.	And	then,	as	if	borne	by
an	impossible	strength,	she	climbed	to	her	feet.	Brushed	feebly	at	the	sand
clinging	to	her	bloody	clothes.	Straightened.	‘Korlat,	daughter	of	Sandalath
Drukorlat,	the	Sister	of	Night	in	the	House	of	the	Shake	is	not	for	one	of	the
pure	blood—’


‘Forgive	me,	Queen,	but	my	blood	is	not	pure.’
Yan	Tovis	paused,	and	then	continued,	‘The	blood	of	the	Eleint—’
‘Queen,	my	blood	is	not	pure.’
Withal	suddenly	comprehended	Korlat’s	meaning.	Cold	dread	curled	in	his
chest.	No,	Korlat	will	have	no	place	in	the	palace	of	Queen	Sandalath
Drukorlat.	And	how	was	it,	after	all	that	had	happened,	here	on	the	First	Shore,
that	his	heart	could	still	break?
One	more	time.
Oh…	Sand.
Yan	Tovis	spoke.	‘Korlat,	Daughter	of	Sandalath	Drukorlat,	I	welcome	you
into	the	House	of	the	Shake.	Sister	of	Night,	come	to	me.’
One	more	time.
	
‘What	are	you	doing?’	Sharl	asked.	She	was	lying	down	on	the	ground	again,
with	no	memory	of	how	she’d	got	there.
‘Pluggin’	the	hole	in	your	gut,’	Brevity	said.
‘Am	I	going	to	die?’
‘Not	a	chance.	You’re	my	new	best	friend,	remember?	Speaking	of	which,
what’s	your	name?’
Sharl	tried	to	lift	herself	up,	but	there	was	no	strength	left	in	her.	She	had
never	felt	so	weak.	All	she	wanted	to	do	was	close	her	eyes.	And	sleep.
Someone	was	shaking	her.	‘Don’t!	Don’t	you	leave	me	alone!’
Her	body	felt	chained	down,	and	she	wanted	free	of	it.	I	never	knew	how	to
fight.
‘No!	I	can’t	bear	this,	don’t	you	understand?	I	can’t	bear	to	see	you	die!’
I’m	sorry.	I	wasn’t	brave	enough	for	any	of	this.	My	brothers,	they	died
years	ago,	you	see.	It	was	only	my	stubbornness,	my	guilt	–	I	couldn’t	let	them
go.	I	brought	them	with	me.	And	those	two	boys	I	found,	they	didn’t	mind	the
new	names	I	gave	them.	Oruth.	Casel.
I	couldn’t	stop	them	dying.	It	was	hunger,	that’s	all.	When	you	have	no	land,
no	way	through,	when	they	just	step	over	you	in	the	street.	I	did	my	best.	We
were	not	good	enough	–	they	said	so,	that	look	in	their	eyes,	stepping	over	us	–
we	just	weren’t	good	enough.	Not	clever	enough,	not	brave	enough.
Casel	was	four	when	he	died.	We	left	him	in	the	alley	behind	Skadan’s.	I
found	a	bit	of	sacking.	I	put	it	over	his	eyes.	Oruth	asked	why	and	I	said	it	was
what	they	did	at	funerals.	They	did	things	to	the	body.	But	why?	he	asked.	I	said
I	didn’t	know.	When	Oruth	died	a	month	later,	I	found	another	piece	of	cloth.	I
put	it	over	his	eyes.	Another	alley,	another	funeral.


They	were	so	little.
Someone	was	crying.	A	sound	of	terrible,	soul-crushing	anguish.	But	she
herself	was	done	with	that.	Let	the	chains	fall	away.	And	for	my	eyes,	a	cloth.
It’s	what	they	do.
	
With	the	Sister	of	Cold	Nights	standing	close,	Yan	Tovis	sat	once	more	beside
the	body	of	her	brother.	She	looked	down	on	his	face,	wondering	what	seemed
so	different	about	it	now,	wondering	what	details	had	now	arrived,	here	in
death,	that	made	it	seem	so	peaceful.
And	then	she	saw.	The	muscles	of	his	jaw	were	no	longer	taut,	bunched	by
that	incessant	clench.	And	suddenly	he	seemed	young,	younger	than	she’d	ever
seen	him	before.
Yedan	Derryg,	you	are	beautiful.
From	all	sides,	she	now	heard,	there	rose	a	keening	sound.	Her	Shake	and
her	Letherii	were	now	mourning	for	their	fallen	prince.	She	let	the	sound	close
round	her	like	a	shroud.
Welcome	home	then,	brother.


Chapter	Twenty

‘We	stood	watching	the	bodies	tumbling	and	rolling	down	the	broad
steps.	Half	the	city	was	on	fire	and	out	in	the	farm-holdings	terrified
slaves	were	dragging	the	diseased	carcasses	into	enormous	heaps
while	lamplighters	wearing	scarves	poured	oil	and	set	alight	the
mountains	of	putrid	flesh,	until	the	black	columns	marched	like
demons	across	the	land.
‘In	the	canals	the	corpses	were	so	thick	we	saw	a	filthy	boy	eschew
the	bridge	for	a	wild	scramble,	but	he	only	made	it	halfway	before
falling	in,	and	the	last	we	saw	of	him	was	a	small	hand	waving
desperately	at	the	sky,	before	it	went	down.
‘Most	of	the	malformed	and	wizened	babies	had	already	been	put	to
death,	as	much	an	act	of	mercy	as	any	kind	of	misplaced	shame,	though
there	was	plenty	about	which	we	rightly	should	be	ashamed,	and	who
would	dare	argue	that?
The	animals	were	gone,	the	skies	were	empty	of	life,	the	waters
were	poisoned,	and	where	paradise	had	once	beckoned	now	desolation
ruled,	and	it	was	all	by	our	own	righteous	will.
‘The	last	pair	of	politicians	fell	with	hands	around	each	other ’s
throat,	trailed	by	frantic	toadies	and	professional	apologists	looking
for	a	way	out,	though	none	existed,	and	soon	they	too	choked	on	their
own	shit.
‘As	for	us,	well,	we	leaned	our	bloodied	pikes	against	the	plinth	of
the	toppled	monument	facing	those	broad	steps,	sat	down	in	the
wreckage,	and	discussed	the	weather.’
Sadakar’s	Account
The	Fall	of	Inderas
	Khundryl	camp.	He	held	his
arms	as	if	cradling	something.	He	heard	the	woman’s	cries	–	it	was	impossible
not	to	–	and	all	the	Khundryl	had	gathered	outside	a	tent,	even	as	the	rest	of	the
army	pushed	itself	upright	like	a	beast	more	dead	than	alive,	to	begin	another
THE	SUN	HAD	SET.	THE	BOY,	AWAKE	AT	LAST,	TOTTERED	INTO	THE


night	of	marching.	He	stood,	listening.	There	was	the	smell	of	blood	in	the	air.
	
Warleader	Gall	could	hear	his	wife’s	labour	pains.	The	sound	filled	him	with
horror.	Could	there	be	anything	crueller	than	this?	To	deliver	a	child	into	this
world.	By	the	Fall	of	Coltaine,	have	we	not	shed	enough	tears?	Do	we	not	bear
their	scars	as	proof?
He	sought	to	roll	over	in	his	furs,	wanting	none	of	this,	but	he	could	not
move.	As	if	his	body	had	died	this	day.	And	he	but	crouched	inside	it.	Born	to	a
dying	mother.	Who	gathers	round	her	now?	Shelemasa.	The	last	of	the	surviving
shoulder-women.	But	there	are	no	daughters.	No	sons	with	their	wives.	And
there	is	not	me,	and	with	this	child,	this	last	child,	for	the	first	time	I	will	not
witness	my	wife	giving	birth.
A	knife	pressed	against	his	cheek.	Jastara’s	voice	hissed	in	his	ear.	‘If	you
do	not	go	to	her	now,	Gall,	I	will	kill	you	myself.’
I	cannot.
‘For	the	coward	you	are,	I	will	kill	you.	Do	you	hear	me,	Gall?	I	will	make
your	screams	drown	out	the	world	–	even	your	wife’s	cries	–	or	do	you
forget?	I	am	Semk.	This	whole	night	–	I	will	make	it	your	eternal	torment.	You
will	beg	for	release,	and	I	shall	deny	it!’
‘Then	do	it,	woman.’
‘Does	not	the	father	kneel	before	the	mother?	In	the	time	of	birth?	Does	he
not	bow	to	the	strength	he	himself	does	not	possess?	Does	he	not	look	into	the
eyes	of	the	woman	he	loves,	only	to	see	a	power	strange	and	terrible	–	how	it
does	not	even	see	him,	how	it	looks	past	–	or	no,	how	it	looks	within?	Does	not
a	man	need	to	be	humbled?	Tell	me,	Gall,	that	you	refuse	to	see	that	again	–
one	final	time	in	your	life!	Witness	it!’
He	blinked	up	at	her.	The	knife	point	had	dug	deep,	now	grazing	the	bone
of	his	cheek.	He	felt	the	blood	running	down	to	drip	from	the	line	of	his	jaw,
the	rim	of	his	ear.	‘The	child	is	not	mine,’	he	whispered.
‘But	it	is.	You	fool,	can’t	you	see	that?	It	will	be	the	last	Khundryl	child!
The	last	of	the	Burned	Tears!	You	are	Warleader	Gall.	It	shall	be	born,	and	it
shall	look	up	into	your	face!	How	dare	you	deny	it	that?’
His	breath	was	coming	in	gasps.	Do	I	have	this	left	in	me?	Can	I	find	the
strength	she	demands	of	me?	I…	I	have	lost	so	much.	So	much.
‘This	is	our	final	night,	Gall.	Be	our	Warleader	one	last	time.	Be	a
husband.	Be	a	father.’
A	feeble,	trembling	hand	fumbled	with	the	furs	covering	him	–	he	caught
its	movement,	wondered	at	it.	My	own?	Yes.	Groaning,	he	struggled	to	sit	up.


The	knife	slipped	away	from	his	bloody	cheek.	He	stared	across	at	Jastara.
‘My	son…did	well	by	you.’
Her	eyes	went	wide.	The	colour	left	her	face.	She	shrank	back.
Gall	pushed	the	furs	away,	reached	for	his	weapon	belt.
	
Summoned	by	a	mother ’s	cries,	Badalle	walked	with	her	children.	Saddic
stumbled	at	her	side.	They	were	all	closing	in,	like	an	indrawn	breath.
The	army	was	on	the	move.	She	had	not	believed	these	soldiers	capable	of
rising	yet	again,	to	face	the	wastes	ahead.	She	did	not	understand	the	source	of
strength	they	had	found,	the	hard	will	in	their	eyes.	Nor	did	she	understand	the
way	they	looked	at	her	and	Saddic,	and	at	the	other	children	of	the	Snake.	As	if
we	have	been	made	holy.	As	if	we	have	blessed	them.	When	the	truth	is,	it	is
they	who	have	blessed	us,	because	now	we	children	will	not	have	to	die	alone.
We	can	die	in	the	arms	of	men	and	women,	men	and	women	who	for	that	moment
become	our	fathers,	our	mothers.
But,	here	in	the	Khundryl	camp,	a	new	child	was	about	to	come	into	the
world.
When	she	arrived,	the	clawed	warriors	surrounded	the	birth-tent.	She	saw
the	corpse	of	a	horse	nearby	and	walked	over	to	stand	upon	it.
Her	children	saw	and	they	faced	her,	for	they	knew	what	was	coming.
Looking	down,	she	met	Saddic’s	shining	eyes,	and	nodded.
Badalle	awakened	her	voice.	‘There	is	a	mother	this	night.’
Warriors	turned	to	her	–	they	had	no	choice.	She	would	make	them	listen,
if	only	to	give	them	the	one	thing	that	she	had	left.	Where	it	all	began,	so	it
ends.	This	is	what	I	have,	the	only	thing	I	ever	had.	Words.
‘There	is	a	mother	this	night
In	the	desert	of	dreams
Beneath	stars	burned	blind
And	soldiers	must	march	where
She	leads	them	on	the	dead	trail
By	this	truth	we	are	all	bound
Past	the	bodies	left	in	the	ditch
She	looks	up	where	we	fail
And	the	sky	is	without	end
Follow	her	for	the	time	of	our	birth
Is	a	birth	still	to	come


There	is	a	mother	this	night
Who	leads	an	army	of	children
What	will	you	ask	of	her
When	dawn	awakens?
What	will	you	demand	of	her
That	she	would	give
If	only	she	could?
There	is	a	mother	in	the	night
For	a	child	lost	in	the	dark’
Faces	stared	up	at	her,	but	she	could	make	no	sense	of	what	she	saw	in
them.	And	she	could	barely	remember	the	words	she	had	just	spoken,	but	when
she	looked	down	at	Saddic	he	nodded,	to	tell	her	that	he	had	them,	gathered	like
the	toys	in	the	sack	dangling	from	one	hand.	And	when	he	is	a	man,	he	will
write	this	down,	all	of	this,	and	one	night	a	stranger	will	find	him,	a	poet,	a
singer	of	tales	and	a	whisperer	of	songs.
He	will	come	in	search	of	the	fallen.
Like	a	newborn	child,	he	will	come	in	search	of	the	fallen.
Saddic,	you	will	not	die	here.	Not	for	many,	many	years.	How	do	I	know
this?	And	the	woman	who	sleeps	in	the	other	room	–	who	has	loved	you	all	her
life	–	who	is	she?	I	would	see	that,	if	I	could.
The	mother ’s	cries	were	softer	now.
A	man	appeared.	Walked	through	the	silent	crowd	that	parted	from	his	path.
Strode	into	the	tent.	Moments	later,	the	mother	inside	was	weeping,	a	sound	that
filled	the	world,	that	made	Badalle’s	heart	pound.	And	then,	a	small,	pitiful
wail.
Badalle	sensed	someone	standing	near	her.	She	turned	to	see	the	Adjunct.
‘Mother,’	Badalle	said,	‘you	should	be	leading	your	children.’
‘Did	you	truly	think	I	would	miss	this?’
Sighing,	Badalle	stepped	down	from	the	carcass	of	the	horse.	Reached	out
and	took	the	Adjunct’s	hand.
She	flinched	as	if	stung,	stared	down	at	Badalle	as	if	in	shock.	‘Don’t	do
that,’	she	said.
‘Mother,	when	will	you	let	yourself	feel?’
The	Adjunct	backed	away,	and	moments	later	she	was	gone,	lost	in	the
crowd.	If	it	made	a	path	for	her,	Badalle	couldn’t	see	it.
‘There	is	a	mother	this	night,’	she	whispered,	‘but	to	her	the	stars	are
blind.’


	
Koryk	reached	up	and	with	one	finger	probed	the	line	of	his	gums.	When	he
withdrew	the	finger	and	looked	down,	he	saw	that	it	was	smeared	with	blood.
And	that	was	a	good	joke.	He	was	dying	of	thirst,	just	like	all	the	others,	but
he’d	been	drinking	his	own	blood	for	two	days	now.	Wiping	his	finger	clean
on	his	thigh,	he	glanced	over	at	the	others.
Smiles	was	going	to	outlast	them	all.	Women	were	stronger	in	ways	no
man	dared	admit.	But	then	they	had	to	be.
There	was	more	blood	running	down	the	back	of	his	nose.	He	could	never
quite	manage	to	get	his	throat	clear	of	it,	no	matter	how	many	times	he
swallowed.	They	had	to	be.	A	house	of	whores.	I	saw	all	I	ever	needed	to	see.
Better	than	any	tutor’s	endless	droning	on	about	history.	Better	than	all	the
sages	and	prophets	and	agitators	and	rebels.	Aye,	those	ones	made	fists	and
shook	them,	punching	walls	at	the	injustice	of	it	all	–	but	those	walls,	they	were
just	the	boxes	they’d	built	for	themselves,	the	boxes	they	lived	in.	They	could
never	see	past.	And	for	most	of	them,	that	box	was	their	whole	world.	They	had
no	idea	there	was	anything	outside	it.
But	the	whores	knew.	Laughter	for	the	moment,	but	take	the	stretch	of	years
and	it’s	all	heartbreak.	A	woman	gives	up	her	body	when	she	has	nothing	else
left	to	give.	She	gives	it	up	like	a	man	his	last	copper.	In	a	whore’s	eyes,	you’ll
find	everything	that	we	do	to	each	other.	Everything.
He’d	killed	a	fellow	Bonehunter	last	night.	A	man	trying	to	steal	an	empty
cask.	But	he	wasn’t	thinking	about	that.	That	damned	face	so	twisted	with	need,
or	the	sigh	that	left	the	man	on	that	last	breath.	No,	he	was	thinking	about
whores.
They	could	have	schooled	me	in	shame.	But	they	didn’t.	And	now,	gods	help
me,	I	wish	they	had.	Because	then,	he	would	understand	what	it	was	that	forced
his	comrades	back	to	their	feet,	that	gave	them	the	strength	to	pick	up	their	gear
one	more	time,	knees	bending	under	that	weight.	‘The	Malazan	soldier	carries
on	his	back	all	that’s	needed	for	war.’	Dassem’s	credo	for	campaigns.	But	what
if	there’s	no	war?	What	if	the	enemy	is	inside	you?	And	what	if	this	burden
doesn’t	belong	to	just	you?	What	if	it	belongs	to	a	whole	damned	world?	What
then?
He’d	listened	to	that	captain,	Ruthan	Gudd.	Lying	dry-skinned	in	the
unbearable	heat,	shivering	beneath	the	last	blanket	he	still	owned,	he	heard
about	the	boy	and	the	girl	and	the	toys	spilled	out	on	the	ground	between	them.
They’d	forgotten	the	word.	Toys.	But	even	finding	it	again	hadn’t	helped	much,
because	they’d	also	forgotten	how	to	play.


There’s	a	secret	few	would	guess.	In	a	house	of	whores,	the	love	for	children
is	as	close	to	sacred	as	a	mortal	can	get.	Too	precious	to	mock,	because	every
whore	remembers	the	child	she	once	was.	Maybe	they	were	sad	memories,
maybe	they	were	bittersweet,	but	it	was	all	before	the	last	thing	was	given	away.
So	they	know.	It’s	innocence	that	is	sacred.
Nothing	else.
On	holy	days,	priests	used	to	incite	mobs	to	stone	whores.	No	one	would
go	out	–	he	remembered	all	the	women	hiding	in	their	rooms,	speaking	only	in
whispers	lest	some	sound	escape	past	the	shutters,	or	out	under	the	door.	And
he	used	to	cower	with	them,	terrified,	and	on	those	days	he	came	to	learn	a
hatred	for	priests,	for	temples,	for	all	those	hunters	of	the	unworthy.
So,	Crippled	God.	Fallen	One.	If	I	could	kill	you	with	my	bare	hands,	I
would.	If	I	could	kill	every	priest,	and	every	god,	and	all	those	others	stalking
the	streets	with	stones	in	their	hands,	I	would.	For	the	whores	and	all	you	took
from	them.	And	for	the	children.
He	rose,	shouldering	his	pack,	his	useless	weapons,	his	useless	armour,
and	faced	the	others,	seeing	that	they	too	were	ready,	and	when	Tarr	gestured
they	fell	in	one	by	one.
One	more	night.	In	the	name	of	innocence.
	
Bottle’s	joints	were	on	fire.	Swollen	and	red,	they	made	every	step	agony.
Since	when	was	a	story	enough	to	keep	someone	alive?	No	matter	how
heartbreaking,	no	matter	how	tragic.	No	matter	how	incensed	the	listener	might
become.	The	world	lacked	such	simplicity.	He’d	never	believed	in	speeches,
was	ever	suspicious	of	that	power	to	incite.	Dreams	could	be	voiced,	desires
could	be	uttered	and	then	whispered	back	with	fervour,	but	in	the	end	most
people	eventually	turned	away	and	the	crowd	dispersed,	and	it	was	back	home
and	getting	on	with	living.
For	all	the	boldness	of	believers	on	the	front	line,	when	the	fires	ebbed	and
no	one	was	looking,	it	was	time	again	to	hide	away.	But	maybe	we	need	that.
Our	little	hole	to	climb	down	into.	For	some	respite,	where	all	the	clamouring
voices	in	your	head	can	just	die	away.	For	blessed	silence.
And	the	ones	who	never	get	to	that,	who	are	so	consumed	they	can	find
nowhere	to	hide,	no	place	to	rest,	see	what	happens	to	them	–	see	the	fever	in
their	eyes.	They	have	made	their	lives	torture,	they	have	made	the	voice	of	their
spirit	one	long,	unbroken	howl.
Fevered,	aye.	He	was	that,	and	more.	‘We’re	the	walking	dead.’	Fiddler ’s
words,	or	someone’s,	anyway.	Maybe	Cuttle.	No	matter.	The	walking	dead


didn’t	feel	pain	like	this.	The	walking	dead	didn’t	carry	on	their	backs	a
thousand	questions	–	questions	with	no	answers.
His	grandmother	was	now	hobbling	beside	him.	She	didn’t	belong	on	this
trail,	in	this	desert,	but	there	she	was.	And	maybe	she	wasn’t	his	grandmother	at
all,	just	some	other	wax	witch	twisting	reeds	in	her	arthritic	hands,	making
dolls	for	the	children	in	the	village	ahead.	Gifts.
Charms.	I	remember	you	giving	them	away.	Toys,	you	said,	head	bobbing.
Free	toys!	And	they	all	ran	up	to	you,	laughing.
But	you	wove	protections	into	those	dolls.	Blessings,	wards	against	illness.
Nothing	powerful,	nothing	to	stop,	say,	a	flash	flood	or	an	avalanche.	But	the
father	that	lashed	out	with	his	fists.	The	uncle	who	slipped	under	the	blankets	in
the	dead	of	night.	Those	ones	paid	for	what	they	did.
And	the	cuts	that	healed.	The	fevers	that	went	away.
So,	Grandmother,	I’ll	walk	this	last	walk.	In	your	memory.	Make	me	a	doll,
for	this	pain.
And	take	this	child	by	the	hand.	And	tell	him	again,	how	they	will	pay	for
what	they	did.
	
For	years,	before	her	nails	were	worn	down	to	bloody	shreds	by	all	that	she
clawed	at,	Smiles	had	carried	a	dream,	carried	it	around	like	a	pearl	inside	a
battered	shell.	Of	a	day	in	the	future	when	she	was	a	mother,	and	she’d	given
birth	to	twins.	Two	girls,	squalling	and	hissing	the	way	girls	do.	Playing	on	the
beach	under	her	watchful	eye.
And	then,	in	a	dark,	desolate	season	–	with	the	skies	grey	and	the	seas
swollen	–	the	older	ones	would	come	to	her.	‘The	fish	are	gone,’	they’d	say.
‘The	spirits	must	be	appeased.	Choose	one,	Mother,	and	make	of	her	the	gift	of
our	people,	our	gift	to	the	thirsty	waters.’	And	she	would	walk	away,	calling
her	daughters	back	to	the	hut.
They	were	lowborn.	The	whole	family.	Her	husband	and	the	father	of	the
twins	was	gone,	maybe	dead.	It	was	all	down	to	her.	One	child	to	be	blessed,	the
other	cursed.	Yet	arguments	could	be	made	as	to	who	was	which.	She	knew	all
about	that.
A	night	of	bitter	winds,	of	fires	doused	by	spray.	And	Smiles	would	set	out,
knives	in	hand.	And	she	would	kill	every	one	of	those	elders	–	in	all	their
hunger,	in	all	their	needs	now	that	they	were	too	old	to	fish,	now	that	the	only
authority	they	still	possessed	came	with	their	threats	and	warnings	about	angry,
vengeful	spirits.	Aye,	she	would	show	them	a	vengeful,	angry	spirit,	and	the
gifts	it	would	make	to	the	hungry	sea	would	appease	a	thousand	spirits	of	the


deep.
Those	kinds	of	dreams	were	honey	on	the	tongue,	heady	with	the	juices	of
pleasure	and	satisfaction.	She	suspected	such	dreams	hid	in	the	hearts	of
everyone.	Desires	for	justice,	for	redress,	for	a	settling	of	the	scales.	And	of
course,	that	sour	undercurrent	of	knowledge,	that	none	of	it	was	possible,	that
so	much	would	rise	in	opposition,	in	self-preservation	even,	to	crush	that
dream,	its	frail	bones,	its	pattering	heart	–	even	that	could	not	take	away	the
sweet	delight,	the	precious	hope.
Wells	for	the	coin,	league-stones	for	the	wreaths,	barrows	for	the
widdershins	dance	–	the	world	was	filled	with	magical	places	awaiting	wishes.
And	empires	raised	lotteries,	opened	games,	sought	to	lift	high	heroes	among
the	common	folk	–	and	everyone	rushes	up	with	their	dreams.	But	stop.	Look
back.	Gods,	look	around!	If	all	we	seek	is	an	escape,	what	does	that	say	about
the	world	we	live	in?	That	village,	that	city,	that	life?
We	are	desperate	with	our	dreams.	What	–	oh,	what	–	does	that	say?
So	those	two	children	had	forgotten	about	toys.	She	wasn’t	surprised.	She
remembered	the	day	she	sat	with	the	last	dolls	she	owned,	but	across	from	her
sat	no	one.	Where	was	her	sister?	They’d	taken	her.	But	how	can	I	play?
‘Child,	she	was	taken	long	ago.	You	cannot	remember	what	you	never	had.
Go	out	now	and	play	with	Skella.’
‘Skella	is	highborn	–	she	just	orders	me	around.’
‘That’s	the	way	it	is,	child.	Best	you	get	used	to	it.’
In	her	dream,	she	saved	murdering	Skella	for	last.
	
Cuttle’s	brothers	had	been	on	the	wall	when	it	came	down.	He	remembered	his
shock.	Their	city	was	falling.	His	brothers	had	just	died	defending	it.	Hengese
soldiers	were	in	the	gap,	clambering	over	the	wreckage,	coming	out	of	the	dust
howling	like	demons.
Lessons,	then.	No	wall	was	impenetrable.	And	the	resolute	in	spirit	could
die	as	easily	as	could	the	coward.	He	would	have	liked	to	believe	it	wasn’t	like
that,	none	of	it	–	this	whole	mess.	And	that	children	could	be	left	to	play	and
not	worry	about	the	life	ahead.	To	play	the	way	he	and	his	brothers	had	played,
unmindful	of	the	irony	as	they	charged	each	other	with	wooden	swords	and
fought	to	defend	a	midden	behind	the	fishworks,	dying	one	by	one	like	heroes
in	some	imagined	last	stand,	giving	their	lives	to	save	the	swarming	flies,	the
screeching	gulls	and	the	heaps	of	shells.	Where	knelt	a	helpless	maiden,	or
some	such	thing.
Maiden,	stolen	crown,	the	jewelled	eye	of	a	goddess.	They	wove	fine


stories	around	their	deeds,	didn’t	they?	In	those	long	winters	when	it	seemed
that	all	the	grey,	sickly	sky	wanted	to	do	was	collapse	down	on	the	whole	city,
crush	it	for	ever,	they	lived	and	died	their	shining	epics.
A	backside	kick	sent	him	out	from	childhood.	He’d	not	forgotten	those
games,	however.	They	lived	with	him	and	would	until	this	–	his	last	damned
day.	But	not	for	the	obvious	reasons.	Nostalgia	was	like	a	disease,	one	that
crept	in	and	stole	the	colour	from	the	world	and	the	time	you	lived	in.	Made
for	bitter	people.	Dangerous	people,	when	they	wanted	back	what	never	was.
And	it	wasn’t	even	our	innocence	back	then	–	we	never	felt	innocent.	They	spent
day	after	day	living	older	than	their	years,	after	all.	And	no,	not	even	the	ties	of
family	blood,	those	so-familiar	faces	he	grew	up	alongside,	and	all	the	safety
and	protection	and	comfort	they	offered.	No,	those	games	stayed	with	him
because	of	something	else,	something	he	now	understood	to	have	been	with
him,	undying,	since	those	days.
Maiden,	stolen	crown,	the	jewelled	eye	of	a	god.	Die	for	a	reason.	That’s
all.	Cuttle,	you’re	the	last	brother	left	who	can	do	this.	The	others	didn’t	make
it,	not	to	this	epic’s	end.	So	you	carry	them	now,	here	on	your	back,	those	boys
with	their	flushed	faces,	you	carry	them.	You’re	carrying	them	right	past	their
useless	deaths	on	that	wall	in	a	war	that	meant	nothing.	Take	them	now	to
where	they	need	to	go.
We’re	going	to	die	for	a	reason.	That’s	not	too	much	to	ask,	is	it?
You	should’ve	seen	our	last	stands.	They	were	something.
	
Corabb	was	thinking	about	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	Not	that	he	wanted	to,	but	that
evil,	lying,	murdering	bastard	was	like	a	friend	you	didn’t	want	any	more	who
just	kept	showing	up	with	a	stupid	grin	on	his	ugly	face.	He	was	covered	in
dust,	too,	and	he	had	no	idea	why	and	no,	he	didn’t	care	either.
That’s	what	came	of	believing	in	people.	All	sorts	of	people,	with	their
foreheads	all	hot	and	burning	and	not	a	drink	of	water	in	sight.	The	man
burned	a	city	to	the	ground.	Tried	killing	fifty	million	people,	too,	or	however
many	were	in	Y’Ghatan	when	the	army	broke	through	and	the	temple	caught
fire	and	the	priest’s	head	was	rolling	around	on	the	floor	like	a	kick-ball	with	a
face	on	it.
Corabb	had	wanted	to	be	good.	He’d	grown	up	wanting	that	and	nothing
else.	The	world	was	bad	and	he	wanted	it	to	be	good.	Was	that	stupid?	What	was
that	his	tutor	used	to	say,	after	the	man	had	cried	himself	dry	and	in	his	fists
were	tangled	clumps	of	his	own	hair	–	what	was	his	name	again?	Baldy?	He’d
look	over	at	young	Corabb	and	say,	‘Good?	You	don’t	know	the	meaning	of


the	word.	In	fact,	you’re	about	the	worst	student	I	have	ever	had	the	horror	of
entertaining.’
That	was	fine.	He	didn’t	entertain	very	good	either,	Corabb	recalled,	old
Baldy.	In	fact,	he	was	the	most	boring	man	in	the	whole	village,	which	was	why
they	voted	him	to	teach	the	young	ones,	because	the	young	ones	were	causing
so	much	trouble	getting	underfoot	and	all	the	grown-ups	decided	they	needed
to	be	talked	at	until	they	turned	into	motionless	lumps	and	their	eyes	fell	out
and	rolled	like	marbles.
But	those	fists,	holding	clumps	of	hair.	That	was	exciting.	Birds	could	use
that	for	nests.	So	maybe	Baldy	really	was	entertaining,	when	he	did	his	red-face
thing	and	bounced	around	on	his	stool.
Leoman	was	no	better.	It	was	just	Corabb’s	luck,	all	these	bad	teachers.
He	remembered	the	day	he	made	his	mother	cry.	The	Gafan	brothers	had
been	teasing	him,	for	what	he	couldn’t	recall,	so	he’d	chased	them	down,
softened	them	up	a	bit,	and	then	used	a	rope	he	stole	from	a	rag	man	to	tie	them
all	together,	wrist	to	ankle,	the	four	of	them,	their	faces	like	burst	gourds,	and
dragged	them	into	the	house.	‘Ma!	Cook	these!’
Grunter	Gafan	had	shown	up	to	get	his	children	back.	Had	the	gall	to
threaten	Corabb’s	mother,	and	since	Canarab	his	father	was	still	off	in	the	wars
it	fell	to	Corabb	to	stand	up	to	the	pig-faced	bully.	But	she’d	been	cooking	a
stew	in	that	pot,	and	besides,	once	Grunter ’s	head	was	inside	it	there	was	no
more	room	for	the	boys.	They	said	he	smelled	like	onions	for	weeks.
It	was	the	spilled	supper	that	made	his	ma	cry.	At	least,	that’s	what	Corabb
worked	out,	eventually.	Couldn’t	have	been	anything	else,	and	if	they	had	to
move	to	get	away	from	the	Gafan	clan,	the	new	neighbourhood	was	nicer
anyway.	And	the	day	Grunter	got	killed,	well,	he	should’ve	known	better	than
trying	to	slide	all	the	way	under	that	wagon,	and	Corabb’s	kicking	him	in	the
head	a	few	times	had	nothing	to	do	with	his	tragic	end.	Nobody	liked	Grunter
anyway,	though	Corabb	probably	shouldn’t	have	used	that	for	his	defence	at	the
trial.
So	it	was	the	priest	pits	for	young	Corabb.	Cutting	limestone	wasn’t	that
bad	a	job,	except	when	people	got	crushed,	or	coughed	their	lungs	out
spraying	blood	everywhere.	And	this	was	where	he	started	listening	to	stories
people	told.	Passing	the	time.	It	had	been	a	mistake.	Of	course,	if	not	for	the
uprising	he’d	probably	still	be	there,	getting	crushed	and	coughing	his	lungs
out.	And	the	uprising	–	well,	if	he	looked	back	on	it,	that	had	been	the
beginning	of	his	own	rebellion,	which	later	led	him	to	join	the	bigger	one.	All
because	people	told	stories	about	freedom	and	the	days	before	the	Malazans.
Stories	that	probably	weren’t	even	true.


Leoman.	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	And	Sha’ik,	and	Toblakai.	And	all	the
fanatics.	And	all	the	bodies.	Nothing	good	in	any	of	that.	When	you	believe
people	telling	all	those	lies.
Was	the	Adjunct	any	different?	He	wasn’t	sure	any	more.	He	didn’t
understand	all	this	business	about	being	unwitnessed.	That	was	what	he’d	been
fighting	against	all	his	life.
But	now	I	got	a	kick-ball	head	and	it’s	burning	up	in	the	sun.	And	by	dawn
we’ll	all	be	done	with,	finished.	Dead	and	no	one	left	to	see.	Is	that	what	she
meant?	But…what’s	the	point	of	that?
	
He	had	been	born	stubborn.	Or	so	everyone	said.	Maybe	it	had	made	for
problems	in	his	life,	but	Tarr	wasn’t	one	to	dwell	on	them.	Here,	this	night,
stubbornness	was	all	he	had	left.	Sergeant	to	a	squad	of	marines	–	he’d	never
thought	he’d	make	it	this	far.	Not	with	Fiddler	there,	taking	care	of	everything
that	needed	taking	care	of.	But	now	Fid	wasn’t	running	this	squad	any	more.
Now	it’s	mine.	I’m	the	one	gets	to	walk	it	into	the	ground.	I’m	the	one	gets	to
watch	them	die	like	flies	on	the	sill.
He	planned	on	being	the	last	to	go	down	–	he	had	his	stubbornness,	after
all.	His	way	of	pushing,	and	pushing,	until	he	pushed	through.
He	remembered	the	day	they	formed	up,	officially,	in	Aren.	The	chaos,	the
guarded	looks,	all	the	bitching	that	went	on.	Unruly,	unhappy,	close	to	falling
apart.	Then	a	few	veterans	stepped	up.	Fiddler.	Cuttle.	Gesler,	Stormy.	And	did
what	was	needed.	And	that’s	when	I	knew	that	I	was	going	to	stick	with	this.	Be
a	soldier.	I	had	them	to	follow,	and	that	was	good	enough.
It	still	is.	It	has	to	be.
Fiddler’s	up	ahead	somewhere.	Cuttle’s	right	behind	me.	Only	ever	had	the
Adjunct	as	commander,	and	she’s	kept	me	alive	this	long.	She	wants	another
march,	she’ll	get	it.	No	questions,	no	complaining.
He	twisted	round,	glared	at	his	squad.	‘First	one	falls,	I	will	personally
curse	to	the	Thirteen	Gates	of	the	Abyss.	Am	I	understood?’
‘That	calls	for	a	drink,’	said	Cuttle.
The	others	laughed.	It	wasn’t	much	of	a	laugh,	but	for	Tarr	it	was	good
enough.	They’ll	make	it	through	this	night.	Past	that,	I	won’t	ask	them	for	a
damned	thing.
Unless	I	need	to.
	


Himble	Thrup	had	picked	up	a	new	name.	Shorthand.	He	liked	it.	The	old
family	line	of	Thrups,	well,	his	brothers	were	welcome	to	it.	That	long,	ropy
thing	tying	him	to	where	he’d	come	from,	and	who	he’d	been,	well,	he’d	just
cut	it.	Gone.	All	the	shit	going	one	way,	all	the	shit	going	back	the	other	way,
the	rotted	birth	cord	no	Thrup	dared	touch.	Snick.	Gone.	Good	riddance.
Shorthand	it	is,	on	account	of	my	short	hands,	y’see?	A	damned	giant	lizard
took	’em.	No,	boys,	it’s	all	true.	A	giant	lizard.	Chain	Kemalles	they	was	called,
but	we	called	’em	Stumpies,	on	account	of	their	tails.	This	was	back	when	I	was
a	heavy.	Aye,	I	don’t	look	like	a	heavy.	I	know	that.	But	it	ain’t	just	size	makes	a
heavy.	In	fact,	I	know	a	Dal	Honese	heavy	no	bigger	than	a	toad,	and	no
prettier	either.	It’s	all	attitude.
Just	look	at	the	ones	hauling	those	ropes	–	the	ones	just	up	ahead.	What	in
Hood’s	name	are	they	doing,	dragging	these	wagons?	It	don’t	matter.	They’re
heavies	and	someone	told	’em,	‘Haul	these	wagons,’	and	so	that’s	what	they’re
doing.	Y’see?	Attitude.
Aye,	we	stopped	’em	cold,	those	Stumpies.	They	swung	high,	we	ducked	low.
They	gave	us	the	blade,	we	gave	’em	the	shield.	That’s	how	it’s	done.	True,	I
won’t	lie,	not	many	of	us	left.	We	was	outnumbered,	badly	outnumbered.
These	days?	I’m	working	for	Master-Sergeant	Lieutenant	Quartermaster
Pores.	He’s	just	gone	back	to	check	on	a	cracked	axle	three	wagons	back.	Be
with	us	shortly.	Me?	I’m	waiting	for	our	squad	of	marines,	t’stand	guard,	aye.
But	they	had	a	scrap	last	night,	got	cut	up	a	bit,	but	it	never	went	further,	since
nobody’s	got	the	strength	to	take	it	further,	if	you	see	what	I	mean.	Still,	needed
some	sewing	and	the	like.	I’m	expectin’	them	any	time.
The	name’s	Shorthand—
Something	hard	as	stone	smashed	into	the	side	of	his	head.
	
Rackle	lowered	the	mace,	watched	as	Stull	and	Bester	dragged	the	body	off	to
one	side.	A	score	or	so	regulars	had	looked	up	at	the	scuffle,	and	now	watched
with	dull	eyes	as	they	went,	their	legs	dragging	them	along	as	if	those	legs
were	the	last	parts	of	them	still	working.
Rackle	wasn’t	ready	to	be	like	that.	Hood	take	’em	all,	he	wasn’t.	‘So	much
for	the	bodyguard,’	he	said.
‘Quiet!’	hissed	Bester,	nodding	ahead	to	the	lines	of	haulers.	‘Get	up	on	the
wagon,	Rack,	but	go	slow	and	careful	–	they’re	going	to	feel	the	extra	weight
no	matter	what.’
Rackle	grunted.	‘Oafs	are	past	feeling	anything,	Best.’	But	he	edged	up
close	to	the	wagon,	reached	up	one	hand	and	set	a	foot	on	the	helper,	and	as	the


wagon	rolled	ahead	he	let	it	lift	him	from	the	ground,	nice	and	slow	the	way
Best	wanted	it.
Rackle	watched	as	Stull	re-joined	Bester,	and	the	two	melted	away	into	the
gloom.
So	far	so	good.	Somewhere	in	this	wagon,	probably	packed	dead	centre,
were	Blistig’s	special	casks.	Time	had	come	for	a	drink.	He	drew	himself
higher	up,	leaning	against	the	bales	as	he	did	so,	reaching	for	more	handholds.
That	water	–	he	could	smell	it.	Close.
	
Pores	crawled	out	from	under	the	wagon.	‘Cracked	right	through,’	he	said,
climbing	to	his	feet.	‘What’s	in	this	one?’	he	asked	the	man	beside	him.
The	once-company	cook	scratched	at	his	beard.	‘Some	lantern	oil.
Horseshoes.	Wax,	grease—’
‘Grease?	And	it	didn’t	occur	to	you	to	maybe	use	some	of	it	on	this
damned	axle?’
‘We	was	saving	it	for	when	it	got	real	bad,	sir.	Aye,	maybe	that	was	a
mistake.’
‘All	right,’	Pores	sighed.	‘Cut	the	haulers	loose	and	send	them	on.	I’ll	take
a	closer	look	at	what	else	is	up	there.’
‘Aye,	sir,	but	I	don’t	think	anybody’s	going	to	come	back	for	whatever	you
think	we	still	need.’
Pores	looked	round.	They’d	been	left	behind	by	the	train.	Shit.	‘Even	so	–
there	might	be	a	child	hiding	under	the	blankets,	the	way	they	come	crawling
out	of	the	unlikeliest	of	places.	Or	too	sick	to	move.’
‘I’ll	be	on	with	it	then,	sir.’
‘Spread	the	haulers	out	with	the	rest.’
‘Aye	sir.’
Pores	watched	him	go,	and	then	heaved	himself	up	on	to	the	bed	of	the
wagon.	Trying	to	ignore	the	fire	someone	had	lit	in	the	back	of	his	throat,	and
his	growing	sense	of	helplessness,	he	set	to	exploring.
The	kegs	of	grease	were	pretty	much	empty	–	with	only	a	few	handfuls	of
the	rancid	gunk	left	–	so	it	probably	wouldn’t	have	been	enough	to	save	the
axle	anyway.	He	tried	pushing	clear	a	cask	filled	with	horseshoes,	but	he	no
longer	had	the	strength	left	to	do	that.	Clambering	over	it,	he	thumped	the
nearest	bale.	‘Anyone	down	there?	Wake	up	or	get	left	behind!’
Silence.
Pores	drew	his	dagger	and	slit	open	the	bale.	Spare	uniforms?	Gods	below!
If	the	haulers	find	out	they’ll	skin	me	alive.	He	cut	open	a	few	more.	Tick	for


mattresses.	Lead	shot	packed	in	wool	for	slingers	–	we	don’t	have	any	slingers.
Who’s	quartermaster	of	this	mess?	Oh,	me.	Right.	‘That’s	it,	then,’	he	muttered,
‘Master-Sergeant	Pores,	fire	Quartermaster	Pores.	Can	I	do	that,	Lieutenant?
You	can,	because	I’m	telling	you	so,	or	do	I	need	to	take	this	to	Fist	Kindly?
Please,	sir,	no,	don’t	do	that.	He	hates	me!	Odd,	he	doesn’t	hate	me,	MasterSergeant.	Really,	sir?	I’m	certain	of	it,	Master-Sergeant.	Reasonably.	I	hope.
All	right,	no	more	excuses	for	the	old	man	–	he	hates	us	all.	This	is	what
happens	to	a	bald	man	who	starts	collecting	combs—’
‘Quartermaster	Pores.’
He	looked	up.	Saw	Fist	Blistig	standing	at	the	back	of	the	wagon.	‘Fist?’
‘I	need	to	speak	to	you.’
‘Aye,	sir.	What	can	I	do	for	you?’
‘You	can	give	me	my	casks.’
‘Casks?	Oh,	those	casks.’
‘Get	over	here,	Pores,	I	ain’t	in	the	mood	to	be	looking	up	at	you.’
He	clambered	his	way	to	the	back	of	the	wagon,	dropped	down	on	to	the
ground	–	at	the	impact	his	knees	folded	under	him	and	he	swore	as	he	sank
lower.
And	the	knife	meant	for	his	heart	went	into	his	upper	chest	instead.
Pores	fell	back,	sliding	from	the	blade.	Blood	sprayed,	pattering	the	dusty
ground	like	raindrops.	He	found	himself	staring	up	at	the	Jade	Strangers.
‘Bleeder,’	Blistig	said,	moving	into	his	line	of	sight	and	looking	down	at
him.	‘That’ll	do.’
He	listened	to	the	Fist	walking	away,	and	he	wanted	to	laugh.	Saves	me	a
night’s	march.
Things	were	quiet	for	a	time,	as	he	felt	himself	fading	away.	And	then	he
heard	the	crunch	of	a	foot	stepping	close	to	the	side	of	his	head.	He	blinked
open	his	eyes.	Look.	It’s	the	Grey	Man,	the	Harrower,	come	for	me.	I	knew	I
rated	special	attention.	The	rotted	skeleton	crouched	down	to	stare	at	him	with
black,	empty	sockets.
Pores	smiled.	‘Just	leave	it	by	the	door.’
	
Balm	looked	round,	scowling.	‘So	where	is	he?’
Throatslitter	hacked	out	a	dry	cough	that	left	him	doubled	over.	On	one
knee,	he	gasped	for	a	time	and	then	said	in	a	voice	like	sifting	sand,	‘Probably
running	an	errand	for	Pores,	Sergeant.’
Deadsmell	snorted.	‘Errand?	You	lost	your	mind,	Throat?	Nobody’s
running	errands	any	more.	He	should	be	here.	No,	I	don’t	like	this.’


Balm	drew	off	his	helm	and	scratched	at	his	scalp.	‘Throat,	climb	up	and
give	it	a	look	over,	will	you?’
‘There	ain’t	nothing	worth	stealing	up	there,	Sergeant.’
‘I	know	that	and	you	know	that,	but	that	don’t	mean	anybody	else	knows	it.
Go	on.’
Groaning,	Throatslitter	slowly	straightened.	Made	his	way	over	to	the	side
of	the	wagon.
‘Widdershins,’	said	Balm,	‘go	up	and	talk	to	the	haulers,	see	what	they
know.’
‘What	they	know	is	the	sight	of	their	own	feet,	Sergeant.’
‘I	don’t	care.’
The	mage	made	his	way	to	the	front	of	the	wagon.
‘Down	to	a	crawl,’	Balm	observed,	eyeing	the	wagon’s	wobbly	wheels
rocking	past.	‘We’ll	be	lucky	making	two	leagues	tonight.’
Throatslitter	pulled	himself	on	to	the	sideboard.
The	crossbow	quarrel	coming	out	of	the	darkness	caught	him	in	the	right
buttock.	He	howled.
Balm	spun	round,	bringing	up	his	shield.	A	quarrel	slammed	into	it,
skittered	up	past	his	face,	slicing	cheek	and	ear.	‘Ambush!’
The	wagon	trundled	to	a	halt.
Throatslitter	had	dropped	back	down,	only	to	fall	on	to	his	side,	a	stream
of	curses	hissing	from	him.	Deadsmell	threw	himself	down	beside	him.	‘Lie
still,	damn	you	–	got	to	cut	it	out	or	you’re	useless	t’us!’
But	Throatslitter	had	managed	to	get	one	hand	around	the	quarrel’s	shaft.
He	tore	it	loose,	flung	it	to	one	side.
Deadsmell	stared	at	the	man	–	he	hadn’t	made	a	sound.
With	bloodied	hands,	Throatslitter	signalled:	Someone	in	wagon.
The	healer	nodded,	looked	round	–	Balm	had	squatted	down	behind	his
shield,	short	sword	readied.	Widdershins	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.	The	last	of
the	regulars	on	this	flank	had	simply	melted	away,	and	though	the	glow	from
the	Strangers	was	now	painting	the	desert	pan	a	luminous	green	their	attackers
were	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Deadsmell	collected	a	pebble	and	flung	it	at	Balm.	It	struck	his	hip	and	the
sergeant’s	head	snapped	around.
More	hand	signals.
Balm	backed	until	he	was	pressed	against	the	wagon’s	front	wheel.	With	his
tongue	he	was	trying	to	lap	up	the	blood	trickling	down	his	cheek.	He	flung	a
series	of	gestures	off	to	his	right,	and	then	glanced	back	at	Deadsmell	and,
tongue	snaking	out	yet	again,	he	nodded.


Thank	Hood.	Deadsmell	met	Throatslitter ’s	eyes,	jerked	his	head	upward.
Make	a	show.
Drawing	his	knives,	Throatslitter	gathered	into	a	crouch.
	
Rackle	held	himself	perfectly	still.	Not	quite	the	way	they’d	planned	this.	One
wounded	to	show	so	far.	The	Fist	wouldn’t	be	happy,	but	maybe	he	could
salvage	this	mess.
He	heard	the	wounded	one	hiss,	‘Get	up	on	top,	Deadsmell,	and	take	a	look
around.’
‘You	lost	your	mind,	Throat?’
‘Just	do	it,’	growled	the	sergeant.
The	weight	of	the	wagon	shifted.	Here	he	comes.	Hey,	Deadsmell,	I	got	me
a	nice	surprise	waiting	for	you.	He	tightened	his	grip	on	the	mace	in	his	right
hand.
A	sound	from	the	back	of	the	wagon.	He	twisted	round	to	see	the	wounded
one	sliding	up	into	view.	Shit!
Another	shudder	of	the	wagon,	as	Deadsmell	began	pulling	himself	up	the
side.
Rackle	looked	across	at	Throatslitter,	saw	the	man	grin.
Time	to	leave.	He	rose,	spun	round—
	
Widdershins	gave	the	bastard	a	smile	as	he	drove	his	short	sword	into	the
man’s	gut,	and	then	up	under	his	heart.
‘Stay	low,	Wid!’	Throatslitter	hissed.
He	let	the	body’s	weight	pull	him	down	behind	some	bales.	‘Where’s	the
other	one?’	he	asked.
‘More	than	one,’	Deadsmell	replied,	sliding	in	from	the	side.	‘Two,	I’d
guess.	Snipers	with	crossbows,	probably	lying	in	shallow	pits	somewhere	out
there.’
The	wagon	rocked	violently	from	the	opposite	side	and	a	moment	later
Sergeant	Hellian	was	staring	down	at	them.	‘You	lads	in	trouble?’
‘Head	low,	Sergeant!’	Throatslitter	hissed,	‘Snipers!’
‘Oh	yeah?	Where?’
‘Out	in	the	desert.’
She	squinted	in	the	direction	he	pointed,	and	then	twisted	round.	‘Spread
out,	squad	–	we’re	going	to	advance	on	some	dug-in	positions.	Gopher	hunting


time.	Oh,	and	shields	up	–	they	got	crossbows.’
Deadsmell	stared	across	at	Throatslitter,	who	simply	shook	his	head.
‘Listen,	Sergeant—’
‘You	got	a	wounded	man	here,	healer,’	Hellian	pointed	out,	and	then	she
clambered	across,	followed	by	two	soldiers	from	her	squad.	Others	had	gone
round	the	wagon,	advancing	slowly	on	the	flank.	Hellian	dropped	down.
‘Sergeant	Balm,	hold	fast	will	ya?	We	got	this.’
‘You	won’t	find	’em,’	Balm	replied.	‘Saw	a	couple	of	shadows	running
off.’
‘Really?	Which	way?’
‘Into	the	regulars.	We	lost	’em,	Hellian.’
The	woman	sagged.	‘What	were	they	after?’
‘Hood	knows.’
Having	observed	all	this	from	atop	the	wagon,	Deadsmell	turned	back.
‘Nice	work,	Wid,	though	it	would’ve	been	good	to	have	taken	him	alive.’
‘Wasn’t	interested	in	talking,’	Widdershins	replied.	‘They	probably	killed
Shorthand.’
Deadsmell	was	silent.	He	should’ve	thought	of	that.	‘We	need	to	look	for
him.’
‘And	leave	the	wagon?’	Throatslitter	demanded.
‘There	ain’t	nothing	on	this	wagon!’
‘Right,	sorry.	Got	caught	up,	somehow.	Anyway,	I	doubt	I	can	walk,	so	I
can	stay	behind	and,	er,	guard.’
‘Where’d	you	get	it,	Throat?’	Widdershins	asked.
‘Where	it	means	I	can’t	walk,	Wid.’
‘In	the	butt,’	Deadsmell	explained.	‘It	ain’t	bleeding	–	did	that	quarrel	hit
bone?’
‘Don’t	think	so.’
‘Miracle,	with	your	skinny—’
‘Just	go	find	Shorthand,	will	you?’
Deadsmell	nodded	over	at	Widdershins,	and	the	two	of	them	climbed	down
from	the	wagon.
As	all	of	this	had	been	going	on,	the	rest	of	the	column	had	simply	gone
round	them.	On	this	flank,	Sergeant	Urb’s	squad	had	arrived,	and	after	a	few
words	with	Balm	and	Hellian	Urb	led	his	marines	onward.	Balm	faced	his	two
soldiers.
‘We	was	targeted	specifically,’	he	said.
‘The	marked	casks,’	said	Widdershins.	‘Don’t	matter	that	we	used	it	all	up
on	the	children.	They	still	think	we’re	holding	back.’


‘Blistig,’	said	Deadsmell.
Balm’s	face	twisted	in	distaste	and	he	reached	up	to	wipe	more	blood	from
his	cheek.	Then	he	licked	his	fingers.	‘Killing	officers	is	one	thing…but	a	Fist?
I	don’t	know.’
‘Who’d	complain?’	Deadsmell	demanded.
‘It’s	mutiny.’
‘We	ain’t	going	against	the	Adjunct’s	command	in	this—’
‘Wrong.	In	a	way	that’s	exactly	what	we’re	doing.	She	made	him	Fist.’
‘But	now	he’s	trying	to	kill	his	own	soldiers!’
‘Aye,	Deadsmell.’
Widdershins	hissed	to	get	their	attention.	‘T’lan	Imass	coming,	Sergeant.’
‘Now	what?’
The	figure	halted	before	Deadsmell.	‘Healer,	there	is	need	for	you.’
‘You’re	way	past	helping—’
‘The	one	named	Pores	is	dying	from	a	knife	wound.	Will	you	come?’
Deadsmell	turned	to	Balm.
‘All	right,’	the	sergeant	said.	‘I’ll	go	find	Kindly.’
	
Shortnose	had	been	cut	loose.	The	rest	agreed	it	should	be	him,	and	he	went
and	found	Flashwit	and	Mayfly,	and	a	little	while	later	Saltlick	joined	them.
None	of	them	said	much,	but	it	was	clear	that	Shortnose	was	in	charge.	He
didn’t	know	why	but	he	wasn’t	in	the	mood	to	argue	anyway	so	it	was	him
whether	he	wanted	it	to	be	or	not.
He	led	them	into	the	press	of	the	regulars,	where	soldiers	melted	from
their	path	and	with	eyes	all	hollow	and	haunted	tracked	them	as	they	went	past.
Maybe	they’d	been	harnessed	like	oxen,	but	that	didn’t	mean	they	weren’t
paying	attention	to	whatever	was	going	on	around	them.	Most	of	it	wasn’t
worth	chewing	on,	but	sometimes	some	unguarded	comment	hung	around	and
then,	when	something	else	arrived,	it	came	back,	and	things	started	making
sense.
They	weren’t	oxen.	They	were	heavies.	And	word	had	reached	them	that
Shorthand	had	a	broken	skull	and	probably	wasn’t	going	to	last	the	night,	and
that	a	squad	of	marines	had	been	ambushed,	with	one	of	them	down	but	luckily
not	dead.	Looked	like	the	one	who	busted	Shorthand’s	head	got	himself	gutted
by	a	marine,	but	at	least	two	more	attackers	had	gotten	away.
There	weren’t	just	two	of	them,	Shortnose	knew.	Two	with	crossbows,	aye,
stolen	from	a	wagon.	At	least	seven	others	with	them,	though.	Fist	Blistig’s
gang	of	thugs.


Every	army	had	them.	They	were	only	trouble	when	some	fool	put	’em	all
together	in	one	place,	and	Blistig	had	done	just	that.
Head-breaking	a	heavy?	And	from	behind,	too?	That	needed	answering.
Shorthand	had	been	a	knot	in	the	saw	of	the	Stumpies.	He’d	blunted	a	lot	of
teeth	on	that	saw.	Bad	luck	about	the	fingers,	but	cutting	wood’s	a	dangerous
business,	almost	–	Shortnose	frowned	–	almost	as	dangerous	as	being	a	heavy.
Too	bad	that	Blistig	wasn’t	with	his	crew	when	they	found	it.	They
wouldn’t	have	killed	him,	though.	Just	let	him	watch	as	they	waded	into	his
gang,	disarming	them	and	breaking	arms	and	legs,	with	at	least	one	stampdown	from	Mayfly	crushing	a	fool’s	pelvis,	making	him	squirt	in	both
directions.	Aye,	it	would	have	been	great	for	the	Fist	to	see	when	Saltlick	found
one	of	the	stolen	crossbows	and	tried	to	jam	it	butt-end	first	down	a	thug’s
mouth.	Things	tore	and	snapped	and	broke	but	he	got	it	as	far	down	as	the
middle	of	the	throat,	which	was	something.	They	left	it	there.
Shortnose	and	Flashwit	just	used	their	fists	and	pounded	faces	into	bloody
pulps,	and	that	took	a	lot	of	punches,	but	the	only	people	looking	on	were
regulars	and	eventually	those	regulars	just	started	walking	again,	since	there
was	nothing	else	to	be	done.
Somebody	blindsided	a	heavy.	That	wasn’t	done.	Ever.
But	even	Shortnose	was	surprised	when	a	regular,	a	sergeant	leading	his
squad	past,	looked	down	on	the	bodies	of	the	thugs,	and	spat	at	the	nearest	one
–	no	real	spit,	just	the	sound,	the	stab	of	his	head,	clear	enough	to	take	its
meaning.	And	Shortnose	looked	across	to	Flashwit	and	then	Saltlick	and	they
nodded	back.
Just	as	the	heavies	weren’t	all	oxen,	the	regulars	weren’t	all	packmules.
They’d	seen,	they’d	listened.	They’d	made	up	their	minds.	And	that	was	good.
Better	that	than	killing	them	all,	wasn’t	it?	That’d	take	all	night.	Or	even
longer.
	
‘Found	him,	Fist,’	said	Captain	Raband.
Kindly	turned	to	Balm.	‘Pull	everybody	back	now	–	this	is	between	me	and
Blistig,	understood?’
The	sergeant	nodded,	and	then	hesitated.	‘Fist?	You’re	going	to	kill	him,
ain’t	ya?’
‘Sergeant?’
‘Well,	sir,	it’s	just…if	you	ain’t	gonna,	cause	of	some	rules	or	something,
a	word	to	Throatslitter,	or	Smiles	who’s	in	Tarr ’s	squad,	or—’
‘Marine,	listen	well	to	what	I’m	about	to	say.	Unless	you	want	to	see	one	of


your	marines	executed,	you	will	not	touch	Fist	Blistig.	Am	I	understood?’
‘Begging	your	pardon,	Fist,	but	come	the	sun’s	rise,	we’re	all	gonna	be
crawling,	if	that.	So	that	kinda	threat	don’t	mean	much,	if	you	see	what	I	mean.
We	got	us	a	list	under	Blistig’s	name,	Fist,	and	we’re	expecting	you	to	carve	a
nice	red	line	right	through	it,	starting	with	him.’
‘You	are	talking	mutiny,	Sergeant.’
‘Ugly	word,	that	one,	sir.	What	did	the	Bridgeburners	call	it?	Culling.	Old
Malazan	habit,	right?	Picked	it	up	from	the	Emperor	himself,	in	fact,	and	then
the	Empress,	who	did	the	same.’
‘As	she	sought	to	do	with	the	Wickans,	Sergeant,	or	have	you	forgotten?’
‘Aye,	easy	to	get	carried	away,	sir.	But	tonight	we’re	talking	one	man.’
Kindly	glanced	across	at	Raband,	who	stood	waiting.	‘Is	the	Fist	alone,
captain?’
‘No	sir.	Fist	Sort	and	Captain	Skanarow	are	with	him,	along	with	Captain
Ruthan	Gudd.	There’s	been	an	accusation	voiced,	sir	–	I	was	planning	on
telling	you	on	the	way,	but,’	and	he	shot	Balm	a	look,	‘Ruthan	Gudd	says
there’s	blood	on	Blistig’s	knife.	Pores’s	blood.’
Balm	swore.	‘Togg’s	bloody	jowls!	By	his	own	hand?’
Raband	shrugged.
‘Lead	on,	Captain,’	Kindly	said,	so	quiet	the	words	barely	carried.
Balm	watched	them	go.
	
Deadsmell	followed	a	pace	behind	his	guide.	Ahead,	the	other	T’lan	Imass	had
raised	a	tarp.	Lanterns	were	lit,	shutters	slipped	back,	wicks	turned	up	and
blazing.	It	had	been	a	long	way	back	along	the	trail,	forty	or	more	paces.
Nearby	squatted	a	wagon.	In	the	harsh	light	beneath	the	tarp,	he	saw	Pores’s
body.
Blood	everywhere.	He	won’t	survive	this.	He	edged	past	the	T’lan	Imass	and
made	his	way	under	the	tarp,	falling	to	his	knees	beside	Pores.	Studied	the
wound.	This	is	a	bleeder.	Above	the	heart.	He	should	be	already	dead.	But	he
could	see	the	faint	pulse,	pushing	out	thinning	trickles	of	blood.	The	man’s
breathing	was	shallow,	rasping.	Not	a	lung,	too.	Please,	not	a	lung.	‘I’ve	got	no
magic	here,’	he	said,	looking	up	and	seeing	nothing	but	withered,	lifeless	faces
staring	back	down	at	him.	Shit,	no	help	there.
He	stared	back	down	at	Pores.	‘Seen	the	insides	of	plenty	of	people,’	he
muttered.	‘Living	and	dead.	Well.	Had	a	teacher,	once,	a	priest.	Dresser	of	the
dead.	He	had	some	radical	notions.	Gods,	why	not?	He’s	going	to	die	either
way.’


Deadsmell	drew	out	his	sewing	kit.	‘Said	it	should	be	possible	to	go	right
inside	a	body,	clamp	the	bleeder,	and	then	sew	it	back	together,	right	there
inside.	Not	that	it’ll	help	much	if	he’s	got	a	punctured	lung	too.	But	no	blood
froth	at	the	mouth.	Not	yet.	So…	I	guess	I’ll	give	it	a	try.’	He	looked	up.	‘Two
of	you,	I	need	your	hands	–	I	need	the	wound	held	open,	wide	as	you	can	make
it	–	gods,	those	are	foullooking	fingers	you	Imass	got.’
‘There	is	nothing	living	on	our	hands,’	said	one	of	them.
‘What’s	that	got	to	do	with	anything?’	Deadsmell	asked.
‘We	will	carry	no	infection	into	his	flesh,	healer.’
‘No,	but	the	knife	blade	that	did	this	probably	has.’
‘His	bleeding	has	cleaned	the	wound,	healer.	The	greatest	risk	of	infection
will	be	from	your	hands,	and	your	tools.’
Threading	a	needle	with	gut,	Deadsmell	scowled.	‘That	old	priest	shared
your	opinion.	But	there’s	nothing	I	can	do	about	that,	is	there?’
‘No.’
Deadsmell’s	vision	spun	momentarily,	and	then	steadied	once	more.
Unbelievable.	I’m	dying,	even	as	I’m	trying	to	save	another	man	from	doing	the
same.	And	really,	is	there	any	point	to	this?
Two	Imass	had	knelt,	reaching	to	prise	open	the	wound.
‘Dig	your	fingers	in	–	I	need	to	see	as	much	as	I	can.	No,	wait,	now	all	I
can	see	are	your	fingers.’
One	spoke.	‘Healer.	One	of	us	shall	hold	open	the	wound.	The	other	shall
reach	inside	and	find	the	two	severed	ends	of	the	vessel.’
‘Yes!	That’s	it!	And	once	you’ve	got	them,	pinch	hard	–	stop	the	blood
flow	–	and	then	bring	them	together	so	I	can	see	them.’
‘We	are	ready,	healer.’
‘He’s	lost	a	lot	of	blood.	He’s	in	shock.	This	probably	won’t	work.
Surprised	he’s	not	already	dead.	I	might	just	kill	him.	Or	he’ll	die	later.	Blood
loss.	Infection.’	He	trailed	off,	looked	across	at	blank,	staring,	lifeless	faces.
‘Right,	needed	to	get	all	that	out	of	the	way.	Here	goes.’
	
They	were	waiting	well	off	to	one	side	of	the	trail.	The	column’s	ragged	end
had	already	passed.	Blistig	stood	facing	the	others,	arms	crossed.
Kindly	and	Raband	made	their	way	over.
Overhead,	the	Jade	Strangers	blazed	with	a	green	light	bright	enough	to
cast	sharp	shadows,	and	it	seemed	the	desert	air	itself	was	confused,	not	nearly
as	chill	as	it	should	have	been.	There	was	no	wind,	and	stillness	surrounded	the
group.


Blistig	met	Kindly’s	eyes	unflinchingly.	‘I	executed	a	traitor	tonight,
Kindly.	That	and	nothing	more.	I	was	holding	on	to	reserves	of	water	–
knowing	a	time	of	great	need	would	come.’
‘Indeed,’	Kindly	replied.	‘How	many	casks	was	it	again?	Four?	Five?’
‘For	the	officer	corps,	Kindly.	With	some,	if	we	so	judged,	to	the	marines
and	heavies.	It	wouldn’t	have	been	much,	granted,	but	something…maybe
enough.	Didn’t	the	Adjunct	make	it	plain?	The	marines	and	the	heavies	before
everyone	else.	In	fact,	the	rest	of	them	don’t	matter.’
‘Lieutenant	Pores	was	not	under	your	command,	Blistig.’
‘Acts	of	treason	fall	under	the	purview	of	any	commanding	officer	who
happens	to	be	present,	Kindly.	I	acted	within	military	law	in	this	matter.’
‘That	water,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd,	‘was	doled	out	to	the	children	of	the	Snake.
By	the	Adjunct’s	direct	command.’
‘The	Adjunct	knew	nothing	about	it,	Captain	Gudd,	so	what	you’re	saying
makes	no	sense.’
Faradan	Sort	snorted.	‘We	all	knew	about	your	stash,	Blistig.	We’ve	just
been	waiting	for	you	to	make	your	move.	But	you	can’t	reclaim	what	was
never	yours	in	the	first	place,	never	mind	that	it’s	now	all	gone.	If	there	was
any	treason	here,	Blistig,	it	was	yours.’
He	sneered.	‘That’s	where	you’ve	lost	the	track	–	all	of	you!	All	this	“we’re
in	this	together”	rubbish	–	so	that	a	lowly	latrine	digger	gets	the	same	portion
as	a	Fist,	or	a	captain,	or	the	damned	Adjunct	herself	–	that’s	not	how	the	world
is,	and	with	good	reason!	It’s	us	highborn	who’ve	earned	the	greater	portion.
On	account	of	our	greater	responsibilities,	our	greater	skills	and	talents.	That’s
the	order	of	the	world,	friends.’
‘Never	knew	you	were	highborn,	Blistig,’	commented	Faradan	Sort.
The	man	scowled.	‘There’s	other	paths	to	privilege,	Sort.	Look	at	you,
after	all,	a	deserter	of	the	Wall,	now	here	you	are,	a	damned	Fist.	And	Kindly
here,	straight	up	from	the	regular	ranks,	and	that	climb	wasn’t	exactly
meteoric,	was	it?	Decades	of	mediocrity,	right,	Kindly?	You	ended	up	just
outlasting	everyone	else.’
‘Everything	you’re	saying,	Blistig,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd,	‘is	undermining
your	original	argument.	Seems	there’s	not	one	highborn	among	us	here.	In
fact,	only	the	Adjunct	can	make	that	claim.’
‘A	woman	who	betrayed	her	own	class,’	Blistig	said,	with	a	cold	grin.
‘Treason	starts	at	the	top	when	it	comes	to	the	Bonehunters.’
‘You	plan	on	killing	everyone,	then,	Blistig?’
‘Kindly,	turns	out	I	don’t	have	to,	do	I?	We’re	finished.	All	those	warnings
have	proved	true.	This	desert	can’t	be	crossed.	We’ve	failed.	In	every	way,


we’ve	failed.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘I	did	Pores	a	damned	favour.	I	made	it
quick.’
‘Expecting	one	of	us	to	make	it	as	quick	for	you?’	Ruthan	Gudd	asked	him.
Blistig	shrugged.	‘Why	not?	I	don’t	care	any	more.	I	really	don’t.	She’s
already	killed	us	all.	Will	it	be	your	blade,	Captain	Gudd?	Do	me	a	favour	–
make	it	the	icy	one.’
‘No	one	will	be	killing	you	this	night,’	Kindly	said.	He	unclipped	his	sword
belt	and	threw	it	to	one	side.	‘We	bear	these	titles.	Fists.	Let’s	find	their	original
meaning,	you	and	me,	Blistig.’
‘You’re	joking,	old	man.’
Faradan	Sort	turned	to	Kindly	in	alarm.	‘What	are	you	doing?	Let’s	just
drag	him	up	before	the	Adjunct.	Kindly!’
But	the	man	bulled	forward.	And	Blistig	moved	to	meet	him.
Two	men	too	weak	to	do	any	real	damage	to	the	other.	The	fight	was
pathetic.	Punches	that	couldn’t	break	skin,	blows	that	could	barely	bruise.
Three	or	four	exchanges	and	both	men	were	kneeling	three	paces	apart,
gasping,	heads	held	down.
When	Kindly	looked	up,	Blistig	threw	sand	into	his	eyes,	lurched	forward,
grasped	Kindly’s	head	and	drove	it	down	on	to	one	knee.
Sort	moved	to	intervene	but	Ruthan	Gudd	reached	out	and	held	her	back.
The	impact	should	have	shattered	Kindly’s	nose,	but	it	didn’t.	He	punched
Blistig’s	crotch.
The	man	let	out	a	strangled	grunt,	sagged	down	on	to	his	side.
Kindly	tried	to	get	up,	fell	back	down,	and	then	rolled	on	to	his	back,	eyes
squeezed	shut,	his	chest	heaving	for	breath.
‘That’s	it,’	Ruthan	Gudd	said.	‘They’re	done.’
‘Stupid!’	Faradan	Sort	snapped,	pulling	her	arm	out	of	Gudd’s	grip.	She
went	to	stand	over	the	two	men.	‘What	was	the	point?	If	the	soldiers	up	there
had	seen	this	–	you	useless	fools!	Blistig,	if	we	weren’t	all	of	us	about	to	die,	I
would	kill	you.	But	you	don’t	deserve	that	mercy	–	no,	you’re	going	to	suffer
through	this	night	just	like	everyone	else.’	She	turned.	‘Captain	Raband,	help
your	Fist.’
Blistig	managed	to	work	himself	back	on	to	his	knees,	and	he	slowly	sat
up.	‘She’s	killed	us	all.	For	nothing.’	He	moved	his	glare	from	one	face	to	the
next.	‘Aye,	I	see	it	in	your	eyes,	every	one	of	you,	you	ain’t	got	a	thing	to	say	to
make	it	different.	She’s	killed	us.	You	know	it	the	same	as	me.	So,	you	want	to
kill	me?	You	want	to	do	her	work	for	her?’	He	climbed,	with	difficulty,	to	his
feet.	‘Give	me	the	dignity	of	dying	on	my	own.’
‘You	should	have	understood	the	value	of	that,’	said	Ruthan,	‘before	you


stuck	a	knife	in	Pores,	Fist	Blistig.’
‘Maybe	I	should	have.	But	he	lied	to	me,	and	I	don’t	like	being	lied	to.’	He
pointed	a	finger	at	Kindly.	‘We’re	not	done,	you	and	me.	I’ll	be	waiting	for	you
at	Hood’s	Gate,	old	man.’
‘Pathetic,’	hissed	Faradan	Sort.
They	left	Blistig	where	he	was,	and	the	way	he	held	himself,	it	would	be	a
while	before	he’d	be	ready	to	start	walking	again.	Skanarow	moved	alongside
Ruthan	Gudd.
‘I	was	hoping	we’d	just	kill	him,’	she	said,	low	under	her	breath.	‘The
man’s	a	murderer,	after	all.	Pores	wasn’t	even	wearing	a	weapon	belt,	and	his
knife	was	jammed	hilt	deep	in	a	bale	on	the	wagon.’
‘If	anyone	will	be	looking	for	Blistig	at	Hood’s	Gate,	it	will	be	Lieutenant
Pores,	don’t	you	think?’
But	Skanarow	shook	her	head.	‘I	never	believed	in	retribution	beyond
Death’s	Gates.	Nobody	is	squatting	on	the	other	side	weighing	and	balancing	a
life’s	scales.’	She	stumbled	slightly	and	Ruthan	moved	to	catch	her.	Felt	her
momentarily	sag	against	him.	‘Shit,	I	may	not	last	the	night.’
‘You	will,	Skanarow.	I’m	not	letting	you	die,	do	you	understand	me?’
‘There’s	no	way	out,	and	you	know	it,	my	love.	You	know	it	–	you	can’t
hide	what	I	see	in	your	eyes.’
He	said	nothing,	because	there	was	nothing	to	say.
‘You’ll	forget	me,	won’t	you?	Eventually.	Like…all	the	rest.’
‘Don’t	say	that,	Skanarow	–	it’s	the	wrong	thing	to	think.	For	people…like
me…it’s	not	forgetting	that	is	our	curse.	It’s	remembering.’
Her	smile	was	faint,	and	she	disengaged	herself	from	his	half-embrace.
‘Then	I	beg	you,	love,	do	all	that	you	can	to	forget	me.	Leave	no	memory
behind	to	haunt	you	–	let	it	all	fade.	It	shouldn’t	be	hard	–	what	we	had	didn’t
last	long,	did	it?’
He’d	heard	such	words	before.	And	this	is	why	remembering	is	a	curse.
	
Blistig	faced	back	the	way	they’d	come.	Off	in	the	distance	he	could	make	out
the	glow	of	lanterns,	the	lights	swinging	low	to	the	ground.	Frowning,	he
watched	as	they	came	closer.
She	killed	us.	Come	the	dawn,	when	we’re	all	finished,	unable	to	take
another	step,	I’m	going	to	go	to	her.	I’m	going	to	stick	a	knife	in	her.	Not	a	fatal
wound,	not	right	away,	no.	In	the	stomach,	where	the	acids	will	all	leak	out	and
start	eating	her	up	from	the	inside	out.	And	I’ll	kneel	over	her,	staring	down
into	her	pain,	and	that	will	be	the	sweetest	sight	I	will	ever	see.	A	sight	to	carry


me	right	into	death.
But	even	that	won’t	be	enough,	not	for	what	she’s	done	to	us.	Kindly,	at
Hood’s	Gate,	you’re	going	to	have	to	wait,	because	I	won’t	be	finished	with
Tavore	Paran	of	House	Paran.
T’lan	Imass,	carrying	a	makeshift	stretcher	on	which	lay	a	swaddled	body.
Beside	this,	a	marine	with	blood	covering	his	hands	and	forearms.
Blistig	squinted	as	they	drew	closer.
The	T’lan	Imass	walked	past	him	and	the	Fist	looked	down	at	the	pale	face
of	the	man	on	the	stretcher.	He	grunted.
The	marine	halted	before	him,	saluted.	‘Fist,’	he	said.
‘Pores	ain’t	dead	yet?	What	was	the	point	of	that,	healer?’
Blistig’s	answer	was	a	fist	smashing	into	his	face,	hard	enough	to	crush	his
nose,	send	him	reeling	back.	Stumbling,	falling	to	the	ground.	Blood	gushing
down,	he	lay	stunned.
The	healer	moved	to	stand	over	him.	‘Thing	is,	Fist,’	he	said,	massaging
his	hand,	‘what	with	all	the	shit	Pores	has	gone	through	because	of	you,	we
decided	to	make	him	an	honorary	marine.	Now,	you	go	sticking	a	knife	in	a
fellow	marine	and,	well,	we’re	out	for	you	now.	Understand	me,	sir?	The
marines	are	out	for	you.’
Blistig	listened	to	the	man	walk	off	in	the	wake	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	He
made	it	on	to	his	side	to	spit	out	slime	and	blood,	and	then	grunted	a	laugh.
Aye,	and	a	man	is	measured	by	his	enemies.
Do	your	worst,	marines.	So	long	as	I	get	to	her	first.
It	was	some	time	before	he	managed	to	regain	his	feet,	but	when	he	set	off
after	the	column,	his	strides	were	stiff,	jerking,	filled	with	a	strength	past
anything	he	had	known	before.	In	his	head	three	words	made	a	mantra.	To	see
her.	To	see	her.	To	see	her.
	
The	Khundryl	camp	was	being	packed	up,	but	the	people	doing	the	task	moved
with	aching	slowness.	The	claws	upon	their	skin	seemed	to	be	dragging	them
down,	and	Badalle	watched	in	the	midst	of	twenty	or	so	of	Rutt’s	children,	as
everything	that	was	coming	along	for	this	final	night	was	put	in	its	proper
place	–	everything	but	for	the	mother ’s	tent,	and	she	was	yet	to	emerge.
The	midwives	and	other	women	had	come	out	earlier,	expressions
guarded,	and,	though	she	could	not	be	certain,	in	Badalle’s	mind	she	saw	but
three	figures	remaining	inside.	The	father,	the	mother,	and	the	baby.	Would	this
be	their	final	home,	then?
A	Khundryl	child	came	up	to	Saddic,	pressing	into	his	hands	yet	another


toy	–	a	bone	top	or	whistle,	she	couldn’t	quite	see	it	before	Saddic	slipped	it
into	his	sack	and	smiled	his	thanks.	A	new	sack,	too	big	to	carry	now.	The
Khundryl	children	had	been	bringing	him	toys	all	day.
The	times	she’d	watched	that	procession,	she’d	wanted	to	cry.	She’d	wanted
Saddic	to	cry.	But	she	didn’t	understand	why	she	wanted	that	–	they	were	being
kind,	after	all.	And	she	didn’t	know	why	she	saw	those	Khundryl	children	as	if
they	were	but	servants	to	something	greater,	something	almost	too	big	for
words.	Not	at	the	instigation	of	adults,	not	even	mothers	and	fathers.	Not	at	the
behest	of	pity,	either.	Didn’t	they	want	their	toys?	She	had	seen	such	precious
things	settle	into	Saddic’s	hand,	had	seen	bright	shining	eyes	lift	shyly	to
Saddic	in	the	moment	of	giving,	and	then	fall	away	again	–	children	running
off,	too	light-footed,	flinging	themselves	into	their	friends’	arms,	and	this	went
on	and	on	and	Badalle	didn’t	understand,	but	how	her	heart	ached.	How	she
wanted	Saddic	to	weep,	how	she	wanted	to	feel	her	own	tears.
She	spoke	a	poem	under	her	breath.
‘Snakes	do	not	know	how	to	cry.
They	know	too	much
and	yearn	for	darkness.
They	know	too	much
and	fear	the	light.
No	one	gives	gifts	to	snakes,
and	no	one	makes	of	them	a	gift.
They	are	neither	given
nor	received.
Yet	in	all	the	world,
snakes	do	not	know	how	to	cry.’
Saddic	studied	her	and	she	knew	that	he	had	heard.	Of	course	it	was	for
him,	this	poem,	though	she	suspected	that	he	did	not	know	that.	But	the	man
who	will	find	him	will.	Maybe	he’ll	cry,	when	we	cannot.	Maybe	he	will	tell	this
tale	in	such	a	way	as	to	make	his	listeners	cry,	because	we	cannot.
A	Khundryl	elder	came	up	then	and	helped	Saddic	load	his	bag	of	toys	on
to	a	wagon.	When	the	boy	glanced	over	at	Badalle,	she	nodded.	He	climbed	up
to	settle	himself	beside	his	treasure.	And	there,	he	believed,	he	would	die.
But	it	is	not	to	be.	How	will	he	survive?	I	wish	I	knew	the	answer	to	that,
because	a	secret	hides	inside	it.
The	birth-tent’s	flap	was	swept	aside	then,	and	the	father	emerged.	His	eyes


were	raw	with	weeping,	yet	there	was	a	fire	in	them.	He	is	proud.	He	is	defiant
in	his	pride,	and	would	challenge	us	all.	I	like	this	look.	It	is	how	a	father
should	look.	Then	behind	him,	out	she	came,	unsteady	on	her	feet,	sagging	with
exhaustion,	and	in	her	arms	a	small	bundled	form.
Badalle	gasped	upon	seeing	Rutt	walking	towards	them	–	where	had	he
come	from?	Where	had	he	been	hiding?
With	his	crooked	arms,	with	a	terrible	need	in	his	ancient	face,	he	walked
to	stand	before	the	mother.
Anguish	gripped	Badalle’s	heart	and	she	staggered	in	sudden	weakness.
Where	is	Held?	Held	is	gone.	Held	was	gone	long	ago.	And	what	Rutt	carried	in
his	arms	was	us,	all	that	way.	He	carried	us.
The	mother	looked	across	at	this	boy,	and	Badalle	saw	now	that	she	was
old	–	and	so	too	was	the	father,	old	enough	to	be	grandparents	–	she	looked	at
Rutt,	his	empty	arms,	the	ravaged	face.
She	does	not	understand.	How	can	she?	He	cannot	hurt	anyone,	not	Rutt.
He	carried	our	hope,	but	our	hope	died.	But	it	wasn’t	his	fault,	it	wasn’t	his
fault.	Mother,	if	you	had	been	there	–	if	you	had	seen—
And	she	stepped	forward	then,	that	old	woman,	that	mother	with	her	last
ever	child,	this	stranger,	and	gently	laid	her	baby	into	Rutt’s	waiting	arms.
A	gift	beyond	measure,	and	when	she	settled	an	arm	about	his	shoulders,
drawing	him	forward,	so	that	he	could	walk	with	them	–	her	and	her	husband	–
and	they	set	out,	slowly	as	it	was	all	she	could	manage,	in	the	wake	of	the
nearest	wagon,	and	all	the	Khundryl	began	to	move…	Badalle	stood
unmoving.
Saddic,	I	will	tell	you	to	remember	this.	These	are	the	Khundryl,	the	givers
of	gifts.	Remember	them,	won’t	you?
And	Rutt	walked	like	a	king.
From	where	he	sat,	Saddic	watched	as	they	made	space	on	a	Khundryl
wagon	for	the	mother,	and	for	Rutt	and	her	child	that	he	held,	and	then	set	out
to	catch	up	with	the	rest	of	the	army.	The	man	who	was	the	father	took	the	lead
yoke	at	the	wagon’s	head,	and	strained	as	if	he	alone	could	shoulder	this
burden.
Because	it	was	no	burden.
As	Saddic	well	knew,	gifts	never	are.
	
Ahead,	the	desert	stretched	on.	Fiddler	could	see	no	end	to	it,	and	now	believed
he	never	would.	He	remembered	that	ancient	shoreline	of	bones,	the	one	they
had	left	behind	what	seemed	a	century	ago.	No	clearer	warning	could	have


been	granted	them,	yet	she	had	not	hesitated.
He	had	to	hand	it	to	her.	The	world	was	her	enemy,	and	she	would	face	it
unblinking.	She	had	led	them	on	to	this	road	of	suffering	in	the	name	of	the
Crippled	God,	and,	to	that	god,	what	other	path	could	there	have	been?	She	was
making	of	them	her	greatest	sacrifice	–	was	it	as	brutal	and	as	simple	as	that?
He	did	not	think	her	capable	of	such	a	thing.	He	wanted	to	refuse	the	very
thought.
But	here	he	walked,	fifty	or	more	paces	ahead	of	them	all.	Even	the
Khundryl	children	were	gone,	leaving	him	alone.	And	behind	him,	a	broken
mass	of	humanity,	somehow	dragging	itself	forward,	like	a	beast	with	a
crushed	spine.	It	had	surrendered	all	formation,	each	soldier	moving	as	his	or
her	strength	dictated.	They	carried	their	weapons	because	they	had	forgotten	a
time	when	they	didn’t.	And	bodies	fell,	one	by	one.
Beneath	the	ghoulish	light	of	the	Jade	Strangers,	Fiddler	set	his	eyes	upon
the	distant	flat	line	of	the	horizon,	his	legs	scissoring	under	him,	the	muscles
too	dead	to	feel	pain.	He	listened	to	his	own	breaths,	wheezing	as	the	air
struggled	up	and	down	a	swollen,	parched	windpipe.	In	so	vast	a	landscape	he
felt	his	world	contracting,	step	by	step,	and	soon,	he	knew,	all	he	would	hear
would	be	his	own	heart,	the	beats	climbing	down,	losing	all	rhythm,	and	finally
falling	still.
That	moment	waited	somewhere	ahead.	He	was	on	his	way	to	find	it.
Whispering	motion	around	him	now,	drifting	out	from	a	fevered	mind.	He
saw	a	horseman	at	his	side,	close	enough	to	reach	out,	if	he	so	wanted,	and	set
a	hand	upon	the	beast’s	patched,	salt-streaked	shoulder.	The	man	riding	the
beast	he	knew	all	too	well.
Broke	his	leg.	A	toppling	pillar,	of	all	things.	Mallet	–	I	see	you	–	you
wanted	to	work	on	that	leg.	Got	damned	insubordinate	about	it,	in	fact.	But	he
didn’t	listen.	That’s	his	problem,	he	only	listens	when	he	feels	like	it.
Trotts,	you’re	still	the	damned	ugliest	Barghast	I	ever	saw.	They	bred	’em
that	way	in	your	tribe,	didn’t	they?	To	better	scare	the	enemy.	Did	they	breed
your	women	to	be	half	blind,	too?	Keep	the	stones	balanced,	that’s	the	only	way
to	make	it	through.
So	where’s	Quick	Ben?	Kalam?	I	want	to	see	you	all	here,	friends.
Hedge,	well,	he’s	stepped	out	of	this	path.	Can’t	look	him	in	the	eye	these
days.	It’s	the	one	bad	twist	in	this	whole	thing,	isn’t	it.	Maybe	you	can	talk	to
him,	Sergeant.	Talk	him	back	to	how	it	should	be.
‘Hedge	is	where	we	want	him,	Fid.’
What?
‘We	sent	him	to	you…	to	this,	I	mean.	He’s	walked	a	lonely	path	back,


sapper.’
Mallet	then	spoke.	‘Bet	he	thought	he’d	made	it	all	the	way,	too,	when	he
stood	before	you,	Fiddler.	Only	to	have	you	back	away.’
I…oh,	gods.	Hedge.	I	better	find	him,	chew	it	all	out,	come	the	dawn	–	we’ll
make	it	that	far,	won’t	we,	Sergeant?
‘Until	it	rises,	aye,	sapper.	Until	it	rises.’
And	then?
‘You’re	so	eager	to	join	us?’
Whiskeyjack	–	please	–	where	else	would	I	go?
‘If	we	were	just	waiting	for	the	dawn,	soldier,	you’d	have	to	ask,	what	in
Hood’s	name	for?	You	think	we’d	see	you	put	through	all	of	this	for	nothing?
And	then	there’s	Hedge.	He’s	here	to	die	beside	you	and	that’s	it?	We	sent	him
to	you	so	you	could	just	kiss	and	make	up?	Gods	below,	Fiddler,	you’re	not
that	important	in	this	wretched	scheme.’
‘Well,’	said	Mallet,	‘he	might	be,	Sergeant.	Made	Captain	now,	didn’t	he?
Got	himself	his	own	company	of	marines	and	heavies.	Bloody	insufferable
now,	is	old	Fid.’
‘Sky’s	paling,’	Whiskeyjack	said.
Because	you’re	on	damned	horses.	I	can’t	see	it.
‘False	dawn,’	growled	Trotts.	‘And	Fid’s	fading,	Sergeant.	We	can’t	hold
on	here	much	longer.	Once	he	stops	thinking	past	his	feet…’
I	was	a	mason’s	apprentice.	Had	dreams	of	being	a	musician,	getting	fat
and	drunk	in	some	royal	court.
‘Not	this	again,’	someone	said	among	the	crowd.	‘Someone	find	him	a
fiddle,	and	me	a	hanky.’
Glad	you’re	all	here	with	me.	Well,	most	of	you,	anyway.	The	Bridgeburners
deserved	a	better	way	to	die—
The	rider	made	a	derisive	sound.	‘Don’t	be	such	an	idiot,	sapper.	In	your
heads	you’ve	all	built	us	up	into	something	we	never	were.	How	quickly
you’ve	forgotten	–	we	were	mutinous	at	the	best	of	times.	The	rest	of	the	time	–
and	that	would	be	almost	all	the	time	–	we	were	at	each	other ’s	throats.
Officers	getting	posted	to	us	would	desert	first.	It	was	that	bad,	Fiddler.’
Look,	I	ain’t	done	nothing	to	make	this	fucking	legend,	Sergeant.	I	ain’t	said
a	damned	thing.
‘You	don’t	have	to,	and	that’s	just	my	point.	People	can	talk	up	anything,
can	make	a	snivelling	dollop	of	shit	the	god’s	own	mountain,	given	enough
time	and	enough	lies	and	enough	silences.’
I’m	a	Bonehunter	now.	Got	nothing	to	do	with	any	of	you	any	more	–	which
is	what	I	was	trying	to	tell	Hedge.


‘Fine.	Now	go	hunt	down	some	bones.’
Sure,	why	not?	Whose	bones	do	you	want	us	to	hunt	for?
Whiskeyjack	rode	slightly	ahead	and	swung	his	mount	round,	blocking
Fiddler ’s	path.	But	his	old	sergeant	wasn’t	looking	good	–	he	was	a	damned
half-mummified	corpse,	and	his	mount	wasn’t	much	better	off.	‘Whose	do	you
think,	Fid?’	And	yet	that	voice	was	his	–	no	question.	Whiskeyjack.
‘Where’d	you	come	by	that	name,	Fid?’	And	that	was	Mallet,	but	he	was
badly	chopped	up,	the	wounds	crusted	with	dried	blood.
The	name?	Bonehunters?	It	was	finger	bones,	I	think.
‘Whose	hand?’
What?	Nobody’s	–	lots	of	people.	Nameless	ones,	long	dead	ones	–	just
nameless	bones!
They	were	all	fading	from	his	vision	now.	But	he	wanted	them	to	stay.
They	were	supposed	to	be	here	with	him,	to	take	up	his	soul	when	he	died.
Whiskeyjack	was	backing	his	horse	even	as	he	grew	translucent.	‘Bones	of
the	fallen,	Fiddler.	Now,	who	fell	the	furthest?’
Before	him	now	nothing	but	that	distant,	flat	line.	Nothing	but	the	horizon.
Fiddler	rubbed	at	his	face.	Fucking	hallucinations.	Least	they	could’ve	done
was	give	me	a	drink	of	water.
He	resumed	walking.	No	reason	to.	No	reason	not	to.
‘Who	fell	the	furthest.	Funny	man,	Whiskeyjack.’	But	maybe	it	was	so.
Maybe	she	made	us	and	named	us	to	hunt	down	the	bones	of	a	damned	god.
Maybe	she	was	telling	us	what	she	wanted	all	along,	and	we	were	too	thick	to
know	it.
But	look	at	that	line.	That	perfect	flat	line.	Just	waiting	for	our	bones	to
make	us	a	shore,	and	once	we’ve	made	it,	why,	we	go	no	farther.
Almost	time.
Hedge,	I’ll	find	you	if	I	can.	A	few	words.	A	clasp	of	hands,	or	a	clout
upside	the	head,	whichever	best	suits	the	moment.
Bonehunters.	Oh.	Nice	one.
	
Lostara	Yil	wanted	her	god	back.	She	wanted	to	feel	that	flow	of	strength,	that
appalling	will.	To	take	her	out	of	here.	To	feel	a	sudden,	immortal	power
filling	her	body,	and	she	would	reach	out	to	draw	Henar	Vygulf	under	her
shadowy	wing.	Others	too,	if	she	could.	This	whole	army	of	sufferers	–	they
didn’t	deserve	this.
Henar	walked	close	by	her	side,	ready	to	steady	her	when	she	stumbled.	He
had	seemed	indomitable,	but	now	he	was	bent	like	an	old	man.	Thirst	was


crushing	them	all,	like	a	vast	hand	pressing	down.	The	Adjunct	was	ten	paces
ahead,	Banaschar	off	to	her	right,	and	far	ahead	walked	Fiddler,	alone,	and	she
imagined	she	could	hear	music	from	him,	a	siren	call	pulling	them	ever
forward.	But	his	fiddle	was	broken.	There	was	no	music,	no	matter	what	she
thought	she	heard,	just	the	sluggish	dirge	of	her	own	blood,	the	rasps	of	their
breaths	and	the	crunch	of	their	worn	boots	on	the	hard	ground.
The	Jade	Strangers	hung	now	over	the	northern	sky,	casting	confused
shadows	–	those	terrible	slashes	would	circle	round	over	the	course	of	the	day,
now	visible	even	through	the	sun’s	bright	glare,	making	the	light	eerie,
unearthly.
The	Adjunct’s	march	was	unsteady,	drifting	to	the	right	for	a	time,	and	then
back	to	the	left.	It	seemed	only	Fiddler	was	capable	of	managing	a	straight	line.
She	remembered	back	to	the	reading.	Its	wild	violence	–	had	it	all	been	for
nothing?	A	rush	of	possibilities,	not	one	realized,	not	one	borne	out	in	the	days
to	follow.	It	seemed	the	Adjunct	–	who	alone	warranted	no	card	–	had	taken
them	all	from	their	destinies,	taken	them	into	a	place	with	no	end	but	death,	and
a	death	bereft	of	glory	or	honour.	If	that	was	so,	then	Fiddler ’s	reading	had
been	the	cruellest	of	jokes.
Was	he	walking	out	there,	ahead	of	the	rest	of	them,	out	of	some	desperate
desire?	To	drag	them	all	into	the	truth	of	his	visions?	But	the	desert	still
stretched	empty	–	not	even	the	bones	of	the	children	of	the	Snake	could	be	seen
–	they	had	lost	them,	but	no	one	knew	precisely	when,	and	the	path	that	might
have	led	them	to	the	mythical	city	of	Icarias	was	now	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Her	gaze	found	the	Adjunct	again,	this	woman	she	had	chosen	to	follow.
And	she	didn’t	know	what	to	think.
Beyond	Tavore,	the	horizon,	pale	as	the	water	of	a	tropical	sea,	now
showed	a	rim	of	fire.	Announcing	the	end	of	the	night,	the	end	of	this	march.
Shadows	spun	round.
Fiddler	halted.	He	turned	round	to	face	them	all.
The	Adjunct	continued	until	she	was	ten	paces	from	him	and	then	slowed,
and	with	her	last	step,	she	tottered	and	almost	fell.	Banaschar	moved	close	but
stopped	when	Tavore	straightened	once	more.
Henar	took	hold	of	Lostara’s	left	arm,	and	they	were	still,	and	she	looked
down	at	the	ground,	as	if	to	make	it	familiar	to	her	eyes,	knowing	that	from
this	place	she	would	not	move,	ever	again.	Not	her,	not	Henar.	This,	this	is	my
grave.
The	Fists	and	their	officers	were	arriving.	Faradan	Sort	with	Skanarow
and,	beside	her,	Ruthan	Gudd.	Kindly,	his	face	puffy	and	red,	as	if	he’d
stumbled	and	driven	it	into	something.	Raband	standing	close,	one	hand	on	his


sword	as	he	eyed	Fist	Blistig.	That	man,	Lostara	saw,	had	taken	a	punch	–	the
evidence	was	plain	in	his	swollen,	misaligned	nose,	his	split	lips	and	the
smears	of	dried	blood.	Bruises	had	spread	out	under	his	reddened	eyes,	and	it
seemed	as	if	those	eyes	were	nailed	to	the	Adjunct.	Fevered,	burning	with
malice.
Behind	them	all,	the	army	slowly	ground	down	into	something	motionless,
and	she	could	see	the	faces	of	the	nearest	soldiers	–	this	legion	of	old	men	and
old	women	–	all	staring.	Equipment	bags	slumped	to	the	ground.	A	few,	here
and	there,	followed	their	kit	to	the	ground.
It’s	done,	then.
All	eyes	were	on	the	Adjunct.
Tavore	Paran	suddenly	looked	small.	A	person	none	would	notice	on	a
street,	or	in	a	crowd.	The	world	was	filled	with	such	people.	They	bore	no
proof	of	gifts,	no	lines	of	beauty	or	grace,	no	bearing	of	confidence	or
challenge.	The	world	is	filled	with	them.	Filled.	For	ever	unnoticed.	For	ever…
unwitnessed.
Her	plain	face	was	ravaged	by	the	sun,	blistered	and	cracked.	The	weight
she	had	lost	made	her	gaunt,	shrunken.	Yet	she	stood,	weathering	this	multitude
of	stares,	the	rising	heat	of	hatred	–	as	every	need	was	refused,	as	every	hope
was	answered	with	nothing	but	silence.
Now	the	T’lan	Imass	arrived.	They	held	their	weapons	of	stone	in	their
lifeless	hands,	drawing	closer	to	the	Adjunct.
Blistig	snarled.	‘Bodyguards,	bitch?	Can	they	kill	us	all?	We’ll	get	to	you.	I
swear	it.’
The	Adjunct	studied	the	man,	but	said	nothing.
Please,	Tavore.	Give	us	some	words.	Give	us	something.	To	make	this
dying…palatable.	We	tried,	didn’t	we?	We	followed	where	you	led.	That	was
duty.	That	was	loyalty.	And	all	you	kept	asking	of	us,	the	battles,	the	marches…
we	did	them.	See	how	many	have	died	for	you,	Tavore.	See	us	who	remain.	Now
we	too	will	die.	Because	we	believed.
Gods	below,	say	something!
The	Adjunct	twisted	round,	to	where	Fiddler	was	standing,	and	then	she
faced	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘Captain,’	her	voice	was	a	dull	croak,	‘where	lies	Icarias?’
‘South	and	east	of	us,	Adjunct.	Nine,	ten	days.’
‘And	directly	east?	Where	is	the	edge	of	this	desert?’
He	clawed	at	his	beard,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘Another	ten,	eleven	days,
if	we	continue	angling	northeast	–	if	we	continue	following	this	shallow	basin
as	we	have	been	doing	since	yesterday.’
‘Is	there	water	beyond	the	desert,	Captain?	On	the	Elan	Plain?’


‘Not	much,	I	would	warrant,	or	so	the	children	have	told	us.’
Tavore	looked	to	the	T’lan	Imass.	‘Upon	the	Elan	Plain,	Beroke,	can	you
find	us	water?’
One	of	the	undead	creatures	faced	her.	‘Adjunct,	we	are	then	within	the
influence	of	Akhrast	Korvalain.	It	is	possible,	but	difficult,	and	the	efforts	we
make	will	be	felt.	We	would	not	be	able	to	hide.’
‘I	understand.	Thank	you,	Beroke.’
She	still	thinks	we	can	make	it.	Ten	more	days!	Has	she	lost	her	mind?
Blistig	laughed,	a	sound	like	the	tearing	open	of	his	own	throat.	‘We	have
followed	a	mad	woman.	Where	else	would	she	lead	us?’
Lostara	could	not	understand	where	Blistig	found	the	energy	for	his	rage,
but	he	now	raised	his	arms,	shouted,	‘Malazans!	She	gave	us	nothing!	We
pleaded	–	we	begged!	In	the	name	of	our	soldiers,	in	the	name	of	all	of	you	–
we	begged	her!’	He	faced	the	army.	‘You	saw	us!	Marching	to	her	tent	again
and	again	–	all	our	questions	she	spat	back	into	our	faces!	Our	fears,	our
concerns	–	they	told	us	this	desert	was	impassable	–	but	she	ignored	them	all!’
Before	him	stood	the	ranks,	and	from	them,	not	a	sound.
Blistig	spun,	advanced	on	the	Adjunct.	‘What	power	is	this?	Within	you,
woman?	That	they	now	die	without	a	complaint?’
Kindly,	Raband,	Sort	and	Skanarow	had	all	drawn	closer,	and	all	at	once
Lostara	knew	that	if	Blistig	sought	to	attack	Tavore	now	he	would	never	reach
her,	never	mind	the	T’lan	Imass.	Yet,	for	all	that,	those	officers	kept	looking	to
the	Adjunct,	and	Lostara	saw	the	yearning	in	their	eyes.
No	one	could	withstand	this	much	longer	–	even	a	god	would	fall	to	his
knees.	But	still	the	Adjunct	stood.	‘Banaschar,’	she	said.
The	ex-priest	limped	over	to	Lostara.	‘Captain,’	he	said,	‘your	kit	bag,
please.’
She	frowned	at	him.	‘What?’
‘Can	I	have	your	kit	bag,	Captain?’
Henar	helped	her	lift	it	off	her	shoulders.	They	set	it	down.
Kneeling	before	it,	Banaschar	fumbled	at	the	straps.	‘She	judged	you	the
strongest,’	he	murmured.	‘Gift	of	a	god?	Possibly.	Or,’	and	he	glanced	up	at
her,	‘maybe	you’re	just	the	most	stubborn	one	of	us	all.’	He	pulled	back	the
sun-cracked	flap,	rummaged	inside,	and	then	drew	out	a	small	wooden	box.
Lostara	gasped.	‘That’s	not—’
‘You	stayed	close,’	Banaschar	said.	‘We	knew	you	would.’
He	struggled	to	straighten,	nodding	his	thanks	when	Lostara	helped	him,
and	then	he	walked	slowly	over	to	the	Adjunct.
In	Lostara’s	mind,	a	memory…a	throne	room.	That	Ceda.	The	king…


complaining,	such	a	plain	gift,	that	dagger.	And	what	did	the	Ceda	tell	her?
Dire	necessity…
Banaschar	opened	the	box.	The	Adjunct	reached	in,	withdrew	the	dagger.
She	held	it	before	her.
“When	blood	is	required.	When	blood	is	needed.”
Tavore	glanced	over	at	her,	and	Lostara	realized	that	she	had	spoken	those
words	aloud.
Banaschar	said,	‘Adjunct,	the	king’s	Ceda—’
‘Is	an	Elder	God,	yes.’	Tavore	continued	studying	the	knife,	and	then,
slowly,	she	looked	up,	her	gaze	moving	from	one	face	to	the	next.	And
something	flickered	in	her	expression,	that	parched	mask	of	plainness.	A	crack
through	to…to	such	hurt.	And	then	it	was	gone	again,	and	Lostara	wondered	if
she’d	ever	seen	it,	wondered	if	she’d	imagined	the	whole	thing.	She	is	only
what	you	see.	And	what	you	see	isn’t	much.
Banaschar	said,	‘Your	blood,	Adjunct.’
She	saw	Fiddler	then,	well	behind	the	Adjunct,	saw	him	turn	away	as	if	in
shame.
The	Adjunct	was	studying	them	all.	Lostara	found	herself	at	Tavore’s	side,
with	no	memory	of	moving,	and	she	saw	the	faces	before	her,	all	fixed	upon
the	Adjunct.	She	saw	their	broken	lips,	the	glint	of	unbearable	need	in	their
eyes.
And	beside	her,	in	a	voice	that	could	crush	stones,	Tavore	Paran	said,
‘Haven’t	you	drunk	enough?’
	
Fiddler	could	hear	music,	filled	with	such	sorrow	that	he	felt	everything
breaking	inside.	He	would	not	turn	round,	would	not	watch.	But	he	knew	when
she	took	that	knife	and	cut	deep	into	her	hand.	He	felt	it	as	if	that	hand	was	his
own.	The	blood	was	bright	on	that	simple	iron	blade,	covering	the	faint
swirling	etching.	He	could	see	it	in	his	mind’s	eye	–	there	was	no	need	to	lift
his	head,	no	need	to	look	over	at	them	all,	the	way	they	stood,	the	thirst	and	the
wound	she	had	delivered	so	raw	in	their	eyes.
And	then,	in	the	weight	of	a	silence	too	vast	to	comprehend,	blood	flowing,
the	Adjunct	fell	to	her	knees.
When	she	drove	that	knife	into	the	hard	ground,	Fiddler	flinched,	and	the
music	deepened	its	timbre,	grew	suddenly	faint,	and	then,	in	a	whisper,
returned	to	him.
His	knees	were	cold.


	
Lostara	Yil	lifted	her	head.	Were	they	killing	the	last	of	the	horses?	She’d	not
even	known	that	any	were	left,	but	now	she	could	hear	them,	somewhere	in	the
mass	of	soldiers.	Stepping	forward,	her	boot	skidded.
Beside	her,	Henar	cursed	under	his	breath	–	but	not	in	anger.	In	wonder.
Now	voices	cried	out,	and	the	sound	rippled	through	the	army.
There	was	a	whispering	sound,	from	below,	and	she	looked	down.	The
ground	was	dark,	stained.
Wet.
Banaschar	was	at	the	Adjunct’s	side,	lifting	her	to	her	feet.	‘Fists!’	he
snapped.	‘Have	them	ready	the	casks!	Move	it!’
Water	welled	up	beneath	them,	spread	over	the	ground.	As	the	sun’s	light
brightened,	Lostara	could	see,	on	all	sides,	a	glistening	tide	flowing	ever
outward.	Through	the	holes	and	tears	in	her	boots	she	could	now	feel	it,	cold,
almost	numbing.	Rising	to	her	ankles.
What	did	Ruthan	Gudd	say?	We’re	in	a	basin?	How	deep	is	this	going	to
get?
She	fell	to	her	knees,	drew	her	head	down,	and	like	an	animal	in	the	wilds,
she	drank.
And	still	the	water	rose.
Chaos	in	the	army.	Laughter.	Howls,	voices	lifted	to	gods.	She	knew	there
would	be	those	–	fools	–	who	drank	too	much	too	quickly,	and	it	would	kill
them.	But	there	were	officers,	and	sergeants,	and	hands	would	be	stayed.
Besides,	most	of	the	fools	were	already	dead.
With	casks	full,	with	all	the	waterskins	heavy	and	sweating…could	they
march	another	eleven	days?	They	would	eat,	now,	and	soak	in	as	much	water	as
they	could.	They	would	feel	strength	return	to	their	limbs.	Their	thoughts
would	awaken	from	the	sluggish	torpor	they	had	known	for	days	now.
Still	the	water	rose.
Horns	sounded.	And	suddenly,	the	Bonehunters	were	on	the	move.	Seeking
high	ground.	For	all	they	knew,	that	knife	had	delivered	an	entire	sea.
Thick	as	blood,	the	smell	of	water	filled	the	air.


Book	Seven

Your	Private	Shore

	


	

Lie	still!
The	jagged	urgent	heat
The	horn-twisted	acts
So	unconscionable
I	have	run	far	from	the	mob
Torn	the	veil	and	bled	in	holes
Under	your	very	feet
Take	my	word	not	for	a	day
Not	a	year	not	a	century
What	I	will	say	charges	the	echo
Of	a	thousand	years	unchained
And	all	the	pillagers	of	derision
Pacing	the	mouths	of	caves
March	legions	of	dust
Back	and	forth
Like	conquerors
And	the	juddering	ways
The	skittered	agitations
The	bridled	and	the	umbraged
My	tears	appease	not	your	thirst
My	blood	was	never	for	you
I	am	running	still
Alone	as	I	have	ever	been
And	this	kissing	air	on	my	face
From	here	to	for	ever
Is	clean	and	pure
As	wonder
Legions	of	Dust
Atalict


Chapter	Twenty-One

‘He	was	not	a	modest	man.	Contemplating	suicide,	he	summoned	a
dragon.’
Gothos’	Folly
Gothos
‘EVEN	SHOULD	YOU	SUCCEED,	COTILLION.	BEYOND	ALL	EXPECTATION,	beyond,	even,	all	desire.	They
will	still	speak	of	your	failure.’
He	stood	in	the	place	where	the	Whorl	had	manifested	–	a	wounding	in	the
fabric	of	Shadow,	a	place	now	slowly	healing.	There	was	nothing	else	here,
nothing	to	give	evidence	to	the	struggles	that	had	occurred,	the	blood	that	had
been	spilled.	Still,	Chaos	felt	closer	than	it	ever	had,	as	if	moments	from
erupting	once	again.	The	madness	of	sorcerers,	the	ambitions	of	the	starved…
we’re	surrounded	by	fools	wanting	more	than	what	they	have.	And,	alas,	it’s	all
too	familiar	company,	and	the	ugly	truth	is	that	we	may	not	be	out	of	place	in
that	crowd.	Edgewalker ’s	words	haunted	him.	The	breathtaking	ambition,	the
sheer	verve	of	all	that	they	had	set	in	motion.	But	now	we	have	finally	arrived	–
it’s	all	cut	loose,	and	so	much	–	so	much	–	is	out	of	our	hands.
He	saw	footprints	in	the	grey	dust,	reminding	him	that	there	were	other
arenas,	distant	places	where	battles	raged	on.	Nothing	was	simple,	and	in	the
spilling	of	blood	no	one	could	guess	the	myriad	channels	it	would	carve.
Shadowthrone,	old	friend,	we	have	done	what	we	could	–	but	the	game	is
much	bigger	than	we	ever	imagined.	This	gamble…gods,	this	gamble.	One	hand
drifted	to	one	of	the	knives	at	his	belt.	And	then	he	shook	himself,
straightening.
Take	a	deep	breath,	lad.	Here	goes…

‘What	you	ask	of	me,	it	is	too	much.	Yes,	of	course	I	see	the	necessity	–	I	may
have	sickened,	even	threatened,	but	magic	is	not	my	enemy.	It	never	was.
Indeed,	I	envy	its	gifts	to	this	world.	Upon	my	own…ah,	no	matter.	Belief	can	be


rotten.	All	it	takes	is	one	betrayal	to	steal	away	an	entire	future.
‘You	would	not	have	recognized	me	in	my	anger.	It	shone	blinding	bright.
There	remain	those,	among	the	multitudes	I	left	behind,	who	imagine	themselves
gods,	for	all	their	mortal	trappings.	They	would	maintain	a	tyranny	such	as	no
true	god	could	ever	imagine.	They	would	enslave	generation	upon	generation	–
all	those	sharing	the	same	soil,	the	same	water,	the	same	air.	They	conspire	to
keep	them	on	their	knees.	Bowed	in	servitude.	And	each	slave,	measuring	his	or
her	life,	can	see	–	if	they	dare	–	only	the	truth,	and	so	most	of	my	world,	most	of
my	children,	live	a	life	of	despair	and	suffering,	and	ever	growing	rage.
‘Is	this	all	there	must	be?	The	tyrants	would	have	it	so.	I	sometimes
dream…yes,	I	know	you	have	little	time…	I	dream	of	returning,	swords	blazing
with	holy	vengeance.	I	dream,	Shadowthrone,	of	murdering	every	one	of	those
fuckers.	Is	this	what	it	means	to	be	a	god?	To	be	an	implacable	weapon	of
justice?
‘Wouldn’t	that	be	nice.	I	agree.
‘No,	I’m	not	that	much	of	a	fool.	It	will	be	no	different.	And	should	you
achieve	the	impossible	with	your	handful	of	mortals,	should	you	free	me…and
find	the	path,	the	moment	I	take	my	first	step	upon	the	soil	of	my	home	they	will
emasculate	me.	Bleed	me.	Gut	me,	and	then	stretch	my	hide	overhead.	They’ll
need	shade	from	the	torrid	heat	of	all	the	fires	they	themselves	lit.	That	is	the
problem	with	tyrants,	they	outlive	us	all.
‘I	will	do	what	you	ask.	Rather,	I	shall	try.	Pieces	of	me	remain	missing	and
I	despair	of	ever	seeing	them	again.	It	is	my	understanding	that	the	one	named
Skinner,	usurper	and	tyrant	king	of	my	House	of	Chains,	has	many	enemies.	He
can	now	count	me	among	them.	Do	you	imagine	he	loses	sleep?
‘No,	I	don’t	either.	Betrayers	never	do.
‘Shadowthrone.	You	will	not	betray	me,	will	you?’
	
‘Karsa	Orlong,	where	are	all	the	gods	of	peace?’
He	stepped	outside,	straightening.	‘I	know	not.’
Picker	turned	to	face	the	city.	Many	troubles	there.	Perhaps	at	last	they	had
begun	to	settle.	But…all	that	boiled	beneath	the	surface,	well,	that	never	went
away.	‘Do	you	know	how	to	get	there?’
He	eyed	her.	‘I	know	how	to	get	there.’
She	drew	a	deep	breath	–	she	could	hear	movement	inside	the	hut	behind
the	giant.	Picker	lifted	her	gaze	until	it	locked	with	the	Toblakai’s.	‘I	call	upon
the	vow	you	made	long	ago,	Karsa	Orlong	of	the	Teblor.	When	you	walk	to
where	you	must	go,	a	crippled	priest	will	find	you.	In	the	street,	a	broken	man,	a


beggar,	and	he	will	speak	to	you.	And	by	his	words,	you	shall	understand.’
‘I	already	understand,	Malazan.’
‘Karsa—’
‘There	are	too	many	gods	of	war.’	And	then	he	took	up	his	sword,	and	inside
the	hut	a	woman	began	weeping.	‘And	not	one	of	them	understands	the	truth.’
‘Karsa—’
His	teeth	were	bared	as	he	said,	‘When	it	comes	to	war,	woman,	who	needs
gods?’
She	watched	as	he	set	off.	And	under	her	breath	she	whispered,
‘Darujhistan,	I	beg	you,	do	not	get	in	this	man’s	way.’
	
Dust	roiled	over	the	distant	encampment.	Squinting,	Paran	took	another	bite	of
the	alien	fruit	his	foragers	had	found,	and	wiped	at	the	juices	dribbling	down
into	his	beard.
‘That	is	not	helping,	High	Fist.’
He	glanced	over.	Ormulogun	was	scratching	desperately	on	a	bleached
board	with	his	willow	charcoal	stick.	At	his	feet	squatted	a	fat	toad,	watching
his	efforts	with	gimlet	eyes.
‘Nothing	will	help	that,’	the	toad	sighed.
‘Posterity!’	snapped	the	Imperial	Artist.
‘Posterity	my	ass,’	Gumble	replied.	‘Oh,	was	that	not	droll	of	me?	Critics
are	never	appreciated	for	what	they	truly	are.’
‘What?	Leeches	sucking	on	the	talent	of	others,	you	mean?’
‘It	is	my	objectivity	that	you	so	envy,	Ormulogun.’
‘And	you,’	the	artist	muttered,	‘can	stick	that	objectivity	up	your	posterity,
toad.’
Paran	took	a	last	bite	of	the	fruit,	examined	the	furry	pit,	and	then	flung	it
over	the	wall.	He	wiped	his	hands	on	his	thighs	and	turned.	‘Fist	Rythe	Bude.’
The	woman	was	leaning	out	over	a	parapet.	She	straightened.	‘Sir?’
‘Assemble	the	companies	at	their	stations.	It’s	time.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Lounging	nearby,	Noto	Boil	drew	the	fish	spine	from	between	his	front
teeth	and	stepped	forward.	‘Is	it	truly?’
‘Weapons,’	said	Paran.	‘Kept	hidden	away.	But	there	comes	a	time,	Noto,
when	they	must	be	unsheathed.	A	time,	in	fact,	to	put	proof	to	the	pretensions.’
He	eyed	the	cutter.	‘The	gods	have	been	kicking	us	around	for	a	long	time.
When	do	we	say	enough?’
‘And	in	their	absence,	High	Fist,	will	we	manage	things	any	better?’


‘No,’	Paran	said,	walking	past	him,	‘but	at	least	then	we	won’t	have	the
option	of	blaming	someone	else.’
	
Sister	Belie	scanned	the	distant	walls.	Suddenly,	not	a	soldier	in	sight.	‘They’ve
quit,’	she	said.	‘Now,	the	question	is,	do	they	leave	the	way	they	came,	or	do
they	march	out	from	the	gate	–	or	what’s	left	of	it	–	and	try	to	break	the	siege?’
Standing	beside	her,	Watered	Exigent	glanced	back	at	the	camp.	‘If	the
latter,	Sister,	then	we	are,	perhaps,	in	trouble.’
Sister	Belie	pretended	not	to	hear	him.	If	his	seed	of	doubt	thirsted	for
water,	he	would	have	to	find	it	elsewhere.	Another	week.	That	is	all	we	need.
And	then	Brother	Serenity	will	be	here,	with	five	thousand	heavily	armoured
foreigners.	The	besieging	forces	were	damaged	–	that	last	assault	had	been
brutal.	She	was	down	to	half	strength.	Her	hold	on	them	was	fragile,	and	this
was	not	a	familiar	feeling.
‘I	see	no	movement	at	the	gate,	Sister	Belie.’
There	was	a	barrier	to	dismantle,	and	that	would	take	time.	But…	I	feel	it.
They’re	coming	for	us.	‘Assemble	the	companies,	Exigent.	That	gate	is	the
bottleneck.	If	we	can	lock	them	there,	we	hold	them	until	they’re	exhausted,	too
mauled	to	force	the	issue.’
‘And	if	they	break	us	instead?’
She	turned,	studied	him.	‘Do	you	doubt	the	power	of	my	will?	Do	you
imagine	that	this	Master	of	the	Deck	can	manage	anything	more	than	fending
me	off?	I	will	not	yield,	Exigent.	Understand	that.	And	if	it	means	that	every
single	one	of	our	Shriven	–	and	every	single	one	of	their	Watered	commanders
–	ends	up	a	corpse	on	the	field,	then	so	be	it.’
Watered	Exigent	paled,	and	then	he	saluted.	‘I	will	inform	the	commanders
that	we	shall	advance.’
‘Have	them	ready,	Exigent.	The	command	to	advance	shall	be	mine	and
mine	alone.’
‘Of	course,	Sister	Belie.’
After	he	had	left,	she	returned	her	attention	to	the	keep.	Still	no	activity	at
the	barricade.	Perhaps	my	feeling	about	this	is	wrong.	Perhaps	indeed	he	flees
through	a	warren,	and	just	like	that,	the	siege	is	done.	But	he	will	return.
Somewhere	–	this	thorn	is	yet	to	leave	our	side,	I	am	certain	of	it.
Her	eyes	narrowed,	and	she	blinked	rapidly	to	clear	a	sudden	blurring	of
her	vision	–	but	the	problem	was	not	with	her	eyes.	To	either	side	of	the
barricaded	gate,	the	massive	walls	had	grown	strangely	smudged,	all	along	the
breadth,	as	if	stone	had	become	water.


And	from	these	places,	troops	appeared	in	formation,	and	then	skirmishers
and	archers,	fanning	out	from	main	ranks.	The	five-deep	lines	then	unfolded
and	began	linking	up	with	those	to	either	side.
Cavalry	thundered	into	view	on	the	far	left	flank,	riding	hard	for	a	rise	to
the	west.
She	heard	the	shouts	of	confusion	from	her	commanders,	felt	the	recoiling
fear	of	the	Shriven.	He	opened	gates	through	the	walls.	He	knew	we	would	be
studying	the	barricade,	waiting	for	them	to	begin	dismantling	it.	He	knew	we
wouldn’t	advance	until	they	did	so.	And	now	we	are	not	ready.
Sister	Belie	swung	round.	‘Form	a	line!	Form	a	line!’	My	voice	will	take
their	souls,	and	I	will	drive	the	Shriven	forward,	like	wolves	unleashed.	They
will	ignore	their	wounds.	Their	fear.	They	will	think	only	of	slaughter.	By	the
time	my	last	soldier	falls,	the	enemy	will	have	ceased	to	be	a	military	threat.
This	I	swear!
She	saw	her	Watered	commanders	taking	control	of	their	companies,	their
voices	powerful	as	iron-toothed	whips.	She	could	feel	it	now	–	the	cold,
implacable	sorcery	of	Akhrast	Korvalain,	gathering,	and	she	was	pleased	at	its
burgeoning	strength.
And	then	someone	shrieked,	and	Sister	Belie	staggered.	What?	I	have	lost
one	of	my	commanders!	How?
She	saw	a	swirl	of	soldiers,	closing	in	to	where	one	of	the	Watered	had
been	standing	a	moment	earlier.	Terror	and	confusion	rippled	outward.
Forty	paces	distant	from	that	scene,	another	commander	suddenly	died,	his
chest	blossoming	wounds.
They	have	infiltrated	assassins!	She	awakened	her	voice.	‘FIND	THEM!
ASSASSINS!	FIND	THEM!’
The	companies	were	in	chaos.	‘FACING	RANKS,	PREPARE	FOR	THE
ENEMY!’
She	saw	Exigent,	heard	his	shouts	as	he	struggled	to	reassert	order	on	his
milling	Shriven.	As	she	moved	to	join	him,	there	was	a	blossom	of	darkness
behind	the	man.	Sister	Belie	shrieked	a	warning,	but	–	too	late.	Knives	sank
home.	Exigent	arched	in	shock,	and	then	was	falling.
Akhrast	Korvalain,	I	call	upon	your	power!	She	set	off	down	the	slope.	The
darkness	had	vanished,	but	then,	as	magic	heightened	her	vision,	she	could	see
its	swirling	path	–	there	would	be	no	hiding	from	her,	not	now.	A	mage.	How
dare	he!	‘NO	POWER	BUT	MINE!’
And	she	saw	that	whirling	black	cloud	stagger,	saw	it	pinned	in	place,
writhing	in	sudden	panic.
Hands	twitching	in	anticipation,	she	advanced	on	it.	Off	to	her	right,	she


could	hear	the	enemy’s	horns	announce	the	attack	–	she	would	deal	with	that
later.	I	can	still	save	this.	I	must!
The	darkness	convulsed	in	the	grip	of	her	power.
Now	only	six	paces	between	her	and	the	hidden	mage.	‘NO	POWER	BUT
MINE!’
The	sorcery	erupted,	vanished	with	a	thunderous	detonation,	and	she	saw
before	her	a	man	staggering,	sinking	down	to	his	knees.	Dark-skinned,	bald,
gaunt	–	not	the	Master	of	the	Deck.	No	matter.	She	would	rend	him	limb	from
limb.
Four	paces,	her	boots	crunching	on	gravel,	and	he	looked	up	at	her.
And	smiled.	‘Got	you.’
She	did	not	even	hear	her	killer	as	he	came	up	behind	her,	but	the	long
knives	that	burst	from	her	chest	lifted	her	from	her	feet.	She	twisted,	balanced
on	two	hilts,	as	her	slayer	raised	her	yet	higher.	Then,	with	a	low	grunt,	he
flung	her	to	one	side.	She	was	thrown	through	the	air,	landing	hard,	rolling
across	sharp	stones.
The	bastard	had	severed	the	veins	beneath	both	her	hearts.	And	now,	lying
in	her	last	moments,	her	head	lolled	and	she	saw	him.	Burly,	ebon-skinned,	the
long-bladed	knives	dripping	in	his	hands.
Her	Watered	were	all	dead.	She	heard	the	enemy	ranks	smashing	into	her
disordered	forces.	She	heard	the	slaughter	begin.
Faintly,	she	caught	the	mage	speaking	to	the	assassin.	‘Sheathe	that	Otataral
blade,	Kalam,	and	be	quick	about	it.’
And	he	rumbled	a	reply,	‘Done.	Now…make	me	invisible	again.’
Their	voices	grew	more	distant.	‘Do	you	think	it’s	easy?	She	damned	near
broke	my	back	with	that	command.’	They	were	walking	away.
‘Just	feeling	a	tad	exposed	here,	Quick	–	behind	enemy	lines	and	all.’
‘What	lines?’
Sister	Belie	closed	her	eyes.	Otataral?	You	unsheathed	Otataral?	Oh,	you
fool.	And	these,	her	last	thoughts,	bubbled	with	a	kind	of	dark	pleasure.
	
The	enemy	broken,	routed,	Warleader	Mathok	rode	up	to	Paran’s	position	near
the	westernmost	rise,	and	reined	in.	‘High	Fist!	The	last	have	fled	east,	down
into	the	valley.	Shall	we	pursue?’
‘No,’	Paran	replied,	watching	as	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	approached	from
across	the	killing	field.	‘Mathok,	begin	gathering	up	forage	for	your	horses.
Send	parties	deeper	into	the	valley	if	needed	–	but	for	resupply	only,	no
chasing	down.	I	fear	we	shall	have	to	ride	hard	now.’


‘Where?’
‘South,	Mathok.	South.’
The	Warleader	wheeled	his	mount	round,	yelling	commands	at	his	second,
T’morol,	who	waited	a	short	distance	back	with	a	wing	of	cavalry,	and	then
rode	off	in	the	direction	of	his	main	force.	Mathok’s	raiders	had	been	eager,
and	they	had	acquitted	themselves	well.	Watching	the	Warleader	ride	away,
Paran	rubbed	at	the	back	of	his	neck.	‘No	wonder	you	winced	at	every	move,
Dujek,’	he	said	under	his	breath.	‘I’m	a	mass	of	knotted	ropes.’	Still,	the	enemy
broke	at	first	contact,	and	what	could	have	been	a	nasty	scrap	turned	into	a
slaughter.	A	mere	handful	of	casualties,	and	most	of	those	from	idiots	falling	on
weapons	in	their	haste	to	pursue.	Ensorcelled	voices	were	all	very	well,	but	if
that	was	where	all	the	discipline	and	courage	came	from…now,	we	can	see	the
flaw	in	that,	can’t	we?
‘High	Fist,’	said	Quick	Ben,	walking	up	like	a	man	who’d	taken	a	beating.
His	face	was	drawn,	his	eyes	skittish	with	something	that	might	be	pain.
Paran	nodded.	‘High	Mage.	Was	it	as	bad	as	it	looks?’
‘Not	really.	Just	out	of	practice.	Lost	touch	with	being	subtle,	I	think.’
A	curious	thing	to	say,	Paran	reflected,	and	then	he	faced	Kalam.	The
assassin’s	weapons	were	sheathed,	and	he	looked	rather	pleased	with	himself.
For	no	reason	he	cared	to	discover,	Paran	found	he	wanted	to	take	that
smugness	down	a	notch	or	two.	You’ve	been	killing	people,	after	all.	He
regarded	him	for	a	moment	longer	before	saying,	‘Your	wife	wishes	your
attention.’
The	man	scowled.	‘Now?’
That	was	easy.	‘Since	you’re	covered	in	blood,	Corporal,	you	might	want
to	wash	first.’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘I’d	forgotten,	Kalam.	You’re	a	lowly	corporal	–
meaning	I	can	order	you	around.’
‘Just	try	it,	you	Hood-bitten	snake.’
After	the	assassin	had	left	them,	the	High	Mage	turned	to	Paran.	Hesitated,
and	then	said,	‘Felt	something,	far	to	the	southwest…’
‘As	did	I,	Quick	Ben.’
That	skittish	look	returned.	‘Do	you	know	what	it	was?’
‘Do	you?’
The	High	Mage	sighed.	‘Back	to	that,	then,	is	it?’
Paran	cocked	his	head.	‘When	I	asked	Shadowthrone	for	Kalam,	I	admit
that	I	didn’t	expect	you	to	be	the	delivery	man.	My	last	sense	of	you	was	in	the
company	of	my	sister ’s	army,	keeping	your	head	down.’
Quick	Ben	nodded,	looking	thoughtful.	‘You	were	able	to	sniff	out	things


like	that?	I’m	impressed,	Ganoes	Paran.	You	have	come	a	long	way	from	the
nervous,	gut-sick	captain	I	remember	from	Black	Coral.’
‘I’m	still	gut-sick,	High	Mage,’	he	said.	‘And	as	for	sensing	distant	powers,
alas,	that’s	been	growing	ever	more	uncertain.	And	obviously,	since	coming
within	the	influence	of	the	Assail	warren	I	have	been	effectively	blind.	But	with
my	sister,	it	was	never	easy	in	the	best	of	circumstances—’
‘Her	sword.’
‘Her	sword,	yes.	And…other	things.’
Quick	Ben’s	nod	was	sympathetic.	‘Sisters,	aye.’	Then	his	gaze	sharpened.
‘That…manifestation	we	felt.	Do	you	think…was	it	her?’
Paran	frowned.	Just	the	mention	of	his	stomach	had	delivered	a	nip	of	pain,
and	then	vague	nausea,	reluctant	to	fade.	And	look	at	us,	still	stepping	round
each	other.	Forget	all	that,	Paran.	Be	honest,	see	what	happens.	‘I	don’t	know,
High	Mage.	But	I	mean	to	find	out.’
Quick	Ben	studied	the	mass	of	soldiers	moving	through	the	enemy
supplies,	and	then	he	rubbed	at	his	eyes.	‘Ganoes	Paran,	what	are	we?	Here,
what	are	we?’
Paran	felt	his	face	twisting	as	anxiety	gnawed	again	at	his	stomach.	‘Quick
Ben,	we’re	soldiers	of	the	Emperor.	It’s	all	we	ever	have	been.’
Quick	Ben	shot	him	a	look.	‘You	were	just	a	child	when	he	ruled.’
Paran	shrugged.	‘Nonetheless.’
‘Aye,’	the	High	Mage	muttered	like	a	man	trying	to	swallow	bad	news,
‘nonetheless.	But…that	empire	is	gone,	Paran.	If	it	ever	existed	at	all.’
Now	that’s	a	sharp	observation.	‘Nothing	lasts,	Quick	Ben.	Speaking	of
which,	how	do	you	warrant	Kalam	and	Minala’s	chances?’
Quick	Ben	grunted	and	the	sound	might	have	been	wry	laughter,	or
sympathy.	‘I	don’t.	And	while	I	think	they’d	be	good	together,	they	keep	trying
to	wear	each	other ’s	skin,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.’
‘Sort	of.’
‘It’s	not	love	that’s	the	problem.’
‘It’s	all	the	rest.’
Quick	Ben	nodded,	and	then	he	shrugged.	‘So	tell	me,	O	Master	of	the
Deck	of	Dragons,	what	awaits	us	now?’
‘That	depends.’
‘On	what?’
‘Gods	below,	where	do	I	begin?’
‘Start	with	the	worst	it	could	get.’
The	worst?	‘How	much	do	you	already	know?’
Quick	Ben	rubbed	vigorously	at	his	face,	as	if	trying	to	rearrange	his	own


features.	And,	maybe,	become	someone	else.	‘Not	as	much	as	you	might
believe,’	he	said.	‘Shadowthrone’s	not	yet	gotten	over	some	past	slight	I
offered	him	–	though	for	the	life	of	me	I	can’t	recall	what	it	might	have	been.
In	any	case,	we’re	not	exactly	whispering	in	each	other ’s	ear.’
‘Still,’	Paran	said,	not	quite	convinced.
‘Well.	You	have	to	understand	–	I	usually	work	alone.	And	if	I	need	help,	I
make	sure	the	bargain	I	make	is	mutually	beneficial…to	keep	down	the	chances
of	taking	a	knife	in	the	back.	I	admit	it,	High	Fist,	I	really	trust	no	one.’
‘No	one	at	all?’
‘The	trust	I	have…for	some	people…comes	down	to	how	well	I	know
them,	and	then	it’s	a	matter	of	my	trusting	them	to	do	what	I	think	they’re	going
to	do.’
‘That’s	a	rather	cynical	take	on	trust,’	Paran	observed.
‘It’s	the	safest.	It	doesn’t	take	much	insight	to	realize	that	most	people	are
only	looking	out	for	themselves.	And	once	you	figure	out	what	they	want,	you
can—’
‘Manipulate	them?’
The	wizard	shrugged.	‘Am	I	that	much	of	a	mystery?	I	have	twelve	souls	in
me.	Think	about	that.	All	those	lives,	all	those	desires,	regrets,	hurts.	Whatever
you	feel	about	your	life,	I	have	that	a	dozen	times	over.	And	some	of	those
souls	in	me…are	old.’
‘Yet,	of	necessity,	you	all	have	to	work	together,	for	a	common	purpose.’
‘If	you	say	so.’
Paran	studied	the	man.	Mystery?	What	mystery?	‘Right.	Very	well.	The
worst?	Here	goes,	then.	Kurald	Galain	falls	to	vengeful	Tiste	Liosan,	and	they
walk	that	path	right	into	the	heart	of	Shadow,	ousting	Shadowthrone,	and	from
there	they	march	onward,	to	this	world,	joining	with	the	Forkrul	Assail	in	a
tide	of	slaughter,	until	not	one	city	is	left	standing,	not	one	field	planted,	not
one	human	child	born	into	the	world.	Do	you	want	the	rest?’
‘There’s	more?’
‘The	Elder	Gods,	having	at	last	freed	the	Otataral	Dragon,	succeed	in	the
annihilation	of	magic,	barring	that	paid	for	in	blood	–	unless	of	course
Korabas	is	killed,	but	if	that	happens	it	will	mean	that	the	Eleint,	who	are	now
or	will	soon	be	loose	in	this	realm,	will	have	killed	it	–	and	they	will	in	turn
seek	domination,	not	just	of	this	realm,	but	of	all	realms,	delivering	chaos
wherever	they	go.	And	so,	even	with	us	wiped	from	the	earth,	terrible	powers
will	contest	the	claim	to	our	legacy.	The	gods	will	be	dead,	magic	a	thirst	only
fools	would	dare	invite,	and…well,	should	I	go	on?’
Quick	Ben	licked	dry	lips.	‘Parts	of	Burn	are	dying	–	on	our	way	here,


whenever	we	touched	the	soil	of	this	world,	I	could	feel	her	skin	searing,
drying	and	shrivelling	into	something…lifeless.’
‘The	Otataral	Dragon,	yes.’
‘I	probably	already	knew	that,’	Quick	Ben	muttered.	‘Just	trying	not	to
think	about	it	and	hoping	it	would	all	go	away.	Hood’s	breath!	Ganoes	Paran	–
tell	me	what	we	can	do	to	prevent	all	this?’
The	High	Fist’s	brows	rose.	‘How	unfortunate.	That	is	the	question	I	was
going	to	ask	you,	Quick	Ben.’
‘That’s	not	funny.’
‘Wasn’t	meant	to	be.’
‘Your	sister—’
‘Aye,	my	sister.	You	were	with	her,	wizard.	She	must	have	explained	her
plan.’
Quick	Ben	looked	away.	‘She	would	free	the	Crippled	God.’
‘And	that’s	it?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Was	your	whole	family	like	her?	Nobody	saying	a
damned	thing	to	each	other?	Dead	silence	at	the	dinner	table?	Is	that	how	you
managed	to	get	along,	assuming	you	got	along	in	the	first	place?’
Paran	grimaced.	‘Can’t	say	we	did,	much.	Got	along,	I	mean.’
‘What	might	she	be	holding	inside?’
‘I	wish	I	knew.’
Quick	Ben’s	growing	agitation	was	evident	in	his	waving	hands,	his	sudden
pacing,	the	sharp,	wide-eyed	looks	he	threw	at	Paran.	‘I	thought	you	two	had
this	planned!’
‘Had	what	planned?’
‘You’re	the	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons!’
‘So	I	am.	Why,	you	want	to	play?’
For	a	moment	it	seemed	Quick	Ben’s	eyes	would	burst	from	their	sockets.
And	then,	with	sudden	hope:	‘A	reading!	Yes	–	that’s	it!	I’d	take	a	damned
reading	right	now	–	why	not?’
But	Paran	was	shaking	his	head.	‘You	don’t	want	that,	High	Mage.	Trust
me,	you	don’t.	There	are	too	many	rogue	players	in	this	game.	Icarium.
Draconus.	The	First	Sword	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	Olar	Ethil,	Silchas	Ruin,	Tulas
Shorn,	Kilava	–	even	Gruntle,	the	Mortal	Sword	of	Treach.	And	now	the	Eleint,
and	how	many	dragons	have	come	or	are	coming	through	the	gate?	A
hundred?	A	thousand?	Oh,	and	the	Elder	Gods:	Errastas,	the	past	Master	of	the
Tiles,	and	Kilmandaros	and	her	son…’
Quick	Ben	was	staring	as	if	Paran	had	lost	his	mind.
Paran	scowled.	‘What	now?’


‘They	–	they’re	all	here?’
‘I	have	the	Deck	of	Dragons	in	my	damned	skull,	remember.	I	caught	the
first	winds	of	convergence	some	time	ago.	Trust	me	when	I	say	this	will	be	the
biggest	the	world	has	ever	seen,	bigger	even	than	the	chaining	of	the	Crippled
God.	Nobody	said	it’d	be	easy,	High	Mage.	The	question	is,	what	do	you	have
to	offer	me?’
Quick	Ben	snarled.	‘Why,	more	good	news,	what	did	you	think?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
The	High	Mage	threw	up	his	hands.	‘Let’s	just	add	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle
and	the	Jaghut,	and	oh,	we	should	probably	mention	Hood	himself	–	no	longer
dragging	the	Throne	of	Death	by	one	ankle.	And	who	knows	how	many
slavering	fanatics	of	the	Wolves	of	Winter!	And	what	about	the	Crippled	God
himself	–	will	he	go	quietly?	Why	should	he?	If	I	was	him,	even	if	you	showed
me	the	inviting	door	at	the	far	end,	I’d	be	slicing	throats	all	the	way	down	the
corridor.	I’d	have	damn	well	earned	the	right	to	as	much	vengeance	as	I	could
muster!’
Paran	grunted.	‘All	right,	it’s	rather	more	complicated	than	I	had	imagined,
then.’
Quick	Ben	seemed	to	choke	on	his	reply.	After	a	bout	of	coughing,	and
then	spitting,	he	shook	his	head	and,	eyes	watering,	he	rubbed	at	his	face	again.
Then	he	took	a	deep,	settling	breath,	and	said,	‘We	need	a	secret	weapon,
Paran.’
‘I	have	a	gut	feeling	about	that—’
‘The	one	burning	a	hole	in	your	stomach?’
I	hope	not.	‘I	think	we	might	have	two	secret	weapons,	High	Mage.’
‘Please,	I	am	begging	you,	go	on.’
‘Quick	Ben,	tell	me,	who	was	the	toughest	Bridgeburner	you	ever	knew?
Think	back,	and	think	carefully.	Get	your	ego	out	of	the	way.	Ignore	your
favourites	and	the	ones	who	spent	all	their	time	looking	mean.	Not	the	callous
shits,	not	the	back-stabbers,	none	of	the	posers.	The	toughest,	Quick	Ben.	Day
in,	day	out,	good	times,	bad.	Tell	me.	Who?’
The	High	Mage	squinted,	glanced	down	at	the	ground	at	his	feet,	and	then
he	sighed	and	nodded,	looking	up	as	he	said,	‘I	didn’t	need	that	list,	Ganoes.	I
knew	my	answer	right	from	the	start.	We	all	knew.’
‘Who?’
‘Fiddler.	There’s	no	tougher	man	alive.’
Paran	looked	away.	‘My	family…aye,	we	were	something	of	a	mess.	But	I
will	tell	you	this,	this	one	thing	I	know	without	any	doubt,	and	it	starts	with	a
memory	–	my	sister	had	an	area	of	ground	cleared	for	her	at	the	country	estate,


and	it	was	where,	beginning	when	she	was	barely	five	years	old,	she	used	toys
to	fight	battles	from	every	history	book	and	scroll	she	could	find.	And	the
times	when	my	father	entertained	High	Fists	in	his	horse-selling	ventures,	he’d
make	it	a	kind	of	challenge	to	those	veteran	commanders	–	take	to	the	field
against	little	sallow-faced	Tavore,	with	all	those	toy	soldiers.	Count	your
attrition	honestly,	and	see	what	happens.	My	sister,	Quick	Ben,	from	about
seven	onward,	never	lost	to	a	single	commander.	And	when	their	corpses	were
dragged	away,	she	went	deeper	into	the	histories,	she	started	taking	the	loser ’s
sides,	and	then	won	those,	too.’
‘Tavore,	then.’
‘Think	of	all	the	great	military	leaders	–	Dassem,	Coltaine,	K’azz,	Dujek,
Greymane	–	for	what	it	is	worth,	I	would	pit	my	sister	against	any	of	them.
Gods	below,	against	all	of	them.’	He	continued	staring	into	the	southwest.
‘There	you	have	it,	High	Mage.	Fiddler	and	my	sister.	Our	two	weapons.’
When	he	looked	back	he	saw	Quick	Ben	studying	him.
The	High	Mage	said,	‘The	ascended	Bridgeburners	hold	the	gates	of
death.’
‘I	know.’
‘Except	for	Hedge.	Whiskeyjack	sent	Hedge	back	–	to	Fiddler.’
‘Did	he	now?’
‘Remember	Pale,	Ganoes	Paran?’
‘As	much	of	it	as	I	could,	which	wasn’t	much.’
‘Right	–	you	weren’t	there	yet,	not	when	we	got	together	on	a	hill	outside
the	city,	to	shake	things	down	one	more	time.	Or,	if	you	were	around,	Sorry
was	sticking	a	dagger	in	your	back	about	then.’
‘What	about	it,	Quick?’
‘It’s	just…we	were	all	there.	Trying	to	make	sense	of	things.	And	now	I’ve
got	this	feeling…we’re	all	going	to	meet	again.	To	bring	it	all	to	an	end.’
‘One	way	or	another.’
‘Aye.’
‘How	do	you	gauge	our	chances,	High	Mage?’
‘Miserable.’
‘And	our	weapons?’
‘With	me	vouching	for	Fiddler,	and	you	for	your	sister,’	he	said,	with	a
wry	grin,	‘the	best	we	could	hope	for,	I	suppose.’
‘And	here	I	have	two	more	–	the	infamous	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben.	You
know,	if	I	wasn’t	such	a	realist,	I’d	be	feeling	confident	right	now.’
A	scowl	replaced	the	grin.	‘Did	you	really	have	to	put	it	quite	that	way,
High	Fist?’


	
He	felt	her	eyes	on	him	as	he	swung	on	to	the	horse.	Settling	in	the	saddle,
gathering	the	reins,	he	squinted	at	the	broad,	terraced	valley	stretching	away	to
his	right.	Rich	lands,	he	mused.	Then	he	glanced	across	at	her.	‘What?’
Minala	shook	her	head.	‘He’s	going	to	get	you	killed	for	real	one	of	these
days.	You	know	that,	don’t	you?’
Kalam	snorted.	‘Whatever	you	think	you’ve	seen,	Minala,	you’ll	just	have
to	take	my	word:	you	really	have	no	idea	what	we’ve	survived,	me	and	Quick.’
‘Fine.	Impress	me.’
‘Probably	not	possible,	but	I’ll	try	anyway.	Jaghut	and	Crimson	Guard
Avowed	in	Mott	Wood.	Tiste	Andii	assassin-mages	and	highborn	demons	in
Darujhistan.	More	Claw	than	you	could	count.’	Looking	across	at	her,	seeing
her	flat	expression,	he	sighed.	‘And	we	ain’t	so	bad	on	our	own,	neither.
Icarium,	the	Pannion	Domin,	K’Chain	Nah’ruk	and	Soletaken	dragons	–
Quick’s	faced	down	them	all.	As	for	me…if	I	could	raise	up	every	person	and
every	demon	and	every	whatever	I’ve	personally	killed,	I’d	have	an	army	big
enough	to	drown	the	Forkrul	Assail	in	piss,	never	mind	a	knockdown	fight.’
She	continued	staring	at	him,	and	then	she	said,	inflectionless,	‘You	are
both	insufferable.’
‘Some	nerve,’	he	rumbled,	‘after	all	that	attention	I	just	gave	you.’
On	all	sides,	Paran’s	Host	was	forming	up,	preparing	to	march	–	they	had	a
third	of	a	day’s	light	left	and	it	seemed	the	High	Fist	wasn’t	much	interested	in
resting	his	troops.	In	a	hurry.	That’s	always	bad.	Decent-looking	soldiers,
though.	Lots	of	North	Genabackan	and	Malazan	mainlanders.	And	then	there’s
those	Seven	Cities	horsewarriors	–	tribals.	Tribals	always	scared	me.
Minala	took	a	drink	from	her	waterskin	and	then	spoke	again.	‘Were	all
you	Bridgeburners	the	same?	Arrogant,	self-important,	narcissistic?’
‘Aye,	and	we	earned	every	strut.’
‘Rubbish.’
‘In	fact,’	Kalam	went	on,	ignoring	her	comment,	‘it’s	probably	why	they
decided	to	wipe	us	out.	Every	officer	they	threw	at	us	couldn’t	hold	up.	We
were	a	company	run	by	the	sergeants,	Whiskeyjack	first	and	foremost,	but	even
then	the	sergeants	voted	on	stuff,	the	orders	they’d	give	to	the	captains	and
lieutenants,	the	orders	to	go	down	to	the	rest	of	us.	As	you	might	imagine,	the
high	command	didn’t	much	like	that.	Oh,	we	might	listen	to	a	few,	the	ones	we
knew	would	do	right	by	us	–	Dassem,	Dujek,	the	ones	we	knew	were	worth
their	salt.	But	the	rest?	Not	a	chance.’
‘Meaning	you	were	ungovernable.’


‘Meaning	we	were	actually	thinking	of	taking	down	the	Empress.	Aye,
looking	on	it	that	way,	Laseen	had	to	wipe	us	out.	She	had	no	choice,	and	if	it
didn’t	sit	well	with	her	–	having	to	kill	off	her	toughest	soldiers	–	well,	I
suppose	we	gave	her	few	options.’
‘Well	now,’	Minala	said,	‘finally,	a	little	honesty.’
‘So	now	I’m	with	the	Host,	wife.	Which	brings	me	to	the	question,	what	are
you	doing	here?	It	ain’t	safe,	wherever	we’re	going.’
‘Shadowthrone’s	children,’	she	said.	‘Those	that	survived,	I	mean.	I
couldn’t	look	them	in	the	eye,	not	after	what	happened.	I	couldn’t	bear	it	any
longer.	And	I	could	see	–	Cotillion	and	Shadowthrone,	they	were	up	to
something.	But	mostly,’	she	seemed	to	shudder,	‘the	children,	and	what
happened	outside	the	throne	room.	I’ll	grant	you,	Quick	Ben	didn’t	hesitate,
even	when	it	looked	like	he	was	going	to	die.	He	didn’t	hesitate.’
‘Icarium,’	Kalam	muttered.	‘Maybe	one	day	I’ll	face	off	against	him,	and
we’ll	see.’
Minala	snorted.	‘That’d	put	a	quick	end	to	your	arrogance,	Kalam	Mekhar.’
A	signaller	waved	a	banner,	and	it	was	time	to	ride	down	to	join	the
vanguard.	Kalam	thought	about	Minala’s	last	words,	and	sighed.
They	kicked	their	horses	into	motion.
And	Kalam	asked,	‘Love,	tell	me	again,	about	that	Tiste	Edur	with	the
spear…’
	
Commander	Erekala	of	the	Grey	Helms	entered	the	tent	to	find	Brother
Serenity	standing	in	a	corner	at	the	back,	draped	in	shadows	and	facing	the
canvas	wall.	There	was	no	one	else	present	and	Erekala	was	brought	up	short.
‘Pure?’
Serenity	slowly	turned.	‘Have	you	ever	been	buried	alive,	Erekala?	No,	I
would	imagine	not.	Perhaps,	in	the	occasional	nightmare…no	matter.	Earlier
this	day	I	felt	the	murder	of	Sister	Belie.	And	every	one	of	her	officers	–	all
dead.	The	siege	has	been	shattered,	and	our	enemy	is	now	loose	within	our
demesne.’
Erekala	blinked,	but	said	nothing.
‘Take	off	your	helm,’	Serenity	said.	‘Do	you	see,	over	there?	A	carafe.
Foreign	wine.	I	admit	to	having	acquired	a	taste	for	it.	It	serves	well	in	easing
my…misgivings.’	And	he	went	over	to	pour	himself	a	goblet.	He	poured	a
second	goblet	and	gestured	to	it.
Helm	now	unstrapped	and	under	one	arm,	Erekala	shook	his	head	and	said,
‘Misgivings,	Pure?	Is	not	the	cause	just?’


‘Oh	indeed,	Erekala,	there	will	be	justice	in	our	tide	of	retribution.	But
there	will	also	be	crime.	We	do	not	spare	the	children.	We	do	not	ask	them	to
remake	their	world,	to	fashion	a	new	place	of	humility,	respect	and
compassion.	We	give	them	no	chance	to	do	better.’
‘Pure,’	said	Erekala,	‘as	the	teachings	of	the	Wolves	make	plain,	each	and
every	generation	is	given	a	new	chance.	And	each	time,	they	but	perpetuate	the
crimes	of	their	fathers	and	mothers.	“From	the	blow	that	strikes	the	innocent
child	to	the	one	that	lays	waste	to	a	forest,	while	the	magnitude	of	the	gesture
may	vary,	the	desire	behind	the	hand	does	not.”	So	the	Wild	would	say,	if	it	but
had	the	words	to	speak.’
Serenity’s	eyes	glittered	in	the	shadows.	‘And	you	see	no	presumption?’
Erekala	cocked	his	head.	‘Pure,	the	presumptions	of	the	Perish	Grey	Helms
are	unending.	Yet	if	we	refuse	or	are	unable	to	comprehend	the	suffering	of	the
innocent	–	be	it	babe	or	beast	–	what	do	our	words	replace,	if	not	all	that	we
would	not	hear,	would	not	countenance,	lest	it	force	us	to	change	our	ways,
which	we	will	never	do.	If	we	would	speak	for	the	Wild,	we	must	begin	with	the
voice	of	human	conscience.	And	when	conscience	is	not	heeded,	or	is
discarded,	then	what	choice	remains	to	us?’
‘How	clearly	you	enjoy	such	debate,	Erekala.	You	remind	me	of	better
days…peaceful	days.	Very	well,	I	will	consider	what	the	world	would	be	like,
for	all	within	it,	if	conscience	was	more	than	just	a	whispering	voice.	If,
indeed,	it	could	raise	a	hand	in	anger.	And,	when	even	a	sound	beating	is	not
enough,	it	might	then	close	that	hand	about	a	throat	and	take	the	life	from	the
transgressor.’
‘It	is	our	greatest	presumption,	Pure,’	said	Erekala,	‘that	we	be	the	hand	of
conscience.’
‘Holding	a	sword.’
‘And	finally	driven	to	use	it,	yes.’
Serenity	drained	his	goblet	and	replaced	it	with	the	other	one.	‘Yet	your
fellow	humans	–	your	victims	–	could	not	but	see	you	as	evil,	as	terrible
murderers	of	the	innocent	–	in	fact,	the	very	notion	of	guilt	or	innocence
would	be	without	relevance,	in	their	eyes.’
‘If	we	are	to	be	evil,	then	we	but	balance	the	evil	that	opposes	us.’
‘Seeking…negation.’	And	Serenity	smiled.
‘Sister	Reverence	made	us	kneel,	Pure.	But	we	are	not	so	naïve	as	to	have
come	to	you	expecting	anything	but	the	opportunity	to	give	our	lives	in	the
name	of	that	which	we	believe	to	be	right.	You	will	use	us,	until	none	of	us	are
left.	She	did	not	need	to	compel	the	Perish.’
‘I	believe	you,	Erekala.	And	I	find	in	you	and	your	people	much	to	admire.


I	will	regret	sending	you	all	to	your	deaths.	But,	as	you	might	well	understand,
the	Wild	poses	a	threat	even	to	us	Forkrul	Assail,	should	it	truly	be	unleashed
upon	the	world.’
‘Pure,	with	my	own	Thrones	of	War	I	have	carried	your	most	dangerous
enemy	to	this	land.	I	know	well	what	is	coming.	It	is	my	judgement	–	and	I	am
confident	that	the	Mortal	Sword	and	the	Shield	Anvil	will	concur	–	it	is	my
judgement,	Pure,	that	in	the	war	now	begun	we	will	all	lose.	And	in	our	losing,
the	Wild	shall	win.’
Serenity	was	silent	for	a	time,	studying	the	Perish	commander,	the
unearthly	eyes	unwavering.	Then,	a	small	catch	of	breath.	‘Do	I	err	in
understanding	you,	Erekala?	You	crossed	the	field	of	battle…to	help	even	the
scales?’
‘By	all	means,	Pure,	send	us	to	our	deaths.	Upon	the	other	side,	we	shall
await	you.’
Serenity	advanced	a	step.	‘I	know	well	these	Malazans.	And	I	will	welcome
them!’
‘The	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	stood	before	the	Adjunct	Tavore	and	placed
her	sword	in	the	Adjunct’s	hands.	Before	her,	Pure,	we	did	not	kneel.’
‘Sister	Reverence	forced	you	to	kneel,	you	pompous	fool!’
Erekala	cocked	his	head.	‘Did	she?’
‘You	resisted!’
‘Pure,	why	would	we	resist?	You	forget,	we	came	to	you,	not	the	other	way
round.’
Serenity	turned,	faced	the	back	wall	again.	His	head	tilted	as	he	emptied	the
goblet	of	wine.	‘Tomorrow	we	double	our	pace,	Commander.	We	will	hunt
down	the	foreign	army	–	the	murderers	of	Sister	Belie.	And	your	Perish	will
fling	themselves	into	the	battle,	and	fight	and	not	yield.	If	it	takes	the	life	of
every	single	one	of	you,	the	enemy	shall	be	destroyed.’
‘Precisely,’	Erekala	replied.
‘Dismissed.’
Donning	his	helm	once	more,	Erekala	left	the	tent.
	
Hips	aching,	Sister	Reverence	made	her	way	along	the	ridge	overlooking	the
now-withered	farmland.	She	could	see	where	Brother	Diligence	had
established	revetments,	arbalest	sangers,	berms	and	trenches.	She	could	see
how	he	intended	to	funnel	the	enemy	to	the	place	of	killing.	Only	the	forward
echelons	and	the	engineer	corps	of	the	Shriven	Army	were	present,	the	rest
remaining	closer	to	the	city	where	supplies	could	readily	accommodate	them.


Such	an	army.	Fifty	thousand	for	this	one	battle,	says	Brother	Diligence.
And	soon,	more	Perish	Grey	Helms.	Five	thousand	heavy	infantry,	fanatical,
and	entirely	subject	to	my	desire	–	and	Brother	Diligence’s.	And	surrounding
the	Spire,	twenty	thousand	more,	entrenched,	immovable.	What	foe	would	dare
this?
She	saw	her	commander	ahead,	surrounded	by	officers	and	messengers.
Old	as	he	was,	Brother	Diligence	seemed	to	have	shed	years	now	that	a	battle
was	imminent.	As	she	drew	closer,	she	heard	him	addressing	his	officers.	‘…
shall	be	starving	–	we	well	know	how	unproductive	the	southlands	are.	And	in
this	weakened	state,	they	will	gamble	everything	on	a	single	cast	of	the	die,	a
solitary,	determined,	desperate	advance.	We	need	but	hold	them	until	their
energy	is	spent,	for	once	that	strength	is	gone	they	will	have	nothing	in
reserve.	And	then,	and	only	then,	shall	we	advance.	Ah,	Sister	Reverence.
Welcome.’
‘Brother	Diligence.	All	that	I	see	here	pleases	me.’
He	tilted	in	head	in	acknowledgement.	‘Sister,	has	there	been	any	word
from	Sisters	Calm	and	Equity?’
‘No,	but	I	am	not	unduly	concerned.	In	truth,	we	can	manage	quite	well
without	them.’
He	frowned,	but	nodded.
They	walked	a	short	distance	from	the	officers.
‘Brother	Diligence,’	she	said,	studying	the	preparations,	‘I	am	aware	of	the
Spire	defences,	and	of	this,	your	main	army.	Where	are	the	reserve	armies?’
‘Sister	Freedom	and	Brother	Grave	command	twenty	thousand	Kolanse
infantry	positioned	ten	leagues	to	the	west.	To	support	them,	Brother	Aloft
oversees	fifteen	thousand	Shriven	auxiliaries.	These	combined	forces	are	so
positioned	as	either	to	respond	to	a	break-out	from	the	enemy	holding	the
keep,	or	to	drive	south	to	engage	the	enemy	marching	here	–	should	we
perceive	the	need	for	them,	which	I	do	not.’	He	fell	silent	then,	and	Reverence
saw	that	his	attention	had	been	drawn	downslope,	to	where	a	rider	was	fast
approaching.
‘News	comes,’	Reverence	said.	‘In	haste.’
‘From	my	southern	outlying	pickets,	Sister.’
The	Shriven’s	horse	was	lathered,	straining	with	exhaustion	as	it	lumbered
up	the	slope.	When	the	rider	reined	the	beast	in,	it	stumbled	and	barely
recovered.	The	man,	soaked	in	sweat,	dismounted	and	stood	before	Diligence.
‘Inquisitor,’	he	said,	struggling	to	catch	his	breath.
‘A	moment,’	Diligence	said.	‘I	see	you	have	ridden	hard,	Shriven,	and	such
efforts	tax	your	imperfect	bodies.	Gather	yourself,	and	when	you	are	ready,


begin.’
The	man	gulped	air	for	a	dozen	or	so	heartbeats,	and	then	nodded.
‘Inquisitor,	a	report	by	relay.	Six	days	to	the	south,	an	army	approaches.’
‘And	the	size	of	this	army?’
‘Perhaps	seven	thousand,	Inquisitor.’
Diligence	gestured	one	of	his	officers	over.	‘Watered	Hestand,	prepare	a
single	mounted	battalion	and	a	full	support	train	–	water	and	food	for	at	least
three	legions.	You	are	to	make	haste	to	intercept	the	army	now	marching	up
from	the	south.	These	foreigners	are	our	allies,	the	land-based	element	of	the
Perish	Grey	Helms.	Treat	them	with	respect,	Hestand,	on	your	life.’
‘Yes	sir.	Shall	I	deliver	a	message	from	you?’
‘A	simple	welcome	will	do,	until	such	time	as	we	meet	in	person.	However,
it	is	certain	that	they	will	have	news	of	our	enemy’s	disposition,	and	that	I	wish
to	hear	immediately.	Be	sure	to	have	with	you	a	full	cadre	of	messengers	and
mounts.’
The	Watered	saluted	and	left.
Sister	Reverence	sighed.	‘Soon,	then.’	She	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and
then	she	faced	Diligence.	‘It	must	be	understood,	Brother,	that	the	Heart	shall
be	secured	above	all	else.	We	well	know	that	the	gods	are	gathering,	and	that
they	will	through	force	or	deceit	seek	to	wrest	that	organ	from	us.	Failing	that,
they	will	attempt	to	destroy	it.’
‘None	can	hope	to	come	close,	Sister.	The	power	of	Akhrast	Korvalain
denies	them	and	shall	continue	to	do	so.	Their	only	possible	path	to	the	Heart	is
through	their	mortal	servants.’
She	feared	she	was	missing	something,	however.	Something…vital.	‘I
shall	attend	the	Heart,’	she	said.	‘I	shall	not	leave	its	side.’
‘Understood,	Sister	Reverence.	You	will	then	be	accorded	a	fine	view	of
the	battle	here,	and	may	well	realize	our	victory	before	do	we	on	the	field.’
‘If	instead	I	see	failure,	Brother,	I	shall	by	my	own	hand	destroy	the	Heart.’
‘Prudent,’	he	said.
Is	this	enough?	What	else	can	I	do?	And	why	–	why	this	sudden	unease?
She	stared	southward,	eyes	narrowing.	‘Why,	Brother,	do	we	now	face	such
opposition?	Another	year,	perhaps	two,	and	Akhrast	Korvalain	would	be	of
such	power	as	to	dominate	this	world.	And	then	we	could	unleash	righteous
adjudication	upon	every	land,	in	cleansing	wrath.’
‘The	Fallen	God	has	forced	their	hand,	Sister	Reverence.	We	cannot
determine	precisely	how,	chained	and	weakened	as	he	is,	but	I	remain
convinced	that	he	is	behind	this	gambit.’
‘Perhaps	that	is	as	it	should	be,’	she	mused.	‘After	all,	is	not	his	creed	the


very	antithesis	of	our	own?	The	flawed,	the	helpless	and	the	hopeless…daring
to	stand	before	holy	perfection.	The	weak	of	spirit	against	the	indomitable	of
spirit,	the	broken	against	the	complete.	What	astonishes	me,	Brother	Diligence,
is	their	audacity	in	thinking	they	could	defeat	us!	Before	they	even	arrive,	why,
by	their	very	doubts	and	mutual	mistrust,	they	are	already	lost.’
Diligence’s	gaunt	face	pinched	into	a	faint	smile.	‘“In	a	war	between
fanatics	and	sceptics,	the	fanatics	win	every	time.”’	At	her	frown	he	shrugged.
‘In	the	vaults	of	the	palace,	Sister,	our	archivists	came	upon	some	ancient
Jaghut	scrolls.	Gothos’	Folly.	I	have	been	acquainting	myself	with	its	peculiar
perspective.’
She	grimaced.	‘Fanaticism,	Brother	Diligence,	is	the	harbour	of	delusions.
While	to	others	we	may	appear	no	different	from	fanatics,	we	are.
Fundamentally	different,	for	our	cause	is	a	justice	beyond	our	own	selves,
beyond	even	our	kind.	And	for	all	that	we	Forkrul	Assail	can	but	aspire	to	true
perfection,	justice	stands	outside	and	its	state	of	perfection	cannot	be
questioned.’
‘“When	wisdom	drips	blood	fools	stand	triumphant.”’
Reverence	shot	him	a	look.	‘Have	those	scrolls	burned,	Brother	Diligence.
That	is	a	command,	not	a	request.’
He	bowed.	‘It	shall	be	done	at	once,	Sister	Reverence.’
‘And	I	would	hear	no	more	of	this	Gothos’	folly,	am	I	understood?’
‘You	are,	Sister	Reverence.	Forgive	me.’
Her	hips	throbbed	with	old	pain.	We	have	walked	so	far.	But	at	last,	we
make	our	stand.	And	we	become	the	fulcrum	of	the	world.	And	where	but	upon
the	fulcrum	shall	justice	be	found?	Clouds	of	dust	from	the	work	crews	lifted
to	roll	over	their	position.	Discomforted	by	the	sting	in	her	eyes	and	the	bitter
taste	in	her	mouth,	she	turned	away.	‘Carry	on,	Brother	Diligence.’

Lying	prone	in	the	withered	grasses	with	his	gaze	fixed	on	the	vast	camp
sprawled	in	the	plain	below,	Stormy	swore	under	his	breath,	reached	under	his
belly	and	dragged	free	a	sharp	stone.	Beside	him,	Gesler	scratched	at	his	nose
and	said,	‘That	looks	ominous,	doesn’t	it?’
A	troop	of	Perish	were	marching	a	half-dozen	of	their	comrades	–	these
ones	stripped	down	weaponless	and	wearing	only	their	undergarments	–	out	to
a	trench	from	which	diggers	were	only	now	climbing.	When	they	were	formed
into	a	line	facing	that	trench,	they	were	made	to	kneel.	Sword	blades	flashed.


Heads	rolled	and	bodies	fell.
Gesler	grunted.	‘Explains	Bent	and	Roach	going	mad	over	those	long
mounds	yesterday.’
Sighing,	Stormy	said,	‘If	we	practised	that,	instead	of	arguing	all	the	time,
Ges,	we’d	have	killed	each	other	a	thousand	times	by	now.’
‘Some	people	hate	it	when	the	party	ends.’
‘Exactly.’
‘Listen,’	said	Stormy,	‘we	caught	us	up	with	the	shits	–	we	should	do	like
Gu’Rull	says	and	cut	’em	all	down,	starting	with	Tanakalian.’
‘In	her	worst	moments,	Krughava	might	agree.	If	we	didn’t	have	her	under
guard,	sooner	or	later	she’d	be	down	there	trying	to	do	it	personally,’	muttered
Gesler,	‘but	it’d	still	be	wrong.	Not…tactical.’
‘Oh,	here	we	go	again.	High	First	Fist	Sword	Prancing	Gesler	the	Great
talking	tactics	again.	Lay	a	wager	the	rest	of	them	Perish	aren’t	already	waiting
in	the	Assail	capital	–	so	instead	of	taking	down	five	thousand	Grey	Helms
here	and	now	we’ll	have	to	take	down	twice	that	number	a	week	from	now.
How	does	that	make	tactical	sense?’
‘Krughava	thinks	she	can	turn	them	back,	Stormy.	But	now’s	not	the	time.’
‘She	also	thinks	the	sun	sets	up	her	ass	every	night	and	comes	out	of	her
mouth	every	morning.	She’s	unhinged,	Ges.	You	can	see	that,	can’t	you?	Mad
as	a	five-eyed	one-whiskered	cat—’
‘Hold	on…who’s	that?’
‘Who?	Where?’
‘That	girl.’
Stormy	fell	silent,	watching.	He	could	see	Tanakalian	approaching	her,	was
stunned	when	the	Shield	Anvil	knelt	before	her.	They	were	too	distant	to	hear,
but	by	the	girl’s	gestures	–	pointing	at	the	trench	where	the	bodies	and	heads
had	been	dumped	–	she	wasn’t	happy	about	something.	And	she	was	giving	that
backstabbing	shit	an	earful.
‘That	must	be	her,’	Gesler	said.	‘The	one	Faint	told	us	about.’
‘Destriant,’	Stormy	grunted.	‘But	the	question	is,	how	in	Hood’s	name	did
she	get	here?’
‘Warren.	She	was	spat	out	by	the	Wolves.’
‘If	Krughava’s	going	to	have	to	face	anybody	down,	it’ll	be	her.’
‘You’re	probably	right,	Stormy.’	Gesler	edged	back	down	the	slope	of	the
ridge,	and	then	sat	up.	After	a	moment	Stormy	slid	down	to	join	him.	‘It’s	this,’
Gesler	said,	wiping	dirt	from	his	hands.	‘The	Wolves	of	War,	right?	So	how
come	that	army’s	acting	like	they	don’t	even	know	we’re	half	a	day	behind
them?’


Stormy	scratched	in	his	beard.	‘Wolves	do	the	hunting.	They	don’t	get
hunted.’
‘Except	by	us	humans.’
‘Still,	might	be	just	never	occurred	to	them	to	take	a	look	back.’
‘So	maybe	the	Adjunct	had	it	right,’	Gesler	said.	‘This	army	of	K’Chain
Che’Malle	is	ready	to	come	down	like	a	knife	in	the	middle	of	the	table.’
‘More	like	we’re	like	snakes	in	the	grass,	and	our	fangs	are	fuckin’
dripping.’	Stormy	smiled	without	humour.	‘Excited	yet,	Mortal	Sword?’
Gesler ’s	eyes	were	bright.	‘You?’
‘Nah,	you’re	bound	to	mess	it	all	up.’
‘That	didn’t	last.	Thanks.’
‘Just	keep	your	head	level,	Ges,	that’s	all	I’m	asking.’
Gesler ’s	expression	was	incredulous.	‘Now	that’s	rich,	Stormy,	coming
from	you.’
‘I’m	more	battle-hardened	these	days,	Ges.	All	my	wisdom	I	earned	the
hard	way.’
‘How	are	you	managing	to	keep	a	straight	face?’
‘That’s	what	us	battle-hardened	veterans	do	best.	Now,	let’s	get	back	to
camp.	My	mouth	is	watering	at	the	thought	of	more	armpit	fungi	and	a	big
tankard	brimming	with	gland	juice.’
	
There	is	treachery	in	his	heart.	Setoc	stared	down	at	the	beheaded	brothers	and
sisters,	feeling	the	fury	of	the	Wolves,	struggling	to	contain	its	wild	wrath.	The
presence	of	the	beast	gods	within	her	surged	mindless	as	a	storm,	and	again
and	again	she	felt	as	if	she	was	moments	from	drowning	in	the	deluge.	I	am
Setoc.	Leave	me	to	be	your	voice!	Blind	rage	is	pointless	–	for	all	that	your
cause	is	just,	it	must	be	a	human	mind	that	guides	us	all	into	the	war	to	come.
And	this	was	what	Tanakalian	did	not	understand.	Or,	perhaps,	what	he
feared	the	most.	We	must	be	free	to	speak	–	all	of	us.	We	must	be	free	to	object,
to	argue	–	even	the	Wolves	do	not	understand	this.	Look	at	these	bodies	–	they
spoke	out	against	the	cruel	pace…among	other	things.	Above	all,	they	spoke	out
of	fear	for	the	readiness	of	their	fellow	soldiers	–	this	army	is	exhausted.
She	turned,	faced	south,	her	eyes	narrowing	on	a	grassy	ridge	opposite.	If
they	came	for	us	now,	these	lizard	warriors,	we	would	fall	like	myrid	to	the
neck-hooks.	If	they	came	for	us	now,	I	would	have	to	awaken	the	Wolves.	But…
the	footfall	of	gods	upon	the	land	shall	summon	like	drums	of	war.	Power	draws
power	–	too	soon,	too	far	away.
Still…	I	wonder.	Why	do	they	not	attack?


She	turned	to	see	Tanakalian	approaching.	Another	audience.	Shall	I	drive
him	to	his	knees	again,	humiliate	him?	No.	That	can	wait.	She	set	off	to	take	the
two	of	them	a	fair	distance	from	the	camp,	well	beyond	earshot.	Still…
treachery	in	his	heart.
Even	before	he	caught	up	to	her	he	began	speaking.	‘Destriant,	you	must
understand.	The	Perish	are	bound	by	strict	rules	of	behaviour.	It	is	this
discipline	which	gives	us	our	strength.’
‘You	are	destroying	this	army,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle—’
‘Have	already	caught	up	to	us.’
His	eyes	widened,	but	for	once	he	did	not	question	her.	‘The	Wolves	must
be	sent	against	them,	Destriant!	We	cannot	hope	to—’
‘Now	that	our	soldiers	can	barely	stand,	no,	you’re	right:	we	cannot.’
He	drew	himself	up.	‘This	threat	was	ever	present	in	my	mind,	Destriant.	It
was	my	hope	that	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	would	be	content	with	escorting	the
Letherii	and	Bolkando.	But	I	knew	that	I	could	not	gamble	the	lives	of	my
brothers	and	sisters	on	that	assumption.	This	is	why	I	drove	my	soldiers	as
hard	as	I	did	–	we	must	reach	the	safety	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	as	soon	as
possible.’
‘But	you	have	failed	to	do	so,	Shield	Anvil.	And	what	manner	of	welcome,
do	you	imagine,	will	the	Assail	accord	us	when	we	arrive	with	an	army	already
half-dead?’
He	was	pale	and	she	could	see	the	venom	in	his	eyes.	‘I	had	no	choice.’
‘You	were	impatient,	Shield	Anvil.	You	exulted	in	your	betrayal	and	in	so
doing	you	revealed	your	true	nature	too	soon	–	your	once-allies	know	the	truth
of	you	now.	And	they	have	had	time	to	adjust	their	tactics.’
‘This	is	Krughava’s	fault!	All	of	it!’
‘There	shall	be	no	more	executions,	Shield	Anvil.	Worse,	your	denial	of
their	embrace	has	made	a	mockery	of	your	title.	I	look	upon	you	and	I	can	see,
at	last,	the	path	that	led	to	the	Forkrul	Assail.’
Shock	twisted	his	face.	‘What	does	that	mean?	I	am	sworn	to	the	Wolves	of
Winter!’
‘You	are	drunk	on	justice,	Shield	Anvil,	and	for	all	that	you	imagine	you
walk	a	straight	line,	in	truth	you	stumble	and	weave.	Now	you	stand	before	me,
deluded	in	your	righteousness,	and	upon	the	path	where	you	walked’	–	she
gestured	back	towards	the	bodies	in	the	trench	–	‘the	corpses	of	the	innocent.’
‘The	delusions,’	he	said	in	a	low	rasp,	‘are	not	mine,	child.’
Setoc	smiled.	‘Go	on.	I	am	intrigued.’
‘Do	you	truly	believe	you	can	withstand	the	will	of	the	Forkrul	Assail?	We


shall	be	brought	to	heel	–	but	that	is	not	how	it	was	supposed	to	be.	Their	aims
are	petty	compared	to	ours.	For	all	their	claims,	Destriant,	the	truth	is,	I
intended	to	use	them.	They	demand	that	we	kneel?	So	be	it.	It	matters	not.	The
Wolves	are	blind	to	all	of	this	–	we	think	in	ways	they	cannot	comprehend,	and
this	game	will	not	be	won	with	slavering	jaws	and	berserk	rage.	Against	us,
that	has	never	worked.	No,	the	Wolves	of	Winter	are	better	off	hiding	in	the
forest,	in	the	dark	shadows.	Leave	us	to	do	what	must	be	done,	and	when	all	the
players	are	weakened,	then	shall	come	the	time	for	our	gods	to	attack	–	after
all,	is	that	not	the	way	of	the	wolves	in	the	wild?’
‘Tanakalian,’	said	Setoc,	‘I	agree	with	you.	But	alas,	I	cannot	choose	the
times	when	the	gods	speak	through	me.	I	will	have	no	control	over	their	power
the	day	it	steals	my	will.	Their	anger	will	overwhelm,	and	through	their	eyes
they	will	see	nothing	but	blood.’
‘That	is	not	how	to	fight	a	war.’
‘I	know.’
He	stepped	forward,	a	sudden	hope	in	his	eyes.	‘Then	you	must	work	with
me,	Destriant!	We	can	win	this	–	win	it	in	truth!	Warn	the	Wolves	–	if	they
manifest,	within	reach	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	they	will	be	murdered.	Or	worse,
enslaved.’
‘Then	stand	before	me	now	as	a	true	Shield	Anvil.	It	is	not	for	you	to
judge,	not	for	you	to	deny	your	brothers	and	sisters.	And	above	all,	it	is	not	for
you	to	take	their	lives.’
Tanakalian	pointed	back	to	the	bodies	in	the	trench.	‘They	would	have
deserted,	Destriant.	They	would	have	fled	back	to	Krughava,	carrying	with
them	vital	information.	Their	crime	was	treason.’
‘They	sought	to	raise	a	new	Mortal	Sword,’	she	said.	‘For	the	field	of
battle,	they	sought	a	veteran	to	command	them.	You	killed	them	because	of	a
personal	slight,	Tanakalian.’
‘Matters	were	far	more	complicated	than	you	realize.’
She	shook	her	head.	‘You	face	a	crisis,	Shield	Anvil.	Your	soldiers	have
lost	confidence	in	you.	It	is	crucial	that	you	understand	–	if	not	for	me,	this
army	would	return	to	Krughava.’
‘Unleash	the	Wolves	upon	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	–	buy	us	the	time	we
need.’
‘It	will	not	be.’
‘Why	not?’
‘Because	they	refuse,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘But…why?’
Setoc	shrugged.	‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	never	the	enemy	of	the


beasts.	They	were	never	so	insecure	as	to	feel	the	need	to	slaughter	everything
in	sight.	They	were	never	so	frightened,	so	ignorant,	so…pathetic.	I	believe	the
Wolves	do	not	see	them	as	deserving	of	slaughter.’
‘And	will	they	change	their	minds	when	those	lizards	attack	us?’
She	fixed	on	him	a	sharp,	searching	stare.	‘What	will	the	Wolves	witness?
K’Chain	Che’Malle	cutting	down…humans.’
‘But	we	Perish	are	to	be	their	swords	of	vengeance!’
‘Then	we	can	only	hope	that	we	do	not	face	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	on	a
field	of	battle.’
‘Do	you	finally	comprehend	the	necessity,	the	burden	upon	us,	Destriant?
We	must	stand	in	the	shadow	of	the	Forkrul	Assail.	We	must	be	free	to	choose
where	and	when	to	fight,	and	indeed	whom	we	shall	face.	Let	the	Assail	believe
they	have	us	well	shackled	and	compliant,	eager	even.’
‘You	balance	everything	on	the	thinnest	knife	edge,	Shield	Anvil.’
‘We	are	the	Grey	Helms,	Destriant,	and	we	shall	serve	the	Wolves.’
‘Indeed.’
‘And	that	is	why	we	must	continue	marching	at	this	pace	–	leave	the	lizards
no	time	to	think	about	what	to	do	about	us.	And	if	they	chase	our	tails	right	into
the	Assail	army,	well,	the	moment	those	two	ancient	foes	set	sight	upon	each
other…’
‘We	need	only	step	aside.’
He	nodded.
Dismissing	him	for	the	moment,	Setoc	turned	away.	Perhaps.	Is	this	the
treachery	I	sense	in	Tanakalian?	And	if	I	cannot	agree	with	his	methods,	must	I
then	reject	his	intentions?	But	the	game	he	would	play…poised	between	two
such	deadly	enemies…is	it	possible?
No,	ask	yourself	this	instead,	Setoc:	what	alternative	do	we	have?	When
she	turned	he	was	standing	as	he	had	been,	facing	her,	and	in	his	face,	blind
need.	‘Are	you	clever	enough	for	this,	Shield	Anvil?’
‘I	see	no	other	way,	Destriant.’	He	hesitated,	and	then	he	said,	‘Each	night,	I
pray	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter—’
She	turned	away	again,	and	this	time	with	finality.	‘You	waste	your	breath,
Shield	Anvil.’
‘What?’
‘They	don’t	understand	worshippers,’	she	said,	closing	her	eyes.	‘They
never	did.’
	
Once	more,	staggering	lost	–	the	darkness	and	the	unbearable	pressure,	the


raging	currents	that	sought	to	rend	the	flesh	from	his	bones,	and	on	all	sides
the	half-buried	wreckage	of	the	lost.	He	stumbled	over	rotted	planks	from
broken	hulls,	kicked	up	bleached	bones	that	flashed	and	spun	in	milky	clouds.
Silt-painted	amphorae,	ingots	of	tin	and	lead,	a	scattering	of	hundreds	of	round
shields,	hammered	bronze	over	crumbling	wood.	Banded	chests	collapsed	and
spilling	out	their	gems	and	coins	–	and	everywhere	the	remains	of	sea
creatures,	their	insensate	bodies	dragged	down	into	the	depths,	and	the	rain
from	above	was	unending.
Brys	Beddict	knew	this	world.	Was	this	yet	another	dream?	A	haunting
from	his	memories?	Or	had	his	soul	at	last	returned,	to	this	place	he	would
learn	to	call	home?
Above	all,	the	greatest	pressure	he	felt,	the	one	force	which	neither	the
strength	of	his	legs	nor	the	stolid	stubbornness	of	his	will	could	withstand,	was
that	of	immense,	devastating	loneliness.	Into	death	we	step	alone.	Our	last
journey	is	made	in	solitude.	Our	eyes	straining,	our	hands	groping	–	where	are
we?	We	do	not	know.	We	cannot	see.
It	was	all	he	needed.	It	was	all	anyone	needed.	A	hand	to	take	ours.	A	hand
reaching	out	from	the	gloom.	To	welcome	us,	to	assure	us	that	our	loneliness	–
that	which	we	knew	all	our	lives	and	so	fought	against	with	each	breath	we	took
–	that	loneliness	has	at	last	come	to	an	end.
Making	death	the	most	precious	gift	of	all.
A	thousand	sages	and	philosophers	had	closed	desperate	fingers	about	the
throat	of	this…this	one	thing.	Even	as	they	recoiled	in	horror,	or,	with	a	defiant
cry,	leapt	forward.	Tell	us,	please	–	show	us	your	proofs.	Tell	us	oblivion	has	a
face,	and	upon	it	the	curve	of	a	smile,	the	blessing	of	recognition.	Is	that	too
much	to	ask?
But	this,	he	knew,	was	the	secret	terror	behind	all	faiths.	The	choice	to
believe,	when	to	not	believe	invited	the	horror	of	the	meaningless,	all	these
lives	empty	of	purpose,	all	these	hopes	relinquished,	dropped	from	the	hand,
left	to	sink	in	the	thick	mud	–	with	silts	raining	down	until	everything	is	buried.
I	knew	a	man	who	studied	fossils.	He	had	made	this	pursuit	his	entire	life.
He	spoke	with	great	animation	about	his	need	to	solve	the	mysteries	of	the
distant	past.	And	this	guided	his	life	for	decades,	until,	in	a	confession	written
the	night	he	took	his	own	life,	he	finally	spoke	of	the	truth	he	had	at	last
discovered.	‘I	have	found	the	secret,	the	one	secret	that	is	the	past.	The	secret	is
this.	There	are	more	life	forms	in	the	history	of	this	world	than	we	could	ever
imagine,	much	less	comprehend.	They	lived	and	they	died	and	what	little
remains	tells	us	only	that	they	once	existed.	And	therein	hides	the	secret,	the
terrible	secret.	It’s	all	for	nothing.	Nothing	but	fragments	of	bone.	All	of	it…for


nothing.’
Easy	enough	to	understand	how	this	could	have	unleashed	the	black	dogs,
when	comprehension	yielded	only	a	vast	abyss.
But	then	Brys	found	a	familiar	face	rising	before	him,	there	in	his
beleaguered	memories,	or	dream-world	–	whichever	this	was.	Tehol,	and	that
look	in	his	eyes	that	one	might	see	the	moment	before	he	spat	in	the	face	of
every	god	that	ever	existed,	only	to	then	move	on	to	the	dour	mendics	and
philosophers	and	wild-haired	poets.	Damn	them	all,	Brys.	No	one	really	needs
an	excuse	to	give	up	on	life,	and	all	the	ones	you	hear	you	might	as	well	pluck
out	of	a	hat.	Surrender	is	easy.	Fighting	is	hard.	Brother,	I	remember	once
reading	about	deadly	swords	that,	in	the	moment	of	war,	would	howl	with
laughter.	What	better	symbol	of	human	defiance	than	that?
Sure,	Brys,	I	remember	that	bone	collector.	He	got	it	all	wrong.	With	that
secret	he	discovered,	he	had	a	choice.	Despair	or	wonder.	Between	the	two,
which	would	you	choose?	Me,	I	look	at	the	idiocy	and	futility	of	existence	and
how	can	I	not	wonder?
Every	creature	dies,	brother	–	you	should	know.	I’d	wager	that	each	and
every	one	of	those	creatures	set	out	into	the	darkness,	soul	crouched	and	timid,
not	knowing	what	waited	ahead.	Why	should	us	smart	animals	be	unique?
Death	levels	us	with	the	cockroaches	and	the	rats	and	the	earthworms.	Faith	is
more	than	turning	our	backs	on	the	abyss	and	pretending	it’s	not	there,	Brys.	It’s
how	we	climb	up	above	the	cockroaches,	top	of	the	ladder,	lads!	And	those
seven	rungs	make	all	the	difference!	Eight?	Eight	rungs,	then.	Up	here,	the	gods
can	finally	see	us,	right?
Remember	that	other	sage	who	said	the	soul	is	carried	from	the	body	by
maggots?	Crush	a	maggot	kill	a	soul.	And	damn	but	they’d	have	to	crawl	far,	so
the	gods	gave	them	wings,	to	carry	them	up	into	the	heavens.	Makes	for	a
strangely	logical	theory,	don’t	you	think?	Where	was	I,	brother?
More	to	the	point,	where	are	you?
The	face	of	Tehol	drifted	away,	leaving	Brys	alone	once	more.	Where	am
I,	Tehol?	I	am…nowhere.
He	stumbled,	he	groped	blindly,	he	staggered	beneath	unimaginable
weights	–	too	ephemeral	to	shrug	off,	yet	heavy	as	mountains	nonetheless.	And
on	all	sides,	unrelieved	darkness—
But	no…is	that	light?	Is	that…
In	the	distance,	a	lantern’s	yellow	flame,	murky,	flaring	and	ebbing	in	the
currents.
Who?	Do…do	you	see	me?
A	hand	reaching	out,	the	curve	of	a	smile	on	a	welcoming	face.


Who	are	you?	Why	do	you	come	for	me,	if	not	to	bless	me	with	revelation?
The	stranger	held	the	lantern	low,	as	if	no	longer	caring	what	it	might
reveal,	and	Brys	saw	that	he	was	a	Tiste	Edur,	a	grey-skinned	warrior	wearing
tattered	leathers	that	streamed	behind	him	like	tentacles.
Step	by	step,	he	drew	closer.	Brys	stood	in	the	man’s	path,	waiting.
When	the	Edur	arrived,	he	looked	up,	dark	eyes	staring	with	an	inner	fire.
His	mouth	worked,	as	if	he’d	forgotten	how	to	speak.
Brys	held	up	a	hand	in	greeting.
The	Edur	grasped	it	and	Brys	grunted	as	the	man	leaned	forward,	giving
him	all	his	weight.	The	face,	pitted	and	rotted,	lifted	to	his	own.
And	the	Edur	spoke.	‘Friend,	do	you	know	me?	Will	you	bless	me?’
	
When	his	eyes	snapped	open,	Aranict	was	ready	for	him,	ready	for	the	raw
horror	of	his	expression,	the	soul	exposed	and	shaken	to	its	very	core,	and	she
took	him	tight	in	her	arms.	And	knew,	in	the	pit	of	her	heart,	that	she	was
losing	him.
Back.	He’s	on	his	way	back,	and	I	cannot	hold	on	to	him.	I	cannot.	She	felt
him	shudder,	and	his	flesh	felt	cold,	almost	damp.	He	smells	of…salt.
It	was	some	time	before	his	breathing	calmed,	and	then	once	more	he	was
asleep.	She	slowly	disengaged	herself,	rose,	throwing	on	a	cloak,	and	stepped
out	from	the	tent.	It	was	near	dawn,	the	encampment	still	and	quiet	as	a
graveyard.	Overhead,	the	Jade	Strangers	cut	a	vast	swathe	across	the	night	sky,
poised	like	talons	about	to	descend.
She	drew	out	her	tinder	box	and	a	stick	of	rustleaf.	To	ease	the	gnawing
hunger.
This	land	was	ruined,	in	many	ways	far	worse	than	the	Wastelands.	All
around	them	were	signs	of	past	prosperity.	Entire	villages	now	empty,
abandoned	to	weeds,	dust	and	the	scattered	remnants	left	by	those	who	had	once
lived	there.	The	fields	surrounding	the	farms	were	blown	down	to	rocks	and
clay,	and	not	a	single	tree	remained	–	only	stumps	or,	here	and	there,	pits
where	even	the	stumps	had	been	dug	out.	There	was	no	animal	life,	no	birds,
and	every	well	they	examined,	every	stream	bed	her	minor	mages	worked
over,	seeking	to	draw	water	from	the	depths,	yielded	little	more	than	soupy
sludge.	Their	few	remaining	horses	were	suffering	and	might	not	even	make	it
into	Kolanse	proper.	And	the	rest	of	us	aren’t	doing	much	better.	Low	on	food,
exhausting	ourselves	sinking	wells,	and	knowing	that	somewhere	ahead	a	wellrested,	well-fed	army	waits	for	us.
She	drew	hard	on	the	stick,	looked	eastward	to	the	distant	camp	of	the


Bolkando.	No	fires.	Even	the	standards	tilted	like	the	masts	of	some	foundered
ship.	I	fear	we	won’t	be	enough,	not	to	do	what	the	Adjunct	needed,	what	she
wanted.	It	may	prove	that	this	entire	journey	will	end	in	failure,	and	death.
Brys	came	out	of	the	tent	to	stand	beside	her.	He	took	the	stick	from	her
fingers	and	drew	on	it.	He’d	begun	doing	that	a	few	weeks	past,	seeking,
perhaps,	to	calm	his	nerves	in	the	wake	of	his	nightmares.	But	she	didn’t	mind.
She	liked	the	company.
‘I	can	almost	taste	the	thoughts	of	my	soldiers,’	he	said.	‘We	will	have	to
kill	and	eat	the	last	horses.	Won’t	be	enough	–	even	sparing	the	water	to	make	a
stew…ah,	if	we	could	have	scavenged,	this	might	have	succeeded.’
‘We’re	not	done	yet,	my	love.’	Please,	I	beg	you,	do	not	answer	that	with
yet	another	sad	smile.	With	each	one,	I	feel	you	slip	further	away.
‘It	is	our	growing	weakness	that	worries	them	the	most,’	he	said.	‘They
fear	we	won’t	be	fit	to	fight.’
‘The	Perish,	if	anything,	will	be	even	worse	off.’
‘But	they	will	have	some	days	in	which	to	recover.	Besides	which,	Aranict,
one	must	fear	more	the	Assail	army.’
She	lit	a	second	stick,	and	then	gestured	with	one	hand.	‘If	all	of	Kolanse	is
like	this,	they	won’t	have	an	army.’
‘Queen	Abrastal	assures	me	that	Kolanse	continues	to	thrive,	with	what	the
sea	offers,	and	the	fertile	valley	province	of	Estobanse	continues	to	produce,
sheltered	from	the	drought.’
And	each	night	the	nightmares	take	you.	And	each	night	I	lie	awake,
watching	you.	Wondering	about	all	the	other	paths	we	could	have	taken.	‘How
have	we	failed	her?’	Aranict	asked.	‘What	more	could	we	have	done?’
Brys	grimaced.	‘This	is	the	risk	when	you	march	an	army	into	the
unknown.	In	truth,	no	commander	in	his	or	her	right	mind	would	even
contemplate	such	a	precipitous	act.	Even	in	the	invasion	of	new	territories,	all
is	preceded	by	extensive	scouting,	contact	with	local	elements,	and	as	much
background	intelligence	as	one	can	muster:	history,	trade	routes,	past	wars.’
‘Then,	without	the	Bolkando,	we	would	truly	be	marching	blind.	If
Abrastal	had	not	concluded	that	it	was	in	her	kingdom’s	interest	to	pursue	this	–
Brys,	have	we	misjudged	the	Adjunct	from	the	very	beginning?	Did	we	fall
into	the	trap	of	assuming	she	knew	more	than	she	did,	that	all	that	she	had	set
out	to	do	was	actually	achievable?’
‘That	depends.’
‘On	what?’
He	reached	over	and	took	the	new	stick	of	rustleaf.	‘On	whether	she	has
succeeded	in	crossing	the	Glass	Desert,	I	suppose.’


‘A	crossing	that	cannot	be	made.’
He	nodded.	‘Yes.’
‘Brys,	not	even	the	Adjunct	can	will	her	Malazans	to	achieve	the
impossible.	The	world	sets	physical	limits	and	we	must	live	by	them,	or	those
limits	will	kill	us.	Look	around	–	we	are	almost	out	of	food	and	water.	And	this
land	has	nothing	to	give	us,	and	just	as	the	farmers	and	villagers	all	fled	or
perished,	so	too	are	we	faced	with	the	same,	hard	reality.	The	country	is
destroyed.’
He	seemed	to	be	studying	the	sky.	‘My	father	was	not	an	imaginative	man.
He	could	never	understand	me	and	Tehol	–	especially	Tehol.	Our	brother	Hull,
well	now,	he	started	out	as	the	perfect	eldest	son,	only	to	be	pronounced	dead
in	the	eyes	of	Father.’	He	was	silent	for	a	few	moments,	smoking,	and	then	he
resumed.	‘Beyond	all	the	tutors	foisted	upon	us,	it	was	our	father	who	insisted
on	delivering	his	one	lesson.	Even	if	it	killed	us,	he	would	teach	us	the	value	of
pragmatism.	Which	is,	as	I	am	sure	you	well	understand,	nothing	more	than	a
cogent	recognition	of	reality:	its	limits,	its	demands	and	its	necessities.’
Aranict	cocked	her	head,	wondering	at	the	direction	of	his	thoughts.
‘Beloved,	of	all	men,	the	name	of	Tehol	does	not	come	to	mind	when	I	think
pragmatic.’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘And	what	of	me?’
‘In	you,	yes.	You	are	a	weaponmaster,	after	all.	I	never	knew	Hull,	so	of
him	I	cannot	say.’
‘So,	you	conclude	that	of	the	three	Beddict	brothers,	I	alone	absorbed	our
father ’s	harsh	lessons	in	pragmatism.’
She	nodded.
Brys	looked	away	again,	this	time	to	the	southeast.	‘How	far	away,	do	you
think,	lies	the	coast?’
‘Proper	marching,	three	days	–	if	the	queen’s	maps	are	at	all	accurate.’
‘Oh,’	he	murmured,	‘I	am	sure	they	are.’
‘It’s	almost	dawn,’	Aranict	said.
‘We	will	not	march	today,	my	love.’
She	shot	him	a	look.	‘A	day’s	rest	–	at	this	point	–	could	prove
counterproductive.’
He	flicked	away	the	stick,	eyes	tracking	the	glowing	end.	‘Before	he…
changed	his	mind	about	things,	Tehol	became	the	wealthiest	man	in	Lether,
Aranict.	Ask	yourself,	how	could	he	have	done	that,	if	in	pragmatism	he	was	an
utter	failure?’	He	faced	the	camp.	‘Today,	we	eat	the	last	of	our	food,	and	drink
the	last	of	our	water.’
‘Brys?’


‘I	think,’	he	said,	‘I	will	walk	over	to	the	Bolkando	camp.	Will	you	join	me,
love?’
	
‘Mud	of	the	gods,	woman,	what	are	you	doing?’
Abrastal	looked	up.	‘What	does	it	look	as	if	I’m	doing,	Spax?’
Her	fiery	tresses	lay	heaped	on	the	tent	floor.	She	was	wrapped	in	her
blanket	and	as	far	as	he	could	tell,	naked	underneath.	He	watched	as	she
resumed	slashing	long	lengths	away	with	her	knife.	‘I	witness,’	he	said,	‘the
death	of	my	lust.’
‘Good.	It’s	about	time.	I	was	never	going	to	bed	you,	Barghast.’
‘Not	the	point.	It	was	the	desire	I	took	so	much	pleasure	in.’
‘That’s	pathetic.’
Spax	shrugged.	‘I	am	an	ugly	man.	This	is	how	ugly	men	get	through	each
damned	day.’
‘You’ve	been	bedding	my	daughter.’
‘She	only	does	it	to	infuriate	you,	Highness.’
Abrastal	paused	with	her	knife,	looked	up	at	him.	‘And	has	it	succeeded?’
Grinning,	Spax	said,	‘So	I	tell	her	every	night.	All	about	your	rants,	your
foaming	mouth,	your	outrage	and	fury.’
‘Ugly	and	clever,	a	deadly	combination	in	any	man.’
‘Or	woman,	I	would	wager.’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘My	scouts	have	returned	from	the	coast,	Highness.	With	news.’
Finally,	she	sensed	something	in	him,	in	his	tone,	or	the	look	in	his	eyes,
for	she	slowly	straightened.	‘Are	we	flanked,	Warchief?’
‘No	enemy	in	sight,	Highness.’
‘Then	what?	As	you	can	see,	I’m	armed,	and	my	patience	is	getting	as	short
as	my	hair.’
‘Ships	were	sighted.	A	rag-tag	fleet.’
‘Ships?	Under	what	flag?’
‘Letherii,	Highness.’
Suddenly	she	was	on	her	feet.	Her	hair	only	half	shorn,	she	flung	the	knife
away.	The	blanket	slipped	down	and	Spax	found	himself	staring	at	her
magnificent	body.
‘Highness,	I	could	live	with	that	short	hair.’
‘Get	out	of	here	–	and	send	a	messenger	to	Brys.’
‘No	need,	Highness	–	about	the	messenger,	I	mean.	He	and	Aranict	are
even	now	approaching	camp.’


She	was	casting	about	for	her	clothes.	Now	she	paused.	‘This	was	planned!’
Spax	shrugged.	‘Possibly.	But	then,	why	not	tell	us?	I’m	more	inclined	to
think	this	gesture	was	made	by	the	king,	entirely	on	his	own.’
She	grunted.	‘You	might	be	right.	What	else	did	the	scouts	see?’
‘Landings,	Highness.	Battalion	strength,	Letherii	infantry	and	auxiliaries.
And	more	supplies	than	any	single	battalion	would	ever	need.’
‘Was	the	Imperial	Standard	flying?	Does	King	Tehol	command?’
‘No,	only	the	battalion	colours	were	present,	as	far	as	my	scouts	could
determine.	In	any	case,	just	this	last	night,	my	scouts	realized	that	riders	were
on	their	trail.	They	too	will	be	upon	us	shortly.’
She	was	still	standing	before	him,	in	all	her	glory.	‘What	are	you	still
doing	here?’
‘Answering	your	questions,	Highness.’
‘I	am	finished	with	my	questions.	Get	out.’
‘One	more	detail	you	might	be	interested	learning,’	Spax	said.	‘Among	the
auxiliaries,	Highness,	there	are	Teblor.’

Abrastal	and	Warchief	Spax	were	waiting	outside	the	queen’s	tent,	and	Aranict
studied	them	as	she	and	Brys	approached.	Both	were	arrayed	in	their	full
regalia,	the	queen	looking	imperial	though	the	hair	on	one	side	of	her	head
was	shorn	away,	and	the	Gilk	Warchief	festooned	in	weapons	and	wearing	an
ankle-length	cloak	made	of	turtle	shells.	What	is	this?	What	has	happened?
Abrastal	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Prince	Brys,	it	seems	we	shall	be
entertaining	guests	shortly.’
‘Before	you	ask,’	Brys	replied,	‘this	was	not	arranged	beforehand.
However,	the	last	messengers	I	sent	back	to	my	brother	detailed	what	we	then
knew	of	our	route.	At	the	time,	we	were	ten	days	into	the	Wastelands.’
‘Still,’	she	said,	‘the	timing	of	this	is…extraordinary.’
‘My	brother ’s	Ceda	is	able	to	sense,	even	at	a	great	distance,	sorcerous
efforts	seeking	groundwater.’	He	turned	slightly	to	nod	at	Aranict.	‘As	you
know,	our	legion	mages	have	been	engaged	in	such	rituals	ever	since	we	left
the	Wastelands.’
Abrastal’s	voice	was	flat.	‘Your	Ceda	was	able	to	track	us	based	on	the
drawing	of	water	from	the	ground…while	he	sits	ensconced	in	the	palace	in
Letheras?	You	expect	me	to	give	credit	to	that	explanation,	Prince?	Not	even	a
god	could	reach	that	far.’


‘Yes,	well.’
They	could	hear	horses	now,	coming	in	from	the	southeast,	and	the
Bolkando	camp	was	suddenly	stirring,	as	exhausted,	suffering	soldiers	left
their	bivouacs	to	line	the	main	avenue	between	tent	rows.	Voices	were	lifting	–
and	now	Aranict	could	see	the	vanguard.	She	squinted	at	the	pennants.	‘Sire,’
she	said	to	Brys,	‘Letherii,	yes,	but	I	do	not	recognize	the	heraldry	–	what
battalion	is	that?’
‘A	new	one,	I	would	hazard,’	Brys	replied.
The	battalion	commander	halted	his	troop	with	a	gesture	and	then	rode
forward	until	he	was	ten	paces	from	Brys	and	the	others.	He	dismounted	in	a
clatter	of	armour,	removed	his	helm	and	then	walked	to	kneel	before	the
prince.
‘Idist	Tennedict,	sire,	commanding	the	Chancel	Battalion.’
‘Please	stand,	Commander,’	said	Brys.	‘Your	arrival	is	most	welcome.	Idist
Tennedict	–	I	believe	I	know	that	family	name	though	at	the	moment	I	cannot
place	it.’
‘Yes,	sire.	My	father	was	one	of	your	brother ’s	principal	stake-holders,
and	numbered	among	the	first	to	go	under	on	the	Day	of	Losses.’
‘I	see.	It	seems,	however,	that	the	Tennedict	family	has	recovered	from
its…misfortune.’
‘Yes,	and	the	king	has	seen	fit	to	reward	us,	sire	–’
‘Excellent.’
‘–	in	the	form	of	community	service,	under	his	new	programme	of
Indebtedness	to	the	Community,	sire.	As	the	middle	son	and	facing	few
prospects,	I	elected	to	take	the	military	route	for	my	community	service,	while
the	rest	of	the	Tennedict	family	set	to	reforming	the	impoverished	conditions
of	the	indigents	out	on	the	Isles.’
Abrastal	made	a	sound	somewhere	between	disbelief	and	disgust.	‘Forgive
my	interruption,	Commander.	Am	I	to	understand	that	the	king	of	Lether,
having	ruined	your	family’s	wealth,	has	since	seen	fit	to	demand	from	you	a
period	of	public	service?’
‘That	is	correct,	Highness.’
‘How	is	that	even	remotely	fair?’
Idist	managed	a	faint	smile	as	he	regarded	her.	‘On	the	matter	of	fairness,
Queen,	King	Tehol	had	much	to	say	to	my	father,	and	all	those	others	who
profit	from	the	debts	of	others.’
Abrastal	scowled.	‘Speaking	from	a	position	of	great	privilege,	I	find	that
offensive.’
‘Highness,’	said	Idist,	‘I	believe	that	was	the	point.’


Brys	spoke.	‘Commander,	you	bring	not	only	yourselves,	but	also
resupply,	is	that	correct?’
‘It	is,	sire.	In	addition,	I	carry	a	written	missive	from	the	king,	addressed	to
you.’
‘Do	you	have	it	with	you?’
‘I	do,	sire.’
‘Then,	please,	read	it	to	us.’
The	young	commander ’s	brows	lifted.	‘Sire?	Perhaps,	some	privacy…’
‘Not	at	all,	Commander.	You	seem	to	have	the	voice	of	a	drill	sergeant	as	it
is.	Lend	it	to	my	brother ’s	words,	if	you	please.’
All	at	once	the	man	was	sweating,	and	Aranict	felt	a	sudden	sympathy.	She
leaned	close	to	Brys.	‘You	might	want	to	reconsider,	love.	This	is	your	brother,
after	all.’
‘Yes,	and?’
‘His	own	words,	Brys.’
The	prince	frowned.	‘Ah,	right.’
But	Idist	had	begun.	‘“Greetings	to	Prince	Brys	from	King	Tehol	the	Only
of	Lether.	Dearest	brother,	have	you	slept	with	her	yet?”’	Wisely,	he	paused
then	and	looked	up	at	the	prince.	On	all	sides,	from	the	soldiers	within	earshot
to	Abrastal	and	Spax,	there	was	deathly	silence.	Sighing,	Aranict	lit	a	stick	of
rustleaf.
Brys	stood,	one	hand	over	his	eyes,	and	then,	with	a	helpless	gesture,	bade
Idist	continue.
‘“Never	mind,	we	can	talk	about	that	later,	but	let	it	be	known	that	as	king	I
can	command	from	you	every	detail	down	to	the	very	last,	er,	detail,	all	the
while	promising	that	my	wife	will	never	hear	a	single	word	of	any	of	it.	Since,
as	I	am	sure	you	have	now	discovered,	pillow	talk	can	be	deadly.
‘“Best	I	turn	now	to	the	dull,	official	content	next,	so	that	we	can	later
return	to	the	juicy	details.	I	feel	justified	in	such	expectations	since	I	have
discovered	that	women	actually	engage	in	the	most	horrendously	explicit
discussions	of	their	menfolk	when	in	the	company	of	their	bosomed	friends,
inviting	tit	for	tat,	and	what	tit	could	be	more	inviting	than	tat?”’
Spax	burst	out	a	harsh	laugh,	and	then	ducked.	‘Sorry,	that	was	just	me,
being	appalled.’
Idist	resumed.	‘“Official	now.	Bugg	formed	up	his	own	battalion,	found	an
able	commander	for	it,	and	then	hired	a	fleet	to	transport	said	reinforcements
along	with	all	the	resupply	he	could	wedge	into	the	holds.	And	then,	following
my	proclamation	of	the	sovereignty	of	the	indigents	out	on	the	Isles,	Bugg
oversaw	all	the	Teblor	who,	strangely,	rushed	to	join	the	Letherii	military	with


the	aim	of	accompanying	the	Chancel	fleet.	Between	you	and	me,	the	Teblor
have	to	be	the	most	contrary	people	I	have	ever	known.	Anyway,	with	all	of
Bugg	doing	this	and	Bugg	doing	that,	I	am	understandably	exhausted	and	I
graciously	accept	your	sympathy.	To	continue,	the	battalion	now	has	three
hundred	Teblor	in	its	auxiliaries.	I	believe	some	ancient	prophecy	has	them	in
an	advanced	state	of	excitement.
‘“Just	as	my	very	own	prophecy	of	your	impending	love-life	having	now
come	true	(I	trust),	why,	I	am	left	in	an	advanced	state	of	excitement	–	but	not
improperly	so,	I	assure	you.	That	would	be	sick.	Never	mind	tales	of	war	and
mayhem,	brother,	spin	me	a	romance!	Trapped	in	a	palace	and	chained	to	a
wife,	well,	you	can	imagine	my	desperation	here.
‘“Sincerely	as	I	am	to	put	into	practice	a	new	period	of	austerity	here	in	the
palace,	I	have	just	discovered	the	error	of	dictating	this	missive	to	my	wife.	So
I	will	take	this	moment,	before	fleeing	the	room,	to	send	to	you	all	my	love,
and	to	extend	my	warmest	greetings	to	everyone	else	whom	you	have	forced
into	the	awkward	position	of	hearing	this.
‘“With	deepest	affection,	your	loving	brother,	King	Tehol.”’
‘Prince	Brys,’	murmured	Abrastal,	‘you	have	my	sympathies.’
Brys	sighed,	and	then,	in	a	remarkably	calm	and	steady	voice,	he	addressed
Idist.	‘Commander,	when	will	the	battalion	arrive?’
‘They	have	already	begun	their	march,	sire.	Two	days	behind	us.	I	left
orders	to	push	on	into	the	night	and	rise	before	dawn,	so	with	luck	they	will
arrive	by	dusk	tomorrow.’
‘Thank	you,	Commander.’
As	they	walked	back	to	the	Letherii	encampment,	Idist	and	his	troop
maintaining	a	respectful	distance	behind	them,	Aranict	took	Brys’s	hand.	‘All
that	cheering	and	laughter	–	that	was	in	gratitude.	You	do	realize	that,	don’t
you?’
He	frowned.
‘Brys.’
‘He	does	it	on	purpose,	you	know.	Sees	me	as	far	too	serious	–	but	then,	it
just	so	happens	I	am	about	to	lead	my	soldiers	into	war.	We	have	marched	a
long	way	and	have	suffered	deprivations,	and	our	enemy	awaits	us,	fit,	rested
and	probably	thoroughly	entrenched.	That	enemy	will	be	choosing	the	ground,
and	to	make	matters	worse	they	will	probably	outnumber	us	by	a	wide	margin.’
‘Nothing	he	said	made	light	of	that,’	she	responded.	‘And	by	his	gesture
alone,	you	must	know	that	he	worries	for	you.	This	resupply	gives	us	a
fighting	chance.’
‘I	know.	And	of	course	I’m	grateful	–	how	could	I	not	be?’


‘Idist	did	warn	you.’
Brys	shook	his	head.	‘It’s	not	the	letter,	Aranict.’
‘It	isn’t?’
‘What	just	happened	back	there	played	out	in	Tehol’s	mind	even	as	he
dictated	the	lines	to	his	wife.	He	knew	I	would	want	his	words	read	out	loud	–
my	brother	is	diabolical	and	thoroughly	shameless.	I	have	spent	my	whole	life
walking	wide-eyed	into	his	snares,	and	none	of	it	bothers	me.	In	fact,	I	cannot
help	but	admire	his	genius.	Every	time.’
Aranict	was	baffled.	‘Brys,	what	is	it	then?’
‘I	cannot	recall,	Aranict	–	and	I	have	been	trying	–	I	cannot	recall	Tehol
ever	saying	that	he	loved	me.	And	that	alone	is	the	measure	of	his	concern,	and
it’s	shaken	me	to	the	core.’
‘Brys—’
‘Tehol	fears	we	will	not	see	each	other	again.	For	all	its	mundane	silliness,
he	came	as	close	to	saying	goodbye	as	anyone	could	without	using	the	word
itself.	And	so,	as	you	perhaps	can	now	imagine,	I	miss	him.	I	miss	him	dearly.’
She	held	tight	on	to	his	hand.	As	if	that	could	help,	when	she	knew	that	it
could	not.	But	she	had	nothing	to	say	to	him	–	her	mind	was	blank,	echoing	in
the	wake	of	what	had	just	rushed	through	it.	He	expects	to	die.	My	love	expects
to	die.
	
The	relief	wagons	rolled	into	the	camp,	and	for	the	first	time,	Shield	Anvil
Tanakalian	set	eyes	upon	a	Forkrul	Assail	–	or	so	he	thought,	only	to
subsequently	discover	that	the	man	was	but	a	half-blood,	a	Watered.	No	matter,
there	was	something	of	a	nightmare	about	him	–	the	skin	white	as	papyrus,	the
way	he	moved,	his	arms	crooking	like	snakes,	the	sinuous	flow	of	his	strides,
and	the	ghastly	coldness	in	his	pallid	eyes.
These	are	the	deadliest	of	allies.	I	am	not	blind	to	the	contempt	you	have
for	us,	when	you	look	upon	our	beleaguered,	battered	condition.	But	we	shall
recover,	and	swiftly,	and	when	the	time	comes	to	do	what	is	necessary,	we	shall
be	ready.
He	saw	Setoc	standing	apart,	ignoring	the	Watered	and	his	officers,
ignoring	everyone	and	everything.	Was	she	caught	in	the	grip	of	the	Wolves?
Did	they	stare	out	now	from	her	mismatched	eyes?	She	is	a	liability.	But	it’s
not	her	fault	–	the	Wolves	have	taken	her,	they	use	her	–	she	is	nothing	more
than	a	portal,	and	when	the	gods	choose	to	manifest	in	this	world	they	will	tear
right	through	her.	I	doubt	she	will	even	survive.
If	necessary,	I	will	seal	that	portal.	I	will	stop	the	Wolves	from	coming.	I


will	do	this	to	save	their	lives.
So	his	prayers	went	unanswered.	By	her	words	she	had	made	plain	that	the
priests	of	the	Grey	Helms	were	all	fools,	self-deluded	in	believing	they	could
touch	the	mind	of	the	Wild.	And	generations	of	Perish	who	gave	their	lives	to
the	Wolves…a	waste.	All	that	blood	spilled.	And	the	struggles	for	power,	those
precious	titles	of	Mortal	Sword,	Shield	Anvil,	Destriant,	they	all	meant	nothing.
And	therein	lurks	the	cruellest	truth	of	all.	In	the	end,	we	are	no	different
from	every	other	cult,	every	other	religion.	Convincing	ourselves	of	the
righteousness	of	our	path.	Convincing	ourselves	that	we	alone	hold	to	an
immutable	truth.	Secure	in	the	belief	that	everyone	else	is	damned.
But	it	was	all	a	game,	the	sacred	a	playground	for	secular	power	struggles,
venal	ambition.
What’s	left	to	believe	in?
His	thoughts	swirled,	spun	in	a	vortex,	taking	him	down	and	down…to
Krughava.	Did	you	see	through	it	all?	Did	you	decide	that	personal	glory	was
all	there	was,	the	only	thing	worthy	of	aspiration?	Are	you,	Krughava,	the
reduction	of	the	argument?
Make	your	last	stand.	Die	neck-deep	in	integrity	and	honour	and	duty	–
those	words	are	borne	on	a	flag,	in	three	shades	of	red,	and	you	will	rally	to
that	standard	and	once	there	you	will	happily	die.	Very	well,	Krughava,	I	can
make	sense	of	you	now.	It	does	not	help,	because	still	I	will	not	follow	you.	But
at	least	I	understand.
They	didn’t	need	Setoc.	The	Grey	Helms	would	be	the	wrath	of	the	Wolves,
the	fury	of	the	Wild,	but	without	risk	to	the	Wolves.	Yes,	this	is	war,	but	do	not
come	here.	Not	to	this	one.	If	you	do,	they	will	take	you.	If	you	do,	gods	will	die
on	that	day.
I	will	not	have	it.
He	realized	that	he	stood	between	the	two	–	between	Krughava	and	Setoc,
between	the	profane	and	the	sacred,	and	yet	to	neither	would	he	give	his
embrace.	Poised	on	the	knife	edge	indeed.	I	am	the	Shield	Anvil,	and	the	virtue
of	blessing	is	my	one	and	my	only	virtue,	yet	here	I	stand,	trapped,	unwilling	to
reach	out	to	either	one.
It	seems	that	the	glorious	death	shall	be	mine,	after	all.
‘Shield	Anvil.’
He	turned,	found	himself	facing	the	Watered	commander.	‘Yes?’
‘I	suggest	you	rest	and	feed	for	this	night.	Come	the	dawn	we	can	begin
our	march	to	Blessed	Gift—’
‘Excuse	me,	where?’
‘Blessed	Gift	is	the	old	name	for	the	plain	where	awaits	the	Kolanse	army.


It	was	a	land	once	rich	with	wheat.’
Tanakalian	smiled,	looked	away.	‘Very	well.’
‘Shield	Anvil.’
He	glanced	back.	‘What	is	it?’
The	Watered	tilted	his	head.	‘I	was	about	to	comment	on	the	impressive
courtesy	in	the	manners	of	your	soldiers.’
‘Forgive	me,’	said	Tanakalian,	voice	tight,	‘I	am…distracted.’
‘Of	course.	Brother	Diligence	wishes	to	know,	are	those	pursuing	you	the
only	threat	we	should	expect?’
Those	pursuing…but	I	say	nothing	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Not	to	you,
not	to	any	of	you.	‘I	believe	so.	However…’
‘Shield	Anvil?’
‘There	was	an	army	of	foreigners	–	but	they	attempted	to	cross	the	Glass
Desert.	It	is	probably	safe	to	assume	that	they	have	failed.’
‘I	agree.	We	have	sensed	nothing	impinging	upon	us	from	that	direction.’
Tanakalian	nodded.	‘Well,	I	doubt	you	would	have	anyway,	but	it	pleases
me	to	hear	your	certainty	in	your	assessment	that	the	Glass	Desert	cannot	be
crossed.’
‘A	moment,	Shield	Anvil	–	you	say	to	me	that	you	do	not	think	we	would
sense	their	appearance.	Why	is	that?’
Tanakalian’s	eyes	wandered	past,	settled	once	more	on	Setoc.	He	shrugged.
‘Their	commander	wields	an	Otataral	sword.	Not	that	it	could	save—’	He
stopped	then,	for	the	Watered	was	marching	back	to	his	entourage,	shouting
commands	in	the	Kolansii	language.	In	moments,	three	riders	wheeled	their
mounts	and	set	out	at	a	gallop	northward.
When	he	glanced	back	at	Setoc,	he	found	her	staring	at	him.
The	Shield	Anvil	realized	that	he	was	sweating,	his	heart	beating	fast	in	his
chest.	‘It’s	just	an	Otataral	sword,’	he	muttered,	baffled	at	the	Watered’s
obvious	alarm,	unnerved	by	Setoc’s	sudden	attention.
Calm	yourself.	Hold	to	the	knife’s	edge.	Breathe	deeply…breathe…


Chapter	Twenty-Two

‘Even	a	man	who	has	lived	a	life	of	sorrows	will	ask	for	one	more
day.’
Prayers	of	the	Condemned
Kolanse	Imperial	Archives
Anonymous
	cloudless,	the	blue	washed
out	and	tinged	green	by	the	Strangers.	Empty,	and	yet…	Death	comes.	I	see	a
road	built	from	bones	and	dust,	a	road	slashing	the	flesh	of	the	earth.	It	comes
with	the	speed	of	the	wind.	It	comes	in	the	shadow	of…gods	below!	Confusion
erupted	within	her.	Then	terror	and	dread.	Korabas!	Unchained!	But	why?	Who
would	do	such	a	thing?	Who	has	summoned	this	power?	It	is	madness!	For	an
instant,	she	felt	once	more	the	unyielding	weight	of	the	stone	that	had	once
imprisoned	her	–	suffocating,	the	horror	of	limbs	she	could	not	move,	the
darkness	and	the	terrible,	terrible	solitude.	And	she	knew	what	this	was;	she
knew	this	sensation,	this	animal	terror.	Panic.	No!	No	one	will	take	me	again!
Trembling,	she	struggled	to	regain	control.
Korabas.	You	are	freed	–	I	feel	your	bitter	exultation.	Perhaps	I	alone	can
truly	understand	it.
But	they	will	come	for	you.	Can	you	not	feel	them?	The	Eleint	are	upon	this
world.	They	will	kill	you.
Do	not	seek	us.	Do	not	pierce	the	skin	of	Akhrast	Korvalain.	We	must	not	be
wounded	–	not	now,	Korabas,	I	beg	you.
But	she	knew	that	there	would	be	no	reasoning	with	such	a	creature.	From
the	moment	of	its	creation,	the	Otataral	Dragon	had	been	doomed	to	an	eternity
of	anguish	and	rage.	Unmatched	in	power,	yet	that	power	was	abnegation.	Its
only	food	was	sorcery,	but	life	itself	was	a	manifestation	of	magic,	and	so	all	it
touched	it	killed.	Only	the	Eleint	possessed	the	will	to	withstand	that.
Such…loneliness.	The	ordeal	of	existence…so	unrelenting	in	its	refutation.
Yes,	Korabas,	I	could	look	into	your	eyes.	Without	flinching.	For	I	know	the
truth	of	your	turmoil.
CALM	STOOD	MOTIONLESS,	FACING	SOUTHWEST.	THE	SKY	WAS	EMPTY,


She	knew	she	could	not	alter	the	dragon’s	deadly	path.	Her	brothers	and
sisters	had	no	idea	what	was	now	winging	towards	them,	and	against	the
Otataral	Dragon…they	might	all	die.	Reverence,	Diligence,	Serenity…all	my
pure	kin.	And	all	that	we	sought	to	achieve	will	be	destroyed.	No,	she	could	not
stop	Korabas.
But	I	can	avenge	the	deaths	of	my	brothers	and	sisters.
She	was	camped	three	days	from	the	bound	body	of	Lifestealer.	Three	days
from	the	one	weapon	capable	of	matching	the	Otataral	Dragon.	Icarium.	I	will
awaken	you.	If	the	Eleint	fail	–	if	they	do	not	come	in	time	–	I	leave	Korabas	to
you.
The	two	would	seek	each	other	out	–	they	could	do	naught	else.	The	dragon
is	negation.	But	Icarium	is	an	open	wound	into	Chaos	itself.	When	his	self
shatters,	when	his	so-called	rage	is	unleashed,	he	is	but	a	conduit,	a	portalway.
This	is	why	he	cannot	be	stopped	–	he	is	not	even	there.	Shall	you	do	battle
against	chaos	itself?	Impossible.
They	will	clash,	and	that	battle	shall	destroy	the	world.
Good.
Even	Sister	Reverence	does	not	understand:	there	is	more	than	one	path	to
justice.
She	set	out.
Beneath	her	feet,	the	earth’s	screaming	now	reached	her	senses	–	she	could
feel	the	tremors	of	the	assault	being	inflicted	upon	it.	The	sudden	blighting,	the
eruptions	of	dust,	the	vast	fissures	opening	below	Korabas.	Where	she	passes,
there	shall	be	no	life.	Where	she	passes,	all	that	is	living	shall	die.
Eleint,	find	Korabas.	Kill	the	Otataral	Dragon.	That	is	all	I	ask.	And	then
we	can	bargain,	for	I	shall	have	Icarium	–	I	shall	have	a	force	of	chaos	to
match	your	own.	We	can	strike	a	perfect	balance,	in	a	world	scoured	empty	of
meddling	gods…imagine	what	can	be	achieved!
We	can	give	the	inheritors	true	freedom,	and	by	their	each	and	every	deed
we	can	watch	them	hang	themselves.	No	gods	to	blame,	no	excuses	to	build	up,
no	lies	to	hide	behind.	Such	a	glorious	world	it	will	be!	Such	a	righteous	place
–	a	place	where	justice	never	blinks.
We	can	share	such	a	world,	Eleint.
Climbing	a	slope	to	a	ridgeline,	she	found	two	figures	standing	in	her	path.
T’lan	Imass.
Ancient	rage	flared	incandescent	in	Calm,	and	once	more	panic	rattled
through	her,	just	as	quickly	crushed	down.	‘You	would	dare	this?’
In	answer	they	readied	their	stone	weapons.
‘He	is	mine!’


‘He	is	no	one’s,	Forkrul	Assail,’	said	the	female.	‘Turn	back.’
Calm	barked	a	laugh	as	she	quested	with	her	power.	‘I	sense	no	others	in
this	soil,	on	the	winds	–	there	are	just	the	two	of	you.	You	must	be	fools	to
think	you	can	stop	me.	I	held	the	Stone	Stairs	against	hundreds	of	your	kind.	I
ended	their	war.’
The	two	T’lan	Imass	stepped	out	to	the	sides,	the	huge	male	hefting	a	flintstudded	bone	mace,	the	female	shifting	her	grip	on	a	stone	spear.
Calm	moved	with	stunning	speed,	lunging	at	the	female,	her	torso	writhing
to	evade	the	thrusting	weapon.	Her	hands	snapped	out,	one	plunging	into	the
undead	warrior ’s	chest	amidst	shattering	ribs,	the	other	lashing	at	her	face	–
catching	the	lower	jaw	and	tearing	it	off.
She	twisted	past,	evading	the	downward	swing	of	the	male’s	weapon,	and
with	one	hand	now	gripping	the	spine,	she	spun	the	female	round,	lifting	her
off	her	feet	and	flinging	her	into	the	male’s	path.	Even	as	he	stumbled,	he
swung	the	mace	in	a	diagonal	slash.	The	Forkrul	Assail	stepped	inside	the
attack,	blocking	the	bone	shaft	with	her	wrists,	turned	to	face	him	and	thrust
upward	with	the	heels	of	her	hands,	catching	each	side	of	the	warrior ’s	lower
jaw.	The	strength	of	the	blow	exploded	the	vertebrae	of	his	neck,	launching	the
skull	into	the	air.
As	the	huge,	headless	warrior	toppled,	Calm	closed	once	more	on	the
female,	who	was	feebly	trying	to	regain	her	feet.	Grasping	her	right	arm,	the
Forkrul	Assail	tore	it	from	the	shoulder	socket.	Using	the	arm	as	a	weapon,	she
swung	it	hard	into	the	side	of	the	female’s	head.	The	ball	of	the	humerus
punched	a	hole	in	the	warrior ’s	temple.
The	T’lan	Imass	staggered	to	one	side.
Calm	struck	again.	Plates	of	the	skull	splintered,	broke	away.	A	third	blow
crushed	the	woman’s	face.	She	fell.	The	Forkrul	Assail	stepped	forward	and
with	one	booted	foot	rolled	the	T’lan	Imass	on	to	her	back.	Then	she	swung	the
arm	down	repeatedly	on	what	was	left	of	the	face	and	skull.	The	ninth	blow
split	the	arm	bone.	Calm	flung	it	away	in	disgust	and	used	the	heel	of	her	boot.
Long	after	the	wretched	spirit	of	the	female	warrior	had	left	the	remains	on
the	ground,	Calm	continued	battering	at	that	hated	face.
Some	time	later,	she	resumed	her	journey.
Such	a	glorious	world	it	will	be.
	
Kilmandaros	fled.	She	could	not	even	remember	when	she	had	begun	running,
or	when	she	had	breached	her	way	into	the	first	of	innumerable	warrens.	The
landscape	she	now	crossed	was	bleak,	colourless,	the	ground	underfoot	hard


uneven	clay	that	had	been	chopped	up	by	thousands	of	hoofs.	Two	small	moons
tracked	the	night	sky.
Half	a	league	ahead,	she	saw	hills	of	red	sand,	rippling	as	they	climbed	to
the	horizon.	No	places	in	which	to	hide	–	no	caves,	no	forests	–	she	would	have
to	leave	this	realm	soon.	And	yet	–	Kilmandaros	glanced	back	over	one
shoulder.
A	storm	of	darkness,	boiling	to	consume	half	the	sky.
Close!	Close!	Her	breath	tore	at	her	throat.	Her	hearts	pounded	like	the
thunder	of	clashing	stormclouds.	She	stumbled	on	torn,	bloodied	feet,	her
muscles	burning	like	acid.
Where?	Where	to	hide?
‘I’ve	done	a	terrible	thing.	And	now	I	will	pay	–	it	was	all	Errastas!	All	his
fault,	not	mine!	I	did	not	want	her	freed	–	I	swear	it!’
The	slope	of	the	nearest	hill	loomed	before	her,	a	sweep	of	red	sand	–	how
she	hated	this	place!
‘A	terrible	thing.	A	terrible	thing!’
Darkness	foamed	up	on	either	side.	Crying	out,	Kilmandaros	staggered	to
a	halt,	wheeled	round,	lifting	her	hands—
He	struck	from	the	sky.
Wings	like	flames	of	night.	The	blaze	of	argent	reptilian	eyes.	Talons
lunging	down,	impaling	her	shoulders,	snatching	her	from	the	ground.
Kilmandaros	shrieked,	fists	closing	to	smash	upward	into	the	dragon’s
ridged	chest.	The	sound	the	impacts	made	was	thunder.
And	then,	trailing	ropes	of	blood,	she	was	falling.
His	shadow	passed	over	her,	a	wheeling,	plummeting	presence,	looming
huge	–	jaws	snapping	out	from	a	head	above	a	lashing	neck.	Fangs	sank	into
one	thigh	and	she	was	thrown	upward	once	more.	Spinning,	she	saw	gleaming
bone	where	the	muscles	of	her	left	thigh	had	been	–	saw	blood	spraying	out
from	her	leg.	Howling,	she	fell	earthward	once	more.
This	time,	he	left	her	to	strike	the	ground.	She	landed	on	her	feet	with	the
sound	of	exploding	trees.	Bones	snapped,	splinters	driving	up	into	her	pelvis
and	torso.	The	impact	threw	her	forward.	On	to	her	chest,	and	then	over.	Lying
stunned,	helpless,	Kilmandaros	stared	upward	to	see	Draconus	descending.
Not	fair.
A	soft	hand	settled	against	her	cheek.	Blinking,	she	found	herself	looking
up	into	her	son’s	face.	‘No!	Leave	here!	Beloved	son	–	flee!’
Instead,	he	straightened,	drawing	a	sword.
Kilmandaros	heard	Draconus	speak	from	only	a	few	paces	distant.	‘Where
is	Errastas,	Sechul?’


‘Gone,’	her	son	replied.
‘Where?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Into	hiding,	of	course.	You	won’t	find	him,	not	any	time
soon.	Shall	I	caution	you	against	uttering	any	vows,	Draconus,	or	would	the
sting	of	that	prove	too	much?’
‘You	always	were	chained	to	his	ankle,	Sechul	Lath,	but	if	you	are
determined	to	oppose	me	here,	I	will	kill	you.’
‘I	will	defend	my	mother.’
‘Then	you	will	die	with	her.’
She	saw	his	sad	smile,	his	lopsided	shrug.	‘Draconus,	I	have	nothing	left.
No	one	but	her.	If	you	will	kill	her	this	day,	then…there	is	no	reason	for	me	to
go	on.	Do	you	understand?’
‘Pathetic,’	growled	Draconus.	‘You	would	spend	an	eternity	under	your
mother ’s	wing?	Step	away,	find	some	light	–	some	light	of	your	own,	Sechul.’
‘Ah,	I	see,	so	this	is	my	opportunity,	is	it?	This	is	what	you	are	offering
me,	Draconus?	You	never	did	understand	acts	of	generosity,	did	you?’
There	was	a	long	pause,	and	Kilmandaros	knew	that	their	gazes	had
locked,	and	then	Draconus	said,	‘Ready	your	weapon.’
She	would	have	cried	out	then,	would	have	begged	for	the	life	of	her	son	–
but	when	she	opened	her	mouth	her	throat	filled	with	blood,	and	she	was
suddenly	drowning.
She	heard	the	whish	of	a	blade,	a	scuffling	of	boots	on	the	hard	scrabble,
and	then	a	terrible,	grinding	sound.	A	sword	fell	to	the	ground,	and	someone
made	a	small,	childish	sound.
Footsteps,	drawing	closer.
She	couldn’t	breathe,	felt	herself	dying.	Her	eyes,	glaring	upward	–	seeing
those	damned	moons	so	puny	in	that	vast	night	sky	–	and	then	that	vision	was
blocked	out	and	Draconus	stared	down	on	her.	He	left	you	no	choice,	yes…but
you	do	not	say	it.	What	need	is	there	to	say	it?
His	eyes	shone	like	silvered	pools	at	midnight,	and	there	was,	she	realized
with	a	start,	such	beauty	in	them	–	with	the	darkness	flowing	round,	falling	like
tears,	but	you	can	see	how	they	could	turn.	You	can	see	it.	Such	a	terrible
thing…
Errastas,	you	have	killed	us.
Was	it	mercy	when	he	set	the	sharp	tip	of	his	sword	into	the	hollow	of	her
neck?	She	looked	again	into	his	eyes,	but	saw	nothing.	Yes.	Let	us	call	it	that.
Mercy.
When	he	thrust	the	blade	through	her	throat,	it	was	cold	as	ice	and	hot	as
fire,	and	all	that	she	saw	suddenly	faded,	from	the	inside	out.


I	–	I’m	leaving.
My	son.	Even	at	the	last,	you	disappoint	me.
	
Draconus	pulled	free	the	sword,	and	then	turned.	A	knot	of	shadows,	vaguely
human	in	form,	stood	opposite	him.	To	either	side	was	a	Hound,	and	he	caught
a	motion	off	to	his	right	and	then	on	his	left	–	more	of	the	beasts,	encircling
him.
Eyes	narrowing	on	the	apparition,	Draconus	leaned	on	his	sword.
‘Usurper,	does	Tulas	know	you	stole	his	dogs?’
The	silver	head	of	a	walking	cane	flashed	briefly	before	the	shadows	hid	it
again,	like	a	fisherman’s	lure	in	dark	water.	The	apparition	spoke	in	a	thin,
wavering	voice,	‘There	is	little	civility	in	you,	Old	One.’	A	sudden	giggle.
‘Your…inheritor…once	stood	before	me,	just	as	you	are	doing	now.	He	too
held	an	infernal	sword	–	oh,	was	it	yours?	How	careless	of	you.’
‘If	you	force	me,’	Draconus	said,	‘I	will	kill	these	Hounds.’
‘How	goes	the	poem?	“The	child	and	his	dog…”’
Draconus	stepped	forward,	blade	lifting.	‘Who	in	the	name	of	the
Azathanai	are	you?’
A	frail,	wispy	hand	gestured	vaguely.	‘Your	pardon,	did	I	offend?’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘Only	a	question	for	you,	Old	One.’	The	cane	reappeared,	bobbing	in	the
direction	of	Kilmandaros’s	corpse.	‘Where	next?	Or,’	and	he	giggled	again,
‘who	next?’
‘Why	should	it	matter	to	you?’
‘Only	this…leave	Korabas.	Leave	the	Forkrul	Assail	–	in	fact,	leave	that
whole	mess.	Even	the	Eleint.	If	you	show	up,	it’ll	only	complicate	matters.’
‘You	are	the	one,	then,’	Draconus	said,	lowering	the	sword	and	stepping
back.
‘I	am?	Why,	yes,	I	am.’
‘The	spider	at	the	centre	of	this	web.	Hood.	Rake—’
‘And	they	were	true	to	their	words	–	now	that	was	a	rarity.	Perhaps	of
greater	relevance	is	this.	Anomander	Rake	spoke	well	of	you,	Draconus.	Can
you	imagine	such	a	thing?	But	it	goes	even	beyond	that,	for	he	also	said	that
you	would	be	true	to	your	word.	Will	you,	Draconus?	Be	true	to	your	word?’
‘I	do	not	recall	giving	it	to	you	on	any	matter	here,’	Draconus	replied.
The	cane’s	heel	thumped	on	the	ground.	‘Excellent!	Now,	as	to	that…’
	


A	short	time	later,	with	Draconus	gone,	the	Hounds	drew	closer	to	the	corpses
of	Kilmandaros	and	Sechul	Lath,	sniffing	with	their	hackles	raised	like	spines.
Shadowthrone	watched	their	agitated	circling,	and	then	glanced	across	to	find
Cotillion	standing	nearby.
The	patron	god	of	assassins	looked…shaken.
Shadowthrone	sighed,	not	without	sympathy.	‘The	Elders	are	so
implacable.	Look	upon	these	two	tragic	victims.	How	many	ages	have	they
survived?	To	come	to	an	end’	–	he	waved	the	cane	–	‘here.	Wherever	here	is.
Even	the	Hounds	were	hard	pressed	to	track	them.’
‘You	convinced	him?’
Shadowthrone	hissed,	lifting	the	cane	to	examine	the	silver	head.	‘He
thought	me…audacious.’
‘Just	you?’
‘Us.’
‘We’ve	lost	her,’	Cotillion	said.	‘Or	so	I	fear.	It	was	too	much,	friend,	too
much	–	they	have	not	walked	our	path.	They	are	mortals.	That	and	nothing
more.	They	have	not	seen.	The	necessity	has	not…	not	gnawed	at	their	souls,
the	way	it	has	with	us.’
‘Paths?	Gnawing?	Souls?	None	of	this	means	anything	to	me.	We
concluded	that	things	had	to	change,	that	is	all.’
‘They	had	to	because	our	position	was	too	perilous,’	Cotillion	replied.
‘Everything	that’s	followed	–	this	whole	insane	scheme	–	it	all	began	with	our
need	to	secure	our	place	in	the	pantheon.’
‘Precisely.’
‘But	then	it	all	changed.’
‘Maybe	for	you,’	Shadowthrone	muttered.
‘Liar.’
‘Shadows	never	lie.’
They	were	both	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	Shadowthrone	tilted	his	head
back	and	let	loose	a	wild	laugh.	Fighting	a	smile,	Cotillion	looked	away.
‘Are	you	done	with	your	moment	of	doubt?’	Shadowthrone	asked.	‘Good.
It	ill-suited	you.	Listen,	she’s	a	woman,	and	that	alone	makes	her	the	most
terrifying	force	in	all	the	realms.’
‘Yes,’	Cotillion	said,	‘I	am	well	aware	of	your	long-standing	fear	of	the
swaying	sex.’
‘I	blame	my	mother.’
‘Convenient.’
‘I	don’t	know	which	of	us	dreads	more	our	visits.’
‘She’s	still	alive?	Don’t	be	ridiculous,	Ammanas.’


‘Listen,	I	wasn’t	always	this	old,	you	know.	In	any	case,	every	time	we	end
up	in	the	same	room	I	can	see	the	disappointment	in	her	eyes,	and	hear	it	in	her
voice.	“Emperor?	Oh,	that	empire.	So	now	you’re	a	god?	Oh	dear,	not
Shadow?	Isn’t	it	broken?	Why	did	you	have	to	pick	a	broken	realm	to	rule?
When	your	father	was	your	age…”	Aagh,	and	on	and	on	it	goes!	I’ve	been	on
the	run	since	I	was	nine	years	old,	and	is	it	any	wonder?’
Cotillion	was	studying	him	bemusedly.
‘They	will	walk	out	from	that	desert,	friend,’	Shadowthrone	said.	‘I	feel	it
in	my	bones.’
‘Didn’t	know	you	had	any.’
‘Sticks,	then.	I	feel	it	in	my	sticks.	Hmm,	doesn’t	sound	sufficiently
assuring,	does	it?’
‘Assuring?	No.	Creepy?	Yes.’
Shadowthrone	thumped	the	cane	down,	looked	round.	‘We’re	still	here?
Why	are	we	still	here?’
‘A	few	last	thoughts	for	the	departed,	perhaps?’
‘Is	it	the	thing	to	do?	I	suppose	it	is.’
Studying	the	corpses	now,	Cotillion	grunted.	‘Not	interested	in	just	a	slap
on	the	wrist,	was	he?’
‘Children	who	can’t	be	touched	end	up	getting	away	with	murder.’
‘That’s	your	last	word	to	them?	It	doesn’t	make	any	sense,	Shadowthrone.’
‘But	it	does.	The	Elder	Gods	were	like	spoiled	children,	with	no	one	to
watch	over	them.	The	only	nonsensical	thing	about	them	was	that	they	weren’t
all	killed	off	long	ago.	Just	how	much	can	any	of	us	tolerate?	That’s	the
question,	the	only	question,	in	fact.’	He	gestured	with	the	cane.	‘There’s	one
man’s	answer.’
‘I	suppose,’	Cotillion	mused,	‘we	should	be	thankful	that	Draconus	was
chained	up	inside	Dragnipur	for	all	that	time.	If	Rake	hadn’t	killed	him…’
‘Every	wayward	child	should	spend	a	few	hundred	lifetimes	dragging	a
wagon	filled	with	bodies.’	Shadowthrone	grunted.	‘Sounds	like	something	my
mother	might	say.	“Only	a	hundred	lifetimes,	Kellan?	Too	weak	to	handle	a
thousand,	are	you?	Why,	your	father…”	Aagh!	Not	again!’
	
Sechul	Lath	found	himself	lying	on	the	ground.	His	eyes	were	closed,	and	he
felt	no	desire	to	open	them.	Not	yet,	anyway.
He	heard	footsteps,	coming	closer.	Two	sets,	halting	to	stand	on	either	side
of	him.
‘Oh	my,’	said	a	woman’s	voice	on	his	left.	‘I	suppose	it	had	to	happen,


eventually.	Still…tell	me,	brother,	are	you	feeling	anything?’
‘No,’	replied	the	man	on	his	right.	‘Why,	should	I?’
‘Well,	we	are	what	was	the	best	of	him,	and	we	shall	live	on.’
‘Do	you	think	he	can	hear	us,	sister?’
‘I	imagine	so.	Do	you	remember	once,	we	sent	a	coin	spinning?’
‘Long	ago	now.’
‘If	I	listen	hard…’
‘Probably	just	your	imagination,	my	love.	Some	games	die	with	barely	a
whisper.	And	as	for	this	new	one	–	I	want	no	part	of	it.’
She	made	a	sound,	something	like	a	laugh.	‘Is	that	wisdom	I’m	hearing?’
‘Look	at	our	father,’	he	said.	‘When	he	opens	his	eyes,	when	he	climbs	to
his	feet,	there	will	be	no	going	back.’
‘No,	no	going	back.	Ever	again.’
Sechul’s	son	sighed.	‘I	think	we	should	hunt	down	the	Errant,	beloved.	In
our	father ’s	name,	we	should	teach	him	about	the	lord’s	push.’
‘Draconus	will	find	him.	You	can	be	certain	of	that.’
‘But	I	want	to	be	there	when	he	does.’
‘Better	we	should	be	like	this,	brother.	Come	to	welcome	him	before	the
gates	of	death.	We	could	help	him	to	his	feet,	reminding	him	that	our	father
waits	on	the	other	side.’
‘We	could	guide	him	to	the	gate.’
‘Just	so.’
‘And	then	give	the	Errant—’
‘A	nudge.’
His	children	laughed,	and	Sechul	Lath	found	himself	smiling.	Son,
daughter,	what	a	fine	gift	you	give	me,	before	I	am	sent	on	my	way.
‘Sister…	I	see	a	coin	with	two	heads,	both	the	Errant’s.	Shall	we	send	it
spinning?’
‘Why	not,	brother?	Prod	and	pull,	’tis	the	way	of	the	gods.’
When	at	last	he	opened	his	eyes,	they	were	gone.
And	all	was	well.
	
Where	her	draconic	shadow	slipped	over	the	land	below,	the	ground	erupted	in
spumes	of	dust	and	stones.	Fissures	spread	outward	jagged	and	depthless.	Hills
slumped,	collapsed,	their	cloak	of	plants	withering,	blackening.	Where	she
passed,	the	earth	died.	Freedom	was	a	gift,	but	freedom	filled	her	with
desperate	rage,	and	such	pain	that	the	rush	of	air	over	her	scales	was	agony.
She	had	no	doubt	that	she	possessed	a	soul.	She	could	see	it	deep	inside,


down	a	tunnel	through	cracked	bedrock,	down	and	ever	down,	to	a	crushed
knot	lying	on	the	floor.	There.	That.	And	the	screams	that	howled	from	it	made
the	roots	of	the	mountains	shiver,	made	seas	tremble.	Made	still	the	winds	and
lifeless	the	air	itself.
Before	her	birth,	there	had	been	the	peace	of	unknowing,	the	oblivion	of
that	which	did	not	exist.	She	neither	felt	nor	cared,	because	she	simply	wasn’t.
Before	the	gods	meddled,	before	they	tore	light	from	dark,	life	from	death,
before	they	raised	their	walls	and	uttered	their	foul	words.	This	is,	but	this	is
not.	There	shall	be	magic	in	the	worlds	we	have	made,	and	by	its	power	shall
life	rise	and	in	looking	upon	its	myriad	faces,	we	shall	see	our	own	–	we	shall
come	to	know	who	and	what	we	are.	Here,	there	is	magic,	but	here,	there	is	not.
She	could	never	give	her	face	to	the	gods	–	they	would	not	look,	they
would	only	turn	away.	She	could	awaken	all	the	power	of	her	voice	to	cry,	I	am
here!	See	me!	Acknowledge	me	–	your	one	forgotten	child!	But	it	would	achieve
nothing.	Because	even	the	vision	of	the	gods	must	have	a	blind	spot.	And	what
will	you	find	there?	Only	me.	A	crushed	knot	lying	on	the	floor.
Her	living	kin	were	hunting	her	now.	She	did	not	know	how	many,	but	it
did	not	matter.	They	sought	her	annihilation.	But…not	yet.	Leave	me	this
freedom…to	do	something.	To	do	a	thing…a	thing	that	does	not	destroy,	but
creates.	Please,	can	I	not	be	more	than	I	am?	Please.	Do	not	find	me.
Below	her,	her	flight	made	a	bleeding	scar	in	the	earth,	and	where	her	eyes
reached	out,	where	they	touched	all	the	beauty	and	wonder	ahead,	her	arrival
delivered	naught	but	devastation.	It	was	unconscionable.	It	was	unbearable.
See	what	comes,	when	every	gift	is	a	curse.
A	sudden	pressure,	far	behind	her,	and	she	twisted	her	neck	round,	glared
into	her	own	wake	of	devastation.
Eleint.
So	many!
Rage	gave	voice	to	her	cry,	and	that	voice	shattered	the	land	for	leagues	on
all	sides.	As	its	echoes	rebounded,	Korabas	flinched	at	the	damage	she	had
unleashed.	No!	Where	is	my	beauty?	Why	is	it	only	for	you?	No!
I	will	have	this	freedom!	I	will	have	it!
To	do	–	to	do	–	to	do	something.
Her	wings	strained	with	the	fury	of	her	flight,	but	she	could	fly	no	faster
than	she	was	already	flying,	and	it	was	not	enough.	The	Eleint	drew	ever
closer,	and	Korabas	could	see	that	crushed	knot	flaring	with	an	inner	fire,
blazing	now	with	all	the	anger	she	had	ever	felt,	had	ever	taken	inside	–	bound
for	so	long.	Anger	at	the	gods.	At	the	makers	–	her	makers	–	for	what	they	did
to	her.


Eleint!	You	would	kill	me	and	call	it	freedom?	Then	come	to	me	and	try!
Her	rage	was	waiting	for	them,	waiting	for	them	all.
	
Mathok	reined	in,	dust	and	stones	scattering	from	his	horse’s	hoofs.	As	the
cloud	lifted	around	him	he	cursed,	spat	and	then	said,	‘They’re	in	the	pass,
High	Fist.	The	bastards!	How	did	they	anticipate	us?’
‘Calm	down,’	Paran	said,	turning	to	glance	back	at	the	column.	‘We	are	in
the	manifestation	of	Akhrast	Korvalain.	The	Assail	can	track	our	every	move.’
He	faced	the	Warleader	again.	‘Mathok	–	are	they	well	placed?’
‘Dug	in,	sir.	And	these	ones,	High	Fist,	are	heavily	armoured.	Not	local	–
the	Assail	have	hired	mercenaries.’
Fist	Rythe	Bude,	standing	beside	Paran	–	somewhat	too	close,	as	he	could
smell	the	spices	in	her	hair	–	asked,	‘Could	you	see	their	standards,
Warleader?’
Mathok	made	a	face.	‘Wolf	furs,	Fist.	Wolf	skulls	too.	I	didn’t	get	close
enough,	but	if	they	had	the	carcasses	of	wolf	puppies	hanging	from	their	ear
lobes	it	wouldn’t	have	surprised	me.’
Paran	sighed.	‘Togg	and	Fanderay.	Now	that	complicates	things.’
‘Why	should	it	complicate	things?’	Noto	Boil	demanded,	withdrawing	the
fish	spine	from	his	mouth	and	studying	its	red	tip.	‘There’s	nothing
complicated	about	any	of	this,	right,	High	Fist?	I	mean,	we’re	marching
double-quick	for	who	knows	where	but	wherever	it	is	it	won’t	be	pretty,	and
once	we	get	there	we’re	aiming	to	link	forces	with	someone	who	might	not
even	be	there,	to	fight	a	war	against	an	Elder	race	and	their	human	slaves	for
no	particular	reason	except	that	they’re	damned	ugly.	Complicated?	Nonsense.
Now	Seven	Cities…that	was	complicated.’
‘Are	you	done,	Boil?’
‘Noto	Boil,	sir,	if	you	please.	And	yes,	I	am.	For	now.’
‘What	makes	this	complicated,’	Paran	resumed,	‘is	that	I	have	no	real
interest	in	fighting	worshippers	sworn	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	In	fact,	I
sympathize	with	their	cause,	and	while	I	might	disagree	with	the	means	by
which	they	intend	to	express	their	particular	faith—’	He	turned	to	Rythe	Bude.
‘Gods,	listen	to	me.	I’m	starting	to	sound	like	Boil!’
‘Noto	Boil.’
‘The	point	is,	we	need	to	get	through	that	pass.	Mathok	–	any	other	routes
through	the	south	mountains?’
‘How	the	Hood	should	I	know?	I’ve	never	been	here	before!’
‘All	right,	never	mind.	Silly	question.’


‘Let’s	just	pound	right	through	’em,	High	Fist.	I	figure	just	under	five
thousand—’
Fist	Rythe	Bude	choked,	coughed	and	then	said,	‘Five	thousand?
Entrenched?	Gods,	this	will	be	a	bloodbath!’
Noto	Boil	cleared	his	throat.	‘High	Fist,	a	modest	suggestion.’
‘Go	on.’
‘You’re	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons,	sir.	Talk	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter.’
Paran	lifted	a	brow.	‘Talk	to	them?	Tell	you	what	–	the	next	pit	full	of
wolves	you	get	thrown	into,	try	a	little	negotiating,	Noto.’
‘Noto	Boil.’
‘You	could	swap	bones.’	This	from	Gumble,	where	he	was	lying	sprawled
atop	a	flat	rock.	‘Sniff	their	butts	–	they	like	that,	I’m	told.	Lie	on	your	back,
maybe.’
‘Somebody	find	us	a	big	snake,’	Mathok	growled,	glaring	at	the	toad.
Gumble	sighed	loudly,	his	bloated	body	deflating	to	half	its	normal	size.	‘I
sense	my	comments	are	not	viewed	as	constructive,	leading	me	to	conclude
that	I	am	in	the	company	of	fools.	What’s	new	about	that,	I	wonder?’
Paran	withdrew	his	helm	and	wiped	grimy	sweat	from	his	forehead.	‘So	we
do	this	the	hard	way.	No,	Fist	Bude,	not	straight-into-the-teeth	kind	of	hard	way.
Signal	the	corps	–	we’re	marching	straight	through	the	night.	I	want	us	formed
up	opposite	the	enemy	come	the	dawn.’
‘Sounds	like	straight	into	the	teeth,	sir.’
‘And	that’s	what	it	will	look	like,	too.	There	might	end	up	being	some
fighting,	but	with	luck,	not	much.’
‘And	how’s	that	going	to	work	out,	sir?’
‘I	intend	to	make	them	surrender,	Fist.	Gumble,	get	your	fat	lump	off	that
rock	and	find	your	erstwhile	artist	and	tell	him	it’s	time.	He’ll	know	what	that
means.’
‘He’s	hardly	mine,	High	Fist,	and	as	for	erstwhile—’
‘Go,	before	Mathok	decides	to	skewer	you	with	that	lance.’
‘To	raucous	cheers	from	friend	and	foe	alike,’	Noto	Boil	muttered,	the	fish
spine	working	up	and	down	with	every	word.
‘Look	at	him	go,’	Rythe	Bude	commented.	‘Didn’t	know	he	could	scramble
that	fast.’
Paran	walked	back	to	his	horse,	took	the	reins	from	one	of	the	foundling
children	now	accompanying	the	army.	Swinging	into	the	saddle,	he	looked
down	at	the	dirty-faced	boy.	‘Still	want	your	reward?’
A	swift	nod.
Paran	reached	down,	lifted	the	boy	up	behind	him.	‘Hold	tight,	we’re	going


to	canter.	Maybe	even	gallop.	You	ready	for	this?’
Another	nod,	but	the	thin	arms	closing	about	Paran	were	tight.
‘Let’s	go	see	this	pass,	then.’	Kicking	his	horse	forward,	Paran	glanced
across	at	Mathok	as	the	Warleader	pulled	up	alongside	him.	‘Well?’
‘Well	what?’	the	warrior	growled.
‘That’s	hardly	a	happy	expression	you’re	wearing.’
‘You	got	a	sharp	eye	there,	High	Fist.’
‘So	what’s	the	problem?’
‘There’s	only	a	problem,	sir,	if	you	pull	this	off.’
‘Are	you	always	this	hungry	for	a	fight,	Mathok?’
‘Sharp	eye,	dumb	mouth.’
Paran	grinned.	‘Can’t	have	everything,	you	know.’
‘So	I’m	learning,	High	Fist.’
	
‘Would’ve	made	us	a	decent	captain,’	Kalam	observed,	as	he	walked	with
Quick	Ben.	They	were	watching	Paran,	flanked	by	a	mob	of	Seven	Cities
horse-raiders,	ride	off	towards	the	foot	of	the	raw,	worn	range	of	mountains
ahead.	The	assassin	drew	his	cloak	tighter	over	his	broad	shoulders.	‘Too	bad
he	came	to	us	too	late.’
‘Did	he?’	the	wizard	wondered.	‘If	he’d	arrived	before	Pale,	he	would’ve
been	down	in	the	tunnels	when	they	collapsed.’
‘Maybe.’
‘Why	are	you	walking	with	me,	Kalam?	Where’s	Minala?’
The	assassin’s	only	answer	was	a	low	growl.
‘Well,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘it’s	just	as	well	that	you’re	here.	We	need	to	work
out	our	next	moves.’
‘Our	next	what?	We’re	here	to	kill	Forkrul	Assail.	There’s	no	other	moves
to	talk	about,	and	those	ones	don’t	need	talking	about.’
‘Listen,	that	last	Pure	damn	near	killed	me.’
‘Rubbish.’
‘Well,	all	right.	It	hurt,	then.’
‘Get	over	it,	wizard.	We’re	back	fighting	a	real	war.	Old	style.	Ugly	magic,
toe	to	toe,	the	works.	Don’t	tell	me	you’ve	forgotten	how	to	do	this.’
‘I	haven’t.	But…where’s	Fiddler?	Hedge?	Mallet,	Trotts,	Whiskeyjack?
Where	are	all	the	ones	we	need	to	cover	our	backs?	Paran’s	sending	us	out	into
the	enemy	camp,	Kalam.	If	we	get	in	serious	trouble,	we’re	finished.’
‘So	fix	it	so	that	we	can	get	back	out	if	we	have	to.’
‘Easy	for	you	to	say.’


Sighing,	Kalam	scratched	at	the	stubble	on	his	jaw,	and	then	said,
‘Something	happened,	Quick,	back	in	Malaz	City.	In	Mock’s	Hold.	In	that
damned	chamber	with	Laseen	and	the	Adjunct.	Well,	just	afterwards.	Tavore
and	me…she	asked	me	to	make	a	choice.	Laseen	had	already	offered	me
whatever	I	wanted,	pretty	much.	Just	to	turn	away.’
Quick	Ben	was	studying	him	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘Everything?’
‘Everything.’
‘Knocking	Topper	off	his	perch?’
‘Aye.	She	was	giving	me	the	Claw,	even	though	I	had	a	feeling	it	was	rotten
through	and	through,	even	then	–	and	I	found	out	the	truth	of	that	later	that
night.’
‘So	something	had	the	Empress	desperate.’
‘Aye.’
‘Fine.	So…what	did	Tavore	offer	you	instead?’
Kalam	shook	his	head.	‘Damned	if	I	know	–	and	I’ve	been	thinking	about	it.
A	lot.	There	was	a	look	in	her	eyes	–	I	don’t	know.	A	need,	maybe.	She	knew
that	Laseen	was	going	to	try	to	kill	her	on	the	way	back	to	the	ships.	We	all
knew	it.’
‘She	wanted	your	help	–	is	that	so	surprising?	Who	wants	to	die?’
‘As	simple	as	that?	Quick	Ben,	she	was	asking	me	to	die	in	her	place.
That’s	what	she	was	asking.’
‘Just	as	desperate	as	Laseen,	then.	The	two	of	them,	they	asked	you	to
choose	between	two	mirror	reflections.	Which	one	was	real?	Which	one	was
worth	serving?	You	still	haven’t	explained	how	Tavore	did	it.’
‘She	did	it	the	way	she	seems	to	get	all	of	us	to	do	what	she	needs	us	to	do.’
‘Well	now,	that’s	been	the	one	mystery	no	one’s	been	able	to	answer,	hasn’t
it?	But,	just	like	you,	we	follow.	Kalam,	I	wish	I	could	have	seen	you	on	that
night	in	Malaz	City.	You	must	have	been	the	holiest	of	terrors.	So,	just	like	the
rest	of	us,	you	gave	her	everything	you	had.	How	does	she	do	it?’
‘She	simply	asks,’	Kalam	said.
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘That’s	it?’
‘I	think	so.	No	offers	–	no	riches,	no	titles,	nothing	any	of	us	can	see	as
payment	or	reward.	No,	she	just	looks	you	straight	in	the	eye,	and	she	asks.’
‘You	just	sent	a	shiver	up	my	spine,	Kalam,	and	I	don’t	even	know	why.’
‘You	don’t?	More	rubbish.’
The	wizard	waved	his	hands,	‘Well,	Hood	knows	it	ain’t	chivalry,	is	it?	She
won’t	even	nudge	open	that	door.	No	fluttering	eyelashes,	no	demure	look	or
coy	glance…’
Kalam	grunted	a	laugh	at	the	image,	but	then	he	shook	himself.	‘She	asks,


and	something	in	your	head	tells	you	that	what	she’s	doing	is	right	–	and	that
it’s	the	only	reason	she	has	to	live.	She	asked	me	to	die	defending	her	–
knowing	I	didn’t	even	like	her	much.	Quick,	for	the	rest	of	my	life,	I	will	never
forget	that	moment.’
‘And	you	still	can’t	quite	work	out	what	happened.’
The	assassin	nodded.	‘All	at	once,	it’s	as	if	she’s	somehow	laid	bare	your
soul	and	there	it	is,	exposed,	trembling,	vulnerable	beyond	all	belief	–	and	she
could	take	it,	grasp	it	tight	until	the	blood	starts	dripping.	She	could	even	stab	it
right	through.	But	she	didn’t	–	she	didn’t	do	any	of	that,	Quick.	She	reached
down,	her	finger	hovered,	and	then…gone,	as	if	that	was	all	she	needed.’
‘You	can	stop	now,’	the	wizard	muttered.	‘What	you’re	talking	about	–
between	two	people	–	it	almost	never	happens.	Maybe	it’s	what	we	all	want,	but
Kalam,	it	almost	never	happens.’
‘There	was	no	respect	in	what	Laseen	offered,’	the	assassin	said.	‘It	was	a
raw	bribe,	reaching	for	the	worst	in	me.	But	from	Tavore…’
‘Nothing	but	respect.	Now	I	see	it,	Kal.	I	see	it.’
‘Quick?’
‘What?’
‘Is	she	alive?	Do	you	think…is	Tavore	still	alive?’
Quick	Ben	kicked	a	stone	from	his	path.	‘Even	her	brother	can’t	answer
that.	I	just	don’t	know.’
‘But	do	you	–	are	you…’
‘Do	I	have	faith?	Is	that	what	you’re	asking?’	He	waved	about.	‘Look
around!	This	whole	damned	army	is	marching	on	faith!	We	just	have	to	get	on
with	it,	right?’
‘Fine	then,’	Kalam	growled.	‘Let	me	ask	you	this:	can	Paran	pull	it	off	on
his	own?	If	he	has	to?’
Quick	Ben	rubbed	at	his	face.	Scowling,	he	spoke	under	his	breath.	‘Listen.
Have	you	been	paying	attention?’
‘To	what?’
‘Just…when	he	walks	through	camp.	Or	rides.	Do	you	hear	the	soldiers	–
calling	up	to	him	as	he	passes?	Jests	flying	back	and	forth,	laughter	and	nods,
all	of	it.	They’re	here	because	following	him	is	what	they	need,	what	they	want.
The	Host	lost	Dujek	Onearm	–	that	should’ve	finished	them,	but	it	hasn’t,	has
it?	Our	old	captain	here	is	now	leading	the	whole	army.	You	say	Tavore	asks
because	for	her	that’s	what’s	needed.	But	her	brother,	he	just	expects.’
Kalam	slowly	nodded.	‘Five	coins	to	that,	Quick.	Still’	–	and	he	shot	the
wizard	a	sharp	look	–	‘Shadowthrone	sent	you	here,	didn’t	he?’
Quick	Ben	made	a	face.	‘The	Emperor ’s	drawing	in	all	the	old	webs	–


frankly,	I’m	appalled	how	he	can	still	do	that,	you	know?	What	kind	of	knots
did	he	tie	on	to	us	anyway?	Gods	below.’
‘Do	you	trust	him?’
‘Shadowthrone?	Are	you	mad?’
The	assassin	paused,	shook	himself,	and	said,	‘That’s	it,	then.	Kalam	is
done	with	his	questions	–	you,	wizard,	you	cover	my	back	and	I’ll	do	the	same
for	yours.	Let’s	go	and	kill	Forkrul	Assail.	Lots	of	them.’
‘It’s	about	time	you	regressed	to	your	usual	brainless	bear-like	self.	So,
there	will	be	a	camp	up	there,	where	the	officers	are	all	gathered.	Well	behind
the	entrenchments.	Watered	and	Pures	and	whatever.	We	need	to	find	the	Pures
first	this	time	–	take	them	out	of	the	way	and	the	rest	won’t	be	as	bad.’
‘Right.	So	what’s	all	this	about	me	not	sheathing	my	Otataral	knife?	Why
should	that	be	a	problem?’
Quick	Ben	shrugged.	‘How	does	one	make	Otataral?’
‘No	idea.’
‘Of	course	you	haven’t!’	the	wizard	snapped.	‘You	make	it	by	pouring	as
much	magic	into	one	place	at	one	time	as	you	possibly	can,	and	if	you’re	lucky
a	threshold	is	crossed	–	a	firestorm	that	burns	everything	out,	making—’
‘Otataral.’
‘Will	you	stop	interrupting	me?	My	point	is,	what	happens	when	ten
thousand	dragons	and	a	few	hundred	Elder	Gods	decide	to	get	together	and	do
the	same	thing?’
‘Otataral	Island?	Off	Seven	Cities?	No	wonder	there’s	so	much—’
‘Be	quiet!	No.	Not	Otataral	Island	–	that	was	just	some	localized	scrap	a
million	or	so	years	ago.	No.	What	you	get,	Kalam,	is	an	Otataral	Dragon.’
‘Hood	take	me	–	wait,	don’t	tell	me	they	went	and	did	that?’
‘Fine,	I	won’t.	But	that’s	still	not	the	point,	Kalam.’
‘So	what	is	the	point,	Quick	Ben?’
‘Only	that	the	dragon’s	free	and	it’s	headed	this	way	and,	most	important,	it
can	smell	Otataral.	So,	every	time	you	use	it—	Aack!’
Kalam	had	his	hands	round	the	wizard’s	throat.	He	dragged	his	friend
close.	‘Hedge	was	right	about	you,’	he	whispered,	as	Quick	Ben’s	eyes	bulged
and	his	face	darkened.	‘You’re	insane,	and	worse,	you	think	it’s	funny!’	Feeble
hands	clawed	at	Kalam’s	wrists.	Snarling,	the	assassin	flung	Quick	Ben	away.
Staggering,	the	wizard	fell	to	his	knees,	coughing,	gasping	to	draw	breath.
Three	soldiers	came	running	up,	but	Kalam	held	out	a	hand	to	halt	them.
‘Return	to	your	ranks.	He’ll	live,	and	if	I	kick	him	while	he’s	down,	it’ll	only
be	once	or	twice.’	Seeing	the	look	in	their	eyes,	the	assassin	snorted.	‘Aye,	he’s
the	High	Mage.	My	point	exactly.	Now,’	his	expression	hardened,	‘get	lost.’


The	soldiers	retreated.
Kalam	turned	to	glare	at	Quick	Ben.	‘Hedge	always	kept	a	sharper	back,
you	know.	Had	your	face	painted	on	it.	He	used	to	tell	us,	if	you	went	and	killed
him	with	one	of	your	schemes,	with	his	last	act	he	was	going	to	wing	it	at	the
back	of	your	head.	You	know,	I	used	to	think	that	was	a	bit	extreme.’
Leaving	the	gagging	man	on	his	hands	and	knees,	Kalam	resumed	his
walk.
	
My	brother	could	not	have	planned	for	this.	To	see	so	much	of	his	work…
unravelled.	He	understood	the	necessity	of	balance,	but	he	also	understood	the
wonder	that	is	life	itself.	No,	he	could	not	have	meant	this	to	happen.	Silchas
Ruin	glanced	over	to	where	Tulas	Shorn	stood	on	the	bluff’s	edge.	Escape	from
death	is	never	the	escape	you	think	it	is.	‘Would	we	have	done	it?’	he	called
over.
The	undead	warrior ’s	head	turned,	tilted	slightly.	‘We	were	young.
Anything	was	possible.’
‘Then…one	of	us	would	have	knelt	before	the	body	of	the	other,	weeping.’
‘That	is	likely.’
‘But	now…Tulas,	it	seems	we	shall	fight	side	by	side,	and	there	will	be
none	to	kneel	by	our	bodies,	none	to	weep	for	us.’
‘My	Hounds	are	wandering	–	I	can	feel	them.	Hunting	interlopers,
dreaming	of	the	chase.	They	wander	the	broken	fragments	of	Kurald
Emurlahn.’
Silchas	Ruin	was	silent,	wondering	where	his	friend’s	thoughts	were	taking
him.
Tulas	Shorn	sighed,	the	breath	a	long,	dry	rattle.	‘Do	you	know	what	I	envy
most	about	my	Hounds?	Their	freedom.	Nothing	complicated	in	their	lives.
No…difficult	choices.’
Nodding,	Silchas	looked	away.	‘We	face	one	now,	don’t	we?’
‘The	Eleint	will	be	driven	to	frenzy.	Their	entire	being	will	be	consumed
with	the	need	to	kill	Korabas	–	can	you	not	feel	it	in	your	own	blood,	Silchas?’
Yes.
Tulas	continued,	‘We	are	left	to	a	matter	of	faith.	I	doubt	even	Anomander
could	have	anticipated	that	the	Elder	Gods	would	be	so	desperate,	so	vengeful.’
‘And	this	is	what	is	troubling	me,’	Silchas	Ruin	admitted.	‘We	cannot
assume	that	all	the	Elder	Gods	acceded	to	the	unchaining	of	the	Otataral
Dragon.’
‘Does	it	matter?’


‘I’m	not	sure.’
Tulas	Shorn	walked	back	from	the	edge.	‘Will	any	of	them	regret	the
annihilation	of	the	gods?	I	doubt	it.	Once	their	children	are	gone,	their
resurrection	is	assured.’
‘To	inherit	what,	Tulas?’
‘Ah,	yes,	but	they	do	expect	the	Eleint	to	kill	Korabas.	They	require	it,	in
fact.’
‘Must	we	satisfy	them?’	Silchas	asked.
Tulas	Shorn	was	for	a	while	silent,	and	his	face	taken	into	death	could	give
no	expression,	and	the	eyes	were	closed	doors.	‘My	friend,	what	choice	have
we?	If	Korabas	survives,	this	realm	will	die,	and	it	will	be	the	first	of	many.’
‘Leaving	in	its	wake	a	land	without	magic.	But	even	in	such	places	life	will
return.’
‘We	cannot	be	certain	of	that.	For	all	that	we	have	explored	the	secrets	of
sorcery,	we	still	know	so	little.	We	have	flown	over	lifeless	flesh	–	we	have
seen	what	happens	when	everything	is	truly	stripped	away.’
Silchas	Ruin	studied	his	friend	for	a	moment,	then	lowered	himself	into	a
squat	and	stared	out	over	the	valley	to	the	south.	‘Am	I	fooling	myself?’
‘About	what?’
Silchas	started,	unaware	that	he	had	spoken	out	loud.	‘My	brother	knew
well	the	Elder	Gods.	He’d	clashed	with	them	often	enough.’
‘It	may	be	that	his	answer	to	the	threat	posed	by	the	Elder	Gods	was	to	free
Draconus.’
Draconus.	‘Then	what	will	Draconus	do?’
‘I	do	not	know,	but	even	thinking	about	it	fills	me	with	fear.	We	know	well
what	comes	when	Draconus	is	awakened	to	true	anger	–	his	solution	may
prove	worse	than	the	problem.	Abyss	knows,	friend,	we	have	seen	that	for
ourselves.	Still,	since	you	have	asked,	I	will	give	the	matter	some	thought.
Draconus…freed.	Who	can	oppose	him,	now	that	your	brother	is	dead?	I	don’t
know	–	this	world	has	moved	on.	What	would	he	do	first?	He	would	hunt	down
and	kill	the	ones	who	freed	Korabas.	He	always	took	retribution	seriously.’
Silchas	Ruin	was	nodding.	‘And	then?’
The	undead	warrior	shrugged.	‘Kill	Korabas?’
‘Leaving	a	realm	filled	with	Eleint?’
‘Then…perhaps	he	would	stand	back	and	watch	the	two	elemental	forces
collide	and	maul	each	other,	until	one	emerged	victorious	–	but	so	weakened,
so	destroyed,	that	he	need	only	act	expeditiously,	without	rage.	It	may	be	that
this	is	what	your	brother	demanded	of	Draconus,	in	exchange	for	his	freedom.’
Silchas	Ruin	held	his	hands	up	to	his	face.	After	a	moment	he	shook	his


head.	‘Knowing	my	brother,	there	was	no	demand.	There	was	only	giving.’
‘Friend,’	said	Tulas	Shorn,	‘what	is	it	that	is	in	your	mind?’
‘That	there	is	more	to	the	unchaining	of	Korabas	than	we	know.	That,	in
some	manner	we	have	yet	to	fathom,	the	Otataral	Dragon’s	freedom	serves	a
higher	purpose.	Korabas	is	here	because	she	needs	to	be.’
‘Silchas	–	your	living	senses	are	sharper	than	my	dead	ones.	How	many
Eleint	have	come	into	this	world?’
The	white-skinned	Tiste	Andii	lowered	his	hands	from	his	face	and	looked
over	at	Tulas	Shorn.	‘All	of	them.’
Tulas	Shorn	staggered	back	a	step,	and	then	turned	away	–	almost	as	if	his
every	instinct	was	demanding	that	he	flee,	that	he	get	away.	Where?	Anywhere.
And	then	he	faced	Silchas	again.	‘Korabas	does	not	stand	a	chance.’
‘No,	she	does	not.’
‘The	Eleint	will	conquer	this	world	–	who	is	there	to	stop	them?	My	friend
–	we	have	been	made	irrelevant.	All	purpose…gone.	I	will	not	surrender	to
T’iam!’
The	sudden	anger	in	Tulas	made	Silchas	straighten.	‘Nor	will	I.’
‘What	can	we	do?’
‘We	can	hope.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘You	say	you	sense	the	Hounds	of	Shadow—’
‘Not	close—’
‘And	you	tell	me	that	they	possess	a	new	master,	the	usurper	of	Kurald
Emurlahn—’
‘Who	commands	nothing.’
‘No.	Not	yet.	There	is	a	game	being	played	here	–	beyond	all	that	we	think
we	understand	of	this	situation.	You	say	the	Hounds	are	wandering.	The
question	that	needs	to	be	asked	is:	why?	What	has	Shadow	to	do	with	any	of
this?’
Tulas	Shorn	shook	his	head.
Silchas	Ruin	drew	out	his	Hust	sword.	‘That	usurper	gave	this	weapon	to
me,	as	I	told	you.	See	the	blade?	Watermarked	and	etched	with	dragons.	But
there	is	more	–	there	is	my	brother ’s	sacrifice.	There	is	the	return	of	Mother
Dark.’
‘And	now	Draconus.	Silchas	–	your	brother,	he	cannot	have	meant	to—’
‘But	I	think	he	did,	Tulas.	We	children	were	as	responsible	for	what
happened	between	Mother	Dark	and	her	consort	as	anyone	was	–	even	Osserc.
My	friend	–	they	set	something	into	play.	Anomander,	this	Shadowthrone,	even
Hood,	and	perhaps	many	other	gods	hidden	from	our	view,	for	ever	veiled.’


‘Draconus	will	never	return	to	Mother	Dark	–	do	you	truly	believe	those
wounds	could	ever	heal?’
‘Tulas,	the	Eleint	must	be	faced	down	–	they	must	be	driven	back.	They	are
the	Children	of	Chaos,	and	who	has	always	stood	against	Chaos?	What	was
Dragnipur,	Tulas,	if	not	a	broken	man’s	attempt	to	save	the	woman	he	had	lost?
It	failed	–	Abyss	knows	how	it	failed	–	but	now,	at	last,	Draconus	has	been
freed	–	his	own	chains	for	ever	cut	away	from	him.	Don’t	you	see?	My	brother
ended	Mother	Dark’s	vow	of	isolation	–	once	again	she	faces	her	children.	But
why	should	it	stop	there?	Tulas!	My	brother	also	freed	Draconus.’
‘Anomander	would	force	the	wounds	to	heal?	The	arrogance	of	the	man!’
‘He	forces	nothing,	Tulas.	He	but	opens	the	door.	He	makes
possible…anything.’
‘Does	Draconus	understand?’
Now	that	is	the	question,	isn’t	it?	‘When	he	is	done	killing	the	Elder	Gods
he	feels	should	be	killed,	he	will	pause.	He	will	ask	himself	the	question,	what
now?	And	then,	perhaps,	it	will	come	to	him.	The	fullest	recognition	of
Anomander ’s	gift.’
‘My	friend,	if	I	truly	had	breath,	you	would	have	taken	it	from	me.	But…
how	can	you	be	certain?	Of	any	of	this?’
Silchas	Ruin	studied	the	sword	in	his	hand.	‘I	think	I	know	who	crouches	at
the	centre	of	this	mad	web.	Tulas,	when	I	veer,	what	happens	to	this	Hust
sword?’
‘It	becomes	one	with	the	fibre	of	your	flesh	and	bone	–	as	you	well	know,
Silchas.’
‘Yes…but	this	is	a	Hust	–	a	slayer	of	dragons.’
‘Was	the	usurper	trying	to	tell	you	something,	do	you	think?’
‘I	begin	to	suspect	the	gift	wasn’t	the	sword.	The	gift	was	what	the	sword
meant	–	what	it	means.’	He	sheathed	the	weapon.	‘The	time	has	come,	friend,
for	our	last	stand.	War	we	shall	now	wage.’
Another	rattle	from	Tulas	Shorn’s	dry	throat,	but	this	time	it	was	laughter.
‘I	delight	in	this	irony,	beloved	blade-brother.	Very	well,	let	us	go	and	kill
some	dragons.’	Then	he	paused	and	cocked	his	head	at	Silchas.	‘Korabas…will
she	thank	us?’
‘Do	you	expect	her	to?’
‘No,	I	suppose	not.	Why	should	she?	We	will	fail.’
‘Now,’	Silchas	mused,	‘you	give	me	reason	to	wonder.	After	all,	will	this
not	be	the	first	time	that	she	does	not	fall	alone?’
Tulas	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	said,	‘My	friend,	our	deaths
shall	be	our	gift	to	her.’


‘Tulas,	can	two	Ancients	make	a	Storm?’
‘We	shall	have	to	try.’
Anomander,	I	believe	I	shall	see	you	soon.	And	Andarist,	too.
‘Since	we	are	about	to	die,	Silchas,	will	you	tell	me	what	happened	to	the
Throne	of	Shadow?’
Silchas	Ruin	smiled	and	shook	his	head.	‘Perhaps,	if	the	throne	so	desires,
it	will	one	day	tell	you	itself.’
‘Thrones	cannot	speak.’
‘That	is	true,	and	it’s	just	as	well,	don’t	you	think?’
‘It	is	a	good	thing	we	are	going	to	die	side	by	side,’	Tulas	Shorn	growled,
‘else	I	would	be	forced	to	fight	you	after	all.’
They	had	moved	well	apart,	and	now	they	veered.
And	two	Ancient	dragons,	one	living,	the	other	undead,	lifted	into	the
empty	sky.
	
Olar	Ethil	crouched	in	the	grasses	like	a	hare	about	to	be	flushed	by	a	hawk.
Torrent	studied	her	for	a	moment	longer,	struggling	to	disguise	his	dark
satisfaction,	and	then	turned	to	check	once	more	on	the	three	children.	They
slept	on	–	the	hag	had	done	something	to	them.	It	was	just	past	midday	and
they’d	not	travelled	far	since	the	dawn.	Behind	him,	the	Bonecaster	was
muttering	to	herself.
‘Too	many	came	through	–	nowhere	to	hide.	I	know	now	what	is	being
attempted.	It	cannot	work.	I	want	it	for	myself	–	I	will	have	it	for	myself!	There
are	Ancients	in	the	sky,	but	I	am	the	most	ancient	one	of	all.	I	will	see	them
driven	back…but	first,	Korabas	needs	to	die.	They	need	to	fail!’
Torrent	walked	over	to	his	horse.	Examined	the	primitive-looking	arrows
in	the	quiver	strapped	beside	the	bow.	Then	he	glanced	back	at	Olar	Ethil.
‘What	are	we	waiting	for?’
Her	battered	face	lifted.	‘I	will	not	be	part	of	this	fight.’
He	looked	round,	seeing	nothing	but	empty	plains.	‘What	fight?’
‘You	are	as	good	as	dead	already,	pup.	Soon	I	won’t	need	you	any	more.	I
have	gifts	to	give.	And	he	will	forgive	me	–	you’ll	see,	he’ll	forgive	me.’
‘How	can	I	see	anything	if	I’m	to	be	dead	soon?’
She	straightened,	kicked	at	the	grasses.	Two	skeletal	lizards	dodged	out,
evading	her	gnarled	foot.	He	heard	their	clacking	jaws	as	they	scampered	past
him,	down	the	slope	and	away.
‘That’s	it	then,’	Olar	Ethil	rasped,	watching	them	flee.	‘They’re	gone.
Good.	I	never	trusted	them	–	GO!’	She	hobbled	to	the	edge	of	the	ridge,


shouted	after	them,	‘Find	the	great	Storm	of	T’iam!	As	if	that	will	help	you,
hah!’	Then	she	wheeled	and	stabbed	a	crooked	finger	at	Torrent.	‘I	am
watching	you,	pup!’
Torrent	sighed.	‘It’s	all	going	wrong,	isn’t	it?’
‘Errastas	was	a	fool!	And	all	the	Elders	who	listened	to	him	–	his	madness
will	kill	them	all!	Good!	So	long	as	he	leaves	me	alone.’
‘You’ve	lost	your	mind,	hag.’
‘Wake	them	up!’	Olar	Ethil	snapped.	‘We	need	to	go	south	–	and	we	must
hurry!’
‘I	smell	the	sea	on	this	wind,’	Torrent	said,	facing	east.
‘Of	course	you	do,	you	fool.	Now	get	the	runts	up	–	we	must	go!’
You	are	losing	your	grip,	witch,	and	you	know	it,	don’t	you?	You	think	that
whatever	you	set	out	to	do	will	be	enough,	that	it	will	solve	everything	–	but
now	you’re	discovering	that	it	won’t.	I	hope	I	do	live	for	a	while	longer	–	long
enough	to	be	standing	over	your	corpse.
‘Your	mind	leaks,	pup.’
It	only	leaks	what	I	let	through.
She	shot	him	a	look.	Torrent	turned	away,	went	to	awaken	the	children.
	
Telorast	lunged	and	leapt	alongside	Curdle.	‘We’ll	be	safe	there,	Curdle,	won’t
we?	The	chains	of	our	curse	–	broken	in	the	Storm!	Right?’
‘What	I	planned	from	the	very	start,	Telorast	–	and	if	you	weren’t	so	thick
you’d	have	guessed	that	long	ago.’
‘It	was	that	priest	of	the	Worm,	that	clever	drunk	one	–	better	than	NotApsalar,	better	by	far!	He	told	us	everything	we	needed	to	know,	so	I	don’t
have	to	guess,	Curdle,	because	between	us	I’m	the	smarter	one.’
‘The	only	smart	thing	you	ever	did	was	swindling	me	into	being	your
friend.’
‘Friend	lover	sister	or	better	half,	it’s	all	the	same	with	us,	and	isn’t	that	the
best,	Curdle?	This	is	what	it	means	to	live	a	life	of	mystery	and	adventure!	Oh
–	is	my	leg	coming	off?	Curdle!	My	leg!’
‘It’s	fine.	Just	wobbly.	Soon	it	won’t	matter.	Soon	we	will	have	the	bodies
to	match	our	egos	and	won’t	that	be	a	scary	thing?	Why,	I	can	smell	us	a
throne,	Telorast.	Can	you?’
But	Telorast	had	skidded	to	a	halt.	‘Wait!	Curdle,	wait!	That	Storm	–	it’ll
devour	us!’
‘So	we	get	eaten	–	at	least	we’ll	be	free.	And	sooner	or	later,	the	Storm	will
break	up.	It	has	to.’


‘More	like	tear	itself	apart,’	Telorast	hissed.	‘We’ve	got	to	be	careful	then,
Curdle,	so	we	don’t	get	eaten	for	real.’
‘Well	of	course	we’ll	be	careful.	We’re	brilliant.’
‘And	sneaky.’
‘That’s	why	creatures	like	us	never	lose,	Telorast.	We	overflow	with	talents
–	they’re	spilling	out	everywhere!’
‘So	long	as	my	leg	doesn’t	fall	off.’
‘If	it	does	I’ll	carry	you.’
‘Really?’
‘Well,	drag	you.’
‘You’re	so	sweet,	Curdle.’
‘It’s	because	we’re	in	love,	Telorast.	Love	is	the	reason	I’d	drag	you
anywhere.	We	love	ourselves	and	so	we	deserve	two	thrones	–	at	least	two!	We
deserve	them	so	we’ll	have	them,	even	if	we	have	to	kill	ten	thousand	babies	to
get	to	them.’
‘Babies?	Killing	babies?’
‘Why	not?’
They	resumed	their	swishing	rush	through	the	grasses.	‘I	can	almost	see
them,	Telorast!	An	army	of	babies	between	us	and	those	thrones.	They	can
swing	their	bone	rattles	all	they	like	–	we’ll	chew	through	them	like	cheese!’
‘And	kittens	and	puppies	and	small	mice,	too!’
‘Stop	it,	Curdle	–	you’re	making	me	hungry!	And	save	your	breath	–	we’ll
need	it	to	kill	Korabas.’
‘Can’t	kill	Korabas	with	our	breaths,	Telorast	–	she’s	Otataral,	remember?
We’ve	got	to	do	it	the	hard	way	–	piece	by	bloody	piece,	until	she’s	raining
down	from	the	sky!’
‘It	will	be	great.	Won’t	it?	Curdle,	won’t	it?’
‘The	best,	Telorast.	Almost	as	good	as	eating	babies!’
‘How	long	is	this	going	to	take?	Are	we	there	yet,	Curdle?	My	legs	are
about	to	fall	off,	I	swear	it.’
‘Hmm,	maybe	we	should	veer.	For	a	bit,	I	mean.	Just	a	bit,	and	then	back
down,	and	then	we	run	for	a	while,	and	then	veer	again	–	what	do	you	think?’
‘I	think	you’re	almost	as	clever	as	me.’
‘And	you’re	almost	as	clever	as	me.	We’re	almost	as	clever	as	each	other!
Isn’t	that	great?’


Paran	reined	in	to	let	the	boy	off.	Ordering	the	rest	of	the	troop	to	remain
where	they	were,	he	waved	Mathok	to	accompany	him	as	he	rode	closer	to	the
foot	of	the	pass.	The	old	mountains	formed	a	saddle	neck	ahead,	and	the	slope
gave	them	a	clear	view	of	the	trenches,	berms	and	redoubts	crowding	there.
Figures	swarmed	the	defences.
‘We’ve	been	seen,’	Mathok	said.
Five	hundred	strides	from	the	base	of	the	rough	slope,	Paran	halted.
Studied	the	vista.	A	cobbled	road	worked	its	way	up	the	pass.	At	the	first	line	of
defences	a	half-ring	of	staked	earthworks	curled	to	face	inward	on	that	road	–
to	attempt	an	assault	there	would	invite	a	deadly	enfilade.	But	the	rest	of	the
ground	to	either	side	of	that	road	was	rough	and	broken,	almost	a	scree.
‘Had	a	wife	once,’	Mathok	muttered,	‘just	like	this.’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘The	closer	I	got	the	uglier	she	looked.	One	of	the	many	pitfalls	in	getting
drunk	at	the	full	moon.	Waking	up	to	the	horrors	you’ve	committed,	and	then
having	to	live	with	them.’
There	were	two	distinct	tiers	to	the	defences,	and	the	closer	one	bore	the
standards	of	Kolanse.	‘Shriven	auxiliaries,’	Paran	said.	‘We’ll	have	to	go
through	them	to	get	to	the	Wolf	army.	Now	that’s	an	unexpected	complication.’
‘But	you	know,	I	loved	that	woman	with	all	my	might	–	she	was	my	best
wife,	it	turned	out.’
‘What	happened	to	her?’
‘She	inherited	and	left	me	for	a	prettier	man.	You	see,	she	woke	up	that
morning	feeling	the	same	horror	as	me,	and	the	closer	I	got…’
‘Mathok,	looks	like	we’re	going	to	have	a	fight	on	our	hands	after	all.’
‘Your	words	make	me	happy.’
‘We	need	to	overwhelm	and	rout	the	Shriven.	Then	we	can	deal	with	the
mercenaries.	As	it	turns	out,’	he	added,	collecting	his	reins,	‘that	might	be	just
what	we	need	to	convince	them	to	surrender.’
‘There’ll	be	a	Pure	up	there,	High	Fist.	More	fun	for	Kalam	and	your	High
Mage.’
‘We’ll	draw	up	tonight.	Mathok,	your	warriors	won’t	be	much	use	if	they
stay	mounted.’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Why	do	raiders	ride	horses,	High	Fist?	Because	it’s
the	quickest	means	of	getting	away.’
‘You’re	not	just	raiders	any	more,	Mathok.’
‘We’ll	skirmish	if	that’s	what	you	need,	but	we	won’t	like	it.	Now,	that
road,	that’s	a	wide	road,	a	military	road.	Clear	the	flanks	and	we	can	ride
straight	up	it.’


‘Into	the	waiting	teeth	of	those	mercenaries?	And	uphill	at	that?	I’ll	not	see
you	wasted.	Sorry,	no	matter	how	thirsty	you	are	for	blood,	you	may	have	to
wait	a	while	longer.’
The	warrior	grimaced	and	then	shrugged.	‘We’re	thirsty	for	blood,	yes,
but	not	if	most	of	it	is	our	own.’
‘Good,’	Paran	grunted.	‘Keep	your	mob	in	check,	that’s	all	I	ask.’
Mathok	was	studying	him	in	a	peculiar	fashion.	‘High	Fist,	I’ve	heard	a
lifetime	of	tales	about	the	Malazan	army.	And	I’ve	run	from	a	few	close	calls	in
my	day,	ended	up	getting	chased	for	weeks.’	He	jutted	his	chin	at	the	pass.	‘But
this	–	even	those	Shriven	look	to	be	enough	to	not	only	stop	us	dead,	but	hurt
us	bad	in	the	doing.’
‘Your	point?’
‘I	fear	for	the	Host,	that’s	all.’
Paran	nodded.	‘Come	the	morning,	Mathok,	find	a	high	vantage	point	for
you	and	your	warriors.	And	I	will	show	you	everything	you	need	to	know
about	the	Malazan	army.’
	
Two	turns	of	the	sand	after	the	sun	had	set,	the	Host	drew	up	a	short	distance
from	the	base	of	the	pass.	Beneath	the	luminous	green	glow	of	the	Jade
Strangers,	the	companies	broke	out	into	their	bivouacs.	Forward	pickets	were
established,	although	no	probes	were	expected	from	the	enemy.	Soldiers	ate	a
quick	meal,	and	then	rested.	Most	slept,	although	a	few	attended	to	their
weapons	and	armour,	their	leather	harnesses,	their	shields	and	footwear.
Trailed	by	Fist	Rythe	Bude,	Paran	walked	among	the	camps,	exchanging	words
here	and	there	with	those	soldiers	too	charged	up	or	nervous	to	sleep.
He	had	never	expected	to	be	commanding	an	army.	He	had	never	expected
to	take	the	place	of	Dujek	Onearm.	He	thought	often	of	that	man,	and	took
from	Dujek	all	he	could.	The	Host	had	known	bad	times.	It	deserved	better,	but
Paran	suspected	that	this	sentiment	was	felt	by	every	commander.
When	he	and	Rythe	Bude	finally	retired	to	the	command	tent,	they	found
Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	awaiting	them.	It	was	two	turns	before	dawn.
The	assassin	was	wrapped	in	black	muslin,	pulling	on	his	stained	and	worn
leather	gloves,	and	though	he	was	wearing	chain	beneath	the	cloth,	there	was
almost	no	sound	while	he	paced.	Quick	Ben	sat	on	the	ground	leaning	back
against	a	squat	four-legged	chest,	his	legs	stretched	out,	his	eyes	half	shut.
Paran	stared	down	at	the	wizard.	‘Well?’
‘Well	what?’
‘Are	you	ready?	Usually	I	can	smell	when	there’s	been	magic	going	on,


and	I	can’t	smell	a	thing,	High	Mage.’
Quick	Ben	opened	one	eye	to	regard	him.	‘If	you	can	tell,	High	Fist,	then
so	can	the	Pures	up	there.	Trust	me.	We’re	ready.’
Paran	glanced	across	at	Rythe,	who	simply	shrugged	in	reply.	He	squinted
at	her.	‘Get	some	sleep,	Fist.’
‘Yes	sir.’
After	she’d	left,	Paran	stepped	into	Kalam’s	path.	Muttering	an	oath,	the
assassin	halted.	Bared	his	teeth	and	said,	‘You’re	getting	on	my	nerves,	High
Fist.’
Quick	Ben	spoke.	‘Do	you	have	that	card	ready,	High	Fist?’
Paran	nodded,	edging	to	one	side	so	that	Kalam	could	resume	pacing.
‘Good,’	said	the	wizard.	He	sat	up,	reached	for	a	leather	satchel	lying
beside	him.	Rummaged	inside	it	for	a	moment	and	then	drew	out	a	crooked
stick	on	which	was	tied	an	arm’s	length	of	twine.	One	end	of	the	stick	had	been
hacked	into	something	resembling	a	point.	Quick	Ben	stabbed	that	end	into	the
floor.	Then	he	removed	from	his	satchel	two	small	balls	of	weighted,	knotted
cloth,	one	black,	the	other	gold.	He	bound	these	to	the	string,	moving	them
away	from	the	stick	until	the	twine	stretched	straight.	‘Kalam,’	he	said,	‘it’s
time.’
The	assassin	halted,	shook	himself	like	a	bear.
Climbing	to	his	feet,	Quick	Ben	faced	Paran.	‘Don’t	you	even	blink,	sir.
Understand?’
‘I	will	be	vigilant,	High	Mage,’	Paran	assured	him.	‘But	you	have	me	a
little	concerned	here.	What	do	you	think	awaits	you?’
‘Beyond	one	or	two	Pure	Forkrul	Assail?’	Quick	Ben	snorted,	and	then
scowled.	‘Not	sure.	Something.’
‘Let’s	get	on	with	this,’	Kalam	growled.
Paran	drew	off	his	helm,	set	it	down	on	the	map	table.	In	battle,	he	would
attach	the	full	face	grille.	It	was	an	arcane	piece,	Untan,	a	gift	from	Rythe	Bude,
but	he	still	wasn’t	used	to	its	full	weight.	Turning	to	face	the	two	men	he	began,
‘I	think	we	should—’	and	then	fell	silent.	He	was	alone	in	the	tent.	‘Gods	below,
he’s	good.’
Heart	suddenly	pounding,	nips	of	pain	flaring	in	his	stomach,	he	drew	out
the	wooden	card	Ormulogun	had	prepared.	Studied	it	in	the	lantern	light.	The
first	truly	Malazan	card	for	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Artist,	you	did	me	proud.	A
single	misshapen,	vaguely	polished	object	in	the	centre	of	a	dark	field.
‘Behold,’	Paran	said	under	his	breath,	‘the	Shaved	Knuckle	in	the	Hole.’
	


Invisible	to	all	eyes,	even	those	of	the	Pures,	Kalam	made	his	way	silently	up
the	cobbled	road.	Well,	hopefully	invisible	to	the	Pures.	Either	way,	we’ll	soon
find	out.	To	his	right	and	left	now,	deep	foxholes	where	sentries	stood,	chests
against	the	pit	side,	looking	down	on	the	foreign	invaders.	At	their	feet,	the	dull
glow	of	signal	lanterns.	Past	them,	the	first	berms	fronting	the	lead	trench:
mounded	rocks	and	earth,	high	enough	to	provide	cover	from	arrows	and
quarrels,	treacherous	enough	underfoot	for	the	attackers	to	lose	their	balance
and	slow	their	charge.
The	trenches	themselves	were	solid	with	Kolanse	soldiers,	well	armoured
and	armed	with	pikes.	Seven	paces	behind	them,	higher	up	the	slope,	ran	a	long
slit	trench,	stepped	for	the	archers.	They	would	loose	their	arrows	at	nearly
point-blank	range,	over	the	heads	of	the	first	line	of	defenders	and	taking	the
Malazans	at	the	top	of	the	berm.
Kalam	hoped	that	Paran’s	damned	card	was	working.	He	hoped	that	the
High	Fist	was	now	seeing	what	he	was	seeing.	This	could	be	brutal.	There’s	a
decent	commander	up	here,	somewhere.	Quick	Ben	–	I	don’t	think	this	is	the
work	of	a	Forkrul	Assail.	This	has	the	feel	of	a	professional	campaigner.
Probably	the	Wolves	commander.	I	hope	you’re	thinking	what	I’m	thinking.
Hold	on…mercenaries	wearing	wolf	furs?	No,	couldn’t	be	them.	Just	some
other	bastards.	Got	to	be.
Two	more	tiers	to	match	the	lead	line,	with	levelled	ramps	allowing	for
retreat,	should	the	first	trench	be	overrun.	And	plenty	of	reserves,	positioned	in
three	fortified	camps	just	above	the	last	tier.	Kalam	judged	there	to	be	at	least
six	thousand	Shriven	here.	Glad	I’m	not	you,	Paran.
Higher	still,	where	at	last	Kalam	thought	he	could	see	the	summit’s	edge,
beyond	which	the	pass	levelled	out.	A	massive	stone	gate	straddled	the	road,
with	a	low	skirting	wall	above	a	moat	stretching	out	to	either	side,	effectively
blocking	the	entire	pass.	And	this	area	was	well	lit,	revealing	companies	of
heavy	infantry.	They	were	awake,	divided	into	squads	of	ten,	each	squad
forming	a	circle	facing	inward	–	the	soldiers	were	praying.
Fanatics.	That’s	bad.	We’ve	seen	this	before,	too	many	times.	Surrender?
Not	a	chance.	Hold	on…	They	were	still	too	far	away	for	him	to	be	certain.	He
looked	for	standards,	but	none	were	raised.	There,	a	fully	armoured	soldier
near	the	gate.	Gods	below!	Fucking	Perish!	Kalam	paused,	his	mind	racing,
sweat	suddenly	trickling	beneath	his	garments.	They	turned	on	us?	Krughava?	I
can’t	believe	this	–	soldiers	of	the	Wolves.	Gods,	who	else	could	they	have
been?	Kalam,	you	idiot.	Hood	take	me,	Hood	take	us	all.
But…if	Krughava’s	here,	it’s	no	wonder	the	defences	are	bristling.
All	right,	woman.	He	began	moving	forward	once	more.	Betray	us	and	you


get	what	you	deserve.
The	gateway	was	barred,	with	projecting	spikes,	all	blackened	iron.	The
lowest	row	of	spikes,	ankle-high,	jutted	a	hand’s	length	beyond	the	higher
ones,	except	for	a	matching	row	at	eye	level.	There	was	a	lone	Perish	sentry
standing	behind	the	gate,	visor	lowered,	heavy	spear	leaning	against	one
shoulder.
Ten	paces	away,	Kalam	slipped	down	from	the	road,	made	his	way	along
the	drainage	ditch,	and	down	into	the	moat.	At	the	bottom,	short	wooden	spikes
were	jammed	between	sharp-edged	rocks.	The	bank	furthest	from	the	wall	was
soaked	in	pitch.	Firewall.	Nothing	nice	here,	nothing	at	all.	Hope	you’re	close,
Quick	Ben.	Hope	you	know	what	I’m	going	to	have	to	do	here.
He	carefully	picked	his	way	across	the	moat.	Waited	a	moment,	and	then
whispered	the	chain-word	the	wizard	had	given	him.	Sudden	weightlessness.
Reaching	up,	he	made	his	way	up	and	over	the	wall.	At	he	touched	ground	on
the	other	side,	the	weightlessness	faded.	Well,	no	alarm	yet.	So	far,	Quick’s
promise	of	being	able	to	hide	magic	seems	to	be	holding.	Ahead,	more	guards,
but	widely	spaced	enough	for	the	assassin	to	slip	easily	between	them.	He	set
out,	made	his	way	into	the	camp.
Past	the	squad	circles,	the	soldiers	still	praying,	to	an	empty	marshalling
area	in	the	centre,	and	opposite	it,	two	command	tents,	the	one	on	the	right
surmounted	by	a	wolf	skull	atop	the	centre	pole.	Grey	Helms	all	right.	But…
this	can’t	be	all	of	them.	Unless	Tavore	made	them	pay	dearly	for	the	treachery.
But	if	she	did,	then	she’s	probably	dead.	She	never	got	her	chance.
Well	then.	If	vengeance	is	all	we	have	left,	let’s	get	started…
The	other	tent	was	larger,	of	the	same	style	as	those	in	the	besieging	camp
outside	the	keep.	It	was	lit	from	within	and	two	guards	flanked	the	front	flap,
both	Kolansii.
Drawing	two	throwing	knives,	Kalam	advanced	on	them,	moving	fast.	At
five	paces	away,	he	raised	both	weapons	and	threw	them	simultaneously	in	a
single	fluid	motion.	Each	found	the	base	of	a	throat.	Bodies	buckled,	blood
splashing	down,	but	before	they	could	fall	Kalam	had	reached	them,	grasping
the	knife	grips	to	hold	both	men	up	before	carefully	settling	them	to	the
ground.
How	much	noise?	Oh,	who	cares?
Leaving	the	daggers	where	they	were,	the	assassin	drew	his	two	long
knives,	slashed	the	flap’s	draw	strings,	and	then	bulled	through.
He	clearly	caught	the	Pure	by	surprise	–	nothing	stealthy	or	subtle	in	this
approach	after	all	–	and	collided	hard	with	the	Forkrul	Assail.	One	long	knife
plunged	deep	directly	beneath	the	heart.	The	other,	moving	up	to	slash	across


the	throat,	was	blocked	by	a	forearm	hard	as	iron.	Even	as	the	Assail	stumbled
back,	his	hands	lashed	out.
The	first	blow	caught	Kalam	high	on	his	right	shoulder,	spinning	him	off
his	feet.	The	second	one	slammed	into	his	chest	on	the	left	side,	crushing	chain,
breaking	at	least	two	ribs	and	fracturing	others.	The	impact	flung	the	assassin
backwards.	He	rebounded	from	the	tent	wall	to	the	left	of	the	entrance.
Half	stunned	with	pain,	Kalam	watched	the	Assail	pull	the	long	knife	from
his	chest	and	fling	it	away.
‘Oh,’	he	gasped,	‘did	I	make	you	mad?’
Snarling,	the	Assail	advanced	on	him.
The	ground	disappeared	beneath	his	feet.	With	a	howl,	the	Pure	plunged
from	sight.	There	followed	a	thud.
Quick	Ben	materialized	just	on	the	other	side	of	the	hole.	Drew	out	a	small
round	ball	of	black	clay.	Leaned	over	to	peer	down.	‘Compliments	of	the
marines,’	he	said,	and	dropped	the	ball.
The	wizard	had	to	lunge	backward	as	a	gout	of	fire	shot	from	the	hole,	and
all	at	once	the	tent	ceiling	was	aflame,	and	Quick	Ben	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Swearing,	Kalam	retrieved	his	long	knife	–	he’d	somehow	held	on	to	the
other	one	–	and	leapt	for	the	entrance.
Rolling	clear,	groaning	at	the	blinding	agony	exploding	in	his	chest,	he
staggered	to	his	feet.	On	all	sides,	Perish	soldiers	were	rushing	to	the	burning
tent.	He	saw	them	drawing	their	swords.
‘Quick	Ben!	I’m	invisible,	right?	Quick	Ben!’
He	heard	a	hiss:	‘Sheathe	that	damned	knife!’
Hood’s	breath!	Kalam	spun	and	ran	from	the	nearest	attacker.	Slammed	the
knife	back	into	its	scabbard.	‘Try	again!’	he	bellowed.
He	stumbled,	fell	with	a	grunt.	There	was	blood	in	his	mouth.	Not	good.
A	hand	settled	on	his	back.	‘Don’t	move,’	came	Quick	Ben’s	whisper.
The	Perish	were	retreating	now	from	the	raging	flames,	and	the	fire	was
almost	close	enough	to	reach	out	and	touch,	but	Kalam	felt	no	heat.	‘Can	we
talk?’	he	asked.
‘Now	we	can,	aye.’
‘You	said	a	sharper!’
‘I	changed	my	mind.	Needed	to	make	certain.	Besides,	the	sharper ’s	pretty
loud.’
‘A	Hood-damned	burner,	though?	Now	that’s	keeping	things	nice	and
quiet!	Any	more	Pures?’
‘No.	Shh	–	something’s	close.	Tracking	us.’
‘How?’


‘Don’t	know.’
‘I	wanted	to	go	after	the	Perish	commander	–	Krughava	or	whoever	it	is.’
‘You’re	bubbling	blood	with	every	breath,	Kalam.	You’re	in	no	shape	for
anything.’
‘Stabbed	the	bastard	in	the	heart	and	it	didn’t	do	a	damned	thing.’
‘I’m	sure	it	did.	But	they’ve	got	two	hearts.’
‘Thanks	for	telling	me.’	Kalam	grimaced,	fought	down	a	cough.	‘These
are	the	Perish,	aren’t	they?’
‘Aye.	Now,	be	quiet,	and	let	me	drag	you	away.	That	fire’s	starting	to	burn
through	what	I	threw	up	around	us.’
But	the	mage	dragged	Kalam	for	only	two	tugs	before	the	assassin	felt
Quick	Ben’s	hands	suddenly	grip	tight.	‘Shit,	it’s	here.’
Blinking,	Kalam	twisted,	looked	round.	‘I	don’t	see—’
‘Smells	like	an	enkar ’l,	feels	like	a	Toblakai.’
Not	a	chance	–	oh,	gods	below,	what’s	it	doing	here?	He	could	feel	it	now.	A
massive,	looming	presence.	‘What’s	it	doing?’	he	hissed.
‘Er,	sniffing	you.’
Kalam	felt	his	skin	crawl.	‘Why	can’t	I	see	it?’
‘Because	it	doesn’t	want	you	to.’
The	assassin	almost	shouted	when	a	sharp	talon	tracked	gently	across	one
cheek,	ending	up	directly	beneath	an	eye.	He	forced	himself	to	lie	perfectly
still.
‘A	servant	of	the	Wolves,	I	think.’
Aye.	Don’t	tell	me	what	I	already	know.
Then	the	hand	pressed	down	on	Kalam’s	chest,	directly	over	his	shattered
ribs.	But	there	was	no	pain,	just	a	sudden	heat.	A	moment	later	the	hand	was
gone.	And	then—
‘Hood	take	me,’	Quick	Ben	muttered	a	few	heartbeats	later.	‘Gone.	Never
seen	the	like.	It	fucking	healed	you,	Kalam.	Why	did	it	do	that?’
Feeling	shaken,	fragile,	as	if	he’d	inhaled	a	fist	and	had	only	just	now
coughed	it	back	out,	the	assassin	slowly	regained	his	feet.	There	was	chaos	on
all	sides	of	the	burning	tent,	and	he	saw	a	Perish	officer,	one	of	Krughava’s
ship	commanders.	He	was	standing	staring	at	the	tent	with	an	odd,	almost
satisfied	expression	on	his	lean	face.
‘Ready	to	try	for	him?’	Quick	Ben	asked.
Kalam	shook	his	head.	‘No.	We	don’t	touch	the	Perish.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Unless	you	want	that	thing	to	come	back,	a	whole	lot	madder.’
‘Good	point.’


‘You’re	sure	there	aren’t	any	more	Pures?’
‘No.’
‘Time	to	go,	then.’
They	set	out,	winding	unseen	through	the	crowd	of	soldiers.	At	the	skirting
wall,	the	assassin	paused	and	glanced	back.	And	nodded.	‘Always	an	even
trade…’	Not	that	I	can	remember	what	I	did	to	make	him	so	happy.

In	his	tent,	Paran	slowly	sat	back,	carefully	setting	down	the	wooden	card.	He
could	have	pulled	them	out,	right	at	the	moment	the	demon	closed	on	them.	But
something	had	held	him	back.	That	was	a	chosen	servant	of	the	Wolves	of
Winter.	I	felt	its	anger,	and	then	I	felt	its…what	was	it?	Solicitude?	I	didn’t
know	they	could	even	feel	things	like	that.
He	straightened,	walked	over	to	the	stick,	took	it	in	his	hand,	and	pulled	it
from	the	ground.	The	balls	on	the	string	snapped	after	it.
A	thunderous	concussion	in	the	confines	of	the	tent,	clouds	of	dust,	and
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	staggered	into	view.	The	wizard’s	expression	twisted
with	outrage.	He	glared	across	at	Paran.	‘That	was	a	little	late,	High	Fist!	We
were	already	halfway	back.’
Paran	waved	at	the	dust.	He	could	hear	footsteps	from	beyond	the	flap	and
called	out,	‘Everything’s	fine!’
From	outside,	a	soldier ’s	voice	hissed,	‘Hear	that,	Gebbla?	When	a	High
Fist	farts	the	whole	world	shakes!’
‘Shh,	y’damned	idiot!’
The	footsteps	retreated.
Paran	sighed.	‘I	got	impatient	waiting	for	you.	Sorry.	I	didn’t	know
retrieving	you	was	going	to	be	so	messy.’
‘It	was	for	emergencies,	sir.	I	feel	like	I’ve	been	pulled	inside	out.’
‘Aye	to	that,’	Kalam	growled,	moving	over	to	sit	down	heavily	on	the
chest.	The	stout	legs	snapped	and	the	chest	thumped	down	hard.	The	assassin
winced.	‘Just	what	my	old	bent	spine	needed,	gods	below.’	He	started	pulling
off	his	gloves.
‘My	sister ’s	allies,	then	–	am	I	correct,	Kalam?’
‘Good	guess.’
‘Allies	no	longer,’	said	Quick	Ben,	and	now	he	was	the	one	pacing	in	the
confines	of	the	tent.	‘But	that	was	Erekala,	not	the	Mortal	Sword.	Didn’t	see	the
Shield	Anvil	either.	This	force	is	the	one	that	came	from	the	sea.	The	soldiers


left	to	travel	with	the	fleet.’
‘So	it	could	be	that	Krughava	has	no	idea	they’ve	turned,’	Kalam	said.
‘That	alliance	always	had	me	nervous,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘Fanatical
worshippers	of	a	world	without	humans	–	how	does	that	make	any	sense?	Even
if	Krughava	hasn’t	turned,	it’s	only	a	matter	of	time	–	all	they	have	to	do	is
follow	their	faith	to	its	logical	conclusion.	I	warned	Tavore—’
‘Now	you’re	lying,’	Kalam	said	in	a	growl.
The	wizard	turned	on	him.	‘How	would	you	know?’
‘Just	guessing.	Because	I	know	you,	remember?	You’re	just	mad	at
yourself	because	you	never	anticipated	this	happening.’
‘Fine.	Have	it	your	way	then.	The	point	is,	Tavore	is	in	trouble.	She	could
get	backstabbed	at	any	time,	and	there’s	no	way	we	can	warn	her.’
‘Maybe	there	is,’	Paran	said.	‘Once	we	get	through	this	pass,	I	want	you
and	Kalam	riding	ahead,	fast	as	your	horses	can	take	you.	Find	my	sister.’
‘Did	you	see	those	defences,	sir?’	Kalam	demanded.	‘How	do	you	hope	to
get	the	Perish	to	surrender?	They	can	stop	the	Host	right	here,	right	now.’
But	Paran	was	frowning.	‘Why	didn’t	that	demon	tear	you	to	pieces,
Kalam?’
The	assassin	looked	away,	shrugged.	‘Met	it	before.	Did	it	a	favour.	Maybe.
I	think.	Can’t	remember	exactly.	But	it	was	back	in	Seven	Cities,	the	middle	of
the	Whirlwind.	Things	happened.’
‘You	weave	a	fine	tale,	Kalam,’	Quick	Ben	observed.
‘I	leave	the	endlessly	flapping	mouth	to	you,	wizard.’
‘Clearly	a	wise	decision.	But	next	time,	just	summarize.’
	
Six	High	Watered	officers	stood	uneasily	before	Erekala,	twenty	paces	behind
them	the	blackened	stain	and	charred	wreckage	of	the	Pure’s	tent,	from	which
embers	still	blinked	open	and	closed	like	glowing	eyes	amidst	the	ashes,	and
smoke	lifted	its	black	pall.
The	times	the	Perish	commander	had	had	occasion	to	engage	with	these
mixed-bloods,	they	had	looked	upon	him	with	disdain.	Now	such	superiority
had	been	swept	away,	in	a	conflagration	of	fire.	Brother	Serenity	was	dead.	But
uttering	that	statement	was	akin	to	stating	the	impossible.	One	rank	below
Reverence	and	Diligence,	Serenity’s	power	had	been	immense,	matched	only
by	that	of	Calm	–	or	so	Erekala	had	been	led	to	believe.
And	Serenity	has	this	night	fallen	to	two	Malazans.	And	come	the	dawn,	we
shall	face	in	battle	eight	thousand	more.	But	did	the	Pure	Brother	heed	my
caution?	He	did	not.	‘We	have	found	blood	trails	leading	out	from	the	Pure’s


tent,’	he	now	said.	‘It	is	fair	to	assume	that	Brother	Serenity	fought	hard	against
his	assailants;	indeed,	that	he	might	have	seriously	wounded	them,	perhaps
even	killed	one.’
But	he	could	see	no	effect	from	these	words.	Sighing,	Erekala	continued,
‘Will	you	elect	one	among	you	to	assume	command	of	the	Shriven?
Alternatively,	you	can	place	yourselves	under	my	command.	Dawn	is	fast
approaching,	sirs,	and	we	shall	soon	be	locked	in	battle.’
One	of	the	officers	stepped	forward.	‘Sir,	in	all	matters	tactical,	Brother
Serenity	instructed	us	to	obey	your	commands.’
Erekala	nodded.	‘As	you	have	done.’
‘Sir,’	the	officer	began,	and	then	hesitated.
‘Speak	your	mind.’
‘The	Pures	have	felt	Brother	Serenity’s	death.	They	are	wounded,
confused,	and	from	them	we	receive	no	guidance.	Indeed,	Akhrast	Korvalain
itself	has	been	damaged	here.’
‘Damaged?’	This	was	unexpected.	‘How	so?’
‘Another	Hold	manifested	here,	last	night.’
‘Indeed?’	He	scanned	the	faces	before	him.	‘Perhaps	you	too	readily
discounted	the	efficacy	of	seven	thousand	Perish	praying	to	their	gods.’
‘We	do	not	speak	of	the	Beast	Hold,	sir.’
Erekala	was	silent,	for	now	he	was	the	one	left	shaken.	In	a	quiet	voice	he
asked,	‘And	have	you	identified	the	intruder,	sir?’
‘Not	us,	Commander.	Sister	Reverence,	however	–	from	the	storm	of	her
thoughts,	we	sense	her…recognition.’
‘Go	on.’
The	man	shook	his	head.	‘This	is	all	we	have,	sir.’
‘Is	it	now	your	thought	that	another	ancient	Hold	has	set	itself	against
Akhrast	Korvalain?’
‘We	would	know	more	of	these	Malazans,	sir.’
Erekala	frowned.	‘Have	you	become	uncertain	regarding	my	preparations
here?’
‘No,	Commander.	Today,	the	enemy	shall	be	savaged,	possibly	shattered.
But	we	seek	to	understand	–	are	these	Malazans	nothing	more	than	humans?’
‘No	different	from	us	Perish,	you	mean?’
‘Then…do	they	too	serve	an	Elder	God?’
‘The	Malazan	Empire	long	ago	outlawed	cults	of	war	in	its	military…but
that	is	not	to	say	that	there	are	no	secret	believers	among	the	ranks.’	He	studied
the	faces	arrayed	before	him.	‘Has	it	not	occurred	to	the	Forkrul	Assail	that,	in
so	forcefully	asserting	the	power	of	Akhrast	Korvalain,	they	would	invite	the


attention	of	the	other	Elder	Holds?’
‘It	was	our	understanding	that	across	most	of	this	realm	the	Holds	were
abandoned,	giving	way	to	a	younger	ascendancy.’
Erekala	cocked	his	head.	‘And	was	this	the	case	for	the	Perish?’
At	last,	a	faint	sneer	from	the	officer.	‘You	were	judged	an	aberration.’
The	commander	smiled.	‘We	can	resume	this	discussion	at	a	later	time.
You	will	descend	among	the	Shriven	and	take	command	of	your	companies.’
The	officers	saluted.
Watching	them	march	off,	Erekala	gestured	to	one	of	his	aides.	‘Sister
Staylock,	make	the	soldiers	aware	that	we	may	face	more	than	one	enemy	this
day.’
The	young	woman	frowned.	‘Sir?’
‘And	then	assure	them	that	the	Wolves	shall	guard	us	against	all	threats.’
‘Yes	sir.’
Alone	once	more,	Erekala	made	his	way	to	the	viewing	platform	he’d	had
raised	fifty	paces	to	the	left	of	the	gate.	From	there,	he	would	have	an
unobstructed	view	of	the	enemy	assault	upon	his	defences.	Malazans.	To	utter
the	name	alone	is	sufficient	to	pale	the	most	hardened	soldier	–	especially
among	those	who	have	faced	them.	What	is	it	about	these	foreigners,	these
blades	of	empire,	that	so	sets	them	apart?
As	he	reached	the	ladder,	he	paused,	recalling	all	that	he	had	seen	of	that
terrible	withdrawal	from	Malaz	City.	Adjunct	Tavore,	did	you	know	you	would
come	to	this	land	to	find	other	Malazans	awaiting	you?	Are	they	your	allies,	or
some	other	gambit	orchestrated	by	Empress	Laseen?	Are	they	hunting	you?	Or
is	this	simply	another	invasion?	A	sudden	chill	tracked	through	him.	If	allies…
then	all	of	this	must	have	been	planned.	The	thought	frightened	him.
He	quickly	climbed	upward.	Reaching	the	platform	–	the	smell	of	fresh
pine	sharp	in	the	air	–	he	crossed	the	raw	wooden	boards	to	the	rail	facing
north.	The	sky	was	lightening	around	him,	although	the	approach	to	the	pass
remained	in	shadow.	He	could	see	enemy	ranks	now	arrayed	in	five	distinct
wedges	at	the	base.	Can	they	not	see	what	awaits	them?	Perhaps	they	will
succeed	in	taking	the	first	trench	–	but	the	second?	It	is	impossible.	The	Grey
Helms	will	not	even	draw	weapons	this	day.	His	unease	deepened.	Call	the
Malazans	every	vile	name	there	is,	but	do	not	call	them	fools.
He	stood,	alone	on	the	platform,	and	waited	to	see	what	would	come.
	
Grainy-eyed	from	lack	of	sleep,	Ganoes	Paran	walked	until	he	was	opposite
the	disordered	mob.	This	was	always	the	problem,	he	reflected,	when	trying	to


manage	four	hundred	sloppy,	unruly	marines.	The	hard	eyes,	the	weathered
faces,	the	sense	that	they	were	all	half	wild	and	straining	at	the	leash.	To	make
matters	worse,	this	lot	slouched	before	him	on	this	chill	morning	were,	one
and	all,	sappers.
Paran	glanced	back	to	the	mass	of	wooden	crates	laid	out	behind	him.
There	were	no	guards	stationed	around	them.	This	entire	gathering	was	taking
place	two	hundred	paces	north	of	the	camp’s	edge.	With	good	reason.	He	felt	a
trickle	of	sweat	work	its	way	down	his	spine.
Facing	the	sappers	once	more,	and	with	a	glance	at	Noto	Boil,	and	then
Captain	Sweetcreek	who	stood	well	off	to	one	side,	Paran	cleared	his	throat,
and	began.	‘I	am	well	aware	of	your	frustration	–	I	held	you	back	from	the
keep	defences,	set	you	to	doing	repairs	and	nothing	else.	I	dare	say	your
swords	are	rusted	in	their	scabbards	by	now…’	Paran	paused,	but	saw	no
reaction	from	them,	not	a	smile,	not	a	nod.	He	cleared	his	throat	again.	‘I
decided	that	it	would	be	to	our	tactical	advantage	to	withhold	you	sappers,
along	with	your	particular…talents,	for	as	long	as	possible.’
There	was	not	a	sound	from	the	assembled	troops,	and	all	eyes	were	fixed
on	Paran.	He	glanced	again	at	Noto	Boil.	The	man	was	standing	a	few	paces
behind	and	off	to	one	side,	fish-spine	moving	up	and	down	in	his	mouth.
Staring	back	at	the	sappers.
Sighing,	the	High	Fist	resumed.	‘In	retrospect,	perhaps	I	should	have
delayed	my	raid	on	that	Moranth	warehouse,	and	not	just	for	reasons	of	safety,
though	as	I	am	sure	you	all	know,	the	Moranth	are	very	efficient	and	careful
when	storing	munitions.	Nonetheless,	transporting	them	in	bulk	and	overland
entails	undeniable	risks.	Fortunately,	here	we	are.’	And	he	gestured	behind	him.
‘And	there	they	are.’
He	had	been	waiting	for	a	heightening	of	tension,	a	stirring	of	anticipation.
The	first	of	broadening	smiles,	soldiers	finally	straightening	to	attention,	even.
Instead…	Paran’s	gaze	narrowed.	Nothing.
I	might	as	well	be	describing	the	weather.	What’s	wrong	with	them?
Thought	they	respected	me.	Thought	that	maybe	I’d	finally	earned	the	rank
I	was	saddled	with.	But	now…feels	like	it	was	all	a	sham.
‘You	may	be	pleased	to	know	that	your	waiting	is	at	an	end.	This	morning,
you	will	avail	yourselves	of	these	munitions,	and	return	to	your	squads.	The
marines	will	lead	the	assault.	You	are	to	break	the	defences	and,	if	possible,
advance	to	the	second	trench.	This	assault	must	be	rapid	and	sustained…’	His
words	trailed	away	as	he	caught	something	at	the	corner	of	his	eye.
Standing	in	the	front	row	off	to	his	right,	where	the	sun’s	light	slanted
across	unobstructed,	a	grizzled	corporal,	his	broad,	flat	face	seamed	with	scars


visible	even	from	where	the	High	Fist	stood.	Paran	squinted	at	the	man.	Then
he	gestured	to	Noto	Boil.	The	cutter	walked	over,	pulling	the	spine	from	his
mouth.
‘Noto	Boil,’	Paran	said	in	a	low	tone.
‘Sir?’
‘Walk	over	to	that	corporal	–	that	one	there	–	and	take	a	closer	look,	and
then	report	back	to	me.’
‘Is	this	a	test?’
‘Just	do	it.’
The	cutter	reinserted	the	spine	and	then	headed	over	to	halt	directly	in	front
of	the	corporal.	After	a	moment,	he	swung	round	and	made	his	way	back.
‘Well?’	Paran	demanded.
Noto	Boil	removed	the	spine.	‘The	man	is	crying,	High	Fist.’
‘He’s	crying.’
‘So	it	seems,	sir.’
‘But…why	is	he	crying?’
Noto	Boil	turned	back	to	regard	the	corporal	once	more.	‘Was	just	the	one
tear.	Could	be	anything.’
Swearing	under	his	breath,	Paran	marched	over	to	stand	before	the
corporal.	The	marine’s	stare	was	fixed	straight	ahead.	The	track	of	that	lone
tear,	etching	its	way	down	from	his	right	eye,	was	already	dulled	with	grit	and
dust.	‘Something	in	your	eye,	Corporal?’
‘No	sir.’
‘Are	you	ill?’
‘No	sir.’
‘You’re	trembling.’
The	eyes	flicked	briefly	in	their	thinned	slits,	locked	for	an	instant	with
Paran’s	own.	‘Is	that	so?	Didn’t	know	that,	sir.	Beggin’	your	pardon.’
‘Soldier,	am	I	blocking	your	view?’
‘Yes	sir,	that	you	are,	sir.’
Slowly,	Paran	edged	to	one	side.	He	studied	the	sapper ’s	face	for	a	halfdozen	heartbeats,	and	then	a	few	more,	until…oh,	gods	below!	‘I	thought	you
said	you	weren’t	sick,	Corporal.’
‘I’m	not,	sir.’
‘I	beg	to	differ.’
‘If	you	like,	sir.’
‘Corporal.’
Another	flicker	of	the	eyes.	‘Sir?’
‘Control	yourselves.	Be	orderly.	Don’t	blow	any	of	us	up.	Am	I


understood?’
A	quick	nod.	‘Aye,	sir.	Bless	you,	sir.’
Startled,	Paran’s	voice	sharpened,	‘Bless	me?’
And	from	the	mob	of	sappers	came	a	muttered	chorus,	echoing	the
corporal’s	blessing.	Paran	stepped	back,	struggled	for	a	moment	to	regain	his
composure,	and	then	raised	his	voice.	‘No	need	to	rush	–	there’s	plenty	for
everyone.’	He	paused	upon	hearing	a	faint	whimper,	then	continued,	‘In	one
turn	of	the	sand	I	want	you	back	with	your	squads.	Your	sergeants	have	been
apprised	of	this	resupply	so	you	can	be	sure	that	the	word	has	gone	out.	By	the
time	you	get	back	to	them	they	will	all	have	done	with	their	prayers,	sacrifices,
and	all	the	rest.	In	other	words,	they’ll	be	ready	for	you.	The	advance	begins
two	turns	of	the	sand	from	now.	That	is	all.’
He	set	off,	not	looking	back.
Noto	Boil	came	up	alongside	him.	‘High	Fist.’
‘What?’
‘Is	this	wise?	That’s	more	munitions	than	any	of	them	has	ever	seen.’
‘In	those	crates	are	just	the	sharpers,	burners	and	smokers.	I	haven’t	even
let	them	see	the	cussers	and	redbolts—’
‘Excuse	me,	sir,	the	what	bolts?’
‘It	turns	out,	Noto,	that	there	exists	a	whole	class	of	munitions	exclusive	to
the	Moranth.	Not	for	export,	if	you	understand	me.	Through	a	card	I	was
witness	to	the	demonstration	of	some	of	them.	These	ones,	which	I	have	called
redbolts,	are	similar	to	onager	bolts.	Only	they	do	not	require	the	onager.’
‘Curious,	High	Fist.	But	if	you	haven’t	shown	them	to	any	sapper	yet,	how
will	anyone	know	how	to	use	them?’
‘If	we	need	to	fight	the	Perish,	well,	it’s	possible	that	a	crash	course	will	be
necessary.	For	the	moment,	however,	why	distract	them?’
They	were	approaching	the	camp	edge,	where	two	companies	of	regulars
and	heavies	were	assembled,	one	to	either	side	of	the	cobbled	road.	Between
them	and	awaiting	their	arrival	was	Fist	Rythe	Bude.
Noto	Boil	said,	‘One	more	question,	sir.’
Paran	sighed.	‘What?’
‘Those	cussers	and	redbolts,	where	did	you	hide	them?’
‘Relax.	I	made	my	own	warren	for	them	–	well,	to	be	more	precise,	I
walled	off	a	small	area	in	a	different	warren,	accessible	only	to	me,	via	a	card.’
‘Ormulogun?’
‘Excuse	me?	Did	he	paint	the	card?	Of	course.’
‘Did	he	use	a	funny	red	slash,	sir?	Like	lightning,	only	the	colour	of
blood?’


Paran	frowned.	‘Redbolt	symbol,	yes.	How	did	you	know	that?’
Noto	Boil	shrugged.	‘Not	sure,	sir.	Seen	it	somewhere,	I	suppose.	No
matter.’
	
Corporal	Stern	wiped	at	his	eyes.	Crates	were	being	cracked	open,	the	sappers
working	quickly.	He	scanned	the	remaining	boxes,	swore	under	his	breath,	and
then	turned.	‘Manx,	get	over	here.’
The	Dal	Honese	shaman	waddled	over.	‘Just	what	we	figured!	Only	the
small	stuff.	That	bastard	don’t	trust	us.’
Stern	grunted.	‘You	idiot.	I	don’t	trust	us.	But	listen,	if	we—’
Manx	held	up	a	hand	in	front	of	Stern’s	face.	‘Got	it	covered.	See?’
The	corporal	tilted	his	head	back,	studied	the	tattoo	blazoned	across	the
hand’s	palm.	A	blood-red	jagged	slash.	‘That’s	it?	That’s	all	you	need?’
‘Should	do.	We	made	sure	the	toad	described	it	in	detail.’
‘Right.	Has	he	recovered?’
‘Well,	we	roasted	him	a	bit	crispy	here	and	there,	but	he’ll	survive.	It	all
kind	of	went	wrong	for	a	bit	–	I	mean,	we	had	’em	both	trussed	up,	and	we
figured	just	threatening	the	toad	would	be	enough	to	make	the	artist	break
down	and	talk.	We	was	wrong.	In	fact,	it	was	Ormulogun	who	suggested	the
roasting	bit	–	never	seen	the	old	lunatic	happier.	We	thought	they	was	friends
—’
‘Be	quiet,	will	you?	You’re	babbling.	I	don’t	care	what	happened,	so	long
as	you	didn’t	kill	either	of	them.’
‘They’re	alive,	I	told	you.	Trussed	up	and	gagged	for	now.	We’ll	let	’em
go	later.’
Stern	looked	round,	raised	his	voice,	‘Sappers!	Leave	room	for	a	cusser	or
two!’
‘Ain’t	no	cussers,	Stern.’
‘Never	mind	that.	It’s	taken	care	of.	Now	let’s	get	this	done	–	and	carefully.
We	make	a	mistake	here	and	we	don’t	take	none	of	the	bad	guys	with	us	on	the
way	out,	and	that’ll	send	our	souls	to	the	fiends	of	the	Sapper ’s	Torment	for
ever	–	and	nobody	wants	that,	do	they?’
A	sudden	hush,	a	renewed	attention	to	caution,	and	here	and	there,	a	few
subtle	gestures	warding	against	the	curse	of	the	Sapper ’s	Torment.
Satisfied,	Stern	nodded.	‘Manx,	stay	close	to	me	from	now	on.’
‘We	ain’t	never	used	one	of	those	redbolts,	Stern.’
The	man	grunted.	‘Show	me	a	munition	I	can’t	figure	out	and	I’ll	show	you
the	inside	of	the	Cobra	God’s	nose.’


Manx	shot	him	a	look.	‘Figured	you	had	north	Dal	Hon	blood	in	you.’
‘What’s	in	my	blood	don’t	matter.	I	just	know	that	when	a	sapper	steps	on
to	the	field	of	battle,	they’d	be	wise	to	call	on	every	god	they	ever	heard	of.’
‘Amen	and	a	spit	in	the	eye	t’that.’
Stern	hesitated,	and	then	nodded.	‘Amen	and	a	spit	in	the	eye	back.	Now,
you	ready?	Good.	Let’s	go	find	our	squad.	The	sarge	is	gonna	love	this.’
‘No	he	ain’t!’
‘Sarge	loves	what	I	tell	him	to	love,	Manx.	Credo	of	the	Sapper ’s	Knuckle.’
‘“Who’s	holding	the	sharper?”	Aye,	Sapper ’s	Knuckle.	Hey,	Stern.’
‘What?’
The	shaman	was	grinning.	‘See	what	this	means?	Us	sappers.	We’re	back	to
what	we	never	were	but	could’ve	been,	and	don’t	that	taste	sweet?’
‘It’s	only	sweet	if	we	don’t	mess	this	up.	Now	pay	attention	where	you’re
stepping.	I	seen	gopher	holes.’
‘Ain’t	gophers,	Stern.	These	are	prairie	dogs.’
‘Whatever.	Stick	a	foot	in	one	of	those	and	we	all	go	up.’
	
Commander	Erekala	could	feel	the	wind	freshening,	down	from	the	north,
funnelling	up	the	narrow	approach	to	the	pass.	Carried	on	that	breeze	was	the
smell	of	iron,	leather,	sweat	and	horses.	Sister	Staylock	stood	at	his	side,	with	a
half-dozen	messengers	stationed	behind	them	should	commands	need	to	be
sent	down	to	the	flag	stations	positioned	along	the	wall.
The	enemy	forces	were	shaking	out,	seething	motion	all	along	the	front
lines.	The	medium	and	heavy	infantry	that	had	been	positioned	there	in	solid
ranks	since	dawn	were	now	splitting	up	to	permit	new	troops	to	move	forward
in	ragged	formation.	These	newcomers	bore	no	standards,	and	most	of	them
had	their	shields	still	strapped	to	their	backs.	From	what	Erekala	could	make
out,	they	were	armed	with	crossbows	and	short	swords.
‘Skirmishers?’	asked	Staylock.	‘They	don’t	look	light	on	their	feet,
Commander	–	some	of	them	are	wearing	chain.	Nor	are	they	forming	a	line.
Who	are	these	soldiers?’
‘Marines.’
‘They	appear…undisciplined,	sir.’
‘It	is	my	understanding,	Sister	Staylock,	that	against	the	Malazan	marines
the	armies	of	the	Seven	Holy	Cities	had	no	counter.	They	are,	in	fact,	unlike
any	other	soldier	on	the	field	of	battle.’
She	turned	to	eye	him	quizzically.	‘Sir,	may	I	ask,	what	else	have	you	heard
about	these	marines?’


Erekala	leaned	on	the	rail.	‘Heard?	Yes,	that	would	be	the	word.’
They	were	advancing	now,	broken	up	into	squads	of	eight	or	ten,
clambering	steadily	over	the	rough	ground	towards	the	first	trench,	where
waited	masses	of	Shriven	–	Kolansii	regulars.	Solid	enough	soldiers,	Erekala
knew.	Proficient	if	not	spectacular,	yet	subject	to	the	sorcery	of	the	Forkrul
Assail.	Without	the	Pure,	however,	there	would	be	no	power	sufficient	to
unleash	in	them	any	battle	frenzy.	Still,	they	would	not	buckle	so	long	as	the
mixed-blood	commanders	held	their	nerve.
‘I	don’t	understand	you,	sir.’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘The	night	of	the	Adjunct’s	disengagement	from
the	docks	of	Malaz	City,	Sister	–	where	were	you	stationed?’
‘The	outer	screen	of	ships,	sir.’
‘Ah.	Do	you	recall,	did	you	by	chance	happen	to	hear	thunder	that	night	–
from	the	island?’
Frowning,	she	shook	her	head.	‘Sir,	for	half	that	night	I	was	in	my	sling,
fast	asleep.’
‘Very	well.	Your	answer,	Sister,	is	not	long	in	coming,	I	fear.’
Thirty	rough	and	broken	paces	below	the	first	berm	now,	the	squads
thinning	out,	those	wielding	crossbows	raising	their	weapons.
On	the	Shriven	side,	the	pikes	angled	down,	readying	for	the	enemy	to
breach	the	top	of	the	berm.	The	iron	points	formed	a	bristling	wall.	From	the
second	trench	the	archers	had	moved	up,	nocking	arrows	but	not	yet	drawing.
Once	the	Malazans	reached	the	ridge	line,	coming	into	direct	line	of	sight,	the
arrows	would	hiss	their	song,	and	as	the	first	line	of	bodies	tumbled,	the
archers	would	begin	firing	in	longer	arcs	–	to	angle	the	arrows	down	the
slope.	And	the	advance	would	grind	to	a	halt,	with	soldiers	huddling	under
their	shields,	seeking	cover	from	the	rain	of	death.
Twenty	paces	now,	where	there	was	a	pause	in	the	advance	–	only	an	instant
–	and	then	Erekala	saw	arms	swinging,	tiny	objects	sailing	out	from	the	hands.
Too	soon.
Striking	the	bank	two-thirds	of	the	way	up.	Sudden	billowing	of	thick	black
smoke,	boiling	out,	devouring	the	lines	of	sight.	Like	a	bank	of	fog,	the
impenetrable	wall	rolled	up	and	over	the	berm’s	topside.
‘Magery?’	gasped	Staylock.
Erekala	shook	his	head.
And	from	that	rising	tide	of	midnight,	more	objects	sailed	out,	landing
amidst	the	pike-wielding	press	of	Shriven.
Detonations	and	flashes	of	fire	erupted	along	the	entire	length	of	the
trench.	The	mass	of	Kolansii	shook,	and	everywhere	was	the	bright	crimson	of


blood	and	torn	flesh.
A	second	wave	of	munitions	landed.
The	report	of	their	explosions	echoed	up	the	slope,	followed	by	screams
and	shrieks	of	pain.	The	smoke	was	rolling	into	the	trench,	torn	here	and	there
by	further	detonations,	but	this	just	added	dust	and	misted	blood	to	the	roiling
mix.
Along	the	second	trench,	the	archers	were	wavering.
‘Begin	firing	blind,’	Erekala	murmured.	‘Do	it	now.’
And	he	was	pleased	to	see	Watered	officers	bellowing	their	commands,
and	the	bows	drawn	back.
A	sleet	of	quarrels	shot	out	from	the	smoke	and	dust,	tore	into	the	archers.
And	the	heads	of	many	of	these	quarrels	were	explosive.	The	entire	line
disintegrated,	bodies	tumbling	back	to	the	crouching	loaders.
More	grenados	arced	after	the	quarrels,	down	into	the	trench.	Closer	now,
Erekala	could	see	limbs,	ripped	clean	from	bodies,	spinning	in	the	air.
Higher	up	the	slope,	the	reserve	companies	boiled	into	motion,	rushing
down	towards	the	third	trench,	while	those	troops	who	had	been	stationed	in
that	position	were	now	foaming	up	over	their	own	berm,	to	begin	a	downhill
charge.	The	line	of	archers	dug	in	above	the	third	trench	were	swept	up	in	the
wholesale	advance.
‘What	are	they	doing?’	demanded	Staylock.
‘The	trenches	are	proving	indefensible	against	these	munitions,’	Erekala
replied.	‘The	half-blood	officers	have	correctly	determined	the	proper
response	to	this	–	they	must	close	with	the	marines.	Their	elevation	and	their
numbers	alone	should	win	the	day.’
The	marines,	he	now	saw	beneath	the	fast	thinning	smoke,	had	overrun	the
archers’	trench,	and	looked	to	be	digging	in	all	along	the	line	–	but	Erekala	had
ensured	that	the	earthworks	were	designed	in	such	a	manner	as	to	expose	them
to	attack	from	higher	up	the	slope.	Those	trenches	offered	them	nothing.	The
marines	began	scurrying	in	full	retreat.
‘They’re	panicking,’	hissed	Staylock.	‘They’ve	run	out	of	toys,	and
now…’
The	descending,	elongated	mass	of	Kolansii	was	like	an	avalanche	racing
after	the	straggly	marines.
‘Hold	up	at	the	lowest	trench,’	Erekala	pleaded.	‘Don’t	follow	the	fools	all
the	way	down!’
The	sound	of	that	charge,	past	the	archers’	trench	and	into	the	dip	of	the
first	trench,	was	like	thunder.
There	were	officers	in	the	lead	ranks.	Erekala	saw	them	checking	their


soldiers—
The	whole	scene	vanished	in	multiple	eruptions,	as	if	the	entire	slope	had
exploded	beneath	the	Kolansii	forces.	The	concussion	rolled	upwards	to	shake
the	summit,	fracturing	the	wall	and	shaking	the	stone	gates,	taking	hold	of	the
wooden	platform	Erekala	and	the	others	stood	on	and	rattling	it	so	fiercely	that
they	all	lost	their	footing.	Rails	snapped	and	men	and	women	tumbled	over	the
sides,	screaming.
Erekala	grasped	one	side	post,	managed	to	hang	on	as	successive	shock
waves	slammed	up	the	slope.	Wolves	protect	us!
Twisting	now	on	the	strangely	tilted	platform,	he	saw	the	clouds	lifting	to
blot	out	the	view	to	the	north	–	dust	and	dirt,	armour	and	weapons	and	sodden
strips	of	clothing	–	all	of	it	now	swept	down	towards	them,	a	grisly	rain	of
devastation.
Unmindful	of	the	deadly	deluge,	Erekala	pulled	himself	upright.	One	of	the
legs	of	the	platform	had	snapped	and	he	was	alone	–	even	Staylock	had
plummeted	to	the	broken	ground	below.
A	sword	tip	stabbed	deep	into	the	pine	boards	just	off	to	his	left,	the	blade
quivering	with	the	impact.	More	rubble	rained	down.
He	stared	downslope,	struggling	to	make	sense	of	what	he	was	seeing.	All
but	the	highest,	nearest	trench	–	along	with	the	levelled	ground	behind	it	–	was
torn	chaos,	the	ground	wounded	with	overlapping	craters	steaming	amidst
chewed-up	corpses.	Most	of	the	Kolansii	army	was	simply…gone.
And	then	he	saw	movement	once	again,	from	the	downward	end	–	the	same
marines,	swarming	back	up	the	slope,	into	the	huge	bites	in	the	earth,	up	and
over.	Squads	advancing,	others	drawing	into	tight	clumps	and	beginning	work
on	something.
Streams	of	Kolansii	survivors,	stunned,	painted	crimson,	were	retreating
up	towards	the	stone	wall,	clumping	on	the	cobbled	road.	Most	of	the	soldiers
had	flung	away	their	weapons.
Just	like	that,	the	Kolansii	are	finished.
Strange	crackling	bursts	of	fire	from	the	marines,	and	Erekala’s	eyes
widened	to	see	streaks	of	flame	race	out	from	squad	positions,	sizzling	as	they
lunged	up	and	into	the	air,	arcing	upslope.
Of	the	dozen	terrifying	projectiles	launched,	only	two	directly	struck	the
crowded	road.
The	platform	under	Erekala	pitched	back,	flinging	him	round.	He	lost	his
grip,	slid	past	the	embedded	sword,	and	then	he	was	falling.	There	was	no
sound.	He	realized	that	he	had	been	deafened,	and	so	in	sweet,	perfect	silence,
he	watched	the	ground	race	up	to	meet	him.	And	overhead,	shadow	stole	the


morning	light.
	
Staylock	had	only	just	picked	herself	up	–	bruised	and	aching	–	when	a	closer
detonation	threw	her	back	to	the	ground.	The	wall	before	her	rippled,	punching
away	the	soldiers	huddled	against	its	protective	barrier.	And	then,	with	a	roar
of	fire,	something	descended	on	the	gate	to	her	right.	The	stones	disintegrated
in	a	flash	of	light.	The	sound	of	the	impact	threatened	to	crush	her.	Stunned,	she
staggered	away	from	the	blazing	gate	–	saw	Commander	Erekala	lying	not	ten
paces	away,	in	the	wreckage	of	the	toppled	platform.	Vague	motions	from	his
body	drew	her	to	him.
‘Brother	Erekala!’	she	cried.
His	eyes	were	open,	but	the	whites	were	crazed	with	blood.	His	mouth
opened	and	closed	like	that	of	a	beached	fish,	but	she	could	hear	no	breaths
going	in	or	out.
Just	as	she	reached	his	side	she	heard	a	desperate	gasp	from	the	man,	and
all	at	once	he	was	on	his	side,	coughing.
‘Commander!’
But	he	did	not	hear	her	–	she	could	see	that.	She	looked	up	–	entire
companies	of	Perish	had	been	thrown	to	the	ground	by	multiple	impacts.
This	is	not	war.
This	is	slaughter.
And	in	her	skull,	she	thought	she	could	hear	the	howling	of	her	gods.	A
sound	of	impotent	rage	and	blind	defiance.	A	sound	that	understood	nothing.
	
A	gloved	hand	grasped	Stern	by	the	shoulder	and	spun	him	round.	Snarling,	he
reached	for	his	sword,	and	then	stared.	‘Fist!’
‘Cease	the	bombardment	immediately!’
The	corporal	looked	up	and	down	the	rough	line	of	redbolt	stations.	The
crates	positioned	behind	them	had	each	been	cracked,	and	bundles	of	fleecepacked	padding	lay	torn	and	scattered	between	the	crates	and	the	launch	sites.
He	did	a	quick	count	of	the	nearest	ones.	‘Still	got	four	or	five	salvos	left,	sir	–
right	down	the	line!’
‘I	said	stop!	The	High	Fist	does	not	want	the	Perish	engaged!’
Stern	blinked.	‘But	we	ain’t	engaging	the	Perish!’
‘Have	you	any	idea	how	far	those	bolts	are	going?’
The	corporal	turned	to	spit	grit	from	his	mouth	–	there	was	another	taste


there,	bitter,	new	to	his	tongue.	‘We’re	softening	up	that	wall,	that’s	all.	Not
one’s	gone	beyond	it,	Fist.	On	my	word!’
‘Pass	it	down,	cease	your	fire!’
‘Aye,	Fist!	–	oh,	Fist	–	did	you	see	that	Fiddling	Hedge	Drum?	Gods	below
–	in	all	my	days	left	I’ll	never	forget—’
He	stopped	when	he	saw	the	black	rage	in	her	face.	‘We	wanted	them
broken,	sapper	–	not	all	dead!’
Stern	scowled.	‘Sorry,	Fist,	but	nobody	told	us	that.’
For	a	moment	he	thought	she	might	attack	him.	Instead,	off	she	stormed.
Stern	watched	her	head	laterally	across	the	slope	to	where	regulars	and	heavies
were	drawing	up,	struggling	to	stay	on	what	was	left	of	the	cobbled	road.	Shit,
we’re	going	to	have	to	rebuild	that,	aren’t	we?	But	isn’t	that	the	secret	truth	of
everything	in	the	military?	Order	us	to	blow	it	up,	and	then	order	us	to	rebuild
the	fucker.	Ah,	the	sapper’s	lot…
Manx	crunched	down	at	his	side,	his	face	flash-burned	and	smeared	with
greasy	smoke.	‘Why’re	we	holding	up?	Got	plenty	left!’
‘Fist’s	orders,	Manx.	Listen,	pass	word	along	–	repack	the	crates,	use	all
that	extra	padding.’	He	straightened,	arched	out	the	ache	in	his	lower	back,	and
then	looked	round.	Enormous	holes	in	the	earth,	huge	craters	steaming,	heaps
of	shattered	bodies,	dust	and	dirt	and	blood	still	raining	down	through	the
choking	smoke.	He	sighed.	‘Looks	like	our	work	here	is	done.’
	
Staylock	helped	Erekala	to	his	feet.	There	was	a	storm	in	his	head,	a	droning
rush	as	if	the	heavens	had	opened	to	a	deluge,	and	beneath	that	pounded	the
labouring	drum	of	his	own	heart.	Looking	up,	squinting	through	the	pall	of
smoke	and	dust,	he	saw	his	soldiers	swarming	like	wasps	–	officers	were
shouting,	straining	to	assert	some	order	in	the	chaos.	‘What	–	what	is
happening?’	He	heard	his	own	question	as	the	faintest	of	whispers.
Staylock	replied	from	what	seemed	a	thousand	paces	away.	‘There	are
Malazans	on	the	other	side	of	the	pass,	Commander	–	at	least	four	companies.’
‘But	that’s	impossible.’
‘They	simply	appeared,	sir.	Now	we	are	trapped	between	two	armies!’
Erekala	shook	his	head,	struggling	to	clear	his	thoughts.	This	cannot	be.
We	were	told	there	was	no	other	way	through	the	mountains.	‘Form	up	into
hollow	squares,	the	wounded	in	the	centre.’	Staggering,	he	set	out	towards	the
southern	stretch	of	the	pass.	Behind	him,	Staylock	was	shouting	orders.
Pushing	through	his	soldiers	–	appalled	at	their	shattered	discipline	–
Erekala	moved	through	the	camp,	still	half	dazed,	until	he	was	beyond	the	last


of	the	Perish	tents.	The	smoke	and	dust	flowed	past	him,	carrying	with	it	the
stench	of	burnt	meat	and	scorched	cloth	and	leather.	He	thought	back	to	what	he
had	seen	down	among	the	trenches	and	shivered.	What	has	come	to	us?	What
have	we	become,	to	do	such	things?
Within	sight	of	the	Malazans,	he	halted.	There	was	no	mistaking	this	–	the
companies	he	now	looked	upon	were	the	same	as	those	he	had	seen	earlier,
down	on	the	north	side	of	the	pass.	Warren.	But…no	one	has	such	power	–	I
doubt	even	the	gods	could	open	such	gates.	Yet,	how	can	I	deny	what	I	see	with
my	own	eyes?	The	enemy	was	drawn	up,	presenting	a	curious	mix	of	heavy
infantry,	marines	with	crossbows,	regulars	and	skirmishers.	Beyond	them	a
single	small	tent	had	been	raised,	around	which	soldiers	clustered.
A	messenger	ran	up	to	Erekala	from	behind.	‘Sir!	The	enemy	has	reached
the	highest	trench	and	continues	to	advance.’
‘Thank	you,’	Erekala	replied.	He	saw	two	figures	emerging	from	the
ranks,	walking	side	by	side,	one	tall,	the	other	almost	as	tall	but	much	broader
across	the	shoulders.	The	ebon	sheen	of	their	skin	cut	a	stark	contrast	to	the
bleached	landscape.	Dal	Honese	or	southeast	Seven	Cities	–	ah,	I	know	these
two	men.	The	thin	one	–	I	remember	him	standing	at	the	prow,	facing	down	the
Tiste	Edur	fleet.	The	High	Mage,	Quick	Ben.	Meaning	the	other	one	is	the
assassin.	They	do	not	belong	here.	But,	among	all	the	flaws	afflicting	me,
blindness	is	not	one	of	them.	Ignoring	the	soldier	behind	him,	the	commander
set	out	to	meet	the	two	men.
	
‘Look	at	us	now,’	Quick	Ben	muttered.
‘Never	mind	us,’	Kalam	growled	in	reply.	‘I	see	the	commander	–	that’s
Erekala,	right?	See	the	ranks	behind	him?	They’re	a	mess.’
‘You	know,’	the	wizard	said,	‘I	didn’t	think	it	was	possible.	Opening	two
gates	at	the	same	time	like	that,	and	the	size	of	them!	Gods	below,	he	really	is
the	Master	of	the	Deck.’
Kalam	glanced	across	at	him.	‘You	were	sceptical?’
‘I’m	always	sceptical.’
‘Well,	impressive	as	it	was,	Paran	came	out	half	dead	–	so	even	he	has	his
limits.’
‘Minala’s	all	over	him	–	jealous,	Kalam?’
The	assassin	shrugged.	‘That’s	one	bone	I	never	had	in	my	body,	Quick.’
‘Her	and	Rythe	Bude	–	what	is	it	with	Ganoes	Paran	anyway?	All	these
women	slobbering	all	over	him.’
‘He’s	younger,’	Kalam	said.	‘That’s	all	it	takes,	you	know.	Us	old	farts	ain’t


got	a	chance.’
‘Speak	for	yourself.’
‘Wipe	that	grin	off,	Quick,	or	I’ll	do	it	for	you.’
They	were	closing	on	Erekala	now,	and	would	meet	approximately
halfway	between	the	two	armies.	The	way	it	should	be.	‘Look	at	us,’	Quick	Ben
said	again,	low,	under	his	breath.	‘What	do	we	know	about	negotiating?’
‘So	leave	it	to	me,’	Kalam	replied.	‘I	mean	to	keep	it	simple.’
‘Oh,	this	should	be	fun.’
They	halted	six	paces	from	the	Perish	commander,	who	also	stopped,	and
the	assassin	wasted	no	time.	‘Commander	Erekala,	High	Fist	Paran	extends	his
greetings.	He	wants	you	to	surrender,	so	we	don’t	have	to	kill	all	of	you.’
The	man	looked	like	he’d	been	caught	in	the	blast-wave	of	a	cusser	or
sharper.	His	face	was	speckled	with	tiny	cuts	and	gashes.	Dust	covered	his
uniform	and	he’d	lost	one	chain-backed	gauntlet.	Erekala	opened	his	mouth,
shut	it,	and	then	tried	again.	‘Surrender?’
Kalam	scowled.	‘Those	sappers	have	only	just	started.	You	understanding
me?’
‘What	have	you	done?’
Kalam	grimaced,	glanced	away,	hands	now	on	his	hips,	and	then	looked
back	at	the	commander.	‘You’re	seeing	how	it’s	going	to	be	–	the	old	way	of
fighting	is	on	its	way	out.	The	future,	Erekala,	just	stood	up	and	bit	off	half
your	face.’
Erekala	was	clearly	confused.	‘The	future…’
‘This	is	how	it’ll	be.	From	now	on.	Fuck	all	the	animals	–	they’ll	all	be
gone.	But	we’ll	still	be	here.	We’ll	still	be	killing	each	other,	but	this	time	in
unimaginable	numbers.’
The	commander	shook	his	head.	‘When	all	the	beasts	are	gone—’
‘Long	live	the	cruellest	beast	of	all,’	Kalam	said,	suddenly	baring	his	teeth.
‘And	it	won’t	end.	It’ll	never	end.’
Erekala’s	eyes	slowly	widened,	and	then	his	gaze	shifted	past	Quick	Ben
and	Kalam,	to	the	waiting	ranks	of	Malazan	soldiers.	‘When	all	the	beasts	are
gone,’	he	whispered,	and	then	raised	his	voice,	once	more	addressing	Kalam.
‘Your	words…satisfy	me.	Inform	your	High	Fist.	The	Perish	Grey	Helms
surrender.’
‘Good.	Disarm	–	we’ll	collect	your	weapons	on	our	way	through.	Sorry
we	can’t	help	with	your	wounded,	though	–	we’re	in	something	of	a	hurry.’
‘And	what	do	you	intend	to	do	with	my	brothers	and	sisters?’
Kalam	frowned.	‘Nothing.	Just	don’t	follow	us	–	your	role	in	this	whole
Hood-damned	mess	is	now	done.	Look,’	the	assassin	added,	‘we	had	to	get


through	the	pass.	You	got	in	our	way.	We	got	no	qualms	killing	the	Assail	and
their	Shriven	–	that’s	what	we’re	here	to	do.	But	you	Perish	–	well,	the	High
Fist	made	it	clear	enough	–	you	ain’t	our	enemy.	You	never	was.’
	
As	they	made	their	way	back	Quick	Ben	shot	Kalam	a	look.	‘How	did	you
know?’
‘Know	what?’
‘The	thought	of	us	humans	slaughtering	each	other	for	ever	and	ever	–
how	did	you	know	that	he’d	settle	with	that?’
The	assassin	shrugged.	‘I	just	told	him	how	it	was	going	to	be.	Soon	as	he
heard	it,	he	knew	the	truth	of	it.	They	may	be	fanatics	but	that	don’t	make	them
fools.’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘Beg	to	differ	on	that	one,	Kalam.’
Grunting,	Kalam	nodded	and	said,	‘Soon	as	I	said	it…all	right,	try	this.
Even	a	fanatic	can	smell	the	shit	they’re	buried	in.	Will	that	do?’
‘Not	really.	They’re	fools	because	they	then	convince	themselves	it	smells
sweet.	Listen,	you	basically	told	him	that	his	sacred	beasts	were	finished.’
‘Aye.	Then	I	made	it	taste	sweet.’
Quick	Ben	thought	about	that	for	a	time,	as	they	approached	the	ranks,	and
finally	he	sighed.	‘You	know,	Erekala	ain’t	the	only	fool	around	here.’
‘What’s	that	smell?	And	I	thought	you	were	smart,	wizard.	Now,	get	us
some	horses	while	I	report	to	Paran.’
‘Tavore?’
‘If	she’s	alive,	we’ll	find	her.’
	
With	an	enraged	scream,	Korabas	snapped	her	head	down,	jaws	closing	on	the
Eleint’s	shoulder.	Bones	exploded	in	her	mouth.	With	the	talons	of	one	of	her
feet,	she	scythed	the	beast’s	underbelly,	and	then	struck	again,	claws	plunging
deep.	Blood	and	fluids	gushed	down	as	she	tore	loose	the	dragon’s	guts.	With
its	carcass	still	in	her	jaws,	she	whipped	it	to	one	side,	into	the	path	of	another
Eleint.
Claws	scored	across	her	back.	The	Otataral	Dragon	twisted	round,	lashing
with	her	talons.	Puncturing	scaly	hide,	she	snatched	the	dragon	close,	bit
through	its	neck,	and	then	flung	it	away.	Jaws	crunched	on	one	ankle.	When	her
own	jaws	lunged	down,	they	closed	sideways	around	the	back	of	the	Eleint’s
head.	A	single	convulsive	crunch	collapsed	the	skull.	Another	dragon


hammered	down	on	her	from	above.	Talons	razored	bloody	tracks	just	beneath
her	left	eye.	Fangs	chewed	at	the	ridge	of	her	neck.	Korabas	folded	her	wings,
tearing	loose	and	plummeting	away	from	the	attacker.	A	dragon	directly	below
her	took	the	full	impact	of	her	immense	weight.	It	spun	away,	one	wing
shattered,	spine	snapped,	and	fell	earthward.
Thundering	the	air,	she	lifted	herself	higher	once	more.	Eleint	swarmed
around	her,	like	crows	surrounding	a	condor,	darting	close	and	then	away
again.	The	air	was	filled	with	their	reptilian	shrieks,	the	Ancients	among	them
roaring	their	fury.
She	had	killed	scores	already,	had	left	a	trail	of	dragon	corpses	strewn	on
the	dead	ground	in	her	wake.	But	it	was	not	enough.	Blood	streamed	from	her
flanks,	her	chest	creaked	with	her	labouring	breath,	and	the	attacks	were
growing	ever	more	frenzied.
The	change	was	coming.	She	could	taste	it	–	in	the	gore	sliming	her	mouth,
shredded	between	her	fangs	–	in	the	frantic	furnaces	of	her	nostrils	–	in	the	air
on	all	sides.	Too	many	Eleint.	Too	many	Ancients	–	the	Storms	are	still	in
collision,	but	soon	they	will	merge.
Soon,	T’iam	will	awaken.
Another	Storm	struck.	Howling,	Korabas	lashed	out.	Crushing	chests,
tearing	legs	from	hips,	wings	from	shoulders.	Ripping	heads	from	necks.	She
bit	through	ribcages,	sent	entrails	spilling.	Bodies	fell	away,	trailing	tails	of
ruin.	The	air	was	thick	with	blood,	and	much	of	it	her	own.	Too	much	of	it	my
own.
T’iam!	T’iam!	Mother!	Will	you	devour	me?	Will	you	devour	your	child	so
wrong,	so	hated,	so	abandoned?
Mother	–	see	the	coming	darkness?	Will	you	hear	my	cries?	My	cries	in	the
dark?
There	was	terrible	pain.	The	blind	rage	surrounding	her	was	its	own
storm,	all	of	it	whirling	in	and	down	to	ceaselessly	batter	her.	She	had	not
asked	to	be	feared.	She	had	not	wanted	such	venom	–	the	only	gift	from	all	of
her	kin.	She	had	not	asked	to	be	born.
I	hurt	so.
Will	you	kill	me	now?
Mother,	when	you	come,	will	you	kill	your	wrong	child?
Around	her,	an	endless	maelstrom	of	dragons.	Weakening,	she	fought	on,
blind	now	to	her	path,	blind	to	everything	but	the	waves	of	pain	and	hate
assailing	her.
This	life.	It	is	all	that	it	is,	all	that	I	am.	This	life	–	why	do	I	deserve	this?
What	have	I	done	to	deserve	this?


The	Storms	ripped	into	her.	The	Storms	tore	her	hide,	rent	vast	tears	in	her
wings,	until	her	will	alone	was	all	that	kept	her	aloft,	flying	across	these
wracked	skies,	as	the	sun	bled	out	over	the	horizon	far,	far	behind	her.
See	the	darkness.	Hear	my	cries.


Chapter	Twenty-Three

On	this	grey	day,	in	a	valley	deep	in	stone
Where	like	shades	from	the	dead	yard
Sorrows	come	forth	in	milling	shrouds
And	but	a	few	leaves	grey	as	moths
cling	to	branches	on	the	shouldered	hillsides,
Fluttering	to	the	winds	borne	on	night’s	passing
I	knelt	alone	and	made	voice	awaken	to	call	upon	my	god
	
Waiting	in	the	echoes	as	the	day	struggled
Until	in	fading	the	silence	found	form
For	my	fingers	to	brush	light	as	dust
And	the	crows	flapped	down	into	the	trees
To	study	a	man	on	his	knees	with	glittering	regard
Reminding	me	of	the	stars	that	moments	before
Held	forth	watchful	as	sentinels
On	the	sky’s	wall	now	withdrawn	behind	my	eyes
	
And	all	the	words	I	have	given	in	earnest
All	the	felt	anguish	and	torrid	will	so	sternly
Set	out	like	soldiers	in	furrowed	rows
Hovered	in	a	season’s	sundering	of	birds
With	no	song	to	beckon	them	into	flight
Where	my	hands	now	spreading	like	wings
Bloodied	in	the	passion	of	prayer
Lay	dying	in	the	bowl	of	my	lap
	
My	god	has	no	words	for	me	on	this	grey	day
Pallor	and	pallid	dust	serve	a	less	imagined	reply
Mute	as	the	leaves	in	the	absence	of	bestir
And	even	the	sky	has	forgotten	the	sun
Give	me	the	weal	of	silence	to	worry	answers
From	this	tease	of	indifference	–	no	matter


I	am	done	with	prayers	on	the	lip	of	dawn
And	the	sorrows	will	fadewith	light
My	Fill	of	Answers
Fisher	kel	Tath
	now	it	was	lying	on	the	ground
beside	him.	The	cloth	was	stained,	threadbare,	the	colour	of	dead	soil.	Astride
his	lifeless	horse,	he	leaned	over	the	saddle	horn	and	with	his	one	eye	studied
the	distant	Spire.	The	vast	bay	on	his	left,	beyond	the	cliffs,	crashed	in	tumult,
as	if	ripped	by	tides	–	but	this	violence	did	not	belong	to	the	tides.	Sorceries
were	gathering	and	the	air	was	heavy	and	sick	with	power.
It	had	all	been	unleashed	and	there	was	no	telling	how	things	would	fall.
But	he	had	done	all	that	he	could.	Hearing	horse	hoofs	behind	him	he	twisted
round.
Toc	saluted.	‘Sir.’
Whiskeyjack’s	face	was	cruel	in	its	mockery	of	what	it	had	once	been,	in
the	times	of	living.	His	beard	was	the	hue	of	iron	below	a	gaunt,	withered	face,
like	the	exposed	roots	of	a	long-dead	tree.	The	eyes	were	unseen	beneath	the
ridge	of	his	brows,	sunken	into	blackness.
We	are	passing	away.	Sinking	back	from	this	beloved	edge.
‘You	cannot	remain	here,	soldier.’
‘I	know.’	Toc	gestured	with	one	desiccated	hand,	down	to	the	shrouded
form	lying	on	the	ground.	Behind	Whiskeyjack	the	Bridgeburners	waited	on
their	mounts,	silent,	motionless.	Toc’s	eye	flitted	over	them.	‘I	had	no	idea,	sir,’
he	said,	‘there	were	so	many.’
‘War	is	the	great	devourer,	soldier.	So	many	left	us	along	the	way.’
The	tone	was	emptied	of	all	emotion	and	this	alone	threatened	to	break
what	remained	of	Toc’s	heart.	This	is	not	how	you	should	be.	We	are	fading.	So
little	remains.	So	little…
When	Whiskeyjack	wheeled	his	mount	and	set	off,	his	Bridgeburners
following,	Toc	rode	with	them	for	a	short	distance,	flanking	the	solid	mass	of
riders,	until	something	struck	him	deep	inside,	like	the	twist	of	a	knife,	and	he
reined	in	once	more,	watching	as	they	continued	on.	Longing	tore	at	his	soul.	I
once	dreamed	of	being	a	Bridgeburner.	If	I	had	won	that,	I	would	now	be	riding
with	them,	and	it	would	all	be	so	much	simpler.	But,	as	with	so	many	dreams,	I
failed,	and	nothing	was	how	I	wanted	it.	He	drew	his	mount	round	and	stared
back	at	that	now	distant	shape	on	the	ground.
Fallen	One,	I	understand	now.	You	maimed	me	outside	the	city	of	Pale.	You
HE’D	BROUGHT	THE	BUNDLED	FORM	AS	CLOSE	AS	HE	DARED,	AND


hollowed	out	one	eye,	made	a	cave	in	my	skull.	Spirits	wandered	in	for	shelter
time	and	again.	They	made	use	of	that	cave.	They	made	use	of	me.
But	now	they	are	gone,	and	only	you	remain.	Whispering	promises	in	the
hollow	of	my	wound.
‘But	can’t	you	see	the	truth	of	this?’	he	muttered.	‘I	hold	on.	I	hold	on,	but	I
feel	my	grip…slipping.	It’s	slipping,	Fallen	One.’	Still,	he	would	cling	to	this
last	promise,	for	as	long	as	he	could.	He	would	make	use	of	this	one	remaining
eye,	to	see	this	through.
If	I	can.
He	kicked	his	horse	into	motion,	swinging	inland,	into	the	wake	of	the
Guardians	of	the	Gate.	The	hamlets	and	villages	of	the	headland	were	grey,
abandoned,	every	surface	coated	in	the	ash	from	the	Spire.	Furrowed	fields
made	ripples	of	dull	white,	as	if	buried	in	snow.	Here	and	there,	the	jutting	cage
of	ribs	and	hip	bones	made	broken	humps.	He	rode	past	them	all,	through	the
hanging	dust	cloud	left	behind	by	the	Bridgeburners.	And	in	the	distance	ahead,
rising	above	banks	of	fog,	the	Spire.
Huddle	close	in	this	cave.	It’s	almost	time.
	
Once,	long	ago,	the	treeless	plains	of	this	land	had	been	crowded	with	vast
herds	of	furred	beasts,	moving	in	mass	migrations	to	the	siren	call	of	the
seasons.	Brother	Diligence	was	reminded	of	those	huge	creatures	as	he
watched	the	bulky	provision	wagons	wheel	upslope	on	the	raised	tracks,	away
from	the	trenches	and	redoubts.	Feeding	almost	fifty	thousand	soldiers	had
begun	to	strain	the	logistics	of	supply.	Another	week	of	this	waiting	would
empty	the	granaries	of	the	city.
But	there	would	be	no	need	for	another	week.	The	enemy	was	even	now
marshalling	to	the	south,	with	outriders	riding	along	the	far	ridge	on	the	other
side	of	the	valley’s	broad,	gentle	saddle.
The	dawn	air	was	brittle	with	surging	energies.	Akhrast	Korvalain	swirled
so	thick	it	was	almost	visible	to	his	eyes.	Yet	he	sensed	deep	agitation,	alien
currents	gnawing	at	the	edges	of	the	Elder	Warren’s	manifestation,	and	this
troubled	him.
He	stood	on	a	slightly	raised,	elongated	platform	overlooking	the
defences,	and	as	the	day’s	light	lifted	he	scanned	yet	again	the	complicated
investment	of	embankments,	slit-trenches,	machicolations,	fortlets	and
redoubts	spread	out	below	him.	In	his	mind,	he	envisioned	the	enemy	advance,
watched	as	the	subtle	adjustments	he’d	had	made	to	the	approaches	funnelled
and	crowded	the	attackers,	punishing	them	at	the	forefront	by	onager	defilade,


and	then	taking	them	on	the	flanks	by	enfilading	arrow	fire	from	the	mounded
redoubts.	He	saw	the	swarming	waves	of	enemy	soldiers	thrust	and	driven	this
way	and	that,	chewing	fiercely	at	the	strongpoints	only	to	reel	back	bloodied.
His	eyes	tracked	down	to	the	centre	high-backed	earthworks	where	he	had
positioned	the	Perish	Grey	Helms	–	they	were	locked	in	place,	thrust	down	on
to	the	flatland,	with	few	avenues	for	retreat.	Too	eager	to	kneel,	that	Shield
Anvil.	And	the	young	girl	–	there	had	been	a	feral	look	in	her	eyes	Diligence
did	not	trust.	But,	they	would	fight	and	die	in	one	place,	and	he	was	confident
that	they	would	hold	the	centre	for	as	long	as	needed.
By	all	estimations	his	defenders	outnumbered	the	attackers,	making	the
enemy’s	chances	for	success	virtually	non-existent.	This	invasion	had	already
failed.
The	planks	underfoot	creaked	and	bowed	slightly	and	Brother	Diligence
turned	to	see	that	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian	had	arrived	on	the	platform.	The
man	was	pale,	his	face	glistening	with	sweat.	He	approached	the	Forkrul	Assail
as	if	struggling	to	stay	upright	–	and	Diligence	smiled	upon	imagining	the	man
flinging	himself	prostrate	at	his	feet.	‘Shield	Anvil,	how	fare	your	brothers	and
sisters?’
Tanakalian	wiped	sweat	from	his	upper	lip.	‘The	Bolkando	forces	possess
a	mailed	fist	in	the	Evertine	Legion,	Brother	Diligence.	Commanded	by	Queen
Abrastal	herself.	And	then	there	are	the	Gilk	Barghast—’
‘Barghast?	This	is	your	first	mention	of	them.’	Diligence	sighed.	‘So	they
have	at	last	come	to	the	home	of	their	ancient	kin,	have	they?	How	fitting.’
‘They	see	themselves	as	shock	troops,	sir.	You	will	know	them	by	their
white-painted	faces.’
Diligence	started.	‘White-painted	faces?’
Tanakalian’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘They	call	themselves	the	White	Face
Barghast,	yes.’
‘Long	ago,’	Diligence	said,	half	in	wonder,	‘we	created	a	Barghast	army	to
serve	us.	They	sought	to	emulate	the	Forkrul	Assail	in	appearance,	electing	to
bleach	the	skin	of	their	faces.’
Frowning,	the	Shield	Anvil	shook	his	head.	‘There	was,	I	believe,	some
kind	of	prophecy,	guiding	them	across	the	seas	to	land	north	of	Lether.	A	holy
war	to	be	fought,	or	some	such	thing.	We	believe	that	only	the	Gilk	clan
remains.’
‘They	betrayed	us,’	Diligence	said,	studying	Tanakalian.	‘Many	Pures	died
at	their	hand.	Tell	me,	these	Gilk	–	are	they	in	the	habit	of	wearing	armour?’
‘Turtle	shell,	yes	–	most	strange.’
‘Gillankai!	Their	hands	are	drenched	in	the	blood	of	Pures!’


Tanakalian	backed	a	step	in	the	face	of	this	sudden	fury.	Seeing	this,
Diligence	narrowed	his	gaze	on	the	Shield	Anvil.	‘How	many	warriors	among
these	Gilk?’
‘Three	thousand,	perhaps?	Four?’
Snarling,	Diligence	turned	to	face	the	valley	again.	‘The	weapons	of	the
Forkrul	Assail	are	our	hands	and	feet	–	the	Gillankai	devised	an	armour	to
blunt	our	blows.	Shield	Anvil,	when	they	come,	concentrate	against	these
Barghast.	Break	them!’
‘Sir,	I	cannot	command	the	presentation	of	enemy	forces.	I	came	here	to
tell	you	it	is	my	suspicion	that	the	Evertine	Legion	will	engage	the	Grey	Helms
–	a	clash	of	heavy	infantry.	We	shall	lock	jaws	with	them	and	we	shall	prevail.
As	such,	sir,	we	leave	the	Gilk,	the	Saphii	and	other	assorted	auxiliaries	to	your
Kolansii.	In	addition	to	the	Letherii,	of	course.’
‘Any	other	threats	you’ve	yet	to	mention,	Brother?’
‘Sir,	you	vastly	outnumber	the	attackers.	I	expect	we	shall	make	short	work
of	them.’
‘And	does	this	disappoint	you,	Shield	Anvil?’
Tanakalian	wiped	again	at	the	sweat	beading	his	upper	lip.	‘Provided	you
do	not	seek	to	use	your	voice,	sir,	to	demand	surrender,	we	shall	welcome	all
the	blood	spilled	on	this	day.’
‘Of	course.	It	is	the	slaughter	you	so	desire.	Perhaps	I	shall	indulge	you	in
this.	Perhaps	not.’
The	Shield	Anvil’s	eyes	flicked	away	momentarily,	and	then	he	bowed.	‘As
you	will,	sir.’
‘Best	return	to	your	soldiers,’	Diligence	said.	‘And	keep	a	watchful	eye	on
that	Destriant.	She	is	not	what	she	would	like	us	to	believe	she	is.’
Tanakalian	stiffened,	and	then	bowed	again.
Diligence	watched	the	fool	hurry	away.
Watered	Hestand	thumped	up	on	to	the	platform	and	saluted.	‘Blessed	Pure,
our	scouts	report	the	advance	of	the	enemy	–	they	will	soon	crest	the	ridge	and
come	into	view.’
‘Very	well.’
‘Sir	–	there	are	not	enough	of	them.’
‘Indeed.’
As	Hestand	hesitated,	Diligence	turned	to	eye	the	officer.	‘Your	thoughts?’
‘Sir,	surely	their	own	scouts	have	assessed	our	numbers,	and	the
completeness	of	our	defences.	Unless	they	hold	some	hidden	knife	or	weapon,
they	cannot	hope	to	best	us.	Sir…’
‘Go	on.’


‘The	High	Watered	among	us	have	sensed	the	sudden	absence	of	Brother
Serenity,	far	to	the	northwest.	Clearly,	the	forces	that	emerged	from	the	keep
are	now	advancing,	and	–	somehow	–	they	are	proving	their	worth	against
even	the	most	powerful	Pures.’
‘Hestand.’
‘Sir.’
‘This	is	not	the	day	to	fret	over	distant	events,	no	matter	how	disquieting
they	may	be.’
‘Sir,	it	is	my	thought	–	perhaps	the	enemy	now	arraying	before	us	possess
similar	efficacy,	when	it	comes	to	the	Forkrul	Assail.’
After	a	long	moment,	Diligence	nodded.	‘Well	said.	I	appreciate	your
persistence	on	this	matter.	By	your	courage	you	chastise	me.	Hestand,	you	are
wise	to	awaken	caution.	As	you	have	observed,	the	enemy	before	us	cannot
hope	to	prevail,	nor	can	they	be	so	blind	that	they	cannot	see	the	hard	truth
awaiting	them.	Raising	the	question,	what	secret	do	they	possess?’
‘Sir,	what	can	we	do?’
‘Only	wait	and	see,	Hestand.’	Diligence	turned	back	to	the	valley,	tracked
with	his	eyes	down	the	paths	leading	to	the	centre	redoubt	–	and	the	wolf
standards	of	the	Perish.	‘Perhaps	I	should	compel	the	Shield	Anvil.	He	is
holding	something	back	–	I	see	that	now.	What	I	took	for	nerves	before	battle	–
I	may	have	misread	him.’
‘Shall	I	retrieve	the	Perish	commander,	sir?	Or	perhaps	send	a	squad	down
to	arrest	him?’
Diligence	shook	his	head.	‘And	invite	a	mutiny	among	the	troops	holding
our	centre?	No.	I	believe	I	must	undertake	this	task	in	person.’
‘Sir	–	is	there	time?’	And	Hestand	now	pointed	to	the	south	ridge.
The	enemy	were	presenting	in	a	solid	line	along	the	crest.	Diligence
studied	the	distant	scene	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	nodded.	‘There	is	time.
Await	me	here,	Hestand.	I	shall	not	be	gone	long.’
	
She	had	ascended	the	Spire	and	now	stood,	her	back	to	the	altar	and	the	Heart	it
held,	facing	out	on	to	the	bay.	The	fleet	of	anchored	Perish	ships	rocked	like
wood	chips	in	a	cauldron	of	boiling	water,	and	as	she	watched	she	saw	a	trio	of
masts	snap	in	a	writhing	fury	of	shredded	stays.	The	white	spume	of	the	waves
sprayed	high	into	the	air.
Sister	Reverence	found	that	she	was	trembling.	There	is	something	down
there,	in	the	depth	of	the	bay.	Something	building	to	rage.
Strangers	have	come	among	us.


Spinning,	she	faced	inland,	eyes	darting	as	she	studied	the	vast	array	of
defences	crowding	the	approach	to	the	narrow	isthmus.	Twenty	thousand	elite
Kolansii	heavy	infantry,	their	pikes	forming	thick	bands	of	forest	in	solid
ribbons	all	down	the	tiered	descent.	Fifteen	hundred	onagers	clustered	in	raised
fortlets	interspersed	among	the	trench	lines,	each	one	capable	of	releasing
twelve	heavy	quarrels	in	a	single	salvo,	with	reloading	time	less	than	forty
heartbeats.	The	defilade	down	the	choke-point	ensured	devastation	should	any
attacker	strive	to	close	on	the	lowest	fortifications.
There	was	a	taste	of	bitter	metal	in	her	mouth.	Her	bones	ached	despite	the
gusts	of	hot,	rancid	air	belching	out	from	fissures	in	the	stone	on	all	sides.	I	am
afraid.	Should	I	reach	out	to	Brother	Diligence?	Should	I	avail	myself	of	all
these	unknown	terrors?	But	what	enemy	can	I	show	him?	An	unruly	bay	–	that
vague	bank	of	fog	or	dust	to	the	south?	These	things	are	nothing.	He	prepares
for	a	battle.	He	has	his	mind	on	real	matters	–	not	an	old	woman’s	gibbering
imagination!
She	should	never	have	sent	Brother	Serenity	away.	And	now	he	was	dead.
She	had	shared	his	last	visions	–	raging	fire,	the	flames	blackening	his	oncewhite	skin,	scouring	the	flesh	of	his	face,	boiling	the	water	of	his	eyes	until	the
balls	burst	–	and	his	cries!	Abyss	below,	his	cries!	The	fire	filling	his	mouth,	the
flames	sweeping	in,	sucked	past	charred	lips,	igniting	his	lungs!	Such	a	terrible
death!
These	humans	were	an	abomination.	Their	brutal	ways	shook	her	to	the
core.	There	was	no	end	to	their	capacity	for	cruel	destruction,	no	end	to	their
will	to	deliver	horror	and	death.	The	world	would	find	a	clean	breath	once	they
were	all	gone,	finally,	a	clean	and	blessedly	innocent	breath.
Akhrast	Korvalain,	attend	me!	This	is	the	day	we	are	challenged!	We	must
prevail!
Reverence	walked	to	stand	before	the	altar.	She	glared	down	at	the	knotted
object	set	in	the	surface	of	the	stone.	Awakening	her	sorcerous	vision,	she
studied	the	now	visible	chains	binding	the	Heart	down	–	all	her	ancestors,	their
bones	given	new	shapes,	but	their	strength	had	not	changed.	There	was	no
weakness	in	what	she	saw.	The	sight	relieved	her.	No	one	shall	take	this	from
us.	If	I	must,	I	will	destroy	it	by	my	own	hand.
The	warren	surrounding	the	Heart	had	kept	it	hidden	for	all	this	time.	What
had	changed?	How	had	it	been	found?	Not	even	the	gods	could	sense	it,	not
hidden	here	at	the	heart	of	our	warren.	And	yet	we	are	about	to	be	attacked.	We
are	about	to	be	besieged.	I	feel	the	truth	of	this!	Who	could	have	found	it?
A	sudden	thought	struck	her,	clenching	like	a	fist	in	the	centre	of	her	chest.
The	Fallen	One!	But	no	–	he	is	too	weak!	Bound	by	his	own	chains!


What	gambit	is	he	playing?	To	think	that	he	could	challenge	us!	No,	this	is
madness!	But	then,	was	the	Crippled	God	not	mad?	Tortured	in	agony,	broken,
ripped	apart	–	fragments	of	him	scattered	across	half	the	world.	But	I	am	the
one	holding	his	heart.	I	have…stolen	it.	Ha,	and	see	how	deep	and	how	vast	my
love!	Watch	as	I	squeeze	it	dry	of	all	life!
A	marriage	of	justice	with	pain.	Is	this	not	the	torture	of	the	world?	Of	all
worlds?	‘No,’	she	whispered,	‘I	will	never	relinquish	my…my	love.	Never!’
This	is	the	only	worship	worthy	of	the	name.	I	hold	in	my	hand	a	god’s	heart,
and	together,	we	sing	a	thousand	songs	of	suffering.
Distant	eruptions	drew	her	round.	The	Perish	ships!	Torn	from	their
anchors,	the	huge	vessels	now	lifting	wild	on	the	heaving	swells	–	white	foam
spouting	skyward,	splinters	as	ships	collided,	broke	apart,	the	wolfheads
drowning	on	all	sides	–	she	saw	the	Kolansii	ships	in	the	harbour	directly
below,	moored	to	the	moles	and	the	inside	of	the	breakwater,	all	stirring,	like
beasts	milling	in	blind	confusion.	Waves	hammered	the	stone	breakwater,
lifting	enormous	sheets	into	the	air.	And	yet.	And	yet…there	is	no	wind.
There	is	no	wind!
	
Grub	was	almost	lost	in	the	moulded	scale	saddle	behind	the	shoulders	of	the
Ve’Gath,	and	yet,	as	the	beast	loped	forward,	he	was	not	tossed	about	as	he
would	have	been	if	on	a	horse.	The	scales	were	still	changing,	growing	to
shield	his	legs,	including	his	thighs,	as	if	the	saddle	sought	to	become	armour
as	well	–	he	was	amazed	at	seeing	such	a	thing.	Flanged	scales	now	rose	to
encircle	his	hips.	He	had	a	moment	of	fear	–	would	this	armour,	extruded	out
from	the	beast	he	was	riding,	eventually	encase	him	in	entirety?	Would	it	ever
release	him?
He	turned	his	head	to	the	rider	travelling	beside	him,	to	see	if	the	Ve’Gath’s
thick	hide	was	growing	up	in	the	same	way,	but	no	–	there	it	remained	an
ornate	saddle,	that	and	nothing	more.	And	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	rode	it	with
all	the	ease	and	familiarity	of	a	veteran.	He	envied	such	people,	for	whom
everything	came	so	easily.
My	father	was	not	like	that.	He	was	never	a	natural	fighter.	He	had	nothing
of	the	talent	of,	say,	Kalam	Mekhar.	Or	Stormy	or	Gesler.	He	was	just	an
average	man,	forced	to	be	more	than	he	was.
I	am	glad	I	did	not	see	him	die.	I	am	glad	my	memories	see	him	as	only
alive,	for	ever	alive.
I	think	I	can	live	with	that.
I	have	no	choice.


They	had	left	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	army	halfway	through	last	night,	and
now	they	were	swiftly	closing	on	the	Letherii	and	Bolkando	armies.	If	he
stretched	up	–	as	far	as	the	sheathing	armour	round	his	thighs	would	permit	–
he	could	see	directly	ahead	the	dark,	seething	stain	of	the	troops	ascending	to
the	ridge.	Grub	glanced	again	across	at	Krughava.	She	was	wearing	her	helm,
the	visor	dropped	down	and	the	hinges	locked.	The	wolfskin	cape	was	too
heavy	to	skirl	out	behind	her,	despite	the	swift	pace	the	Ve’Gath	were	setting,
but	still	it	flowed	down	with	impressive	grace	along	the	horizontal	back	of	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle,	sweeping	down	to	cover	its	hips	and	the	projecting	mass
of	its	upper	leg	muscles,	so	that	the	fur	rippled	and	glistened	as	the	muscles
bunched	and	stretched.
She	would	have	made	a	frightening	mother,	he	decided,	this	Krughava.
Frightening,	and	yet,	if	she	gave	a	child	her	love,	he	suspected	it	would	be
unassailable.	Fierce	as	a	she-wolf,	yes.
But	I	have	no	mother.	Maybe	I	never	had	one	–	I	don’t	remember.	Not	a
single	face,	swimming	blurry	in	my	dreams	–	nothing.	And	now	I	have	no	father.
I	have	no	one	and	when	I	look	ahead,	into	my	future,	I	see	myself	riding,	for
ever	alone.	The	notion,	which	he	trucked	out	again	and	again,	as	if	to	taste	it	on
his	tongue,	stirred	nothing	in	him.	He	wondered	if	there	was	something	wrong
with	him;	he	wondered	if,	years	from	now,	on	that	long	journey,	he	might	find
it	–	that	wrongness,	like	a	corpse	lying	on	the	ground	on	the	path	ahead.	He
wondered	what	he	would	feel	then.
Thinking	back	on	their	parting	from	the	K’Chain	army,	Grub	tried	to
recall	the	reasons	behind	his	decision	to	leave	Sinn’s	side.	Something	had
pulled	him	to	Brys	Beddict	and	all	the	Letherii	and	Bolkando,	a	vague	belief
that	he	would	be	more	useful	there,	though	he	had	no	idea	what	he	might	do,	or
if	he	had	anything	to	give.	It	was	easier	thinking	of	this	like	that,	instead	of	the
suspicion	that	he	was	fleeing	Sinn	–	fleeing	what	she	might	do.
‘No	one	can	stop	me,	Grub.	No	one	but	you.’	So	she’d	told	him,	more	than
once,	but	not	in	a	reassuring	way,	not	in	a	way	that	told	him	that	he	mattered	to
her.	No,	it	was	more	like	a	challenge,	as	if	to	ask:	What	have	you	got	hidden
inside	you,	Grub?	Let’s	see,	shall	we?	But	he	didn’t	want	to	know	what	he	had
inside	him.	That	day	they’d	come	to	do	battle	with	the	Moons,	that	day	when
there	had	been	fire	and	stone	and	earth	and	something	cold	at	the	centre	of	it
all,	he	had	felt	himself	falling	away,	and	the	boy	who	had	walked	at	Sinn’s	side
was	somebody	else,	wearing	his	skin,	wearing	his	face.	It	had	been…terrifying.
All	that	power,	how	it	poured	through	us.	I	didn’t	like	it.	I	don’t	like	it.
I’m	not	running	away.	Sinn	can	do	what	she	likes.	I	can’t	really	stop	her,
and	I	don’t	want	her	to	prove	it,	to	spite	her	own	words.	I	don’t	want	to	hear	her


laughing.	I	don’t	want	to	look	into	her	eyes	and	see	the	fires	of	Telas.
They	had	been	seen,	and	now	the	warrior-beasts	under	them	were	shifting
their	approach,	angling	towards	a	small	party	that	had	ridden	out	to	one	side.
Prince	Beddict.	Aranict.	Queen	Abrastal	and	Spax,	and	three	people	he’d	not
seen	before	–	two	women	and	a	tall,	ungainly-looking	man	with	a	long	face.
Just	behind	this	group,	standing	alone	and	impossibly	tall,	was	a	woman
shrouded	in	a	cloak	of	rabbit-skins,	down	to	her	ankles,	her	hair	a	wild,
tangled	mane	of	brown,	her	face	looking	like	it	had	been	carved	from
sandstone.
The	thumping	gait	of	the	Ve’Gath	fell	off	as	they	drew	nearer.	Glancing
down,	Grub	saw	that	the	armour	formed	a	high	collar	up	past	his	hips,	flaring
out	just	beneath	his	ribs.	And	behind	his	back,	an	upthrust	of	overlapping	scales
formed	a	kind	of	back-rest,	protecting	his	spine.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	halted,	and	Grub	saw	Brys	Beddict	studying
Krughava.
‘You	are	a	most	welcome	sight,	Mortal	Sword.’
‘Where	are	my	Perish	positioned?’	Krughava	demanded	in	a	voice	like
grating	gravel.
Queen	Abrastal	replied.	‘Centre,	nearest	line	of	defences	and	a	little	way
past	that.	Mortal	Sword,	their	position	is	untenable	–	they	are	provided	no
avenues	of	retreat.	With	a	little	pushing,	we	can	attack	them	on	three	sides.’
Krughava	grunted.	‘We	are	meant	to	maul	ourselves	on	this	studded	fist,
sirs.	And	should	they	all	die,	my	Perish,	it	is	of	little	interest	to	the	Forkrul
Assail.’
‘We	more	or	less	worked	that	one	out,’	Spax	said.	The	Gilk	Warchief	was
in	full	turtleshell	armour,	his	face	painted	white,	the	eyes	rimmed	in	deep	red
ochre.
The	Mortal	Sword	was	momentarily	silent,	her	gaze	moving	from	one
figure	to	the	next,	then	slipping	past	to	narrow	on	the	huge	woman	standing
fifteen	paces	back.	‘You	have	found	new	allies,	Prince.	Toblakai?’
Brys	glanced	back,	made	a	face.	‘Gods	below,	I’ve	never	known	a	woman
as	shy	as	her.	She	is	Teblor	and	she	commands	three	hundred	of	her	kind.	She
is	named	Gillimada.’
‘Where	will	you	place	them?’	Krughava’s	tone	was,	if	anything,	yet
harsher	than	it	had	been	a	moment	earlier.
Grub	saw	them	all	hesitating,	and	this	confused	him.	What	is	wrong?
Aranict	lit	a	new	stick	from	her	old	one	and	flung	the	latter	away,	speaking
all	the	while,	‘Mortal	Sword,	there	are	over	forty	thousand	Kolansii	on	the
other	side	of	the	valley.’


‘Forty	thousand?’
‘We	are	faced	with	a	challenge,’	Brys	Beddict	said.	‘We	must	endeavour	to
engage	the	entirety	of	this	force,	for	as	long	as	possible.’
Queen	Abrastal	spoke.	‘Once	the	Pure	commanding	here	learns	of	the	real
assault	–	the	one	upon	the	Spire	–	he	will	seek	to	withdraw	as	many	of	his
troops	as	he	can	safely	manage.	We	judge	three	bells	to	fast-march	to	the
isthmus	–	in	other	words,	they	can	reach	that	battle	in	time,	Mortal	Sword,	and
strike	at	Gesler ’s	flank.	As	yet,	we	can	determine	no	way	in	which	to	prevent
this	happening.’
‘I	will	turn	the	Perish,’	pronounced	Krughava.	‘I	will	pull	them	from	their
position	and	wheel	them	round,	placing	them	to	block	the	way	east.	We	need
only	slow	the	enemy,	sirs,	not	stop	them.’
‘If	you	so	succeed	in	regaining	your	command	of	the	Grey	Helms,’	said
Brys,	‘will	you	welcome	the	company	of	the	Teblor?’
Krughava’s	thinned	eyes	switched	to	the	Teblor	commander.	‘Sirs,’	she
said,	loud	enough	for	all	to	hear,	‘to	fight	alongside	the	Teblor	would	be	an
honour	unsurpassed	on	this	day.’
Grub	sought	to	see	the	effect	of	these	words,	but	from	Gillimada	there	was
no	reaction	at	all.
‘Mortal	Sword,’	said	Queen	Abrastal,	‘are	you	confident	that	you	can
resume	command	of	the	Grey	Helms?	And	before	you	answer,	this	is	not	the
time	for	unrealistic	bravado.’
Krughava	stiffened	at	that.	‘Do	you	imagine	that	I	do	not	understand	the
severity	of	this	moment,	Highness?	I	will	speak	plainly.	I	do	not	know	if	I	will
succeed.	But	I	will	give	my	life	in	the	effort	–	would	you	ask	more	of	me?’
Abrastal	shook	her	head.
‘We	must,	however,’	said	Brys,	‘present	ourselves	to	the	enemy	in	such	a
manner	as	to	deal	with	either	eventuality.’
A	loud	voice	suddenly	boomed,	‘They	talk	bad!’
Gillimada	was	suddenly	among	them,	her	eyes	level	with	the	mounted	men
and	women.
‘Excuse	me?’
She	fixed	the	prince	with	her	gaze,	her	brow	fiercely	knotted.	‘The	fishfaces.	They	use	words	that	hurt.	If	this	fight	goes	bad,	the	fish-face	will	speak,
and	make	us	kneel.	Make	us	kill	our	own	anger.	You	–	you	must	be	stubborn!
You	must	say	no	and	shake	your	heads	no!	You	must	see	the	fish-face	in	your
head,	and	then	you	must	push	him	or	her	to	the	ground,	and	then	you	must
squat,	and	then	you	must	shit	on	that	fish-face!	I	have	spoken!’
A	short	time	of	awkward	silence,	and	then	Grub	saw	that	Aranict	was


staring	straight	at	him.
He	felt	a	strange	shiver	track	up	his	spine.	‘I	don’t	know,’	he	said	in	a	small
voice.
All	eyes	fixed	on	him	and	he	felt	himself	shrinking	inside	his	peculiar	halfarmour.
Aranict	spoke.	‘Grub,	we	have	heard	what	you	achieved	when	you	joined
the	battle	between	the	K’Chain	factions.	The	Teblor	commander	speaks	of	the
power	of	Akhrast	Korvalain	–	this	sorcery	of	the	voice	–	and	we	are	uncertain
if	we	will	face	that	power	today.	Nor	do	we	know	how	to	oppose	it	if	it	should
come.’
‘Shit!’	bellowed	Gillimada.	‘I	have	spoken!’
Grub	shook	his	head.	‘At	the	battle	of	the	Moons…that	was	Sinn.	Most	of	it.
She	just	used	me.	As	if	I	was	a	knife	in	her	left	hand.	I	don’t	know	what	I	can
do.’
‘We	shall	deal	with	that	threat	when	it	comes,’	announced	Brys	Beddict.
‘For	now,	I	would	welcome	suggestions	on	the	engagement.	Queen	Abrastal,
what	are	your	thoughts?’
The	Bolkando	woman	scowled.	She	unstrapped	and	drew	off	her	helm,
revealing	a	shaved	head.	‘I	think	we	should	ignore	the	Perish	–	long	may	they
sit	in	their	holes,	or ’	–	and	she	shot	a	glance	at	Krughava	–	‘spin	their
standards	round,	should	the	Mortal	Sword	reassert	her	authority.	Either	way,
we	leave	the	centre	alone.’
Brys	was	nodding.	‘I	was	thinking	much	the	same.	I	have	no	taste	for
spilling	Perish	blood,	and	in	truth	the	Assail	commander	has	done	us	a	favour
by	so	isolating	them.	This	said,	we	must	weight	our	right	flank	–	the	moment
we	see	the	enemy	splitting	to	form	up	and	fast-march	towards	the	Spire,	we
need	to	contest	that	move,	with	as	much	ferocity	as	we	can	manage.
Accordingly,	I	would	the	Teblor	form	the	centre	of	that	intercept.’
‘The	rest	will	need	only	a	handful	to	hold	us	off	the	trenches,’	Spax
muttered.
‘So	we	engage	with	but	a	handful,’	Brys	retorted,	‘and	peel	off	rank	on
rank	as	fast	as	we	are	able	to.’
‘That	will	have	to	do,’	said	Abrastal.	‘No	offence,	Prince,	but	I	will	place
the	Evertine	Legion	on	the	right	of	centre.’
‘None	taken,	Highness.	You	are	correct	in	assessing	your	legion	as	our
elites.	Once	we	start	that	wheeling	of	reserves,	the	enemy	might	well	advance
pressure	on	your	side,	to	break	through	and	cut	off	our	motion	eastward.’
‘I	would	do	the	same,’	Abrastal	replied.	‘We	shall	be	ready	for	that.’
‘Very	well.’	Brys	looked	round.	‘That’s	it,	then?	So	be	it.	All	of	you,	in	the


tasks	awaiting	you,	fare	well.’
Krughava	said,	‘Prince,	I	will	ride	with	you	to	the	ridge.’
Brys	nodded.
As	the	group	dispersed,	Grub	allowed	his	Ve’Gath	to	fall	in	behind
Krughava’s.	He	looked	up	at	the	sky.	The	Jade	Strangers	blazed	directly
overhead,	the	point	of	each	talon	as	bright	as	the	sun	itself.	The	sky	was	too
crowded,	and,	in	a	flash,	he	suddenly	knew	that	it	would	get	much	more
crowded	before	this	day	was	done.

‘What	the	fuck	is	this?’
‘Careful,’	muttered	Stormy.	‘Your	language	is	offending	our	Destriant.’
Growling	under	his	breath,	Gesler	pulled	his	feet	from	the	scale	stirrups
and	clambered	to	stand	balanced	on	the	Ve’Gath’s	back.	‘A	Hood-damned	army
all	right,	but	I	see	no	camp,	and	they’re	looking…rough.’
‘Gods	below,	Ges,	sit	back	down	before	you	fall	and	break	your	scrawny
neck.’	Stormy	turned	to	Kalyth.	‘Halt	’em	all,	lass,	except	for	Sag’Churok	–
we’ll	take	the	K’ell	Hunter	with	us	and	check	this	out.’
The	woman	nodded.
As	the	vast	K’Chain	Che’Malle	army	ceased	its	advance,	Gesler	gestured
and	led	Stormy	and	Sag’Churok	forward	at	what	passed	for	a	canter.
The	mysterious	army	stood	motionless	on	a	treed	hill	at	the	edge	of	an
abandoned	village.	Squinting,	Gesler	looked	for	the	usual	flash	of	armour	and
weapons,	but	there	was	none	of	that.	‘Maybe	not	an	army	at	all,’	he	muttered	as
Stormy	rode	up	alongside	him.	‘Maybe	refugees.’
‘Your	eyes	are	getting	bad,	Ges.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Old	man,	you’ve	gone	blind	as	Hood’s	own	arsehole.	Those	are	T’lan
Imass!’
Aw,	shit.	‘Who	invited	those	hoary	bastards?’	He	shot	Stormy	a	glare.	‘Was
it	you,	O	Carrier	of	Flint	Fucking	Swords?’
‘I	know	nothing	about	’em,	Gesler,	I	swear	it!’
‘Right.	Playing	friendly	on	ships	and	now	look!	You	never	could	just	stay
out	of	other	people’s	business,	Stormy.	A	soul	stuck	in	the	sky	–	oh!	Let	me	fix
that!’
‘This	ain’t	them,	Gesler.	Can’t	be.	Besides,	that	debt	was	paid	up.	Back	in
Malaz	City	–	you	was	there!	I	gave	that	sword	back!’


Off	to	one	side,	Sag’Churok	suddenly	clashed	his	massive	swords,	and
both	men	looked	over.
Gesler	snorted.	‘Think	he	just	told	us	to	shut	up,	Stormy.’
They	were	fast	closing	on	the	hill	with	its	grey,	silent	mass	of	undead
warriors.	That	hill	–	that’s	a	cemetery.	Well,	where	else	would	they	be?	Gesler
saw	one	warrior	setting	off	down	the	lumpy	hillside,	dragging	its	stone	sword
as	a	child	would	an	oversized	branch.	‘That	one,’	he	said.	‘Wants	to	talk	to	us.’
‘Better	than	rising	up	under	our	feet	and	cutting	us	to	pieces.’
‘Aye,	much	better.	What	do	you	think,	Stormy?	We	got	ourselves
unexpected	allies?’
‘Pity	the	Assail	if	we	have.’
Gesler	spat.	‘This	ain’t	the	day	for	pity.	Sag’Churok!	Don’t	do	anything
stupid	like	attacking	it,	all	right?’
They	slowed	to	a	walk	thirty	paces	from	the	lone	T’lan	Imass.	At	fifteen	the
K’ell	Hunter	halted	and	planted	the	tips	of	his	swords	in	the	ground.	Gesler	and
Stormy	continued	on,	halting	five	paces	from	the	undead	warrior.
Gesler	called	out,	‘What	clan?’
For	a	moment	it	seemed	the	T’lan	Imass	would	ignore	the	question,	but
then,	in	a	heavy,	rasping	voice,	the	warrior	said,	‘Logros,	Malazan.	I	am	Onos
T’oolan.’
‘Onos—’	Gesler	began,	then	snapped	his	mouth	shut.
Stormy	muttered	a	curse.	‘Can’t	be.	The	First	Sword?	How	many	cronies
of	that	long-dead	rat-faced	Emperor	are	involved	in	this?’
More	T’lan	Imass	were	coming	down	from	the	hill,	ragged	and	slow,	like
the	grinding	of	stones,	and	Gesler	sensed	something	wretched	in	this	scene,
something…appalling.	What	are	they	doing	here?
Onos	T’oolan	spoke.	‘Logros’s	banishment	of	me	was	without	meaning,
Malazan.	I	knelt	before	a	mortal	human	on	the	Throne	of	Bones,	and	there	is
none	other	whom	I	shall	serve.	This	is	what	Olar	Ethil	did	not	comprehend.
Bound	once	more	to	the	Ritual	of	Tellann,	I	am	returned	to	the	shadow	of	the
Emperor.’
Gesler	felt	sick	inside.	He	knew	he	was	getting	only	a	taste	of	what	all	this
meant,	but	it	was	already	breaking	his	heart.	‘He	sent	you,	First	Sword?’
‘I	am	invited	to	my	own	death,	Malazan.	The	manner	of	it	remains	to	be
decided.	If	the	One	upon	the	Throne	could	see	into	my	soul,	he	would	know
that	I	am	broken.’
‘Broken,	you	say?’	Stormy	interrupted.	‘Now	that’s	an	interesting	fact,
Onos	T’oolan.’
The	ancient	warrior	tilted	his	head.	‘I	do	not	understand	your	meaning.’


Stormy	pointed	north.	‘See	that	spire	of	rock,	First	Sword?	Right	up	top	of
that,	there’s	something	else	–	something	just	as	broken	as	you	are.	The	Forkrul
Assail	are	guarding	it	–	but	we	mean	to	take	it	from	them.	You	say	Kellanved
ordered	you	here	–	so	we	got	to	know,	First	Sword,	are	you	here	to	fight?	And
if	you	are,	will	it	be	against	us	or	at	our	side?’
‘You	are	Malazans.’
‘The	army	behind	us	ain’t.’
Onos	T’oolan	was	silent	for	a	time,	and	then	he	said,	‘The	K’Chain
Che’Malle	hunted	Imass,	from	time	to	time.’
‘Just	like	you	hunted	bhederin,	or	elk,	or	whatever.	What	of	it?’
‘When	we	were	mortal,	we	had	cause	to	fear	them.’
‘And	elk	will	run	when	it	sees	you.	But	then,	you’re	not	mortal	any	more,
are	you?’
‘I	am	here,	Malazans,	seeking	a	war.	And	yet	only	now	do	I	realize	that	I
have	walked	in	shadow,	all	this	time,	since	I	first	rose	from	the	dust	outside	the
city	of	Pale.	I	thought	I	was	abandoned.	And	each	time	I	sought	a	new	path,	that
shadow	followed	me.	That	shadow	found	me,	as	it	must.	I	am	the	First	Sword
of	the	T’lan	Imass,	and	from	this	there	is	no	escape.’
Gesler	cleared	his	throat,	blinked	to	work	the	water	from	his	eyes.	‘First
Sword,	am	I	understanding	you?	Are	you	placing	yourselves	under	our
command	–	just	because	we	happen	to	have	come	from	the	Malazan	Empire?
Before	you	answer,	you’ve	got	to	understand	–	Kellanved	is	long	dead,	and	that
empire	has	since	outlawed	us.	We’re	not	here	because	of	any	damned	throne,
and	we’re	not	at	the	beckoning	of	anyone	who’s	sitting	in	it	either.’
‘Tell	me,	then,	human,	why	are	you	here?’
Gesler	looked	up,	studied	the	hundreds	of	T’lan	Imass	crowding	the
hillside,	spilling	out	into	the	streets	and	avenues	of	the	village.	Lifeless	faces
were	turned	to	him,	and	their	regard	was	a	crushing	weight.	Gods	below.	‘It
sounds…stupid,	you	know,’	he	said,	now	eyeing	Stormy,	‘when	you	just	out
and	say	it.’
‘Go	on,’	growled	Stormy,	his	face	reddening	as	emotions	rose	within	the
huge	man	–	Gesler	could	see	it,	and	he	was	experiencing	the	same	thing.	The
air	itself	seemed	to	swirl	with	feelings	of	appalling	force.	‘Go	on,	Gesler,	and
if	it	makes	us	fools…well,	we	can	live	with	that,	can’t	we?’
Sighing,	he	faced	Onos	T’oolan.	‘Why	are	we	here?	The	truth	is,	we’re	not
even	sure.	But…we	think	we’re	here	to	right	an	old	wrong.	Because	it’s	the
thing	to	do,	that’s	all.’
Silence,	stretching.
Gesler	turned	back	to	Stormy.	‘I	knew	it’d	sound	stupid.’


Onos	T’oolan	spoke.	‘What	do	you	seek	on	that	spire,	Gesler	of	the
Malazans?’
‘The	heart	of	the	Crippled	God.’
‘Why?’
‘Because,’	Stormy	replied,	‘we	want	to	free	him.’
‘He	is	chained.’
‘We	know.’
Onos	T’oolan	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	and	then:	‘You	would	defy	the
will	of	the	gods?’
‘Fast	as	spit,’	Stormy	said.
‘Why	do	you	wish	to	free	the	Fallen	One?’
When	Stormy	hesitated,	Gesler	shifted	in	the	scaled	saddle	and	said,	‘Hood
take	us.	We	want	to	send	him	home.’

Home.	The	word	very	nearly	drove	Onos	T’oolan	to	his	knees.	Something	was
roaring	in	his	skull.	He	had	believed	it	to	be	the	sound	of	his	own	rage	–	but
now	he	could	sense	a	multitude	of	voices	in	that	cacophony.	More	than	the
unfettered	thoughts	of	the	T’lan	Imass	following	him;	more	than	the	still
distant	conflagration	that	was	the	Otataral	Dragon	and	the	Eleint;	no,	what
deafened	him	here	was	the	unceasing	echoes	of	terrible	pain	–	this	land,	all	the
life	that	had	once	thrived	here,	only	to	falter	and	suffer	and	finally	vanish.	And
there,	upon	that	tower	of	rock,	that	cracked	spire	that	was	the	core	of	a	restless
volcano	–	where	the	earth’s	blood	coursed	so	close	to	the	surface,	in	serpentine
tracks	round	its	fissured,	hollowed	base	–	another	broken	piece	of	a	broken,
shattered	god,	a	being	that	had	been	writhing	in	torment	for	thousands	of	years.
No	different	from	the	T’lan	Imass.	No	different	from	us.
The	shadow	of	a	throne	–	is	that	not	a	cold,	frightening	place?	And	yet,
Kellanved…do	you	truly	offer	succour?	Dare	you	cast	a	shadow	to	shield	us?
To	protect	us?	To	humble	us	in	the	name	of	humanity?
I	once	called	you	our	children.	Our	inheritors.	Forgive	my	irony.	For	all	the
venal	among	your	kind…I	had	thought	–	I	had	thought…no	matter.
In	his	mind,	he	reached	among	his	followers,	found	the	one	he	sought.	She
was	close	–	almost	behind	him.	‘Bonecaster	Bitterspring,	of	the	Second	Ritual,
do	you	hear	me?’
‘I	do,	First	Sword.’
‘You	are	named	a	seer.	Can	you	see	what	awaits	us?’


‘I	have	no	true	gift	of	prophecy,	First	Sword.	My	talent	was	in	reading
people.	That	and	nothing	more.	I	have	been	an	impostor	for	so	long	I	know	no
other	way	of	being.’
‘Bitterspring,	we	are	all	impostors.	What	awaits	us?’
‘What	has	always	awaited	us,’	she	replied.	‘Blood	and	tears.’
In	truth,	he’d	had	no	reason	to	expect	anything	else.	Onos	T’oolan	drew	his
flint	sword	round,	dragging	a	jagged	furrow	through	dirt	and	stones.	He	lifted
his	gaze	to	the	Malazans.	‘Even	the	power	of	Tellann	cannot	penetrate	the
wards	raised	by	the	Forkrul	Assail.	We	cannot,	therefore,	rise	in	the	midst	of
the	enemy	in	their	trenches.	This	will	have	to	be	a	direct	assault.’
‘We	know	that,’	the	one	named	Gesler	said.
‘We	shall	fight	for	you,’	Onos	T’oolan	said,	and	then	he	was	silent,
confused	at	seeing	the	effect	of	his	words	on	these	two	men.	‘Have	I	distressed
you?’
Gesler	shook	his	head.	‘No,	you	greatly	relieve	us,	First	Sword.	It	is	not
that.	It’s	just…’	and	he	shook	his	head.	‘Now	it’s	my	turn	to	ask.	Why?’
‘If	by	our	sacrifice	–	yours	and	mine,’	said	Onos	T’oolan,	‘the	pain	of	one
life	can	be	ended;	if,	by	our	deaths,	this	one	can	be	guided	home…we	will
judge	this	a	worthy	cause.’
‘This	Crippled	God	–	he	is	a	stranger	to	us	all.’
‘It	is	enough	that	in	the	place	he	calls	home,	he	is	no	stranger.’
Why	should	these	words	force	tears	from	these	two	hardened	soldiers?	I	do
not	understand.	Onos	T’oolan	opened	his	mind	to	his	followers.	‘You	have
heard.	You	have	shared.	This	is	the	path	your	First	Sword	chooses	–	but	I	will
not	compel	you,	and	so	I	ask,	will	you	fight	at	my	side	this	day?’
Bitterspring	replied.	‘First	Sword,	I	am	chosen	to	speak	for	all.	We	have
seen	the	sun	rise.	It	may	be	that	we	shall	not	see	it	set.	Thus,	we	have	us	this
one	day,	to	find	the	measure	of	our	worth.	It	is,	perhaps,	less	time	than	many
might	possess;	but	so	too	is	it	more	than	many	others	are	privileged	to	know.
One	day,	to	see	who	and	what	we	are.	One	day,	to	find	meaning	in	our	existence.
‘First	Sword,	we	welcome	the	opportunity	you	have	given	us.	Today,	we
shall	be	your	kin.	Today,	we	shall	be	your	sisters	and	brothers.’
To	this,	Onos	T’oolan	could	find	no	words.	He	floundered	for	what
seemed	a	long,	long	time.	And	then,	from	the	depths	of	his	being,	there	arose	a
strange	feeling,	a	sense	of…of	recognition.	‘Then	you	shall	be	my	kin	on	this
day.	And	among	my	kin,	am	I	not,	at	last,	home?’	He	had	spoken	these	words
out	loud,	and	turning,	he	saw	surprise	on	the	faces	of	the	two	Malazans.	Onos
T’oolan	stepped	forward.	‘Malazans,	make	it	known	to	your	K’Chain
Che’Malle.	Each	in	our	time,	we	two	peoples	have	warred	against	the	Forkrul


Assail.	On	this	day,	for	the	very	first	time,	we	shall	do	so	as	allies.’
Fifteen	paces	back	the	K’ell	Hunter	straightened	then,	and	lifted	high	both
swords,	and	Onos	T’oolan	felt	its	reptilian	eyes	fixed	solely	upon	him.	And	he
raised	his	own	weapon.
One	more	gift,	then,	on	this	final	day.	I	see	you,	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	and	I
call	you	brother.
	
Gesler	wiped	at	his	eyes	–	he	could	not	fathom	the	rawness	of	his	emotions.
‘First	Sword,’	he	called	out	in	a	roughened	voice,	‘how	many	of	your	warriors
are	here?’
Onos	T’oolan	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘I	do	not	know.’
Another	T’lan	Imass,	who	had	been	standing	behind	Onos	T’oolan,	then
spoke,	‘Mortals,	we	are	eight	thousand	six	hundred	and	eighty-four.’
‘Hood’s	black	breath!’	Stormy	swore.	‘Gesler	–	T’lan	Imass	in	the	centre?
With	Ve’Gath	to	either	side,	and	K’ell	screening	our	flanks?’
‘Aye,’	Gesler	nodded.	‘First	Sword,	do	you	know	the	Jagged	Teeth—’
‘Gesler,’	Onos	T’oolan	cut	in,	‘like	you,	I	am	a	veteran	of	the	Seven	Cities
campaigns.’
‘Guess	you	are,	aren’t	you?’	Gesler	grinned.	‘Stormy,	suck	some	oil	and
get	our	lizards	back	up	and	moving.	I	don’t	see	any	point	in	wasting	any	time
on	this.’
‘Fine	–	but	what	about	you?’
‘Me	and	Sag’Churok	–	we’re	riding	ahead.	I	want	to	see	the	lay	of	the	land,
especially	at	the	base	of	the	Spire.	You	catch	us	up,	right?’
Stormy	nodded.	‘Good	enough.	How	come	that	winged	snake’s	not	around
again?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Get	going	–	I’ll	see	you	on	whatever	high	ground	I
find.	Make	sure	we	draw	up	in	formation	–	I	don’t	plan	on	posing	for	the
bastards.’
	
Kalyth	stood	close	to	Matron	Gunth	Mach.	The	Destriant	had	crossed	her	arms
and	knew	the	gesture	to	be	protective,	though	it	did	little	good	–	not	in	the	face
of	what	was	coming.	Wars	were	not	part	of	the	Elan	heritage	–	skirmishes,	yes,
and	feuds,	and	raids.	But	not	wars.	But	already	she	had	been	in	the	midst	of	one,
and	now	here	she	was,	about	to	join	another.
The	frail	woman	stumbling	from	the	camp	so	long	ago	now	would	have


quailed	at	the	thought,	would	have	wept,	helpless	with	fear.
It	was	the	flavours	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	that	now	made	her	resilient,
resolute—
‘You	are	wrong	in	that,	Destriant.’
She	turned	in	surprise,	studied	the	huge	reptilian	head	hovering	at	her	side,
close	enough	to	caress.	‘It	is	your	courage,’	Kalyth	insisted.	‘It	has	to	be.	I	have
none	of	my	own.’
‘You	are	mistaken.	It	is	your	courage	that	gives	us	strength,	Destriant.	It	is
your	humanness	that	guides	us	into	the	waiting	darkness	of	battle.’
Kalyth	shook	her	head.	‘But	I	don’t	know	why	we’re	here	–	I	don’t	know
why	we’re	going	to	fight	this	battle.	We	should	have	led	you	away	–
somewhere	far	from	everyone	else.	Somewhere	you	don’t	have	to	fight,	and
die.	A	place	to	live.	In	peace.’
‘There	is	no	such	place,	Destriant.	Even	in	isolation	we	were	assailed	–	by
our	own	doubts,	by	all	the	flavours	of	grief	and	despair.	You	and	the	Mortal
Sword	and	the	Shield	Anvil,	you	have	led	us	back	into	the	living	world	–	we
have	come	from	a	place	of	death,	but	now	we	shall	take	our	place	among	the
peoples	of	this	world.	It	is	right	that	we	do	so.’
‘But	so	many	of	you	will	die	today!’
‘We	must	fight	to	earn	our	right	to	all	we	would	claim	for	ourselves.	This	is
the	struggle	of	all	life.	There	are	those	who	would	deny	us	this	right	–	they	feel
it	belongs	to	them	alone.	Today,	we	shall	assert	otherwise.	Be	free	this	day,
Destriant.	You	have	done	what	was	needed	–	you	have	guided	us	here.	The
Mortal	Sword	and	the	Shield	Anvil	shall	lead	us	into	battle	–	and	by	the	wind’s
scent,	we	shall	be	joined	by	T’lan	Imass,	in	whom	the	hope	for	redemption	is	no
stranger.’
Thinking	about	Stormy	and	Gesler,	Kalyth	shivered.	‘Protect	them,	I	beg
you.’
‘They	shall	lead.	It	is	their	purpose.	This	too	is	freedom.’
Motion	in	the	corner	of	her	eye	drew	Kalyth’s	attention	–	Sinn,	slipping
down	from	the	back	of	her	Ve’Gath,	racing	forward	a	few	steps	in	the	manner
of	any	carefree	child.	And	then	she	whirled,	like	a	dancer,	and	faced	Kalyth.
‘The	worm	is	burning	–	can’t	you	taste	it?	Burning!’
Kalyth	shook	her	head.	‘I	don’t	know	what	you	mean,	Sinn.’
But	the	girl	was	smiling.	‘You	can’t	leave	fire	behind.	Once	you’ve	found
it,	you	carry	it	with	you	–	it’s	in	the	swords	in	your	hands.	It’s	in	the	armour
you	wear,	and	the	food	you	eat,	and	the	warmth	of	the	night	and	the	way	to	see
through	the	dark.	And	it	never	sits	still	–	it’s	always	moving.	It	moved	away
from	the	Imass	when	they	turned	from	it.	But	now	they’ll	see	that	the	fire	they


once	knew	didn’t	leave	them	–	it	just	spread	out.	But	maybe	they	won’t
understand	anyway	–	they’re	not	even	alive,	after	all.	You	forget	so	much	when
you	stop	living.’	She	waved	her	arms	in	her	excitement.	‘That’s	what	was
wrong	with	the	lizard	camps!	No	fires!’	She	jabbed	a	finger	at	the	Matron,
hissed,	‘You	need	reminding	about	fire.’
The	words	were	bitter	as	ice,	and	Kalyth	found	her	arms	wrapping	yet
tighter	about	her	chest.	And	from	beside	her	the	flavour	of	Gunth	Mach’s	oil
suddenly	soured	–	and	the	Destriant	knew	it	for	what	it	was.
She	is	afraid.	The	Matron	is	afraid.
	
Sister	Reverence	stared	to	the	south.	At	last,	the	enemy	shows	its	face.	Still	too
far	to	make	out	anything	more	than	the	solid,	dark	mass	of	advancing	legions.
Those	numbers	are	paltry.	They	need	fifty	or	sixty	thousand	to	even	hope	to
break	the	defences.	And	from	the	looks	of	it,	these	are	cavalry	–	imagine	the
forage	they	must	have	carried	with	them!
She	glanced	to	the	left,	but	the	storm	in	the	bay	was	unchanged,	the
cauldron	ferocious	yet	striking	her	as	strangely…impotent.	The	one	hiding
there	can	come	no	closer.	Akhrast	Korvalain	is	too	powerful,	drinking	deep	of
the	Fallen	One’s	heart.	It	is	too	late	for	all	of	them	–	we	have	grown	too	strong.
We	have	achieved	what	we	sought.
A	Watered	was	on	the	stairs	below,	using	both	feet	and	hands	to	make	his
way	up,	his	gasps	sounding	torn	and	raw.	Sister	Reverence	awaited	him	with
impatience.	Even	with	our	blessed	blood	–	their	humanness	makes	them	so
weak!
‘Beloved	Sister!’
‘I	am	here,’	she	replied.
‘Our	scouts	have	returned!	The	army	to	the	south!’
‘I	see	it,	yes.’
‘They	are	giant	lizards!	Thousands	of	giant	lizards!’
Sister	Reverence	staggered	back	a	step.	Then,	in	a	surge	of	suddenly
febrile	power,	she	quested	out	towards	that	army	–	her	mind	reaching,
reaching,	there!	A	presence…a	little	further,	reaching…touch—	She	cried	out.
‘A	Matron!	But	there	are	no	matrons	left!	The	Nah’ruk	promised!	The	K’Chain
Che’Malle	are	destroyed!’	She	realized	that	she	was	shouting	out	loud,	and
looked	down	into	the	wide	eyes	of	the	man	kneeling	at	the	edge	of	the	stairs.
‘Return	to	the	defences	–	have	the	onagers	loaded.	The	Che’Malle	will	waste
no	time	–	they	never	do.	Go!’
Alone	once	more,	Reverence	closed	her	eyes,	sought	to	slow	the	savage


twin	beats	of	her	hearts	that	now	seemed	to	clash	in	discordant	panic.	Brother
Diligence,	hear	my	cry.	We	are	deceived!	The	foe	you	face	is	but	a	feint	–	ignore
them.	I	summon	you	and	as	much	of	the	army	as	you	can	relinquish	–	we	face
K’Chain	Che’Malle!	Releasing	her	power,	she	waited,	breath	held,	for	her
brother ’s	reply.
And	received…nothing.
	
With	hooded	eyes,	Setoc	crouched	atop	a	berm,	facing	upslope,	and	watched
the	descent	of	Brother	Diligence.	‘This	is	not	your	place,’	she	whispered.	‘Can
you	feel	that	yet?	The	Wolves	have	claimed	this	den	–	this	den	you	so	kindly
made	for	us.	And	here	we	will	wait,	until	the	chosen	time.’
She	pivoted	and	scanned	the	brothers	and	sisters.	She	could	smell	their
distress,	rising	up	rank	and	sour	from	the	maze	of	trenches,	from	these	dusty
holes	carved	down	through	stone	and	dead	soil.	Many	were	looking	out,	across
the	width	of	the	valley,	to	where	the	Bolkando	and	Letherii	armies	were	even
now	beginning	the	descent.	She	saw	how	the	soldiers	reacted	in	dismay	upon
seeing	no	enemy	element	positioning	itself	at	the	centre.	Well,	not	all	dismay	–
she	saw	quickly	hidden	expressions	of	relief,	and	the	scent	of	that	was	a	looser,
thinner	emanation.
When	the	wolf	becomes	you,	you	hear	and	taste	and	smell	so	much	more,
making	vision	seem	like	a	lesser	power,	a	weakling	subject	to	blindness	in	the
face	of	truths.	No,	it	is	better	with	the	ghosts	gathered	within	me	now.	So	much
better.
Down	came	Brother	Diligence,	and	there	was	Tanakalian,	climbing	into
view,	turning	first	to	study	the	approaching	Forkrul	Assail,	and	then	facing
Setoc.	He	made	his	way	closer	–	but	not	so	close	that	should	she	leap,	her	fangs
would	find	his	throat.	She	noted	that,	and	was	not	surprised.
‘Destriant	Setoc.	We	are	about	to	be	challenged.’
She	bared	her	teeth.
His	face	knotted	in	a	scowl.	‘Listen	to	me!	It	is	of	no	use	if	you	can	do	little
more	than	lift	hackles	and	growl!	He	will	use	Akhrast	Korvalain	–	do	you
understand	me?’
‘And	what	is	it	about	that	to	cause	fear,	Shield	Anvil?’
‘The	Assail	know	nothing	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	–	do	you	see?	I	have
kept	that	from	them.’
‘Why?’
‘It	does	us	no	good	if	the	Assail	win	on	this	day,	does	it?’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘It	doesn’t?’


‘We	remain	balanced	on	the	knife’s	edge	–	or	have	you	forgotten?	By	what
we	do,	by	what	we	say	or	do	not	say,	it	all	falls	to	us.	Here.	Now.’
‘Shield	Anvil’	–	she	paused	to	yawn	–	‘Shield	Anvil,	why	did	you	banish
the	Mortal	Sword?’
‘She	broke	our	holy	vow,	Destriant.	I	have	already	told	you	this.’
‘By	swearing	fealty	to	this	Adjunct	woman.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	these	Letherii	and	Bolkando	–	they	are	her	allies?	This	Adjunct’s
allies?’	She	could	see	the	growing	frustration	in	the	man,	and	was	unmoved.
‘I	told	you	this!’
‘Do	you	fear	Brother	Diligence?	I	see	that	you	do.	Should	he…compel	us.
But,	Shield	Anvil,	I	want	to	know,	which	do	you	fear	the	most?	The	Adjunct	or
the	Brother?	Think	of	it	as	a	contest	if	that	helps.	Which	one	is	it?’
Tanakalian	looked	back	up	the	slope,	to	where	Diligence	was	coming	ever
nearer	to	their	earthen	fort,	and	then	back	again.	‘The	Adjunct	is	dead.’
‘You	do	not	know	that,	and	besides,	that	doesn’t	matter	–	it’s	not	relevant	to
the	question	I	asked.’
A	sneer	curled	his	lips.	‘If	it	is	a	question	of	immediacy,	then	it	must	be
Brother	Diligence.’	His	tone	dripped	venom,	and	she	understood	that	as	well	–
all	the	reasons,	all	the	emotions	raging	back	and	forth	in	this	man.
Setoc	nodded,	and	then	straightened	from	her	crouch.	She	arched	her	back,
stretched	out	her	limbs.	‘Immediacy,	it’s	such	a	lie.	One	is	close,	the	other	is	far
away.	So…fear	more	the	one	who	is	close.	But,	you	see,	there	are	two	sides	to
immediacy.	The	one	you’re	seeing	is	the	one	now,	but	there	is	another	one,	the
one	you	only	find	at	the	end	of	things.’
Tanakalian’s	eyes	narrowed	on	her,	and	she	could	see	that	he	was	startled,
that	he	was	thinking,	and	thinking	hard	now.
‘So,’	Setoc	continued,	‘let’s	forget	the	now	for	the	moment,	and	go	to	the
end	of	things.	At	the	end	of	things,	Shield	Anvil,	whom	will	you	fear	the	most?
Yon	Brother	Diligence,	or	the	Adjunct?’	Hearing	voices	from	the	trenches	–
filled	with	surprise	and	something	like	excitement	–	she	smiled	and	added,	‘Or
our	Mortal	Sword,	who	even	now	rides	for	us?’
Suddenly	white,	Tanakalian	climbed	the	nearest	berm,	faced	the	valley
called	Blessed	Gift.	For	a	dozen	heartbeats,	he	made	no	move.	And	then	he
looked	back	down	at	Setoc.	‘Where	will	you	stand	in	this,	Destriant?’
‘I	stand	with	the	Wolves.’
Triumph	flashed	in	his	eyes.
‘But,’	she	continued,	‘that	is	only	half	the	question,	isn’t	it?’
He	frowned.


‘You	must	then	ask	me,	where	stand	the	Wolves?’
He	half	snarled	–	and	all	the	beasts	beneath	now	awaken!	–	and	said,	‘I
know	well	their	position,	Destriant.’
‘Well,’	Setoc	corrected,	‘you	thought	you	did.’	She	leapt	down	then,
crossed	the	back	edge	of	the	fort	to	come	opposite	the	narrow	stepped	track
down	which	the	Forkrul	Assail	was	descending.	Lifting	her	gaze,	she	held	out
her	arms	and	shouted,	‘Brother!	Come	no	closer!	You	are	not	welcome	here!’
Diligence	was	still	fifty	or	more	steps	away,	but	he	halted	in	obvious
surprise.
She	felt	him	awakening	the	sorcery	in	his	voice.
And	in	the	moment	that	he	released	it,	Setoc	opened	her	own	throat	to	the
howl	of	ten	thousand	ghost	wolves.
The	sound	was	a	detonation,	rising	up	to	slam	Diligence	down	on	to	his
back	on	the	earthen	steps.	In	the	numbed	silence	that	followed,	Setoc	shouted
again,	‘You	are	not	welcome!	Go	back	to	your	slaves,	Brother!’
There	was	no	sign	that	the	Forkrul	Assail	had	heard.	He	was	lying
sprawled	on	the	track,	unmoving.	Shriven	were	rushing	towards	him	from	both
sides	and	from	above.	In	moments	they	had	closed,	and	then	were	lifting	him
up,	carrying	him	back	up	the	steps.
Satisfied,	Setoc	turned	round.
The	entire	Perish	army	was	facing	her,	every	soldier.	Among	those	closest
to	her,	she	saw	blood	at	their	ears,	and	trickling	down	from	nostrils.	She	saw
faces	that	looked	bruised,	and	eyes	shot	with	red.	When	Setoc	spread	out	her
arms	again,	they	visibly	flinched	back.	‘No	foreign	magic	can	compel	us,’	she
said,	and	then	she	pointed.	‘The	Mortal	Sword	approaches.	We	shall	welcome
her.	And	in	the	making	of	this	day,	we	shall	know	our	fates.’
‘Destriant!’	someone	shouted	from	one	of	the	trenches.	‘Who	do	we
choose?	Who	do	we	follow?’
Tanakalian	wheeled	round	at	that,	but	there	was	no	way	to	find	the	speaker
amidst	the	press.
‘I	am	Destriant	of	the	Wolves,’	Setoc	replied.	‘I	am	not	a	Grey	Helm,	not	a
sister	to	any	of	you.	I	am	not	one	of	your	pack,	and	in	this	matter,	who	is	to
rule	the	pack	is	not	for	me	to	say.’
‘Who	do	we	fight?	Destriant!	Who	do	we	fight?’
Setoc	dropped	her	gaze	to	Tanakalian,	just	briefly,	and	then	she	answered,
‘Sometimes	even	wolves	know	the	value	of	not	fighting	at	all.’
And	there,	she	had	given	him	what	he	thought	he	would	need,	for	the
challenge	to	come.	Because	Setoc	could	smell	that	Mortal	Sword,	and	that
woman	–	that	woman	was	a	thing	of	war.


Inside,	the	ghost	wolves	huddled	close,	giving	her	their	immeasurable
warmth.	The	echoes	of	their	howl	whispered	back	and	forth	–	even	they	had
been	surprised	at	its	power.	But	I	wasn’t.	This	is	my	den	and	we	shall	defend	it.
	
Ears	ringing	at	that	holy	cry,	Krughava	slowed	her	mount	to	a	slow	canter.
Before	her,	lining	the	top	of	the	front	berm,	stood	her	brothers	and	sisters	–
those	she	had	known	and	loved	for	years.	It	was	still	too	far	for	her	to	make
out	their	expressions,	to	see	if	her	arrival	was	welcome	or	cause	for	fury.	But
even	the	latter	would	not	dissuade	her.	She	was	coming	to	fight	for	her	people,
and	for	all	of	Tanakalian’s	gleeful	mocking	of	her	belief	in	heroism	–	and
indeed,	in	heroism	lay	her	one	and	only	true	faith	–	she	knew	that	the	next	few
moments	would	test	her	as	no	battle	had	ever	done.
If	I	am	to	be	a	hero,	if	I	have	such	capacity	within	me,	let	it	come	now.
They	said	nothing	when	she	reined	in	at	the	foot	of	the	mound.
Dismounting,	Krughava	looped	the	reins	about	the	saddle’s	horn,	pulled	the
horse	round	until	it	faced	the	valley	once	more,	and	with	a	hard	slap	on	his
rump	sent	it	on	its	way.	Was	the	gesture	lost	on	the	witnesses?	No,	it	most
assuredly	was	not.
Drawing	off	her	helm,	Mortal	Sword	Krughava	swung	round	and	looked
up	at	her	estranged	brothers	and	sisters.	She	raised	her	voice.	‘I	would	speak	to
Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian.’
An	old	veteran	replied	in	a	toneless	voice,	‘He	awaits	you	within.	Come
forward	in	peace,	Krughava.’
They	have	not	chosen	a	new	Mortal	Sword…but	neither	will	they	give	me
my	old	title.	So	then,	it	all	remains	to	be	decided.	So	be	it.
A	knotted	rope	slithered	down	the	steep	ramp	side.	She	took	hold	of	it,	and
began	climbing.
	
Precious	Thimble	drew	closer	to	Faint’s	side.	They	remained	on	the	valley’s
ridge,	watching	the	ranks	of	Letherii	marching	down	into	the	basin.	Far	to	their
right	the	Evertine	Legion	and	its	auxiliaries	were	doing	the	same.	All	that
marching,	for	this.	This	and	only	this.	I’ll	never	understand	soldiers.
‘Faint?’
‘What	is	it,	Precious?	You’re	going	to	tell	me	that	you	can	use	all	this
power,	to	carve	us	out	a	gate	back	home?’	She	glanced	over,	studied	the	pale,
round	face.	‘No,	I	thought	not.’


‘What	can	you	feel?’
Faint	shrugged.	‘My	skin	is	crawling,	and	I’m	no	mage.’
‘Exactly!	You	have	no	idea	how	this	is	feeling!	Even	Amby	Bole	is	a	mass
of	nerves,	though	he	won’t	talk	to	me	any	more.	I	think	he’s	become	unhinged
—’
‘He	never	was	hinged	in	the	first	place,’	Faint	cut	in.	‘So,	what	do	you	want
from	me?’
‘That	boy.’
‘What	boy?’
‘The	one	half	swallowed	up	by	that	giant	lizard	–	who	did	you	think	I	was
talking	about?’
Faint	twisted	kinks	from	her	back,	wincing.	‘Fine.	What	about	him?	I’ll
grant	you	he’s	cute	enough,	but—’
‘You	think	all	this	sorcery	that’s	making	us	sick	is	coming	from	the
Assail?	You’re	wrong.’
‘What?’	Faint	stared	at	Precious.	‘Him?’
‘It’s	only	making	us	sick	because	he	doesn’t	know	what	to	do	with	it.’
‘He’s	Malazan,	isn’t	he?’
‘I	don’t	think	he’s	anything.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
But	the	witch’s	eyes	were	wide,	staring	at	seemingly	nothing.	‘Can	an	idea
find	flesh?	Bone?	Does	it	have	a	face	–	is	that	even	possible?	Can	people	build
a	saviour,	with	handfuls	of	clay	and	withered	sticks?	If	their	need	for	a	voice	is
so	terrible,	so…demanding	–	can	a	people	build	their	own	god,	Faint?	Tell	me
–	have	you	ever	heard	such	a	thing?	Has	anyone	ever	even	thought	it?’
Faint	reached	out,	pulled	Precious	Thimble	round	to	face	her.	‘What	in
Hood’s	name	are	you	talking	about?	What	do	you	see	in	that	boy?’
Precious	Thimble’s	face	twisted.	‘I	don’t	know!’	she	cried,	pulling	herself
away.
Faint	turned,	scanned	the	mass	of	troops	–	where	was	he,	then?	That
strange	boy?	But	the	dust	was	rising	in	walls,	slipping	across	like	curtains	in
the	hesitant	wind	tracking	the	length	of	the	valley.	She	looked	to	the	prince’s
command	position	–	off	to	her	left	–	but	saw	only	mounted	messengers,
signallers	and	the	prince’s	staff.	Her	eyes	narrowed	on	Atri-Ceda	Aranict.
‘Precious	–	come	with	me.’
She	set	out.
The	ghost	of	Sweetest	Sufferance	was	suddenly	walking	at	her	side.	‘You
should	listen	to	the	witch,	love.’
Faint	glared	at	the	ethereal	form,	and	then	shot	a	look	back	over	one


shoulder	–	to	see	Precious	trailing	half	a	dozen	paces	behind,	walking	like	a
drunk.	‘Sweetest,’	Faint	whispered,	‘how	can	I	listen	to	her?	She’s	talking
nonsense!’
‘I’m	just	saying,	her	ideas	are	intriguing.	Maybe	she’s	on	the	right	track	–	I
doubt	that	boy’s	even	got	a	belly	button.	Have	you	looked?	He’s	probably	old
enough	for	a	roll	in	the	grasses,	a	little	schooling	from	Mistress	Faint	–	what
do	you	think?	Can	I	watch?	Just	to	see	if	he’s	got	one,	of	course.’
Breath	hissed	from	between	Faint’s	teeth.	‘Gods	below.	I	can’t	even	see	the
runt.	Besides,	in	case	you	hadn’t	noticed,	this	whole	valley	is	about	to	erupt	in	a
bloodbath	–	and	you	want	me	to	tickle	his	damned	sack?’
‘Never	mind	the	whole	belly	thing,	then.	It	was	just	a	thought.	I’m	sure	he’s
got	one.	Everyone	does.	Precious	is	panicking,	that’s	all.	When	the	Forkrul
Assail	unleash	Akhrast	Korvalain,	when	they	awaken	that	deadly	voice,	well,
who’s	here	to	fight	against	that?	Yon	Atri-Ceda	and	Precious	herself,	and	that’s
it.	Is	it	any	wonder	she’s	gibbering?’
‘Stop	talking,	Sweetest.’	Faint	was	almost	upon	the	Atri-Ceda	–	the	woman
was	standing	on	the	very	edge	of	the	descent	into	the	valley,	dragging	on	a
rustleaf	stick	as	if	it	held	the	blood	of	immortality	and	eternal	youth.	And	for
all	Faint	knew,	maybe	it	did.
‘Atri-Ceda.’
Aranict	turned,	and	almost	immediately	her	eyes	shifted	past	Faint,	fixing
on	Precious	Thimble.	‘Greetings,	witch.	Be	so	good	as	to	awaken	a	circle
round	us	–	and	I	would	ask	that	you	add	your	talents	to	my	efforts	in	the
defence	to	come.’	She	pulled	hard	on	the	stick.	‘Failing	that,	we	fall	that	much
sooner.’
Precious	Thimble	made	a	whimpering	sound.
Aranict’s	expression	darkened.	‘Courage,	child.	Where	is	your	boyfriend?
We	will	need	him	here	–	he	possesses	a	natural	disinclination	to	sorcerous
attacks.’
Licking	dust-dry	lips,	Faint	cleared	her	throat.	‘Atri-Ceda,	your	words	do
not	elicit	confidence	over	the	outcome	of	this	battle.’
Lighting	another	stick,	Aranict	waved	one	hand,	as	if	distracted.	Sending	a
blast	of	smoke	into	the	air	she	said,	‘I	would	advise	that	you	run,	but	then	there
is	nowhere	to	run	to.’	She	pointed	with	a	hand	visibly	trembling.	‘See	the
prince	–	down	there,	on	the	horse	behind	the	last	ranks?	That	is	the	man	I	love,
and	he	is	about	to	die.	Precious	–	listen	to	me.	Defend	this	position	with	all	that
is	within	you,	because	all	my	power	will	be	down	there,	with	him.	Once	the
Pure	finds	me,	he	will	make	every	effort	to	shred	me	alive.’
Faint	took	a	step	back,	appalled	by	the	heart-rending	rawness	of	the	woman


standing	before	her,	so	much	exposed,	so	much	ripped	open	for	all	to	see.	And
yet…and	yet…if	I	could	find	a	love	like	that.	If	I	could	find	such	a	love.
‘Aranict,’	she	now	said	in	a	soft	voice	–	and	something	in	the	tone	drew	the
Atri-Ceda	round.	‘If	I	may,	I	will	stand	with	you.’
She	saw	Aranict’s	eyes	widen,	and	then	flit	away	–	as	if	she	could	no
longer	bear	to	see	what	was	there	in	Faint’s	own	face.	The	Atri-Ceda	stared
north.	‘He’s	not	yet	touched	on	his	power.	But	it’s	only	a	matter	of	time.’
‘He	may	not	have	to,’	Faint	said,	following	Aranict’s	gaze.	‘I	don’t	know
much	about	battles,	but	I	can’t	see	us	winning	this	one.’
‘We’re	not	here	to	win,’	Aranict	replied.	‘We’re	just	here	to	take	a	long
time	to	die.’
Precious	Thimble	moved	past	Faint	then,	mumbling	chaining	words	under
her	breath.	And	there,	three	paces	to	the	right,	stood	Amby	Bole,	his	face	a
stone	mask,	his	hands	clenched	into	scarred	fists.
And	the	ghost	of	Sweetest	Sufferance	spoke.	‘Faint,	I	hear	an	echo	of…of
something.’
‘It’s	nothing,’	Faint	muttered	in	reply.	Nothing	but	the	sound	of	all	that	we
are	about	to	lose.	What	is	that	sound	like?	When	you	hear	it,	you	will	know.
	
Brys	Beddict	rode	hard	along	the	back	of	the	reserve	line.	He	wanted	his
soldiers	to	hear	the	hoofs	of	his	horse	behind	them,	wanted	them	to	know	he
was	there.	So	that	they	would	understand	that	wherever	they	hesitated,	he	would
ride	to	them;	when	they	needed	the	strength	of	a	commander ’s	will,	he	would
find	them.	Riding	parallel	to	the	ranks,	he	scanned	the	formations.	Companies
held	tight	in	their	rectangles,	with	broad	avenues	between	them.	Their
discipline	remained	strong,	resolute.	There	would	be	nothing	subtle	in	the
assault	to	come,	and	they	had	not	yet	wavered.
Horns	sounded	from	the	front	ranks,	to	mark	the	last	fifty	paces	from	the
enemy’s	forward	earthworks.	That	forlorn	cry	sang	through	Brys	and	he
almost	faltered.	Is	she	alive?	Do	we	give	our	lives	to	a	cause	already	lost?	Is
my	last	gesture	to	be	an	empty	one?	Oh,	beloved	brother	–	I	could	do	with	some
encouraging	words	right	now.
Better	yet,	make	me	laugh.	What	more	fitting	way	to	meet	that	moment	when
you	fall	to	your	knees	than	with	sweet,	unchained	laughter?	The	kind	that	lifts
you	into	the	air,	high	above	the	grim	violence	of	the	land	and	all	its	sordid
cruelty?
He	was	riding	inward	along	the	line,	now,	the	ranks	on	his	left,	and	in
moments	he	would	come	into	the	clearing	opposite	the	Perish-held	centre,	and


before	him,	across	the	gap,	he	would	see	the	Evertine	Legion	closing	with	the
Kolansii	lines.	Queen	Abrastal,	such	a	noble	ally	you	have	become.	If	my
brother	could	but	know	of	this	–	if	your	husband	could	witness	this…some
futures	hold	such	promise	as	to	convince	you	they	can	be	nothing	more	than
dreams,	delusions	built	on	wishful	thoughts.
You	walk	the	steps	of	your	life,	and	always	that	dream	beckons,	that	dream
waits.	You	don’t	know	if	it	can	ever	be	made	real.	You	don’t	know	that,	even
should	you	somehow	stumble	upon	it,	you	won’t	find	it	less	than	it	was,	less
than	it	could	have	been	–	if	only	you	could	have	kept	that	distance,	kept	it	just
outside	arm’s	reach.	For	ever	shining.	For	ever	unsullied	by	the	all-too-real
flaws	of	your	own	making.
Aranict.	How	could	you	have	given	me	such	a	thing?	How	could	you	have
let	me	take	it	close,	feel	it	here	in	my	arms,	so	warm,	so	solid?
When	those	dreams	in	that	unreachable	future	suddenly	rise	up	around	you,
how	can	you	not	be	blinded	to	their	truths?	All	at	once,	it	is	here.	All	at	once,
you	are	living	in	its	very	midst.	Why	then	must	you	seek	to	pull	away?
He	rode	on,	waiting	for	the	roar	of	clashing	weapons,	waiting	for	the
awakening	of	the	power	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	–	and	I	must	answer	it,	in	the
only	way	I	know	how.	And	when	I	am	done,	I	know,	there	will	be	nothing	left	of
me.	For	so	long,	he	had	not	understood	what	he	was	meant	to	do,	but	now,	with
energies	crackling	the	air,	it	had	all	come	clear.
Aranict,	my	love,	you	now	hold	the	best	in	me.	I	pray	that,	for	you,	it	is
enough.
He	bolted	into	the	gap,	sawed	on	the	reins	of	his	mount,	and	swung	round
to	face	the	massive	earthen	fort	where	waited	the	Perish	Grey	Helms.	But	he
could	see	nothing	of	what	was	happening	behind	the	banked	walls	of	earth.
	
In	the	centre	of	the	maze	of	trenches	and	berms	there	was	a	broad	marshalling
area	of	packed	earth	cut	with	narrow	slits	to	gather	the	blood	of	the	wounded
who	would	be	brought	here	during	the	battle.	Cutters	waited	standing	close	to
stretchers,	their	faces	smeared	with	ash	to	keep	sweat	from	dripping	into	open
wounds.	Their	sawing	and	cutting	tools	were	laid	out	on	skins	beside	leather
buckets	of	steaming	water.	In	all	the	trenches	that	Krughava	could	see	into,	her
blessed	soldiers	stood	with	their	eyes	fixed	on	her	as	she	made	her	way
towards	the	centre,	where	waited	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian	and,	a	dozen	paces
behind	him,	a	young	woman	whom	Krughava	had	never	seen	before.
There	was	something	strange	about	her	eyes,	but	the	Mortal	Sword	could
not	yet	determine	what	gave	them	such	a	disquieting	regard.	She	was	barely


into	womanhood,	dressed	in	ragged	deerskins,	her	hair	long	and	ropy	with
filth,	and	the	smile	curving	her	lips	looked	faintly	ironic.
Krughava	ascended	a	ridged	ramp	and	stepped	out	on	to	the	hard	ground.
She	set	her	helm	down,	and	drew	off	her	gauntlets.
Tanakalian	spoke,	‘It	is	our	hope,	Krughava,	that	you	have	come	seeking	to
return	to	the	fold.	That	you	will	fight	with	us	on	this	day.	That	you	will	lead	us
in	battle.’
She	drew	herself	up,	settling	one	hand	on	the	pommel	of	her	sword.	‘Yes,	I
would	lead	the	Grey	Helms	in	battle,	Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian.	But	not	against
the	Letherii	or	Bolkando.	Rather,	I	would	our	soldiers	quit	these	trenches.’	She
lifted	her	gaze,	studied	the	avenues	leading	back	up	the	slope,	and	scowled.	‘Do
you	not	see	what	they	have	done?	The	Assail	have	made	the	Grey	Helms	a
forlorn	hope.’
Tanakalian	sighed,	tilting	his	head	as	he	regarded	her.	‘There	is	another
way	of	seeing	our	position	here,	Krughava.	Simply	put,	Brother	Diligence
does	not	trust	us	–	and	you	would	prove	to	him	that	the	Perish	are	as
treacherous	as	he	suspected.’
‘Treachery?	Now,	that	is	a	curious	thing,	Shield	Anvil.	I	am	not	surprised
the	Assail	does	not	trust	you,	given	your	precedents.’
The	Shield	Anvil’s	face	flushed.	‘The	betrayal	was	yours,	not	mine	–	but
have	we	not	already	been	through	all	of	this?	The	Grey	Helms	heard	your
arguments.	They	heard	mine.	They	voted.’
Krughava	looked	round.	Hard	expressions,	unyielding,	on	all	sides.	‘On
this	day,	brothers	and	sisters,	our	allies	will	seek	to	break	the	tyranny	of	the
Forkrul	Assail.	But	that	is	not	the	only	reason	for	this	war	–	indeed,	it	is	the
least	of	them.	Hear	me,	all	of	you!	Long	ago,	a	foreign	god	was	brought	down
to	this	earth.	He	was	torn	to	pieces,	but	they	would	not	let	him	die	–	no,	instead
they	chained	him,	as	one	would	bind	a	wild	beast.	As	one	might	chain	a	wolf.
And	so	bound,	so	caged,	that	god	has	known	nothing	but	unending	pain	and
anguish.	The	gods	feed	upon	him!	The	wretched	among	us	mortals	sip	his
blood	in	prayer!	And	these	Forkrul	Assail,	they	hold	his	heart	in	their	cold,
cruel	hands!
‘My	brothers	and	sisters!	On	this	day	we	shall	seek	to	shatter	those	chains.
We	shall	seek	to	free	the	Fallen	God!	But	more	than	that,	we	shall	endeavour	to
return	him	to	his	realm!’	She	pointed	upslope.	‘And	yet,	where	do	you	stand?
Why,	you	stand	at	the	side	of	torturers,	and	all	the	words	of	justice	they	so
eagerly	whisper	in	your	ears	–	they	are	nothing	but	lies!’
The	young	woman	came	forward	then,	and	Krughava	saw	now	what	gave
her	gaze	such	strangeness.	Wolf	eyes.	One	silver,	one	amber.	Blessed	Throne	–


she	is	our	Destriant!	The	Wolves	of	Winter	look	out	from	those	eyes!	Where	had
she	come	from?
The	Destriant	spoke	in	the	Letherii	trader	tongue,	‘Mortal	Sword,	we	are
stirred	by	your	words.	But	then,	what	do	we	know	of	mercy?	We	who	have
never	felt	its	gentle	touch?	We	who	are	hunted	and	ever	hunted	down?	Shall	I
tell	you	of	the	memories	rushing	through	me	now?	Will	you	hear	my	words?’
Krughava	felt	the	blood	draining	from	her,	the	heat	of	her	passion	stealing
away.	Beneath	her	heavy	armour,	she	was	suddenly	cold.	This	woman	is	my	foe.
Tanakalian	is	as	nothing	compared	with	her.	‘Destriant,	I	will	hear	your	words.’
The	young	woman	looked	round.	‘In	your	mind,	see	a	herd	–	so	many!
Great,	strong	beasts	–	and	they	see	us,	they	see	us	running	beside	them,	or
standing	off	in	the	distance.	They	see	our	shaggy	heads	sink	low.	Yet	to	all	their
nervous	attention	we	are	indifferent.	Our	eyes	study	the	beasts.	We	seek	scents
on	the	wind.	And	when	at	last	we	drive	that	herd	into	flight,	whom	do	we	single
out?	Which	of	these	great,	terrible	animals	do	we	choose?’
Tanakalian	answered	with	unfeigned	excitement.	‘Destriant	Setoc,	the
wolves	ever	choose	the	weakest	among	the	herd.	The	old	one,	the	wounded
one.’
Krughava	stared	at	Setoc.	‘The	Wolves	would	feed	on	this	day,	Destriant?
Upon	the	heart	of	the	Crippled	God?’
Setoc	gestured,	a	loose	wave	of	one	hand.	‘Tell	your	allies	–	ignore	us	in
this	battle.	We’ll	not	leave	this	nest.	And	when	this	day	is	done,	we	shall	see
who	remains	standing.	It	does	not	matter	which	of	you	has	won	–	for	you	will
be	bleeding,	your	head	will	be	hanging.	You	will	be	on	one	knee.’
‘And	then	shall	the	Grey	Helms	strike!’	cried	out	Tanakalian.	‘Can	you	not
see	the	truth	of	this,	Krughava?	Are	you	so	blind	as	to	still	hold	to	your	foolish
conceit?’
Krughava	was	silent.	After	a	long	moment,	wherein	the	only	sounds	came
from	the	advancing	armies	on	the	plain,	she	approached	the	Shield	Anvil,
halting	only	when	she	stood	directly	before	him.	‘Tankalian,’	she	said	in	a	low
rasp,	‘we	are	not	wolves.	Do	you	understand?	When	we	act,	we	are	privileged,
or	cursed,	to	know	the	consequences	–	the	Wolves	of	Winter	are	not.	They	have
no	sense,	no	sense	at	all,	of	the	future.	There	can	be	no	worship	of	the	Wild,
Shield	Anvil,	without	the	knowledge	of	right	and	wrong.’
Tanakalian	shook	his	head,	avid	pleasure	gleaming	in	his	eyes.	‘You	have
lost	this,	Krughava.	You	cannot	win	–	it	is	not	just	me	any	more,	is	it?	Not	even
just	the	Perish.	Now,	you	face	a	Destriant,	and	through	her,	our	very	gods.’
‘That	child	is	mad,	Tanakalian.’
‘I	do	not	fear	her,	Krughava.’


That	struck	her	as	an	odd	thing	to	say.	Deeply	shaken,	she	lifted	her	gaze,
studied	Setoc.	‘Destriant!	Shall	this	be	the	only	game	the	Wolves	play?’
‘This	game	they	know	well.’
Krughava	pushed	past	Tanakalian,	pushed	him	out	to	the	side	–	no	longer
important,	no	longer	relevant.	‘Yes,	they	do,	don’t	they?	The	glory	of	the	hunt,
yes?	I	will	speak	to	the	wolf	gods	now,	and	they	would	do	well	to	hear	me!’
Shouts	from	the	Perish	Grey	Helms,	offended,	indignant,	shocked,	but
Setoc	simply	shrugged.
Krughava	drew	a	deep	breath	–	the	ground	was	trembling	beneath	her	now,
and	in	moments	the	forces	beyond	this	fort	would	collide.	‘You	wolves	think
yourselves	masters	of	the	hunt	–	but	have	you	not	seen?	We	humans	are	better
at	it.	We’re	so	good	at	it	that	we	have	been	hunting	down	and	killing	you	for
half	a	million	years.	But	we’re	not	content	with	just	the	weak	among	you,	or
the	wounded.	We	kill	every	damned	one	of	you.	It	may	be	the	only	game	you
know,	but	hear	my	words.	You’re	not	good	enough	at	it!’	She	advanced	on
Setoc	now,	and	saw	the	Destriant	flinch	back.	I	have	found	my	moment.	I	see	the
comprehension	in	her	eyes	–	the	Wolves	of	Winter	have	heard	me.	They	finally
understand.	‘Let	me	show	you	another	way!	Let	me	be	your	Mortal	Sword
once	again!’
	
But	it	was	not	the	wolf	gods	who	understood.	It	was	only	Setoc,	and	in	the
moment	before	the	wolf	gods	poured	through	her,	she	spun	round	in	her	mind.
NO!	Heed	her	words!	Can	you	not	see	the	truth	–	you	cannot	hunt	here!	But
then	they	were	upon	her,	tearing	her	apart	in	their	frenzy	to	reach	through,	to
close	jaws	on	the	hated	human.
No!	I	loved	you!	I	wept	for	you!
She	screamed,	and	it	was	the	last	sound	Setoc	ever	made.
	
Krughava’s	eyes	widened	upon	seeing	the	woman’s	face	transform	into
something	unhuman.	The	flesh	of	her	arms	burst	as	the	bones	seemed	to	twist
their	way	free,	black	tendons	writhing	like	serpents.	Her	body	stretched,	the
shoulders	hunching.	The	eyes	flared.	Shrieking,	she	launched	herself	at	the
Mortal	Sword.
Fangs	–	welters	of	boiling	blood	and	thick	saliva	–	a	sudden	burgeoning	of
mass,	black-furred,	looming	huge	before	her	–	and	then	a	figure	slipped	past
Krughava	–	Tanakalian,	forgotten	Tanakalian,	his	knife	flashing,	the	blade


plunging	deep	into	Setoc’s	chest.
A	deafening	howl	thundered,	staggering	Krughava	back.
Blood	sprayed	from	Setoc’s	eyes	–	she	leapt	away	from	the	knife,	suddenly
flailing,	groping	blind.	Another	howl	sounded,	battering	the	air.	Dark	blood
spilling	down	from	her	mouth	and	nose,	the	woman	fell	on	to	her	back	on	the
earthen	steps,	and	then	curled	up	like	a	child.
Krughava	stumbled	forward.	‘Tanakalian!	What	have	you	done?’
He	had	been	thrown	to	the	ground	by	that	terrible	death	cry,	but	now	he
clambered	back	to	his	feet,	the	knife	still	in	his	hand.	The	face	he	turned	to
Krughava	horrified	her.	‘This	was	supposed	to	be	my	day!	Not	yours!	Not
hers!	I	am	the	hero!	I	am!’
‘Tanak—’
‘This	is	my	day!	Mine!’	He	rushed	her.
She	threw	up	an	arm,	but	the	gore-smeared	blade	slipped	beneath	it,
punched	hard,	stabbing	through	her	neck	from	one	side	to	the	other.
Krughava	fell	back,	struggling	to	stay	on	her	feet,	and	then	pitching	round
to	land	hard	on	one	knee.	The	side	of	her	face	where	the	hilt	had	struck
throbbed	–	she	could	feel	that.	One	hand	reached	up,	collided	with	the	leatherbound	grip.	The	knife	was	still	stuck	through	her	throat,	and	her	lungs	were
filling	with	blood.	She	opened	her	mouth,	but	could	draw	no	breath.
Tanakalian	was	shrieking.	‘They	were	coming	through!	I	couldn’t	allow
that!	The	Assail!	The	Assail!	He	would	have	taken	them!	He	would	have	killed
them!’
She	fought	back	to	her	feet,	dragged	free	her	sword.
Seeing	her,	he	backed	away.	‘I	saved	our	gods!’
You	fool	–	you	killed	one	of	them!	Did	you	not	hear	it	die?	The	world	was
growing	black	on	all	sides.	Her	chest	was	heavy,	as	if	someone	had	poured
molten	lead	down	into	her	lungs.	Blessed	Wolves!	I	did	not	intend	this!	Foul
murder!	This	day	–	so	sordid,	so…human.	Rearing	upright,	blood	pouring
down	her	chin,	Krughava	advanced.
Tanakalian	stared	at	her,	frozen	in	place.	‘We	needed	her	out	of	the	way!
Don’t	you	see?	Don’t	you—’
Her	first	swing	smashed	into	his	right	side,	shattering	ribs,	slicing	through
the	lung	before	jamming	halfway	through	his	sternum.	The	blow	lifted	him
from	the	ground,	flung	him	three	paces	to	the	right.
Astonishingly,	he	landed	on	his	feet,	scattering	the	cutters	–	blood	and
unidentifiable	pieces	of	meat	were	spilling	from	the	enormous	cut	in	his	chest.
Krughava	closed	again.	Enough	for	one	more.	Enough—	Her	second	swing
took	off	the	top	half	of	his	head,	the	blade	slicing	across	just	beneath	his	eyes.


The	broken	bowl	spun	over	the	slick	back	of	her	blade,	then	off	to	one	side,
loosing	the	brain	it	held	and	with	it	both	eyes,	swinging	on	their	stalks.	What
remained	of	Tanakalian	then	pitched	forward,	landing	on	his	chin.
She	sank	down	on	to	her	knees.	All	breath	was	gone.	The	world	roared	in
her	skull.
Someone	was	at	her	side,	fumbling	with	the	knife	still	thrust	through	her
neck.	She	feebly	pushed	the	hands	away,	and	then	fell	forward.	Her	face	settled
against	the	hard	clay	–	and	there,	a	gouged	furrow,	no	wider	than	a	knuckle,
running	out	from	under	her	eyes.	She	watched	it	fill	with	blood.
I	wanted…	I	wanted	a	better…a	better	death…	But	then,	don’t	we	all?
	
Two	thunderous	howls	erupted	in	quick	succession	from	the	Perish	position,
their	ferocity	plunging	Brys	Beddict’s	horse	into	a	blind	panic.	He	was	almost
thrown	from	the	lunging,	terrified	animal,	but	then	he	managed	to	set	his	heels
in	the	stirrups,	drawing	tight	the	reins.
The	horse	bucked,	and	then,	unexpectedly,	it	ran	straight	towards	the	fort’s
high	bank.
He	looked	to	the	top	edge	of	the	high	banked	wall	–	but	he	could	see	no
Perish	soldiers	watching	him,	no	one	preparing	for	his	arrival	–	he	saw	no	one
at	all.
Brys	eased	the	reins	–	there	was	no	fighting	this	bolting	beast,	not	yet.	He
rose	in	the	saddle	as	the	animal	tackled	the	slope.	The	ascent	was	steep,	uneven,
and	the	straining	effort	burned	out	the	horse’s	fear	as	it	lunged	upward.
Reaching	the	top	of	the	berm,	Brys	checked	his	mount’s	advance,	pulling
on	the	reins	hard	enough	to	make	the	animal	rear	once	more.	His	heels	took
his	own	weight	as	he	shifted	to	take	the	movement,	his	eyes	already	studying
the	array	of	faces,	turned	now	towards	him.
Where	was	Krughava?	Where	were	all	the	officers?
He	saw	the	nearest	Grey	Helms	–	almost	directly	below	in	the	first	trench	–
reaching	for	their	pikes.	Swearing,	Brys	wheeled	his	horse	round	while	it	still
stood	high	on	its	hind	legs,	sent	it	stumbling	back	down	the	slope.	Stones	and
clouds	of	dirt	followed	the	frantic	descent.	Gods,	they	could	have	ended	this	for
me	right	then!
Wasn’t	anyone	watching?	No,	they	had	all	been	facing	the	other	way.	I
caught	them	completely	by	surprise	–	what	was	happening	in	that	camp?
He	suspected	that	he	would	never	know.	He	was	riding	across	level	ground
again,	his	horse’s	hoofs	kicking	through	the	dusty	plough	tracks	–	and	ahead
and	to	his	right,	his	Letherii	soldiers	had	reached	the	first	of	the	earthworks.


Behind	the	companies,	crews	swarmed	to	position	the	heavy	onagers,	driving
wedges	beneath	the	front	runners	to	lift	the	arc	of	fire.
The	enemy	had	begun	releasing	their	own	salvos	of	heavy	bolts	from
raised	fortlets	flanking	the	trenches.	Those	deadly	quarrels	tore	deep	gashes
into	the	advancing	ranks.
His	soldiers	had	begun	dying.	Because	I	asked	them	to.	Dying,	in	the	name
of	a	failed	wish.	I	have	brought	them	to	this.
But…why?	Why	do	they	follow?	They	are	no	more	fools	than	I	am.	They
know	–	my	title	means	nothing.	It	is	an	illusion.	No,	worse,	a	delusion.	Nobility
is	not	something	you	can	wear,	like	a	damned	cloak	of	jewels.	You	can’t	buy	it.
You	can’t	even	be	born	into	it.	The	nobility	we	talk	about	is	nothing	but	a
mockery	of	all	that	it	used	to	mean.
By	no	measure	am	I	noble.
Why	do	you	follow?
Gods,	why	do	I	presume	to	lead?	Into	this?
Brys	Beddict	drew	his	sword,	but	the	taste	of	ashes	filled	his	mouth.	So
many	conceits,	gathering	here,	crowding	this	moment	and	all	the	moments	to
come.	Now	then,	shake	yourself	awake,	Brys.	The	time	has	come…to	find	us	a
name.
He	twisted	his	horse	round,	headed	for	the	nearest	avenue	between
companies,	and	rode	to	meet	the	enemy.
	
High	Cutter	Syndecan	was	still	kneeling	beside	the	body	of	Krughava,	staring
down	into	her	pale,	lifeless	visage.	In	the	clearing	behind	him	all	the	officers
and	veterans	had	gathered,	and	the	arguments	were	raging	fierce	on	all	sides.
Horror,	shock	and	confusion	–	the	Perish	was	moments	from	tearing	itself
apart.
Syndecan	was	the	eldest	among	them	all.	A	veteran	of	many	campaigns,	a
soldier	in	the	long,	hopeless	battle	that	was	staunching	wounds,	breathing	life
into	dying	lungs.	And,	once	more,	he	could	only	sit,	silent,	looking	down	at	yet
another	of	his	failures.
She	came	among	us.	A	brave,	brave	woman.	We	all	knew:	her	pride	was
ever	her	enemy.	But	see	here,	she	came	to	us	–	imagine	how	doing	that	must
have	stung	that	pride.	And	yet,	even	over	this	powerful	flaw	within	her,	she
finally	triumphed.
What	could	be	more	heroic	than	that?
When	at	last	he	straightened	–	though	in	truth	it	was	no	more	than	thirty
heartbeats	since	Krughava’s	fall	–	all	the	voices	fell	away.	He	was	the	veteran.


He	was	the	one	they	would	now	turn	to,	desperate	for	guidance.	Oh,	all	you
fools.	What	to	do?	What	to	do	now?
He	cleared	his	throat.	‘I	do	not	know	what	has	happened	here.	I	do	not
know	if	the	Shield	Anvil	slew	a	young	woman,	or	a	god.	Nor	can	I	judge	his
reasons	for	doing	so	–	this,	this	is	beyond	all	of	us.’
A	young	soldier	called	out,	‘Brother	Syndecan!	Do	we	fight	this	day?’
He’d	been	thinking	about	that,	from	the	moment	of	Krughava’s	fall,	and	he
recalled	looking	across	to	the	hacked	corpse	of	Tanakalian,	and	thinking,	you
are	only	what	we	deserved.	‘Brothers,	sisters,	on	this	day,	yes,	we	must	fight!’
Silence	answered	him.
He	had	expected	as	much.	They	would	not	follow	blindly	–	not	any	more.
Not	after	this.
‘Brothers,	sisters!	There	has	been	murder	in	our	fold	–	we	were	witness	to
it!	And	in	witnessing,	we	are	made	part	of	this	crime.	We	must	be	cleansed.
Today,	we	must	fight	to	regain	our	honour!’
‘But	who	is	the	damned	enemy?’
And	here,	the	old	veteran	found	himself	at	an	impasse.	Wolves	help	me,	I
don’t	know.	And	I’m	not	the	one	to	decide.	Veteran,	am	I?	Yes,	but	the	only	wise
veterans	are	the	ones	who	have	left	war	and	killing	behind	them.	No,	I’m	just
the	biggest	fool	among	you	all.	Oh,	fine	then!	Time	to	fall	back	on	useless
superstition.	Isn’t	that	what	old	soldiers	turn	to	when	all	else	fails?	‘Brothers,
sisters!	We	must	seek	a	sign!	We	must	look	to	the	world	–	here	and	on	this	day!
We	must—’
And	then	his	eyes	widened.
Faces	turned.	Eyes	stared	–
–	as	the	Prince	of	Lether	lunged	into	view	atop	the	high	berm	at	the	fort’s
facing	wall.	Surging	up	and	on	to	the	narrow,	ragged	edge	–	and	how	the	horse
found	purchase	there	was	a	mystery.	That	beast	then	reared,	hoofs	scything	the
air,	with	the	prince	glaring	down	at	them	all.	And	at	that	moment,	from	either
side	of	the	valley’s	length,	came	the	sound	of	battle’s	clash.
Gods	take	me!	Think	I	just	pissed	my	breeches.
	
Abrastal	sat	astride	her	charger	–	the	beast	felt	thin	beneath	her,	but	was	still
quivering	in	anticipation.	Bastard	loves	this	–	the	stench	of	blood,	the	screams	–
wants	at	them.	Gods,	war	is	a	fever!	She	glanced	back	at	Spax	and	his	mass	of
warriors.	‘Hold	them,	Warchief!	Wait	for	it!’
The	Gilk	Barghast	glared	up	at	her.	‘But	how	long?	Your	damned	soldiers
are	dying	on	that	front	–	at	least	let	us	charge	and	take	out	one	of	the	fortlets.


Those	onagers	are	carving	you	bloody!’
She	knew	that	–	she	could	see	the	terrible	casualties	those	perfectly
emplaced	weapons	were	delivering	as	her	legion	struggled	to	overrun	the	first
line	of	defences.	‘I	said	wait,	Spax!	I	will	need	you	and	the	Teblor	to	move	fast
when	that	Assail	finds	out—’
‘But	what	if	it’s	all	gone	wrong	at	the	Spire?	Firehair!	We	can	collapse	this
flank	–	just	let	us	loose,	damn	you!’
But	something	had	caught	her	eye	–	she	wheeled	her	mount	round,	stared
towards	the	centre.	‘Jheckan’s	fat	cock!	The	Perish	are	pouring	out	of	their
trenches!	Spax!’
‘I	see	them!	Do	you	see	Krughava?’
Abrastal	shook	her	head.	‘They’re	too	far	away	–	listen,	form	a	line	to
hold	our	inside	flank,	Warchief.	If	I	was	commanding	that	position	and	saw	it
uncontested,	I’d	do	precisely	what	they’re	doing	right	now	–	out	and	into	our
unprotected	sides.’
‘They’ll	see	us’	–	Spax	was	now	at	her	side,	a	heavy	axe	in	his	hand,	a
spear	in	the	other,	his	face	half	hidden	by	his	ornate	shell	helm	–	‘and	wheel
round	to	bite	the	Letherii	flank	–	Brys	has	no	reserves	to	guard	against	them.’
‘If	they	do	that,’	Abrastal	said	in	a	snarl,	‘you	know	what	to	do,	Spax.’
‘Climb	up	their	hairy	asses,	yes.	But—’
‘Just	ready	your	warriors,’	she	cut	in,	and	then	jabbed	her	spurs	into	her
mount’s	sides.	‘I’m	going	for	a	closer	look!’
‘Not	too	close!’
She	pushed	her	horse	into	a	canter,	the	beast’s	armour	cladding	a
weaponsmith’s	clamour	around	her.	When	four	bodyguards	rode	to	join	her
she	waved	them	back.	She	hated	the	fools.	Worse	than	hens.	But	the	one
messenger	who	drew	close	she	gestured	forward.
Beyond	the	Perish,	the	Letherii	army	had	locked	jaws	with	the	first	line	of
defenders,	but	they	too	were	being	savaged	by	the	Kolansii	onagers.	She	saw
that	the	prince	had	deployed	his	own	artillery,	and	the	rate	of	fire	from	these
heavy	weapons	was	superior	to	the	enemy’s.	At	least	three	positions	were
concentrating	fire	on	the	nearest	fortlet,	and	the	raised	redoubt	was	studded
with	heavy	quarrels.	Foot	archers	and	skirmishers	had	advanced	under	the
cover	of	that	counterfire	and	were	now	assaulting	the	position.
The	prince	knew	his	business.	But	would	it	matter?	Already	the	losses	were
appalling	–	and	she	knew	her	own	Evertine	soldiers	were	suffering	the	same
behind	her.
And	now,	these	Perish…a	part	of	her	wanted	to	sink	her	teeth	into	the
throat	of	the	Grey	Helms.	For	all	that	betrayal	and	treachery	thrived	in	the


court	games	of	the	Bolkando	kingdom,	out	here	it	was	a	far	deadlier
indulgence.	Maybe	this	is	teaching	me	a	lesson.	About	backstabbing,	lying	and
cheating	to	get	your	way.
No,	try	as	I	might,	I	can’t	swing	it	across.	The	palace	is	my	world	and	I’ll
run	it	the	way	I	like.
Hoofs	thundering,	she	was	fast	closing	on	the	Perish	–	the	soldiers	were
smoothly	forming	up	now	that	they’d	cleared	the	fort,	and	she	saw	them
wheeling	to	face	her.	‘You	want	us	first,	do	you?	Spax	will	be	so	pleased!’
But	that	wasn’t	tactical	–	no,	clearly	they	should	have	swung	to	face	the
Letherii.	And	as	she	drew	yet	closer,	the	front	ranks	before	her	made	no	effort
to	draw	weapons.	Can	it	be?	Has	Krughava	won	them	over?	Where	is	she?
Where	is	Tanakalian?	Errant’s	nudge,	who’s	commanding	this	army?
Abrastal	waved	up	the	messenger.	‘Stay	close,	until	we’re	within	earshot,
and	then	halt	yourself.	I	will	ride	on.	Listen	well	to	this	parley,	soldier	–	the
lives	of	thousands	may	well	count	on	it,	should	I	fail	to	win	clear.’
The	young	woman,	selected	for	her	riding	ability,	was	pale	beneath	the	rim
of	her	helm,	but	she	nodded.
‘Your	eyes	are	better	than	mine	–	do	you	see	a	commander	anywhere?’
‘Highness,	there	is	one	–	with	the	grey	face.	He	has	been	gesturing	–
sending	out	orders.	There,’	and	she	pointed.
‘I	see	him.	What’s	with	the	face	paint?’
‘He’s	a	cutter,	Highness.	A	field	medic.’
Whatever.	‘No	matter.	Looks	as	if	he’s	the	one	wanting	to	talk	–	I	don’t	like
this.	What	has	happened	to	Krughava?’
They	slowed	to	a	canter,	and	at	the	appropriate	distance	the	messenger
halted,	whilst	the	queen	trotted	forward.	She	studied	the	cutter.	An	old	man,	at
least	in	so	far	as	these	Grey	Helms	went.	His	face	was	well	worn	with	tracks	of
sorrow	and	loss,	and	she	saw	nothing	in	that	face	to	suggest	that	anything	had
changed	in	his	outlook.	Her	unease	deepened.
The	cutter	raised	a	hand	in	greeting.	‘Highness,	the	Grey	Helms	welcome
you.	I	am	Syndecan,	elected	commander	following	the	tragic	deaths	of	the
Mortal	Sword	and	the	Shield	Anvil.’
Abrastal	felt	her	jaws	clench.	The	words	had	struck	like	a	blow	to	her
chest.	Leave	it,	woman.	Now	is	not	the	time.	‘You	are	arrayed.	State	your
intentions,	Syndecan	–	as	you	can	see,	we’ve	got	us	a	fight	here	and	I	really
cannot	waste	any	more	time	while	you	decide	which	way	the	fucking	wind’s
blowing.’
The	man	recoiled	as	if	slapped,	and	then	he	drew	a	deep	breath	and	slowly
straightened.	‘The	Perish	Grey	Helms	humbly	place	themselves	under	the


command	of	you	and	Prince	Brys.’	He	made	a	faint	gesture	to	the	troops
behind	him.	‘We	face	you	because	we	could	not	determine	the	whereabouts	of
the	prince.	Highness,	the	Pure	Forkrul	Assail	was	injured	in	a	clash	with	our
Destriant.	It	is	safe	to	assume,	however,	that	he	will	recover.	And	when	that
happens…we	anticipate	an	awakening	of	dire	sorcery.’
‘Can	you	defend	against	it?’
The	old	man	shook	his	head.	‘I	fear	not,	Highness.	We	have	lost	our	place
as	the	weapon	of	the	wolf	gods.	You	see	us	as	we	are	–	simple	soldiers	seeking
to	regain	our	honour	as	men	and	women.	That	and	nothing	more.’
‘As	soon	as	that	Pure	is	made	aware	of	the	attack	on	the	Spire,	he	will
disengage	as	many	soldiers	as	he	feels	he	can	spare.’
‘We	understand	this,	Highness.’
‘Are	your	soldiers	rested,	Syndecan?	Can	you	fast-trot	down	this	valley,
and	find	an	undefended	ascent?’	She	made	her	voice	louder,	addressing	the
soldiers	waiting	behind	the	cutter.	‘Grey	Helms!	Can	you	stand	in	the	path	of
the	Kolansii	who	will	soon	drive	east	to	the	Spire?’
In	answer	the	soldiers	shipped	their	shields	on	to	their	backs,	began
tightening	straps.
Abrastal	grunted.	Who	needs	words?
Syndecan	spoke.	‘Do	you	require	that	we	delay	the	enemy,	or	stop	them	in
their	tracks?’
‘There	are	not	enough	of	you	to	stop	them,	Commander,	and	you	know	it.
If	I	can,	I	will	spare	you	my	Barghast,	and	the	Teblor	–	but	they	may	be
arriving	late	to	the	fight.’
‘We	shall	hold	until	they	arrive,	Highness.’
Abrastal	hesitated,	and	then	called,	‘What	I’ve	seen	of	you	thus	far,	Perish,
has	been	sticks	up	the	ass	and	plenty	of	proper	marching	and	not	much	else.
Well,	now’s	your	chance	to	show	the	world	what	you	can	do	in	a	real	fight.’
They	seemed	to	weather	this,	either	in	humility	or	in	shame.	She	had
expected	a	wave	of	anger,	but	saw	not	a	single	spark.	Her	gaze	fell	once	more
to	the	cutter.	‘Syndecan,	you’ll	need	to	work	hard	at	inspiring	this	lot	–	they’re
broken.’
‘Yes,	Highness,	we	are.	But	on	this	day,	I	believe	that	this	is	no	weakness.
We	shall	answer	the	world.’
She	studied	him	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	collected	her	reins.	‘I	trust
you’ll	forgive	my	Barghast	if	they	face	you	while	you	pass.’
The	man	simply	nodded.
‘Fare	you	well,	then.	If	justice	truly	exists,	perhaps	your	Mortal	Sword	will
stand	with	you,	if	only	in	spirit.	Seek	to	match	her	measure,	all	of	you,	and


perhaps	you	will	indeed	find	your	honour	once	more.’
Dragging	her	mount	round,	she	set	off.
The	messenger	fell	in	alongside	her.	Abrastal	glanced	over.	‘You’ve	the
lighter	burden	here.	Ride	ahead	and	inform	Warchief	Spax	that	the	Perish
march	to	take	position	in	the	expected	path	of	the	Kolansii	relief	force.	They
will	pass	south	of	our	position	at	a	fast-trot	–	but	he	is	to	face	his	warriors	on
them	the	entire	time.	Repeat	my	words	back	to	me.’
The	messenger	did	so,	without	error.
‘Ride	then.	Go!’
Abrastal	watched	the	younger	woman	swiftly	pulling	away.	Was	I	ever	that
young?	It’s	the	curse	of	nobility	that	we	must	be	made	to	grow	up	all	too	fast.
But	then,	look	at	you	–	tits	barely	budding	and	you’re	in	the	middle	of	a	damned
war.
And	I	can’t	even	remember	your	name.
But	should	we	both	survive	this,	I’m	sending	you	to	learn	embroidery,	and	a
year	or	two	of	flirting	with	artists	and	musicians	and	other	ne’er-do-wells.
Growling	under	her	breath,	the	queen	of	Bolkando	shook	her	head.	Rose	in
her	saddle	to	glare	at	the	forward	lines	of	her	beloved	legion.
They’d	yet	to	even	take	the	first	entrenchments	–	and	that	slope	was	a	mass
of	dead	and	dying	soldiers,	getting	deeper	with	every	moment	that	passed.
Errant’s	tug	–	they’ve	got	us	by	the	balls	here.	We	need	to	push	harder	–	no	letup	on	this	pressure.	Time	for	the	Saphii,	then	–	assuming	they’ve	gotten	all
yellow-eyed	on	that	brave-spit	they	guzzle	before	battle.	They	should	be	well
primed.
But	were	they	all	doing	little	more	than	going	through	the	motions?
Fourteenth	Daughter	–	can	you	hear	me?…	Thought	not.	I	could	use	your	eyes
right	now,	just	to	see	where	things	stand	over	there.	You	should	be	in	the
damned	bay	by	now.	You	should	be	in	a	good	position	to	witness…everything.
Once	more	she	shook	her	head	–	too	many	things	in	her	damned	skull!
Her	horse	was	tiring	and	she	slowed	her	pace	a	fraction	–	she	might	need
one	more	charge	out	of	this	beast.	The	queen	takes	the	sword	and	shows	her
face	beneath	the	mask.	But	the	world	does	not	tremble	as	it	should,	for	the	mask
only	comes	off	in	the	face	of	death.	Husband,	dear	me,	your	wife’s	strayed	too
far	this	time.
She	drew	her	sword	as	she	closed	–	the	Saphii	commander	was	standing	to
the	right	of	the	royal	entourage,	his	eyes	upon	her	as	were	the	eyes	of	virtually
everyone	else.	She	pointed	her	sword	directly	at	him,	saw	him	suddenly
straighten	as	if	in	delight,	raising	his	spear	in	one	hand,	and	then	he	was
moving,	his	tall	dark	figure	speeding	across	the	ground,	back	to	his	troops.


And	she	saw	them	now,	too,	leaping	and	dancing	in	a	frenzy	of	excitement.
Oh,	Kolansii,	you	have	no	idea	what	is	about	to	hit	you.
	
Captain	Feveren,	Ninth	Cohort	of	the	Evertine	Legion,	slid	back	down	the
slope	on	a	greasy	mass	of	bodies,	swearing	all	the	way	down	to	the	base,
where	he	was	thrown	up	against	the	shins	of	the	soldiers	struggling	to	do	what
he’d	just	tried.	He’d	lost	sight	of	his	own	troops	–	those	that	remained	alive	–
but	such	details	barely	mattered	now.	The	only	cohesion	left	was	the	one	that
defined	the	living	from	the	dead.
This	was	slaughter.	Twice	they	had	momentarily	overrun	the	first	trench,
only	to	be	thrown	back	by	indiscriminate	fire	from	ranks	of	onagers,	the	huge
quarrels	tearing	through	multiple	bodies,	blood	and	gore	exploding	in
torrents,	men	and	women	flung	about	like	rag	dolls.	Shields	shattered	with
impacts,	breaking	the	shoulders	behind	them,	driving	soldiers	down	to	their
knees.	The	bank	of	the	first	berm	was	a	ceaseless	mudslide	of	all	that	could
spill	out	from	a	human	body,	streaming	over	pale	limbs,	over	staring,	sightless
faces,	ruptured	armour	and	tangled	embraces.
Cursing,	he	struggled	to	find	his	feet	again.	He	could	feel	another	push
coming	from	the	ranks	pressing	against	him,	and	wanted	to	be	in	a	position	to
ride	that	tide	upward.	They	were	going	to	take	that	damned	trench,	no	matter—
But	the	Evertine	infantry	were	being	jostled,	the	solid	lines	broken	apart	–
and	Feveren	swore	upon	seeing	tall	Saphii	pushing	through,	their	eyes	bright
yellow	with	that	infernal	drug	they	took	before	battle,	the	froth	thick	on	their
lips.
‘Clear	paths!’	the	captain	bellowed.	‘Clear	paths!’
But	the	command	was	not	needed	–	nothing	would	stop	the	Saphii	spearwielders,	not	this	close	to	the	enemy.
Lighter-armoured,	lithe	and	fleet	of	foot,	the	warriors	seemed	to	clamber
like	spiders	up	the	slope	of	the	berm.	In	one	hand	they	held	their	spears,	and	in
the	other	a	pick	of	some	sort	–	its	business	end	a	splay	of	talon-like	hooks	that
they	swung	down	into	dead	and	dying	flesh	alike,	pulling	themselves	yet
higher.
In	moments	the	first	line	of	Saphii	had	reached	the	top,	and	over	and	out	of
sight.
The	screams	from	the	first	trench	intensified.
‘Follow!’	bellowed	Feveren.	‘Follow!’
And	up	they	went.


	
Somehow,	they’d	lifted	him	to	his	feet.	But	his	mind	remained	lost	in	a
deafening	roar.	Brother	Diligence	raised	his	head,	struggled	to	find	his
balance.	Officers	surrounded	him,	healers	crowded	close,	and,	from	a	great
distance,	the	sounds	of	battle	took	hold	of	the	air	above	the	valley,	shaking	it
without	pause.
He	sought	to	make	sense	of	the	cacophony	in	his	head.	He	heard	screams,
horrified	screams,	rising	in	waves	of	panic	and	dread,	but	even	that	seemed	far
away.	Far	away,	yes.	That	voice	–	so	far	away.	Abruptly	he	shoved	his	helpers
from	his	side,	and	then	staggered	as	at	last	he	could	make	out	the	words,	the
sources	of	those	desperate	screams.
Sister	Reverence!
Her	answer	came	in	a	savage	torrent.	‘Brother	Diligence!	Your	battle	is
feint!	We	are	attacked!	K’Chain	Che’Malle!	T’lan	Imass!	We	cannot	hold	–
gods,	the	slaughter!’
He	silenced	her	hard	as	a	slap.	You	must	hold,	Sister!	We	are	coming!
Looking	around,	he	saw	the	panic	in	the	eyes	of	the	Watered	–	they	had	felt
her,	had	heard	her	frantic	cries.	‘Attend!’	he	bellowed.	‘Maintain	the	defences
of	the	two	lowest	tiers	–	the	rest	are	to	withdraw	to	the	high	road	–	they	must
march	east	to	the	Spire	with	all	haste!	Weapons	and	armour	and	one	skin	of
water	and	nothing	more!	You	have	one	bell	to	get	twenty-five	thousand
soldiers	on	the	road!’
‘Blessed	Pure,	the	Perish	have	betrayed	us!’
He	waved	a	dismissive	hand.	‘Leave	them.	I	shall	awaken	Akhrast
Korvalain	–	I	shall	obliterate	the	enemies	before	us!	Wait!	I	want	the	forces	on
our	left	to	counter-attack	–	lock	on	to	the	enemy	flank	–	I	want	those	Bolkando
and	Barghast	driven	from	the	field!	Now,	clear	me	a	path	down	to	the	second
tier!’
The	world	seemed	to	be	trembling	beneath	his	feet.	As	he	made	his	way
down,	choosing	the	right	flank,	he	quickly	scanned	the	battle	before	him.	The
damned	Letherii	fought	as	if	blind	to	defeat	–	and	they	would	be	defeated,	of
that	there	was	no	doubt.	Even	without	his	voice,	they	could	not	hope	to	overrun
his	defences.
But	I	want	them	on	their	knees,	empty-handed,	heads	bowed.	And	my
soldiers	shall	rise	from	the	trenches	and	walk	among	them,	their	weapons
swinging.	Not	one	Letherii	shall	leave	this	place	–	not	one!
And	when	I	have	driven	them	down,	I	shall	turn	to	the	other	flank	–	it	is
stronger,	I	can	see	that,	the	White	Faces	remain	in	reserve	–	but	none	there	can


hope	to	stop	me.	They	will	be	held	in	place	by	the	counter-attack.	I	will	have
them	all!
Almost	directly	below,	he	saw	a	tight	mass	of	Letherii,	a	standard	waving
above	them,	and	there,	to	his	amazement,	two	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Ve’Gath
soldiers,	one	being	ridden	by	a	scale-armoured	figure,	the	other	revealing	an
empty	saddle.	They	were	flanking	a	lone	Letherii	on	a	horse,	a	man	struggling
to	form	the	tip	of	a	wedge	pushing	its	way	up	the	first	berm.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	we	shall	have	to	cut	down	the	hard	way	–	and
Sister	Reverence	faces	an	army	of	these	creatures!	We	were	complacent.	We
were	fools	to	think	them	without	cunning	–	are	they	not	humans,	after	all?
I	see	you,	Commander.	I	will	take	you	first.
The	first	to	kneel.	The	first	to	submit	to	execution.
He	continued	his	rapid	descent	of	the	earthworks,	feeling	his	warren
awakening	within	him.
Below,	Letherii	sorcery	crackled	in	a	grey	wave,	swept	up	and	over	an
onager	redoubt.	Bodies	erupted	in	crimson	mists.	Furious,	Diligence	reached
out,	found	a	handful	of	squad	mages.	With	a	single	word	he	crushed	their
skulls.
Reaching	a	ramp,	he	made	his	way	across,	and	took	position	atop	the
second	tier.	Across	a	distance	less	than	a	bowshot,	the	Letherii	commander	had
attained	the	top	of	the	berm,	his	Ve’Gath	clearing	a	path	with	vicious,	sweeping
strokes	of	their	halberds	that	sent	bodies	spinning	through	the	air.
‘I	see	you!’	roared	Diligence.
	
Brys	Beddict	felt	his	horse	crumpling	under	him,	and	as	he	flung	his	feet	clear
of	the	stirrups	and	twisted	to	evade	the	falling	beast	he	saw	an	enormous
quarrel	driven	deep	into	its	chest.	Landing	in	a	crouch,	he	readied	his	bloodsmeared	sword.
The	trench	below	was	a	mass	of	Kolansii	infantry,	pikes	thrust	upward	and
awaiting	their	descent.	On	either	side	of	the	prince,	the	Ve’Gath	were	fending
off	flanking	counter-attacks,	and	their	ferocity	forced	the	breach	yet	wider.
The	moment	he	straightened,	three	shouted	words	struck	him	like	a	fist,
snapping	his	head	back,	and	all	at	once	he	was	under	siege.
The	Forkrul	Assail	had	found	him.	At	last.	You	saw.	You	saw	and	wanted
me	first.	Oh,	friend,	you	are	most	welcome	to	me.
He	rose	under	the	barrage,	lifted	his	head,	and	met	the	eyes	of	the	Pure.
‘I	see	you!	Kneel!	YIELD	TO	MY	WILL!’
‘You	see	me?	Tell	me,	Assail,	whom	do	you	see?’


‘I	will	command	you	–	I	will	take	all	that	is	within	you—’
Brys	Beddict,	King’s	Champion	and	prince	of	Lether,	spread	open	his
arms,	and	smiled.	‘Then	have	me.’
And	from	his	soul,	from	a	deep,	unlit	world	of	silts	and	crushed	bones,
there	came	a	stirring,	a	sudden	billowing	of	dark	clouds,	and	from	this
maelstrom…names.	A	torrent,	a	conflagration.	‘Saeden	Thar,	Lord	Protector
of	Semii,	Haravathan	of	the	River	People,	Y’thyn	Dra	the	Mountain	of	Eyes,
Woman	of	Sky	above	the	Erestitidan,	Blessed	Haylar	Twin-Horns	of	the
Elananas,	Horastal	Neh	Eru	SunBearer	and	Giver	of	Crops	in	the	Valley	of	the
Sanathal,	Itkovas	Lord	of	Terror	among	the	K’ollass	K’Chain	Che’Malle	of
Ethilas	Nest…’	And	the	names	rose	unending,	flowing	through	Brys	Beddict’s
mind,	one	after	another.	‘Tra	Thelor	of	the	Twin	Rivers,	Sower	of	Spring
among	the	Grallan.	Adast	Face	of	the	Moon	among	the	Korsone…’
All	the	forgotten	gods,	and	as	each	name	whispered	out,	sweeping	into	the
torrid	current	of	the	Forkrul	Assail’s	warren	–	his	terrible	power	of	the	voice,
of	words	and	all	their	magic	–	Brys	felt	part	of	himself	tearing	away,	snatched
loose,	drowned	in	the	swirling	flow.
There	was	no	stopping	this.	The	Pure	had	found	him	in	the	manner	that
Brys	had	desired	–	as	he	rode	to	the	forefront	of	his	army,	as	he	fought
between	two	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	as	he	delivered	unopposable	slaughter.	Find
me,	he	had	prayed.	Find	me	–	I	am	waiting	for	you.	Find	me!
Once	begun,	once	the	warren	was	a	torrent	between	the	Assail	and	the
prince,	there	was	no	stopping	it.	Power	fed	power,	and	its	fuel	was	justice.	Let
them	be	known.	All	the	forgotten	gods.	All	their	forgotten	people.	All	the	ages
past,	all	the	mysteries	lost.	This	unending	stream	of	rise	and	fall,	dream	and
despair,	love	and	surrender.
They	deserve	utterance,	one	more	time.	One	last	time.
Take	them,	take	me.	You	with	your	power	in	words,	me	with	my	power	in
names.	Without	me,	your	words	are	nothing.
Come,	let	us	devour	each	other.
He	could	see	the	Pure	now	with	a	sudden	clarity,	a	tall,	ancient	male,	one
arm	outthrust,	one	finger	pointing	across	at	Brys,	but	the	Assail	was
motionless,	frozen	in	place	–	no	–	Brys’s	eyes	narrowed.	He	was	crumbling.
His	face	was	a	stretched	mask,	thin	over	the	bizarre	skeletal	structure
underneath.	His	eyes	wept	red,	his	mouth	was	open,	pulling	taut	as	the	jaw
angled	down	–	as	if	the	names	were	pouring	down	the	Pure’s	throat,	as	if	he
was	drowning	in	their	deluge.
Brys’s	own	soul	was	shredding	apart.	The	world	–	this	valley,	this	battle	–
all	fell	away.	He	could	feel	the	pressure	of	the	sea	now,	could	feel	his	legs


planted	in	shin-deep	mud,	and	the	current	rushed	past	him,	scouring	the	flesh
from	the	bones	of	his	soul,	and	still	he	had	more	to	give.
Clouds	of	silt	billowed	and	seethed	around	him	–	he	was	losing	his	vision
–	something	was	blinding	his	soul,	something	new,	unexpected.
No	matter.	I	am	almost	done	with	him	–	no,	the	names	do	not	cease,	they
can	never	cease,	and	once	my	voice	is	gone	there	will	be	another.	Some	day.	To
guard	what	would	otherwise	be	for	ever	lost.	For	you,	Forkrul	Assail,	I	have
held	back	on	one	final	name	–	the	one	to	gather	up	your	own	life	and	carry	it
into	the	darkness.
This	is	the	name	of	your	god,	Forkrul	Assail.	You	thought	it	a	name
forgotten.
But	I	remember.	I	remember	them	all.
Blinded,	deafened	by	some	unknown	roar,	feeling	the	last	of	his	soul
ripping	free,	Brys	Beddict	smiled	and	spoke	then	the	last	name.	The	name	of
the	slain	god	of	the	Forkrul	Assail.
He	heard	the	Pure’s	shriek	as	the	power	of	the	name	reached	out,	clutched
him	tight.	For	this	one	god,	alone	among	them	all,	did	not	come	bereft	of	its
people.	This	god	flowed	into	the	soul	of	its	own	child.
It	does	not	do,	to	abandon	one’s	own	gods,	for	when	they	return,	so
unexpected,	they	are	most	vengeful.
The	current	pulled	him	from	the	silts,	drove	him	forward	into	a	darkness
so	complete,	so	absolute,	that	he	knew	it	to	be	the	Abyss	itself.
I	have	saved	my	people,	my	dear	soldiers	–	let	them	fight	on.	Let	them	take
breaths,	in	owning	and	in	release,	in	all	the	measures	of	living.	I	have	done	as	a
prince	should	do	–	Tehol,	be	proud	of	me.	Aranict,	do	not	curse	me.
The	sorrow	of	the	ages	closed	around	him.	This	was	one	river	from	which
there	could	be	no	escape.	Do	not	grieve.	We	all	must	come	to	this	place.
My	friends,	it	is	time	to	leave—
Impossibly,	he	felt	hands	close	from	behind,	hard	as	iron	over	his
shoulders.	And	a	harsh	voice	hissed	in	his	ear.	‘Not	so	fast.’
	
Faint	stood	close	to	Aranict.	The	Atri-Ceda	was	standing,	head	bowed,	her
arms	out-thrust	–	but	her	hands	and	forearms	had	vanished	inside	a	billowing,
grey-brown	cloud,	and	water	was	streaming	down	from	her	elbows.	The	air
around	her	was	rank,	thick	with	the	decay	of	tidal	flats.
Faint	could	see	the	veins	standing	out	on	Aranict’s	taut	neck,	could	see	the
muscles	of	her	shoulders	straining.	And	the	Atri-Ceda	was	slowly	being	pulled
forward	–	whatever	was	inside	that	swirling	cloud	was	seeking	to	drag	her	into


its	maw.
Off	to	one	side,	Precious	Thimble	was	on	her	knees,	shrieking	without
surcease.
They	had	seen	Brys	Beddict,	there	atop	the	first	earthen	embankment	–	they
had	seen	the	standing	stones	rise	from	the	ground	around	him,	pushing	upward
through	dirt	and	rocks,	almost	black	with	slime	and	filth.	They	had	seen	the
prince’s	armour	and	clothing	disintegrating,	and	then	on	the	man’s	pallid	skin
dark	swarms	–	tattoos,	runes	–	emerging	only	to	be	torn	free,	spinning	wild
around	him,	and	then	rushing	across,	hammering	into	the	Forkrul	Assail.
And	then,	as	if	within	a	whirlwind,	Brys	Beddict	vanished	inside	swirling
gloom	that	was	so	thick	as	to	be	impenetrable.	It	spread	out,	devouring	the
huge	menhirs.
Aranict	now	began	howling	–	she	was	being	pulled	forward	–	and	Faint
suddenly	understood.	She	has	him.	She	has	hold	of	the	prince!	Gods	below—
Faint	staggered	towards	the	Atri-Ceda	–	but	something	resisted	with
devastating	pressure,	bitter	cold,	and	she	was	flung	back,	gasping,	spitting	out
blood.	On	her	hands	and	knees,	she	lifted	her	head	and	looked	across.
Most	of	Aranict’s	arms	had	disappeared	inside	the	cloud.	And	now	Faint
could	make	out	words	in	the	Atri-Ceda’s	cries.
‘Mael!	Damn	you!	Help	me!’
Faint	crawled	over	to	Precious	Thimble.	‘Stop	that	screaming,	witch!	Look
at	me!	No,	here,	look	at	me!’
But	the	eyes	that	fixed	on	Faint	belonged	to	a	mad	woman.	‘I	can’t	help	her!
Can’t	you	see	that?	She’s	gone	too	far	–	too	deep	–	how	is	she	even	alive?	It’s
impossible!’	Precious	Thimble	pulled	away,	scrabbling	like	a	crab.	‘He’s	lost!
He’s	for	ever	lost!’
Faint	stared	at	the	witch,	as	the	words	slowly	sank	deep.	But	that’s	not	fair.
Not	a	love	like	that	–	no!	You	can’t	take	it	away	–	don’t	you	dare	kill	it!
‘Precious!	What	can	I	do?	To	help?	Tell	me!’
‘Nothing!’
Go	to	Hood	then.
She	spun	round,	drawing	a	dagger.	Mael’s	an	Elder	God	–	but	Aranict	must
understand	this.	He	cannot	answer	this	prayer,	not	the	way	it	is	now.	I	won’t
stand	here	to	see	this	love	die.	I	won’t.	The	blade	cut	a	glistening	slash	along
her	left	arm,	and	then,	fumbling	to	take	the	knife	in	her	left	hand,	she	carved
deep	diagonally	across	her	right	forearm.	Forcing	herself	forward,	she
reached	for	Aranict.
Mael	–	take	my	blood	in	offering.	Just	fucking	take	it!
The	pressure	sought	to	rebuff	her,	but	she	pushed	harder	–	and	then	she


was	through,	floundering,	unable	to	breathe,	the	cold	crushing	her	–	she	saw
her	blood	billowing	out	as	if	under	water,	saw	it	spin	on	currents	–	so	much	of
it	–	she	almost	lost	sight	of	Aranict.
Desperate,	feeling	her	bones	cracking,	Faint	pushed	closer,	reached	out
and	took	the	Atri-Ceda	into	an	embrace.
Mael…don’t	you	dare…don’t	you	dare	tell	me	this	is	not	enough.
	
Precious	Thimble	had	stared,	disbelieving,	as	Faint	struggled	to	reach	Aranict.
Her	blood	was	a	thick	billowing	cloud	streaming	out	from	her,	curling	round
to	whirl	into	the	dark	cloud.	There	seemed	to	be	no	end	to	it.
Someone	had	taken	hold	of	the	witch	–	strong	arms	closing	round	her,
lifting	her	from	the	ground.	Twisting	now,	she	looked	up.
Amby	Bole’s	face	was	almost	unrecognizable.	‘This	is	bad	magic,’	he	said.
‘Save	Faint!	Save	her!’
But	the	man	shook	his	head.	‘No	one	can	live	in	there.’
‘Save	her,	Amby!	For	my	love	–	save	her!’
His	frown	deepened,	his	eyelids	suddenly	fluttering,	and	he	met	her	eyes.
‘What?’
‘You	want	me?	I’m	yours,	damn	you	–	just	save	Faint!’
Bole	threw	her	down,	visage	darkening.	‘All	the	fun	ended	with	you!	I
don’t	want	you,	witch!	I	don’t	ever	want	to	see	you	again!’
Precious	stared	up	at	him,	and	then	she	snarled.	‘I	will	chase	you,	Amby!
I’ll	hunt	you	down,	no	matter	where	you	go!	Year	after	year,	I	will	follow	you,
I	swear	it!	There’s	nowhere	you	can	run	to	–	you	understand	me?	Nowhere!’
‘I	hate	you!’
‘The	only	place	you	could	hope	to	escape	me	–	is	there!’	and	she	pointed	at
that	billowing	cloud	of	blood	now	obscuring	Faint	and	Aranict.
Amby	made	an	animal	cry,	spun	and	ran	heavy-footed	–	straight	into	the
crimson	cloud.
Precious	Thimble	fell	back.	Gods	below	but	that	man	is	stupid!
	
‘Hold	on,	my	love,’	whispered	a	voice	close	to	Faint’s	ear.	‘Some	laws	even	an
Elder	God	cannot	easily	defy.	But	he’s	trying.’
Faint	felt	the	life	leaving	her.	She	was	lying	against	the	legs	of	Aranict	–
she	could	feel	them	cold	as	bars	of	ice.	Were	her	eyes	open?	All	she	could	see
was	the	redness	of	her	own	blood.	‘Sweetest,	is	that	you?’


‘Always	knew	you	had	a	romantic	streak.	What	a	thing	to	do!’
‘I’m	dying.’
‘Looks	like	it.	Regretting	your	moment	of	madness?’
Faint	shook	her	head	–	or	tried	to.	‘Only	if	it	fails.’
‘Well,	how	often	do	we	regret	successes?’
‘Is	it	enough,	Sweetie?	It’s	all	I	have.’
‘You’re	in	water,	fool,	of	course	it	looks	like	a	lot	–	and	if	you	stay	in	here
any	longer	you’ll	bleed	out	for	sure.	Now,	wish	I	could	help	you	–	wish	I	could
help	both	of	you,	but	I’m	just	a	ghost.	Well,	not	even	that.	Could	be	I’m	just	a
voice	in	your	head,	Faint,	born	out	of	some	bizarre	misguided	guilt.’
‘Oh,	thanks	for	that.’
A	foot	slammed	into	the	side	of	her	head,	half	stunning	her,	and	she
struggled	feebly	as	hands	groped	across	her	body,	briefly	closing	on	one	of
her	tits	before	moving	on	–	and	then	back	again	for	a	second	squeeze.
Abruptly	someone	was	lifting	her	from	the	muddy	silts,	throwing	her	over
one	bony	shoulder.	She	felt	one	hand	clutch	and	then	leave	her	thigh,	felt	the
fingers	brush	her	knee	as	the	arm	reached	out.
A	deep	grunt	seemed	to	thrum	through	Faint,	and	she	felt	the	stranger ’s	feet
slip	suddenly,	as	if	pulled	by	some	inexorable	pressure	–	and	then	the	heels
planted	firm,	and	–	impossibly	–	she	felt	him	heave	back	against	the	current.
One	step,	and	then	another.	Another…


Amby	Bole	reappeared	from	the	crimson	cloud,	Faint	hanging	limp	over	one
shoulder.	His	other	arm	was	stretched	back	behind	him,	and	Precious	saw	him
strain,	saw	him	leaning	hard,	and	then	out	from	the	cloud	emerged	Aranict,
held	by	the	back	of	her	collar,	and	after	her	–	the	naked	form	of	Brys	Beddict.
The	cloud	erupted,	burst	apart	in	a	welter	of	icy	water.
The	four	figures	fell	to	the	ground,	Faint	rolling	out	almost	to	the	witch’s
knees.	Precious	Thimble	stared	down,	saw	the	blood	still	pumping	from	the
woman’s	slashed	arms.	She	closed	trembling	hands	on	both	wrists,	healing
spells	tumbling	out	on	her	breath.
Soldiers	were	rushing	up.	Shouts	filled	the	air.
Precious	Thimble’s	hands	tightened	on	the	wounds,	but	now	there	were
only	scars	beneath	her	palms,	and	she	could	feel	Faint’s	pulse.	But…gods,	it’s
there	–	I	can	feel	it.	It’s…faint.	A	sudden	giggle	escaped	her	–	but	that	was	just
relief.	She’d	always	hated	puns.	Proper	women	did.	She	scowled	down	at	the
scars.	Hold	on,	where	did	I	get	that	power?	Looking	up,	she	saw	Amby	Bole
lying	motionless	on	the	muddy	ground.	Beyond	him	soldiers	crowded	round
Aranict,	who	knelt	with	her	prince,	cradling	his	head	on	her	lap.
And	then	Precious	Thimble	caught	a	glimpse	of	motion	from	one	of
Brys’s	hands,	out	from	under	the	cloak	someone	had	thrown	over	him.
I	can’t	believe	it.
Faint	stirred,	groaned,	eyes	opening,	stared	unseeing	for	a	moment,	and
then	focused	on	the	witch.	She	slowly	frowned.	‘I’m	not	dead?’
‘No.	I’ve	just	healed	you.	The	Atri-Ceda	made	it	out,	too.	So	did	the	prince.
Your	blood	bought	passage	–	though	how	that	watery	piss	you	call	blood	ever
passed	muster	in	the	eyes	of	an	Elder	God,	I’ll	never	know.’
‘What	–	but	how?	Who	saved	us?	Who	dragged	us	free?’
Sudden	coughing	from	where	Amby	Bole	lay	sprawled.
Precious	Thimble	shook	her	head.	‘The	only	one	who	could,	Faint,	some
idiot	from	Blackdog	Swamp.’
	
The	dozen	menhirs	erupting	from	the	earthworks	around	Prince	Brys	Beddict
had	ruptured	the	embankment	for	sixty	paces,	driving	fighting	soldiers	from
their	feet	–	bodies	tumbling	into	the	trenches	even	as	enormous	mounds	of
earth	and	stones	poured	down,	burying	scores	alive.
The	Ve’Gath	beneath	Grub	elected	to	escape	the	chaos	by	leaping	forward,
across	the	entire	trench,	and	landed	close	to	where	the	Forkrul	Assail	stood.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	shattered	its	halberd	some	time	earlier,	and	now
wielded	a	double-bladed	axe	in	one	hand	and	a	falchion	in	the	other.


The	Forkrul	Assail	stood	with	his	face	stretched	as	if	in	agony,	tilted	back,
the	eyes	shut	and	the	mouth	stretched	wide	open.	When	the	Ve’Gath	advanced,
he	gave	no	sign	of	awareness.	Two	swift	thumping	strides	and	the	falchion
swung	down,	taking	the	motionless	Pure	between	his	right	shoulder	and	neck.
The	blade	tore	down	through	the	chest,	ripped	free	in	a	spray	of	bone	shards.
The	other	Ve’Gath	had	followed	its	kin	and	now	came	in	from	the	left.	An
instant	after	the	first	Ve’Gath’s	attack,	its	heavy	single-bladed	axe	slammed	into
the	side	of	the	Assail’s	head	in	an	explosion	of	skull	fragments	and	gore.
The	Forkrul	Assail	collapsed	in	red	ruin.
Even	as	Grub	struggled	to	wheel	the	beast	round,	two	heavy	quarrels
hissed	across	–	between	him	and	the	Ve’Gath’s	head	–	and	punched	into	the	side
of	the	other	Ve’Gath.	The	impact	staggered	the	giant	reptile,	and	then	it	fell
over,	hind	legs	scything	the	air.
‘Back!	Back	across!’
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	burst	into	motion,	sprinting	down	the	length	of	the
berm	–	fifteen,	twenty	paces,	and	then	wheeling	to	plunge	down	amidst	crowds
of	Kolansii	in	the	first	trench.	Weapons	hammered	down,	slashed	and	chopped
a	carnage-strewn	path	through	to	the	other	side.
Pike	blades	glanced	across	the	armour	encasing	Grub’s	legs	and	girdling
his	hips	–	and	then	they	were	clawing	up	the	other	side,	winning	free	atop	what
remained	of	the	first	bank.
Grub	looked	round	for	the	prince	–	for	any	officer	–	but	the	chaos	reigned
on	all	sides.
Had	Brys	fallen?	There	was	no	way	of	knowing.
But	Grub	now	saw	Letherii	soldiers	lifting	their	heads,	saw	them	tracking
his	thumping	trek	across	the	front	of	the	warring	forces	–	watching	the
Ve’Gath	clear	attackers	from	its	path	with	devastating	sweeps	of	its	bladed
weapons.
They’re	looking	to	me.
But	I	know	nothing.
Fool!	Nothing	but	a	life	of	war!	Look	well	–	decide	what	must	be	done!
Twisting	in	the	saddle,	he	scanned	the	climbing	slope	to	his	left,	squinted	at	the
succession	of	fortified	tiers	–	and	saw	soldiers	streaming	from	the	highest
positions.
But	between	them	and	the	Letherii…four	trenches.	No,	this	is	impossible.
We’ve	lost	a	third	of	the	army	against	this	first	trench	alone!
Grub	faced	the	Letherii	ranks	once	more.	‘Withdraw!’	he	shouted.	‘By	the
prince’s	command,	withdraw!’
And	he	saw,	all	along	the	front,	the	Letherii	soldiers	disengaging,	shields


up	as	they	backed	away,	others	dragging	wounded	comrades	with	them.
Another	quarrel	hissed	past	–	too	close.	Cursing,	Grub	kicked	at	the	sides
of	the	Ve’Gath.	‘Down	from	the	ridge	–	along	the	front	–	put	those	weapons
away	and	find	us	some	shields!	Better	yet,	pick	up	some	of	the	wounded	–	as
many	as	you	can	carry!’
The	beast	skidded	down	the	slope,	righted	itself	and,	staying	low	beneath
the	cover	of	the	first	berm,	began	picking	its	way	through	heaps	of	bodies.
Grub	stared	down	at	the	terrible	carnage.	I	remember	on	the	wall	and	that
man	and	all	the	ones	who	fell	around	him	–	he	fought	and	fought,	until	they
overcame	him,	brought	him	down,	and	then	there	was	a	cross	and	he	was	nailed
to	it	and	the	crows	spun	and	screamed	and	fell	from	the	sky.
I	remember	the	old	man	on	his	horse,	reaching	down	to	collect	me	up	–	and
the	way	he	wheeled	outside	the	gate,	to	stare	back	–	as	if	he	could	see	all	the
way	we’d	come	–	the	bloody	road	where	I	was	born,	where	I	came	alive.
I	remember	that	world.	I	remember	no	other.
All	of	the	brave	soldiers,	I	am	yours.	I	was	always	yours.
	
The	Kolansii	counter-attack	from	troops	stationed	in	the	next	two	trenches	met
the	advance	of	Saphii	and	Evertine	legionnaires	in	an	avalanche	of	iron	fury.
Rolling	down	with	the	slope,	along	the	wide	descent	tracks	or	up	and	over	the
berms,	they	slammed	into	the	Bolkando	forces	like	a	storm	of	studded	fists.
For	all	the	wild	fury	of	the	Saphii,	they	were	not	sufficiently	armoured	against
heavy	infantry,	and	the	Evertine	soldiers	were	unable	to	close	a	solid
shieldwall	with	the	Saphii	in	their	midst.
The	first	lines	were	overwhelmed,	driven	underfoot,	and	the	entire
Bolkando	front	reeled	back,	yielding	once	more	the	second	berm	and	then	the
first	trench,	and,	finally,	the	first	bank	of	earthworks.	With	the	enemy	gaining
momentum,	the	legion	was	pushed	back	still	further.
Almost	none	of	the	Saphii	remained	by	this	time,	and	as	the	Kolansii	rolled
out	on	to	level	ground	they	rushed	across,	only	to	collide	with	the
legionnaires.	They	met	a	solid	shieldwall.	The	impact	sent	bodies	and	weapons
into	the	air	and	the	crush	made	both	sides	recoil,	before	closing	once	more	in
savage	fighting.
Queen	Abrastal,	still	mounted,	her	sword	and	forearm	painted	with	blood,
forced	her	charger	away	from	the	inside	edge	of	the	Evertine	line	–	the
animal’s	muzzle	was	gushing	blood	from	a	frenzied	bite	against	a	visored	face
and	its	hind	flanks	were	slashed	through	the	cladding,	spattering	blood	with
every	muscle	surge.	But	she	could	feel	the	pounding	of	its	heart	and	she	knew


that	her	horse	had	never	felt	more	alive	than	at	this	moment	–	it	was	impossible
for	her	not	to	grin	at	the	terrible	joy	in	the	beast	she	rode.	Impossible	to	not
find	herself	sharing	it.
Still,	they’d	arrived	upon	the	crux	–	and	looking	to	the	west,	she	saw	the
Letherii	forces	withdrawing	from	the	assault,	though	their	onager	salvos
continued	unabated.
The	Pure	had	done	as	she	had	expected	–	seeking	to	break	her	hold	here,
forcing	the	Letherii	away	from	any	hope	of	marching	to	the	Spire	by	blocking
the	valley	–	but	only	if	they	could	succeed	in	turning	the	Evertine	Legion.
She	rode	hard	round	to	the	back	of	her	legion.
Still	held	in	reserve,	the	Barghast	ranks	were	readying	weapons,	and
Abrastal	caught	sight	of	Warchief	Spax,	standing	atop	a	small	hill	of	bundled
supplies	and	straining	to	see	over	the	Evertine	ranks	to	the	front	of	the	battle.
She	saw	him	turn	to	her	upon	hearing	her	horse’s	drumming	hoofbeats.
She	reined	in	before	him.
‘I’ve	never	swum	in	a	sea	of	blood	before,	Firehair.	How	was	it?’
The	queen	glanced	down	to	see	herself	lathered	in	gore.	She	shook	her
sword	clear.	‘How	fast	were	those	Perish	moving?’	she	asked.
‘A	good	clip	–	almost	as	quickly	as	a	band	of	White	Faces	on	the	raid.	If
they	have	anything	left	after	tackling	the	valley	side,	they	should	be	almost	in
position	–	but	Highness,	you’ve	seen	how	many	are	headed	their	way.’	He
shook	his	head.
‘Can	they	even	slow	them	down?’
The	Warchief	shrugged.	‘Depends	on	the	lay	of	the	land,	I	suppose.	If	it’s	a
broad	front	they	need	to	hold…no,	they’ll	barely	slow	’em.’
Abrastal	cursed	under	her	breath	as	she	swung	her	mount	round.	Thought
furiously	for	a	moment,	and	then	nodded.	‘Very	well.	Warchief,	take	your
warriors	and	the	Teblor	and	move	with	all	haste	to	support	the	Perish	–
whatever	you	can	manage,	understood?’
‘You	send	us	to	our	deaths,	Highness.’
‘Aye.’	She	bared	her	teeth	at	him.	‘I	show	you	my	coin.	You	show	me	your
love.’
‘I	wasn’t	complaining,	just	saying.’
‘We	will	screen	you	here.’
‘Highness,	you	can’t	hold	against	this	counter-attack	–	we	can	see	that.’
‘We	will	screen	you	for	as	long	as	is	needed,’	Abrastal	said	firmly.	‘Now
get	going,	Warchief.’
‘If	we	do	not	meet	again,	Firehair,	I	should	tell	you’	–	and	Spax	leapt	down
from	the	mound	of	supplies	–	‘I	went	and	knocked	up	your	daughter.’


‘Gods	below!’
‘You’ll	have	years	of	doting	on	that	little	runt	–	you’ll	know	it	for	mine
’cause	it’s	got	my	eyes.’
‘Just	get	going	for	Errant’s	sake!’
Laughing,	Spax	raised	his	axe	and	waved	it	in	a	circle	over	his	head.
As	one,	the	White	Faces	lunged	into	motion	–	eastward.
Impressed	in	spite	of	herself,	Abrastal	watched	in	silence	for	a	moment.
Spax	was	following	her	gaze.	‘Aye,	we	live	for	this,	Firehair.	We’ll	give	a
good	account	of	ourselves,	I	promise	you.’	He	looked	up	at	her.	‘Sing	songs
about	us,	and	remember	to	tell	your	court	poets,	that’s	Gilk	with	one	k.’
She	frowned	down	at	him.	‘How	else	would	it	be,	you	fool?’
‘Fare	you	well,	my	queen,’	Spax	said,	bowing	even	as	he	turned	away.
When	he’d	trotted	a	dozen	paces	Abrastal	called	out,	‘Spax!’
The	Warchief	glanced	back.
‘Boy	or	girl,	I’ll	make	sure	it’s	named	after	you	–	but	that’s	the	only	favour
you’ll	get!’
Smiling,	the	Barghast	waved	his	weapon,	and	then	was	on	his	way	again.
She	watched	the	Teblor	falling	in	alongside	the	mass	of	White	Faces,	and
then	she	swung	round	to	study	her	legion.
Sure	enough,	they	were	being	driven	back	–	these	Kolansii	heavies	were
anything	but	soft.	Abrastal	adjusted	her	grip	on	the	sword	in	her	hand,
collected	the	reins	once	more.	Let	us	make	them	remember	us.
She	was	about	to	kick	her	horse	forward	when	a	rider	thundered	up	on	her
left.	‘Highness!’
Abrastal	stared.	A	damned	Letherii!	‘That	was	a	long	ride	–	what	news?’
The	messenger	–	a	Bluerose	Lancer	–	saluted.	‘Felicitations	from	the
prince,	Highness—’
‘Felicitations?	Gods	take	me	–	sorry,	go	on.’
‘Highness,	the	Pure	Forkrul	Assail	is	dead.	Only	mixed-blood	Assail
remain	in	command.	The	prince	hereby	informs	you	that	he	has	disengaged	his
forces	from	the	Kolansii	positions.	And	that	he	has	established	dug-in	defences
along	the	onager	line	on	the	valley	floor	and	will	commit	a	third	of	his
remaining	forces	there—’
‘Excuse	me,	a	third?’
The	Letherii	nodded.	‘Prince	begs	to	inform	you,	Highness,	that	he	is	on
his	way	to	your	position.’
Abrastal	looked	round,	and	then	cursed.	‘Take	a	moment	to	rest	your
horse,	sir,	and	then	ride	with	all	haste	back	to	Prince	Brys.	Inform	him	he’d
better	hurry.’


But	the	messenger	wasn’t	interested	in	resting,	and	he	wheeled	his	weary
horse	round	and	set	out	at	the	gallop.
Damn	but	those	lancers	know	how	to	ride.	And	damn	me,	young	man	–	if	we
both	survive	this,	I’m	going	to	give	you	a	ride	you’ll	never	forget.
Abrastal	sighed,	and	then	shook	herself.	With	a	low	growl,	she	kicked	her
horse	forward.	‘My	standard	to	the	front!	Get	on	with	you	–	follow	your
damned	queen!’
	
Someone	had	found	clothing	and	armour	for	the	prince.	With	Aranict	close	by
his	side,	he	stood	on	the	high	ground	and	watched	his	troops	swarming	to
entrench	all	along	the	line	of	onagers.	Lines	of	soldiers	were	moving	the
wounded	back	on	stretchers,	while	still	others	retrieved	serviceable	weapons
from	the	field.	And	overseeing	it	all,	a	young	man	riding	a	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
Brys	was	still	struggling	to	regain	himself	–	he	did	not	know	how	Aranict
had	managed	to	save	him,	or	how	she	even	survived	her	descent	into	that
lifeless	warren.	While	still	only	half	conscious	he	had	heard	fragments	of
conversation,	and	it	seemed	that	the	three	foreigners,	Faint,	Precious	Thimble
and	Amby	Bole,	had	all	had	a	hand	in	his	resurrection.	And	then	he’d	caught
the	name	Mael.
Old	man,	we	owe	you	so	much.	Why	are	we	Beddicts	so	important	to	you?
But…it	wasn’t	me	you	did	this	for,	was	it?	It	was	for	Tehol.	Your	chosen	mortal,
the	one	you	would	have	wanted	as	your	own	son.
Rest	assured,	I’m	not	complaining.
Someone	brought	him	a	helm	and	he	took	it	with	a	grateful	nod.	Tugged	it
on	and	fastened	the	clasp.
An	officer	crowded	close.	‘Sir,	we	have	found	you	a	horse	–	it	would	do
the	troops	good	to	see	you	again	as	soon	as	possible.’
Brys	shook	his	head.	‘Our	Malazan	guest	has	things	well	in	hand,
Lieutenant.’
‘He	has	issued	orders	in	the	prince’s	name,	sir!’
‘A	clever	thing	to	do,	under	the	circumstances.	He	may	be	young,	but	he
does	command	a	presence	on	the	back	of	that	lizard.	From	this	moment
forward,	he	is	to	be	considered	my	second	–	make	this	clear	to	all	the	other
officers.’
‘Yes	sir.’
Brys	glanced	over	to	see	that	a	horse	had	been	brought	forward.
Aranict	spoke,	‘Still,	beloved,	it	would	be	good	for	them	to	see	you.’
‘I	am	tempted	to	place	Grub	in	command	of	our	relieving	force,’	he


replied.	When	she	stepped	closer	he	held	up	a	hand.	‘I	am	not	recovered	–	I	feel
as	likely	to	fall	off	that	horse	as	stay	on	it.	Oh,	I’ll	mount	up,	and	as	long	as	the
beast	isn’t	moving	under	me,	why,	I	should	cut	a	strikingly	inspiring	figure.’
He	shot	a	look	up	at	the	imperial	standard	and	winced.	‘So	long	as	no	one
looks	too	carefully.’	He	reached	out	and	took	hold	of	her	hand.	‘Aranict…	I	am
glad	you	fought	for	me.’
‘It	was	Mael,’	she	said.	‘And	Faint’s	blood.	And	then,	if	not	for	Amby	Bole,
we	still	would	have	failed.’
‘Will	you	think	less	of	me	if	I	choose	to	remain	here,	commanding	these
defences?’
‘Brys,	if	I	had	to,	I’d	have	tied	you	down	to	keep	you	here.	Close	to	me.
We’re	not	saving	you	just	to	see	you	fall	to	some	errant	arrow	–	no,	you	stay
back,	issue	orders	and	leave	the	rest	to	everyone	else.’
He	smiled.	‘You	have	begun	to	show	a	stubborn	side,	Atri-Ceda.’
‘Idiot.’	She	lit	a	stick	of	rustleaf.	‘The	only	thing	just	begun	is	you	noticing
it	–	but	that’s	what	makes	the	first	flush	of	love	so	dangerous,	and	once	it	fades
and	you	start	seeing	clearly	again,	why,	it’s	too	late.’
Still	smiling,	he	took	the	reins	and	set	a	foot	in	the	stirrup,	pulling	himself
up	to	slump	in	the	saddle	with	a	low	groan.
From	all	sides	voices	rose	upon	seeing	him.	Grimacing,	Brys	straightened,
and	then	raised	one	gauntleted	hand.	The	roar	redoubled	in	its	intensity.
He	saw	Grub	riding	up	the	slope	towards	him.	The	boy	didn’t	look	much
like	a	boy	any	longer.	He	was	splashed	with	drying	blood,	and	from
somewhere	he’d	found	a	Bluerose	lance,	and	its	iron	point	had	swum	in	blood
not	long	past.
‘Prince	Brys	–	I	didn’t	know	you—	I	mean—’
‘There	is	little	time	to	waste,’	Brys	cut	in.	‘I	am	placing	you	in	command
of	the	relief	force.	They’re	almost	assembled	–	in	fact’	–	he	squinted	eastward
–	‘they	can	shake	themselves	out	on	the	march	–	the	Bolkando	are	losing
ground.	Lead	them,	Commander,	and	be	quick	about	it.’
Grub	saluted.	‘Sir,	when	we	close,	I	may	ride	ahead.’
‘Would	any	of	us	expect	otherwise?’	Brys	asked.	‘Just	don’t	get	yourself
killed.’
Nodding,	the	Malazan	youth	kicked	at	the	flanks	of	the	Ve’Gath,	and	the
huge	beast	wheeled	round	and	set	off.
	
Faint	studied	the	defenders	opposite,	watching	as	they	regrouped,	drawing
reinforcements	down	from	the	higher	earthworks.	‘They’re	going	to	break


cover,’	she	muttered.	‘They’re	going	to	charge	us.’
Precious	Thimble	glanced	over.	‘What?	Why	would	they	do	that?’
‘Because	most	of	us	are	headed	east,	down	the	valley	–	they	can’t	let	us
chase	after	their	own	relieving	force.	They	need	to	wipe	out	both	the	Letherii
and	the	Bolkando.’
The	witch’s	gaze	was	darting	back	and	forth	along	the	hasty	defences
thrown	up	by	the	Letherii.	‘We’re	badly	outnumbered.’
‘Haven’t	you	been	paying	attention?	Assaulting	costs	dear	–	we’re	about	to
turn	the	tables	on	them,	and	they’re	not	going	to	like	it.’
‘It’s	only	the	mixed-bloods	who’re	keeping	them	fighting	at	all,’	Precious
said	under	her	breath.
‘What?	What	did	you	say?’
‘It’s	the	mixed-bloods,	feeding	off	this	cursed	warren	–	using	it	to	bend	the
Kolansii	to	their	will.	I	doubt	they’d	fight	this	hard	without	it.’
‘Now	you	say	all	this!’	Faint	looked	about,	saw	the	prince	sitting	on	a
horse	twenty	paces	away,	his	back	to	them	as	he	observed	the	departing
companies.	Stepping	forward,	Faint	stumbled	slightly,	recovered.	But	her	head
was	spinning.	‘What’s	wrong	with	me?’
‘Blood	loss,’	snapped	Precious	Thimble.
Hissing	in	frustration,	Faint	made	her	way	–	slowly	–	towards	Brys
Beddict.	Find	the	damned	mixed-bloods.	Aim	a	few	onagers	at	them.	Tear	them
to	pieces.	And	this	battle	is	done.	‘Prince	Brys!’
The	man	turned	his	head.
Faint	hobbled	forward.	‘A	word	with	you,	Highness…’
	
Ascending	a	valley	side	at	the	run	and	in	full	armour	left	the	Perish	staggering
once	they’d	reached	the	top.	Heart	hammering	in	the	cage	of	his	chest,
Syndecan	pulled	clear	of	the	others	and	then	halted,	studying	the	lay	of	the	land.
Shit.	It’s	all	shit.
Forty	paces	away	was	a	raised	road,	running	parallel	with	the	valley,	its
steep	side	facing	them	banked	with	water-worn	stones.	In	between	was	a	strip
of	furrowed	field,	left	fallow	for	two	years	or	more.	Off	to	the	right,	a	hundred
paces	along,	rose	a	cluster	of	buildings	–	farmstead	facing	on	to	the	field,
public	stables	and	inn	facing	the	road.
Syndecan	continued	on,	bleakly	eyeing	the	sharp	slope	of	the	roadside.
Reaching	it,	he	sheathed	his	sword	and	scrambled	his	way	to	the	top.
Beyond	the	road	the	unplanted	fields	stretched	on	for	at	least	a	third	of	a
league,	broken	up	by	walled	hedgerows	forming	a	chaotic	patchwork.	‘Now


that’s	better,’	he	grunted.	No	army	would	be	happy	crossing	that	–	the	walls
alone	would	slow	them	up,	since	they	were	as	high	as	a	man	was	tall.	The
Perish	could	break	up	into	half-cohorts	and	contest	one	after	another,	and	by
the	time	the	Kolansii	won	through	the	battle	at	the	Spire	would	be	long	over.
Still	leaves	the	road	and	this	side,	though.	Narrow	enough,	but	where	do	I
weight	my	defence?	Road	or	field?	And	what	about	this	infernal	stony	bank?
Can’t	defend	it	worth	a	damn.	That	said,	trying	to	breach	along	it	would	be	a
nightmare	–	until	they	won	through.	So	I	throw	a	cohort	five	steps	back	of	the
line,	waiting	for	them.	We	bottle	them	up,	don’t	let	them	spill	out	to	the	sides.
It’ll	work.	It’ll	have	to.
Hands	on	his	hips,	he	turned	round,	looked	down	on	his	Grey	Helms.
Winded,	most	of	them	bent	over,	or	on	one	knee,	gulping	air	like	beached	carp.
He	pointed	at	the	buildings.	‘Wounded	go	there.	Cutters	on	your	way	–	set	up
fast	as	you	can.	Rest	of	you,	drink	down	the	last	of	your	water	if	you	haven’t
already.	Chew	on	some	food	while	you’re	at	it.	We’re	going	to	hold	on	the
road	and	this	side	of	it	–	mostly.	I	want	two	cohorts	on	the	other	side	in	case
they	send	anyone	that	way.	If	they	do,	make	them	pay,	brothers	and	sisters.
Now,	march	to	twenty	paces	from	the	buildings	and	form	up	there.’
Not	a	single	groan	as	the	Perish	picked	themselves	up	again	and	set	off
along	the	rippled,	weed-knotted	field.
Swinging	round,	Syndecan	looked	up	the	road.
Was	that	a	glitter	of	pike	points?
He	glared	back	at	his	Grey	Helms.	‘Step	lively!	Enemy	sighted	on	the
road!’	Wolves	preserve	us	this	day.
	
High	Watered	Festian	gestured,	watched	as	the	columns	plunged	down	off	the
road	on	the	inland	side,	breaking	up	as	they	entered	the	hedgerow	fields.	He
saw	crews	rushing	ahead	with	picks	to	ensure	that	the	passage	gates	through	the
walls	were	serviceable.
Seven	hundred	paces	up	the	road	he	could	see	the	cursed	Perish	–	but	they
had	fully	discounted	the	enclosed	fields.
Festian	intended	to	lock	fiercely	with	the	Grey	Helms,	pushing	forward
with	the	weight	of	fifteen	thousand	Kolansii	heavy	infantry,	and	then	send	eight
thousand	through	the	enclosures,	to	take	the	road	behind	them.	They	would
first	crush	the	defenders	on	the	road	itself,	and	then	drive	the	rest	south	across
the	field,	to	the	very	edge	of	the	valley	–	where	the	only	retreat	was	a	deadly
tumble	down	the	steep	valley	side.
He	intended	to	make	quick	work	of	this.


In	the	distance	to	the	east,	he	could	make	out	the	top	third	of	the	Spire.
Everything	below	that,	on	the	ridged	ascent	of	the	isthmus,	was	obscured	in
clouds	of	dust	or	smoke.	The	sight	chilled	him.
And	now	Brother	Diligence	is	dead.	Slain	by	some	foul	trap	of	sorcery.	It	all
falls	to	you,	Sister	Reverence.	But	we	shall	prevail.	Justice	is	a	sword	without
equal.	I	pray	to	you,	Sister,	hold	on.	We	are	coming.
	
Gillimada	slowed	her	pace	to	match	that	of	the	Warchief,	and	he	glared	up	at
the	huge	woman	as	he	struggled	for	breath.
‘I	sent	a	scout	up	to	the	road	–	there	are	soldiers	on	it.’
Spax	nodded	but	could	manage	little	more.	He	couldn’t	remember	the	last
time	he’d	led	a	raid,	and	while	his	warriors	were	thumping	along	in	his	wake
with	all	the	infernal	ease	of	youth,	his	own	legs	were	cramping,	there	was	a
stitch	in	his	side,	and	sweat	was	stinging	the	vicious	bite	Abrastal’s	daughter
had	delivered	to	his	penis	the	night	before.	That	she’d	been	trying	to	tear	it	off
with	her	own	teeth	was	only	because	of	her	frustration	and	anger	at	getting
pregnant	–	nothing	to	do	with	him,	really	–	and	it	was	just	his	bad	luck	that	his
champion	was	the	nearest	thing	at	hand	on	which	to	vent	all	her	anger	and
whatnot.
‘We	could	attack,’	suggested	the	Teblor	in	her	stentorian	voice.	‘A
surprise!’
‘Can	–	can	we	overtake	’em?’
‘Teblor	can	–	but	not	you.	They	are	using	the	road.	There	is	a	road	up
there.	My	scout	saw	it	and	there	were	soldiers	on	it.	Running.’
‘Did	your	scout	–	did	your	scout	see	–	the	Perish?’
‘No.	Kolansii	soldiers!	On	the	road.	Running!’
Oh,	my	cursed	gods	of	the	Barghast,	am	I	wallowing	in	the	muck	with	you?
Feels	like	it!	With	some	brainless	backwoods	harridan	for	company	too!	‘Felled
any	trees	lately,	woman?’
‘What?	No	trees	anywhere!	I’d	hit	my	head	if	there	were	trees.	I’m	glad
there	are	no	trees!’	And	she	bellowed	a	laugh,	only	to	then	shake	her	head.
‘Your	language	–	it	is	so	clumsy!’	She	drew	a	sudden	deep	breath	and	out	from
her	came	a	smooth	flow	of	sounds	Spax	had	not	imagined	possible	from	this
Teblor.
‘What	was	that?’	he	demanded	when	she’d	finished.
‘I	make	up	poem	songs	in	my	own	language.	I	am	famous	for	it,	hah	hah!’
‘Care	to	translate	what	you	just	said?’
‘No.	Useless.	You	have	one	word	for	one	thought.	We	have	many	thoughts


for	one	word!	You	all	speak	too	slow	and	we	have	to	slow	down	too	and	we	get
bored	talking	to	you	humans!’
Gasping,	Spax	shook	his	head.	‘Right	now	–	no	more	words	from	me	–	at
all!’
‘I	should	carry	you?’
Oh,	and	watch	me	try	and	live	that	down	–	in	front	of	all	my	warriors?
They’d	die	laughing,	never	mind	enemy	pikes	and	swords!	‘Don’t	even	touch
me!’	he	growled.
‘Hah	hah	hah!’
	
The	Kolansii	wasted	little	time,	pouring	down	from	the	road	to	form	up
opposite	the	Perish	on	the	field,	and	then,	once	the	shields	were	locked	and
swords	drawn,	they	advanced,	matching	step	by	step	the	troops	remaining	on
the	road.
Syndecan	stood	one	row	back	from	the	front	line.	Much	as	he	wanted	to	be
with	his	fellow	cutters	amongst	the	buildings,	he	was	now	commanding	and	his
place	was	here,	with	his	brothers	and	sisters.
They	were	still	winded,	their	legs	sagging	under	them	–	he	knew	the	signs
of	muscle	exhaustion	and	there	was	no	time	to	fully	recover.	This	is	going	to	be
unpleasant.
The	Kolansii	closed	to	within	six	paces	and	then	charged.
	
Gillimada	dropped	back	again.	‘There	is	fighting!’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	Teblor	–	we	may	be	slow	but	we’re	not	deaf!’
‘Should	we	join	them	from	here?’
‘Not	unless	you	want	to	fight	on	the	damned	slope!	No,	we’ll	move	past	the
whole	mess	and	come	up	behind	the	Perish,	and	then	move	forward.’
‘But	I	want	to	kill	the	mixed-blood!’
‘Maybe	you’ll	get	a	chance	at	that—’
‘No!	I	want	to	kill	him	right	away!	It’s	important!’
‘Fine!	You	can	lead	a	counter-attack	once	we’re	up	there,	all	right?’
Gillimada	smiled	broadly,	her	teeth	even	and	white	as	snow.	‘And	we	will
cut	down	every	tree	we	see!’
He	glared	at	her	back	as	she	loped	ahead.	His	heart	felt	ready	to	burst	and
he	wondered	if	it	might,	the	moment	he	stepped	up	to	fight	–	a	sudden
clenching	in	his	chest,	or	whatever	happened	when	the	thing	seized	up.	He	was


certain	that	it’d	hurt.	Probably	a	lot.
Glancing	upslope	to	his	left,	he	saw	rising	dust,	and	there	–	the	flash	of
spears	or	perhaps	pikes,	or	even	swords.	Ahead,	the	Teblor	raised	a	shout	–
and	Spax	squinted	to	see	bodies	sliding	down	the	slope,	limbs	flailing,
weapons	skirling	away.
‘Go	past!	Go	past!’
His	warriors	were	pressing	up	behind	him.	Spax	snarled.	‘Go	round	me
then,	damn	you	all!	I’ll	catch	up!’	They	poured	past	on	either	side	in	a	clatter	of
armour	and	drawn	weapons.
My	beloved	fools,	all	of	you.
Forty	more	heaving	paces,	another	ten,	five,	and	then,	looking	up,	he	saw
his	Barghast	scrambling	in	the	wake	of	the	Teblor,	up	the	valley	side,	many	of
them	using	their	hands	where	they	could.	And	above	them	the	Perish	falling
back,	spinning	away	from	blows,	tumbling	and	skidding	down	into	the	midst	of
the	climbing	warriors.
Gods	curse	us	all!
‘Climb!	Get	up	there!’
He	saw	the	Teblor	reach	the	summit,	saw	them	plunge	forward	and	out	of
sight,	weapons	swinging.	And	then,	behind	them,	the	first	of	the	Gilk,	armour
grey	with	dust,	their	white	faces	running	with	stained	sweat.
Spax	reached	the	base,	clambered	upward.	His	legs	were	half	numb	under
him.	Blisters	roared	with	pain	on	his	ankles,	his	heels.	He	coughed	out	dust,
was	almost	knocked	over	by	a	descending	corpse	–	a	Perish,	most	of	his	face
cut	away	–	and	struggled	yet	higher.
Is	there	no	end	to	this	damned	hillside?
And	then	a	hand	reached	down,	took	hold	of	his	wrist,	and	Spax	was
dragged	on	to	level	ground.
They	were	in	the	midst	of	farm	buildings,	and	the	Kolansii	were	on	all
sides,	sweeping	down	from	the	road,	driving	the	buckling	clumps	of	Perish
back	towards	the	valley	edge.
His	first	sight	of	this	told	him	that	the	Grey	Helms	had	been	flanked,	and
though	they	fought	on,	with	a	ferocity	worthy	of	their	gods,	they	were	dying	by
the	score.	His	Gilk	had	slammed	into	this	press,	but	even	as	they	did	so	more
Kolansii	surged	forward,	fully	encircling	the	defenders	–	with	the	valley	side
the	only	possible	retreat.
Dark	fury	raged	in	Spax	as	he	staggered	forward,	readying	his	weapons.
We	failed,	Firehair.	May	all	the	swamp	gods	rot	in	Hood’s	own	bog!	We	should
have	set	out	earlier	–	we	should	have	marched	with	the	Perish!
The	Teblor	had	formed	a	solid	square	and	were	pushing	through	the


enemy,	but	even	they	were	not	enough.
On	the	road,	Spax	could	see	massive	elements	of	the	Kolansii	army	simply
driving	forward,	eastward,	ignoring	the	vicious	last	stand	on	their	right.
We	didn’t	even	slow	them	down.
‘Withdraw!	Barghast!	Perish!	Teblor!	Withdraw	–	down	the	hillside!	Back
down	the	hillside!’
Seeing	warrior	and	soldier	stumbling	back,	seeing	them	twist	and	pour
down	from	the	summit,	the	Warchief’s	heart	felt	cold,	buried	in	ashes.	Gesler,
’ware	your	flank.	We	couldn’t	hold	them.	We	just	couldn’t.
The	press	of	retreating	warriors,	bloodied	and	desperate,	gathered	him	up
and	they	all	slid	ragged	paths	back	down	the	slope.	He	was	pulled	along
unresisting.	All	this	way	–	for	this?	We	could	have	done	more.	But	he	knew	that
any	stand	would	have	been	doomed	–	there	were	just	too	many	Kolansii,	and
they	fought	with	demonic	valour.
He	had	lost	both	his	weapons	on	the	descent,	and	his	soul	howled	at	the
appropriateness	of	that.	Tilting	his	head	back,	he	stared	up	at	the	sun.
It	was	barely	noon.
	
In	the	depths	of	night	rain	was	pouring	down	in	Darujhistan.	Karsa	Orlong	had
walked	into	the	city,	and	now	he	stood,	water	streaming	from	him,	waiting.
Opposite	him	was	the	temple,	and	the	vow	that	he	had	made	so	long	ago	now,	in
the	savage	intensity	of	youth,	was	a	heat	in	his	flesh,	so	fierce	that	he	thought
he	could	see	steam	rising	from	his	limbs.
Almost	time.
He’d	seen	no	one	else	in	the	street	since	dusk,	and	during	the	day,	while	he
had	stood	in	place,	the	people	of	this	city	had	swept	past,	unwilling	to	fix	eyes
upon	him	for	very	long.	A	troop	of	city	guards	had	lingered	for	a	time,	nervous,
half	circling	his	position	where	he	had	stood,	his	huge	stone	sword	resting	point
down,	his	hands	wrapped	about	its	leather-bound	grip.	Then	they	had	simply
moved	on.
He	would	have	been	irritated	at	having	to	kill	them,	and	no	doubt	there
would	have	been	alarms,	and	yet	more	guards,	and	more	killing.	But,	rather
than	being	heaped	with	the	dead,	the	cobbled	width	of	the	street	before	him
remained	unobstructed.
Eyes	half	closed,	he	experienced	again	the	echo	of	the	life	he	had	watched
seething	back	and	forth	in	the	day	now	gone.	He	wondered	at	all	those	lives,	the
way	few	would	meet	the	gazes	of	their	fellows,	as	if	crowds	demanded	wilful
anonymity,	when	the	truth	was	they	were	all	in	it	together	–	all	these	people,


facing	much	the	same	struggles,	the	same	fears.	And	yet,	it	seemed,	each	one
was	determined	to	survive	them	alone,	or	with	but	a	few	kin	and	friends	offering
paltry	allegiance.	Perhaps	they	each	believed	themselves	unique,	like	a	knotstone	in	the	centre	of	the	world’s	mill	wheel,	but	the	truth	was	there	were	very
few	who	could	truly	make	claim	to	such	a	pivotal	existence.
After	all,	there	was	only	one	Karsa	Orlong.	Standing	here	across	from	a
modest	temple	with	stained	walls	and	faded	friezes,	standing	here	with	the	fate
of	the	world	in	his	hands.
He	had	known	a	time	in	chains.	He	had	lived	in	that	wretched	house,	his
hands	closed	into	fists	against	the	slavery	in	which	so	many	insisted	he	reside	–
meek,	uncomplaining,	accepting	of	his	fate.	He	thought	back	to	the	citizens	he’d
seen	here.	So	many	had	been	dragging	chains.	So	many	had	walked	bowed	and
twisted	by	their	weight.	So	many	had	with	their	own	hands	hammered	tight	the
shackles,	believing	that	this	was	how	it	was	supposed	to	be.	Sweating	at
another	person’s	behest,	the	muscles	and	will	given	away	and	now	owned	by
someone	claiming	to	be	their	better	in	all	things.	Year	after	year,	a	lifetime	of
enslavement.
This	was	the	conversation	of	the	civilized,	and	it	repulsed	Karsa	Orlong	to
the	very	core	of	his	being.
Who	was	the	slavemaster?	Nothing	but	a	host	of	cruel	ideas.	Nothing	but	a
deceitful	argument.	A	sleight	of	hand	deception	between	things	of	value,	where
one	wins	and	the	other	always	loses.	He	had	heard	bartering,	had	witnessed
bargains	made,	and	it	all	had	the	illusion	of	fairness,	and	it	all	played	out	as	if
it	was	a	ritual	deemed	necessary,	made	iron	like	a	natural	law.
But	where	was	the	joy	in	that	ceaseless	struggle?	Where	was	the	proper
indolence	of	the	predator,	and	just	how	many	fangs	needed	pulling	to	make	this
precious	civilization?
Of	course,	not	everyone	suffered	the	same	emasculation,	and	this	was	where
all	the	lies	finally	gathered.	The	hungriest	maws,	fangs	dripping,	hid	in	the	cool
upper	rooms	of	the	estates,	in	the	fountained	gardens	of	the	rich	–	and	these
ones,	oh,	they	indulged	all	the	indolence	they	desired.	While	the	crowds	of	their
lessers	looked	on,	wide-eyed	and	ever	eager	for	details.
A	broken	and	suffering	god	in	chains	had	haunted	him.	It	had	flung
weapons	in	his	path.	It	had	whispered	all	manner	of	enticements.	It	had,	in	all
its	desperate	pain,	rushed	down	a	thousand	tracks,	only	to	find	not	a	moment	of
blessed	relief.
Karsa	now	understood	that	god.	The	times	that	he	had	been	chained,	he	had
felt	that	terrible	panic,	that	animal	frenzy	to	escape.	No	mortal,	human	or
Toblakai,	should	ever	feel	such	feelings.	Nor,	he	knew	now,	should	a	god.


‘He	cannot	know	compassion,	from	whom	compassion	has	been	taken.	He
cannot	know	love,	with	love	denied	him.	But	he	will	know	pain,	when	pain	is	all
that	is	given	him.’
Compassion.	Love.	It	was	not	civilization	that	birthed	these	gentle	gifts	–
though	its	followers	might	claim	otherwise.	Nor	was	civilization	the	sweetest
garden	for	such	things	to	blossom	in	–	though	those	trapped	within	it	might
imagine	it	so.	No,	as	far	as	he	could	see,	civilization	was	a	madman’s
mechanism	that,	for	all	its	good	intentions,	ended	up	ensnaring	the	gentle	gifts,
stifling	them,	leaving	them	to	wander	mazes	only	to	die	alone	and	in	the	dark.
A	mechanism,	a	cagework,	and	in	its	chaos	the	slaves	bred	like	flies	–	until
the	world	itself	groaned	under	the	assault	of	their	appetites.
‘You	have	made	many	vows,	Karsa	Orlong.’
A	civilization	was	the	means	by	which	too	many	people	could	live	together
despite	their	mutual	hatred.	And	those	moments	where	love	and	community
burgeoned	forth,	the	cynics	descended	like	vultures	eager	to	feed,	and	the	skies
soured,	and	the	moment	died	away.
‘Upon	my	heart,	Karsa	Orlong.	Do	you	hear	me?	Upon	my	heart!’
Blinking,	Karsa	looked	down	to	see	a	crippled	man	drawn	up	against	his
feet.	The	rain	streamed	around	him,	gushed	and	swirled,	and	the	face	that	had
twisted	up	to	look	at	him	seemed	to	be	shedding	from	blinded	eyes	the	tears	of
the	world.
‘Is	it	time	then?’	Karsa	demanded.
‘Will	you	kill	it	all?’
The	Toblakai	showed	his	teeth.	‘If	I	can.’
‘It	will	simply	grow	up	again,	like	a	weed	from	the	ashes.	For	all	that	we
are	made	to	kneel,	Karsa	Orlong,	we	yearn	to	fly.’
‘Yes,	rare	and	noble	and	precious	as	pigeons.	I’ve	seen	the	statues	of	old
heroes	in	the	square,	old	man.	I’ve	seen	their	crowns	of	birdshit.’
‘I	–	I	was	an	artist	once.	These	hands	–	so	deformed	now,	so	bent	and
frozen	–	can	you	understand?	All	this	talent,	but	no	way	to	release	it,	no	way	to
give	it	shape.	But	perhaps	we	are	all	like	that,	and	only	the	lucky	few	are	able
to	find	talent’s	path	unbarred.’
‘I	doubt	it,’	Karsa	replied.
Thunder	rumbled	from	beyond	the	lake.
The	crippled	man	coughed.	‘I	am	drowning.	I	have	enjoyed	our
conversation	on	the	merits	of	the	civilized,	Karsa	Orlong,	but	now	I	must
surrender.	I	must	die.	Sick.	Fevered.	The	needs	burn	too	hot.	I	have	given	you
the	words	you	shall	use.	Upon	my	heart.	Upon	my	heart.’
Karsa	stared	at	the	wretched	shape	at	his	feet.	He	set	his	sword	to	lean


against	the	wall	behind	him,	and	then	crouched	down.
The	crippled	man’s	face	lifted,	the	sightless	eyes	white	as	polished	coins.
‘What	are	you	doing?’
Karsa	reached	down,	gathered	the	skeletal	figure	into	his	arms,	and	then
settled	back.	‘I	stepped	over	corpses	on	the	way	here,’	the	Toblakai	said.
‘People	no	one	cared	about,	dying	alone.	In	my	barbaric	village	this	would
never	happen,	but	here	in	this	city,	this	civilized	jewel,	it	happens	all	the	time.’
The	ravaged	face	was	turned	upward,	the	last	of	the	raindrops	dripping
away	as	he	huddled	beneath	the	cover	Karsa	provided.	The	mouth	worked,	but
no	sounds	came	forth.
‘What	is	your	name?’	Karsa	asked.
‘Munug.’
‘Munug.	This	night	–	before	I	must	rise	and	walk	into	the	temple	–	I	am	a
village.	And	you	are	here,	in	my	arms.	You	will	not	die	uncared	for.’
‘You	–	you	would	do	this	for	me?	A	stranger?’
‘In	my	village	no	one	is	a	stranger	–	and	this	is	what	civilization	has	turned
its	back	on.	One	day,	Munug,	I	will	make	a	world	of	villages,	and	the	age	of
cities	will	be	over.	And	slavery	will	be	dead,	and	there	shall	be	no	chains	–	tell
your	god.	Tonight,	I	am	his	knight.’
Munug’s	shivering	was	fading.	The	old	man	smiled.	‘He	knows.’
It	wasn’t	too	much,	to	take	a	frail	figure	into	one’s	arms	for	those	last
moments	of	life.	Better	than	a	cot,	or	even	a	bed	in	a	room	filled	with	loved
ones.	Better,	too,	than	an	empty	street	in	the	cold	rain.	To	die	in	someone’s	arms
–	could	there	be	anything	more	forgiving?
Every	savage	barbarian	in	the	world	knew	the	truth	of	this.
	
Behind	their	massive	shields	the	Ve’Gath	soldiers	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle
advanced	into	a	hailstorm	of	arrows	and	heavy	quarrels.	Impacts	staggered
some	of	them,	quarrels	shattering	against	the	shields.	Others	reeled,	heads,
necks	and	chests	sprouting	shafts,	and	as	they	fell	their	kin	moved	up	to	take
their	places,	and	the	reptilian	assault	drew	ever	closer	to	the	trenches	and
redoubts.
In	the	centre	of	the	advance,	the	T’lan	Imass	weathered	a	similar	deluge	of
missile	fire,	but	they	held	no	shields,	and	where	the	oversized	quarrels	struck
the	bodies	shattered,	bones	exploding	into	shards	and	splinters.	Those	that
could	then	picked	themselves	back	up	and	continued	on.	But	many	were	too
broken	to	rise	again,	lying	amid	the	wreckage	of	their	own	bones.
The	withering	fusillade	lashed	into	the	attacking	forces	again	and	again.


Scores	of	Ve’Gath	went	down,	legs	kicking,	tails	whipping	or	striking	the
ground.	Deep	gaps	opened	in	the	T’lan	Imass	lines.	Yet	there	were	no	screams,
no	terrible	cries	of	agony	or	horror.
Sister	Reverence	stood	high	above	the	battle,	winds	both	hot	and	bitter	cold
whipping	about	her,	and	watched	as	the	enemy	forces	pushed	ever	closer	to	her
soldiers	waiting	in	their	trenches	and	raised	redoubts.	The	sorcery	of	Akhrast
Korvalain	streaming	from	her,	she	held	fast	her	Kolansii	heavy	infantry,
leaving	no	room	for	fear,	and	she	could	feel	them	bristling	as	she	fed	them	her
hunger.	Do	not	yield.	Slay	them	all!	Do	not	yield!	They	would	hold	–	they	had
to	–	and	then	High	Watered	Festian	would	arrive,	to	strike	at	the	K’Chain	flank,
driving	deep	a	mortal	wound	against	these	hated	enemies	of	old.
She	swore	under	her	breath	upon	seeing	masses	of	K’ell	Hunters	break	out
along	the	high	rock-studded	sides,	rushing	the	fortified	onager	positions	–	and
she	watched	as	the	crews	frantically	swung	the	heavy	weapons	round.	They
managed	a	single	salvo,	the	scores	of	quarrels	tearing	into	the	ranks	of
Hunters,	before	the	rest	reached	the	base	of	the	hill	and	swarmed	upward,	their
terrible	swords	lifting	high.
As	the	helpless	crews	were	slaughtered,	their	machines	smashed	into
splinters,	Sister	Reverence	dismissed	the	scene	from	her	mind.	She	had	seen
ten	or	more	K’ell	Hunters	go	down,	and	if	each	fortlet	could	match	or	better
that	toll,	then	she	was	satisfied.	She	would	rely	on	attrition	–	there	was	no	other
choice.
Now	that	the	battle	was	under	way,	her	panic	had	subsided,	though	the
murder	of	Brother	Diligence	still	sent	trembling	waves	of	shock	through	her.
She	remained	uncertain	as	to	the	manner	of	his	death,	and	that	still	disturbed
her;	if	she	gave	her	dread	free	rein,	she	knew	her	fear	would	return.	Humans
were	duplicitous	and	brazen	–	they	should	have	known	better	than	to
underestimate	their	treacherous,	deceitful	natures.	His	power	had	been	turned
back	upon	him.	Somehow.	He	had	drowned	in	a	deluge	of	words,	and	she	could
not	comprehend	how	that	was	even	possible.
But	in	this	battle	below	she	could	see	but	two	humans.	Riding	Ve’Gath,	by
the	Abyss.	Do	they	command?	No,	that	cannot	be.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle
would	never	yield	to	human	rule.	They	are	ever	commanded	by	their	Matron
and	none	other.	It	has	always	been	so	and	so	it	remains.
A	formidable	Matron,	however,	to	have	spawned	so	many	Ve’Gath.	She
stays	hidden.	She	evades	my	questing.	That	alone	speaks	of	impressive	power.
But	when	this	is	done,	when	her	army	is	destroyed,	I	will	find	her.	I	will
eviscerate	her.	This	day	is	the	last	gasp	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	There	are	no
other	Matrons	left	–	I	am	certain	of	it.	They	must	have	discovered	the	alliance	I


made	with	the	Nah’ruk,	and	so	they	have	come	here,	seeking	vengeance.
Am	I	a	child	with	a	hand	to	be	slapped?
Of	the	four	ancient	races,	who	was	always	the	most	feared,	if	not	the
Forkrul	Assail?
She	knew	there	were	other	Pures,	on	distant	continents.	And,	once	Akhrast
Korvalain’s	power	was	made	unassailable	in	this	place,	she	would	quest	to	find
them.	She	would	invite	them	to	share	in	this	power,	and	the	cleansing	could
begin	in	earnest.	We	shall	unleash	such	justice	as	to—
A	frigid	blast	of	air	swept	up	around	her	and	Sister	Reverence	turned	from
the	battle	below.	Facing	into	that	icy	wind,	she	made	her	way	across	the
platform	to	the	side	looking	out	over	the	sea.
What	she	saw	stunned	her.
Kolanse	Bay	was	filling	with	ice.	Mountains,	glowing	emerald	and
sapphire,	were	rising	up	from	the	depths,	and	as	she	stared	she	saw	the
churning	water	bleach	white,	saw	every	wave	freeze	solid.	The	Perish	ships,
which	had	been	broken	and	smashed	and	swallowed	by	the	sea,	had	now
reappeared,	the	wreckage	sealed	in	ice	–	and	there	were	more	ships,	ones	long
buried	in	the	silts	of	the	sea	bottom,	heaving	to	the	surface.	Directly	below,	the
sheltered	Kolansii	galleys	and	triremes,	now	locked	in	ice,	began	to	shatter,
hulls	collapsing.	The	sound	of	that	destruction,	rising	up	to	where	she	stood,
was	a	chorus	of	detonations,	as	of	trees	battered	down	by	winds.
The	entire	bay	was	now	solid	ice,	the	surface	a	crazed	landscape	of	jagged
translucent	crags,	welling	fissures,	and	flat	sweeps	of	dirty	snow.	Mists	poured
from	it	in	roiling	clouds.
And,	with	the	voice	of	grinding	mountains,	it	had	begun	lifting	higher,
tilting,	the	nearest	end	reaching	upwards.	The	mole	and	breakwaters	of	the
harbour	directly	below	were	suddenly	obliterated,	torn	and	crushed	to	rubble	–
and	as	the	ice	shifted,	reaching	the	base	of	the	Spire,	Sister	Reverence	felt	the
stone	tremble	beneath	her	feet.
This	cannot	be!
Omtose	Phellack	–	what	Jaghut	dares	this?	No!	They	are	gone!	Extinct	–
there	is	not	one	Jaghut	left	with	this	kind	of	power	–	we	would	have	found	the
threat,	we	would	have	destroyed	it!
Sister	Reverence	staggered	back	from	the	precipice	as	she	felt	the	Spire
sway	under	her.	Hearts	pounding,	hips	aching,	she	stumbled	across	the
platform.	Reaching	her	previous	position,	she	glared	down	at	the	battle.
In	time	to	see	the	Ve’Gath	soldiers	pouring	up	the	embankment.
Rise!	Kolansii	–	my	blessed	children	–	rise	to	meet	them!
Fists	clenched,	she	flung	her	humans	into	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.


Buffeted	to	one	side	by	a	collapsing	Ve’Gath,	Gesler	struggled	for	balance	as
his	mount	stumbled.	He	could	see	that	the	front	line	had	plunged	into	the	trench
–	and	from	higher	up	the	tiers,	hundreds	of	Kolansii	were	rushing	down	to
support	their	besieged	comrades.
He	saw	Stormy,	dragging	his	axe	upward,	a	cloven	helm	jammed	on	the
blade.	The	man’s	face	was	red	as	his	beard,	a	berserk	rage	upon	him.	His
Ve’Gath	stood	atop	the	berm,	its	own	weapons	hammering	down	at	the
Kolansii	swarming	up	to	assail	it.
Fool’s	going	to	get	himself	killed.	He’ll	do	it,	too,	just	to	spite	me!
He	commanded	his	Ve’Gath	forward.	Amidst	the	swirling	flavours	in	his
mind,	he	spoke	to	his	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	‘Take	this	trench!	Push!	All	of	you	–
push!’
Off	to	his	right	he	saw	the	T’lan	Imass	chopping	their	way	through	the
defenders,	overrunning	the	redoubts.	Once	they	were	able	to	close	in	hand-tohand	fighting,	their	battle	turned	into	slaughter.	Gesler	saw	Onos	T’oolan	–
enemy	weapons	rebounding	from	him	–	wade	forward,	flint	sword	swinging.
He	seemed	to	be	walking	through	a	mist	of	blood.
Bastards	are	showing	us	up.	Of	course,	we’re	all	flesh	and	blood,	and
they’re	not.	Nothing’s	more	irritating	than	an	unfair	advantage	on	the	field.	At
least	they’re	on	our	side	–	gods,	why	am	I	even	complaining?
‘Push!’
The	Ve’Gath	advance	stalled	in	the	trench.	The	sheer	mass	of	armoured
bodies	had	blocked	the	huge	reptilian	warriors	–	their	weapons	tore	through
the	Kolansii,	but	more	of	the	enemy	kept	arriving.	Ascending	the	berm,	Gesler
could	see	that	the	next	tier	of	earthworks	had	been	abandoned,	all	the	forces
pouring	down	to	slam	into	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Yet	beyond	those
entrenchments,	the	remaining	infantry	stayed	in	their	positions.	He	could	see
high	redoubts	on	enfilading	angles,	onagers	loaded	and	waiting.
This	is	going	to	take	all	day.
Worse	yet.	We	might	even	lose.
The	T’lan	Imass	had	taken	the	trench	at	the	centre	and	were	now	seeking	to
broaden	the	breach.	A	salvo	of	heavy	bolts	slashed	through	their	ranks.
‘K’ell	Hunters	–	Sag’Churok	–	we	need	you	at	the	centre	–	we	need	those
onagers	destroyed!	The	T’lan	Imass	can	break	this	wide	open.	Flow	in	behind
them	–	Ve’Gath	rear	ranks,	form	up	on	the	centre	and	advance	into	the	breach!’
An	arrow	skidded	off	his	left	shoulder.	Swearing,	he	kicked	his	Ve’Gath
forward,	down	into	the	trench	to	join	Stormy.


The	slaughter	was	appalling,	close	and	packed	with	heaving	bodies,
slashing	and	stabbing	weapons.	His	Ve’Gath	landed	on	corpses	–	already	the
trench	was	at	but	half	its	normal	depth	–	and	the	smeared	limbs	and	torsos
slipped	beneath	his	mount’s	weight	until	its	claws	dug	in	for	purchase.
A	half	dozen	shield-locked	Kolansii	held	the	top	of	the	ramp	directly
opposite,	short-handled	spiked	axes	at	the	ready	–	they	were	attacking	the
Ve’Gath	low,	chopping	at	legs	and	thrusting	at	underbellies.	This	is	how	the
Malazans	did	it.	Why	couldn’t	these	Kolansii	be	stupid?
Howling,	he	drove	his	Ve’Gath	forward.
	
‘We	kill	and	we	kill	still	more,	and	yet	they	do	not	break.	Destriant,	these
soldiers	are	under	a	geas.	The	pure-blood	Forkrul	Assail	commands	their
souls.’
Kalyth	slowly	nodded.	She	could	see	that	well	enough	–	no	army	could
withstand	this	kind	of	ceaseless	slaughter.	She	knew	that	thousands	of	Kolansii
had	fallen.	The	battle	for	the	first	trenches	had	consumed	almost	half	the
morning,	and	now,	as	the	sun	blazed	directly	overhead	–	in	the	very	midst	of
the	Jade	Strangers	–	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	and	T’lan	Imass	had	advanced	no
further	than	crushing	the	last	defenders	of	the	third	entrenchment.
Only	halfway	through	the	defences.
Beside	her	the	Matron	Gunth	Mach	spoke	in	a	mélange	of	flavours.	‘My
Ve’Gath	are	beginning	to	tire,	Destriant.	A	thousand	have	fallen	and	will	not
rise	again.	And	now	Gu’Rull	informs	me	that	more	Kolansii	are	on	the	way	–
upon	the	inland	high	road	to	the	west.’
Kalyth	hugged	herself.	What	to	do,	what	to	say?	‘Then	the	Letherii	and
Bolkando	have	failed.’
‘No.	They	pursue,	but	they	are	much	reduced	and	exhausted	–	they	will	not
arrive	in	time	to	assist	us.	Destriant,	it	is	difficult	to	reach	the	Shield	Anvil	and
the	Mortal	Sword.	They	are	in	battle	frenzy	–	again	and	again	they	call	upon	a
name	I	do	not	know,	but	each	time	it	is	voiced,	something	trembles	in	the	air.	A
flavour	pungent	and	bestial.
‘Destriant,	we	must	withdraw	an	element	of	our	forces	to	meet	this	threat
from	the	west.	You	must	reach	through	to	our	human	commanders	–	you	must
break	their	fury	and	speak	with	a	voice	of	reason.	Ride	the	minds	of	the	Ve’Gath
–	they	will	guide	you	to	them.’
Kalyth	drew	a	deep	breath,	and	then	closed	her	eyes.
	


The	tattoos	on	Gesler ’s	forearms	were	burning,	as	if	splashed	with	acid,	but	he
barely	noticed	as	he	leaned	over	the	shoulders	of	his	reeling	Ve’Gath.	He	had
never	been	so	tired,	so…demoralized.	The	enemy	would	not	break.	The	enemy
fought	with	a	rage	to	match	his	and	Stormy’s,	and	though	they	died	and	died,
still	more	came.
An	axe	spike	had	plunged	deep	into	his	mount’s	gut	and	the	animal	was
dying	beneath	him,	yet	somehow	it	remained	on	its	feet,	somehow	it	continued
advancing,	weapons	bashing	foes	aside.
They	had	drawn	closer	to	the	centre	–	to	where	the	T’lan	Imass	still	pushed
forward,	their	tireless	arms	rising	and	descending.	Never	before	had	Gesler
been	so	close	to	the	ancient	undead	warriors	in	the	midst	of	battle,	witness	to
this	devastating…implacability.
And	the	Emperor	had	almost	twenty	thousand	of	them	at	his	command.	He
could	have	conquered	the	world.	He	could	have	delivered	such	slaughter	as	to
break	every	kingdom,	every	empire	in	his	path.
But	he	barely	used	them	at	all.
Kellanved	–	is	it	possible?	Did	even	you	quail	at	the	carnage	these
creatures	promised?	Did	you	see	for	yourself	how	victory	could	destroy	you,
destroy	the	entire	Malazan	Empire?
Gods	below,	I	think	you	did.
You	took	command	of	the	T’lan	Imass	–	to	keep	them	off	the	field	of	battle,
to	keep	them	out	of	human	wars.
And	now	I	see	why.
He	still	held	his	heavy	sword,	but	had	no	strength	left	to	even	so	much	as
lift	it.
The	battle	lust	was	fading	–	something	was	assaulting	it,	tearing	it	down,
away	from	his	eyes,	and	all	at	once	the	redness	of	his	vision	fragmented,
vanished.
And	he	heard	Kalyth’s	voice.	‘Gesler.	There	is	another	Kolansii	army	on
the	high	inland	road.	They	are	fast-marching	–	we	must	guard	our	flank.’
‘Guard	our	flank?	With	what?’	He	angled	his	mount	round,	lurched	as	it
staggered.	‘Ah,	shit,	my	Ve’Gath’s	finished.’	He	pulled	his	boots	from	the	scale
stirrups,	slid	down	from	the	beast’s	slathered	back.	Landing,	his	knees	buckled
and	he	fell	to	one	side.	Fighting	to	regain	his	breath,	he	stared	up	at	the	strange
–	and	strangely	crowded	–	sky.	‘All	right.	Listen,	Kalyth.	Draw	the	K’ell	back
and	send	them	over	there,	all	of	them.	Tell	Sag’Churok	–	I’m	sending	him	the
T’lan	Imass.’	He	forced	himself	to	his	feet.	‘Did	you	hear	all	that?’	He	flinched
as	his	Ve’Gath	fell	over,	legs	flailing,	half	its	guts	hanging	out	in	thick	ropes.
He	saw	the	life	empty	from	its	eyes.


‘Yes.	Gu’Rull	says	you	must	hurry.	There	is	little	time.’
‘That	damned	rhizan’s	finally	come	back,	has	it?’
‘Gu’Rull	says	there	is	a	storm	coming,	Gesler.	He	says	you	called	it.’
‘Like	Hood	I	have!’	He	looked	around,	but	Stormy	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
A	storm?	What’s	she	going	on	about?	Whatever	it	is,	it’s	probably	that	redbearded	bastard’s	fault.
Cursing,	the	Mortal	Sword	set	off	to	find	Onos	T’oolan.	His	forearms,	he
saw	with	faint	alarm,	were	sweating	beads	of	blood.

Onos	T’oolan	cut	diagonally	in	a	downward	chop,	through	the	torso	of	the
Kolansii	opposite	him,	dragging	his	blade	free	as	he	stepped	over	the
crumpling	body.	An	axe	head	slammed	into	his	ribs	on	his	left	side,	bounced
off,	and	he	turned	and	slashed	through	his	attacker ’s	neck,	watched	the	head
roll	off	the	shoulders.	Two	more	strides	and	he	was	atop	the	fourth	berm,	his
warriors	coming	up	alongside	him.
Looking	down	into	the	trench,	he	stared	at	a	mass	of	upturned	faces	–	all
twisted	with	inhuman	hatred	–	and	weapons	lifted	as	he	prepared	to	descend
into	the	press.
‘First	Sword!’
Onos	T’oolan	paused,	stepped	back	and	turned	round.
The	Malazan	named	Gesler	was	stumbling	towards	him.
‘Gesler,’	said	Onos	T’oolan,	‘there	are	but	two	more	tiers	left	–	and	the
number	of	enemy	in	those	positions	is	sorely	diminished.	We	shall	prevail.
Draw	your	Ve’Gath	into	our	wake—’
‘First	Sword	–	we	are	about	to	be	flanked	to	the	west.	I	have	sent	what
remains	of	my	K’ell	Hunters	there,	but	they	are	not	enough.’
Onos	T’oolan	lowered	his	sword.	‘I	understand.’
‘We	will	push	on	here	without	you,’	Gesler	said.	‘You’ve	split	the	defences
in	two,	and	when	all	is	said	and	done,	the	Ve’Gath	can	out-climb	and	out-run
humans	–	we	will	fight	to	the	foot	of	the	stairs.	We	will	assault	the	Spire.’
‘Akhrast	Korvalain	is	wounded	now,	Mortal	Sword.	Tellann	is	awake	–
Olar	Ethil	is	near.	It	seems	that	this	shall	be	a	day	of	ancient	powers.	Malazan,
beware	the	voice	of	the	Pure	who	awaits	you	atop	the	Spire.’
The	man	revealed	red-stained	teeth.	‘Once	I	get	up	there,	she	won’t	have
time	to	get	a	single	damned	word	out.’
‘I	wish	you	success,	Mortal	Sword.	Tell	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	we	are


honoured	to	have	fought	at	their	side	this	day.’
Onos	T’oolan	reached	out	to	his	followers,	and	as	one	they	fell	to	dust.
	
Sister	Reverence	could	hear	the	grinding	ascent	of	the	ice	against	the	Spire	off
to	her	left,	while	before	her	she	saw	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	carve	their	way
ever	closer	to	the	base	of	the	stairs.	The	T’lan	Imass	had	vanished,	but	she
knew	where	they	were	going	–	and	High	Watered	Festian	will	have	to	face
them.	He	will	have	to	find	a	way	to	encircle	them,	to	win	past	and	strike	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle.
Then	she	looked	skyward,	where	enormous	dark	clouds	were	building
almost	directly	overhead,	forming	huge,	towering	columns	bruised	blue	and
green.	She	saw	flashes	of	lightning	flaring	from	their	depths	–	and	the	blinding
light	was	slow	to	fade.	Two	remained,	burning	luridly,	and	instead	of
diminishing,	it	seemed	that	those	actinic	glares	were	growing	stronger,
deepening	in	hue.
All	at	once,	she	realized	what	she	was	seeing.
There	is	a	god	among	us.	A	god	has	been	summoned!
The	eyes	blazed	with	demonic	fire,	and	the	clouds,	ever	massing,	found
form,	a	shape	so	vast,	so	overwhelming,	that	Sister	Reverence	cried	out.
The	argent	gleam	of	tusks,	the	clouds	curling	into	swirls	of	dark	fur.
Towering,	seething,	building	into	a	thing	of	muscle	and	terrible	rage,	the	eyes
baleful	as	twin	desert	suns.	Dominating	the	entire	sky	above	the	Spire,	Fener,
the	Boar	of	Summer,	manifested.
This	is	no	sending.	He	is	here.	The	god	Fener	is	here!
	
With	dawn	paling	the	grey	sky	overhead	and	water	running	in	streams	along	the
gutters,	Karsa	Orlong	looked	down	at	the	peaceful	face	of	the	old	man	cradled
in	his	lap.	He	slipped	a	hand	under	that	head	and	lifted	it	slightly,	and	then
moved	away,	settling	it	once	more	on	the	hard	cobbles	of	the	street.
It	was	time.
He	rose,	taking	hold	of	his	sword.	Fixing	his	eyes	on	the	temple	opposite,	he
walked	towards	the	barred	door.
The	city	was	awakening.	Early	risers	out	on	the	street	paused	upon	seeing
him	crossing	their	path.	And	those	who	could	see	his	face	backed	away.
He	reached	for	the	heavy	brass	latch,	grasped	hold	of	it,	and	tore	it	away
from	the	wooden	door.	Then	he	kicked,	shattering	the	door’s	planks	like


kindling,	the	sound	of	the	impact	like	thunder,	its	echoes	tumbling	down	the
passageway	within.	Voices	shouted.
Karsa	entered	the	temple	of	Fener.
Down	a	once-opulent	corridor,	past	the	flanking	braziers	–	two	priests
appearing	with	the	intent	of	blocking	his	passage,	but	when	they	saw	him	they
shrank	from	his	path.
Into	the	altar	chamber.	Thick	smoke	sweetly	redolent	with	incense,	a	heat
rising	from	the	very	stones	underfoot,	and	to	either	side	the	paint	of	the	murals
was	crackling,	bubbling,	and	then	it	began	to	blacken,	curling	away	from	the
walls,	devouring	the	images.
Priests	were	wailing	in	terror	and	grief,	but	the	Toblakai	ignored	them	all.
His	eyes	were	on	the	altar,	a	block	of	rough-hewn	stone	on	which	rested	a	jewelstudded	boar	tusk.
Closing	on	the	altar,	Karsa	raised	his	stone	sword.
‘Upon	his	heart.’
When	the	blade	descended,	it	smashed	through	the	tusk	and	then	continued
on,	cracking	the	altar	stone	with	the	sound	of	thunder,	shattering	the	block	in
half.

Onos	T’oolan	could	hear	weeping,	but	this	was	the	sound	of	something	unseen,
something	long	hidden	in	the	souls	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	He	had	never	expected	it
to	awaken,	had	never	expected	to	feel	it	again.	In	his	mind	he	saw	a	child,
clothed	in	mortal	flesh,	lifting	a	face	to	the	heavens,	and	that	face	was	his	own
–	so	long	ago	now.	There	had	been	dreams,	but	even	as	they	faded	the	child
boy	wept	with	shuddering	convulsions.
Things	die.	Dreams	fall	to	dust.	Innocence	bleeds	out	to	soak	the	ground.
Love	settles	in	cold	ashes.	We	had	so	much.	But	we	surrendered	it	all.	It	was…
unforgivable.
He	rose	again,	on	a	broad,	level	stretch	of	land	where	a	village	had	once
stood.	It	had	been	made	mostly	of	wood	and	that	wood	had	been	taken	away	to
build	engines	of	war.	Now	only	the	foundation	stones	remained.	The	raised
road	that	ran	into	it	sloped	until	it	was	level	with	the	cobbled	street	at	the
village’s	edge.
His	kin	rose	around	him	and	they	moved	out	to	present	a	broad	front
facing	on	to	that	road,	there	to	await	the	army	they	could	now	see	to	the	west.
The	sound	of	thousands	of	marching	boots	on	cobbles	was	a	solid	roar


underfoot.
We	shall	fight	here.	Because	the	fighting	and	the	killing	goes	on	for	ever.
And	the	child	will	shed	his	tears	until	the	end	of	time.	I	remember	so	many
loves,	so	many	things	lost.	I	remember	being	broken.	Again	and	again.	There
need	be	no	end	to	it	–	there	is	no	law	to	say	that	one	cannot	break	one	more
time.
When	he	raised	his	weapon,	his	kin	followed	suit.	Seven	thousand	four
hundred	and	fifty-nine	T’lan	Imass.	Another	battle,	the	same	war.	The	war	we
never	lost,	yet	never	knew	how	to	win.
The	concussion	that	clove	through	the	heaving	clouds	behind	them
staggered	the	T’lan	Imass,	a	thunder	so	loud	it	shivered	through	their	bones.
Wheeling	round,	Onos	T’oolan	stared	up	to	see	a	stone	sword	–	an	Imass
sword	–	descending	as	if	held	in	the	hand	of	the	Jade	Strangers,	impossibly
huge,	slicing	down	through	a	vague	bestial	shape	–	that	then	staggered.
Twin	embers	of	crimson	–	eyes	–	suddenly	blossomed	as	if	filling	with
blood.
A	roar	sounded,	filling	the	air	with	such	fury	and	pain	that	it	pounded	the
entire	army	of	T’lan	Imass	back	a	step,	and	then	another.
The	death	cry	of	a	god.
And	the	heavens	erupted.
Onos	T’oolan	watched	the	waves	of	blood	descending,	falling	earthward.
He	watched	the	crimson	sheets	rolling	across	the	land,	watched	them	roll	ever
closer	–	and	then	with	yet	another	roar,	the	rain	slammed	down	upon	the	T’lan
Imass,	driving	them	to	their	knees.
Head	bowed	beneath	the	deluge,	Onos	T’oolan	gasped.	One	breath.
Another.	And	his	eyes,	fixed	now	upon	the	hands	on	his	knees,	slowly	widened.
As	the	withered	skin	softened,	thickened.	As	muscles	expanded.
Another	terrible	gasp	of	breath,	deep	into	aching	lungs.
From	his	kin,	sudden	cries.	Of	shock.	Of	wonder.
We	are	remade.	By	the	blood	of	a	slain	god,	we	are	reborn.
Then	he	lifted	his	gaze,	to	look	upon	the	Kolansii	ranks,	fast	closing	on
their	position.
This…this	was	ill-timed.
	
The	blood	of	a	slain	god	rained	from	the	sky.	In	torrents,	cascading	down	from
the	ruptured,	now	shapeless	clouds.	The	air	filled	with	the	terrible	roar	of	those
thick	drops,	falling	heavy	as	molten	lead.	The	armies	fighting	near	the	highest
level	of	the	isthmus	were	staggered	by	the	downpour.	The	vast	shelf	of	ice,


ever	rising	towards	the	pinnacle	of	the	Spire,	now	streamed	crimson	in
growing	torrents.
Bowed	beneath	the	onslaught,	Sister	Reverence	staggered	towards	the	altar
stone.	Through	the	carmine	haze	she	could	see	the	Crippled	God’s	heart	–	no
longer	a	withered,	knotted	thing	of	stone	–	now	pulsing,	now	surging	with	life.
But	the	sorcerous	chains	still	held	it	bound	to	the	altar.
This	–	this	changes	nothing.	My	soldiers	shall	hold.	I	still	have	their	souls
in	my	hands.	I	have	the	chains	of	their	fallen	comrades,	their	slain	souls	–	all
feeding	my	power.	At	the	foot	of	the	stairs,	they	shall	make	a	human	wall.	And	I
will	take	this	unexpected	power	and	make	of	it	a	gift.	I	will	feed	this	blood	into
the	soul	of	Akhrast	Korvalain.
She	drew	up	against	the	altar	stone,	slowly	straightened,	and	held	her	face
to	the	sky,	to	feel	that	hot	blood	streaming	down.	And	then,	laughing,	she
opened	her	mouth.
Make	me	young	again.	Banish	this	bent	body.	Make	all	that	is	outside	as
beautiful	as	that	which	was	ever	inside.	Make	me	whole	and	make	me	perfect.
The	blood	of	a	god!	See	me	drink	deep!
	
It	was	as	if	the	heavens	had	been	struck	a	mortal	wound.	Kalyth	cried	out,	in
shock,	in	dread	horror,	as	the	deluge	descended	upon	the	land	–	to	all	sides,
devouring	every	vista,	as	if	swallowing	up	the	entire	world.	The	blood	–	on
her	face,	on	her	hands	–	felt	like	fire,	but	did	not	burn.	She	saw	the	heavy	drops
pounding	into	the	lifeless	earth,	saw	the	soil	blacken,	watched	as	streams	of
thick	mud	slumped	down	the	hillsides.
She	could	barely	draw	breath.	‘Gunth	Mach!	What	–	what	will	come	of
this?’
‘Destriant,	I	cannot	give	answer.	Immortal	rituals	unravel.	Ancient	power
melts…dissolves.	But	what	do	these	things	mean?	What	is	resolved?	No	one	can
say.	A	god	has	died,	Destriant,	and	that	death	tastes	bitter	and	it	fills	me	with
sorrow.’
Kalyth	saw	how	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	momentarily	stunned,	now
resumed	their	assault	upon	the	highest	defences	of	the	Kolansii.	She	saw	the
defenders	rise	to	meet	the	Ve’Gath.
A	god	dies.	And	the	fighting	simply	goes	on,	and	we	add	to	the	rain	with
blood	of	our	own.	I	am	seeing	the	history	of	the	world	–	here,	before	me.	I	am
seeing	it	all,	age	upon	age.	All	so…useless.
There	was	low	laughter	behind	her,	cutting	through	the	dull	roar,	and
Kalyth	turned.


Sinn	had	stripped	naked,	and	now	she	was	painted	in	blood.	‘The	Pure	has
made	a	shining	fist,’	she	said.	‘To	block	the	ascent.	The	lizards	cannot	break	it
–	their	oils	are	fouled	with	exhaustion.’	Her	eyes	lifted	to	Kalyth.	‘Tell	them	to
disengage.	Order	them	to	retreat.’
She	walked	past.
	
The	Imass	reeled	back.	The	Kolansii	heavy	infantry	pushed	forward,	over
Imass	corpses.	With	shields	and	armour	they	weathered	blows	from	stone
weapons.	With	iron	sword,	axe	and	spear,	they	tore	apart	unprotected	flesh,	and
on	all	sides	the	rain	of	blood	–	cooled	now,	lifeless	–	hammered	down.
Driven	past	the	remains	of	the	village,	the	Imass	forces	contracted,	unable
to	hold	the	enemy	back.	Pincers	swept	out	to	either	side,	seeking	to	encircle	the
increasingly	crowded,	disorganized	warriors.	Onos	Toolan	sought	to	hold	the
centre	in	the	front	line	–	he	alone	remembered	what	it	was	to	defend	his	own
body	–	now	so	vulnerable,	so	frail.	His	kin	had…forgotten.	They	attacked
unmindful	of	protecting	themselves,	and	so	they	died.
Reborn,	only	to	live	but	moments.	The	anguish	of	this	threatened	to	tear	the
First	Sword	apart.	But	he	was	only	one	man,	as	mortal	as	his	brothers	and
sisters	now,	and	it	was	only	a	matter	of	time	before—
He	saw	the	Kolansii	line	opposite	him	flinch	back	suddenly,	saw	them
hesitate,	and	Onos	Toolan	did	not	understand.
Low,	deep	laughter	sounded	from	somewhere	on	his	right,	and	even	as	he
turned,	a	voice	spoke.
‘Imass,	we	greet	you.’
Now,	pushing	through	to	stand	in	the	foremost	line	–	Jaghut.
Armoured,	helmed,	bristling	with	weapons,	all	of	it	dripping	blood.
The	Jaghut	beside	Onos	Toolan	then	said	in	a	loud	voice,	‘Suvalas!	Are
you	as	beautiful	as	I	remembered?’
A	female	shouted	in	answer,	‘You	only	remember	what	I	told	you,	Haut!
And	it	was	all	lies!’
Amid	Jaghut	laughter,	the	one	named	Haut	tilted	his	head	to	regard	Onos
Toolan.	‘To	draw	breath	was	unexpected.	We	thought	to	fight	with	you	–	two
lifeless	but	eternally	stubborn	peoples.	A	day	of	slaughter,	hah!’
The	Jaghut	beyond	Haut	then	said,	‘And	slaughter	it	shall	be!	Alas,	the
wrong	way	round!	And	there	are	but	fourteen	of	us.	Aimanan	–	you	are	good
with	numbers!	Does	fourteen	dead	Jaghut	constitute	a	slaughter?’
‘With	five	thousand	Imass,	I	would	think	so,	Gedoran!’
‘Then	our	disappointment	is	averted	and	I	am	once	more	at	ease!’


The	Jaghut	drew	weapons.	Beside	Onos	Toolan,	Haut	said,	‘Join	us,	First
Sword.	If	we	must	die,	must	it	be	on	the	back	step?	I	think	not.’	His	eyes	flashed
from	the	shadows	of	his	helm.	‘First	Sword	–	do	you	see?	Forkrul	Assail,
K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Imass	and	now	Jaghut!	What	a	fell	party	this	is!’
Gedoran	grunted	and	said,	‘All	we	now	need	are	a	few	Thel	Akai,	Haut,
and	we	can	swap	old	lies	all	night	long!’
And	then,	with	bull	roars,	the	Jaghut	charged	the	Kolansii.
Onos	Toolan	leapt	forward	to	join	them,	and	behind	him,	the	Imass
followed.
	
Gillimada,	who	had	been	chosen	to	lead	because	she	was	the	most	beautiful,
looked	back	on	the	way	they’d	come.	She	could	barely	make	out	the	Barghast.
‘They	are	slow!’
‘If	only	you	were	taller,	Gilli,’	bellowed	her	brother,	Gand,	‘you	could
look	the	other	way	and	see	the	fighting!’
Scowling,	Gillimada	faced	forward	again.	‘I	was	about	to	–	impatient	runt,
Gand!	Everyone,	enough	resting	–	we	shall	run	some	more.	Do	you	all	see?’
‘Of	course	we	do,’	shouted	one	of	her	brother ’s	mouthy	friends,	‘we’re	all
taller	than	you,	Gilli!’
‘But	who’s	the	most	beautiful?	Exactly!’
‘Gilli	–	there	are	Jaghut	with	those	Imass!’
Gillimada	squinted,	but	the	truth	of	it	was,	she	was	the	shortest	one	here.
‘Are	they	killing	each	other?’
‘No!’
‘Good!	All	the	old	stories	are	lies!’
‘Surely	just	that	one,	Gilli—’
‘No!	If	one	is	a	lie	then	all	of	them	are!	I	have	spoken!	Is	everyone	rested?
Good!	Let	us	join	the	fight,	just	like	in	the	old	story	about	the	war	against
Death	itself!’
‘But	it’s	a	lie,	Gilli	–	you	just	said	so!’
‘Well,	maybe	I	was	the	one	doing	the	lying,	did	you	think	of	that?	Now,	no
more	wasting	of	breath,	let	us	run	and	fight!’
‘Gilli	–	I	think	it’s	raining	blood	over	there!’
‘I	don’t	care	–	you	all	have	to	do	what	I	say,	because	I’m	still	the	most
beautiful,	aren’t	I?’
	


With	the	remaining	K’ell	Hunters	–	cut	and	slashed,	many	with	the	snapped
stubs	of	arrow	shafts	protruding	from	their	bodies	–	Sag’Churok	advanced	at	a
cantering	pace.	Before	them,	he	could	see	the	Imass	–	granted	the	bitter	gift	of
mortality	–	locked	in	fierce	battle	against	overwhelming	numbers	of	Kolansii
heavy	infantry.	Among	them,	near	the	front,	there	were	armoured	Jaghut.
To	see	these	two	ancient	foes	now	standing	side	by	side	sent	strange
flavours	surging	through	the	K’ell	Hunter,	scouring	away	his	exhaustion.	He
felt	the	scents	flowing	out	now	to	embrace	his	kin,	felt	a	reawakening	of	their
strength.
What	is	this,	that	so	stirs	my	heart?
It	is…glory.
We	rush	to	our	deaths.	We	rush	to	fight	beside	ancient	foes.	We	rush	like	the
past	itself,	into	the	face	of	the	present.	And	what	is	at	stake?	Why,	nothing	but
the	future	itself.
Beloved	kin,	if	this	day	must	rain	blood,	let	us	add	to	it.	If	this	day	must
know	death,	let	us	take	its	throat	in	our	jaws.	We	are	alive,	and	there	is	no
greater	power	in	all	the	world!
Brothers!	Raise	your	swords!
Reaching	level	ground,	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	K’ell	Hunters	stretched	out
their	bodies,	swords	lifting	high,	and	charged.
	
Two	hundred	and	seventy-eight	Teblor	smashed	into	the	flank	of	the	Kolansii
forces	near	the	line	of	engagement.	Suddenly	singing	ancient	songs	–	mostly
about	unexpected	trysts	and	unwelcome	births	–	they	thundered	into	the	press,
weapons	swinging.	Kolansii	bodies	spun	through	the	air.	Entire	ranks	were
driven	to	the	ground,	trampled	underfoot.
Wild	terrible	laughter	rose	from	the	Jaghut	upon	seeing	their	arrival.	Each
of	the	fourteen	led	knots	of	Imass,	and	the	Jaghut	themselves	were	islands
amidst	slaughter	–	none	could	stand	before	them.
Yet	they	were	but	fourteen,	and	the	Imass	fighting	close	to	them	continued
to	fall,	no	matter	how	savagely	they	fought.
	
The	K’ell	Hunters	struck	the	inside	envelopment,	driving	the	enemy	back	in	a
maelstrom	of	savagery.	They	swarmed	out	across	the	pasture	and	over	the
paddocks	to	swing	round	and	plunge	into	the	Kolansii	flank,	almost	opposite
the	Teblor.


And	in	answer	to	all	of	this,	High	Watered	Festian	ordered	his	reserves
into	the	battle.	Four	legions,	almost	eight	thousand	heavy	infantry,	heaved
forward	to	close	on	the	enemy.

Bitterspring,	crippled	by	a	sword	thrust	through	her	left	thigh,	lay	among	the
heaps	of	fallen	kin.	There	had	been	a	charge	–	it	had	swept	over	her,	but	now
she	saw	how	it	had	stalled,	and	was	once	more	yielding	ground,	step	by	step.
There	were	no	memories	to	match	this	moment	–	this	time,	so	short,	so
sweet,	when	she	had	tasted	breath	once	again,	when	she	had	felt	the	softness	of
her	skin,	had	known	the	feel	of	tears	in	her	own	eyes	–	how	that	blurred	her
vision,	a	thing	she	had	forgotten.	If	this	was	how	living	had	been,	if	this	was	the
reality	of	mortality…she	could	not	imagine	that	anyone,	no	matter	how
despairing,	would	ever	willingly	surrender	it.	And	yet…and	yet…
The	blood	still	raining	down	–	thinner	now,	cooler	on	her	skin	–	offered
no	further	gifts.	She	could	feel	her	own	blood,	much	warmer,	pooling	under
her	thigh,	and	around	her	hip,	and	the	life	so	fresh,	so	new,	was	slowly
draining	away.
Was	this	better	than	an	inexorable	advance	into	the	enemy	forces?	Better
than	killing	hundreds	and	then	thousands	when	they	could	do	little	to	defend
themselves	against	her	and	her	immortal	kind?	Was	this	not,	in	fact,	a
redressing	of	the	balance?
She	would	not	grieve.	No	matter	how	short-lived	this	gift.
I	have	known	it	again.	And	so	few	are	that	fortunate.	So	few.
	
The	Ship	of	Death	lay	trapped	on	its	side,	embraced	in	ice.	Captain	Shurq
Elalle	picked	herself	up,	brushing	the	snow	from	her	clothes.	Beside	her,
Skorgen	Kaban	the	Pretty	was	still	on	his	knees,	gathering	up	a	handful	of	icy
snow	and	then	sucking	on	it.
‘Bad	for	your	teeth,	Pretty,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.
When	the	man	grinned	up	at	her	she	sighed.
‘Apologies.	Forgot	you	had	so	few	left.’
Princess	Felash	came	round	from	the	other	side	of	the	ship’s	prow,	trailed
by	her	handmaid.	‘I	have	found	him,’	she	announced	through	a	gust	of	smoke.
‘He	is	indeed	walking	this	chilly	road,	and	it	is	safe	to	surmise,	from	careful
gauging	of	the	direction	of	his	tracks,	that	he	intends	to	walk	all	the	way	to	that


spire.	Into	that	most	unnatural	rain.’
Shurq	Elalle	squinted	across	what	had	been	–	only	a	short	time	ago	–	a	bay.
The	awakening	of	Omtose	Phellack	had	been	like	a	fist	to	the	side	of	the	head,
and	only	the	captain	had	remained	conscious	through	the	unleashing	of	power
that	followed.	She	alone	had	witnessed	the	freezing	of	the	seas,	even	as	she
struggled	to	ensure	that	none	of	her	crew	or	guests	slid	over	the	side	as	the
ship	ran	aground	and	started	tilting	hard	to	port.
And,	alone	among	them	all,	she	had	seen	Hood	setting	out,	on	foot.
A	short	time	later,	a	storm	had	broken	over	the	spire,	releasing	a	torrential
downpour	of	rain	that	seemed	to	glisten	red	as	blood	as	it	fell	over	the
headland.
Shurq	Elalle	regarded	Felash.	‘Princess…any	sense	of	the	fate	of	your
mother?’
‘Too	much	confusion,	alas,	in	the	ether.	It	seems,’	she	added,	pausing	to
draw	on	her	pipe	and	turning	to	face	inland,	‘that	we	too	shall	have	to	trek
across	this	wretched	ice	field	–	and	hope	that	it	does	not	begin	breaking	up	too
soon,	now	that	Omtose	Phellack	sleeps	once	more.’
Skorgen	scowled.	‘Excuse	me…sleeps?	Cap’n,	she	saying	it’s	going	to
melt?’
‘Pretty,’	said	Shurq	Elalle,	‘it	is	already.	Very	well	then,	shall	we	make
haste?’
But	the	princess	lifted	a	plump	hand.	‘At	first,	I	considered	following	in
Hood’s	footsteps,	but	that	appears	to	entail	a	steep	and	no	doubt	treacherous
ascent.	Therefore,	might	I	suggest	an	alternative?	That	we	strike	due	west	from
here?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	said	Shurq	Elalle.	‘Shall	we	spend	half	a	day	discussing
this?’
Felash	frowned.	‘And	what,	precisely,	did	I	say	to	invite	such	sarcasm?
Hmm,	Captain?’
‘My	apologies,	Highness.	This	has	been	a	rather	fraught	journey.’
‘It	is	hardly	done,	my	dear,	and	we	can	scarcely	afford	the	luxury	of
complaining	now,	can	we?’
Shurq	Elalle	turned	to	Skorgen.	‘Get	everything	ready.	There	truly	is	no
time	to	waste.’
The	first	mate	turned	away	and	then	glanced	back	at	Shurq.	‘If	that’s	the
case,	then	why	in	Mael’s	name	is	she—’
‘That	will	be	enough,	Pretty.’
‘Aye,	Cap’n.	Sorry,	Cap’n.	On	my	way,	aye.’
Queen	Abrastal,	I	will	deliver	your	daughter	into	your	keeping.	With	every


blessing	I	can	muster.	Take	her,	I	beg	you.	Before	I	close	my	hands	round	that
soft	delicious	neck	and	squeeze	until	her	brains	spurt	from	every	hole	in	her
head.	And	then	her	handmaid	will	have	to	chop	me	into	tiny	pieces,	and	Skorgen
will	do	something	stupid	and	get	his	head	sliced	in	half	and	won’t	that	be	a	scar
worth	bragging	about?
She	could	just	make	out	Hood’s	trail	towards	the	spire,	and	caught	herself
looking	at	it	longingly.	Don’t	be	a	fool,	woman.	Some	destinies	are	better	just
hearing	about,	over	ales	in	a	tavern.
Go	well	on	your	way,	Hood.	And	the	next	face	you	see,	well,	why	not	just
bite	it	off?

He	had	passed	through	the	Gates	of	Death,	and	this	rain	–	in	its	brief	moments
of	magic	–	could	do	nothing	for	ghosts.	No	kiss	of	rebirth,	and	no	blinding
veil	to	spare	from	me	what	I	now	see.
Toc	sat	on	his	lifeless	horse,	and	from	a	hillside	long	vanished	–	worn
down	to	nothing	but	a	gentle	mound	by	centuries	of	ploughing	–	he	watched,	in
horror,	the	murder	of	his	most	cherished	dreams.
It	was	not	supposed	to	happen	this	way.	We	could	smell	the	blood,	yes	–	we
knew	it	was	coming.
But	Onos	Toolan	–	none	of	this	was	your	war.	None	of	this	battle	belonged
to	you.
He	could	see	his	old	friend	–	there	at	the	centre	of	less	than	a	thousand
Imass.	The	fourteen	Jaghut	had	been	separated	from	kin,	and	now	fought	in
isolation,	and	archers	had	come	forward	and	those	Jaghut	warriors	were
studded	with	arrows,	yet	still	they	fought	on.
The	K’ell	Hunters	had	been	driven	back,	pushed	away	from	the	Imass,	and
Toc	could	see	the	Toblakai	–	barely	fifty	of	them	left	–	forced	back	to	the	very
edge	of	the	slope.	There	were	Barghast	on	that	far	side	now,	but	they	were	few
and	had	arrived	staggering,	half	dead	with	exhaustion.
Toc	found	that	he	was	holding	his	scimitar	in	his	hand.	But	my	power	is
gone.	I	gave	the	last	of	it	away.	What	holds	me	here,	if	not	some	curse	that	I	be
made	to	witness	my	failure?	Onos	Toolan,	friend.	Brother.	I	will	not	await	you
at	the	Gates	–	my	shame	is	too	great.	He	drew	up	his	reins.	I	will	not	see	you
die.	I	am	sorry.	I	am	a	coward	–	but	I	will	not	see	you	die.	It	was	time	to	leave.
He	swung	his	mount	round.
And	stopped.


On	the	high	ridge	before	him	was	an	army,	mounted	on	lifeless	warhorses.
Bridgeburners.
Seeing	Whiskeyjack	at	the	centre,	Toc	kicked	his	mount	into	a	canter,	and
the	beast	tackled	the	hillside,	hoofs	carving	the	broken	ground.
‘Will	you	just	watch	this?’	he	cried	as	his	horse	scrabbled	up	on	to	the
ridge.	He	drove	his	charger	towards	Whiskeyjack,	reined	in	at	the	last	moment.
The	old	soldier ’s	empty	eyes	were	seemingly	fixed	on	the	scene	below,	as
if	he	had	not	heard	Toc’s	words.
‘I	beg	you!’	pleaded	Toc,	frantic	–	the	anguish	and	frustration	moments
from	tearing	him	apart.	‘I	know	–	I	am	not	a	Bridgeburner	–	I	know	that!	But	as
a	fellow	Malazan,	please!	Whiskeyjack	–	don’t	let	him	die!’
The	lifeless	face	swung	round.	The	empty	eyes	regarded	him.
Toc	could	feel	himself	collapsing	inside.	He	opened	his	mouth,	to	speak
one	more	time,	to	plead	with	all	he	had	left—
Whiskeyjack	spoke,	in	a	tone	of	faint	surprise.	‘Toc	Younger.	Did	you
truly	imagine	that	we	would	say	no?’
And	he	raised	one	gauntleted	hand,	the	two	soldiers	of	his	own	squad
drawing	up	around	him	–	Mallet	on	his	left,	Trotts	on	his	right.
When	he	threw	that	hand	forward,	the	massed	army	of	Bridgeburners
surged	on	to	the	hillside,	lunged	like	an	avalanche	–	sweeping	past	Toc,
driving	his	own	horse	round,	shoving	it	forward.
And	one	last	time,	the	Bridgeburners	advanced	to	do	battle.
	
The	thunderous	concussion	of	the	god’s	death	had	driven	Torrent’s	horse
down	to	the	ground,	throwing	the	young	warrior	from	the	saddle.	As	he	lay
stunned,	he	heard	the	thumping	of	the	animal’s	hoofs	as	it	scrambled	back
upright	and	then	fled	northward,	away	from	the	maelstrom.
And	then	the	rain	slammed	down,	and	out	over	the	rising	ice	beyond	the
headland	he	could	hear	shattering	detonations	as	the	ice	fields	buckled.
Whirling	storms	of	snow	and	sleet	lifted	from	the	cliffside,	spun	crimson
twisters	–	and	the	ground	beneath	him	shifted,	slumped	seaward.
All	madness!	The	world	is	not	like	this.	Torrent	struggled	to	his	feet,
looked	across	to	where	the	children	huddled	together	in	terror.	He	staggered
towards	them.	‘Listen	to	me!	Run	inland	–	do	you	hear	me?	Inland	and	away
from	here!’
Frozen	blood	slashed	down	from	the	sky.	Behind	him,	the	wind	brought
close	the	sound	of	laughter	from	Olar	Ethil.	Glancing	back,	he	saw	that	she


was	facing	the	Spire.
Absi	suddenly	wailed.
Storii	cried,	‘Don’t	leave	us,	Torrent!	You	promised!’
‘I	will	catch	you	up!’
‘Torrent!’
‘Just	run!’
Taking	up	Absi	in	her	thin	arms,	Stavi	plucked	at	her	sister ’s	filthy	tunic.
And	then	they	were	on	their	way,	vanishing	in	moments	as	the	red	sleet
intensified,	flinging	curtains	down	that	rolled	deeper	inland,	one	after	another.
Turning	to	the	east,	Torrent	stared	in	astonishment.	The	entire	edge	of	the
headland	now	sloped	steeply	towards	the	bay	–	but	ice	was	rising	beyond	that
edge,	now	level	with	the	top	of	the	cliff.	Off	to	his	right,	the	Spire	was	engulfed
in	the	downpour.
Hearing	the	witch’s	laughter	again,	he	looked	across	to	where	Olar	Ethil
stood.
But	the	ancient	hag	was	no	more	–	a	young	woman	stood	in	the	deluge.
‘Reborn!’	she	shrieked.	‘My	kin	–	all	reborn!	I	shall	lead	them	–	we	shall	rise
again!’	She	spun	to	face	Torrent,	blood	like	paint	on	her	bold	features,	and
then	her	head	darted	like	a	bird’s.	‘Where	are	they?	Where	are	the	children!	My
gifts	to	him	–	and	I	will	give	him	more!	More	children!	We	shall	rule	together
–	the	Bonecaster	and	the	First	Sword	–	where	are	they?’
Torrent	stared	at	her,	and	then,	slipping	treacherously	on	the	icy	ground,
he	collected	up	his	bow	and	quiver.	‘They	slid,’	he	said.	‘They	panicked	–	went
down	the	slope.	Down	on	to	the	ice	–	I	couldn’t	reach	them—’
‘You	fool!’
When	she	ran	towards	the	ice	field,	Torrent	followed.
The	frozen	blood	lacerated	his	face	as	the	wind	howled	up	from	the	bay.
One	forearm	held	up	to	shield	his	eyes,	he	stumbled	after	Olar	Ethil.
You	will	give	him	more?	Is	that	what	all	this	was	about?	You	love	him?	You
took	his	life	and	made	him	a	thing	of	skin	and	bones	–	you	stole	his	children
away	–	maybe	even	killed	his	wife,	their	mother.	You	did	all	this	–	thinking	you
could	win	his	heart?
But	he	had	seen	her	–	enough	of	her,	anyway.	Reborn,	made	young,	she
was	not	displeasing	to	the	eye,	solid,	full-breasted	and	wide-hipped,	her	hair	–
before	the	blood	soaked	it	–	so	blonde	it	was	almost	white,	her	eyes	the	colour
of	a	winter	sky.	No	longer	undead.	So	too,	then,	Onos	Toolan?	Now	reborn?	She
took	everything	away	from	him,	and	would	now	replace	it	with	herself	–	with	the
world	she	would	make.
Toc	Anaster,	did	you	know	this?	Did	you	understand	her	reasons	for	all	that


she	has	done?
Does	it	matter?
He	reached	the	ice	–	she	was	still	ahead,	fleet	as	a	hare	as	she	danced	her
way	down	the	broken,	jagged	slope.	He	thought	he	could	hear	her,	crying	out
for	the	children.
Fissures	were	opening	up	as	the	field’s	own	weight	began	to	crush	the	ice,
and	the	descent	was	growing	ever	steeper	–	off	to	his	right	he	could	see	one
part	of	it	still	climbing	as	if	would	reach	to	the	very	summit	of	the	Spire	itself.
Was	there	a	speck	there,	halfway	up	that	ramp	of	ice?	Someone	ascending?	He
could	not	be	sure.
His	feet	went	out	from	under	him	and	he	slid,	rebounding	from	spars	of
rock-hard	ice.	In	a	blur	he	was	past	Olar	Ethil,	hearing	her	shout	of	surprise.
His	head	struck	something,	spinning	him	round,	and	then	his	feet	jammed
against	a	hard	edge	that	suddenly	gave	way.	He	was	thrown	forward,	the	upper
half	of	his	body	pitching	hard,	as	what	felt	like	jaws	closed	on	the	lower	half	–
snapping	shut	on	his	hips	and	legs.
He	heard	and	felt	both	thigh	bones	snap.
Torrent	screamed.	Trapped	in	a	fissure,	the	edges	now	rising	above	his
hips	as	he	sank	deeper.	He	could	feel	blood	streaming	down,	could	feel	it
freezing.
He	had	lost	grip	on	his	bow	and	the	hide	quiver	–	they	lay	just	beyond	his
reach.
Olar	Ethil	was	suddenly	there,	standing	almost	above	him.	‘I	heard	bones
break	–	is	it	true?	Is	it	true,	pup?’	She	reached	down	and	took	a	handful	of	hair,
twisting	his	torn	face	around.	‘Is	it?	Are	you	useless	to	me	now?’
‘No,	listen	–	I	thought	I	heard	them	–	the	children.	Absi	–	I	thought	I	heard
him	crying.’
‘Where?	Point	–	you	can	still	do	that.	Where?’
‘Pull	me	out,	witch,	and	I’ll	show	you.’
‘Can	you	walk?’
‘Of	course	I	can,	woman	–	I’m	simply	jammed	in	this	crack.	Pull	me	out	–
we	can	find	them!	But	quickly	–	this	entire	field	is	shattering!’
She	cackled.	‘Omtose	Phellack	in	all	its	glory	–	yet	who	dares	face	it?	A
Bonecaster,	that	is	who!	I	will	destroy	it.	Even	now,	I	am	destroying	it	–	that
fool	thinks	he	will	take	that	wretched	heart?	I	will	defy	him!	He	deserves	no
less	–	he	is	Jaghut!’
‘Pull	me	free,	witch.’
She	reached	down.
Her	strength	was	immense,	and	he	could	feel	frozen	blood	splitting,	could


feel	massive	sections	of	skin	and	flesh	torn	away	as	she	lifted	and	dragged	him
out	from	the	fissure.
‘Liar!	You	lied!’
Torrent	lay	on	his	back.	The	red	sleet	was	diminishing	now	–	he	could	see
the	Jade	Strangers	and	the	sun	itself.	From	below	his	hips	he	could	feel
nothing.	Frozen.	Bloodless.	I	haven’t	got	long.
‘Where	are	they?’
He	forced	himself	on	to	one	elbow,	pointed	off	to	the	right	and	slightly
downslope.	‘There,	behind	that	rise	–	stand	atop	it,	witch,	and	you	may	see
them.’
‘That	is	all	I	need	from	you	–	now	you	can	die,	pup.	Did	I	not	say	you
would?’
‘You	did,	Olar	Ethil.’
Laughing,	she	set	off	for	the	rise	of	hard-packed	snow	and	ice.	Twentyfive,	maybe	thirty	paces	away.
Torrent	twisted	round,	dragged	himself	closer	to	his	bow.	‘I	promised,’	he
whispered.	Half-numb	fingers	closed	about	the	bow’s	shaft.	He	scrabbled	onehanded	for	the	quiver,	drew	out	a	stone-tipped	arrow.	Rolling	on	to	his	back,	he
lay	gasping	for	a	moment.	It	was	getting	hard	–	hard	to	do	anything.
Ice	squealed	and	then	cracked	and	he	slid	half	a	pace	–	back	towards	that
fissure,	but	now	it	was	wider	–	now	it	could	take	all	of	him.
Torrent	forced	the	nock’s	slitted	mouth	round	the	gut-string.
She	was	almost	there,	tackling	the	ragged	side	of	the	rise.
He	used	his	elbows	and	shoulders	to	push	himself	up	against	a	heap	of
rubbled	ice.	Brought	the	bow	round	and	drew	the	arrow	back.	This	is
impossible.	I’m	lying	all	wrong.	She’s	too	far	away!	Wretched	panic	gripped
him.	He	struggled	to	calm	his	breath,	deafened	by	the	pounding	of	his	own
heart.
Olar	Ethil	scrambled	on	to	the	rise,	straightened	and	stared	downslope.
He	saw	her	fists	clench,	half-heard	her	howl	of	fury.
Squinting,	his	muscles	starting	to	tremble,	he	stared	at	her	shoulders	–
waiting,	waiting	–	and	when	he	saw	them	pivot,	he	released.
	
I	will	make	him	pay	for	the	lies!	Olar	Ethil,	eldest	among	all	the	Bonecasters
and	now	reborn,	spun	round	towards	Torrent—
The	arrow	caught	her	in	the	left	eye.
The	stone	tip	tore	through	the	eyeball,	punched	through	the	back	of	the
socket,	where	the	bone	was	thin	as	skin,	and	the	spinning	chippedstone	point


drilled	a	gory	tunnel	through	her	brain,	before	shattering	against	the	inside	of
the	back	of	her	skull.
	
He	saw	her	head	snap	back,	saw	the	shaft	protruding	from	her	face,	and	by	the
way	her	body	fell	–	collapsing	like	a	sack	of	bones	–	he	knew	that	she	was	dead
–	killed	instantly.	Gasping,	he	sagged	back.	Did	you	see	that,	Toc?	Did	you	see
that	shot?
Ah,	gods.	It’s	done,	brother.
It’s	done.	I	am	Torrent,	last	warrior	of	the	Awl.
When	he	slid	towards	the	fissure,	he	was	helpless	to	resist.
Torrent.	Last	warrior	of	the…
	
Stormy	bellowed	in	agony	as	Gesler	dragged	him	away.	The	red-haired	Falari
had	been	stabbed	through	his	right	thigh.	But	the	blood	was	slow,	gushing	only
when	the	muscles	moved,	telling	Gesler	that	the	fool	wouldn’t	bleed	out	before
he	got	him	away.
The	Ve’Gath	were	all	drawing	back	–	and	back…
Because	she’s	coming.	Because	she’s	finally	joining	this	fight.
Gods	help	us	all.
Pulling	Stormy	on	to	the	blood-soaked	embankment	of	the	third	trench,	he
looked	back	upslope.
She	was	walking	alone	towards	the	massed	Kolansii.	Little	more	than	a
child,	stick-thin,	looking	undernourished.	Pathetic.
When	Gesler	saw	her	raise	her	hands,	he	flinched.
With	a	terrible	roar	a	wall	of	fire	engulfed	the	highest	trench.	Scalding
winds	erupted	in	savage	gusts,	rolling	back	down	the	slope	–	Gesler	saw	the
corpses	nearest	the	girl	crisp	black,	limbs	suddenly	pulling,	curling	inward	in
the	heat’s	bitter	womb.
And	then	Sinn	began	walking,	and,	as	she	did	so,	she	marched	the	wall	of
fire	ahead	of	her.
Kalyth	stumbled	to	her	knees	beside	Gesler.	‘You	must	call	her	back!	She
can’t	just	burn	them	all	alive!’
Gesler	sagged	back.	‘It’s	too	late,	Kalyth.	There’s	no	stopping	her	now.’
Kalyth	screamed	–	a	raw,	breaking	sound,	her	hands	up	at	her	face	–	but
even	she	could	not	tear	her	eyes	from	the	scene.
The	fire	devoured	the	army	crouched	against	the	base	of	the	Spire.	Bodies


simply	exploded,	blood	boiling.	Thousands	of	soldiers	burst	into	flames,	their
flesh	melting.	Everything	within	the	fire	blackened,	began	crumbling	away.
And	still	the	firestorm	raged.
Gunth	Mach	was	crouched	down	over	Stormy,	oil	streaming	from	her
clawed	hands	and	sealing	the	wound	on	his	leg,	but	he	was	already	pushing
those	hands	away.	‘Gesler	–	we	got	to	reach	those	stairs—’
‘I	know,’	he	said.	Through	fire.	Well,	of	course	it	has	to	be	us.
‘She	won’t	stop,’	Stormy	said,	pushing	himself	to	his	feet,	swaying	like	a
drunk.	‘She’ll	take	it	for	herself	–	all	that	power.’
‘I	know,	Stormy!	I	know,	damn	you!’	Gesler	forced	himself	to	his	feet.	He
squinted	inland.	‘Gods	below	–	what	is	that?’
‘A	ghost	army,’	Kalyth	said.	‘The	Matron	says	they	simply	came	down
from	the	sky.’
‘Send	the	Ve’Gath	that	way	–	all	of	them,	Kalyth!	Do	you	understand	–	you
need	to	get	them	as	far	away	from	this	as	possible.	If	Sinn	reaches	the	heart,
that	fire’s	likely	to	consume	the	whole	fucking	land	for	leagues	around!’
She	pulled	at	him.	‘Then	you	can	do	nothing.	Don’t	you	see	–	you	can’t—’
Gesler	took	her	face	in	his	hands	and	kissed	her	hard	on	the	lips.	‘Teach
these	lizards,	Kalyth,	only	the	best	in	us	humans.	Only	the	best.’	He	turned	to
Stormy.	‘All	right,	let’s	go.	Forget	any	weapons	–	they’ll	get	too	hot	in	our
hands.	We	can	tear	off	this	armour	on	the	way.’
‘Stop	ordering	me	around!’
Side	by	side,	the	two	old	marines	set	out.
They	climbed	across	greasy	bodies,	over	ground	that	steamed,	and	through
air	hot	as	the	breath	of	a	smithy’s	forge.
‘Can’t	believe	you,	Ges,’	gasped	Stormy.	‘You	called	on	Fener!’
‘I	wasn’t	the	only	one,	Stormy!	I	heard	you—’
‘Not	me	–	must’ve	been	someone	else.	You	called	him	and	someone
fucking	killed	him!	Gesler,	you	went	and	killed	our	god!’
‘Go	to	Hood,’	Gesler	growled.	‘Who	crossed	his	finger	bones	when	he
swore	off	that	cult?	Wasn’t	that	you?	I	think	it	was.’
‘You	told	me	you	did	the	same!’
‘Right,	so	let’s	just	forget	it	–	we	both	killed	Fener,	all	right?’
Five	more	strides	and	there	could	be	no	more	words	–	every	breath
scalded,	and	the	leathers	they	now	wore	as	their	only	clothing	had	begun	to
blacken.	Now	it’s	going	to	get	bad.
But	this	is	Telas.	I	can	feel	it	–	we’ve	been	through	this	before.	He	looked
for	Sinn,	but	could	not	see	her	anywhere.	Walked	out	of	the	flames	at	Y’Ghatan.
Walked	into	them	here.	It’s	her	world	in	there,	it	always	was.	But	we	knew	that,


didn’t	we?
I	swear	I	can	hear	her	laughing.
The	two	men	pushed	forward.
	
Kalyth	cried	out	when	Gesler	and	Stormy	vanished	into	the	flames.	She	did	not
understand.	She	had	looked	on	in	disbelief	as	they	had	stepped	over	bodies
reduced	to	black	ash	–	she	had	seen	their	tunics	catch	fire.
‘Matron	–	what	gift	is	this?	What	power	do	they	possess?’
‘Destriant,	this	surpasses	me.	But	it	is	now	clear	to	me	–	as	it	is	to	all	of	us
–	that	you	chose	most	wisely.	If	we	could,	we	would	follow	these	two	humans
into	the	firestorm	itself.	If	we	could,	we	would	follow	them	to	the	edge	of	the
very	Abyss.	You	ask	what	manner	of	men	are	these	–	Destriant,	I	was	about	to
ask	this	very	same	question	of	you.’
She	shook	her	head,	shrugged	helplessly.	‘I	don’t	know.	Malazans.’
	
The	flames	drove	him	back.	And	this	was	a	source	of	fury	and	anguish.	He	tried
again	and	again,	but	his	beloved	master	was	beyond	his	reach.	Howling,	he
raced	back	and	forth	along	the	third	berm,	the	foul	stench	of	his	own	burnt	hair
acrid	in	his	nostrils.
And	then	he	saw	the	pup	–	the	one	of	tangled	hair	and	piercing	voice,	the
pup	that	never	grew	up	–	running	towards	the	cold,	towards	the	frozen	sea.
Had	the	pup	found	a	way	round	this	burning	air?
The	Wickan	cattledog	with	the	scarred	face	tore	off	in	pursuit.
There	would	be	a	way	round	–	he	would	find	his	master	again.	To	fight	at
his	side.	There	was,	for	Bent,	no	other	reason	to	exist.
	
The	base	around	the	Spire	had	been	reduced	to	scorched	bedrock	–	not	a	scrap
of	armour	remained,	nothing	but	molten	streaks	of	iron	tracking	the	slopes	of
the	blackened	stone.
Yet	Gesler	and	Stormy	walked	through	the	conflagration.	Their	leathers
had	melted	on	to	their	bodies,	hard	and	brittle	as	eggshells,	and	as	the	two
marines	pushed	closer	to	the	stairs	the	clothing’s	remnants	cracked,	made
crazed	patterns	like	a	snake’s	shedding	skin.
Gesler	could	see	the	stairs	–	but	she	wasn’t	there.	His	gaze	tracked	upward.
Shit.	She	was	already	a	quarter	of	the	way	up.	He	punched	at	Stormy’s	shoulder


and	pointed.
They	reached	the	base,	set	foot	on	the	baked,	crumbling	stone.
Stormy	edged	into	Gesler ’s	path	and	began	gesturing	–	the	hand	language
of	the	marines.	‘Leave	her	to	me	–	I’ll	slow	her	up,	hold	her	back,	whatever.	You
go	past.	You	go	fast	as	you	can	–	get	to	the	top.’
‘Listen	–	this	was	almost	too	much,	even	for	us.	She’ll	cook	you	down	to
bones—’
‘Never	mind	that.	I’ll	hold	her	back	–	just	don’t	fuck	up	up	there,	Ges!
Throw	the	hag	off	the	edge.	Get	that	damned	heart!’
Gesler ’s	legs	ached	with	every	step	–	he	was	too	tired	for	this.	A	whole	day
of	fighting.	The	strain	of	command.	The	seemingly	endless	slaughter.	By	the
time	he	reached	the	top	–	assuming	they	even	got	past	Sinn	–	he’d	have	nothing
left.	Weaponless,	face	to	face	with	a	damned	Forkrul	Assail.
Sinn	had	not	looked	back	down,	not	once.	She	had	no	idea	she	was	being
pursued.	Her	steps	were	measured,	relentless	but	slow,	almost	casual.
They	had	all	climbed	above	the	flames,	which	had	at	last	begun	dying
below	them.
The	girl	would	hold	it	back	now	–	saving	it	for	the	Forkrul	Assail.	Telas	to
wage	war	against	the	Assail’s	warren.	Old	old	shit,	all	of	this.	Can’t	they	all
just	go	away?	Back	into	their	forgotten	graves.	It’s	not	right,	us	having	to	fight
in	wars	we	didn’t	even	start	–	wars	that	have	been	going	on	for	so	long	they
don’t	mean	a	thing	any	more.
You	took	a	foreign	god’s	wounded	heart.	I	see	the	blood	on	your	lips.	It’s	not
right.	It	just	isn’t.
Adjunct.	I	know	you	ain’t	dead.	Well,	no,	I	don’t.	But	I	refuse	to	believe	you
failed.	I	don’t	think	there’s	a	thing	in	this	world	that	can	stop	you.	We’ll	do	our
part.	You’ll	know	that	much	–	you’ll	know	it.
Make	this	right.	Make	it	all	right.
Stormy	was	one	step	up	from	Gesler.	He	saw	his	friend	reaching	out,	saw
his	hand	close	about	Sinn’s	ankle.
And	then,	visibly	snarling,	Stormy	tore	her	from	the	stairs,	swung	her	out
into	the	air	behind	him,	and	let	go.
Gesler	saw	her	plummet	–	saw	her	mouth	open	wide	in	shock,	and	then	that
visage	darkened.
Now	you	got	her	mad,	Stormy.
But	he	was	reaching	now	for	Gesler,	grasping	his	arm	and	lifting	him	past.
‘Go,	Gesler!	Climb	your	sorry	arse	off!’
A	push	that	almost	sent	Gesler	sprawling	against	the	steps,	but	he
recovered,	and	pulled	himself	upward,	leaving	Stormy	in	his	wake.


Don’t	look	down	–	don’t	look	at	him,	Gesler.	You	know	why	–	don’t—	Instead
he	paused,	twisted	round,	met	his	friend’s	eyes.
Their	gazes	locked.
And	then	Stormy	nodded,	and	flashed	a	half-mad	smile.
Gesler	made	a	rude	gesture,	and	then,	before	his	heart	could	shatter,	he
turned	back	to	the	stone	steps	and	resumed	his	ascent.
	
Hood	pulled	himself	over	a	splintered	ridge	of	ice	and	looked	up	once	more.
Not	far	now.	The	ice	road	was	groaning,	cracks	spreading	like	lightning.	He
had	felt	the	assault	of	Olar	Ethil	–	her	hatred	of	Omtose	Phellack	unleashing
power	that	raked	through	him	sharp	as	talons	–	and	then	it	had	vanished,	and	he
knew	that	she	was	dead.	But	the	damage	had	been	done.	There	was	the	very	real
chance	that	he	would	not	make	it,	that	this	spar	of	ice	would	shatter	beneath
him,	sending	him	down	to	his	death.
Death.	Now,	that	was	an	interesting	notion.	One	that,	perhaps,	he	should
have	been	more	familiar	with	than	any	other	being,	but	the	truth	was,	he	knew
nothing	about	it	at	all.	The	Jaghut	went	to	war	against	death.	So	many	met	that
notion	with	disbelief,	or	confusion.	They	could	not	understand.	Who	is	the
enemy?	The	enemy	is	surrender.	Where	is	the	battlefield?	In	the	heart	of
despair.	How	is	victory	won?	It	lies	within	reach.	All	you	need	do	is	choose	to
recognize	it.	Failing	that,	you	can	always	cheat.	Which	is	what	I	did.
How	did	I	defeat	death?
By	taking	its	throne.
And	now	the	blood	of	a	dying	god	had	gifted	him	with	mortal	flesh	–	with
a	return	to	mortality.	Unexpected.	Possibly	unwelcome.	Potentially…fatal.	But
then,	who	has	a	choice	in	these	matters?
Ah,	yes,	I	did.
A	rumble	of	laughter	from	deep	in	his	chest	followed	the	thought.	He
resumed	his	climb.
Ahead	was	a	broad	fissure	cutting	diagonally	across	his	path.	He	would
have	to	jump	it.	Dangerous	and	undignified.	His	moment	of	humour	fell	away.
He	could	sense	the	nearby	unleashing	of	Telas	–	could	see	how	the	air
around	the	Spire	was	grey	with	smoke,	and	the	stench	of	burnt	flesh	swept	over
him	on	an	errant	gust	of	wind	from	inland.	This	is	not	by	the	hand	of	an	Imass.
This	is	something…new.	Foul	with	madness.
This	could	defeat	us	all.
He	reached	the	fissure,	threw	himself	over	its	span.	His	chest	struck	the
edge,	the	impact	almost	winding	him,	and	he	clawed	handholds	in	the	rotted	ice


beyond.	And	then	waited	for	a	moment,	recovering,	before	dragging	himself
from	the	crevasse.	As	he	cleared	it	a	solid	shape	flashed	past	on	his	left,	landed
with	a	crunch,	claws	digging	into	the	crusted	snow	–	a	dog.
A	dog?
He	stared	at	it	as	it	scrabbled	yet	higher,	running	like	a	fiend	from	the
Abyss.
From	behind	him,	on	the	other	side	of	the	fissure,	Hood	heard	furious
barking,	and	looking	back	he	saw	another	dog	–	or,	rather,	some	shrunken,
hair-snarled	mockery	of	a	dog,	rushing	up	to	the	edge	only	to	pull	back.
Don’t	even	try—
And	then,	with	a	launching	leap,	the	horrid	creature	was	sailing	through	the
air.
Not	far	enough—
Hood	cursed	as	jaws	clamped	on	his	left	foot,	the	teeth	punching	through
the	rotted	leathers	of	his	boot.	Hissing	in	pain	he	swung	his	leg	round,	kicked
to	shake	off	the	snarling	creature.	He	caught	a	blurred	glimpse	of	its	horrid
face	–	like	a	rat	that	had	been	slammed	headfirst	into	a	wall	–	as	it	shot	past
him,	on	the	trail	of	the	bigger	animal.
He	glared	after	it	for	a	moment,	and	then	the	Jaghut	picked	himself	up,	and
resumed	climbing.
With	a	limp.
	
She	had	been	hurt	by	the	fall,	Stormy	saw,	watching	as	she	laboriously	made
her	way	back	up	the	stairs.	Her	left	arm	was	clearly	broken,	the	shoulder
dislocated,	skin	scraped	off	where	she	had	struck	the	unyielding	bedrock.	Had
they	been	a	dozen	steps	higher,	she	would	be	dead	now.
The	marine	swore	under	his	breath,	twisted	round	to	glare	up	at	Gesler.
He’d	reached	some	kind	of	rest	platform,	maybe	twenty-five	steps	below	the
summit.	What’s	he	doing?	Taking	a	damned	breather?	There’s	no	time	for	that,
you	idiot!	Go!
‘I	will	kill	you!’
At	the	shriek	Stormy	looked	back	down.	Ten	steps	between	him	and	Sinn.
Her	face	was	lifted	towards	him,	made	demonic	by	hatred	and	rage.
A	billowing	gust	of	scorching	heat	rushed	up	to	buffet	him.	He	backed	up
the	steps.	Two,	three,	five.
She	climbed	closer.
The	air	ignited	around	Sinn,	red	and	orange	flames,	white-hot	where	her
body	had	been.	Yet	from	that	raging,	incandescent	core,	he	could	still	see	her


eyes	–	fixed	on	him.
Gods	below,	she	is	not	even	human!	Was	she	ever	human?	What	manner	of
creature	is	this?
The	fire	roared	words.	‘I	will	kill	you!	No	one	touches	me!	I	will	burn	you
–	I	will	burn	all	who	touch	me!	I	will	burn	you	all!	You	will	know	what	it	is	to
hurt!
‘You	said	you	wanted	the	fire	inside	me	–	you	said	you	would	kiss	it	–	but
you	lied!	You	hurt	me!	You	hurt	me!
‘You	wanted	the	fire	in	me?	You	shall	have	it!’
The	flames	exploded	out	from	her,	stormed	up	the	steps	and	engulfed
Stormy.
He	howled.	This	was	not	Telas	–	this	burned.	This	reached	for	him,	took
hold	of	him,	bursting	and	cracking	open	his	skin,	tearing	into	his	flesh,
burrowing	to	clutch	at	his	very	bones.	His	screams	vanished	though	his	mouth
remained	open,	his	head	thrown	back	in	the	stunning	agony	of	the	fire	–	his
lungs	were	burned,	useless.	His	eyes	erupted	and	boiled	away.
He	felt	her	drawing	closer	–	knew	she	was	directly	below	him	now.	He
could	feel	the	stone	steps	against	his	back,	could	feel	his	body	melting,	pouring
down	as	if	molten.
Her	hand	closed	on	one	ankle,	crushed	it	to	dust.
But	he	had	been	waiting	for	that	touch.	He	had	been	holding	on	–	to	what	he
knew	not	–	and	with	a	silent	sob	that	seemed	to	tear	his	soul	in	half	Stormy
threw	himself	forward.	Closed	what	remained	of	his	arms	about	her.
Her	shriek	filled	his	skull	–	and	then	they	were	falling.
Not	like	the	first	time	–	he’d	drawn	her	almost	half	the	way	to	the	top	–	and
he	could	feel	her	body	inside	that	fire,	or	thought	he	could.
They	plummeted.
Ges–	take	this	–	all	I	could	—
	
He	was	dead	before	they	struck,	but	enough	of	Stormy’s	corpse	remained	to
hammer	Sinn	against	the	bedrock,	though	it	was	not	needed.	The	impact	split
her	skull,	sent	burning	meat,	blood	and	flesh	spraying	out	to	sizzle	on	the
superheated	rock.	Her	spine	broke	in	four	places.	Her	ribs	buckled	and	folded
under	her	back,	splintered	ends	driving	up	through	her	lungs	and	heart.
The	raging	fires	then	closed	on	her,	consuming	every	last	shred,	before
dying	in	flickering	puddles	on	the	bedrock.
	


Gesler	could	not	keep	the	tears	from	his	eyes	as	he	climbed	the	last	few	steps	–
he	would	not	look	down,	would	not	surrender	to	that,	knowing	it	would	break
him.	The	fury	of	heat	that	had	lifted	up	around	him	moments	earlier	was	now
gone.	He’s	done	it.	Somehow.	He’s	killed	her.
But	he	didn’t	make	it.	I	feel	it	–	a	hole	carved	out	of	my	soul.	Beloved
brother,	you	are	gone.
I	should	have	ordered	you	to	stay	behind.
Not	that	you	ever	listened	to	orders	–	that	was	always	your	problem,
Stormy.	That	was	–	oh,	gods	take	me!
He	pulled	himself	on	to	the	summit,	rolled	on	to	his	back,	stared	up	at	the
chaotic	sky	–	smoke,	the	Jade	Strangers,	a	day	dying	to	darkness	–	and	then,
gasping,	numbed,	Gesler	pushed	himself	on	to	his	feet.	Straightening,	he
looked	across	the	flat	expanse.
A	female	Forkrul	Assail	stood	facing	him.	Young,	almost	incandescent
with	power.	Behind	her	was	a	mass	of	bone	chains	heaped	over	something	that
pulsed	with	carmine	light.	The	heart	of	the	Crippled	God.
‘Where	is	your	sword?’	the	Forkrul	Assail	demanded.	‘Or	do	you	think
you	can	best	me	with	just	your	hands?’
My	hands.	‘I	broke	a	man’s	nose	once,’	Gesler	said,	advancing	on	her.
She	sneered.	‘It	is	too	late,	human.	Your	god’s	death	assured	that	–	it	was
your	god,	wasn’t	it?	By	your	own	prayers	you	summoned	it	–	to	its	execution.
By	your	own	prayers	you	lost	your	war,	human.	How	does	that	feel?	Should
you	not	kneel	before	me?’
Her	words	had	slowed	him,	then	halted	him	still	three	paces	from	her.	He
could	feel	the	last	remnants	of	his	strength	draining	away.	There	is	no	magic	in
her	voice,	none	we	would	call	so,	anyway.	No,	the	only	power	in	her	voice
resides	in	the	truth	she	speaks.
I	killed	Fener.
‘When	this	day	began,’	continued	the	Forkrul	Assail,	‘I	was	an	old	woman,
frail	and	bent.	You	could	have	pushed	me	over	with	a	nudge	then	–	look	at	you,
after	all.	A	soldier.	A	veteran	of	many	battles,	many	wars.	I	know	this	not	by	the
scars	you	bear,	but	by	the	endless	losses	in	your	eyes.’
Losses.	Yes.	So	many	losses.
The	woman	gestured	behind	her.	‘There	can	be	an	end	to	the	pain,	soldier,
if	you	so	desire.	I	can	grant	you	that…sip.’
‘I	–	I	need	a	way	out,’	said	Gesler.
She	nodded.	‘I	understand,	soldier.	Shall	I	give	it	to	you?	That	way	out?’
‘Yes.’
She	cocked	her	head,	her	forehead	seeming	to	flinch	inward	momentarily,


as	if	about	to	vertically	fold	in	half.	‘I	sense	no	duplicity	in	you	–	that	is	good.	I
am	indeed	become	your	salvation.’
‘Yes,’	he	replied.	‘Lead	me	from	here,	Pure.’
She	raised	one	bony,	long-fingered	hand,	reaching	for	his	brow.
His	fist	was	a	blur.	It	smashed	into	her	face.	Bones	snapped.
The	Fokrul	Assail	reeled	back,	breath	spraying	from	a	crushed	nose	–	and
that	fold	dividing	her	face	was	deeply	creased.	Shaking	her	head,	she
straightened.
Gesler	knew	he	was	fast	–	but	she	was	faster.	She	blocked	his	second	punch
and	countered.	The	blow	broke	his	left	shoulder,	threw	him	six	paces	back.	He
landed	hard,	skidded	and	then	rolled	on	to	his	broken	shoulder	–	the	agony	that
ripped	through	him	took	with	it	all	of	his	strength,	his	will.	Stunned,	helpless,
he	heard	her	advance.
A	strange	skittering	sound,	and	then	the	sound	of	two	bodies	colliding.
He	heard	her	stumble.	Heard	bestial	snarling.
Gesler	forced	himself	on	to	his	side.	Looked	across.
Bent	had	struck	the	Forkrul	Assail	from	one	side,	with	enough	force	to
drive	her	to	one	knee.	The	cattledog’s	jaws	had	closed	on	the	side	of	her	face,
its	canines	tearing	through	flesh	and	bone.	One	eye	was	already	gone,	a
cheekbone	pulled	away	–	spat	out	and	lying	on	the	blood-stained	stone.
He	saw	her	reach	round,	even	as	she	staggered	upright,	and	one	hand
closed	on	Bent’s	throat.	She	dragged	the	beast	from	the	ruin	of	her	face.
The	cattledog,	held	out	at	the	end	of	that	long,	muscled	arm,	struggled
desperately	in	her	choking	grip.
No.
Somehow	Gesler	found	his	feet.	And	then	he	was	rushing	her.
Her	lone	eye	locked	with	his	glare	and	she	smiled.
He	saw	her	flexing	her	free	arm	–	drawing	it	back	to	await	him.	He	could
block	that	blow	–	he	could	try	to	take	her	down	–	but	Bent	was	dying.	She	was
crushing	his	throat.	No.	In	a	flash,	he	saw	a	battlefield	filled	with	corpses,	saw
Truth	dragging	a	limp	dog	free	of	the	bodies.	He	heard	the	lad’s	shout	of
surprise	–	and	then	that	look	in	his	eyes.	So	hopeful.	So…young.
No!
Ignoring	her	fist,	even	as	it	shot	out	for	his	head,	Gesler	sent	his	own	blow
–	not	into	her	face,	but	into	the	shoulder	of	the	arm	holding	the	dog.
The	hardest	punch	he	ever	threw.
Crushing	impacts,	and	then—
	


The	soldier ’s	punch	spun	Reverence	round,	the	stunning	power	behind	it
shattering	her	shoulder,	even	as	her	own	blow	connected	with	his	forehead,
splitting	it,	snapping	his	head	back	and	breaking	the	vertebrae	of	his	neck.
He	was	dead	before	he	struck	the	ground.
But	her	right	arm	was	useless,	and	she	sagged	to	one	knee	as	the	dog
pulled	itself	free	of	her	numbed	hand.
No	matter.	I	will	kill	it	next.	A	moment	–	to	push	past	this	pain	–	to	clear	my
thoughts.
	
Bent	kicked	free,	stumbled	away.	Air	filled	his	lungs.	Life	flooded	back	into	him.
In	his	mind,	a	red	mist,	yearning	need,	and	nothing	else.	Head	lifting,	the	beast
turned	back	to	his	master’s	enemy.
But	his	master	was	lying	so	still,	so	emptied	of	all	life.
The	Wickan	cattledog	was	not	bred	for	its	voice.	It	rarely	barked,	and	never
howled.
Yet	the	cry	that	now	came	from	Bent	could	have	awakened	the	wolf	gods
themselves.
And	the	white-skinned	woman	straightened	then	and	laughed,	slowly
turning	to	face	the	beast.
Bent	gathered	his	legs	beneath	him.	The	scarred	nightmare	of	his	muzzle
peeled	back,	revealing	misshapen,	jagged	fangs.
And	then	someone	stepped	past	him.
	
Hood	advanced	on	the	Forkrul	Assail	even	as	she	was	turning	towards	the	dog.
When	she	saw	him,	she	cried	out,	took	a	step	back.
He	closed.
Her	left	fist	snapped	out	but	he	caught	it	one-handed,	crushed	both	wrist
bones.
She	screamed.
The	Jaghut	then	reversed	his	grip	on	that	wrist	and	added	his	other	hand.
With	a	savage	lunge	he	whirled	her	off	her	feet,	slammed	her	body	down	on
the	stone.
Yelping,	the	dog	backed	away.
But	Hood	was	not	yet	done	with	her.	He	swung	her	up	again,	spun	and	once
more	hammered	her	on	to	the	stone.	‘I	have	had,’	the	Jaghut	roared,	and	into
the	air	she	went	again,	and	down	once	more,	‘enough’	–	with	a	sob	the	crushed,


broken	body	was	yanked	from	the	ground	again	–	‘of—
‘your—
‘justice!’
	
As	the	stranger	dropped	the	limp	arm	he	still	held,	Bent	crawled	over	to	his
master’s	side.	He	lay	down,	settling	his	heavy	head	across	the	man’s	chest.
The	stranger	looked	at	him,	but	said	nothing.
Bent	showed	his	teeth	to	make	his	claim	clear.	He	is	mine.
	
The	heavy	thud	of	wings	made	Hood	turn	round	–	to	see	a	Shi’gal	Assassin
descend	to	the	Great	Altar.	Half	crouched	yet	still	towering	over	the	Jaghut,	it
regarded	him	with	cold	eyes.
Hood	glanced	over	at	the	heart	of	the	Crippled	God.
The	Pure’s	ancestral	chains	were	gone	–	destroyed	with	her	own	death.	The
heart	was	finally	free,	lying	pulsing	feebly	in	a	pool	of	blood.
The	smaller	dog	arrived,	rushing	over	to	worry	at	the	torn	face	of	the
Forkrul	Assail.
Grunting,	Hood	gestured	towards	the	heart,	and	then	turned	away,	to	stare
out	over	the	lands	to	the	west.	Beyond	the	fields	heaped	with	corpses,	beyond
the	armies	now	gathered,	virtually	motionless	with	exhaustion.	And	now
figures	were	climbing	the	stairs.
He	heard	the	winged	assassin	lifting	into	the	air	and	he	knew	that	the
creature	now	clutched	that	pathetic	heart.	The	Shi’gal’s	shadow	slipped	over
the	Jaghut,	and	then	he	could	see	it,	rising	yet	higher,	winging	towards	the
setting	sun.	Then	his	gaze	fell	once	more,	looking	down	on	the	devastation
below.
I	once	sat	upon	the	Throne	of	Death.	I	once	greeted	all	who	must	in	the	end
surrender,	with	skeletal	hands,	with	a	face	of	skin	and	bone	hidden	in	darkness.
How	many	battlefields	have	I	walked?	Must	I	walk	one	more?
But	this	time,	they	are	the	ones	who	have	left.
Guardians	of	the	Gate,	will	you	tell	all	these,	who	come	to	you	now,	that	it
all	meant	nothing?	Or	have	you	something	to	give	them?	Something	more	than	I
ever	could?
Others	had	arrived.	He	heard	the	wailing	of	a	woman	in	grief.
And	was	reminded	that	there	was,	in	truth,	no	sadder	sound	in	all	the
worlds.


	
Bitterspring,	Lera	Epar	of	the	Imass,	lay	propped	up	against	cold	bodies.	Her
wound	had	been	bandaged,	the	flow	of	blood	staunched.	Around	her	the
survivors	were	moving	about,	many	simply	wandering,	while	others	stood
motionless,	heads	lowered,	scanning	the	ground	for	familiar	faces.
She	saw	her	kin.	She	saw	Thel	Akai.	She	saw	K’Chain	Che’Malle	and
Jaghut.
And	she	watched	Onos	Toolan	leaving	them	all,	stumbling	northward,	on
to	the	stretch	of	flat	land	edging	the	walled	port	city	that	had	once	been	the
capital	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	empire.
None	of	the	Imass	called	after	him.	None	asked	where	he	was	going.	He
was	the	First	Sword,	but	so	too	was	he	a	man.
She	tilted	her	head	back,	studied	the	procession	up	the	scalded	stone	stairs
of	the	Spire.	Prince	Brys	Beddict,	Aranict,	Queen	Abrastal,	Spax	of	the	Gilk
Barghast,	the	priest-woman	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	The	eleven	remaining
Jaghut	were	also	making	their	way	in	that	direction.
It	is	done,	then.	It	must	be	done.
There	is	peace	now.	It	must	be	peace	–	what	other	name	for	this	terrible
silence?
More	rain	began	to	fall,	as	the	day’s	light	slowly	died,	but	this	rain	was
pure	and	clear.	She	closed	her	eyes	and	let	it	rinse	clean	her	face.
	
Onos	Toolan	walked	past	the	city,	out	on	to	a	barren	headland	of	gorse	and
heather.	The	day’s	light	was	fast	fading,	but	he	was	indifferent	to	that,	and	the
ground	underfoot,	which	had	been	soaked	in	blood,	was	now	slick	with	simple
rain.
The	sun	spread	gold	across	the	western	horizon.
And	then,	in	the	distance,	he	saw	three	figures,	and	Onos	Toolan’s	eyes
narrowed.	Like	him,	they	seemed	to	be	wandering.	Like	him,	lost	in	the	world.
He	drew	closer.
The	sword	in	his	right	hand,	thick	with	gore	but	now	showing	its	gleaming
stone	as	the	rain	washed	down	its	length,	then	fell	to	the	ground,	and	he	was
running.	His	heart	seemed	to	swell	in	his	chest,	seemed	to	grow	too	large	for
the	bone	cage	holding	it.
When	they	saw	him,	he	heard	childish	cries,	and	now	they	were	rushing
towards	him,	the	girl	not	carrying	the	boy	winging	ahead.	All	three	were
crying	as	they	ran	to	meet	him.


He	fell	to	his	knees	to	take	them	into	his	arms.
Words	were	tumbling	from	the	twins.	A	saviour	–	an	Awl	warrior	they	had
lost	in	the	storm.	A	witch	who	had	stolen	them	–	their	escape	–	and	he	had
promised	them	he	would	find	them,	but	he	never	did,	and—
Lifting	his	gaze,	still	facing	into	the	north,	Onos	Toolan	then	saw
something	else.
A	vague	shape	that	appeared	to	be	sitting	on	the	ground,	curled	over.
He	rose,	the	girls	reaching	up	to	take	his	arms,	the	boy	clinging	to	one
shin.	And	then	he	moved	forward,	taking	them	all	with	him.	When	the	boy
complained,	Storii	picked	him	up	in	her	arms.	But	Onos	Toolan	walked	on,	his
steps	coming	faster	and	faster.
It	was	not	possible.	It	was—
And	then	once	more	he	was	running.
She	must	have	heard	his	approach,	for	she	looked	up	and	then	over,	and	sat
watching	him	rushing	towards	her.
He	almost	fell	against	her,	his	arms	wrapping	tight	round	her,	lifting	her
with	his	embrace.
Hetan	gasped.	‘Husband!	I	have	missed	you.	I	–	I	don’t	know	where	I	am.	I
don’t	know	what	has	happened…’
‘Nothing	has	happened,’	he	whispered,	as	the	children	screamed	behind
them.
‘Onos	–	my	toes…’
‘What?’
‘I	have	someone	else’s	toes,	husband,	I	swear	it—’
The	children	collided	with	them.
In	the	distance	ahead,	on	a	faint	rise	of	land,	Onos	Toolan	saw	a	figure
seated	on	a	horse.	The	darkness	was	taking	the	vision	–	dissolving	it	before	his
eyes.
And	then	he	saw	it	raise	one	hand.
Straightening,	Onos	Toolan	did	the	same.	I	see	you,	my	brother.
I	see	you.
When	at	last	the	light	left	the	rise	of	land,	the	vision	faded	from	his	eyes.


Chapter	Twenty-Four

I	have	heard	voices	thick	with	sorrow
I	have	seen	faces	crumble	with	grief
I	have	beheld	broken	men	rise	to	stand
And	witnessed	women	walk	from	small	graves
Yet	now	you	would	speak	of	weakness
Of	failings	worth	nothing	but	scorn
You	would	show	all	the	sides	of	your	fear
Brazen	as	trophies	in	the	empty	shell	of	conquest
But	what	have	you	won	when	the	night	draws	close
To	make	stern	your	resolve	among	these	shadows
When	at	last	we	are	done	with	the	world
When	we	neither	stand	nor	fall	nor	wake	from	stillness
And	the	silent	unknowing	waits	for	us?
I	have	heard	my	voice	thick	with	sorrow
I	have	felt	my	face	crumble	with	grief
I	have	broken	and	turned	away	from	graves
And	I	have	grasped	tight	this	hand	of	weakness
And	walked	in	the	company	of	familiar	failings
Scorn	lies	in	the	dust	and	in	the	distance	behind
Every	trophy	fades	from	sight
The	night	lies	ahead	drawing	me	into	its	close
For	when	I	am	done	with	this	world
In	the	unknowing	I	will	listen	for	the	silence
To	await	what	is	to	come
And	should	you	seek	more
Find	me	in	this	place
Before	the	rising	dawn
Journey’s	Resolution
Fisher	kel	Tath
BANASCHAR	REMEMBERED	HOW	SHE	HAD	STOOD,	THE	SWORD	IN	ITS

	scabbard	lying	on	the	map


table	before	her.	A	single	oil	lamp	had	bled	weak	light	and	weaker	shadows	in
the	confines	of	the	tent.	The	air	was	close	and	damp	and	it	settled	on	things	like
newborn	skin.	A	short	time	earlier,	she	had	spoken	to	Lostara	Yil	with	her	back
to	that	weapon,	and	Banaschar	did	not	know	if	Tavore	had	used	those	words
before	and	the	question	of	that	gnawed	at	him	in	strange,	mysterious	ways.
If	they	had	been	words	oft	repeated	by	the	Adjunct,	then	what	tragic	truths
did	that	reveal	about	her?	But	if	she’d	not	said	them	before	–	not	ever	–	then
why	had	he	heard	them	as	if	they	were	echoes,	rebounding	from	some	place
far	away	and	long	ago?
Lostara	had	been	to	see	Hanavat,	to	share	in	the	gift	of	the	son	that	had
been	born.	The	captain’s	eyes	had	been	red	from	weeping	and	Banaschar
understood	the	losses	these	women	were	now	facing	–	the	futures	about	to	be
torn	away	from	them.	He	should	not	have	been	there.	He	should	not	have	heard
the	Adjunct	speak.
‘It	is	not	enough	to	wish	for	a	better	world	for	the	children.	It	is	not	enough
to	shield	them	with	ease	and	comfort.	Lostara	Yil,	if	we	do	not	sacrifice	our
own	ease,	our	own	comfort,	to	make	the	future’s	world	a	better	one,	then	we
curse	our	own	children.	We	leave	them	a	misery	they	do	not	deserve;	we	leave
them	a	host	of	lessons	unearned.
‘I	am	no	mother,	but	I	need	only	look	at	Hanavat	to	find	the	strength	I
need.’
The	words	were	seared	into	his	memory.	In	the	voice	of	a	childless
woman,	they	left	him	more	shaken,	more	distraught	than	he	perhaps	would
otherwise	have	been.
Was	this	what	they	were	fighting	for?	Only	one	among	a	host	of	reasons,
surely	–	and	in	truth	he	could	not	quite	see	how	this	path	they’d	chosen	could
serve	such	aspirations.	He	did	not	doubt	the	nobility	of	the	Adjunct’s
motivations,	nor	even	the	raw	compassion	so	driving	her	to	seek	what	was,	in
most	eyes,	virtually	impossible.	But	there	was	something	else	here,	something
still	hidden.
How	many	great	compassions	arose	from	a	dark	source?	A	private	place
of	secret	failings?
After	she	had	sent	Lostara	away,	Tavore	had	turned	once	more	to	the
sword,	and	after	a	time	Banaschar	had	stirred	from	his	seat	on	the	war-gear
chest,	risen	and	walked	to	her	side.
‘I	have	stopped	running,	Adjunct.’
She	was	silent,	her	eyes	fixed	on	the	weapon	in	its	battered,	scratched
scabbard.
‘I	–	I	wish	to	thank	you	for	that.	Proof,’	he	added	with	a	sour	smile,	‘of


your	gifts	of	achieving	the	impossible.’
‘Priest,’	she	said,	‘the	Chal’Managa	–	the	Snake	–	that	was	a	manifestation
of	D’rek,	was	it	not?’
He	found	himself	unable	to	meet	her	eyes,	but	managed	a	simple	shrug.	‘I
think	so.	For	a	time.	Her	children	were	lost.	In	her	eyes,	anyway.	And	that	made
her	just	as	lost,	I	suppose.	Together,	they	needed	to	find	their	way.’
‘Those	details	do	not	interest	me,’	she	said,	tone	hardening.	‘Banaschar,
tell	me.	What	does	she	want?	Why	is	she	so	determined	to	be	here?	Will	she
seek	to	oppose	me?’
‘Why	would	you	think	I	have	answers	to	those	questions,	Adjunct?’
‘Because	she	never	left	you	either.	She	needed	at	least	one	of	her
worshippers	to	live	on,	and	for	some	unknown	reason	she	chose	you.’
He	wanted	to	sit	down	again.	Anywhere.	Maybe	even	on	the	floor.	‘Adjunct,
it	is	said	that	a	worm	finding	itself	in	a	puddle	of	ale	will	get	drunk	and	then
drown.	I’ve	often	thought	about	that,	and	I	admit,	I’ve	come	to	suspect	that	any
puddle	will	do,	and	getting	drunk	has	nothing	to	do	with	it.	The	damned	things
drown	anyway.	And	yet,	oddly	enough,	without	any	puddles	the	worms	don’t
show	up	at	all.’
‘We	have	left	the	new	lake	behind	us,	Priest.	No	one	drowned,	not	even
you.’
‘They’re	just	children	now.’
‘I	know.’
Banaschar	sighed,	nodded	down	at	the	sword.	‘She	will	protect	it,	Adjunct.’
He	heard	her	breath	catch,	and	then,	‘But…that	might	well	kill	her.’
He	nodded,	not	trusting	himself	to	speak.
‘Are	you	certain	of	this,	Demidrek?’
‘Demi—	Gods	below,	Adjunct	–	are	you	a	student	of	theology	as	well?
Tayschrenn	was—’
‘As	the	last	surviving	priest	of	the	Worm	of	Autumn,	the	honorific	belongs
to	you,	Banaschar.’
‘Fine,	but	where	are	the	gold-stitched	robes	and	the	gaudy	rings?’
An	aide	entered	behind	them,	coughed	and	then	said,	‘Adjunct,	three	horses
are	saddled	and	waiting	outside.’
‘Thank	you.’
Suddenly	Banaschar	was	chilled,	his	hands	cold	and	stiff	as	if	he’d	left
them	in	buckets	of	ice-water.	‘Adjunct	–	we	do	not	know	if	the	heart	will	be
freed.	If	you—’
‘They	will	succeed,	Demidrek.	Your	own	god	clearly	believes	that—’
‘Wrong.’


She	was	startled	to	silence.
‘It’s	simpler	than	that,	Adjunct,’	Banaschar	went	on,	the	words	tasting	of
ashes.	‘D’rek	doesn’t	care	if	the	Crippled	God	is	whole	or	not	–	if	he’s	little
more	than	a	gibbering	fool,	or	a	gutted	body	with	a	huge	hole	in	his	chest,	it
doesn’t	matter.	Whatever	you	have	of	him,	she	wants	it	gone.’
‘Then…’	Her	eyes	narrowed.
‘Correct.	Listen	to	her	last	Demidrek,	because	he	knows	when	his	god	has
lost	all	faith.’
‘They	won’t	fail,’	Tavore	whispered,	eyes	once	more	on	the	sword.
‘And	if	the	Perish	betray	them?	What	then?’
But	she	was	shaking	her	head.	‘You	don’t	understand.’
‘All	our	putative	allies,	Adjunct	–	are	they	strong	enough?	Wilful	enough?
Stubborn	enough?	When	the	bodies	start	falling,	when	the	blood	starts	flowing
–	listen	to	me,	Tavore	–	we	have	to	weigh	what	we	do	–	all	that	we	do	here	–	on
the	likelihood	of	their	failing.’
‘I	will	not.’
‘Do	you	think	I	have	no	respect	for	Prince	Brys	Beddict	–	or	Queen
Abrastal?	But	Adjunct,	they	are	striking	where	Akhrast	Korvalain	is	at	its
strongest!	Where	the	most	powerful	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	will	be	found	–	has	it
not	once	occurred	to	you	that	your	allies	won’t	be	enough?’
But	she	was	shaking	her	head,	and	Banaschar	felt	a	flash	of	fury	–	will	you
be	nothing	more	than	a	child,	hands	over	your	ears	because	you	don’t	like
hearing	what	I	have	to	say?
‘You	do	not	yet	understand,	Demidrek.	Nor,	it	seems,	does	your	god.’
‘So	tell	me	then.	Explain	it	to	me!	How	in	Hood’s	name	can	you	be	so
sure?’
‘The	K’Chain—’
‘Adjunct	–	this	is	the	last	gasp	of	those	damned	lizards.	It	doesn’t	matter
who	seems	to	be	commanding	them	either	–	the	Matron	commands.	The
Matron	must	command.	If	she	sees	too	many	of	her	children	dying,	she	will
withdraw.	She	has	to!	For	the	very	survival	of	her	kind!’
‘They	are	led	by	Gesler	and	Stormy,	Banaschar.’
‘Gods	below!	Just	how	much	faith	have	you	placed	in	the	efforts	of	two
demoted	marines?’
She	met	his	eyes	unflinching.	‘All	that	I	need	to.	Now,	you	have	indulged
your	moment	of	doubt,	I	trust.	It	is	time	to	leave.’
He	studied	her	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	felt	the	tension	draining
from	him.	Managed	a	lopsided	smile.	‘I	am	Demidrek	to	the	Worm	of	Autumn,
Adjunct.	Perhaps	she	hears	you	through	me.	Perhaps,	in	the	end,	we	can	teach


D’rek	a	lesson	in	faith.’
‘Better,’	she	snapped,	picking	up	the	sword.
They	stepped	outside.
The	three	horses	were	waiting,	two	saddles	as	yet	unfilled.	Slouched	in	the
third	one…	Banaschar	looked	up,	nodded	in	greeting.	‘Captain.’
‘Priest,’	Fiddler	replied.
He	and	the	Adjunct	swiftly	mounted	up	–	the	scrawny	animals	shifting
beneath	them	–	and	then	the	three	of	them	swung	away.	Rode	out	from	the
Malazan	encampment	on	the	grassy	plain.
Riding	northwest.
	
There	had	been	few	words	on	that	journey.	They	rode	through	the	night,
alternating	between	canter	and	trot.	The	western	horizon	was	lit	on	occasion
with	lurid	lightning,	the	flashes	stained	red,	but	overhead	the	Jade	Strangers
commanded	the	night	sky,	bright	enough	to	expunge	the	stars,	and	the	rolling
grasslands	around	them	bore	a	hue	of	healthy	green	the	day’s	light	would
reveal	as	false.	There	had	been	no	rain	in	this	place	for	years,	and	the	hoofs	of
their	horses	kicked	up	broken	blades	of	grass	like	scythes.
When	they	came	in	sight	of	a	lone	rise	that	dominated	all	the	others,	the
Adjunct	angled	her	horse	towards	it.	The	lesser	hills	they	crossed	as	they	drew
closer	all	bore	signs	of	ancient	camps	–	boulders	left	in	ragged	rings	to	mark
where	the	sides	of	tipis	had	been	anchored	down.	A	thousand	paces	to	the
northwest	the	land	dropped	down	into	a	broad,	shallow	valley,	and	its	far	slope
was	marked	by	long	curving	stretches	of	rocks	and	boulders,	forming	lines,
blinds	and	runs	for	herd	beasts	now	long	gone,	as	vanished	as	the	hunters	who
had	preyed	upon	them.
Banaschar	could	feel	the	desolation	of	this	place,	like	an	itch	under	his
skin,	a	crawling	unease	of	mortality.	It	all	passes.	All	our	ways	of	doing	things,
seeing	things,	all	these	lost	ways	of	living.	And	yet…could	I	step	back	into	that
age,	could	I	stand	unseen	among	these	people,	I	would	be	no	different	–	no
different	inside…gods,	could	I	explain	this,	even	to	myself,	I	might	someday
make	a	claim	to	wisdom.
Our	worlds	are	so	small.	They	only	feel	endless	because	our	minds	can
gather	thousands	of	them	all	at	once.	But	if	we	stop	moving,	if	we	hold	to	one
place,	if	we	draw	breath	and	look	around…each	one	is	the	same.	Barring	a	few
details.	Lost	ages	are	neither	more	nor	less	profound	than	the	one	we	live	in
right	now.	We	think	it’s	all	some	kind	of	forward	momentum,	endless	leaving
behind	and	reaching	towards.	But	the	truth	is,	wherever	we	find	ourselves	–


with	all	its	shiny	gifts	–	we	do	little	more	than	walk	in	circles.
The	thought	makes	me	want	to	weep.
They	drew	rein	at	the	base	of	the	hill.	The	sides	were	uneven,	with
projections	of	rust-stained	bedrock	pushing	up	through	the	thin	skin	of	earth,
the	stone	cracked	and	fissured	by	untold	centuries	of	frost	and	heat.	Closer	to
the	summit	was	a	crowded	chaos	of	yellow-white	dolomite	boulders,	their
softer	surfaces	pecked	and	carved	with	otherworldly	scenes	and	geometric
patterns.	Spikewood	and	some	kind	of	prairie	rose	bushes,	skeletal	now	and
threatening	with	thorns,	filled	the	spaces	between	the	boulders.
The	Adjunct	dismounted,	drawing	off	her	leather	gloves.	‘Captain.’
‘Aye,’	he	replied.	‘It	will	do.’
When	Fiddler	slipped	down	from	his	horse,	Banaschar	followed	suit.
The	Adjunct	in	the	lead,	they	ascended	the	hillside.	Now	closer	to	the	rotted
outcrops,	Banaschar	saw	bleached	fragments	of	human	bone	trapped	in	cracks
and	crevasses,	or	heaped	on	ledges	and	in	niches.	On	the	narrow,	winding
tracks	between	the	up-thrust	bedrock,	his	boots	crunched	on	beads	made	from
polished	nuts,	and	the	ground	was	littered	with	the	withered	remnants	of	woven
baskets.
Reaching	the	summit,	they	saw	that	the	dolomite	boulders	formed	a	rough
ring,	perhaps	ten	paces	across,	with	the	centre	area	more	or	less	level.	When
the	Adjunct	walked	between	two	boulders	and	stepped	into	the	clearing,	her
lead	boot	skidded	and	she	lurched	back.	Righting	herself,	she	looked	down,
and	then	crouched	to	pick	something	up.
Banaschar	reached	her	side.
She	was	holding	a	spear	point	made	from	chipped	flint,	almost	dagger
length,	and	the	priest	now	saw	that	the	entire	stretch	of	level	ground	was
carpeted	in	thousands	of	similar	spear	points.
‘Left	here,	all	unbroken,’	muttered	Banaschar,	as	Fiddler	joined	them.
‘Why,	I	wonder?’
The	captain	grunted.	‘Never	could	figure	out	holy	sites.	Still,	those	tools
are	beautifully	made.	Even	an	Imass	would	be	impressed.’
‘Here	is	my	guess,’	Banaschar	said.	‘They	discovered	a	technology	that
was	too	successful.	Ended	up	killing	every	animal	they	saw,	until	none	were
left.	Why?	Because	we	are	all	equally	stupid,	just	as	shortsighted,	twenty
thousand	years	ago	or	tomorrow,	makes	no	difference.	And	the	seduction	of
slaughter	is	like	a	fever.	When	they	finally	realized	what	they’d	done,	when
they	all	began	starving,	they	blamed	their	tools.	And	yet,’	he	glanced	across	at
Fiddler,	‘even	to	this	day,	we	think	efficiency’s	a	good	thing.’
Fiddler	sighed.	‘I	sometimes	think	we	only	invented	war	when	we	ran	out


of	animals	to	kill.’
Dropping	the	spear	point	–	it	broke	in	half	when	it	struck	the	layer	of	its
kin	–	the	Adjunct	stepped	forward.	Stone	snapped	with	every	stride.	When	she
was	at	the	very	centre,	she	turned	to	face	them.
‘This	is	not	a	matter	of	sacredness,’	she	said.	‘There	is	nothing	worth
worshipping	in	this	place,	except	perhaps	a	past	that	can	never	again	exist,	and
the	name	for	that	is	nostalgia.	I	am	not	a	believer	in	innocence,	either.’
‘Then	why	here?’	Banaschar	asked.
But	it	was	Fiddler	who	answered,	‘Because	it	is	defendable,	Priest.’
‘Demidrek?’	Tavore	asked,	one	hand	now	on	the	grip	of	her	sword.
He	looked	round,	stepped	over	to	one	of	the	dolomite	boulders.	Swirling
patterns,	grooves	flowing	like	hair.	Demonic,	vaguely	human	figures,	faces
composed	of	staring	eyes	and	open	mouths	filled	with	sharp	teeth.	He	sighed,
looked	back	at	the	Adjunct,	and	then	nodded.	‘She	can…	I	don’t	know…wrap
herself	round	the	base	of	this	hill,	like	a	dragon-worm	of	legend,	I	suppose.’
‘To	what	end,	Demidrek?’
‘Containment.’
‘For	how	long?’
Until	she	dies.	He	shrugged.
He	saw	her	studying	him	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	the	Adjunct
Tavore	drew	out	her	Otataral	sword.
The	rust-coloured	blade	seemed	to	blaze	in	Banaschar ’s	eyes,	and	he
staggered	back	a	step.
Nearby,	Fiddler	swore	under	his	breath.	‘Adjunct	–	it’s…awake.’
‘And,’	whispered	Banaschar,	‘it	shall	summon.’
Tavore	kicked	a	space	clear	on	the	ground	with	one	boot,	and	then	set	the
sword’s	tip	against	the	earth.	She	pushed	down	using	all	of	her	weight.
The	blade	slid,	as	if	through	sand,	down	to	half	its	length.
Stepping	back,	the	Adjunct	seemed	to	reel.
Banaschar	and	Fiddler	reached	her	at	the	same	time,	taking	her	weight	–
gods,	there	is	so	little	left	of	her!	Bones	and	skin!	She	slumped	unconscious	in
their	arms.
‘Here,’	grunted	Fiddler,	‘let’s	drag	her	back	–	find	somewhere	clear.’
‘No,’	said	Banaschar.	‘I	will	carry	her	down	to	the	horses.’
‘Right.	I’ll	go	ahead,	get	her	some	water.’
Banaschar	had	picked	Tavore	up.	‘Fiddler…’
‘Aye,’	he	growled.	‘Like	a	starved	child	under	that	armour.	When	she
comes	round,	Priest,	we’re	making	her	eat.’
The	soldier	might	as	well	have	said,	‘We’re	laying	siege	to	the	moon,’	and


been	absolutely	convinced	that	he	would	do	just	that,	and	then	take	the	damned
thing	down	in	ruin	and	flames.	It’s	how	a	soldier	thinks.	At	least,	this	one,	this
damned	marine.	Saying	nothing,	he	followed	Fiddler	down	the	narrow,
twisting	track.
	
She	had	been	laid	down	on	a	threadbare	saddle	blanket.	Banaschar	had
unstrapped	and	removed	her	helm,	and	rested	her	head	on	the	worn	saddle
they’d	pulled	from	the	Adjunct’s	horse.	Off	to	one	side,	Fiddler	was	splintering
wood	and	building	a	small	fire.
Taking	a	waterskin,	the	priest	soaked	a	bundle	of	bandages	from	the
sapper ’s	kit	bag	and	began	tenderly	wiping	the	sweat	and	grime	from	Tavore’s
brow	and	those	so-plain	features.	With	her	eyes	closed,	he	saw	the	child	she
had	once	been	–	serious,	determined,	impatient	to	grow	up.	But	the	face	was
gaunter	than	it	should	have	been,	too	old,	too	worn	down.	He	brushed	tendrils
of	damp,	lank	hair	from	her	forehead.	Then	glanced	over	at	Fiddler.	‘Is	it	just
exhaustion,	do	you—	Gods	below,	Fiddler!’
The	man	was	breaking	up	his	Deck	of	Dragons,	using	his	knife	to	split
each	card.	He	paused,	looked	across	at	the	priest.	‘She’s	getting	a	cooked
meal.’
Banaschar	watched	as	the	sapper	fed	the	splinters	into	the	fire.	The	paints
filled	the	flames	with	strange	colours.	‘You	don’t	expect	to	survive,	do	you?’
‘Even	if	I	do,	I’m	done	with	this.	All	of	it.’
‘You	couldn’t	retire	from	soldiering	even	if	you	wanted	to.’
‘Really?	Just	watch	me.’
‘What	will	you	do?	Buy	a	farm,	start	growing	vegetables?’
‘Gods	no.	Too	much	work	–	never	could	figure	out	soldiers	saying	they’d
do	that	once	they	buried	their	swords.	Earth	grows	what	it	wants	to	grow	–
spending	the	rest	of	your	life	fighting	it	is	just	another	damned	war.’
‘Right,	then.	Get	drunk,	tell	old	stories	in	some	foul	tavern—’
‘Like	you	was	doing	back	in	Malaz	City?’
Banaschar ’s	smile	was	wry.	‘I	was	about	to	advise	against	it,	Captain.
Maybe	it	sounds	good	from	here	–	being	able	to	live	every	moment	without
purpose,	emptied	of	all	pressure.	But	take	it	from	me,	you’d	do	just	as	well
topping	yourself	–	it’s	quicker	and	probably	a	lot	less	miserable.’
Fiddler	poured	some	water	into	a	pot	and	then	set	it	on	the	flames.	He
began	dropping	shreds	of	dried	meat	into	it.	‘Nah,	nothing	so…wasteful.
Thought	I’d	take	up	fishing.’
‘Never	figured	you	for	a	man	of	the	seas.’


‘You	mean,	like,	in	a	boat	with	lines	and	nets?	Out	on	the	waves	and	o’er
the	deeps?	No,	not	that	kind	of	fishing,	Priest.	Sounds	like	work	to	me,	and
dangerous	besides.	No,	I’ll	stay	ashore.	I’m	thinking	hobby,	not	livelihood.’
Glancing	down	at	Tavore’s	lined	face,	Banaschar	sighed.	‘We	should	all
live	a	life	of	hobbies.	Doing	only	what	gives	us	pleasure,	only	what	rewards	us
in	secret,	private	ways.’
‘Wise	words,	Priest.	You’re	just	filled	with	surprises	tonight,	aren’t	you?’
When	Banaschar	shot	the	man	a	look,	he	saw	his	faint	grin	and	the	tension
eased	out	from	him.	He	grunted.	‘I	went	into	the	priesthood	looking	for
wisdom	and	only	then	did	I	realize	I’d	gone	in	precisely	the	wrong	direction.’
‘Piety	not	all	it’s	made	out	to	be,	then?’
‘Is	soldiering,	Fiddler?’
The	man	slowly	settled	back,	stirring	with	his	knife	blade.	‘Had	a	friend
once,	tried	warning	an	eager	little	boy	away	from	the	soldier ’s	life.’
‘And	did	your	friend	succeed?’
‘Doesn’t	matter	if	he	did	or	didn’t.	That’s	not	the	point.’
‘So,	what	is	the	point,	then?’
‘You	can’t	steer	anyone	away	from	the	path	they’re	going	to	take.	You	can
show	’em	that	there’s	plenty	of	other	paths	–	you	can	do	that	much	–	but	past
that?	They’ll	go	where	they	go.’
‘Your	friend	should	have	scared	that	boy	rigid.	That	might’ve	worked.’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘Can’t	feel	someone	else’s	terror,	either,
Banaschar.	We	only	know	terror	for	what	it	is	when	it	looks	us	dead	in	the	eye.’
There	was	a	sigh	from	Tavore	and	the	priest	looked	down.	‘You	fainted,
Adjunct.’
‘The	–	the	sword…’
‘It’s	done.’
She	struggled	to	sit	up.	‘Then	we	must	leave.’
‘We	will,	Adjunct,’	Fiddler	said.	‘But	first,	we	eat.’
Tavore	pushed	Banaschar ’s	hands	away	and	struggled	upright.	‘You
damned	fool	–	do	you	know	who	that	sword	is	summoning?’
‘Aye.	Just	burned	that	card,	as	it	happens.’
Banaschar	almost	felt	the	Adjunct’s	shock,	like	a	jolt	of	sparks	snapping
through	the	air	between	them.
The	priest	snorted.	‘You’ve	gone	and	made	her	speechless,	sapper.’
‘Good.	Can’t	eat	and	talk	at	the	same	time.	Come	over	here,	Adjunct,	else
me	and	the	priest	will	have	to	hold	you	and	force	this	stew	down	your	throat.
Won’t	do	anyone	any	good	if	you	go	and	collapse	at	the	wrong	moment,	will
it?’


‘You	–	you	should	not	have	done	that,	Fiddler.’
‘Relax,’	the	man	replied,	tapping	his	satchel.	‘Saved	one	House	–	the	only
one	that	means	anything	to	us	now.’
‘Ours	is	a	house	still	divided,	Captain.’
‘The	King	in	Chains?	Never	mind	him	–	the	fool’s	too	busy	undermining
the	throne	he	happens	to	be	sitting	on.	And	the	Knight	is	with	us.’
‘Are	you	certain?’
‘I	am.	Be	at	ease	on	that	count.’
‘When	that	god	manifests,	Fiddler,	it	will	be	upon	a	battlefield	–	thousands
of	souls	will	feed	its	shaping.	We	are	speaking	of	a	god	of	war	–	when	it
comes,	it	could	well	fill	half	the	sky.’
Fiddler	glanced	across	at	Banaschar,	and	then	he	shrugged.	‘Beware	the
vow	of	a	Toblakai.’	And	then,	with	a	half-smile,	he	filled	a	tin	bowl	with	stew
and	handed	it	up	to	the	Adjunct.	‘Eat,	dear	Consort.	The	rest	are	with	us.
Reaver,	Fool,	the	Seven…	Leper…’	and	his	gaze	fell	for	a	moment	with	that
title,	before	he	looked	back	up,	grinned	over	at	Banaschar.	‘Cripple.’
Cripple.	Oh.	Well,	yes.	Been	staring	me	in	the	face	all	this	time,	I	suppose.
Been	thinking	it	was	terror,	that	old	mirror	reflection.	And	surprise,	it	was.
While	they	ate,	Banaschar ’s	memories	wandered	back,	to	the	moment	in
her	tent,	and	her	words	with	Lostara,	and	all	that	followed.
Children,	gather	close.	Your	mother’s	days	are	fraught	now.	She	needs	you.
She	needs	us	all.
Glancing	up,	he	saw	Tavore	studying	him.	‘Banaschar,	was	it	you	who
removed	my	helm?	Wiped	down	my	face	and	combed	through	my	hair?’
His	gaze	dropped.	‘Yes,	Adjunct.’
She	made	an	odd	sound,	and	then	said,	‘I	am	sorry…	I	must	have	looked	a
mess.’
Oh,	Tavore.
Fiddler	rose	suddenly	and	said	in	a	gruff	voice,	‘I’ll	saddle	your	horse,
Adjunct.’
	
Hedge	watched	as	the	three	riders	rode	back	into	the	camp.	‘Bavedict,	distribute
the	munitions.’
The	alchemist	turned	and	in	a	startled	voice	asked,	‘All	of	them?’
‘All	of	them.	And	get	’em	kitted	out	–	water,	a	little	food,	armour	and
weapons	and	nothing	else.’
‘I’ll	go	talk	to	the	sergeants.’
Nodding,	Hedge	set	off.


He	found	Fiddler	on	foot,	just	outside	the	Adjunct’s	tent.	The	man	was
alone,	standing	looking	down	at	the	ground.
‘We’re	coming	with	you,’	Hedge	said.
Fiddler	looked	up,	scowled.	‘No,	you’re	not.’
‘The	Bridgeburners	are	coming	with	you	–	nothing	you	can	do	about	it.’
‘It’s	all	over	with,	Hedge.	Just	leave	it	alone.’	And	he	turned	away.
But	Hedge	reached	out,	pulled	the	man	round.	‘I	already	asked	the	Adjunct
–	I	did	it	last	night,	once	I	figured	out	what	was	going	on.	You	need	me	there,
Fiddler.	You	just	don’t	know	it	yet	–	you	don’t	know	the	half	of	it,	but	you’ll
just	have	to	trust	me	on	this.	You	need	me	there.’
Fiddler	stepped	close,	his	face	dark.	‘Why?	Why	the	fuck	do	I?’
Passing	soldiers	paused,	turned	to	stare.
‘You	just	do!	If	you	don’t	–	I	swear	this,	Fid,	I	swear	it	–	you’ll	spend	the
rest	of	your	days	poisoned	with	regret.	Listen	to	me!	It’s	not	only	us,	can’t	you
see	that?	You	need	the	Bridgeburners!’
Fiddler	pushed	him	back	with	both	hands,	staggering	Hedge.	‘They’re	not
Bridgeburners!	It’s	not	just	a	fucking	name!	You	can’t	just	pick	up	any	old
useless	fools	and	call	them	Bridgeburners!’
‘Why	not?’	Hedge	retorted.	‘It’s	what	we	were,	wasn’t	it?	At	the	beginning?
Young	and	wide-eyed	stupid	and	wanting	to	be	better	than	we	were!’	He	waved
an	arm	to	take	in	the	camp.	‘No	different	from	these	Bonehunters	–	don’t	you
see	that?’
‘Don’t	follow	me!’
‘You’re	not	listening!	I	went	through	–	I	came	back!	I	have	no	choice,
damn	you!’
There	were	tears	glistening	in	Fiddler ’s	eyes.	‘Just	don’t.’
Hedge	shook	his	head.	‘I	told	you.	No	choice,	none	at	all.’
When	Fiddler	pushed	past	him,	Hedge	let	him	go.	He	looked	round,
scowled.	‘It’s	almost	noon	–	go	eat	something,	you	slack-jawed	bastards.’	Then
he	headed	back	for	his	company’s	camp.
	
Fiddler	cut	between	two	staff	tents,	and	made	it	halfway	down	before	he
stopped	and	slowly	sank	to	one	knee,	his	hands	over	his	face.	As	tears	broke
loose,	shudders	drove	through	him,	wave	upon	wave.
We’re	going	to	die	–	can’t	he	see	that?	I	can’t	lose	him	again	–	I	just	can’t.
He	could	still	feel	Hedge’s	shoulders	where	he’d	pushed	him,	and	see	the
hurt	look	on	the	man’s	face	–	no,	don’t.	His	hands	stung,	his	hands	burned.	He
balled	them	into	fists,	head	hanging,	forcing	himself	to	draw	deep	breaths,


forcing	all	the	rawness	away,	and	with	it	the	terrible	anguish	that	threatened	to
break	him,	crush	him	down.
He	needed	to	go	to	his	soldiers	now.	The	sergeants	would	have	them	ready.
Waiting.	Marines	and	heavies,	the	last	of	both.	One	more	thing	to	do,	and	then
we’ll	be	done.	All	of	it,	finished.
Gods,	Hedge,	we	should	have	died	in	the	tunnels.	So	much	easier,	so	much
quicker.	No	time	to	grieve,	no	time	for	the	scars	to	get	so	thick	it’s	almost
impossible	to	feel	anything	at	all.
And	then	you	showed	up	and	tore	them	all	open	again.
Whiskeyjack,	Kalam,	Trotts	–	they’re	gone.	Why	didn’t	you	stay	there	with
them?	Why	couldn’t	you	just	have	waited	for	me?
Still	the	tears	streamed	down	his	face,	soaking	his	beard.	He	could	barely
see	the	matted	dead	grasses	beneath	him.
End	this.	One	more	thing	to	do	–	they’ll	try	and	stop	us.	They	have	to.	We
need	to	be	ready	for	them.	We	need	–	I	need…to	be	a	captain,	the	one	in	charge.
The	one	to	tell	my	soldiers	where	to	die.
Wiping	at	his	face,	he	slowly	straightened.
‘Gods,’	he	muttered.	‘First	the	Adjunct,	and	now	this.’	He	sighed.	‘Let’s	just
call	it	a	bad	day	and	be	done	with	it.	Ready,	Fid?	Ready	for	them?	You’d	better
be.’
He	set	out.
	
There	was	glory	in	pissing,	Corabb	decided	as	he	watched	the	stream	curve	out
and	make	that	familiar	but	unique	sound	as	it	hit	the	ground.
‘Doesn’t	look	like	you	need	both	hands	for	that,’	Smiles	observed	from
where	she	sat	nearby.
‘Today,	I	shall	even	look	upon	you	with	sympathy,’	he	replied,	finishing	up
and	then	spitting	on	his	hands	to	clean	them.
‘Sympathy?	What	am	I,	a	lame	dog?’
Sitting	leaning	against	his	pack,	Bottle	laughed,	earning	a	dark	look	from
Smiles.
‘We	are	going	somewhere	to	fight,’	Corabb	said,	turning	to	face	her	and
the	others	sitting	on	the	ground	beyond.	‘Today,	you	are	all	my	family.’
‘Explains	the	sympathy,’	Koryk	muttered.
‘And	I	will	stand	at	your	side,	Koryk	of	the	Seti,’	Corabb	said.
Smiles	snorted.	‘To	what,	keep	him	from	running?’
‘No.	Because,	this	time,	he	will	stand	with	us.	He	will	be	a	soldier	again.’
There	was	a	long	moment	of	silence	from	the	gathered	squad,	and	then


Koryk	rose	and	walked	a	short	distance	away.
‘There’s	demons	crouched	in	his	brain,’	Cuttle	said	under	his	breath.	‘All
that	whispering	must	be	driving	him	mad.’
‘Here	comes	the	sergeant,’	Corabb	said.	‘It’s	time.’	He	went	to	his	kit	bag,
checked	the	straps	once	again,	picking	up	the	crossbow	and	admiring	it	for	a
moment	before	tying	it	on	to	the	satchel.	He	re-counted	the	quarrels	and	was
satisfied	to	find	that	they	still	numbered	twelve.
‘Load	up,’	Tarr	said	when	he	arrived.	‘We’re	headed	northwest.’
‘That’s	damn	near	back	the	way	we	came!’	said	Smiles.	‘How	far?	If	I	even
come	within	sight	of	that	desert,	I’ll	slit	my	own	throat.’
‘It’s	a	big	lake	now,	Smiles,’	Bottle	pointed	out.
Tarr	said,	‘Should	be	there	by	noon	tomorrow,	or	so	the	captain	says.	Take
food	for	two	days,	and	as	much	water	as	you	can	carry.’
Corabb	scratched	at	the	beard	covering	his	jaw.	‘Sergeant	–	the	regulars
are	getting	ready	to	break	camp,	too.’
‘They’re	going	east,	Corporal.’
‘When	do	we	rendezvous?’
But	the	sergeant’s	only	reply	was	a	sharp	glance,	and	then	he	went	to	his
own	gear.
Smiles	edged	up	close	to	Corabb.	‘Should’ve	used	that	thing	for	more	than
just	pissing,	Corporal,	and	now	it’s	too	late.’
Oh.	I	get	it.	We’re	not	coming	back.	‘Then	we	march	to	glory.’
‘Hood’s	breath,’	Smiles	sighed.
But	he	caught	a	look	on	her	face	–	quickly	hidden.	She	is	afraid.	She	is	so
young.	‘And	you,	Smiles,	shall	stand	on	my	other	side.’
Did	she	almost	sag	towards	him	then?	He	could	not	be	sure,	and	she	kept
her	face	down,	turned	away	as	she	worked	on	her	satchel.
‘You	have	let	your	hair	grow	long,’	he	said.	‘It	makes	you	almost	pretty.’
Cuttle	edged	close.	‘You	really	don’t	know	when	to	keep	your	mouth	shut,
do	you,	Corabb?’
‘Form	up,’	Tarr	said.	‘We’re	in	the	lead	to	start.’
	
Cuttle	met	his	sergeant’s	eyes	and	gave	a	faint	nod.	Tarr	turned	and	looked
ahead	to	where	Fiddler	waited.	The	captain	looked	ill,	but	he	held	Tarr ’s	gaze
without	expression,	and	then	Fiddler	swung	round	and	set	off.
Their	march	would	take	them	through	the	entire	camp	of	regulars,	down
the	central,	widest	avenue	between	the	uneven	rows	of	tents,	awnings	and
blinds.	The	sapper	looked	up	at	the	sky,	then	back	down	again	–	those	blazing


slashes	seemed	closer	than	ever,	unnerving	him.
Cuttle	waved	the	others	in	their	squad	forward,	then	glanced	back	to	see
Balm	leading	his	own	soldiers,	and	beyond	them	Sergeant	Urb.	And	then	the
rest	of	them.	Hellian,	Badan	Gruk,	Sinter,	Gaunt-Eye,	and	the	heavies	falling	in
wherever	they	felt	like	it.
He	stepped	in	behind	Shortnose	–	the	man	had	a	way	of	wandering	off,	as
if	forgetting	which	squad	he’d	joined,	but	now	he	was	here,	trudging	along
under	a	massive	bundle	of	rolled	chain	armour,	weapons	and	shield.	The	heavy
had	tied	a	Nah’ruk	finger	bone	to	his	beard	and	it	made	a	thumping	sound	on
his	chest	as	he	walked.	His	maimed	shield	hand	was	bound	up	in	leather	straps.
As	they	walked,	the	regulars	to	either	side	began	converging	ahead,	as	if	to
line	their	route,	as	if	to	watch	in	that	Hood-damned	silence	of	theirs	as	the
marines	and	heavies	passed.	His	unease	deepened.	Not	a	word	from	them,	not	a
thing.	As	if	we’re	strangers.	As	the	troop	approached	the	broad	avenue,	the
only	sound	came	from	their	marching	–	the	hard	impact	of	their	boots	and	the
clatter	of	equipment	–	and	through	his	growing	anger	Cuttle	had	an	uncanny
sensation	of	walking	through	an	army	of	ghosts	as	the	regulars	drew	up	on
either	side.	He	didn’t	see	a	single	youthful	face	among	all	the	onlookers.	And
not	a	nod,	not	even	a	tilt	of	a	head.
But	we	look	just	as	old	and	ruined,	don’t	we?	What	are	they	seeing?	What
are	they	thinking?
Tavore,	I	don’t	envy	you	these	soldiers.	I	can’t	read	them	at	all.	Do	they
understand?	Have	they	worked	it	out	yet?
They’re	heading	east	–	to	block	the	army	the	Assail	are	sending	after	us	–
to	buy	us	the	time	we	need.	But	if	they	can’t	do	it	–	if	they	can’t	slow	the
bastards	down	–	it’s	all	lost.	This	whole	damned	thing	falls	apart.
You’re	headed	for	a	fight.	And	we	won’t	be	there	for	you	–	any	of	you.	No
fist	of	heavies.	No	knots	of	marines	in	the	line.	So	if	that’s	a	look	of	betrayal	in
your	faces,	if	you	think	all	this	is	about	abandoning	all	of	you,	then	Hood	take
me—
The	thought	ended	abruptly,	and	Cuttle’s	growing	anger	simply
disintegrated.
The	regulars	began	saluting,	fists	to	their	chests.	Standing	at	attention,	in
suddenly	perfect	rows	to	either	side.
The	few	muttered	conversations	among	the	marines	and	heavies	fell	off,
and	suddenly	the	silence	became	oppressive	in	an	entirely	different	way.	Cuttle
felt	more	than	heard	the	company’s	footfalls	slipping	into	cadence,	and	in	the
squad	directly	in	front	of	him	he	now	saw	the	soldiers	edging	into	paired	rows
behind	Captain	Fiddler,	with	Corabb	and	Tarr	in	the	lead,	Smiles	and	Koryk


behind	them,	followed	by	Bottle	and	Shortnose.
‘You	just	had	to	be	uneven,’	growled	Balm	in	a	low	voice	as	he	came	up	on
his	right.
‘Then	drop	back.’
‘And	shake	this	out	all	over	again?	Can’t	even	remember	the	last	time	I
found	myself	on	a	parade	–	no,	we	just	hold	this,	sapper,	and	hope	to	Hood	no
one	trips	over	their	own	Hood-damned	feet.’
‘Wasn’t	expecting	this.’
‘I	hate	it.	I	feel	sick.	Where	we	going	again?’
‘Stop	panicking,	Sergeant.’
‘And	who	in	the	White	Jackal’s	name	are	you,	soldier?’
Cuttle	sighed.	‘Just	march,	Sergeant.	Once	we	get	through	this,	we	can
relax	again.	Promise.’
‘We	getting	medals	or	something?’
No.	This	is	something	else.	This	is	what	the	Adjunct	said	wouldn’t	happen.
Look	at	these	regulars.
They’re	witnessing	us.
	
‘Did	you	see	this?’	Kisswhere	asked.
Sinter	kept	staring	straight	ahead,	but	she	frowned.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Your	visions	–	did	you	see	any	of	this?	And	what	about	what’s	coming	–
what	about	tomorrow,	or	the	next	day?’
‘It’s	not	like	that.’
Her	sister	sighed.	‘Funny.	I	can	see	what’s	coming,	right	through	to	the
very	end.’
‘No	you	can’t.	That’s	just	fear	talking.’
‘And	it’s	got	a	lot	to	say.’
‘Just	leave	it,	Kisswhere.’
‘No.	I	won’t.	Tell	me	about	a	vision	of	the	future,	with	us	in	it.	Here’s	mine.
You’ve	got	a	baby	on	your	hip,	with	a	boy	running	ahead.	It’s	the	morning
walk	down	to	the	imperial	school	–	the	one	they	were	building	before	we	left.
And	I	got	a	girl	who	looks	just	like	me,	but	wild,	a	demon	in	disguise.	We’re
exhausted,	in	the	way	of	all	mothers,	and	I’m	getting	fat.	We	brag	about	the
runts,	complain	about	our	husbands,	bitch	at	how	tired	we	are.	It’s	hot,	the	flies
are	out	and	the	air	smells	of	rotted	vegetables.	Husbands.	When	are	they	going
to	finish	fixing	the	roof,	that’s	what	we	want	to	know,	when	instead	of	doing
something	useful	the	lazy	bastards	spend	all	day	lying	in	the	shade	picking
their	noses.	And	then	if	that’s	not—’


‘Stop	it,	Kisswhere.’
To	Sinter ’s	astonishment,	her	sister	fell	silent.
	
Was	that	the	first	time?	Must’ve	been.	Sorido	the	miller’s	boy.	I’d	woken	up	that
morning	with	tits.	We	went	behind	the	old	custom	house	annexe,	on	that	burnt
stubble	where	they’d	toasted	an	infestation	of	spiders	only	a	few	days	before,
and	I	lifted	up	my	shirt	and	showed	them	off.
What	was	that	boy’s	name?	Rilt?	Rallit?	His	eyes	got	huge.	I’d	stolen	a
flask	from	the	house.	Peach	brandy.	You	could	set	your	breath	on	fire	with	that
stuff.	I	figured	he	needed	loosening	up.	Hood	knows	I	did.	So	we	drank	and	he
played	with	them.
I	had	to	fight	him	to	get	his	cock	out.
And	that	was	the	first	time.	Wish	there’d	been	a	thousand	more,	but	it	didn’t
work	out	that	way.	He	was	killed	a	year	later	in	his	father’s	shop	–	some	rushed
order	on	ship	fittings,	rumours	of	another	crackdown	on	Kartoolii	pirates
because	the	Malazan	overlords	were	losing	revenues	or	something.
They	weren’t	pirates.	That’s	just	a	name	for	people	being	obvious	about
theft.
There	could	have	been	other	boys.	Dozens	of	them.	But	who	wants	to	lie
down	on	the	ground	on	an	island	crawling	with	deadly	spiders?
Rallit	or	Ralt	or	whatever	your	name	was,	I’m	glad	we	fucked	before	you
died.	I’m	glad	you	had	at	least	that.
It’s	not	fair,	how	the	years	just	vanish.
	
I	love	you,	Hellian.	How	hard	could	it	be	to	just	say	those	words?	But	even
thinking	them	made	Urb’s	jaw	tighten	as	if	bound	in	wire.	Sudden	sweat	under
his	armour,	a	thudding	heart,	a	thickening	sensation	of	nausea	in	his	throat.	She
had	never	looked	better.	No,	she	was	beautiful.	Why	wasn’t	he	the	drunk?	Then
he	could	blather	out	all	he	wanted	to	say	in	that	shameless	way	drunks	had.	But
why	would	she	want	him	then?	Unless	she	was	just	as	drunk.	But	she	wasn’t
anything	like	that	now.	Her	eyes	were	clear	and	they	never	rested,	as	if	she	was
finally	seeing	things,	and	all	that	slackness	was	gone	from	her	face	and	she
could	probably	have	any	man	she	wanted	now	so	why	bother	looking	at	him?
He	kept	his	gaze	ahead,	trying	not	to	notice	all	these	regular	soldiers	with
their	salutes.	Better	to	pretend	they	weren’t	even	there,	weren’t	paying	them	any
attention,	and	they	could	walk	out	of	this	army,	off	to	do	whatever	it	was	that


needed	doing,	and	no	one	needed	to	notice	anything.
Attention	made	him	nervous,	when	the	only	attention	he	really	wanted	was
from	her.	But	if	she	gave	it	to	him,	he’d	probably	fall	to	pieces.
I’d	like	to	make	love.	Just	once.	Before	I	die.	I’d	like	to	hold	her	in	my	arms
and	feel	as	if	the	world’s	just	slid	and	shifted	into	its	proper	shape,	making
everything	perfect.	And	I	could	see	all	of	that,	right	there	in	her	eyes.
And	looking	up…	I’d	see	all	these	soldiers	saluting	me.
No,	that’s	not	right.	Don’t	look	up,	Urb.	Listen	to	yourself!	Idiot!
	
Widdershins	found	that	he	was	walking	beside	Throatslitter.	He’d	not	expected
an	actual	military	march,	and	already	his	bare	feet	inside	his	worn	boots	were
raw.	He’d	always	hated	having	to	throw	his	heels	down	with	every	step,	feeling
the	shocks	shooting	up	his	spine,	and	having	to	lift	his	knees	higher	than	usual
was	wearing	him	out.
He	could	see	the	end	ahead,	the	edge	of	the	damned	camp.	Once	out	of
sight	of	these	wretched	regulars	going	all	formal	on	them,	they	could	relax
again.	He’d	happily	forgotten	all	this	shit,	those	first	months	of	training	before
he’d	managed	to	slip	across	into	the	marines	–	where	discipline	didn’t	mean
striding	in	cadence	and	throwing	the	shoulders	back	and	all	that	rubbish.
Where	it	meant	doing	your	job	and	not	wasting	time	on	anything	else.
He	remembered	the	first	officers	he’d	encountered,	bitching	about
companies	like	the	Bridgeburners.	Sloppy,	slouching	slackers	–	couldn’t	get
’em	to	stand	in	a	straight	line	if	their	lives	depended	on	it,	and	as	likely	to	slit
their	officers’	throats	as	take	an	order.	Well,	not	quite.	If	it	was	a	good	order,	a
smart	order,	they’d	step	up	smart.	If	it	was	a	stupid	order,	an	order	that	would
see	soldiers	die	for	no	good	reason,	well,	the	choice	was	not	doing	it	and
getting	hammered	for	insubordination,	or	quietly	arranging	a	tragic	battlefield
casualty.
Maybe	the	Bridgeburners	had	been	the	worst	of	the	lot,	but	they’d	also
been	the	best,	too.	No,	Widdershins	liked	being	a	marine,	a	Bonehunter	in	the
tradition	of	their	unruly	predecessors.	At	least	it	had	put	an	end	to	this	kind	of
marching.
His	heels	were	already	bloody	in	his	boots.
	
Deadsmell	didn’t	want	to	say	goodbye,	not	to	anyone.	Not	even	Throatslitter
limping	one	row	ahead	of	him,	whom	with	a	choice	comment	or	two	he	could


make	yelp	that	laugh	–	like	squeezing	a	duck.	Always	entertaining,	seeing
people	flinch	on	hearing	it.	And	Deadsmell	could	do	it	over	and	over	again.
It’d	been	a	while	since	he’d	last	heard	it,	but	now	was	not	the	time	–	not
with	all	these	regulars	on	either	side.	All	these	men	and	women	saying	goodbye
to	us.	The	Bonehunters	were	in	their	last	days.	This	tortured	army	could	finally
see	the	end	of	things	–	and	it	seemed	to	have	come	up	on	them	fast,	unexpected,
appallingly	close.
But	no.	We	marched	across	half	a	world.	We	chased	a	Whirlwind.	We
walked	out	of	a	burning	city.	We	stood	against	our	own	in	Malaz	City.	We	took
down	the	Letherii	Empire,	held	off	the	Nah’ruk.	We	crossed	a	desert	that
couldn’t	be	crossed.
Now	I	know	how	the	Bridgeburners	must	have	felt,	as	the	last	of	them	was
torn	down,	crushed	underfoot.	All	that	history,	vanishing,	soaking	red	into	the
earth.
Back	home	–	in	the	Empire	–	we’re	already	lost.	Just	one	more	army	struck
off	the	ledgers.	And	this	is	how	things	pass,	how	things	simply	go	away.	We’ve
gone	and	marched	ourselves	off	the	edge	of	the	world.
I	don’t	want	to	say	goodbye.	And	I	want	to	hear	Throatslitter’s	manic	laugh.
I	want	to	hear	it	again	and	again,	and	for	ever	more.
	
Hedge	had	drawn	up	his	Bridgeburners	just	outside	the	northwest	edge	of	the
encampment.	Waiting	for	the	marines	and	heavies	to	appear,	he	scanned	his
collection	of	soldiers.	They	were	loaded	down,	almost	groaning	beneath	the
weight	of	their	gear.	Way	too	many	kittens.
Sergeant	Rumjugs	caught	his	eye	and	he	nodded.	She	moved	up	to	position
herself	at	his	side	as	he	turned	to	face	the	Bonehunter	camp.	‘Ever	seen	the	like,
sir?	Who	do	you	think	gave	the	command	for	that?	Maybe	the	Adjunct
herself?’
Hedge	shook	his	head.	‘No	commands,	Sergeant	–	this	came	from
somewhere	else.	From	the	regulars	themselves,	rank	and	file	and	all	that.	I
admit	it,	I	didn’t	think	they	had	this	in	them.’
‘Sir,	we	heard	rumours,	about	the	marines	and	heavies…that	maybe	they
won’t	want	us	with	them.’
‘Doesn’t	matter,	Sergeant.	When	it	comes	right	down	to	it,	we	don’t	even
take	orders	from	the	Adjunct.’
‘But	didn’t	she—’
‘I	lied,’	Hedge	said.	‘I	ain’t	talked	to	nobody.	This	is	my	decision.’	He
glanced	over	at	her.	‘Got	a	problem	with	that,	Sergeant?’


But	she	was	grinning.
Hedge	studied	her.	‘You	find	that	funny,	do	you?	Why?’
She	shrugged.	‘Sir,	we	heard	rumours	–	other	ones	–	about	us	not	being
real	Bridgeburners.	But	you	just	proved	’em	wrong,	didn’t	you?	We	don’t
belong	to	nobody	–	only	to	each	other,	and	to	you,	sir.	You	lied	–	hah!’
Behind	them	Sweetlard	said,	‘Last	night	I	took	a	man	t’bed	for	free,	sir,	and
y’know	why?	When	he	asked	me	how	old	I	was	and	I	said	twenty-six,	he
believed	me.	Lies	are	sweet,	ain’t	they?’
‘Here	they	come,’	said	Hedge.
Fiddler	had	appeared,	leading	his	troops	out	from	the	camp.	Even	from
this	distance,	Hedge	could	see	the	faces	of	the	marines	and	heavies	–	sickly,
grim.	They’d	not	been	expecting	any	sort	of	send-off.	And	they	don’t	know
what	to	do	with	it.	Did	Fiddler	throw	a	salute	back?	No,	he	wouldn’t	have.
Fid,	I	see	you.	You’re	as	bad	off	as	the	rest	of	’em.	Like	you’re	headed	for
the	executioner.
Us	soldiers	only	got	one	kind	of	coin	worth	anything,	and	it’s	called
respect.	And	we	hoard	it,	we	hide	it	away,	and	there	ain’t	nobody	who’d	call	us
generous.	Easy	spenders	we’re	not.	But	there’s	something	feels	even	worse	than
having	to	give	up	a	coin	–	it’s	when	somebody	steps	up	and	tosses	one	back	at
us.
We	get	antsy.	We	look	away.	And	part	of	us	feels	like	breaking	inside,	and
we	get	down	on	ourselves,	and	outsiders	don’t	understand	that.	They	think	we
should	smile	and	wave	or	stand	proud.	But	we	don’t	want	to	do	anything	of	the
sort,	even	when	we’re	made	to.	It’s	because	of	all	the	friends	we	left	behind,	on
all	those	battlefields,	because	we	know	that	they’re	the	ones	deserving	of	all
that	respect.
We	could	sit	on	a	king’s	hoard	of	those	coins	and	still	stay	blind	to	all	of
’em.	Because	some	riches	stick	in	the	throat,	and	choke	us	going	down.
When	he	saw	Fiddler	look	up	and	see	him,	Hedge	strode	over.
‘Don’t	do	this,	Fid.’
‘Do	what?	I	told	you—’
‘Not	that.	You	halt	your	company	now.	You	form	’em	up	facing	those
regulars.	You’re	captain	now	and	they’re	looking	to	you.	It’s	the	coin,	Fiddler.
You	got	to	give	it	back.’
The	captain	stared	at	Hedge	for	a	long	moment.	‘Didn’t	think	it’d	be	this
hard.’
‘So	you	thought	to	just	run	away?’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘No.	I	didn’t	know	what	to	do.	Wasn’t	sure	what
they	wanted.’


Cocking	his	head,	Hedge	said,	‘You’re	not	convinced	they’re	worth	it,	are
you?’
The	captain	was	silent.
Hedge	shook	his	head.	‘We	ain’t	made	for	this,	you	and	me,	Fid.	We’re
sappers.	When	I	get	in	trouble	on	all	this	stuff	I	just	think	what	would
Whiskeyjack	do?	Listen,	you	need	those	regulars	to	stand	up,	you	need	them	to
buy	you	the	time	needed.	You	need	them	to	buy	it	with	their	own	blood,	their
own	lives.	It	don’t	matter	if	you	think	they’ve	not	earned	a	damned	thing.	You
got	to	give	the	coin	back.’
When	Fiddler	still	hesitated,	Hedge	swung	round	and	gestured	to	his
Bridgeburners,	then	turned	back.	‘We’re	forming	up,	Fid,	faces	to	the	camp	–
you	just	gonna	stand	there,	with	all	your	marines	and	heavies	mobbing	up	and
not	knowing	where	to	fucking	look?’
‘No,’	Fiddler	replied	in	a	thick	voice.	‘Hedge	–	I	think…	I	just	faltered	a
step.	That’s	all.’
‘Better	now	than	a	few	days	from	now,	hey?’
As	Hedge	moved	to	join	his	squads,	Fiddler	called	out.	‘Wait.’
He	turned	back.	‘What	now?’
‘Something	else	everyone	needs	to	see,	I	think.’	And	Fiddler	stepped
forward	and	held	out	his	hand.
Hedge	eyed	it.	‘You	think	that’s	enough?’
‘Start	there,	idiot.’
Smiling,	Hedge	grasped	that	forearm.
And	Fiddler	pulled	him	into	a	hard	embrace.
	
Badalle	stood	atop	a	wagon,	Saddic	at	her	side,	watching	the	scene	at	the	edge
of	camp.
‘What’s	happening,	Badalle?’	Saddic	asked.
‘Wounds	take	time	to	heal,’	she	replied,	watching	the	two	men	embracing,
feeling	a	vast	tension	seem	to	drain	away	on	all	sides.
‘Are	they	lovers?’
‘Brothers,’	she	said.
‘The	one	with	the	red	beard	–	you	called	him	Father,	Badalle.	Why?’
‘It’s	what	being	a	soldier	is	all	about.	That	is	what	I	have	seen	since	we
found	them.	You	do	not	choose	your	family,	and	sometimes	there’s	trouble	in
that	family,	but	you	don’t	choose.’
‘But	they	did.	They	chose	to	be	soldiers.’
‘And	then	they	come	face	to	face	with	death,	Saddic.	That	is	the	blood	tie,


and	it	makes	a	knot	not	even	dying	can	cut.’	And	that	is	why	the	others	are
saluting.	‘Soon,’	she	said,	‘very	soon,	we	are	going	to	see	this	family	awaken
to	anger.’
‘But	Mother	is	sending	those	ones	away.	Will	we	ever	see	them	again?’
‘It’s	easy,	Saddic,’	she	said.	‘Just	close	your	eyes.’
	
Walking	slowly,	Pores	made	his	way	to	the	edge	of	the	camp	so	that	he	could
look	out	on	the	marines	and	heavies,	who	were	now	forming	up	to	face	the
regulars.	He	looked	round	for	the	Adjunct	but	could	not	see	her.	Nor	was	Fist
Blistig	anywhere	in	sight	–	the	man	who	tried	to	murder	me.
There	is	nothing	more	dangerous	than	a	man	without	a	sense	of	humour.
As	Fiddler	and	Hedge	drew	apart	and	headed	for	their	respective
companies,	Faradan	Sort	came	up	alongside	Pores,	and	then,	on	his	other	side,
Fist	Kindly.
Pores	sighed.	‘Fists.	Was	all	this	by	your	command?’
‘I	was	barking	orders	when	they	just	stood	up	and	left	me	standing	there,’
said	Faradan	Sort.	‘They’re	as	bad	as	marines,	these	regulars.’
‘We	will	see	if	that’s	true	soon	enough,’	Kindly	said.	‘Master-Sergeant
Lieutenant	Pores,	are	you	recovered?’
‘Some	additional	healing	proved	possible	once	we	were	away	from	the
desert.	As	you	see,	sir,	I	am	up	and	about.’
‘It	is	your	innate	laziness	that	still	needs	addressing.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘Are	you	agreeing	with	me,	Master-Sergeant	Lieutenant	Pores?’
‘I	always	agree	with	you,	sir.’
‘Oh,	enough,	you	two,’	Faradan	Sort	said.	‘We’re	about	to	be	saluted.’
All	the	regulars	had	drawn	to	this	side	of	the	camp	and	stood	in	an	uneven
mass.	There	was	an	ease	to	all	of	this	that	Pores	found…peculiar,	as	if	the
entire	structure	of	the	military,	in	all	its	rigidity	and	inane	affectation,	had
ceased	to	be	relevant.	The	regulars	no	longer	held	their	own	salute	and	now
stood	watching,	for	all	the	world	like	a	crowd	drawn	down	to	the	docks	to	see
a	fleet’s	departure	from	the	bay,	while	Captain	Fiddler	moved	out	to	stand	in
front	of	his	marines,	facing	them	all.	He	lifted	his	hand	in	a	salute,	held	it	for	a
moment	as	his	soldiers	did	the	same,	and	then	let	the	hand	fall.
And	that	was	it.	No	answering	gesture	from	the	regulars.	Pores	grunted.
‘It’s	the	old	coin	thing,	isn’t	it?’
‘Indeed,’	replied	Kindly	in	a	rough	voice.	He	cleared	his	throat	and	said,
‘That	tradition	was	born	on	the	Seti	Plain,	from	the	endless	internecine	warfare


among	the	horse	clans.	Honest	scraps	ended	in	an	exchange	of	trophy	coins.’
He	was	silent	for	a	few	breaths,	and	then	he	sighed.	‘Seti	combs	are	works	of
art.	Antler	and	horn,	polished	to	a	lustre—’
‘I	feel	another	bout	of	laziness	coming	on,	sir.	Isn’t	it	time	you	ordered	me
to	do	something?’
Blinking,	Kindly	faced	Pores.	Then	shocked	him	with	a	hand	on	his
shoulder.	‘Not	today.’	And	he	walked	back	into	camp.
Faradan	Sort	remained	at	his	side	for	a	moment	longer.	‘If	he	had	a	son	to
choose,	Pores…’
‘I’ve	already	been	disowned	once,	Fist,	and	regardless	of	what	you	might
think,	I’m	not	a	glutton	for	punishment.’
She	studied	him.	‘He	was	saying	goodbye.’
‘I	know	what	it	was,’	Pores	snapped,	wincing	as	he	turned	too	quickly
away.	When	she	reached	to	take	his	arm,	he	waved	her	off.	Both	gestures	made
his	chest	hurt,	but	that	was	the	kind	of	pain	he	welcomed	these	days.	Keeping
the	other	kind	at	bay.
Forgot	to	thank	him.	Deadsmell.	And	now	it’s	too	late.	And	now	Kindly	goes
all	soft	on	me.	Where’s	the	fun	in	that?
‘Go	back	to	your	wagon,’	Faradan	Sort	said.	‘I’ll	detail	three	squads	for
the	harness.’
No	heavies	now.	‘Better	make	it	four,	Fist.’
‘It	is	my	understanding,’	she	replied,	‘that	we	do	not	have	far	to	go	today.’
Despite	himself,	he	glanced	over	at	her.	‘Really?	Has	she	announced	our
destination,	then?’
‘She	has.’
‘And?’
She	looked	across	at	him.	‘We’re	looking	for	a	suitable	field	of	battle.’
Pores	thought	about	that	for	a	few	moments.	‘So	they	know	we’re	here.’
‘Yes,	Lieutenant.	And	they	are	marching	to	meet	us.’
He	looked	to	the	departing	column	of	marines	and	heavies.	Then…where
are	they	going?	This	is	what	I	get	for	lying	half	dead	for	days,	and	then	spoonfeeding	old	Shorthand,	waiting	for	a	word	from	him.	Just	one	word.	Something
more	than	just	staring	into	space	–	that’s	not	a	proper	way	for	a	man	to	end	his
days.
And	now	I	don’t	know	what	the	Hood’s	going	on.	Me,	of	all	people.
The	camp	was	breaking	up	behind	him.	Everything	coming	down	for	the
march,	with	barely	a	single	word	spoken.	He’d	never	known	an	army	as	quiet
as	this	one.	‘Fist.’
‘Yes?’


‘Will	they	fight?’
She	stepped	close,	her	eyes	cold	as	ice.	‘You	don’t	ask	that	kind	of
question,	Pores.	Not	another	word.	Am	I	understood?’
‘Aye,	Fist.	I	just	don’t	want	to	be	the	only	one	unsheathing	my	sword,	that’s
all.’
‘You’re	in	no	condition	for	that.’
‘That	detail	hardly	matters,	Fist.’
Making	a	face,	she	turned	away.	‘I	suppose	not.’
Pores	watched	her	head	back	into	the	camp.
Besides,	I	might	need	that	sword.	If	Blistig	gets	close.	It’s	not	like	he’ll	be
of	any	use	in	the	scrap	–	the	very	opposite,	in	fact.	But	I’ll	choose	the	perfect
moment.	It’s	all	down	to	timing.	All	of	life	is	down	to	timing,	and	that	was
always	my	talent,	wasn’t	it?
I’m	mostly	a	nice	guy.	Made	a	career	of	avoiding	blood	and	fighting	and	all
the	unpleasant	stuff.	The	challenge	was	pulling	that	off	while	being	in	an	army.
But…not	as	hard	as	it	sounds.
No	matter.	It’s	not	as	if	I’m	afraid	of	war.	It’s	the	chaos	I	don’t	like.	Kindly’s
combs…now,	you	see,	those	I	do	understand.	That	man	I	understand.	Through
and	through.	And	being	his	one	unruly	comb,	why,	how	perfect	was	that?
Mostly	a	nice	guy,	like	I	said.	But	Blistig	tried	killing	me,	for	a	few	empty
casks.
I	don’t	feel	like	being	nice	any	more.
	
‘Adjunct	wishes	to	see	you,	Fist,’	said	Lostara	Yil.
Blistig	glanced	up,	saw	the	look	in	her	eyes	and	decided	to	ignore	it.
Grunting,	he	straightened	from	where	he	had	been	sitting	amidst	discarded
equipment.
He	followed	the	woman	through	the	camp,	paying	little	attention	to	the
preparations	going	on	around	them.	These	regulars	were	good	at	going
through	all	the	motions	–	they’d	done	enough	of	it,	after	all,	and	had	probably
walked	more	leagues	since	forming	up	than	most	people	did	in	a	lifetime.	But
that	didn’t	add	any	notches	on	the	scabbard,	did	it?	For	all	their
professionalism	–	suddenly	rediscovered	since	the	Blood	for	Water	miracle,
and	not	just	rediscovered,	but	reinvented	with	a	discipline	so	zealous	it
bordered	on	the	obsessive	–	these	regulars	looked	fragile	to	Blistig.
They	would	melt	away	before	the	enemy	at	the	first	hint	of	pressure.	He’d
seen	them	lining	the	route	taken	by	the	marines	and	heavies;	he’d	seen	their
pathetic	salutes.	Good	for	gestures	now,	these	soldiers,	but	their	faces	were


empty.	They	had	the	look	of	the	dead.	Every	man,	every	woman.
When	Lostara	reached	the	entrance	to	the	Adjunct’s	tent,	she	halted,
gesturing	him	inside.
He	moved	past	her,	stepped	within.
Only	the	front	chamber	remained	standing	–	the	back	end	of	the	tent	was
already	unstaked	and	hanging	in	a	thick	creased	wall	behind	Tavore,	who	stood
facing	him.	There	was	no	one	else	present,	not	even	that	smirking	priest,	and
Lostara	Yil	had	not	followed	him	in.
‘What	is	it,	Adjunct?	I	have	troops	to	oversee	if	you	want	us	up	and	on	the
way	before	noon.’
‘Fist	Blistig,	I	am	placing	you	in	command	of	the	centre.	You	will	have	Fist
Kindly	on	your	right	and	Fist	Faradan	Sort	on	your	left.	Warleader	Gall	will
hold	the	Khundryl	in	reserve,	along	with	the	skirmishers	and	archers.’
He	stared	at	her,	dumbfounded.	‘You	are	describing	the	presentation	for
battle,’	he	said.	‘But	there	won’t	be	any	battle.	It	will	be	a	rout.	We	will	face
Forkrul	Assail	–	and	you’ve	gone	and	given	up	your	sword.	Their	sorcery	will
overwhelm	us.’
Her	eyes	held	on	his,	unwavering.	‘You	will	hold	the	centre,	Fist.	That	is
your	only	task	in	the	upcoming	engagement.	You	will	be	attacked	by	normal
soldiers	–	Kolansii	–	a	conventional	army.	Expect	them	to	be	highly	disciplined
and	well	trained.	If	there	are	heavy	infantry	among	the	enemy	then	you	can	be
certain	that	they	will	strike	for	your	position.	You	will	not	yield	a	single	step,	is
that	understood?’
Blistig	drew	off	his	helmet,	contemplated	throwing	it	at	the	woman
standing	opposite	him.	Instead,	he	clawed	a	hand	through	his	thinning	hair.	I
could	kill	her.	Right	now,	here	in	this	tent.	But	she	bought	their	souls	again,
didn’t	she?	I’d	never	get	away	alive.	Better	to	wait,	find	a	more	perfect	moment.
But	then,	who	am	I	trying	to	fool?	‘Put	me	there,	Adjunct,	and	I’ll	take	a	knife
to	the	back	before	the	Kolansii	even	crest	the	horizon.’
There	was	a	look	in	her	eyes	that	made	him	wonder	if	she’d	seen	right
through	to	his	thoughts,	if	she	knew	how	close	she	was	to	being	murdered,	and
simply	did	not	care	enough	to	feel	fear.	‘Fist,	I	was	advised	when	in	Aren	to
leave	you	in	command	of	the	city	garrison.	Indeed,	there	was	talk	of	promoting
you	to	the	city’s	Fist,	and	had	that	occurred	it	is	possible	that	you	would	then	be
touted	to	become	High	Fist,	overseeing	all	of	South	Seven	Cities.	I	understand
that	what	I	have	just	described	would	have	suited	you	perfectly.	At	least	until	the
next	uprising.’
Blistig’s	voice	was	a	rasp,	‘What	is	the	point	of	this,	Adjunct?’
‘However,	your	proponents	–	the	officers	and	functionaries	in	Aren	–


couldn’t	see	a	span	beyond	their	city’s	walls.	They	could	not	imagine	that
Jhistal	Mallick	Rel	would	not	rot	away	the	rest	of	his	days	in	a	gaol	cell,	or
lose	his	head	to	a	pike	above	the	main	gate.	In	other	words,	they	had	no
comprehension	of	the	extent	of	the	man’s	influence,	how	it	had	already
corrupted	the	Claw,	or	that	his	agents	were	even	then	positioned	within	reach
of	Laseen’s	throne.
‘Furthermore,’	she	continued,	still	studying	him,	‘that	his	hatred	for	you
and	your…betrayal	at	Aren,	following	Coltaine’s	fall,	pretty	much	assured
your	eventual	assassination.	You	may	indeed	be	unaware	that	between	the	Fall
and	my	arrival	in	the	city	three	attempts	were	made	on	your	life.	All	of	them
successfully	intercepted,	at	the	cost	of	four	valuable	agents.
‘Your	transfer	to	under	my	command	was	in	fact	the	only	means	of
keeping	you	alive,	Fist	Blistig.	The	fourth	time	your	life	was	saved	was	at
Malaz	City;	had	we	failed	in	extricating	ourselves	you	would	have	been
arrested	and	executed.	Now,	you	may	choose	to	believe	that	I	undertook	such
efforts	because	I	value	you	as	a	commander,	and	be	sure	that	to	this	day	I
remain	impressed	and	admiring	of	your	quick	wit	and	decisiveness	when
refusing	to	yield	Aren	to	the	rebels.	But	that	was	not	my	primary	reason	for
saving	your	life.	Mallick	Rel,	High	Fist	Korbolo	Dom	and	their	interests	would
seek	to	revise	the	events	at	Aren	–	the	outlawing	and	castigation	of	the	Wickans
was	but	the	beginning.
‘Fist	Blistig,	there	are	few	who	know	the	truth	of	those	events.	I	saved	your
life	to	keep	that	truth	alive.’
He	was	silent	following	this	speech.	A	part	of	him	wanted	to	disbelieve
every	word,	wanted	to	call	her	a	damned	liar,	and	a	self-serving	one	at	that.
But…how	could	any	of	this	be	self-serving?	She	was	placing	him	in	command
of	the	centre	–	probably	facing	heavy	infantry	–	among	Malazan	soldiers	who
despised	him.	She’d	saved	his	life	only	to	throw	it	away	now,	and	how	did	that
make	sense,	any	sense	at	all?	‘Adjunct,	are	you	expecting	me	to	thank	you?’
‘The	only	expectation	of	any	importance,	Fist,	concerns	commanding	the
centre	to	the	best	of	your	abilities.’
‘They	won’t	follow	me.’
‘They	will.’
‘Why	should	they?’
‘Because	they	will	have	no	one	else.’
No	one…	‘Where	will	you	be,	Adjunct?’
‘I	will	be	facing	the	Forkrul	Assail	and	their	sorcery.	I	will	be	fighting	the
power	of	their	will.	I	will	be	preventing	it	from	reaching	my	soldiers.’
‘But	you	gave	up	your	damned	sword,	woman!’


‘There	are	residual	effects	to	bearing	such	a	weapon,	Fist.	In	any	case,
none	of	that	is	your	concern.’
‘Except	when	you	fail.	When	you	fall.’
‘Even	then,	Fist.’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her.	‘That	only	works	if	you	take	them	down	with
you.	Is	that	the	plan,	Adjunct?	One	final	sacrifice	to	defend	an	army	that	doesn’t
even	like	you?	That	doesn’t	want	to	be	here?	That	doesn’t	even	know	what	it’s
supposed	to	be	fighting	for?	And	then	you	expect	me	and	the	other	Fists	to	hold
them	together?	With	you	dead	and	gone?’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘You	are	contradicting	yourself.’
He	waved	a	dismissive	hand,	the	gesture	chopping	the	air.
Tavore	seemed	to	flinch	slightly	at	that,	but	the	tone	of	her	next	words
belied	the	impression.	‘Maintain	your	line	with	the	flanks,	Fist.’
‘We’re	going	to	get	cut	to	pieces.’
Turning	away,	she	reached	for	her	leather	gloves.	‘If	so,	Fist,	just	make
sure	you	take	a	long	time	dying.’
He	left	without	bothering	to	salute,	walked	with	his	helm	dangling	from
one	hand.
Three	foiled	attempts	on	my	life?	A	corrupted	Claw?
Then	who	did	the	foiling?
	
Banaschar	stood	twenty	paces	away	from	her	tent,	motionless	while	figures
moved	in	measured	haste	around	him,	wanting	to	be	a	heavy	stone	in	the
stream,	a	place	to	set	a	foot	and	find	an	instant	or	two	of	rest.	But	his	was	a
lifeless	island,	until	Lostara	Yil	found	him,	taking	his	arm	in	hers	and	pulling
him	round	–	Henar	Vygulf	grinning	off	to	one	side.
‘What	is	this?’	Banaschar	demanded,	only	vaguely	resisting	as	she	led	him
away	–	he’d	just	seen	Blistig	exit	Tavore’s	tent,	his	stride	echoing	that	of	a
lifeless	T’lan	Imass,	and	he’d	been	considering	going	to	the	Adjunct	again,	to
see	what	he	could	glean	of	what	had	taken	place	between	her	and	the	Fist.
Instead,	he	was	being	pulled	away.
And	there,	ahead,	stood	a	small	group	of	officers.	Skanarow.	Ruthan	Gudd,
Raband	and	Faradan	Sort.
Banaschar	sought	to	disengage	his	arm.	‘You	keep	forgetting,	I’m	not
actually	in	this	army.’
‘Our	last	palaver,’	said	Lostara.	‘Make	it	mocking,	make	it	solemn,
however	you	like	it,	Priest.	But	it	will	happen,	and	you	will	be	in	attendance.’
‘Why?’


They’d	reached	the	others,	and	Banaschar	saw	the	expectation	in	their	faces
and	wanted	to	hide	under	a	shield.
Ruthan	Gudd,	fingers	combing	his	beard,	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Priest.
We’ve	all	been	given	our	orders.	Will	you	be	at	the	Adjunct’s	side	through	all
of	this?’
All	of	what?	The	dying?	‘I	don’t	know.	I	doubt	it.’
‘Why?’	asked	Faradan	Sort,	the	word	sharp,	accusing.
He	shrugged.	‘I	expect	she	will	be	fighting.	Eventually.’
Lostara	Yil	cleared	her	throat	in	the	silence	that	followed,	and	then	said,
‘She	has	ordered	me,	Henar	and	Ruthan	Gudd	to	attend	to	her	at	all	times.’
‘That	makes	sense,’	Banaschar	said.
‘It’s	the	Forkrul	Assail,	isn’t	it?’
To	Lostara’s	question	Banaschar	simply	shrugged	again.
‘She	has	surrendered	her	sword,	somewhere,’	said	Faradan	Sort.	‘How
does	she	expect	to	defend	herself	against	the	sorcery	of	the	Assail?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
Raband	voiced	a	raw	curse	and	looked	ready	to	leave,	but	Skanarow	shook
her	head	at	him	and	he	subsided,	scowling.
Lostara	caught	Banaschar ’s	eye	–	he	could	see	fear	in	hers.	‘Priest,	I	do	not
think	I	will	again	Shadow	Dance.	Not	the	way	I	did	before.	If	she	is	expecting
such	a	thing	from	me	–	perhaps	against	the	Forkrul	Assail—’
‘Captain,	I	don’t	know	what	she	is	expecting,’	said	Banaschar	quietly.	‘You
and	Ruthan	Gudd,	you	have	both	shown	exceptional	abilities.	Is	that	why	she
wants	you	close?	I	imagine	that	it	is,	and	at	the	moment	of	greatest	need,	will
she	look	to	you	two?	Why	wouldn’t	she?’
‘I	can’t	do	it	again!’
Banaschar	glanced	over	at	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘And	what	of	you,	Captain?
Besieged	by	the	same	uncertainties,	are	you?	Or	will	the	gift	of	the
Stormriders	reawaken	to	protect	you?’
‘The	Adjunct	clearly	believes	that	it	will,’	he	replied.
‘Have	you	told	her	otherwise,	Captain?’
‘It’s	complicated.’
‘Is	it	not	why	you’re	here?’	Banaschar	asked.	‘Was	this	not	the	reason	for
their	gift?’
The	others	were	studying	Ruthan	Gudd	now,	and	the	man	looked	decidedly
unhappy.	‘It	depends.	Nobody’s	ever	as	forthcoming	on	these	things	as	one
might	like.	Did	they	know	what	was	hidden	in	Kolanse?	Probably.	Are	they
interested	in…liberation?’
‘Hardly,’	growled	Faradan	Sort,	one	hand	now	on	the	sword	belted	at	her


side.
Ruthan	Gudd’s	eyes	flicked	down	to	that	weapon	and	his	smile	was	wry
when	he	lifted	his	gaze	to	Faradan’s.	‘I	suspected	you	had	a	sound	reason	for
forswearing	the	Wall.’
‘I	fought	three	links	from	Greymane.’
Ruthan	Gudd	nodded	but	said	nothing	more.
Breath	hissed	from	Lostara	Yil.	‘This	isn’t	fair.	Ruthan	–	do	you	fear	using
what	the	Stormriders	gave	you?’
‘The	Stormriders	are	not	a	people	given	to	compromise,’	Banaschar	said,
when	it	was	clear	that	Ruthan	Gudd	had	no	intention	of	replying.	‘The	captain
senses	the	ambivalence	in	what	is	to	come.	And	the	risk	of	failure.	He
anticipates	that	the	power	of	the	Stormriders	will,	if	unleashed,	conclude	that
said	risk	is	too	great	–	with	too	much	to	lose	should	the	Adjunct’s	plan	fail.’
Lostara	said,	‘Ruthan	–	do	you	not	control	that	power?’
Finally,	the	man	scowled	and	said,	‘Ask	that	of	yourself	and	the	Shadow
Dance,	Lostara	Yil.’
‘But	that	is	the	will	of	a	god!’
‘And	whom	do	the	Stormriders	serve?	Does	anyone	even	know?	You,
Faradan?	Are	they	mindless,	senseless	creatures?	You	have	stood	the	Wall.	Tell
her	–	tell	her	what	you	have	seen	with	your	own	eyes.’
‘They	have	purpose,’	she	said	slowly.	‘They	are	driven.	More	than	that,	I
cannot	say.’
‘This	is	getting	us	nowhere,’	said	Raband.	‘The	fact	is	this:	you	and	me,
Skanarow,	we’re	in	command	of	our	companies.	Is	there	anything	more	that
you	and	I	need	know?	Then	I	suggest	we	head	back	to	our	troops	and	leave	the
rest	of	their	discussion	to	our	superiors.’
Banaschar	watched	him	dragging	Skanarow	away	by	one	arm	–	she	threw
a	look	back	at	Ruthan	Gudd	but	he	either	did	not	notice	or	chose	not	to,	and	so
did	not	see	the	crushing	grief	take	her	face.
Sighing,	Faradan	Sort	drew	her	gauntlets	from	her	belt.	‘Fare	you	well,
captains.’
The	priest	looked	up	at	the	morning	sky,	squinted	at	the	Jade	Strangers.
Never	been	closer.	We	only	have	a	day	or	two.	Not	more,	surely.
‘Cotillion	swore	to	me	that	he	would	never	again	take	possession,’	said
Lostara	Yil.
Banaschar	shot	her	a	searching	look.	‘Too	tempting,	I	imagine?’
‘What’s	given	and	what’s	taken	away,	Priest.’
He	nodded,	understanding	her	meaning.
‘I	was	expecting	to	survive	all	of	this,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘Now	I	am	not	so


sure.’
‘So	you	know	how	the	rest	of	us	feel,’	snapped	Lostara	Yil.
But	the	man	simply	turned	to	Banaschar.	‘If	you	will	not	be	with	her,	Priest,
then	where	will	you	be?	What	is	your	reason	for	being	here?’
‘There	is	a	question	that	has	been	haunting	me,’	he	replied	over	the	sound
of	the	first	horns	announcing	column	formation.	‘How	does	a	mortal	win	over
a	god?	Has	it	ever	happened	before,	even?	Has	the	old	order	been	overturned?
Or	is	this	just…special	circumstance?	A	moment	unique	in	all	of	history?’
‘You	have	won	the	Worm	of	Autumn	to	her	cause,	Priest?’
At	Lostara’s	question,	Banaschar	frowned.	He	studied	her	for	a	moment,
and	then	glanced	at	Ruthan	Gudd.	‘You	look	shocked,’	he	said	to	him.	‘Is	it	that
I	somehow	possessed	that	power?	Or	is	it	the	very	idea	that	what	we	do	in	this
mortal	world	–	with	our	lives,	with	our	will	–	could	make	a	god	kneel	before
us?’	Then	he	shook	his	head.	‘But	you	both	misunderstood	me.	I	was	not
speaking	of	myself	at	all.	I	cannot	win	over	a	god,	even	when	I	am	the	last
priest	in	that	god’s	House.	Don’t	you	understand?	It’s	her.	She	did	it.	Not	me.’
‘She	spoke	to	your	god?’
Banaschar	grunted.	‘No,	Lostara.	She	rarely	speaks	at	all	–	you	of	all
people	should	know	that	by	now.	No.	Instead,	she	simply	refused	to	waver	from
her	path,	and	by	that	alone	she	has	humbled	the	gods.	Do	you	understand	me?
Humbled	them.’
Ruthan	Gudd	shook	his	head.	‘The	gods	are	too	arrogant	to	ever	be
humbled.’
‘A	year	ago,	lying	drunk	on	my	cot,	I	would	have	agreed	with	you,
Captain.	So	tell	me	now,	will	you	fight	for	her?’
His	eyes	were	thinned	as	he	studied	Banaschar,	and	then	he	said,	‘With	all
my	heart.’
The	gasp	that	came	from	Lostara	was	almost	a	sob.
	
The	Bonehunters	formed	up	into	column.	Alone	by	express	order,	the	Adjunct
mounted	her	horse	and	remained	motionless	on	it	until	the	last	of	the	wagons
they	were	taking	trundled	past,	and	then	she	took	up	her	reins	and	swung	the
animal	to	face	west.
She	could	see	the	worn	path	taken	by	the	marines	and	the	heavies,	angling
slightly	northward	but	still	on	a	westerly	track.	They	were	already	out	of	sight,
vanishing	into	the	deceptive	folds	of	the	plain.	Her	hand	brushed	the	empty
scabbard	at	her	side,	and	then	away	again.	She	adjusted	the	strap	of	her	helm,
and	looked	down	to	examine	her	worn,	oft-mended	Malazan	uniform.	The


burgundy	was	faded,	the	grey	worn	to	white	in	places.	The	leather	of	her
gloves	was	cracked,	sweat-	and	salt-stained.	The	armour	bands	protecting	her
thighs	had	rubbed	through	the	underpadding	here	and	there.
She	had	clasped	her	cloak	to	the	fittings	situated	on	the	harness	over	her
breastbone,	and	the	black	wool	hung	heavy,	drawing	her	shoulders	back.
Adjusting	its	weight	until	it	was	even,	she	straightened	and	ran	a	hand	across
the	fittings	she	could	reach,	tightening	them	where	needed.	Reached	up	and
pushed	stray	wisps	of	thin	hair	from	her	cheeks.
Guiding	her	horse	round,	she	nudged	the	animal	into	a	slow	trot.
As	she	passed	her	soldiers	on	her	left,	the	Adjunct	held	her	gaze	straight
ahead.
Faces	turned	to	watch	her.
No	one	called	out.	Not	a	word	of	encouragement,	not	a	single	jest,	not	a
question	rising	up	above	the	thump	of	boots	and	the	rustle	of	gear	to	which	she
might	respond	with	a	word	or	two.
She	held	herself	straight,	moving	slowly,	making	her	way	towards	the	head
of	the	column.	And	of	all	the	journeys	she	had	undertaken,	since	the	very
beginning,	this	one	–	from	the	back	of	the	column	to	its	head	–	was	the	longest
one	she	had	ever	travelled.	And,	as	ever,	she	travelled	it	alone.
	
Riding	bone-white	Jhag	horses,	the	three	Forkrul	Assail	reined	in	a	third	of	a
league	ahead	of	their	armies.	In	their	minds,	they	could	hear	distant	clamour,
and	they	knew	that	the	assault	against	the	Great	Spire	had	begun.	But	Akhrast
Korvalain	was	trembling	with	blows	from	foreign	magics,	both	ancient	and
new,	and	so	details	evaded	their	questing.	The	unease	drifting	between	them
was,	alas,	palpable.
‘It	does	not	matter,’	Brother	Aloft	announced.	‘We	have	before	us	a
singular	task,	and	in	this	we	shall	prevail.	If	it	follows	that	we	must	retrace	our
steps	to	win	once	more	the	Altar	of	Judgement,	then	we	shall	do	so.’
Sister	Freedom	spoke.	‘Brothers,	I	sense	three	threats	before	us,	but	one
will	not	reach	us	in	time	to	affect	the	forthcoming	battle,	so	we	can	for	the
moment	discount	it.	It	is,	however,	the	smaller	of	the	two	elements	before	us
that	troubles	me.	Clearly,	they	have	a	specific	intention,	and	the	main	force
marching	towards	us	is	positioning	itself	with	the	aim	of	blocking	our
advance.	From	this,	I	conclude	that	the	purpose	of	the	smaller	force	is	of	vital
importance.’
Brother	Aloft	slowly	nodded.	‘What	do	you	propose,	Sister?’
‘We	each	possess	an	army,	Brothers.	If	my	senses	are	accurate	–	and	I


assure	you	that	they	are	–	any	one	of	us	alone	is	more	than	a	match	for	the
main	force	ahead	of	us.	However,	bearing	in	mind	that	our	enemy	is	perhaps
formidable	in	ways	we	have	not	yet	been	made	aware	of	–	they	did	manage	to
cross	the	Glass	Desert,	after	all	–	I	advise	that	we	commit	two	armies	to	their
destruction.	The	third,	perhaps	yours,	Brother	Grave,	sets	off	at	a	faster	pace	to
hunt	down	the	smaller	force	–	and	prevent	them	from	doing	whatever	it	is	they
plan	to	do.’
‘And	this	small	force,’	Brother	Grave	said	in	his	thin	voice,	‘they	flee
northwest,	yes?’
‘I	doubt	it	is	flight	as	such,	Brother,’	Freedom	said,	frowning.	‘I	continue
to	sense	a	measure	of	confidence	in	you,	Brother	Grave,	perhaps	somewhat
overinflated	under	the	circumstances.’
The	older	Pure	snorted.	‘We	shall	face	humans.	Thus	far,	in	all	my
thousands	of	years	of	life,	I	have	yet	to	be	impressed	by	these	creatures.’
‘Nevertheless,	I	implore	you	to	engage	with	surety	tempered	by	caution,
Brother.’
‘I	shall	be	suitably	exact	in	the	execution	of	my	mission,	Sister	Freedom.	I
shall	hunt	down	this	handful	of	humans	and	destroy	them.’
‘Your	words	reassure	me,’	she	replied.	‘Brother	Aloft,	I	welcome	your
advice	in	the	matter	to	follow,	as	much	as	I	do	Brother	Grave’s.	That	third
element	–	so	disturbingly	efficacious	against	our	northern	forces	–	is,	as	I	said,
too	far	away	to	affect	the	engagements	we	anticipate.	However,	there	is	the
slight	risk	–	as	it	is	known	that	certain	companies	among	them	are	mounted	–
that	they	would	in	fact	intercept	Brother	Grave	should	he	lead	his	forces	north
from	here	in	his	effort	to	reach	his	target	as	quickly	as	possible.	You	see,	my
instincts	are	that	Brother	Grave’s	foe	–	despite	its	paltry	size	–	is	in	fact	the
most	dangerous	element	now	arrayed	before	us.’
‘Understood,	Sister	Freedom.	Then,	might	I	suggest	the	following?	That
Brother	Grave	divide	his	army	on	the	basis	of	speed	of	travel.	That	he
personally	lead	his	light	and	medium	infantry	not	northwestward,	but
southwest	skirting	the	force	you	and	I	shall	engage,	and	then	striking	due	north
behind	said	enemy;	while	in	turn	his	heavy	infantry	take	the	shorter	northwest
route	–	being	heavy	infantry,	they	can	well	successfully	withstand	incursions
by	cavalry	should	the	unexpected	happen.	If	led	by	the	purest	of	the	Watered,
the	heavy	infantry	element	can	coordinate	their	arrival	at	the	target	to	coincide
with	Brother	Grave’s	own	companies,	as	rudimentary	communication	should
be	possible.’
Sister	Freedom	turned	to	Brother	Grave.	‘Does	this	suit	you,	Brother?’
‘Light	and	medium	elements	constitute	a	little	over	two	thousand	soldiers	–


my	force	was	ever	weighted	on	the	heavier	elements,	organized	as	it	originally
was	for	sieges	and	set	battles.	Sister	Freedom,	how	accurate	is	your	gauging	of
the	complement	of	this	smaller	enemy	force?’
‘No	more	than	a	hundred,	I	believe,	Brother	Grave.’
‘Well	then.’	The	man	smiled,	face	folding	with	the	expression.	‘Two
thousand	against	a	hundred.	Will	you	both	forgive	me	for	a	small	measure	of
confidence	regarding	those	odds?’
Brother	Aloft	said,	‘Since	we	are	certain	that	there	is	nothing	like	a	pass	or
any	other	similar	feature	into	which	to	force	attackers,	then	I	cannot	but	share
your	confidence,	Brother	Grave.	At	best,	the	enemy	will	be	defending	a	hill	–
perhaps	one	of	the	ancient	Elan	barrow	camps	–	and	so	can	be	attacked	from
all	sides.	And	of	course,	even	should	the	light	and	medium	forces	fail,	the
heavy	infantry	companies	will	rejoin	you	and	thereby	contribute	to	subsequent
assaults.	Given	all	this,	I	believe	we	have	successfully	addressed	the	matter	of
the	smaller	enemy	force.’	Aloft	faced	Freedom.	‘Only	a	hundred,	you	say?
Perhaps	they	are	deserters.’
‘It	is	possible,’	she	conceded.	‘Yet	my	instincts	say	otherwise.’
‘With	vehemence?’
She	glanced	at	him.	‘Yes,	Brother	Aloft,	with	vehemence.’
‘Then,	if	I	may,’	said	Aloft,	‘we	should	perhaps	discuss	another	concern.
The	third	force,	which	has	so	thoroughly	negated	our	efforts	at	defeating	or
even	containing	it,	is	now	marching	with	the	clear	intention	of	joining	this
battle	–	though	as	you	say,	Sister,	they	will	be	too	late.	My	thoughts	are	these:	it
is	too	great	a	reach	to	imagine	that	there	has	been	no	coordination	here.	To
begin,	the	strongest	fortress	in	Estobanse	is	taken,	thus	threatening	our	north
and,	more	important,	our	primary	source	of	food,	being	the	valley	province.
We	respond	by	sending	armies	against	them,	only	to	have	them	crushed.	Now,
from	what	we	are	able	to	glean	from	Sister	Reverence	and	Brother	Diligence,
at	the	Spire,	two	distinct	elements	have	engaged	us	from	the	south.	And	we	of
course	now	march	to	block	an	incursion	from	the	west.	For	all	we	know,	a
foreign	fleet	is	even	now	entering	Kolanse	Bay.’	He	surveyed	the	expressions
before	him	and	slowly	nodded.	‘This	was	well	planned,	do	you	not	agree?	Its
principal	aim,	to	draw	apart	our	active	armies,	has	already	succeeded.	In	each
instance,	we	are	forced	to	react	rather	than	initiate.’
‘A	proficient	high	command,	then,’	said	Sister	Freedom,	nodding.
But	Aloft	shook	his	head.	‘In	truth,	this	has	the	feel	of	a	grand	strategy,	and
just	as	your	instincts	speak	with	vehemence	to	you	about	the	matter	of	the
smaller	force,	Sister	Freedom,	so	now	my	instincts	have	been	shouting	that	this
invasion	–	this	strategy	and	each	and	every	tactical	engagement	–	is	in	fact	the


product	of	a	single	individual’s	will.’	He	nodded	to	Brother	Grave.	‘I	accept
your	assessment	of	humans,	in	general.	But	is	it	not	also	true	that,	on	rare
occasions,	there	rises	from	the	multitude	of	mediocrity	that	is	humanity	a
single	person	of	extraordinary	vision	conjoined	with	the	will	to	achieve	that
vision,	who	presents	a	most	formidable	presence.	One	to	shape	the	course	of
history.’
Brother	Grave	grunted.	‘Charismatic	tyrants,	you	mean.	Indeed,	they	do
appear	from	time	to	time,	burning	bright	and	deadly	and	expunged	just	as
quickly.	Such	individuals,	among	humans,	are	inevitably	self-corrupting,	and
for	all	that	they	may	shape	history,	that	shaping	is	more	often	than	not	simply
born	out	of	that	tyrant’s	indulgence	in	destruction.	Brother	Aloft,	you	may	well
be	right	that	we	face	such	a	person	behind	all	of	this.	But	does	it	matter	in	the
end?	And	is	it	not	that	unbridled	ambition	that	assures	the	fool’s	demise?	I
would	venture,	with	considerable	amusement,	that	we	now	represent	that	fatal
overreaching	on	that	tyrant’s	part.’	He	faced	Sister	Freedom.	‘Have	you	not
confirmed	that	the	northern	threat	is	too	far	away?	This	grand	execution	of
coordinated	invasions	has	failed,	in	fact.’
‘It	may	be	as	you	say,’	acknowledged	Brother	Aloft.	‘But	what	if	our	eyes
deceive	us?	What	if	what	we	are	seeing	is	in	fact	precisely	what	our	opponent
wants	us	to	see?’
‘Now	you	are	too	generous	by	far,’	Sister	Freedom	admonished	him.	‘This
is	a	breakdown	in	timing,	perhaps	precipitated	by	our	detecting	this	western
threat	almost	the	instant	it	stepped	out	from	the	Glass	Desert,	and	already	being
in	perfect	position	to	strike	them	with	little	delay.’
‘I	accept	the	wisdom	of	your	words,	Sister.’
‘I	will	not	castigate	you,	Brother,	for	listening	to	your	instincts.	Although,
as	we	all	know,	if	left	unrestrained	instincts	have	a	way	of	encouraging	panic	–
as	they	lie	beyond	the	control	of	the	intellect	to	begin	with,	theirs	is	the	shorter
path	to	fear.’
The	three	Forkrul	Assail	were	silent	then,	each	preoccupied	with	their	own
thoughts.
And	then	Sister	Freedom	said,	‘I	shall	seek	to	enslave	the	soldiers	we	face.
They	could	prove	useful.’
‘But	not	the	hundred	I	hunt,’	said	Brother	Grave.
‘No,’	she	agreed.	‘Kill	them	all,	Brother.’
	
Ben	Adaephon	Delat	reined	in	hard,	his	horse’s	hoofs	skidding	through	the
parched	grasses.


Cursing,	Kalam	wheeled	his	mount	round,	the	beast	pitching	beneath	him
in	its	exhaustion.	He	glared	back	his	friend.	‘What	is	it	now,	Quick?’
But	the	wizard	held	up	a	hand,	shaking	his	head.
Settling	back	to	ease	his	aching	spine,	Kalam	looked	round,	seeing	nothing
but	empty,	rolling	land.	The	taint	of	green	from	the	jade	slashes	overhead
made	the	world	look	sickly,	but	already	he	was	growing	used	to	that.
‘Never	mind	the	Adjunct,’	Quick	Ben	said.
Kalam	shot	him	a	startled	look.	‘What?	Her	brother—’
‘I	know	–	you	think	this	was	easy?	I	felt	them	pulling	apart.	I’ve	been
thinking	about	that	all	morning.	I	know	why	Ganoes	wants	us	to	find	her	–	I
know	why	he	sent	us	ahead.	But	it’s	no	good,	Kalam.	I’m	sorry.	It’s	no	good.’
The	assassin	stared	at	his	friend	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	he	sagged,
spat	to	clear	the	taste	of	ashes	from	his	mouth.	‘She’s	on	her	own,	then.’
‘Aye.	Her	choice.’
‘No	–	don’t	even	try	that,	Quick.	This	is	your	choice!’
‘She’s	forced	my	hand,	damn	you!’
‘How?	What	has	she	done?	What’s	all	this	about	pulling	apart?	What	in
Hood’s	name	does	that	even	mean?’
Quick	Ben’s	horse	must	have	picked	up	some	of	its	rider ’s	agitation,	for	it
now	shied	beneath	him	and	he	fought	to	regain	control	for	a	moment.	As	the
animal	backed	in	a	half-circle,	the	wizard	swore	under	his	breath.	‘Listen.	It’s
not	with	her	any	more.	She’s	made	herself	the	sacrifice	–	how	do	you	think	I
can	even	know	this?	Kalam,	she’s	given	up	her	sword.’
Kalam	stared.	‘What?’
‘But	I	can	feel	it	–	that	weapon.	It’s	the	blank	place	in	my	vision.	That’s
where	we	have	to	go.’
‘So	she	dies,	does	she?	Just	like	that?’
Quick	Ben	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘No.	We’ve	been	doing	too	much	of	this	–	all
of	us.	From	the	very	start.’
‘Back	to	the	fucking	riddles.’
‘Underestimating	her!	From	damned	near	the	first	day	I	ended	up	with	the
Bonehunters,	I’ve	listened	to	us	all	second-guessing	her,	every	damned	step	she
took.	I	did	my	share,	Hood	knows.	But	it	wasn’t	just	me,	was	it?	Her	officers.
The	marines.	The	fucking	camp	cook	–	what	did	you	tell	me	a	while	back?
About	that	moment	in	Mock’s	Hold,	when	she	asked	you	to	save	her?	You	did
it,	you	said,	because	she	just	asked	you	–	no	bargaining,	no	reasons	or
explanations.	She	just	went	and	asked	you,	Kalam.	Was	it	hard	saying	yes?	Tell
me	the	truth.	Was	it?’
Slowly,	Kalam	shook	his	head.	‘But	I	sometimes	wondered…did	I	just	feel


sorry	for	her?’
Quick	Ben	reacted	as	if	he’d	been	slapped.	In	a	soft	voice	he	asked,	‘Do
you	still	think	that,	Kalam?’
The	assassin	was	silent,	thinking	about	it.	Then	he	sighed.	‘We	know	where
Ganoes	wants	us.	We	even	know	why	–	he’s	her	brother,	for	Hood’s	sake.’
‘We	know	where	she	wants	us,	too,	Kalam.’
‘Do	we?’
Quick	Ben	slowly	nodded.
‘So	which	of	the	fucking	Parans	do	we	obey	here?’
‘Which	one	would	you	rather	face	–	here	or	other	side	of	the	Gates	–	to	tell
’em	you	failed,	that	you	made	the	wrong	choice?	No,	I	don’t	mean	brazening	it
out,	either.	Just	standing	there,	saying	what	needs	saying?’
Fuck.	‘I	feel	like	I’m	back	in	Mock’s	Hold,’	he	said	in	a	growl.	‘I	feel	as	if	I
never	left.’
‘And	she	meets	your	eyes.’
Abruptly	a	sob	took	the	assassin,	vicious	as	a	body	blow	and	just	as
unexpected.
His	friend	waited,	saying	nothing	–	and	Kalam	knew	that	he	wouldn’t,
because	they’d	been	through	it	all	together.	Because	true	friends	knew	when	to
keep	silent,	to	give	all	the	patience	needed.	Kalam	struggled	to	lock	down	on
his	emotions	–	he	wasn’t	even	sure	what	had	taken	him,	in	that	moment.	Maybe
this	unrelenting	pressure.	This	endless	howl	no	one	else	even	hears.
I	stood	looking	down	on	the	city.	I	stood	knowing	I	was	about	to	walk	a	path
of	blood.
The	betrayal	didn’t	even	matter,	not	to	me;	the	Claw	was	always	full	of
shits.	Did	it	matter	to	her	either?	No.	She’d	already	dismissed	it.	Just	one	more
knife	in	her	chest,	and	she	was	already	carrying	plenty	of	those,	starting	with
the	one	she	stuck	there	with	her	own	hands.
Kalam	shook	himself.	‘Same	direction?’
‘For	now,’	Quick	Ben	replied.	‘Until	we	get	closer.	Then	–	southwest.’
‘To	the	sword.’
‘To	the	sword.’
‘Anyone	babysitting	it,	Quick?’
‘I	hope	not.’
Kalam	gathered	his	reins,	drew	a	deep	breath	and	slowly	eased	it	back	out.
‘Quick	–	how	did	she	manage	to	cross	that	desert	anyway?’
The	wizard	shook	his	head,	half	smiled.	‘Guess	we…underestimated	her.’
After	a	moment,	they	set	out	once	again.


	
Wings	crooking,	Silchas	Ruin	slid	earthward.	After	a	moment,	Tulas	Shorn
followed.	To	the	south	they	could	see	something	like	a	cloud,	or	a	swarm.	The
air	hissing	past	their	wings	felt	brittle,	fraught	with	distant	pain	rolling	like
waves	across	the	sky.
Silchas	Ruin	landed	hard	on	the	ground,	sembled	almost	immediately,	and
staggered	forward,	hands	held	over	his	ears.
Taking	his	Edur	form,	Tulas	Shorn	studied	his	friend,	but	drew	no	closer.
Overhead,	one	of	the	jade	slashes	began	edging	across	the	face	of	the	sun.	A
sudden	deepening	of	shadow	enveloped	them,	the	gloom	eerie	and	turgid.
Groaning,	Silchas	finally	straightened,	stiff	as	an	old	man.	He	looked
across.	‘It’s	the	Hust	sword,’	he	said.	‘Its	howling	was	driving	me	mad.’
‘I	hear	nothing,’	Tulas	said.
‘In	my	skull	–	I	swear	I	could	feel	bones	crack.’
‘Unsheathe	it,	friend.’
Silchas	Ruin	looked	over	with	wide	eyes,	his	expression	filling	with	dread.
‘Grasp	it	when	you	veer.’
‘And	what	will	that	achieve?’
‘I	don’t	know.	But	I	cannot	imagine	that	this	gift	was	meant	to	torture	you.
Your	only	other	choice,	Silchas,	is	to	discard	it.’	He	gestured	southward.	‘We
are	almost	upon	them	–	I	am,	frankly,	astonished	that	she	still	lives.	But	if	we
delay	here	much	longer…’
‘Tulas,	I	am	afraid.’
‘Of	dying?	A	little	late	for	that.’
Silchas	smiled,	but	it	was	more	of	a	grimace.	‘Easy	for	you	to	say.’
‘I	dwelt	a	long	time	in	the	House	of	Death,	tormented	by	the	truth	that	I
failed	to	achieve	what	I	most	wanted	in	my	life.	That	sense,	of	terrible
incompleteness,	overwhelmed	me	many	times.	But	now	I	stand	with	you,	my
brother,	and	I	will	fall	in	your	stead	if	I	can	in	this	battle	to	come.	Oblivion
does	not	frighten	me	–	I	see	only	its	blessed	release.’
Silchas	Ruin	studied	him.	Then	he	sighed	and	reached	for	the	sword.	Hand
closing	on	its	plain	grip,	he	slid	the	weapon	free.
The	Hust	sword	bucked	in	his	hand,	voicing	a	deafening	shriek.
Tulas	Shorn	was	driven	back	a	step,	and	he	stared	in	shock	as	enormous
ghostly	chains	appeared,	writhing	from	the	sword’s	patterned	blade.	Those
chains	seemed	to	be	anchored	deep	into	the	ground,	and	suddenly	the	land
beneath	them	was	shaking,	pitching	them	about	as	if	the	world	was	rolling	its
shoulders.	From	below,	a	rising	thunder—


A	blast	of	dirt	and	stone	lifted	skyward	off	to	Tulas	Shorn’s	left,	and	he
bellowed	in	shock	upon	seeing	a	dragon	clawing	its	way	free	of	the	steaming
earth.	And	then,	off	to	the	right,	another	erupted	in	a	shower	of	debris,	and	then
a	third	–	each	one	chained	as	it	rose	from	the	ground,	wings	hammering	the
dust-filled	air.
Their	roars	–	of	release	–	ripped	across	the	plain.
Silchas	Ruin	stood,	both	hands	now	on	the	sword,	as	the	ethereal	chains
snapped	taut,	scissoring	wildly	above	him	like	the	strands	of	a	wind-whipped
thread.
Eloth.	Ampelas.	Kalse.
Tulas	Shorn	staggered	forward.	‘Veer!	Silchas	Ruin	–	veer!	We	have	our
Storm!	He	has	given	us	our	Storm!’
Screaming,	Silchas	Ruin	blurred,	pungent	clouds	roiling	out	from	him.
Sword	and	chains	vanished	–	yet	the	three	dragons	held	close	in	the	air	above
them.
Veering,	Tulas	Shorn	launched	himself	into	the	sky.
Eloth’s	voice	filled	his	skull.	‘Brothers!	It	is	as	Cotillion	promised!	We	are
freed	once	more!’
‘Only	to	die!’	cried	another	voice	–	Ampelas	–	yet	there	was	nothing	of
frustration	in	its	tone.
‘Should	we	prevail	–	Silchas	Ruin,	will	you	vow	to	break	our	chains?’
And	Silchas	replied,	‘Eloth,	I	so	swear.’
‘Then	we	have	a	cause	worth	fighting	for!	He	bargained	true.	He	is	a	god
with	honour!’
The	five	Ancient	Dragons	wheeled	then,	climbing	ever	higher	as	they
winged	southward.	The	shadow	cast	down	by	one	talon	slash	in	the	heavens
above	them	marked	their	path,	true	as	an	arrow	into	the	heart	of	the	battle.
	
‘My	leg!’	Telorast	shrieked.	‘Curdle!	I	am	crippled!	Help	me!’
The	other	skeletal	lizard	halted	so	quickly	it	fell	over,	rolled	once,	twice,
and	then	leapt	back	to	its	feet.	‘Aaii!	See	the	shadow?	It	hunts	us!	It	chases	us!
Webs	across	the	sky!	Telorast	–	you	are	doomed!’
‘I	see	Eleint!	They	are	coming	for	us!	This	was	a	trap!	A	lie!	A	deceit!
Betrayal!	Bad	luck!	Help	me,	Curdle!’
Curdle	leapt	up	and	down	as	if	eating	flies	on	the	wing.	‘They	only
pretended!	Those	two	usurpers	–	they	are	venal	and	vicious,	selfish!	NotApsalar	was	their	servant,	was	she	not?	She	was!	This	has	been	planned	from
the	very	start	–	Telorast,	I	will	weep	for	you.	My	sister,	my	lover,	my


occasional	acquaintance	–	I	promise,	I	will	weep	for	you.’
‘You	lying	bitch!	Carry	me!	Save	me!	I	would	save	you	in	your	place	if	I
was	you	and	you	were	me	and	I	wanted	to	run	because	that’s	the	smart	thing	to
do	–	except	when	I’m	me	and	you’re	you!	Then	it’s	not	smart	at	all!’	She
clawed	furiously	at	the	ground,	one	leg	kicking,	trying	to	reach	Curdle,	her
small	hands	clutching	the	air,	her	serrated	jaws	clacking	in	a	manic	frenzy.
‘Come	closer,	I	beg	you!’	Snap	snap	snap.	‘I	only	want	to	say	goodbye,	I	swear
it!’	Snap	snap	snap	snap.
‘The	shadow!’	Curdle	shrieked.	‘I’ve	waited	too	long!	Help!’	She	began
running,	leaping	over	tufts	of	dead	grass,	dodging	boulders	and	small	stones.
Her	rush	startled	a	grasshopper	into	the	air	and	she	bit	it	in	half	in	passing.
‘Did	you	see	that?	Telor—’
Both	creatures	veered.	Chains	cracked	like	lightning,	lifting	them	skyward.
‘Storm!	Five	Ancients	–	now	seven!’
‘Eloth	greets	you,	betrayers!	Telorast	Anthras!	Kerudas	Karosias!’
‘Eloth!	Ampelas!	Kalse!	They	still	hate	us!	Telorast,	look	what	you’ve
done!’
	
Korabas,	the	Otataral	Dragon,	was	being	driven	earthward	as	dragon	after
dragon	crashed	down	on	her	from	above,	their	talons	raking	through	her	hide,
flensing	her	wings.	She	had	killed	hundreds,	but	now,	at	last,	she	was	failing.
The	land	beneath	her	loomed,	every	detail	a	bitter	language	of	death.	She	could
no	longer	give	voice	to	her	fury,	her	crushing	frustration,	and	was	too
exhausted	to	strike	out	at	the	Eleint	harrying	her	on	all	sides.
Blood	streamed	down	her	flanks,	rained	like	acid	on	the	lifeless	earth
below.
The	summons	dragged	her	forward,	but	she	was	blind	to	its	purpose.
Perhaps	nothing	more	than	a	lure.	Yet	the	imperative	was	absolute	and	she
would	strive	to	answer	it.	With	her	last	breath,	she	would	seek	that	fated	place.
A	trap,	or	a	promise?	An	answer	to	my	prayers,	or	the	making	of	my	barrow?
No	matter.	I	fail.	I	would	even	welcome	chains,	but	they	will	not	grant	me	that
mercy.	I	feel	Mother	awakening.	I	feel	T’iam,	so	close	now	–	the	Storms
gathered,	the	power	building.	She	is	coming	–	she	will	see	me	killed!
She	pitched	as	yet	another	Eleint	slammed	down	on	her.	With	one	last
surge,	she	swung	her	neck	round,	lacerated	jaws	stretching	wide—
And	saw	seven	dragons,	descending	from	high	above	the	swarm
surrounding	her.	Another	Storm.	This	ends	it,	then.
The	creature	clinging	to	her	back	tore	itself	away,	flinching	from	her	jaws


–	she	caught	a	hind	limb,	ripped	the	flesh	from	the	bone.
The	seven	Ancients	plunged	into	the	maelstrom	–	and	suddenly	Eleint	were
screaming	in	shock	and	pain,	bodies	twisting	as	they	plummeted,	blooms	of
blood	like	clouds—
They	fight	to	save	me!	But	why?	Do	not	draw	near,	friends!	I	am	poison!
But	–	more	–	do	not	die	for	me!
I,	whose	touch	is	death,	beg	you	–	do	not	die	for	me!
Yet	on	they	fought,	but	now	their	foes	were	recovering,	and	scores	lifted
higher	to	close	on	them.
And	should	T’iam	manifest	–	she	will	take	even	you.
East,	the	place	of	the	summons,	called	to	her.	Torn	fragments	of	meat
falling	from	her	jaws,	Korabas	fixed	her	gaze	upon	that	beckoning	horizon.
Her	allies	had	drawn	away	her	assailants,	won	her	a	reprieve	with	fatal
sacrifice.	She	did	not	understand,	but	she	would	honour	them	in	the	only
possible	manner	available	to	her.
If	this	be	a	destiny	offered	me,	I	shall	meet	it.	I	shall	face	it,	and,	if	I	can,	I
shall	speak	to	the	world.
And	if	this	be	the	place	of	my	death,	so	be	it.
I	was	free,	even	if	only	for	a	moment.
I	was	free.
	
He	had	pushed	them	hard,	marching	them	through	half	the	night	and	without
pause	through	most	of	this	day,	and	the	marines	and	heavies	were	staggering	as
they	came	within	sight	of	the	hill.	The	muscles	of	his	legs	leaden,	Fiddler
angled	towards	it.	Vast	bands	of	shadow	were	still	tracking	the	landscape,	cast
down	by	the	Jade	Strangers	spanning	the	entire	sky,	leaving	the	captain	with	a
sense	that	the	world	was	unravelling	before	his	very	eyes.
He	had	worked	hard	not	to	think	about	the	army	they	had	left	behind,	and
the	fate	that	awaited	them.	Before	the	captain	now	was	all	that	mattered.	That
forlorn	hilltop	with	its	fractured	flanks,	the	lone	sword	of	Otataral	thrust	deep
into	the	ground	at	its	very	centre.
He	feared	that	it	would	not	be	enough	–	they	had	all	feared	as	much,	those
among	them	who	understood	what	she	was	attempting	here.	The	chains	that
bound	the	Crippled	God	had	been	forged	by	gods.	A	single	sword	to	shatter
them	all?	Tavore,	you	must	have	believed	it	was	possible.	Or	that	some	other
force	would	awaken	here,	to	lend	us	a	blessed	hand	in	this.
Without	this	–	this	breaking	of	chains	–	all	that	we	do	here	is	for	naught.
Tavore,	I	am	trusting	you.	With	the	lives	of	my	soldiers	–	with	the	meaning


to	their	deaths.	I	know,	it’s	unfair,	asking	this	of	you.	You’re	mortal,	that	and
nothing	more.	But	I	know	–	I	feel	it	–	I	am	setting	my	weight	upon	your
shoulders.	We	all	are,	whether	we	care	to	admit	it	or	not.
And	it’s	that	unfairness	that’s	tearing	me	apart.
He	glanced	off	to	his	left.	Hedge	walked	there	at	the	head	of	his	own	troop
–	Letherii	and	Khundryl	cast-offs,	a	mix	of	half-bloods	from	a	dozen	subdued
tribes	of	the	Lether	Empire.	They’d	had	trouble	keeping	up,	so	loaded	down
were	the	soldiers	–	Hood	knew	why	they’d	felt	the	need	to	carry	so	much.	All
those	kittens,	I	expect.	Hope	they’re	worth	it.
Hedge	had	been	keeping	his	distance,	and	Fiddler	knew	why	–	he	could	feel
his	own	face	transforming	whenever	his	friend	drew	near,	becoming	a	mask,
bleak	and	broken,	and	the	anguish	and	dread	clawed	at	him	with	a	strength	he
could	not	match.	So	much	of	this	is	unfair.	So	much.	But	now	Hedge	shifted	his
track,	came	closer.
He	pointed	at	the	hill.	‘That’s	it?	Damned	ugly,	Fid.’
‘We	can	defend	it.’
‘We’re	too	thin,	even	for	a	knoll	as	puny	as	that	one.	Listen,	I’m	breaking
up	my	company.	I	ain’t	making	too	many	big	promises	here,	but	my
Bridgeburners	got	a	secret—’
‘Kittens,	aye.’
Hedge	scowled	at	him.	‘You	had	spies!	I	knew	it!’
‘Gods	below,	Hedge,	never	met	anyone	as	hopeless	with	secrets	as	you.’
‘Go	ahead	and	think	that.	You’re	in	for	a	surprise,	I	promise	you.’
‘Can	they	match	the	Moranth	munitions,	that’s	the	only	thing	I	need	to
know.’
But	Hedge	shook	his	head.	‘Not	them.	Never	mind.’	And	then	he	shrugged,
as	if	dismissing	something.	‘You	was	probably	too	busy	last	time,	but	we	made
a	mess	of	those	Short-Tails.’
‘And	you	didn’t	use	most	of	them	up?	That’s	not	like	you,	Hedge.’
‘Bavedict	concocted	more	–	the	man’s	a	genius.	Deranged	and	obsessive,
the	best	kind	of	genius.	Anyway,	we’re	packing	them	all.’
‘I’d	noticed.’
‘Sure,	it’s	wore	us	out,	all	that	stuff.	Tell	me,	Fid,	we	going	to	get	time	to
rest	up	first?’
‘Little	late	asking	me	that	now.’
‘So	what?	I’m	still	asking	you.’
‘To	be	honest,	I	don’t	know.	Depends.’
‘On	what?’
‘Whether	the	Spire’s	fallen	to	us.	Whether	they	got	the	heart	undamaged.


Whether	they	managed	to	break	its	own	set	of	chains,	or	whatever	geas	is
protecting	it	–	could	be	twenty	Kenyll’rah	demons	for	all	we	know,	and
imagine	the	scrap	that’d	be.’
‘Twenty	Kenyll’rah	demons?	What	is	this,	some	bad	fairy	tale?	Why	not	a
demon	king?	Or	a	giant	three-headed	ogre	with	scorpion	tails	at	the	end	of
every	finger,	and	a	big	one	on	his	cock	for	added	measure?	Breathing	fire	outa
his	arse,	too.’
‘Fine,	so	my	imagination’s	failed.	Sorry	about	that	–	I	ain’t	no	spinner	of
decent	tales,	Hedge.’
‘I’ll	say.	What	else	should	I	know?	We	got	to	kiss	that	fucking	heart	awake
once	we	get	it?	Put	a	hat	on	it?	Dance	in	fucking	circles	round	it?	Gods,	not
more	blood	sacrifice	–	that	stuff	creeps	me	out.’
‘You’re	babbling,	Hedge.	It’s	what	you	always	do	before	a	fight	–	why?’
‘To	distract	you,	of	course.	You	keep	chewing	on	yourself	there’ll	be
nothing	left	but	wet	gristle	and	a	few	pubic	hairs	I	really	don’t	want	to	see.	Oh,
and	the	teeth	that	did	all	the	chewing.’
‘You	know,’	Fiddler	said	with	a	sidelong	glance,	‘if	you	wasn’t	here,
Hedge,	I’d	have	to	invent	you.’
‘What’s	that?’
‘Just	saying	thanks,	that’s	all.’
‘Fine.	Now	can	I	babble	some	more?	’Cause	I’m	terrified,	y’see.’
‘This	will	work,	Hedge.	Get	your	kitten	throwers	spread	out	through	my
squads,	and	we’ll	make	a	mess	of	whoever	tries	to	take	us	down.’
‘Exactly.	Good	idea.	Shoulda	thought	of	it	myself.’
The	man	moved	off	again,	and	Fiddler ’s	gaze	tracked	him	until	he	reached
his	original	position	at	the	head	of	the	Bridgeburners.	Bless	ya,	Hedge.	He
swung	round	to	face	his	troops.	‘That’s	the	place,	soldiers.	That	hill.	Let’s
quick-time	it	now	–	only	a	bell	or	two	before	dusk	and	I	want	us	digging	and
piling	stones	in	a	solid	perimeter.’
‘Aye,	Captain,’	barked	out	a	heavy.	‘Could	do	with	some	fucking	exercise.’
Another	soldier	answered.	‘Knew	I	should	never	have	carried	you,
woman!’
‘If	you’d	been	carrying	me,	Reliko,	I’d	be	pregnant	by	now	–	any	chance
y’get,	right,	you	rat-eating	piece	of	elephant	dung.’
‘Maybe	if	I	closed	my	eyes.	But	then,	can	a	man	even	breed	with	a
warthog?’
‘If	anybody’d	know	the	answer	to	that—’
‘Save	your	breaths,	damn	you,’	growled	Fiddler.


They	trudged	over	the	lesser	rises,	tackled	the	hillside.	Bottle	moved	up	past
Corabb	and	made	the	climb	alongside	Sergeant	Tarr.	‘Listen,	Sergeant…’
‘Now	what,	Bottle?	Pull	out	your	shovel	–	we	got	work	to	do.’
Soldiers	were	throwing	down	their	kits	on	all	sides,	muttering	and
complaining	about	sore	backs	and	aching	shoulders.
‘It’s	this	ground,’	Bottle	said,	drawing	close.	‘I	need	to	talk	to	the	captain.’
Tarr	scowled	at	him,	and	then	nodded.	‘Go	on,	but	don’t	take	too	long.	I
don’t	want	you	dying	’cause	you	dug	your	hole	too	shallow.’
Bottle	stared	at	the	man,	and	then	looked	round.	‘They	that	close?’
‘How	should	I	know?	Care	to	risk	your	life	that	they	aren’t?’
Swearing	under	his	breath,	Bottle	set	out	to	where	he’d	last	seen	Fiddler	–
up	near	the	crest	of	the	hill.	Hedge	had	gone	up	there	as	well.
Taking	a	narrow,	twisted	route	between	outcrops	of	bedrock,	he	heard
boots	behind	him	and	turned.	‘Deadsmell.	You	following	me	for	a	reason	or	is
it	my	cute	backside?’
‘Your	cute	backside,	but	I	need	to	talk	to	Fid,	too.	Two	joys	in	one,	what
can	I	say?’
‘This	hill—’
‘Barrow.’
‘Right,	fine.	Barrow.	There’s	something—’
‘Sunk	deep	all	the	way	round	it,	aye.	Widdershins	damn	near	shit	himself
the	moment	he	hit	the	slope.’
Bottle	shrugged.	‘Us	other	squaddies	call	him	Widdershits,	on	account	of
his	loose	bowels.	What	about	it?’
‘Really?	Widdershits?	That’s	great.	Wait	till	Throatslitter	hears	that	one.
But	listen,	how	come	you’re	keeping	secrets	from	us	like	that?	Names	like
that?	We	wouldn’t	do	it	to	you,	you	know.’
‘Stifflips	and	Crack?	Scuttle	and	Corncob?	Turd	and	Brittle?’
‘Oh,	you	heard	them,	huh?’
They	reached	the	crest,	stepped	out	on	to	level	ground.	Ahead,	standing
near	a	long	sword	thrust	into	the	ground,	Fiddler	and	Hedge.	Both	men	turned
as	the	soldiers	approached,	hearing	the	stones	snapping	underfoot.
‘Forgot	how	to	dig	holes,	you	two?’
‘No,	Captain.	It’s	just	that	we	got	us	company.’
‘Explain	that,	Bottle.	And	be	succinct	for	a	change.’
‘There’s	a	god	here	with	us.’
Hedge	seemed	to	choke	on	something	and	turned	away,	coughing,	hacking


and	then	spitting.
‘You	idiot,’	said	Fiddler.	‘That’s	the	whole	fucking	point.’
‘Not	him,	Captain,’	said	Deadsmell.
‘What	do	you	mean,	not	him?	Of	course	he’s	here	–	as	much	of	him	as
there	is,	I	mean.	The	Adjunct	said	this	was	the	place.’
Deadsmell	met	Bottle’s	eyes,	and	after	a	moment	Bottle	turned	away,	his
mouth	suddenly	dry.	‘Captain,’	he	said,	‘the	Crippled	God	ain’t	here.	We’d
know	it	if	he	was.’
Fiddler	gestured	at	the	sword.	‘That’s	the	Adjunct’s,	Bottle.	Otataral,
remember?	Why	should	you	think	you’d	be	able	to	sense	anything?’
Deadsmell	was	rubbing	at	the	back	of	his	neck	as	if	he	wanted	to	wear	off
two	or	three	layers	of	skin,	checking	to	see	if	he	still	had	a	backbone.	Then	he
drew	a	fortifying	breath	and	said,	‘He’s	foreign	–	we’d	know	it	anyway,
Captain.’
Fiddler	seemed	to	sag.
Hedge	clapped	him	on	the	back.	‘Relax,	Fid,	it’s	just	the	usual	fuck-up.	So
we	go	through	the	motions	anyway	–	you’re	still	a	damned	sapper,	you	know.
Who	said	you	were	supposed	to	be	on	the	thinking	side	of	things?	We	don’t
know	that	all	this	isn’t	how	it’s	supposed	to	be	right	now,	anyway.	In	fact,	we
don’t	know	a	damned	thing	about	anything.	The	way	it	always	is.	What’s	the
problem?’	He	faced	Bottle	then.	‘So	which	turd-chewing	god’s	got	the	nerve	to
horn	in	our	business?’
But	Deadsmell	was	the	first	to	respond.	‘Smells	like	old	death.’
‘Hood?	Wrong.	Impossible.’
‘Didn’t	say	that,	did	I?’	Deadsmell	retorted,	scowling.	‘Just	smells	old	and
dead,	right?	Like	brown	leaves	in	a	cold	wind.	Like	a	barrow’s	stone-lined	pit.
Like	the	first	breath	of	winter.	Like—’
‘Worm	of	Autumn,’	growled	Bottle.
‘I	was	working	up	to	that,	damn	you!’
‘What	does	D’rek	want	with	us?’	Hedge	demanded.
‘Doesn’t	matter,’	said	Fiddler,	turning	back	to	stare	at	the	sword.	‘We’ve
had	that	priest	crouching	on	our	shoulders	ever	since	Malaz	City.	When	we
were	here	he	said	something	about	his	god,	I	seem	to	recall.	Wrapping	round
the	base	of	the	hill.	Him	and	the	Adjunct	seemed	to	think	we’d	need	help.
Anyway,	it’s	not	like	we	can	do	anything	about	it.	Fine,	what	you	said,	Hedge.
We	go	through	the	motions.	Deadsmell,	is	this	place	a	barrow?’
‘Aye,	but	no	longer	sanctified.	The	tomb’s	been	looted.	Broken.’
‘Broken,	huh?’
‘Trust	the	Adjunct,’	said	Hedge.


Fiddler	rounded	on	him.	‘Was	that	you	saying	that?’
Hedge	shrugged.	‘Thought	it	worth	a	try.’	Then	he	frowned.	‘What’s	that
smell?’
‘Probably	Widdershits,’	Bottle	said.
‘Gods,	downwind,	damn	him	–	always	downwind!’

Masan	Gilani	threw	herself	down	near	Sinter	and	Kisswhere.	‘Balm	just	tried
putting	his	hand	down	my	breeches.	Said	he	forgot	where	he	was.	Said	he
wasn’t	even	looking.	Said	he	thought	he	was	reaching	into	his	kit	bag.’
Kisswhere	snorted.	‘And	with	that	sharpness	of	wit,	Dal	Honese	men	won
an	empire.’
‘I	should’ve	stayed	with	the	cavalry.’
‘There	was	no	cavalry.’
‘The	Khundryl,	then.’
Sinter	slowly	straightened,	studied	the	darkening	sky.	‘See	any	clouds?’	she
asked,	slowly	turning	as	she	scanned	the	heavens.
‘Clouds?	What’s	up,	sister?’
‘Not	sure.	I	keep	expecting…’
‘Clouds?’
Sinter	made	a	face.	‘You	were	the	one	asking	me	what	I	was	seeing,
remember?	Now	I’m	telling	you,	I	got	something.’
‘Clouds.’
‘Oh,	never	mind.’	She	settled	back	down	lengthways	in	the	slit	trench	she’d
hacked	out	of	the	stony	barrowside.	‘But	if	anyone	sees…’
‘Clouds,	aye,’	said	Masan	Gilani,	rubbing	at	her	eyes.
	
Rejoining	his	squad,	Bottle	glanced	over	at	Shortnose.	‘Joined	us	again,	have
you?’
‘I	brought	a	shield,’	the	heavy	said.
‘Oh,	that’s	nice.’
‘You	need	to	tie	it	to	my	hand.’
‘What,	now?’
‘Tie	it	so	it	doesn’t	come	loose.	Use…knots	and	things.’
‘With	rawhide.’
‘And	knots	and	things.’


Bottle	moved	over	to	the	man,	crouched	down.
‘You	do	that,’	Smiles	observed,	‘and	next	he’ll	be	asking	you	to	give	him	a
shake,	too.’
‘Make	sure	it’s	after	the	little	shudder,’	Cuttle	advised.	‘Else	you	get	wet.’
‘I	once	shuddered	so	hard,’	said	Shortnose,	‘I	shit	myself.’
Everyone	looked	over,	but	it	seemed	that	no	one	could	think	of	a	rejoinder
to	that.
Koryk	had	drawn	his	sword	from	its	scabbard	and	now	began	running	a
stone	down	the	length	of	the	blade’s	edge.	‘Someone	make	us	a	fire,’	he	said.
‘We’re	facing	east	here	–	if	they	come	in	from	the	morning	sun…I	want
charcoal	under	my	eyes.’
‘Sound	enough,’	replied	Cuttle,	grunting	to	his	feet.	‘Glad	you’re	back
thinking	like	a	soldier,	Koryk.’
The	Seti	half-blood	said	nothing,	lifting	the	weapon	to	squint	at	its	edge.
‘Once	that’s	all	done,’	Tarr	said,	‘eat,	drink	and	sleep.	Corporal,	set	the
watch.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	Listen	all	of	you!	I	can	taste	it	in	the	air!’
‘That’d	be	Widdershins.’
‘No!	It	is	glory,	my	friends.	Glory!’
Koryk	said,	‘If	that’s	the	smell	of	glory,	Corabb,	I	knew	an	anaemic	cat	that
was	queen	of	the	world.’
Corabb	frowned	at	him.	‘I	don’t	get	it.	Was	it	named	Glory?’
Corporal	Rim	settled	down	beside	Honey.	‘I	can	hold	a	shield,’	he	said.	‘I’ll
cover	you	one	side.’
‘Not	if	it’s	going	to	get	you	killed.’
‘A	soldier	who’s	lost	his	weapon	arm	isn’t	much	good	to	anyone.	Just	let
me	do	this,	will	you?’
Honey’s	brow	creased.	‘Listen,	you’ve	been	moping	ever	since	the	lizards.
It’s	obvious	why,	but	still,	show	us	a	smile,	will	you?	If	you	die	here	you	won’t
be	the	only	one,	will	you?’
‘So	what’s	the	problem	if	my	guarding	you	gets	me	killed?’
‘Because	I	don’t	want	it	on	me,	right?’
Rim	scratched	at	his	beard.	‘Fine	then,	I’ll	shield-bash	the	fuckers.’
‘That’s	better.	Now,	I	got	a	watch	here	–	go	to	sleep,	sir.’
	
Fiddler	walked	the	crest	of	the	hill,	doing	a	full	circuit,	studying	where	his
troops	had	dug	in	and	fortified	defensive	positions	using	boulders	and	stones.
Hedge	was	right,	he	saw.	They	were	too	thin,	and	the	footing	was	precarious	at


best.	Should’ve	brought	spears	–	like	those	Bridgeburners	did.
Admit	it,	Fid,	having	Hedge	here	may	hurt	like	a	stuck	knife,	but	you’re
glad	of	it	anyway.
He	studied	the	sky	–	the	setting	of	the	sun	had	passed	almost	unnoticed,	so
bright	were	the	Jade	Strangers	overhead.	Sighing,	the	captain	moved	to	find	a
place	to	sit,	his	back	against	a	carved	stela.	He	closed	his	eyes.	He	knew	he
should	try	to	sleep,	but	knew	as	well	that	such	a	thing	was	impossible.
He’d	never	wanted	any	of	this.	Handling	a	single	squad	had	been	burden
enough.	And	now	everyone	here’s	looking	to	me.	If	only	they	knew,	the	fools.	I’m
as	lost	as	they	are.
In	the	ghoulish	light	he	drew	out	the	House	of	Chains.	The	lacquered
wooden	cards	slipped	about	in	his	hands	as	if	coated	in	grease.	He	squinted
down	at	them,	slowly	worked	his	way	through	each	one,	studying	it	in	turn.
Seven	cards.	Six	felt	cool	to	his	touch.	Only	one	glistened	with	sweat.
Leper.
Aw,	Hedge.	I’m	so	sorry	for	that.
	
The	Shi’gal	Assassin	had	left	a	place	of	flame	far	behind	him	now.	Flame	and
the	blood	of	a	slain	god	raining	down	from	a	tortured	sky.	He	had	witnessed
the	deaths	of	thousands.	Humans,	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Imass.	He	had	seen	the
fall	of	Forkrul	Assail	and	Jaghut	warriors.	Toblakai	and	Barghast.	All	for	the
scarred	thing	he	now	clutched	in	his	hands.
It	dripped	blood	and	there	seemed	to	be	no	end	to	that	flow,	trickling	down
his	fingers,	painting	his	claws,	spattering	his	thighs	as	the	rhythmic	beat	of	his
wings	carried	him	westward,	as	if	chasing	the	sun’s	eager	plunge	beyond	the
horizon.	The	heart	was	once	more	alive,	heavier	than	any	stone	of	similar	size
–	the	weight	of	a	skystone,	such	as	fell	from	the	sky.	But	that	seemed	an
appropriate	detail,	since	it	belonged	to	the	Fallen	God.
Gu’Rull’s	mind	tracked	back	to	the	last	scene	he	had	witnessed	atop	the
Spire,	moments	after	he	had	torn	loose	the	heart	from	those	dying	chains.	The
body	of	the	Mortal	Sword	lying	so	motionless	on	the	blood-splashed	platform.
The	dog	guarding	what	had	already	left	the	world.
It	is	only	the	dumb	beast	that	understands	futile	gestures	–	the	cold
necessity	for	them,	in	the	face	of	all	the	hard	truths.	We	who	hold	to	the	higher
aspirations	of	the	intellect,	we	surrender	too	quickly.	And	yet,	in	looking	upon
that	dog	–	a	creature	knowing	only	loyalty	and	courage	–	we	find	flavours	to
wound	our	own	souls.
I	now	wonder,	is	it	envy	we	feel?


He	had	underestimated	the	Matron’s	choices.	Destriant	Kalyth,	Shield	Anvil
Stormy	and	Mortal	Sword	Gesler	–	were	these	not	worthy	humans?	They	have
shown	us	a	path,	for	all	the	children	of	Gunth	Mach.	Two	are	fallen.	Two	gave
their	lives,	but	one	remains.
I	am	not	likely	to	see	her	again.	But	in	my	mind,	in	this	moment	and	all	the
moments	that	remain	to	me,	I	will	honour	her,	as	I	honour	Gesler	and	Stormy.
They	lived	as	brothers,	they	fell	as	brothers.	I	shall	call	them	kin,	and	of	the
tasks	awaiting	me,	I	shall	in	turn	strive	to	see	this	through.
Destriant,	in	your	sorrow	and	grief	–	which	I	even	now	taste	–	I	will	seek	to
give	meaning	to	their	deaths.
His	wings	shifted	slightly	at	a	sudden	twist	in	the	currents,	and	all	at	once
the	air	seemed	to	thicken	around	the	Shi’gal	Assassin,	filling	with	a	strange
susurration	–	heavy	whispers,	a	sudden	darkness	that	swarmed	and	swirled,
blotting	out	the	entire	sky.
And	Gu’Rull	realized	that	he	would	not	be	making	this	journey	alone.

Sinter	sat	up,	and	then	stood.	She	studied	the	sky	–	and	there,	to	the	east.	A	black
cloud,	vast	and	seething,	growing.	Growing.	Gods	below.	‘Everyone!’	she
shouted.	‘Get	under	your	shields!	Take	cover!	Everyone!’
	
‘Beloved	children!	Listen	to	your	mother!	Hear	her	words	–	the	words	of	Crone!
We	took	inside	us	his	flesh!	All	that	we	could	find!	We	kept	it	alive	on	the	blood
of	sorcery!	All	for	this	moment!	Rejoice,	my	sweet	children,	for	the	Fallen	God
is	reborn!’
And	Crone	gave	voice	to	her	joy,	and	on	all	sides	her	children,	in	their	tens
of	thousands,	cried	out	in	answer.
The	winged	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	clutching	its	precious	prize,	was	buffeted
by	the	cacophony,	and	Crone	cackled	in	delight.
Ahead,	she	could	sense	the	fragments	of	bone	scattered	on	the	knoll	–	the
bones	of	dozens	of	people	once	interred	in	crypts	within	the	barrow.	Would
they	be	enough?	There	was	no	choice.	The	moment	had	come,	and	they	would
take	what	was	available	to	them.	They	would	make	a	man.	A	poor	man.	A	weak
man.	But	a	man	nonetheless	–	they	would	make	a	home	for	the	god’s	flesh
from	these	bones,	and	then	fill	it	with	their	own	blood,	and	it	would	have	to	be
enough.


The	Great	Ravens	whirled	over	the	knoll,	and	then	plunged	downward.
	
Fiddler	threw	himself	behind	the	carved	stela.	The	thunder	of	wings	was
deafening,	crashing	down,	and	the	air	grew	hot	and	brittle.	He	felt	the	stone
shuddering	against	his	back.
Something	like	fists	struck	the	ground,	concussive	blows	coming	one	after
another.	He	clutched	at	his	head,	tried	to	block	his	ears,	but	it	was	no	use.	The
world	had	vanished	inside	a	storm	of	black	wings.	He	was	suffocating,	and
before	his	eyes	small	objects	were	flashing	past,	converging	somewhere	close
to	the	sword.	Splinters,	bleached	fragments	–	bones,	pulled	into	the	air,	prised
loose	from	tangles	of	grass	and	roots.	One	cut	a	vicious	gouge	across	the	back
of	his	hand	and	he	flinched	it	under	cover.
Who	had	voiced	the	warning?
Whoever	it	had	been,	it	had	probably	saved	their	lives.
Except	for	me	–	I	stayed	too	close	to	the	sword.	I	should	have	gone	down
lower,	with	my	soldiers.	But	I	held	back.	I	didn’t	want	to	see	their	faces,	didn’t
want	to	feel	this	terrible	love	that	takes	a	commander	before	battle	–	love	for
his	soldiers,	every	one	of	them,	that	builds	and	ever	builds,	trying	to	shatter	his
heart.
My	courage	failed	–	and	now—

Gu’Rull	circled	high	overhead.	He	watched	as	the	Great	Ravens	launched
themselves	at	the	knoll,	saw	the	blooms	of	raw	power	erupt	one	after	another.
The	black-winged	creatures	were	sacrificing	themselves,	one	by	one,	to	return
their	god	to	living	flesh	–	to	make	for	his	soul	a	mortal	house.
One	of	the	birds	swung	up	alongside	him	and	he	tracked	her	with	his	lower
eyes.
‘K’Chain	Che’Malle!	I	am	Crone,	mother	of	all	these	blessed	children!	You
bring	a	gift!’	And	she	laughed.
Reaching	for	her	mind,	Gu’Rull	recoiled	at	the	first	touch	–	so	alien,	so
cold	in	its	power.
Crone	cackled.	‘Careful!	We	are	anathema	in	this	realm!	Heed	me	well	now
–	your	task	is	not	done.	Beyond	this	gift	you	carry,	you	will	be	needed	on	the
morrow.	But	I	tell	you	this	–	in	your	moment	of	dire	need,	look	again	to	the
skies.	Do	you	understand?


‘I	promised	a	most	noble	lord.	I	have	sent	my	sweetest	daughter	far	away,
but	she	will	return.	You	will	see	–	she	returns!’
The	huge	raven	banked	up	closer	still.	‘Look	below!	They	are	almost	all
gone.	We	have	waited	for	this	all	our	lives	–	do	you	see	what	we	have	made?
Do	you?’
He	did.	A	figure,	sprawled	close	to	the	Otataral	sword,	bound	by	chains	to
the	earth.	But	its	chest	was	a	gaping	hole.
Gu’Rull	crooked	his	wings,	plummeted.
Crone	followed,	cackling	madly.
The	last	of	the	other	ravens	plunged	into	the	man’s	body	in	a	flash	of	lurid
power.
Wings	thundering	to	slow	his	descent,	the	Shi’gal	landed	straddling	the
man	and	looked	down,	appalled	at	this	mockery	the	Great	Ravens	had	made.
Bent	bones,	twisted	muscles,	a	sickly	pallor,	the	face	deformed	as	if	by	disease.
The	hole	in	its	chest	was	a	pool	of	black	blood,	revealing	the	reflection	of
Gu’Rull’s	own	elongated	face,	his	glittering	eyes.
He	took	the	heart	in	his	hands,	slowly	crouched,	and	settled	it	like	a	stone
in	that	ragged-edged	pit.	The	blood	swallowed	it.
Flesh	knitted,	bones	growing	like	roots.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	spread	his	wings	once	more,	and	then	lifted
skyward.
	
Crone	watched	from	above.	Reborn!	Reborn!	Look	down,	all	ye	souls	in	the	sky
–	look	down	upon	the	one	taken	from	you!	He	is	almost	within	reach	–	your	lost
wandering	is	soon	to	end,	for	his	spark	of	life	shall	return,	his	eyes	shall	open!
Witness,	for	I	am	that	spark.
He	was	brought	down.	He	was	torn	apart.	Scattered	across	the	world.	He
made	us	to	keep	him	alive	–	we	fed	on	his	corpse,	by	his	will.
Ye	souls	in	the	sky	–	your	god	did	not	lose	faith.	He	did	not.
As	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	lifted	away,	Crone	swept	down,	power
burgeoning	within	her.	All	she	had.	Eyes	fixed	on	the	body	below,	she	loosed
one	last	cry	–	of	triumph	–	before	striking	home.
	
One	final	detonation,	of	such	power	as	to	fling	Fiddler	away,	send	him	rolling
to	the	very	edge	of	the	slope.	Gasping,	drawing	in	the	suddenly	cold	night	air
as	the	echoes	died	away,	he	forced	himself	on	to	his	hands	and	knees.


Astonished	that	he	still	lived.
Silence	now	swallowed	the	knoll	–	but	no,	as	he	looked	up,	he	saw	marines
and	heavies	stumbling	into	view,	slowly	rising	to	their	feet	in	bludgeoned
wonder.	The	ringing	in	his	ears	began	to	fade,	and	through	the	fugue	he	could
now	hear	their	voices.
Pushing	himself	to	his	feet,	he	saw	that	the	half-buried	standing	stone	he
had	been	hiding	behind	had	been	pushed	almost	on	to	its	side	by	the	blast	–	and
all	the	others	ringing	the	summit	were	similarly	tilted	back.	On	the	ground,	not
a	single	spear	point	remained,	leaving	only	scorched	earth.
Seeing	a	figure	lying	close	to	the	sword,	Fiddler	staggered	forward.
A	broken,	deformed	man.	The	Crippled	God.
Heavy	chains	pinned	him	to	the	ground.
We’ll	never	break	those.	Not	with	that	sword.	We’ve	done	nothing	but	make
him	more	vulnerable	than	he	has	ever	been.	Now,	he	can	truly	be	killed.
Perhaps	that’s	a	mercy.
Then	he	saw	that	the	man’s	eyes	were	on	him.
Fiddler	drew	closer.	‘I’m	sorry,’	he	said.
But	the	twisted	face	softened,	and	in	a	frail	voice	the	Crippled	God	replied,
‘No	need.	Come	near	–	I	am	still	so…weak.	I	would	tell	you	something.’
Fiddler	walked	until	he	was	beside	the	figure,	and	then	he	squatted	down.
‘We	have	water.	Food.’
But	the	god	shook	his	head.	‘In	the	time	when	I	was	nothing	but	pain,	when
all	that	came	from	me	was	spite,	and	the	hunger	to	hurt	this	world,	I	saw	you
Malazans	as	no	better	than	all	the	rest.	Children	of	your	cruel	gods.	Their
tools,	their	weapons.’	He	paused,	drew	a	rattling	breath.	‘I	should	have	sensed
that	you	were	different	–	was	it	not	your	emperor ’s	champion	who	defied
Hood	at	the	last	Chaining?	Did	he	not	cry	out	that	what	they	sought	was	unjust?
Did	he	not	pay	terribly	for	his	temerity?’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘I	know	nothing	about	any	of	that,	Lord.’
‘When	he	came	to	me	–	your	emperor	–	when	he	offered	me	a	way	out…I
was	mistrustful.	And	yet…and	yet,	what	do	I	see	now?	Here,	standing	before
me?	A	Malazan.’
Fiddler	said	nothing.	He	could	hear	conversations	from	all	the	slope	sides
of	the	barrow,	voices	raised	in	wonder,	and	plenty	of	cursing.
‘You	are	not	like	the	others.	Why	is	this?	I	wish	to	understand,	Malazan.
Why	is	this?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘And	now	you	will	fight	to	protect	me.’
‘We	can’t	break	these	chains	–	she	was	wrong	about	that.’


‘No	matter,	Malazan.	If	I	am	to	lie	here,	bound	for	the	rest	of	days,	still	–
you	will	fight	to	defend	me.’
Fiddler	nodded.
‘I	wish	I	could	understand.’
‘So	do	I,’	Fiddler	said	with	a	grimace.	‘But,	maybe,	in	the	scrap	to	come,
you’ll	get	a…	I	don’t	know…a	better	sense	of	us.’
‘You	are	going	to	die	for	me,	a	foreign	god.’
‘Gods	can	live	for	ever	and	make	real	their	every	desire.	We	can’t.	They
got	powers,	to	heal,	to	destroy,	even	to	resurrect	themselves.	We	don’t.	Lord,	to
us,	all	gods	are	foreign	gods.’
The	bound	man	sighed.	‘When	you	fight,	then,	I	will	listen.	For	this	secret
of	yours.	I	will	listen.’
Suddenly	so	weary	that	his	legs	trembled	beneath	him,	Fiddler	shrugged
and	turned	from	the	chained	man.	‘Not	long	now,	Lord,’	he	said,	and	walked
away.
	
Hedge	was	waiting,	seated	on	one	of	the	tilted	standing	stones.	‘Hood	take	us
all,’	he	said,	eyeing	Fiddler	as	he	approached.	‘They	did	it	–	her	allies	–	they
did	what	she	needed	them	to	do.’
‘Aye.	And	how	many	people	died	for	that	damned	heart?’
Cocking	his	head,	Hedge	drew	off	his	battered	leather	cap.	‘Little	late	to	be
regretting	all	that	now,	Fid.’
‘It	was	Kellanved	–	all	of	this.	Him	and	Dancer.	They	used	Tavore	Paran
from	the	very	start.	They	used	all	of	us,	Hedge.’
‘That’s	what	gods	do,	aye.	So	you	don’t	like	it?	Fine,	but	listen	to	me.
Sometimes,	what	they	want	–	what	they	need	us	to	do	–	sometimes	it’s	all	right.
I	mean,	it’s	the	right	thing	to	do.	Sometimes,	it	makes	us	better	people.’
‘You	really	believe	that?’
‘And	when	we’re	better	people,	we	make	better	gods.’
Fiddler	looked	away.	‘It’s	hopeless,	then.	We	can	stuff	a	god	with	every
virtue	we	got,	it	still	won’t	make	us	any	better,	will	it?	Because	we’re	not	good
with	virtues,	Hedge.’
‘Most	of	the	time,	aye,	we’re	not.	But	maybe	then,	at	our	worst,	we	might
look	up,	we	might	see	that	god	we	made	out	of	the	best	in	us.	Not	vicious,	not
vengeful,	not	arrogant	or	spiteful.	Not	selfish,	not	greedy.	Just	clear-eyed,	with
no	time	for	all	our	rubbish.	The	kind	of	god	to	give	us	a	slap	in	the	face	for
being	such	shits.’
Fiddler	sank	back	down	on	to	the	ground.	He	leaned	forward	and	closed


his	eyes,	hands	covering	his	face.	‘Ever	the	optimist,	you.’
‘When	you	been	dead,	everything	after	that’s	looking	up.’
Fiddler	snorted.
‘Listen,	Fid.	They	did	it.	Now	it’s	our	turn.	Ours	and	Tavore’s.	Who’d	have
thought	we’d	even	get	this	far?’
‘Two	names	come	to	mind.’
‘Since	when	didn’t	their	empire	demand	the	best	in	us,	Fid?	Since	when?’
‘Wrong.	It	was	as	corrupt	and	self-serving	as	any	other.	Conquered	half	the
fucking	world.’
‘Not	quite.	World’s	bigger	than	that.’
Fiddler	sighed,	freed	one	hand	to	wave	it	in	Hedge’s	direction.	‘Go	get
some	rest,	will	you?’
The	man	rose.	‘Don’t	want	anyone	interrupting	all	that	feeling	sorry	for
yourself,	huh?’
‘For	myself?’	Fiddler	looked	up,	shook	his	head,	and	his	gaze	slipped	past
Hedge,	down	to	where	his	soldiers	were	only	now	settling	once	again,
desperate	for	sleep.
‘We’re	not	finished	yet,’	Hedge	said.	‘You	plan	on	talking	to	’em	all?
Before	it	all	starts	up?’
‘No.’
‘Why	not?’
‘Because	this	is	their	time,	from	now	to	the	end.	They	can	do	the	talking,
Hedge.	Right	now,	for	me,	I’ll	do	the	listening.	Just	like	that	god	back	there.’
‘What	do	you	expect	to	be	hearing?’
‘No	idea.’
‘It’s	a	good	knoll,’	Hedge	said.	‘Defendable.’	And	then	he	departed.
Closing	his	eyes	again,	Fiddler	listened	to	the	crunch	of	his	boots,	until
they	were	gone.	Chains.	House	of	Chains.	Us	mortals	know	all	about	them.	It’s
where	we	live.
	
Calm	could	see	the	rise	where	she	had	left	him,	could	see	a	darker	shape	low
across	its	summit.	The	chains	of	her	ancestors	still	bound	him.	Distant	deaths
tracked	cold	fingers	across	her	skin	–	Reverence	was	no	more.	Diligence	was
gone.	They	had	lost	the	heart	of	the	Fallen	God.
When	a	building	is	so	battered	and	worn	that	no	further	repairs	are
possible,	it	needs	tearing	down.	As	simple	as	that,	now.	Their	enemies	might
well	stand	filled	with	triumph	at	this	very	moment,	there	on	the	heights	of	the
Great	Spire,	with	a	fresh	clean	wind	coming	in	from	the	sea.	They	might


believe	that	they	had	won,	and	that	no	longer	would	the	Forkrul	Assail	make
hard	the	fist	of	implacable	justice	–	to	strike	at	their	venal	selves,	to	crush	their
presumptuous	arrogance.	They	might	now	imagine	that	they	were	free	to	take
the	future,	to	devour	this	world	beast	by	beast,	tree	by	tree,	emptying	the
oceans	and	skies	of	all	life.
And	if	the	victory	on	this	day	just	past	tasted	of	blood,	so	be	it	–	it	was	a
familiar	taste	to	them,	and	they	were	still	not	weaned	from	it	and	perhaps
would	never	be.
But	nature	had	its	own	weapons	of	righteousness.	Weapons	that	struck	even
when	none	held	them.	No	god,	no	guiding	force	or	will	beyond	that	of	blind
destruction	was	even	necessary.	All	it	needed	was	freedom.
The	time	for	Lifestealer	had	come.
Face	the	sea,	you	fools.	Face	the	rising	of	the	sun,	imagining	your	new	day.
You	do	not	see	what	comes	from	the	darkness	in	the	west.	The	slayer	is
awakened.	Obliteration	awaits	you	all.
	
Innocence	and	ignorance.	He	had	struggled	with	those	two	words	for	so	long,
and	each	time	he	had	looked	upon	the	face	of	Icarium	Mappo	had	known	his
own	war,	there	in	his	mind.	They	were	places	of	being,	that	and	nothing	more,
and	long	had	sages	chewed	on	their	distinctiveness.	But	they	understood	little
of	the	battle	the	Trell	had	fought.	He	protected	innocence	by	making	ignorance
a	weapon	and	shield.	In	the	belief	that	innocence	had	value,	was	a	virtue,	was	a
state	of	purity.
So	long	as	he	remains…ignorant.
Knowledge	is	the	enemy.	Knowledge	was	ever	the	enemy.
Staggering	through	the	gloom,	shadow	roads	crossing	the	plain	around
him	though	there	was	no	sun	left	to	cast	them,	he	looked	up	to	see	a	figure	in
the	distance,	coming	from	the	southeast.
Something	cold	whispered	through	him.
He’s	close.	I	feel	him…so	close!	He	forced	himself	to	move	faster	–	that
stranger,	the	way	it	walked,	the	way	it	seemed	a	thing	of	bleached	bone	beneath
this	uncanny	light	–	he	knew.	He	understood.
With	a	soft	groan,	he	broke	into	a	run.
	
She	saw	him,	after	turning,	after	feeling	his	footfalls	lumbering	closer.	Skin
the	colour	of	stained	wood,	a	dark	visage	bestial	by	nature	and	ravaged	by


deprivation.	The	creature	was	emaciated,	hunched	beneath	a	heavy	satchel,	his
clothes	half	rotted	off.	An	apparition,	yet	one	of	weakness	and	pathos.
Calm	faced	him,	waited.
When	she	saw	him	spot	the	body	of	Lifestealer	–	when	he	cried	out	a	small
animal	sound,	pitching	as	he	changed	direction,	as	he	stumbled	towards
Icarium	–	Calm	stepped	into	his	path.	‘It	is	too	late,	Trell.	He	is	mine	now.’
Haunted	eyes	fixed	on	her	as	the	Trell	stopped,	only	a	few	paces	away.	She
could	see	the	pain	that	had	come	from	running,	the	way	his	chest	heaved,	the
way	he	bent	over,	legs	shaky	beneath	him.	Then	he	sank	down,	pulled	the
satchel	from	his	shoulder.	His	hands	fumbled	and	a	scatter	of	small	objects
spilled	out	from	the	sack	–	the	shards	of	a	broken	pot.	The	Trell	stared	down	at
them,	as	if	in	horror.	‘We’ll	fix	that,’	he	mumbled,	visibly	jerking	as	he	pulled
his	gaze	away	from	the	fragments.	Looking	up,	he	glared	at	Calm.	‘I	won’t	let
you,	Assail.’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool.’
He	pulled	a	heavy	mace	from	the	satchel,	struggled	to	his	feet.
‘I	will	kill	you	if	you	continue	to	stand	in	my	way,’	she	said.	‘I	understand,
Trell.	You	are	his	latest	protector	–	but	you	lost	him.	All	the	ones	before	you	–
and	there	were	many	–	they	all	lost	him,	eventually,	and	then	they	died.
‘But	none	of	you	ever	understood.	The	Nameless	Ones	weren’t	interested
in	Icarium.	Each	time,	the	one	they	chose	–	that	one	was	the	real	danger.	A
warleader	who	threatened	their	hidden	alliances.	A	rebel	of	terrible	potential.
Each	time,	for	nothing	more	than	squalid,	immediate	necessities	–	political
expediency	–	they	snatched	away	the	maker	of	trouble,	gave	to	him	or	her	a
task	impossible	to	achieve,	and	a	lifetime	chained	to	it.
‘You	are	the	last	of	them,	Trell.	Made…harmless.’
He	was	shaking	his	head.	‘Icarium—’
‘Icarium	Lifestealer	is	what	he	is	and	what	he	has	always	been.
Uncontrollable,	destined	to	awaken	again	and	again,	there	in	the	midst	of	the
devastation	he	has	wrought.	He	cannot	be	stopped,	cannot	be	saved.’	She
stepped	forward.	‘So,	let	me	free	him,	Trell.’
‘No.’	The	mace	lifted	in	his	hands.	‘I	will	die	first.’
She	sighed.	‘Trell,	you	died	long	ago.’
Roaring,	he	charged.
Calm	evaded	the	clumsy	swing,	moved	in	close,	one	hand	shooting	out.
The	blow	against	his	right	shoulder	punched	the	bone	from	its	socket,	ripped
the	muscles	clean	away.	The	Trell	was	thrown	round	by	the	impact.	She	drove
her	elbow	into	his	face,	shattering	it.	Angled	a	kick	against	his	right	shin,
broke	both	bones.


The	mace	thudded	on	to	the	ground.
Even	as	he	fell,	he	tried	to	grasp	her	with	his	left	hand.	She	caught	it	by	the
wrist,	clenched	and	twisted,	crushed	the	bones.	A	savage	pull	snapped	him
closer.	Calm	plunged	her	other	hand	into	his	chest,	up	and	under	the	ribs,	the
fingers	stabbing	through	to	sink	deep.	She	pushed	him	back,	her	hand
reappearing	in	a	welter	of	blood,	fingers	clutching	half	a	lung.
Another	push	sent	him	on	to	his	back.
Calm	dropped	down	over	him,	hands	closing	on	his	throat.
	
Mappo	stared	up	at	her.	Lies.	I	was	nothing.	Throwing	away	my	life.	They	gave
me	a	purpose	–	it’s	all	anyone	needs.	A	purpose.	She	had	stolen	his	breath	and
his	chest	raged	with	fire.	His	body	was	broken,	and	now	the	end	was	upon	him.
Icarium!	She’s	done	something	to	you.	She’s	hurt	you.
Darkness	closed	around	him.	I	tried.	But…too	weak.	Too	flawed.
They	all	hurt	you.
I	was	nothing.	A	Trell	youth	among	a	dying	people.	Nothing.
My	friend.	I	am	sorry.
	
She	crushed	his	windpipe.	She	crushed	every	bone	in	his	neck.	Her	fingers
pushed	through	wrinkled,	slack	skin	–	skin	that	felt	like	worn	deerhide	–	and
the	blood	welled	out.
His	dead	eyes	stared	up	at	her	from	a	blackened	face,	a	face	now	frozen	in
a	peculiar	expression	of	sorrow.	But	she	would	give	that	no	thought.	Just	one
more	warrior	cursed	to	fail.	The	world	was	filled	with	them.	They	littered
battlefields.	They	marched	into	the	fray	beating	time	with	swords	on	shields.
But	not	for	much	longer.
He	is	mine.	I	will	awaken	him	now	–	I	will	free	him	to	kill	this	world.
A	sound	to	her	left,	and	then	a	voice.	‘That’s	not	nice.’
She	twisted,	to	fling	herself	away,	but	something	massive	slammed	into	the
side	of	her	head,	hard	enough	to	lift	her	from	the	ground,	spin	her	in	the	air.
Calm	landed	on	her	right	shoulder,	rolled	and	came	to	her	feet.	Her	face	–
her	entire	head	–	felt	lopsided,	unbalanced.
The	backswing	caught	her	left	hip.	Shards	of	jagged	bone	erupted	from	her
pelvis.	She	folded	around	the	blow,	pitched	headfirst	downward,	and	once
more	landed	hard.	Fought	to	her	knees,	stared	up	with	her	one	working	eye	to
see	a	Toblakai	standing	before	her.


But	you	freed	me!
No.	You’re	not	him.	That	was	long	ago.	Another	place	–	another	time.
‘I	don’t	like	fighting,’	he	said.
His	next	swing	tore	her	head	from	her	shoulders.
	
‘Brother	Grave?’
‘A	moment.’	The	Forkrul	Assail	stared	at	the	distant	knot	of	hills.	This	is
where	the	cloud	of	birds	descended.	I	see…shapes,	there,	upon	the	flanks	of	the
Elan	barrow.	He	spoke	to	the	High	Watered	at	his	side.	‘Do	you	see,	Haggraf?
We	will	now	encircle	–	but	maintain	our	distance.	I	want	us	rested	before	we
strike.’
‘Perhaps	we	should	await	the	heavy	infantry,	Pure.	They	have	prepared	for
us	on	that	barrow.’
‘We	will	not	wait,’	Grave	replied.	‘That	hill	is	not	large	enough	to	hold	a
force	of	any	appreciable	threat.	Before	dawn,	we	shall	form	up	and	advance.’
‘They	will	surrender.’
‘Even	if	they	do,	I	will	execute	them	all.’
‘Pure,	will	you	make	them	kneel	before	our	blades?’
Brother	Grave	nodded.	‘And	once	we	are	done	here,	we	shall	return	to
Brother	Aloft	and	Sister	Freedom	–	perhaps	the	enemy	they	have	now	found
will	prove	more	of	a	challenge.	If	not,	we	will	form	up	and	march	our	three
armies	north,	to	eliminate	that	threat.	And	then…we	shall	retake	the	Great
Spire.’
Haggraf	strode	off	to	relay	the	orders	to	the	company	commanders.
Brother	Grave	stared	at	the	distant	barrow.	At	last,	we	will	end	this.
	
Vastly	Blank	stepped	down	from	the	boulder,	and	then	sat	to	adjust	the	leather
bindings	protecting	his	shins.
Fiddler	frowned	down	at	the	heavy,	and	then	across	at	Badan	Gruk.
The	sergeant	shrugged.	‘Just	our	luck,	Captain,	that	it’s	him	got	the	best
eyes	here.’
‘Soldier,’	said	Fiddler.
Vastly	Blank	looked	up,	smiled.
‘Captain	wants	to	know	what	you	saw	from	up	there,’	Badan	Gruk	said.
‘We’re	surrounded.’	He	began	pulling	at	a	torn	toenail.
Fiddler	made	a	fist,	raised	it	for	a	moment,	and	then	let	his	hand	fall	to	his


side	again.	‘How	many?’
Vastly	Blank	looked	back	up,	smiled.	‘Maybe	three	thousand.’	He	brought
up	most	of	the	nail,	which	he’d	prised	off,	and	squinted	at	it,	wiping	the	blood
away.
‘And?’
‘Banded	leather,	Captain.	Some	splint.	Not	much	chain.	Round	shields	and
spears,	javelins,	curved	swords.	Some	archers.’	He	wiped	more	blood	from	the
nail,	but	it	was	still	mottled	brown.
‘They’re	getting	ready	to	attack?’
‘Not	yet,’	Vastly	Blank	replied.	‘I	smell	their	sweat.’
‘You	what?’
‘Long	march.’
‘Best	nose,	too,’	Badan	Gruk	offered.
Vastly	Blank	popped	the	nail	into	his	mouth,	made	sucking	sounds.
Sighing,	Fiddler	moved	away.
	
The	sky	to	the	east	was	lightening,	almost	colourless,	with	streaks	of	silver	and
pewter	close	to	the	horizon.	The	sound	of	the	Kolansii	soldiers	was	a	soft
clatter	coming	at	them	from	all	sides.	The	enemy	taking	position,	readying
shields	and	weapons.	Ranks	of	archers	were	forming	up,	facing	the	hill.
Sergeant	Urb	heard	Commander	Hedge	talking	to	his	own	dozen	or	so
archers,	but	couldn’t	quite	make	out	what	he	was	saying.	Shifting	his	heavy
shield,	he	edged	closer	to	where	Hellian	sat.	He	couldn’t	keep	his	eyes	from
her.	She	is	so	beautiful	now.	So	pure	and	clean	and	the	awful	truth	is,	I	liked	her
better	when	she	looked	like	a	bird	that’s	flown	into	a	wall.	At	least	then	I	had	a
chance	with	her.	A	drunk	woman	will	take	anyone,	after	all,	so	long	as	they
clean	up	after	them	and	take	care	of	them,	and	got	the	coin	for	more	to	drink.
‘Take	cover	–	they’re	drawing!’
He	worked	his	way	back	under	his	shield.
He	heard	Fiddler.	‘Hedge!’
‘After	the	first	salvo!’
Distant	thrums.	Hollow	whistling,	and	suddenly	arrows	thudded	the	ground
and	snapped	and	skidded	on	rock.	One	pained	howl	and	a	chorus	of	curses.
Urb	looked	across	at	her	to	see	if	she	was	all	right.	Two	arrows	were	stuck
in	her	shield	and	there	was	a	lovely	startled	look	on	her	face.
‘I	love	you!’	Urb	shouted.
She	stared	at	him.	‘What?’
At	that	moment	a	thick	rushing	sound	filled	the	air.	He	saw	her	flinch	back


down,	but	these	weren’t	arrows.	He	angled	himself	up,	saw	a	band	of	enemy
archers	on	the	ground,	writhing,	and,	pelting	back	towards	the	barrow,	one	of
Hedge’s	Bridgeburners,	his	shoulders	covered	in	turf,	his	uniform	grey	and
brown	with	dirt.
Dug	a	hole,	did	he?	Hit	the	archers	with	some	gods-awful	grenado.
Hedge	shouted,	‘Archers	down!’
‘Gods	below!’	someone	bellowed.	‘What	was	that	blue	stuff?	They’re
rotting	to	bones!’
Looking	over,	Urb	saw	the	accuracy	of	that	assessment.	Whatever	had
splashed	all	over	the	archers	had	dissolved	their	flesh.	Even	the	bones	and
quivers	filled	with	arrows	were	nothing	but	paste.
Now	an	officer	was	stepping	out	from	the	ring	of	Kolansii	infantry	–	tall,
white-skinned.
Corporal	Clasp	crawled	up	beside	him.	‘That’s	one	of	those	Fuckeral’s,
isn’t	it?’
‘You!’	shouted	Hellian,	pointing	a	finger	at	Urb.	‘What	did	you	say?’
The	Forkrul	Assail	then	roared	–	impossibly	loud,	the	sound	hammering
against	the	hillside.	Urb	was	driven	into	the	ground	by	the	concussion.	He
clawed	at	his	ears.	A	second	roar—
And	then	it	seemed	to	dim,	as	if	muffled.
A	quavering	voice	lifted	from	a	nearby	trench.	‘Worm	says	fuck	you,
Assail!’
‘Is	that	you	I’m	smelling	again,	Wid?’
Urb	uncurled,	straightened	up,	though	still	on	his	knees.
He	could	see	the	Forkrul	Assail.	Watched	him	roaring	for	a	third	time	–	but
the	sound	barely	reached	through.
A	rock	sailed	out,	landed	well	short	of	the	Pure,	bounced	and	rolled.	The
enemy	commander	seemed	to	flinch	from	it	nevertheless,	and	then	he	whirled.
‘Here	they	come!’
Hellian’s	voice	was	much	closer	and	much	louder.	‘What	did	you	say?’
He	twisted	round.	Corporal	Clasp	was	lying	between	them,	staring	back
and	forth.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	is	with	you	two?’
‘I	love	you!’	Urb	shouted.
When	he	saw	her	delighted	grin,	Urb	clambered	over	a	grunting	Clasp.
Hellian	pitched	up	to	meet	him,	her	mouth	hard	against	his	own.
Pinned	by	Urb’s	weight,	Clasp	squirmed	and	kicked.	‘You	idiots!	The
enemy’s	advancing!	Get	off	me!’


	
Cuttle	watched	the	lines	closing	in.	At	twenty	or	so	paces	javelins	flashed	out,
colliding	against	uplifted	shields,	and	then,	at	a	signal	from	the	company
commanders,	the	Kolansii	surged	forward	into	a	charge	against	the	slope.
The	sapper	half	rose	from	his	position.	The	crossbow	thocked,	thick	cord
humming,	the	vibration	a	soft	brush	against	his	cheek.	He	saw	his	quarrel	take
a	squad	leader	in	the	throat.	The	rest	of	the	marines	had	also	loosed	quarrels
into	the	rushing	enemy.	Bodies	went	tumbling	among	the	crags	and	outcrops.
The	sapper	set	his	weapon	down	behind	him,	swung	his	shield	round,
slipping	his	arm	through	the	straps,	and	drew	his	short	sword.	These	four
motions	were	done	before	the	squad	leader	hit	the	ground.	‘Hold	and	at	’em!’
he	shouted,	rising	as	the	first	Kolansii	arrived.

An	arrow	had	pinned	Saltlick’s	left	foot	to	the	ground,	but	he	didn’t	want	to
move	anyway.	The	soldier	arriving	directly	in	front	of	him	stumbled	at	the	last
moment.	Saltlick	pressed	his	shield	down	on	the	man	and	drove	the	pommel	of
his	sword	through	the	top	of	his	helm	and	then	the	bones	of	his	skull.	When	he
pulled	his	weapon	free,	the	helm	was	stuck	to	the	pommel.
A	spear	thrust	at	him.	He	batted	it	aside	with	the	helm,	put	his	shoulder
behind	his	shield-bash,	and	flattened	the	soldier ’s	face.	As	the	man	reeled	back,
Saltlick	stabbed	him	low	in	the	gut.	Dragged	the	weapon	free	and	began
hacking	at	another	Kolansii	–	they	seemed	to	be	everywhere.


He	never	even	saw	the	spear	that	impaled	his	neck	and	tore	out	his	throat.
	
Koryk	swore,	swinging	his	left	arm	to	shake	off	the	remnants	of	his	broken
shield.	He	drew	a	Seti	long	knife	from	his	harness,	kicked	away	the	man	whose
skull	had	broken	his	shield,	and	looked	up	in	time	to	meet	the	next	attacker.
Blades	flashed	out,	the	heavier	one	batting	aside	the	jabbing	spear,	the
thinner	one	thrusting	through	leather	armour	to	sink	a	hand’s	width	into	the
Kolansii’s	chest,	and	then	back	out	again.	As	the	soldier	staggered	back,
sagging,	Koryk	brought	his	long	sword	down	between	head	and	neck,	the	blow
of	such	power	that	he	cut	through	a	clavicle	and	down	through	three	ribs	where
they	met	the	breastbone.
Koryk	twisted	to	avoid	another	spear	point,	then	heard	a	laugh	and	saw
Smiles	spin	away	again,	leaving	behind	her	a	toppling	corpse.
Another	surging	mass	of	Kolansii	rushed	up	towards	them.
	
The	blued	Letherii	blade	seemed	to	shout	as	it	clove	through	the	side	of	a	helm,
crushing	the	cheek-guard	and	then	the	bones	it	was	meant	to	protect.	Blood	spat
out	from	the	soldier ’s	gaping	mouth,	the	eyes	bulging,	and	then	Corabb	kicked
the	man	away,	watched	as	he	pitched	backward	to	collide	with	the	next	soldier.
The	echo	of	that	shout	raced	back	and	forth	in	his	skull.	He	bellowed	in
answer	to	it,	lifted	the	weapon	crossways	over	his	shield	and	awaited	the	next
fool.
I	am	a	marine!	A	heroic	soldier	on	a	day	of	glory!	Come	to	me	and	die!
	
Swearing,	Throatslitter	cut	off	an	arm	to	his	right,	then	another	to	his	left.
Blood	sprayed	him	from	both	sides,	making	him	curse	some	more.	He	shifted
to	avoid	a	spear	thrust,	kicked	under	a	jaw	hard	enough	to	snap	the	head	back,
and	then	slashed	across	that	exposed	neck.
Beside	him,	Deadsmell	staggered	to	repeated	blows	on	his	shield	from	a
Kolansii	wielding	a	heavy	spiked	axe.	Throatslitter ’s	sideways	thrust	drove	his
long	knife	over	the	attacker ’s	shoulder,	into	the	gap	behind	the	corner	of	jaw
and	the	flared	helm,	angling	slightly	upwards	to	slice	through	the	spinal	cord
just	below	the	base	of	the	skull.
Righting	himself,	Deadsmell	lunged	with	his	shield,	blocking	an	attacker
trying	to	take	Throatslitter	from	the	flank.	The	enemy	soldier	grunted	at	the


impact,	knees	buckling.	Having	broken	his	own	weapon,	Deadsmell	now	held
the	spiked	axe,	and	he	hammered	it	down,	splitting	the	Kolansii’s	round	shield,
and	then	thrusting	the	spike	into	the	man’s	shoulder.
Ducking	low,	Throatslitter	cut	through	the	Achilles	tendon	of	the
Kolansii’s	right	leg,	and	as	the	screaming	man	fell	he	stabbed	down	through
the	eye	socket,	silencing	the	cries.
‘Stay	down!’	shouted	Widdershins	behind	him.
A	quarrel	hissed	over	Throatslitter,	caught	the	next	foe	in	the	chest.
From	Deadsmell’s	other	side,	Balm	shouted,	‘Where’d	you	get	that	stupid
axe,	soldier!	Find	a	sword!	You	end	up	hanging	out	there	and	you’re	finished!’
‘I’m	looking,	damn	you!	I’m	looking!’
	
Kisswhere	fell	on	to	her	back.	She	heard	the	blocked	thrust	above	her,	and	then
Sinter ’s	snarl	as	her	sister	backslashed	across	the	Kolansii’s	face.	Kicking
herself	clear	of	his	collapsing	body,	her	hand	closed	on	a	javelin.	She	grasped
it,	pushed	herself	back	on	to	her	feet,	and	leapt	into	the	press	yet	again.
Sinter	was	taking	blows	on	her	shield,	righting	herself	from	that	sideways
lunge	against	Kisswhere’s	assailant.	Badan	Gruk	then	flung	himself	at	her
attacker,	pushing	his	short	sword	deep	into	the	man’s	side.
An	axe	came	down	on	the	back	of	the	sergeant’s	helm,	splitting	it,	driving
Badan	Gruk	face	first	into	the	ground.	The	half-moon	blade	sobbed	free,	its
edge	dragging	free	hair,	scalp	and	fragments	of	bone.
Howling,	Sinter	cut	off	the	hand	holding	it,	and	then	the	flailing	arm,	and
then	opened	wide	the	man’s	belly	with	a	single	savage	slash.	Intestines	tumbled
out	over	Badan	Gruk’s	corpse.
And	still	she	howled.
	
A	spear	transfixed	Lap	Twirl,	drove	him	against	a	tilted	standing	stone.	The
Falari	cutter	shrieked	as	the	iron	point	bit	through	to	grind	against	the	rock.	He
chopped	down	with	his	short	sword,	slicing	off	the	fingers	of	the	nearer	hand
along	the	spear ’s	shaft.	The	pressure	from	the	weapon	released	all	at	once.	He
slid	forward	on	the	slick	wood	until	he	was	close	to	the	Kolansii,	and	slashed
halfway	through	the	woman’s	neck,	severing	the	jugular.
As	the	woman	fell,	the	cutter	dropped	sword	and	shield,	grasped	hold	of
the	butt	end	of	the	spear.	Feeling	the	point	dig	at	an	angle	into	the	ground	at	the
base	of	the	stone	behind	him,	he	flung	out	his	feet	and	fell	straight	down.	The


shaft	snapped	just	past	his	back.	Leaving	it	there,	he	gained	his	knees,	wiping
his	hands	on	dead	grasses,	and	took	up	shield	and	sword	again.
Spitting	out	a	mouthful	of	blood	from	a	cut	tongue,	he	gasped,	‘Now	that
wasn’t	so	bad.’
More	Kolansii	clambered	into	view	between	the	outcrops.	Lap	Twirl	went
forward	to	meet	them,	stepping	over	Burnt	Rope’s	body.	He	had	enough	left	in
him	to	take	a	few	more	down.	Maybe.
	
Skulldeath	sailed	sideways	through	the	air,	gliding	over	the	hunched	back	of	a
Kolansii	engaged	in	a	fierce	battle	with	Reliko.	Lashing	down,	his	blade	bit
deep	beneath	the	flared	rim	of	the	man’s	helm,	cutting	through	his	vertebrae.
Spinning	round,	Skulldeath	landed	in	a	crouch,	and	then	screamed	as	he	lunged
forward.	He	saw	a	face	–	staring	–	directly	ahead,	and	the	Kolansii	ducked
down	behind	his	round	shield,	slashing	out	with	his	scimitar,	but	Skulldeath
leapt	high,	one	hand	landing	atop	the	enemy’s	helm,	and	used	that	to	pivot
round	above	him.	Cutting	downward,	he	sliced	through	the	Kolansii’s
hamstrings.
Striking	the	ground,	the	desert	prince	rolled—
He	heard	Sinter	shouting	–	heard	Kisswhere’s	cursing—
Gaining	his	feet,	Skulldeath	found	himself	surrounded.	He	twisted,	slashed,
ducked,	kicked	and	closed.	Bodies	fell	away.	Blood	sprayed.
Then	a	blow	hammered	his	lower	back,	lifted	him	from	his	feet.	He	tried
curling	away	from	the	blow,	but	something	was	jammed	in	his	body,	a	hard
edge	crunching	and	grinding	against	his	spine.	He	was	driven	to	the	ground
face	first,	and	then	they	were	beating	on	him	–	heavy	edges	chopping	into	his
muscles	and	bones.
One	struck	the	back	of	his	head	and	there	was	darkness,	and	then	oblivion.
	
Hedge	stood	over	the	corpse	of	Bavedict	–	the	damned	fool	had	been	killed
outright	by	that	first	shower	of	arrows,	taking	one	through	an	eye.	From	his
vantage	point	Hedge	could	see	the	ring	of	defenders	contracting	as	the	enemy
pushed	higher	up	the	slope.	He	watched	Fiddler	moving	down	to	block	an
imminent	breach	where	most	of	a	squad	had	gone	down.
‘You	–	archers	–	keep	an	eye	on	there.	If	they	get	through	it’s	a	straight
path	to	the	Crippled	God.’
‘Yes	sir!’


‘Now,	the	rest	of	you	–	we	got	to	relieve	the	pressure.	Take	those	coppery
ones	and	throw	for	the	fifth	and	sixth	ranks	–	use	’em	all	up.	If	we	don’t	make
’em	reel	right	now	we’re	done	for.’
‘What’s	the	copper	kittens	do,	sir?’
Hedge	shook	his	head.	‘I	forget,	and	the	alchemist’s	dead.	Just	go	–	spread
out,	get	moving!’
As	they	left,	the	sapper	took	up	his	crossbow	–	he	only	had	half	a	dozen
quarrels	left.	The	occasional	arrow	still	sailed	down	here	and	there,	but	either
the	sappers	he’d	dug	in	below	the	slope	were	all	dead	or	they’d	used	up	their
munitions	–	it’d	be	just	his	luck	if	some	errant	arrow	took	him	or	Fiddler	out
now.
Loading	his	weapon,	he	moved	down	past	his	four	remaining	archers,	who
were	sending	arrows	into	the	breach.	He	could	see	Fiddler,	there	with	those	Dal
Honese	sisters	and	a	lone	heavy	infantryman	shorter	than	any	of	them.	The
Kolansii	who’d	been	advancing	to	flank	them	were	all	down,	feathered	with
arrows.	‘Good	work,’	barked	out	Hedge	to	his	archers.	‘Now	find	somewhere
else	you’re	needed.’
	
A	stone	turned	underfoot	and	Fiddler ’s	left	ankle	gave	way	in	a	stab	of	pain.
Cursing,	he	stumbled.	Looked	up	to	see	a	Kolansii	closing	–	the	eyes	manic
and	wild	beneath	the	helm,	a	heavy	axe	lifting	high.
The	quarrel	punched	the	man	back	a	step,	and	he	looked	down	in
astonishment	at	the	heavy	bolt	buried	in	his	chest.
One	hand	closed	on	Fiddler ’s	collar,	dragged	him	clear.	An	allmetal
crossbow	landed	in	his	lap,	followed	by	a	quiver.	‘Load	up,	Fid,’	said	Hedge,
drawing	his	short	sword.	‘Keep	’em	off	my	left	flank,	will	you?’
‘You	getting	mad,	Hedge?’
‘Aye.’
‘Gods	help	them.’
	
His	attacker	had	pushed	his	spear	right	through	Bottle’s	right	thigh,	pinning
him	down,	but	Bottle	had	replied	with	a	sword	through	the	stomach,	and	as	the
Kolansii	sagged	back	voicing	terrible	screams	the	marine	decided	he’d	come
away	the	winner	of	the	argument.
Is	that	what	this	is?	An	argument?	But	look	at	them	–	they’re	slaves.
They’re	not	asking	for	this.


Tarr	dropped	down	beside	him,	blood	streaming	from	a	gash	in	his	face.
‘You	want	that	spear	out,	Bottle?	It	ain’t	bleeding	much	for	the	moment,	but	if	I
take	it	out…’
‘I	know,’	Bottle	said.	‘But	it’s	pushed	right	through	–	I	want	it	gone,
Sergeant.	I’ll	stuff	rags	in.’
‘A	bleeder—’
‘It	ain’t	one,	Sergeant.	It’s	just	a	big	fucking	hole.’
Tarr	pushed	Bottle	on	to	his	side,	and	then	quickly	drew	out	the	spear.
‘Bleeding,’	he	said	after	a	moment,	‘but	not	spurting.	When	I	see	Deadsmell	I’ll
send	him	your	way.’
Nodding,	feeling	faint,	Bottle	pushed	himself	upright,	fumbling	at	the
pouch	at	his	side,	where	he	found	a	roll	of	bandages.	He	was	working	a	wad
into	one	end	of	the	hole	when	there	was	a	flash	of	heat	from	downslope	and
then	blood-chilling	screams.
	
Brother	Grave	stared,	in	shock,	furious	at	his	own	helplessness,	as	copperhued	grenados	sailed	down	from	the	defenders	to	strike	the	Kolansii	ranks	at
the	foot	of	the	barrow	and	on	the	level	ground	beyond	it.	The	emerald	fires	that
erupted	when	they	shattered	seemed	almost	demonic	as	they	spread	with
terrible	ferocity	through	the	ranks.
The	attack	was	a	shambles	–	he	saw	his	soldiers	reeling,	flinching	back.
This	is	going	to	take	longer	than	I	anticipated.
He	looked	to	the	northeast,	seeking	that	telltale	sign	of	dust	on	the	horizon.
Where	are	they?
‘Haggraf.	Sound	the	recall.	We	shall	wait	until	the	fires	burn	down.	Then
strike	again,	and	again,	until	they	are	all	dead!’
The	stench	of	burnt	flesh	carried	with	it	a	strange	flavour,	something
between	sulphur	and	limes.
	
The	Crippled	God	listened	to	the	clamour	of	battle	on	all	sides.	He	heard	the
cries	of	pain	and	anger,	but	these	were	sounds	he	had	expected.	Amidst	the
clash	of	iron	and	the	splinter	of	wooden	shields,	amidst	the	whistle	of	arrows	–
some	of	them	striking	close	–	and	the	splinter	of	shafts	against	insensate	stone,
he	heard	soldiers	shouting	to	each	other,	heard	their	desperate	breaths	as	they
struggled	to	stay	alive	and	to	kill	those	who	rose	up	against	them	in	seemingly
endless	waves.


And	overhead	the	sky	was	almost	blinding	with	all	the	souls	abandoned	by
his	descent	to	this	world.	He	thought	to	hear	them	as	well,	but	they	were	too	far
away,	lost	in	the	heavens.	Did	they	still	struggle	to	hold	on	to	their	faith,	with
their	god	vanished	for	so	long?	Or	had	they	surrendered	to	the	cruel	malice
that	came	to	so	many	of	the	spiritually	vacant?	Did	they	now	wander	without
purpose,	in	the	horror	of	a	meaningless	existence?
Fires	erupted	around	him	–	not	so	close	that	he	could	feel	their	heat	–	and
now	shrieks	rushed	out	to	fill	the	air.
Sounds	of	dying,	from	all	sides.	He	had	heard	these	sounds	before.	There
was	nothing	new,	nothing	to	give	him	comprehension.	That	mortal	lives	could
so	willingly	extinguish	themselves,	in	the	name	of	causes	and	noble	desires	–
was	this	not	the	most	profound,	most	baffling	sacrifice	of	all?	The	one
sacrifice	every	god	has	long	since	forgotten;	the	one	sacrifice	that	they,	in	their
callous	indifference,	could	not	even	comprehend.
Their	flesh	is	all	they	know	–	all	these	men	and	women	here.	Flesh	as	now
clothes	me.	Feel	our	limits,	our	terrible	limits.	So	frail,	so	temporary.	A	flitting
light,	a	moment’s	breath.
I	hear	you	surrendering	it.	This	one	gift	that	is	the	only	gift	ever	given	you
–	you	yield	it	back	into	the	firmament.	And	the	world	passes	on,	barely	taking
notice.
Will	no	one	notice?
I	will	heed	your	deaths.	I	will	remember.
The	Crippled	God	listened,	past	the	horns	of	retreat,	past	the	cries	for
healers,	past	the	clashing	signals	announcing	the	next	wave	to	advance	upon
these	beleaguered	few.	The	Crippled	God	listened,	and	he	waited.
	
Seven	of	the	Dead	Fires,	the	T’lan	Imass	stood	on	a	bare	rise	to	the	east	of	the
Malazan	regulars.	Nom	Kala	and	Kalt	Urmanal	were	now	among	them,	as
bound	as	true	kin,	and	in	Nom	Kala’s	mind	it	was	well.	She	did	not	feel	like	a
stranger.	She	did	not	feel	alone.
Urugal	the	Woven	spoke.	‘She	prepares	for	the	enemy’s	approach.	We	have
listened	to	her	silence	and	we	know	that	there	are	no	lies	within	her	soul.	Yet
she	is	mortal.’
‘Many	who	see	her,’	said	Beroke,	‘believe	her	weak	–	not	in	her	will,	but	in
her	flesh	and	bones.	She	has	yielded	her	sword.	I	sought	to	give	her	mine,	but
she	refused	me.’
‘We	understand	the	power	of	a	formidable	will,’	observed	Kahlb	the	Silent
Hunter.


‘Nevertheless,’	said	Beroke.
Urugal	said,	‘I	have	elected	that	we	remain	with	her.	To	stand	here	rather
than	join	the	fate	of	the	marines.	Should	the	Crippled	God	indeed	rise	once
more,	we	shall	not	even	witness	that	moment.’	He	faced	the	others.	‘You	did	not
agree	with	me	on	this	–	my	command	that	we	remain	with	her.’
‘It	is	what	we	may	lose,	Urugal,’	said	Thenik	the	Shattered.	‘To	see	him
reborn.’
‘Must	our	faith	show	its	face	to	us,	Thenik?’
‘I	have	longed	for	proof,’	the	Shattered	replied.	‘That	all	that	we	have	done
has	purpose.	Is	this	not	what	the	Fallen	One	offered	us?	Yet	we	do	not	lend	our
swords	to	the	defence	of	our	god.’
‘In	the	manner	I	have	chosen,’	countered	Urugal,	‘we	will	do	just	that.’
Nom	Kala	spoke,	hesitantly.	‘Kin,	I	have	listened	to	the	soldiers	–	these
Malazans.	At	the	campfires,	in	the	times	of	rest.’	They	had	turned	to	regard	her
now.	‘They	speak	to	each	other	rarely,	yet	when	they	do,	it	is	of	her	words
from	long	ago.	When	she	spoke	of	being	unwitnessed.	They	do	not,	I	feel,
quite	understand	her	–	nor	do	I	–	and	yet,	when	I	hear	them,	when	I	see	what
stirs	in	their	eyes…the	word	awakens	something	in	them.	Perhaps	it	is	no	more
than	defiance.	But	then,	is	not	defiance	mortality’s	most	powerful
proclamation?’
There	was	silence	for	a	time,	barring	the	faint	moan	of	the	morning	wind.
Finally,	Beroke	said,	‘Unwitnessed.	Then	let	us	make	this	our	cause,	too.’
‘One	none	of	us	understands?’	demanded	Thenik.
‘Yes.	One	none	of	us	understands.’
‘Very	well.	Nom	Kala,	your	words	awaken	in	me…defiance.’	Thenik
turned	to	Urugal.	‘We	have	been	ghosts	among	them.	We	have	given	them	so
little,	because	we	had	so	little	to	give.	This	day,	let	us	give	to	her	all	that	we
have	left.’
‘The	Fallen	One,’	said	Beroke,	‘has	placed	his	trust	in	her.	His	faith.
Urugal,	I	honour	you.	My	kin,	I	honour	you	all.’	The	T’lan	Imass	paused,	and
then	said,	‘One	must	be	sacrificed.	The	interference	of	Akhrast	Korvalain
remains	and	will	do	so	until	the	last	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	falls.	But	the
sundering	of	the	Vow,	by	one	of	us	here,	will	grant	us	what	we	seek.	I	volunteer
to	be	that	sacrifice.’
‘Soft-Voice,’	said	Urugal,	‘you	are	most	formidable	in	battle.	One	of	lesser
use	should	be	the	one	to	sunder	the	Vow.	It	shall	be	me.’
‘You	are	both	incorrect,’	said	Thenik.	‘I	am	well-named	the	Shattered.
There	must	be	no	sentimentality	to	this	decision.	Nor	obstinate	courage	–	after
all,	does	any	of	us	here	not	possess	that?	Beroke.	Urugal.	Kahlb	and	Halad.


Nom	Kala	of	the	wise	words.	Kalt	Urmanal	of	Trell	blood.	I	shall	open	the	way
for	you	all,	in	the	name	of	defiance.	The	discussion	ends.’
The	T’lan	Imass	were	silent.
And	in	silence	they	fell	to	dust.
	
The	enemy	had	been	sighted.	The	enemy	was	closing.	Lostara	Yil	stood	with
the	Adjunct	in	Tavore’s	tent,	watching	as	the	woman	prepared	for	battle.	The
Adjunct	had	selected	a	standard	issue	long	sword	from	the	depleted	stores.	Its
last	wielder	had	scorched	uneven	patterns	down	the	length	of	the	leatherbacked	wooden	scabbard.	An	eye	bereft	of	talent	but	possessed	of	boundless
discipline	and	patience.	Not	an	artist.	A	soldier.
The	captain	had	enquired	of	Tavore	about	her	selection	of	this	particular
weapon	–	was	it	the	scabbard’s	elaborate	pattern	that	caught	her	interest?	The
well-honed	blade	edges?	The	solid-looking	crosshilt	and	firm	grip?	–	and	had
earned	nothing	more	than	a	blank	look	in	reply.	And	Lostara	understood,	when
Tavore	had	a	moment	later	glanced	back	at	the	scabbard,	that	the	Adjunct	had
not	even	noticed	any	of	these	details.
Her	coat	of	chain	waited	on	the	wooden	chest	that	had	held	it,	with	the
leather-cuffed	gauntlets	folded	over	the	glistening	iron	links.	The	plain	shirt
Tavore	was	now	wearing	was	worn	through	in	places,	revealing	pale,	almost
bloodless	skin	and	the	ripples	of	bone	so	close	beneath	it.	Her	iron	helm	with
its	grilled	cheek-guards	sat	waiting	on	the	map	table.
Tavore	finished	binding	her	boot	laces,	and	then	walked	to	stand	before	a
small	wooden	box	beside	the	helm,	one	that	bore	a	silver-inlaid	family	crest	of
House	Paran.	The	fingertips	of	her	right	hand	settled	upon	the	lid,	and	then	the
Adjunct	closed	her	eyes	for	a	moment.
Lostara	suddenly	felt	an	intruder	on	this,	Tavore’s	private	readying	for
what	was	to	come,	and	almost	turned	to	leave	before	recalling	that	the	Adjunct
had	ordered	her	to	attend	her	preparations,	to	help	with	the	chain	coat	and	its
fastenings.
The	lid	creaked	as	Tavore	opened	it,	startling	Lostara.
Reaching	inside,	she	drew	out	a	necklace	–	a	simple	leather	string	and	an
eagle’s	talon	of	brass	or	gold.	Then	she	turned	to	the	captain.	‘Would	you	tie
this	for	me,	please?’
But	Lostara	simply	stared	at	the	talon.
‘Captain.’
She	looked	up,	met	Tavore’s	eyes.
The	Adjunct	sighed.	‘I	am	a	child	of	the	Emperor	–	what	more	is	there	for


you	to	understand,	Lostara	Yil?’
‘Nothing,	Adjunct.’	She	moved	forward,	took	the	necklace	in	her	hands.	As
she	stepped	close,	drawing	it	up	round	Tavore’s	neck,	Lostara	caught	a	faint
scent	of	perfume	from	the	woman’s	thin,	straight	hair	and	her	knees	came
close	to	buckling,	a	rush	of	ineffable	sorrow	taking	hold	of	her.
‘Captain?’
‘A	moment	–	sorry,	sir.’	She	struggled	to	tie	the	knot,	but	it	was	harder	than
it	should	have	been,	as	her	vision	wasn’t	clear.	‘Done.’
‘Thank	you,’	Tavore	replied.	‘Now,	the	chain.’
‘Of	course.’
	
Banaschar	stood	holding	the	reins	of	the	Adjunct’s	horse.	A	Khundryl	breed,
tough	and	stubborn,	but	it	was	gaunt,	aged	by	suffering,	its	coat	matted	and
dull.	Even	the	Burned	Tears	had,	in	the	last	days	on	the	desert,	failed	in	their
diligence.	This	beast	had	no	running	left	in	it	–	the	damned	thing	might	well
collapse	beneath	Tavore	as	she	rode	out	to	address	her	army.
Address	her	army.	Is	this	truly	the	Adjunct?	When	did	she	last	speak	to	all
of	her	soldiers?	Now	I	remember.	On	the	ships.	Confusing	words,	the	awakening
of	an	idea	few	could	even	grasp.
Will	she	manage	better	this	time?
He	realized	that	he	was	nervous	for	her	–	no,	he	was	sick	with	anxiety.	So	I
stand	here	holding	the	reins	of	her	horse,	outside	her	tent.	I	am…gods,	the	word
is	pathetic.	But	what	does	it	matter?	I	am	also	priest	to	a	god	about	to	die	on
him.
I	once	vowed	that	I	would	meet	this	day	cold	sober.	What	a	miserable	vow
to	make.
The	tent	flap	was	drawn	back	and	Captain	Lostara	Yil	stepped	outside,
looked	round	until	she	saw	Banaschar,	and	then	gestured.
He	led	the	beast	forward	by	the	reins.
The	Adjunct	stepped	into	view.	Met	his	eyes	and	nodded.	‘Demidrek.	You
have	stood	here	for	some	time,	I	should	think	–	I	was	expecting	one	of	my
aides	to	attend	to	this,	and	they’re	used	to	standing	around	and	waiting.	My
apologies.’
He	blinked.	‘Adjunct,	you	misunderstand.	I	drove	the	poor	man	away.’	He
handed	her	the	reins.	‘I	am	and	always	will	be	honoured,	Tavore	Paran.’
‘If	I	could,’	she	said,	‘I	would	order	you	away	from	here.’
‘But	I	am	not	one	of	your	soldiers	to	be	bullied	around,’	he	said,	smiling.
‘So	I	will	do	as	I	damned	well	please,	Adjunct.’


She	studied	him,	and	then	said,	‘I	wonder.’
‘Adjunct?’
‘Is	this	not	the	true	purpose	of	a	priest?	To	take	faith	from	the	one	hand	and
place	it	into	the	next?	To	stand	between	a	god	and	one	such	as	myself?’
His	breath	caught.	‘A	few	remain,’	he	managed.	‘Most	go	through	the
motions,	but	see	themselves	as	privileged…from	both	sides.	Closer	to	their
god	than	to	their	unordained	flock.’
‘But	that	is	not	you,	is	it?’
‘Adjunct,	I	am	kneeling	beside	you.’
There	was	the	flicker	of	something	in	her	eyes,	something	raw	swiftly
suppressed,	and	then	she	was	setting	a	boot	in	the	stirrup	and	drawing	herself
into	the	saddle.
Banaschar	stepped	back.	Looking	away,	he	saw	rank	upon	rank	of	soldiers
turned,	facing	them,	and	now	they	slowly	shifted	as	Tavore	trotted	her	mount
forward.	She	reached	the	southwest	corner	of	the	formation	before	wheeling
inward	to	pass	along	the	back	line.	She	rode	straight	in	her	saddle,	a	figure	in
tattered	chain,	upon	a	starved,	dying	horse.
The	image	seemed	to	sear	itself	in	Banaschar ’s	mind.
Reaching	the	far	end,	she	swung	round	the	corner	–	making	her	way	up	to
face	the	front	of	the	three,	much-reduced,	legions.	She	would	speak	to	her
soldiers	now.	And,	much	as	he	yearned	to	hear	her	words,	he	knew	that	they
were	not	for	him.
Chest	aching,	the	priest	turned	away.
	
As	she	rode	towards	the	head	of	her	forces,	Tavore	could	see	the	dust	cloud
from	the	approaching	army,	and	it	was	vast.	Wheeling	her	horse,	she	walked
the	animal	on	a	course	parallel	to	the	presented	ranks,	slowing	the	beast’s	steps
enough	to	move	her	gaze	from	one	face	to	the	next	in	the	front	line.
When	the	Adjunct	finally	spoke,	her	voice	carried	firm	on	the	wind.	‘Does
anyone	know	you?	You,	who	stood	in	the	shadows	of	the	heavies	and	the
marines.	Who	are	you?	What	is	your	tale?	So	many	have	seen	you	–	marching
past.	Seen	you,	standing	silent	and	unknown.	Even	now,	your	faces	are	almost
lost	beneath	the	rims	of	your	helms.’	She	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	her
eyes	tracking	each	and	every	visage.
And	then	she	halted,	gaze	fixing	upon	one	man.	A	Falari.	‘Corporal	Grid
Ffan,	Third	Squad,	Eleventh	Company.	Bonehunter.	You	carried	Sample	–	the
soldier	on	your	left	–	on	your	back.	The	last	day	in	the	desert.	And,	before	the
Blood	for	Water,	the	only	thing	that	kept	you	–	and	her	–	alive	was	your	love


for	her.’
The	man	seemed	to	sway	before	her	words.	She	nudged	her	horse	forward.
‘Where	stands	Wreck-Eye?’
‘Here!’	cried	out	a	voice	from	a	dozen	ranks	back.
‘When	Lostara	Yil	lost	consciousness	protecting	my	life	on	the	day	of	the
Nah’ruk,	you	led	your	squad	to	recover	us.	Myself.	Henar	Vygulf.	Captain	Yil.
You	lost	a	brother,	and	to	this	day	you	can	find	no	tears	for	him.	But	be	at	ease.
There	are	those	in	your	squad	who	have	wept	in	your	stead.	At	night,	when	you
sleep.’
She	walked	her	horse	forward	a	few	more	steps,	found	another	face.
‘Sergeant	Ordinary	Grey.	When	Sergeant	Gaunt-Eye’s	squad	of	marines	broke
and	tried	to	murder	him,	you	and	Could	Howl	held	them	all	off	–	you	cut	them
down	to	save	Gaunt-Eye.	Because	once,	long	ago	on	the	Holy	Desert	of
Raraku,	he	showed	kindness	to	you.’
She	reached	the	end	of	the	ranks,	turned	her	mount	round	and	began
retracing	her	route.	‘Who	are	you?	I	know	who	you	are.	What	have	you	done?
You	have	stayed	with	me	since	the	very	beginning.	Soldiers,	hear	me!	This	day
is	already	lost	to	history,	and	all	that	happens	here	shall	remain	for	ever
unknown.	On	this	day,	you	are	unwitnessed.
‘Except	for	the	soldier	to	either	side	of	you.	They	shall	witness.	And	I	tell
you	this,	those	soldiers	to	either	side	of	you,	they	are	all	that	matters.	The
historians’	scrolls	have	no	time	for	soldiers	like	you	–	I	know,	for	I	have	read
hundreds	of	them.	They	yield	a	handful	of	words	to	speak	of	defeat	or	victory.
Perhaps,	if	so	warranted,	they	will	make	mention	of	great	valour,
extraordinary	courage,	but	the	weight	of	those	words	is	no	more	and	no	less
than	those	used	to	speak	of	slaughter	and	murder.	Because,	as	we	all	know,	one
soldier	can	be	hero	and	villain	both.
‘We	have	no	place	in	their	histories.	So	few	do.	They	are	not	us	–	they	were
never	us,	and	we	shall	never	be	them.
‘You	are	the	Unwitnessed,	but	I	have	seen	what	you	see.	I	have	felt	what	you
feel.	And	I	am	as	much	a	stranger	to	history	as	any	of	you.’
The	Adjunct	reined	in	again,	at	the	very	centre,	and	swung	her	horse	round
to	face	the	silent	troops.	‘On	the	day	of	the	Na’ruk,	they	stood	for	you.	Today,
here,	you	shall	stand	for	them.	And	I	shall	stand	with	you,	my	beloved
soldiers.’	She	held	up	a	gauntleted	hand.	‘Say	nothing.	We	are	walls	of	silence,
you	and	me.	We	are	perfect	reflections	of	the	one	we	face,	and	we	have	faced
each	other	for	so	long	now.
‘And	the	meaning	of	that	silence	is	none	of	the	enemy’s	business.’
Behind	her	she	could	feel	the	tramp	of	thousands	of	boots	reverberating	up


from	the	ground,	but	she	would	not	turn,	would	not	face	the	enemy.	Her	eyes
belonged	only	to	her	soldiers,	and,	she	could	see,	theirs	belonged	in	turn	to	her
and	her	alone.
‘Bonehunters.	Yield	only	in	death	on	this	day.’
	
When	she	rode	to	take	her	position	on	the	south	flank,	Fist	Blistig	watched	her,
his	eyes	following	her	as	did	the	gazes	of	every	soldier	round	him.
Gods	below.	What	kind	of	rousing	speech	was	that?	Salvage	it,	Fist	–	before
it’s	too	late.	He	swung	round.	‘For ’ard	ranks!	Dr—’
But	he	got	no	further.	Weapons	snapped	out	of	sheaths	and	scabbards,
shields	lifting	on	to	shoulders.
And	in	the	faces	around	him	he	saw	the	coldest	iron	he	had	ever	seen.
	
Sister	Freedom	surveyed	the	enemy	position.	They	had	done	the	best	they
could	given	the	limits	of	the	land,	arrayed	along	a	modest	ridge,	and	before
them	the	ground	stretched	more	or	less	level,	although	just	to	the	north	rose	a
series	of	low	hills.	Her	scouts	had	informed	her	that	the	land	beyond	those	hills
was	cut	by	ravines	–	if	not	for	that	obstacle	to	ordered	retreat,	no	doubt	the
enemy	commander	would	have	positioned	his	or	her	troops	on	those	heights.
But	movement	would	have	been	too	restricted,	and	in	a	battle	that	could	prove
deadly.
She	saw	no	heavily	armoured	infantry	among	the	foreign	soldiers	facing
them,	and	no	cavalry.	The	ranks	of	archers	anchoring	each	flank	looked
pitifully	small.
‘This	is	barely	an	army,’	ventured	Brother	Aloft,	who	rode	at	her	side.	‘I
might	well	believe	that	they	crossed	the	Glass	Desert	–	see	how	disordered	and
worn	they	are,	how	few	in	number.	They	must	have	left	a	road	of	corpses
behind	them.’
‘Of	that	I	have	no	doubt,’	Freedom	replied,	eyes	narrowing	upon	seeing	a
lone	rider	–	a	slight,	frail-looking	figure	–	out	in	front	of	the	facing	line	of
soldiers.	‘Yet,’	she	added,	‘crossing	that	desert	should	have	been	impossible.’
‘The	foes	who	destroyed	our	kin	at	the	Great	Spire	were	known	to	Brother
Diligence.	Bolkando.	Letherii.	I	do	not	recognize	those	standards.’
‘Nor	I,	Brother	Aloft.	From	what	land	have	they	come,	I	wonder?’	She
looked	round,	baffled.	‘To	this	place.	To	die.’
‘Brother	Grave	draws	close	to	the	smaller	force.’


She	nodded.	Though	faint,	his	sending	had	reached	through	to	her.	Akhrast
Korvalain	was	in	a	tumult	–	disturbed	and	thinning	with	weakness.	There	is
something	still	to	come.	I	feel	its	assault.	She	looked	up	at	the	sky	but	saw	only
those	slashes	of	jade.	Icy	worlds	flung	across	the	heavens.	They	had	last
appeared	on	the	day	the	foreign	god	was	brought	down.
And	that	is	the	truth	of	this	–	all	of	this.	They	seek	to	return	him	to	the
heavens.
But	the	fate	of	the	Fallen	God	belongs	to	the	gods,	not	to	humans.	We	could
have	wrested	that	privilege	away	from	those	gods	–	with	our	ancient	power,	our
Elder	Warren	–	but	that	has	been	taken	from	us.	For	the	moment.
‘Whose	game	was	this?’	she	wondered,	eyes	still	on	that	frail	commander
–	who	was	clearly	addressing	his	or	her	troops.	Her.	That	is	a	woman.
‘Sister?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Audacity	rarely	goes	unpunished.’	She	reined	in.	‘The
way	to	the	south	is	open.	Brother,	I	want	you	there	–	I	no	longer	trust	that	we
shall	have	the	power	to	make	these	foreigners	yield.’
‘But…why?’
‘We	shall	strike	them,	yes,	but	not	seeking	to	enslave.	Voice	no	words	in
your	cries,	Brother.	Instead,	flense	the	flesh	from	their	bones.	I	trust	nothing
more	subtle.’
‘As	you	wish.’
‘Lead	your	forces	round	to	the	south,	to	encircle	–	the	ranks	we	see	are	no
doubt	screening	reserves,	and	I	would	know	their	strength.	I	in	turn	will	leave
the	centre	to	High	Watered	Melest	and	take	the	north,	where	I	will	lead	the	dead
king’s	elite	infantry	into	the	crook	between	the	enemy’s	flank	and	the	hills.’
‘There	is	great	risk	in	that,	Sister	Freedom.’
‘No	one	hides	behind	those	hills,	Brother.	Furthermore,	with	me	in	the
lead,	we	can	drive	that	flank	inward.	Shatter	the	hinge	on	your	side	while	I
break	the	one	on	mine,	and	we	shall	make	quick	work	of	this.’
Aloft	faced	the	north.	‘Do	you	sense	anything	from	High	Watered
Kessgan?	Have	they	encountered	the	other	army?	Brother	Grave	cannot	find
them	at	all.’
‘Nor	can	I.	If	they	are	in	battle,	then	we	must	trust	that	they	can	delay	or
even	drive	back	the	enemy.’
The	woman	commanding	the	foreigners	was	now	riding	to	take	position
on	the	south	flank.	Whatever	she	had	said	to	her	soldiers	had	elicited	no	cheers,
no	defiant	roars.
‘She	has	lost	them!’	cried	Brother	Aloft.
‘So	it	seems.	Brother	–	see	where	she	goes?	She	understands	the	weakness


of	that	side.	Ride	straight	for	her	when	you	advance.	Kill	her.’
‘She	might	well	be	alone	by	then	–	I	believe	this	army	is	moments	from
routing.’
‘Such	is	the	failing	of	their	kind,’	Freedom	replied.	‘Humans	have	the
qualities	of	vermin	–	you	will	find	them	everywhere,	but	they	share	a	belief	in
the	virtue	of	running	away	when	threatened.	We	shall	have	to	hunt	them	down,
Brother,	and	rid	us	of	them	once	and	for	all.’
‘I	will	ride	to	my	vanguard	now,	Sister.	When	next	we	meet,	it	shall	be
standing	upon	the	corpses	of	these	wretched	upstarts.’
‘The	ground	will	welcome	their	bones,’	she	replied,	nodding.
	
Warleader	Gall	surveyed	his	paltry	force	of	horse-warriors,	and	then,	helm
tucked	under	one	arm,	he	walked	over	to	Hanavat.	The	foundling	Rutt	was
beside	her,	the	unnamed	baby	cradled	in	his	arms.	His	thin	face	was	white	with
fear.
‘Wife,’	said	Gall	in	greeting.
‘Husband.’
‘I	will	die	today.’
‘I	know,’	she	replied.
‘Will	you	flee	this	battle?	For	our	child?’
‘No,’	she	said.
‘Please.	I	beg	you.’
‘Husband,	we	have	nowhere	to	go.	We	shall	find	you	in	the	Ancestral	Hills,
beneath	a	warm	sun,	and	the	desert	flowers	will	fill	our	eyes	with	the	colours
of	spring.’
At	the	ancient	parting	words	of	the	Khundryl,	Gall	slowly	closed	his	eyes.
‘I	have	fallen,’	he	said,	looking	up	once	more	to	meet	her	level	gaze.	‘You
have	seen	my	weakness.’
‘I	have	only	seen	what	can	be	found	in	all	of	us,	beloved.	Does	not	a
Warleader	of	the	Khundryl	walk	the	same	ground	as	the	rest	of	us?	Your	gift
was	courage	and	cunning	on	the	field	of	battle.	That	gift	remains.	Take	it	with
you	this	day,	in	the	name	of	Coltaine,	and	in	the	spirit	of	the	Wickans,	who
were	the	greatest	horse-warriors	this	world	has	ever	seen.	Did	we	not	proclaim
that?	With	your	own	words,	did	you	not	cry	their	name	to	the	heavens	–	until
even	the	Ancestral	Hills	stirred	in	the	awakening	of	our	ghosts?’
‘I	did,	my	love.’
‘We	burned	tears	upon	our	faces	to	mark	their	passing	from	the	world.	But
I	see	Khundryl	warriors	behind	you,	husband.	I	see	the	best	of	what	remains.


Lead	them.	I	give	to	you	the	courage	of	my	own	heart,	to	join	with	yours.
Today,	I	am	proud.’
Trembling,	he	stepped	forward	and	took	her	in	his	arms.
	
Fist	Faradan	Sort	watched	the	massive	army	form	up	on	the	plain	beyond.	By
numbers	alone	the	centre	dominated.	Medium	infantry	along	with	skirmishers
and	crescents	of	archers:	she	judged	seven	or	eight	thousand.	The	wings
belonged	to	heavy	infantry,	and	she	could	see	a	pure-blooded	Forkrul	Assail
commanding	each	one.	Her	eyes	narrowed	on	the	Pure	opposite	her	–	a	female,
mounted	on	a	bone-white	horse,	from	which	she	was	now	dismounting.
‘They	have	power	in	their	voice!’	Faradan	Sort	shouted.	‘By	command
alone	they	will	seek	to	make	you	yield.	To	drop	your	weapons.	Defy	them,
Malazans!’	Easy	enough	to	say.	Probably	impossible	to	achieve.	This	could	turn
into	horror	very	quickly.	She	drew	her	sword.	Ancient	scars	from	the	sorcery
of	the	Stormriders	marred	the	blade,	forming	a	crazed	mottling	of	pattern
welding	and	watermarking.
In	her	mind,	a	faint	echo	rose	up	–	the	crash	of	massive	waves,	shuddering
the	treacherous,	icy	stone	underfoot.	The	bitter	cold	bite	of	the	shackles	round
her	bandaged	ankles.	Explosions	of	foam	–	and	then,	rising	through	the	bluewhite	foment,	a	shape,	a	figure	armoured	in	ice—	she	shook	herself,	mouth
suddenly	dry.
It’s	a	warm	day.	Nothing	to	slip	on.	No	numbness	to	steal	all	feeling	from
my	hands.	No	raw	patches	where	my	skin	has	torn	away	at	the	touch	of	metal.
I	have	faced	worse.	Remember	that	–	it’s	what	has	kept	you	going	battle
after	battle.
The	Forkrul	Assail	was	walking	ahead	of	her	troops	now,	up	towards	a
low	rise.
Faradan	Sort	suddenly	looked	down,	studied	the	yellow,	brittle	grasses,	the
countless	rodent	holes.	‘Soldiers	–	anyone	see	any	scorpions	hereabouts?’
A	chorus	of	grunts	answered	her,	all	in	the	negative.
‘Good.	That	will	do,	then.	Shields	high	–	seems	she’s	got	something	to	say
to	us!’	Gods,	this	is	where	it	gets	unfair.

Smiling,	Sister	Freedom	studied	the	enemy	forces.	Ah,	we	were	wrong.	They
are	not	moments	from	routing.	There	was	rage	and	stolid	determination	in	the


faces	across	from	her,	but	none	of	that	would	help	–	not	now.	Shields	and
armour	would	resist	the	power	she	was	about	to	unveil,	would	protect	them	–
for	a	time.	Perhaps	a	handful	of	heartbeats.	But	then	her	voice	would	tear
through,	claw	away	skin	and	muscle,	spray	blood	into	the	air.	Bones	would
snap,	skulls	would	shatter.
They	were	all	about	to	die,	and	nothing	they	did	would	prevent	that.
As	here,	so	too	the	rest	of	the	world.
Glancing	to	her	left,	she	saw	the	centre	advancing	–	now	less	than	thirty
paces	distant	from	the	motionless	line	of	defenders.	Archers	were	loosing
arrow	upon	arrow,	with	the	enemy’s	own	archers	countering	here	and	there.
Soldiers	were	falling,	though	for	most	shields	fended	off	the	deadly	rain.
Twelve	paces,	and	then	the	charge.	Its	weight	will	drive	them	back,	break	up
that	facing	line,	and	into	the	gaps	we	will	pour,	splitting	the	formation	apart.
And	then	will	come	the	slaughter.
Returning	her	attention	to	the	flank	opposite	her,	she	raised	her	arms,
began	drawing	breath.
	
The	flint	sword	that	erupted	from	the	ground	beneath	the	Forkrul	Assail	ripped
into	the	inside	of	her	left	thigh,	lifting	her	into	the	air	as	the	tip	cracked	and
pierced	her	hip	bone.	As	its	wielder	rose	in	a	shower	of	earth,	stones	and	roots,
others	burst	from	the	ground	surrounding	the	Forkrul	Assail.
Weapons	hammered	into	her.
Howling,	writhing	still	on	that	sword,	she	lashed	out.	The	back	of	one	hand
struck	the	forehead	of	Urugal	the	Woven,	collapsing	it	inward,	pitching	the
T’lan	Imass	from	its	feet.
Kalt	Urmanal’s	bone	mace	caught	the	Forkrul	Assail	under	her	left	arm,
spun	her	entirely	around,	boots	skyward,	and	off	from	the	skewering	sword.
She	landed	with	a	roar,	surging	back	to	her	feet.
Beroke’s	obsidian-tipped	spear	slid	through	her,	exploding	out	from	her
lower	belly.	Twisting	round,	the	Assail	grasped	hold	of	the	spear	shaft	and
lifted	it	into	the	air,	taking	Beroke	with	it.	Releasing	the	wood,	she	reached	up
to	trap	Beroke’s	skull	between	her	hands	as	he	slid	closer	to	her.
With	a	bellow	she	crushed	the	warrior ’s	skull.
	
In	her	mind,	Sister	Freedom	shouted	commands	to	her	officers.	‘Charge	the
enemy	–	break	through	and	encircle	them!	Kill	every	damned	one	of	them!


Leave	these	bone-bags	to	me!’	The	T’lan	Imass	with	the	crumpled	forehead
came	towards	her	again.	Snarling,	she	flung	herself	at	him.
	
Blistig	could	feel	the	desperate	rage	growing	in	him,	and	as	the	enemy	ranks
suddenly	seemed	to	build	like	a	rising	wave	and	rush	howling	towards	him,	he
screamed	his	own	fury.
The	collision	lifted	soldiers	from	their	feet,	shoved	them	into	the	air.
Blood	misted,	weapons	hammered	down,	and	the	front	ranks	of	the	Malazans
recoiled,	and	then	stiffened.	The	clamour	was	deafening	–	weapons	and	shrieks
–	and	the	world	was	crazed	before	the	Fist’s	eyes,	frantic	with	motion,	the	flash
of	faces,	teeth	bared,	sudden	gushes	of	blood	from	mouths	and	gaping	throats.
Bodies	pushing	up	against	his	shins.	Staggering,	flaying	with	his	sword,
buffeted	by	repeated	blows	against	his	shield,	Blistig	fought	with	the	ferocity
of	a	rabid	dog.
He	was	going	to	die.	They	wanted	to	kill	him	–	every	damned	one	of	them
wanted	to	kill	him,	drag	him	down,	trample	his	corpse.	His	life	wasn’t
supposed	to	end	like	this.	He	would	fight,	and	fight.	This	was	not	going	to	be
the	end	–	he	wouldn’t	let	it.	I	will	not	let	it!
Chaos	spun	wild	around	him	and	the	soldiers	pressing	against	his	sides.
They	were	pushed	back	another	step.
	
Lostara	Yil	moved	up	alongside	the	Adjunct,	drawing	her	swords.	Another
dance.	All	I	can	do.	The	dance	of	the	world	–	this	fucking,	miserable,	murderous
world.	She	saw	Ruthan	Gudd	take	Tavore’s	other	flank,	and	behind	her	she
could	hear	Henar	Vygulf	–	the	fool	was	singing	some	damned	Bluerose	sea
shanty.
Ahead,	advancing	now,	leaning	forward	and	striding	on	stiff	legs	like	a
madman,	came	the	Forkrul	Assail.	His	eyes	were	feral	and	they	were	fixed	on
the	Adjunct.
When	he	roared,	the	sound	hammered	them	back.
Blood	sprayed	into	the	air	and	Lostara	staggered,	blinded.	Whose	blood?
What—	And	now	it	was	pouring	down	her	cheeks	and	she	saw	Henar	thump
down,	turning	to	her	a	shredded	face.	Oh,	gods,	it’s	my	blood	–	we’re	all—
Impossibly,	the	Adjunct	straightened	against	that	devastating	onrush	of
wordless	sound,	drew	her	sword	round,	and	sought	to	close.
The	Forkrul	Assail	was	still	almost	forty	paces	away.


We	can’t	do	this.	Even	Tavore	–	we	can’t—
Ruthan	Gudd	reached	the	Adjunct’s	side	in	his	armour	of	ice	–	but	that	too
was	riven	with	cracks,	breaking	away	in	a	hail	of	shards.	He	seemed	to	be
reaching	for	her,	as	if	to	drag	her	back	–	away	from	this	–	but	no	retreat	was
far	enough.
The	Assail	roared	again.
Lostara	Yil’s	own	scream	was	lost	even	to	her	own	ears.
She	felt	her	body	skidding	across	the	broken,	tortured	ground.
Against	this	–	we	are	done	with.	Not	even	the	Adjunct.	Not	even	Ruthan
Gudd.	He	slays	us.	Cotillion—
But	not	even	a	god	could	hear	her	prayers	now.
	
Fifty	paces	behind,	driven	to	his	knees	by	the	power	of	Akhrast	Korvalain,
Banaschar	wiped	blood	from	his	eyes.	He	had	tried	to	get	closer	–	tried	to
move	up	and	join	with	the	Adjunct	and	her	companions	–	but	he	had	failed.
Failure.	I	know	that	word	–	spent	many	a	night	sitting	at	its	table—
A	figure	stepped	past	him.
	
Badalle	hummed	softly	to	herself,	and	that	gentle	sound	pushed	away	all	that
the	Quisitor	flung	at	her.	Ahead,	she	could	see	how	the	power	was	hurting
Mother	–	even	with	all	her	magic-deadening	blood,	her	extraordinary	will,
Mother	was	being	torn	apart.
She	gave	words	to	her	wordless	song.	Simple	words,	three	to	find	the
fourth,	when	the	fourth	was	all	that	mattered.	‘Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.
Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.’	You	have	forgotten	so	much.	Until	only	hunger
and	pain	remains.	I	know	those	two	things.	I	know	them	well.	We	have	shared
them,	you	and	I.
‘Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.	Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.’
I	sent	you	away	once.	I	told	you	to	take	your	hurt	and	your	hunger	away
from	us.	Because	we	deserved	neither.
Someone	hurt	you	long	ago.	Someone	hurt	Rutt	long	ago.	Someone	hurt
Saddic,	and	Held,	and	all	the	others.	Someone	must	have	hurt	me,	too.
‘Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.	Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.’
I	sent	you	away.	Now,	I	summon	you.	See	the	bringer	of	pain.	See	the
deliverer	of	hunger.	The	Quisitor.	I	know	him.	I	remember	him.	He	came	among
my	people.	He	told	them	they	had	to	die.	To	answer	ancient	crimes.


Perhaps	he	was	right.
But	that	did	not	mean	he	had	the	right.
‘Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.	Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.’
Do	you	know	his	kind?	I	think	you	do.	Do	you	awaken	now	to	ancient	hurts?
I	think	you	do.	I	summon	you.	They	like	their	justice.	Now,	my	friend,	deliver	it.
‘Opals	gems	diamonds	shards.	Opals	gems	diamonds	Shards!’
And	above	the	Forkrul	Assail,	the	sky	darkened.

Banaschar	stared	as	the	swarm	of	locusts	descended	–	where	they	had	come
from,	how	they	had	been	summoned,	he	knew	not.	Their	sound	was	a	seething
whisper,	and	then	a	swarming,	howling	cacophony.	He	saw	the	Forkrul	Assail
cease	his	attack,	saw	the	man	look	up.
And	then	the	swarm	plunged	down	in	an	enveloping	cloud,	a	storm	of
wings	that	suddenly	blossomed	crimson.
	
Brother	Aloft	screamed,	and	as	he	screamed	the	locusts	crawled	into	his
mouth,	poured	inside,	mandibles	slashing.	Blood	soaked	the	creatures,	helped
them	slide	down	his	throat.	Choking,	blinded	and	deafened,	he	fell	to	his	knees.
They	chewed	inside	–	his	windpipe,	and	now	his	stomach.	They	blocked	his
nostrils,	fought	to	enter	his	ears.	Their	bites	cut	through	his	eyelids	and	burst
the	eyes	behind	them.	They	swarmed	into	the	sockets.
The	god	of	the	Forkrul	Assail	was	coming	home.
	
The	locusts	formed	a	seething	pillar,	which	fell	as	the	body	it	shrouded	toppled
to	one	side.	Flashes	of	red	gristle,	of	pink	bone,	and	then	the	creatures	were
lifting	away	on	their	wings,	rushing	into	the	Kolansii	infantry	–	but	those
soldiers,	well	armoured,	their	shields	up	before	their	faces,	pushed	through
and	the	locusts	spun,	the	whirr	of	their	wings	reaching	a	higher	pitch,	as	if
giving	voice	to	their	frustration.
Abruptly	the	swarm	lifted,	swirled	into	the	air	overhead.
Badalle	could	feel	their	need	–	it	was	without	end	–	and	she	knew	that	if
they	remained	in	this	place	she	would	lose	control	of	them	–	they	would
devour	everyone.
Go	now.	You	cannot	stay.


The	roar	reached	a	pitch	that	shivered	the	air	–	a	scream	of	impotence	–
and	then	the	whirling	cloud	spun	away.
Just	beyond	the	bones	of	the	Forkrul	Assail,	the	Kolansii	infantry
advanced,	and	before	them	stood	four	figures	sheathed	in	blood.
Mother,	when	this	is	done	–	when	you	and	all	your	children	have	fallen	–	I
shall	with	my	last	breath	summon	them	again.	To	deliver	our	revenge.
	
Warleader	Gall	sat	on	his	horse,	eyes	on	the	heavy	infantry	pushing	past	the
embattled	female	Forkrul	Assail.	Their	ranks	were	disordered,	broken	by	the
steep	pitch	of	the	hillside	on	their	right,	crowding	to	avoid	the	hill	where
fought	their	commander	and	the	T’lan	Imass.	Large	stones	that	had	long	ago
rolled	down	from	the	summit	further	slowed	their	advance.
He	could	see	the	flank	of	Malazans	turning	to	ready	for	the	inward	attack	–
but	he	could	also	see	that	the	intention	of	the	enemy	was	to	win	through	to	the
rear	of	the	defenders.
Beside	him,	Shelemasa	said,	‘Warleader	–	the	south	flank—’
‘We	must	choose	one	or	the	other,’	Gall	cut	in.	‘Do	you	see	the	ones	before
us?	They	cannot	hold	their	lines	–	but	see	how,	once	they	are	past	the	Malazans,
they	will	be	able	to	spread	out,	once	more	on	level	ground.	They	will	then
form	up.’
‘Warleader,	the	Adjunct—’
‘We	cannot	help	her,’	he	said.	‘If	there	were	three	thousand	of	us,	yes,	we
could	challenge	that	flank.	But	these	ones	here	–	at	the	threshold	of	open
ground	–	we	will	meet	them	there.’	He	drew	his	tulwar,	rode	out	ahead	of	his
pitifully	small	army,	and	then	wheeled.
‘In	the	name	of	Coltaine	and	the	Fall!’
He	needed	say	nothing	more.	Weapons	flashed,	the	horses	tossing	their
heads	as	they	caught	the	sudden	fever	of	their	riders.
Gall	sawed	on	his	reins,	pitching	his	mount	round.	The	beast	reared,	hoofs
scything	in	the	air.
And	the	Warleader	laughed.
	
Faradan	Sort	had	pushed	her	way	to	the	edge	of	the	flank	–	once	the	Kolansii
broke	through,	she	would	need	to	be	there,	to	hold	her	soldiers,	to	maintain
their	resolve	–	but	they	do	not	need	me.	See	their	faces!	The	enemy	seeks	our
underbelly	and	will	be	met	with	iron.	And	I	will	be	there	–	this	battle	shall	be


mine,	to	the	end.
And	then	she	heard	the	sound	of	horse’s	hoofs.	Looked	up,	twisted	round	–
and	saw	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	at	full	charge.	Even	as	the	first	of	the
Kolansii	spilled	out	from	the	narrow	passage,	the	horsewarriors	–	with	Gall	in
the	lead	–	crashed	into	them.
The	impact	shook	the	ground,	rippled	through	bodies	all	the	way	to	the
Malazan	ranks.
‘Hold	fast!’	Faradan	Sort	shouted.	‘Now	push!	Into	the	enemy!	Push!’
The	Kolansii	advance	had	been	checked	–	but	not	for	long,	she	knew.	It	has
to	be	enough.	Now	let’s	make	them	pay	for	that	bad	footing.
The	north-facing	side	of	the	Malazan	phalanx	surged	forward,	Faradan
Sort	in	their	midst,	and	the	Kolansii	heavy	infantry	turned	to	meet	them.	But
they	were	staggering,	stones	rolling	underfoot,	boulders	trapping	their	legs.
And	the	Khundryl	were	in	a	frenzy,	driving	ever	deeper	into	their	ranks.
Gods!	See	them	fight!
	
Sergeant	Ordinary	Grey	grasped	hold	of	the	corporal’s	jerkin,	pulled	him
close.	‘Grid	Ffan	–	where’s	your	squad?’
The	Falari’s	eyes	were	wild,	his	face	bright	red.	‘All	around	us,	you
Kartoolii	spider	bait!’
‘Where’s	your	sergeant?’
‘Dead!	Where’s	your	fucking	squad?’
‘With	your	sergeant,’	snapped	Ordinary	Grey.	‘Except	for	my	Semk
here…’
They	were	being	jostled,	ever	losing	ground.	Grid	Ffan’s	eyes	shifted	past
the	sergeant	and	then	widened.	‘Someone	sewed	up	his	fucking	mouth!’
‘He	likes	it	that	way.	Now	listen	–	the	south	flank—’
‘We	ain’t	got	a	south	flank!’
‘She’s	over	there	–	her	and	that	Shadow	Dancer	and	that	captain	with	pissice	in	his	beard.	The	Assail’s	finished,	but	the	heavy	infantry’s	about	to	fold	us
up.	She	named	you,	Ffan!	Just	like	she	named	me	and	Could	Howl.	You
understanding	me?’
Grid	Ffan	shifted	round.	‘Hare	Ravage!	Sample!	Find	the	others	–	we’re
pulling	out	of	this	press!’
The	squad’s	huge	mailed	fist	turned	to	the	corporal.	‘I	barely	got	a	swing
in!	Been	waiting	for	fucking	ever,	Corporal!’
‘We’ll	get	you	your	Hood-damned	fight,	you	Kanese	squid-eater	–	we’re
taking	on	a	whole	army	of	heavies!’


‘How	many	of	us?’	Sample	demanded,	her	blue-tinted	skin	ashen	with	dust.
Ffan	turned	back	to	Ordinary	Grey,	who	answered,	‘Maybe	ten.’
The	Napan’s	grin	flashed	white,	and	in	a	sharp,	piercing	voice,	she	cried
out,	‘Shades,	Brutan,	Asp,	Shipwreck	and	Gill	Slime!	With	us!	Move,	damn
you	all!’
	
Pores	sagged	beside	Kindly,	who	risked	a	moment	to	glower	down	at	the	man.
‘Get	out	of	here!	You’re	a	damned	liability!’
‘Just	need	–	to	–	catch	my	breath!’
Beyond	Pores,	in	the	seething	press,	Kindly	saw	a	dozen	or	so	soldiers
moving	through	the	ranks	away	from	the	frontline.	‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are
they	doing?’	But	he	saw	no	panic	in	the	faces	of	the	soldiers	closest	to	them	–
words	were	shouted	back	and	forth,	and	the	ranks	shifted	to	make	room	for
them	to	pass.
Pores	straightened	once	more,	followed	Kindly’s	glare.	‘Ordinary	Grey…
Ffan	and	Sample.	And	there’s	that	scary	Semk	–	it’s	the	ones	she	called	on,	sir.’
‘Is	it	now?’
Another	hard	shove	from	the	front	staggered	them	back	again.
‘Head	back	to	the	camp,	Pores	–	do	something	useful.	Protect	the	children.’
‘I	don’t	think	–	oh,	right.	Sir—’
‘I’m	moving	up	again	–	get	out	of	here.’
‘Sir—’
‘That’s	it	–	you’re	up	on	report,	soldier!	Now	go	before	I	kill	you	myself!’
	
Lesser	Watered	Trissin	moved	past	the	bones	of	Brother	Aloft	–	she	struggled
to	not	look	down,	yet	could	not	help	herself.	Locusts	still	crawled	here	and
there,	out	from	under	the	bones	or	the	slack	skins	of	intestines,	still	crowded
the	gaping	jaws.
She	could	feel	Sister	Freedom’s	fury	and	pain	as	the	wounded	Pure	lashed
out	–	the	T’lan	Imass	would	not	win	that	battle	–	but	they	were	taking	all	the
Forkrul	Assail’s	concentration.	In	truth,	it	was	High	Watered	Melest	who	was
commanding	the	assault,	from	the	centre.
She	saw,	ahead	of	them,	a	line	of	four	soldiers,	and	her	eyes	widened	–	this
is	all	they	have	for	us?	They	are	mad!
Off	to	the	right,	spilling	out	from	the	enemy	phalanx,	came	a	dozen	or	so
medium	infantry.


A	laugh	burst	from	her.	‘This	is	what	they	offer	in	opposition?’	She
gestured,	her	mind	snapping	out	the	command	to	spread	out,	widen	the	facing
line.
They	would	sweep	past	these	fools,	and	then	wheel	round	to	close	on	the
flank	from	behind.
The	battle	was	as	good	as	done.
	
‘Adjunct,’	said	Ruthan	Gudd,	‘we	need	to	fall	back	–	into	the	phalanx.	We	can’t
stay	out	here	–	we	can’t	hold	that	advance—’
But	Tavore	Paran	seemed	to	be	beyond	words.	Blood	flowed	down	her
face,	as	if	all	that	she	had	contained,	all	that	she	had	held	inside,	was	now
pushing	free.
Gods	below.	‘Take	her	left,	Lostara	–	with	Henar	on	yours.	I’ve	got	the
right.	Adjunct!	Fuck	this	waiting,	let’s	charge.’
Her	head	snapped	round,	the	eyes	raw	and	wild.
And	then	the	four	of	them	were	moving	forward.
	
Trissin	shouted	in	shock	–	they	were	attacking!
And	now	she	saw	–	one	of	the	soldiers	was	sheathed	in	ice,	even	unto	the
long	sword	in	his	hand.	And	another	was	coming	forward	with	the	fluid	grace
of	water,	two	swords	seeming	to	flow	from	her	hands.	Apart	from	the	icebound	figure,	the	others	were	covered	in	blood	–	these	were	the	ones	who	had
stood	against	Brother	Aloft.	That	woman	–	she	commands	this	army.
What	is	she	doing?
What	are	they	all	doing?
	
Grid	Ffan	swore	in	a	stream	of	languages	and	then	yelled,	‘Run,	you	fools!
Catch	up	to	’em!’	And	as	they	pelted	forward,	ten	regulars	racing	to	join	up
with	their	Adjunct	and	her	officers,	the	corporal	found	breath	to	bark	out
orders.
‘Hare	Ravage	–	go	far	end	and	arrive	hard!	Sample	–	follow	him	up!
Shades	Elar	and	Brutan	Harb	–	back	up	the	Shadow	Dancer	and	the	Bluerose.
Shipwreck	and	Could	Howl,	stay	with	me	for	the	Adjunct!	You	too,	Grey.’
Sergeant	Ordinary	Grey	cursed.	‘I	outrank	you,	Ffan!’
‘So	what?’


‘Right,’	the	man	gasped.	‘You	all,	what	Ffan	said!	Carry	on,	Corporal!’
‘Asp	Slither	–	got	any	magic?	How	’bout	you,	Gill?’
‘’S	coming	back,’	hissed	Gill	Slime.
And	Asp	Slither	cackled	like	a	strangled	swan.	‘Just	watch	me!’	she
crowed.
‘No!’	Ffan	shouted	–	they	were	only	a	dozen	or	so	paces	away	now.	‘Hold
back,	both	of	you!	Find	their	fucking	commander	and	hit	the	fucker	with	all
you	fucking	got,	you	fucking	got	it?’
The	Kartoolii	mage	cackled	a	second	time	and	loomed	close.	‘No,	sir.
What	do	you	mean?’
A	strange	burbling	sound	spat	out	from	Could	Howl.
Ffan	shot	the	Semk	a	look.	‘That’s	some	laugh	you	got	there.’
	
They	arrived	like	a	whirlwind,	into	the	front	line	of	the	Kolansii.	Swords	were
a	blur	in	the	hands	of	the	dancer,	and,	where	they	touched,	blood	sang	forth	and
bodies	tumbled	back.	The	ice-clad	soldier	waded	in,	blows	bouncing	from	him
unnoticed,	and	cut	deep	into	the	ranks,	his	sword	seemingly	everywhere.	The
tall	soldier	on	the	dancer ’s	left	was	bellowing	as	he	beat	down	the	Kolansii	in
front	of	him,	shieldslamming	another	and	knocking	the	two	men	off	their	feet,
where	they	fouled	those	coming	up	behind	them.	And	the	commander	fought
with	breathtaking	precision,	every	motion	either	evading	a	thrust	or	dealing
death,	on	her	face	an	expression	that	struck	ice	through	Trissin’s	heart.
And	then	the	other	soldiers	arrived,	four	coming	up	around	the
commander,	three	of	them	howling	like	demons,	the	fourth	with	his	mouth
horribly	sewn	tight.	They	struck	in	a	manic	frenzy,	driving	the	Kolansii	back.
She	saw	a	huge	soldier	collide	with	the	heavies	who	had	swung	round	the
ice-bound	man,	somehow	knocking	three	of	them	to	the	ground.	His	short
sword	lashed	down,	seemingly	little	more	than	touching	each	Kolansii	on	the
side	of	the	neck	–	and	from	three	throats	blood	sprayed	out.
‘Surround	them!’	screamed	Trissin	from	three	ranks	behind	the	fighting.
‘Cut	them—’

A	ball	of	flames	engulfed	the	Kolansii	commander,	raging	wild,	and	from	the
cloudless	sky	above	lightning	crashed	down,	the	impact	thundering,	flinging
soldiers	to	the	ground,	the	strike	creating	a	vast	hole	in	the	ranks.	Burnt	flesh


and	parts	of	bodies	rained	down.
Three	demons	clawed	up	from	the	ground	beneath	the	burning	woman,
their	bodies	covered	in	protruding	mouths	filled	with	dagger-length	fangs,	the
talons	on	the	ends	of	their	fingers	long	as	sabres,	their	heads	swarming	with
coal-red	eyes.	Roaring,	they	lunged	into	the	raging	flames,	tearing	the
commander	to	pieces.
Seeing	all	this,	Grid	Ffan	shot	a	wild	look	back	at	his	mages	–	saw	them
convulsed	with	laughter.	Fucking	illusionists!	‘Tone	it	down,	you	fools!	You
want	t’give	it	all	away?’
Gill	Slime	and	Asp	Slither	looked	up,	suddenly	straight-faced.
‘Got	anything	else?’	Ffan	demanded.
Both	shook	their	heads.
‘Then	get	up	here	and	fight!’
The	Kolansii	had	recovered,	were	now	pushing	to	close	once	again.	And
more	were	swinging	round	on	the	far	side,	forcing	Sample	and	Hare	Ravage	to
back	up.
Swearing,	Ffan	worked	up	close	to	the	Adjunct.
‘Sir!	We	need	to	fall	back	into	the	phalanx!	Adjunct!’
When	she	did	not	reply	–	or	even	seem	to	hear	him	–	he	cursed	and	said	to
the	sergeant	beside	him,	‘Grey,	listen.	We	come	up	and	around	her,	either	side
–	we	make	us	a	wall	so	she	can’t	get	past	us.	Shipwreck,	go	there	–	and	you,
Semk,	right	here	–	we’re	going	to	force	her	back	and	into	the	ranks,
understood?’
‘It’s	the	battle	lust,	sir!’	shouted	Shipwreck,	staggering	drunkenly	as	was
his	way	in	moments	of	high	excitement,	when	his	damaged	inner	ear	started
acting	up.
‘I	know	what	the	fuck	it	is,	idiot.	Now,	let’s	do	this!’
	
Lostara	Yil	was	being	pulled	away	from	the	Adjunct’s	flank	–	Henar	Vygulf
was	hard	pressed,	now	defending	himself	from	attackers	on	two	sides.	The
sudden	arrival	of	the	regulars	had	eased	the	threat,	but	only	momentarily	–
there	were	simply	too	many	of	the	bastards.
Sobbing,	bearing	countless	wounds,	Lostara	Yil	drew	closer	to	her	love.
Don’t	die.	Please.	Don’t	die.
A	sword	blade	clipped	Henar ’s	head.	He	staggered,	stunned.
Lostara	screamed,	now	fighting	blind	to	the	threats	pressing	in	around	her,
her	gaze	fixed	on	Henar.
The	two	regulars	collapsed	in	to	fend	off	the	blows	rushing	down	towards


Henar.	A	woman	and	a	man,	the	former	Nathii,	the	latter	Seven	Cities	–	she	had
never	seen	them	before,	but	they	fought	the	attackers	to	a	standstill	above	her
love,	who’d	dragged	off	his	cracked	helm,	blood	gushing	down	from	a	scalp
wound,	and	was	trying	to	regain	his	feet.
Lostara	hacked	down	a	Kolansii	on	her	left,	leapt	over	his	crumpling	form.
The	grace	was	gone	now.	Only	brutal	savagery	remained.	She	opened	another
man’s	throat.
The	Nathii	woman	shrieked,	a	sword	driven	through	her	chest.	Dropping
her	weapon	she	took	hold	of	the	arm	gripping	that	sword,	and	pulled	her
attacker	down	as	she	fell.	Her	companion’s	short	sword	licked	out,	cut	through
half	his	neck;	the	man	was	shouting,	trying	to	drag	Henar	back	to	his	feet,	until
an	axe	crushed	the	back	of	the	regular ’s	head,	through	helm	and	bone,	and
flung	him	forward,	limbs	flopping.	But	Henar	was	on	his	feet	once	more	–	and
Lostara	reached	his	side.	Just	beyond,	a	row	of	faces:	Malazan	regulars,
shouting	from	their	line	on	the	flank,	screaming	and	beckoning.	Close!	Hurry!
Come	to	us!
Lostara	spun	round,	blades	whipping	out.	‘Henar!	To	the	ranks!	Go!’
She	saw	the	other	regulars	spilling	back,	all	of	them	arrayed	protectively
round	the	Adjunct	as	they	forced	her	towards	the	ranks.	Ruthan	Gudd	and	one
huge	regular	were	fighting	to	prevent	the	group	from	getting	cut	off,
enveloped,	but	even	they	were	being	pushed	back.
Take	me,	Cotillion!	Please,	I	beg	you!	Take	me!
But	from	her	patron	god…nothing.	She	twisted	to	her	left,	marched	ahead
to	hold	the	enemy.
A	dozen	Kolansii	rushed	her.
	
The	Khundryl	had	pushed	as	deep	as	they	could	into	the	press	of	heavy
infantry.	They	had	gone	farther	than	Warleader	Gall	had	thought	possible.	But
now	the	horses	were	all	dead,	and	so	too	the	last	of	his	warriors.	But	the
advance	had	been	blocked	–	bodies	alone	were	enough	to	prevent	the	enemy
from	swinging	round	the	Malazan	wing	–	so	now	they	were	simply	pushing
inward,	forcing	the	regulars	into	an	ever-contracting	formation.
A	sword	had	ripped	open	everything	below	his	ribcage.	He	was	lying	on
his	back,	on	the	corpses	of	strangers	and	kin,	his	intestines	spilled	out	and
tangled	round	his	legs.
Something	was	pulsing	in	the	air	–	he	could	not	be	certain	if	it	came	from
outside	or	from	somewhere	deep	inside	him.	No.	Outside.	Voices,	rising	in
rhythm,	but	he	could	not	quite	make	out	the	word.	Again	and	again,	the	sound


rising	and	falling,	coming	from	somewhere	off	to	his	right.
He	found	the	pounding	of	his	heart	falling	into	that	pulse,	and	warmth
flowed	through	him,	though	he	knew	not	the	reason	for	it.
Darkness	was	drawing	close.
That	sound.	That	sound…voices.	They	are	voices.	Rising	from	the
Malazans.	What	are	they	saying?	What	do	they	shout,	again	and	again?
Abruptly,	thick	blood	crackled	in	one	ear,	opened	a	way	through,	and	he
could	at	last	hear	the	endlessly	repeated	cry.
‘Khundryl!	Khundryl!	Khundryl!’
A	word	for	his	fading	heart,	a	song	for	his	ending	life.	Coltaine,	I	shall
stand	before	you.	We	shall	ride	with	your	Wickans.	I	see	crows	over	the
Ancestral	Hills—
	
Sister	Freedom	strode	forward	as	the	huge	Imass	toppled.	She	kicked	him	on	to
his	back,	plunged	her	battered	hands	down,	closed	her	fingers	through	torn,
papery	skin	and	ripped	sinews,	and	took	hold	of	his	spine.	She	paused	a
moment,	glaring	at	the	one	with	the	flint-studded	harpoon	who	was	rising	yet
again	a	few	paces	away.
The	Forkrul	Assail	was	a	mass	of	wounds	and	broken	bones,	but	she	was
far	from	dead.	Bellowing,	she	lifted	the	T’lan	Imass	from	the	ground	and
broke	his	spine	like	a	branch,	twisting	it	amidst	snapping,	grinding	sounds.
Flinging	the	corpse	away,	she	advanced	on	the	last	undead	warrior.
‘This	ends	now!’
The	female	warrior	backed	away.
They	were	both	down	from	the	rise,	down	among	heaps	of	bodies	–	cold
flesh	and	thick,	cooling	blood	underfoot,	limbs	that	flopped	away	with	each
step.
Fury	filled	Freedom.	At	the	murder	of	Brother	Aloft.	At	the	pathetic
audacity	and	stubbornness	of	these	T’lan	Imass.	At	this	army	of	foreigners	who
refused	to	break,	who	did	nothing	but	die	where	they	stood,	killing	her	soldiers
and	killing	yet	more	of	them.
She	would	destroy	them	–	soon,	once	this	last	Imass	was	crushed	and	torn
apart.
She	stepped	over	a	dead	horse-warrior,	one	boot	cracking	into	the	side	of
the	man’s	head.
	


The	blow	rang	loud,	and	Gall	opened	his	eyes.	Blinked	up	at	the	sky.	I	should
be	dead.	Why	am	I	not	yet	dead?
Behind	him	he	heard	someone	speak.	‘Surrender	to	me,	T’lan	Imass.	Your
kin	are	all	gone.	There	is	no	point	in	continuing	this	fight.	Stand	and	I	will
destroy	you.	But	I	will	give	you	leave	to	depart.	Be	done	with	this	–	it	is	not
your	battle.’
Gall	reached	down,	took	hold	of	a	handful	of	his	intestines,	just	under	his
ribcage	and	tore	it	free.	He	groped,	slicing	open	the	palm	of	his	hand	on	a
discarded	sword	–	a	Kolansii	blade,	straight	and	tipped	for	thrusting.	A	child’s
toy.	Not	like	my	tulwar.	But	it	will	have	to	do.	He	climbed	to	his	feet,	almost
folded	as	a	weight	slipped	behind	his	ribs	and	sternum	–	with	his	free	hand	he
reached	in,	to	hold	everything	up.
Turning,	he	found	himself	staring	at	the	back	of	the	Forkrul	Assail.
Beyond	her	stood	a	T’lan	Imass,	the	one	he	knew	to	be	named	Nom	Kala.	Her
left	thigh	had	been	shattered,	bent	and	splintered,	yet	still	she	stood,	her	spear
held	at	the	ready.
Gall	stepped	forward,	and	drove	the	sword	through	the	Forkrul	Assail,
through	her	spine.	She	arched	in	shock,	the	breath	rushing	from	her.
The	Khundryl	fell	back,	his	lungs	slipping	past	his	spread	fingers	to	flop	in
his	lap.
He	was	dead	before	his	head	hit	the	ground.
	
Nom	Kala	stepped	forward.	The	Forkrul	Assail’s	eyes	were	wide,	staring	into
her	own.	The	T’lan	Imass	had	been	watching	those	eyes	for	what	seemed	an
eternity,	since	the	moment	they	had	risen	up	from	the	ground	beneath	her.	She
had	studied	the	malice	and	ferocity	in	that	unhuman	glare.	She	had	witnessed
the	flares	of	pleasure	and	triumph	each	time	the	Assail	had	shattered	another	of
her	kin.	She	had	seen	their	delight	when	breaking	Kalt	Urmanal’s	spine.
But	now	there	was	a	sword	thrust	through	the	Forkrul	Assail,	iron
gleaming	blue-red,	and	those	eyes	held	nothing	but	astonishment.
Nom	Kala	took	one	more	step	closer.	Then	drove	her	harpoon	into	the
bitch’s	eye.
Hard	enough	to	drive	through,	punching	out	the	back	of	the	Assail’s	skull.
	
The	Malazan	army	was	crumbling.	Driven	back,	pushed	ever	tighter	inward,
they	left	bodies	heaped	in	ribboned	mounds	with	every	step	they	yielded.


Joined	by	a	stumbling	Pores,	Banaschar	led	the	non-combatants	–	the	children
of	the	Snake	and	the	Khundryl	–	as	far	back	as	they	dared,	but	it	was	clear	that
the	Kolansii	sought	only	to	annihilate	the	Bonehunters.	All	the	heavy	infantry
now	working	round	from	the	south	were	ignoring	the	huddled	mass	of
unarmed	onlookers.
Blistig	was	still	fighting,	a	hard,	defiant	knot	at	the	front	of	the	centre
phalanx.	Banaschar	could	see	Kindly,	there	on	the	right,	doing	the	same.	And
Faradan	Sort	on	his	left.	These	three	Fists,	chosen	by	the	Adjunct,	simply
refused	to	fall.
The	ex-priest	could	no	longer	see	Tavore,	but	something	told	him	that	she
still	stood	–	somewhere	in	the	ranks	on	the	south-facing	line.	That	attack,	with
the	squad	of	regulars	coming	up	to	join	it,	had	been…extraordinary.
And	that	magic	was…ridiculous.	But	see	that	commander	–	lying	dead.
That’s	real	enough.	Not	much	Assail	blood	in	that	one,	to	have	succumbed	to
nothing	but	invented	nightmares.	Nice	play,	regulars.
But	it	was	all	hopeless.	All	that	he’d	seen	here,	all	that	he’d	witnessed.
He	felt	a	presence	to	his	right	and	turned	to	see	Hanavat,	and	a	step	behind
her	and	to	one	side,	Rutt	carrying	the	child.	‘Your	husband	–	I	am	sorry,’	said
Banaschar.
She	shook	her	head.	‘He	stopped	them.	They	all	did.	And	now	–	see?	The
Forkrul	Assail	herself	has	fallen.’
‘It	was	well	fought,	was	it	not?’
She	nodded.
‘Tell	me,	have	you	named	the	child?’
Hanavat	met	his	eyes.	‘I	believed…what	is	the	point?	Until	this	moment.
Until	you	spoke.’	Then	her	eyes	fell	from	his.	‘Yet	for	the	life	of	me,	I	cannot
think	of	one.’
‘Gall?’
‘Gall	bears	but	one	face	in	my	life,	and	so	it	shall	ever	be.	Priest,	I	am	lost.’
He	could	say	nothing	to	that.
We	are	all	lost.
Banaschar	faced	the	terrible	battle	once	more,	Hanavat	upon	one	side	with
the	boy	and	the	baby,	Pores	upon	the	other.	They	looked	on,	silent.
To	where	the	Bonehunters	were	dying.	Every	one	of	them.
	
The	air	swirling	brittle	with	outrage,	High	Fist	Ganoes	Paran	rode	to	the	top	of
the	ridge,	Fist	Rythe	Bude	at	his	side.	Behind	them	the	Host	was	drawing	up	at
the	trot	–	he	did	not	need	to	look	behind	him,	or	listen	to	Bude’s	desperate


breaths,	to	know	that	they	were	exhausted.
That	legion	of	heavy	infantry	had	savaged	them.	Without	Kalam	and	Quick
Ben’s	deadly	antics,	the	High	Watered	who	had	commanded	the	Kolansii	had
proved	a	stubborn	foe,	refusing	to	yield	to	the	inevitable	–	they	had	been
forced	to	kill	every	last	one	of	them	before	finally	cutting	down	the
commander.
And	now	his	army	was	bleeding,	dragging	itself	up	the	slope	like	a
wounded	dog.
They	reached	the	rise	and	reined	in.
Before	them,	the	Bonehunters	formed	a	crumbling	core	under	sustained
attack	from	three	sides,	and	in	moments	the	fourth	side	would	be	engulfed	as
well.	Ganoes	could	barely	comprehend	the	magnitude	of	the	slaughter	he	was
seeing	–	corpses	made	low	hills	around	the	combatants,	as	orderly	as	the
berms	of	an	earthworks	fortification.
Shock	and	horror	tightened	like	a	fist	round	his	heart.
His	sister ’s	army	had	been	reduced	to	less	than	half	a	thousand,	and	they
were	falling	fast.
‘High	Fist—’
Rythe	Bude’s	mouth	snapped	shut	when	he	spun	to	her	and	she	saw	his	face.
Paran	swung	his	mount	round	as	the	first	line	of	soldiers	reached	the	summit.
‘To	the	edge!	To	this	damned	edge!	Close	up,	damn	you!	Those	are	fellow
Malazans	dying	down	there!	Look	on	them!	All	of	you,	look	on	them!’
His	horse	staggered	beneath	him,	but	he	righted	it	with	a	savage	sawing	of
the	reins,	then	reached	up	and	dropped	the	full	visor	over	his	face.	Drew	out
his	sword	and	rose	in	his	stirrups	as	still	more	soldiers	crowded	the	ridge.
‘Draw	breath,	you	bastards!	And	CHARGE!’
As	he	and	Fist	Rythe	Bude	drove	their	mounts	down	the	slope,	Ganoes
Paran	angled	close	to	her.	‘Into	that	flank	–	leave	the	south	alone!’
‘Yes	sir!’
‘Look	for	any	mixed-bloods.’
The	look	she	shot	him	was	venomous.	‘Oh	really,	sir?’
Behind	them	the	ground	shook	as	the	Host	thundered	down	the	slope.
‘High	Fist!	If	we	take	down	their	commanders!	Mercy?’
He	glared	ahead,	drawing	his	mount	away	from	the	woman,	angling
towards	the	unoccupied	flats	between	the	fighters	and	the	non-combatants.
‘Today,	Fist,	I	don’t	know	the	word!’
But	he	knew	he	would	change	his	mind.	Cursed	with	softness.	I	got	it	all.
Left	nothing	for	Tavore,	my	sister	of	ice-cold	iron.	We	should	have	shared	it	out.
Like	coins.	Gods,	so	many	things	we	should	have	done.	Is	it	now	too	late?	Does


she	live?
Sister,	do	you	live?
	
High	Watered	Melest,	still	shaken	by	the	deaths	of	the	Pures,	turned	at	the	cries
of	shock	and	dismay	from	the	Kolansii	on	the	right	flank,	and	his	eyes	widened
upon	seeing	another	foreign	army	pouring	down	from	the	hills.	Even	as	he
watched,	they	slammed	into	the	heavy	infantry	–	and	these	attackers	were	as
heavily	armoured,	and	with	the	weight	of	the	downhill	charge	behind	them	they
shattered	the	wing	with	the	force	of	an	avalanche.
Howling	in	rage,	he	pushed	back	through	the	ranks	–	he	needed	one	of	the
Pures’	horses,	to	attain	a	higher	vantage	point.	They	still	held	the	centre	and
fully	commanded	the	south	side	of	the	field.	Victory	was	still	possible.
And	he	would	win	it.
In	his	mind,	drawing	as	much	strength	as	he	could	from	Akhrast
Korvalain,	he	exhorted	his	soldiers	into	a	battle	frenzy.
‘Kill	them!	All	these	who	have	so	defied	us	on	this	day	–	destroy	them!’
	
His	horse	lagging	beneath	him,	beginning	to	weave,	Paran	cursed	and	slowed
the	beast.	He	fumbled	in	the	saddlebag	on	his	left,	drew	out	a	lacquered	card.
Glared	at	the	lone	rider	painted	on	it.	‘Mathok!	I	know	you	can	hear	me!	I’m
about	to	open	the	gate	for	you.	But	listen!	Come	at	the	charge,	do	you
understand?	You	wanted	a	damned	Hood-balled	blood-pissing	fight,	and	now
I’m	giving	it	to	you!’
Paran	kicked	his	horse	forward	again,	pushing	the	poor	beast	into	a	gallop.
He	fixed	his	eyes	on	the	place	where	he	would	tear	open	the	gate,	and	then	rose
in	his	stirrups.	‘There,’	he	said	to	the	card,	and	then	threw	it.
The	card	sailed	out,	level	as	a	quarrel	from	a	crossbow,	so	fast	it	blurred
as	it	cut	through	the	air.
Beneath	Paran,	his	horse	stumbled.	Then	collapsed.
He	threw	himself	clear,	struck	hard,	rolled	and	was	still.
	
Ruthan	Gudd	fought	to	defy	the	envelopment,	but	even	with	this	unknown	brute
of	a	soldier	fighting	at	his	side	he	could	not	prevent	the	hundreds	of	Kolansii
from	swinging	round,	well	beyond	the	reach	of	their	swords.
Behind	him	he	felt	a	sudden	surge	rip	through	the	regulars,	pushing


everyone	forward	a	step.	Twisting	round,	Ruthan	strained	to	see	the	cause	–	but
dust	filled	the	air,	and	all	he	could	see	was	the	reeling	mass	of	Malazans,	now
breaking	apart,	spilling	out,	as	if	in	a	berserk	fever	they	now	sought	to	charge
–	but	before	these	soldiers	there	were	no	Kolansii.
They	are	broken.	They	are	finally—
Thunder	spun	him	round,	and	he	stared,	disbelieving,	as	thousands	of
warriors	rode	out	from	an	enormous	gate	–	but	no,	this	ragged	tear	in	the
fabric	of	the	world	did	not	deserve	so	lofty	a	title.	It	was	huge,	opened	to	a
howling	wind	–	and	it	was	barely	thirty	paces	from	the	first	ranks	of	the	enemy.
The	riders	bore	lances,	their	mounts	heavily	armoured	across	chest	and
neck.	They	struck	the	disordered	mass	of	heavy	infantry	–	there	had	been	no
time	to	wheel,	no	time	to	draw	shields	round	–	and	the	concussion	of	that
impact	shuddered	through	the	Kolansii.	The	wing	split,	broke	apart	–	and
suddenly	all	cohesion	was	lost,	and	the	horsewarriors	were	delivering
slaughter	on	all	sides.
The	regular	infantryman	beside	him	stumbled	then,	leaned	hard	against
Ruthan	Gudd’s	hip.	Startled,	he	stared	down,	saw	the	man	pressing	his	forehead
against	his	ice-sheathed	side.
Eyes	closed,	the	gasping	Kanese	breathed,	‘Gods	below,	that	feels	good.’
	
Lostara	Yil	saw	Adjunct	Tavore	stumbling	away	from	the	ranks.	The	pressure
was	gone	–	the	enemy	had	other	foes	to	deal	with,	and	those	foes	were	driving
them	back,	away	from	the	Bonehunters.	She	stared	after	Tavore.
The	Adjunct	was	barely	recognizable.	Covered	in	blood	and	gore,	her
helm	torn	off,	her	hair	stained	red,	she	staggered	into	the	clear.	Ten	jerking,
almost	manic	steps,	her	sword	still	in	her	hand	but	held	out	to	one	side,	as	if	the
arm	had	forgotten	how	to	relax.
Lostara	pulled	free	of	the	ranks,	moved	after	her	–	but	a	hand	grasped	her,
dragged	her	back,	and	Henar ’s	voice	was	close	by	her	ear.	‘No,	love.	Leave
her.	Just…leave	her.’
	
Her	steps	ran	out,	lost	all	momentum,	and	then	she	was	standing,	alone,	her
back	to	her	army.	The	sounds	of	battle	seemed	to	be	falling	away,	as	if	thick,
heavy	curtains	were	being	drawn	across	every	side	of	the	world,	shutting	away
every	scene,	every	swirl	of	motion	and	dust.
She	was	alone.


The	sword,	still	held	out	so	awkwardly,	and	her	head	slowly	tilting	back,	to
lift	her	face	to	the	sky.
Eyes	were	upon	her	now,	but	she	saw	them	not.
Tavore’s	mouth	opened,	and	the	cry	of	anguish	that	tore	from	it	held
nothing	human.
It	rang	across	the	field	of	battle.	It	pushed	past	the	witnessing	Bonehunters,
reached	out	and	caressed	countless	corpses.	It	fought	with	the	dust,	rising	up	to
vanish	in	the	lurid	green	hue	of	the	sky’s	fading	light.
When	her	voice	gave	out,	all	could	see	that	cry	continuing	in	the	stretched
contortion	of	her	face.	Silent	now,	she	gave	nothing	to	the	sky,	and	in	that
nothing,	there	was	everything.
	
Half	stunned	by	the	fall	from	the	horse,	Paran	staggered	towards	her.	That
sound	had	not	come	from	his	sister.	Too	terrible,	too	ravaged,	too	brutal,	and
yet	it	dragged	him	towards	her,	as	if	he	was	caught	in	a	rushing	current.
Off	to	his	left,	a	few	hundred	Bonehunters	still	alive,	motionless,	unable
even	to	sag	or	settle	to	the	ground.	They	looked	upon	his	sister	and	he	could
make	no	sense	of	their	meaning,	of	what	they	still	wanted	from	her.
Is	this	not	enough?	This	one	weakness,	breaking	loose	so	raw,	so
horrifyingly,	from	her?
Is	it	never	enough?
I	don’t	–	I	don’t	understand	what	you	want	from	her!	What	more	are	you
waiting	for?
Through	the	bars	of	his	helm’s	iron	grille,	she	was	directly	ahead,	a
prisoner	still.
	
Someone	was	rushing	towards	her.	Another	enemy.	She	could	not	even	open
her	eyes,	could	not	turn	to	meet	him.	One	more	death	seemed	too	much,	but	she
knew	what	waited	within	her.	This	need.	This	need…to	finish.
Do	not	attack	me.	Please.	Someone	stop	him.	Please.
I	will	kill	him.
She	heard	him	arrive	and	she	dropped	down	into	a	crouch,	spinning	round,
eyes	opening	–	a	heavy	helm,	an	armoured	body	lunging	for	her.
Her	blade	was	a	blur.
	


He	caught	her	wrist,	was	rocked	back	by	the	force	of	the	swing.
Pulled	her	close	as	she	struggled.
Fumbled	at	his	helm’s	strap.
‘Tavore!	Stop!	It’s	me	–	it’s	Ganoes!’
The	helm	came	away,	left	his	hand	to	thump	on	the	ground	–	she	stared	up
at	him,	disbelieving,	and	then,	in	her	face,	everything	shattered.
‘I	lost	her!	Oh,	Ganoes,	I	lost	her!’
As	she	collapsed	into	his	arms,	frail	as	a	child,	Ganoes	held	her	tight.	One
hand	against	the	back	of	her	sweat-matted	head,	her	bloodied	face	now	pressed
into	his	shoulder	as	she	broke	down,	he	found	himself	sinking	to	his	knees,
taking	her	within	him.
And	when	he	looked	up,	over	at	those	Bonehunters,	he	saw	that	whatever
they	had	been	waiting	for	they	had	now	found.
Like	him,	like	her,	they	were	settling	down,	to	their	knees.	They	were…
surrendering.
To	whatever	was	left	inside	them.
Muffled	against	his	shoulder,	through	her	sobs,	she	was	saying	his	name.
Over	and	over	again.
	
On	a	distant	part	of	the	field,	as	High	Watered	Melest	swung	his	Jhag	horse
round,	seeking	to	flee,	Mathok’s	lance	took	him	in	the	side	of	the	head.
And	the	final	battle	of	the	Bonehunter	Regular	Infantry	was	done.

‘Corporal!	Get	over	to	those	fat	women!’
‘Dead,	Sergeant!’
‘Then	the	other	one,	damn	you!’
‘Both	corporals	are	dead	–	I	told	you!’
Cursing,	Hellian	sidestepped	a	lunging	attacker,	drove	her	knee	into	the
man’s	jaw.	The	head	snapped	upward	and	the	body	beneath	it	sagged.	She
stabbed	him	in	the	neck	and	then	turned	to	glare	at	her	squad’s	last	soldier.
‘Well	what	good	are	you,	damn	it?	What’s	your	name?’
‘You	stupid	brain-dead	cow	–	I’m	Maybe!	I	been	with	you	from	the	start!’
‘And	you’re	still	here	–	just	my	luck.	I’ll	hold	this	track	–	go	find	someone
to	spell	those	two	whales.	Most	of	those	Bridgeburners	are	dead.’
Swearing,	Maybe	moved	off.


Hellian	took	a	moment	to	dry	the	sweat	and	blood	from	her	palm,	and	then
picked	up	her	sword	again.	Where	was	Urb?	If	that	fool	was	dead	she’d	kill
him.	No,	that’s	not	right.	No	matter.
Below,	she	saw	more	helmed	heads	lurching	into	view	on	the	narrow,
winding	incline.
Come	on,	then.	One	of	you’s	gotta	have	a	flask.	Something,	for	Hood’s	sake.
See	what	happens	when	I’m	sober?
	
Corabb	heard	Maybe	shouting	behind	him	and	turned	–	saw	weapons	flashing,
Kolansii	soldiers	pouring	up	on	to	the	summit.	Marines	were	going	down	all
round	Maybe	–	Mulvan	Dreader,	Ruffle,	Honey	–	‘Breach!’	he	screamed.
‘Breach!’
And	then	he	was	running.
Maybe	stumbled,	stabbed	through	one	calf,	buckling	to	blows	against	his
shield.	Corabb	saw	Ruffle	push	herself	on	to	her	hands	and	knees	–	but	then	an
axe	descended,	bursting	her	skull.	She	flopped	back	down,	limp	as	a	rag	doll.
Now	he	could	see	the	breach.	The	two	Bridgeburner	sergeants	had	both
gone	down	at	the	top	of	the	trail	they	had	been	defending.
Corabb	leapt	over	the	chained	god.
Kolansii	faces	turned	towards	him	–	and	then	he	was	among	them,	his
sword	singing.	The	shield	was	torn	from	his	left	arm	by	an	axe	blade.	A	point
bit	deep	into	his	side.	Howling,	he	slashed	open	a	shoulder,	cutting	through
chain,	the	links	scattering,	and	then	drove	another	man	to	his	knees	on	the
backswing.
A	heavy	grunt	from	someone	on	his	right	–	Shortnose	had	arrived,	shieldbashing	two	foes,	sending	both	to	the	ground.	He’d	collected	up	a	Kolansii	axe
and	now	used	it	to	dispatch	the	stunned	soldiers.
More	of	the	enemy	rushed	them.

The	Crippled	God	was	able	to	turn	his	head,	was	witness	to	the	savage,
desperate	defence	from	these	two	Malazans.	He	watched	the	enemy	driven	back
in	one	instant,	then	pushing	closer	in	the	next.	The	sweat	of	one	of	his
protectors	had	splashed	his	face	when	the	man	had	sailed	over	him,	and	those
droplets	now	ran	down	in	trickles,	leaving	tracks	that	felt	cool	as	tears.
It	seemed	that	there	would	be	no	reinforcements	to	this	modest	engagement


–	the	enemy	was	upon	them	on	all	sides.	They	had	finally	come	within	sight	of
his	chained	body	–	and	now	the	Forkrul	Assail	understood	the	purpose	behind
all	this.	The	Crippled	God	could	feel	the	Assail’s	hunger.
I	am	almost	all	here,	within	this	bag	of	skin.	And	I	remain	in	chains.
He	can	wound	me.	He	can	feed	on	my	power	for	all	time	–	and	none	could
challenge	him.	He	will	unleash	my	poison	upon	the	world.
The	Malazan	with	the	cut-off	nose-tip	staggered,	pierced	through	by	a
sword,	and	then	another.	Only	to	then	straighten,	his	axe	lashing	out.	Bodies
reeled,	toppled	in	welters	of	gore.	He	stumbled	forward,	and	the	Crippled	God
saw	his	face	in	profile	–	and	saw	the	man’s	smile	as	he	fell	face	first	on	to	the
ground.
Leaving	but	one	defender,	harried	now	by	three	Kolansii,	with	a	fourth	and
fifth	soldier	appearing	from	behind	them.
His	lone	stalwart	marine	cut	one	down	with	his	singing	blade.	And	then
another	–	crippled	by	a	thigh	chopped	down	to	the	bone.
The	axe	that	caught	the	marine	was	swung	from	the	shield	side	–	but	the
Malazan	held	no	shield,	could	not	block	the	swing.	It	cut	clean	through	his	left
shoulder,	severing	the	arm.	Blood	spraying,	the	man	stepped	back,	his	torso
held	pitched	to	one	side,	unbalanced.	A	second	swing	slashed	through	half	his
neck.
Somehow,	the	marine	found	the	strength	to	drive	the	point	of	his	sword
into	his	killer ’s	throat,	the	tip	bursting	out	below	the	back	of	the	skull.	The
thrust	toppled	him	forward,	into	the	dying	man’s	arms.	They	fell	as	one.
Even	as	the	remaining	two	Kolansii	moved	towards	the	Crippled	God,
weapons	lifting,	quarrels	flashed	in	the	air,	knocked	both	men	down.
The	god	heard	the	scuff	and	thump	of	boots,	and	then	someone	landed	and
slid	up	against	him,	and	he	turned	his	head	to	the	kneeling	saviour,	looked	up
into	Captain	Fiddler ’s	eyes.
‘They	reach	you,	Lord?’
The	Crippled	God	shook	his	head.	‘Captain,	your	soldiers…’
As	if	the	word	alone	wounded	him,	Fiddler	looked	away,	and	then
scrambled	back	on	to	his	feet,	cranking	back	the	claw	on	the	crossbow,	his	eyes
fixing	on	the	breach.	Those	eyes	then	went	wide.	‘Hedge!’	he	screamed.
	
Hedge	fell	against	the	hacked	bodies	of	Sweetlard	and	Rumjugs.	The	trail	just
below	where	the	two	women	had	fought	was	jammed	with	corpses	–	but
beyond	them	he	could	see	more	Kolansii	soldiers,	dragging	the	way	clear.
They’d	be	through	in	moments.


Too	many.	Fuck.
How	long	had	they	been	fighting?	He	had	no	idea.	How	many	waves	of
attacks?	It	seemed	like	hundreds,	but	that	wasn’t	possible	–	they	still	had
daylight	above	them.	Dying	daylight,	aye,	but	still…
Eyes	on	the	mass	of	enemy	below,	an	enemy	heaving	ever	closer,	he	drew
round	the	satchel	he	had	collected	from	the	mound	of	gear	close	to	the	feet	of
the	Crippled	God.	Drew	out	the	cusser.	Always	keep	one.	Always.
Sapper’s	vow.	If	you’re	going	down,	take	the	bastards	with	ya.
He	lifted	it	high.
Behind	him	he	heard	Fiddler	shriek	his	name.
Aw,	shit.	Sorry,	Fid.
Hedge	plunged	down	the	trail,	rushing	the	mob	of	Kolansii.
And	then	heard	someone	behind	him,	and	whirled.	‘Fiddler,	damn	you!	No!
Go	back!’
Instead,	his	friend	tackled	him.	Both	went	down,	the	cusser	flying	from
Hedge’s	hand.
Neither	man	ducked	for	cover,	instead	turning	to	watch	the	munition	take
its	leisurely,	curving	path	down	to	the	press	of	soldiers	–	and	all	those	bobbing
iron	helms.
It	struck	one	of	those	helms	clean	as	a	coconut	falling	from	a	tree.
Burst	open	to	spill	insensate	carmine	powder.
The	two	sappers	stared	at	each	other,	faces	barely	a	hand’s	width	apart,	and
in	unison	they	cried,	‘Dud!’
And	then	a	Malazan	slammed	down	beside	them	in	a	clatter	of	armour	–	a
man	if	anything	shorter	than	Reliko,	yet	pale	and	thin,	his	ears	protruding	from
the	sides	of	his	narrow	head.	He	faced	them	and	offered	up	a	yellow,	snaggletoothed	smile.	‘Got	your	backs,	sirs.	Get	on	wi’yee	now!’
Fiddler	stared	at	the	man.	‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you?’
The	soldier	gave	him	a	hurt	look.	‘I’m	Nefarias	Bredd,	sir!	Who	else
would	I	be?	Now,	get	back	up	there	–	I’ll	cover	yee,	aye?’
Fiddler	turned	and	dragged	Hedge	back	on	to	his	feet,	pulling	him	up	the
trail.	As	they	scrabbled	to	the	edge,	hands	reached	down	and	dragged	them	up.
The	faces	of	the	marines	now	surrounding	them	–	Tarr,	Bottle,	Smiles	and
Koryk	–	were	the	palest	he	had	ever	seen.	Deadsmell	arrived	and	fell	to	his
knees	beside	the	prone	bodies	of	Rumjugs	and	Sweetlad,	looked	up	and
muttered	something	to	Tarr.
Nodding,	Sergeant	Tarr	pushed	Hedge	and	Fiddler	from	the	edge.	‘We	got
this	breach	taken	care	of,	sirs.’
Fiddler	grasped	Hedge’s	arm,	yanked	him	as	he	dragged	him	away.


‘Fid—’
‘Shut	the	fuck	up!’	He	rounded	on	Hedge.	‘You	thought	to	just	do	it	all	over
again?’
‘It	looked	like	we	was	finished!’
‘We	ain’t	never	finished,	damn	you!	We	drove	’em	back	again	–	you
hearing	me?	They’re	pulling	back	–	we	drove	them	back	again!’
Hedge’s	legs	suddenly	felt	watery	beneath	him.	He	abruptly	sat	down.
Gloom	was	settling	round	them.	He	listened	to	gasping	breaths,	cursing,
ragged	coughs.	Looking	about,	he	saw	that	the	others	within	sight	were	also
down	on	the	ground,	too	tired	for	anything	more.	Heads	fell	back,	eyes	closed.
His	sigh	was	a	rasp.	‘Gods,	how	many	soldiers	you	got	left,	Fid?’
The	man	was	now	lying	beside	him,	back	propped	against	a	tilted	stone.
‘Maybe	twenty.	You?’
A	shudder	took	Hedge	and	he	looked	away.	‘The	sergeants	were	the	last	of
’em.’
‘They	ain’t	dead.’
‘What?’
‘Cut	up,	aye.	But	just	unconscious.	Deadsmell	figures	it	was	heat
prostration.’
‘Heat—	Gods	below,	I	told	’em	to	drink	all	they	had!’
‘They’re	big	women,	Hedge.’
‘My	last	Bridgeburners.’
‘Aye,	Hedge,	your	last	Bridgeburners.’
Hedge	opened	his	eyes	and	looked	over	at	his	friend	–	but	Fid’s	own	eyes
remained	shut,	face	towards	the	darkening	sky.	‘Really?	What	you	said?’
‘Really.’
Hedge	settled	back.	‘Think	we	can	stop	’em	again?’
‘Of	course	we	can.	Listen,	you	ain’t	hiding	another	cusser,	are	you?’
‘No.	Hood	take	me,	I	been	carrying	that	one	for	bloody	ever.	And	all	that
time,	it	was	a	dud!’
	
Faces	floated	behind	Fiddler ’s	eyes.	Stilled	in	death,	when	so	many	memories
of	each	one	gave	them	so	much	life	–	but	that	life	was	trapped	now,	inside
Fiddler ’s	own	mind.	And	there	they	would	remain,	when	in	opening	his	eyes	–
which	he	was	not	yet	ready	to	do	–	he	would	see	only	that	stillness,	the
emptiness.
He	knew	which	world	he	wanted	to	live	in.	But,	people	didn’t	have	that
choice,	did	they?	Not	unless	they	killed	the	spark	inside	themselves	first.	With


drink,	with	the	oblivion	of	sweet	smoke,	but	those	were	false	dreams	and	made
mockery	of	the	ones	truly	lost	–	the	ones	whose	lives	had	passed.
Around	him,	the	desperate	gulps	of	breath	were	fading,	the	groans	falling
off	as	wounds	were	bound.	Few	soldiers	had	the	strength	to	move,	and	he	knew
that	they	were	now	settled	as	he	was,	here	against	this	stone.	Too	tired	to	move.
From	the	slope	on	all	sides,	the	low	cries	and	moans	of	wounded	Kolansii
lifted	up,	soft	and	forlorn,	abandoned.	The	Malazans	had	killed	hundreds,	had
wounded	even	more,	and	still	the	attackers	would	not	relent,	as	if	this	hill	had
become	the	lone	island	in	a	world	of	rising	seas.
But	it’s	not	that.
It’s	just	the	place	we	chose.	To	do	what’s	right.
But	then,	maybe	that	alone	gives	reason	to	take	us	down,	to	destroy	us.
Hedge	was	silent	beside	him,	but	not	asleep	–	if	he	had	been,	his	snores
would	have	driven	them	all	from	this	place,	the	Crippled	God	included,	chains
be	damned.	And	from	the	army	still	surrounding	them,	down	on	the	lower
ground,	nothing	more	than	a	sullen	mutter	of	sound	–	soldiers	resting,
checking	weapons	and	armour.	Readying	for	the	next	assault.
The	last	assault.
Twenty-odd	soldiers	cannot	stop	an	army.
Even	these	soldiers.
Someone	coughed	nearby,	from	some	huddle	of	stones,	and	then	spoke.
‘So,	who	are	we	fighting	for	again?’
Fiddler	could	not	place	the	voice.
Nor	the	one	that	replied,	‘Everyone.’
A	long	pause,	and	then,	‘No	wonder	we’re	losing.’
Six,	a	dozen	heartbeats,	before	someone	snorted.	A	rumbling	laugh
followed,	and	then	someone	else	burst	out	in	a	howl	of	mirth	–	and	all	at	once,
from	the	dark	places	among	the	rocks	of	this	barrow,	laughter	burgeoned,
rolled	round,	bounced	and	echoed.
Fiddler	felt	his	mouth	cracking	wide	in	a	grin,	and	then	he	barked	a	laugh,
and	then	another.	And	then	he	simply	could	not	stop,	pain	clenching	his	side.
Beside	him,	Hedge	was	suddenly	hysterical,	twisting	over	and	curling	up	as	the
laughter	poured	out	of	him.
Tears	now	in	Fiddler ’s	eyes	–	wiping	them	frantically	–	but	the	laughter
went	on.
And	on.


Smiles	looked	over	at	the	others	in	her	squad,	saw	them	doubling	over,	saw
faces	flushed	and	tears	streaming	down.	Bottle.	Koryk.	Even	Tarr.	And
Smiles…smiled.
When	her	squad-mates	saw	that,	they	convulsed	as	if	gut-stabbed.
	
Lying	jammed	in	a	crack	between	two	stones	a	third	of	the	way	down	the	slope,
half	buried	beneath	Kolansii	corpses,	and	feeling	the	blood	draining	away
from	the	deep,	mortal	wounds	in	his	chest,	Cuttle	heard	that	laughter.
And	in	his	mind	he	went	back,	and	back.	Childhood.	The	battles	they
fought,	the	towering	redoubts	they	defended,	the	sunny	days	of	dust	and	sticks
for	swords	and	running	this	way	and	that,	where	time	was	nothing	but	a	world
without	horizons	–	and	the	days	never	closed,	and	every	stone	felt	perfect	in	the
palm	of	the	hand,	and	when	a	bruise	arrived,	or	a	cut	opened	red,	why	he	need
only	run	to	his	ma	or	da,	and	they	would	take	his	shock	and	indignation	and
make	it	all	seem	less	important	–	and	then	that	disturbance	would	be	gone,
drifting	into	the	time	of	before,	and	ahead	there	was	only	the	sun	and	the
brightness	of	never	growing	up.
To	the	stones	and	sweat	and	blood	here	in	his	last	resting	place,	Cuttle
smiled,	and	then	he	whispered	to	them	in	his	mind,	You	should	have	seen	our
last	stands.	They	were	something.
They	were	something.
Darkness,	and	then	brightness	–	brightness	like	a	summer	day	without	end.
He	went	there,	without	a	single	look	back.
	
Lying	beneath	the	weight	of	the	chains,	the	Crippled	God,	who	had	been
listening,	now	heard.	Long-forgotten,	half-disbelieved	emotions	rose	up
through	him,	ferocious	and	bright.	He	drew	a	sharp	breath,	feeling	his	throat
tighten.	I	will	remember	this.	I	will	set	out	scrolls	and	burn	upon	them	the
names	of	these	Fallen.	I	will	make	of	this	work	a	holy	tome,	and	no	other	shall
be	needed.
Hear	them!	They	are	humanity	unfurled,	laid	out	for	all	to	see	–	if	one
would	dare	look!
There	shall	be	a	Book	and	it	shall	be	written	by	my	hand.	Wheel	and	seek
the	faces	of	a	thousand	gods!	None	can	do	what	I	can	do!	Not	one	can	give
voice	to	this	holy	creation!
But	this	is	not	bravado.	For	this,	my	Book	of	the	Fallen,	the	only	god


worthy	of	its	telling	is	the	crippled	one.	The	broken	one.	And	has	it	not	always
been	thus?
I	never	hid	my	hurts.
I	never	disguised	my	dreams.
And	I	never	lost	my	way.
And	only	the	fallen	can	rise	again.
He	listened	to	the	laughter,	and	suddenly	the	weight	of	those	chains	was	as
nothing.	Nothing.
	
‘They	have	resurr—’	Brother	Grave	stopped.	He	turned,	faced	the	dark	hill.
Beside	him,	High	Watered	Haggraf’s	eyes	slowly	widened	–	and	on	all
sides	the	Kolansii	soldiers	were	looking	up	at	the	barrow,	the	weapons	in	their
hands	sagging.	More	than	a	few	took	a	backward	step.
As	laughter	rolled	down	to	them	all.
When	Brother	Grave	pushed	harshly	through	the	soldiers,	marching
towards	the	corpse-strewn	foot	of	the	hill,	Haggraf	followed.
The	Pure	halted	five	paces	beyond	the	milling,	disordered	ranks,	stared
upward.	He	flung	Haggraf	a	look	drawn	taut	with	incredulity.	‘Who	are	these
foreigners?’
The	High	Watered	could	only	shake	his	head,	a	single	motion.
Brother	Grave’s	face	darkened.	‘There	are	but	a	handful	left	–	there	will	be
no	retreat	this	time,	do	you	understand	me?	No	retreat!	I	want	them	all	cut
down!’
‘Yes	sir.’
The	Forkrul	Assail	glared	at	the	soldiers.	‘Form	up,	all	of	you!	Prepare	to
advance!’
Suddenly,	from	the	hill,	deathly	silence.
Brother	Grave	smiled.	‘Hear	that?	They	know	that	it	is	over!’
A	faint	whistling	in	the	air,	and	then	Haggraf	grunted	in	pain,	staggering	to
one	side	–	an	arrow	driven	through	his	left	shoulder.
Brother	Grave	spun	to	him,	glared.
Teeth	clenching,	Haggraf	tore	the	iron	point	from	his	shoulder,	almost
collapsing	from	the	burst	of	agony	as	blood	streamed	down.	Staring	down	at
the	glistening	sliver	of	wood	in	his	hand,	he	saw	that	it	was	Kolansii.
	
Snarling,	Brother	Grave	wheeled	and	forced	his	way	back	through	the	press	of


soldiers.	He	would	join	this	assault	–	he	would	ride	his	Jhag	horse	to	the	very
top,	cutting	down	every	fool	who	dared	stand	in	his	way.
In	his	mind,	seeping	in	from	the	soldiers	surrounding	him,	he	could	hear
whispers	of	dread	and	fear,	and	beneath	that	palpable	bitterness	there	was
something	else	–	something	that	forced	its	way	through	his	utter	command	of
their	bodies,	their	wills.
These	were	hardened	veterans,	one	and	all.	By	their	hands	they	had
delivered	slaughter,	upon	foes	armed	and	unarmed,	at	the	command	of	the
Forkrul	Assail.	They	had	been	slaves	for	years	now.	And	yet,	like	a	black
current	beneath	the	stone	of	his	will,	Brother	Grave	sensed	emotions	that	had
nothing	to	do	with	a	desire	to	destroy	the	enemy	now	opposing	them.
They	were	in…awe.
The	very	notion	infuriated	him.
‘Silence!	They	are	mortal!	They	have	not	the	wits	to	accept	the	inevitable!
You	will	fight	them,	you	will	take	them	down,	every	last	one	of	them!’	Seeing
them	wither	before	his	command,	a	surge	of	satisfaction	rushed	through	him
and	he	moved	on.
‘And	I	will	claim	the	Crippled	God,’	he	hissed	under	his	breath,	finally
pushing	clear	of	the	troops,	marching	towards	his	hobbled	horse.	‘I	will	wound
him	and	Akhrast	Korvalain	shall	be	reborn,	and	then	none	will	be	able	to
oppose	me.	None!’
Motion	off	to	his	left	caught	his	attention.	He	halted,	squinted	into	the
green-tinted	gloom.
Someone	was	walking	towards	him	across	the	plain.
What	now?
At	forty	paces	he	saw	the	figure	raise	its	arms.
The	sorcery	that	erupted	from	him	was	a	blinding,	coruscating	wave,
argent	as	the	heart	of	lightning.	It	tore	across	the	ground	between	them,	struck
one	edge	of	the	Kolansii	ranks,	and	scythed	through	them.
Bellowing	in	answer,	Brother	Grave	threw	up	his	hands	a	moment	before
the	magic	struck.
He	was	flung	backwards	through	the	air,	only	to	slam	into	something
unyielding	–	something	that	gave	an	animal	grunt.
Strength	fled	Brother	Grave.	He	looked	down,	stared	at	two	long	blades
jutting	from	his	chest.	Each	knife	had	pierced	through	one	of	his	hearts.
Then	a	low	voice	rumbled	close	to	one	ear.	‘Compliments	of	Kalam
Mekhar.’
	


The	assassin	let	the	body	sag,	slide	off	his	long	knives.	Then	he	turned	and
slashed	through	the	rope	hobbling	the	horse.	Moved	up	alongside	the	beast’s
head.	‘I	hate	horses,	you	know.	But	this	time	you’d	better	run	–	even	you	won’t
like	what’s	coming.’	He	stepped	back,	slapped	the	animal’s	rump.
The	bone-white	Jhag	horse	bolted,	trying	a	kick	that	Kalam	barely
managed	to	dodge.	He	glared	after	it,	and	then	turned	to	face	the	Kolansii
soldiers	–
–	in	time	to	see	another	wave	of	Quick	Ben’s	brutal	sorcery	hammer	into
the	press	of	troops,	tearing	down	hundreds.	The	rest	scattered.
And	the	High	Mage	was	shouting,	running	now.	‘Through	the	gap,	Kalam!
Hurry!	Get	to	that	barrow!	Run,	damn	you!’
Growling,	the	assassin	lumbered	forward.	I	hate	horses,	aye,	but	I	hate
running	even	more.	Shoulda	ridden	the	damned	thing	–	then	this	would	be	easy.
Better	still,	we	should	never	have	let	the	other	one	go.	Quick’s	going	on	soft	on
me.
A	Kolansii	officer	with	Assail	blood	in	him	stepped	into	his	path,	clutching
his	wounded	shoulder.
Kalam	cut	the	man’s	head	off	with	a	scissoring	motion	of	his	long	knives,
knocked	the	headless	body	to	one	side,	and	continued	on.	He	knew	that	tone
from	Quick	Ben.	Run	like	a	damned	gazelle,	Kalam!
Instead,	he	ran	like	a	bear.
With	luck,	that	would	be	fast	enough.
	
Hedge	knew	that	sound,	recognized	that	flash	of	blinding	magefire.	He	rose,
dragging	Fiddler	to	his	feet.	‘Quick	Ben!	Fiddler	–	they’re	here!’
On	all	sides,	the	last	few	marines	were	rising,	weapons	hanging,	their	faces
filling	with	disbelief.
Hedge	pointed.	‘There!	I’d	know	that	scrawny	excuse	for	a	man	anywhere!
And	there	–	that’s	Kalam!’
‘They	broke	the	Kolansii,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Why	are	they	running?’
As	Hedge	spun	round	–	as	if	to	shout	to	the	marines	–	his	hand	suddenly
clenched	on	Fiddler ’s	arm,	and	the	captain	turned.
He	looked	skyward.
‘Gods	below!’
	
She	was	the	finder	of	paths.	There	were	ways	through	the	worlds	that	only	she


had	walked.	But	now,	as	she	forced	her	will	through	the	warren’s	veil,	she
could	feel	the	pressure	behind	her	–	a	need	that	seemed	without	answer.
Instinct	had	taken	her	this	far,	and	the	world	beyond	was	unknown	to	her.
Has	my	course	been	true?	Or	nothing	but	a	lie	I	whispered	to	myself,	over
and	over,	as	if	the	universe	would	bend	to	my	will?
I	promised	so	much	to	my	lord.
I	led	him	home,	I	led	him	to	the	throne	of	his	ancestors.
I	promised	answers.	To	all	of	the	hidden	purposes	behind	all	that	his	father
had	done.	I	promised	him	a	meaning	to	all	this.
And	I	promised	him	peace.
She	emerged	into	a	dying	day,	trod	lifeless	grasses	beneath	her	moccasinclad	feet.	And	the	sky	above	was	crazed	with	emerald	comets,	the	light	stunning
her	eyes	with	its	virulence.	They	seemed	close	enough	to	touch,	and	in	the
falling	rain	of	that	light	she	heard	voices.
But	a	moment	later	those	actinic	arcs	were	not	alone	in	the	heavens.	Vast
shadows	tore	ragged	trails	through	the	green	glow,	coming	from	her	right
with	the	fury	of	clashing	storm	clouds.	Blood	and	gore	spattered	the	ground
around	her	like	hail.
She	spun	in	that	direction,	and	the	breath	escaped	Apsal’ara	in	a	rush.
A	blight	was	taking	the	land,	faster	than	any	wildfire	–	and	above	it	was	a
dragon,	appallingly	huge,	assailed	on	all	sides	by	lesser	kin.
Korabas!
She	saw	the	front	of	that	blight	rushing	towards	her.
She	turned	and	ran.	Reached	desperately	for	warrens,	but	nothing
awakened	–	it	was	all	being	destroyed.	Every	path,	every	gate.	Life’s	myriad
fires	were	being	snuffed	out,	crushed	like	dying	embers.
What	have	I	done?
They	are	following	–	they	trusted	in	me!	My	lord	and	his	followers	are
coming	–	there	is	no	stopping	that,	but	they	will	arrive	in	a	realm	which	they
cannot	leave.
Where	flies	Korabas,	there	shall	be	T’iam!
What	have	I	done?
Suddenly,	in	the	distance	ahead,	sure	as	a	dreaded	dawn,	the	rift	she	had
made	tore	open	wide,	and	five	dragons	sailed	out,	their	vast	shadows	rushing
towards	her.	Four	were	black	as	onyx,	the	fifth	the	crimson	hue	of	blood.
Desra.	Skintick.	Korlat.	Silanah.	Nimander.
And	awaiting	them,	in	the	skies	above	this	world,	between	earth	and	the
fiery	heavens,	the	air	swarmed	with	their	kin.	And	Korabas.
At	war.


She	saw	her	lord	and	his	followers	drawn	into	that	maelstrom	–	all	will
lost,	stolen	away	by	what	was	coming.
Where	flies	Korabas,	there	shall	be	T’iam.
And	the	goddess	of	the	Eleint	had	begun	to	manifest.
Panicked,	weeping,	Apsal’ara	began	running	again,	and	there,	in	the
distance,	beckoned	a	hill	crowded	with	crags	and	boulders,	and	upon	that	hill
there	were	figures.
	
As	Fiddler	turned	to	face	the	west,	he	found	himself	staring	at	the	most	massive
dragon	he	had	ever	seen.	Harried	by	scores	of	lesser	dragons,	seemingly	torn
to	shreds,	it	was	labouring	straight	for	them.
He	spun	–	the	Adjunct’s	sword	was	now	bleeding	coppery,	rust-stained
light,	visibly	trembling	where	it	was	driven	into	the	earth.	Oh	no.	We’re	all
dead.
The	land	beneath	the	Otataral	Dragon	was	withering,	crumbling	to	dust	and
cracked,	bare	clay.	The	devastation	spread	out	like	floodwaters	over	the	plains.
The	sword	wasn’t	enough.	We	all	knew	that.	When	we	stood	here	–	her,	me,
the	priest…
The	priest!
He	whirled	round.
At	that	moment	Quick	Ben	reached	the	crest.	‘No	one	leaves	the	barrow!
Stay	inside	the	ring!’
The	ring?	‘Gods	below.	D’rek!’
The	wizard	heard	him	and	flashed	a	half-panicked	grin.	‘Well	said,	Fid!
But	not	gods	below.	Just	one.’
Kalam	stumbled	into	view	behind	Quick	Ben,	lathered	in	sweat	and	so
winded	he	fell	to	his	knees,	face	stretched	in	pain	as	he	struggled	to	catch	his
breath.
Hedge	threw	the	assassin	a	waterskin.	‘You’re	out	of	shape,	soldier.’
Fiddler	saw	his	marines	drawing	up	–	their	eyes	were	on	the	approaching
dragon,	and	the	hundreds	of	other,	smaller	dragons	swooping	down	upon	it	in
deadly	waves.	When	some	of	them	saw	the	blight,	spreading	out	and	now
rushing	closer,	they	flinched	back.	Fiddler	well	understood	that	gesture.	‘Quick
Ben!	Can	she	protect	us?’
The	wizard	scowled	across	at	him.	‘You	don’t	know?	She’s	here,	isn’t	she?
Why	else	would	she	be	here?’	He	then	advanced	on	Fiddler.	‘Didn’t	you	plan
this?’
‘Plan?	What	fucking	plan?’	he	retorted,	unwilling	to	budge.	‘Banaschar


said	something…his	god	was	coming	–	to	offer	protection—’
‘Exactly	–	wait,	what	kind	of	protection?’
‘I	don’t	know!’
The	blight	struck	the	lower	ground,	caught	the	scattered	Kolansii	soldiers.
They	disintegrated	in	billows	of	dust.
The	Malazans	threw	themselves	to	the	ground,	covering	their	heads.
Fiddler	simply	stared,	as	the	Otataral	Dragon	voiced	a	terrible	cry	that
seemed	to	hold	in	it	a	world’s	pain	and	anguish,	age	upon	age	–	and	its	tattered
wings,	snapping	like	torn	sails,	thundered	wildly	in	the	air	as	the	creature
halted	directly	above	the	barrow.	Quick	Ben	pulled	him	down	to	the	ground.
Nearby	the	earth	shook	as	the	corpse	of	a	dragon	slammed	into	it.	A
curtain	of	blood	slapped	the	hillside.
The	wizard	dragged	himself	close.	‘Stay	low	–	she’s	fighting	it.	Gods,	it’s
killing	her!’
Twisting	round	on	the	ground,	Fiddler	looked	over	at	the	Crippled	God.
His	eyes	widened.
	
Forged	by	the	gods,	the	chains	shattered	like	ice,	links	exploding,	flinging
shards	in	a	vicious	hail.	Soldiers	cried	out,	flinched	away.	The	Crippled	God
remained	lying	on	the	ground,	motionless.	He	had	carried	that	weight	for	so
long,	he	felt	unable	to	move.
Yet	his	chest	filled	with	air,	the	unyielding	constriction	now	gone.	The
sudden	release	from	pain	left	him	hollow	inside.	Trembling	took	his	body,	and
he	turned	his	head.
The	mortals	were	screaming,	though	he	could	not	hear	them.	They	looked
upon	him	with	desperate	need,	but	he	no	longer	understood	what	they	desired
of	him.	And	then,	blinking,	he	stared	up,	not	at	the	hovering,	dying	dragon,	but
beyond	it.
My	worshippers.	My	children.	I	hear	them.	I	hear	their	calls.
The	Crippled	God	slowly	sat	up,	staring	down	at	his	mangled	hands,	the
uneven	fingers,	the	nubs	where	nails	should	have	been.	He	studied	his	scarred,
seamed	skin,	the	slack	muscles	beneath	it.	Is	this	mine?	Is	this	how	I	am?
Rising	to	his	feet,	his	attention	was	caught	by	the	hundreds	of	dragons	now
massing	to	the	south.	They	had	drawn	back	from	the	Otataral	Dragon,	and	now
had	begun	writhing,	swarming	against	each	other,	forming	spiralling	pillars	of
scale,	wings	and	dragon	flesh,	twisting	above	a	more	solid	mass.	The	shape
towered	into	the	sky,	impossibly	huge,	and	from	the	flattened,	elongated	ends
of	those	pillars,	high	above	them	all,	eyes	suddenly	flared	awake.


A	word	whispered	into	the	Crippled	God’s	mind	–	faint,	yet	still	voiced	in	a
howl	of	terror.
T’iam.
Manifesting.	Awakening	to	slay	the	Otataral	Dragon.
The	Crippled	God	saw	a	man	fighting	his	way	closer	to	where	he	stood,	as
if	against	a	whirlwind.	Iron	in	his	beard,	a	familiar	face	he	vaguely	recalled,
and	with	that	recollection	vague	emotions	rising	into	his	thoughts.	There	have
been	sacrifices	this	day.	Made	for	me,	by	these	strangers.	Yet…asking	for
nothing.	Not	for	themselves.	Still,	what	do	they	now	want	from	me?
I	am	free.
I	can	hear	my	children.
And	yet	they	are	trapped	in	the	heavens.	If	I	call	them	down,	all	will	be
destroyed	here.
There	were	others,	once	–	they	fell	as	I	did,	and	so	much	was	damaged,	so
much	was	lost.	I	see	them	still,	trapped	in	jade,	shaped	to	make	a	message	to
these	mortal	creatures	–	but	that	message	was	never	understood,	and	the	voices
stayed	for	ever	trapped	within.
If	I	call	my	children	down,	this	world	will	end	in	fire.
Craning,	he	stared	beseechingly	into	the	heavens,	and	reached	up,	as	if	he
might	fly	into	them.
The	uneven	fingers	strained	on	the	ends	of	his	misshapen	hands,	pathetic	as
broken	wings.
The	bearded	man	reached	him,	and	now	at	last	the	Crippled	God	could
hear	his	words,	could	understand	them.
‘You	must	chain	her!	Lord!	She	will	accept	your	chains!	You	must	–	T’iam
is	manifesting!	She	will	destroy	everything!’
The	Crippled	God	felt	his	face	twisting.	‘Chain	her?	I,	who	have	known	an
eternity	in	chains?	You	cannot	ask	this	of	me!’
‘Chain	her	or	she	dies!’
‘Then	death	shall	be	her	release!’
‘Lord	–	if	she	dies,	then	we	all	die!	I	beg	you,	chain	her!’
He	studied	this	mortal.	‘She	accepts	this?’
‘Yes!	And	quickly	–	D’rek	is	dying	beneath	us.’
‘But	my	power	is	alien	–	I	have	no	means	of	binding	it	to	this	world,
mortal.’
‘Find	a	way!	You	have	to!’
He	was	freed.	He	could	walk	from	this	place.	He	could	leave	these	mortals
–	not	even	the	deadly	power	of	the	Otataral	Dragon	could	harm	him.	Otataral,
after	all,	is	nothing	more	than	the	scab	this	world	makes	to	answer	the


infection.	And	what	is	that	infection?	Why,	it	is	me.
The	Crippled	God	looked	down	upon	this	mortal.	He	kneels,	as	all	broken
mortals	kneel.	Against	the	cruelty	of	this	and	every	world,	a	mortal	can	do
nothing	but	kneel.
Even	before	a	foreign	god.
And	what	of	the	love	I	possess?	Perhaps	there	is	nothing	–	but	no,	there	is
no	such	thing	as	foreign	love.
He	closed	his	eyes,	released	his	mind	to	this	world.
And	found	them	waiting	for	him.
	
Two	Elder	Gods,	each	taking	a	hand	–	their	touches	heartbreakingly	gentle.	The
crushing	pressure	in	this	place	had	levelled	every	feature,	darkness	and	silts
swirling	in	unceasing	dance.	Currents	raged	on	all	sides,	but	none	could	reach
through	–	the	gods	held	them	at	bay.
No,	only	one	of	these	Elders	possessed	that	power,	and	he	was	named	Mael
of	the	Seas.
They	led	him	across	this	plain,	this	ocean	bed	lost	to	the	sun’s	light.
To	where	knelt	another	mortal	–	but	only	his	soul	remained,	though	for	the
moment	it	once	more	occupied	the	body	it	had	abandoned	long	ago:	rotted	with
decay,	swirl-tattoos	seeming	to	flow	in	the	currents	from	the	naked	form.	He
knelt	with	his	hands	thrust	down,	buried	deep	in	the	silts,	as	if	seeking	a	lost
coin,	a	precious	treasure,	a	memento.
When	he	looked	up	at	them,	the	Crippled	God	saw	that	he	was	blind.
‘Who	is	this?’	the	mortal	asked.	‘Who	is	this,	nailed	so	cruelly	to	this	tree?
Please,	I	beg	you	–	I	cannot	see.	Please,	tell	me.	Is	it	him?	He	tried	to	save	me.
It	cannot	have	come	to	this.	It	cannot!’
And	the	Elder	God	who	was	not	Mael	of	the	Seas	then	spoke.	‘Heboric,	you
but	dream,	and	this	dream	of	yours	is	not	a	conversation.	Only	a	monologue.	In
this	dream,	Heboric	Ghosthands,	you	are	trapped.’
But	the	mortal	named	Heboric	shook	his	head.	‘You	don’t	understand.	All	I
have	touched	I	have	destroyed.	Friends.	Gods.	Even	the	child	–	I	lost	her	too,	to
the	Whirlwind.	I	lost	them	all.’
‘Heboric	Ghosthands,’	said	Mael,	‘will	you	fill	this	ocean	with	your	tears?
If	you	believe	this	notion	to	be	new,	know	this:	these	waters	were	so	filled…
long	ago.’
The	other	Elder	God	said,	‘Heboric,	you	must	awaken	from	this	dream.	You
must	free	your	hands	–	they	have	waited	for	this	moment	since	the	island.	They
have	touched	and	taken	the	Jade	and	now	within	you	reside	a	million	lost	souls


–	souls	belonging	to	this	foreign	god.	And,	too,	your	hands	have	touched
Otataral,	the	summoner	of	Korabas.’
But	Heboric	sank	back	down,	groping	in	the	silts	once	more.	‘I	killed	my
god.’
‘Heboric,’	said	Mael	of	the	Seas,	‘even	gods	of	war	will	tire	of	war.	It	seems
that	only	mortals	will	not.	No	matter.	He	has	absolved	you	of	all	blame.	His
blood	has	brought	life	to	dead	lands.	He	deems	it	a	worthy	sacrifice.’
‘But	that	sacrifice	will	fail,	Heboric,’	said	the	other	Elder	God,	‘if	you	do
not	awaken	from	your	dream.’
‘Who	is	upon	the	tree?’
‘Heboric,	there	is	no	one	upon	the	tree.’
The	sightless	eyes	lifted	once	again.	‘No	one?’
‘Let	us	see	your	hands,	old	friend.	I	have	awakened	all	the	warrens,	and	all
now	lead	to	one	place.	A	cavern	far	beneath	a	barrow,	made	by	the	jaws	of
D’rek.	Shall	we	walk	there	now,	Heboric?’
‘A	barrow?’
‘A	barrow.’
‘No	one	dreams	within	a	barrow.’
Both	Elder	Gods	were	silent	to	that,	and	when	the	Crippled	God	looked	at
each	of	them	in	turn	he	saw	that	they	were	weeping	–	he	could	see	the	tears	on
their	weathered	faces,	as	if	they	stood,	not	at	the	bottom	of	an	ocean,	but	upon	a
desert.
Or	upon	the	broken	skin	of	a	barrow.
When	Heboric	dragged	his	hands	from	the	silts,	one	glowed	emerald
through	the	billowing	clouds,	the	other	the	hue	of	Otataral.	The	face	he	now
turned	to	the	Elder	Gods	was	filled	with	sudden	fear.	‘Will	I	be	alone	there?	In
that	cavern?’
‘No,’	replied	Mael	of	the	Seas.	‘Never	again.’
‘Who	was	upon	the	tree?’
‘We	go	to	her	now,	Heboric	Ghosthands.’
They	began	walking,	and	the	Crippled	God	could	feel	the	sorceries	of	this
realm	drawing	towards	them,	gathering,	conjoining	to	make	this	road.
Then,	ahead	on	the	path,	he	saw	the	glimmer	of	a	lantern	–	a	figure,	now
guiding	them	forward,	but	from	a	great	distance.
The	journey	seemed	to	take	an	eternity.	Things	sank	down	from	time	to	time,
coming	from	the	darkness	above,	stirring	clouds	of	silt	into	the	currents.	He
saw	ships	of	wood,	ships	of	iron.	He	saw	the	carcasses	of	serpentine	monsters.
He	saw	a	rain	of	human	corpses,	shark-gnawed	and	dragged	down	boots	first	to
land	upon	the	bottom	as	if	to	walk	–	perhaps	even	to	join	this	procession	–	but


then	their	legs	folded	beneath	them,	and	the	silts	made	for	them	a	soft	place	to
rest.
He	thought	he	saw	mounted	warriors,	glimmering	green	and	blue,	tracking
them	from	a	distance.
The	lantern	light	was	suddenly	closer,	and	the	Crippled	God	saw	their
guide	standing	before	a	cave	chewed	into	the	face	of	a	massive	cliffside.
When	they	reached	the	mouth	of	that	cave,	the	two	Elder	Gods	paused	and
both	bowed	to	their	guide,	but	that	ghastly	figure	gave	no	sign	of
acknowledgement,	only	turned	away,	as	if	to	take	its	light	on	to	some	other
path.	As	if	to	lead	others	to	their	own	fates.
They	strode	down	a	winding	tunnel,	and	emerged	in	a	vast	cavern.
The	Elder	God	who	was	not	Mael	of	the	Seas	faced	the	Crippled	God.	‘Long
have	you	wandered	the	blood	I	gave	to	this	realm.	I	am	K’rul,	the	Maker	of
Warrens.	Now	it	is	time	for	you	to	leave,	to	return	to	your	home.’
The	Crippled	God	considered	this,	and	then	said,	‘I	am	flesh	and	bone.
Made	in	the	guise	of	a	human.	Where	my	children	call	down	to	me,	I	cannot	go.
Would	you	have	me	summon	them	down?’
‘No.	That	would	mean	our	deaths	–	all	of	us.’
‘Yes.	It	would.’
‘There	will	be	a	way,’	K’rul	said.	‘It	begins	with	Heboric,	but	it	ends	at	the
hands	of	another.’
‘This	flesh	you	wear,’	Mael	of	the	Seas	added,	‘is	unsuited	to	your	return.
But	it	was	the	best	that	they	could	do.’
‘Fallen	One,’	said	K’rul,	‘will	you	trust	us?’
The	Crippled	God	looked	at	Heboric,	and	then	he	released	his	grip	on	the
hands	of	the	Elder	Gods.	Reached	for	Heboric’s.
But	the	mortal	stepped	back,	and	said,	‘Not	yet,	and	not	both	of	them.	Both
of	them	will	kill	you.	I	will	reach	for	you,	Lord,	when	the	moment	arrives.	This	I
promise.’
The	Crippled	God	bowed,	and	stepped	back.
And	with	his	Otataral	hand,	Heboric,	once	named	Light-Touch,	reached
through	the	waters	above	him.	Copper	light	burst	forth,	filled	the	entire	cavern.

The	vast	fingers	that	erupted	from	the	barrow	encompassed	the	entire
mound	–	but	they	did	not	tear	the	ground.	Ghostly,	translucent,	they	arced	high
overhead,	and	closed	about	the	Otataral	Dragon.


Korabas	loosed	a	deafening	scream	–	but	if	it	was	a	cry	of	pain,	torment	or
release	Fiddler	could	not	tell.
Beyond	the	Otataral	Dragon,	which	was	even	now	being	drawn	closer
down	above	them,	the	manifestation	of	T’iam	–	growing	ever	more	corporeal,
forming	a	multi-headed	leviathan	–	began	to	tear	itself	apart	once	more.
Distant	shrieks,	as	dragons	pulled	away,	lunged	free.
Most	fled	as	if	their	tails	were	on	fire.	Fiddler	stared,	now	unmindful	of	the
vast,	descending	form	of	the	Otataral	Dragon,	as	they	raced	away,	while	others,
too	badly	damaged,	spun	earthward,	striking	the	ground	with	thunderous
concussions.	It’s	fucking	raining	dragons.
	
Quick	Ben	stared	upward,	praying	under	his	breath,	and	then	his	eyes	narrowed
–	he	could	see	through	Korabas.	He	has	her	–	whoever	you	are,	you	have	her
now.
Gods,	this	is	going	to	work.
I	promised,	Burn.	I	promised	you,	didn’t	I?
All	right,	so	maybe	I	can’t	take	all	the	credit.
Maybe.
For	modesty’s	sake,	if	I	ever	talk	about	it,	I	mean.	But	here,	in	my	head…	I
did	it!
	
Kalam	saw	the	infernal	pride	burgeoning	in	the	wizard’s	face	and	knew
precisely	what	the	scrawny	bastard	was	thinking.	The	assassin	wanted	to	hit	the
man.	At	least	ten	times.
Crouched,	even	as	the	ghostly	body	of	the	Otataral	Dragon	slipped	down
around	them	all,	Kalam	turned	to	look	at	the	Crippled	God.	Who	stood
motionless,	eyes	shut,	hands	still	raised	into	the	sky.
Maybe	a	dragon	can	fly	you	up	there,	friend.	They’re	not	all	fleeing,	are
they?
A	woman	he’d	never	seen	before	slumped	down	beside	him,	offered	him
an	inviting	smile.	‘I	like	the	look	of	you,’	she	said.
Gods,	not	another	one.	‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you?’
Her	smile	flashed	wider.	‘I	am	the	woman	who	stole	the	moon.	Oh,	I	see
that	you	don’t	believe	me,	do	you?’
‘It’s	not	that,’	he	replied.	‘Fine,	you	stole	it	–	but	then	you	broke	the
fucking	thing!’


Fury	lit	her	face	most	becomingly.	‘I	am	Apsal’ara,	the	Mistress	of
Thieves!’
He	grinned	at	her.	‘Never	liked	thieves.’	Frustrate	them.	Works	every	time.

Hearing	the	exchange,	Quick	Ben	snorted.
Kalam,	you	never	learn,	do	you?	Or	maybe	you	just	can’t	help	yourself.
	
The	roof	of	the	cavern	suddenly	glowed	white-hot,	and	Heboric	spun	to	the
Crippled	God.	‘Now!	Open	your	eyes	–	you	can’t	be	down	here	when	she
arrives.	No	one	can!’
The	Crippled	God	turned.	He	sensed	the	two	Elder	Gods	were	gone.
Farewell,	Mael	of	the	Seas	and	K’rul	Maker	of	Warrens.
‘Open	your	eyes!’
And	so	he	did,	and	in	that	moment	he	felt	Heboric	take	his	hand.
	
Koryk	had	dragged	himself	behind	a	tilted	standing	stone,	his	eyes	fixed	upon
the	Crippled	God	not	five	paces	away.	There	was	a	need	inside	him,
unbearable,	savage.	It	wanted	to	devour	him.	It	wanted	to	annihilate	the	world,
the	one	he	lived	in,	the	one	that	had	nothing	but	the	thinnest	skin	between	what
hid	inside	and	what	lay	outside.
There	was	no	answer.	None	but	the	obvious	one	–	the	one	he	dared	not
look	at.	If	he	did,	he	would	have	to	face	his	own	story	–	not	as	some	nostalgic
bravado,	but	as	the	succession	of	hurts	that	he	was	not	unique	in	carrying.	And
he	would	see	all	the	scars	–	the	ones	he	bore,	the	others	he	had	made	on	those
close	to	him.
He	stared	at	the	Crippled	God,	as	if	it	could	somehow	save	his	soul.
And	the	Fallen	One	opened	his	eyes	–	and	stared	directly	into	Koryk’s.
Jade	fire	lit	a	whirling	pillar	round	the	god,	spinning	ever	faster,	the	glow
brightening,	the	air	howling.
Their	gazes	were	locked	together	through	the	emerald	flames.
And	Koryk	saw	something	–	there,	awakening,	a	look…a	promise.
He	felt	his	soul	reaching	forth	–	closer…closer	–	reaching	to	touch.
The	Crippled	God	smiled	at	him,	with	such	love,	such	knowing.
The	shadow	rising	behind	him	was	out	of	place	–	it	could	not	belong	inside


those	raging	fires.	Yet	Koryk	saw	it	lifting,	taking	form.	He	saw	two	arms
rising	from	that	shape,	saw	the	raw,	dull	gleam	of	dagger	blades.
Shadow.
Koryk’s	scream	of	warning	ripped	raw	his	throat	–	he	flung	himself
forward—
Even	as	Cotillion’s	knives	plunged	down.
To	sink	into	the	Crippled	God’s	back.
Shock	took	that	otherworldly	face	–	as	if	the	smile	had	never	been	–	and
the	head	rocked	back,	the	body	arching	in	agony.
Someone	slammed	into	Koryk,	dragged	him	to	the	ground.	He	fought,
howling.
The	green	fire	ignited,	shot	spiralling	into	the	sky	–	so	fast	it	was	gone	in
moments.
Koryk	stared	after	it,	one	hand	stretching	upward.
Beside	him,	too	close	to	bear,	he	heard	Fiddler	say,	‘It	was	the	only	way,
Koryk.	It’s	for	the	best.	Nothing	you	can—’
Suddenly	sobbing,	Koryk	pushed	the	man	away,	and	then	curled	up,	like	a
child	who	lived	in	a	world	of	broken	promises.
	
Hedge	pulled	Fiddler	away	from	the	sobbing	soldier.	Fiddler	shot	him	a
helpless	look.
‘He’ll	shake	out	of	it,’	Hedge	said.	‘Once	it	all	settles	and	he	works	it	out,
he’ll	be	fine,	Fid.’
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	joined	the	two	sappers,	and	Fiddler	fixed	his	eyes	on
the	wizard.	‘Was	it	real,	Quick?	What	I	saw	–	did	I…’
The	wizard	gestured	and	they	followed	him	to	one	edge	of	the	summit.	He
pointed	down	to	a	lone	figure	standing	some	distance	away,	little	more	than	a
silhouette,	its	back	to	them.	‘Care	to	ask	him,	Fid?’
Ask	him?	After	all	we’ve	done…how	to	see	this?	Ask	him?	What	if	he
answers	me?	‘No,’	he	said.
‘Listen,	you	were	right	–	it	had	to	be	this	way.’
Yes!	It	had	to	–	we	didn’t	do	all	this	for	nothing!
Fiddler	stepped	back,	eyed	the	three	men	standing	before	him.	‘Look	at	us,’
he	whispered.	‘I	never	thought…’
‘Send	them	down,	Fid,’	said	Hedge.	‘Your	soldiers	–	get	’em	to	carry	the
wounded	down	off	this	fucking	barrow.’
‘What?’
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	were	now	eyeing	Hedge	suspiciously.


The	man	scowled	at	the	attention.	‘Fid,	send	them	down,	will	you?	This	is
just	for	us	–	don’t	you	see?	What’s	coming	–	it’s	just	for	us.’
When	Fiddler	turned,	he	saw	his	soldiers.	And,	feeling	grief	grip	his	heart,
he	forced	himself	to	look	from	one	face	to	the	next.	In	his	mind,	he	spoke	their
names.	Tarr.	Koryk.	Bottle.	Smiles.	Balm.	Throatslitter.	Deadsmell.	Widdershins.
Hellian.	Urb.	Limp.	Crump.	Sinter.	Kisswhere.	Maybe.	Flashwit.	Mayfly.	Clasp.
Nep	Furrow.	Reliko.	Vastly	Blank.	Masan	Gilani.	‘Where’s	Nefarias	Bredd?’	he
demanded.
Sergeant	Tarr	tilted	his	head.	‘Captain?’
‘Where	is	he,	damn	you?’
‘There	is	no	Nefarias	Bredd,	sir.	We	made	him	up	–	on	the	march	to
Y’Ghatan.	Got	us	a	bad	loaf	of	bread.	Someone	called	it	nefarious.	We	thought
it	was	funny	–	like	something	Braven	Tooth	would’ve	made	up.’	He	shrugged.
‘But	I—’	Fiddler	turned	to	Hedge,	saw	the	man’s	blank	look.	‘Oh,	never
mind,’	he	sighed,	facing	his	soldiers	again.	‘All	of	you,	go	down	–	take
Sweetlard	and	Rumjugs	with	you.	I’ll…I’ll	be	down	shortly.’
He	watched	them	walk	away.	He	knew	their	thoughts	–	the	emptiness	now
overtaking	them.	Which	would	in	the	days	and	nights	ahead	slowly	fill	with
grief,	until	they	were	all	drowning.	Fiddler	looked	back	up	at	the	sky.	The	Jade
Strangers	looked	farther	away.	He	knew	that	was	impossible.	Too	soon	for	that.
Still…
A	faint	wind	swept	across	the	summit,	cool	and	dry.
‘Now,’	said	Hedge.
Fiddler	thought	he	heard	horses,	drawing	up,	and	then	three	figures	were
climbing	into	view.	Ghostly,	barely	visible	to	his	eyes	–	he	could	see	through
them	all.
Whiskeyjack.	Trotts.	Mallet.
‘Aw,	shit,’	said	Kalam,	kicking	at	a	discarded	helm.	It	spun,	rolled	down	the
hillside.
Whiskeyjack	regarded	him.	‘Got	something	to	say,	Assassin?’
And	the	man	suddenly	grinned.	‘It	stinks,	sir,	from	here	to	the	throne.’
The	ghost	nodded,	and	then	squinted	westward	for	a	moment	before
turning	to	Hedge.	‘Well	done,	soldier.	It	was	a	long	way	back.	You	ready	for	us
now?’
Fiddler	felt	something	crumble	inside	him.
Hedge	drew	off	his	tattered	leather	cap,	scratched	at	the	few	hairs	left	on
his	mottled	scalp.	‘That	depends,	sir.’
‘On	what?’	Whiskeyjack	demanded,	eyes	fixing	hard	on	the	sapper.
Hedge	glanced	over	at	Fiddler.	‘On	him,	sir.’


And	Fiddler	knew	what	he	had	to	say.	‘I	let	you	go	long	ago,	Hedge.’
‘Aye.	But	that	was	then	and	this	isn’t.	You	want	me	to	stay?	A	few	more
years,	maybe?	Till	it’s	your	time,	I	mean?’
If	he	spoke	at	all,	Fiddler	knew	that	he	would	lose	control.	So	he	simply
nodded.
Hedge	faced	Whiskeyjack.	‘Not	yet,	sir.	Besides,	I	was	talking	with	my
sergeants	just	the	other	day.	About	buying	us	a	bar,	back	in	Malaz	City.	Maybe
even	Smiley’s.’
Fiddler	shot	the	man	a	glare.	‘But	no	one	can	find	it,	Hedge.	Kellanved
went	and	hid	it.’
‘Kitty-corner	to	the	Deadhouse,	that’s	where	it	is.	Everyone	knows,	Fid.’
‘But	they	can’t	find	it,	Hedge!’
The	man	shrugged.	‘I	will.’
‘Fiddler,’	Whiskeyjack	said.	‘Pay	attention	now.	Our	time	is	almost	done
here	–	sun’s	soon	to	rise,	and	when	it	does,	we	will	have	left	this	world	for	the
last	time.’	He	gestured	and	Mallet	stepped	forward,	carrying	a	satchel.	He
crouched	down	and	removed	the	straps,	and	then	drew	out	a	fiddle.	Its	body
was	carved	in	swirling	Barghast	patterns.	Seeing	that,	Fiddler	looked	up	at
Trotts.	The	warrior	grinned,	showing	his	filed	teeth.
‘I	did	that,	Fid.	And	that	mistake	there,	up	near	the	neck,	that	was	Hedge’s
fault.	He	tugged	my	braid.	Blame	him.	I	do.’
Mallet	carefully	set	the	instrument	down,	placing	the	bow	beside	it.	The
healer	glanced	up,	almost	shyly.	‘We	all	had	a	hand	in	its	making,	Fid.	Us
Bridgeburners.’
‘Take	it,’	ordered	Whiskeyjack.	‘Fiddler,	you	were	the	best	of	us	all.	You
still	are.’
Fiddler	looked	over	at	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam,	saw	their	nods,	and	then	at
Hedge,	who	hesitated,	as	if	to	object,	and	then	simply	shrugged.	Fiddler	met
Whiskeyjack’s	ethereal	eyes.	‘Thank	you,	sir.’
The	ghost	then	surprised	him	by	stepping	forward,	reaching	down	and
touching	the	fiddle.	Straightening,	he	walked	past	them,	to	stand	facing	the
lowland	to	the	west.
Fiddler	stared	after	him,	frowning.
Sighing,	Hedge	spoke	low	at	his	side.	‘She’s	out	there,	sembled	now	–
they’re	keeping	their	distance.	They’re	not	sure	what’s	happened	here.	By	the
time	she	comes,	it’ll	be	too	late.’
‘Who?	By	the	time	who	comes?’
‘The	woman	he	loves,	Fid.	Korlat.	A	Tiste	Andii.’
Tiste	Andii.	Oh…no.


Hedge’s	grunt	was	strained	with	emotion.	‘Aye,	the	sergeant’s	luck	ain’t
never	been	good.	He’s	got	a	long	wait.’
But	wait	he	will.
Then	he	caught	a	blur	of	motion	from	a	nearby	jumble	of	boulders.	A
woman,	watching	them.
Fiddler	hugged	himself,	looked	over	once	more	at	Mallet	and	Trotts.	‘Take
care	of	him,’	he	whispered.
They	nodded.
And	then	Whiskeyjack	was	marching	past.	‘Time	to	leave,	you	two.’
Mallet	reached	down	and	touched	the	fiddle	before	turning	away.	Trotts
stepped	past	him,	squatted	and	did	the	same.
Then	they	were	down	over	the	edge	of	the	hill.
Moments	later,	Fiddler	heard	horses	–	but	in	the	gloom	he	could	not	see
his	friends	riding	away.

A	voice	spoke	beside	Cotillion.	‘Well	done.’
The	patron	god	of	assassins	looked	down	at	the	knives	still	in	his	hands.	‘I
don’t	like	failure.	Never	did,	Shadowthrone.’
‘Then,’	and	the	ethereal	form	at	his	side	giggled,	‘we’re	not	quite	finished,
are	we?’
‘Ah.	You	knew,	then.’
‘Of	course.	And	this	may	well	shock	you,	but	I	approve.’
Cotillion	turned	to	him	in	surprise.	‘I	knew	you	had	a	heart	in	there
somewhere.’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.	I	just	appreciate…symmetry.’
Together	they	turned	back	to	face	the	barrow	once	again,	but	now	the
ghosts	were	gone.
Shadowthrone	thumped	his	cane	on	the	ground.	‘Among	all	the	gods,’	he
said,	‘who	do	you	think	now	hates	us	the	most?’
‘The	ones	still	alive,	I	should	imagine.’
‘We’re	not	done	with	them	either.’
Cotillion	nodded	towards	the	barrow.	‘They	were	something,	weren’t
they?’
‘With	them	we	won	an	empire.’
‘I	sometimes	wonder	if	we	should	ever	have	given	it	up.’
‘Bloody	idealist.	We	needed	to	walk	away.	Sooner	or	later,	no	matter	how


much	you	put	into	what	you’ve	made,	you	have	to	turn	and	walk	away.’
‘Shall	we,	then?’
And	the	two	gods	set	out,	fading	shadows	as	the	dawn	began	to	awaken.
	
Toc	Younger	had	waited	astride	his	horse,	halfway	between	the	motionless
ranks	of	the	Guardians	and	Whiskeyjack	and	his	two	soldiers.	He	had	watched
the	distant	figures	gathering	on	the	barrow’s	gnarled	summit.	And	now	the
three	ghostly	riders	were	returning	the	way	they	had	come.
When	they	reached	him,	Whiskeyjack	waved	Mallet	and	Trotts	on	and	then
reined	in.
He	drew	his	mount	round,	to	face	the	barrow	one	last	time.
Toc	spoke.	‘That	was	some	squad	you	had	yourself	there,	sir.’
‘My	life	was	blessed	with	fortune.	It’s	time,’	he	said,	drawing	his	horse
round.	He	glanced	across	at	Toc.	‘Ready,	Bridgeburner?’
They	set	out	side	by	side.
And	then	Toc	shot	Whiskeyjack	a	startled	look.	‘But	I’m	not	a—’
‘You	say	something,	soldier?’
Mute,	Toc	shook	his	head.
Gods	below,	I	made	it.

In	the	luminescent	sky	high	above	the	plain,	Gu’Rull	sailed	on	the	currents,
wings	almost	motionless.	The	Shi’gal	Assassin	studied	the	world	far	below.
Scores	of	dragon	carcasses	were	strewn	round	the	barrow,	and	there,	leading
off	into	the	west	as	far	as	Gu’Rull’s	eyes	could	see,	a	road	of	devastation
almost	a	league	wide,	upon	which	were	littered	the	bodies	of	Eleint.	Hundreds
upon	hundreds.
The	Shi’gal	struggled	to	comprehend	the	Otataral	Dragon’s	ordeal.	The
flavours	that	rose	within	him	threatened	to	overwhelm	him.
I	still	taste	the	echoes	of	her	pain.
What	is	it	in	a	life	that	can	prove	so	defiant,	so	resilient	in	the	face	of	such
wilful	rage?	Korabas,	do	you	crouch	now	in	your	cave	–	gift	of	a	god	wounded
near	unto	death	–	closing	about	your	wounds,	your	sorrow,	as	if	in	the	folding
of	wings	you	could	make	the	world	beyond	vanish?	And	with	it	all	the	hate	and
venom,	and	all	that	so	assailed	you	in	your	so-few	moments	of	freedom?
Are	you	alone	once	more,	Korabas?


If	to	draw	close	to	you	would	not	kill	me	–	if	I	could	have	helped	you	in
those	blood-filled	skies,	upon	that	death-strewn	road	–	I	would	join	you	now.	To
bring	to	an	end	your	loneliness.
But	all	I	can	do	is	circle	these	skies.	Above	the	ones	who	summoned	you,
who	fought	to	free	a	god,	and	to	save	your	own	life.
Those	ones,	too,	I	do	not	understand.
These	humans	have	much	to	teach	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
I,	Gu’Rull,	Shi’gal	Assassin	of	Gunth’an	Wandering,	am	humbled	by	all
that	I	have	witnessed.	And	this	feeling,	so	strange,	so	new,	now	comes	to	me	in
the	sweetest	flavours	imaginable.
I	did	not	know.
	
Settling	the	last	stone	down	on	the	elongated	pile,	Icarium	brushed	dust	from
his	hands	and	slowly	straightened.
Ublala	–	with	Ralata	sitting	nearby	–	watched	the	warrior	walk	to	the	edge
of	the	hill,	watched	as	Icarium	dislodged	a	small	rock	and	sent	it	rolling	down
the	slope.	And	then	he	looked	back	at	the	barrow,	and	then	at	Ublala.	The
morning	was	bright	but	there	were	clouds	building	to	the	east	and	the	wind
carried	the	promise	of	rain.
‘It	is	as	you	said,	friend?’
Ublala	nodded.
Icarium	wiped	at	the	tears	still	streaming	down	his	face	from	when	he’d
wept	over	the	grave.	But	the	look	on	his	face	wasn’t	filled	with	grief	any	more.
Just	empty	now.	Lost.	‘Ublala,	is	this	all	there	is	of	me?’	He	gestured	vaguely.
‘Is	this	all	there	is	to	any	of	us?’
The	Toblakai	shrugged.	‘I	am	Ublala	Pung	and	that	is	all	I	ever	am,	or	was.
I	don’t	know	if	there’s	more.	I	never	do.’
Icarium	studied	the	grave	again.	‘He	died	defending	me.’
‘Yes.’
‘But	I	don’t	know	who	he	was!’
Ublala	shrugged	again.	There	was	no	shame	in	weeping	for	the	death	of	a
stranger.	Ublala	had	done	it	many	times.	He	reached	down,	picked	up	a
potsherd,	examined	the	sky-blue	glaze.	‘Pretty,’	he	said	under	his	breath,
tucking	it	behind	his	belt.
Icarium	collected	up	his	weapons,	and	then	faced	north.	‘I	feel	close	this
time,	Ublala.’
Ublala	thought	to	ask	close	to	what,	but	already	he	was	confused,	and	so	he
put	the	question	away.	He	didn’t	think	he’d	ever	go	back	to	find	it.	It	was	where


all	the	other	troubling	things	went,	never	to	be	gone	back	to,	ever.
‘I	am	glad	you	found	a	woman	to	love,	friend,’	Icarium	said.
The	giant	warrior	smiled	over	at	Ralata	and	received	a	stony	stare	in
return,	reminding	him	how	she’d	said	she	liked	it	better	when	it	was	just	the
two	of	them.	But	she	was	a	woman	and	once	he	sexed	her	again,	everything
would	be	all	right.	That’s	how	it	worked.
When	Icarium	set	out,	Ublala	collected	up	the	useful	sack	he’d	found,
shouldered	it,	and	went	to	join	the	warrior.
Ralata	caught	up	a	short	time	later,	just	before	Icarium	happened	to	glance
at	the	pottery	fragment	Ublala	had	taken	out	to	admire	again,	and	then	halted	to
face	one	last	time	the	low	hill	they’d	left	behind.	Icarium	frowned	and	was
silent.
Ublala	was	ready	to	turn	away	when	Icarium	said,	‘Friend,	I	have
remembered	something.’


Epilogue	I

Perched	upon	the	stones	of	a	bridge
The	soldiers	had	the	eyes	of	ravens
Their	weapons	hung	black	as	talons
Their	eyes	gloried	in	the	smoke	of	murder
To	the	shock	of	iron-heeled	sticks
I	drew	closer	in	the	cripple’s	bitter	patience
And	before	them	I	finally	tottered
Grasping	to	capture	my	elusive	breath
With	the	cockerel	and	swift	of	their	knowing
They	watched	and	waited	for	me
‘I	have	come,’	said	I,	‘from	this	road’s	birth,
I	have	come,’	said	I,	‘seeking	the	best	in	us.’
The	sergeant	among	them	had	red	in	his	beard
Glistening	wet	as	he	showed	his	teeth
‘There	are	few	roads	on	this	earth,’	said	he,
‘that	will	lead	you	to	the	best	in	us,	old	one.’
‘But	you	have	seen	all	the	tracks	of	men,’	said	I
‘And	where	the	mothers	and	children	have	fled
Before	your	advance.	Is	there	naught	among	them
That	you	might	set	an	old	man	upon?’
The	surgeon	among	this	rook	had	bones
Under	her	vellum	skin	like	a	maker	of	limbs
‘Old	one,’	said	she,	‘I	have	dwelt
In	the	heat	of	chests,	among	heart	and	lungs,


And	slid	like	a	serpent	between	muscles,
Swum	the	currents	of	slowing	blood,
And	all	these	roads	lead	into	the	darkness
Where	the	broken	will	at	last	rest.
Dare	say	I,’	she	went	on,	‘there	is	no
Place	waiting	inside	where	you	might	find
In	slithering	exploration	of	mysteries
All	that	you	so	boldly	call	the	best	in	us.’
And	then	the	man	with	shovel	and	pick,
Who	could	raise	fort	and	berm	in	a	day
Timbered	of	thought	and	measured	in	all	things
Set	the	gauge	of	his	eyes	upon	the	sun
And	said,	‘Look	not	in	temples	proud,
Or	in	the	palaces	of	the	rich	highborn,
We	have	razed	each	in	turn	in	our	time
To	melt	gold	from	icon	and	shrine
And	of	all	the	treasures	weeping	in	fire
There	was	naught	but	the	smile	of	greed
And	the	thick	power	of	possession.
Know	then	this:	all	roads	before	you
From	the	beginning	of	the	ages	past
And	those	now	upon	us,	yield	no	clue
To	the	secret	equations	you	seek,
For	each	was	built	of	bone	and	blood
And	the	backs	of	the	slave	did	bow
To	the	laboured	sentence	of	a	life
In	chains	of	dire	need	and	little	worth.
All	that	we	build	one	day	echoes	hollow.’
‘Where	then,	good	soldiers,	will	I


Ever	find	all	that	is	best	in	us?
If	not	in	flesh	or	in	temple	bound
Or	wretched	road	of	cobbled	stone?’
‘Could	we	answer	you,’	said	the	sergeant,
‘This	blood	would	cease	its	fatal	flow,
And	my	surgeon	could	seal	wounds	with	a	touch,
All	labours	will	ease	before	temple	and	road,
Could	we	answer	you,’	said	the	sergeant,
‘Crows	might	starve	in	our	company
And	our	talons	we	would	cast	in	bogs
For	the	gods	to	fight	over	as	they	will.
But	we	have	not	found	in	all	our	years
The	best	in	us,	until	this	very	day.’
‘How	so?’	asked	I,	so	lost	now	on	the	road,
And	said	he,	‘Upon	this	bridge	we	sat
Since	the	dawn’s	bleak	arrival,
Our	perch	of	despond	so	weary	and	worn,
And	you	we	watched,	at	first	a	speck
Upon	the	strife-painted	horizon
So	tortured	in	your	tread	as	to	soak	our	faces
In	the	wonder	of	your	will,	yet	on	you	came
Upon	two	sticks	so	bowed	in	weight
Seeking,	say	you,	the	best	in	us
And	now	we	have	seen	in	your	gift
The	best	in	us,	and	were	treasures	at	hand
We	would	set	them	humbly	before	you,
A	man	without	feet	who	walked	a	road.’
Now,	soldiers	with	kind	words	are	rare
Enough,	and	I	welcomed	their	regard


As	I	moved	among	them,	’cross	the	bridge
And	onward	to	the	long	road	beyond
I	travel	seeking	the	best	in	us
And	one	day	it	shall	rise	before	me
To	bless	this	journey	of	mine,	and	this	road
I	began	upon	long	ago	shall	now	end
Where	waits	for	all	the	best	in	us.
Where	Ravens	Perch	
Avas	Didion	Flicker
	
	had	emerged	from	the	city,
and	after	five	days	of	hard	labour	the	vast	trenches,	revetments	and	redoubts
had	been	transformed	into	long	barrows.	Three	such	barrows	now	stood	to
mark	the	Battle	of	Blessed	Gift,	where	the	Letherii,	Bolkando,	Gilk	and	Teblor
had	fought	the	army	of	Brother	Diligence;	and	at	the	foot	of	the	fissured	ruin
of	the	Spire,	three	large	barrows	of	raw	earth	rose	to	commemorate	the	fallen
Imass,	Jaghut,	K’Chain	Che’Malle	and	Kolansii,	with	one	smaller	mound
holding	the	remains	of	two	Malazans.	And	it	was	at	this	last	place	that	figures
now	gathered.
Remaining	at	a	respectful	distance,	close	to	the	now-abandoned	work
camps	of	the	diggers,	Lord	Nimander	stood	with	Korlat	and	his	uncle,	Silchas
Ruin.	Along	with	Skintick	and	Desra,	and	Apsal’ara,	they	had	accompanied	the
troops	commanded	by	Captain	Fiddler	on	this	long,	tedious	journey	to	the
coast.
It	was	not	hard	to	mourn	the	death	of	brave	men	and	women.	Nor	even
reptilian	soldiers	bred	for	war.	There	was	no	shame	in	the	tears	that	ran	from
Nimander ’s	face	when	he	came	to	learn	of	the	slaughter	of	the	Imass	in	the
moment	of	their	rebirth.	The	survivors	had	departed	some	days	ago	now,	into
the	north	–	seeking	their	leader,	he	had	been	told,	whose	fate	after	the	battle
remained	unknown.
And	the	brother	of	his	father,	standing	now	at	his	side,	had	grieved	over	the
destruction	of	an	old	friend,	Tulas	Shorn,	in	the	draconic	War	of	Awakening.
The	sword	strapped	to	Silchas	Ruin’s	hip	still	held	bound	to	its	blade	the	souls
of	three	surviving	Eleint	from	Kurald	Emurlahn.	The	details	of	this	binding
THIS	HAD,	IN	THE	END,	BEEN	A	WAR	OF	LIBERATION.	KOLANSII	CITIZENS


were	still	unclear	to	Nimander,	and	his	uncle	seemed	to	be	a	man	of	few	words.
More	rain	threatened	from	the	east,	and	Nimander	watched	the	dark	grey
wall	of	clouds	drawing	ever	closer.	He	glanced	over	at	Korlat.	Something	had
awakened	her	own	grief,	and	it	had	struck	deep	in	the	Sister	of	Cold	Nights.
And	as	the	distant	figures	now	closed	about	the	small	barrow,	he	saw	her	take	a
half-step	forward	and	then	halt.
‘Korlat,’	said	Nimander.
She	caught	herself,	turned	to	him	wretched	eyes.	‘Lord?’
‘It	is	not	our	place	to	intrude	upon	them	at	this	time.’
‘I	understand.’
‘But	I	believe	it	is	nevertheless	fitting	that	we	convey	our	respect	and
honour	in	some	fashion.	I	wonder,	could	I	ask	you,	Sister	of	Cold	Nights,	to
represent	us	by	attending	their	ceremonies	on	our	behalf?’
Something	was	released	from	her	face,	suddenly	softening	it,	awakening
once	more	her	extraordinary	beauty.	She	bowed	to	him.	‘Lord,	I	shall	go	at
once.’
Nimander	watched	her	make	her	way	towards	the	ceremony.
Beside	him,	Silchas	Ruin	said,	‘She	was	ever	favoured	by	your	father,
Lord.’
‘Silchas,	she	gave	her	heart	to	a	human,	a	Malazan,	who	died	in	the
conquest	of	Black	Coral.’
The	white-skinned	man	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘He	must
have	been…formidable.’
‘I	imagine	so.’
‘My	experience	with	these	Malazans	has	thus	far	been	brief	–	I	recognize
the	uniforms	from	my…attempt	on	Letheras.	To	say	that	they	have	earned	my
respect	is	something	of	an	understatement.	I	would	not	willingly	cross	them
again.’
Nimander	looked	at	his	uncle,	wondering.
	
Tentative,	weakened	by	a	sudden	feeling	of	temerity,	Korlat’s	steps	slowed
when	she	was	still	forty	or	more	paces	away	from	the	gathering	of	dignitaries.
Off	to	her	left,	assembled	in	formation,	stood	the	ranks	of	Malazans	–	the	army
known	by	the	name	of	Bonehunters.	Beyond	them,	arrayed	on	a	higher	vantage
point,	were	the	far	more	numerous	ranks	of	the	second	Malazan	army,	the
Host.
To	her	right,	where	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	encamped,	the	Ve’Gath	and
K’ell	Hunters	had	formed	up	in	a	facing	line,	the	Matron	foremost	among


them.	A	human	woman	was	walking	out	from	that	formation,	on	a	route	that
would	intersect	Korlat’s	own.
Perhaps	she	would	find	strength	in	that	company.	Failing	that,	she	doubted
she	would	manage	to	get	much	closer.	Her	heart	felt	laid	bare	–	she	had
believed	her	days	of	deepest	grief	were	past.	But	seeing	those	Malazan	marines
–	seeing	Hedge,	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	–	had	cut	her	open	all	over	again.	When
they	had	seen	her	–	when	at	last	Nimander	had	judged	it	time	to	approach	that
fated	barrow	–	they	had	but	nodded	in	greeting,	and	she	could	admit	now	that
the	distance	they	had	maintained	since	had	hurt	her	in	some	way.
Perhaps	they	thought	that	she	had	been	intent	on	stealing	their	sergeant
away	from	them.	Perhaps,	even,	they	blamed	her	for	his	death.	She	did	not
know,	and	now	she	had	been	commanded	to	join	them	once	more,	at	this	place
where	two	Malazan	marines	were	interred.
She	had	selected	a	polished	jet	stone	from	her	modest	collection	–
knowing	how	the	humans	would	smile	at	that,	these	small	leather	bags	the	Tiste
Andii	always	carried,	with	a	stone	to	mark	each	gift	of	the	owner ’s	heart.	She
possessed	but	a	few.	One	for	Anomander	Rake,	one	for	her	fallen	brother,
Orfantal;	one	for	Spinnock	Durav	–	who	cared	nothing	for	her	low	birth	–	and
one	for	Whiskeyjack.	Soon,	she	had	begun	to	suspect,	she	would	set	out	to	find
two	more.	For	Queen	Yan	Tovis.	For	Lord	Nimander.
These	stones	were	not	to	be	surrendered.
To	give	one	up	was	to	set	down	a	love,	to	walk	away	from	it	for	evermore.
But	it	had	been	foolish,	finding	a	stone	for	a	man	whose	love	she	had
known	for	so	brief	a	time.	He	had	never	felt	the	way	she	had	–	he	could	not
have	–	she	had	gone	too	far,	had	given	up	too	much.	They’d	not	possessed	the
time	to	forge	something	eternal.
Then	he	had	died,	and	it	was	as	if	he	had	been	the	one	doing	the	walking
away,	leaving	his	own	stone	behind	–	the	dull,	lifeless	thing	that	was	her	heart.
‘The	dead	forget	us.’	So	said	Gallan.	‘The	dead	forget	us,	and	this	is	why	we
fear	death.’
She	had	thought…there	on	that	distant	barrow	now	called	the	Awakening…
a	whisper	of	something,	a	presence	arriving	old	and	achingly	familiar.	As	if	he
had	looked	upon	her	–	as	if	she	had	felt	his	eyes	–	no,	you	foolish	woman.	It
was	his	soldiers	gathered	on	that	hill.	If	he	was	there	at	all,	it	was	for	them.
Her	thoughts	were	interrupted	by	the	arrival	of	the	woman	from	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle	ranks.	Korlat	had	come	to	a	halt	with	her	memories,	and
now	she	looked	on	this	stranger,	offering	a	rueful	half-smile.	‘My	courage
fails,’	she	said.
The	human	woman,	plain,	past	her	youth,	studied	her	for	a	moment.	‘What


is	that,’	she	asked,	‘in	your	hand?’
Korlat	thought	to	hide	it	away	again,	but	then	sighed	and	showed	the	black
stone.	‘I	thought…a	gift.	For	the	barrow.	I	have	seen	such	practices	before…’
‘Did	you	know	them?’
After	a	moment,	Korlat	turned	to	retrace	her	steps.	‘No.	I	am	sorry.	I	did
not.’
But	the	woman	took	her	arm.	‘Walk	with	me,	then,	and	I	will	tell	you	about
Mortal	Sword	Gesler	and	Shield	Anvil	Stormy.’
‘I	was	presumptuous—’
‘I	doubt	it,’	the	woman	replied.	‘But	you	can	hold	on	to	your	tale,	if	you
like.	I	am	Kalyth.’
Korlat	gave	her	own	name.
‘They	won	free	the	heart	of	the	Crippled	God,’	said	Kalyth	as	they	drew
closer.	‘But	that	is	not	how	I	remember	them.	They	were	stubborn.	They
snapped	at	each	other	like…like	dogs.	They	mocked	their	own	titles,	told	each
other	lies.	They	told	me	lies,	too.	Wild	stories	of	their	adventures.	Ships	on
seas	of	fire.	Dragons	and	headless	Tiste	Andii	–	whatever	they	are…’
Korlat	turned	at	that,	thought	to	speak,	then	decided	to	remain	silent.
‘In	the	time	I	knew	them,’	Kalyth	went	on,	not	noticing	her	companion’s
reaction,	‘they	pretty	much	argued	without	surcease.	Even	in	the	middle	of
terrible	battle	they	bickered	back	and	forth.	And	all	the	while,	these	two
Malazans,	they	did	all	that	needed	to	be	done.	Each	and	every	time.’	She	nodded
towards	the	Spire.
‘Up	there,’	she	said,	‘they	climbed	through	walls	of	fire,	and	at	that
moment	I	realized	that	all	those	wild	tales	they	told	me	–	they	were	probably	all
true.
‘Stormy	died	on	the	stairs,	keeping	a	wild	witch	away	from	the	heart.
Those	flames	he	could	not	in	the	end	defeat.	Gesler	–	we	are	told	–	died	saving
the	life	of	a	dog.’	She	pointed.	‘That	one,	Korlat,	the	one	guarding	the	barrow’s
entrance.	See	how	they	await	me	now?	It	is	because	I	am	the	only	one	the	dog
will	let	pass	into	the	chamber.	I	dragged	Gesler ’s	body	in	there	myself.’
When	the	woman	at	her	side	stopped	talking	then,	Korlat	looked	down	and
saw	how	her	face	had	crumpled	–	with	her	own	words,	as	if	their	meaning	only
now	struck	true.	She	very	nearly	collapsed	–	would	have	done	so	if	not	for
Korlat’s	arm,	now	flexing	to	take	the	woman’s	weight.
Kalyth	righted	herself.	‘I	–	I	am	sorry.	I	did	not	mean	–	oh,	look	at	me…’
‘I	have	you,’	Korlat	said.
They	went	on.
This	side	of	the	small	round	barrow,	the	group	of	humans	parted	before


them,	as	many	eyes	on	Korlat	as	on	Kalyth.	She	saw	Hedge	there,	along	with
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam,	and	the	grey-bearded	man	she	now	knew	to	be	Fiddler,
Whiskeyjack’s	closest	friend.	Their	expressions	were	flat,	and	she	weathered
their	regards	with	as	much	dignity	as	she	could	muster.	Near	them	stood	a
mother	and	daughter,	the	latter,	though	little	more	than	a	child,	pulling	hard	on
a	stick	of	rustleaf	–	and	on	this	one’s	other	side	stood	an	older	woman	doing
the	same	with	her	own,	beside	a	handsome	young	man.	She	saw	a	White	Face
Barghast	chieftain	grinning	openly	at	herself	–	his	desires	made	plain	in	the
amused	glint	in	his	eyes.
Just	beyond	Whiskeyjack’s	old	squad	stood	a	man	and	a	woman	–	possibly
siblings	–	in	the	company	of	an	older	man	weighed	down	in	the	robes	of	a
High	Priest,	the	gold	silk	patterned	in	the	sinewy	forms	of	serpents.	Behind	this
group	stood	a	man	picking	at	his	teeth	and	beside	him,	seated	on	a	stool,	was
an	artist,	sketching	frantically	on	bleached	lambskin	with	a	wedge	of	charcoal.
At	his	feet	was	a	bloated	toad.
Arrayed	in	a	semicircle	around	this	group	was	an	honour	guard	of	some
sort,	facing	outward,	but	as	Korlat	and	Kalyth	approached	they	smartly	turned
round,	gauntleted	hands	lifting	to	their	chests	in	salute.	And	she	saw	that	they
were	the	soldiers	who	had	fought	at	the	Awakening.
Kalyth	leaned	close	against	Korlat	and	disengaged	her	arm.	‘I	believe	there
are	burial	gifts,’	she	said,	nodding	to	a	soldier ’s	chest	waiting	beside	the
barrow	entrance.	‘I	will	take	it	inside.’	She	looked	up	at	Korlat.	‘I	will	take
your	gift,	Korlat,	if	you	like.’
She	held	up	her	hand,	opened	it	to	look	at	the	gleaming	stone	in	her	hand.
There	was	a	commotion	from	Whiskeyjack’s	squad	and	Korlat	faced	them,
ready	to	retreat	–	to	flee	this	place.
‘Captain!’	snapped	the	plain	woman	behind	the	marines.
Korlat	saw	that	the	squad	had	reached	for	their	weapons,	swords	now	half
drawn.	At	that	woman’s	bark	they	had	halted	their	motions,	and	Korlat	stared,
frightened	and	dismayed	by	what	she	saw	in	their	faces.
The	plain	woman	stepped	round	to	place	herself	between	Korlat	and	the
squad.	Standing	directly	in	front	of	Fiddler,	she	said,	‘What	in	Hood’s	name	do
you	think	you’re	doing?’
‘Forgive	us,	Adjunct,’	Fiddler	replied,	eyes	still	on	Korlat.
‘Explain	yourselves!	High	Mage!	Kalam	–	one	of	you,	speak!’
‘Your	pardon,	Adjunct,’	Fiddler	ground	out.	‘I	would	ask	the	Tiste	Andii	a
question.’
‘By	your	threat,’	snapped	the	Adjunct,	turning	to	Korlat,	‘should	she	refuse
the	courtesy,	I	will	defend	her	decision.’


Korlat	shook	her	head,	drawing	a	deep,	fortifying	breath.	‘No,	thank	you,
Adjunct.	This	soldier	was	Whiskeyjack’s	closest	friend.	If	he	would	ask	me
something,	I	shall	answer	as	best	I	am	able.’
The	Adjunct	stepped	back.
Fiddler ’s	gaze	fell	to	the	stone	in	her	hand.	‘You	mean	to	give	that	up?	Did
you	know	Gesler	and	Stormy?’
Korlat	shook	her	head.
‘Then…why?’
Her	thoughts	fumbled,	words	failing	her,	and	her	eyes	fell	from	Fiddler ’s.
‘Is	it	his?’
She	looked	back	up,	startled.	Behind	Fiddler	the	marines	of	the	squad
stared	–	but	now	she	saw	that	what	she	had	taken	for	rage	in	their	expressions
was	in	fact	something	else,	something	far	more	complicated.
‘Korlat,	is	it	his?’
She	faced	the	barrow	entrance.	‘They	were	marines,’	she	said	in	a	weak
voice.	‘I	thought…a	measure	of	respect.’
‘If	you	give	that	up,	you	will	destroy	him.’
She	met	Fiddler ’s	eyes,	and	at	last	saw	the	raw	anguish	in	them.	‘I
thought…he	left	me.’
‘No,	he	hasn’t.’
Hedge	spoke.	‘He	only	found	love	once,	Korlat,	and	we’re	looking	at	the
woman	he	chose.	If	you	give	up	that	stone,	we’ll	cut	you	to	pieces	and	leave
your	bones	scattered	across	half	this	world.’
Korlat	stepped	close	to	Fiddler.	‘How	do	you	know	this?’
His	eyes	flickered,	were	suddenly	wet.	‘On	the	hill.	His	ghost	–	he	saw	you
on	the	plain.	He	–	he	couldn’t	take	his	eyes	off	you.	I	see	now	–	you	thought…
through	Hood’s	Gate,	the	old	loves	forgotten,	drifting	away.	Maybe	you	even
began	questioning	if	it	ever	existed	at	all,	or	meant	what	you	thought	it	meant.
Listen,	they’ve	told	me	the	whole	story.	Korlat,	he’s	waiting	for	you.	And	if	he
has	to,	he’ll	wait	for	ever.’
Her	hand	closed	about	the	stone,	and	all	at	once	the	tension	fell	away,	and
she	looked	past	Fiddler	to	the	soldiers	of	the	squad.	‘You	would	have	killed	me
for	forsaking	him,’	she	said.	‘I	am	reminded	of	the	man	he	was	–	to	have	won
such	loyalty	among	his	friends.’
Hedge	said,	‘You’ve	got	centuries	–	well,	who	knows	how	long?	Don’t
think	he	expects	you	to	be	celibate	or	anything	–	we	ain’t	expectin’	that	neither.
But	that	stone	–	we	know	what	it	means	to	your	kind.	You	just	shocked	us,	that’s
all.’
Korlat	slowly	turned	to	the	barrow.	‘Then	I	should	leave	here,	for	I	have


nothing	for	these	fallen	soldiers.’
The	Adjunct	surprised	her	by	stepping	forward	and	taking	her	arm.	She	led
her	to	the	chest.	‘Open	it,’	she	invited.
Wondering,	Korlat	crouched	down,	lifted	back	the	lid.	The	chest	was
empty.	Baffled,	she	straightened,	met	the	Adjunct’s	eyes.
And	saw	a	wry	smile.	‘They	were	marines.	Everything	of	value	they’ve
already	left	behind.	In	fact,	Korlat	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	if	Gesler	and	Stormy
could,	they’d	be	the	first	ones	to	loot	their	own	grave	goods.’
‘And	then	bitch	about	how	cheap	we	were,’	Fiddler	said	behind	them.
‘We	are	here	to	see	the	barrow	sealed,’	said	the	Adjunct.	‘And,	if	we	can,
get	that	Wickan	demon	to	yield,	before	it	starves	to	death.’
	
A	thousand	paces	away	from	this	scene,	a	gathering	of	Jaghut	warriors	stood
facing	a	barrow	raised	to	embrace	the	fallen	Imass.
They	were	silent,	as	befitted	the	moment	–	a	moment	filled	with	respect	and
that	bone-deep	loss	for	comrades	fallen	in	a	battle	shared,	a	time	lived	to	the
hilt	–	but	for	all	that,	it	was	a	silence	riotous	with	irony.
After	a	time,	a	small	creature	looking	like	a	burst	pillow	of	rotted	straw
came	up	to	lie	down	at	the	feet	of	one	of	the	Jaghut.	From	the	filthy	tangle	out
came	a	lolling	tongue.
One	of	the	warriors	spoke,	‘Varandas,	our	commander	never	tires	of	pets.’
‘Clearly,’	replied	another,	‘he	has	missed	us.’
‘Or	does	the	once-Lord	of	Death	return	with	alarming	appetites?’
‘You	raise	disquiet	in	me,’	said	Sanad.
‘You	promised	to	never	speak	of	that	–	oh,	you	mean	my	query	on
appetites.	Humblest	apologies,	Sanad.’
‘She	lies,	Gathras,	this	I	swear!’
‘The	only	one	lying	here	is	the	dog,	surely!’
The	warriors	all	stared	down	at	the	creature.
And	then	roared	with	laughter.	That	went	on,	and	on.
Until	Hood	whirled	round.	‘Will	you	all	shut	up!’
In	the	sudden	silence	that	followed,	someone	snorted.
When	Hood	reached	for	the	sword	at	his	hip,	his	warriors	all	found
somewhere	else	to	look.	Until	the	ratty	dog	rose	and	lifted	a	leg.
Weathering	their	raucous	laughter	and	the	steady	stream	tapping	his	ankle,
Hood	slowly	closed	his	eyes.	This	is	why	Jaghut	chose	to	live	alone.
	


Brys	Beddict	turned	at	the	sound	of	distant	laughter.	Squinted	at	the	Jaghut
warriors	standing	at	the	Imass	barrow.	‘Errant’s	nudge,	but	that’s	hardly	fitting,
is	it?’
Aranict	frowned.	‘Theirs	is	an	odd	humour,	my	love.	I	do	not	think
disrespect	is	the	intention.	Indifference	would	have	managed	that	succinctly
enough.	Instead,	they	walked	out	there,	and	requested	solitude.’
‘Ah,’	murmured	Brys,	taking	her	hand,	‘it	is,	I	believe,	time.’
He	led	her	towards	the	Adjunct,	where	Queen	Abrastal,	Felash	and	Spax
now	joined	Tavore.	Just	beyond	them,	Aranict	saw,	was	Ganoes	–	not	one	to
join	in	these	moments,	yet	never	far	from	his	sister.
Brys	spoke	as	soon	as	they	drew	near.	‘There	was	some	tension	at	the
barrow,	Adjunct.	I	trust	all	is	well?’
‘A	misunderstanding,	Prince.’
‘The	cattledog—’
‘No	–	once	the	barrow	was	sealed,	the	beast	joined	Destriant	Kalyth,	and	at
her	side	I	believe	it	will	stay	until	its	life	is	done.’
‘There	is	word,’	said	Abrastal,	‘of	a	tribe	on	the	plateau	north	of
Estobanse,	remote	kin	of	Kalyth’s	Elan.	Bhederin	herders.’
‘They	will	journey	alone?’	Brys	asked	in	concern.
‘With	only	a	few	hundred	K’ell	Hunters	as	escort,	yes,’	replied	the
Bolkando	queen.
‘Prince	Brys,’	said	Felash,	‘your	brother	the	king’s	fleet	is	only	days
away.’	Her	languid	gaze	flicked	to	Aranict.
‘I’ve	not	yet	told	him,’	Aranict	replied,	lighting	a	stick.	‘Beloved,’	she	now
said,	‘your	brother	is	with	that	fleet.’
‘Tehol	hates	the	sea	–	are	you	certain	of	that?’
But	Felash	was	coughing,	her	eyes	wide	on	the	prince.	‘Excuse	me,	King
Tehol	hates	the	sea?	But	–	rather,	I	mean,	forgive	me.	Bugg	–	his—	Oh,	never
mind.	My	pardon,	Prince	Brys.’
Abrastal	was	regarding	her	daughter	sidelong.	‘You’re	as	plump	as	you
ever	were,’	she	said.	‘Smoke	more,	girl!’
‘Yes,	mother.	At	once.’
‘And	where	is	your	handmaid?’
‘Down	with	Captain	Elalle,	Mother,	shipshaping	a	boat	or	whatever	they
call	it.’
Brys	spoke	to	Tavore.	‘Adjunct…there	were	times	when	I…well,	I	doubted
you.	This	seemed	so	vast	–	what	you	sought—’
‘Forgive	me	for	interrupting,	Highness,’	Tavore	replied.	‘The	deeds	that
have	won	us	this	victory	belong	to	every	soul	on	this	journey,	and	it	has	been	a


rather	long	journey.	A	sword’s	tip	is	nothing	without	the	length	of	solid	steel
backing	it.’	She	hesitated.	‘There	have	been	many	doubts	to	weather,	but	this	is
a	weakness	we	all	share.’
‘You	said	you	would	be	unwitnessed.	Yet,	that	proved	untrue,	did	it	not?’
She	shrugged.	‘For	each	moment	recorded	in	the	annals	of	history,	how
many	more	are	lost?	Highness,	we	shall	be	forgotten.	All	of	this,	it	will	fade
into	the	darkness,	as	all	things	will.	I	do	not	regret	that.’
‘In	Letheras,’	said	Brys,	‘there	will	be	a	statue	of	bronze	raised	in	your
likeness.	I	know,	few	will	know	what	it	means,	what	it	signifies.	But	I	will,
Adjunct.’
‘A	statue?’	Tavore	cocked	her	head,	as	if	considering	the	notion.	‘Will	I	be
beautiful?’	she	asked,	and	before	Brys	could	answer	she	formally	bowed
before	him	and	then	Queen	Abrastal.	‘I	thank	you	both,	for	making	my	cause
your	own.	For	your	losses,	I	grieve.	Goodbye,	Highnesses.’
They	let	her	depart.
And	only	Aranict	heard	Boys	say,	‘Of	course	you	will.’
	
‘A	Hood-damned	dog,’	muttered	Deadsmell	as	the	marines	and	heavies	walked
from	the	barrow.
‘That’s	Gesler	for	you,’	replied	Throatslitter.	‘Brainless	to	the	end.’
‘He	wouldn’t	have	liked	things	without	Stormy,	anyway,’	observed	Balm.
Bottle	considered	this	brief	exchange,	and	then	nodded	to	himself.	There’s
a	point	when	there’s	nothing	left	to	say.	When	every	word	does	nothing	more
than	stir	the	ashes.	He	glanced	over	at	Smiles,	and	then	Koryk,	and	finally
Tarr.	We	finally	took	some	losses,	our	squad.	Cuttle	–	never	thought	he’d	die,
not	like	that.	In	some	whore’s	bed,	maybe.	Corabb	–	gods	below,	how	that	man
could	fight.
Limp	says	he	saw	him,	there	at	the	end	–	he’d	blown	his	knee	again,	was
looking	over	at	the	Crippled	God	–	and	there	was	Corabb,	his	face	all	lit	with
the	glory	of	his	last	stand	over	the	chained	body	of	a	god.
Really,	what	could	be	more	perfect	than	that?
Well	done,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.
‘Heard	she’s	retiring	us,’	ventured	Sinter.	‘Priest’s	paying	us	out	–	a
damned	fortune	for	each	and	every	one	of	us.’
‘Where’en	ne	faareden?	Eh?	War	bit	ana	dem?’
‘To	the	families	if	they	got	any,	Nep.	That’s	how	it’s	done.	Stand	or	fall,
you	still	get	paid.’
‘G’han	nered	pah	vreem!’


Sinter	made	a	startled	sound,	and	beside	her	Kisswhere	leaned	forward	to
shoot	Nep	Furrow	a	shocked	look.
‘Really,	Nep?’	Kisswhere	asked.
‘Nepel!’
‘Gods	below,’	Sinter	whispered.	‘I	never…’
Reaching	the	road,	they	came	within	sight	of	the	Bonehunter	regulars.
Glancing	back,	Bottle	saw	the	Adjunct	on	her	way	up,	with	Banaschar	at	her
side.	Behind	these	two	walked	Lostara	Yil,	Henar	Vygulf,	the	three	Fists,
Skanarow	and	Ruthan	Gudd.
‘She	wants	a	last	word	with	them,’	Tarr	said,	evidently	noticing	Bottle’s
backward	look.	‘But	we’re	not	going	to	be	there	for	that.	Between	her	and	them
–	you	others	all	hear	that?	We	walk	through.’
‘We	walk	through,’	Hellian	echoed.	‘Crump,	go	back	and	help	Limp	–	he’s
lagging.	Let’s	just	get	this	over	with.’
They	strode	into	the	loose	ranks	of	the	regulars.
‘Wish	we	had	it	as	easy	as	you	did!’	someone	shouted.
Koryk	yelled	back,	‘You	never	would’ve	hacked	it,	Ffan!’
‘Hey,	Hellian,	found	me	this	big	spider	here	–	wanna	see	it?’
‘Call	it	whatever	you	want,	soldier,	it’s	still	small.’
Bottle	shook	his	head.	Aw,	fuck.	They’re	soldiers	–	what	did	you	expect?
	
It	was	dark	by	the	time	Korlat	returned	to	the	small	Tiste	Andii	camp.	They
were	seated	round	a	fire,	like	hunters	out	from	the	wood,	or	harvesters	at	day’s
end.	A	fresh	rain	had	cleansed	the	air,	but	its	passage	had	been	brief	and	now
overhead	tracked	the	Jade	Strangers	–	as	she	had	learned	to	call	them	–	casting
down	a	green	light.
Nimander	looked	up,	made	room	for	her	on	the	Kolansii	workbench	they
had	found	in	one	of	the	work	camps.	‘We	were	wondering	if	you	would	ever
return,’	he	said.
She	drew	her	cloak	about	her	shoulders.	‘I	watched	the	Bonehunters
depart,’	she	said.
‘Have	ships	arrived,	then?’
Korlat	shook	her	head.	‘They’re	moving	to	a	camp	at	this	end	of	the
Estobanse	Valley.	The	Adjunct	spoke	to	her	regulars.	She	thanked	them.	That
and	nothing	more.	She	was	the	last	to	leave	–	she	bade	the	others	go	ahead,
even	her	brother,	and	she	walked	alone.	There	was	something…something…’
She	shook	her	head.	‘It	broke	my	heart.’
A	voice	spoke	from	the	darkness	behind	her.	‘She	does	that,	does	Tavore.’


They	turned	to	see	Fiddler	stepping	into	the	firelight,	carrying	something
wrapped	in	skins.	Behind,	arrayed	but	drawing	no	closer,	Korlat	saw	the	rest	of
Whiskeyjack’s	old	squad.	They	seemed	to	be	muttering	to	each	other	in	low
tones,	and	then	Quick	Ben	pointed	up	past	the	road,	and	in	a	sharp	voice	said,
‘There,	that	hilltop.	Not	too	far,	but	far	enough.	Well?’	He	looked	at	his
companions,	and	both	men	grunted	their	assent.
Returning	her	attention	to	Fiddler,	she	saw	that	he	had	been	watching,	and
now	he	nodded,	faced	Korlat.	‘It’s	not	far	–	in	this	air	it’ll	carry	just	fine.’
‘I’m	sorry,’	said	Korlat,	‘what	are	you	doing?’
‘See	the	hill	they	indicated,	other	side	of	the	road?	Go	there,	Korlat.’
‘Excuse	me?’
Nimander	made	to	rise,	but	a	look	from	Fiddler	stilled	him.	‘Just	her,’	he
said.	‘I’ll	take	that	stump	there	–	mind,	sir?’
Silchas	Ruin,	seated	on	that	stump,	rose,	shaking	his	head	and	then
gesturing	an	invitation.
Fiddler	went	over	and	settled	down	on	it.	He	began	unwrapping	the	object
on	his	lap,	and	then	looked	up	and	met	Korlat’s	eyes.	‘Why	are	you	still	here?’
‘What	are	you	going	to	do?’	she	demanded.
He	sighed.	‘Said	it	was	the	last	time	for	him.	Said	it	like	it	was	an	order.
Well,	he	should	know	by	now,	we’re	lousy	with	taking	orders.’	He	slipped
away	the	final	layer	of	skin,	revealing	a	fiddle	and	bow.	‘Go	on	now,	Korlat.
Oh,	and	tell	him,	this	one’s	called	“My	Love	Waits”.	I	won’t	take	credit	for	it	–
one	of	Fisher ’s.’	Then	he	looked	round	at	the	gathered	Tiste	Andii.	‘There’s
another	one	that	I	can	slide	into	it	easily	enough,	a	bit	sadder	but	not	too	sad.
It’s	from	Anomandaris.	You’ll	forgive	me,	please,	if	I	get	the	title	wrong	–	it’s
been	a	long	time.	“Gallan’s	Hope”?	Does	that	sound	right	to	you	all?…	Seems
it	does.’
Korlat	backed	away,	felt	a	hand	touch	her	shoulder.	It	was	Hedge.	‘Hilltop,
Korlat.	Fid’s	gonna	call	him	back.	One	more	time.	But	listen,	if	it’s	too	much,
walk	the	other	way,	or	stay	off	the	hill.	He’ll	see	you	anyway	–	we’re	doing	that
bit	no	matter	what.	For	him.’
He	would	have	babbled	on,	but	she	moved	past	him.
Eyes	on	the	hill	on	the	other	side	of	the	road.
Behind	her,	the	strings	drew	a	song	into	the	night	air.
When	she	reached	the	road	and	saw	her	beloved	standing	on	the	hill	before
her,	Korlat	broke	into	a	run.


Epilogue	II

	tide	out	many	of	the	Imass
had	ventured	on	to	the	flats	to	collect	shellfish.	Off	to	one	side	the	twins	played
with	Absi,	and	the	sound	of	the	boy’s	laughter	reached	up	to	the	shelf	of	stone
where	sat	Udinaas.
He	heard	footsteps	coming	down	the	trail	nearby	and	turned	to	see	Onos
and	Hetan.	They	were	carrying	reed	baskets	to	join	in	the	harvest.	Udinaas	saw
Onos	pause,	look	out	towards	the	children.
‘Relax,	Onos,’	Udinaas	said.	‘I’ll	keep	an	eye	on	them.’
The	warrior	smiled.	Hetan	took	his	hand	to	lead	him	down.
Reclined	on	a	high	shelf	of	limestone	above	Udinaas,	Ryadd	said,	‘Stop
worrying,	Father.	It’ll	wear	you	out.’
From	one	of	the	caves	higher	up	the	climb	behind	them,	there	drifted	out
the	sound	of	a	crying	baby.	Poor	Seren.	That’s	one	cranky	baby	she	has	there.
‘We’re	safe,’	Ryadd	said.	‘And	if	some	damned	mob	of	vicious	humans
shows	up,	well,	they’ll	have	Kilava,	Onrack,	Onos	Toolan	and	me	to	deal	with.’
‘I	know,’	Udinaas	replied.	He	rubbed	and	massaged	his	hands.	The	aches
were	coming	back.	Maybe	it	was	time	to	try	that	foul	medicine	Lera	Epar	kept
offering	him.	Ah,	it’s	just	years	of	cold	water.	Sinks	in.	That’s	all.
Glancing	over,	he	grunted	to	his	feet.
‘Father?’
‘It’s	all	right,’	he	said.	‘The	twins	have	buried	Absi	up	to	his	neck.	Those
girls	need	a	good	whipping.’
‘You’ve	never	whipped	a	child	in	your	life.’
‘How	would	you	know?	Well.	Maybe	I	haven’t,	but	the	threat	still	works.’
Ryadd	sat	up,	looked	down	on	Udinaas	with	his	young,	sun-darkened	face.
Squinting,	Udinaas	said,	‘In	the	bright	sun,	I	see	your	mother	in	your	smile.’
‘She	smiled?’
‘Once,	I	think,	but	I	won’t	take	credit	for	it.’
Udinaas	set	off	down	to	the	beach.
Absi	had	clambered	free	and	tackled	one	of	the	girls	and	was	now	tickling
her	into	a	helpless	state.	Trouble	passed,	but	he	continued	anyway.
Out	in	the	sea	beyond	the	small	bay,	whales	broached	the	surface,	sending
FOR	ONCE	THE	SEAS	WERE	CALM	ON	THE	BEACH	BELOW,	AND	WITH	THE


geysers	into	the	air,	announcing	the	coming	of	summer.
	
The	rider	paused	on	the	road,	glancing	down	at	the	untended	turnips	growing
wild	in	the	ditch,	and	after	a	moment	he	kicked	his	horse	onward.	The	sun	was
warm	on	his	face	as	he	rode	west	along	Itko	Kan’s	coastal	track.
In	his	wake,	in	the	lengthening	shadows,	two	figures	took	form.	Moments
later	huge	hounds	appeared.	One	bent	to	sniff	at	the	turnips,	and	then	turned
away.
The	figure	with	the	cane	sighed.	‘Satisfied?’
The	other	one	nodded.
‘And	you	imagine	only	the	best	now,	don’t	you?’
‘I	see	no	reason	why	not.’
Shadowthrone	snorted.	‘You	wouldn’t.’
Cotillion	glanced	over	at	him.	‘Why	not,	then?’
‘Old	friend,	what	is	this?	Do	you	still	hold	to	a	belief	in	hope?’
‘Do	I	believe	in	hope?	I	do.’
‘And	faith?’
‘And	faith.	Yes.	I	believe	in	faith.’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time,	and	then	Shadowthrone	looked	over	at	the
Hounds,	and	cocked	his	head.	‘Hungry,	are	we?’	Bestial	heads	lifted,	eyes
fixing	on	him.
‘Don’t	even	think	it,	Ammeanas!’
‘Why	not?	Remind	that	fop	on	the	throne	who’s	really	running	this	game!’
‘Not	yet.’
‘Where	is	your	impatience?	Your	desire	for	vengeance?	What	sort	of
Patron	of	Assassins	are	you?’
Cotillion	nodded	down	the	road.	‘Leave	them	alone.	Not	here,	not	now.’
Shadowthrone	sighed	a	second	time.	‘Misery	guts.’
The	shadows	dissolved,	and	a	moment	later	were	gone,	leaving	nothing	but
an	empty	road.

The	sun	set,	dusk	closing	in.	He’d	yet	to	pass	any	traffic	on	this	day	and	that
was	a	little	troubling,	but	he	rode	on.	Having	never	been	this	way	before,	he
almost	missed	the	side	track	leading	down	to	the	settlement	on	the	shelf	of	land
above	a	crescent	beach,	but	he	caught	the	smell	of	woodsmoke	in	time	to	slow


up	his	mount.
The	beast	carefully	picked	its	way	down	the	narrow	path.
Reaching	the	bottom,	now	in	darkness,	he	reined	in.
Before	him	was	a	small	fishing	village,	though	it	looked	mostly
abandoned.	He	saw	a	cottage	nearby,	stone-walled	and	thatch-roofed,	with	a
stone	chimney	from	which	smoke	drifted	in	a	thin	grey	stream.	An	area	of	land
had	been	cleared	above	and	behind	it	where	vegetables	had	been	planted,	and
working	still	in	the	growing	gloom	was	a	lone	figure.
Crokus	dismounted,	hobbled	the	horse	outside	an	abandoned	shack	to	his
left,	and	made	his	way	forward.
It	should	not	have	taken	long,	yet	by	the	time	he	reached	the	verge	of	the
garden	the	moon	overhead	was	bright,	its	effervescent	light	glistening	along
her	limbs,	the	sheen	of	her	black	hair	like	silk	as	she	bent	to	gather	up	her
tools.
He	stepped	between	rows	of	bushy	plants.
And	she	turned.	Watched	him	walk	up	to	her.
Crokus	took	her	face	in	his	hands,	studied	her	dark	eyes.	‘I	never	liked	that
story,’	he	said.
‘Which	one?’	she	asked.
‘The	lover…lost	on	the	moon,	tending	her	garden	alone.’
‘It’s	not	quite	like	that,	the	story	I	mean.’
He	shrugged.	‘It’s	what	I	remember	from	it.	That,	and	the	look	in	your	eyes
when	you	told	it	to	me.	I	was	reminded	of	that	look	a	moment	ago.’
‘And	now?’
‘I	think,’	he	said,	‘the	sadness	just	went	away,	Apsalar.’
‘I	think,’	she	replied,	‘you	are	right.’
	
The	boy	watched	the	old	man	come	down	to	the	pier	as	he	did	almost	every	day
whenever	the	boy	happened	to	be	lingering	along	the	waterfront	at	around	this
time,	when	the	morning	was	stretching	towards	noon	and	all	the	fish	were
asleep.	Day	after	day,	he’d	seen	the	old	man	carrying	that	silly	bucket	with	the
rope	tied	to	the	handle	for	the	fish	he	never	caught	–	and	the	fishing	rod	in	his
other	hand	would	most	likely	snap	in	half	at	a	crab’s	tug.
Bored,	as	he	was	every	day,	the	boy	ambled	down	to	stand	on	the	edge	of
the	pier,	to	look	out	on	the	few	ships	that	bothered	sheltering	in	the	harbour	of
Malaz	City.	So	he	could	dream	of	the	worlds	beyond,	where	things	exciting	and
magical	happened	and	heroes	won	the	day	and	villains	bled	out	in	the	dirt.
He	knew	he	was	nobody	yet.	Not	old	enough	for	anything.	Trapped	here


where	nothing	ever	happened	and	never	would.	But	one	day	he	would	face	the
whole	world	and,	why,	they’d	all	know	his	face,	they	would.	He	glanced	over
to	where	the	old	man	was	sitting	down,	legs	over	the	edge,	working	bait	on	to
the	hook.
‘You	won’t	never	catch	nothing,’	the	boy	said,	idly	pulling	at	a	rusty
mooring	ring.	‘You	sleep	in	too	late,	every	day.’
The	old	man	squinted	at	the	hook,	adjusted	the	foul-smelling	bait.	‘Late
nights,’	he	said.
‘Where?	Where	you	go?	I	know	all	the	taverns	and	bars	in	the	whole
harbour	district.’
‘Do	you	now?’
‘All	of	them	–	where	d’you	drink,	then?’
‘Who	said	anything	about	drinking,	lad?	No,	what	I	do	is	play.’
The	boy	drew	slightly	closer.	‘Play	what?’
‘Fiddle.’
‘You	play	at	a	bar?’
‘I	do,	aye.’
‘Which	one?’
‘Smiley’s.’	The	old	man	ran	out	the	hook	on	its	weighted	line	and	leaned
over	to	watch	it	plummet	into	the	depths.
The	boy	studied	him	suspiciously.	‘I	ain’t	no	fool,’	he	said.
The	old	man	glanced	over,	nodded.	‘I	can	see	that.’
‘Smiley’s	doesn’t	exist.	It’s	just	a	story.	A	haunting.	People	hearing	things	–
voices	in	the	air,	tankards	clunking.	Laughing.’
‘That’s	all	they	hear	in	the	night	air,	lad?’
The	boy	licked	his	suddenly	dry	lips.	‘No.	They	hear…fiddling.	Music.
Sad,	awful	sad.’
‘Hey	now,	not	all	of	it’s	sad.	Though	maybe	that’s	what	leaks	out.	But,’	and
he	grinned	at	the	boy,	‘I	wouldn’t	know	that,	would	I?’
‘You’re	like	all	the	rest,’	the	boy	said,	facing	out	to	sea	once	again.
‘Who	are	all	the	rest,	then?’
‘Making	up	stories	and	stuff.	Lying	–	it’s	all	anybody	ever	does	here,
’cause	they	got	nothing	else	to	do.	They’re	all	wasting	their	lives.	Just	like	you.
You	won’t	catch	any	fish	ever.’	And	he	waited,	to	gauge	the	effect	of	his	words.
‘Who	said	I	was	after	fish?’	the	old	man	asked,	offering	up	an
exaggeratedly	sly	expression.
‘What,	crabs?	Wrong	pier.	It’s	too	deep	here.	It	just	goes	down	and	down
and	for	ever	down!’
‘Aye,	and	what’s	down	there,	at	the	very	bottom?	You	ever	hear	that	story?’


The	boy	was	incredulous	and	more	than	a	little	offended.	‘Do	I	look	two
years	old?	That	demon,	the	old	emperor ’s	demon!	But	you	can’t	fish	for	it!’
‘Why	not?’
‘Well	–	well,	your	rod	would	break!	Look	at	it!’
‘Looks	can	be	deceiving,	lad.	Remember	that.’
The	boy	snorted.	He	was	always	getting	advice.	‘I	won’t	be	like	you,	old
man.	I’m	going	to	be	a	soldier	when	I	grow	up.	I’m	going	to	leave	this	place.
For	ever.	A	soldier,	fighting	wars	and	getting	rich	and	fighting	and	saving
people	and	all	that!’
The	old	man	seemed	about	to	say	one	thing,	stopped,	and	instead	said,
‘Well,	the	world	always	needs	more	soldiers.’
The	boy	counted	this	as	a	victory,	the	first	of	what	he	knew	would	be	a
lifetime	of	victories.	When	he	was	grown	up.	And	famous.	‘That	demon	bites
and	it’ll	eat	you	up.	And	even	if	you	catch	it	and	drag	it	up,	how	will	you	kill	it?
Nobody	can	kill	it!’
‘Never	said	anything	about	killing	it,’	the	old	man	replied.	‘Just	been	a
while	since	we	last	talked.’
‘Ha!	Hah!	Hahaha!’
	
High	above	the	harbour,	the	winds	were	brisk	coming	in	from	the	sea.	They
struck	and	spun	the	old	battered	weathervane	on	its	pole,	as	if	the	demon	knew
not	where	to	turn.
A	sudden	gust	took	it	then,	wrenched	it	hard	around,	and	with	a	solid	squeal
the	weathervane	jammed.	The	wind	buffeted	it,	but	decades	of	decay	and	rust
seemed	proof	to	its	will,	and	the	weathervane	but	quivered.
Like	a	thing	in	chains.
	
This	ends	the	Tenth	and	Final	Tale	of	The	
Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen


	

And	now	the	page	before	us	blurs.	
An	age	is	done.	The	book	must	close.	
We	are	abandoned	to	history.	
Raise	high	one	more	time	the	tattered	standard	of	the	Fallen.	See	through	the
drifting	smoke	to	the	dark	stains	upon	the	fabric.	
This	is	the	blood	of	our	lives,	this	is	the	payment	of	our	deeds,	all	soon	to	be	
forgotten.	
We	were	never	what	people	could	be.	
We	were	only	what	we	were.
Remember	us.


Appendix
DRAMATIS	PERSONAE
(Characters	appearing	in	both	Dust	of	Dreams	and	The	Crippled	God)
The	Malazans
Adjunct	Tavore	Paran
High	Mage	Quick	Ben
Fist	Keneb
Fist	Blistig
Captain	Lostara	Yil
Banaschar
Fist	Kindly
Captain	Skanarow
Fist	Faradan	Sort
Captain	Ruthan	Gudd
Lieutenant	Pores
Captain	Raband
Sinn
Grub
The	Squads
Captain	Fiddler
Sergeant	Tarr
Koryk
Smiles
Bottle
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas
Cuttle
Sergeant	Gesler
Corporal	Stormy
Shortnose
Flashwit
Mayfly
Sergeant	Cord


Corporal	Shard
Limp
Ebron
Crump
Sergeant	Hellian
Corporal	Touchy
Corporal	Brethless
Maybe
Sergeant	Balm
Corporal	Deadsmell
Throatslitter
Widdershins
Sergeant	Urb
Corporal	Clasp
Masan	Gilani
Saltlick
Burnt	Rope
Lap	Twirl
Sad
Sergeant	Sinter
Corporal	Pravalak	Rim
Honey
Lookback
Sergeant	Badan	Gruk
Corporal	Ruffle
Nep	Furrow
Reliko
Vastly	Blank
Corporal	Kisswhere
Skulldeath
Drawfirst
Sergeant	Gaunt-Eye
Corporal	Rib
Wimble	Thrup
Dead	Hedge
Alchemist	Bavedict
Sergeant	Sweetlard
Sergeant	Rumjugs


The	Host
Ganoes	Paran,	High	Fist	and	Master	of	the	Deck
High	Mage	Noto	Boil
Fist	Rythe	Bude
Imperial	Artist	Ormulogun
Warleader	Mathok
Bodyguard	T’morol
Gumble
Skintick
Desra
Nemanda
Kalam	Mekhar
The	Khundryl
Warleader	Gall
Hanavat	(Gall’s	wife)
Shelemasa
Jastara
The	Perish	Grey	Helms
Mortal	Sword	Krughava
Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian
Destriant	Run’Thurvian
Commander	Erekala
The	Letherii
King	Tehol
Queen	Janath
Brys	Beddict
Atri-Ceda	Aranict
Henar	Vygulf
Shurq	Elalle
Skorgen	Kaban
Ublala	Pung
The	Bolkando


Queen	Abrastal
Spultatha
Felash,	Fourteenth	Daughter
Handmaid
Silk	Warchief-Spax
The	Barghast
Hetan
Stavi
Storii
Absi
Skincut	Ralata
Awl	Torrent
Setoc	of	the	Wolves
The	Snake
Rutt
Held
Badalle
Saddic
Yan	Tovis	(Twilight)
Yedan	Derryg	(the	Watch)
Witch	Pully
Witch	Skwish
Brevity
Pithy
Sharl
Corporal	Nithe
Sergeant	Cellows
Withal
The	Imass
Onrack	T’emlava
Kilava	Onass
Ulshun	Pral


The	T’Lan	Imass
Warleader	Onos	T’oolan
Bitterspring	(Lera	Epar)
Kalt	Urmanal
Rystalle	Ev
Ulag	Togtil
Nom	Kala
Urugal	the	Woven
Thenik	the	Shattered
Beroke	Soft	Voice
Kahlb	the	Silent	Hunter
Halad	the	Giant
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle
J’an	Sentinel	Bre’nigan
K’ell	Hunter	Sag’Churok
Matron	Gunth	Mach
Shi’gal	Assassin	Gu’Rull
Destriant	Kalyth	(Elan)
The	Tiste	Andii
Nimander	Golit
Spinnock	Durav
Korlat
Dathenar	Fandoris	Prazek	Gowl
Skintick
Desra
Nemanda
Sandalath	Drukorlat
Silchas	Ruin
The	Jaghut:	Among	The	Fourteen
Bolirium
Gedoran
Daryft
Gathras


Sanad
Varandas
Haut
Suvalas
Aimanan	Hood
The	Forkrul	Assail:	The	Lawful	Inquisitors
Reverence
Serenity
Equity
Diligence
Abide
Aloft
Calm
Belie
Freedom
Grave
The	Watered:	The	Tiers	Of	Lesser	Assail
Amiss
Exigent
Hestand
Festian
Kessgan
Trissin
Melest
Haggraf
The	Tiste	Liosan
Kadagar	Fant
Aparal	Forge
Iparth	Erule
Gaelar	Throe
Eldat	Pressen
Others


Rud	Elalle	(Ryadd	Eleis)
Telorast
Curdle
The	Errant	(Errastas)
Knuckles	(Sechul	Lath)
Kilmandaros
Mael
Olar	Ethil
Udinaas	Bent
Roach
	
Shadowthrone	(Ammeanas)
Cotillion
Draconus
K’rul
Kaminsod	(the	Crippled	God)
Karsa	Orlong
Silanah
Apsal’ara
Tulas	Shorn
D’rek,	the	Worm	of	Autumn
Gillimada	(Teblor	Leader)
Faint
Precious	Thimble
Amby	Bole
Gruntle
Mappo
Icarium
Korabas,	the	Orataral	Dragon
Absi
Spultatha


Acknowledgments
My	deepest	gratitude	is	accorded	to	the	following	people.	My	advance	readers
for	their	timely	commentary	on	this	manuscript	which	I	foisted	on	them	at
short	notice	and	probably	inopportune	times:	A.	P.	Canavan,	William	Hunter,
Hazel	Hunter,	Baria	Ahmed,	and	Bowen	Thomas-Lundin.	And	the	staff	of	The
Norway	Inn	in	Perranarworthal,	the	Mango	Tango	and	Costa	Coffee	in
Falmouth,	all	of	whom	participated	in	their	own	way	in	the	writing	of	this
novel.
Also,	a	heartfelt	thank-you	to	all	my	readers,	who	(presumably)	have
stayed	with	me	through	to	this,	the	tenth	and	final	novel	of	the	‘Malazan	Book
of	the	Fallen.’	I	have	enjoyed	our	long	conversation.	What’s	three	and	a	half
million	words	between	friends?
I	could	well	ask	the	same	question	of	my	publishers.	Thank	you	for	your
patience	and	support.	The	unruly	beast	is	done,	and	I	can	hear	your	relieved
sighs.
Finally,	my	love	and	gratitude	to	my	wife,	Clare	Thomas,	who	suffered
through	the	ordeal	of	not	just	this	novel,	but	all	those	that	preceded	it.	I	think	it
was	your	mother	who	warned	you	that	marrying	a	writer	was	a	dicey
proposition….


	

A	graduate	of	the	Iowa	Writers’	Workshop,	archaeologist	and	anthropologist
Steven	Erikson	recently	moved	back	to	the	United	Kingdom	from	Canada	and
now	lives	in	Cornwall.	His	début	fantasy	novel,	Gardens	of	the	Moon,	marked
the	opening	chapter	in	the	epic	‘Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen’	sequence,	which
has	been	hailed	as	one	of	the	most	significant	works	of	fantasy	of	this
millennium.
	
To	find	out	more,	visit	www.stevenerikson.com	and	www.malazanempire.com.


Also	by	Steven	Erikson
GARDENS	OF	THE	MOON
DEADHOUSE	GATES
MEMORIES	OF	ICE
HOUSE	OF	CHAINS
MIDNIGHT	TIDES
THE	BONEHUNTERS
REAPER’S	GALE
TOLL	THE	HOUNDS
DUST	OF	DREAMS

