GARDENS	OF
THE	MOON
BOOK	ONE	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


Gardens	of
the	Moon


This	 is	 a	 work	 of	 fiction.	 All	 of	 the	 characters,	 organizations,	 and	 events	 portrayed	 in	 this	 novel	 are	 either
products	of	the	author's	imagination	or	are	used	fictitiously.
GARDENS	OF	THE	M OON:	BOOK	ONE	OF	THE	M ALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

Copyright	©	1999	by	Steven	Erikson
Maps	by	Neil	Gower
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	in	1999	by	Bantam	Books,	a	division	of	Transworld	Publishers
All	rights	reserved.
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor®	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
The	Library	of	Congress	has	catalogued	the	hardcover	edition	as	follows:
Erikson,	Steven.
				Gardens	of	the	moon	/	Steven	Erikson.
								p.	cm.
				“A	Tom	Doherty	Associates	Book.”
				ISBN-13:	978-0-7653-1001-9
				ISBN-10:	0-7653-1001-5
				1.	Fantasy	fiction.	I.	Title.
				PR9199.4.E745	G37	2004
				823'.92—dc22
																																																																																																																												2004301319
ISBN-13:	978-0-7653-2288-3	(trade	paperback)
ISBN-10:	0-7653-2288-9	(trade	paperback)
0	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2
eISBN	9781429926584


This	novel	is	dedicated	to
I.	C.	ESSLEM ONT
worlds	to	conquer	worlds	to	share


Acknowledgments
No	novel	is	ever	written	in	isolation.	The	author	wishes	to	thank	the	following	for
their	support	over	the	years:	Clare	Thomas,	Bowen,	Mark	Paxton-MacRae,	David
Keck,	Courtney,	Ryan,	Chris	and	Rick,	Mireille	Theriacelt,	Dennis	Valdron,	Keith
Addison,	Susan,	David	and	Harriet,	Clare	and	David	Thomas	Jr,	Chris	Rodell,
Patrick	Carroll,	Kate	Peach,	Peter	Knowlson,	Rune,	Kent	and	Val	and	the	kids,	my
tireless	agent	Patrick	Walsh,	and	Simon	Taylor,	one	terrific	editor.




Dramatis	Personae
The	Malazan	Empire
ONEARM'S	HOST
Tattersail,	Cadre	Sorceress,	2nd	Army,	a	reader	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons
Hairlock,	Cadre	Mage,	2nd	Army,	an	unpleasant	rival	of	Tayschrenn
Calot,	Cadre	Mage,	2nd	Army,	Tattersail's	lover
Toc	 the	Younger,	 scout,	 2nd	 Army,	 a	 Claw	 agent	 badly	 scarred	 at	 the	 Siege	 of
Pale
THE	BRIDGEBURNERS
Sergeant	Whiskeyjack,	9th	Squad,	past	commander	of	the	2nd	Army
Corporal	Kalam,	9th	Squad,	an	ex-Claw	from	Seven	Cities
Quick	Ben,	9th	Squad,	a	Seven	Cities	Mage
Sorry,	9th	Squad,	a	deadly	killer	in	the	guise	of	a	young	girl
Hedge,	9th	Squad,	a	sapper
Fiddler,	9th	Squad,	a	sapper
Trotts,	9th	Squad,	a	Barghast	warrior
Mallet,	9th	Squad,	the	squad	healer
Sergeant	Antsy,	7th	Squad
Picker,	7th	Squad
THE	IMPERIAL	COMMAND
Ganoes	Stabro	Paran,	a	noble-born	officer	in	the	Malazan	Empire
Dujek	Onearm,	High	Fist,	Malazan	Armies,	Genabackis	Campaign
Tayschrenn,	High	Mage	to	the	Empress
Bellurdan,	High	Mage	to	the	Empress


Nightchill,	High	Sorceress	to	the	Empress
A'Karonys,	High	Mage	to	the	Empress
Lorn,	Adjunct	to	the	Empress
Topper,	Commander	of	the	Claw
Empress	Laseen,	Ruler	of	the	Malazan	Empire
HOUSE	PARAN	(UNTA)
Tavore,	Ganoes'	sister	(middle-child)
Felisin,	Ganoes'	youngest	sister
Gamet,	House	Guard	and	veteran
IN	THE	EMPEROR'S	TIME
Emperor	Kellanved,	the	founder	of	the	Empire,	assassinated	by	Laseen
Dancer,	the	Emperor's	chief	adviser,	assassinated	by	Laseen
Surly,	Laseen's	old	name	when	Commander	of	the	Claw
Dassem	Ultor,	the	First	Sword	of	Empire,	killed	outside	Y'ghatan,	Seven	Cities
Toc	(the	Elder),	disappeared	in	Laseen's	purges	of	the	Old	Guard

In	Darujhistan
THE	PHOENIX	INN	REGULARS
Kruppe,	a	man	of	false	modesty
Crokus	Younghand,	a	young	thief
Rallick	Nom,	an	assassin	in	the	Guild
Murillio,	a	courtier
Coll,	a	drunk
Meese,	a	regular
Irilta,	a	regular
Scurve,	the	barman
Sulty,	a	serving	woman
Chert,	an	unlucky	bully


THE	T'ORRUD	CABAL
Baruk,	a	High	Alchemist
Derudan,	a	Witch	of	Tennes
Mammot,	a	High	Priest	of	D'riss	and	eminent	scholar,	uncle	to	Crokus
Travale,	a	pious	soldier	of	the	Cabal
Tholis,	a	High	Mage
Parald,	a	High	Mage
THE	COUNCIL
Turban	Orr,	a	powerful	councilman	and	Simtal's	lover
Lim,	an	ally	of	Turban	Orr
Simtal,	Lady	of	Simtal	Estate
Estraysian	D'Arle,	a	rival	of	Turban	Orr
Challice	D'Arle,	his	daughter
THE	GUILD	OF	ASSASSINS
Vorcan,	Mistress	of	the	Guild	(also	known	as	the	Master	of	Assassins)
Ocelot,	Rallick	Nom's	Clan	Leader
Talo	Krafar,	an	assassin	of	Jurrig	Denatte's	Clan
Krute	of	Talient,	an	agent	of	the	Guild
ALSO	IN	THE	CITY
The	Eel,	a	rumoured	master-spy
Circle	Breaker,	an	agent	of	the	Eel
Vildrom,	a	city	guard
Captain	Stillis,	Captain	of	Guard,	Simtal	Estate

Further	Players
THE	TISTE	ANDII
Anomander	Rake,	Lord	of	Moon's	Spawn,	Son	of	Darkness,	Knight	of	Darkness
Serrat,	second-in-command	to	Rake


Korlat,	a	night-hunter	and	blood-kin	to	Serrat
Orfantal,	a	night-hunter
Horult,	a	night-hunter
THE	T'LAN	IMASS
Logros,	Commander	of	the	T'lan	Imass	Clans	serving	the	Malazan	Empire
Onos	T'oolan,	a	clanless	warrior
Pran	Chole,	a	Bonecaster	(shaman)	of	the	Kron	T'lan	Imass
Kig	Aven,	a	Clan	Leader
OTHERS
Crone,	a	Great	Raven	and	servant	to	Anomander	Rake
Silanah,	an	Eleint	and	companion	to	Anomander	Rake
Raest,	a	Jaghut	Tyrant
K'rul,	an	Elder	God,	the	Maker	of	Paths
Caladan	Brood,	the	warlord,	opposing	the	Malazan	armies	in	the	North	Campaign
Kallor,	Brood's	second-in-command
Prince	K'azz	D'Avore,	Commander	of	the	Crimson	Guard
Jorrick	Sharplance,	a	Crimson	Guard	officer
Cowl,	a	High	Mage	in	the	Crimson	Guard
Corporal	Blues,	Sixth	Blade	of	the	Crimson	Guard
Fingers,	Sixth	Blade	of	the	Crimson	Guard
The	Hound	Baran,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
The	Hound	Blind,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
The	Hound	Gear,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
The	Hound	Rood,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
The	Hound	Shan,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
The	Hound	Doan,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
The	Hound	Ganrod,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Shadowthrone/Ammanas,	Ruler	of	the	Warren	of	Shadow
The	Rope/Cotillion,	Companion	of	Shadowthrone	and	Patron	of	Assassins
Icarium,	Builder	of	the	Wheel	of	Ages	in	Darujhistan
Mappo,	Icarium's	companion
The	Pannion	Seer,	a	Prophet	Tyrant	ruling	the	Pannion	Domin


Now	these	ashes	have	grown	cold,	we	open	the	old	book.
These	oil-stained	pages	recount	the	tales	of	the	Fallen,
a	frayed	empire,	words	without	warmth.	The	hearth
has	ebbed,	its	gleam	and	life's	sparks	are	but	memories
against	dimming	eyes	–	what	cast	my	mind,	what	hue	my
thoughts	as	I	open	the	Book	of	the	Fallen
and	breathe	deep	the	scent	of	history?
Listen,	then,	to	these	words	carried	on	that	breath.
These	tales	are	the	tales	of	us	all,	again	yet	again.
We	are	history	relived	and	that	is	all,	without	end	that	is	all.


	

The	Emperor	is	dead!
So	too	his	right	hand—now	cold,	now	severed!
But	mark	these	dying	shadows,
twinned	and	flowing	bloody	and	beaten,
down	and	away	from	mortal	sight	.	.	.
From	sceptre's	rule	dismissed,
from	gild	candelabra	the	light	now	fled,
from	a	hearth	ringed	in	hard	jewels,
seven	years	this	warmth	has	bled	.	.	.
	

The	Emperor	is	dead.
So	too	his	master'd	companion,	the	rope	cut	clean.
But	mark	this	burgeoning	return—
faltering	dark,	the	tattered	shroud—
embracing	children	in	Empire's	dying	light.
Hear	now	the	dirge	faint	reprised,
before	the	sun's	fall,	this	day	spills	red
on	buckled	earth,	and	in	obsidian	eyes
vengeance	chimes	seven	times	.	.	.
CALL	TO	SHADOW	(I.I.	1–18)
FELISIN	(B.	1146)


Prologue


1154th	Year	of	Burn's	Sleep
96th	Year	of	the	Malazan	Empire
The	Last	Year	of	Emperor	Kellanved's	Reign
The	 stains	 of	 rust	 seemed	 to	 map	 blood	 seas	 on	 the	 black,	 pocked	 surface	 of
Mock's	Vane.	A	century	old,	it	squatted	on	the	point	of	an	old	pike	that	had	been
bolted	to	the	outer	top	of	the	Hold's	wall.	Monstrous	and	misshapen,	it	had	been
cold-hammered	into	the	form	of	a	winged	demon,	teeth	bared	in	a	leering	grin,	and
was	tugged	and	buffeted	in	squealing	protest	with	every	gust	of	wind.
The	 winds	 were	 contrary	 the	 day	 columns	 of	 smoke	 rose	 over	 the	 Mouse
Quarter	of	Malaz	City.	The	Vane's	silence	announced	the	sudden	falling-off	of	the
sea	 breeze	 that	 came	 clambering	 over	 the	 ragged	 walls	 of	 Mock's	 Hold,	 then	 it
creaked	 back	 into	 life	 as	 the	 hot,	 spark-scattered	 and	 smoke-filled	 breath	 of	 the
Mouse	Quarter	reached	across	the	city	to	sweep	the	promontory's	heights.
Ganoes	 Stabro	 Paran	 of	 the	 House	 of	 Paran	 stood	 on	 tiptoe	 to	 see	 over	 the
merlon.	Behind	him	rose	Mock's	Hold,	once	capital	of	the	Empire	but	now,	since
the	mainland	had	been	conquered,	relegated	once	more	to	a	Fist's	holding.	To	his
left	rose	the	pike	and	its	wayward	trophy.
For	Ganoes,	the	ancient	fortification	overlooking	the	city	was	too	familiar	to
be	of	interest.	This	visit	was	his	third	in	as	many	years;	he'd	long	ago	explored	the
courtyard	 with	 its	 heaved	 cobblestones,	 the	 Old	 Keep—now	 a	 stable,	 its	 upper
floor	home	to	pigeons	and	swallows	and	bats—and	the	citadel	where	even	now
his	 father	 negotiated	 the	 island	 export	 tithe	 with	 the	 harbor	 officials.	 In	 the	 last
instance,	of	course,	a	goodly	portion	was	out	of	bounds,	even	for	a	son	of	a	noble
house;	 for	 it	 was	 in	 the	 citadel	 that	 the	 Fist	 had	 his	 residence,	 and	 in	 the	 inner
chambers	that	such	affairs	of	the	Empire	as	concerned	this	island	were	conducted.
Mock's	Hold	forgotten	behind	him,	Ganoes'	attention	was	on	the	tattered	city
below,	and	the	riots	that	ran	through	the	Mouse,	its	poorest	quarter.	Mock's	Hold
stood	atop	a	cliff.	The	higher	land	of	the	Pinnacle	was	reached	by	a	switch-back
staircase	 carved	 into	 the	 limestone	 of	 the	 cliff	 wall.	 The	 drop	 to	 the	 city	 below
was	eighty	armspans	or	more,	with	the	Hold's	battered	wall	adding	still	another
six.	The	Mouse	was	at	the	city's	inland	edge,	an	uneven	spreading	of	hovels	and
overgrown	tiers	cut	in	half	by	the	silt-heavy	river	that	crawled	toward	the	harbor.
With	 most	 of	 Malaz	City	between	Ganoes'	position	and	the	riots,	it	was	hard	to
make	out	any	detail,	beyond	the	growing	pillars	of	black	smoke.
It	was	midday,	but	the	flash	and	thundering	concussion	of	magery	made	the	air


seem	dark	and	heavy.
Armor	clanking,	a	soldier	appeared	along	the	wall	near	him.	The	man	leaned
vambraced	 forearms	 on	 the	 battlement,	 the	 scabbard	 of	 his	 longsword	 scraping
against	 the	 stones.	 “Glad	 for	 your	 pure	 blood,	 eh?”	 he	 asked,	 gray	 eyes	 on	 the
smoldering	city	below.
The	 boy	 studied	 the	 soldier.	 He	 already	 knew	 the	 complete	 regimental
accoutrements	of	the	Imperial	Army,	and	the	man	at	his	side	was	a	commander	in
the	Third—one	of	the	Emperor's	own,	an	élite.	On	his	dark	gray	shoulder-cloak
was	a	silver	brooch:	a	bridge	of	stone,	lit	by	ruby	flames.	A	Bridgeburner.
High-ranking	 soldiers	 and	 officials	 of	 the	 Empire	 commonly	 passed	 through
Mock's	Hold.	The	island	of	Malaz	remained	a	vital	port	of	call,	especially	now
that	 the	 Korel	 wars	 to	 the	 south	 had	 begun.	 Ganoes	 had	 brushed	 shoulders	 with
more	than	his	share,	here	and	in	the	capital,	Unta.
“Is	it	true,	then?”	Ganoes	asked	boldly.
“Is	what	true?”
“The	First	Sword	of	Empire.	Dassem	Ultor.	We	heard	in	the	capital	before	we
left.	He's	dead.	Is	it	true?	Is	Dassem	dead?”
The	man	seemed	to	flinch,	his	gaze	unwavering	on	the	Mouse.	“Such	is	war,”
he	 muttered,	 under	 his	 breath,	 as	 if	 the	 words	 were	 not	 meant	 for	 anyone	 else's
ears.
“You're	with	the	Third.	I	thought	the	Third	was	with	him,	in	Seven	Cities.	At
Y'ghatan—”
“Hood's	Breath,	they're	still	looking	for	his	body	in	the	still-hot	rubble	of	that
damned	 city,	 and	 here	 you	 are,	 a	 merchant's	 son	 three	 thousand	 leagues	 from
Seven	Cities	with	information	only	a	few	are	supposed	to	possess.”	He	still	did
not	turn.	“I	know	not	your	sources,	but	take	my	advice	and	keep	what	you	know	to
yourself.”
Ganoes	shrugged.	“It's	said	he	betrayed	a	god.”
Finally	 the	 man	 faced	 him.	 His	 face	 was	 scarred,	 and	 something	 that	 might
have	been	a	burn	marred	his	jaw	and	left	cheek.	For	all	that,	he	looked	young	for	a
commander.	“Heed	the	lesson	there,	son.”
“What	lesson?”
“Every	decision	you	make	can	change	the	world.	The	best	life	is	the	one	the
gods	don't	notice.	You	want	to	live	free,	boy,	live	quietly.”
“I	want	to	be	a	soldier.	A	hero.”
“You'll	grow	out	of	it.”


Mock's	Vane	squealed	as	a	wayward	gust	from	the	harbor	cleared	the	grainy
smoke.	Ganoes	could	now	smell	rotting	fish	and	the	waterfront's	stink	of	humanity.
Another	Bridgeburner,	this	one	with	a	broken,	scorched	fiddle	strapped	to	his
back,	 came	 up	 to	 the	 commander.	 He	 was	 wiry	 and	 if	 anything	 younger—only	 a
few	 years	 older	 than	 Ganoes	 himself,	 who	 was	 twelve.	 Strange	 pockmarks
covered	 his	 face	 and	 the	 backs	 of	 his	 hands,	 and	 his	 armor	 was	 a	 mixture	 of
foreign	accoutrements	over	a	threadbare,	stained	uniform.	A	shortsword	hung	in	a
cracked	 wooden	 scabbard	 at	 his	 hip.	 He	 leaned	 against	 the	 merlon	 beside	 the
other	man	with	the	ease	of	long	familiarity.
“It's	a	bad	smell	when	sorcerers	panic,”	the	newcomer	said.	“They're	losing
control	down	there.	Hardly	the	need	for	a	whole	cadre	of	mages,	just	to	sniff	out	a
few	wax-witches.”
The	commander	sighed.	“Thought	to	wait	to	see	if	they'd	rein	themselves	in.”
The	soldier	grunted.	“They	are	all	new,	untested.	This	could	scar	some	of	them
forever.	Besides,”	he	added,	“more	than	a	few	down	there	are	following	someone
else's	orders.”
“A	suspicion,	no	more.”
“The	proof's	right	there,”	the	other	man	said.	“In	the	Mouse.”
“Perhaps.”
“You're	 too	 protective,”	 the	 man	 said.	 “Surly	 says	 it's	 your	 greatest
weakness.”
“Surly's	the	Emperor's	concern,	not	mine.”
A	second	grunt	answered	that.	“Maybe	all	of	us	before	too	long.”
The	commander	was	silent,	slowly	turning	to	study	his	companion.
The	 man	 shrugged.	 “Just	 a	 feeling.	 She's	 taking	 a	 new	 name,	 you	 know.
Laseen.”
“Laseen?”
“Napan	word.	Means—”
“I	know	what	it	means.”
“Hope	the	Emperor	does,	too.”
Ganoes	said,	“It	means	Thronemaster.”
The	two	looked	down	at	him.
The	wind	shifted	again,	making	the	iron	demon	groan	on	its	perch—a	smell	of
cool	stone	from	the	Hold	itself.	“My	tutor's	Napan,”	Ganoes	explained.
A	 new	 voice	 spoke	 behind	 them,	 a	 woman's,	 imperious	 and	 cold.


“Commander.”
Both	 soldiers	 turned,	 but	 without	 haste.	 The	 commander	 said	 to	 his
companion,	“The	new	company	needs	help	down	there.	Send	Dujek	and	a	wing,
and	 get	 some	 sappers	 to	 contain	 the	 fires—wouldn't	 do	 to	 have	 the	 whole	 city
burn.”
The	soldier	nodded,	marched	away,	sparing	the	woman	not	a	single	glance.
She	stood	with	two	bodyguards	near	the	portal	in	the	citadel's	square	tower.
Her	dusky	blue	skin	marked	her	as	Napan,	but	she	was	otherwise	plain,	wearing	a
salt-stained	gray	robe,	her	mousy	hair	cut	short	like	a	soldier's,	her	features	thin
and	 unmemorable.	 It	 was,	 however,	 her	 bodyguards	 that	 sent	 a	 shiver	 through
Ganoes.	They	flanked	her:	tall,	swathed	in	black,	hands	hidden	in	sleeves,	hoods
shadowing	their	faces.	Ganoes	had	never	seen	a	Claw	before,	but	he	instinctively
knew	these	creatures	to	be	acolytes	of	the	cult.	Which	meant	the	woman	was	.	.	.
The	commander	said,	“It's	your	mess,	Surly.	Seems	I'll	have	to	clean	it	up.”
Ganoes	 was	 shocked	 at	 the	 absence	 of	 fear—the	 near-contempt	 in	 the
soldier's	voice.	Surly	had	created	the	Claw,	making	it	a	power	rivaled	only	by	the
Emperor	himself.
“That	is	no	longer	my	name,	Commander.”
The	 man	 grimaced.	 “So	 I've	 heard.	 You	 must	 be	 feeling	 confident	 in	 the
Emperor's	 absence.	 He's	 not	 the	 only	 one	 who	 remembers	 you	 as	 nothing	 more
than	a	serving-wench	down	in	the	Old	Quarter.	I	take	it	the	gratitude's	washed	off
long	since.”
The	 woman's	 face	 betrayed	 no	 change	 of	 expression	 to	 mark	 if	 the	 man's
words	had	stung.	“The	command	was	a	simple	one,”	she	said.	“It	seems	your	new
officers	are	unable	to	cope	with	the	task.”
“It's	got	out	of	hand,”	the	commander	said.	“They're	unseasoned—”
“Not	my	concern,”	she	snapped.	“Nor	am	I	particularly	disappointed.	Loss	of
control	delivers	its	own	lessons	to	those	who	oppose	us.”
“Oppose?	 A	 handful	 of	 minor	 witches	 selling	 their	 meager	 talents—to	 what
sinister	end?	Finding	the	coraval	schools	on	the	shoals	in	the	bay.	Hood's	Breath,
woman,	hardly	a	threat	to	the	Empire.”
“Unsanctioned.	Defiant	of	the	new	laws—”
“Your	 laws,	 Surly.	 They	 won't	 work,	 and	 when	 the	 Emperor	 returns	 he'll
quash	your	prohibition	of	sorcery,	you	can	be	certain	of	that.”
The	 woman	 smiled	 coldly.	 “You'll	 be	 pleased	 to	 know	 that	 the	 Tower's
signaled	the	approach	of	the	transports	for	your	new	recruits.	We'll	not	miss	you


or	your	restless,	seditious	soldiers,	Commander.”
Without	 another	 word,	 or	 a	 single	 glance	 spared	 for	 the	 boy	 standing	 beside
the	commander,	she	swung	about	and,	flanked	by	her	silent	bodyguards,	reentered
the	citadel.
Ganoes	 and	 the	 commander	 returned	 their	 attention	 to	 the	 riot	 in	 the	 Mouse.
Flames	were	visible,	climbing	through	the	smoke.
“One	day	I'll	be	a	soldier,”	Ganoes	said.
The	man	grunted.	“Only	if	you	fail	at	all	else,	son.	Taking	up	the	sword	is	the
last	 act	 of	 desperate	 men.	 Mark	 my	 words	 and	 find	 yourself	 a	 more	 worthy
dream.”
Ganoes	scowled.	“You're	not	like	the	other	soldiers	I've	talked	to.	You	sound
more	like	my	father.”
“But	I'm	not	your	father,”	the	man	growled.
“The	world,”	Ganoes	said,	“doesn't	need	another	wine	merchant.”
The	commander's	eyes	narrowed,	gauging.	He	opened	his	mouth	to	make	the
obvious	reply,	then	shut	it	again.
Ganoes	Paran	looked	back	down	at	the	burning	quarter,	pleased	with	himself.
Even	a	boy,	Commander,	can	make	a	point.
Mock's	 Vane	 swung	 once	 more.	 Hot	 smoke	 rolled	 over	 the	 wall,	 engulfing
them.	 A	 reek	 of	 burning	 cloth,	 scorched	 paint,	 and	 stone,	 and	 now	 of	 something
sweet.	“An	abattoir's	caught	fire,”	Ganoes	said.	“Pigs.”
The	 commander	 grimaced.	 After	 a	 long	 moment	 he	 sighed	 and	 leaned	 back
down	on	the	merlon.	“As	you	say,	boy,	as	you	say.”


Book	One
Pale


	

.	.	.	In	the	eighth	year	the	Free	Cities	of	Genabackis	established
contracts	with	a	number	of	mercenary	armies	to	oppose	the
Imperium's	advance;	prominent	among	these	were	the	Crimson
Guard,	under	the	command	of	Prince	K'azz	D'Avore	(see	Volumes
III	&	V);	and	the	Tiste	Andii	regiments	of	Moon's	Spawn,	under	the
command	of	Caladan	Brood	and	others.
The	forces	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	commanded	by	High	Fist
Dujek	Onearm,	consisted	in	that	year	of	the	2nd,	5th,	and	6th	Armies,
as	well	as	legions	of	Moranth.
In	retrospect	two	observations	can	be	made.	The	first	is	that	the
Moranth	alliance	of	1156	marked	a	fundamental	change	in	the
science	of	warfare	for	the	Malazan	Imperium,	which	would	prove
efficacious	in	the	short	term.	The	second	observation	worth	noting	is
that	the	involvement	of	the	sorcerous	Tiste	Andii	of	Moon's	Spawn
represented	the	beginning	of	the	continent's	Sorcery	Enfilade,	with
devastating	consequences.
In	the	Year	of	Burn's	Sleep	1163,	the	Siege	of	Pale	ended	with	a
now	legendary	sorcerous	conflagration	.	.	.
IMPERIAL	CAMPAIGNS	1158–1194
VOLUME	IV,	GENABACKIS
IMRYGYN	TALLOBANT	(B.1151)


Chapter	One
	

The	old	stones	of	this	road
have	rung	with	iron
black-shod	hoofs	and	drums
where	I	saw	him	walking
up	from	the	sea	between	the	hills	soaked	red
in	sunset	he	came,	a	boy	among	the	echoes
sons	and	brothers	all	in	ranks
of	warrior	ghosts	he	came	to	pass
where	I	sat	on	the	worn	final
league-stone	at	day's	end—
his	stride	spoke	loud	all	I	needed
know	of	him	on	this	road	of	stone—
the	boy	walks
another	soldier,	another	one
bright	heart	not	yet	cooled
to	hard	iron
MOTHER'S	LAMENT
ANONYMOUS


	
1161st	Year	of	Burn's	Sleep
103rd	Year	of	the	Malazan	Empire
7th	Year	of	Empress	Laseen's	Rule
“Prod	and	pull,”	the	old	woman	was	saying,	“'tis	the	way	of	the	Empress,	as	like
the	gods	themselves.”	She	leaned	to	one	side	and	spat,	then	brought	a	soiled	cloth
to	her	wrinkled	lips.	“Three	husbands	and	two	sons	I	saw	off	to	war.”
The	 fishergirl's	 eyes	 shone	 as	 she	 watched	 the	 column	 of	 mounted	 soldiers
thunder	past,	and	she	only	half	listened	to	the	hag	standing	beside	her.	The	girl's
breath	had	risen	to	the	pace	of	the	magnificent	horses.	She	felt	her	face	burning,	a
flush	that	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	heat.	The	day	was	dying,	the	sun's	red	smear
over	the	trees	on	her	right,	and	the	sea's	sighing	against	her	face	had	grown	cool.
“That	 was	 in	 the	 days	 of	 the	 Emperor,”	 the	 hag	 continued.	 “Hood	 roast	 the
bastard's	soul	on	a	spit.	But	look	on,	lass.	Laseen	scatters	bones	with	the	best	of
them.	Heh,	she	started	with	his,	didn't	she,	now?”
The	 fishergirl	 nodded	 faintly.	 As	 befitted	 the	 lowborn,	 they	 waited	 by	 the
roadside,	 the	 old	 woman	 burdened	 beneath	 a	 rough	 sack	 filled	 with	 turnips,	 the
girl	with	a	heavy	basket	balanced	on	her	head.	Every	minute	or	so	the	old	woman
shifted	 the	 sack	 from	 one	 bony	 shoulder	 to	 the	 other.	 With	 the	 riders	 crowding
them	on	the	road	and	the	ditch	behind	them	a	steep	drop	to	broken	rocks,	she	had
no	place	to	put	down	the	sack.
“Scatters	bones,	I	said.	Bones	of	husbands,	bones	of	sons,	bones	of	wives	and
bones	 of	 daughters.	 All	 the	 same	 to	 her.	 All	 the	 same	 to	 the	 Empire.”	 The	 old
woman	spat	a	second	time.	“Three	husbands	and	two	sons,	ten	coin	apiece	a	year.
Five	of	ten's	fifty.	Fifty	coin	a	year's	cold	company,	lass.	Cold	in	winter,	cold	in
bed.”
The	fishergirl	wiped	dust	from	her	forehead.	Her	bright	eyes	darted	among	the
soldiers	 passing	 before	 her.	 The	 young	 men	 atop	 their	 high-backed	 saddles	 held
expressions	stern	and	fixed	straight	ahead.	The	few	women	who	rode	among	them
sat	 tall	 and	 somehow	 fiercer	 than	 the	 men.	 The	 sunset	 cast	 red	 glints	 from	 their
helms,	flashing	so	that	the	girl's	eyes	stung	and	her	vision	blurred.
“You're	the	fisherman's	daughter,”	the	old	woman	said.	“I	seen	you	afore	on
the	 road,	 and	 down	 on	 the	 strand.	 Seen	 you	 and	 your	 dad	 at	 market.	 Missing	 an


arm,	ain't	he?	More	bones	for	her	collection	is	likely,	eh?”	She	made	a	chopping
motion	with	one	hand,	then	nodded.	“Mine's	the	first	house	on	the	track.	I	use	the
coin	 to	 buy	 candles.	 Five	 candles	 I	 burn	 every	 night,	 five	 candles	 to	 keep	 old
Rigga	 company.	 It's	 a	 tired	 house,	 full	 of	 tired	 things	 and	 me	 one	 of	 them,	 lass.
What	you	got	in	the	basket	there?”
Slowly	the	fishergirl	realized	that	a	question	had	been	asked	of	her.	She	pulled
her	 attention	 from	 the	 soldiers	 and	 smiled	 down	 at	 the	 old	 woman.	 “I'm	 sorry,”
she	said,	“the	horses	are	so	loud.”
Rigga	raised	her	voice.	“I	asked	what	you	got	in	your	basket,	lass?”
“Twine.	Enough	for	three	nets.	We	need	to	get	one	ready	for	tomorrow.	Dadda
lost	 his	 last	 one—something	 in	 the	 deep	 waters	 took	 it	 and	 a	 whole	 catch,	 too.
Ilgrand	Lender	wants	the	money	he	loaned	us	and	we	need	a	catch	tomorrow.	A
good	 one.”	 She	 smiled	 again	 and	 swept	 her	 gaze	 back	 to	 the	 soldiers.	 “Isn't	 it
wonderful?”	she	breathed.
Rigga's	hand	shot	out	and	snagged	the	girl's	thick	black	hair,	yanked	it	hard.
The	 girl	 cried	 out.	 The	 basket	 on	 her	 head	 lurched,	 then	 slid	 down	 onto	 one
shoulder.	She	grabbed	frantically	for	it	but	it	was	too	heavy.	The	basket	struck	the
ground	 and	 split	 apart.	 “Aaai!”	 the	 girl	 gasped,	 attempting	 to	 kneel.	 But	 Rigga
pulled	and	snapped	her	head	around.
“You	listen	to	me,	lass!”	The	old	woman's	sour	breath	hissed	against	the	girl's
face.	“The	Empire's	been	grinding	this	land	down	for	a	hundred	years.	You	was
born	 in	 it.	 I	 wasn't.	 When	 I	 was	 your	 age	 Itko	 Kan	 was	 a	 country.	 We	 flew	 a
banner	and	it	was	ours.	We	were	free,	lass.”
The	girl	was	sickened	by	Rigga's	breath.	She	squeezed	shut	her	eyes.
“Mark	 this	 truth,	 child,	 else	 the	 Cloak	 of	 Lies	 blinds	 you	 forever.”	 Rigga's
voice	 took	 on	 a	 droning	 cadence,	 and	 all	 at	 once	 the	 girl	 stiffened.	 Rigga,
Riggalai	the	Seer,	the	wax-witch	who	trapped	souls	in	candles	and	burned	them.
Souls	 devoured	 in	 flame—Rigga's	 words	 carried	 the	 chilling	 tone	 of	 prophecy.
“Mark	this	truth.	I	am	the	last	to	speak	to	you.	You	are	the	last	to	hear	me.	Thus	are
we	linked,	you	and	I,	beyond	all	else.”
Rigga's	fingers	snagged	tighter	in	the	girl's	hair.	“Across	the	sea	the	Empress
has	 driven	 her	 knife	 into	 virgin	 soil.	 The	 blood	 now	 comes	 in	 a	 tide	 and	 it'll
sweep	you	under,	child,	 if	you're	not	 careful.	 They'll	put	 a	sword	in	your	hand,
they'll	give	you	a	fine	horse,	and	they'll	send	you	across	that	sea.	But	a	shadow
will	 embrace	 your	 soul.	 Now,	 listen!	 Bury	 this	 deep!	 Rigga	 will	 preserve	 you
because	we	are	linked,	you	and	I.	But	it	is	all	I	can	do,	understand?	Look	to	the
Lord	spawned	in	Darkness;	his	is	the	hand	that	shall	free	you,	though	he'll	know	it


not—”
“What's	this?”	a	voice	bellowed.
Rigga	 swung	 to	 face	 the	 road.	 An	 outrider	 had	 slowed	 his	 mount.	 The	 Seer
released	the	girl's	hair.
The	girl	staggered	back	a	step.	A	rock	on	the	road's	edge	turned	underfoot	and
she	fell.	When	she	looked	up	the	outrider	had	trotted	past.	Another	thundered	up	in
his	wake.
“Leave	 the	 pretty	 one	 alone,	 hag,”	 this	 one	 growled,	 and	 as	 he	 rode	 by	 he
leaned	in	his	saddle	and	swung	an	open,	gauntleted	hand.	The	iron-scaled	glove
cracked	against	Rigga's	head,	spinning	her	around.	She	toppled.
The	fishergirl	screamed	as	Rigga	landed	heavily	across	her	thighs.	A	thread	of
crimson	spit	spattered	her	face.	Whimpering,	the	girl	pushed	herself	back	across
the	 gravel,	 then	 used	 her	 feet	 to	 shove	 away	 Rigga's	 body.	 She	 climbed	 to	 her
knees.
Something	within	Rigga's	prophecy	seemed	lodged	in	the	girl's	head,	heavy	as
a	stone	and	hidden	from	light.	She	found	she	could	not	retrieve	a	single	word	the
Seer	had	said.	She	reached	out	and	grasped	Rigga's	woolen	shawl.	Carefully,	she
rolled	 the	 old	 woman	 over.	 Blood	 covered	 one	 side	 of	 Rigga's	 head,	 running
down	behind	the	ear.	More	blood	smeared	her	lined	chin	and	stained	her	mouth.
The	eyes	stared	sightlessly.
The	fishergirl	pulled	back,	unable	to	catch	her	breath.	Desperate,	she	looked
about.	The	column	of	soldiers	had	passed,	leaving	nothing	but	dust	and	the	distant
tremble	 of	 hoofs.	 Rigga's	 bag	 of	 turnips	 had	 spilled	 onto	 the	 road.	 Among	 the
trampled	vegetables	lay	five	tallow	candles.	The	girl	managed	a	ragged	lungful	of
dusty	air.	Wiping	her	nose,	she	looked	to	her	own	basket.
“Never	mind	the	candles,”	she	mumbled,	in	a	thick,	odd	voice.	“They're	gone,
aren't	they,	now?	Just	a	scattering	of	bones.	Never	mind.”	She	crawled	toward	the
bundles	 of	 twine	 that	 had	 fallen	 from	 the	 breached	 basket,	 and	 when	 she	 spoke
again	her	voice	was	young,	normal.	“We	need	the	twine.	We'll	work	all	night	and
get	one	ready.	Dadda's	waiting.	He's	right	at	the	door,	he's	looking	up	the	track,
he's	waiting	to	see	me.”
She	stopped,	a	shiver	running	through	her.	The	sun's	light	was	almost	gone.	An
unseasonal	chill	bled	from	the	shadows,	which	now	flowed	like	water	across	the
road.
“Here	it	comes,	then,”	the	girl	grated	softly,	in	a	voice	that	wasn't	her	own.
A	soft-gloved	hand	fell	on	her	shoulder.	She	ducked	down,	cowering.
“Easy,	girl,”	said	a	man's	voice.	“It's	over.	Nothing	to	be	done	for	her	now.”


The	 fishergirl	 looked	 up.	 A	 man	 swathed	 in	 black	 leaned	 over	 her,	 his	 face
obscured	 beneath	 a	 hood's	 shadow.	 “But	 he	 hit	 her,”	 the	 girl	 said,	 in	 a	 child's
voice.	“And	we	have	nets	to	tie,	me	and	Dadda—”
“Let's	 get	 you	 on	 your	 feet,”	 the	 man	 said,	 moving	 his	 long-fingered	 hands
down	 under	 her	arms.	He	straightened,	lifting	her	effortlessly.	Her	 sandaled	feet
dangled	in	the	air	before	he	set	her	down.
Now	she	saw	a	second	man,	shorter,	also	clothed	in	black.	This	one	stood	on
the	road	and	was	turned	away,	his	gaze	in	the	direction	the	soldiers	had	gone.	He
spoke,	his	voice	reed-thin.	“Wasn't	much	of	a	life,”	he	said,	not	turning	to	face	her.
“A	minor	talent,	long	since	dried	up	of	the	Gift.	Oh,	she	might	have	managed	one
more,	but	we'll	never	know,	will	we?”
The	 fishergirl	 stumbled	 over	 to	 Rigga's	 bag	 and	 picked	 up	 a	 candle.	 She
straightened,	her	eyes	suddenly	hard,	then	deliberately	spat	on	to	the	road.
The	 shorter	 man's	 head	 snapped	 toward	 her.	 Within	 the	 hood	 it	 seemed	 the
shadows	played	alone.
The	 girl	 shrank	 back	 a	 step.	 “It	 was	 a	 good	 life,”	 she	 whispered.	 “She	 had
these	candles,	you	see.	Five	of	them.	Five	for—”
“Necromancy,”	the	short	man	cut	in.
The	 taller	 man,	 still	 at	 her	 side,	 said	 softly,	 “I	 see	 them,	 child.	 I	 understand
what	they	mean.”
The	 other	 man	 snorted.	 “The	 witch	 harbored	 five	 frail,	 weak	 souls.	 Nothing
grand.”	He	cocked	his	head.	“I	can	hear	them	now.	Calling	for	her.”
Tears	filled	the	girl's	eyes.	A	wordless	anguish	seemed	to	well	up	from	that
black	stone	in	her	mind.	She	wiped	her	cheeks.	“Where	did	you	come	from?”	she
asked	abruptly.	“We	didn't	see	you	on	the	road.”
The	 man	 beside	 her	 half	 turned	 to	 the	 gravel	 track.	 “On	 the	 other	 side,”	 he
said,	a	smile	in	his	tone.	“Waiting,	just	like	you.”
The	other	giggled.	“On	the	other	side	indeed.”	He	faced	down	the	road	again
and	raised	his	arms.
The	girl	drew	in	a	sharp	breath	as	darkness	descended.	A	loud,	tearing	sound
filled	 the	 air	 for	 a	 moment,	 then	 the	 darkness	 dissipated	 and	 the	 girl's	 eyes
widened.
Seven	massive	Hounds	now	sat	around	the	man	in	the	road.	The	eyes	of	these
beasts	 glowed	 yellow,	 and	 all	 were	 turned	 in	 the	 same	 direction	 as	 the	 man
himself.
She	heard	him	hiss,	“Eager,	are	we?	Then	go!”


Silently,	the	Hounds	bolted	down	the	road.
Their	 master	 turned	 and	 said	 to	 the	 man	 beside	 her,	 “Something	 to	 gnaw	 on
Laseen's	mind.”	He	giggled	again.
“Must	you	complicate	things?”	the	other	answered	wearily.
The	short	man	stiffened.	“They	are	within	sight	of	the	column.”	He	cocked	his
head.	From	up	the	road	came	the	scream	of	horses.	He	sighed.	“You've	reached	a
decision,	Cotillion?”
The	 other	 grunted	 amusedly.	 “Using	 my	 name,	 Ammanas,	 means	 you've	 just
decided	for	me.	We	can	hardly	leave	her	here	now,	can	we?”
“Of	course	we	can,	old	friend.	Just	not	breathing.”
Cotillion	looked	down	on	the	girl.	“No,”	he	said	quietly,	“she'll	do.”
The	fishergirl	bit	her	lip.	Still	clutching	Rigga's	candle,	she	took	another	step
back,	her	wide	eyes	darting	from	one	man	to	the	other.
“Pity,”	Ammanas	said.
Cotillion	seemed	to	nod,	then	he	cleared	his	throat	and	said,	“It'll	take	time.”
An	 amused	 note	 entered	 Ammanas's	 reply.	 “And	 have	 we	 time?	 True
vengeance	needs	the	 slow,	 careful	stalking	of	the	victim.	Have	you	forgotten	the
pain	she	once	delivered	us?	Laseen's	back	is	against	the	wall	already.	She	might
fall	without	our	help.	Where	would	be	the	satisfaction	in	that?”
Cotillion's	 response	 was	 cool	 and	 dry.	 “You've	 always	 underestimated	 the
Empress.	Hence	our	present	circumstances	.	.	.	No.”	He	gestured	at	the	fisher-girl.
“We'll	 need	 this	 one.	 Laseen's	 raised	 the	 ire	 of	 Moon's	 Spawn,	 and	 that's	 a
hornet's	nest	if	ever	there	was	one.	The	timing	is	perfect.”
Faintly,	 above	 the	 screaming	 horses,	 came	 the	 shrieks	 of	 men	 and	 women,	 a
sound	that	pierced	the	girl's	heart.	Her	eyes	darted	to	Rigga's	motionless	form	on
the	roadside,	then	back	to	Ammanas,	who	now	approached	her.	She	thought	to	run
but	her	legs	had	weakened	to	a	helpless	trembling.	He	came	close	and	seemed	to
study	her,	even	though	the	shadows	within	his	hood	remained	impenetrable.
“A	fishergirl?”	he	asked,	in	a	kindly	tone.
She	nodded.
“Have	you	a	name?”
“Enough!”	 Cotillion	 growled.	 “She's	 not	 some	 mouse	 under	 your	 paw,
Ammanas.	Besides,	I've	chosen	her	and	I	will	choose	her	name	as	well.”
Ammanas	stepped	back.	“Pity,”	he	said	again.
The	 girl	 raised	 imploring	 hands.	 “Please,”	 she	 begged	 Cotillion,	 “I've	 done
nothing!	My	father's	a	poor	man,	but	he'll	pay	you	all	he	can.	He	needs	me,	and


the	twine—he's	waiting	right	now!”	She	felt	herself	go	wet	between	her	legs	and
quickly	sat	down	on	the	ground.	“I've	done	nothing!”	Shame	rose	through	her	and
she	put	her	hands	in	her	lap.	“Please.”
“I've	 no	 choice	 anymore,	 child,”	 Cotillion	 said.	 “After	 all,	 you	 know	 our
names.”
“I've	never	heard	them	before!”	the	girl	cried.
The	man	sighed.	“With	what's	happening	up	the	road	right	now,	well,	you'd	be
questioned.	Unpleasantly.	There	are	those	who	know	our	names.”
“You	see,	lass,”	Ammanas	added,	suppressing	a	giggle,	“we're	not	supposed
to	be	here.	There	are	names,	and	then	there	are	names.”	He	swung	to	Cotillion	and
said,	in	a	chilling	voice,	“Her	father	must	be	dealt	with.	My	Hounds?”
“No,”	Cotillion	said.	“He	lives.”
“Then	how?”
“I	suspect,”	Cotillion	said,	“greed	will	suffice,	once	the	slate	is	wiped	clean.”
Sarcasm	filled	his	next	words.	“I'm	sure	you	can	manage	the	sorcery	in	that,	can't
you?”
Ammanas	giggled.	“Beware	of	shadows	bearing	gifts.”
Cotillion	faced	the	girl	again.	He	lifted	his	arms	out	to	the	sides.	The	shadows
that	held	his	features	in	darkness	now	flowed	out	around	his	body.
Ammanas	 spoke,	 and	 to	 the	 girl	 his	 words	 seemed	 to	 come	 from	 a	 great
distance.	 “She's	 ideal.	 The	 Empress	 could	 never	 track	 her	 down,	 could	 never
even	so	much	as	guess.”	He	raised	his	voice.	“It's	not	so	bad	a	thing,	lass,	to	be
the	pawn	of	a	god.”
“Prod	and	pull,”	the	fishergirl	said	quickly.
Cotillion	 hesitated	 at	 her	 strange	 comment,	 then	 he	 shrugged.	 The	 shadows
whirled	out	to	engulf	the	girl.	With	their	cold	touch	her	mind	fell	away,	down	into
darkness.	Her	last	fleeting	sensation	was	of	the	soft	wax	of	the	candle	in	her	right
hand,	and	how	it	seemed	to	well	up	between	the	fingers	of	her	clenched	fist.
The	 captain	 shifted	 in	 his	 saddle	 and	 glanced	 at	 the	 woman	 riding	 beside	 him.
“We've	closed	the	road	on	both	sides,	Adjunct.	Moved	the	local	traffic	inland.	So
far,	 no	 word's	 leaked.”	 He	 wiped	 sweat	 from	 his	 brow	 and	 winced.	 The	 hot
woolen	cap	beneath	his	helm	had	rubbed	his	forehead	raw.
“Something	wrong,	Captain?”
He	shook	his	head,	squinting	up	the	road.	“Helmet's	loose.	Had	more	hair	the


last	time	I	wore	it.”
The	Adjunct	to	the	Empress	did	not	reply.
The	 mid-morning	 sun	 made	 the	 road's	 white,	 dusty	 surface	 almost	 blinding.
The	captain	felt	sweat	running	down	his	body,	and	the	mail	of	his	helm's	lobster
tail	kept	nipping	the	hairs	on	his	neck.	Already	his	lower	back	ached.	It	had	been
years	since	he'd	last	ridden	a	horse,	and	the	roll	was	slow	in	coming.	With	every
saddle-bounce	he	felt	vertebrae	crunch.
It	had	been	a	long	time	since	somebody's	title	had	been	enough	to	straighten
him	 up.	 But	 this	 was	 the	 Adjunct	 to	 the	 Empress,	 Laseen's	 personal	 servant,	 an
extension	of	her	Imperial	will.	The	last	thing	the	captain	wanted	was	to	show	his
misery	to	this	young,	dangerous	woman.
Up	 ahead	 the	 road	 began	 its	 long,	 winding	 ascent.	 A	 salty	 wind	 blew	 from
their	left,	whistling	through	the	newly	budding	trees	lining	that	side	of	the	road.	By
mid-afternoon,	that	wind	would	breathe	hot	as	a	baker's	oven,	carrying	with	it	the
stench	of	the	mudflats.	And	the	sun's	heat	would	bring	something	else	as	well.	The
captain	hoped	to	be	back	in	Kan	by	then.
He	 tried	 not	 to	 think	 about	 the	 place	 they	 rode	 toward.	 Leave	 that	 to	 the
Adjunct.	In	his	years	of	service	to	the	Empire,	he'd	seen	enough	to	know	when	to
shut	everything	down	inside	his	skull.	This	was	one	of	those	times.
The	Adjunct	spoke.	“You've	been	stationed	here	long,	Captain?”
“Aye,”	the	man	growled.
The	woman	waited,	then	asked,	“How	long?”
He	hesitated.	“Thirteen	years,	Adjunct.”
“You	fought	for	the	Emperor,	then,”	she	said.
“Aye.”
“And	survived	the	purge.”
The	captain	threw	her	a	look.	If	she	felt	his	gaze,	she	gave	no	indication.	Her
eyes	remained	on	the	road	ahead;	she	rolled	easily	in	the	saddle,	the	scabbarded
longsword	 hitched	 high	 under	 her	 left	 arm—ready	 for	 mounted	 battle.	 Her	 hair
was	either	cut	short	or	drawn	up	under	her	helm.	Her	figure	was	lithe	enough,	the
captain	mused.
“Finished?”	 she	 asked.	 “I	 was	 asking	 about	 the	 purges	 commanded	 by
Empress	Laseen	following	her	predecessor's	untimely	death.”
The	captain	gritted	his	teeth,	ducked	his	chin	to	draw	up	the	helm's	strap—he
hadn't	had	time	to	shave	and	the	buckle	was	chafing.	“Not	everyone	was	killed,
Adjunct.	The	people	of	Itko	Kan	aren't	exactly	excitable.	None	of	those	riots	and


mass	 executions	 that	 hit	 other	 parts	 of	 the	 Empire.	 We	 all	 just	 sat	 tight	 and
waited.”
“I	 take	 it,”	 the	 Adjunct	 said,	 with	 a	 slight	 smile,	 “you're	 not	 noble-born,
Captain.”
He	 grunted.	 “If	 I'd	 been	 noble-born,	 I	 wouldn't	 have	 survived,	 even	 here	 in
Itko	Kan.	We	both	know	that.	Her	orders	were	specific,	and	even	the	droll	Kanese
didn't	 dare	 disobey	 the	 Empress.”	 He	 scowled.	 “No,	 up	 through	 the	 ranks,
Adjunct.”
“Your	last	engagement?”
“Wickan	Plains.”
They	rode	on	in	silence	for	a	time,	passing	the	occasional	soldier	stationed	on
the	road.	Off	to	their	left	the	trees	fell	away	to	ragged	heather,	and	the	sea	beyond
showed	 its	 white-capped	 expanse.	 The	 Adjunct	 spoke.	 “This	 area	 you've
contained,	how	many	of	your	guard	have	you	deployed	to	patrol	it?”
“Eleven	hundred,”	the	captain	replied.
Her	head	turned	at	this,	her	cool	gaze	tightening	beneath	the	rim	of	her	helm.
The	captain	studied	her	expression.	“The	carnage	stretches	half	a	league	from
the	sea,	Adjunct,	and	a	quarter-league	inland.”
The	woman	said	nothing.
They	 approached	 the	 summit.	 A	 score	 of	 soldiers	 had	 gathered	 there,	 and
others	waited	along	the	slope's	rise.	All	had	turned	to	watch	them.
“Prepare	yourself,	Adjunct.”
The	 woman	 studied	 the	 faces	 lining	 the	 roadside.	 She	 knew	 these	 to	 be
hardened	men	and	women,	veterans	of	the	siege	of	Li	Heng	and	the	Wickan	Wars
out	on	the	north	plains.	But	something	had	been	clawed	into	their	eyes	that	had	left
them	 raw	 and	 exposed.	 They	 looked	 upon	 her	 with	 a	 yearning	 that	 she	 found
disturbing,	as	if	they	hungered	for	answers.	She	fought	the	urge	to	speak	to	them	as
she	 passed,	 to	 offer	 whatever	 comforting	 words	 she	 could.	 Such	 gifts	 were	 not
hers	to	give,	however,	nor	had	they	ever	been.	In	this	she	was	much	the	same	as
the	Empress.
From	beyond	the	summit	she	heard	the	cries	of	gulls	and	crows,	a	sound	that
rose	 into	 a	 high-pitched	 roar	 as	 they	 reached	 the	 rise.	 Ignoring	 the	 soldiers	 on
either	 side,	 the	 Adjunct	 moved	 her	 horse	 forward.	 The	 captain	 followed.	 They
came	to	the	crest	and	looked	down.	The	road	dipped	here	for	perhaps	a	fifth	of	a
league,	climbing	again	at	the	far	end	to	a	promontory.
Thousands	 of	 gulls	 and	 crows	 covered	 the	 ground,	 spilling	 over	 into	 the


ditches	and	among	the	low,	rough	heather	and	gorse.	Beneath	this	churning	sea	of
black	 and	 white	 the	 ground	 was	 a	 uniform	 red.	 Here	 and	 there	 rose	 the	 ribbed
humps	of	horses,	and	from	among	the	squalling	birds	came	the	glint	of	iron.
The	captain	reached	up	and	unstrapped	his	helm.	He	lifted	it	slowly	from	his
head,	then	set	it	down	over	his	saddle	horn.	“Adjunct	.	.	.”
“I	am	named	Lorn,”	the	woman	said	softly.
“One	hundred	and	seventy-five	men	and	women.	Two	hundred	and	ten	horses.
The	Nineteenth	Regiment	of	the	Itko	Kanese	Eighth	Cavalry.”	The	captain's	throat
tightened	 briefly.	 He	 looked	 at	 Lorn.	 “Dead.”	 His	 horse	 shied	 under	 him	 as	 it
caught	an	updraft.	He	closed	savagely	on	the	reins	and	the	animal	stilled,	nostrils
wide	and	ears	back,	muscles	trembling	under	him.	The	Adjunct's	stallion	made	no
move.	 “All	 had	 their	 weapons	 bared.	 All	 fought	 whatever	 enemy	 attacked	 them.
But	the	dead	are	all	ours.”
“You've	 checked	 the	 beach	 below?”	 Lorn	 asked,	 still	 staring	 down	 on	 the
road.
“No	 signs	 of	 a	 landing,”	 the	 captain	 replied.	 “No	 tracks	 anywhere,	 neither
seaward	nor	inland.	There	are	more	dead	than	these,	Adjunct.	Farmers,	peasants,
fisherfolk,	travelers	on	the	road.	All	of	them	torn	apart,	limbs	scattered—children,
livestock,	 dogs.”	 He	 stopped	 abruptly	 and	 turned	 away.	 “Over	 four	 hundred
dead,”	he	grated.	“We're	not	certain	of	the	exact	count.”
“Of	course,”	Lorn	said,	her	tone	devoid	of	feeling.	“No	witnesses?”
“None.”
A	man	was	riding	toward	them	on	the	road	below,	leaning	close	to	his	horse's
ear	as	he	talked	the	frightened	animal	through	the	carnage.	Birds	rose	in	shrieking
complaint	in	front	of	him,	settling	again	once	he	had	passed.
“Who	is	that?”	the	Adjunct	asked.
The	 captain	 grunted.	 “Lieutenant	 Ganoes	 Paran.	 He's	 new	 to	 my	 command.
From	Unta.”
Lorn's	 eyes	 narrowed	 on	 the	 young	 man.	 He'd	 reached	 the	 edge	 of	 the
depression,	 stopping	 to	 relay	 orders	 to	 the	 work	 crews.	 He	 leaned	 back	 in	 his
saddle	then	and	glanced	in	their	direction.	“Paran.	From	House	Paran?”
“Aye,	gold	in	his	veins	and	all	that.”
“Call	him	up	here.”
The	 captain	 gestured	 and	 the	 lieutenant	 kicked	 his	 mount's	 flanks.	 Moments
later	he	reined	in	beside	the	captain	and	saluted.
The	 man	 and	 his	 horse	 were	 covered	 from	 head	 to	 toe	 in	 blood	 and	 bits	 of


flesh.	 Flies	 and	 wasps	 buzzed	 hungrily	 around	 them.	 Lorn	 saw	 in	 Lieutenant
Paran's	face	none	of	the	youth	that	rightly	belonged	there.	For	all	that,	it	was	an
easy	face	to	rest	eyes	upon.
“You	checked	the	other	side,	Lieutenant?”	the	captain	asked.
Paran	 nodded.	 “Yes,	 sir.	 There's	 a	 small	 fishing	 settlement	 down	 from	 the
promontory.	A	dozen	or	so	huts.	Bodies	in	all	but	two.	Most	of	the	barques	look	to
be	in,	though	there's	one	empty	mooring	pole.”
Lorn	cut	in.	“Lieutenant,	describe	the	empty	huts.”
He	batted	at	a	threatening	wasp	before	answering.	“One	was	at	the	top	of	the
strand,	just	off	the	trail	from	the	road.	We	think	it	belonged	to	an	old	woman	we
found	dead	on	the	road,	about	half	a	league	south	of	here.”
“Why?”
“Adjunct,	the	hut's	contents	were	that	of	an	old	woman.	Also,	she	seemed	in
the	habit	of	burning	candles.	Tallow	candles,	in	fact.	The	old	woman	on	the	road
had	 a	 sack	 full	 of	 turnips	 and	 a	 handful	 of	 tallow	 candles.	 Tallow's	 expensive
here,	Adjunct.”
Lorn	 asked,	 “How	 many	 times	 have	 you	 ridden	 through	 this	 battlefield,
Lieutenant?”
“Enough	to	be	getting	used	to	it,	Adjunct.”	He	grimaced.
“And	the	second	empty	hut?”
“A	 man	 and	 a	 girl,	 we	 think.	 The	 hut's	 close	 to	 the	 tidemark,	 opposite	 the
empty	mooring	pole.”
“No	sign	of	them?”
“None,	Adjunct.	Of	course,	we're	still	finding	bodies,	along	the	road,	out	in
the	fields.”
“But	not	on	the	beach.”
“No.”
The	Adjunct	frowned,	aware	that	both	men	were	watching	her.	“Captain,	what
kind	of	weapons	killed	your	soldiers?”
The	 captain	 hesitated,	 then	 turned	 a	 glare	 on	 the	 lieutenant.	 “You've	 been
crawling	around	down	there,	Paran,	let's	hear	your	opinion.”
Paran's	answering	smile	was	tight.	“Yes,	sir.	Natural	weapons.”
The	captain	felt	a	sinking	feeling	in	his	stomach.	He'd	hoped	he'd	been	wrong.
“What	do	you	mean,”	Lorn	asked,	“natural	weapons?”
“Teeth,	mostly.	Very	big,	very	sharp	ones.”


The	captain	cleared	his	throat,	then	said,	“There	haven't	been	wolves	in	Itko
Kan	for	a	hundred	years.	In	any	case,	no	carcasses	around—”
“If	it	was	wolves,”	Paran	said,	turning	to	eye	the	basin,	“they	were	as	big	as
mules.	No	tracks,	Adjunct.	Not	even	a	tuft	of	hair.”
“Not	wolves,	then,”	Lorn	said.
Paran	shrugged.
The	Adjunct	drew	a	deep	breath,	held	it,	then	let	it	out	in	a	slow	sigh.	“I	want
to	see	this	fishing	village.”
The	 captain	 made	 ready	 to	 don	 his	 helmet,	 but	 the	 Adjunct	 shook	 her	 head.
“Lieutenant	Paran	will	suffice,	Captain.	I	suggest	you	take	personal	command	of
your	guard	in	the	meantime.	The	dead	must	be	removed	as	quickly	as	possible.	All
evidence	of	the	massacre	is	to	be	erased.”
“Understood,	Adjunct,”	the	captain	said,	hoping	he'd	kept	the	relief	out	of	his
voice.
Lorn	turned	to	the	young	noble.	“Well,	Lieutenant?”
He	nodded	and	clucked	his	horse	into	motion.
It	was	when	the	birds	scattered	from	their	path	that	the	Adjunct	found	herself
envying	 the	 captain.	 Before	 her	 the	 roused	 carrion-eaters	 exposed	 a	 carpet	 of
armor,	 broken	 bones,	 and	 meat.	 The	 air	 was	 hot,	 turgid	 and	 cloying.	 She	 saw
soldiers,	still	helmed,	their	heads	crushed	by	what	must	have	been	huge,	terribly
powerful	 jaws.	 She	 saw	 torn	 mail,	 crumpled	 shields,	 and	 limbs	 that	 had	 been
ripped	from	bodies.	Lorn	managed	only	a	few	moments	of	careful	examination	of
the	scene	around	them	before	she	fixed	her	gaze	on	the	promontory	ahead,	unable
to	encompass	the	magnitude	of	the	slaughter.	Her	stallion,	bred	of	the	finest	lines
of	Seven	Cities	stock,	a	warhorse	trained	in	the	blood	for	generations,	had	lost	its
proud,	unyielding	strut,	and	now	picked	its	way	carefully	along	the	road.
Lorn	 realized	 she	 needed	 a	 distraction,	 and	 sought	 it	 in	 conversation.
“Lieutenant,	have	you	received	your	commission	yet?”
“No,	Adjunct.	I	expect	to	be	stationed	in	the	capital.”
She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Indeed.	And	how	will	you	manage	that?”
Paran	squinted	ahead,	a	tight	smile	on	his	lips.	“It	will	be	arranged.”
“I	 see.”	 Lorn	 fell	 silent.	 “The	 nobles	 have	 refrained	 from	 seeking	 military
commissions,	kept	their	heads	low	for	a	long	time,	haven't	they?”
“Since	the	first	days	of	the	Empire.	The	Emperor	held	no	love	for	us.	Whereas
Empress	Laseen's	concerns	seem	to	lie	elsewhere.”
Lorn	 eyed	 the	 young	 man.	 “I	 see	 you	 like	 taking	 risks,	 Lieutenant,”	 she	 said.


“Unless	your	presumption	extends	to	goading	the	Adjunct	to	the	Empress.	Are	you
that	confident	of	your	blood's	invincibility?”
“Since	when	is	speaking	the	truth	presumptuous?”
“You	are	young,	aren't	you?”
This	 seemed	 to	 sting	 Paran.	 A	 flush	 rose	 in	 his	 smooth-shaven	 cheeks.
“Adjunct,	for	the	past	seven	hours	I	have	been	knee-deep	in	torn	flesh	and	spilled
blood.	 I've	 been	 fighting	 crows	 and	 gulls	 for	 bodies—do	 you	 know	 what	 these
birds	 are	 doing	 here?	 Precisely?	 They're	 tearing	 off	 strips	 of	 meat	 and	 fighting
over	them;	they're	getting	fat	on	eyeballs	and	tongues,	livers	and	hearts.	In	their
frantic	greed	they	fling	the	meat	around	.	.	.”	He	paused,	visibly	regaining	control
over	 himself	 as	 he	 straightened	 in	 his	 saddle.	 “I'm	 not	 young	 anymore,	 Adjunct.
As	for	presumption,	I	honestly	couldn't	care	less.	Truth	can't	be	danced	around,
not	out	here,	not	now,	not	ever	again.”
They	reached	the	far	slope.	Off	to	the	left	a	narrow	track	led	down	toward	the
sea.	Paran	gestured	to	it,	then	angled	his	horse	forward.
Lorn	 followed,	 her	 thoughtful	 expression	 holding	 on	 the	 lieutenant's	 broad
back,	before	she	turned	her	attention	to	the	route	they	took.	The	path	was	narrow,
skirting	 the	 promontory's	 bluff.	 Off	 to	 the	 left	 the	 trail's	 edge	 dropped	 away	 to
rocks	 sixty	 feet	 below.	 The	 tide	 was	 out,	 the	 waves	 breaking	 on	 a	 reef	 a	 few
hundred	yards	offshore.	Pools	filled	the	black	bedrock's	cracks	and	basins,	dully
reflecting	an	overcast	sky.
They	 came	 to	 a	 bend,	 and	 beyond	 and	 below	 stretched	 a	 crescent-shaped
beach.	 Above	 it,	 at	 the	 promontory's	 foot,	 lay	 a	 broad,	 grassy	 shelf	 on	 which
squatted	a	dozen	huts.
The	Adjunct	swung	her	gaze	seaward.	The	barques	rested	on	their	low	flanks
beside	their	mooring	poles.	The	air	above	the	beach	and	the	tidal	flat	was	empty
—not	a	bird	in	sight.
She	halted	her	mount.	A	moment	later	Paran	glanced	back	at	her	then	did	the
same.	He	watched	her	as	she	removed	her	helmet	and	shook	out	her	long,	auburn
hair.	 It	 was	 wet	 and	 stringy	 with	 sweat.	 The	 lieutenant	 rode	 back	 to	 her	 side,	 a
questioning	look	in	his	eyes.
“Lieutenant	 Paran,	 your	 words	 were	 well	 spoken.”	 She	 breathed	 in	 the	 salty
air,	 then	 met	 his	 gaze.	 “You	 won't	 be	 stationed	 in	 Unta,	 I'm	 afraid.	 You	 will	 be
taking	your	orders	from	me	as	a	commissioned	officer	on	my	staff.”
His	eyes	slowly	narrowed.	“What	happened	to	those	soldiers,	Adjunct?”
She	didn't	answer	immediately,	leaning	back	on	her	saddle	and	scanning	the
distant	 sea.	 “Someone's	 been	 here,”	 she	 said.	 “A	 sorcerer	 of	 great	 power.


Something's	happened,	and	we're	being	diverted	from	discovering	it.”
Paran's	mouth	dropped	open.	“Killing	four	hundred	people	was	a	diversion?”
“If	that	man	and	his	daughter	had	been	out	fishing,	they'd	have	come	in	with
the	tide.”
“But—”
“You	won't	find	their	bodies,	Lieutenant.”
Paran	was	puzzled.	“Now	what?”
She	glanced	at	him,	then	swung	her	horse	around.	“We	go	back.”
“That's	 it?”	 He	 stared	 after	 her	 as	 she	 directed	 her	 mount	 back	 up	 the	 trail,
then	rode	to	catch	up.	“Wait	a	minute,	Adjunct,”	he	said,	as	he	came	alongside.
She	gave	him	a	warning	look.
Paran	 shook	 his	 head.	 “No.	 If	 I'm	 now	 on	 your	 staff,	 I	 have	 to	 know	 more
about	what's	going	on.”
She	placed	her	helmet	back	on	and	cinched	tight	the	strap	under	her	chin.	Her
long	hair	dangled	in	tattered	ropes	down	over	her	Imperial	cape.	“Very	well.	As
you	know,	Lieutenant,	I'm	no	mage—”
“No,”	Paran	cut	in,	with	a	cold	grin,	“you	just	hunt	them	down	and	kill	them.”
“Don't	 interrupt	 me	 again.	 As	 I	 was	 saying,	 I	 am	 anathema	 to	 sorcery.	 That
means,	 Lieutenant,	 that,	 even	 though	 I'm	 not	 a	 practitioner,	 I	 have	 a	 relationship
with	 magic.	 Of	 sorts.	 We	 know	 each	 other,	 if	 you	 will.	 I	 know	 the	 patterns	 of
sorcery,	 and	 I	 know	 the	 patterns	 of	 the	 minds	 that	 use	 it.	 We	 were	 meant	 to
conclude	 that	 the	 slaughter	 was	 thorough,	 and	 random.	 It	 was	 neither.	 There's	 a
path	here,	and	we	have	to	find	it.”
Slowly	Paran	nodded.
“Your	 first	 task,	 Lieutenant,	 is	 to	 ride	 to	 the	 market	 town—what's	 its	 name
again?”
“Gerrom.”
“Yes,	Gerrom.	They'll	know	this	fishing	village,	since	that's	where	the	catch
is	 sold.	 Ask	 around,	 find	 out	 which	 fisher	 family	 consisted	 of	 a	 father	 and
daughter.	Get	me	their	names,	and	their	descriptions.	Use	the	militia	if	the	locals
are	recalcitrant.”
“They	won't	be,”	Paran	said.	“The	Kanese	are	cooperative	folk.”
They	 reached	 the	 top	 of	 the	 trail	 and	 stopped	 at	 the	 road.	 Below,	 wagons
rocked	among	the	bodies,	the	oxen	braying	and	stamping	their	blood-soaked	hoofs.
Soldiers	 shouted	 in	 the	 press,	 while	 overhead	 wheeled	 thousands	 of	 birds.	 The
scene	stank	of	panic.	At	the	far	end	stood	the	captain,	his	helmet	hanging	from	its


strap	in	one	hand.
The	 Adjunct	 stared	 down	 on	 the	 scene	 with	 hard	 eyes.	 “For	 their	 sake,”	 she
said,	“I	hope	you're	right,	Lieutenant.”
As	he	watched	the	two	riders	approach,	something	told	the	captain	that	his	days	of
ease	 in	 Itko	 Kan	 were	 numbered.	 His	 helmet	 felt	 heavy	 in	 his	 hand.	 He	 eyed
Paran.	 That	 thin-blooded	 bastard	 had	 it	 made.	 A	 hundred	 strings	 pulling	 him
every	step	of	the	way	to	some	cushy	posting	in	some	peaceful	city.
He	saw	Lorn	studying	him	as	they	came	to	the	crest.	“Captain,	I	have	a	request
for	you.”
The	 captain	 grunted.	 Request,	 hell.	 The	 Empress	 has	 to	 check	 her	 slippers
every	morning	to	make	sure	this	one	isn't	already	in	them.	“Of	course,	Adjunct.”
The	 woman	 dismounted,	 as	 did	 Paran.	 The	 lieutenant's	 expression	 was
impassive.	 Was	 that	 arrogance,	 or	 had	 the	 Adjunct	 given	 him	 something	 to	 think
about?
“Captain,”	Lorn	began,	“I	understand	there's	a	recruiting	drive	under	way	in
Kan.	Do	you	pull	in	people	from	outside	the	city?”
“To	join?	Sure,	more	of	them	than	anyone	else.	City	folk	got	too	much	to	give
up.	 Besides,	 they	 get	 the	 bad	 news	 first.	 Most	 of	 the	 peasants	 don't	 know
everything's	 gone	 to	 Hood's	 Gate	 on	 Genabackis.	 A	 lot	 of	 them	 figure	 city	 folk
whine	too	much	anyway.	May	I	ask	why?”
“You	may.”	Lorn	turned	to	watch	the	soldiers	cleaning	up	the	road.	“I	need	a
list	of	recent	recruits.	Within	the	last	two	days.	Forget	the	ones	born	in	the	city,
just	the	outlying	ones.	And	only	the	women	and/or	old	men.”
The	captain	grunted	again.	“Should	be	a	short	list,	Adjunct.”
“I	hope	so,	Captain.”
“You	figured	out	what's	behind	all	this?”
Still	following	the	activity	on	the	road	below,	Lorn	said,	“No	idea.”
Yes,	 the	 captain	 thought,	 and	 I'm	 the	 Emperor	 reincarnated.	 “Too	 bad,”	 he
muttered.
“Oh.”	 The	 Adjunct	 faced	 him.	 “Lieutenant	 Paran	 is	 now	 on	 my	 staff.	 I	 trust
you'll	make	the	necessary	adjustments.”
“As	you	wish,	Adjunct.	I	love	paperwork.”
That	 earned	 him	 a	 slight	 smile.	 Then	 it	 was	 gone.	 “Lieutenant	 Paran	 will	 be
leaving	now.”


The	 captain	 looked	 at	 the	 young	 noble	 and	 smiled,	 letting	 the	 smile	 say
everything.	 Working	 for	 the	 Adjunct	 was	 like	 being	 the	 worm	 on	 the	 hook.	 The
Adjunct	was	the	hook,	and	at	the	other	end	of	the	line	was	the	Empress.	Let	him
squirm.
A	 sour	 expression	 flitted	 across	 Paran's	 face.	 “Yes,	 Adjunct.”	 He	 climbed
back	into	the	saddle,	saluted,	then	rode	off	down	the	road.
The	captain	watched	him	leave,	then	said,	“Anything	else,	Adjunct?”
“Yes.”
Her	tone	brought	him	around.
“I	would	like	to	hear	a	soldier's	opinion	of	the	nobility's	present	inroads	on
the	Imperial	command	structure.”
The	captain	stared	hard	at	her.	“It	ain't	pretty,	Adjunct.”
“Go	on.”
The	captain	talked.
It	 was	 the	 eighth	 day	 of	 recruiting	 and	 Staff	 Sergeant	 Aragan	 sat	 bleary-eyed
behind	 his	 desk	 as	 yet	 another	 whelp	 was	 prodded	 forward	 by	 the	 corporal.
They'd	 had	 some	 luck	 here	 in	 Kan.	 Fishing's	 best	 in	 the	 backwaters,	 Kan's	 Fist
had	said.	All	they	get	around	here	is	stories.	Stories	don't	make	you	bleed.	Stories
don't	 make	 you	 go	 hungry,	 don't	 give	 you	 sore	 feet.	 When	 you're	 young	 and
smelling	 of	 pigshit	 and	 convinced	 there	 ain't	 a	 weapon	 in	 all	 the	 damn	 world
that's	going	to	hurt	you,	all	stories	do	is	make	you	want	to	be	part	of	them.
The	old	woman	was	right.	As	usual.	These	people	had	been	under	the	boot	so
long	they	actually	liked	it.	Well,	Aragan	thought,	the	education	begins	here.
It	had	been	a	bad	day,	with	the	local	captain	roaring	off	with	three	companies
and	 leaving	 not	 one	 solid	 rumor	 in	 their	 wake	 about	 what	 was	 going	 on.	 And	 if
that	 wasn't	 bad	 enough,	 Laseen's	 Adjunct	 arrived	 from	 Unta	 shortly	 afterward,
using	one	of	those	eerie	magical	Warrens	to	get	here.	Though	he'd	never	seen	her,
just	her	name	on	the	hot,	dry	wind	was	enough	to	give	him	the	shakes.	Mage	killer,
the	scorpion	in	the	Imperial	pocket.
Aragan	 scowled	 down	 at	 the	 writing	 tablet	 and	 waited	 until	 the	 corporal
cleared	his	throat.	Then	he	looked	up.
The	recruit	standing	before	him	took	the	staff	sergeant	aback.	He	opened	his
mouth,	on	his	tongue	a	lashing	tirade	designed	to	send	the	young	ones	scampering.
A	 second	 later	 he	 shut	 it	 again,	 the	 words	 unspoken.	 Kan's	 Fist	 had	 made	 her
instructions	 abundantly	 clear:	 if	 they	 had	 two	 arms,	 two	 legs	 and	 a	 head,	 take


them.	The	Genabackis	campaign	was	a	mess.	Fresh	bodies	were	needed.
He	grinned	at	the	girl.	She	matched	the	Fist's	description	perfectly.	Still.	“All
right,	lass,	you	understand	you're	in	line	to	join	the	Malazan	Marines,	right?”
The	girl	nodded,	her	gaze	steady	and	cool	and	fixed	on	Aragan.
The	recruiter's	expression	tightened.	Damn,	she	can't	be	more	than	twelve	or
thirteen.	If	this	was	my	daughter	.	.	.
What's	got	her	eyes	looking	so	bloody	old?	The	last	time	he'd	seen	anything
like	 them	 had	 been	 outside	 Mott	 Forest,	 on	 Genabackis—he'd	 been	 marching
through	 farmland	 hit	 by	 five	 years'	 drought	 and	 a	 war	 twice	 as	 long.	 Those	 old
eyes	were	brought	by	hunger,	or	death.	He	scowled.	“What's	your	name,	girl?”
“Am	I	in,	then?”	she	asked	quietly.
Aragan	 nodded,	 a	 sudden	 headache	 pounding	 against	 the	 inside	 of	 his	 skull.
“You'll	get	your	assignment	in	a	week's	time,	unless	you	got	a	preference.”
“Genabackan	campaign,”	the	girl	answered	immediately.	“Under	the	command
of	High	Fist	Dujek	Onearm.	Onearm's	Host.”
Aragan	blinked.	“I'll	make	a	note,”	he	said	softly.	“Your	name,	soldier?”
“Sorry.	My	name	is	Sorry.”
Aragan	jotted	the	name	down	on	his	tablet.	“Dismissed,	soldier.	The	corporal
will	tell	you	where	to	go.”	He	looked	up	as	she	was	near	the	door.	“And	wash	all
that	mud	off	your	feet.”	Aragan	continued	writing	for	a	moment,	then	stopped.	It
hadn't	rained	in	weeks.	And	the	mud	around	here	was	halfway	between	green	and
gray,	not	dark	red.	He	tossed	down	the	stylus	and	massaged	his	temples.	Well,	at
least	the	headache's	fading.
Gerrom	 was	 a	 league	 and	 a	 half	 inland	 along	 the	 Old	 Kan	 Road,	 a	 pre-Empire
thoroughfare	 rarely	 used	 since	 the	 Imperial	 raised	 coast	 road	 had	 been
constructed.	 The	 traffic	 on	 it	 these	 days	 was	 mostly	 on	 foot,	 local	 farmers	 and
fishers	 with	 their	 goods.	 Of	 them	 only	 unraveled	 and	 torn	 bundles	 of	 clothing,
broken	 baskets	 and	 trampled	 vegetables	 littering	 the	 track	 remained	 to	 give
evidence	of	their	passage.	A	lame	mule,	the	last	sentinel	overseeing	the	refuse	of
an	 exodus,	 stood	 dumbly	 nearby,	 ankle-deep	 in	 a	 rice	 paddy.	 It	 spared	 Paran	 a
single	forlorn	glance	as	he	rode	past.
The	detritus	looked	to	be	no	more	than	a	day	old,	the	fruits	and	green-leaved
vegetables	only	now	beginning	to	rot	in	the	afternoon	heat.
His	horse	carrying	him	at	a	slow	walk,	Paran	watched	as	the	first	outbuildings
of	 the	 small	 trader	 town	 came	 into	 view	 through	 the	 dusty	 haze.	 No	 one	 moved


between	the	shabby	mudbrick	houses;	no	dogs	came	out	to	challenge	him,	and	the
only	cart	in	sight	leaned	on	a	single	wheel.	To	add	to	the	uncanny	scene,	the	air
was	still,	empty	of	birdsong.	Paran	loosened	the	sword	in	its	scabbard.
As	he	neared	the	outbuildings	he	halted	his	mount.	The	exodus	had	been	swift,
a	 panicked	 flight.	 Yet	 he	 saw	 no	 bodies,	 no	 signs	 of	 violence	 beyond	 the	 haste
evident	in	those	leaving.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	slowly	released	it,	then	clicked
his	horse	forward.	The	main	street	was	in	effect	the	town's	only	street,	leading	at
its	 far	 end	 to	 a	 T	 intersection	 marked	 by	 a	 single	 two-story	 stone	 building:	 the
Imperial	Constabulary.	Its	tin-backed	shutters	were	closed,	its	heavy	banded	door
shut.	As	he	approached	Paran	held	his	eyes	on	the	building.
He	dismounted	before	it,	tying	his	mare	to	the	hitching	rail	then	looking	back
up	 the	 street.	 No	 movement.	 Unsheathing	 his	 blade,	 Paran	 swung	 back	 to	 the
Constabulary	door.
A	soft,	steady	sound	from	within	stopped	him,	too	low	to	be	heard	from	any
distance	 but	 now,	 as	 he	 stood	 before	 the	 huge	 door,	 he	 could	 hear	 a	 liquid
murmuring	that	raised	the	hairs	on	his	neck.	Paran	reached	out	with	his	sword	and
set	its	point	under	the	latch.	He	lifted	the	iron	handle	upward	until	it	disengaged,
then	pushed	open	the	door.
Movement	rippled	in	the	gloom	within,	a	flap	and	soft	thumping	of	air	carrying
to	Paran	the	redolent	stench	of	putrifying	flesh.	Breathing	hard	and	with	a	mouth
dry	as	old	cotton,	he	waited	for	his	eyes	to	adjust.
He	stared	into	the	Constabulary's	outer	room,	and	it	was	a	mass	of	movement,
a	 chilling	 soft	 sussuration	 of	 throats	 giving	 voice.	 The	 chamber	 was	 filled	 with
black	 pigeons	 cooing	 in	 icy	 calm.	 Uniformed	 human	 shapes	 lay	 in	 their	 midst,
stretched	 haphazardly	 across	 the	 floor	 amid	 droppings	 and	 drifting	 black	 down.
Sweat	and	death	clung	to	the	air	thick	as	gauze.
He	 took	 a	 step	 inside.	 The	 pigeons	 rustled	 but	 otherwise	 ignored	 him.	 None
made	for	the	open	doorway.
Swollen	faces	with	coin-dull	eyes	stared	up	from	the	shadows;	the	faces	were
blue,	 as	 of	 men	 suffocated.	 Paran	 looked	 down	 at	 one	 of	 the	 soldiers.	 “Not	 a
healthy	thing,”	he	muttered,	“wearing	these	uniforms	these	days.”
A	 conjuring	 of	 birds	 to	 keep	 mocking	 vigil.	 Dark	 humor's	 not	 to	 my	 liking
anymore,	I	think.	He	shook	himself,	walked	across	the	room.	The	pigeons	tracked
away	 from	 his	 boots,	 clucking.	 The	 door	 to	 the	 captain's	 office	 was	 ajar.	 Musty
light	 bled	 through	 the	 shuttered	 windows'	 uneven	 joins.	 Sheathing	 his	 sword,
Paran	 entered	 the	 office.	 The	 captain	 still	 sat	 in	 his	 chair,	 his	 face	 bloated	 and
bruised	in	shades	of	blue,	green,	and	gray.


Paran	 swept	 damp	 feathers	 from	 the	 desktop,	 rummaged	 through	 the	 scroll
work.	 The	 papyrus	 sheets	 fell	 apart	 under	 his	 touch,	 the	 leaves	 rotten	 and	 oily
between	his	fingers.
A	thorough	eliminating	of	the	trail.
He	turned	away,	walked	swiftly	back	through	the	outer	room	until	he	stepped
into	the	warm	light.	He	closed	the	Constabulary	door	as,	no	doubt,	the	villagers
had.
The	 dark	 bloom	 of	 sorcery	 was	 a	 stain	 few	 cared	 to	 examine	 too	 closely.	 It
had	a	way	of	spreading.
Paran	 untethered	 his	 mare,	 climbed	 into	 the	 saddle	 and	 rode	 from	 the
abandoned	town.	He	did	not	look	back.
The	 sun	 sat	 heavy	 and	 bloated	 amid	 a	 smear	 of	 crimson	 cloud	 on	 the	 horizon.
Paran	 fought	 to	 keep	 his	 eyes	 open.	 It	 had	 been	 a	 long	 day.	 A	horrific	 day.	 The
land	 around	 him,	 once	 familiar	 and	 safe,	 had	 become	 something	 else,	 a	 place
stirred	 with	 the	 dark	 currents	 of	 sorcery.	 He	 was	 not	 looking	 forward	 to	 a	 night
camped	in	the	open.
His	 mount	 plodded	 onward,	 head	 down,	 as	 dusk	 slowly	 enveloped	 them.
Pulled	by	the	weary	chains	of	his	thoughts,	Paran	tried	to	make	sense	of	what	had
happened	since	morning.
Snatched	 out	 from	 the	 shadow	 of	 that	 sour-faced,	 laconic	 captain	 and	 the
garrison	at	Kan,	the	lieutenant	had	seen	his	prospects	begin	a	quick	rise.	Aide	to
the	Adjunct	was	an	advancement	in	his	career	he	could	not	have	even	imagined	a
week	 ago.	 Despite	 the	 profession	 he	 had	 chosen,	 his	 father	 and	 his	 sisters	 were
bound	 to	 be	 impressed,	 perhaps	 even	 awed,	 by	 his	 achievement.	 Like	 so	 many
other	noble-born	sons	and	daughters,	he'd	long	since	set	his	sights	on	the	Imperial
military,	hungry	for	prestige	and	bored	with	the	complacent,	static	attitudes	of	the
noble	 class	 in	 general.	 Paran	 wanted	 something	 more	 challenging	 than
coordinating	shipments	of	wine,	or	overseeing	the	breeding	of	horses.
Nor	 was	 he	 among	 the	 first	 to	 enlist,	 thus	 easing	 the	 way	 for	 entrance	 into
officer	training	and	selective	postings.	It	had	just	been	ill-luck	that	saw	him	sent	to
Kan,	where	a	veteran	garrison	had	been	licking	its	wounds	for	nigh	on	eight	years.
There'd	been	little	respect	for	an	untested	 lieutenant,	and	even	 less	 for	a	nobleborn.
Paran	 suspected	 that	 that	 had	 changed	 since	 the	 slaughter	 on	 the	 road.	 He'd
handled	it	better	than	many	of	those	veterans,	helped	in	no	small	part	by	the	superb
breeding	 of	 his	 horse.	 More,	 to	 prove	 to	 them	 all	 his	 cool,	 detached


professionalism,	he'd	volunteered	to	lead	the	inspection	detail.
He'd	 done	 well,	 although	 the	 detail	 had	 proved	 .	 .	 .	 difficult.	 He'd	 heard
screaming	 while	 crawling	 around	 among	 the	 bodies,	 coming	 from	 somewhere
inside	his	own	head.	His	eyes	had	fixed	on	details,	oddities—the	peculiar	twist	of
this	body,	the	inexplicable	smile	on	that	dead	soldier's	face—but	what	had	proved
hardest	 was	 what	 had	 been	 done	 to	 the	 horses.	 Crusted	 foam-filled	 nostrils	 and
mouths—the	signs	of	terror—and	the	wounds	were	terrible,	huge	and	devastating.
Bile	and	feces	stained	the	once-proud	mounts,	and	over	everything	was	a	glittering
carpet	of	blood	and	slivers	of	red	flesh.	He	had	nearly	wept	for	those	horses.
He	 shifted	 uneasily	 on	 the	 saddle,	 feeling	 a	 clamminess	 come	 to	 his	 hands
where	they	rested	on	the	ornate	horn.	He'd	held	on	to	his	confidence	through	the
whole	episode;	yet	now,	as	his	thoughts	returned	to	that	horrid	scene,	it	was	as	if
something	that	had	always	been	solid	in	his	mind	now	stuttered,	shied,	threatening
his	balance;	the	faint	contempt	he'd	shown	for	those	veterans	in	his	troop,	kneeling
helpless	 on	 the	 roadside	 racked	 by	 dry-heaves,	 returned	 to	 him	 now	 with	 a
ghoulish	cast.	And	the	echo	that	came	from	the	Constabulary	at	Gerrom,	arriving
like	a	late	blow	to	his	already	bruised	and	battered	soul,	rose	once	again	to	pluck
at	the	defensive	numbness	still	holding	him	in	check.
Paran	straightened	 with	 an	 effort.	 He'd	 told	the	Adjunct	 his	 youth	was	gone.
He'd	told	her	other	things	as	well,	fearless,	uncaring,	lacking	all	the	caution	his
father	had	instilled	in	him	when	it	came	to	the	many	faces	of	the	Empire.
From	 a	 great	 distance	 in	 his	 mind	 came	 old,	 old	 words:	 live	 quietly.	 He'd
rejected	 that	 notion	 then;	 he	 rejected	 it	 still.	 The	 Adjunct,	 however,	 had	 noticed
him.	He	wondered	now,	for	the	first	time,	if	he	was	right	to	feel	pride.	That	hardbitten	commander	of	so	many	years	ago,	on	the	walls	of	Mock's	Hold,	would	have
spat	at	Paran's	feet,	with	contempt,	had	he	now	stood	before	him.	The	boy	was	a
boy	no	longer,	but	a	man.	Should've	heeded	my	words,	son.	Now	look	at	you.
His	mare	pulled	up	suddenly,	hooves	thumping	confusedly	on	the	rutted	road.
Paran	 reached	 for	 his	 weapon	 as	 he	 looked	 uneasily	 around	 in	 the	 gloom.	 The
track	 ran	 through	 rice	 paddies,	 the	 nearest	 shacks	 of	 the	 peasants	 on	 a	 parallel
ridge	a	hundred	paces	from	the	road.	Yet	a	figure	now	blocked	the	road.
A	cold	breath	swirled	lazily	past,	pinning	back	the	mare's	ears	and	widening
her	nostrils	as	she	flinched.
The	 figure—a	man	by	 his	height—was	 swathed	in	shades	 of	green:	cloaked,
hooded,	wearing	a	faded	tunic	and	linen	leggings	above	green-dyed	leather	boots.
A	 single	 long-knife,	 the	 weapon	 of	 choice	 among	 Seven	 Cities	 warriors,	 was
slung	 through	 a	 thin	 belt.	 The	 man's	 hands,	 faintly	 gray	 in	 the	 afternoon	 light,


glittered	 with	 rings,	 rings	 on	 every	 finger,	 above	 and	 below	 the	 knuckles.	 He
raised	one	now,	holding	up	a	clay	jug.
“Thirsty,	Lieutenant?”	The	man's	voice	was	soft,	the	tone	strangely	melodic.
“Have	 I	 business	 with	 you?”	 Paran	 asked,	 his	 hand	 remaining	 on	 the	 grip	 of
his	longsword.
The	man	smiled,	pulling	back	his	hood.	His	face	was	long,	the	skin	a	lighter
shade	 of	 gray,	 the	 eyes	 dark	 and	 strangely	 angled.	 He	 looked	 to	 be	 in	 his	 early
thirties,	 though	 his	 hair	 was	 white.	 “The	 Adjunct	 asked	 of	 me	 a	 favor,”	 he	 said.
“She	grows	impatient	for	your	report.	I	am	to	escort	you	.	.	.	with	haste.”	He	shook
the	jug.	“But	first,	a	repast.	I	have	a	veritable	feast	secreted	in	my	pockets—far
better	 fare	 than	 a	 brow-beaten	 Kanese	 village	 can	 offer.	 Join	 me,	 here	 on	 the
roadside.	We	can	amuse	ourselves	in	conversation	and	idle	watching	of	peasants
toiling	endlessly.	I	am	named	Topper.”
“I	know	that	name,”	Paran	said.
“Well,	you	should,”	Topper	replied.	“I	am	he,	alas.	The	blood	of	a	Tiste	Andii
races	in	my	veins,	seeking	escape,	no	doubt,	from	its	more	common	human	stream.
Mine	 was	 the	 hand	 that	 took	 the	 life	 of	 Unta's	 royal	 line,	 king,	 queen,	 sons,	 and
daughters.”
“And	cousins,	second	cousins,	third—”
“Expunging	 all	 hope,	 indeed.	 Such	 was	 my	 duty	 as	 a	 Claw	 of	 unsurpassed
skill.	But	you	have	failed	in	answering	my	question.”
“Which	was?”
“Thirsty?”
Scowling,	 Paran	 dismounted.	 “I	 thought	 you	 said	 the	 Adjunct	 wished	 for
haste.”
“Hasten	we	shall,	Lieutenant,	once	we've	filled	our	bellies,	and	conversed	in
civil	fashion.”
“Your	reputation	puts	civility	far	down	your	list	of	skills,	Claw.”
“It's	 a	 most	 cherished	 trait	 of	 mine	 that	 sees	 far	 too	 little	 opportunity	 for
exercise	these	fell	days,	Lieutenant.	Surely	you'd	grant	me	some	of	your	precious
time,	since	I'm	to	be	your	escort?”
“Whatever	arrangement	you	made	with	the	Adjunct	is	between	you	and	her,”
Paran	said,	approaching.	“I	owe	you	nothing,	Topper.	Except	enmity.”
The	 Claw	 squatted,	 removing	 wrapped	 packages	 from	 his	 pockets,	 followed
by	 two	 crystal	 goblets.	 He	 uncorked	 the	 jug.	 “Ancient	 wounds.	 I	 was	 led	 to
understand	you've	taken	a	different	path,	leaving	behind	the	dull,	jostling	ranks	of


the	 nobility.”	 He	 poured,	 filling	 the	 goblets	 with	 amber-colored	 wine.	 “You	 are
now	 one	 with	 the	 body	 of	 Empire,	 Lieutenant.	 It	 commands	 you.	 You	 respond
unquestioningly	to	its	will.	You	are	a	small	part	of	a	muscle	in	that	body.	No	more.
No	 less.	 The	 time	 for	 old	 grudges	 is	 long	 past.	 So,”	 he	 set	 down	 the	 jug	 and
handed	Paran	a	goblet,	“we	now	salute	new	beginnings,	Ganoes	Paran,	lieutenant
and	aide	to	Adjunct	Lorn.”
Scowling,	Paran	accepted	the	goblet.
The	two	drank.
Topper	smiled,	producing	a	silk	handkerchief	to	dab	against	his	lips.	“There
now,	that	wasn't	so	difficult,	was	it?	May	I	call	you	by	your	chosen	name?”
“Paran	will	do.	And	you?	What	title	does	the	commander	of	the	Claw	hold?”
Topper	 smiled	 again.	 “Laseen	 still	 commands	 the	 Claw.	 I	 assist	 her.	 In	 this
way	I	too	am	an	aide	of	sorts.	You	may	call	me	by	my	chosen	name,	of	course.	I'm
not	one	for	maintaining	formalities	beyond	a	reasonable	point	in	an	acquaintance.”
Paran	sat	down	on	the	muddy	road.	“And	we've	passed	that	point?”
“Indeed.”
“How	do	you	decide?”
“Ah,	 well.”	 Topper	 began	 unwrapping	 his	 packages,	 revealing	 cheese,	 fistbread,	fruit,	and	berries.	“I	make	acquaintances	in	one	of	two	ways.	You've	seen
the	second	of	those.”
“And	the	first?”
“No	time	for	proper	introductions	in	those	instances,	alas.”
Wearily	Paran	unstrapped	and	removed	his	helm.	“Do	you	wish	to	hear	what	I
found	in	Gerrom?”	he	asked,	running	a	hand	through	his	black	hair.
Topper	shrugged.	“If	you've	the	need.”
“Perhaps	I'd	better	await	my	audience	with	the	Adjunct.”
The	Claw	smiled.	“You	have	begun	to	learn,	Paran.	Never	be	too	easy	with	the
knowledge	you	possess.	Words	are	like	coin—it	pays	to	hoard.”
“Until	you	die	on	a	bed	of	gold,”	Paran	said.
“Hungry?	I	hate	eating	alone.”
Paran	accepted	a	chunk	of	fistbread.	“So,	was	the	Adjunct	truly	impatient,	or
are	you	here	for	other	reasons?”
With	 a	 smile,	 the	 Claw	 rose.	 “Alas,	 genteel	 conversation	 is	 done.	 Our	 way
opens.”	He	faced	the	road.
Paran	 turned	 to	 see	 a	 curtain	 in	 the	 air	 tear	 open	 on	 the	 road,	 spilling	 dull


yellow	light.	A	Warren,	the	secret	paths	of	sorcery.	“Hood's	Breath.”	He	sighed,
fighting	 off	 a	 sudden	 chill.	 Within	 he	 could	 see	 a	 grayish	 pathway,	 humped	 on
either	side	by	low	mounded	walls	and	vaulted	overhead	by	impenetrable	ocherhued	 mist.	 The	 air	 swept	 past	 into	 the	 portal	 like	 a	 drawn	 breath,	 revealing	 the
pathway	to	be	of	ash	as	invisible	currents	stirred	and	raised	spinning	dust-devils.
“You	will	have	to	get	used	to	this,”	Topper	said.
Paran	collected	his	mare's	reins	and	slung	his	helm	on	the	saddlehorn.	“Lead
on,”	he	said.
The	Claw	cast	him	a	quick	appraising	glance,	then	strode	into	the	Warren.
Paran	followed.	The	portalway	closed	behind	them,	in	its	place	a	continuation
of	the	path.	Itko	Kan	had	vanished,	and	with	it	all	signs	of	life.	The	world	they	had
entered	was	barren,	deathly.	The	banked	mounds	lining	the	trail	proved	to	be	more
ash.	The	air	was	gritty,	tasting	of	metal.
“Welcome	to	the	Imperial	Warren,”	Topper	said,	with	a	hint	of	mockery.
“Pleasant.”
“Carved	 by	 force	 out	 of	 .	 .	 .	 what	 was	 here	 before.	 Has	 such	 an	 effort	 ever
been	achieved	before?	Only	the	gods	can	say.”
They	began	walking.
“I	take	it,	then,”	Paran	said,	“that	no	god	claims	this	Warren.	By	this,	you	cheat
the	tolls,	the	gatekeepers,	the	guardians	on	unseen	bridges,	and	all	the	others	said
to	dwell	in	the	Warrens	in	service	to	their	immortal	masters.”
Topper	 grunted.	 “You	 imagine	 the	 Warrens	 as	 crowded	 as	 that?	 Well,	 the
beliefs	 of	 the	 ignorant	 are	 ever	 entertaining.	 You	 shall	 be	 good	 company	 on	 this
short	journey,	I	think.”
Paran	fell	silent.	The	horizons	beyond	the	banked	heaps	of	ash	were	close,	a
vague	blending	of	ocher	sky	and	gray-black	ground.	Sweat	trickled	under	his	mail
hauberk.	His	mare	snorted	heavily.
“In	case	you	were	wondering,”	Topper	said,	after	a	time,	“the	Adjunct	is	now
in	Unta.	We	will	use	this	Warren	to	cross	the	distance—three	hundred	leagues	in
only	 a	 few	 short	 hours.	 Some	 think	 the	 Empire	 has	 grown	 too	 large,	 some	 even
think	their	remote	provinces	are	beyond	the	Empress	Laseen's	reach.	As	you	have
just	learned,	Paran,	such	beliefs	are	held	by	fools.”
The	mare	snorted	again.
“I've	 shamed	you	into	silence,	 then?	I	 do	 apologize,	 Lieutenant,	for	 mocking
your	ignorance—”
	


“It's	a	risk	you'll	have	to	live	with,”	Paran	said.
The	next	thousand	paces	of	silence	belonged	to	Topper.
	

No	 shifting	 of	 light	 marked	 the	 passing	 of	 time.	 On	 a	 number	 of	 occasions	 they
came	 upon	 places	 where	 the	 ash	 embankments	 had	 been	 disturbed,	 as	 if	 by	 the
passage	 of	 something	 large,	 shambling;	 and	 wide,	 slithery	 trails	 led	 off	 into	 the
gloom.	In	one	such	place	they	found	a	dark	encrusted	stain	and	the	scatter	of	chain
links	 like	 coins	 in	 the	 dust.	 Topper	 examined	 the	 scene	 closely	 while	 Paran
watched.
Hardly	the	secure	road	he'd	have	me	believe.	There're	strangers	here,	and
they're	not	friendly.
He	was	not	surprised	to	find	Topper	increasing	their	pace	thereafter.	A	short
while	 later	 they	 came	 to	 a	 stone	 archway.	 It	 had	 been	 recently	 constructed,	 and
Paran	 recognized	 the	 basalt	 as	 Untan,	 from	 the	 Imperial	 quarries	 outside	 the
capital.	 The	 walls	 of	 his	 family's	 estate	 were	 of	 the	 same	 gray-black	 glittering
stone.	At	the	center	of	the	arch,	high	over	their	heads,	was	carved	a	taloned	hand
holding	a	crystal	globe:	the	Malazan	Imperial	sigil.
Beyond	the	arch	was	darkness.
Paran	cleared	his	throat.	“We	have	arrived?”
Topper	 spun	 to	 him.	 “You	 answer	 civility	 with	 arrogance,	 Lieutenant.	 You'd
do	well	to	shed	the	noble	hauteur.”
Smiling,	Paran	gestured.	“Lead	on,	escort.”
In	a	whirl	of	cloak	Topper	stepped	through	the	arch	and	vanished.
The	mare	bucked	as	Paran	pulled	her	closer	to	the	arch,	head	tossing.	He	tried
to	soothe	her	but	it	was	no	use.	Finally,	he	climbed	into	the	saddle	and	gathered	up
the	reins.	He	straightened	the	horse,	then	drove	hard	his	spurs	into	her	flanks.	She
bolted,	leaped	into	the	void.
Light	and	colors	exploded	outward,	engulfing	them.	The	mare's	hooves	landed
with	a	crunching	thump,	scattering	something	that	might	be	gravel	in	all	directions.
Paran	 halted	 his	 horse,	 blinking	 as	 he	 took	 in	 the	 scene	 around	 them.	 A	 vast
chamber,	its	ceiling	glittering	with	beaten	gold,	its	walls	lined	with	tapestries,	and
a	score	of	armored	guards	closing	in	on	all	sides.
Alarmed,	the	mare	sidestepped	to	send	Topper	sprawling.	A	hoof	lashed	out
after	him,	missing	by	a	handspan.	More	gravel	crunched—only	it	was	not	gravel,
Paran	 saw,	 but	 mosaic	 stones.	 Topper	 rolled	 to	 his	 feet	 with	 a	 curse,	 his	 eyes


flashing	as	he	glared	at	the	lieutenant.
The	 guardsmen	 seemed	 to	 respond	 to	 some	 unspoken	 order,	 slowly
withdrawing	 to	 their	 positions	 along	 the	 walls.	 Paran	 swung	 his	 attention	 from
Topper.	Before	him	was	a	raised	dais	surmounted	by	a	throne	of	twisted	bone.	In
the	throne	sat	the	Empress.
Silence	 fell	 in	 the	 chamber	 except	 for	 the	 crunch	 of	 semi-precious	 gems
beneath	 the	 mare's	 hooves.	 Grimacing,	 Paran	 dismounted,	 warily	 eyeing	 the
woman	seated	on	the	throne.
Laseen	had	changed	little	since	the	only	other	time	he'd	been	this	close	to	her;
plain	 and	 unadorned,	 her	 hair	 short	 and	 fair	 above	 the	 blue	 tint	 of	 her
unmemorable	features.	Her	brown	eyes	regarded	him	narrowly.
Paran	adjusted	his	sword-belt,	clasped	his	hands	and	bowed	from	the	waist.
“Empress.”
“I	 see,”	 Laseen	 drawled,	 “that	 you	 did	 not	 heed	 the	 commander's	 advice	 of
seven	years	ago.”
He	blinked	in	surprise.
She	 continued,	 “Of	 course,	 he	 did	 not	 heed	 the	 advice	 given	 him,	 either.	 I
wonder	what	god	tossed	you	two	together	on	that	parapet—I	would	do	service	to
acknowledge	its	sense	of	humor.	Did	you	imagine	the	Imperial	Arch	would	exit	in
the	stables,	Lieutenant?”
“My	horse	was	reluctant	to	make	the	passage,	Empress.”
“With	good	reason.”
Paran	smiled.	“Unlike	me,	she's	of	a	breed	known	for	its	intelligence.	Please
accept	my	humblest	apologies.”
“Topper	 will	 see	 you	 to	 the	 Adjunct.”	 She	 gestured,	 and	 a	 guardsman	 came
forward	to	collect	the	mare's	reins.
Paran	bowed	again	then	faced	the	Claw	with	a	smile.
Topper	led	him	to	a	side	door.
“You	 fool!”	 he	 snapped,	 as	 the	 door	 was	 closed	 soundly	 behind	 them.	 He
strode	 quickly	 down	 the	 narrow	 hallway.	 Paran	 made	 no	 effort	 to	 keep	 pace,
forcing	 the	 Claw	 to	 wait	 at	 the	 far	 end	 where	 a	 set	 of	 stairs	 wound	 upward.
Topper's	expression	was	dark	with	fury.	“What	was	that	about	a	parapet?	You've
met	her	before—when?”
“Since	she	declined	to	explain	I	can	only	follow	her	example,”	Paran	said.	He
eyed	the	saddle-backed	stairs.	“This	would	be	the	West	Tower,	then.	The	Tower
of	Dust—”


“To	the	top	floor.	The	Adjunct	awaits	you	in	her	chambers—there's	no	other
doors	so	you	won't	get	lost,	just	keep	on	until	you	reach	the	top.”
Paran	nodded	and	began	climbing.
The	door	to	the	tower's	top	room	was	ajar.	Paran	rapped	a	knuckle	against	it
and	stepped	inside.	The	Adjunct	was	seated	at	a	bench	at	the	far	end,	her	back	to	a
wide	 window.	 Its	 shutters	 were	 thrown	 open,	 revealing	 the	 red	 glint	 of	 sunrise.
She	was	getting	dressed.	Paran	halted,	embarrassed.
“I'm	not	one	for	modesty,”	the	Adjunct	said.	“Enter	and	close	the	door	behind
you.”
Paran	 did	 as	 he	 was	 bidden.	 He	 looked	 around.	 Faded	 tapestries	 lined	 the
walls.	Ragged	furs	covered	the	stone	tiles	of	the	floor.	The	furniture—what	little
there	was—was	old,	Napan	in	style	and	thus	artless.
The	 Adjunct	 rose	 to	 shrug	 into	 her	 leather	 armor.	 Her	 hair	 shimmered	 in	 the
red	light.	“You	look	exhausted,	Lieutenant.	Please,	sit.”
He	 looked	 around,	 found	 a	 chair	 and	 slumped	 gratefully	 into	 it.	 “The	 trail's
been	thoroughly	obscured,	Adjunct.	The	only	people	left	in	Gerrom	aren't	likely	to
talk.”
She	fastened	the	last	of	the	clasps.	“Unless	I	were	to	send	a	necromancer.”
He	grunted.	“Tales	of	pigeons—I	think	the	possibility	was	foreseen.”
She	regarded	him	with	a	raised	brow.
“Pardon,	Adjunct.	It	seems	that	death's	heralds	were	.	.	.	birds.”
“And	were	we	to	glance	through	the	eyes	of	the	dead	soldiers,	we	would	see
little	else.	Pigeons,	you	said?”
He	nodded.
“Curious.”	She	fell	silent.
He	watched	her	for	a	moment	longer.	“Was	I	bait,	Adjunct?”
“No.”
“And	Topper's	timely	arrival?”
“Convenience.”
He	fell	silent.	When	he	closed	his	eyes	his	head	spun.	He'd	not	realized	how
weary	he'd	become.	It	was	a	moment	before	he	understood	that	she	was	speaking
to	him.	He	shook	himself,	straightened.
The	 Adjunct	 stood	 before	 him.	 “Sleep	 later,	 not	 now,	 Lieutenant.	 I	 was
informing	 you	 of	 your	 future.	 It	 would	 be	 well	 if	 you	 paid	 attention.	 You
completed	 your	 task	 as	 instructed.	 Indeed,	 you	 have	 proved	 yourself	 highly	 .	 .	 .


resilient.	To	all	outward	appearances,	I	am	done	with	you,	Lieutenant.	You	will	be
returned	to	the	Officer	Corps	here	in	Unta.	What	will	follow	will	be	a	number	of
postings,	completing	your	official	training.	As	for	your	time	in	Itko	Kan,	nothing
unusual	occurred	there,	do	you	understand	me?”
“Yes.”
“Good.”
“And	what	of	what	really	happened	there,	Adjunct?	Do	we	abandon	pursuit?
Do	we	resign	ourselves	to	never	knowing	exactly	what	happened,	or	why?	Or	is	it
simply	me	who	is	to	be	abandoned?”
“Lieutenant,	 this	 is	 a	 trail	 we	 must	 not	 follow	 too	 closely,	 but	 follow	 it	 we
shall,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 central	 to	 the	 effort.	 I	 have	 assumed—perhaps	 in	 error—
that	you	would	wish	to	see	it	through,	to	be	witness	when	the	time	for	vengeance
finally	arrives.	Was	I	wrong?	Perhaps	you've	seen	enough	and	seek	only	a	return
to	normality.”
He	closed	his	eyes.	“Adjunct,	I	would	be	there	when	the	time	came.”
She	 was	 silent	 and	 he	 knew	 without	 opening	 his	 eyes	 that	 she	 was	 studying
him,	gauging	his	worth.	He	was	beyond	unease	and	beyond	caring.	He'd	stated	his
desire;	the	decision	was	hers.
“We	proceed	slowly.	Your	reassignment	will	take	effect	in	a	few	days'	time.	In
the	meanwhile,	go	home	to	your	father's	estate.	Get	some	rest.”
He	opened	his	eyes	and	rose	to	his	feet.	As	he	reached	the	doorway	she	spoke
again.	“Lieutenant,	I	trust	you	won't	repeat	the	scene	in	the	Hall	of	the	Throne.”
“I	doubt	I'd	earn	as	many	laughs	the	second	time	around,	Adjunct.”
As	he	reached	the	stairs	he	heard	what	might	have	been	a	cough	from	the	room
behind	him.	It	was	hard	to	imagine	that	it	could	have	been	anything	else.
______
As	he	led	his	horse	through	the	streets	of	Unta	he	felt	numb	inside.	The	familiar
sights,	 the	 teeming,	 interminable	 crowds,	 the	 voices	 and	 clash	 of	 languages	 all
struck	 Paran	 as	 something	 strange,	 something	 altered,	 not	 before	 his	 eyes	 but	 in
that	 unknowable	 place	 between	 his	 eyes	 and	 his	 thoughts.	 The	 change	 was	 his
alone,	and	it	made	him	feel	shorn,	outcast.
Yet	 the	 place	 was	 the	 same:	 the	 scenes	 before	 him	 were	 as	 they	 always	 had
been	and	even	in	watching	them	pass	by	all	around	him,	nothing	had	changed.	It
was	the	gift	of	noble	blood	that	kept	the	world	at	a	distance,	to	be	observed	from	a


position	unsullied,	unjostled	by	the	commonry.	Gift	.	.	.	and	curse.
Now,	 however,	 Paran	 walked	 among	 them	 without	 the	 family	 guards.	 The
power	of	blood	was	gone,	and	all	he	possessed	by	way	of	armor	was	the	uniform
he	 now	 wore.	 Not	 a	 craftsman,	 not	 a	 hawker,	 not	 a	 merchant,	 but	 a	 soldier.	 A
weapon	of	the	Empire,	and	the	Empire	had	those	in	the	tens	of	thousands.
He	 passed	 through	 Toll	 Ramp	 Gate	 and	 made	 his	 way	 along	 Marble	 Slope
Road,	 where	 the	 first	 merchant	 estates	 appeared,	 pushed	 back	 from	 the	 cobbled
street,	half	hidden	by	courtyard	walls.	The	foliage	of	gardens	joined	their	lively
colors	 with	 brightly	 painted	 walls;	 the	 crowds	 diminished	 and	 private	 guards
were	visible	outside	arching	gates.	The	sweltering	air	lost	its	reek	of	sewage	and
rotting	food,	slipping	cooler	across	unseen	fountains	and	carrying	into	the	avenue
the	fragrance	of	blossoms.
Smells	of	childhood.
The	 estates	 spread	 out	 as	 he	 led	 his	 horse	 deeper	 into	 the	 Noble	 District.
Breathing-space	 purchased	 by	 history	 and	 ancient	 coin.	 The	 Empire	 seemed	 to
melt	 away,	 a	 distant,	 mundane	 concern.	 Here,	 families	 traced	 their	 lines	 back
seven	centuries	to	those	tribal	horsemen	who	had	first	come	to	this	land	from	the
east.	In	blood	and	fire,	as	was	always	the	way,	they	had	conquered	and	subdued
the	 cousins	 of	 the	 Kanese	 who'd	 built	 villages	 along	 this	 coast.	 From	 warrior
horsemen	 to	 horsebreeders	 to	 merchants	 of	 wine,	 beer,	 and	 cloth.	 An	 ancient
nobility	 of	 the	 blade,	 now	 a	 nobility	 of	 hoarded	 gold,	 trade	 agreements,	 subtle
maneuverings,	and	hidden	corruptions	in	gilded	rooms	and	oil-lit	corridors.
Paran	had	imagined	himself	acquiring	trappings	that	closed	a	circle,	a	return	to
the	 blade	 from	 which	 his	 family	 had	 emerged,	 strong	 and	 savage,	 all	 those
centuries	ago.	For	his	choice,	his	father	had	condemned	him.
He	 came	 to	 a	 familiar	 postern,	 a	 single	 high	 door	 along	 one	 side	 wall	 and
facing	an	alley	that	in	another	part	of	the	city	would	be	a	wide	street.	There	was
no	guard	here,	just	a	thin	bell-chain,	which	he	pulled	twice.
Alone	in	the	alley,	Paran	waited.
A	bar	clanked	on	the	other	side,	a	voice	growled	a	curse	as	the	door	swung
back	on	protesting	hinges.
Paran	 found	 himself	 staring	 down	 at	 an	 unfamiliar	 face.	 The	 man	 was	 old,
scarred	 and	 wearing	 much-mended	 chain-mail	 that	 ended	 raggedly	 around	 his
knees.	His	pot-helm	was	uneven	with	hammered-out	dents,	yet	polished	bright.
The	man	eyed	Paran	up	and	down	with	watery	gray	eyes,	then	grunted,	“The
tapestry	lives.”
“Excuse	me?”


The	 guardsman	 swung	 the	 door	 wide.	 “Older	 now,	 of	 course,	 but	 it's	 all	 the
same	by	the	lines.	Good	artist,	to	capture	the	way	of	standing,	the	expression	and
all.	Welcome	home,	Ganoes.”
Paran	led	his	horse	through	the	narrow	doorway.	The	path	was	between	two
outbuildings	of	the	estate,	showing	sky	overhead.
“I	 don't	 know	 you,	 soldier,”	 Paran	 said.	 “But	 it	 seems	 my	 portrait	 has	 been
well	studied	by	the	guards.	Is	it	now	a	throw-rug	in	your	barracks?”
“Something	like	that.”
“What	is	your	name?”
“Gamet,”	the	guard	answered,	as	he	followed	behind	the	horse	after	shutting
and	locking	the	door.	“In	service	to	your	father	these	last	three	years.”
“And	before	that,	Gamet?”
“Not	a	question	asked.”
They	 came	 to	 the	 courtyard.	 Paran	 paused	 to	 study	 the	 guardsman.	 “My
father's	usually	thorough	in	researching	the	histories	of	those	entering	his	employ.”
Gamet	grinned,	revealing	a	full	set	of	white	teeth.	“Oh,	that	he	did.	And	here	I
am.	Guess	it	weren't	too	dishonorable.”
“You're	a	veteran.”
“Here,	sir,	I'll	take	your	horse.”
Paran	passed	over	the	reins.	He	swung	about	and	looked	round	the	courtyard.
It	 seemed	 smaller	 than	 he	 remembered.	 The	 old	 well,	 made	 by	 the	 nameless
people	who'd	lived	here	before	even	the	Kanese,	looked	ready	to	crumble	into	a
heap	 of	 dust.	 No	 craftsman	 would	 reset	 those	 ancient	 carved	 stones,	 fearing	 the
curse	 of	 awakened	 ghosts.	 Under	 the	 estate	 house	 itself	 were	 similarly	 unmortared	 stones	 in	 the	 deepest	 reaches,	 the	 many	 rooms	 and	 tunnels	 too	 bent,
twisted,	and	uneven	to	use.
Servants	and	groundskeepers	moved	back	and	forth	in	the	yard.	None	had	yet
noticed	Paran's	arrival.
Gamet	cleared	his	throat.	“Your	father	and	mother	aren't	here.”
He	nodded.	There'd	be	foals	to	care	for	at	Emalau,	the	country	estate.
“Your	 sisters	 are,	 though,”	 Gamet	 continued.	 “I'll	 have	 the	 house	 servants
freshen	up	your	room.”
“It's	been	left	as	it	was,	then?”
Gamet	 grinned	 again.	 “Well,	 clear	 out	 the	 extra	 furniture	 and	 casks,	 then.
Storage	space	at	a	premium,	you	know	.	.	.”


“As	 always.”	 Paran	 sighed	 and,	 without	 another	 word,	 made	 his	 way	 to	 the
house	entrance.
The	feast	hall	echoed	to	Paran's	boots	as	he	strode	to	the	long	dining	table.	Cats
bolted	 across	 the	 floor,	 scattering	 at	 his	 approach.	 He	 unclasped	 his	 traveling
cloak,	tossed	it	across	the	back	of	a	chair,	then	sat	at	a	longbench	and	leaned	his
back	against	the	paneled	wall.	He	closed	his	eyes.
A	 few	 minutes	 passed,	 then	 a	 woman's	 voice	 spoke.	 “I	 thought	 you	 were	 in
Itko	Kan.”
He	opened	his	eyes.	His	sister	Tavore,	a	year	younger	than	him,	stood	close	to
the	head	of	the	table,	one	hand	on	the	back	of	their	father's	chair.	She	was	as	plain
as	 ever,	 a	 slash	 of	 bloodless	 lines	 comprising	 her	 features,	 her	 reddish	 hair
trimmed	shorter	than	was	the	style.	She	was	taller	than	the	last	time	he'd	seen	her,
nearly	 his	 own	 height,	 no	 longer	 the	 awkward	 child.	 Her	 expression	 revealed
nothing	as	she	studied	him.
“Reassignment,”	Paran	said.
“To	here?	We	would	have	heard.”
Ah,	 yes,	 you	 would	 have,	 wouldn't	 you?	 All	 the	 sly	 whisperings	 among	 the
connected	families.
“Unplanned,”	he	conceded,	“but	done	nevertheless.	Not	stationed	here	in	Unta,
though.	My	visit	is	only	a	few	days.”
“Have	you	been	promoted?”
He	smiled.	“Is	the	investment	about	to	reap	coin?	Reluctant	as	it	was,	we	still
must	think	in	terms	of	potential	influence,	mustn't	we?”
“Managing	this	family's	position	is	no	longer	your	responsibility,	brother.”
“Ah,	it's	yours	now,	then?	Has	Father	withdrawn	from	the	daily	chores?”
“Slowly.	His	health	is	failing.	Had	you	asked,	even	in	Itko	Kan	.	.	.”
He	 sighed.	 “Still	 making	 up	 for	 me,	 Tavore?	 Assuming	 the	 burden	 of	 my
failings?	 I	 hardly	 left	 here	 on	 a	 carpet	 of	 petals,	 you	 may	 recall.	 In	 any	 case,	 I
always	assumed	the	house	affairs	would	fall	into	capable	hands	.	.	.”
Her	pale	eyes	narrowed,	but	pride	silenced	the	obvious	question.
He	asked,	“And	how	is	Felisin?”
“At	her	studies.	She's	not	heard	of	your	return.	She	will	be	very	excited,	then
crushed	to	hear	of	the	shortness	of	your	visit.”
“Is	she	your	rival	now,	Tavore?”


His	 sister	 snorted,	 turning	 away.	 “Felisin?	 She's	 too	 soft	 for	 this	 world,
brother.	For	any	world,	I	think.	She's	not	changed.	She'll	be	happy	to	see	you.”
He	watched	her	stiff	back	as	she	left	the	hall.
He	 smelled	 of	 sweat—his	 own	 and	 the	 mare's—travel	 and	 grime,	 and	 of
something	else	as	well	.	.	.	Old	blood	and	old	fear.	Paran	looked	around.	Much
smaller	than	I	remembered.


Chapter	Two
	

With	the	coming	of	the	Moranth
the	tide	turned.
And	like	ships	in	a	harbor
the	Free	Cities	were	swept	under
Imperial	seas.
The	war	entered	its	twelfth	year,
the	Year	of	the	Shattered	Moon
and	its	sudden	spawn	of
deathly	rain	and
black-winged	promise.
Two	cities	remained	to	contest
the	Malazan	onslaught.
One	stalwart,	proud	banners
beneath	Dark's	powerful	wing.
The	other	divided—
—without	an	army,
bereft	of	allies—
The	strong	city	fell	first.
CALL	TO	SHADOW
FELISIN	(B.1146)


	
1163rd	Year	of	Burn's	Sleep	(two	years	later)
105th	Year	of	the	Malazan	Empire
9th	Year	of	Empress	Laseen's	Rule
Through	 the	 pallor	 of	 smoke	 ravens	 wheeled.	 Their	 calls	 raised	 a	 shrill	 chorus
above	the	 cries	of	wounded	and	dying	soldiers.	The	stench	of	seared	flesh	hung
unmoving	in	the	haze.
On	 the	 third	 hill	 overlooking	 the	 fallen	 city	 of	 Pale,	 Tattersail	 stood	 alone.
Scattered	 around	 the	 sorceress	 the	 curled	 remains	 of	 burned	 armor—greaves,
breastplates,	helms,	and	weapons—lay	heaped	in	piles.	An	hour	earlier	there	had
been	 men	 and	 women	 wearing	 that	 armor,	 but	 of	 them	 there	 was	 no	 sign.	 The
silence	within	those	empty	shells	rang	like	a	dirge	in	Tattersail's	head.
Her	 arms	 were	 crossed,	 tight	 against	 her	 chest.	 The	 burgundy	 cloak	 with	 its
silver	emblem	betokening	her	command	of	the	2nd	Army's	wizard	cadre	now	hung
from	 her	 round	 shoulders	 stained	 and	 scorched.	 Her	 oval,	 fleshy	 face,	 usually
parading	an	expression	of	cherubic	humor,	was	etched	with	deep-shadowed	lines,
leaving	her	cheeks	flaccid	and	pale.
For	 all	 the	 smells	 and	 sounds	 surrounding	 Tattersail,	 she	 found	 herself
listening	 to	 a	 deeper	 silence.	 In	 some	 ways	 it	 came	 from	 the	 empty	 armor
surrounding	her,	an	absence	that	was	in	itself	an	accusation.	But	there	was	another
source	 of	 the	 silence.	 The	 sorcery	 that	 had	 been	 unleashed	 here	 today	 had	 been
enough	 to	 fray	 the	 fabric	 between	 the	 worlds.	 Whatever	 dwelt	 beyond,	 in	 the
Warrens	of	Chaos,	felt	close	enough	to	reach	out	and	touch.
She'd	 thought	 her	 emotions	 spent,	 used	 up	 by	 the	 terror	 she	 had	 just	 been
through,	but	as	she	watched	the	tight	ranks	of	a	legion	of	Moranth	Black	marching
into	the	city	a	frost	of	hatred	slipped	over	her	heavy-lidded	eyes.
Allies.	 They're	 claiming	 their	 hour	 of	 blood.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 that	 hour	 there
would	be	a	score	thousand	fewer	survivors	among	the	citizens	of	Pale.	The	long
savage	history	between	the	neighboring	peoples	was	about	to	have	the	scales	of
retribution	balanced.	By	the	sword.	Shedunul's	mercy,	hasn't	there	been	enough?
A	 dozen	 fires	 raged	 unchecked	 through	 the	 city.	 The	 siege	 was	 over,	 finally,
after	three	long	years.	But	Tattersail	knew	that	there	was	more	to	come.	Something
hid,	and	waited,	in	the	silence.	So	she	would	wait	as	well.	The	deaths	of	this	day


deserved	that	much	from	her—after	all,	she	had	failed	in	all	the	other	ways	that
mattered.
On	 the	 plain	 below,	 the	 bodies	 of	 Malazan	 soldiers	 covered	 the	 ground,	 a
rumpled	carpet	of	dead.	Limbs	jutted	upward	here	and	there,	ravens	perching	on
them	like	overlords.	Soldiers	who	had	survived	the	slaughter	wandered	in	a	daze
among	 the	 bodies,	 seeking	 fallen	 comrades.	 Tattersail's	 eyes	 followed	 them
achingly.
“They're	 coming,”	 said	 a	 voice,	 a	 dozen	 feet	 to	 her	 left.	 Slowly	 she	 turned.
The	 wizard	 Hairlock	 lay	 sprawled	 on	 the	 burned	 armor,	 the	 pate	 of	 his	 shaved
skull	reflecting	the	dull	sky.	A	wave	of	sorcery	had	destroyed	him	from	the	hips
down.	Pink,	mud-spattered	entrails	billowed	out	from	under	his	ribcage,	webbed
by	drying	fluids.	A	faint	penumbra	of	sorcery	revealed	his	efforts	at	staying	alive.
“Thought	you	were	dead,”	Tattersail	muttered.
“Felt	lucky	today.”
“You	don't	look	it.”
Hairlock's	 grunt	 released	 a	 gout	 of	 dark	 thick	 blood	 from	 below	 his	 heart.
“They're	coming,”	he	said.	“See	them	yet?”
She	swung	her	attention	to	the	slope,	her	pale	eyes	narrowing.	Four	soldiers
approached.	“Who	are	they?”
The	wizard	didn't	answer.
Tattersail	faced	him	again	and	found	his	hard	gaze	fixed	on	her,	intent	in	the
way	a	dying	person	achieves	in	those	last	moments.	“Thought	you'd	take	a	wave
through	the	gut,	huh?	Well,	I	suppose	that's	one	way	to	get	shipped	out	of	here.”
His	reply	surprised	her.	“The	tough	façade	ill	fits	you,	'Sail.	Always	has.”	He
frowned	and	blinked	rapidly,	fighting	off	darkness,	she	supposed.	“There's	always
the	 risk	 of	 knowing	 too	 much.	 Be	 glad	 I	 spared	 you.”	 He	 smiled,	 unveiling	 redstained	teeth.	“Think	nice	thoughts.	The	flesh	fades.”
She	 eyed	him	 steadily,	wondering	at	his	sudden	.	.	 .	 humanity.	Maybe	dying
did	away	with	the	usual	games,	the	pretenses	of	the	living	dance.	Maybe	she	just
wasn't	 prepared	 to	 see	 the	 mortal	 man	 in	 Hairlock	 finally	 showing	 itself.
Tattersail	prised	her	arms	from	the	dreadful,	aching	hug	she	had	wrapped	around
herself,	 and	 sighed	 shakily.	 “You're	 right.	 It's	 not	 the	 time	 for	 façades,	 is	 it?	 I
never	 liked	 you,	 Hairlock,	 but	 I'd	 never	 question	 your	 courage—I	 never	 will.”
She	 studied	 him	 critically,	 a	 part	 of	 her	 astonished	 that	 the	 horror	 of	 his	 wound
didn't	 so	 much	 as	 make	 her	 flinch.	 “I	 don't	 think	 even	 Tayschrenn's	 arts	 are
enough	to	save	you,	Hairlock.”
Something	 cunning	 flashed	 in	 his	 eyes	 and	 he	 barked	 a	 pained	 laugh.	 “Dear


girl,”	he	gasped,	“your	naïveté	never	fails	to	charm	me.”
“Of	course,”	she	snapped,	stung	at	falling	for	his	sudden	ingenuousness.	“One
last	joke	on	me,	just	for	old	times'	sake.”
“You	misunderstand—”
“Are	you	so	certain?	You're	saying	it	isn't	over	yet.	Your	hatred	of	our	High
Mage	is	fierce	enough	to	let	you	slip	Hood's	cold	grasp,	is	that	it?	Vengeance	from
beyond	the	grave?”
“You	must	know	me	by	now.	I	always	arrange	a	back	door.”
“You	can't	even	crawl.	How	do	you	plan	on	getting	to	it?”
The	 wizard	 licked	 his	 cracked	 lips.	 “Part	 of	 the	 deal,”	 he	 said	 softly.	 “The
door	comes	to	me.	Comes	even	as	we	speak.”
Unease	 coiled	 around	 her	 insides.	 Behind	 her,	 Tattersail	 heard	 the	 crunch	 of
armor	and	the	rattle	of	iron,	the	sound	arriving	like	a	cold	wind.	She	turned	to	see
the	four	soldiers	appear	on	the	summit.	Three	men,	one	woman,	mud-smeared	and
crimson-streaked,	 their	 faces	 almost	 bone-white.	 The	 sorceress	 found	 her	 eyes
drawn	to	the	woman,	who	hung	back	like	an	unwelcome	afterthought	as	the	three
men	approached.	The	girl	was	young,	pretty	as	an	icicle	and	looking	as	warm	to
the	touch.	Something	wrong	there.	Careful.
The	 man	 in	 the	 lead—a	 sergeant	 by	 the	 torque	 on	 his	 arm—came	 up	 to
Tattersail.	 Set	 deep	 in	 a	 lined,	 exhausted	 face,	 his	 dark	 gray	 eyes	 searched	 hers
dispassionately.	“This	one?”	he	asked,	turning	to	the	tall,	thin	black-skinned	man
who	came	up	beside	him.
This	 man	 shook	 his	 head.	 “No,	 the	 one	 we	 want	 is	 over	 there,”	 he	 said.
Though	he	spoke	Malazan,	his	harsh	accent	was	Seven	Cities.
The	third	and	last	man,	also	black,	slipped	past	on	the	sergeant's	left	and	for
all	his	girth	seemed	to	glide	forward,	his	eyes	on	Hairlock.	His	ignoring	Tattersail
made	her	feel	somehow	slighted.	She	considered	a	well-chosen	word	or	two	as	he
stepped	around	her,	but	the	effort	seemed	suddenly	too	much.
“Well,”	she	said	to	the	sergeant,	“if	you're	the	burial	detail,	you're	early.	He's
not	dead	yet.	Of	course,”	she	continued,	“you're	not	the	burial	detail.	I	know	that.
Hairlock's	 made	 some	 kind	 of	 deal—he's	 thinking	 he	 can	 survive	 with	 half	 a
body.”
The	sergeant's	lips	grew	taut	beneath	his	grizzled,	wiry	beard.	“What's	your
point,	Sorceress?”
The	black	man	beside	the	sergeant	glanced	back	at	the	young	girl	still	standing
a	 dozen	 paces	 behind	 them.	 He	 seemed	 to	 shiver,	 but	 his	 lean	 face	 was


expressionless	as	he	turned	back	and	offered	Tattersail	an	enigmatic	shrug	before
moving	past	her.
She	shuddered	involuntarily	as	power	buffeted	her	senses.	She	drew	a	sharp
breath.	 He's	 a	 mage.	 Tattersail	 tracked	 the	 man	 as	 he	 joined	 his	 comrade	 at
Hairlock's	side,	striving	to	see	through	the	muck	and	blood	covering	his	uniform.
“Who	are	you	people?”
“Ninth	Squad,	the	Second.”
“Ninth?”	The	breath	hissed	from	her	teeth.	“You're	Bridgeburners.”	Her	eyes
narrowed	on	the	battered	sergeant.	“The	Ninth.	That	makes	you	Whiskeyjack.”
He	seemed	to	flinch.
Tattersail	found	her	mouth	dry.	She	cleared	her	throat.	“I've	heard	of	you,	of
course.	I've	heard	the—”
“Doesn't	 matter,”	 he	 interrupted,	 his	 voice	 grating.	 “Old	 stories	 grow	 like
weeds.”
She	rubbed	at	her	face,	feeling	grime	gather	 under	her	 nails.	Bridgeburners.
They'd	 been	 the	 old	 Emperor's	 élite,	 his	 favorites,	 but	 since	 Laseen's	 bloody
coup	nine	years	ago	they'd	been	pushed	hard	into	every	rat's	nest	in	sight.	Almost
a	 decade	 of	 this	 had	 cut	 them	 down	 to	 a	 single,	 undermanned	 division.	 Among
them,	 names	 had	 emerged.	 The	 survivors,	 mostly	 squad	 sergeants,	 names	 that
pushed	 their	 way	 into	 the	 Malazan	 armies	 on	 Genabackis,	 and	 beyond.	 Names,
spicing	the	already	sweeping	legend	of	Onearm's	Host.	Detoran,	Antsy,	Spindle,
Whiskeyjack.	 Names	 heavy	 with	 glory	 and	 bitter	 with	 the	 cynicism	 that	 every
army	feeds	on.	They	carried	with	them	like	an	emblazoned	standard	the	madness
of	this	unending	campaign.
Sergeant	 Whiskeyjack	 was	 studying	 the	 wreckage	 on	 the	 hill.	 Tattersail
watched	him	piece	together	what	had	happened.	A	muscle	in	his	cheek	twitched.
He	looked	at	her	with	new	understanding,	a	hint	of	softening	behind	his	gray	eyes
that	almost	broke	Tattersail	then	and	there.	“Are	you	the	last	left	in	the	cadre?”	he
asked.
She	looked	away,	feeling	brittle.	“The	last	left	standing.	It	wasn't	skill,	either.
Just	lucky.”
If	he	heard	her	bitterness	he	gave	no	sign,	falling	silent	as	he	watched	his	two
Seven	Cities	soldiers	crouching	low	over	Hairlock.
Tattersail	 licked	 her	 lips,	 shifted	 uneasily.	 She	 glanced	 over	 to	 the	 two
soldiers.	 A	 quiet	 conversation	 was	 under	 way.	 She	 heard	 Hairlock	 laugh,	 the
sound	a	soft	jolt	that	made	her	wince.	“The	tall	one,”	she	said.	“He's	a	mage,	isn't
he?”


Whiskeyjack	grunted,	then	said,	“His	name's	Quick	Ben.”
“Not	the	one	he	was	born	with.”
“No.”
She	rolled	her	shoulders	against	the	weight	of	her	cloak,	momentarily	easing
the	dull	pain	in	her	lower	back.	“I	should	know	him,	Sergeant.	That	kind	of	power
gets	noticed.	He's	no	novice.”
“No,”	Whiskeyjack	replied.	“He	isn't.”
She	felt	herself	getting	angry.	“I	want	an	explanation.	What's	happening	here?”
Whiskeyjack	 grimaced.	 “Not	 much,	 by	 the	 looks	 of	 it.”	 He	 raised	 his	 voice.
“Quick	Ben!”
The	 mage	 looked	 over.	 “Some	 last-minute	 negotiations,	 Sergeant,”	 he	 said,
flashing	a	white	grin.
“Hood's	Breath.”	Tattersail	sighed,	turning	away.	The	girl,	she	saw,	still	stood
at	the	hill's	crest	and	seemed	to	be	studying	the	Moranth	columns	passing	into	the
city.	As	if	sensing	Tattersail's	attention,	her	head	snapped	around.	Her	expression
startled	the	sorceress.	Tattersail	pulled	her	eyes	away.	“Is	this	what's	left	of	your
squad,	Sergeant?	Two	desert	marauders	and	a	blood-hungry	recruit?”
Whiskeyjack's	tone	was	flat:	“I	have	seven	left.”
“This	morning?”
“Fifteen.”
Something's	wrong	here.	 Feeling	 a	 need	 to	 say	 something,	 she	 said,	 “Better
than	 most.”	 She	 cursed	 silently	 as	 the	 blood	 drained	 from	 the	 sergeant's	 face.
“Still,”	she	added,	“I'm	sure	they	were	good	men,	the	ones	you	lost.”
“Good	at	dying,”	he	said.
The	 brutality	 of	 his	 words	 shocked	 her.	 Mentally	 reeling,	 she	 squeezed	 shut
her	 eyes,	 fighting	 back	 tears	 of	 bewilderment	 and	 frustration.	 Too	 much	 has
happened.	I'm	not	ready	for	this.	I'm	not	ready	for	Whiskeyjack,	a	man	buckling
under	his	own	legend,	a	man	who's	climbed	more	than	one	mountain	of	the	dead
in	service	to	the	Empire.
The	 Bridgeburners	 hadn't	 shown	 themselves	 much	 over	 the	 past	 three	 years.
Since	 the	 siege	 began,	 they'd	 been	 assigned	 the	 task	 of	 undermining	 Pale's
massive,	ancient	walls.	That	order	had	come	straight	from	the	capital,	and	it	was
either	a	cruel	joke	or	the	product	of	appalling	ignorance:	the	whole	valley	was	a
glacial	dump,	a	rock	pile	plugging	a	crevice	that	reached	so	far	underground	even
Tattersail's	 mages	 had	 trouble	 finding	 its	 bottom.	 They've	 been	 underground
three	years	running.	When	was	the	last	time	they	saw	the	sun?


Tattersail	stiffened	suddenly.	“Sergeant.”	She	opened	her	eyes	to	him.	“You've
been	in	your	tunnels	since	this	morning?”
With	 sinking	 understanding,	 she	 watched	 anguish	 flit	 across	 the	 man's	 face.
“What	tunnels?”	he	said	softly,	then	moved	to	stride	past	her.
She	 reached	 out	 and	 closed	 her	 hand	 on	 his	 arm.	 A	 shock	 seemed	 to	 run
through	 him.	 “Whiskeyjack,”	 she	 whispered,	 “you've	 guessed	 as	 much.	 About—
about	me,	about	what	happened	here	on	this	hill,	all	these	soldiers.”	She	hesitated,
then	said,	“Failure's	something	we	share.	I'm	sorry.”
He	 pulled	 away,	 eyes	 averted.	 “Don't	 be,	 Sorceress.”	 He	 met	 her	 gaze.
“Regret's	not	something	we	can	afford.”
She	watched	him	walk	to	his	soldiers.
A	 young	 woman's	 voice	 spoke	 directly	 behind	 Tattersail.	 “We	 numbered
fourteen	hundred	this	morning,	Sorceress.”
Tattersail	 turned.	 At	 this	 close	 range,	 she	 saw	 that	 the	 girl	 couldn't	 be	 more
than	 fifteen	 years	 old.	 The	 exception	 was	 her	 eyes,	 which	 held	 the	 dull	 glint	 of
weathered	onyx—they	looked	ancient,	every	emotion	eroded	away	into	extinction.
“And	now?”
The	 girl's	 shrug	 was	 almost	 careless.	 “Thirty,	 maybe	 thirty-five.	 Four	 of	 the
five	tunnels	fell	in	completely.	We	were	in	the	fifth	and	dug	our	way	out.	Fiddler
and	Hedge	are	working	on	the	others,	but	they	figure	everybody	else's	been	buried
for	good.	They	tried	to	round	up	some	help.”	A	cold,	knowing	smile	spread	across
her	mud-streaked	face.	“But	your	master,	the	High	Mage,	stopped	them.”
“Tayschrenn	did	what?	Why?”
The	girl	frowned,	as	if	disappointed.	Then	she	simply	walked	away,	stopping
at	the	hill's	crest	and	facing	the	city	again.
Tattersail	stared	after	her.	The	girl	had	thrown	that	last	statement	at	her	as	if
hunting	 for	 some	 particular	 response.	 Complicity?	 In	 any	 case,	 a	 clean	 miss.
Tayschrenn's	not	making	any	friends.	Good.	The	day	had	been	a	disaster,	and	the
blame	fell	squarely	at	the	High	Mage's	feet.	She	stared	at	Pale,	then	lifted	her	gaze
to	the	smoke-filled	sky	above	it.
That	massive,	looming	shape	she	had	greeted	every	morning	for	the	last	three
years	was	indeed	gone.	She	still	had	trouble	believing	it,	despite	the	evidence	of
her	eyes.	“You	warned	us,”	she	whispered	to	the	empty	sky,	as	the	memories	of	the
morning	returned.	“You	warned	us,	didn't	you?”
She'd	been	sleeping	with	Calot	the	past	four	months:	a	little	diversionary	pleasure


to	ease	the	boredom	of	a	siege	that	wasn't	going	anywhere.	At	least,	that	was	how
she	 explained	 to	 herself	 their	 unprofessional	 conduct.	 It	 was	 more	 than	 that,	 of
course,	 much	 more.	 But	 being	 honest	 with	 herself	 had	 never	 been	 one	 of
Tattersail's	strengths.
The	magical	summons,	when	it	came,	awakened	her	before	Calot.	The	mage's
small	but	well-proportioned	body	was	snug	in	the	many	soft	pillows	of	her	flesh.
She	opened	her	eyes	to	find	him	clinging	to	her	like	a	child.	Then	he,	too,	sensed
the	calling	and	awoke	to	her	smile.
“Hairlock?”	he	asked,	shivering	as	he	climbed	out	from	under	the	blankets.
Tattersail	grimaced.	“Who	else?	The	man	never	sleeps.”
“What	now,	I	wonder?”	He	stood,	looking	around	for	his	tunic.
She	 was	 watching	 him.	 He	 was	 so	 thin,	 making	 them	 an	 odd	 combination.
Through	the	faint	dawn	light	seeping	through	the	canvas	tent	walls,	the	sharp,	bony
angles	 of	 his	 body	 looked	 soft,	 almost	 childlike.	 For	 a	 man	 a	 century	 old,	 he
carried	 it	 well.	 “Hairlock's	 been	 running	 errands	 for	 Dujek,”	 she	 said.	 “It's
probably	just	an	update.”
Calot	 grunted	 as	 he	 pulled	 on	 his	 boots.	 “That's	 what	 you	 get	 for	 taking
command	of	the	cadre,	'Sail.	Anyway,	it	was	easier	saluting	Nedurian,	let	me	tell
you.	Whenever	I	look	at	you,	I	just	want	to—”
“Stick	 to	 business,	 Calot,”	 Tattersail	 said,	 meaning	 it	 with	 humor	 though	 it
came	out	with	enough	of	an	edge	to	make	Calot	glance	at	her	sharply.
“Something	up?”	he	asked	quietly,	the	old	frown	finding	its	familiar	lines	on
his	high	forehead.
Thought	 I'd	 got	 rid	 of	 those.	 Tattersail	 sighed.	 “Can't	 tell,	 except	 that
Hairlock's	contacted	both	of	us.	If	it	was	just	a	report,	you'd	still	be	snoring.”
In	 growing	 tension	 they	 finished	 dressing	 in	 silence.	 Less	 than	 an	 hour	 later
Calot	 would	 be	 incinerated	 beneath	 a	 wave	 of	 blue	 fire,	 and	 ravens	 would	 be
answering	 Tattersail's	 despairing	 scream.	 But,	 for	 the	 moment,	 the	 two	 mages
were	 readying	 themselves	 for	 an	 unscheduled	 gathering	 at	 High	 Fist	 Dujek
Onearm's	command	tent.
In	 the	 muddy	 path	 beyond	 Calot's	 tent,	 soldiers	 of	 the	 last	 watch	 huddled
around	braziers	filled	with	burning	horse	dung,	holding	out	hands	to	the	heat.	Few
walked	the	pathways,	the	hour	still	too	early.	Row	upon	row	of	gray	tents	climbed
the	 hills	 overlooking	 the	 plain	 that	 surrounded	 the	 city	 of	 Pale.	 Regimental
standards	ruffled	sullenly	in	a	faint	breeze—the	wind	had	turned	since	last	night,
carrying	 to	 Tattersail	 the	 stench	 of	 the	 latrine	 trenches.	 Overhead	 the	 remaining
handful	 of	 stars	 dimmed	 into	 insignificance	 in	 the	 lightening	 sky.	 The	 world


seemed	almost	peaceful.
Drawing	 her	 cloak	 against	 the	 chill,	 Tattersail	 paused	 outside	 the	 tent	 and
turned	to	study	the	enormous	mountain	hanging	suspended	a	quarter-mile	above	the
city	 of	 Pale.	 She	 scanned	 the	 battered	 face	 of	 Moon's	 Spawn—its	 name	 for	 as
long	as	she	could	remember.	Ragged	as	a	blackened	tooth,	the	basalt	fortress	was
home	to	the	most	powerful	enemy	the	Malazan	Empire	had	ever	faced.	High	above
the	 earth,	 Moon's	 Spawn	 could	 not	 be	 breached	 by	 siege.	 Even	 Laseen's	 own
undead	army,	the	T'lan	Imass,	who	traveled	as	easily	as	dust	on	the	wind,	were
unable,	or	unwilling,	to	penetrate	its	magical	defenses.
Pale's	wizards	had	found	a	powerful	ally.	Tattersail	recalled	that	the	Empire
had	locked	horns	with	the	Moon's	mysterious	lord	once	before,	in	the	days	of	the
Emperor.	 Things	 had	 threatened	 to	 get	 ugly,	 but	 then	 Moon's	 Spawn	 withdrew
from	the	game.	No	one	still	living	knew	why—just	one	of	the	thousand	secrets	the
Emperor	took	with	him	to	his	watery	grave.
The	Moon's	reappearance	here	on	Genabackis	had	been	a	surprise.	And	this
time,	 there	 was	 no	 last-minute	 reprieve.	 A	 half-dozen	 legions	 of	 the	 sorcerous
Tiste	Andii	descended	from	Moon's	Spawn,	and	under	the	command	of	a	warlord
named	 Caladan	 Brood	 they	 joined	 forces	 with	 the	 Crimson	 Guard	 mercenaries.
Together,	the	two	armies	proceeded	to	drive	back	the	Malaz	5th	Army,	which	had
been	 pushing	 eastward	 along	 the	 northern	 edge	 of	 Rhivi	 Plain.	 For	 the	 past	 four
years	the	battered	5th	had	been	bogged	down	in	Blackdog	Forest,	forcing	them	to
make	a	stand	against	Brood	and	the	Crimson	Guard.	It	was	a	stand	fast	becoming	a
death	sentence.
But,	clearly,	Caladan	Brood	and	the	Tiste	Andii	weren't	the	only	inhabitants	of
Moon's	Spawn.	An	unseen	lord	remained	in	command	of	the	fortress,	bringing	it
here	and	sealing	a	pact	with	Pale's	formidable	wizards.
Tattersail's	cadre	had	little	hope	of	magically	challenging	such	opposition.	So
the	siege	had	ground	to	a	halt,	with	the	exception	of	the	Bridgeburners	who	never
relaxed	their	stubborn	efforts	to	undermine	the	city's	ancient	walls.
Stay,	 she	 prayed	 to	 Moon's	 Spawn.	 Turn	 your	 face	 endlessly,	 and	 keep	 the
smell	of	blood,	the	screams	of	the	dying	from	settling	on	this	land.	Wait	for	us	to
blink	first.
Calot	 waited	 beside	 her.	 He	 said	 nothing,	 understanding	 the	 ritual	 this	 had
become.	It	was	one	of	the	many	reasons	why	Tattersail	loved	the	man.	As	a	friend,
of	course.	Nothing	serious,	nothing	frightening	in	the	love	for	a	friend.
“I	sense	impatience	in	Hairlock,”	Calot	murmured	beside	her.
She	sighed.	“I	do,	too.	That's	why	I'm	reluctant.”


“I	know,	but	we	can't	dally	too	long,	'Sail.”	He	grinned	mischievously.	“Bad
form.”
“Hmmm,	can't	have	them	jumping	to	conclusions,	can	we?”
“They	 wouldn't	 have	 to	 jump	 very	 far.	 Anyway,”	 his	 smile	 faltered	 slightly,
“let's	get	going.”
A	 few	 minutes	 later	 they	 arrived	 at	 the	 command	 tent.	 The	 lone	 marine
standing	guard	at	the	flap	seemed	nervous	as	he	saluted	the	two	mages.	Tattersail
paused	and	searched	his	eyes.	“Seventh	Regiment?”
Avoiding	her	gaze,	the	guard	nodded.	“Yes,	Sorceress.	Third	Squad.”
“Thought	 you	 looked	 familiar.	 Give	 my	 regards	 to	 Sergeant	 Rusty.”	 She
stepped	closer.	“Something	in	the	air,	soldier?”
He	blinked.	“High	in	the	air,	Sorceress.	High	as	they	come.”
Tattersail	glanced	at	Calot,	who	had	paused	at	the	tent	flap.	Calot	puffed	out
his	cheeks,	making	a	comical	face.	“Thought	I	smelled	him.”
She	winced	at	this	confirmation.	The	guard,	she	saw,	was	sweating	under	his
iron	helmet.	“Thanks	for	the	warning,	soldier.”
“Always	an	even	trade,	Sorceress.”	The	man	snapped	a	second	salute,	this	one
sharper,	 and	 in	 its	 way	 more	 personal.	 Years	 and	 years	 of	 this.	 Insisting	 I'm
family	 to	 them,	 one	 of	 the	 2nd	 Army—the	 oldest	 intact	 force,	 one	 of	 the
Emperor's	 own.	 Always	 an	 even	 trade,	 Sorceress.	 Save	 our	 skins,	 we'll	 save
yours.	 Family,	 after	 all.	 Why,	 then,	 do	 I	 always	 feel	 so	 estranged	 from	 them?
Tattersail	returned	the	salute.
They	 entered	 the	 command	 tent.	 She	 sensed	 immediately	 the	 presence	 of
power,	 what	 Calot	 called	 smell.	 It	 made	 his	 eyes	 water.	 It	 gave	 her	 a	 migraine
headache.	 This	 particular	 emanation	 was	 a	 power	 she	 knew	 well,	 and	 it	 was
anathema	to	her	own.	Which	made	the	headaches	all	the	worse.
Inside	 the	 tent,	 lanterns	 cast	 a	 dim	 smoky	 light	 on	 the	 dozen	 or	 so	 wooden
chairs	in	the	first	compartment.	A	camp-table	off	to	one	side	held	a	tin	pitcher	of
watered	wine	and	six	tarnished	cups	that	glistened	with	droplets	of	condensation.
Calot	muttered	beside	her,	“Hood's	Breath,	'Sail,	I	hate	this.”
As	her	eyes	adjusted	to	the	gloom,	Tattersail	saw,	through	the	opening	that	led
into	the	tent's	second	compartment,	a	familiar	robed	figure.	He	leaned	with	longfingered	hands	on	Dujek's	map-table.	His	magenta	cloak	rippled	like	water	though
he	remained	motionless.	“Oh,	really	now,”	Tattersail	whispered.
“Just	my	thought,”	Calot	said,	wiping	his	eyes.
“Do	you	think,”	she	said,	as	they	took	their	seats,	“it's	a	studied	pose?”


Calot	grinned.	“Absolutely.	Laseen's	High	Mage	couldn't	read	a	battle	map	if
his	life	depended	on	it.”
“So	long	as	our	lives	don't	depend	on	it.”
A	voice	spoke	from	a	chair	near	them,	“Today	we	work.”
Tattersail	scowled	at	the	preternatural	darkness	enwreathing	the	chair.	“You're
as	bad	as	Tayschrenn,	Hairlock.	And	be	glad	I	didn't	decide	to	sit	in	that	chair.”
Dully,	a	row	of	yellow	teeth	appeared,	then	the	rest	of	the	mage	took	shape	as
Hairlock	 relinquished	 the	 spell.	 Beads	 of	 sweat	 marked	 the	 man's	 flat,	 scarred
brow	and	shaved	pate—nothing	unusual	there:	Hairlock	would	sweat	in	an	ice-pit.
He	 held	 his	 head	 at	 an	 angle,	 achieving	 in	 his	 expression	 something	 like	 smug
detachment	combined	with	contempt.	He	fixed	his	small	dark	eyes	on	Tattersail.
“You	 remember	 work,	 don't	 you?”	 His	 smile	 broadened,	 further	 flattening	 his
mashed,	misaligned	nose.	“It's	what	you	were	doing	before	you	started	rolling	in
the	sack	with	dear	Calot	here.	Before	you	went	soft.”
Tattersail	drew	breath	for	a	retort,	but	was	interrupted	by	Calot's	slow,	easy
drawl.	 “Lonely,	 Hairlock?	 Should	 I	 tell	 you	 that	 the	 camp-followers	 demand
double	 the	 coin	 from	 you?”	 He	 waved	 a	 hand,	 as	 if	 clearing	 away	 unsavory
thoughts.	“The	simple	fact	is,	Dujek	chose	Tattersail	to	command	the	cadre	after
Nedurian's	untimely	demise	at	Mott	Wood.	You	may	not	like	it,	but	that's	just	too
bad.	It's	the	price	you	pay	for	ambivalence.”
Hairlock	 reached	 down	 and	 brushed	 a	 speck	 of	 dirt	 from	 his	 satin	 slippers,
which	had,	improbably,	escaped	unmarred	the	muddy	streets	outside.	“Blind	faith,
dear	comrades,	is	for	fools—”
He	was	interrupted	by	 the	tent	flap	swishing	aside.	High	Fist	Dujek	Onearm
entered,	the	soap	of	his	morning	shave	still	clotting	the	hair	in	his	ears,	the	smell
of	cinnamon	water	wafting	after	him.
Over	 the	 years,	 Tattersail	 had	 come	 to	 attach	 much	 to	 that	 aroma.	 Security,
stability,	sanity.	Dujek	Onearm	represented	all	those	things,	and	not	just	to	her	but
to	the	army	that	fought	for	him.	As	he	stopped	now	in	the	center	of	the	room	and
surveyed	 the	 three	 mages,	 she	 leaned	 back	 slightly	 and,	 from	 under	 heavy	 lids,
studied	 the	 High	 Fist.	 Three	 years	 of	 enforced	 passivity	 in	 this	 siege	 seemed	 to
have	acted	like	a	tonic	on	the	aging	man.	He	looked	more	like	fifty	rather	than	his
seventy-nine	 years.	 His	 gray	 eyes	 remained	 sharp	 and	 unyielding	 in	 his	 tanned,
lean	face.	He	stood	straight,	which	made	him	seem	taller	than	his	five	and	a	half
feet,	 wearing	 simple,	 unadorned	 leathers,	 stained	 as	 much	 by	 sweat	 as	 by	 the
Imperial	 magenta	 dye.	 The	 stump	 of	 his	 left	 arm,	 just	 below	 the	 shoulder,	 was
wrapped	in	leather	strips.	His	hairy	chalk-white	calves	were	visible	between	the


sharkskin	straps	of	the	Napan	sandals.
Calot	withdrew	a	handkerchief	from	his	sleeve	and	tossed	it	to	Dujek.
The	 High	 Mage	 snagged	 it.	 “Again?	 Damn	 that	 barber,”	 he	 growled,	 wiping
the	 soap	 from	 his	 jaw	 and	 ears.	 “I	 swear	 he	 does	 it	 on	 purpose.”	 He	 balled	 the
handkerchief	and	flung	it	on	to	Calot's	lap.	“Now,	we're	all	here.	Good.	Regular
business	first.	Hairlock,	you	finished	jawing	with	the	boys	below?”
Hairlock	stifled	a	yawn.	“Some	sapper	named	Fiddler	took	me	in,	showed	me
around.”	He	paused	to	pluck	lint	from	his	brocaded	sleeve,	then	met	Dujek's	eyes.
“Give	them	six	or	seven	years	and	they	might	have	reached	the	city	walls	by	then.”
“It's	 pointless,”	 Tattersail	 said,	 “which	 is	 what	 I	 put	 in	 my	 report.”	 She
squinted	up	at	Dujek.	“Assuming	it	ever	made	it	to	the	Imperial	Court.”
“Camel's	still	swimming,”	Calot	said.
Dujek	 grunted—as	 close	 as	 he	 ever	 got	 to	 laughing.	 “All	 right,	 cadre,	 listen
carefully.	 Two	 things.”	 A	 faint	 scowl	 crossed	 his	 scarred	 features.	 “One,	 the
Empress	has	sent	a	Claw.	They're	in	the	city,	hunting	down	Pale's	wizards.”
A	chill	danced	up	Tattersail's	spine.	No	one	liked	having	the	Claws	around.
Those	 Imperial	 assassins—Laseen's	 favored	 weapon—kept	 their	 poisoned
daggers	sharp	for	anyone	and	everyone,	Malazans	included.
It	seemed	Calot	was	thinking	the	same	thing,	for	he	sat	up	sharply.	“If	they're
here	for	any	other	reason	.	.	.”
“They'll	 have	 to	 come	 through	 me	 first,”	 Dujek	 said,	 his	 lone	 hand	 reaching
down	to	rest	on	the	pommel	of	his	longsword.
He	 has	 an	 audience,	 there	 in	 the	 other	 room.	 He's	 telling	 the	 man
commanding	the	Claw	how	things	stand.	Shedunul	bless	him.
Hairlock	spoke.	“They'll	go	to	ground.	They're	wizards,	not	idiots.”
It	was	a	moment	before	Tattersail	understood	the	man's	comment.	Oh,	right.
Pale's	wizards.
Dujek	 glanced	 down	 at	 Hairlock,	 gauging,	 then	 he	 nodded.	 “Two,	 we're
attacking	Moon's	Spawn	today.”
In	 the	 other	 compartment,	 High	 Mage	 Tayschrenn	 turned	 at	 these	 words	 and
approached	 slowly.	 Within	 his	 hood	 a	 broad	 smile	 creased	 his	 dark	 face,	 a
momentary	 cracking	 of	 seamless	 features.	 The	 smile	 passed	 quickly,	 the	 ageless
skin	 becoming	 smooth	 once	 again.	 “Hello,	 my	 colleagues,”	 he	 said,	 droll	 and
menacing	all	at	once.
Hairlock	snorted.	“Keep	the	melodrama	to	a	minimum,	Tayschrenn,	and	we'll
all	be	happier.”


Ignoring	 Hairlock's	 comment,	 the	 High	 Mage	 continued,	 “The	 Empress	 has
lost	her	patience	with	Moon's	Spawn—”
Dujek	cocked	his	head	and	interrupted,	his	voice	softly	grating.	“The	Empress
is	scared	enough	to	hit	first	and	hit	hard.	Tell	it	plain,	Magicker.	This	is	your	front
line	you're	talking	to	here.	Show	some	respect,	dammit.”
The	High	Mage	shrugged.	“Of	course,	High	Fist.”	He	faced	the	cadre.	“Your
group,	 myself	 and	 three	 other	 High	 Mages	 will	 strike	 Moon's	 Spawn	 within	 the
hour.	The	North	Campaign	has	drawn	most	of	the	edifice's	inhabitants	away.	We
believe	 that	 the	 Moon's	 lord	 is	 alone.	 For	 almost	 three	 years	 his	 mere	 presence
has	 been	 enough	 to	 hold	 us	 in	 check.	 This	 morning,	 my	 colleagues,	 we	 will	 test
this	lord's	mettle.”
“And	 hope	 to	 Hood	 he's	 been	 bluffing	 all	 this	 time,”	 Dujek	 added,	 a	 scowl
deepening	the	lines	on	his	forehead.	“Any	questions?”
“How	soon	can	I	get	a	transfer?”	Calot	asked.
Tattersail	 cleared	 her	 throat.	 “What	 do	 we	 know	 about	 the	 Lord	 of	 Moon's
Spawn?”
“Scant	little,	I'm	afraid,”	Tayschrenn	said,	his	eyes	veiled.	“A	Tiste	Andii,	for
certain.	An	archmage.”
Hairlock	 leaned	 forward	 and	 deliberately	 spat	 at	 the	 floor	 in	 front	 of
Tayschrenn.	“Tiste	Andii,	High	Mage?	I	think	we	can	be	a	little	more	specific	than
that,	don't	you?”
Tattersail's	 migraine	 worsened.	 She	 realized	 she	 was	 holding	 her	 breath,
slowly	forced	it	out	as	she	gauged	Tayschrenn's	reaction—to	the	man's	words	and
to	the	traditional	Seven	Cities	challenge.
“An	 archmage,”	 Tayschrenn	 repeated.	 “Perhaps	 the	 Archmage	 of	 the	 Tiste
Andii.	 Dear	 Hairlock,”	 he	 added,	 his	 voice	 lowering	 a	 notch,	 “your	 primitive
tribal	gestures	remain	quaint,	if	somewhat	tasteless.”
Hairlock	 bared	 his	 teeth.	 “The	 Tiste	 Andii	 are	 Mother	 Dark's	 first	 children.
You've	 felt	 the	 tremors	 through	 the	 Warrens	 of	 Sorcery,	 Tayschrenn.	 So	 have	 I.
Ask	Dujek	about	the	reports	coming	down	from	the	North	Campaign.	Elder	magic
—Kurald	Galain.	The	Lord	of	Moon's	Spawn	is	the	Master	Archmage—you	know
his	name	as	well	as	I	do.”
“I	know	nothing	of	the	sort,”	the	High	Mage	snapped,	losing	his	calm	at	last.
“Perhaps	you'd	care	to	enlighten	us,	Hairlock,	and	then	I	can	begin	inquiries	as	to
your	sources.”
“Ahh!”	Hairlock	bolted	forward	in	his	chair,	an	eager	malice	in	his	taut	face.
“A	 threat	 from	 the	 High	 Mage.	 Now	 we're	 getting	 somewhere.	 Answer	 me	 this,


then.	Why	only	three	other	High	Mages?	We've	hardly	been	thinned	out	that	badly.
More,	why	didn't	we	do	this	two	years	ago?”
Whatever	was	building	between	Hairlock	and	Tayschrenn	was	interrupted	by
Dujek,	 who	 growled	 wordlessly,	 then	 said,	 “We're	 desperate,	 mage.	 The	 North
Campaign	 has	 gone	 sour.	 The	 Fifth	 is	 damn	 near	 gone,	 and	 won't	 be	 getting	 any
reinforcements	 until	 next	 spring.	 The	 point	 is,	 the	 Moon's	 lord	 could	 have	 his
army	back	any	day	now.	I	don't	want	to	have	to	send	you	up	against	an	army	of
Tiste	Andii,	and	I	sure	as	Hood	don't	want	the	Second	having	to	show	two	fronts
with	 a	 relieving	 force	 coming	 down	 on	 them.	 Bad	 tactics,	 and	 whoever	 this
Caladan	Brood	is,	he's	shown	himself	adept	at	making	us	pay	for	our	mistakes.”
“Caladan	Brood,”	Calot	murmured.	“I	swear	I've	heard	that	name	somewhere
before.	Odd	that	I've	never	given	it	much	thought.”
Tattersail's	 eyes	 narrowed	 on	 Tayschrenn.	 Calot	 was	 right:	 the	 name	 of	 the
man	commanding	the	Tiste	Andii	alongside	the	Crimson	Guard	did	sound	familiar
—but	in	an	old	way,	echoing	ancient	legends,	perhaps,	or	some	epic	poem.
The	High	Mage	met	her	gaze,	flat	and	calculating.	“The	need,”	he	said,	turning
to	the	others,	“for	justifications	has	passed.	The	Empress	has	commanded,	and	we
must	obey.”
Hairlock	snorted	a	second	time.	“Speaking	of	twisting	arms,”	he	sat	back,	still
smiling	contemptuously	at	Tayschrenn,	“remember	how	we	played	cat	and	mouse
at	Aren?	This	plan	has	your	stink	on	it.	You've	been	itching	for	a	chance	like	this
for	 a	 long	 time.”	 His	 grin	 turned	 savage.	 “Who,	 then,	 are	 the	 other	 three	 High
Mages?	Let	me	guess—”
“Enough!”	 Tayschrenn	 stepped	 close	 to	 Hairlock,	 who	 went	 very	 still,	 eyes
glittering.
The	lanterns	had	dimmed.	Calot	used	the	handkerchief	in	his	lap	to	wipe	tears
from	his	cheeks.
Power,	oh,	damn,	my	head	feels	ready	to	crack	wide	open.
“Very	 well,”	 Hairlock	 whispered,	 “let's	 lay	 it	 out	 on	 the	 table.	 I'm	 sure	 the
High	Fist	will	appreciate	you	putting	all	his	suspicions	in	the	proper	order.	Make
it	plain,	old	friend.”
Tattersail	 glanced	 at	 Dujek.	 The	 commander's	 face	 had	 closed	 up,	 his	 sharp
eyes	narrow	and	fixed	on	Tayschrenn.	He	was	doing	some	hard	thinking.
Calot	leaned	against	her.	“What's	going	on,	'Sail?”
“No	idea,”	she	whispered,	“but	it's	heating	up	nicely.”	Though	she'd	made	her
comment	 light,	 her	 mind	 was	 whirling	 around	 a	 cold	 knot	 of	 fear.	 Hairlock	 had
been	 with	 the	 Empire	 longer	 than	 she	 had—or	 Calot.	 He'd	 been	 among	 the


sorcerers	who'd	fought	against	the	Malazans	in	Seven	Cities,	before	Aren	fell	and
the	 Holy	 Falah'd	 were	 scattered,	 before	 he'd	 been	 given	 the	 choice	 of	 death	 or
service	 to	 the	 new	 masters.	 He'd	 joined	 the	 2nd's	 cadre	 at	 Panpot'sun—like
Dujek	himself	he'd	been	there,	with	the	Emperor's	old	guard,	when	the	first	vipers
of	 usurpation	 had	 stirred,	 the	 day	 the	 Empire's	 First	 Sword	 was	 betrayed	 and
brutally	murdered.	Hairlock	knew	something.	But	what?
“All	right,”	Dujek	drawled,	“we've	got	work	to	do.	Let's	get	at	it.”
Tattersail	 sighed.	 Old	 Onearm's	 way	 with	 words.	 She	 swung	 a	 look	 on	 the
man.	She	knew	him	well,	not	as	a	friend—Dujek	didn't	make	friends—but	as	the
best	 military	 mind	 left	 in	 the	 Empire.	 If,	 as	 Hairlock	 had	 just	 implied,	 the	 High
Fist	was	being	betrayed	by	someone,	somewhere,	and	if	Tayschrenn	was	part	of	it
.	.	.	we're	a	bent	bough,	Calot	had	once	said	of	Onearm's	Host,	and	beware	the
Empire	 when	 it	 breaks.	 Seven	 Cities'	 soldiery,	 the	 closeted	 ghosts	 of	 the
conquered	but	unconquerable	.	.	.
Tayschrenn	 gestured	 to	 her	 and	 to	 the	 other	 mages.	 Tattersail	 rose,	 as	 did
Calot.	Hairlock	remained	seated,	eyes	closed	as	if	asleep.
Calot	said	to	Dujek,	“About	that	transfer.”
“Later,”	 the	 High	 Fist	 grunted.	 “Paperwork's	 a	 nightmare	 when	 you've	 only
got	 one	 arm.”	 He	 surveyed	 his	 cadre	 and	 was	 about	 to	 add	 something	 but	 Calot
spoke	first.
“Anomandaris.”
Hairlock's	 eyes	 snapped	 open,	 found	 Tayschrenn	 with	 bright	 pleasure.
“Ahhh,”	 he	 said,	 into	 the	 silence	 following	 Calot's	 single	 pronouncement.	 “Of
course.	Three	more	High	Mages?	Only	three?”
Tattersail	 stared	 at	 Dujek's	 pale,	 still	 face.	 “The	 poem,”	 she	 said	 quietly.	 “I
remember	now.”
	
“Caladan	Brood,	the	menhired	one,
winter-bearing,	barrowed	and	sorrowless	.	.	.”
Calot	picked	up	the	next	lines.
	
“.	.	.	in	a	tomb	bereaved	of	words,


and	in	his	hands	that	have	crushed	anvils—”
Tattersail	continued,
“the	hammer	of	his	song—
he	lives	asleep,	so	give	silent	warning
to	all—wake	him	not.
Wake	him	not.”
Everyone	in	the	compartment	was	staring	at	Tattersail	now	as	her	last	words
fell	 away.	 “He's	 awake,	 it	 seems,”	 she	 said,	 her	 mouth	 dry.	 ‘Anomandaris,'	 the
epic	poem	by	Fisher	kel	Tath.”
“The	poem's	not	about	Caladan	Brood,”	Dujek	said,	frowning.
“No,”	she	agreed.	“It's	mostly	about	his	companion.”
Hairlock	 climbed	 slowly	 to	 his	 feet.	 He	 stepped	 close	 to	 Tayschrenn.
“Anomander	Rake,	Lord	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	who	are	the	souls	of	Starless	Night.
Rake,	the	Mane	of	Chaos.	That's	who	the	Moon's	lord	is,	and	you're	pitting	four
High	Mages	and	a	single	cadre	against	him.”
Tayschrenn's	 smooth	 face	 held	 the	 faintest	 sheen	 of	 sweat	 now.	 “The	 Tiste
Andii,”	 he	 said,	 in	 an	 even	 voice,	 “are	 not	 like	 us.	 To	 you	 they	 may	 seem
unpredictable,	 but	 they	 aren't.	 Just	 different.	 They	 have	 no	 cause	 of	 their	 own.
They	 simply	 move	 from	 one	 human	 drama	 to	 the	 next.	 Do	 you	 actually	 think
Anomander	Rake	will	stay	and	fight?”
“Has	Caladan	Brood	backed	away?”	Hairlock	snapped.
“He	is	not	Tiste	Andii,	Hairlock.	He's	human—some	say	with	Barghast	blood,
but	nonetheless	he	shares	nothing	of	Elder	blood,	or	its	ways.”
Tattersail	said,	“You're	counting	on	Rake	betraying	Pale's	wizards—betraying
the	pact	made	between	them.”
“The	 risk	 is	 not	 as	 overreaching	 as	 it	 may	 seem,”	 the	 High	 Mage	 said.
“Bellurdan	 has	 done	 the	 research	 in	 Genabaris,	 Sorceress.	 Some	 new	 scrolls	 of
Gothos'	Folly	 were	 discovered	 in	 a	 mountain	 fastness	 beyond	 Blackdog	 Forest.
Among	the	writings	are	discussions	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	and	other	peoples	from	the
Elder	 Age.	 And	 remember,	 Moon's	 Spawn	 has	 retreated	 from	 a	 direct
confrontation	with	the	Empire	before.”
The	waves	of	fear	sweeping	through	Tattersail	made	her	knees	weak.	She	sat
down	again,	heavily	enough	to	make	the	camp	chair	creak.	“You've	condemned	us


to	death,”	she	said,	“if	your	gamble	proves	wrong.	Not	just	us,	High	Mage,	all	of
Onearm's	Host.”
Tayschrenn	swung	round	slowly,	putting	his	back	to	Hairlock	and	the	others.
“Empress	 Laseen's	 orders,”	 he	 said,	 without	 turning.	 “Our	 colleagues	 come	 by
Warren.	When	they	arrive,	I	will	detail	the	positioning.	That	is	all.”	He	strode	into
the	map	room,	resumed	his	original	stance.
Dujek	seemed	to	have	aged	in	front	of	Tattersail's	eyes.	Swiftly	she	slid	her
glance	 from	 him,	 too	 anguished	 to	 meet	 the	 abandonment	 in	 his	 eyes,	 and	 the
suspicion	 curdling	 beneath	 its	 surface.	 Coward—that's	 what	 you	 are,	 woman.	 A
coward.
Finally	 the	 High	 Fist	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “Prepare	 your	 Warrens,	 cadre.	 As
usual,	always	an	even	trade.”
Give	the	High	Mage	credit,	Tattersail	thought.	There	was	Tayschrenn,	standing	on
the	first	hill,	almost	inside	the	Moon's	shadow.	They	had	arrayed	themselves	into
three	groups,	each	taking	a	hilltop	on	the	plain	outside	Pale's	walls.	The	cadre's
was	most	distant,	Tayschrenn's	the	closest.	On	the	center	hill	stood	the	three	other
High	 Mages.	 Tattersail	 knew	 them	 all.	 Nightchill,	 raven-haired,	 tall,	 imperious
and	 with	 a	 cruel	 streak	 the	 old	 Emperor	 used	 to	 drool	 over.	 At	 her	 side	 her
lifelong	 companion,	 Bellurdan,	 skull-crusher,	 a	 Thelomen	 giant	 who	 would	 test
his	 prodigious	 strength	 against	 the	 Moon's	 portal,	 should	 it	 come	 to	 that.	 And
A'Karonys,	fire-wielder,	short	and	round,	his	burning	staff	taller	than	a	spear.
The	 2nd	 and	 6th	 Armies	 had	 formed	 ranks	 on	 the	 plain,	 weapons	 bared	 and
awaiting	 the	 call	 to	 march	 on	 the	 city	 when	 the	 time	 came.	 Seven	 thousand
veterans	and	four	thousand	recruits.	The	Black	Moranth	legions	lined	the	ridge	to
the	west	a	quarter-mile	distant.
No	wind	stirred	the	midday	air.	Biting	midges	roved	in	visible	clouds	through
the	 soldiers	 waiting	 below.	 The	 sky	 was	 overcast,	 the	 cloud	 cover	 thin	 but
absolute.
Tattersail	stood	on	the	hill's	crest,	sweat	running	down	under	her	clothing,	and
watched	the	soldiers	on	the	plain	before	facing	her	meager	cadre.	At	full	strength,
six	mages	should	have	been	arrayed	behind	her,	but	there	were	only	two.	Off	to
one	side	Hairlock	waited,	wrapped	in	the	dark	gray	raincloak	that	was	his	battle
attire—looking	smug.
Calot	 nudged	Tattersail	and	jerked	his	head	toward	Hairlock.	“What's	he	so
happy	about?”
“Hairlock,”	Tattersail	called.	The	man	swung	his	head.	“Were	you	right	about


the	three	High	Mages?”
He	smiled,	then	turned	away	again.
“I	hate	it	when	he's	hiding	something,”	Calot	said.
The	 sorceress	 grunted.	 “He's	 added	 something	 up,	 all	 right.	 What's	 so
particular	about	Nightchill,	Bellurdan,	and	A'Karonys?	Why	did	Tayschrenn	pick
them	and	how	did	Hairlock	know	he'd	pick	them?”
“Questions,	questions.”	Calot	sighed.	“All	three	are	old	hands	at	this	kind	of
stuff.	Back	in	the	days	of	the	Emperor	they	each	commanded	a	company	of	Adepts
—when	 the	 Empire	 had	 enough	 mages	 in	 the	 ranks	 to	 form	 actual	 companies.
A'Karonys	climbed	through	the	ranks	in	the	Falari	Campaign,	and	Bellurdan	and
Nightchill	 were	 from	 before	 even	 then—came	 down	 from	 Fenn	 on	 the	 Quon
mainland	during	the	unification	wars.”
“All	old	hands,”	Tattersail	mused,	“as	you	said.	None	have	been	active	lately,
have	they?	Their	last	campaign	was	Seven	Cities—”
“Where	A'Karonys	took	a	beating	in	the	Panpot'sun	Wastes—”
“He	 was	 left	 hanging—the	 Emperor	 had	 just	 been	 assassinated.	 Everything
was	chaotic.	The	T'lan	Imass	refused	to	acknowledge	the	new	Empress,	marched
themselves	off	into	the	Jhag	Odhan.”
“Rumor	has	it	they're	back,	at	half-strength—whatever	they	ran	into	out	there
wasn't	pleasant.”
Tattersail	nodded.	“Nightchill	and	Bellurdan	were	told	to	report	to	Nathilog,
left	sitting	on	their	hands	for	the	past	six,	seven	years—”
“Until	 Tayschrenn	 sent	 the	 Thelomen	 off	 to	 Genabaris,	 to	 study	 a	 pile	 of
ancient	scrolls,	of	all	things.”
“I'm	 frightened,”	 Tattersail	 admitted.	 “Very	 frightened.	 Did	 you	 see	 Dujek's
face?	He	knew	something—a	realization,	and	it	hit	him	like	a	dagger	in	the	back.”
“Time	to	work,”	Hairlock	called.
Calot	and	Tattersail	swung	around.
A	shiver	ran	through	her.	Moon's	Spawn	had	been	revolving	steadily	for	the
last	three	years.	It	had	just	stopped.	Near	its	very	top,	on	the	side	facing	them,	was
a	 small	 ledge,	 and	 a	 shadowed	 recess	 had	 appeared.	 A	 portal.	 No	 movement
showed	yet.	“He	knows,”	she	whispered.
“And	he	isn't	running,”	Calot	added.
Down	on	the	first	hill,	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	rose	and	lifted	his	arms	out	to
the	sides.	A	wave	of	golden	flame	spanned	his	hands,	then	rolled	upward,	growing
as	 it	 raced	 toward	 Moon's	 Spawn.	 The	 spell	 crashed	 against	 the	 black	 rock,


sending	chunks	hurtling	out,	then	down.	A	rain	of	death	descended	into	the	city	of
Pale,	and	among	the	Malazan	legions	waiting	in	the	plain.
“It's	begun,”	Calot	breathed.
Silence	answered	Tayschrenn's	first	attack,	save	for	the	faint	scatter	of	rubble
on	the	city's	tiled	rooftops	and	the	distant	cries	of	wounded	soldiers	on	the	plain.
Everyone's	eyes	were	trained	upward.
The	reply	was	not	what	anyone	expected.
A	 black	 cloud	 enshrouded	 Moon's	 Spawn,	 followed	 by	 faint	 shrieking.	 A
moment	later	the	cloud	spread	out,	fragmenting,	and	Tattersail	realized	what	she
was	seeing.
Ravens.
Thousands	upon	thousands	of	Great	Ravens.	They	must	have	nested	among	the
crags	 and	 pocks	 in	 the	 Moon's	 surface.	 Their	 shrieks	 grew	 more	 defined,	 a
caterwaul	 of	 outrage.	 They	 wheeled	 out	 from	 the	 Moon,	 their	 fifteen-foot
wingspans	catching	the	wind	and	lifting	them	high	above	the	city	and	plain.
Fear	lurched	into	terror	in	Tattersail's	heart.
Hairlock	 barked	 a	 laugh	 and	 whirled	 to	 them.	 “These	 are	 the	 Moon's
messengers,	colleagues!”	Madness	glittered	in	his	eyes.	“These	carrion	birds!”	He
flung	 back	 his	 cloak	 and	 raised	 his	 arms.	 “Imagine	 a	 lord	 who's	 kept	 thirty
thousand	Great	Ravens	well	fed!”
A	figure	had	appeared	on	the	ledge	before	the	portal,	its	arms	upraised,	long
silver	hair	blowing	from	its	head.
Mane	 of	 Chaos.	 Anomander	 Rake.	 Lord	 of	 the	 black-skinned	 Tiste	 Andii,
who	has	looked	down	on	a	hundred	thousand	winters,	who	has	tasted	the	blood
of	dragons,	who	leads	the	last	of	his	kind,	seated	in	the	Throne	of	Sorrow	and	a
kingdom	tragic	and	fey—a	kingdom	with	no	land	to	call	its	own.
Anomander	 Rake	 looked	 tiny	 against	 the	 backdrop	 of	 his	 edifice,	 almost
insubstantial	at	this	distance.	The	illusion	was	about	to	be	shattered.	She	gasped
as	 the	 aura	 of	 his	 power	 bloomed	 outward—to	 see	 it	 at	 such	 a	 distance	 .	 .	 .
“Channel	your	Warrens,”	Tattersail	commanded,	her	voice	cracking.	“Now!”
Even	as	Rake	gathered	his	power,	twin	balls	of	blue	fire	raced	upward	from
the	 center	 hill.	 They	 struck	 the	 Moon	 near	 its	 base	 and	 rocked	 it.	 Tayschrenn
launched	 another	 wave	 of	 gilden	 flames,	 crashing	 with	 amber	 spume	 and	 redtongued	smoke.
The	Moon's	lord	responded.	A	black,	writhing	wave	rolled	down	to	the	first
hill.	The	High	Mage	was	buffeted	to	his	knees	deflecting	it,	the	hilltop	around	him


blighted	as	the	necrous	power	rolled	down	the	slopes,	engulfing	nearby	ranks	of
soldiers.	 Tattersail	 watched	 as	 a	 midnight	 flash	 swallowed	 the	 hapless	 men,
followed	by	a	thump	that	thundered	through	the	earth.	When	the	flash	dissipated,
the	soldiers	lay	in	rotting	heaps,	mown	down	like	stalks	of	grain.
Kurald	Galain	sorcery.	Elder	magic,	the	Breath	of	Chaos.
Her	breaths	coming	fast	and	tight	in	her	chest,	Tattersail	felt	her	Thyr	Warren
flow	 into	 her.	 She	 shaped	 it,	 muttering	 chain-words	 under	 her	 breath,	 then
unleashed	the	power.	Calot	followed,	drawing	from	his	Mockra	Warren.	Hairlock
surrounded	himself	in	his	own	mysterious	source,	and	the	cadre	entered	the	fray.
Everything	narrowed	down	for	Tattersail	from	then	on,	yet	a	part	of	her	mind
remained	distant,	held	on	a	leash	of	terror,	observing	with	a	kind	of	muffled	vision
all	that	happened	around	her.
The	 world	 became	 a	 living	 nightmare,	 as	 sorcery	 flew	 upward	 to	 batter
Moon's	 Spawn,	 and	 sorcery	 rained	 downward,	 indiscriminate	 and	 devastating.
Earth	 rose	 skyward	 in	 thundering	 columns.	 Rocks	 ripped	 through	 men	 like	 hot
stones	through	snow.	A	downpour	of	ash	descended	to	cover	the	living	and	dead
alike.	The	sky	dimmed	to	pallid	rose,	the	sun	a	coppery	disc	behind	the	haze.
She	saw	a	wave	sweep	past	Hairlock's	defenses,	cutting	him	in	half.	His	howl
was	more	rage	than	pain,	instantly	muted	as	virulent	power	washed	over	Tattersail
and	she	found	her	own	defenses	assailed	by	the	sorcery's	cold,	screaming	will	as
it	sought	to	destroy	her.	She	reeled	back,	brought	up	short	by	Calot	as	he	added	his
Mockra	power	to	bolster	her	faltering	parries.	Then	the	assault	passed,	sweeping
on	and	down	the	hill	to	their	left.
Tattersail	 had	 fallen	 to	 her	 knees.	 Calot	 stood	 over	 her,	 chaining	 words	 of
power	around	her,	his	face	turned	away	from	Moon's	Spawn,	fixed	on	something
or	someone	down	below	on	the	plain.	His	eyes	were	wide	with	terror.
Too	late	Tattersail	understood	what	was	happening.	Calot	was	defending	her
at	his	own	expense.	A	final	act,	even	as	he	watched	his	own	death	erupt	around
him.	 A	 blast	 of	 bright	 fire	 engulfed	 him.	 Abruptly	 the	 net	 of	 protection	 over
Tattersail	vanished.	A	wash	of	crackling	heat	from	where	Calot	had	stood	sent	her
tumbling	 to	 one	 side.	 She	 felt	 more	 than	 heard	 her	 own	 shriek,	 and	 her	 sense	 of
distance	closed	in	then,	a	layer	of	mental	defense	obliterated.
Spitting	dirt	and	ashes,	Tattersail	climbed	to	her	feet	and	fought	on,	no	longer
launching	 attacks,	 just	 struggling	 to	 remain	 alive.	 Somewhere	 in	 the	 back	 of	 her
head	 a	 voice	 was	 screaming,	 urgent,	 panicked.	 Calot	 had	 faced	 the	 plain	 not
Moon's	Spawn—he'd	faced	right!	Hairlock	had	been	struck	from	the	plain!
She	 watched	 as	 a	 Kenryll'ah	 demon	 arose	 beneath	 Nightchill.	 Laughing


shrilly,	the	towering,	gaunt	creature	tore	Nightchill	limb	from	limb.	It	had	begun
feeding	 by	 the	 time	 Bellurdan	 arrived.	 The	 Thelomen	 bellowed	 as	 the	 demon
raked	its	knife-like	talons	against	his	chest.	Ignoring	the	wounds	and	the	blood	that
sprayed	from	them,	he	closed	his	hands	around	the	demon's	head	and	crushed	it.
A'Karonys	unleashed	gouts	of	 flame	from	 the	 staff	in	his	hands	 until	 Moon's
Spawn	almost	disappeared	inside	a	ball	of	fire.	Then	ethereal	wings	of	ice	closed
around	the	short,	fat	wizard,	freezing	him	where	he	stood.	An	instant	later	he	was
crushed	to	dust.
Magic	rained	in	an	endless	storm	around	Tayschrenn,	where	he	still	knelt	on
the	 withered,	 blackened	 hilltop.	 But	 every	 wave	 directed	 his	 way	 he	 shunted
aside,	 wreaking	 devastation	 among	 the	 soldiers	 cowering	 on	 the	 plain.	 Through
the	 carnage	 filling	 the	 air,	 through	 the	 ash	 and	 shrill-tongued	 ravens,	 through	 the
raining	 rocks	 and	 the	 screams	 of	 the	 wounded	 and	 dying,	 through	 the	 bloodchilling	shrieks	of	demons	flinging	themselves	into	ranks	of	soldiery—through	it
all	 sounded	 the	 steady	 thunder	 of	 the	 High	 Mage's	 onslaught.	 Enormous	 cliffs,
sheared	from	the	Moon's	face	and	raging	with	flame	and	trailing	columns	of	black
smoke,	fell	down	into	the	city	of	Pale,	transforming	the	city	into	its	own	cauldron
of	death	and	chaos.
Her	ears	numbed	and	body	throbbing	as	if	her	flesh	itself	gasped	for	breath,
Tattersail	was	slow	to	grasp	that	the	sorcery	had	ceased.	Even	the	voice	shrieking
in	 the	 back	 of	 her	 mind	 had	 fallen	 silent.	 She	 raised	 bleary	 eyes	 to	 see	 Moon's
Spawn,	 billowing	 smoke	 and	 ablaze	 in	 a	 dozen	 places	 on	 its	 ravaged	 mien,
moving	away,	pulling	back.	Then	it	was	past	the	city,	unsteady	in	its	revolutions
and	leaning	to	one	 side.	 Moon's	Spawn	headed	 south,	 toward	the	distant	 Tahlyn
Mountains.
She	 looked	 around,	 vaguely	 recalling	 that	 a	 company	 of	 soldiers	 had	 sought
refuge	on	the	blasted	summit.	Then	something	had	hit	her,	taking	all	she	had	left	to
resist	 it.	 Now,	 nothing	 was	 left	 of	the	 company	 but	 their	armor.	Always	 an	 even
trade,	Sorceress.	She	fought	against	a	sob,	then	swung	her	attention	to	the	first	hill.
Tayschrenn	 was	 down,	 but	 alive.	 A	 half-dozen	 marines	 scampered	 up	 the
hillside	to	gather	around	the	High	Mage.	A	minute	later	they	carried	him	away.
Bellurdan,	 most	 of	 his	 clothing	 burned	 away	 and	 his	 flesh	 scorched	 red,
remained	on	the	center	hill,	collecting	Nightchill's	scattered	limbs	and	raising	his
voice	in	a	mournful	wail.	The	sight,	in	all	its	horror	and	pathos,	struck	Tattersail's
heart	 like	 a	 hammer	 on	 an	 anvil.	 Quickly	 she	 turned	 away.	 “Damn	 you,
Tayschrenn.”
Pale	had	fallen.	The	price	was	Onearm's	Host	and	four	mages.	Only	now	were


the	Black	Moranth	legions	moving	in.	Tattersail's	jaw	clenched,	her	lips	drawing
from	their	fullness	into	a	thin	white	line.	Something	tugged	at	her	memory,	and	she
felt	a	growing	certainty	that	this	scene	was	not	yet	played	out.
The	sorceress	waited.
The	Warrens	of	Magic	dwelt	in	the	beyond.	Find	the	gate	and	nudge	it	open	a
crack.	What	leaks	out	is	yours	to	shape.	With	these	words	a	young	woman	set	out
on	the	path	to	sorcery.	Open	yourself	to	the	Warren	that	comes	to	you—that	finds
you.	 Draw	 forth	 its	 power—as	 much	 as	 your	 body	 and	 soul	 are	 capable	 of
containing—but	remember,	when	the	body	fails,	the	gate	closes.
Tattersail's	limbs	ached.	She	felt	as	though	someone	had	been	beating	her	with
clubs	for	the	past	two	hours.	The	last	thing	she	had	expected	was	that	bitter	taste
on	 her	 tongue	 that	 said	 something	 nasty	 and	 ugly	 had	 come	 to	 the	 hilltop.	 Such
warnings	 seldom	 came	 to	 a	 practitioner	 unless	 the	 gate	 was	 open,	 a	 Warren
unveiled	 and	 bristling	 with	 power.	 She'd	 heard	 tales	 from	 other	 sorcerers,	 and
she'd	 read	 moldy	 scrolls	 that	 touched	 on	 moments	 like	 these,	 when	 the	 power
arrived	groaning	and	deadly,	and	each	time,	it	was	said,	a	god	had	stepped	onto
the	mortal	ground.
If	she	could	have	driven	the	nail	of	immortal	presence	in	this	place,	however,
it	would	have	to	be	Hood,	the	God	of	Death.	Yet	her	instincts	said	no.	She	didn't
believe	a	god	had	arrived,	but	something	else	had.	What	frustrated	the	sorceress
was	 that	 she	 couldn't	 decide	 who	 among	 the	 people	 surrounding	 her	 was	 the
dangerous	 one.	 Something	 kept	 drawing	 her	 gaze	 back	 to	 the	 young	 girl.	 But	 the
child	seemed	only	half	there	most	of	the	time.
The	voices	behind	her	finally	drew	her	attention.	Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	stood
over	Quick	Ben	and	the	other	soldier,	both	of	whom	still	knelt	at	Hairlock's	side.
Quick	Ben	clutched	an	oblong	object,	wrapped	in	hides,	and	was	looking	up	at	his
sergeant	as	if	awaiting	approval.
There	 was	 tension	 between	 the	 two	 men.	 Frowning,	 Tattersail	 walked	 over.
“What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 she	 asked	 Quick	 Ben,	 her	 eyes	 on	 the	 object	 in	 the
wizard's	 almost	 feminine	 hands.	 He	 seemed	 not	 to	 have	 heard,	 his	 eyes	 on	 the
sergeant.
Whiskeyjack	shot	her	a	glance.	“Go	ahead,	Quick,”	he	growled,	then	strode	off
to	stand	at	the	hill's	edge,	facing	west—toward	the	Moranth	Mountains.
Quick	 Ben's	 fine,	 ascetic	 features	 tightened.	 He	 nodded	 at	 his	 companion.
“Get	ready,	Kalam.”
The	 soldier	 named	 Kalam	 leaned	 back	 on	 his	 haunches,	 his	 hands	 in	 his


sleeves.	 The	 position	 seemed	 an	 odd	 response	 to	 Quick	 Ben's	 request,	 but	 the
mage	seemed	satisfied.	Tattersail	watched	as	he	laid	one	of	his	thin,	spidery	hands
on	 Hairlock's	 trembling,	 blood-splashed	 chest.	 He	 whispered	 a	 few	 chaining
words	and	closed	his	eyes.
“That	sounded	like	Denul,”	Tattersail	said,	glancing	at	Kalam,	who	remained
motionless	 in	 his	 crouch.	 “But	 not	 quite,”	 she	 added	 slowly.	 “He's	 twisted	 it
somehow.”	She	fell	silent	then,	seeing	something	in	Kalam	that	reminded	her	of	a
snake	 waiting	 to	 strike.	 Wouldn't	 take	 much	 to	 set	 him	 off,	 I	 think.	 Just	 a	 few
more	ill-timed	words,	a	careless	move	toward	Quick	Ben	or	Hairlock.	The	man
was	big,	bearish,	but	she	remembered	his	dangerous	glide	past	her.	Snake	indeed,
the	 man's	 a	 killer,	 a	 soldier	 who's	 reached	 the	 next	 level	 in	 the	 art	 of	 murder.
Not	 just	 a	 job	 anymore,	 this	 man	 likes	 it.	 She	 wondered	 then	 if	 it	 wasn't	 this
energy,	this	quiet	promise	of	menace,	that	swept	over	her	with	the	flavor	of	sexual
tension.	Tattersail	sighed.	A	day	for	perversity.
Quick	Ben	had	resumed	his	chaining	words,	this	time	over	the	object,	which
he	now	set	down	beside	Hairlock.	She	watched	as	enwreathing	power	enveloped
the	wrapped	object,	watched	in	growing	apprehension	as	the	mage	traced	his	long
fingers	 along	 the	 hide's	 seams.	 The	 energy	 trickled	 from	 him	 with	 absolute
control.	He	was	her	superior	in	the	lore.	He	had	opened	a	Warren	she	didn't	even
recognize.
“Who	are	you	people?”	she	whispered,	stepping	back.
Hairlock's	 eyes	 snapped	 open,	 clear	 of	 pain	 and	 shock.	 His	 gaze	 found
Tattersail	and	the	stained	smile	came	easily	to	his	broken	lips.	“Lost	arts,	'Sail.
What	you're	about	to	see	hasn't	been	done	in	a	thousand	years.”	His	face	darkened
then	 and	 the	 smile	 faded.	 Something	 burned	 in	 his	 eyes.	 “Think	 back,	 woman!
Calot	 and	 I.	 When	 we	 went	 down.	 What	 did	 you	 see?	 Did	 you	 feel	 something?
Something	odd?	Come	on,	think!	Look	at	me!	See	my	wound,	see	how	I'm	lying!
Which	direction	was	I	facing	when	that	wave	hit?”
She	saw	the	fire	in	his	eyes,	of	anger	mingled	with	triumph.	“I'm	not	sure,”	she
said	slowly.	“Something,	yes.”	That	detached,	reasoning	part	of	her	mind	that	had
labored	 with	 her	 throughout	 the	 battle,	 that	 had	 screamed	 in	 her	 mind	 at	 Calot's
death,	 screamed	 in	 answer	 to	 the	 waves	 of	 sorcery—to	 the	 fact	 that	 they	 had
come	from	the	 plain.	 Her	 eyes	 narrowed	 on	 Hairlock.	 “Anomander	 Rake	 never
bothered	 to	 aim.	 He	 was	 being	 indiscriminate.	 Those	 waves	 of	 power	 were
aimed,	weren't	they?	Coming	at	us	from	the	wrong	side.”	She	was	trembling.	“But
why?	Why	would	Tayschrenn	do	that?”
Hairlock	reached	up	one	mangled	hand	and	clutched	Quick	Ben's	cloak.	“Use
her,	Mage.	I'll	take	the	chance.”


Tattersail's	 thoughts	 raced.	 Hairlock	 had	 been	 sent	 down	 into	 the	 tunnels	 by
Dujek.	 And	 Whiskeyjack	 and	 his	 squad	 had	 been	 down	 there.	 A	 deal	 had	 been
struck.	 “Hairlock,	 what's	 happening	 here?”	 she	 demanded,	 fear	 clenching	 the
muscles	of	her	neck	and	shoulders.	“What	do	you	mean,	‘use'	me?”
“You're	not	blind,	woman!”
“Quiet,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said.	 He	 laid	 down	 the	 object	 on	 the	 wizard's	 ravaged
chest,	positioning	it	carefully	so	that	it	was	centered	lengthways	along	Hairlock's
breastbone.	 The	 top	 end	 reached	 to	 just	 under	 the	 man's	 chin,	 the	 bottom	 end
extending	a	few	inches	beyond	what	was	left	of	his	torso.	Webs	of	black	energy
spun	incessantly	over	the	hide's	mottled	surface.
Quick	 Ben	 passed	 a	 hand	 over	 the	 object	 and	 the	 web	 spread	 outward.	 The
glittering	 black	 threads	 traced	 a	 chaotic	 pattern	 that	 insinuated	 Hairlock's	 entire
body,	 over	 flesh	 and	 through	 it,	 the	 pattern	 ever	 changing,	 the	 changes	 coming
faster	 and	 faster.	 Hairlock	 jerked,	 his	 eyes	 bulging,	 then	 fell	 back.	 A	 breath
escaped	his	lungs	in	a	slow,	steady	hiss.	When	it	ceased	with	a	wet	gurgle,	he	did
not	draw	another.
Quick	 Ben	 sat	 back	 on	 his	 haunches	 and	 glanced	 over	 at	 Whiskeyjack.	 The
sergeant	was	now	facing	them,	his	expression	unreadable.
Tattersail	 wiped	 sweat	 from	 her	 brow	 with	 a	 grimy	 sleeve.	 “It	 didn't	 work,
then.	You	failed	to	do	whatever	it	was	you	were	trying	to	do.”
Quick	 Ben	 climbed	 to	 his	 feet.	 Kalam	 picked	 up	 the	 wrapped	 object	 and
stepped	 close	 to	 Tattersail.	 The	 assassin's	 eyes	 were	 dark,	 penetrating	 as	 they
searched	her	face.
Quick	 Ben	 spoke.	 “Hold	 on	 to	 it,	 Sorceress.	 Take	 it	 back	 to	 your	 tent	 and
unwrap	it	there.	Above	all,	don't	let	Tayschrenn	see	it.”
Tattersail	 scowled.	 “What?	 Just	 like	 that?”	 Her	 gaze	 fell	 on	 the	 object.	 “I
don't	even	know	what	I'd	be	accepting.	Whatever	it	is,	I	don't	like	it.”
The	girl	spoke	directly	behind	her	in	a	voice	that	was	sharp	and	accusing.	“I
don't	 know	 what	 you've	 done,	 Wizard.	 I	 felt	 you	 keeping	 me	 away.	 That	 was
unkind.”
Tattersail	faced	the	girl,	then	glanced	back	at	Quick	Ben.	What	is	all	this?	The
black	man's	expression	was	glacial,	but	she	saw	a	flicker	around	his	eyes.	Looked
like	fear.
Whiskeyjack	 rounded	 on	 the	 girl	 at	 her	 words.	 “You	 got	 something	 to	 say
about	all	this,	recruit?”	His	tone	was	tight.
The	girl's	dark	eyes	slid	to	her	sergeant.	She	shrugged,	then	walked	away.


Kalam	offered	the	object	to	Tattersail.	“Answers,”	he	said	quietly,	in	a	north
Seven	 Cities	 accent,	 melodic	 and	 round.	 “We	 all	 need	 answers,	 Sorceress.	 The
High	 Mage	 killed	 your	 comrades.	 Look	 at	 us,	 we're	 all	 that's	 left	 of	 the
Bridgeburners.	Answers	aren't	easily	.	.	.	attained.	Will	you	pay	the	price?”
With	 a	 final	 glance	 at	 Hairlock's	 lifeless	 body—so	 brutally	 torn	 apart—and
the	 lifeless	 stare	 of	 his	 eyes,	 she	 accepted	 the	 object.	 It	 felt	 light	 in	 her	 hands.
Whatever	 was	 within	 the	 hide	 cocoon	 was	 slight	 in	 size;	 parts	 of	 it	 moved,	 and
against	 her	 grip	 she	 felt	 knobs	 and	 shafts	 of	 something	 hard.	 She	 stared	 at	 the
assassin's	bearish	face.	“I	want,”	she	said	slowly,	“to	see	Tayschrenn	get	what	he
deserves.”
“Then	we're	in	agreement,”	Kalam	said,	smiling.	“This	is	where	it	starts.”
Tattersail	 felt	 her	 stomach	 jump	 at	 that	 smile.	 Woman,	 what's	 got	 into	 you?
She	sighed.	“Done.”	As	she	turned	away	to	descend	the	slope	and	make	her	way
back	to	the	main	camp,	she	caught	the	girl's	eye.	A	chill	rippled	through	her.	The
sorceress	stopped.	“You,	recruit,”	she	called.	“What's	your	name?”
The	girl	smiled	as	if	at	a	private	joke.	“Sorry.”
Tattersail	 grunted.	 It	 figured.	 She	 tucked	 the	 package	 under	 an	 arm	 and
staggered	down	the	slope.
Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	kicked	at	a	helmet	and	watched	as	it	tumbled	and	bounced
down	the	hillside.	He	spun	and	glared	at	Quick	Ben.	“It's	done?”
The	wizard's	eyes	darted	to	Sorry,	then	he	nodded.
“You	 will	 draw	 unwarranted	 attention	 on	 our	 squad,”	 the	 young	 girl	 told
Whiskeyjack.	“High	Mage	Tayschrenn	will	notice.”
The	 sergeant	 raised	 an	 eyebrow.	 “Unwarranted	 attention?	 What	 in	 Hood's
name	does	that	mean?”
Sorry	made	no	reply.
Whiskeyjack	bit	back	sharp	words.	What	had	Fiddler	called	her?	An	uncanny
bitch.	 He'd	 said	 it	 to	 her	 face	 and	 she'd	 just	 stared	 him	 down	 with	 those	 dead,
stony	 eyes.	 As	 much	 as	 he	 hated	 to	 admit	 it,	 Whiskeyjack	 shared	 the	 sapper's
crude	 assessment.	 What	 made	 things	 even	 more	 disturbing,	 this	 fifteen-year-old
girl	had	Quick	Ben	scared	half	out	of	his	wits,	and	the	wizard	didn't	want	to	talk
about	it.	What	had	the	Empire	sent	him?
His	gaze	swung	back	to	Tattersail.	She	was	crossing	the	killing	field	below.
The	 ravens	 rose	 screaming	 from	 her	 path,	 and	 remained	 circling	 overhead,	 their
caws	uneasy	and	frightened.	The	sergeant	felt	Kalam's	solid	presence	at	his	side.


“Hood's	 Breath,”	 Whiskeyjack	 muttered.	 “That	 sorceress	 seems	 an	 unholy
terror	as	far	as	those	birds	are	concerned.”
“Not	her,”	Kalam	said.	“It's	what	she's	carrying.”
Whiskeyjack	scratched	his	beard,	his	eyes	narrowing.	“This	stinks.	You	sure
it's	necessary?”
Kalam	shrugged.
“Whiskeyjack,”	Quick	Ben	said,	behind	them,	“they	kept	us	in	the	tunnels.	Do
you	think	the	High	Mage	couldn't	have	guessed	what	would	happen?”
The	sergeant	faced	his	wizard.	A	dozen	paces	beyond	stood	Sorry,	well	within
hearing	range.	Whiskeyjack	scowled	at	her,	but	said	nothing.
After	a	moment	of	heavy	silence,	the	sergeant	turned	his	attention	to	the	city.
The	 last	 of	 the	 Moranth	 legions	 was	 marching	 beneath	 the	 West	 Gate's	 arch.
Columns	of	black	smoke	rose	from	behind	the	battered,	scarred	walls.	He	knew
something	 of	 the	 history	 of	 grim	 enmity	 between	 the	 Moranth	 and	 the	 citizens	 of
the	once	Free	City	of	Pale.	Contested	trade	routes,	two	mercantile	powers	at	each
other's	throat.	And	Pale	won	more	often	than	not.	At	long	last	it	seemed	that	the
black-armored	 warriors	 from	 beyond	 the	 western	 mountains,	 whose	 faces
remained	 hidden	 behind	 the	 chitinous	 visors	 on	 their	 helms	 and	 who	 spoke	 in
clicks	 and	 buzzes,	 were	 evening	 the	 score.	 Faintly,	 beyond	 the	 cries	 of	 carrion
birds,	came	the	wail	of	men,	women,	and	children	dying	beneath	the	sword.
“Sounds	like	the	Empress	is	keeping	her	word	with	the	Moranth,”	Quick	Ben
said	quietly.	“An	hour	of	slaughter.	I	didn't	think	Dujek—”
“Dujek	 knows	 his	 orders,”	 Whiskeyjack	 cut	 in.	 “And	 there's	 a	 High	 Mage
taloned	on	his	shoulder.”
“An	hour,”	Kalam	repeated.	“Then	we	clean	up	the	mess.”
“Not	our	squad,”	Whiskeyjack	said.	“We've	received	new	orders.”
The	two	men	stared	at	their	sergeant.
“And	you	 still	need	convincing?”	Quick	 Ben	demanded.	 “They're	 driving	 us
into	the	ground.	They	mean	to—”
“Enough!”	 Whiskeyjack	 barked.	 “Not	 now.	 Kalam,	 find	 Fiddler.	 We	 need
resupply	 from	 the	 Moranth.	 Round	 up	 the	 rest,	 Quick,	 and	 take	 Sorry	 with	 you.
Join	me	outside	the	High	Fist's	tent	in	an	hour.”
“And	you?”	Quick	Ben	asked.	“What	are	you	going	to	do?”
The	sergeant	heard	an	ill-concealed	yearning	in	the	wizard's	voice.	The	man
needed	a	direction,	or	maybe	confirmation	that	they	were	doing	the	right	thing.	A
little	late	for	that.	Even	so,	Whiskeyjack	felt	a	pang	of	regret—he	couldn't	give


what	Quick	Ben	wanted	the	most.	He	couldn't	tell	him	that	things	would	turn	out
for	the	best.	He	sank	down	on	his	haunches,	his	eyes	on	Pale.	“What	am	I	going	to
do?	 I'm	 going	 to	 do	 some	 thinking,	 Quick	 Ben.	 I've	 been	 listening	 to	 you	 and
Kalam,	to	Mallet	and	Fiddler,	even	Trotts	has	been	jawing	in	my	ear.	Well,	now
it's	my	turn.	So	leave	me	be,	Wizard,	and	take	that	damn	girl	with	you.”
Quick	Ben	flinched,	seeming	to	withdraw.	Something	in	Whiskeyjack's	words
had	made	him	very	unhappy—or	maybe	everything.
The	sergeant	was	too	tired	to	worry	about	it.	He	had	their	new	assignment	to
think	 over.	 Had	 he	 been	 a	 religious	 man,	 Whiskeyjack	 would	 have	 let	 blood	 in
Hood's	 Bowl,	 calling	 upon	 the	 shades	 of	 his	 ancestors.	 As	 much	 as	 he	 hated	 to
admit	it,	he	shared	the	feeling	among	his	squad:	someone	in	the	Empire	wanted	the
Bridgeburners	dead.
Pale	was	behind	them	now,	the	nightmare	nothing	but	the	taste	of	ashes	in	his
mouth.	 Ahead	 lay	 their	 next	 destination:	 the	 legendary	 city	 of	 Darujhistan.
Whiskeyjack	had	a	premonition	that	a	new	nightmare	was	about	to	begin.
______
Down	in	the	camp	just	beyond	the	last	crest	of	denuded	hills,	horse-drawn	carts
loaded	with	wounded	soldiers	crowded	the	narrow	aisles	between	the	tent	rows.
All	 the	 precise	 order	 of	 the	 Malazan	 encampment	 had	 disintegrated,	 and	 the	 air
was	febrile	with	soldiers	screaming	their	pain,	giving	voice	to	horror.
Tattersail	 threaded	 her	 way	 around	 the	 dazed	 survivors,	 stepping	 across
puddles	 of	 blood	 in	 the	 wagon-ruts,	 her	 eyes	 lingering	 on	 an	 obscene	 pile	 of
amputated	 limbs	 outside	 the	 cutter	 tents.	 From	 the	 massive	 sprawl	 of	 the	 camp
followers'	 slum	 of	 tents	 and	 shelters	 came	 a	 wailing	 dirge—a	 broken	 chorus	 of
thousands	of	voices,	the	sound	a	chilling	reminder	that	war	was	always	a	thing	of
grief.
In	 some	 military	 headquarters	 back	 in	 the	 Empire's	 capital	 of	 Unta,	 three
thousand	leagues	distant,	an	anonymous	aide	would	paint	a	red	stroke	across	the
2nd	 Army	 on	 the	 active	 list,	 and	 then	 write	 in	 fine	 script	 beside	 it:	 Pale,	 late
winter,	the	 1163rd	Year	of	 Burn's	 Sleep.	Thus	would	 the	 death	of	 nine	 thousand
men	and	women	be	noted.	And	then	forgotten.
Tattersail	 grimaced.	 Some	 of	 us	 won't	 forget.	 The	 Bridgeburners	 harbored
some	 frightening	 suspicions.	 The	 thought	 of	 challenging	 Tayschrenn	 in	 a	 direct
confrontation	appealed	to	her	sense	of	outrage	and—if	the	High	Mage	had	killed
Calot—her	 feeling	 of	 betrayal.	 But	 she	 knew	 that	 her	 emotions	 had	 a	 way	 of


running	away	with	her.	A	sorcery	duel	with	the	Empire's	High	Mage	would	buy
her	 a	 quick	 passage	 to	 Hood's	 Gate.	 Self-righteous	 wrath	 had	 planted	 more
corpses	in	the	ground	than	an	empire	could	lay	claim	to,	and	as	Calot	used	to	say:
Shake	your	fist	all	you	want	but	dead	is	dead.
She'd	witnessed	all	too	many	scenes	of	death	since	she'd	first	joined	the	ranks
of	the	Malazan	Empire,	but	at	least	they	couldn't	be	laid	squarely	at	her	feet.	That
was	the	difference,	and	it	had	been	enough	for	a	long	time.	Not	as	I	once	was.	I've
spent	twenty	years	washing	the	blood	from	my	hands.	 Right	 now,	 however,	 the
scene	 that	 rose	 again	 and	 again	 behind	 her	 eyes	 was	 the	 empty	 armor	 on	 the
hilltop,	and	it	gnawed	at	her	heart.	Those	men	and	women	had	been	running	to	her,
looking	 for	 protection	 against	 the	 horrors	 of	 the	 plain	 below.	 It	 had	 been	 a
desperate	 act,	 a	 fatal	 one,	 but	 she	 understood	 it.	 Tayschrenn	 didn't	 care	 about
them,	 but	 she	 did.	 She	 was	 one	 of	 their	 own.	 In	 past	 battles	 they'd	 fought	 like
rabid	dogs	to	keep	enemy	legions	from	killing	her.	This	time,	it	was	a	mage	war.
Her	territory.	Favors	were	traded	in	the	2nd.	It's	what	kept	everyone	alive,	and	it
was	what	had	made	the	2nd	a	legion	of	legend.	Those	soldiers	had	expectations,
and	they	had	the	right	to	them.	They'd	come	to	her	for	salvation.	And	they	died	for
it.
And	 if	 I	 had	 sacrificed	 myself	 then?	 Cast	 my	 Warren's	 defenses	 onto	 them
instead	 of	 shielding	 my	 own	 hide?	 She'd	 been	 surviving	 on	 instinct	 back	 then,
and	her	instincts	had	had	nothing	to	do	with	altruism.	Those	kind	of	people	didn't
live	long	in	war.
Being	alive,	Tattersail	concluded	as	she	approached	her	tent,	isn't	the	same	as
feeling	 good	 about	 it.	 She	 entered	 her	 tent	 and	 closed	 the	 flap	 behind	 her,	 then
stood	 surveying	 her	 worldly	 possessions.	 Scant	 few,	 after	 two	 hundred	 and
nineteen	years	of	life.	The	oak	chest	containing	her	book	of	Thyr	sorcery	remained
sealed	by	warding	spells;	the	small	collection	of	alchemical	devices	lay	scattered
on	the	tabletop	beside	her	cot,	like	a	child's	toys	abandoned	in	mid-game.
Amid	 the	 clutter	 sat	 her	 Deck	 of	 Dragons.	 Her	 gaze	 lingered	 on	 the	 reading
cards	before	continuing	its	round.	Everything	looked	different	now,	as	if	the	chest,
the	 alchemy,	 and	 her	 clothes	 all	 belonged	 to	 someone	 else:	 someone	 younger,
someone	still	possessing	a	shred	of	vanity.	Only	the	Deck—the	Fatid—called	out
to	her	like	an	old	friend.
Tattersail	walked	over	to	stand	before	it.	With	an	absent	gesture	she	set	down
the	 package	 given	 her	 by	 Kalam,	 then	 pulled	 out	 a	 stool	 from	 under	 the	 table.
Sitting	down,	she	reached	for	the	Deck.	She	hesitated.
It	had	been	months.	Something	had	kept	her	away.	Maybe	Calot's	death	could
have	been	foretold,	and	maybe	that	suspicion	had	been	pacing	in	the	darkness	of


her	thoughts	all	this	time.	Pain	and	fear	had	been	shaping	her	soul	all	her	life,	but
her	 time	 with	 Calot	 had	 been	 another	 kind	 of	 shaping,	 something	 light,	 happy,
pleasantly	floating.	She'd	called	it	mere	diversion.
“How's	that	for	willful	denial?”	She	heard	the	bitterness	in	her	tone	and	hated
herself	 for	 it.	 Her	 old	 demons	 were	 back,	 laughing	 at	 the	 death	 of	 her	 illusions.
You	 refused	 the	 Deck	 once	 before,	 the	 night	 before	 Mock's	 throat	 was	 opened,
the	night	before	Dancer	and	the	man	who	would	one	day	rule	an	Empire	stole
into	 your	 master's—your	 lover's—Hold.	 Would	 you	 deny	 that	 a	 pattern	 exists,
woman?
Her	 vision	 blurry	 with	 memories	 she'd	 thought	 buried	 forever,	 she	 looked
down	at	the	Deck,	blinking	rapidly.	“Do	I	want	you	to	talk	to	me,	old	friend?	Do	I
need	your	reminders,	your	wry	confirmation	that	faith	is	for	fools?”
A	 motion	 caught	 the	 corner	 of	 her	 eye.	 Whatever	 was	 inside	 the	 bound	 hide
had	 moved.	 Lumps	 rose	 here	 and	 there,	 pushing	 against	 the	 seams.	 Tattersail
stared.	Then,	her	breath	catching,	she	reached	to	it	and	set	it	in	front	of	her.	She
withdrew	 a	 small	 dagger	 from	 her	 belt	 and	 began	 to	 cut	 the	 seams.	 The	 object
within	went	still,	as	if	awaiting	the	result	of	her	efforts.	She	peeled	back	a	sliced
flap	of	hide.
“	'Sail,”	said	a	familiar	voice.
Her	 eyes	 widened	 as	 a	 wooden	 marionette,	 wearing	 bright	 yellow	 silk
clothing,	 climbed	 out	 of	 the	 bag.	 Painted	 on	 its	 round	 face	 were	 features	 she
recognized.
“Hairlock.”
“Good	to	see	you	again,”	the	marionette	said,	rising	to	its	feet.	It	wobbled	and
held	out	artfully	carved	hands	to	regain	balance.	“And	the	soul	did	shift,”	he	said,
doffing	his	floppy	hat	and	managing	an	unsteady	bow.
Soul	shifting.	“But	that's	been	lost	for	centuries.	Not	even	Tayschrenn—”	She
stopped,	pursing	her	lips.	Her	thoughts	raced.
“Later,”	 Hairlock	 said.	 He	 took	 a	 few	 steps,	 then	 bent	 his	 head	 forward	 to
study	 his	 new	 body.	 “Well,”	 he	 sighed,	 “one	 mustn't	 quibble,	 must	 one?”	 He
looked	 up	 and	 fixed	 painted	 eyes	 on	 the	 sorceress.	 “You	 have	 to	 go	 to	 my	 tent
before	the	thought	occurs	to	Tayschrenn.	I	need	my	Book.	You're	part	of	this	now.
There's	no	turning	back.”
“Part	of	what?”
Hairlock	made	no	reply,	having	broken	his	uncanny	stare.	He	lowered	himself
down	to	his	knees.	“Thought	I	smelled	a	Deck,”	he	said.
Sweat	 ran	 in	 cold	 rivulets	 under	 Tattersail's	 arms.	 Hairlock	 had	 made	 her


uneasy	at	the	best	of	times,	but	this	.	.	.	She	could	smell	her	own	fear.	That	he'd
swung	 his	 gaze	 from	 her	 made	 her	 grateful	 for	 small	 mercies.	 This	 was	 Elder
Magic,	Kurald	Galain,	if	the	legends	were	true,	and	it	was	deadly,	vicious,	raw
and	 primal.	 The	 Bridgeburners	 had	 a	 reputation	 for	 being	 a	 mean	 crowd,	 but	 to
walk	the	Warrens	closest	to	Chaos	was	pure	madness.	Or	desperation.
Almost	of	its	own	accord,	her	Thyr	Warren	opened	and	a	surge	of	power	filled
her	weary	body.	Her	eyes	snapped	to	the	Deck.
Hairlock	 must	 have	 sensed	 it.	 “Tattersail,”	 he	 whispered,	 amusement	 in	 his
tone.	“Come.	The	Fatid	calls	to	you.	Read	what	is	to	be	read.”
Profoundly	 disturbed	 by	 her	 own	 answering	 flush	 of	 excitement,	 Tattersail
reluctantly	 reached	 for	 the	 Deck	 of	 Dragons.	 She	 saw	 her	 hand	 tremble	 as	 it
closed	on	it.	She	shuffled	slowly,	feeling	the	chill	of	the	lacquered	wooden	cards
seep	into	her	fingers	and	then	her	arms.	“I	feel	a	storm	raging	in	them	already,”	she
said,	trimming	the	Deck	and	setting	it	down	on	the	tabletop.
Hairlock's	answering	laugh	was	eager	and	mean.	“First	House	sets	the	course.
Quickly!”
She	turned	over	the	top	card.	Her	breath	caught.	“Knight	of	Dark.”
Hairlock	sighed.	“The	Lord	of	Night	rules	this	game.	Of	course.”
Tattersail	 studied	 the	 painted	 figure.	 The	 face	 remained	 blurred	 as	 it	 always
did;	 the	 Knight	 was	 naked,	 his	 skin	 jet	 black.	 From	 the	 hips	 up	 he	 was	 human,
heavily	 muscled,	 holding	 aloft	 a	 black	 two-handed	 sword	 that	 trailed	 smoky,
ethereal	chains	drifting	off	into	the	background's	empty	darkness.	His	lower	body
was	draconean,	its	armored	scales	black,	paling	to	gray	at	the	belly.	As	always,
she	saw	something	new,	something	she	had	never	seen	before	that	pertained	to	the
moment.	There	was	a	shape	suspended	in	the	darkness	above	the	Knight's	head:
she	could	only	detect	it	on	the	edge	of	her	vision,	a	vague	hint	that	vanished	when
she	focused	on	the	place	itself.	Of	course,	you	never	give	up	the	truth	so	easily,
do	you?
“Second	card,”	Hairlock	urged,	crouching	close	to	the	playing	field	inscribed
on	the	tabletop.
She	 flipped	 the	 second	 card.	 “Oponn.”	 The	 two-faced	 Jester	 of	 Chance.
“Hood's	Curse	on	their	meddling	ways,”	Hairlock	growled.
The	 Lady	 held	 the	 upright	 position,	 her	 male	 twin's	 bemused	 stare	 upside
down	at	the	card's	foot.	Thus	the	thread	of	luck	that	pulled	back	rather	than	pushed
forward—the	 thread	 of	 success.	 The	 Lady's	 expression	 seemed	 soft,	 almost
tender,	a	new	facet	marking	how	things	now	balanced.	A	second	heretofore	unseen
detail	caught	Tattersail's	intense	study.	Where	the	Lord's	right	hand	reached	up	to


touch	 the	 Lady's	 left	 a	 tiny	 silver	 disc	 spanned	 the	 space	 between	 them.	 The
sorceress	 leaned	 forward,	 squinting.	 A	 coin,	 and	 on	 the	 face	 a	 male	 head.	 She
blinked.	No,	female.	Then	male,	then	female.	She	sat	back	suddenly.	The	coin	was
spinning.
“Next!”	Hairlock	demanded.	“You	are	too	slow!”
Tattersail	saw	that	the	marionette	was	paying	no	attention	to	the	card	Oponn,
and	had	in	fact	probably	given	it	only	sufficient	notice	to	identify	it.	She	drew	a
deep	breath.	Hairlock	 and	the	Bridgeburners	were	tied	 up	 in	 this,	she	knew	 that
instinctively,	 but	 her	 own	 role	 was	 as	 yet	 undecided.	 With	 these	 two	 cards,	 she
already	 knew	 more	 than	 they	 did.	 It	 still	 wasn't	 much,	 but	 it	 might	 be	 enough	 to
keep	her	alive	in	what	was	to	come.	She	released	her	breath	all	at	once,	reached
forward	and	slammed	a	palm	down	on	the	Deck.
Hairlock	jumped,	then	whirled	to	her.	“You	hold	on	this?”	he	raged.	“You	hold
on	the	Fool?	The	second	card?	Absurd!	Play	on,	woman!”
“No,”	Tattersail	replied,	sweeping	the	two	cards	into	her	hands	and	returning
them	to	the	Deck.	“I've	chosen	to	hold.	And	there's	nothing	you	can	do	about	it.”
She	rose.
“Bitch!	I	can	kill	you	in	the	blink	of	an	eye!	Here	and	now!”
“Fine,”	Tattersail	 said.	 “A	good	 excuse	for	missing	Tayschrenn's	 debriefing.
By	all	means	proceed,	Hairlock.”	Crossing	her	arms,	she	waited.
The	marionette	snarled.	“No,”	he	said.	“I	have	need	of	you.	And	you	despise
Tayschrenn	even	more	than	I.”	He	cocked	his	head,	reconsidering	his	last	words,
then	barked	a	laugh.	“Thus	I	am	assured	there	will	be	no	betrayal.”
Tattersail	thought	about	that.	“You	are	right,”	she	said.	She	turned	and	walked
to	the	tent	flap.	Her	hand	closed	on	the	rough	canvas,	then	she	stopped.	“Hairlock,
how	well	can	you	hear?”
“Well	enough,”	the	marionette	growled	behind	her.
“Do	you	hear	anything,	then?”	A	spinning	coin?
“Camp	sounds,	is	all.	Why,	what	do	you	hear?”
Tattersail	 smiled.	 Without	 answering	 she	 pulled	 aside	 the	 tent	 flap	 and	 went
outside.	As	she	headed	toward	the	command	tent,	a	strange	hope	sang	through	her.
She'd	 never	 held	 Oponn	 as	 an	 ally.	 Calling	 on	 luck	 in	 anything	 was	 sheer
idiocy.	The	first	House	she	had	placed,	Darkness,	touched	her	hand	ice-cold,	loud
with	the	crashing	waves	of	violence	and	power	run	amok—and	yet	an	odd	flavor
there,	something	like	salvation.	The	Knight	could	be	enemy	or	ally,	or	more	likely
neither.	Just	out	there,	unpredictable,	self-absorbed.	But	Oponn	rode	the	warrior's


shadow,	leaving	House	Dark	tottering	on	the	edge,	suspended	in	a	place	between
night	and	day.	More	than	anything	else,	it	had	been	Oponn's	spinning	coin	that	had
demanded	her	choice	to	hold.
Hairlock	heard	nothing.	Wonderful.
Even	now,	as	she	approached	the	command	tent,	the	faint	sound	continued	in
her	head,	as	it	would	for	some	time,	she	believed.	The	coin	spun,	and	spun.	Oponn
whirled	two	faces	to	the	cosmos,	but	it	was	the	Lady's	bet.	Spin	on,	silver.	Spin
on.


Chapter	Three
	
	

Thelomen	Tartheno	Toblakai	.	.	.
find	the	names	of	a	people
so	reluctant	to	fade
into	oblivion	.	.	.
Their	legend	rots
my	cynical	cast	and	blights
my	eyes	with	bright	glory	.	.	.
“Cross	not	the	loyal	cage
embracing	their	unassailable	heart	.	.	.
	

.	.	.	Cross	not	these	stolid	menhirs,
ever	loyal	to	the	earth.”
Thelomen	Tartheno	Toblakai	.	.	.
Still	standing,	these	towering	pillars
mar	the	gelid	scape
of	my	mind	.	.	.
GOTHOS'	FOLLY	(II.IV)
GOTHOS	(B.?)


	
The	imperial	trireme	carved	the	deep-sea	troughs	like	a	relentless	ax-blade,	sails
stretched	 and	 spars	 creaking	 under	 the	 steady	 wind.	 Captain	 Ganoes	 Paran
remained	 in	 his	 cabin.	 He	 had	 long	 since	 grown	 tired	 of	 scanning	 the	 eastern
horizon	for	the	first	sighting	of	land.	It	would	come,	and	it	would	come	soon.
He	 leaned	 against	 the	 sloping	 wall	 opposite	 his	 bunk,	 watching	 the	 lanterns
sway	and	idly	tossing	his	dagger	into	the	lone	table's	center	pole,	which	was	now
studded	with	countless	tiny	holes.
A	cool	musty	brush	of	air	swept	across	his	face	and	he	turned	to	see	Topper
emerge	from	the	Imperial	Warren.	It	had	been	two	years	since	he'd	last	seen	the
Claw	Master.	“Hood's	Breath,	man,”	Paran	said,	“can't	you	find	another	color	of
cloth?	This	perverse	love	of	green	must	surely	be	curable.”
The	tall	half-blood	Tiste	Andii	seemed	to	be	wearing	the	same	clothes	as	the
last	time	Paran	had	seen	him:	green	wool,	green	leather.	Only	the	countless	rings
spearing	his	long	fingers	showed	any	splash	of	contrary	color.	The	Claw	Master
had	arrived	in	a	sour	mood	and	Paran's	opening	words	had	not	improved	it.	“You
imagine	 I	 enjoy	 such	 journeys,	 Captain?	 Seeking	 out	 a	 ship	 on	 the	 ocean	 is	 a
challenge	of	sorcery	few	could	manage.”
“Makes	you	a	reliable	messenger,	then,”	Paran	muttered.
“I	 see	 you've	 made	 no	 effort	 to	 improve	 on	 courtesy,	 Captain—I	 admit	 I
understand	nothing	of	the	Adjunct's	faith	in	you.”
“Don't	 lose	 sleep	 over	 it,	 Topper.	 Now	 you've	 found	 me,	 what	 is	 the
message?”
The	man	scowled.	“She's	with	the	Bridgeburners.	Outside	Pale.”
“The	siege	continues?	How	old	is	your	information?”
“Less	than	a	week,	which	is	as	long	as	I've	been	hunting	you.	In	any	case,”	he
continued,	“the	deadlock	is	about	to	be	broken.”
Paran	grunted.	Then	he	frowned.	“Which	squad?”
“You	know	them	all?”
“Yes,”	Paran	asserted.
Topper's	 scowl	 deepened,	 then	 he	 raised	 a	 hand	 and	 began	 examining	 his
rings.	“Whiskeyjack's.	She's	one	of	his	recruits.”
Paran	closed	his	eyes.	It	should	not	have	surprised	him.	The	gods	are	playing
with	 me.	 Question	 is,	 which	 gods?	 Oh,	 Whiskeyjack.	 You	 once	 commanded	 an


army,	back	when	Laseen	was	named	Surly,	back	when	you	could	have	listened	to
your	 companion,	 when	 you	 could	 have	 made	 a	 choice.	 You	 could've	 stopped
Surly.	 Hood,	 perhaps	 you	 could	 have	 stopped	 me.	 But	 now	 you	 command	 a
squad,	just	a	squad,	and	she's	the	Empress.	And	me?	I'm	a	fool	who	followed	his
dream,	and	now	all	I	desire	is	its	end.	He	opened	his	eyes	and	regarded	Topper.
“Whiskeyjack.	 The	 War	 of	 Seven	 Cities:	 through	 the	 breach	 at	 Aren,	 the	 Holy
Desert	Raraku,	Panpot'sun,	Nathilog	.	.	.”
“All	in	the	Emperor's	time,	Paran.”
“So,”	Paran	said,	“I'm	to	take	command	of	Whiskeyjack's	squad.	The	mission
will	take	us	to	Darujhistan,	to	the	city	of	cities.”
“Your	 recruit	 is	 showing	 her	 powers,”	 Topper	 said,	 grimacing.	 “She's
corrupted	the	Bridgeburners,	possibly	even	Dujek	Onearm	and	the	entire	Second
and	Third	Armies	on	Genabackis.”
“You	can't	be	serious.	Besides,	my	concern	is	with	the	recruit.	With	her.	Only
her.	The	Adjunct	agrees	we've	waited	long	enough.	Now	you're	telling	me	we've
waited	too	long?	I	can't	believe	Dujek's	about	to	become	a	renegade—not	Dujek.
Not	Whiskeyjack	either.”
“You	are	to	proceed	as	planned,	but	I	have	been	instructed	to	remind	you	that
secrecy	is	paramount,	now	more	than	ever.	An	agent	of	the	Claw	will	contact	you
once	you	reach	Pale.	Trust	no	one	else.	Your	recruit's	found	her	weapon,	and	with
it	 she	 means	 to	 strike	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 Empire.	 Failure	 cannot	 be	 considered.”
Topper's	odd	eyes	glinted.	“If	you	now	feel	unequal	to	the	task	.	.	.”
Paran	studied	the	man	standing	before	him.	If	it's	as	bad	as	you	describe,	why
not	send	in	a	hand	of	Claw	assassins?
The	man	sighed,	as	if	he'd	somehow	heard	Paran's	silent	question.	“A	god	is
using	 her,	 Captain.	 She	 won't	 die	 easily.	 The	 plan	 for	 dealing	 with	 her	 has
required	.	.	.	adjustments.	Expansion,	in	fact.	Additional	threats	must	be	taken	care
of,	 but	 these	 are	 threads	 already	 woven.	 Do	 as	 you	 have	 been	 commanded.	 All
risk	 must	 be	 removed	 if	 we	 are	 to	 take	 Darujhistan,	 and	 the	 Empress	 wants
Darujhistan.	She	also	feels	it	is	time	for	Dujek	Onearm	to	be	.	.	.”	he	smiled	“.	.	.
disarmed.”
“Why?”
“He	has	a	following.	It's	still	held	that	the	Emperor	had	old	Onearm	in	mind
as	his	heir.”
Paran	snorted.	“The	Emperor	planned	to	rule	forever,	Topper.	This	suspicion
of	Laseen's	is	plain	ridiculous	and	persists	only	because	it	justifies	her	paranoia.”
“Captain,”	Topper	said	quietly,	“greater	men	than	you	have	died	for	less.	The


Empress	expects	obedience	of	her	servants,	and	demands	loyalty.”
“Any	 reasonable	 ruler	 would	 have	 the	 expectation	 and	 the	 demand	 the	 other
way	round.”
Topper's	mouth	thinned	to	a	pale	line.	“Assume	 command	of	the	squad,	stay
close	to	the	recruit	but	otherwise	do	nothing	to	make	her	suspicious	of	you.	Once
in	place	you	are	to	wait.	Understood?”
Paran	looked	away,	his	gaze	finding	the	porthole.	Beyond	was	blue	sky.	There
were	 too	 many	 omissions,	 half-truths,	 and	 outright	 lies	 in	 this	 .	 .	 .	 this	 chaotic
mess.	 How	 will	 I	 play	 it,	 when	 the	 time	 comes?	 The	 recruit	 must	 die.	 At	 least
that	much	is	certain.	But	the	rest?	Whiskeyjack,	I	remember	you,	you	stood	tall
then,	 and	 in	 my	 dreams	 I	 never	 imagined	 this	 growing	 nightmare.	 Will	 I	 have
your	 blood	 on	 my	 hands	 when	 all	 this	 is	 done?	 At	 the	 very	 heart	 of	 things,	 he
realized,	he	no	longer	knew	who	was	the	ultimate	betrayer	in	all	this,	if	a	betrayer
there	must	be.	Was	the	Empire	the	Empress?	Or	was	it	something	else,	a	legacy,	an
ambition,	a	vision	at	the	far	end	of	peace	and	wealth	for	all?	Or	was	it	a	beast	that
could	not	cease	devouring?	Darujhistan—the	greatest	city	in	the	world.	Would	it
come	to	the	Empire	in	flames?	Was	there	wisdom	in	opening	its	gates?	Within	the
troubled	 borders	 of	 the	 Malazan	 Empire,	 people	 lived	 in	 such	 peace	 as	 their
ancestors	 had	 never	 imagined;	 and	 if	 not	 for	 the	 Claw,	 for	 the	 endless	 wars	 in
distant	lands,	there	would	be	freedom	as	well.	Had	this	been	the	Emperor's	dream
at	the	very	beginning?	Did	it	matter	anymore?
“Are	my	instructions	understood,	Captain?”
He	glanced	over	at	the	man	and	waved	a	hand.	“Well	enough.”
Snarling,	Topper	spread	wide	his	arms.	The	Imperial	Warren	yawned	behind
him.	He	stepped	back	and	was	gone.
Paran	leaned	forward,	his	head	in	his	hands.
It	was	the	Season	of	Currents	and	in	the	port	city	of	Genabaris	the	heavy	Malazan
transports	 rocked	 and	 twisted,	 straining	 at	 their	 ropes	 like	 massive	 beasts.	 The
piers,	unused	to	such	gargantuan	craft	moored	alongside	them,	creaked	ominously
with	every	wayward,	savage	pull	on	the	bollards.
Crates	and	cloth-wrapped	bundles	crowded	the	yards,	supplies	fresh	in	from
the	 Seven	 Cities	 and	 destined	 for	 the	 front	 lines.	 Supply	 clerks	 clambered	 over
them	 like	 monkeys,	 hunting	 sigils	 of	 identification	 and	 chattering	 to	 each	 other
over	the	heads	of	dockmen	and	soldiers.
The	agent	leaned	against	a	crate	at	the	foot	of	the	pier,	his	burly	arms	crossed


and	 his	 small,	 narrow	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 officer	 sitting	 on	 a	 bundle	 some	 thirty
yards	farther	down	the	pier.	Neither	had	moved	in	the	last	hour.
The	 agent	 was	 having	 a	 hard	 time	 convincing	 himself	 that	 this	 was	 the	 man
he'd	 been	 sent	 to	 retrieve.	 He	 looked	 awfully	 young,	 and	 as	 green	 as	 the	 rancid
water	 of	 this	 bay.	 His	 uniform	 still	 bore	 its	 maker's	 chalk	 lines,	 and	 the	 leather
grip	of	his	longsword	showed	not	a	single	sweat-stain.	He	had	the	stink	of	nobility
about	him	like	a	perfumed	cloud.	And	for	the	past	hour	he'd	just	been	sitting	there,
hands	 in	 lap,	 shoulders	 hunched,	 watching	 like	 some	 stupid	 cow	 the	 frenzied
activity	swirling	around	him.	Though	he	ranked	captain,	not	a	single	soldier	even
bothered	to	salute	him—the	stink	wasn't	subtle.
The	Adjunct	must	have	been	knocked	on	her	head	during	that	last	assassination
attempt	 on	 the	 Empress.	 It	 was	 the	 only	 possible	 explanation	 for	 this	 farce	 of	 a
man	 rating	 the	 kind	 of	 service	 the	 agent	 was	 about	 to	 deliver.	 In	 person,	 yet.
These	days,	he	concluded	sourly,	the	whole	show	was	being	run	by	idiots.
With	 a	 loud	 sigh,	 the	 agent	 pushed	 himself	 upright	 and	 sauntered	 over	 to	 the
officer.
The	man	didn't	even	know	he	had	company	until	the	agent	stepped	in	front	of
him,	then	he	looked	up.
The	 agent	 did	 some	 quick	 rethinking.	 Something	 in	 this	 man's	 gaze	 was
dangerous.	There	was	a	glitter	there,	buried	deep,	that	made	the	man's	eyes	seem
older	than	the	rest	of	his	face.	“Name?”	The	agent's	question	was	a	strained	grunt.
“Took	your	time	about	it,”	the	captain	said,	rising.
A	tall	bastard,	too.	The	agent	scowled.	He	hated	tall	bastards.	“Who're	you
waiting	for,	Captain?”
The	man	looked	up	the	pier.	“The	waiting's	over.	Let's	walk.	I'll	just	take	it	on
faith	you	know	where	we're	going.”	He	reached	down	and	retrieved	a	duffel	bag,
then	took	the	lead.
The	 agent	 moved	 up	 beside	 the	 captain.	 “Fine,”	 he	 growled.	 “Be	 that	 way.”
They	 left	 the	 pier	 and	 the	 agent	 turned	 them	 up	 the	 first	 street	 on	 the	 right.	 “A
Green	Quorl	came	in	last	night.	You'll	be	taken	directly	to	Cloud	Forest,	and	from
there	a	Black	will	take	you	into	Pale.”
The	captain	gave	the	agent	a	blank	stare.
“You	never	heard	of	Quorls?”
“No.	 I	 assume	 they're	 a	 means	 of	 transportation.	 Why	 else	 would	 I	 be
removed	from	a	ship	a	thousand	leagues	distant	from	Pale?”
“The	Moranth	use	them,	and	we're	using	the	Moranth.”	The	agent	scowled	to


himself.	“Using	them	a	lot,	these	days.	The	Green	do	most	of	the	courier	stuff,	and
moving	people	around	like	you	and	me,	but	the	Black	are	stationed	in	Pale,	and	the
different	clans	don't	like	to	mix.	The	Moranth	are	made	up	of	a	bunch	of	clans,	got
colors	for	names,	and	wear	them	too.	Nobody	gets	confused	that	way.”
“And	I'm	to	ride	with	a	Green,	on	a	Quorl?”
“You	got	it,	Captain.”
They	 headed	 up	 a	 narrow	 street.	 Malazan	 guards	 milled	 around	 every
crossing,	hands	on	their	weapons.
The	 captain	 returned	 a	 salute	 from	 one	 such	 squad.	 “Having	 trouble	 with
insurrections?”	he	asked.
“Insurrections,	yeah.	Trouble,	no.”
“Let's	see	if	I	understand	you	correctly.”	The	captain's	tone	was	stiff.	“Instead
of	delivering	me	by	ship	to	a	point	nearest	Pale,	I'm	to	ride	overland	with	a	bunch
of	 half-human	 barbarians	 who	 smell	 like	 grasshoppers	 and	 dress	 like	 them,	 too.
And	this	way,	no	one	will	notice,	especially	since	it'll	take	us	a	year	to	get	to	Pale
and	by	then	everything	will	have	gone	straight	to	Hood's	Gate.	Correct	so	far?”
Grinning,	the	agent	shook	his	head.	Despite	his	hatred	for	tall	men	or,	rather,
men	 taller	 than	 himself,	 he	 felt	 his	 guard	 going	 down.	 At	 least	 this	 one	 talked
straight—and,	 for	 a	 noble,	 that	 was	 pretty	 impressive.	 Maybe	 Lorn	 still	 had	 the
old	 stuff	 after	 all.	 “You	 said	 overland?	 Well,	 yes,	 Captain.	 Way	 overland.”	 He
stopped	 at	 a	 nondescript	 doorway	 and	 turned	 to	 the	 man.	 “Quorls,	 you	 see,	 they
fly.	They	got	wings.	Four	in	fact.	And	you	can	see	right	through	every	one	of	them,
and	if	you're	of	a	mind	you	can	poke	your	finger	through	one	of	those	wings.	Only
don't	 do	 it	 when	 you're	 a	 quarter-mile	 up,	 right?	 ‘Cause	 it	 may	 be	 a	 long	 way
down	but	it'll	seem	awfully	fast	at	the	time.	You	hear	me,	Captain?”	He	opened
the	door.	Beyond	rose	a	staircase.
The	 man's	 face	 had	 lost	 its	 color.	 “So	 much	 for	 intelligence	 reports,”	 he
muttered.
The	agent's	grin	widened.	“We	see	them	before	you	do.	Life's	on	a	need-toknow.	Remember	that,	Captain	.	.	.	?”
The	man's	smile	was	the	only	answer	he	gave.
They	entered	and	closed	the	door	behind	them.
A	young	marine	intercepted	Tattersail	as	she	made	her	way	across	the	compound
in	what	was	now	Empire	headquarters	in	Pale.	The	boy's	face	had	bewilderment
written	all	over	it,	and	he	opened	his	mouth	a	few	times	before	any	words	came


out.
“Sorceress?”
She	stopped.	The	thought	of	having	Tayschrenn	wait	a	little	longer	appealed	to
her.	“What	is	it,	soldier?”
The	 marine	 stole	 a	 glance	 over	 one	 shoulder,	 then	 said,	 “The	 guards,
Sorceress.	They've	got	something	of	a	problem.	They	sent	me	to—”
“Who?	Which	guards?	Take	me	to	them.”
“Yes,	Sorceress.”
She	followed	the	marine	around	the	nearest	corner	of	the	main	building,	where
the	 compound	 wall	 ran	 close,	 creating	 a	 narrow	 passage	 running	 the	 building's
length.	At	the	far	end	knelt	a	figure,	his	bare	head	bowed.	Beside	him	was	a	large,
lumpy	burlap	sack,	covered	in	brown	stains.	Clouds	of	flies	swarmed	around	both
the	man	and	the	sack.
The	 marine	 halted	 and	 turned	 to	 the	 sorceress.	 “He	 still	 hasn't	 moved.	 The
guards	keep	getting	sick	when	they	patrol	through	here.”
Tattersail	 stared	 at	 the	 huddled	 man,	 a	 sudden	 welling	 of	 tears	 behind	 her
eyes.	Ignoring	the	marine,	she	strode	into	the	aisle.	The	stench	hit	her	like	a	wall.
Damn,	she	thought,	he's	been	here	since	the	battle.	Five	days.	The	sorceress	came
closer.	 Though	 Bellurdan	 knelt,	 his	 head	 came	 near	 to	 her	 own	 height.	 The
Thelomen	High	Mage	still	wore	what	was	left	of	his	battle	garb,	the	ragged	strips
of	fur	scorched	and	torn,	the	rough	weave	of	fragments	of	tunic	stained	with	blood.
As	she	arrived	to	stop	before	him,	she	saw	that	his	neck	and	face	were	covered	in
burn	blisters,	and	most	of	his	hair	was	gone.
“You	look	terrible,	Bellurdan,”	she	said.
The	giant's	head	slowly	turned.	Red-rimmed	eyes	focused	on	her	face.	“Ah,”
he	 rumbled.	 “Tattersail.”	 His	 exhausted	 smile	 cracked	 the	 charred	 flesh	 of	 one
cheek.	The	wound	gaped	red	and	dry.
That	smile	almost	broke	her	down.	“You	need	healing,	old	friend.”	Her	gaze
flicked	 to	 the	 burlap	 sack.	 Its	 surface	 crawled	 with	 flies.	 “Come	 on.	 Nightchill
would	bite	your	head	off	if	she	could	see	you	now.”	She	felt	a	trembling	steal	into
her,	 but	 grimly	 pressed	 on.	 “We'll	 take	 care	 of	 her,	 Bellurdan.	 You	 and	 me.	 But
we'll	need	our	strength	to	do	that.”
The	 Thelomen	 shook	 his	 head	 slowly.	 “I	 choose	 this,	 Tattersail.	 The	 scars
without	 are	 the	 scars	 within.”	 He	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath.	 “I	 will	 survive	 these
wounds.	And	I	alone	will	raise	my	love's	barrow.	But	the	time	is	not	yet	right.”
He	laid	a	massive	hand	on	the	sack.	“Tayschrenn	has	given	me	leave	to	do	this.
Will	you	do	the	same?”


Tattersail	was	shocked	to	feel	the	surge	of	anger	rising	up	in	her.	“Tayschrenn
gave	 you	 leave,	 did	 he?”	 To	 her	 own	 ears	 her	 voice	 sounded	 brutal,	 a	 harsh
grating	of	sarcasm.	She	saw	Bellurdan	flinch	and	seem	to	withdraw,	and	a	part	of
her	 wanted	 to	 wail,	 to	 throw	 her	 arms	 around	 the	 giant	 and	 weep,	 but	 rage
possessed	 her.	 “That	 bastard	 killed	 Nightchill,	 Bellurdan!	 The	 Moon's	 lord	 had
neither	the	time	nor	the	inclination	to	raise	demons.	Think	about	it!	Tayschrenn	had
the	time	to	prepare—”
“No!”	The	Thelomen's	voice	thundered	down	the	aisle.	He	surged	to	his	feet
and	 Tattersail	 stepped	 back.	 The	 giant	 looked	 ready	 to	 tear	 down	 the	 walls,	 a
desperate	fire	in	his	eyes.	His	hands	closed	into	fists.	Then	his	glare	fixed	on	her.
He	seemed	to	freeze.	All	at	once	his	shoulders	slumped,	his	hands	opened,	and	his
eyes	 dimmed.	 “No,”	 he	 said	 again,	 this	 time	 in	 a	 tone	 filled	 with	 sorrow.
“Tayschrenn	 is	 our	 protector.	 As	 he	 has	 always	 been,	 Tattersail.	 Remember	 the
very	 beginning?	 The	 Emperor	 was	 mad,	 but	 Tayschrenn	 stood	 at	 his	 side.	 He
shaped	 the	 Empire's	 dream	 and	 so	 opposed	 the	 Emperor's	 nightmare.	 We
underestimated	the	Lord	of	Moon's	Spawn,	that	is	all.”
Tattersail	 stared	 up	 at	 Bellurdan's	 ravaged	 face.	 The	 memory	 of	 Hairlock's
torn	body	returned	to	her.	There	was	an	echo	there,	but	she	couldn't	quite	catch	it.
“I	remember	the	beginning,”	she	said	softly,	doing	some	searching	of	her	own.	The
memories	 remained	 sharp,	 but	 whatever	 thread	 there	 was	 that	 connected	 then	 to
now	 still	 eluded	 her.	 She	 wanted	 desperately	 to	 talk	 to	 Quick	 Ben,	 but	 she	 had
seen	nothing	of	the	Bridgeburners	since	the	day	of	the	battle.	They'd	left	her	with
Hairlock,	 and	 that	 puppet	 scared	 her	 more	 and	 more	 with	 every	 passing	 day.
Particularly	now	that	he'd	found	a	grudge	to	hold	on	to—the	scene	with	the	Deck
of	 Dragons	 still	 smarted—and	 he	 worked	 it	 by	 keeping	 her	 in	 the	 dark.	 “The
Emperor	 had	 a	 knack	 for	 gathering	 the	 right	 people	 around	 him,”	 she	 continued.
“But	he	wasn't	a	fool.	He	knew	the	betrayal	would	come	from	that	group.	What
made	us	the	right	people	was	our	power.	I	remember,	Bellurdan.”	She	shook	her
head.	“The	Emperor's	gone,	but	the	power's	still	here.”
Tattersail's	 breath	 caught.	 “And	 that's	 it,”	 she	 said,	 half	 to	 herself.
“Tayschrenn's	the	thread.”
“The	 Emperor	 was	 insane,”	 Bellurdan	 said.	 “Else	 he	 would	 have	 protected
himself	better.”
Tattersail	frowned	at	that.	The	Thelomen	had	a	point.	Like	she'd	just	said,	that
old	man	wasn't	a	fool.	So	what	had	happened?	“I'm	sorry.	We	must	talk	later.	The
High	Mage	has	summoned	me.	Bellurdan,	will	we	talk	later?”
The	 giant	 nodded.	 “As	 you	 wish.	 Soon	 I	 will	 depart	 to	 raise	 Nightchill's
barrow.	Far	out	on	the	Rhivi	Plain,	I	think.”


Tattersail	glanced	back	up	the	aisle.	The	marine	still	stood	there,	shifting	from
one	foot	to	the	other.	“Bellurdan,	would	you	mind	if	I	cast	a	sealing	spell	on	her
remains?”
His	eyes	clouded	and	he	looked	down	at	the	sack.	“The	guards	are	unhappy,
it's	true.”	He	thought	for	a	moment,	then	said,	“Yes,	Tattersail.	You	may	do	that.”
“It	smells	bad	from	here	to	the	throne,”	Kalam	said,	his	scarred	face	twisted	with
worry.	He	sat	crouched	on	his	haunches,	absently	scratching	the	lines	of	a	web	on
the	ground	with	his	dagger,	then	looked	up	at	his	sergeant.
Whiskeyjack	 eyed	 Pale's	 stained	 walls,	 the	 muscles	 of	 his	 jaw	 bunching
beneath	his	beard.	“The	last	time	I	stood	on	this	hill,”	he	said,	his	gaze	narrowing,
“it	was	crowded	with	armor.	And	a	mage	and	a	half.”	He	was	silent	for	a	time,
then	he	sighed.	“Go	on,	Corporal.”
Kalam	 nodded.	 “I	 pulled	 some	 old	 threads,”	 he	 said,	 squinting	 against	 the
harsh	morning	light.	“Somebody	high	up	has	us	marked.	Could	be	the	court	itself,
or	 maybe	 the	 nobility—there's	 rumors	 they're	 back	 at	 it	 behind	 the	 scenes.”	 He
grimaced.	 “And	 now	 we've	 got	 some	 new	 captain	 from	 Unta	 eager	 to	 get	 our
throats	cut.	Four	captains	in	the	last	three	years,	not	one	worth	his	weight	in	salt.”
Quick	Ben	stood	ten	feet	away,	at	the	hill's	crest,	his	arms	crossed.	He	now
spoke.	“You	heard	the	plan.	Come	on,	Whiskeyjack.	That	man	slid	straight	out	of
the	palace	and	into	our	laps	on	a	stream	of—”
“Quiet,”	Whiskeyjack	muttered.	“I'm	thinking.”
Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	exchanged	glances.
A	 long	 minute	 passed.	 On	 the	 road	 below	 troop	 wagons	 rattled	 in	 the	 ruts
leading	into	the	city.	Remnants	of	the	5th	and	6th	Armies,	already	battered,	almost
broken,	by	Caladan	Brood	and	the	Crimson	Guard.	Whiskeyjack	shook	his	head.
The	only	force	intact	was	the	Moranth,	and	they	seemed	determined	to	field	only
the	 Black	 regiments,	 using	 the	 Green	 for	 lifts	 and	 drops—and	 where	 in	 Hood's
name	 was	 the	 Gold	 he'd	 been	 hearing	 so	 much	 about?	 Damn	 those	 unhuman
bastards	anyway.	Pale's	gutters	still	ran	red	from	their	hour	of	retribution.	Once
the	burial	shifts	were	through,	there'd	be	a	few	more	hills	outside	the	city's	walls.
Big	ones.
There	would	be	nothing	to	mark	thirteen	hundred	dead	Bridgeburners,	though.
The	 worms	 didn't	 need	 to	 travel	 far	 to	 feast	 on	 those	 bodies.	 What	 chilled	 the
sergeant	to	his	bones	was	the	fact	that,	apart	from	the	few	survivors,	nobody	had
made	 a	 serious	 effort	 to	 save	 them.	 Some	 low-ranking	 officer	 had	 delivered
Tayschrenn's	commiserations	on	those	lost	in	the	line	of	duty,	then	had	unloaded	a


wagonload	of	tripe	about	heroism	and	sacrifice.	His	audience	of	thirty-nine	stonefaced	soldiers	had	looked	on	without	a	word.	The	officer	was	found	dead	in	his
room	 two	 hours	 later,	 expertly	 garotted.	 The	 mood	 was	 bad—nobody	 in	 the
regiment	would	have	even	thought	of	something	so	ugly	five	years	ago.	But	now
they	didn't	blink	at	the	news.
Garotte—sounds	 like	 Claw	 work.	 Kalam	 had	 suggested	 it	 was	 a	 set-up,	 an
elaborate	frame	to	discredit	what	was	left	of	the	Bridgeburners.	Whiskeyjack	was
skeptical.
He	tried	to	clear	his	thoughts.	If	there	was	a	pattern	it	would	be	a	simple	one,
simple	 enough	 to	 pass	 by	 unnoticed.	 But	 exhaustion	 seeped	 in	 like	 a	 thick	 haze
behind	his	eyes.	He	took	a	deep	lungful	of	the	morning	air.	“The	new	recruit?”	he
asked.
Kalam	 rose	 from	 his	 haunches	 with	 a	 grunt.	 A	 faraway	 and	 long-ago	 look
entered	his	eyes.	“Maybe,”	he	said	finally.	“Pretty	young	for	a	Claw,	though.”
“I	never	believed	in	pure	evil	before	Sorry	showed	up,”	Quick	Ben	said.	“But
you're	 right,	 she's	 awfully	 young.	 How	 long	 are	 they	 trained	 before	 they're	 sent
out?”
Kalam	 shrugged	 uneasily.	 “Fifteen	 years	 minimum.	 Mind	 you,	 they	 get	 them
young.	Five	or	six.”
“Could	be	magery	involved,	making	her	look	younger	than	she	is,”	Quick	Ben
said.	“High-level	stuff,	but	within	Tayschrenn's	abilities.”
“Seems	too	obvious,”	Whiskeyjack	muttered.	“Call	it	bad	upbringing.”
Quick	Ben	snorted.	“Don't	tell	me	you	believe	that,	Whiskeyjack.”
The	sergeant's	face	tightened.	“The	subject's	closed	on	Sorry.	And	don't	tell
me	what	I	think,	Wizard.”	He	faced	Kalam.	“All	right.	You	think	the	Empire's	into
killing	 its	 own	 these	 days.	 You	 think	 Laseen's	 cleaning	 her	 house,	 maybe?	 Or
someone	close	to	her?	Getting	rid	of	certain	people.	Fine.	Tell	me	why.”
“The	 old	 guard,”	 Kalam	 replied	 immediately.	 “Everyone	 still	 loyal	 to	 the
Emperor's	memory.”
“Doesn't	 wash,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.	 “We're	 all	 dying	 off	 anyway.	 We	 don't
need	 Laseen's	 help.	 Apart	 from	 Dujek	 there's	 not	 a	 man	 in	 this	 army	 here	 who
even	 knows	 the	 Emperor's	 name,	 and	 nobody'd	 give	 a	 damn	 in	 any	 case.	 He's
dead.	Long	live	the	Empress.”
“She	ain't	got	the	patience	to	wait	it	out,”	Quick	Ben	said.
Kalam	nodded	agreement.	“She's	losing	momentum	as	it	is.	Things	used	to	be
better—it's	that	memory	she	wants	dead.”


“Hairlock's	 our	 snake	 in	 the	 hole,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said	 with	 a	 sharp	 nod.	 “It'll
work,	Whiskeyjack.	I	know	what	I'm	doing	on	this	one.”
“We	 do	 it	 the	 way	 the	 Emperor	 would	 have,”	 Kalam	 added.	 “We	 turn	 the
game.	We	do	our	own	house-cleaning.”
Whiskeyjack	 raised	 a	 hand.	 “All	 right.	 Now	 be	 quiet.	 You're	 both	 sounding
too	damn	rehearsed.”	He	paused.	“It's	a	theory.	A	complicated	one.	Who's	in	the
know	 and	 who	 isn't?”	 He	 scowled	 at	 Quick	 Ben's	 expression.	 “Right,	 that's
Hairlock's	task.	But	what	happens	when	you	come	face	to	face	with	someone	big,
powerful,	and	mean?”
“Like	Tayschrenn?”	The	wizard	grinned.
“Right.	I'm	sure	you've	got	an	answer.	Let's	see	if	I	can	work	it	out	myself.
You	look	for	someone	even	nastier.	You	make	a	deal	and	you	set	things	up,	and	if
we're	quick	enough	we'll	come	out	smelling	of	roses.	Am	I	close,	Wizard?”
Kalam	snorted	his	amusement.
Quick	Ben	looked	away.	“Back	in	the	Seven	Cities,	before	the	Empire	showed
up—”
“Back	 in	 the	 Seven	 Cities	 is	 back	 in	 the	 Seven	 Cities,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.
“Hood	knows,	I	led	the	company	chasing	you	across	the	desert,	remember?	I	know
how	you	work,	Quick.	And	I	know	you're	damn	good	at	this.	But	I	also	recall	that
you	were	the	only	one	of	your	cabal	to	come	out	alive	back	then.	And	this	time?”
The	wizard	seemed	hurt	by	Whiskeyjack's	words.	His	lips	thinned	to	a	straight
line.
The	 sergeant	 sighed.	 “All	 right.	 We	 go	 with	 it.	 Start	 things	 rolling.	 And	 pull
that	sorceress	all	the	way	in.	We'll	need	her	if	Hairlock	breaks	his	chains.”
“And	Sorry?”	Kalam	asked.
Whiskeyjack	hesitated.	He	knew	the	question	behind	that	question.	Quick	Ben
was	 the	 squad's	 brains,	 but	 Kalam	 was	 their	 killer.	 Both	 made	 him	 uneasy	 with
their	 single-minded	 devotion	 to	 their	 respective	 talents.	 “Leave	 her	 alone,”	 he
said	at	last.	“For	now.”
Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	sighed,	sharing	a	grin	behind	their	sergeant's	back.
“Just	don't	get	cocky,”	Whiskeyjack	said	dryly.
The	grins	faded.
The	 sergeant's	 gaze	 returned	 to	 the	 wagons	 entering	 the	 city.	 Two	 riders
approached.	 “All	 right,”	 he	 said.	 “Mount	 up.	 Here	 comes	 our	 reception
committee.”	The	riders	were	from	his	squad,	Fiddler	and	Sorry.
“You	 think	 the	 new	 captain's	 arrived?”	 Kalam	 asked,	 as	 he	 climbed	 into	 his


saddle.	His	roan	mare	turned	her	head	and	snapped	at	him.	He	growled	in	return.
A	 moment	 later	 the	 two	 longtime	 companions	 settled	 down	 into	 their	 mutual
mistrust.
Whiskeyjack	 looked	 on,	 amused.	 “Probably.	 Let's	 head	 down	 to	 them.
Anybody	up	on	the	wall	watching	us	might	be	getting	antsy.”	Then	his	humor	fell
away.	They	had,	indeed,	just	turned	the	game.	And	the	timing	couldn't	have	been
worse.	He	knew	the	full	extent	of	their	next	mission,	and	in	that	he	knew	more	than
either	 Quick	 Ben	 or	 Kalam.	 There	 was	 no	 point	 in	 complicating	 things	 even
further,	though.	They'll	find	out	soon	enough.
Tattersail	stood	half	a	dozen	paces	behind	High	Mage	Tayschrenn.	The	Malazan
banners	 snapped	 in	 the	 wind,	 the	 spars	 creaking	 above	 the	 smoke-stained	 turret,
but	here	in	the	shelter	of	the	wall	the	air	was	calm.	On	the	western	horizon	across
from	 her	 rose	 the	 Moranth	 Mountains,	 reaching	 a	 mangled	 arm	 northward	 to
Genabaris.	 As	 the	 range	 swept	 southward	 it	 joined	 the	 Tahlyn	 in	 a	 jagged	 line
stretching	 a	 thousand	 leagues	 into	 the	 east.	 Off	 to	 her	 right	 lay	 the	 flat	 yellowgrassed	Rhivi	Plain.
Tayschrenn	 leaned	 on	 a	 merlon	 looking	 down	 on	 the	 wagons	 rolling	 into	 the
city.	From	below	rose	the	groans	of	oxen	and	shouting	soldiers.	The	High	Mage
hadn't	moved	or	said	a	word	in	some	minutes.	Off	to	his	left	waited	a	small	wood
table,	its	surface	scarred	and	pitted	and	crowded	with	runes	cut	deep	into	the	oak.
Peculiar	dark	stains	blotted	the	surface	here	and	there.
Knots	 of	 tension	 throbbed	 in	 Tattersail's	 shoulders.	 Meeting	 Bellurdan	 had
shaken	her,	and	she	didn't	feel	up	to	what	was	to	come.
“Bridgeburners,”	the	High	Mage	muttered.
Startled,	the	sorceress	frowned,	then	stepped	up	to	stand	beside	Tayschrenn.
Descending	from	a	hill	off	to	the	right,	a	hill	she	knew	intimately,	rode	a	party	of
soldiers.	Even	from	this	distance	she	recognized	four	of	them:	Quick	Ben,	Kalam,
Whiskeyjack,	and	that	recruit,	Sorry.	The	fifth	rider	was	a	short,	wiry	man,	who
had	sapper	written	all	over	him.	“Oh?”	she	said,	feigning	lack	of	interest.
“Whiskeyjack's	 squad,”	 Tayschrenn	 said.	 He	 turned	 his	 full	 gaze	 on	 the
sorceress.	 “The	 same	 squad	 you	 spoke	 with	 immediately	 following	 the	 Moon's
retreat.”	 The	 High	 Mage	 smiled,	 then	 clapped	 Tattersail's	 shoulder.	 “Come.	 I
require	 a	 Reading.	 Let's	 begin.”	 He	 walked	 over	 to	 stand	 before	 the	 table.
“Oponn's	strands	are	twisting	a	peculiar	maze,	the	influence	snares	me	again	and
again.”	He	turned	his	back	to	the	wall	and	sat	down	on	a	crenel,	then	looked	up.
“Tattersail,”	 he	 said	 soberly,	 “in	 matters	 of	 Empire,	 I	 am	 the	 servant	 of	 the


Empress.”
Tattersail	 recalled	 their	 argument	 at	 the	 debriefing.	 Nothing	 had	 been
resolved.	“Perhaps	I	should	take	my	complaints	to	her,	then.”
Tayschrenn's	brows	rose.	“I	take	that	as	sarcastic.”
“You	do?”
The	High	Mage	said,	stiffly,	“I	do,	and	be	thankful	for	it,	woman.”
Tattersail	 pulled	 out	 her	 Deck	 and	 held	 it	 against	 her	 stomach,	 running	 her
fingers	over	the	top	card.	Cool,	a	feeling	of	great	weight	and	darkness.	She	set	the
Deck	in	the	table's	center,	then	lowered	her	bulk	slowly	into	a	kneeling	position.
Her	gaze	locked	with	Tayschrenn's.	“Shall	we	begin?”
“Tell	me	of	the	Spinning	Coin.”
Tattersail's	breath	caught.	She	could	not	move.
“First	card,”	Tayschrenn	commanded.
With	an	effort	she	expelled	the	air	from	her	lungs	in	a	hissing	sigh.	Damn	him,
she	 thought.	 An	 echo	 of	 laughter	 sounded	 in	 her	 head,	 and	 she	 realized	 that
someone,	something,	had	opened	the	way.	An	Ascendant	was	reaching	through	her,
its	presence	cool	and	amused,	almost	fickle.	Her	eyes	shut	of	their	own	accord,
and	she	reached	for	the	first	card.	She	flipped	it	almost	haphazardly	to	her	right.
Eyes	still	closed,	 she	felt	herself	smile.	“An	unaligned	card:	Orb.	Judgment	and
true	sight.”	The	second	card	she	tossed	to	the	left	side	of	the	field.	“Virgin,	High
House	Death.	Here	scarred	and	blindfolded,	with	blood	on	her	hands.”
Faintly,	as	if	from	a	great	distance	away,	came	the	sound	of	horses,	thundering
closer,	now	beneath	her,	as	if	the	earth	had	swallowed	them.	Then	the	sound	rose
anew,	behind	her.	She	felt	herself	nod.	The	recruit.	“The	blood	on	her	hands	is	not
her	own,	the	crime	not	its	own.	The	cloth	against	her	eyes	is	wet.”
She	 slapped	 the	 third	 card	 immediately	 in	 front	 of	 her.	 Behind	 her	 lids	 an
image	formed.	It	left	her	cold	and	frightened.	“Assassin,	High	House	Shadow.	The
Rope,	a	count	of	knots	unending,	the	Patron	of	Assassins	is	in	this	game.”	For	a
moment	she	thought	she	heard	the	howling	of	Hounds.	She	laid	a	hand	on	the	fourth
card	and	felt	a	thrill	of	recognition	ripple	through	her,	followed	by	something	like
false	modesty.	“Oponn,	Lady's	head	high,	Lord's	low.”	She	picked	it	up	and	set	it
down	opposite	Tayschrenn.
There's	 your	 block.	 She	 smiled	 to	 herself.	 Chew	 on	 it	 awhile,	 High	 Mage.
The	 Lady	 regards	 you	 with	 disgust.	 Tattersail	 knew	 he	 must	 be	 burning	 with
questions,	 but	 he	 wouldn't	 speak	 them.	 There	 was	 too	 much	 power	 behind	 this
opening.	Had	he	sensed	the	Ascendant's	presence?	She	wondered	if	it	scared	him.


“The	Coin,”	she	heard	herself	say,	“spins	on,	High	Mage.	Its	face	looks	upon
many,	a	handful	perhaps,	and	here	is	their	card.”	She	set	the	fifth	card	to	Oponn's
right,	edges	touching.	“Another	unaligned	card:	Crown.	Wisdom	and	justice,	as	it
is	upright.	Around	it	a	fair	city's	walls,	lit	by	flames	of	gas,	blue	and	green.”	She
pondered.	“Yes,	Darujhistan,	the	last	Free	City.”
The	 way	 closed,	 the	 Ascendant	 withdrawing	 as	 if	 bored.	 Tattersail's	 eyes
opened,	an	unexpected	warmth	comforting	her	weary	body.	“Into	Oponn's	maze,”
she	said,	amused	at	the	truth	hidden	in	that	statement.	“I	can	take	it	no	further,	High
Mage.”
Tayschrenn's	 breath	 gusted	 out	 and	 he	 leaned	 back.	 “You've	 gone	 far	 past
what	 I've	 managed,	 Sorceress.”	 His	 face	 was	 drawn	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 her.	 “I'm
impressed	 with	 your	 source,	 though	 not	 pleased	 with	 its	 message.”	 He	 frowned,
planting	his	elbows	on	his	knees	and	steepling	his	long-fingered	hands	before	his
face.	 “This	 Spinning	 Coin,	 ever	 echoing.	 There's	 the	 Jester's	 humor	 in	 this
shaping—even	now	I	feel	we	are	being	misled.	Death's	Virgin,	a	likely	deceit.”
It	was	now	Tattersail's	turn	to	be	impressed.	The	High	Mage	was	an	Adept,
then.	Had	he,	too,	heard	the	laughter	punctuating	the	laying	of	the	field?	She	hoped
not.	“You	might	be	right,”	she	said.	“The	Virgin's	face	is	ever	changing—it	could
be	 anyone.	 Can't	 say	 the	 same	 for	 Oponn,	 or	 the	 Rope's.”	 She	 nodded.	 “A	 very
possible	 deception,”	 she	 said,	 pleased	 to	 be	 conversing	 with	 an	 equal—a	 truth
that	made	her	grimace	inwardly.	It's	always	better	when	hatred	and	outrage	stay
pure,	uncompromised.
“I	would	hear	your	thoughts,”	Tayschrenn	said.
Tattersail	 started,	 shied	 from	 the	 High	 Mage's	 steady	 gaze.	 She	 began
collecting	the	cards.	Would	it	hurt	to	offer	some	explanation?	If	anything,	it	will
leave	 him	 even	 more	 rattled	 than	 he	 already	 is.	 “Deception	 is	 the	 Patron
Assassin's	forte.	I	sensed	nothing	of	his	presumed	master,	Shadowthrone	himself.
Makes	me	suspect	the	Rope	is	on	his	own	here.	Beware	the	Assassin,	High	Mage;
if	 anything	 his	 games	 are	 even	 more	 subtle	 than	 Shadowthrone's.	 And	 while
Oponn	plays	their	own	version,	it	remains	the	same	game,	and	that	game	is	being
played	out	in	our	world.	The	Twins	of	Luck	have	no	control	in	Shadow's	Realm,
and	 Shadow	 is	 a	 Warren	 known	 for	 slipping	 its	 boundaries.	 For	 breaking	 the
rules.”
“True	enough,”	Tayschrenn	said,	rising	to	his	feet	with	a	grunt.	“The	birth	of
that	bastard	realm	has	ever	troubled	me.”
“It's	young	yet,”	Tattersail	said.	She	picked	up	her	Deck	and	returned	it	to	the
pocket	inside	her	cloak.	“Its	final	shaping	is	still	centuries	away,	and	it	may	never


happen.	Recall	other	new	Houses	that	ended	up	dying	a	quick	death.”
“This	one	stinks	of	too	much	power.”	Tayschrenn	returned	to	his	study	of	the
Moranth	 Mountains.	 “My	 gratitude,”	 he	 said,	 as	 Tattersail	 went	 to	 the	 steps
leading	 down	 into	 the	 city,	 “is	 worth	 something,	 I	 hope.	 In	 any	 case,	 Sorceress,
you	have	it.”
Tattersail	 hesitated	 at	 the	 landing,	 then	 began	 the	 descent.	 He'd	 be	 less
magnanimous	 if	 he	 found	 out	 that	 she	 had	 just	 misled	 him.	 She	 could	 guess	 the
Virgin's	 identity.	 Her	 thoughts	 traveled	 back	 to	 the	 moment	 of	 the	 Virgin's
appearance.	 The	 horses	 she	 had	 heard,	 passing	 beneath,	 hadn't	 been	 an	 illusion.
Whiskeyjack's	squad	had	just	entered	the	city,	through	the	gate	below.	And	among
them	rode	Sorry.	Coincidence?	Maybe,	but	she	didn't	think	so.	The	Spinning	Coin
had	faintly	wobbled	at	that	instant,	then	its	ringing	returned.	Though	she	heard	it	in
her	mind	day	and	night,	it	had	become	almost	second	nature,	and	Tattersail	found
she	had	to	concentrate	to	find	it.	But	she'd	caught	the	nudge,	felt	the	pitch	change
and	sensed	a	brief	instant	of	uncertainty.
Death's	 Virgin,	 and	 the	 Assassin	 of	 High	 House	 Shadow.	 There	 was	 a
connection	 there,	 somehow,	 and	 it	 bothered	 Oponn.	 Obviously,	 everything
remained	 in	 a	 flux.	 “Terrific,”	 she	 muttered,	 as	 she	 reached	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
staircase.
She	saw	the	young	marine	who	had	approached	her	earlier.	He	stood	in	a	line
of	 recruits	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 compound.	 No	 commanding	 officer	 was	 in	 sight.
Tattersail	called	the	boy	over.
“Yes,	Sorceress?”	he	asked,	as	he	arrived	to	stand	at	attention	in	front	of	her.
“What	are	you	all	standing	around	for,	soldier?”
“We're	about	to	be	issued	our	weapons.	The	staff	sergeant's	gone	to	bring	the
wagon	round.”
Tattersail	nodded.	“I	have	a	task	for	you.	I'll	see	that	you	get	your	weapons—
but	 not	 the	 tinny	 ones	 your	 friends	 are	 about	 to	 receive.	 If	 a	 superior	 officer
questions	your	absence,	refer	him	to	me.”
“Yes,	Sorceress.”
A	 pang	 of	 regret	 hit	 Tattersail	 upon	 meeting	 the	 boy's	 bright,	 eager	 gaze.
Chances	were,	he'd	be	dead	within	a	few	months.	The	Empire	had	many	crimes
staining	its	banner,	but	this	was	the	worst	of	them.	She	sighed.	“Deliver,	in	person,
this	message	to	Sergeant	Whiskeyjack,	Bridgeburners.	The	fat	lady	with	the	spells
wants	to	talk.	You	have	it,	soldier?”
The	boy	blanched.
“Let's	hear	it.”


The	marine	repeated	the	message	in	a	deadpan	tone.
Tattersail	 smiled.	 “Very	 good.	 Now	 run	 along,	 and	 don't	 forget	 to	 get	 an
answer	from	him.	I'll	be	in	my	quarters.”
Captain	Paran	swung	around	for	a	last	look	at	the	Black	Moranth.	The	squad	had
just	 reached	 the	 plateau's	 crest.	 He	 watched	 until	 they	 disappeared	 from	 view,
then	shifted	his	gaze	back	to	the	city	in	the	east.
From	this	distance,	with	the	wide,	flat	plain	in	between,	Pale	seemed	peaceful
enough,	 although	 the	 ground	 outside	 the	 walls	 was	 studded	 with	 black	 basaltic
rubble	 and	 the	 memory	 of	 smoke	 and	 fire	 clung	 to	 the	 air.	 Along	 the	 wall
scaffolding	rose	in	places,	tiny	figures	crowding	the	frameworks.	They	appeared
to	be	rebuilding	huge	gaps	in	the	stonework.	From	the	north	gate	a	sluggish	stream
of	 wagons	 wound	 out	 toward	 the	 hills,	 the	 air	 above	 them	 filled	 with	 crows.
Along	the	edge	of	those	hills	ran	a	line	of	mounds	too	regular	to	be	natural.
He'd	 heard	 the	 rumors,	 here	 and	 there.	 Five	 dead	 mages,	 two	 of	 them	 High
Mages.	The	2nd's	losses	enough	to	fire	speculation	that	it	would	be	merged	with
the	 5th	 and	 the	 6th	 to	 form	 a	 new	 regiment.	 And	 Moon's	 Spawn	 had	 retreated
south,	 across	 the	 Tahlyn	 Mountains	 to	 Lake	 Azur,	 trailing	 smoke,	 drifting	 and
leaning	 to	 one	 side	 like	 a	 spent	 thunderhead.	 But	 one	 tale	 reached	 into	 the
captain's	 thoughts	 deeper	 than	 all	 the	 rest:	 the	 Bridgeburners	 were	 gone.	 Some
stories	said	killed	to	a	man;	others	insisted	that	a	few	squads	had	made	it	out	of
the	tunnels	before	the	collapse.
Paran	 was	 frustrated.	 He'd	 been	 among	 Moranth	 for	 days.	 The	 uncanny
warriors	 hardly	 ever	 spoke,	 and	 when	 they	 did	 it	 was	 to	 each	 other	 in	 that
incomprehensible	tongue	of	theirs.	All	of	his	information	was	out	of	date,	and	that
put	 him	 in	 an	 unfamiliar	 position.	 Mind	 you,	 he	 thought,	 since	 Genabaris	 it	 had
been	one	unfamiliar	situation	after	another.
So	 here	 he	 was,	 on	 the	 waiting	 end	 of	 things	 once	 again.	 He	 readjusted	 his
duffel	bag	and	was	preparing	for	a	long	wait	when	he	saw	a	horseman	top	the	far
plateau's	crest.	The	man	had	an	extra	mount	with	him,	and	he	rode	straight	for	the
captain.
He	sighed.	Dealing	with	the	Claw	always	grated.	They	were	so	damn	 smug.
With	the	exception	of	that	man	in	Genabaris,	none	seemed	to	like	him	much.	It	had
been	 a	 long	 time	 since	 he'd	 known	 someone	 he	 could	 call	 a	 friend.	 Over	 two
years,	in	fact.
The	rider	arrived.	Seeing	him	up	close,	Paran	took	an	involuntary	step	back.
Half	the	man's	face	had	been	burned	away.	A	patch	covered	the	right	eye	and	the


man	 held	 his	 head	 at	 an	 odd	 angle.	 The	 man	 flashed	 a	 ghastly	 grin,	 then
dismounted.
“You're	the	one,	huh?”	he	asked	in	a	rasping	voice.
“Is	it	true	about	the	Bridgeburners?”	Paran	demanded.	“Wiped	out?”
“More	 or	 less.	 Five	 squads	 left,	 or	 thereabouts.	 About	 forty	 in	 all.”	 His	 left
eye	squinted	and	he	reached	up	to	adjust	his	battered	helmet.	“Didn't	know	where
you'd	be	heading	before.	Do	now.	You're	Whiskeyjack's	new	captain,	huh?”
“Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	is	known	to	you?”	Paran	scowled.	This	Claw	wasn't
like	the	others.	Whatever	thinking	they	did	about	him	they	kept	to	themselves,	and
he	preferred	it	that	way.
The	man	climbed	back	into	his	saddle.	“Let's	ride.	We	can	talk	on	the	way.”
Paran	went	to	the	other	horse	and	tied	his	bag	to	the	saddle,	which	was	of	the
Seven	Cities	style,	high-backed	and	with	a	hinged	horn	that	folded	forward—he'd
seen	 several	 like	 this	 on	 this	 continent.	 It	 was	 a	 detail	 he'd	 already	 filed	 away.
Natives	 from	 the	 Seven	 Cities	 had	 a	 predisposition	 for	 making	 trouble,	 and	 this
whole	 Genabackan	 Campaign	 had	 been	 a	 foul-up	 from	 the	 very	 start.	 No
coincidence,	that.	Most	of	the	2nd,	5th,	and	6th	Armies	had	been	recruited	from
the	Seven	Cities	subcontinent.
He	mounted	and	they	settled	into	a	steady	canter	across	the	plateau.
The	Claw	talked.	“Sergeant	Whiskeyjack's	got	a	lot	of	followers	around	here.
Acts	like	he	don't	know	it.	You	got	to	remember	something	that's	been	damn	near
forgotten	back	in	Malaz—Whiskeyjack	once	commanded	his	own	company	.	.	.”
Paran's	head	snapped	around.	That	fact	had	been	thoroughly	stripped	from	the
annals.	As	far	as	Empire	history	was	concerned,	it	had	never	happened.
“.	.	.	back	in	the	days	when	Dassem	Ultor	ran	the	military,”	the	Claw	continued
blithely.	“It	was	Whiskeyjack's	Seventh	Company	that	ran	down	the	Seven	Cities'
mage	 cabal	 out	 in	 the	 Panpot'sun	 Wastes.	 He	 ended	 the	 war	 then	 and	 there.	 Of
course,	 everything	 went	 bad	 after	 that,	 what	 with	 Hood	 taking	 Ultor's	 daughter.
And	not	long	after	that,	when	Ultor	died,	all	his	men	were	pulled	down	fast.	That's
when	 the	 bureaucrats	 swallowed	 up	 the	 Army.	 Damn	 jackals.	 And	 they've	 been
sniping	 at	 each	 other	 ever	 since	 and	 to	 Hood's	 Gate	 with	 the	 campaigns.”	 The
Claw	sat	forward,	pushing	the	saddlehorn	down,	and	spat	past	his	horse's	left	ear.
Paran	 shivered,	 seeing	 that	 gesture.	 In	 the	 old	 days	 it	 had	 announced	 the
beginning	of	tribal	war	among	the	Seven	Cities.	Now,	it	had	become	the	symbol	of
the	Malaz	2nd	Army.	“Are	you	suggesting,”	he	cut	in,	“that	the	story	you've	just
told	me	is	commonplace?”
“Not	 in	 detail,”	 the	 Claw	 admitted.	 “But	 some	 old	 veterans	 in	 the	 Second


fought	with	Ultor,	not	just	in	Seven	Cities	but	as	far	back	as	Falar.”
Paran	thought	for	a	time.	The	man	riding	beside	him,	though	a	Claw,	was	also
2nd	 Army.	 And	 he'd	 been	 through	 a	 lot	 with	 them.	 It	 made	 for	 an	 interesting
perspective.	He	glanced	at	the	man	and	saw	him	grinning.	“What's	so	funny?”
The	 man	 shrugged.	 “The	 Bridgeburners	 are	 a	 little	 hot,	 these	 days.	 They're
getting	chaff	for	recruits	and	that	makes	it	look	like	they're	about	to	be	disbanded.
You	talk	with	whoever	it	is	you	talk	with	back	in	Malaz,	you	tell	them	they'd	end
up	with	a	mutiny	on	their	hands,	they	start	messing	with	the	Bridgeburners.	That's
in	 every	 report	 I	 send	 but	 no	 one	 seems	 to	 listen	 to	 me.”	 His	 grin	 broadened.
“Maybe	they	think	I've	been	turned	or	something,	eh?”
Paran	shrugged.	“You	were	called	in	to	meet	me,	weren't	you?”
The	Claw	laughed.	“You've	really	been	out	of	touch,	haven't	you?	They	called
me	in	because	I'm	the	last	Active	in	the	Second.	And	as	for	the	Fifth	and	Sixth—
forget	it.	Brood's	Tiste	Andii	could	pick	out	a	Claw	from	a	thousand	paces.	None
of	 them	 left,	 either.	 My	 own	 Claw	 Master	 was	 garotted	 two	 days	 back—that's
something	else,	ain't	it?	You,	I	inherited,	Captain.	Once	we	hit	the	city,	I	send	you
on	your	way,	and	that's	probably	the	last	we'll	ever	see	of	each	other.	You	deliver
your	mission	details	as	Captain	of	the	Ninth	Squad,	they	either	laugh	in	your	face
or	they	stick	a	knife	in	your	eye—it's	even	betting	what	they'll	do.	Too	bad,	but
there	it	is.”
Up	ahead	loomed	the	gates	of	Pale.
“One	more	thing,”	the	Claw	said,	his	eyes	on	the	merlons	above	the	gate,	“just
a	 bone	 I'll	 throw	 you	 in	 case	 Oponn's	 smiling	 on	 you.	 The	 High	 Mage
Tayschrenn's	running	things	here.	Dujek's	not	happy,	especially	considering	what
happened	 with	 Moon's	 Spawn.	 It's	 a	 bad	 situation	 between	 them,	 but	 the	 High
Mage	 is	 relying	 on	 his	 being	 in	 close	 and	 constant	 communication	 with	 the
Empress,	and	that's	what's	keeping	him	on	top.	A	warning,	then.	Dujek's	soldiers
will	follow	him	.	.	.	anywhere.	And	that	goes	for	the	Fifth	and	Sixth	Armies,	too.
What's	been	gathered	here	is	a	storm	waiting	to	break.”
Paran	 stared	 at	 the	 man.	 Topper	 had	 explained	 the	 situation,	 but	 Paran	 had
dismissed	the	man's	assessment—it	had	seemed	too	much	like	a	scenario	devised
to	justify	the	Empress	filling	the	gallows.	Not	a	tangle	I	want	to	get	involved	in.
Leave	me	to	complete	my	single	task—I	desire	no	more	than	that.
As	 they	 passed	 into	 the	 gate's	 shadow,	 the	 Claw	 spoke	 again.	 “By	 the	 by,
Tayschrenn	just	watched	us	arrive.	Any	chance	he	knows	you,	Captain?”
“No.”	I	hope	not,	he	added	silently.
As	 they	 trotted	 into	 the	 city	 proper	 and	 a	 wall	 of	 sound	 rose	 to	 meet	 them,


Paran's	eyes	glazed	slightly.	Pale	was	a	madhouse,	buildings	on	all	sides	gutted
by	 fire;	 the	 streets,	 despite	 being	 cobble-heaved	 in	 places	 and	 dented	 in	 others,
were	packed	with	people,	carts,	braying	animals,	and	marines.	He	wondered	if	he
should	 start	 measuring	 his	 life	 in	 minutes.	 Taking	 command	 of	 a	 squad	 that	 had
gone	 through	 four	 captains	 in	 three	 years,	 then	 delivering	 a	 mission	 that	 no	 sane
soldier	 would	 consider,	 coupled	 with	 a	 brewing	 firestorm	 of	 a	 large-scale
insurrection	possibly	headed	by	the	Empire's	finest	military	commander,	against	a
High	Mage	who	looked	to	be	carving	his	own	rather	big	niche	in	the	world—all
of	this	had	Paran	feeling	somewhat	dismayed.
He	 was	 jolted	 by	 a	 heavy	 slap	 on	 his	 back.	 The	 Claw	 had	 moved	 his	 horse
close	and	now	he	leaned	over.
“Out	 of	 your	 depth,	 Captain?	 Don't	 worry,	 every	 damn	 person	 here's	 out	 of
their	depth.	Some	know	it,	some	don't.	It's	the	ones	who	don't	you	got	to	worry
about.	Start	with	what's	right	in	front	of	you	and	forget	the	rest	for	now.	It'll	show
up	in	its	own	time.	Find	any	marine	and	ask	direction	to	the	Bridgeburners.	That's
the	easy	part.”
Paran	nodded.
The	 Claw	 hesitated,	 then	 leaned	 closer.	 “I've	 been	 thinking,	 Captain.	 It's	 a
hunch,	 mind	 you,	 but	 I	 think	 you're	 here	 to	 do	 some	 good.	 No,	 don't	 bother
answering.	Only,	if	you	get	into	trouble,	you	get	word	to	Toc	the	Younger,	that's
me.	I'm	in	the	Messenger	Corps,	outrider	class,	the	Second.	All	right?”
Paran	nodded	again.	“Thank	you,”	he	said,	just	as	a	loud	crash	sounded	behind
them,	followed	by	a	chorus	of	angry	voices.	Neither	rider	turned.
“What's	that	you	said,	Captain?”
Paran	smiled.	“Better	head	off.	Keep	your	cover—in	case	something	happens
to	me.	I'll	find	myself	a	guide,	by	the	book.”
“Sure	thing,	Captain.”	Toc	the	Younger	waved,	then	swung	his	mount	down	a
side-street.	 Moments	 later	 Paran	 lost	 sight	 of	 him.	 He	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath,	 then
cast	his	gaze	about,	searching	for	a	likely	soldier.
_____
Paran	knew	that	his	early	years	in	the	noble	courts	of	his	homeland	had	prepared
him	well	for	the	kind	of	deception	Adjunct	Lorn	demanded	of	him.	In	the	past	two
years,	however,	he	had	begun	to	recognize	more	clearly	what	he	was	becoming.
That	brash,	honest	youth	who	had	spoken	with	the	Empress's	Adjunct	that	day	on
the	Itko	Kanese	coast	now	gnawed	at	him.	He'd	dropped	right	into	Lorn's	lap	like


a	lump	of	unshaped	clay.	And	she	had	proceeded	to	do	what	she	did	best.
What	frightened	Paran	most,	these	days,	was	that	he	had	grown	used	to	being
used.	He'd	been	someone	else	so	many	times	that	he	saw	a	thousand	faces,	heard	a
thousand	 voices,	 all	 at	 war	 with	 his	 own.	 When	 he	 thought	 of	 himself,	 of	 that
young	noble-born	man	with	the	overblown	faith	in	honesty	and	integrity,	the	vision
that	came	to	him	now	was	of	something	cold,	hard,	and	dark.	It	hid	in	the	deepest
shadows	 of	 his	 mind,	 and	 it	 watched.	 No	 contemplation,	 no	 judgment,	 just	 icy,
clinical	observation.
He	didn't	think	that	that	young	man	would	see	the	light	of	day	again.	He	would
just	shrink	further	back,	swallowed	by	darkness,	then	disappear,	leaving	no	trace.
And	Paran	wondered	if	he	even	cared	anymore.
He	marched	into	the	barracks	that	had	once	housed	Pale's	Noble	Guard.	One
old	 veteran	 lounged	 on	 a	 nearby	 cot,	 her	 rag-wrapped	 feet	 jutting	 over	 the	 end.
The	mattress	had	been	stripped	away	and	tossed	into	a	corner;	the	woman	lay	on
the	flat	boards,	her	hands	behind	her	head.
Paran's	gaze	held	on	her	briefly,	then	traveled	down	the	ward.	With	the	lone
exception	of	the	veteran	marine,	the	place	was	empty.	He	returned	his	attention	to
her.	“Corporal,	is	it?”
The	woman	didn't	move.	“Yeah,	what?”
“I	 take	 it,”	 he	 said	 dryly,	 “that	 the	 chain	 of	 command	 has	 thoroughly
disintegrated	around	here.”
Her	eyes	opened	and	managed	a	lazy	sweep	of	the	officer	standing	before	her.
“Probably,”	she	said,	then	closed	her	eyes	again.	“You	looking	for	somebody	or
what?”
“I'm	looking	for	the	Ninth	Squad,	Corporal.”
“Why?	They	in	trouble	again?”
Paran	smiled	to	himself.	“Are	you	the	average	Bridgeburner,	Corporal?”
“All	the	average	ones	are	dead,”	she	said.
“Who's	your	commander?”	Paran	asked.
“Antsy,	but	he's	not	here.”
“I	can	see	that.”	The	captain	waited,	then	sighed.	“Well,	where	is	this	Antsy?”
“Try	Knobb's	Inn,	up	the	street.	The	last	I	seen	of	him	he	was	losing	his	shirt
to	Hedge.	Antsy's	a	card-player,	right,	only	not	a	good	one.”	She	began	picking	at
a	tooth	at	the	back	of	her	mouth.
Paran's	brows	rose.	“Your	commander	gambles	with	his	men?”
“Antsy's	 a	 sergeant,”	 the	 woman	 explained.	 “Our	 captain's	 dead.	 Anyway,


Hedge	is	not	in	our	squad.”
“Oh,	and	what	squad	is	he	with?”
The	 woman	 grinned,	 swallowing	 whatever	 her	 finger	 had	 dislodged.	 “The
Ninth.”
“What's	your	name,	Corporal?”
“Picker,	what's	yours?”
“Captain	Paran.”
Picker	 shot	 up	 into	 a	 sitting	 position,	 her	 eyes	 wide.	 “Oh,	 you're	 the	 new
captain	who's	yet	to	pull	a	sword,	eh?”
Paran	smiled.	“That's	right.”
“You	got	any	idea	of	the	odds	on	you	right	now?	It	doesn't	look	good.”
“What	do	you	mean?”
She	smiled	a	broad	smile.	“The	way	I	pick	it,”	she	said,	leaning	back	down
and	closing	her	eyes	again,	“the	first	blood	you	see	on	your	hands	is	gonna	be	your
own,	 Captain	 Paran.	 Go	 back	 to	 Quon	 Tali	 where	 it's	 safe.	 Go	 on,	 the	 Empress
needs	her	feet	licked.”
“They're	 clean	 enough,”	 Paran	 said.	 He	 was	 not	 sure	 how	 to	 deal	 with	 this
situation.	 Part	 of	 him	 wanted	 to	 draw	 his	 sword	 and	 cut	 Picker	 in	 half.	 Another
wanted	to	laugh,	and	that	one	had	an	edge	of	hysteria	to	it.
Behind	 him	 the	 outer	 door	 banged	 open	 and	 heavy	 footsteps	 sounded	 on	 the
floorboards.	 Paran	 turned.	 A	 red-faced	 sergeant,	 his	 face	 dominated	 by	 an
enormous	handlebar	mustache,	stormed	into	the	room.	Ignoring	Paran,	he	strode	up
beside	Picker's	cot	and	glowered	down	at	her.
“Dammit,	Picker,	you	told	me	Hedge	was	having	a	bad	run,	and	now	that	bowlegged	turd's	cleaned	me	out!”
“Hedge	 is	 having	 a	 bad	 run,”	 Picker	 said.	 “But	 yours	 is	 worse.	 You	 never
asked	me	about	that,	did	you?	Antsy,	meet	Captain	Paran,	the	Ninth's	new	officer.”
The	 sergeant	 swung	 around	 and	 stared.	 “Hood's	 Breath,”	 he	 muttered,	 then
faced	Picker	again.
“I'm	looking	for	Whiskeyjack,	Sergeant,”	Paran	said	softly.
Something	 in	 the	 captain's	 tone	 brought	 Antsy	 around.	 He	 opened	 his	 mouth,
then	 shut	 it	 when	 his	 eyes	 caught	 Paran's	 steady	 gaze.	 “Some	 kid	 delivered	 a
message.	Whiskeyjack	trooped	out.	A	few	of	his	people	are	at	Knobb's.”
“Thank	you,	Sergeant.”	Paran	walked	stiffly	from	the	room.
Antsy	let	out	a	long	breath	and	glanced	at	Picker.


“Two	 days,”	 she	 pronounced,	 “then	 somebody	 does	 him.	 Old	 Rockface	 has
already	laid	twenty	to	that.”
Antsy's	expression	tightened.	“Something	tells	me	that'd	be	a	damned	shame.”
Paran	 entered	 Knobb's	 Inn	 and	 stopped	 just	 inside	 the	 doorway.	 The	 place	 was
packed	 with	 soldiers,	 their	 voices	 a	 jumbled	 roar.	 Only	 a	 few	 showed	 on	 their
uniforms	the	flame	emblem	of	the	Bridgeburners.	The	rest	were	2nd	Army.
At	 a	 large	 table	 beneath	 an	 overhanging	 walkway	 that	 fronted	 rooms	 on	 the
first	floor	half	a	dozen	Bridgeburners	sat	playing	cards.	A	wide-shouldered	man
whose	black	hair	was	braided	into	a	ponytail	and	knotted	with	charms	and	fetishes
sat	 with	 his	 back	 to	 the	 room,	 dealing	 out	 the	 cards	 with	 infinite	 patience.	 Even
through	 the	 high-tide	 roar,	 Paran	 could	 hear	 the	 man's	 monotone	 counting.	 The
others	at	the	table	deluged	the	dealer	with	curses,	to	little	effect.
“Barghast,”	 Paran	 murmured,	 his	 gaze	 on	 the	 dealer.	 “Only	 one	 in	 the
Bridgeburners.	 That's	 the	 Ninth,	then.”	He	took	a	 deep	 breath,	 then	 plunged	 into
the	crowd.
By	the	time	he	arrived	behind	the	Barghast	his	fine	cloak	was	drenched	with
sour	ale	and	bitter	wine,	and	sweat	cast	a	shine	on	his	forehead.	The	Barghast,	he
saw,	had	just	finished	the	deal	and	was	setting	down	the	deck	in	the	table's	center,
revealing	as	he	did	so	the	endless	blue	woad	tattooing	on	his	bared	arm,	the	spiral
patterns	marred	here	and	there	by	white	scars.
“Is	this	the	Ninth?”	Paran	asked	loudly.
The	man	opposite	the	Barghast	glanced	up,	his	weathered	face	the	same	color
as	his	leather	cap,	then	returned	his	attention	to	his	cards.	“You	Captain	Paran?”
“I	am.	And	you,	soldier?”
“Hedge.”	He	nodded	at	the	heavy	man	seated	to	his	right.	“That's	Mallet,	the
squad's	 healer.	 And	 the	 Barghast's	 name	 is	 Trotts,	 and	 it	 ain't	 because	 he	 likes
jogging.”	 He	 jerked	 his	 head	 to	 his	 left.	 “The	 rest	 don't	 matter—they're	 Second
Army	 and	 lousy	 players	 to	 boot.	 Take	 a	 seat,	 Captain.	 Whiskeyjack	 and	 the	 rest
been	called	out	for	the	time	being.	Should	be	back	soon.”
Paran	found	an	empty	chair	and	pulled	it	up	between	Mallet	and	Trotts.
Hedge	growled,	“Hey,	Trotts,	you	gonna	call	this	game	or	what?”
Releasing	a	long	breath,	Paran	turned	to	Mallet.	“Tell	me,	Healer,	what's	the
average	life	expectancy	for	an	officer	in	the	Bridgeburners?”
A	grunt	escaped	Hedge's	lips.	“Before	or	after	Moon's	Spawn?”
Mallet's	 heavy	 brows	rose	slightly	as	he	answered	 the	 captain.	 “Maybe	 two


campaigns.	Depends	on	a	lot	of	things.	Balls	ain't	enough,	but	it	helps.	And	that
means	forgetting	everything	you	learned	and	jumping	into	your	sergeant's	lap	like
a	babe.	You	listen	to	him,	you	might	make	it.”
Hedge	thumped	the	table.	“Wake	up,	Trotts!	What	are	we	playing	here?”
The	Barghast	scowled.	“I'm	thinking,”	he	rumbled.
Paran	leaned	back	and	unhitched	his	belt.
Trotts	 decided	 on	 a	 game,	 to	 the	 groans	 of	 Hedge,	 Mallet	 and	 the	 three	 2nd
Army	soldiers,	since	it	was	the	game	Trotts	always	decided	on.
Mallet	 spoke.	 “Captain,	you've	been	 hearing	things	about	the	Bridgeburners,
right?”
Paran	nodded.	“Most	officers	are	terrified	of	the	Bridgeburners.	Word	is,	the
mortality	 rate's	 so	 high	 because	 half	 the	 captains	 end	 up	 with	 a	 dagger	 in	 their
back.”
He	paused,	and	was	about	to	continue	when	he	noticed	the	sudden	silence.	The
game	had	stopped,	and	all	eyes	had	fixed	on	him.	Sweat	broke	out	under	Paran's
clothing.	“And	from	what	I've	seen	so	far,”	he	pressed	on,	“I'm	likely	to	believe
that	 rumor.	 But	 I'll	 tell	 you	 something—all	 of	 you—if	 I	 die	 with	 a	 knife	 in	 my
back,	 it'd	 better	 be	 because	 I	 earned	 it.	 Otherwise,	 I	 will	 be	 severely
disappointed.”	 He	 hitched	 his	 belt	 and	 rose.	 “Tell	 the	 sergeant	 I'll	 be	 in	 the
barracks.	I'd	like	to	speak	with	him	before	we're	officially	mustered.”
Hedge	gave	a	slow	nod.	“Will	do,	Captain.”	The	man	hesitated.	“Uh,	Captain?
Care	to	sit	in	on	the	game?”
Paran	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Thanks,	 no.”	 A	 grin	 tugged	 the	 corner	 of	 his	 mouth.
“Bad	practice,	an	officer	taking	his	enlisted	men's	money.”
“Now	 there's	 a	 challenge	 you'd	 better	 back	 up	 some	 time,”	 Hedge	 said,	 his
eyes	brightening.
“I'll	 think	 about	 it,”	 Paran	 replied,	 as	 he	 left	 the	 table.	 Pushing	 through	 the
crowd,	he	felt	a	growing	sense	of	something	that	caught	him	completely	off-guard:
insignificance.	 A	 lot	 of	 arrogance	 had	 been	 drilled	 into	 him,	 from	 his	 days	 as	 a
boy	 among	 the	 nobility	 through	 to	 his	 time	 at	 the	 academy.	 That	 arrogance	 now
cowered	in	some	corner	of	his	brain,	shocked	silent	and	numb.
He	had	known	that	well	before	he'd	met	the	Adjunct:	his	path	into	and	through
the	 officer	 training	 corps	 of	 the	 Marine	 Academy	 had	 been	 an	 easy	 procession
marked	by	winks	and	nods.	But	the	Empire's	wars	were	fought	here,	thousands	of
leagues	 away,	 and	 here,	 Paran	 realized,	 nobody	 cared	 one	 whit	 about	 court
influences	 and	 mutually	favorable	deals.	 Those	shortcuts	swelled	his	chances	 of
dying,	and	dying	fast.	If	not	for	the	Adjunct,	he'd	have	been	totally	unprepared	to


take	command.
Paran	 grimaced	 as	 he	 pushed	 open	 the	 tavern	 door	 and	 stepped	 out	 into	 the
street.	 It	 was	 no	 wonder	 the	 old	 Emperor's	 armies	 had	 so	 easily	 devoured	 the
feudal	kingdoms	in	his	path	on	the	road	to	Empire.	He	was	suddenly	glad	of	the
stains	marring	his	uniform—he	no	longer	looked	out	of	place.
He	strode	into	the	alley	leading	to	the	barracks'	side	entrance.	The	way	lay	in
shadow	 beneath	 high-walled	 buildings	 and	 the	 faded	 canopies	 that	 hung	 over
sagging	 balconies.	 Pale	 was	 a	 dying	 city.	 He	 knew	 enough	 of	 its	 history	 to
recognize	 the	 bleached	 tints	 of	 long-lost	 glory.	 True,	 it	 had	 commanded	 enough
power	to	forge	an	alliance	with	Moon's	Spawn,	but	the	captain	suspected	that	that
had	had	more	to	do	with	the	Moon's	lord's	sense	of	expedience	than	to	any	kind	of
mutual	recognition	of	power.	The	local	gentry	made	much	of	finery	and	pomp,	but
their	props	looked	tired	and	worn.	He	wondered	how	alike	he	and	his	kind	were
with	these	droopy	citizens—
A	 sound	 behind	 him,	 the	 faintest	 scuff,	 made	 him	 turn.	 A	 shadow-wrapped
figure	closed	on	him.	Paran	cried	out,	snatching	at	his	sword.	An	icy	wind	washed
over	 him	 as	 the	 figure	 moved	 in.	 The	 captain	 backpedaled,	 seeing	 the	 glint	 of
blades	 in	 each	 hand.	 He	 twisted	 to	 one	 side,	 his	 sword	 halfway	 out	 of	 the
scabbard.	His	attacker's	left	hand	darted	up.	Paran	jerked	his	head	back,	throwing
his	shoulder	forward	to	block	a	blade	that	never	arrived.	Instead,	the	long	dagger
slid	 like	 fire	 into	 his	 chest.	 A	 second	 blade	 sank	 into	 his	 side	 even	 as	 blood
gushed	up	inside	to	fill	his	mouth.	Coughing	and	groaning,	Paran	reeled,	careened
off	a	wall,	then	slid	down	with	one	hand	grasping	futilely	at	the	damp	stones,	his
fingernails	gouging	tracks	through	the	mold.
A	blackness	closed	around	his	thoughts	which	seemed	to	involve	only	a	deep,
heartfelt	 regret.	 Faintly,	 a	 ringing	 sound	 came	 to	 his	 ears,	 as	 if	 something	 small
and	 metallic	 was	 skittering	 across	 a	 hard	 surface.	 The	 sound	 remained,	 of
something	spinning,	and	the	darkness	encroached	no	further.
“Sloppy,”	 a	 man	 said	 in	 a	 thin	 voice.	 “I	 am	 surprised.”	 The	 accent	 was
familiar,	pulling	him	to	a	childhood	memory,	his	father	dealing	with	Dal	Honese
traders.
The	 answer	 came	 from	 directly	 above	 Paran.	 “Keeping	 an	 eye	 on	 me?”
Another	accent	he	recognized,	Kanese,	and	the	voice	seemed	to	come	from	a	girl,
or	a	child,	yet	he	knew	it	was	the	voice	of	his	killer.
“Coincidence,”	 the	 other	 replied,	 then	 giggled.	 “Someone—something,	 I
should	say—has	entered	our	Warren.	Uninvited.	My	Hounds	hunt.”
“I	don't	believe	in	coincidences.”


Again	 came	 the	 giggle.	 “Nor	 do	 I.	 Two	 years	 ago	 we	 began	 a	 game	 of	 our
own.	 A	 simple	 settling	 of	 old	 scores.	 It	 seems	 we	 have	 stumbled	 into	 a	 wholly
different	game	here	in	Pale.”
“Whose?”
“I	shall	have	that	answer	soon	enough.”
“Don't	get	distracted,	Ammanas.	Laseen	remains	our	target,	and	the	collapse
of	the	Empire	she	rules	but	never	earned.”
“I	have,	as	always,	supreme	confidence	in	you,	Cotillion.”
“I	must	be	getting	back,”	the	girl	said,	moving	away.
“Of	course.	So	this	is	the	man	Lorn	sent	to	find	you?”
“I	believe	so.	This	should	draw	her	into	the	fray,	in	any	case.”
“And	this	is	desirable?”
The	conversation	faded	as	the	two	speakers	walked	away	leaving,	as	the	only
sound	 in	 Paran's	 head,	 that	 whirring	 hum,	 as	 if	 a	 coin	 was	 spinning,	 endlessly
spinning.


Chapter	Four
	

They	were	of	a	kind,	then
the	histories	writ	large
in	tattooed	tracery
the	tales	a	tracking
of	old	wounds
but	something	glowed	hard
in	their	eyes—those
flame-gnawed	arches,
that	vanishing	span,
they	are	their	own	past
each	in	turn	destined
to	fall	in	line
on	the	quiet	wayside
beside	the	river
they	refuse	to	name	.	.	.
THE	BRIDGEBURNERS	(IV.I)
TOC	THE	YOUNGER	(B.1141)


	
Tattersail	 glared	 at	 Whiskeyjack.	 “Hairlock	 is	 insane,”	 she	 pronounced.	 “That
edge	to	him	was	always	there,	but	he's	chewed	holes	in	his	own	Warrens	and	he's
tasting	Chaos.	Worse	yet,	it's	making	him	more	powerful,	more	dangerous.”
They	had	gathered	in	Tattersail's	quarters,	which	consisted	of	an	outer	room—
where	they	now	sat—and	a	bedroom	with	the	rare	luxury	of	a	solid	wood	door.
The	 past	 occupants	 had	 hastily	 stripped	 the	 place	 of	 anything	 valuable	 and
portable,	 leaving	 behind	 only	 the	 larger	 pieces	 of	 furniture.	 Tattersail	 sat	 at	 the
table,	 along	 with	 Whiskeyjack,	 Quick	 Ben,	 and	 Kalam,	 and	 the	 sapper	 named
Fiddler.	The	air	in	the	room	had	grown	hot,	stifling.
“Of	 course	 he's	 insane,”	 Quick	 Ben	 replied,	 looking	 at	 his	 sergeant,	 whose
face	 remained	 impassive.	 The	 wizard	 hastily	 added,	 “But	 that's	 to	 be	 expected.
Fener's	tail,	lady,	he's	got	the	body	of	a	puppet!	Of	course	that's	twisted	him.”
“How	 twisted?”	 Whiskeyjack	 asked	 his	 wizard.	 “He's	 supposed	 to	 be
watching	our	backs,	isn't	he?”
Kalam	said,	“Quick's	got	him	under	control.	Hairlock's	backtracking,	working
through	the	maze—he'll	find	out	who	in	the	Empire	wants	us	dead.”
“The	danger,”	Quick	Ben	added,	rounding	on	Tattersail,	“is	his	being	detected.
He	needs	to	slip	through	the	Warrens	the	unconventional	way—the	regular	paths
are	all	trip-wired.”
Tattersail	mulled	over	that	point,	then	nodded.	“Tayschrenn	would	find	him,	or
at	least	catch	wind	that	someone's	sniffing	around.	But	Hairlock's	using	the	power
of	 Chaos,	 the	 paths	 that	 lie	 between	 Warrens,	 and	 that's	 unhealthy—not	 just	 for
him,	but	for	all	of	us.”
“Why	all	of	us?”	Whiskeyjack	asked.
Quick	Ben	answered,	“It	weakens	the	Warrens,	frays	the	fabric,	which	in	turns
allows	 Hairlock	 to	 break	 into	 them	 at	 will	 .	 .	 .	 and	 out	 again.	 But	 we	 have	 no
choice.	We	have	to	give	Hairlock	his	rope.	For	now.”
The	 sorceress	 sighed,	 massaging	 her	 brow.	 “Tayschrenn's	 the	 one	 you're
looking	for.	I've	already	told	you—”
“That's	not	good	enough,”	Quick	Ben	cut	in.	“How	many	agents	is	he	using?
What	are	the	details	of	the	plan—what	in	Hood's	name	is	the	plan?	Is	all	this	on
Laseen's	 orders,	 or	 is	 the	 High	 Mage	 eyeing	 the	 throne	 for	 himself?	 We	 need	 to
know,	dammit!”


“All	right,	all	right,”	Tattersail	said.	“So	Hairlock	unravels	the	whole	thing	for
you—then	 what?	 Do	 you	 intend	 to	 try	 to	 kill	 Tayschrenn	 and	 everyone	 else
involved?	Are	you	counting	on	my	help	in	that?”	She	looked	from	one	face	to	the
next.	Each	revealed	nothing.	Anger	flared	and	she	rose.	“I	know,”	she	said	stiffly,
“that	 Tayschrenn	 probably	 murdered	 A'Karonys,	 Nightchill,	 and	 my	 cadre.	 He
probably	knew	your	tunnels	would	collapse	around	you,	and	he	might	well	have
decided	that	Dujek's	Second	was	a	threat	that	needed	culling.	But	if	you	think	I'm
going	to	help	you	without	knowing	what	you're	planning,	you're	mistaken.	There's
more	to	all	this	than	you're	willing	to	tell	me.	If	it	was	just	your	survival	at	stake,
why	 don't	 you	 just	 desert?	 I	 doubt	 Dujek	 would	 chase	 you	 down.	 Unless,	 of
course,	 Tayschrenn's	 suspicions	 about	 Onearm	 and	 the	 Second	 are	 grounded	 in
truth—you've	plans	for	a	mutiny,	proclaiming	Dujek	Emperor	and	marching	off	to
Genabaris.”	 She	 paused,	 looking	 from	 one	 man	 to	 the	 next.	 “Has	 Tayschrenn
simply	 anticipated	 you,	 thereby	 fouling	 up	 your	 plans?	 Am	 I	 being	 pulled	 into	 a
conspiracy?	If	I	am,	then	I	have	to	know	its	eventual	goals.	I	have	that	right,	don't
I?”
Whiskeyjack	 grunted,	 then	 reached	 for	 the	 jug	 of	 wine	 standing	 on	 the	 table.
He	refilled	everyone's	cup.
Quick	Ben	let	out	a	long	breath,	then	rubbed	the	back	of	his	neck.	“Tattersail,”
he	said	quietly,	“we're	not	going	to	challenge	Tayschrenn	directly.	That	would	be
suicide.	No,	we'll	cut	away	his	support,	carefully,	with	precision,	then	we	arrange
his	 .	 .	 .	 fall	from	 grace.	Assuming	 the	 Empress	 is	 not	involved.	 But	we	need	to
know	more,	we	need	those	answers	before	we	can	decide	our	options.	You	don't
have	 to	 get	 any	 more	 involved	 than	 you	 already	 are.	 In	 fact,	 it's	 safer	 that	 way.
Hairlock	wants	you	to	 protect	his	back,	 failing	every	 other	option.	 Chances	are,
that	 won't	 be	 necessary.”	 He	 looked	 up	 and	 gave	 her	 a	 strained	 smile.	 “Leave
Tayschrenn	to	me	and	Kalam.”
All	very	well,	but	you	didn't	answer	me.	Tattersail	looked	at	the	other	blackskinned	man,	her	eyes	narrowing.	“You	were	a	Claw	once,	weren't	you?”
Kalam	shrugged.
“I	thought	no	one	could	leave—alive.”
He	shrugged	again.
The	sapper,	Fiddler,	growled	something	incomprehensible	and	 rose	from	his
chair.	He	began	pacing,	his	bandied	legs	carrying	him	from	one	wall	to	the	next,
like	a	fox	in	a	pit.	No	one	paid	him	any	further	attention.
Whiskeyjack	 handed	 a	 cup	 to	 Tattersail.	 “Stay	 with	 us	 in	 this,	 Sorceress.
Quick	 Ben	 doesn't	 usually	 foul	 things	 .	 .	 .	 too	 badly.”	 He	 made	 a	 sour	 face.	 “I


admit,	I'm	not	completely	convinced	either,	but	I've	learned	to	trust	him.	You	can
take	that	for	whatever	it's	worth.”
Tattersail	 took	 a	 deep	 draft	 of	 wine.	 She	 wiped	 her	 lips.	 “Your	 squad's
heading	 to	 Darujhistan	 tonight.	 Covert,	 which	 means	 I	 won't	 be	 able	 to
communicate	with	you	if	the	situation	turns	bad.”
“Tayschrenn	 would	 detect	 the	 usual	 ways,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said.	 “Hairlock's	 our
only	unbreachable	link—you	reach	us	through	him,	Tattersail.”
Whiskeyjack	eyed	the	sorceress.	“Back	to	Hairlock.	You	don't	trust	him.”
“No.”
The	 sergeant	 fell	 silent,	 his	 gaze	 fixed	 on	 the	 tabletop.	 His	 impassive
expression	fell	away,	revealing	a	war	of	emotions.
He	 keeps	 his	 world	 bottled	 up,	 but	 the	 pressure's	 building.	 She	 wondered
what	would	happen	when	everything	broke	loose	inside	him.
The	 two	 Seven	 Cities	 men	 waited,	 eyes	 on	 their	 sergeant.	 Only	 Fiddler
continued	his	preoccupied	pacing.	The	sapper's	mismatched	uniform	still	carried
the	stains	of	the	tunnels.	Someone	else's	blood	had	splashed	thickly	on	the	front	of
his	tunic—as	if	a	friend	had	died	in	his	arms.	Poorly	healed	blisters	showed	under
the	uneven	bristle	of	his	cheeks	and	jaw,	and	his	lank	red	hair	hung	haphazardly
beneath	his	leather	helmet.
A	 long	 minute	 passed,	 then	 the	 sergeant	 nodded	 sharply	 to	 himself.	 His	 hard
eyes	still	fixed	on	the	tabletop,	he	said,	“All	right,	Sorceress.	We'll	give	you	this.
Quick	Ben,	tell	her	about	Sorry.”
Tattersail's	brows	rose.	She	crossed	her	arms	and	faced	the	wizard.
Quick	 Ben	 looked	 none	 too	 pleased.	 He	 shifted	 uneasily	 and	 cast	 a	 hopeful
glance	at	Kalam,	but	the	big	man	looked	away.
Whiskeyjack	growled,	“Now,	Wizard.”
Quick	Ben	met	Tattersail's	steady	gaze	with	an	almost	childlike	expression—
fear,	guilt,	and	chagrin	flitted	across	his	fine	features.	“You	remember	her?”
She	barked	a	harsh	laugh.	“Not	an	easy	one	to	forget.	An	odd	.	.	.	sense	.	.	.
about	her.	Dangerous.”	She	thought	about	revealing	what	she'd	learned	during	her
Fatid	 with	 Tayschrenn.	 Virgin	 of	 Death.	 But	 something	 held	 her	 back.	 No,	 she
corrected	herself,	not	just	something—I	still	don't	trust	them.	“You	suspect	she's
in	the	service	of	someone	else?”
The	wizard's	face	was	ashen.	He	cleared	his	throat.	“She	was	recruited	two
years	ago	in	Itko	Kan,	one	of	the	usual	sweeps	across	the	Empire's	heartland.”
Kalam's	voice	rumbled	beside	her.	“Something	ugly	happened	there	at	around


the	same	time.	It's	been	buried	pretty	deep,	but	the	Adjunct	became	involved,	and
a	Claw	came	in	her	wake	and	silenced	damn	near	everyone	in	the	city	guard	who
might	have	talked.	I	made	use	of	old	sources,	scrounged	up	some	odd	details.”
“Odd,”	Quick	Ben	said,	“and	revealing,	if	you	know	what	you're	looking	for.”
Tattersail	 smiled	 to	 herself.	 These	 two	 men	 had	 a	 way	 of	 talking	 in	 tandem.
She	returned	her	attention	to	the	wizard,	who	continued.
“Seems	a	company	of	cavalry	hit	some	hard	luck.	No	survivors.	As	for	what
they	ran	into,	it	had	something	to	do	with—”
“Dogs,”	Kalam	finished	without	missing	a	beat.
The	sorceress	frowned	at	the	assassin.
“Put	it	together,”	Quick	Ben	said,	drawing	her	attention	once	again.	“Adjunct
Lorn	is	Laseen's	personal	mage-killer.	Her	arrival	on	the	scene	suggests	sorcery
was	 involved	 in	 the	 massacre.	 High	 sorcery.”	 The	 wizard's	 gaze	 narrowed	 on
Tattersail	and	he	waited.
She	 swallowed	 another	 mouthful	 of	 wine.	 The	 Fatid	 showed	 me.	 Dogs	 and
sorcery.	 Into	 her	 mind	 returned	 the	 image	 of	 the	 Rope	 as	 she	 had	 seen	 it	 in	 the
reading.	High	House	Shadow,	ruled	by	Shadowthrone	and	the	Rope,	and	in	their
service—“The	 Seven	 Hounds	 of	 Shadow.”	 She	 looked	 to	 Whiskeyjack	 but	 the
sergeant's	eyes	remained	downcast,	his	expression	blank	as	stone.
“Good,”	 Quick	 Ben	 snapped,	 somewhat	 impatiently.	 “The	 Hounds	 hunted.
That's	 our	 guess,	 but	 it's	 a	 good	 one.	 The	 Nineteenth	 Regiment	 of	 the	 Eighth
Cavalry	 were	 all	 killed,	 even	 their	 horses.	 A	 league's	 worth	 of	 coastline
settlements	needed	repopulating.”
“Fine.”	Tattersail	sighed.	“But	what	does	this	have	to	do	with	Sorry?”
The	wizard	turned	away	and	Kalam	spoke.	“Hairlock's	going	to	follow	more
than	just	one	trail,	Sorceress.	We're	pretty	sure	Sorry	is	somehow	involved	with
House	Shadow	.	.	.”
“It	certainly	seems,”	Tattersail	said,	“that	since	its	arrival	in	the	Deck	and	the
opening	 of	 its	 Warren,	 Shadow's	 path	 crosses	 the	 Empire's	 far	 too	 often	 to	 be
accidental.	 Why	 should	 the	 Warren	 between	 Light	 and	 Dark	 display	 such	 .	 .	 .
obsession	with	the	Malazan	Empire?”
Kalam's	gaze	was	veiled.	“Odd,	isn't	it?	After	all,	the	Warren	only	appeared
following	 the	 Emperor's	 assassination	 at	 Laseen's	 hand.	 Shadowthrone	 and	 his
companion	 the	 Patron	 of	 Assassins—Cotillion—were	 unheard	 of	 before
Kellanved	 and	 Dancer's	 deaths.	 It	 also	 seems	 that	 whatever	 .	 .	 .	 disagreement
there	is	between	House	Shadow	and	Empress	Laseen	is,	uhm,	personal	.	.	.”


Tattersail	 closed	 her	eyes.	 Dammit,	it's	that	obvious,	isn't	it?	“Quick	Ben,”
she	said,	“hasn't	there	always	been	an	accessible	Warren	of	Shadow?	Meanas,	the
Warren	of	Illusions?”
“Meanas	 is	 a	 false	 Warren,	 Sorceress.	 A	 shadow	 of	 what	 it	 claims	 to
represent,	 if	 you'll	 excuse	 my	 wording.	 It	 is	 itself	 an	 illusion.	 The	 gods	 alone
know	where	it	came	from,	or	who	created	it	in	the	first	place,	or	even	why.	But	the
true	 Warren	 of	 Shadow	 has	 been	 closed,	 inaccessible	 for	 millennia,	 until	 the
1154th	 year	 of	 Burn's	 Sleep,	 nine	 years	 ago.	 The	 earliest	 writings	 of	 House
Shadow	seemed	to	indicate	that	its	throne	was	occupied	by	a	Tiste	Edur—”
“Tiste	Edur?”	Tattersail	interrupted.	“Who	were	they?”
The	wizard	shrugged.	“Cousins	of	the	Tiste	Andii?	I	don't	know,	Sorceress.”
You	don't	know?	Actually,	it	seems	you	know	a	whole	lot.
Quick	Ben	shrugged	to	punctuate	his	last	words,	then	he	added,	“In	any	case,
we	believe	Sorry	is	connected	with	House	Shadow.”
Whiskeyjack	startled	everyone	by	surging	to	his	feet.	“I'm	not	convinced,”	he
said,	 throwing	 Quick	 Ben	 a	 glare	 that	 told	 Tattersail	 there	 had	 been	 countless
arguments	 over	 this	 issue.	 “Sorry	 likes	 killing,	 and	 having	 her	 around	 is	 like
having	spiders	down	your	shirt.	I	know	all	that,	I	can	see	it	and	feel	it	the	same	as
any	of	you.	It	doesn't	mean	she's	some	kind	of	demon.”	He	turned	to	face	Kalam.
“She	kills	like	you	do,	Kalam.	You've	both	got	ice	in	your	veins.	So	what?	I	look
at	you	and	I	see	a	man	because	that's	what	men	are	capable	of—I	don't	hunt	for
excuses	because	I	don't	like	to	think	that	that's	how	nasty	we	can	get.	We	look	at
Sorry	and	we	see	reflections	of	ourselves.	Hood	take	it,	if	we	don't	like	what	we
see.”
He	 sat	 down	 just	 as	 abruptly	 as	 he	 had	 risen,	 and	 reached	 for	 the	 wine	 jug.
When	he	continued	his	voice	had	dropped	a	notch.	“That	is	my	opinion,	anyway.
I'm	 no	 expert	 on	 demons	 but	 I've	 seen	 enough	 mortal	 men	 and	 women	 act	 like
demons,	given	the	need.	My	squad's	wizard	is	scared	witless	by	a	fifteen-year-old
girl.	My	assassin	slips	a	knife	into	his	palm	whenever	she's	within	twenty	paces
of	him.”	He	met	Tattersail's	eyes.	“So,	Hairlock	has	two	missions	instead	of	one,
and	if	you	think	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	are	correct	in	their	suspicions	you	can	walk
from	 all	 this—I	 know	 how	 things	 go	 when	 gods	 step	 into	 the	 fray.”	 The	 lines
around	 his	 eyes	 tightened	 momentarily,	 a	 replaying	 of	 memories.	 “I	 know,”	 he
whispered.
Tattersail	 slowly	 let	 out	 her	 breath,	 which	 she	 had	 been	 holding	 since	 the
sergeant	first	rose	to	his	feet.	His	needs	were	clear	to	her	now:	he	wanted	Sorry	to
be	 just	 human,	 just	 a	 girl	 twisted	 hard	 by	 a	 hard	 world.	 Because	 that	 was


something	he	understood,	something	he	could	deal	with.	“Back	in	Seven	Cities,”
she	said	quietly,	“the	story	goes	that	the	Emperor's	First	Sword—his	commander
of	his	armies—Dassem	Ultor,	had	accepted	a	god's	offer.	Hood	made	Dassem	his
Knight	 of	 Death.	 Then	 something	 happened,	 something	 went	 .	 .	 .	 wrong.	 And
Dassem	renounced	the	title,	swore	a	vow	of	vengeance	against	Hood—against	the
Lord	 of	 Death	 himself.	 All	 at	 once	 other	 Ascendants	 started	 meddling,
manipulating	events.	It	all	culminated	with	Dassem's	murder,	then	the	Emperor's
assassination,	and	blood	in	the	streets,	temples	at	war,	sorceries	unleashed.”	She
paused,	seeing	the	memories	of	those	times	reflected	in	Whiskeyjack's	face.	“You
were	there.”	And	you	don't	want	it	to	happen	again,	here	and	now.	You	think	if
you	can	deny	that	Sorry	serves	Shadow	your	conviction	will	be	enough	to	shape
reality.	 You	 need	 to	 believe	 that	 to	 save	 your	 sanity,	 because	 there	 are	 some
things	in	life	that	you	can	go	through	only	once.	Oh,	Whiskeyjack,	I	can't	ease
your	 burden.	 You	 see,	 I	 think	 Quick	 Ben	 and	 Kalam	 are	 right.	 “If	 Shadow	 has
claimed	the	girl,	the	trail	will	be	evident—Hairlock	will	find	it.”
“Do	you	walk	away	from	this?”	the	sergeant	asked.
Tattersail	smiled.	“The	only	death	I	fear	is	dying	ignorant.	No,	is	my	answer.”
Brave	 words,	 woman.	 These	 people	 have	 a	 way	 of	 bringing	 out	 the	 best—or
maybe	the	worst—in	me.
Something	glittered	in	Whiskeyjack's	eyes,	and	he	nodded.	“So	that's	that,”	he
said	 gruffly.	 He	 leaned	 back.	 “What's	 on	 your	 mind,	 Fiddler?”	 he	 asked	 the
sapper,	who	was	still	pacing	behind	him.
“Got	a	bad	feeling,”	the	man	muttered.	“Something's	wrong.	Not	here,	though,
but	close	by.	It's	just—”	He	stopped,	cocking	his	head,	then	he	sighed,	resuming
his	uneasy	walk.	“Not	sure,	not	sure.”
Tattersail's	 eyes	 followed	 the	 wiry	 little	 man.	 A	 natural	 talent?	 Something
working	on	pure	instinct?	Very	rare.	“I	think	you	should	listen	to	him,”	she	said.
Whiskeyjack	gave	her	a	pained	look.
Kalam	 grinned,	 a	 network	 of	 lines	 crinkling	 around	 his	 dark	 eyes.	 “Fiddler
saved	our	lives	in	the	tunnel,”	he	explained.	“One	of	his	bad	feelings.”
Tattersail	 leaned	 back	 in	 her	 chair	 and	 crossed	 her	 arms.	 She	 asked,	 “So
where	is	Sorry	right	now?”
Fiddler	whirled,	his	eyes	widening	on	the	sorceress.	His	mouth	opened,	then
snapped	shut	again.
The	other	three	surged	to	their	feet,	chairs	toppling	backward.
“We've	got	to	get	going,”	Fiddler	grated.	“There's	a	knife	out	there,	and	it's
got	blood	on	it.”


Whiskeyjack	 checked	 his	 longsword.	 “Kalam,	 out	 front	 twenty	 paces.”	 He
faced	Tattersail	as	the	assassin	slipped	out.	“We	lost	her	a	couple	of	hours	ago.
Happens	 a	 lot	 between	 missions.”	 His	 face	 looked	 drawn.	 “There	 may	 be	 no
connection	with	this	bloodied	knife.”
A	blossoming	of	power	filled	the	room	and	Tattersail	spun	to	face	Quick	Ben.
The	wizard	had	accessed	his	Warren.	The	sorcery	bled	a	strange,	swirling	flavor
that	 she	 could	 not	 recognize,	 and	 it	 frightened	 her	 with	 its	 intensity.	 She	 met	 the
black	 man's	 shining	 eyes.	 “I	 should	 know	 you,”	 she	 whispered.	 “There's	 not
enough	 true	 masters	 in	 this	 world	 for	 me	 to	 not	 know	 you.	 Who	 are	 you,	 Quick
Ben?”
Whiskeyjack	interjected,	“Everyone	ready?”
The	wizard's	only	answer	to	Tattersail	was	a	shrug.	To	Whiskeyjack	he	said,
“Ready.”
The	sergeant	strode	to	the	door.	“Take	care,	Sorceress.”
A	moment	later	they	were	gone.	Tattersail	righted	the	chairs,	then	refilled	her
goblet	 with	 wine.	 High	 House	 Shadow,	 and	 a	 knife	 in	 the	 dark.	 A	 new	 game's
begun,	or	the	old	one's	just	turned.
Paran	 opened	 his	 eyes	 to	 bright,	 hot	 sunlight,	 but	 the	 sky	 above	 him	 was	 .	 .	 .
wrong.	 He	 saw	 no	 sun;	 the	 yellow	 glare	 was	 sharp	 yet	 sourceless.	 Heat	 gusted
down	on	him	with	oppressive	weight.
A	moaning	sound	filled	the	air,	not	wind	because	there	was	no	wind.	He	tried
to	think,	tried	to	recall	his	last	memories,	but	the	past	was	blank,	torn	away,	and
only	 fragments	 remained:	 a	 ship's	 cabin,	 the	 thunk	 of	 his	 dagger	 as	 he	 flung	 it
again	and	again	against	a	wooden	post;	a	man	with	rings,	hair	of	white,	grinning
sardonically.
He	rolled	to	one	side,	seeking	the	source	of	the	moaning	sound.	A	dozen	paces
away	 on	 the	 flat	 plain	 that	 was	 neither	 grass	 nor	 earth	 rose	 an	 arched	 gateway
leading	to—
Nothing.	 I've	 seen	 such	 gates	 before.	 None	 so	 large,	 I	 think,	 as	 this	 one.
None	looking	quite	like	this	.	.	.	this	thing.	Twisted,	upright	yet	from	his	position
sideways,	 the	 gate	 was	 not,	 he	 realized,	 made	 of	 stone.	 Bodies,	 naked	 human
figures.	Carved	likenesses?	No	.	.	.	oh,	no.	The	figures	moved,	groaned,	slowly
writhed	in	place.	Flesh	blackened,	as	if	stained	with	peat,	eyes	closed	and	mouths
open	with	faint,	endless	moans.
Paran	climbed	to	his	feet,	staggered	as	a	wave	of	dizziness	ran	through	him,


then	fell	once	again	to	the	ground.
“Something	like	indecision,”	a	voice	said	coolly.
Blinking,	 Paran	 rolled	 onto	 his	 back.	 Above	 him	 stood	 a	 young	 man	 and
woman—twins.	 The	 man	 wore	 loose	 silk	 clothing,	 white	 and	 gold;	 his	 thin	 face
was	pale,	expressionless.	His	twin	was	wrapped	in	a	shimmering	purple	cape,	her
blond	hair	casting	reddish	glints.
It	 was	 the	 man	 who'd	 spoken.	 He	 smiled	 without	 humor	 down	 at	 Paran.
“We've	long	admired	your	.	.	.”	His	eyes	widened.
“Sword,”	the	woman	finished,	a	smirk	in	her	tone.
“Far	more	subtle	than,	say,	a	coin,	don't	you	think?”	The	man's	smile	turned
mocking.	 “Most,”	 he	 said,	 swinging	 his	 head	 to	 study	 the	 ghastly	 edifice	 of	 the
gate,	“don't	pause	here.	It's	said	there	was	a	cult,	once,	in	the	habit	of	drowning
victims	in	bogs	.	.	.	I	imagine	Hood	finds	them	aesthetically	pleasing.”
“Hardly	surprising,”	the	woman	drawled,	“that	Death	has	no	taste.”
Paran	tried	to	sit	up,	but	his	limbs	refused	the	command.	He	dropped	his	head
back,	 feeling	 the	 strange	 loam	 yield	 to	 its	 weight.	 “What	 has	 happened?”	 he
rasped.
“You	were	murdered,”	the	man	said	lightly.
Paran	closed	his	eyes.	“Why,	then,	have	I	not	passed	through	Hood's	Gate,	if
that	is	what	it	is?”
“We're	meddling,”	the	woman	said.
Oponn,	 the	 Twins	 of	 Chance.	 And	 my	 sword,	 my	 untested	 blade	 purchased
years	ago,	with	a	name	I	chose	so	capriciously—“What	does	Oponn	want	from
me?”
“Only	this	stumbling,	ignorant	thing	you	call	your	life,	dear	boy.	The	trouble
with	Ascendants	is	that	they	try	to	rig	every	game.	Of	course,	we	 delight	 in	 .	 .	 .
uncertainty.”
A	distant	howl	stroked	the	air.
“Oops,”	 the	 man	 said.	 “Come	 to	 make	 certain	 of	 things,	 I'd	 say.	 We'd	 best
leave,	sister.	Sorry,	Captain,	but	it	seems	you'll	pass	through	that	Gate	after	all.”
“Maybe,”	the	woman	said.
Her	 brother	 rounded	 on	 her.	 “We	 agreed!	 No	 confrontation!	 Confrontation's
messy.	 Unpleasant.	 I	 despise	 discomfiting	 scenes!	 Besides,	 the	 ones	 who	 come
don't	play	fair.”
“Then	 neither	 do	 we,”	 the	 sister	 snapped.	 She	 turned	 to	 the	 gate,	 raised	 her
voice,	“Lord	of	Death!	We	would	speak	with	you!	Hood!”


Paran	 rolled	 his	 head,	 watched	 as	 a	 bent,	 limping	 figure	 emerged	 from	 the
Gate.	 Wearing	 rags,	 the	 figure	 slowly	 approached.	 Paran	 squinted—an	 old
woman,	 a	 child	 with	 drool	 on	 its	 chin,	 a	 deformed	 young	 girl,	 a	 stunted,	 broken
Trell,	a	desiccated	Tiste	Andii—
“Oh,	make	up	your	mind!”	the	sister	said.
The	 apparition	 cocked	 a	 death's	 head,	 the	 grin	 of	 its	 teeth	 stained	 muddy
yellow.	“You	have	chosen,”	it	said	in	quavering	voice,	“unimaginatively.”
“You	are	not	Hood.”	The	brother	scowled.
Bones	shifted	under	creaking	skin.	“The	lord	is	busy.”
“Busy?	We	do	not	take	kindly	to	insults,”	the	sister	said.
The	 apparition	 cackled,	 then	 stopped	 abruptly.	 “How	 unfortunate.	 A
mellifluous,	deep-throated	laugh	would	be	more	to	my	liking.	Ah	well,	in	answer:
nor	does	my	lord	appreciate	your	interruption	of	this	natural	passage	of	a	soul.”
“Murdered	at	the	hand	of	a	god,”	the	sister	said.	“That	makes	him	fair	game.”
The	 creature	 grunted,	 shuffled	 close	 to	 look	 down	 at	 Paran.	 The	 eye	 sockets
glimmered	 faintly,	 as	 if	 old	 pearls	 hid	 within	 the	 shadows.	 “What,	 Oponn,”	 it
asked,	as	it	studied	Paran,	“do	you	wish	of	my	lord?”
“Nothing	from	me,”	the	brother	said,	turning	away.
“Sister?”
“Even	 for	 the	 gods,”	 she	 replied,	 “death	 awaits,	 an	 uncertainty	 hiding	 deep
within	them.”	She	paused.	“Make	them	uncertain.”
The	creature	cackled	again,	and	again	cut	it	short.	“Reciprocity.”
“Of	 course,”	 the	 sister	 responded.	 “I'll	 look	 for	 another,	 a	 death	 premature.
Meaningless,	even.”
The	 apparition	 was	 silent,	 then	 the	 head	 creaked	 in	 a	 nod.	 “In	 this	 mortal's
shadow,	of	course.”
“Agreed.”
“My	shadow?”	Paran	asked.	“What	does	that	mean,	precisely?”
“Much	sorrow,	alas,”	the	apparition	said.	“Someone	close	to	you	shall	walk
through	Death's	Gates	.	.	.	in	your	place.”
“No.	Take	me	instead,	I	beg	of	you.”
“Be	quiet!”	snapped	the	apparition.	“Pathos	makes	me	ill.”
The	howl	reverberated	again,	much	closer	this	time.
“We'd	best	leave,”	the	brother	said.
The	apparition	opened	its	jaws	as	if	to	laugh,	then	clacked	them	shut.	“No,”	it


muttered,	“not	again.”	It	hobbled	back	to	the	Gate,	pausing	once	to	turn	back	and
wave.
The	sister	rolled	her	eyes.
“Time	to	leave,”	the	brother	repeated	uneasily.
“Yes,	yes,”	his	sister	said,	eyeing	Paran.
The	captain	sighed,	looking	away.	“No	final	riddles,	if	you	please.”	When	he
looked	back	Oponn	was	gone.	Once	again	he	tried	to	sit	up.	Once	again	he	failed.
A	new	presence	arrived,	filling	the	air	with	tension,	a	smell	of	threat.
Sighing,	 Paran	 craned	 his	 head	 around.	 He	 saw	 a	 pair	 of	 Hounds—massive
hulking	creatures,	dark,	tongues	lolling	as	they	sat,	watching	him.	These	are	what
killed	 the	 company	 in	 Itko	 Kan.	 These	 are	 the	 cursed,	 horrifying	 beasts.	 Both
Hounds	 froze,	 heads	 hunching	 toward	 him,	 as	 if	 seeing	 the	 hatred	 in	 his	 eyes.
Paran	felt	his	heart	go	cold	at	their	avid	attention.	He	was	slow	to	realize	he	had
bared	his	teeth.
A	 stain	 of	 shadow	 separated	 the	 two	 Hounds,	 the	 stain	 vaguely	 man-shaped
and	 translucent.	 The	 shadow	 spoke.	 “The	 one	 Lorn	 sent.	 I	 would	 have	 thought
someone	of	.	.	.	ability.	Though,	it	must	be	said,	you	died	well.”
“Evidently	not,”	Paran	said.
“Ah,	yes,”	the	shadow	said,	“and	so	it	falls	to	me	to	complete	the	task.	Busy
hours,	these.”
Paran	thought	of	Oponn's	conversation	with	Hood's	servant.	Uncertainty.	If	a
god	fears	anything	.	.	.	“The	day	you	die,	Shadowthrone,”	he	said	quietly,	“I	will
be	waiting	for	you	on	the	other	side	of	that	gate.	With	a	smile.	Gods	can	die,	can't
they?”
Something	 crackled	 in	 the	 portalway	 of	 the	 gate.	 Shadowthrone	 and	 the
Hounds	flinched.
Paran	 continued,	 wondering	 at	 his	 own	 courage,	 to	 bait	 these	 Ascendants.
Always	 despised	 authority,	 didn't	 I?	 “Halfway	 between	 life	 and	 death—this
promise	costs	me	nothing,	you	see.”
“Liar,	the	only	Warren	that	can	touch	you	now	is—”
“Death,”	 Paran	 said.	 “Of	 course,”	 he	 added,	 “someone	 else	 .	 .	 .	 interceded,
and	was	certain	to	leave	long	before	you	and	your	too-loud	Hounds	arrived.”
The	King	of	High	House	Shadow	edged	forward.	“Who?	What	does	it	plan?
Who	opposes	us?”
“Find	your	own	answers,	Shadowthrone.	You	do	understand,	don't	you,	that	if
you	 send	 me	 on	 my	 way	 now,	 your	 .	 .	 .	 opposition	 will	 seek	 other	 means?


Knowing	nothing	of	who	their	next	tool	is,	how	will	you	sniff	out	their	next	move?
You'll	be	left	darting	at	shadows.”
“Easier	to	follow	you,”	the	god	conceded.	“I	must	speak	with	my	companion
—”
“As	you	like,”	Paran	interrupted.	“I	wish	I	could	stand	.	.	.”
The	god	rasped	laughter.	“If	you	stand,	you	walk.	One	way	only.	You	have	a
reprieve—and	if	Hood	comes	to	gather	you	to	your	feet,	the	guiding	hand	is	his,
not	ours.	Excellent.	And	if	you	live,	so	shall	my	shadow	follow	you.”
Paran	 grunted.	 “My	 shadow's	 a	 crowded	 place,	 these	 days.”	 His	 eyes	 fell
once	again	on	the	Hounds.	The	creatures	watched	him	still,	their	eyes	faint	coals.
I'll	have	you	yet.	As	if	fanned	by	his	silent	promise,	the	red	glows	sharpened.
The	god	resumed	speaking,	but	the	world	had	darkened	around	Paran,	fading,
dwindling,	 until	 the	 voice	 was	 gone,	 and	 with	 it	 all	 awareness	 but	 the	 faint,
renewed	spinning	of	a	coin.
An	unknown	span	of	time	passed	in	which	Paran	wandered	through	memories	he
had	thought	long	lost—his	days	as	a	child	clinging	to	his	mother's	dress	and	taking
his	first,	tottering	steps;	the	nights	of	storm	when	he	raced	down	the	chill	hallway
to	his	parents'	bedroom,	tiny	feet	slapping	on	the	cold	stone;	holding	the	hands	of
his	 two	 sisters	 as	 they	 stood	 waiting	 on	 the	 hard	 cobbles	 of	 the	 courtyard—
waiting,	waiting	for	someone.	The	images	seemed	to	lurch	sideways	in	his	head.
His	 mother's	 dress?	 No,	 an	 old	 woman	 in	 the	 service	 of	 the	 household.	 Not	 his
parents'	 bedroom,	 but	 those	 of	 the	 servants;	 and	 there,	 in	 the	 courtyard	 with	 his
sisters,	 they'd	 stood	 half	 the	 morning,	 awaiting	 the	 arrival	 of	 their	 mother	 and
father,	two	people	they	barely	knew.
In	his	mind	scenes	replayed	themselves,	moments	of	mysterious	import,	hidden
significance,	 pieces	 of	 a	 puzzle	 he	 couldn't	 recognize,	 shaped	 by	 hands	 not	 his
own	and	with	a	purpose	he	couldn't	fathom.	A	tremor	of	fear	traveled	the	length	of
his	 thoughts	 as	 he	 sensed	 that	 something—someone—was	 busy	 reordering	 the
formative	events	of	his	life,	turning	them	on	end	and	casting	them	into	the	present
new	shadows.	Somehow,	the	guiding	hand	.	.	.	played.	With	him,	with	his	life.
It	seemed	an	odd	kind	of	death—
Voices	reached	him.
“Aw,	Hood	take	him.”	A	face	bent	close	to	Paran's	own,	looked	into	his	open
blank	eyes.	The	face	was	Picker's.	“He	didn't	stand	a	chance,”	she	said.
Sergeant	Antsy	spoke	from	a	few	feet	away.	“Nobody	in	the	Ninth	would've


done	him	like	this,”	he	said.	“Not	right	here	in	the	city.”
Picker	reached	out	and	touched	the	chest	wound,	her	fingers	surprisingly	soft
on	his	torn	flesh.	“This	isn't	Kalam's	work.”
“You	 all	 right	 here?”	 Antsy	 asked.	 “I'm	 going	 to	 get	 Hedge	 and	 Mallet,	 and
whoever	else	has	shown	up.”
“Go	 ahead,”	 Picker	 replied,	 seeking	 and	 finding	 the	 second	 wound,	 eight
inches	below	the	first.	“This	one	came	later,	right-handed	and	weak.”
A	very	odd	death	indeed,	Paran	thought.	What	held	him	here?	Had	there	been
another	.	.	.	place?	A	place	of	heat,	searing	yellow	light?	And	voices,	figures	faint,
indistinct,	 there	 beneath	 the	 arch	 of	 .	 .	 .	 of	 crowds	 strangely	 held	 in	 place,	 eyes
closed,	mouths	open.	A	chorus	of	the	dead	.	.	.	Had	he	gone	somewhere	only	to
return	 to	 these	 real	 voices,	 these	 real	 hands	 on	 his	 flesh?	 How	 could	 he	 see
through	the	empty	glass	of	his	eyes,	or	feel	the	woman's	gentle	touch	on	his	body?
And	what	of	the	pain,	rising	as	from	a	great	depth	like	a	leviathan?
Picker	 withdrew	 her	 hands	 and	 rested	 her	 elbows	 on	 her	 thighs	 as	 she
crouched	 before	 Paran.	 “Now,	 how	 come	 you're	 still	 bleeding,	 Captain?	 Those
knife	wounds	are	at	least	an	hour	old.”
The	pain	reached	the	surface.	Paran	felt	his	gummy	lips	split.	The	hinges	of	his
jaw	cracked	and	he	drew	in	a	savage	gasp.	Then	screamed.
Picker	bolted	backward,	her	sword	appearing	in	her	hand	as	if	from	nowhere
as	she	backed	to	the	alley's	far	wall.	“Shedenul's	mercy!”
Boots	pounded	on	the	cobbles	off	to	her	right	and	her	head	whipped	around.
“Healer!	The	bastard's	alive!”
The	 third	 bell	 after	 midnight	 tolled	 sonorously	 through	 the	 city	 of	 Pale,	 echoing
down	streets	emptied	by	the	curfew.	A	light	rain	had	begun,	casting	the	night	sky
with	a	murky	gold	hue.	In	front	of	the	large,	rambling	estate,	two	blocks	from	the
old	palace,	 that	had	become	part	of	the	2nd's	quarters,	two	marines	wrapped	in
black	raincapes	stood	guard	outside	the	main	gate.
“Damned	miserable	night,	ain't	it?”	one	said,	shivering.
The	 other	 shifted	 his	 pike	 to	 his	 left	 shoulder	 and	 hawked	 a	 mouthful	 of
phlegm	into	the	gutter.	“You	just	guessing,	mind,”	he	said,	wagging	his	head.	“Any
other	brilliant	insights	you	feel	ready	to	toss	my	way,	you	just	speak	up,	hear?”
“What	did	I	do?”	the	first	man	demanded,	hurt.
The	second	soldier	stiffened.	“Hush,	someone	coming	up	the	street.”
The	guards	waited	tensely,	hands	on	their	weapons.	A	figure	crossed	from	the


opposite	side	and	stepped	into	the	torchlight.
“Halt,”	 the	 second	 guard	 growled.	 “Advance	 slowly,	 and	 you'd	 better	 have
business	here.”
The	 man	 took	 a	 step	 closer.	 “Kalam,	 Bridgeburners,	 the	 Ninth,”	 he	 said
quietly.
The	marines	remained	wary,	but	the	Bridgeburner	kept	his	distance,	his	dark
face	glistening	in	the	rain.	“What's	your	business	here?”	the	second	guard	asked.
Kalam	 grunted	 and	 glanced	 back	 down	 the	 street.	 “We	 didn't	 expect	 to	 be
coming	 back.	 As	 for	 our	 business,	 well,	 it's	 better	 that	 Tayschrenn	 don't	 know
about	it.	You	with	me,	soldier?”
The	marine	grinned	and	spat	a	second	time	into	the	gutter.	“Kalam—you'd	be
Whiskeyjack's	 corporal.”	 There	 was	 a	 new	 tone	 of	 respect	 in	 his	 voice.
“Whatever	you	want	you've	got.”
“Damned	right,”	the	other	soldier	growled.	“I	was	at	Nathilog,	sir.	You	want
us	blinded	by	the	rain	for	the	next	hour	or	so,	you	just	say	the	word.”
“We're	 bringing	 in	 a	 body,”	 Kalam	 said.	 “But	 this	 never	 happened	 on	 your
shift.”
“Hood's	Gate,	no,”	the	second	marine	said.	“Peaceful	as	the	Seventh	Dawn.”
From	down	the	street	came	the	sounds	of	a	number	of	men	approaching.	Kalam
waved	 them	 forward,	 then	 slipped	 inside	 as	 the	 first	 guard	 unlocked	 the	 gate.
“What	do	you	figure	they're	up	to?”	he	asked,	after	Kalam	had	disappeared.
The	other	shrugged.	“Hope	it'll	stick	something	hard	and	sharp	up	Tayschrenn,
Hood	 take	 the	 treacherous	 murderer.	 And,	 knowing	 them	 Bridgeburners,	 that's
exactly	what	they'll	do.”	He	fell	silent	as	the	group	arrived.	Two	men	carried	a
third	man	between	them.	The	second	soldier's	eyes	widened	as	he	saw	the	rank	of
the	 unconscious	 man,	 and	 the	 blood	 staining	 the	 front	 of	 his	 baldric.	 “Oponn's
luck,”	 he	 hissed	 to	 the	 Bridgeburner	 nearest	 him,	 a	 man	 wearing	 a	 tarnished
leather	cap.	“The	pull	not	the	push,”	he	added.
The	 Bridgeburner	 threw	 him	 a	 sharp	 look.	 “You	 see	 a	 woman	 come	 after	 us
you	get	out	of	her	way,	you	hear	me?”
“A	woman?	Who?”
“She's	in	the	Ninth,	and	she	might	be	thirsty	for	blood,”	the	man	replied,	as	he
and	his	comrade	dragged	the	captain	through	the	gate.	“Forget	security,”	he	said,
over	his	shoulder.	“Just	stay	alive	if	you	can.”
The	two	marines	stared	at	each	other	after	the	men	had	passed.	After	a	moment
the	first	soldier	reached	to	close	the	gate.	The	other	man	stopped	him.


“Leave	 it	 open,”	 he	 muttered.	 “Let's	 find	 some	 shadows,	 close	 but	 not	 too
close.”
“Lousy	night,”	the	first	marine	said.
“You	got	a	thing	about	stating	the	obvious,	haven't	you?”	the	other	said,	as	he
moved	away	from	the	gate.
The	first	man	shrugged	helplessly,	then	hurried	to	follow.
Tattersail	stared	long	and	hard	at	the	card	centered	on	the	field	she	had	laid	down.
She	 had	 chosen	 a	 spiral	 pattern,	 working	 her	 way	 through	 the	 entire	 Deck	 of
Dragons	 and	 arriving	 with	 a	 final	 card,	 which	 could	 mark	 either	 an	 apex	 or	 an
epiphany	depending	on	how	it	placed	itself.
The	 spiral	 had	 become	 a	 pit,	 a	 tunnel	 downward,	 and	 at	 its	 root,	 seeming
distant	and	shadow-hazed,	waited	the	image	of	a	Hound.	She	sensed	an	immediacy
to	this	reading.	High	House	Shadow	had	become	involved,	a	challenge	to	Oponn's
command	of	the	game.	Her	eyes	were	drawn	to	the	first	card	she	had	placed,	at	the
spiral's	 very	 beginning.	 The	 Mason	 of	 High	 House	 Death	 held	 a	 minor	 position
among	the	overall	rankings,	but	now	the	figure	etched	on	the	wood	seemed	to	have
risen	to	an	eminent	placing.	Brother	to	the	Soldier	of	the	same	House,	the	Mason's
image	 was	 that	 of	 a	 lean,	 graying	 man	 clothed	 in	 faded	 leathers.	 His	 massive,
vein-roped	 hands	 held	 stone-cutting	 tools,	 and	 around	 him	 rose	 roughly	 dressed
menhirs.	Tattersail	found	she	could	make	out	faint	glyphs	on	the	stones,	a	language
unfamiliar	to	her	but	reminiscent	of	Seven	Cities'	script.	In	the	House	of	Death	the
Mason	was	the	builder	of	barrows,	the	placer	of	stones,	a	promise	of	death	not	to
one	or	a	few	but	to	many.	The	language	on	the	menhirs	delivered	a	message	not
intended	 for	 her:	 the	 Mason	 had	 carved	 those	 words	 for	 himself,	 and	 time	 had
worn	 the	 edges—even	 the	 man	 himself	 appeared	 starkly	 weathered,	 his	 face
latticed	 with	 cracks,	 his	 silvered	 beard	 thin	 and	 tangled.	 The	 role	 had	 been
assumed	by	a	man	who'd	once	worked	in	stone,	but	no	longer.
The	sorceress	was	having	difficulty	understanding	this	field.	The	patterns	she
saw	startled	her:	it	was	as	if	a	whole	new	game	had	begun,	with	players	stepping
onto	the	scene	at	every	turn.	Midway	through	the	spiral	was	High	House	Dark's
Knight,	its	placement	counterpoint	to	both	the	beginning	and	the	end.	As	with	the
last	 time	 the	 Deck	 had	 unveiled	 this	 draconean	 figure,	 something	 hovered	 in	 the
inky	sky	behind	the	Knight,	as	elusive	as	ever,	at	times	seeming	like	a	dark	stain
on	her	own	eyes.
The	 Knight's	 sword	 reached	 a	 black,	 smoky	 streak	 toward	 the	 Hound	 at	 the
spiral's	apex,	and	in	this	instance	she	knew	its	meaning.	The	future	held	a	clash


between	 the	 Knight	 and	 High	 House	 Shadow.	 The	 thought	 both	 frightened
Tattersail	and	left	her	feeling	relieved—it	would	be	a	confrontation.	There	would
be	 no	 alliance	 between	 the	 Houses.	 It	 was	 a	 rare	 thing	 to	 see	 such	 a	 clear	 and
direct	 link	 between	 two	 Houses:	 the	 potential	 for	 devastation	 left	 her	 cold	 with
worry.	Blood	spilled	on	such	a	high	level	of	power	cast	aftershocks	down	through
the	 world.	 Inevitably,	 people	 would	 be	 hurt.	 And	 this	 thought	 brought	 her	 round
back	 to	the	Mason	of	High	House	Death.	Tattersail's	heart	thudded	heavy	in	her
chest.	She	blinked	sweat	from	her	eyes	and	managed	a	few	deep	breaths.
“Blood,”	 she	 murmured,	 “ever	 flows	 downward.”	 The	 Mason's	 shaping	 a
barrow—after	 all,	 he	 is	 Death's	 servant—and	 he	 will	 touch	 me	 directly.	 That
barrow	.	.	.	is	it	mine?	Do	I	back	out?	Abandon	the	Bridgeburners	to	their	fate,
flee	from	Tayschrenn,	from	the	Empire?
An	ancient	memory	flooded	her	thoughts,	which	she	had	repressed	for	almost
two	centuries.	The	image	shook	her.	Once	again	she	walked	the	muddy	streets	of
the	village	where	she	had	been	born,	a	child	bearing	the	Talent,	a	child	who	had
seen	the	horsemen	of	war	sweeping	down	into	their	sheltered	lives.	A	child	who
had	run	away	from	the	knowledge,	telling	no	one,	and	the	night	came,	a	night	of
screams	and	death.
Guilt	 rose	 within	 her,	 its	 specter	 visage	 hauntingly	 familiar.	 After	 all	 these
years	its	face	still	held	the	power	to	shatter	her	world,	making	hollow	those	things
she	needed	solid,	rattling	her	illusion	of	security	with	a	shame	almost	two	hundred
years	old.
The	image	sank	once	again	into	its	viscid	pool,	but	it	left	her	changed.	There
would	be	no	running	away	this	time.	Her	eyes	returned	one	last	time	to	the	Hound.
The	beast's	eyes	seemed	to	burn	with	yellow	fire,	boring	into	her	as	if	seeking	to
brand	her	soul.
She	 stiffened	 in	 her	 chair	 as	 a	 cold	 presence	 washed	 over	 her	 from	 behind.
Slowly,	Tattersail	turned.
“Sorry	 for	 not	 giving	 you	 warning,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said,	 emerging	 from	 the
swirling	cloud	of	his	Warren.	It	held	a	strange,	spicy	scent.	“Company's	coming,”
he	said,	seeming	distracted.	“I've	called	Hairlock.	He	comes	by	Warren.”
Tattersail	shivered	as	a	wave	of	premonition	brushed	her	spine.	She	faced	the
Deck	again	and	began	to	collect	the	cards.
“The	situation's	just	become	a	lot	more	complicated,”	the	wizard	said	behind
her.
The	 sorceress	 paused,	 giving	 herself	 a	 small,	 tight	 smile.	 “Really?”	 she
murmured.


The	wind	flung	rain	against	Whiskeyjack's	face.	Faintly	through	the	dark	night	the
fourth	 bell	 clanged.	 The	 sergeant	 pulled	 his	 raincape	 tighter	 and	 wearily	 shifted
his	 stance.	 The	 view	 from	 the	 rooftop	 of	 the	 palace's	 east	 turret	 was	 mostly
obscured	 by	 sheets	 of	 rain.	 “You've	 been	 chewing	 on	 something	 for	 days,”	 he
said,	to	the	man	beside	him.	“Let's	hear	it,	soldier.”
Fiddler	wiped	the	rain	from	his	eyes	and	squinted	into	the	east.	“Not	much	to
tell	you,	Sarge,”	he	said	gruffly.	“Just	feelings.	That	sorceress,	for	one.”
“Tattersail?”
“Yeah.”	 Metal	 clinked	 as	 the	 sapper	 unstrapped	 his	 sword	 belt.	 “Hate	 this
damned	thing,”	he	muttered.
Whiskeyjack	watched	as	the	man	tossed	the	belt	and	scabbarded	shortsword	to
the	rooftop's	pebbled	surface	behind	them.	“Just	don't	forget	it	like	you	did	last
time,”	the	sergeant	said,	hiding	a	grin.
Fiddler	winced.	“Make	one	mistake	and	nobody	lets	you	forget	it.”
Whiskeyjack	made	no	reply,	though	his	shoulders	shook	with	laughter.
“Hood's	 Bones,”	 Fiddler	 went	 on,	 “I	 ain't	 no	 fighter.	 Not	 like	 that,	 anyway.
Was	born	in	an	alley	in	Malaz	City,	learned	the	stone-cutting	trade	breaking	into
barrows	 up	 on	 the	 plain	 behind	 Mock's	 Hold.”	 He	 glanced	 up	 at	 his	 sergeant.
“You	 used	 to	 be	 a	 stonecutter,	 too.	 Just	 like	 me.	 Only	 I'm	 no	 fast	 learner	 in
soldiering	like	you	was.	It	was	the	ranks	or	the	mines	for	me—sometimes	I	think	I
went	and	made	the	wrong	choice.”
Whiskeyjack's	 amusement	 died	 as	 a	 pang	 followed	 Fiddler's	 words.	 Learn
what?	he	wondered.	How	 to	 kill	 people?	 How	 to	 send	 them	 off	 to	 die	 in	 some
foreign	land?	“What's	your	feeling	on	Tattersail?”	the	sergeant	asked	curtly.
“Scared,”	the	sapper	responded.	“She's	got	some	old	demons	riding	her,	is	my
guess,	and	they're	closing	in.”
Whiskeyjack	 grunted.	 “It's	 rare	 you'll	 find	 a	 mage	 with	 a	 pleasant	 past,”	 he
said.	“Story	goes	she	wasn't	recruited,	she	 was	on	the	run.	Then	she	messed	up
with	her	first	posting.”
“It's	bad	timing	her	going	all	soft	on	us	now.”
“She's	lost	her	cadre.	She's	been	betrayed.	Without	the	Empire,	what's	she	got
to	hold	on	to?”	What	has	any	of	us	got?
“It's	like	she's	ready	to	cry,	right	on	the	edge,	every	single	minute.	I'm	thinking
she's	 lost	 her	 backbone,	 Sarge.	 If	 Tayschrenn	 puts	 her	 under	 his	 thumb,	 she's
liable	to	squeal.”
“I	 think	 you've	 underestimated	 the	 sorceress,	 Fiddler,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.


“She's	 a	 survivor—and	 loyal.	 It's	 not	 common	 news,	 but	 she's	 been	 offered	 the
title	 of	 High	 Mage	 more	 than	 once	 and	 she	 won't	 accept.	 It	 doesn't	 show,	 but	 a
head-to-head	between	her	and	Tayschrenn	would	be	a	close	thing.	She's	a	Master
of	her	Warren,	and	you	don't	acquire	that	with	a	weak	spine.”
Fiddler	whistled	softly,	leaned	his	arms	on	the	parapet.	“I	stand	corrected.”
“Anything	else,	Sapper?”
“Just	one,”	Fiddler	replied,	deadpan.
Whiskeyjack	stiffened.	He	knew	what	that	tone	implied.	“Go	on.”
“Something's	about	to	be	unleashed	tonight,	Sergeant.”	Fiddler	swung	round,
his	eyes	glittering	in	the	darkness.	“It's	going	to	be	messy.”
Both	 men	 turned	 at	 the	 thumping	 of	 the	 roof's	 trap-door.	 High	 Fist	 Dujek
Onearm	 emerged,	 the	 light	 from	 the	 room	 below	 a	 broken	 beacon	 rising	 around
him.	He	cleared	the	ladder's	last	rung	and	stepped	onto	the	roof.	“Give	me	a	hand
with	this	damn	door	here,”	he	called	to	the	two	men.
They	 strode	 over,	 their	 boots	 crunching	 on	 the	 gravel	 scatter.	 “Any	 word	 on
Captain	Paran,	High	Fist?”	Whiskeyjack	asked,	as	Fiddler	crouched	over	the	trapdoor	and,	with	a	grunt,	levered	it	back	into	place.
“None,”	Dujek	said.	“He's	disappeared.	Then	again	so	has	that	killer	of	yours,
Kalam.”
Whiskeyjack	 shook	 his	 head.	 “I	 know	 where	 he	 is,	 and	 where	 he's	 been	 all
night.	Hedge	and	Mallet	were	the	last	to	see	the	captain,	leaving	Knobb's	Inn,	and
then	he	just	seems	to	vanish.	High	Fist,	we	didn't	kill	this	Captain	Paran.”
“Don't	quibble	with	words,”	Dujek	muttered.	“Damn	it,	Fiddler,	is	that	your
sword	lying	over	there?	In	a	puddle?”
Breath	hissed	between	Fiddler's	teeth	and	he	hurried	over	to	the	weapon.
“The	 man's	 a	 hopeless	 legend,”	 Dujek	 said.	 “Shedenul	 bless	 his	 hide.”	 He
paused,	seeming	to	reorder	his	thoughts.	“OK,	perish	the	thought,	then.	You	didn't
kill	Paran.	So	where	is	he?”
“We're	looking,”	Whiskeyjack	said	tonelessly.
The	 High	 Fist	 sighed.	 “All	 right.	 Understood.	 You	 want	 to	 know	 who	 else
might	be	wanting	Paran	dead,	and	that	means	explaining	who	sent	him.	Well,	he's
Adjunct	 Lorn's	 man,	 has	 been	 for	 some	 time.	 He's	 not	 Claw,	 though.	 He's	 a
bloody	noble's	son	from	Unta.”
Fiddler	 had	 donned	 his	 weapon	 and	 now	 stood	 twenty	 paces	 away	 at	 the
roof's	 edge,	 hands	 on	 his	 hips.	 A	 good	 man.	 They're	 all	 good,	 dammit.
Whiskeyjack	blinked	the	rain	from	his	eyes.	“From	the	capital?	Could	be	someone


in	 those	 circles.	 Nobody	 likes	 the	 old	 noble	 families,	 not	 even	 the	 nobles
themselves.”
“It's	possible,”	Dujek	conceded,	without	much	conviction.	“In	any	case,	he's
to	 command	 your	 squad,	 and	 not	 for	 just	 this	 mission.	 The	 assignment's
permanent.”
Whiskeyjack	asked,	“Is	the	Darujhistan	infiltration	his	own	idea?”
The	 High	 Fist	 replied,	 “No,	 but	 whose	 it	 is	 is	 anybody's	 guess.	 Maybe	 the
Adjunct,	maybe	the	Empress	herself.	So	what	all	that	means	is	we're	sending	you
in	anyway.”	He	scowled	briefly.	“I'm	to	relay	the	final	details	to	you.”	He	faced
the	sergeant.	“Assuming	Paran	is	gone	for	good.”
“May	I	speak	freely,	High	Fist?”
Dujek	 barked	 a	 laugh.	 “You	 think	 I	 don't	 know	 it,	 Whiskeyjack?	 The	 plan
stinks.	A	tactical	nightmare—”
“I	don't	agree.”
“What?”
“I	think	it	will	do	just	as	it	was	intended	to	do,”	the	sergeant	said	dully,	his
gaze	at	first	on	the	lightening	eastern	horizon,	 then	 on	the	soldier	 standing	 at	the
roof's	edge.	Because	it	is	intended	to	get	us	all	killed.
The	High	Fist	studied	the	sergeant's	face,	then	he	said,	“Come	with	me.”	He
led	 Whiskeyjack	 over	 to	 where	 Fiddler	 stood.	 The	 sapper	 gave	 them	 a	 nod.	 A
moment	later	all	three	stood	looking	down	on	the	city.	Pale's	ill-lit	streets	wound
between	 the	 rough	 blocks	 of	 buildings	 that	 seemed	 unwilling	 to	 yield	 the	 night;
behind	 curtains	 of	 rain	 their	 squatting	 silhouettes	 appeared	 to	 shiver	 before	 the
coming	dawn.
After	a	while,	Dujek	said	quietly,	“Damned	lonely	out	here,	isn't	it?”
Fiddler	grunted.	“That	it	is,	sir.”
Whiskeyjack	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 Whatever	 was	 happening	 thousands	 of	 leagues
away	was	being	played	out	here.	Such	was	Empire,	and	it	always	would	be,	no
matter	 the	 place	 or	 the	 people.	 They	 were	 all	 instruments	 blind	 to	 the	 hands
shaping	them.	The	sergeant	had	faced	that	truth	long	ago.	It	had	galled	him	then	and
it	galled	him	now.	The	only	relief,	these	days,	seemed	to	come	with	exhaustion.
“There's	 pressure,”	 the	 High	 Fist	 continued	 slowly,	 “to	 disband	 the
Bridgeburners.	I've	already	received	the	order	to	merge	the	Second	with	the	Fifth
and	Sixth.	We'll	stand	as	the	Fifth,	near	full	 complement.	The	tides	 are	bringing
new	waters	to	our	shore,	gentlemen,	and	they	smell	bitter.”	He	hesitated,	then	said,
“If	 you	 and	 your	 squad	 come	 out	 of	 Darujhistan	 alive,	 Sergeant,	 you	 have	 my


permission	just	to	walk.”
Whiskeyjack's	head	snapped	around	and	Fiddler	stiffened.
Dujek	nodded.	“You	heard	me.	And	as	for	the	rest	of	the	Bridgeburners,	well,
rest	easy	that	I'll	take	care	of	them.”	The	High	Fist	glanced	eastward,	baring	his
teeth	in	a	humorless	grin.	“They're	pushing	me.	But	there's	no	way	in	hell	they're
going	 to	 leave	 me	 with	 no	 room	 to	 manoeuvre.	 I've	 got	 ten	 thousand	 soldiers	 I
owe	a	lot	to—”
“Excuse	me,	sir,”	Fiddler	cut	in,	“there's	ten	thousand	soldiers	saying	they're
the	ones	owing.	You	say	the	word	and—”
“Quiet,”	Dujek	warned.
“Yes,	sir.”
Whiskeyjack	 remained	 silent,	 his	 thoughts	 a	 whirling	 maelstrom.	 Desertion.
That	 word	 rang	 in	 his	 head	 like	 a	 dirge.	 And	 Fiddler's	 assertion	 was,	 he	 felt,	 a
true	 one.	 If	 High	 Fist	 Dujek	 decided	 it	 was	 time	 to	 make	 a	 move,	 the	 last	 place
Whiskeyjack	 wanted	 to	 be	 was	 on	 the	 run	 hundreds	 of	 leagues	 away	 from	 the
center	of	things.	He	was	too	close	to	Dujek,	and	though	they	strove	to	hide	it,	the
history	between	them	ever	churned	beneath	the	surface.	There'd	been	a	time	when
Dujek	had	called	him	“sir,”	and	though	Whiskeyjack	held	no	grudges	he	knew	that
Dujek	 still	 had	 trouble	 accepting	 the	 change	 of	 fortunes.	 If	 the	 time	 came,
Whiskeyjack	intended	to	be	at	Onearm's	side.
“High	Fist,”	he	said	at	last,	aware	that	both	men	had	been	waiting	for	him	to
speak,	“there's	still	a	few	Bridgeburners	left.	Fewer	hands	on	the	sword.	But	the
sword's	still	sharp.	It's	not	our	style	to	make	life	easy	for	those	who	oppose	us—
whoever	they	happen	to	be.	To	just	quietly	walk	away	.	.	.”	The	sergeant	sighed.
“Well,	that'd	suit	them,	wouldn't	it?	While	there's	a	hand	on	the	sword,	a	single
hand,	the	Bridgeburners	won't	back	down.	It	settles	on	honor,	I	guess.”
“I	hear	you,”	Dujek	said.	Then	he	grunted.	“Well,	here	they	come.”
Whiskeyjack	looked	up,	followed	the	High	Fist's	gaze	into	the	eastern	sky.
Quick	 Ben	 cocked	 his	 head,	 then	 hissed	 through	 his	 teeth.	 “The	 Hounds	 have
caught	his	trail,”	he	said.
Kalam	cursed	vehemently,	surging	to	his	feet.
Sitting	 on	 the	 bed,	 Tattersail	 frowned	 bleary-eyed	 at	 the	 bearish	 man	 as	 he
paced,	 his	 footsteps	 on	 the	 floorboards	 barely	 raising	 a	 creak.	 Big	 as	 he	 was,
Kalam	seemed	to	glide,	giving	the	scene	an	almost	surreal	feel,	with	the	wizard
cross-legged	and	hovering	a	few	inches	off	the	wooden	floor	in	the	room's	center.


Tattersail	 realized	 she	 was	 exhausted.	 Too	 much	 was	 happening,	 and	 it	 was
happening	 all	 at	 once.	 She	 shook	 herself	 mentally	 and	 returned	 her	 attention	 to
Quick	Ben.
The	wizard	was	linked	to	Hairlock,	and	the	marionette	had	been	on	someone's
—something's—	trail,	which	led	down	into	the	Warren	of	Shadow.	Hairlock	had
reached	the	very	gates	of	the	Shadow	Realm,	and	then	he	had	gone	beyond.
For	a	time	Quick	Ben	had	lost	contact	with	the	puppet,	and	those	long	minutes
of	 silence	 had	 left	 everyone's	 nerves	 in	 tatters.	 When	 Hairlock's	 presence
returned	to	the	wizard	he	no	longer	moved	alone.
“He's	 coming	 out,”	 Quick	 Ben	 announced.	 “Shifting	 Warrens.	 With	 Oponn's
luck	he'll	lose	the	Hounds.”
Tattersail	winced	at	the	wizard's	casual	use	of	the	Fool's	name.	With	so	many
currents	 swirling	 so	 close	 beneath	 the	 surface	 it	 might	 well	 call	 unwelcome
attention	to	them.
Weariness	hung	heavy	in	the	room	like	bitter	incense,	redolent	with	sweat	and
tension.	After	his	last	words	Quick	Ben	had	bowed	his	head.	Tattersail	knew	his
mind	 now	 traveled	 the	 Warrens,	 clinging	 to	 Hairlock's	 shoulder	 with	 an
unbreakable	grip.
Kalam's	pacing	brought	him	before	the	sorceress.	He	stopped	and	faced	her.
“What	about	Tayschrenn?”	he	asked	gruffly,	his	hands	twitching.
“He	knows	something	has	happened.	He's	hunting,	but	the	quarry	eludes	him.”
She	smiled	up	at	the	assassin.	“I	feel	him	moving	cautiously.	Very	cautiously.	For
all	he	knows,	the	quarry	might	be	a	rabbit,	or	a	wolf.”
Kalam's	expression	remained	grim.	“Or	a	Hound,”	he	muttered,	then	resumed
his	pacing.
Tattersail	stared	at	him.	Was	this	what	Hairlock	was	doing?	Drawing	a	Hound
after	him?	Were	they	all	leading	Tayschrenn	into	a	deadly	ambush?	“I	trust	not,”
she	said,	her	eyes	hardening	on	the	assassin.	“That	would	be	foolish.”
Kalam	ignored	her,	pointedly	avoiding	her	gaze.
Tattersail	rose.	“Not	foolish.	Insane.	Do	you	realize	what	could	be	unleashed
here?	 Some	 believe	 the	 Hounds	 are	 more	 ancient	 than	 the	 Shadow	 Realm	 itself.
But	it's	not	just	them—power	draws	power.	If	one	Ascendant	parts	the	fabric	here
and	now,	others	will	come,	smelling	blood.	Come	the	dawn	every	mortal	in	this
city	could	be	dead.”
“Easy,	lady,”	Kalam	said.	“Nobody	wants	a	Hound	loosed	in	the	city.	I	spoke
from	fear.”	He	still	would	not	look	at	her.


The	 assassin's	 admission	 startled	 Tattersail.	 It	 was	 shame	 that	 kept	 his	 eyes
from	 her.	 Fear	 was	 an	 admission	 of	 weakness.	 “For	 Hood's	 Sake,”	 she	 sighed,
“I've	been	sitting	on	a	pillow	for	the	past	two	hours.”
That	caught	him.	He	stopped,	faced	her,	then	laughed.
It	was	a	deep,	smooth	laugh,	and	it	pleased	her	immensely.
The	bedroom	door	opened	and	Mallet	entered	the	room,	his	round	face	shiny
and	 flushed.	 The	 healer	 glanced	 briefly	 at	 Quick	 Ben,	 then	 walked	 to	 Tattersail,
where	he	crouched	down	in	front	of	her.	“By	all	rights,”	he	said	quietly,	“Captain
Paran	should	be	in	an	Officer's	Hole	with	five	feet	of	mud	on	his	pretty	face.”	He
nodded	to	Kalam,	who	had	joined	them.	“The	first	wound	was	fatal,	up	under	his
heart.	 A	 professional	 thrust,”	 he	 added,	 with	 a	 meaningful	 look	 at	 the	 assassin.
“The	second	would	have	done	him	more	slowly,	but	no	less	certain.”
Kalam	grimaced.	“So	he	should	be	dead.	He	isn't.	Which	means?”
“Intervention,”	 Tattersail	 answered,	 a	 queasy	 feeling	 settling	 in	 her	 stomach.
Her	heavy-lidded	gaze	fixed	on	Mallet.	“Your	Denul	skills	proved	sufficient?”
The	 healer	 quirked	 a	 smile.	 “It	 was	 easy.	 I	 had	 help.”	 He	 explained,	 “The
wounds	were	 already	 closing,	 the	damage	 already	mended.	 I	quickened	 it	some,
but	 that's	 all.	 There's	 been	 a	 deep	 trauma,	 both	 body	 and	 mind.	 By	 all	 rights	 it
should	 be	 weeks	 before	 he	 recovers	 physically.	 And	 that	 alone	 could	 be	 a
problem.”
“What	do	you	mean?”	Tattersail	asked.
Kalam	 strode	 to	 the	 table,	 retrieved	 a	 jug	 of	 wine	 and	 three	 clay	 cups.	 He
rejoined	 them	 and	 began	 pouring	 as	 Mallet	 said,	 “Healing	 should	 never	 be
separated	 between	 the	 flesh	 and	 the	 sense	 of	 the	 flesh.	 It's	 hard	 to	 explain.	 The
Denul	 Warrens	 involve	 every	 aspect	 of	 healing,	 since	 damage,	 when	 it	 occurs,
does	so	on	all	levels.	Shock	is	the	scar	that	bridges	the	gap	between	the	body	and
the	mind.”
“All	 and	 well,”	 Kalam	 growled,	 handing	 the	 healer	 a	 cup.	 “What	 about
Paran?”
Mallet	took	a	long	draft	and	wiped	at	his	mouth.	“Whatever	force	interceded
cared	for	nothing	but	healing	the	flesh.	He	may	well	be	on	his	feet	in	a	day	or	two,
but	the	shock	needs	time	to	heal.”
“You	couldn't	do	it?”	Tattersail	asked.
He	 shook	 his	 head.	 “All	 such	 things	 are	 intertwined.	 Whatever	 interceded
severed	 those	 connections.	 How	 many	 shocks,	 traumatic	 events,	 has	 Paran
received	in	his	lifetime?	Which	scar	am	I	to	trace?	I	may	well	do	more	damage	in
my	ignorance.”


Tattersail	thought	about	the	young	man	they	had	dragged	into	her	room	an	hour
earlier.	After	his	scream	in	the	alley,	announcing	to	Picker	that	he	still	lived,	he
had	 fallen	 into	 unconsciousness.	 All	 that	 she	 knew	 of	 Paran	 was	 that	 he	 was	 a
noble's	son;	that	he'd	come	from	Unta,	and	that	he	was	the	squad's	new	officer	on
their	mission	in	Darujhistan.
“In	any	case,”	Mallet	said,	draining	his	cup,	“Hedge	is	keeping	an	eye	on	him.
He	may	come	to	any	minute,	but	there's	no	telling	what	state	his	mind	will	be	in.”
The	 healer	 grinned	 at	 Kalam.	 “Hedge	 has	 taken	 a	 liking	 to	 the	 brat.”	 His	 grin
broadened	as	the	assassin	cursed.
Tattersail	raised	an	eyebrow.
Seeing	her	expression,	Mallet	explained,	“Hedge	also	adopts	stray	dogs—and
other,	uh,	needy	creatures.”	He	glanced	at	Kalam,	who	had	resumed	pacing.	“And
he	can	get	stubborn	about	it,	too.”
The	corporal	growled	wordlessly.
Tattersail	smiled.	The	smile	faded	as	her	thoughts	returned	to	Captain	Paran.
“He's	going	to	be	used,”	she	pronounced,	flatly.	“Like	a	sword.”
Mallet	sobered	with	her	words.	“There's	nothing	of	mercy	in	the	healing,	only
calculation.”
Quick	 Ben's	 voice	 startled	 them	 all.	 “The	 attempt	 on	 his	 life	 came	 from
Shadow.”
There	was	silence	in	the	room.
Tattersail	 sighed.	 Before,	 it	 had	 been	 just	 a	 suspicion.	 She	 saw	 Mallet	 and
Kalam	 exchange	 glances,	 and	 guessed	 at	 what	 passed	 between	 them.	 Wherever
Sorry	was,	when	she	returned	to	the	fold	there	would	be	some	hard	questions.	And
Tattersail	now	knew—with	certainty—that	the	girl	belonged	to	Shadow.
“And	 that	 means,”	 Quick	 Ben	 resumed	 blithely,	 “that	 whoever	 interceded	 on
Paran's	behalf	is	now	in	direct	opposition	with	the	Realm	of	Shadow.”	His	head
turned,	dark	eyes	fixing	on	the	sorceress.	“We'll	need	to	know	what	Paran	knows,
whenever	he	comes	around.	Only—”
“We	won't	be	here,”	Kalam	finished.
“As	 if	 Hairlock	 wasn't	 enough,”	 Tattersail	 muttered,	 “now	 you	 want	 me
nursing	this	captain	of	yours.”
Quick	Ben	rose,	brushing	the	dust	from	his	leather	leggings.	“Hairlock	will	be
gone	for	some	time.	Those	Hounds	are	stubborn.	It	may	be	a	while	before	he	can
shake	them.	Or,	if	the	worst	comes	to	the	worst,”	the	wizard	grinned	darkly,	“he'll
turn	on	them	and	give	the	Shadow	Lord	something	to	think	about.”


Kalam	said	to	Mallet,	“Gather	up	Hedge.	We've	got	to	move.”
Quick	Ben's	last	comment	left	Tattersail	cold.	She	grimaced	at	the	ashen	taste
in	her	mouth,	and	watched	in	silence	as	the	squad	prepared	to	leave.	They	had	a
mission	ahead	of	them,	one	that	would	take	them	right	into	the	heart	of	Darujhistan.
That	city	was	the	next	on	the	Empire's	list,	the	last	Free	City,	the	continent's	lone
gem	worthy	enough	to	covet.	The	squad	would	infiltrate,	prepare	the	way.	They'd
be	entirely	on	their	own.	In	a	strange	way,	Tattersail	almost	envied	the	isolation
they	were	about	to	enter.	Almost,	but	not	quite.	She	feared	they	would	all	die.
The	Mason's	Barrow	returned	to	her	thoughts	as	if	raised	by	her	own	fears.	It
was,	she	realized,	big	enough	to	hold	them	all.
With	 dawn	 a	 blade-thin	 crimson	 streak	 at	 their	 backs,	 the	 Black	 Moranth,
crouching	on	the	high	saddles	of	their	Quorl	mounts,	glittered	like	diamonds	slick
with	 blood.	 Whiskeyjack,	 Fiddler,	 and	 the	 High	 Fist	 watched	 the	 dozen	 fliers
approach.	 Overhead	 the	 rain	 had	 lessened,	 and	 around	 the	 nearby	 rooftops
smudges	of	gray	mist	sank	down	to	scuff	stone	and	tile.
“Where's	your	squad,	Sergeant?”	Dujek	asked.
Whiskeyjack	nodded	at	Fiddler,	who	turned	and	headed	back	to	the	trap-door.
“They'll	be	here,”	the	sergeant	answered.
The	sparkling,	skin-thin	wings	of	the	Quorl,	four	to	each	creature,	seemed	to
flip	for	the	briefest	of	moments,	and	as	one	the	twelve	Moranth	descended	toward
the	turret's	rooftop.	The	sharp	whirring	sound	of	the	wings	was	punctuated	by	the
clicked	 commands	 of	 the	 Moranth	 riders	 as	 they	 called	 out	 to	 each	 other.	 They
swept	over	the	heads	of	the	two	men	with	a	bare	five	feet	to	spare,	and	without
ceremony	landed	behind	them.
Fiddler	 had	 disappeared	 into	 the	 room	 below.	 Dujek,	 his	 hand	 on	 his	 hip,
glared	 at	 the	 Moranth	 for	 a	 moment	 before	 grumbling	 something	 inaudible	 and
making	his	way	to	the	trap-door.
Whiskeyjack	walked	up	to	the	nearest	Moranth.	A	black	chitin	visor	covered
the	soldier's	face,	and	it	turned	toward	the	sergeant	in	silent	regard.	“There	was
one	among	you,”	Whiskeyjack	said,	“one-handed.	He	was	five	times	marked	for
valor.	Does	he	still	live?”
The	Black	Moranth	did	not	reply.
The	 sergeant	 shrugged	 and	 turned	 his	 attention	 to	 the	 Quorls.	 Though	 he	 had
ridden	their	backs	before,	they	continued	to	fascinate	him.	The	winged	creatures
balanced	on	four	thin	legs	emerging	from	beneath	the	saddles.	They	waited	on	the


rooftop	with	wings	splayed	out	and	quivering	fast	enough	to	create	a	haze	of	water
droplets	suspended	around	them.	Their	long,	oddly	segmented	tails	jutted	straight
out	 behind	 them,	 multihued	 and	 twenty	 feet	 in	 length.	 Whiskeyjack's	 nostrils
twitched	 as	 the	 now	 familiar	 acrid	 scent	 reached	 him.	 The	 nearest	 Quorl's
enormous,	 wedge-shaped	 head	 was	 dominated	 by	 faceted	 eyes	 and	 articulating
mandibles.	Two	additional	limbs—arms,	he	supposed—were	tucked	underneath.
As	he	stared	the	Quorl's	head	swiveled	until	its	left	eye	faced	him	squarely.
The	 sergeant	 continued	 staring,	 wondering	 what	 the	 Quorl	 was	 seeing,
wondering	what	it	was	thinking—if	it	thought	at	all.	Curious,	he	gave	the	Quorl	a
nod.
The	head	cocked,	then	turned	away.	Whiskeyjack's	eyes	widened	to	see	the	tip
of	the	Quorl's	tail	curl	up	briefly.	It	was	the	first	time	he	had	seen	such	a	motion.
The	 alliance	 between	 the	 Moranth	 and	 the	 Empire	 had	 changed	 the	 face	 of
Imperial	 war.	 The	 Malazan	 tactics	 here	 on	 Genabackis	 had	 twisted	 into	 a	 new
shape,	 one	 increasingly	 dependent	 on	 transport	 by	 air	 of	 both	 soldiers	 and
supplies.	Such	dependency	was	dangerous,	as	far	as	Whiskeyjack	was	concerned.
We	know	so	little	about	these	Moranth—no	one	has	ever	seen	their	cities	in	the
forest.	I	can't	even	tell	their	sex.	Most	scholars	held	that	they	were	true	humans,
but	 there	 was	 no	 way	 to	 tell—the	 Moranth	 collected	 their	 own	 dead	 from	 the
battlefields.	There	would	be	trouble	in	the	Empire	if	the	Moranth	ever	exercised	a
thirst	 for	 power.	 From	 what	 he	 had	 heard,	 however,	 the	 various	 color	 factions
among	 them	 marked	 an	 ever-changing	 hierarchy,	 and	 the	 rivalry	 and	 competition
remained	at	a	fanatical	pitch.
High	 Fist	 Dujek	 marched	 back	 to	 Whiskeyjack's	 side,	 his	 hard	 expression
softened	 slightly	 with	 relief.	 From	 the	 trap-door,	 voices	 rose	 in	 argument.
“They've	 arrived,”	 Dujek	 said.	 “Giving	 your	 new	 recruit	 an	 earful	 about
something—and	don't	tell	me	what	because	I	don't	want	to	know.”
Whiskeyjack's	momentary	relief	was	shattered	by	what	he	only	now	realized
was	the	secret	hope	that	Sorry	had	deserted.	So	his	men	had	found	her	after	all,	or
she	had	found	them.	Either	way,	his	veterans	did	not	sound	happy	to	see	her.	He
couldn't	blame	them.	Had	she	tried	to	kill	Paran?	That	seemed	to	be	the	suspicion
of	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam.
Kalam	was	doing	most	of	the	bellowing,	putting	more	into	his	role	as	corporal
than	was	warranted,	and	Dujek's	searching	glance	at	Whiskeyjack	was	enough	to
push	 him	 toward	 the	 trap-door.	 He	 came	 to	 the	 edge	 and	 glared	 down	 into	 the
room	 below.	 Everyone	 was	 there,	 standing	 in	 a	 menacing	 circle	 around	 Sorry,
who	leaned	against	the	ladder	as	if	bored	by	the	whole	proceedings.


“Quiet!”	 Whiskeyjack	 roared	 down.	 “Check	 your	 supplies	 and	 get	 up	 here,
now!”	He	watched	them	scamper,	then	gave	a	satisfied	nod	and	returned	to	where
the	High	Fist	waited.
Dujek	was	rubbing	the	stump	of	his	left	arm,	frowning	distractedly.	“Damn	this
weather,”	he	muttered.
“Mallet	could	ease	that,”	Whiskeyjack	said.
“Not	necessary,”	Dujek	replied.	“I'm	just	getting	old.”	He	scratched	his	jaw.
“All	of	your	heavy	supplies	have	been	delivered	to	the	drop	point.	Ready	to	fly,
Sergeant?”
Whiskeyjack	eyed	the	ridged	second	saddles	on	the	Quorl	where	they	rose	up
at	the	back	of	the	thorax	like	cowls,	then	nodded	sharply.
They	watched	as	the	squad	members	emerged	from	the	square	doorway,	each
wearing	 a	 raincape	 and	 burdened	 with	 a	 heavy	 pack.	 Fiddler	 and	 Hedge	 were
engaged	in	a	whispering	argument,	the	latter	casting	a	glare	back	at	Trotts	who'd
trodden	 on	 his	 heel.	 The	 Barghast	 had	 attached	 his	 entire	 collection	 of	 charms,
trinkets,	and	trophies	to	various	parts	of	his	burly	body,	looking	like	a	bedecked
leadwood	tree	during	the	Kanese	Fête	of	the	Scorpions.	Barghast	were	known	for
their	 odd	 sense	 of	 humor.	 Quick	 Ben	 and	 Kalam	 flanked	 Sorry,	 both	 men
glowering	and	on	edge,	while	Sorry,	ignoring	everyone,	slowly	made	her	way	to
the	waiting	Quorls.	Her	satchel	was	no	bigger	than	a	bedroll,	and	the	raincape	she
wore	 was	 more	 like	 a	 cloak—not	 standard	 issue—reaching	 down	 to	 her	 ankles.
She'd	raised	the	hood.	Despite	the	dawn's	burgeoning	light	her	face	remained	in
shadow.	This	is	all	I	have	left.	Whiskeyjack	sighed.
Dujek	asked	quietly,	“How	is	she	doing,	Sergeant?”
“Still	breathing,”	Whiskeyjack	replied	stonily.
The	High	Fist	slowly	shook	his	head.	“So	damn	young	these	days	.	.	.”
A	 memory	 returned	 to	 Whiskeyjack	 as	 he	 considered	 Dujek's	 words.	 On	 a
brief	attachment	to	the	5th,	away	from	the	siege	at	Pale,	in	the	midst	of	the	Mott
Campaign,	Sorry	had	joined	them	from	the	new	troops	arriving	at	Nathilog.	He'd
watched	 her	 put	 a	 knife	 to	 three	 local	 mercenaries	 they'd	 taken	 prisoner	 in
Graydog—ostensibly	to	glean	information	but,	he	recalled	with	a	shudder,	it	had
been	nothing	like	that.	Not	an	act	of	expedience.	He	had	stared	aghast,	horrified,
as	Sorry	set	to	work	on	their	loins.	He	remembered	meeting	Kalam's	gaze,	and	the
desperate	 gesture	 that	 sent	 the	 black	 man	 surging	 forward,	 knives	 bared.	 Kalam
had	 pushed	 past	 Sorry	 and	 with	 three	 quick	 motions	 had	 laid	 open	 the	 men's
throats.	And	then	came	the	moment	that	still	twisted	Whiskeyjack's	heart.	In	their
last,	frothing	words,	the	mercenaries	had	blessed	Kalam.


Sorry	had	merely	sheathed	her	weapon,	then	walked	away.
Though	the	woman	had	been	with	the	squad	for	two	years,	still	his	men	called
her	a	recruit,	and	they	would	probably	do	so	until	the	day	they	died.	There	was	a
meaning	 there,	 and	 Whiskeyjack	 understood	 it	 well.	 Recruits	 were	 not
Bridgeburners.	The	stripping	away	of	that	label	was	an	earned	thing,	a	recognition
brought	 by	 deeds.	 Sorry	 was	 a	 recruit	 because	 the	 thought	 of	 having	 her
inextricably	enfolded	within	the	Bridgeburners	burned	like	a	hot	knife	in	the	throat
of	 everyone	 in	 his	 squad.	 And	 that	 was	 something	 to	 which	 the	 sergeant	 himself
was	not	immune.
As	 all	 of	 this	 flashed	 through	 Whiskeyjack's	 thoughts,	 his	 usually	 impassive
expression	 failed	 him.	 In	 his	 head,	 he	 replied:	 Young?	 No,	 you	 can	 forgive	 the
young,	you	can	answer	their	simple	needs,	and	you	can	look	in	their	eyes	and	find
enough	there	that	is	recognizable.	But	her?	No.	Best	to	avoid	those	eyes,	in	which
there	was	nothing	that	was	young—nothing	at	all.
“Let's	get	you	moving,”	Dujek	growled.	“Mount	everyone	up.”	The	High	Fist
turned	to	say	a	few	last	words	to	the	sergeant,	but	what	he	saw	in	Whiskeyjack's
face	killed	those	words	in	his	throat.
________
Two	muted	thunderclaps	sounded	in	the	city	as	the	east	spread	its	crimson	cloak
skyward,	the	 first	report	 followed	scant	minutes	later	 by	the	 second.	The	last	of
the	 night's	 tears	 churned	 down	 gunnels	 and	 swirled	 along	 street	 gutters.	 Muddy
puddles	 filled	 potholes,	 reflecting	 the	 thinning	 clouds	 overhead	 with	 an	 opaque
cast.	 Among	 the	 narrow	 crooked	 alleys	 of	 Pale's	 Krael	 Quarter,	 the	 chill	 and
damp	 of	 the	 night	 clung	 to	 the	 dark	 spaces	 with	 tenacity.	 Here,	 the	 mold-laden
bricks	and	worn	cobbles	had	swallowed	the	second	thunderclap,	leaving	no	echo
to	challenge	the	patter	of	water	droplets.
Down	one	aisle,	winding	south	along	the	outer	wall,	loped	a	dog	the	size	of	a
mule.	 Its	 massive	 head	 was	 slung	 low	 forward	 in	 front	 of	 the	 broad,	 bunched
muscles	of	its	shoulders.	That	it	had	seen	a	night	without	rain	was	marked	by	its
dusty,	 dry,	 mottled	 gray	 and	 black	 fur.	 The	 animal's	 muzzle	 was	 speckled	 with
gray,	and	its	eyes	glowed	amber.
The	Hound,	marked	Seventh	among	Shadowthrone's	servants	and	called	Gear,
hunted.	 The	 quarry	 was	 elusive,	 cunning,	 and	 swift	 in	 its	 flight.	 Yet	 Gear	 felt
close.	He	knew	that	it	was	no	human	he	tracked—no	mortal	man	or	woman	could
have	escaped	his	jaws	for	so	long.	Even	more	astonishing,	Gear	had	yet	to	catch	a


glimpse	 of	 the	 quarry.	 But	 it	 had	 trespassed,	 with	 impunity	 it	 had	 entered	 the
Shadow	Realm,	trailing	Shadowthrone	himself	and	strumming	all	the	webs	Gear's
lord	had	spun.	The	only	answer	to	such	an	affront	was	death.
Soon,	the	Hound	knew,	he	would	be	the	hunted	one,	and	if	those	hunters	came
in	 numbers	 and	 in	 strength	 Gear	 would	 be	 hard	 pressed	 to	 continue	 his	 search.
There	 were	 those	 within	 the	 city	 who	 had	 felt	 the	 savage	 partings	 of	 the	 fabric.
And	less	than	a	minute	after	passing	through	the	Warren's	gate	Gear's	hackles	had
stiffened,	telling	him	of	nearby	magic's	burgeoning.	Thus	far	the	Hound	had	eluded
detection,	but	that	would	not	last.
He	 moved	 silent	 and	 cautiously	 through	 the	 maze	 of	 shanties	 and	 lean-tos
crouching	against	the	city	wall,	ignoring	the	occasional	denizen	come	out	to	taste
the	dawn's	rain-cleansed	air.	He	stepped	over	the	beggars	sprawled	in	his	path.
Local	dogs	and	ratters	gave	him	one	glance	then	slunk	away,	ears	flattened	and	tail
sweeping	the	muddy	ground.
As	 Gear	 rounded	 the	 corner	 of	 a	 sunken	 stone	 house	 the	 morning	 breeze
brought	his	head	round.	He	paused,	eyes	searching	down	the	street	opposite	him.
Mist	drifted	here	and	there,	and	the	first	carts	of	the	lesser	merchants	were	being
pulled	out	by	figures	wrapped	warm	against	the	chill—the	Hound	was	running	out
of	time.
Gear's	eyes	traveled	down	the	length	of	the	street,	focusing	on	a	large,	walled
estate	 at	 the	 far	 end.	 Four	 soldiers	 lounged	 before	 its	 gate,	 watching	 passers-by
with	 little	 interest	 and	 talking	 among	 themselves.	 Gear's	 head	 lifted,	 his	 study
finding	a	shuttered	window	on	the	estate's	second	floor.
Anticipation	and	pleasure	surged	through	the	Hound.	He	had	found	the	trail's
end.	Lowering	his	head	again,	he	moved,	his	gaze	unwavering	on	the	four	guards.
_________
The	 shift	 had	 ended.	 As	 the	 new	 marines	 approached	 they	 both	 noticed	 that	 the
gate	was	unlocked,	ajar.
“What's	 this?”	 one	 asked,	 eyeing	 the	 two	 drawn	 faces	 of	 the	 soldiers	 who
stood	against	the	wall.
“It's	been	that	kind	of	night,”	the	elder	responded.	“The	kind	where	you	don't
ask	questions.”
The	two	new	men	exchanged	glances,	then	the	one	who	had	spoken	gave	the
older	 man	 a	 nod	 and	 a	 grin.	 “I	 know	 the	 kind.	 Well,	 get	 on,	 then.	 Your	 cots	 are
waiting.”


The	 older	 man	 shifted	 his	 pike	 and	 seemed	 to	 sag.	 His	 gaze	 flicked	 to	 his
partner,	but	the	young	man	had	his	attention	on	something	up	the	street.	“I'd	guess
it's	too	late	now,”	the	older	man	said	to	the	newcomers,	“meaning	it	won't	happen
and	 so	 it	 don't	 matter,	 but	 if	 a	 woman	 shows	 up,	 a	 Bridgeburner,	 you	 let	 her
through	and	keep	your	eyes	on	the	walls.”
“Look	at	that	dog,”	the	younger	soldier	said.
“We	hear	you,”	said	the	new	man.	“Life	in	the	Second—”
“Look	at	that	dog,”	the	young	marine	repeated.
The	 others	 turned	 to	 look	 up	 the	 street.	 The	 old	 guard	 stared,	 his	 eyes
widening,	 then	 he	 hissed	 a	 curse	 and	 fumbled	 with	 his	 pike.	 None	 of	 the	 others
managed	even	that	much	before	the	Hound	was	upon	them.
Sleepless,	 Tattersail	 lay	 flat	 on	 her	 back	 on	 the	 bed	 in	 the	 outer	 room.	 Her
exhaustion	had	reached	a	point	where	even	sleep	eluded	her	so	she	stared	at	the
ceiling,	 her	 thoughts	 wandering	 in	 a	 disordered	 review	 of	 the	 past	 seven	 days.
Despite	 her	 initial	 anger	 at	 being	 embroiled	 in	 the	 Bridgeburners'	 schemes,	 she
had	to	acknowledge	the	excitement	she	felt.
The	 desire	 to	 collect	 her	 possessions	 and	 open	 a	 Warren,	 away	 from	 the
Empire,	 away	 from	 Hairlock's	 madness	 and	 hunger,	 away	 from	 the	 field	 of	 an
endless	war,	now	seemed	an	ancient	one,	born	of	a	desperation	she	no	longer	felt.
But	it	was	more	than	just	a	renewed	sense	of	humanity	that	compelled	her	to
stay	to	see	it	through—the	Bridgeburners,	after	all,	had	shown	again	and	again	that
they	could	take	care	of	their	own	affairs.	No,	she	wanted	to	see	Tayschrenn	pulled
down.	It	was	a	truth	that	frightened	her.	Hunger	for	vengeance	poisoned	the	soul.
And	it	was	likely	that	she	would	have	to	wait	a	long	time	to	see	Tayschrenn's	just
demise.	She	wondered	if,	having	fed	on	that	poison	for	so	long,	she	might	not	end
up	viewing	the	world	with	Hairlock's	shining	bright	mad	eyes.
“Too	much,”	she	muttered.	“Too	much	all	at	once.”
A	sound	at	the	door	startled	her.	She	sat	up.	“Oh,”	she	said,	scowling,	“you've
returned.”
“Safe	 and	 sound,”	 Hairlock	 said.	 “Sorry	 to	 disappoint	 you,	 'Sail.”	 The
marionette	waved	one	tiny,	gloved	hand	and	the	door	behind	him	closed,	its	latch
falling	 into	 place.	 “Much	 feared,	 these	 Hounds	 of	 Shadow,”	 he	 said,	 sauntering
into	the	room's	center	and	pirouetting	once	before	sitting	down,	legs	splayed	and
arms	 hanging	 limp.	 He	 sniggered.	 “But	 in	 the	 end	 nothing	 more	 than	 glorified
mutts,	stupid	and	slow	and	sniffing	at	every	tree.	Finding	naught	of	sly	Hairlock.”


Tattersail	 leaned	 back	 and	 closed	 her	 eyes.	 “Quick	 Ben	 was	 displeased	 by
your	sloppiness.”
“Fool!”	 Hairlock	 spat.	 “I	 leave	 him	 to	 his	 watching,	 I	 leave	 him	 convinced
that	 such	 knowledge	 has	 power	 over	 me	 while	 I	 go	 where	 I	 choose.	 He	 eagerly
lays	 claim	 to	 commanding	 me,	 a	 foolishness	 I	 give	 him	 now,	 to	 make	 my
vengeance	sweeter.”
She	 had	 heard	 it	 all	 before	 and	 knew	 he	 was	 working	 on	 her,	 seeking	 to
weaken	her	resolve.	Unfortunately	he	was	succeeding	in	part,	for	she	felt	doubt.
Maybe	Hairlock	was	telling	the	truth:	maybe	Quick	Ben	had	already	lost	him,	yet
remained	ignorant	of	the	fact.	“Keep	your	vengeance	for	the	man	who	stole	your
legs	and	then	your	body,”	Tattersail	said	dryly.	“Tayschrenn	still	mocks	you.”
“He'll	 pay	 first!”	 Hairlock	 shrieked.	 Then	 he	 hunched	 down,	 gripping	 his
sides.	“One	thing	at	a	time,”	he	whispered.
From	the	compound	beyond	the	window	came	the	first	screams.
Tattersail	 bolted	 upright	 as	 Hairlock	 shouted:	 “Found!	 I	 mustn't	 be	 seen,
woman!”
The	marionette	leaped	to	his	feet	and	scurried	to	his	box	against	the	far	wall.
“Destroy	 the	 Hound—you've	 no	 choice!”	 Scrambling,	 he	 opened	 the	 box	 and
climbed	 inside.	 The	 lid	 thudded	 into	 place	 and	 the	 nimbus	 of	 a	 protective	 spell
suffused	it.
Tattersail	stood	by	the	bed,	hesitating.	Wood	shattered	below	and	the	building
shook.	 Men	 shrieked,	 weapons	 clanged.	 The	 sorceress	 pushed	 herself	 upright,
terror	 seeping	 into	 her	 limbs	 like	 molten	 lead.	 Destroy	 a	 Hound	 of	 Shadow?
Heavy	 thumps	 rattled	 the	 window,	 as	 of	 bodies	 being	 flung	 aside	 on	 the	 floor
below,	then	the	thumps	reached	the	foot	of	the	stairs,	and	the	screaming	stopped.
From	the	compound	she	heard	soldiers	shouting.
Tattersail	drew	on	her	Thyr	Warren.	Power	swept	into	her	and	pushed	aside
the	paralyzing	fear.	She	straightened,	all	exhaustion	gone,	and	swung	her	gaze	on
the	door.	Wood	creaked,	then	the	timber	panel	exploded	inward,	as	if	flung	from	a
catapult,	and	was	instantly	buffeted	aside	by	Tattersail's	magical	shield.	The	twin
impacts	 shattered	 it,	 flinging	 shards	 and	 splinters	 against	 the	 ceiling	 and	 walls.
Glass	broke	behind	her,	the	window's	shutters	springing	open.	An	icy	wind	roiled
into	the	room.
The	Hound	appeared,	its	eyes	yellow	flames,	the	muscles	of	its	high	shoulders
taut,	 rippling	 under	 its	 skin.	 The	 creature's	 power	 swept	 like	 a	 wave	 over
Tattersail	and	she	drew	a	sharp	breath.	The	Hound	was	old,	 older	than	anything
she	 had	 ever	 encountered.	 It	 paused	 in	 the	 doorway,	 sniffing	 the	 air,	 blood


dripping	from	its	black	lips.	Then	its	gaze	fixed	on	the	iron-bound	box	against	the
wall	to	Tattersail's	left.	The	beast	stepped	forward.
“No,”	she	said.
The	Hound	froze.	Its	massive	head	swung	slow	and	measured	to	her,	as	if	it
was	noticing	her	for	the	first	time.	Its	lips	peeled	back	to	reveal	the	luminescent
gleam	of	canines	the	length	of	a	man's	thumb.
Damn	you,	Hairlock!	I	need	your	help!	Please!
A	 white	 strip	 flashed	 above	 the	 Hound's	 eyes	 as	 the	 lids	 snapped	 back.	 It
charged.
The	 attack	 was	 so	 swift	 that	 Tattersail	 was	 unable	 to	 raise	 her	 hands	 before
the	beast	was	upon	her,	surging	through	her	outer	magic	as	if	it	was	no	more	than	a
brisk	 wind.	 Her	 closest	 defenses,	 a	 layering	 of	 High	 Wards,	 met	 the	 Hound's
charge	 like	 a	 stone	 wall.	 She	 felt	 cracks	 streak	 outward,	 deep	 fissures	 reaching
through	 to	 her	 arms	 and	 chest	 with	 a	 snapping	 sound	 immediately	 replaced	 by
spurting	blood.	This,	and	the	Hound's	momentum,	flung	her	back	through	the	air.
The	wards	at	her	back	cushioned	the	blow	as	she	hit	the	wall	beside	the	window.
Mortar	 puffed	 into	 the	 air	 around	 her,	 and	 fragments	 of	 crushed	 brick	 scattered
across	the	floor.
The	 Hound	 had	 fallen	 to	 its	 knees.	 Shaking	 its	 head,	 it	 regained	 its	 feet,
snorted,	then	attacked	again.
Tattersail,	 her	 wits	 rocked	 by	 the	 first	 charge,	 weakly	 lifted	 one	 bloodstreaked	arm	before	her	face,	unable	to	do	anything	else.
As	the	Hound	sprang	into	the	air,	jaws	open	and	reaching	for	her	head,	a	wave
of	 gray	 light	 struck	 the	 beast	 in	 the	 side,	 throwing	 it	 into	 the	 bed	 to	 Tattersail's
right.	Wood	crunched.	With	a	grunt	the	Hound	was	up	again,	wheeling	this	time	to
face	 Hairlock,	 who	 stood	 perched	 atop	 his	 box,	 glistening	 with	 sweat	 and	 arms
raised.	“Oh,	yes,	Gear,”	he	shrilled.	“I'm	your	quarry!”
Tattersail	slumped,	then	leaned	to	one	side	and	vomited	on	the	floor.	A	chaotic
Warren	 swirled	 in	 the	 room,	 a	 miasma	 that	 churned	 into	 her	 like	 riotous
pestilence.	It	radiated	from	Hairlock	in	visible	pulses	of	grainy	gray	shot	through
with	black.
The	Hound	eyed	Hairlock,	its	sides	heaving.	It	was	as	if	it	was	trying	to	dispel
the	 waves	 of	 power	 from	 its	 brain.	 A	 low	 growl	 rumbled	 in	 its	 chest—its	 first
sound.	The	wide	head	sagged.
Tattersail	 stared,	 then	 understanding	 struck	 a	 hammer	 blow	 to	 her	 chest.
“Hound!”	she	screamed.	“He's	reaching	for	your	soul!	Escape!	Get	out	of	here!”
The	beast's	growl	deepened,	but	it	did	not	move.


None	of	the	three	noticed	the	door	to	the	inner	bedroom	opening	off	to	the	left,
or	 the	 halting	 appearance	 of	 Captain	 Paran,	 wrapped	 in	 the	 colorless	 woolen
blanket	 that	 covered	 him	 down	 to	 his	 ankles.	 Pale	 and	 drawn,	 the	 man	 moved
forward,	a	blank	cast	to	his	eyes,	which	were	fixed	on	the	Hound.	As	the	invisible
battle	of	wills	continued	between	Gear	and	Hairlock,	Paran	stepped	closer.
The	 movement	 caught	 Tattersail's	 eye.	 She	 opened	 her	 mouth	 to	 shout	 a
warning,	but	Paran	moved	first.	The	blanket	parted	to	reveal	a	longsword,	point
flashing	 outward	 as	 he	 extended	 into	 a	 full	 lunge.	 The	 sword	 sank	 into	 Gear's
chest,	even	as	the	man	leaped	back,	withdrawing	the	lunge,	twisting	the	weapon	as
he	pulled	it	clear.	A	bellow	thundered	from	Gear's	throat.	The	Hound	staggered
back	into	the	ruins	of	the	bed,	biting	at	the	wound	gushing	blood	from	its	side.
Hairlock	screamed	in	rage	and	jumped	forward,	closing	in	on	Gear.
Tattersail	scythed	one	foot	into	the	puppet's	path,	flinging	him	against	the	far
wall.
Gear	howled.	A	dark	rift	opened	around	him	with	the	sound	of	tearing	burlap.
He	 whirled	 and	 plunged	 into	 the	 deepening	 shadow.	 The	 rent	 closed	 and	 was
gone,	leaving	in	its	wake	a	rippling	of	cold	air.
Astonished	 beyond	 her	 pain,	 Tattersail	 swung	 her	 attention	 to	 Captain	 Paran
and	the	bloodied	sword	in	his	hands.	“How?”	she	gasped.	“How	could	you	have
pierced	the	Hound's	magic?	Your	sword—”
The	captain	looked	down	at	it.	“Just	lucky,	I	suppose.”
“Oponn!”	 Hairlock	 hissed,	 as	 he	 regained	 his	 feet,	 and	 glared	 at	 Tattersail.
“Hood's	Curse	on	the	Fools!	And	you,	woman,	this	I'll	not	forget.	You	will	pay—I
swear	it!”
Tattersail	looked	away	and	sighed.	A	smile	touched	her	lips	as	words	uttered
earlier	now	returned	with	new,	grim	meaning.	“You'll	be	too	busy	staying	alive,
Hairlock,	 to	 start	 on	 me.	 You've	 given	 Shadowthrone	 something	 to	 think	 about.
And	you'll	live	to	regret	his	attention,	puppet.	Deny	that	if	you	dare.”
“I'm	 returning	 to	 my	 box,”	 Hairlock	 said,	 scrambling.	 “Expect	 Tayschrenn
here	in	minutes.	You'll	say	nothing,	Sorceress.”	He	clambered	inside.	“Nothing.”
The	lid	slammed	shut.
Tattersail's	smile	broadened,	the	taste	of	blood	in	her	mouth	like	an	omen,	a
silent,	 visible	 warning	 to	 Hairlock	 of	 things	 to	 come—a	 warning	 she	 knew	 he
couldn't	see.	That	made	the	taste	almost	sweet.
She	tried	to	move,	but	it	seemed	that	a	chill	had	come	to	her	limbs.	Within	her
mind	 visions	 floated,	 but	 walls	 of	 darkness	 closed	 in	 around	 them	 before	 they
could	register.	She	felt	herself	fading.


A	man's	voice	spoke	close	by,	urgent.	“What	do	you	hear?”
She	frowned,	trying	to	concentrate.	Then	she	smiled.	“A	spinning	coin.	I	hear	a
spinning	coin.”


Book	Two
Darujhistan


	
	

What	windfall	has	brushed	our	senses?
This	rocking	thunderhead	that	scraped
the	lake's	placid	waters
and	spun	a	single	day's
shadows	like	a	wheel	that	rolled	us
from	dawn	to	dusk,	while	we
tottered	our	tender	ways	.	.	.
	

What	windlass	crackles	dire	warnings?
There	in	the	gentle	swells	that	tossed
a	bobbing	cork	our	way
with	its	fine	magenta	scent	wafting
like	a	panoply	of	petals
that	might	be	ashes
in	twilight's	crimson	smear	.	.	.
RUMOR	BORN
FISHER	(B.?)


Chapter	Five
	

And	if	this	man	sees	you	in	his	dreams,
while	you	rock	in	the	season's
brooding	night
'neath	a	tree's	stout	branch,
and	your	shadow	is	hooded
above	the	knotted	rope,
so	will	the	winds	of	his	passing
twitch	your	stiffened	limbs
into	some	semblance	of	running	.	.	.
RUMOR	BORN
FISHER	(B.?)


	
907th	Year	in	the	Third	Millennium
The	Season	of	Fanderay	in	the	year	of	the	Five	Tusks
Two	thousand	years	since	the	birth	of	Darujhistan,	the	city
In	 his	 dream	 the	 small	 round	 man	 found	 himself	 leaving	 the	 city	 of	 Darujhistan
through	Two-Ox	Gate	as	he	headed	toward	the	setting	sun.	The	tattered	tails	of	his
faded	red	waistcoat	flapped	in	his	haste.	He	had	no	idea	how	far	he	would	have	to
walk.	Already	his	feet	ached.
There	 were	 miseries	 in	 the	 world,	 and	 then	 there	 was	 misery.	 In	 times	 of
conscience	he	held	the	world's	concerns	above	his	own.	Fortunately,	he	reflected,
such	times	were	few,	and	this,	he	told	himself,	was	not	one	of	them.
“Alas,	the	very	same	dream	propels	these	many-toed	implements	beneath	these
wobbly	knees.”	He	sighed.	“Ever	the	same	dream.”	And	so	it	was.	He	saw	before
him	the	sun	riding	the	distant	hilltop,	a	copper	disc	through	woodsmoke	haze.	His
feet	carried	him	down	the	winding	dirt	street	of	Gadrobi	Shantytown,	the	shacks
and	huts	on	either	side	crouching	in	the	gathering	gloom.	Old	men	wrapped	in	the
dingy	 yellow	 rags	 of	 lepers	 squatted	 over	 nearby	 cookfires,	 falling	 silent	 as	 he
passed.	Similarly	clad	women	stood	by	the	muddy	well,	pausing	in	their	endless
dunking	of	cats—a	bemusing	activity,	its	symbolism	lost	on	the	man	as	he	hurried
past.
He	 crossed	 Maiten	 River	 bridge,	 passed	 through	 the	 dwindling	 Gadrobi
Herder	 camps,	 out	 onto	 the	 open	 road	 flanked	 by	 vineyard	 plantations.	 He
lingered	 here,	 thinking	 of	 the	 wine	 these	 succulent	 grapes	 would	 produce.	 But
dreams	carried	on	with	their	own	momentum,	and	the	thought	was	but	fleeting	in
its	passage.
He	knew	his	mind	was	in	flight—fleeing	the	doomed	city	at	his	back,	fleeing
the	dark,	brooding	smudge	in	the	sky	above	it;	but	most	of	all,	fleeing	all	that	he
knew	and	all	that	he	was.
For	 some,	 the	 talent	 they	 possessed	 found	 its	 channel	 through	 a	 toss	 of
knucklebones,	the	reading	of	heat	fractures	in	scapulae,	or	the	Fatid	of	the	Deck	of
Dragons.	 For	 Kruppe,	 he	 had	 no	 need	 of	 any	 such	 affectations.	 The	 power	 of
divination	was	in	his	head	and	he	could	not	deny	it,	no	matter	how	hard	he	tried.
Within	the	walls	of	his	skull	rang	the	dirge	of	prophecy,	and	it	echoed	through	his
bones.


He	muttered	under	his	breath.	“Of	course	this	is	a	dream,	the	flight	of	sleep.
Perhaps,	thinks	Kruppe,	he	will	in	truth	escape	this	time.	None	could	call	Kruppe
a	 fool,	 after	 all.	 Fat	 with	 sloth	 and	 neglect,	 yes;	 inclined	 to	 excesses,	 indeed,
somewhat	clumsy	with	a	bowl	of	soup,	most	certainly.	But	not	a	fool.	Such	times
are	 upon	 us	 when	 the	 wise	 man	 must	 choose.	 Is	 it	 not	 wisdom	 to	 conclude	 that
other	 lives	 are	 of	 less	 importance	 than	 one's	 own?	 Of	 course,	 very	 wise.	 Yes,
Kruppe	is	wise.”
He	 paused	 to	 catch	 his	 breath.	 The	 hills	 and	 the	 sun	 before	 him	 seemed	 no
closer.	Such	were	dreams	like	the	hastening	of	youth	into	adulthood,	a	precipitous
course	one	could	never	turn	back	on—but	who	mentioned	youth?	Or	one	youth	in
particular?	“Surely	not	wise	Kruppe!	His	mind	wanders—Kruppe	excuses	the	pun
magnanimously—racked	 by	 the	 misery	 of	 his	 soles,	 which	 are	 tired,	 nay,	 half
worn	out	from	this	reckless	pace.	Blisters	have	already	appeared,	no	doubt.	The
foot	cries	out	for	a	warm,	soapy	balm.	Its	companion	joins	in	the	chorus.	Ah!	Such
a	litany!	Such	a	wail	of	despair!	Cease	complaining,	dear	wings	of	flight.	How	far
is	 the	 sun,	 anyway?	 Just	 beyond	 the	 hills,	 Kruppe	 is	 certain.	 No	 more	 than	 that,
surely.	Yes,	as	certain	as	an	ever-spinning	coin—but	who	spoke	of	coins?	Kruppe
proclaims	his	innocence!”
A	breeze	swept	into	his	dream,	down	from	the	north	carrying	with	it	the	smell
of	 rain.	 Kruppe	 began	 fastening	 his	 threadbare	 coat.	 He	 drew	 in	 his	 belly	 in	 an
effort	to	secure	the	last	two	buttons,	but	succeeded	in	clasping	only	one.	“Even	in
sleep,”	he	groaned,	“guilt	makes	its	point.”
He	blinked	against	the	wind.	“Rain?	But	the	year	has	just	begun!	Does	it	rain
in	 the	 spring?	 Kruppe	 has	 never	 before	 concerned	 himself	 with	 such	 mundane
matters.	Perhaps	this	scent	is	no	more	than	the	lake's	own	breath.	Yes,	indeed.	The
question	is	settled.”	He	squinted	at	the	dark	ridge	of	clouds	above	Lake	Azur.
“Must	Kruppe	run?	Nay,	where	is	his	pride?	His	dignity?	Not	once	have	they
shown	 their	 faces	 in	 Kruppe's	 dreams.	 Is	 there	 no	 shelter	 on	 yon	 road?	 Ah,
Kruppe's	 feet	 are	 flailed,	 his	 soles	 bloodied	 shreds	 of	 throbbing	 flesh!	 What's
this?”
Up	 ahead	 was	 a	 crossroads.	 A	 building	 squatted	 on	 a	 low	 rise	 just	 beyond.
Candlelight	bled	from	its	shuttered	windows.
Kruppe	smiled.	“Of	course,	an	inn.	Far	has	the	journey	been,	clear	the	need	for
a	 place	 of	 rest	 and	 relaxation	 for	 the	 weary	 traveler.	 Such	 as	 Kruppe,	 wizened
adventurer	with	more	than	a	few	leagues	under	his	belt,	not	to	mention	spanning
it.”	He	hurried	forward.
A	 broad,	 bare-limbed	 tree	 marked	 the	 crossroads.	 From	 one	 heavy	 branch


something	long	and	wrapped	in	burlap	swung	creaking	in	the	wind.	Kruppe	spared
it	but	the	briefest	glance.	He	came	to	the	path	and	began	his	ascent.
“Ill	judgment,	pronounces	Kruppe.	Inns	for	the	dusty	journeyman	should	not	sit
atop	 hills.	 The	 curse	 of	 climbing	 is	 discovering	 how	 great	 the	 distance	 yet	 to
climb.	A	word	to	the	proprietor	shall	be	necessary.	Once	sweet	ale	has	soothed
the	 throat,	 slabs	 of	 juicy	 red	 meat	 and	 broiled	 yams	 eased	 the	 gullet,	 and	 clean,
anointed	bandages	clothed	the	feet.	Such	repairs	must	take	precedence	over	flaws
in	planning	such	as	Kruppe	sees	here.”
His	monologue	fell	away,	replaced	by	gasps	as	he	struggled	up	the	path.	When
he	arrived	at	the	door	Kruppe	was	so	winded	that	he	did	not	even	so	much	as	look
up,	merely	pushed	against	the	weathered	panel	until	it	swung	inward	with	a	squeal
of	 rusty	 hinges.	 “Alas!”	 he	 cried,	 pausing	 to	 brush	 the	 sleeves	 of	 his	 coat.	 “A
foamy	tankard	for	this	.	.	.”	His	voice	died	as	he	surveyed	the	array	of	grimy	faces
turned	 to	 him.	 “Methinks	 the	 business	 is	 poor,”	 he	 mumbled.	 The	 place	 was
indeed	an	inn—or	it	had	been,	perhaps	a	century	past.	“'Tis	rain	in	the	night	air,”
he	said,	to	the	half-dozen	beggars	crouched	around	a	thick	tallow	candle	set	on	the
earthen	floor.
One	 of	 the	 fellows	 nodded.	 “We	 will	 grant	 you	 audience,	 hapless	 one.”	 He
waved	at	a	straw	mat.	“Be	seated	and	entertain	our	presence.”
Kruppe	 raised	 an	 eyebrow.	 “Kruppe	 is	 graced	 by	 your	 invitation,	 sire.”	 He
dipped	 his	 head,	 then	 strode	 forward.	 “But,	 please,	 do	 not	 think	 he	 is	 bereft	 of
contributions	to	this	honored	gathering.”	He	sat	down	cross-legged,	grunting	with
the	 effort,	 and	 faced	 the	 one	 who	 had	 spoken.	 “He	 would	 break	 bread	 with	 you
all.”	From	a	sleeve	he	withdrew	a	small	rye	loaf.	A	bread	knife	appeared	in	his
other	hand.	“Known	to	friends	and	strangers	alike	is	Kruppe,	the	man	now	seated
before	 you.	 Inhabitant	 of	 yon	 glittering	 Darujhistan,	 the	 mystic	 jewel	 of
Genabackis,	the	juicy	grape	ripe	for	picking.”	He	produced	a	chunk	of	goat	cheese
and	smiled	broadly	at	the	faces	before	him.	“And	this	is	his	dream.”
“So	 it	 is,”	 the	 beggars'	 spokesman	 said,	 his	 lined	 face	 crinkling	 with
amusement.	 “It	 ever	 pleases	 us	 when	 we	 taste	 your	 particular	 flavor,	 Kruppe	 of
Darujhistan.	And	always	are	we	pleased	at	your	traveling	appetites.”
Kruppe	laid	down	the	rye	loaf	and	cut	slices.	“Kruppe	has	always	considered
you	mere	aspects	of	himself,	a	half-dozen	Hungers	among	many,	as	it	were.	Yet,
for	all	your	needs,	you	would	urge	what	of	your	master?	That	he	turn	back	from
his	flight,	of	course.	That	one's	own	skull	is	too	worthy	a	chamber	for	deception
to	reign—and	yet	Kruppe	assures	you	from	long	experience	that	all	deceit	is	born
in	the	mind	and	there	it	is	nurtured	while	virtues	starve.”


The	spokesman	 accepted	a	slice	of	bread	and	smiled.	“Perhaps	we	are	your
virtues,	then.”
Kruppe	 paused	 to	 study	 the	 cheese	 in	 his	 hand.	 “A	 thought	 Kruppe	 has	 not
considered	 before	 now,	 mingling	 with	 the	 silent	 observation	 of	 mold	 on	 this
cheese.	 But	 alas,	 the	 subject	 is	 in	 danger	 of	 being	 lost	 within	 the	 maze	 of	 such
semantics.	 Nor	 can	 beggars	 be	 choosers	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 cheese.	 You	 have
returned	 once	 again,	 and	 Kruppe	 knows	 why,	 as	 he	 has	 already	 explained	 with
admirable	equanimity.”
“The	Coin	spins,	Kruppe,	still	spins.”	The	spokesman's	face	lost	its	humor.
Kruppe	sighed.	He	handed	the	chunk	of	goat	cheese	to	the	man	seated	on	his
right.	 “Kruppe	 hears	 it,”	 he	 conceded	 wearily.	 “He	 cannot	 help	 but	 hear	 it.	 An
endless	ringing	that	sings	in	the	head.	And	for	all	that	Kruppe	has	seen,	for	all	that
he	suspects	to	be,	he	is	just	Kruppe,	a	man	who	would	challenge	the	gods	in	their
own	game.”
“Perhaps	 we	 are	 your	 Doubts,”	 the	 spokesman	 said,	 “which	 you	 have	 never
been	afraid	to	face	before,	as	you	do	now.	Yet	even	we	seek	to	turn	you	back,	even
we	 demand	 that	 you	 strive	 for	 the	 life	 of	 Darujhistan,	 for	 the	 life	 of	 your	 many
friends,	and	for	the	life	of	the	youth	at	whose	feet	the	Coin	shall	fall.”
“It	falls	this	very	night,”	Kruppe	said.	The	six	beggars	nodded	at	this,	though
mostly	 they	 remained	 intent	 on	 the	 bread	 and	 cheese.	 “Shall	 Kruppe	 accept	 this
challenge,	then?	What	are	gods,	after	all,	if	not	the	perfect	victims?”	He	smiled,
raising	his	hands	and	fluttering	his	fingers.	“For	Kruppe,	whose	sleight	of	hand	is
matched	 only	 by	 his	 sleight	 of	 mind?	 Perfect	 victims	 of	 confidence,	 claims
Kruppe,	 ever	 blinded	 by	 arrogance,	 ever	 convinced	 of	 infallibility.	 Is	 it	 not	 a
wonder	that	they	have	survived	this	long?”
The	 spokesman	 nodded	 and	 said,	 around	 a	 mouthful	 of	 cheese,	 “Perhaps	 we
are	your	Gifts,	then.	Wasting	away,	as	it	were.”
“Possibly,”	Kruppe	said,	his	eyes	narrowing.	“Yet	only	one	of	you	speaks.”
The	 beggar	 paused	 to	 swallow,	 then	 he	 laughed,	 his	 eyes	 dancing	 in	 the
candlelight.	“Perhaps	the	others	have	yet	to	find	their	voice,	Kruppe.	They	await
only	their	master's	command.”
“My,”	 Kruppe	 sighed,	 as	 he	 prepared	 to	 stand,	 “but	 Kruppe	 is	 full	 of
surprises.”
The	spokesman	looked	up.	“You	return	to	Darujhistan?”
“Of	 course,”	 Kruppe	 replied,	 gaining	 his	 feet	 with	 a	 heartfelt	 groan.	 “He
merely	 stepped	 out	 for	 a	 breath	 of	 night	 air,	 so	 much	 cleaner	 beyond	 the	 city's
crumbling	walls,	don't	you	agree?	Kruppe	must	needs	exercise	to	hone	his	already


prodigious	skills.	A	walk	in	his	sleep.	This	night,”	he	said,	hitching	his	thumbs	in
his	 belt,	 “the	 Coin	 falls.	 Kruppe	 must	 take	 his	 place	 in	 the	 center	 of	 things.	 He
returns	to	his	bed,	the	night	still	young.”	His	eyes	traveled	among	the	beggars.	All
seemed	 to	 have	 gained	 weight,	 a	 healthy	 robust	 color	 to	 their	 upturned	 faces.
Kruppe	 sighed	 with	 satisfaction.	 “It	 has,	 pronounces	 Kruppe,	 been	 a	 pleasure,
gentlemen.	 Next	 time,	 however,	 let	 us	 settle	 on	 an	 inn	 that	 is	 not	 on	 a	 hilltop.
Agreed?”
The	spokesman	smiled.	“Ah,	but,	Kruppe,	Gifts	are	not	easily	attained,	nor	are
Virtues,	 nor	 are	 Doubts	 easily	 overcome,	 and	 Hungers	 are	 ever	 the	 impetus	 to
climbing.”
Kruppe's	 eyes	 narrowed	 on	 the	 man.	 “Kruppe	 is	 too	 clever	 by	 far,”	 he
muttered.
He	left	their	company	and	shut	the	creaking	door	softly	behind	him.	Returning
down	 the	 path	 he	 came	 to	 the	 crossroads	 and	 stopped	 in	 front	 of	 the	 burlapwrapped	figure	swinging	from	the	branch.	Kruppe	planted	his	fists	on	his	hips	and
studied	it.	“I	know	who	you	are,”	he	said	jovially.	“The	final	aspect	of	Kruppe	to
complete	this	dream's	array	of	those	faces	facing	him	which	are	Kruppe's	own.	Or
so	you	would	proclaim.	You	are	Humility	but,	as	everyone	knows,	Humility	has	no
place	in	Kruppe's	life,	remember	that.	So	here	you	will	stay.”	With	that	he	moved
his	 gaze	 to	 the	 great	 city	 lighting	 the	 eastern	 sky	 blue	 and	 green.	 “Ah,	 this
wondrous	fiery	gem	that	is	Darujhistan	is	home	to	Kruppe.	And	that,”	he	added,	as
he	began	to	walk,	“is	as	it	should	be.”
From	 the	 wharf	 sprawled	 along	 the	 shore	 of	 the	 lake,	 upward	 along	 the	 stepped
tiers	 of	 the	 Gadrobi	 and	 Daru	 Districts,	 among	 the	 temple	 complexes	 and	 the
Higher	Estates,	to	the	summit	of	Majesty	Hill	where	gathers	the	city's	Council,	the
rooftops	of	Darujhistan	presented	flat	tops,	arched	gables,	coned	towers,	belfries,
and	 platforms	 crowded	 in	 such	 chaotic	 profusion	 as	 to	 leave	 all	 but	 the	 major
streets	forever	hidden	from	the	sun.
The	 torches	 marking	 the	 more	 frequented	 alleyways	 were	 hollow	 shafts	 that
gripped	pumice	stones	with	fingers	of	blackened	iron.	Fed	through	ancient	pitted
copper	pipes,	gas	hissed	balls	of	flame	around	the	porous	stones,	an	uneven	fire
that	cast	a	blue	and	green	light.	The	gas	was	drawn	from	great	caverns	beneath	the
city	and	channeled	by	massive	valves.	Attending	these	works	were	the	Grayfaces,
silent	men	and	women	who	moved	like	specters	beneath	the	city's	cobbled	streets.
For	 nine	 hundred	 years	 the	 breath	 of	 gas	 had	 fed	 at	 least	 one	 of	 the	 city's
districts.	 Though	 pipes	 had	 been	 sundered	 by	 raging	 tenement	 fires	 and	 gouts	 of


flame	reached	hundreds	of	feet	into	the	sky,	the	Grayfaces	had	held	on,	twisting	the
shackles	and	driving	their	invisible	dragon	to	its	knees.
Beneath	the	rooftops	was	an	underworld	forever	bathed	in	a	blue	glow.	Such
light	 marked	 the	 major	 avenues	 and	 the	 oft-frequented,	 narrow	 and	 crooked
thoroughways	 of	 the	 markets.	 In	 the	 city,	 however,	 over	 twenty	 thousand	 alleys,
barely	wide	enough	for	a	two-wheeled	cart,	remained	in	shadow	broken	only	by
the	occasional	torch-bearing	citizen	or	the	globed	lanterns	of	the	City	Watch.
By	 day	 the	 rooftops	 were	 bright	 and	 hot	 beneath	 the	 sun,	 crowded	 with	 the
fluttering	 flags	 of	 domestic	 life	 drying	 in	 the	 lake	 wind.	 By	 night,	 the	 stars	 and
moon	 illuminated	 a	 world	 webbed	 with	 empty	 clotheslines	 and	 the	 chaotic
shadows	they	cast.
On	 this	 night	 a	 figure	 wove	 around	 the	 hemp	 ropes	 and	 through	 the	 faint
shadows.	Overhead,	a	sickle	moon	sliced	its	way	between	thin	clouds	like	a	god's
scimitar.	 The	 figure	 wore	 soot-stained	 cloth	 wrapped	 snugly	 about	 its	 torso	 and
limbs,	and	its	face	was	similarly	hidden,	leaving	only	space	enough	for	its	eyes,
which	 scanned	 the	 nearby	 rooftops.	 A	 black	 leather	 harness	 criss-crossed	 the
figure's	 chest,	 bearing	 pockets	 and	 tight,	 stiff	 loops	 holding	 tools	 of	 the	 trade:
coils	 of	 copper	 wire,	 iron	 files,	 three	 metal	 saws	 each	 wrapped	 in	 oiled
parchment,	root	gum	and	a	squared	lump	of	tallow,	a	spool	of	fishing	string,	a	thinbladed	 dagger	 and	 a	 throwing	 knife	 both	 sheathed	 under	 the	 figure's	 left	 arm,
pommels	facing	forward.
The	tips	of	the	thief's	moccasins	had	been	soaked	in	pitch.	As	he	crossed	the
flat	rooftop	he	was	careful	not	to	lower	his	full	weight	on	his	toes,	leaving	mostly
intact	the	half-inch	strip	of	sticky	tar.	He	came	to	the	building's	edge	and	looked
down.	Three	flights	below	crouched	a	small	garden,	faintly	lit	by	four	gas	lamps
set	at	each	 corner	of	a	flagstoned	patio	that	encircled	a	fountain.	A	purple	glow
clung	to	the	foliage	encroaching	on	the	patio,	and	glimmered	on	the	water	trickling
down	a	series	of	stone	tiers	to	the	fountain's	shallow	pool.	On	a	bench	beside	the
fountain	sat	a	guard	reclined	in	sleep,	a	spear	across	his	knees.
The	 D'Arle	 estate	 was	 a	 popular	 topic	 among	 the	 higher	 circles	 of
Darujhistan's	 nobility,	 specifically	 for	 the	 eligibility	 of	 the	 family's	 youngest
daughter.	Many	had	been	the	suitors,	many	the	gifts	of	gems	and	baubles	that	now
resided	in	the	young	maiden's	bedroom.
While	such	stories	were	passed	like	the	sweetest	bread	in	the	upper	circles,
few	 of	 the	 commonry	 paid	 attention	 when	 the	 tales	 trickled	 down	 into	 their
company.	 But	 there	 were	 those	 who	 listened	 carefully	 indeed,	 possessive	 and
mute	with	their	thoughts	yet	oddly	eager	for	details.


His	gaze	on	the	dozing	house	guard	in	the	garden	below,	the	mind	of	Crokus
Younghand	 picked	 its	 way	 carefully	 through	 speculations	 of	 what	 was	 to	 come.
The	 key	 lay	 in	 finding	 out	 which	 room	 among	 the	 estate's	 score	 of	 chambers
belonged	 to	 the	 maiden.	 Crokus	 did	 not	 like	 guesswork,	 but	 he'd	 found	 that	 his
thoughts,	 carried	 almost	 entirely	 on	 instinct,	 moved	 with	 their	 own	 logic	 when
determining	these	things.
Top	floor	most	assuredly	for	the	youngest	and	fairest	daughter	of	the	D'Arles.
And	with	a	balcony	overlooking	the	garden.
He	 turned	 his	 attention	 from	 the	 guard	 to	 the	 wall	 immediately	 beneath	 him.
Three	balconies,	but	only	one,	off	to	the	left,	was	on	the	third	floor.	Crokus	pulled
back	 from	 the	 edge	 and	 slipped	 silently	 along	 the	 roof	 until	 he	 judged	 he	 was
directly	above	the	balcony,	then	he	approached	again	and	looked	down.
Ten	 feet,	 at	 the	 most.	 On	 either	 side	 of	 the	 balcony	 rose	 ornately	 carved
columns	of	painted	wood.	A	half-moon	arch	spanned	them	an	arm's	length	down,
completing	the	fancy	frame.	With	a	final	glance	at	the	house	guard,	who	had	not
moved,	and	whose	spear	did	not	seem	in	danger	of	clattering	to	the	flag-stones	at
any	moment,	Crokus	slowly	lowered	himself	down	the	wall.
His	 moccasins'	 pitch	 gripped	 the	 eaves	 with	 snug	 assurance.	 There	 were
plenty	of	handholds,	as	the	carver	had	cut	deep	into	the	hardwood,	and	sun,	rain,
and	wind	had	weathered	the	paint.	He	descended	along	one	of	the	columns	until
his	feet	touched	the	balcony's	handrail	where	it	abutted	the	wall.	A	moment	later
he	 crouched	 on	 the	 glazed	 tiles	 in	 the	 shadow	 of	 a	 wrought-iron	 table	 and
pillowed	chair.
No	 light	 leaked	 between	 the	 shutters	 of	 the	 sliding	 door.	 Two	 soft	 steps
brought	him	next	to	it.	A	moment's	examination	identified	the	style	of	the	latch's
lock.	 Crokus	 withdrew	 a	 fine-toothed	 saw	 and	 set	 to	 work.	 The	 sound	 the	 tool
made	was	minimal,	no	more	than	the	shivering	of	a	locust's	leg.	A	fine	tool,	rare
and	probably	expensive.	Crokus	was	fortunate	in	having	an	uncle	who	dabbled	in
alchemy	 and	 had	 need	 of	 such	 magically	 hardened	 tools	 when	 constructing	 his
bizarre	 condensing	 and	 filtering	 mechanisms.	 Better	 yet,	 an	 absentminded	 uncle
prone	to	misplacing	things.
Twenty	 minutes	 later	 the	 saw's	 teeth	 snipped	 the	 last	 restraining	 bolt.	 He
returned	the	tool	to	his	harness,	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	hands,	then	nudged	the
door	open.
Crokus	poked	his	head	into	the	room.	In	the	gray	dimness	he	saw	a	large	fourposter	 bed	 a	 few	 feet	 to	 his	 left,	 its	 headboard	 against	 the	 outer	 wall.	 Mosquito
netting	descended	around	it,	ending	in	piled	heaps	on	the	floor.	From	within	came


the	even	breaths	of	someone	deep	in	sleep.	The	room	was	redolent	of	expensive
perfume,	something	spicy	and	probably	from	Callows.
Immediately	 across	 from	 him	 were	 two	 doors,	 one	 ajar	 and	 leading	 into	 a
bathing	 chamber;	 the	 other	 a	 formidable	 barrier	 of	 banded	 oak	 sporting	 an
enormous	 lock.	 Against	 the	 wall	 to	 his	 right	 stood	 a	 clothes	 cupboard	 and	 a
makeup	stand	over	which	stood	three	polished	silver	mirrors	hinged	together.	The
center	one	rose	flush	on	the	wall,	the	outer	two	angled	onto	the	tabletop	to	provide
an	infinity	of	admiring	visages.
Crokus	 turned	 sideways	 and	 edged	 into	 the	 room.	 He	 rose	 slowly	 and
stretched,	relieving	his	muscles	of	the	tension	that	had	held	them	for	the	past	halfhour.	He	swung	his	gaze	to	the	makeup	stand,	then	tiptoed	toward	it.
_______
The	 D'Arle	 estate	 was	 third	 from	 the	 summit	 of	 Old	 K'rul's	 Avenue,	 which
climbed	the	first	of	the	inner	city's	hills	to	a	circular	court	tangled	with	weeds	and
irregular,	half-buried	dolmens.	Opposite	the	court	rose	K'rul	Temple,	its	ancient
stones	latticed	with	cracks	and	entombed	in	moss.
The	 last	 monk	 of	 the	 Eldering	 God	 had	 died	 generations	 past.	 The	 square
belfry	 that	 rose	 from	 the	 temple's	 inner	 court	 bore	 architectural	 stylings	 of	 a
people	long	dead.	Four	rose	marble	posts	marked	the	corners	of	the	high	platform,
still	 holding	 aloft	 a	 peaked	 roof	 with	 sides	 that	 were	 scaled	 in	 green-stained
bronze	tiles.
The	 belfry	 overlooked	 a	 dozen	 flat	 roofs,	 of	 houses	 that	 belonged	 to	 gentry.
One	such	structure	 crowded	close	to	one	of	the	temple's	rough-hewn	walls,	and
across	 its	 roof	 lay	 the	 heavy	 shadow	 of	 the	 tower.	 On	 this	 roof	 crouched	 an
assassin	with	blood	on	his	hands.
Talo	 Krafar	 of	 Jurrig	 Denatte's	 Clan	 drew	 breath	 in	 hissing	 gasps.	 Sweat
trickled	muddy	streaks	down	his	brow	and	droplets	fell	from	his	broad,	crooked
nose.	 His	 dark	 eyes	 were	 wide	 as	 he	 stared	 down	 at	 his	 hands,	 for	 the	 blood
staining	them	was	his	own.
His	 mission	 this	 night	 had	 been	 as	 a	 Roamer,	 patrolling	 the	 city's	 rooftops
which,	except	for	the	occasional	thief,	were	the	assassins'	sole	domain,	the	means
by	 which	 they	 traveled	 the	 city	 for	 the	 most	 part	 undetected.	 The	 rooftops
provided	 their	 routes	 on	 missions	 of	 unsanctioned	 political	 .	 .	 .	 activities	 or	 the
continuation	 of	 a	 feud	 between	 two	 Houses,	 or	 the	 punishment	 for	 betrayal.	 The
Council	 ruled	 by	 day	 under	 public	 scrutiny;	 the	 Guild	 ruled	 by	 night,	 unseen,


leaving	no	witnesses.	It	had	always	been	this	way,	since	Darujhistan	first	rose	on
the	shores	of	Lake	Azur.
Talo	 had	 been	 crossing	 an	 innocuous	 rooftop	 when	 a	 crossbow	 quarrel	 had
driven	 a	 hammer	 blow	 to	 his	 left	 shoulder.	 He	 was	 flung	 forward	 by	 the
concussion,	and	for	an	unknown	length	of	time	stared	dumbfounded	at	the	cloudwreathed	 sky	 overhead,	 wondering	 what	 had	 happened.	 Finally,	 as	 numbness
slowly	gave	way	to	agony,	he	twisted	onto	his	side.	The	quarrel	had	gone	entirely
through	 him.	 It	 lay	 on	 the	 tarred	 tiles	 a	 few	 feet	 away.	 He	 rolled	 until	 he	 was
beside	the	bloodied	bolt.
One	glance	had	been	enough	to	confirm	that	this	was	no	thief's	quarrel.	It	had
come	from	a	heavy	weapon—an	assassin's	weapon.	As	this	fact	worked	its	way
through	the	confused	jumble	of	Talo's	thoughts,	he	drew	himself	up	to	his	knees,
and	then	to	his	feet.	An	unsteady	jog	brought	him	to	the	building's	edge.
Blood	streamed	from	the	wound	as	he	climbed	down	to	the	unlit	alley	below.
His	 moccasins	 resting	 finally	 on	 the	 slick,	 rubbish-littered	 cobblestones,	 he
paused,	 forcing	 clarity	 into	 his	 head.	 An	 assassin	 war	 had	 begun	 this	 night.	 But
which	 Clan	 Leader	 was	 fool	 enough	 to	 believe	 he	 or	 she	 could	 usurp	 Vorcan's
mastery	of	the	Guild?	In	any	case,	he	would	return	to	his	clan's	nest,	if	possible.
With	this	in	mind,	he	began	to	run.
He	had	dashed	into	the	shadows	of	his	third	alley	when	ice	trickled	down	his
spine.	 Breath	 catching,	 Talo	 froze.	 The	 sensation	 creeping	 over	 him	 was
unmistakable,	as	certain	as	instinct:	he	was	being	stalked.	He	glanced	down	at	the
blood-soaked	front	of	his	shirt	and	realized	that	there	was	no	hope	of	outrunning
his	hunter.	No	doubt	his	stalker	had	seen	him	enter	the	alley	and	even	now	had	a
crossbow	trained	on	its	mouth	at	the	far	end.	At	least,	that	is	how	Talo	would	play
it.
He'd	 have	 to	 turn	 the	 game	 round,	 set	 a	 trap.	 And	 for	 that	 he'd	 need	 the
rooftops.	Talo	turned	back	to	the	alley-mouth	he	had	just	entered	and	studied	the
nearby	 buildings.	 Two	 streets	 to	 his	 right	 squatted	 the	 K'rul	 Temple.	 His	 gaze
fixed	on	the	dark	edifice	that	was	the	belfry.	There.
The	 climb	 left	 him	 close	 to	 unconsciousness,	 and	 he	 now	 crouched	 in	 the
belfry's	 shadow	 one	 building	 away	 from	 the	 temple.	 His	 exertions	 had	 pumped
blood	from	his	shoulder	in	horrifying	volume.	He'd	seen	blood	before,	of	course,
but	never	so	much	of	his	own	at	one	time.	He	wondered	for	the	first	time	seriously
if	 he	 would	 die.	 A	 numbness	 spread	 in	 his	 arms	 and	 legs,	 and	 he	 knew	 if	 he
remained	 where	 he	 was	 any	 longer	 he	 might	 never	 leave.	 With	 a	 soft	 grunt	 he
pushed	himself	upright.	The	jump	down	to	the	temple	roof	was	only	a	matter	of	a
few	yards,	but	the	impact	jarred	him	to	his	knees.


Gasping,	Talo	drove	thoughts	of	failure	from	his	mind.	All	that	was	left	was	to
climb	 down	 the	 temple's	 inner	 wall	 to	 the	 court,	 then	 ascend	 the	 belfry's	 spiral
staircase.	Two	tasks.	Two	simple	tasks.	And,	once	within	the	belfry's	shadows,	he
could	 command	 every	 nearby	 rooftop.	 And	 the	 stalker	 would	 come	 to	 him.	 Talo
paused	to	check	his	own	crossbow,	which	was	strapped	to	his	back,	and	the	three
quarrels	sheathed	on	his	left	thigh.
He	glared	into	the	darkness	around	him.	“Whoever	you	are,	you	bastard,”	he
whispered,	“I	want	you.”
He	began	to	crawl	across	the	temple	roof.
The	lock	on	the	jewel	box	had	proved	simple	to	pick.	Ten	minutes	after	entering
the	room	Crokus	had	swept	it	clean.	A	small	fortune's	worth	of	gold	and	gemand
pearl-studded	jewelry	now	resided	in	a	small	leather	bag	tied	to	his	belt.
He	squatted	by	the	dressing-table	and	held	in	his	hands	his	final	prize.	This,
I'll	keep.	The	item	was	a	sky-blue	silk	turban	with	gold-braided	tassels,	no	doubt
intended	 for	 the	 upcoming	 Fête.	 He	 ended	 his	 long	 minute	 of	 admiration,	 tucked
the	turban	under	an	arm,	then	rose.	His	gaze	lingered	on	the	bed	across	from	him,
and	he	moved	closer.
The	netting	obscured	the	form	half	buried	beneath	soft	blankets.	Another	step
brought	 him	 to	 the	 bedframe's	 edge.	 From	 the	 waist	 up	 the	 girl	 was	 naked.	 An
embarrassed	flush	rose	in	the	thief's	cheeks,	but	he	did	not	look	away.	Queen	of
Dreams,	 but	 she's	 lovely!	 At	 seventeen	 years	 of	 age,	 Crokus	 had	 seen	 enough
whores	and	dancers	not	to	tremble	agape	at	a	woman's	exposed	virtues;	even	still
his	gaze	lingered.	Then,	grimacing,	he	headed	back	to	the	balcony	door.	A	moment
later	he	was	outside.	He	drew	a	deep	breath	of	the	cool	night	air	to	clear	his	head.
In	the	blanket	of	darkness	overhead	a	handful	of	stars	shone	sufficiently	bright	to
pierce	the	gauze	of	clouds.	Not	clouds,	but	smoke,	drifting	across	the	lake	from	the
north.	The	word	of	Pale's	fall	to	the	Malazan	Empire	had	been	on	the	tongues	of
everyone	for	the	past	two	days.
And	we're	next.
His	uncle	had	told	him	that	the	Council	still	frantically	proclaimed	neutrality,
desperate	in	their	efforts	to	separate	the	city	from	the	now	destroyed	Free	Cities
alliance.	 But	 the	 Malazans	 didn't	 seem	 to	 be	 listening.	 And	 why	 should	 they?
Uncle	 Mammot	 had	 asked.	 Darujhistan's	 army	 is	 a	 contemptible	 handful	 of
noble	sons	who	do	nothing	but	strut	back	and	forth	on	Whore	Street,	gripping
their	jeweled	swords	.	.	.
Crokus	 climbed	 to	 the	 estate's	 roof	 and	 padded	 silently	 across	 its	 tiles.


Another	house,	of	equal	height,	was	before	him,	its	flat	top	less	than	six	feet	away.
The	thief	paused	at	the	edge	and	looked	down	to	the	alley	thirty	feet	below,	seeing
only	a	pool	of	darkness,	then	he	jumped	to	land	softly	on	the	next	roof.
He	began	to	cross	it.	Off	to	his	left	rose	the	stark	silhouette	of	K'rul's	belfry
tower,	gnarled	like	a	bony	fist	thrust	into	the	night	sky.	Crokus	brought	one	hand
down	to	the	leather	bag	tied	to	his	belt,	probing	with	his	fingers	the	knot	and	the
condition	of	the	drawstrings.	Satisfied	that	all	was	secure,	he	checked	the	turban
tucked	beneath	a	strap	of	his	harness.	All	was	well.	He	continued	his	soundless
way	across	the	rooftop.	A	fine	night	indeed.	Crokus	smiled	to	himself.
Talo	 Krafar	 opened	 his	 eyes.	 Dazed	 and	 uncomprehending,	 he	 stared	 about
himself.	Where	was	he?	Why	did	he	feel	so	weak?	Then	memory	returned,	and	a
groan	slipped	from	his	lips.	He	had	blacked	out,	leaning	here	against	this	marble
pillar.	But	what	had	awoken	him?	Stiffening,	the	assassin	pushed	himself	up	on	the
dusty	column	and	scanned	the	rooftops	below.	There!	A	figure	moved	across	the
flat	top	of	a	building	less	that	fifty	feet	away.
Now,	you	bastard.	Now.	He	raised	his	crossbow,	anchoring	one	elbow	against
the	pillar.	He	had	already	cocked	his	weapon,	though	he	had	no	memory	of	having
done	so.	At	this	 distance	there	 was	no	chance	of	missing.	In	seconds	his	stalker
would	be	dead.	Talo	bared	his	teeth	and	took	careful	aim.
Crokus	 was	 halfway	 across	 the	 rooftop,	 one	 hand	 tracing	 the	 silk	 finery	 of	 the
turban	snug	over	his	heart,	when	a	coin	clattered	loudly	at	his	feet.	Instinctively	he
pounced	down	and	trapped	it	beneath	both	hands.	Something	hissed	through	the	air
immediately	 above	 his	 head,	 and	 he	 looked	 up,	 startled,	 then	 ducked	 again	 as	 a
ceramic	tile	shattered	twenty	feet	away.
He	 moaned	 with	 sudden	 realization.	 As	 he	 clambered	 to	 his	 feet	 one	 hand
absently	collected	the	coin	and	tucked	it	under	his	belt.
Talo	cursed	in	disbelief.	He	lowered	the	crossbow	and	stared	down	at	the	figure,
dumbfounded,	until	his	instinct	for	danger	asserted	itself	one	last	time.	Whirling,
he	caught	a	blurred	glimpse	of	a	cloaked	figure	standing	before	him,	arms	raised.
Then	the	arms	flashed	down	and	two	long,	grooved	daggers	slid	into	Talo's	chest.
With	a	final	baffled	grunt,	the	assassin	died.


A	 grating	 sound	 reached	 Crokus's	 ears	 and	 he	 spun	 to	 face	 the	 belfry.	 A	 black
shape	tumbled	from	between	the	pillars	and	landed	with	a	thump	fifteen	feet	away.
Moments	 later	 a	 crossbow	 clanged	 down	 beside	 it.	 Crokus	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 a
silhouette	 framed	 between	 the	 pillars,	 glittering	 long-bladed	 knives	 in	 its	 hands.
The	figure	seemed	to	be	studying	him.
“Oh,	Mowri,”	the	thief	prayed,	then	turned	and	ran.
In	 the	 K'rul	 belfry	 the	 killer's	 oddly	 shaped	 eyes	 watched	 the	 thief	 scamper
toward	the	rooftop's	far	side.	With	a	slight	lifting	of	its	head	the	killer	sniffed	the
air,	then	frowned.	A	burst	of	power	had	just	frayed	the	fabric	of	night,	like	a	finger
poking	through	rotted	cloth.	And,	through	the	rent,	something	had	come.
The	 thief	 reached	 the	 far	 edge	 and	 disappeared	 over	 it.	 The	 killer	 hissed	 a
spell	 in	 a	 language	 older	 than	 the	 belfry	 and	 the	 temple,	 a	 language	 that	 had	 not
been	heard	in	this	land	for	millennia,	then	sprang	from	the	tower.	Enwreathed	in
magic,	the	killer's	descent	to	the	rooftop	below	was	slow,	controlled.	The	landing
came	as	a	light	brush	on	the	tiles.
A	second	figure	appeared,	its	cloak	spread	like	a	black	wing,	from	the	above
darkness	to	join	the	first.	Then	a	third,	also	descending	in	silence,	landed	on	the
rooftop.	They	spoke	briefly.	The	last	to	arrive	muttered	a	command,	then	moved
off.	 The	 remaining	 two	 exchanged	 a	 few	 last	 words,	 then	 set	 out	 on	 the	 thief's
trail,	the	second	one	preparing	its	crossbow.
Ten	minutes	later	Crokus	leaned	against	the	sloped	roof	of	a	merchant's	house	to
regain	his	breath.	He'd	seen	no	one,	heard	nothing.	Either	the	killer	hadn't	pursued
or	he	had	managed	to	lose	him.	Or	her.	In	his	mind	returned	his	single	vision	of	the
figure	 as	 it	 stood	 in	 the	 belfry.	 No,	 unlikely	 that	 it	 could	 be	 a	 woman—too	 tall,
perhaps	six	and	a	half	feet,	and	thin.
A	tremor	ran	through	the	young	thief.	What	had	he	stumbled	on?	An	assassin
had	almost	skewered	him,	and	then	had	himself	been	murdered.	A	Guild	war?	If
so,	it	made	the	rooftops	a	risky	place	to	be.
Warily,	Crokus	rose	and	looked	about	him.
A	tile	farther	along	the	roof	clattered	down	the	sloped	side.	Crokus	whirled	to
see	the	killer	dashing	toward	him.	One	look	at	the	two	daggers	flashing	in	the	air
and	the	thief	darted	to	the	roof's	edge	and	leaped	out	into	darkness.
The	 building	 across	 from	 him	 was	 too	 distant,	 but	 Crokus	 had	 chosen	 his
resting	 place	 on	 familiar	 territory.	 As	 he	 fell	 into	 the	 shadows	 he	 reached	 out


grasping	hands.	The	guidewire	caught	his	arms	near	the	elbows	and	he	scrambled
frantically	for	a	secure	grip,	then	hung	dangling	twenty	feet	above	the	alley.
While	 most	 of	 the	 clotheslines	 spanning	 the	 city's	 streets	 were	 just	 thin,
unreliable	hemp,	among	them	were	wrapped	wires.	Placed	by	thieves	generations
past	they	were	securely	bolted	to	the	walls.	By	day	Monkey	Road,	as	the	thieves
called	 it,	 looked	 no	 different	 from	 any	 other	 line,	 festooned	 with	 undergarments
and	sheets.	With	the	sun's	setting,	however,	came	its	true	purpose.
With	 hands	 burned	 raw	 Crokus	 made	 his	 way	 along	 the	 wire	 toward	 the	 far
wall.	 He	 chanced	 to	 glance	 up	 then,	 and	 froze.	 On	 the	 roof's	 edge	 before	 him
stood	a	second	hunter,	taking	careful	aim	with	a	heavy,	antique	crossbow.
Crokus	 let	 go	 of	 the	 wire.	 A	 quarrel	 whizzed	 directly	 above	 his	 head	 as	 he
fell.	From	behind	and	below	a	window	shattered.	His	drop	was	cut	short	by	the
first	of	a	series	of	clotheslines,	tugging	his	limbs	and	twitching	him	about	before
snapping.	After	what	seemed	an	eternity	of	bone-wrenching	jerks	and	the	whip	of
cord	 slicing	 through	 his	 clothes	 and	 flaying	 his	 skin,	 Crokus	 struck	 the	 alley's
cobblestones,	 straight-legged	 and	 leaning	 far	 forward.	 His	 knees	 buckled.	 He
dipped	a	shoulder	enough	to	earn	a	slightly	cushioned	roll,	brought	up	short	when
his	head	struck	a	wall.
Dazed	 and	 groaning,	 Crokus	 pushed	 himself	 upright.	 He	 looked	 up.	 Through
vision	 blurred	 with	 pain	 he	 saw	 a	 figure	 descending	 in	 seeming	 slow-motion
immediately	overhead.	The	thief's	eyes	widened.	Sorcery!
He	 turned	 and	 staggered	 dizzily	 before	 managing	 a	 limping	 run	 down	 the
alleyway.	He	reached	the	corner	and,	briefly	lit	by	gaslight,	hurried	across	a	wide
street,	 then	 entered	 the	 mouth	 of	 another	 alley.	 Once	 in	 its	 shadow,	 Crokus
stopped.	 Cautiously,	 he	 poked	 his	 head	 out	 from	 the	 wall's	 edge	 for	 a	 look.	 A
quarrel	struck	the	brick	beside	his	face.	He	jumped	back	into	the	alley,	spun,	and
sprinted.
Above	him	Crokus	heard	the	flapping	of	a	cloak.	A	burning	spasm	in	his	left
hip	made	him	stumble.	Another	quarrel	whipped	past	his	shoulder	and	skidded	on
the	 cobblestones.	 The	 spasm	 passed	 as	 quickly	 as	 it	 had	 come	 and	 he	 staggered
on.	Ahead,	at	the	alley-mouth,	was	the	lit	doorway	of	a	tenement.	An	old	woman
sat	on	the	stone	steps	puffing	on	a	pipe.	Her	eyes	glittered	as	she	watched	the	thief
approach.	 As	 Crokus	 bounded	 past	 her	 and	 up	 the	 steps	 she	 rapped	 the	 pipe
against	the	sole	of	her	shoe.	Sparks	rained	on	to	the	cobbles.
Crokus	 pushed	 open	 the	 door	 and	 plunged	 inside.	 He	 paused.	 A	 narrow,
poorly	 lit	 hallway	 was	 before	 him,	 a	 staircase	 crowded	 with	 children	 at	 the	 far
end.	His	eyes	on	the	stairs,	he	jogged	up	the	hall.	From	the	curtained	doorways	on


either	side	came	a	cacophony	of	noise:	voices	raised	in	argument,	wailing	babies,
the	clatter	of	cookware.
“Don't	you	people	ever	sleep?”	Crokus	shouted	as	he	ran.	The	children	on	the
stairs	scampered	out	of	his	way	and	he	took	the	warped	steps	two	at	a	time.	On	the
top	floor	he	stopped	at	a	door	a	third	of	the	way	down	the	hall,	this	one	solid	oak.
He	pushed	it	open	and	entered	the	room	within.
An	 old	 man	 sitting	 behind	 a	 massive	 desk	 looked	 up	 briefly	 from	 his	 work,
then	 resumed	 his	 frantic	 scrawl	 on	 a	 sheet	 of	 crinkled	 parchment.	 “Evening,
Crokus,”	he	said	distractedly.
“And	to	you,	Uncle,”	Crokus	gasped.
On	 Uncle	 Mammot's	 shoulder	 squatted	 a	 small	 winged	 monkey,	 whose
glittering,	 half-mad	 gaze	 followed	 the	 young	 thief's	 dart	 across	 the	 room	 to	 the
window	opposite	the	door.	Flinging	open	the	shutters	Crokus	climbed	up	onto	the
sill.	 Below	 was	 a	 squalid,	 overgrown	 garden	 mostly	 lost	 in	 shadows.	 A	 lone,
gnarled	tree	rose	upward.	He	eyed	the	branches	across	from	him,	then	gripped	the
window-frame	 and	 leaned	 back.	 He	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath,	 then	 propelled	 himself
forward.
As	he	passed	through	the	intervening	gap	he	heard	a	surprised	grunt	come	from
directly	 above,	 then	 a	 wild	 scratching	 against	 stone.	 An	 instant	 later	 someone
crashed	 down	 into	 the	 garden	 below.	 Cats	 shrieked	 and	 a	 voice	 groaned	 out	 a
single	pained	curse.
Crokus	clung	to	a	bowing	branch.	He	timed	each	bounce	of	the	resilient	wood
then	 extended	 his	 legs	 as	 the	 branch	 pulled	 him	 up.	 His	 moccasins	 landed	 on	 a
window-sill	and	held.	Grunting,	he	swung	himself	onto	it	and	let	go	of	the	branch.
He	 punched	 at	 the	 wooden	 shutters.	 They	 sprang	 inward	 and	 Crokus	 followed
head	first,	down	onto	the	floor	and	rolling	to	his	feet.
He	 heard	 movement	 from	 another	 room	 in	 the	 apartment.	 Scrambling	 to	 his
feet,	he	bolted	for	the	hallway	door,	flung	it	open	and	slipped	out	just	as	a	hoarse
voice	shouted	a	curse	behind	him.	Crokus	ran	to	the	far	end	of	the	passage,	where
a	ladder	led	to	a	hatch	on	the	ceiling.
Soon	he	was	on	the	roof.	He	crouched	in	the	darkness	and	tried	to	catch	his
breath.	 The	 burning	 sensation	 returned	 to	 his	 hip.	 He	 must	 have	 damaged
something	 in	 his	 fall	 from	 the	 guidewire.	 He	 reached	 down	 to	 massage	 the	 spot
and	found	his	fingers	pressing	something	hard,	round,	and	hot.	The	coin!	 Crokus
reached	for	it.
Just	then	he	heard	a	sudden	whistling	sound,	and	chips	of	stone	spattered	him.
Ducking,	he	saw	a	quarrel,	its	shaft	split	by	the	impact,	bounce	once	on	the	rooftop


then	plummet	over	the	edge,	spinning	wildly.	A	soft	moan	escaped	his	lips	and	he
scrambled	across	the	roof	to	the	far	side.	Without	pause	he	jumped.	Ten	feet	down
was	an	awning,	sagged	and	stretched	out	of	shape,	on	which	he	landed.	The	iron
spars	framing	the	canvas	dipped	but	held.	From	there	it	was	a	quick	climb	down
to	the	street.
Crokus	jogged	to	the	corner,	where	an	old	building	squatted	with	yellow	light
bleeding	through	dirty	windows.	A	wooden	sign	hung	above	the	door,	bearing	the
faded	image	of	a	bird	dead	on	its	back,	feet	jutting	upward.	The	thief	bounded	up
the	steps	and	pushed	open	the	door.
A	 rush	 of	 light	 and	 noise	 washed	 over	 him	 like	 balm.	 He	 slammed	 the	 door
behind	him	and	leaned	against	it.	He	closed	his	eyes,	pulling	the	disguising	cloth
from	his	face	and	head,	revealing	shoulder-length	black	hair—now	dripping	with
sweat—and	regular	features	surrounding	light	blue	eyes.
As	he	reached	up	to	wipe	his	brow	a	mug	was	pushed	into	his	hand.	Crokus
opened	 his	 eyes	 to	 see	 Sulty	 hurry	 by,	 carrying	 on	 one	 hand	 a	 tray	 loaded	 with
pewter	tankards.	She	glanced	at	him	over	her	shoulder	and	grinned.	“Rough	night,
Crokus?”
He	stared	at	her,	then	said,	“No,	nothing	special.”	He	raised	the	mug	to	his	lips
and	drank	deep.
______
Across	 the	 street	 from	 the	 ramshackle	 Phoenix	 Inn,	 a	 hunter	 stood	 at	 the	 roof's
edge	and	studied	the	door	through	which	the	thief	had	just	passed.	The	crossbow
lay	cradled	in	its	arms.
The	second	hunter	arrived,	sheathing	two	long-knives	as	it	came	alongside	the
first.
“What	happened	to	you?”	the	first	hunter	asked	quietly,	in	its	native	tongue.
“Had	an	argument	with	a	cat.”
The	two	were	silent	for	a	moment,	then	the	first	hunter	sighed	worriedly.	“All
in	all,	too	awry	to	be	natural.”
The	other	agreed.	“You	felt	the	parting	too,	then.”
“An	Ascendant	.	.	.	meddled.	Too	cautious	to	show	itself	fully,	however.”
“Unfortunate.	It's	been	years	since	I	last	killed	an	Ascendant.”
They	began	to	check	their	weapons.	The	first	hunter	loaded	the	crossbow	and
slipped	four	extra	quarrels	in	its	belt.	The	second	hunter	removed	each	long-knife


and	cleaned	it	carefully	of	sweat	and	grime.
They	 heard	 someone	 approach	 from	 behind,	 and	 turned	 to	 see	 their
commander.
“He's	in	the	inn,”	the	second	hunter	said.
“We'll	leave	no	witnesses	to	this	secret	war	with	the	Guild,”	the	first	added.
The	commander	glanced	at	the	door	of	the	Phoenix	Inn.	Then,	to	the	hunters,
she	said,	“No.	The	wagging	tongue	of	a	witness	might	be	useful	to	our	efforts.”
“The	runt	had	help,”	the	first	hunter	said	meaningfully.
The	commander	shook	her	head.	“We	return	to	the	fold.”
“Very	well.”
The	two	hunters	put	away	their	weapons.	The	first	glanced	back	at	the	inn	and
asked,	“Who	protected	him,	do	you	think?”
The	second	hunter	snarled.	“Someone	with	a	sense	of	humor.”


Chapter	Six
	

There	is	a	cabal	breathing
deeper	than	the	bellows
drawing	up	the	emerald	fires
beneath	rain-glistened	cobbles,
while	you	may	hear	the	groaning
from	the	caverns	below,
the	whisper	of	sorcery
is	less	than	the	dying	sigh
of	a	thief	stumbling	unwilling
into	Darujhistan's	secret	web	.	.	.
CABAL	(FRAGMENT)
PUDDLE	(B.1122?)


	
The	splayed	tip	of	her	right	wing	brushed	the	scarred	black	rock	as	Crone	climbed
the	whistling	updrafts	of	Moon's	Spawn.	From	the	pocked	caves	and	starlit	ledges
her	restless	brothers	and	sisters	called	out	to	her	as	she	passed.	“Do	we	fly?”	they
asked.	But	Crone	made	no	reply.	Her	glittering	black	eyes	were	fixed	on	heaven's
vault.	 Her	 enormous	 wings	 beat	 a	 thundering	 refrain	 of	 taut,	 unrelenting	 power.
She	had	no	time	for	the	nervous	cackling	of	the	younglings;	no	time	for	answering
their	simplistic	needs	with	the	wisdom	her	thousands	of	years	of	life	had	earned
her.
This	night,	Crone	flew	for	her	lord.
As	she	rose	above	the	shattered	peaks	of	the	Moon's	crest	a	high	wind	swept
her	wings,	rasping	dry	and	cold	along	her	oily	feathers.	Around	her,	thin	wisps	of
shredded	smoke	rode	the	currents	of	night	air	like	lost	spirits.	Crone	circled	once,
her	 sharp	 gaze	 catching	 the	 glimmer	 of	 the	 few	 remaining	 fires	 among	 the	 crags
below,	 then	 she	 dipped	 a	 wing	 and	 sailed	 out	 on	 the	 wind's	 tide	 as	 it	 rolled
northward	to	Lake	Azur.
The	 featureless	 expanse	 of	 the	 Dwelling	 Plain	 was	 beneath	 her,	 the	 grass
sweeping	 in	 gray	 waves	 unbroken	 by	 house	 or	 hill.	 Directly	 ahead	 lay	 the
glittering	jeweled	cloak	that	was	Darujhistan,	casting	into	the	sky	a	sapphire	glow.
As	she	neared	the	city	her	unnaturally	acute	vision	detected,	here	and	there	among
the	estates	crowding	the	upper	tier,	the	aquamarine	emanation	of	sorcery.
Crone	cackled	aloud.	Magic	was	ambrosia	to	Great	Ravens.	They	were	drawn
to	it	by	the	scent	of	blood	and	power,	and	within	its	aura	their	lifespans	lengthened
into	centuries.	Its	musk	had	other	effects	as	well.	Crone	cackled	again.	Her	gaze
fixed	 on	 one	 particular	 estate,	 around	 which	 glowed	 a	 profusion	 of	 protective
sorcery.	 Her	 lord	 had	 imparted	 to	 her	 a	 thorough	 description	 of	 the	 magical
signature	she	must	find,	and	now	she	had	found	it.	Crooking	her	wings,	she	sank
gracefully	toward	the	estate.
Inland	 from	 Gadrobi	 District's	 harbor	 the	 land	 rose	 in	 four	 tiers	 climbing
eastward.	 Ramped	 cobblestone	 streets,	 worn	 to	 a	 polished	 mosaic,	 marked
Gadrobi	District's	Trade	Streets,	five	in	all,	which	were	the	only	routes	through
Marsh	 District	 and	 into	 the	 next	 tier,	 Lakefront	 District.	 Beyond	 Lakefront's
crooked	 aisles	 twelve	 wooden	 gates	 opened	 onto	 Daru	 District,	 and	 from	 Daru
another	 twelve	 gates—these	 ones	 manned	 by	 the	 City	 Watch	 and	 barred	 by	 iron


portcullis—connected	the	lower	and	upper	cities.
On	the	fourth	and	highest	tier	brooded	the	estates	of	Darujhistan's	nobility	as
well	as	its	publicly	known	sorcerers.	At	the	intersection	of	Old	King's	Walk	and
View	Street	rose	a	flat-topped	hill	on	which	sat	Majesty	Hall,	where	each	day	the
Council	 gathered.	 A	 narrow	 park	 encircled	 the	 hill,	 with	 sand-strewn	 pathways
winding	among	centuries-old	acacias.	At	the	park's	entrance,	near	High	Gallows
Hill,	 stood	 a	 massive	 rough-hewn	 stone	 gate,	 the	 last-surviving	 remnant	 of	 the
castle	that	once	commanded	Majesty	Hill.
The	 days	 of	 kings	 had	 long	 since	 ended	 in	 Darujhistan.	 The	 gate,	 known	 as
Despot's	Barbican,	stood	stark	and	unadorned,	its	lattice	of	cracks	a	fading	script
of	past	tyranny.
In	 the	 shadow	 of	 the	 Barbican's	 single	 massive	 lintel	 stone	 stood	 two	 men.
One,	 his	 shoulder	 against	 the	 pitted	 rock,	 wore	 a	 ringed	 hauberk	 and	 a	 boiled
leather	 cap	 bearing	 the	 City	 Watch	 insignia.	 Scabbarded	 to	 his	 belt	 was	 a	 plain
shortsword,	its	grip	of	wrapped	leather	worn	smooth.	A	pike	leaned	against	one
shoulder.	He	was	nearing	the	end	of	his	midnight	guard	duty	and	patiently	awaited
the	arrival	of	the	man	who	would	officially	relieve	him.	The	guard's	eyes	flicked
on	occasion	to	the	second	man,	with	whom	he	had	shared	this	place	many	another
night	over	the	past	year.	The	glances	he	cast	at	the	well-dressed	gentleman	were
surreptitious,	empty	of	expression.
As	with	every	other	time	Councilman	Turban	Orr	came	to	the	gate	at	this	dead
hour	of	night,	the	nobleman	had	scarcely	deemed	the	guard	worthy	of	notice;	nor
had	he	ever	given	an	indication	that	he	recognized	the	guard	as	being	the	same	man
each	time.
Turban	 Orr	 seemed	 a	 man	 short	 on	 patience,	 forever	 pacing	 and	 fretting,
pausing	 every	 now	 and	 then	 to	 adjust	 his	 jeweled	 burgundy	 cloak.	 The
councilman's	polished	boots	clicked	as	he	paced,	throwing	a	soft	echo	under	the
Barbican.	 From	 the	 shadow	 the	 guard's	 gaze	 caught	 Orr's	 gloved	 hand	 where	 it
rested	on	the	silver	pommel	of	a	duelling	sword,	noting	the	index	finger	tapping	in
time	with	the	boot	clicks.
At	the	early	part	of	his	watch,	long	before	the	arrival	of	the	councilman,	the
guard	would	walk	slowly	around	the	Barbican,	reaching	out	on	occasion	to	touch
the	ancient,	grim	stonework.	Six	years'	worth	of	night	watch	at	this	gate	had	bred	a
close	relationship	between	the	man	and	the	rough-cut	basalt:	he	knew	every	crack,
every	chisel	scar;	he	knew	where	the	fittings	had	weakened,	where	time	and	the
elements	had	squeezed	mortar	from	between	the	stones	then	gnawed	it	to	dust.	And
he	 also	 knew	 that	 its	 apparent	 weaknesses	 were	 but	 a	 deception.	 The	 Barbican,
and	all	it	stood	for,	patiently	waited	still,	a	specter	of	the	past,	hungry	to	be	born


yet	again.
And	 that,	 the	 guard	 had	 long	 ago	 vowed,	 he	 would	 never	 let	 it	 do—if	 such
things	 were	 within	 his	 power.	 Despot's	 Barbican	 provided	 the	 man	 with	 every
reason	he	needed	to	be	what	he	was:	Circle	Breaker,	a	spy.
Both	he	and	the	councilman	awaited	the	arrival	of	the	other;	the	one	who	never
failed	 to	 appear.	 Turban	 Orr	 would	 growl	 his	 usual	 complaint,	 disgusted	 with
tardiness;	then	he	would	grasp	the	other's	arm	and	they	would	walk	side	by	side
beneath	the	Barbican's	brooding	lintel	stone.	And,	with	eyes	long	accustomed	to
darkness,	the	guard	would	mark	the	other's	face,	burning	it	indelibly	in	the	superb
memory	hidden	behind	expressionless,	unmemorable	features.
By	 the	 time	 the	 two	 Council	 members	 returned	 from	 their	 walk,	 the	 guard
would	have	been	relieved	and	well	on	his	way	to	delivering	a	message	according
to	 his	 master's	 instructions.	 If	 Circle	 Breaker's	 luck	 held,	 he	 might	 survive	 the
civil	 war	 into	 which	 Darujhistan,	 he	 felt,	 was	 about	 to	 plunge—and	 never	 mind
the	Malazan	nemesis.	One	nightmare	at	a	time,	he	often	told	himself,	particularly
on	 nights	 like	 these,	 when	 Despot's	 Barbican	 seemed	 to	 breathe	 its	 promise	 of
resurrection	with	mocking	certainty.
“As	 this	 may	 be	 in	 your	 interest,”	 High	 Alchemist	 Baruk	 read	 aloud	 from	 the
parchment	 note	 in	 his	 plump	 hands.	 Always	 the	 same	 opening	 line,	 hinting	 of
disquieting	knowledge.	An	hour	earlier	his	servant	Roald	had	delivered	the	note,
which,	like	all	the	others	that	had	come	to	him	over	the	past	year,	had	been	found
tucked	into	one	of	the	ornamental	murder	holes	in	the	estate's	rear	postern	gate.
Recognizing	 the	 pattern,	 Baruk	 had	 immediately	 read	 the	 missive	 then
dispatched	his	 messengers	out	 into	the	 city.	Such	news	 demanded	action,	and	he
was	one	of	the	few	secret	powers	within	Darujhistan	capable	of	dealing	with	it.
Now	he	sat	in	a	plush	chair	in	his	study,	musing.	His	deceptively	sleepy	gaze
flicked	down	again	to	the	words	on	the	parchment.	“Councilman	Turban	Orr	walks
in	 the	 garden	with	Councilman	Feder.	I	 remain	known	only	as	Circle	 Breaker,	a
servant	 of	 the	 Eel,	 whose	 interests	 continue	 to	 coincide	 with	 your	 own.”	 Once
again	Baruk	felt	temptation.	With	his	talents	it	would	be	a	small	thing	to	discover
the	writer's	identity—though	not	the	Eel's,	of	course:	that	was	an	identity	sought
by	many,	all	to	no	avail—but,	as	always,	something	held	him	back.
He	 shifted	 his	 bulk	 on	 the	 chair	 and	 sighed.	 “Very	 well,	 Circle	 Breaker,	 I'll
continue	 to	 honor	 you,	 though	 clearly	 you	 know	 more	 of	 me	 than	 I	 of	 you,	 and
fortunate	it	is	indeed	that	your	master's	interests	coincide	with	my	own.	Still.”	He
frowned,	 thinking	 about	 the	 Eel,	 about	 the	 man's—or	 woman's—undisclosed


interests.	He	knew	enough	to	recognize	that	too	many	forces	had	come	into	play—
a	 gathering	 of	 Ascendant	 powers	 was	 a	 fell	 thing.	 To	 continue	 to	 step	 unseen	 in
defense	of	the	city	was	becoming	increasingly	difficult.	So,	the	question	came	yet
again:	Was	this	Eel	using	him	as	well?
Oddly	 enough,	 he	 did	 not	 feel	 too	 concerned	 about	 this	 possibility.	 So	 much
vital	information	had	been	passed	into	his	hands	already.
He	 folded	 the	 parchment	 carefully	 and	 muttered	 a	 simple	 cantrip.	 The	 note
vanished	with	a	small	plop	of	displaced	air,	joining	the	others	in	a	safe	place.
Baruk	closed	his	eyes.	Behind	him	the	broad	window	shutters	rattled	in	a	gust
of	 wind,	 then	 settled	 again.	 A	 moment	 later	 there	 came	 a	 sharp	 rap	 against	 the
smoky	glass.	Baruk	sat	upright,	his	eyes	startled	open.	A	second	rap,	louder	than
the	first,	brought	him	round	with	a	swift	alacrity	surprising	for	one	of	his	girth.	On
his	feet,	he	faced	the	window.	Something	crouched	on	the	ledge,	visible	through
the	shutters	only	as	a	bulky	black	shape.
Baruk	 frowned.	 Impossible.	 Nothing	 could	 penetrate	 his	 magic	 barriers
undetected.	The	alchemist	gestured	with	one	hand,	and	the	shutters	sprang	open.
Behind	the	glass	waited	a	Great	Raven.	Its	head	snapped	to	view	Baruk	with	one
eye,	then	the	other.	It	pushed	boldly	against	the	thin	glass	with	its	massive,	ridged
chest.	The	pane	bulged,	then	shattered.
His	Warren	fully	open,	Baruk	raised	both	hands,	a	savage	spell	on	his	lips.
“Don't	waste	your	breath!”	the	Raven	 rasped,	swelling	its	chest	and	ruffling
its	mangy	feathers	to	rid	itself	of	glass	shards.	It	cocked	its	head.	“You've	called
your	guards,”	it	observed.	“No	need,	Wizard.”	A	single	hop	brought	the	enormous
bird	onto	the	floor.	“I	bring	words	you	will	value.	Have	you	anything	to	eat?”
Baruk	studied	the	creature.	“I'm	not	in	the	habit	of	inviting	Great	Ravens	into
my	home,”	he	said.	“You	are	no	disguised	demon,	either.”
“Of	 course	 not.	 I'm	 named	 Crone.”	 Her	 head	 bobbed	 mockingly.	 “At	 your
pleasure,	Lord.”
Baruk	hesitated,	considering.	After	a	moment	he	sighed	and	said,	“Very	well.
I've	returned	my	guards	to	their	posts.	My	servant	Roald	comes	with	the	leavings
of	supper,	if	that's	agreeable	to	you.”
“Excellent!”	 Crone	 waddled	 across	 the	 floor	 to	 settle	 on	 the	 rug	 before	 the
fireplace.	“There,	Lord.	Now,	a	calming	crystal	of	wine,	don't	you	think?”
“Who	has	sent	you,	Crone?”	Baruk	asked,	walking	over	to	the	decanter	on	his
desk.	Normally	he	did	not	drink	after	sunset,	for	night	was	when	he	worked,	but	he


had	to	acknowledge	Crone's	perceptiveness.	A	calming	balm	was	exactly	what	he
needed.
The	 Great	 Raven	 hesitated	 slightly	 before	 answering,	 “The	 Lord	 of	 Moon's
Spawn.”
Baruk	paused	in	the	filling	of	his	glass.	“I	see,”	he	said	quietly,	struggling	to
control	 his	 surging	 heart.	 He	 set	 the	 decanter	 down	 slowly	 and,	 with	 great
concentration,	raised	the	goblet	to	his	lips.	The	liquid	was	cool	on	his	tongue,	and
its	 passage	 down	 his	 throat	 indeed	 calmed	 him.	 “Well,	 then,”	 he	 said,	 turning,
“what	would	your	lord	have	of	a	peaceful	alchemist?”
Crone's	chipped	beak	opened	in	what	Baruk	realized	was	silent	laughter.	The
bird	 fixed	 a	 single	 glittering	 eye	 on	 him.	 “Your	 answer	 rode	 the	 very	 breath	 of
your	words,	Lord.	Peace.	My	lord	wishes	to	speak	with	you.	He	wishes	to	come
here,	this	very	night.	Within	the	hour.”
“And	you're	to	await	my	answer.”
“Only	if	you	decide	quickly,	Lord.	I	have	things	to	do,	after	all.	I'm	more	than
a	 simple	 message-bearer.	 Those	 who	 know	 wisdom	 when	 they	 hear	 it	 hold	 me
dear.	 I	 am	 Crone,	 eldest	 of	 the	 Moon's	 Great	 Ravens,	 whose	 eyes	 have	 looked
upon	a	hundred	thousand	years	of	human	folly.	Hence	my	tattered	coat	and	broken
beak	as	evidence	of	your	indiscriminate	destruction.	I	am	but	a	winged	witness	to
your	eternal	madness.”
In	quiet	mockery	Baruk	said,	“More	than	just	a	witness.	It's	well	known	how
you	and	your	kind	feasted	on	the	plain	outside	Pale's	walls.”
“Yet	we	were	not	the	first	to	feast	on	flesh	and	blood,	Lord,	lest	you	forget.”
Baruk	turned	away.	“Far	be	it	for	me	to	defend	my	species,”	he	muttered,	more
to	himself	than	to	Crone,	whose	words	had	stung	him.	His	eyes	fell	on	the	shards
of	 glass	 littering	 the	 floor.	 He	 voiced	 a	 mending	 spell	 and	 watched	 as	 they
reassembled.	“I	will	speak	with	your	lord,	Crone.”	He	nodded	as	the	glass	pane
rose	from	the	floor	and	returned	to	the	window-frame.	“Tell	me,	will	he	as	easily
disdain	my	wards	as	you	did?”
“My	lord	is	possessed	of	honor	and	courtesy,”	Crone	replied	ambiguously.	“I
shall	call	him,	then?”
“Do	so,”	Baruk	said,	sipping	his	wine.	“An	avenue	will	be	provided	for	his
passage.”
There	came	a	knock	at	the	door.
“Yes?”
Roald	stepped	inside.	“Someone	is	at	the	gate	wishing	to	speak	with	you,”	the


white-haired	servant	said,	setting	down	a	plate	heaped	with	roast	pork.
Baruk	glanced	at	Crone	and	raised	an	eyebrow.
The	 bird	 ruffled	 her	 feathers.	 “Your	 guest	 is	 mundane,	 a	 restless	 personage
whose	 thoughts	 are	 thick	 with	 greed	 and	 treachery.	 A	 demon	 crouches	 on	 his
shoulder,	named	Ambition.”
“His	name,	Roald?”	Baruk	asked.
The	servant	hesitated,	his	 soft	eyes	flicked	uneasily	at	the	bird	now	ambling
toward	the	food.
Baruk	laughed.	“My	wise	guest's	counsel	indicates	she	well	knows	the	man's
name.	Speak	on,	Roald.”
“Councilman	Turban	Orr.”
“I	would	remain	for	this,”	Crone	said.	“If	you	would	seek	my	counsel.”
“Please	do,	and,	yes,	I	would,”	the	alchemist	replied.
“I	am	no	more	than	a	pet	dog,”	the	Great	Raven	crooned	slyly,	anticipating	his
next	question.	“To	the	councilman's	eyes,	that	is.	My	words	a	beast's	whimper	to
his	ears.”	She	speared	a	piece	of	meat	and	swallowed	it	quickly.
Baruk	found	himself	beginning	to	like	this	mangy	old	witch	of	a	bird.	“Bring
the	councilman	to	us,	Roald.”
The	servant	departed.
Archaic	torches	lit	an	estate's	high-walled	garden	with	a	flickering	light	that	threw
wavering	shadows	across	the	pavestones.	As	a	nightwind	swept	in	from	the	lake,
rustling	leaves,	the	shadows	danced	like	imps.	On	the	second	floor	of	the	building
was	a	balcony	overlooking	the	garden.	Behind	the	curtained	window,	two	figures
moved.
Rallick	Nom	lay	prone	on	the	garden	wall	in	a	niche	of	darkness	beneath	the
estate's	gabled	cornice.	He	studied	the	feminine	silhouette	with	the	patience	of	a
snake.	It	was	the	fifth	night	in	a	row	that	he	had	occupied	his	hidden	vantage-point.
The	 Lady	 Simtal's	 lovers	 numbered	 as	 many,	 but	 he	 had	 identified	 two	 in
particular	worthy	of	attention.	Both	were	city	councilmen.
The	 glass	 door	 opened	 and	 a	 figure	 walked	 out	 on	 to	 the	 balcony.	 Rallick
smiled	 as	 he	 recognized	 Councilman	 Lim.	 The	 assassin	 shifted	 position	 slightly,
slipping	 one	 gloved	 hand	 under	 the	 stock	 of	 his	 crossbow,	 reaching	 up	 with	 the
other	 to	 swing	 back	 the	 oiled	 crank.	 His	 eyes	 on	 the	 man	 leaning	 against	 the
balcony	 railing	 across	 from	 him,	 Rallick	 carefully	 inserted	 a	 quarrel.	 A	 glance
down	at	the	bolt's	iron	head	reassured	him.	The	poison	glittered	wetly	along	the


razor-sharp	edges.	Returning	his	attention	to	the	balcony	he	saw	that	Lady	Simtal
had	joined	Lim.
No	wonder	there's	no	shortage	of	lovers	for	that	one,	Rallick	thought,	his	eyes
narrowing	in	study.	Her	black	hair,	now	unpinned,	flowed	down	sleek	and	shiny	to
the	small	of	her	back.	She	wore	a	gauze-thin	nightdress,	and	with	the	lamps	of	the
room	behind	her,	her	body's	round	curves	were	clearly	visible.
As	they	spoke	their	voices	carried	to	where	Rallick	lay	hidden.
“Why	 the	 alchemist?”	 Lady	 Simtal	 was	 asking,	 evidently	 resuming	 a
conversation	 begun	 inside.	 “A	 fat	 old	 man	 smelling	 of	 sulfur	 and	 brimstone.
Hardly	suggestive	of	political	power.	Not	even	a	council	member,	is	he?”
Lim	laughed	softly.	“Your	naïveté	is	a	charm,	Lady,	a	charm.”
Simtal	pulled	back	from	the	railing	and	crossed	her	arms.	“Educate	me,	then.”
Her	words	came	sharp,	tightly	bridled.
Lim	shrugged.	“We	have	naught	but	suspicions,	Lady.	But	it	is	the	wise	wolf
that	follows	every	spoor,	no	matter	how	slight.	The	alchemist	would	have	people
think	 as	 you	 do.	 A	 doddering	 old	 fool.”	 Lim	 paused,	 as	 if	 in	 thought,	 perhaps
weighing	how	much	he	should	reveal.	“We	have	sources,”	he	continued	cautiously,
“among	the	magery.	They	inform	us	of	one	certain	fact	heavy	with	implications.	A
good	many	of	the	wizards	in	the	city	fear	the	alchemist,	and	they	name	him	by	a
title—that	 alone	 suggests	 a	 secret	 cabal	 of	 some	 sort.	 A	 gathering	 of	 sorcerers,
Lady,	is	a	fell	thing.”
Lady	 Simtal	 had	 returned	 to	 the	 councilman's	 side.	 Both	 now	 leaned	 on	 the
railing	studying	the	dark	garden	below.	The	woman	was	silent	for	a	time,	then	she
said,	“He	has	Council	ties?”
“If	he	has,	the	evidence	is	buried	deep.”	Lim	flashed	a	grin.	“And	if	he	hasn't,
then	that	might	change—this	very	night.”
Politics,	 Rallick	 snarled	 silently.	 And	 power.	 The	 bitch	 spreads	 her	 legs	 to
the	Council,	offering	a	vice	few	can	ignore.	Rallick's	hands	twitched.	He	would
kill	 this	 night.	 Not	 a	 contract:	 the	 Guild	 had	 no	 part	 in	 this.	 The	 vendetta	 was
personal.	 She	 was	 gathering	 power	 around	 her,	 insulating	 herself,	 and	 Rallick
thought	he	understood	why.	The	ghosts	of	betrayal	would	not	leave	her	alone.
Patience,	he	reminded	himself,	as	he	took	aim.	For	the	last	two	years	the	life
of	Lady	Simtal	had	been	one	of	indolence,	the	riches	she	had	stolen	had	served	to
whet	her	every	greed,	and	the	prestige	as	sole	owner	of	the	estate	had	done	much
to	grease	the	hinges	of	her	bedroom	door.	The	crime	she'd	committed	had	not	been
against	Rallick	but,	unlike	her	victim,	Rallick	had	no	pride	to	halt	vengeance.
Patience,	Rallick	repeated,	his	lips	moving	to	the	word	as	he	sighted	down	the


crossbow's	 length.	 A	 quality	 defined	 by	 its	 reward,	 and	 that	 reward	 was	 but
moments	away.
______
“A	 fine-looking	 hound,”	 Councilman	 Turban	 Orr	 said,	 as	 he	 handed	 Roald	 his
cloak.
In	the	room	Baruk	was	the	only	one	capable	of	discerning	the	aura	of	illusion
surrounding	the	black	hunting	dog	lying	curled	on	the	rug	before	the	fireplace.	The
alchemist	smiled	and	gestured	to	a	chair.	“Please	be	seated,	Councilman.”
“I	 apologize	 for	 disturbing	 you	 so	 late	 at	 night,”	 Orr	 said,	 as	 he	 lowered
himself	into	the	plush	chair.	Baruk	sat	down	opposite	him,	Crone	between	them.
“It's	said,”	Orr	continued,	“that	alchemy	flowers	best	in	deep	darkness.”
“Hence	you	gambled	on	my	being	awake,”	Baruk	said.	“A	well-placed	wager,
Councilman.	Now,	what	would	you	have	of	me?”
Orr	reached	down	to	pat	Crone's	head.
Baruk	looked	away	to	keep	himself	from	laughing.
“The	Council	votes	in	two	days,”	Orr	said.	“With	a	proclamation	of	neutrality
such	as	we	seek,	war	with	the	Malazan	Empire	will	be	averted—so	we	believe,
but	 there	 are	 those	 in	 the	 Council	 who	 do	 not.	 Pride	 has	 made	 them	 belligerent,
unreasonable.”
“As	it	does	us	all,”	murmured	Baruk.
Orr	leaned	forward.	“The	support	of	Darujhistan's	sorcerers	would	do	much
to	favor	our	cause,”	he	said.
“Careful,”	Crone	rumbled.	“This	man	now	hunts	in	earnest.”
Orr	glanced	down	at	the	dog.
“A	bad	leg,”	Baruk	said.	“Pay	it	no	mind.”	The	alchemist	leaned	back	in	his
chair	 and	 plucked	 at	 a	 loose	 thread	 on	 his	 robe.	 “I	 admit	 to	 some	 confusion,
Councilman.	You	appear	to	be	assuming	some	things	I	cannot	countenance.”	Baruk
spread	his	hands	and	met	Orr's	eyes.	“Darujhistan's	sorcerers,	for	one.	You	could
travel	the	Ten	Worlds	and	not	find	a	more	spiteful,	rabid	collection	of	humanity.
Oh,	I	don't	suggest	that	they	are	all	like	this—there	are	those	whose	only	interest,
indeed,	obsession,	lies	in	the	pursuit	of	their	craft.	Their	noses	have	been	buried
in	books	so	long	they	could	not	even	tell	you	what	century	this	is.	The	others	find
bickering	their	only	true	pleasure	in	life.”
A	 smile	 had	 come	 to	 Orr's	 thin	 lips	 as	 Baruk	 spoke.	 “But,”	 he	 said	 with	 a


cunning	gleam	in	his	dark	eyes,	“there	is	one	thing	they	all	acknowledge.”
“Oh?	What	is	that,	Councilman?”
“Power.	 We're	 all	 aware	 of	 your	 eminence	 among	 the	 city's	 mages,	 Baruk.
Your	word	alone	would	bring	others.”
“I'm	flattered	that	you	would	think	so,”	Baruk	replied.	“Unfortunately,	therein
lies	 your	 second	 erroneous	 assumption.	 Even	 if	 I	 had	 such	 influence	 as	 you
suggest,”	Crone	 snorted	and	 Baruk	flicked	a	savage	glare	at	her,	then	continued,
“which	 I	 do	 not,	 for	 what	 possible	 reason	 would	 I	 support	 such	 a	 willfully
ignorant	 position	 as	 yours?	 A	 proclamation	 of	 neutrality?	 Might	 as	 well	 whistle
against	the	wind,	Councilman.	What	purpose	would	it	serve?”
Orr's	 smile	 had	 tightened.	 “Surely,	 Lord,”	 he	 purred,	 “you	 have	 no	 wish	 to
share	the	same	fate	as	the	wizards	of	Pale?”
Baruk	frowned.	“What	do	you	mean?”
“Assassinated	 by	 an	 Empire	 Claw.	 Moon's	 Spawn	 was	 entirely	 on	 its	 own
against	the	Empire.”
“Your	information	contradicts	mine,”	Baruk	said	stiffly,	then	cursed	himself.
“Lean	not	too	heavily	on	this	one,”	Crone	said	smugly.	“You	are	both	wrong.”
Orr's	eyebrows	had	risen	at	Baruk's	words.	“Indeed?	Perhaps	it	might	profit
us	both	to	share	our	information?”
“Unlikely,”	 Baruk	 said.	 “Throwing	 the	 threat	 of	 the	 Empire	 at	 me	 implies
what?	That	if	the	proclamation	is	voted	down,	the	city's	sorcerers	will	all	die	at
the	 Empire's	 hand.	 But	 if	 it	 wins,	 you're	 free	 to	 justify	 opening	 the	 gates	 to	 the
Malazans	in	peaceful	coexistence,	and	in	such	a	scenario	the	city's	magery	lives
on.”
“Astute,	Lord,”	Crone	said.
Baruk	 studied	 the	 anger	 now	 visible	 beneath	 Orr's	 expression.	 “Neutrality?
How	you've	managed	to	twist	that	word.	Your	proclamation	serves	the	first	step
toward	 total	 annexation,	 Councilman.	 Fortunate	 for	 you	 that	 I	 cast	 no	 weight,	 no
vote,	no	influence.”	Baruk	rose.	“Roald	will	see	you	out.”
Turban	 Orr	 also	 rose.	 “You've	 made	 a	 grave	 error,”	 he	 said.	 “The
proclamation's	wording	is	not	yet	complete.	It	seems	we	would	do	well	to	remove
any	consideration	regarding	Darujhistan's	magery.”
“Too	bold,”	Crone	observed.	“Prod	him	and	see	what	more	comes	forth.”
Baruk	strode	toward	the	window.	“One	may	only	hope,”	he	said	dryly	over	a
shoulder,	“that	your	vote	fails	to	win	the	day.”
Orr's	reply	was	hot	and	rushed.	“By	my	count	we've	reached	a	majority	this


very	night,	Alchemist.	You	could	have	provided	the	honey	on	the	cream.	Alas,”	he
sneered,	“we'll	win	by	only	one	vote.	But	that	will	suffice.”
Baruk	 turned	 to	 face	 Orr	 as	 Roald	 quietly	 entered	 the	 room,	 bearing	 the
councilman's	cloak.
Crone	stretched	out	on	the	rug.	“On	this	night	of	all	nights,”	she	said,	in	mock
dismay,	 “to	 tempt	 myriad	 fates	 with	 such	 words.”	 The	 Great	 Raven	 cocked	 her
head.	Faintly,	as	from	a	great	distance,	she	thought	she	could	hear	the	spinning	of	a
coin.
There	was	a	tremble	of	power,	coming	from	somewhere	within	the	city,	and
Crone	shivered.
Rallick	 Nom	 waited.	 No	 more	 indolence	 for	 the	 Lady	 Simtal.	 The	 end	 of	 such
luxuries	came	this	night.	The	two	figures	moved	away	from	the	railing	and	faced
the	glass	door.	Rallick's	finger	tightened	on	the	trigger.
He	 froze.	 A	 whirring,	 spinning	 sound	 filled	 his	 head,	 whispering	 words	 that
left	him	bathed	in	sudden	sweat.	All	at	once	everything	shifted,	turned	over	in	his
mind.	 His	 plan	 for	 quick	 vengeance	 tumbled	 into	 disarray,	 and	 from	 the	 ruins
arose	something	far	more	.	.	.	elaborate.
All	 this	 had	 come	 between	 breaths.	 Rallick's	 gaze	 cleared.	 Lady	 Simtal	 and
Councilman	Lim	stood	at	the	door.	The	woman	reached	out	to	slide	the	panel	to
one	 side.	 Rallick	 swerved	 his	 crossbow	 an	 inch	 to	 the	 left,	 then	 squeezed	 the
trigger.	The	blackened	iron	rib	of	the	bow	bucked	with	the	release	of	tension.	The
quarrel	sped	outward,	so	fast	as	to	be	invisible	until	it	hit	home.
A	figure	on	the	balcony	spun	with	the	quarrel's	impact,	arms	thrown	out	as	it
stumbled.	The	glass	door	shattered	as	the	figure	fell	through	it.
Lady	Simtal	screamed	in	horror.
Rallick	 waited	 no	 longer.	 Rolling	 onto	 his	 back	 he	 reached	 up	 and	 slid	 the
crossbow	into	the	narrow	ledge	between	the	cornice	and	the	roof.	Then	he	slipped
down	the	outside	of	the	wall,	hung	with	his	hands	briefly	as	shouts	of	alarm	filled
the	estate.	A	moment	later	he	dropped,	spinning	as	he	fell,	and	landed	catlike	in
the	alley.
The	 assassin	 straightened,	 adjusted	 his	 cloak,	 then	 calmly	 walked	 into	 the
side-street,	away	from	the	estate.	No	more	indolence	for	the	Lady	Simtal.	But	no
quick	 demise,	 either.	 A	 very	 powerful,	 very	 well-respected	 member	 of	 the	 City
Council	 had	 just	 been	 assassinated	 on	 her	 balcony.	 Lim's	 wife—now	 widow—
would	 certainly	 have	 something	 to	 say	 about	 this.	 The	 first	 phase,	 Rallick	 told


himself	as	he	strode	through	Osserc's	Gate	and	descended	the	wide	ramp	leading
down	into	the	Daru	District,	just	the	first	phase,	an	opening	gambit,	a	hint	to	Lady
Simtal	 that	 a	 hunt	 has	 begun,	 with	 the	 eminent	 mistress	 herself	 as	 the	 quarry.	 It
won't	be	easy:	the	woman's	no	slouch	in	the	intrigue	game.
“There'll	 be	 more	 blood,”	 he	 whispered	 aloud,	 as	 he	 turned	 a	 corner	 and
approached	the	poorly	lit	entrance	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.	“But	in	the	end	she'll	fall,
and	with	that	fall	an	old	friend	will	rise.”	As	he	neared	the	inn	a	figure	stepped
from	the	shadows	of	an	adjacent	alleyway.	Rallick	stopped.	The	figure	gestured,
then	stepped	back	into	the	darkness.
Rallick	followed.	In	the	alley	he	waited	for	his	eyes	to	adjust.
The	 man	 in	 front	 of	 him	 sighed.	 “Your	 vendetta	 probably	 saved	 your	 life
tonight,”	he	said,	his	tone	bitter.
Rallick	leaned	against	a	wall	and	crossed	his	arms.	“Oh?”
Clan	 Leader	 Ocelot	 stepped	 close,	 his	 narrow,	 pitted	 face	 twisted	 into	 its
habitual	scowl.	“The	night's	been	a	shambles,	Nom.	You've	heard	nothing?”
“No.”
Ocelot's	 thin	 lips	 curled	 into	 a	 humorless	 smile.	 “A	 war	 has	 begun	 on	 the
rooftops.	 Someone	 is	 killing	 us.	 We	 lost	 five	 Roamers	 in	 less	 than	 an	 hour,
meaning	there's	more	than	one	killer	out	there.”
“Undoubtedly,”	Rallick	replied,	fidgeting	as	the	damp	stones	of	the	inn's	wall
reached	 through	 his	 cloak	 and	 touched	 his	 flesh	 with	 chill.	 As	 always,	 Guild
affairs	bored	him.
Ocelot	 continued,	 “We	 lost	 that	 bull	 of	 a	 man,	 Talo	 Krafar,	 and	 a	 Clan
Leader.”	 The	 man	 snapped	 a	 glance	 over	 his	 shoulder	 as	 if	 expecting	 a	 sudden
dagger	to	come	flashing	at	his	own	back.
Despite	his	lack	of	interest	Rallick's	eyebrows	lifted	at	this	last	bit	of	news.
“They	must	be	good.”
“Good?	All	of	our	eyewitnesses	are	dead,	goes	the	sour	joke	this	night.	They
don't	make	mistakes,	the	bastards.”
“Everyone	makes	mistakes,”	Rallick	muttered.	“Has	Vorcan	gone	out?”
Ocelot	shook	his	head.	“Not	yet.	She's	too	busy	recalling	all	the	Clans.”
Rallick	frowned,	curious	in	spite	of	himself.	“Could	this	be	a	challenge	to	her
Guild	mastery?	Perhaps	an	inside	thing—a	rival	faction—”
“You	think	we're	all	fools,	don't	you,	Nom?	That	was	Vorcan's	first	suspicion.
No,	 it's	 not	 internal.	 Whoever's	 killing	 our	 people	 is	 from	 outside	 the	 Guild,
outside	the	city.”


To	 Rallick	 the	 answer	 seemed	 obvious	 suddenly,	 and	 he	 shrugged.	 “An
Empire	Claw,	then.”
Though	 his	 expression	 bore	 reluctance,	 Ocelot	 nevertheless	 acknowledged
agreement.	“Likely,”	he	grated.	“They're	supposed	to	be	the	best,	aren't	they?	But
why	go	after	the	Guild?	You'd	think	they'd	be	taking	out	the	nobles.”
“Are	you	asking	me	to	guess	the	Empire's	intentions,	Ocelot?”
The	Clan	Leader	blinked,	then	his	scowl	deepened.	“I	came	to	warn	you.	And
that's	a	favor,	Nom.	With	you	 wrapped	up	in	 this	vendetta	thing,	the	Guild's	not
obliged	to	spread	its	wing	over	you.	A	favor.”
Rallick	pushed	himself	from	the	wall	and	turned	to	the	alley-mouth.	“A	favor,
Ocelot?”	He	laughed	softly.
“We're	setting	a	trap,”	Ocelot	said,	moving	to	block	Rallick's	way.	He	jerked
his	scarred	chin	at	the	Phoenix	Inn.	“Make	yourself	visible,	and	leave	no	doubt	as
to	what	you	do	for	a	living.”
Rallick's	gaze	on	Ocelot	held	steady,	impassive.	“Bait.”
“Just	do	it.”
Without	 replying,	 Rallick	 left	 the	 alley,	 climbed	 the	 steps,	 and	 entered	 the
Phoenix	Inn.
“There	 is	 a	 shaping	 in	 the	 night,”	 Crone	 said,	 after	 Turban	 Orr	 had	 left.	 The	 air
around	her	shimmered	as	she	assumed	her	true	shape.
Baruk	 strode	 to	 his	 map	 table,	 hands	 clasped	 behind	 his	 back	 to	 still	 the
trembling	 that	 had	 seized	 them.	 “You	 felt	 it	 too,	 then.”	 He	 paused,	 then	 sighed.
“All	in	all,	these	seem	the	busiest	hours.”
“A	convergence	of	power	ever	yields	thus,”	Crone	said,	as	she	rose	to	stretch
her	wings.	“The	black	winds	gather,	Alchemist.	Beware	their	flaying	breath.”
Baruk	grunted.	“While	you	ride	them,	a	harbinger	of	our	tragic	ills.”
Crone	 laughed.	 She	 waddled	 to	 the	 window.	 “My	 master	 comes.	 I've	 other
tasks	before	me.”
Baruk	turned.	“Permit	me,”	he	said,	gesturing.	The	window	swung	clear.
Crone	 flapped	 up	 onto	 the	 sill.	 She	 swiveled	 her	 head	 round	 and	 cocked	 an
eye	at	Baruk.	“I	see	twelve	ships	riding	a	deep	harbor,”	she	said.	“Eleven	stand
tall	in	flames.”
Baruk	stiffened.	He	had	not	anticipated	a	prophecy.	Now	he	was	afraid.	“And
the	twelfth?”	he	asked,	his	voice	barely	a	whisper.


“On	 the	 wind	 a	 hailstorm	 of	 sparks	 fill	 the	 night	 sky.	 I	 see	 them	 spinning,
spinning	 about	 the	 last	 vessel.”	 Crone	 paused.	 “Still	 spinning.”	 Then	 she	 was
gone.
Baruk's	shoulders	slumped.	He	turned	back	to	the	map	on	the	table	and	studied
the	 eleven	 once	 Free	 Cities	 that	 now	 bore	 the	 Empire	 flag.	 Only	 Darujhistan
remained,	 the	 twelfth	 and	 last	 marked	 by	 a	 flag	 that	 was	 not	 burgundy	 and	 gray.
“The	passing	of	freedom,”	he	murmured.
Suddenly	 the	 walls	 around	 him	 groaned,	 and	 Baruk	 gasped	 as	 an	 enormous
weight	seemed	to	press	down	on	him.	The	blood	pounded	in	his	head,	lancing	him
with	 pain.	 He	 gripped	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 map	 table	 to	 steady	 himself.	 The
incandescent	 globes	 of	 light	 suspended	 from	 the	 ceiling	 dimmed,	 then	 flickered
out.	In	the	darkness	the	alchemist	heard	cracks	sweeping	down	the	walls,	as	if	a
giant's	 hand	 had	 descended	 on	 the	 building.	 All	 at	 once	 the	 pressure	 vanished.
Baruk	raised	a	shaking	hand	to	his	sweat-slicked	brow.
A	soft	voice	spoke	behind	him.	“Greetings,	High	Alchemist.	I	am	the	Lord	of
Moon's	Spawn.”
Still	 facing	 the	 table,	 Baruk	 closed	 his	 eyes	 and	 nodded.	 “The	 title	 isn't
necessary,”	he	whispered.	“Please	call	me	Baruk.”
“I'm	at	home	in	darkness,”	the	Lord	said.	“Will	this	prove	an	inconvenience,
Baruk?”
The	alchemist	muttered	a	spell.	Before	him	the	details	of	the	map	on	the	table
took	 on	 distinction,	 emanating	 a	 cool	 blue	 glow.	 He	 faced	 the	 Lord	 and	 was
startled	 to	 discover	 that	 the	 tall,	 cloaked	 figure	 reflected	 as	 little	 heat	 as	 the
room's	 inanimate	 objects.	 Nevertheless,	 he	 was	 able	 to	 distinguish	 quite	 clearly
the	man's	features.	“You're	Tiste	Andii,”	he	said.
The	Lord	bowed	slightly.	His	angled,	multihued	eyes	scanned	the	room.	“Have
you	any	wine,	Baruk?”
“Of	course,	Lord.”	The	alchemist	walked	over	to	his	desk.
“My	name,	as	best	as	it	can	be	pronounced	by	humans,	is	Anomander	Rake.”
The	Lord	followed	Baruk	to	the	desk,	his	boots	clicking	on	the	polished	marble
floor.
Baruk	 poured	 wine,	 then	 turned	 to	 study	 Rake	 with	 some	 curiosity.	 He	 had
heard	that	Tiste	Andii	warriors	were	fighting	the	Empire	up	north,	commanded	by
a	savage	beast	of	a	man	named	Caladan	Brood.	They	had	allied	with	the	Crimson
Guard,	and	together,	the	two	forces	were	decimating	the	Malazans.	So,	there	were
Tiste	Andii	in	Moon's	Spawn,	and	the	man	standing	before	him	was	their	lord.
This	moment	marked	the	first	time	Baruk	had	ever	seen	a	Tiste	Andii	face	to


face.	He	was	more	than	a	little	disturbed.	Such	remarkable	eyes,	he	thought.	One
moment	a	deep	hue	of	amber,	catlike	and	unnerving,	the	next	gray	and	banded	like
a	snake's—a	fell	rainbow	of	colors	to	match	any	mood.	He	wondered	if	they	were
capable	of	lying.
In	the	alchemist's	library	lay	copies	of	the	surviving	tomes	of	Gothos'	Folly,
Jaghut	writings	from	millennia	past.	In	them	Tiste	Andii	were	mentioned	here	and
there	in	an	aura	of	fear,	Baruk	recalled.	Gothos	himself,	a	Jaghut	wizard	who	had
descended	the	deepest	warrens	of	Elder	Magic,	had	praised	the	gods	of	the	time
that	the	Tiste	Andii	were	so	few	in	number.	And	if	anything,	the	mysterious	blackskinned	race	had	dwindled	since	then.
Anomander	Rake's	skin	was	jet-black,	befitting	Gothos'	descriptions,	but	his
mane	flowed	silver.	He	stood	close	to	seven	feet	tall.	His	features	were	sharp,	as
if	cut	from	onyx,	a	slight	upward	tilt	to	the	large	vertical-pupiled	eyes.
A	 two-handed	 sword	 was	 strapped	 to	 Rake's	 broad	 back,	 its	 silver
dragonskull	 pommel	 and	 archaic	 crosshilt	 jutting	 from	 a	 wooden	 scabbard	 fully
six	and	a	half	feet	long.	From	the	weapon	bled	power,	staining	the	air	like	black
ink	in	a	pool	of	water.	As	his	gaze	rested	on	it	Baruk	almost	reeled,	seeing,	for	a
brief	moment,	a	vast	darkness	yawning	before	him,	cold	as	the	heart	of	a	glacier,
from	 which	 came	 the	 stench	 of	 antiquity	 and	 a	 faint	 groaning	 sound.	 Baruk
wrenched	 his	 eyes	 from	 the	 weapon,	 looked	 up	 to	 find	 Rake	 studying	 him	 from
over	one	shoulder.
The	Tiste	Andii	quirked	a	knowing	smile,	then	handed	Baruk	one	of	the	winefilled	goblets.	“Was	Crone	her	usual	melodramatic	self?”
Baruk	blinked,	then	could	not	help	but	grin.
Rake	 sipped	 his	 wine.	 “She's	 never	 been	 modest	 in	 displaying	 her	 talents.
Shall	we	sit?”
“Of	course,”	Baruk	replied,	relaxing	in	spite	of	his	trepidation.	From	his	years
of	 study	 the	 alchemist	 knew	 that	 great	 power	 shaped	 different	 souls	 differently.
Had	 Rake's	 been	 twisted	 Baruk	 would	 have	 known	 immediately.	 But	 the	 Lord's
control	seemed	absolute.	That	alone	engendered	awe.	The	man	shaped	his	power,
not	the	other	way	around.	Such	control	was,	well,	inhuman.	He	suspected	that	this
would	 not	 be	 the	 first	 insight	 he'd	 have	 regarding	 this	 warrior-mage	 that	 would
leave	him	astonished	and	frightened.
“She	threw	everything	she	had	at	me,”	Rake	said	suddenly.	The	Tiste	Andii's
eyes	shone	green	as	glacial	ice.
Startled	 by	 the	 vehemence	 of	 that	 outburst,	 Baruk	 frowned.	 She?	 Oh,	 the
Empress,	of	course.


“And	even	then,”	Rake	continued,	“she	couldn't	bring	me	down.”
The	 alchemist	 stiffened	 in	 his	 chair.	 “Yet,”	 he	 said	 cautiously,	 “you	 were
driven	 back,	 battered	 and	 beaten.	 I	 can	 feel	 your	 power,	 Anomander	 Rake,”	 he
added,	 grimacing.	 “It	 pulses	 from	 you	 like	 waves.	 So	 I	 must	 ask:	 how	 is	 it	 you
were	defeated?	I	know	something	of	the	Empire's	High	Mage	Tayschrenn.	He	has
power	but	it's	no	match	to	yours.	So	again	I	ask,	how?”
His	 gaze	 on	 the	 map	 table,	 Rake	 replied,	 “I've	 committed	 my	 sorcerers	 and
warriors	 to	 Brood's	 north	 campaign.”	 He	 turned	 a	 humorless	 grin	 on	 Baruk.
“Within	 my	 city	 are	 children,	 priests	 and	 three	 elderly,	 exceedingly	 bookish
warlocks.”
City?	There	was	a	city	within	Moon's	Spawn?
A	dun	tone	had	entered	Rake's	eyes.	“I	cannot	defend	an	entire	Moon.	I	cannot
be	 everywhere	 at	 once.	 And	 as	 for	 Tayschrenn,	 he	 didn't	 give	 a	 damn	 about	 the
people	 around	 him.	 I	 thought	 to	 dissuade	 him,	 make	 the	 price	 too	 high	 .	 .	 .”	 He
shook	his	head	as	if	perplexed,	then	he	looked	to	Baruk.	“To	save	the	home	of	my
people,	I	retreated.”
“Leaving	Pale	to	fall—”	Baruk	shut	his	mouth,	cursing	his	lack	of	tact.
But	Rake	merely	shrugged.	“I	didn't	anticipate	that	I'd	face	a	full	assault.	My
presence	alone	had	been	keeping	the	Empire	at	bay	for	almost	two	years.”
“I've	 heard	 the	 Empress	 is	 short	 of	 patience,”	 murmured	 Baruk	 thoughtfully.
His	 eyes	 narrowed,	 then	 he	 looked	 up.	 “You	 have	 asked	 to	 meet	 with	 me,
Anomander	Rake,	and	so	here	we	are.	What	is	it	you	wish	from	me?”
“An	alliance,”	the	Moon's	lord	answered.
“With	me?	Personally?”
“No	games,	Baruk.”	Rake's	voice	was	suddenly	cold.	“I'm	not	fooled	by	that
Council	of	idiots	bickering	at	Majesty	Hall.	I	know	that	it's	you	and	your	fellow
mages	 who	 rule	 Darujhistan.”	 He	 rose	 and	 glared	 down	 with	 eyes	 of	 gray.	 “I'll
tell	you	this.	For	the	Empress	your	city	is	the	lone	pearl	on	this	continent	of	mud.
She	wants	it	and	what	she	wants	she	usually	gets.”
Baruk	 reached	 down	 and	 plucked	 at	 the	 frayed	 edge	 of	 his	 robe.	 “I	 see,”	 he
said,	in	a	low	voice.	“Pale	had	its	wizards.”
Rake	frowned.	“Indeed.”
“Yet,”	 Baruk	 continued,	 “when	 the	 battle	 was	 begun	 in	 earnest,	 your	 first
thought	was	not	for	the	alliance	you	made	with	the	city	but	for	the	well-being	of
your	Moon.”
“Who	told	you	this?”	Rake	demanded.


Baruk	looked	up	and	raised	both	hands.	“Some	of	those	wizards	managed	to
escape.”
“They're	in	the	city?”	Rake's	eyes	had	gone	black.
Seeing	them,	Baruk	felt	sweat	break	out	beneath	his	clothes.	“Why?”	he	asked.
“I	want	their	heads,”	Rake	replied	casually.	He	refilled	his	goblet	and	took	a
sip.
An	 icy	 hand	 had	 slipped	 around	 Baruk's	 heart	 and	 was	 now	 tightening.	 His
headache	had	increased	tenfold	in	the	last	few	seconds.	“Why?”	he	asked	again,
the	word	coming	out	almost	as	a	gasp.
If	the	Tiste	Andii	knew	of	the	alchemist's	sudden	discomfort	he	made	no	sign
of	 it.	 “Why?”	 He	 seemed	 to	 roll	 the	 word	 in	 his	 mouth	 like	 wine,	 a	 light	 smile
touching	 his	 lips.	 “When	 the	 Moranth	 army	 came	 down	 from	 the	 mountains,	 and
Tayschrenn	rode	at	the	head	of	his	wizard	cadre,	and	when	word	spread	that	an
Empire	 Claw	 had	 infiltrated	 the	 city,”	 Rake's	 smile	 twisted	 into	 a	 snarl,	 “the
wizards	of	Pale	fled.”	He	paused,	as	if	reliving	memories.	“I	dispatched	the	Claw
when	 they	 were	 but	 a	 dozen	 steps	 inside	 the	 walls.”	 He	 paused	 again,	 his	 face
betraying	 a	 flash	 of	 regret.	 “Had	 the	 city's	 wizards	 remained,	 the	 assault	 would
have	 been	 repelled.	 Tayschrenn,	 it	 seemed,	 was	 preoccupied	 with	 .	 .	 .	 other
imperatives.	He'd	saturated	his	position—a	hilltop—with	defensive	wards.	Then
he	 unleashed	 demons	 not	 against	 me	 but	 against	 some	 of	 his	 companions.	 That
baffled	 me,	 but	 rather	 than	 allow	 such	 conjurings	 to	 wander	 at	 will,	 I	 expended
vital	power	destroying	them.”	He	sighed	and	said,	“I	pulled	the	Moon	back	mere
minutes	from	its	destruction.	I	left	it	to	drift	south	and	went	after	those	wizards.”
“After	them?”
“I	 tracked	 down	 all	 but	 two.”	 Rake	 gazed	 at	 Baruk.	 “I	 want	 those	 two,
preferably	alive,	but	their	heads	will	suffice.”
“You	killed	those	you	found?	How?”
“With	my	sword,	of	course.”
Baruk	recoiled	as	if	struck.	“Oh,”	he	whispered.	“Oh.”
“The	alliance,”	Rake	said,	before	draining	his	goblet.
“I'll	speak	to	the	Cabal	on	this	matter,”	Baruk	answered,	rising	shakily	to	his
feet.	 “Word	 of	 the	 decision	 will	 be	 sent	 to	 you	 soon.”	 He	 stared	 at	 the	 sword
strapped	to	the	Tiste	Andii's	back.	“Tell	me,	if	you	get	those	wizards	alive,	will
you	use	that	on	them?”
Rake	frowned.	“Of	course.”
Turning	away,	Baruk	closed	his	eyes.	“You'll	have	their	heads,	then.”


Behind	 him	 Rake	 laughed	 harshly.	 “There's	 too	 much	 mercy	 in	 your	 heart,
Alchemist.”
The	pale	light	beyond	the	window	signified	the	dawn.	Within	the	Phoenix	Inn	only
one	table	remained	occupied.	Around	it	sat	four	men,	one	asleep	in	his	chair	with
his	head	lying	in	a	pool	of	stale	beer.	He	snored	loudly.	The	others	were	playing
cards,	 two	 red-eyed	 with	 exhaustion	 while	 the	 last	 one	 studied	 his	 hand	 and
talked.	And	talked.
“And	 then	 there	 was	 the	 time	 I	 saved	 Rallick	 Nom's	 life,	 at	 the	 back	 of	 All
Eve's	Street.	Four,	no,	five	nefarious	hoodlums	had	backed	the	boy	to	a	wall.	He
was	 barely	 standing,	 was	 Rallick,	 gushing	 blood	 from	 a	 hundred	 knife	 wounds.
Clear	to	me	was	the	grim	fact	that	it	couldn't	last	much	longer,	that	tussle.	I	come
up	 on	 them	 six	 assassins	 from	 behind,	 old	 Kruppe	 with	 fire	 dancing	 on	 his
fingertips—a	magical	spell	of	frightful	violence.	I	uttered	the	cantrip	in	a	single
breath	and	lo!	Six	piles	of	ash	at	Rallick's	feet.	Six	piles	of	ash	aglitter	with	the
coin	from	their	wallets—hah!	A	worthy	reward!”
Murillio	 leaned	 his	 long,	 elegant	 frame	 close	 to	 Crokus	 Younghand.	 “Is	 this
possible?”	he	whispered.	“For	a	turn	to	last	as	long	as	Kruppe's?”
Crokus	 grinned	 wearily	 at	 his	 friend.	 “I	 don't	 mind,	 really.	 It's	 safe	 in	 here,
and	that's	what	counts	for	me.”
“Assassin's	 war,	 bosh!”	 Kruppe	 said,	 leaning	 back	 to	 mop	 his	 brow	 with	 a
wilted	silk	handkerchief.	“Kruppe	remains	entirely	unconvinced.	Tell	me,	did	you
not	see	Rallick	Nom	in	here	earlier?	Spoke	long	with	Murillio	here,	the	lad	did.
As	calm	as	ever,	was	he	not?”
Murillio	grimaced.	“Nom	gets	like	that	every	time	he's	just	killed	somebody.
Lay	down	a	card,	dammit!	I've	early	appointments	to	attend	to.”
Crokus	asked,	“So	what	was	Rallick	talking	to	you	about?”
Murillio's	answer	was	a	mere	shrug.	He	continued	glaring	at	Kruppe.
The	small	man's	pencil-thin	eyebrows	rose.	“Is	it	Kruppe's	turn?”
Closing	 his	 eyes,	 Crokus	 slumped	 in	 his	 chair.	 He	 groaned.	 “I	 saw	 three
assassins	on	the	rooftops,	Kruppe.	And	the	two	that	killed	the	third	went	after	me,
even	though	it's	obvious	I'm	no	assassin.”
“Well,”	 said	 Murillio,	 eyeing	 the	 young	 thief's	 tattered	 clothing	 and	 the	 cuts
and	scrapes	on	his	face	and	hands,	“I'm	inclined	to	believe	you.”
“Fools!	Kruppe	sits	at	a	table	of	fools.”	Kruppe	glanced	down	at	the	snoring
man.	 “And	 Coll	 here	 is	 the	 biggest	 of	 them	 all.	 But	 sadly	 gifted	 with	 self-


knowledge.	 Hence	 his	 present	 state,	 from	 which	 many	 profane	 truths	 might	 be
drawn.	 Appointments,	 Murillio?	 Kruppe	 didn't	 think	 the	 city's	 multitude	 of
mistresses	 awoke	 so	 early	 in	 the	 day.	 After	 all,	 what	 might	 they	 see	 in	 their
mirrors?	Kruppe	shivers	at	the	thought.”
Crokus	massaged	the	bruise	hidden	beneath	his	long,	brown	hair.	He	winced,
then	leaned	forward.	“Come	on,	Kruppe,”	he	muttered.	“Play	a	card.”
“My	turn?”
“Seems	 self-knowledge	 doesn't	 extend	 to	 whose	 turn	 it	 is,”	 Murillio
commented	dryly.
Boots	sounded	on	the	stairs.	The	three	turned	to	see	Rallick	Nom	descending
from	 the	 first	 floor.	 The	 tall,	 dark-skinned	 man	 looked	 rested.	 He	 wore	 his	 day
cloak,	a	deep	royal	purple,	clasped	at	the	neck	by	a	silver	clamshell	brooch.	His
black	 hair	 was	 freshly	 braided,	 framing	 his	 narrow,	 clean-shaven	 face.	 Rallick
walked	up	to	the	table	and	reached	down	to	grasp	Coll's	thinning	hair.	He	raised
the	 man's	 head	 from	 the	 pool	 of	 beer	 and	 bent	 forward	 to	 study	 Coll's	 blotched
face.	Then	he	gently	set	down	the	man's	head,	and	pulled	up	a	chair.
“Is	this	the	same	game	as	last	night?”
“Of	course,”	Kruppe	replied.	“Kruppe	has	these	two	men	backed	to	the	very
wall,	 in	 danger	 of	 losing	 their	 very	 shirts!	 It's	 good	 to	 see	 you	 again,	 friend
Rallick.	 The	 lad	 here,”	 Kruppe	 indicated	 Crokus	 with	 a	 limp	 hand,	 fingers
fluttering,	“speaks	endlessly	of	murder	above	our	heads.	A	veritable	downpour	of
blood!	Have	you	ever	heard	such	nonsense,	Rallick	Kruppe's	friend?”
Rallick	shrugged.	“Another	rumor.	This	city	was	built	on	rumors.”
Crokus	 scowled	 to	 himself.	 It	 seemed	 that	 no	 one	 was	 willing	 to	 answer
questions	this	morning.	He	wondered	yet	again	what	the	assassin	and	Murillio	had
been	 talking	 about	 earlier;	 hunched	 as	 they'd	 been	 over	 a	 dimly	 lit	 table	 in	 one
corner	of	the	room,	Crokus	had	suspected	some	sort	of	conspiracy.	Not	that	such	a
thing	was	unusual	for	them,	though	most	times	Kruppe	was	at	its	center.
Murillio	swung	his	gaze	to	the	bar.	“Sulty!”	he	called	out.	“You	awake?”
There	was	a	mumbled	response	from	behind	 the	 wooden	 counter,	 then	 Sulty,
her	blonde	hair	disheveled	and	plump	face	looking	plumper,	stood	up.	“Yah,”	she
mumbled.	“What?”
“Breakfast	for	my	friends	here,	if	you	please.”	Murillio	climbed	to	his	feet	and
cast	a	critical,	obviously	disapproving	eye	over	his	clothing.	The	soft	billowing
shirt,	dyed	a	bright	green,	now	hung	on	his	lanky	frame,	wilted	and	beer-stained.
His	 fine	 tanned	 leather	 pantaloons	 were	 creased	 and	 patchy.	 Sighing,	 Murillio
stepped	 away	 from	 the	 table.	 “I	 must	 bathe	 and	 change.	 As	 for	 the	 game,	 I


surrender	consumed	by	hopelessness.	Kruppe,	I	now	believe,	will	never	play	his
card,	 thus	 leaving	 us	 trapped	 in	 the	 unlikely	 world	 of	 his	 recollections	 and
reminiscences,	 potentially	 forever.	 Good	 night,	 one	 and	 all.”	 He	 and	 Rallick
locked	gazes,	then	Murillio	gave	a	faint	nod.
Crokus	witnessed	the	exchange	and	his	scowl	deepened.	He	watched	Murillio
leave,	 then	 glanced	 at	 Rallick.	 The	 assassin	 sat	 staring	 down	 at	 Coll,	 his
expression	as	unreadable	as	ever.
Sulty	 wandered	 into	 the	 kitchen,	 and	 a	 moment	 later	 the	 clanking	 of	 pots
echoed	into	the	room.
Crokus	 tossed	 his	 cards	 into	 the	 table's	 center	 and	 leaned	 back,	 closing	 his
eyes.
“Does	the	lad	surrender	as	well?”	Kruppe	asked.
Crokus	nodded.
“Hah,	 Kruppe	 remains	 undefeated.”	 He	 set	 down	 his	 cards	 and	 tucked	 in	 a
napkin	at	his	thick,	jiggling	neck.
In	 the	 thief's	 mind	 suspicions	 of	 intrigue	 ran	 wild.	 First	 the	 assassin's	 war,
now	Rallick	and	Murillio	had	something	cooking.	He	sighed	mentally	and	opened
his	 eyes.	 His	 whole	 body	 ached	 from	 the	 night's	 adventures,	 but	 he	 knew	 he'd
been	lucky.	He	stared	down	at	Coll	without	seeing	him.	The	vision	of	those	tall,
black	assassins	returned	to	him	and	he	shivered.	Yet,	for	all	the	dangers	hounding
his	back	up	on	the	rooftops	this	past	night,	he	had	to	admit	how	exciting	it'd	all
been.	After	slamming	that	door	behind	him	and	quaffing	the	beer	Sulty	had	thrust
into	his	hand,	his	whole	body	had	trembled	for	an	hour	afterward.
His	gaze	focused	on	Coll.	Coll,	Kruppe,	Murillio,	and	Rallick.	What	a	strange
group—a	 drunkard,	 an	 obese	 mage	 of	 dubious	 abilities,	 a	 dandified	 fop,	 and	 a
killer.
Still,	 they	 were	 his	 best	 friends.	 His	 parents	 had	 succumbed	 to	 the	 Winged
Plague	when	 he'd	 been	 four	 years	old.	Since	then	 his	uncle	 Mammot	had	 raised
him.	The	old	scholar	had	done	the	best	he	could,	but	it	hadn't	been	enough.	Crokus
found	the	street's	shadows	and	moonless	nights	on	rooftops	far	more	exciting	than
his	uncle's	moldy	books.
Now,	 however,	 he	 felt	 very	 much	 alone.	 Kruppe's	 mask	 of	 blissful	 idiocy
never	 dropped,	 not	 even	 for	 an	 instant—all	 through	 the	 years	 when	 Crokus	 had
been	apprenticed	to	the	fat	man	in	the	art	of	thievery,	he'd	never	seen	Kruppe	act
otherwise.	Coll's	life	seemed	to	involve	the	relentless	avoidance	of	sobriety,	for
reasons	 unknown	 to	 Crokus—though	 he	 suspected	 that,	 once,	 Coll	 had	 been
something	more.	And	now	Rallick	and	Murillio	had	counted	him	out	of	some	new


intrigue.
Into	 his	 thoughts	 came	 an	 image—the	 moonlit	 limbs	 of	 a	 sleeping	 maiden—
and	he	angrily	shook	his	head.
Sulty	 arrived	 with	 breakfast,	 husks	 of	 bread	 fried	 in	 butter,	 a	 chunk	 of	 goat
cheese,	 a	 stem	 of	 local	 grapes,	 and	 a	 pot	 of	 Callows	 bitter	 coffee.	 She	 served
Crokus	first	and	he	muttered	his	thanks.
Kruppe's	 impatience	 grew	 while	 Sulty	 served	 Rallick.	 “Such	 impertinence,”
the	man	said,	adjusting	his	coat's	wide,	stained	sleeves.	“Kruppe	is	of	a	mind	to
cast	a	thousand	horrible	spells	on	rude	Sulty.”
“Kruppe	had	better	not,”	Rallick	said.
“Oh,	 no,	 of	 course	 not,”	 Kruppe	 amended,	 wiping	 his	 brow	 with	 his
handkerchief.	 “A	 wizard	 of	 my	 skills	 would	 never	 belittle	 himself	 on	 a	 mere
scullion,	after	all.”
Sulty	turned	to	him.	“Scullion?”	She	snatched	a	bread	husk	from	the	plate	and
slapped	it	down	on	Kruppe's	head.	“Don't	worry,”	she	said,	as	she	walked	back
to	the	bar.	“With	hair	like	yours	nobody'd	notice.”
Kruppe	 pulled	 the	 husk	 from	 his	 head.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 toss	 it	 down	 on	 the
floor,	 then	 changed	 his	 mind.	 He	 licked	 his	 lips.	 “Kruppe	 is	 magnanimous	 this
morning,”	he	said,	breaking	into	a	wide	smile	and	setting	the	bread	down	on	his
plate.	He	leaned	forward	and	laced	together	his	pudgy	fingers.	“Kruppe	wishes	to
begin	his	meal	with	some	grapes,	please.”


Chapter	Seven
	

I	see	a	man
crouched	in	a	fire
who	leaves	me	cold
and	wondering	what
he	is	doing	here	so	boldly
crouched	in	my	pyre	.	.	.
GADROBI	EPITAPH
ANONYMOUS


	
This	time,	Kruppe's	dream	took	him	out	through	Marsh	Gate,	along	South	Road,
then	 left	 onto	 Cutter	 Lake	 Road.	 Overhead	 the	 sky	 swirled	 a	 most	 unpleasant
pattern	of	silver	and	pale	green.	“All	is	in	flux,”	Kruppe	gasped,	his	feet	hurrying
him	 along	 the	 dusty,	 barren	 road.	 “The	 Coin	 has	 entered	 a	 child's	 possession,
though	he	knows	it	not.	Is	it	for	Kruppe	to	walk	this	Monkey	Road?	Fortunate	that
Kruppe's	perfectly	round	body	is	an	example	of	perfect	symmetry.	One	is	not	only
born	skilled	at	said	balance,	one	must	learn	it	through	arduous	practice.	Of	course,
Kruppe	is	unique	in	never	requiring	practice—at	anything.”
Off	in	the	fields	to	his	left,	within	a	circle	of	young	trees,	a	small	fire	cast	a
hazy	red	glow	up	among	the	budding	branches.	Kruppe's	sharp	eyes	could	make
out	 a	 single	 figure	 seated	 there,	 seemingly	 holding	 its	 hands	 in	 the	 flames.	 “Too
many	 stones	 to	 turn	 underfoot,”	 he	 gasped,	 “on	 this	 rocky,	 rutted	 road.	 Kruppe
would	try	the	ribbed	earth,	which	is	yet	to	green	with	the	season's	growth.	Indeed,
yon	fire	beckons.”	He	left	the	road	and	approached	the	circle	of	trees.
As	 he	 strode	 between	 two	 slim	 boles	 and	 stepped	 into	 the	 pool	 of	 light,	 the
hooded	figure	turned	slowly	to	study	him,	its	face	hidden	in	shadows	despite	the
fire	 before	 it.	 Though	 it	 held	 its	 hands	 in	 the	 flame,	 they	 withstood	 the	 heat,	 the
long,	sinuous	fingers	spread	wide.
“I	 would	 partake	 of	 this	 warmth,”	 Kruppe	 said,	 with	 a	 slight	 bow.	 “So	 rare
within	Kruppe's	dreams	of	late.”
“Strangers	 wander	 through	 them,”	 the	 figure	 said,	 in	 a	 thin,	 oddly	 accented
voice.	“Such	as	I.	Have	you	summoned	me,	then?	It	has	been	a	long	time	since	I
walked	on	soil.”
Kruppe's	brows	rose.	“Summoned?	Nay,	not	Kruppe	who	is	also	a	victim	of
his	 dreams.	 Imagine,	 after	 all,	 that	 Kruppe	 sleeps	 even	 now	 beneath	 warm
blankets	 secure	 in	 his	 humble	 room.	 Yet	 see	 me,	 stranger,	 for	 I	 am	 cold,	 nay,
chilled.”
The	 other	 laughed	 softly	 and	 beckoned	 Kruppe	 to	 the	 fire.	 “I	 seek	 sensation
once	again,”	it	said,	“but	my	hands	feel	nothing.	To	be	worshiped	is	to	share	the
supplicant's	pain.	I	fear	my	followers	are	no	more.”
Kruppe	was	silent.	He	did	not	like	the	somber	mood	of	this	dream.	He	held	his
hands	 before	 the	 fire	 yet	 felt	 little	 heat.	 A	 chill	 ache	 had	 settled	 into	 his	 knees.
Finally	 he	 looked	 over	 the	 flames	 to	 the	 hooded	 figure	 opposite	 him.	 “Kruppe
thinks	you	are	an	Elder	God.	Have	you	a	name?”


“I	am	known	as	K'rul.”
Kruppe	 stiffened.	 His	 guess	 had	 been	 correct.	 The	 thought	 of	 an	 Elder	 God
awakened	 and	 wandering	 through	 his	 dreams	 sent	 his	 thoughts	 scampering	 like
frightened	rabbits.	“How	have	you	come	to	be	here,	K'rul?”	he	asked,	a	tremor	in
his	voice.	All	at	once	this	place	seemed	too	hot.	He	pulled	his	handkerchief	from
his	sleeve	and	mopped	sweat	from	his	brow.
K'rul	 considered	 before	 answering,	 and	 Kruppe	 heard	 doubt	 in	 his	 voice.
“Blood	has	been	spilled	behind	the	walls	of	this	glowing	city,	Kruppe,	upon	stone
once	 holy	 in	 my	 name.	 This—this	 is	 new	 to	 me.	 Once	 I	 reigned	 in	 the	 minds	 of
many	mortals,	and	they	fed	me	well	with	blood	and	split	bones.	Long	before	the
first	 towers	 of	 stone	 rose	 to	 mortal	 whims,	 I	 walked	 among	 hunters.”	 The	 hood
tilted	 upward	 and	 Kruppe	 felt	 immortal	 eyes	 fixing	 upon	 him.	 “Blood	 has	 been
spilled	again,	but	that	alone	is	not	enough.	I	believe	I	am	here	to	await	one	who
will	be	awakened.	One	I	have	known	before,	long	ago.”
Kruppe	digested	this	like	sour	bile.	“And	what	do	you	bring	Kruppe?”
The	 Elder	 God	 rose	 abruptly.	 “An	 ancient	 fire	 that	 will	 give	 you	 warmth	 in
times	of	need,”	he	said.	“But	I	hold	you	to	nothing.	Seek	the	T'lan	Imass	who	will
lead	the	woman.	They	are	the	Awakeners.	I	must	prepare	for	battle,	I	think.	One	I
will	lose.”
Kruppe's	eyes	widened	with	sudden	comprehension.	“You	are	being	used,”	he
breathed.
“Perhaps.	 If	 so,	 then	 the	 Child	 Gods	 have	 made	 a	 grave	 error.	 After	 all,”	 a
ghastly	 smile	 seemed	 to	 come	 into	 his	 tone,	 “I	 will	 lose	 a	 battle.	 But	 I	 will	 not
die.”	 K'rul	 turned	 away	 from	 the	 fire	 then.	 His	 voice	 drifted	 back	 to	 Kruppe.
“Play	 on,	 mortal.	 Every	 god	 falls	 at	 a	 mortal's	 hands.	 Such	 is	 the	 only	 end	 to
immortality.”
The	Elder	God's	wistfulness	was	not	lost	on	Kruppe.	He	suspected	that	a	great
truth	had	been	revealed	to	him	with	those	final	words,	a	truth	he	was	now	given
leave	to	use.	“And	use	it	Kruppe	shall,”	he	whispered.
The	Elder	God	had	left	the	pool	of	light,	heading	northeast	across	the	fields.
Kruppe	 stared	 at	 the	 fire.	 It	 licked	 the	 wood	 hungrily,	 but	 no	 ash	 was	 born,	 and
though	unfed	since	he'd	arrived	it	did	not	dim.	He	shivered.
“In	the	hands	of	a	child,”	he	muttered.	“This	night,	Kruppe	is	truly	alone	in	the
world.	Alone.”
An	 hour	 before	 dawn	 Circle	 Breaker	 was	 relieved	 of	 his	 vigil	 at	 Despot's


Barbican.	 This	 night	 none	 had	 come	 to	 rendezvous	 beneath	 the	 gate.	 Lightning
played	 among	 the	 jagged	 peaks	 of	 the	 Tahlyn	 Mountains	 to	 the	 north	 as	 the	 man
walked	in	solitude	down	the	winding	Charms	of	Anise	Street	in	the	Spice	Quarter.
Ahead	 and	 below	 glittered	 the	 Lakefront,	 the	 merchant	 trader	 ships	 from	 distant
Callows,	Elingarth,	and	Kepler's	Spite	hunched	dark	and	gloaming	between	gaslit
stone	piers.
A	cool	lake	breeze	carried	to	the	man	the	smell	of	rain,	though	overhead	the
stars	glistened	with	startling	clarity.	He	had	removed	his	tabard,	folding	it	into	a
small	 leather	 satchel	 now	 slung	 on	 one	 shoulder.	 Only	 the	 plain	 shortsword
strapped	at	his	hip	marked	him	as	a	soldier,	yet	a	soldier	without	provenance.
He	had	divested	himself	of	his	official	duties,	and	as	he	walked	down	toward
the	water,	the	years	of	service	seemed	to	slough	from	his	spirit.	Bright	were	the
memories	of	his	childhood	at	these	docks,	to	which	he	had	been	ever	drawn	by	the
allure	 of	 the	 strange	 traders	 as	 they	 swung	 into	 their	 berths	 like	 weary	 and
weathered	 heroes	 returned	 from	 some	 elemental	 war.	 In	 those	 days	 it	 was	 not
uncommon	 to	 see	 the	 galleys	 of	 the	 Freemen	 Privateers	 ease	 into	 the	 bay,	 sleek
and	 riding	 low	 with	 booty.	 They	 hailed	 from	 such	 mysterious	 ports	 as	 Filman
Orras,	Fort	By	a	Half,	Dead	Man's	Story,	and	Exile;	names	that	rang	of	adventure
in	the	ears	of	a	lad	who	had	never	seen	his	home	city	from	outside	its	walls.
The	man	slowed	as	he	reached	the	foot	of	the	stone	pier.	The	years	between
him	 and	 that	 lad	 marched	 through	 his	 mind,	 a	 possession	 of	 martial	 images
growing	ever	grimmer.	If	he	searched	out	the	many	crossroads	he	had	come	to	in
the	 past,	 he	 saw	 their	 skies	 storm-warped,	 the	 lands	 ragged	 and	 wind-torn.	 The
forces	of	age	and	experience	worked	on	them	now,	and	whatever	choices	he	had
made	then	seemed	fated	and	almost	desperate.
Is	it	only	the	young	who	know	desperation?	he	wondered,	as	he	moved	to	sit
on	the	pier's	stone	sea-wall.	Before	him	rippled	the	bay's	sooty	waters.	Twenty
feet	below,	the	rock-studded	shore	lay	sheathed	in	darkness,	the	glitter	of	broken
glass	and	crockery	here	and	there	winking	like	stars.
The	man	turned	slightly	to	face	the	right.	His	gaze	traveled	the	slope	there	as	it
climbed	 to	 the	 summit,	 on	 which	 loomed	 the	 squat	 bulk	 of	 Majesty	 Hall.	 Never
reach	too	far.	A	simple	lesson	of	life	he	had	learned	long	ago	on	the	burning	deck
of	 a	 corsair,	 its	 belly	 filling	 with	 the	 sea	 as	 it	 drifted	 outside	 the	 pinnacle
fortifications	 of	 a	 city	 named	 Broken	 Jaw.	 Hubris,	 the	 scholars	 would	 call	 the
fiery	end	of	the	Freemen	Privateers.
Never	reach	too	far.	The	man's	eyes	held	on	Majesty	Hall.	The	deadlock	that
had	come	with	the	assassination	of	Councilman	Lim	still	held	within	those	walls.
The	 Council	 raced	 aflurry	 in	 circles,	 more	 precious	 hours	 spent	 on	 eager


speculation	and	gossip	than	on	the	matters	of	state.	Turban	Orr,	his	victory	on	the
voting	 floor	 snatched	 from	 his	 hands	 in	 the	 last	 moment,	 now	 flung	 his	 hounds
down	every	trail,	seeking	the	spies	he	was	convinced	had	infiltrated	his	nest.	The
councilman	was	no	fool.
Overhead	 a	 flock	 of	 gray	 gulls	 swept	 lakeward,	 crying	 into	 the	 night-chilled
air.	He	drew	a	breath,	hunched	his	shoulders,	and	pulled	his	gaze	with	an	effort
from	Majesty	Hall.
Too	 late	 to	 concern	 himself	 about	 reaching	 too	 far.	 Since	 the	 day	 the	 Eel's
agent	had	come	to	him,	the	man's	future	was	sealed;	to	some	it	would	be	called
treason.	And	perhaps,	in	the	 end,	it	was	 treason.	 Who	 could	 say	 what	 lay	 in	 the
Eel's	mind?	Even	his	principal	agent—the	man's	contact—professed	ignorance	of
his	master's	plans.
His	thoughts	returned	to	Turban	Orr.	He'd	set	himself	against	a	cunning	man,	a
man	of	power.	His	only	defense	against	Orr	lay	in	anonymity.	It	wouldn't	last.
He	 sat	 on	 the	 pier,	 awaiting	 the	 Eel's	 agent.	 And	 he	 would	 deliver	 into	 that
man's	hands	a	message	for	the	Eel.	How	much	would	change	with	the	delivery	of
that	missive?	Was	it	wrong	for	him	to	seek	help,	to	threaten	his	frail	anonymity—
the	solitude	that	gave	him	so	much	inner	strength,	that	stiffened	his	own	resolve?
Yet,	to	match	wits	with	Turban	Orr—he	did	not	think	he	could	do	it	alone.
The	man	reached	into	his	jerkin	and	withdrew	the	scroll.	A	crossroads	marked
where	he	now	stood,	he	recognized	that	much.	In	answer	to	his	ill-measured	fear,
he'd	written	the	plea	for	help	on	this	scroll.
It	 would	 be	 an	 easy	 thing	 to	 do,	 to	 surrender	 now.	 He	 hefted	 the	 frail
parchment	in	his	hands,	feeling	its	slight	weight,	the	vague	oiliness	of	the	coating,
the	rough	weave	of	its	tie-string.	An	easy,	desperate	thing	to	do.
The	man	lifted	his	head.	The	sky	had	begun	to	pale,	the	lake	wind	picking	up
the	day's	momentum.	There	would	be	rain,	coming	from	the	north	as	it	often	did	at
this	time	of	year.	A	cleansing	of	the	city,	a	freshening	of	its	spice-laden	breath.	He
slipped	the	string	from	the	scroll	and	unfurled	the	parchment.
So	easy.
With	slow,	deliberate	movements,	the	man	tore	up	the	scroll.	He	let	the	ragged
pieces	 drift	 down,	 scattering	 into	 the	 gloom	 of	 the	 lake's	 shadowed	 shore.	 The
rising	waves	swept	them	outward	to	dot	the	turgid	swells	like	flecks	of	ash.
Coming	from	somewhere	in	the	back	of	his	mind,	he	thought	he	heard	a	coin
spinning.	It	seemed	a	sad	sound.
A	few	minutes	later	he	left	the	pier.	The	Eel's	agent,	out	on	his	morning	stroll,
would	in	passing	note	his	contact's	absence	and	simply	continue	on	his	way.


He	made	his	way	along	the	Lakefront	Street	with	the	summit	of	Majesty	Hill
dwindling	 behind	 him.	 As	 he	 passed,	 the	 first	 of	 the	 silk	 merchants	 appeared,
laying	 out	 their	 wares	 on	 the	 wide	 paved	 walk.	 Among	 the	 silks	 the	 man
recognized	the	dyed	lavender	twists	and	bolts	of	Illem,	the	pale	yellows	of	Setta
and	 Lest—two	 cities	 to	 the	 southeast	 he	 knew	 had	 been	 annexed	 by	 the	 Pannion
Seer	 in	 the	 last	 month—and	 the	 heavy	 bold	 twists	 of	 Sarrokalle.	 A	 dwindled
sampling:	all	trade	from	the	north	had	ended	under	Malazan	dominion.
He	turned	from	the	lake	at	the	entry	to	the	Scented	Wood	and	headed	into	the
city.	Four	streets	ahead	his	single	room	waited	on	the	second	floor	of	a	decaying
tenement,	gray	and	silent	with	the	coming	dawn,	its	thin,	warped	door	latched	and
locked.	In	that	room	he	allowed	no	place	for	memories;	nothing	to	mark	him	in	a
wizard's	eye	or	tell	the	sharp-witted	spy-hunter	details	of	his	life.	In	that	room,	he
remained	anonymous	even	to	himself.
The	Lady	Simtal	paced.	These	last	few	days	too	much	of	her	hard-won	gold	had
been	spent	smoothing	the	waters.	That	damn	bitch	of	Lim's	had	not	let	grief	get	in
the	way	of	her	greed.	Barely	two	days	shrouded	in	black	and	then	out	on	the	courts
hanging	on	that	fop	Murillio's	arm,	smug	as	a	tart	at	a	ball.
Simtal's	penciled	brows	knitted	slightly.	Murillio:	that	young	man	had	a	way
of	being	seen.	He	might	be	worth	cultivation,	all	things	considered.
She	 stopped	 pacing	 and	 faced	 the	 man	 sprawled	 on	 her	 bed.	 “So,	 you've
learned	nothing.”	A	hint	of	contempt	had	slipped	into	her	tone	and	she	wondered	if
he'd	caught	it.
Councilman	Turban	Orr,	his	heavily	scarred	forearm	covering	his	eyes,	did	not
move	 as	 he	 replied,	 “I've	 told	 you	 all	 this.	 There's	 no	 knowing	 where	 that
poisoned	 quarrel	 came	 from,	 Simtal.	 Hood's	 Breath,	 poisoned!	 What	 assassin
uses	poison	these	days?	Vorcan's	got	them	so	studded	with	magic	everything	else
is	obsolete.”
“You're	digressing,”	she	said,	satisfied	that	he'd	missed	the	careless	unveiling
of	her	sentiments.
“It's	 like	 I	 said,”	 Orr	 continued.	 “Lim	 was	 involved	 in	 more	 than	 one,	 uh,
delicate	 venture.	 The	 assassination's	 probably	 unconnected	 with	 you.	 It	 could
have	been	anyone's	balcony,	it	just	happened	to	be	yours.”
Lady	 Simtal	 crossed	 her	 arms.	 “I	 don't	 believe	 in	 coincidence,	 Turban.	 Tell
me,	 was	 it	 coincidence	 that	 his	 death	 broke	 your	 majority—the	 night	 before	 the
vote?”	She	saw	the	man's	cheek	twitch	and	knew	she'd	stung	him.	She	smiled	and
moved	to	the	bed.	She	sat	and	ran	a	hand	along	his	bared	thigh.	“In	any	case,	have


you	checked	on	him	lately?”
“Him?”
Simtal	 scowled,	 withdrawing	 her	 hand	 and	 standing.	 “My	 beloved
dispossessed,	you	idiot.”
Turban	Orr's	mouth	curved	into	a	smug	smile.	“I	always	keep	a	check	on	him
for	you,	my	dear.	Nothing's	changed	in	that	area.	He	hasn't	sobered	up	since	you
threw	him	out	on	his	arse.”	The	man	sat	up	and	reached	to	the	bedpost	where	his
clothes	hung.	He	began	dressing.
Simtal	 whirled	 to	 him.	 “What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 she	 demanded,	 her	 voice
strident.
“What's	it	look	like?”	Turban	pulled	on	his	breeches.	“The	debate	rages	on	at
Majesty	Hall.	My	influence	is	required.”
“To	do	what?	Bend	yet	another	councilman	to	your	will?”
He	slipped	on	his	silk	shirt,	still	smiling.	“That,	and	other	things.”
Simtal	rolled	her	eyes.	“Oh,	of	course—the	spy.	I'd	forgotten	about	him.”
“Personally,”	 Orr	 resumed,	 “I	 believe	 the	 proclamation	 of	 neutrality	 to	 the
Malazans	will	go	through—perhaps	tomorrow	or	the	next	day.”
She	 laughed	 harshly.	 “Neutrality!	 You're	 beginning	 to	 believe	 your	 own
propaganda.	What	you	want,	Turban	Orr,	is	power,	the	naked	absolute	power	that
comes	with	being	a	Malazan	High	Fist.	You	think	this	the	first	step	to	paving	your
road	 into	 the	 Empress's	 arms.	 At	 the	 city's	 expense,	 but	 you	 don't	 give	 a	 damn
about	that!”
Turban	sneered	up	at	Simtal.	“Stay	out	of	politics,	woman.	Darujhistan's	fall
to	the	Empire	is	inevitable.	Better	a	peaceful	occupation	than	a	violent	one.”
“Peaceful?	Are	you	blind	to	what	happened	to	Pale's	nobility?	Oh,	the	ravens
feasted	on	delicate	flesh	for	days.	This	Empire	devours	noble	blood.”
“What	happened	at	Pale	isn't	as	simple	as	you	make	it,”	Turban	said.	“There
was	a	Moranth	reckoning	involved,	a	clause	in	the	alliance	writ.	Such	culling	will
not	occur	here—and	what	if	it	does?	We	could	use	it,	as	far	as	I'm	concerned.”
His	 grin	 returned.	 “So	 much	 for	 your	 heart	 bleeding	 to	 the	 city's	 woes.	 All	 that
interests	you	is	you.	Save	the	righteous	citizen	offal	for	your	fawns,	Simtal.”	He
adjusted	his	leggings.
Simtal	 stepped	 to	 the	 bedpost,	 reaching	 down	 to	 touch	 the	 silver	 pommel	 of
Orr's	dueling	sword.	“You	should	kill	him	and	be	done	with	it,”	she	said.
“Back	to	him	again?”	The	councilman	laughed	as	he	rose.	“Your	brain	works
with	all	the	subtlety	of	a	malicious	child.”	He	collected	his	sword	and	strapped	it


on.	 “It's	 a	 wonder	 you	 wrested	 anything	 from	 that	 idiot	 husband	 of	 yours—you
were	so	evenly	matched	in	matters	of	cunning.”
“The	easiest	thing	to	break	is	a	man's	heart,”	Simtal	said,	with	a	private	smile.
She	 lay	 down	 on	 the	 bed.	 Stretching	 her	 arms	 and	 arching	 her	 back,	 she	 said,
“What	about	Moon's	Spawn?	It's	still	just	hanging	there.”
Gazing	down	at	her,	his	eyes	traveling	along	her	body,	the	councilman	replied
distractedly,	“We've	yet	to	work	out	a	way	to	get	a	message	up	there.	We've	set	up
a	tent	in	its	shadow	and	stationed	representatives	in	it,	but	that	mysterious	lord	just
ignores	us.”
“Maybe	he's	dead,”	Simtal	said,	relaxing	with	a	sigh.	“Maybe	the	Moon's	just
sitting	 there	 because	 there's	 nobody	 left	 alive	 inside.	 Have	 you	 thought	 of	 that,
dear	Councilman?”
Turban	Orr	turned	to	the	door.	“We	have.	I'll	see	you	tonight?”
“I	want	him	killed,”	Simtal	said.
The	councilman	reached	for	the	latch.	“Maybe.	I'll	see	you	tonight?”	he	asked
again.
“Maybe.”
Turban	 Orr's	 hand	 rested	 on	 the	 latch,	 then	 he	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 left	 the
room.
Lying	on	her	bed,	Lady	Simtal	sighed.	Her	thoughts	shifted	to	a	certain	dandy,
whose	loss	to	a	certain	widow	would	be	a	most	delicious	coup.
Murillio	sipped	spiced	wine.	“The	details	are	sketchy,”	he	said,	making	a	face	as
the	fiery	alcohol	stung	his	lips.
In	the	street	below	a	brilliantly	painted	carriage	clattered	past,	drawn	by	three
white	horses	in	black	bridles.	The	man	gripping	the	reins	was	robed	in	black	and
hooded.	The	horses	tossed	their	heads,	ears	pinned	back	and	eyes	rolling,	but	the
driver's	 broad,	 veined	 hands	 held	 them	 in	 check.	 On	 either	 side	 of	 the	 carriage
walked	middle-aged	women.	Bronze	cups	sat	on	their	shaved	heads	from	which
unfurled	wavering	streams	of	scented	smoke.
Murillio	 leaned	 against	 the	 railing	 and	 looked	 down	 upon	 the	 troupe.	 “The
bitch	Fander's	being	carted	out,”	he	said.	“Bloody	grim	rituals,	if	you	ask	me.”	He
sat	back	in	the	plush	chair	and	smiled	at	his	companion,	raising	the	goblet.	“The
Wolf	 Goddess	 of	 Winter	 dies	 her	 seasonal	 death,	 on	 a	 carpet	 of	 white,	 no	 less.
And	 in	 a	 week's	 time	 the	 Gedderone	 Fête	 fills	 the	 streets	 with	 flowers,	 soon	 to
clog	gutters	and	block	drains	throughout	the	city.”


The	 young	 woman	 across	 from	 him	 smiled,	 her	 eyes	 on	 her	 own	 goblet	 of
wine,	 which	 she	 held	 in	 both	 hands	 like	 an	 offering.	 “Which	 details	 were	 you
referring	to?”	she	asked,	glancing	up	at	him	briefly.
“Details?”
She	smiled	faintly.	“The	sketchy	ones.”
“Oh.”	Murillio	waved	one	gloved	hand	dismissively.	“Lady	Simtal's	version
held	 that	 Councilman	 Lim	 had	 come	 in	 person	 to	 acknowledge	 her	 formal
invitation.”
“Invitation?	Do	you	mean	to	the	festive	she's	throwing	on	Gedderone's	Eve?”
Murillio	blinked.	“Of	course.	Surely	your	house	has	been	invited?”
“Oh,	yes.	And	you?”
“Alas,	no,”	Murillio	said,	smiling.
The	woman	fell	silent,	her	eyelids	lowering	in	thought.
Murillio	 glanced	 back	 to	 the	 street	 below.	 He	 waited.	 Such	 things,	 after	 all,
moved	 of	 their	 own	 accord,	 and	 even	 he	 could	 not	 guess	 the	 pace	 or	 track	 of	 a
woman's	 thoughts,	 especially	 when	 it	 had	 to	 do	 with	 sex.	 And	 this	 was	 most
assuredly	 a	 play	 for	 favors—Murillio's	 best	 game,	 and	 he	 always	 played	 it
through.	 Never	 disappoint	 them,	 that	 was	 the	 key.	 The	 closest-held	 secret	 is	 the
one	that	never	sours	with	age.
Few	 of	 the	 other	 tables	 on	 the	 balcony	 were	 occupied,	 the	 establishment's
noble	patrons	preferring	the	scented	airs	of	the	dining	room	within.	Murillio	found
comfort	in	the	buzzing	life	of	the	streets,	and	he	knew	his	guest	did	too—at	least	in
this	 instance.	 With	 all	 the	 noise	 rising	 from	 below,	 their	 chances	 of	 being
overheard	were	slight.
As	his	gaze	wandered	aimlessly	along	Morul's	Street	of	Jewels,	he	stiffened
slightly,	eyes	widening	as	they	focused	on	a	figure	standing	in	a	doorway	opposite
him.	He	shifted	in	his	seat,	dropping	his	left	hand	past	the	stone	railing,	out	of	the
woman's	sight.	Then	he	jerked	it	repeatedly,	glaring	down	at	the	figure.
Rallick	 Nom's	 smile	 broadened.	 He	 stepped	 away	 from	 the	 doorway	 and
strolled	up	the	street,	pausing	to	inspect	 an	 array	of	pearls	laid	out	on	an	ebony
table	in	front	of	a	store.	The	proprietor	took	a	nervous	step	forward	then	relaxed
as	Rallick	moved	on.
Murillio	sighed,	leaning	back	and	taking	a	mouthful	of	liquor.	Idiot!	The	man's
face,	 his	 hands,	 his	 walk,	 his	 eyes,	 all	 said	 one	 thing:	 killer.	 Hell,	 even	 his
wardrobe	had	all	the	warmth	and	vitality	of	an	executioner's	uniform.
When	 it	 came	 to	 subtlety	 Rallick	 Nom	 was	 sorely	 lacking.	 Which	 made	 this


whole	thing	rather	odd,	that	such	a	complex	scheme	could	have	been	born	from	the
assassin's	rigidly	geometric	brain.	Still,	whatever	its	origins,	it	was	pure	genius.
“Do	you	dearly	wish	to	attend,	Murillio?”	the	woman	asked.
Murillio	smiled	his	warmest	smile.	He	looked	away.	“It's	a	large	estate,	isn't
it?”
“Lady	Simtal's?	Indeed,	fraught	with	rooms.”	The	woman	dipped	one	dainty
finger	into	the	pungent,	fiery	liquid,	then	raised	it	to	her	lips,	inserting	it	into	her
mouth	as	if	in	afterthought.	She	continued	studying	the	goblet	in	her	other	hand.	“I
would	expect	a	good	many	of	the	servants'	quarters,	though	lacking	in	the	simplest
needs	of	luxury,	will	remain	empty	for	much	of	the	night.”
No	clearer	invitation	did	Murillio	require.	Rallick's	plan	centered	on	this	very
moment,	and	its	consequences.	Still,	adultery	had	one	drawback.	Murillio	had	no
desire	 to	 meet	 this	 woman's	 husband	 on	 the	 duelling	 piste.	 He	 drove	 such
disturbing	thoughts	away	with	another	mouthful	of	wine.	“I	would	love	to	attend
the	 Lady's	 festival,	 on	 one	 condition.”	 He	 looked	 up	 and	 locked	 gazes	 with	 the
woman.	 “That	 you	 will	 grace	 me	 with	 your	 company	 that	 night—for	 an	 hour	 or
two,	that	is.”	His	brow	assumed	a	troubled	furrow.	“I	would	not	wish	to	impinge
on	your	husband's	claim	on	you,	of	course.”	Which	is	exactly	what	he	would	be
doing,	and	they	both	knew	it.
“Of	 course,”	 the	 woman	 replied,	 suddenly	 coy.	 “That	 would	 be	 unseemly.
How	many	invitations	do	you	require?”
“Two,”	he	said.	“Best	that	I	be	seen	with	a	companion.”
“Yes,	it's	best.”
Murillio	glanced	down	at	his	now	empty	goblet	with	a	rueful	expression.	Then
he	sighed.	“Alas,	I	must	be	taking	my	leave.”
“I	admire	your	self-discipline,”	the	woman	said.
You	 won't	 on	 Gedderone's	 Eve,	 Murillio	 answered	 silently,	 as	 he	 rose	 from
his	chair.	“The	Lady	of	Chance	has	graced	me	with	this	meeting	of	ours,”	he	said,
bowing.	“Until	the	eve,	Lady	Orr.”
“Until	then,”	the	councilman's	wife	answered,	seeming	already	to	lose	interest
in	him.	“Good-bye.”
Murillio	bowed	again,	then	left	the	balcony.	Among	the	crowded	tables	more
than	a	few	noblewomen's	heavy-lidded	eyes	watched	him	leave.
Morul's	Street	of	Jewels	ended	at	Sickle	Gate.	Rallick	felt	the	wide	eyes	of	the
two	 guards	 beside	 the	 ramp	 following	 him	 as	 he	 passed	 through	 the	 passage


between	the	massive	stones	of	the	Third	Tier	Wall.	Ocelot	had	told	him	to	make	it
plain,	 and	 while	 Murillio	 was	 of	 the	 opinion	 that	 only	 a	 blind	 man	 could	 ever
mistake	him	for	anything	other	than	a	killer,	Rallick	had	taken	pains	to	achieve	the
obvious.
The	guards	did	nothing,	of	course.	Giving	the	appearance	of	being	a	murderer
wasn't	the	same	as	being	one	in	truth.	The	city's	laws	were	strict	in	such	things.
He	 knew	 he	 might	 find	 himself	 being	 followed	 as	 he	 strode	 down	 the	 opulent
streets	of	Higher	Estates,	but	he'd	leave	them	to	it,	making	no	effort	to	lose	them.
Darujhistan's	 nobles	 paid	 good	 money	 to	 loose	 spies	 on	 to	 the	 streets	 day	 after
day.	Might	as	well	make	them	earn	their	bread.
Rallick	had	no	sympathy	for	them.	He	did	not,	however,	share	the	commoner's
hatred	for	the	nobility.	Their	constant	airs,	prickly	honors,	and	endless	squabbles
made	for	good	business,	after	all.
When	the	Malazan	Empire	came	that	would	end,	he	suspected.	In	the	Empire,
assassin	 guilds	 were	 illegal,	 and	 those	 of	 the	 trade	 who	 were	 deemed	 worthy
were	 enlisted	 into	 the	 secret	 ranks	 of	 the	 Claw.	 As	 for	 those	 who	 weren't
considered	worthy,	they	simply	disappeared.	The	nobles	didn't	fare	much	better,	if
the	 rumors	 from	 Pale	 held	 any	 truth.	 It	 would	 be	 a	 different	 world	 when	 the
Empire	came,	and	Rallick	wasn't	sure	he	wanted	to	be	part	of	it.
Still,	 there	 were	 things	 left	 to	 achieve.	 He	 wondered	 if	 Murillio	 had
succeeded	 in	 getting	 the	 invitations.	 Everything	 hinged	 on	 that.	 There'd	 been	 a
long-drawn-out	 argument	 about	 it	 the	 night	 before.	 Murillio	 preferred	 widows.
Adultery	had	never	been	his	style.	But	Rallick	had	remained	insistent,	and	finally
Murillio	had	given	in.
The	 assassin	 still	 wondered	 about	 his	 friend's	 reluctance.	 His	 first	 thought
was	that	Murillio	feared	the	possibility	of	a	duel	with	Turban	Orr.	But	Murillio
was	 no	 slouch	 with	 a	 rapier.	 Rallick	 had	 practiced	 with	 him	 in	 secluded	 places
enough	times	to	suspect	that	he	was	an	Adept—and	to	that	even	Turban	Orr	could
not	make	claim.
No,	it	wasn't	fear	that	made	Murillio	shy	from	this	part	of	the	plan.	It	dawned
on	Rallick	that	there	was	a	moral	issue	at	stake.	A	whole	new	side	of	Murillio	had
revealed	itself	to	Rallick	then.
He	was	pondering	the	implications	when	his	gaze	found	a	familiar	face	among
the	street's	crowd.	He	stopped	and	studied	the	surrounding	buildings,	and	his	eyes
widened	 as	 he	 realized	 where	 his	 wanderings	 had	 taken	 him.	 His	 attention
snapped	back	to	the	familiar	figure	appearing	every	few	moments	on	the	street's
opposite	side.	The	assassin's	eyes	narrowed	thoughtfully.


Beneath	 the	 mid-morning's	 blue	 and	 silver	 hue,	 Crokus	 walked	 along	 Lakefront
Street	surrounded	by	the	bedlam	of	merchants	and	shoppers.	A	dozen	streets	ahead
rose	the	city	hills	beyond	the	Third	Tier	Wall.	On	the	easternmost	hill	stood	the
K'rul	belfry,	its	green-patched	bronze	scales	glimmering	in	the	sun's	light.
To	his	mind	the	tower	challenged	Majesty	Hall's	bright	mien,	gazing	over	the
estates	 and	 buildings	 crouched	 on	 the	 lower	 hills	 with	 its	 rheumed	 eyes	 and
history-scarred	face—a	jaded	cast	to	its	mocking	gleam.
Crokus	 shared	 something	 of	 the	 tower's	 imagined	 sardonic	 reserve	 for	 the
pretense	so	rife	in	Majesty	Hall,	an	emotion	of	his	uncle's	that	had	seeped	into	the
lad	 over	 the	 years.	 Adding	 fuel	 to	 this	 fire	 was	 a	 healthy	 dose	 of	 youthful
resentment	toward	anything	that	smacked	of	authority.	And	though	he	gave	it	little
thought,	these	provided	the	primary	impulses	for	his	thieving	activities.	Yet	he'd
never	before	understood	the	most	subtle	and	hurtful	insult	his	thefts	delivered—the
invasion	and	violation	of	privacy.	Again	and	again,	in	his	dreamy	wanderings	both
day	and	night,	the	vision	of	the	young	woman	asleep	in	her	bed	returned	to	him.
Eventually	 Crokus	 grasped	 that	 the	 vision	 had	 everything	 to	 do	 with
—everything.	He'd	come	into	her	room,	a	place	where	the	noble	brats	drooling	at
her	heels	couldn't	enter,	a	place	where	she	might	talk	to	the	ragged	dolls	of	her
childhood,	 when	 innocence	 didn't	 just	 mean	 a	 flower	 not	 yet	 plucked.	 Her
sanctuary.	And	he'd	despoiled	it,	he'd	snatched	from	this	young	woman	her	most
precious	possession:	her	privacy.
No	matter	that	she	was	the	daughter	of	the	D'Arles,	that	she	was	born	to	the
pure	 blood—untainted	 by	 the	 Lady	 of	 Beggars'	 touch—that	 she	 would	 flow
through	 life	 protected	 and	 shielded	 from	 the	 degradations	 of	 the	 real	 world.	 No
matter	 any	 of	 these	 things.	 For	 Crokus,	 his	 crime	 against	 her	 was	 tantamount	 to
rape.	To	have	so	boldly	shattered	her	world	.	.	.
His	 thoughts	 a	 storm	 of	 self-recrimination,	 the	 young	 thief	 turned	 up	 the
Charms	of	Anise	Street,	pushing	through	the	crowds.
In	his	mind	the	once-stalwart	walls	of	righteous	outrage	were	crumbling.	The
hated	 nobility	 had	 shown	 him	 a	 face	 that	 now	 haunted	 him	 with	 its	 beauty,	 and
tugged	 him	 in	 a	 hundred	 unexpected	 directions.	 The	 sweet	 scents	 of	 the	 spice
stores,	wafting	like	perfume	on	the	warming	breeze,	had	unaccountably	lodged	a
nameless	emotion	in	his	throat.	The	shouts	of	Daru	children	playing	in	the	alleys
brimmed	his	eyes	with	sentimental	maundering.
Crokus	strode	through	Clove	Gate	and	entered	Osserc	Narrow.	Directly	ahead
rose	 the	 ramp	 leading	 into	 Higher	 Estates.	 As	 he	 approached	 he	 had	 to	 move
quickly	to	one	side	to	avoid	a	large	carriage	coming	up	on	him	from	behind.	He


didn't	 need	 to	 see	 the	 crest	 adorning	 the	 carriage's	 side	 panel	 to	 recognize	 its
house.	 The	 horses	 snapped	 and	 kicked,	 surging	 forward	 heedless	 of	 anyone	 or
anything	 in	 their	 path.	 Crokus	 paused	 to	 watch	 the	 carriage	 clatter	 up	 the	 ramp,
people	scattering	to	either	side.	From	what	he'd	heard	of	Councilman	Turban	Orr,
it	 seemed	 the	 duelist's	 horses	 matched	 his	 contempt	 for	 those	 he	 supposedly
served.
By	the	time	he	reached	the	Orr	estate	the	carriage	had	already	passed	through
the	outer	gate.	Four	burly	private	guards	had	resumed	their	station	to	either	side.
The	wall	at	their	backs	rose	a	full	fifteen	feet,	topped	with	rusty	iron	cuttings	set
in	 sun-baked	 clay.	 Pumice	 torches	 lined	 the	 wall	 at	 ten-foot	 intervals.	 Crokus
strolled	past	the	gate,	ignoring	the	guards.	At	the	base	the	wall	looked	to	be	about
four	feet	in	breadth,	the	rough-hewn	bricks	a	standard	squared	foot.	He	continued
on	along	the	street,	then	turned	right	to	check	the	wall	fronting	the	alley.	A	single
service	 door,	 tarred	 oak	 banded	 in	 bronze,	 was	 set	 in	 this	 wall	 at	 the	 nearest
corner.
And	 no	 guard.	 The	 shadows	 of	 the	 opposite	 estate	 draped	 a	 heavy	 cloak
across	 the	 narrow	 aisle.	 Crokus	 entered	 the	 damp,	 musty	 darkness.	 He	 had
traveled	 half	 the	 length	 of	 the	 alley	 when	 a	 hand	 closed	 around	 his	 mouth	 from
behind	 and	 a	 dagger's	 sharp	 point	 pressed	 against	 his	 side.	 Crokus	 froze,	 then
grunted	as	the	hand	pulled	his	face	round.	He	found	himself	looking	into	familiar
eyes.
Rallick	Nom	withdrew	his	dagger	and	stepped	back,	a	severe	frown	marring
his	 brow.	 Crokus	 gaped	 then	 licked	 his	 lips.	 “Rallick,	 Beru's	 Heart,	 you	 scared
me!”
“Good,”	 the	 assassin	 said.	 He	 came	 close.	 “Listen	 carefully,	 Crokus.	 You'll
not	try	Orr's	estate.	You'll	not	go	near	it	again.”
The	thief	shrugged.	“It	was	just	a	thought,	Nom.”
“Kill	it,”	Rallick	said.
His	 lips	 thinning	 into	 a	 straight	 line,	 Crokus	 nodded.	 “All	 right.”	 He	 turned
and	 headed	 toward	 the	 strip	 of	 bright	 sunlight	 marking	 the	 next	 street.	 He	 felt
Rallick's	eyes	on	him	until	he	stepped	out	onto	Traitor's	Track.	He	stopped.	Off	to
his	 left	 climbed	 High	 Gallows	 Hill,	 its	 immaculate	 flowered	 slope	 a	 burst	 of
colors	 surrounding	 the	 fifty-three	 Winding	 Steps.	 The	 five	 nooses	 above	 the
platform	 swung	 slightly	 in	 the	 breeze,	 their	 shadows	 streaks	 of	 black	 reaching
down	the	slope	to	the	cobbles	of	the	street.	It	had	been	a	long	time	since	the	last
High	 Criminal	 was	 hanged,	 while	 off	 in	 the	 Gadrobi	 District	 the	 Low	 Gallows'
ropes	were	replaced	weekly	due	to	stretching.	An	odd	contrast	to	mark	these	tense


times.
Abruptly,	he	shook	his	head.	Avoiding	the	turmoil	of	questions	was	too	much
of	 an	 effort.	 Had	 Nom	 followed	 him?	 No,	 a	 lesser	 likelihood	 than	 the	 assassin
having	 marked	 Orr	 or	 someone	 in	 the	 estate	 for	 murder.	 A	 bold	 contract.	 He
wondered	 who	 had	 had	 the	 guts	 to	 offer	 it—a	 fellow	 noble,	 no	 doubt.	 But	 the
courage	of	the	contract's	offering	paled	when	compared	to	Rallick's	accepting	it.
In	any	case,	the	weight	of	the	assassin's	warning	was	enough	to	crush	any	idea
of	 thieving	 Orr's	 estate—at	 least	 for	 now.	 Crokus	 jammed	 his	 hands	 into	 his
pockets.	As	he	walked,	his	thoughts	lost	in	a	maze	of	dead	ends,	he	frowned	with
the	realization	that	one	of	his	hands,	probing	deep	in	the	pocket,	had	closed	around
a	coin.
He	 withdrew	 it.	 Yes,	 it	 was	 the	 coin	 he'd	 found	 on	 the	 night	 of	 the
assassinations.	 He	 recalled	 its	 inexplicable	 appearance,	 clattering	 at	 his	 feet	 an
instant	 before	 the	 assassin's	 crossbow	 quarrel	 whizzed	 past.	 Beneath	 the	 bright
morning	 light	 Crokus	 now	 took	 the	 time	 to	 examine	 it.	 The	 first	 side	 he	 held	 up
before	 him	 displayed	 the	 profile	 of	 a	 young	 man,	 with	 an	 amused	 expression,
wearing	some	kind	of	 floppy	hat.	Tiny	runelike	lettering	ran	around	the	edge—a
language	 the	 thief	 didn't	 recognize	 as	 it	 was	 so	 very	 different	 from	 the	 cursive
Daru	script	with	which	he	was	familiar.
Crokus	turned	the	coin.	How	odd!	Another	head,	this	one	a	woman's	facing	the
other	way.	The	etched	script	here	was	of	a	style	different	from	the	opposite	side,	a
kind	of	left-slanting	hatchwork.	The	woman	looked	young,	with	features	similar	to
the	man's;	her	expression	held	nothing	of	amusement,	seeming	to	the	thief's	eyes
cold	and	unyielding.
The	metal	was	old,	streaked	here	and	there	with	raw	copper	and	pitted	around
the	faces	with	rough	tin.	The	coin	felt	surprisingly	heavy,	though	he	concluded	that
its	 only	 worth	 lay	 in	 its	 uniqueness.	 He'd	 seen	 the	 coinage	 of	 Callows,
Genabackis,	 Amat	 El,	 and,	 once,	 the	 ridged	 bars	 of	 the	 Seguleh,	 but	 none	 had
looked	like	this	one.
Where	had	it	fallen	from?	Had	his	clothing	picked	it	up	somewhere,	or	had	he
kicked	 it	 into	 motion	 while	 crossing	 the	 roof?	 Or	 had	 it	 been	 among	 the	 D'Arle
maiden's	treasure?	Crokus	shrugged.	In	any	case,	its	arrival	had	been	timely.
By	this	time	his	walk	had	taken	him	to	the	East	Gate.	Just	outside	the	city	wall
and	 along	 the	 road	 called	 Jatem's	 Worry,	 crouched	 the	 handful	 of	 sagging
buildings	 named	 Worrytown:	 the	 thief's	 destination.	 The	 gate	 remained	 open
during	 daylight	 hours,	 and	 a	 slow-plodding	 line	 of	 vegetable-carts	 crowded	 the
narrow	passage.	Among	them,	he	saw	as	he	pushed	his	way	along	one	edge,	were


the	first	wagonloads	of	refugees	from	Pale,	those	who'd	managed	to	slip	through
the	 siege	 lines	 during	 the	 battle	 and	 had	 crossed	 the	 south	 Rhivi	 Plain	 and	 then
through	the	Gadrobi	Hills	and	finally	on	to	Jatem's	Worry.	Scanning	their	faces	he
saw	 a	 fiery	 desperation	 dulled	 by	 exhaustion:	 they	 looked	 upon	 the	 city	 with	 a
jaded	 eye	 toward	 its	 meager	 defenses,	 realizing	 that	 they'd	 bought	 only	 a	 short
measure	of	time	with	their	flight,	yet	too	tired	to	care.
Disturbed	 by	 what	 he	 saw,	 Crokus	 hurried	 through	 the	 gate	 and	 approached
Worrytown's	 largest	 structure,	 a	 rambling	 wooden	 tavern.	 Over	 the	 door	 hung	 a
board	on	which	had	been	painted,	decades	ago,	a	three-legged	ram.	To	the	thief's
mind,	the	painting	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	tavern's	name,	which	was	the	Boar's
Tears.	The	coin	still	in	one	hand,	Crokus	entered	and	paused	just	inside.
A	 few	 desultory	 faces	 turned	 to	 regard	 him	 briefly,	 then	 swung	 back	 to	 their
cups.	 At	 a	 table	 in	 a	 gloomy	 corner	 opposite,	 Crokus	 saw	 a	 familiar	 figure,	 its
hands	raised	above	its	head	and	gesticulating	wildly.	A	grin	tugged	the	thief's	lips,
and	he	strode	forward.
“.	.	.	and	then	did	Kruppe	sweep	with	motion	so	swift	as	to	be	unseen	by	any
the	 king's	 crown	 and	 scepter	 from	 the	 sarcophagus	 lid.	 Too	 many	 priests	 in	 this
tomb,	thinks	Kruppe	then,	one	less	'twould	be	a	relief	to	all	lest	the	dead	king's
musty	breath	shorten	and	so	awaken	his	wraith.	Many	times	afore	this	had	Kruppe
faced	 a	 wraith's	 wrath	 in	 some	 deep	 pit	 of	 D'rek,	 droning	 its	 list	 of	 life-crimes
and	bemoaning	its	need	to	devour	my	soul—harrah!	Kruppe	was	ever	too	elusive
for	such	sundry	spirits	and	their	knock-kneed	chatter—”
Crokus	 laid	 a	 hand	 on	 Kruppe's	 damp	 shoulder,	 and	 the	 shiny	 round	 face
swung	 up	 to	 observe	 him.	 “Ah!”	 Kruppe	 exclaimed,	 waving	 a	 hand	 toward	 his
lone	companion	at	the	table	and	explaining,	“An	apprentice	past	comes	to	fawn	in
due	fashion!	Crokus,	be	seated	by	all	means	possible.	Wench!	Some	more	of	your
finest	wine,	haste!”
Crokus	eyed	the	man	seated	opposite	Kruppe.	“Seems	you	two	might	be	busy
right	now.”
Hope	 flared	 in	 the	 man's	 expression	 and	 he	 rose	 quickly.	 “Oh,	 no,”	 he
exclaimed.	 “By	 all	 means	 interrupt.”	 His	 eyes	 darted	 to	 Kruppe	 then	 back	 to
Crokus.	“I	must	be	leaving	in	any	event,	I	assure	you!	Good	day	to	you,	Kruppe.
Until	some	other	time,	then.”	The	man	bobbed	his	head	then	departed.
“Precipitous	creature,”	Kruppe	muttered,	reaching	for	the	mug	of	wine	the	man
had	 left	 behind.	 “Ah,	 look	 at	 this,”	 he	 said,	 frowning	 up	 at	 Crokus,	 “nigh	 twothirds	 full.	 A	 potential	 waste!”	 Kruppe	 drank	 it	 down	 in	 one	 swift	 gulp,	 then
sighed.	“Said	potential	averted,	Dessembrae	be	praised.”


Crokus	sat.	“Was	that	man	your	trader	contact?”	he	asked.
“Heavens,	no.”	Kruppe	waved	a	hand.	“A	poor	refugee	from	Pale,	wandering
lost.	Fortunate	for	him	was	Kruppe,	whose	brilliant	insights	have	sent	him—”
“Straight	out	the	door,”	Crokus	finished,	laughing.
Kruppe	scowled.
The	 serving	 woman	 arrived	 with	 an	 earthen	 carafe	 of	 sour-smelling	 wine.
Kruppe	refilled	the	mugs.	“And	now,	wonders	Kruppe,	what	would	this	expertly
trained	 lad	 seek	 from	 this	 one-time	 master	 of	 all	 arts	 nefarious?	 Or	 have	 you
triumphed	 yet	 again	 and	 come	 with	 booty	 atucked,	 seeking	 proper	 dispensation
and	the	like?”
“Well,	 yes—I	 mean,	 no,	 not	 quite.”	 Crokus	 glanced	 around,	 then	 leaned
forward.	“It's	about	last	time,”	he	whispered.	“I	knew	you'd	be	out	here	to	sell	the
stuff	I	brought	you.”
Kruppe	leaned	forward	to	meet	the	lad,	their	faces	inches	apart.	“The	D'Arle
acquisition?”	he	whispered	back,	waggling	his	eyebrows.
“Exactly!	Have	you	sold	it	off	yet?”
Kruppe	 pulled	 a	 handkerchief	 from	 a	 sleeve	 and	 mopped	 his	 brow.	 “What
with	 all	 this	 talk	 of	 war,	 the	 traders'	 routes	 are	 all	 amiss.	 So,	 to	 answer	 your
question,	uhm,	not	quite	yet,	admits	Kruppe—”
“Great!”
Kruppe	started	at	the	lad's	shout,	his	eyes	squeezing	shut.	When	they	opened
again	they	were	thin	slits.	“Ah,	Kruppe	understands.	The	lad	wishes	their	return	to
his	possession	so	that	he	might	seek	higher	recompense	elsewhere?”
Crokus	 blinked.	 “No,	 of	 course	 not.	 I	 mean,	 yes,	 I	 want	 it	 back.	 But	 I'm	 not
planning	on	fencing	it	anywhere.	That	is,	I'm	still	dealing	with	you	on	everything
else.	Only	this	one's	special.”	As	he	spoke	Crokus	felt	heat	rise	to	his	face,	and
was	thankful	for	the	gloom.	“A	special	case,	Kruppe.”
A	broad	smile	broke	on	Kruppe's	round	face.	“Why,	most	certainly,	then,	lad.
Shall	I	deliver	said	items	to	you	this	eve?	Excellent,	consider	the	matter	closed.
Pray,	tell,	what	do	you	have	in	yon	hand	there?”
Crokus	 stared	 in	 confusion,	 then	 he	 glanced	 down	 at	 his	 hand.	 “Oh,	 just	 a
coin,”	he	explained,	showing	it	to	Kruppe.	“I	picked	it	up	the	same	night	I	thieved
D'Arle's.	Two-headed,	see?”
“Indeed?	May	Kruppe	examine	the	peculiar	item	more	closely?”
Crokus	 obliged,	 then	 reached	 for	 the	 mug	 of	 wine.	 He	 leaned	 back.	 “I	 was
thinking	of	Orr's	estate	next,”	he	said	casually,	his	eyes	fixed	on	Kruppe.


“Mmm.”	Kruppe	turned	the	coin	in	his	hand	again	and	again.	“Poorest	quality
cast,”	he	muttered.	“Crooked	stamping,	too.	Orr's	estate,	you	say?	Kruppe	advises
caution.	The	house	is	well	protected.	The	metallurgist	who	foundried	this	should
have	 been	 hanged,	 indeed,	 probably	 was,	 thinks	 Kruppe.	 Black	 copper,	 no	 less.
Cheap	tin,	temperatures	all	too	cool.	Favor	me,	Crokus?	Peruse	the	scene	in	the
street	from	yon	door.	If	you	spy	a	red	and	green	merchant's	wagon	wobbling	into
town,	Kruppe	would	be	much	obliged	for	such	information.”
Crokus	rose	and	crossed	the	room	to	the	door.	Opening	it	he	stepped	outside
and	glanced	around.	Seeing	no	wagon	in	sight,	the	youth	shrugged	again	and	went
back	inside.	He	returned	to	the	table.	“No	merchant	wagon.”
“Ah,	 well,”	 Kruppe	 said.	 He	 set	 down	 the	 coin	 on	 the	 table.	 “Altogether
worthless,	judges	wise	Kruppe.	You	may	part	with	it	at	your	leisure.”
Crokus	collected	the	coin	and	slipped	it	into	his	pocket.	“No,	I'm	keeping	it.
For	good	luck.”
Kruppe	looked	up,	his	eyes	bright,	but	Crokus	had	his	attention	on	the	mug	in
his	 hands.	 The	 fat	 man	 glanced	 away,	 sighing.	 “Kruppe	 must	 needs	 depart
immediately,	if	this	eve's	rendezvous	is	to	be	propitious	for	all	involved.”
Crokus	drained	his	wine.	“We	can	head	back	together.”
“Excellent.”	Kruppe	rose,	pausing	to	brush	crumbs	from	his	chest.	“Shall	we
be	 off,	 then?”	 He	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 Crokus	 frowning	 down	 at	 his	 hand.	 “Has
something	smitten	the	lad?”	he	asked	quickly.
Crokus	started.	He	looked	away	guiltily,	the	color	rising	in	his	face.	“No,”	he
mumbled.	 He	 glanced	 again	 at	 his	 hand.	 “I	 must've	 picked	 up	 some	 wax
somewhere,”	he	explained.	He	rubbed	his	hand	on	his	leg	and	grinned	sheepishly.
“Let's	go.”
“It	 will	 be	 a	 fine	 day	 for	 a	 walk,	 pronounces	 Kruppe,	 who	 is	 wise	 in	 all
things.”
White	 Gold's	 Round	 encircled	 an	 abandoned	 tower	 with	 a	 panoply	 of	 brightly
dyed	awnings.	The	goldsmith	merchant	shops,	each	with	their	own	security	guards
loitering	 outside,	 faced	 out	 on	 the	 round	 street,	 the	 aisles	 between	 them	 narrow
cracks	leading	to	the	tower's	ruined	compound.
The	 many	 tales	 of	 death	 and	 madness	 surrounding	 Hinter's	 Tower	 and	 its
environs	kept	it	empty	and,	uppermost	in	the	minds	of	the	goldsmiths,	an	unlikely
approach	to	their	precious	stores.
As	 the	 afternoon	 waned	 toward	 dusk,	 the	 Round's	 crowds	 thinned	 and	 the


private	 guards	 grew	 more	 wary.	 Iron	 grilles	 rattled	 into	 place	 over	 storefronts
here	and	there,	and	among	the	few	that	remained	open,	torches	were	ignited.
Murillio	entered	the	Round	from	the	Third	Tier	Road,	pausing	every	now	and
then	to	examine	a	shopkeeper's	wares.	Wrapped	in	a	shimmering	blue	cloak	from
the	Malle	Waste,	Murillio	knew	his	ostentatious	display	of	wealth	would	do	much
to	allay	suspicion.
He	came	to	one	shop	in	particular,	framed	on	either	side	by	unlit	stores.	The
goldsmith,	narrow-faced	and	pebble-nosed,	leaned	hawkishly	on	his	counter,	his
weathered	hands	before	him	bearing	tiny	gray	scars	that	looked	like	raven	tracks
on	mud.	One	finger	tapped	a	restless	beat.	Murillio	approached,	meeting	the	man's
beetle	eyes.
“Is	this	the	shop	of	Krute	of	Talient?”
“I'm	Krute,”	the	goldsmith	grated	sourly,	as	if	disgruntled	with	his	lot	in	life.
“Talient	pearls,	set	in	Bloodgold	from	the	mines	of	Moap	and	Belt,	none	other	to
be	 found	 in	 all	 Darujhistan.”	 He	 leaned	 forward	 and	 spat	 past	 Murillio,	 who
involuntarily	stepped	to	one	side.
“No	customers	this	day?”	he	asked,	pulling	a	handkerchief	from	his	sleeve	and
touching	his	lips.
Krute's	 gaze	 tightened.	 “Only	 one,”	 he	 said.	 “Perused	 a	 cache	 of	 Goaliss
gems,	rare	as	dragon's	milk	and	suckled	from	rock	as	grim.	A	hundred	slaves	lost
to	each	stone	prised	from	the	angry	veins.”	Krute's	shoulders	jerked	and	his	eyes
darted.	“Out	the	back	I	keep	them,	lest	temptation	spatter	the	street	with	blood,	and
like.”
Murillio	nodded.	“Sound	practice.	Did	he	purchase	any?”
Krute	 grinned,	 revealing	 blackened	 stumps	 for	 teeth.	 “One,	 but	 not	 the	 best.
Come,	 I'll	 show	 you.”	 He	 went	 to	 the	 side	 door	 and	 opened	 it.	 “Through	 here,
then.”
Murillio	entered	the	shop.	Black	curtains	covered	the	walls,	and	the	air	was
musty	 with	 old	 sweat.	 Krute	 led	 him	 into	 the	 back	 room,	 which	 if	 anything	 was
more	 rank	 and	 stifling	 than	 the	 first.	 The	 goldsmith	 dropped	 the	 curtain	 between
the	two	rooms	and	faced	Murillio.
“Move	quickly!	I've	laid	out	a	horde	of	fool's	gold	and	worthless	stones	on
the	 counter	 out	 front.	 If	 any	 sharp-eyed	 customer	 marks	 them	 this	 hole	 will	 be
finished.”	He	kicked	at	the	back	wall	and	a	panel	swung	from	its	hinges.	“Crawl
through,	dammit,	and	tell	Rallick	that	the	Guild	is	not	pleased	with	his	generosity
regarding	our	secrets.	Go!”
Murillio	 fell	 to	 his	 knees	 and	 pushed	 his	 way	 through	 the	 portal,	 the	 earthen


floor	damp	beneath	his	hands	and	staining	his	knees.	He	groaned	his	distaste	as	the
door	swung	down	behind	him,	then	climbed	to	his	feet.	Before	him	rose	Hinter's
Tower,	 its	 mold-ridden	 stone	 walls	 glistening	 in	 the	 dying	 light.	 An	 overgrown
cobbled	 pathway	 led	 up	 to	 the	 arched	 entrance	 bereft	 of	 a	 door	 and	 heavy	 with
shadows.	Of	the	chamber	within	Murillio	saw	only	darkness.
Roots	 from	 the	 scraggy	 scrub	 oaks	 lining	 the	 path	 had	 pushed	 most	 of	 the
cobbles	 up	 from	 the	 earth,	 making	 the	 way	 treacherous.	 After	 a	 cautious	 minute
Murillio	 arrived	 at	 the	 doorway.	 He	 narrowed	 his	 gaze	 and	 tried	 to	 pierce	 the
darkness.	“Rallick?”	he	hissed.	“Where	in	Hood's	name	are	you?”
A	voice	spoke	behind	him.	“You're	late.”
Murillio	 spun,	 a	 long,	 thin	 dueling	 rapier	 in	 his	 left	 hand	 rasping	 from	 its
sheath	 and	 sweeping	 low	 into	 guard	 position,	 a	 main-gauche	 appearing	 in	 his
right	 hand	 as	 he	 dropped	 into	 a	 defensive	 crouch,	 then	 relaxed.	 “Dammit,
Rallick!”
The	assassin	grunted	in	amusement,	eyeing	the	rapier's	razor-sharp	tip,	which
had	but	a	moment	earlier	hovered	inches	from	his	solar	plexis.	“Good	to	see	your
reflexes	have	not	dulled,	friend.	All	that	wine	and	those	pastries	seem	not	to	have
girdled	you	.	.	.	much.”
Murillio	resheathed	his	weapons.	“I	expected	to	find	you	in	the	tower.”
Eyes	widening,	Rallick	said,	“Are	you	mad?	The	place	is	haunted.”
“You	 mean	 that's	 not	 just	 a	 story	 you	 assassins	 made	 up	 to	 keep	 people
away?”
Rallick	turned	and	made	his	way	to	a	lower	terrace	that	had	once	overlooked
the	garden.	White	stone	benches	squatted	in	the	wiry	yellow	grass	like	the	stained
bones	of	some	gargantuan	beast.	Below	the	terrace,	Murillio	saw	as	he	joined	the
assassin,	 sprawled	 a	 muddy,	 algae-filled	 pond.	 Frogs	 croaked	 and	 mosquitoes
buzzed	 in	 the	 tepid	 air.	 “Some	 nights,”	 Rallick	 said	 as	 he	 brushed	 dead	 leaves
from	one	of	the	benches,	“wraiths	crowd	the	entrance—you	can	walk	right	up	to
them,	listen	to	their	pleas	and	threats.	They	all	want	out.”	He	sat	down.
Murillio	remained	 standing,	his	gaze	on	 the	 tower.	“What	 of	 Hinter	himself?
Does	his	wraith	number	among	them?”
“No.	The	madman	sleeps	within,	or	so	it's	said.	The	wraiths	are	trapped	in	the
sorcerer's	nightmares—he	holds	onto	them,	and	even	Hood	cannot	draw	them	to
his	 cold	 bosom.	 Do	 you	 wish	 to	 know	 where	 those	 wraiths	 have	 come	 from,
Murillio?”	Rallick	grinned.	“Enter	the	tower,	and	you'll	discover	it	first	hand.”
Murillio	had	been	about	to	go	into	the	tower	when	Rallick	had	surprised	him.
“Thanks	for	the	warning,”	he	snapped	sarcastically,	gathering	his	cloak	and	sitting


down.
Rallick	waved	the	mosquitoes	from	his	face.	“Well?”
“I	have	them,”	Murillio	said.	“Lady	Orr's	most	trusted	hand-servant	delivered
them	this	afternoon.”	He	removed	from	inside	his	cloak	a	bamboo	tube	tied	in	blue
ribbon.	“Two	invitations	to	Lady	Simtal's	Fête,	as	promised.”
“Good.”	The	assassin	looked	quickly	at	his	friend.	“You've	not	seen	Kruppe's
nose	twitch?”
“Not	yet.	Ran	into	him	this	afternoon.	Seems	Crokus	is	making	some	bizarre
demands.	 Of	 course,”	 Murillio	 added,	 scowling,	 “who	 can	 tell	 when	 Kruppe's
caught	wind	of	something?	In	any	case,	I've	seen	nothing	to	suggest	the	slippery
little	gnome	suspects	we're	up	to	anything.”
“What	was	that	you	said	about	Crokus	making	bizarre	demands?”
“A	peculiar	thing,	that,”	Murillio	mused.	“When	I	dropped	by	the	Phoenix	Inn
this	 afternoon	 Kruppe	 was	 delivering	 to	 the	 lad	 the	 pickings	 from	 his	 last	 job.
Now,	 surely	 Crokus	 hasn't	 abandoned	 Kruppe	 as	 his	 fence—we	 all	 would've
caught	wind	of	that.”
“That	was	from	an	estate,	wasn't	it?	Whose?”	Rallick	asked.
“D'Arle's,”	Murillio	answered,	then	his	eyebrows	rose.	“Kiss	of	Gedderone!
The	 D'Arle	 maiden!	 The	 ripe	 one	 with	 the	 cheeks—she's	 being	 shown	 at	 damn
near	every	gathering,	all	the	frilly	lads	leaving	a	trail	for	the	mop-boys.	Oh,	my!
Our	young	thief	is	perchance	smitten,	and	now	keeps	her	baubles	for	himself.	Of
all	the	hopeless	dreams	a	boy	could	have,	he's	reached	for	the	worst.”
“Maybe,”	Rallick	said	quietly.	“Maybe	not.	A	word	to	his	uncle	.	.	.”
Murillio's	 pained	 expression	 lifted.	 “A	 nudge	 in	 the	 right	 direction?	 Yes,
finally!	Mammot	will	be	pleased—”
“Patience,”	 Rallick	 interjected.	 “Turning	 a	 thieving	 child	 into	 a	 man	 of
standing	and	learning	will	require	more	work	than	a	swooning	heart	will	manage.”
Murillio	 frowned.	 “Well,	 forgive	 me	 for	 being	 so	 excited	 at	 the	 prospect	 of
saving	the	lad's	life.”
Rallick's	smile	was	soft.	“Never	regret	such	pleasure,”	he	said.
Catching	the	assassin's	tone,	Murillio	sighed,	the	sharp	edges	of	his	sarcasm
sinking	away.	“It's	been	many	years	since	we	had	so	many	things	of	hope	to	strive
for,”	he	said	quietly.
“The	 path	 to	 one	 will	 be	 bloody,”	 Rallick	 said.	 “Don't	 forget	 that.	 But,	 yes,
it's	been	a	long	time.	I	wonder	if	Kruppe	even	remembers	such	days.”
Murillio	 snorted.	 “Kruppe's	 memory	 is	 revised	 hourly.	 All	 that	 holds	 him


together	is	fear	of	being	discovered.”
Rallick's	eyes	darkened.	“Discovered?”
His	 friend	 seemed	 far	 away	 but	 then	 he	 collected	 himself	 and	 smiled.	 “Oh,
worn	suspicions,	no	more.	He's	a	slippery	one,	is	Kruppe.”
Rallick	 chuckled	 at	 Murillio's	 mocking	 syntax.	 He	 studied	 the	 pond	 before
them.	“Yes,”	he	agreed,	after	a	time,	“he's	the	slippery	one,	all	right.”	He	stood.
“Krute	will	be	wanting	to	close	up.	The	Round's	asleep	by	now.”
“Right.”
The	two	men	left	the	terrace,	methane	mists	swirling	around	their	legs.	As	they
reached	the	path	Murillio	turned	for	a	look	at	the	tower's	doorway,	wondering	if
he	could	see	the	gibbering	wraiths,	but	all	he	saw	beneath	the	sagging	arch	was	a
wall	 of	 darkness.	 In	 some	 strange	 way	 he	 found	 that	 more	 disturbing	 than	 any
horde	of	lost	souls	he	might	imagine.
Bright	morning	sunlight	flowed	in	from	the	broad	windows	of	Baruk's	study,	and	a
warm	 wind	 slipped	 into	 the	 room	 carrying	 the	 smells	 and	 noises	 from	 the	 street
below.	 The	 alchemist,	still	 dressed	in	his	nightclothes,	sat	 on	a	 high	stool	 at	the
map	table.	He	held	a	brush	in	one	hand,	dipping	it	now	and	again	into	an	ornate
silver	inkwell.
The	 red	 ink	 had	been	watered	 down.	 He	 painted	wash	on	 the	 map,	 covering
the	areas	now	held	by	the	Malazan	Empire.	Fully	one	half	of	the	map—the	north
half—was	red.	A	small	clear	strip	just	south	of	Blackdog	Forest	marked	Caladan
Brood's	 forces,	 flanked	 on	 either	 side	 by	 two	 smaller	 patches	 indicating	 the
Crimson	Guard.	The	red	wash	surrounded	these	clear	spots	and	extended	down	to
engulf	Pale,	ending	on	the	north	edge	of	the	Tahlyn	Mountains.
The	street	noises	had	become	quite	loud,	Baruk	noted,	as	he	leaned	close	to
the	map	to	paint	the	red	tide's	southern	border.	Construction	work,	he	concluded,
hearing	 the	 squeal	 of	 winches	 and	 a	 voice	 bellowing	 at	 passers-by.	 The	 sounds
died	away,	then	there	came	a	loud	crack!	Baruk	jumped,	his	right	forearm	jerking
out	and	knocking	over	the	inkwell.	The	red	ink	poured	across	his	map.
Cursing,	Baruk	sat	back.	His	eyes	widened	as	he	watched	the	spreading	stain
cover	Darujhistan	and	continue	south	to	Catlin.	He	stepped	down	from	the	stool,
reaching	 for	 a	 cloth	 to	 wipe	 his	 hands,	 more	 than	 a	 little	 shaken	 by	 what	 could
easily	 be	 taken	 as	 an	 omen.	 He	 walked	 across	 the	 chamber	 to	 the	 window,	 bent
forward	and	looked	down.
A	crew	of	workers	was	busy	tearing	up	the	street	directly	below.	Two	burly


men	 swung	 picks	 while	 three	 others	 formed	 a	 line	 passing	 the	 shattered
cobblestones	 to	 a	 growing	 pile	 on	 the	 pavement.	 The	 foreman	 stood	 nearby,	 his
back	to	a	wagon,	studying	a	parchment	scroll.
Baruk	frowned.	“Who's	in	charge	of	road	maintenance?”	he	wondered	aloud.
A	soft	knock	diverted	his	attention.	“Yes?”
His	servant,	Roald,	took	a	single	step	into	the	room.	“One	of	your	agents	has
arrived,	Lord.”
Baruk	flicked	a	glance	at	the	map	table.	“Have	him	wait	a	moment,	Roald.”
“Yes,	Lord.”	The	servant	stepped	back	and	closed	the	door.
The	alchemist	walked	over	to	the	table	and	rolled	up	the	ruined	map.	From	the
hallway	came	a	loud	voice	followed	by	a	murmur.	Baruk	slid	the	map	on	to	a	shelf
and	turned	in	time	to	see	the	agent	enter,	on	his	trail	a	scowling	Roald.
Waving	 at	 Roald	 to	 leave,	 Baruk	 gazed	 down	 at	 the	 gaudily	 dressed	 man.
“Good	day,	Kruppe.”
Roald	stepped	out	and	softly	shut	the	door.
“More	 than	 good,	 Baruk,	 dear	 friend	 of	 Kruppe.	 Truly	 wonderful!	 Have	 you
partaken	of	the	morn's	fresh	air?”
Baruk	 glanced	 at	 the	 window.	 “Unfortunately,”	 he	 said,	 “the	 air	 outside	 my
window	has	become	rather	dusty.”
Kruppe	paused.	His	arms	returned	to	his	sides,	then	he	reached	into	a	sleeve
and	withdrew	his	handkerchief.	He	patted	his	brow.	“Ah,	yes,	the	road	workers.
Kruppe	passed	them	on	his	way	in.	A	rather	belligerent	lot,	thinks	Kruppe.	Indeed,
rude,	but	hardly	exceptional	for	such	menial	laborers.”
Baruk	gestured	to	a	chair.
With	a	beatific	smile	Kruppe	sat.	“Such	a	hot	day,”	he	said,	eyeing	the	carafe
of	wine	on	the	mantelpiece.
Ignoring	 this,	 Baruk	 strode	 to	 the	 window,	 then	 turned	 his	 back	 to	 it.	 He
studied	the	man,	wondering	if	he	would	ever	catch	a	glimpse	of	what	lay	beyond
Kruppe's	cherubic	demeanor.	“What	have	you	heard?”	he	asked	softly.
“What	has	Kruppe	heard?	What	hasn't	Kruppe	heard!”
Baruk	raised	an	eyebrow.	“How	about	brevity?”
The	 man	 shifted	 in	 the	 chair	 and	 mopped	 his	 forehead.	 “Such	 heat!”	 Seeing
Baruk's	expression	harden,	he	continued,	“Now,	as	for	news.”	He	leaned	forward,
his	 voice	 falling	 to	 a	 whisper.	 “'Tis	 muttered	 in	 corners	 in	 the	 bars,	 in	 dark
doorways	of	dank	streets,	in	the	nefarious	shadows	of	nocturnal	night,	in—”
“Get	on	with	it!”


“Yes,	of	course.	Well,	Kruppe	has	caught	wind	of	a	rumor.	An	assassin's	war,
no	less.	The	Guild	is	taking	losses,	'tis	said.”
Baruk	turned	back	to	the	window,	his	eyes	on	the	street	below.	“And	where	do
the	thieves	stand?”
“The	 rooftops	 are	 getting	 crowded.	 Throats	 are	 being	 slit.	 Profits	 have
plummeted.”
“Where's	Rallick?”
Kruppe	 blinked.	 “He's	 disappeared,”	 he	 said.	 “Kruppe	 has	 not	 seen	 him	 in
days.”
“This	assassin's	war,	it	isn't	internal?”
“No.”
“Has	this	new	force	been	identified,	then?”
“No.”
Baruk's	 gaze	 intensified.	 Below,	 the	 street	 workers	 seemed	 to	 spend	 more
time	 arguing	 than	 working.	 An	 assassin's	 war	 could	 be	 trouble.	 Vorcan's	 Guild
was	strong,	but	the	Empire	was	stronger,	if	indeed	these	newcomers	were	Claws.
But	 something	 felt	 decidedly	odd	 about	 the	whole	 thing.	 In	 the	past	the	Empress
used	such	local	guilds,	often	recruited	from	them.	The	alchemist	could	discern	no
purpose	behind	such	a	war,	and	that	was	even	more	disturbing	to	him	than	the	war
itself.	 Hearing	 a	 shuffling	 behind	 him,	 he	 remembered	 his	 agent.	 He	 turned	 and
smiled.	“You	can	go	now.”
Something	flashed	in	Kruppe's	eyes	that	startled	Baruk.	The	fat	man	rose	in	a
single	fluid	motion.	“Kruppe	has	more	to	tell,	Master	Baruk.”
Bemused,	the	alchemist	nodded	for	Kruppe	to	continue.
“The	tale	is	arduous	and	confused,	alas,”	he	said,	striding	to	join	Baruk	at	the
window.	His	handkerchief	had	disappeared.	“Kruppe	can	only	surmise	as	best	a
man	 of	 innumerable	 talents	 may.	 In	 moments	 of	 leisure,	 during	 games	 of	 chance
and	 the	 like.	 In	 the	 aura	 of	 the	 Twins	 an	 Adept	 may	 hear,	 see,	 smell,	 and	 touch
things	as	insubstantial	as	the	wind.	A	taste	of	Lady	Luck,	the	bitter	warning	of	the
Lord's	 Laughter.”	 Kruppe's	 gaze	 snapped	 to	 the	 alchemist.	 “Do	 you	 follow,
Master?”
His	eyes	riveted	 on	the	 man's	round	 face,	 Baruk	said	 quietly,	“You	speak	 of
Oponn.”
Kruppe	looked	back	down	at	the	street.	“Perhaps.	Perhaps	a	grim	feint	meant
to	mislead	such	as	foolish	Kruppe—”
Foolish?	Baruk	smiled	inwardly.	Not	this	man.


“—who	 can	 say?”	 Kruppe	 raised	 a	 hand,	 showing	 in	 his	 palm	 a	 flat	 disc	 of
wax.	 “An	 item,”	 he	 said	 softly,	 his	 eyes	 on	 the	 disc,	 “that	 passes	 without
provenance,	 pursued	 by	 many	 who	 thirst	 for	 its	 cold	 kiss,	 on	 which	 life	 and	 all
that	lay	within	life	is	often	gambled.	Alone,	a	beggar's	crown.	In	great	numbers,	a
king's	folly.	Weighted	with	ruin,	yet	blood	washes	from	it	beneath	the	lightest	rain,
and	to	the	next	no	hint	of	its	cost.	It	is	as	it	is,	says	Kruppe,	worthless	but	for	those
who	insist	otherwise.”
Baruk	was	holding	his	breath.	His	lungs	burned,	yet	it	was	an	effort	to	release
them.	 Kruppe's	 words	 had	 drawn	 him	 into	 something—a	 place,	 hinting	 of	 vast
stores	 of	 knowledge	 and	 the	 sure,	 unfailing,	 precise	 hand	 that	 had	 gathered	 it,
marked	it	on	parchment.	A	library,	shelves	of	black	wood	in	sharp	relief,	tomes
bound	to	shiny	leather,	yellowed	scrolls,	a	pitted,	stained	desk—Baruk	felt	he	had
but	stolen	a	single	glance	into	this	chamber.	Kruppe's	mind,	the	secret	place	with
its	 door	 locked	 to	 all	 but	 one.	 “You	 speak,”	 Baruk	 said	 slowly,	 fighting	 to	 pull
back	into	reality	by	focusing	on	the	wax	disc	in	Kruppe's	hand,	“of	a	coin.”
Kruppe's	 hand	 snapped	 shut.	 He	 turned	 and	 set	 the	 disc	 down	 on	 the
windowsill.	 “Examine	 this	 semblance,	 Master	 Baruk.	 It	 marks	 both	 sides	 of	 a
single	coin.”	The	handkerchief	reappeared	and	Kruppe	stepped	back,	dabbing	his
brow.	“My,	but	it	is	hot,	says	Kruppe!”
“Help	yourself	to	some	wine,”	Baruk	murmured.	As	the	man	left	his	side	the
alchemist	 opened	 his	 Warren.	 He	 gestured	 and	 the	 wax	 disc	 rose	 into	 the	 air,
slowly	 moving	 to	 hover	 before	 him	 at	 eye-level.	 He	 studied	 the	 imprint	 facing
him.	“The	Lady,”	he	muttered,	nodding.	The	disc	turned,	revealing	to	him	the	Lord.
The	disc	turned	again,	and	Baruk's	eyes	widened	as	it	began	spinning.	A	whirring
sound	filled	the	back	of	his	head.	He	felt	his	Warren	resisting	a	pressure	that	grew
with	the	sound,	then	his	source	collapsed.
Faintly,	 as	 if	 from	 a	 great	 distance,	 he	 heard	 Kruppe	 speak.	 “Even	 in	 this
semblance,	 Master	 Baruk,	 blows	 the	 Twins'	 breath.	 No	 mage's	 Warren	 can
withstand	that	wind.”
The	 disc	 still	 spun	 in	 the	 air	 in	 front	 of	 Baruk,	 a	 silver	 blur.	 A	 fine	 mist
expanded	around	it.	Hot	droplets	spattered	his	face	and	he	stepped	back.	Blue	fire
flickered	 from	 the	 melting	 wax,	 the	 disc	 dwindling	 rapidly.	 A	 moment	 later	 it
vanished,	and	the	spinning	sound	and	its	accompanying	pressure	stopped	abruptly.
The	sudden	silence	filled	Baruk's	head	with	pain.	He	laid	a	trembling	hand	on
the	 windowsill	 for	 support,	 then	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 “Who	 carries	 the	 Coin,
Kruppe?”	His	voice	rasped	from	his	constricted	throat.	“Who?”
Kruppe	once	again	stood	at	his	side.	“A	lad,”	he	answered	casually.	“Known


to	 Kruppe,	 assuredly	 so,	 as	 well	 as	 to	 your	 other	 agents,	 Murillio,	 Rallick,	 and
Coll.”
Baruk's	eyes	reopened.	“That	can't	be	a	coincidence,”	he	hissed,	a	desperate
hope	rising	to	struggle	against	the	terror	he	felt.	Oponn	had	entered	the	gambit,	and
in	such	reaches	of	power	the	life	of	a	city	and	those	within	it	meant	nothing.	He
glared	at	Kruppe.	“Gather	the	group,	then.	All	you've	named.	They've	served	my
interests	for	a	long	time,	and	they	must	do	so	now,	above	all	other	concerns.	Do
you	understand	me?”
“Kruppe	 will	 convey	 your	 insistence.	 Rallick	 perchance	 is	 bound	 to	 Guild
duties,	 while	 Coll,	 given	 purpose	 in	 life	 once	 again,	 might	 well	 steady	 his	 gaze
and	tread	and	take	this	mission	to	heart.	Master	Baruk?	What	is	the	mission,	by	the
way?”
“Protect	the	Coinbearer.	Watch	him,	mark	whose	face	rests	on	him	benign	or
foul.	 I	 must	 know	 if	 the	 Lady	 has	 him,	 or	 the	 Lord.	 And,	 Kruppe,	 for	 this,	 find
Rallick.	If	the	Lord	claims	the	Coinbearer,	the	assassin's	talents	will	be	required.”
Kruppe	blinked.	“Understood.	Alas,	may	mercy	smile	upon	young	Crokus.”
“Crokus?”	Baruk	frowned.	“That's	a	name	I	know.”
Kruppe's	face	remained	blank.
“Never	mind.	Very	well,	Kruppe.”	He	turned	back	to	the	window	once	again.
“Keep	me	informed.”
“As	always,	Baruk,	Kruppe's	friend.”	The	man	bowed.	“And	thank	you	for	the
wine,	it	was	most	delicious.”
Baruk	 heard	 the	 door	 open	 then	 close.	 He	 gazed	 down	 the	 street.	 He'd
managed	to	clamp	a	hold	on	his	fear.	Oponn	had	a	way	of	making	ruins	of	the	most
finely	 wrought	 plans.	 Baruk	 despised	 that	 prospect	 of	 chance	 operating	 in	 his
affairs.	He	could	no	longer	rely	on	his	ability	to	predict,	to	prepare	contingencies,
to	work	out	every	possibility	and	seek	out	the	one	best	suited	to	his	desires.	As	the
Coin	spun,	thus	the	city.
Added	 to	 this	 the	 mysterious	 ways	 of	 the	 Empress.	 Baruk	 rubbed	 his	 brow.
He'd	 have	 to	 instruct	 Roald	 to	 bring	 him	 some	 healing	 tea.	 His	 headache	 was
reaching	debilitating	proportions.	As	he	brought	his	hand	down	past	his	face	his
eyes	caught	a	flash	of	red.	He	raised	both	palms	into	view.	Red	ink	stained	them.
He	 leaned	 forward	 on	 the	 windowsill.	 Through	 a	 sparkling	 cloud	 of	 dust,
Darujhistan's	rooftops	sprawled,	and	the	harbor	beyond.	“And	you,	Empress,”	he
whispered.	“I	know	you're	here,	somewhere.	Your	pawns	move	unseen	as	yet,	but
I	will	find	them.	Be	sure	of	that,	with	or	without	Oponn's	damned	luck.”


Book	Three
The	Mission


	
	

Marionettes	dance	afield
beneath	masterly	hands—
I	stumble	among	them
crossed	by	the	strings
in	tangled	two-step
and	curse	all	these	fools
in	their	mad	pirouette—
I	shall	not	live	as	they	do
oh,	no,	leave	me	in	my
circled	dance—
these	unbidden
twitchings	you	see
I	swear	on	Hood's	Grave
is	artistry	in	motion
SAYINGS	OF	THE	FOOL
THENY	BULE	(B?)


Chapter	Eight
	

He	stepped	down	then
among	women	and	men,
the	sigil	stripped
in	her	foul	cleansing
there	on	the	blood-soaked	sand
spilled	the	lives
of	Emperor	and	First	Sword—
so	tragic	this	treachery	.	.	.
He	was	of	the	Old	Guard,
commanding	the	honed	edge
of	Empire's	fury,
and	so	in	stepping	down
but	not	away
he	remained	the	remembrance
before	her	eyes,	the	curse
of	conscience	she	would	not	stand.
A	price	was	placed	before	him
that	he	glanced	over	in	first	passing
unknowing	and	so	unprepared
in	stepping	down	among	women
and	men,	he	found	what
he'd	surrendered	and	damned
its	reawakening	.	.	.
THE	BRIDGEBURNERS
TOC	THE	YOUNGER


	
A	 quarter-hour	 before	 dawn	 the	 sky	 held	 the	 color	 of	 iron	 shot	 through	 with
streaks	of	rust.	Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	squatted	on	a	dome	of	bedrock	up	from	the
pebble	 beach,	 gazing	 out	 over	 the	 misty	 calm	 surface	 of	 Lake	 Azur.	 Far	 to	 the
south,	on	the	lake's	opposite	shore,	rose	the	faint	glow	of	Darujhistan.
The	 mountain	 crossing	 of	 the	 night	 just	 past	 had	 been	 unpleasant,	 the	 Quorl
tossed	about	in	the	midst	of	three	warring	thunderheads.	It	was	a	miracle	no	one
had	been	lost.	The	rain	had	since	stopped,	leaving	the	air	cool	and	clammy.
He	 heard	 the	 sound	 of	 boots	 accompanied	 by	 a	 clicking	 noise	 behind	 him.
Whiskeyjack	 turned	 and	 straightened.	 Kalam	 and	 a	 Black	 Moranth	 approached,
picking	 their	 way	 through	 the	 mossy	 tumble	 of	 rocks	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 slope.
Behind	them	rose	the	shadowed	redwood	forest,	the	patched	trunks	standing	like
bearded	 sentinels	 against	 the	 mountainside.	 The	 sergeant	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath	 of
the	chill	morning	air.
“Everything's	 fine,”	 Kalam	 said.	 “The	 Green	 Moranth	 delivered	 as	 ordered,
and	more.	Fiddler	and	Hedge	are	two	happy	sappers.”
Whiskeyjack	 raised	 an	 eyebrow.	 He	 turned	 to	 the	 Black	 Moranth.	 “I	 thought
your	munitions	were	getting	scarce.”
The	creature's	face	remained	in	shadow	beneath	the	hinged	helmet.	The	words
that	 came	 from	 it	 seemed	 born	 from	 a	 cavern,	 hollow	 and	 faintly	 echoing.
“Selectively,	Bird	That	Steals.	You	are	well	known	to	us,	Bridgeburner.	You	tread
the	enemy's	shadow.	From	the	Moranth,	assistance	will	never	be	scarce.”
Surprised,	Whiskeyjack	looked	away,	the	skin	tightening	around	his	eyes.
The	Moranth	continued.	“You	asked	of	the	fate	of	one	of	our	kind.	A	warrior
with	 but	 one	 arm,	 who	 fought	 at	 your	 side	 in	 the	 streets	 of	 Nathilog	 many	 years
ago.	He	lives	still.”
The	sergeant	took	a	deep	breath	of	the	sweet	forest	air.	“Thank	you,”	he	said.
“We	 wish	 that	 the	 blood	 you	 next	 find	 on	 your	 hands	 is	 your	 enemy's,	 Bird
That	Steals.”
He	frowned,	then	gave	a	brusque	nod	and	turned	his	attention	back	to	Kalam.
“What	else?”
The	assassin's	face	became	expressionless.	“Quick	Ben's	ready,”	he	said.
“Good.	Gather	the	others.	I'll	be	laying	out	my	plan.”
“Your	plan,	Sergeant?”


“Mine,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said	 firmly.	 “The	 one	 devised	 by	 the	 Empress	 and	 her
tacticians	 is	 being	 rejected,	 as	 of	 now.	 We're	 doing	 it	 my	 way.	 Get	 going,
Corporal.”
Kalam	saluted	then	left.
Whiskeyjack	 stepped	 down	 from	 the	 rock,	 his	 boots	 sinking	 into	 the	 moss.
“Tell	 me,	 Moranth,	 might	 a	 squadron	 of	 your	 Black	 be	 patrolling	 this	 area	 two
weeks	from	now?”
The	 Moranth's	 head	 swiveled	 audibly	 toward	 the	 lake.	 “Such	 unscheduled
patrols	are	common.	I	expect	to	command	one	myself	in	two	weeks'	time.”
Whiskeyjack	gazed	steadily	at	the	black-armored	warrior	standing	beside	him.
“I'm	not	quite	sure	how	to	take	that,”	he	said	eventually.
The	warrior	faced	him.	“We	are	not	so	unalike,”	he	said.	“In	our	eyes	deeds
have	measure.	We	judge.	We	act	upon	our	judgments.	As	in	Pale,	we	match	spirit
with	spirit.”
The	sergeant	frowned.	“What	do	you	mean?”
“Eighteen	thousand	seven	hundred	and	thirty-nine	souls	departed	in	the	purge
of	Pale.	One	for	each	Moranth	confirmed	as	a	victim	of	Pale's	history	of	enmity
toward	us.	Spirit	with	spirit,	Bird	That	Steals.”
Whiskeyjack	found	he	had	no	response.	The	Moranth's	next	words	shook	him
deeply.
“There	are	worms	within	your	empire's	flesh.	But	such	degradation	is	natural
in	all	bodies.	Your	people's	infection	is	not	yet	fatal.	It	can	be	scoured	clean.	The
Moranth	are	skilled	at	such	efforts.”
“How	 exactly,”	 Whiskeyjack	 paused,	 choosing	 his	 words	 carefully,	 “do	 you
intend	this	scouring?”	He	recalled	the	wagons	piled	with	corpses	winding	out	of
Pale,	and	struggled	against	the	ice	tingling	along	his	spine.
“Spirit	 with	 spirit,”	 the	 Moranth	 answered,	 returning	 his	 attention	 to	 the	 city
on	the	south	shore.	“We	depart	for	now.	You	will	find	us	here	in	two	weeks'	time,
Bird	That	Steals.”
Whiskeyjack	 watched	 the	 Black	 Moranth	 walk	 away,	 pushing	 through	 the
thicket	surrounding	the	clearing	where	his	riders	waited.	A	moment	later	he	heard
the	rapid	thud	of	wings,	then	the	Quorl	rose	above	the	trees.	The	Moranth	circled
once	overhead,	then	turned	north,	slipping	between	the	bearded	boles	and	heading
upslope.
The	 sergeant	 sat	 down	 on	 the	 bedrock	 again,	 his	 eyes	 on	 the	 ground	 as	 the
members	 of	 his	 squad	 arrived,	 hunkering	 down	 around	 him.	 He	 remained	 silent,


seeming	unaware	that	he	had	company,	his	brow	furrowed	and	jaw	bunching	as	he
ground	his	molars	with	a	slow,	steady	precision.
“Sarge?”	Fiddler	said	quietly.
Startled,	 Whiskeyjack	 looked	 up.	 He	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath.	 Everyone	 had
gathered	with	the	exception	of	Quick	Ben.	He'd	leave	Kalam	to	fill	in	the	wizard
later.	“All	right.	The	original	plan's	been	scrapped,	since	it	was	intended	to	get	us
all	 killed.	 I	 didn't	 like	 that	 part,	 so	 we'll	 do	 it	 my	 way	 and	 hopefully	 get	 out
alive.”
“We	ain't	going	to	mine	the	city	gates?”	Fiddler	asked,	glancing	at	Hedge.
“No,”	 the	 sergeant	 answered.	 “We'll	 put	 those	 Moranth	 munitions	 to	 better
use.	Two	objectives,	two	teams.	Kalam	will	lead	one,	and	with	him	will	be	Quick
Ben	and	.	.	.”	he	hesitated	“.	.	.	and	Sorry.	I'll	lead	the	other	team.	The	first	task	is
to	get	into	the	city	unnoticed.	Out	of	uniform.”	He	looked	to	Mallet.	“I	take	it	the
Green	delivered?”
The	healer	nodded.	“It's	a	local	make,	all	right.	Eighteen-foot	fisher,	four	oars,
should	get	us	across	the	lake	easy	enough.	Even	a	couple	of	nets	included.”
“So	 we'll	 do	 some	 fishing,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.	 “Coming	 into	 the	 harbor
without	a	catch	would	look	suspect.	Anybody	here	ever	fished?”
There	was	silence,	then	Sorry	spoke	up.	“I	have,	a	long	time	ago.”
Whiskeyjack	stared	at	her,	then	said,	“Right.	Pick	whoever	you	need	for	that.”
Sorry	smiled	mockingly.
Whiskeyjack	pulled	his	gaze	from	hers	with	an	oath	under	his	breath.	He	eyed
his	two	saboteurs.	“How	much	munitions?”
“Two	crates,”	Hedge	replied,	adjusting	his	leather	cap.	“Cussers	all	the	way
down	to	Smokers.”
“We	could	cook	a	palace,”	Fiddler	added,	shifting	about	excitedly.
“Good	 enough,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.	 “All	 right,	 everyone	 listen	 and	 pay
attention,	or	we	won't	come	out	of	this	alive	.	.	.”
In	a	secluded	glade	in	the	forest,	Quick	Ben	poured	white	sand	in	a	circle	and	sat
down	 in	 its	 center.	 He	 took	 five	 sharpened	 sticks	 and	 set	 them	 in	 a	 row	 before
him,	pushing	them	to	various	depths	in	the	loam.	The	center	stick,	the	highest,	rose
about	three	feet;	the	ones	on	either	side	stood	at	two	feet	and	the	outer	ones	at	a
foot.
The	 wizard	 uncoiled	 a	 yard's	 length	 of	 thin	 gut	 string.	 He	 took	 one	 end	 and


fashioned	a	scaled-down	noose,	which	he	tightened	over	the	center	stick	near	the
top.	 He	 ran	 the	 line	 to	 the	 left,	 looping	 it	 once	 over	 the	 next	 shaft,	 then	 crossed
over	to	the	right	side	and	looped	it	again.	He	brought	the	string	across	to	the	far
left	stick,	muttering	a	few	words	as	he	did	so.	He	wrapped	it	twice	and	brought	it
over	to	the	far	right	stick,	where	he	tied	a	knot	and	cut	the	trailing	string.
Quick	Ben	leaned	back	and	folded	his	hands	on	his	lap.	A	frown	creased	his
brow.	 “Hairlock!”	 An	 outer	 stick	 twitched,	 turned	 slightly,	 then	 fell	 still.
“Hairlock!”	 he	 barked	 again.	 All	 five	 shafts	 jerked.	 The	 center	 one	 bent	 toward
the	wizard.	The	string	tautened	and	a	low-pitched	hum	emanated	from	it.
A	 cold	 wind	 swept	 across	 Quick	 Ben's	 face,	 stripping	 away	 the	 beads	 of
sweat	that	had	gathered	in	the	last	minute.	A	rushing	sound	filled	his	head,	and	he
felt	himself	falling	through	dark	caverns,	their	unseen	walls	ringing	in	his	ears	as
if	iron	hammers	clanged	against	the	rock.	Flashes	of	blinding	silver	light	stung	his
eyes	and	the	wind	pulled	at	the	skin	and	flesh	of	his	face.
In	some	shielded	part	of	his	mind	he	retained	a	sense	of	distance,	of	control.
Within	 this	 calm	 he	 could	 think,	 observe,	 analyze.	 “Hairlock,”	 he	 whispered,
“you've	gone	too	far.	Too	deep.	This	Warren	has	swallowed	you	and	will	never
spit	 you	 out.	 You're	 losing	 control,	 Hairlock.”	 But	 these	 thoughts	 were	 for	 him
alone;	he	knew	the	puppet	was	still	distant.
He	 watched	 himself	 continue,	 spinning,	 whirling	 through	 the	 Caverns	 of
Chaos.	 Hairlock	 was	 compelled	 to	 match	 him,	 only	 upward.	 Abruptly	 he	 found
himself	 standing.	 Beneath	 his	 feet	 the	 black	 rock	 seemed	 to	 swirl,	 cracked	 here
and	there	in	its	slow	convolutions	by	bright,	glowing	red.
Looking	around,	he	saw	that	he	stood	on	a	spar	of	rock,	rising	at	an	angle,	its
jagged	apex	a	dozen	feet	in	front	of	him.	Turning,	his	gaze	followed	the	spar	as	it
sank	down	and	out	of	sight,	lost	to	billowing	yellow	clouds.	A	moment	of	vertigo
gripped	 Quick	 Ben.	 He	 tottered,	 then,	 as	 he	 regained	 his	 balance,	 he	 heard	 a
chuckle	behind	him.	He	turned	to	see	Hairlock	perched	atop	the	apex,	his	wooden
body	smeared	and	scorched,	the	doll's	clothing	ripped	and	frayed.
Quick	Ben	asked,	“This	is	the	Spar	of	Andii,	isn't	it?”
Hairlock's	 round	 head	 bobbed.	 “Halfway.	 Now	 you	 know	 how	 far	 I	 have
gone,	Wizard.	To	the	very	foot	of	the	Warren,	where	power	finds	its	first	shape,
and	all	is	possible.”
“Just	 not	 very	 likely,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said,	 eyeing	 the	 marionette.	 “How	 does	 it
feel,	standing	in	the	middle	of	all	that	creation	but	unable	to	touch	it,	to	use	it?	It's
too	alien,	isn't	it?	It	burns	you	with	every	reach.”
“I'll	master	it,”	Hairlock	hissed.	“You	know	nothing.	Nothing.”


Quick	Ben	smiled.	“I've	been	here	before,	Hairlock.”	He	scanned	the	swirling
gases	 around	 them,	 scudding	 on	 contrary	 winds.	 “You've	 been	 lucky,”	 he	 said.
“Though	they	are	few	in	number,	there	are	creatures	who	call	this	realm	home.”
He	paused	and	turned	his	smile	on	the	puppet.	“They	dislike	intruders—have	you
seen	 what	 they	 do	 to	 them?	 What	 they	 leave	 behind?”	 The	 wizard's	 smile
broadened	at	seeing	Hairlock's	involuntary	jerk.	“So	you	have,”	he	said	quietly.
“You	 are	 my	 protector,”	 Hairlock	 snapped.	 “I'm	 bound	 to	 you,	 Wizard!	 The
responsibility	is	yours,	nor	will	I	hide	the	fact	if	I	am	taken.”
“Bound	to	me,	indeed.”	Quick	Ben	lowered	himself	to	his	haunches.	“Good	to
hear	your	memory's	come	back.	Tell	me,	how	fares	Tattersail?”
The	puppet	slumped,	looking	away.	“Her	recovery	is	a	difficult	one.”
Quick	Ben	frowned.	“Recovery?	From	what?”
“The	 Hound	 Gear	 tracked	 me.”	 Hairlock	 shifted	 uneasily.	 “There	 was	 a
skirmish.”
A	scowl	grew	on	the	wizard's	face.	“And?”
The	puppet	shrugged.	“Gear	fled,	sorely	wounded	by	a	mundane	sword	in	the
hands	of	that	captain	of	yours.	Tayschrenn	then	arrived,	but	Tattersail	had	slipped
into	unconsciousness	by	then,	so	his	search	for	answers	was	thwarted.	But	the	fire
of	suspicion	has	been	stoked	beneath	him.	He	sends	out	his	servants,	and	they	stalk
the	 Warrens.	 They	 hunt	 for	 signs	 of	 who	 and	 what	 I	 am.	 And	 why.	 Tayschrenn
knows	your	squad	is	involved,	he	knows	you're	trying	to	save	your	own	skins.”
The	 puppet's	 mad	 gaze	 flickered.	 “He	 wants	 you	 all	 dead,	 Wizard.	 And	 as	 for
Tattersail,	perhaps	he	hopes	her	fever	will	kill	her	so	he	won't	have	to—but	there
is	much	he'd	lose	if	she	died	without	his	questioning	her	first.	No	doubt	he'd	seek
out	her	soul,	he'd	pursue	what	she	knows	into	Hood's	own	realm,	but	she'd	know
enough	to	be	elusive.”
“Shut	up	for	a	minute,”	Quick	Ben	ordered.	“Back	to	the	beginning.	You	said
Captain	Paran	stabbed	Gear	with	his	sword?”
Hairlock	scowled.	“I	did.	A	mortal	weapon—it	shouldn't	have	been	possible.
He	 may	 well	 have	 dealt	 the	 Hound	 a	 fatal	 wound.”	 The	 puppet	 paused,	 then
growled,	“You've	not	told	me	everything,	Wizard.	There	are	gods	involved	in	this.
If	 you	 keep	 me	 in	 such	 ignorance	 I	 might	 well	 stumble	 into	 the	 path	 of	 one	 of
them.”	He	spat.	“A	slave	to	you	is	bad	enough.	Do	you	think	you	could	challenge	a
god	 for	 mastery	 of	 me?	 I'd	 be	 taken,	 turned,	 perhaps	 even	 .	 .	 .”	 Hairlock
unsheathed	one	of	his	small	knives	“.	.	.	used	against	you.”	He	advanced	a	step,	a
dark	glitter	in	his	eyes.
Quick	 Ben	 raised	 an	 eyebrow.	 Inside,	 his	 heart	 lurched	 in	 his	 chest.	 Was	 it


possible?	 Would	 he	 not	 have	 detected	 something?	 A	 flavor,	 a	 hint	 of	 immortal
presence?
“One	 last	 thing,	 Wizard,”	 Hairlock	 murmured,	 taking	 another	 step.
“Tattersail's	 fever	 crested	 just	 this	 night	 past.	 She	 screamed	 something	 about	 a
coin.	 A	 coin	 that	 had	 spun,	 but	 now	 it	 has	 fallen,	 it	 has	 bounced,	 it	 has	 entered
someone's	 hand.	 You	 must	 tell	 me	 about	 this	 coin—I	 must	 have	 your	 thoughts,
Wizard.”	The	puppet	stopped	suddenly	and	looked	down	at	the	knife	in	his	hand.
Hairlock	 hesitated,	 seeming	 confused,	 then	 sheathed	 the	 weapon	 and	 squatted.
“What's	so	important	about	a	coin?”	he	growled.	“Nothing.	The	bitch	raved—she
was	stronger	than	I	had	thought.”
Quick	 Ben	 froze.	 The	 puppet	 seemed	 to	 have	 forgotten	 that	 the	 wizard	 was
present.	 The	 thoughts	 he	 now	 heard	 were	 Hairlock's	 own.	 He	 realized	 he	 was
looking	through	the	shattered	window	 into	the	puppet's	 insane	mind.	And	it	was
there	that	all	the	danger	lay.	The	wizard	held	his	breath	as	Hairlock	continued,	its
eyes	fixed	on	the	clouds	below.
“Gear	should	have	killed	her—would	have,	if	not	for	that	idiot	captain.	What
irony,	he	now	tends	to	her	and	puts	his	hand	to	his	sword	whenever	I	seek	to	come
near.	He	knows	I	would	snuff	her	life	in	an	instant.	But	that	sword.	What	god	plays
with	 this	 fool	 noble?”	 The	 puppet	 spoke	 on,	 but	 his	 words	 dwindled	 into
inaudible	mumbles.
Quick	 Ben	 waited,	 hoping	 for	 more,	 though	 what	 he'd	 already	 heard	 was
enough	to	set	his	heart	pounding.	This	mad	creature	was	unpredictable,	and	all	that
held	 him	 in	 check	 was	 a	 tenuous	 control—the	 strings	 of	 power	 he'd	 attached	 to
Hairlock's	 wooden	 body.	 But	 with	 this	 kind	 of	 madness	 came	 strength—enough
strength	to	break	those	strings?	The	wizard	was	no	longer	as	sure	of	his	control	as
he	had	been.
Hairlock	had	fallen	silent.	His	painted	eyes	still	flickered	with	black	flame—
the	leaking	of	Chaotic	power.	Quick	Ben	took	a	step	forward.
“Pursue	Tayschrenn's	plans,”	he	commanded,	then	he	kicked	hard.	The	toe	of
his	 boot	 struck	 Hairlock's	 chest	 and	 sent	 the	 puppet	 spinning.	 Hairlock	 flew	 out
over	 the	 edge,	 then	 fell	 downward.	 His	 outraged	 snarl	 dwindled	 as	 he
disappeared	into	the	yellow	clouds.
Quick	Ben	drew	a	deep	breath	of	the	thick,	stale	air.	He	hoped	that	his	abrupt
dismissal	 had	 been	 enough	 to	 skew	 Hairlock's	 recollections	 of	 the	 past	 few
minutes.	 Still,	 he	 felt	 those	 strings	 of	 control	 growing	 ever	 more	 taut.	 The	 more
this	Warren	twisted	Hairlock,	the	more	power	he	would	command.
The	wizard	knew	what	he'd	have	to	do—Hairlock	had	given	it	to	him,	in	fact.


Still,	Quick	Ben	wasn't	looking	forward	to	it.	The	taste	of	sour	bile	rose	into	his
mouth	 and	 he	 spat	 over	 the	 ledge.	 The	 air	 stank	 of	 sweat	 and	 it	 was	 a	 moment
before	 he	 realized	 it	 was	 his	 own.	 He	 hissed	 a	 curse.	 “Time	 to	 leave,”	 he
muttered.	He	raised	his	arms.
The	wind	returned	with	a	roar,	and	he	felt	his	body	flung	up,	up	into	the	cavern
above,	 then	 the	 next.	 As	 the	 caverns	 blurred	 by,	 a	 single	 word	 clung	 to	 his
thoughts,	a	word	that	seemed	to	twist	around	the	problem	of	Hairlock	like	a	web.
Quick	 Ben	 smiled,	 but	 it	 was	 a	 smile	 responding	 to	 terror.	 And	 the	 word
remained,	Gear,	and	with	that	name	the	wizard's	terror	found	a	face.
Whiskeyjack	rose	amid	silence.	The	expressions	arrayed	around	him	were	sober,
eyes	 downcast	 or	 fixed	 elsewhere,	 closed	 into	 some	 personal,	 private	 place
where	swam	the	heaviest	thoughts.	The	lone	exception	was	Sorry,	who	stared	at
the	sergeant	with	bright,	approving	eyes.	Whiskeyjack	wondered	who	was	doing
the	approving	within	those	eyes—then	he	shook	his	head,	angry	that	something	of
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam's	suspicions	had	slipped	into	his	thoughts.
He	glanced	away,	to	see	Quick	Ben	approaching.	The	wizard	looked	tired,	an
ashen	tint	to	his	face.	Whiskeyjack's	gaze	snapped	to	Kalam.
The	assassin	nodded.	“Everyone,	look	alive,”	he	said.	“Load	up	the	boat	and
get	it	ready.”
Mallet	leading	the	way,	the	others	headed	down	to	the	beach.
Waiting	for	Quick	Ben	to	arrive,	Kalam	said,	“The	squad	looks	beat,	Sergeant.
Fiddler,	Trotts,	and	Hedge	moved	enough	dirt	in	those	tunnels	to	bury	the	Empire's
dead.	I'm	worried	about	them.	Mallet—he	seems	to	be	holding	together,	so	far	.	.	.
Still,	whatever	Sorry	knows	about	fishing,	I	doubt	any	one	of	us	could	row	their
way	out	of	a	bathtub.	And	we're	about	to	try	crossing	a	lake	damn	near	big	as	a
sea?”
Whiskeyjack's	jaw	tightened,	then	he	forced	a	casual	shrug	into	his	shoulders.
“You	know	damn	well	that	any	Warren	opening	anywhere	near	the	city	will	likely
be	detected.	No	choice,	Corporal.	We	row.	Unless	we	can	rig	up	a	sail.”
Kalam	grunted.	“Since	when	does	the	girl	know	about	fishing?”
The	sergeant	sighed.	“I	know.	Came	out	of	nowhere,	didn't	it?”
“Bloody	convenient.”
Quick	 Ben	 reached	 the	 dome	 of	 rock.	 Both	 men	 fell	 silent	 at	 seeing	 his
expression.
“I'm	about	to	propose	something	you're	going	to	hate,”	the	wizard	said.


“Let's	hear	it,”	Whiskeyjack	replied,	in	a	voice	empty	of	feeling.
Ten	 minutes	 later	 the	 three	 men	 arrived	 on	 the	 slick	 pebbled	 beach,	 both
Whiskeyjack	and	Kalam	looking	shaken.	A	dozen	yards	from	the	water's	edge	sat
the	fisher	boat.	Trotts	was	straining	on	the	rope	attached	to	the	prow	hook,	gasping
and	moaning	as	he	leaned	forward	with	all	his	weight.
The	 rest	 of	 the	 squad	 stood	 in	 a	 clump	 off	 to	 one	 side,	 quietly	 discussing
Trotts's	futile	efforts.	Fiddler	chanced	 to	look	up.	Seeing	Whiskeyjack	marching
toward	them,	he	blanched.
“Trotts!”	the	sergeant	bellowed.
The	 Barghast's	 face,	 woad	 tattoos	 stretched	 into	 illegibility,	 turned	 to
Whiskeyjack	with	wide	eyes.
“Let	go	of	the	rope,	soldier.”
Kalam	 released	 an	 amused	 snort	 behind	 Whiskeyjack,	 who	 glared	 at	 the
others.	 “Now,”	 he	 said,	 his	 voice	 harsh,	 “since	 one	 of	 you	 idiots	 convinced
everyone	else	that	loading	all	the	equipment	into	the	boat	when	it's	still	on	shore
was	 a	 good	 idea,	 you	 can	 all	 man	 the	 rope	 and	 drag	 it	 into	 the	 lake—not	 you,
Trotts.	 You	 get	 inside,	 get	 comfortable,	 there	 at	 the	 stern.”	 Whiskeyjack	 paused.
He	 studied	 Sorry's	 expressionless	 face.	 “From	 Fiddler	 and	 Hedge	 I	 expect	 this,
but	I	thought	I	put	you	in	charge	of	setting	things	up.”
Sorry	shrugged.
Whiskeyjack	sighed.	“Can	you	rig	us	a	sail?”
“There's	no	wind.”
“Well,	maybe	there	will	be!”	Whiskeyjack	said,	exasperated.
“Yes,”	Sorry	answered.	“We	have	some	canvas.	We'll	need	a	mast.”
“Take	 Fiddler	 and	 make	 one.	 Now,	 the	 rest	 of	 you,	 get	 this	 boat	 into	 the
water.”
Trotts	climbed	inside	and	sat	down	at	the	stern.	He	stretched	out	his	long	legs
and	draped	 an	 arm	over	the	splashboard.	 He	bared	his	filed	teeth	 in	what	might
have	been	a	smile.
Whiskeyjack	 turned	 to	 a	 grinning	 Kalam	 and	 Quick	 Ben.	 “Well?”	 he
demanded.	“What're	you	waiting	for?”
The	grins	died.


Chapter	Nine
	

Have	you	seen	the	one
who	stands	apart
cursed	in	a	ritual
sealing	his	kind
beyond	death	the	host
amassed	and	whirling
like	a	plague	of	pollen—
he	stands	apart
the	First	among	all
ever	veiled	in	time
yet	outcast	and	alone
a	T'lan	Imass	wandering
like	a	seed	unfallen
LAY	OF	ONOS	T'OOLAN
TOC	THE	YOUNGER


	
Toc	 the	 Younger	 leaned	 forward	 in	 his	 saddle	 and	 spat.	 It	 was	 his	 third	 day	 out
from	 Pale,	 and	 he	 longed	 for	 the	 city's	 high	 walls	 around	 him.	 The	 Rhivi	 Plain
stretched	 out	 on	 all	 sides,	 cloaked	 in	 yellow	 grass	 that	 rippled	 in	 the	 afternoon
wind,	but	otherwise	featureless.
He	scratched	the	edges	of	the	wound	that	had	taken	his	left	eye,	and	muttered
under	 his	 breath.	 Something	 was	 wrong.	 He	 should	 have	 met	 her	 two	 days	 past.
Nothing	 was	 going	 as	 planned	 these	 days.	 What	 with	 Captain	 Paran	 vanishing
before	even	meeting	Whiskeyjack	and	the	story	making	the	rounds	about	a	Hound
attacking	 the	 2nd's	 last-surviving	 mage	 and	 leaving	 fourteen	 dead	 marines	 in	 its
wake,	he	supposed	he	shouldn't	be	surprised	that	this	rendezvous	had	gone	awry
as	well.
Chaos	 seemed	 a	 sign	 of	 the	 times.	 Toc	 straightened	 and	 rose	 in	 his	 saddle.
Though	 there	 was	 no	 true	 road	 as	 such	 on	 the	 Plain,	 merchant	 caravans	 had
mapped	a	rough	track	running	north–south	along	the	western	edge.	Trade	had	since
died	 out,	 but	 the	 passing	 of	 generations	 of	 wagons	 and	 horse	 trains	 had	 left	 its
mark.	The	center	of	the	Plain	was	home	to	the	Rhivi,	those	small	brown-skinned
people	 who	 moved	 with	 the	 herds	 in	 a	 seasonal	 cycle.	 Though	 not	 warlike,	 the
Malazan	Empire	had	forced	their	hand,	and	now	they	fought	and	scouted	alongside
Caladan	Brood's	Tiste	Andii	legions	against	the	Empire.
Moranth	 reports	 placed	 the	 Rhivi	 far	 to	 the	 north	 and	 east,	 and	 Toc	 was
thankful	for	that.	He	was	feeling	very	alone	out	in	this	wasteland,	yet	loneliness
was	a	lesser	evil,	all	things	considered.
Toc's	single	eye	widened.	It	seemed	he	wasn't	so	alone,	after	all.	Perhaps	a
league	ahead	ravens	wheeled.	The	man	cursed	and	loosened	the	scimitar	sheathed
at	his	hip.	He	fought	the	urge	to	push	his	horse	into	a	gallop	and	settled	for	a	quick
trot.
As	he	neared	he	saw	trampled	grass	off	to	one	side	of	the	trader's	track.	The
cackling	laughter	of	the	ravens	was	the	only	sound	to	break	the	stillness.	They	had
already	 begun	 feeding.	 Toc	 reined	 in	 his	 horse	 and	 sat	 unmoving	 in	 his	 saddle,
hunched	forward.	 None	of	the	 bodies	he	saw	looked	as	if	they	were	apt	to	start
moving,	 and	 the	 ravens'	 preoccupied	 squabbling	 was	 good	 evidence	 that	 any
survivors	had	long	gone.	Still,	he	had	a	bad	feeling	about	this.	Something	hung	in
the	air,	something	between	a	smell	and	a	taste.
He	waited,	for	what	he	wasn't	certain,	but	a	reluctance	to	move	gripped	him.


All	at	once	he	identified	the	strangeness	he	felt:	magic.	It	had	been	unleashed	here.
“I	hate	this,”	he	muttered,	then	dismounted.
The	 ravens	 gave	 him	 room,	 but	 not	 much.	 Ignoring	 their	 outraged	 shrieks	 he
approached	the	bodies.	They	numbered	twelve	in	all.	Eight	wore	the	uniforms	of
Malazan	Marines—but	these	weren't	average	soldiers.	His	gaze	narrowed	on	the
silver	 sigils	 on	 their	 helmets.	 “Jakatakan,”	 he	 said.	 Élites.	 They'd	 been	 cut	 to
pieces.
He	 turned	 his	 attention	 to	 the	 remaining	 bodies	 and	 felt	 a	 tremor	 of	 fear	 run
through	him.	No	wonder	the	Jakatakan	had	taken	such	a	beating.	Toc	strode	to	one
of	 the	 bodies	 and	 crouched	 beside	 it.	 He	 knew	 something	 of	 the	 clan	 markings
among	 the	 Barghast,	 how	 each	 hunter	 group	 was	 identified	 through	 their	 woad
tattooing.	 The	 breath	 hissed	 between	 his	 teeth	 and	 he	 reached	 out	 to	 turn	 the
savage's	 face	 toward	 him,	 then	 he	 nodded.	 These	 were	 Ilgres	 Clan.	 Before	 the
Crimson	 Guard	 had	 enlisted	 them,	 their	 home	 territory	 had	 been	 fifteen	 hundred
leagues	to	the	east,	among	the	mountains	just	south	of	the	Porule.	Slowly	Toc	rose.
The	 Ilgres	 numbered	 among	 the	 strongest	 of	 those	 who	 had	 joined	 the	 Crimson
Guard	at	Blackdog	Forest,	but	that	was	four	hundred	leagues	north.	So	what	had
brought	them	here?
The	 stench	 of	 spilled	 magic	 wafted	 across	 his	 face	 and	 he	 turned,	 his	 eye
fixing	on	a	body	he	hadn't	noticed	before.	It	lay	beside	scorched	grass.	“So,”	he
said,	 “my	 question's	 answered.”	 This	 band	 had	 been	 led	 by	 a	 Barghast	 shaman.
Somehow,	they'd	stumbled	onto	a	trail	and	this	shaman	had	recognized	it	for	what
it	was.	Toc	studied	the	shaman's	body.	Killed	by	a	sword	wound	in	the	throat.	The
unleashing	of	sorcery	had	been	the	shaman's,	but	no	magic	had	opposed	him.	And
that	 was	 odd,	 particularly	 since	 it	 was	 the	 shaman	 who	 had	 died,	 rather	 than
whomever	he'd	attacked.
Toc	grunted.	“Well,	she's	said	to	be	tough	on	mages.”	He	walked	a	slow	circle
around	the	kill	site,	and	found	the	trail	with	little	difficulty.	Some	of	the	Jakatakan
had	 survived,	 and	 from	 the	 smaller	 set	 of	 boot-prints,	 so	 had	 their	 charge.	 And
overlaying	 these	 tracks	 were	 half	 a	 dozen	 moccasin	 prints.	 The	 trail	 veered
westerly	from	the	trader's	track,	yet	still	led	south.
Returning	 to	 his	 horse,	 Toc	 mounted	 and	 swung	 the	 animal	 around.	 He
removed	the	short	bow	from	its	saddle	holster	and	strung	it,	then	nocked	an	arrow.
There	 was	 no	 hope	 of	 coming	 up	 on	 the	 Barghast	 undetected.	 Out	 on	 this	 plain
he'd	 be	 visible	 a	 long	 time	 before	 entering	 arrow-range—and	 that	 range	 had
become	much	closer	now	that	he'd	lost	an	eye.	So	they'd	be	waiting	for	him,	with
those	damn	lances.	But	he	knew	he	had	no	choice;	he	hoped	only	to	take	down	one
or	two	of	them	before	they	skewered	him.


Toc	spat	again,	then	wrapped	the	reins	around	his	left	forearm	and	adjusted	his
grip	on	the	bow.	He	gave	the	wide	red	scar	crossing	his	face	a	vigorous,	painful
scratch,	 realizing	 that	 the	 maddening	 itch	 would	 return	 in	 moments	 anyway.	 “Oh
well,”	he	said,	then	drove	his	heels	into	the	horse's	flanks.
The	lone	hill	that	rose	up	before	Adjunct	Lorn	was	not	a	natural	one.	The	tops	of
mostly	 buried	 stones	 encircled	 its	 base.	 She	 wondered	 what	 might	 be	 entombed
within	it,	then	dismissed	her	misgivings.	If	those	standing	stones	were	of	the	size
she'd	 seen	 rising	 around	 the	 mysterious	 barrows	 outside	 Genabaris,	 this	 mound
dated	 back	 millennia.	 She	 turned	 to	 the	 two	 exhausted	 marines	 stumbling	 in	 her
wake.	 “We'll	 make	 our	 stand	 here.	 You	 with	 the	 crossbow,	 I	 want	 you	 lying	 up
top.”
The	 man	 ducked	 his	 head	 in	 answer	 and	 staggered	 to	 the	 mound's	 grassy
summit.	Both	he	and	his	comrade	seemed	almost	relieved	that	she'd	called	a	halt,
though	they	knew	their	death	was	but	minutes	away.
Lorn	eyed	the	other	soldier.	He'd	taken	a	lance	barb	in	his	left	shoulder	and
the	 blood	 still	 flowed	 profusely	 down	 the	 front	 of	 his	 breastplate.	 How	 he	 had
stayed	 on	 his	 feet	 in	 the	 last	 hour	 was	 beyond	 Lorn's	 understanding.	 He	 looked
upon	her	with	eyes	dulled	by	resignation,	showing	nothing	of	the	pain	he	must	be
feeling.
“I'll	hold	your	left,”	he	said,	shifting	his	grip	on	the	curved	tulwar	in	his	right
hand.
Lorn	unsheathed	 her	own	longsword	and	fixed	her	attention	northward.	Only
four	of	the	six	Barghast	were	visible,	approaching	slowly.	“We're	being	flanked,”
she	called	out	to	her	crossbowman.	“Take	the	one	on	your	left.”
The	soldier	beside	her	grunted.	“My	life	need	not	be	sheltered,”	he	said.	“We
were	charged	with	your	protection,	Adjunct—”
“Quiet,”	Lorn	commanded.	“The	longer	you	stand	the	better	protected	I'll	be,”
she	said.
The	soldier	grunted	again.
The	 four	 Barghast	 were	 lingering	 now,	 just	 out	 of	 bowshot	 range.	 Two	 still
carried	their	lances;	the	other	two	gripped	short	axes.	Then	a	voice	cried	out	far	to
Lorn's	right	and	she	whirled	to	see	a	lance	speeding	toward	her,	and	behind	it	a
charging	Barghast.
Lorn	 brought	 her	 blade	 across	 her	 body	 and	 dropped	 into	 a	 crouch	 as	 she
raised	the	weapon	over	her	head.	Her	sword	caught	the	lance's	shaft	and	even	as


it	 did	 so	 she	 was	 turning,	 pulling	 her	 weapon	 to	 one	 side.	 The	 deflected	 lance
sped	past	and	cracked	into	the	hillside	off	to	her	right.
Behind	her	she	heard	the	crossbowman	release	a	quarrel.	As	she	spun	back	to
the	four	charging	Barghast	there	came	a	scream	of	pain	from	the	other	side	of	the
mound.	The	soldier	beside	her	seemed	to	have	forgotten	his	wound,	as	he	gripped
his	tulwar	with	both	hands	and	planted	his	feet	wide.
“Attend,	Adjunct,”	he	said.
The	Barghast	off	to	the	right	cried	out	and	she	turned	to	see	him	spinning	with
the	impact	of	a	quarrel.
The	 four	 warriors	 before	 them	 were	 no	 more	 than	 thirty	 feet	 away.	 The	 two
with	lances	now	launched	them.	Lorn	made	no	move,	realizing	almost	immediately
that	the	one	aimed	at	her	would	fly	wide.	The	soldier	beside	her	dropped	away	to
his	left,	but	not	enough	to	avoid	the	lance	as	it	thudded	into	his	right	thigh.	It	struck
with	such	force	as	to	drive	right	through	his	leg	and	embed	itself	in	the	earth.	The
soldier	 was	 pinned,	 but	 his	 only	 response	 was	 a	 soft	 gasp,	 and	 he	 raised	 his
sword	to	parry	an	ax	swinging	at	his	head.
In	this	time	Lorn	had	already	closed	with	the	Barghast	rushing	at	her.	His	ax
was	a	shorter	weapon,	and	she	took	advantage	of	this	with	a	thrust	before	he	came
into	his	own	range.	He	brought	the	copper-sheathed	haft	up	to	parry,	but	Lorn	had
already	flicked	her	wrist,	completing	the	feint	and	dipping	under	the	ax.	Her	lunge
buried	 the	 sword	 point	 in	 the	 Barghast's	 chest,	 slicing	 the	 leather	 armor	 as	 if	 it
were	cloth.
Her	attack	had	committed	her,	and	her	sword	was	nearly	wrenched	from	her
hand	as	the	savage	toppled	backward.	Off-balance,	she	staggered	a	step,	expecting
the	crushing	blow	of	an	ax.	But	it	did	not	arrive.	Regaining	her	balance	she	spun
round,	 to	 find	 her	 crossbowman,	 now	 wielding	 his	 tulwar,	 engaging	 the	 other
Barghast.	Lorn	snapped	her	attention	to	see	how	her	other	guard	fared.
Somehow,	he	still	lived,	though	he	faced	two	Barghast.	He'd	managed	to	drag
the	lance	out	of	the	earth,	but	the	weapon's	shaft	remained	in	his	leg.	That	he	was
able	 to	 move	 at	 all,	 much	 less	 defend	 himself,	 spoke	 eloquently	 of	 Jakatakan
discipline	and	training.
Lorn	rushed	to	engage	the	Barghast	on	the	man's	right,	nearest	her.	Even	as	she
did	 so,	 an	 ax	 slipped	 past	 the	 soldier's	 guard	 and	 struck	 him	 across	 the	 chest.
Scale	 snapped	 as	 the	 heavy	 weapon's	 edge	 ripped	 through	 armor.	 The	 soldier
groaned	and	fell	to	one	knee,	blood	spraying	onto	the	ground.
Lorn	was	in	no	position	to	defend	him	and	could	only	watch	in	horror	as	the	ax
swung	again,	this	time	striking	the	man	in	the	head.	The	helmet	collapsed	inward


and	 his	 neck	 broke.	 He	 toppled	 sideways,	 landing	 at	 Lorn's	 feet.	 Her	 forward
momentum	carried	her	right	over	him.
A	 curse	 broke	 from	 her	 lips	 as	 she	 sprawled,	 crashing	 into	 the	 Barghast	 in
front	of	her.	She	tried	to	bring	the	point	of	her	sword	up	behind	him	but	he	twisted
lithely	to	one	side	and	leaped	away.	Lorn	took	a	wild	swing	at	him,	missing,	even
as	 she	 fell.	 She	 felt	 her	 shoulder	 dislocate	 as	 she	 hit	 the	 hard	 ground,	 and	 the
sword	dropped	from	her	numbed	hand.
Now,	she	thought,	the	only	thing	left	to	do	is	die.	She	rolled	onto	her	back.
With	a	growl	the	Barghast	was	standing	beside	her,	ax	raised	high.
Lorn	 was	 in	 a	 good	 position	 to	 see	 the	 skeletal	 hand	 bursting	 from	 the	 earth
beneath	 the	 Barghast.	 It	 grasped	 an	 ankle.	 Bones	 snapped	 and	 the	 warrior
screamed.	 Vaguely,	 as	 she	 watched,	 she	 wondered	 where	 the	 other	 two	 savages
had	gone.	All	sounds	of	fighting	seemed	to	have	stopped,	but	the	ground	rumbled
with	a	growing,	urgent	thunder.
The	Barghast	stared	down	at	the	hand	crushing	his	shin.	He	screamed	again	as
the	wide,	rippled	blade	of	a	flint	sword	shot	up	between	his	legs.	The	ax	left	the
warrior's	 hands	 as	 he	 frantically	 brought	 them	 down	 in	 an	 effort	 to	 deflect	 the
sword,	twisting	to	one	side	and	kicking	out	with	his	free	leg.	It	all	came	too	late.
The	 sword	 impaled	 him,	 jamming	 against	 his	 hipbone	 and	 lifting	 him	 from	 the
ground.	His	dying	shriek	rose	skyward.
Lorn	 climbed	 to	 her	 feet	 with	 difficulty,	 her	 right	 arm	 hanging	 useless	 at	 her
side.	 She	 identified	 the	 thundering	 sound	 as	 the	 beat	 of	 hoofs,	 and	 turned	 in	 the
direction	from	which	they	came.	A	Malazan.	As	that	fact	sank	in,	she	swung	her
attention	 from	 the	 rider	 and	 looked	 around.	 Both	 her	 guards	 were	 dead,	 and
arrows	jutted	from	two	Barghast	bodies.
She	 took	 a	 shallow	 breath—all	 she	 could	 manage	 as	 pain	 spread	 across	 her
chest—and	gazed	upon	the	creature	that	had	risen	from	the	earth.	It	was	cloaked	in
rotting	furs,	and	it	stood	over	the	warrior's	body,	one	leg	still	clutched	in	its	hand.
The	 other	 hand	 gripped	 the	 sword,	 which	 had	 been	 pushed	 the	 length	 of	 the
Barghast's	body,	the	point	emerging	from	his	neck.
“I	was	expecting	you	days	ago,”	Lorn	said,	glaring	at	the	figure.
It	turned	to	regard	her,	its	face	hidden	in	shadow	beneath	the	yellowed	bone
shelf	of	its	helmet.	The	helmet,	she	saw,	was	the	skull-cap	of	some	horned	beast,
one	horn	broken	off	at	its	base.
The	rider	arrived	behind	her.	“Adjunct!”	he	called	out,	dismounting.	He	came
to	her	side,	bow	still	in	his	hand	and	arrow	nocked.	His	lone	eye	glanced	across
Lorn	and,	seeming	satisfied	that	her	wound	was	not	mortal,	fixed	on	the	massive


but	squat	creature	facing	them.	“Hood's	Breath,	a	T'lan	Imass.”
Lorn	 continued	 glaring	 at	 the	 T'lan	 Imass.	 “I	 knew	 you	 were	 about.	 It's	 the
only	thing	that	explains	a	Barghast	shaman	bringing	himself	and	his	hand-picked
hunters	 into	 the	 area.	 He	 must	 have	 used	 a	 Warren	 to	 get	 here.	 So	 where	 were
you?”
Toc	the	Younger	stared	at	the	Adjunct,	amazed	at	her	outburst.	His	gaze	flicked
back	 to	 the	 T'lan	 Imass.	 The	 last	 time	 he'd	 seen	 one	 was	 in	 Seven	 Cities,	 eight
years	past,	and	then	it	had	been	from	a	distance	as	the	undead	legions	marched	out
into	 the	 western	 wastelands	 on	 some	 mission	 even	 the	 Empress	 could	 learn
nothing	about.	At	this	close	range,	Toc	eagerly	studied	the	T'lan	Imass.	Not	much
left	 of	 it,	 he	 concluded.	 Despite	 the	 sorcery,	 three	 hundred	 thousand	 years	 had
taken	their	toll.	The	skin	that	stretched	across	the	squat	man's	robust	bones	was	a
shiny	nut	brown	in	color,	the	texture	of	leather.	Whatever	flesh	it	had	once	covered
had	contracted	to	thin	strips	the	consistency	of	oak	roots—such	muscles	showed
through	torn	patches	here	and	there.	The	creature's	face,	what	Toc	could	see	of	it,
bore	 a	 heavy	 chinless	 jawbone,	 high	 cheeks	 and	 a	 pronounced	 brow	 ridge.	 The
eye	sockets	were	dark	holes.
“I	asked	you	a	question,”	Lorn	grated.	“Where	were	you?”
The	 head	 creaked	 as	 the	 Imass	 looked	 down	 at	 its	 feet.	 “Exploring,”	 it	 said
quietly	in	a	voice	born	of	stones	and	dust.
Lorn	demanded,	“Your	name,	T'lan?”
“Onos	T'oolan,	once	of	the	Tarad	Clan,	of	the	Logros	T'lan.	I	was	birthed	in
the	autumn	of	the	Bleak	Year,	the	ninth	son	to	the	Clan	whetted	as	warrior	in	the
Sixth	Jaghut	War—”
“Enough,”	Lorn	said.	She	sagged	wearily	and	Toc	moved	to	her	side.	Glancing
up	 at	 him	 she	 scowled,	 “You	 look	 grim.”	 Then	 a	 small	 smile	 came	 to	 her	 lips.
“But	good	to	me.”
Toc	grinned.	“First	things	first,	Adjunct.	A	place	for	you	to	rest.”	She	did	not
protest	as	he	guided	her	to	a	grassy	knoll	near	the	barrow	and	gently	pushed	her	to
her	knees.	He	glanced	back	to	see	the	T'lan	Imass	still	standing	where	it	had	first
emerged	from	the	ground.	It	had	turned,	however,	and	seemed	to	be	studying	the
barrow.	 “We	 must	 make	 your	 arm	 immobile,”	 Toc	 said	 to	 the	 worn,	 weathered
woman	 kneeling	 before	 him.	 “I	 am	 named	 Toc	 the	 Younger,”	 he	 said,	 squatting
down.
She	raised	her	gaze	at	this.	“I	knew	your	father,”	she	said.	Her	smile	returned.
“Also	a	great	bowman.”
He	ducked	his	head	in	reply.


“He	was	a	fine	commander	too,”	Lorn	continued,	studying	the	ravaged	youth
who	was	now	tending	to	her	arm.	“The	Empress	has	regretted	his	death—”
“Not	dead	for	sure,”	Toc	interrupted,	his	tone	tight	and	his	single	eye	averted
as	he	began	removing	the	gauntlet	from	her	hand.	“Disappeared.”
“Yes,”	 Lorn	 said	 softly.	 “Disappeared	 since	 the	 Emperor's	 death.”	 She
winced	as	he	pulled	away	the	gauntlet	and	tossed	it	aside.
“I'll	need	some	strips	of	cloth,”	he	said,	rising.
Lorn	 watched	 him	 stride	 to	 one	 of	 the	 Barghast	 bodies.	 She	 had	 not	 known
who	her	Claw	contact	would	be,	only	that	he	was	the	last	left	alive	among	Dujek's
forces.	She	wondered	why	he	had	veered	so	sharply	from	his	father's	path.	There
was	nothing	pleasant,	or	proud,	in	being	a	Claw.	Only	efficiency	and	fear.
He	took	a	knife	to	the	body's	tanned	leather	armor,	slicing	it	back	to	reveal	a
rough	woolen	shirt,	into	which	he	cut.	Then	he	returned	to	her	side,	a	handful	of
long	strips	in	one	hand.	“I	didn't	know	you	had	an	Imass	for	company,”	he	said,	as
he	crouched	beside	her	again.
“They	 choose	 their	 own	 modes	 of	 travel,”	 Lorn	 said,	 a	 hint	 of	 anger	 in	 her
voice.	 “And	 come	 when	 they	 please.	 But	 yes,	 he's	 an	 integral	 player	 in	 my
mission.”	 She	 fell	 silent,	 gritting	 her	 teeth	 in	 pain	 as	 Toc	 slipped	 the	 rude	 sling
over	her	shoulder	and	under	her	arm.
“I	 have	 little	 good	 to	 report,”	 Toc	 said,	 and	 he	 told	 her	 of	 Paran's
disappearance,	and	of	Whiskeyjack	and	his	squad	departing	without	the	captain	in
attendance.	 By	 the	 time	 he	 had	 finished	 he	 had	 adjusted	 the	 sling	 to	 his	 own
satisfaction,	and	sat	back	on	his	haunches	with	a	sigh.
“Damn,”	Lorn	hissed.	“Help	me	to	my	feet.”
After	 he'd	 done	 so,	 she	 wobbled	 a	 bit	 and	 gripped	 his	 shoulder	 to	 steady
herself.	Then	she	nodded.	“Get	me	my	sword.”
Toc	 strode	 to	 the	 spot	 she'd	 indicated.	 After	 a	 brief	 search	 he	 found	 the
longsword	 in	 the	 grass,	 and	 his	 eye	 thinned	 to	 a	 slit	 upon	 seeing	 the	 weapon's
dusty	red	blade.	He	brought	it	to	her,	and	said,	“An	Otataral	sword,	Adjunct,	the
ore	that	kills	magic.”
“And	 mages,”	 Lorn	 said,	 taking	 the	 weapon	 awkwardly	 in	 her	 left	 hand	 and
sheathing	it.
“I	came	upon	the	dead	shaman,”	Toc	said.
“Well,”	Lorn	said,	“Otataral	is	no	mystery	to	you	of	the	Seven	Cities,	but	few
here	know	it,	and	I	would	keep	it	that	way.”
“Understood.”	Toc	turned	to	regard	the	immobile	Imass.


Lorn	 seemed	 to	 read	 his	 thought.	 “Otataral	 cannot	 quench	 their	 magic—
believe	me,	it's	been	tried.	The	Warrens	of	the	Imass	are	similar	to	those	of	the
Jaghut	and	the	Forkrul	Assail—Elder-,	blood-,	and	earthbound—that	flint	sword
of	his	will	never	break,	and	it	cuts	through	the	finest	iron	as	easily	as	it	will	flesh
and	bone.”
Toc	shivered	and	spat.	“I'll	not	envy	you	your	company,	Adjunct.”
Lorn	 smiled.	 “You'll	 be	 sharing	 it	 for	 the	 next	 few	 days,	 Toc	 the	 Younger.
We've	a	long	walk	to	Pale.”
“Six,	seven	days,”	Toc	said.	“I	expected	you	to	be	mounted.”
Lorn's	sigh	was	heartfelt.	“The	Barghast	shaman	worked	his	talents	on	them.	A
disease	 took	 them	 all,	 even	 my	 stallion,	 which	 I	 brought	 with	 me	 through	 the
Warren.”	 Her	 lined	 face	 softened	 momentarily,	 and	 Toc	 could	 feel	 her	 genuine
sorrow.
It	 surprised	 him.	 All	 that	 he'd	 heard	 of	 the	 Adjunct	 had	 painted	 for	 him	 a
picture	of	a	cold-blooded	monster,	the	gauntleted	hand	of	death	that	could	descend
from	anywhere	at	any	time.	Perhaps	this	side	of	her	existed;	he	hoped	he	would
not	have	to	see	it.	Then	again,	he	corrected	himself,	she'd	not	spared	her	soldiers
a	second	glance.	Toc	spoke,	“You'll	ride	my	mare,	Adjunct.	She's	no	warhorse,
but	she's	quick	and	long	on	endurance.”
They	walked	to	where	he'd	left	his	horse,	and	Lorn	smiled.	“That's	a	Wickan
breed,	 Toc	 the	 Younger,”	 she	 said,	 as	 she	 laid	 a	 hand	 on	 the	 mare's	 neck,	 “so
cease	the	modesty,	else	I	lose	trust	in	you.	A	fine	animal.”
Toc	 helped	 her	 into	 the	 saddle.	 “Do	 we	 leave	 the	 Imass	 where	 it	 is?”	 he
asked.
Lorn	 nodded.	 “He'll	 find	 his	 own	 way.	 Now,	 let's	 give	 this	 mare	 the
opportunity	to	prove	herself.	Wickan	blood	is	said	to	smell	of	iron.”	She	reached
down	and	offered	her	left	arm.	“Mount	up,”	she	said.
Toc	barely	managed	to	hide	his	shock.	Share	the	saddle	with	the	Adjunct	of	the
Empire?	 The	 notion	 was	 so	 absurd	 that	 he	 came	 near	 to	 laughing.	 “I	 can	 walk,
Adjunct,”	he	said	gruffly.	“With	such	little	time	to	waste,	you	would	be	better	to
ride	on,	and	ride	hard.	You'll	see	Pale's	walls	in	three	days.	I	can	manage	a	jog	at
ten-hour	stretches.”
“No,	Toc	the	Younger.”	Lorn's	tone	brooked	no	argument.	“I	need	you	in	Pale,
and	 I	 need	 to	 hear	 all	 there	 is	 about	 the	 occupying	 legions,	 and	 Dujek,	 and
Tayschrenn.	Better	to	arrive	a	few	days	late	than	unprepared.	Now,	grasp	my	arm
and	let's	be	on	with	it.”
Toc	complied.


As	he	sank	into	the	saddle	behind	Lorn,	his	mare	snorted	and	stepped	quickly
to	 one	 side.	 Both	 he	 and	 the	 Adjunct	 almost	 fell.	 They	 turned	 to	 see	 the	 T'lan
Imass	standing	beside	them.	It	raised	its	head	to	Lorn.
“The	barrow	has	yielded	a	truth,	Adjunct,”	Onos	T'oolan	said.
Toc	felt	her	stiffen.	“And	that	is?”
“We	are	upon	the	right	path,”	the	T'lan	Imass	replied.
Something	told	Toc	that	the	path	the	creature	referred	to	had	nothing	to	do	with
the	 trader's	 track	 leading	 south	 to	 Pale.	 He	 cast	 one	 final	 glance	 back	 at	 the
barrow	 as	 Lorn	 silently	 swung	 the	 horse	 around,	 and	 then	 at	 Onos	 T'oolan.
Neither	 seemed	 likely	 to	 unveil	 their	 secrets,	 but	 Lorn's	 reaction	 had	 raised	 the
hairs	on	the	back	of	his	neck,	and	the	itch	around	his	lost	eye	roused	itself.	Toc
muttered	a	curse	under	his	breath	and	began	to	scratch.
“Something	the	matter,	Toc	the	Younger?”	Lorn	asked,	not	turning.
He	 thought	 about	 his	 reply.	 He	 said,	 “The	 price	 of	 being	 blind,	 Adjunct.
Nothing	more.”
Captain	Paran	paced	in	the	narrow	room.	This	was	madness!	All	he	knew	was	that
he	 was	 being	 hidden,	 but	 the	 only	 answers	 to	 his	 questions	 would	 come	 from	 a
bedridden	 sorceress	 locked	 in	 some	 strange	 fever,	 and	 a	 nasty	 puppet	 whose
painted	eyes	seemed	to	fix	on	him	with	intense	hatred.
Vague	 memories	 haunted	 him	 as	 well,	 the	 feel	 of	 slick,	 cold	 stones	 scraping
beneath	 his	 fingernails	 at	 a	 moment	 when	 all	 his	 strength	 had	 poured	 from	 his
body;	and	then	the	hazy	vision	of	a	massive	dog—a	Hound?—in	the	room,	a	dog
that	 seemed	 to	 breathe	 death.	 It	 had	 been	 seeking	 to	 kill	 the	 woman,	 and	 he'd
stopped	it—somehow,	he	wasn't	sure	of	the	details.
A	suspicion	nagged	him	that	the	dog	wasn't	dead,	that	it	would	be	back.	The
puppet	ignored	most	of	his	questions,	and	when	it	did	speak	to	him	it	was	to	voice
dire	 threats.	 Apparently,	 though	 the	 Sorceress	 was	 ill,	 her	 presence	 alone—her
continued	existence—was	all	that	kept	Hairlock	from	fulfilling	those	threats.
Where	was	Whiskeyjack?	Had	the	sergeant	left	without	him?	What	would	that
do	to	Adjunct	Lorn's	plan?
He	 ceased	 pacing	 and	 turned	 a	 glare	 on	 the	 sorceress	 lying	 in	 the	 bed.
Hairlock	 had	 told	 Paran	 that	 she'd	 somehow	 hidden	 him	 when	 Tayschrenn
arrived,	the	High	Mage	having	sensed	the	dog's	presence.	Paran	had	no	memory	of
any	of	that,	but	he	wondered	how	the	woman	could	have	managed	anything	after
the	beating	she'd	taken.	Hairlock	had	scoffed	that	the	sorceress	hadn't	even	been


aware	of	opening	her	Warren	that	one	last	time;	that	she'd	done	it	all	on	instinct.
Paran	 had	 the	 feeling	 that	 the	 marionette	 had	 been	 scared	 by	 that	 unveiling	 of
power.	Hairlock	seemed	most	eager	for	the	woman's	death,	but	was	either	unable
to	achieve	it	himself	or	too	frightened	to	try.	The	creature	had	muttered	something
about	wards	she'd	raised	about	her	person.
Yet	Paran	found	nothing	to	impede	his	ministrations	when	the	fever	had	been	at
its	 worst.	 It	 had	 broken	 the	 previous	 night,	 and	 now	 Paran	 felt	 his	 impatience
reaching	 some	 kind	 of	 threshold.	 The	 sorceress	 slept,	 but	 if	 she	 didn't	 awaken
soon	he'd	take	matters	into	his	own	hands—leave	this	hiding	place,	perhaps	seek
out	Toc	the	Younger,	provided	he	could	avoid	Tayschrenn	or	any	officers	on	his
way	out	of	the	building.
Paran's	 unseeing	 glare	 remained	 fixed	 on	 the	 sorceress,	 his	 thoughts	 racing.
Slowly,	a	new	awareness	tickled	the	edges	of	his	mind,	and	he	abruptly	blinked.
The	woman's	eyes	were	open,	and	they	studied	him.
He	took	a	half-step	forward	but	was	stopped	dead	by	her	first	words.
“I	heard	the	Coin	drop,	Captain.”
The	 blood	 drained	 from	 Paran's	 face.	 An	 echo	 flittered	 through	 his	 memory.
“A	coin?”	he	asked,	his	voice	barely	a	whisper.	“A	spinning	coin?”	The	voices	of
gods,	 of	 dead	 men	 and	 women.	 Howls	 of	 Hounds—all	 pieces	 of	 my	 memory's
torn	tapestry.
“Spins	 no	 longer,”	 the	 woman	 replied.	 She	 pushed	 herself	 into	 a	 sitting
position.	“How	much	do	you	remember?”
“Scant,”	 the	 captain	 admitted,	 surprised	 at	 himself	 for	 telling	 the	 truth.	 “The
puppet	will	not	even	tell	me	your	name,”	he	said.
“Tattersail.	I've	been,	uh,	in	the	company	of	Whiskeyjack	and	his	squad.”	 A
veil	 of	 caution	 seemed	 to	 slip	 over	 her	 sleepy	 gaze.	 “I	 was	 to	 take	 care	 of	 you
until	your	health	returned.”
“I	 believe	 you	 did,”	 Paran	 said.	 “And	 I	 returned	 the	 favor,	 which	 evens	 the
scales,	Sorceress.”
“So	it	does.	Well,	now	what?”
Paran's	eyes	widened.	“You	don't	know?”
Tattersail	shrugged.
“But	 this	 is	 ridiculous,”	 Paran	 exclaimed.	 “I	 know	 nothing	 of	 what's
happening	 here.	 I	 awaken	 to	 find	 a	 half-dead	 witch	 and	 a	 talking	 puppet	 for
company,	and	of	my	new	command	not	a	single	sign.	Have	they	left	for	Darujhistan
already?”


“I	can't	give	you	much	in	the	way	of	answers,”	Tattersail	murmured.	“All	I	can
tell	you	is	the	sergeant	wanted	you	alive,	because	he	needs	to	know	who	tried	to
assassinate	you.	We'd	all	like	to	know,	in	fact.”	She	fell	silent,	expectant.
Paran	studied	her	round,	ghostly	pale	face.	There	was	something	about	her	that
seemed	to	disregard	her	physical	mundanity,	overwhelmed	it,	 in	fact,	so	that	the
captain	 found	 himself	 responding	 in	 ways	 that	 surprised	 him.	 It	 was,	 he	 saw,	 a
friendly	face,	and	he	couldn't	recall	the	last	time	he'd	experienced	such	a	thing.	It
left	him	off-balance,	with	only	Tattersail	to	steady	him.	And	that	made	him	feel	as
if	 he	 were	 descending	 a	 spiral,	 with	 the	 sorceress	 in	 the	 center.	 Descending?
Perhaps	it	was	an	ascent.	He	wasn't	sure,	and	the	uncertainty	made	him	wary.
“I	 recall	 nothing	 of	 it,”	 he	 said.	 And	 that	 wasn't	 entirely	 a	 lie,	 though	 it	 felt
like	it	with	her	heavy-lidded	eyes	steady	upon	him.
“I	 think,”	 Paran	 added,	 despite	 his	 misgivings,	 “there	 were	 two	 of	 them.	 I
recall	a	conversation,	though	I	was	dead.	I	think.”
“But	you	heard	a	spinning	coin,”	Tattersail	said.
“Yes,”	 he	 answered,	 bewildered.	 And	 more	 .	 .	 .	 I	 went	 to	 a	 place—yellow,
infernal	light,	a	chorus	of	moans,	a	death's	head	.	.	.
Tattersail	nodded	to	herself	as	if	confirming	a	suspicion.	“A	god	intervened,
Captain	Paran.	Returned	the	life	to	you.	You	might	think	it	was	on	your	behalf,	but
I'm	afraid	there	wasn't	any	altruism	involved.	Are	you	following	me?”
“I'm	being	used,”	Paran	stated	flatly.
She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“That	doesn't	bother	you?”
Paran	shrugged	and	turned	away.	“It's	nothing	new,”	he	muttered.
“I	 see,”	 she	 said	 quietly.	 “So	 Whiskeyjack	 was	 right,	 then.	 You're	 not	 just
some	new	captain,	you're	something	a	lot	more.”
“That's	 my	 concern,”	 Paran	 snapped,	 still	 avoiding	 her	 gaze.	 Then	 he	 faced
her,	his	expression	dark.	“And	what's	your	role	in	all	this?	You	took	care	of	me.
Why?	Serving	your	god,	are	you?”
Tattersail	barked	a	laugh.	“Not	likely.	Nor	did	I	do	much	for	you	in	any	case.
Oponn	took	care	of	that.”
Paran	 stiffened.	 “Oponn?”	 The	 Twins,	 sister	 and	 brother,	 the	 Twins	 of
Chance.	He	who	pushes,	she	who	pulls.	Have	they	been	in	my	dreams?	Voices,
mention	of	my	.	.	.	sword.	He	was	still	for	a	moment,	then	he	strode	over	to	the
dresser.	On	it	lay	his	sheathed	sword.	He	laid	a	hand	on	the	grip.	“I	purchased	this
sword	three	years	ago,	though	its	first	use	came	just	a	few	nights	past—against	the
dog.”


“You	recall	that?”
Something	in	Tattersail's	voice	brought	him	around.	In	her	eyes	he	now	saw
fear.	She	made	no	attempt	to	hide	it.	He	nodded.	“Yet	I	named	the	weapon	the	day
I	bought	it.”
“The	name?”
Paran's	grin	was	ghastly.	“Chance.”
“The	pattern	has	been	long	in	the	weaving,”	Tattersail	said,	closing	her	eyes
and	 sighing.	 “Though	 I	 suspect	 even	 Oponn	 could	 not	 have	 imagined	 your	 blade
tasting	its	first	blood	on	a	Hound	of	Shadow.”
Paran	closed	his	eyes,	then	he	sighed.	“The	dog	was	a	Hound.”
She	looked	at	him	and	nodded.	“You've	met	Hairlock?”
“I	have.”
“Beware	 him,”	 Tattersail	 said.	 “It	 was	 his	 unleashing	 of	 a	 Warren	 of	 Chaos
that	 left	 me	 fevered.	 If	 Warrens	 are	 indeed	 structured,	 then	 Hairlock's	 is
diametrically	opposed	to	mine.	He's	mad,	Captain,	and	he	vowed	to	kill	you.”
Paran	strapped	on	his	sword.	“What's	his	role	in	all	of	this?”
“I'm	not	sure,”	Tattersail	said.
That	 sounded	 like	 a	 lie,	 but	 Paran	 let	 it	 pass.	 “He	 was	 coming	 in	 nightly	 to
check	on	your	progress,”	he	said.	“But	I	haven't	seen	him	the	past	two	nights.”
“How	many	days	have	I	been	out?”
“Six,	I	think.	I'm	no	more	certain	of	time's	passage	than	you	are,	I'm	afraid.”
He	strode	to	the	door.	“All	I	know	is,	I	can't	just	hide	here	forever.”
“Wait!”
Paran	 smiled.	 “Very	 well.”	 He	 faced	 her	 again.	 “Tell	 me	 why	 shouldn't	 I
leave?”
The	sorceress	hesitated,	then	spoke.	“I	still	need	you	here,”	she	said.
“Why?”
“It's	 not	 me	 that	 Hairlock's	 afraid	 of,”	 she	 answered,	 seeming	 to	 find	 the
words	 difficult.	 “It's	 you—your	 sword—that's	 kept	 me	 alive.	 He	 saw	 what	 you
managed	to	do	to	the	Hound.”
“Damn,”	 he	 hissed.	 Though	 essentially	 still	 a	 stranger	 to	 him,	 she'd	 reached
through	 to	 him	 with	 her	 admission.	 He	 tried	 to	 fight	 the	 compassion	 welling	 up
inside	him.	He	told	himself	that	his	mission	overrode	all	other	concerns,	that	he'd
repaid	 his	 debt	 to	 her,	 if	 ever	 there	 was	 one,	 that	 she	 hadn't	 given	 him	 all	 the
reasons	he	suspected	existed	for	his	staying	hidden,	meaning	she	didn't	trust	him


—he	told	himself	all	these	things,	but	none	of	it	was	enough.
“If	you	go,”	she	said,	“Hairlock	will	kill	me.”
“What	of	the	wards	about	you?”	he	demanded,	almost	desperately.	“Hairlock
said	you've	wards	about	you.”
Tattersail's	smile	was	drawn.	“You	think	he'd	just	come	right	out	and	tell	you
how	dangerous	you	really	are?	Wards?”	She	laughed.	“I've	barely	the	strength	to
sit	 straight.	 If	 I	 attempted	 to	 open	 my	 Warren	 in	 this	 state	 the	 power	 would
consume	 me,	 burn	 me	 to	 ashes.	 Hairlock	 wants	 you	 kept	 in	 the	 dark—about
everything.	The	puppet	lied.”
Even	this	rang	like	a	half-truth	in	Paran's	ears.	But	there	was	enough	there	that
made	 sense,	 that	 gave	 reason	 to	 Hairlock's	 hatred	 of	 him,	 and	 the	 puppet's
obvious	fear.	The	greater	deceit	would	come	from	Hairlock,	not	Tattersail,	or	so
he	 believed,	 though	 there	 was	 little	 to	 support	 that	 belief—only	 .	 .	 .	 at	 least
Tattersail	was	human.	He	sighed.	“Sooner	or	later,”	he	said,	unclipping	his	sword
belt	 and	 returning	 it	 to	 the	 dresser,	 “you	 and	 I	 will	 have	 to	 cut	 past	 all	 this
misleading	game-playing.	Oponn	or	no,	we've	a	common	enemy.”
Tattersail	sighed.	“Thank	you.	Captain	Paran?”
He	eyed	her	warily.	“What?”
She	smiled.	“It	is	good	to	meet	you.”
He	scowled.	She	was	at	it	again.
“This	 seems	 an	 unhappy	 army,”	 Lorn	 said,	 as	 they	 waited	 outside	 Pale's	 north
gate.	One	of	the	guards	had	entered	the	city	in	search	of	another	horse,	while	the
remaining	three	stood	muttering	a	short	distance	away.
Toc	the	Younger	had	dismounted.	He	moved	close	to	his	horse	and	said,	“It	is,
Adjunct.	 Very	 unhappy.	 Along	 with	 the	 dismantling	 of	 the	 Second	 and	 Sixth
Armies	 came	 a	 shuffling	 of	 commands.	 Nobody's	 where	 they	 were	 before,	 right
down	 to	 the	 greenest	 recruit.	 Squads	 split	 up	 everywhere.	 And	 now	 there's	 the
rumor	that	the	Bridgeburners	are	going	to	be	retired.”	He	glanced	over	at	the	three
marines,	saw	their	hard	eyes	on	him	and	the	Adjunct.	“People	around	here	don't
like	that,”	he	said	quietly.
Lorn	leaned	back	in	her	saddle.	The	pain	in	her	shoulder	had	become	a	steady
throb,	and	she	was	glad	the	journey	was	done—at	least	for	the	time	being.	They'd
seen	 nothing	 of	 the	 T'lan	 Imass	 since	 the	 barrow,	 though	 she	 often	 sensed	 his
presence,	 in	 the	 dusty	 wind,	 beneath	 the	 plain's	 cracked	 pan.	 While	 in	 the
company	of	Toc	the	Younger	she'd	sensed	the	restless	anger	churning	among	the


Malazan	forces	on	this	continent.
In	 Pale,	 ten	 thousand	 soldiers	 crowded	 the	 edge	 of	 revolt,	 the	 spies	 among
them	brutally	removed,	awaiting	only	High	Fist	Dujek's	word.	And	the	High	Mage
Tayschrenn	 wasn't	 easing	 the	 situation	 by	 openly	 countermanding	 Dujek's
instructions	to	his	officers.	Yet	what	troubled	the	Adjunct	the	most	was	this	vague
tale	of	a	Hound	of	Shadow	doing	battle	with	the	2nd's	last	cadre	mage—there	was
a	 mystery	 there,	 and	 she	 suspected	 it	 was	 vital.	 The	 rest	 could	 be	 dealt	 with,
provided	she	took	charge.
The	 Adjunct	 was	 eager	 for	 her	 meeting	 with	 Tayschrenn	 and	 this	 sorceress
Tattersail—the	 name	 was	 familiar,	 tugging	 at	 memories	 that	 seemed	 born	 in	 her
childhood.	 And	 around	 such	 evasive	 hints	 rustled	 a	 cloak	 of	 fear.	 But	 she	 was
determined	to	deal	with	that	when	the	time	came.
The	gate	swung	open.	She	looked	up	to	see	the	marine	with	a	warhorse,	and
they	had	company.	Toc	the	Younger	snapped	a	salute,	the	energy	behind	it	making
Lorn	wonder	at	his	loyalty.	The	Adjunct	dismounted	slowly,	then	nodded	at	High
Fist	Dujek.
The	man	seemed	to	have	aged	a	dozen	years	since	she'd	last	seen	him,	thirteen
months	 ago	 in	 Genabaris.	 A	 small	 smile	 came	 to	 Lorn's	 mouth	 as	 the	 scene
emerged	in	her	mind:	the	High	Fist	a	worn,	weary	one-armed	man,	the	Empress's
Adjunct,	her	sword	arm	in	a	sling,	and	Toc	the	Younger,	last	representative	of	the
Claw	on	Genabackis,	one-eyed	and	half	his	face	scarred	by	fire.	Here	they	were,
representatives	of	three	of	the	four	Empire	powers	on	the	continent,	and	they	all
looked	like	Hood's	Heralds.
Misreading	her	smile,	Dujek	grinned.	“Good	to	see	you,	 too,	Adjunct.	I	was
overseeing	the	resupply	when	this	guard	brought	word	of	your	arrival.”	His	gaze
grew	 thoughtful	 as	 he	 studied	 her,	 the	 grin	 fading.	 “I'll	 find	 you	 a	 Denul	 healer,
Adjunct.”
“Sorcery	doesn't	work	on	me,	High	Fist.	It	hasn't	in	a	long	time.	A	mundane
healer	is	sufficient.”	Her	gaze	narrowed	on	Dujek.	“Assuming	I'll	have	no	need	to
unsheath	my	sword	within	the	walls	of	Pale.”
“I	make	no	guarantees,	Adjunct,”	Dujek	said	casually.	“Come,	let	us	walk.”
Lorn	turned	to	Toc	the	Younger.	“Thank	you	for	the	escort,	soldier.”
Dujek	 laughed,	 his	 eyes	 bright	 on	 Toc.	 “Unnecessary,	 Adjunct.	 I	 know	 who,
and	what,	Toc	the	Younger	is—as	does	virtually	everyone	else.	If	he's	as	good	a
Claw	as	he	is	a	soldier,	you'd	do	well	to	keep	him	alive.”
“Meaning?”
Dujek	gestured	that	they	walk.	“Meaning	that	his	reputation	as	a	soldier	of	the


Second	is	the	only	thing	preventing	a	knife	across	the	throat.	Meaning	get	him	out
of	Pale.”
The	Adjunct	eyed	Toc.	“I	will	see	you	later,”	she	said.
Joining	Dujek,	who	had	passed	beneath	the	gate's	massive	arch,	Lorn	matched
his	pace	as	they	entered	the	city.	Soldiers	crowded	the	streets,	directing	merchant
wagons	and	the	mobs	of	citizenry.	Evidence	of	the	rain	of	death	still	scarred	many
of	the	buildings,	but	laborers	had	been	set	to	work	under	the	direction	of	marines.
“The	 nobility	 are	 about	 to	 be	 culled,”	 Dujek	 said	 at	 her	 side.	 “Tayschrenn
wants	it	to	be	thorough,	and	public.”
“Empire	policy,”	Lorn	replied	stiffly.	“You're	well	aware	of	that,	High	Fist.”
Dujek	 glared	 at	 her.	 “Nine	 out	 of	 ten	 nobles	 to	 hang,	 Adjunct?	 Children
included?”
Lorn	stared	at	him.	“That	seems	excessive.”
Dujek	was	silent	for	a	time,	leading	her	down	the	main	avenue,	then	heading
uphill	toward	the	Empire	headquarters.	Many	faces	turned	to	regard	them	stonily
as	they	passed.	It	seemed	Dujek's	identity	was	known	among	Pale's	citizens.	Lorn
tried	 to	 sense	 the	 atmosphere	 his	 presence	 created,	 but	 couldn't	 be	 certain	 if	 it
was	fear	or	respect,	or	both.
“My	mission,”	Lorn	said,	as	they	approached	a	three-story	stone	building,	its
entrance	blocked	by	a	dozen	watchful	marines,	“will	take	me	out	of	the	city	soon
—”
“I	don't	want	any	details,	Adjunct,”	Dujek	cut	in.	“You	do	what	you	have	to	do
and	just	stay	out	of	my	way.”
His	tone	was	unthreatening,	almost	pleasant,	but	Lorn	felt	her	muscles	tense.
This	man	was	being	pushed,	and	Tayschrenn	was	doing	the	pushing.	What	was	the
High	Mage	up	to?	The	whole	situation	stank	of	incompetence.
“As	 I	 was	 saying,”	 Lorn	 continued,	 “I	 won't	 be	 here	 long.	 When	 I	 am	 here,
however,”	and	her	voice	hardened,	“I	will	make	plain	to	the	High	Mage	that	his
interference	 in	 the	 city's	 management	 will	 not	 be	 tolerated.	 If	 you	 need	 backing,
you	have	it,	Dujek.”
They	 stopped	 just	 outside	 the	 building's	 entrance,	 and	 the	 old	 man	 gazed
steadily	 at	 her,	 as	 if	 weighing	 her	 sincerity.	 But	 when	 he	 spoke,	 his	 words
surprised	her.	“I	can	take	care	of	my	own	problems,	Adjunct.	Do	what	you	will,
but	I'm	not	asking	for	anything.”
“You'll	permit	the	excessive	culling	of	the	nobility,	then?”
Dujek's	 expression	 set	 into	 stubborn	 lines.	 “Battle	 tactics	 can	 be	 applied	 in


any	situation,	Adjunct.	And	the	High	Mage	is	no	tactician.”	He	turned	and	led	her
up	the	steps.	Two	guards	opened	the	doors,	which	looked	new	and	were	banded	in
bronze.	The	High	Fist	and	the	Adjunct	entered.
They	strode	down	a	long,	wide	hallway	marked	by	doors	on	either	side	every
dozen	feet	or	so.	Marines	stood	guard	before	each	one,	hands	on	their	weapons.	It
was	clear	to	Lorn	that	the	incident	with	the	Hound	had	heightened	wariness	to	an
almost	 absurd	 degree.	 Then	 a	 thought	 struck	 her.	 “High	 Fist,	 have	 there	 been
attempts	on	your	life?”
Dujek's	grunt	was	amused.	“Four	in	the	last	week,	Adjunct.	You	get	used	to	it.
All	 these	 marines	 here	 volunteered	 themselves—they	 don't	 even	 listen	 to	 me
anymore.	The	last	assassin	was	so	badly	chopped	up	I	couldn't	even	make	out	if	it
was	a	man	or	a	woman.”
“You've	a	lot	of	Seven	Cities	natives	in	your	legions,	High	Fist?”
“Aye.	Loyal	to	a	fault	when	they	want	to	be.”
Loyal	 to	 what,	 Lorn	 wondered,	 and	 to	 whom?	 Seven	 Cities	 recruits	 were
being	 sent	 elsewhere	 these	 days.	 The	 Empress	 did	 not	 wish	 Dujek's	 soldiers	 to
become	aware	that	their	homeland	was	on	the	brink	of	open	rebellion.	Such	news
might	well	tip	the	scales	here	on	Genabackis,	and	that	in	turn	would	trigger	Seven
Cities	itself.	Both	Lorn	and	the	Empress	were	well	aware	how	dangerous	things
had	 become,	 and	 they	 had	 to	 tread	 carefully	 indeed	 in	 their	 efforts	 to	 repair	 the
damage.	 And	 it	 was	 now	 becoming	 obvious	 that	 Tayschrenn	 presented	 a	 major
problem.
She	realized	that	she	needed	Dujek's	support	more	than	he	needed	hers.
They	arrived	at	the	hall's	end	where	stood	massive	double	doors.	The	soldiers
at	 either	 side	 saluted	 the	 High	 Fist,	 then	 opened	 them.	 Beyond	 was	 a	 large
chamber	 dominated	 by	 a	 hardwood	 table	 in	 its	 center.	 Maps,	 scrolls,	 ink,	 and
paint	 jars	 crowded	 its	 surface.	 Dujek	 and	 Lorn	 entered	 and	 the	 doors	 were	 shut
behind	them.
“Tayschrenn	 has	 been	 informed	 of	 your	 arrival,	 but	 will	 be	 delayed
somewhat,”	 Dujek	 said,	 sitting	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 table.	 “If	 you	 have	 questions
regarding	the	recent	events	at	Pale,	ask	them	now.”
She	knew	he	was	giving	her	the	opportunity	to	hear	answers	that	didn't	come
from	Tayschrenn.	Though	as	to	whose	version	of	the	truth	she	would	accept	was
up	 to	 her.	 Lorn	 began	 to	 appreciate	 Dujek's	 comment	 about	 battle	 tactics.	 She
strode	 to	 a	 nearby	 chair	 and	 settled	 slowly	 into	 its	 cushions.	 “Very	 well,	 High
Fist.	Small	matters	first.	Have	you	encountered	any	difficulty	with	the	Moranth?”
Dujek	 scowled.	 “Funny	 you	 should	 ask.	 They're	 getting	 pretty	 high-minded


about	some	things.	I	had	a	hard	time	getting	the	Gold	legions—their	élite	wariors
—to	fight	Caladan	Brood.	Seems	they	consider	him	too	honorable	to	 treat	as	an
enemy.	The	whole	alliance	was	on	shaky	ground	for	a	while	there,	but	in	the	end
they	marched.	Soon	I'll	send	the	Black	to	join	them.”
Lorn	nodded.	“Similar	problems	with	the	Green	and	the	Blue	in	Genabaris,”
she	said,	“which	explains	why	I	came	overland.	The	Empress	suggests	we	make
the	most	of	the	alliance,	since	it	may	not	last.”
“We	haven't	much	choice,”	Dujek	growled.	“How	many	legions	will	I	have	in
the	spring	landing?”
Lorn	 hesitated,	 then	 said,	 “Two.	 And	 a	 regiment	 of	 Wickan	 lancers.	 The
Wickans	and	the	Eleventh	Legion	will	disembark	at	Nathilog.	The	Ninth	will	land
in	 Nisst	 and	 join	 with	 the	 conscript	 forces—the	 Empress	 trusts	 the	 latter
reinforcements	 will	 be	 sufficient	 to	 break	 the	 Crimson	 Guard	 at	 Fox	 Pass,	 thus
opening	Brood's	flank.”
“Then	the	Empress	is	a	fool,”	Dujek	said,	his	tone	hard.	“The	conscripts	are
next	to	useless,	Adjunct,	and	by	this	time	next	year	the	Crimson	Guard	will	have
liberated	Nisst,	Treet,	One	Eye	Cat,	Porule,	Garalt,	and—”
“I	know	the	list.”	Lorn	rose	abruptly.	“You'll	receive	two	more	legions	next
year,	High	Fist.	That's	it.”
Dujek	 thought	 for	 a	 time,	 his	 gaze	 on	 the	 map	 pegged	 to	 the	 tabletop.	 Lorn
waited.	 She	 knew	 he	 was	 lost	 in	 reordering,	 re-evaluating	 his	 plans	 for	 next
season's	campaign,	that	he'd	entered	a	world	of	matériel	and	divisions,	in	secondguessing	Caladan	Brood	and	the	commander	of	the	Crimson	Guard,	Prince	K'azz.
Finally	he	cleared	his	throat.	“Adjunct,	is	it	possible	to	reverse	the	landings?	The
Eleventh	and	the	Wickan	lancers	disembarking	on	the	east	coast,	south	of	Apple.
The	Ninth	on	the	west	coast,	to	Tulips.”
Lorn	strode	to	the	table	and	studied	the	map.	Tulips?	 Why	there?	 That	made
no	 sense	 at	 all.	 “The	 Empress	 would	 be	 curious	 as	 to	 your	 revised	 plans,	 High
Fist.”
“Meaning	‘maybe.'	”	Dujek	rubbed	the	stubble	on	his	jaw,	then	gave	a	sharp
nod.	“All	right,	Adjunct.	First,	the	conscripts	will	not	hold	Fox	Pass.	The	Crimson
Guard	will	be	into	the	northlands	by	the	time	our	reinforcements	arrive.	Much	 of
that	area	is	farmland,	pasture.	As	we	retreat,	pulling	the	conscripts	back	to	Nisst,
we	 raze	 the	 countryside.	 No	 crops,	 no	 livestock.	 Whatever	 supplies	 K'azz	 will
need	he'll	have	to	bring	with	him.	Now,	Adjunct,	any	army	on	the	move,	any	army
pursuing	a	routed	army,	is	bound	to	leave	its	supply	train	behind,	string	it	out	in	its
haste	to	catch	its	enemy	and	deliver	the	killing	blow.	And	that's	where	the	Wickan


lancers	come	in.”
The	 Wickan	 were	 born	 raiders,	 Lorn	 knew.	 In	 such	 countryside	 they'd	 be
elusive,	 striking	 quickly	 and	 with	 deadly	 consequences.	 “And	 the	 Eleventh?
Where	will	they	be	in	all	this?”
“A	 third	will	be	stationed	in	Nisst.	The	 rest	 will	be	on	 the	 quick	 march—to
Fox	Pass.”
“While	Caladan	Brood	remains	south	of	Blackdog	Forest?	That	doesn't	make
sense,	High	Fist.”
“You	 suggested	 using	 the	 Moranth	 for	 all	 it's	 worth,	 didn't	 you?	 Well,	 from
Tulips	the	Moranth	and	their	Quorl	will	be	staging	a	massive	lift.”	Dujek's	gaze
narrowed	as	he	studied	the	map.	“I	want	the	Ninth	south	of	Blackdog	Swamp	by
the	 time	 I	 bring	 up	 my	 forces	 from	 here	 and	 place	 them	 south	 of	 Brood.	 A
concerted	push	from	the	Gold	and	Black	should	push	him	right	into	our	laps,	while
his	allies,	the	Crimson	Guard,	are	stuck	on	the	wrong	side	of	Fox	Pass.”
“You	intend	to	transport	an	entire	legion	by	air?”
“Does	 the	 Empress	 want	 this	 war	 won	 in	 her	 lifetime	 or	 not?”	 He	 pushed
himself	 away	 from	 the	 table	 and	 paced.	 “Mind	 you,”	 he	 said,	 as	 if	 struck	 by
sudden	doubts,	“it	may	all	be	academic.	If	I	were	Brood	I'd	.	.	.”	His	voice	trailed
away,	and	he	faced	the	Adjunct.	“Will	the	transport	orders	be	reversed?”
Lorn	searched	his	face.	Something	told	her	that	the	High	Fist	had	just	made	an
intuitive	leap,	and	it	had	to	do	with	Caladan	Brood,	and	that	as	far	as	Dujek	was
concerned,	it	was	indeed	now	academic.	She	also	realized	that	this	was	something
he	wouldn't	share	with	her.	She	scanned	the	map	again,	trying	to	see	what	Dujek
had	 seen.	 But	 it	 was	 hopeless,	 she	 was	 no	 tactician.	 Trying	 to	 guess	 Dujek's
thoughts	 was	 hard	 enough;	 but	 to	 try	 the	 same	 with	 Caladan	 Brood	 was
impossible.	“Your	plan,	although	brash,	is	now	officially	accepted	on	behalf	of	the
Empress.	Your	request	will	be	fulfilled.”
Dujek	nodded	half-heartedly.
“One	 thing,	 High	 Fist,	 before	 Tayschrenn	 arrives.	 There	 was	 a	 Hound	 of
Shadow	here?”
“Yes,”	the	man	said.	“I	wasn't	here	at	the	time,	but	I	saw	the	mess	the	beast
left	behind.	If	not	for	Tattersail	it	would've	been	far	worse.”
Lorn	saw	a	glint	of	horror	in	Dujek's	eyes	and	into	her	mind	returned	the	scene
from	 the	 coast	 road	 west	 of	 Itko	 Kan,	 two	 years	 ago.	 “I've	 seen	 the	 work	 of
Hounds	before,”	she	said,	meeting	his	eyes.
In	 that	 moment	 of	 locked	 gazes	 they	 shared	 something	 profound.	 Then	 Dujek
pulled	his	eyes	away.	“This	Tattersail,”	Lorn	said,	to	hide	a	pang	of	regret,	“must


be	a	very	capable	sorceress.”
“The	 only	 cadre	 mage	 to	 have	 survived	 Tayschrenn's	 assault	 on	 Moon's
Spawn,”	Dujek	replied.
“Indeed?”	To	Lorn,	that	revelation	was	even	more	remarkable.	She	wondered
if	Dujek	suspected	anything,	but	his	next	words	put	her	at	ease.
“She	called	it	luck,	on	both	counts,	and	she	might	be	right.”
“Has	she	been	a	cadre	mage	for	a	long	time?”	Lorn	asked.
“Ever	since	I	took	command.	Perhaps	eight,	nine	years.”
The	 familiarity	 of	 Tattersail's	 name	 returned	 to	 Lorn	 then,	 like	 a	 mailed	 fist
clenching	her	heart.	She	found	herself	sitting	down	again,	and	Dujek	had	taken	a
step	toward	her,	genuine	concern	in	his	eyes.
“Your	injury	needs	attending	to,”	he	said	gruffly.	“I	shouldn't	have	waited.”
“No,	no,	it's	all	right.	Weariness,	that's	all.”
He	studied	her	quizzically.	“Would	you	like	some	wine,	Adjunct?”
She	nodded.	Tattersail.	Was	it	possible?	She	would	know	when	she	saw	the
woman.	She	would	know	then.	“Nine	years,”	she	murmured,	“the	Mouse.”
“I	beg	your	pardon?”
She	 looked	 up	 to	 find	 Dujek	 before	 her.	 He	 offered	 her	 a	 goblet	 of	 wine.
“Nothing,”	she	said,	as	she	accepted	it.	“Thank	you.”
As	 the	 double	 doors	 swung	 open	 both	 turned.	 In	 strode	 Tayschrenn,	 his	 face
dark	with	fury	as	he	confronted	Dujek.
“Damn	you,”	the	High	Mage	grated.	“If	you	had	a	hand	in	this	I'll	find	it,	and
that	is	a	promise.”
Dujek	raised	an	eyebrow.	“A	hand	in	what,	High	Mage?”	he	asked	coolly.
“I've	just	been	to	the	Hall	of	Records.	A	fire?	The	place	looks	like	the	inside
of	an	oven.”
Lorn	rose	and	stepped	between	them.	“High	Mage	Tayschrenn,”	she	said,	in	a
low,	dangerous	tone,	“perhaps	you	could	tell	me	why	this	matter	of	some	fire	in
some	bureaucrat's	chamber	should	override	all	other	considerations?”
Tayschrenn	blinked.	“I	beg	your	pardon,	Adjunct,”	he	said	tightly,	“but	within
the	Hall	of	Records	were	the	city's	census	lists.”	His	dark	eyes	swung	past	her	to
fix	on	Dujek.	“Wherein	all	the	names	of	Pale's	nobility	could	be	found.”
“Unfortunate,”	 the	 High	 Fist	 said.	 “Have	 you	 begun	 an	 investigation?	 My
staff's	services	are,	of	course,	entirely	at	your	disposal.”
“Unnecessary,	 High	 Fist,”	 the	 wizard	 drawled	 sardonically.	 “Why	 make	 all


your	other	spies	redundant?”	Tayschrenn	paused,	then	stepped	back	and	bowed	to
Lorn.	“Greetings,	Adjunct.	I	apologize	for	this	ungracious-seeming	reunion—”
“Save	 your	 apologies	 for	 later,”	 Lorn	 said	 levelly.	 She	 faced	 Dujek.	 “Thank
you	 for	 the	 wine	 and	 conversation,”	 she	 said,	 noting	 with	 satisfaction
Tayschrenn's	stiffening	at	that.	“I	trust	there'll	be	a	formal	dinner	this	evening?”
Dujek	nodded.	“Of	course,	Adjunct.”
“Would	you	be	so	kind	as	to	request	Tattersail's	attendance	as	well?”	She	felt
yet	 another	 flinch	 come	 from	 the	 High	 Mage,	 and	 saw	 in	 Dujek's	 gaze	 a	 new
respect	as	he	looked	upon	her,	as	if	acknowledging	her	own	skills	in	this	brand	of
tactics.
Tayschrenn	interrupted.	“Adjunct,	the	sorceress	has	been	ill	as	a	result	of	her
encounter	 with	 the	 Hound	 of	 Shadow,”	 he	 turned	 a	 smile	 on	 Dujek,	 “which	 I'm
sure	has	been	described	to	you	by	the	High	Fist.”
Not	well	enough,	Lorn	thought	ruefully,	but	let	Tayschrenn	imagine	the	worst.
“I'm	interested	in	a	wizard's	evaluation	of	that	event,	High	Mage,”	she	said.
“Which	you	shall	have	shortly.”
Dujek	 bowed.	 “I	 will	 inquire	 as	 to	 Tattersail's	 health,	 Adjunct.	 If	 you	 will
excuse	me,	 then,	 I	can	 be	 on	my	way.”	He	 turned	to	Tayschrenn	 and	gave	a	 curt
nod.
Tayschrenn	 watched	 the	 one-armed	 old	 man	 leave	 the	 room,	 then	 waited	 for
the	doors	to	close	once	again.	“Adjunct,	this	situation	is—”
“Absurd,”	 Lorn	 finished	 hotly.	 “Dammit,	 Tayschrenn,	 where's	 your	 sense?
You've	 taken	 on	 the	 craftiest	 bastard	 the	 Empire	 military	 has	 ever	 had	 the
privilege	 of	 possessing	 and	 he's	 eating	 you	 alive.”	 She	 spun	 to	 the	 table	 and
refilled	her	goblet.	“And	you	deserve	it.”
“Adjunct—”
She	 faced	 him.	 “No.	 Listen,	 Tayschrenn.	 I	 speak	 directly	 from	 the	 Empress.
She	reluctantly	approved	your	commandeering	the	assault	on	Moon's	Spawn—	but
if	she'd	known	you	so	thoroughly	lacked	subtlety,	she	would	never	have	permitted
it.	Do	you	take	everyone	else	for	fools?”
“Dujek	is	just	one	man,”	Tayschrenn	said.
Lorn	took	a	large	mouthful	of	wine,	then	set	down	the	goblet	and	rubbed	her
brow.	“Dujek's	not	the	enemy,”	she	said	wearily.	“Dujek's	never	been	the	enemy.”
Tayschrenn	stepped	forward.	“He	was	the	Emperor's	man,	Adjunct.”
“Challenging	 that	 man's	 loyalty	 to	 the	 Empire	 is	 insulting,	 and	 it's	 that	 very
insult	 that	 may	 well	 turn	 him.	 Dujek	 is	 not	 just	 one	 man.	 Right	 now	 he's	 ten


thousand,	 and	 in	 a	 year's	 time	 he'll	 be	 twenty-five	 thousand.	 He	 doesn't	 yield
when	 you	 push,	 does	 he?	 No,	 because	 he	 can't.	 He's	 got	 ten	 thousand	 soldiers
behind	him—and,	believe	me,	when	they	get	angry	enough	to	push	back,	you'll	not
be	 able	 to	 withstand	 them.	 As	 for	 Dujek,	 he'll	 just	 end	 up	 being	 carried	 on	 the
tide.”
“Then	he	is	a	traitor.”
“No.	 He's	 a	 man	 who	 cares	 for	 those	 he	 is	 responsible	 for	 and	 to.	 He's	 the
best	of	the	Empire.	If	he's	forced	to	turn,	Tayschrenn,	then	we're	the	traitors.	Am	I
getting	through?”
The	 High	 Mage's	 face	 was	 lined	 with	 a	 deep,	 disturbed	 frown.	 “Yes,
Adjunct,”	 he	 said	 quietly.	 “You	 are.”	 He	 looked	 up.	 “This	 task	 the	 Empress	 has
commanded	 of	 me,	 it	 weighs	 heavily,	 Adjunct.	 These	 are	 not	 my	 strengths.	 It
would	do	well	if	you	dismissed	me.”
Lorn	 gave	 that	 serious	 consideration.	 Mages	 by	 nature	 never	 commanded
loyalty.	 Fear,	 yes,	 and	 the	 respect	 born	 of	 fear,	 but	 the	 one	 thing	 a	 mage	 found
difficult	to	understand	or	cope	with	was	loyalty.	And	yet	there	had	been	one	mage,
long	 ago,	 who	 had	 commanded	 loyalty—and	 that	 was	 the	 Emperor.	 She	 said,
“High	Mage,	we	are	all	agreed	on	one	thing.	The	old	guard	must	disappear.	All
who	stood	with	the	Emperor	and	still	cling	to	his	memory	will	ever	work	against
us,	 whether	 consciously	 or	 unconsciously.	 Dujek	 is	 an	 exception,	 and	 there	 is	 a
handful	of	others	like	him.	Those	we	must	not	lose.	As	for	the	others,	they	have	to
die.	The	risk	lies	in	alerting	them	to	that	fact.	If	we're	too	open	we	may	end	up
with	an	insurrection	the	size	of	which	could	destroy	the	Empire.”
“Apart	 from	 Dujek	 and	 Tattersail,”	 Tayschrenn	 said,	 “we've	 cleaned	 out
everyone	else.	As	for	Whiskeyjack	and	his	squad,	he's	all	yours,	Adjunct.”
“With	luck,”	Lorn	said,	then	frowned	as	the	High	Mage	winced.	“What's	the
matter?”
He	rose.	“I	peruse	my	Deck	of	Dragons	nightly,”	he	said.	“And	I'm	certain	that
Oponn	has	entered	the	world	of	mortal	affairs.	Tattersail's	own	reading	did	much
to	confirm	my	suspicions.”
Lorn	looked	at	him	sharply.	“She's	an	Adept?”
“Far	more	adept	than	I,”	Tayschrenn	admitted.
Lorn	thought.	“What	can	you	tell	me	of	Oponn's	involvement?”
“Darujhistan,”	Tayschrenn	replied.
Lorn	 closed	 her	 eyes.	 “I	 was	 afraid	 you'd	 say	 that.	 We	 need	 Darujhistan—
desperately.	Its	wealth,	coming	into	our	hands,	would	break	this	continent's	back.”


“I	know,	Adjunct.	But	the	matter	is	even	worse	than	you	realize.	I	also	believe
that,	somehow,	Whiskeyjack	and	Tattersail	are	in	league	with	one	another.”
“Any	word	of	what	happened	to	Captain	Paran?”
“None.	Someone	is	hiding	him,	or	his	body.	I'm	inclined	to	believe	he's	dead,
Adjunct,	but	his	soul	has	yet	to	pass	through	Hood's	Gate	and	only	a	mage	could
prevent	that.”
“Tattersail?”
The	High	Mage	shrugged.	“Possibly.	I	would	know	more	of	this	captain's	role
in	all	this.”
Lorn	hesitated,	then	said,	“He	was	engaged	in	a	long,	arduous	search.”
Tayschrenn	growled,	“Perhaps	he	found	whatever	he	was	seeking.”
Lorn	eyed	him.	“Perhaps.	Tell	me,	how	good	is	Tattersail?”
“Good	enough	to	be	a	High	Mage,”	Tayschrenn	said.	“Good	enough	to	survive
a	 Hound's	 attack	 and	 to	 drive	 it	 away,	 though	 I	 would	 not	 think	 such	 a	 thing
possible.	Even	I	would	have	difficulty	managing	that.”
“Maybe	she	had	help,”	Lorn	murmured.
“I	hadn't	thought	of	that.”
“Think	on	it	now,”	Lorn	said.	“But	before	you	do,	the	Empress	requests	that
you	 continue	 your	 efforts,	 though	 not	 against	 Dujek.	 You're	 needed	 here	 as	 a
conduit	 in	 case	 my	 mission	 goes	 wrong	 in	 Darujhistan.	 Do	 not	 involve	 yourself
with	 managing	 the	 occupation	 of	 Pale.	 Further,	 you	 are	 to	 provide	 Dujek	 with
details	 on	 Oponn's	 appearance.	 If	 a	 god	 has	 entered	 the	 fray,	 he	 has	 a	 right	 to
know	and	to	plan	accordingly.”
“How	can	one	plan	anything	with	Oponn	in	the	game?”
“Leave	that	to	Dujek.”	She	studied	his	face.	“Do	you	have	difficulty	with	any
of	these	instructions?”
Tayschrenn	smiled.	“In	truth,	Adjunct,	I'm	greatly	relieved.”
Lorn	nodded.	“Good.	Now,	I	need	a	mundane	healer	and	quarters.”
“Of	 course.”	 Tayschrenn	 strode	 to	 the	 doors,	 then	 paused	 and	 turned.
“Adjunct,	I	am	glad	you're	here.”
“Thank	you,	High	Mage.”	After	he	left,	Lorn	sank	into	her	chair	and	her	mind
traveled	 back	 nine	 years,	 to	 the	 sights	 and	 sounds	 experienced	 by	 a	 child,	 to	 a
night,	 one	 particular	 night	 in	 the	 Mouse,	 when	 every	 nightmare	 a	 young	 girl's
imagination	could	hold	became	real.	She	remembered	blood,	blood	everywhere,
and	the	empty	faces	of	her	mother,	her	father,	and	older	brother—faces	numbed	by
the	 realization	 that	 they'd	 been	 spared,	 that	 the	 blood	 wasn't	 their	 own.	 As	 the


memories	stalked	once	again	through	her	mind,	a	name	rode	the	winds,	rustling	in
the	 air	 as	 if	 clawing	 through	 dead	 branches.	 Lorn's	 lips	 parted,	 and	 she
whispered,	“Tattersail.”
The	 sorceress	 had	 found	 the	 strength	 to	 leave	 her	 bed.	 She	 now	 stood	 at	 the
window,	leaning	with	one	hand	against	the	frame	for	support,	and	looked	down	on
a	street	crowded	with	military	wagons.	The	systematic	plunder	that	quartermasters
called	“resupply”	was	well	under	way.	The	eviction	of	nobility	and	gentry	from
their	familial	estates	for	the	stationing	of	the	officer	corps,	of	which	she	was	one,
had	 ended	 days	 ago,	 while	 the	 repairing	 of	 the	 outer	 walls,	 the	 refitting	 of
sundered	gates,	and	the	clearing	of	“Moon	rain”	continued	apace.
She	was	glad	she'd	missed	the	river	of	corpses	that	must	have	filled	the	city
streets	during	the	initial	phase	of	cleanup—wagon	after	wagon	groaning	beneath
the	 weight	 of	 crushed	 bodies,	 white	 flesh	 seared	 by	 fire	 and	 slashed	 by	 sword,
rat-gnawed	and	raven-pecked—men,	women,	and	children.	It	was	a	scene	she	had
witnessed	before,	and	she	had	no	wish	ever	to	see	it	again.
Now,	shock	and	terror	had	seeped	down	and	out	of	sight.	Scenes	of	normality
reappeared	 as	 farmers	 and	 merchants	 emerged	 from	 hiding	 to	 meet	 the	 needs	 of
occupiers	and	occupied	alike.	Malazan	healers	had	swept	the	city,	rooting	out	the
birthing	of	plague	and	treating	common	ailments	among	all	those	they	touched.	No
citizen	 would	 have	 been	 turned	 from	 their	 path.	 And	 sentiments	 began	 the	 long,
perfectly	planned	swing.
Soon,	 Tattersail	 knew,	 there'd	 be	 the	 culling	 of	 the	 nobility,	 a	 scourge	 that
would	 raise	 to	 the	 gallows	 the	 greediest,	 least-liked	 nobles.	 And	 the	 executions
would	be	public.	A	tried	and	true	procedure	that	swelled	recruitment	on	a	tide	of
base	 vengeance—with	 every	 hand	 stained	 by	 a	 righteous	 glee.	 A	 sword	 in	 such
hands	completed	the	conspiracy	 and	included	all	players	 in	 the	 hunt	 for	the	next
victim	to	the	cause—the	Empire's	cause.
She'd	seen	it	run	its	course	in	a	hundred	such	cities.	No	matter	how	benign	the
original	rulers,	no	matter	how	generous	the	nobility,	the	word	of	Empire,	weighted
by	might,	twisted	the	past	into	a	tyranny	of	demons.	A	sad	comment	on	humanity,	a
bitter	lesson	made	foul	by	her	own	role	in	it.
In	her	mind	returned	the	faces	of	the	Bridgeburners,	a	strange	counterpoint	to
the	cynicism	with	which	she	viewed	all	around	her.	Whiskeyjack,	a	man	pushed	to
the	edge,	or,	rather,	the	edge	creeping	on	him	on	all	sides,	a	crumbling	of	beliefs,	a
failing	 of	 faiths,	 leaving	 as	 his	 last	 claim	 to	 humanity	 his	 squad,	 a	 shrinking
handful	of	the	only	people	that	mattered	anymore.	But	he	held	on,	and	he	pushed


back—pushed	 back	 hard.	 She	 liked	 to	 think—no,	 she	 wanted	 to	 believe—he
would	win	out	in	the	end,	that	he'd	live	to	see	his	world	stripped	of	the	Empire.
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam,	seeking	to	take	the	responsibility	from	their	sergeant's
shoulders.	It	was	their	only	means	of	loving	the	man,	though	they'd	never	put	it	in
such	terms.	In	the	others,	barring	Sorry,	she	saw	the	same,	yet	with	them	there	was
a	 desperation	 that	 she	 found	 endearing,	 a	 childlike	 yearning	 to	 relieve
Whiskeyjack	of	everything	their	grim	place	had	laid	upon	him.
She	 responded	 to	 them	 in	 a	 way	 deeper	 than	 she'd	 thought	 possible,	 from	 a
core	 she'd	 long	 been	 convinced	 was	 burned	 out,	 the	 ashes	 scattered	 in	 silent
lament—a	 core	 no	 mage	 could	 afford.	 Tattersail	 recognized	 the	 danger,	 but	 that
only	made	it	all	the	more	alluring.
Sorry	was	another	matter,	and	she	found	herself	avoiding	even	thinking	about
that	young	woman.
And	that	left	Paran.	What	to	do	about	this	captain?	At	the	moment	the	man	was
in	the	room,	seated	on	the	bed	behind	her	and	oiling	his	sword,	Chance.	They'd
not	 spoken	much	since	 she'd	 awakened	 four	 days	ago.	 There	 was	 still	too	 much
distrust.
Perhaps	it	was	that	mystery,	that	uncertainty,	that	made	them	so	attracted	to	one
another.	And	the	attraction	was	obvious:	even	now,	with	her	back	to	the	man,	she
sensed	a	taut	thread	between	them.	Whatever	energy	burned	between	them,	it	felt
dangerous.	Which	made	it	exciting.
Tattersail	sighed.	Hairlock	had	appeared	this	very	morning,	eager	and	agitated
about	 something.	 The	 puppet	 would	 not	 answer	 their	 queries,	 but	 the	 sorceress
suspected	that	Hairlock	had	found	a	trail,	and	it	seemed	it	might	take	the	puppet
out	of	Pale	and	on	to	Darujhistan.
That	was	not	a	happy	thought.
She	 stiffened	 as	 the	 ward	 she'd	 placed	 outside	 her	 door	 was	 tripped.
Tattersail	whirled	to	Paran.	“A	visitor,”	she	said.
He	rose,	Chance	in	his	hands.
The	sorceress	waved	her	hand	over	him.	“You're	no	longer	visible,	Captain.
Nor	can	anyone	sense	your	presence.	Make	no	sound,	and	wait	here.”	She	strode
into	the	outer	room	just	as	a	soft	knock	sounded	on	the	door.
She	opened	it	to	see	a	young	marine	standing	in	the	hallway.	“What	is	it?”	she
demanded.
The	 marine	 bowed.	 “High	 Fist	 Dujek	 is	 inquiring	 as	 to	 your	 health,
Sorceress.”


“Much	better,”	she	said.	“That's	kind	of	him.	Now,	if	you'll—”
The	marine	interrupted	diffidently.	“If	you	answered	as	you	just	have,	I	am	to
convey	the	High	Fist's	request	that	you	attend	a	formal	supper	this	evening	in	the
main	building.”
Tattersail	 cursed	 silently.	 She	 shouldn't	 have	 told	 the	 truth.	 Now,	 it	 was	 too
late.	 A	 “request”	 from	 her	 commander	 was	 not	 something	 that	 could	 be	 denied.
“Inform	the	High	Fist	that	I	will	be	honored	to	share	his	company	over	supper.”	A
thought	struck	her.	“May	I	ask	who	else	will	be	present?”
“High	 Mage	 Tayschrenn,	 a	 messenger	 named	 Toc	 the	 Younger,	 and	 Adjunct
Lorn.”
“Adjunct	Lorn	is	here?”
“Arrived	this	morning,	Sorceress.”
Oh,	 Hood's	 Breath.	 “Convey	 my	 reply,”	 Tattersail	 said,	 struggling	 against	 a
rising	tide	of	fear.	She	shut	the	door,	then	heard	the	marine's	boots	hurrying	down
the	hallway.
“What's	wrong?”	Paran	asked,	from	the	opposite	doorway.
She	 faced	 him.	 “Put	 that	 sword	 away,	 Captain.”	 She	 walked	 over	 to	 the
dresser	 and	 began	 rummaging	 through	 the	 drawers.	 “I'm	 to	 attend	 a	 dinner,”	 she
said.
Paran	approached.	“An	official	gathering.”
Tattersail	 nodded	 distractedly.	 “With	 Adjunct	 Lorn	 there	 as	 well,	 as	 if
Tayschrenn	isn't	bad	enough.”
The	Captain	murmured,	“So	she's	finally	arrived.”
Tattersail	froze.	She	turned	to	him	slowly.	“You've	been	expecting	her,	haven't
you?”
Paran	started	and	looked	at	her	with	frightened	eyes.
She	 realized	 his	 mumbling	 hadn't	 been	 meant	 for	 her	 ears.	 “Dammit,”	 she
hissed.	“You're	working	for	her!”
The	 captain's	 answer	 was	 clear	 as	 he	 spun	 round.	 She	 watched	 him	 vanish
into	 the	 bedroom,	 her	 thoughts	 a	 storm	 of	 fury.	 The	 threads	 of	 conspiracy	 now
thrummed	in	her	mind.	So,	Quick	Ben's	suspicions	had	been	accurate:	a	plan	was
afoot	 to	 kill	 the	 squad.	 Did	 that	 make	 her	 life	 at	 risk	 as	 well?	 She	 felt	 herself
nearing	 a	 decision.	 What	 that	 decision	 was	 she	 wasn't	 sure,	 but	 there	 was	 a
direction	to	her	thoughts	now,	and	it	had	the	inevitable	momentum	of	an	avalanche.


The	seventh	bell	was	ringing	from	some	distant	tower	as	Toc	the	Younger	passed
into	the	Empire	headquarters.
He	 showed	 his	 invitation	 to	 yet	 another	 grim-faced,	 intense	 guard,	 and	 was
grudgingly	 allowed	 to	 continue	 on	 down	 the	 main	 hall	 to	 the	 dining	 chamber.
Unease	churned	in	Toc's	stomach.	He	knew	the	Adjunct	was	behind	the	request,
but	 she	 could	 be	 as	 unpredictable	 and	 as	 manipulative	 as	 the	 rest.	 Beyond	 the
doors	he	now	approached	 might	 as	 well	 be	a	pit	filled	with	vipers,	 all	 hungrily
awaiting	his	arrival.
Toc	 wondered	 if	 he'd	 be	 able	 to	 keep	 anything	 down,	 and	 knowing	 the
condition	of	his	facial	wound,	he	then	wondered	grimly	if	anyone	else	would	be
able	 to	 keep	 anything	 down.	 Among	 his	 fellow	 soldiers	 his	 scars	 were	 barely
noticed:	rare	was	the	soldier	in	Dujek's	army	who	did	not	carry	a	scar	or	three.
Those	few	friends	he	had	seemed	simply	thankful	that	he	still	lived.
In	the	Seven	Cities,	superstition	held	that	loss	of	an	eye	was	also	the	birth	of
inner	 sight.	 He'd	 been	 reminded	 of	 that	 belief	 at	 least	 a	 dozen	 times	 in	 the	 last
couple	 of	 weeks.	 There	 had	 been	 no	 secret	 gift	 granted	 him	 in	 exchange	 for	 his
eye.	Flashes	of	searing	light	ripped	through	his	mind	every	now	and	then,	but	he
suspected	that	was	no	more	than	a	memory	of	the	last	thing	his	eye	had	seen:	fire.
And	 now	 he	 was	 about	 to	 sit	 among	 the	 loftiest	 company	 in	 the	 Empire,
barring	the	Empress	herself.	Suddenly	the	wound	was	a	thing	of	shame.	He'd	sit
there	 as	 testament	 to	 the	 horrors	 of	 war—Toc	 stiffened	 just	 outside	 the	 dining
room	door.	Was	that	why	the	Adjunct	had	invited	him?	He	hesitated,	then	shrugged
and	entered.
Dujek,	 Tayschrenn,	 and	 the	 Adjunct	 turned	 as	 one	 to	 regard	 him.	 Toc	 the
Younger	bowed.
“Thank	you	for	coming,”	Adjunct	Lorn	said.	She	stood	with	the	two	men	near
the	largest	of	three	fireplaces,	in	the	wall	opposite	the	entrance.	“Please,	join	us.
We're	now	awaiting	but	one	more	guest.”
Toc	 strode	 to	 them,	 thankful	 for	 Dujek's	 grin.	 The	 High	 Fist	 set	 his	 crystal
goblet	down	on	the	mantel	and	deliberately	scratched	the	stump	of	his	left	arm.
“Bet	it's	driving	you	half	crazed,”	the	old	man	said,	his	grin	broadening.
“I	scratch	with	both	hands,”	Toc	said.
Dujek	barked	a	laugh.	“Join	us	in	a	drink?”
“Thank	you.”	He	noticed	Lorn's	appraisal	as	he	accepted	a	goblet	from	Dujek.
Taking	 the	 decanter	 from	 a	 nearby	 table,	 his	 glance	 crossed	 the	 High	 Mage,	 but
Tayschrenn's	attention	was	fixed	on	the	roaring	fire	behind	Lorn.
“Has	your	horse	recovered?”	the	Adjunct	asked.


Toc	nodded	as	he	filled	his	goblet.	“Doing	handstands	the	last	time	I	looked	in
on	her,”	he	said.
Lorn	 smiled	 tentatively,	 as	 if	 unsure	 whether	 he	 was	 mocking	 her.	 “I've
explained	your	vital	role	in	keeping	me	alive,	Toc	the	Younger,	how	you	loosed
four	arrows	on	the	fly,	and	brought	down	four	Barghast.”
He	looked	at	 her	sharply.	“I	didn't	 know	 I	had	 the	 last	two	 shots	 in	me,”	he
said.	He	sipped	wine,	resisting	the	urge	to	scratch	his	wound.
Dujek	grunted.	“Your	father	was	also	in	the	habit	of	surprising	people.	There's
a	man	I	miss.”
“I,	too,”	Toc	replied,	looking	down.
The	 awkward	 silence	 that	 followed	 this	 exchange	 was	 mercifully	 broken	 by
the	arrival	of	the	last	guest.	Toc	turned	with	the	others	as	the	door	swung	open.	He
gazed	 at	 the	 woman	 standing	 in	 the	 entrance,	 then	 started.	 Was	 that	 Tattersail?
He'd	never	seen	her	wearing	anything	but	battle	garb,	and	was	now	stunned.	My,
he	 thought	 wonderingly,	 she's	 not	 bad,	 if	 you	 like	 them	 big,	 that	 is.	 He	 half
grinned.
Lorn's	response	to	Tattersail's	appearance	had	sounded	much	like	a	gasp,	then
she	spoke.	“We	have	met	before,	though	I	doubt	you'd	remember.”
Tattersail	blinked.	“I	think	I	would	have	recalled	that,”	she	said	cautiously.
“I	think	not.	I	was	but	eleven	years	old	at	the	time.”
“Then	you	must	be	mistaken.	I'm	rarely	in	the	company	of	children.”
“They	 burned	 the	 Mouse	 Quarter	 a	 week	 after	 you	 swept	 through	 it,
Tattersail.”	 Lorn's	 voice	 made	 everyone	 stiffen	 with	 its	 barely	 controlled	 rage.
“Those	survivors,	the	ones	you	left	behind,	were	resettled	in	Mock's	Hole.	And	in
those	plague-ridden	caverns	my	mother,	my	father,	and	my	brother	died.”
The	blood	drained	from	Tattersail's	round	face.
Bewildered,	 Toc	 glanced	 at	 the	 others.	 Dujek's	 expression	 was	 masked,	 but
there	was	a	storm	behind	his	eyes	as	he	studied	Lorn.	On	Tayschrenn's	face,	as	he
looked	upon	the	sorceress,	there	dawned	a	sudden	light.
“It	was	our	first	command,”	Tattersail	said	quietly.
Toc	 saw	 Lorn	 trembling	 and	 held	 his	 breath.	 But	 when	 she	 spoke	 it	 was
controlled,	 the	 words	 precise.	 “An	 explanation	 is	 required.”	 She	 turned	 to	 High
Fist	 Dujek.	 “They	 were	 recruits,	 a	 cadre	 of	 mages.	 They	 were	 in	 Malaz	 City,
awaiting	 their	 new	 commander,	 when	 the	 Master	 of	 the	 Claw	 issued	 an	 edict
against	sorcery.	They	were	sent	into	the	Old	City—the	Mouse—to	cleanse	it.	They
were—”	 her	 voice	 caught	 “—indiscriminate.”	 She	 swung	 her	 attention	 back	 to


Tattersail.	“This	woman	was	one	of	those	mages.	Sorceress,	that	night	was	my	last
with	 my	 family.	 I	 was	 given	 to	 the	 Claw	 the	 very	 next	 day.	 The	 news	 of	 my
family's	death	was	kept	from	me	for	years.	Yet,”	her	words	fell	to	a	whisper,	“I
well	remember	that	night—the	blood,	the	screams.”
Tattersail	 seemed	 unable	 to	 speak.	 The	 air	 in	 the	 room	 had	 grown	 thick,
stifling.	Finally	the	sorceress	prised	her	gaze	from	the	Adjunct	and	said	to	Dujek,
“High	Fist,	it	was	our	first	command.	We	lost	control.	I	resigned	from	the	officer
corps	the	very	next	day	and	was	posted	with	another	Army.”	She	gathered	herself.
“If	it	is	the	Adjunct's	wish	to	convene	a	court,	I	offer	no	defense	and	will	accept
my	execution	as	a	just	penalty.”
Lorn	replied,	“That	is	acceptable.”	She	laid	her	left	hand	upon	her	sword	and
prepared	to	withdraw	it.
“No,”	High	Fist	Dujek	said.	“It	is	not	acceptable.”
Lorn	 froze.	 She	 glared	 at	 the	 old	 man.	 “You	 seem	 to	 forget	 my	 rank.”“No,	 I
haven't.	 Adjunct,	 if	 it	 is	 your	 will	 that	 those	 within	 the	 Empire	 who	 have
committed	crimes	in	the	Emperor's	name	must	be	executed,”	he	stepped	forward,
“then	you	must	include	me.	Indeed,	I	believe	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	also	has	his
share	 of	 horror	 committed	 on	 the	 Emperor's	 behalf.	 And,	 finally,	 there	 is	 the
Empress	herself	to	consider.	Laseen,	after	all,	commanded	the	Emperor's	Claw—
she	created	it,	in	fact.	More,	the	Edict	was	hers,	thankfully	short-lived	as	it	was.”
He	turned	to	Tattersail.	“I	was	there,	Tattersail.	Under	Whiskeyjack's	command	I
was	sent	down	to	rein	you	in,	which	I	did.”
She	 shook	 her	 head.	 “Whiskeyjack	 commanded?”	 Her	 eyes	 narrowed.	 “This
has	the	taste	of	a	god's	game.”
Dujek	 swung	 back	 to	 the	 Adjunct.	 “The	 Empire	 has	 its	 history,	 and	 we	 each
are	in	it.”
“In	this,”	Tayschrenn	rasped,	“I	must	agree	with	the	High	Fist,	Adjunct.”
“There's	no	need	to	have	all	this	official,”	Tattersail	said,	her	eyes	on	Lorn.	“I
hereby	challenge	you	to	a	duel.	On	my	behalf	I	shall	employ	all	my	magical	skills
in	an	effort	to	destroy	you.	You	may	defend	with	your	sword,	Adjunct.”
Toc	took	a	step	forward.	He	opened	his	mouth,	then	closed	it	again.	He'd	been
about	to	tell	Tattersail	that	Lorn	carried	an	Otataral	sword,	that	the	duel	would	be
grossly	 unfair,	 that	 she'd	 die	 within	 seconds,	 as	 the	 sword	 devoured	 her	 every
spell.	Then	he	saw	that	the	sorceress	knew	all	that.
Dujek	 rounded	 on	 Tattersail.	 “Dammit,	 woman!	 Do	 you	 think	 everything
hinges	on	how	it's	worded?	Execution.	Duel.	None	of	it	matters	one	whit!	All	that
the	Adjunct	does,	all	that	she	says,	is	on	behalf	of	Empress	Laseen.”	He	spun	to


Lorn.	“You	are	here	as	Laseen's	voice,	as	her	will,	Adjunct.”
Tayschrenn	spoke	softly,	“The	woman	named	Lorn,	the	woman	who	once	was
a	child,	who	once	had	a	family,”	he	looked	upon	the	Adjunct	with	anguish	in	his
eyes,	 “that	 woman	 does	 not	 exist.	 She	 ceased	 to	 exist	 the	 day	 she	 became	 the
Adjunct.”
Lorn	stared	at	the	two	men,	her	eyes	wide.
Standing	beside	her,	Toc	watched	those	words	battering	her	will,	crushing	the
anger,	shattering	into	dust	every	last	vestige	of	identity.	And	from	her	eyes	rose	the
icy,	clinical	repose	of	the	Adjunct	to	the	Empress.	Toc	felt	his	heart	pounding	hard
against	his	chest.	He'd	just	witnessed	an	execution.	The	woman	named	Lorn	had
risen	from	the	turgid	mists	of	the	past,	risen	to	right	a	wrong,	to	find	justice	and	in
that	last	act	reclaim	its	life—and	she	had	been	denied.	Not	by	the	words	of	Dujek
or	Tayschrenn,	but	by	the	thing	known	as	the	Adjunct.
“Of	 course,”	 she	 said,	 removing	 her	 hand	 from	 her	 sword.	 “Please	 enter,
Sorceress	Tattersail,	and	dine	with	us.”
The	flat	tone	of	her	voice	told	Toc	that	her	invitation	had	not	cost	anything—
and	 this	 horrified	 him,	 shook	 him	 to	 his	 very	 core.	 A	 quick	 glance	 showed	 a
similar	response	from	Tayschrenn	and	Dujek,	though	the	latter	veiled	it.
Tattersail	 looked	 positively	 ill,	 but	 she	 nodded	 shakily	 in	 answer	 to	 the
Adjunct's	invitation.
Toc	 found	 the	 decanter	 and	 a	 spare	 crystal	 goblet.	 He	 walked	 up	 to	 the
sorceress.	“I	am	Toc	the	Younger,”	he	said,	smiling,	“and	you	need	a	drink.”	He
poured	the	glass	full	and	handed	it	to	her.	“Often,	when	we	camped	on	the	march,
I'd	 see	 you	 lugging	 that	 traveling	 wardrobe	 of	 yours	 around.	 Now	 I	 finally	 see
what	was	in	it.	Sorceress,	you're	a	sight	for	a	sore	eye.”
A	look	of	gratitude	entered	Tattersail's	gaze.	She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“I	hadn't
realized	my	traveling	wardrobe	garnered	such	attention.”
Toc	 grinned.	 “I'm	 afraid	 you've	 provided	 a	 standing	 joke	 in	 the	 Second.
Anything	 surprising,	 be	 it	 an	 ambush	 or	 an	 unplanned	 skirmish—the	 enemy
invariably	came	from	your	traveling	wardrobe,	Sorceress.”
Dujek	 guffawed	 behind	 him.	 “I've	 often	 wondered	 where	 that	 phrase	 came
from,	and	damn,	I	heard	it	a	lot—even	from	my	officers.”
The	 atmosphere	 in	 the	 room	 relaxed	 somewhat;	 though	 undercurrents	 of
tension	 still	 swirled,	 they	 seemed	 to	 be	 between	 Tattersail	 and	 High	 Mage
Tayschrenn.	 The	 sorceress	 turned	 her	 gaze	 upon	 Lorn	 whenever	 the	 Adjunct's
attention	was	elsewhere,	and	Toc	could	see	the	compassion	there,	and	his	respect
for	her	rose	considerably.	In	her	shoes,	any	look	he	gave	Lorn	would	have	been


filled	 with	 fear.	 And	 whatever	 storm	 threatened	 between	 Tattersail	 and
Tayschrenn	 seemed	 born	 of	 a	 difference	 in	 opinion	 coupled	 with	 suspicion;	 it
didn't	look	personal.
Then	 again,	 Toc	 considered,	 Dujek's	 steady	 presence	 may	 have	 been
providing	the	leveling	influence.	His	father	had	spoken	much	of	Dujek,	of	a	man
who	never	lost	his	touch	with	the	powerless	or	the	less	powerful.	In	dealing	with
the	 former,	 he	 always	 made	 his	 own	 failings	 an	 easy	 recognition;	 and	 with	 the
latter	he	had	an	unerring	eye	that	cut	away	personal	ambition	with	the	precision	of
a	 surgeon	 removing	 septic	 flesh,	 leaving	 in	 its	 place	 someone	 who	 treated	 trust
and	honesty	as	givens.
Studying	Dujek's	easy,	relaxed	rapport	with	the	others	in	attendance,	including
himself,	and	then	with	the	servants	who	filed	in	bearing	trays	of	food,	it	struck	Toc
that	 the	 man	 had	 not	 changed	 perceptibly	 from	 the	 one	 Toc	 the	 Elder	 had	 called
friend.	 And	 that	 impressed	 Toc	 deeply,	 knowing	 as	 he	 did	 the	 pressures	 that
burdened	the	High	Fist.
As	soon	as	everyone	was	seated	and	the	first	course	presented,	it	was	Adjunct
Lorn	 who	 took	 command,	 however.	 Dujek	 relinquished	 it	 without	 a	 word	 or	 a
gesture,	 evidently	 confident	 that	 the	 earlier	 incident	 was	 now	 over	 as	 far	 as	 the
Adjunct	was	concerned.
Lorn	addressed	Tattersail	in	that	uncanny,	flat	voice.	“Sorceress,	permit	me	to
compliment	 you	 on	 besting	 a	 Hound	 of	 Shadow,	 and	 on	 your	 timely	 recovery.	 I
know	that	Tayschrenn	has	questioned	you	regarding	this	incident,	but	I	would	like
to	hear	the	tale	from	you	directly.”
Tattersail	 set	 down	 her	 goblet	 and	 regarded	 her	 plate	 briefly	 before	 meeting
the	Adjunct's	steady	gaze.	“As	the	High	Mage	may	have	explained,	it's	now	clear
that	the	gods	have	entered	the	fray.	Specifically,	they've	become	involved	with	the
Empire's	plans	for	Darujhistan—”
Toc	rose	quickly.	“I	believe,”	he	said,	“I	should	excuse	myself	now,	as	what
will	be	discussed	here	exceeds—”
“Be	 seated,	 Toc	 the	 Younger,”	 Lorn	 commanded.	 “You	 are	 the	 Claw
representative	here,	and	as	such	you	are	responsible	for	speaking	on	its	behalf.”
“I	am?”
“You	are.”
Slowly,	Toc	sat.
“Please	continue,	Sorceress.”
Tattersail	nodded.	“Oponn	is	central	to	this	gambit.	The	Twin	Jesters'	opening
move	 has	 created	 ripples—I'm	 sure	 the	 High	 Mage	 would	 agree	 with	 this—and


thus	attracted	the	attention	of	other	gods.”
“Shadowthrone,”	Lorn	said.	She	looked	to	Tayschrenn.
The	High	Mage	concurred.	“One	could	expect	such	a	thing.	I,	however,	have
sensed	 nothing	 of	 Shadowthrone's	 attention	 upon	 us,	 even	 though	 I	 pursued	 that
possibility	vigorously	after	the	Hound's	attack.”
Lorn	exhaled	slowly.	“Sorceress,	please	go	on.”
“The	 Hound's	 presence	 was	 triggered	 entirely	 by	 accident,”	 Tattersail	 said,
flicking	a	glance	at	Tayschrenn.	“I	was	doing	a	reading	from	my	Deck	of	Dragons,
and	 came	 upon	 the	 card	 of	 the	 Hound.	 As	 with	 all	 Adepts,	 I	 found	 the	 image
animate	 to	 a	 certain	 extent.	 When	 I	 gave	 it	 my	 full	 concentration,	 it	 felt,”	 she
cleared	her	throat,	“as	if	a	portal	opened,	created	entirely	from	the	other	side	of
that	 card—from	 High	 House	 Shadow	 itself.”	 She	 raised	 her	 hands	 and	 gazed
steadily	at	the	High	Mage.	“Is	this	possible?	The	Shadow	Realm	is	new	among	the
Houses,	 its	 full	 power	 not	 yet	 expressed.	 Well,	 whatever	 happened—a	 portal,	 a
rent—the	Hound	Gear	appeared.”
“Then	why,”	Tayschrenn	asked,	“did	it	appear	in	the	street?	Why	not	in	your
room?”
Tattersail	smiled.	“I	can	speculate.”
“Please	do,”	the	Adjunct	said.
“I	 have	 wards	 about	 my	 room,”	 Tattersail	 said.	 “The	 innermost	 of	 these	 are
High	Thyr.”
Tayschrenn	started	at	that,	clearly	surprised.
“Such	wards,”	Tattersail	continued,	“create	a	flux,	a	tide	of	power	that	surges
and	 ebbs	 like	 a	 pulsing	 heart,	 one	 that	 is	 beating	 very	 fast.	 I	 suspect	 that	 these
wards	were	sufficient	to	bounce	the	Hound	away	from	my	immediate	area,	since
in	 its	 transitional	 state—halfway	 between	 its	 realm	 and	 ours—the	 Hound	 could
not	fully	express	its	powers.	Once	it	had	arrived,	however,	it	could,	and	it	did.”
“How	did	you	manage	to	fend	off	a	Hound	of	Shadow?”	Tayschrenn	asked.
“Luck,”	Tattersail	replied,	without	hesitation.	Her	answer	hung	in	the	air,	and
it	seemed	to	Toc	that	everyone	had	forgotten	their	meal.
“In	other	words,”	Lorn	said	slowly,	“you	believe	that	Oponn	intervened.”
“I	do.”
“Why?”
Tattersail	 barked	 a	 laugh.	 “If	 I	 could	 work	 that	 out,	 Adjunct,	 I'd	 be	 a	 happy
woman.	As	it	is,”	her	humor	fell	away,	“it	seems	we're	being	used.	The	Empire
itself	has	become	a	pawn.”


“Is	there	a	way	out?”	Dujek	asked,	his	words	a	growl	that	startled	everyone.
Tattersail	shrugged.	“If	there	is,	it	lies	in	Darujhistan,	since	that's	where	Oponn's
gambit	 seems	 centered.	 Mind	 you,	 High	 Fist,	 drawing	 us	 into	 Darujhistan	 might
well	be	what	Oponn	seeks	to	achieve.”
Toc	 sat	 back,	 absently	 scratching	 his	 wound.	 There	 was	 more	 to	 it,	 he
suspected,	 though	 he	 could	 find	 no	 discernible	 source	 for	 his	 suspicion.	 He
scratched	harder.	Tattersail	could	be	glib	when	she	wanted	to	be;	her	story	had	a
straightforwardness	 to	 it.	 The	 best	 lies	 were	 the	 simple	 ones.	 Still,	 nobody	 else
seemed	unduly	suspicious.	The	sorceress	had	shifted	attention	from	her	story	to	its
implications	 for	 future	action.	 She	 had	everyone	 thinking	 past	 her,	 and	the	faster
their	thoughts	raced,	the	farther	behind	they	left	their	doubts	about	her.
He	watched	her	watching	the	others,	and	was	the	only	one	to	notice	the	flash
of	triumph	and	relief	in	her	eyes	when	Lorn	spoke.
“Oponn	 is	 not	 the	 first	 god	 seeking	 to	 manipulate	 the	 Malazan	 Empire,”	 the
Adjunct	said.	“Others	have	failed,	come	away	bloodied.	It's	unfortunate	the	lesson
was	 lost	 on	 Oponn—and	 on	 Shadowthrone,	 for	 that	 matter.”	 She	 sighed	 deeply.
“Tattersail,	 whatever	 your	 differences	 with	 the	 High	 Mage,	 it	 is	 necessary,	 no,
vital,	 that	 you	 work	 together	 in	 seeking	 to	 discover	 the	 details	 of	 Oponn's
intervention.	In	the	meantime,	High	Fist	Dujek	will	continue	preparing	his	legion
to	march,	as	well	as	solidifying	our	hold	on	Pale.	For	myself,	I	will	be	leaving	the
city	shortly.	Rest	assured,	my	mission	has	goals	identical	to	yours.	Now,	one	last
thing,”	she	turned	to	Toc.	“I	wish	to	hear	the	Claw's	evaluation	of	the	words	that
have	been	exchanged	here.”
He	stared	in	surprise.	He'd	assumed	the	role	she	had	expected	of	him	without
even	 realizing	 it.	 He	 sat	 straight	 and	 glanced	 at	 Tattersail.	 She	 now	 looked
nervous,	drawing	her	hands	beneath	the	table.	He	waited	until	their	gazes	locked
and	held	before	he	turned	to	the	Adjunct.
“In	 so	 far	 as	 she	 knows	 it,	 the	 sorceress	 speaks	 the	 truth,”	 he	 said.	 “Her
speculations	 were	 genuine,	 although	 concerning	 the	 dynamics	 of	 magic	 I'm	 at	 a
loss.	Perhaps	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	could	comment	on	that.”
Lorn	 seemed	 vaguely	 disappointed	 with	 Toc's	 evaluation,	 but	 she	 nodded
anyway	and	said,	“Accepted,	then.	High	Mage?”
Tayschrenn	 released	 a	 slow	 breath.	 “Accurate,”	 he	 said.	 “Speculation	 is
sound.”
Toc	refilled	his	goblet.	The	first	course	was	removed	almost	untouched,	but	as
the	 second	 course	 arrived	 everyone	 turned	 their	 full	 attention	 to	 it	 and
conversation	ceased.	Toc	ate	slowly,	avoiding	Tattersail's	eyes,	though	he	sensed


them	 upon	 him	 time	 and	 again.	 He	 wondered	 at	 his	 own	 actions:	 deceiving	 the
Adjunct	 to	 the	 Empress,	the	High	Mage,	 and	the	 High	Fist	all	 in	one	shot	struck
him	 as	 rash,	 if	 not	 suicidal.	 And	 his	 reasons	 for	 doing	 so	 were	 not	 entirely
rational,	which	made	it	all	the	more	distressing.
The	2nd	had	a	long,	bloody	history.	More	times	than	Toc	could	count	someone
had	come	through	for	someone	else	whatever	the	odds.	And,	more	often	than	not,	it
had	 been	 the	 mage	 cadre.	 He'd	 been	 there	 on	 the	 plain	 outside	 Pale,	 and	 he'd
watched	with	a	thousand	others	the	cadre	being	torn	apart,	hopelessly	outmatched.
That	kind	of	waste	didn't	sit	well	with	the	2nd.	And,	though	he	was	a	Claw,	the
faces	that	surrounded	him,	the	faces	that	looked	upon	him	in	hope,	despair,	and—
at	 times—fatal	 resignation,	 those	 faces	 had	 been	 mirrors	 of	 his	 own,	 and	 they
defied	the	Claw	at	every	turn.	The	years	in	the	Claw	where	feeling	and	caring	had
been	 systematically	 assailed,	 those	 years	 failed	 to	 withstand	 the	 day-in,	 day-out
reality	that	was	the	2nd	Army.
This	night,	and	with	his	words,	Toc	had	given	something	back	to	Tattersail,	not
just	for	her	but	for	the	cadre.	It	didn't	matter	if	she	understood,	and	he	knew	she
must	be	feeling	bewildered	by	his	actions;	none	of	that	mattered.	What	he'd	done
he'd	done	for	himself.
He	sat	up.	Now	that's	odd,	he	thought,	my	wound's	stopped	itching.
Feeling	light-headed,	Tattersail	wobbled	every	now	and	then	as	she	walked	down
the	 hall	 toward	 the	 door	 to	 her	 room.	 She	 knew	 it	 wasn't	 the	 wine.	 With	 her
nerves	as	frayed	as	they	were,	that	fine	vintage	had	tasted	like	water,	and	had	had
as	much	effect.
Adjunct	Lorn	had	raised	in	the	sorceress	memories	she'd	spent	years	burying.
For	 Lorn,	 it	 had	 been	 a	 pivotal	 event.	 But	 for	 Tattersail,	 it	 had	 been	 just	 one
nightmare	among	many.	Still,	it	had	pushed	her	where	other	crimes	had	not,	and	as
a	result	she'd	found	herself	attached	to	the	2nd	Army—the	Army	she'd	been	sent
to	as	a	recruit,	the	closing	of	a	circle,	but	in	that	time	she	had	changed.
That	 attachment,	 those	 twenty-odd	 years	 of	 service,	 had	 this	 night	 saved	 her
life.	She	knew	that	Toc	the	Younger	had	lied	for	her,	and	the	look	he	had	given	her
prior	 to	 stating	 his	 evaluation	 had	 been	 a	 message	 she'd	 understood.	 Though	 he
had	come	to	the	2nd	as	a	Claw,	as	a	spy,	not	even	his	years	of	training	within	that
secret	organization	could	withstand	the	new	world	in	which	he'd	found	himself.
Tattersail	 understood	 this	 all	 too	 clearly,	 for	 the	 same	 had	 happened	 to	 her.
The	sorceress	in	a	cadre	of	mages	who	had	entered	the	Mouse	Quarter	so	long	ago
had	cared	naught	for	anyone	but	herself.	Even	her	attempt	to	cut	herself	away	from


the	horrors	of	which	she'd	been	part	had	been	born	of	a	selfish	desire	to	flee,	to
absolve	 her	 own	 conscience—but	 the	 Empire	 had	 denied	 her	 in	 this.	 An	 old
soldier	 had	 come	 to	 her	 the	 day	 after	 the	 slaughter	 in	 the	 Mouse	 Quarter.	 Old,
nameless,	a	veteran	sent	to	convince	the	sorceress	that	she	was	still	needed.	She
well	remembered	his	words.	“Should	you	ever	outrun	the	guilt	within	your	past,
Sorceress,	 you	 will	 have	 outrun	 your	 soul.	 When	 it	 finds	 you	 again	 it	 will	 kill
you.”	And	then,	rather	than	deny	her	desperate	needs	absolutely,	he'd	sent	her	into
a	veteran	army,	the	5th,	until	the	time	came	for	her	to	return—to	the	2nd,	to	a	place
under	 the	 command	 of	 Dujek	 Onearm.	 With	 that,	 she'd	 been	 given	 a	 second
chance.
Tattersail	 came	 to	 her	 door	 and	 paused	 to	 sense	 the	 condition	 of	 her	 wards.
All	 was	 well.	 Sighing,	 she	 entered	 her	 room,	 then	 leaned	 against	 the	 door	 as	 it
closed	behind	her.
Captain	 Paran	 stepped	 out	 from	 the	 bedroom,	 his	 expression	 wary	 and
somehow	shy.	“Not	under	arrest?	I'm	surprised.”
“So	am	I,”	she	replied.
“Hairlock	was	here,”	Paran	said.	“He	instructed	me	to	give	you	a	message.”
Tattersail	 studied	 the	 man's	 face,	 seeking	 a	 hint	 of	 what	 he	 was	 about	 to
deliver.	 He	 avoided	 her	 gaze	 and	 remained	 standing	 near	 the	 doorway	 into	 the
bedroom.	“Well?”	she	demanded.
Paran	cleared	his	throat.	“First,	he	was,	uh,	excited.	He	knew	of	the	Adjunct's
arrival,	and	said	she	wasn't	alone.”
“Not	alone?	Did	he	explain	that?”
Paran	 shrugged.	 “Said	 the	 dust	 walks	 around	 the	 Adjunct,	 the	 dirt	 shifts
beneath	 her	 boots,	 and	 the	 wind	 whispers	 of	 frost	 and	 fire.”	 He	 raised	 his
eyebrows.	“Does	that	explain	anything?	Damned	if	I	know.”
Tattersail	strode	to	her	dresser.	She	began	to	remove	the	scant	jewelry	she'd
donned	 for	 the	 dinner.	 “I	 think	 it	 does,”	 she	 said	 slowly.	 “Did	 he	 say	 anything
else?”
“He	did.	He	said	that	the	Adjunct	and	her	companion	were	leaving	Pale	soon,
and	that	he	intended	to	track	them.	Sorceress	.	.	.”
She	 saw	 that	 Paran	 was	 struggling	 with	 something,	 as	 if	 fighting	 his	 every
instinct.	Tattersail	laid	one	arm	on	the	dresser	and	waited.	When	he	met	her	gaze,
her	 breath	 caught.	 “You	 were	 about	 to	 say	 something,”	 she	 said,	 her	 voice	 low.
Her	heart	was	pounding	all	too	fast,	and	she	felt	her	body	responding	as	if	of	its
own	accord.	The	look	she'd	seen	in	his	eyes	had	been	clear	in	its	meaning.
“I	know	something	of	the	Adjunct's	mission,”	he	said.	“I	was	to	be	her	contact


in	Darujhistan.”
Whatever	 had	 been	 building	 between	 them	 disintegrated	 as	 Tattersail's	 eyes
went	hard	and	anger	darkened	her	face.	“She's	going	to	Darujhistan,	is	she?	And
you	 and	 she	 were	 to	 oversee	 the	 long-awaited	 demise	 of	 the	 Bridgeburners.
Together,	 you	 thought	 you'd	 be	 able	 to	 kill	 Whiskeyjack,	 to	 cut	 down	 his	 squad
from	within.”
“No!”	Paran	took	a	step	forward,	but	when	Tattersail	shot	out	her	hand,	palm
facing	him,	he	froze.	“Wait,”	he	whispered.	“Before	you	do	anything,	just	hear	me
out.”
Her	Thyr	Warren	surged	into	her	hand,	eager	for	release.	“Why?	Damn	Oponn
for	letting	you	live!”
“Tattersail,	please!”
She	scowled.	“Speak.”
Paran	stepped	back	and	turned	to	a	nearby	chair.	Hands	held	out	at	his	sides,
he	sat	down	and	looked	up	at	her.
“Keep	those	hands	there,”	Tattersail	commanded.	“Away	from	your	sword.”
“This	 has	 been	 the	 Adjunct's	 personal	 mission,	 from	 the	 very	 start.	 Three
years	 ago	 I	 was	 stationed	 in	 Itko	 Kan,	 Officers	 Corps.	 One	 day	 every	 available
soldier	 was	 mustered	 out	 and	 marched	 to	 a	 section	 of	 the	 coast	 road.”	 Paran's
hands	 had	 begun	 to	 shake,	 and	 the	 muscles	 of	 his	 jaw	 stood	 out.	 “What	 we	 saw
there,	Tattersail,	you	would	not	believe.”
She	 recalled	 Quick	 Ben	 and	 Kalam's	 story.	 “A	 massacre.	 A	 company	 of
cavalry.”
Astonishment	showed	on	Paran's	face.	“How	did	you	know?”
“Go	on,	Captain,”	she	grated.
“Adjunct	Lorn	arrived	from	the	capital	and	took	charge.	She	guessed	that	the
massacre	 had	 been	 a	 .	 .	 .	 a	 diversion.	 We	 began	 upon	 a	 trail.	 It	 was	 not	 a	 clear
one,	not	at	first.	Sorceress,	may	I	lower	my	arms?”
“Slowly.	On	the	chair	arms,	Captain.”
He	sighed	gratefully	and	set	down	his	trembling	forearms	as	she'd	instructed.
“Anyway,	the	Adjunct	determined	that	a	girl	had	been	taken,	possessed	by	a	god.”
“Which	god?”
Paran	 made	 a	 face.	 “Come,	 now,	 if	 you	 know	 of	 the	 massacre,	 is	 it	 hard	 to
guess?	 That	 company	 was	 killed	 by	 Shadow	 Hounds.	 Which	 god?	 Well,
Shadowthrone	 comes	 to	 mind,”	 he	 said	 sarcastically.	 “The	 Adjunct	 believes
Shadowthrone	was	involved,	but	the	god	that	possessed	the	girl	was	the	Rope—I


know	 of	 no	 other	 name	 for	 him—the	 Patron	 of	 Assassins,	 Shadowthrone's
companion.”
Tattersail	dropped	her	arm.	She'd	closed	her	Warren	a	minute	earlier,	since	it
had	begun	to	push	hard	and	she	had	feared	she	didn't	have	the	strength	to	resist	it
much	longer.	“You've	found	the	girl,”	she	stated	dully.
Paran	sat	forward.	“Yes!”
“Her	name's	Sorry.”
“You're	aware	of	this,”	Paran	said,	sinking	back	into	the	chair.	“Which	means
that	Whiskeyjack	is	also	aware,	since	who	else	could	have	told	you?”	He	looked
up	into	her	eyes	with	a	clouded	expression.	“I'm	now	very	confused.”
“You're	not	alone,”	Tattersail	said.	“So	all	this—your	arrival,	the	Adjunct's—
it	was	all	a	hunt	for	the	girl?”	She	shook	her	head.	“That's	not	enough,	it	can't	be
enough,	Captain.”
“It's	all	that	I'm	aware	of,	Tattersail.”
She	studied	him	for	a	moment.	“I	believe	you.	Tell	me,	what	are	the	details	of
the	Adjunct's	mission?”
“I	 don't	 know,”	 Paran	 said,	 tossing	 up	 his	 hands.	 “Somehow,	 I	 was	 the	 one
she'd	be	able	to	find,	so	my	being	with	the	squad	would	bring	her	to	the	girl.”
“The	Adjunct's	talents	are	many,”	Tattersail	mused.	“Through	the	antithesis	of
sorcery,	she	might	well	possess	the	ability	to	have	linked	with	you,	especially	if
you've	been	in	her	company	for	the	past	two	years.”
“Then	why	isn't	she	breaking	down	your	door?”
Tattersail's	eyes	were	on	the	jewelry	scattered	on	the	dresser.	“Oponn	severed
the	link,	Captain.”
“I	 dislike	 the	 thought	 of	 exchanging	 one	 set	 of	 shackles	 for	 another,”	 Paran
grumbled.
“There's	more	to	this,”	Tattersail	insisted,	more	to	herself	than	to	the	captain.
“Lorn	has	a	T'lan	Imass	with	her.”
Paran	jerked	upright.
“Hairlock's	snide	hints,”	she	explained.	“I	believe	the	mission	was	twofold.
Kill	Sorry,	yes,	but	also	kill	Whiskeyjack	and	his	squad.	The	T'lan	would	not	be
involved	 if	 her	 plan	 concerned	 just	 you.	 Her	 Otataral	 sword	 is	 sufficient	 to
destroy	 Sorry,	 and	 possibly	 kill	 the	 Rope	 as	 well,	 assuming	 that's	 who's
possessing	the	girl.”
“I	 would	 not	 like	 to	 believe	 that,”	 Paran	 said.	 “They	 are	 my	 command.	 My
responsibility.	The	Adjunct	would	not	betray	me	so—”


“Wouldn't	she?	Why	not?”
The	captain	seemed	at	a	loss	to	answer	her,	but	there	was	a	stubborn	glower	in
his	eyes.
Tattersail	 reached	 the	 decision	 she	 had	 sensed	 was	 coming,	 and	 it	 left	 her
cold.	 “Hairlock	 left	 too	 early.	 The	 puppet	 was	 eager,	 too	 eager	 to	 pursue	 the
Adjunct	 and	 that	 T'lan	 Imass.	 He	 must	 have	 discovered	 something	 about	 them,
about	what	they're	up	to.”
“Who	is	Hairlock's	master?”	Paran	asked.
“Quick	 Ben,	 Whiskeyjack's	 mage.”	 She	 looked	 to	 him.	 “He's	 the	 best	 I've
seen.	Not	the	most	powerful,	mind	you,	but	smart.	Still,	if	the	T'lan	Imass	comes
on	him	unawares	he	won't	stand	a	chance,	and	neither	will	the	rest.”	She	paused,
her	eyes	holding	on	the	captain.	“I	have	to	leave	Pale,”	she	said	abruptly.
Paran	shot	to	his	feet.	“Not	alone.”
“Alone,”	Tattersail	insisted.	“I	have	to	find	Whiskeyjack,	and	if	you're	tagging
along	then	Lorn	will	find	him	too.”
“I	refuse	to	believe	the	Adjunct	presents	any	risk	to	the	sergeant,”	Paran	said.
“Tell	me,	can	you	succeed	in	killing	Sorry?	Even	with	Quick	Ben's	help?”
The	sorceress	hesitated.	“I'm	not	sure	I	want	to,”	she	said	slowly.
“What?”
“It	has	to	be	Whiskeyjack's	decision,	Captain.	And	I	don't	think	I	can	give	any
good	 reason	 for	 convincing	 you	 of	 that.	 I	 just	 feel	 it's	 right.”	 She	 felt	 herself
relying	on	instinct	in	this	matter,	but	vowed	to	hold	true	to	it.
“Even	so,”	Paran	said,	“I	can't	remain	hiding	here,	can	I?	What	do	I	eat?	The
bedding?”
“I	 can	 get	 you	 out	 into	 the	 city,”	 Tattersail	 said.	 “None	 will	 recognize	 you.
Take	a	room	in	an	inn	and	stay	out	of	your	uniform.	If	all	goes	well	I'll	be	back	in
two	weeks.	You	can	wait	that	long,	can't	you,	Captain?”
Paran	 stared.	 “And	 what	 happens	 if	 I	 just	 walk	 out	 of	 here	 and	 introduce
myself	to	Dujek	Onearm?”
“The	 High	 Mage	 Tayschrenn	 would	 shred	 your	 brain	 with	 truth-seeking
sorcery,	 Captain.	 You've	 Oponn's	 touch,	 and	 after	 tonight	 Oponn	 is	 now	 an
official	enemy	of	the	Empire.	And	when	Tayschrenn's	done	he'll	leave	you	to	die,
which	is	preferable	to	the	madness	that	would	grip	you	if	he	kept	you	alive.	He'll
show	 that	 mercy,	 at	 least.”	 Tattersail	 anticipated	 Paran's	 thoughts.	 “Dujek	 might
well	 seek	 to	 protect	 you,	 but	 in	 this	 Tayschrenn	 outranks	 him.	 You've	 become	 a
tool	of	Oponn,	and	for	Dujek	the	safety	of	his	soldiers	takes	precedence	over	his


pleasure	in	frustrating	Tayschrenn.	So,	in	fact,	he	might	not	protect	you	at	all.	I'm
sorry,	Captain,	but	you're	truly	alone	if	you	walk.”
“I'll	be	alone	when	you	leave,	too,	Sorceress.”
“I	know,	but	it	won't	be	forever.”	She	searched	his	eyes	and	felt	compassion
welling	 behind	 her	 own.	 “Paran,”	 she	 said,	 “it's	 not	 all	 bad.	 Despite	 all	 the
distrust	between	us,	I'm	feeling	things	for	you	I	haven't	felt	for	anyone	in—well,
in	some	time.”	She	smiled	sadly.	“I	don't	know	what	that's	worth,	Captain,	but	I'm
glad	I	said	it	anyway.”
Paran	gazed	at	her	for	a	long	minute,	then	said,	“Very	well,	Tattersail,	I'll	do
as	you	ask.	An	inn?	Do	you	have	some	local	coin?”
“Easily	acquired.”	Her	shoulders	slumped.	“I'm	sorry,	but	I'm	exhausted.”	As
she	turned	to	the	bedroom	her	gaze	fell	on	the	dresser-top	one	last	time.	Amid	a
small	pile	of	underclothing	she	saw	her	Deck	of	Dragons.	It	would	be	foolish	not
to	do	a	reading,	considering	the	decision	she'd	made.
Paran	spoke	close	behind	her.	“Tattersail,	how	thorough	is	your	exhaustion?”
She	felt	the	heat	in	his	words	triggering	a	smoldering	fire	beneath	her	stomach,
and	her	gaze	slid	away	from	the	Deck	as	she	turned	to	face	the	captain.	Though	she
voiced	 no	 reply	 to	 his	 question,	 her	 answer	 was	 clear.	 He	 took	 her	 hand,
surprising	her	with	such	an	innocent	gesture.	So	young,	she	thought,	and	now	he's
leading	 me	 into	 the	 bedroom.	 She	 would	 have	 laughed	 if	 the	 act	 hadn't	 been	 so
sweet.
______
False	 dawn	 played	 the	 eastern	 horizon	 as	 Adjunct	 Lorn	 guided	 her	 mount	 and
packhorse	 out	 from	 Pale's	 East	 Gate.	 True	 to	 Dujek's	 words	 the	 guards	 were
nowhere	in	sight,	and	the	gate	had	been	left	open.	She	hoped	the	few	sleepy	eyes
that	had	followed	her	through	the	streets	had	only	mild	curiosity	behind	them.	In
any	 case,	 she	 was	 dressed	 in	 simple,	 unadorned	 leather	 armor;	 her	 face	 was
mostly	hidden	in	the	shadow	cast	by	the	plain	bronze	helmet's	browguard.	Even
her	horses	were	a	local	breed,	sturdy	and	placid,	much	smaller	than	the	Malazan
warhorses	with	which	she	was	most	familiar,	but	a	comforting	ride	none	the	less.
It	 seemed	 unlikely	 that	 she	 would	 have	 attracted	 undue	 attention.	 More	 than	 one
unemployed	mercenary	had	left	Pale	since	the	Empire's	arrival.
The	 south	 horizon	 was	 a	 jagged	 line	 of	 snow-capped	 mountains.	 The	 Tahlyn
Mountains	would	remain	on	her	right	for	some	time,	before	the	Rhivi	Plain	swept
past	them	and	became	the	Catlin	Plain.	Few	farms	broke	the	flatlands	around	her,


and	 those	 that	 did	 crowded	 the	 city's	 own	 lands.	 The	 Rhivi	 people	 were	 not
tolerant	 of	 such	 encroachments,	 and	 since	 every	 trade	 route	 that	 led	 to	 and	 from
Pale	 crossed	 their	 traditional	 territory,	 those	 of	 the	 city	 wisely	 refrained	 from
angering	the	Rhivi.
Ahead,	as	she	walked	her	horses,	the	dawn	showed	its	face	with	a	streak	of
crimson.	The	rain	had	passed	a	few	days	back,	and	the	sky	overhead	was	silverblue	and	clear,	a	few	stars	dwindling	as	light	came	to	the	world.
The	day	promised	to	be	hot.	The	Adjunct	loosened	the	leather	thongs	between
her	breasts,	revealing	the	fine	mail	hauberk	beneath.	By	midday	she	would	reach
the	 first	 wellspring,	 where	 she	 would	 replenish	 her	 supply	 of	 water.	 She	 ran	 a
hand	 across	 the	 surface	 of	 one	 of	 the	 bladders	 strapped	 to	 her	 saddle.	 It	 came
away	wet	with	condensation.	She	passed	her	hand	across	her	lips.
The	voice	that	spoke	beside	her	jolted	her	in	the	saddle	and	her	mount	snorted
in	fear	and	sidestepped.
“I	will	walk	with	you,”	Onos	T'oolan	said,	“for	a	time.”
Lorn	glared	at	the	T'lan	Imass.	“I	would	rather	you	announced	your	arrival,”
she	said	tightly,	“from	a	distance.”
“As	you	wish.”	Onos	T'oolan	sank	into	the	ground	like	so	much	dust.
The	Adjunct	cursed.	Then	she	saw	him	waiting	a	hundred	yards	ahead	of	her,
backlit	by	the	rising	sun.	The	crimson	sky	seemed	to	have	cast	a	red	flame	about
the	 warrior.	 The	 effect	 jangled	 her	 nerves,	 as	 if	 she	 looked	 upon	 a	 scene	 that
touched	her	deepest,	oldest	memories—memories	that	went	beyond	her	own	life.
The	T'lan	Imass	stood	unmoving	until	she	reached	him,	then	fell	into	step	beside
her.
Lorn	tightened	her	knees	about	the	horse's	shoulders	and	closed	the	reins	until
the	mare	settled	down.	“Do	you	have	to	be	so	literal-minded,	Tool?”	she	asked.
The	desiccated	warrior	seemed	to	consider,	then	nodded.	“I	accept	that	name.
All	of	my	history	is	dead.	Existence	begins	anew,	and	with	it	shall	be	a	new	name.
It	is	suitable.”
“Why	were	you	selected	to	accompany	me?”	the	Adjunct	asked.
“In	the	lands	west	and	north	of	Seven	Cities,	I	alone	among	my	clan	survived
the	Twenty-eighth	Jaghut	War.”
Lorn's	eyes	widened.	“I	thought	those	wars	numbered	twenty-seven,”	she	said
quietly.	 “When	 your	 legions	 left	 us	 after	 conquering	 Seven	 Cities,	 and	 you
marched	into	the	wastelands—”
“Our	 Bonecasters	 sensed	 an	 enclave	 of	 surviving	 Jaghut,”	 Tool	 said.	 “Our


commander	Logros	T'lan	determined	that	we	exterminate	them.	Thus	we	did.”
“Which	 explains	 your	 decimated	 numbers	 upon	 returning,”	 Lorn	 said.	 “You
could	 have	 explained	 your	 decision	 to	 the	 Empress.	 As	 it	 was,	 she	 was	 left
without	her	most	powerful	army,	and	no	knowledge	of	when	it	might	return.”
“Return	was	not	guaranteed,	Adjunct,”	Tool	said.
Lorn	stared	at	the	tattered	creature.	“I	see.”
“The	cessation	of	my	clan's	chieftain,	Kig	Aven,	was	accompanied	by	all	my
kin.	 Thus	 alone,	 I	 am	 unbound	 to	 Logro.	 Kig	 Aven's	 Bonecaster	 was	 Kilava
Onass,	who	has	been	lost	since	long	before	the	Emperor	reawakened	us.”
Lorn's	 mind	 raced.	 Among	 the	 Malazan	 Empire,	 the	 T'lan	 Imass	 were	 also
known	as	the	Silent	Host.	She'd	never	known	an	Imass	as	loquacious	as	this	Tool.
Perhaps	 it	 had	 something	 to	 do	 with	 this	 “unbounding.”	 Within	 the	 Imass,	 only
Commander	 Logros	 ever	 spoke	 to	 humans	 on	 a	 regular	 basis.	 As	 for	 the
Bonecasters—Imass	 shamans—they	 stayed	 out	 of	 sight.	 The	 only	 one	 that	 had
ever	appeared	was	one	named	Olar	Ethil,	who	stood	alongside	the	clan	chieftain
Eitholos	Ilm	during	the	battle	of	Kartool,	which	had	seen	an	exchange	of	sorcery
that	made	Moon's	Spawn	look	like	a	child's	cantrip.
In	 any	 case,	 she'd	 already	 learned	 more	 of	 the	 Imass	 from	 this	 brief
conversation	with	Tool	than	was	present	in	the	Empire	Annals.	The	Emperor	had
known	more,	much	more,	but	making	records	of	such	knowledge	had	never	been
his	 style.	 That	 he	 had	 reawakened	 the	 Imass	 had	 been	 a	 theory	 argued	 among
scholars	 for	 years.	 And	 now	 she	 knew	 it	 to	 be	 true.	 How	 many	 other	 secrets
would	this	T'lan	Imass	reveal	in	casual	conversation?
“Tool,”	she	said,	“had	you	ever	met	the	Emperor	personally?”
“I	awakened	before	Galad	Ketan	and	after	Onak	Shendok,	and	as	with	all	the
T'lan	Imass,	I	knelt	before	the	Emperor	as	he	sat	upon	the	First	Throne.”
“The	Emperor	was	alone?”	Lorn	asked.
“No.	He	was	accompanied	by	the	one	named	Dancer.”
“Damn,”	she	hissed.	Dancer	had	died	beside	the	Emperor.	“Where	is	this	First
Throne,	Tool?”
The	warrior	was	silent	for	a	time,	then	it	said,	“Upon	the	Emperor's	death	the
Logros	 T'lan	 Imass	 gathered	 minds—a	 rare	 thing	 that	 was	 last	 done	 before	 the
Diaspora—and	a	binding	resulted.	Adjunct,	the	answer	to	your	question	is	within
this	binding.	I	cannot	satisfy	you.	This	holds	for	all	Logros	T'lan	Imass	and	for	all
Kron	T'lan	Imass.”
“Who	are	the	Kron?”


“They	are	coming,”	Tool	replied.
Sudden	sweat	sprang	out	on	the	Adjunct's	brow.	Logros's	legions,	when	they
first	 arrived	 on	 the	 scene,	 numbered	 around	 nineteen	 thousand.	 They	 were
believed	 now	 to	 number	 fourteen	 thousand,	 and	 the	 majority	 of	 those	 losses	 had
come	beyond	the	Empire's	borders,	in	this	last	Jaghut	War.	Were	another	nineteen
thousand	Imass	about	to	arrive?	What	had	the	Emperor	unleashed?
“Tool,”	she	asked	slowly,	almost	regretting	her	need	to	persist	in	questioning
him,	“what	is	the	significance	of	these	Kron	coming?”
“The	 Year	 of	 the	 Three	 Hundredth	 Millennium	 approaches,”	 the	 warrior
replied.
“What	happens	then?”
“Adjunct,	the	Diaspora	ends.”
The	 Great	 Raven	 called	 Crone	 rode	 the	 high	 winds	 above	 Rhivi	 Plain.	 The
northern	 horizon	 was	 now	 a	 green-tinged	 curve,	 growing	 more	 substantial	 with
every	hour	of	flight.	Weariness	weighed	down	her	wings,	but	the	heaven's	breath
was	a	strong	one.	And	more,	nothing	could	assail	her	certainty	that	changes	were
coming	 to	 this	 world,	 and	 she	 drew	 again	 and	 again	 upon	 her	 vast	 reserves	 of
magical	power.
If	ever	there	was	a	dire	convergence	of	great	forces,	it	was	now,	and	in	this
place.	 The	 gods	 were	 descending	 to	 the	 mortal	 soil	 to	 do	 battle,	 shapings	 were
being	 forged	 of	 flesh	 and	 bone,	 and	 the	 blood	 of	 sorcery	 now	 boiled	 with	 a
madness	born	of	inevitable	momentum.	Crone	had	never	felt	more	alive.
With	these	unveiling	of	powers,	heads	had	turned.	And	to	one	Crone	flew	in
answer	 to	 a	 summons	 she	 was	 powerless	 to	 ignore.	 Lord	 Anomander	 Rake	 was
not	her	only	master,	and	for	her	this	only	made	things	more	interesting.	As	for	her
own	 ambitions,	 she	 would	 keep	 them	 to	 herself.	 For	 now,	 knowledge	 was	 her
power.
And	 if	 there	 was	 one	 secret	 more	 alluring	 than	 any	 other	 she	 might	 covet,	 it
was	 the	 mystery	 surrounding	 the	 half-human	 warrior	 called	 Caladan	 Brood.
Anticipation	lifted	Crone's	wings	with	renewed	strength.
Steadily,	Blackdog	Forest	spread	its	verdant	cloak	over	the	north.


Chapter	Ten
	

Kallor	said:	“I	walked	this	land	when	the	T'lan	Imass	were	but
children.	I	have	commanded	armies	a	hundred	thousand	strong.	I
have	spread	the	fire	of	my	wrath	across	entire	continents,	and	sat
alone	upon	tall	thrones.	Do	you	grasp	the	meaning	of	this?”
“Yes,”	said	Caladan	Brood,	“you	never	learn.”
CONVERSATIONS	OF	WAR
(SECOND	IN	COMMAND
KALLOR	SPEAKING	WITH
WARLORD	CALADAN	BROOD),
RECORDED	BY	OUTRIDER
HURLOCHEL,	6TH	ARMY


	
Vimkaros	Inn	stood	just	beyond	Eltrosan	Square	in	the	Opal	Quarter	of	Pale.	That
much	 Toc	 knew	 from	 his	 wanderings	 through	 the	 city.	 But	 for	 the	 life	 of	 him	 he
could	not	think	of	anyone	staying	there	whom	he	knew.	Yet	the	instructions	for	this
mysterious	meeting	had	been	clear.
He	 now	 approached	 the	 ostentatious	 structure	 warily.	 He	 saw	 nothing
suspicious.	The	square	was	crowded	with	the	usual	gentry	and	merchant	shops;	of
Malazan	 guards	 there	 were	 few.	 The	 culling	 of	 the	 nobility	 had	 done	 much	 to
cloak	 Pale's	 atmosphere	 with	 a	 shocked	 stillness	 that	 hung	 about	 people	 like
invisible	yokes.
The	 past	 few	 days	 Toc	 had	 kept	 much	 to	 himself,	 carousing	 with	 his	 fellow
soldiers	 when	 the	 mood	 took	 him,	 though	 those	 times	 seemed	 rarer	 these	 days.
With	 the	 Adjunct	 gone,	 and	 Tattersail	 reported	 missing,	 Dujek	 and	 Tayschrenn
were	 involved	 in	 mutually	 exclusive	 responsibilities.	 The	 High	 Fist	 was	 busy
restructuring	Pale,	and	his	newly	formed	5th	Army;	while	the	High	Mage	sought
Tattersail,	evidently	without	much	success.
Toc	 suspected	 that	the	peace	 between	the	two	men	would	not	last.	Since	the
dinner,	 he	 had	 stayed	 away	 from	 anything	 official,	 choosing	 to	 eat	 with	 his
comrades	rather	than	dine	with	the	officers	as	was	now	his	privilege	as	ranking
Claw.	The	less	noticed	he	made	himself	the	better,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned.
He	 entered	 Vimkaros	 Inn	 and	 paused.	 Before	 him	 was	 a	 roofless	 courtyard
with	paths	winding	among	a	rich	garden.	Clearly,	the	inn	had	survived	the	siege
unscathed.	A	wide	central	path	led	directly	to	a	broad	counter	behind	which	stood
a	 corpulent	 old	 man	 eating	 grapes.	 A	 few	 guests	 walked	 the	 side	 paths,	 moving
among	the	plants	and	conversing	in	low	tones.
The	message	had	insisted	he	come	dressed	in	local	garb.	Thus,	Toc	drew	little
attention	as	he	strode	to	the	counter.
The	 old	 man	 paused	 in	 his	 snacking	 and	 bowed	 with	 his	 head.	 “At	 your
service,	sir,”	he	said,	wiping	his	hands.
“I	 believe	 a	 table	 has	 been	 reserved	 in	 my	 name,”	 Toc	 said.	 “I	 am	 Render
Kan.”
The	old	man	studied	a	wax	tablet	before	him,	then	looked	up	with	a	smile.	“Of
course.	Follow	me.”
A	 minute	 later	 Toc	 sat	 at	 a	 table	 on	 a	 balcony	 overlooking	 the	 garden	 court.


His	only	company	was	a	decanter	of	chilled	Saltoan	wine,	which	arrived	when	he
did,	 and	 he	 now	 sipped	 from	 a	 goblet,	 his	 lone	 eye	 surveying	 the	 people	 in	 the
garden	below.
A	servant	arrived	and	bowed	before	him.	“Kind	sir,”	the	man	said,	“I	am	to
deliver	the	following	message.	A	gentleman	will	soon	join	you	who	has	been	out
of	his	depth	yet	not	aware	of	it.	He	is,	now.”
Toc	frowned.	“That's	the	message?”
“It	is.”
“His	own	words?”
“And	yours,	sir.”	The	servant	bowed	again	and	departed.
Toc's	 frown	 deepened,	 then	 he	 sat	 forward,	 his	 every	 muscle	 tensing.	 He
turned	 to	 the	 balcony's	 entrance	 in	 time	 to	 see	 Captain	 Paran	 stride	 through.	 He
was	dressed	in	the	manner	of	the	local	gentry,	unarmed,	and	looking	quite	fit.	Toc
rose,	grinning.
“Not	unduly	shocked,	I	hope,”	Paran	said,	as	he	arrived.	They	sat	down	and
the	captain	poured	himself	some	wine.	“Did	the	message	prepare	you?”
“Barely,”	 Toc	 replied.	 “I'm	 not	 sure	 how	 to	 receive	 you,	 Captain.	 Is	 this
according	to	the	Adjunct's	instructions?”
“She	 believes	 me	 dead,”	 Paran	 said,	 his	 brow	 wrinkling.	 “And	 I	 was,	 for	 a
time.	 Tell	 me,	 Toc	 the	 Younger,	 am	 I	 speaking	 to	 a	 Claw,	 or	 to	 a	 soldier	 of	 the
Second?”
Toc's	eye	narrowed.	“That's	a	tough	question.”
“Is	it?”	Paran	asked,	his	gaze	intense	and	unwavering.
Toc	hesitated,	then	grinned	again.	“Hood's	Breath,	no,	it	damn	well	isn't!	All
right,	Captain,	welcome	to	the	defunct	Second,	then.”
Paran	laughed,	clearly	relieved.
“Now	what's	all	this	about	you	being	dead	but	not	dead,	Captain?”
Paran's	humor	vanished.	He	took	a	mouthful	of	wine	and	swallowed,	looking
away.	“An	attempted	assassination,”	he	explained,	grimacing.	“I	should	have	died,
if	not	for	Mallet	and	Tattersail.”
“What?	Whiskeyjack's	healer	and	the	sorceress?”
Paran	 nodded.	 “I've	 been	 recovering	 until	 recently	 in	 Tattersail's	 quarters.
Whiskeyjack's	 instructions	 were	 to	 keep	 my	 existence	 secret	 for	 the	 time	 being.
Toc,”	he	leaned	forward,	“what	do	you	know	of	the	Adjunct's	plans?”
Toc	 examined	 the	 garden	 below.	 Tattersail	 had	 known—she'd	 managed	 to
keep	it	from	everyone	at	the	dinner.	Remarkable.	“Now,”	he	said	quietly,	“you	ask


questions	of	a	Claw.”
“I	do.”
“Where's	 Tattersail?”	 Toc	 swung	 his	 gaze	 to	 the	 captain	 and	 held	 the	 man's
eyes.
The	 captain	 jerked	 his	 head.	 “Very	 well.	 She	 travels	 overland—to
Darujhistan.	She	knows	a	T'lan	Imass	accompanies	the	Adjunct,	and	she	believes
Lorn's	plan	includes	killing	Whiskeyjack	and	his	squad.	I	do	not	agree.	My	role	in
the	mission	was	to	keep	an	eye	on	one	member	of	the	sergeant's	squad,	and	that
person	was	to	be	the	only	one	to	die.	She	gave	me	the	command	after	three	years
of	service	to	her—it's	a	reward,	and	I	can't	believe	she	would	take	it	from	me.
There,	that	is	what	I	know.	Can	you	help	me,	Toc?”
“The	Adjunct's	mission,”	Toc	said,	after	releasing	a	long	breath,	“as	far	as	I'm
aware	of	it,	involves	far	more	than	just	killing	Sorry.	The	T'lan	Imass	is	with	her
for	 something	 else.	 Captain,”	 Toc's	 expression	 was	 grim,	 “the	 days	 of	 the
Bridgeburners	 are	 numbered.	 Whiskeyjack's	 name	 is	 damn	 near	 sacred	 among
Dujek's	men.	This	is	something	of	which	I	couldn't	convince	the	Adjunct—in	fact
she	 seems	 to	 think	 the	 opposite—but	 if	 the	 sergeant	 and	 the	 Bridgeburners	 are
eliminated,	this	army	won't	be	pulled	back	in	line,	it	will	mutiny.	And	the	Malazan
Empire	will	be	up	against	High	Fist	Dujek	with	not	a	single	commander	who	can
match	him.	The	Genabackan	Campaign	will	disintegrate,	and	civil	war	may	well
sweep	into	the	heart	of	the	Empire.”
The	 blood	 had	 drained	 from	 Paran's	 face.	 “I	 believe	 you,”	 he	 said.	 “Very
well,	you've	taken	my	doubts	and	made	of	them	convictions.	And	they	leave	me
with	but	one	choice.”
“And	that	is?”
Paran	turned	the	empty	goblet	in	his	hands.	“Darujhistan,”	he	said.	“With	luck
I'll	catch	Tattersail,	and	together	we'll	attempt	to	contact	Whiskeyjack	before	the
Adjunct	does.”	He	glanced	at	Toc.	“Evidently	the	Adjunct	can	no	longer	sense	my
whereabouts.	Tattersail	forbade	me	to	accompany	her,	arguing	that	Lorn	would	be
able	 to	 detect	 me,	 but	 she	 also	 let	 slip	 that	 my	 ‘death'	 had	 severed	 the	 bonds
between	me	and	the	Adjunct.	I	should	have	made	the	connection	sooner,	but	she	.	.
.	distracted	me.”
Into	Toc's	mind	returned	the	memory	of	how	she'd	looked	that	evening,	and	he
nodded	knowingly.	“I'm	sure	she	did.”
Paran	 sighed.	 “Yes,	 well.	 In	 any	 case,	 I	 need	 at	 least	 three	 horses,	 and
supplies.	The	Adjunct	is	proceeding	on	some	kind	of	timetable.	I	know	that	much.
So	she's	not	traveling	with	much	haste.	I	should	catch	up	with	Tattersail	in	a	day


or	two,	then	together	we	can	drive	hard	to	the	edge	of	the	Tahlyn	Mountains,	skirt
them	and	slip	past	the	Adjunct.”
Toc	had	leaned	back	during	Paran's	elaboration	of	his	plan,	a	half-smile	on	his
lips.	“You'll	need	Wickan	horses,	Captain,	since	what	you've	described	requires
mounts	superior	to	those	the	Adjunct's	riding.	Now,	how	do	you	plan	to	get	past
the	city	gates	dressed	as	a	local	but	leading	Empire	horses?”
Paran	blinked.
Toc	 grinned.	 “I've	 got	 your	 answer,	 Captain.”	 He	 spread	 his	 hands.	 “I'll	 go
with	you.	Leave	the	horses	and	supplies	to	me,	and	I	guarantee	we'll	get	out	of	the
city	unnoticed.”
“But—”
“Those	are	my	conditions,	Captain.”
Paran	coughed.	“Very	well.	And	now	that	I	think	on	it,	the	company	would	be
welcome.”
“Good,”	 Toc	 grunted.	 He	 reached	 for	 the	 decanter.	 “Let's	 drink	 on	 the	 damn
thing,	then.”
The	way	was	becoming	more	and	more	difficult,	and	Tattersail	felt	her	first	tremor
of	fear.	She	traveled	a	Warren	of	High	Thyr	and	not	even	Tayschrenn	possessed
the	 ability	 to	 assail	 it,	 yet	 under	 attack	 it	 was.	 Not	 directly.	 The	 power	 that
opposed	her	was	pervasive,	and	it	deadened	her	sorcery.
The	Warren	had	become	narrow,	choked	with	obstacles.	At	times	it	shuddered
around	her,	the	dark	walls	to	either	side	writhing	as	if	under	tremendous	pressure.
And	 within	 the	 tunnel	 she	 struggled	 to	 shape,	 the	 air	 stank	 of	 something	 she	 had
difficulty	 identifying.	 There	 was	 a	 tinge	 of	 sour	 brimstone	 and	 a	 mustiness	 that
reminded	 her	 of	 unearthed	 tombs.	 It	 seemed	 to	 drain	 the	 power	 from	 her	 with
every	breath	she	took.
She	realized	that	she	could	not	continue.	She	would	have	to	enter	the	physical
world	 and	 find	 rest.	 Once	 again	 she	 cursed	 her	 own	 carelessness.	 She	 had
forgotten	her	Deck	of	Dragons.	With	them	she	would	have	known	what	to	expect.
She	entertained	once	again	the	suspicion	that	an	outside	force	had	acted	upon	her,
severing	 her	 from	 the	 Deck.	 The	 first	 distraction	 had	 come	 from	 Captain	 Paran,
and	 while	 it	 had	 been	 pleasant,	 she	 reminded	 herself	 that	 Paran	 belonged	 to
Oponn.	After	that,	she'd	experienced	an	unaccountable	urgency	to	be	on	her	way,
so	much	so	that	she'd	left	everything	behind.
Bereft	of	her	Warren,	she	would	find	herself	alone	on	the	Rhivi	Plain,	without


food,	without	even	a	bedroll.	The	mindless	need	for	haste	she'd	experienced	ran
contrary	to	her	every	instinct.	She	was	growing	certain	that	it	had	been	imposed
upon	her,	that	somehow	she'd	let	her	defenses	down,	left	herself	exposed	to	such
manipulations.	And	that	returned	her	thoughts	to	Captain	Paran,	to	the	servant	of
Oponn's	will.
Finally,	 she	 could	 go	 no	 further.	 She	 began	 to	 withdraw	 her	 strained	 power,
collapsing	 the	 Warren	 layer	 by	 layer	 about	 her.	 The	 ground	 beneath	 her	 boots
became	solid,	cloaked	in	spar	yellow	grass,	and	the	air	around	her	shifted	into	the
dull	 lavender	 of	 dusk.	 A	 wind	 brushed	 her	 face	 smelling	 of	 soil.	 The	 horizon
steadied	 itself	 on	 all	 sides—far	 off	 to	 her	 right	 the	 sun	 still	 bathed	 the	 Talhyn
Mountains,	 the	 peaks	 glittering	 like	 gold—and	 immediately	 ahead	 rose	 an
enormous	silhouetted	figure,	turning	to	face	her	and	voicing	a	surprised	grunt.
Tattersail	 stepped	 back	 in	 alarm,	 and	 the	 voice	 that	 emerged	 from	 the	 figure
pushed	the	air	from	her	lungs	in	a	whooshing	breath	of	relief,	then	terror.
“Tattersail,”	Bellurdan	said	sadly,	“Tayschrenn	did	not	expect	you'd	manage
to	 come	 this	 far.	 Thus,	 I	 was	 anticipating	 detecting	 you	 from	 a	 distance.”	 The
Thelomen	giant	lifted	his	arms	in	an	expansive,	childlike	shrug.	At	his	feet	was	a
familiar	burlap	sack,	though	the	body	within	had	shrunk	since	she'd	last	seen	it.
“How	 has	 the	 High	 Mage	 managed	 to	 deny	 my	 Warren?”	 she	 asked.	 On	 the
heels	of	her	terror	had	come	weariness,	almost	resignation.
“He	could	not	do	that,”	Bellurdan	answered.	“He	simply	anticipated	that	you
would	attempt	to	travel	to	Darujhistan,	and	as	your	Thyr	Warren	cannot	function
over	water,	he	concluded	you	would	take	this	path.”
“Then	what	happened	with	my	Warren?”
Bellurdan	 grunted	 distastefully.	 “The	 T'lan	 Imass	 who	 accompanies	 the
Adjunct	 has	 created	 around	 them	 a	 dead	 space.	 Our	 sorcery	 is	 devoured	 by	 the
warrior's	 Eldering	 powers.	 The	 effect	 is	 cumulative.	 If	 you	 were	 to	 open	 your
Warren	 entirely,	 you	 would	 be	 consumed	 utterly,	 Tattersail.”	 The	 Thelomen
stepped	forward.	“The	High	Mage	has	instructed	me	to	arrest	you	and	return	you
to	him.”
“And	if	I	resist?”
Bellurdan	answered,	in	a	tone	filled	with	sorrow,	“Then	I	am	to	kill	you.”
“I	 see.”	 Tattersail	 thought	 for	 a	 time.	 Her	 world	 seemed	 to	 have	 closed	 in
now,	 her	 every	 memory	 irrelevant	 and	 discarded.	 Her	 heart	 pounded	 like	 a
thundering	drum	in	her	chest.	All	that	remained	of	her	past,	and	her	only	true	sense
of	her	life,	was	regret—an	unspecified,	yet	overwhelming	regret.	She	looked	up	at
the	Thelomen,	compassion	brimming	in	her	eyes.	“So	where	are	this	T'lan	and	the


Adjunct,	then?”
“Perhaps	eight	hours	to	the	east.	The	Imass	is	not	even	aware	of	us.	The	time
for	conversation	is	ended,	Tattersail.	Will	you	accompany	me?”
Her	 mouth	 dry,	 she	 said,	 “I	 did	 not	 think	 you	 one	 to	 betray	 a	 long-standing
friend.”
Bellurdan	spread	his	hands	wider	and	said,	in	a	pained	voice,	“I	will	never
betray	 you,	 Tattersail.	 The	 High	 Mage	 commands	 both	 of	 us.	 How	 can	 there	 be
betrayal?”
“Not	that,”	Tattersail	replied	quickly.	“I	once	asked	if	I	could	speak	with	you
at	length.	Remember?	You	said	yes,	Bellurdan.	Yet	now	you	tell	me	conversation
is	ended.	I	had	not	imagined	your	word	to	be	so	worthless.”
In	the	dying	light	it	was	impossible	to	see	the	Thelomen's	face,	but	the	anguish
in	his	tone	was	plain.	“I	am	sorry,	Tattersail.	You	are	correct.	I	gave	you	my	word
that	we	would	speak	again.	Can	we	not	do	this	while	we	return	to	Pale?”
“No,”	Tattersail	snapped.	“I	wish	it	now.”
Bellurdan	bowed	his	head.	“Very	well.”
Tattersail	 forced	 the	 tension	 from	 her	 shoulders	 and	 neck.	 “I	 have	 some
questions,”	 she	 said.	 “First,	 Tayschrenn	 sent	 you	 to	 Genabaris	 for	 a	 time,	 didn't
he?	You	were	searching	through	some	scrolls	for	him?”
“Yes.”
“May	I	ask	what	were	those	scrolls?”
“Is	it	of	vital	significance	now,	Tattersail?”
“It	is.	The	truth	will	help	me	in	deciding	whether	to	go	with	you,	or	die	here.”
Bellurdan	hesitated	only	a	moment.	“Very	well.	Among	the	archives	collected
from	 the	 city's	 mages—all	 of	 whom	 were	 executed,	 as	 you	 know—were	 found
some	copied	fragments	of	Gothos'	Folly,	an	ancient	Jaghut	tome—”
“I	know	of	it,”	Tattersail	interjected.	“Go	on.”
“As	a	Thelomen,	I	possess	Jaghut	blood,	though	of	course	Gothos	would	deny
it.	The	High	Mage	entrusted	the	examination	of	these	writings	to	me.	I	was	to	seek
out	information	concerning	the	burial	of	a	Jaghut	Tyrant,	a	burial	that	was	in	fact	a
prison.”
“Wait,”	 Tattersail	 said,	 shaking	 her	 head.	 “The	 Jaghut	 had	 no	 government.
What	do	you	mean	by	a	Tyrant?”
“One	 whose	 blood	 was	 poisoned	 by	 the	 ambition	 to	 rule	 over	 others.	 This
Jaghut	 Tyrant	 enslaved	 the	 land	 around	 it—all	 living	 things—for	 close	 to	 three
thousand	years.	The	Imass	of	the	time	sought	to	destroy	it,	and	failed.	It	was	left	to


other	Jaghut	to	attend	to	the	sundering	and	imprisoning	of	the	Tyrant—for	such	a
creature	was	as	abominable	to	them	as	it	was	to	Imass.”
Tattersail's	heart	now	hammered	in	her	chest.	“Bellurdan.”	She	had	to	fight	to
push	the	words	from	her.	“Where	was	this	Tyrant	buried?”
“I	concluded	that	the	barrow	lies	south	of	here,	in	the	Gadrobi	Hills	directly
east	of	Darujhistan.”
“Oh,	Queen	of	Dreams.	Bellurdan,	do	you	know	what	you've	done?”
“I	have	done	as	I	was	commanded	by	our	High	Mage.”
“And	that's	why	the	T'lan	Imass	is	with	the	Adjunct.”
“I	don't	understand	what	you	are	saying,	Tattersail.”
“Dammit,	you	brainless	ox!”	she	rasped.	“They	plan	to	free	the	Tyrant!	Lorn's
sword—her	Otataral	sword—”
“No,”	Bellurdan	rumbled.	“They	would	not	do	such	a	thing.	Rather,	they	seek
to	 prevent	 someone	 else	 releasing	 it.	 Yes,	 that	 is	 more	 likely.	 It	 is	 the	 truth	 of
things.	Now,	Tattersail,	our	conversation	is	done.”
“I	can't	go	back,”	the	sorceress	said.	“I	must	go	on.	Please,	don't	stop	me.”
“We	are	to	return	to	Pale,”	Bellurdan	said	stubbornly.	“Your	concern	has	been
satisfied.	 Permit	 me	 to	 take	 you	 back	 so	 that	 I	 may	 continue	 seeking	 the	 proper
burial	place	for	Nightchill.”
There	was	no	choice	left	in	Tattersail's	mind,	but	there	had	to	be	a	way	out.
The	conversation	had	bought	her	time,	time	to	recover	from	the	ordeal	of	traveling
by	 Warren.	 Bellurdan's	 words	 returned	 to	 her:	 if	 she	 accessed	 her	 Thyr	 Warren
now	 she	 would	 be	 consumed.	 Incinerated	 by	 the	 reactive	 influence	 of	 the	 T'lan
Imass.	 Her	 eyes	 fell	 on	 the	 burlap	 sack	 beside	 the	 Thelomen	 and	 saw	 from	 it	 a
faint	 gleam	 of	 sorcery.	 A	 spell.	 My	 own	 spell.	 She	 recalled	 now:	 a	 gesture	 of
compassion,	a	spell	of	.	.	.	preservation.	Is	this	my	way	out?	Hood's	Breath,	is	it
even	 possible?	 She	 thought	 of	 Hairlock,	 the	 journey	 from	 the	 dying	 body	 to	 a
lifeless	.	.	.	vessel.	Shedenul,	have	mercy	on	us	.	.	.
The	sorceress	stepped	back	and	opened	her	Warren.	High	Thyr	magic	blazed
around	 her.	 She	 saw	 Bellurdan	 stagger	 back	 then	 steady	 himself.	 He	 screamed
something,	but	she	could	not	hear	him.	Then	he	charged	at	her.
She	 regretted	 the	 Thelomen's	 fatal	 courage	 as	 the	 fire	 blackened	 the	 world
around	her,	even	as	she	opened	her	arms	and	embraced	him.
Lorn	 strode	 to	 Tool's	 side.	 The	 T'lan	 Imass	 faced	 west,	 and	 a	 tension	 swirled
about	him	that	she	could	almost	see.


“What	is	it?”	she	asked,	her	eyes	on	the	white	fountain	of	fire	rising	above	the
horizon.	“I've	never	seen	anything	like	that.”
“Nor	I,”	Tool	replied.	“It	is	within	the	barrier	I	have	cast	around	us.”
“But	that's	impossible,”	the	Adjunct	snapped.
“Yes,	 impossible	 to	 last	 this	 long.	 Its	 source	 should	 have	 been	 consumed
almost	instantly.	Yet	.	.	.”	The	T'lan	Imass	fell	silent.
There	was	no	need	for	Tool	to	finish	his	sentence.	The	pillar	of	fire	still	raged
in	 the	 night	 sky	 as	 it	 had	 for	 the	 past	 hour.	 The	 stars	 swam	 in	 the	 inky	 darkness
around	 it,	 magic	 swirling	 in	 a	 frenzy	 as	 if	 from	 a	 bottomless	 well.	 On	 the	 wind
was	 a	 smell	 that	 left	 Lorn	 slightly	 nauseous.	 “Do	 you	 recognize	 the	 Warren,
Tool?”
“Warrens,	Adjunct.	Tellann,	Thyr,	Denul,	D'riss,	Tennes,	Thelomen	Toblakai,
Starvald	Demelain	.	.	.”
“Starvald	Demelain,	what	in	Hood's	Name	is	that?”
“Elder.”
“I	thought	there	were	but	three	Elder	Warrens,	and	that's	not	one	of	them.”
“Three?	No,	there	were	many,	Adjunct,	all	born	of	one.	Starvald	Demelain.”
Lorn	 wrapped	 her	 cloak	 tighter	 about	 herself,	 eyes	 on	 the	 column	 of	 fire.
“Who	could	manage	such	a	conjuring?”
“There	was	one	.	.	.	once.	Of	worshipers	there	are	none	left,	so	he	is	no	more.
I	 have	 no	 answer	 to	 your	 question,	 Adjunct.”	 The	 Imass	 staggered	 as	 the	 pillar
bloomed	outward,	then	winked	out.	A	distant	thundering	rumble	reached	them.
“Gone,”	Lorn	whispered.
“Destroyed,”	Tool	said.	The	warrior	cocked	his	head.	“Strange,	the	source	is
indeed	destroyed.	But	something	has	also	been	born.	I	sense	it,	a	new	presence.”
Lorn	checked	her	sword.	“What	is	it?”	she	demanded.
Tool	shrugged.	“New.	It	flees.”
Was	this	cause	for	worry?	Lorn	scowled	and	turned	to	the	T'lan	Imass,	but	he
had	 already	 left	 her	 side,	 and	 was	 now	 striding	 back	 to	 their	 campfire.	 The
Adjunct	glanced	once	more	at	the	western	horizon.	There	was	a	cloud,	blotting	out
the	stars.	It	looked	huge.	She	shivered.
It	 was	 time	 to	 sleep.	 The	 Imass	 would	 stand	 guard,	 so	 she	 need	 not	 worry
about	surprise	visitors.	The	day	had	been	long,	and	she'd	over-rationed	her	water;
she	felt	weak,	an	unfamiliar	sensation.	Her	scowl	deepened	as	she	walked	to	the
camp.	Tool,	standing	immobile	beside	the	flames,	reminded	her	of	his	arrival	two
days	ago.	The	fiery	glimmer	that	jumped	along	his	withered	flesh-and-bone	helm


once	again	triggered	something	primordial	in	her	mind,	and	with	it	came	a	deep,
unreasoning	 fear	 of	 darkness.	 She	 stepped	 close	 to	 the	 Imass.	 “Fire	 is	 life,”	 she
whispered,	the	phrase	seeming	to	rise	from	the	depths	of	instinct.
Tool	 nodded.	 “Life	 is	 fire,”	 he	 said.	 “With	 such	 words	 was	 born	 the	 First
Empire.	The	Empire	of	Imass,	the	Empire	of	Humanity.”	The	warrior	turned	to	the
Adjunct.	“You've	done	well,	my	child.”
The	 gray	 pall	 of	 smoke	 hung	 unmoving	 over	 Blackdog	 Forest	 a	 dozen	 leagues
north	of	her	as	Crone	dipped	her	splayed	tail	and	sank	wearily	toward	the	army
encamped	on	the	Rhivi	Plain.
The	 tents	 marched	 outward	 like	 spokes	 from	 a	 central	 fortified	 hub	 where
stood	a	large	canopy,	rippling	in	the	morning	breeze.	Toward	this	center	the	Great
Raven	 descended.	 Her	 sharp	 gaze	 marked	 Rhivi	 plainsmen	 moving	 among	 the
aisles.	Off	on	the	eastern	rim	fluttered	the	banners	of	the	Catlin	Horse,	green	and
silver	to	mark	the	mercenary	contingent	of	Caladan	Brood's	main	army.	By	far	the
greatest	 proportion	 of	 soldiers,	 however,	 were	 Tiste	 Andii—Anomander	 Rake's
people,	 dwellers	 of	 the	 city	 within	 Moon's	 Spawn—their	 tall,	 dark-clad	 forms
moving	like	shadows	between	the	tents.
Wheeled	tracks	led	north	to	the	forest	fringes:	supply	routes	to	entrenchments
once	 held	 by	 the	 Malazans	 and	 now	 marking	 Brood's	 front	 lines.	 Rhivi-driven
carts	 moved	 forward	 an	 endless	 stream	 of	 supplies,	 while	 other	 wagons,	 laden
with	the	dead	and	the	wounded,	entered	the	camp	in	a	grim	flow.
Crone	cackled.	Magic	bled	from	the	main	tent	and	stained	the	dusty	air	with	a
heavy,	turgid	magenta,	the	color	of	the	D'riss	Warren,	earth	magic.	Her	wings	now
felt	 light	 and	 held	 a	 youthful	 spring	 as	 she	 beat	 the	 air.	 “Ahhh,”	 Crone	 sighed,
“magic.”	Sweeping	through	the	wards	and	traps,	the	Great	Raven	glided	over	the
tent	and	thrummed	rapidly	as	she	dropped	outside	the	entrance.
No	guard	barred	the	doorway,	which	had	been	left	pulled	back	and	tied	to	a
support	pole.	Crone	hopped	inside.
With	the	exception	of	a	small	hanging	at	the	far	end,	behind	which	squatted	an
army	cot,	no	other	divisions	had	been	made	within	the	tent.	In	the	center	stood	a
massive	 table,	 its	 surface	 etched	 with	 the	 contours	 of	 the	 surrounding	 land.	 One
man	 stood	 alone,	 leaning	 over	 it,	 his	 back	 to	 the	 doorway.	 An	 enormous	 iron
hammer	was	 slung	across	his	broad	back;	despite	its	size	and	evident	weight,	it
looked	 almost	 toylike	 against	 that	 span	 of	 muscle	 and	 bone.	 Power	 rolled	 from
him	in	musky	waves.
“Delays,	delays,”	Crone	muttered,	as	she	flapped	up	to	land	on	the	tabletop.


Caladan	Brood	grunted	distractedly.
“You	sensed	the	storm	of	sorcery	last	night?”	she	asked.
“Sensed?	We	could	see	it.	The	Rhivi	shamans	seem	somewhat	disturbed,	but
they	have	no	answers.	We'll	discuss	that	later,	Crone.	Now	I	must	think.”
Crone	cocked	her	head	at	the	map.	“The	west	flank	falls	back	in	total	disarray.
Who	commands	that	Barghast	mob?”
Brood	asked,	“When	did	you	fly	within	sight	of	them?”
“Two	days	past.	I	saw	but	a	third	of	the	original	force	left	alive.”
Brood	shook	his	head.	“Jorrick	Sharplance,	under	him	five	thousand	Barghast
and	seven	Blades	of	the	Crimson	Guard.”
“Sharplance?”	Crone	hissed	laughter.	“Full	of	himself,	is	he?”
“He	is,	but	the	Barghast	so	named	him.	As	I	was	saying,	five	legions	of	Gold
Moranth	 dropped	 into	 his	 lap	 three	 days	 ago.	 Jorrick	 retreated	 under	 cover	 of
night,	 and	 bled	 off	 two-thirds	 of	 his	 army	 east	 and	 west—his	 Barghast	 have	 a
knack	 of	 disappearing	 where	 no	 cover	 seems	 possible.	 Yesterday	 his	 panicked
mob	did	an	about-face	and	met	the	Gold.	His	Barghast	moved	in	as	pincers.	Two
Moranth	legions	wiped	out,	the	other	three	retreating	to	the	forest	with	half	their
supplies	scattered	on	the	plain.”
Crone	cocked	her	head	again.	“Jorrick's	plan?”
Brood	inclined	his	head.	“He's	Crimson	Guard,	though	the	Barghast	call	him
their	own.	Young,	thus	fearless.”
The	raven	studied	the	map.	“And	the	east?	How	holds	Fox	Pass?”
“Well,”	 Brood	 said.	 “Mostly	 Stannis	 conscripts	 on	 the	 other	 side—the
Malazans	are	finding	them	a	reluctant	ally.	We'll	see	the	Crimson	Guard's	mettle
in	 twelve	 months'	 time,	 when	 the	 next	 wave	 of	 Malazan	 marines	 disembark	 at
Nisst.”
“Why	 not	 drive	 northward?”	 Crone	 asked.	 “Prince	 K'azz	 could	 liberate	 the
Free	Cities	over	the	winter.”
“The	Prince	and	I	agree	on	this,”	Brood	said.	“He	stays	where	he	is.”
“Why?”	Crone	demanded.
Brood	grunted.	“Our	tactics	are	our	business.”
“Suspicious	bastard,”	Crone	muttered.	She	hopped	along	the	south	edge	of	the
map.	“Your	underbelly	remains	for	final	grim	scrutiny.	Naught	but	Rhivi	plainsmen
between	you	and	Pale.	And	now	forces	walk	the	plain	that	even	the	Rhivi	know
nothing	of—yet	you	show	little	concern,	warrior.	Why	is	that,	Crone	wonders?”
“I	have	been	in	communication	with	Prince	K'azz	and	his	mages,	and	with	the


Barghast	and	Rhivi	shamans.	What	was	born	on	the	plain	last	night	belongs	to	no
one.	It	is	alone,	and	frightened.	Even	now	the	Rhivi	have	begun	the	search	for	it.
Concerned?	No,	not	by	that.	Still,	there's	much	more	going	on	in	the	south.”	Brood
straightened.
“Anomander	is	in	the	midst	of	it,”	Crone	purred.	“Plotting	and	counterplotting,
scattering	broken	glass	in	everyone's	path.	I've	never	seen	him	in	a	better	mood.”
“Enough	gossip.	You	have	news	for	me?”
“Of	 course,	 Master.”	 Crone	 stretched	 her	 wings	 and	 sighed.	 She	 jabbed	 her
beak	 at	 an	 itch,	 crunched	 a	 flea	 and	 gulped	 it	 down.	 “I	 know	 who	 holds	 the
Spinning	Coin.”
“Who?”
“A	youth	whose	bliss	is	ignorance.	The	Coin	spins	and	turns	a	face	to	all	those
in	his	company.	They've	their	own	game,	but	it	will	converge	with	greater	things,
and	 so	 Oponn's	 thin	 threads	 reverberate	 in	 spheres	 otherwise	 immune	 to	 the
Jesters'	influence.”
“What	does	Rake	know?”
“Of	this,	little.	But	you	well	know	his	dislike	of	Oponn.	He	would	cut	those
threads	given	the	opportunity.”
“Idiot,”	 Brood	 muttered.	 He	 thought	 for	 a	 time,	 unmoving,	 like	 a	 shaping	 of
stone	 and	 iron,	 while	 Crone	 ambled	 back	 and	 forth	 across	 the	 Rhivi	 Plain,	 her
long,	 black	 talons	 scattering	 the	 wooden	 regiment	 and	 division	 markers	 like
dominoes.
“Without	 Oponn,	 Rake's	 power	 is	 presently	 unmatched,”	 Brood	 said.	 “He
hangs	over	Darujhistan	like	a	beacon	and	the	Empress	is	sure	to	send	something
against	him.	Such	a	battle	would—”
“Level	Darujhistan,”	Crone	chirped	brightly.	“In	flames	numbering	twelve,	so
fly	the	Free	Cities,	so	much	ash	in	the	wind.”
“Rake's	 disdain	 for	 everything	 beneath	 him	 has	 left	 us	 stumbling	 and	 flat	 on
our	 faces	 one	 time	 too	 many,”	 Brood	 said.	 He	 glanced	 at	 Crone	 and	 raised	 a
hairless	eyebrow.	“You're	scattering	my	armies.	Stop	it.”
Crone	 stopped	 pacing	 and	 squatted.	 “Once	 again,”	 she	 sighed,	 “Caladan
Brood	 the	 Great	 Warrior	 seeks	 the	 bloodless	 way.	 Rake	 gets	 that	 coin	 and	 he'll
pull	 Oponn	 right	 in	 and	 spit	 the	 Lord	 and	 Lady	 on	 that	 lovely	 sword	 of	 his.
Imagine	 the	 chaos	 that	 would	 ensue—a	 wonderful	 ripple	 that	 could	 topple	 gods
and	 deluge	 realms.”	 She	 heard	 her	 own	 excitement	 and	 reveled	 in	 its	 blatancy.
“Such	fun.”


“Quiet,	 bird,”	 Brood	 said.	 “The	 Coin	 Bearer	 needs	 protection,	 now	 that
Rake's	recalled	his	mages.”
“But	who	is	there	to	match	the	Tiste	Andii?”	Crone	asked.	“Surely	you	don't
intend	to	leave	your	campaign	here?”
Brood	bared	his	filed	teeth	in	a	nasty	grin.	“Ha,	caught	you	out,	I	think.	Good.
You	 need	 taking	 down	 a	 notch	 or	 two,	 Crone.	 You	 don't	 know	 everything.	 How
does	it	feel?”
“I'll	permit	such	torture	from	you,	Brood,”	Crone	squawked,	“only	because	I
respect	 your	 temper.	 Just	 don't	 push	 me	 too	 far.	 Tell	 me,	 who	 around	 here	 can
match	Rake's	mages?	This	is	something	I	must	know.	You	and	your	secrets.	How
can	 I	 be	 a	 true	 servant	 to	 my	 master's	 wishes	 when	 he	 withholds	 vital
information?”
“What	do	you	know	of	the	Crimson	Guard?”	Brood	asked.
“Scant,”	Crone	replied.	“A	company	of	mercenaries	held	in	high	regard	among
such	kind,	what	of	them?”
“Ask	Rake's	Tiste	Andii	for	their	assessment,	crow.”
Crone's	 feathers	 arched	 indignantly.	 “Crow?	 I'll	 not	 take	 such	 insults!	 I'm
leaving.	 Returning	 to	 the	 Moon,	 there	 to	 devise	 such	 a	 list	 of	 foul	 names	 for
Caladan	Brood	as	to	stain	the	realms!”
“Begone	with	you,	then,”	Brood	said,	smiling.	“You've	done	well.”
“If	only	Rake	wasn't	even	more	stingy	than	you,”	Crone	said,	as	she	hopped
toward	the	doorway,	“my	spying	skills	would	be	used	on	you	instead	of	on	him.”
Brood	spoke.	“One	last	thing,	Crone.”
She	stopped	at	the	entrance	and	cocked	her	head.
The	warrior's	attention	had	returned	to	the	map.	“When	you	find	yourself	over
the	Rhivi	Plain	far	to	the	south,	mark	whatever	powers	you	sense	active	there.	But
be	careful,	Crone.	Something's	brewing,	and	it	stinks.”
Crone's	cackle	was	her	only	reply,	and	then	she	was	gone.
Brood	stood	over	his	map,	thinking	hard.	He	remained	unmoving	for	close	to
twenty	minutes,	then	he	straightened.	Stepping	outside	he	searched	the	sky.	Crone
was	nowhere	in	sight.	He	grunted	and	turned	to	survey	the	nearest	tents.	“Kallor!
Where	are	you?”
A	tall	gray	man	stepped	around	a	tent	and	walked	slowly	up	to	Brood.	“The
Gold	have	bogged	down	in	the	forest,	Warlord,”	he	said	in	a	gravelly	voice,	his
ancient,	lifeless	eyes	meeting	Brood's.	“A	storm	comes	down	from	the	Laederon
Heights.	The	Moranth's	Quorls	will	be	grounded	for	some	time.”


Brood	nodded.	“I'm	leaving	you	in	charge.	Heading	to	Fox	Pass.”
Kallor	raised	an	eyebrow.
Brood	 stared	 at	 him,	 then	 said,	 “Let's	 not	 get	 too	 excited.	 People	 will	 start
thinking	you're	not	as	bored	with	all	this	as	you	make	out	to	be.	I'm	meeting	with
Prince	K'azz.”
A	 faint	 smile	 quirked	 Kallor's	 thin	 lips.	 “What	 madness	 has	 Jorrick
Sharplance	perpetrated	now?”
“None,	 so	 far	 as	 I'm	 aware,”	 Brood	 answered.	 “Ease	 up	 on	 the	 lad,	 Kallor.
He	pulled	off	the	last	one.	Remember,	you	were	young	once,	too.”
The	old	warrior	shrugged.	“Jorrick's	last	success	belongs	to	the	Lady	of	Luck
if	anything.	It	surely	was	not	the	product	of	genius.”
“I'll	not	argue	you	that	one,”	Brood	said.
“May	I	ask,	what	is	the	reason	for	speaking	with	K'azz	in	person?”
Brood	looked	around.	“Where's	that	damn	horse	of	mine,	anyway?”
“Probably	 cowering,”	 Kallor	 said	 dryly.	 “Word	 is,	 his	 legs	 have	 become
shorter	and	stubbier	beneath	your	prodigious	self.	I	remain	unconvinced	that	such
a	thing	is	possible,	but	who	can	argue	with	a	horse?”
“I	need	some	of	the	Prince's	men,”	Brood	said,	heading	off	down	an	aisle.	“To
be	more	precise,”	he	said,	over	his	shoulder,	“I	need	the	Crimson	Guard's	Sixth
Blade.”
Watching	 Caladan	 Brood	 stride	 away,	 Kallor	 sighed.	 “Rake	 again,	 is	 it,
Warlord?	 You'd	 do	 better	 to	 follow	 my	 advice	 and	 destroy	 him.	 You	 will	 rue
dismissing	 my	 advice,	 Brood.”	 His	 dull	 eyes	 followed	 Brood	 until	 he	 turned	 a
corner	and	disappeared	from	sight.	“Consider	that	my	last	warning.”
The	 charred	 earth	 crunched	 under	 their	 horses'	 hooves.	 The	 glance	 that	 Toc	 the
Younger	threw	back	over	his	shoulder	was	received	with	a	grim	nod	from	Captain
Paran.	They	were	nearing	the	source	of	last	night's	column	of	fire.
As	 Toc	 had	 promised,	 leaving	 the	 city	 had	 proved	 a	 simple	 matter;	 none
accosted	them,	and	the	gates	had	been	left	ajar.	Their	horses	were	indeed	Wickanbred,	 lean	 and	 long-limbed;	 and	 though	 their	 ears	 flattened	 and	 eyes	 rolled	 they
held	to	the	discipline	of	their	reins.
The	 still	 midday	 air	 was	 heavy	 with	 the	 stench	 of	 sulfur,	 and	 already	 a	 fine
coat	of	ash	covered	the	two	riders	and	their	horses.	Overhead	the	sun	was	a	bright
copper	orb.	Toc	stopped	his	mount	and	waited	for	the	captain	to	arrive.


Paran	wiped	grimy	sweat	from	his	brow	and	adjusted	his	helmet.	The	camail
felt	heavy	on	his	shoulders	as	he	squinted	ahead.	They	were	heading	toward	the
place	where	the	pillar	of	fire	had	come	from.	The	night	just	past	had	been	one	of
deep	fear	for	Paran:	neither	he	nor	Toc	had	ever	witnessed	such	a	conflagration	of
sorcery.	Though	they	had	camped	leagues	away	they	had	felt	the	heat	pouring	from
it.	Now,	as	they	approached,	all	Paran	could	feel	was	dread.
Neither	he	nor	Toc	spoke.	Perhaps	a	hundred	yards	eastward	rose	something
that	looked	like	a	misshapen	tree	stump,	one	gnarled,	blackened	branch	reaching
skyward.	In	a	perfect	circle	around	it	the	grassy	sward	was	untouched	for	perhaps
five	yards.	A	dark	smudge	lay	in	this	unburned	area,	slightly	off	to	one	side.
Paran	 nudged	 his	 mount	 forward	 and	 Toc	 followed	 after	 unslinging	 and
stringing	 his	 bow.	 As	 Toc	 caught	 up	 with	 the	 captain,	 Paran	 saw	 that	 his
companion	had	nocked	an	arrow.
The	closer	they	approached	the	less	like	a	tree	the	charred	thing	looked.	The
limb	 that	 reached	 out	 from	 it	 had	 familiar	 lines.	 Paran's	 gaze	 narrowed	 some
more,	 then	 he	 cursed	 and	 spurred	 his	 horse.	 He	 closed	 the	 distance	 quickly,
leaving	behind	a	startled	Toc.
Arriving,	he	dismounted	and	strode	up	to	what	he	now	saw	were	two	bodies,
one	 gigantic.	 Both	 had	 been	 burned	 beyond	 recognition,	 but	 Paran	 held	 no
illusions	as	to	who	the	other	was.	All	that	come	close	to	me,	all	that	I	care	for	.	.
.	“Tattersail,”	he	whispered,	then	fell	to	his	knees.
Toc	 joined	 him,	 but	 remained	 in	 the	 saddle,	 standing	 in	 the	 stirrups	 and
scanning	 the	 horizon.	 A	 minute	 later	 he	 dismounted	 and	 walked	 a	 slow	 circle
around	 the	 embracing	 bodies,	 stopping	 at	 the	 dark	 smudge	 they'd	 seen	 from	 a
distance.	He	crouched	to	study	it.
Paran	raised	his	head	and	struggled	to	keep	his	eyes	on	the	figures.	The	limb
belonged	to	the	giant.	The	fire	that	had	consumed	them	both	had	blackened	the	arm
for	most	of	its	length,	but	its	hand	was	only	slightly	scorched.	Paran	stared	at	the
grasping	 fingers	 and	 wondered	 what	 salvation	 the	 giant	 had	 reached	 for	 in	 its
moment	 of	 death.	 The	 freedom	 that	 is	 death,	 a	 freedom	 denied	 me.	 Damn	 the
gods,	damn	them	all.	Numbed,	he	was	slow	to	realize	that	Toc	called	to	him.
It	was	an	effort	to	rise	to	his	feet.	He	staggered	to	where	Toc	still	crouched.
On	the	ground	before	the	man	was	a	torn	burlap	sack.
“Tracks	lead	from	this,”	Toc	said	shakily,	a	strange	expression	on	his	face.	He
scratched	vigorously	at	his	scar,	then	rose.	“Heading	northeast.”
Paran	looked	at	his	companion	without	comprehension.	“Tracks?”
“Small,	like	a	child's.	Only	.	.	.”


“Only	what?”
The	 man	 hugged	 himself.	 “Those	 feet	 were	 mostly	 bones.”	 He	 met	 the
captain's	blank	stare.	“As	if	the	soles	were	gone,	rotted	or	burned	away—I	don't
know	 .	 .	 .	 Something	 horrible	 has	 happened	 here,	 Captain.	 I'm	 glad	 it's	 heading
away,	whatever	it	is.”
Paran	turned	back	to	the	two	entwined	figures.	He	flinched.	One	hand	reached
up	to	touch	his	face.	“That's	Tattersail,”	he	said,	in	a	flat	voice.
“I	know.	I'm	sorry.	The	other	one	is	the	Thelomen	High	Mage	Bellurdan.	It	has
to	be.”	Toc	looked	down	at	the	burlap	sack.	“He	took	leave	to	come	out	here	and
bury	 Nightchill.”	 He	 added	 quietly,	 “I	 don't	 think	 Nightchill	 needs	 burying
anymore.”
“Tayschrenn	did	this,”	Paran	said.
Something	in	the	captain's	voice	brought	Toc	round.
“Tayschrenn.	 And	 the	 Adjunct.	 Tattersail	 was	 right.	 They	 would	 not	 have
killed	 her	 otherwise.	 Only	 she	 didn't	 die	 easily,	 she	 never	 took	 the	 easy	 path	 in
anything.	Lorn's	taken	her	from	me,	just	like	she's	taken	everything	else.”
“Captain	.	.	.”
Paran's	hand	unconsciously	gripped	the	pommel	of	his	sword.	“That	heartless
bitch	has	a	lot	coming	to	her,	and	I	mean	to	deliver	it.”
“Fine,”	Toc	growled.	“Just	let's	be	smart	about	it.”
Paran	glared	at	him.	“Let's	get	going,	Toc	the	Younger.”
Toc	glanced	one	last	time	into	the	northeast.	This	wasn't	over,	he	told	himself,
shivering.	 He	 winced	 as	 a	 savage,	 painful	 itch	 rose	 beneath	 his	 scar.	 Though	 he
tried,	he	found	he	could	not	reach	through	to	it.	And	a	formless	fire	burned	behind
his	empty	eye-socket—something	he	had	been	experiencing	often	lately.	Muttering,
he	strode	to	his	horse	and	climbed	into	the	saddle.
The	 captain	 had	 already	 swung	 his	 own	 mount	 and	 the	 trailing	 horse
southward.	The	set	of	the	man's	back	spoke	volumes	to	Toc	the	Younger,	and	he
wondered	 if	 he	 hadn't	 made	 a	 mistake	 in	 accompanying	 him.	 Then	 he	 shrugged.
“Well,”	he	said,	to	the	two	charred	bodies,	as	he	rode	past,	“it's	done,	ain't	it?”
The	plain	below	lay	sheathed	in	darkness.	Looking	to	the	west,	Crone	could	still
see	the	setting	sun.	She	rode	the	highest	winds,	the	air	around	her	bitter	cold.	The
Great	Raven	had	left	Caladan	Brood's	company	two	days	ago.	Since	then,	she'd
detected	no	sign	of	life	in	the	wastes	below.	Even	the	massive	herds	of	Bhederin,
which	the	Rhivi	were	in	the	habit	of	following,	had	disappeared.


At	night,	Crone's	senses	were	limited,	though	it	was	in	such	darkness	that	she
could	best	detect	sorcery.	As	she	winged	ever	southward	she	scanned	the	land	far
below	 with	 a	 hungry	 eye.	 Others	 among	 her	 brethren	 from	 Moon's	 Spawn
regularly	patrolled	the	plains	in	service	to	Anomander	Rake.	She'd	yet	to	see	one,
but	 it	 was	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 time.	 When	 she	 did,	 she	 would	 ask	 them	 if	 they'd
detected	any	source	of	magic	recently.
Brood	was	not	one	to	overreact.	If	something	was	happening	down	here	that
soured	 his	 palate,	 it	 could	 be	 momentous,	 and	 she	 wanted	 to	 know	 of	 it	 before
anyone	else.
Fire	flashed	in	the	sky	ahead	of	her,	perhaps	a	league	distant.	It	flared	briefly,
tinged	green	and	blue,	then	disappeared.	Crone	tensed.	That	had	been	sorcery,	but
of	a	kind	she'd	never	known.	As	she	swept	into	the	area	the	air	washed	over	her
hot	and	wet,	with	a	charnel	stench	that	reminded	her	of—she	cocked	her	head—
burned	feathers.
A	cry	sounded	ahead,	angry	and	frightened.	Crone	opened	her	beak	to	reply,
then	shut	it	again.	It	had	come	from	one	of	her	kin,	she	was	certain,	but	for	some
reason	she	felt	the	need	to	hold	her	tongue.	Then	another	ball	of	fire	flashed,	this
time	close	enough	to	Crone	that	she	saw	what	it	engulfed:	a	Great	Raven.
Her	breath	hissed	from	her	beak.	In	that	brief	instant	of	light	she'd	seen	half	a
dozen	more	of	her	brethren	wheeling	in	the	sky	ahead	of	her	and	to	the	west.	She
thrummed	her	wings	and	angled	toward	them.
When	 she	 could	 hear	 their	 panicked	 flapping	 about	 her	 on	 all	 sides,	 Crone
called	out,	“Children!	Attend	to	Crone!	The	Great	Mother	has	come!”
The	ravens	voiced	relieved	cries	and	closed	in	around	her.	They	all	shrieked
at	once	in	an	effort	to	tell	her	what	was	happening,	but	Crone's	angry	hiss	silenced
them	at	once.	“I	heard	among	you	Hurtle's	voice,”	Crone	said,	“did	I	not?”
One	male	swept	near	her.	“You	did,”	he	replied.	“I	am	Hurtle.”
“I've	just	come	from	the	north,	Hurtle.	Explain	to	me	what	has	occurred.”
“Confusion,”	Hurtle	drawled	sarcastically.
Crone	 cackled.	 She	 loved	 a	 good	 joke	 more	 than	 anyone.	 “Indeed!	 Go	 on,
lad!”
“Before	dusk	Kin	Clip	detected	a	flare	of	sorcery	below	her	on	the	plain.	It
was	odd,	its	feel,	but	clearly	a	Warren	had	just	opened	and	something	had	issued
onto	 the	 plain.	 Kin	 Clip	 spoke	 to	 me	 of	 this,	 then	 investigated.	 I	 shadowed	 her
from	above	during	the	descent,	and	so	saw	what	she	saw.	Crone,	it	has	come	to	my
mind	that	once	again	the	art	of	soul-shifting	has	been	exercised.”
“Eh?”


“Traveling	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 having	 just	 come	 from	 a	 Warren	 was	 a	 small
puppet,”	 Hurtle	 explained,	 “animate	 and	 possessing	 great	 power.	 When	 this
puppet	detected	Clip	he	gestured	at	her	and	she	burst	into	flames.	Since	then,	the
creature	has	disappeared	into	its	Warren,	reappearing	only	to	kill	another	of	us.”
“Why	do	you	remain?”	Crone	demanded.
Hurtle	chuckled.	“We	would	determine	its	course,	Crone.	Thus	far,	it	seems	to
travel	southward.”
“Very	 well.	 Now	 that	 that's	 been	 confirmed,	 leave	 and	 take	 the	 others	 with
you.	Return	to	Moon's	Spawn	and	report	to	our	lord.”
“As	you	command,	Crone.”	Hurtle	dipped	a	wing	and	slid	off	into	darkness.
His	voice	called	out	and	was	answered	by	a	chorus.
Crone	 waited.	 She	 wanted	 to	 be	 certain	 that	 they	 had	 all	 departed	 the	 area
before	doing	some	investigating	on	her	own.	Was	this	puppet	the	thing	birthed	in
the	pillar	of	fire?	It	didn't	seem	likely.	And	what	kind	of	sorcery	did	it	employ	that
no	 Great	 Raven	 could	 absorb?	 There	 was	 an	 Eldering	 taste	 about	 this.	 Soulshifting	was	no	simple	cantrip,	and	it	had	never	been	common	among	the	wizards
even	when	its	techniques	were	known.	Too	many	tales	of	madness	born	within	the
shifting.
Perhaps	this	puppet	had	survived	from	these	times.	Crone	thought	about	that.
Unlikely.
Magic	 bloomed	 on	 the	 plain	 below,	 then	 faded.	 A	 small	 magical	 force
scampered	 from	 the	 spot,	 weaving	 as	 it	 ran.	 There,	 thought	 Crone,	 there	 lie	 the
answers	to	my	questions.	Destroy	my	younglings,	will	you?	Would	you	so	easily
disdain	Crone?
She	crooked	her	wings	and	dropped.	The	air	whistled	around	her.	She	raised	a
penumbra	of	protective	magic	that	encapsulated	her	just	as	the	small	figure	ceased
its	march	and	looked	up.	Faintly,	Crone	heard	a	manic	laugh	rise	up	to	meet	her,
then	the	puppet	gestured.
The	 power	 that	 engulfed	 Crone	 was	 immense,	 far	 beyond	 anything	 she
anticipated.	Her	defenses	held	but	she	found	herself	buffeted,	as	if	fists	punched
her	from	every	direction.	She	cried	out	in	pain,	spinning	as	she	fell.	It	took	all	her
strength	and	will	to	thrust	out	her	battered	wings	and	catch	a	rising	current	of	air.
She	voiced	an	outraged,	alarmed	shriek	as	she	climbed	higher	into	the	night	sky.	A
glance	down	revealed	that	the	puppet	had	returned	once	again	to	its	Warren,	for
nothing	magical	was	visible.
“Aye.”	She	sighed.	“What	a	price	to	pay	for	knowledge!	Elder	Warren	indeed,
the	eldest	of	them	all.	Who	plays	with	Chaos?	Crone	knows	naught.	All	things	are


gathering,	 gathering	 here.”	 She	 found	 another	 stream	 of	 wind	 and	 angled	 south.
This	was	something	Anomander	Rake	must	know	of,	never	mind	Caladan	Brood's
instructions	that	the	Tiste	Andii	lord	be	kept	ignorant	of	almost	everything.	Rake
was	 good	 for	 more	 than	 Brood	 credited	 him.	 “Destruction,	 for	 one.”	 Crone
laughed.	“And	death.	Good	at	death!”
She	picked	up	speed,	so	did	not	notice	the	dead	smudge	on	the	land	below	her,
nor	the	woman	camped	in	its	center.	There	was	no	magic	there	to	speak	of,	in	any
case.
Adjunct	Lorn	squatted	by	her	bedroll,	her	eyes	scanning	the	night	sky.	“Tool,	was
all	that	connected	to	what	we	witnessed	two	nights	ago?”
The	 T'lan	 Imass	 shook	 his	 head.	 “I	 think	 not,	 Adjunct.	 If	 anything,	 this
concerns	me	more.	It	is	sorcery,	and	it	ignores	the	barrier	I	have	set	around	us.”
“How?”	she	asked	quietly.
“There	is	only	one	possibility,	Adjunct.	It	is	Eldering,	a	lost	Warren	of	ages
past,	returned	to	us.	Whoever	its	wielder	might	be,	we	must	assume	it	tracks	us,
with	purpose.”
Lorn	straightened	wearily,	then	stretched	her	back,	feeling	her	vertebrae	pop.
“Is	its	flavor	Shadowthrone's?”
“No.”
“Then	I	will	not	assume	it's	tracking	us,	Tool.”	She	eyed	her	bedroll.
Tool	 faced	 the	 woman	 and	 watched	 in	 silence	 as	 she	 prepared	 to	 sleep.
“Adjunct,”	he	said,	“this	hunter	appears	able	to	penetrate	my	defenses,	and	thus	it
may	open	its	Warren's	portal	directly	behind	us,	once	we	are	found.”
“I've	no	fear	of	magic,”	Lorn	muttered.	“Let	me	sleep.”
The	T'lan	Imass	fell	silent,	but	he	continued	staring	down	at	the	woman	as	the
hours	 of	 night	 crawled	 on.	 Tool	 moved	 slightly	 as	 dawn	 lightened	 the	 east,	 then
was	still	again.
Groaning,	 Lorn	 rolled	 onto	 her	 back	 as	 the	 sunlight	 reached	 her	 face.	 She
opened	 her	 eyes	 and	 blinked	 rapidly,	 then	 froze.	 She	 slowly	 raised	 her	 head	 to
find	 the	 T'lan	 Imass	 standing	 directly	 above	 her.	 And,	 hovering	 inches	 from	 her
throat,	was	the	tip	of	the	warrior's	flint	sword.
“Success,”	Tool	said,	“demands	discipline,	Adjunct.	Last	night	we	witnessed
an	expression	of	Elder	magic,	choosing	as	its	target	ravens.	Ravens,	Adjunct,	do
not	fly	at	night.	You	might	think	the	combination	of	my	abilities	with	yours	ensures
our	safety.	That	is	no	guarantee,	Adjunct.”	The	T'lan	Imass	withdrew	his	weapon


and	stepped	to	one	side.
Lorn	 drew	 a	 shaky	 breath.	 “A	 flaw,”	 she	 said,	 pausing	 to	 clear	 her	 throat
before	 continuing,	 “which	 I	 admit	 to,	 Tool.	 Thank	 you	 for	 alerting	 me	 to	 my
growing	complacency.”	She	sat	up.	“Tell	me,	doesn't	it	strike	you	as	odd	that	this
supposedly	empty	Rhivi	Plain	should	display	so	much	activity?”
“Convergence,”	 Tool	 said.	 “Power	 ever	 draws	 other	 power.	 It	 is	 not	 a
complicated	thought,	yet	it	escaped	us,	the	Imass.”	The	ancient	warrior	swung	his
head	to	the	Adjunct.	“As	it	escapes	their	children.	The	Jaghut	well	understood	the
danger.	Thus	they	avoided	one	another,	abandoned	each	other	to	solitude,	and	left
a	civilization	to	crumble	into	dust.	The	Forkrul	Assail	understood	as	well,	though
they	 chose	 another	 path.	 What	 is	 odd,	 Adjunct,	 is	 that	 of	 these	 three	 founding
peoples,	it	is	the	Imass	whose	legacy	of	ignorance	survived	the	ages.”
Lorn	stared	at	Tool.	“Was	that	an	attempt	at	humor?”	she	asked.
The	T'lan	Imass	adjusted	his	helmet.	“That	depends	on	your	mood,	Adjunct.”
She	 climbed	 to	 her	 feet	 and	 strode	 to	 check	 her	 horses.	 “You're	 getting
stranger	every	day,	Tool,”	she	said	quietly,	more	to	herself	than	to	the	Imass.	Into
her	mind	returned	the	first	thing	she	had	seen	when	she'd	opened	her	eyes—that
damned	creature	and	his	sword.	How	long	had	he	stood	like	that?	All	night?
The	 Adjunct	 paused	 to	 test	 her	 shoulder	 tentatively.	 It	 was	 healing	 quickly.
Perhaps	the	injury	had	not	been	as	severe	as	she'd	first	thought.
As	 she	 saddled	 her	 horse	 she	 chanced	 to	 glance	 at	 Tool.	 The	 warrior	 stood
staring	at	her.	What	kind	of	thoughts	would	occupy	someone	who'd	lived	through
three	hundred	thousand	years?	Or	did	the	Imass	live?	Before	meeting	Tool	she	had
generally	 thought	 of	 them	 as	 undead,	 hence	 without	 a	 soul,	 the	 flesh	 alone
animated	by	some	external	force.	But	now	she	wasn't	so	sure.
“Tell	me,	Tool,	what	dominates	your	thoughts?”
The	Imass	shrugged	before	replying.	“I	think	of	futility,	Adjunct.”
“Do	all	Imass	think	about	futility?”
“No.	Few	think	at	all.”
“Why	is	that?”
The	Imass	leaned	his	head	to	one	side	and	regarded	her.	“Because,	Adjunct,	it
is	futile.”
“Let's	get	going,	Tool.	We're	wasting	time.”
“Yes,	Adjunct.”
She	climbed	into	the	saddle,	wondering	how	the	Imass	had	meant	that.


Book	Four
Assassins


	
	

I	dreamed	a	coin
with	shifting	face—
so	many	youthful	visages
so	many	costly	dreams,
and	it	rolled	and	rang
'round	the	gilded	rim
of	a	chalice
made	for	gems
LIFE	OF	DREAMS
ILBARES	THE	HAG


Chapter	Eleven
	

The	night	held	close
as	I	wandered
my	spirit	unfooted
to	either	earth	or	stone
unraveled	from	tree
undriven	by	iron	nail
but	like	the	night	itself
a	thing	of	air
stripped	of	light
so	I	came	upon	them,
those	masons	who	cut	and	carved
stone	in	the	night
sighting	by	stars	and	battered	hand.
“What	of	the	sun?”	asked	I	of	them.
“Is	not	its	cloak	of	revelation
the	warmth	of	reason
in	your	shaping?”
And	one	among	them	answered,
“No	soul	can	withstand
the	sun's	bones	of	light
and	reason	dims
when	darkness	falls—
so	we	shape	barrows	in	the	night
for	you	and	your	kin.”
“Forgive	my	interruption,	then,”	said	I.
“The	dead	never	interrupt,”	said	the	mason,
“they	but	arrive.”
PAUPER'S	STONE
DARUJHISTAN


	
“Yet	another	night,	yet	another	dream,”	Kruppe	moaned,	“with	naught	but	a	scant
fire	 to	 keep	 this	 wanderer	 company.”	 He	 held	 his	 hands	 over	 the	 flickering,
undying	hearth	that	had	been	stoked	by	an	Elder	God.	It	seemed	an	odd	gift,	but	he
sensed	a	significance	to	it.	“Kruppe	would	understand	this	meaning,	for	rare	and
unwelcome	is	this	frustration.”
The	landscape	around	him	was	barren;	even	the	plowed	earth	was	gone,	with
no	sign	of	habitation	in	sight.	He	squatted	by	the	lone	fire	in	a	tundra	wasteland,
and	the	air	had	the	breath	of	rotting	ice.	To	the	north	and	to	the	east	the	horizon
gleamed	 green,	 almost	 luminescent	 though	 no	 moon	 had	 risen	 to	 challenge	 the
stars.	Kruppe	had	never	before	seen	such	a	thing,	yet	it	was	an	image	fashioned
within	 his	 mind.	 “Disturbing,	 indeed,	 proclaims	 Kruppe.	 Are	 these	 visions	 of
instinct,	then,	unfurled	in	this	dream	for	a	purpose?	Kruppe	knows	not,	and	would
return	to	his	warm	bed	this	instant,	were	the	choice	his.”
He	 stared	 about	 at	 the	 lichen-	 and	 moss-covered	 ground,	 frowning	 at	 the
strange	bright	colors	born	there.	He'd	heard	tales	of	Redspire	Plain,	that	land	far
to	the	north,	beyond	the	Laederon	Plateau.	Is	this	what	tundra	looked	like?	He'd
always	pictured	a	bleak,	colorless	world.	“Yet	peruse	these	stars	overhead.	They
glisten	 with	 a	 youthful	 energy,	 nay,	 sparkle	 as	 if	 amused	 by	 the	 one	 who
contemplates	them.	While	the	earth	itself	hints	of	vast	blushes	of	red,	orange,	and
lavender.”
Kruppe	rose	as	low	thunder	reached	him	from	the	west.	In	the	distance	moved
a	massive	herd	of	brown-furred	beasts.	The	steam	of	their	breath	gusted	silver	in
the	air	above	and	behind	them	as	they	ran,	turning	as	one	this	way	and	that	but	ever
at	a	distance.	He	watched	them	for	some	time.	When	they	came	closest	to	him	he
saw	the	reddish	streaks	in	their	fur,	and	their	horns,	sweeping	down	then	up	and
out.	The	land	shook	with	their	passage.
“Such	is	the	life	in	this	world,	Kruppe	wonders.	Has	he	traveled	back,	then,	to
the	very	beginning	of	things?”
“You	have,”	said	a	deep	voice	behind	him.
Kruppe	turned.	“Ah,	come	to	share	my	fire,	of	course.”	He	saw	before	him	a
squat	 figure,	 covered	 in	 the	 tanned	 hides	 of	 deer	 or	 some	 such	 similar	 animal.
Antlers	stretched	out	from	a	flat	skullcap	on	the	man's	head,	gray	and	covered	in
fuzzy	skin.	Kruppe	bowed.	“You	see	before	you	Kruppe,	of	Darujhistan.”
“I	am	Pran	Chole	of	Cannig	Tol's	Clan	among	the	Kron	Tlan.”	Pran	stepped


close	and	crouched	before	the	fire.	“I	am	also	the	White	Fox,	Kruppe,	wise	in	the
ways	of	ice.”	He	glanced	at	Kruppe	and	smiled.
Pran's	 face	 was	 wide,	 the	 bones	 pronounced	 beneath	 smooth,	 gold	 skin.	 His
eyes	were	barely	visible	between	tight	lids,	but	what	Kruppe	saw	of	them	was	a
startling	amber	in	color.	Pran	reached	out	long,	supple	hands	over	the	fire.	“Fire	is
life,	 and	 life	 is	 fire.	 The	 age	 of	 ice	 passes,	 Kruppe.	 Long	 have	 we	 lived	 here,
hunting	the	great	herds,	gathering	to	war	with	the	Jaghut	in	the	southlands,	birthing
and	dying	with	the	ebb	and	flow	of	the	frozen	rivers.”
“Kruppe	has	traveled	far,	then.”
“To	 the	 beginning	 and	 to	 the	 end.	 My	 kind	 give	 way	 to	 your	 kind,	 Kruppe,
though	 the	 wars	 do	 not	 cease.	 What	 we	 shall	 give	 to	 you	 is	 freedom	 from	 such
wars.	The	Jaghut	dwindle,	ever	retreat	into	forbidding	places.	The	Forkrul	Assail
have	 vanished,	 though	 we	 never	 found	 need	 to	 fight	 them.	 And	 the	 K'chain
Che'Malle	are	no	more—the	ice	spoke	to	them	with	words	of	death.”	Pran's	gaze
swung	back	to	the	fire.	“Our	hunting	has	brought	death	to	the	great	herds,	Kruppe.
We	are	driven	south,	and	this	must	not	be.	We	are	the	Tlan,	but	soon	the	Gathering
comes,	 and	 so	 shall	 be	 voiced	 the	 Rite	 of	 Imass	 and	 the	 Choosing	 of	 the
Bonecasters,	 and	 then	 shall	 come	 the	 sundering	 of	 flesh,	 of	 time	 itself.	 With	 the
Gathering	shall	be	born	the	T'lan	Imass,	and	the	First	Empire.”
“Why,	Kruppe	wonders,	is	he	here?”
Pran	Chole	shrugged.	“I	have	come	for	I	have	been	called.	By	whom,	I	know
not.	Perhaps	it	is	the	same	with	you.”
“But	Kruppe	is	dreaming.	This	is	Kruppe's	dream.”
“Then	 I	 am	 honored.”	 Pran	 straightened.	 “One	 of	 your	 time	 comes.	 Perhaps
this	one	possesses	the	answers	we	seek.”
Kruppe	 followed	 Pran's	 gaze	 to	 the	 south.	 He	 raised	 an	 eyebrow.	 “If	 not
mistaken,	then	Kruppe	recognizes	her	as	a	Rhivi.”
The	woman	who	approached	was	perhaps	middle-aged,	heavy	with	child.	Her
dark,	 round	 face	 bore	 features	 similar	 to	 Pran	 Chole's,	 though	 less	 pronounced.
Fear	shone	in	her	eyes,	yet	there	was	a	grim	determination	about	her	as	well.	She
reached	 the	 fire	 and	 eyed	 the	 two	 men,	 most	 of	 her	 attention	 drawing	 to	 Pran
Chole.	“Tlan,”	she	said,	“the	Tellann	Warren	of	the	Imass	of	our	time	has	birthed	a
child	 in	 a	 confluence	 of	 sorceries.	 Its	 soul	 wanders	 lost.	 Its	 flesh	 is	 an
abomination.	A	shifting	must	take	place.”	She	turned	to	Kruppe	and	swept	back	the
thick	 woven	 robe	 she	 wore,	 revealing	 her	 swelled	 stomach.	 The	 bare,	 stretched
skin	had	been	recently	traced	in	a	tattoo.	The	image	was	that	of	a	white-haired	fox.
“The	Elder	God	walks	again,	risen	from	blood	spilled	on	consecrated	stone.	K'rul


came	in	answer	to	the	child's	need	and	now	aids	us	in	our	quest.	He	apologizes	to
you,	 Kruppe,	 for	 using	 the	 world	 within	 your	 dream,	 but	 no	 younger	 god	 can
influence	this	place.	Somehow	you	have	made	your	soul	immune	to	them.”
“The	rewards	of	cynicism,”	Kruppe	said,	bowing.
The	woman	smiled.
“I	understand,”	Pran	Chole	said.	“You	would	make	of	this	child,	born	of	Imass
powers,	a	Soletaken.”
“Yes.	It	is	the	best	we	can	manage,	Tlan.	A	shapeshifter—which	we	too	know
as	Soletaken—must	be	fashioned.”
Kruppe	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “Excuse	 Kruppe,	 please.	 But	 are	 we	 not	 missing
someone	vital	to	these	plans?”
“She	strides	two	worlds,”	the	Rhivi	said.	 “K'rul	 guides	 her	now	into	yours.
She	is	frightened	still.	It	falls	to	you,	Kruppe,	to	welcome	her.”
Kruppe	adjusted	the	sleeves	of	his	faded,	threadbare	cloak.	“This	should	not
prove	difficult	for	one	of	Kruppe's	charms.”
“Perhaps,”	the	Rhivi	said,	frowning.	“Her	flesh	is	an	abomination.	You	have
been	warned.”
Kruppe	nodded	affably,	then	looked	around.	“Will	any	direction	do?”
Pran	Chole	laughed.
“I	suggest	south,”	the	Rhivi	said.
He	shrugged	and,	with	a	bow	to	the	two	companions,	he	headed	south.	After	a
few	minutes	he	glanced	back,	but	the	fire	was	nowhere	in	sight.	He	was	alone	in
the	chill	night.
A	full	moon	appeared	on	the	eastern	horizon,	bathing	the	land	in	silver	light.
Ahead,	the	tundra	rolled	on	as	far	as	Kruppe	could	see,	flat	and	featureless.	Then
he	squinted.	Something	had	just	appeared,	still	distant,	walking	with	seeming	great
difficulty.	 He	 watched	 it	 fall	 once,	 then	 climb	 back	 to	 its	 feet.	 Despite	 the
luminescence,	the	figure	looked	black.
Kruppe	moved	forward.	It	had	yet	to	see	him,	and	he	stopped	when	he	was	but
thirty	feet	away.	The	Rhivi	had	been	right.	Kruppe	produced	his	silk	handkerchief
and	 wiped	 the	 sweat	 that	 had	 sprung	 across	 his	 brow.	 The	 figure	 had	 been	 a
woman	once,	tall,	with	long	black	hair.	But	that	woman	had	been	long	dead.	Her
flesh	had	withered	and	assumed	the	hue	of	dark	wood.	Perhaps	the	most	horrific
aspect	 of	 her	 was	 her	 limbs,	 which	 had	 been	 roughly	 sewn	 back	 onto	 her	 body.
“Aye,”	Kruppe	whispered.	This	woman	had	been	torn	apart	once.
The	 woman's	 head	 flew	 up	 and	 sightless	 eyes	 fixed	 upon	 Kruppe.	 She


stopped,	her	mouth	opening	but	no	words	coming	forth.
Surreptitiously,	Kruppe	cast	a	spell	upon	himself,	then	looked	at	her	yet	again.
He	frowned.	A	spell	had	been	woven	about	the	woman,	one	of	preservation.	But
something	had	happened	to	that	spell,	something	had	reshaped	it.	“Lass!”	Kruppe
barked.	“I	know	you	can	hear	me.”	He	didn't	know,	but	decided	to	insist	in	any
case.	“Your	soul	is	trapped	within	a	body	that	is	not	your	own.	It	does	not	become
you.	I	am	named	Kruppe,	and	I	will	lead	you	to	succour.	Come!”	He	spun	round
and	began	to	walk.	A	moment	later	he	heard	a	shuffling	behind	him,	and	smiled.
“Ah,”	he	whispered,	“Kruppe	has	charms	indeed.	But	more,	he	can	be	harsh	when
necessary.”
The	fire	had	returned,	a	beacon	before	them,	and	Kruppe	saw	the	two	figures
awaiting	them.	The	vestiges	of	the	spell	he	had	cast	upon	himself	made	the	Tlan
and	the	Rhivi	blinding	to	his	eyes,	such	was	their	power.	Kruppe	and	the	woman
arrived.
Pran	Chole	stepped	forward.	“Thank	you,	Kruppe.”	He	studied	the	woman	and
nodded	slowly.	“Yes,	I	see	the	effects	of	the	Imass	upon	her.	But	there	is	more.”
He	looked	to	the	Rhivi.	“She	was	a	mage	once?”
The	 Rhivi	 moved	 close	 to	 the	 woman.	 “Hear	 me,	 lost	 one.	 Your	 name	 is
Tattersail,	 your	 sorcery	 is	 Thyr.	 The	 Warren	 flows	 within	 you	 now,	 it	 animates
you,	protects	you.”	She	opened	her	robe	once	more.	“It	is	time	to	bring	you	back
into	the	world.”
Tattersail	stepped	back	in	alarm.
“Within	you	is	the	past,”	Pran	said.	“My	world.	You	know	the	present,	and	the
Rhivi	offers	you	to	the	future.	In	this	place	all	is	merged.	The	flesh	you	wear	has
upon	 it	 a	 spell	 of	 preservation,	 and	 in	 your	 dying	 act	 you	 opened	 your	 Warren
within	 the	 influence	 of	 Tellann.	 And	 now	 you	 wander	 within	 a	 mortal's	 dream.
Kruppe	is	the	vessel	of	change.	Permit	us	to	aid	you.”
With	a	wordless	cry	Tattersail	staggered	into	Pran's	arms.	The	Rhivi	quickly
joined	them.
“My,”	 Kruppe	 breathed,	 “but	 Kruppe's	 dreams	 have	 taken	 a	 strange	 turn.
While	his	own	concerns	are	ever	present,	a	haunting	voice,	once	again	he	must	set
them	aside.”
Suddenly	K'rul	stood	beside	him.	“Not	so.	It	is	not	my	way	to	use	you	without
just	recompense.”
Kruppe	looked	up	at	the	Elder	God.	“Kruppe	asks	for	nothing.	There	is	a	gift
in	this,	and	I	am	glad	to	be	part	of	its	making.”
K'rul	nodded.	“Nevertheless.	Speak	to	me	of	your	efforts.”


“Rallick	and	Murillio	seek	to	right	an	old	wrong,”	Kruppe	said,	with	a	sigh.
“They	 think	 me	 ignorant	 of	 their	 schemes,	 but	 I	 shall	 turn	 such	 schemes	 to	 my
purposes.	Guilt	rides	this	decision,	but	they	are	needed.”
“Understood.	And	the	Coin	Bearer?”
“Protection	 has	 been	 set	 in	 motion,	 though	 its	 final	 shaping	 is	 yet	 to	 come.	 I
know	that	the	Malazan	Empire	is	present	in	Darujhistan,	covertly	for	the	moment.
What	they	seek—”
“Is	anything	but	clear,	Kruppe.	Even	to	them.	Use	this	to	your	advantage	when
you	find	them.	Allies	might	come	from	surprising	quarters.	I	will	tell	you	this:	two
now	 approach	 the	 city,	 one	 is	 a	 T'lan	 Imass,	 the	 other	 a	 bane	 to	 magic.	 Their
purposes	 are	 destructive,	 but	 already	 forces	 are	 in	 play	 attending	 to	 them.	 Seek
knowledge	 of	 them,	 but	 do	 not	 openly	 oppose	 them.	 They	 are	 dangerous.	 Power
attracts	power,	Kruppe.	Leave	them	to	the	consequences	of	their	actions.”
Kruppe	nodded.	“Kruppe	is	no	fool,	K'rul.	He	openly	opposes	no	one,	and	he
finds	power	a	thing	to	be	avoided	at	all	costs.”
As	they	spoke	the	Rhivi	woman	had	taken	Tattersail	in	her	arms.	Pran	Chole
squatted	 nearby,	 his	 eyes	 closed	 and	 his	 lips	 forming	 silent	 words.	 The	 Rhivi
woman	 rocked	 the	 desiccated	 body	 in	 rhythmic	 motion,	 chanting	 softly.	 Water
stained	the	Rhivi's	thighs.
“Aye,”	Kruppe	whispered.	“She	prepares	to	give	birth	in	truth.”
Abruptly	the	Rhivi	tossed	away	the	body.	It	crumpled	in	a	lifeless	heap.
The	 Moon	 now	 hung	 immediately	 overhead,	 so	 bright	 that	 Kruppe	 found	 he
could	not	look	at	it	directly.
The	Rhivi	had	assumed	a	squatting	position,	moving	with	the	rhythm	of	labor,
her	face	sheathed	in	sweat.	Pran	Chole	remained	immobile,	though	his	body	was
racked	in	shivering	bouts	that	twisted	his	face	with	pain.	His	eyes	opened	wide,
glowing	bright	amber,	and	fixed	on	the	Moon.
“Elder	God,”	 Kruppe	said	quietly,	 “how	much	will	this	Tattersail	remember
of	her	former	life?”
“Unknown,”	K'rul	replied.	“Soul-shifting	is	a	delicate	thing.	The	woman	was
consumed	in	a	conflagration.	Her	soul's	first	flight	was	carried	on	wings	of	pain
and	violence.	More,	she	entered	another	ravaged	body,	bearing	its	own	traumas.
The	 child	 that	 is	 born	 will	 be	 like	 no	 other	 ever	 seen.	 Its	 life	 is	 a	 mystery,
Kruppe.”
Kruppe	grunted.	“Considering	her	parents,	she	will	indeed	be	exceptional.”	A
thought	 came	 to	 him	 and	 he	 frowned.	 “K'rul,	 what	 of	 the	 first	 child	 within	 the
Rhivi?”


“There	 was	 none,	 Kruppe.	 The	 Rhivi	 woman	 was	 prepared	 in	 a	 manner
unknown	to	any	man.”	He	chuckled.	“Including	myself.”	He	raised	his	head.	“This
sorcery	belongs	to	the	Moon,	Kruppe.”
They	continued	watching	the	labors	of	birth.	To	Kruppe	it	seemed	they	waited
more	hours	in	the	darkness	than	any	normal	night	could	hold.	The	Moon	remained
overhead,	as	if	it	found	its	position	to	its	liking—or,	he	reconsidered,	as	if	it	stood
guard	over	them.
Then	a	small	cry	rose	into	the	still	air,	and	the	Rhivi	lifted	in	her	arms	a	child
furred	in	silver.
Even	 as	 Kruppe	 watched,	 the	 fur	 sloughed	 away.	 The	 Rhivi	 turned	 the	 child
and	placed	her	mouth	against	its	belly.	Her	jaws	bunched	and	the	remaining	length
of	umbilical	cord	fell	away.
Pran	 Chole	 strode	 to	 stand	 beside	 Kruppe	 and	 the	 Elder	 God.	 The	 T'lan
looked	exhausted.	“The	child	drew	from	me	power	beyond	my	control,”	he	said
softly.
As	 the	Rhivi	squatted	again	in	afterbirth,	holding	the	child	 against	her	chest,
Kruppe's	eyes	widened.	The	mother's	belly	was	smooth,	the	white	fox	tattoo	was
gone.
“I	am	saddened,”	Pran	said,	“that	I	may	not	return	in	twenty	years	to	see	the
woman	this	child	shall	become.”
“You	shall,”	K'rul	said	in	a	low	tone,	“but	not	as	a	T'lan.	As	a	T'lan	Imass
Bonecaster.”
The	breath	hissed	between	Pran's	teeth.	“How	long?”	he	asked.
“Three	hundred	thousand	years,	Pran	Chole	of	Cannig	Tol's	Clan.”
Kruppe	laid	a	hand	on	Pran's	arm.	“You've	something	to	look	forward	to,”	he
said.
The	T'lan	stared	at	Kruppe	a	moment,	then	he	threw	back	his	head	and	roared
with	laughter.
The	hours	before	Kruppe's	dream	had	proved	eventful,	beginning	with	his	meeting
with	 Baruk	 that	 permitted	 the	 revelation	 of	 the	 Coin	 Bearer	 punctuated	 with	 the
clever	if	slightly	dramatic	suspension	of	the	coin's	wax	impression—a	cantrip	that
had	gone	strangely	awry.
But	soon	after	the	meeting,	droplets	of	now-hardened	wax	pebbling	the	breast
and	arms	of	his	coat,	Kruppe	paused	just	outside	the	alchemist's	door.	Roald	was
nowhere	 to	 be	 seen.	 “Oh,	 my,”	 Kruppe	 breathed	 as	 he	 wiped	 sweat	 from	 his


forehead.	 “Why	 should	 Master	 Baruk	 find	 Crokus's	 name	 familiar?	 Ah,	 stupid
Kruppe!	Uncle	Mammot,	of	course.	Oh	dear,	that	was	close—all	could	well	have
been	lost!”	He	continued	on	down	the	hall	to	the	stairs.
For	a	time	there,	Oponn's	power	had	waxed	considerably.	Kruppe	smiled	at
his	pun,	but	it	was	a	distracted	smile.	He	would	do	well	to	avoid	such	contacts.
Power	had	a	habit	of	triggering	his	own	talents;	already	he	felt	the	urgings	of	the
Deck	of	Dragons	within	his	head.
He	hurried	down	the	stairs	and	crossed	the	main	hall	to	the	doors.	Roald	was
just	entering,	burdened	beneath	mundane	supplies.	Kruppe	noted	the	dust	covering
the	 old	 man's	 clothing.	 “Dear	 Roald,	 you	 look	 as	 if	 you've	 just	 weathered	 a
sandstorm!	Do	you	require	Kruppe's	assistance?”
“No,”	Roald	grunted.	“Thank	you,	Kruppe.	I	can	manage.	Will	you	be	so	kind
as	to	close	the	doors	on	your	way	out?”
“Of	course,	kind	Roald!”	Kruppe	patted	the	man's	arm	and	strode	out	into	the
courtyard.	 The	 gates	 leading	 to	 the	 street	 had	 been	 left	 open,	 and	 beyond	 was	 a
swirling	cloud	of	dust.	“Ah,	yes,	the	road	repairs,”	Kruppe	muttered.
A	 headache	 had	 burgeoned	 behind	 his	 eyes,	 and	 the	 bright	 sun	 overhead
wasn't	helping	matters	any.	He	was	halfway	to	the	gates	when	he	stopped.	“The
doors!	 Kruppe	 has	 forgotten	 to	 close	 the	 doors!”	 He	 spun	 round	 and	 returned	 to
the	 estate	 entrance,	 sighing	 as	 the	 doors	 closed	 with	 a	 satisfying	 click.	 As	 he
turned	away	a	second	time	someone	shouted	in	the	street	beyond.	There	followed
a	loud	crash,	but	this	latter	sound	was	lost	on	Kruppe.
With	that	bellowed	curse	a	sorcerous	storm	roared	into	his	head.	He	fell	to	his
knees,	 then	 his	 head	 snapped	 up,	 eyes	 widening.	 “That,”	 he	 whispered,	 “was
indeed	a	Malazan	curse.	Then	why	does	House	Shadow's	image	burn	like	fire	in
Kruppe's	 skull?	 Who	 now	 walks	 the	 streets	 of	 Darujhistan?”	 A	 count	 of	 knots
unending	.	.	.	“Mysteries	solved,	more	mysteries	created.”
The	pain	had	passed.	Kruppe	climbed	to	his	feet	and	brushed	the	dust	from	his
clothing.	“Good	that	said	affliction	occurred	beyond	the	eyes	of	suspicious	beings,
Kruppe	 notes	 with	 relief.	 All	 upon	 a	 promise	 made	 to	 friend	 Roald.	 Wise	 old
friend	Roald.	Oponn's	breath	is	this	time	welcome,	though	begrudgingly	so.”
He	strode	to	the	gates	and	peered	into	the	street.	A	cart	filled	with	shattered
cobbles	had	toppled.	Two	men	argued	incessantly	as	to	whose	fault	it	was	while
they	righted	the	cart	and	proceeded	to	refill	it.	Kruppe	studied	them.	They	spoke
well	 the	 Daru	 tongue,	 but	 to	 one	 who	 listened	 carefully	 there	 was	 the	 hint	 of	 an
accent—an	accent	that	did	not	belong.	“Oh,	my,”	Kruppe	said,	stepping	back.	He
adjusted	 his	 coat,	 took	 a	 deep	 breath,	 then	 opened	 the	 gate	 and	 walked	 into	 the


street.
The	 fat	 little	 man	 with	 the	 flopping	 sleeves	 walked	 from	 the	 house's	 gate	 and
turned	left.	He	seemed	in	a	hurry.
Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	brow	with	a	scarred	forearm,
his	eyes	slits	against	the	bright	sunlight.
“That	is	the	one,	Sergeant,”	Sorry	said,	beside	him.
“Are	you	sure?”
“Yes,	I'm	sure.”
Whiskeyjack	 watched	 the	 man	 winding	 through	 the	 crowd.	 “What's	 so
important	about	him?”	he	asked.
“I	admit,”	Sorry	replied,	“to	some	uncertainty	as	to	his	significance.	But	he	is
vital,	Sergeant.”
Whiskeyjack	chewed	his	lip,	then	turned	to	the	wagon	bed	where	a	city	map
had	 been	 laid	 flat,	 its	 corners	 anchored	 down	 by	 chunks	 of	 rock.	 “Who	 lives	 in
that	estate?”
“A	man	named	Baruk,”	Sorry	answered.	“An	alchemist.”
He	scowled.	How	did	she	know	that?	“Are	you	saying	that	fat	little	man	is	this
Baruk?”
“No.	 He	 works	 for	 the	 alchemist.	 Not	 a	 servant.	 A	 spy,	 perhaps.	 His	 skills
involve	thievery,	and	he	possesses	.	.	.	talent.”
Whiskeyjack	looked	up.	“A	Seer?”
For	 some	 reason	 Sorry	 winced.	 The	 sergeant	 watched,	 bemused,	 as	 Sorry's
face	paled.	Damn,	he	wondered,	what	on	earth	is	going	on	with	this	girl?
“I	believe	so,”	she	said,	her	voice	trembling.
Whiskeyjack	straightened.	“All	right.	Follow	him.”
She	nodded	shakily,	then	slipped	into	the	crowd.
The	 sergeant	 rested	 his	 back	 against	 the	 wagon's	 sidewall.	 His	 expression
soured	as	he	studied	his	squad.	Trotts	was	swinging	his	pick	as	if	on	a	battlefield.
Stones	 flew	 everywhere.	 Passersby	 ducked,	 and	 cursed	 when	 ducking	 failed.
Hedge	 and	 Fiddler	 crouched	 behind	 a	 wheelbarrow,	 flinching	 each	 time	 the
Barghast's	 pick	 struck	 the	 street.	 Mallet	 stood	 a	 short	 distance	 away,	 directing
pedestrians	 to	 the	 other	 pavement.	 He	 no	 longer	 bellowed	 at	 the	 people,	 having
lost	his	voice	arguing	with	an	old	man	with	a	donkey	wobbling	under	an	enormous
basket	of	firewood.	The	bundles	now	lay	scattered	across	the	street—the	old	man


and	 the	 donkey	 nowhere	 to	 be	 seen—providing	 an	 effective	 barrier	 to	 wheeled
vehicles.
All	in	all,	Whiskeyjack	concluded,	everyone	with	him	had	assumed	the	role	of
heat-crazed	street	worker	with	a	facility	he	found	oddly	disturbing.
Hedge	and	Fiddler	had	acquired	the	wagon,	loaded	down	with	cobbles,	less
than	an	hour	after	their	midnight	landing	at	a	public	dock	on	the	Lakefront.	Exactly
how	 this	 had	 been	 accomplished,	 Whiskeyjack	 was	 afraid	 to	 ask.	 But	 it	 suited
their	plans	perfectly.	Something	nagged	at	the	back	of	Whiskeyjack's	mind	but	he
dismissed	 it.	 He	 was	 a	 soldier	 and	 a	 soldier	 followed	 orders.	 When	 the	 time
came,	there	would	be	chaos	at	every	major	intersection	of	streets	in	the	city.
“Planting	 mines	 ain't	 gonna	 be	 easy,”	 Fiddler	 had	 pointed	 out,	 “so	 we	 do	 it
right	in	front	of	everyone's	nose.	Road	repair.”
Whiskeyjack	 shook	 his	 head.	 True	 to	 Fiddler's	 prediction,	 no	 one	 had	 yet
questioned	them.	They	continued	ripping	up	streets	and	replacing	the	old	cobbles
with	Moranth	munitions	encased	in	fire-hardened	clay.	Was	everything	going	to	be
so	easy?
His	 thoughts	returned	 to	Sorry.	Not	likely.	 Quick	 Ben	 and	 Kalam	 had	 at	 last
convinced	 him	 that	 their	 half	 of	 the	 mission	 was	 better	 off	 without	 her.	 She'd
tagged	 along	 with	 his	 crew,	 eyes	 never	 still,	 but	 otherwise	 offering	 little	 in	 the
way	of	assistance.	He	admitted	to	feeling	some	relief	that	he'd	sent	her	off	on	that
fat	man's	trail.
But	 what	 had	 pulled	 a	 seventeen-year-old	 girl	 into	 the	 world	 of	 war?	 He
couldn't	understand	it—he	couldn't	get	past	her	youthfulness,	couldn't	see	beyond
to	the	cold,	murderous	killer	behind	those	dead	eyes.	As	much	as	he	told	his	squad
that	she	was	as	human	as	any	of	them,	the	doubts	grew	with	every	question	about
her	 that	 he	 could	 not	 answer.	 He	 knew	 almost	 nothing	 about	 her.	 The	 revelation
that	she	could	manage	a	fishing	boat	had	come	from	seemingly	nowhere.	And	here
in	Darujhistan	she'd	hardly	acted	like	a	girl	raised	in	a	fishing	village.	There	was
a	 natural	 poise	 about	 her,	 a	 measure	 of	 assurance	 more	 common	 to	 the	 higher,
educated	classes.	No	matter	where	she	was,	she	carried	herself	as	if	she	belonged
there.
Did	 that	 sound	 like	 a	 seventeen-year-old	 girl?	 No,	 but	 it	 seemed	 to	 match
Quick	Ben's	assertions,	and	that	galled	him.	How	else	to	match	her	with	that	icycold	woman	torturing	prisoners	outside	Nathilog?	He	could	look	at	her	and	part	of
him	 would	 say:	 “Young,	 not	 displeasing	 to	 the	 eye,	 a	 confidence	 that	 makes	 her
magnetic.”	 While	 another	 part	 of	 his	 mind	 snapped	 shut.	 Young?	 He'd	 hear	 his
own	 harsh,	 pained	 laugh.	 Oh,	 no,	 not	 this	 lass.	 She's	 old.	 She	 walked	 under	 a


blood-red	moon	in	the	dawn	of	time,	did	this	one.	Her	face	is	the	face	of	all	that
cannot	be	fathomed,	and	she's	looking	you	in	the	eye,	Whiskeyjack,	and	you'll
never	know	what	she's	thinking.
He	could	feel	sweat	drain	down	his	face	and	neck.	Nonsense.	That	part	of	his
mind	 lost	 itself	 to	 its	 own	 terror.	 It	 took	 the	 unknown	 and	 fashioned,	 in	 blind
desperation,	 a	 visage	 it	 could	 recognize.	 Despair,	 he	 told	 himself,	 always
demands	a	direction,	a	focus.	Find	the	direction	and	the	despair	goes	away.
Of	course,	it	wasn't	that	easy.	The	despair	he	felt	had	no	shape.	It	was	not	just
Sorry,	not	just	this	endless	war,	not	even	the	treachery	from	within	the	Empire.	He
had	nowhere	to	look	for	answers,	and	he	was	tired	of	asking	questions.
When	he	had	looked	upon	Sorry	at	Graydog,	the	source	of	his	horror	lay	in	the
unveiling	of	what	he	was	becoming:	a	killer	stripped	of	remorse,	armored	in	the
cold	iron	of	inhumanity,	freed	from	the	necessity	to	ask	questions,	to	seek	answers,
to	fashion	a	reasonable	life	like	an	island	in	a	sea	of	slaughter.
In	the	empty	eyes	of	this	child,	he'd	seen	the	withering	of	his	own	soul.	The
reflection	 had	 been	 unblemished,	 with	 no	 imperfections	 to	 challenge	 the	 truth	 of
what	he	saw.
The	sweat	running	down	his	back	beneath	the	jerkin	felt	hot	against	the	chill
that	gripped	him.	Whiskeyjack	lifted	a	trembling	hand	to	his	forehead.	In	the	days
and	nights	ahead,	people	would	die	by	his	command.	He'd	been	thinking	of	that	as
the	fruition	of	his	careful,	precise	planning—success	measured	by	the	ratio	of	the
enemy's	dead	to	his	own	losses.	The	city—its	busy,	jostling	multitudes	unceasing
in	their	lives	small	and	large,	cowardly	and	brave—no	more	than	a	gameboard,
and	 the	 game	 played	 solely	 for	 the	 benefit	 of	 others.	 He'd	 made	 his	 plans	 as	 if
nothing	of	himself	was	at	stake.	And	yet	his	friends	might	die—there,	he'd	finally
called	 them	 what	 they	 were—and	 the	 friends	 of	 others	 might	 die,	 and	 sons,
daughters,	parents.	The	roll-call	of	shattered	lives	seemed	unending.
Whiskeyjack	 pressed	 his	 back	 against	 the	 sidewall	 in	 an	 effort	 to	 steady	 his
reeling	 mind.	 Desperately,	 he	 lifted	 his	 gaze	 from	 the	 street.	 He	 saw	 a	 man	 at	 a
window	 on	 the	 second	 floor	 of	 the	 estate.	 The	 man	 was	 watching	 them,	 and	 his
hands	were	bright	red.
Shaken,	the	sergeant	looked	away.	He	bit	into	the	side	of	his	mouth	until	he	felt
a	 sharp	 stab	 of	 pain,	 then	 tasted	 blood.	 Concentrate,	 he	 told	 himself.	 Step	 back
from	that	chasm.	Concentrate,	or	you'll	die.	And	not	just	you,	but	also	your	squad.
They	 trust	 you	 to	 get	 them	 out	 of	 this.	 You've	 got	 to	 keep	 earning	 that	 trust.	 He
drew	 a	 deep	 breath	 through	 his	 nostrils,	 then	 turned	 to	 one	 side	 and	 spat	 a
mouthful	of	blood.	He	stared	down	at	the	red-slicked	cobble.	“There,”	he	hissed.


“It's	easy	to	look	at	it,	isn't	it?”
He	heard	footsteps	and	looked	up	to	see	Hedge	and	Fiddler	arrive.	Both	men
wore	troubled	expressions.
“You	 all	 right,	 Sarge?”	 Fiddler	 asked	 quietly.	 Behind	 the	 two	 saboteurs,
Mallet	 approached,	 his	 gaze	 calculating	 and	 fixed	 on	 Whiskeyjack's	 white,
sweatsoaked	face.
The	sergeant	grimaced.	“We're	behind	schedule.	How	much	longer?”
Their	faces	smeared	with	white	dust	and	sweat,	the	two	men	looked	at	each
other,	then	Hedge	answered,	“Three	hours.”
“We	 decided	 on	 seven	 mines,”	 Fiddler	 said.	 “Four	 Sparkers,	 two	 Flamers,
and	one	Cusser.”
“Will	that	bring	down	some	of	these	buildings?”	Whiskeyjack	asked,	avoiding
Mallet's	eyes.
“Sure.	 No	 better	 way	 to	 block	 an	 intersection.”	 Fiddler	 grinned	 at	 his
companion.
“You	got	one	in	particular	you	want	dropped?”	Hedge	inquired.
“The	estate	behind	you	is	an	alchemist's.”
“Right,”	Hedge	said.	“That	should	light	the	sky	all	right.”
“You've	 got	 two	 and	 a	 half	 hours,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.	 “Then	 it's	 on	 to	 the
Majesty	Hill	crossroads.”
Mallet	stepped	close.	“Another	headache?”	he	asked	softly.
Whiskeyjack	closed	his	eyes,	then	gave	a	sharp	nod.
The	healer	raised	a	hand	and	passed	it	over	the	sergeant's	brow.	“Just	easing
it	a	little,”	he	said.
The	sergeant	grinned	ruefully.	“This	is	getting	old,	Mallet.	You're	even	using
the	same	words.”	A	cool	numbness	flowed	through	his	thoughts.
Mallet's	face	was	drawn.	He	lowered	his	hand.	“When	we	have	time	I'll	find
the	source,	Whiskeyjack.”
“Right.”	The	sergeant	smiled.	“When	we	have	time.”
“Hope	Kal	and	Quick	are	doing	OK,”	Mallet	said,	turning	to	watch	the	street
traffic.	“You	sent	Sorry	off?”
“Yes.	We're	on	our	own.	They	know	where	to	find	us,	all	three	of	them.”	He
glanced	 up	 at	 the	 estate	 window.	 The	 man	 with	 the	 red	 hands	 was	 still	 there,
though	 now	 he	 was	 studying	 the	 distant	 rooftops.	 A	 cloud	 of	 dust	 rose	 between
them,	and	Whiskeyjack	returned	his	attention	to	the	city	map,	where	every	major


intersection,	the	barracks,	and	Majesty	Hill	had	been	circled	in	red.	“Mallet?”
“Sarge?”
“Bit	the	inside	of	my	cheek	again.”
The	healer	stepped	close,	once	more	raising	his	hand.
Crokus	Younghand	strode	south	on	Trallit's	Walk.	The	first	signs	of	the	upcoming
Gedderone	 Fête	 had	 appeared.	 Dyed	 banners	 hung	 from	 clotheslines	 over	 the
street,	painted	flowers	and	strips	of	bark	framed	doorways,	and	bushels	of	dried
weeds	had	been	tacked	to	walls	at	every	crossing.
Outlanders	 already	 filled	 the	 streets,	 Gadrobi	 herders,	 Rhivi	 traders,	 Catlin
weavers—a	mob	of	sweaty,	shouting,	excited	people.	Animal	smells	mixed	with
human,	making	the	narrower	alleys	so	redolent	as	to	be	almost	impassable,	which
in	turn	crowded	the	main	thoroughfares	even	more.
In	 past	 years	 Crokus	 had	 reveled	 in	 the	 celebration,	 pushing	 through	 the
midnight	 crowds	 and	 filling	 his	 own	 pockets	 by	 emptying	 those	 around	 him.
During	 the	 Fête,	 worries	 of	 the	 Malazan	 Empire's	 exploits	 in	 the	 far	 north
disappeared	 for	 a	 time.	 His	 uncle	 always	 smiled	 at	 that,	 saying	 the	 turn	 of	 the
season	gave	the	efforts	of	humanity	their	proper	perspective.	“The	mewling,	petty
acts,”	he'd	say,	“of	a	short-lived	and	short-sighted	species,	Crokus,	can	do	nothing
to	mar	the	Great	Cycles	of	Life.”
As	 he	 walked	 home	 Mammot's	 words	 returned	 to	 him	 now.	 He	 had	 always
looked	 upon	 his	 uncle	 as	 a	 wise,	 if	 slightly	 ineffectual,	 old	 man.	 Increasingly,
however,	he	found	himself	troubled	by	Mammot's	observations.
Celebrating	 Gedderone's	 Rite	 of	 Spring	 shouldn't	 be	 an	 excuse	 to	 avoid	 the
pressures	of	reality.	It	wasn't	just	a	harmless	escape:	it	was	a	means	of	delaying
the	probable	and	making	it	inevitable.	We	could	dance	in	the	streets	all	year	long,
he	 scowled	 to	 himself,	 to	 a	 thousand	 Great	 Cycles,	 and	 with	 the	 same	 certainty
reserved	for	the	coming	and	going	of	seasons	the	Malazan	Empire	would	march
through	 our	 gates.	 They'd	 end	 the	 dance	 with	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 sword,	 being
industrious,	 disciplined	 people,	 impatient	 with	 useless	 expenditures	 of	 energy—
grimly	short-sighted.
He	came	to	a	tenement	and,	nodding	at	the	pipe-smoking	old	woman	sitting	on
the	 steps,	 went	 inside.	 The	 hallway	 was	 empty,	 the	 usual	 crowd	 of	 children	 no
doubt	 outside	 playing	 in	 the	 streets,	 and	 a	 calming	 domestic	 murmur	 drifted	 out
from	behind	closed	doors.	He	climbed	the	creaking	staircase	to	the	first	floor.
Outside	Mammot's	door	the	scholar's	pet	winged	monkey	hovered,	scratching


and	pulling	desperately	at	the	latch.	It	ignored	Crokus	until	he	arrived	to	push	it
aside,	then	it	squealed	and	flew	in	circles	around	his	head.
“Being	a	pain	again,	eh?”	Crokus	said	to	the	creature,	waving	a	hand	as	it	flew
too	 close	 and	 ended	 up	 snarled	 in	 his	 hair.	 Tiny	 humanlike	 hands	 gripped	 his
scalp.	“All	right,	Moby,”	he	said,	relenting,	and	opened	the	door.
Inside,	 Mammot	 was	 preparing	 herbal	 tea.	 Without	 turning	 he	 asked,	 “Tea,
Crokus?	And	as	for	that	little	monster	who's	probably	riding	your	head,	tell	him
I've	had	just	about	enough	of	him	today.”
Moby	 sniffed	 indignantly	 and	 flapped	 over	 to	 the	 scholar's	 desk,	 where	 he
landed	with	a	belly-flop,	scattering	papers	to	the	floor.	He	chirped.
Sighing,	Mammot	turned	with	the	tray	in	his	hands.	His	watery	eyes	fixed	on
Crokus.	“You	look	tired,	lad.”
Crokus	 slumped	 into	 the	 less	 ragged	 of	 the	 two	 chairs	 occupying	 the	 room.
“Yes.	Tired,	and	in	a	dark	mood.”
“My	tea	will	do	its	usual	wonders,”	Mammot	said,	smiling.
Crokus	grunted,	not	looking	up.	“Maybe.	Maybe	not.”
Mammot	 stepped	 forward	 and	 laid	 the	 tray	 on	 a	 small	 table	 between	 the
chairs.	He	sat	down	with	a	soft	groan.	“As	you	know,	I	possess	few	moral	qualms
about	 your	 chosen	 profession,	 Crokus,	 since	 I	 question	 rights	 of	 any	 kind,
including	ownership.	Even	privileges	demand	responsibility,	as	I've	always	said,
and	 the	 privilege	 of	 ownership	 demands	 that	 the	 owner	 be	 responsible	 for
protecting	 his	 or	 her	 claim.	 My	 only	 concern,	 of	 course,	 is	 for	 risks	 you	 must
perforce	take.”	Mammot	leaned	forward	and	poured	tea.	“Lad,	a	thief	must	be	sure
of	one	thing—his	concentration.	Distractions	are	dangerous.”
Crokus	glanced	up	at	his	uncle.	“What	have	you	been	writing	all	these	years?”
he	asked	suddenly,	gesturing	at	the	desk.
Surprised,	Mammot	picked	up	his	cup	and	sat	back.	“Well!	A	genuine	interest
in	 education,	 then?	 Finally?	 As	 I've	 said	 before,	 Crokus,	 you	 possess	 the
intelligence	to	go	so	far.	And	while	I'm	but	a	humble	man	of	letters,	my	word	will
open	to	you	many	doors	in	the	city.	Indeed,	even	the	City	Council	is	not	beyond
your	reach,	if	you	would	choose	such	a	direction.	Discipline,	lad,	the	very	same
requirement	you've	mastered	as	a	thief.”
A	 crafty	 expression	 glittered	 in	 Crokus's	 gaze	 as	 it	 held	 on	 Mammot.	 “How
long	would	it	take,”	he	asked	quietly,	“to	become	known	in	such	circles?”
“Well,”	said	Mammot,	“it	is	the	learning	that	matters,	of	course.”
“Of	 course.”	 In	 Crokus's	 mind,	 however,	 there	 rose	 the	 image	 of	 a	 sleeping


maiden.
Mammot	 blew	 on	 his	 drink.	 “With	 full-time	 studies,	 and	 your	 youthful
eagerness,	I	would	hazard	a	year,	perhaps	more,	perhaps	less.	Is	there	a	need	for
haste?”
“Just	youthful	eagerness,	I	suppose.	In	any	case,	you	haven't	answered	me	yet.
What	are	you	writing,	Uncle?”
“Ah.”	 Mammot	 glanced	 at	 his	 desk,	 raising	 an	 eyebrow	 at	 Moby,	 who	 had
opened	an	inkwell	and	was	drinking	from	it.	“The	history	of	Darujhistan,”	he	said.
“I	 am	 just	 beginning	 the	 fifth	 volume,	 which	 opens	 with	 the	 reign	 of	 Ektalm,
second	to	last	of	the	Tyrant	Kings.”
Crokus	blinked.	“Who?”
Smiling,	 Mammot	 sipped	 his	 tea.	 “Usurper	 of	 Letastte	 and	 succeeded	 by	 his
daughter,	Sandenay,	who	brought	on	the	Rising	Time	and	with	it	the	end	of	the	age
of	tyrants.”
“Oh,	right.”
“Crokus,	if	you're	serious	about	all	this,	Darujhistan's	history	is	where	we'll
begin	in	the	lessons,	but	that	doesn't	mean	starting	at	volume	five.	It	means	starting
at	the	very	beginning.”
Crokus	nodded.	“Born	on	a	rumor,”	he	said.
At	the	desk	Moby	squawked,	then	coughed.	Mammot	shot	him	a	glance,	then
swung	 his	 attention	 back	 to	 Crokus,	 expression	 veiled	 as	 he	 replied,	 “Yes,	 lad.
Darujhistan	 was	 born	 on	 a	 rumor.”	 He	 hesitated.	 “You've	 heard	 that	 saying
elsewhere?	Recently?”
“Someone	mentioned	it,”	Crokus	said	casually.	“Can't	recall	who,	though.”	He
could,	in	fact.	It	had	been	spoken	by	the	assassin,	Rallick	Nom.
“Do	you	know	what	it	means?”
Crokus	shook	his	head.
Mammot	 leaned	 back.	 “Drink	 your	 tea,	 my	 lad.”	 The	 old	 man	 paused,	 then
began,	 “In	 the	 Early	 Cycles	 in	 this	 Realm,	 three	 great	 peoples	 struggled	 for
dominion,	none	of	them	human	as	we	would	know	human.	Bowing	out	early	in	the
struggle	 were	 the	 Forkrul	 Assail,	 or	 the	 Krussail	 as	 they	 are	 now	 known.	 Not
through	 weakness,	 but	 .	 .	 .	 well,	 disinterest.	 The	 remaining	 two	 peoples	 warred
endlessly.	 Eventually	 one	 fell,	 for	 they	 were	 a	 race	 of	 individuals,	 battling	 as
much	 among	 themselves	 as	 against	 their	 racial	 enemies.	 They	 were	 called	 the
Jaghut,	though	the	term	has	degenerated	these	days	to	Jhag,	or	Shurl.	While	losers
in	the	war,	they	did	not	disappear	entirely—it's	said	some	Jaghut	survive	to	this


day,	though,	thankfully,	not	on	Genabackis.
“So,”	Mammot	cupped	his	hands	around	his	teacup,	“Darujhistan	was	born	on
a	 rumor.	 Among	 the	 indigenous	 Gadrobi	 hill	 tribes	 survived	 the	 legend	 that	 a
Jaghut's	barrow	lay	somewhere	in	the	hills.	Now,	the	Jaghut	were	possessors	of
great	 magic,	 creators	 of	 secret	 Warrens	 and	 items	 of	 power.	 Over	 time	 the
Gadrobi	legend	made	its	way	beyond	the	hills,	into	the	Genabackan	north	and	the
Catlin	south,	to	kingdoms	since	crumbled	to	dust	in	the	east	and	west.	In	any	case,
searchers	 came	 to	 the	 hills,	 at	 first	 a	 trickle	 then	 hordes—entire	 tribes	 led	 by
power-hungry	shamans	and	warlocks.	Every	hillside	was	laced	with	trenches	and
bore-holes.	 From	 the	 camps	 and	 shantytowns,	 from	 the	 thousands	 of	 treasureseekers	arriving	each	spring,	a	city	was	born.”
“Darujhistan,”	Crokus	said.
“Yes.	The	barrow	was	never	found,	and	the	rumor	has	long	since	dwindled—
few	are	even	aware	of	it	these	days,	and	those	who	are	know	better	than	to	resume
the	search.”
“Why?”
Mammot	frowned.	“Rarely	does	a	Jaghut	construction	appear	in	the	hands	of	a
human,	 but	 it	 has	 happened,	 and	 the	 consequences	 have	 inevitably	 been
catastrophic.”	The	old	man's	frown	deepened.	“The	lesson	is	clear	for	those	who
would	choose	to	recognize	it.”
Crokus	thought	for	a	time.	“So	the	Krussail	vanished,	the	Jhag	were	defeated.
What	 happened	 to	 the	 third	 people,	 then?	 The	 ones	 who	 won?	 Why	 aren't	 they
here	instead	of	us?”
Mammot	opened	his	mouth	to	reply,	then	stopped,	reconsidering.
Crokus's	 eyes	 narrowed.	 He	 wondered	 what	 Mammot	 had	 been	 about	 to
reveal,	and	why	he'd	chosen	not	to	reveal	it.
Mammot	set	down	his	cup.	“No	one	is	certain	what	happened	to	them,	Crokus,
or	how	they	became	what	they	are	today.	They	exist,	sort	of,	and	are	known,	to	all
who	have	faced	the	Malazan	Empire,	as	the	T'lan	Imass.”
Sorry	pushed	through	the	crowd,	struggling	to	keep	the	fat	man	within	sight.	It	was
not	 that	 he	 was	 difficult	 to	 follow,	 but	 the	 girl	 was	 struggling	 against	 a	 storm
within	her	head,	which	had	been	triggered	by	a	single	word	uttered	by	Sergeant
Whiskeyjack.
Seer.
It	had	felt	as	if	a	dark,	compacted	thing	in	her	brain	had	burst	open	with	that


word,	and	now	warred	against	all	that	surrounded	it.	Though	it	had	initially	come
upon	her	with	a	force	that	seemed	almost	overwhelming,	she	could	now	sense	its
waning.	 Whatever	 it	 fought	 was	 winning	 the	 battle.	 Yet,	 faintly,	 she	 thought	 she
could	hear	the	weeping	of	a	child.
“I	am	Cotillion,”	she	heard	herself	murmur,	“Patron	of	Assassins,	known	to	all
as	the	Rope	of	Shadow.”	The	weeping	grew	fainter.	“The	Seer	is	dead.”
A	part	of	her	mind	cried	out	at	that,	while	another	asked,	What	Seer?
“I	 am	 within,	 yet	 apart.	 I	 stand	 at	 Shadowthrone's	 side,	 and	 he	 is	 named
Ammanas	and	he	is	the	Lord	of	Shadows.	I	am	here	as	the	hand	of	death.”	Sorry
smiled	and	nodded	to	herself,	once	again	in	control.	Whatever	had	challenged	that
was	now	gone,	once	more	buried	deep	inside.	The	luxury	of	weeping,	of	anger,	of
fear	did	not	belong	to	her,	had	never	belonged	to	her.
She	drew	a	deep	breath,	and	her	senses	narrowed	to	the	task	at	hand.	The	fat
little	man	was	dangerous.	The	how	and	why	of	this	remained	to	be	answered,	but
every	 power	 hissed	 in	 alarm	 each	 time	 she	 caught	 a	 glimpse	 of	 him	 amid	 the
crowds.	And	all	that	is	dangerous,	she	told	herself,	must	die.
Beneath	the	Second	Tier	Wall	in	the	Lakefront,	the	market	along	Salt	Walk	was	at
its	usual	frenzied	peak.	The	sour	heat,	building	all	day	in	the	cluttered	avenues	and
alleys,	 was	 at	 its	 height.	 Sweating,	 exhausted	 merchants	 screamed	 curses	 at
competitors	 over	 the	 heads	 of	 customers.	 Fights	 broke	 out	 every	 few	 minutes	 in
one	 or	 another	 area,	 the	 turgid	 jostle	 of	 the	 crowds	 pulling	 the	 contestants	 apart
long	before	the	arrival	of	ill-tempered	guards.
Squatting	on	their	grass	mats,	local	Rhivi	plainsmen	called	out	in	their	nasal
singsong	endless	descriptions	of	fine	horseflesh.	At	intersections,	Gadrobi	herders
stood	 at	 tethering	 poles	 surrounded	 by	 braying	 goats	 and	 sheep,	 while	 others
pushed	wooden	carts	burdened	with	cheeses	and	clay	jugs	filled	with	fermented
milk.	 Daru	 fishermen	 walked	 with	 spears	 of	 smoked	 fish	 bobbing	 above	 their
heads	 streaming	 with	 buzzing	 flies.	 Catlin	 weavers	 sat	 behind	 waist-high
fortresses	 comprised	 of	 bolts	 of	 brightly	 dyed	 cloth.	 Gredfalan	 farmers	 stood	 in
their	 wagons	 selling	 the	 season's	 bitter	 fruits	 and	 sweet	 tubers.	 Woodsellers
forced	 their	 ox-drawn	 wagons	 through	 the	 crowds,	 their	 children	 clinging	 to	 the
stacked	 bundles	 of	 wood	 like	 monkeys.	 Dark-robed	 men	 and	 women	 from
Callows	 sang	 out	 the	 clashing	 claims	 of	 their	 Thousand	 Sects	 of	 D'rek,	 each
holding	aloft	their	sect's	particular	icon.
Kruppe	 strode	 down	 the	 market	 street	 with	 a	 jaunty	 step,	 his	 arms	 waving
about	 seemingly	 of	 their	 own	 accord.	 Such	 movement,	 however,	 was	 no	 mere


affectation:	 it	 disguised	 the	 gesturing	 required	 for	 casting	 spells.	 As	 a	 thief,	 it
appeared	 that	 Kruppe's	 tastes	 did	 not	 demand	 much.	 He	 stole	 food—fruit	 and
sweets,	 mostly—and	 it	 was	 to	 such	 desires	 of	 the	 palate	 that	 he	 had	 honed	 his
skills	of	magic.
As	he	walked,	the	chaotic	dance	of	his	arms	was	timed	to	catch	apples	flying
from	 baskets,	 pastries	 leaping	 from	 trays,	 chocolate-covered	 cherries	 plucked
from	 pans,	 all	 moving	 so	 swiftly	 as	 to	 be	 no	 more	 than	 blurs	 dodging	 bodies	 in
their	path.	Inside	the	wide,	flopping	sleeves	of	his	coat,	pockets	had	been	sewn,
some	 large,	 some	 tiny.	 All	 that	 entered	 Kruppe's	 hands	 disappeared	 up	 his
sleeves,	tucked	into	 appropriately	sized	pockets.	He	strode	on,	a	connoisseur	 of
edible	delicacies	of	a	hundred	cultures,	an	expression	of	sated	contentment	on	his
round	face.
Eventually,	 after	 a	 long,	 circuitous	 route,	 Kruppe	 arrived	 at	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn.
He	paused	on	the	steps	and	chatted	with	a	lone	thug	standing	there,	removing	from
a	 sleeve	 a	 glazed	 honeyball.	 Then,	 taking	 a	 bite	 from	 the	 sweetmeat,	 he	 pushed
open	the	door	and	disappeared	inside.
Half	 a	 block	 down	 the	 street,	 Sorry	 propped	 herself	 against	 the	 pitted	 wall	 of	 a
tenement	 and	 crossed	 her	 arms.	 The	 fat	 little	 man	 was	 a	 wonder.	 She'd	 seen
enough	of	his	exquisite	ballet	to	recognize	him	as	an	Adept.	Yet	she	felt	confused,
for	 the	 mind	 behind	 the	 man's	 façade	 hinted	 at	 capacities	 far	 greater	 than	 those
he'd	shown.	Confirmation	that	here	indeed	was	a	dangerous	creature.
From	where	she	stood	she	studied	the	inn.	The	man	on	the	steps	seemed	to	be
screening	everyone	entering,	but	she	couldn't	detect	any	gesture	that	might	indicate
a	 thieves'	 cant.	 The	 conversations	 were	 brief,	 usually	 of	 mutual	 recognition.
Nevertheless	she	intended	to	enter	the	inn.	It	was	the	kind	of	place	Whiskeyjack
had	 sent	 Kalam	 and	 Quick	 Ben	 to	 find—a	 haunt	 of	 thieves,	 strongarms,	 and
assassins.	Why	the	sergeant	wanted	to	find	such	a	place	was	a	detail	that	hadn't
been	 shared	 with	 her.	 The	 wizard	 and	 Kalam	 had	 suspicions	 about	 her,	 and	 she
sensed	that	their	arguments	were	swaying	Whiskeyjack.	If	they	could,	they'd	keep
her	out	of	everything,	but	she	didn't	intend	that	to	happen.
Pushing	 herself	 from	 the	 wall,	 Sorry	 crossed	 the	 street	 and	 approached	 the
Phoenix	 Inn.	 Overhead,	 the	 afternoon	 had	 waned	 into	 a	 thick,	 heavy	 dusk,	 the
smell	of	rain	in	the	air.	As	she	neared	the	front	steps,	the	thug's	attention	focused
on	her.	The	man	grinned.	“Following	Kruppe	around,	eh?”	He	wagged	his	head.
“Girls	 shouldn't	 carry	 swords	 anyway.	 Hope	 you're	 not	 planning	 to	 go	 inside.
With	a	sword?	Uh,	uh.	Not	unescorted,	anyway.”


Sorry	 stepped	 back.	 She	 glanced	 up	 and	 down	 the	 street.	 The	 nearest
pedestrian	was	over	a	street	away,	heading	in	the	opposite	direction.	She	closed
her	hands	around	the	edges	of	her	half-cloak	and	drew	it	around	her	waist.	“Let
me	pass,”	she	said	quietly.	How	had	that	fat	man	spotted	her?
The	 man	 leaned	 on	 the	 railing.	 “All	 this	 is	 just	 begging	 for	 some	 kind	 of
conversation,	 friendly-like,”	 he	 said.	 “So	 how	 about	 you	 and	 me	 go	 back	 to	 the
alley.	 You	 lay	 down	 your	 sword	 and	 I'll	 be	 gentle.	 Otherwise,	 things	 could	 get
rough,	and	what	would	be	the	fun	of—?”
Sorry's	 left	 hand	 darted	 out.	 A	 dagger	 flashed	 between	 them.	 The	 blade
entered	 the	 man's	 right	 eye	 and	 then	 his	 brain.	 He	 jerked	 back	 over	 the	 rail	 and
fell,	 landing	 with	 a	 heavy	 thud	 beside	 the	 steps.	 Sorry	 walked	 up	 to	 him	 and
retrieved	 her	 dagger.	 She	 paused,	 adjusting	 the	 belt	 that	 carried	 her	 duelling
sword,	 then	 checked	 the	 street.	 Seeing	 no	 one	 close	 enough	 to	 have	 noticed
anything	awry	in	the	deepening	gloom,	she	climbed	the	steps	and	entered	the	inn.
She	was	stopped	before	she'd	taken	her	second	step,	coming	face-to-face	with
a	moaning	boy	hanging	upside	down.	Two	rough-looking	women	were	taking	turns
to	swing	him	back	and	forth.	Every	time	he	tried	to	reach	up	to	the	rope	tied	to	his
feet	he	earned	a	knock	on	the	head.	One	of	the	women	grinned	at	Sorry.
“Hey,	now!”	the	woman	said,	grasping	Sorry's	arm	as	she	walked	by.
Sorry	turned	a	cold	eye	on	the	woman.	“What?”
The	woman	leaned	close,	her	breath	a	mist	of	beer	as	she	whispered,	“You	get
in	trouble,	you	just	call	for	Irilta	and	Meese.	That's	us,	right?”
“Thank	you.”
Sorry	resumed	her	walk.	She'd	already	seen	the	fat	little	man—what	had	the
thug	called	him?	Kruppe.	He'd	seated	himself	at	a	table	near	the	far	wall,	beneath
the	gallery.	Through	the	crowded	room	Sorry	saw	a	space	open	at	the	bar,	where
she	might	take	position	and	observe.	She	pushed	forward.
Since	Kruppe	evidently	knew	of	her,	she	decided	to	make	no	effort	in	hiding
her	 attention.	 Often,	 that	 was	 exactly	 the	 kind	 of	 pressure	 that	 cracked	 a	 man's
will.	 In	 a	 war	 of	 patience,	 Sorry	 smiled	 inwardly,	 the	 mortal	 is	 ever	 at	 a
disadvantage.
Crokus	 turned	 the	 corner	 and	 approached	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn.	 The	 course	 Mammot
had	set	for	him	was	intimidating,	the	education	extending	far	beyond	books,	to	the
etiquette	 of	 court	 manners,	 the	 functions	 of	 various	 officials,	 bloodlines	 and
particular	 quirks	 among	 certain	 dignitaries—but	 he'd	 vowed	 to	 himself	 he'd


follow	 it	 through.	 His	 goal	 was	 one	 day	 to	 stand	 before	 that	 D'Arle	 maiden,
awaiting	a	formal	introduction.
Something	 in	 him	 mocked	 the	 image.	 There	 stands	 Crokus,	 the	 scholar,	 the
sophisticated	 young	 promise,	 the	 thief.	 It	 was	 all	 too	 absurd.	 Yet	 it	 dogged	 him,
steeled	his	resolve.	He'd	come	to	it	one	day	soon.	Until	then,	however,	there	were
other	matters	to	attend	to,	things	that	needed	redressing.
As	he	came	up	to	the	inn's	steps	he	saw	a	huddled	shadow	beneath	the	railing.
Cautiously	Crokus	moved	closer.
As	 Sorry	reached	the	 bar	 the	 door	 slammed	open	on	 the	 other	 side	 of	the	 room.
She	turned	with	everyone	else	to	see	a	young,	black-haired	man	standing	there.
“Someone's	murdered	Chert!”	the	man	shouted.	“He's	been	knifed!”
Half	 a	 dozen	 patrons	 surged	 to	 the	 door,	 pushing	 past	 the	 young	 man	 and
disappearing	outside.
Sorry	faced	the	bar	again.	Catching	the	barman's	eye	she	said,	“Gredfalan	ale,
please,	in	a	pewter	tankard.”
The	woman	Irilta	had	called	Meese	appeared	beside	her,	thumping	two	broad
forearms	 on	 the	 bar	 as	 she	 leaned	 forward.	 “Attend	 the	 lady,	 Scurve,”	 Meese
growled.	“She	got	taste.”
Meese	dipped	her	head	close	to	Sorry's.	“Good	taste	all	round.	Chert	was	a
pig.”
Sorry	stiffened.	Her	hands	slipped	down	beneath	her	cloak.
“Easy,	 girl,”	 Meese	 said,	 in	 a	 low	 tone.	 “We	 ain't	 wagging	 tongues.	 Around
here,	y'	take	care	of	yourselves	first,	and	I	don't	want	no	knife	in	my	eye.	We	said
we'd	take	care	of	you,	didn't	we?”
The	ale	arrived,	as	ordered.	Sorry	raised	a	hand	and	closed	it	on	the	tankard's
handle.	“You	don't	want	to	take	care	of	me,	Meese,”	she	said	quietly.
Another	person	arrived	on	Meese's	other	side.	Glancing	at	him,	Sorry	saw	that
it	 was	 the	 black-haired	 youth,	 his	 face	 pale.	 “Dammit,	 Meese,”	 he	 hissed,	 “I'm
having	a	really	bad	day.”
Meese	chuckled	and	draped	an	arm	over	his	shoulders.	“Scurve,	serve	us	up	a
couple	of	them	Gredfalan	ales.	Crokus	here's	earned	Darujhistan's	best.”	Meese
turned	her	head	and	bent	close	to	Sorry	again.	“Next	time,”	she	whispered,	“you
don't	want	to	show	that	kind	of	breeding.	Not	around	here,	anyway.”
Sorry	 frowned	 down	 at	 her	 drink.	 She'd	 been	 careless,	 ordering	 the	 city's
best.	Then	she	took	a	mouthful.	“That's	fine,”	she	said.	“Fine	indeed.”


Meese	grinned,	nudging	Crokus.	“The	lady	likes	it	just	fine.”
Crokus	leaned	forward,	offering	Sorry	a	weary	but	warm	smile.	From	outside
came	the	klaxon	of	the	Guard.
Scurve	served	up	the	two	ales.
Sorry	 watched	 Crokus's	 gaze	 move	 down	 her	 body,	 then	 stop.	 The	 youth's
smile	tightened,	his	face	whitening	even	more	than	before.	As	the	tankard	was	set
before	him,	Crokus	averted	his	eyes	and	reached	for	it.
“Pay	up	before	you	drink	that,	Crokus,”	Scurve	muttered.	“You're	getting	to	be
just	as	bad	as	Kruppe.”
Crokus	reached	into	his	pocket	and	pulled	out	a	handful	of	coins.	As	he	tried
to	 count	 them	 some	 slipped	 between	 his	 fingers	 and	 bounced	 on	 the	 bar.	 Of	 the
three	 that	 fell,	 two	 clattered	 briefly	 then	 stopped.	 The	 third	 coin	 spun,	 and
continued	spinning.	Sorry's	eyes	swung	to	it,	as	did	Scurve's	and	Meese's.	Crokus
reached	 for	 it,	 then	 hesitated.	 The	 coin	 was	 still	 spinning,	 its	 momentum
unchanged.
Sorry	stared	at	the	coin,	feeling	echoes	of	power	slam	into	her	skull	like	ocean
waves.	From	within,	all	at	once,	came	an	answering	surge.	Scurve	shouted	as	the
coin	skidded	across	the	bar,	bounced	once	high	into	the	air,	then	clattered	to	a	stop
directly	in	front	of	Crokus.
No	one	spoke.	Beyond	their	small	ring	no	one	else	had	witnessed	the	event.
Crokus	 thrust	 his	 hand	 forward	 and	 collected	 the	 coin.	 “Not	 this	 one,”	 he
grated.
“Fine,”	 Scurve	 answered,	 in	 a	 similar,	 hoarse	 voice.	 He	 reached	 shaking
hands	to	gather	in	the	other	coins	Crokus	had	laid	on	the	bar.
Beneath	 the	 counter,	 Sorry	 brushed	 her	 hand	 against	 her	 dagger's	 hilt	 and
scabbard.	It	came	away	wet.	So,	Crokus	had	seen	the	blood.	She	would	have	to
kill	him.	Only,	her	frown	deepened,	she	knew	she	wouldn't.
“Crokus,	my	boy!”	came	a	shout	from	under	the	gallery.
Meese	 sneered	 in	 that	 direction.	 “The	 flopping	 fish	 himself,”	 she	 muttered.
“Kruppe	calls,	lad.”
Crokus	 snorted,	 having	 returned	 the	 coin	 to	 his	 pocket.	 He	 picked	 up	 his
tankard.	“Later,	Meese.”
So,	 she'd	 found	 Oponn's	 man—as	 easily	 as	 that.	 And	 he	 was	 connected	 to
Kruppe,	somehow.	This	was	almost	too	simple.	It	made	her	suspicious.
“A	likely	lad,”	Meese	said.	“Me	and	Irilta,	we	look	out	for	him,	right?”
Sorry	leaned	against	the	bar,	her	eyes	on	the	tankard	in	her	hand.	She'd	have	to


play	 this	 very	 carefully.	 That	 burst	 of	 Shadow	 sorcery,	 responding	 to	 the	 Coin's
influence,	had	been	entirely	instinctive.	“Right,	Meese,”	she	said.	“No	worries	on
that	count.	OK?”
Meese	 sighed.	 “OK.	 Let's	 try	 for	 the	 cheap	 stuff	 now.	 Scurve?	 Daru	 beer,	 if
you	please.	Earthenware,	if	you	have	it.”
Crouched	against	 the	 Second	 Tier	Wall	on	 the	Lakefront	 side	was	Quip's	 Bar,	a
common	haunt	of	shipmen	and	fisher-hands.	The	bar's	walls	were	cut	sandstone,
and	 over	 time	 the	 whole	 edifice	 had	 developed	 a	 backward	 lean,	 as	 if
withdrawing	 from	 the	 front	 street.	 Quip's	 now	 sagged	 against	 the	 Second	 Tier
Wall,	 as	 did	 the	 adjoining	 squatter	 shacks	 constructed	 mostly	 of	 driftwood	 and
hull	planks	washed	ashore	from	the	occasional	wreck	out	on	Mole's	Reef.
Dusk	brought	a	light	rain	to	Darujhistan,	the	mists	crawling	in	from	the	water
and	 onto	 the	 shore.	 Far	 out	 over	 the	 lake	 lightning	 flashed,	 but	 too	 distant	 for
thunder	to	be	heard.
Kalam	emerged	from	Quip's	Bar	just	as	a	local	Grayface	brought	his	burning
pitch-stick	to	a	nearby	gaslight,	having	moments	earlier	opened	the	copper	valves.
The	lamp	ignited	in	a	flash	of	blue	flame	that	quickly	evened	out.	Kalam	paused
outside	the	bar	to	watch	the	odd,	gray-robed	man	continue	on	down	the	street.	He
squinted	 skyward,	 then	 moved	 up	 the	 street.	 He	 came	 to	 the	 last	 squatter	 shack,
this	one	abutting	a	peculiar	jag	in	the	tier	wall,	and	entered.
Quick	 Ben	 looked	up	 from	 his	cross-legged	position	 in	 the	 center	of	 the	 dirt
floor.	“Any	luck?”
“No,”	Kalam	said.	“The	Guild's	gone	to	ground—why,	I've	no	idea.”	He	went
to	the	far	wall	and	sat	down	on	his	bedroll.	He	leaned	back	against	the	ancient,
pitted	stone	and	eyed	his	comrade.	“You	think	maybe	the	City	Council's	moved	to
take	out	the	local	assassins?”
Quick	Ben's	gaze	glittered	in	the	gloom.	“You	mean,	anticipating	we'd	try	to
make	contact?”
Kalam	looked	away.	“I	doubt	they're	idiots.	They	must	know	it's	the	Malazan
way.	Offer	the	Guild	a	contract	it	can't	refuse,	then	sit	back	and	watch	the	rulers
drop	 like	 headless	 flies.	 Whiskeyjack	 suggested	 the	 plan.	 Dujek	 OK'd	 it.	 Those
two	were	talking	the	old	Emperor's	language	there,	Quick.	The	old	man	must	be
laughing	in	the	Abyss	right	now.”
The	wizard	shivered.	“An	unpleasant	image.”
Shrugging,	 Kalam	 continued,	 “It's	 all	 academic,	 anyway,	 if	 we	 can't	 find	 a


local	assassin.	Wherever	they	are,	it's	not	in	Lakefront	District,	I'd	swear	to	that.
The	only	name	I	picked	up	that's	got	mystery	around	it	is	someone	named	the	Eel.
Not	an	assassin,	though.	Something	else.”
“Where	next,	then?”	Quick	Ben	asked.	“Gadrobi	District?”
“No.	Just	a	bunch	of	farmers	and	herders	there.	Hood	knows,	the	smell	alone
coming	 from	 that	 place	 is	 enough	 to	 cross	 it	 off	 the	 list.	 We'll	 try	 Daru,	 starting
tomorrow.”	Kalam	hesitated.	“What	about	your	side	of	things?”
Quick	 Ben	 bowed	 his	 head.	 When	 he	 answered	 it	 was	 a	 faint	 whisper.
“Almost	ready.”
“Whiskeyjack	nearly	choked	when	he	heard	your	proposal.	So	did	I.	You'll	be
walking	into	the	viper's	den,	Quick.	You	sure	it's	necessary?”
“No.”	 Quick	 Ben	 looked	 up.	 “Personally,	 I'd	 rather	 we	 just	 dropped
everything	 and	 ran—away	 from	 it	 all,	 from	 the	 Empire,	 from	 Darujhistan,	 from
war.	But	try	convincing	the	sergeant	to	do	that.	He's	loyal	to	an	idea,	and	that's	the
hardest	kind	to	turn.”
Kalam	nodded.	“Honor,	integrity,	all	that	expensive	crap.”
“Right.	So	we	do	it	this	way	because	it's	the	only	way	left	to	us.	Hairlock's
insanity	 has	 become	 a	 liability,	 but	 we	 can	 use	 him	 still,	 one	 last	 time.	 Power
draws	 power,	 and	 with	 luck	 Hairlock's	 demise	 will	 do	 just	 that.	 The	 more
Ascendants	we	can	lure	into	the	fray	the	better.”
“I	always	thought	that	was	something	to	avoid,	Quick.”
The	 wizard's	 smile	 was	 strained.	 “Tell	 me	 about	 it.	 But	 right	 now	 the	 more
confusion	and	chaos	the	better.”
“And	if	Tayschrenn	catches	wind?”
Quick	 Ben's	 smile	 broadened.	 “Then	 we're	 dead	 all	 that	 much	 sooner.	 So	 it
goes.”
Kalam	barked	a	short,	humorless	laugh.	“So	it	goes.”
The	wizard	cocked	his	head.	“The	sun's	past	the	horizon.	Time	to	start.”
“You	want	me	out	of	here?”	Kalam	asked.
Quick	Ben	shook	his	head.	“No,	I	want	you	right	where	you	are	for	this	one.	If
I	don't	 come	back,	 take	 my	 body	and	 burn	 it	down	 to	 ash.	Scatter	 the	 ash	to	the
four	winds,	and	curse	my	name	with	all	your	heart.”
Kalam	was	silent.	Then	he	asked,	in	a	growl,	“How	long	do	I	wait?”
“Dawn,”	 Quick	 Ben	 replied.	 “You	 understand	 I	 would	 only	 ask	 this	 of	 my
closest	friend.”
“I	understand.	Now,	get	on	with	it,	dammit.”


Quick	 Ben	 gestured.	 A	 ring	 of	 fire	 sprang	 from	 the	 earth,	 surrounding	 the
wizard.	He	closed	his	eyes.
To	 Kalam,	 his	 friend	 seemed	 to	 deflate	 slightly,	 as	 if	 something	 essential	 to
life	 had	 disappeared.	 Quick	 Ben's	 neck	 creaked	 as	 his	 chin	 sank	 down	 to	 his
chest,	his	shoulders	slumped,	and	a	long	breath	escaped	with	a	slow	hiss.	The	ring
of	fire	flared,	then	dimmed	to	a	lapping	glimmer	on	the	earth.
Kalam	 shifted	 position,	 stretching	 out	 his	 legs	 and	 crossing	 his	 arms.	 In	 the
gathering	silence,	he	waited.
A	pale	Murillio	returned	to	the	table	and	sat	down.	“Someone's	disposing	of	the
body,”	 he	 said,	 then	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Whoever	 killed	 Chert	 was	 a	 professional
with	a	real	nasty	streak.	Right	through	the	eye—”
“Enough!”	Kruppe	cried	out,	raising	his	hands.	“Kruppe	happens	to	be	eating,
dear	Murillio,	and	Kruppe	also	happens	to	have	a	delicate	stomach.”
“Chert	was	a	fool,”	Murillio	continued,	ignoring	Kruppe,	“but	hardly	the	type
to	attract	such	viciousness.”
Crokus	said	nothing.	He'd	seen	the	blood	on	that	dark-haired	woman's	dagger.
“Who	can	say?”	Kruppe	waggled	his	eyebrows.	“Perhaps	he	was	witness	to
some	horrific	horror.	Perhaps	he	was	stamped	out	as	a	man	crushes	a	cute	mouse
underfoot.”
Crokus	glanced	around.	His	eyes	returned	to	the	woman	standing	with	Meese
at	 the	 bar.	 Dressed	 in	 leather	 armor	 with	 a	 plain	 dueling	 sword	 strapped	 to	 her
hip,	 she	 reminded	 him	 of	 the	 time	 he'd	 watched,	 as	 a	 young	 boy,	 a	 troop	 of
mercenaries	ride	through	the	city.	They	had	been	the	Crimson	Guard,	he	recalled:
five	hundred	men	and	women	without	a	shiny	buckle	among	them.
His	gaze	remained	on	the	woman.	Like	a	mercenary,	a	killer	for	whom	killing
had	long	since	lost	its	horror.	What	had	Chert	done	to	earn	a	knife	in	the	eye?
Crokus	looked	away,	in	time	 to	 see	 Rallick	Nom	enter	 the	 bar.	 The	assassin
approached	the	table,	seemingly	unconscious	of	the	locals	moving	from	his	path.
Coll	 intercepted	 him	 before	 he	 reached	 the	 table.	 The	 burly	 man	 slapped
Rallick's	back	and	leaned	drunkenly	against	him.	“Nom,	you	old	bastard!”
Rallick	threw	an	arm	around	Coll's	round	shoulders	and	together	they	came	to
the	table.
Kruppe	 looked	 up.	 “Ho,	 my	 dear	 comrades!	 Kruppe	 invites	 you	 to	 join	 our
familiar	gathering.”	Waving	his	arms	at	the	two	empty	chairs,	he	rocked	back	in
his	seat.	“To	bring	you	up	to	date	on	our	dramatic	doings,	the	lad	Crokus	has	been


staring	dreamily	into	space	while	Murillio	and	Kruppe	have	discussed	the	latest
natterings	of	the	street	rats.”
Coll	 remained	 standing,	 weaving	 unsteadily,	 a	 frown	 knitting	 his	 brows.
Rallick	sat	down	and	reached	for	the	pitcher	of	beer.	“What	natterings	are	those?”
the	assassin	asked	casually.
“The	rumor	that	we're	now	allied	with	Moon's	Spawn,”	Murillio	said.
“Nonsense,	of	course,”	Kruppe	said.	“Have	you	seen	anything	to	suggest	such
a	thing?”
Murillio	grinned.	“The	Moon	hasn't	moved	away,	has	it?	Not	only	that,	there's
that	Council	tent	stationed	directly	under	it.”
Crokus	 spoke	 up.	 “I	 heard	 from	 Uncle	 Mammot	 that	 the	 councilmen	 haven't
had	any	luck	getting	a	message	to	whoever's	in	Moon's	Spawn.”
“Typical,”	Murillio	commented,	his	eyes	narrowing	briefly	on	Rallick.
“Who	lives	in	there?”	Crokus	asked.
Coll	 tottered	 and	 threw	 both	 hands	 down	 on	 the	 table	 to	 steady	 himself.	 He
thrust	his	red	face	at	Crokus	and	bellowed,	“Five	black	dragons!”
Within	the	Warren	of	Chaos,	Quick	Ben	knew	of	the	innumerable	shifting	pathways
that	led	to	doors.	Though	he	called	them	doors	they	were	in	fact	barriers	created
where	Warrens	touched,	a	calcretion	of	energy	as	solid	as	basalt.	Chaos	touched
on	all	realms	with	gnarled	fingertips	bleeding	power,	the	doors	hardened	wounds
in	the	flesh	of	other	worlds,	other	avenues	of	magic.
The	wizard	had	focused	his	talents	on	such	doors.	While	within	the	Warren	of
Chaos,	 he	 had	 learned	 the	 ways	 of	 shaping	 their	 energy.	 He'd	 found	 means	 of
altering	 the	 barriers,	 of	 sensing	 what	 lay	 beyond	 them.	 Each	 Warren	 of	 magic
possessed	 a	 smell,	 each	 realm	 a	 texture,	 and	 though	 the	 pathways	 he	 took	 were
never	the	same	as	those	he'd	taken	before,	he	had	mastered	the	means	of	finding
those	he	sought.
He	traveled	now	down	one	of	those	paths,	a	track	of	nothingness	enclosed	by
the	Warren's	own	accretions,	twisting	and	fraught	with	contradictions.	On	one	trail
he'd	 will	 himself	 forward	 yet	 find	 himself	 moving	 back;	 he'd	 come	 to	 a	 sharp
right	 turn,	 followed	 by	 another,	 then	 another,	 then	 yet	 another—all	 in	 the	 same
direction.
He	knew	it	was	the	power	of	his	mind	that	opened	the	pathways,	but	they	had
their	 own	 laws—or	 perhaps	 they	 were	 his,	 yet	 unknown	 to	 him.	 Whatever	 the
source	of	the	shaping,	it	was	madness	defined.


He	 came	 at	 last	 to	 the	 door	 he	 sought.	 The	 barrier	 showed	 as	 nothing	 more
than	 a	 dull,	 slate-gray	 stone.	 Hovering	 before	 it,	 Quick	 Ben	 whispered	 a
command,	 and	 his	 spirit	 took	 the	 form	 of	 his	 own	 body.	 He	 stood	 a	 moment,
mastering	 the	 disconnected	 tremble	 of	 his	 ghost-body,	 then	 stepped	 forward	 and
laid	hands	on	the	door.
Its	edges	were	hard	and	warm.	Toward	the	center	it	grew	hot	and	soft	to	the
touch.	 The	 surface	 slowly	 lost	 its	 opaqueness	 beneath	 the	 wizard's	 hands,
becoming	glassy	like	obsidian.	Quick	Ben	closed	his	eyes.
He'd	never	before	sought	to	pass	through	such	a	door.	He	was	not	even	certain
that	 it	 was	 possible.	 And	 if	 he	 survived	 into	 the	 beyond,	 was	 there	 any	 way	 to
return?	Past	the	mechanics	of	the	one	thing	loomed	his	final,	most	difficult	worry:
he	was	about	to	attempt	entry	into	a	realm	where	he	wasn't	welcome.
Quick	 Ben	 opened	 his	 eyes.	 “I	 am	 direction,”	 he	 said	 quietly.	 He	 leaned
against	the	barrier.	“I	am	the	power	of	will	in	a	place	that	respects	this,	and	only
this.”	 He	 leaned	 harder.	 “I	 am	 the	 Warren's	 touch.	 To	 chaos	 nothing	 is	 immune,
nowhere	 is	 immune.”	 He	 felt	 the	 door	 begin	 to	 yield.	 He	 lashed	 out	 one	 hand
behind	 him,	 fending	 off	 a	 growing	 pressure.	 “Only	 I	 shall	 pass!”	 he	 hissed.
Abruptly,	with	a	strange	thumping	sound,	he	slipped	through,	energy	flaring	around
his	body.
The	wizard	staggered	over	rough,	parched	earth.	He	regained	his	balance	and
looked	around.	He	stood	on	a	barren	plain,	the	horizon	off	to	his	left	humped	with
low	 hills.	 Overhead	 spanned	 a	 sky	 the	 color	 of	 quicksilver,	 a	 scatter	 of	 long,
stringy	clouds	moving	in	unison	and	black	as	ink	directly	above.
Quick	 Ben	 sat	 down,	 folding	 his	 legs	 and	 clasping	 his	 hands	 in	 his	 lap.
“Shadowthrone,”	he	said,	“Lord	of	Shadows,	I	am	come	to	your	realm.	Will	you
receive	my	presence	as	befits	a	peaceful	visitor?”
From	the	hills	came	an	answer:	the	howling	of	Hounds.


Chapter	Twelve
	

Walk	with	me
on	Thieves'	Road
hear	its	song
underfoot
how	clear	its
tone	in	misstep
as	it	sings
you	in	two
APSALAR'S	CANT
DRISBIN	(B.	1135)


	
Kneading	his	brow,	Kruppe	sat	reading	in	Mammot's	study.
	 	 	 	 	 .	 .	 .	 and	 in	 the	 Calling	 Down	 to	 earth	 the	 God	 was	 Crippled,	 and	 so
Chained	 in	 its	 place.	 In	 the	 Calling	 Down	 many	 lands	 were	 sundered	 by	 the
God's	 Fists,	 and	 things	 were	 born	 and	 things	 were	 released.	 Chained	 and
Crippled	was	this	God
Kruppe	 glanced	 up	 from	 the	 ancient	 tome	 and	 rolled	 his	 eyes.	 “Brevity,
Kruppe	prays	for	brevity!”	He	returned	to	the	faded	handwritten	script.
and	 it	 bred	 caution	 in	 the	 unveiling	 of	 its	 powers.	 The	 Crippled	 God	 bred
caution	but	not	well	enough,	for	the	powers	of	the	earth	came	to	it	in	the	end.
Chained	was	the	Crippled	God,	and	so	Chained	was	it	destroyed.	And	upon
this	barren	plain	that	imprisoned	the	Crippled	God	many	gathered	to	the	deed.
Hood,	gray	wanderer	of	Death,	was	among	the	gathering,	as	was	Dessembrae,
then	 Hood's	 Warrior—though	 it	 was	 here	 and	 in	 this	 time	 that	 Dessembrae
shattered	the	bonds	Hood	held	upon	him.	Also	among	the	gathering	were
Kruppe	 groaned	 and	 flipped	 pages.	 The	 list	 seemed	 interminable,	 absurdly
long.	 From	 this	 account	 he	 half	 expected	 to	 see	 his	 grandmother's	 name	 among
those	listed.	Finally,	after	three	pages,	he	found	the	names	he	sought.
and	among	those	that	came	from	the	vaulted	heavens	of	silver,	the	Tiste	Andii,
dwellers	 of	 Darkness	 in	 the	 Place	 before	 Light,	 Black	 Dragons	 numbering
five,	and	in	their	league	sailed	red-winged	Silanah,	said	to	dwell	among	the
Tiste	Andii	in	their	Fang	of	Darkness	descending	from	the	vaulted	heavens	of
silver
Kruppe	 nodded,	 muttering	 to	 himself.	 A	 descending	 Fang	 of	 Darkness—
Moon's	Spawn?	Home	to	five	Black	Dragons	and	one	Red	Dragon?	He	shivered.
How	had	Coll	come	upon	this?	True,	the	man	hadn't	always	been	a	drunken	lout,
but	even	his	past	station,	lofty	as	it	was,	hadn't	been	the	scholarly	kind.
Who,	then,	had	spoken	through	the	old	man's	wine-stained	mouth?


“That,”	 Kruppe	 sighed	 to	 himself,	 “shall	 have	 to	 wait	 its	 answer.	 The
significance,	however,	of	Coll's	bellowed	claim	lies	in	its	evident	truth,	and	as	to
how	it	pertains	to	the	present	situation.”	He	closed	the	book	and	rose	to	his	feet.
Behind	him	he	heard	footsteps.
“I've	brought	you	herbal	tea,”	the	old	man	said,	as	he	entered	the	closet-sized
room.	“Has	Alladart's	Realm	Compendium	been	beneficial,	Kruppe?”
“Beneficial	 indeed,”	 Kruppe	 said,	 gratefully	 accepting	 the	 earthenware	 mug.
“Kruppe	 has	 learned	 the	 value	 of	 modern	 language.	 Such	 long-lipped	 dribbles
common	to	those	ancient	scholars	are	a	curse	Kruppe	is	thankful	to	find	extinct	in
our	time.”
“Ah,	ha,”	the	old	man	said,	coughing	slightly	and	looking	away.	“Well,	do	you
mind	if	I	ask	what	you	were	seeking?”
Kruppe	 glanced	 up,	 the	 corners	 of	 his	 eyes	 crinkling	 slightly.	 “Not	 at	 all,
Mammot.	I	thought	to	find	mention	of	my	grandmother's	name.”
Mammot	frowned,	then	nodded.	“I	see.	Well,	I'll	not	inquire	as	to	your	luck,
then.”
“Please,	 do	 not,”	 Kruppe	 said,	 eyes	 widening.	 “Luck	 is	 such	 a	 dreadful
companion	 these	 days,	 with	 all	 awry	 as	 all	 happens	 to	 be.	 But	 thank	 you	 for
understanding	Kruppe's	need	for	circumspection.”
“Not	at	all,”	Mammot	said,	waving	one	hand.	“I	didn't	mean	to—well,	yes,	I
did.	Curiosity,	you	understand.	The	intellectual	kind.”
Kruppe	smiled	beatifically	and	sipped	tea.
“Well,”	 Mammot	 said,	 “shall	 we	 return	 to	 the	 common	 room,	 then,	 and	 find
respite	before	the	hearth?”
They	strode	into	the	other	chamber.	Once	seated,	Kruppe	stretched	out	his	legs
and	leaned	back.	“How	has	your	writing	been	coming	along?”	he	asked.
“Slow,”	Mammot	answered,	“as	one	would	expect,	of	course.”
It	seemed	Mammot	was	working	up	to	something,	and	so	Kruppe	waited,	idly
wiggling	his	toes.	A	minute	passed,	then	the	old	man	cleared	his	throat	and	spoke.
“Kruppe,	have	you	seen	much	of	my	dear	nephew	lately?”
Kruppe	raised	his	eyebrows.	“Long	ago,”	he	said,	“Kruppe	made	a	promise	to
a	man,	the	man	being	a	concerned	uncle	to	a	young	boy	who	found	the	streets	an
exciting	 playground.	 Aye,	 the	 lad	 dreamed	 of	 sword-fights	 and	 dark	 deeds
committed	in	alleys	on	behalf	of	princesses	in	disguise,	or	some	such	thing—”
Mammot	was	nodding,	his	eyes	closed.
“—and	to	such	promises	Kruppe	has	availed	of	himself	thoroughly,	for	he,	too,


loved	the	boy.	And	as	with	any	endeavor,	survival	is	measured	in	ability,	and	so
did	Kruppe	take	the	lad	under	his	silken	wing,	with	some	success,	yes?”
Mammot	smiled,	still	nodding.
“And	so,	to	answer	the	uncle's	question.	Indeed	Kruppe	has	seen	the	lad.”
Mammot	 leaned	 forward	 and	 fixed	 Kruppe	 with	 an	 intense	 gaze.	 “Have	 you
seen	anything	odd	in	his	actions?	I	mean,	has	he	asked	you	any	strange	questions,
made	any	requests?”
Kruppe's	eyes	narrowed.	He	paused	to	drink.	“Bluntly,	yes.	For	one,	he	sought
the	return	of	a	fine	cache	of	jewelry	he	acquired	recently,	for	personal	reasons—
as	 he	 said.	 Personal	 reasons.	 Kruppe	 wondered	 then	 and	 wonders	 now,	 but	 the
lad's	seeming	sincerity,	nay,	focused	intensity,	struck	Kruppe	as	laudable.”
“Agreed!	Would	you	believe	Crokus	has	now	expressed	an	interest	in	formal
education?	I	can't	understand	it.	The	boy's	positively	obsessed	about	something.”
“Perhaps,	then,	Kruppe	should	piece	this	together.”
“Thank	you,”	Mammot	said,	relieved.	“I	would	know	where	all	this	is	coming
from.	So	much	ambition	all	at	once,	I	fear	it	may	soon	burn	itself	out.	If	we	can
nourish	it,	however	.	.	.”
“By	all	means,”	Kruppe	said.	“There	is	more	to	life	than	petty	thievery,	after
all.”
Mammot	grinned.	“Why,	Kruppe,	I'm	surprised	to	hear	that	coming	from	you.”
“Such	comments	are	better	left	between	you	and	Kruppe.	In	any	case,	I	believe
Murillio	knows	something	of	all	this.	He	intimated	as	much	this	evening	while	we
dined	at	the	Phoenix	Inn.”
Mammot	asked,	“Is	Murillio	well?”
Kruppe	 smiled.	 “The	 net	 about	 the	 lad	 remains	 intact,”	 he	 said.	 “For	 one,
Rallick	 Nom	 has	 taken	 the	 responsibility	 seriously	 indeed.	 Mayhap	 he	 sees
something	of	his	own	lost	youth	in	Crokus.	In	truth,	Rallick	is	a	man	whose	true
nature	escapes	Kruppe.	Fiercely	loyal	for	certain,	and	one	who,	as	you	well	know,
honors	 his	 debts	 with	 such	 vigor	 as	 to	 humble	 those	 around	 him.	 Excepting
Kruppe,	 naturally.	 Yet	 is	 it	 blood	 that	 travels	 his	 veins?	 One	 must	 wonder,	 at
times.”
A	distant	look	had	entered	Mammot's	face.
Kruppe	tensed.	The	air	smelled	of	magic.	He	leaned	forward	and	studied	the
old	man	seated	across	from	him.	Someone	was	communicating	with	Mammot,	and
the	Warren	that	now	pulsed	in	the	room	was	familiar	to	Kruppe.
He	sat	back	and	waited.


Eventually,	Mammot	got	swiftly	to	his	feet.	“I	have	some	research	to	do,”	he
said	 distractedly.	 “As	 for	 you,	 Kruppe,	 Master	 Baruk	 wishes	 to	 speak	 with	 you
immediately.”
“I	thought	I	sensed	the	alchemist's	presence,”	Kruppe	said,	rising	with	a	soft
grunt.	 “Ah,	 the	 rigors	 of	 these	 fated	 nights	 ever	 urge	 us	 on.	 Until	 later,	 then,
Mammot.”
“Good-bye,”	the	scholar	said,	a	frown	on	his	face	as	he	crossed	the	room.	He
entered	the	small	chamber	where	Kruppe	had	spent	the	past	hour.
Kruppe	adjusted	the	sleeves	of	his	cloak.	Whatever	had	happened,	it	had	been
enough	to	jar	Mammot's	etiquette,	and	that	alone	hinted	at	dire	events.	“Well,”	he
murmured,	 “best	 not	 keep	 Baruk	 waiting,	 then.	 At	 least,”	 he	 amended,	 as	 he
headed	for	 the	door,	“not	for	too	long.	 Decorum	demands	that	Kruppe	retain	his
sense	of	dignity.	He	shall	walk	fast,	yes.	But	walk	he	shall,	for	Kruppe	needs	time
to	think,	to	plan,	to	scheme,	to	anticipate,	to	backtrack	with	some	thoughts,	to	leap
ahead	with	others,	to	do	all	the	things	necessary.	First	and	foremost,	Kruppe	must
discern	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 woman	 who	 followed	 him,	 and	 who	 killed	 Chert,	 and
who	 noted	 that	 Crokus	 saw	 the	 blood	 on	 her	 weapon,	 and	 who	 marked	 Rallick
Nom	 as	 an	 assassin	 with	 his	 very	 arrival.	 She	 might	 well	 provide	 the	 key	 to
everything,	and	more,	for	the	Coin	did	indeed	turn	its	face	upon	her,	if	only	for	a
moment.	 And	 that,	 thinks	 Kruppe,	 shall	 return	 to	 us	 all,	 for	 good	 or	 ill.”	 He
stopped	 and	 looked	 around,	 blinking	 rapidly.	 “At	 the	 very	 least,”	 he	 muttered,
“Kruppe	should	leave	Mammot's	room.”	He	glanced	back	at	the	chamber	Mammot
had	 entered.	 From	 within	 came	 the	 sounds	 of	 brittle	 pages	 being	 rapidly	 turned.
Kruppe	sighed	in	relief,	then	left.
_______
Crone	ruffled	her	singed	feathers	and	hopped	about	in	agitation.	Where	was	that
alchemist?	She	had	a	thousand	things	to	attend	to	before	the	night	was	done,	though
in	 truth	 she	 couldn't	 think	 of	 any	 of	 them.	 Nevertheless,	 she	 disliked	 being	 kept
waiting.
The	door	to	the	study	opened	and	Baruk	strode	through,	gathering	a	robe	about
his	considerable	bulk.	“My	apologies,	Crone,	I	was	otherwise	indisposed.”
Crone	 grunted.	 Sorcery	 trailed	 from	 the	 man	 in	 thick,	 pungent	 streams.	 “My
master,	Lord	Anomander	Rake,”	she	said,	without	preamble,	“has	commanded	that
I	tell	you	what	I	told	him	of	my	adventures	on	the	Rhivi	Plain.”
Baruk	 came	 up	 to	 where	 the	 Great	 Raven	 paced	 on	 the	 map	 table.	 The


alchemist	frowned.	“You've	been	injured.”
“Pride,	no	more.	Hearken	then	to	my	story.”
Baruk	raised	an	eyebrow.	The	old	witch's	mood	was	dark.	He	fell	silent	and
she	began.
“A	small	wooden	puppet	approaches	from	the	north,	a	creation	of	soulshifting
and	sourced	from	a	Warren	of	Chaos.	Its	power	is	immense,	twisted,	malign	even
to	Great	Ravens.	It	killed	many	of	my	kin	as	it	slipped	in	and	out	of	its	Warren.	It
evidently	 took	 pleasure	 in	 such	 acts.”	 Crone	 snapped	 her	 beak	 in	 anger,	 then
continued,	“It	pursues	a	power	I	could	not	approach,	and	whatever	this	power,	it
strikes	 directly	 for	 the	 Gadrobi	 Hills—my	 lord	 and	 I	 are	 agreed	 in	 this.	 The
power	seeks	something	within	those	hills,	yet	we	are	not	native	to	this	land.	Hence
we	bring	this	news	to	you,	Alchemist.	Two	forces	are	converging	on	the	Gadrobi
Hills.	My	lord	asks	you	why.”
Baruk's	 face	 had	 lost	 all	 its	 color.	 He	 turned	 slowly	 and	 walked	 to	 a	 chair.
Sitting	 down,	 he	 steepled	 his	 hands	 before	 his	 face	 and	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 “The
Malazan	 Empire	 seeks	 something	 it	 cannot	 hope	 to	 control,	 something	 buried
within	 the	 Gadrobi	 Hills.	 Whether	 or	 not	 either	 force	 is	 capable	 of	 freeing	 that
thing	is	another	matter.	Seeking	is	not	the	same	as	finding,	and	finding	is	not	the
same	as	succeeding.”
Crone	hissed	impatiently.	“Who	is	buried	there,	Alchemist?”
“A	 Jaghut	 Tyrant,	 imprisoned	 by	 the	 Jaghut	 themselves.	 Generations	 of
scholars	and	sorcerers	have	sought	to	find	this	barrow.	None	managed	to	discover
even	 so	 much	 as	 a	 clue.”	 Baruk	 looked	 up,	 his	 expression	 lined	 with	 worry.	 “I
know	 of	 one	 man,	 here	 in	 Darujhistan,	 who	 has	 gathered	 all	 the	 available
knowledge	 concerning	 this	 burial	 place.	 I	 must	 confer	 with	 him.	 I	 can	 give	 your
lord	this,	however.	There	lies	a	standing	stone	in	the	Gadrobi	Hills—I	know	its
location	precisely.	It	is	almost	invisible,	only	its	weathered	top	breaks	the	ground,
perhaps	a	hand's	span	in	height.	The	remaining	twenty	feet	are	beneath	the	earth.
You	 will	 see	 the	 remnants	 of	 many	 pits	 and	 trenches	 that	 have	 been	 excavated
around	it—all	fruitless.	For	while	the	stone	marks	the	beginning	point,	it	is	not	the
entrance	to	the	barrow.”
“Where,	then,	is	this	entrance?”
“That	I	will	not	tell	you.	Once	I	speak	with	my	colleague,	perhaps	I	can	give
you	more	details.	Perhaps	not.	But	the	means	by	which	the	barrow	is	entered	must
remain	a	secret.”
“This	avails	us	nothing!	My	lord—”
“Is	extremely	powerful,”	Baruk	cut	in.	“His	intentions	are	anything	but	clear,


Crone,	 no	 matter	 that	 we	 are	 allied.	 What	 lies	 within	 that	 barrow	 can	 destroy	 a
city—this	 city.	 That	 I	 will	 not	 allow	 to	 enter	 Rake's	 hands.	 You	 shall	 have	 the
location	of	the	standing	stone,	for	it	is	there	that	the	hunters	must	first	go.	I	have
one	 question	 to	 ask,	 Crone.	 This	 puppet,	 are	 you	 certain	 it	 pursues	 this	 other
power?”
Crone	bobbed	her	head.	“It	tracks.	It	hides	when	necessary.	You	assume	both
powers	are	Malazan.	Why?”
Baruk	 grunted.	 “First,	 they	 want	 Darujhistan.	 They'll	 do	 anything	 to	 win	 it.
They've	 had	 access	 to	 vast	 libraries	 among	 the	 lands	 they've	 conquered.	 The
Jaghut	 barrow	 is	 no	 secret	 in	 and	 of	 itself.	 Second,	 you	 said	 both	 powers	 came
down	from	the	north.	They	can	only	be	Malazan.	Why	one	hides	from	the	other	is
beyond	 me,	 though	 I	 wouldn't	 doubt	 that	 there	 are	 competing	 factions	 within	 the
Empire—any	political	entity	as	large	as	that	one	is	bound	to	be	rife	with	discord.
In	 any	 case,	 they	 pose	 a	 direct	 threat	 to	 Darujhistan	 and,	 by	 extension,	 to	 your
lord's	desires	to	prevent	the	Malazan	Empire	from	conquering	us.	Assuming	that
the	powers	are	Malazan	seems	warranted.”
Crone's	displeasure	was	obvious.	“You	will	be	kept	informed	of	the	activities
on	the	Rhivi	Plain.	My	lord	must	decide	whether	to	intercept	these	powers	before
they	 reach	 the	 Gadrobi	 Hills.”	 She	 turned	 an	 angry	 eye	 on	 Baruk.	 “He	 has
received	little	assistance	from	his	allies.	I	trust	when	we	next	speak	that	situation
will	be	remedied.”
The	alchemist	shrugged.	“My	first	meeting	with	Anomander	Rake	has	proved
my	 only	 meeting	 with	 him.	 Assistance	 demands	 communication.”	 His	 tone
hardened.	“Inform	your	lord	that	the	present	dissatisfaction	exists	with	us	as	much
as	it	does	with	him.”
“My	lord	has	been	busy	with	his	side	of	things,”	Crone	muttered,	flapping	to
the	windowsill.
Baruk	stared	at	the	bird	as	she	prepared	to	leave.	“Busy?”	he	asked	darkly.	“In
what	way?”
“In	due	time,	Alchemist,”	Crone	purred.	A	moment	later	she	was	gone.
Baruk	cursed,	and	with	an	angry	gesture	returned	the	window	to	its	place	and
slammed	 the	 shutters.	 Doing	 this	 through	 magic	 and	 from	 a	 distance	 was	 not	 as
satisfying	as	it	would	have	been	had	he	done	it	physically.	Grumbling,	he	rose	and
walked	to	the	mantelpiece.	As	he	poured	himself	some	wine,	he	paused.	Less	than
half	an	hour	ago	he'd	conjured	a	demon.	It	was	not	an	ambitious	conjuring:	he'd
needed	a	spy,	not	a	killer.	 Something	told	him	he'd	be	calling	upon	far	deadlier
creatures	in	the	near	future.	He	scowled,	then	took	a	mouthful	of	wine.	“Mammot,”


he	whispered,	as	he	opened	his	Warren,	“I	need	you.”
He	smiled	as	a	scene	appeared	in	his	head,	of	a	small	room	and	a	stone	hearth.
Seated	 in	 the	 chair	 opposite	 his	 point	 of	 view	 was	 Kruppe.	 “Good.	 I	 need	 you
both.”
_______
The	Hound	that	approached	Quick	Ben	was	wide	and	heavy,	its	fur	a	pasty	white.
As	it	trotted	up	to	the	wizard,	he	saw	that	its	eyes	were	also	white.	The	creature
possessed	no	pupils.	It	stopped	a	short	distance	away	and	sat.
Quick	Ben	bowed.	“You	are	the	Hound	called	Blind,”	he	said,	“mate	to	Baran
and	mother	of	Gear.	I	come	seeking	no	harm.	I	would	speak	with	your	master.”
He	heard	a	growl	beside	him	and	froze.	Slowly,	he	turned	his	head	and	looked
down.	Less	than	a	foot	from	his	right	leg	lay	another	Hound,	mottled	brown	and
tan,	lean	and	scarred.	Its	eyes	were	fixed	on	Blind.	“Baran.”	He	nodded.	Another
growl	answered	Baran's,	this	one	behind	the	wizard.	He	turned	further	to	see,	ten
feet	 away,	 a	 third	 Hound,	 this	 one	 long,	 black	 and	 sleek.	 Its	 eyes,	 fixed	 on	 him,
glowed	red.	“And	Shan,”	he	said	quietly.	He	faced	Blind	again.	“Have	you	found
your	quarry,	or	are	you	my	escort?”
Baran	rose	silently	beside	him,	its	shoulders	level	with	his	chest.	Blind	stood,
then	 trotted	 off	 to	 the	 left.	 She	 stopped	 and	 looked	 back.	 Twin	 growls	 spurred
Quick	Ben	after	them.
The	 land	 around	 them	 changed	 slowly,	 details	 slipping	 into	 sourceless
shadows	 and	 re-emerging	 subtly	 altered.	 On	 what	 the	 wizard	 thought	 of	 as	 the
north	horizon,	a	gray	forest	climbed	a	slope	to	what	might	have	been	a	wall.	This
wall	was	in	place	of	sky—maybe	it	was	sky—but	to	Quick	Ben	it	looked	strangely
close,	even	though	the	forest	was	leagues	away.	Glancing	overhead	did	not	help
him	confirm	or	refute	his	feeling	that	this	realm	was	bordered	by	a	magical	wall,
for	it,	too,	seemed	close,	almost	within	reach.	Yet	black	clouds	rode	winds	above
him,	skewing	his	perceptions	and	making	him	dizzy.
Another	 Hound	 had	 joined	 their	 company.	 This	 one,	 a	 male,	 was	 dark	 gray,
one	 of	 its	 eyes	 blue,	 the	 other	 yellow.	 Though	 it	 didn't	 come	 close,	 Quick	 Ben
judged	 that	 it	 was	 the	 largest	 of	 those	 around	 him,	 and	 its	 movement	 hinted	 at
deadly	 speed.	 He	 knew	 it	 as	 Doan,	 firstborn	 to	 the	 pack's	 leader,	 Rood,	 and	 its
first	mate,	Pallick.
Doan	trotted	alongside	Blind	for	a	time,	then,	when	they	came	to	the	crest	of	a
low	rise,	he	bolted	forward.	Reaching	the	crest,	Quick	Ben	saw	their	destination.


He	sighed.	Just	as	the	image	carved	upon	the	altar	within	the	temples	dedicated	to
Shadowthrone,	Shadowkeep	rose	from	the	plain	like	an	enormous	lump	of	black
glass,	 fractured	 with	 curving	 planes,	 rippled	 in	 places,	 with	 some	 corners
glistening	 white	 as	 if	 crushed.	 The	 largest	 surface	 facing	 them—a	 wall,	 he
supposed—was	mottled	and	dull,	as	if	it	was	a	cortex,	the	weathered	surface	of
obsidian.
There	were	no	windows	as	such,	but	many	of	the	slick	surfaces	looked	semitranslucent	and	seemed	to	glow	with	an	inner	light.	As	far	as	Quick	Ben	could	see,
there	was	no	door,	no	gate,	no	drawbridge.
They	 arrived,	 and	 the	 wizard	 exclaimed	 in	 surprise	 as	 Blind	 strode	 into	 the
stone	and	disappeared.	He	hesitated,	and	Baran	came	as	close	to	nudging	him	as
Quick	Ben	allowed.	He	walked	up	to	the	mottled	stone	and	held	out	his	hands	as
he	stepped	into	it.	He	felt	nothing,	passing	through	effortlessly	to	find	himself	in	a
hallway	that	could	have	been	found	in	any	mundane	estate.
Barren	of	trappings,	the	corridor	led	straight	forward	for,	perhaps,	thirty	feet
and	 ended	 at	 double	 doors.	 Blind	 and	 Doan	 sat	 to	 either	 side	 of	 these	 doors,
which	now	opened	of	their	own	accord.
Quick	Ben	entered	the	room	beyond.	The	chamber	was	domed.	Opposite	him
stood	a	simple	obsidian	throne	on	a	slightly	raised	dais.	The	dull,	cobbled	floor
bore	 no	 rugs,	 and	 the	 walls	 were	 bare	 except	 for	 torches	 spaced	 every	 ten	 feet.
Quick	 Ben	 counted	 forty,	 but	 the	 light	 was	 fitful,	 seeming	 to	 struggle	 against
encroaching	shadows.
At	 first	 he	 thought	 the	 throne	 unoccupied,	 but	 as	 he	 approached	 he	 saw	 the
figure	 seated	 there.	 It	 seemed	 composed	 of	 almost	 translucent	 shadows,	 vaguely
human	 in	 form,	 but	 hooded,	 preventing	 even	 the	 glint	 of	 eyes.	 Still,	 Quick	 Ben
could	 feel	 the	 god's	 attention	 fixed	 solely	 on	 him,	 and	 he	 barely	 repressed	 a
shiver.
Shadowthrone	spoke,	his	voice	calm	and	clear.	“Shan	tells	me	you	know	the
names	of	my	Hounds.”
Quick	Ben	stopped	before	the	dais.	He	bowed.	“I	was	once	an	acolyte	within
your	temple,	Lord.”
The	god	was	silent	for	a	time,	then	he	said,	“Is	it	wise	to	admit	such	a	thing,
Wizard?	Do	I	look	kindly	upon	those	who	once	served	me	but	then	abandoned	my
ways?	Tell	me.	I	would	hear	from	you	what	my	priests	teach.”
“To	 begin	 upon	 the	 Path	 of	 Shadow	 and	 then	 to	 leave	 it	 is	 rewarded	 by	 the
Rope.”
“Meaning?”


“I	am	marked	for	assassination	by	all	who	follow	your	ways,	Lord.”
“Yet	here	you	stand,	Wizard.”
Quick	Ben	bowed	again.	“I	would	strike	a	deal,	Lord.”
The	god	giggled,	then	raised	a	hand.	“No,	dear	Shan.	Strike	naught.”
Quick	Ben	stiffened.	The	black	Hound	stepped	around	him,	and	ascended	the
dais.	She	lay	down	before	her	god	and	eyed	the	wizard	blankly.
“Do	you	know	why	I	just	saved	your	life,	Wizard?”
“I	do,	Lord.”
Shadowthrone	leaned	forward.	“Shan	wants	you	to	tell	me.”
Quick	Ben	met	the	Hound's	red	stare.	“Shadowthrone	loves	deals.”
The	god	sighed	and	sank	back.	“Acolyte,	indeed.	Well,	then,	Wizard,	speak	on,
while	you	can.”
“I	must	begin	with	a	question,	Lord.”
“Ask	it.”
“Does	Gear	still	live?”
Shan's	eyes	flared	and	she	half	rose	before	the	god's	hand	touched	her	head.
“Now	 that,”	 Shadowthrone	 said,	 “is	 quite	 a	 question.	 You've	 managed
something	few,	alas,	have	been	able	to	do.	Wizard,	my	curiosity	is	piqued.	So,	I
answer	you:	yes,	Gear	survives.	By	all	means,	continue.”
“Lord,	I	would	deliver	into	your	hands	the	one	who	offended	your	Hound.”
“How?	He	belongs	to	Oponn.”
“Not	 him,	 Lord.	 But	 the	 one	 who	 led	 Gear	 to	 that	 chamber.	 The	 one	 who
sought	to	take	Gear's	soul,	and	would	have	succeeded	if	not	for	Oponn's	mortal
tool.”
“In	exchange	for	what?”
Quick	 Ben	 cursed	 inwardly.	 He	 could	 read	 nothing	 from	 the	 god's	 tone,	 and
that	 made	 things	 even	 trickier	 than	 he'd	 expected.	 “My	 life,	 Lord.	 I	 wish	 the
Rope's	reward	lifted	from	me.”
“Anything	else?”
“Yes.”	 He	 hesitated,	 then	 continued,	 “I	 wish	 to	 choose	 the	 time	 and	 place,
Lord.	Otherwise,	this	one	of	whom	I	speak	will	escape	your	Hounds	through	its
Warren	of	Chaos.	Only	I	can	prevent	that.	Thus,	it	must	be	part	of	the	deal.	All	that
you	need	do	is	have	your	Hounds	ready.	I	will	call	upon	you	at	the	proper	moment,
providing	you	with	the	creature's	precise	location.	The	rest	is	up	to	your	Hounds.”
“You've	 planned	 this	 well,	 Wizard,”	 Shadowthrone	 said.	 “As	 of	 yet,	 I	 can


think	of	no	way	to	kill	both	the	creature	and	you.	I	commend	you.	How	then,	do
you	intend	to	call	upon	me?	Surely,	you'll	not	once	again	enter	my	realm.”
“Lord,	you	will	be	contacted.	I	guarantee	this,	but	I	can	say	no	more	about	it.”
“And	if	I	were	to	lay	my	powers	upon	you	now,	Wizard?	If	I	were	to	wring
whatever	lies	hidden	in	that	frail	brain	of	yours,	how	would	you	prevent	me?”
“To	answer	that,	Lord,	you	must	answer	my	proposal	first.”
Shan	growled	and	this	time	the	god	made	no	motion	to	still	her.
Quick	 Ben	 went	 on	 hastily,	 “Given	 that	 you	 will	 seek	 to	 betray	 me	 at	 every
opportunity,	given	that	you'll	hunt	for	the	weaknesses	in	my	plan,	given	all	this,	I
would	have	your	word	that	you	will	complete	your	part	of	the	deal	if	all	else	fails
you,	Lord.	Give	me	that,	and	I	will	answer	your	last	question.”
Shadowthrone	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 long	 minute.	 “Ah	 well,”	 he	 muttered.	 “Your
cunning	is	admirable,	Wizard.	I	am	astonished	and,	I	must	admit,	delighted	by	this
duel.	My	only	regret	is	that	you	departed	the	Paths	of	Shadow—you	would	have
risen	 far.	 Very	 well.	 You	 have	 my	 word.	 The	 Hounds	 will	 be	 ready.	 Now,	 why
shouldn't	I	shred	your	brain	here	and	now,	Wizard?”
“Your	answer,	Lord,	is	in	your	very	words.”	Quick	Ben	raised	his	arms.	“I	did
indeed	rise	far,	Shadowthrone,	in	service	to	you.”	He	opened	his	Warren.	“You'll
not	have	me,	Lord,	because	you	can't.”	Quick	Ben	whispered	his	word	of	recall,	a
word	born	of	Chaos.	Power	burst	around	him,	and	he	felt	as	if	a	giant	hand	had
closed	 around	 him.	 As	 it	 pulled	 him	 back	 into	 his	 Warren,	 he	 heard
Shadowthrone's	scream	of	recognition.
“It	is	you!	Delat!	You	shape-shifting	bastard!”
Quick	Ben	smiled.	He'd	done	it.	He	was	out	of	reach.	He'd	done	it—again.
Kruppe	was	ushered	into	Baruk's	study	with	none	of	the	delays	he	was	so	fond	of
confounding.	Slightly	disappointed,	he	took	his	seat	and	wiped	his	forehead	with
his	handkerchief.
Baruk	 entered.	 “You	 took	 your	 time	 getting	 here,”	 he	 growled.	 “Well,	 never
mind.	Have	you	any	news?”
Kruppe	 laid	 his	 handkerchief	 on	 his	 lap	 and	 began	 carefully	 to	 fold	 it.	 “We
continue	to	protect	the	Coin	Bearer,	as	instructed.	As	for	the	presence	of	Malazan
infiltrators,	no	luck.”	It	was	a	major	lie,	but	necessary.	“I	am	to	convey	a	message
to	you,”	he	continued,	“most	unusual	in	its	source.	Indeed,	strange	in	fact	was	its
delivery	to	Kruppe.”
“Get	on	with	it.”


Kruppe	winced.	Baruk	was	in	a	terrible	mood.	He	sighed.	“A	message	to	you
personally,	Master.”	He	completed	folding	his	handkerchief	and	looked	up.	“From
the	Eel.”
Baruk	stiffened,	then	a	scowl	darkened	his	features.	“Why	not?”	he	muttered.
“The	 man	 even	 knows	 who	 my	 agents	 are.”	 His	 gaze	 cleared	 and	 he	 watched
Kruppe.	“I'm	waiting,”	he	growled.
“Of	 course!”	 Kruppe	 shook	 loose	 his	 handkerchief	 and	 mopped	 his	 brow.
“‘Look	 to	 the	 streets	 to	 find	 those	 you	 seek.'	 That,	 and	 no	 more.	 Delivered	 to
Kruppe	by	the	smallest	child	he'd	ever	seen—”	He	stopped	and	shook	his	head.
No,	 such	 exaggeration	 would	 never	 do,	 not	 with	 Baruk's	 mood	 as	 foul	 as	 it
appeared	to	be.	“A	small	child,	in	any	case.”
Baruk	stood	glowering	at	the	dying	embers	in	the	fireplace,	his	hands	clasped
behind	his	back,	fingers	twisting	a	large	silver	ring.	“Tell	me,	Kruppe,”	he	asked
slowly,	“what	do	you	know	of	this	Eel?”
“Little,	Kruppe	admits.	Man,	woman?	Unknown.	Origins?	A	mystery.	Designs?
Perpetuating	a	status	quo	defined	by	aversion	to	tyranny.	Or	so	it's	said.	Influence?
Far-reaching;	even	if	one	discounts	nine	out	of	ten	rumors	associated	with	the	Eel,
his	 or	 her	 agents	 must	 number	 in	 the	 hundreds.	 All	 devoted	 to	 protecting
Darujhistan.	 'Tis	 said	 that	 Councilman	 Turban	 Orr	 is	 even	 now	 hunting	 them
down,	convinced	they've	ruined	all	his	schemes.	Mayhap	they	have,	and	for	that
we	can	all	be	relieved.”
Baruk	seemed	anything	but	relieved.	Kruppe	thought	he	could	almost	hear	the
man's	 teeth	 grinding.	 However,	 he	 turned	 to	 Kruppe	 and	 nodded.	 “I	 have	 an
assignment.	For	it,	you	will	need	to	round	up	Murillio,	Rallick,	and	Coll.	And	take
the	Coin	Bearer	with	you,	just	to	keep	him	safe.”
Kruppe	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Out	of	the	city?”
“Yes.	Paramount	is	the	Coin	Bearer—keep	him	beyond	anyone's	reach.	As	for
your	 mission,	 you	 will	 observe.	 Nothing	 more.	 Do	 you	 understand	 me,	 Kruppe?
Observe.	 To	 do	 anything	 else	 will	 be	 to	 risk	 the	 Coin	 Bearer	 falling	 into	 the
wrong	 hands.	 While	 he	 is	 Oponn's	 tool,	 he	 also	 is	 the	 means	 by	 which	 another
Ascendant	can	reach	Oponn.	The	last	thing	we	need	is	gods	battling	on	the	mortal
plain.”
Kruppe	cleared	his	throat.	“What	are	we	to	observe,	Master?”
“I'm	not	sure,	possibly	a	foreign	work	party,	digging	here	and	there.”
Kruppe	started.	“As	in	.	.	.	road	repairs?”
The	alchemist	frowned.	“I	will	be	sending	you	to	the	Gadrobi	Hills.	Remain
there	 until	 either	 someone	 comes	 or	 I	 contact	 you	 with	 further	 instructions.	 If


someone	comes,	Kruppe,	you're	to	remain	hidden.	Avoid	detection	at	all	costs—
use	your	Warren,	if	need	be.”
“None	 shall	 find	 Kruppe	 and	 his	 worthy,	 loyal	 comrades,”	 Kruppe	 said,
smiling	and	waggling	his	fingers.
“Good.	That	will	be	all,	then.”
Surprised,	Kruppe	climbed	to	his	feet.	“When	are	we	to	leave,	Master?”
“Soon.	I'll	let	you	know	at	least	a	day	beforehand.	Is	that	sufficient	time?”
“Yes,	friend	Baruk.	Kruppe	deems	that	more	than	enough	time.	Rallick	appears
temporarily	indisposed,	but	with	luck	he	shall	be	available.”
“Get	 him	 if	 you	 can.	 If	 the	 Coin	 Bearer's	 influence	 turns	 against	 us,	 the
assassin	is	charged	with	killing	the	boy.	Does	he	understand	this?”
“We've	discussed	it,”	Kruppe	said.
Baruk	inclined	his	head	and	fell	silent.
Kruppe	waited	a	moment,	then	quietly	left.
Less	than	an	hour	after	Quick	Ben's	soul	had	left	the	body	seated	on	the	hut's	floor
and	journeyed	into	the	Shadow	Realm,	it	creaked	back	into	life.	Red-eyed	with	an
exhaustion	 born	 of	 unrelenting	 tension,	 Kalam	 pushed	 himself	 to	 his	 feet	 and
waited	for	his	friend	to	come	round.
The	assassin	laid	his	hands	on	his	long-knives,	just	to	be	on	the	safe	side.	If
Quick	 Ben	 had	 been	 taken,	 whatever	 controlled	 him	 might	 well	 announce	 its
arrival	by	attacking	anyone	within	range.	Kalam	held	his	breath.
The	wizard's	eyes	opened,	the	glaze	slipping	away	as	awareness	returned.	He
saw	Kalam,	and	smiled.
The	assassin	released	his	breath.	“Done?	Success?”
“Yes,	on	both	counts.	Hard	to	believe,	isn't	it?”
Kalam	found	he	was	grinning	uncontrollably.	He	stepped	forward	and	helped
Quick	Ben	to	stand.	The	wizard	leaned	heavily	against	him,	also	grinning.
“He	 realized	 who	 I	 was	 just	 as	 I	 left.”	 Quick	 Ben's	 grin	 broadened.	 “You
should	have	heard	him	scream.”
“Well,	 are	 you	 surprised?	 How	 many	 High	 Priests	 burn	 the	 robes	 of	 their
vestment?”
“Not	 enough,	 if	 you	 ask	 me.	 Without	 temples	 and	 priests	 the	 gods'	 bloody
meddling	 couldn't	 touch	 the	 mortal	 realm.	 Now,	 that	 would	 be	 paradise,	 right,
friend?”


“Perhaps,”	said	a	voice	at	the	doorway.	Both	men	turned	to	see	Sorry	standing
within	the	entrance,	her	half-cloak	drawn	about	her	slim	body.	She	was	wet	with
rain,	and	only	now	did	Kalam	notice	the	water	dripping	through	cracks	all	around
them.	The	assassin	stepped	away	from	Quick	Ben	to	free	his	hands.	“What	are	you
doing	here?”	he	demanded.
“You	dream	of	paradise,	Wizard?	I	wish	I'd	heard	the	entire	conversation.”
“How	did	you	find	us?”	Quick	Ben	asked.
Sorry	stepped	inside	and	pushed	back	her	hood.	“I've	found	an	assassin,”	she
said.	 “I've	 marked	 him.	 He	 is	 in	 a	 place	 called	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn,	 in	 the	 Daru
District.	Are	you	interested?”	she	asked,	dully	eyeing	both	men.
“I	want	answers,”	Kalam	said,	in	a	low	voice.
Quick	Ben	backed	to	the	far	wall,	to	give	the	assassin	room	and	to	prepare	his
spells	 if	 need	 be—though	 he	 was	 in	 no	 real	 shape	 to	 manage	 his	 Warren	 at	 the
moment.	 Nor,	 he	 noticed,	 did	 Kalam	 look	 up	 to	 a	 scrap,	 not	 that	 the	 assassin
would	allow	that	to	stop	him.	Right	now,	he	was	at	his	most	dangerous—that	low
tone	had	said	it	all.
Sorry	held	her	dead	eyes	on	Kalam.	“The	sergeant	has	sent	me	to	you—”
“A	lie,”	Kalam	interjected	softly.	“Whiskeyjack	doesn't	know	where	we	are.”
“Very	well.	I	sensed	your	power,	Wizard.	It	has	a	notable	signature.”
Quick	 Ben	 was	 stunned.	 “But	 I	 established	 a	 shield	 around	 this	 place,”	 he
said.
“Yes.	I,	too,	was	surprised,	Wizard.	Usually	I	cannot	find	you.	It	seems	cracks
appeared.”
Quick	Ben	thought	about	that.	“Cracks,”	he	decided,	wasn't	the	right	word—
but	Sorry	didn't	know	that.	She'd	sensed	his	whereabouts	because	she	was	what
they'd	 suspected,	 a	 pawn	 of	 the	 Rope.	 The	 Shadow	 Realm	 had	 been	 linked,
however	 briefly	 and	 however	 tenuously,	 to	 his	 flesh	 and	 blood.	 Yet	 none	 but	 a
servant	 of	 Shadow	 possessed	 the	 necessary	 sensitivity	 to	 detect	 that	 link.	 The
wizard	moved	to	stand	beside	Kalam	and	laid	a	hand	on	the	burly	man's	shoulder.
Kalam	threw	him	a	startled	glare.
“She's	right.	Cracks	appeared,	Kalam.	She's	obviously	a	natural	Talent	in	the
ways	of	sorcery.	Come	on,	friend,	the	girl's	found	what	we've	been	looking	for.
Let's	move	on	it.”
Sorry	pulled	up	the	hood	around	her	head.	“I	am	not	accompanying	you,”	she
said.	“You'll	know	the	man	when	you	see	him.	I	suspect	it	is	his	task	to	make	his
profession	 obvious.	 Perhaps	 the	 Guild	 is	 anticipating	 you.	 In	 any	 case,	 find	 the


Phoenix	Inn.”
“What	the	hell	are	you	up	to?”	Kalam	demanded.
“I	will	be	completing	an	assignment	for	the	sergeant.”	She	turned	and	left	the
hut.
Kalam's	shoulders	slumped	and	he	let	out	a	long	breath.
“She's	 the	 one	 we	 thought	 her	 to	 be,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said	 quietly.	 “So	 far,	 so
good.”
“In	other	words,”	the	assassin	growled,	“if	I'd	attacked	her	I'd	be	a	dead	man
right	now.”
“Exactly.	We'll	take	her	out,	when	the	time's	right.	But	for	now	we	need	her.”
Kalam	nodded.
“Phoenix	Inn?”
“Damn	 right.	 And	 when	 we	 get	 there	 the	 first	 thing	 I'm	 doing	 is	 buying	 a
drink.”
Quick	Ben	smiled.	“Agreed.”
Rallick	looked	up	as	the	heavyset	man	entered	the	bar.	His	black	skin	marked	him
a	 southerner,	 which	 in	 itself	 was	 not	 unusual.	 What	 caught	 Rallick's	 attention,
however,	 was	 the	 horn-handled,	 silver-pommeled	 long-knives	 tucked	 into	 the
man's	 narrow	 belt.	 Those	 weapons	 were	 anything	 but	 southern,	 and	 stamped	 on
the	pommels	was	a	cross-hatched	pattern,	recognizable	to	all	within	the	trade	as
the	mark	of	an	assassin.
The	man	swaggered	into	the	room	as	if	he	owned	it,	and	none	of	the	locals	he
shouldered	 aside	 seemed	 inclined	 to	 disagree	 with	 him.	 He	 reached	 the	 bar	 and
ordered	an	ale.
Rallick	studied	the	dregs	in	his	own	tankard.	Obviously	the	man	wanted	to	be
marked,	precisely	by	someone	like	Rallick	Nom,	a	Guild	assassin.	So,	who	was
the	bait,	then?	This	didn't	fit.
Ocelot,	 his	 Clan	 Leader,	 was	 convinced,	 along	 with	 everyone	 else	 in	 the
Guild,	 that	 Empire	 Claws	 had	 come	 into	 the	 city	 and	 now	 waged	 war	 against
them.	Rallick	wasn't	so	sure.	The	man	standing	at	the	bar	could	as	easily	be	Seven
Cities	as	a	traveler	from	Callows.	He	had	the	look	of	Malazan	Empire	about	him.
Was	 he	 Claw?	 If	 so,	 why	 show	 himself?	 Up	 until	 now	 the	 enemy	 hadn't	 left	 a
single	 clue,	 or	 a	 single	 eyewitness,	 as	 to	 their	 identity.	 The	 brazenness	 he	 now
observed	either	didn't	fit,	or	marked	a	reversal	of	tactics.	Had	Vorcan's	order	to
go	to	ground	triggered	it?


Alarm	bells	rang	in	Rallick's	head.	None	of	this	felt	right.
Murillio	leaned	close	to	him.	“Something	wrong,	friend?”
“Guild	business,”	Rallick	replied.	“You	thirsty?”
Murillio	grinned.	“An	offer	I	can't	refuse.”
After	 a	 single,	 bemused	 glance	 at	 Coll's	 unconscious	 form,	 slumped	 in	 the
chair,	the	assassin	left	the	table.	What	had	all	that	been	about	five	black	dragons?
He	made	his	way	to	the	bar.	As	he	pushed	through	the	crowd,	he	gave	one	youth	a
hard	elbow	to	the	back.	The	boy	gasped,	then	surreptitiously	slipped	toward	the
kitchen.
Rallick	arrived,	called	Scurve	over,	then	ordered	another	pitcher.	Though	he
did	 not	 look	 the	 man's	 way,	 he	 knew	 he'd	 been	 marked	 by	 him.	 It	 was	 no	 more
than	 a	 feeling,	 but	 one	 he'd	 learned	 to	 trust.	 He	 sighed	 as	 Scurve	 delivered	 the
foaming	 pitcher.	 Well,	 he'd	 done	 what	 Ocelot	 had	 demanded	 of	 him,	 though	 he
suspected	his	Clan	Leader	would	be	asking	for	more.
He	 returned	 to	 the	 table	 and	 conversed	 with	 Murillio	 for	 a	 time,	 plying	 his
friend	 with	 the	 majority	 of	 the	 ale.	 Murillio	 sensed	 a	 growing	 tension	 around
Rallick	 and	 took	 his	 cue.	 He	 drained	 the	 last	 of	 his	 drink	 and	 rose.	 “Well,”	 he
said,	 “Kruppe's	 scurried	 off,	 Crokus	 too.	 And	 Coll's	 once	 again	 dead	 to	 the
world.	Rallick,	I	thank	you	for	the	ale.	Time	to	find	a	warm	bed.	Until	the	morrow,
then.”
Rallick	 remained	 seated	 for	 another	 five	 minutes,	 only	 once	 brushing	 gazes
with	 the	 black	 man	 leaning	 against	 the	 bar.	 Then	 he	 rose	 and	 strode	 into	 the
kitchen.	The	two	cooks	rolled	their	eyes	at	each	other	as	he	strode	past.	Rallick
ignored	them.	He	came	to	the	door,	which	had	been	left	ajar	in	hopes	of	a	cooling
draft.	 The	 alley	 beyond	 was	 wet,	 though	 the	 rain	 had	 passed.	 From	 a	 shadowed
recess	on	the	wall	opposite	the	inn	stepped	a	familiar	figure.
Rallick	walked	up	to	Ocelot.	“It's	done.	Your	man	is	the	big	black	one	nursing
an	ale.	Two	daggers,	hatch-marked.	He	looks	mean	and	not	one	I'd	like	to	tussle
with.	He's	all	yours,	Ocelot.”
The	man's	pocked	face	twisted.	“He's	still	inside?	Good.	Head	back	in.	Make
sure	you've	been	noticed—damn	sure,	Nom.”
Rallick	crossed	his	arms.	“I'm	sure	already,”	he	drawled.
“You're	to	draw	him	out,	lead	him	into	Tarlow's	warehouse—into	the	loading
grounds.”	Ocelot	sneered.	“Vorcan's	orders,	Nom.	And	when	you	head	out,	do	it
by	the	front	door.	No	mistakes,	nothing	subtle.”
“The	 man's	 an	 assassin,”	 Rallick	 grated.	 “If	 I'm	 not	 subtle	 he'll	 know	 it's	 a
trap	and	crawl	all	over	me	in	seconds	flat.”


“You	do	as	Vorcan	wills,	Nom.	Now	get	back	inside!”
Rallick	stared	at	his	commander,	to	make	his	disgust	plain,	then	returned	to	the
kitchen.	The	cooks	grinned	at	him,	but	only	for	a	moment.	One	look	at	Rallick's
face	 was	 enough	 to	 kill	 any	 humor	 in	 the	 room.	 They	 bent	 to	 their	 tasks	 as	 if
prodded	by	a	landmaster.
Rallick	 entered	 the	 main	 room,	 then	 stopped	 dead	 in	 his	 tracks.	 “Damn,”	 he
muttered.	The	black	man	was	gone.	Now	what?	He	shrugged.	“Front	door	it	is.”
He	made	his	way	through	the	crowd.
In	an	alley,	on	one	side	of	which	ran	a	high	stone	wall,	Crokus	leaned	against	the
damp	bricks	of	a	merchant's	house	and	gazed	steadily	at	a	window.	It	was	on	the
third	 floor,	 beyond	 the	 wall,	 and	 behind	 its	 shuttered	 face	 was	 a	 room	 he	 knew
intimately.
There'd	been	a	light	on	inside	for	most	of	the	two	hours	he'd	stood	below,	but
for	the	last	fifteen	minutes	the	room	within	had	been	dark.	Numb	with	exhaustion
and	 plagued	 with	 doubts,	 Crokus	 pulled	 his	 cloak	 tighter	 around	 him.	 He
wondered	 what	 he	 was	 doing	 here,	 and	 not	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 All	 his	 resolve
seemed	to	have	drained	into	the	gutters	along	with	the	rain.
Had	 it	 been	 the	 dark-haired	 woman	 in	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn?	 Had	 she	 rattled	 him
that	much?	The	blood	on	her	dagger	made	it	obvious	that	she	wouldn't	hesitate	to
kill	him	just	to	keep	her	secret	intact.	Maybe	it	was	the	spinning	coin	that	had	him
so	confused.	Nothing	about	that	incident	had	been	natural.
What	was	so	wrong	with	his	dream	of	being	introduced	to	the	D'Arle	maiden?
It	had	nothing	to	do	with	that	killer	woman	in	the	bar.
“Nothing,”	he	mumbled,	then	scowled.	Now	he	was	talking	aloud	to	himself.
A	thought	came	to	him	that	deepened	his	scowl.	Everything	had	begun	its	mad
unraveling	the	night	he'd	robbed	the	maiden.	If	only	he	hadn't	paused,	if	only	he
hadn't	looked	upon	her	soft,	round,	lovely	face.
A	groan	escaped	him,	and	he	shifted	his	feet.	A	high-born.	That	was	the	real
problem,	wasn't	it?
It	all	seemed	so	stupid	now,	so	absurd.	How	could	he	have	convinced	himself
that	such	a	thing	as	meeting	her	was	possible?	He	shook	himself.	It	didn't	matter,
he'd	planned	this,	now	it	was	time	to	do	it.
“I	 don't	 believe	 this,”	 he	 muttered	 as	 he	 pushed	 himself	 from	 the	 wall	 and
headed	down	the	alley.	His	hand	brushed	the	pouch	tied	to	his	waist.	“I'm	about	to
put	a	maiden's	ransom	back.”


He	came	to	the	stone	wall	he'd	been	looking	for,	and	began	to	climb.	He	drew
a	deep	breath.	All	right,	let's	get	it	done.
The	 stone	 was	 wet,	 but	 he	 had	 enough	 determination	 in	 him	 to	 scale	 a
mountain.	He	climbed	on,	and	did	not	slip	even	so	much	as	a	single	foothold.


Chapter	Thirteen
	

There's	a	spider	here
in	this	corner	in	that—
her	three	eyes
tiptoe	in	darkness,
her	eight	legs
track	my	spine,
she	mirrors	and	mocks
my	pacing.
	

There's	a	spider	here
who	knows	all	of	me
her	web	my	history	full	writ.
Somewhere	in	this	strange	place
a	spider	waits
for	my	panicked	flight	.	.	.
THE	CONSPIRACY
BLIND	GALLAN	(B.1078)


	
As	soon	as	the	Guild	assassin	 left	the	room,	Kalam	drained	the	last	of	his	beer,
paid	up,	and	ascended	the	staircase.	From	the	gallery	railing	he	studied	the	crowd
below,	 then,	 seeing	 that	 no	 one	 paid	 him	 much	 attention,	 he	 strode	 down	 the
hallway	and	entered	the	last	room	on	the	right.
He	closed	the	door	and	locked	it.	Quick	Ben	was	seated	cross-legged	on	the
floor,	 within	 a	 circle	 of	 melted	 blue	 wax.	 The	 wizard	 was	 hunched	 over,
barechested,	his	eyes	shut	and	droplets	of	sweat	trickling	down	his	face.	Around
him	the	air	shimmered,	as	if	glossed	with	lacquer.
Kalam	walked	around	the	wax	circle	to	the	bed.	He	took	a	leather	satchel	from
a	peg	above	the	bedpost	and	set	it	down	on	the	thin,	straw-filled	mattress.	Peeling
back	the	flap	he	removed	the	contents.	A	minute	later	he'd	laid	out	the	mechanisms
for	a	goat's-foot	arbalest.	The	crossbow's	metal	parts	had	been	blued,	the	narrow
wooden	stock	soaked	in	pitch	and	dusted	with	black	sand.	Kalam	slowly,	quietly,
assembled	the	weapon.
Quick	Ben	spoke	behind	him.	“Done.	Whenever	you're	ready,	friend.”
“The	man	left	through	the	kitchen.	But	he'll	be	back,”	Kalam	said,	rising	with
the	arbalest	in	his	hands.	He	attached	a	strap	to	it	and	slung	the	weapon	over	one
shoulder.	Then	he	faced	the	wizard.	“I'm	ready.”
Quick	Ben	also	stood,	wiping	his	forehead	with	a	sleeve.	“Two	spells.	You'll
be	able	to	float,	control	every	descent.	The	other	should	give	you	the	ability	to	see
anything	magical—well,	almost	anything.	If	there's	a	High	Mage	kicking	around,
we're	out	of	luck.”
“And	you?”	Kalam	asked,	as	he	examined	his	quiver	of	bolts.
“You	won't	see	me	directly,	just	my	aura,”	Quick	Ben	replied	with	a	grin,	“but
I'll	be	with	you	all	the	way.”
“Well,	hopefully	this'll	go	smoothly.	We	make	contact	with	the	Guild,	we	offer
the	 Empire's	 contract,	 they	 accept	 and	 remove	 for	 us	 every	 major	 threat	 in	 the
city.”	He	shrugged	into	his	black	cloak	and	pulled	up	the	hood.
“You	 sure	 we	 can't	 just	 go	 downstairs	 and	 walk	 right	 up	 to	 the	 man,	 lay	 it
out?”
Kalam	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Not	 how	 it's	 done.	 We've	 identified	 him,	 he's	 done
the	 same	 with	 us.	 He's	 probably	 just	 made	 contact	 with	 his	 commander,	 and
they'll	arrange	things	to	their	liking.	Our	man	should	lead	us	now	to	the	meet.”


“Won't	it	be	an	ambush	we're	walking	into,	then?”
The	large	man	agreed.	“More	or	less.	But	they'll	want	to	know	what	we	want
with	them	first.	And	once	that's	out,	I	doubt	the	Guild's	master	will	be	interested
in	killing	us.	You	ready?”
Quick	Ben	raised	a	hand	toward	Kalam,	then	muttered	briefly	under	his	breath.
Kalam	 felt	 a	 lightness	 come	 into	 him,	 rising	 to	 his	 skin	 and	 emanating	 a
cushion	 of	 cool	 air	 that	 enveloped	 his	 body.	 And	 before	 his	 eyes	 Quick	 Ben's
figure	formed	a	blue-green	penumbra,	concentrated	at	the	wizard's	long-fingered
hands.	“I	have	them,”	the	assassin	said,	smiling,	“two	old	friends.”
Quick	 Ben	 sighed.	 “Yes,	 here	 we	 are	 doing	 this	 all	 over	 again.”	 He	 met	 his
friend's	gaze.	“Hood's	on	our	heels,	Kal.	I	can	feel	his	breath	on	my	neck,	these
days.”
“You're	not	alone	in	that.”	Kalam	turned	to	the	window.	“Sometimes,”	he	said
dryly,	“I	have	the	feeling	our	Empire	wants	us	dead.”	He	walked	to	the	window,
unlatched	the	shutters,	then	swung	them	inward	and	leaned	both	hands	on	the	sill.
Quick	Ben	came	up	beside	him	and	rested	a	hand	on	his	shoulder.	They	gazed
out	at	the	darkness,	a	brief	sharing	of	unease	passing	between	them.
“We've	seen	too	much,”	Quick	Ben	said	softly.
“Hood's	Breath,”	Kalam	growled,	“what	are	we	doing	this	for	anyway?”
“Maybe	 if	 the	 Empire	 gets	 what	 it	 wants—Darujhistan—they'll	 let	 us	 slip
away.”
“Sure,	but	who's	going	to	convince	the	sergeant	to	walk	out	of	the	Empire?”
“We	show	him	he	hasn't	got	any	choice.”
Kalam	 climbed	 onto	 the	 sill.	 “Good	 thing	 I'm	 not	 a	 Claw	 anymore.	 Just
soldiers,	right?”
Behind	him	Quick	Ben	touched	his	own	chest	and	vanished.	His	disembodied
voice	held	a	note	of	wry	amusement.	“Right.	No	more	cloak-and-dagger	games	for
old	Kalam.”
The	 assassin	 pulled	 himself	 up,	 turning	 to	 face	 the	 wall,	 then	 beginning	 his
climb	to	the	roof.	“Yeah,	I've	always	hated	it.”
Quick	Ben's	voice	was	beside	him	now.	“No	more	assassinations.”
“No	more	spying,”	Kalam	added,	reaching	for	the	roof's	edge.
“No	more	disguising	spells.”
Clambering	onto	the	roof,	Kalam	lay	still.	“No	more	daggers	in	the	back,”	he
whispered,	 then	 sat	 up	 and	 scanned	 the	 nearby	 rooftops.	 He	 saw	 nothing;	 no
unusual	huddled	shapes,	no	bright	magical	auras.


“Thank	the	gods,”	came	Quick	Ben's	whisper	from	above.
“Thank	 the	 gods,”	 Kalam	 echoed,	 then	 looked	 down	 over	 the	 roof's	 edge.
Below	a	pool	of	light	marked	the	inn	entrance.	“You	take	the	back	door.	I've	got
this	one.”
“Right.”
Even	as	the	wizard	answered	Kalam	stiffened.	“There	he	is,”	he	hissed.	“You
still	with	me?”
Quick	Ben	assented.
They	watched	the	figure	of	Rallick	Nom,	now	cloaked,	crossing	to	the	far	side
of	the	street	and	entering	an	alley.
“I'm	on	him,”	Quick	Ben	said.
A	blue-green	glow	rose	around	the	wizard.	He	rose	into	the	air	and	flew	out
swiftly	 across	 the	 street,	 slowing	 as	 he	 reached	 the	 alley.	 Kalam	 climbed	 to	 his
feet	 and	 padded	 silently	 along	 the	 roof's	 edge.	 Reaching	 the	 corner,	 he	 glanced
down	to	the	rooftop	of	an	adjacent	building,	then	jumped.
He	descended	slowly,	as	if	sinking	through	water,	and	landed	without	a	sound.
Off	to	his	right,	moving	on	a	parallel	path,	was	Quick	Ben's	magical	aura.	Kalam
crossed	 the	 rooftop	 to	 the	 next	 building.	 Their	 man	 was	 heading	 for	 the	 harborfront.
Kalam	continued	tracking	Quick	Ben's	beacon,	moving	from	one	rooftop	to	the
next,	sometimes	jumping	down,	at	other	times	climbing.	There	was	little	subtlety
about	Kalam:	where	others	used	finesse	he	used	the	strength	of	his	thick	arms	and
legs.	 It	 made	 him	 an	 unlikely	 assassin,	 but	 he'd	 learned	 to	 use	 that	 to	 his
advantage.
They	now	approached	the	harbor	area,	the	buildings	single-storyed	and	large,
the	 streets	 rarely	 lit	 except	 around	 the	 double-door	 entrances	 to	 warehouses,
where	 the	 occasional	 private	 guard	 lingered.	 In	 the	 night	 air	 hung	 the	 taint	 of
sewage	and	fish.
Finally,	Quick	Ben	stopped,	hovered	over	a	warehouse	courtyard,	then	hurried
back	 to	 Kalam,	 who	 waited	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 nearby	 two-storyed	 clearing	 house.
“Looks	like	the	place,”	Quick	Ben	said,	floating	a	few	feet	above	Kalam.	“What
now?”
“I	want	a	good	line	of	sight	to	that	courtyard.”
“Follow	me.”
Quick	Ben	led	him	to	another	building.	Their	man	was	now	visible,	crouching
on	the	warehouse	roof,	attention	down	on	the	courtyard	below.


“Kal,	do	you	smell	something	bad	about	this?”
Kalam	snorted.	“Hood,	no,	it's	bloody	roses	out	here.	Take	position,	friend.”
“Right.”
Rallick	Nom	lay	down	on	the	rooftop,	his	head	out	over	its	edge.	Below	was	the
warehouse's	 courtyard,	 flat,	 gray,	 and	 empty.	 Directly	 beneath	 him	 the	 shadows
were	impenetrable.	Sweat	trickled	down	Rallick's	face.
From	the	shadow	below	came	Ocelot's	voice,	“He's	got	you	in	sight?”
“Yes.”
“And	he's	not	moving?”
“No.	Listen,	I'm	sure	there's	more	than	one	of	them.	I	would've	known	if	he'd
been	trailing	me,	and	no	one	was.	It	stinks	of	magery,	Ocelot,	and	you	know	what	I
think	about	magery.”
“Dammit,	 Nom.	 If	 you'd	 just	 start	 using	 the	 stuff	 we	 give	 you,	 you'd	 rank
among	the	best	of	us.	But	to	Hood's	Gate	with	that.	We've	got	spotters,	and	unless
there's	a	very	good	wizard	around	we'd	pick	up	on	any	magic.	Face	it,”	a	note	of
malice	 entered	 Ocelot's	 voice,	 “he's	 better	 than	 you.	 He	 tracked	 you	 all	 right.
Solo.”
“What	now?”	Rallick	asked.
Ocelot	 chuckled.	 “We're	 closing	 the	 circle	 even	 as	 we	 speak.	 Your	 work's
done,	Nom.	Tonight	the	assassins'	war	ends.	In	five	minutes	you	can	head	home.”
High	 above	 the	 city	 a	 demon	 flapped	 on	 leathery	 wings,	 its	 green	 reptilian	 eyes
surveying	the	rooftops	below	with	a	vision	that	detected	magic	as	easily	as	it	did
heat.	Though	the	demon	was	no	larger	than	a	dog,	its	power	was	immense,	near
par	to	the	man	who	had	summoned	and	chained	it	this	very	night.	On	the	rooftops	it
saw	two	auras	close	together,	one	a	man	on	whom	spells	had	been	cast,	and	the
other	a	wizard,	a	very	good	wizard.	In	a	ragged	circle	on	other	rooftops	around
these	 two,	 men	 and	 women	 moved	 inward,	 some	 betrayed	 by	 the	 heat	 of	 their
bodies,	others	by	items	imbued	with	sorcery.
Until	 now	 the	 demon	 rode	 the	 high	 night	 winds	 bored	 and	 resentful	 of	 its
master.	A	mere	mission	of	observation,	for	one	of	such	power!	But	now	the	demon
felt	a	surge	of	bloodlust.	If	only	its	master	had	been	weaker,	so	that	it	could	break
the	bonds	and	descend	to	the	rooftops,	then	there	would	have	been	slaughter.
The	demon	was	musing	on	these	thoughts,	its	eyes	fixed	on	the	scene	below,


when	a	booted	heel	rammed	into	the	back	of	its	small,	round	head.	The	creature
spun,	tumbling,	then	twisted	round	to	face	its	attacker,	rage	blazing	in	its	skull.
A	 moment	 later	 it	 was	 fighting	 for	 its	 life.	 The	 figure	 that	 closed	 with	 the
demon	possessed	a	blinding	magical	aura.	Grappling,	the	surging	energies	of	both
collided,	enwrapped	like	tentacles.	The	demon	struggled	against	the	savage	pain
constricting	 it	 as	 the	 figure	 pressed	 its	 attack.	 A	 cold	 that	 burned	 filled	 the
demon's	skull,	a	cold	alien	in	its	breath	of	power,	so	alien	that	the	demon	could
find	no	means	of	countering	it.
The	 two	 fell	 slowly	 as	 they	 fought,	 dueling	 in	 absolute	 silence	 with	 forces
invisible	 to	 the	 city's	 inhabitants	 below,	 while	 around	 them	 other	 figures
descended	toward	the	warehouse,	cloaks	spread	like	sails,	crossbows	crooked	in
their	 arms,	 hooded	 faces	 angled	 downward	 and	 hidden	 beneath	 black	 masks.
There	were	eleven	in	all	that	passed	the	demon	and	its	attacker.	None	of	the	others
paid	any	attention,	and	with	this	realization	the	demon	experienced	an	emotion	it
had	never	known	before.	Fear.
Its	 thoughts	 turning	 from	 battle	 to	 survival,	 the	 demon	 tore	 itself	 from	 its
attacker's	grasp.	Loosing	a	high-pitched	cry,	it	flapped	upward.
The	figure	did	not	pursue,	instead	joining	the	others	in	their	silent	descent	to
the	city.
As	 the	 twelve	 shrouded	 assassins	 dropped	 toward	 the	 circle	 of	 men	 and
women	 below,	 one	 splitting	 off	 and	 angling	 above	 the	 circle's	 two	 targets,	 they
took	careful	aim	with	their	crossbows,	and	began	a	massacre.
Kalam	 stared	 down	 at	 the	 assassin	 lying	 supine	 on	 the	 roof	 below,	 wondering
what	 to	 do	 next.	 Were	 they	 waiting	 for	 him	 to	 initiate	 contact?	 A	 low	 growl
escaped	him.	Something	was	wrong.	He	could	feel	it	like	fever	in	his	bones.
“Dammit,	Quick.	Let's	get	out	of	here!”
“Wait!”	 came	 Quick	 Ben's	 disembodied	 voice.	 “Oh,	 damn,”	 he	 said	 softly
then.
In	 front	 of	 Kalam	 two	 brightly	 glowing	 shapes	 dropped	 down	 onto	 the	 roof
below,	landing	behind	their	mark.
“What	in	Hood's	name?”
Then	he	felt	a	slight	tremor	on	the	flat	tiles	beneath	his	hands.	 Kalam	rolled
onto	his	back,	hearing	a	quarrel	whiz	past.	Framed	by	his	knees,	a	cloaked	figure
stood	 about	 thirty	 feet	 away.	 After	 missing	 with	 the	 quarrel	 the	 figure	 raced
forward.	Another	landed	behind	the	first	one,	near	the	roof's	far	edge.


Kalam	scampered.	He	dropped	down	over	the	roof's	edge.
Quick	 Ben	 floated	 above	 him.	 The	 spell	 of	 deflection	 he'd	 raised	 about
himself	was	a	High	Order	magery,	and	he	was	certain	he	remained	unseen	by	these
new	 assailants.	 He	 watched	 as	 the	 approaching	 figure	 slowed,	 then	 padded
cautiously	 to	 the	 roof	 edge	 where	 Kalam	 had	 dropped	 from	 sight.	 Daggers
gleaming	in	both	gloved	hands,	this	new	assassin	reached	the	edge	and	crouched.
Quick	Ben	held	his	breath	as	the	figure	leaned	forward.
Kalam	 hadn't	 gone	 far.	 He	 gripped	 the	 roof's	 gables.	 When	 the	 attacker's
upper	body	came	into	view,	blotting	out	the	stars	behind	it,	he	surged	upward	on
the	strength	of	one	arm,	his	other	shooting	up	to	close	on	the	assassin's	neck	with	a
vicelike	grip.	Kalam	jerked	the	assassin	downward,	at	the	same	time	bringing	up
his	 knee.	 The	 attacker's	 cloth-wrapped	 face	 met	 his	 knee	 with	 a	 crunch.	 Kalam,
still	gripping	the	gable	with	one	hand,	gave	the	now	limp	figure	a	shake,	then	sent
the	body	spiraling	down	to	the	street	below.
Gasping,	 he	 pulled	 himself	 back	 onto	 the	 roof.	 At	 the	 far	 end	 he	 saw	 the
second	assassin	whirl	around.	Growling,	Kalam	surged	to	his	feet	and	sprinted	at
the	figure.
The	unknown	assassin	stepped	back	as	if	startled,	then	brought	a	hand	down
and	promptly	vanished.
Kalam	slid	to	a	stop	and	stood	crouched,	both	hands	hanging	at	his	sides.
“I	see	her,”	Quick	Ben	whispered.
With	 a	 hiss	 Kalam	 spun	 in	 a	 full	 circle,	 then	 danced	 to	 one	 side,	 putting	 his
back	to	the	roof's	edge.	“I	don't.”
“She's	putting	energy	into	it,”	Quick	Ben	said.	“I	keep	losing	her.	Wait,	Kal.”
The	wizard	fell	silent.
Kalam's	head	snapped	with	every	muted	sound.	His	breath	gusted	in	and	out
from	 his	 nostrils,	 his	 hands	 twitched.	 Wait.	 A	 low	 rumble	 came	 from	 his	 chest.
Wait	for	what?	A	knife	in	his	throat?
All	 at	 once	 the	 night	 exploded	 with	 sound	 and	 fire.	 The	 attacker	 burst	 into
view	 immediately	 in	 front	 of	 Kalam,	 dagger	 flashing	 at	 his	 chest.	 Smoke	 and
sparks	rained	from	her	but	she	moved	as	if	unaffected.	Kalam	twisted	to	one	side,
trying	to	avoid	the	blade.	The	dagger	tore	through	his	shirt	below	his	ribs,	sinking
deep	into	his	flesh	then	ripping	sideways.	He	felt	a	hot	gush	of	blood	as	he	drove
a	fist	into	the	woman's	 solar	plexus.	She	gasped,	reeling	back,	threads	of	blood
whipping	from	the	dagger	in	her	right	hand.	Kalam	charged	forward	with	a	snarl.
He	closed	and,	ignoring	the	assassin's	dagger,	punched	into	her	chest	again.	Ribs
cracked.	 His	 other	 hand	 flat-palmed	 her	 forehead.	 The	 assassin	 sprawled


backward,	landing	with	a	thump	on	the	roof.	Her	body	stilled.
Kalam	 sank	 to	 one	 knee,	 drawing	 in	 gulps	 of	 air.	 “Wait,	 you	 said,	 dammit!
What	the	hell's	wrong	with	you,	Quick?”	He	pushed	a	knot	of	cloth	into	the	wound
below	his	ribcage.	“Quick?”
There	 was	 no	 reply.	 He	 tensed,	 then	 turned	 and	 scanned	 the	 lower	 rooftops.
Bodies	 lay	 scattered	 here	 and	 there.	 The	 warehouse	 roof,	 where	 he'd	 seen	 two
figures	land	behind	their	mark,	was	empty.	Groaning	softly,	he	sank	down	onto	his
knees.
With	 the	 woman's	 attack	 he'd	 heard	 something	 amid	 the	 flashing	 fires.	 A
boom,	 no,	 two	 booms,	 very	 close	 together.	 An	 exchange	 of	 magic.	 His	 breath
caught.	Was	there	a	third	assassin?	A	wizard?	Quick	Ben	had	damaged	this	one,
but	 someone	 else	 had	 damaged	 Quick	 Ben.	 “Oh,	 Hood,”	 he	 whispered,	 glaring
about.
Rallick's	 first	 intimation	 of	 trouble	 was	 a	 sharp	 blow	 between	 his	 shoulder
blades.	The	breath	burst	from	his	lungs,	carrying	with	it	the	ability	to	move.	His
back	 throbbed,	 and	 he	 knew	 he'd	 been	 hit	 by	 a	 quarrel,	 but	 the	 Jazeraint	 armor
under	his	shirt	had	withstood	the	impact—the	quarrel's	spiked	head	had	pierced
the	iron	but	had	been	too	spent	to	push	farther.	Through	the	thumping	pulse	in	his
ears	he	caught	a	pair	of	footsteps	approaching	him	from	behind.
From	the	shadows	below	came	Ocelot's	voice,	“Nom?	What's	happening?”
Behind	 Rallick	 the	 footsteps	 stopped,	 and	 there	 came	 the	 soft	 clacking	 of	 a
crossbow	being	cocked.	Rallick's	wind	returned,	the	numbness	receding	from	his
body.	His	own	weapon	lay	beside	him,	ready.	He	waited.
“Nom?”
A	soft	footfall	sounded	behind	him	and	to	the	left.	In	one	motion	Rallick	rolled
onto	 his	 back,	 grasped	 his	 crossbow,	 sat	 up	 and	 fired.	 The	 assassin,	 less	 than
fifteen	feet	away,	was	thrown	back	by	the	quarrel's	impact,	its	weapon	flying.
Rallick	heaved	himself	to	one	side,	only	now	seeing	the	second	attacker	well
behind	 the	 first.	 The	 figure	 crouched	 and	 fired	 its	 crossbow.	 The	 quarrel	 caught
Rallick's	upper	chest	on	 the	right,	then	ricocheted	up	past	his	head	to	 disappear
into	 the	 darkness.	 The	 blow	 left	 his	 right	 arm	 numb.	 He	 struggled	 to	 his	 feet,
unsheathing	his	knife,	the	hooked	blade	a	blue	flicker	in	the	night.
The	assassin	opposite	him	took	a	careful	step	forward,	then	backed	away	to
the	far	edge	and	dropped	over	the	side.
“Hood's	Breath,”	came	Ocelot's	voice	beside	Rallick.	He	turned	but	saw	no


one.
“He	saw	my	magic,”	Ocelot	said.	“Good	work	on	the	first	one,	Nom.	Maybe
we	can	finally	determine	who	these	people	are.”
“I	 don't	 think	 so,”	 Rallick	 said,	 his	 eyes	 on	 the	 motionless	 body.	 An
incandescent	shimmer	now	wreathed	it.
As	the	body	disappeared	Ocelot	cursed.	“Some	kind	of	recall	spell,”	he	said.
Suddenly	 the	 Clan	 Master	 appeared	 in	 front	 of	 Rallick.	 His	 face	 twisted	 into	 a
snarl	as	he	glared	about.	“We	set	the	trap,	we	end	up	dead.”
Rallick	did	not	reply.	He	reached	over	his	shoulder,	pulled	out	the	quarrel	and
tossed	it	to	one	side.	The	trappers	had	become	the	trapped,	that	was	true,	but	he
felt	 certain	 that	 the	 man	 who'd	 followed	 him	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 these
newcomers.	 He	 turned	 and	 gazed	 up	 at	 the	 roof	 where	 his	 follower	 had	 been
stationed.	 Even	 as	 he	 watched	 there	 was	 a	 flash	 of	 red	 and	 yellow	 light	 and	 a
double	 thunderclap,	 and	 in	 that	 instant	 Rallick	 saw	 a	 silhouetted	 figure	 at	 the
roof's	 edge,	 defending	 itself	 from	 a	 frontal	 attack.	 The	 flash	 winked	 out	 leaving
only	darkness.
“Magery,”	Ocelot	whispered.	“High-power	stuff,	too.	Come	on,	we're	getting
out	of	here.”
They	left	quickly,	climbing	down	into	the	warehouse	court.
Once	she	had	marked	them,	Sorry	could	find	the	fat	little	man	and	the	Coin	Bearer
effortlessly.	 Though	 she'd	 intended	 to	 trail	 this	 Kruppe	 after	 leaving	 Kalam	 and
Quick	Ben	in	the	hut,	something	had	drawn	her	instead	to	the	boy.	A	suspicion,	a
sense	 that	 his	 actions	 were—at	 least	 for	 now—more	 important	 than	 Kruppe's
meanderings.
The	Coin	Bearer	was	the	last	of	Oponn's	influence,	and	the	god's	most	vital
player	 in	 the	 game.	 Thus	 far,	 she'd	 done	 well	 in	 eliminating	 the	 other	 potential
players—men	 like	 Captain	 Paran,	 who	 had	 been	 the	 Adjunct's	 aide	 and,	 by
extension,	a	servant	to	the	Empress.	And	there	had	been	that	Claw	Leader	in	Pale,
the	 one	 she	 had	 garotted.	 On	 her	 path	 to	 the	 Bridgeburners,	 others	 had	 been
removed	as	well,	but	only	as	necessary.
She	knew	that	the	boy	would	have	to	die,	yet	something	within	her	seemed	to
be	fighting	that	conclusion,	and	it	was	a	part	of	her	she	could	not	recognize.	She'd
been	 taken,	 born	 a	 killer	 two	 years	 ago	 on	 a	 coastal	 road.	 The	 body	 she	 dwelt
within	 was	 convenient,	 suitably	 unmarred	 by	 the	 events	 of	 a	 dramatic	 life—a
young	 girl's	 body,	 a	 young	 girl	 whose	 mind	 was	 no	 match	 for	 the	 power	 that
overwhelmed	it,	obliterated	it.


But	 was	 it	 obliterated?	 What	 had	 the	 coin	 touched	 inside	 her?	 And	 whose
voice	was	this	that	spoke	with	such	power	and	determination	in	her	head?	It	had
come	upon	her	before,	when	Whiskeyjack	had	uttered	the	word	Seer.
She	tried	hard	to	remember	any	dealings	she	might	have	had	with	a	seer	in	the
last	two	years,	but	none	came	to	mind.
She	 pulled	 her	 cloak	 tighter	 about	 her	 shoulders.	 Finding	 the	 boy	 had	 been
easy,	but	as	to	what	he	was	up	to,	that	was	another	matter.	On	the	surface	it	looked
no	more	complicated	than	a	simple	theft.	Crokus	had	stood	in	an	alley	studying	a
lighted	 window	 on	 the	 third	 floor	 of	 an	 estate,	 waiting	 until	 the	 light	 went	 out.
Wrapped	in	unnatural	shadows	as	she	was,	he	had	not	seen	her	as	he	scaled	the
slick	wall	she	leaned	against.	He	climbed	with	impressive	grace	and	skill.
After	he'd	gone	she	found	another	vantage-point,	which	allowed	her	full	view
of	 the	 room's	 balcony	 and	 sliding	 doors.	 This	 had	 meant	 entering	 the	 estate's
garden.	 But	 there	 had	 been	 only	 one	 guard,	 patrolling	 the	 grounds.	 She'd	 killed
him	effortlessly	and	now	stood	beneath	a	tree	with	her	eyes	on	the	balcony.
Crokus	 had	 already	 reached	 it,	 had	 picked	 the	 lock	 and	 entered	 the	 room
beyond.	 He	 was	 quite	 good,	 she	 had	 to	 admit.	 But	 what	 thief	 would	 then	 spend
close	 to	 half	 an	 hour	 in	 the	 chamber	 he	 was	 robbing?	 Half	 an	 hour	 and	 still
counting.	 She'd	 heard	 no	 alarms,	 seen	 no	 lights	 spring	 to	 life	 behind	 any	 of	 the
estate's	other	windows,	nothing	to	indicate	that	anything	had	gone	wrong.	So	what
was	Crokus	doing	in	there?
Sorry	stiffened.	Sorcery	had	burgeoned	in	another	part	of	Darujhistan,	and	its
flavor	 was	 known	 to	 her.	 She	 hesitated,	 unable	 to	 decide.	 Leave	 the	 lad	 and
investigate	this	new,	deadly	emanation?	Or	remain	here	until	Crokus	reemerged	or
was	discovered?
Then	 she	 saw	 something	 behind	 the	 balcony's	 sliding	 doors	 that	 ended	 her
indecision.
Sweat	ran	down	Crokus's	face	and	he	found	he	had	repeatedly	to	wipe	it	from	his
eyes.	He'd	beaten	the	new	triggers	to	get	inside—the	one	on	the	balcony,	the	tripwire	 at	 the	 latch—and	 now	 padded	 to	 the	 makeup	 table.	 Once	 there	 he	 froze,
unable	to	move.	Idiot!	What	am	I	doing	here?
He	 listened	 to	 her	 soft,	 regular	 breathing	 behind	 him—like	 the	 breath	 of	 a
dragon—he	 was	 certain	 he	 could	 feel	 it	 gusting	 against	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck.
Crokus	 looked	 up	 and	 scowled	 at	 his	 own	 reflection	 in	 the	 mirror.	 What	 was
happening	 to	 him?	 If	 he	 didn't	 leave	 soon	 .	 .	 .	 He	 began	 to	 remove	 his	 bag's
contents.	 When	 he'd	 finished	 he	 glanced	 again	 at	 his	 own	 face—to	 see	 another


behind	it,	a	round,	white	face	watching	him	from	the	bed.
The	 girl	 spoke.	 “Since	 you're	 putting	 it	 all	 back,	 I'd	 prefer	 the	 proper
arrangement.	My	makeup	jar	goes	to	the	left	of	the	mirror,”	she	said,	in	a	whisper.
“The	hairbrush	goes	to	the	right.	Have	you	my	earrings	as	well?	Just	leave	them
on	the	dresser.”
Crokus	groaned.	He'd	even	forgotten	to	cover	his	face.	“Don't	try	anything,”
he	growled.	“I've	returned	everything,	and	now	I'll	leave.	Understand?”
The	girl	pulled	her	blankets	about	her	and	moved	to	the	bed's	end.	“Threats
won't	 work,	 thief,”	 she	 said.	 “All	 I	 need	 do	 is	 scream	 and	 my	 father's	 Master
Guardsman	 will	 be	 here	 in	 seconds.	 Would	 you	 cross	 your	 dagger	 with	 his
shortsword?”
“No,”	 said	 Crokus.	 “I'd	 put	 it	 to	 your	 throat	 instead.	 With	 you	 as	 a	 hostage,
with	you	between	me	and	the	guard,	will	he	swing	his	blade	at	me?	Unlikely.”
The	girl	paled.	“As	a	thief,	you'd	lose	a	hand.	But	kidnapping	a	high-born,	it'd
be	the	high	gallows	for	you.”
Crokus	tried	to	shrug	casually.	He	glanced	at	the	balcony,	gauging	how	fast	he
could	be	outside	and	then	up	on	the	roof.	That	new	trip-wire	was	a	nuisance.
“Stay	where	you	are,”	the	girl	commanded.	“I'm	lighting	a	lantern.”
“Why?”	Crokus	demanded,	fidgeting.
“To	 see	 you	 better,”	 she	 replied,	 and	 light	 bloomed	 in	 the	 room	 from	 the
lantern	in	her	lap.
He	scowled.	He	hadn't	noticed	it	there,	so	close	at	hand.	She	was	ruining	his
plans	even	as	he	made	them.	“What's	the	point	in	seeing	me	better?”	he	snarled.
“Just	call	your	damn	guards	and	have	me	arrested.	Be	done	with	it.”	He	pulled	the
silk	turban	from	his	shirt	and	dropped	it	on	the	tabletop.	“That's	all	of	it,”	he	said.
The	girl	glanced	at	the	turban	and	shrugged	easily.	“That	was	to	be	part	of	my
costume	for	the	Fête,”	she	said.	“I've	since	found	a	nicer	one.”
“What,”	he	hissed,	“do	you	want	with	me?”
Fear	 showed	 momentarily	 on	 her	 face	 at	 his	 desperate	 outburst,	 then	 she
smiled.	 “I	 wish	 to	 know	 why	 a	 thief	 who	 succeeded	 in	 stealing	 all	 my	 jewels
should	now	be	returning	them.	That	isn't	something	thieves	usually	do.”
“With	 good	 reason,”	 he	 muttered,	 more	 to	 himself	 than	 to	 her.	 He	 stepped
forward	then	stopped	as	she	jerked	back	onto	her	bed,	her	eyes	widening.	Crokus
raised	 a	 hand.	 “Sorry,	 didn't	 mean	 to	 frighten	 you.	 Only	 .	 .	 .	 I	 want	 to	 see	 you
better.	That's	all.”
“Why?”


He	was	at	a	loss	for	an	answer	to	that.	After	all,	he	couldn't	very	well	tell	her
he'd	fallen	madly	in	love	with	her.	“What's	your	name?”	he	blurted.
“Challice	D'Arle.	What's	yours?”
Challice.	 “Of	 course,”	 he	 said,	 rolling	 his	 eyes.	 “You	 would	 be	 named
something	like	that.”	He	glared	at	her.	“My	name?	None	of	your	business.	Thieves
don't	introduce	themselves	to	their	victims.”
Her	eyebrows	rose.	“Victim?	But	I'm	no	longer	a	victim,	am	I?	You've	settled
that	by	returning.	I'd	think,”	she	said	slyly,	“you're	more	or	less	obliged	to	tell	me
your	name,	considering	what	you're	doing.	And	you	must	be	the	type	who	treats
obligations	seriously,	no	matter	how	strange	they	seem.”
Crokus	frowned	at	that.	What	was	she	talking	about?	What	did	she	know	about
how	 he	 looked	 at	 obligations?	 And	 why	 was	 she	 right?	 “My	 name,”	 he	 sighed,
defeated,	“is	Crokus	Younghand.	And	you're	the	daughter	of	the	high	born	D'Arle
who	all	those	suitors	are	lining	up	to	be	introduced	to.	But	one	day	you'll	see	me
in	that	line,	Challice,	and	only	you	will	know	where	you	last	saw	me.	It'll	be	a
formal	introduction,	and	I'll	bring	a	gift	as	is	correct.”	He	stared	at	her,	horrified
by	his	own	words.
Her	 wide	 eyes	 held	 his,	 emotion	 bright	 in	 them—emotion	 he'd	 no	 hope	 of
understanding—then	she	burst	out	laughing.	She	immediately	clapped	a	hand	over
her	 mouth,	 then	 jolted	 forward	 on	 the	 bed.	 “You'd	 better	 go,	 Crokus.	 Someone
will	have	heard	me.	Quickly,	and	beware	the	trip-wire!”
Crokus	moved	woodenly	to	the	balcony's	sliding	doors.	Her	laughter	had	been
the	 final	 punctuation	 to	 all	 his	 dreams.	 He	 felt	 dead	 inside,	 except	 for	 a	 cynic's
chuckle	 that	 might	 have	 been	 his	 own,	 given	 the	 odd	 look	 she	 threw	 him.	 Her
blankets	had	fallen	down	around	her,	and	once	again	she	was	naked.	It	astonished
him	in	a	distant	way	that	she	hadn't	even	seemed	to	notice.
A	voice	came	from	beyond	the	door	leading	to	the	hallway,	indistinct.
The	girl	hissed,	“Hurry,	you	fool!”
Alarm	 bells	 jangled	 in	 his	 head,	 awakening	 him.	 He	 had	 to	 move,	 and	 fast.
Crokus	stepped	over	the	trip-wire	and	opened	the	door.	He	paused	to	glance	back
at	her,	and	smiled	as	she	clutched	the	blankets	to	her	neck.	Well,	at	least	he'd	won
that	much.
A	knock	sounded	on	the	opposite	door.
Crokus	emerged	onto	the	balcony	and	hitched	himself	up	onto	the	railing.	He
looked	 down	 into	 the	 garden	 and	 almost	 fell.	 The	 guard	 was	 gone.	 In	 his	 place
stood	 a	 woman—and,	 though	 she	 was	 cloaked,	 something	 about	 her	 triggered
instant	 recognition.	 The	 woman	 from	 the	 bar,	 and	 she	 was	 looking	 right	 at	 him


with	dark	eyes	that	burned	him	deep	inside.
The	door	in	the	room	opened	and	Crokus	shook	himself.	Damn	that	woman,
anyway!	 Damn	 both	 of	 them!	 He	 grasped	 the	 eaves	 above	 his	 head	 and	 swung
lithely	up	and	out	of	sight.
Kalam	 crouched	 motionless	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 rooftop,	 a	 knife	 in	 each	 hand.
Around	him	was	silence,	the	night	air	tense	and	heavy.	Long	minutes	 passed.	At
times	he	convinced	himself	he	was	alone,	that	Quick	Ben	and	the	other	wizard	had
left	the	roof;	that	they	hunted	each	other	in	the	sky	overhead,	or	in	the	alleys	and
streets	below,	or	on	another	roof.	But	then	he'd	hear	something,	a	drawn	breath,	a
scuff	 of	 cloth	 against	 leather,	 or	 a	 wisp	 of	 wind	 would	 brush	 his	 cheek	 on	 this
windless	night.
Then,	 before	 his	 eyes,	 the	 darkness	 was	 shattered.	 Two	 shapes	 appeared
hovering	 over	 the	 rooftop.	 The	 assassin	 had	 found	 Quick	 Ben,	 attacking	 with	 a
bolt	 of	 fire	 that	 seemed	 to	 stun	 the	 wizard,	 then	 swiftly	 closing	 the	 distance
between	himself	and	the	dazed	man.
Kalam	 surged	 forward	 to	 intercept.	 Quick	 Ben	 vanished	 then	 reappeared
immediately	 behind	 the	 assassin.	 The	 blue	 flash	 of	 power	 bursting	 from	 the
wizard's	 hands	 struck	 the	 magic-wielding	 assassin	 full	 in	 the	 back.	 Clothes
aflame,	the	man	tumbled	through	the	air.
Quick	Ben	whirled	to	Kalam.	“Come	on!	Get	moving!”
Kalam	 ran,	 his	 friend	 flying	 beside	 him.	 As	 they	 reached	 the	 roof's	 edge	 he
turned	for	a	last	look.	The	assassin	mage	had	somehow	snuffed	the	fire	from	his
clothes	 and	 was	 regaining	 his	 balance.	 At	 the	 far	 edge	 two	 of	 his	 comrades
appeared.
“Jump,”	Quick	Ben	said.	“I'll	stall	them.”
“With	what?”	Kalam	demanded,	tottering	on	the	edge.
In	answer	Quick	Ben	produced	a	small	vial.	He	spun	in	the	air	and	hurled	it.
Kalam	cursed,	then	jumped.
The	vial	struck	the	rooftop	and	shattered	with	a	thin	tinkle.	Beyond,	the	three
assassins	 paused.	 Quick	 Ben	 remained,	 his	 eyes	 on	 the	 white	 smoke	 rising	 from
the	glass	shards.	A	figure	took	form	within	the	smoke,	growing	in	size.	Its	shape
was	almost	insubstantial,	the	smoke	stretching	like	threads	in	places,	curling	like
wool	in	others.	All	that	was	visible	within	it	was	its	eyes,	two	black	slits,	which
it	swung	to	Quick	Ben.
“You,”	it	said,	its	voice	that	of	a	child,	“are	not	Master	Tayschrenn.”


“That's	 right,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said,	 “but	 I'm	 in	 his	 legion.	 Your	 service	 remains
with	 the	 Empire.”	 He	 pointed	 across	 the	 roof.	 “There	 are	 three	 who	 are	 the
Empire's	enemies,	Demon.	Tiste	Andii,	here	to	oppose	the	Malazan	Empire.”
“My	name	is	Pearl,”	the	Korvalah	demon	said	softly,	then	turned	to	the	three
assassins,	 who	 had	 spread	 out	 along	 the	 far	 edge.	 “They	 are	 not	 fleeing,”	 Pearl
said,	with	a	note	of	surprise.
Quick	 Ben	 wiped	 sweat	 from	 his	 forehead.	 He	 glanced	 down.	 Kalam	 was	 a
vague	 shape	 waiting	 in	 the	 alley	 below.	 “I	 know,”	 he	 said	 to	 Pearl.	 That
observation	 had	 unnerved	 him	 as	 well.	 One	 of	 Tayschrenn's	 Korvalahrai	 could
level	a	city	if	it	so	chose.
“They	 accept	 my	 challenge,”	 Pearl	 said,	 facing	 Quick	 Ben	 again.	 “Should	 I
pity	them?”
“No,”	he	answered.	“Just	kill	them	and	be	done	with	it.”
“Then	I	return	to	Master	Tayschrenn.”
“Yes.”
“What	is	your	name,	Wizard?”
He	hesitated,	then	said,	“Ben	Adaephon	Delat.”
“You	are	supposed	to	be	dead,”	Pearl	said.	“Your	name	is	so	marked	on	the
scrolls	of	those	High	Mages	who	fell	to	the	Empire	in	Seven	Cities.”
Quick	Ben	glanced	up.	“Others	are	coming,	Pearl.	You	are	in	for	a	fight.”
The	demon	lifted	its	gaze.	Above	them	glowing	figures	descended,	five	in	the
first	wave,	one	in	the	second.	This	last	one	radiated	such	power	that	Quick	Ben
shrank	 back,	 his	 blood	 chilled.	 The	 figure	 had	 something	 long	 and	 narrow
strapped	to	its	back.
“Ben	Adaephon	Delat,”	Pearl	said	plaintively,	“see	the	last	who	comes.	You
send	me	to	my	death.”
“I	know,”	Quick	Ben	whispered.
“Flee,	then.	I	will	hold	them	enough	to	ensure	your	escape,	no	more.”
Quick	Ben	sank	down	past	the	roof.
Before	he	passed	from	sight	Pearl	spoke	again.	“Ben	Adaephon	Delat,	do	you
pity	me?”
“Yes,”	he	replied	softly,	then	pivoted	and	dropped	down	into	darkness.
Rallick	walked	down	the	center	of	the	street.	On	either	side	of	the	wide	corridor
rose	columns	from	which	gas	torches	jutted,	casting	circles	of	blue	light	onto	the


wet	cobblestones.	The	light	rain	had	returned,	coating	everything	in	a	slick	sheen.
To	his	right	and	beyond	the	resident	houses	lining	that	side	of	the	street,	the	pale
domes	of	the	High	Thalanti	on	the	hill	glistened	against	the	deep	gray	sky.
The	 temple	 was	 among	 the	 oldest	 structures	 in	 the	 city,	 its	 founding	 blocks
over	two	thousand	years	old.	The	Thalanti	monks	had	come,	like	so	many	others,
carried	 on	 the	 wings	 of	 the	 rumor.	 Rallick	 knew	 less	 about	 the	 story	 than	 did
Murillio	and	Coll.	One	of	the	Elder	Peoples	was	believed	to	have	been	entombed
among	the	hills,	an	individual	of	great	wealth	and	power,	that	was	the	extent	of	his
knowledge.
But	it	had	been	a	rumor	with	many	consequences.	If	not	for	the	thousands	of
shafts	 sunk	 into	 the	 earth	 the	 caverns	 of	 gas	 would	 never	 have	 been	 found.	 And
while	many	of	those	shafts	had	collapsed	or	had	been	forgotten	over	the	centuries,
still	others	remained,	now	connected	by	tunnels.
In	one	of	the	many	chambers	that	honeycombed	the	ground	beneath	the	temple
waited	Vorcan,	Master	of	Assassins.	Rallick	imagined	Ocelot	making	his	descent,
burdened	with	the	news	of	disaster,	and	it	brought	a	smile	to	his	lean	face.	He'd
never	 met	 Vorcan,	 but	 Ocelot	 suited	 those	 catacombs—just	 another	 of	 the	 city's
rats	rushing	about	beneath	his	feet.
One	day,	Rallick	knew,	he'd	become	a	Clan	Leader,	he'd	meet	Vorcan	face	to
face	somewhere	below.	He	wondered	at	how	it	would	change	him,	and	traveling
down	this	path	soured	his	thoughts	with	displeasure.
He	had	no	option.	Once,	he	thought,	as	he	approached	the	block	of	the	Phoenix
Inn,	long	ago,	there'd	been	choices	he	could	have	made	that	would	have	sent	him
on	 a	 different	 path.	 But	 those	 days	 were	 dead,	 and	 the	 future	 held	 only	 nights,	 a
stretch	 of	 darkness	 that	 led	 down	 to	 the	 eternal	 dark.	 He	 would	 meet	 Vorcan,
eventually,	and	he'd	swear	his	life	to	the	Guild	Master,	and	that	would	be	that,	the
closing	of	the	final	door.
And	 his	 sense	 of	 outrage	 at	 the	 injustices	 around	 him,	 the	 corruptions	 of	 the
world,	would	wither	in	the	unlit	tunnels	beneath	Darujhistan.	In	the	exactness	of
the	methods	of	assassination,	his	final	victim	would	be	himself.
And	this,	more	than	anything,	made	his	and	Murillio's	scheme	the	last	act	of
humanity	 he'd	 ever	 make.	 Betrayal	 was	 the	 greatest	 of	 all	 crimes	 in	 Rallick's
mind,	for	it	took	all	that	was	human	within	a	person	and	made	it	a	thing	of	pain.	In
the	face	of	that,	murder	itself	was	surcease:	it	was	quick,	and	it	ended	the	anguish
and	despair	of	a	life	without	hope.	If	all	went	as	planned,	Lady	Simtal	and	those
men	who'd	conspired	with	her	in	the	betrayal	of	her	husband,	Lord	Coll,	would
die.	Could	that	right	the	wrong,	could	it	even	the	scales	of	retribution?	No,	but	it


might	return	to	a	man	his	life	and	his	hope.
For	himself,	Rallick,	such	gifts	had	long	since	 been	lost,	and	he	was	not	the
kind	of	man	to	stir	the	ashes.	No	embers	survived,	no	flame	could	be	born	anew.
Life	 belonged	 to	 other	 people,	 and	 his	 only	 claim	 to	 it	 was	 his	 power	 to	 take	 it
from	them.	Nor	would	he	recognize	hope	if	it	came	to	him.	Too	much	a	stranger,
too	long	a	ghost.
As	he	neared	the	inn's	entrance,	Rallick	saw	Crokus	approaching	from	down
the	street.	He	increased	his	pace.	“Crokus,”	he	called.
The	boy	flinched,	then,	seeing	Rallick,	he	stopped	and	waited.
Rallick	took	his	arm	and	steered	him	toward	the	alley	without	saying	a	word.
Once	 in	 the	 shadows	 he	 tightened	 his	 grip,	 swung	 Crokus	 round	 and	 pulled	 him
close.	 “Listen	 to	 me,”	 he	 hissed,	 his	 face	 inches	 from	 the	 boy's	 own	 astonished
visage,	“the	Guild's	best	were	slaughtered	tonight.	This	isn't	a	game.	You	stay	off
the	rooftops,	do	you	understand	me?”
Crokus	nodded.
“And	tell	your	uncle	this.	There's	a	Claw	in	the	city.”
The	boy's	eyes	widened.
“And,”	Rallick	continued,	“there's	someone	else.	Someone	coming	down	from
the	sky,	killing	everything	in	sight.”
“Uncle	Mammot?”
“Just	tell	him.	And	now	listen	carefully,	Crokus.	What	I'm	about	to	say	is	from
me	to	you,	one	to	one,	understand?”
Crokus	nodded	again,	his	face	pale.
“You	 stay	 on	 this	 path	 and	 you'll	 end	 up	 dead.	 I	 don't	 give	 a	 damn	 how
exciting	 it	 all	 seems—what's	 excitement	 to	 you	 is	 desperation	 to	 others.	 Stop
feeding	off	the	city's	lifeblood,	lad.	There's	no	hero's	role	in	sucking	others	dry.
Am	I	understood?”
“Yes,”	Crokus	whispered.
Rallick	 released	 the	 boy's	 arm	 and	 stepped	 back.	 “Now,	 leave.”	 He	 shoved
Crokus	 up	 the	 street,	 watched	 the	 boy	 stagger	 away	 and	 disappear	 around	 a
corner.	 He	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath,	 surprised	 to	 find	 his	 hands	 trembling	 as	 he
loosened	his	cloak's	collar.
Murillio	stepped	from	the	shadows.	“I'm	not	sure	it'll	work,	friend,	but	it	was
a	good	try.”	He	laid	a	hand	on	the	assassin's	shoulder.	“Master	Baruk	has	a	job	for
us.	Kruppe	insists	we	bring	Crokus	along.”
Rallick	frowned.	“Along?	Are	we	leaving	Darujhistan,	then?”


“Afraid	so.”
“Go	without	me,”	Rallick	said.	“Tell	Baruk	I	can't	be	found.	Everything's	at	a
critical	juncture—our	planning	included.”
“Something	else	happening,	Nom?”
“You	heard	the	message	I	gave	Crokus	for	his	uncle?”
Murillio	shook	his	head.	“I	came	late	to	your	scene.	Saw	you	dragging	the	lad
into	the	alley.”
“Well,”	 Rallick	 said,	 “let's	 go	 inside.	 It's	 been	 a	 night	 to	 make	 Hood	 smile,
friend.”
Together,	the	two	men	strode	from	the	alley.	In	the	street	outside	the	Phoenix
Inn,	dawn's	light	crept	through	the	mists	of	the	lingering	rain.
In	the	center	of	the	rooftop	lay	a	large	patch	of	ash	and	bone	that	crackled	faintly
and	 cast	 out	 the	 occasional	 hissing	 spark.	 Anomander	 Rake	 slammed	 his	 sword
into	its	sheath.	“I	sent	twelve	of	you,”	he	said,	to	the	black-caped	figure	standing
beside	him,	“and	I	see	but	eight.	What	happened,	Serrat?”
The	 Tiste	 Andii	 woman	 was	 clearly	 exhausted.	 “We've	 been	 working	 hard,
Lord.”
“Details,”	Rake	said	abruptly.
Serrat	 sighed.	 “Jekaral	 has	 a	 broken	 neck	 and	 three	 cracked	 ribs.	 Boruld's
face	is	a	mess,	broken	nose,	broken	cheekbone,	broken	jaw—”
“Who	 were	 they	 fighting?”	 Rake	 asked,	 turning	 to	 his	 lieutenant	 in
exasperation.	“Has	the	Guild	Master	come	out	of	hiding?”
“No,	 Lord.	 Both	 Jekaral	 and	 Boruld	 fell	 to	 a	 single	 man,	 not	 of	 the	 city's
Guild.”
Rake's	eyes	flashed	dangerously.	“Claw?”
“Possibly.	He	was	accompanied	by	a	High	Mage.	The	one	who	gave	 us	this
Korvalah	to	play	with.”
“It	 had	 the	 smell	 of	 Empire	 about	 it,”	 Rake	 muttered,	 his	 gaze	 on	 the
smoldering	patch	that	had	begun	to	eat	its	way	into	the	roof.	“One	of	Tayschrenn's
conjurings,	 I	 should	 think.”	 A	 savage	 grin	 flashed.	 “Pity	 to	 have	 disturbed	 his
sleep	this	night.”
“Dashtal	was	struck	by	a	poisoned	quarrel,”	Serrat	said.	“One	of	the	Guild's
assassins	managed	that.”	She	hesitated.	“Lord.	We	were	hard-pressed	in	Brood's
campaign.	 We're	 in	 need	 of	 rest.	 Mistakes	 were	 made	 this	 night.	 Some	 of	 the


Guild	 slipped	 through	 our	 fingers,	 and	 had	 you	 not	 answered	 my	 request,	 we
would	have	suffered	more	casualties	destroying	this	demon.”
Rake	 placed	 his	 hands	 on	 his	 hips	 and	 surveyed	 the	 morning	 sky.	 After	 a
moment	he	sighed.	“Ah,	Serrat.	Don't	think	me	insensitive.	But	the	Guild	Master
must	 be	 flushed.	 This	 Guild	 must	 be	 shut	 down.”	 He	 eyed	 his	 lieutenant.	 “This
Claw	you	encountered,	do	you	think	a	meet	was	being	established?”
“Not	a	meet,”	Serrat	answered.	“A	trap.”
Rake	nodded.	“Good.”	He	paused,	his	eyes	matching	Serrat's	with	a	shade	of
violet.	“Return	to	Moon's	Spawn,	then.	Have	the	High	Priestess	herself	attend	to
Jekaral.”
Serrat	bowed.	“Thank	you,	Lord.”	She	turned	and	gestured	to	the	others.
“Oh,”	 Rake	 said,	 raising	 his	 voice	 to	 address	 his	 cadre	 of	 assassin-mages,
“one	last	thing.	You've	done	well,	exceptionally	well.	You've	earned	a	rest.	Three
days	and	nights	are	yours	to	do	with	as	you	please.”
Serrat	bowed	again.	“We	will	mourn,	Lord.”
“Mourn?”
“The	 poisoned	 quarrel	 killed	 Dashtal.	 The	 poison	 was	 the	 product	 of	 an
alchemist,	Lord.	One	of	some	ability.	It	contained	paralt.”
“I	see.”
“Will	you	return	with	us?”
“No.”
The	lieutenant	bowed	a	third	time.	As	one,	the	eight	Tiste	Andii	raised	their
hands,	then	vanished.
Rake	glanced	down	at	the	sizzling	patch	just	as	it	ate	through	the	roof	and	fell
into	darkness.	There	came	a	faint	crash	from	below.	Lord	Anomander	Rake	swung
his	gaze	back	to	the	sky,	then	sighed.
_______
Sergeant	 Whiskeyjack	 rocked	 his	 chair	 onto	 its	 back	 two	 legs	 and	 anchored	 it
against	the	crumbling	wall.	The	small,	dingy	room	reeked	of	urine	and	damp.	Two
single	beds,	wood-framed	with	burlap	mattresses	stuffed	with	straw,	ran	along	the
wall	to	his	left.	The	three	other	rickety	chairs	had	been	pulled	up	around	the	lone
table	in	the	room's	center.	Above	the	table	hung	an	oil	lantern,	which	shone	down
on	Fiddler,	Hedge,	and	Mallet	as	they	sat	playing	cards.
They'd	done	their	work,	finishing	with	the	coming	of	dusk	just	outside	Majesty


Hall.	Until	the	alliance	with	the	Moranth,	the	Malazan	saboteur	had	been	nothing
more	 than	 a	 glorified	 sapper,	 a	 digger	 of	 tunnels	 and	 breaker	 of	 city	 gates.
Moranth	alchemy	had	introduced	to	the	Empire	a	variety	of	chemical	and	powder
explosives,	 most	 of	 which	 detonated	 when	 exposed	 to	 air.	 Applying	 a	 slowworking	acid	worm-holed	the	unfired	clay	shells.	Sabotage	had	become	an	art,	the
precise	equation	of	clay	thickness	and	acid	strength	was	tricky,	and	few	survived
to	learn	from	their	mistakes.
To	 Whiskeyjack's	 mind,	 Hedge	 and	 Fiddler	 were	 terrible	 soldiers.	 He	 had
trouble	 recalling	 the	 last	 time	 they'd	 unsheathed	 their	 shortswords.	 Whatever
discipline	that	had	been	part	of	their	basic	training	had	disintegrated	through	years
in	the	field.	Still,	when	it	came	to	sabotage	they	had	no	equals.
Through	hooded	eyes	Whiskeyjack	studied	the	three	men	sitting	at	the	table.	It
had	been	some	minutes	since	any	of	them	had	made	a	move	or	said	a	word.	One	of
Fiddler's	 new	 games,	 he	 decided,	 the	 man	 was	 forever	 inventing	 new	 ones,
improvising	 the	 rules	 whenever	 they	 gave	 him	 an	 edge.	 Despite	 the	 endless
arguments	Fiddler	was	never	short	of	players.
“And	 that's	 what	 boredom	 can	 do,”	 he	 said	 to	 himself.	 But,	 no,	 it	 was	 more
than	 just	 boredom.	 Waiting	 gnawed,	 especially	 when	 it	 had	 to	 do	 with	 friends.
Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	might	be	facedown	in	some	alley	for	all	they	knew.	And	that
made	it	hard.
Whiskeyjack's	 gaze	 strayed	 to	 one	 of	 the	 beds,	 on	 which	 lay	 his	 armor	 and
longsword.	 Rust	 stained	 the	 hauberk's	 tattered	 chain	 like	 old	 blood.	 The	 links
were	missing	in	some	places,	torn	in	others.	In	his	bones	and	muscles	the	memory
of	 that	 damage	 remained:	 every	 cut,	 every	 blow	 now	 haunted	 him	 with	 aches,
greeting	him	each	morning	like	old	comrades.	The	sword,	with	its	plain	leatherwrapped	grip	and	stub	hilt,	lay	in	its	hide-over-wood	scabbard,	the	belt	and	straps
draped	over	the	bedside.
That	weapon	had	come	to	him	after	his	first	battle,	found	amid	a	field	of	dead.
He'd	 still	 had	 the	 chalk	 of	 his	 father's	 quarry	 on	 his	 boots	 then,	 and	 a	 world's
promise	stretched	out	before	him	on	the	banners	of	Empire.	The	sword	had	come
to	him	shiny,	without	even	so	much	as	a	nick	in	its	honed	blade,	and	he	had	taken	it
as	his	own	personal	standard.
Whiskeyjack's	gaze	lost	its	focus.	His	mind	had	stepped	into	the	gray,	muddy
tracks	 of	 his	 youth,	 where	 he	 walked	 the	 familiar	 path,	 lost	 and	 blinded	 by	 an
unidentifiable	sorrow.
The	 door	 flew	 open,	 carrying	 into	 the	 room	 a	 gust	 of	 steamy	 air	 and	 then
Trotts.	The	Barghast's	coal-dark	eyes	met	the	sergeant's.


Whiskeyjack	stood	quickly.	He	went	to	the	bed	and	retrieved	his	sword.	At	the
table	the	others	remained	intent	on	their	card	game,	their	only	betrayal	of	anxiety	a
subtle	shifting	of	chairs.	Whiskeyjack	pushed	past	Trotts	and	closed	the	door	to	a
crack,	 through	 which	 he	 looked.	 Across	 the	 street,	 at	 the	 mouth	 of	 an	 alley,	 two
figures	 crouched,	 the	 larger	 leaning	 heavily	 against	 the	 other.	 Whiskeyjack's
breath	hissed	through	his	teeth.	“Mallet,”	he	said	over	his	shoulder.
At	the	table	the	healer	frowned	at	the	two	saboteurs,	then	carefully	set	down
his	cards.
The	 two	 figures	 in	 the	 alley	 crossed	 the	 street.	 Whiskeyjack's	 hand	 crept	 to
grip	his	sword.
“Which?”	Mallet	asked,	as	he	rearranged	the	blankets	on	one	of	the	beds.
“Kalam,”	the	sergeant	replied.	The	two	men	reached	the	door	and	he	swung	it
wide	 to	 let	 them	 through,	 then	 shut	 it	 again.	 He	 beckoned	 at	 Trotts,	 who	 walked
over	to	the	curtained	window,	pulling	back	a	corner	to	watch	the	street.
Kalam	 was	 pale,	 sagging	 against	 Quick	 Ben.	 The	 assassin's	 dark	 gray	 shirt
was	soaked	with	blood.	Mallet	moved	to	help	the	wizard	and	together	they	carried
Kalam	 to	 the	 bed.	As	 soon	 as	the	 healer	had	 him	 laid	out,	he	waved	 Quick	Ben
away	and	began	removing	Kalam's	shirt.
Quick	 Ben	 shook	 his	 head	 at	 Whiskeyjack	 and	 sat	 down	 in	 the	 chair	 Mallet
had	 occupied.	 “What's	 the	 game?”	 he	 asked,	 picking	 up	 Mallet's	 cards	 and
frowning	as	he	studied	them.
Neither	Hedge	nor	Fiddler	replied.
“No	 idea,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said,	 as	 he	 walked	 over	 to	 stand	 behind	 Mallet.
“They	just	sit	and	stare.”
Quick	 Ben	 grinned.	 “Ah,	 a	 waiting	 game,	 right,	 Fid?”	 He	 leaned	 back
comfortably	and	stretched	out	his	legs.
Mallet	 glanced	 up	 at	 the	 sergeant.	 “He'll	 be	 down	 for	 a	 while,”	 the	 healer
said.	“The	wound	is	clean,	but	he's	lost	a	lot	of	blood.”
Crouching,	 Whiskeyjack	 studied	 the	 assassin's	 pallid	 face.	 Kalam's	 gaze
remained	sharp,	focused	on	the	sergeant.	“Well?”	Whiskeyjack	demanded.	“What
happened?”
Quick	Ben	answered	behind	him.	“Had	a	bit	of	a	mage	duel	out	there.”
Kalam	nodded	in	confirmation.
“And?”	Whiskeyjack	asked,	straightening	to	glare	at	the	wizard.
Quick	 Ben	 wilted	 slightly	 in	 his	 chair.	 “It	 went	 sour.	 I	 had	 to	 release	 an
Empire	demon	to	get	us	out	alive.”


Everyone	 in	 the	 room	 went	 still.	 At	 the	 window	 Trotts	 turned	 and	 made	 a
tribal	warding	gesture,	tracing	the	woad	lines	on	his	face.
Whiskeyjack's	voice	was	soft.	“It's	loose	in	the	city?”
“No,”	the	wizard	answered.	“It's	dead.”
“Who	did	you	run	into?”	Whiskeyjack	bellowed,	throwing	up	his	hands.
“Not	sure	exactly,”	Quick	Ben	said	quietly.	“Whatever	it	was,	it	took	care	of
the	demon	in	less	than	a	minute.	I	heard	the	death	cry	when	we	were	only	a	block
away.	 Assassin	 mages,	 Sergeant,	 coming	 down	 out	 of	 the	 sky.	 Seemed	 intent	 on
wiping	out	the	city's	Guild.”
Whiskeyjack	returned	to	his	chair	and	dropped	into	it,	the	wood	complaining
beneath	him.	“From	the	sky.	Tiste	Andii.”
“Yes,”	Quick	Ben	muttered.	“We	thought	that.	The	sorcery	had	that	flavor.	Old,
dark,	and	icy	cold.	Kurald	Galain.”
“From	what	we	saw,”	Kalam	added,	“they	did	a	damn	good	job.	No	contact
established,	Sergeant.	It	was	messy	up	there.”
“So	the	Moon's	active	here.”	Whiskeyjack	paused,	then	pounded	his	fist	on	the
chair's	arm.	“Worse,	the	Moon's	lord	is	a	move	ahead	of	us.	He	reckoned	we'd
try	to	contact	the	Guild,	so	what	does	he	do?”
“Takes	out	the	Guild,”	Kalam	said.	“How's	that	for	arrogance?”
“Whatever	 arrogance	 that	 lord	 has,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said,	 grimacing,	 “he's
earned	it.	I'll	give	him	that.	I	wonder	how	good	this	city's	Guild	Master	is—good
enough	to	take	on	Tiste	Andii?	Unlikely.”
“And	about	the	other	thing,”	Quick	Ben	said.	“It	worked.”
The	sergeant	stared	at	the	wizard	for	half	a	dozen	seconds,	then	nodded.
“We	also	ran	into	Sorry,”	Kalam	said,	wincing	as	Mallet	pressed	a	hand	on	his
wound.	The	healer	muttered	under	his	breath.
“Oh?	I	sent	her	after	some	fat	man	she	thought	was	important.	How	come	she
ran	into	you	two?”
Quick	Ben's	brows	had	risen.	“So	she	told	the	truth,	then.	We	don't	know	how
she	found	us,	but	she'd	found	the	man	we	were	looking	for—and	gave	him	to	us.”
Mallet	raised	his	hand.	Where	the	wound	had	been	there	was	now	a	pink	scar.
Kalam	grunted	his	thanks	and	sat	up.
Whiskeyjack	tapped	his	fingers	against	the	chair's	arm.	“If	we	only	knew	who
was	running	this	damn	city,	we	could	try	it	ourselves.”
The	 assassin	 sniffed.	 “If	 we	 start	 taking	 out	 Council	 members,	 maybe	 we'll
flush	out	the	real	rulers.”


The	 sergeant	 frowned.	 “Not	 bad,”	 he	 said,	 rising	 to	 his	 feet.	 “Work	 on	 that.
The	Moon's	lord	knows	we're	here,	now,	with	that	demon	popping	up.	We'll	have
to	move	fast.”
Fiddler	 spoke	 up.	 “We	 could	 blow	 up	 Majesty	 Hall,”	 he	 said,	 smirking	 at
Hedge.
“You've	got	enough	munitions	to	manage	that?”	Whiskeyjack	asked.
Fiddler's	face	fell.	“Well,	uh,	we've	got	enough	to	take	out	an	estate,	maybe.
But	if	we	pull	up	some	of	the	mines	we	planted	.	.	.”
Whiskeyjack	sighed.	“This	is	getting	absurd.	No,	we	leave	things	as	they	are.”
He	watched	the	nonexistent	card	game.	It	seemed	to	involve	complete	immobility.
A	stand-off.	The	sergeant's	eyes	narrowed.	Were	they	trying	to	tell	him	something?
Orange	and	yellow	hues	lit	the	eastern	horizon,	casting	a	coppery	sheen	upon	the
city's	bricks	and	cobbles.	Apart	from	the	dripping	of	water	the	streets	were	quiet,
though	 the	 first	 emergings	 of	 citizenry	 were	 minutes	 away.	 Soon	 those	 farmers
who	 had	 depleted	 their	 supplies	 of	 grains,	 fruits,	 and	 root	 crops	 would	 take	 to
their	carts	and	wagons	and	depart	the	city.	Merchant	shops	and	stalls	would	open
to	catch	the	morning	wave	of	shoppers.
Throughout	Darujhistan	the	Grayfaces	prepared	to	shut	the	valves	feeding	gas
to	 the	 torches	 lining	 the	 major	 avenues.	 These	 figures	 moved	 in	 small	 groups,
gathering	at	intersections	then	dispersing	with	the	day's	first	bell.
Sorry	watched	Crokus	wearily	ascend	a	tenement's	front	steps.	She	stood	half
a	 block	 down	 the	 street,	 within	 shadows	 that	 seemed	 reluctant	 to	 disappear
despite	the	growing	light.
A	 short	 while	 earlier,	 she'd	 felt	 the	 Empire	 demon's	 death	 strike	 her	 almost
physically,	 deep	 in	 her	 chest.	 Normally	 demons	 fled	 back	 to	 their	 realm	 once
enough	 damage	 had	 been	 inflicted	 on	 them,	 enough	 to	 sever	 the	 links	 of
summoning.	 But	 the	 Korvalah	 had	 not	 been	 simply	 cut	 down,	 or	 forcibly
dismissed.	There'd	been	a	finality	to	its	end	that	had	left	her	shaken.	A	death	in
truth.	She	still	recalled	its	silent,	despairing	scream	ringing	in	her	head.
All	the	ambivalence	surrounding	the	Coin	Bearer	was	gone,	driven	away.	She
knew	 now	 she	 would	 kill	 him.	 It	 had	 to	 be	 done,	 and	 soon.	 All	 that	 remained
before	she	could	do	so	was	the	mystery	of	his	actions.	To	what	extent	was	Oponn
using	the	boy?
She	knew	he'd	seen	her	in	the	D'Arles'	garden,	just	before	he'd	escaped	to	the
estate's	 roof.	 Seeing	 the	 light	 come	 on	 behind	 the	 balcony's	 sliding	 doors	 had


clinched	 her	 decision	 to	 continue	 following	 Crokus.	 The	 D'Arle	 family	 was
powerful	in	Darujhistan.	That	the	boy	seemed	to	be	involved	in	a	clandestine	love
affair	 with	 the	 daughter	 was	 an	 outrageous	 proposition,	 yet	 what	 else	 could	 she
conclude?	 So,	 the	 question	 remained:	 was	 Oponn	 working	 through	 the	 boy
directly,	insinuating	a	peculiar	influence	with	the	City	Council?	What	powers	of
influence	did	this	young	maiden	possess?
Only	 a	 matter	 of	 position,	 of	 possible	 scandal.	 Yet	 what	 was	 the	 political
position	of	Councilman	Estraysian	D'Arle?	Sorry	realized	that	even	though	she'd
learned	 much	 of	 Darujhistan's	 political	 arena	 she	 still	 did	 not	 know	 enough	 to
second-guess	 Oponn's	 moves.	 Councilman	 D'Arle	 was	 Turban	 Orr's	 principal
opposition	on	this	proclamation-of-neutrality	business—but	what	did	that	matter?
The	 Malazan	 Empire	 could	 not	 care	 less.	 Unless	 the	 proclamation	 was	 no	 more
than	 a	 feint.	 Was	 this	 Turban	 Orr	 seeking	 to	 lay	 the	 groundwork	 for	 an	 Empirebacked	coup?
The	answers	to	such	questions	would	be	slow	in	coming.	She	knew	she'd	have
to	exercise	patience.	Of	course,	patience	was	her	finest	quality.	She'd	hoped	that
showing	herself	to	Crokus	a	second	time,	there	in	the	garden,	might	trigger	panic
in	the	lad—or,	at	the	very	least,	annoy	Oponn	if	indeed	the	god's	control	was	as
direct	as	that.
Sorry	had	watched	on,	from	the	shadows	she	drew	around	her,	as	the	assassin
named	Rallick	took	the	lad	to	task.	She'd	also	lingered	to	catch	the	conversation
between	 Rallick	 and	 Murillio.	 It	 seemed	 the	 boy	 had	 protectors,	 and	 an	 odd	 lot
they	were,	assuming	that	the	fat	little	man,	Kruppe,	was	some	kind	of	group	leader.
Hearing	that	they	were	to	take	Crokus	out	of	the	city	on	behalf	of	their	“master”
made	the	whole	situation	even	more	intriguing.
She	 knew	 she'd	 have	 to	 make	 her	 move	 soon.	 The	 protection	 offered	 by
Kruppe	 and	 this	 Murillio	 would	 not	 impede	 her	 much,	 she	 expected.	 Though
Kruppe	 was	 certainly	 more	 than	 he	 seemed,	 violence	 hardly	 seemed	 his	 major
skill.
She	would	kill	Crokus,	then,	outside	the	city.	As	soon	as	she	discovered	the
nature	 of	 their	 mission,	 and	 who	 their	 master	 was.	 As	 soon	 as	 everything	 had
fallen	into	place.
Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	would	have	to	wait	a	while	longer	for	her	return.	Sorry
smiled	at	that,	knowing	full	well	how	relieved	the	whole	squad	would	be	that	she
was	nowhere	to	be	seen.	As	for	that	whole	matter—the	threat	presented	by	Quick
Ben	and	Kalam—well,	everything	in	its	own	time.


Alchemist	 Baruk's	 savage	 migraine	 was	 ebbing.	 Whatever	 presence	 had	 been
unleashed	 in	 the	 city	 was	 gone.	 He	 sat	 in	 his	 reading	 chair,	 pressing	 a	 clothwrapped	chunk	of	ice	against	his	forehead.	It	had	been	a	conjuring.	He	felt	certain
of	 that.	 The	 emanations	 stank	 of	 demonry.	 But	 there'd	 been	 more.	 The	 moment
before	the	presence	vanished,	Baruk	had	experienced	a	mental	wrench	that	came
close	to	driving	him	into	unconsciousness.
He'd	 shared	 the	 creature's	 final	 death	 scream,	 his	 own	 shriek	 echoing	 down
the	hall	and	bringing	his	men-at-arms	shouting	to	his	bedroom	door.
Baruk	felt	a	wrongness,	deep	within	him,	as	if	his	soul	had	been	battered.	For
a	single,	brief	second,	he'd	looked	upon	a	world	of	absolute	darkness,	and	from
that	darkness	came	sounds,	the	creak	of	wooden	wheels,	the	clank	of	chains,	the
groans	 of	 a	 thousand	 imprisoned	 souls.	 Then	 it	 was	 gone,	 and	 he	 found	 himself
sitting	in	his	chair,	Roald	kneeling	at	his	side	with	a	pail	of	ice	from	the	cellar.
He	now	sat	in	his	study,	alone,	and	the	ice	pressed	against	his	brow	was	warm
compared	to	what	he	felt	in	his	heart.
There	 was	 a	 knock	 at	 the	 door,	 and	 Roald	 entered,	 his	 face	 creased	 with
worry.	“Lord,	you	have	a	visitor.”
“I	have?	At	this	hour?”	He	rose	shakily	to	his	feet.	“Who	is	it?”
“Lord	Anomander	Rake.”	Roald	hesitated.	“And	.	.	.	another.”
Frowning,	Baruk	waved	a	hand.	“Bring	them	in.”
“Yes,	Lord.”
Rake	entered,	holding	a	dog-sized	winged	creature	by	the	nape	of	its	neck.	The
creature	twisted	and	hissed,	then	turned	pleading	eyes	to	Baruk.
“This	thing	was	following	me	here,”	Rake	said.	“Yours?”
Startled,	Baruk	managed	a	nod.
“I	thought	as	 much,”	Rake	 said,	releasing	 the	demon	 to	 flap	across	the	 room
and	land	at	the	alchemist's	slippered	feet.
Baruk	gazed	down	on	it.	The	demon	was	trembling.
Rake	strode	to	a	chair	and	sat,	stretching	out	his	long	legs.	“A	busy	night,”	he
said.
Baruk	gestured	and	the	demon	vanished	with	a	faint	popping	sound.	“Indeed,”
he	 said,	 his	 voice	 hard.	 “My	 servant	 was	 on	 a	 mission.	 I	 had	 no	 idea	 it	 would
involve	 you.”	 He	 went	 to	 stand	 before	 the	 Tiste	 Andii.	 “Why	 were	 you	 in	 the
middle	of	an	assassin	war?”
“Why	not?”	Rake	answered.	“I	started	it.”
“What?”


He	smiled	up	at	Baruk.	“You	don't	know	the	Empress	as	well	as	I	do,	Baruk.”
“Please	explain.”	Color	had	risen	in	the	alchemist's	face.
Rake	 looked	 away.	 “Tell	 me	 this,	 Baruk,”	 he	 said,	 turning	 to	 meet	 the
alchemist's	 gaze,	 “who	 in	 this	 city	 is	 most	 likely	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 your	 secret
council?	 And	 who	 might	 benefit	 the	 most	 from	 your	 removal?	 And,	 most
importantly,	who	in	this	city	is	capable	of	killing	you?”
Baruk	 did	 not	 answer	 immediately.	 He	 walked	 slowly	 to	 the	 table,	 where	 a
newly	painted	map	had	been	laid	out.	He	leaned	over	it,	hands	resting	on	the	edge.
“You	suspect	the	Empress	might	seek	out	Vorcan,”	he	said.	“A	contract	to	offer.”
“On	 you	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 High	 Mages,”	 Rake	 said,	 behind	 him.	 “The
Empress	has	sent	a	Claw	here,	not	so	much	to	worry	your	city's	defenses,	but	to
establish	 contact	 with	 the	 Master	 Assassin.	 I	 wasn't	 entirely	 certain	 that	 I	 was
right	in	this,	but	I	meant	to	prevent	that	contact.”
Baruk's	 eyes	 remained	 on	 the	 map's	 red	 wash.	 “So	 you	 sent	 your	 own
assassins	 to	 wipe	 out	 her	 Guild.	 To	 flush	 her	 out.”	 He	 faced	 Rake.	 “And	 then
what?	Kill	her?	All	on	the	basis	of	some	suspicion	of	yours?”
“This	 night,”	 Rake	 said	 calmly,	 “we	 prevented	 the	 Claw	 from	 making	 that
contact.	Your	demon's	report	will	confirm	this.	Besides,	you	aren't	suggesting	that
the	death	of	Vorcan	and	the	decimation	of	the	city's	assassins	is	a	bad	thing,	are
you?”
“I	fear	I	am.”	Baruk	was	pacing,	struggling	against	a	growing	sense	of	outrage.
“I	 may	 not	 know	 the	 Empress	 as	 well	 as	 you,	 Rake,”	 he	 said,	 gritting	 his	 teeth,
“but	 I	 do	 know	 this	 city—far	 better	 than	 you	 ever	 will.”	 He	 glared	 at	 the	 Tiste
Andii.	“To	you,	Darujhistan	is	just	another	battleground	for	your	private	war	with
the	 Empress.	 You	 don't	 give	 a	 damn	 about	 how	 this	 city	 survives—how	 it	 has
managed	to	survive	three	thousand	years.”
Rake	shrugged.	“Enlighten	me.”
“The	 City	 Council	 has	 its	 function,	 a	 vital	 one.	 They	 are	 the	 city's	 machine.
True,	 Majesty	 Hall	 is	 a	 place	 of	 pettiness,	 corruption,	 endless	 bickering,	 but,
despite	all	that,	it's	also	a	place	where	things	get	done.”
“What's	that	got	to	do	with	Vorcan	and	her	gang	of	killers?”
Baruk	 grimaced.	 “Like	 any	 burdened	 wagon,	 the	 wheels	 require	 grease.
Without	 the	 option	 of	 assassination	 the	 noble	 families	 would	 have	 long	 since
destroyed	themselves,	taking	the	city	with	them,	through	civil	war.	Secondly,	the
Guild's	efficiency	provides	a	measure	of	control	on	vendettas,	arguments,	and	so
forth.	 It	 is	 the	 guaranteed	 option	 of	 bloodshed,	 and	 bloodshed	 is	 messy.	 Usually
too	messy	for	the	nobility's	sensibilities.”


“Curious,”	Rake	said.	“Nevertheless,	don't	you	think	that	Vorcan	would	listen
very	 carefully	 indeed	 to	 an	 offer	 from	 the	 Empress?	 After	 all,	 Laseen	 has	 the
precedent	of	handing	over	the	rule	of	a	conquered	city	to	an	assassin.	In	fact,	at
least	a	third	of	her	present	High	Fists	come	from	that	profession.”
“You	are	missing	the	point!”	Baruk's	face	was	dark.	“You	did	not	consult	us,
and	that	cannot	be	tolerated.”
“You	haven't	answered	me,”	Rake	retorted,	in	a	voice	quiet	and	cold.	“Would
Vorcan	take	the	contract?	Could	she	manage	it?	Is	she	that	good,	Baruk?”
The	 alchemist	 turned	 away.	 “I	 don't	 know.	 That's	 my	 answer,	 to	 all	 three
questions.”
Rake	 stared	 hard	 at	 Baruk.	 “If	 you	 were	 indeed	 nothing	 more	 than	 an
alchemist,	I	might	believe	you.”
Baruk's	smile	was	wry.	“Why	would	you	think	me	anything	but?”
Now	it	was	Rake's	turn	to	smile.	“There	are	few	who	would	argue	with	me
without	flinching.	I	am	unused	to	be	addressed	as	an	equal.”
“There	are	many	paths	to	Ascendancy,	some	more	subtle	than	others.”	Baruk
walked	over	to	the	mantel	above	the	fireplace,	took	a	carafe,	then	went	to	the	shelf
behind	 his	 desk	 and	 retrieved	 two	 crystal	 goblets.	 “She's	 a	 High	 Mage.	 We	 all
have	magical	defenses,	but	against	her	.	.	.”	He	filled	the	goblets	with	wine.
Rake	joined	the	alchemist.	He	accepted	the	glass	and	raised	it	between	them.
“I	apologize	for	not	informing	you.	In	truth,	the	thought	hadn't	crossed	my	mind	as
being	especially	important.	Until	tonight,	I	was	acting	on	a	theory,	nothing	more.	I
didn't	consider	the	ripples	a	grounded	Guild	might	cause.”
Baruk	 sipped	 his	 wine.	 “Anomander	 Rake,	 tell	 me	 something.	 There	 was	 a
presence	in	our	city	tonight—a	conjuring.”
“One	 of	 Tayschrenn's	 Korvalah	 demons,”	 Rake	 answered.	 “Released	 by	 a
Claw	wizard.”	He	took	a	mouthful	of	the	tart	liquid,	let	it	roll	for	a	moment,	then
swallowed	with	satisfaction.	“It's	gone.”
“Gone?”	Baruk	asked	quietly.	“Where?”
“Out	 of	 Tayschrenn's	 reach,”	 Rake	 said,	 a	 tight	 smile	 on	 his	 lips.	 “Out	 of
anyone's	reach.”
“Your	sword,”	Baruk	said,	repressing	a	shiver	as	the	memory	of	that	closing
vision	returned	to	him.	The	creak	of	wheels,	the	clank	of	chains,	the	groans	of	a
thousand	lost	souls.	And	darkness.
“Oh,	yes,”	Rake	said,	refilling	his	goblet.	“I	received	the	two	Pale	wizards'
heads.	As	you	promised.	I	admire	your	efficiency,	Baruk.	Did	they	protest?”


Baruk	 paled.	 “I	 explained	 to	 them	 the	 options,”	 he	 said	 quietly.	 “No,	 they
didn't	protest.”
Rake's	soft	laugh	chilled	the	blood	in	Baruk's	veins.
At	the	distant	sound	Kruppe	rose.	The	small	fire	flickered	steadily	before	him,	but
its	heat	seemed	less.	“Ah,”	he	sighed,	“Kruppe's	hands	are	near	numb,	yet	his	ears
are	 as	 sharp	 as	 ever.	 Listen	 to	 this	 faint	 sound	 in	 the	 very	 nether	 regions	 of	 his
present	dream.	Does	he	know	its	source?”
“Perhaps,”	K'rul	said	beside	him.
Startled,	Kruppe	turned,	his	eyebrows	rising.	“Kruppe	thought	you	long	gone,
Eldering	One.	Nonetheless,	he	is	thankful	for	your	company.”
The	 hooded	 god	 nodded.	 “All	 is	 well	 with	 the	 child	 Tattersail.	 The	 Rhivi
protect	 her,	 and	 she	 grows	 swiftly,	 as	 is	 the	 nature	 of	 Soletaken.	 A	 powerful
warlord	now	shelters	her.”
“Good,”	 Kruppe	 said,	 smiling.	 The	 noises	 in	 the	 distance	 drew	 his	 attention
again.	He	stared	out	into	the	darkness,	seeing	nothing.
“Tell	me,	Kruppe,”	K'rul	said,	“what	do	you	hear?”
“The	passing	of	a	great	wagon	or	some	such	thing,”	he	replied,	with	a	frown.
“I	hear	its	wheels,	and	chains,	and	the	groaning	of	slaves.”
“Its	name	is	Dragnipur,”	K'rul	said.	“And	it	is	a	sword.”
Kruppe's	frown	deepened.	“How	can	a	wagon	and	slaves	be	a	sword?”
“Forged	 in	 darkness,	 it	 chains	 souls	 to	 the	 world	 that	 existed	 before	 the
coming	of	light.	Kruppe,	its	wielder	is	among	you.”
In	 Kruppe's	 mind	 his	 Deck	 of	 Dragons	 rose.	 He	 saw	 the	 image	 of	 half	 man,
half	 dragon—the	 Knight	 of	 High	 House	 Darkness,	 also	 known	 as	 the	 Son	 of
Darkness.	The	man	held	aloft	a	black	sword	trailing	smoky	chains.	“The	Knight	is
in	Darujhistan?”	he	asked,	fighting	a	shiver	of	fear.
“In	Darujhistan,”	K'rul	replied.	“Around	Darujhistan.	Above	Darujhistan.	His
presence	is	a	lodestone	to	power,	and	great	is	the	danger.”	The	Elder	God	faced
Kruppe.	 “He	 is	 in	 league	 with	 Master	 Baruk	 and	 the	 T'orrud	 Cabal—
Darujhistan's	 secret	 rulers	 have	 found	 a	 two-edged	 ally.	 Dragnipur	 tasted	 a
demon's	soul	this	night,	Kruppe,	in	your	city.	It	is	never	thirsty	for	long,	and	it	will
feed	on	more	blood	before	this	is	done.”
“Can	anyone	withstand	it?”	Kruppe	asked.
K'rul	shrugged.	“None	could	when	it	was	first	forged,	but	that	was	long	ago.	I


cannot	 answer	 for	 the	 present.	 I	 have	 one	 other	 piece	 of	 information,	 Kruppe,	 a
small	piece,	I'm	afraid.”
“Kruppe	hearkens.”
“The	 journey	 Master	 Baruk	 is	 sending	 you	 on	 to	 the	 Gadrobi	 Hills.	 Elder
magic	brews	anew,	after	so	long.	It	is	Tellann—of	the	Imass—but	what	it	touches
is	 Omtose	 Phellack—Jaghut	 Elder	 magic.	 Kruppe,	 stay	 out	 of	 their	 way.
Especially	guard	the	Coin	Bearer.	What	is	about	to	come	is	a	danger	as	grave	as
the	Knight	and	his	sword,	and	as	ancient.	Step	carefully,	Kruppe.”
“Kruppe	always	steps	carefully,	Eldering	One.”


Book	Five!
The	Gadrobi	Hills


	
	

Beyond	these	thin	hide	walls
a	child	sits,	before	her	on	worn	silk
a	Deck	is	arrayed.
She	cannot	yet	speak
and	the	scenes	before	her
she's	never	before	seen	in	this	life.
The	child	gazes	upon	a	lone	card
named	Obelisk,	the	stone	gray
she	can	feel	its	roughness	in	her	mind.
Obelisk	stands	buried	in	a	grassy	knoll
like	a	knuckle	protruded
from	the	earth,	past	and	future.
This	child's	eyes	are	wide
with	terror,	for	cracks	have	appeared
in	the	stone	of	stones	and	she	knows
the	shattering	is	begun.
SILVERFOX
OUTRIDER	HURLOCHEL,
6TH	ARMY


Chapter	Fourteen
	

I	saw	them	on	the	shores
the	deepening	pits	of	their	gaze
vowed	immortal	war
against	the	sighing	calm
of	Jaghut	seas	.	.	.
GOTHOS'	FOLLY
GOTHOS	(B.?)


	
907th	Year	in	the	Third	Millennium
The	Season	of	Fanderay	in	the	Year	of	the	Five	Tusks
By	Malazan	reckoning,	1163rd	Year	of	Burn's	Sleep
T'lan	Imass	reckoning,	The	Year	of	Gathering,	Tellann	Arise
As	 the	 days	 passed,	 Adjunct	 Lorn	 felt	 a	 sharpness	 return	 to	 her	 mind,	 the
exhaustion	and	depression	fading	away.	The	thought	that	she	could	allow	herself
to	slip	into	carelessness	so	easily	had	left	her	shaken,	and	that	was	not	a	feeling
with	which	she	was	familiar.	She	did	not	know	how	to	deal	with	it,	and	this	kept
her	unbalanced,	not	quite	sure	of	her	own	efficacy.
As	the	Gadrobi	Hills	appeared,	first	to	the	south	and	then	to	the	west	as	well,
she	sensed	a	desperate	urgency	to	regain	her	confidence.	The	mission	approached
a	vital	juncture.	Success	with	the	Jaghut	barrow	would	almost	ensure	success	with
everything	else.
Since	 this	 dawn	 she'd	 ridden	 hard,	 pushing	 to	 keep	 her	 schedule	 intact	 after
traveling	so	slowly	in	the	first	few	days.	Both	horses	were	in	need	of	rest,	so	she
now	 walked	 ahead	 of	 them,	 the	 reins	 tucked	 through	 her	 belt.	 And	 beside	 her
walked	Tool.
Though	the	Imass	spoke	often,	at	her	prodding,	of	many	fascinating	things,	he
denied	 her	 efforts	 regarding	 matters	 important	 to	 the	 Empire,	 and	 to	 Laseen's
continued	 power.	 All	 seemed	 to	 return	 to	 the	 vows	 he	 had	 taken	 at	 the	 last
Gathering.	For	the	Imass,	something	was	coming	to	a	head.	She	wondered	if	it	was
somehow	 connected	 with	 freeing	 this	 Jaghut	 Tyrant.	 And	 that	 was	 a	 disturbing
thought.
Still,	she	would	not	permit	any	ambivalence	to	threaten	the	mission.	In	this	she
was	 Laseen's	 arm,	 and	 it	 was	 directed	 not	 of	 Lorn's	 own	 accord	 but	 by	 the
Empress.	 Dujek	 and	 Tayschrenn	 had	 well	 reminded	 her	 of	 that	 truth.	 Thus,	 she
played	no	role	in	all	this—not	as	the	woman	named	Lorn.	How	could	she	be	held
responsible	for	anything?
“In	my	years	among	humans,”	Tool	said,	beside	her,	“I	have	come	to	recollect
the	passing	of	emotions	in	body	and	expressions.	Adjunct,	you	have	worn	a	frown
the	past	two	days.	Is	this	significant?”
“No,”	 she	 snapped.	 “It	 isn't.”	 Purging	 her	 thoughts	 of	 personal	 feelings	 had


never	 been	 so	 difficult	 as	 it	 was	 now—was	 this	 a	 lasting	 effect	 of	 Oponn's
meddling?	Perhaps	Tool	could	rid	her	of	it.	“Tool,”	she	said,	“what	is	significant,
as	you	put	it,	is	that	I	don't	know	enough	about	what	we're	doing.	We	are	seeking
a	standing	stone,	the	barrow's	marker.	Well,	assuming	it	can	be	found,	why	was	it
not	so	long	ago?	Why	could	not	three	thousand	years	of	hunting	find	this	barrow?”
“We	will	find	the	standing	stone,”	Tool	replied	calmly.	“It	marks	the	barrow	in
truth,	but	the	barrow	is	not	there.”
The	Adjunct	scowled.	More	riddles.	“Explain.”
The	 Imass	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 minute,	 then	 he	 said,	 “I	 am	 born	 of	 an	 Elder
Warren,	Adjunct,	known	as	Tellann.	It	is	more	than	a	source	of	magic,	it	is	also	a
time.”
“Are	you	suggesting	that	the	barrow	exists	in	a	different	time?	Is	that	how	you
plan	to	reach	it—by	using	your	Tellann	Warren?”
“No,	there	is	no	parallel	time	any	different	from	the	one	we	know.	That	time	is
gone,	past.	It	is	more	a	matter	of	.	.	.	flavor.	Adjunct,	may	I	continue?”
Lorn's	mouth	thinned	into	a	straight	line.
“The	Jaghut	who	entombed	the	Tyrant	were	born	of	a	different	Elder	Warren.
But	the	term	‘Elder'	is	relative	only	to	the	existing	Warrens	of	this	age.	The	Jaghut
Omtose	Phellack	is	not	‘Elder'	when	compared	to	Tellann.	They	are	the	same,	of
the	same	flavor.	Do	you	understand	thus	far,	Adjunct?”
“Patronizing	bastard,”	she	muttered	to	herself.	“Yes,	Tool.”
The	 Imass	 nodded,	 his	 bones	 creaking.	 “The	 barrow	 has	 not	 been	 found
before,	precisely	because	it	is	Omtose	Phellack.	It	lies	within	a	Warren	now	lost
to	the	world.	Yet,	I	am	Tellann.	My	Warren	touches	Omtose	Phellack.	I	can	reach
it,	Adjunct.	Any	T'lan	Imass	could.	I	was	chosen	because	I	am	without	a	Clan.	I
am	alone	in	every	way.”
“Why	should	that	be	important?”	Lorn	asked,	her	stomach	twisting.
Tool	looked	at	her.	“Adjunct.	What	we	seek	to	accomplish	is	the	freeing	of	a
Jaghut	Tyrant.	Such	a	being,	should	it	escape	our	control,	or	defy	our	predictions,
is	 capable	 of	 destroying	 this	 continent.	 It	 can	 enslave	 all	 living	 upon	 it,	 and	 it
would	do	so	if	permitted.	If,	instead	of	me,	Logros	had	selected	a	Bonecaster,	and
if	the	Tyrant	was	freed,	that	Bonecaster	would	become	enslaved.	A	Jaghut	Tyrant
is	 dangerous	 alone.	 A	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 with	 an	 Imass	 Bonecaster	 at	 its	 side	 is
unstoppable.	 They	 would	 challenge	 the	 gods,	 and	 they	 would	 kill	 most	 of	 them.
Also,	I	am	without	a	Clan,	thus	my	enslavement—should	that	event	befall—would
not	enslave	blood	kin.”
Lorn	stared	at	the	Imass.	What	were	the	Empress	and	Tayschrenn	thinking	of?


How	 could	 they	 hope	 to	 control	 this	 thing?	 “You	 are	 saying,	 Tool,	 that	 you're
expendable.”
“Yes,	Adjunct.”
And	so,	she	realized,	am	I.	“What,”	she	asked,	“will	stop	the	Tyrant?	How	do
we	control	it?”
“We	don't,	Adjunct.	That	is	the	gamble	we	take.”
“And	what	does	that	mean?”
Tool	 shrugged,	 an	 audible	 lifting	 and	 dropping	 of	 bones	 beneath	 the	 rotted
furs.	 “The	 Lord	 of	 Moon's	 Spawn,	 Adjunct.	 He	 will	 have	 no	 choice	 but	 to
intervene.”
“He's	capable	of	stopping	the	Tyrant?”
“Yes,	Adjunct.	He	is,	although	it	will	cost	him	dearly,	weaken	him.	More,	he
is	capable	of	delivering	the	single	punishment	that	a	Jaghut	Tyrant	fears	most.”	A
faint	 gleam	 of	 light	 rose	 in	 Tool's	 eye	 sockets	 as	 the	 Imass	 stared	 at	 Lorn.
“Enslavement,	Adjunct.”
Lorn	stopped	in	her	tracks.	“You	mean	the	Moon's	lord	will	have	the	Tyrant
working	on	his	side?”
“No,	Adjunct.	The	enslavement	is	by	the	lord's	hand,	but	it	is	beyond	him	as
well.	You	see,	the	Empress	knows	who	the	lord	is,	and	what	he	possesses.”
Lorn	nodded.	“He's	Tiste	Andii,	and	a	High	Mage.”
A	rasp	of	laughter	came	from	Tool.	“Adjunct,	he	is	Anomander	Rake,	the	Son
of	Darkness.	Bearer	of	Dragnipur.”
Lorn	frowned.
Tool	 seemed	 to	 have	 noticed	 her	 confusion,	 for	 the	 Imass	 elaborated.
“Dragnipur	is	a	sword,	born	of	the	Age	before	light.	And	Darkness,	Adjunct,	is	the
Goddess	of	the	Tiste	Andii.”
A	few	minutes	later,	Lorn	found	her	voice.	 “The	Empress,”	she	said	 quietly,
“knows	how	to	pick	her	enemies.”
And	then	Tool	hit	her	with	another	stunning	revelation.	“I	am	sure,”	the	Imass
said,	“the	Tiste	Andii	regret	their	coming	to	this	world.”
“They	came	to	this	world?	From	where?	How?	Why?”
“The	 Tiste	 Andii	 were	 of	 Kurald	 Galain,	 the	 Warren	 of	 Darkness.	 Kurald
Galain	stood	alone,	untouched.	The	Goddess,	their	mother,	knew	loneliness	.	.	.”
Tool	hesitated.	“There	is	probably	little	truth	in	this	story,	Adjunct.”
“Go	on,”	Lorn	said	quietly.	“Please.”


“In	 her	 loneliness,	 the	 Goddess	 sought	 something	 outside	 herself.	 Thus	 was
born	Light.	Her	children	the	Tiste	Andii	saw	this	as	a	betrayal.	They	rejected	her.
Some	hold	they	were	cast	out,	others	that	they	departed	their	mother's	embrace	by
choice.	While	Tiste	Andii	mages	still	use	the	Warren	of	Kurald	Galain	they	are	no
longer	 of	 it.	 And	 some	 have	 embraced	 another	 Warren,	 that	 of	 Starvald
Demelain.”
“The	First	Warren.”
Tool	nodded.
“Whose	Warren	did	Starvald	Demelain	belong	to?”
“It	was	the	home	of	Dragons,	Adjunct.”
Murillio	turned	in	his	saddle	and	brought	the	mule	to	a	halt	on	the	dusty	road.	He
glanced	ahead.	Kruppe	and	Crokus	had	already	reached	the	Worry	Crossroads.	He
patted	 his	 brow	 with	 the	 soft	 satin	 of	 his	 burnous,	 then	 looked	 back	 again.	 Coll
leaned	hunched	over	in	his	saddle,	losing	the	rest	of	his	breakfast.
Murillio	sighed.	It	was	a	wonder	to	see	the	man	sober,	but	that	he'd	insisted
on	 accompanying	 them	 bordered	 on	 miraculous.	 Murillio	 wondered	 if	 Coll
suspected	anything	of	Rallick's	plans—but	no,	he	would've	brought	a	fist	down	on
his	and	Rallick's	head	in	short	order	if	he'd	so	much	as	caught	a	hint	of	what	they
were	doing.
It	had	been	Coll's	pride	that	had	got	him	into	his	present	mess,	and	drink	did
nothing	 to	 diminish	 it.	 To	 the	 contrary,	 in	 fact.	 Coll	 had	 even	 donned	 his
brigandine	armor,	replete	with	arm	and	leg	greaves.	A	bastard	sword	hung	at	the
large	man's	hip,	and	with	his	mail	coif	and	helmet,	he	looked	every	inch	a	noble
knight.	The	only	exception	was	the	green	tinge	to	his	rounded	face.	He	was	also
the	only	one	of	them	to	have	found	a	horse	instead	of	these	damned	mules	Kruppe
had	scrounged.
Coll	straightened	in	his	saddle	and	smiled	wanly	at	Murillio,	then	spurred	his
horse	alongside.	They	resumed	the	journey	without	a	word,	nudging	their	mounts
into	a	canter	until	they'd	caught	up	with	the	others.
As	usual,	Kruppe	was	pontificating.	“No	more	than	a	handful	of	days,	assures
Kruppe,	wizened	traveler	of	the	wastes	beyond	glittering	Darujhistan.	No	reason
to	be	so	glum,	lad.	Consider	this	a	mighty	adventure.”
Crokus	looked	to	Murillio	and	threw	up	his	hands.	“Adventure?	I	don't	even
know	what	we're	doing	out	here!	Won't	anybody	tell	me	anything?	I	can't	believe
I	agreed	to	this!”


Murillio	grinned	at	the	boy.	“Come	now,	Crokus.	How	many	times	have	you
expressed	curiosity	about	our	constant	travels	outside	the	city?	Well,	here	we	are
—all	your	questions	are	about	to	find	answers.”
Crokus	 hunched	 down	 in	 his	 saddle.	 “You	 told	 me	 you	 all	 worked	 as	 agents
for	 some	 merchant.	 What	 merchant?	 I	 don't	 see	 any	 merchant.	 And	 where's	 our
horses?	How	come	Coll's	the	only	one	with	a	horse?	How	come	nobody	gave	me
a	sword	or	something?	Why—?”
“All	 right!”	 Murillio	 laughed,	 holding	 up	 a	 hand.	 “Enough,	 please!	 We	 are
agents	for	a	merchant,”	he	explained.	“But	it's	rather	unusual	merchandise	we're
acquiring.”
“A	rather	unusual	merchant	as	well,	Kruppe	adds	with	a	warm	smile.	Lad,	we
are	agents	seeking	information	on	behalf	of	our	employer,	who	is	none	other	than
High	Alchemist	Baruk!”
Crokus	stared	at	Kruppe.	“Baruk!	And	he	can't	afford	to	give	us	horses?”
Kruppe	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “Ah,	 yes.	 Well.	 There	 was	 something	 of	 a
misunderstanding	 between	 worthy,	 honest	 Kruppe	 and	 a	 conniving,	 deceitful
stabler.	 Nonetheless,	 Kruppe	 received	 full	 recompense,	 thus	 saving	 our	 kind
master	eleven	silver	coins.”
“Which	he'll	never	see,”	Murillio	muttered.
Kruppe	 went	 on,	 “As	 for	 a	 sword,	 lad,	 what	 on	 earth	 for?	 Ignore	 blustery,
pallid	Coll	there,	with	all	his	sweaty	trappings	of	war.	A	mere	affectation	of	his.
And	 Murillio's	 rapier	 is	 no	 more	 than	 an	 ornamental	 trifle,	 though	 no	 doubt	 he
would	 claim	 that	 the	 jewels	 and	 emeralds	 studding	 said	 item's	 hilt	 are	 toward
achieving	fine	balance	or	some	such	martial	detail.”	Kruppe	smiled	beatifically	at
Murillio.	“Nay,	lad,	the	true	masters	at	acquiring	information	need	no	such	clumsy
pieces	of	metal;	indeed,	we	disdain	them.”
“OK,”	Crokus	grumbled,	“what	kind	of	information	are	we	looking	for,	then?”
“All	that	yon	ravens	overhead	can	see,”	Kruppe	said,	waving	a	hand	in	the	air.
“Other	 travelers,	 other	 efforts	 within	 the	 Gadrobi	 Hills,	 all	 grist	 for	 Master
Baruk's	 mill	 of	 news.	 We	 observe	 without	 being	 observed.	 We	 learn	 while
remaining	a	mystery	to	all.	We	ascend	to	the—”
“Will	you	shut	up?”	Coll	moaned.	“Who	brought	the	waterskins?”
Smiling,	 Murillio	 removed	 a	 clay	 jug	 webbed	 in	 twine	 from	 his	 saddlehorn
and	handed	it	to	Coll.
“A	sponge,”	Kruppe	said,	“squeezed	beneath	the	burden	of	armor.	See	the	man
down	 our	 precious	 water,	 see	 it	 immediately	 reappear	 salty	 and	 grimy	 on	 his
weathered	 skin.	 What	 yon	 poisons	 have	 leaked	 forth?	 Kruppe	 shudders	 at	 the


thought.”
Coll	ignored	him,	handing	the	jug	to	Crokus.	“Buck	up,	lad,”	he	said.	“You're
getting	paid,	and	damn	well.	With	luck	there'll	be	no	trouble.	Believe	me,	in	this
kind	 of	 work,	 excitement	 is	 the	 last	 thing	 we're	 looking	 for.	 Still,”	 he	 glared	 at
Murillio,	“I'd	feel	a	whole	lot	better	if	Rallick	were	with	us.”
Crokus	bristled.	“And	I'm	an	unworthy	stand-in,	right?	You	think	I	don't	know
that,	Coll?	You	think—?”
“Don't	tell	me	what	I	think,”	Coll	rumbled.	“I	never	said	you	were	a	stand-in,
Crokus.	You're	a	thief,	and	those	kinds	of	skill	come	in	a	lot	handier	than	anything
I	 could	 manage.	 The	 same	 for	 Murillio.	 And	 as	 for	 Kruppe,	 well,	 his	 talents
extend	no	further	than	his	stomach	and	whatever	he	wants	jammed	in	it.	You	and
Rallick	share	a	lot	more	than	you	think,	and	that's	why	you're	the	most	qualified
man	here.”
“Barring	 the	 necessary	 brains,	 of	 course,”	 Kruppe	 said,	 “which	 is	 my	 true
skill—though	 one	 such	 as	 Coll	 would	 never	 understand	 such	 abilities,	 alien	 as
they	are	to	him.”
Coll	 leaned	 toward	 Crokus.	 “You're	 wondering	 why	 I'm	 wearing	 all	 this
armor,”	he	whispered	loudly.	“It's	because	Kruppe's	in	charge.	When	Kruppe's	in
charge	I	don't	feel	safe	unless	I'm	prepared	for	war.	If	it	comes	to	that,	lad,	I'll	get
us	 out	 alive.”	 He	 leaned	 back	 and	 stared	 straight	 ahead.	 “I've	 done	 it	 before.
Right,	Kruppe?”
“Absurd	accusations.”	Kruppe	sniffed.
“So,”	Crokus	said,	“what	are	we	supposed	to	be	on	the	lookout	for?”
“We'll	 know	 it	 when	 we	 see	 it,”	 Murillio	 said.	 He	 nodded	 toward	 the	 hills
rising	to	the	east.	“Up	there.”
Crokus	was	silent	for	a	time,	then	his	eyes	narrowed.	“The	Gadrobi	Hills.	Are
we	looking	for	a	rumor,	Murillio?”
Murillio	stiffened,	but	it	was	Kruppe	who	replied,	“Indeed,	lad.	Rumors	upon
rumors.	 I	 applaud	 your	 cunning	 conclusion.	 Now,	 where	 is	 that	 water	 jug?
Kruppe's	thirst	has	become	intense.”
Sorry's	departure	through	Jammit's	Gate	was	casual,	unhurried.	Tracking	the	Coin
Bearer	 was	 simple,	 and	 did	 not	 require	 that	 the	 boy	 remain	 within	 her	 range	 of
vision.	She	sensed	Crokus	and	Kruppe,	in	the	company	of	two	others,	on	the	road
a	league	beyond	Worrytown.	They	did	not	seem	to	be	in	any	kind	of	rush.
Whatever	mission	they	were	on,	that	it	concerned	the	welfare	of	Darujhistan


was	 plain.	 Thinking	 on	 it,	 Sorry	 was	 sure	 that	 the	 men	 within	 that	 group	 were
spies	and,	in	all	likelihood,	able	ones.	The	dandy,	Murillio,	could	move	through
noble-born	 circles	 with	 an	 ease	 coupled	 with	 a	 desirable	 coyness—the	 perfect
combination	for	a	spy.	Rallick,	though	he	did	not	accompany	them	on	this	mission,
was	the	eyes	and	ears	within	the	Assassins'	Guild,	thus	covering	another	power
base.	Kruppe's	world	was	that	of	the	thieves	and	lower	classes,	whence	rumors
sprang	to	life	like	weeds	in	muddy	soil.	The	third	man	was	clearly	a	military	man,
no	doubt	serving	as	the	group's	sword	arm.
On	 a	 mundane	 level,	 then,	 an	 adequate	 group	 to	 protect	 the	 Coin	 Bearer,
though	 insufficient	 to	 prevent	 her	 killing	 him—especially	 with	 the	 assassin	 left
behind.
Yet	 something	 nagged	 within	 Sorry's	 mind,	 a	 vague	 suspicion	 that	 the	 group
was	 heading	 into	 danger—a	 danger	 that	 threatened	 her	 as	 well.	 Once	 beyond
Worrytown	 she	 picked	 up	 her	 pace.	 As	 soon	 as	 she	 found	 herself	 alone	 on	 the
road,	she	opened	her	Warren	of	Shadow	and	slipped	into	its	swift	tracks.
The	 Adjunct	 could	 find	 nothing	 to	 set	 apart	 the	 hill	 they	 approached.	 Its	 grasscloaked	 summit	 was	 dwarfed	 by	 those	 around	 it.	 A	 half	 dozen	 scraggly,	 windtwisted	scrub	oaks	climbed	one	side	amid	a	scree	of	broken	boulders.	The	summit
flattened	out	into	a	rough	circle,	rock	pushing	through	here	and	there.
Overhead	 wheeled	 ravens,	 so	 high	 as	 to	 be	 no	 more	 than	 specks	 against	 the
muggy	gray	sky.	Lorn	watched	Tool	striding	ahead	of	her,	the	Imass	choosing	an
unwavering	 path	 toward	 the	 hill's	 base.	 She	 slumped	 in	 her	 saddle,	 feeling
defeated	 by	 the	 world	 around	 her.	 The	 midday	 heat	 sapped	 her	 strength,	 and	 the
sluggishness	reached	through	to	her	thoughts—not	Oponn's	doing,	she	knew.	This
was	the	pervasive	dread	clinging	to	the	air,	the	sense	that	what	they	were	doing
was	wrong,	terribly	wrong.
To	fling	this	Jaghut	Tyrant	into	the	hands	of	the	Empire's	enemy,	to	trust	this
Tiste	 Andii	 Anomander	 Rake	 to	 destroy	 it,	 yet	 at	 great	 cost	 to	 himself—thus
opening	the	way	for	Malazan	sorceries	in	turn	to	kill	the	Son	of	Darkness—now
seemed	precipitous,	absurd	in	its	ambitions.
Tool	 came	 to	 the	 base	 of	 the	 hill	 and	 waited	 for	 the	 Adjunct	 to	 arrive.	 Lorn
saw,	at	Tool's	hide-wrapped	feet,	a	gray	rock	jutting	perhaps	ten	inches	from	the
earth.
“Adjunct,”	the	Imass	said,	“this	is	the	barrow	marker	we	seek.”
She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“There's	hardly	any	soil	cover	here	at	all,”	she	said.
“Are	you	suggesting	this	standing	stone	has	eroded	down	to	its	present	size?”


“The	stone	has	not	eroded,”	Tool	answered.	“It	has	stood	here	since	before	the
sheets	of	ice	came	to	cover	this	land.	It	stood	here	when	the	Rhivi	Plain	was	an
inland	sea,	long	before	the	waters	withdrew	to	what	is	now	Lake	Azur.	Adjunct,
the	 stone	 is	 in	 fact	 taller	 than	 both	 of	 us	 combined,	 and	 what	 you	 think	 to	 be
bedrock	is	shale.”
Lorn	was	surprised	at	the	hint	of	anger	in	Tool's	voice.	She	dismounted	and
set	to	hobbling	the	horses.	“How	long	do	we	stay	here,	then?”
“Until	 this	 evening	 passes.	 With	 tomorrow's	 dawn	 I	 will	 open	 the	 way,
Adjunct.”
Faintly	from	above	came	the	cries	of	ravens.	Lorn	lifted	her	head	and	gazed	at
the	 specks	 wheeling	 high	 over	 them.	 They'd	 been	 with	 them	 for	 days.	 Was	 that
unusual?	She	didn't	know.	Shrugging,	she	unsaddled	the	horses.
The	 Imass	 remained	 motionless,	 his	 gaze	 seeming	 fixed	 on	 the	 stone	 marker.
Lorn	went	about	preparing	her	camp.	Among	the	scrub	oaks	she	found	wood	for	a
small	cooking	fire.	It	was	dry,	weathered,	and	likely	to	yield	little	smoke.	Though
she	did	not	anticipate	company,	caution	had	become	her	habit.	Before	dusk	arrived
she	 found	 a	 nearby	 hill	 higher	 than	 those	 around	 it,	 and	 ascended	 to	 its	 summit.
From	this	position	she	commanded	a	view	that	encompassed	leagues	on	all	sides.
The	hills	continued	their	roll	southward,	sinking	to	steppes	to	the	southeast.	Due
east	of	them	stretched	Catlin	Plain,	empty	of	life	as	far	as	she	could	see.
Lorn	 turned	 to	 the	 north.	 The	 forest	 they	 had	 traveled	 round	 a	 few	 days	 ago
was	 still	 visible,	 a	 dark	 line	 thickening	 as	 it	 swept	 westward	 to	 the	 Tahlyn
Mountains.	 She	 sat	 down	 and	 waited	 for	 night	 to	 fall.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 she'd	 be
able	to	spot	any	campfires.
Even	as	night	fell,	the	heat	remained	oppressive.	Lorn	walked	around	the	hill's
summit	to	stretch	her	legs.	She	found	evidence	of	past	excavations,	scars	that	dug
into	the	shale.	And	evidence	of	the	Gadrobi	herders	remained,	from	as	far	back	as
when	they	fashioned	stone	tools.	Against	the	south	side	of	the	hill	the	ground	had
been	carved	out,	not	in	search	of	a	barrow	but	as	a	stone	quarry.	It	appeared	that
beneath	 the	 shale	 was	 flint,	 chocolate	 brown,	 sharp-edged	 and	 crusted	 in	 white
chalk.
Curious,	 Lorn	 investigated	 further,	 scrambling	 down	 into	 the	 cavity.	 Stone
flakes	carpeted	the	pit's	base.	She	crouched	and	picked	up	a	piece	of	flint.	It	was
the	tip	of	a	spear	point,	expertly	shaped.
The	 echo	 of	 this	 technology	 was	 found	 in	 Tool's	 chalcedony	 sword.	 She
needed	no	further	proof	of	the	Imass's	assertions.	Humans	had	indeed	come	from
them,	had	indeed	inherited	a	world.


Empire	was	a	part	of	them,	a	legacy	flowing	like	blood	through	human	muscle,
bone,	 and	 brain.	 But	 such	 a	 thing	 could	 easily	 be	 seen	 as	 a	 curse.	 Were	 they
destined	one	day	to	become	human	versions	of	the	T'lan	Imass?	Was	war	all	there
was?	 Would	 they	 bow	 to	 it	 in	 immortal	 servitude,	 no	 more	 than	 deliverers	 of
death?
Lorn	sat	down	in	the	quarry	and	leaned	against	the	chiseled,	weathered	stone.
The	Imass	had	conducted	a	war	of	extermination	lasting	hundreds	of	thousands	of
years.	Who	or	what	had	the	Jaghut	been?	According	to	Tool,	they'd	abandoned	the
concept	 of	 government,	 and	 turned	 their	 backs	 on	 empires,	 on	 armies,	 on	 the
cycles	of	rise	and	fall,	fire	and	rebirth.	They'd	walked	alone,	disdainful	of	their
own	kind,	dismissive	of	community,	of	purposes	greater	than	themselves.
They	would	not,	she	realized,	have	started	a	war.
“Oh,	Laseen,”	she	murmured,	tears	welling	in	her	eyes,	“I	know	why	we	fear
this	Jaghut	Tyrant.	Because	he	became	human,	he	became	like	us,	he	enslaved,	he
destroyed,	 and	 he	 did	 it	 better	 than	 we	 could.”	 She	 lowered	 her	 head	 into	 her
hands.	“That's	why	we	fear.”
She	fell	silent	then,	letting	the	tears	roll	down	her	cheeks,	seep	between	 her
fingers,	trickle	along	her	wrists.	Who	wept	from	her	eyes?	she	wondered.	Was	it
Lorn,	or	Laseen?	Or	was	it	for	our	kind?	What	did	it	matter?	Such	tears	had	been
shed	before,	and	would	be	again—by	others	like	her	and	yet	unlike	her.	And	the
winds	would	dry	them	all.
Captain	Paran	glanced	at	his	companion.	“You've	got	a	theory	about	all	this?”	he
asked.
Toc	the	Younger	scratched	his	scar.	“Damned	if	I	know,	Captain.”	He	stared
down	at	the	black,	burned,	crusted	raven	lying	on	the	ground	in	front	of	them.	“I've
been	counting,	though.	That's	the	eleventh	roasted	bird	in	the	last	three	hours.	And,
unless	they're	covering	the	Rhivi	Plain	like	some	bloody	carpet,	it	seems	we're
on	somebody's	trail.”
Paran	grunted,	then	kicked	his	horse	forward.
Toc	followed.	“And	it's	a	nasty	somebody,”	he	continued.	“Those	ravens	look
like	they	was	blasted	from	the	inside	out.	Hell,	even	the	flies	avoid	them.”
“In	other	words,”	Paran	grated,	“sorcery.”
Toc	 squinted	 at	 the	 hills	 south	 of	 them.	 They'd	 found	 a	 woodcutter's	 trail
through	 the	 Tahlyn	 Forest,	 shaving	 days	 off	 their	 journey.	 As	 soon	 as	 they'd
returned	to	the	Rhivi	traders'	track,	however,	they'd	found	the	ravens,	and	also	the


signs	of	two	horses	and	one	moccasined	man	on	foot.	This	latter	group	of	tracks
was	only	a	few	days	old.
“Can't	understand	why	the	Adjunct	and	that	Imass	are	moving	so	slowly,”	Toc
muttered,	 repeating	 words	 he'd	 uttered	 a	 dozen	 times	 since	 the	 day's	 beginning.
“You	think	she	doesn't	know	something's	trailing	her?”
“She's	 an	 arrogant	 woman,”	 Paran	 said,	 his	 free	 hand	 gripping	 his	 sword.
“And	with	that	Imass	with	her,	why	should	she	worry?”
“Power	 draws	 power,”	 Toc	 said,	 scratching	 again	 at	 his	 scar.	 The	 motion
triggered	 yet	 another	 flash	 of	 light	 in	 his	 head,	 but	 it	 was	 changing.	 At	 times	 he
thought	he	could	almost	see	images,	scenes	within	the	light.	“Damn	Seven	Cities'
superstitions,	anyway,”	he	growled,	under	his	breath.
Paran	looked	at	him	oddly.	“You	say	something?”
“No.”	 Toc	 hunched	 down	 in	 his	 saddle.	 The	 captain	 had	 been	 pushing	 them
hard.	His	obsession	was	running	them	down;	even	with	the	extra	mount,	the	horses
were	 near	 finished.	 And	 a	 thought	 nagged	 Toc.	 What	 would	 happen	 when	 they
caught	 up	 with	 the	 Adjunct?	 Obviously,	 Paran	 intended	 to	 catch	 Lorn	 and	 the
Imass,	spurred	by	vengeance	that	overwhelmed	his	previous	intentions.	With	Lorn
dead	 or	 her	 plans	 awry,	 Paran's	 command	 would	 be	 safe.	 He	 could	 join
Whiskeyjack	and	the	squad	at	leisure.	Assuming	they	still	lived,	of	course.
Toc	could	think	of	a	thousand	flaws	in	the	Captain's	plans.	First	and	foremost
was	the	T'lan	Imass.	Was	Paran's	sword	its	match?	In	the	past,	sorcery	had	been
flung	 at	 the	 Imass	 warriors	 with	 a	 frenzy	 born	 of	 desperation.	 Nothing	 had
worked.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 destroy	 an	 Imass	 was	 to	 chop	 it	 to	 pieces.	 Toc	 didn't
think	the	captain's	weapon,	god-touched	as	it	was,	could	do	the	job,	but	there	was
no	convincing	Paran	of	anything	these	days.
They	came	upon	another	raven,	its	feathers	fluttering	in	the	wind,	its	entrails
swollen	 by	 the	 sun	 and	 bright	 red	 like	 cherries.	 Toc	 rubbed	 his	 scar	 again,	 and
almost	fell	from	the	saddle	as	an	image,	clear	and	precise,	burgeoned	in	his	head.
He	saw	a	small	shape,	moving	so	fast	as	to	be	but	a	blur.	Horses	screamed,	and	a
massive	tear	opened	up	in	the	air.	He	jolted,	as	if	something	large	and	heavy	had
struck	 him,	 and	 the	 tear	 yawned,	 swirling	 darkness	 beyond.	 Toc	 heard	 his	 own
horse	scream.	Then	it	was	gone,	and	he	found	himself	gripping	the	hinged	horn	of
his	saddle	with	all	his	strength.
Paran	rode	ahead,	apparently	noticing	nothing,	his	back	straight	and	his	gaze
fixed	southward.	One	hand	played	lightly	on	the	sword's	pommel.
Toc	shook	himself,	leaned	to	one	side	and	spat.	What	had	he	just	seen?	That
tear—how	 could	 the	 air	 itself	 be	 torn	 like	 that?	 The	 answer	 came	 to	 him.	 A


Warren,	 an	 opening	 Warren	 could	 do	 that.	 He	 spurred	 his	 horse	 alongside
Paran's.
“Captain,	we're	heading	into	an	ambush.”
Paran's	head	snapped	around.	His	eyes	glittered.	“Then	prepare	yourself.”
Toc	opened	his	mouth	to	protest,	but	he	shut	it	without	speaking.	What	was	the
use?	 He	 strung	 his	 bow	 and	 loosened	 the	 scimitar	 in	 its	 scabbard,	 then	 set	 an
arrow	 against	 the	 bowstring.	 He	 glanced	 over	 at	 Paran,	 who	 had	 unsheathed	 his
sword	and	laid	it	across	his	thighs.	“It'll	come	by	Warren,	Captain.”
Paran	found	no	need	to	question	Toc's	certitude.	He	almost	looked	eager.
Toc	studied	the	sword,	Chance.	The	dull,	hazy	light	played	along	the	polished
blade	like	water.	Somehow	it,	too,	looked	eager	to	Toc's	eye.


Chapter	Fifteen
'Tis	bloody	stirrups	when	the	Jaghut
ride	their	souls,	a	thund'rous	charge
without	surcease,
the	hard	knots	within	thud
drumming	fierce	the	flow	of	ice
a	certain	promise	.	.	.
'tis	the	Jaghut	warring	the	dusk
on	a	field	of	broken	stones	.	.	.
JAGHUT
FISHER	(B.?)


	
Quick	Ben	sat	in	the	hut,	his	back	to	the	ancient	stone	tier	Wall.	Before	him	rose
the	five	sticks	that	linked	him	with	Hairlock.	The	string	connecting	the	sticks	was
taut.	Across	from	the	wizard,	near	the	hide-covered	entrance,	sat	Trotts.
Kalam	 had	 still	 not	 recovered	 enough	 to	 accompany	 Quick	 Ben,	 or	 to	 guard
him	as	Trotts	now	did.	The	wizard	had	known	the	Barghast	warrior	for	years,	he'd
fought	alongside	him	in	more	battles	than	he	cared	to	recall,	and	more	than	once
one	of	them	had	saved	the	other's	skin.	And	yet	Quick	Ben	realized	he	really	knew
very	little	about	Trotts.	The	one	thing	he	did	know,	however,	comforted	him.	The
Barghast	was	a	savage,	brutal	fighter,	as	capable	with	his	throwing	axes	as	he	was
with	the	longsword	he	now	cradled	in	his	lap.	And	he	was	fearless	in	the	face	of
sorcery,	 secure	 in	 the	 fetishes	 tied	 into	 his	 braids,	 and	 in	 the	 woad	 tattoos
inscribed	by	the	hand	of	his	clan's	shaman.
Considering	 what	 might	 fall	 into	 their	 laps,	 those	 protections	 could	 come	 in
handy.
The	Barghast	stared	at	the	wizard	with	flat,	expressionless	eyes,	unwavering
in	the	dim	light.
Quick	 Ben	 shook	 out	 the	 kinks	 in	 his	 hands,	 then	 bent	 forward	 to	 study	 the
array	 of	 tied	 sticks.	 “Hairlock's	 crouching	 inside	 his	 Warren,”	 he	 said.	 “Not
moving.	 Seems	 to	 be	 waiting.”	 He	 sat	 back	 and	 withdrew	 his	 dagger,	 which	 he
jammed	point	first	into	the	packed	earth.	“So	we	wait,	too.	And	watch.”
Trotts	asked,	“Watch	what?”
“Never	mind.”	Quick	Ben	sighed.	“You	have	that	scrap	of	bedroll?”
Trotts	removed	from	a	sleeve	a	torn	piece	of	cloth.	He	came	forward,	giving
the	sticks	more	room	than	was	necessary,	and	pushed	the	scrap	into	the	wizard's
hand.
Quick	 Ben	 set	 it	 down	 on	 his	 left.	 He	 muttered	 a	 few	 words	 and	 passed	 his
hand	over	it.	“Resume	your	seat,”	he	said.	“And	keep	your	weapon	ready	in	case
things	go	bad.”
He	 closed	 his	 eyes	 then,	 reaching	 into	 his	 Warren.	 Before	 him	 an	 image
formed	 that	 made	 him	 jerk	 with	 surprise.	 “What,”	 he	 whispered,	 “is	 Hairlock
doing	on	Rhivi	Plain?”
Paran	 could	 feel	 nothing	 but	 the	 white	 fire	 of	 vengeance,	 filling	 his	 mind,


coruscating	 through	 his	 body.	 Oponn	 had	 chosen	 to	 use	 him.	 Now	 he	 would	 use
Oponn,	 the	 Twins'	 power,	 that	 horrifying	 edge	 of	 destruction	 that	 came	 with
Ascendancy.	 And	 like	 the	 gods,	 he	 could	 be	 cold-blooded	 in	 that	 use,	 even	 if	 it
meant	 pulling	 Oponn	 kicking	 and	 screaming	 onto	 this	 plain	 to	 face	 whatever	 lay
ahead.
A	hiss	of	warning	that	might	have	been	his	conscience	reached	through	to	him.
Toc	 the	 Younger	 was	 his	 friend,	 perhaps	 the	 only	 friend	 he	 had.	 Unprotected	 by
any	 god,	 his	 chance	 of	 surviving	 what	 was	 coming	 was	 slim.	 Would	 there	 be
another	death	to	lay	at	his	feet?	Paran	pushed	aside	the	possibility.	He	was	here	to
answer	 for	 Tattersail's	 murder.	 The	 Adjunct	 had	 taught	 him	 the	 value	 of	 being
singleminded.	But	what	did	Tattersail	teach	you?
“If	 things	 get	 too	 hot,”	 he	 said,	 “pull	 out,	 Toc.	 Ride	 for	 Darujhistan.	 Find
Whiskeyjack.”
The	scout	nodded.
“If	I	go	down—”
“I	heard	you,	Captain.”
“Good.”
Silence	fell	between	them,	the	only	sounds	remaining	the	thump	of	hooves	and
the	hot	west	wind	that	blew	like	sand	whispering	across	stone.
Vague	anticipations	crowded	Paran's	head.	Was	the	Adjunct	waiting	for	them?
If	 she	 recognized	 him	and	 Toc,	 she'd	 have	no	reason	to	 attack	them.	For	all	she
knew,	the	captain	had	been	killed.	And	Toc	was	a	Claw.	There'd	be	no	ambush.
The	Adjunct	would	simply	step	out	into	the	open	and	hail	him,	no	doubt	shocked
by	his	appearance	but	hardly	suspicious.
And	 when	 she	 came	 close,	 Chance	 would	 sing.	 It	 would	 be	 done,	 and	 if
necessary	 they'd	 deal	 with	 the	 Imass	 afterward.	 He	 hoped	 that	 the	 Imass	 would
simply	leave	with	the	mission's	collapse.	Without	the	Adjunct,	everything	would
fall	through.
At	 least,	 so	 he	 hoped.	 Chance	 might	 be	 a	 gifted	 sword,	 but	 the	 T'lan	 Imass
were	Elder	creations,	born	of	sorceries	that	made	Oponn	less	than	a	child.
Paran's	 grip	 on	 the	 sword's	 handle	 was	 tight.	 His	 hand	 ached,	 and	 he	 could
feel	 sweat	 between	 his	 fingers.	 Chance	 felt	 no	 different	 from	 any	 other	 weapon.
Should	he	be	expecting	something	more?	He	couldn't	recall	much	of	the	time	he'd
last	used	it,	against	the	Hound.	But	if	there	was	power	in	the	weapon,	should	he
not	be	able	to	sense	it?	As	it	was,	Chance	felt	cold,	as	if	he	clutched	a	shard	of	ice
that	refused	to	melt	in	his	grip.	If	anything,	Chance	felt	awkward,	as	if	he	was	a
novice	and	held	it	wrongly.


What	 had	 triggered	 this	 sudden	 crumpling	 of	 confidence?	 Pulling	 an
Ascendant	into	the	fray	.	.	.	how	precisely	do	I	do	that?	Of	course,	if	Oponn's	as
eager	as	last	time	.	.	.	Maybe	it	was	no	more	than	just	the	tension	that	came	with
waiting	for	something	to	happen.	Was	Toc	mistaken?	He	turned	to	the	man	beside
him	and	opened	his	mouth	to	speak.
A	 loud,	 manic	 cackle	 stopped	 him.	 Paran	 pulled	 savagely	 on	 the	 reins.	 His
horse	screamed	and	reared.	The	air	seemed	to	rip	and	a	cold	wind	gusted	against
them.	 The	 captain	 raised	 his	 sword	 and	 cursed.	 The	 horse	 screamed	 again,	 this
time	 in	 pain.	 It	 crumpled	 beneath	 him,	 as	 if	 its	 bones	 had	 been	 turned	 to	 dust.
Paran	sprawled,	the	sword	flying	from	his	hand	as	the	ground	rose	up	to	meet	him.
The	 horse's	 fall	 had	 the	 sound	 of	 a	 bag	 filled	 with	 rocks	 and	 lamp	 oil,	 landing
beside	him	and	rolling	over	his	legs.
Toc's	bowstring	twanged	and	an	arrow	shattered	against	something	hard.
Paran	pushed	himself	onto	his	side	and	looked	up.
The	 puppet	 Hairlock	 floated	 above	 the	 ground	 twenty	 feet	 ahead.	 A	 second
arrow	struck	as	the	captain	watched,	also	shattering.
Hairlock	laughed	again,	swinging	his	mad	stare	to	Toc.	He	gestured.
Paran	 cried	 out,	 twisting	 to	 see	 Toc	 thrown	 from	 his	 mount.	 The	 Claw
cartwheeled	through	the	air.	A	jagged	tear	opened	in	the	air	in	front	of	him.	Paran
shouted	a	second	time	in	helpless	horror	as	Toc	the	Younger	plunged	into	that	tear
and	disappeared	into	swirling	mists.	The	rent	closed	with	a	snap,	leaving	no	sign
of	Paran's	companion.
Hairlock	 descended	 slowly	 to	 the	 ground.	 The	 puppet	 paused	 to	 adjust	 his
tattered	clothing,	then	strode	toward	Paran.
“I	thought	it	might	be	you,”	Hairlock	sniggered.	“Isn't	vengeance	sweeter	than
honey,	 eh,	 Captain?	 Your	 death	 will	 be	 long,	 protracted,	 and	 very,	 very	 painful.
Imagine	my	pleasure	at	seeing	you	like	this!”
Paran	 pushed	 with	 his	 legs.	 The	 horse's	 body	 fell	 back,	 freeing	 him.	 He
scrambled	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 dived	 for	 his	 sword,	 grasping	 it	 while	 rolling,	 then
regained	his	feet.
Hairlock	watched	in	evident	amusement	and	began	to	advance.	“That	weapon
is	 not	 for	 me,	 Captain.	 It'll	 not	 even	 cut	 me.	 So,”	 the	 puppet	 came	 on,	 “wail
away.”
Paran	raised	the	weapon,	a	wave	of	despair	coming	over	him.
Hairlock	stopped	and	cocked	his	head.	He	whirled	to	face	the	north.
“Impossible!”	the	puppet	snarled.


Now	Paran	caught	what	Hairlock	had	already	heard:	the	howling	of	Hounds.
In	 the	 hut	 Quick	 Ben	 had	 watched	 the	 ambush,	 dumbfounded.	 What	 was	 Paran
doing?	Where	was	Tattersail?	“Hood's	Path,”	he'd	whispered	angrily,	“talk	about
losing	track!”	In	any	case,	it	had	all	happened	too	fast	for	him	to	prevent	the	loss
of	the	one-eyed	man	accompanying	the	captain.
His	 eyes	 flew	 open	 and	 he	 snatched	 the	 scrap	 of	 cloth.	 “Sorry,”	 he	 hissed.
“Sorry!	Hear	me,	woman!	I	know	you.	I	know	who	you	are.	Cotillion,	Patron	of
Assassins,	the	Rope,	I	call	upon	you!”
He	 felt	 a	 presence	 enter	 his	 mind,	 followed	 by	 a	 man's	 voice.	 “Well	 done,
Quick	Ben.”
The	 wizard	 said,	 “I	 have	 a	 message	 for	 you,	 Rope.	 For	 Shadowthrone.”	 He
felt	a	heightened	tension	in	his	head.	“A	deal's	been	struck.	Your	 lord's	Hounds
hunger	 for	 vengeance.	 I	 haven't	 time	 to	 explain	 it	 all	 now—leave	 that	 to
Shadowthrone.	 I	 am	 about	 to	 give	 to	 you	 the	 location	 of	 the	 one	 Shadowthrone
seeks.”
He	 heard	 wry	 amusement	 in	 the	 Rope's	 voice.	 “I	 provide	 the	 link,	 correct?
The	means	by	which	you	stay	alive	in	all	this.	I	congratulate	you,	Quick	Ben.	Few
mortals	have	ever	succeeded	in	avoiding	my	lord's	inclination	to	double-cross.	It
seems	 you	 have	 outwitted	 him.	 Very	 well,	 convey	 to	 me	 this	 location.
Shadowthrone	will	receive	it	immediately.”
Quick	Ben	cast	forth	Hairlock's	precise	position	on	the	Rhivi	Plain.	He	only
hoped	the	Hounds	would	arrive	in	time.	He	had	a	lot	of	questions	for	Paran,	and
wanted	the	captain	to	reach	them	alive,	but	he	had	to	admit	that	the	chances	of	that
were	slight.
All	that	remained	for	the	wizard	now	was	to	prevent	the	puppet's	escape.	He
smiled	again.	That	was	something	he	looked	forward	to.
Onos	 T'oolan	 had	 squatted	 before	 the	 standing	 stone	 since	 dawn.	 In	 the	 hours
since,	 Lorn	 had	 wandered	 the	 nearby	 hills,	 at	 war	 with	 herself.	 She	 now	 knew
with	a	certainty	that	what	they	were	doing	was	wrong,	that	its	consequences	went
far	beyond	the	petty	efforts	of	a	mundane	Empire.
The	T'lan	Imass	worked	in	the	span	of	millennia,	their	purposes	their	own.	Yet
their	endless	war	had	become	her	endless	war.	Laseen's	Empire	was	a	shadow	of
the	First	Empire.	The	difference	lay	in	that	the	Imass	conducted	genocide	against
another	species.	Malaz	killed	its	own.	Humanity	had	not	climbed	up	since	the	dark


age	of	the	Imass:	it	had	spiraled	down.
The	sun	stood	high	overhead.	She	had	last	looked	upon	Tool	an	hour	past.	The
warrior	had	not	moved	an	inch.	Lorn	climbed	yet	another	hill,	already	a	quartermile	distant	from	the	standing	stone.	She	hoped	to	catch	a	glimpse	of	Lake	Azur,	to
the	west.
She	 came	 to	 the	 hill's	 summit	 and	 found	 herself	 not	 thirty	 feet	 from	 four
mounted	 travelers.	 It	 was	 hard	 to	 determine	 who	 was	 more	 surprised,	 but	 the
Adjunct	moved	first,	her	sword	rasping	into	her	hands	as	she	sprang	to	close	the
distance.
Two	were	essentially	unarmed,	a	boy	and	a	short	fat	man.	They	and	one	other,
a	gaudily	dressed	man	now	unsheathing	a	dueling	rapier,	rode	mules.	But	it	was
the	last	man	who	held	Lorn's	attention.	Fully	armored	astride	a	horse,	he	was	the
first	 to	 react	 to	 her	 charge.	 Bellowing,	 he	 spurred	 his	 mount	 past	 the	 others	 and
unsheathed	a	bastard	sword.
Lorn	smiled	as	the	fat	man	attempted	to	open	a	Warren	and	failed.	Her	Otataral
blade	steamed	briefly	before	a	cold	wash	of	air	poured	from	it.	The	fat	man,	his
eyes	 widening,	 reeled	 back	 in	 his	 saddle	 and	 promptly	 rolled	 over	 the	 mule's
rump,	landing	heavily	in	the	dust.	The	boy	leaped	down	from	his	own	mount	and
paused,	unsure	whether	to	aid	the	fat	man	or	remove	the	dagger	from	his	belt.	As
the	armored	man	rode	past	him,	he	reached	his	decision	and	ran	to	where	the	fat
man	had	fallen.	The	one	with	the	rapier	had	also	dismounted	and	approached	in
the	warrior's	wake.
Lorn's	 eyes	 caught	 all	 this	 between	 blinks.	 Then	 the	 warrior	 was	 upon	 her,
swinging	his	bastard	sword	one-handed	down	toward	her	head.
The	Adjunct	didn't	bother	to	parry.	Instead,	she	dodged	in	front	of	the	horse	to
come	 up	 on	 the	 man	 from	 his	 left,	 away	 from	 his	 sword	 arm.	 The	 horse	 reared.
Lorn	darted	past,	slicing	her	blade	across	the	man's	thigh,	above	the	plate	armor.
The	Otataral	edge	sliced	through	chain	links,	leather,	and	flesh	with	equal	ease.
The	warrior	grunted	and	clapped	a	mailed	hand	to	the	spurting	wound	even	as
the	horse	threw	him	from	the	saddle.
Ignoring	him,	Lorn	engaged	the	duelist,	attempting	to	beat	his	thin	blade	aside
and	close	to	bring	the	edge	of	her	weapon	into	play.	But	the	man	was	good,	deftly
disengaging	 her	 attempted	 beat.	 The	 sword's	 swing	 unbalanced	 her	 before	 she
could	 slow	 its	 momentum	 preparatory	 to	 an	 uppercut,	 and	 in	 this	 moment	 the
duelist	extended	his	rapier.
She	cursed	as	her	forward	motion	brought	her	onto	the	blade's	tip.	The	point
pushed	through	the	links	of	her	hauberk	and	entered	her	left	shoulder.	Pain	lanced


like	fire	up	her	arm.	Angered	by	the	wound,	she	swung	her	sword	savagely	at	the
man's	head.	The	flat	of	the	blade	caught	him	flush	on	the	forehead	and	he	sprawled
back	like	a	limp	doll.
Lorn	cast	a	quick	glance	to	where	the	warrior	still	struggled	to	stop	the	blood
gushing	from	his	leg,	then	whirled	to	face	the	last	two	men.	The	boy	stood	before
the	fat	man,	who	lay	unconscious.	Though	his	face	was	pale,	he	held	a	thin-bladed
dagger	in	his	left	hand	and	a	larger	knife	in	the	other.	His	eyes	were	hard	as	he
stared	at	her.
The	 thought	 crossed	 Lorn's	 mind,	 belatedly,	 that	 she	 need	 not	 have	 attacked
these	 men.	 She	 wore	 mercenary	 garb,	 and	 the	 T'lan	 Imass	 was	 not	 even	 within
sight.	Words	might	have	achieved	the	same	results,	and	she'd	never	liked	shedding
blood.	Well,	it	was	too	late	for	that	now.	She	advanced	slowly.
“We	meant	no	harm,”	the	boy	said	in	Daru.	“Leave	us	be.”
Lorn	 hesitated.	 The	 suggestion	 surprised	 her.	 Why	 not?	 She	 straightened.
“Agreed,”	 she	 answered	 in	 the	 same	 language.	 “Patch	 up	 your	 friends	 and	 steer
clear.”
“We'll	 head	 back	 to	 Darujhistan,”	 the	 boy	 said,	 looking	 equally	 surprised.
“We'll	camp	here	and	recover,	leave	in	the	morning.”
The	Adjunct	stepped	back.	“Do	that,	and	you'll	stay	alive.	Try	anything	else,
and	I'll	kill	you	all.	Understood?”
The	boy	nodded.
Lorn	backed	away,	angling	to	the	north.	She'd	head	that	way	for	a	time,	then
swing	round	to	the	east	and	come	back	down	to	where	Tool	was.	She	had	no	idea
what	had	brought	these	men	out	into	the	hills,	but	didn't	suspect	it	had	anything	to
do	 with	 her,	 or	 even	 the	 barrow.	 As	 she	 increased	 the	 distance	 between	 herself
and	the	hill,	she	saw	the	boy	rush	over	to	the	warrior.	In	any	case,	she	concluded,
there	wasn't	much	left	of	that	group	to	cause	her	worry.	The	duelist	wasn't	dead,
but	he'd	awake	to	a	headache.	As	for	the	warrior,	it	was	touch	and	go.	She'd	seen
a	lot	of	blood	come	from	him.	The	fat	man	might	have	broken	his	neck,	and	as	a
mage	he	was	harmless	in	her	vicinity.	That	left	the	boy,	and	since	when	had	she
had	cause	to	fear	a	boy?
Lorn	quickened	her	pace.
______
After	 the	 startling	 communication	 from	 Quick	 Ben,	 Sorry	 had	 contacted


Shadowthrone.	 The	 Lord	 of	 Shadows	 had	 fumed	 briefly,	 and	 after	 informing	 the
Rope	 that	 Ben	 Adaephon	 Delat	 had	 been	 a	 high	 priest	 of	 Shadow,	 Sorry	 found
herself	sharing	Shadowthrone's	anger.	The	man	would	pay	for	his	many	deceits.
Shadowthrone's	 Hounds	 had	 indeed	 been	 ready,	 and	 she	 was	 sure	 that	 even
now	they	closed	the	hunt.
As	 she	 resumed	 her	 journey	 through	 her	 Warren	 she	 met	 with	 increasing
resistance,	 a	 strange	 pressure	 with	 every	 step	 she	 took	 eastward.	 Finally,	 she
relented	and	emerged	into	the	Gadrobi	Hills.	It	was	midday,	and	half	a	mile	ahead
rode	 the	 Coin	 Bearer's	 party.	 She	 closed	 the	 gap	 swiftly	 until	 she	 was	 no	 more
than	 a	 hundred	 yards	 behind	 them,	 gathering	 shadows	 about	 her	 as	 she	 went—
though	even	this	proved	increasingly	difficult.	And	that	could	mean	only	one	thing:
a	T'lan	Imass	was	nearby.
To	 what,	 and	 to	 whom,	 was	 the	 Coin	 Bearer	 riding?	 Had	 she	 miscalculated
entirely?	Were	they	agents	for	the	Malazan	Empire?	That	possibility	ran	contrary
to	Oponn's	influence,	but	she	had	trouble	arriving	at	any	other	conclusion.
This,	she	told	herself,	would	prove	an	interesting	day.
The	party	was	fifty	yards	ahead,	making	their	way	up	a	hillside.	They	reached
the	summit	and	disappeared	briefly	from	her	view.	She	quickened	her	pace,	only
to	hear	sounds	of	fighting	on	the	hilltop—a	fight	in	which	Otataral	was	unveiled.
A	 flash	 of	 rage	 ran	 through	 her.	 Memory	 was	 attached	 to	 Otataral,	 a	 very
personal	memory.	Cautiously	she	sought	a	vantage	point	at	the	hill's	crest.
The	exchange	had	been	short,	and	the	Coin	Bearer's	party	looked	near	wiped
out.	In	fact,	only	the	Coin	Bearer	still	stood,	facing	a	tall,	lithe	woman	wielding	an
Otataral	blade.
Sorry	recognized	Adjunct	Lorn.	On	a	mission,	no	doubt,	for	her	dear	Empress,
a	mission	that	included	a	T'lan	Imass,	still	out	of	sight	but	close.	She	caught	their
conversation.	If	the	boy's	group	weren't	agents	for	the	Empire	then	perhaps	their
master	in	Darujhistan	had	sensed	the	presence	of	the	Imass	out	here,	and	had	sent
them	to	investigate.
She	 would	 discover	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 Adjunct's	 mission	 later.	 Right	 now,
however,	it	was	time	to	kill	the	Coin	Bearer.	And	the	near	proximity	of	the	Imass
made	success	all	the	more	certain.	Even	Oponn's	powers	could	not	overcome	the
influence	 of	 a	 Tellann	 Warren.	 Murdering	 the	 boy	 would	 be	 easy.	 Sorry	 waited,
then	smiled	as	Adjunct	Lorn	withdrew,	heading	north.
In	 minutes,	 the	 Coin	 of	 Oponn	 would	 be	 in	 her	 hands.	 And	 this	 day,	 a	 god
might	die.
As	soon	as	Lorn	was	sufficiently	distant	Crokus	ran	to	the	warrior.	Sorry	rose


slowly	into	a	crouch,	then	moved	forward	in	silence,	her	garotte	in	her	hands.
______
The	 Hounds	 howled	 again,	 their	 eager	 cries	 closing	 in	 from	 all	 sides.	 Hairlock
crouched,	 indecisive.	 Then	 the	 puppet	 faced	 the	 captain.	 “You'll	 have	 to	 wait	 a
little	longer	to	die,	Captain.	I've	no	intention	of	allowing	things	to	be	rushed.	No,	I
wish	to	linger	over	your	demise.”
Chance	 sweaty	 in	 his	 hands,	 Paran	 shrugged.	 To	 his	 own	 surprise,	 it	 made
little	 difference	 to	 him.	 If	 the	 Hounds	 arrived	 to	 find	 Hairlock	 gone,	 they'd
probably	take	out	their	frustration	on	him,	and	that	would	be	that.	“You'll	come	to
regret	the	opportunity,	Hairlock.	Whether	this	sword's	magic	is	meant	for	you	or
not,	I	was	looking	forward	to	chopping	you	into	kindling.	Is	your	magic	a	match
for	my	hatred?	It	would	have	been	nice	to	find	out.”
“Oh,	sudden	bravery!	What	do	you	know	of	hatred,	Captain?	When	I	return	I'll
show	you	precisely	what	hatred	can	achieve.”	The	wooden	figure	gestured	and	a
dozen	 feet	 away	 another	 tear	 opened	 in	 the	 air,	 this	 one	 exuding	 a	 fetid	 stench.
“Stubborn	 mutts,”	 Hairlock	 muttered.	 “Until	 later,	 Captain,”	 and	 he	 scurried	 for
the	rent.
In	the	hut,	Quick	Ben's	grin	turned	savage.	He	jerked	the	dagger	free	with	his	right
hand	and,	in	a	single,	fluid	motion,	sliced	the	taut	strings	connecting	the	sticks.
“Goodbye,	Hairlock,”	he	hissed.
Paran's	 eyes	 widened	 as	 the	 puppet	 flopped	 onto	 his	 stomach.	 A	 moment	 later
Hairlock	let	loose	a	shriek.
The	 captain's	 eyes	 narrowed.	 “Looks	 like	 somebody	 cut	 your	 strings,
Hairlock,”	he	said.
The	Hounds	were	close.	In	moments	they'd	be	all	over	them.
“Your	life,	Captain!”	Hairlock	cried.	“Fling	me	into	the	Warren	and	your	life
is	yours,	I	swear	it!”
Paran	leaned	on	his	sword	and	made	no	reply.
“Pawn	of	Oponn,”	Hairlock	snarled,	“I	would	spit	on	you	if	I	could!	Spit	on
your	soul!”
The	earth	rumbled,	and	at	once	massive	shapes	moved	around	Paran,	silently


closing	 in	 on	 the	 immobile	 marionette.	 Paran	 recognized	 Gear,	 the	 Hound	 he'd
wounded.	 He	 felt	 the	 sword	 in	 his	 hands	 answer	 that	 challenge	 with	 an	 eager
tremor	that	reached	into	his	arms.	Gear's	head	swung	in	his	direction	as	it	passed,
and	 Paran	 saw	 a	 promise	 in	 its	 eyes.	 The	 captain	 smiled.	 If	 anything	 draws
Oponn	out,	it	will	be	the	fight	to	come.
Hairlock	shrieked	one	last	time,	and	then	the	Hounds	were	upon	him.
A	 large	 shadow	 passed	 across	 the	 hill	 and	 Paran	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 a	 Great
Raven	swooping	over	them.	The	bird	cawed	hungrily.	“Too	bad,”	Paran	said	to	it.
“I	doubt	its	remains	would	be	palatable.”
Three	 Hounds	 began	 fighting	 over	 the	 splintered	 wood—all	 that	 was	 left	 of
Hairlock.	The	remaining	four,	led	by	Gear,	now	turned	to	Paran.
The	 captain	 raised	 his	 sword	 and	 dropped	 into	 a	 combative	 crouch.	 “Come
on,	then.	Through	me	to	the	god	using	me,	just	once	let	the	tool	turn	in	the	Twins'
hands.	Come	on,	Hounds,	let	us	soak	this	ground	with	blood.”
The	creatures	fanned	out	into	a	half-circle,	Gear	in	the	center.
Paran's	 smile	 broadened.	 Come	 to	 me,	 Gear.	 I'm	 tired	 of	 being	 used	 and
death	doesn't	seem	so	frightening	anymore.	Let's	be	done	with	it.
Something	heavy	pressed	down	on	him,	as	if	a	hand	had	reached	down	from
the	 sky	 and	 tried	 to	 drive	 him	 into	 the	 earth.	 The	 Hounds	 flinched.	 Paran
staggered,	 unable	 to	 breathe,	 a	 sudden	 darkness	 closing	 around	 the	 edges	 of	 his
vision.	The	ground	groaned	beneath	him,	the	yellowed	grasses	of	the	plain	lying
flat.	Then	the	pressure	lifted	and	chilled	air	flooded	back	into	his	lungs.	Sensing	a
presence,	the	captain	whirled.
“Step	aside,”	a	tall,	black-skinned,	white-haired	man	said,	as	he	pushed	past
to	confront	the	Hounds.	Paran	almost	dropped	his	sword.	A	Tiste	Andii?
The	 man	 wore	 a	 massive	 two-handed	 sword	 strapped	 to	 his	 back.	 He	 stood
before	 the	 Hounds,	 making	 no	 move	 toward	 the	 weapon.	 All	 seven	 had	 now
arrayed	 themselves	 before	 them,	 but	 they	 shifted	 restlessly,	 warily	 eyeing	 the
newcomer.
The	 Tiste	 Andii	 glanced	 at	 Paran.	 “Whatever	 you've	 done	 to	 draw	 the
attention	of	gods,	it	was	unwise,”	he	said,	in	Malazan.
“It	seems	I	never	learn,”	Paran	replied.
The	Tiste	Andii	smiled.	“Then	we	are	much	alike,	mortal.”
Mortal?
The	 Hounds	 paced	 back	 and	 forth,	 growling	 and	 snapping	 the	 air.	 The	 Tiste
Andii	watched	them,	then	spoke.	“Enough	meddling.	I	see	you,	Rood,”	he	said	to


one	 Hound,	 mangy	 brown,	 scarred,	 and	 yellow-eyed.	 “Take	 your	 kin	 and	 leave.
Tell	Shadowthrone	I	won't	tolerate	his	interference.	My	battle	with	Malaz	is	my
own.	Darujhistan	is	not	for	him.”
Rood	was	the	only	Hound	not	growling.	Its	glowing	eyes	bore	steadily	into	the
Tiste	Andii's.
“You	have	heard	my	warning,	Rood.”
Paran	 watched	 as	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 cocked	 his	 head.	 Slowly	 he	 returned	 his
attention	to	the	captain.	“Gear	wishes	you	dead.”
“It's	the	price	I	pay	for	showing	mercy.”
The	Tiste	Andii	raised	an	eyebrow.
Paran	shrugged.	“See	the	scar	he	carries?”
“That	was	your	mistake,	mortal.	You	must	finish	what	you	set	out	to	do.”
“Next	time.	What	happens	now?”
“For	 the	 moment,	 mortal,	 they	 find	 the	 thought	 of	 killing	 me	 more	 desirable
than	that	of	killing	you.”
“And	what	are	their	chances?”
“The	answer	to	that	is	evident	in	how	long	they've	been	hesitating,	wouldn't
you	think,	mortal?”
The	 Hounds	 attacked	 faster	 than	 anything	 Paran	 could	 have	 imagined.	 His
heart	lurched	as	a	flurry	of	motion	closed	in	around	the	other	man.	As	the	captain
stepped	back	an	invisible	fist	of	darkness	exploded	behind	his	eyes,	a	snapping	of
massive	 chains,	 the	 groan	 of	 huge	 wooden	 wheels.	 He	 squeezed	 shut	 his	 eyes
against	the	staggering	pain,	then	forced	them	open	again	to	see	that	the	fight	was
over.	The	Tiste	Andii	had	his	sword	in	his	hands,	its	black	blade	slick	with	blood
—blood	 that	 boiled	 and	 swiftly	 became	 ash.	 Two	 Hounds	 lay	 unmoving,	 one	 to
either	side	of	him.	A	wayward	wind	drew	a	wintry	breath	across	the	scene	with	a
sound	like	a	gasp,	shivering	the	grasses.
Paran	 saw	 that	 one	 Hound	 had	 been	 nearly	 decapitated,	 while	 the	 other	 had
been	sliced	across	its	broad	chest—it	did	not	look	like	a	killing	wound,	but	the
creature's	eyes,	one	blue	the	other	yellow,	stared	sightlessly	skyward.
Rood	yelped	and	the	others	backed	away.
Paran	 tasted	 blood	 in	 his	 mouth.	 He	 spat,	 then	 raised	 a	 hand	 to	 find	 blood
trickling	from	his	ears.	The	pain	in	his	head	was	ebbing.	He	looked	up	just	as	the
Tiste	Andii's	head	came	round	to	face	him.	Seeing	death	in	the	man's	eyes,	Paran
stepped	back	and	half	raised	his	sword,	though	the	effort	took	all	his	strength.	He
watched,	 uncomprehending,	 as	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 shook	 his	 head.	 “For	 a	 moment	 I


thought	.	.	.	No,	I	see	nothing	now	.	.	.”
Paran	blinked	stinging	tears	from	his	eyes,	then	wiped	his	cheeks.	He	started
on	 seeing	 that	 the	 stain	 of	 those	 tears	 on	 his	 forearm	 was	 pink.	 “You	 just	 killed
two	Hounds	of	Shadow.”
“The	others	withdrew.”
“Who	are	you?”
The	Tiste	Andii	did	not	answer,	his	attention	once	more	on	the	Hounds.
Behind	 them	 a	 cloud	 of	 shadow	 was	 forming	 in	 the	 air,	 deepening	 and
thickening	 in	 its	 center.	 A	 moment	 later	 it	 dissipated,	 and	 a	 black,	 shrouded,
translucent	 figure	 stood	 in	 its	 place,	 hands	 tucked	 into	 its	 sleeves.	 Shadows
commanded	whatever	face	lay	hidden	beneath	the	hood.
The	Tiste	Andii	lowered	his	sword's	point	to	the	ground.	“They	were	warned,
Shadowthrone.	 I	 want	 one	 thing	 understood.	 You	 may	 prove	 my	 match	 here,
especially	if	your	Rope	is	about.	But	I	promise	you,	it	will	be	messy,	and	there	are
those	 who	 will	 avenge	 me.	 Your	 existence,	 Shadowthrone,	 could	 become
uncomfortable.	Now,	I've	yet	to	lose	my	temper.	Withdraw	your	Realm's	influence
from	the	proceedings,	and	I	will	leave	it	at	that.”
“I	am	not	involved,”	Shadowthrone	said	quietly.	“My	Hounds	found	the	quarry
I	 sought.	 The	 hunt	 is	 over.”	 The	 god's	 head	 tilted	 to	 observe	 the	 two	 dead
creatures.	 “Over	 for	 all	 time,	 for	 Doan	 and	 Ganrod.”	 Shadowthrone	 looked	 up.
“There	is	no	release	for	them?”
“None.	Nor	for	any	who	would	pursue	vengeance.”
A	 sigh	 issued	 from	 the	 hooded	 darkness	 of	 the	 god's	 face.	 “Ah,	 well.	 As	 I
said,	I	am	not	involved.	However,	the	Rope	is.”
“Recall	him,”	the	Tiste	Andii	commanded.	“Now.”
“He	 will	 be	 severely	 displeased,	 Anomander	 Rake.	 His	 plans	 extend	 far
beyond	Darujhistan,	seeking	to	reach	the	Malazan	throne	itself.”
Anomander	Rake	.	.	.	Paran	recalled	Tattersail's	convictions	after	scrying	her
Deck	of	Dragons.	The	Knight	of	High	House	Dark,	the	Son	of	Darkness,	the	lord
with	the	black	sword	and	its	deadly	chains.	Ruler	of	Moon's	Spawn,	or	so	she
thought.	She	saw	this	coming.	This	very	moment,	the	clash	between	Shadow	and
Dark,	the	blood	spilled	.	.	.
“I	fight	my	own	battles,”	Rake	growled.	“And	I'd	rather	deal	with	Laseen	on
the	Malazan	throne	than	with	a	servant	of	Shadow.	Recall	him.”
“One	 last	 point,”	 Shadowthrone	 said,	 a	 giggle	 escaping	 him,	 “I	 am	 not
responsible	for	whatever	actions	the	Rope	might	take	against	you.”


A	 smile	 entered	 Rake's	 tone.	 “Convince	 him	 of	 the	 wise	 course,
Shadowthrone.	I	have	no	patience	for	your	games.	If	I	am	pushed,	by	either	you,
your	 Hounds,	 or	 by	 the	 Rope,	 I'll	 make	 no	 distinction.	 I	 will	 assail	 the	 Shadow
Realm,	and	you	are	invited	to	try	to	stop	me.”
“You	 lack	 all	 subtlety,”	 the	 god	 said,	 sighing.	 “Very	 well.”	 He	 paused	 and
shadows	 swirled	 around	 him.	 “He	 has	 been	 recalled.	 Forcibly	 extracted,	 as	 it
were.	The	field	is	yours	once	again,	Anomander	Rake.	The	Malazan	Empire	is	all
yours,	as	is	Oponn,”	Shadowthrone	added.
“Oponn?”	Rake's	head	turned	slowly,	and	the	captain	once	again	looked	into
eyes	 of	 deep,	 cold	 blue.	 Paran's	 spirits	 sank.	 The	 Tiste	 Andii's	 gaze	 fell	 to	 the
sword,	then	again	to	Shadowthrone.	“Begone,”	Rake	said.	“The	matter	is	ended.”
Shadowthrone	 dipped	 his	 head.	 “For	 now.”	 The	 god	 raised	 his	 hands	 and
shadows	gathered	around	him.	The	surviving	Hounds	closed	in,	leaving	their	dead
kin	where	they	lay.	The	shadows	thickened,	became	opaque,	entirely	hiding	those
within.	When	they	dispersed,	the	lord	and	his	Hounds	were	gone.
Paran	 eyed	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 who	 now	 faced	 him.	 After	 a	 moment	 the	 captain
shrugged.
Rake's	 brows	 rose.	 “That's	 it?”	 he	 asked.	 “That's	 the	 extent	 of	 your
comments?	Do	I	speak	with	Oponn	directly?	I	thought	I	sensed	a	presence	before,
but	when	I	looked	more	carefully	.	.	.	nothing.”	Rake	shifted	grip	on	his	sword,	the
point	rising.	“Do	you	hide	within,	Oponn?”
“Not	as	far	as	I'm	aware,”	Paran	replied.	“Apparently	Oponn	 saved	my	life
or,	rather,	brought	me	back	to	life.	I've	no	idea	why,	but	I've	been	told	that	I've
become	Oponn's	tool.”
“You	are	journeying	to	Darujhistan?”
Paran	nodded.
“May	I	approach?”	Rake	asked,	sheathing	his	sword.
“Why	not?”
The	Tiste	Andii	strode	up	to	him	and	laid	a	hand	against	his	chest.	Paran	felt
nothing	 untoward.	 Rake	 stepped	 back.	 “Oponn	 may	 have	 been	 within	 you	 in	 the
past,	but	it	seems	the	Twins	have	hastily	withdrawn.	I	see	their	signs,	but	no	god
controls	you	now,	mortal.”	He	hesitated.	“Their	treatment	of	you	was	.	.	.	unkind.
If	Caladan	Brood	was	here	he	could	heal	that	.	.	.	You're	no	longer	Oponn's	tool.”
The	Tiste's	eyes	remained	blue,	but	they'd	lightened	to	the	color	of	the	sky.	“But
your	sword	is.”
There	 was	 a	 squawk	 nearby	 and	 both	 turned	 to	 see	 a	 Great	 Raven	 alight	 on
one	 of	 the	 Hound's	 bodies.	 It	 plucked	 out	 an	 eye	 and	 gobbled	 it	 down.	 Paran


fought	back	a	wave	of	nausea.	The	huge	battered	bird	hopped	toward	them.
“This	 man's	 sword,	 Master,”	 the	 raven	 said,	 “is	 not	 Oponn's	 only	 tool,	 I'm
afraid.”
Paran	shook	his	 head,	his	only	surprise	the	realization	that	nothing	surprised
him	anymore.	He	sheathed	his	sword.
“Speak	on,	Crone,”	Rake	commanded.
The	raven	cocked	its	head	at	Paran.	“Here,	Master?”
Rake	 frowned.	 “Perhaps	 not.”	 He	 faced	 the	 captain	 again.	 “Hold	 on	 to	 that
weapon	until	your	luck	turns.	When	that	happens,	and	if	you're	still	alive,	break	it
or	give	it	to	your	worst	enemy.”	A	grin	crossed	his	features.	“Thus	far,	it	seems
your	luck	holds.”
Paran	hesitated.	“I'm	free	to	go?”
Lord	Anomander	Rake	nodded.
The	captain	looked	around,	then	strode	off	in	search	of	the	surviving	horses.
Minutes	later,	the	shock	came	to	Paran,	driving	him	to	his	knees.	Toc	was	gone.
He'd	dragged	the	man	with	him	in	his	relentless,	mindless	pursuit	across	the	plain.
He	looked	up,	eyes	unseeing.	He'd	called	Hairlock	his	enemy.	He'd	proclaimed
Lorn's	death	his	final	goal.	As	if	these	two	things	would	answer	the	anguish	within
him,	would	heal	the	pain	of	loss.	But	the	demon	is	within	me.
Oponn	 had	 been	 unkind	 .	 .	 .	 What	 had	 Rake	 meant?	 Have	 any	 of	 these
thoughts	been	my	own?	Look	at	me—my	every	move	seems	a	desperate	search
for	someone	to	blame,	always	someone	else.	I've	made	being	a	tool	of	a	god	an
excuse,	 a	 justification	 for	 not	 thinking,	 for	 simply	 reacting.	 And	 others	 have
died	for	it.
Rake	had	also	said,	“Finish	what	you	start.”	He	would	have	to	deal	with	his
own	demons	later.	There	could	be	no	turning	back.	But	it	had	been	wrong	to	think
that	what	he	planned	would	end	the	pain	within	him.	Adding	Lorn's	blood	to	his
stained	hands	would	not	achieve	what	he	sought.
Paran	rose,	collected	the	reins	of	the	surviving	horses.	He	led	the	beasts	back
to	the	scene	of	the	fight.	The	Tiste	Andii	had	vanished,	but	the	Hounds	remained,
motionless	dark	humps	in	the	yellow	grass.	He	dropped	the	reins	and	approached
one.	The	slice	across	its	chest	still	leaked	blood.	Crouching,	Paran	reached	out,
ran	his	fingers	along	the	animal's	hide.	See	what	the	desire	for	murder	gets	you?
Hood's	Breath,	but	you	were	a	beautiful	beast.	His	fingertips	brushed	blood.	The
captain	recoiled	at	the	contact,	but	it	was	too	late.	Something	rippled	up	his	arm,


swept	through	him.	He	fell	back	into	darkness,	the	sound	of	chains	rattling	taut.
Paran	 found	 himself	 walking	 and	 he	 was	 not	 alone.	 Through	 the	 gloom	 he
could	make	out	figures	on	all	sides,	each	shackled	with	long	iron	chains,	leaning
forward	 as	 if	 pulling	 at	 an	 immense	 weight.	 The	 ground	 underfoot	 was	 barren,
lifeless.	Overhead	there	was	nothing	but	darkness.	Beneath	the	constant	creak	of
the	chains	was	a	heavier	sound	that	Paran	could	feel	through	the	soles	of	his	boots.
Alone	 unchained,	 he	 fell	 back	 toward	 the	 source	 of	 that	 sound,	 passing	 chained
figures,	many	of	them	not	human.	A	shape	appeared,	hulking,	pitching.	A	wagon,
impossibly	 huge,	 its	 wooden	 wheels	 taller	 than	 a	 man.	 Driven	 by	 an	 insatiable
desire	to	discover	what	it	carried,	Paran	moved	closer.
A	chain	ripped	across	his	chest,	throwing	him	from	his	feet.	An	ear-piercing
howl	 sounded	 directly	 above	 him.	 Claws	 gouged	 his	 left	 arm,	 pinning	 it	 to	 the
ground.	 A	 chain	 rippled	 under	 his	 back.	 He	 struggled	 as	 a	 cold	 wet	 nose	 and
savage	 teeth	 pushed	 under	 his	 chin.	 The	 jaws	 opened,	 slipped	 around	 his	 neck,
then	tightened.
Paran	lay	perfectly	still,	waiting	for	the	fatal	clenching	of	those	jaws.	Instead,
they	pulled	away.	He	found	himself	staring	up	into	the	Hound's	eyes,	one	blue,	one
brown.	 A	 massive	 collar	 of	 iron	 circled	 its	 neck.	 The	 beast	 lunged	 away.	 The
chain	under	him	snapped	taut,	flinging	Paran	into	the	air.	He	felt	more	than	heard
the	wagon	groan	sideways,	even	as	he	landed	sprawling	into	the	path	of	one	of	the
wooden	wheels.
A	 hand	 grasped	 the	 collar	 of	 his	 cloak	 and	 dragged	 him	 clear.	 The	 captain
scrambled	to	his	feet.
A	voice	beside	him	spoke.	“Any	man	who	has	earned	mercy	from	Hounds	and
walks	here	unchained	is	a	man	worth	talking	to.	Walk	with	me.”
The	shadow	of	a	cowl	hid	the	stranger's	features.	The	man	was	big,	dressed	in
rags.	After	releasing	Paran	he	resumed	straining	on	his	chain.	“Never	before,”	he
grunted,	“has	this	prison	been	so	tested.”	He	hissed	as	the	wagon	lurched	yet	again
to	the	Hounds'	frantic	attempts	to	escape.	“I	fear	this	will	overturn.”
“And	if	it	does?”
The	face	swung	to	him	briefly	and	in	the	darkness	Paran	saw	the	flash	of	teeth.
“The	pulling	will	get	harder.”
“Where	are	we?”
“The	Warren	within	the	Sword.	Did	not	Dragnipur	take	your	life,	too?”
“If	it	had,	would	I	not	be	chained	as	well?”
“True	enough.	What	then	are	you	doing	here?”


“I	 don't	 know,”	 Paran	 admitted.	 “I	 saw	 the	 Hounds	 killed	 by	 Rake's	 sword.
Then	I	touched	the	blood	of	one	of	the	slain	beasts.”
“That	explains	their	confusion.	They	thought	you	one	of	their	own	.	.	.	at	first.
You	were	wise	to	submit	to	that	Hound's	challenge.”
“Too	frightened	to	move,	you	mean.”
The	stranger	laughed.	“Even	so.”
“What	is	your	name?”
“Names	are	meaningless.	Rake	killed	me.	Long	ago.	That	is	enough.”
Paran	 fell	 silent.	 Eternity,	 chained	 here,	 forever	 pulling.	 And	 I	 ask	 for	 the
man's	name.	Would	any	apology	suffice?
The	wagon	bucked	savagely,	earth	ripped	from	under	its	wheels.	Figures	fell,
wailing.	The	Hounds	howled	their	fury.
“Gethol's	Breath,”	the	stranger	gasped.	“Will	they	never	cease?”
“I	don't	think	they	will,”	Paran	said.	“Can	those	chains	be	broken?”
“No.	None	have	managed	it	yet,	that	is,	and	there	are	dragons	among	us.	But
these	Hounds	.	.	.”	He	sighed.	“It	is	astonishing,	but	already	I	long	for	the	peace
their	arrival	has	shattered.”
“Perhaps	I	can	help.”
The	stranger	barked	a	laugh.	“By	all	means,	try.”
Paran	moved	away,	heading	toward	the	Hounds.	He	had	no	plan	in	mind.	But	I
alone	 am	 unchained.	 The	 thought	 stopped	 him	 and	 he	 smiled.	 Unchained.	 No
one's	tool.	He	continued	on,	wondering.	He	passed	figures	straining	step	by	step,
some	 silent,	 some	 muttering	 in	 madness.	 None	 raised	 its	 head	 to	 glance	 as	 he
passed.	 The	 sound	 of	 bestial	 gasping	 reached	 him.	 “Hounds!”	 Paran	 called.	 “I
would	help!”
After	 a	 time,	 they	 appeared	 from	 the	 gloom.	 Blood	 sheathed	 their	 shoulders
and	 chests,	 the	 flesh	 torn	 and	 mangled	 by	 the	 collars.	 The	 Hounds	 trembled,
muscles	 jumping	 along	 their	 flanks.	 Their	 eyes,	 level	 with	 Paran's	 own,	 met	 his
with	 such	 numbed,	 helpless	 misery	 that	 his	 heart	 lurched.	 He	 reached	 out	 to	 the
odd-eyed	one.	“I	would	examine	your	collars,	your	chains,	seeking	a	flaw.”
The	beast	walked	alongside	him—they	were	ever	moving	forward,	the	wagon
unceasing	in	its	roll.	Paran	bent	close,	running	his	hands	on	the	collar,	seeking	a
join.	There	was	none.	Where	the	chain	attached,	the	link	and	the	collar	seemed	of
one	 solid	 piece.	 Though	 he	 knew	 little	 of	 smithing,	 he	 believed	 this	 attachment
would	prove	the	weakest	element	and	should	already	show	signs	of	strain.	But	his
fingertips	told	him	otherwise.	The	iron	was	not	even	scratched.


Paran	 ran	 his	 hand	 along	 the	 chain,	 leaving	 the	 Hound's	 side.	 He	 paused,
noticing	 the	 other	 beast	 watching	 his	 every	 move,	 then	 continued	 on.	 From	 the
animal	to	the	wagon,	over	seventy	armspans	of	length,	he	ran	his	hands	from	link
to	link,	seeking	a	change	in	the	feel	of	the	iron,	seeking	heat,	gouges.	Nothing.	He
arrived	 alongside	 the	 wagon.	 The	 wheel	 he	 walked	 behind	 was	 solid	 wood,	 a
span	in	width,	nicked	and	gouged	but	otherwise	featureless.	The	wall	of	the	bed
was	 twenty	 or	 more	 feet	 high.	 The	 slatted	 sideboards	 of	 withered,	 bone-gray
wood	 showed	 spaces	 a	 finger's	 width	 between.	 Paran	 flinched	 back	 on	 seeing
skeletal	fingers	crowding	the	cracks,	wriggling	helplessly.
The	wagon's	frame	beneath	the	sideboards	drew	his	attention.	Here	the	wood
was	 black,	 glistening	 with	 pitch.	 Chain-ends	 entered	 it,	 countless	 in	 number,
sinking	seamlessly	into	the	wood.	Under	his	touch	the	frame	seemed	solid,	yet	it
was	as	if	the	chain	links	passed	through	it—whatever	held	them,	then,	was	beyond
the	 wagon's	 frame.	 Paran	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath	 of	 the	 cool,	 stale	 air,	 then	 ducked
under	the	bed.
The	frame's	beam	was	a	dozen	spans	thick,	condensation	dripping	down	from
its	pitched	underside	in	endless	rain.	At	the	inside	edge	Paran	found	once	again
the	 chains,	 continuing	 on	 farther	 under	 the	 wagon.	 Grasping	 one,	 he	 followed	 it
inward.	 The	 links	 grew	 colder	 as	 did	 the	 air	 around	 him.	 Before	 long	 he	 was
forced	 to	 release	 the	 chain,	 his	 hands	 burned	 by	 the	 cold.	 The	 rain	 from	 the
underside	of	the	wagon	came	down	as	slivers	of	ice.	Two	paces	ahead,	the	chains
converged,	 swallowed	 by	 a	 suspended	 pool	 of	 absolute	 darkness.	 Cold	 poured
from	it	in	pulsing	waves.	Paran	could	get	no	closer.
He	 hissed	 in	 frustration	 as	 he	 scrambled	 along	 opposite	 the	 dark	 hole,
wondering	what	to	do	next.	Even	if	he	managed	to	break	a	chain,	he	had	no	idea
which	 ones	 belonged	 to	 the	 Hounds.	 As	 for	 the	 others	 .	 .	 .	 Anomander	 Rake
seemed	 a	 creature	 of	 clear—if	 cold—justice.	 To	 break	 a	 chain	 could	 unleash
ancient	horrors	upon	the	realms	of	the	living.	Even	the	stranger	he'd	spoken	with
could	once	have	been	a	Tyrant,	a	horrible	dominator.
Paran	unsheathed	Chance.	As	the	blade	leaped	free	of	the	scabbard	it	bucked
wildly	in	his	hands.	The	captain	grinned	even	as	tremors	of	terror	reached	through
his	hands	from	the	sword.	“Oponn!	Dear	Twins,	I	call	on	you!	Now!”
The	 air	 groaned.	 Paran	 stumbled	 over	 someone,	 who	 loosed	 a	 stream	 of
curses.	 Sheathing	 his	 sword,	 he	 reached	 down,	 hand	 closing	 on	 brocaded	 cloth.
He	 pulled	 the	 god	 to	 his	 feet.	 “Why	 you?”	 Paran	 demanded.	 “I	 wanted	 your
sister.”
“Madness,	mortal!”	the	male	Twin	snapped.	“To	call	me	here!	So	close	to	the
Queen	of	Darkness—here,	within	a	god-slaying	sword!”


Paran	 shook	 him.	 Filled	 with	 a	 mindless,	 bestial	 rage,	 the	 captain	 shook	 the
god.	He	heard	the	Hounds	howl,	and	fought	back	a	sudden	desire	to	join	his	voice
to	their	cries.
The	 Twin,	 terror	 in	 his	 bright	 eyes,	 clawed	 at	 Paran.	 “What—what	 are	 you
doing?”
Paran	stopped,	his	attention	drawn	to	two	chains	that	had	gone	slack.	“They're
coming.”
The	wagon	seemed	to	leap	upward,	rocked	as	it	had	never	been	before.	The
thunder	of	the	impact	filled	the	air,	wood	and	ice	cascading	down.
“They	have	your	scent,	Twin.”
The	god	shrieked,	battered	his	fists	into	Paran's	face,	scratching,	kicking,	but
the	captain	held	on.	“Not	the	luck	that	pulls.”	He	spat	blood.	“The	luck	.	.	.	that
pushes—”
The	wagon	was	hammered	again,	its	wheels	bucking	into	the	air	to	come	down
with	a	splintering,	echoing	concussion.	Paran	had	no	time	to	wonder	at	the	savage
strength	that	coursed	through	him,	a	strength	sufficient	to	hold	down	a	god	gripped
in	panic.	He	simply	held	on.
“Please!”	 the	 Twin	 begged.	 “Anything!	 Just	 ask	 it!	 Anything	 within	 my
powers.”
“The	Hounds'	chains,”	Paran	said.	“Break	them.”
“I—I	cannot!”
The	wagon	shuddered	sickeningly,	distant	wood	splintering.	Paran	dragged	the
Twin	a	pace	as	it	rolled	forward	again.	“Think	of	a	way,”	he	said.	“Or	the	Hounds
will	have	you.”
“I—I	cannot	be	sure,	Paran.”
“What?	You	can't	be	sure	of	what?”
The	 Twin	 gestured	 toward	 the	 blackness.	 “In	 there.	 The	 chains	 are	 held	 in
place	 within	 it—within	 the	 Warren	 of	 Darkness,	 within	 Kurald	 Galain.	 Should
they	enter	.	.	.	I	do	not	know—I	cannot	be	certain,	but	the	chains	may	disappear.”
“How	can	they	enter?”
“They	could	be	leaving	one	nightmare	only	to	enter	another.”
“It	cannot	be	worse,	Twin.	I	asked	you,	how?”
“Bait.”
“What?”
The	Twin	smiled	shakily.	“As	you	said,	they're	coming.	But,	Paran,	you	must


release	me.	By	all	means,	hold	me	before	the	portal,	but	please,	at	the	last	moment
.	.	.”
“I	release	my	hold	on	you.”
The	god	nodded.
“Very	well.”
The	 Hounds	 struck	 the	 wagon	 again,	 and	 this	 time	 they	 broke	 through.
Clutching	the	Twin,	Paran	spun	round	to	see	the	beasts	charging	out	of	the	gloom.
His	captive	shrieked.
The	Hounds	leaped.
Paran	 released	 the	 god,	 dropping	 flat	 to	 the	 ground	 as	 the	 Hounds	 passed
through	the	air	above.	The	Twin	vanished.	The	Hounds	flashed	past,	disappeared
into	the	portal	in	silence,	and	were	gone.
Paran	 rolled	 to	 his	 feet,	 even	 as	 darkness	 reached	 out	 for	 him,	 not	 with	 the
cold	of	oblivion	but	with	a	breath	like	warm,	sighing	wind.
He	 opened	 his	 eyes	 to	 find	 himself	 on	 his	 hands	 and	 knees	 on	 the	 plain's
yellowed	 grass,	 beside	 a	 flattened,	 blood-smeared	 patch	 where	 the	 body	 of	 a
Hound	had	once	lain.	Insects	buzzed	close	by.	His	head	aching,	Paran	climbed	to
his	feet.	The	other	Hound's	body	was	gone	as	well.	What	had	he	done?	And	why?
Of	all	the	things	that	the	Twin	could	have	offered	him	.	.	.	Tattersail	.	.	.	Toc	the
Younger	.	.	.	Then	again,	to	pluck	a	soul	back	through	Hood's	Gate	was	not	likely
within	 Oponn's	 power	 to	 achieve.	 Had	 he	 freed	 the	 Hounds?	 He	 realized	 he
would	probably	never	know.
He	staggered	over	to	the	horses.	At	least,	for	a	short	time	there,	he	had	been
unchained.	 He	 had	 been	 free,	 and	 what	 he	 had	 done	 he	 had	 done	 by	 his	 own
choice.	My	own	choice.
He	looked	to	the	south.	Darujhistan	and	the	Adjunct	await	me.	Finish	what
you	started,	Paran.	Finish	it	once	and	for	all.
“Damn	inconvenient,”	Coll	growled	as	Crokus	completed	tying	the	bandage.	“She
was	good,”	he	added.	“She	knew	exactly	what	to	do.	I'd	say	she'd	been	trained.
Sort	of	fits,	since	she	was	dressed	like	a	mercenary.”
“I	 still	 don't	 understand,”	 Crokus	 said,	 sitting	 back	 on	 his	 haunches.	 He
glanced	at	Murillio	and	Kruppe.	Both	remained	unconscious.	“Why	did	she	attack
us?	And	why	didn't	she	kill	me?”
Coll	did	not	reply.	He	sat	glaring	at	his	horse,	which	stood	a	dozen	feet	away,
quietly	cropping	grass.	He'd	already	voiced	a	dozen	foul	curses	at	the	beast,	and


Crokus	 suspected	 that	 their	 relationship	 had	 been,	 as	 Kruppe	 would	 put	 it,
irretrievably	compromised.
“What's	this?”	Coll	grunted.
Crokus	 realized	 that	 the	 man	 was	 looking	 past	 the	 horse,	 a	 frown	 deepening
the	lines	of	his	forehead.
The	boy	turned,	then	let	out	a	wild	shout,	springing	backward	and	snatching	at
his	daggers.	His	boot	caught	a	stone	and	he	sprawled.	He	jumped	to	his	feet,	one
blade	freed	and	in	his	hand.	“It's	her!”	he	yelled.	“The	woman	from	the	bar!	She's
a	killer,	Coll.”
“Easy,	lad,”	Coll	said.	“She	looks	anything	but	dangerous,	despite	that	sword
on	 her	 hip.	 Hell,”	 he	 added,	 pushing	 himself	 straighter,	 “if	 anything,	 she	 looks
completely	lost.”
Crokus	 stared	 at	 the	 woman,	 who	 stood	 at	 the	 summit's	 edge.	 “Hood's
Breath,”	he	muttered.	Coll	was	right.	He'd	never	seen	anyone	look	so	bewildered,
so	 utterly	 at	 a	 loss.	 She	 was	 looking	 at	 them,	 tensed	 as	 if	 ready	 to	 flee.	 All	 the
poise,	the	deadly	confidence	she'd	possessed	in	the	Phoenix	Inn,	was	gone,	as	if	it
had	never	been.	Crokus	sheathed	his	dagger.
“So,”	he	asked,	“what	do	we	do	now,	Coll?”
The	wounded	man	shrugged.	“Ease	the	girl's	mind,	I	guess.	From	the	looks	of
it,	she	needs	some	help.”
“But	she	killed	Chert,”	Crokus	stated.	“I	saw	the	blood	on	her	knife.”
Coll	 squinted	 at	 the	 girl.	 “I	 don't	 doubt	 you,	 boy,	 but	 this	 girl	 doesn't	 look
capable	of	killing	anyone.”
“You	think	I	can't	see	that?”	Crokus	said.	“I'm	just	telling	you	what	I	saw.	I
know	it	doesn't	make	any	sense!”
Coll	sighed.	“Anyway,	she	still	needs	our	help.	So	go	and	get	her,	Crokus.”
The	boy	threw	up	his	hands.	“How	do	I	do	that?”
“Damned	if	I	know,”	Coll	replied,	grinning.	“Try	flirting.”
Crokus	threw	the	man	a	disgusted	look,	then	he	walked	cautiously	toward	the
girl.	 She	 tensed	 and	 backed	 a	 step.	 “Careful!”	 Crokus	 cried,	 pointing	 at	 the
summit's	crest	behind	her.
The	girl	saw	that	she	stood	at	the	very	edge	of	a	steep	slope.	Oddly	enough,
this	seemed	to	relax	her.	She	moved	a	few	steps	closer	to	Crokus,	her	wide	eyes
searching	his.
“That's	right,”	Crokus	murmured.	“Everything's	fine.	Do	you	understand?”	He
pointed	at	his	mouth	and	made	talking	motions.


Coll	groaned.
The	girl	surprised	them	both	by	replying	in	Daru,	“I	understand	you,”	she	said
haltingly.	 “More	 now.	 You're	 not	 Malazan,	 you're	 not	 speaking	 Malazan.	 But	 I
understand	you.”	She	frowned.	“How?”
“Malazan,	huh?”	Coll	said.	“Where	are	you	from,	girl?”
She	thought	for	a	moment.	“Itko	Kan,”	she	said.
“What?”	Coll	laughed.	“What	storm	blew	you	here?”
Realization	flooded	her	eyes.	“Where's	my	father?	What	happened	to	the	nets?
I	bought	the	twine,	and	there	was	that	Seer—Riggalai	the	Seer,	the	wax-witch.	I
remember	her—she	died!”	The	girl	fell	to	her	knees.	“She	died.	And	then—”
Coll's	expression	was	severe,	thoughtful.	“And	then?”
“I	 don't	 remember,”	 the	 girl	 whispered,	 looking	 down	 at	 her	 hands.	 “I	 don't
remember	anything	more.”	She	began	to	cry.
“Gedderone's	thousand	teats,”	Coll	cursed	quietly,	waving	Crokus	to	his	side.
“Listen	carefully,	lad.	Don't	wait	for	us.	Take	this	girl	to	your	uncle.	Take	her	to
Mammot,	and	quickly.”
Crokus	 scowled.	 “Why?	 I	 can't	 just	 leave	 you	 here,	 Coll.	 Who	 knows	 when
Murillio	and	Kruppe	will	come	around?	What	if	that	mercenary	comes	back?”
“What	if	she	does?”	Coll	asked	pointedly.
Crokus	flushed	and	looked	away.
“Murillio's	a	tough	bastard,	despite	the	perfume,”	Coll	said.	“He'll	be	up	and
dancing	in	no	time.	Take	the	girl	to	your	uncle,	lad.	Do	as	I	say.”
“You	still	haven't	told	me	why,”	Crokus	said.
“It's	a	hunch,	no	more.”	Coll	reached	up	and	gripped	the	boy's	shoulder.	“This
girl's	 been	 possessed.	 I	 think.	 Someone,	 something,	 brought	 her	 here,	 to
Darujhistan,	and	on	to	our	trail.	The	truth	is	somewhere	in	her	head,	Crokus,	and	it
could	 be	 vital.	 Your	 uncle	 knows	 the	 right	 people,	 they	 can	 help	 her,	 lad.	 Now,
saddle	up	my	horse.	I'll	wait	here	for	our	friends	to	wake.	Hood	knows,	I	can't
walk	anyway.	I	shouldn't	move	for	at	least	a	couple	of	days.	Kruppe	and	Murillio
will	handle	things	here.	Go!”
Crokus	eyed	the	weeping	girl.	Then	he	said.	“All	right,	Coll.	We'll	go	back,
me	and	her.”
“Good,”	Coll	grunted.	“Now,	lay	me	out	a	bedroll	and	some	food.	Then	ride
on	out	of	here,	and	if	that	damn	horse	of	mine	has	a	heart	attack	outside	the	city
gates,	even	better.	Hop	to	it,	lad.”


Chapter	Sixteen
	

Dessembrae	knows	the	sorrows
in	our	souls.
He	walks	at	the	side	of	each	mortal
a	vessel	of	regret	on	the	fires
of	vengeance.
Dessembrae	knows	the	sorrows
and	would	now	share	them	with	us	all.
THE	LORD	OF	TRAGEDY
HOLY	BOOK	PRAYER
(CANON	OF	KASSAL)


	
The	 puncture	 wound	 in	 Lorn's	 left	 shoulder	 was	 not	 deep.	 Without	 magical	 aid,
however,	the	risk	of	infection	was	a	cause	for	concern.	She	returned	to	the	camp	to
find	Tool	still	positioned	where	he	had	been	since	dawn.
Ignoring	the	Imass,	the	Adjunct	found	her	collection	of	herbs	in	her	saddle	bag.
She	sat	down	and	leaned	back	against	the	saddle,	then	set	to	treating	the	wound.
It	 had	 been	 a	 foolish,	 unnecessary	 attack.	 Too	 many	 things	 had	 happened
recently,	 too	 many	 ideas,	 too	 much	 of	 the	 woman	 Lorn	 interfering	 with	 her
functions	and	duties	as	Adjunct	to	the	Empress.	She	was	making	mistakes	that	she
would	not	have	made	a	year	ago.
Tool	had	given	her	more	to	think	about	than	she	could	handle.	The	words	the
Imass	had	thrown	 at	 her	 feet,	as	if	in	afterthought,	had	reached	into	and	grasped
something	 deep	 within	 her	 and	 now	 would	 not	 let	 go.	 Emotions	 seeped	 into	 the
Adjunct,	clouding	the	world	around	her.	She'd	abandoned	sorrow	long	ago,	along
with	regret.	Compassion	was	anathema	to	the	Adjunct.	Yet	now	all	these	feelings
swept	through	her	in	tides	pulling	her	every	which	way.	She	found	herself	clinging
to	 the	 title	 of	 Adjunct,	 and	 what	 it	 meant,	 as	 if	 it	 was	 a	 lifeline	 to	 sanity,	 to
stability	and	control.
She	completed	cleaning	the	wound	as	best	she	could,	then	prepared	a	poultice.
Control.	The	word	rebounded	in	her	thoughts,	clipped,	hard	and	sure.	What	was
the	heart	of	Empire,	if	not	control?	What	shaped	Empress	Laseen's	every	act,	her
every	thought?	And	what	had	been	at	the	heart	of	the	very	first	Empire—the	great
wars	that	shaped	the	T'lan	Imass	to	this	day?
She	sighed	and	looked	down	at	the	dirt	beneath	her.	But	that	was	no	more	than
we	 all	 sought,	 she	 told	 herself.	 From	 a	 young	 girl	 bringing	 twine	 home	 to	 her
father,	 to	 the	 immortal	 power	 that	 had	 seized	 her	 for	 its	 own	 use.	 Through	 the
gamut	of	life	we	struggled	for	control,	for	a	means	to	fashion	the	world	around
us,	an	eternal,	hopeless	hunt	for	the	privilege	of	being	able	to	predict	the	shape
of	our	lives.
The	Imass,	and	his	three-hundred-thousand-year-old	words,	had	given	to	Lorn
a	sense	of	futility.	And	it	worked	on	her,	it	threatened	to	overwhelm	her.
She'd	 given	 the	 boy	 his	 life,	 surprising	 both	 him	 and	 herself.	 Lorn	 smiled
ruefully.	 Prediction	 had	 become	 a	 privilege	 now	 lost	 to	 her.	 Never	 mind	 the
outside	 world,	 she	 could	 not	 even	 guess	 her	 own	 actions,	 or	 the	 course	 of	 her
thoughts.


Was	this	the	true	nature	of	emotion?	she	wondered.	The	great	defier	of	logic,
of	control—the	whims	of	being	human.	What	lay	ahead?
“Adjunct.”
Startled,	 Lorn	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 Tool	 standing	 over	 her.	 Frost	 covered	 the
warrior,	steaming	in	the	heat.
“You	have	been	wounded.”
“A	 skirmish,”	 she	 said	 gruffly,	 almost	 embarrassed.	 “It's	 over	 now.”	 She
pressed	the	poultice	against	the	wound	then	wrapped	cloth	around	her	shoulder.	It
was	an	awkward	effort,	since	she	could	use	only	one	hand.
Tool	knelt	beside	her.	“I	will	assist	you,	Adjunct.”
Surprised,	Lorn	studied	the	warrior's	death's	face.	But	his	next	words	wiped
out	any	thought	of	the	Imass	revealing	compassion.
“We	have	little	time,	Adjunct.	The	opening	awaits	us.”
An	 expressionless	 mask	 settled	 over	 her	 face.	 She	 jerked	 a	 nod	 as	 Tool
finished,	 his	 withered,	 shredded	 hands—the	 nails	 blunt,	 polished	 brown	 and
curved—deftly	 tying	 a	 knot	 with	 the	 strips	 of	 cloth.	 “Help	 me	 to	 my	 feet,”	 she
commanded.
The	 marker	 had	 been	 shattered,	 she	 saw,	 as	 the	 Imass	 guided	 her	 forward.
Apart	 from	 this,	 however,	 all	 looked	 unchanged.	 “Where	 is	 this	 opening?”	 she
asked.
Tool	 halted	 before	 the	 broken	 stones.	 “I	 will	 lead,	 Adjunct.	 Follow	 closely
behind	 me.	 When	 we	 are	 within	 the	 tomb,	 unsheath	 your	 sword.	 The	 deadening
effect	 will	 be	 minimal,	 yet	 it	 will	 slow	 the	 Jaghut's	 return	 to	 consciousness.
Enough	for	us	to	complete	our	efforts.”
Lorn	drew	a	deep	breath.	She	shrugged	off	her	doubts.	There	was	no	turning
back	now.	Had	there	ever	been	such	a	chance?	The	question,	she	realized,	was	a
moot	 one:	 the	 course	 had	 been	 chosen	 for	 her.	 “Very	 well,”	 she	 said.	 “Lead	 on,
Tool.”
The	Imass	spread	out	his	arms	to	the	sides.	The	hillside	before	them	blurred,
as	if	a	curtain	of	wind-blown	sand	rose	before	it.	A	churning	wind	roiled	through
this	strange	mist.	Tool	stepped	forward.
Following,	Lorn	at	first	recoiled	at	the	stench	that	wafted	into	her,	a	stench	of
air	poisoned	by	centuries	of	pulsing	sorcery,	countless	wards	dispersed	by	Tool's
Tellann	powers.	She	pushed	ahead,	her	eyes	fixing	on	the	Imass's	broad,	tattered
back.
They	 entered	 the	 hillside.	 A	 rough	 corridor,	 leading	 into	 darkness,	 appeared


before	them.	Frost	limned	the	stacked	boulders	forming	the	walls	and	ceiling.	As
they	went	farther,	the	air	grew	bitter	cold,	stripped	of	scents,	and	thick	green	and
white	 ropes	 of	 ice	 tracked	 the	 walls.	 The	 floor,	 which	 had	 been	 frozen,	 packed
earth,	became	slabs	of	stone,	slick	with	ice.
Numbness	 seeped	 into	 Lorn's	 extremities	 and	 her	 face.	 She	 saw	 her	 breath
curl	 in	 a	 white	 stream,	 drawn	 inward	 to	 the	 darkness	 beyond.	 The	 corridor
narrowed	and	she	saw	strange	symbols	painted	on	and	within	the	ice	streaking	the
walls,	dull	red	ocher	in	color.	These	markings	brushed	something	deep	inside	her
—she	 almost	 recognized	 them,	 but	 as	 soon	 as	 she	 concentrated	 on	 doing	 so,	 the
sensation	of	familiarity	vanished.
Tool	spoke.	“My	people	have	visited	here	before,”	he	said,	pausing	to	look	at
the	Adjunct	over	one	shoulder.	“They	added	their	own	wards	to	those	of	the	Jaghut
who	imprisoned	this	Tyrant.”
Lorn	was	irritated.	“What	of	it?”
The	 Imass	 stared	 at	 her	 in	 silence,	 then	 replied,	 dully,	 “Adjunct,	 I	 believe	 I
know	the	name	of	this	Jaghut	Tyrant.	I	am	now	beset	by	doubts.	It	should	not	be
freed.	Yet,	like	you,	I	am	compelled.”
Lorn's	breath	caught.
“Adjunct,”	 Tool	 continued,	 “I	 acknowledge	 the	 ambivalence	 you	 have	 been
feeling.	I	share	it.	When	this	is	done,	I	shall	leave.”
She	was	confused.	“Leave?”
Tool	 nodded.	 “Within	 this	 tomb,	 and	 with	 what	 we	 will	 do,	 my	 vows	 are
ended.	They	will	bind	me	no	longer.	Such	is	the	residual	power	of	this	sleeping
Jaghut.	And	for	that,	I	am	thankful.”
“Why	are	you	telling	me	this?”
“Adjunct,	you	are	welcome	to	accompany	me.”
Lorn	opened	her	mouth,	but	could	think	of	no	immediate	reply	so	shut	it	again.
“I	 ask	 that	 you	 consider	 my	 offer,	 Adjunct.	 I	 shall	 journey	 in	 search	 of	 an
answer,	and	I	shall	find	it.”
Answer?	To	what?	she	wanted	to	ask.	Yet	something	stopped	her,	a	surge	of
fear	that	said	to	her:	You	don't	want	to	know.	Remain	ignorant	in	this.	“Let's	get
on	with	it,”	she	grated.
Tool	resumed	his	march	into	the	darkness.
After	a	minute	Lorn	asked,	“How	much	time	is	this	going	to	take?”
“Time?”	 There	 was	 amusement	 in	 his	 voice.	 “Within	 this	 barrow,	 Adjunct,
time	does	not	exist.	The	Jaghut	who	imprisoned	their	kin	brought	an	age	of	ice	to


this	 land,	 the	 barrow's	 final	 seal.	 Adjunct,	 a	 half-league	 of	 ice	 stands	 over	 this
burial	chamber—still.	We	have	 come	to	a	time	and	place	before	the	 faltering	of
the	 Jaghut	 ice,	 before	 the	 coming	 of	 the	 great	 inland	 sea	 known	 to	 the	 Imass	 as
Jhagra	Til,	before	the	passing	of	countless	ages—”
“And	when	we	return?”	Lorn	interrupted.	“How	much	time	will	have	passed?”
“I	 cannot	 say,	 Adjunct.”	 The	 Imass	 paused	 and	 turned	 back	 to	 her,	 his	 eye
sockets	glimmering	with	a	sourceless	light.	“I	have	never	done	this	before.”
Despite	the	hardened	leather	armor,	the	feel	of	a	woman	pressing	against	Crokus's
back	had	brought	to	his	face	more	sweat	than	the	afternoon	heat	could	account	for.
Yet	it	was	a	mix	of	feelings	that	had	his	heart	thumping	against	his	chest.	On	the
one	hand	was	the	bald	fact	that	here	was	a	girl	of	nearly	his	age,	and	an	attractive
one	at	that,	with	surprisingly	strong	arms	wrapped	around	his	waist	and	her	warm,
moist	breath	on	his	neck.	On	the	other	hand,	this	woman	had	murdered	a	man,	and
the	only	reason	he	could	think	of	her	arriving	on	the	scene	back	there	in	the	hills
was	 that	 she'd	 been	 planning	 to	 kill	 him,	 too.	 So	 he	 found	 himself	 too	 tense	 to
enjoy	sharing	the	saddle	with	her.
They	 had	 said	 little	 to	 each	 other	 since	 leaving	 Coll.	 In	 another	 day,	 Crokus
knew,	 Darujhistan's	 walls	 would	 come	 into	 view.	 He	 wondered	 if	 she'd
remember	it.	And	then	a	voice	spoke	in	his	head	that	sounded	like	Coll's:	“Why
don't	you	ask	the	girl,	idiot?”	Crokus	scowled.
She	spoke	first.	“Is	Itko	Kan	far	from	here?”
He	 thought	 about	 laughing,	 but	 something—an	 instinct—stopped	 him.	 Tread
softly,	 he	 told	 himself.	 “I've	 never	 heard	 of	 such	 a	 place,”	 he	 said.	 “It's	 in	 the
Malazan	Empire?”
“Yes.	We	aren't	in	the	Empire?”
Crokus	 growled,	 “Not	 yet.”	 Then	 his	 shoulders	 slumped.	 “We're	 on	 a
continent	 called	 Genabackis.	 The	 Malazans	 came	 from	 the	 seas	 both	 east	 and
west.	 They	 now	 control	 all	 the	 Free	 Cities	 to	 the	 north,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 Nathilog
Confederacy.”
“Oh,”	the	girl	replied	weakly.	“You're	at	war	with	the	Empire,	then.”
“More	or	less,	though	you'd	never	know	it	as	far	as	Darujhistan	is	concerned.”
“Is	that	the	name	of	the	town	you	live	in?”
“Town?	Darujhistan's	a	city.	It's	the	biggest,	richest	city	in	all	the	land.”
There	was	awe	and	excitement	in	her	reply.	“A	city.	I've	never	been	to	a	city.
Your	name	is	Crokus,	isn't	it?”


“How	did	you	know	that?”
“That's	what	your	soldier	friend	called	you.”
“Oh,	 of	 course.”	 Why	 did	 the	 fact	 that	 she'd	 known	 his	 name	 send	 his	 heart
lurching?
“Aren't	you	going	to	ask	me	my	name?”	the	woman	asked	quietly.
“You	can	remember	it?”
“No,”	she	admitted.	“That's	strange,	isn't	it?”
He	heard	pathos	in	that	reply,	and	something	melted	inside—making	him	even
angrier.	“Well,	I	can't	very	well	help	you	in	that,	can	I?”
The	woman	seemed	to	withdraw	behind	him,	and	her	arms	loosened	their	grip.
“No.”
Abruptly	his	anger	fell	away.	Crokus	was	ready	to	scream	at	the	chaos	in	his
head.	 Instead	 he	 shifted	 in	 the	 saddle,	 forcing	 her	 to	 clutch	 him	 tightly.	 Ah,	 he
smirked,	that's	better.	Then	his	eyes	widened.	What	am	I	saying?
“Crokus?”
“What?”
“Give	me	a	Darujhistan	name.	Pick	one.	Pick	your	favorite.”
“Challice,”	 he	 responded	 immediately.	 “No,	 wait!	 You	 can't	 be	 Challice.	 I
already	know	a	Challice.	You've	got	to	be	someone	else.”
“Is	she	your	girlfriend?”
“No!”	he	snapped.	He	pulled	at	the	reins	and	they	stopped.	Crokus	clawed	at
his	hair,	then	threw	a	leg	over	and	dropped	to	the	ground.	He	pulled	the	reins	over
the	horse's	head.	“I	want	to	walk,”	he	said.
“Yes,”	she	said.	“I	would	like	to,	too.”
“Well,	maybe	I	want	to	run!”
She	 stepped	 round	 to	 face	 him,	 her	 expression	 troubled.	 “Run?	 From	 me,
Crokus?”
He	saw	things	falling	into	ruins	behind	her	eyes—what	were	those	things?	He
felt	a	desperate	need	to	know,	but	asking	straight	out	was	clearly	impossible.	Why
it	was	impossible	he	couldn't	say.	It	just	was.	He	looked	down	at	the	ground	and
kicked	at	a	rock.	“No,”	he	mumbled.	“I	didn't	mean	that.	Sorry.”
Her	 eyes	 widened.	 “That	 was	 my	 name!”	 she	 gasped.	 “That	 was	 my	 name,
Crokus—you	just	said	my	name!”
“What?”	He	frowned.	“Sorry?”
“Yes!”	She	looked	away.	“Only,	it	wasn't	always	my	name.	I	don't	think.	No.


It	wasn't	the	name	my	father	gave	me.”
“Can	you	remember	that	one?”
She	shook	her	head	and	ran	a	hand	through	her	long,	dark	hair.
Crokus	started	walking,	and	the	girl	fell	into	step	beside	him.	The	road	wound
down	through	the	low	hills.	In	an	hour	they'd	reach	the	Catlin	Bridge.	The	panic
that	 had	 filled	 him	 was	 subsiding,	 perhaps	 having	 burned	 itself	 out.	 He	 felt
relaxed,	 and	 that	 surprised	 him,	 since	 he	 couldn't	 recall	 the	 last	 time	 he'd	 felt
relaxed	in	a	female's	company.
They	 walked	 in	 silence	 for	 a	 time.	 Ahead,	 the	 sun	 sank	 down	 in	 a	 golden
blaze,	 shimmering	 along	 a	 blue	 and	 green	 line	 on	 the	 horizon	 beyond	 the	 hills.
Crokus	 pointed	 to	 the	 glistening	 line.	 “That's	 Lake	 Azur.	 Darujhistan	 lies	 on	 its
south	shore.”
“Haven't	you	thought	of	a	name	for	me	yet?”	the	woman	asked.
“The	 only	 name	 that	 comes	 to	 mind,”	 Crokus	 said	 sheepishly,	 “is	 my
matron's.”
The	girl	glanced	at	him.	“Your	mother's?”
Crokus	 laughed.	 “No,	 not	 that	 kind	 of	 matron.	 I	 meant	 the	 Lady	 of	 Thieves,
Apsalar.	Only,	it's	not	good	to	take	that	kind	of	name,	since	she's	a	goddess.	What
about	Salar?”
Her	nose	wrinkled.	“No,	I	like	Apsalar.	Make	it	Apsalar.”
“But	I	just	said—”
“That's	the	name	I	want,”	the	girl	insisted,	her	face	darkening.
Uh-oh,	Crokus	thought.	Better	not	press	this	one.	“All	right.”	He	sighed.
“So	you're	a	thief.”
“What's	wrong	with	that?”
Apsalar	grinned.	“Given	my	new	name,	nothing.	Nothing	at	all,	Crokus.	When
do	we	camp?”
He	blanched.	He	hadn't	thought	about	that.	“Maybe	we	should	just	push	on,”
he	said	warily,	not	meeting	her	eyes.
“I'm	tired.	Why	don't	we	camp	at	this	Catlin	Bridge?”
“Well,	I've	only	got	the	one	bedroll.	You	can	have	it.	I'll	stand	watch.”
“All	night?	What's	there	to	watch	out	for?”
Crokus	 rounded	 on	 her.	 “Why	 all	 these	 questions?”	 he	 demanded	 hotly.	 “It's
dangerous	 out	 here!	 Didn't	 you	 see	 Coll's	 wound?	 And	 how	 do	 we	 know	 the
garrison's	still	there?”


“What	garrison?”
Crokus	cursed	himself.	He	averted	his	gaze.	“The	garrison	on	the	other	side	of
the	bridge,”	he	said.	“But	it's	a	long	bridge—”
“Oh,	come	on,	 Crokus!”	Apsalar	laughed	and	drove	her	elbow	 into	his	ribs.
“We'll	 share	 the	 bedroll.	 I	 don't	 mind,	 so	 long	 as	 you	 keep	 your	 hands	 to
yourself.”
Rubbing	his	ribs,	Crokus	could	only	stare	at	her.
Cursing,	Kruppe	glared	over	his	shoulder	at	Murillio.	“Damnation!	Can't	you	urge
that	beast	any	faster?”
The	 mule	 was	 living	 up	 to	 its	 reputation,	 refusing	 anything	 but	 a	 plodding
walk.	 Murillio	 grinned	 sheepishly.	 “What's	 the	 big	 hurry,	 Kruppe?	 The	 boy	 can
take	care	of	himself.”
“It	 was	 Master	 Baruk's	 explicit	 command	 that	 we	 guard	 him,	 and	 guard	 him
we	must!”
Murillio's	 eyes	 narrowed.	 “So	 you	 keep	 saying,”	 he	 muttered.	 “Is	 this	 some
favor	on	Mammot's	behalf?	Has	the	boy's	uncle	got	all	worried	all	of	a	sudden?
Why's	Baruk	so	interested	in	Crokus?	You	convey	the	alchemist's	orders,	Kruppe,
but	you	don't	explain	them.”
Kruppe	 reined	 in	 his	 mount.	 “Oh,	 very	 well,”	 he	 said.	 “Mutiny	 in	 the	 ranks
forces	 Kruppe's	 sly	 hand.	 Oponn	 has	 chosen	 Crokus,	 for	 whatever	 purposes	 the
devious	deity	may	devise.	Baruk	would	have	us	keep	an	eye	on	the	lad	and,	more,
prevent	any	other	powers	from	finding	him.”
Murillio	 rubbed	 the	 bruise	 on	 his	 forehead	 and	 winced.	 “Damn	 you.”	 He
sighed.	 “You	 should've	 explained	 all	 this	 from	 the	 start,	 Kruppe.	 Does	 Rallick
know?”
“Of	 course	 not,”	 Kruppe	 replied	 tartly.	 “He's	 too	 busy,	 after	 all,	 unable	 to
extricate	himself	from	his	various	responsibilities.	Hence,”	Kruppe's	expression
turned	crafty,	“the	assassin's	absence	on	this	journey.	But	why,	pray	tell,	is	Kruppe
informing	 Murillio	 of	 such	 things?	 Clearly,	 Murillio	 knows	 more	 of	 Rallick's
doings	than	poor,	ignorant	Kruppe.”
Murillio's	look	was	blank.	“What	do	you	mean?”
Kruppe	sniggered,	then	kicked	his	mule	into	motion	once	again.
Murillio	followed.
“And	as	for	our	present	mission,”	Kruppe	continued	blithely,	“what	seems	a
vast	failure,	particularly	on	Coll's	part,	is	in	truth	an	astonishing	success.	Master


Baruk	must	be	made	aware	of	the	nefarious	activities	afoot	in	the	Gadrobi	Hills.”
“Success?	What	are	you	talking	about?”
Kruppe	 waved	 a	 hand.	 “Dear	 man,	 though	 I	 was	 conscious	 but	 a	 moment
during	 the	 fracas,	 clear	 it	 was	 that	 this	 woman	 warrior	 possessed	 an	 Otataral
sword.	Which	means,	as	any	child	might	guess,	she's	Malazan.”
Murillio	hissed	slowly	between	his	teeth.	“And	we	left	Coll	back	there?	Are
you	insane,	Kruppe?”
“He'll	 mend	enough	to	follow	 us	shortly,”	Kruppe	said.	 “The	need	for	haste
overwhelms	all	other	considerations.”
“Except	 cheap	 deals	 with	 a	 certain	 stabler,”	 Murillio	 growled.	 “So,	 there's
some	 Malazan	 in	 the	 Gadrobi	 Hills.	 What's	 she	 up	 to?	 And	 don't	 try	 telling	 me
you	don't	know.	If	you	didn't	suspect	something	we	wouldn't	be	in	such	a	hurry.”
“Suspicions,	indeed.”	Kruppe	nodded,	his	shoulders	hunching.	“Recall	Crokus
uttering	 that	 perceptive	 comment	 as	 we	 left	 the	 crossroads?	 Hunting	 a	 rumor,	 or
some	such	thing?”
“Wait	 a	 minute.”	 Murillio	 groaned.	 “Not	 that	 barrow	 legend	 again?	 There's
not	a—”
Kruppe	held	up	a	finger	and	cut	in	smoothly,	“What	we	believe	is	irrelevant,
Murillio.	 The	 fact	 remains	 that	 the	 Malazans	 are	 seeking	 the	 truth	 of	 that	 rumor.
And	both	Kruppe	and	Master	Baruk	suspect,	being	of	equal	intelligence,	that	they
might	 well	 discover	 it.	 Hence	 this	 mission,	 my	 fluttery	 friend.”	 He	 waggled	 his
brows.	 “Otataral	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 swordmaster	 of	 the	 Empire.	 A	 T'lan	 Imass
lurking	in	the	vicinity—”
“What?”	Murillio	exploded,	his	eyes	wide.	He	made	to	turn	his	mule	around,
but	 the	 beast	 complained	 and	 planted	 its	 hooves.	 He	 struggled	 with	 it,	 cursing.
“Coll's	all	cut	up	and	he's	got	a	Malazan	killer	out	there	and	an	Imass!	You've	lost
your	mind,	Kruppe!”
“But,	 dear	 Murillio,”	 Kruppe	 crooned,	 “Kruppe	 would	 have	 thought	 you
eager,	nay,	desperate	to	return	to	Darujhistan	as	quickly	as	possible!”
That	stopped	the	man.	He	rounded	on	Kruppe,	face	darkening.	“Come	on,”	he
gritted,	“out	with	it,	then.”
Kruppe's	brows	rose.	“Out	with	what?”
“You've	been	hinting	about	something,	poking	me	with	it.	So	if	you	think	you
know	something	about	whatever,	let's	hear	it.	Otherwise,	we	turn	round	right	now
and	head	back	to	Coll.”	Seeing	Kruppe's	eyes	dart,	Murillio	grinned.	“Hah,	you
thought	to	distract	me,	didn't	you?	Well,	it's	not	going	to	work.”


Kruppe	raised	his	hands	palm	up.	“No	matter	whose	brain	was	responsible	for
your	scheme	to	return	Coll	to	his	rightful	title,	Kruppe	can	do	naught	but	eagerly
applaud!”
Murillio's	jaw	dropped.	How	in	Hood's	name	did	Kruppe	.	.	.	?
The	man	continued,	“But	all	that	is	inconsequential	when	faced	with	the	fact	of
Crokus,	 and	 the	 grave	 danger	 he	 is	 presently	 in.	 More,	 if	 this	 young	 girl	 was
indeed	 possessed,	 as	 Coll	 suspects,	 the	 risks	 are	 frightening	 to	 behold!	 Was	 she
the	only	hunter	for	the	lad's	frail,	unprotected	life?	What	of	the	thousand	gods	and
demons	who	would	eagerly	confound	Oponn	at	the	first	opportunity?	Thus,	would
Murillio,	 friend	 of	 long	 standing	 with	 Crokus,	 so	 callously	 abandon	 the	 child	 to
the	fates?	Is	Murillio	a	man	to	succumb	to	panic,	to	what-ifs,	to	a	host	of	imagined
nightmares	slinking	about	within	the	shadows	of	his	overwrought	imagination—?”
“All	right!”	Murillio	barked.	“Now	hold	your	tongue	and	let's	ride.”
Kruppe	gave	a	brusque	nod	at	this	wise	remark.
An	 hour	 later,	 as	 dusk	 clambered	 up	 the	 hillsides	 and	 ever	 westward	 to	 the
dying	sun,	Murillio	started	and	threw	Kruppe	a	furious	glare	that	was	lost	in	the
gloom.	“Damn	him,”	he	whispered,	“I	said	I	wasn't	about	to	let	him	distract	me.
So	what's	the	first	thing	he	does?	Distract	me.”
“Murillio	murmurs	something?”	Kruppe	asked.
Murillio	massaged	his	forehead.	“I'm	having	dizzy	spells,”	he	said.	“Let's	find
a	camp.	Crokus	and	the	girl	won't	make	it	to	the	city	before	tomorrow	anyway.	I
doubt	 he's	 in	 any	 danger	 on	 the	 road,	 and	 we'll	 find	 him	 easily	 enough	 before
tomorrow's	sunset.	They	should	be	fine	in	the	daytime—Hood	knows,	they'll	be
with	Mammot,	right?”
“Kruppe	 admits	 to	 his	 own	 weariness.	 Indeed,	 a	 camp	 should	 be	 found,	 and
Murillio	can	construct	a	small	fire,	perhaps,	and	so	prepare	dinner	while	Kruppe
ponders	vital	thoughts	and	such.”
“Fine.”	Murillio	sighed.	“Just	fine.”
It	 came	 to	 Captain	 Paran	 a	 couple	 days	 after	 his	 encounter	 with	 the	 Tiste	 Andii
and	 the	 events	 within	 the	 lord's	 sword	 that	 Rake	 had	 not	 suspected	 him	 to	 be	 a
Malazan	 soldier.	 Or	 he'd	 be	 dead.	 Oversights	 blessed	 him,	 it	 seemed.	 His
assassin	 in	 Pale	 should	 have	 checked	 twice—and	 now	 the	 Son	 of	 Darkness,
snatching	 him	 from	 the	 jaws	 of	 the	 Hounds,	 had	 in	 turn	 let	 him	 walk	 free.	 Was
there	 a	 pattern	 to	 this?	 It	 had	 Oponn's	 flavor,	 yet	 Paran	 didn't	 doubt	 Rake's
assertion.


Then	did	his	luck	indeed	lie	in	his	sword?	And	had	these	mercies	of	fortune
marked	 pivotal	 moments—moments	 that	 would	 come	 back	 to	 haunt	 those	 who'd
spared	him?	For	his	own	well-being,	he	hoped	not.
His	 was	 no	 longer	 the	 Empire's	 road.	 He'd	 walked	 that	 path	 of	 blood	 and
treachery	for	too	long.	Never	again.	What	lay	before	him,	then,	was	the	singular
effort	to	save	the	lives	of	Whiskeyjack	and	the	squad.	If	he	managed	that,	he	would
not	begrudge	his	own	death	as	a	consequence.
Some	 things	 went	 beyond	 a	 single	 man's	 life,	 and	 maybe	 justice	 existed
outside	 the	 minds	 of	 humanity,	 beyond	 even	 the	 hungry	 eyes	 of	 gods	 and
goddesses,	a	thing	shining	and	pure	and	final.	Some	philosophers	he'd	read	during
his	schooling	in	the	Malazan	capital,	Unta,	had	asserted	what	seemed	to	him	then
an	 absurd	 position.	 Morality	 was	 not	 relative,	 they	 claimed,	 nor	 even	 existing
solely	 in	 the	 realm	 of	 the	 human	 condition.	 No,	 they	 proclaimed	 morality	 as	 an
imperative	of	all	life,	a	natural	law	that	was	neither	the	brutal	acts	of	beasts	nor
the	lofty	ambitions	of	humanity,	but	something	other,	something	unassailable.
Just	another	hunt	for	certainty.	Paran	scowled	and	stiffened	in	his	saddle,	his
eyes	fixed	on	the	trader	track	winding	before	him	through	low,	rounded	hills.	He
recalled	 discussing	 this	 with	 Adjunct	 Lorn,	 at	 a	 time	 when	 neither	 had	 been
compelled	 by	 the	 outside	 world.	 Just	 another	 hunt	 for	 certainty,	 she'd	 said,	 in	 a
voice	 brittle	 and	 cynical,	 putting	 an	 end	 to	 the	 discussion	 as	 clearly	 as	 if	 she'd
driven	a	knife	into	the	wine-stained	table	between	them.
For	 such	 words	 to	 have	 come	 from	 a	 woman	 no	 older	 than	 him,	 Paran
suspected	then,	as	he	did	now,	that	her	particular	view	had	been	no	more	than	an
easy,	lazy	mimicry	of	Empress	Laseen's.	But	Laseen	had	a	right	to	it	and	Lorn	did
not.	At	least,	in	Paran's	mind.	If	anyone	had	a	right	to	world-weary	cynicism,	it
was	the	Empress	of	the	Malazan	Empire.
Truly	had	the	Adjunct	made	herself	Laseen's	extension.	But	at	what	cost?	He'd
seen	 the	 young	 woman	 behind	 the	 mask	 just	 once—as	 they'd	 looked	 out	 over	 a
road	carpeted	with	dead	soldiers,	then	proceeded	to	pick	their	way	through	them.
The	pale,	frightened	girl	that	was	Lorn	had	shown	herself	in	a	single	frail	moment.
He	 couldn't	 remember	 what	 had	 triggered	 the	 return	 of	 the	 mask—likely	 it	 had
been	 something	 he'd	 said,	 something	 he'd	 tossed	 off	 in	 his	 own	 guise	 as	 a
hardened	soldier.
Paran	 sighed	 deeply.	 Too	 many	 regrets.	 Lost	 chances—and	 with	 each	 one
passing	 the	 less	 human	 we	 all	 became,	 and	 the	 deeper	 into	 the	 nightmare	 of
power	we	all	sank.
Was	his	life	irretrievable?	He	wished	he	had	an	answer	to	that	question.


Movement	in	the	south	caught	his	attention,	and	with	it	he	became	aware	of	a
rumbling	sound,	rising	up	from	the	earth	around	him.	He	rose	in	the	saddle.	A	wall
of	 dust	 curled	 over	 the	 ridge	 of	 land	 directly	 ahead.	 He	 swung	 his	 mount
westward	 and	 nudged	 it	 into	 a	 trot.	 Moments	 later	 he	 reined	 in.	 The	 curtains	 of
dust	 hung	 in	 that	 direction	 as	 well.	 Cursing,	 he	 spurred	 to	 the	 crest	 of	 a	 nearby
rise.	Dust.	Dust	on	all	sides.	A	storm?	No,	the	thunder	is	 too	regular.	He	rode
down	to	the	plain	below	and	reined	in	again,	wondering	what	to	do.	The	dust	wall
rose,	cresting	the	hill	he	faced.	The	deep	rumbling	grew.	Paran	squinted	into	the
dust.	 Dark,	 massive	 shapes	 moved	 there,	 spreading	 out	 to	 either	 side,	 sweeping
down	on	his	position.	In	moments	he	was	surrounded.
Bhederin.	 He'd	 heard	 tales	 of	 the	 huge	 shaggy	 creatures,	 moving	 across	 the
inner	plains	in	herds	half	a	million	strong.	On	all	sides,	Paran	could	see	nothing
but	 the	 humped	 reddish-brown,	 dust-caked	 backs	 of	 the	 beasts.	 There	 was
nowhere	 he	 could	 lead	 his	 horse,	 no	 place	 of	 safety	 within	 sight.	 Paran	 leaned
back	in	his	saddle	and	waited.
Something	 flashed	 to	 his	 left,	 tawny	 and	 low	 to	 the	 ground.	 The	 captain	 half
turned,	just	as	something	heavy	hammered	him	from	the	right	and	clung,	dragging
him	 from	the	saddle.	Cursing,	Paran	thumped	heavily	in	the	dust,	grappling	with
wiry	 limbs,	 ragged	 black	 hair.	 He	 drove	 his	 knee	 up,	 connecting	 with	 a	 solid
stomach.	 His	 attacker	 rolled	 to	 one	 side,	 gasping.	 Paran	 scrambled	 to	 his	 feet,
found	 himself	 facing	 a	 youth	 in	 tanned	 hides.	 The	 boy	 sprang	 to	 close	 with	 the
captain	once	again.
Paran	 sidestepped	 and	 clouted	 the	 boy	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 head.	 His	 attacker
sprawled	unconscious.
Piercing	cries	were	sounding	on	all	sides.	The	Bhederin	were	parting,	moving
away.	Figures	emerged,	closing	on	Paran's	position.	Rhivi.	Sworn	enemies	to	the
Empire,	allied	in	the	north	with	Caladan	Brood	and	the	Crimson	Guard.
Two	 warriors	 came	 to	 the	 unconscious	 boy's	 side;	 each	 took	 an	 arm	 and
dragged	him	off.
The	herd	had	come	to	a	stop.
Another	 warrior	 approached,	 striding	 boldly	 up	 to	 Paran.	 His	 dust-streaked
face	was	stitched	with	dyed	threads,	black	and	red,	from	high	on	the	cheeks	down
to	the	jawline	then	up	and	around	the	mouth.	A	Bhederin	hide	rode	the	broad	line
of	his	shoulders.	Stopping	less	than	an	arm's	length	in	front	of	Paran,	the	warrior
reached	 out	 and	 closed	 his	 hand	 on	 the	 grip	 of	 Chance.	 Paran	 struck	 away	 the
hand.	The	Rhivi	smiled,	stepped	back	and	loosed	a	high-pitched,	ululating	cry.
Figures	rose	on	the	backs	of	the	surrounding	Bhederin,	lances	balanced	in	one


hand	as	they	crouched	on	the	shaggy	backs.	The	huge	animals	beneath	the	warriors
ignored	them	as	if	they	were	but	tick-birds.
The	two	Rhivi	who	had	taken	the	boy	away	now	returned,	joining	the	stitchfaced	 warrior,	 who	 said	 something	 to	 the	 one	 on	 his	 left.	 This	 man	 moved
forward.	Before	Paran	could	react,	he	surged	into	motion,	throwing	a	leg	behind
the	captain	then	driving	his	shoulder	into	Paran's	chest.
The	warrior	fell	on	top	of	him.	A	knife	blade	slid	against	the	line	of	Paran's
jaw,	 sliced	 through	 the	 helmet	 strap.	 The	 iron	 skullcap	 was	 pulled	 away	 and
fingers	snagged	a	handful	of	his	hair.	Dragging	the	warrior	with	him,	Paran	pushed
himself	upright.	He'd	had	enough.	Death	was	one	thing,	death	without	dignity	quite
another.	 As	 the	 Rhivi's	 hand	 twisted,	 pulling	 his	 head	 up,	 the	 captain	 reached
between	the	warrior's	legs	and	found	his	own	handful.	He	yanked	hard.
The	warrior	shrieked,	releasing	Paran's	hair.	A	knife	appeared	again,	flashing
at	the	captain's	face.	He	ducked	to	one	side,	his	free	hand	snapping	up	to	grasp	the
wrist,	 pushing	 away	 the	 knife.	 He	 squeezed	 once	 more	 with	 his	 other	 hand.	 The
Rhivi	 shrieked	 again,	 then	 Paran	 let	 go,	 twisted	 round	 and	 drove	 his	 armored
elbow	into	the	man's	face.
Blood	spattered	like	rain	in	the	dust.	The	warrior	reeled	back,	crumpled	to	the
ground.
A	lance	haft	hammered	a	glancing	blow	along	Paran's	temple.	He	spun	round
with	the	impact.	A	second	lance	struck	him	in	the	hip,	hard	as	a	kick	from	a	horse,
numbing	his	leg.	Something	pinned	his	left	foot	to	the	ground.
Paran	 unsheathed	 Chance.	 The	 weapon	 was	 almost	 knocked	 from	 his	 hand
with	a	ringing,	pealing	sound.	He	swung	it	upward	and	it	was	struck	again.	Half
blinded	with	pain,	sweat	and	dust,	Paran	reared	upright,	shifting	to	a	two-handed
grip	and	drawing	Chance	down	to	a	center	guard	position.	The	sword's	blade	was
struck	a	third	time,	but	he	retained	his	grip.
There	was	silence.	Gasping,	blinking,	Paran	raised	his	head,	looked	around.
Rhivi	surrounded	him,	but	none	moved.	Their	dark	eyes	were	wide.
Paran	 flicked	 his	 gaze	 to	 his	 weapon,	 glared	 back	 up	 and	 around	 at	 the
warriors,	then	his	eyes	returned	to	Chance.	And	stayed	there.
Three	 iron	 lanceheads	 sprouted	 from	 the	 blade	 like	 leaves,	 each	 point	 split
and	 jammed,	 the	 hafts	 shattered	 and	 gone,	 leaving	 only	 white	 wood	 jutting	 out
from	the	sockets.
He	looked	down	at	his	pinned	foot.	A	lance	had	struck,	through	his	boot,	but
the	 wide	 blade	 of	 the	 head	 was	 turned,	 its	 flat	 side	 pressing	 against	 his	 foot.
Splintered	 wood	 surrounded	 him.	 Paran	 glanced	 at	 his	 hip,	 saw	 no	 wound.	 A


jagged	tear	marred	the	leather	of	Chance's	scabbard.
The	 Rhivi	 warrior	 with	 the	 smashed	 face	 lay	 motionless	 a	 few	 feet	 from
where	 Paran	 stood.	 The	 captain	 saw	 that	 his	 mount	 and	 the	 packhorses	 were
untouched	and	had	not	moved.	The	other	Rhivi	had	pulled	back.	The	encirclement
now	divided	as	a	small	figure	approached.
A	girl,	perhaps	no	more	than	five	years	old.	The	warriors	moved	aside	from
her	as	if	in	awe,	or	fear,	possibly	both.	She	wore	antelope	skins	tied	with	cord	at
the	waist,	and	nothing	on	her	feet.
There	was	something	familiar	about	her,	a	way	of	walking,	her	stance	as	she
stopped	before	him—something	in	her	heavy-lidded	eyes—that	made	Paran	frown
uneasily.
The	girl	stopped	to	regard	him,	her	small	round	face	slowly	coming	to	mirror
Paran's	own	frown.	She	raised	one	hand,	as	if	reaching	for	him,	then	dropped	it.
The	 captain	 found	 he	 could	 not	 pull	 away	 his	 eyes	 from	 her.	 Child,	 do	 I	 know
you?
As	 the	 silence	 between	 them	 lengthened,	 an	 old	 woman	 came	 up	 behind	 the
girl,	rested	a	wrinkled	hand	on	her	shoulder.	Looking	worn,	almost	exasperated,
the	old	woman	studied	the	captain.	The	girl	beside	her	said	something,	the	quick
lilting	language	of	the	Rhivi,	surprisingly	low-pitched	for	one	so	young.	The	old
woman	crossed	her	arms.	The	girl	spoke	again,	insistently.
The	 old	 woman	 addressed	 Paran	 in	 Daru,	 “Five	 lances	 claimed	 you	 as	 our
enemy.”	She	paused.	“Five	lances	were	wrong.”
“You've	plenty	more,”	Paran	said.
“So	we	have,	and	the	god	favoring	your	sword	has	no	followers	here.”
“So	finish	it,”	Paran	growled.	“I'm	tired	of	the	game.”
The	girl	spoke,	a	tone	of	command	that	rang	like	iron	on	stone.
The	old	woman	turned	in	obvious	surprise.
The	 girl	 continued,	 her	 words	 now	 evidently	 explanatory.	 The	 old	 woman
listened,	 then	 swung	 her	 dark,	 glittering	 gaze	 back	 to	 the	 captain.	 “You	 are
Malazan,	and	Malazans	have	chosen	to	be	the	enemies	of	the	Rhivi.	Is	this	choice
yours	as	well?	And	know	this:	I	will	recognize	a	lie	when	I	hear	it.”
“I	am	Malazan	by	birth,”	Paran	said.	“I	have	no	interest	in	calling	the	Rhivi
my	enemy.	I	would	rather	have	no	enemies	at	all.”
The	old	woman	blinked.	“She	offers	you	words	to	ease	your	grief,	soldier.”
“Meaning?”
“You	are	to	live.”


Paran	did	not	quite	trust	this	turn	of	events.	“What	words	has	she	for	me?	I've
never	seen	her	before.”
“Nor	has	she	seen	you	before.	Yet	you	know	each	other.”
“No,	we	don't.”
The	old	woman's	eyes	hardened.	“Will	you	hear	her	words	or	not?	She	offers
you	a	gift.	Will	you	throw	it	back	in	her	face?”
Profoundly	uneasy,	he	said.	“No,	I	suppose	not.”
“The	 child	 says	 you	 need	 not	 grieve.	 The	 woman	 you	 know	 has	 not	 passed
through	 the	 Arching	 Trees	 of	 Death.	 Her	 journey	 was	 beyond	 the	 lands	 you	 can
see,	beyond	those	of	the	spirit	that	all	mortals	sense.	And	now	she	has	returned.
You	must	be	patient,	soldier.	You	will	meet	again,	so	this	child	promises.”
“Which	woman?”	Paran	demanded,	his	heart	pounding.
“The	one	you	thought	dead.”
He	looked	again	at	the	girl.	The	familiarity	returned	like	a	blow	to	his	chest.
He	staggered	back	a	step.	“Not	possible,”	he	whispered.
The	girl	withdrew,	dust	swirling.	She	vanished.
“Wait!”
Another	cry	sounded.	The	herd	lurched	into	motion,	closing	in,	obscuring	the
Rhivi.	In	moments	all	Paran	could	see	were	the	backs	of	the	giant	beasts,	shuffling
past.	He	thought	to	push	among	them,	but	knew	it	would	bring	him	only	death.
“Wait!”	the	captain	shouted	again,	but	the	sound	of	hundreds—thousands—of
hooves	on	the	plain	drowned	his	efforts.
Tattersail!
It	was	fully	an	hour	before	the	Bhederin	herd's	tail	end	appeared.	As	the	last	of
the	 beasts	 strolled	 past	 the	 captain,	 he	 looked	 around.	 The	 wind	 rolled	 the	 dust
cloud	eastward,	over	the	sloping,	humped	hills.
Paran	 climbed	 into	 the	 saddle,	 swung	 his	 mount	 southward	 once	 again.	 The
hills	of	Gadrobi	rose	before	him.	Tattersail,	what	did	you	do?	He	recalled	Toc
noting	the	trail	of	small	prints	leading	from	the	scorched	pillar	that	had	been	all
that	 was	 left	 of	 Bellurdan	 and	 Tattersail.	 Hood's	 Breath,	 did	 you	 plan	 such	 a
thing?	And	why	the	Rhivi?	Reborn,	already	a	child	of	five,	maybe	six—are	you
even	 mortal	 anymore,	 woman?	 Have	 you	 ascended?	 You've	 found	 yourself	 a
people,	a	strange,	primitive	people—to	what	end?	And	when	we	next	meet,	how
old	will	you	appear	to	be	then?


He	thought	again	about	the	Rhivi.	They'd	been	driving	the	herd	north,	a	herd
big	enough	to	feed	.	.	.	an	army	on	the	march.	Caladan	Brood—he's	on	his	way	to
Pale.	 That	 is	 something	 I	 don't	 think	 Dujek's	 prepared	 for.	 Old	 Onearm's	 in
trouble.
He	had	another	two	hours	of	riding	before	sunset.	Beyond	the	Gadrobi	Hills
was	Lake	Azur,	and	the	city	of	Darujhistan.	And	within	the	city,	Whiskeyjack	and
his	squad.	And	 in	 that	 squad,	 a	 young	 woman	 I've	 been	 preparing	 to	 meet	 for
three	years.	The	god	possessing	her—is	he	even	my	enemy	anymore?
The	question	arrived	unbidden,	turning	his	heart	cold.	Gods,	what	a	journey
this	has	been,	and	here	I	had	thought	to	travel	this	plain	unnoticed.	A	foolish
thought.	 Scholars	 and	 mages	 write	 endlessly	 of	 fell	 convergences—it	 seems	 I
am	 a	 walking	 convergence,	 a	 lodestone	 to	 draw	 Ascendants.	 To	 their	 peril,	 it
seems.	 My	 sword	 Chance	 answered	 those	 five	 lances,	 despite	 my	 treatment	 of
one	of	the	Twins.	How	to	explain	that?	The	truth	is,	my	cause	has	become	my
own.	Not	the	Adjunct's,	not	the	Empire's.	I	said	I'd	rather	have	no	enemies	at	all
—and	the	old	woman	saw	those	as	true	words.	And	so,	it	seems,	they	are.
Endless	surprises,	Ganoes	Paran.	Ride	on,	see	what	comes.
______
The	 track	 climbed	 a	 hillside	 and	 the	 captain	 spurred	 his	 horse	 up	 the	 slope.
Reaching	the	summit,	he	yanked	hard	on	the	reins.	The	horse	snorted	indignantly
and	swung	her	head	round,	eyes	rolling.	But	Paran's	attention	was	elsewhere.	He
leaned	back	in	the	saddle	and	loosened	his	sword.
A	heavily	armored	man	struggled	to	his	feet	beside	a	small	campfire.	Beyond
him	was	a	hobbled	mule.	The	man	tottered,	his	weight	on	one	leg,	and	unsheathed
a	bastard	sword,	which	he	then	leaned	on	as	he	regarded	the	captain.
Paran	nudged	his	mount	forward,	scanning	the	immediate	area.	It	seemed	that
the	 warrior	 was	 alone.	 He	 brought	 his	 horse	 to	 a	 halt	 with	 thirty	 feet	 between
them.
The	man	spoke	in	Daru.	“I'm	in	no	shape	for	a	fight,	but	if	you	want	one	it's
yours.”
Once	again	Paran	found	himself	thankful	for	the	Adjunct's	insistence	that	he	be
thoroughly	 schooled:	 his	 reply	 was	 as	 fluent	 as	 this	 native's.	 “No.	 I've	 lost	 the
taste	for	it.”	He	waited,	leaning	forward	in	the	saddle,	then	grinned	at	the	mule.
“Is	that	beast	a	War	Mule?”
The	man	barked	a	laugh.	“I'm	sure	it	thinks	it	is,”	he	said,	relaxing.	“I've	food


to	spare,	traveler,	if	you're	of	a	mind.”
The	captain	dismounted	and	approached.	“My	name's	Paran,”	he	said.	He	sat
down	by	the	fire.
The	other	followed	suit,	the	fire	between	them.	“Coll,”	he	grunted,	stretching
out	a	bandaged	leg.	“You	down	from	the	north?”
“Genabaris,	initially.	Spent	some	time	in	Pale,	recently.”
Coll's	brows	rose	at	that.	“You've	the	look	of	a	mercenary,”	he	said,	“though
likely	an	officer.	I	heard	it	was	pretty	bad	up	there.”
“I	arrived	a	little	late,”	Paran	admitted.	“Saw	lots	of	rubble	and	lots	of	dead,
so	 I'm	 inclined	 to	 believe	 the	 stories.”	 He	 hesitated,	 then	 said,	 “There	 was	 a
rumor	in	Pale	that	Moon's	Spawn	is	now	over	Darujhistan.”
Coll	grunted,	tossing	a	handful	of	sticks	onto	the	fire.	“So	it	is,”	he	said.	He
gestured	at	a	battered	pot	tucked	against	the	coals.	“That's	stew,	if	you're	hungry.
Help	yourself.”
Paran	 realized	 he	 was	 famished.	 He	 accepted	 Coll's	 offer	 gratefully.	 As	 he
ate,	 using	 a	 wooden	 spoon	 the	 man	 loaned	 him,	 he	 thought	 to	 ask	 about	 that	 leg
wound.	But	then	he	recalled	his	Claw	training.	When	you	play	a	soldier,	you	play
it	to	the	hilt.	Nobody	talks	about	what's	obvious.	Something	staring	you	in	the	eye,
you	look	around	it	and	grumble	about	the	weather.	Anything	important	will	come
out	in	its	own	time.	Soldiers	have	nothing	to	look	forward	to,	making	patience	an
easy	virtue,	and	sometimes	it's	not	just	a	virtue,	but	a	contest	of	indifference.	So
Paran	emptied	the	pot,	while	Coll	waited	in	casual	silence,	poking	at	the	fire	and
adding	the	occasional	stick	from	an	enormous	pile	behind	him—where	the	wood
had	come	from	was	anybody's	guess.
Finally,	 Paran	 wiped	 his	 mouth	 with	 his	 sleeve	 and	 scrubbed	 the	 spoon	 as
clean	as	he	could	manage	without	water.	He	sat	back	then,	and	belched.
Coll	spoke.	“You	heading	into	Darujhistan,	then?”
“I	am.	And	you?”
“Should	 be	 able	 to	 manage	 it	 in	 another	 day	 or	 so,	 though	 I	 can't	 say	 I'm
looking	forward	to	riding	into	the	city	on	the	back	of	a	mule.”
Paran	looked	westward.	“Well,”	he	said,	squinting,	“sun's	about	down.	Mind
if	I	share	this	camp	for	the	night?”
“By	all	means.”
The	captain	rose	and	attended	to	his	horses.	He	thought	about	delaying	a	day	to
let	this	man	mend	some	more,	then	lending	him	a	horse.	If	he	rode	into	the	city	in
the	 company	 of	 a	 local,	 there'd	 be	 advantages—someone	 to	 direct	 him,	 perhaps


even	give	him	a	place	to	stay	for	a	day	or	two.	Not	only	that,	but	he	might	learn
something	 in	 the	 meantime.	 Would	 another	 day	 matter?	 Possibly,	 but	 it	 looked
worth	 it.	 He	 hobbled	 the	 Wickan	 horses	 near	 the	 mule,	 then	 carried	 his	 saddle
back	to	the	fire.
“Been	thinking	about	your	problem,”	Paran	said,	as	he	dropped	the	saddle	and
sat	with	his	back	against	it.	“I'll	ride	in	with	you.	You	can	use	my	pack	horse.”
Coll's	eyes	were	alert.	“A	generous	offer.”
Seeing	 the	 man's	 suspicion,	 Paran	 smiled.	 “The	 horses	 could	 use	 the	 extra
day's	rest,	for	one.	Second,	I've	never	before	been	to	Darujhistan,	so	in	exchange
for	 my	 so-called	 generosity	 I'd	 like	 to	 plague	 you	 with	 endless	 questions	 in	 the
next	 two	 days.	 After	 that,	 I	 get	 my	 horse	 back	 and	 you're	 on	 your	 way,	 and	 if
anyone's	come	out	ahead,	it's	me.”
“Better	warn	you	now,	Paran,	I'm	not	much	of	a	talker.”
“I'll	take	the	risk.”
Coll	considered	for	a	time.	“Hood	knows,”	he	said,	“I'd	be	mad	not	to	accept,
wouldn't	I?	You	don't	look	the	type	to	stick	me	in	the	back.	I	don't	know	your	real
story,	Paran.	If	that's	something	you	want	to	keep	to	yourself,	that's	your	business.
That	won't	stop	me	from	asking	questions,	though.	It's	up	to	you	whether	you	lie	or
not.”
“I	 think	 that	 goes	 both	 ways,	 doesn't	 it?”	 Paran	 responded.	 “Well,	 you	 want
my	 story	 straight?	 Fine,	 here	 it	 is,	 Coll.	 I'm	 a	 deserter	 from	 the	 Malazan	 Army,
ranked	as	captain.	I	also	did	a	lot	of	work	with	the	Claw,	and	looking	back	on	it
that's	where	the	trouble	started.	Anyway,	it's	done.”	Oh,	yes,	and	one	more	thing:
people	who	get	close	to	me	usually	end	up	dead.
Coll	 was	 silent,	 his	 eyes	 glittering	 in	 the	 firelight	 and	 fixed	 on	 the	 man
opposite	him.	Then	he	puffed	his	cheeks	and	blew	out	a	loud	breath	of	air.	“Truth
as	bald	as	that	makes	a	challenge,	don't	it?”	He	stared	into	the	fire,	then	leaned
back	on	his	elbows	and	lifted	his	face	to	the	stars	now	appearing	overhead.	“I	was
once	a	noble	in	Darujhistan,	the	last	son	of	a	long-lined,	powerful	family.	I	was
set	 for	 an	 arranged	 marriage	 but	 I	 fell	 in	 love	 with	 another	 woman—a	 hungry,
ambitious	 woman,	 though	 I	 was	 blind	 to	 that.”	 He	 smiled	 wryly.	 “She	 was	 a
whore,	 in	 fact,	 only	 where	 most	 whores	 I've	 met	 are	 pretty	 down-to-earth,	 she
was	as	twisted	a	soul	as	you	could	imagine.”
He	 passed	 a	 hand	 across	 his	 eyes.	 “Anyway,	 I	 refuted	 my	 obligations	 and
broke	off	the	arranged	marriage.	It	killed	my	father,	I	think,	when	I	married	Aystal
—that	was	the	whore's	name,	though	she's	changed	it	since.”	He	laughed	harshly
at	 the	 night	 sky.	 “Didn't	 take	 her	 long.	 I'm	 still	 not	 sure	 how	 she	 managed	 the


details,	how	many	men	she	took	to	bed	to	buy	their	influence,	or	how	they	did	it.
All	I	know	is	I	woke	up	one	day	and	found	myself	stripped	of	title,	stripped	even
of	my	family	name.	The	estate	was	hers,	the	money	was	hers,	it	was	all	hers,	and
her	need	for	me	had	ended.”
The	flames	licked	the	dry	wood	between	them.	Paran	said	nothing.	He	sensed
that	 more	 was	 to	 come	 from	 the	 man	 opposite	 him,	 and	 that	 Coll	 was	 struggling
with	it.
“But	 that	 wasn't	 the	 worst	 betrayal,	 Paran,”	 he	 said	 at	 length,	 meeting	 the
captain's	eyes.	“Oh,	no.	That	came	when	I	walked	away	from	it.	I	could've	fought
her.	 I	 might	 even	 have	 won.”	 His	 jaw	 tautened—the	 only	 hint	 of	 anguish	 that
escaped	 his	 self-control—then	 he	 continued,	 in	 a	 flat,	 empty	 voice,
“Acquaintances	 I'd	 known	 for	 decades	 looked	 right	 through	 me.	 To	 everyone	 I
was	dead.	They	chose	not	to	hear	me.	They	just	walked	past,	or	didn't	even	come
to	 the	 gates	 of	 their	 estates	 when	 I	 called	 on	 them.	 I	 was	 dead,	 Paran,	 even	 the
city's	records	claimed	it.	And	so	I	agreed	with	them.	I	walked	away.	Disappeared.
It's	one	thing	to	have	your	friends	mourn	your	passing	in	your	face.	But	it's	another
to	betray	your	own	life,	Paran.	But,	as	you	said,	it's	done.”
The	captain	looked	away,	squinting	into	the	darkness.	What's	this	human	urge,
he	wondered,	that	brings	us	to	such	devastation?	“The	games	of	the	high	born,”	he
said	 quietly,	 “span	 the	 world.	 I	 was	 born	 a	 noble,	 like	 you,	 Coll.	 But	 in	 Malaz
we'd	 met	 our	 match	 in	 the	 old	 Emperor.	 He	 crushed	 us	 at	 every	 turn	 until	 we
cowered	 like	 whipped	 dogs.	 Cowered	 for	 years.	 But	 it	 was	 only	 an	 issue	 of
power,	wasn't	it?”	he	said,	more	to	himself	than	to	the	man	who	shared	the	fire.
“There	are	no	lessons	worthy	enough	for	a	noble	to	heed.	I	look	back	on	my	years
within	that	twisted,	hungry	company—I	look	back	on	that	life	now,	Coll,	and	I	see
it	 wasn't	 a	 life	 at	 all.”	 He	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 time,	 then	 a	 slow	 smile	 curved	 his
mouth	 and	 his	 gaze	 swung	 to	 Coll.	 “Since	 I	 walked	 away	 from	 the	 Malazan
Empire,	and	severed	once	and	for	all	the	dubious	privileges	of	my	noble	blood,
damn,	I've	never	felt	so	alive.	It	was	never	a	life	before,	only	the	palest	shadow
of	what	I've	now	found.	Is	that	a	truth	most	of	us	are	too	frightened	to	face?”
Coll	grunted.	“I'm	not	the	sharpest	man	you'll	meet,	Paran,	and	your	thoughts
are	running	a	touch	too	deep	for	me.	But	if	I	understand	you	right,	you're	sitting
there	looking	at	a	chopped-up	old	fool	of	a	man	and	you're	telling	him	he's	alive.
Right	now.	As	alive	as	can	be.	And	whatever	he	betrayed	back	then,	it	wasn't	life,
was	it?”
“You	tell	me,	Coll.”
The	 man	 grimaced	 and	 ran	 a	 hand	 through	 his	 thinning	 hair.	 “The	 thing	 is,	 I
want	it	back.	I	want	it	all	back.”


Paran	burst	out	laughing,	and	continued	to	laugh	until	sharp	pains	cramped	his
stomach.
Coll	sat	watching	him,	then	a	low,	rumbling	chuckle	rose	from	his	chest.	He
reached	back,	retrieved	a	handful	of	sticks	and	tossed	them	into	the	fire,	one	at	a
time.	 “Well,	 dammit,	 Paran,”	 he	 said,	 amused	 lines	 crinkling	 around	 his	 eyes,
“you've	come	out	of	the	blue	like	a	god-sent	bolt	of	lightning.	And	I	appreciate	it.
I	appreciate	it	more	than	you'll	ever	know.”
Paran	 wiped	 tears	 from	 his	 eyes.	 “Hood's	 Breath,”	 he	 said.	 “Just	 one	 War
Mule	talking	to	another,	right?”
“I	guess	so,	Paran.	Now,	if	you'll	look	in	that	pack	of	mine,	you'll	find	a	jug	of
Worrytown	wine.	Its	vintage	is	about	a	week.”
The	captain	rose.	“Meaning?”
“Meaning	it's	running	out	of	time.”


Book	Six
The	City	of	Blue	Fire


	
	

Rumors	like	tattered	flags
wind-snapped	and	echoing
in	the	streets	below
told	the	tale	of	the	days	upon	us	.	.	.
'Twas	said	an	eel	had	slipped	ashore
or	not	one	but	a	thousand
under	a	jagged	moon	that	might	be	dead,
'twas	whispered	that	a	claw	scraped	slow
on	the	city's	cobbles,	even	as	a	dragon
was	seen	sailing	high	silver	and	black	in	the	night	sky.
'Twas	heard,	they	say,	a	demon's	death	cry
on	the	rooftops	on	a	night	of	blood,	even
as	the	master's	hundred	hands	lost
a	hundred	daggers	to	the	dark,
and	'twas	rumored	then,	a	lady
masked	highborn	had	offered	to	unbidden	guests
a	fête	to	remember	.	.	.
RUMOR	BORN
FISHER	(B.?)


Chapter	Seventeen
	

Few	can	see
the	dark	hand
holding	aloft
the	splinter,	or
the	notched	chains
fated	to	be	heard
before	death's	rattle,
but	hark	the	wheel
of	minions	and	victims
who	moan	the
lord's	name
in	the	dark	heart
of	Moon's	Spawn	.	.	.
SILVERFOX
OUTRIDER	HURLOCHEL,
6TH	ARMY


	
As	 Rallick	 Nom	 approached	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn	 from	 the	 alleyway,	 a	 large,	 beefy
woman	 stepped	 out	 from	 a	 shadowed	 niche	 and	 confronted	 him.	 He	 raised	 an
eyebrow.	“You	want	something,	Meese?”
“Never	mind	what	I	want.”	She	grinned	invitingly.	“You've	known	about	that
for	years.	Anyway,	I	come	to	tell	ya	something,	Nom.	So	relax.”
He	crossed	his	arms	and	waited.
Meese	glanced	back	up	the	alley,	then	hunched	close	to	the	assassin.	“There's
someone	in	the	bar.	Been	asking	for	ya.	By	name.”
Startled,	Rallick	straightened.	“What's	he	look	like?”	he	asked	casually.
“Like	a	soldier	outa	uniform,”	Meese	replied.	“Never	seen	him	around	before.
So	what	do	ya	think,	Nom?”
He	looked	away.	“Nothing.	Where's	he	sitting?”
Meese	grinned	again.	“At	Kruppe's	table.	Home	ground.	Now	ain't	that	fine?”
Rallick	stepped	past	the	woman	and	headed	toward	the	inn.	As	she	moved	to
follow	 he	 held	 out	 his	 hand.	 “A	 minute	 between	 us,	 Meese,”	 he	 said,	 without
turning.	“Where's	Irilta?”
“Inside,”	she	said,	behind	him.	“Good	luck,	Nom.”
“Luck's	never	free,”	Rallick	muttered,	as	he	turned	the	corner	and	climbed	the
steps.
He	stood	still	just	within	the	door	and	surveyed	the	crowd.	A	few	strangers,
not	enough	to	cause	him	concern,	however.	His	gaze	slid	across	to	a	man	sitting	at
Kruppe's	table.	He	almost	had	to	take	a	second	look,	so	nondescript	was	he.	Then
Rallick	 strode	 straight	 for	 him,	 the	 crowd	 parting	 as	 he	 went—something	 he'd
never	 noticed	 before.	 Amused,	 he	 held	 his	 eyes	 on	 the	 stranger	 until	 he	 was
noticed.	They	locked	gazes,	though	the	man	made	no	move	other	than	to	take	a	sip
from	his	tankard,	then	set	it	down	carefully	on	the	table.
Rallick	pulled	out	a	chair	and	dragged	it	opposite.	“I'm	Rallick	Nom.”
There	 was	 something	 solid	 about	 this	 person,	 a	 kind	 of	 assurance	 that	 was
calming.	Rallick	felt	 himself	relaxing	in	spite	of	his	habitual	caution.	The	man's
first	words	changed	that,	however.
“The	Eel	has	a	message	for	you,”	he	said	quietly.	“Direct,	by	word	of	mouth
only.	 Before	 I	 deliver	 it,	 though,	 I'm	 to	 give	 you	 some	 background—as	 only	 I
can.”	He	paused	to	drink	from	the	tankard,	then	resumed.	“Now,	Turban	Orr	has


hired	 another	 dozen	 hunters.	 What	 are	 they	 hunting?	 Well,	 me,	 for	 one.	 Your
problem	is	that	he's	going	to	be	harder	to	reach.	The	Eel	approves	of	your	efforts
concerning	 Lady	 Simtal.	 Coll's	 return	 is	 desired	 by	 all	 who	 value	 integrity	 and
honor	within	the	Council.	If	you	require	anything,	ask	now	and	it's	yours.”
Rallick's	eyes	had	hardened.	“Never	knew	Murillio	had	such	a	big	mouth,”	he
said.
The	 man	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Your	 compatriot	 has	 revealed	 nothing.	 Nor	 have
you.	It	is	the	Eel's	business.	Now,	what	do	you	require?”
“Nothing.”
“Good.”	The	stranger	nodded,	as	if	he'd	expected	that	reply	and	was	pleased.
“Incidentally,	 Turban	 Orr's	 efforts	 to	 pass	 the	 proclamation	 have	 been	 .	 .	 .
impeded.	Indefinitely.	The	Eel	wishes	to	thank	you	for	your	unwitting	role	in	that.
Nevertheless,	 the	 councilman	 explores	 other	 options.	 He	 has	 been	 watched
closely.	Hence	our	fortunate	discovery	that	is	at	the	heart	of	the	Eel's	message	to
you.	Last	night,	beneath	Despot's	Barbican,	Turban	Orr	met	with	a	representative
of	the	Assassins'	Guild—how	he	managed	that	was	quite	a	feat,	considering	how
difficult	your	comrades	have	been	to	find.	In	any	case,	a	contract	was	tendered	by
Turban	 Orr.”	 The	 man	 waited	 for	 the	 shock	 to	 wear	 off	 Rallick's	 face,	 then
continued.	“Tendered	by	Turban	Orr,	as	I	said,	but	not	on	his	own	behalf.	Rather,
Lady	Simtal	has	decided	that	Coll's	death	should	be	a	fact	in	the	real	world	as	it
is	on	paper.”
“Who?”	Rallick	rasped.	“Who	was	the	contact?”
“I'm	 coming	 to	 that.	 First,	 it	 was	 accepted,	 for	 the	 payment	 was	 substantial.
They	are	aware	that	Coll	is	presently	outside	Darujhistan.	They	simply	await	his
return.”
“The	assassin's	name.”
“Ocelot.”	 The	 man	 rose.	 “The	 Eel	 wishes	 you	 success	 in	 all	 your	 ventures,
Rallick	Nom.	Thus	the	message	ends.	Good	evening.”	He	turned	to	leave.
“Wait.”
“Yes?”
“Thank	you,”	Rallick	said.
The	stranger	smiled,	then	left.
The	 assassin	 took	 the	 man's	 seat,	 and	 leaned	 against	 the	 wall.	 He	 waved	 at
Sulty,	 who	 had	 a	 pitcher	 of	 ale	 and	 a	 tankard	 waiting.	 She	 hurried	 over.	 Behind
her	 strode,	 at	 a	 more	 leisurely	 pace,	 Irilta	 and	 Meese.	 They	 sat	 down	 without
preamble,	each	with	her	own	tankard.


“Everybody's	 still	 breathing,”	 Irilta	 said,	 raising	 her	 drink.	 “And	 here's	 t'
that.”
Meese	 lifted	hers	as	well	and	the	two	women	drank	deep.	Then	Meese	bent
forward.	“Any	word	of	Kruppe	and	the	boy?”
Rallick	 shook	 his	 head.	 “I	 may	 not	 be	 here	 when	 they	 come	 back,”	 he	 said.
“Tell	Murillio	to	go	ahead	if	I	don't	show,	and	if	other	.	.	.	events	occur.	And,	if
that	 happens,	 tell	 him	 our	 man's	 eyes	 are	 open.”	 Rallick	 filled	 his	 tankard	 and
drained	it	immediately.	Then	he	rose.	“Don't	wish	me	luck,”	he	said.
“How	about	success?”	Meese	asked,	a	worried	expression	on	her	broad	face.
Rallick	jerked	his	head	in	a	nod.	Then	he	left	the	inn.
Anomander	 Rake	 was	 hiding	 something.	 Baruk	 was	 certain	 of	 it	 as	 he	 stared
moodily	into	the	fireplace.	In	his	right	hand	was	a	goblet	of	goat's	milk,	and	in	his
left	 a	 large	 fragment	 of	 Daru	 flatbread.	 Why	 had	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 permitted	 the
Imass	 to	 enter	 the	 barrow?	 He'd	 asked	 that	 question	 already	 of	 the	 Lord	 sitting
beside	him,	but	an	answer	didn't	seem	forthcoming.	Instead,	all	the	alchemist	got
from	Rake	was	that	irritating	smugness.	Baruk	took	a	bite	from	the	flatbread,	the
crack	loud	between	them.
Rake	stretched	out	his	legs	and	sighed.	“An	odd	hour	to	dine,”	he	said.
“All	my	hours	have	been	odd,	lately,”	Baruk	said,	around	the	bread.	He	drank
a	mouthful	of	milk.
“I'd	 no	 idea	 that	 both	 the	 Shadow	 Lord	 and	 Oponn	 had	 become	 involved	 in
affairs,”	Rake	said.
Baruk	felt	the	Lord's	eyes	on	him,	but	he	remained	staring	at	the	fire.	“I	had	an
intimation	of	Oponn,”	he	said.	“But	nothing	definite.”
Rake	snorted	in	reply.
Baruk	downed	some	more	milk.	“You	hold	your	hunches	close	to	your	chest.	I
do	the	same.”
“This	avails	us	nothing,”	Rake	snapped.
The	 alchemist	 turned	 in	 his	 chair	 to	 face	 the	 Tiste	 Andii.	 “Your	 ravens
watched	 that	 woman	 and	 the	 T'lan	 Imass	 enter	 the	 barrow.	 Do	 you	 still	 believe
they	will	fail?”
“Do	you?”	Rake	retorted.	“I	seem	to	recall	that	that	was	your	position	on	the
matter,	Baruk.	As	far	as	I	was	and	am	concerned,	I	don't	much	care	whether	they
succeed	 or	 not.	 Either	 way,	 there'll	 be	 a	 fight.	 I	 suspect	 you'd	 imagined	 there
would	 be	 a	 way	 to	 avoid	 one.	 Obviously,	 your	 intelligence	 concerning	 the


Malazan	Empire	is	sorely	lacking.	Laseen	knows	only	one	thing,	and	that's	force.
She'll	ignore	power	until	it's	unveiled,	and	then	she'll	hit	you	with	everything	at
her	disposal.”
“And	you	just	wait	for	it	to	happen?”	Baruk	scowled.	“That's	how	cities	are
destroyed.	 That's	 how	 thousands	 of	 people	 die.	 Does	 any	 of	 that	 matter	 to	 you,
Anomander	Rake?	So	long	as	you	win	in	the	end?”
A	tight	smile	played	on	the	Lord's	thin	lips.	“An	accurate	assessment,	Baruk.
In	this	case,	however,	Laseen	wants	Darujhistan	intact.	I	mean	to	prevent	that.	But
destroying	the	city	to	defy	her	would	be	too	easy.	I	could	have	managed	that	weeks
ago.	 No,	 I	 want	 Darujhistan	 to	 remain	 as	 it	 is.	 Yet	 out	 of	 Laseen's	 reach.	 That,
Alchemist,	is	victory.”	His	gray	eyes	were	on	Baruk.	“I	would	not	have	sought	an
alliance	with	you	otherwise.”
The	alchemist	frowned.	“Unless	you	plan	treachery.”
Rake	was	silent	for	a	time,	studying	his	hands	clasped	on	his	lap.	“Baruk,”	he
said	softly,	“as	any	commander	of	long	standing	knows,	treachery	breeds	its	own.
Once	 committed,	 whether	 against	 an	 enemy	 or	 an	 ally,	 it	 becomes	 a	 legitimate
choice	for	everyone	in	your	command,	from	the	lowest	private	seeking	promotion,
to	your	personal	aides,	bodyguards,	and	officers.	My	people	know	of	our	alliance
with	 you,	 Alchemist.	 If	 I	 were	 to	 betray	 it,	 I	 would	 not	 long	 remain	 the	 Lord	 of
Moon's	Spawn.	And	rightly	so.”
Baruk	smiled.	“And	who	could	challenge	your	power,	Rake?”
“Caladan	 Brood,	 for	 one,”	 Rake	 replied	 immediately.	 “And	 then	 there's	 my
four	assassin	mages.	Even	Silanah,	the	dweller	within	the	Moon's	caverns,	might
take	 it	 upon	 herself	 to	 exact	 judgment	 on	 me.	 I	 can	 think	 of	 others,	 Baruk,	 many
others.”
“So	fear	holds	you	in	check,	Son	of	Darkness?”
Rake	 scowled.	 “That	 title	 is	 held	 by	 those	 fools	 who	 think	 me	 worthy	 of
worship.	I	dislike	it,	Baruk,	and	would	not	hear	it	again	from	you.	Does	fear	hold
me	 in	 check?	 No.	 As	 powerful	 as	 fear	 is,	 it	 is	 no	 match	 for	 what	 compels	 me.
Duty.”	The	Lord's	eyes	had	shifted	into	a	dun	tone	as	they	remained	fixed	on	his
hands,	 which	 he	 now	 turned	 palms	 up.	 “You	 have	 a	 duty	 to	 your	 city,	 Baruk.	 It
drives	you,	shapes	you.	I'm	no	stranger	to	such	a	thing.	Within	Moon's	Spawn	are
the	last	of	the	Tiste	Andii	on	this	world.	We	are	dying,	Alchemist.	No	cause	seems
great	enough	to	return	to	my	people	the	zest	for	life.	I	try,	but	inspiration	has	never
been	a	great	talent	of	mine.	Even	this	Malazan	Empire	could	not	make	us	rise	to
defend	ourselves—until	we	ran	out	of	places	to	run	to.
“We	still	die	on	this	continent.	Better	that	it	be	by	the	sword.”	He	let	his	hands


slip	from	his	lap.	“Imagine	your	spirit	dying	while	your	body	lives	on.	Not	for	ten
years,	not	for	fifty.	But	a	body	that	lives	on	for	fifteen,	twenty	thousand	years.”
Rake	rose	swiftly.	He	looked	 down	upon	a	silent	Baruk,	and	smiled	a	smile
that	launched	a	dagger	of	pain	into	the	alchemist's	heart.	“Thus	duty	holds	me,	yet
a	 duty	 that	 is	 in	 itself	 hollow.	 Is	 it	 enough	 to	 preserve	 the	 Tiste	 Andii?	 Simply
preserve	 them?	 Do	 I	 raise	 Moon's	 Spawn	 into	 the	 heavens,	 where	 we	 live	 on,
beyond	 any	 risk,	 any	 threat?	 What,	 then,	 will	 I	 be	 preserving?	 A	 history,	 a
particular	point	of	view.”	He	shrugged.	“The	history	is	done,	Baruk,	and	the	Tiste
Andii	point	of	view	is	one	of	disinterest,	stoicism,	and	quiet,	empty	despair.	Are
these	gifts	to	the	world	worthy	of	preservation?	I	think	not.”
Baruk	had	no	immediate	response.	What	Anomander	Rake	had	described	was
almost	 beyond	 comprehension,	 yet	 its	 anguished	 cry	 reached	 through	 to	 the
alchemist.	“And	yet,”	he	said,	“here	you	are.	Allied	with	the	Empire's	victims.	Do
you	stand	alone	in	this,	Anomander	Rake?	Do	your	people	approve?”
“They	 care	 not,”	 Rake	 said.	 “They	 accept	 my	 commands.	 They	 follow	 me.
They	serve	Caladan	Brood	when	I	ask	them	to.	And	they	die	in	the	mud	and	forests
of	 a	 land	 that	 is	 not	 their	 own,	 in	 a	 war	 not	 their	 own,	 for	 a	 people	 who	 are
terrified	of	them.”
Baruk	sat	forward.	“Then	why?	Why	do	you	do	all	this?”
A	 harsh	 laugh	 was	 Rake's	 response.	 After	 a	 moment,	 however,	 his	 bitter
amusement	 fell	 away	 and	 he	 said,	 “Is	 an	 honorable	 cause	 worth	 anything	 these
days?	Does	it	matter	that	we've	borrowed	it?	We	fight	as	well	as	any	man.	We	die
alongside	 them.	 Mercenaries	 of	 the	 spirit.	 And	 even	 that	 is	 a	 coin	 we	 scarcely
value.	Why?	It	doesn't	matter	why.	But	we	never	betray	our	allies.
“I	 know	 you	 are	 worried	 that	 I	 did	 nothing	 to	 prevent	 the	 T'lan	 Imass	 from
entering	 the	 barrow.	 I	 believe	 the	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 will	 be	 freed,	 Baruk.	 But	 better
now,	with	me	here	beside	you,	than	at	some	other	time	when	the	Jaghut	has	no	one
capable	 of	 opposing	 him.	 We'll	 take	 this	 legend	 and	 carve	 the	 life	 from	 it,
Alchemist,	and	never	again	will	the	threat	haunt	you.”
Baruk	stared	at	the	Tiste	Andii.	“Are	you	that	certain	you'll	be	able	to	destroy
the	Jaghut?”
“No.	But	when	it	is	finished	with	us,	it	will	have	been	much	reduced.	Then	it
falls	 to	 others—to	 your	 Cabal,	 in	 fact.	 There's	 no	 certainty	 in	 this,	 Baruk.	 That
seems	a	fact	particularly	galling	to	you	humans.	You'd	better	learn	to	accept	it.	We
may	well	be	able	to	destroy	the	Jaghut	Tyrant,	but	even	this	will	serve	Laseen's
plans.”
The	alchemist	was	bemused.	“I	don't	understand.”


Rake	 grinned.	 “When	 we	 are	 finished	 with	 it,	 we	 will	 have	 been	 much
reduced.	 And	 then	 will	 come	 the	 powers	 of	 the	 Malazan	 Empire.	 So,	 you	 see,
either	way	she	wins.	If	anything	has	her	worried,	it's	your	T'orrud	Cabal,	Baruk.
Of	 your	 abilities	 she	 knows	 nothing.	 Which	 is	 why	 her	 agents	 seek	 this	 Vorcan.
The	Guild	Master	accepting	the	contract	will	solve	the	problem	you	represent.”
“Yet,”	Baruk	mused,	“there	are	other	factors	involved.”
“Oponn,”	Rake	stated.	“That	is	a	danger	to	everyone	involved.	Do	you	think
Oponn	cares	for	a	mortal	city?	For	its	people?	It	is	the	nexus	of	power	that	matters
to	Oponn,	the	whirlwind	where	games	get	nasty.	Will	immortal	blood	be	spilled?
That's	the	question	the	gods	are	eager	to	have	answered.”
Baruk	stared	down	at	his	goblet	of	goat's	milk.	“Well,	at	least	we've	avoided
that	so	far.”	He	took	a	sip.
“Wrong,”	Rake	said.	“Forcing	Shadowthrone	out	of	the	game	marked	the	first
spilling	of	immortal	blood.”
Baruk	almost	choked	on	the	milk.	He	set	down	the	goblet	and	stared	up	at	the
Tiste	Andii.	“Whose?”
“Two	 Hounds	 died	 by	 my	 sword.	 Knocked	 Shadowthrone	 somewhat	 offbalance,	I	believe.”
Baruk	leaned	back	and	closed	his	eyes.	“Then	the	stakes	have	risen,”	he	said.
“As	 far	 as	 Moon's	 Spawn,	 Alchemist.”	 Rake	 returned	 to	 his	 chair	 and	 sat,
once	again	stretching	his	legs	out	to	the	fire's	warmth.	“Now,	what	more	can	you
tell	 me	 about	 this	 Jaghut	 Tyrant?	 I	 recall	 you	 said	 you	 wished	 to	 consult	 an
authority.”
Baruk	 opened	 his	 eyes	 and	 tossed	 the	 flatbread	 into	 the	 fire.	 “There's	 a
problem	there,	Rake.	I'm	hoping	you	can	help	explain	what's	happened.	Please,”
he	said,	rising,	“follow	me.”
Grunting,	Rake	climbed	back	to	his	feet.	This	night	he'd	not	worn	his	sword.
To	 Baruk	 the	 Lord's	 broad	 back	 looked	 incomplete,	 but	 he	 was	 thankful	 for	 the
weapon's	absence.
He	led	Rake	from	the	room	and	down	the	central	stairs	to	the	lower	chambers.
The	first	of	these	subterranean	rooms	held	a	narrow	cot,	and	on	the	cot	lay	an	old
man.	Baruk	indicated	him.	“As	you	see,	he	appears	to	be	sleeping.	He	is	named
Mammot.”
Rake	raised	an	eyebrow.	“The	historian?”
“Also	a	High	Priest	of	D'rek.”
“That	explains	the	cynicism	in	his	writings,”	Rake	said,	grinning.	“The	Worm


of	Autumn	breeds	an	unhappy	lot.”
Baruk	was	surprised	 that	this	Tiste	Andii	had	read	Mammot's	Histories	but,
then,	 why	 not?	 A	 life	 spanning	 twenty	 thousand	 years	 necessitated	 hobbies,	 he
supposed.
“So,”	Rake	said,	striding	to	the	bed,	“this	Mammot	sleeps	a	deep	sleep.	What
triggered	it?”	He	crouched	before	the	old	man.
Baruk	 joined	 him.	 “That	 is	 the	 odd	 part.	 I	 admit	 to	 knowing	 little	 of	 earth
magic.	D'riss	is	a	Warren	I've	never	explored.	I	called	on	Mammot,	as	I	indicated
to	you,	and	upon	his	arrival	I	asked	him	to	tell	me	all	he	knew	of	the	Jaghut	Tyrant
and	the	barrow.	He	promptly	sat	down	and	closed	his	eyes.	They've	yet	to	open,
and	he's	not	uttered	a	single	word	since.”
Rake	straightened.	“He	took	your	request	seriously,	I	see.”
“What	do	you	mean?”
“As	 you	 guessed,	 he	 opened	 his	 D'riss	 Warren.	 He	 sought	 to	 answer	 your
question	by	rather,	shall	we	say,	direct	means.	And	now	something's	trapped	him.”
“He	traveled	by	Warren	to	the	Jaghut	Tyrant's	barrow?	The	old	fool!”
“Into	 a	 concentration	 of	 Tellann	 sorcery,	 not	 to	 mention	 Jaghut	 Omtose
Phellack.	On	top	of	all	that,	a	woman	with	an	Otataral	sword.”	Rake	crossed	his
arms.	“He'll	not	come	round	until	both	the	T'lan	Imass	and	the	Otataral	have	left
the	 barrow.	 And	 even	 then,	 if	 he's	 not	 quick,	 the	 awakening	 Jaghut	 might	 take
him.”
A	chill	burgeoned	in	Baruk's	bones.	“Take,	as	in	possession?”
Rake	 nodded,	 his	 expression	 grim.	 “A	 High	 Priest,	 is	 he?	 The	 Jaghut	 would
find	 him	 very	 useful.	 Not	 to	 mention	 the	 access	 Mammot	 provides	 to	 D'rek.	 Do
you	know,	Baruk,	if	this	Tyrant's	capable	of	enslaving	a	goddess?”
“I	don't	know,”	Baruk	whispered,	sweat	trickling	down	his	round	face	as	he
stared	at	Mammot's	recumbent	form.	“Dessembrae	fend,”	he	added.
The	 old	 woman	 sitting	 on	 the	 tenement	 steps	 squinted	 at	 the	 late	 afternoon	 sky
while	she	tamped	dried	Italbe	leaves	into	her	steatite	pipe.	On	the	wooden	steps
beside	 her	 was	 a	 small	 covered	 bronze	 brazier.	 Thin	 kindling	 sticks	 jutted	 from
holes	around	the	bowl.	The	old	woman	withdrew	one	and	set	it	to	her	pipe,	then
tossed	it	into	the	street.
The	man	walking	down	the	opposite	side	of	the	street	caught	the	signal	and	ran
a	hand	through	his	hair.	Circle	Breaker	felt	near	to	panic.	This	taking	to	the	streets
was	far	too	risky.	Turban	Orr's	hunters	were	close	to	him—he	could	feel	it	with


dread	 certainty.	 Sooner	 or	 later,	 the	 councilman	 would	 recall	 his	 many	 meetings
beneath	Despot's	Barbican,	and	the	guard	who'd	been	stationed	there	every	time.
This	brazen	showing	of	himself	compromised	everything.
He	turned	a	corner,	passing	beyond	the	old	woman's	sight,	and	continued	for
three	blocks	until	he	came	opposite	the	Phoenix	Inn.	Two	women	lounged	by	the
door,	laughing	at	some	joke	between	them.
Circle	Breaker	tucked	his	thumbs	into	his	sword-belt	and	angled	the	scabbard
out	to	the	side.	Its	bronze-capped	end	scraped	against	the	stone	wall	beside	him.
Then	he	withdrew	his	hands	and	continued	on	his	way	toward	Lakefront.	Well,	it's
done.	All	that	remained	for	him	was	one	final	contact,	possibly	redundant,	but	he
would	follow	the	Eel's	orders.	Things	were	coming	to	a	head.	He	did	not	expect
to	live	much	longer,	but	he'd	do	what	he	must	until	that	time.	What	more	could	be
asked	of	him?
At	the	entrance	of	the	Phoenix	Inn,	Meese	nudged	Irilta.	“That's	it,”	she	muttered.
“You	do	the	backup	this	time.	Usual	pattern.”
Irilta	scowled,	then	nodded.	“Head	off,	then.”
Meese	 descended	 the	 steps	 and	 turned	 up	 the	 street.	 She	 reversed	 the	 route
taken	by	Circle	Breaker	until	she	reached	the	tenement.	She	saw	the	old	woman
still	sitting	there,	lazily	watching	passersby.	As	Meese	passed	through	her	line	of
vision,	the	old	woman	removed	the	pipe	from	her	mouth	and	tapped	it	against	the
heel	of	her	shoe.	Sparks	rained	onto	the	cobbles.
That	was	the	signal.	Meese	came	to	the	corner	of	the	block,	then	turned	right
and	entered	the	alley	running	the	building's	length.	A	door	opened	for	her	a	third
of	the	way	down	and	she	strode	into	a	dimly	lit	room	with	an	open	door	beyond.
Someone	 hid	 behind	 the	 first	 door	 but	 she	 did	 not	 acknowledge	 that	 someone's
presence.	 She	 passed	 through	 the	 second,	 inner	 door	 and	 found	 herself	 in	 a
hallway.	From	there	it	was	a	quick	jog	up	the	stairs.
Apsalar—or	Sorry,	as	she	had	been	known	before—hadn't	been	much	impressed
by	 her	 first	 sight	 of	 Darujhistan.	 For	 some	 reason,	 despite	 her	 excitement	 and
anticipation,	it	had	all	seemed	too	familiar.
Disappointed,	 Crokus	 had	 wasted	 no	 time	 in	 taking	 her	 to	 his	 uncle's	 home
once	 they'd	 stabled	 Coll's	 horse.	 The	 journey	 to	 the	 city,	 and	 then	 through	 its
crowded	 streets,	 had	 been,	 for	 Crokus,	 a	 continual	 storm	 of	 confusion.	 This
woman	seemed	to	have	a	knack	for	catching	him	off-guard,	and	all	he	desired	now


was	to	throw	her	into	someone	else's	lap	and	be	done	with	it.
Yet,	if	that	was	truly	the	case,	why	did	he	feel	so	miserable	about	it?
Crokus	 left	 Mammot's	 library	 and	 returned	 to	 the	 outer	 room.	 Moby	 chirped
and	 stuck	 out	 its	 red	 tongue	 at	 him	 from	 Mammot's	 desk.	 Ignoring	 the	 creature,
Crokus	stood	before	Apsalar,	who'd	seated	herself	in	the	better	of	the	two	chairs
—his	chair,	of	course.	“I	don't	understand.	From	the	looks	of	it,	he's	been	gone	for
a	couple	of	days	at	least.”
“So?	Is	that	so	unusual?”	Apsalar	asked	casually.
“It	is,”	he	grumbled.	“Did	you	feed	Moby	as	I	asked?”
She	nodded.	“The	grapes?”
“Yes.”	 He	 placed	 his	 hands	 on	 his	 hips.	 “Strange.	 Maybe	 Rallick	 knows
something	about	it.”
“Who's	Rallick?”
“An	assassin	friend,”	Crokus	replied	distractedly.
Apsalar	shot	to	her	feet,	her	eyes	wide.
“What's	 wrong?”	 Crokus	 asked,	 stepping	 close.	 The	 girl	 looked	 positively
terrified.	He	glared	around,	half	expecting	to	see	some	demon	rise	out	of	the	floor
or	the	cupboard,	but	the	room	was	unchanged—a	little	messier	than	usual,	though.
Moby's	fault,	he	assumed.
“I'm	not	sure,”	she	said,	relaxing	with	an	effort.	“It	was	as	if	I	was	about	to
remember	something.	But	it	never	came.”
“Oh,”	Crokus	said.	“Well,	we	could—”
A	knock	sounded	on	the	door.
Crokus	 brightened,	 walking	 over	 to	 it.	 “Oh,	 he	 probably	 lost	 his	 keys	 or
something,”	he	said.
“It	was	unlocked,”	Apsalar	pointed	out.
Crokus	opened	the	door.	“Meese!	What're	you—?”
“Quiet!”	 the	 big	 woman	 hissed,	 pushing	 past	 him	 and	 shutting	 the	 door.	 Her
gaze	 fell	 on	 Apsalar	 and	 her	 eyes	 widened.	 Then	 she	 turned	 back	 to	 Crokus.
“Good	I	found	you,	lad!	You've	seen	no	one	since	getting	back?”
“Why,	no.	That's	just	it—”
“A	stabler,”	Apsalar	said,	frowning	up	at	Meese.	“Have	we	met?”
“She's	 lost	 her	 memory,”	 Crokus	 explained.	 “But,	 yes,	 we	 stabled	 Coll's
horse.”
“Why?”	Meese	demanded,	then	as	Crokus	was	about	to	elaborate	she	went	on,


“Never	mind.	The	stabler	shouldn't	prove	a	problem.	Well,	we're	in	luck!”
“Dammit,	Meese,”	Crokus	said.	“What's	going	on?”
She	met	his	eyes.	“That	D'Arle	guard	you	killed	the	other	night.	The	one	in	the
garden.	 They've	 got	 your	 name	 and	 description,	 lad.	 Don't	 ask	 me	 how.	 But	 the
D'Arles	are	talking	high	gallows	when	you're	caught.”
The	blood	left	Crokus's	face.	Then	his	head	jerked	to	Apsalar.	He	opened	his
mouth,	then	shut	it	again.	No,	she	truly	didn't	remember.	But	it	must	have	been	her.
He	collapsed	into	Mammot's	chair.
“We've	got	to	hide	you,	lad,”	Meese	said.	“Both	of	you,	I	guess.	But	don't	you
worry,	Crokus,	me	and	Irilta,	we'll	take	care	of	you	till	something	can	be	worked
out.”
“I	 don't	 believe	 this,”	 he	 whispered,	 staring	 at	 the	 wall	 opposite	 him.	 “She
betrayed	me,	damn	her!”
Meese	looked	questioningly	at	Apsalar,	who	said,	“It's	a	guess,	but	I'd	say	a
girl	named	Challice.”
Meese	 closed	 her	 eyes	 briefly.	 “Challice	 D'Arle,	 the	 court's	 honey	 these
days.”	 Compassion	 softened	 her	 face	 as	 she	 looked	 down	 on	 Crokus.	 “Oh,	 lad.
That's	the	way	of	it,	then.”
He	jerked	in	the	seat	and	glared	up	at	her.	“It	isn't	anymore.”
Meese	grinned.	“Right.	For	now,”	she	said,	arms	folded	over	her	chest,	“we
just	 sit	 tight	 till	 night,	 then	 it's	 the	 rooftops	 for	 us.	 Don't	 worry,	 we'll	 handle
things,	lad.”
Apsalar	rose.	“My	name's	Apsalar,”	she	said.	“Pleased	to	meet	you,	Meese.
And	thank	you	for	helping	Crokus.”
“Apsalar,	 huh?	 Well,”	 her	 grin	 broadened,	 “guess	 the	 rooftops	 will	 be	 no
problem	for	you,	then.”
“None,”	she	replied,	knowing	somehow	that	she	was	right	in	this.
“Good	enough,”	Meese	said.	“Now,	how	about	we	find	something	to	drink?”
“Meese,”	Crokus	asked,	“do	you	know	where	my	uncle	might	have	gone?”
“Can't	help	you	there,	lad.	No	idea.”
She	wasn't	sure	about	the	old	woman	on	the	steps,	but	the	one	immediately	below,
tucked	 into	 a	 shadowed	 niche	 and	 steadily	 watching	 the	 tenement	 building—that
one	 would	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 care	 of.	 It	 seemed	 that	 this	 Coin	 Bearer	 had
protection.


Serrat	 was	 not	 unduly	 concerned.	 Next	 to	 her	 lord,	 Anomander	 Rake,	 she
ranked	 the	 deadliest	 among	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 of	 Moon's	 Spawn.	 Finding	 this	 boyservant	 of	 Oponn's	 had	 not	 proved	 difficult.	 Once	 her	 lord	 had	 given	 her	 the
necessary	details,	Oponn's	magical	signature	had	been	easy	to	find.	It	helped	that
she'd	encountered	it	before—and	from	this	very	boy—on	the	rooftops	two	weeks
past.	Her	agents	had	chased	the	Coin	Bearer	that	night,	abandoning	him	once	he'd
entered	the	Phoenix	Inn—but	only	at	her	command.	If	she'd	suspected	then	what
she	now	knew,	Oponn's	presence	would	have	ended	that	very	night.
Ill	 luck,	 Serrat	 smiled	 to	 herself,	 taking	 a	 more	 comfortable	 position	 on	 the
rooftop.	 They'd	 move	 at	 night,	 she	 suspected.	 As	 for	 the	 woman	 hiding	 below,
she'd	have	to	be	removed.	Indeed,	with	a	spell	of	blurring	and	enough	in	the	way
of	shadows,	she	might	as	easily	take	the	woman's	place.
There'd	be	no	suspicion	from	the	other	woman,	then,	the	one	presently	inside
with	the	Coin	Bearer.	Serrat	nodded.	Yes,	that	would	be	how	she'd	play	it.
But	for	now,	she'd	wait.	Patience	ever	rewards.
“Well,”	Murillio	said,	as	he	scanned	the	crowd,	“they're	not	here.	Which	means
they're	with	Mammot.”
Kruppe	 drew	 a	 deep	 breath	 of	 the	 sweaty,	 smoky	 air.	 “Ah,	 civilization.
Kruppe	believes	your	assessment	is	accurate,	friend.	If	so,	then	we	might	as	well
rest	here,	drinking	and	supping	for	an	hour	or	two.”	With	that,	he	strode	into	the
Phoenix	Inn.
A	few	old	hands,	seated	at	Kruppe's	table,	gathered	their	tankards	and	pitcher
and	left,	murmuring	apologies	and	grinning	among	themselves.	Kruppe	gave	them
a	gracious	nod	and	settled	with	a	loud	sigh	into	his	usual	chair.	Murillio	paused	at
the	bar	and	spoke	with	Scurve,	then	he	joined	Kruppe.
Brushing	dust	from	his	shirt,	Murillio	frowned	distractedly	at	his	road-weary
condition.	“I	look	forward	to	a	bath,”	he	said.	“Apparently	Scurve	saw	Rallick	in
here	earlier,	talking	with	some	stranger.	Since	then,	nobody's	seen	him.”
Kruppe	 waved	 an	 uninterested	 hand.	 “Kind	 Sulty	 arrives,”	 he	 announced.	 A
moment	later	a	pitcher	of	ale	stood	on	the	table.	Kruppe	wiped	his	tankard	with
his	silk	handkerchief,	then	filled	it	with	the	foaming	brew.
“Weren't	 we	 supposed	 to	 report	 to	 Baruk?”	 Murillio	 asked,	 his	 eyes	 on	 his
friend.
“All	 in	 due	 time,”	 Kruppe	 said.	 “First,	 we	 must	 recover	 from	 our	 ordeals.
What	if	Kruppe	were	to	lose	his	voice	in	very	mid-sentence	of	said	report?	What


would	avail	Baruk	of	that?”	He	raised	his	tankard	and	drank	deep.
Murillio	 drummed	 the	 fingers	 of	 one	 hand	 restlessly	 on	 the	 table,	 his	 eyes
constantly	 scanning	 the	 crowd.	 Then	 he	 straightened	 in	 his	 seat.	 He	 filled	 his
tankard.	“So	now	that	you	know	what	Rallick	and	I	are	up	to,”	he	said,	“what	do
you	plan	to	do	about	it?”
Kruppe's	eyebrows	lifted.	“Kruppe?	Why,	nothing	but	good,	of	course.	Timely
assistance,	 and	 such.	 No	 need	 for	 blatant	 fretting,	 friend	 Murillio.	 By	 all	 means
proceed	as	planned.	Think	of	wise	Kruppe	as	no	more	than	a	kindly	chaperon.”
“Hood's	Breath,”	Murillio	groaned,	eyes	rolling.	“We	were	doing	fine	without
your	 help.	 The	 best	 thing	 you	 could	 do	 for	 us	 is	 stay	 out	 of	 our	 way.	 Don't	 get
involved.”
“And	abandon	my	friends	to	the	fates?	Nonsense!”
Murillio	finished	his	ale	and	rose.	“I'm	going	home,”	he	said.	“You	can	make
the	report	to	Baruk	in	a	week's	time	for	all	I	care.	And	when	Rallick	finds	out	you
know	all	about	our	plans,	well,	Kruppe,	I'd	hate	to	be	in	your	boots.”
Kruppe	 waved	 dismissively.	 “See	 Sulty	 yon?	 Upon	 her	 tray	 is	 Kruppe's
supper.	 Rallick	 Nom's	 nasty	 daggers	 and	 nastier	 temper	 pale	 to	 insignificance
before	such	repast	as	now	approaches.	Good	night	to	you,	then,	Murillio.	Until	the
morrow.”
Murillio	stared	down	at	him,	then	grumbled,	“Good	night,	Kruppe.”
He	left	the	bar	through	the	kitchen	door.	As	soon	as	he	stepped	into	the	back
alley	 a	 figure	 accosted	 him	 from	 across	 the	 way.	 Murillio	 frowned.	 “That	 you,
Rallick?”
“No,”	the	shadowed	figure	said.	“Fear	me	not,	Murillio.	I	have	a	message	to
you	from	the	Eel.	Call	me	Circle	Breaker.”	The	man	strode	closer.	“The	message
concerns	Councilman	Turban	Orr	.	.	.”
Rallick	 moved	 from	 rooftop	 to	 rooftop	 in	 the	 darkness.	 The	 need	 for	 absolute
silence	 slowed	 his	 hunt	 considerably.	 There'd	 be	 no	 conversation	 with	 Ocelot.
Rallick	expected	he'd	have	but	one	shot	at	the	man.	If	he	missed	his	chance,	his
Clan	Leader's	sorcery	would	prove	the	deciding	factor.	Unless	.	.	.
Rallick	 paused	 and	 checked	 his	 pouch.	 Years	 back,	 the	 alchemist	 Baruk	 had
rewarded	 him	 for	 work	 well	 done	 with	 a	 small	 bag	 of	 reddish	 dust.	 Baruk	 had
explained	its	magic-deadening	properties,	but	Rallick	resisted	placing	his	trust	in
the	 powder.	 Had	 its	 potency	 survived	 the	 years?	 Was	 it	 a	 match	 for	 Ocelot's
powers?	There	was	no	telling.


He	 crossed	 a	 high	 rooftop,	 skirting	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 dome.	 Off	 to	 his	 right	 and
below	was	the	city's	eastern	wall.	The	faint	glow	of	Worrytown	rose	beyond	it.
The	 assassin	 suspected	 that	 Ocelot	 would	 await	 Coll's	 arrival	 at	 Worry	 Gate,
hiding	within	crossbow	range.	Better	to	kill	the	man	before	he	entered	the	city.
This	 limited	 the	 possibilities	 considerably.	 Lines	 of	 sight	 were	 few,	 and
K'rul's	 Hill	 was	 the	 best	 of	 them.	 Still,	 Ocelot	 might	 well	 have	 used	 sorcery
already,	and	lie	hidden	from	mundane	eyes.	Rallick	might	stumble	right	over	him.
He	 reached	 the	 north	 side	 of	 the	 dome's	 skirt.	 Before	 him	 rose	 the	 K'rul
Temple.	 From	 the	 belfry,	 there'd	 be	 a	 clean	 shot	 just	 as	 Coll	 entered	 the	 gate.
Rallick	 removed	 the	 pouch	 from	 his	 bag.	 Whatever	 the	 dust	 covered,	 Baruk	 had
said,	 would	 be	 impervious	 to	 magic.	 More,	 it	 had	 an	 area	 effect.	 The	 assassin
scowled.	How	much	of	an	area?	And	did	it	wear	off?	Most	importantly,	Baruk	had
said—and	Rallick	remembered	this	clearly—do	not	let	it	touch	your	skin.	Poison?
he'd	asked.	“No,”	the	alchemist	had	replied.	“The	powder	changes	some	people.
There	 is	 no	 predicting	 such	 changes,	 however.	 Best	 not	 to	 take	 the	 chance,
Rallick.”
Sweat	 trickled	 down	 his	 face.	 Finding	 Ocelot	 was	 already	 a	 slim	 chance.
Coll's	death	would	ruin	everything	and,	more,	it	would	strip	from	Rallick	his	last
claim	 .	 .	 .	 to	 what?	 To	 humanity.	 The	 price	 of	 failure	 had	 become	 very	 high.
“Justice,”	he	hissed	angrily.	“It	has	to	mean	something.	It	has	to!”
Rallick	 untied	 the	 pouch.	 He	 dipped	 into	 it	 and	 scraped	 out	 a	 handful	 of	 the
powder.	 He	 rubbed	 it	 between	 his	 fingers.	 It	 felt	 like	 rust.	 “That's	 it?”	 he
wondered.	Maybe	it	had	deteriorated.	Shrugging,	he	began	to	massage	it	into	his
skin,	 starting	 with	 his	 face.	 “What	 changes?”	 he	 muttered.	 “I	 don't	 feel	 any
changes.”
Reaching	under	his	clothing	as	much	as	was	possible,	Rallick	used	up	the	last
of	the	powder.	The	pouch	itself	was	stained	on	the	inside.	He	turned	it	inside	out,
then	stuffed	it	into	his	belt.	Now,	he	grimaced,	the	hunt	continues.	Somewhere	out
there	 an	 assassin	 waited,	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 Jammit's	 Worry	 Road.	 “I'll	 find	 you,
Ocelot,”	he	whispered,	his	eyes	fixed	on	K'rul's	belfry	tower.	“And	magic	or	no
magic,	you	won't	hear	me,	you	won't	even	feel	my	breath	on	your	neck	until	it's
too	late.	I	swear	it.”
He	began	his	ascent.


Chapter	Eighteen
	

This	blue	city
hides	under	its	cloak
a	hidden	hand
that	holds	like	stone
a	blade	envenomed
by	the	eight-limbed	Paralt—
the	sting	brings	death
in	the	span	of	grief
that	marks	a	final	breath—
so	this	hand	defies
sorcery's	web
and	trembles	the	gossamer	strand
of	a	spider's	deadly	threat.
This	hand	beneath
the	blue	city's	cloak
drives	home	Power's
gentle	balance.
THE	CONSPIRACY
BLIND	GALLAN	(B.1078)


	
Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	strode	to	the	bedside.	“You	sure	you're	up	to	it?”	he	asked
Kalam.	 The	 assassin,	 sitting	 with	 his	 back	 against	 the	 wall,	 glanced	 up	 from
honing	 his	 long	 knives.	 “Not	 much	 choice,	 is	 there?”	 He	 returned	 to	 his
sharpening.
Whiskeyjack's	 expression	 was	 drawn	 and	 haggard	 from	 lack	 of	 sleep.	 He
looked	 across	 the	 small	 room	 to	 where	 Quick	 Ben	 crouched	 in	 a	 corner.	 A
fragment	of	bedroll	was	clutched	in	the	wizard's	hands,	and	his	eyes	were	closed.
At	the	table,	Fiddler	and	Hedge	had	dismantled	their	massive	arbalest.	They
now	sat	cleaning	and	examining	each	piece.	They	were	looking	at	a	fight	ahead	of
them.
Whiskeyjack	shared	their	conviction.	Each	hour	that	passed	brought	their	many
hunters	that	much	closer.	Of	those	it	was	the	Tiste	Andii	he	feared	the	most.	His
squad	was	good,	but	not	that	good.
By	 the	 window	 was	 Trotts,	 leaning	 against	 the	 wall	 with	 his	 burly	 arms
crossed.	And	against	one	wall	slept	Mallet,	his	snores	loud	in	the	room.
The	sergeant	returned	his	attention	to	Kalam.	“It's	a	long	shot,	isn't	it?”
The	assassin	nodded.	“No	reason	for	the	man	to	keep	showing	himself.	They
got	burned	the	last	time.”	He	shrugged.	“I'll	try	the	inn	again.	If	anything,	someone
will	mark	me	and	the	Guild	will	come.	If	I	can	get	a	word	in	before	they	kill	me,
there's	a	chance.	It's	not	much	.	.	.”
“.	.	.	but	it'll	have	to	do,”	Whiskeyjack	finished.	“You've	got	tomorrow.	If	we
draw	a	blank,”	he	looked	over	to	Fiddler	and	Hedge	and	found	their	eyes	on	him,
“we	detonate	the	intersections.	Do	damage,	hurt	them.”
The	two	saboteurs	grinned	their	anticipation.
Quick	 Ben's	 loud	 hiss	 of	 frustration	 brought	 everyone	 round.	 The	 wizard's
eyes	 had	 opened.	 He	 tossed	 the	 torn	 cloth	 contemptuously	 on	 to	 the	 floor.	 “No
good,	Sergeant,”	he	said.	“Can't	find	Sorry	anywhere.”
Kalam	rumbled	a	curse	and	thrust	his	weapons	into	their	scabbards.
“So,	what	does	that	mean?”	Whiskeyjack	asked	the	wizard.
“Most	likely,”	Quick	Ben	said,	“she's	dead.”	He	gestured	at	the	cloth.	“With
that,	 there's	 no	 way	 the	 Rope	 could	 hide	 from	 me.	 Not	 while	 still	 possessing
Sorry.”
“Maybe	once	you	told	him	you'd	figured	him	out,”	Fiddler	said,	“he	tossed	in


his	coins	and	quit	the	game.”
Quick	Ben	made	a	face.	“The	Rope	isn't	scared	of	us,	Fiddler.	Come	back	to
earth.	If	anything,	he'd	be	coming	down	on	us.	Shadowthrone	must've	told	him	by
now	 who	 I	 am	 or,	 rather,	 who	 I	 once	 was.	 It's	 not	 the	 Rope's	 business,	 but
Shadowthrone	 might	 insist.	 Gods	 don't	 like	 being	 cheated.	 Especially	 being
cheated	twice.”	He	climbed	to	his	feet	and	stretched	the	kinks	from	his	back.	He
met	Whiskeyjack's	gaze.	“I	don't	understand	this,	Sergeant.	I'm	stumped.”
“Do	we	abandon	her?”	Whiskeyjack	asked.
Quick	 Ben	 nodded.	 “Might	 as	 well.”	 He	 paused,	 then	 stepped	 forward.	 “We
were	 all	 wishing	 we	 were	 wrong	 about	 her,”	 he	 said,	 “but	 what	 Sorry	 did	 had
nothing	to	do	with	being	human.	And,	as	far	as	I'm	concerned,	I'm	glad	of	that.”
“I'd	 hate	 to	 think,”	 Kalam	 said,	 from	 the	 bed,	 “that	 evil	 was	 real,	 that	 it
existed	 with	 a	 face	 as	 plain	 as	 the	 next	 man's.	 I	 know,	 Whiskeyjack,	 you've	 got
your	reasons	for	wanting	it	that	way.”
Quick	Ben	moved	closer	to	the	sergeant,	his	gaze	softening.	“Keeps	you	sane
every	 time	 you	 order	 somebody	 to	 die,”	 he	 said.	 “We	 all	 know	 about	 that,
Sergeant.	And	we'd	be	the	last	to	suggest	there's	some	other	way	that	maybe	you
haven't	thought	of	yet.”
“Well,	 I'm	 glad	 to	 hear	 it,”	 Whiskeyjack	 growled.	 He	 surveyed	 everyone	 in
the	 room,	 seeing	 that	 Mallet	 was	 awake	 and	 watching	 him.	 “Anybody	 else	 got
something	to	say?”
“I	have,”	Fiddler	said,	then	ducked	at	the	sergeant's	glower.	“Well,	you	asked,
didn't	you?”
“Out	with	it,	then.”
Fiddler	 straightened	 in	 his	 chair	 and	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 Hedge	 poked	 him	 in
the	ribs	as	he	was	about	to	begin.	After	a	menacing	scowl,	he	tried	again.	“It's	like
this,	 Sergeant.	 We've	 seen	 a	 lot	 of	 our	 friends	 die,	 right?	 And	 maybe	 we	 didn't
have	to	give	the	orders,	so	maybe	you	think	it's	easier	for	us.	But	I	don't	think	so.
You	see,	to	us	those	people	were	living,	breathing.	They	were	friends.	When	they
die,	 it	 hurts.	 But	 you	 go	 around	 telling	 yourself	 that	 the	 only	 way	 to	 keep	 from
going	mad	is	to	take	all	that	away	from	them,	so	you	don't	have	to	think	about	it,
so	you	don't	have	to	feel	anything	when	they	die.	But,	damn,	when	you	take	away
everybody	else's	humanity,	you	take	away	your	own.	And	that'll	drive	you	mad	as
sure	 as	 anything.	 It's	 that	 hurt	 we	 feel	 that	 makes	 us	 keep	 going,	 Sergeant.	 And
maybe	 we're	 not	 getting	 anywhere,	 but	 at	 least	 we're	 not	 running	 away	 from
anything.”
There	was	silence	in	the	room.	Then	Hedge	punched	Fiddler	in	the	arm.	“I'll


be	damned!	You	got	a	brain	in	there,	after	all.	I	guess	I	been	wrong	about	you	all
these	years.”
“Yeah,	 right,”	 Fiddler	 said,	 rolling	 his	 eyes	 at	 Mallet,	 “and	 who	 is	 it	 who's
burned	 his	 hair	 off	 so	 many	 times	 he's	 gotta	 wear	 some	 ugly	 leather	 cap	 all	 the
time,	hey?”
Mallet	laughed,	but	the	tension	remained	and	everyone's	gaze	swung	back	to
fix	on	their	sergeant.	Slowly,	Whiskeyjack	studied	each	man	in	his	squad.	He	saw
the	 caring	 in	 their	 eyes,	 the	 open	 offer	 to	 the	 friendship	 he'd	 spent	 years
suppressing.	 All	 that	 time	 pushing	 them	 away,	 pushing	 everyone	 away,	 and	 the
stubborn	bastards	just	kept	on	coming	back.
So	Sorry	hadn't	been	human.	His	conviction	that	all	she'd	done	was	within	the
possibilities	of	humanity	now	seemed	to	 rest	on	uncertain	 ground.	But	it	 did	 not
collapse.	He'd	seen	too	much	in	his	life.	There'd	be	no	sudden	faith	in	his	view	of
human	history,	no	burgeoning	optimism	to	chase	away	all	the	demonic	memories
of	the	horrors	he'd	lived	through.
Still,	 there	 came	 a	 time	 when	 some	 denials	 lost	 their	 function,	 when	 the
world's	relentless	battering	at	him	made	his	foolishness	obvious	even	to	himself.
He	 was,	 finally,	 and	 after	 all	 these	 years,	 among	 friends.	 That	 was	 a	 hard
admission	 and	 he	 realized	 he	 was	 already	 impatient	 with	 it.	 “All	 right,”	 he
growled,	“enough	with	the	flapping	lips.	We've	got	work	to	do.	Corporal?”
“Sergeant?”	Kalam	replied.
“Get	yourself	ready.	You've	got	the	daylight	hours	to	re-establish	contact	with
the	Assassins'	Guild.	Meanwhile,	I	want	everyone	else	to	lay	out	their	weapons
and	give	them	a	good	cleaning.	Repairs	to	armor.	There'll	be	an	inspection,	and	if
I	 find	 a	 single	 damn	 thing	 I	 don't	 like,	 there'll	 be	 Hood's	 heel	 coming	 down.
Understood?”
“We	hear	ya,”	Mallet	said,	grinning.
Despite	their	slow	pace,	Coll's	wound	had	opened	half	a	dozen	times	since	they'd
begun	the	journey.	He'd	found	a	way	of	sitting	in	his	saddle,	leaning	to	one	side
and	 taking	 most	 of	 the	 weight	 on	 his	 uninjured	 leg,	 and	 since	 this	 morning	 the
wound	had	yet	to	reopen.	The	awkward	position	brought	pains	and	cramps	to	the
rest	of	him,	however.
Paran	knew	a	foul	mood	when	he	saw	one.	Though	it	was	clear	to	both	of	them
that	 a	 bond	 had	 formed	 between	 them,	 comfortable	 and	 unfettered	 by	 pretenses,
they'd	 exchanged	 but	 scant	 words	 as	 the	 ravages	 of	 Coll's	 wound	 continued	 to
take	its	toll.


Coll's	entire	left	leg,	from	the	hip	where	the	sword	had	done	its	damage	down
to	 the	 foot,	 was	 a	 uniform	 sun-darkened	 brown	 color.	 Clots	 of	 drying	 blood
gathered	in	the	joints	of	his	upper	leg	plates	and	knee	guard.	As	the	thigh	swelled,
they	were	forced	to	slice	the	leather	padding	beneath	the	plate.
Succour	 had	 been	 denied	 them	 at	 the	 Catlin	 Bridge	 garrison,	 since	 the	 lone
surgeon	 stationed	 there	 had	 been	 sleeping	 off	 one	 of	 his	 “bad	 nights.”	 Clean
bandages	had	been	donated,	though,	and	it	was	these—already	soaked	through—
that	now	covered	the	wound.
There	 was	 little	 traffic	 on	 Jammit's	 Worry	 despite	 the	 city's	 walls	 being
within	sight.	The	flood	of	refugees	from	the	north	had	since	ended,	and	those	who
would	gather	for	the	Gedderone	Festival	had	already	done	so.
As	 they	 approached	 the	 edge	 of	 Worrytown,	 Coll	 raised	 himself	 from	 the
semi-conscious	 state	 he'd	 been	 in	 for	 the	 last	 few	 hours.	 His	 face	 was	 deathly
white.	“Is	this	Worry	Gate?”	he	asked	dully.
“I	 believe	 so,”	 Paran	 said,	 since	 they	 were	 on	 the	 road	 sharing	 that	 strange
name.	“Will	we	be	permitted	to	pass	within?”	he	asked.	“Will	the	guards	call	for	a
surgeon?”
Coll	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Take	 me	 on	 through.	 Phoenix	 Inn.	 Take	 me	 to	 the
Phoenix	Inn.”	His	head	sagged	again.
“Very	well,	Coll.”	He'd	be	surprised	if	the	guards	permitted	it,	and	he'd	need
a	story	to	tell	them,	though	Coll	had	said	nothing	of	how	he'd	been	wounded.	“I
hope,”	he	muttered,	“there's	someone	in	this	Phoenix	Inn	with	a	healer's	touch.”
The	man	looked	bad.	Paran	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	city's	gates.	He'd	already	seen
enough	 to	 understand	 why	 the	 Empress	 wanted	 it	 so	 avidly.	 “Darujhistan.”	 He
sighed.	“My,	but	you	are	a	wonder,	aren't	you?”
Rallick	nudged	himself	another	inch	upward.	His	limbs	trembled	with	exhaustion.
If	not	for	the	morning	shadows	on	this	side	of	the	belfry,	he'd	have	been	spotted
long	ago.	As	it	was,	he	would	not	remain	hidden	much	longer.
Taking	the	stairs	would	have	been	suicide	in	the	darkness.	Ocelot	would	have
set	alarms	all	along	the	way—the	man	was	no	fool	at	covering	the	approaches	to
his	position.
If	he	was	up	there,	Rallick	reminded	himself.	If	not,	Coll	was	in	trouble.	There
was	no	telling	if	his	friend	had	arrived	at	the	gates	yet,	and	the	silence	from	the
top	of	the	belfry	could	mean	anything.	He	paused	to	rest	and	glanced	up.	Ten	feet
to	go,	the	most	critical	ones	yet.	He	was	so	tired	it	was	all	he	could	do	simply	to


retain	 the	 handholds.	 The	 silent	 approach	 was	 now	 beyond	 him.	 His	 only
advantage	 lay	 in	 that	 Ocelot's	 concentration	 would	 be	 eastward,	 while	 he	 now
climbed	the	west	side	of	the	tower.
He	drew	some	deep	breaths,	then	reached	for	another	handhold.
Passersby	 stopped	 to	 watch	 Paran	 and	 Coll	 move	 slowly	 through	 Worrytown
toward	the	gate.	Ignoring	them,	and	the	questions	they	asked,	the	captain	focused
his	attention	on	the	two	guards	at	the	gate	itself.	They'd	spotted	him	and	Coll,	and
now	stood	waiting.
Reaching	 the	 gate,	 Paran	 motioned	 that	 they	 would	 pass	 through.	 One	 guard
nodded	while	the	other	walked	alongside	the	captain's	horse.	“Your	friend	needs	a
surgeon,”	he	said.	“If	you	wait	just	inside	we	can	have	one	here	in	five	minutes.”
Paran	refused	the	offer.	“We	need	to	find	the	Phoenix	Inn.	I'm	from	the	north,
never	been	here	before.	The	man	said	the	Phoenix	Inn,	so	that's	where	I'm	going	to
take	him.”
The	 guard	 was	 dubious.	 “Be	 surprised	 if	 he'd	 make	 it	 that	 far.	 But	 if	 that's
what	you	want,	the	least	we	can	do	is	give	you	an	escort.”
As	they	emerged	from	the	gate's	shadow	the	other	guard	cried	out	in	surprise.
Paran	held	his	breath	as	the	man	stepped	close	to	Coll.	“I	know	him,”	he	said.
“He's	Coll	Jhamin,	of	House	Jhamin.	I	served	under	him.	What	happened?”
“I	thought	Coll	died	a	few	years	back,”	the	other	guard	said.
“Screw	 the	 writs,”	 his	 companion	 snapped.	 “I	 know	 what	 I	 know,	 Vildron.
This	is	Coll,	all	right.”
“He	wants	to	go	to	the	Phoenix	Inn,”	Paran	told	the	man.	“That's	the	last	thing
he	said	to	me.”
The	man	nodded.	“Let's	do	it	right,	though.”	He	turned	to	the	other	guard.	“I'll
take	the	grief	if	there's	any,	Vildron.	Get	me	the	wagon—it's	still	hitched	up	from
this	morning,	right?”	The	guard	smiled	up	at	Paran.	“Thanks	for	getting	him	here.
Some	of	us	in	the	city	still	got	eyes,	and	damn	what	the	highbrows	whisper.	We'll
put	him	in	the	back	of	the	wagon—less	jarring	that	way.”
Paran	relaxed.	“Thanks,	soldier.”	He	looked	past	the	man,	eager	to	see	what
he	could	of	the	city	now	that	the	wall	was	behind	him.	Immediately	before	them
rose	 a	 humped	 hill,	 its	 sides	 overgrown	 with	 weeds	 and	 gnarled	 trees.	 On	 its
summit	squatted	a	temple	of	some	kind,	abandoned	long	ago,	from	which	a	squaresided	tower	rose,	capped	by	a	bronze-tiled	roof.	As	his	eyes	reached	the	belfry's
open-sided	platform,	he	saw	a	flash	of	movement.	He	squinted.


Rallick	 raised	 his	 head	 cautiously	 over	 the	 platform's	 edge.	 He	 almost	 gasped
aloud.	The	belfry	was	empty.	Then	he	remembered	Ocelot's	sorcery.	Holding	his
breath,	he	strained	one	last	time	with	leaden	arms,	drawing	himself	flat	onto	the
platform.	 As	 soon	 as	 he	 moved	 to	 gather	 in	 his	 feet,	 the	 barren	 stone	 of	 the
platform	shimmered	and	he	saw	Ocelot	lying	before	him,	crossbow	cocked,	taking
aim	at	something	below.
Rallick	unsheathed	his	knives	and	moved	all	at	once.	But	his	exhaustion	gave
him	away,	his	boots	scuffing	the	stone.
Ocelot	 spun	 onto	 his	 back,	 weapon	 swinging	 to	 fix	 on	 Rallick.	 The	 Clan
Leader's	face	twisted	into	a	mask	of	rage	and	fear.	He	wasted	no	time	with	words
and	immediately	released	the	quarrel	set	in	his	crossbow.
Rallick	tensed	for	the	impact	that	he	was	certain	would	throw	him	across	the
platform	and	possibly	over	the	edge.	A	flash	of	red	before	his	chest	blinded	him
momentarily,	but	no	impact	came.	Blinking,	Rallick	looked	down.	The	quarrel	had
vanished.	The	truth	came	to	him	in	an	instant.	The	quarrel	had	been	magic,	created
by	sorcery	to	fly	unimpeded,	but	Baruk's	rusty	powder	had	worked.	Even	as	this
thought	burst	into	his	head,	he	propeled	himself	forward.
Ocelot	swore	and	dropped	the	crossbow.	As	he	reached	for	his	knife,	Rallick
landed	on	him.	A	loud	grunt	sounded	from	the	Clan	Leader,	his	eyes	squeezing	shut
in	pain.
Rallick	drove	the	dagger	in	his	right	hand	against	Ocelot's	chest.	The	weapon
scraped	across	mail	beneath	the	cloth	shirt.	Damn,	the	man	had	learned	something
from	 that	 other	 night—and	 this	 was	 Rallick's	 own	 precaution,	 come	 to	 defy	 him
now.	The	blade	in	his	left	hand	he	angled	upward,	under	Ocelot's	right	arm.	The
weapon's	point	cut	into	flesh,	then	continued	on	into	the	man's	armpit.
Rallick	 saw,	 inches	 from	 his	 face,	 the	 dagger's	 tip	 emerge	 from	 the	 cloth
covering	Ocelot's	right	shoulder,	followed	by	a	bloom	of	blood.	He	heard	a	knife
skitter	across	the	flagstones.
Teeth	 bared,	 Ocelot	 snapped	 his	 left	 hand	 up	 to	 the	 back	 of	 Rallick's	 neck,
finding	his	braid.	He	gave	it	a	savage	yank,	twisting	Rallick's	head	around.	Then
he	tried	to	sink	his	teeth	into	Rallick's	neck.
Ocelot	gasped	as	Rallick	jammed	a	knee	into	his	crotch.	He	tightened	his	hold
on	the	braid	again,	this	time	near	its	knotted	end.
Rallick	heard	the	snick	of	metal	and	attempted	desperately	to	roll	to	his	right.
Wounded	as	Ocelot's	right	arm	was,	it	struck	his	body	with	enough	force	to	drive
the	 wedged	 wrist-blade	 through	 the	 chain	 links	 and	 into	 his	 chest.	 A	 dull	 fire
blossomed	 from	 the	 wound.	 Ocelot	 jerked	 the	 blade	 free	 and,	 still	 holding


Rallick's	braid,	drew	back	for	another	stab.
Rallick	 brought	 up	 his	 right	 arm	 and,	 in	 a	 single	 sweeping	 motion,	 sliced
through	his	braid.	Freed,	he	pushed	himself	onto	that	side,	withdrawing	the	knife
in	his	left	hand	as	he	did	so.	Ocelot	slashed	wildly	at	his	face,	missing	by	inches.
With	all	the	remaining	strength	in	his	left	arm,	Rallick	slammed	his	knife	into
Ocelot's	stomach.	Links	snapped	and	the	blade	sank	to	its	hilt.	The	Clan	Leader's
body	doubled	up,	curling	around	the	embedded	weapon.	Gasping,	Rallick	lurched
forward	and	hammered	the	other	dagger	into	Ocelot's	forehead.
Rallick	lay	unmoving	for	a	time,	wondering	at	the	absence	of	pain.	The	plan
would	fall	to	Murillio	now.	Coll	would	be	avenged.	Murillio	could	handle	it—he
had	no	choice.
Ocelot's	body	seemed	to	grow	heavier	on	him	despite	the	blood	leaking	from
it.	“I'd	always	believed	I	was	this	man's	match,”	he	muttered.	He	pushed	himself
from	the	still-twitching	body	and	rolled	onto	his	back	in	the	center	of	the	platform.
He'd	hoped	to	see	sky,	to	look	one	last	time	on	its	bright,	depthless	blue.	Instead,
he	 found	 himself	 looking	 at	 the	 underside	 of	 the	 belfry's	 roof,	 its	 ancient	 stone
arch	crowded	with	nesting	bats.	This	detail	fixed	itself	in	his	head	as	he	felt	the
blood	stream	from	his	chest.	He	thought	he	could	see	beady	eyes	glittering	down
at	him.
After	seeing	no	other	sign	of	movement	on	the	belfry,	Paran's	gaze	swung	to	the
avenue	on	his	left.	Vildron	approached,	seated	on	a	wagon	drawn	by	two	horses.
The	guard	waiting	beside	Coll's	horse	said,	“Give	me	a	hand	here,	will	you?	Let's
get	the	old	man	down.”
Paran	dismounted	and	hurried	to	help	him.	He	glanced	at	Coll's	face.	Though
still	hunched	on	the	saddle,	he	was	unconscious.	How	much	longer	could	he	last?
If	that	was	me,	Paran	realized,	I'd	be	dead	by	now.	“After	all	this,”	he	growled	as
they	dragged	Coll	from	the	saddle,	“you'd	damn	well	better	live.”
Groaning,	Serrat	rolled	onto	her	back.	The	sun	beat	down	hot	against	her	eyelids
as	the	scattered	fragments	of	her	memory	gathered.	The	Tiste	Andii	had	been	about
to	make	her	move	on	the	woman	in	the	alley	below.	With	that	one	dead,	the	Coin
Bearer's	protectors	would	number	but	one.	And	when	they	left	the	tenement	block
under	cover	of	darkness,	they'd	walk	right	into	the	trap	she'd	set.
The	 assassin-mage	 opened	 her	 eyes	 to	 a	 mid-morning	 sun	 overhead.	 Her
daggers,	which	she'd	held	in	her	hands	as	she	crouched	at	the	rooftop's	edge,	now


lay	 on	 the	 pebbled	 surface	 beside	 her,	 neatly	 placed	 side	 by	 side.	 A	 thick,	 dull
ache	throbbed	in	the	back	of	her	skull.	She	probed	the	wound,	wincing,	then	sat
up.
The	 world	 spun,	 then	 settled.	 Serrat	 was	 bewildered	 and	 angry.	 She'd	 been
blindsided,	 and	 whoever	 had	 done	 it	 was	 good,	 good	 enough	 to	 sneak	 up	 on	 a
Tiste	Andii	assassin-mage.	And	that	was	worrying,	since	they'd	yet	to	meet	such	a
match	 in	 Darujhistan,	 with	 the	 exception	 of	 those	 two	 Claw	 on	 the	 night	 of	 the
ambush.	But	if	it	had	been	the	Claw,	she'd	be	dead	now.
Instead,	 the	 arrangements	 looked	 to	 have	 been	 designed	 more	 with
embarrassment	 in	 mind	 than	 anything	 else.	 Leaving	 her	 here	 in	 broad	 daylight,
weapons	 beside	 her,	 hinted	 of	 a	 subtle	 and	 cunning	 sense	 of	 humor.	 Oponn?
Possibly,	though	gods	rarely	acted	so	directly,	preferring	unwitting	agents	culled
from	among	the	mortal	masses.
One	certainty	rose	from	the	mystery,	however,	and	that	was	that	she'd	lost	her
opportunity	 to	 kill	 the	 Coin	 Bearer—at	 least,	 for	 another	 day.	 Next	 time,	 she
vowed,	 as	 she	 climbed	 to	 her	 feet	 and	 accessed	 her	 Kurald	 Galain	 Warren,	 her
secret	foes	would	find	her	ready	for	them.
The	air	around	her	shimmered	with	sorcery.	When	it	settled,	Serrat	was	gone.
Motes	 of	 dust	 drifted	 through	 the	 dead,	 hot	 air	 of	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn's	 attic.	 The
slanting	ceiling	rose	from	five	feet	along	the	east	wall	to	seven	feet	along	the	west
wall.	 Sunlight	 streamed	 in	 from	 windows	 at	 each	 end	 of	 the	 long	 and	 narrow
room.
Both	Crokus	and	Apsalar	slept,	though	at	opposite	ends	of	the	room.	Sitting	on
a	 crate	 beside	 the	 trapdoor,	 Meese	 cleaned	 her	 nails	 with	 a	 sliver	 of	 wood.
Leaving	Mallet's	tenement	and	making	their	way	across	the	rooftops	to	this	hiding
place	had	proved	an	easy	task.	Too	easy,	in	fact.	Irilta	reported	that	no	one	on	the
streets	had	followed	them.	And	the	rooftops	themselves	had	been	empty	of	life.	It
was	as	if	a	path	free	of	obstruction	had	been	made	for	them.
More	 of	 the	 Eel's	 brilliance	 at	 work?	 Meese	 grunted	 softly.	 Maybe.	 More
likely	Meese	was	putting	too	much	weight	on	the	instinctive	unease	that	traveled
like	an	elusive	itch	along	her	spine.	Even	now	she	felt	hidden	eyes	upon	them,	and
that,	she	told	herself,	glaring	around	the	musty	attic,	was	impossible.
There	 came	 a	 soft	 knock	 at	 the	 trapdoor.	 The	 door	 swung	 up	 and	 Irilta
appeared.	“Meese?”	she	whispered	loudly.
“Breathing	down	your	neck,”	Meese	rumbled,	tossing	the	wood	sliver	onto	the
oily	floor.	“Tell	Scurve	this	place	is	a	fire	waiting	to	happen.”


Irilta	 grunted	 as	 she	 pulled	 herself	 into	 the	 room.	 She	 shut	 the	 trapdoor	 and
wiped	 the	 dust	 from	 her	 hands.	 “Getting	 strange	 downstairs,”	 she	 said.	 “City
wagon	 rolls	 up	 and	 off	 comes	 a	 guard	 and	 some	 other	 fellow	 carrying	 Coll
between	 them.	 The	 old	 fool's	 near-dead	 from	 a	 sword	 cut.	 They	 put	 him	 in
Kruppe's	room	a	floor	down.	Sulty's	run	off	to	find	a	cutter,	but	it	don't	look	good.
Not	good	at	all.”
Meese	squinted	in	the	dusty	air,	her	gaze	fixing	on	Crokus	where	he	still	slept.
“What's	the	other	one	look	like?”	she	asked.
Irilta	grinned.	“Good	enough	for	a	roll	on	the	mat,	I'd	say.	Said	he	found	Coll
on	Jammit's	Worry,	bleeding	all	over	the	place.	Coll	woke	up	long	enough	to	tell
him	to	ride	here.	The	guy's	downstairs	in	the	bar	right	now,	eating	enough	for	three
men.”
Meese	grunted.	“Foreigner?”
Irilta	strode	to	the	window	facing	the	street.	“Speaks	Daru	like	he	was	born	to
it.	But	he	said	he'd	come	down	from	the	north.	Pale,	Genabaris	before	that.	He's
got	the	soldier	about	him,	I'd	say.”
“Any	word	from	the	Eel	yet?”
“We	keep	the	lad	here	for	now.”
“And	the	girl?”
“The	same.”
Meese	sighed	loudly.	“Crokus	ain't	gonna	like	being	cooped	up	here.”
Irilta	 glared	 over	 at	 Crokus's	 sleeping	 form.	 Was	the	lad	truly	asleep?	 “No
choice.	Got	word	that	there's	a	couple	of	guardsmen	waiting	at	Mammot's	place—
too	 late,	 of	 course,	 but	 they've	 got	 damn	 close.”	 Irilta	 rubbed	 dust	 from	 the
window	 and	 leaned	 forward.	 “Sometimes	 I	 swear	 I	 see	 someone,	 or	 maybe
something.	Then	I	blink	and	it's	gone.”
“Know	what	you	mean.”	Bones	creaking,	Meese	pushed	herself	to	her	feet.	“I
think	even	the	Eel's	beginning	to	sweat.”	She	chuckled.	“Life's	heating	up,	friend.
Rolling	times	ahead.”
Irilta	nodded	grimly.	“Roll	on,	roll	on.”
Captain	Paran	refilled	his	tankard	for	the	third	time.	Was	this	what	that	Tiste	Andii
had	 meant	 about	 his	 luck	 turning?	 Since	 coming	 to	 this	 land	 he'd	 found	 three
friends—something	wholly	unexpected	and	new	to	him,	precious,	in	fact.	But	the
Tattersail	he	knew	was	dead,	and	in	her	place	.	.	 .	a	child.	 Toc	 was	 dead.	 And
now	it	looked	like	Coll	would	join	that	list.


He	 ran	 a	 finger	 through	 a	 pool	 of	 spilled	 beer	 on	 the	 table,	 creating	 a	 river
leading	 to	 a	 crack	 between	 two	 planks,	 then	 watched	 as	 the	 beer	 drained	 down
and	out	of	sight.	He	felt	a	spreading	wetness	on	his	right	shin	but	ignored	it	as	his
eyes	 focused	 on	 the	 crack.	 The	 wood	 had	 been	 bolted	 down,	 joining	 the	 thick
planks	to	an	equally	robust	frame	of	legs.
What	had	Rake	said?	Paran	rose	and	unclipped	his	sword	belt.	He	laid	it	on
the	table,	then	withdrew	Chance.
The	 few	 regulars	 in	 the	 bar	 fell	 silent	 and	 turned	 to	 watch	 him.	 Behind	 the
counter,	Scurve	reached	for	his	club.
The	captain	noticed	none	of	this.	With	the	sword	in	his	right	hand,	he	set	the
point	into	the	crack	and	brought	the	weapon	vertical.	Working	it	back	and	forth,	he
managed	to	drive	it	close	to	half	its	length	between	the	planks.	Then	he	sat	down
again	and	reached	for	his	beer.
Everyone	relaxed,	and	spoke	among	themselves	in	shared	confusion.
Paran	 swallowed	 a	 mouthful	 of	 beer,	 frowning	 at	 Chance.	 What	 had	 Rake
said?	When	your	luck	turns,	break	the	sword.	Or	give	it	to	your	worst	enemy.	He
doubted	Oponn	would	accept	it,	however.	And	that	meant	breaking	it.	The	sword
had	been	with	him	for	a	long	time.	He'd	used	it	in	battle	only	once,	and	that	had
been	against	the	Hound.
Faintly,	 he	 heard	 the	 words	 of	 one	 of	 his	 childhood	 tutors.	 The	 man's	 lined
face	rose	into	his	thoughts	to	accompany	the	voice.	“Those	whom	the	gods	choose,
'tis	 said,	 they	 first	 separate	 from	 other	 mortals—by	 treachery,	 by	 stripping	 from
you	your	spirit's	lifeblood.	The	gods	will	take	all	your	loved	ones,	one	by	one,	to
their	death.	And,	as	you	harden,	as	you	become	what	they	seek,	the	gods	smile	and
nod.	Each	company	you	shun	brings	you	closer	to	them.	'Tis	the	shaping	of	a	tool,
son,	 the	 prod	 and	 pull,	 and	 the	 final	 succour	 they	 offer	 you	 is	 to	 end	 your
loneliness—the	very	isolation	they	helped	you	create.”	Never	get	noticed,	boy.
Had	the	shaping	begun?	Paran	scowled.	Was	he	responsible	for	taking	Coll's
life?	 The	 mere	 brush	 of	 friendship	 between	 them—enough	 to	 seal	 the	 man's
doom?	“Oponn,”	he	whispered,	“you've	a	lot	to	answer	for,	and	answer	for	it	you
shall.”
He	set	down	the	tankard	and	rose.	Then	he	reached	for	the	sword.
Climbing	the	steps	of	the	Phoenix	Inn,	Kalam	paused.	Damn,	there	it	was	again,
this	feeling	that	unseen	eyes	were	fixed	on	him.	The	sensation,	born	of	his	Claw
training,	 had	 struck	 him	 four	 times	 in	 quick	 succession	 since	 he'd	 come	 within
sight	of	this	bar.	Heeding	such	warnings	was	what	kept	him	alive,	and	yet	he	felt


no	malice	in	that	unwanted	attention—rather,	it	had	the	feel	of	amused	curiosity,	as
if	 whoever	 watched	 him	 knew	 full	 well	 who	 and	 what	 he	 was,	 yet	 seemed
unconcerned.
He	shook	himself,	then	entered	the	bar.	As	soon	as	he	took	his	first	step	into
the	heavy,	stagnant	atmosphere,	Kalam	knew	that	something	was	wrong.	He	shut
the	 door	 behind	 him,	 waited	 for	 his	 eyes	 to	 adjust	 to	 the	 gloom.	 He	 heard
breathing,	 the	 light	 scuff	 of	 furniture	 and	 clank	 of	 tankards	 coming	 to	 rest	 on
tabletops.	So,	there	were	people	here.	Then	why	the	silence?
As	 the	 gray	 confines	 of	 the	 bar	 grew	 defined,	 he	 saw	 that	 its	 denizens	 had
turned	their	backs	to	him	and	were	watching	a	man	standing	behind	his	table	at	the
far	end	of	the	room.	The	lantern	light	reflected	dully	from	a	sword	thrust	through
the	table,	and	the	man	had	closed	one	hand	around	its	grip.	He	seemed	oblivious
to	everyone	else	in	the	bar.
Kalam	took	a	half-dozen	steps,	coming	to	the	near	end	of	the	counter.	His	dark
eyes	remained	on	the	man	with	the	sword,	and	a	frown	deepened	the	lines	on	his
broad,	 flat	 forehead.	 The	 assassin	 stopped.	 Was	 it	 a	 trick	 of	 this	 damn	 light?	 he
wondered.	“No,”	he	said,	startling	the	innkeeper	behind	the	counter,	“it	isn't.”	He
pushed	himself	back	from	the	counter,	ran	his	eyes	over	the	others	in	the	chamber
—all	locals.	He'd	have	to	take	the	risk.
A	band	of	tension	tightened	around	Kalam's	neck	and	shoulders	as	he	strode
directly	 for	 the	 man,	 who	 looked	 to	 be	 but	 moments	 away	 from	 snapping	 his
sword's	blade.	The	assassin	plucked	an	empty	chair	from	a	table	in	his	path	and
slammed	it	down	one-handed	opposite	the	man.	Startled	eyes	fixed	on	Kalam.
“Your	god-given	luck's	holding,	Captain,”	the	assassin	rumbled,	in	low,	close
tones.	“Sit	down.”
His	 expression	 confused	 and	 frightened,	 Paran	 released	 his	 grip	 on	 the
weapon	and	sank	back	into	his	seat.
Kalam	 followed	 suit	 and	 leaned	 forward	 over	 the	 table.	 “What's	 all	 this
drama	anyway?”	he	asked,	in	a	whisper.
The	captain	frowned.	“Who	are	you?”
Behind	them	conversations	resumed,	loud	with	rattled	nerves.
“Ain't	 you	 guessed?”	 Kalam	 wagged	 his	 head.	 “Corporal	 Kalam,	 Ninth
Squad,	Bridgeburners.	The	last	time	I	saw	you,	you	was	recovering	from	two	fatal
knife	wounds—”
Paran's	 hands	 shot	 out	 and	 gripped	 Kalam's	 shirt.	 The	 assassin	 was	 too
surprised	 to	 react,	 and	 the	 captain's	 words	 confused	 him	 all	 the	 more.	 “Is	 your
squad's	healer	still	alive,	Corporal?”


“What?	Alive?	Yeah,	sure,	why	not?	What's—?”
“Shut	 up,”	 Paran	 snapped.	 “Just	 listen,	 soldier.	 Bring	 him	 here.	 Now!	 No
questions.	 I'm	 giving	 you	 a	 direct	 order,	 Corporal.”	 He	 released	 his	 grip	 on	 the
assassin's	shirt.	“Now,	move!”
Kalam	almost	saluted,	but	caught	himself	in	time.	“As	you	command,	sir,”	he
whispered.
Paran	 glared	 at	 the	 corporal's	 back	 until	 the	 man	 disappeared	 through	 the	 front
door.	Then	he	surged	to	his	feet.	“Innkeeper!”	he	called,	stepping	around	the	table.
“The	black	man	will	be	showing	up	in	a	few	minutes	with	company.	Send	them	up
to	Coll's	room	on	the	double.	Understood?”
Scurve	nodded.
Paran	strode	to	the	stairs.	As	he	reached	them	he	glanced	back	at	the	sword.
“And	nobody	touch	that	sword,”	he	ordered,	swinging	a	glare	across	everyone	in
the	room.	Nobody	seemed	inclined	to	challenge	him.	With	a	sharp,	satisfied	nod,
the	captain	ascended	the	stairs.
On	the	first	floor,	he	strode	down	the	hallway	to	the	last	room	on	the	right.	He
entered	 without	 knocking	 to	 find	 Sulty	 and	 a	 local	 surgeon	 sitting	 at	 the	 room's
lone	table.	Coll's	blanket-covered	form	lay	unmoving	on	the	bed.
The	 surgeon	 rose.	 “It's	 no	 good,”	 he	 said,	 in	 a	 thin,	 reedy	 voice.	 “The
infection's	too	far	along.”
Paran	asked,	“Is	he	still	breathing?”
“Aye,”	the	surgeon	replied.	“But	it	won't	be	for	much	longer.	If	the	wound	had
been	further	down	on	his	leg,	I	might	have	been	able	to	cut	it	off.	Even	then,	I'm
afraid	the	poison's	spread	through	all	of	him.	I'm	sorry,	sir.”
“Leave,”	Paran	snapped.
The	surgeon	bowed	and	prepared	to	depart.
“What	do	I	owe	you	for	the	services?”	the	captain	asked,	remembering.
The	 surgeon	 frowned	 over	 at	 Sulty.	 “Why,	 nothing,	 sir.	 I	 failed.”	 He	 left	 the
room,	shutting	the	door	behind	him.
Sulty	 joined	 the	 captain	 at	 the	 bedside.	 She	 wiped	 her	 face	 as	 she	 looked
down	on	Coll,	but	said	nothing.	A	few	minutes	later	she,	too,	left	the	room,	unable
to	remain	any	longer.
Paran	 found	 a	 stool	 and	 pulled	 it	 over	 to	 the	 bed.	 He	 sat	 and	 leaned	 his
forearms	on	his	knees.	He	was	not	sure	how	long	he	sat	there,	staring	down	at	the


straw-littered	 floor,	 but	 the	 door	 slamming	 open	 behind	 him	 brought	 him	 to	 his
feet.
A	bearded	man	stood	in	the	doorway,	his	slate-gray	eyes	hard	and	cold.
“Are	you	Mallet?”	Paran	demanded.
The	man	shook	his	head	 and	strode	inside.	Behind	him	 appeared	Kalam	and
another	man.	The	latter's	gaze	found	Coll,	and	he	walked	quickly	to	the	bed.
“I'm	 Sergeant	 Whiskeyjack,”	 the	 bearded	 man	 said	 quietly.	 “Pardon	 my
directness,	sir,	but	what	in	Hood's	name	are	you	doing	here?”
Ignoring	 the	 question,	 Paran	 joined	 the	 healer.	 Mallet	 laid	 a	 hand	 over	 the
crusted	 bandages.	 He	 glared	 up	 at	 the	 captain.	 “Can't	 you	 smell	 the	 rot?	 He's
gone.”	Mallet	frowned	and	leaned	forward.	“No,	wait	.	.	.	Damn,	I	don't	believe
it.”	 The	 healer	 took	 a	 spoon-shaped	 blade	 from	 his	 pouch	 and	 removed	 the
bandages.	Then	he	began	to	dig	into	the	wound	with	the	blade.	“Shedenul's	Mercy,
someone's	stuffed	this	with	herbs!”	He	drove	his	fingers	into	the	wound.
Coll	jerked	and	moaned.
Mallet	 grinned.	 “Hah,	 that	 got	 you	 going,	 did	 it?	 Good.”	 He	 probed	 deeper.
“This	 cut's	 halfway	 through	 the	 bone,”	 he	 breathed	 in	 amazement.	 “Those	 damn
herbs	 have	 poisoned	 his	 marrow.	 Who	 the	 hell	 treated	 this?”	 he	 asked,	 looking
accusingly	at	Paran.
“I	don't	know,”	Paran	said.
“All	 right,”	 Mallet	 said,	 removing	 his	 hand	 and	 wiping	 it	 on	 the	 blankets.
“Move	 back,	 everybody.	 Give	 me	 some	 room.	 A	 minute	 later,	 Captain,	 and	 this
man	would've	been	striding	through	Hood's	Gate.”	He	pressed	his	hand	down	on
Coll's	chest	and	closed	his	eyes.	“And	be	glad	I'm	as	good	as	I	am.”
“Now,	Captain?”
Paran	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 table	 and	 motioned	 for	 the	 sergeant	 to	 join	 him.
“First,	has	Adjunct	Lorn	contacted	you	yet?”
Whiskeyjack's	blank	look	was	sufficient	answer.
“Good,	 I'm	 in	 time,	 then.”	 Paran	 glanced	 up	 at	 Kalam,	 who	 had	 stationed
himself	 behind	the	sergeant.	“You've	been	set	up.	The	plan	was	to	take	the	city,
yes,	but	also	to	make	certain	you	were	all	killed	in	the	process.”
Whiskeyjack	held	up	a	hand.	“A	moment,	sir.	You	and	Tattersail	worked	this
out?”
Paran	 closed	 his	 eyes	 briefly.	 “She's	 .	 .	 .	 dead.	 Chasing	 Hairlock	 out	 on	 the
Rhivi	Plain.	Tayschrenn	got	to	her.	It	was	also	her	intent	to	find	you	and	tell	you
all	 that	 I'm	 telling	 you.	 I'm	 afraid	 I	 won't	 be	 her	 equal	 as	 your	 ally	 once	 the


Adjunct	shows	up,	but	at	least	I	can	prepare	you	somewhat.”
Kalam	spoke.	“I	don't	like	the	idea	of	Oponn's	pawn	supposedly	helping	us.”
Paran	nodded.	“I	have	it	on	good	authority	that	I'm	not	Oponn's.	That	sword
downstairs	is,	though.	Your	squad	wizard	should	be	able	to	confirm	this.”
“The	 Adjunct's	 plan,”	 Whiskeyjack	 reminded	 him,	 the	 fingers	 of	 one	 hand
tapping	slowly	on	the	tabletop.
“She'll	 have	 no	 trouble	 finding	 you.	 She	 has	 a	 talent	 in	 that	 area.	 But	 I	 fear
she's	not	the	major	threat.	There's	a	T'lan	Imass	with	her.	Maybe	her	mission	is
simply	to	lead	him	to	you,	then	he'll	handle	the	rest.”
Kalam	cursed	and	began	pacing	behind	the	sergeant's	chair.
Whiskeyjack	reached	a	decision.	“The	satchel,	Corporal.”
The	 assassin	 frowned,	 then	 picked	 up	 the	 sergeant's	 standard-issue	 supply
satchel	left	beside	the	door.	He	returned	and	set	it	down	on	the	tabletop.
Whiskeyjack	released	the	straps	and	pulled	out	an	object	wrapped	in	burgundy
silk.	 He	 removed	 the	 cloth,	 revealing	 twin	 yellowed	 bones	 of	 a	 human	 forearm.
The	 elbow-end's	 ball	 joints	 were	 bound	 together	 with	 verdigrised	 copper	 wire;
the	 wrist	 ends	 were	 wrapped	 as	 well,	 but	 as	 a	 misshapen	 knife	 grip,	 beyond
which	jutted	a	serrated	blade.
“What	is	it?”	the	captain	asked.	“I've	never	seen	its	like	before.”
“Be	 surprised	 if	 you	 had,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.	 “Back	 in	 the	 days	 of	 the
Emperor,	the	inner	ring	of	military	commanders	each	possessed	one	of	these,	the
booty	 of	 a	 looted	 K'chain	 Che'Malle	 tomb.”	 He	 grasped	 the	 bones	 with	 both
hands.	“It	was	the	source	of	much	of	our	success,	Captain.”	He	rose	and	drove	the
point	into	the	table.
A	 flash	 of	 white	 light	 erupted	 from	 the	 bones,	 then	 contracted	 to	 a	 swirl
spinning	threadlike	between	them.	Paran	heard	a	voice	he	knew.
“I	was	getting	worried,	Whiskeyjack,”	High	Fist	Dujek	growled.
“Unavoidable,”	 the	 sergeant	 replied,	 frowning	 at	 Paran.	 “We've	 had	 little	 to
report	.	.	.	until	now.	But	I	need	to	know	the	situation	in	Pale,	High	Fist.”
“You	want	an	update	before	you	spill	the	bad	news,	eh?	Fair	enough,”	Dujek
said.	“Tayschrenn's	stumbling	in	circles.	He	was	last	happy	when	Bellurdan	was
killed	along	with	Tattersail.	Two	more	of	the	Old	Guard	gone	in	one	fell	swoop.
Since	then,	all	he's	got	is	questions.	What	game	is	Oponn	playing?	Was	there	truly
a	 clash	 between	 the	 Knight	 of	 Darkness	 and	 Shadowthrone?	 Did	 a	 soul-shifted
puppet	 kidnap,	 torture,	 then	 murder	 a	 Claw	 officer	 in	 Nathilog	 and	 what	 truths
were	revealed	by	the	poor	man?”


“We	were	not	aware	that	Hairlock	had	done	that,	High	Fist.”
“I	believe	you,	Whiskeyjack.	In	any	case,	enough	of	the	Empress's	plans	have
been	 discovered	 and,	 indeed,	 she	 seems	 convinced	 that	 the	 dismantling	 of	 my
army	will	pull	me	back	under	her	wing,	in	time	to	saddle	me	with	the	command	of
the	Seven	Cities'	garrisons	and	put	a	bloody	stop	to	the	rebellion	that's	brewing.
She	 seriously	 miscalculated	 there—if	 only	 she'd	 paid	 attention	 to	 Toc	 the
Younger's	reports.	Well	.	.	.	Laseen's	intentions	now	seem	to	be	riding	on	Adjunct
Lorn	and	Onos	T'oolan.	They've	reached	the	Jaghut	barrow,	Whiskeyjack.”
Mallet	joined	them	and	met	Kalam's	stunned	gaze.	Clearly,	even	they'd	had	no
idea	that	their	sergeant	was	so	well	informed.	Suspicion	dawned	in	the	assassin's
eyes,	and	Paran	nodded	to	himself.	It	was	happening,	after	all.
Dujek	 continued,	 “The	 Moranth	 Black	 are	 ready	 to	 march,	 but	 it's	 only	 for
show,	 and	 to	 get	 them	 out	 of	 the	 city.	 So,	 what	 are	 we	 looking	 at,	 friend?	 The
balance	 of	 the	 world	 is	 with	 you,	 in	 Darujhistan.	 If	 Lorn	 and	 Onos	 T'oolan
succeed	in	unleashing	the	Tyrant	on	the	city,	you	can	be	certain	that	you	and	your
squad	 are	 intended	 to	 be	 on	 the	 casualty	 list.	 Closer	 to	 home,	 here's	 what	 you
want:	 we're	 ready	 to	 move.	 Tayschrenn	 himself	 will	 trigger	 events	 when	 he
announces	 the	 disbanding	 of	 the	 Bridgeburners—the	 blind	 idiot.	 Now,	 I'm
waiting.”
“High	Fist,”	Whiskeyjack	began,	“Captain	Paran's	made	it.	He's	sitting	across
from	me	right	now.	His	story	is	that	Oponn's	working	through	his	sword,	not	him.”
He	met	the	captain's	eyes.	“I	believe	him.”
Dujek	spoke.	“Captain?”
“Yes,	High	Fist?”
“Was	Toc	any	help?”
Paran	 winced.	 “He	 gave	 his	 life	 for	 this,	 High	 Fist.	 The	 puppet	 Hairlock
ambushed	us,	tossed	Toc	into	a—a	rent	or	something.”
There	was	silence,	then	Dujek	said,	his	voice	hoarse,	“I'm	sorry	to	hear	that,
Captain.	 More	 than	 you	 know.	 His	 father	 .	 .	 .	 Well,	 enough	 of	 that.	 Go	 on,
Whiskeyjack.”
“No	 success	 yet	 in	 contacting	 the	 local	 Assassins'	 Guild,	 High	 Fist.	 We've
mined	 the	 intersections,	 though.	 I'll	 be	 explaining	 everything	 to	 my	 men	 tonight.
The	question	remains	what	to	do	about	Captain	Paran.”
“Understood,”	Dujek	replied.	“Captain	Paran?”
“Sir?”
“Have	you	come	to	any	conclusions?”


Paran	glanced	at	Whiskeyjack.	“Yes,	sir.	I	think	so.”
“So?	What	choice	will	you	make,	Captain?”
He	 ran	 a	 hand	 through	 his	 hair	 and	 leaned	 back	 in	 the	 chair.	 “High	 Fist,”	 he
said	slowly,	“Tayschrenn	killed	Tattersail.”	And	failed,	but	that	is	a	secret	I	will
keep	 to	 myself.	 “The	 Adjunct's	 plan	 included	 betraying	 her	 word	 to	 me,	 and
probably	 killing	 me	 in	 the	 process.	 But,	 I	 admit,	 that's	 secondary	 to	 what
Tayschrenn	did.”	Looking	up,	he	met	Whiskeyjack's	steady	gaze.	“Tattersail	took
care	of	me,	and	I	her	after	that	Hound.	It	.	.	.”	he	hesitated	“.	.	.	it	meant	something,
High	Fist.”	He	straightened.	“So,	I	gather	you	intend	to	defy	the	Empress.	But	what
then?	Do	we	challenge	the	Empire's	hundred	legions	with	ten	thousand	men?	Do
we	proclaim	an	independent	kingdom	and	wait	for	Laseen	to	make	an	example	of
us?	I	need	more	details,	High	Fist,	before	I	decide	whether	I	join	you.	Because,
sir,	I	want	vengeance.”
Dujek	 responded,	 “The	 Empress	 loses	 Genabackis,	 Captain.	 We've	 got	 the
support	 for	 that.	 By	 the	 time	 the	 Malazan	 Marines	 arrive	 to	 reinforce	 the
campaign,	 it'll	 already	 be	 over.	 The	 Crimson	 Guard	 won't	 even	 let	 them
disembark.	 Expect	 Nathilog	 to	 rise	 up	 and	 Genabaris	 to	 follow.	 The	 Moranth
alliance	is	about	to	lose	its	punch—though	I'm	afraid	I	can't	give	you	the	details
on	that.
“My	plans,	Captain?	They	might	not	make	sense,	because	I	don't	have	time	to
explain.	 But	 we're	 readying	 ourselves	 to	 take	 on	 a	 new	 player	 in	 the	 game—
someone	 completely	 outside	 all	 of	 this,	 and	 that	 someone	 is	 damn	 nasty.	 He	 is
called	the	Pannion	Seer,	who	even	now	prepares	his	armies	for	a	holy	war.	You
want	vengeance?	Leave	Tayschrenn	to	enemies	closer	to	home.	As	for	Lorn,	she's
all	yours,	if	you	can	manage	it.	I	can't	offer	you	anything	more,	Captain.	You	can
say	no.	Nobody	will	kill	you	for	that.”
Paran	stared	at	his	hands.	“I	want	to	know	when	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	gets
what	he	deserves.”
“Agreed.”
“Very	well,	High	Fist.	As	far	as	this	present	situation	is	concerned,	however,
I'd	rather	Sergeant	Whiskeyjack	remained	in	command.”
Dujek	asked,	a	grin	in	his	voice,	“Whiskeyjack?”
“Accepted,”	 the	 sergeant	 answered.	 He	 smiled	 at	 Paran.	 “Welcome	 aboard,
Captain.”
“Enough?”	Dujek	asked.
“We'll	 speak	 again	 after	 it's	 all	 done,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said.	 “Until	 then,	 High
Fist,	success.”


“Success,	Whiskeyjack.”
The	threads	of	light	faded.	As	soon	as	they	were	gone	Kalam	rounded	on	his
sergeant.	 “You	 old	 bastard!	 Fiddler	 told	 me	 Dujek	 wouldn't	 hear	 any	 talk	 of
revolt!	Not	only	that,	the	High	Fist	told	you	to	walk	after	this	mission!”
Whiskeyjack	 shrugged,	 removing	 the	 strange	 contraption	 from	 the	 table.
“Things	 change,	 Corporal.	 When	 Dujek	 got	 the	 Adjunct's	 word	 on	 next	 year's
reinforcements,	it	became	obvious	that	someone	was	ensuring	that	the	Genabackan
Campaign	would	end	in	disaster.	Now,	even	Dujek	won't	tolerate	that.	Obviously,
plans	would	have	to	be	revised.”	He	faced	Paran,	his	eyes	hardening.	“I'm	sorry,
Captain,	but	Lorn	has	to	live.”
“But	the	High	Fist—”
Whiskeyjack	shook	his	head.	“She's	on	her	way	into	the	city,	assuming	that	she
and	the	Imass	succeed	in	freeing	the	Jaghut.	The	Tyrant	will	need	a	reason	to	come
to	Darujhistan,	and	we	can	only	assume	that,	somehow,	Lorn	will	be	that	reason.
She	will	find	us,	Captain.	Once	that	happens,	we'll	decide	what's	to	be	done	with
her,	depending	on	what	she	tells	us.	If	you	challenge	her	openly,	she	will	kill	you.
If	 necessary,	 she	 will	 have	 to	 die,	 but	 her	 demise	 will	 be	 subtle.	 Do	 you	 have
problems	with	any	of	this?”
Paran	released	a	long	breath.	“Can	you	at	least	explain	why	you	went	ahead
and	mined	the	city?”
“In	a	moment,”	Whiskeyjack	said,	rising.	“First,”	he	said,	“who's	the	wounded
man?”
“Not	wounded	anymore,”	Mallet	said,	grinning	at	Paran.	“Just	sleeping.”
Paran	 also	 rose.	 “In	 that	 case,	 I'll	 also	 explain	 everything.	 Just	 let	 me	 go
downstairs	 and	 retrieve	 my	 sword.”	 At	 the	 door	 he	 paused	 and	 turned	 to
Whiskeyjack.	“One	more	thing.	Where's	your	recruit,	Sorry?”
Kalam	answered,	“Missing.	We	know	what	she	is,	Captain.	Do	you?”
“Yes.”	 But	 she	 may	 not	 be	 what	 she	 once	 was,	 assuming	 Shadowthrone
didn't	lie.	He	thought	to	relate	that	part	of	his	story,	then	dismissed	the	notion.	He
couldn't	be	sure,	after	all.	Better	to	wait	and	see.
The	 burial	 chamber	 proved	 to	 be	 a	 small,	 nondescript	 beehive	 tomb,	 the	 low
dome	 constructed	 of	 roughly	 dressed	 stones.	 The	 passageway	 leading	 to	 it	 was
narrow	 and	 less	 than	 four	 feet	 high,	 sloping	 slightly	 downward.	 The	 chamber's
floor	was	of	packed	earth	and	in	its	center	rose	a	circular	wall	of	stones,	capped
by	a	single,	massive	lintel	stone.	Frost-crusted	objects	lay	on	this	flat	surface.


Tool	swung	to	the	Adjunct.	“The	object	you	seek	is	called	a	Finnest.	Within	it
is	 stored	 the	 Jaghut	 Tyrant's	 powers.	 It	 is	 perhaps	 best	 described	 as	 a	 selfcontained	 Omtose	 Phellack	 Warren.	 He	 will	 discover	 it	 is	 missing	 once	 fully
awakened,	and	will	unerringly	hunt	it	down.”
Lorn	blew	on	her	numb	hands,	then	slowly	approached	the	lintel	stone.	“And
while	it's	in	my	possession?”	she	asked.
“Your	 Otataral	 sword	 will	 deaden	 its	 aura.	 Not	 completely.	 The	 Finnest
should	not	remain	in	your	hands	for	long,	Adjunct.”
She	scanned	the	objects	scattered	on	the	stone	surface.	The	Imass	joined	her.
Lorn	picked	up	a	scabbarded	knife,	then	discarded	it.	In	this	Tool	could	not	help
her.	 She	 had	 to	 rely	 upon	 her	 own	 senses,	 honed	 by	 the	 strange,	 unpredictable
effects	of	the	Otataral.	A	mirror	set	in	an	antler	caught	her	eye.	The	mica	surface
was	latticed	in	a	web	of	frost,	yet	it	seemed	to	glimmer	with	a	light	of	its	own.
She	 reached	 for	 it,	 then	 hesitated.	 Beside	 it,	 almost	 lost	 among	 the	 crystalline
frost,	 was	 a	 small,	 round	 object.	 It	 lay	 upon	 a	 flap	 of	 hide.	 Lorn	 frowned,	 then
picked	it	up.
As	its	ice	coating	melted,	she	saw	that	it	was	not	perfectly	round.	She	polished
the	blackened	surface	and	studied	it	closely.
“I	believe	it	is	an	acorn,”	Tool	said.
Lorn	 nodded.	 “And	 it's	 the	 Finnest.”	 Her	 gaze	 fell	 to	 the	 capped	 mound	 of
rocks.	“What	an	odd	choice.”
The	Imass	shrugged	in	a	clatter	of	bones.	“The	Jaghut	are	odd	people.”
“Tool,	they	weren't	very	warlike,	were	they?	I	mean,	before	your	kind	sought
to	destroy	them.”
The	 Imass	 was	 slow	 to	 reply.	 “Even	 then,”	 he	 said	 at	 last.	 “The	 key	 lay	 in
making	them	angry,	for	then	they	destroyed	indiscriminately,	including	their	own.”
Lorn	shut	her	eyes	briefly.	She	pocketed	the	Finnest.	“Let's	get	out	of	here.”
“Yes,	Adjunct.	Even	now	the	Jaghut	Tyrant	stirs.”


Chapter	Nineteen
	

But	someone	died	here
alas.	Who	drinks
of	this	now	and	then
and	stirs	the	ashes
of	thine	own	pyre?
Maker	of	Paths,	you
were	never	so	thirsty
in	youth	.	.	.
OLD	TEMPLE
SIVYN	STOR	(B.1022)


	
“This	isn't	right,	Meese,”	Crokus	said,	as	he	rubbed	the	sleep	from	his	eyes.	“We
can't	just	hide	in	here	forever.”
Apsalar	said,	from	the	window,	“It's	almost	dark.”
Meese	 crouched	 once	 again	 to	 check	 the	 trapdoor's	 lock.	 “We're	 moving	 you
again,	after	the	twelfth	bell.	Irilta's	down	below,	getting	details.”
“Who's	 giving	 these	 orders?”	 Crokus	 demanded.	 “Have	 you	 found	 Uncle
Mammot	yet?”
“Relax,	 lad.”	 Meese	 straightened.	 “No,	 we	 ain't	 found	 your	 uncle.	 And	 the
orders	come	from	your	protectors.	I	won't	answer	any	questions	about	who	they
are,	Crokus,	so	save	your	breath.”
Apsalar	shifted	position	by	the	window	to	take	in	Meese.	“Your	friend's	been
a	long	time,”	she	said.	“Do	you	think	something's	happened?”
Meese	looked	away.	This	girl	was	sharp.	Of	course,	Meese	had	known	that	the
first	time	they'd	met,	and	old	Chert	had	found	out	the	hard	way.	“Not	sure,”	she
admitted.	 She	 bent	 to	 unlock	 the	 trapdoor.	 “You	 both	 stay	 put,”	 she	 ordered,
glaring	 at	 Crokus.	 “I	 ain't	 going	 to	 be	 happy	 if	 you	 do	 something	 stupid.
Understand?”
The	 boy	 looked	 glum,	 his	 arms	 crossed.	 He	 watched	 as	 Meese	 opened	 the
trapdoor	and	climbed	down	the	ladder.
“Close	this	up	after	me,”	she	said,	from	below,	“and	lock	it.	Wait	to	hear	from
either	me	or	Irilta,	got	it?”
“Yes.”	Crokus	strode	to	the	square	hole	in	the	floor	and	stared	down	at	Meese.
“We	got	it,”	he	said,	grasping	the	door	and	swinging	it	shut.	Then	he	locked	it.
“Crokus,”	Apsalar	asked,	“why	did	you	kill	a	guard?”
This	was	their	first	time	alone	since	entering	the	city.	Crokus	glanced	away.	“It
was	an	accident.	I	don't	want	to	talk	about	it.”	He	crossed	the	room	to	the	back
window.	 “All	 these	 people	 trying	 to	 protect	 me,”	 he	 said.	 “Makes	 me	 uneasy.
There's	 more	 going	 on	 than	 just	 an	 order	 for	 my	 arrest.	 Hood's	 Breath,	 the
Thieves'	Guild	takes	care	of	such	things,	that's	why	they	get	ten	percent	of	every
job	I	do.	No,	none	of	it	makes	sense,	Apsalar.	And,”	he	said,	as	he	unlatched	the
window,	“I'm	sick	of	everybody	telling	me	what	to	do.”
She	came	to	his	side.	“Are	we	leaving,	then?”


“Damn	right.	It's	already	dusk	so	we'll	take	the	rooftops.”	He	pulled	and	the
window	swung	inward.
“Where?”
Crokus	grinned.	“I've	got	a	great	hiding-place	in	mind.	Nobody	will	find	us,
not	even	my	protectors.	Once	there,	I	can	do	what	I	want.”
Apsalar's	brown	eyes	searched	his	face.	“What	do	you	want	to	do?”	she	asked
softly.
He	looked	away,	concentrating	on	propping	up	the	window.	“I	want	to	talk	to
Challice	D'Arle,”	he	said.	“Face	to	face.”
“She	betrayed	you,	didn't	she?”
“Never	mind	that.	Are	you	staying	here?”
“No,”	she	said,	surprised.	“I'm	coming	with	you,	Crokus.”
The	power	of	her	Warren	bristled	on	her	body.	Serrat	scanned	the	area	one	more
time,	 still	 seeing	 and	 sensing	 nothing.	 She	 was	 certain	 she	 was	 alone.	 The	 Tiste
Andii	 tensed	 as	 the	 window	 in	 the	 attic	 beneath	 her	 creaked	 inward	 on	 rusty
hinges.	Knowing	herself	to	be	invisible,	she	leaned	forward.
The	 lad's	 head	 popped	 out.	 He	 glanced	 at	 the	 alley	 below,	 the	 opposite
rooftops	and	those	to	either	side,	then	he	looked	up.	His	gaze	passed	right	through
Serrat,	and	she	smiled.
It	hadn't	taken	long	to	find	him	again.	His	only	company,	she	could	sense,	was
a	young	woman	whose	aura	was	harmless,	astonishingly	innocent.	The	other	two
women	no	longer	occupied	the	attic.	Excellent.	It	would	be	that	much	easier.	She
stepped	back	as	the	Coin	Bearer	climbed	through	the	window.
A	moment	later	he	scrambled	onto	the	sloping	rooftop.
Serrat	decided	that	she	would	waste	no	time.	Even	as	the	Coin	Bearer	pushed
himself	to	his	feet,	she	sprang	forward.
Her	 charge	 met	 an	 invisible	 hand,	 driving	 into	 her	 chest	 with	 bone-jarring
force.	 It	 pushed	 her	 back	 through	 the	 air,	 giving	 a	 final	 shove	 that	 sent	 her
cartwheeling	beyond	the	roof's	edge.	Her	spells	of	invisibility	and	flight	remained
with	her,	even	when	she	rebounded	off	a	brick	chimney,	dazed	and	drifting.
Apsalar	appeared	on	the	roof's	edge.	Crokus	crouched	before	her,	daggers	in	hand
and	glaring	all	around	him.	“What's	wrong?”	she	whispered,	frightened.
Slowly,	 Crokus	 relaxed	 and	 turned	 a	 rueful	 grin	 her	 way.	 “Just	 nerves,”	 he


said.	“Thought	I	saw	something,	felt	a	wind.	Looked	like	.	.	.	Well,	never	mind.”
He	looked	around	again.	“There's	nothing	here.	Come	on,	then.”
“Where's	this	new	hiding-place	of	yours?”	 Aspalar	asked,	as	she	 gained	the
rooftop.
He	faced	east	and	pointed	to	the	shadowed	hills	rising	on	the	other	side	of	the
wall.	“Up	there,”	he	said.	“Right	under	their	very	noses.”
Murillio	clasped	on	his	sword-belt.	The	longer	he	waited	for	Rallick	to	arrive	the
more	 certain	 he	 was	 that	 Ocelot	 had	 killed	 his	 friend.	 The	 only	 question	 that
remained	was	whether	Coll	still	lived.	Maybe	Rallick	had	done	enough,	wounded
Ocelot	sufficiently	to	prevent	the	Clan	Master	from	completing	the	contract.	I	can
hope,	anyway.
They'd	know	at	the	Phoenix	Inn,	and	each	minute	that	passed	made	his	Spartan
room	 seem	 smaller,	 more	 cramped.	 If	 Coll	 lived,	 Murillio	 vowed	 to	 attempt
Rallick's	 role	 in	 the	 plan.	 He	 checked	 his	 rapier.	 It'd	 been	 years	 since	 his	 last
duel,	and	Turban	Orr	was	said	to	be	the	city's	best.	His	chances	looked	poor.
He	collected	his	cape	and	fastened	the	collar	around	his	neck.	And	who	was
this	 Circle	 Breaker	 with	 all	 the	 devastating	 news?	 How	 did	 this	 Eel	 justify
involving	 himself	 or	 herself	 in	 their	 schemes?	 Murillio's	 eyes	 narrowed.	 Was	 it
possible?	That	little	round	runt	of	a	man?
He	pulled	on	his	doeskin	gloves,	muttering	under	his	breath.
A	scrape	at	the	door	caught	his	attention.	A	heavy	sigh	of	relief	escaped	him.
“Rallick,	 you	 old	 bastard,”	 he	 said,	 as	 he	 opened	 the	 door.	 For	 an	 instant	 he
thought	the	hallway	empty,	then	his	gaze	fell	to	the	floor.	The	assassin	lay	there,
his	clothing	soaked	through	with	blood,	looking	up	at	him	with	a	weak	grin.
“Sorry	I'm	late,”	he	said.	“My	legs	keep	giving	out.”
Cursing,	Murillio	helped	Rallick	into	the	room	and	onto	the	bed.	He	returned
to	the	door,	checked	the	hallway,	then	shut	and	set	the	lock.
Rallick	pushed	himself	upright	against	the	headboard.	“Orr	offered	a	contract
on	Coll—”
“I	know,	I	know,”	Murillio	said,	as	he	approached.	He	knelt	beside	the	bed.
“Let's	see	to	your	wound.”
“I	need	to	take	off	my	armor	first,”	Rallick	said.	“Ocelot	stuck	me	one.	Then	I
killed	him.	Coll's	still	alive	as	far	as	I	know.	What	day	is	this?”
“The	 same	 day,”	 Murillio	 said,	 as	 he	 helped	 his	 friend	 remove	 his	 mail
hauberk.	 “We're	 still	 on	 schedule,	 though	 from	 all	 this	 blood	 it	 looks	 like	 you


won't	be	dueling	Orr	at	Simtal's	Fête.	I'll	handle	that.”
“Stupid	 idea.”	 Rallick	 groaned.	 “You'll	 just	 get	 killed	 and	 Turban	 Orr	 will
walk	away,	still	Lady	Simtal's	backer	and	still	powerful	enough	to	prevent	Coll's
claim	to	rights.”
Murillio	made	no	reply	to	that.	He	peeled	back	the	leather	padding	to	expose
the	wound.	“What's	with	all	this	blood	on	you?”	he	demanded.	“There's	nothing
here	but	a	week-old	scar.”
“Huh?”	Rallick	probed	the	place	where	Ocelot's	wrist-blade	had	stabbed	him.
It	felt	mildly	tender,	itchy	at	the	edges.	“I'll	be	damned,”	he	muttered.	“Anyway,
get	me	a	washcloth,	so	I	can	clean	all	this	rust	off.”
Murillio	sat	back	on	his	haunches,	clearly	confused.	“What	rust?”
“The	stuff	on	my	face,”	Rallick	said,	scowling	at	his	friend.
Murillio	leaned	close.
“Baruk's	magic-deadening	powder!”	the	assassin	snapped.	“How	the	hell	do
you	think	I	managed	to	kill	Ocelot?”
“Your	 face	 is	 clean,	 Rallick,”	 Murillio	 said.	 “You're	 welcome	 to	 the
washcloth.	We'll	get	all	that	dried	blood	off	you	in	any	case.”
“Give	me	a	mirror	first,”	Rallick	said.
Murillio	found	one	and	stood	watching	Rallick	study	his	own	pallid	reflection,
which	bore	a	deep	frown.	He	observed	dryly,	“Well,	that	expression	confirms	it
for	me.”
“Confirms	what?”	the	assassin	asked,	in	a	dangerous	tone.
“That	you're	you,	Rallick.”	Murillio	squared	his	shoulders.	 “Rest	 here	 for	a
while.	You've	lost	a	lot	of	blood.	I'm	off	to	find	the	Eel	and	tell	him	a	thing	or
two.”
“You	know	who	the	Eel	is?”
He	strode	to	the	door.	“I've	got	a	hunch.	If	you	can	walk,	try	locking	this	door
behind	me,	will	you?”
Kruppe	 mopped	 his	 brow	 with	 his	 limp,	 sodden	 handkerchief.	 “Kruppe	 has
uttered	 every	 single	 detail	 at	 least	 a	 thousand	 times,	 Master	 Baruk,”	 he
complained.	 “Will	 this	 ordeal	 never	 end?	 Look	 at	 yon	 window.	 A	 whole	 day	 in
Kruppe's	life	has	passed!”
The	 alchemist	 sat	 frowning	 down	 at	 his	 slippers,	 occasionally	 wiggling	 his
toes,	as	the	minutes	passed.	It	was	as	if	he'd	forgotten	Kruppe's	presence	in	the


room,	 and	 it	 had	 been	 this	 way	 for	 the	 past	 hour,	 no	 matter	 how	 much	 Kruppe
talked.
“Master	Baruk,”	Kruppe	tried	again,	“may	your	loyal	servant	leave?	He's	not
yet	recovered	from	his	horrific	journey	in	the	eastern	wastelands.	Simple	fare,	of
roast	 mutton,	 potatoes,	 fried	 onions	 and	 carrots,	 mussels	 in	 garlic	 butter,	 dates,
cheese,	smoked	slipper	 minnows,	and	a	carafe	of	wine,	 now	 occupies	Kruppe's
mind	 to	 the	 exclusion	 of	 all	 else.	 Such	 as	 he	 has	 been	 reduced,	 his	 world
contracting	apace	with	his	stomach—”
Baruk	 spoke.	 “For	 the	 past	 year,”	 he	 said	 slowly,	 “an	 agent	 of	 the	 Eel's,
known	 to	 me	 as	 Circle	 Breaker,	 has	 been	 providing	 me	 with	 vital	 information
regarding	the	City	Council.”
Kruppe's	mouth	shut	with	an	audible	click.
“It	 lies	 within	 my	 powers,	 of	 course,	 to	 identify	 this	 Circle	 Breaker	 at	 my
leisure.	I	have	a	score	of	missives	written	in	his	own	hand—the	parchment	alone
suffices.”	 Baruk's	 eyes	 lifted	 to	 fix	 on	 the	 mantelpiece.	 “I	 am	 considering	 doing
so,”	he	said.	“I	must	speak	with	this	Eel.	We've	reached	a	critical	juncture	in	the
life	of	Darujhistan,	and	I	must	know	the	Eel's	purposes.	We	could	work	in	close
alliance,	 sharing	 all	 we	 know,	 and	 perhaps	 we	 can	 save	 the	 life	 of	 this	 city.
Perhaps.”
Kruppe	cleared	his	throat	and	wiped	his	brow	again.	He	carefully	folded	the
handkerchief	on	his	lap,	then	stuffed	it	into	a	sleeve.	“If	you	wish	to	convey	such	a
message,”	he	said	quietly,	“Kruppe	can	oblige	Master	Baruk.”
Baruk's	gaze	dropped	calmly	to	Kruppe.	“Thank	you.	How	soon	the	reply?”
“By	this	evening,”	Kruppe	said.
“Excellent.	 I	 admit	 to	 resisting	 my	 own	 decision	 to	 compromise	 this	 Circle
Breaker.	The	means	you	offer	seem	the	best.	You	may	go	now,	Kruppe.”
Kruppe's	head	bobbed.	He	rose.	“Until	tonight,	then,	Master	Baruk.”
Coll	slept	while	the	men	in	the	room	continued	their	discussion.	Mallet	said	that
the	man	might	well	sleep	for	days,	Hood's	Gate	having	been	as	close	as	it	was.
Paran	 felt	 frustrated.	 Something	 was	 missing	 from	 Whiskeyjack's
explanations.	 The	 saboteurs	 had	 gone	 ahead	 with	 planting	 the	 mines,	 and	 even
now	it	was	Whiskeyjack's	plan	to	detonate	them.	More,	the	efforts	to	contact	the
Assassins'	 Guild	 remained	 with	 the	 purpose	 of	 offering	 a	 contract	 on
Darujhistan's	 true	 rulers.	 These	 facts	 hardly	 complemented	 this	 idea	 of	 a	 fullscale,	 continent-wide	 revolt.	 If	 anything,	 wouldn't	 Dujek	 be	 seeking	 local


alliances?
As	the	sergeant	went	on,	more	and	more	of	what	the	man	said	gathered	in	the
captain's	mind,	and	he	sensed	a	pattern	emerging.	He	broke	his	hour-long	silence
and	addressed	Whiskeyjack.	“You	still	intend	to	cripple	Darujhistan.	And	I	keep
thinking	 about	 that,	 and	 now	 I	 think	 I've	 worked	 out	 why.”	 He	 studied
Whiskeyjack's	blank	expression.	“What	you	seek	is	to	crack	this	city	wide	open.
Chaos	in	the	streets,	a	headless	government.	Everybody	who	matters	shows	up	and
they	kill	each	other.	What	does	that	leave?”	Paran	leaned	forward,	his	eyes	hard.
“Dujek's	got	an	army	ten	thousand	strong,	about	to	become	outlaws	of	the	Empire.
Maintaining	ten	thousand	soldiers	is	an	expensive	business.	Housing	them	is	even
tougher.	 Dujek	 knows	 Pale's	 days	 are	 numbered.	 Caladan	 Brood's	 on	 the	 march
down	the	Rhivi	Plain	right	now.	Are	the	Moranth	about	to	pull	out	of	the	alliance?
Maybe	make	a	move	of	their	own?	Tayschrenn's	in	Pale—maybe	old	Onearm	can
handle	him,	maybe	not.	How	am	I	so	far,	Sergeant?”
Whiskeyjack	glanced	over	at	Kalam,	then	shrugged.	“Go	on,”	he	said	to	Paran.
“Darujhistan's	 filled	 with	 panic.	 No	 one	 knows	 anything.	 In	 marches	 Dujek,
rebel	army	at	his	heels.	He'll	set	things	aright.	Wealth	beyond	measure	falls	into
his	 lap—and	 he'll	 need	 all	 of	 it	 if	 he's	 to	 oppose	 what	 the	 Empress	 sends	 after
him.	So,	the	city	gets	conquered	after	all.	Fancy	that.”	He	sat	back.
“Not	 bad,”	 Whiskeyjack	 admitted,	 grinning	 at	 the	 surprise	 on	 the	 faces	 of
Mallet	 and	 Kalam.	 “With	 one	 piece	 missing.	 Something,”	 he	 eyed	 Paran,	 “that
might	relieve	the	captain's	sense	of	betrayal,	if	not	his	outrage.”
Paran's	smile	was	cold.	“Surprise	me.”
“All	right,	Captain.	We	don't	give	a	damn	if	the	Empress	wants	to	come	after
us.	 She	 won't	 have	 much	 to	 do	 it	 with,	 since	 Seven	 Cities	 is	 days	 away	 from
reclaiming	its	independence.	It's	coming	down,	Captain.	On	all	sides.	So	why	do
we	 maintain	 our	 army?	 Look	 to	 the	 south.	 Something's	 growing	 there,	 so	 ugly	 it
makes	the	Imass	look	like	kittens.	When	I	say	we're	in	trouble,	I	don't	mean	just
Genabackis,	I	mean	the	world.	We're	all	in	for	a	fight,	Captain.	And	that's	why	we
need	Darujhistan.”
“What's	to	the	south?”	Paran	asked	skeptically.
Kalam	 answered,	 his	 words	 a	 breath	 of	 fear,	 “The	 Pannion	 Seer.	 So	 the
rumors	are	true,	then.	The	Seer's	proclaimed	a	holy	war.	The	genocide's	begun.”
Whiskeyjack	got	to	his	feet.	“Explain	it	to	the	man,”	he	said	to	Kalam.	“That
Guild	 still	 needs	 contacting,	 if	 possible.	 Hood	 knows,	 we've	 made	 a	 show	 of
ourselves	 at	 this	 bar.	 Might	 be	 what's	 needed,	 though.”	 He	 looked	 to	 Paran.
“Captain,	I	don't	think	Adjunct	Lorn	should	know	you're	alive,	do	you?”


“No.”
“Can	you	stay	here	until	I	call	for	you?”
Paran	glanced	at	Kalam,	then	nodded
“Good.	Mallet,	let's	move.”
“We've	lost	at	least	two	days,”	Lorn	pronounced,	thankful	for	the	day's	lingering
heat.	“These	are	thirsty	horses.”
Tool	stood	near	the	shattered	barrow	marker,	watching	the	Adjunct	ready	her
horses	 for	 the	 journey	 into	 Darujhistan.	 “How	 fares	 your	 wound,	 Adjunct?”	 he
asked.
“Mostly	healed,”	she	replied.	“Otataral	has	that	effect	on	me.”
“My	task	is	finished,”	the	Imass	said.	“If	it	becomes	your	desire	to	accompany
me	 after	 you	 have	 completed	 your	 mission,	 I	 will	 be	 found	 here	 for	 the	 next	 ten
days.	I	wish	to	observe	this	Jaghut	Tyrant—though	it	will	not	see	me,	nor	will	I
interfere.	My	thoughts	of	success	are	with	you,	Adjunct.”
Lorn	climbed	onto	her	horse	and	stared	down	at	the	Imass.	“Fare	well	in	your
search,	Onos	T'oolan.”
“That	name	is	past.	I	am	now	Tool.”
She	 grinned,	 then	 gathered	 the	 reins	 and	 kicked	 her	 mount	 forward,	 the
packhorse	trailing	on	its	lead.	Once	the	Finnest	was	out	of	her	hands,	she	would
focus	her	talents	on	discovering	this	Coin	Bearer.	Until	now	she	had	not	allowed
herself	 to	 think	 about	 Oponn.	 She	 had	 had	 too	 many	 other,	 more	 immediate
concerns,	like	Sorry.
A	 strong	 sense	 of	 regret	 filled	 her	 at	 the	 loss	 of	 Captain	 Paran.	 That	 man
would	 have	 made	 her	 task	 much	 easier,	 possibly	 even	 enjoyable.	 Though	 he'd
been	a	dour	man,	getting	grimmer	by	the	minute,	she	had	to	admit	that	she	had	been
attracted	to	him.	There	might	have	been	something	there.
“Well,”	 she	 sighed,	 as	 she	 urged	 her	 horse	 up	 a	 hillside,	 “dying's	 never	 in
anybody's	plans.”
Tool's	 estimation	 gave	 her	 two	 days	 at	 the	 most.	 Then	 the	 Jaghut	 would	 be
fully	 awake,	 and	 free	 of	 the	 barrow.	 The	 Finnest	 would	 have	 to	 be	 securely	 in
place	 long	 before	 then.	 She	 looked	 forward	 to	 her	 meeting	 with	 Sorry,	 and
instinctively	 brushed	 a	 hand	 against	 her	 sword's	 pommel.	 To	 kill	 a	 servant	 of
Shadow,	 perhaps	 the	 Rope	 himself.	 The	 Empress's	 pleasure	 at	 that	 would	 be
immense.
She	realized	that	the	doubts	that	had	plagued	her,	borne	on	those	dark	wings	of


knowledge,	now	lay	quiescent.	An	effect	of	her	time	in	the	barrow?	More	likely
this	 acorn	 in	 her	 pocket.	 Or	 perhaps	 she'd	 moved	 unconsciously	 beyond	 them.
When	 the	 time	 for	 action	 comes,	 all	 doubts	 must	 be	 discarded.	 An	 old	 Claw
tenet.	She	knew	herself	well,	and	she	knew	how	to	control	all	that	was	within	her.
Years	of	training,	discipline,	loyalty,	and	duty.	The	virtues	of	a	soldier.
She	 was	 ready	 for	 the	 mission,	 and	 with	 this	 realization	 the	 weight	 on	 her
shoulders	vanished.	She	urged	her	mount	into	a	gallop.
Crokus	craned	his	head	and	squinted	into	the	darkness	above.	“Right	to	the	top,”
he	said.	“We	can	see	the	whole	city	from	there.”
Apsalar	eyed	the	stairs	dubiously.	“It's	awfully	dark,”	she	said.	“Are	you	sure
this	tower	is	abandoned?	I	mean,	my	father	told	me	stories	about	ghosts,	undead
monsters,	and	they	always	lived	in	ruined	places.”	She	looked	around	with	wide
eyes.	“Places	just	like	this	one.”
Crokus	groaned.	“The	god	K'rul's	been	dead	for	thousands	of	years,”	he	said.
“Besides,	no	one	ever	comes	here,	so	what	would	all	those	monsters	do	with	all
that	spare	time?	What	would	they	eat?	Tell	me	that!	Stupid	stories.”	He	walked	to
the	foot	of	the	spiral	staircase.	“Come	on,	the	view's	worth	it.”
She	 watched	 Crokus	 climb	 upward	 and	 hurried	 to	 follow	 before	 he
disappeared	from	sight.	What	at	first	seemed	to	be	impenetrable	darkness	slowly
faded	to	gray,	and	Apsalar	was	surprised	to	find	herself	able	to	discern	even	the
minutest	details.	The	first	things	she	noticed	were	the	soot-stained	paintings	on	the
wall	 to	 their	 left.	 Each	 stone	 panel	 was	 as	 wide	 as	 a	 single	 step,	 rising	 half	 a
dozen	 feet	 in	 a	 jagged	 procession	 that	 mimicked	 the	 stairs.	 “Crokus,”	 she
whispered,	“there's	a	story	painted	on	this	wall.”
Crokus	snorted.	“Don't	be	ridiculous!	You	can't	even	see	your	hand	in	front	of
your	face	in	here.”
I	can't?
He	 continued,	 “Wait	 till	 you	 get	 up	 top.	 Those	 clouds	 we	 saw	 should	 have
cleared	the	moon	by	now.”
“There's	something	wet	on	these	steps,”	Apsalar	said.
“Run	off	from	up	top,”	he	explained,	exasperated.
“No,	it	isn't,”	she	insisted.	“It's	thick,	and	sticky.”
Crokus	 stopped	 above	 her.	 “Look,	 will	 you	 be	 quiet	 for	 a	 minute?	 We're
almost	there.”
They	emerged	onto	a	platform	bathed	in	the	moon's	silver	glow.	Near	one	of


the	low	walls	Crokus	saw	a	heap	of	cloth.	“What's	that?”	he	wondered.	“Looks
like	somebody's	been	camping	up	here.”
Apsalar	stifled	a	gasp.	“That's	a	dead	man!”
“What?”	 Crokus	 hissed.	 “Not	 another	 one!”	 He	 rushed	 to	 the	 huddled	 figure
and	crouched	beside	it.	“Blessed	Mowri,	somebody's	stabbed	him	in	the	head.”
“There's	a	crossbow	over	here.”
He	 grunted.	 “An	 assassin.	 I	 saw	 one	 just	 like	 this	 killed	 here	 last	 week.
There's	an	assassin	war	going	on.	Just	like	I	told	Kruppe	and	Murillio.”
“Look	at	the	moon,”	Apsalar	breathed,	from	the	far	side	of	the	platform.
Crokus	shivered.	She	was	still	a	cold	one,	at	times.	“Which	one?”	he	asked,
rising.
“The	shining	one,	of	course.”
Feeling	contrary,	Crokus	studied	Moon's	Spawn	instead.	A	faint	reddish	glow
suffused	 it—something	 he'd	 not	 seen	 before.	 A	 worm	 of	 fear	 squirmed	 in	 his
stomach.	Then	his	eyes	widened.	Five	massive	winged	shapes	seemed	to	sweep
down	the	Moon's	face,	angling	northeast.	He	blinked,	and	they	were	gone.
“Do	you	see	its	oceans?”	Apsalar	asked.
“What?”	He	turned.
“Its	 oceans.	 Grallin's	 Sea.	 That's	 the	 big	 one.	 The	 Lord	 of	 the	 Deep	 Waters
living	there	is	named	Grallin.	He	tends	vast,	beautiful	underwater	gardens.	Grallin
will	come	down	to	us,	one	day,	to	our	world.	And	he'll	gather	his	chosen	and	take
them	to	his	world.	And	we'll	live	in	those	gardens,	warmed	by	the	deep	fires,	and
our	 children	 will	 swim	 like	 dolphins,	 and	 we'll	 be	 happy	 since	 there	 won't	 be
anymore	 wars,	 and	 no	 empires,	 and	 no	 swords	 and	 shields.	 Oh,	 Crokus,	 it'll	 be
wonderful,	won't	it?”
Her	profile	was	in	silhouette.	He	stared	at	her.	“Of	course,”	he	said	quietly.
“Why	 not?”	 And	 then	 that	 question	 repeated	 itself	 in	 his	 head	 for	 an	 entirely
different	reason.	Why	not?


Book	Seven
The	Fête


	
	

The	Flaying	of	Fander,	She-Wolf	of	Winter,	marks
the	Dawn	of	Gedderone.	The	priestesses	race	down
the	streets,	strips	of	wolf-fur	streaming	from	their
hands.	Banners	are	unfurled.	The	noises	and	smells
of	the	market	rise	into	the	morning	air.	Masks	are
donned,	the	citizens	discard	the	year's	worries	and
dance	across	the	day	into	night.
The	Lady	of	Spring	is	born	anew.
It	is	as	if	the	gods	themselves	pause	their	breath	.	.	.
FACES	OF	DARUJHISTAN
MASKRAL	JEMRE	(B.	1101)


Chapter	Twenty
	

It	is	said	that	the	matron's
blood	like	ice	brought	forth	into	this
world	a	birthing	of	dragons
and	this	flowing	river	of	fate
brought	light	into	dark	and	dark	into	light,
unveiling	at	last	in	cold,	cold	eyes
the	children	of	chaos	.	.	.
T'MATHA'S	CHILDREN
HEBORIC


	
Murillio	wondered	again	at	Rallick's	healed	wound.	He'd	already	concluded	that
whatever	 magic-deadening	 powder	 of	 Baruk's	 the	 assassin	 had	 used	 had	 been
responsible	for	the	healing.	Nevertheless,	much	blood	had	been	lost,	and	Rallick
would	need	time	to	recover—time	they	didn't	have.	Was	the	assassin	capable	of
killing	Orr	now?
In	answer	to	his	own	question,	Murillio	laid	a	hand	on	the	rapier	at	his	side.
He	 strode	 down	 the	 empty	 street,	 cleaving	 the	 low-lying	 mists	 that	 swirled	 like
incandescent	cloaks	in	the	gaslight.	Dawn	was	still	two	hours	away.	As	was	the
Daru	 custom,	 the	 new	 year's	 celebrations	 would	 begin	 with	 sunrise,	 lasting
through	the	day	and	well	into	the	night.
He	walked	through	a	silent	city,	as	if	he	were	the	last	of	the	living	yet	to	flee
the	 past	 year's	 turmoil,	 and	 now	 shared	 the	 world	 with	 ghosts	 tolled	 among	 the
year's	dead.	The	Five	Tusks	had	slipped	behind	in	the	ancient	cycle,	and	taking	its
place	was	the	Year	of	the	Moon's	Tears.	Murillio	mused	on	such	obscure,	arcane
titles.	A	massive	stone	disc	in	Majesty	Hall	marked	the	Cycle	of	the	Age,	naming
each	year	in	accordance	with	its	mysterious	moving	mechanisms.
As	a	child,	he'd	thought	the	wheel	magical	in	how	it	spun	slowly	as	the	year
rolled	by,	coming	into	the	new	year	aligned	precisely	with	the	dawn	whether	there
was	 cloud	 in	 the	 sky	 or	 not.	 Mammot	 had	 since	 explained	 to	 him	 that	 the	 wheel
was	in	fact	a	machine.	It	had	been	a	gift	to	Darujhistan	over	a	thousand	years	ago,
by	a	man	named	Icarium.	It	was	Mammot's	belief	that	Icarium	had	Jaghut	blood.
By	all	accounts	he'd	ridden	a	Jaghut	horse,	and	a	Trell	strode	at	his	side—clear
evidence,	 Mammot	 asserted,	 to	 add	 to	 the	 wonder	 of	 the	 wheel	 itself,	 for	 the
Jaghut	were	known	to	have	been	skilled	at	such	creations.
Murillio	wondered	at	the	significance	of	the	names	each	year	bore.	The	close
association	of	the	Five	Tusks	with	Moon's	Tears	held	prophecy,	according	to	the
Seers.	 The	 Boar	 Tennerock's	 tusks	 were	 named	 Hate,	 Love,	 Laughter,	 War,	 and
Tears.	 Which	 Tusk	 would	 prove	 dominant	 in	 the	 year?	 The	 new	 year's	 name
provided	 the	 answer.	 Murillio	 shrugged.	 He	 viewed	 such	 astrology	 with	 a
skeptical	eye.	How	could	a	man	of	a	thousand	years	ago—Jaghut	or	otherwise—
have	predicted	such	things?
Still,	 he	 admitted	 to	 more	 than	 a	 few	 qualms.	 The	 arrival	 of	 Moon's	 Spawn
threw	the	new	year's	title	into	a	different	light,	and	he	knew	that	the	local	scholars
—particularly	those	who	moved	in	the	noble	circles—had	become	an	agitated	and


short-tempered	lot.	Quite	unlike	their	usual	patronizing	selves.
Murillio	turned	a	corner	on	his	approach	to	the	Phoenix	Inn,	and	collided	with
a	short,	fat	man	in	a	red	coat.	Both	grunted,	and	three	large	boxes	that	the	man	had
been	carrying	fell	between	them,	spilling	out	their	contents.
“Aye,	 why,	 Murillio!	 Such	 fortune	 as	 Kruppe	 is	 known	 for!	 Thus	 does	 your
search	 end,	 here	 in	 this	 dank,	 dark	 street	 where	 even	 the	 rats	 shun	 the	 shadow.
What?	Is	something	the	matter,	friend	Murillio?”
He	 stared	 down	 at	 the	 objects	 on	 the	 cobbles	 at	 his	 feet.	 Slowly,	 Murillio
asked,	“What	are	these	for,	Kruppe?”
Kruppe	 stepped	 forward	 and	 frowned	 down	 at	 the	 three	 expertly	 carved
masks.	“Gifts,	friend	Murillio,	of	course.	For	you	and	Rallick	Nom.	After	all,”	he
looked	 up	 with	 a	 beatific	 smile,	 “the	 Lady	 Simtal's	 Fête	 demands	 the	 finest	 in
workmanship,	the	subtlest	of	design	perfectly	mated	with	ironic	intent.	Don't	you
think	Kruppe's	taste	is	sufficiently	expensive?	Do	you	fear	embarrassment?”
“You'll	 not	 distract	 me	 this	 time,”	 Murillio	 growled.	 “First	 of	 all,	 there	 are
three	masks	here,	not	two.”
“Indeed!”	Kruppe	replied,	bending	down	to	pick	one	up.	He	brushed	spatters
of	 mud	 from	 the	 painted	 face.	 “This	 is	 Kruppe's	 own.	 Well	 chosen,	 Kruppe
pronounces	with	certain	aplomb.”
Murillio's	eyes	hardened.	“You're	not	coming,	Kruppe.”
“Well,	 of	 course	 Kruppe	 will	 attend!	 Do	 you	 think	 Lady	 Simtal	 would	 ever
show	 herself	 if	 her	 longtime	 acquaintance,	 Kruppe	 the	 First,	 was	 not	 in
attendance?	Why,	she'd	wither	with	shame!”
“Dammit,	you've	never	even	met	Simtal!”
“Not	 relevant	 to	 Kruppe's	 argument,	 friend	 Murillio.	 Kruppe	 has	 been
acquainted	 with	 Simtal's	 existence	 for	 many	 years.	 Such	 association	 is	 made
better,	nay,	pristine,	for	the	fact	that	she	has	not	met	Kruppe,	nor	Kruppe	her.	And,
in	final	argument	designed	to	end	all	discussion,	here,”	he	pulled	from	his	sleeve	a
parchment	scroll	tied	in	blue	silk	ribbon,	“Kruppe's	invitation,	signed	by	the	Lady
herself.”
Murillio	made	a	grab	for	it	but	Kruppe	replaced	it	deftly	in	his	sleeve.
“Rallick	will	kill	you,”	Murillio	said	levelly.
“Nonsense.”	 Kruppe	 placed	 the	 mask	 over	 his	 face.	 “How	 will	 the	 lad	 ever
recognize	Kruppe?”
Murillio	studied	the	man's	round	body,	the	faded	red	waistcoat,	gathered	cuffs,
and	the	short	oily	curls	atop	his	head.	“Never	mind.”	He	sighed.


“Excellent,”	 Kruppe	 said.	 “Now,	 please	 accept	 these	 two	 masks,	 gifts	 from
your	 friend	 Kruppe.	 A	 trip	 is	 saved,	 and	 Baruk	 need	 not	 wait	 any	 longer	 for	 a
secret	message	that	must	not	be	mentioned.”	He	replaced	his	mask	in	its	box,	then
spun	round	to	study	the	eastern	skyline.	“Off	to	yon	alchemist's	abode,	then.	Good
evening,	friend—”
“Wait	a	minute,”	Murillio	said,	grasping	Kruppe's	arm	and	turning	him	round.
“Have	you	seen	Coll?”
“Why,	 of	 course.	 The	 man	 sleeps	 a	 deep,	 recovering	 sleep	 from	 his
ordeals.'Twas	 healed	 magically,	 Sulty	 said.	 By	 some	 stranger,	 yet.	 Coll	 himself
was	brought	in	by	yet	a	second	stranger,	who	found	a	third	stranger,	who	in	turn
brought	a	fifth	stranger	in	the	company	of	the	stranger	who	healed	Coll.	And	so	it
goes,	friend	Murillio.	Strange	doings,	indeed.	Now,	Kruppe	must	be	off.	Goodbye,
friend—”
“Not	yet,”	Murillio	snarled.	He	glanced	around.	The	street	was	still	empty.	He
leaned	 close.	 “I've	 worked	 some	 things	 out,	 Kruppe.	 Circle	 Breaker	 contacting
me	put	everything	into	order	in	my	mind.	I	know	who	you	are.”
“Aaai!”	Kruppe	cried,	withdrawing.	“I'll	not	deny	it,	then!	It's	true,	Murillio,
Kruppe	is	Lady	Simtal	connivingly	disguised.”
“Not	this	time!	No	distractions.	You're	the	Eel,	Kruppe.	All	this	blubbering,
sweaty	meek-mouse	stuff	is	just	an	act,	isn't	it?	You've	got	half	this	city	in	your
pocket,	Eel.”
Eyes	wide,	Kruppe	snatched	the	handkerchief	from	his	sleeve	and	mopped	his
brow.	He	wrung	sweat	from	it,	droplets	spattering	on	the	cobbles,	then	a	veritable
torrent	splashed	onto	the	stones.
Murillio	barked	a	laugh.	“No	more	magical	cantrips,	Kruppe.	I've	known	you
a	long	time,	remember?	I've	seen	you	cast	spells.	You've	got	everybody	fooled,
but	 not	 me.	 I'm	 not	 telling,	 though.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 worry	 about	 that.”	 He
smiled.	 “Then	 again,	 if	 you	 don't	 come	 out	 with	 it	 here	 and	 now,	 I	 might	 get
annoyed.”
Sighing,	 Kruppe	 returned	 the	 handkerchief	 to	 his	 sleeve.	 “Annoyance	 is
uncalled	for,”	he	said,	waving	a	hand	and	fluttering	his	fingers.
Murillio	blinked,	suddenly	dizzy.	He	rubbed	his	forehead	and	frowned.	What
had	they	just	been	talking	about?	It	couldn't	have	been	important.	“Thanks	for	the
masks,	 friend.	 They'll	 come	 in	 handy,	 I'm	 sure.”	 His	 frown	 deepened.	 What	 a
confusing	thing	to	say!	He	wasn't	even	angry	that	Kruppe	had	figured	things	out;
nor	that	the	fat	little	man	would	attend	the	Fête.	How	odd!	“Good	that	Coll's	all
right,	isn't	it?	Well,”	he	mumbled,	“I'd	better	head	back	to	check	on	Rallick.”


Smiling,	 Kruppe	 nodded.	 “Until	 the	 Fête,	 then,	 fare	 you	 well,	 Murillio,
Kruppe's	finest	and	dearest	friend.”
“Good	night,”	Murillio	replied,	turning	to	retrace	his	steps.	He	lacked	sleep.
All	these	late	nights	were	taking	their	toll.	That	was	the	problem.	“Of	course,”	he
muttered,	then	began	to	walk.
His	features	darkening,	Baruk	studied	the	Tiste	Andii	lounging	in	the	chair	across
from	him.	“I	don't	think	it's	a	very	good	idea,	Rake.”
The	Lord	raised	an	eyebrow.	“As	I	understand	such	things,	the	event	includes
the	wearing	of	disguises,”	he	said,	with	a	slight	smile.	“Do	you	fear	I	lack	taste?”
“I've	 no	 doubt	 your	 attire	 will	 be	 suitable,”	 Baruk	 snapped.	 “Particularly	 if
you	choose	the	costume	of	a	Tiste	Andii	warlord.	It's	the	Council	that	worries	me.
They're	not	all	fools.”
“I	 would	 be	 surprised	 if	 they	 were,”	 Rake	 said.	 “Indeed,	 I	 would	 have	 you
point	out	the	cunning	ones.	I	don't	imagine	you	will	refute	my	suspicion	that	there
are	 those	 within	 the	 Council	 seeking	 to	 pave	 the	 way	 for	 the	 Empress—for	 a
price,	 of	 course.	 Power	 comes	 to	 mind.	 Nobles	 delving	 in	 merchant	 trades	 no
doubt	drool	at	the	prospect	of	Empire	trade.	Am	I	far	off	the	mark,	Baruk?”
“No,”	the	alchemist	admitted	sourly.	“But	we	have	that	under	control.”
“Ah,	 yes,”	 Rake	 said.	 “This	 brings	 to	 mind	 my	 other	 reason	 for	 wishing	 to
attend	 this	 Lady	 Simtal's	 Fête.	 As	 you	 said,	 the	 city's	 power	 will	 be	 there.	 I
assume	this	includes	such	mages	as	are	in	your	T'orrud	Cabal?”
“Some	will	attend,”	Baruk	conceded.	“But	I	must	tell	you,	Anomander	Rake,
your	debacle	with	the	Assassins'	Guild	has	made	a	good	number	of	them	rue	our
alliance.	They'll	not	appreciate	your	presence	in	the	least.”
Rake's	smile	returned.	“To	the	extent	that	they	will	reveal	their	community	to
cunning	Council	members?	I	think	not.”	He	rose	in	a	fluid	motion.	“No,	I	would
like	to	attend	this	Fête.	My	own	people	hold	little	to	such	social	affairs.	There	are
times	when	I	grow	weary	of	their	dour	preoccupations.”
Baruk's	 gaze	 focused	 on	 the	 Tiste	 Andii.	 “You	 suspect	 a	 convergence,	 don't
you?	A	fell	gathering	of	powers,	like	iron	filings	to	a	lodestone.”
“With	so	much	power	gathered	in	one	place,”	Rake	admitted,	“it's	likely.	I'd
rather	 be	 on	 hand	 in	 such	 circumstances.”	 His	 eyes	 held	 Baruk's,	 their	 color
flowing	from	dun	green	to	amber.	“Also,	if	this	event	is	as	publicly	known	as	you
suggest,	then	the	Empire's	agents	within	the	city	will	know	of	it.	Should	they	wish
to	cut	out	Darujhistan's	heart,	they'll	have	no	better	opportunity.”


Baruk	barely	repressed	a	shiver.	“Extra	guards	have	been	hired,	of	course.	If
an	 Empire	 Claw	 should	 strike,	 they	 will	 find	 their	 hands	 full	 with	 the	 T'orrud
mages	 besides.”	 He	 thought	 for	 a	 time,	 then	 nodded	 wearily.	 “Very	 well,	 Rake.
Simtal	will	accept	you	as	my	guest.	You	will	wear	an	effective	disguise?”
“Naturally.”
Baruk	climbed	to	his	feet	and	strode	to	the	window.	Beyond	the	sky	had	begun
to	pale.	“And	so	it	begins,”	he	whispered.
Rake	joined	him.	“What	begins?”
“The	new	year,”	the	alchemist	replied.	“Past	is	the	Five	Tusks.	The	dawn	you
see	marks	the	birth	of	the	Year	of	the	Moon's	Tears.”
Lord	Anomander	Rake	stiffened.
Baruk	 noticed.	 “Indeed.	 An	 unusual	 coincidence,	 though	 I	 would	 put	 little
weight	 upon	 it.	 The	 titles	 were	 devised	 over	 a	 millennium	 ago,	 by	 a	 visitor	 to
these	lands.”
When	 Rake	 spoke	 his	 voice	 was	 a	 ravaged	 whisper.	 “Icarium's	 gifts.	 I
recognize	the	style.	Five	Tusks,	Moon's	Tears—the	Wheel	is	his,	correct?”
Eyes	 wide,	 Baruk	 hissed	 his	 surprise	 between	 his	 teeth.	 A	 dozen	 questions
struggled	to	be	uttered	first,	but	the	Lord	continued.	“In	the	future,	I'd	suggest	you
heed	 Icarium's	 gifts—all	 of	 them.	 A	 thousand	 years	 is	 not	 so	 long	 a	 time,
Alchemist.	Not	so	long	a	time.	Icarium	last	visited	me	eight	hundred	years	ago,	in
the	company	of	the	Trell	Mappo,	and	Osric—or	Osserc,	as	the	local	worshipers
call	 him.”	 Rake	 smiled	 bitterly.	 “Osric	 and	 I	 argued,	 as	 I	 recall,	 and	 it	 was	 all
Brood	could	do	to	keep	us	apart.	It	was	 an	 old	argument	.	.	.”	His	almond	eyes
shaded	into	gray.	He	fell	silent,	lost	in	memories.
There	came	a	knock	at	the	door	and	both	turned	to	see	Roald	enter	and	bow.
“Master	 Baruk,	 Mammot	 has	 awakened	 and	 appears	 refreshed.	 More,	 your
agent	Kruppe	has	delivered	a	verbal	message.	He	extends	his	regret	that	he	cannot
deliver	it	to	you	in	person.	Do	you	wish	to	receive	it	now?”
“Yes,”	Baruk	said.
Roald	 bowed	 again.	 “The	 Eel	 will	 contact	 you	 the	 eve	 of	 this	 day.	 At	 Lady
Simtal's	 Fête.	 The	 Eel	 further	 finds	 the	 prospect	 of	 shared	 information	 and
cooperation	intriguing.	That	is	all.”
Baruk	brightened.	“Excellent.”
“Shall	I	bring	Mammot	to	you,	Master?”
“If	he's	able.”
“He	is.	A	moment,	then.”	Roald	left.


The	alchemist	smiled.	“As	I	said,”	he	laughed,	“everyone	will	be	there,	and	in
this	case,	everyone	is	an	appropriate	term.”	His	smile	broadened	at	Rake's	blank
look.	“The	Eel,	Lord.	Darujhistan's	master-spy,	a	figure	without	a	face.”
“A	masked	face,”	the	Tiste	Andii	reminded	him.
“If	my	suspicions	are	correct,”	Baruk	said,	“the	mask	won't	help	the	Eel	one
bit.”
The	door	opened	again	and	there	stood	Mammot,	looking	fit	and	full	of	energy.
He	 nodded	 to	 Baruk.	 “Withdrawal	 proved	 easier	 than	 I'd	 imagined,”	 he	 said,
without	preamble.	His	bright	gaze	fixed	on	Anomander	Rake	and	he	smiled,	then
bowed.	 “Greetings,	 Lord.	 I've	 looked	 forward	 to	 this	 meeting	 ever	 since	 Baruk
brought	to	us	the	offer	of	alliance.”
Rake	glanced	at	Baruk	and	raised	an	eyebrow.
The	alchemist	said,	“Mammot	numbers	 among	the	T'orrud	Cabal.”	He	faced
the	old	man	again.	“We	were	deeply	worried,	friend,	given	the	Elder	mageries	at
play	around	the	barrow.”
“I	was	snared	for	a	time,”	Mammot	admitted,	“but	at	the	extreme	edges	of	the
Omtose	Phellack	influence.	Quiescent	regard	proved	the	correct	course,	as	the	one
stirring	within	did	not	sense	me.”
“How	much	time	do	we	have?”	Baruk	asked	tightly.
“Two,	perhaps	three	days.	Even	for	a	Jaghut	Tyrant,	it	is	an	effort	to	make	the
return	journey	to	life.”	Mammot's	eyes	fell	upon	the	mantelpiece.	“Ah,	your	carafe
of	wine	awaits	as	is	usual.	Excellent.”	He	strode	over	to	the	fireplace.	“Have	you
word	of	my	nephew,	by	any	chance?”
Baruk	frowned.	“No,	should	I	have?	The	last	time	I	met	the	child	was,	what,
five	years	ago?”
“Mmm,”	Mammot	said,	raising	his	freshly	filled	goblet	and	taking	a	mouthful.
“Well,	Crokus	has	grown	somewhat	since	then,	I	assure	you.	I	hope	the	lad's	all
right.	He	was—”
Baruk	threw	up	a	hand	and	staggered	a	step	forward.	“What?”	he	demanded	in
sudden	 fear.	 “What's	 his	 name?	 Crokus?	 Crokus!”	 The	 alchemist	 rapped	 his
forehead.	“Oh,	what	a	fool	I've	been!”
Mammot's	 face	 crinkled	 into	 a	 wise	 smile.	 “Oh,	 you	 mean	 the	 matter	 of	 the
Coin	Bearer,	do	you?”
Shock	registered	in	Baruk's	face.	“You	knew?”
Standing	to	one	side,	his	charcoal-gray	eyes	fixed	intently	on	Mammot,	Rake
said,	in	a	strangely	flat	tone,	“Mammot,	forgive	me	for	interrupting.	Will	you	be


attending	Lady	Simtal's	Fête?”
The	old	man	nodded	easily.	“Of	course.”
“Very	 good,”	 Rake	 said,	 with	 something	 like	 anticipation.	 He	 pulled	 his
leather	gloves	from	his	belt.	“We'll	speak	then.”
Baruk	 had	 no	 time	 to	 think	 about	 Rake's	 sudden	 departure.	 It	 was	 his	 first
mistake	of	the	day.
A	woman	with	a	shaved	head	and	long	flowing	robes	ran	shrieking	from	the	gates,
a	shred	of	brown	fur	streaming	from	one	hand.	Adjunct	Lorn	stepped	back	to	let
the	priestess	pass.	She	watched	as	the	woman	plunged	into	the	crowd	behind	her.
The	 festival	 had	 spilled	 out	 beyond	 Darujhistan's	 walls,	 and	 Worrytown's	 main
street	was	a	streaming	mob	she'd	spent	the	last	half-hour	pushing	through	on	her
way	to	the	gates.
Absently	 she	 rubbed	 the	 rapier	 wound	 in	 her	 shoulder.	 Her	 journey	 into	 the
barrow	 seemed	 to	 have	 slowed	 the	 healing,	 and	 an	 ache	 had	 settled	 inside	 the
puncture,	cold	as	the	ice	in	the	barrow's	tunnel.	Eyeing	the	two	guards	stationed	at
the	gate,	she	approached	warily.
Only	 one	 seemed	 to	 pay	 her	 any	 attention,	 and	 this	 man	 spared	 her	 but	 the
briefest	glance	before	returning	his	attention	to	the	Worrytown	mob.	Lorn	entered
the	city	unremarked,	simply	one	more	traveler	come	to	attend	the	spring	festival.
Immediately	within	the	gates	the	avenue	split	around	the	base	of	a	squat	hill,
on	which	crouched	a	half-ruined	temple	and	tower.	Off	to	her	right	rose	another
hill,	evidently	a	garden,	given	the	wide	steps	ascending	to	the	summit,	covered	in
trees,	and	the	many	fetishes	and	banners	tied	to	branches	and	the	gas-lamps.
Lorn's	sense	of	those	she	sought	was	strong,	unerring.	Once	past	the	hills,	she
could	 see	 an	 inner	 wall.	 Sergeant	 Whiskeyjack	 and	 his	 squad	 were	 somewhere
beyond	 it,	 in	 the	 lower	 city.	 Lorn	 strode	 through	 the	 surging	 crowds,	 one	 hand
hitched	 in	 her	 sword	 belt,	 the	 other	 massaging	 the	 puffed	 red	 flesh	 around	 her
wound.
The	guard	at	Worry	Gate	pushed	himself	from	the	wall	he	had	been	leaning	against
and	 paced	 a	 slow	 circle	 on	 the	 cobblestones.	 He	 paused	 to	 adjust	 his	 peaked
helmet,	loosening	the	strap	a	notch.
The	 other	 guard,	 an	 older	 man,	 bandy-legged	 and	 short,	 approached.	 “Those
fools	out	there	making	you	uneasy?”	he	asked	with	a	grin	more	gaps	than	teeth.
The	first	man	glanced	through	the	gateway.	“Had	a	near-riot	here	a	couple	of


years	back,”	he	said.
“I	was	there,”	the	old	man	said,	hawking	onto	the	stones.	“We	had	to	pull	the
hoods	 off	 our	 polearms,	 draw	 some	 blood.	 That	 sent	 them	 packing,	 and	 I	 don't
think	 the	 lesson's	 gone	 on	 them.	 I	 wouldn't	 worry	 much.	 This	 ain't	 your	 regular
duty,	is	it?”
“No,	just	filling	in	time	for	a	friend.”
“That's	the	way	of	it,	isn't	it?	What's	your	usual	round?”
“Midnight	till	the	third	bell,	Despot's	Barbican,”	Circle	Breaker	replied.	He
adjusted	his	helmet	again,	hoping	the	unseen	friendly	eyes	had	marked	his	signal.
That	 woman	 who	 had	 passed	 through	 a	 few	 minutes	 ago	 had	 matched	 the	 Eel's
description	perfectly.	Circle	Breaker	knew	he	wasn't	mistaken.
She'd	 looked	 the	 warrior,	 dressed	 as	 a	 mercenary	 and	 trying	 to	 hide	 the
bloodstains	 of	 a	 wound	 on	 her	 shoulder.	 His	 searching	 glance	 had	 been	 but
momentary.	Years	of	practice,	however,	made	it	sufficient.	He'd	caught	everything
the	Eel's	messenger	had	told	him	to	look	for.
“That's	a	grisly	watch,”	 the	old	man	said	beside	him,	turning	to	squint	up	at
Despot's	Park.	“And	you	were	here	t'	meet	the	dawn.”	He	wagged	his	head.	“The
bastards	 got	 us	 working	 too	 hard	 these	 days,	 what	 with	 the	 city	 infiltrated	 with
Empire	spies	and	the	like.”
“It	doesn't	get	any	better,”	Circle	Breaker	agreed.
“I'm	here	for	another	three	hours,	and	you	think	they	give	me	some	time	to	join
my	wife	and	kids	in	the	festival?”	The	old	man	spat	again.	“No	way.	Old	Berrute's
off	to	stand	around	watching	other	people	having	fun	in	some	bloody	estate.”
Circle	Breaker	held	his	breath,	then	sighed.	“Lady	Simtal's	Fête,	I	suppose.”
“Damn	right.	Bloody	Councilmen	chuffing	around	with	all	their	stinking	airs.
And	me	with	sore	feet	and	all,	standing	like	a	statue.”
This	was	a	bit	of	luck,	Circle	Breaker	smiled	to	himself.	His	companion's	next
station	was	precisely	what	the	Eel	had	wanted	for	Circle	Breaker.	Better	yet,	the
old	 man	 was	 complaining	 about	 it.	 “They	 need	 those	 statues,”	 he	 said.	 “Keeps
them	 secure.”	 He	 stepped	 close	 to	 Berrute.	 “Didn't	 you	 tell	 the	 sergeant	 about
your	bad	feet?”
“What's	 the	 point?”	 Berrute	 complained.	 “He	 just	 delivered	 them	 orders,	 he
didn't	come	up	with	them.”
Circle	Breaker	looked	up	the	street,	as	if	considering	something,	then	he	laid	a
hand	on	the	other's	shoulder	and	met	his	gaze.	“Look,	I	don't	have	any	family.	For
me,	today's	just	another	day.	I'll	stand	in	for	you,	Berrute.	Next	time	I	want	some


time	off,	though,	I'll	come	calling.”
Genuine	 relief	 lit	 the	 old	 man's	 eyes.	 “Nerruse	 bless	 you,”	 he	 said,	 grinning
again.	“It's	a	deal,	friend.	Hey,	I	don't	even	know	your	name!”
Circle	Breaker	smiled,	then	told	him.
With	most	of	the	revelry	out	in	the	streets,	the	interior	of	Quip's	Bar	was	all	but
deserted.	 Adjunct	 Lorn	 paused	 inside	 the	 doorway	 and	 waited	 for	 her	 eyes	 to
adjust	to	the	gloom.	A	few	desultory	voices	drifted	out	to	her,	mingling	with	the
clatter	of	wooden	cards.
She	entered	the	low-ceilinged	chamber.	A	disheveled	old	woman	watched	her
dully	from	behind	the	counter.	Against	the	far	wall	was	a	table	at	which	sat	three
men.	 Copper	 coins	 glittered	 in	 the	 lamplight,	 amid	 pools	 of	 spilled	 beer	 on	 the
tabletop.	The	men	held	cards	in	their	hands.
The	 man	 with	 his	 back	 against	 the	 wall,	 wearing	 a	 scorched	 leather	 cap,
looked	 up	 to	 meet	 Lorn's	 eyes.	 He	 gestured	 to	 an	 empty	 chair.	 “Have	 a	 seat,
Adjunct,”	he	said.	“Join	in	the	game.”
Lorn	 blinked,	 then	 hid	 her	 shock	 with	 a	 shrug.	 “I	 don't	 gamble,”	 she	 said,
lowering	herself	into	the	rickety	chair.
The	man	examined	his	cards.	“Not	what	I	meant,”	he	said.
The	one	seated	on	her	left	muttered,	“Meant	a	different	game,	did	Hedge.”
She	 turned	 to	 regard	 him.	 Skinny,	 short,	 with	 massive	 wrists.	 “And	 what's
your	name,	soldier?”	she	asked	quietly.
“Fiddler.	The	guy	losing	his	coins	is	Mallet.	We've	been	expecting	you.”
“So	I	gather,”	Lorn	said	dryly,	leaning	back.	“Your	intelligence	impresses	me,
gentlemen.	Is	the	sergeant	nearby?”
“Making	the	rounds,”	Fiddler	said.	“Should	be	by	in	ten	minutes	or	so.	We've
got	the	back	room	in	this	rat	trap.	Right	up	against	the	Tier	wall.”
Hedge	 added,	 “Me	 and	 Fid	 dug	 through	 that	 damn	 wall,	 seven	 bloody	 feet
thick	 at	 its	 base.	 An	 abandoned	 house	 on	 the	 Daru	 side.”	 He	 grinned.	 “It's	 our
back	door.”
“So	you're	the	saboteurs.	And	Mallet?	A	healer,	correct?”
Mallet	nodded,	still	contemplating	his	cards.	“C'mon,	Fiddler,”	he	said,	“it's
your	game.	Let's	hear	the	next	rule.”
Fiddler	sat	forward.	“Knight	of	House	Dark	is	the	wild	card,”	he	said.	“That's
the	opening	suit,	too.	Unless	you're	holding	the	Virgin	of	Death.	If	you	get	her	you


can	open	with	half	ante	and	double	up	if	you	win	the	round.”
Mallet	slapped	down	the	Virgin	of	Death.	He	tossed	a	single	copper	coin	into
the	center	of	the	table.	“Let's	run	it	through,	then.”
Fiddler	 dealt	 the	 man	 another	 card.	 “We	 ante	 up	 now,	 Hedge,	 two	 coppers
apiece	and	High	Hood	come	the	Herald	of	Death.”
Lorn	 watched	 the	 bizarre	 game	 proceed.	 These	 men	 were	 using	 a	 Deck	 of
Dragons.	 Astonishing.	 The	 man	 Fiddler	 was	 inventing	 the	 rules	 as	 they	 went
along,	 and	 yet	 she	 watched	 the	 cards	 merge	 into	 a	 pattern	 on	 the	 tabletop.	 Her
brows	knitted	thoughtfully.
“You	got	the	Hound	on	the	run,”	Fiddler	said,	pointing	at	the	latest	card	placed
on	the	table	by	Mallet.	“Knight	of	Dark's	close,	I	can	feel	it.”
“But	what	about	this	damned	Virgin	of	Death?”	groused	the	healer.
“She's	 had	 her	 teeth	 pulled.	 Take	 a	 look,	 the	 Rope's	 right	 outa	 the	 picture,
ain't	 he?”	 Fiddler	 laid	 another	 card.	 “And	 there's	 the	 Dragon	 bastard	 himself,
sword	 all	 smoking	 and	 black	 as	 a	 moonless	 night.	 That's	 what's	 got	 the	 Hound
scampering.”
“Wait	a	minute,”	Hedge	cried,	ramming	down	a	card	atop	the	Knight	of	Dark.
“You	said	the	Captain	of	Light's	rising,	right?”
Fiddler	 concentrated	 on	 the	 pattern.	 “He's	 right,	 Mallet.	 We	 pay	 over	 two
coppers	 each	 automatically.	 That	 Captain's	 already	 dancing	 on	 the	 Knight's
shadow—”
“Excuse	 me,”	 Lorn	 said	 loudly.	 The	 three	 men	 looked	 at	 her.	 “Are	 you	 a
Talent,	Fiddler?	Should	you	be	using	this	deck?”
Fiddler	scowled.	“It	ain't	your	business,	Adjunct.	We	been	playing	for	years,
nobody's	 tossed	 a	 dagger	 our	 way.	 You	 want	 in,	 just	 say	 so.	 Here,	 I'll	 give	 you
your	first	card.”
Before	 she	 could	 protest	 he	 placed	 a	 card	 before	 her,	 face	 up.	 She	 stared
down	at	it.
“Now,	ain't	that	odd?”	Fiddler	remarked.	“Throne,	inverted.	You	owe	us	all
ten	gold	each—a	year's	pay	for	all	of	us,	quite	a	coincidence.”
Hedge	snorted	loudly.	“Also	happens	to	be	the	Empire	Guilt	Coin	paid	to	our
kin	once	we're	confirmed	dead.	Thanks	a	lot,	Fid.”
“Take	the	coin	and	shut	up,”	Fiddler	snapped.	“We	ain't	dead	yet.”
“I'm	still	holding	a	card,”	Mallet	said.
Fiddler	rolled	his	eyes.	“So	let's	see	the	damn	thing,	then.”
The	healer	set	the	card	down.


“Orb.”	Fiddler	laughed.	“True	sight	and	judgment	closes	this	game,	wouldn't
you	know	it?”
Lorn	sensed	a	presence	at	her	back.	She	turned	slowly	to	find	a	bearded	man
behind	her.	His	flat	gray	eyes	held	hers.	“I'm	Whiskeyjack,”	he	said	softly.	“Good
morning,	 Adjunct,	 and	 welcome	 to	 Darujhistan.”	 He	 found	 a	 nearby	 chair	 and
pulled	 it	 to	 the	 table,	 sitting	 down	 beside	 Hedge.	 “You'll	 want	 a	 report,	 right?
Well,	 we're	 still	 trying	 to	 contact	 the	 Assassin's	 Guild.	 All	 the	 mining's	 done,
ready	for	the	order.	One	squad	member	lost	thus	far.	In	other	words,	we've	been
damn	lucky.	There	are	Tiste	Andii	in	the	city,	hunting	us.”
“Who	have	you	lost,	Sergeant?”	Lorn	asked.
“The	recruit.	Sorry	was	her	name.”
“Dead?”
“Been	missing	for	a	few	days	now.”
Lorn	 clenched	 her	 teeth	 to	 bite	 back	 a	 curse.	 “So	 you	 don't	 know	 if	 she's
dead?”
“No.	Is	there	a	problem,	Adjunct?	She	was	just	a	recruit.	Even	if	she'd	been
nabbed	by	the	guard,	there's	scant	little	she	could	tell	them.	Besides,	we've	heard
no	such	news.	More	likely	some	thugs	scrubbed	her	in	some	back	alley—we've
been	 scurrying	 down	 a	 lot	 of	 rat-holes	 trying	 to	 find	 these	 local	 assassins.”	 He
shrugged.	“It's	a	risk	you	live	with,	that's	all.”
“Sorry	was	a	spy,”	Lorn	explained.	“A	very	good	one,	Sergeant.	You	can	be
certain	that	no	thug	killed	her.	No,	she's	not	dead.	She's	hiding,	because	she	knew
I'd	come	looking	for	her.	I've	been	on	her	trail	for	three	years.	I	want	her.”
“If	 we'd	 had	 a	 hint	 of	 all	 this,”	 Whiskeyjack	 said	 tightly,	 “it	 could've	 been
arranged,	 Adjunct.	 But	 you	 kept	 it	 to	 yourself,	 and	 that	 makes	 you	 on	 your	 own
now.”	 His	 eyes	 hardened	 on	 her.	 “Whether	 we	 contact	 the	 Guild	 or	 not,	 we
detonate	the	mines	before	tomorrow's	dawn,	and	then	we're	out	of	here.”
Lorn	drew	herself	up.	“I	am	Adjunct	to	the	Empress,	Sergeant.	As	of	now	this
mission	is	under	my	direction.	You	will	take	orders	from	me.	All	this	independent
crap	 is	 over,	 understand?”	 For	 a	 moment	 she	 almost	 thought	 she	 saw	 a	 flash	 of
triumph	 in	 the	 man's	 eyes.	 A	 second	 look	 revealed	 it	 to	 be	 no	 more	 than	 the
expected	anger.
“Understood,	Adjunct,”	Whiskeyjack	replied	curtly.	“What	are	your	orders?”
“I	am	serious	in	this,	Sergeant,”	she	warned.	“And	I	don't	care	how	angry	this
makes	 you.	 Now,	 I	 suggest	 we	 retire	 to	 more	 private	 surroundings.”	 She	 rose.
“Your	men	can	remain	here.”


Whiskeyjack	stood.	“Of	course,	Adjunct.	We	have	the	back	room.	If	you	will
follow	me.”
Lorn	reached	down	to	the	bed's	top	blanket.	“There	is	blood	here,	Sergeant.”	She
turned	to	regard	the	man	as	he	closed	the	door.
He	faced	her.	“One	of	my	men	had	a	brush	with	a	Tiste	Andii	assassin-mage.
He'll	recover.”
“Highly	unlikely,	Sergeant.	The	Tiste	Andii	are	all	with	Caladan	Brood	in	the
north.”	Her	eyes	widened	in	disbelief.	“You	don't	mean	to	suggest	that	the	Lord	of
Moon's	 Spawn	 himself	 has	 left	 his	 fortress?	 To	 do	 what?	 Hunt	 down	 Malazan
spies?	Don't	be	absurd.”
Whiskeyjack	 scowled.	 “Corporal	 Kalam	 and	 my	 squad	 mage	 had	 a	 rooftop
engagement	with	at	least	half	a	dozen	Tiste	Andii.	That	my	men	survived	makes	it
highly	 unlikely	 that	 the	 Moon's	 lord	 was	 anywhere	 in	 the	 vicinity,	 doesn't	 it,
Adjunct?	 Put	 it	 together.	 The	 Moon	 stations	 itself	 just	 south	 of	 the	 city.	 Its	 lord
strikes	an	alliance	with	Darujhistan's	rulers,	and	their	first	task	is	to	wipe	out	the
local	Assassins'	Guild.	Why?	To	prevent	people	like	us	from	contacting	them	and
offering	a	contract.	And,	so	far,	it's	worked.”
Lorn	 thought	 for	 a	 time,	 then	 she	 said,	 “So	 if	 the	 Guild	 cannot	 be	 contacted,
why	not	do	the	assassinations	yourselves?	Your	Corporal	Kalam	ranked	among	the
best	in	the	Claw	before	his	.	.	.	his	falling	out.	Why	not	take	out	the	city's	rulers?”
The	man	folded	his	arms	across	his	chest	and	leaned	against	the	wall	beside
the	door.	“We've	been	considering	that,	Adjunct.	And	we're	a	step	ahead	of	you.
Right	now,	one	of	my	men	is	negotiating	for	us	to	work	as	private	strong-arms	for
a	highbrow	Fête	this	evening.	Everybody	who's	anybody	is	supposed	to	attend—
Council	 members,	 High	 Mages,	 the	 works.	 My	 saboteurs	 have	 enough	 leftover
munitions	to	make	it	a	party	this	city	will	have	a	hard	time	forgetting.”
Lorn	 struggled	 against	 a	 growing	 sense	 of	 frustration.	 As	 much	 as	 she'd
intended	 to	 take	 command	 of	 things,	 it	 seemed	 that	 this	 Whiskeyjack	 had	 been
doing	just	fine	up	until	now,	given	the	circumstances.	She	suspected	she	could	not
have	 done	 things	 any	 better,	 though	 she	 still	 doubted	 the	 story	 about	 the	 Tiste
Andii.	 “Why	 on	 earth,”	 she	 asked	 finally,	 “would	 an	 estate	 hire	 a	 bunch	 of
strangers	as	guards?”
“Oh,	there'll	be	city	soldiers	there	as	well.	But	none	of	them	is	a	Barghast.”
Whiskeyjack	 smiled	 cynically.	 “Titillation	 factor,	 Adjunct.	 It's	 what	 makes	 the
nobility	 drool.	 Look	 there,	 a	 big	 tattooed	 barbarian	 glowering	 down	 at	 them.
Exciting,	yes?”	He	shrugged.	“It's	a	risk,	but	one	worth	taking.	Unless,	of	course,


you	have	a	better	idea,	Adjunct?”
She	heard	the	challenge	in	his	tone.	Had	she	thought	about	it,	she	would	have
realized	long	before	now	that	her	title	and	power	would	not	intimidate	this	man.
He'd	stood	at	Dassem	Ultor's	side,	arguing	tactics	with	the	Sword	of	the	Empire
in	the	midst	of	battle.	And	it	seemed	that	demotion	to	sergeant	had	failed	to	break
this	man—that	much	she'd	gathered	from	the	Bridgeburners'	reputation	at	Pale.	He
would	not	hesitate	to	challenge	her	every	command	if	he	found	reason	to	do	so.
“Your	plan	is	sound,”	she	said.	“Tell	me	the	name	of	this	estate.”
“Some	 woman	 named	 Lady	 Simtal.	 I	 don't	 know	 the	 family	 name,	 but
everybody	 seems	 to	 know	 her.	 Said	 to	 be	 a	 real	 looker,	 with	 influence	 in	 the
Council.”
“Very	well,”	Lorn	said,	adjusting	her	cloak.	“I'll	return	in	two	hours,	Sergeant.
There	are	other	matters	I	must	attend	to.	Be	certain	that	all	is	ready—detonation
procedures	 included.	 If	 you	 don't	 get	 hired,	 we'll	 have	 to	 find	 another	 way	 of
being	at	that	fête.”	She	strode	to	the	door.
“Adjunct?”
She	turned.
Whiskeyjack	 walked	 to	 the	 back	 wall	 and	 pulled	 aside	 a	 tattered	 hanging.
“This	tunnel	emerges	into	another	house.	From	it	you	can	enter	the	Daru	District.”
“Unnecessary.”	Lorn	was	irritated	by	his	condescending	tone.
As	 soon	 as	 she	 was	 gone	 Quick	 Ben	 scrambled	 from	 the	 tunnel.	 “Dammit,
Sergeant,”	he	muttered.	“You	almost	had	her	walking	in	on	me!”
“No	chance,”	Whiskeyjack	observed.	“In	fact,	I	made	certain	she	wouldn't	use
it.	Anything	from	Kalam?”
Quick	 Ben	 paced	 the	 small	 room.	 “Not	 yet.	 But	 he's	 about	 to	 run	 out	 of
patience.”	He	turned	to	the	sergeant.	“So?	Do	you	think	she	was	fooled?”
“Fooled?”	Whiskeyjack	laughed.	“She	was	reeling.”
“Paran	said	she	was	going	to	drop	something	off,”	Quick	Ben	said.	“Did	she?”
“Not	yet.”
“It's	getting	tight,	Sergeant.	Damn	tight.”
The	other	door	opened	and	Trotts	entered,	his	filed	teeth	exposed	in	something
between	a	smile	and	a	grimace.
“Success?”	Whiskeyjack	asked.
Trotts	nodded.


As	 the	 afternoon	 waned	 Crokus	 and	 Apsalar	 waited	 atop	 the	 tower's	 platform.
Every	now	and	then	they	peered	over	the	edge	to	watch	the	festivities.	There	was
a	 taste	 of	 mania	 among	 the	 crowds	 below,	 as	 if	 they	 danced	 on	 the	 rim	 of
desperation.	In	spite	of	the	season's	rejoicing,	the	shadow	of	the	Malazan	Empire
hung	over	all.	Indeed,	with	Moon's	Spawn	immediately	to	the	south,	Darujhistan's
place	between	the	two	forces	was	obvious	to	everyone.
“Somehow,”	 Crokus	 muttered,	 as	 he	 watched	 the	 crowds	 moving	 down	 the
streets	like	churning	rivers,	“Darujhistan	seems	smaller.	Almost	insignificant.”
“It	 looks	 huge	 to	 me,”	 Apsalar	 said.	 “It's	 one	 of	 the	 biggest	 cities	 I've	 ever
seen,”	she	said.	“As	big	as	Unta,	I	think.”
He	stared	at	her.	She'd	been	saying	strange	things	lately,	which	did	not	seem
right	 coming	 from	 a	 fishergirl	 from	 a	 small	 coastal	 village.	 “Unta.	 That's	 the
Empire	capital,	isn't	it?”
She	frowned,	which	made	her	look	older.	“Yes.	Only	I've	never	been	there.”
“Well,	how	could	you	know	how	big	it	is,	then?”
“I'm	not	sure,	Crokus.”
Possession,	Coll	had	said.	Two	sets	of	memory	warred	in	the	woman,	and	the
war	was	getting	worse.	He	wondered	if	Mammot	had	shown	up	yet.	For	a	moment
he	came	near	to	regretting	their	escape	from	Meese	and	Irilta.	But	then	his	thoughts
turned	 to	 what	 was	 to	 come.	 He	 sat	 down	 on	 the	 platform	 and	 propped	 himself
against	the	low	wall.	He	stared	at	the	assassin's	body	across	from	him.	The	blood
that	had	been	spilled	had	blackened	under	the	hot	sun.	A	trail	of	droplets	crossed
the	 floor	 to	 the	 stairs.	 Clearly,	 this	 assassin's	 killer	 had	 himself	 been	 wounded.
Yet	Crokus	did	not	feel	in	danger,	up	here,	although	he	wasn't	sure	why.
For	an	abandoned	belfry	tower,	this	place	had	witnessed	a	lot	of	drama	lately.
“Are	we	waiting	for	night?”	Apsalar	asked.
Crokus	nodded.
“Then	we	find	this	Challice?”
“That's	right.	The	D'Arles	will	be	at	Lady	Simtal's	Fête,	I'm	sure	of	it.	The
estate	has	an	enormous	garden,	almost	a	forest.	It	goes	right	up	to	the	back	wall.
Getting	in	should	be	easy.”
“Won't	you	be	noticed	once	you	join	the	guests,	though?”
“I'll	 be	 dressed	 as	 a	 thief.	 Everybody	 will	 be	 wearing	 costumes.	 Besides,
there'll	 be	 hundreds	 of	 people	 there.	 It	 might	 take	 an	 hour	 or	 two,	 but	 I'll	 find
her.”
“And	then?”


“I'll	think	of	something,”	Crokus	said.
Apsalar	 stretched	 out	 her	 legs	 on	 the	 paving	 stones	 and	 crossed	 her	 arms.
“And	I'm	supposed	to	hide	in	the	bushes,	huh?”
He	 shrugged.	 “Maybe	 Uncle	 Mammot	 will	 be	 there,”	 he	 said.	 “Then
everything	will	be	all	right.”
“Why?”
“Because	 that's	 what	 Coll	 said,”	 Crokus	 shot	 back,	 exasperated.	 Was	 he
supposed	to	tell	her	she'd	been	possessed	for	who	knew	how	long?	“We'll	work
out	a	way	to	get	you	home,”	he	explained.	“That's	what	you	want,	right?”
She	nodded	slowly,	as	if	no	longer	certain	of	that.	“I	miss	my	father,”	she	said.
To	 Crokus,	 Apsalar	 sounded	 as	 though	 she	 was	 trying	 to	 convince	 herself.
He'd	looked	at	her	when	they'd	arrived,	thinking,	Why	not?	And	he	had	to	admit
to	 himself	 now	 that	 her	 company	 wasn't	 bad.	 Except	 for	 all	 the	 questions,	 of
course.	Mind,	what	if	he'd	been	in	her	situation,	waking	up	thousands	of	leagues
from	home?	It'd	be	terrifying.	Would	he	have	held	up	as	well	as	she	seemed	to	be
doing?
“I'm	feeling	all	right,”	she	said,	watching	him.	“It's	as	if	something	inside	is
keeping	things	together.	I	can't	explain	it	any	better,	but	it's	like	a	smooth,	black
stone.	Solid	and	warm,	and	whenever	I	start	getting	scared	it	takes	me	inside.	And
then	 everything's	 fine	 again.”	 She	 added,	 “I'm	 sorry.	 I	 didn't	 mean	 to	 push	 you
away.”
“Never	mind,”	he	said.
Within	 the	 shadows	 of	 the	 stairwell,	 Serrat	 studied	 the	 two	 figures	 out	 on	 the
platform.	 Enough	 was	 enough.	 She'd	 opened	 her	 Kurald	 Galain	 Warren	 into	 a
defensive	 layering	 of	 wards	 around	 her.	 No	 more	 of	 these	 invisible	 enemies.	 If
they	wanted	her,	they'd	have	to	show	themselves.	And	then	she'd	kill	them.	And	as
for	the	Coin	Bearer	and	the	girl,	where	could	they	hope	to	escape	to,	up	here	on
this	tower?
She	 unsheathed	 her	 daggers	 and	 prepared	 for	 her	 attack.	 A	 dozen	 wards
protected	 her	 back,	 all	 along	 the	 staircase.	 An	 approach	 from	 there	 was
impossible.
Two	sharp	points	touched	her	flesh,	one	under	her	chin	and	the	other	beneath
her	left	shoulder	blade.	The	Tiste	Andii	froze.	And	then	she	heard	a	voice	close	to
her	ear—a	voice	she	recognized.
“Give	Rake	this	warning,	Serrat.	He'll	only	get	one,	and	the	same	for	you.	The


Coin	Bearer	shall	not	be	harmed.	The	games	are	done.	Try	this	again	and	you'll
die.”
“You	bastard!”	she	exploded.	“My	lord's	anger—”
“Will	be	in	vain.	We	both	know	who	sends	this	message,	don't	we?	And,	as
Rake	 well	 knows,	 he's	 not	 as	 far	 away	 as	 he	 once	 was.”	 The	 point	 beneath	 her
chin	moved	away	to	allow	her	to	nod,	then	returned.	“Good.	Deliver	the	message,
then,	and	hope	we	don't	meet	again.”
“This	will	not	be	forgotten,”	Serrat	promised,	shaking	with	rage.
A	low	chuckle	answered	her.	“Compliments	of	the	Prince,	Serrat.	Take	it	up
with	our	mutual	friend.”
The	 daggers	 left	 her	 flesh.	 Serrat	 exhaled	 a	 long	 breath,	 then	 sheathed	 her
weapons.	She	snapped	a	Kurald	Galain	spell	and	vanished.
Crokus	jumped	at	a	faint	plopping	sound	from	the	stairwell.	He	laid	his	hands	on
his	knives,	tensing.
“What's	wrong?”	Apsalar	said.
“Shhh.	Wait.”	He	felt	his	heart	pound	hard	against	his	chest.	“I'm	ducking	at
shadows,”	he	said,	sitting	back.	“Well,	we're	off	soon,	anyway.”
It	was	an	age	of	wind,	sweeping	across	the	grass	plains	beneath	a	pewter	sky,	a
wind	whose	thirst	assailed	all	life,	mindless,	unrelenting	like	a	beast	that	did	not
know	itself.
Struggling	 in	 his	 mother's	 wake,	 it	 was	 Raest's	 first	 lesson	 in	 power.	 In	 the
hunt	for	domination	that	would	shape	his	life,	he	saw	the	many	ways	of	the	wind—
its	 subtle	 sculpting	 of	 stone	 over	 hundreds	 and	 then	 thousands	 of	 years,	 and	 its
raging	 gales	 that	 flattened	 forests—and	 found	 closest	 to	 his	 heart	 the	 violent
power	of	the	wind's	banshee	fury.
Raest's	 mother	 had	 been	 the	 first	 to	 flee	 his	 deliberate	 shaping	 of	 power.
She'd	denied	him	to	his	face,	proclaiming	the	Sundering	of	Blood	and	thus	cutting
him	 free.	 That	 the	 ritual	 had	 broken	 her	 he	 disregarded.	 It	 was	 unimportant.	 He
who	would	dominate	must	learn	early	that	those	resisting	his	command	should	be
destroyed.	Failure	was	her	price,	not	his.
While	the	Jaghut	feared	community,	pronouncing	society	to	be	the	birthplace	of
tyranny—of	the	flesh	and	the	spirit—and	citing	their	own	bloody	history	as	proof,
Raest	 discovered	 a	 hunger	 for	 it.	 The	 power	 he	 commanded	 insisted	 upon


subjects.	 Strength	 was	 ever	 relative,	 and	 he	 could	 not	 dominate	 without	 the
company	of	the	dominated.
At	first	he	sought	to	subjugate	other	Jaghut,	but	more	often	than	not	they	either
escaped	 him	 or	 he	 was	 forced	 to	 kill	 them.	 Such	 contests	 held	 only	 momentary
satisfaction.	 Raest	 gathered	 beasts	 around	 him,	 bending	 nature	 to	 his	 will.	 But
nature	withered	and	died	in	bondage,	and	so	found	an	escape	he	could	not	control.
In	 his	 anger	 he	 laid	 waste	 to	 the	 land,	 driving	 into	 extinction	 countless	 species.
The	earth	resisted	him,	and	its	power	was	immense.	Yet	it	was	directionless	and
could	not	overwhelm	Raest	in	its	ageless	tide.	His	was	a	focused	power,	precise
in	its	destruction	and	pervasive	in	its	effect.
Then	into	his	path	came	the	first	of	the	Imass,	creatures	who	struggled	against
his	 will,	 defying	 slavery	 and	 yet	 living	 on.	 Creatures	 of	 boundless,	 pitiful	 hope.
For	Raest,	he	had	found	in	them	the	glory	of	domination,	for	with	each	Imass	that
broke	 he	 took	 another.	 Their	 link	 with	 nature	 was	 minimal,	 for	 the	 Imass
themselves	played	the	game	of	tyranny	over	their	lands.	They	could	not	defeat	him.
He	fashioned	an	empire	of	sorts,	bereft	of	cities	yet	plagued	with	the	endless
dramas	of	society,	its	pathetic	victories	and	inevitable	failures.	The	community	of
enslaved	 Imass	 thrived	 in	 this	 quagmire	 of	 pettiness.	 They	 even	 managed	 to
convince	themselves	that	they	possessed	freedom,	a	will	of	their	own	that	could
shape	 destiny.	 They	 elected	 champions.	 They	 tore	 down	 their	 champions	 once
failure	 draped	 its	 shroud	 over	 them.	 They	 ran	 in	 endless	 circles	 and	 called	 it
growth,	emergence,	knowledge.	While	over	them	all,	a	presence	invisible	to	their
eyes,	Raest	flexed	his	will.	His	greatest	joy	came	when	his	slaves	proclaimed	him
god—though	 they	 knew	 him	 not—and	 constructed	 temples	 to	 serve	 him	 and
organized	 priesthoods	 whose	 activities	 mimicked	 Raest's	 tyranny	 with	 such
cosmic	irony	that	the	Jaghut	could	only	shake	his	head.
It	should	have	been	an	empire	to	last	for	millennia,	and	its	day	of	dying	should
have	been	by	his	own	hand,	when	he	at	last	tired	of	it.	Raest	had	never	imagined
that	 other	 Jaghut	 would	 find	 his	 activities	 abhorrent,	 that	 they	 would	 risk
themselves	 and	 their	 own	 power	 on	 behalf	 of	 these	 short-lived,	 small-minded
Imass.	Yet	what	astonished	Raest	more	than	anything	else	was	that	when	the	Jaghut
came	 they	 came	 in	 numbers,	 in	 community.	 A	 community	 whose	 sole	 purpose	 of
existence	was	to	destroy	his	empire,	to	imprison	him.
He	had	been	unprepared.
The	lesson	was	learned,	and	no	matter	what	the	world	had	become	since	that
time,	Raest	was	ready	for	it.	His	limbs	creaked	at	first,	throbbing	with	dull	aches
bridged	 by	 sharp	 pangs.	 The	 effort	 of	 digging	 himself	 from	 the	 frozen	 earth	 had
incapacitated	 him	 for	 a	 time,	 but	 finally	 he	 felt	 ready	 to	 walk	 the	 tunnel	 that


opened	out	into	a	new	land.
Preparation.	Already	he'd	initiated	his	first	moves.	He	sensed	that	others	had
come	to	him,	had	freed	the	path	of	Omtose	Phellack	wards	and	seals.	Perhaps	his
worshipers	 remained,	 fanatics	 who	 had	 sought	 his	 release	 for	 generations,	 and
even	now	awaited	him	beyond	the	barrow.
The	missing	Finnest	would	be	his	first	priority.	Much	of	his	power	had	been
stored	within	the	seed,	stripped	from	him	and	stored	there	by	the	Jaghut	betrayers.
It	had	not	been	carried	far,	and	there	was	nothing	that	could	prevent	his	recovering
it.	Omtose	Phellack	no	longer	existed	in	the	land	above—he	could	feel	its	absence
like	an	airless	void.	Nothing	could	oppose	him	now.
Preparation.	 Raest's	 withered,	 cracked	 face	 twisted	 into	 a	 savage	 grin,	 his
lower	 tusks	 splitting	 desiccated	 skin.	 The	 powerful	 must	 gather	 other	 power,
subjugate	 it	 to	 their	 own	 will,	 then	 direct	 it	 unerringly.	 His	 moves	 had	 already
begun.
He	sloshed	through	the	slush	now	covering	the	barrow's	muddy	floor.	Before
him	rose	the	slanted	wall	that	marked	the	tomb's	barrier.	Beyond	the	limestreaked
earth	 waited	 a	 world	 to	 be	 enslaved.	 Raest	 gestured	 and	 the	 barrier	 exploded
outward.	Bright	sunlight	flared	in	the	clouds	of	steam	rolling	around	him,	and	he
felt	waves	of	cold,	ancient	air	sweeping	past	him.
The	Jaghut	Tyrant	walked	into	the	light.
The	 Great	 Raven	 Crone	 rode	 the	 hot	 streams	 of	 wind	 high	 above	 the	 Gadrobi
Hills.	The	burst	of	power	that	launched	tons	of	earth	and	rocks	a	hundred	feet	into
the	sky	elicited	a	cackle	from	her.	She	dipped	a	wing,	eyes	on	the	white	pillar	of
steam,	and	banked	toward	it.
This,	she	laughed	to	herself,	should	prove	interesting.
A	wash	of	air	pounded	down	on	to	her.	Shrieking	her	outrage,	Crone	twisted
and	 slid	 along	 the	 shunting	 wind.	 Massive	 shadows	 flowed	 over	 her.	 Her	 anger
was	swept	away	on	a	surge	of	excitement.	Head	craning,	she	beat	the	air	with	her
wings	 and	 climbed	 again.	 In	 matters	 such	 as	 these,	 a	 proper	 point	 of	 view	 was
essential.	Crone	climbed	higher	still,	then	cocked	her	head	and	looked	down.	By
the	light	of	the	sun	scales	flashed	iridescent	from	five	ridged	backs,	but	of	the	five
one	shone	like	fire.	Sorcerous	power	bled	in	ripples	from	the	web	of	their	spread
wings.	 The	 dragons	 sailed	 silent	 over	 the	 landscape,	 closing	 on	 the	 billowing
dust-cloud	 above	 the	 Jaghut	 tomb.	 Crone's	 black	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 dragon	 that
blazed	red.
“Silanah!”	she	screamed,	laughing.	“Dragnipurake	t'na	Draconiaes!	Eleint,


eleint!”	The	day	of	the	Tiste	Andii	had	come.
______
Raest	 emerged	 into	 rich	 afternoon	 sunlight.	 Yellow-grassed	 hills	 rose	 in
weathered	 humps	 in	 every	 direction	 but	 the	 one	 he	 faced.	 To	 the	 east	 behind	 a
thinning	curtain	of	drifting	dust	stretched	an	empty	plain.
The	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 grunted.	 Not	 so	 different	 after	 all.	 He	 raised	 his	 arms,
feeling	 wind	 slide	 along	 his	 cabled	 muscles.	 He	 drew	 a	 breath,	 tasting	 the	 liferich	air.	He	quested	lightly	with	his	power	and	exulted	in	the	waves	of	fear	that
answered	it—answers	that	came	from	the	mindless	life	beneath	his	feet	or	hiding
in	the	grasses	around	him.	But	of	higher	life,	higher	concentrations	of	power,	he
sensed	nothing.	Raest	drove	his	senses	down	into	the	ground,	seeking	what	dwelt
there.	 Earth	 and	 bedrock,	 the	 sluggish	 molten	 darkness	 beneath,	 down,	 down	 to
find	 the	 sleeping	 goddess—young	 as	 far	 as	 the	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 was	 concerned.
“Shall	 I	 wake	 you?”	 he	 whispered.	 “Not	 yet.	 But	 I	 shall	 make	 you	 bleed.”	 His
right	hand	closed	into	a	fist.
He	 speared	 the	 goddess	 with	 pain,	 driving	 a	 fissure	 through	 the	 bedrock,
feeling	the	gush	of	her	blood,	enough	to	make	her	stir	but	not	awaken.
The	line	of	hills	to	the	north	lifted	skyward.	Magma	sprayed	into	the	air	amid
a	rising	pillar	of	smoke,	rock,	and	ash.	The	earth	shuddered	even	as	the	sound	of
the	eruption	swept	over	Raest	in	a	fierce,	hot	wind.	The	Jaghut	Tyrant	smiled.
He	 studied	 the	 shattered	 ridge	 and	 breathed	 the	 heavy,	 sulfurous	 air,	 then
turned	about	and	strode	west	toward	the	highest	hill	in	that	direction.	His	Finnest
lay	beyond	it,	perhaps	three	days'	walk.	He	considered	opening	his	Warren,	then
decided	 to	 wait	 until	 he	 reached	 the	 hill's	 summit.	 From	 that	 vantage	 point,	 he
could	better	judge	the	Finnest's	location.
Halfway	up	the	slope	he	heard	distant	laughter.	Raest	stiffened	just	as	the	day
darkened	 suddenly	 around	 him.	 On	 the	 sward	 before	 him	 he	 saw	 five	 enormous
shadows	 sweeping	 up	 the	 slope,	 then	 beyond	 the	 hill's	 summit.	 The	 sunlight
returned.	The	Jaghut	Tyrant	looked	into	the	sky	above	him.
Five	dragons	banked	in	perfect	formation,	their	heads	dipping	to	watch	him	as
they	glided	back	in	his	direction.	“Estideein	eleint,”	he	whispered,	in	his	Jaghut
tongue.	Four	were	black,	barbed	in	silver	along	the	wings	and	flying	two	to	either
side	of	the	fifth	dragon,	this	one	red	and	twice	as	large	as	the	others.	“Silanah	redwings,”	Raest	muttered,	eyes	narrowing.	“Elder-born	and	trueblooded	Tiam,	you
lead	Soletaken,	whose	blood	is	alien	to	this	world.	I	feel	you	all!”	He	raised	fists


to	the	sky.	“Colder	than	the	ice	born	of	Jaghut	hands,	as	dark	as	blindness—I	feel
you!”
He	lowered	his	arms.	“Harass	me	not,	eleint.	I	cannot	enslave	you,	but	I	will
destroy	you.	Know	that.	I	will	drive	you	to	the	ground,	each	and	all,	and	with	my
own	 hands	 I	 shall	 tear	 your	 hearts	 from	 your	 chests.”	 His	 eyes	 narrowed	 on	 the
four	 black	 dragons.	 “Soletaken.	 You	 would	 challenge	 me	 at	 the	 command	 of
another.	You	would	battle	with	me	for	no	reason	of	your	own.	Ah,	but	if	I	were	to
command	you	I	would	not	throw	your	lives	away	so	carelessly.	I	would	cherish
you,	 Soletaken,	 I	 would	 give	 you	 causes	 worth	 believing	 in,	 show	 you	 the	 true
rewards	of	power.”	Raest	scowled,	as	their	derision	swept	through	his	mind.	“So
be	it.”
The	 dragons	 passed	 low	 overhead	 in	 silence,	 banking	 once	 again	 and
disappearing	 behind	 the	 hills	 to	 the	 south.	 Raest	 spread	 his	 arms	 wide	 and
unleashed	 his	 Warren.	 His	 flesh	 split	 as	 power	 flowed	 into	 him.	 His	 arms	 shed
skin	 like	 ash.	 He	 both	 felt	 and	 heard	 hills	 crack	 all	 around	 him,	 the	 snapping	 of
stone,	the	sundering	of	crags.	To	all	sides	the	horizons	blurred	as	dust	curtained
skyward.	He	faced	south.	“This	is	my	power!	Come	to	me!”
A	long	minute	passed.	He	frowned	at	the	hills	before	him,	then	cried	out	and
whirled	to	his	right	just	as	Silanah	and	the	four	black	dragons,	all	less	than	ten	feet
above	the	ground,	plunged	over	the	summit	of	the	hill	he'd	been	climbing.
Raest	 screamed	 at	 the	 whirlwind	 of	 power	 battering	 him,	 his	 shrunken	 eyes
locked	on	Silanah's	blank,	empty,	deadly	gaze—eyes	as	large	as	the	Jaghut's	head
—as	it	bore	down	upon	him	with	the	speed	of	a	springing	viper.	The	red	dragon's
jaws	opened	wide	and	Raest	found	himself	staring	down	the	beast's	throat.
He	screamed	a	second	time	and	released	his	power	all	at	once.
The	air	detonated	as	the	Warrens	collided.	Jagged	shards	of	rock	ripped	in	all
directions.	Starvald	Demelain	and	Kurald	Galain	warred	with	Omtose	Phellack	in
a	savage	maelstrom	of	will.	Grasses,	earth,	and	rock	withered	to	fine	ash	on	all
sides,	and	within	the	vortex	stood	Raest,	his	power	roaring	from	him.	Lashes	of
sorcery	from	the	dragons	lanced	into	his	body,	boring	through	his	withered	flesh.
The	Jaghut	Tyrant	flayed	his	power	like	a	scythe.	Blood	spattered	the	ground,
sprayed	in	gouts.	The	dragons	shrieked.
A	 wave	 of	 incandescent	 fire	 struck	 Raest	 from	 the	 right,	 solid	 as	 a	 battering
fist.	 Howling,	he	was	thrown	through	 the	 air,	 landing	 in	 a	 bank	of	 powdery	ash.
Silanah's	 fire	 raced	 over	 him,	 blackening	 what	 was	 left	 of	 his	 flesh.	 The	 Tyrant
clambered	 upright,	 his	 body	 jerking	 uncontrollably	 as	 sorcery	 gouted	 from	 his
right	hand.


The	 ground	 shook	 as	 Raest's	 power	 hammered	 Silanah	 down,	 driving	 the
dragon	skidding	and	tumbling	across	the	slope.	The	Tyrant's	exultant	roar	was	cut
short	as	talons	the	length	of	a	forearm	crunched	into	him	from	behind.	A	second
clawed	foot	joined	the	first,	snapping	through	the	bones	of	Raest's	chest	as	if	they
were	twigs.	More	talons	flexed	around	him	as	a	second	dragon	sought	grip.
The	Tyrant	twisted	helplessly	as	the	claws	lifted	him	into	the	air	and	started
ripping	his	body	apart.	He	dislocated	his	own	shoulder	in	reaching	round	to	dig
his	 fingers	 into	 a	 sleek	 scaled	 shin.	 At	 the	 contact,	 Omtose	 Phellack	 surged	 into
the	 dragon's	 leg,	 shattering	 bone,	 boiling	 blood.	 Raest	 laughed	 as	 the	 claws
spasmed	 loose	 and	 he	 was	 flung	 away.	 More	 bones	 snapped	 as	 he	 struck	 the
ground,	 but	 it	 did	 not	 matter.	 His	 power	 was	 absolute,	 the	 vessel	 that	 carried	 it
had	little	relevance.	If	need	be,	the	Tyrant	would	find	other	bodies,	bodies	in	the
thousands.
He	climbed	once	more	to	his	feet.	“Now,”	he	whispered,	“I	deliver	death.”


Chapter	Twenty-one
	

The	flowering	of	light	from	darkness
brought	into	my	sight	there	on	the	field
a	host	of	dragons	caught
like	a	crest	of	wind	before	the	eternal	flame.
I	saw	the	ages	in	their	eyes
a	worldly	map	inscribed
in	each	whirled	scale	on	their	hides.
Their	sorcery	bled	from	them
like	the	breathing	of	stars
and	I	knew	then
that	dragons	had	come	among	us	.	.	.
ANOMANDARIS
FISHER	(B.?)


	
Shadows	crowded	the	garden's	undergrowth.	Adjunct	Lorn	rose	from	her	crouch
and	brushed	the	dirt	from	her	hands.	“Find	an	acorn.”	She	smiled	to	herself.	“Plant
it.”
Somewhere	beyond	the	heavily	wooded	garden,	servants	shouted	at	each	other
as	they	scrambled	about	making	last-minute	arrangements.	She	hitched	her	cloak's
tail	 into	 her	 belt	 and	 quietly	 slipped	 among	 the	 boles	 of	 vine-wrapped	 trees.	 A
moment	later	the	back	wall	came	into	view.
An	alley	lay	beyond,	narrow	and	choked	with	the	leaves	and	fallen	branches
from	the	gardens	rising	above	the	walls	on	its	either	side.	Her	route	in—and	now
out—was	a	thing	of	ease.	She	scaled	the	rough-stoned	wall,	grasping	vines	when
necessary,	then	slid	over	the	top.
She	landed	with	a	soft	crunch	of	twigs	and	dry	leaves,	within	shadows	as	deep
as	those	in	the	garden.	She	adjusted	her	cloak,	then	walked	to	one	end	of	the	alley
where	 she	 leaned	 against	 a	 corner,	 crossed	 her	 arms,	 and	 smiled	 at	 the	 crowds
passing	to	and	fro	on	the	street	before	her.
Two	tasks	left	to	perform,	then	she	would	leave	this	city.	One	of	those	tasks,
however,	 might	 prove	 impossible.	 She	 sensed	 nothing	 of	 Sorry's	 presence.
Perhaps	 the	 woman	 was	 indeed	 dead.	 Under	 the	 circumstances	 it	 was	 the	 only
explanation.
She	 watched	 the	 sea	 of	 people,	 its	 tide	 of	 faces	 swirling	 past.	 The	 latent
madness	there	made	her	 uneasy,	especially	with	the	city's	guards	maintaining	 an
aloof	distance.	She	wondered	at	the	taint	of	terror	in	that	multitude	of	faces,	and
how	almost	every	face	seemed	familiar.
Darujhistan	blurred	in	her	mind,	becoming	a	hundred	other	cities,	each	rising
out	of	her	past	as	if	on	parade.	Joy	and	fear,	agony	and	laughter—the	expressions
merged	into	one,	the	sounds	coming	to	her	no	different	from	each	other.	She	could
distinguish	 nothing,	 the	 faces	 becoming	 expressionless,	 the	 sounds	 a	 roar	 of
history	without	meaning.
Lorn	passed	a	hand	over	her	eyes,	then	staggered	back	a	step	and	reeled	into
the	alley's	shadows	behind	her.	She	slid	down	one	wall	into	a	sagging	crouch.	A
celebration	of	insignificance.	Is	that	all	we	are	in	the	end?	Listen	to	them!	In	a
few	 hours	 the	 city's	 intersections	 would	 explode.	 Hundreds	 would	 die	 instantly,
thousands	to	follow.	Amid	the	rubble	of	shattered	cobbles	and	toppled	buildings
would	be	these	faces,	locked	in	expressions	somewhere	between	joy	and	terror.


And	 from	 the	 dying	 would	 come	 sounds,	 hopeless	 cries	 that	 dwindled	 in	 the
passing	of	pain.
She'd	seen	them	all	before,	those	faces.	She	knew	them	all,	knew	the	sound	of
their	voices,	sounds	mired	in	human	emotions,	sounds	clear	and	pure	with	thought,
and	 sounds	 wavering	 in	 that	 chasm	 between	 the	 two.	 Is	 this,	 she	 wondered,	 my
legacy?	And	 one	 day	 I'll	 be	 just	 one	 more	 of	 those	 faces,	 frozen	 in	 death	 and
wonder.
Lorn	 shook	 her	 head,	 but	 it	 was	 a	 wan	 effort.	 She	 realized,	 with	 sudden
comprehension,	that	she	was	breaking	down.	The	Adjunct	was	cracking,	its	armor
crumbling	and	the	luster	gone	from	its	marbled	grandeur.	A	title	as	meaningless	as
the	 woman	 bearing	 it.	 The	 Empress—just	 another	 face	 she'd	 seen	 somewhere
before,	a	mask	behind	which	someone	hid	from	mortality.
“No	 use	 hiding,”	 she	 whispered,	 frowning	 down	 at	 the	 dead	 leaves	 and
branches	around	her.	“No	use.”
A	few	minutes	later	she	pushed	herself	upright	once	again.	She	brushed	the	dirt
meticulously	from	her	cloak.	One	task	remained	within	her	abilities.	Find	the	Coin
Bearer.	 Kill	 him,	 and	 take	 Oponn's	 Coin.	 Make	 the	 god	 pay	 for	 its	 intrusion	 in
Empire	affairs—the	Empress	and	Tayschrenn	would	see	to	that.
The	 task	 demanded	 concentration,	 fixing	 her	 senses	 upon	 one	 particular
signature.	It	would	be	her	last	act,	she	knew.	But	she	would	succeed.	Death	at	the
hands	 of	 failure	 was	 unthinkable.	 Lorn	 turned	 to	 the	 street.	 Dusk	 crept	 from	 the
ground	 and	 engulfed	 the	 crowds.	 Far	 off	 to	 the	 east	 thunder	 sounded,	 yet	 the	 air
was	dry,	with	no	hint	of	rain.	She	checked	her	weapons.	“The	Adjunct's	mission,”
she	said	quietly,	“is	almost	done.”
She	entered	the	street	and	disappeared	into	the	mob.
Kruppe	 rose	 from	 his	 table	 at	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn	 and	 attempted	 to	 fasten	 the	 last
button	on	his	waistcoat.	Failing,	he	let	his	stomach	relax	once	again	and	let	loose
a	weary	sigh.	Well,	at	least	the	coat	had	been	cleaned.	He	adjusted	the	cuffs	of	his
new	shirt,	then	walked	out	of	the	mostly	empty	bar.
He'd	spent	the	last	hour	seated	at	his	table,	to	all	outward	appearances	musing
on	 nothing	 of	 great	 importance,	 though	 in	 his	 head	 a	 pattern	 formed,	 born	 of	 his
Talent,	 and	 it	 disturbed	 him	 greatly.	 Meese	 and	 Irilta	 losing	 Crokus	 and	 the	 girl
brought	everything	into	focus—as	with	most	unwitting	servants	of	the	gods,	once
the	 game	 was	 done	 so	 was	 the	 servant's	 life.	 The	 Coin	 might	 be	 gambled	 in	 a
single	 contest,	 but	 to	 have	 it	 floating	 around	 indefinitely	 was	 far	 too	 dangerous.
No,	 Crokus	 would	 find	 his	 luck	 abandoning	 him	 when	 he	 needed	 it	 most,	 and	 it


would	cost	the	lad	his	life.
“No,	no,”	Kruppe	had	murmured	over	his	tankard.	“Kruppe	can't	permit	that.”
Yet	the	pattern	of	success	remained	elusive.	He	felt	certain	he	had	covered	all	the
potential	 threats	 regarding	 the	 lad	 or,	 rather,	 someone	 was	 doing	 a	 good	 job	 of
protecting	Crokus—that	much	the	pattern	showed	him.	He	experienced	a	nagging
suspicion	that	the	“someone”	wasn't	himself,	or	any	of	his	agents.	And	he'd	just
have	to	trust	in	its	integrity.
Circle	 Breaker	 had	 come	 through	 yet	 again,	 and	 Kruppe	 was	 still	 confident
that	 Turban	 Orr's	 hunt	 for	 the	 man	 would	 prove	 fruitless.	 The	 Eel	 knew	 how	 to
protect	 his	 own.	 In	 fact,	 Circle	 Breaker	 was	 due	 for	 retirement—for	 the	 man's
own	 safety—and	 Kruppe	 intended	 to	 deliver	 the	 good	 news	 this	 very	 night,	 at
Lady	Simtal's	Fête.	Circle	Breaker	deserved	no	less	after	all	these	years.
The	pattern	also	told	him	 something	he	already	knew:	his	cover	was	blown.
The	spell	he	had	cast	on	Murillio	wouldn't	last	much	longer,	nor	was	it	required
to.	 Kruppe	 had	 wanted	 his	 freedom	 unimpeded	 this	 day.	 After	 that,	 well,	 things
would	fall	as	they	would	fall—and	the	same	applied	for	his	meeting	with	Baruk.
If	 anything	 gave	 Kruppe	 pause,	 it	 was	 the	 pattern's	 abrupt	 ending.	 Beyond
tonight,	the	future	was	blank.	Clearly,	a	crux	had	been	reached,	and	it	would	turn,
he	knew,	at	Lady	Simtal's	Fête.
Kruppe	 now	 entered	 the	 Higher	 Estates	 District,	 with	 a	 generous	 nod	 at	 the
lone	 guard	 stationed	 near	 the	 ramp.	 The	 man	 scowled,	 but	 otherwise	 made	 no
comment.	 The	 Fête	 was	 set	 to	 begin	 in	 thirty	 minutes,	 and	 Kruppe	 planned	 on
being	 one	 of	 the	 first	 to	 arrive.	 His	 mouth	 watered	 at	 the	 thought	 of	 all	 those
pastries,	fresh	and	dripping	with	warm,	sweet	liquids.	He	removed	his	mask	from
inside	 his	 coat	 and	 smiled	 at	 it.	 Perhaps,	 among	 all	 those	 attending,	 High
Alchemist	 Baruk	 alone	 would	 appreciate	 the	 irony	 of	 this	 molded	 visage.	 Ah,
well,	 he	 sighed.	 One	 is	 more	 than	 enough,	 given	 who	 that	 one	 is.	 After	 all,	 is
Kruppe	greedy?
His	stomach	rumbled	in	answer.
Crokus	 strained	 his	 eyes	 toward	 the	 darkening	 east.	 Something	 like	 lightning
flashed	every	now	and	then	beyond	the	hills,	each	one	closer	than	the	last.	But	the
thunder's	 rumble,	 which	 had	 begun	 early	 that	 afternoon	 and	 still	 continued,
sounded	somehow	wrong,	its	timbre	unlike	the	normal	bass	that	rolled	through	the
earth.	It	seemed	almost	brittle.	The	clouds	that	had	appeared	over	the	hill	earlier
had	been	an	eerie	ocher	color,	sickly,	and	those	clouds	now	approached	the	city.
“When	are	we	leaving?”	Apsalar	asked,	leaning	on	the	wall	beside	him.


Crokus	shook	himself.	“Now.	It's	dark	enough.”
“Crokus?	What	will	you	do	if	Challice	D'Arle	betrays	you	a	second	time?”
He	could	barely	see	her	face	in	the	gloom.	Had	she	meant	that	to	cut?	It	was
hard	to	tell	from	her	voice.	“She	won't,”	he	said,	telling	himself	that	he	believed
it.	“Trust	me,”	and	he	turned	toward	the	stairwell.
“I	do,”	she	said	simply.
Crokus	 winced.	 Why	 did	 she	 make	 things	 seem	 so	 easy	 for	 her?	 Hood's
Breath,	 he	 wouldn't	 trust	 him.	 Of	 course,	 he	 didn't	 know	 Challice	 very	 well.
They'd	only	had	that	one,	confusing	conversation.	What	if	she	called	the	guards?
Well,	he'd	make	sure	Apsalar	got	away	safely.	He	paused	and	grasped	her	arm.
“Listen,”	 his	 own	 voice	 sounded	 unduly	 harsh,	 but	 he	 pushed	 on,	 “if	 something
goes	 wrong,	 go	 to	 the	 Phoenix	 Inn.	 Right?	 Find	 Meese,	 Irilta,	 or	 my	 friends
Kruppe	and	Murillio.	Tell	them	what	happened.”
“All	right,	Crokus.”
“Good.”	He	released	her	arm.	“Wish	we	had	a	lantern,”	he	said,	as	he	stepped
into	the	darkness,	one	hand	reaching	before	him.
“Why?”	 Apsalar	 asked,	 slipping	 past	 him.	 She	 took	 his	 hand	 and	 led	 him
down.	“I	can	see.	Don't	let	go	of	my	hand.”
That	might	be	a	hard	thing	to	do	even	if	he'd	desired	it,	he	realized.	Still,	there
were	a	lot	of	rough	calluses	on	that	small	hand.	He	let	them	remind	him	of	what
this	 woman	 was	 capable	 of	 doing,	 though	 the	 effort	 embarrassed	 him	 in	 some
vague	way.
Eyes	wide,	yet	seeing	nothing,	Crokus	allowed	himself	to	be	guided	down	the
stairs.
The	 captain	 of	 Simtal's	 House	 Guard	 viewed	 Whiskeyjack	 and	 his	 men	 with
obvious	distaste.	“I	thought	you	were	all	Barghast.”	He	stepped	up	to	Trotts	and
jabbed	a	finger	into	the	warrior's	massive	chest.	“You	led	me	to	believe	you	were
all	like	you,	Niganga.”
A	 low,	 menacing	 growl	 emerged	 from	 Trotts,	 and	 the	 captain	 stepped	 back,
one	hand	reaching	for	his	short	sword.
“Captain,”	Whiskeyjack	said,	“if	we	were	all	Barghast—”
The	man's	narrow	face	swung	to	him	with	a	scowl.
“—you'd	never	be	able	to	afford	us,”	the	sergeant	finished	with	a	tight	smile.
He	 glanced	 at	 Trotts.	 Niganga?	 Hood's	 Breath!	 “Niganga	 is	 my	 second-incommand,	Captain.	Now,	how	would	you	like	us	positioned?”


“Just	beyond	the	fountain,”	he	said.	“Your	backs	will	be	to	the	garden,	which
has,	 ah,	 run	 wild	 of	 late.	 We	 don't	 want	 any	 guests	 getting	 lost	 in	 there,	 so	 you
gently	 steer	 them	 back.	 Understood?	 And	 when	 I	 say	 gently	 I	 mean	 it.	 You're	 to
salute	 anyone	 who	 talks	 to	 you,	 and	 if	 there's	 an	 argument	 direct	 them	 to	 me,
Captain	Stillis.	I'll	be	making	the	rounds,	but	any	one	of	the	house	guard	can	find
me.”
Whiskeyjack	 nodded.	 “Understood,	 sir.”	 He	 turned	 to	 survey	 his	 squad.
Fiddler	and	Hedge	stood	behind	Trotts,	both	looking	eager.	Past	them	Mallet	and
Quick	Ben	stood	on	the	edge	of	the	street,	heads	bent	together	in	conversation.	The
sergeant	 frowned	 at	 them,	 noticing	 how	 his	 wizard	 winced	 with	 every	 boom	 of
thunder	to	the	east.
Captain	 Stillis	 marched	 off	 after	 giving	 them	 directions	 through	 the	 estate's
rooms	 out	 to	 the	 terrace	 and	 garden	 beyond.	 Whiskeyjack	 waited	 for	 the	 man	 to
leave	his	line	of	sight,	then	he	strode	to	Quick	Ben	and	Mallet.	“What's	wrong?”
he	asked.
Quick	Ben	looked	frightened.
Mallet	 said,	 “That	 thunder	 and	 lightning,	 Sergeant?	 Well,	 it	 ain't	 no	 storm.
Paran's	story	is	looking	real.”
“Meaning	we	 have	little	time,”	Whiskeyjack	said.	“Wonder	why	the	Adjunct
didn't	show	up—you	think	she's	melting	her	boots	getting	away	from	here?”
Mallet	shrugged.
“Don't	you	get	it?”	Quick	Ben	said	shakily.	He	took	a	couple	of	deep	breaths,
then	 continued,	 “That	 creature	 out	 there	 is	 in	 a	 fight.	 We're	 talking	 major
sorceries,	only	it's	getting	closer,	which	means	that	it's	winning.	And	that	means
—”
“We're	 in	 trouble,”	 Whiskeyjack	 finished.	 “All	 right,	 we	 go	 as	 planned	 for
now.	Come	on,	we've	been	assigned	right	where	we	want	to	be.	Quick	Ben,	you
sure	Kalam	and	Paran	can	find	us?”
The	wizard	moaned.	“Directions	delivered,	Sergeant.”
“Good.	Let's	move,	then.	Through	the	house	and	eyes	forward.”
“He	 looks	 like	 he's	 going	 to	 sleep	 for	 days,”	 Kalam	 said,	 straightening	 beside
Coll's	bed	and	facing	the	captain.
Paran	 rubbed	 his	 red-shot	 eyes.	 “She	 must	 have	 given	 them	 something,”	 he
insisted	wearily,	“even	if	they	didn't	see	it.”
Kalam	wagged	his	head.	“I've	told	you,	sir,	she	didn't.	Everyone	was	on	the


lookout	 for	 something	 like	 that.	 The	 squad's	 still	 clean.	 Now,	 we'd	 better	 get
moving.”
Paran	 climbed	 to	 his	 feet	 with	 an	 effort.	 He	 was	 exhausted,	 and	 he	 knew	 he
was	 just	 an	 added	 burden.	 “She'll	 turn	 up	 at	 this	 estate,	 then,”	 he	 insisted,
strapping	on	his	sword.
“Well,”	Kalam	said,	as	he	walked	to	the	door,	“that's	where	you	and	me	come
in,	 right?	 She	 shows	 up	 and	 we	 take	 her	 out—just	 like	 you've	 wanted	 to	 do	 all
along.”
“Right	now,”	Paran	said,	joining	the	assassin,	“the	shape	I'm	in	will	make	my
role	 in	 the	 fight	 a	 short	 one.	 Consider	 me	 the	 surprise	 factor,	 the	 one	 thing	 she
won't	be	expecting,	the	one	thing	that'll	stop	her	for	a	second.”	He	looked	into	the
man's	dark	eyes.	“Make	that	second	count,	Corporal.”
Kalam	grinned.	“I	hear	you,	sir.”
They	left	Coll	still	snoring	contentedly	and	went	down	to	the	bar's	main	floor.
As	they	passed	along	the	counter,	Scurve	looked	at	them	warily.
Kalam	 released	 an	 exasperated	 curse	 and,	 in	 a	 surge	 of	 motion,	 reached	 out
and	 grasped	 him	 by	 the	 shirt.	 He	 pulled	 the	 squealing	 innkeeper	 halfway	 across
the	counter	until	their	faces	were	inches	apart.	“I'm	sick	of	waiting,”	the	assassin
growled.	“You	get	this	message	to	this	city's	Master	of	the	Assassins.	I	don't	care
how.	Just	do	it,	and	do	it	fast.	Here's	the	message:	the	biggest	contract	offer	of	the
Master's	life	will	be	waiting	at	the	back	wall	of	Lady	Simtal's	estate.	Tonight.	If
the	Guild	Master's	worthy	of	that	name	then	maybe—just	maybe—it's	not	too	big
for	the	Guild	to	handle.	Deliver	that	message,	even	if	you	have	to	shout	it	from	the
rooftops,	or	I'm	coming	back	here	with	killing	in	mind.”
Paran	stared	at	his	corporal,	too	tired	to	be	amazed.	“We're	wasting	time,”	he
drawled.
Kalam	tightened	his	grip	and	glared	into	Scurve's	eyes.	“We'd	better	not	be,”
he	growled.	He	released	the	man	by	gently	lowering	him	onto	the	countertop.	Then
he	tossed	a	handful	of	silver	coins	beside	Scurve.	“For	your	troubles,”	he	said.
Paran	gestured	and	the	assassin	nodded.	They	left	the	Phoenix	Inn.
“Still	following	orders,	Corporal?”
Kalam	 grunted.	 “We	 were	 instructed	 to	 make	 the	 offer	 in	 the	 name	 of	 the
Empress,	Captain.	If	the	contract's	accepted	and	the	assassinations	are	done,	then
Laseen	will	have	to	pay	up,	whether	we've	been	outlawed	or	not.”
“A	gutted	city	for	Dujek	and	his	army	to	occupy,	with	the	Empress	paying	for
it.	She'll	choke	on	that,	Kalam.”


He	grinned.	“That's	her	problem,	not	mine.”
In	the	street,	the	Grayfaces	moved	through	the	noisy	crowd	like	silent	specters,
lighting	the	gas-lamps	with	long-poled	sparkers.	Some	people,	brazen	with	drink,
hugged	 the	 figures	 and	 blessed	 them.	 The	 Grayfaces,	 hooded	 and	 anonymous,
simply	bowed	in	reply	and	continued	on	their	way	once	freed.
Kalam	stared	at	them,	his	brows	knitting.
“Something	the	matter,	Corporal?”	Paran	asked.
“Just	something	nagging	me.	Can't	pin	it	down.	Only,	it's	got	to	do	with	those
Grayfaces.”
The	 captain	 shrugged.	 “They	 keep	 the	 lanterns	 lit.	 Shall	 we	 make	 our	 way,
then?”
Kalam	sighed.	“Might	as	well,	sir.”
The	black	lacquered	carriage,	drawn	by	two	dun	stallions,	moved	slowly	through
the	 press.	 A	 dozen	 feet	 ahead	 marched	 a	 brace	 of	 Baruk's	 own	 house	 guards,
driving	 a	 wedge	 down	 the	 street's	 center,	 using	 their	 wrapped	 weapons	 when
shouts	and	curses	failed.
In	the	plush	confines	of	the	carriage	the	outside	roar	surged	and	ebbed	like	a
distant	tide,	muted	by	the	alchemist's	sound-deadening	spells.	He	sat	with	his	chin
lowered	on	his	chest,	his	eyes—hidden	in	the	shadow	of	his	brow	and	half-shut—
studying	the	Tiste	Andii	seated	across	from	him.	Rake	had	said	nothing	since	his
return	to	the	estate	just	minutes	before	their	planned	departure.
Baruk's	head	throbbed.	Sorcery	shook	the	hills	to	the	east,	sending	waves	of
concussion	that	struck	every	mage	within	range	like	mailed	fists.	He	well	knew	its
source.	The	barrow	dweller	approached,	its	every	step	contested	by	Anomander
Rake's	 Tiste	 Andii.	 It	 seemed	 that	 Mammot's	 prediction	 had	 been	 too	 generous.
They	didn't	have	days,	they	had	hours.
Yet,	 despite	 the	 warring	 Warrens,	 despite	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 Jaghut	 Tyrant's
power	 was	 superior	 to	 Rake's	 mages'—that	 the	 barrow	 dweller	 came	 on,
relentless,	unstoppable,	a	growing	storm	of	Omtose	Phellack	sorcery—the	Lord	of
Moon's	Spawn	sat	at	ease	on	the	padded	couch,	legs	stretched	out	before	him	and
gloved	 hands	 folded	 in	 his	 lap.	 The	 mask	 lying	 on	 the	 velvet	 at	 his	 side	 was
exquisite,	if	ghastly.	In	better	times	Baruk	might	have	been	amused,	appreciative
of	 its	 workmanship,	 but	 right	 now	 when	 he	 regarded	 it	 his	 lone	 response	 was
suspicion.	A	secret	was	locked	in	that	mask,	something	that	bespoke	the	man	who
would	wear	it.	But	the	secret	eluded	Baruk.


Turban	Orr	adjusted	his	hawk	mask	and	paused	just	before	the	wide	steps	leading
to	 the	 estate's	 main	 doors.	 He	 heard	 another	 carriage	 arrive	 at	 the	 gates	 and
turned.	From	the	doorway	at	his	back	came	the	shuffle	of	footsteps.
Lady	 Simtal	 spoke	 behind	 him.	 “I	 would	 rather	 you'd	 permitted	 one	 of	 my
servants	 to	 inform	 me	 of	 your	 arrival,	 Councilman.	 Allow	 me	 the	 privilege	 of
escorting	you	into	the	main	chamber.”	She	slipped	her	arm	through	his.
“A	moment,”	he	muttered,	eyes	on	the	figure	now	emerging	from	the	carriage.
“It's	the	alchemist's	carriage,”	he	said,	“but	that's	hardly	Baruk,	now,	is	it?”
Lady	Simtal	looked.	“Trake	unleashed!”	she	gasped.	“Who	would	that	be?”
“Baruk's	guest,”	Orr	said	dryly.
Her	grip	bit	into	his	arm.	“I'm	aware	of	his	privilege,	Councilman.	Tell	me,
have	you	seen	this	one	before?”
The	man	shrugged.	“He's	masked.	How	could	I	tell?”
“How	many	men	do	you	know,	Turban,	who	are	seven	feet	tall	and	wear	twohanded	swords	strapped	to	their	backs?”	She	squinted.	“That	white	hair,	do	you
think	it's	part	of	the	mask?”
The	 councilman	 did	 not	 reply.	 He	 watched	 as	 Baruk	 emerged	 behind	 the
stranger.	The	alchemist's	mask	was	a	conservative	silver-inlaid	half-shield	that	no
more	than	covered	his	eyes.	An	obvious	statement	denying	duplicity.	Turban	Orr
grunted,	 knowing	 well	 that	 his	 suspicions	 about	 the	 alchemist's	 influence	 and
power	 were	 accurate.	 His	 eyes	 returned	 to	 the	 stranger.	 His	 mask	 was	 that	 of	 a
black	dragon,	lacquered	with	fine	silver-traced	highlights;	somehow	the	dragon's
expression	seemed	.	.	.	sly.
“Well?”	 Lady	 Simtal	 demanded.	 “Are	 we	 going	 to	 linger	 out	 here	 all	 night?
And	where's	your	dear	wife,	anyway?”
“Ill,”	he	said	distractedly.	He	smiled	at	her.	“Shall	we	introduce	ourselves	to
the	alchemist's	guest?	And	have	I	complimented	you	yet	on	your	attire?”
“You	haven't,”	she	said.
“A	black	panther	suits	you,	Lady.”
“But	of	course	it	does,”	she	replied	testily,	as	Baruk	and	his	guest	strode	down
the	 paved	 walk	 toward	 them.	 She	 disengaged	 her	 arm	 and	 stepped	 forward.
“Good	 evening,	 Alchemist	 Baruk.	 Welcome,”	 she	 added	 to	 the	 black-dragonmasked	man.	“An	astonishing	presentation.	Have	we	met?”
“Good	evening,	Lady	Simtal,”	Baruk	said,	bowing.	“Councilman	Turban	Orr.
Permit	me	to	introduce,”	 he	 hesitated,	but	the	Tiste	Andii	had	been	firm	on	this,
“Lord	Anomander	Rake,	a	visitor	to	Darujhistan.”	The	alchemist	waited	to	see	if


the	councilman	would	recognize	the	name.
Turban	Orr	bowed	formally.	“On	behalf	of	the	City	Council,	welcome,	Lord
Anomander	Rake.”
Baruk	sighed.	Anomander	Rake,	a	name	known	by	poets	and	scholars,	but	not,
it	appeared,	by	councilmen.
Orr	continued,	“As	a	lord,	I	assume	you	hold	title	to	land?”	He	almost	stepped
back	as	the	dragon's	visage	swung	to	regard	him.	Deep	blue	eyes	fixed	on	his.
“Land?	Yes,	Councilman,	I	hold	title.	However,	my	title	is	honorary,	presented
to	 me	 by	 my	 people.”	 Rake	 looked	 past	 Orr's	 shoulder	 to	 the	 room	 beyond	 the
wide	doorway.	“It	seems,	Lady,	that	the	evening	is	well	under	way.”
“Indeed.”	She	laughed.	“Come,	join	in	the	festivities.”
Baruk	breathed	another	relieved	sigh.
Murillio	had	to	admit	that	Kruppe's	choice	of	mask	suited	him	perfectly.	He	found
himself	 grinning	 behind	 his	 feather-decked	 peacock	 mask	 in	 spite	 of	 his
trepidation.	 He	 stood	 near	 the	 opened	 doorway	 leading	 out	 to	 the	 patio	 and
garden,	a	goblet	of	light	wine	in	one	hand,	the	other	hitched	in	his	belt.
Rallick	leaned	against	the	wall	beside	him,	arms	crossed.	His	mask	was	that
of	 a	 Catlin	 tiger,	 idealized	 to	 mimic	 the	 god	 Trake's	 image.	 Murillio	 knew	 the
assassin	 let	 the	 wall	 bear	 his	 weight	 out	 of	 exhaustion	 rather	 than	 from	 a	 lazy
slouch.	He	wondered	yet	again	if	matters	would	fall	to	him.	The	assassin	stiffened
suddenly,	eyes	on	the	entrance	across	from	them.
Murillio	craned	to	see	past	the	crowd.	There,	the	hawk.	He	murmured,	“That's
Turban	Orr	all	right.	Who's	he	with?”
“Simtal,”	Rallick	growled.	“And	Baruk,	and	some	monster	of	a	man	wearing	a
dragon's	mask—and	armed.”
“Baruk?”	Murillio	laughed	nervously.	“Let's	hope	he	doesn't	recognize	us.	It
wouldn't	take	him	a	second	to	put	everything	together.”
“It	doesn't	matter,”	Rallick	said.	“He	won't	stop	us.”
“Maybe	 you're	 right.”	 Then	 Murillio	 almost	 dropped	 his	 glass.	 “Hood's
Weary	Feet!”
Rallick	hissed	between	his	teeth.	“Dammit!	Look	at	him!	He's	heading	straight
for	them!”
Lady	 Simtal	 and	 Turban	 Orr	 excused	 themselves,	 leaving	 Baruk	 and	 Rake


momentarily	alone	in	the	middle	of	the	chamber.	People	moved	around	them,	some
nodding	 deferentially	 at	 Baruk	 but	 all	 keeping	 their	 distance.	 A	 crowd	 gathered
around	 Simtal	 where	 she	 stood	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 winding	 staircase,	 eager	 with
questions	regarding	Anomander	Rake.
A	figure	approached	Baruk	and	his	companion.	Short,	round,	wearing	a	faded
red	 waistcoat,	 both	 hands	 clutching	 pastries,	 the	 man	 wore	 a	 cherub's	 mask,	 its
open	red-lipped	mouth	smeared	with	cake	icing	and	crumbs.	His	route	to	them	met
with	one	obstacle	after	another	as	he	negotiated	his	way	across	the	room,	excusing
himself	at	every	turn	and	twist.
Rake	noticed	the	newcomer,	for	he	said,	“Seems	eager,	doesn't	he?”
Baruk	chuckled.	“He's	worked	for	me,”	he	said.	“And	I've	worked	for	him	as
well.	 Anomander	 Rake,	 behold	 the	 one	 they	 call	 the	 Eel.	 Darujhistan's	 masterspy.”
“Do	you	jest?”
“No.”
Kruppe	 arrived,	 his	 chest	 heaving.	 “Master	 Baruk!”	 he	 said	 breathlessly.
“What	a	surprise	to	find	you	here.”	The	cherub	face	swung	over	and	up	to	Rake.
“The	hair	is	an	exquisite	touch,	sir.	Exquisite.	I	am	named	Kruppe,	sir.	Kruppe	the
First.”	He	raised	a	pastry	to	his	mouth	and	jammed	it	in.
“This	is	Lord	Anomander	Rake,	Kruppe.”
Kruppe	 nodded	 vigorously,	 then	 swallowed	 audibly.	 “Of	 course!	 Why,	 then,
you	 must	 be	 quite	 used	 to	 such	 a	 lofty	 stance,	 sir.	 Kruppe	 envies	 those	 who	 can
look	down	upon	everyone	else.”
“It	is	easy	to	fool	oneself,”	Rake	answered,	“into	viewing	those	beneath	one
as	small	and	insignificant.	The	risks	of	oversight,	you	might	say.”
“Kruppe	 might	 well	 say,	 assuming	 the	 pun	 was	 intended.	 But	 who	 would
disagree	that	the	dragon's	lot	is	ever	beyond	the	ken	of	mere	humankind?	Kruppe
can	only	guess	at	the	thrill	of	flight,	the	wail	of	high	winds,	the	rabbits	scurrying
below	as	one's	shadow	brushes	their	limited	awareness.”
“My	dear	Kruppe,”	Baruk	sighed,	“it	is	but	a	mask.”
“Such	is	the	irony	of	life,”	Kruppe	proclaimed,	raising	one	pastry-filled	hand
over	 his	 head,	 “that	 one	 learns	 to	 distrust	 the	 obvious,	 surrendering	 instead	 to
insidious	suspicion	and	confused	conclusion.	But,	lo,	is	Kruppe	deceived?	Can	an
eel	swim?	Hurrah,	these	seeming	muddy	waters	are	home	to	Kruppe,	and	his	eyes
are	 wide	 with	 wonder!”	 He	 bowed	 with	 a	 flourish,	 spattering	 bits	 of	 cake	 over
Rake	 and	 Baruk,	 then	 marched	 off,	 still	 talking.	 “A	 survey	 of	 the	 kitchen	 is	 in
order,	Kruppe	suspects	.	.	.”


“An	eel	indeed,”	Rake	said,	in	an	amused	tone.	“He	is	a	lesson	to	us	all,	is	he
not?”
“Agreed,”	Baruk	muttered,	shoulders	slumping.	“I	need	a	drink.	Let	me	get	you
one.	Excuse	me.”
Turban	Orr	stood	with	his	back	to	the	wall	and	surveyed	the	crowded	room.	He
was	 finding	 it	 difficult	 to	 relax.	 The	 last	 week	 had	 been	 exhausting.	 He	 still
awaited	confirmation	from	the	Assassins'	Guild	that	Coll	was	dead.	It	wasn't	like
them	 to	 take	 so	 long	 to	 complete	 a	 contract,	 and	 sticking	 a	 knife	 into	 a	 drunk
shouldn't	have	been	too	difficult.
His	 hunt	 for	 the	 spy	 in	 his	 organizations	 had	 reached	 a	 dead	 end,	 but	 he
remained	convinced	that	such	a	man—or	woman—existed.	Again	and	again,	and
especially	since	Lim's	assassination,	he'd	found	his	moves	in	the	Council	blocked
by	countermoves,	too	unfocused	for	him	to	point	a	finger	at	any	one	person.	But
the	proclamation	was	dead	in	the	water.
He'd	 come	 to	 that	 conclusion	 this	 morning.	 And	 he'd	 acted.	 Even	 now	 his
most	 trusted	 and	 capable	 messenger	 rode	 the	 trader's	 track,	 probably	 passing
through	the	Gadrobi	Hills	and	that	thunderstorm	at	this	very	moment,	on	his	way	to
Pale.	To	the	Empire.	Turban	Orr	knew	the	Malazans	were	on	the	way.	No	one	in
Darujhistan	 could	 stop	 them.	 And	 the	 Moon's	 lord	 had	 been	 defeated	 once,	 at
Pale.	Why	would	it	be	any	different	this	time	around?	No,	the	time	had	come	to
ensure	 that	 his	 own	 position	 would	 survive	 the	 Empire's	 occupation.	 Or,	 better
yet,	an	even	higher	rank	to	reward	his	vital	support.
His	eyes	fell	casually	on	a	guard	stationed	to	one	side	of	the	spiral	staircase.
The	man	looked	familiar	somehow—not	his	face,	but	the	way	he	stood,	the	set	of
the	shoulders.	Was	the	man's	usual	station	at	Majesty	Hall?	No,	the	uniform	was
that	of	a	regular,	while	Majesty	Hall	was	the	domain	of	the	élites.	Turban	Orr's
frown	deepened	behind	the	hawk	mask.	Then	the	guard	adjusted	his	helmet	strap,
and	Turban	Orr	gasped.	He	leaned	back	against	the	wall,	overcome	by	trembling.
Despot's	Barbican!	All	those	nights,	night	after	night—for	years—that	guard	had
witnessed	his	midnight	meetings	with	his	allies	and	agents.	There	stood	his	spy.
He	straightened,	closing	one	hand	over	the	pommel	of	his	dueling	sword.	He'd
leave	 no	 room	 for	 questions,	 and	 damn	 Simtal's	 sensibilities—and	 damn	 this
party.	He	wanted	his	vengeance	to	be	swift	and	immediate.	He'd	let	no	one	stop
him.	His	eyes	fixing	on	the	unsuspecting	guard,	Turban	Orr	stepped	forward.
He	collided	with	a	hard	shoulder	and	staggered	back.	A	large	man	in	a	tiger
mask	 turned	 to	 him.	 Orr	 waited	 for	 an	 apology,	 but	 received	 only	 silence.	 He


moved	to	step	past	the	man.
The	 stranger's	 arm	 intercepted	 him.	 Turban	 Orr	 cursed	 as	 a	 gloved	 hand
poured	wine	down	his	chest.	“Idiot!”	he	snapped.	“I	am	Councilman	Turban	Orr!
Out	of	my	way.”
“I	know	who	you	are,”	the	man	said	quietly.
Orr	jabbed	a	finger	into	the	man's	chest.	“Keep	that	mask	on,	so	I'll	know	who
to	look	for	later.”
“I	 didn't	 even	 notice	 your	 mask,”	 the	 man	 said,	 his	 voice	 cold	 and	 flat.
“Fooled	by	the	nose,	I	suppose.”
The	councilman's	eyes	narrowed.	“Eager	to	die,	are	you?”	he	grated.	“I	will
oblige	you.”	His	hand	twitched	on	his	sword's	pommel.	“In	a	few	minutes.	Right
now	I	have—”
“I	wait	on	no	man,”	Rallick	Nom	said.	“And	certainly	not	for	some	thin-lipped
prancer	pretending	to	manhood.	If	you've	the	belly	for	a	duel,	make	it	now	or	stop
wasting	time	with	all	this	talk.”
Shaking,	Turban	Orr	took	a	step	back	and	faced	the	man	directly.	“What's	your
name?”	he	demanded	hoarsely.
“You	are	not	fit	to	hear	it,	Councilman.”
Turban	 Orr	 raised	 his	 hands	 and	 whirled	 to	 the	 crowd.	 “Hear	 me,	 guests!
Unexpected	entertainment	for	you	all!”	Conversation	died	and	everyone	faced	the
councilman.	 He	 continued,	 “A	 fool	 has	 challenged	 my	 honor,	 friends.	 And	 since
when	has	Turban	Orr	permitted	such	an	insult?”
“A	duel!”	someone	cried	excitedly.	Voices	rose.
Orr	pointed	at	Rallick	Nom.	“This	man,	so	bold	as	to	wear	Trake's	face,	will
be	 dead	 shortly.	 Look	 upon	 him	 now,	 friends,	 as	 he	 looks	 upon	 you—and	 know
that	he	is	all	but	dead	already.”
“Stop	babbling,”	Rallick	drawled.
The	 councilman	 pulled	 the	 mask	 from	 his	 face,	 revealing	 a	 tight	 grin.	 “If	 I
could	kill	you	a	thousand	times,”	he	said,	“it	would	not	be	enough	to	satisfy	me.	I
must	settle	with	you	but	once.”
Rallick	removed	his	mask	and	tossed	it	on	to	the	carpeted	stairs.	He	looked
upon	Turban	Orr	with	flat,	dark	eyes.	“Done	breaking	wind,	Councilman?”
“Unmasked	and	still	a	stranger,”	Orr	said,	scowling.	“So	be	it.	Find	yourself	a
second.”	 A	 thought	 struck	 him,	 and	 he	 turned	 back	 to	 the	 crowd,	 searching	 it.
Toward	 the	 back	 he	 saw	 the	 mask	 he	 sought,	 that	 of	 a	 wolf.	 His	 choosing	 of	 a
second	could	well	have	political	benefits,	assuming	the	man	accepted.	And,	in	this


crowd,	 he'd	 be	 a	 fool	 to	 deny	 Orr.	 “For	 myself,”	 he	 said	 loudly,	 “I	 would	 be
honored	if	Councilman	Estraysian	D'Arle	act	as	my	second.”
The	 wolf	 started.	 Beside	 him	 stood	 two	 women,	 one	 no	 more	 than	 a	 girl.
D'Arle's	 wife	 was	 dressed	 as	 a	 veiled	 woman	 of	 Callows,	 while	 the	 girl	 had
selected—outrageously—the	 minimal	 garb	 of	 a	 Barghast	 warmaiden.	 Both	 wife
and	 daughter	 spoke	 to	 Estraysian.	 He	 stepped	 forward.	 “The	 honor	 is	 mine,”	 he
rumbled,	completing	the	ritual	acceptance.
Turban	 Orr	 felt	 a	 surge	 of	 triumph.	 To	 have	 his	 most	 powerful	 enemy	 in	 the
Council	at	his	side	for	this	duel	would	send	a	message	mixed	enough	to	panic	half
the	Council	members	present.	Pleased	at	his	coup,	he	faced	his	nameless	opponent
again.	“And	your	second?”
Silence	fell	over	the	room.
“I	haven't	much	time,”	Lady	Simtal	said	in	a	low	voice.	“After	all,	as	the	hostess
for	this	fête	.	.	.”
“It's	 your	 duty,”	 murmured	 the	 man	 before	 her,	 “to	 satisfy	 your	 guests.”	 He
reached	 forth	 and	 brushed	 the	 hair	 from	 her	 forehead.	 “Which	 is	 something	 I'm
certain	you	can	do,	and	do	well.”
She	smiled	and	walked	to	the	door.	She	locked	its	latch,	then	spun	to	face	the
man	again.	“Perhaps	half	an	hour,”	she	said.
The	 man	 strode	 to	 the	 bed	 and	 tossed	 down	 his	 leather	 gloves.	 “I'm
confident,”	he	said,	“that	those	thirty	minutes	will	be	satisfying	indeed,	each	more
than	the	last.”
Lady	 Simtal	 joined	 him	 beside	 the	 bed.	 “I	 suppose,”	 she	 whispered,	 as	 she
slipped	her	arms	around	the	man's	neck	and	drew	his	face	down	to	her	lips,	“that
you've	no	choice	now	but	to	tell	the	Widow	Lim	the	sad	news.”	She	touched	her
lips	to	his,	then	ran	her	tongue	along	the	line	of	his	jaw.
“Mmm?	What	sad	news	is	that?”
“Oh,	that	you've	found	yourself	a	more	worthy	lover,	of	course.”	Her	tongue
reached	into	his	ear.	Abruptly	she	pulled	back	and	met	his	eyes	searchingly.	“Do
you	hear	that?”	she	asked.
He	brought	his	arms	around	her	and	drew	her	closer.	“Hear	what?”
“That's	just	it,”	she	said.	“It's	suddenly	quiet	downstairs.	I'd	better—”
“They're	in	the	garden,	no	doubt,”	the	man	said	reassuringly.	“The	minutes	are
passing,	Lady.”
She	hesitated,	then	made	the	mistake	of	letting	him	press	his	body	against	hers.


Lady	 Simtal's	 eyes	 widened	 in	 near-alarm.	 Her	 breathing	 changed.	 “So,”	 she
gasped,	“what	are	we	doing	still	dressed?”
“Good	question,”	Murillio	growled,	pulling	both	of	them	onto	the	bed.
_____
In	the	silence	following	Turban	Orr's	question,	Baruk	found	himself	preparing	to
step	 forward.	 Knowing	 well	 what	 that	 would	 reveal,	 he	 felt	 compelled
nevertheless.	Rallick	Nom	was	here	to	right	a	dreadful	wrong.	More,	the	man	was
a	 friend,	 closer	 to	 the	 alchemist	 than	 Kruppe	 or	 Murillio—and,	 in	 spite	 of	 his
profession,	a	man	of	integrity.	And	Turban	Orr	was	Lady	Simtal's	last	link	to	real
power.	If	Rallick	killed	the	man,	she'd	fall.
Coll's	 return	 to	 the	 Council	 was	 something	 Baruk	 and	 his	 fellow	 T'orrud
mages	 greatly	 desired.	 And	 Turban	 Orr's	 death	 would	 be	 a	 relief.	 More	 was
riding	 on	 this	 duel	 than	 Rallick	 imagined.	 The	 alchemist	 adjusted	 his	 robe	 and
drew	a	deep	breath.
A	 large	 hand	 closed	 on	 his	 upper	 arm,	 and	 before	 Baruk	 could	 react,	 Lord
Anomander	 Rake	 stepped	 forward.	 “I	 offer	 my	 services	 as	 second,”	 he	 said
loudly.	He	met	Rallick's	eyes.
The	assassin	betrayed	nothing,	not	once	looking	at	Baruk.	He	answered	Rake's
offer	with	a	nod.
“Perhaps,”	Turban	Orr	sneered,	“the	two	strangers	know	each	other.”
“We've	never	met,”	Rake	said.	“However,	I	find	myself	instinctively	sharing
his	 distaste	 for	 your	 endless	 talk,	 Councilman.	 Thus	 I	 seek	 to	 avoid	 a	 Council
debate	on	who	will	be	this	man's	second.	Shall	we	proceed?”
Turban	Orr	led	the	way	out	to	the	terrace,	Estraysian	D'Arle	behind	him.	As
Baruk	turned	to	follow	he	felt	a	familiar	contact	of	energies	at	his	side.	He	swung
his	 head	 and	 recoiled.	 “Good	 gods,	 Mammot!	 Where	 did	 you	 get	 that	 hideous
mask?”
The	old	man's	eyes	held	his	briefly	then	shied	away.	“An	accurate	rendition	of
Jaghut	 features,	 I	 believe,”	 he	 said	 softly.	 “Though	 I	 think	 the	 tusks	 are	 a	 little
short.”
Baruk	shook	himself.	“Have	you	managed	to	find	your	nephew	yet?”
“No,”	Mammot	replied.	“I	am	deeply	worried	by	that.”
“Well,”	the	alchemist	grunted	as	they	walked	outside,	“let's	hope	that	Oponn's
luck	holds	for	the	lad.”


“Of	course,”	Mammot	murmured.
Whiskeyjack's	 eyes	 widened	 as	 a	 crowd	 of	 excited	 guests	 poured	 out	 from	 the
main	chamber	and	gathered	on	the	terrace.
Fiddler	scurried	to	his	side.	“It's	a	duel,	Sergeant.	The	guy	with	the	wine	stain
on	his	shirt	is	one	of	them,	a	councilman	named	Orr.	Nobody	knows	who	the	other
man	is.	He's	over	there	with	that	big	man	in	the	dragon	mask.”
The	sergeant	had	been	leaning,	arms	crossed,	against	one	of	the	marble	pillars
encircling	the	fountain,	but	at	seeing	the	tall	dragon-masked	figure	he	came	near	to
toppling	into	the	fountain	behind	him.	“Hood's	Balls!”	he	cursed.	“Recognize	that
long	silver	hair,	Fid?”
The	saboteur	frowned.
“Moon's	 Spawn,”	 Whiskeyjack	 breathed.	 “That's	 the	 mage,	 the	 Lord	 who
stood	on	that	portal	and	battled	Tayschrenn.”	He	reeled	off	an	impressive	list	of
curses,	then	added,	“And	he's	not	human.”
Fiddler	groaned.	“Tiste	Andii.	The	bastard's	found	us.	We've	had	it.”
“Shut	up.”	Whiskeyjack	was	recovering	from	his	shock.	“Line	everybody	up
the	way	that	Captain	Stillis	wanted	us.	Backs	to	the	woods	and	hands	on	weapons.
Move!”
Fiddler	 scrambled.	 The	 sergeant	 watched	 the	 saboteur	 round	 up	 his	 men.
Where	 in	 Hood's	 name	 were	 Kalam	 and	 Paran	 anyway?	 He	 caught	 Quick	 Ben's
eye	and	gestured	the	mage	over.
“Fid	 explained	 it,”	 Quick	 Ben	 said,	 leaning	 close.	 “I	 may	 not	 be	 much	 use,
Sergeant.	That	barrow-dweller's	unleashing	waves	of	nasty	stuff.	My	head	feels
ready	to	explode.”	He	grinned	wanly.	“And	look	around.	You	can	pick	out	all	the
mages	by	the	sick	looks	on	their	faces.	If	we	all	accessed	our	Warrens,	we'd	be
fine.”
“Then	why	don't	you?”
The	wizard	grimaced.	“That	Jaghut	would	fix	on	us	as	if	we	were	a	beacon	of
fire.	And	he'd	take	the	weaker	ones—even	from	this	distance,	he'd	take	them.	And
then	there'd	be	Hood	to	pay.”
Whiskeyjack	 watched	 the	 guests	 create	 a	 space	 on	 the	 terrace,	 lining	 up	 on
either	 side.	 “Check	 with	 Hedge	 and	 Fiddler,”	 he	 ordered,	 eyes	 lingering	 on	 the
Tiste	Andii.	“Make	sure	they've	got	something	handy,	in	case	it	all	comes	apart.
This	estate's	got	to	burn	then,	hot	and	long.	We'll	need	the	diversion	to	set	off	the
intersection	mines.	Give	me	the	nod	telling	me	they're	up	to	it.”


“Right.”	Quick	Ben	moved	off.
Whiskeyjack	grunted	in	surprise	as	a	young	man	stepped	round	him,	dressed	as
a	thief,	complete	with	face	mask.
“Excuse	me,”	the	man	muttered,	as	he	walked	into	the	crowd.
The	sergeant	stared	after	him,	then	glanced	back	at	the	garden.	How	had	that
lad	 got	 past	 them	 in	 the	 first	 place?	 He	 could've	 sworn	 they'd	 sealed	 off	 the
woods.	He	loosened	his	sword	surreptitiously	in	its	sheath.
Crokus	had	no	idea	what	kind	of	costume	Challice	D'Arle	would	be	wearing,	and
he	was	resigned	to	a	long	hunt.	He'd	left	Apsalar	at	the	garden's	back	wall,	and
now	felt	guilty.	Still,	she'd	seemed	to	take	it	well—though	in	a	way	that	made	him
feel	even	worse.	Why	did	she	have	to	be	so	nice	about	things?
He	spared	barely	a	thought	about	the	crowd's	strange	formation,	looking	as	he
was	for	a	head	somewhere	at	chest	level	to	everyone	else.	As	it	turned	out,	that
proved	unnecessary,	for	Challice	D'Arle's	costume	was	no	disguise.
Crokus	 found	 himself	 between	 two	 burly	 house	 guards.	 Across	 from	 him,
twenty	 feet	 away	 with	 no	 one	 to	 block	 his	 view,	 stood	 Challice	 and	 an	 older
woman	Crokus	took	to	be	her	mother.	Their	attention	was	held	unerringly	on	a	tall,
severe-looking	 man	 standing	 at	 one	 end	 of	 the	 cleared	 space	 and	 speaking	 with
another	man,	who	was	strapping	on	a	dueling	glove.	It	slowly	dawned	on	the	thief
that	a	duel	was	but	moments	away.
Squeezing	 between	 the	 two	 guards,	 Crokus	 craned	 his	 neck	 to	 find	 the	 other
duelist.	 At	 first	 he	 thought	 him	 the	 giant	 with	 the	 dragon	 mask	 and	 two-handed
sword.	Then	his	gaze	found	the	man.	Rallick	Nom.	His	eyes	snapped	back	to	the
first	duelist.	Familiar.	He	nudged	the	guard	on	his	left.	“Is	that	Councilman	Turban
Orr?”
“It	is,	sir,”	the	guard	replied,	an	odd	tightness	in	his	tone.
Crokus	glanced	up	to	see	the	man's	face	wet	with	sweat,	trickling	down	from
under	his	peaked	helmet.	Strange.	“So,	where's	Lady	Simtal?”	he	asked	casually.
“Nowhere	 in	 sight,”	 the	 guard	 answered,	 with	 obvious	 relief.	 “Otherwise
she'd	stop	this.”
Crokus	nodded	at	that.	“Well,”	he	said,	“Rallick	will	win.”
The	 guard's	 gaze	 was	 on	 him,	 the	 eyes	 hard	 and	 piercing.	 “You	 know	 the
man?”
“Well—”
Someone	 tapped	 his	 back	 and	 he	 turned	 to	 find	 a	 cherub's	 face	 smiling


mindlessly	at	him.	“Why,	Crokus	lad!	What	an	inventive	costume	you're	wearing!”
“Kruppe?”
“Well	guessed!”	Kruppe	replied.	The	painted	wooden	face	swung	to	the	guard.
“Oh,	kind	sir,	I	have	a	written	message	for	you.”	Kruppe	placed	a	scroll	into	the
man's	hand.	“Compliments	of	a	longtime	secret	admirer.”
Crokus	grinned.	These	guards	had	all	the	luck	when	it	came	to	noble	ladies.
Circle	Breaker	accepted	the	scroll	and	slid	from	it	the	silk	tie.
More	than	once	he	had	sensed	Turban	Orr's	eyes	on	him.	First	in	the	central
chamber,	when	it	looked	as	if	the	councilman	might	accost	him	directly,	and	now,
while	others	argued	over	who	should	referee	the	duel.
Circle	 Breaker	 prayed	 Rallick	 would	 kill	 Turban	 Orr.	 He	 felt	 his	 own	 fear
racing	 through	 his	 body,	 and	 it	 was	 with	 trembling	 hands	 that	 he	 read	 the	 Eel's
message.
	

The	time	has	come	for	Circle	Breaker	to	retire	from	active	duty.	The
circle	is	mended,	loyal	friend.	Though	you	have	never	seen	the	Eel,
you	have	been	his	most	trusted	hand,	and	you	have	earned	your	rest.
Think	not	that	the	Eel	simply	discards	you	now.	Such	is	not	the	Eel's
way.	The	sigil	at	the	bottom	of	this	parchment	will	provide	you
passage	to	the	city	of	Dhavran,	where	loyal	servants	of	the	Eel	have
prepared	your	arrival	by	purchasing	an	estate	and	a	legitimate	title
on	your	behalf.	You	enter	a	different	world	soon,	with	its	own
games.
Trust	your	new	servants,	friend,	in	this	and	all	other	concerns.
Proceed,	this	very	night,	to	the	Dhavran	trader's	pier	in
Lakefront.	You	seek	the	river	longboat	named	Enskalader.	Show	the
sigil	to	any	crewman	aboard—all	are	servants	of	the	Eel.	The	time
has	come,	Circle	Breaker.	The	circle	is	mended.	Fare	you	well.
Baruk	threw	up	his	hands	in	exasperation.	“Enough	of	this!”	he	bellowed.	“I	will
referee	 this	 duel,	 and	 accept	 all	 responsibility.	 Judgment	 of	 victory	 is	 mine.
Accepted	by	both	parties?”
Turban	 Orr	 nodded.	 Even	 better	 than	 Estraysian	 being	 his	 second.	 Baruk's
proclaiming	him	victor	in	the	duel	would	be	a	coup	in	its	own	right.	“I	accept.”
“As	do	I,”	Rallick	said,	his	short	cloak	drawn	about	his	body.
A	 sudden	 wind	 thrashed	 the	 treetops	 in	 the	 garden,	 sweeping	 down	 from	 the


east.	Thunder	boomed	from	this	side	of	the	hills.	A	number	of	onlookers	seemed	to
flinch.	 Turban	 Orr	 grinned,	 stepping	 into	 the	 cleared	 area.	 Leaves	 skirled	 past,
clattering	like	tiny	bones.	“Before	it	rains,”	he	said.
His	allies	in	the	crowd	laughed	at	this.	“Of	course,”	Orr	continued,	“it	might
prove	more	entertaining	to	draw	things	out.	A	wound	here,	a	wound	there.	Shall	I
cut	him	to	pieces	slowly?”	He	feigned	dismay	at	the	chorus	of	eager	assent.	“Too
eager	for	blood,	friends!	Must	the	ladies	dance	on	slick	flagstones	once	darkness
falls?	 We	 must	 consider	 our	 host	 .	 .	 .”	 And	 where	 was	 Simtal?	 His	 imagination
conjured	 an	 image	 in	 answer	 and	 he	 frowned.	 “No	 indeed,”	 he	 said	 coldly,	 “it
shall	be	quick.”
The	councilman	unsheathed	his	sword	and	fastened	his	glove's	leather	straps
to	 the	 ornate	 grip	 behind	 the	 bell	 guard.	 He	 scanned	 the	 faces	 of	 his	 audience,
even	 now	 seeking	 some	 betrayal	 of	 expression—he	 had	 friends	 who	 were
enemies,	 enemies	 who	 would	 be	 friends,	 the	 game	 would	 continue	 beyond	 this
moment,	but	it	could	prove	a	telling	moment.	He	would	recall	every	face	later,	and
study	it	at	his	leisure.
Turban	Orr	assumed	his	stance.	His	opponent	stood	ten	feet	away,	both	hands
hidden	 beneath	 his	 cloak.	 He	 looked	 at	 ease,	 almost	 bored.	 “What's	 this?”	 Orr
demanded.	“Where	is	your	weapon?”
“I'm	ready,”	Rallick	replied.
Baruk	placed	himself	equidistant	between	the	two	duelists,	slightly	off	to	one
side.	His	face	was	pale,	as	if	he	had	fallen	ill.	“Comments	from	the	seconds?”	he
asked	faintly.
Rake	made	no	reply.
Estraysian	 D'Arle	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “I	 hereby	 make	 it	 known	 that	 I	 oppose
this	duel	as	facile	and	trite.”	He	stared	at	Turban	Orr.	“I	find	the	councilman's	life
irrelevant	in	the	best	of	times.	Should	he	die,”	the	tall	man	looked	over	to	Rallick,
“there	will	be	no	vengeance	pact	from	the	House	of	D'Arle.	You,	sir,	are	freed	of
that.”
Rallick	bowed.
Turban	Orr's	smile	tightened.	The	bastard	would	pay	for	that,	he	vowed.	He
lowered	himself	into	a	crouch,	ready	to	launch	an	attack	as	soon	as	the	duel	began.
Baruk	said,	“You	have	been	heard,	Estraysian	D'Arle.”	The	alchemist	raised	a
handkerchief	before	him,	then	released	it.
Turban	Orr	jumped	forward	and	lunged	in	a	single,	fluid	motion,	so	fast	he'd
fully	 extended	 his	 weapon	 before	 the	 handkerchief	 struck	 the	 paving	 stones.	 He
saw	 his	 opponent's	 left	 hand	 dart	 under	 his	 blade,	 then	 twist	 up	 and	 outward,	 a


short,	curved	knife	flashing	in	its	grip.	The	parry	was	a	blur,	yet	Orr	caught	it	and
deftly	disengaged,	driving	his	point	low	and	toward	the	man's	midsection.	He	had
no	time	even	to	notice	the	second	knife,	as	Rallick	turned	his	body	sideways,	the
blade	in	his	right	hand	guiding	Turban	Orr's	sword	past	him.	The	assassin	stepped
in	 then,	 his	 left	 hand	 moving	 in	 a	 high	 swing	 that	 buried	 its	 blade	 in	 the
councilman's	 neck.	 Rallick	 followed	 this	 by	 driving	 his	 other	 knife	 into	 Orr's
chest.
The	councilman	staggered	to	one	side,	his	sword	clanging	on	the	stones	as	he
clutched	 at	 the	 gushing	 wound	 in	 his	 neck.	 The	 motion	 was	 reflex,	 for	 he	 was
already	dead	from	the	wound	in	his	heart.	He	toppled.
Rallick	 stepped	 back,	 weapons	 once	 again	 hidden	 beneath	 his	 cloak.	 “A
thousand	other	deaths,”	he	whispered,	so	low	that	only	Baruk	and	Rake	heard	him,
“would	not	have	satisfied	me.	But	I'll	settle	for	this	one.”
Baruk	stepped	close	and	made	to	speak,	but	then,	at	a	gesture	from	Rake,	he
turned	to	see	Estraysian	D'Arle	approaching.
The	councilman's	heavy	eyes	held	Rallick.	“I	might	suspect,”	he	said,	“given
your	style,	that	we	have	witnessed	an	assassination.	Of	course,	not	even	the	Guild
of	Assassins	is	brash	enough	to	commit	public	murder.	Therefore	I've	no	choice
but	 to	 keep	 such	 suspicions	 to	 myself.	 And	 leave	 it	 at	 that.	 Good	 evening,
gentlemen.”	He	whirled	and	strode	away.
“I	think,”	Rake	said,	his	masked	face	swinging	to	the	assassin,	“that	that	was	a
rather	uneven	match.”
A	 rush	 of	 people	 closed	 in	 around	 Turban	 Orr's	 body.	 Voices	 shouted	 in
dismay.
Baruk	studied	the	cool	satisfaction	on	Rallick's	face.	“It's	done,	Rallick.	Go
home.”
A	 large,	 rounded	 woman	 in	 a	 bright	 green,	 gold-trimmed	 robe	 joined	 them.
Unmasked,	she	smiled	broadly	at	Baruk.	“Greetings,”	she	said.	“Interesting	times,
yes?”	 A	 personal	 servant	 stood	 at	 her	 side,	 bearing	 a	 padded	 tray	 on	 which
squatted	a	water-pipe.
Rallick	stepped	back	with	a	slight	bow,	then	left.
Baruk	sighed.	“Greetings,	Derudan.	Permit	me	to	introduce	Lord	Anomander
Rake.	Lord,	the	witch	Derudan.”
“Forgive	the	mask,”	Rake	said	to	her.	“It	is	best	that	it	remain	on,	however.”
Smoke	streamed	down	from	Derudan's	nose.	“My	compatriots	share	my	growing
unease,	 yes?	 We	 feel	 the	 approaching	 storm,	 and	 while	 Baruk	 continues	 to
reassure	us,	still	the	misgivings,	yes?”


“Should	it	prove	necessary,”	Rake	said,	“I	will	attend	to	the	matter	personally.
I	 do	 not	 believe,	 however,	 that	 our	 greatest	 threat	 is	 the	 one	 beyond	 the	 city's
walls.	A	suspicion,	Witch,	no	more.”
“I	think,”	Baruk	said	tentatively,	“that	we	would	like	to	hear	these	suspicions
of	yours,	Rake.”
The	 Tiste	 Andii	 hesitated,	 then	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Unwise.	 The	 matter	 is
presently	too	sensitive	to	be	broached.	I	shall	remain	here	for	now,	however.”
Derudan	 waved	 dismissively	 at	 Baruk's	 angry	 growl.	 “True,	 the	 T'orrud
Cabal	is	unused	to	feeling	helpless,	yes?	True	also,	dangers	abound,	and	any	might
prove	a	feint,	a	diversion,	yes?	Cunning	is	the	Empress.	For	myself,	I	affirm	the
trust	 between	 us,	 Lord.”	 She	 smiled	 at	 Baruk.	 “We	 must	 speak,	 you	 and	 I,
Alchemist,”	she	said,	linking	arms	with	him.
Rake	bowed	to	the	woman.	“A	pleasure	meeting	you,	Witch.”	He	watched	the
witch	and	the	alchemist	walk	away,	the	servant	scurrying	at	Derudan's	heel.
Kruppe	 intercepted	 a	 servant	 burdened	 with	 delicious-looking	 savories.	 Taking
two	handfuls	at	random,	he	turned	back	to	resume	his	conversation	with	Crokus.
He	stopped.	The	lad	was	nowhere	in	sight.
The	 crowd	 milled	 about	 on	 the	 terrace,	 some	 upset	 although	 the	 majority
appeared	simply	confused.	Where	was	Lady	Simtal?	they	asked.	Some,	grinning,
changed	 the	 question	 to:	 Who's	 she	 with?	 Already	 a	 new	 wave	 of	 anticipation
rose	 among	 the	 nobles.	 They	 circled	 like	 vultures,	 waiting	 for	 their	 faltering
hostess.
Smiling	beatifically	behind	the	cherub	mask,	Kruppe	raised	his	eyes	slowly	to
the	 balcony	 overlooking	 the	 patio,	 in	 time	 to	 see	 a	 figure	 appear	 as	 a	 dark,
feminine	 silhouette	 behind	 the	 shutters.	 He	 licked	 sticky	 sugar	 from	 his	 fingers,
smacking	his	lips.	“There	are	times,	Kruppe	murmurs,	when	celibacy	born	of	sad
deprivation	becomes	a	boon,	nay,	a	source	of	great	relief.	Dear	Murillio,	prepare
for	a	storm.”
Simtal	pushed	apart	two	slats	of	the	shutters	and	looked	down.	“You	were	right,”
she	said.	“They	have	indeed	retired	to	the	terrace.	Odd,	with	that	storm	coming.	I
should	 get	 dressed.”	 She	 returned	 to	 the	 bed	 and	 began	 to	 collect	 her	 clothing,
which	 lay	 scattered	 all	 around	 it.	 “And	 what	 about	 you,	 Murillio?”	 she	 asked.
“Don't	 you	 think	 your	 companion	 below	 is	 wondering	 where	 you	 are,	 dear
lover?”


Murillio	 swung	 his	 legs	 over	 the	 bedside	 and	 pulled	 on	 his	 tights.	 “I	 think
not,”	he	said.
Simtal	shot	him	a	curious	look.	“Who	did	you	come	with?”
“Just	a	friend,”	he	answered,	buttoning	his	shirt.	“I	doubt	you'd	recognize	the
name.”
At	that	moment	the	door's	lock	snapped	and	the	door	itself	slammed	inward.
Dressed	 only	 in	 her	 underclothes,	 Simtal	 loosed	 a	 startled	 cry.	 Her	 eyes
flashed	at	the	tall,	cloaked	man	standing	in	the	doorway.	“How	dare	you	enter	my
bedroom?	Leave	at	once,	or	I'll	call—”
“Both	guards	patrolling	this	hallway	have	departed,	Lady,”	Rallick	Nom	said,
stepping	into	the	room	and	closing	the	door	behind	him.	The	assassin	glanced	at
Murillio.	“Get	dressed,”	he	snapped.
“Departed?”	Simtal	moved	to	place	the	bed	between	herself	and	Rallick.
“Their	loyalty	has	been	purchased,”	the	assassin	said.	“The	lesson	shouldn't
be	lost	on	you.”
“I	need	only	scream	and	others	will	come.”
“But	you	haven't,”	Rallick	grinned,	“because	you're	curious.”
“You	don't	 dare	 harm	me,”	Simtal	 said,	straightening.	 “Turban	Orr	 will	hunt
you	down.”
The	assassin	took	another	step	forward.	“I'm	here	only	to	talk,	Lady	Simtal,”
he	said.	“You	won't	be	harmed,	no	matter	what	you	deserve.”
“Deserve?	I've	done	nothing—I	don't	even	know	you.”
“Neither	 did	 Councilman	 Lim,”	 Rallick	 said	 quietly.	 “And	 tonight	 the	 same
could	be	said	for	Turban	Orr.	Both	men	paid	for	their	ignorance,	alas.	Fortunate
that	 you	 missed	 the	 duel,	 Lady.	 It	 was	 unpleasant,	 but	 necessary.”	 His	 eyes
hardened	 on	 the	 pale	 woman.	 “Allow	 me	 to	 explain.	 Turban	 Orr's	 offer	 of
contract	to	the	Assassins'	Guild	is	now	officially	canceled.	Coll	lives,	and	now
his	return	to	this	house	is	assured.	You're	done	with,	Lady	Simtal.	Turban	Orr	is
dead.”
He	turned	and	walked	from	the	room,	closing	the	door	behind	him.
Murillio	 rose	 slowly.	 He	 looked	 into	 Simtal's	 eyes,	 seeing	 there	 a	 growing
terror.	Undermined	by	the	stripping	away	of	her	links	to	power,	her	once	secure
defenses	 collapsed.	 He	 watched	 as	 she	 seemed	 physically	 to	 contract,	 her
shoulders	drawing	inward,	her	hands	clasped	at	her	stomach,	knees	bending.	Then
he	 could	 look	no	longer.	The	 Lady	Simtal	was	gone,	 and	he	dared	not	study	 too
closely	the	creature	in	her	place.


He	unsheathed	his	ornamental	dagger	and	tossed	it	on	the	bed.	Without	another
word	or	gesture,	he	left	the	room,	knowing	with	certainty	that	he	would	have	been
the	last	man	to	see	her	alive.
Out	 in	 the	 hallway	 he	 paused.	 “Mowri,”	 he	 said	 softly.	 “I'm	 not	 cut	 out	 for
this.”	 Planning	 to	 reach	 this	 point	 was	 one	 thing;	 having	 now	 reached	 it	 was
another.	 He	 hadn't	 considered	 how	 he'd	 feel.	 Justice	 got	 in	 the	 way	 of	 that,	 a
white	fire	he'd	had	no	reason	to	look	behind,	or	push	aside.	Justice	had	seduced
him	 and	 he	 wondered	 what	 he	 had	 just	 lost,	 he	 wondered	 at	 the	 death	 he	 felt
spreading	within	him.	The	regret	following	in	that	death's	wake,	so	unanswerable
it	was,	 threatened	 to	 overwhelm	him.	 “Mowri,”	he	whispered	 a	 second	 time,	 as
close	to	praying	as	he'd	ever	been,	“I	think	I'm	now	lost.	Am	I	lost?”
Crokus	 edged	 round	 a	 marble	 pillar,	 his	 eyes	 on	 the	 rather	 short	 Barghast	 warmaiden	 sitting	 on	 the	 fountain's	 rim.	 Damn	 those	 guards	 at	 the	 wood's	 edge,
anyway.	He	was	a	thief,	wasn't	he?	Besides,	they	all	looked	pretty	distracted.
He	 waited	 for	 his	 opportunity,	 and	 when	 it	 came	 he	 darted	 for	 the	 shadows
between	 the	 first	 line	of	trees.	No	 shout	 of	alarm	 or	call	 to	 halt	 sounded	 behind
him.	 Slipping	 into	 the	 darkness,	 Crokus	 turned	 and	 crouched.	 Yes,	 she	 still	 sat
there,	facing	in	his	direction.
He	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	stood	straight,	a	pebble	in	one	hand.	Eyeing	the
guards,	 he	 waited.	 Half	 a	 minute	 later	 he	 found	 his	 chance.	 He	 stepped	 forward
and	flung	the	pebble	into	the	fountain.
Challice	 D'Arle	 jumped,	 then	 looked	 round	 as	 she	 wiped	 droplets	 of	 water
from	her	painted	face.
His	heart	sank	as	her	gaze	passed	over	him,	then	her	head	whipped	back.
Crokus	gestured	desperately.	This	was	it,	this	was	when	he'd	find	out	where
she	stood	as	far	as	he	was	concerned.	He	held	his	breath	and	gestured	again.
With	a	backward	glance	toward	the	patio,	Challice	rose	and	ran	to	him.
As	she	came	close	she	squinted	at	him.	“Gorlas?	Is	that	you?	I've	been	waiting
all	night!”
Crokus	 froze.	 Then,	 without	 thinking,	 he	 lunged	 forward	 and	 clasped	 a	 hand
over	 her	 mouth,	 his	 other	 arm	 encircling	 her	 waist.	 Challice	 squealed,	 trying	 to
bite	his	palm,	and	struggled	against	him,	but	he	dragged	her	into	the	darkness	of
the	garden.	Now	what?	he	wondered.
Circle	 Breaker	 leaned	 against	 the	 marble	 pillar	 just	 inside	 the	 estate's	 main


chamber.	Behind	him	guests	milled	around	Turban	Orr's	body,	arguing	loudly	and
voicing	empty	threats.	The	air	hung	heavy	over	the	garden,	smelling	of	blood.
He	wiped	at	his	eyes,	trying	to	calm	his	heart.	It's	over.	Queen	of	Dreams,	I'm
done.	I	can	rest	now.	Finally	rest.	He	straightened	slowly,	taking	a	deep	breath,
adjusted	his	sword	belt	and	glanced	around.	Captain	Stillis	was	nowhere	in	sight,
and	 the	 chamber	 was	 almost	 empty	 except	 for	 a	 knot	 of	 servants	 outside	 the
kitchen	 entrance.	 Lady	 Simtal	 was	 still	 missing,	 and	 confusion	 now	 seeped	 into
the	void	of	her	absence.
Circle	Breaker	looked	one	last	time	at	the	guests	in	the	garden,	then	he	made
his	 way	 to	 the	 doors.	 As	 he	 passed	 a	 long	 table	 on	 which	 sat	 the	 remnants	 of
pastries	and	puddings,	he	heard	faint	snoring.	Another	step	forward	brought	him	to
the	table's	end	and	into	view	the	small	round	man	seated	in	a	plush	antique	chair.
The	 smeared	 cherub	 mask	 hid	 the	 man's	 face,	 but	 Circle	 Breaker	 could	 see	 the
closed	 eyes,	 and	 the	 nasal	 drone	 that	 matched	 the	 rise	 and	 fall	 of	 his	 chest	 was
loud	and	steady.
The	 guardsman	 hesitated.	 Then,	 shaking	 his	 head,	 he	 moved	 on.	 Beyond	 the
gates	 now	within	 sight	 waited	 the	streets	of	 Darujhistan,	 and	freedom.	Now	 that
he'd	begun	his	first	steps	on	that	path,	he	would	let	nothing	deter	him.
I've	 done	 my	 part.	 Just	 another	 nameless	 stranger	 who	 couldn't	 run	 from
the	face	of	tyranny.	Dear	Hood,	take	the	man's	shriveled	soul—his	dreams	are
over,	ended	by	an	assassin's	whim.	As	for	my	own	soul,	well,	you	shall	have	to
wait	a	while	longer.
He	passed	through	the	gates,	welcoming	at	last	the	smile	that	came	unbidden	to
his	mouth.


Chapter	Twenty-two
Ravens!	Great	Ravens!
Your	damning	cawls	deride
histories	sweeping	beneath
your	blackened	wings—
	

Shatter	the	day
O	flags	of	night,
rend	with	shadows
this	innocent	light
	

Ravens!	Great	Ravens!
Your	drumming	clouds	arrive
swoop'd	sudden	sheer,
hissing	travails
from	no	place
t'	the	other—
	

Shatter	the	day,
O	flags	of	night,
rend	with	shadows
this	innocent	light
	

Ravens!	Great	Ravens!
Your	beaks	clatter	open
disgorging	the	sweat
of	straining	dismay
the	clack	of	bones
promised	this	day—
	

I've	seen	the	sheen
of	your	eyes	the	laughter
that	rimes	the	living


your	passing	but	an	illusion—
we	stop,	we	stare
we	curse	your	cold	winds
in	knowing	your	flight's	path
wheeling	you	round	us
again,	oh,	forever	again!
RAVENS
COLLITT	(B.978)


	
Raest	had	driven	two	of	the	black	dragons	from	the	battle.	The	remaining	two	now
circled	high	overhead	while	Silanah	Redwings	sped	down	and	out	of	sight	beyond
the	 hill.	 She	 was	 hurting,	 the	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 knew,	 the	 power	 of	 her	 immense
lifeforce	bleeding	away.
“And	 now,”	 he	 said,	 through	 tattered	 lips,	 “she	 will	 die.”	 Raest's	 flesh	 had
been	 torn	 away,	 ravaged	 by	 the	 virulent	 power	 of	 the	 dragons,	 power	 that	 burst
from	 their	 jaws	 like	 breath	 of	 fire.	 His	 brittle,	 yellowed	 bones	 were	 splintered,
crushed,	 and	 shattered.	 All	 that	 kept	 him	 upright	 and	 moving	 was	 his	 Omtose
Phellack	Warren.
Once	 the	 Finnest	 was	 in	 his	 hands,	 he	 would	 make	 his	 body	 anew,	 filling	 it
with	the	vigor	of	health.	And	he	was	near	his	goal.	One	last	ridge	of	hills	and	the
city's	walls	would	be	visible,	its	fortifications	all	that	stood	between	Raest	and
his	greater	powers.
The	 battle	 had	 laid	 waste	 to	 the	 hills,	 incinerating	 everything	 in	 the	 deadly
clash	of	Warrens.	And	Raest	had	driven	back	the	dragons.	He'd	listened	to	their
cries	 of	 pain.	 Laughing,	 he'd	 flung	 dense	 clouds	 of	 earth	 and	 stone	 skyward	 to
blind	them.	He	ignited	the	air	in	the	path	of	their	flight.	He	filled	clouds	with	fire.
It	was,	he	felt,	good	to	be	alive	again.
As	he	walked,	he	continued	to	devastate	the	land	around	him.	A	single	jerk	of
his	head	had	shattered	a	stone	bridge	spanning	a	wide,	shallow	river.	There	had
been	 a	 guardhouse	 there,	 and	 soldiers	 with	 iron	 weapons—odd	 creatures,	 taller
than	Imass,	yet	he	sensed	that	they	could	be	easily	enslaved.	These	particular	men,
however,	he	destroyed	lest	they	distract	him	in	his	battle	with	the	dragons.	He'd
met	another	man,	similarly	clad	and	riding	a	horse.	He	killed	both	man	and	beast,
irritated	at	their	intrusion.
Wreathed	 in	 the	 crackling	 fire	 of	 his	 sorcery,	 Raest	 ascended	 the	 side	 of	 the
hill	 behind	 which	 Silanah	 had	 disappeared	 minutes	 earlier.	 Anticipating	 another
ambush,	the	Jaghut	Tyrant	gathered	his	power,	fists	clenching.	Yet	he	reached	the
crest	 unmolested.	Had	she	fled?	He	craned	skyward.	No,	the	two	black	dragons
remained,	and	between	them	a	Great	Raven.
Raest	crossed	the	hill's	summit	and	stopped	when	the	valley	beyond	came	into
view.	Silanah	waited	there,	her	red	pebbled	skin	streaked	with	black,	wet	burns
across	her	heaving	chest.	Wings	folded,	she	watched	him	from	her	position	at	the
base	 of	 the	 valley,	 where	 a	 stream	 wound	 a	 tortured	 cut	 through	 the	 earth,	 its


jagged	path	choked	with	bramble.
The	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 laughed	 harshly.	 Here	 she	 would	 die.	 The	 far	 side	 of	 the
valley	 was	 a	 low	 ridge,	 and	 beyond,	 glowing	 in	 the	 darkness,	 was	 the	 city	 that
held	his	Finnest.	Raest	paused	at	seeing	it.	Even	the	great	Jaghut	cities	of	the	early
times	were	dwarfed	by	comparison.	And	what	of	its	strange	blue	and	green	light,
fighting	the	darkness	with	such	steady,	unfaltering	determination?
There	 were	 mysteries	 here.	 He	 was	 eager	 to	 discover	 them.	 “Silanah!”	 he
cried.	 “Eleint!	 I	 give	 you	 your	 life!	 Flee	 now,	 Silanah.	 I	 show	 mercy	 but	 once.
Hear	me,	eleint!”
The	 red	 dragon	 regarded	 him	 steadily,	 her	 multi-faceted	 eyes	 glowing	 like
beacons.	She	did	not	move,	nor	did	she	reply.
Raest	 strode	 toward	 her,	 surprised	 to	 find	 her	 Warren	 gone.	 Was	 this
surrender,	then?	He	laughed	a	second	time.
As	he	neared,	the	sky	above	him	changed,	filling	with	a	sourceless	mercurial
glow.	The	city	beyond	vanished,	replaced	by	wind-whipped	mudflats.	The	distant
jagged	 line	 of	 mountains	 loomed	 massive,	 uncarved	 by	 rivers	 of	 ice,	 bright	 and
savage	with	youth.	Raest's	steps	slowed.	This	is	an	Elder	vision,	a	vision	before
even	the	Jaghut.	Who	has	lured	me	here?
“Oh,	my,	oh,	my	.	.	.”
The	Tyrant's	gaze	snapped	down	to	find	a	mortal	standing	before	him.	Raest
cocked	a	withered	brow	at	the	man's	peculiar	clothing,	the	coat	tattered	and	faded
red	 with	 large,	 food-stained	 cuffs,	 the	 baggy	 shimmering	 pantaloons	 dyed	 an
astonishing	 pink,	 and	 the	 broad	 black	 leather	 boots	 covering	 his	 small	 feet.	 The
man	 withdrew	 a	 cloth	 and	 patted	 the	 sweat	 from	 his	 brow.	 “Dear	 sir,”	 he
wheezed,	“you've	not	aged	well	at	all!”
“There	 is	 Imass	 within	 you,”	 Raest	 rasped.	 “Even	 the	 language	 you	 speak
echoes	their	guttural	throats.	Have	you	come	forth	to	grovel	at	my	feet?	Are	you
my	first	acolyte,	then,	eager	for	my	rewards?”
“Alas,”	 the	 man	 replied,	 “you	 are	 mistaken,	 sir.	 Kruppe—this	 humble,	 weak
mortal	who	stands	before	you—bows	to	no	man,	be	he	Jaghut	or	god.	Such	are	the
nuances	of	this	new	age	that	you	are	felled	by	indifference,	made	insignificant	in
your	 mighty	 struggles	 by	 lowly	 Kruppe	 into	 whose	 dream	 you	 have	 ignobly
stumbled.	 Kruppe	 stands	 before	 you	 so	 that	 you	 may	 gaze	 upon	 his	 benign
countenance	in	the	last	moments	before	your	demise.	Magnanimous	of	Kruppe,	all
things	considered.”
Raest	laughed.	 “I	have	walked	in	the	dreams	 of	mortals	before.	You	believe
you	are	the	master	here,	but	you	are	mistaken.”	The	Tyrant's	hand	shot	out,	virulent


power	erupting	from	it.	The	sorcery	engulfed	Kruppe,	blazing	darkly,	then	faded,
leaving	not	even	a	remnant	of	the	man.
A	voice	 spoke	to	Raest's	 left:	“Rude,	 Kruppe	proclaims.	Disappointing,	this
precipitateness.”
The	Jaghut	swung	around,	eyes	narrowing.	“What	game	is	this?”
The	man	smiled.	“Why,	Kruppe's	game,	of	course.”
A	sound	behind	Raest	alerted	him,	but	too	late.	He	spun—even	as	a	massive
flint	 sword	 crunched	 through	 his	 left	 shoulder,	 tearing	 a	 path	 that	 snapped	 ribs,
sliced	through	sternum	and	spine.	The	blow	dragged	the	Tyrant	down	and	to	one
side.	Raest	sprawled,	pieces	of	his	body	striking	the	ground	around	him.	He	stared
up	at	the	T'lan	Imass.
Kruppe's	 shadow	 moved	 over	 Raest's	 face	 and	 the	 Tyrant	 met	 the	 mortal
man's	watery	eyes.
“He	is	Clanless,	of	course.	Unbound	and	beyond	binding,	yet	the	ancient	call
commands	him	still—to	his	dismay.	Imagine	his	surprise	at	being	found	out.	Onos
T'oolan,	Sword	of	the	First	Empire,	is	once	more	called	upon	by	the	blood	that
once	warmed	his	limbs,	his	heart,	his	life	of	so	very	long	ago.”
The	T'lan	Imass	spoke.	“You	have	strange	dreams,	mortal.”
“Kruppe	possesses	many	surprises,	even	unto	himself.”
“I	sense,”	Onos	T'oolan	continued,	“a	Bonecaster's	hand	in	this	summoning.”
“Indeed.	Pran	Chole	of	Kig	Aven's	clan	of	the	Kron	T'lan	Imass,	I	believe	he
called	himself.”
Raest	raised	himself	from	the	ground,	drawing	his	sorcery	around	his	body	to
hold	its	shattered	parts	in	place.	“No	T'lan	Imass	can	withstand	me,”	he	hissed.
“A	dubious	claim,”	Kruppe	said.	“Even	so,	he	is	joined	in	this	endeavor.”
The	 Jaghut	 Tyrant	 straightened	 to	 see	 a	 tall,	 black-shrouded	 figure	 emerge
from	 the	 streambed.	 He	 cocked	 his	 head	 as	 the	 apparition	 approached.	 “You
remind	me	of	Hood.	Is	the	Death	Wanderer	still	alive?”	He	scowled.	“But,	no.	I
sense	nothing	from	you.	You	do	not	exist.”
“Perhaps,”	the	figure	replied,	in	a	deep,	soft	tone	that	hinted	of	regret.	“If	so,”
he	 continued,	 “then	 neither	 do	 you.	 We	 are	 both	 of	 the	 past,	 Jaghut.”	 The	 figure
halted	 fifteen	 feet	 away	 from	 Raest	 and	 swung	 his	 hooded	 head	 in	 the	 dragon's
direction.	“Her	master	awaits	your	arrival,	Jaghut,	but	he	waits	in	vain	and	for	this
you	 should	 thank	 us.	 He	 would	 deliver	 a	 kind	 of	 death	 from	 which	 there	 is	 no
escape,	even	by	such	a	creature	as	you.”	The	head	turned,	and	the	darkness	within
the	hood	once	again	regarded	the	Tyrant.	“Here,	within	a	mortal's	dream,	we	bring


an	end	to	your	existence.”
Raest	grunted.	“In	this	age	there	are	none	who	can	defeat	me.”
The	figure	laughed,	a	low	rumble.	“You	are	a	fool,	Raest.	In	this	age	even	a
mortal	can	kill	you.	The	tide	of	enslavement	has	reversed	itself.	It	is	now	we	gods
who	are	the	slaves,	and	the	mortals	our	masters—though	they	know	it	not.”
“You	are	a	god,	then?”	Raest's	scowl	deepened.	“You	are	a	child	to	me	if	so.”
“I	was	once	a	god,”	the	figure	replied.	“Worshipped	as	K'rul,	and	my	aspect
was	the	Obilisk.	I	am	the	Maker	of	Paths—do	you	find	significance	in	that	ancient
title?”
Raest	 took	 a	 step	 back,	 raising	 his	 desiccated	 hands.	 “Impossible,”	 he
breathed.	 “You	 passed	 into	 the	 Realms	 of	 Chaos—returned	 to	 the	 place	 of	 your
birth—you	are	among	us	no	more—”
“As	 I	 said,	 things	 have	 changed,”	 K'rul	 said	 quietly.	 “You	 have	 a	 choice,
Raest.	Onos	T'oolan	can	destroy	you.	You	have	no	understanding	of	what	his	title
of	 Sword	 signifies—he	 is	 without	 equal	 in	 this	 world.	 You	 can	 fall	 ignobly
beneath	the	blade	of	an	Imass,	or	you	can	accompany	me—for	in	one	thing	we	are
the	same,	you	and	I.	Our	time	has	passed,	and	the	Gates	of	Chaos	await	us.	What
choice	do	you	make?”
“I	 make	 neither,	 Eldering	 One.”	 With	 a	 soft,	 hollow	 laugh,	 Raest's	 battered,
withered	body	collapsed.
K'rul	cocked	his	head.	“He's	found	another	body.”
Kruppe	pulled	out	his	handkerchief.	“Oh,	my,”	he	said.
Kalam	 gestured	 sharply	 and	 Paran	 ducked	 down.	 The	 captain's	 mouth	 was	 dry.
There	was	something	very	wrong	with	this	garden.	He	wondered	if	it	was	simply
the	exhaustion	he	felt.	The	garden's	air	itself	rubbed	his	senses	raw.	He	thought	he
could	see	the	darkness	pulse,	and	the	smell	of	decay	had	thickened	to	a	stench.
Kalam	reached	for	his	knives.	Paran	tensed,	unable	to	see	anything	beyond	the
assassin.	Too	many	trees,	not	enough	light.	Somewhere	ahead	flickered	gas-lamps,
and	 people	 were	 gathered	 on	 the	 terrace.	 But	 civilization	 seemed	 a	 thousand
leagues	 away.	 Here,	 the	 captain	 felt	 as	 if	 he	 was	 within	 a	 primordial	 presence,
breathing	slowly	and	heavily	on	all	sides.
Kalam	 gestured	 that	 Paran	 remain	 where	 he	 was,	 then	 slipped	 into	 the
shadows	 to	 their	 right.	 Crouching	 low,	 the	 captain	 edged	 forward	 to	 where	 the
assassin	 had	 been	 standing	 moments	 earlier.	 There	 looked	 to	 be	 a	 glade,	 or
clearing,	 just	ahead.	 He	couldn't	be	certain,	however,	nor	could	he	see	anything


amiss.	Yet	his	feeling	of	wrongness	now	ached	in	his	skull.	He	took	another	step.
Something	occupied	the	glade's	center,	blockish,	like	a	dressed	stone,	or	an	altar,
and	before	it	stood	a	small	woman,	almost	wraithlike	in	the	darkness.	Her	back
was	to	Paran.
One	 moment	 she	 stood	 alone,	 the	 next	 Kalam	 rose	 behind	 her,	 knives
glimmering	in	his	hands.	He	drew	back	his	arms.
The	woman	moved	in	a	blur,	one	elbow	driving	backward	into	the	assassin's
stomach.	 She	 twisted	 round	 and	 drove	 her	 knee	 into	 the	 man's	 crotch.	 A	 shout
burst	 from	 Kalam	 as	 he	 reeled	 back	 a	 step,	 then	 fell	 to	 the	 ground	 with	 a	 heavy
thump.
Paran's	sword	was	in	his	hand.	He	dashed	into	the	clearing.
The	woman	saw	him	and	voiced	a	surprised,	frightened	yelp.	“No!”	she	cried.
“Please!”
The	captain	stopped	at	that	girlish	voice.	Kalam	sat	up.	He	groaned,	then	said,
“Dammit,	Sorry.	Wasn't	expecting	you.	We	figured	you	were	dead,	girl.”
The	 woman	 eyed	 Paran	 warily	 as	 he	 approached	 cautiously.	 “I	 should	 know
you,	 shouldn't	 I?”	 she	 asked	 Kalam.	 Then,	 as	 Paran	 came	 closer,	 she	 raised	 a
frightened	 hand	 between	 them	 and	 stepped	 back.	 “I—I	 killed	 you!”	 With	 a	 soft
moan	she	fell	to	her	knees.	“Your	blood	was	on	my	hands.	I	remember	it!”
A	fire	of	rage	flared	in	Paran.	He	raised	his	sword	and	moved	to	stand	over
her.
“Wait!”	Kalam	hissed.	“Wait,	Captain.	Something's	not	right	here.”
With	 great	 difficulty,	 the	 assassin	 climbed	 to	 his	 feet,	 then	 prepared	 to	 sit
down	on	the	stone	block.
“Don't!”	the	girl	gasped.	“Can't	you	feel	it?”
“I	 can,”	 Paran	 growled.	 He	 lowered	 his	 weapon.	 “Don't	 touch	 that	 thing,
Corporal.”
Kalam	stepped	away.	“Thought	it	was	just	me,”	he	muttered.
“It's	 not	 stone	 at	 all,”	 the	 woman	 said,	 her	 face	 free	 of	 the	 anguish	 that	 had
twisted	 it	 a	 moment	 before.	 “It's	 wood.”	 She	 rose	 and	 faced	 Kalam.	 “And	 it's
growing.”
A	suspicion	came	to	Paran.	“Girl,	do	you	remember	me?	Do	you	know	who	I
am?”
She	frowned	at	him,	then	shook	her	head.	“I	know	Kalam,”	she	said.	“He's	an
old	friend,	I	think.”
The	assassin	choked	on	something,	then	coughed	loudly,	wagging	his	head.


The	woman	pointed	at	the	wooden	block.	“See?	It's	growing	again.”
Both	men	looked.	A	haze	blurred	the	block's	edges,	swelling	and	shifting,	then
vanished,	yet	it	was	clear	to	Paran	that	the	thing	was	now	bigger.
“It	has	roots,”	the	woman	added.
Paran	shook	himself.	“Corporal?	Remain	here	with	the	girl.	I	won't	be	long.”
He	sheathed	his	sword	and	left	the	glade.	After	winding	through	the	undergrowth
for	a	minute,	he	came	to	its	edge	and	looked	out	on	a	terrace	crowded	with	guests.
A	low-walled	fountain	rose	from	the	paving	stones	to	his	left,	encircled	by	marble
pillars	spaced	about	a	yard	apart.
The	captain	saw	that	Whiskeyjack	and	the	squad	had	arrayed	themselves	in	a
rough	 line	 a	 dozen	 feet	 from	 the	 garden's	 edge,	 facing	 the	 terrace.	 They	 looked
tense.	Paran	found	a	dead	branch	and	snapped	it	in	half.
At	 the	 sound	 all	 six	 men	 turned.	 The	 captain	 pointed	 at	 Whiskeyjack	 and
Mallet,	then	stepped	back	between	the	trees.	The	sergeant	whispered	something	to
Quick	Ben.	Then	he	collected	the	healer	and	they	came	over.
Paran	 pulled	 Whiskeyjack	 close.	 “Kalam's	 found	 Sorry,	 and	 something	 else
besides,”	he	said.	“The	girl's	not	all	there,	Sergeant,	and	I	don't	think	it's	an	act.
One	minute	she	remembers	killing	me,	the	next	she	doesn't.	And	she's	got	it	into
her	head	right	now	that	Kalam's	an	old	friend.”
Mallet	grunted.
After	 a	 brief	 glance	 back	 at	 the	 party,	 Whiskeyjack	 asked,	 “So	 what's	 this
‘something	else?'	”
“I'm	not	sure,	but	it's	ugly.”
“All	right.”	The	sergeant	sighed.	“Go	with	the	captain,	Mallet.	Take	a	look	at
Sorry.	Any	contact	from	the	Assassins'	Guild	yet?”	he	asked	Paran.
“No.”
“Then	we	move	soon,”	Whiskeyjack	said.	“We	let	Fiddler	and	Hedge	loose.
Bring	Kalam	when	you	come	back,	Mallet.	We	need	to	talk.”
Rallick	 found	 his	 path	 unobstructed	 as	 he	 moved	 across	 the	 central	 chamber
toward	 the	 front	 doors.	 Faces	 turned	 to	 him	 and	 conversations	 fell	 away,	 rising
again	as	he	passed.	A	bone-deep	weariness	gripped	the	assassin,	more	than	could
be	 accounted	 for	 by	 the	 blood	 lost	 to	 a	 wound	 already	 healed.	 The	 malaise
gripping	him	was	emotional.
He	 paused	 at	 seeing	 Kruppe	 rising	 from	 a	 chair,	 mask	 dangling	 from	 one
plump	hand.	The	man's	face	was	sheathed	in	sweat	and	there	was	fear	in	his	eyes.


“You've	a	right	to	be	terrified,”	Rallick	said,	approaching	him.	“If	I'd	known
you'd	be	here—”
“Silence!”	Kruppe	snapped.	“Kruppe	must	think!”
The	 assassin	 scowled	 but	 said	 nothing.	 He'd	 never	 before	 seen	 Kruppe
without	his	usual	affable	façade,	and	the	sight	of	him	so	perturbed	made	Rallick
profoundly	uneasy.
“Be	on	your	way,	friend,”	Kruppe	said	then,	his	voice	sounding	strange.	“Your
destiny	awaits	you.	More,	it	seems	this	new	world	is	well	prepared	for	one	such
as	Raest,	no	matter	what	flesh	he	wears.”
Rallick's	 scowl	 deepened.	 The	 man	 sounds	 drunk.	 He	 sighed,	 then	 turned
away,	 his	 mind	 returning	 once	 again	 to	 what	 had	 been	 achieved	 this	 night.	 He
continued	on	his	way,	leaving	Kruppe	behind.	What	now?	he	wondered.	So	much
had	gone	into	reaching	this	moment.	The	sharp	focus	of	his	thoughts	seemed	dulled
now	 by	 success.	 Never	 the	 crusader,	 Rallick's	 obsession	 to	 right	 the	 wrong	 had
been,	in	a	sense,	no	more	than	the	assassin	assuming	the	role	Coll	himself	should
have	taken.	He'd	played	 the	instrument	of	Coll's	will,	relying	on	a	faith	that	the
man's	own	will	would	return.
And	if	it	didn't?	His	scowl	deepening,	Rallick	crushed	that	question	before	it
could	 lead	 his	 thought	 in	 search	 of	 an	 answer.	 As	 Baruk	 had	 said,	 the	 time	 had
come	to	go	home.
As	he	passed	a	silver-masked	woman	touched	his	arm.	Startled	by	the	contact,
he	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 her.	 Long	 brown	 hair	 surrounded	 the	 featureless	 mask,	 its
eyehole	slits	revealing	nothing	of	what	lay	behind	it.	The	woman	stepped	close.
“I've	 been	 curious,”	 she	 said	 quietly,	 “for	 some	 time.	 However,	 I	 see	 now	 I
should	 have	 observed	 you	 personally,	 Rallick	 Nom.	 Ocelot's	 death	 could	 have
been	avoided.”
The	assassin's	gaze	darkened.	“Vorcan.”
Her	head	tilted	in	a	fraction	of	a	nod.
“Ocelot	 was	 a	 fool,”	 Rallick	 snapped.	 “If	 Orr's	 contract	 was	 sanctioned	 by
the	Guild,	I	await	punishment.”
She	did	not	reply.
Rallick	waited	calmly.
“You're	a	man	of	few	words,	Rallick	Nom.”
His	answer	was	silence.
Vorcan	laughed	softly.	“You	say	you	await	punishment,	as	if	already	resigned
to	 your	 own	 death.”	 Her	 gaze	 shifted	 from	 him	 toward	 the	 crowded	 terrace.


“Councilman	 Turban	 Orr	 possessed	 protective	 magic,	 yet	 it	 availed	 him	 naught.
Curious.”	She	seemed	to	be	considering	something,	then	she	nodded.	“Your	skills
are	required,	Rallick	Nom.	Accompany	me.”
He	blinked,	then,	as	she	strode	toward	the	garden	at	the	rear	of	the	house,	he
followed.
Crokus	held	one	hand	over	Challice's	mouth	as	he	lay	atop	her.	With	his	other
he	removed	his	 thief's	mask.	Her	eyes	widened	in	recognition.	“If	you	scream,”
Crokus	warned	in	a	harsh	voice,	“you'll	regret	it.”
He'd	managed	to	drag	her	perhaps	ten	yards	into	the	undergrowth	before	she
tripped	him.	They'd	thrashed	about,	but	he'd	won	the	battle.
“I	just	want	to	talk	to	you,”	Crokus	said.	“I	won't	hurt	you,	Challice,	I	swear
it.	Unless	you	try	something,	of	course.	Now,	I'm	going	to	remove	my	hand.	Please
don't	 scream.”	 He	 tried	 to	 read	 the	 expression	 in	 her	 eyes,	 but	 all	 he	 saw	 was
fear.	Ashamed,	he	raised	his	hand.
She	didn't	scream,	and	a	moment	later	Crokus	found	himself	wishing	she	had.
“Damn	you,	thief!	When	my	father	catches	you	he'll	have	you	skinned	alive!	That's
if	 Gorlas	 doesn't	 find	 you	 first.	 You	 try	 anything	 with	 me	 and	 he'll	 have	 you
boiled,	slowly—”
Crokus	 jammed	 his	 hand	 over	 her	 mouth	 again.	 Skinned?	 Boiled?	 “Who's
Gorlas?”	he	demanded,	glaring.	“Some	amateur	chef?	So	you	did	betray	me!”
She	stared	up	at	him.
He	lifted	his	hand	again.
“I	didn't	betray	you,”	she	said.	“What	are	you	talking	about?”
“That	murdered	house	guard.	I	never	did	it,	but—”
“Of	 course	 you	 didn't.	 Father	 hired	 a	 Seer.	 A	 woman	 killed	 that	 guard,	 a
servant	 of	 the	 Rope's.	 The	 Seer	 was	 terrified	 and	 didn't	 even	 stay	 to	 be	 paid!
Now	get	off	me,	thief.”
He	let	her	go	and	sat	back	on	the	ground.	He	stared	into	the	trees.	“You	didn't
betray	me?	What	about	Meese?	The	guards	at	Uncle	Mammot's?	The	big	hunt?”
Challice	 climbed	 to	 her	 feet	 and	 brushed	 dead	 leaves	 from	 her	 hide	 cloak.
“What	are	you	babbling	about?	I	have	to	get	back.	Gorlas	will	be	looking	for	me.
He's	the	first	son	of	House	Tholius,	in	training	to	be	a	master	duelist.	If	he	sees
you	with	me,	there'll	be	real	trouble.”
He	looked	up	at	her	blankly.	“Wait!”	He	sprang	to	his	feet.	“Listen,	Challice!
Forget	 this	 Gorlas	 idiot.	 Within	 the	 year	 my	 uncle	 will	 introduce	 us	 formally.
Mammot	is	a	famous	writer.”


Challice	rolled	her	eyes.	“Get	your	feet	back	on	the	ground.	A	writer?	Some
old	 man	 with	 ink-stained	 hands	 who	 walks	 into	 walls—has	 his	 house	 power?
Influence?	 House	 Tholius	 has	 power,	 influence,	 everything	 required.	 Besides,
Gorlas	loves	me.”
“But	 I—”	 He	 stopped,	 looking	 away.	 Did	 he?	 No.	 Did	 that	 matter,	 though?
What	did	he	want	from	her,	anyway?
“What	do	you	want	from	me,	anyway?”	Challice	demanded.
He	studied	his	feet.	Then	he	met	her	eyes.	“Company?”	he	asked	diffidently.
“Friendship?	What	am	I	saying?	I'm	a	thief!	I	rob	women	like	you!”
“That's	 right,”	 she	 snapped.	 “So	 why	 pretend	 otherwise?”	 Her	 expression
softened.	“Crokus,	I	won't	betray	you.	It	will	be	our	secret.”
For	the	briefest	of	moments	he	felt	like	a	child	being	stroked	and	consoled	by
a	kindly	matron,	and	he	found	himself	enjoying	it.
“Before	you,”	she	added,	smiling,	“I'd	never	met	a	real	thief	from	the	streets.”
His	enjoyment	ended	in	a	surge	of	anger.	“Hood's	Breath,	no,”	he	sneered.
“Real?	You	don't	know	what's	real,	Challice.	You've	never	had	blood	on	your
hands.	 You've	 never	 seen	 a	 man	 die.	 But	 that's	 the	 way	 it	 should	 be,	 isn't	 it?
Leave	the	dirt	to	us,	we're	used	to	it.”
“I	 saw	 a	 man	 die	 tonight,”	 Challice	 said	 quietly.	 “I	 never	 want	 to	 again.	 If
that's	 what	‘real'	means,	then	I	 don't	want	it.	It's	all	yours,	 Crokus.	Good-bye.”
She	turned	and	walked	away.
Crokus	stared	at	her	back,	her	braided	hair,	as	her	words	rang	in	his	head.
Suddenly	exhausted,	he	turned	to	the	garden.	He	hoped	Apsalar	had	remained
where	he'd	left	her.	The	last	thing	he	wanted	now	was	to	have	to	track	her	down.
He	slipped	into	the	shadows.
Mallet	 recoiled	 with	 his	 first	 step	 into	 the	 glade.	 Paran	 gripped	 his	 arm.	 Their
eyes	met.
The	healer	shook	his	head.	“I'll	not	approach	any	closer,	sir.	Whatever	lives
there	is	anathema	to	my	Denul	Warren.	And	it	.	.	.	it	senses	me	.	.	.	with	hunger.”
He	wiped	sweat	from	his	brow,	drew	a	shaky	breath.	“Best	bring	the	girl	to	me
here.”
Paran	released	his	arm	and	darted	into	the	clearing.	The	block	of	wood	was
now	the	size	of	a	table,	veined	in	thick,	twisting	roots	and	pocked	on	its	sides	with
rough	squared	holes.	The	earth	around	it	looked	soaked	in	blood.	“Corporal,”	he
whispered,	chilled.	“Send	the	girl	over	to	Mallet.”


Kalam	laid	a	hand	on	her	shoulder.	“It's	all	right,	lass,”	he	said,	in	the	tone	of
a	kindly	uncle,	“you	go	on,	now.	We'll	join	you	shortly.”
“Yes,”	she	smiled,	and	moved	to	where	the	healer	stood	at	the	glade's	edge.
Kalam	 rubbed	 his	 bristly	 jaw,	 eyes	 following	 her.	 “Never	 seen	 Sorry	 smile
before,”	he	said,	as	Paran	arrived.	“And	that's	a	shame.”
They	 stood	 and	 watched	 as	 Mallet	 spoke	 quietly	 to	 the	 girl,	 then	 stepped
forward	and	laid	a	hand	on	her	forehead.
Paran	cocked	his	head.	“The	storm's	stopped,”	he	said.
“Yeah.	Hope	it	means	what	we'd	like	it	to	mean.”
“Someone's	 stopped	 it.	 I	 share	 your	 hope,	 Corporal.”	 For	 the	 captain
however,	it	was	a	small	hope.	Something	was	building.	He	sighed.	“It's	not	even
the	twelfth	bell	yet.	Hard	to	believe.”
“Long	night	ahead	of	us,”	the	assassin	said,	making	it	clear	that	he,	too,	found
himself	sorely	lacking	in	optimism.	He	grunted.	Mallet	had	voiced	an	amazed	cry
that	reached	them.	The	healer	drew	back	his	hand	and	waved	at	Paran	and	Kalam.
“You	go,”	the	assassin	said.
The	captain	frowned	at	the	black	man,	confused.	Then	he	went	over	to	where
the	 healer	 and	 Sorry	 waited.	 The	 girl's	 eyes	 were	 closed,	 and	 she	 seemed	 in	 a
trance.
Mallet	was	direct.	“The	possession's	gone,”	he	said.
“Guessed	as	much,”	Paran	replied,	eyeing	the	girl.
“There's	 more	 to	 it,	 though,”	 the	 healer	 continued.	 “She's	 got	 someone	 else
inside	her,	sir.”
Paran's	brows	rose.
“Someone	who	was	there	all	along.	How	it	survived	the	Rope's	presence	is
beyond	me.	And	now	I've	got	a	choice.”
“Explain.”
Mallet	crouched,	found	a	twig	and	began	to	scratch	aimless	patterns	in	the	dirt.
“That	someone's	been	protecting	the	girl's	mind,	acting	like	an	alchemist's	filter.
In	 the	 last	 two	 years,	 Sorry's	 done	 things	 that	 would	 drive	 her	 insane	 if	 she'd
remembered	any	of	it.	That	presence	is	fighting	those	memories	right	now,	but	it
needs	help,	because	it	isn't	as	strong	as	it	once	was.	It's	dying.”
Paran	squatted	beside	the	man.	“You're	thinking	of	offering	that	help,	then?”
“Not	 sure.	 You	 see,	 sir,	 I	 don't	 know	 its	 plans.	 Don't	 know	 what	 it's	 up	 to,
can't	read	the	pattern	it's	trying	to	make.	So	let's	say	I	help	it,	only	what	it	wants
is	absolute	control?	Then	the	girl's	possessed	all	over	again.”


“So	 you	 think	 the	 presence	 was	 protecting	 Sorry	 from	 the	 Rope,	 only	 so	 it
could	now	jump	in	and	take	over?”
“Put	 it	 that	 way,”	 Mallet	 said,	 “and	 it	 doesn't	 make	 sense.	 What	 gets	 me,
though,	is	why	else	would	that	presence	commit	itself	so	thoroughly?	Its	body,	its
flesh	is	gone.	If	it	lets	go	of	the	girl	it's	got	nowhere	to	go,	sir.	Now,	maybe	it's	a
loved	one,	a	relative	or	something	like	that.	A	person	who	was	willing	to	sacrifice
herself	absolutely.	That's	a	possibility.”
“Herself?	It's	a	woman?”
“It	was.	Damned	if	I	know	what	it	is	now.	All	I	get	from	it	is	sadness.”	The
healer	met	Paran's	eyes.	“It's	the	saddest	thing	I've	ever	known,	sir.”
Paran	studied	the	man's	face	briefly,	then	he	rose.	“I'm	not	going	to	give	you
an	order	on	what	to	do,	Healer.”
“But?”
“But,	for	what	it's	worth,	I	say	do	it.	Give	it	what	it	needs	so	it	can	do	what	it
wants	to	do.”
Mallet	puffed	out	his	cheeks,	then	tossed	down	the	twig	and	straightened.	“My
instinct,	too,	sir.	Thanks.”
Kalam	spoke	loudly	from	the	glade.	“Far	enough.	Show	yourselves.”
The	two	men	spun	 around	to	see	Kalam	looking	into	the	woods	 to	their	left.
Paran	grasped	Mallet's	arm	and	pulled	him	into	the	shadows.	The	healer	dragged
Sorry	with	them.
Two	figures	entered	the	glade,	a	woman	and	a	man.
Crokus	snaked	closer	through	the	vines	and	mulch	of	the	forest	floor.	For	an	offlimits	garden,	this	was	a	busy	tangle	of	wood.	The	voices	he'd	heard	in	his	search
for	Apsalar	now	revealed	themselves	as	two	men	and	one	silver-masked	woman.
All	 three	 were	 looking	 at	 an	 odd,	 blurry	 tree	 stump	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 glade.
Slowly	Crokus	let	out	a	breath.	One	of	the	men	was	Rallick	Nom.
“There	is	ill	in	this,”	the	woman	said,	stepping	back.	“A	hunger.”
The	large	black-skinned	man	at	her	side	grunted.	“Wouldn't	argue	with	you	on
that,	Guild	Master.	Whatever	it	is,	it	ain't	Malazan.”
The	thief's	eyes	widened.	Malazan	spies?	Guild	Master?	Vorcan!	Seemingly
impervious	to	the	strangeness	around	her,	the	woman	now	turned	to	Rallick.	“How
does	it	affect	you,	Rallick?”
“It	doesn't,”	he	said.


“Approach	it,	then.”
The	 assassin	 shrugged	 and	 walked	 up	 to	 the	 writhing,	 knotted	 block.	 Its
blurred	movement	stopped.
Vorcan	relaxed.	“You	seem	to	damage	its	efforts,	Rallick.	Curious.”
The	man	grunted.	“Otataral	dust.”
“What?”
“I	rubbed	it	into	my	skin.”
Vorcan	stared.
The	 other	 man's	 eyes	 narrowed	 on	 Rallick.	 “I	 remember	 you,	 Assassin.	 Our
quarry	 when	 we	 first	 sought	 to	 make	 contact.	 The	 night	 of	 the	 ambush	 from
above.”
Rallick	nodded.
“Well,”	the	Malazan	continued,	“I'm	surprised	you	survived.”
“He	is	a	man	of	many	surprises,”	Vorcan	said.	“Very	well,	Corporal	Kalam	of
the	Bridgeburners,	your	request	for	an	audience	reached	me	and	I	have	granted	it.
Before	we	begin,	however,	I	would	appreciate	it	if	the	rest	of	your	party	were	to
join	us.”	She	turned	to	the	trees	on	her	right.
Crokus's	 head	 was	 already	 reeling—Bridgeburners!—but	 it	 felt	 moments
away	from	bursting	when	he	saw	two	men	emerge	from	the	shadows,	with	Apsalar
between	them.	She	looked	drugged,	and	her	eyes	were	closed.
One	of	the	men	said,	“Guild	Master,	I	am	Captain	Paran	of	the	Ninth	Squad.”
He	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	continued,	“In	this	matter,	however,	Kalam	speaks	for
the	Empire.”
Vorcan	turned	back	to	the	black	man.	“Then	the	audience	is	begun.”
“We	both	know,	Guild	Master,	that	the	City	Council	is	not	Darujhistan's	true
power	base.	And	since	you're	not,	either,	we've	concluded	that	the	city's	mages
operate	 covertly,	 keeping	 the	 status	 quo	 intact	 being	 their	 overriding	 interest.
Whoever	they	are,	they're	good	at	hiding	themselves.	Now,	we	might	just	decide
to	kill	every	mage	in	Darujhistan,	but	that	would	take	too	long,	and	it	might	prove
messy.	 Instead,	 Guild	 Master,	 the	 Malazan	 Empire	 has	 issued	 a	 contract	 on
Darujhistan's	 true	 rulers.	 One	 hundred	 thousand	 gold	 jakatas.	 Each.	 More,	 the
Empress	 offers	 the	 mantle	 of	 the	 city's	 control,	 accompanied	 with	 the	 title	 High
First	and	all	the	privileges	that	come	with	it.”	He	crossed	his	arms.
Vorcan	 was	 silent,	 then	 she	 said,	 “Empress	 Laseen	 is	 willing	 to	 pay	 nine
hundred	thousand	jakatas	to	me?”
“If	that's	the	number.	Yes,”	Kalam	agreed.


“The	 T'orrud	 Cabal	 is	 a	 powerful	 force,	 Corporal.	 But	 before	 I	 answer,	 I
would	 know	 of	 the	 creature	 who	 approaches	 from	 the	 east.”	 Her	 face	 tightened
fractionally.	“Five	dragons	opposed	it	for	a	time,	presumably	hailing	from	Moon's
Spawn.	I	assume	that	Master	Baruk	and	his	Cabal	have	sealed	an	agreement	with
the	Son	of	Darkness.”
Kalam	 looked	 stunned,	 then	 recovered	 quickly.	 “Guild	 Master,	 the
approaching	 force	 was	 not	 of	 our	 making.	 We'd	 welcome	 its	 destruction	 at	 the
hands	of	the	Son	of	Darkness.	As	for	your	hidden	question,	I	would	assume	that
the	 alliance	 between	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 and	 the	 Cabal	 will	 become	 void	 with	 the
death	 of	 the	 cabal's	 members.	 We're	 not	 asking	 you	 to	 try	 to	 kill	 the	 Lord	 of
Moon's	Spawn.”
Paran	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “Guild	 Master,	 Moon's	 Spawn	 and	 the	 Malazan
Empire	 have	 clashed	 before.	 The	 pattern	 indicates	 that	 the	 Son	 of	 Darkness	 is
likely	to	retreat	rather	than	stand	against	us	alone.”
“Accurate,”	 Vorcan	 agreed.	 “Corporal	 Kalam,	 I	 have	 no	 wish	 to	 waste	 the
lives	 of	 my	 assassins	 on	 such	 an	 effort.	 Only	 an	 assassin	 who	 is	 a	 High	 Mage
could	 hope	 to	 succeed.	 Therefore,	 I	 accept	 the	 contract.	 I	 will	 conduct	 the
assassinations.	Now,	as	to	the	matter	of	payment	.	.	.”
“Delivered	 by	 Warren	 upon	 completion	 of	 the	 contract,”	 Kalam	 said.	 “You
may	know	this	already,	Guild	Master,	but	the	Empress	was	once	an	assassin.	She
abides	 by	 the	 rules	 of	 conduct.	 The	 gold	 shall	 be	 paid.	 The	 title	 and	 rule	 of
Darujhistan	given	without	hesitation.”
“Accepted,	Corporal	Kalam.”	Vorcan	turned	to	Rallick.	“I	begin	immediately.
Rallick	 Nom,	 the	 task	 I	 now	 give	 you	 is	 vital.	 I	 have	 considered	 your	 strange
ability	to	negate	the	growth	of	this	.	.	.	ill	thing.	My	instincts	are	such:	it	must	not
be	permitted	to	continue	growing.	You	will	remain	here,	thus	holding	it	in	stasis.”
“For	how	long?”	he	growled.
“Until	my	return.	At	that	time	I	will	test	its	defenses.	Oh,	and	one	more	thing:
Ocelot's	 actions	 were	 not	 sanctioned	 by	 the	 Guild.	 Executing	 him	 fulfilled	 the
Guild's	 judgment	 as	 to	 fit	 punishment.	 Thank	 you,	 Rallick	 Nom.	 The	 Guild	 is
pleased.”
Rallick	walked	over	to	the	strange	stump	and	sat	down	on	it.
“Until	later,”	Vorcan	said,	and	strode	from	the	glade.
Crokus	 watched	 as	 the	 three	 Malazan	 spies	 gathered	 for	 a	 whispered
discussion.	Then	one	of	the	men	grasped	Apsalar's	arm	and	gently	guided	her	into
the	 woods,	 making	 for	 the	 rear	 wall.	 The	 remaining	 two,	 Captain	 Paran	 and
Corporal	Kalam,	glanced	over	at	Rallick.


The	 assassin's	 head	 was	 in	 his	 hands,	 his	 elbows	 on	 his	 thighs,	 staring
gloomily	at	the	ground.
Kalam	hissed	a	sigh	through	his	teeth	and	shook	his	head.	A	moment	later	both
men	left,	in	the	direction	of	the	terrace.
Crokus	 hesitated,	 a	 part	 of	 him	 wanting	 to	 rush	 into	 the	 glade	 and	 confront
Rallick.	Assassinate	the	mages!	Hand	Darujhistan	to	the	Malazans?	How	could
the	man	allow	such	a	thing	to	happen?	He	did	not	move,	however,	a	fear	growing
inside	him	that	he,	in	truth,	knew	nothing	of	this	man.	Would	the	assassin	listen	to
him?	 Or	 would	 he	 answer	 Crokus	 with	 a	 knife	 in	 the	 throat?	 Crokus	 didn't	 feel
like	taking	the	chance.
In	 the	 last	 minute	 Rallick	 had	 not	 moved.	 Then	 he	 rose,	 turned	 directly	 to
where	Crokus	lay	hidden.
The	thief	groaned.
Rallick	beckoned.
Slowly,	Crokus	approached.
“You	hide	well,”	Rallick	said.	“And	you	were	lucky	Vorcan	kept	her	mask	on
—she	couldn't	see	much	out	of	it.	You	heard,	then?”
Crokus	 nodded,	 his	 eyes	 drawn	 to	 what	 he'd	 called	 a	 tree	 stump	 in	 spite	 of
himself.	It	looked	more	like	a	small	wooden	house.	The	pocks	on	its	sides	could
well	 have	 been	 windows.	 Unlike	 Vorcan,	 he	 sensed	 not	 hunger	 but	 a	 kind	 of
urgency,	almost	frustration.
“Before	you	condemn	me,	listen	carefully,	Crokus.”
The	thief	dragged	his	attention	from	the	wooden	block.	“I'm	listening.”
“Baruk	 may	 yet	 be	 at	 the	 party.	 You	 must	 find	 him,	 tell	 him	 exactly	 what's
happened.	Tell	 him	Vorcan	is	a	High	Mage—and	she'll	kill	them	all	unless	they
gather	 to	 defend	 each	 other.”	 The	 assassin	 reached	 out	 a	 hand	 to	 Crokus's
shoulder.	 The	 boy	 flinched,	 his	 eyes	 wary.	 “And	 if	 Baruk	 has	 gone	 home,	 find
Mammot.	I	saw	him	here	not	long	ago.	He	wears	the	mask	of	a	tusked	beast.”
“Uncle	Mammot?	But	he's—”
“He's	 a	 High	 Priest	 of	 D'riss,	 Crokus,	 and	 a	 member	 of	 the	 T'orrud	 Cabal.
Now,	hurry.	There's	no	time	to	waste.”
“You	 mean	 you're	 going	 to	 stay	 here,	 Rallick?	 Just	 sit	 there	 on	 that.	 .	 .	 that
stump?”
The	assassin's	grip	tightened.	“Vorcan	spoke	true,	lad.	Whatever	this	thing	is,
it	seems	I	can	hold	it	in	check.	Baruk	needs	to	know	of	this	conjuring.	I	trust	his
senses	more	than	I	do	Vorcan's,	but	for	now	I	will	obey	her	in	this.”


For	 a	 moment	 Crokus	 resisted,	 his	 thoughts	 on	 Apsalar.	 They'd	 done
something	to	her,	he	was	certain—and	if	they'd	harmed	her,	he'd	make	them	pay.
But	.	.	.	Uncle	Mammot?	Vorcan	was	planning	to	kill	his	uncle?	The	thief's	eyes
hardened	as	he	looked	up	at	Rallick.	“Consider	it	done,”	he	said.
At	 that	 instant,	 a	 roar	 of	 rage	 and	 agony,	 coming	 from	 the	 terrace,	 shook	 the
trees.	 The	 block	 of	 wood	 behind	 them	 responded	 with	 a	 burst	 of	 bright	 yellow
fire,	its	roots	writhing	and	swelling	like	groping	fingers.
Rallick	 pushed	 Crokus	 hard	 then	 whirled	 and	 dived	 onto	 the	 block.	 The
yellow	fire	winked	out	and	cracks	opened	in	the	earth,	spreading	in	all	directions.
“Go!”	yelled	Rallick.
The	thief,	his	heart	hammering,	turned	and	sprinted	for	Lady	Simtal's	estate.
Baruk's	 hand	 snapped	 out	 and	 yanked	 savagely	 on	 the	 bell	 cord.	 Above	 him,	 he
heard	 the	 wagoner	 cry	 out.	 The	 carriage	 skidded	 to	 a	 halt.	 “Something's
happened,”	he	hissed	to	Rake.	“We	left	too	early,	dammit!”	He	moved	on	the	seat
to	the	window	and	opened	its	shutters.
“A	 moment,	 Alchemist,”	 Rake	 said	 levelly,	 his	 brows	 knitted	 and	 his	 head
cocked	 as	 if	 listening	 for	 something.	 “The	 Tyrant,”	 he	 pronounced.	 “But	 he	 is
weakened,	and	enough	mages	remain	to	deal	with	him.”	He	opened	his	mouth	to
add	 something,	 then	 shut	 it	 again.	 His	 eyes	 deepened	 to	 azure	 as	 he	 studied	 the
alchemist.	 “Baruk,”	 he	 said	 quietly,	 “return	 to	 your	 estate.	 Prepare	 for	 the
Empire's	next	move—we'll	not	have	long	to	wait.”
Baruk	stared	at	the	Tiste	Andii.	“Tell	me	what's	happening,”	he	said	angrily.
“Will	you	challenge	the	Tyrant	or	not?”
Rake	tossed	his	mask	onto	the	floor	between	them	and	clasped	the	collar	of	his
cloak.	“If	it	proves	necessary,	I	shall.”
Fists	pounded	on	the	carriage	and	voices	shouted	good-naturedly.	The	crowds
around	them	pushed	in	on	all	sides,	rocking	the	carriage.	The	festival	approached
the	Twelfth	Bell,	the	Hour	of	Ascension	as	the	Lady	of	Spring	took	to	the	sky	in
the	coming	of	the	moon.
Rake	continued,	“In	the	meantime	the	city's	streets	must	be	cleared,”	he	said.
“I	imagine	it's	your	desire	to	minimize	the	loss	of	life.”
“And	 this	 is	 all	 you	 give	 me,	 Rake?”	 Baruk	 gestured	 sharply.	 “Clear	 the
streets?	 How	 in	 Hood's	 name	 do	 we	 manage	 that?	 There	 are	 three	 hundred
thousand	people	in	Darujhistan,	and	they're	all	in	the	streets!”
The	Tiste	Andii	opened	the	door	beside	him.	“Then	leave	that	to	me.	I	need	to


find	a	high	vantage-point,	Alchemist.	Suggestions?”
Baruk's	 frustration	 was	 so	 great	 that	 he	 had	 to	 fight	 the	 desire	 to	 defy
Anomander	Rake.	“K'rul's	Belfry,”	he	said.	“A	square	tower	near	Worry	Gate.”
Rake	 stepped	 out	 of	 the	 carriage.	 “We'll	 speak	 again	 at	 your	 estate,
Alchemist,”	 he	 said,	 leaning	 back	 inside.	 “You	 and	 your	 fellow	 mages	 must
prepare	yourselves.”	He	faced	the	crowds,	pausing	for	a	moment	as	if	smelling	the
air.	“How	far	to	this	belfry?”
“Three	hundred	paces—surely	you	don't	mean	to	go	on	foot?”
“I	do.	I	am	not	yet	ready	to	unveil	my	Warren.”
“But	how—?”	Baruk	fell	silent,	as	Anomander	Rake	provided	the	answer	to
his	question.
Standing	 head	 and	 shoulders	 above	 the	 jostling	 crowds,	 he	 unsheathed	 his
sword.	 “If	 you	 value	 your	 souls,”	 the	 Son	 of	 Darkness	 bellowed,	 “make	 way!”
Raised	high,	the	sword	groaned	awake,	chains	of	smoke	writhing	from	the	blade.
A	terrible	sound	as	of	wheels	creaking	filled	the	air	and	behind	it	arose	a	chorus
of	moaning	filled	with	hopelessness.	Before	Lord	Anomander	Rake	the	crowd	in
the	street	shrank	back,	all	thoughts	of	festivity	swept	away.
“Gods	forfend!”	Baruk	whispered.
It	had	begun	innocently	enough.	Quick	Ben	and	Whiskeyjack	stood	together	near
the	fountain.	Servants	scurried	as,	despite	the	night's	bloodshed	and	the	hostess's
absence,	the	party's	energy	burgeoned	anew	as	the	twelfth	bell	approached.	They
were	joined	by	Captain	Paran.
“We	 have	 met	 with	 the	 Guild	 Master,”	 he	 said.	 “She	 has	 accepted	 the
contract.”
Whiskeyjack	grunted.	“Where	would	we	all	be	without	greed?”
“I	just	noticed	something,”	Quick	Ben	said.	“My	headache's	gone.	I'm	tempted
to	access	my	Warren,	Sergeant.	See	what	I	can	see.”
Whiskeyjack	thought	briefly.	“Go	ahead.”
Quick	Ben	stepped	back	into	the	shadow	of	a	marble	pillar.
Before	them,	an	old	man	wearing	a	ghastly	mask	drifted	toward	Whiskeyjack's
line	 of	 men.	 Then	 a	 large,	 buxom	 woman	 with	 a	 water-pipe	 approached	 the	 old
man.	Her	servant	followed	half	a	step	behind.	Trailing	smoke	as	she	walked,	she
called	to	the	old	man.
The	 next	 moment	 the	 night	 was	 shattered	 as	 a	 wave	 of	 energy	 flowed	 like	 a


stream	of	water	between	Whiskeyjack	and	Paran,	striking	the	old	man	in	the	chest.
The	 sergeant's	 sword	 was	 in	 his	 hand	 as	 he	 turned	 to	 find	 his	 wizard,	 magic
swirling	 from	 him,	 pushing	 him	 to	 one	 side	 and	 racing	 for	 the	 woman.	 “No!”
Quick	Ben	screamed.	“Stay	away	from	him!”
Paran,	too,	had	unsheathed	his	sword	in	his	hand,	the	blade	keening	as	if	filled
with	terror.	He	sprinted	forward.
A	 bestial	 roar	 of	 rage	 shook	 the	 air	 as	 the	 old	 man,	 his	 mask	 torn	 away,
whirled.	His	burning	eyes	found	the	woman	and	he	flung	a	hand	toward	her.	The
surge	of	power	that	streamed	from	him	was	as	gray	as	slate,	crackling	in	the	air.
Whiskeyjack,	frozen,	watched	in	disbelief	as	Quick	Ben's	body	hurled	into	the
woman's.	Both	collided	with	the	servant	and	all	three	went	down	in	a	heap.	The
writhing	 stream	 of	 energy	 cut	 a	 swath	 through	 the	 stunned	 crowd,	 incinerating
everyone	it	touched.	Where	men	and	women	had	stood	a	moment	earlier	there	was
nothing	but	white	ash.	The	attack	branched	out,	ripping	through	everything	in	sight.
Trees	 disintegrated,	 stone	 and	 marble	 exploded	 in	 clouds	 of	 dust.	 People	 died,
some	with	parts	of	their	body	simply	gone,	blood	spraying	in	black	flecks	as	they
crumpled.	A	lance	of	energy	shot	wildly	skyward,	flashing	in	the	night	sky	within
a	 heavy	 cloud.	 Another	 struck	 the	 estate	 with	 a	 rattling	 boom.	 A	 third	 snaked
toward	 Paran	 as	 he	 closed	 the	 gap	 between	 him	 and	 the	 old	 man.	 The	 power
struck	the	sword,	and	it	and	Paran	vanished.
The	sergeant	took	a	half-step	forward,	then	something	hard	and	massive	struck
a	 glancing	 blow	 to	 his	 shoulder.	 He	 was	 spun	 round,	 his	 right	 knee	 buckling
inward	as	he	fell.
He	felt	the	snap	of	bone,	then	the	meaty	tearing	of	flesh	and	skin	as	his	weight
bore	him	down.	His	sword	clanged.	Agony	lancing	through	him,	he	rolled	to	free
his	pinned	leg,	and	came	up	against	a	toppled	pillar.
An	instant	later	hands	grasped	his	cloak.	“I	got	you!”	Fiddler	grunted.
Whiskeyjack	bellowed	in	pain	as	the	saboteur	dragged	him	across	the	pavingstones.	Then	darkness	swept	in	around	him	and	he	knew	no	more.
Quick	Ben	found	himself	buried	beneath	flesh,	and	for	a	second	he	could	not
breathe.	Then	the	woman's	hands	pressed	down	on	his	shoulders	and	she	pushed
herself	off	him.	She	shouted	at	the	old	man.
“Mammot!	Anikaleth	araest!”
Quick	Ben's	eyes	widened	as	he	sensed	the	wave	of	power	rise	through	her
body.	The	air	suddenly	smelled	of	deep	forest	loam.
“Araest!”	she	yelled,	and	the	power	burst	from	her	in	a	virulent	pulse.
Quick	Ben	heard	Mammot's	scream	of	pain.


“Attend,	Wizard!”	the	woman	said.	“He	is	Jaghut-possessed.”
“I	know,”	he	growled,	rolling	onto	his	stomach	then	climbing	to	his	hands	and
knees.	A	quick	glance	showed	Mammot	on	the	ground,	waving	a	feeble	hand.	The
wizard's	 gaze	 flicked	 to	 where	 Whiskeyjack	 had	 been.	 The	 pillars	 around	 the
fountain	had	toppled,	and	the	sergeant	was	nowhere	in	sight.	In	fact,	he	realized,
none	 of	 the	 squad	 was	 visible.	 On	 the	 terrace	 crumpled	 bodies	 lay	 in	 grotesque
piles,	none	moving.	Everyone	else	had	fled.
“Mammot	 recovers,”	 the	 woman	 said	 desperately.	 “I	 have	 nothing	 left,
Wizard.	You	must	do	something	now,	yes?”
He	stared	at	her.
Paran	 stumbled,	 slid	 across	 greasy	 clay	 and	 rolled	 up	 against	 a	 bank	 of	 tufted
reeds.	 A	 storm	 racked	 the	 sky	 above	 him.	 He	 scrambled	 to	 his	 feet,	 the	 sword
Chance	hot	and	moaning	in	his	hand.	A	calm	shallow	lake	stretched	out	on	his	left,
ending	 in	 a	 distant	 ridge	 of	 faintly	 luminescent	 green.	 To	 his	 right	 the	 marshes
continued	out	to	the	horizon.	The	air	was	cool,	sweet	with	decay.
Paran	sighed	shakily.	He	studied	the	storm	overhead.	Jagged	arcs	of	lightning
warred	with	each	other,	the	clouds	dark	and	twisting	as	if	in	agony.	A	concussion
sounded	to	his	right	and	he	spun.	A	thousand	paces	away,	something	had	appeared.
The	 captain	 squinted.	 It	 rose	 above	 the	 marsh	 grasses	 like	 an	 animated	 tree,
gnarled	 and	 black,	 pulling	 at	 the	 roots	 that	 gripped	 it	 and	 flinging	 them	 aside.
Another	figure	appeared,	danced	lithely	around	it,	a	brown-bladed	jagged	sword
in	its	hands.	This	figure	was	clearly	in	retreat,	as	the	gnarled	man-shape	lashed	at
it	with	miasmic	waves	of	power.	They	were	approaching	Paran's	position.
He	heard	bubbling,	sucking	sounds	behind	him	and	turned.	“Hood's	Breath!”
A	 house	 was	 rising	 out	 of	 the	 lake.	 Swamp	 grass	 and	 mud	 slid	 from	 its
battered	stone	walls.	A	huge	stone	doorway	gaped	black,	hissing	with	steam.	The
second	 level	 of	 the	 structure	 looked	 misshapen,	 scarred,	 the	 cut	 stones	 melted
away	here	and	there,	revealing	a	skeletal	wooden	frame.
Another	 explosion	 drew	 his	 attention	 back	 to	 the	 fighters.	 They	 were	 much
closer	now,	and	Paran	could	see	the	figure	with	the	two-handed	sword	clearly.	A
T'lan	Imass.	Despite	its	awesome	skill	with	the	chalcedony	weapon	in	its	hands	it
was	being	driven	back.	Its	attacker	was	a	tall,	lean	creature	with	flesh	like	oak.
Two	 gleaming	 tusks	 rose	 from	 its	 lower	 jaw,	 and	 it	 was	 shrieking	 with	 rage.	 It
struck	the	T'lan	Imass	again,	flinging	the	warrior	fifteen	paces,	to	roll	through	the
muck	and	come	to	rest	almost	at	Paran's	feet.
The	captain	found	himself	staring	down	into	depthless	eyes.


“The	Azath	is	not	yet	ready,	mortal,”	the	T'lan	Imass	said.	“Too	young,	not	yet
of	 strength	 to	 imprison	 that	 which	 called	 it	 into	 being—the	 Finnest.	 When	 the
Tyrant	fled,	I	sought	out	its	power.”	It	tried	to	rise,	failed.	“Defend	the	Azath,	the
Finnest	seeks	to	destroy	it.”
Paran	looked	up	to	see	the	 apparition	 stalking	toward	 him.	 Defend?	 Against
that?	The	choice	was	taken	from	him.	The	Finnest	roared	and	a	sizzling	wave	of
power	rolled	toward	him.	He	swung	Chance	into	its	path.
The	blade	slid	through	the	energy.	Unaffected,	the	power	swept	over,	then	into
Paran.	 Blinded,	 he	 screamed	 as	 bitter	 cold	 lanced	 through	 him,	 shattering	 his
thoughts,	his	sense	of	self.	An	invisible	hand	closed	around	his	soul.	Mine!	 The
word	rang	in	his	head,	triumphant	and	filled	with	savage	glee.	You	are	mine!
Paran	 dropped	 Chance,	 fell	 to	 his	 knees.	 The	 grip	 on	 his	 soul	 was	 absolute.
He	 could	 only	 obey.	 Fragments	 of	 awareness	 reached	 through.	 A	 tool,	 nothing
more.	All	I	have	done,	all	I	have	survived,	to	reach	but	this.
Deep	within	him	he	heard	a	sound,	repeating	again	and	again,	growing	louder.
A	howl.	 The	 chill	 of	 his	 blood	 that	 had	 seamlessly	 filled	 every	 part	 of	 his	 body
began	to	break	apart.	Flashes	of	heat,	bestial	and	defiant,	ripped	through	the	cold.
He	 threw	 back	 his	 head,	 the	 howling	 reaching	 his	 throat.	 As	 it	 broke	 loose,	 the
Finnest	staggered	back.
Blood	of	a	Hound!	Blood	no	one	can	enslave—Paran	launched	himself	at	the
Finnest.	His	muscles	filled	with	pain	as	overwhelming	strength	flowed	into	them.
You	dare!	 He	 struck	 the	 creature,	 driving	 it	 to	 the	 ground,	 battering	 its	 oak	 flesh
with	his	fists,	sinking	his	teeth	into	the	bark	of	its	face.	The	Finnest	tried	to	push
him	 away,	 and	 failed.	 It	 screamed,	 flailing	 its	 limbs.	 Paran	 began	 ripping	 it
methodically	to	pieces.
A	 hand	 closed	 on	 the	 collar	 of	 his	 cloak,	 pulled	 him	 from	 the	 tattered	 body.
Frenzied,	Paran	tried	to	twist	round,	to	rend	the	creature	holding	him.	The	T'lan
Imass	shook	him.	“Cease!”
The	captain	blinked.
“Cease!	 You	 cannot	 destroy	 the	 Finnest.	 But	 you	 have	 held	 it.	 Long	 enough.
The	Azath	will	take	it	now.	Do	you	understand?”
Paran	 sagged,	 the	 fires	 within	 him	 ebbing.	 Glancing	 down	 at	 the	 Finnest,	 he
saw	 roots	 and	 fibrous	 tendrils	 rising	 from	 the	 wet	 earth	 to	 wrap	 themselves
around	 the	 battered	 apparition	 and	 begin	 to	 pull	 their	 captive	 down	 into	 the
cloying	mud.	In	a	moment,	the	Finnest	was	gone.
The	T'lan	Imass	released	Paran	and	stepped	back.	It	regarded	him	steadily	for
a	long	moment.


Paran	spat	blood	and	splinters	from	his	mouth,	wiped	his	lips	with	the	back	of
a	hand.	He	bent	down	and	retrieved	Chance.	“Damned	luck	turned,”	he	mumbled,
sheathing	the	weapon.	“Do	you	have	something	to	say,	Imass?”
“You	are	a	long	way	from	home,	mortal.”
Paran	 reappeared	 a	 moment	 later,	 staggering	 half-blind	 across	 the	 terrace,	 then
collapsing	 in	 a	 heap.	 Quick	 Ben	 scowled.	 What	 in	 Hood's	 Breath	 happened	 to
him?
A	 Jaghut	 curse	 escaped	 Mammot,	 fierce	 as	 if	 ripped	 from	 the	 soul.	 The	 old
man	 regained	 his	 feet,	 trembling	 with	 rage.	 Then	 his	 hooded	 eyes	 were	 on	 the
wizard.
“Awaken	 the	 Seven	 within	 me!”	 Quick	 Ben	 roared,	 then	 shrieked	 as	 seven
Warrens	 opened	 within	 him.	 His	 agonized	 scream	 rode	 the	 cascading	 waves	 of
power	as	they	swept	across	the	terrace.
The	Jaghut	Possessed	threw	up	his	arms	before	his	face	as	the	waves	struck.
Mammot's	 body	 withered	 beneath	 the	 clambering,	 frenzied	 attack.	 Flesh	 was
ripped	away,	fires	lancing,	boring	holes	through	him.	He	was	driven	to	his	knees,
a	 vortex	 swirling	 like	 madness	 around	 him.	 Mammot	 howled,	 raising	 a	 fist	 that
was	nothing	but	charred	bone.	The	fist	spasmed	and	one	of	Quick	Ben's	Warrens
slammed	shut.	The	fist	jerked	again.
Quick	Ben	sagged.	“I'm	done.”
Derudan	grabbed	a	handful	of	the	wizard's	cloak.	“Wizard!	Listen	to	me!”
Another	Warren	was	driven	away.	Quick	Ben	shook	his	head.	“I'm	done.”
“Listen!	That	man—the	one	over	there—what's	he	doing?”
Quick	Ben	looked	up.	“Hood's	Breath!”	he	yelled,	in	sudden	terror.	A	dozen
paces	 away	 crouched	 Hedge,	 only	 his	 head	 and	 shoulders	 showing	 behind	 a
bench.	The	saboteur's	eyes	shone	with	a	manic	glaze	that	the	wizard	recognized,
and	a	large,	bulky	arbalest	was	in	his	hands,	pointed	directly	at	Mammot.
A	wordless,	wailing	scream	came	from	Hedge.
The	 wizard	 shouted	 and	 dived	 for	 the	 woman	 a	 second	 time.	 As	 he	 flew
through	the	air,	he	heard	the	thock	of	the	saboteur's	crossbow.	Quick	Ben	closed
his	eyes	before	colliding	once	again	with	the	woman.
Crone	flew	tight	circles	over	the	plain	where	the	Jaghut	Tyrant	had	been.	He	had
reached	 to	 within	 fifty	 paces	 of	 Silanah,	 then	 vanished.	 Not	 a	 flight	 through	 a


Warren,	but	a	vanishing	more	complete,	more	absolute	and	all	the	more	fascinating
for	that.
It	 had	 been	 a	 glorious	 night,	 a	 battle	 worthy	 of	 remembrance,	 and	 its	 end
proved	no	end	at	all.	“Delicious	mystery,”	she	cackled.	Crone	knew	her	presence
was	demanded	elsewhere,	but	she	was	reluctant	to	leave.	“Such	terrible	energies	I
have	witnessed.”	She	laughed.	“I	mock	the	waste,	the	sheer	foolishness!	Ah,	and
now	all	that	remains	is	questions,	questions!”
She	craned	her	head	upward.	Her	lord's	two	Tiste	Andii	Soletaken	remained
overhead.	No	one	wanted	to	leave	before	the	truth	of	the	Jaghut	Tyrant's	fate	was
revealed.	 They'd	 earned	 the	 right	 to	 witness	 it,	 though	 Crone	 was	 beginning	 to
suspect	such	answers	would	never	come.
Silanah	 loosed	 a	 keening	 cry,	 then	 rose	 from	 the	 ground,	 the	 Warren	 that
birthed	 her	 flight	 a	 strong,	 pungent	 exhalation.	 The	 red	 dragon's	 head	 swung
westward,	and	she	voiced	a	second	cry.
With	 a	 mad	 flap	 of	 wings,	 Crone	 brought	 her	 descent	 under	 control,	 then
skirted	the	tattered	ground.	She	climbed	skyward	again,	and	saw	what	Silanah	had
seen.	Crone	shrieked	in	joy	and	anticipation—and	surprise.	“And	now	it	comes!	It
comes!”
_______
As	he	shut	his	eyes,	Quick	Ben	relinquished	the	last	of	his	Warrens.	The	woman's
arms	 closed	 around	 him	 as	 he	 struck	 her.	 She	 grunted	 loudly	 and	 collapsed
beneath	his	momentum.
The	detonation	snatched	the	air	from	his	lungs.	The	stones	under	them	jumped
and	 a	 flash	 of	 fire	 and	 flying	 masonry	 filled	 their	 world	 to	 the	 exclusion	 of	 all
else.	Then	everything	was	still.
Quick	Ben	sat	up.	He	looked	to	where	Mammot	had	been	standing.	The	paving
stones	were	gone,	and	a	wide,	deep,	steaming	hole	now	yawned	near	the	shattered
fountain.	The	old	man	was	nowhere	in	sight.
“Dear	wizard,”	the	woman	murmured	beneath	him.	“We	live?”
Quick	Ben	glanced	down	at	her.	“You'd	closed	your	Warren.	Very	clever.”
“Closed,	yes,	but	not	by	choice.	Why	clever?”
“Moranth	munitions	are	mundane	weapons,	Witch.	Opened	Warrens	draw	their
explosive	force.	That	Tyrant	is	dead.	Obliterated.”
And	then	Hedge	was	beside	them,	his	leather	cap	half	blown	away	and	flash-


burns	covering	one	side	of	his	face.	“You	all	right?”	he	gasped.
The	wizard	reached	out	and	cuffed	the	man.	“You	idiot!	How	many	times	have
I—?”
“He's	 dead,	 ain't	 he?”	 Hedge	 retorted,	 hurt.	 “Just	 a	 smoldering	 hole	 in	 the
ground—best	way	to	deal	with	mages	right?”
They	 saw	 Captain	 Paran	 rise	 shakily	 from	 the	 rubble-strewn	 terrace.	 He
scanned	 the	 scene,	 his	 gaze	 finding	 the	 wizard.	 “Where	 is	 Whiskeyjack?”	 he
demanded.
“In	the	woods,”	Hedge	answered.
Paran	stumbled	in	that	direction.
“Big	help	he	was,”	Hedge	muttered.
“Quick!”
The	wizard	turned	to	see	Kalam	approach.	The	assassin	paused	as	he	skirted
the	edge	of	the	crater,	then	he	said.	“Something's	moving	down	there.”
Paling,	Quick	Ben	rose,	then	helped	the	witch	to	her	feet.
They	approached	the	crater.	“Impossible,”	the	wizard	breathed.	A	man-shaped
form	had	coalesced	at	the	base	of	the	pit.	“We're	dead.	Or	worse.”
Thrashing	 from	 the	 garden	 drew	 their	 attention.	 The	 three	 froze	 as	 strangely
blurred	roots	broke	free	of	the	undergrowth	and	snaked	hungrily	toward	the	crater.
The	Jaghut	Possessed	straightened,	spreading	gray,	swirling	arms.
The	 roots	 closed	 around	 the	 creature.	 It	 shrieked	 in	 sudden	 terror.	 “Azath
edieirmarn!	 No!	 You've	 taken	 my	 Finnest—but	 leave	 me!	 Please!”	 Tendrils
clambered	in	a	frenzy,	entwining	its	limbs.	The	Omtose	Phellack	power	writhed	in
a	 panicked	 effort	 to	 escape,	 to	 no	 avail.	 The	 roots	 pulled	 the	 apparition	 down,
then	dragged	it	screaming	into	the	garden.
“Azath?”	Quick	Ben	whispered.	“Here?”
“None,	I	would	swear,”	Derudan	said,	her	face	white.	“It's	said	they	arise—”
“Where	unchained	power	threatens	life,”	the	wizard	finished.
“I	know	where	it	is,”	Kalam	said.	“Quick	Ben,	will	that	Jaghut	escape?”
“No.”
“So	we're	done	with	it.	What	of	the	Azath?”
Quick	Ben	hugged	himself.	“Leave	it,	Kalam.”
“I	must	leave,”	Derudan	said	hastily.	“Again,	my	gratitude	for	twice	saving	my
life.”
They	watched	her	rush	away.


Fiddler	joined	them,	looking	distracted.	“Mallet's	tending	to	the	sergeant,”	he
said,	closing	the	straps	on	a	bulky	bag	he	carried.	“We're	off,	then.”	He	nudged
Hedge.	“Got	a	city	to	blow.”
“Whiskeyjack's	hurt?”	Quick	Ben	asked.
“Broken	leg,”	Fiddler	answered.	“Pretty	bad.”
At	 a	 surprised	 cry	 from	 Derudan,	 who	 had	 gone	 to	 the	 opposite	 side	 of	 the
fountain,	 they	 all	 turned.	 She'd	 walked	 onto	 a	 black-clad	 youth,	 who	 must	 have
been	 crouching	 behind	 the	 fountain's	 stone	 wall.	 Darting	 like	 a	 rabbit,	 the	 boy
leaped	the	fountain	and	raced	toward	the	estate.
“What	do	you	think	he	heard?”	Fiddler	wondered.
“Nothing	 that	 would	 mean	 much	 to	 him,”	 said	 Quick	 Ben,	 recalling	 their
conversation.	“You	and	Hedge	going	to	do	the	deed?”
“Sky	high.”	Fiddler	grinned.
The	 two	 saboteurs	 checked	 their	 equipment	 one	 last	 time,	 then	 turned	 to	 the
patio.
Meanwhile,	Kalam	stood	glowering	into	the	pit.	Ancient	copper	water-pipes
streamed	 water	 down	 its	 ragged	 sides.	 For	 some	 reason	 a	 memory	 of	 the
Grayfaces	 flashed	 into	 his	 head.	 The	 assassin	 crouched,	 seeing	 one	 pipe	 that
leaked	no	water.	He	sniffed	the	air,	then	lay	flat	on	the	ground	and	reached	down
to	lay	his	hand	over	the	pipe's	broken	end.	“Osserc,”	he	breathed.
He	rolled	and	gained	his	feet,	then	asked	Quick	Ben,	“Where	are	they?”
The	wizard's	expression	was	blank.	“Who?”
Kalam	roared,	“The	saboteurs,	dammit!”
“Just	left,”	Quick	Ben	replied,	bemused.	“Through	the	estate.”
“To	the	back	wall,	soldier,”	the	assassin	snapped.	“Find	the	others—Paran's
taken	command.	Tell	him	to	pull	out.	Find	a	place	I	know.	I'll	meet	you	there.”
“Where	are	you	going?”
“After	 the	 saboteurs.”	 Kalam	 wiped	 sweat	 from	 his	 face.	 “Pull	 out	 the	 city
map	when	you	can,	Quick	Ben.”	The	assassin's	eyes	were	tight	with	fear.	“Check
the	 legend	 on	 it.	 We've	 planted	 mines	 at	 every	 major	 intersection.	 It's	 the	 main
valves—don't	 you	 see?”	 He	 waved	 an	 arm.	 “The	 Grayfaces!	 The	 gas,	 Quick
Ben!”
Kalam	whirled	and	crossed	the	patio.	A	moment	later	he	disappeared	into	the
estate	house.
Quick	 Ben	 stared	 after	 him.	 The	 gas?	 His	 eyes	 widened.	 “We'll	 all	 go	 sky
high,”	he	whispered.	“The	whole	damn	city!”


Chapter	Twenty-three
	

It	was	said
she	turned	the	blade	on	herself	then
to	steal	the	magic
of	life.
CALL	TO	SHADOW	(IX.	II)
FELISIN	(B.1146)


	
Exhausted,	 Paran	 made	 his	 way	 through	 the	 undergrowth.	 He	 ducked	 beneath	 a
tree	into	shadow—and	the	world	shifted.
Jaws	closed	on	his	left	shoulder,	teeth	grinding	through	chain,	and	lifted	him
from	 the	 ground.	 A	 surge	 of	 unseen	 muscle	 flung	 him	 through	 the	 air.	 He	 landed
heavily,	 rolled	 to	 his	 knees,	 and	 looked	 up	 in	 time	 to	 see	 the	 Hound	 close	 once
again.	Paran's	left	arm	was	numb;	he	reached	vainly	for	his	sword	as	the	Hound
opened	its	maw	and	closed	it	around	his	chest.	Mail	popped,	flesh	tore	and	blood
sprayed	as	the	Hound	lifted	Paran	once	again.
The	 captain	 hung	 in	 the	 giant	 beast's	 mouth.	 He	 felt	 Chance	 slide	 free	 of	 its
scabbard,	 its	 weight	 pulling	 it	 away	 from	 his	 twitching	 hand.	 The	 Hound	 shook
him.	Blood	spattered	the	ground.	Then	it	dropped	him	and	stepped	back,	looking
almost	 baffled.	 It	 whined,	 began	 to	 pace	 back	 and	 forth,	 eyes	 darting	 again	 and
again	to	the	captain.
Pain	surged	through	Paran	in	growing	waves;	his	limbs	shook	uncontrollably,
he	could	barely	draw	breath.
“It	 seems	 Rood	 must	 find	 someone	 to	 blame,”	 a	 voice	 said.	 Paran	 blinked,
opened	 his	 eyes	 to	 see	 a	 black-cowled	 man	 standing	 above	 him.	 “But	 he	 was
premature,	 and	 for	 that	 I	 apologize.	 Evidently,	 some	 old	 scores	 need	 settling
between	you	and	the	Hounds.”	The	man	frowned	at	Rood.	“More,	something	has
confused	him	about	you	.	.	.	Kinship?	Now,	how	could	that	be?”
“You	 were	 the	 one,”	 Paran	 said,	 as	 numbness	 spread	 through	 him,	 “the	 one
who	possessed	the	girl—”
The	man	faced	the	captain.	“Yes,	I	am	Cotillion.	Shadowthrone	regrets	leaving
you	outside	Hood's	Gates—at	the	cost	of	two	Hounds.	Do	you	realize	that	those
precious	creatures	had	lived	for	thousands	of	years?	Do	you	realize	that	no	man—
mortal	or	Ascendant—has	ever	before	killed	a	Hound?”
Did	I	save	their	souls?	Wouldn't	telling	that	story	matter?	No,	too	much	like
begging.	 Paran	 glanced	 at	 Rood.	 Kinship?	 “What	 do	 you	 want	 from	 me?”	 he
asked	Cotillion.	“My	death?	Leave	me	here,	then,	it's	almost	done.”
“You	 should	 have	 left	 us	 to	 our	 work,	 Captain,	 since	 you	 now	 hate	 the
Empress	so.”
“What	you	did	to	the	girl—”
“What	I	did	was	merciful.	I	used	her,	yes,	but	she	knew	it	not.	Can	the	same	be


said	for	you?	Tell	me,	is	knowing	you're	being	used	better	than	not	knowing?”
Paran	said	nothing.
“I	can	release	to	the	girl	all	those	memories,	if	you	like.	The	memories	of	what
I	did,	what	she	did,	when	I	possessed	her	.	.	.”
“No.”
Cotillion	nodded.
Paran	 could	 feel	 the	 pain	 returning	 and	 it	 surprised	 him.	 He'd	 lost	 so	 much
blood	 that	 he'd	 expected	 to	 be	 fading	 from	 consciousness	 by	 now.	 Instead,	 the
pain	was	back,	incessant,	throbbing	amid	unbearable	itching.	He	coughed.	“Now
what?”
“Now?”	Cotillion	seemed	surprised.	“Now	I	start	again.”
“Another	girl	like	her?”
“No,	the	plan	was	flawed.”
“You	stole	her	life!”
Cotillion's	 dark	 eyes	 hardened.	 “Now	 she	 has	 it	 back.	 I	 see	 you	 still	 carry
Chance,	so	the	same	cannot	be	said	for	you.”
Paran	turned	his	head,	found	the	weapon	an	arm's	length	away.	“When	my	luck
turns,”	he	muttered.	And	turn	it	did.	He	found	he	could	move	his	left	arm,	and	the
pain	in	his	chest	seemed	less	insistent	than	it	had.
Cotillion	 laughed	 dryly	 at	 Paran's	 words.	 “It	 will	 be	 too	 late	 then,	 Captain.
You	 gamble	 that	 the	 Lady	 continues	 to	 look	 kindly	 on	 you.	 You've	 surrendered
whatever	wisdom	you	may	have	once	possessed.	Such	is	the	power	of	the	Twins.”
“I	am	healing,”	Paran	said.
“So	you	are.	As	I	said,	Rood	was	premature.”
The	 captain	 slowly,	 cautiously,	 sat	 up.	 His	 chain	 armor	 was	 in	 shreds,	 but
beneath	he	could	see	the	red	flame	of	newly	healed	flesh.	“I—I	don't	understand
you,	Cotillion,	or	Shadowthrone.”
“You	are	not	alone	in	that.	Now,	as	to	Chance	.	.	.”
Paran	looked	down	at	the	weapon.	“It's	yours,	if	you	want	it.”
“Ah.”	Cotillion	smiled,	stepping	over	to	pick	it	up.	“I'd	suspected	a	change	of
heart,	 Captain.	 The	 world	 is	 so	 complex,	 isn't	 it?	 Tell	 me,	 do	 you	 pity	 the	 ones
who	used	you?”
Paran	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 A	 terrible	 burden	 seemed	 to	 drain	 from	 him.	 He
recalled	the	Finnest's	grip	on	his	soul.	He	glanced	up	at	the	Hound.	In	Rood's	eyes
he	saw	something	almost	.	.	.	soft.	“No.”


“Wisdom	 returns	 quickly,”	 Cotillion	 said,	 “once	 the	 bond	 is	 severed.	 I	 will
return	 you	 now,	 Captain,	 with	 this	 one	 last	 warning:	 try	 not	 to	 be	 noticed.	 And
when	next	you	see	a	Hound,	run.”
The	air	swirled	into	darkness	around	Paran.	He	blinked,	saw	the	trees	of	the
estate	garden	rising	before	him.	I	wonder,	will	I	run	from	it	.	.	.	or	with	it?
“Captain?”	It	was	Mallet's	voice.	“Where	in	Hood's	Name	are	you?”
Paran	sat	up.	“Not	in	Hood's	Name,	Mallet.	I'm	here,	in	the	shadows.”
The	 healer	 scrambled	 to	 his	 side.	 “We've	 got	 trouble	 everywhere.	 You	 look
—”
“Deal	with	it,”	the	captain	barked,	climbing	to	his	feet.
Mallet	stared	at	Paran.	“Hood's	Breath,	you	look	chewed	to	pieces	.	.	.	sir.”
“I'm	going	after	Lorn.	If	we	all	live	through	this	we	will	meet	at	the	Phoenix
Inn.	Understood?”
Mallet	blinked.	“Yes,	sir.”
Paran	turned	to	leave.
“Captain?”
“What?”
“Don't	treat	her	kindly,	sir.”
Paran	moved	off.
The	images	remained	with	Crokus,	brutally	sharp.	They	returned	again	and	again
even	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 move	 away	 from	 them,	 his	 thoughts	 driven	 by	 panic	 and
desperation.
Uncle	Mammot	was	dead.	In	the	youth's	head	a	distant,	steady	voice	told	him
that	the	man	who	had	borne	Mammot's	face	was	not	the	man	he'd	known	all	his
life,	 and	 that	 what	 had	 been	 .	 .	 .	 claimed	 by	 the	 roots	 was	 something	 else,
something	horrific.	The	voice	repeated	this,	and	he	heard	its	clear	statement	rising
and	falling	beneath	the	storm	of	what	he	had	seen	with	his	own	eyes:	the	images
that	would	not	leave	him.
The	 central	 chamber	 of	 Lady	 Simtal's	 estate	 was	 abandoned,	 the	 fête's
trappings	 scattered	 about	 on	 the	 floor	 amid	 puddles	 and	 smears	 of	 blood.	 The
dead	and	those	whom	Mammot	had	hurt	had	been	carried	away	by	the	guards;	the
servants	had	all	fled.
Crokus	raced	across	the	room	to	the	open	front	doors.	Beyond,	torchlight	cast
a	hissing	blue	glow	down	onto	the	walkway's	paved	stones	and	the	gates,	which


had	 been	 left	 ajar.	 The	 thief	 leaped	 down	 the	 steps	 and	 hurried	 for	 the	 gate.	 He
slowed	as	he	approached	it,	for	something	was	wrong	in	the	street.
Like	Simtal's	main	floor,	the	street	was	empty,	littered	with	pennants,	banners,
and	fetishes.	Eddies	of	dry	wind	whipped	tatters	of	cloth	and	reed	paper	about	in
dancing	circles.	The	air	felt	heavy	and	close.
Crokus	emerged	onto	the	street.	In	either	direction,	as	far	as	he	could	see,	not
a	single	reveler	was	visible,	and	a	thick	silence	hung	over	all.	The	wind	curled
round	 him,	 first	 from	 one	 direction,	 then	 from	 another,	 as	 if	 seeking	 escape.	 A
charnel	smell	filled	the	air.
Mammot's	 death	 returned	 to	 him.	 He	 felt	 utterly	 alone,	 yet	 Rallick's	 words
urged	him	on.	Days	ago,	the	assassin	had	closed	angry	hands	on	the	thief's	shirt,
pulling	 him	 close—and	 he'd	 called	 Crokus	 a	 drinker	 of	 the	 city's	 blood.	 He
wanted	to	refute	that,	especially	now.	Darujhistan	mattered.	It	was	his	home,	and	it
mattered.
He	 turned	in	the	 direction	of	 Baruk's	estate.	 At	least,	 with	 the	streets	empty,
this	wouldn't	take	long.	He	began	to	run.
The	gusting	wind	beat	against	him,	whipping	his	hair	into	his	face.	Darkness
hung	low	above	the	street's	gas	lamps.	Crokus	skidded	to	a	halt	on	a	corner.	He'd
heard	something.	Cocking	his	head,	he	held	his	breath	and	listened.	There,	again.
Birds—hundreds	of	them	from	the	sound,	murmuring,	talking,	clucking.	And	amid
the	 charnel	 smell	 he	 now	 detected	 the	 reek	 of	 birds'	 nests.	 Crokus	 frowned,
thinking.	Then	he	looked	directly	overhead.
A	shout	broke	from	his	lips	and	he	ducked	instinctively.	Above	him,	blotting
out	the	night	sky's	stars,	was	a	ceiling	of	jagged	black	stone,	hanging	so	low	as	to
seem	 inches	 from	 the	 highest	 buildings.	 He	 stared	 up	 at	 it,	 then	 pulled	 away	 his
gaze	as	a	wave	of	dizziness	spun	through	him.	The	ceiling	was	revolving	slowly.
In	 its	 pocks,	 shelves,	 and	 crags	 he'd	 seen	 the	 restless	 motion	 of	 nesting	 ravens,
oily	blots	against	the	grainy	background.
Moon's	 Spawn	 had	 arrived,	 to	 clear	 the	 streets,	 to	 silence	 the	 festival	 of
rebirth.	What	could	it	mean?	Crokus	didn't	know,	but	Baruk	would.	Of	course.
The	thief	resumed	his	run,	his	moccasins	a	whisper	on	the	cobbles.
Kruppe	 took	 an	 expansive	 breath,	 his	 eyes	 bright	 as	 he	 surveyed	 the	 hastily
abandoned	leavings	in	the	kitchen.	“Always	the	way	of	things.”	He	sighed,	patting
his	 stomach.	 “Ever	 and	 anon,	 Kruppe's	 dreams	 come	 true.	 Granted,	 the	 pattern
still	finds	shape,	but	Kruppe	senses	that	all	is	well	with	the	world,	symbolized	by
the	vision	of	bounty	now	arrayed	before	his	renewed	appetites.	Rigors	of	the	flesh


demand	replenishment,	after	all.”
He	drew	another	satisfied	breath	of	the	steamy	air.	“We	must	needs	await,	at
the	end,	the	spin	of	a	coin.	In	the	meantime,	of	course,	wondrous	food	beckons.”
In	an	alley	facing	the	gates	of	Lady	Simtal's	estate,	Adjunct	Lorn	had	watched	the
Coin	Bearer	appear,	and	a	slow,	satisfied	smile	spread	over	her	lips.	Finding	the
boy	had	been	one	thing,	but	she'd	had	no	desire	to	enter	the	garden	where	she'd
buried	the	Finnest.
Minutes	earlier	she'd	sensed	the	death	of	the	Jaghut	Tyrant.	Had	the	Lord	of
Moon's	Spawn	been	drawn	into	the	battle?	She	hoped	so.	It	had	been	her	hope	that
the	Jaghut	would	reach	the	city,	perhaps	even	retrieve	the	Finnest,	thus	challenging
the	Son	of	Darkness	as	an	equal.	In	retrospect,	however,	she	realized	that	the	Lord
would	never	have	permitted	that.
Which	 meant	 that	 Whiskeyjack	 still	 lived.	 Well,	 there'd	 be	 another	 time	 for
that,	once	the	city	was	in	the	hands	of	the	Empress	and	Tayschrenn.	Perhaps	then
they'd	find	no	need	to	disguise	their	efforts:	they	could	make	the	arrest	a	public
spectacle.	With	this	coup	even	Dujek	could	not	challenge	them.
She'd	watched	the	Coin	Bearer	race	down	the	street,	seeming	not	even	to	have
noticed	Moon's	Spawn	hanging	so	close	overhead.	A	moment	later,	she	followed.
With	the	Coin	in	her	hands,	the	Empress	would	bring	Oponn	to	its	knees.
Like	 a	 drowning	 voice,	 deep	 within	 her	 mind,	 came	 a	 question	 heavy	 with
dismay	 and	 despair:	 What	 of	 your	 doubts?	 What	 of	 the	 woman	 who'd	 once
challenged	 Tayschrenn,	 in	 Pale?	 Has	 so	 much	 changed?	 Has	 so	 much	 been
destroyed?
The	Adjunct	shook	her	head,	dispelling	the	plaintive	cries.	She	was	the	arm	of
the	 Empress.	 The	 woman	 called	 Lorn	 was	 dead,	 had	 been	 dead	 for	 years,	 and
would	 remain	 forever	 dead.	 And	 now	 the	 Adjunct	 moved	 through	 these	 hollow
shadows,	 in	 a	 city	 cowering	 in	 fear.	 The	 Adjunct	 was	 a	 weapon.	 Its	 edge	 could
bite	deep,	or	it	could	snap,	break.	She	might	once	have	called	the	latter	“death.”
Now,	it	was	no	more	than	the	misfortune	of	war,	a	flaw	in	the	weapon's	design.
She	paused	and	hid	against	a	wall	as	the	Coin	Bearer	stopped	on	a	corner	and
realized	for	the	first	time	what	hovered	above	him.	She	considered	attacking	now,
while	he	was	so	confused,	possibly	terrified.	But	then	he	continued	on.
The	 Adjunct	 crouched	 down.	 Time	 for	 Tayschrenn's	 gambit.	 Hopefully	 the
Jaghut	Tyrant	had	managed	to	inflict	damage	upon	the	Moon's	lord.	She	removed	a
small	flask	from	her	shirt	and	held	the	patinated	glass	up	to	the	shine	of	gaslight.
The	contents	swirled	like	trapped	smoke	as	she	gave	it	a	shake.


She	 rose	 and	 threw	 it	 across	 the	 street.	 The	 flask	 struck	 a	 stone	 wall	 and
shattered.	Glowing	red	smoke	curled	upward,	slowly	taking	shape.
The	 Adjunct	 spoke:	 “You	 know	 your	 task,	 Lord	 of	 the	 Galayn.	 Succeed,	 and
freedom	will	be	yours.”
She	 unsheathed	 her	 sword	 and	 closed	 her	 eyes	 briefly,	 locating	 the	 Coin
Bearer	 in	 her	 mind.	 He	 was	 fast,	 but	 she	 was	 faster.	 The	 Adjunct	 smiled	 again.
Now,	the	Coin	would	be	hers.
When	she	moved,	it	was	as	a	blur,	quicker	than	any	eye	could	follow,	even	that
of	a	Galayn	lord	loose	on	the	material	plane.
In	his	study,	Baruk	cradled	his	head	in	his	hands.	Mammot's	death	had	come	like	a
knife	 to	 his	 own	 heart,	 and	 he	 still	 felt	 its	 stabbing	 pain.	 He	 was	 alone	 in	 the
chamber,	having	dismissed	Roald	earlier.
Rake	had	suspected.	He'd	refused	to	speak	of	it,	considering	it	too	sensitive	a
matter.	The	alchemist	had	wearily	to	admit	that	the	Tiste	Andii	had	been	correct.
Would	he	even	have	believed	Rake?	Undoubtedly,	the	power	possessing	Mammot
had	shielded	itself,	defying	detection.	Rake	had	anticipated	Baruk's	anger	at	such
a	suggestion,	and	had,	wisely	and	with	compassion,	chosen	to	say	nothing.
And	now	Mammot	was	dead,	even	as	was	the	Jaghut	Tyrant.	Had	it	been	Rake
who	had	killed	his	old	friend?	If	so,	he	hadn't	used	his	sword,	yet	another	mercy
granted	both	Mammot	and	Baruk—the	alchemist	had	sensed,	if	anything,	a	kind	of
relief	in	Mammot's	death	cry.
A	soft	cough	at	the	door	alerted	him.	Baruk	rose	swiftly	and	turned.	His	brows
rose.	“Witch	Derudan!”
Her	face	was	pale,	her	smile	wan.	“I	thought	of	you,	upon	Mammot's	end.	I	am
here,	 so.	 Alas,”	 she	 said,	 as	 she	 strode	 to	 a	 chair	 by	 the	 fireplace	 and	 set	 her
water-pipe	 down	 on	 the	 floor	 beside	 it,	 “my	 servant	 has	 taken	 the	 rest	 of	 the
evening	off.”	She	removed	the	ash-cup	and	tapped	its	contents	into	the	unlit	hearth.
“Such	mundane	exertions,”	she	said,	sighing.
At	first,	Baruk	resented	her	intrusion.	He	preferred	to	mourn	alone.	But	as	he
watched	her,	the	supple	grace	of	her	movements,	his	thoughts	changed.	Her	Warren
was	Tennes,	ancient	and	bound	to	the	cycles	of	seasons;	and	among	the	handful	of
deities	 she	 could	 call	 upon	 was	 Tennerock,	 the	 Boar	 of	 Five	 Tusks.	 Derudan's
greatest	power—the	one	she	shared,	in	any	case—was	the	Tusk	named	Love.	He
chastised	himself.	Slow	had	the	realization	come	that	she	was	bringing	him	a	gift.
Derudan	 replaced	 the	 ash-cup	 and	 packed	 it	 with	 leaves.	 She	 closed	 a	 hand


around	it,	and	the	contents	glowed	with	sudden	heat.	A	moment	later	the	witch	sat
heavily	in	the	chair.	She	drew	deeply	on	the	mouthpiece.
Baruk	 strode	 to	 the	 other	 chair.	 “Rake	 believes	 it	 isn't	 yet	 over,”	 he	 said,
sitting.
She	 nodded.	 “I	 was	 witness	 to	 Mammot's	 end,	 yes?	 He	 was	 opposed	 by
myself	 .	 .	 .	 and	 a	 most	 remarkable	 wizard.	 The	 flesh	 that	 was	 Mammot	 was
destroyed	by	a	Moranth	incendiary.	The	Jaghut	spirit	survived	but	was	taken	.	.	.
by	an	Azath.”	Her	heavy-lidded	eyes	appraised	him.
“Azath?	Here,	in	Darujhistan?”
“Indeed,	 such	 mysterious	 conjurings,	 known	 for	 their	 hunger	 for	 mages,	 will
impose	upon	our	efforts	.	.	.	a	certain	caution,	yes?”
“Where	has	it	arisen?”
“In	the	garden	of	Simtal's	estate.	Did	I	not	also	mention	a	Moranth	incendiary?
Lady	Simtal's	Fête	had	some	unusual	guests,	yes?”
“Malazans?”
“Twice	 my	 life	 saved—the	 wizard	 of	 whom	 I	 spoke,	 who	 commands	 within
him	seven	Warrens—”
“Seven?”	Baruk	said,	flinching.	“Hood's	Breath,	is	that	even	possible?”
“If	they	mean	ill,	it	shall	fall	to	the	Son	of	Darkness	to	meet	the	challenge.”
Both	 stiffened	 as	 power	 surged	 into	 life	 somewhere	 nearby.	 The	 alchemist
was	on	his	feet,	fists	clenched.	“A	demon	is	unleashed,”	he	hissed.
“I	feel	it	as	well,”	Derudan	said,	her	face	white.	“Of	great	power.”
“A	Demon	Lord.”	Baruk	nodded.	“This	is	what	Rake	awaited.”
Derudan's	eyes	widened	and	she	pulled	on	her	mouthpiece	before	asking,	“Is
he	 capable	 of	 defeating	 such	 a	 creature?	 Son	 of	 Darkness	 he	 is,	 but	 feel	 this
creature's	power,	yes?”
“I	don't	know,”	Baruk	said	quietly.	“If	not,	then	the	city	is	doomed.”
At	that	point	there	came	another	blow,	followed	by	another.	The	witch	and	the
alchemist	 stared	 at	 each	 other	 in	 recognition.	 Two	 of	 their	 Cabal	 had	 just	 died
violent	deaths.
“Parald,”	she	whispered	in	fear.
“And	Tholis,”	Baruk	said.	“It's	begun,	and	damn	Rake	for	being	so	right.”
She	looked	at	him	blankly.
Baruk	grimaced.	“Vorcan.”


Standing	on	the	stained,	pitted	bronze	tiles	of	the	belfry's	roof,	Anomander	Rake's
head	snapped	around.	His	eyes	deepened	to	black.	The	wind	clawed	at	his	long,
silver	 hair	 and	 his	 gray	 cloak,	 its	 moan	 hollow	 and	 lost.	 He	 raised	 his	 gaze
momentarily	to	Moon's	Spawn	as	it	moved	west.	He	could	feel	its	pain,	as	if	the
wounds	it	had	received	at	Pale	were	somehow	echoed	in	his	own	body.	A	flash	of
regret	crossed	his	lean	features.
Air	 buffeted	 him	 and	 he	 heard	 the	 heavy	 flap	 of	 wings.	 Rake	 smiled.
“Silanah,”	 he	 said	 softly,	 knowing	 she	 would	 hear	 him.	 The	 red	 dragon	 slipped
between	two	towers	and	banked,	returning	to	his	position.	“I	know	you	sense	the
Demon	Lord's	presence,	Silanah.	You	would	help	me	in	this.	I	know,	I	know.”	He
shook	his	head.	“Return	to	Moon's	Spawn,	dear	friend.	This	battle	is	mine.	Yours
is	done.	But	know	this:	if	I	fail,	you	may	seek	to	avenge	my	death.”
Silanah	swept	overhead	and	loosed	a	thin	wail.
“Go	home,”	Rake	whispered.
The	red	dragon	cried	again,	then	swung	westward	and	rose	through	the	night
air.
He	sensed	a	presence	at	his	side	and	turned	to	find	a	tall,	hooded	man	sharing
his	view	of	the	city	below.	“Unwise,”	Rake	murmured,	“to	appear	unannounced.”
The	man	sighed.	“The	stones	beneath	your	feet,	Lord,	are	newly	sanctified.	I
am	reborn.”
“There	 is	 no	 place	 in	 the	 world	 for	 an	 Eldering	 god,”	 Rake	 said.	 “Take	 my
word	for	it.”
K'rul	nodded.	“I	know.	I	anticipated	returning	to	the	Realms	of	Chaos,	with	a
Jaghut	Tyrant	for	company.	Alas,	he	evaded	me.”
“And	found	imprisonment	elsewhere.”
“I	am	relieved.”
The	 two	 were	 silent	 for	 a	 long	 minute,	 then	 K'rul	 sighed.	 “I	 am	 lost.	 In	 this
world.	In	this	time.”
Rake	grunted.	“You	are	not	alone	with	those	sentiments,	Eldering	One.”
“Do	 I	 follow	 in	 your	 steps,	 Lord?	 Do	 I	 seek	 out	 new	 battles,	 new	 games	 to
play	in	the	company	of	Ascendants?	Are	you	rewarded	in	spirit	for	your	efforts?”
“Sometimes,”	Rake	said	quietly.	“But	mostly,	no,	I	am	not.”
The	hooded	face	turned	to	the	Tiste	Andii.	“Then	why?”
“I	know	no	other	way	of	living.”
“I	have	no	means	of	assisting	you	this	night,	Anomander	Rake.	I	am	manifest	in
this	sanctified	place,	and	manifest	in	a	lone	mortal's	dreams,	but	nowhere	else.”


“I	will	do	my	best,	then,”	Rake	said,	“to	avoid	damaging	your	temple.”
K'rul	bowed,	then	vanished.
Alone	once	again,	Rake	turned	his	attention	to	the	street	below.	An	apparition
arrived.	 It	 paused	 to	 sniff	 the	 air,	 then	 began	 changing—veering.	 A	 Lord	 of	 the
Galayn,	and	a	Soletaken.
“Well,”	 the	 Lord	 of	 Moon's	 Spawn	 growled,	 “so	 am	 I.”	 The	 Tiste	 Andii
spread	 his	 arms	 wide,	 then	 rose	 upward.	 Kurald	 Galain	 sorcery	 swirled	 around
him,	blending	his	clothing,	his	massive	sword,	drawing	all	inward	to	the	shape	he
now	 climbed	 toward.	 The	 veering	 was	 smooth,	 eloquent,	 as	 jet-black	 wings
unfolded	from	his	shoulders.	Flesh	and	bone	surged	in	size,	changed	in	shape.
As	he	flew	higher,	eyes	fixed	on	the	stars,	Anomander	Rake	became	a	black
dragon,	 silver-maned	 and	 dwarfing	 even	 Silanah.	 His	 eyes	 gleamed	 silver,	 the
vertical	slits	of	the	pupils	dilating.	His	breath	gusted	in	heavy	grunts,	the	snap	of
his	wings	loud	amid	the	deep	groan	of	muscle	on	bone.	His	chest	swelled	to	draw
in	the	cold,	dry	air,	and	power	filled	his	being.
Rake	 climbed	 ever	 higher,	 slipping	 through	 a	 stray	 cloud	 that	 scudded	 in
darkness	over	the	city.	When	he	finally	tilted	his	wings	forward	and	caressed	the
surface	 of	 a	 wayward	 wind,	 he	 looked	 down	 on	 a	 city	 that	 glimmered	 like	 a
mottled	copper	coin	at	the	bottom	of	a	pellucid	pond.
Sorcery	flared	occasionally,	centered	mostly	in	the	Estate	District,	and	Rake
sensed	 death	 within	 those	 emanations.	 He	 considered	 the	 message	 delivered	 by
Serrat,	 courtesy	 of	 a	 foul	 mage	 he'd	 thought	 a	 thousand	 leagues	 away.	 Was	 the
sorcery	 the	 work	 of	 these	 unwelcome	 intruders?	 He	 rumbled	 in	 frustration—he
would	deal	with	them	later.	Before	him	now	was	a	battle.	The	Empress	and	her
Empire	 had	 challenged	 him	 again	 and	 again,	 willful	 in	 the	 desire	 to	 test	 his
strength.	 Each	 time	 he'd	 withdrawn,	 unwilling	 to	 commit	 himself.	 Very	 well,
Empress,	my	patience	is	at	an	end.
The	 membrane	 of	 his	 wings	 tautened,	 the	 joints	 creaking,	 as	 he	 grunted	 a
straining	 breath.	 He	 hung	 almost	 motionless	 for	 a	 second	 studying	 the	 great	 city
beneath	 him.	 Then,	 tucking	 in	 his	 wings,	 Anomander	 Rake,	 the	 Son	 of	 Darkness
and	Lord	of	Moon's	Spawn,	plummeted.
Kalam	knew	the	pattern	of	detonation	the	saboteurs	would	follow.	He	skirted	one
side	of	the	street	as	he	ran.	So	what	if	Moon's	Spawn	hung	over	them	as	if	ready
to	 descend	 on	 the	 city	 and	 crush	 the	 life	 from	 it	 like	 a	 god's	 heel—Fiddler	 and
Hedge	wouldn't	give	a	damn.	They	had	a	job	to	do.
The	assassin	cursed	every	stubborn	bone	in	their	heads.	Why	didn't	they	run


away	like	normal,	sane	people?	He	came	to	a	corner	and	crossed	the	intersection
diagonally.	Ahead,	at	the	far	end	of	the	street,	rose	Majesty	Hill.	As	he	reached
the	corner	he	almost	collided	with	the	two	saboteurs.	Fiddler	darted	to	one	side	of
him,	 Hedge	 to	 the	 other,	 running	 as	 if	 not	 even	 recognizing	 him,	 terror	 plain	 on
their	faces.
Kalam	 reached	 back	 and	 with	 each	 hand	 grasped	 a	 cloak's	 hood.	 Then	 he
grunted	in	pain	as	the	two	men	jerked	him	backward	and	off	his	feet.	“Damn	you
bastards!”	he	yelled.	“Hold	it!”
“It's	Kal!”	Hedge	yelled.
Kalam	 twisted	 around	 to	 find	 a	 rusty	 shortsword	 inches	 from	 his	 face,	 with
Fiddler's	white	face	and	wide	eyes	immediately	behind	it.	“Put	that	piece	of	junk
away,”	the	assassin	snapped.	“You	want	to	give	me	an	infection?”
“We're	 getting	 out	 of	 here!”	 Hedge	 hissed.	 “Forget	 the	 damn	 mines!	 Forget
everything!”
Still	 gripping	 their	 cloaks,	 Kalam	 shook	 them	 both.	 “Calm	 down.	 What's
happened?”
Fiddler	moaned	and	pointed	up	the	street.
Turning,	Kalam	stiffened.
A	 twelve-foot-tall	 creature	 shambled	 down	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 road,	 hunched
shoulders	 wrapped	 in	 a	 glittering	 cape	 with	 a	 high	 cowl.	 A	 two-bladed	 ax	 was
slung	 in	 its	 wide	 dragon-hide	 belt,	 its	 handle	 as	 long	 as	 Kalam	 was	 tall.	 The
creature's	wide,	squat	face	held	two	slitted	eyes.
“Oh,	 Hood's	 Gates	 and	 back,”	 the	 assassin	 muttered.	 “That's	 Tayschrenn's
precious	 lord.”	 He	 pushed	 the	 two	 saboteurs	 around	 the	 corner.	 “Get	 moving.
Back	to	Simtal's	estate.”	Neither	objected,	and	moments	later	were	running	as	fast
as	 they	 could	 down	 the	 street.	 Kalam	 crouched	 at	 the	 corner	 and	 waited	 for	 the
Galayn	lord	to	come	into	view.	When	it	did,	he	blanched.	“Soletaken.”
The	Galayn	was	assuming	a	form	better	suited	to	wholesale	destruction.	The
dun-brown	 dragon	 paused,	 its	 wingtips	 brushing	 the	 buildings	 on	 either	 side.	 Its
rumble	trembled	the	cobbles.
Kalam	watched	as	the	creature	tensed	its	limbs,	then	rose	upward	on	a	wave
of	power.	The	darkness	swallowed	it.	“Hood's	Breath,”	he	said.	“Now	things	are
going	to	get	messy.”	He	whirled	and	ran	to	catch	up	with	the	saboteurs.
The	Coin	Bearer	came	to	a	street	lined	with	walled	estates.	He	slowed	his	pace,
studying	each	structure	he	passed.


The	 time	 had	 come,	 the	 Adjunct	 knew.	 Before	 the	 boy	 had	 a	 chance	 to	 get
inside	one	of	those	places,	where	he	might	find	protection.	She	adjusted	her	grip
on	the	sword,	padding	in	silence	not	fifteen	feet	behind	him.
She	drew	a	long,	deep	breath,	then	surged	forward,	sword's	point	extended.
At	 the	 sharp,	 ringing	 clang	 of	 metal	 immediately	 behind	 him,	 Crokus	 dived
forward.	 He	 dipped	 a	 shoulder	 and	 rolled,	 regaining	 his	 feet.	 He	 cried	 out	 in
shock.	 The	 woman	 who	 had	 attacked	 Coll	 in	 the	 hills	 was	 in	 a	 whirlwind
exchange	with	a	tall,	round-shouldered	man	with	two	scimitars.
The	thief's	jaw	dropped	as	he	watched	the	fight.	As	good	as	the	woman	had
shown	herself	against	Coll,	she	was	now	being	driven	back	as	a	flurry	of	attacks
swept	around	her.	They	both	moved	so	quickly	that	Crokus	could	not	even	see	the
parries,	 or	 the	 blades	 themselves,	 but	 as	 he	 watched,	 he	 saw	 the	 blossoming	 of
wounds	 on	 the	 woman—her	 arms,	 legs,	 chest.	 Her	 expression	 held	 complete
disbelief.
Then	a	voice	chuckled	beside	him,	“He's	good,	ain't	he?”
Crokus	whirled	to	see	a	tall,	thin	man,	wearing	a	gray	and	crimson	longcoat,
his	hands	in	its	pockets.	He	swung	a	narrow	hatchet	face	to	the	thief	and	grinned.
“You	headin'	somewhere,	boy?	Somewhere	safe?”
Crokus	nodded	numbly.
The	 man's	 grin	 widened.	 “I'll	 escort	 you,	 then.	 And	 don't	 worry,	 you're
covered	from	the	roofs,	too.	Cowl's	up	there,	damn	his	snakeskin	hide.	But	he's	a
powerful	mage,	anyway.	Serrat	was	furious,	I	hear.	Let's	walk,	then.”
Crokus	 let	 the	 man	 take	 his	 arm	 and	 lead	 him	 away	 from	 the	 duel.	 The	 thief
cast	a	glance	over	his	shoulder.	The	woman	was	trying	to	disengage	now,	her	left
arm	 hanging	 useless	 and	 glistening	 in	 the	 gaslight.	 Her	 opponent	 continued
pressing,	silent	as	a	ghost.
“Don't	worry,”	the	man	beside	him	said,	pulling	him	along.	“That's	Corporal
Blues.	He	lives	for	this	stuff.”
“C-Corporal?”
“We've	been	covering	your	back,	Coin	Bearer.”	The	man's	other	hand	reached
up	to	his	collar,	 which	he	turned	back	to	reveal	a	brooch.	“The	name's	Fingers,
Sixth	Blade,	Crimson	Guard.	You're	being	protected,	boy,	compliments	of	Prince
K'azz	and	Caladan	Brood.”
Crokus	 stared,	 then	 he	 scowled.	 “Coin	 Bearer?	 What's	 that	 mean?	 I	 think
you've	got	the	wrong	person.”


Fingers	laughed	dryly.	“We	figured	you	was	walking	blind	and	dumb,	boy.	The
only	 explanation.	 You've	 got	 other	 people	 trying	 to	 protect	 you,	 too,	 you	 know.
There's	 a	 coin	 in	 your	 pocket,	 probably	 two-headed,	 right?”	 He	 grinned	 at	 the
thief's	stunned	expression.	“It's	Oponn's	own.	You've	been	serving	a	god	and	you
didn't	even	know	it!	How's	your	luck	been,	lately?”	He	laughed	again.
Crokus	stopped	at	a	gate.
“This	 is	 the	 place,	 then?”	 Fingers	 asked,	 glancing	 at	 the	 estate	 rising	 behind
the	 compound	 wall.	 “Well,	 there's	 a	 powerful	 mage	 living	 in	 there,	 ain't	 there?
Well,”	he	released	the	thief's	arm,	“you	should	be	safe	enough	inside.	Good	luck,
boy,	and	I	mean	that.	But	listen,”	Fingers'	eyes	hardened,	“if	your	luck	goes	sour,
you	dump	that	coin,	y'	hear?”
Confusion	flickered	across	Crokus's	face.	“Thank	you,	sir.”
“Our	pleasure,”	Fingers	said,	as	he	placed	his	hands	in	his	pockets	again.	“Get
a	move	on,	then.”
The	Adjunct	broke	away,	taking	a	cut	across	her	right	shoulder	blade	as	she	did
so.	She	ran,	blood	spraying	with	the	effort,	and	the	man	did	not	pursue.
What	a	fool	she'd	been!	Thinking	that	the	Coin	Bearer	wasn't	protected!	But
who	was	that	man?	Never	before	had	she	faced	such	a	swordsman,	and	the	most
appalling	 thing	 was	 that	 he	 had	 fought	 without	 the	 aid	 of	 sorcery.	 For	 once,	 her
Otataral	blade	and	her	skill	had	not	been	enough.
She	staggered,	half	blind,	down	the	street,	then	wheeled	round	a	corner.	Out	of
the	corner	of	her	eye	she	saw	a	flash	of	movement.	The	Adjunct	threw	her	back	to
a	wall	and	raised	her	sword	again.
A	large	woman	stood	before	her,	regarding	her	quizzically.	“Looks	to	me,”	she
drawled,	“like	you're	already	done.”
“Leave	me	be,”	Lorn	gasped.
“Can't	do	it,”	Meese	said.	“We	been	on	you	since	Circle	Breaker	picked	you
up	 at	 the	 gate.	 The	 Eel	 says	 you've	 got	 some	 things	 t'	 pay	 for,	 lady.	 And	 we're
here	to	collect.”
As	 soon	 as	 the	 woman	 said	 that,	 the	 Adjunct	 sensed	 another	 presence,
immediately	on	her	left.	She	cried	out	as	she	tried	to	spin	into	a	defensive	crouch,
and	 in	 the	 cry	 was	 an	 overwhelming	 sense	 of	 frustration	 and	 despair.	 What	 a
waste!	she	cursed.	No,	not	like	this!
Even	 as	 that	 thought	 thundered	 through	 her	 head,	 both	 women	 attacked.	 She
parried	the	blade	coming	at	her	from	the	left,	but	could	only	watch	in	horror	as	the


woman	who'd	spoken	revealed	two	blades,	both	driving	for	her	chest.
The	 Adjunct	 screamed	 in	 rage	 as	 the	 weapons	 punched	 into	 her.	 Her	 sword
clanged	and	bounded	as	it	struck	the	cobbles.	Hands	groping,	Lorn	slid	down	the
wall.	“Who?”	she	managed,	a	blind	need	behind	the	word.	“Who?”
One	of	the	women	bent	low	over	her.	“What's	that?”
Anguish	 filled	 Lorn's	 face,	 the	 corners	 of	 her	 mouth	 drooping	 as	 her	 eyes
closed.	“Who?”	she	asked	again.	“Who	is	this	Eel?”
“Let's	go,	Meese,”	the	woman	said,	ignoring	the	body	at	her	feet.
Paran	found	her	sprawled	on	the	grimy	cobbles	of	an	alley-mouth.	Something	had
drawn	him	to	her	unerringly,	a	final	closing	of	the	mysterious	link	between	them.
Her	sword	was	beside	her,	the	grip	slick	with	blood,	its	edges	gouged	and	nicked.
The	captain	crouched	beside	her.
“You	made	it	a	hard	fight,”	he	whispered,	“for	what	that	is	worth.”
He	watched	her	eyes	flicker	open.	She	stared	up	at	him	as	recognition	arrived.
“Captain.	Ganoes.”
“Adjunct.”
“They	have	killed	me.”
“Who?”
She	 managed	 a	 stained	 smile.	 “I	 don't	 know.	 Two	 women.	 Looked	 like	 .	 .	 .
thieves.	Thugs.	Do	you	see	.	.	.	the	irony,	Ganoes	Paran?”
Thin-lipped,	he	nodded.
“No	.	.	.	glorious	end	.	.	.	for	the	Adjunct.	If	you'd	come	.	.	.	a	few	minutes
sooner	.	.	.”
The	captain	said	nothing.	He	watched	the	life	leave	Lorn,	feeling	nothing.	Ill
luck,	 knowing	 me,	 Adjunct.	 I'm	 sorry	 for	 that.	 Then	 he	 collected	 the	 Otataral
sword	and	slipped	it	into	his	scabbard.
Above	him	two	voices	spoke	in	unison.	“You	gave	him	our	sword.”
He	straightened	to	find	himself	facing	Oponn.	“The	Rope	took	it	from	me,	to
be	more	precise.”
The	 Twins	 could	 not	 conceal	 their	 fear.	 They	 looked	 upon	 Paran	 with
something	 akin	 to	 pleading.	 “Cotillion	 spared	 you,”	 the	 sister	 said,	 “the	 Hounds
spared	you.	Why?”
Paran	shrugged.	“Do	you	blame	the	knife,	or	the	hand	wielding	it?”
“Shadowthrone	never	plays	fair,”	the	brother	whined,	hugging	himself.


“You	and	Cotillion	both	used	mortals,”	the	captain	said,	baring	his	teeth,	“and
paid	for	it.	What	do	you	want	from	me?	Sympathy?	Help?”
“That	Otataral	blade—”	the	sister	said.
“Will	 not	 be	 used	 to	 do	 your	 dirty	 work,”	 Paran	 finished.	 “You'd	 best	 flee,
Oponn.	I	imagine	even	now	Cotillion	has	given	Shadowthrone	the	sword	Chance,
and	the	two	are	putting	their	heads	together	to	plan	how	best	to	use	it.”
The	Twin	Jesters	flinched.
Paran	laid	a	hand	over	the	sword's	sticky	grip.	“Now.	Else	I	return	Cotillion's
favor.”
The	gods	vanished.
The	captain	drew	a	deep	breath.	He	turned	once	again	to	Lorn.
Her	armor	removed,	she	proved	light	in	his	arms.
The	 air	 roared	 around	 Anomander	 Rake	 as	 he	 plummeted,	 but	 he	 made	 no	 other
sound,	his	Warren	drawn	in	tight	around	him.	Below,	now	sweeping	lazy	circles
over	 Darujhistan,	 was	 the	 dun	 dragon—Rake's	 equal	 in	 size,	 with	 the	 power	 to
match.
But	it	was	a	fool,	hunting	for	him	in	the	streets	below.
Rake	 carefully	 spread	 his	 wings,	 angling	 toward	 the	 Galayn	 lord.	 His	 hind
limbs	reached	down,	talons	spreading.	He	drew	in	the	air	around	him,	preparing
for	 a	 burst	 of	 power.	 He	 was	 Kurald	 Galain,	 Tiste	 Andii,	 and	 darkness	 was	 his
home.
The	 Galayn	 lord	 was	 immediately	 beneath	 him	 now,	 growing	 larger	 with
incredible	speed.	Rake	opened	his	mouth,	head	snapping	back	as	he	bit	into	a	wall
of	air.	This	sound	 brought	the	dun	dragon's	gaze	upward,	but	it	was	already	too
late.


Chapter	Twenty-four
	

I	am	the	House
imprisoning	in	my	birth
demonic	hearts,
so	locked	in	each	chamber
some	trembling	enraged
antiquity.
And	these	roots	of	stone
spread	the	deepest	cracks
in	parched	ground
holding	forever	the	dream
of	fruit,	ah,	pilgrims
come	to	my	door
and	starve	.	.	.
AZATH	(II.III)
ADAEPHON	(B.?)


	
The	compound	beyond	the	gate	was	empty.	Crokus	ran	across	it,	wondering	if	he
was	too	late.	He	bounded	up	the	steps	and	reached	for	the	door	latch.	A	burst	of
energy	flung	him	backward.
Dazed,	the	thief	found	himself	sitting	on	the	paving	stones	before	the	steps,	his
flesh	tingling.	At	the	door	a	deep	crimson	glow	slowly	faded.	A	ward.	“Hood!”	he
hissed,	climbing	to	his	feet.	He'd	run	into	barriers	like	these	before,	in	the	Higher
Estates.	There	was	no	way	to	get	through	them.
Cursing	 again,	 Crokus	 whirled	 and	 raced	 to	 the	 gate.	 He	 emerged	 onto	 the
street	 and	 looked	 around,	 seeing	 no	 one.	 If	 those	 Crimson	 Guard	 still	 protected
him,	they	weren't	showing	themselves.
There	 was	 a	 slight	 chance	 that	 the	 garden	 entrance	 to	 Baruk's	 estate	 was
unguarded	by	magic—a	very	slight	chance.	He	ran	down	the	street	and	turned	into
the	first	alley	to	his	right.	There'd	be	a	wall	to	scale,	but	he	did	not	consider	that
much	of	an	obstacle.
He	came	to	the	alley's	end	and	skidded	to	a	halt	on	the	street	beyond.	The	wall
was	 high,	 he	 saw.	 He'd	 need	 a	 running	 start.	 Crokus	 trotted	 across	 the	 street,
trying	to	catch	his	breath.	What	was	the	point	of	all	this?	Couldn't	Baruk	take	care
of	himself,	after	all?	Wasn't	he	a	High	Mage,	and	hadn't	even	Fingers	commented
on	the	alchemist's	sorcerous	defenses?
He	hesitated,	scowling	at	the	wall	opposite	him.
At	that	moment	a	piercing,	earth-shaking	scream	was	loosed	directly	above	the
street.	 Crokus	 threw	 himself	 against	 the	 wall	 behind	 him	 as	 an	 enormous	 shape
descended	into	the	gaslight.	Filling	the	street,	it	struck	the	ground	less	than	twenty
yards	 to	 the	 thief's	 left.	 He	 was	 thrown	 from	 his	 feet	 by	 the	 impact.	 Stones
shattered.
He	ducked	beneath	the	hail	of	bricks	and	cobbles,	then,	as	the	scatter	of	rubble
diminished,	he	jumped	to	his	feet.
A	dragon,	its	wings	tattered	and	streaked	with	blood,	slowly	regained	its	feet
in	the	street,	wagging	its	massive	wedge-shaped	head	from	side	to	side.	Along	its
brown	 flanks,	 scales	 had	 been	 torn	 away,	 revealing	 deep	 puncture	 wounds.	 Its
neck	and	shoulders	glistened	with	blood.
Crokus	saw	that	the	wall	beyond	it—Baruk's—had	been	obliterated,	opening
the	 garden	 to	 his	 view.	 Snapped	 tree	 trunks	 rose	 amid	 steaming	 earth.	 A	 raised


patio	marked	the	approach	of	the	estate's	back	entrance.	Two	toppled	statues	lay
in	pieces	before	the	doors.
The	 dragon	 looked	 stunned.	 Crokus	 tensed.	 Now	 was	 the	 time	 to	 move.
Almost	 disbelieving	 his	 own	 temerity,	 the	 thief	 darted	 into	 the	 street	 behind	 the
creature,	hoping	to	reach	the	cover	of	the	garden.	His	gaze	remained	on	the	dragon
as	he	ran,	his	thoughts	on	the	coin	of	luck	in	his	pocket.
Then,	 before	 his	 eyes,	 the	 creature's	 shape	 changed,	 drawing	 into	 itself	 in	 a
shimmering	haze.	Crokus	slowed,	then	stopped,	unable	to	pull	away	his	attention.
His	heart	hammered	against	his	ribs,	as	if	seeking	escape.	Each	drawn	breath	was
a	painful	gasp.	His	luck,	he	told	himself	in	terror,	had	just	ended.
The	 shimmering	 faded,	 and	 a	 giant	 man-shaped	 apparition	 now	 stood	 on	 the
street,	cloaked	and	cowled.
Crokus	tried	to	will	himself	to	move,	but	his	body	refused	to	obey.	He	stared,
eyes	widening,	as	the	demon	turned	to	him.	It	snarled	and	removed	an	enormous
ax	from	its	belt.	Hefting	the	weapon,	it	spoke	in	a	deep,	soft	voice.	“What	reason
to	continue	this?”	it	asked	reasonably.	“The	Empress	permits	your	escape,	Lord.
Once	again	she	grants	you	mercy.	Accept	it,	and	leave.”
“Good	idea,”	the	thief	whispered.	Then	he	frowned,	for	the	demon's	attention,
he	now	saw,	was	directed	past	him.
A	man	spoke	behind	him.	“We	run	no	further,	Galayn.”
A	 hand	 fell	 on	 the	 thief's	 shoulder,	 breaking	 the	 spell	 of	 immobility.	 Crokus
ducked	 and	 spun	 to	 one	 side,	 then	 looked	 up	 into	 shifting,	 indigo	 eyes	 set	 in	 a
black,	narrow	face.
“Flee,	mortal,”	the	silver-haired	man	said,	drawing	a	two-handed	sword	from
the	 scabbard	 slung	 between	 his	 shoulder-blades.	 The	 black	 weapon	 seemed
almost	invisible,	as	if	it	swallowed	all	light	that	found	it.
“You	were	at	the	fête!”	Crokus	blurted.
The	man's	eyes	flickered,	as	if	seeing	him	for	the	first	time.	“Coin	Bearer,”	he
said,	with	a	wry	smile,	“fear	not.	Brood	has	convinced	me	to	spare	you,	at	least
for	the	moment.	Begone,	child.”	His	gaze	returned	to	the	Galayn	lord.	“This	will
be	a	close	thing.”
“I	know	that	weapon,”	the	demon	snarled.	“Dragnipurake.	And	I	smell	the	reek
of	Tiama	in	you,	Lord.	There	is	more	of	her	in	you	than	Tiste	Andii	blood.”
Crokus	backed	against	what	remained	of	Baruk's	wall.
The	 Galayn	 lord	 grinned,	 revealing	 long,	 curved	 canines.	 “The	 Empress
would	reward	your	services,	Lord.	You've	only	to	say	yes,	and	this	battle	can	be


avoided.”
Anomander	Rake	stepped	forward.	“Attend,	Galayn.”
With	 a	 roar	 the	 demon	 attacked,	 ax	 whistling	 through	 the	 air	 and	 streaming
blue	flames.
Rake	 whirled	 his	 sword	 in	 a	 circle,	 catching	 the	 ax	 and	 adding	 to	 its
momentum.	 As	 the	 double-blades	 swept	 past,	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 stepped	 in	 close,
sword	drawn	back,	pommel	against	his	left	hip.	In	a	blur	of	motion	he	extended
the	blade.	The	demon	ducked	and,	releasing	one	hand	from	the	ax	haft,	reached	for
Rake's	throat.	The	Tiste	Andii	twisted	his	right	shoulder	and	caught	the	blow.
Thrown	backward,	Rake	landed	heavily	on	the	cobbles.
The	demon	pounced,	flaming	weapon	above	its	head.
Rake	 regained	 his	 feet	 in	 time	 to	 catch	 the	 ax	 with	 his	 sword.	 The	 clash	 of
weapons	 sent	 a	 jolt	 through	 the	 air	 and	 ground.	 The	 demon's	 ax	 flared	 bright
white,	 cascading	 light	 like	 liquid.	 Rake's	 sword	 was	 swallowed	 in	 darkness,
devouring	the	lashing	waves	of	light	that	struck	it.
The	 flagstones	 beneath	 Crokus's	 feet	 tilted	 sickeningly,	 as	 if	 the	 stones
themselves	had	turned	to	soft	clay.	Overhead	the	stars	swam	wildly.	Gripped	by
nausea,	Crokus	fell	to	his	knees.
Rake	began	to	launch	attacks,	savage	swings	of	his	black	weapon.	At	first	the
demon	held	its	ground,	delivering	fierce	ripostes,	then	staggered	back	a	step,	then
another.	Relentless,	Rake	pressed	his	attack.	“To	the	Mother's	regret,”	he	grated
between	blows,	“was	Light	granted	birth.	To	her	dismay	.	.	.	she	saw	too	late	.	.
.	its	corruption.	Galayn	.	.	.	you	are	the	unintended	victim	.	.	.	to	punishment	.	.	.
long	overdue.”
The	 demon	 reeled	 beneath	 the	 blows,	 desperately	 parrying	 every	 attack,	 no
longer	counterattacking.	The	light	bleeding	from	the	axe	flickered,	dimmed,	flared
fitfully	 as	 darkness	 closed	 in	 around	 the	 blade.	 Shrieking,	 the	 demon	 launched
itself	at	Rake.	As	it	descended	over	the	Tiste	Andii,	Crokus	saw	a	streak	of	black
burst	 from	 the	 demon's	 back,	 slicing	 through	 the	 cloak.	 The	 ax	 flew	 from	 the
creature's	hands,	its	fire	dying	as	it	clattered	on	the	ground.
Squealing	in	horror,	the	demon	clawed	at	the	sword	impaling	it.	Black	smoke
spread	in	swift	tendrils	from	the	weapon,	engulfing	the	demon.	The	smoke	twisted,
became	chains,	drawing	taut.	The	Galayn	screamed	in	earnest.
Rake	regained	his	feet	and	pushed	the	sword	through	the	demon's	chest	until
the	hilt	jammed	against	bone.	The	demon	sank	to	its	knees,	its	black	eyes	locking
with	Rake's	own.
The	swimming	stars	settled,	the	flagstones	beneath	the	thief	became	solid	once


again,	though	warped	and	twisted.	Crokus	swallowed	bile,	his	eyes	fixed	on	the
demon.	 It	 seemed	 to	 collapse	 in	 on	 itself,	 the	 chains	 of	 black	 smoke	 ever
tightening,	 pulling	 the	 creature	 into	 the	 sword.	 It	 toppled	 backward	 and	 Rake
drove	 the	 weapon's	 point	 into	 the	 cobbled	 street,	 pinning	 the	 demon.	 Then	 the
Tiste	Andii	leaned	heavily	on	the	hilt,	and	Crokus	now	noticed	the	blood-soaked
cloth	 surrounding	 Rake's	 shoulder,	 where	 the	 demon's	 hand	 had	 struck.	 Wearily,
the	Tiste	Andii	swung	his	gaze	to	the	thief.
“Move	quickly,”	he	rasped.	“The	alchemist	is	in	danger.	I	cannot	protect	him
now.	Hurry,	Coin	Bearer.”
Crokus	whirled	and	ran.
The	death	of	Travale,	third	in	the	Cabal,	still	echoed	in	their	thoughts.	The	witch
Derudan	had	inscribed	an	ash	circle	on	the	floor	in	the	center	of	the	chamber.	With
Baruk's	 help,	 she	 placed	 the	 two	 plush	 chairs	 within	 it,	 and	 now	 sat,	 smoking
steadily,	her	dark	eyes	following	the	alchemist	as	he	paced.
Baruk	found	himself	reluctant	to	enter	the	protective	circle.	While	they	would
be	 safe	 there,	 surrounded	 by	 High	 Tennes	 sorcery,	 they	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to
counterattack,	 should	 Vorcan	 arrive.	 More,	 some	 things	 could	 penetrate	 the
defenses	 of	 magic.	 Otataral,	 that	 strange	 rustlike	 ore	 from	 the	 Tanno	 Hills	 of
Seven	 Cities,	 immediately	 came	 to	 mind.	 It	 was	 unlikely	 that	 Vorcan	 would
possess	 such	 material,	 given	 that	 she	 was	 a	 High	 Mage,	 yet	 still	 Baruk	 felt
reluctant	to	place	himself	in	a	position	where	he	could	not	use	his	Warren	against
the	assassin.
“Those	 of	 the	 Cabal,”	 Derudan	 said	 slowly,	 “who	 are	 now	 dead,	 yes?
Stubborn,	 convinced	 of	 their	 own	 invincibility.	 No	 doubt	 they	 paced	 restless
steps,	awaiting	the	assassin's	imminent	arrival.”
Baruk	 paused	 to	 reply,	 but	 was	 interrupted	 by	 a	 loud,	 inhuman	 scream	 from
outside.	 This	 was	 followed	 immediately	 by	 a	 concussion	 that	 rattled	 the	 walls.
The	alchemist	made	a	move	toward	the	door.
“Wait!”	Derudan	called	from	the	circle.	“Appease	not	this	curiosity,	Baruk,	for
Vorcan	will	surely	take	advantage,	yes?”
“A	ward	was	shattered,”	Baruk	said.	“My	defenses	are	breached.”
“More	 the	 reason	 for	 caution,”	 Derudan	 admonished.	 “Friend,	 I	 plead	 with
you,	join	me	here.”
“Very	well,”	Baruk	sighed,	moving	toward	her.	A	gust	of	air	brushed	the	left
side	of	his	face.	Derudan	cried	out	a	warning	even	as	the	alchemist	turned.


Vorcan,	 her	 gloved	 hands	 glowing	 red,	 surged	 toward	 Baruk.	 He	 raised	 his
arms,	 knowing	 full	 well	 that	 he	 would	 be	 too	 late.	 At	 that	 moment,	 however,
another	figure	appeared,	emerging	from	darkness	to	intercept	the	Master	Assassin
with	a	flurry	of	blows.	Vorcan	reeled	back,	then	lashed	out	with	a	hand,	catching
her	attacker	a	glancing	blow.
An	agonized	shriek	rang	through	the	chamber.	Baruk	stared,	only	now	realizing
that	his	protector	was	a	Tiste	Andii	woman.	He	stepped	aside	lithely	as	she	flew
past	him	to	strike	the	floor	then	the	wall,	where	she	lay	unmoving.	The	alchemist
pulled	his	gaze	back	to	Vorcan,	seeing	that	one	of	her	hands	no	longer	glowed.
He	 gestured,	 and	 virulent	 sorcery	 erupted	 from	 his	 arm,	 arcing	 yellow
lightning.	Vorcan	hissed	a	counter-spell	and	the	lightning	was	swallowed	by	a	red
haze	before	her	that	dimmed	quickly,	then	disappeared.	She	advanced.
Vaguely,	 Baruk	 heard	 the	 witch	 Derudan	 shouting	 at	 him.	 Yet	 it	 was	 the
Mistress	 of	 the	 Assassins'	 death-filled	 eyes	 that	 held	 him.	 The	 ease	 with	 which
she'd	dispelled	his	power	made	it	clear	that	she	was	his	master	in	sorcery.	All	he
could	do	now,	he	understood	with	clarity,	was	await	his	death.
But	Baruk	heard	a	grunt	behind	him,	then	Vorcan	gasped.	The	hilt	of	a	dagger
protruded	 from	 the	 assassin's	 chest.	 Frowning,	 she	 reached	 for	 it,	 then	 pulled	 it
out	and	tossed	it	aside.
“All	 .	 .	 .”	 the	 alchemist	 heard	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 woman	 gasp	 from	 the	 floor
behind	him	“.	.	.	all	I	can	do.	My	apologies,	Lord.”
Derudan	 appeared	 behind	 Vorcan.	 As	 she	 raised	 her	 hands	 and	 began	 an
incantation,	Vorcan	whirled	and	something	sped	from	her	hand.	The	witch	grunted,
then	crumpled.
Anguish	flooded	Baruk.	With	a	wordless	roar	he	launched	himself	at	Vorcan.
She	laughed	and	ducked	to	one	side,	throwing	out	her	glowing	hand.	The	alchemist
twisted,	off-balance,	narrowly	avoiding	the	killing	touch,	then	staggered	past.	He
heard	her	laughter	again,	as	she	moved	in	behind	him.
A	dozen	feet	in	front	of	Baruk	was	the	door.	The	alchemist's	eyes	widened	to
find	it	open.	A	youth	crouched	there,	holding	blockish	objects	in	each	hand.
Expecting	at	any	moment	to	feel	Vorcan's	touch,	Baruk	threw	himself	forward.
He	saw	the	boy	straighten	at	the	same	time	and	thrust	forward	first	his	right	arm,
then	his	left.	As	the	alchemist	fell	toward	the	floor,	two	bricks	flew	over	him.	He
heard	them	strike	the	woman	behind	him,	one	making	a	crunching	sound,	the	other
crackling.	A	flash	of	red	accompanied	the	crackle.
As	he	struck	the	floor,	the	breath	was	hammered	from	Baruk's	lungs.	Agonized
seconds	passed	as	he	struggled	to	draw	air	into	his	tortured	chest.	He	rolled	onto


his	 back.	 Vorcan,	 he	 saw,	 lay	 motionless	 almost	 against	 his	 feet.	 The	 boy's	 face
came	into	view,	streaked	with	sweat,	brow	furrowed	with	concern.
“Alchemist	Baruk?”	he	asked.
The	man	nodded.
The	 boy	 sighed,	 then	 grinned.	 “You're	 alive.	 Good.	 Rallick	 sent	 me	 to	 warn
you.”
Baruk	 sat	 up.	 “The	 witch,”	 he	 said	 hoarsely.	 He	 pointed.	 “Tend	 to	 her,
please.”
He	felt	his	strength	returning	as	he	watched	the	boy	crouch	beside	Derudan.
“She's	 breathing,”	 Crokus	 announced.	 “There's	 some	 kind	 of	 knife	 in	 her,
looks	like	it's	covered	in	sap.”	He	reached	down	to	touch	it.
“No!”	Baruk	shouted.
Crokus	jumped	back	in	alarm.
“Poison,”	the	alchemist	said,	climbing	to	his	feet.	“Help	me	to	her,	quickly.”	A
moment	 later	 he	 knelt	 beside	 Derudan.	 A	 quick	 glance	 at	 the	 saplike	 substance
coating	the	blade	confirmed	his	suspicion.	“White	paralt,”	he	said.
“That's	a	spider,	isn't	it?”
Baruk	laid	a	hand	on	Derudan.	“Your	knowledge	surprises	me,	boy,”	he	said.
“Fortunately,	 she's	 in	 the	 home	 of	 the	 one	 man	 who	 possesses	 its	 antidote.”	 He
muttered	something	and	a	vial	appeared	in	his	hand.
“Rallick	said	there	was	no	antidote	to	white	paralt.”
“It's	 not	 something	 I'm	 likely	 to	 announce.”	 Baruk	 unstoppered	 the	 vial	 and
poured	 the	 contents	 down	 the	 witch's	 throat,	 triggering	 a	 coughing	 fit.	 As
Derudan's	 breathing	 became	 even,	 Baruk	 leaned	 back	 and	 eyed	 Crokus.	 “You
seem	well	acquainted	with	Rallick.	What's	your	name?”
“Crokus.	Mammot	was	my	uncle,	sir.	I	saw	him	die.”
Derudan's	 eyelids	 flickered,	 then	 opened.	 She	 smiled	 lazily.	 “What	 I	 see
pleases	me,”	she	said	weakly.	“Yes?”
Baruk	returned	the	smile.	“Yes,	my	friend.	But	I	make	no	claim	for	defeating
Vorcan.	That	falls	to	Crokus,	nephew	of	Mammot.”
Derudan's	 gaze	 swung	 to	 the	 youth.	 “Ah,	 the	 one	 I	 came	 near	 to	 treading	 on
earlier	this	evening.”	The	amusement	left	her	expression.	“I	am	sorry	for	Mammot,
child.”
“So	am	I,”	he	replied.
Baruk	rose	and	turned.	He	hissed	a	vehement	curse.	Vorcan's	body	was	gone.


“She's	 fled.”	 He	 hurried	 over	 to	 the	 Tiste	 Andii	 woman;	 he	 bent	 down	 and
examined	her.	She	was	dead.	“I	will	soon	know	your	name,”	he	whispered,	“and	I
will	remember	it.”
“I	have	to	go!”	Crokus	announced.
Baruk	wondered	at	the	sudden	panic	in	the	boy's	face.
“I	mean,”	Crokus	continued,	“if	everything's	over	here,	that	is.”
“I	believe	it	is,”	the	alchemist	answered.	“I	thank	you,	Crokus,	for	your	skill	at
throwing	bricks.”
The	boy	went	to	the	door.	He	paused,	then	tossed	a	coin	into	the	air.	He	caught
it,	and	grinned	tightly.	“Just	lucky,	I	suppose.”	Then	he	was	gone.
Captain	 Paran	 crouched	 beside	 Coll's	 bed.	 “Still	 asleep,”	 he	 said,	 rising	 and
facing	Whiskeyjack.	“Go	ahead.”
Kalam	and	the	two	saboteurs	had	arrived	minutes	earlier.	So	far,	the	sergeant
mused,	no	losses,	though	the	captain's	armor	had	taken	a	beating	and	the	look	in
his	 face	 when	 he'd	 entered	 the	 room	 with	 Lorn's	 body	 in	 his	 arms	 warned
Whiskeyjack	away	from	probing	Paran's	state	of	mind	too	deeply.	The	Adjunct's
body	 now	 occupied	 a	 second	 bed,	 motionless	 and	 pale,	 a	 strange	 ironic	 smile
curving	her	bloodless	lips.
The	sergeant	studied	everyone	in	the	small	room,	the	faces	he	knew	so	well	all
watching	 him,	 waiting.	 His	 gaze	 held	 on	 Sorry,	 or	 Apsalar	 as	 she	 now	 called
herself.	Whatever	Mallet	had	done	to	her,	she	was	a	changed	woman	from	the	one
he'd	known.	Less,	and	somehow	more	as	well.	Even	Mallet	was	unsure	of	what
he'd	 done.	 Certain	 memories,	 skills,	 had	 been	 freed,	 and	 with	 them	 a	 brutal
knowledge.	 The	 pain	 was	 there	 in	 the	 woman's	 eyes,	 a	 pain	 layered	 in	 years	 of
horror—yet	 it	 seemed	 that	 she	 had	 it	 under	 control,	 that	 she'd	 found	 a	 way,	 a
strength,	 to	 live	 with	 what	 she'd	 been.	 Her	 only	 words	 upon	 meeting	 him	 had
been:	“I	wish	to	return	home,	Sergeant.”
He	 had	 no	 objection,	 though	 he	 wondered	 how	 she	 planned	 to	 cross	 two
continents	 and	 the	 ocean	 between	 them.	 Whiskeyjack	 reached	 for	 the	 wrapped
forearm	 bones	 lying	 on	 the	 table.	 “Yes,	 sir,”	 he	 said,	 in	 answer	 to	 Paran's
command.
The	hot	sweaty	air	in	the	room	thickened	with	tension.	Whiskeyjack	hesitated.
There'd	 been	a	battle	in	Darujhistan's	streets,	and	 Quick	Ben	had	confirmed	the
Galayn	lord's	death.	In	fact,	the	black	wizard	seemed	still	in	shock.	The	sergeant
sighed	 under	 his	 breath	 and	 massaged	 his	 newly	 healed	 leg,	 then	 drove	 the


forearm's	blade	into	the	tabletop.
Contact	 was	 immediate.	 High	 Fist	 Dujek's	 gravelly	 voice	 filled	 the	 room.
“About	 time,	 Whiskeyjack!	 Don't	 bother	 telling	 me	 about	 the	 Galayn	 lord—
Tayschrenn's	in	a	coma	or	something.	Everyone	in	Headquarters	heard	his	scream.
So	Anomander	Rake	took	out	the	beast.	What	else?”
Whiskeyjack	 glanced	 at	 Paran,	 who	 nodded	 deferentially.	 “Adjunct	 Lorn's
gambit	 failed,”	 the	 sergeant	 said.	 “She's	 dead.	 We	 have	 her	 body	 with	 us.	 The
intersections	 remain	 mined—we're	 not	 detonating	 them,	 High	 Fist,	 since	 they're
likely	 to	 open	 the	 gas	 caverns	 beneath	 the	 city	 and	 turn	 us	 all	 into	 ash.	 So.”	 He
drew	 a	 deep	 breath,	 feeling	 a	 twinge	 from	 his	 leg—Mallet	 had	 done	 what	 he
could,	 and	 that'd	 been	 a	 lot,	 but	 some	 damage	 remained,	 and	 it	 made	 him	 feel
fragile.	“So,”	he	repeated	softly,	“we're	pulling	out,	High	Fist.”
Dujek	was	silent,	then	he	grunted.	“Problems,	Whiskeyjack.	One,	we're	about
to	 lose	 Pale.	 As	 I	 suspected,	 Caladan	 Brood	 left	 the	 Crimson	 Guard	 to	 handle
things	up	north,	and	marched	down	here	with	his	Tiste	Andii.	He's	also	got	Rhivi
with	him,	and	Jorrick's	Barghast,	who've	just	finished	chewing	up	Gold	Moranth.
Two,	it	gets	worse.”	The	High	Fist	swallowed	audibly.	“Seven	Cities	is	maybe	a
week	 away	 from	 open	 rebellion.	 The	 Empress	 knows	 it.	 Some	 Claw	 from
Genabaris	arrived	half	an	hour	ago,	looking	for	Tayschrenn.	My	people	got	to	him
first.	 Whiskeyjack,	 he	 was	 carrying	 a	 handwritten	 message	 from	 the	 Empress	 to
Tayschrenn.	I've	just	been	outlawed	by	the	Empire.	It's	official,	and	Tayschrenn
was	to	have	effected	my	arrest	and	execution.	We're	on	our	own,	friend.”
The	room	was	silent.	Whiskeyjack	closed	his	eyes	briefly.	“Understood,	High
Fist.	So,	when	do	you	march?”
“Seems	 the	 Black	 Moranth	 are	 with	 us—don't	 ask	 why.	 Anyway,	 I	 have	 a
parley	 at	 dawn	 tomorrow	 with	 Caladan	 Brood	 and	 Kallor.	 That	 will	 decide
matters,	I	suspect.	Either	he	lets	us	walk,	or	he	kills	us	taking	Pale.	Everything's
riding	on	what	he	knows	about	the	Pannion	Seer.”
Whiskeyjack	 said,	 “We're	 rendezvousing	 with	 some	 Black	 Moranth	 in	 a
couple	of	days,	High	Fist.	Makes	me	wonder	how	much	they'd	guessed	when	that
arrangement	was	made.	Anyway,	they'll	take	us	to	you,	wherever	you	are.”
“No,”	Dujek	replied.	“We	may	be	under	siege	here.	The	Black	will	drop	you
off	on	the	Catlin	Plain.	Their	orders	are	clear	on	this,	but	you're	welcome	to	try
overruling	them.”
The	sergeant	grimaced.	Not	likely.	“Catlin	Plain	it	is.	Just	means	it'll	take	us
longer	to	get	to	you,	sir.”
The	 glow	 surrounding	 the	 bones	 flickered	 briefly	 and	 they	 heard	 an	 echoing


thump.	Fiddler	chuckled.	Dujek	had	just	pounded	a	fist	on	the	table	at	his	end	of
the	conversation.
Whiskeyjack	shot	the	saboteur	a	ferocious	look.
“Captain	Paran?”	Dujek	bellowed.
“Here,	High	Fist,”	Paran	replied,	stepping	forward.
“What	I'm	about	to	say	is	to	Whiskeyjack,	but	I	want	you	to	hear	it,	Captain.”
“I'm	listening.”
“Sergeant,	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 in	 my	 army,	 you'd	 better	 get	 used	 to	 the	 new
order.	 First,	 I'm	 placing	 the	 Bridgeburners	 under	 Captain	 Paran's	 command.
Second,	 you're	 not	 a	 sergeant	 anymore,	 Whiskeyjack.	 You	 are	 my	 second-incommand,	and	that	means	responsibilities.	I	don't	want	you	anywhere	near	Pale.
And	you	know	I'm	right,	dammit.	Captain	Paran?”
“Yes?”
“Whiskeyjack's	squad	has	earned	the	right	to	walk.	Understood?	If	any	of	them
elect	to	rejoin	the	Bridgeburners,	fine.	But	I	don't	want	any	recriminations	if	they
decide	otherwise.	I	trust	that's	clear.”
“Yes,	High	Fist.”
“And	with	Whiskeyjack	between	commissions,”	Dujek	continued	inexorably,
“he's	just	coming	along	for	the	ride,	if	you	follow	me,	Captain.”
Paran	grinned.	“I	do.”
“Now,	the	Black	Moranth	will	know	the	story	by	the	time	they	pick	you	up,	so
go	with	them.”
“Yes,	High	Fist.”
Dujek	growled,	“Questions,	Whiskeyjack?”
“No,”	the	grizzled	veteran	answered	glumly.
“All	right.	Hopefully,	we'll	talk	later.”
The	bones'	glow	died.
Captain	 Paran	 rounded	 on	 the	 soldiers.	 He	 studied	 each	 face.	 They	 were	 to
have	been	my	command.	I	could	not	have	done	better	anywhere.	“Very	well,”	he
said	gruffly.	“Who	is	ready	to	be	outlawed	and	counted	among	Dujek's	rebels?”
Trotts	 was	the	first	to	rise,	his	teeth	bared.	He	was	followed	by	Quick	Ben,
Hedge,	and	Mallet.
There	was	a	shocked	silence,	then	Kalam	nodded	at	Fiddler	and	cleared	his
throat.	“We're	with	you,	only	we're	not	going	with	you.	Me	and	Fiddler,	that	is.”
“Can	you	explain	that?”	Paran	asked	quietly.


Apsalar	spoke	up,	surprising	everyone.	“They'll	find	that	hard	to	do,	Captain.
And,	I	admit,	I'm	not	sure	what	they're	up	to,	but	they're	coming	with	me.	Back	to
the	Empire.	Home.”
With	an	uneasy	shrug,	Fiddler	rose	and	faced	Whiskeyjack.	“We	feel	we	owe
it	to	her,	sir,”	he	said.	He	looked	to	the	captain.	“And	we're	settled	on	it,	sir.	But
we're	coming	back,	if	we	can.”
Bemused,	 Whiskeyjack	 pushed	 himself	 painfully	 to	 his	 feet.	 As	 he	 turned	 to
face	 Paran,	 he	 froze.	 Behind	 the	 captain,	 Coll	 sat	 upright	 on	 the	 bed.	 “Um,”
Whiskeyjack	said,	gesturing.
Tension	burgeoned	in	the	room	once	again	as	everyone	swung	to	Coll.	Paran
stepped	forward	in	genuine	relief.
“Coll!	I'm—”	He	stopped	abruptly,	then	said	tonelessly,	“You've	been	awake
for	some	time,	I	see.”
Coll's	eyes	flicked	to	the	bones	stuck	in	the	tabletop,	then	returned	to	Paran.
“Heard	it	all,”	he	said.	“So	tell	me,	Paran,	do	you	soldiers	need	any	help	getting
out	of	Darujhistan?”
Rallick	stood	in	the	darkness	beneath	the	trees	at	the	edge	of	the	glade.	It	seemed
that	 his	 magic-deadening	 powers	 had	 proved	 insufficient	 after	 all.	 He'd	 been
driven	 from	 his	 seat	 by	 what	 had	 felt	 like	 a	 giant	 hand—a	 god's	 hand,	 sure	 and
powerful	 and	 unyielding.	 He'd	 watched	 in	 astonishment	 as	 a	 maze	 of	 roots
clambered	 swiftly	 across	 the	 clearing,	 headed	 toward	 the	 terrace.	 He'd	 heard	 a
shriek,	 then	 the	 roots	 returned,	 wrapped	 around	 a	 man-shaped	 .	 .	 .	 apparition,
which	the	roots	pulled	unceremoniously	into	the	earth.
Rallick	 had	 been	 filled	 suddenly	 with	 near-euphoria.	 He	 knew	 with
unaccountable	certainty,	that	what	grew	here	was	right,	and	just.
It	was	new,	young.	Even	now,	as	he	continued	watching	it,	he	saw	trembles	of
shaping	 ripple	 beneath	 its	 angular,	 geometric	 surfaces.	 What	 had	 been	 no	 more
than	a	tree	stump	less	than	an	hour	ago	was	now	a	house.	A	massive	door	lay	half
buried	in	shadows	beneath	an	arching	branch.	Vines	barred	shuttered	windows.	A
balcony	 hung	 above	 and	 to	 the	 left	 of	 the	 door,	 festooned	 with	 leaves	 and
creepers.	It	led	into	a	kind	of	tower,	turreted	above	the	second	story	and	shingled
to	 a	 gnarled	 peak.	 Another	 tower	 marked	 the	 house's	 front	 right	 flank,	 this	 one
stockier	 and	 windowless,	 its	 roof	 flat	 with	 jagged	 merlons	 lining	 the	 edge.	 He
suspected	 that	 this	 roof	 was	 a	 platform,	 with	 access	 through	 a	 trapdoor	 of	 some
kind.
The	glade	around	the	structure	had	changed,	too,	becoming	mounded	here	and


there	as	if	the	house's	yard	was	a	burial	ground.	Young,	scraggly	trees	ringed	each
oblong	mound,	each	growing	as	if	an	invisible	wind	twisted	them	away	from	the
humped,	grassy	earth.	The	roots	had	dragged	the	apparition	into	one	such	mound.
It	felt	right,	and	just.	These	two	words	echoed	in	the	assassin's	head,	with	an
appeal	that	wrapped	calm	around	his	heart.	He	almost	imagined	he	felt	an	affinity
with	this	child-house—as	if	it	knew	of	him	and	accepted	him.
He	knew	the	house	to	be	empty.	Another	sourceless	certainty.
Rallick	 continued	 watching,	 as	 the	 lines	 of	 the	 house	 grew	 firm,	 sharply
defined.	A	musty	smell	pervaded	the	area,	as	of	freshly	turned	earth.	The	assassin
felt	at	peace.
A	 moment	 later	 he	 heard	 thrashing	 behind	 him,	 and	 whirled	 to	 see	 Vorcan
stagger	 through	 the	 undergrowth.	 Her	 face	 was	 covered	 in	 blood	 from	 a	 gash	 to
her	brow,	and	she	nearly	collapsed	into	Rallick's	arms.
“Tiste	 Andii,”	 she	 gasped.	 “After	 me.	 Hunting.	 They	 seek	 to	 avenge	 a
murder!”
Rallick	 looked	 past	 her,	 and	 his	 eyes,	 long	 accustomed	 to	 the	 surrounding
darkness,	 detected	 silent	 movement	 among	 the	 trees,	 closing	 in.	 He	 hesitated,
gripping	 the	 now	 unconscious	 woman	 in	 his	 arms.	 Then	 he	 bent	 down,	 threw
Vorcan	over	one	shoulder,	turned,	and	ran	toward	the	house.
He	 knew	 that	 the	 door	 would	 open	 for	 him,	 and	 it	 did.	 Beyond	 was	 a	 dark
antechamber	and	an	archway	leading	into	a	hallway	running	from	side	to	side.	A
gust	of	warm,	sweet	air	flowed	over	Rallick,	and	he	entered	without	pause.
Korlat,	blood-kin	to	Serrat,	slowed	as	she	approached	the	strange	house.	The	door
had	closed	behind	their	quarry.	She	came	to	the	edge	of	the	clearing,	then	squatted
on	her	haunches.	Her	fellow	hunters	gathered	slowly	around	her.
Horult	hissed	angrily,	then	said,	“Have	you	summoned	our	lord,	Korlat?”
The	 woman	 shook	 her	 head.	 “I	 know	 of	 such	 creations	 from	 old,”	 she	 said.
“The	 Deadhouse	 of	 Malaz	 City,	 the	 Odhanhouse	 of	 Seven	 Cities	 .	 .	 .	 Azath
edieimarn,	Pillars	of	Innocence—this	door	will	not	open	to	us.”
“Yet	it	opened	to	them,”	Horult	said.
“There	 is	 precedence.	 The	 Azath	 choose	 their	 own.	 It	 was	 so	 with	 the
Deadhouse.	Two	 men	 were	 chosen:	 one	 who	 would	 be	 Emperor,	 the	 other	 who
would	accompany	him.	Kellanved	and	Dancer.”
“I	 sense	 its	 power,”	 Orfantal	 whispered.	 “Our	 lord	 could	 destroy	 it,	 now,
while	it's	still	young.”


“Yes,”	agreed	Korlat.	“He	could.”	She	was	silent	a	moment,	then	she	rose.	“I
am	blood-kin	to	the	fallen,”	she	said.
“You	are	blood-kin,”	the	others	intoned.
“The	quest	for	vengeance	is	ended,”	Korlat	said,	the	lines	around	her	almondshaped	 eyes	 tightening.	 “Our	 lord	 will	 not	 be	 summoned.	 Leave	 him	 to	 his
recovery.	 The	 Azath	 will	 not	 be	 touched,	 for	 it	 is	 new,	 a	 child.”	 Her	 eyes,	 soft
brown,	slowly	regarded	those	of	her	companions.	“The	Queen	of	Darkness	spoke
thus	of	Light	when	it	was	first	born:	‘It	is	new,	and	what	is	new	is	innocent,	and
what	is	innocent	is	precious.	Observe	this	child	of	wonder,	and	know	respect.'	”
Orfantal	 scowled.	 “Thus	 did	 Light	 survive,	 and	 so	 was	 Darkness	 destroyed,
the	 purity	 vanquished—and	 now	 you	 would	 have	 us	 flawed	 as	 our	 Queen	 was
flawed.	 Light	 became	 corrupted	 and	 destroyed	 our	 world,	 Korlat,	 or	 have	 you
forgotten?”
Korlat's	 smile	 was	 a	 sad	 one.	 “Cherish	 such	 flaws,	 dear	 brother,	 for	 our
Queen's	was	hope,	and	so	is	mine.	Now	we	must	leave.”
Kruppe's	 expression	 was	 benign	 as	 he	 watched	 Crokus	 approach,	 clearly
exhausted	 by	 this	 night	 of	 endless	 running.	 He	 nudged	 Murillio	 and	 fluttered	 his
fingers	in	the	young	thief's	direction.	“The	lad	returns	with	undue	haste,	yet	I	fear
such	sad	tidings	as	Kruppe	must	bring.”
“He's	had	a	rough	night	all	around,”	Murillio	commented.	He	leaned	against
the	gate's	support	wall	outside	the	Simtal	Estate.	The	streets	remained	empty,	the
citizens	shocked	numb	with	the	night's	horrors.
Kruppe	gestured	at	Moon's	Spawn,	now	a	league	to	the	west,	well	beyond	the
city's	walls.	“A	remarkable	contraption,	that.	However,	Kruppe	is	pleased	that	it
has	chosen	to	depart.	Imagine,	even	the	stars	blotted	out,	leaving	naught	but	dread
in	this	world.”
“I	need	a	drink,”	Murillio	muttered.
“Excellent	idea,”	Kruppe	said.	“Shall	we	await	the	lad,	however?”
The	 wait	 was	 not	 long.	 Crokus	 recognized	 them	 and	 slowed	 his	 frantic	 run.
“Apsalar's	been	kidnaped	by	the	Empire!”	he	shouted.	“I	need	help!”	He	wobbled
to	a	halt	before	Murillio.	“And	Rallick's	still	in	the	garden—”
“Tut,	tut,”	Kruppe	said.	“Easy,	lad.	Apsalar's	location	is	known	to	Kruppe.	As
for	 Rallick,	 well	 .	 .	 .”	 He	 faced	 the	 street	 and	 waved	 his	 arms	 expansively.
“Breathe	the	night	air,	Crokus!	A	new	year	has	begun!	Come,	let	us	walk,	the	three
of	us,	masters	of	Darujhistan!”	He	linked	arms	with	his	comrades	and	pulled	them


forward.
Murillio	 sighed.	 “Rallick's	 missing,”	 he	 explained.	 “There's	 some	 kind	 of
extraordinary	house	in	Coll's	garden	now.”
“Ah,	 so	 much	 unveiled	 in	 that	 single	 statement!”	 Kruppe	 leaned	 against
Crokus.	 “While,	 no	 doubt,	 the	 lad's	 secret,	 overriding	 concern	 at	 the	 moment
regards	the	fate	of	a	fair	young	maiden,	whose	life	was	saved	at	the	last	moment
by	 a	 noble	 son	 named	 Gorlas,	 of	 all	 things.	 Saved,	 Kruppe	 says,	 from	 a	 ton	 of
masonry	shrugged	off	a	wall.	'Twas	heroic,	indeed.	The	lass	near-swooned	with
satisfaction.”
“What	are	you	talking	about?”	Crokus	demanded.	“Who	was	saved?”
Murillio	snorted.	“I	think,	dear	Kruppe,	Master	of	Darujhistan,	you've	got	the
wrong	fair	maiden	in	mind.”
“She's	not	fair,	anyway,”	Crokus	asserted.
Kruppe's	chest	swelled	slightly.	“You	need	but	ask	the	gods,	lad,	and	they'll
tell	that	life	itself	isn't	fair.	Now,	are	you	interested	in	how	Lady	Simtal's	estate
has	just	this	night	become	Coll's	estate?	Or	is	your	mind	so	thoroughly	enamoured
of	 this	 new	 love	 of	 yours	 that	 even	 the	 fates	 of	 your	 dearest	 friends—Kruppe
included—yield	such	lack	of	interest?”
Crokus	bridled.	“Of	course	I'm	interested!”
“Then	the	story	begins,	as	always,	with	Kruppe	.	.	.”
Murillio	groaned.	“Thus	spake	the	Eel.”


Epilogue
	

I	have	seen	a	rumor	born
swathed	in	snug	mystery
left	lying	under	the	sun
in	the	hills	of	the	Gadrobi
	

where	the	sheep	have	scattered
on	wolf-laden	winds
and	the	shepherds	have	fled
a	whispering	of	sands
	

and	it	blinked	in	the	glare
a	heart	hardened	into	stone
while	the	shadow	of	the	Gates	of	Nowhere
crept	'cross	the	drifting	dust	of	home
	

I	have	seen	this	rumor	born
a	hundred	thousand	hunters	of	the	heart
in	a	city	bathed	in	blue	light	.	.	.
RUMOR	BORN	(I.	I-IV)
FISHER	(B.?)


	
The	 sun	 lit	 the	 morning	 mists	 into	 a	 shield	 of	 white	 over	 the	 lake.	 Down	 on	 the
beach	 a	 fisher-boat	 rocked	 in	 the	 freshening	 waves.	 Unmoored,	 it	 was	 moments
before	pulling	free	of	the	pebbles.
Mallet	helped	Whiskeyjack	to	a	dome	of	rock	above	the	beach,	where	they	sat.
The	 healer's	 gaze	 hesitated	 on	 the	 figure	 of	 Quick	 Ben,	 standing	 with	 shoulders
hunched	 and	 staring	 across	 the	 lake.	 He	 followed	 the	 wizard's	 gaze.	 Moon's
Spawn	hung	low	on	the	horizon,	a	gold	cast	to	its	ravaged	basalt.	Mallet	grunted.
“It's	heading	south.	I	wonder	what	that	means?”
Whiskeyjack	squinted	against	the	glare.	He	began	to	massage	his	temples.
“More	headaches?”	Mallet	asked.
“Not	so	bad,	lately,”	the	grizzled	man	said.
“It's	the	leg	that	worries	me,”	the	healer	muttered.	“I	need	to	work	on	it	some
more,	and	you	need	to	stay	off	it	awhile.”
Whiskeyjack	grinned.	“As	soon	as	there's	time,”	he	said.
Mallet	sighed.	“We'll	work	on	it	then.”
From	the	forested	slope	behind	them	Hedge	called,	“They're	coming	in!”
The	 healer	 helped	 Whiskeyjack	 stand.	 “Hood	 knows,”	 he	 whispered.	 “It
could've	been	a	lot	worse,	right,	Sergeant?”
Whiskeyjack	glared	across	the	lake.	“Three	lost	ain't	that	bad,	considering.”
A	pained	expression	crossed	Mallet's	face.	He	said	nothing.
“Let's	 move,”	 Whiskeyjack	 growled.	 “Captain	 Paran	 hates	 tardiness.	 And
maybe	the	Moranth	have	good	news.	Be	a	change,	wouldn't	it?”
From	 the	 beach,	 Quick	 Ben	 watched	 Mallet	 supporting	 his	 sergeant	 up	 the
slope.	 Was	 it	 time?	 he	 wondered.	 To	 stay	 alive	 in	 this	 business,	 no	 one	 could
afford	 to	 let	 up.	 The	 best	 plans	 work	 inside	 other	 plans,	 and	 when	 it's	 right	 to
feint,	feint	big.	Keeping	the	other	hand	hidden	is	the	hard	part.
The	wizard	felt	a	stab	of	regret.	No,	it	wasn't	time.	Give	the	old	man	a	chance
to	rest.	He	forced	himself	into	motion.	He	wouldn't	let	himself	look	back—never
a	good	idea.	The	scheme	was	hatched.
“Whiskeyjack's	 going	 to	 howl	 when	 he	 hears	 this	 one,”	 he	 whispered	 to
himself.


Captain	Paran	listened	to	the	others	on	the	beach	below,	but	made	no	move	to	join
them.	 Not	 yet.	 His	 brush	 with	 Ascendants	 seemed	 to	 have	 left	 him	 with	 a	 new
sensitivity—or	perhaps	it	was	the	Otataral	sword	scabbarded	at	his	side.	But	he
could	 sense	 her,	 now,	 already	 in	 her	 adolescence,	 plump	 as	 he	 knew	 she'd	 be,
smiling	with	her	heavy-lidded	eyes	deceptively	sleepy	as	she	studied	the	morning
sky.
I	will	come	to	you,	he	promised	her.	When	this	Pannion	Seer	and	his	cursed
holy	war	is	crushed,	I	will	come	to	you	then,	Tattersail.
“I	know.”
He	 stiffened.	 That	 voice	 in	 his	 head	 had	 not	 been	 his	 own.	 Or	 had	 it?	 He
waited,	 waited	 for	 more.	 Tattersail?	 Only	 silence	 answered	 him.	 Ah,	 my
imagination,	nothing	more.	To	think	you	would	call	up	enough	of	your	old	life,
to	find	the	feelings	you	once	held	for	me,	find	them	and	feel	them	once	again.	I
am	a	fool.
He	rose	from	his	crouch	at	Lorn's	graveside—a	mound	of	rocks—and	brushed
twigs	and	orange	pine	needles	from	his	clothing.	Look	at	me	now.	Agent	for	the
Adjunct	once,	now	a	soldier.	Finally,	a	soldier.	Smiling,	he	made	his	way	down
to	his	squad.
“Then	I	shall	await	the	coming	of	a	soldier.”
Paran	 stopped	 in	 his	 tracks,	 then,	 smiling,	 continued	 on.	 “Now	 that,”	 he
whispered,	“was	not	my	imagination.”
The	tradecraft	hugged	the	southern	shore,	making	for	Dhavran	and	the	river	mouth.
Kalam	 leaned	 on	 the	 gunwale,	 his	 gaze	 sweeping	 the	 north	 horizon's	 ragged,
snow-capped	 mountains.	 Near	 him	 stood	 another	 passenger,	 hardly	 memorable
and	disinclined	to	talk.
The	 only	 voices	 reaching	 the	 assassin	 came	 from	 Apsalar	 and	 Crokus.	 They
sounded	excited,	each	revolving	around	the	other	in	a	subtle	dance	that	was	yet	to
find	its	accompanying	words.	A	slow,	half	smile	quirked	Kalam's	mouth.	It'd	been
a	long	time	since	he'd	heard	such	innocence.
A	 moment	 later,	 Crokus	 appeared	 beside	 him,	 his	 uncle's	 demon	 familiar
clutching	 his	 shoulder.	 “Coll	 says	 that	 the	 Empire's	 capital,	 Unta,	 is	 as	 big	 as
Darujhistan.	Is	it?”
Kalam	shrugged.	“Maybe.	A	lot	uglier.	I	don't	expect	we'll	have	a	chance	to
visit	it,	though.	Itko	Kan	lies	on	the	south	coast,	while	Unta	is	on	Kartool	Bay,	the
northeast	coast.	Miss	Darujhistan	already?”


An	 expression	 of	 regret	 came	 over	 Crokus's	 face.	 He	 stared	 down	 into	 the
waves.	“Just	some	people	there,”	he	said.
The	 assassin	 grunted.	 “Know	 how	 you	 feel,	 Crokus.	 Hood's	 Breath,	 look	 at
Fiddler	back	there,	mooning	away	as	if	somebody	had	cut	off	one	of	his	arms	and
one	of	his	legs.”
“Apsalar	 still	 can't	 believe	 you'd	 go	 to	 all	 this	 trouble	 for	 her.	 She	 doesn't
remember	being	much	liked	in	your	squad.”
“Wasn't	her,	though,	was	it?	This	woman	here	is	a	fishergirl	from	some	twocopper	village.	And	she's	a	long	way	from	home.”
“She's	more	than	that,”	Crokus	muttered.	He	had	a	coin	in	his	hand	and	was
playing	with	it	absently.
Kalam	threw	the	boy	a	sharp	look.	“Really,”	he	said,	deadpan.
Crokus	nodded	affably.	He	held	up	the	coin	and	examined	the	face	on	it.	“Do
you	believe	in	luck,	Kalam?”
“No,”	the	assassin	growled.
Crokus	grinned	happily.	“Me	neither.”	He	flipped	the	coin	into	the	air.
They	 watched	 it	 plummet	 into	 the	 sea,	 flash	 once,	 then	 vanish	 beneath	 the
waves.
From	near	the	bow,	Circle	Breaker	slowly	nodded	to	himself.	The	Eel	would
be	delighted	with	the	news,	not	to	mention	greatly	relieved.	Then	he	returned	his
attention	to	the	west,	and	wondered	what	it	would	be	like,	no	longer	anonymous	to
the	world.
This	ends	the	first	Tale
of	the
Malazan
Book	of	the	Fallen


Glossary
Titles	and	Groups
First	 Sword	 of	 Empire:	 Malazan	 and	 T'lan	 Imass,	 a	 title	 denoting	 an	 Imperial
champion
Fist:	a	military	governor	in	the	Malazan	Empire
High	Fist:	a	commander	of	armies	in	a	Malazan	Campaign
Kron	T'lan	Imass:	the	name	of	the	clans	under	the	command	of	Kron
Logros	T'lan	Imass:	the	name	of	the	clans	under	the	command	of	Logros
The	Bridgeburners:	a	legendary	élite	division	in	the	Malaz	2nd	Army
The	 Crimson	 Guard:	 a	 famous	 mercenary	 company	 commanded	 by	 a	 deposed
prince
The	Pannion	Seer:	a	mysterious	prophet	ruling	the	lands	south	of	Darujhistan
The	Warlord:	the	name	for	Caladan	Brood
The	Claw:	the	covert	organization	of	the	Malazan	Empire

Peoples	(human	and	non-human)
Barghast	(non-human):	pastoral	nomadic	warrior	society
Daru:	cultural	group	sharing	citizenry	in	cities	in	northern	Genabackis
Gadrobi:	indigenous	cultural	group	in	central	Genabackis
Genabarii:	cultural	group	(and	language)	in	northwest	Genabackis
Forkrul	Assail	 (non-human):	 extinct	 mythical	 people	 (one	 of	 the	 Four	 Founding
Races)


Jaghut	(non-human):	extinct	mythical	people	(one	of	the	Four	Founding	Races)
K'chain	 Che'Malle	 (non-human):	 extinct	 mythical	 people	 (one	 of	 the	 Four
Founding	Races)
Moranth	(non-human):	highly	regimented	civilization	centered	in	Cloud	Forest
Rhivi:	pastoral	nomadic	society	in	central	plains	of	Genabackis
T'lan	Imass:	one	of	the	Four	Founding	Races,	now	immortal
Tiste	Andii	(non-human):	an	Elder	Race
Trell	 (non-human):	 pastoral	 nomadic	 warrior	 society	 in	 transition	 to
sedentarianism

Ascendants
Apsalar,	Lady	of	Thieves
Beru,	Lord	of	Storms
Burn,	Lady	of	the	Earth,	the	Sleeping	Goddess
Caladan	Brood,	the	Warlord
Cotillion/The	Rope	(the	Assassin	of	High	House	Shadow)
Dessembrae,	Lord	of	Tragedy
D'rek,	the	Worm	of	Autumn	(sometimes	the	Queen	of	Disease,	see	Poliel)
Fanderay,	She-Wolf	of	Winter
Fener,	the	Boar	(see	also	Tennerock)
Gedderone,	Lady	of	Spring	and	Rebirth
Great	Ravens,	ravens	sustained	by	magic
Hood	(King	of	High	House	Death)
Jhess,	Queen	of	Weaving
Kallor,	the	High	King
K'rul,	Elder	God
Mowri,	Lady	of	Beggars,	Slaves,	and	Serfs
Nerruse,	Lady	of	Calm	Seas	and	Fair	Wind
Oponn,	Twin	Jesters	of	Chance
Osserc,	Lord	of	the	Sky
Poliel,	Mistress	of	Pestilence


Queen	of	Dreams	(Queen	of	High	House	Life)
Shadowthrone/Ammanas	(King	of	High	House	Shadow)
Shedenul/Soliel,	Lady	of	Health
Soliel,	Mistress	of	Healing
Tennerock/Fener,	the	Boar	of	Five	Tusks
The	Crippled	God,	King	of	Chains
The	Hounds	(of	High	House	Shadow)
Togg	(see	Fanderay),	the	Wolf	of	Winter
Trake/Treach,	the	Tiger	of	Summer	and	Battle
Son	of	Darkness/Moon's	Lord/Anomander	Rake	(Knight	of	High	House	Dark)
Treach,	First	Hero

The	World	of	Sorcery
THE	WARRENS	(THE	PATHS—THOSE	WARRENS	ACCESSIBLE	TO	HUMANS)
Denul:	the	Path	of	Healing
D'riss:	the	Path	of	Stone
Hood's	Path:	the	Path	of	Death
Meanas:	the	Path	of	Shadow	and	Illusion
Ruse:	the	Path	of	the	Sea
Rashan:	the	Path	of	Darkness
Serc:	the	Path	of	the	Sky
Tennes:	the	Path	of	the	Land
Thyr:	the	Path	of	Light
THE	ELDER	WARRENS
Kurald	Galain:	the	Tiste	Andii	Warren	of	Darkness
Tellann:	the	T'lan	Imass	Warren
Omtose	Phellack:	the	Jaghut	Warren
Starvald	Demelain:	the	Tiam	Warren,	the	First	Warren


THE	DECK	OF	DRAGONS—THE	FATID	(AND	ASSOCIATED	ASCENDANTS)
High	House	Life
King
Queen	(Queen	of	Dreams)
Champion
Priest
Herald
Soldier
Weaver
Mason
Virgin
High	House	Death
King	(Hood)
Queen
Knight	(once	Dassem	Ultor)
Magi
Herald
Soldier
Spinner
Mason
Virgin
High	House	Light
King
Queen
Champion
Priest
Captain
Soldier
Seamstress
Builder
Maiden
High	House	Dark
King


Queen
Knight	(Son	of	Darkness)
Magi
Captain
Soldier
Weaver
Mason
Wife
High	House	Shadow
King	(Shadowthrone/Ammanas)
Queen
Assassin	(the	Rope/Cotillion)
Magi
Hound
Unaligned
Oponn	(the	Jesters	of	Chance)
Obilisk	(Burn)
Crown
Sceptre
Orb
Throne
	

Bonecaster:	a	shaman	of	the	T'lan	Imass
Chance:	a	sword	dedicated	to	Oponn
D'ivers:	a	higher	order	of	shape-shifting
Dragnipur:	a	sword	used	by	Anomander	Rake
Finnest:	an	object	used	as	a	repository	of	power	by	a	Jaghut
Otataral:	a	magic-negating	reddish	ore	mined	from	the	Tanno	Hills,	Seven	Cities
Soletaken:	an	order	of	shape-shifting
The	T'orrud	Cabal:	the	Cabal	of	Darujhistan
The	Tyrant	Kings:	the	ancient	rulers	of	Darujhistan
Warrens	of	Chaos:	the	miasmic	paths	between	the	Warrens


Place	Names
Apple	A	Genabackan	Free	City
Blackdog	Forest	 On	 the	 continent	 of	 Genabackis,	 large	 boreal	 forest	 on	 shield
bedrock,	 site	 of	 major	 battles	 between	 the	 Malazan	 Empire	 and	 the	 armies	 of
Caladan	Brood	and	the	Crimson	Guard	during	the	First	Campaigns
Cloud	Forest	Home	of	the	Moranth,	situated	on	the	northwest	coast	of	Genabackis
Darujhistan	 Legendary	 city	 on	 Genabackis,	 largest	 and	 most	 influential	 of	 the
Free	Cities,	situated	on	the	south	shore	of	Lake	Azur	and	peopled	mainly	by	Daru
and	 Gadrobi	 populations;	 the	 only	 known	 city	 to	 use	 natural	 gas	 as	 an	 energy
source
Dhavran	A	city	west	of	Darujhistan
Free	Cities	Mercantile	alliance	of	city-states	in	northern	Genabackis,	all	but	one
of	which	has	since	been	conquered	by	the	Malazan	Empire
Gadrobi	 Hills	 Hill	 range	 east	 of	 Darujhistan,	 sparsely	 inhabited	 at	 present
although	once	the	homeland	of	the	Gadrobi	people
Garalt	A	Genabackan	Free	City
Genabaris	 Large	 Malazan-held	 city	 on	 northwest	 coast	 of	 Genabackis	 and
principal	debarkation	point	during	the	campaigns
Gerrom	A	small	rural	town	in	Itko	Kan
Graydog	A	Genabackan	city
Itko	Kan	Province	on	the	continent	of	Quon	Tali,	within	the	Malazan	Empire
Kan	The	capital	city	of	Itko	Kan
Laederon	Plateau	Northern	tundra	of	Genabackis
Lest	City-state	to	the	east	of	Darujhistan
Malaz	City	Island	city	and	home	of	the	founding	Emperor	of	the	Malazan	Empire
Malazan	Empire	An	empire	originating	on	Malaz	Island	off	the	coast	of	the	Quon
Tali	 continent.	 The	 original	 founder	 was	 the	 Emperor	 Kellanved	 and	 his	 cohort
Dancer,	 both	 of	 whom	 were	 assassinated	 by	 Laseen,	 the	 present	 Empress.	 The
Empire	spans	Quon	Tali,	the	subcontinent	of	Falar,	Seven	Cities,	and	the	coasts	of
north	Genabackis.	Additional	forays	include	the	continents	of	Stratem	and	Korel
Meningalle	Ocean	Genabackan	name	for	Seeker's	Deep
Mock's	 Hold	 A	 Keep	 overlooking	 Malaz	 City	 where	 the	 Emperor	 and	 Dancer
were	assassinated


Moon's	Spawn	A	floating	mountain	of	black	basalt	inside	which	is	a	city,	home	of
the	Son	of	Darkness	and	the	Tiste	Andii
Moranth	Mountains	The	mountain	range	encircling	Cloud	Forest
Mott	A	Genabackan	city
Mouse	Quarter	An	ill-fated	district	in	Malaz	City
Nathilog	Malazan-held	city	in	northwest	Genabackis
Nisst	A	Genabackan	Free	City
One	Eye	Cat	A	Genabackan	Free	City
Pale	Free	City	on	Genabackis,	recently	conquered	by	the	Malazan	Empire
Pannion	Domin	Emerging	empire	in	southeast	 Genabackis,	ruled	by	the	Pannion
Seer
Porule	A	Genabackan	Free	City
Quon	Tali	Home	continent	of	the	Malazan	Empire
Rhivi	Plain	Central	plain,	north	Genabackis
Seeker's	Deep	Malazan	name	for	Meningalle	Ocean
Setta	City	on	eastern	coast	of	Genabackis
Tahlyn	Mountains	Mountain	range	on	north	side	of	Lake	Azur
Tulips	A	Genabackan	Free	City
Unta	Capital	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	on	Quon	Tali

Darujhistan	and	Environs
Despot's	Barbican:	an	ancient	edifice	and	remnant	of	the	Age	of	Tyrants
Hinter's	Tower:	an	abandoned	sorcerer's	tower	in	the	Noble	District
Jammit's	Worry:	the	east	road
K'rul's	Belfry/Temple:	an	abandoned	temple	in	the	Noble	District
Phoenix	Inn:	a	popular	haunt	in	the	Daru	District
Quip's	Bar:	a	ramshackle	bar	in	the	Lakefront	District
The	Estates	(the	Houses)
The	Old	Palace	(Majesty	Hall):	present	site	of	the	Council
Worrytown:	the	slum	outside	the	wall	on	Jammit's	Worry


