REAPER’S	GALE
BOOK	SEVEN	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	the	characters,	organizations,	and	events
portrayed	in	this	novel	are	either	products	of	the	author ’s	imagination	or	are
used	fictitiously.
REAPER’S	GALE:	BOOK	SEVEN	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE
FALLEN
Copyright	©	2007	by	Steven	Erikson
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	in	2007	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers.
All	rights	reserved.
Maps	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor ® 	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
eISBN:	978-1-4299-2588-4


To	Glen	Cook


Acknowledgments

Thank	you	to	my	advance	readers:	Rick,	Chris,	Mark,	Bill,	Hazel	and	Bowen.
Thanks	also	to	the	folks	at	Black	Stilt	Cafe,	Ambiente	Cafe	and	Cafe	Teatro	in
Victoria	for	the	table,	the	coffees	and	AC	access.	And	for	all	the	other	support
that	keeps	me	afloat,	thanks	to	Clare,	Simon	at	Transworld,	Howard	and
Patrick,	the	scary	mob	at	Malazanempire.com,	David	and	Anne,	Peter	and
Nicky	Crowther.



Dramatis	Personae

THE	LETHERII
Tehol	Beddict,	a	destitute	resident
Bugg,	Tehol’s	manservant
Shurq	Elalle,	an	itinerant	pirate
Skorgen	Kaban,	Shurq’s	First	Mate
Ublala	Pung,	an	unemployed	Tarthenal	half-blood
Ormly,	a	member	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Rucket,	Chief	Investigator	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild
Karos	Invictad,	Invigilator	of	the	Patriotists
Tanal	Yathvanar,	Karos’s	personal	assistant
Rautos	Hivanar,	Master	of	the	Liberty	Consign	of	Merchants
Venitt	Sathad,	Rautos’s	principal	field	agent
Triban	Gnol,	Chancellor	of	the	New	Empire
Nisall,	First	Concubine	of	the	old	emperor
Janall,	deposed	empress
Turudal	Brizad,	ex-consort
Janath	Anar,	a	political	prisoner
Sirryn	Kanar,	a	palace	guard
Brullyg	(Shake),	nominal	Ruler	of	Second	Maiden	Fort
Yedan	Derryg	(The	Watch)
Orbyn	‘Truthfinder’,	Section	Commander	of	the	Patriotists
Letur	Anict,	Factor	in	Drene
Bivatt,	Atri-Preda	of	the	Eastern	Army
Feather	Witch,	Letherii	slave	to	Uruth
THE	TISTE	EDUR
Rhulad,	ruler	of	the	New	Empire
Hannan	Mosag,	Imperial	Ceda
Uruth,	Matriarch	of	the	Emperor	and	wife	to	Tomad	Sengar
K’risnan,	warlocks	of	the	Emperor
Bruthen	Trana,	Edur	in	palace


Brohl	Handar,	Overseer	of	the	East	in	Drene
ARRIVING	WITH	THE	EDUR	FLEET
Yan	Tovis	(Twilight),	Atri-Preda	of	the	Letherii	Army
Varat	Taun,	her	lieutenant
Taralack	Veed,	a	Gral	agent	of	the	Nameless	Ones
Icarium,	Taralack’s	weapon
Hanradi	Khalag,	a	warlock	of	the	Tiste	Edur
Tomad	Sengar,	Patriarch	of	the	Emperor
Samar	Dev,	a	scholar	and	witch	from	Seven	Cities
Karsa	Orlong,	a	Toblakai	warrior
Taxilian,	an	interpreter
THE	AWL’DAN
Redmask,	an	exile	who	returned
Masarch,	a	warrior	of	the	Renfayar	Clan
Hadralt,	War	Leader	of	Ganetok	Clan
Sag’Churok,	a	bodyguard	to	Redmask
Gunth	Mach,	a	bodyguard	to	Redmask
Torrent,	a	Copperface
Natarkas,	a	Copperface
THE	HUNTED
Seren	Pedac,	a	Letherii	Acquitor
Fear	Sengar,	a	Tiste	Edur
Kettle,	a	Letherii	orphan
Udinaas,	a	Letherii	runaway	slave
Wither,	a	shadow	wraith
Silchas	Ruin,	a	Tiste	Andii	Ascendant
THE	REFUGIUM
Ulshun	Pral,	an	Imass
Rud	Elalle,	an	adopted	foundling
Hostille	Rator,	a	T’lan	Imass
Til’aras	Benok,	a	T’lan	Imass
Gr’istanas	Ish’ilm,	a	T’lan	Imass
THE	MALAZANS


Bonehunters
Tavore	Paran,	Commander	of	the	Bonehunters
Lostara	Yil,	Second	to	Tavore
Keneb,	Fist	in	the	Bonehunters
Blistig,	Fist	in	the	Bonehunters
Faradan	Sort,	Captain
Madan’tul	Rada,	Faradan	Sort’s	lieutenant
Grub,	adopted	son	of	Keneb
Beak,	mage	seconded	to	Captain	Faradan	Sort
8th	Legion,	9th	Company
4th	Squad
Fiddler,	sergeant
Tarr,	corporal
Koryk,	half-blood	Seti,	marine
Smiles,	Kanese,	marine
Cuttle,	sapper
Bottle,	squad	mage
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	soldier
5th	Squad
Gesler,	sergeant
Stormy,	corporal
Sands,	marine
Shortnose,	heavy	infantry
Flashwit,	heavy	infantry
Uru	Hela,	heavy	infantry
Mayfly,	heavy	infantry
7th	Squad
Cord,	sergeant
Shard,	corporal
Limp,	marine
Ebron,	squad	mage
Crump	(Jamber	Bole),	sapper
Sinn,	mage


8th	Squad
Hellian,	sergeant
Touchy,	corporal	#1
Brethless,	corporal	#2
Balgrid,	squad	mage
Tavos	Pond,	marine
Maybe,	sapper
Lutes,	squad	healer
9th	Squad
Balm,	sergeant
Deadsmell,	corporal
Throatslitter,	marine
Galt,	marine
Lobe,	marine
Widdershins,	squad	mage
12th	Squad
Thom	Tissy,	sergeant
Tulip,	corporal
Ramp,	heavy	infantry
Jibb,	medium	infantry
Gullstream,	medium	infantry
Mudslinger,	medium	infantry
Bellig	Harn,	heavy	infantry
13th	Squad
Urb,	sergeant
Reem,	corporal
Masan	Gilani,	marine
Bowl,	heavy	infantry
Hanno,	heavy	infantry
Saltlick,	heavy	infantry
Scant,	heavy	infantry
8th	Legion,	3rd	Company
4th	Squad


Pravalak	Rim,	corporal
Honey,	sapper
Strap	Mull,	sapper
Shoaly,	heavy	infantry
Lookback,	heavy	infantry
5th	Squad
Badan	Gruk,	sergeant
Ruffle,	marine
Skim,	marine
Nep	Furrow,	mage
Reliko,	heavy	infantry
Vastly	Blank,	heavy	infantry
10th	Squad
Primly,	sergeant
Hunt,	corporal
Mulvan	Dreader,	mage
Neller,	sapper
Skulldeath,	marine
Drawfirst,	heavy	infantry
OTHERS
Banaschar,	the	Last	Priest	of	D’rek
Withal,	a	Meckros	Swordsmith
Sandalath	Drukorlat,	a	Tiste	Andii,	Withal’s	wife
Nimander	Golit,	a	Tiste	Andii,	offspring	of	Anomander	Rake
Phaed,	a	Tiste	Andii,	offspring	of	Anomander	Rake
Curdle,	a	possessed	skeletal	reptile
Telorast,	a	possessed	skeletal	reptile
Onrack,	a	T’lan	Imass,	unbound
Trull	Sengar,	a	Tiste	Edur	renegade
Ben	Adaephon	Delat,	a	wizard
Menandore,	a	Soletaken	(Sister	of	Dawn)
Sheltatha	Lore,	a	Soletaken	(Sister	of	Dusk)
Sukul	Ankhadu,	a	Soletaken	(Sister	Dapple)
Kilmandaros,	an	Elder	Goddess
Clip,	a	Tiste	Andii


Cotillion,	The	Rope,	Patron	God	of	Assassins
Emroth,	a	broken	T’lan	Imass
Hedge,	a	ghost
Old	Hunch	Arbat,	Tarthenal
Pithy,	an	ex-con
Brevity,	an	ex-con
Pully,	a	Shake	witch
Skwish,	a	Shake	witch


Prologue

The	Elder	Warren	of	Kurald	Emurlahn
The	Age	of	Sundering
In	a	landscape	torn	with	grief,	the	carcasses	of	six	dragons	lay	strewn	in	a
ragged	row	reaching	a	thousand	or	more	paces	across	the	plain,	flesh	split
apart,	broken	bones	jutting,	jaws	gaping	and	eyes	brittle-dry.	Where	their
blood	had	spilled	out	onto	the	ground	wraiths	had	gathered	like	flies	to	sap	and
were	now	ensnared,	the	ghosts	writhing	and	voicing	hollow	cries	of	despair,	as
the	blood	darkened,	fusing	with	the	lifeless	soil;	and,	when	at	last	the	substance
grew	indurate,	hardening	into	glassy	stone,	those	ghosts	were	doomed	to	an
eternity	trapped	within	that	murky	prison.
The	naked	creature	that	traversed	the	rough	path	formed	by	the	fallen
dragons	was	a	match	to	their	mass,	yet	bound	to	the	earth,	and	it	walked	on	two
bowed	legs,	the	thighs	thick	as	thousand-year-old	trees.	The	width	of	its
shoulders	was	equal	to	the	length	of	a	Tartheno	Toblakai’s	height;	from	a	thick
neck	hidden	beneath	a	mane	of	glossy	black	hair,	the	frontal	portion	of	the
head	was	thrust	forward	–	brow,	cheekbones	and	jaw,	and	its	deep-set	eyes
revealing	black	pupils	surrounded	in	opalescent	white.	The	huge	arms	were
disproportionately	long,	the	enormous	hands	almost	scraping	the	ground.	Its
breasts	were	large,	pendulous	and	pale.	As	it	strode	past	the	battered,	rotting
carcasses,	the	motion	of	its	gait	was	strangely	fluid,	not	at	all	lumbering,	and
each	limb	was	revealed	to	possess	extra	joints.
Skin	the	hue	of	sun-bleached	bone,	darkening	to	veined	red	at	the	ends	of
the	creature’s	arms,	bruises	surrounding	the	knuckles,	a	latticework	of	cracked
flesh	exposing	the	bone	here	and	there.	The	hands	had	seen	damage,	the	result
of	delivering	devastating	blows.
It	paused	to	tilt	its	head,	upward,	and	watched	as	three	dragons	sailed	the
air	high	amidst	the	roiling	clouds,	appearing	then	disappearing	in	the	smoke	of
the	dying	realm.
The	earthbound	creature’s	hands	twitched,	and	a	low	growl	emerged	from
deep	in	its	throat.


After	a	long	moment,	it	resumed	its	journey.
Beyond	the	last	of	the	dead	dragons,	to	a	place	where	rose	a	ridge	of	hills,
the	largest	of	these	cleft	through	as	if	a	giant	claw	had	gouged	out	the	heart	of
the	rise,	and	in	that	crevasse	raged	a	rent,	a	tear	in	space	that	bled	power	in
nacreous	streams.	The	malice	of	that	energy	was	evident	in	the	manner	in
which	it	devoured	the	sides	of	the	fissure,	eating	like	acid	into	the	rocks	and
boulders	of	the	ancient	berm.
The	rent	would	soon	close,	and	the	one	who	had	last	passed	through	had
sought	to	seal	the	gate	behind	him.	But	such	healing	could	never	be	done	in
haste,	and	this	wound	bled	anew.
Ignoring	the	virulence	pouring	from	the	rent,	the	creature	strode	closer.	At
the	threshold	it	paused	again	and	turned	to	look	back	the	way	it	had	come.
Draconean	blood	hardening	into	stone,	horizontal	sheets	of	the	substance,
already	beginning	to	separate	from	the	surrounding	earth,	to	lift	up	on	edge,
forming	strange,	disarticulated	walls.	Some	then	began	sinking,	vanishing
from	this	realm.	Falling	through	world	after	world.	To	reappear,	finally,	solid
and	impermeable,	in	other	realms,	depending	on	the	blood’s	aspect,	and	these
were	laws	that	could	not	be	challenged.	Starvald	Demelain,	the	blood	of
dragons	and	the	death	of	blood.
In	the	distance	behind	the	creature,	Kurald	Emurlahn,	the	Realm	of
Shadows,	the	first	realm	born	of	the	conjoining	of	Dark	and	Light,	convulsed
in	its	death-throes.	Far	away,	the	civil	wars	still	raged	on,	whilst	in	other	areas
the	fragmenting	had	already	begun,	vast	sections	of	this	world’s	fabric	torn
away,	disconnected	and	lost	and	abandoned	–	to	either	heal	round	themselves,
or	die.	Yet	interlopers	still	arrived	here,	like	scavengers	gathered	round	a
fallen	leviathan,	eagerly	tearing	free	their	own	private	pieces	of	the	realm.
Destroying	each	other	in	fierce	battles	over	the	scraps.
It	had	not	been	imagined	–	by	anyone	–	that	an	entire	realm	could	die	in
such	a	manner.	That	the	vicious	acts	of	its	inhabitants	could	destroy…
everything.	Worlds	live	on,	had	been	the	belief	–	the	assumption	–	regardless
of	the	activities	of	those	who	dwelt	upon	them.	Torn	flesh	heals,	the	sky	clears,
and	something	new	crawls	from	the	briny	muck.
But	not	this	time.
Too	many	powers,	too	many	betrayals,	too	vast	and	all-consuming	the
crimes.
The	creature	faced	the	gate	once	more.
Then	Kilmandaros,	the	Elder	Goddess,	strode	through.


The	ruined	K’Chain	Che’Malle	demesne
after	the	fall	of	Silchas	Ruin
Trees	were	exploding	in	the	bitter	cold	that	descended	like	a	shroud,	invisible
yet	palpable,	upon	this	racked,	devastated	forest.
Gothos	had	no	difficulty	following	the	path	of	the	battle,	the	successive
clashes	of	two	Elder	Gods	warring	with	the	Soletaken	dragon,	and	as	the
Jaghut	traversed	its	mangled	length	he	brought	with	him	the	brutal	chill	of
Omtose	Phellack,	the	Warren	of	Ice.	Sealing	the	deal,	as	you	asked	of	me,	Mael.
Locking	the	truth	in	place,	to	make	it	more	than	memory.	Until	the	day	that
witnesses	the	shattering	of	Omtose	Phellack	itself.	Gothos	wondered,	idly,	if
there	had	ever	been	a	time	when	he	believed	that	such	a	shattering	would	not
come	to	pass.	That	the	Jaghut,	in	all	their	perfected	brilliance,	were	unique,
triumphant	in	eternal	domination.	A	civilization	immortal,	when	all	others
were	doomed.
Well,	it	was	possible.	He	had	once	believed	that	all	of	existence	was	under
the	benign	control	of	a	caring	omnipotence,	after	all.	And	crickets	exist	to	sing
us	to	sleep,	too.	There	was	no	telling	what	other	foolishness	might	have	crept
into	his	young,	naive	brain	all	those	millennia	ago.
No	longer,	of	course.	Things	end.	Species	die	out.	Faith	in	anything	else
was	a	conceit,	the	product	of	unchained	ego,	the	curse	of	supreme	selfimportance.
So	what	do	I	now	believe?
He	would	not	permit	himself	a	melodramatic	laugh	in	answer	to	that
question.	What	was	the	point?	There	was	no-one	nearby	who	might	appreciate
it.	Including	himself.	Yes,	I	am	cursed	to	live	with	my	own	company.
It’s	a	private	curse.
The	best	kind.
He	ascended	a	broken,	fractured	rise,	some	violent	uplift	of	bedrock,
where	a	vast	fissure	had	opened,	its	vertical	sides	already	glistening	with	frost
when	Gothos	came	to	the	edge	and	looked	down.	Somewhere	in	the	darkness
below,	two	voices	were	raised	in	argument.
Gothos	smiled.
He	opened	his	warren,	made	use	of	a	sliver	of	power	to	fashion	a	slow,
controlled	descent	towards	the	gloomy	base	of	the	crevasse.
As	Gothos	neared,	the	two	voices	ceased,	leaving	only	a	rasping,	hissing
sound,	pulsating	–	the	drawing	of	breath	on	waves	of	pain	–	and	the	Jaghut
heard	the	slithering	of	scales	on	stone,	slightly	off	to	one	side.
He	alighted	atop	broken	shards	of	rock,	a	few	paces	from	where	stood


Mael,	and,	ten	paces	beyond	him,	the	huge	form	of	Kilmandaros,	her	skin
vaguely	luminescent	–	in	a	sickly	sort	of	way	–	standing	with	hands	closed	into
fists,	a	belligerent	cast	to	her	brutal	mien.
Scabandari,	the	Soletaken	dragon,	had	been	driven	into	a	hollow	in	the
cliff-side	and	now	crouched,	splintered	ribs	no	doubt	making	every	breath	an
ordeal	of	agony.	One	wing	was	shattered,	half	torn	away.	A	hind	limb	was
clearly	broken,	bones	punched	through	flesh.	Its	flight	was	at	an	end.
The	two	Elders	were	now	eyeing	Gothos,	who	strode	forward,	then	spoke.
‘I	am	always	delighted,’	he	said,	‘when	a	betrayer	is	in	turn	betrayed.	In	this
instance,	betrayed	by	his	own	stupidity.	Which	is	even	more	delightful.’
Mael,	Elder	God	of	the	Seas,	asked,	‘The	Ritual…are	you	done,	Gothos?’
‘More	or	less.’	The	Jaghut	fixed	his	gaze	on	Kilmandaros.	‘Elder	Goddess.
Your	children	in	this	realm	have	lost	their	way.’
The	huge	bestial	woman	shrugged,	and	said	in	a	faint,	melodic	voice,
‘They’re	always	losing	their	way,	Jaghut.’
‘Well,	why	don’t	you	do	something	about	it?’
‘Why	don’t	you?’
One	thin	brow	lifted,	then	Gothos	bared	his	tusks	in	a	smile.	‘Is	that	an
invitation,	Kilmandaros?’
She	looked	over	at	the	dragon.	‘I	have	no	time	for	this.	I	need	to	return	to
Kurald	Emurlahn.	I	will	kill	him	now—’	and	she	stepped	closer.
‘You	must	not,’	Mael	said.
Kilmandaros	faced	him,	huge	hands	opening	then	closing	again	into	fists.
‘So	you	keep	saying,	you	boiled	crab.’
Shrugging,	Mael	turned	to	Gothos.	‘Explain	it	to	her,	please.’
‘How	many	debts	do	you	wish	to	owe	me?’	the	Jaghut	asked	him.
‘Oh	now	really,	Gothos!’
‘Very	well.	Kilmandaros.	Within	the	Ritual	that	now	descends	upon	this
land,	upon	the	battlefields	and	these	ugly	forests,	death	itself	is	denied.	Should
you	kill	the	Tiste	Edur	here,	his	soul	will	be	unleashed	from	his	flesh,	but	it
will	remain,	only	marginally	reduced	in	power.’
‘I	mean	to	kill	him,’	Kilmandaros	said	in	her	soft	voice.
‘Then,’	Gothos’s	smile	broadened,	‘you	will	need	me.’
Mael	snorted.
‘Why	do	I	need	you?’	Kilmandaros	asked	the	Jaghut.
He	shrugged.	‘A	Finnest	must	be	prepared.	To	house,	to	imprison,	this
Soletaken’s	soul.’
‘Very	well,	then	make	one.’
‘As	a	favour	to	you	both?	I	think	not,	Elder	Goddess.	No,	alas,	as	with


Mael	here,	you	must	acknowledge	a	debt.	To	me.’
‘I	have	a	better	idea,’	Kilmandaros	said.	‘I	crush	your	skull	between	a
finger	and	thumb,	then	I	push	your	carcass	down	Scabandari’s	throat,	so	that	he
suffocates	on	your	pompous	self.	This	seems	a	fitting	demise	for	the	both	of
you.’
‘Goddess,	you	have	grown	bitter	and	crabby	in	your	old	age,’	Gothos	said.
‘It	is	no	surprise,’	she	replied.	‘I	made	the	mistake	of	trying	to	save	Kurald
Emurlahn.’
‘Why	bother?’	Mael	asked	her.
Kilmandaros	bared	jagged	teeth.	‘The	precedent	is…unwelcome.	You	go
bury	your	head	in	the	sands	again,	Mael,	but	I	warn	you,	the	death	of	one	realm
is	a	promise	to	every	other	realm.’
‘As	you	say,’	the	Elder	God	said	after	a	moment.	‘And	I	do	concede	that
possibility.	In	any	case,	Gothos	demands	recompense.’
The	fists	unclenched,	then	clenched	again.	‘Very	well.	Now,	Jaghut,	fashion
a	Finnest.’
‘This	will	do,’	Gothos	said,	drawing	an	object	into	view	from	a	tear	in	his
ragged	shirt.
The	two	Elders	stared	at	it	for	a	time,	then	Mael	grunted.	‘Yes,	I	see,	now.
Rather	curious	choice,	Gothos.’
‘The	only	kind	I	make,’	the	Jaghut	replied.	‘Go	on,	then,	Kilmandaros,
proceed	with	your	subtle	conclusion	to	the	Soletaken’s	pathetic	existence.’
The	dragon	hissed,	screamed	in	rage	and	fear	as	the	Elder	Goddess
advanced.
When	she	drove	a	fist	into	Scabandari’s	skull,	centred	on	the	ridge	between
and	above	the	draconic	eyes,	the	crack	of	the	thick	bone	rang	like	a	dirge	down
the	length	of	the	crevasse,	and	with	the	impact	blood	spurted	from	the
Goddess’s	knuckles.
The	dragon’s	broken	head	thumped	heavily	onto	the	broken	bedrock,
fluids	spilling	out	from	beneath	the	sagging	body.
Kilmandaros	wheeled	to	face	Gothos.
He	nodded.	‘I	have	the	poor	bastard.’
Mael	stepped	towards	the	Jaghut,	holding	out	a	hand.	‘I	will	take	the	Finnest
then—’
‘No.’
Both	Elders	now	faced	Gothos,	who	smiled	once	more.	‘Repayment	of	the
debt.	For	each	of	you.	I	claim	the	Finnest,	the	soul	of	Scabandari,	for	myself.
Nothing	remains	between	us,	now.	Are	you	not	pleased?’
‘What	do	you	intend	to	do	with	it?’	Mael	demanded.


‘I	have	not	yet	decided,	but	I	assure	you,	it	will	be	most	curiously
unpleasant.’
Kilmandaros	made	fists	again	with	her	hands	and	half	raised	them.	‘I	am
tempted,	Jaghut,	to	send	my	children	after	you.’
‘Too	bad	they’ve	lost	their	way,	then.’
Neither	Elder	said	another	word	as	Gothos	departed	from	the	fissure.	It
always	pleased	him,	outwitting	doddering	old	wrecks	and	all	their	hoary,	brutal
power.	Well,	a	momentary	pleasure,	in	any	case.
The	best	kind.

Upon	her	return	to	the	rent,	Kilmandaros	found	another	figure	standing	before
it.	Black-cloaked,	white-haired.	An	expression	of	arched	contemplation,	fixed
upon	the	torn	fissure.
About	to	enter	the	gate,	or	waiting	for	her?	The	Elder	Goddess	scowled.
‘You	are	not	welcome	in	Kurald	Emurlahn,’	she	said.
Anomandaris	Purake	settled	cool	eyes	upon	the	monstrous	creature.	‘Do
you	imagine	I	contemplate	claiming	the	throne	for	myself?’
‘You	would	not	be	the	first.’
He	faced	the	rent	again.	‘You	are	besieged,	Kilmandaros,	and	Edgewalker
is	committed	elsewhere.	I	offer	you	my	help.’
‘With	you,	Tiste	Andii,	my	trust	is	not	easily	earned.’
‘Unjustified,’	he	replied.	‘Unlike	many	others	of	my	kind,	I	accept	that	the
rewards	of	betrayal	are	never	sufficient	to	overwhelm	the	cost.	There	are
Soletaken	now,	in	addition	to	feral	dragons,	warring	in	Kurald	Emurlahn.’
‘Where	is	Osserc?’	the	Elder	Goddess	asked.	‘Mael	informed	me	that	he
—’
‘Was	planning	to	get	in	my	way	again?	Osserc	imagined	I	would	take	part
in	slaying	Scabandari.	Why	should	I?	You	and	Mael	were	more	than	enough.’
He	grunted	then.	‘I	can	picture	Osserc,	circling	round	and	round.	Looking	for
me.	Idiot.’
‘And	Scabandari’s	betrayal	of	your	brother?	You	have	no	desire	to	avenge
that?’
Anomandaris	glanced	at	her,	then	gave	her	a	faint	smile.	‘The	rewards	of
betrayal.	The	cost	to	Scabandari	proved	high,	didn’t	it?	As	for	Silchas,	well,
even	the	Azath	do	not	last	for	ever.	I	almost	envy	him	his	new-found	isolation
from	all	that	will	afflict	us	in	the	millennia	to	come.’
‘Indeed.	Do	you	wish	to	join	him	in	a	similar	barrow?’


‘I	think	not.’
‘Then	I	imagine	that	Silchas	Ruin	will	not	be	inclined	to	forgive	you	your
indifference,	the	day	he	is	freed.’
‘You	might	be	surprised,	Kilmandaros.’
‘You	and	your	kind	are	mysteries	to	me,	Anomandaris	Purake.’
‘I	know.	So,	Goddess,	have	we	a	pact?’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘I	mean	to	drive	the	pretenders	from	the	realm	–	if
Kurald	Emurlahn	must	die,	then	let	it	do	so	on	its	own.’
‘In	other	words,	you	want	to	leave	the	Throne	of	Shadow	unoccupied.’
‘Yes.’
He	thought	for	a	time,	then	he	nodded.	‘Agreed.’
‘Do	not	wrong	me,	Soletaken.’
‘I	shall	not.	Are	you	ready,	Kilmandaros?’
‘They	will	forge	alliances,’	she	said.	‘They	will	all	war	against	us.’
Anomandaris	shrugged.	‘I	have	nothing	better	to	do	today.’
The	two	Ascendants	then	walked	through	the	gate,	and,	together,	they
closed	the	rent	behind	them.	There	were	other	paths,	after	all,	to	this	realm.
Paths	that	were	not	wounds.
Arriving	within	Kurald	Emurlahn,	they	looked	upon	a	ravaged	world.
Then	set	about	cleansing	what	was	left	of	it.

The	Awl’dan,	in	the	last	days	of	King	Diskanar
Preda	Bivatt,	a	captain	in	the	Drene	Garrison,	was	far	from	home.	Twenty-one
days	by	wagon,	commanding	an	expedition	of	two	hundred	soldiers	of	the
Tattered	Banner	Army,	a	troop	of	thirty	Bluerose	light	cavalry,	and	four
hundred	support	staff,	including	civilians,	she	had,	after	delivering	orders	for
the	setting	of	camp,	slid	down	from	the	back	of	her	horse	to	walk	the	fifty-odd
paces	to	the	edge	of	the	bluff.
When	she	reached	the	rise	the	wind	struck	her	a	hammer	blow	to	her	chest,
as	if	eager	to	fling	her	back,	to	scrape	her	from	this	battered	lip	of	land.	The
ocean	beyond	the	ridge	was	a	vision	from	an	artist’s	nightmare,	a	seascape
torn,	churning,	with	heavy	twisting	clouds	shredding	apart	overhead.	The	water
was	more	white	than	blue-green,	foam	boiling,	spume	flying	out	from	between
rocks	as	the	waves	pounded	the	shore.
Yet,	she	saw	with	a	chill	rushing	in	to	bludgeon	her	bones,	this	was	the


place.
A	fisher	boat,	blown	well	off	course,	into	the	deadly	maelstrom	that	was
this	stretch	of	ocean,	a	stretch	that	no	trader	ship,	no	matter	how	large,	would
willingly	venture	into.	A	stretch	that	had,	eighty	years	ago,	caught	a	Meckros
City	and	had	torn	it	to	pieces,	pulling	into	the	depths	twenty	thousand	or	more
dwellers	of	that	floating	settlement.
The	fisher	crew	had	survived,	long	enough	to	draw	their	beleaguered	craft
safely	aground	in	hip-deep	water	thirty	or	so	paces	from	the	bedrock	strand.
Catch	lost,	their	boat	punched	into	kindling	by	relentless	waves,	the	four
Letherii	managed	to	reach	dry	land.
To	find…this.
Tightening	the	strap	of	her	helm,	lest	the	wind	tear	it	and	her	head	from	her
shoulders,	Preda	Bivatt	continued	scanning	the	wreckage	lining	this	shoreline.
The	promontory	she	stood	on	was	undercut,	dropping	away	three	man-heights
to	a	bank	of	white	sand	heaped	with	elongated	rows	of	dead	kelp,	uprooted
trees,	and	remnants	of	eighty-year-old	Meckros	City.	And	something	else.
Something	more	unexpected.
War	canoes.	The	seagoing	kind,	each	as	long	as	a	coral-face	whale,	highprowed,	longer	and	broader	of	beam	than	Tiste	Edur	craft.	Not	flung	ashore	as
wreckage	–	no,	not	one	she	could	see	displayed	anything	like	damage.	They
were	drawn	up	in	rows	high	along	the	beach,	although	it	was	clear	that	that	had
happened	some	time	past	–	months	at	least,	perhaps	years.
A	presence	at	her	side.	The	merchant	from	Drene	who	had	been	contracted
to	supply	this	expedition.	Pale-skinned,	his	hair	pallid	blond,	so	fair	as	to	be
nearly	white.	The	wind	was	blasting	red	the	man’s	round	face,	but	she	could	see
his	light	blue	eyes	fixed	on	the	array	of	war	canoes,	tracking,	first	westward
along	the	beach,	then	eastward.	‘I	have	some	talent,’	he	said	to	her,	loudly	so	as
to	be	heard	over	the	gale.
Bivatt	said	nothing.	The	merchant	no	doubt	had	skill	with	numbers	–	his
claim	to	talent.	And	she	was	an	officer	in	the	Letherii	Army,	and	could	well
gauge	the	likely	complement	of	each	enormous	craft	without	his	help.	A
hundred,	give	or	take	twenty.
‘Preda?’
‘What?’
The	merchant	gestured	helplessly.	‘These	canoes.’	He	waved	up	the	beach,
then	down.	‘There	must	be…’	And	then	he	was	at	a	loss	for	words.
She	well	understood	him.
Yes.	Rows	upon	rows,	all	drawn	up	to	this	forbidding	shore.	Drene,	the
nearest	city	of	the	kingdom,	was	three	weeks	away,	to	the	southwest.	Directly


south	of	here	was	the	land	of	the	Awl’dan,	and	of	the	tribes’	seasonal	rounds
with	their	huge	herds	virtually	all	was	known.	The	Letherii	were	in	the	process
of	conquering	them,	after	all.	There	had	been	no	report	of	anything	like	this.
Thus.	Not	long	ago,	a	fleet	arrived	upon	this	shore.	Whereupon	everyone
had	disembarked,	taking	all	they	had	with	them,	and	then,	presumably,	set	off
inland.
There	should	have	been	signs,	rumours,	a	reverberation	among	the	Awl	at
the	very	least.	We	should	have	heard	about	it.
But	they	hadn’t.	The	foreign	invaders	had	simply…disappeared.
Not	possible.	How	can	it	be?	She	scanned	the	rows	once	again,	as	if	hoping
that	some	fundamental	detail	would	reveal	itself,	would	ease	the	hammering	of
her	heart	and	the	leaden	chill	of	her	limbs.
‘Preda…’
Yes.	One	hundred	per	craft.	And	here	before	us…stacked	four,	five	deep	–
what?	Four,	maybe	five	thousand?
The	north	shoreline	was	a	mass	of	grey-wooded	war	canoes,	for	almost	as
far	as	she	could	see	to	the	west	and	to	the	east.	Drawn	up.	Abandoned.	Filling
the	shore	like	a	toppled	forest.
‘Upwards	of	a	half-million,’	the	merchant	said.	‘That	is	my	estimate.	Preda,
where	in	the	Errant’s	name	did	they	all	go?’
She	scowled.	‘Kick	that	mage	nest	of	yours,	Letur	Anict.	Make	them	earn
their	exorbitant	fees.	The	king	needs	to	know.	Every	detail.	Everything.’
‘At	once,’	the	man	said.
While	she	would	do	the	same	with	the	Ceda’s	squad	of	acolytes.	The
redundancy	was	necessary.	Without	the	presence	of	Kuru	Qan’s	chosen
students,	she	would	never	learn	all	that	Letur	Anict	held	back	on	his	final
report,	would	never	be	able	to	distil	the	truths	from	the	half-truths,	the	outright
lies.	A	perennial	problem	with	hiring	private	contractors	–	they	had	their	own
interests,	after	all,	and	loyalty	to	the	crown	was,	for	creatures	like	Letur	Anict,
the	new	Factor	of	Drene,	always	secondary.
She	began	looking	for	a	way	down	onto	the	beach.	Bivatt	wanted	a	closer
look	at	these	canoes,	especially	since	it	seemed	that	sections	of	their	prows	had
been	dismantled.	Which	is	an	odd	thing	to	do.	Yet,	a	manageable	mystery,	one	I
can	deal	with	and	so	not	think	about	all	the	rest.
‘Upwards	of	a	half-million.’
Errant’s	blessing,	who	is	now	among	us?


The	Awl’dan,	following	the	Edur	conquest
The	wolves	had	come,	then	gone,	and	where	corpses	had	been	dragged	out
from	the	solid	press	atop	the	hilltop	–	where	the	unknown	soldiers	had	made
their	last	stand	–	the	signs	of	their	feeding	were	evident,	and	this	detail
remained	with	the	lone	rider	as	he	walked	his	horse	amidst	the	motionless,
sprawled	bodies.	Such	pillaging	of	the	dead	was…unusual.	The	dun-furred
wolves	of	this	plain	were	as	opportunistic	as	any	other	predator	on	the
Awl’dan,	of	course.	Even	so,	long	experience	with	humans	should	have	sent	the
beasts	fleeing	at	the	first	sour	scent,	even	if	it	was	commingled	with	that	of
spilled	blood.	What,	then,	had	drawn	them	to	this	silent	battlefield?
The	lone	rider,	face	hidden	behind	a	crimson	scaled	mask,	drew	rein	near
the	base	of	the	low	hill.	His	horse	was	dying,	racked	with	shivers;	before	the
day’s	end	the	man	would	be	walking.	As	he	was	breaking	camp	this	dawn,	a
horn-nosed	snake	had	nipped	the	horse	as	it	fed	on	a	tuft	of	sliver-stem	grasses
at	the	edge	of	a	gully.	The	poison	was	slow	but	inevitable,	and	could	not	be
neutralized	by	any	of	the	herbs	and	medicines	the	man	carried.	The	loss	was
regrettable	but	not	disastrous,	since	he	had	not	been	travelling	in	haste.
Ravens	circled	overhead,	yet	none	descended	–	nor	had	his	arrival	stirred
them	from	this	feast;	indeed,	it	had	been	the	sight	of	them,	wheeling	above	this
hill,	that	had	guided	him	to	this	place.	Their	cries	were	infrequent,	strangely
muted,	almost	plaintive.
The	Drene	legions	had	taken	away	their	dead,	leaving	naught	but	their
victims	to	feed	the	grasses	of	the	plain.	The	morning’s	frost	still	mapped
glistening	patterns	on	death-dark	skin,	but	the	melt	had	already	begun,	and	it
seemed	to	him	that	these	dead	soldiers	now	wept,	from	stilled	faces,	from	open
eyes,	from	mortal	wounds.
Rising	on	his	stirrups,	he	scanned	the	horizon	–	as	much	of	it	as	he	could
see	–	seeking	sight	of	his	two	companions,	but	the	dread	creatures	had	yet	to
return	from	their	hunt,	and	he	wondered	if	they	had	found	a	new,	more	inviting
trail	somewhere	to	the	west	–	the	Letherii	soldiers	of	Drene,	marching
triumphant	and	glutted	back	to	their	city.	If	so,	then	there	would	be	slaughter	on
this	day.	The	notion	of	vengeance,	however,	was	incidental.	His	companions
were	indifferent	to	such	sentiments.	They	killed	for	pleasure,	as	far	as	he	could
tell.	Thus,	the	annihilation	of	the	Drene,	and	any	vengeance	that	could	be
ascribed	to	the	deed	existed	only	in	his	own	mind.	The	distinction	was
important.
Even	so,	a	satisfying	conceit.
Yet,	these	victims	here	were	strangers,	these	soldiers	in	their	grey	and


black	uniforms.	Stripped	now	of	weapons	and	armour,	standards	taken	as
trophies,	their	presence	here	in	the	Awl’dan	–	in	the	heart	of	the	rider ’s
homeland	–	was	perturbing.
He	knew	the	invading	Letherii,	after	all.	The	numerous	legions	with	their
peculiar	names	and	fierce	rivalries;	he	knew	as	well	the	fearless	cavalry	of	the
Bluerose.	And	the	still-free	kingdoms	and	territories	bordering	the	Awl’dan,
the	rival	D’rhasilhani,	the	Keryn,	the	Bolkando	Kingdom	and	the	Saphinand
State	–	he	had	treated	with	or	crossed	blades	with	them	all,	years	ago,	and	none
were	as	these	soldiers	here.
Pale-skinned,	hair	the	colour	of	straw	or	red	as	rust.	Eyes	of	blue	or	grey.
And…so	many	women.
His	gaze	settled	upon	one	such	soldier,	a	woman	near	the	hill’s	summit.
Mangled	by	sorcery,	her	armour	melded	with	the	twisted	flesh	–	there	were
sigils	visible	on	that	armour…
Dismounting,	he	ascended	the	slope,	picking	his	way	round	bodies,
moccasins	skidding	on	blood-soaked	mud,	until	he	crouched	down	at	her	side.
Paint	on	the	blackened	bronze	hauberk.	Wolf	heads,	a	pair.	One	was	whitefurred	and	one-eyed,	the	other	furred	silver	and	black.	A	sigil	he	had	not	seen
before.
Strangers	indeed.
Foreigners.	Here,	in	the	land	of	his	heart.
Behind	the	mask,	he	scowled.	Gone.	Too	long.	Am	I	now	the	stranger?
Heavy	drumbeats	reverberated	through	the	ground	beneath	his	feet.	He
straightened.	His	companions	were	returning.
So,	no	vengeance	after	all.
Well,	there	was	time	yet.
The	mournful	howl	of	wolves	had	awakened	him	this	morning,	their	calls
the	first	to	draw	him	here,	to	this	place,	as	if	they	sought	a	witness,	as	if	indeed
they	had	summoned	him.	While	their	cries	had	urged	him	on,	he	had	not	caught
sight	of	the	beasts,	not	once.
The	wolves	had	fed,	however,	some	time	this	morning.	Dragging	bodies
from	the	press.
His	steps	slowed	as	he	made	his	way	down	the	slope,	slowed	until	he	stood,
his	breath	drawn	in	and	held	as	he	looked	more	closely	at	the	dead	soldiers	on
all	sides.
The	wolves	have	fed.	But	not	as	wolves	do…not	like…like	this.
Chests	torn	open,	ribs	jutting…they	had	devoured	hearts.	Nothing	else.	Just
the	hearts.
The	drumbeats	were	louder	now,	closer,	the	rake	of	talons	hissing	through


grass.	Overhead,	the	ravens,	screaming,	fled	in	all	directions.


Book	One

The	Emperor	in	Gold


	

The	lie	stands	alone,	the	solitary	deceit	with	its	back	turned	no	matter
the	direction	of	your	reluctant	approach,	and	with	each	step	your	goal
is	driven	on,	your	stride	carried	astray,	the	path	enfolding	upon	itself,
round	and	round	you	walk	and	what	stood	alone	before	you,	errant	as
mischance,	an	accidental	utterance,	now	reveals	its	legion	of	children,
this	mass	seething	in	threads	and	knots	and	surrounded,	you	cannot
draw	breath,	cannot	move.
The	world	is	of	your	making	and	one	day,	my	friend,	you	will	stand
alone	amidst	a	sea	of	dead,	the	purchasing	of	your	words	all	about	you
and	the	wind	will	laugh	you	a	new	path	into	unending	torment	–	the
solitary	deceit	is	its	solitude,	the	lie	is	the	lie	standing	alone,	the	threads
and	knots	of	the	multitude	tighten	in	righteous	judgement	with	which
you	once	so	freely	strangled	every	truthsayer,	every	voice	of	dissent.
So	now	ease	your	thirst	on	my	sympathy	and	die	parched	in	the
wasteland.
Fragment	found	on	the	day
the	poetess	Tesora	Veddict
was	arrested	by	the	Patriotists
		(six	days	before	her	Drowning)
	


Chapter	One

Two	forces,	once	in	vicious	opposition,	now	found	themselves	virtual
bedmates,	although	neither	could	decide	which	of	them	had	their	legs
pried	open	first.	The	simple	facts	are	these:	the	original	hierarchical
structure	of	the	Tiste	Edur	tribes	proved	well-suited	to	the	Letherii
system	of	power	through	wealth.	The	Edur	became	the	crown,	settling
easy	upon	the	bloated	gluttony	of	Lether,	but	does	a	crown	possess
will?	Does	the	wearer	buckle	beneath	its	burden?	Another	truth	is	now,
in	hindsight,	self-evident.	As	seamless	as	this	merging	seemed	to	be,	a
more	subtle,	far	deadlier	conjoining	occurred	below	the	surface:	that
of	the	specific	flaws	within	each	system,	and	this	blending	was	to	prove
a	most	volatile	brew.
The	Hiroth	Dynasty	(Volume	XVII)
The	Colony,	a	History	of	Lether
Dinith	Arnara
‘Where	is	this	one	from?’
Tanal	Yathvanar	watched	the	Invigilator	slowly	rotating	the	strange	object
in	his	pudgy	hands,	the	onyx	stones	in	the	many	rings	on	the	short	fingers
glimmering	in	the	shafts	of	sunlight	that	reached	in	through	the	opened
window.	The	object	Karos	Invictad	manipulated	was	a	misshapen	collection	of
bronze	pins,	the	ends	bent	into	loops	that	were	twisted	about	one	another	to
form	a	stiff	cage.	‘Bluerose,	I	believe,	sir,’	Tanal	replied.	‘One	of	Senorbo’s.
The	average	duration	for	solving	it	is	three	days,	although	the	record	is	just
under	two—’
‘Who?’	Karos	demanded,	glancing	up	from	where	he	sat	behind	his	desk.
‘A	Tarthenal	half-blood,	if	you	can	believe	that,	sir.	Here	in	Letheras.	The
man	is	reputedly	a	simpleton,	yet	possesses	a	natural	talent	for	solving
puzzles.’
‘And	the	challenge	is	to	slide	the	pins	into	a	configuration	to	create	a
sudden	collapse.’


‘Yes	sir.	It	flattens	out.	From	what	I	have	heard	the	precise	number	of
manipulations	is—’
‘No,	Tanal,	do	not	tell	me.	You	should	know	better.’	The	Invigilator,
commander	of	the	Patriotists,	set	the	object	down.	‘Thank	you	for	the	gift.
Now,’	a	brief	smile,	‘have	we	inconvenienced	Bruthen	Trana	long	enough,	do
you	think?’	Karos	rose,	paused	to	adjust	his	crimson	silks	–	the	only	colour
and	the	only	material	he	ever	wore	–	then	collected	the	short	sceptre	he	had
made	his	official	symbol	of	office,	black	bloodwood	from	the	Edur	homeland
with	silver	caps	studded	in	polished	onyx	stones,	and	gestured	with	it	in	the
direction	of	the	door.
Tanal	bowed	then	led	the	way	out	into	the	corridor,	to	the	broad	stairs
where	they	descended	to	the	main	floor,	then	strode	through	the	double	doors
and	out	into	the	compound.
The	row	of	prisoners	had	been	positioned	in	full	sunlight,	near	the	west
wall	of	the	enclosure.	They	had	been	taken	from	their	cells	a	bell	before	dawn
and	it	was	now	shortly	past	midday.	Lack	of	water	and	food,	and	this	morning’s
searing	heat,	combined	with	brutal	sessions	of	questioning	over	the	past	week,
had	resulted	in	more	than	half	of	the	eighteen	detainees	losing	consciousness.
Tanal	saw	the	Invigilator ’s	frown	upon	seeing	the	motionless	bodies
collapsed	in	their	chains.
The	Tiste	Edur	liaison,	Bruthen	Trana	of	the	Den-Ratha	tribe,	was	standing
in	the	shade,	more	or	less	across	from	the	prisoners,	and	the	tall,	silent	figure
slowly	turned	as	Tanal	and	Karos	approached.
‘Bruthen	Trana,	most	welcome,’	said	Karos	Invictad.	‘You	are	well?’
‘Let	us	proceed,	Invigilator,’	the	grey-skinned	warrior	said.
‘At	once.	If	you	will	accompany	me,	we	can	survey	each	prisoner
assembled	here.	The	specific	cases—’
‘I	have	no	interest	in	approaching	them	any	closer	than	I	am	now,’	Bruthen
said.	‘They	are	fouled	in	their	own	wastes	and	there	is	scant	breeze	in	this
enclosure.’
Karos	smiled.	‘I	understand,	Bruthen.’	He	leaned	his	sceptre	against	a
shoulder	then	faced	the	row	of	detainees.	‘We	need	not	approach,	as	you	say.	I
will	begin	with	the	one	to	the	far	left,	then—’
‘Unconscious	or	dead?’
‘Well,	at	this	distance,	who	can	say?’
Noting	the	Edur ’s	scowl,	Tanal	bowed	to	Bruthen	and	Karos	and	walked
the	fifteen	paces	to	the	line.	He	crouched	to	examine	the	prone	figure,	then
straightened.	‘He	lives.’
‘Then	awaken	him!’	Karos	commanded.	His	voice,	when	raised,	became


shrill,	enough	to	make	a	foolish	listener	wince	–	foolish,	that	is,	if	the
Invigilator	was	witness	to	that	instinctive	reaction.	Such	careless	errors
happened	but	once.
Tanal	kicked	at	the	prisoner	until	the	man	managed	a	dry,	rasping	sob.	‘On
your	feet,	traitor,’	Tanal	said	in	a	quiet	tone.	‘The	Invigilator	demands	it.	Stand,
or	I	will	begin	breaking	bones	in	that	pathetic	sack	you	call	a	body.’
He	watched	as	the	prisoner	struggled	upright.
‘Water,	please—’
‘Not	another	word	from	you.	Straighten	up,	face	your	crimes.	You	are
Letherii,	aren’t	you?	Show	our	Edur	guest	the	meaning	of	that.’
Tanal	then	made	his	way	back	to	Karos	and	Bruthen.	The	Invigilator	had
begun	speaking.	‘…known	associations	with	dissenting	elements	in	the
Physicians’	College	–	he	has	admitted	as	much.	Although	no	specific	crimes
can	be	laid	at	this	man’s	feet,	it	is	clear	that—’
‘The	next	one,’	Bruthen	Trana	cut	in.
Karos	closed	his	mouth,	then	smiled	without	showing	his	teeth.	‘Of	course.
The	next	is	a	poet,	who	wrote	and	distributed	a	call	for	revolution.	He	denies
nothing	and	indeed,	you	can	see	his	stoic	defiance	even	from	here.’
‘And	the	one	beside	him?’
‘The	proprietor	of	an	inn,	the	tavern	of	which	was	frequented	by
undesirable	elements	–	disenchanted	soldiers,	in	fact	–	and	two	of	them	are
among	these	detainees.	We	were	informed	of	the	sedition	by	an	honourable
whore—’
‘Honourable	whore,	Invigilator?’	The	Edur	half	smiled.
Karos	blinked.	‘Why,	yes,	Bruthen	Trana.’
‘Because	she	informed	on	an	innkeeper.’
‘An	innkeeper	engaged	in	treason—’
‘Demanding	too	high	a	cut	of	her	earnings,	more	likely.	Go	on,	and	please,
keep	your	descriptions	of	the	crimes	brief.’
‘Of	course,’	Karos	Invictad	said,	the	sceptre	gently	tapping	on	his	soft
shoulder,	like	a	baton	measuring	a	slow	march.
Tanal,	standing	at	his	commander ’s	side,	remained	at	attention	whilst	the
Invigilator	resumed	his	report	of	the	specific	transgressions	of	these	Letherii.
The	eighteen	prisoners	were	fair	representations	of	the	more	than	three
hundred	chained	in	cells	below	ground.	A	decent	number	of	arrests	for	this
week,	Tanal	reflected.	And	for	the	most	egregious	traitors	among	them	waited
the	Drownings.	Of	the	three	hundred	and	twenty	or	so,	a	third	were	destined	to
walk	the	canal	bottom,	burdened	beneath	crushing	weights.	Bookmakers	were
complaining	these	days,	since	no-one	ever	survived	the	ordeal	any	more.	Of


course,	they	did	not	complain	too	loudly,	since	the	true	agitators	among	them
risked	their	own	Drowning	–	it	had	taken	but	a	few	of	those	early	on	to	mute
the	protestations	among	the	rest.
This	was	a	detail	Tanal	had	come	to	appreciate,	one	of	Karos	Invictad’s
perfect	laws	of	compulsion	and	control,	emphasized	again	and	again	in	the	vast
treatise	the	Invigilator	was	penning	on	the	subject	most	dear	to	his	heart.	Take
any	segment	of	population,	impose	strict	yet	clear	definitions	on	their
particular	characteristics,	then	target	them	for	compliance.	Bribe	the	weak	to
expose	the	strong.	Kill	the	strong,	and	the	rest	are	yours.	Move	on	to	the	next
segment.
Bookmakers	had	been	easy	targets,	since	few	people	liked	them	–
especially	inveterate	gamblers,	and	of	those	there	were	more	and	more	with
every	day	that	passed.
Karos	Invictad	concluded	his	litany.	Bruthen	Trana	nodded,	then	turned	and
left	the	compound.
As	soon	as	he	was	gone	from	sight,	the	Invigilator	faced	Tanal.	‘An
embarrassment,’	he	said.	‘Those	unconscious	ones.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘A	change	of	heads	on	the	outer	wall.’
‘At	once,	sir.’
‘Now,	Tanal	Yathvanar,	before	anything	else,	you	must	come	with	me.	It
will	take	but	a	moment,	then	you	can	return	to	the	tasks	at	hand.’
They	walked	back	into	the	building,	the	Invigilator ’s	short	steps	forcing
Tanal	to	slow	up	again	and	again	as	they	made	their	way	to	Karos’s	office.
The	most	powerful	man	next	to	the	Emperor	himself	took	his	place	once
more	behind	the	desk.	He	picked	up	the	cage	of	bronze	pins,	shifted	a	dozen	or
so	in	a	flurry	of	precise	moves,	and	the	puzzle	collapsed	flat.	Karos	Invictad
smiled	across	at	Tanal,	then	flung	the	object	onto	the	desk.	‘Despatch	a	missive
to	Senorbo	in	Bluerose.	Inform	him	of	the	time	required	for	me	to	find	a
solution,	then	add,	from	me	to	him,	that	I	fear	he	is	losing	his	touch.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
Karos	Invictad	reached	out	for	a	scroll.	‘Now,	what	was	our	agreed
percentage	on	my	interest	in	the	Inn	of	the	Belly-up	Snake?’
‘I	believe	Rautos	indicated	forty-five,	sir.’
‘Good.	Even	so,	I	believe	a	meeting	is	in	order	with	the	Master	of	the
Liberty	Consign.	Later	this	week	will	do.	For	all	our	takings	of	late,	we	still
possess	a	strange	paucity	in	actual	coin,	and	I	want	to	know	why.’
‘Sir,	you	know	Rautos	Hivanar ’s	suspicions	on	that	matter.’
‘Vaguely.	He	will	be	pleased	to	learn	I	am	now	prepared	to	listen	more


closely	to	said	suspicions.	Thus,	two	issues	on	the	agenda.	Schedule	the
meeting	for	a	bell’s	duration.	Oh,	and	one	last	thing,	Tanal.’
‘Sir?’
‘Bruthen	Trana.	These	weekly	visits.	I	want	to	know,	is	he	compelled?	Is
this	some	Edur	form	of	royal	disaffection	or	punishment?	Or	are	the	bastards
truly	interested	in	what	we’re	up	to?	Bruthen	makes	no	comment,	ever.	He	does
not	even	ask	what	punishments	follow	our	judgements.	Furthermore,	his	rude
impatience	tires	me.	It	may	be	worth	our	while	to	investigate	him.’
Tanal’s	brows	rose.	‘Investigate	a	Tiste	Edur?’
‘Quietly,	of	course.	Granted,	they	ever	give	us	the	appearance	of
unquestioning	loyalty,	but	I	cannot	help	but	wonder	if	they	truly	are	immune	to
sedition	among	their	own	kind.’
‘Even	if	they	aren’t,	sir,	respectfully,	are	the	Patriotists	the	right
organization—’
‘The	Patriotists,	Tanal	Yathvanar,’	said	Karos	sharply,	‘possess	the
imperial	charter	to	police	the	empire.	In	that	charter	no	distinction	is	made
between	Edur	and	Letherii,	only	between	the	loyal	and	the	disloyal.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘Now,	I	believe	you	have	tasks	awaiting	you.’
Tanal	Yathvanar	bowed,	then	strode	from	the	office.

The	estate	dominated	a	shelf	of	land	on	the	north	bank	of	Lether	River,	four
streets	west	of	Quillas	Canal.	Stepped	walls	marking	its	boundaries	made	their
way	down	the	bank,	extending	out	into	the	water	–	on	posts	to	ease	the	current’s
tug	–	more	than	two	boat-lengths.	Just	beyond	rose	two	mooring	poles.	There
had	been	flooding	this	season.	An	infrequent	occurrence	in	the	past	century,
Rautos	Hivanar	noted	as	he	leafed	through	the	Estate	Compendium	–	a	family
tome	of	notes	and	maps	recording	the	full	eight	hundred	years	of	Hivanar
blood	on	this	land.	He	settled	back	in	the	plush	chair	and,	with	contemplative
languor,	finished	his	balat	tea.
The	house	steward	and	principal	agent,	Venitt	Sathad,	quietly	stepped
forward	to	return	the	Compendium	to	the	wood	and	iron	chest	sunk	in	the	floor
beneath	the	map	table,	then	replaced	the	floorboards	and	unfurled	the	rug	over
the	spot.	His	tasks	completed,	he	stepped	back	to	resume	his	position	beside	the
door.
Rautos	Hivanar	was	a	large	man,	his	complexion	florid,	his	features
robust.	His	presence	tended	to	dominate	a	room,	no	matter	how	spacious.	He


sat	in	the	estate’s	library	now,	the	walls	shelved	to	the	ceiling.	Scrolls,	clay
tablets	and	bound	books	filled	every	available	space,	the	gathered	learning	of	a
thousand	scholars,	many	of	whom	bore	the	Hivanar	name.
As	head	of	the	family	and	overseer	of	its	vast	financial	holdings,	Rautos
Hivanar	was	a	busy	man,	and	such	demands	on	his	intellect	had	redoubled
since	the	Tiste	Edur	conquest	–	which	had	triggered	the	official	formation	and
recognition	of	the	Liberty	Consign,	an	association	of	the	wealthiest	families	in
the	Lether	Empire	–	in	ways	he	could	never	have	imagined	before.	He	would
be	hard-pressed	to	explain	how	he	found	all	such	activities	tedious	or
enervating.	Yet	that	was	what	they	had	become,	even	as	his	suspicions	slowly,
incrementally,	resolved	into	certainties;	even	as	he	began	to	perceive	that,
somewhere	out	there,	there	was	an	enemy	–	or	enemies	–	bent	on	the	singular
task	of	economic	sabotage.	Not	mere	embezzlement,	an	activity	with	which	he
was	personally	very	familiar,	but	something	more	profound,	allencompassing.	An	enemy.	To	all	that	sustained	Rautos	Hivanar,	and	the	Liberty
Consign	of	which	he	was	Master;	indeed,	to	all	that	sustained	the	empire	itself,
regardless	of	who	sat	upon	the	throne,	regardless	even	of	those	savage,
miserable	barbarians	who	were	now	preening	at	the	very	pinnacle	of	Letherii
society,	like	grey-feathered	jackdaws	atop	a	hoard	of	baubles.
Such	comprehension,	on	Rautos	Hivanar ’s	part,	would	once	have	triggered
a	most	zealous	response	within	him.	The	threat	alone	should	have	sufficed	to
elicit	a	vigorous	hunt,	and	the	notion	of	an	agency	of	such	diabolical	purpose	–
one,	he	was	forced	to	admit,	guided	by	the	most	subtle	genius	–	should	have
enlivened	the	game	until	its	pursuit	acquired	the	power	of	obsession.
Instead,	Rautos	Hivanar	found	himself	seeking	notations	among	the	dusty
ledgers	for	evidence	of	past	floodings,	pursuing	an	altogether	more	mundane
mystery	that	would	interest	but	a	handful	of	muttering	academics.	And	that,	he
admitted	often	to	himself,	was	odd.	Nonetheless,	the	compulsion	gathered
strength,	and	at	night	he	would	lie	beside	the	recumbent,	sweat-sheathed	mass
that	was	his	wife	of	thirty-three	years	and	find	his	thoughts	working
ceaselessly,	struggling	against	the	currents	of	time’s	cyclical	flow,	seeking	to
clamber	his	way	back,	with	all	his	sensibilities,	into	past	ages.	Looking.
Looking	for	something…
Sighing,	Rautos	set	down	the	empty	cup,	then	rose.
As	he	walked	to	the	door,	Venitt	Sathad	–	whose	family	line	had	been
Indebted	to	the	Hivanars	for	six	generations	now	–	stepped	forward	to	retrieve
the	fragile	cup,	then	set	off	in	his	master ’s	wake.
Out	onto	the	waterfront	enclosure,	across	the	mosaic	portraying	the
investiture	of	Skoval	Hivanar	as	Imperial	Ceda	three	centuries	past,	then	down


the	shallow	stone	stairs	to	what,	in	drier	times,	was	the	lower	terrace	garden.
But	the	river ’s	currents	had	swirled	in	here,	stealing	away	soil	and	plants,
exposing	a	most	peculiar	arrangement	of	boulders	set	like	a	cobbled	street,
framed	in	wooden	posts	arranged	in	a	rectangle,	the	posts	little	more	than
rotted	stumps	now,	rising	from	the	flood’s	remnant	pools.
At	the	edge	of	the	upper	level,	workers,	under	Rautos’s	direction,	had	used
wood	bulwarks	to	keep	it	from	collapsing,	and	to	one	side	sat	a	wheelbarrow
filled	with	the	multitude	of	curious	objects	that	had	been	exposed	by	the
floodwaters.	These	items	had	littered	the	cobbled	floor.
In	all,	Rautos	mused,	a	mystery.	There	was	no	record	whatsoever	of	the
lower	terrace	garden’s	being	anything	but	what	it	was,	and	the	notations	from
the	garden’s	designer	–	from	shortly	after	the	completion	of	the	estate’s	main
buildings	–	indicated	the	bank	at	that	level	was	nothing	more	than	ancient	flood
silts.
The	clay	had	preserved	the	wood,	at	least	until	recently,	so	there	was	no
telling	how	long	ago	the	strange	construct	had	been	built.	The	only	indication
of	its	antiquity	rested	with	the	objects,	all	of	which	were	either	bronze	or
copper.	Not	weapons,	as	one	might	find	associated	with	a	barrow,	and	if	tools,
then	they	were	for	activities	long	forgotten,	since	not	a	single	worker	Rautos
had	brought	to	this	place	was	able	to	fathom	the	function	of	these	items	–	they
resembled	no	known	tools,	not	for	stone	working,	nor	wood,	nor	the
processing	of	foodstuffs.
Rautos	collected	one	and	examined	it,	for	at	least	the	hundredth	time.
Bronze,	clay-cast	–	the	flange	was	clearly	visible	–	the	item	was	long,
roundish,	yet	bent	at	almost	right	angles.	Incisions	formed	a	cross-hatched
pattern	about	the	elbow.	Neither	end	displayed	any	means	of	attachment	–	not
intended,	therefore,	as	part	of	some	larger	mechanism.	He	hefted	its
considerable	weight	in	his	hand.	There	was	something	imbalanced	about	it,
despite	the	centrally	placed	bend.	He	set	it	down	and	drew	out	a	circular	sheet
of	copper,	thinner	than	the	wax	layer	on	a	scrier ’s	tablet.	Blackened	by	contact
with	the	clays,	yet	only	now	the	edges	showing	signs	of	verdigris.	Countless
holes	had	been	punched	through	the	sheet,	in	no	particular	pattern,	yet	each
hole	was	perfectly	uniform,	perfectly	round,	with	no	lip	to	indicate	from	which
side	it	had	been	punched.
‘Venitt,’	he	said,	‘have	we	a	map	recording	the	precise	locations	of	these
objects	when	they	were	originally	found?’
‘Indeed,	Master,	with	but	a	few	exceptions.	You	examined	it	a	week	past.’
‘I	did?	Very	well.	Set	it	out	once	more	on	the	table	in	the	library,	this
afternoon.’


Both	men	turned	as	the	gate	watcher	appeared	from	the	narrow	side
passage	along	the	left	side	of	the	house.	The	woman	halted	ten	paces	from
Rautos	and	bowed.	‘Master,	a	message	from	Invigilator	Karos	Invictad.’
‘Very	good,’	Rautos	replied	distractedly.	‘I	will	attend	to	it	in	a	moment.
Does	the	messenger	await	a	response?’
‘Yes,	Master.	He	is	in	the	courtyard.’
‘See	that	refreshments	are	provided.’
The	watcher	bowed	then	departed.
‘Venitt,	I	believe	you	must	prepare	to	undertake	a	journey	on	my	behalf.’
‘Master?’
‘The	Invigilator	at	last	perceives	the	magnitude	of	the	threat.’
Venitt	Sathad	said	nothing.
‘You	must	travel	to	Drene	City,’	Rautos	said,	his	eyes	once	more	on	the
mysterious	construct	dominating	the	lower	terrace.	‘The	Consign	requires	a
most	specific	report	of	the	preparations	there.	Alas,	the	Factor ’s	own	missives
are	proving	unsatisfactory.	I	require	confidence	in	those	matters,	if	I	am	to
apply	fullest	concentration	to	the	threat	closer	to	hand.’
Again,	Venitt	did	not	speak.
Rautos	looked	out	onto	the	river.	Fisher	boats	gathered	in	the	bay	opposite,
two	merchant	traders	drawing	in	towards	the	main	docks.	One	of	them,	bearing
the	flag	of	the	Esterrict	family,	looked	damaged,	possibly	by	fire.	Rautos
brushed	the	dirt	from	his	hands	and	turned	about,	making	his	way	back	into	the
building,	his	servant	falling	into	step	behind	him.
‘I	wonder,	what	lies	beneath	those	stones?’
‘Master?’
‘Never	mind,	Venitt.	I	was	but	thinking	out	loud.’
	
The	Awl’dan	camp	had	been	attacked	at	dawn	by	two	troops	of	Atri-Preda
Bivatt’s	Bluerose	cavalry.	Two	hundred	skilled	lancers	riding	into	a	maelstrom
of	panic,	as	figures	struggled	out	from	the	hide	huts,	as	the	Drene-bred
wardogs,	arriving	moments	before	the	horse-soldiers,	closed	on	the	pack	of
Awl	herder	and	dray	dogs,	and	in	moments	the	three	breeds	of	beast	were
locked	in	a	vicious	battle.
The	Awl	warriors	were	unprepared,	and	few	had	time	to	even	so	much	as
find	their	weapons	before	the	lancers	burst	into	their	midst.	In	moments,	the
slaughter	extended	out	to	encompass	elders	and	children.	Most	of	the	women
fought	alongside	their	male	kin	–	wife	and	husband,	sister	and	brother,	dying
together	in	a	last	blending	of	blood.


The	engagement	between	the	Letherii	and	the	Awl	took	all	of	two	hundred
heartbeats.	The	war	among	the	dogs	was	far	more	protracted,	for	the	herder
dogs	–	while	smaller	and	more	compact	than	their	attackers	–	were	quick	and
no	less	vicious,	while	the	drays,	bred	to	pull	carts	in	summer	and	sleds	in
winter,	were	comparable	with	the	Drene	breed.	Trained	to	kill	wolves,	the
drays	proved	more	than	a	match	for	the	wardogs,	and	if	not	for	the	lancers
then	making	sport	of	killing	the	mottle-skinned	beasts,	the	battle	would	have
turned.	As	it	was,	the	Awl	pack	finally	broke	away,	the	survivors	fleeing	onto
the	plain,	eastward,	a	few	Drene	wardogs	giving	chase	before	being	recalled
by	their	handlers.
Whilst	lancers	dismounted	to	make	certain	there	were	no	survivors	among
the	Awl,	others	rode	out	to	collect	the	herds	of	myrid	and	rodara	in	the	next
valley.
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	sat	astride	her	stallion,	struggling	to	control	the	beast
with	the	smell	of	blood	so	heavy	in	the	morning	air.	Beside	her,	sitting
awkward	and	in	discomfort	on	the	unfamiliar	saddle,	Brohl	Handar,	the	newly
appointed	Tiste	Edur	Overseer	of	Drene	City,	watched	the	Letherii
systematically	loot	the	encampment,	stripping	corpses	naked	and	drawing	their
knives.	The	Awl	bound	their	jewellery	–	mostly	gold	–	deep	in	the	braids	of
their	hair,	forcing	the	Letherii	to	slice	away	those	sections	of	the	scalp	to	claim
their	booty.	Of	course,	there	was	more	than	just	expedience	in	this	mutilation,
for	it	had	been	extended	to	the	collecting	of	swaths	of	skin	that	had	been
decorated	in	tattoos,	the	particular	style	of	the	Awl	rich	in	colour	and	often
outlined	in	stitched	gold	thread.	These	trophies	adorned	the	round-shields	of
many	lancers.
The	captured	herds	now	belonged	to	the	Factor	of	Drene,	Letur	Anict,	and
as	Brohl	Handar	watched	the	hundreds	of	myrid	come	over	the	hill,	their	black
woolly	coats	making	them	look	like	boulders	as	they	poured	down	the	hillside,
it	was	clear	that	the	Factor ’s	wealth	had	just	risen	substantially.	The	taller
rodara	followed,	blue-backed	and	long-necked,	their	long	tails	thrashing	about
in	near-panic	as	wardogs	on	the	herd’s	flanks	plunged	into	feint	attacks	again
and	again.
The	breath	hissed	from	the	Atri-Preda’s	teeth.	‘Where	is	the	Factor ’s	man,
anyway?	Those	damned	rodara	are	going	to	stampede.	Lieutenant!	Get	the
handlers	to	call	off	their	hounds!	Hurry!’	The	woman	unstrapped	her	helm,
pulled	it	free	and	set	it	atop	the	saddle	horn.	She	looked	across	at	Brohl.	‘There
you	have	it,	Overseer.’
‘So	these	are	the	Awl.’
She	grimaced,	looked	away.	‘A	small	camp	by	their	standards.	Seventy-odd


adults.’
‘Yet,	large	herds.’
Her	grimace	became	a	scowl.	‘They	were	once	larger,	Overseer.	Much
larger.’
‘I	take	it	then	that	this	campaign	of	yours	is	succeeding	in	driving	away
these	trespassers.’
‘Not	my	campaign.’	She	seemed	to	catch	something	in	his	expression	for
she	added,	‘Yes,	of	course,	I	command	the	expeditionary	forces,	Overseer.	But
I	receive	my	orders	from	the	Factor.	And,	strictly	speaking,	the	Awl	are	not
trespassers.’
‘The	Factor	claims	otherwise.’
‘Letur	Anict	is	highly	ranked	in	the	Liberty	Consign.’
Brohl	Handar	studied	the	woman	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Not	all	wars	are
fought	for	wealth	and	land,	Atri-Preda.’
‘I	must	disagree,	Overseer.	Did	not	you	Tiste	Edur	invade	pre-emptively,	in
response	to	the	perceived	threat	of	lost	land	and	resources?	Cultural
assimilation,	the	end	of	your	independence.	There	is	no	doubt	in	my	mind,’	she
continued,	‘that	we	Letherii	sought	to	obliterate	your	civilization,	as	we	had
done	already	with	the	Tarthenal	and	so	many	others.	And	so,	an	economic	war.’
‘It	does	not	surprise	me,	Atri-Preda,	that	your	kind	saw	it	that	way.	And	I
do	not	doubt	that	such	concerns	were	present	in	the	mind	of	the	Warlock	King.
Did	we	conquer	you	in	order	to	survive?	Perhaps.’	Brohl	considered	saying
more,	then	he	shook	his	head,	watching	as	four	wardogs	closed	on	a	wounded
cattle	dog.	The	lame	beast	fought	back,	but	was	soon	down,	kicking,	then	silent
and	limp	as	the	wardogs	tore	open	its	belly.
Bivatt	asked,	‘Do	you	ever	wonder,	Overseer,	which	of	us	truly	won	that
war?’
He	shot	her	a	dark	look.	‘No,	I	do	not.	Your	scouts	have	found	no	other
signs	of	Awl	in	this	area,	I	understand.	So	now	the	Factor	will	consolidate	the
Letherii	claim	in	the	usual	fashion?’
The	Atri-Preda	nodded.	‘Outposts.	Forts,	raised	roads.	Settlers	will	follow.’
‘And	then,	the	Factor	will	extend	his	covetous	intentions,	yet	further	east.’
‘As	you	say,	Overseer.	Of	course,	I	am	sure	you	recognize	the	acquisitions
gift	the	Tiste	Edur	as	well.	The	empire’s	territory	expands.	I	am	certain	the
Emperor	will	be	pleased.’
This	was	Brohl	Handar ’s	second	week	as	governor	of	Drene.	There	were
few	Tiste	Edur	in	this	remote	corner	of	Rhulad’s	empire,	less	than	a	hundred,
and	only	his	three	staff	members	were	from	Brohl’s	own	tribe,	the	Arapay.	The
annexation	of	Awl’dan	by	what	amounted	to	wholesale	genocide	had	begun


years	ago	–	long	before	the	Edur	conquest	–	and	the	particulars	of	rule	in	far
Letheras	seemed	to	have	little	relevance	to	this	military	campaign.	Brohl
Handar,	the	patriarch	of	a	clan	devoted	to	hunting	tusked	seals,	wondered	–	not
for	the	first	time	–	what	he	was	doing	here.
Titular	command	as	Overseer	seemed	to	involve	little	more	than
observation.	The	true	power	of	rule	was	with	Letur	Anict,	the	Factor	of	Drene,
who	‘is	highly	ranked	in	the	Liberty	Consign’.	Some	kind	of	guild	of
merchants,	he	had	learned,	although	he	had	no	idea	what,	precisely,	was
liberating	about	this	mysterious	organization.	Unless,	of	course,	it	was	the
freedom	to	do	as	they	pleased.	Including	the	use	of	imperial	troops	to	aid	in	the
acquisition	of	ever	more	wealth.
‘Atri-Preda.’
‘Yes,	Overseer?’
‘These	Awl	–	do	they	fight	back?	No,	not	as	they	did	today.	I	mean,	do	they
mount	raids?	Do	they	mass	their	warriors	on	the	path	to	all-out	war?’
She	looked	uncomfortable.	‘Overseer,	there	are	two…well,	levels,	to	this.’
‘Levels.	What	does	that	mean?’
‘Official	and…unofficial.	It	is	a	matter	of	perception.’
‘Explain.’
‘The	belief	of	the	common	folk,	as	promulgated	through	imperial	agents,
is	that	the	Awl	have	allied	themselves	with	the	Ak’ryn	to	the	south,	as	well	as
the	D’rhasilhani	and	the	two	kingdoms	of	Bolkando	and	Saphinand	–	in	short,
all	the	territories	bordering	the	empire	–	creating	a	belligerent,	warmongering
and	potentially	overwhelming	force	–	the	Horde	of	the	Bolkando	Conspiracy	–
that	threatens	the	entire	eastern	territories	of	the	Lether	Empire.	It	is	only	a
matter	of	time	before	that	horde	is	fully	assembled,	whereupon	it	will	march.
Accordingly,	every	attack	launched	by	the	Letherii	military	serves	to	diminish
the	numbers	the	Awl	can	contribute,	and	furthermore,	the	loss	of	valuable
livestock	in	turn	weakens	the	savages.	Famine	may	well	manage	what	swords
alone	cannot	–	the	entire	collapse	of	the	Awl.’
‘I	see.	And	the	unofficial	version?’
She	glanced	across	at	him.	‘There	is	no	conspiracy,	Overseer.	No	alliance.
The	truth	is,	the	Awl	continue	to	fight	among	themselves	–	their	grazing	land	is
shrinking,	after	all.	And	they	despise	the	Ak’ryn	and	the	D’rhasilhani,	and	have
probably	never	met	anyone	from	Bolkando	or	Saphinand.’	She	hesitated,	then
said,	‘We	did	clash	with	a	mercenary	company	of	some	sort,	two	months	past	–
the	disastrous	battle	that	spurred	your	appointment,	I	suspect.	They	numbered
perhaps	seven	hundred,	and	after	a	half-dozen	skirmishes	I	led	a	force	of	six
thousand	Letherii	in	pursuit.	Overseer,	we	lost	almost	three	thousand	soldiers


in	that	final	battle.	If	not	for	our	mages…’	She	shook	her	head.	‘And	we	still
have	no	idea	who	they	were.’
Brohl	studied	the	woman.	He	had	known	nothing	about	any	such	clash.	The
reason	for	his	appointment?	Perhaps.	‘The	official	version	you	spoke	of
earlier	–	the	lie	–	justifies	the	slaughter	of	the	Awl,	in	the	eyes	of	the
commonry.	All	of	which	well	serves	the	Factor ’s	desire	to	make	himself	yet
richer.	I	see.	Tell	me,	Atri-Preda,	why	does	Letur	Anict	need	all	that	gold?
What	does	he	do	with	it?’
The	woman	shrugged.	‘Gold	is	power.’
‘Power	over	whom?’
‘Anyone,	and	everyone.’
‘Excepting	the	Tiste	Edur,	who	are	indifferent	to	the	Letherii	idea	of
wealth.’
She	smiled.	‘Are	you,	Overseer?	Still?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘There	are	Hiroth	in	Drene	–	yes,	you	have	met	them.	Each	claims	kinship
with	the	Emperor,	and	upon	that	claim	they	have	commandeered	the	finest
estates	and	land.	They	have	hundreds	of	Indebted	as	slaves.	Soon,	perhaps,
there	will	be	Tiste	Edur	among	the	membership	of	the	Liberty	Consign.’
Brohl	Handar	frowned.	On	a	distant	ridge	stood	three	Awl	dogs,	two	drays
and	one	smaller	cattle	dog,	watching	as	the	herds	were	driven	through	the
destroyed	encampment	–	the	livestock	bawling	in	the	stench	of	spilled	blood
and	wastes.	He	studied	the	three	silhouettes	on	the	ridge.	Where	would	they	go
now,	he	wondered.	‘I	have	seen	enough.’	He	tugged	his	horse	round,	too	tight
on	the	reins,	and	the	beast’s	head	snapped	up	and	it	snorted,	backing	as	it
turned.	Brohl	struggled	to	keep	his	balance.
If	the	Atri-Preda	was	amused	she	was	wise	enough	not	to	show	it.
In	the	sky	overhead,	the	first	carrion	birds	had	appeared.
	
The	South	Jasp	River,	one	of	the	four	tributaries	of	Lether	River	leading	down
from	the	Bluerose	Mountains,	was	flanked	on	its	south	bank	by	a	raised	road
that,	a	short	distance	ahead,	began	its	long	climb	to	the	mountain	pass,	beyond
which	lay	the	ancient	kingdom	of	Bluerose,	now	subject	to	the	Letherii	Empire.
The	South	Jasp	ran	fast	here,	the	momentum	of	its	savage	descent	from	the
mountains	not	yet	slowed	by	the	vast	plain	it	now	found	itself	crossing.	The	icy
water	pounded	over	huge	boulders	left	behind	by	long-extinct	glaciers,
flinging	bitter-cold	mist	into	the	air	that	drifted	in	clouds	over	the	road.
The	lone	figure	awaiting	the	six	Tiste	Edur	warriors	and	their	entourage


was	if	anything	taller	than	any	Edur,	yet	thin,	wrapped	in	a	black	sealskin	cloak,
hood	raised.	Two	baldrics	criss-crossed	its	chest,	from	which	hung	two
Letherii	longswords,	and	the	few	wisps	of	long	white	hair	that	had	pulled	free
in	the	wind	were	now	wet,	adhering	to	the	collar	of	the	cloak.
To	the	approaching	Merude	Edur,	the	face	within	that	cowl	looked	pallid	as
death,	as	if	a	corpse	had	just	dragged	itself	free	of	the	numbing	river,
something	long	frozen	in	the	white-veined	reaches	of	the	mountains	that
awaited	them.
The	lead	warrior,	a	veteran	of	the	conquest	of	Letheras,	gestured	for	his
comrades	to	halt	then	set	out	to	speak	to	the	stranger.	In	addition	to	the	other
five	Edur,	there	were	ten	Letherii	soldiers,	two	burdened	wagons,	and	forty
slaves	shackled	one	to	the	next	in	a	line	behind	the	second	wagon.
‘Do	you	wish	company,’	the	Merude	asked,	squinting	to	see	more	of	that
shadowed	face,	‘for	the	climb	to	the	pass?	It’s	said	there	remain	bandits	and
renegades	in	the	heights	beyond.’
‘I	am	my	own	company.’
The	voice	was	rough,	the	accent	archaic.
The	Merude	halted	three	paces	away.	He	could	see	more	of	that	face,	now.
Edur	features,	more	or	less,	yet	white	as	snow.	The	eyes	were…unnerving.	Red
as	blood.	‘Then	why	do	you	block	our	path?’
‘You	captured	two	Letherii	two	days	back.	They	are	mine.’
The	Merude	shrugged.	‘Then	you	should	have	kept	them	chained	at	night,
friend.	These	Indebted	will	run	at	any	opportunity.	Fortunate	for	you	that	we
captured	them.	Oh,	yes	–	of	course	I	will	return	them	into	your	care.	At	least
the	girl	–	the	man	is	an	escaped	slave	from	the	Hiroth,	or	so	his	tattoos	reveal.
A	Drowning	awaits	him,	alas,	but	I	will	consider	offering	you	a	replacement.	In
any	case,	the	girl,	young	as	she	is,	is	valuable.	I	trust	you	can	manage	the	cost
of	retrieving	her.’
‘I	will	take	them	both.	And	pay	you	nothing.’
Frowning,	the	Merude	said,	‘You	were	careless	in	losing	them.	We	were
diligent	in	recapturing	them.	Accordingly,	we	expect	compensation	for	our
efforts,	just	as	you	should	expect	a	certain	cost	for	your	carelessness.’
‘Unchain	them,’	the	stranger	said.
‘No.	What	tribe	are	you?’	The	eyes,	still	fixed	unwavering	upon	his	own,
looked	profoundly…dead.	‘What	has	happened	to	your	skin?’	As	dead	as	the
Emperor’s.	‘What	is	your	name?’
‘Unchain	them	now.’
The	Merude	shook	his	head,	then	he	laughed	–	a	little	weakly	–	and	waved
his	comrades	forward	as	he	began	drawing	his	cutlass.


Disbelief	at	the	absurdity	of	the	challenge	slowed	his	effort.	The	weapon
was	halfway	out	of	its	scabbard	when	one	of	the	stranger ’s	longswords	flashed
clear	of	its	sheath	and	opened	the	Edur ’s	throat.
Shouting	in	rage,	the	other	five	warriors	drew	their	blades	and	rushed
forward,	while	the	ten	Letherii	soldiers	quickly	followed	suit.
The	stranger	watched	the	leader	crumple	to	the	ground,	blood	spurting
wild	into	the	river	mist	descending	onto	the	road.	Then	he	unsheathed	his	other
longsword	and	stepped	to	meet	the	five	Edur.	A	clash	of	iron,	and	all	at	once
the	two	Letherii	weapons	in	the	stranger ’s	hands	were	singing,	a	rising	timbre
with	every	blow	they	absorbed.
Two	Edur	stumbled	back	at	the	same	time,	both	mortally	wounded,	one	in
the	chest,	the	other	with	a	third	of	his	skull	sliced	away.	This	latter	one	turned
away	as	the	fighting	continued,	reaching	down	to	collect	the	fragment	of	scalp
and	bone,	then	walked	drunkenly	back	along	the	road.
Another	Edur	fell,	his	left	leg	cut	out	from	beneath	him.	The	remaining
two	quickly	backed	away,	yelling	at	the	Letherii	who	were	now	hesitating	three
paces	behind	the	fight.
The	stranger	pressed	forward.	He	parried	a	thrust	from	the	Edur	on	the
right	with	the	longsword	in	his	left	hand	–	sliding	the	blade	under	then	over,
drawing	it	leftward	before	a	twist	of	his	wrist	tore	the	weapon	from	the
attacker ’s	hand;	then	a	straight-arm	thrust	of	his	own	buried	his	point	in	the
Edur ’s	throat.	At	the	same	time	he	reached	over	with	the	longsword	in	his	right
hand,	feinting	high.	The	last	Edur	leaned	back	to	avoid	that	probe,	attempting	a
slash	aimed	at	clipping	the	stranger ’s	wrist.	But	the	longsword	then	deftly
dipped,	batting	the	cutlass	away,	even	as	the	point	drove	up	into	the	warrior ’s
right	eye	socket,	breaking	the	delicate	orbital	bones	on	its	way	into	the
forebrain.
Advancing	between	the	two	falling	Edur,	the	stranger	cut	down	the	nearest
two	Letherii	–	at	which	point	the	remaining	eight	broke	and	ran,	past	the
wagons	–	where	the	drivers	were	themselves	scrambling	in	panicked
abandonment	–	and	then	alongside	the	row	of	staring	prisoners.	Running,
flinging	weapons	away,	down	the	road.
As	one	Letherii	in	particular	moved	opposite	one	of	the	slaves,	a	leg
kicked	out,	tripping	the	man,	and	it	seemed	the	chain-line	writhed	then,	as	the
ambushing	slave	leapt	atop	the	hapless	Letherii,	loose	chain	wrapping	round
the	neck,	before	the	slave	pulled	it	taut.	Legs	kicked,	arms	thrashed	and	hands
clawed,	but	the	slave	would	not	relent,	and	eventually	the	guard’s	struggles
ceased.
Silchas	Ruin,	the	swords	keening	in	his	hands,	walked	up	to	where	Udinaas


continued	strangling	the	corpse.	‘You	can	stop	now,’	the	albino	Tiste	Andii
said.
‘I	can,’	Udinaas	said	through	clenched	teeth,	‘but	I	won’t.	This	bastard	was
the	worst	of	them.	The	worst.’
‘His	soul	even	now	drowns	in	the	mist,’	Silchas	Ruin	said,	turning	as	two
figures	emerged	from	the	brush	lining	the	ditch	on	the	south	side	of	the	road.
‘Keep	choking	him,’	said	Kettle,	from	where	she	was	chained	farther	down
the	line.	‘He	hurt	me,	that	one.’
‘I	know,’	Udinaas	said	in	a	grating	voice.	‘I	know.’
Silchas	Ruin	approached	Kettle.	‘Hurt	you.	How?’
‘The	usual	way,’	she	replied.	‘With	the	thing	between	his	legs.’
‘And	the	other	Letherii?’
The	girl	shook	her	head.	‘They	just	watched.	Laughing,	always	laughing.’
Silchas	Ruin	turned	as	Seren	Pedac	arrived.
Seren	was	chilled	by	the	look	in	the	Tiste	Andii’s	uncanny	eyes	as	Silchas
Ruin	said,	‘I	will	pursue	the	ones	who	flee,	Acquitor.	And	rejoin	you	all	before
day’s	end.’
She	looked	away,	her	gaze	catching	a	momentary	glimpse	of	Fear	Sengar,
standing	over	the	corpses	of	the	Merude	Tiste	Edur,	then	quickly	on,	to	the
rock-littered	plain	to	the	south	–	where	still	wandered	the	Tiste	Edur	who’d	lost
a	third	of	his	skull.	But	that	sight	as	well	proved	too	poignant.	‘Very	well,’	she
said,	now	squinting	at	the	wagons	and	the	horses	standing	in	their	yokes.	‘We
will	continue	on	this	road.’
Udinaas	had	finally	expended	his	rage	on	the	Letherii	body	beneath	him,
and	he	rose	to	face	her.	‘Seren	Pedac,	what	of	the	rest	of	these	slaves?	We	must
free	them	all.’
She	frowned.	Exhaustion	was	making	thinking	difficult.	Months	and
months	of	hiding,	fleeing,	eluding	both	Edur	and	Letherii;	of	finding	their
efforts	to	head	eastward	blocked	again	and	again,	forcing	them	ever
northward,	and	the	endless	terror	that	lived	within	her,	had	driven	all	acuity
from	her	thoughts.	Free	them.	Yes.	But	then…
‘Just	more	rumours,’	Udinaas	said,	as	if	reading	her	mind,	as	if	finding	her
thoughts	before	she	did.	‘There’s	plenty	of	those,	confusing	our	hunters.
Listen,	Seren,	they	already	know	where	we	are,	more	or	less.	And	these	slaves
–	they’ll	do	whatever	they	can	to	avoid	recapture.	We	need	not	worry
overmuch	about	them.’
She	raised	her	brows.	‘You	vouch	for	your	fellow	Indebted,	Udinaas?	All
of	whom	will	turn	away	from	a	chance	to	buy	their	way	clear	with	vital
information,	yes?’


‘The	only	alternative,	then,’	he	said,	eyeing	her,	‘is	to	kill	them	all.’
The	ones	listening,	the	ones	not	yet	beaten	down	into	mindless	automatons,
suddenly	raised	their	voices	in	proclamations	and	promises,	reaching	out
towards	Seren,	chains	rattling.	The	others	looked	up	in	fear,	like	myrid
catching	scent	of	a	wolf	they	could	not	see.	Some	cried	out,	cowering	in	the
stony	mud	of	the	road.
‘The	first	Edur	he	killed,’	said	Udinaas,	‘has	the	keys.’
Silchas	Ruin	had	walked	down	the	road.	Barely	visible	in	the	mist,	the	Tiste
Andii	veered	into	something	huge,	winged,	then	took	to	the	air.	Seren	glanced
over	at	the	row	of	slaves	–	none	had	seen	that,	she	was	relieved	to	note.	‘Very
well,’	she	said	in	answer	to	Udinaas,	and	she	walked	up	to	where	Fear	Sengar
still	stood	near	the	dead	Edur.
‘I	must	take	the	keys,’	she	said,	crouching	beside	the	first	fallen	Edur.
‘Do	not	touch	him,’	Fear	said.
She	looked	up	at	him.	‘The	keys	–	the	chains—’
‘I	will	find	them,’	he	said.
Nodding,	she	straightened,	then	stepped	back.	Watched	as	he	spoke	a	silent
prayer,	then	settled	onto	his	knees	beside	the	body.	He	found	the	keys	in	a
leather	pouch	tied	to	the	warrior ’s	belt,	a	pouch	that	also	contained	a	handful	of
polished	stones.	Fear	took	the	keys	in	his	left	hand	and	held	the	stones	in	the
palm	of	his	right.	‘These,’	he	said,	‘are	from	the	Merude	shore.	Likely	he
collected	them	when	but	a	child.’
‘Children	grow	up,’	Seren	said.	‘Even	straight	trees	spawn	crooked
branches.’
‘And	what	was	flawed	in	this	warrior?’	Fear	demanded,	glaring	up	at	her.
‘He	followed	my	brother,	as	did	every	other	warrior	of	the	tribes.’
‘Some	eventually	turned	away,	Fear.’	Like	you.
‘What	I	have	turned	away	from	lies	in	the	shadow	of	what	I	am	now	turned
towards,	Acquitor.	Does	this	challenge	my	loyalty	towards	the	Tiste	Edur?	My
own	kind?	No.	That	is	something	all	of	you	forget,	conveniently	so,	again	and
again.	Understand	me,	Acquitor.	I	will	hide	if	I	must,	but	I	will	not	kill	my	own
people.	We	had	the	coin,	we	could	have	bought	their	freedom—’
‘Not	Udinaas.’
He	bared	his	teeth,	said	nothing.
Yes,	Udinaas,	the	one	man	you	dream	of	killing.	If	not	for	Silchas
Ruin…‘Fear	Sengar,’	she	said.	‘You	have	chosen	to	travel	with	us,	and	there
can	be	no	doubt	–	none	at	all	–	that	Silchas	Ruin	commands	this	meagre	party.
Dislike	his	methods	if	you	must,	but	he	alone	will	see	you	through.	You	know
this.’


The	Hiroth	warrior	looked	away,	back	down	the	road,	blinking	the	water
from	his	eyes.	‘And	with	each	step,	the	cost	of	my	quest	becomes	greater	–	an
indebtedness	you	should	well	understand,	Acquitor.	The	Letherii	way	of	living,
the	burdens	you	can	never	escape.	Nor	purchase	your	way	clear.’
She	reached	out	for	the	keys.
He	set	them	into	her	hand,	unwilling	to	meet	her	eyes.
We’re	no	different	from	those	slaves.	She	hefted	the	weight	of	the	jangling
iron	in	her	hand.	Chained	together.	Yet…who	holds	the	means	of	our	release?
‘Where	has	he	gone?’	Fear	asked.
‘To	hunt	down	the	Letherii.	I	trust	you	do	not	object	to	that.’
‘No,	but	you	should,	Acquitor.’
I	suppose	I	should	at	that.	She	set	off	to	where	waited	the	slaves.
A	prisoner	near	Udinaas	had	crawled	close	to	him,	and	Seren	heard	his
whispered	question:	‘That	tall	slayer	–	was	that	the	White	Crow?	He	was,
wasn’t	he?	I	have	heard—’
‘You	have	heard	nothing,’	Udinaas	said,	raising	his	arms	as	Seren
approached.	‘The	three-edged	one,’	he	said	to	her.	‘Yes,	that	one.	Errant	take
us,	you	took	your	time.’
She	worked	the	key	until	the	first	shackle	clicked	open.	‘You	two	were
supposed	to	be	stealing	from	a	farm	–	not	getting	rounded	up	by	slavetrackers.’
‘Trackers	camped	on	the	damned	grounds	–	no-one	was	smiling	on	us	that
night.’
She	opened	the	other	shackle	and	Udinaas	stepped	out	from	the	line,
rubbing	at	the	red	weals	round	his	wrists.	Seren	said,	‘Fear	sought	to	dissuade
Silchas	–	you	know,	if	those	two	are	any	indication,	it’s	no	wonder	the	Edur
and	the	Andii	fought	ten	thousand	wars.’
Udinaas	grunted	as	the	two	made	their	way	to	where	stood	Kettle.	‘Fear
resents	his	loss	of	command,’	he	said.	‘That	it	is	to	a	Tiste	Andii	just	makes	it
worse.	He’s	still	not	convinced	the	betrayal	was	the	other	way	round	all	those
centuries	back;	that	it	was	Scabandari	who	first	drew	the	knife.’
Seren	Pedac	said	nothing.	As	she	moved	in	front	of	Kettle	she	looked	down
at	the	girl’s	dirt-smeared	face,	the	ancient	eyes	slowly	lifting	to	meet	her	own.
Kettle	smiled.	‘I	missed	you.’
‘How	badly	were	you	used?’	Seren	asked	as	she	removed	the	large	iron
shackles.
‘I	can	walk.	And	the	bleeding’s	stopped.	That’s	a	good	sign,	isn’t	it?’
‘Probably.’	But	this	talk	of	rape	was	unwelcome	–	Seren	had	her	own
memories	haunting	her	every	waking	moment.	‘There	will	be	scars,	Kettle.’


‘Being	alive	is	hard.	I’m	always	hungry,	and	my	feet	hurt.’
I	hate	children	with	secrets	–	especially	ones	with	secrets	they’re	not	even
aware	of.	Find	the	right	questions;	there’s	no	other	way	of	doing	this.	‘What
else	bothers	you	about	being	among	the	living	again,	Kettle?’	And…how?
Why?
‘Feeling	small.’
Seren’s	right	arm	was	plucked	by	a	slave,	an	old	man	who	reached	out	for
the	keys	with	pathetic	hope	in	his	eyes.	She	handed	them	to	him.	‘Free	the
others,’	she	said.	He	nodded	vigorously,	scrabbling	at	his	shackles.	‘Now,’
Seren	said	to	Kettle,	‘that’s	a	feeling	we	all	must	accept.	Too	much	of	the	world
defies	our	efforts	to	conform	to	what	would	please	us.	To	live	is	to	know
dissatisfaction	and	frustration.’
‘I	still	want	to	tear	out	throats,	Seren.	Is	that	bad?	I	think	it	must	be.’
At	Kettle’s	words,	the	old	man	shrank	away,	redoubling	his	clumsy
attempts	at	releasing	himself.	Behind	him	a	woman	cursed	with	impatience.
Udinaas	had	climbed	onto	the	bed	of	the	lead	wagon	and	was	busy	looting
it	for	whatever	they	might	need.	Kettle	scrambled	to	join	him.
‘We	need	to	move	out	of	this	mist,’	Seren	muttered.	‘I’m	soaked	through.’
She	walked	towards	the	wagon.	‘Hurry	up	with	that,	you	two.	If	more	company
finds	us	here,	we	could	be	in	trouble.’	Especially	now	that	Silchas	Ruin	is	gone.
The	Tiste	Andii	had	been	the	singular	reason	for	their	survival	thus	far.	When
hiding	and	evading	the	searchers	failed,	his	two	swords	found	voice,	the	eerie
song	of	obliteration.	The	White	Crow.
It	had	been	a	week	since	they	last	caught	sight	of	Edur	and	Letherii	who
were	clearly	hunters.	Seeking	the	traitor,	Fear	Sengar.	Seeking	the	betrayer,
Udinaas.	Yet	Seren	Pedac	was	bemused	–	there	should	have	been	entire	armies
chasing	them.	While	the	pursuit	was	persistent,	it	was	dogged	rather	than
ferocious	in	its	execution.	Silchas	had	mentioned,	once,	in	passing,	that	the
Emperor ’s	K’risnan	were	working	ritual	sorceries,	the	kind	that	sought	to	lure
and	trap.	And	that	snares	awaited	them	to	the	east,	and	round	Letheras	itself.
She	could	understand	those	to	the	east,	for	it	was	the	wild	lands	beyond	the
empire	that	had	been	their	destination	all	along,	where	Fear	–	for	some	reason
he	did	not	care	to	explain	–	believed	he	would	find	what	he	sought;	a	belief	that
Silchas	Ruin	did	not	refute.	But	to	surround	the	capital	city	itself	baffled	Seren.
As	if	Rhulad	is	frightened	of	his	brother.
Udinaas	leapt	down	from	the	lead	wagon	and	made	his	way	to	the	second
one.	‘I	found	coin,’	he	said.	‘Lots.	We	should	take	these	horses,	too	–	we	can
sell	them	once	we’re	down	the	other	side	of	the	pass.’
‘There	is	a	fort	at	the	pass,’	Seren	said.	‘It	may	be	un-garrisoned,	but


there’s	no	guarantee	of	that,	Udinaas.	If	we	arrive	with	horses	–	and	they
recognize	them…’
‘We	go	round	that	fort,’	he	replied.	‘At	night.	Unseen.’
She	frowned,	wiped	water	from	her	eyes.	‘Easier	done	without	horses.
Besides,	these	beasts	are	old,	too	broken	–	they	won’t	earn	us	much,	especially
in	Bluerose.	And	when	Wyval	returns	they’ll	probably	die	of	terror.’
‘Wyval’s	not	coming	back,’	Udinaas	said,	turning	away,	his	voice	grating.
‘Wyval’s	gone,	and	that’s	that.’
She	knew	she	should	not	doubt	him.	The	dragon-spawn’s	spirit	had	dwelt
within	him,	after	all.	Yet	there	was	no	obvious	explanation	for	the	winged
beast’s	sudden	disappearance,	at	least	none	that	Udinaas	would	share.	Wyval
had	been	gone	for	over	a	month.
Udinaas	swore	from	where	he	crouched	atop	the	bed	of	the	wagon.
‘Nothing	here	but	weapons.’
‘Weapons?’
‘Swords,	shields	and	armour.’
‘Letherii?’
‘Yes.	Middling	quality.’
‘What	were	these	slavers	doing	with	a	wagon	load	of	weapons?’
Shrugging,	he	climbed	back	down,	hurried	past	her	and	began	unhitching
the	horses.	‘These	beasts	would’ve	had	a	hard	time	on	the	ascent.’
‘Silchas	Ruin	is	coming	back,’	Kettle	said,	pointing	down	the	road.
‘That	was	fast.’
Udinaas	laughed	harshly,	then	said,	‘The	fools	should	have	scattered,	made
him	hunt	each	one	down	separately.	Instead,	they	probably	regrouped,	like	the
stupid	good	soldiers	they	were.’
From	near	the	front	wagon,	Fear	Sengar	spoke.	‘Your	blood	is	very	thin,
Udinaas,	isn’t	it?’
‘Like	water,’	the	ex-slave	replied.
For	Errant’s	sake,	Fear,	he	did	not	choose	to	abandon	your	brother.	You
know	that.	Nor	is	he	responsible	for	Rhulad’s	madness.	So	how	much	of	your
hatred	for	Udinaas	comes	from	guilt?	Who	truly	is	to	blame	for	Rhulad?	For
the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths?
The	white-skinned	Tiste	Andii	strode	from	the	mists,	an	apparition,	his
black	cloak	glistening	like	snakeskin.	Swords	sheathed	once	more,	muting
their	cries	–	iron	voices	reluctant	to	fade,	they	would	persist	for	days,	now.
How	she	hated	that	sound.
	


Tanal	Yathvanar	stood	looking	down	at	the	naked	woman	on	his	bed.	The
questioners	had	worked	hard	on	her,	seeking	the	answers	they	wanted.	She	was
badly	broken,	her	skin	cut	and	burned,	her	joints	swollen	and	mottled	with
bruises.	She	had	been	barely	conscious	when	he’d	used	her	last	night.	This	was
easier	than	whores,	and	cost	him	nothing	besides.	He	wasn’t	much	interested	in
beating	his	women,	just	in	seeing	them	beaten.	He	understood	his	desire	was
perversion,	but	this	organization	–	the	Patriotists	–	was	the	perfect	haven	for
people	like	him.	Power	and	immunity,	a	most	deadly	combination.	He
suspected	that	Karos	Invictad	was	well	aware	of	Tanal’s	nightly	escapades,	and
held	that	knowledge	like	a	sheathed	knife.
It’s	not	as	if	I’ve	killed	her.	It’s	not	as	if	she’ll	even	remember	this.	She’s
destined	for	the	Drownings	in	any	case	–	what	matter	if	I	take	some	pleasure
first?	Soldiers	do	the	same.	He	had	dreamed	of	being	a	soldier	once,	years	ago,
when	in	his	youth	he	had	held	to	misguided,	romantic	notions	of	heroism	and
unconstrained	freedom,	as	if	the	first	justified	the	second.	There	had	been
many	noble	killers	in	the	history	of	Lether.	Gerun	Eberict	had	been	such	a	man.
He’d	murdered	thousands	–	thieves,	thugs	and	wastrels,	the	depraved	and	the
destitute.	He	had	cleansed	the	streets	of	Letheras,	and	who	had	not	indulged	in
the	rewards?	Fewer	beggars,	fewer	pickpockets,	fewer	homeless	and	all	the
other	decrepit	failures	of	the	modern	age.	Tanal	admired	Gerun	Eberict	–	he
had	been	a	great	man.	Murdered	by	a	thug,	his	skull	crushed	to	pulp	–	a	tragic
loss,	senseless	and	cruel.
One	day	we	shall	find	that	killer.
He	turned	away	from	the	unconscious	woman,	adjusted	his	light	tunic	so
that	the	shoulder	seams	were	even	and	straight,	then	closed	the	clasps	of	his
weapon	belt.	One	of	the	Invigilator ’s	requirements	for	all	officers	of	the
Patriotists:	belt,	dagger	and	shortsword.	Tanal	liked	the	weight	of	them,	the
authority	implicit	in	the	privilege	of	wearing	arms	where	all	other	Letherii	–
barring	soldiers	–	were	forbidden	by	proclamation	of	the	Emperor.
As	if	we	might	rebel.	The	damned	fool	thinks	he	won	that	war.	They	all	do.
Dimwitted	barbarians.
Tanal	Yathvanar	walked	to	the	door,	stepped	out	into	the	corridor,	and
made	his	way	towards	the	Invigilator ’s	office.	The	second	bell	after	midday
sounded	a	moment	before	he	knocked	on	the	door.	A	murmured	invitation	bade
him	enter.
He	found	Rautos	Hivanar,	Master	of	the	Liberty	Consign,	already	seated
opposite	Karos	Invictad.	The	large	man	seemed	to	fill	half	the	room,	and	Tanal
noted	that	the	Invigilator	had	pushed	his	own	chair	as	far	back	as	possible,	so
that	it	was	tilted	against	the	sill	of	the	window.	In	this	space	on	his	side	of	the


desk,	Karos	attempted	a	posture	of	affable	comfort.
‘Tanal,	our	guest	is	being	most	insistent	with	respect	to	his	suspicions.
Sufficient	to	convince	me	that	we	must	devote	considerable	attention	to	finding
the	source	of	the	threat.’
‘Invigilator,	is	the	intent	sedition	or	treason,	or	are	we	dealing	with	a
thief?’
‘A	thief,	I	should	think,’	Karos	replied,	glancing	over	at	Rautos	Hivanar.
The	man’s	cheeks	bulged,	before	he	released	a	slow	sigh.	‘I	am	not	so	sure.
On	the	surface,	we	appear	to	be	facing	an	obsessive	individual,	consumed	by
greed	and,	accordingly,	hoarding	wealth.	But	only	as	actual	coin,	and	this	is
why	it	is	proving	so	difficult	to	find	a	trail.	No	properties,	no	ostentation,	no
flouting	of	privilege.	Now,	as	subtle	consequence,	the	shortage	of	coin	is
finally	noticeable.	True,	no	actual	damage	to	the	empire’s	financial	structure
has	occurred.	Yet.	But,	if	the	depletion	continues,’	he	shook	his	head,	‘we	will
begin	to	feel	the	strain.’
Tanal	cleared	his	throat,	then	asked,	‘Master,	have	you	assigned	agents	of
your	own	to	investigate	the	situation?’
Rautos	frowned.	‘The	Liberty	Consign	thrives	precisely	because	its
members	hold	to	the	conviction	of	being	the	most	powerful	players	in	an
unassailable	system.	Confidence	is	a	most	fragile	quality,	Tanal	Yathvanar.
Granted,	a	few	who	deal	specifically	in	finances	have	brought	to	me	their
concerns.	Druz	Thennict,	Barrakta	Ilk,	for	example.	But	there	is	nothing	as	yet
formalized	–	no	true	suspicion	that	something	is	awry.	Neither	man	is	a	fool,
however.’	He	glanced	out	of	the	window	behind	Karos	Invictad.	‘The
investigation	must	be	conducted	by	the	Patriotists,	in	utmost	secrecy.’	The
heavy-lidded	eyes	lowered,	settling	on	the	Invigilator.	‘I	understand	that	you
have	been	targeting	academics	and	scholars	of	late.’
A	modest	shrug	and	lift	of	the	brows	from	Karos	Invictad.	‘The	many	paths
of	treason.’
‘Some	are	members	of	established	and	respected	families	in	Lether.’
‘No,	Rautos,	not	the	ones	we	have	arrested.’
‘True,	but	those	unfortunate	victims	have	friends,	Invigilator,	who	have	in
turn	appealed	to	me.’
‘Well,	my	friend,	this	is	delicate	indeed.	You	tread	now	on	the	thinnest	skin
of	ground,	with	naught	but	mud	beneath.’	He	sat	forward,	folding	his	hands	on
the	desk.	‘But	I	shall	look	into	it	nonetheless.	Perhaps	the	recent	spate	of	arrests
has	succeeded	in	quelling	the	disenchantment	among	the	learned,	or	at	least
culled	the	most	egregious	of	their	lot.’
‘Thank	you,	Invigilator.	Now,	who	will	conduct	your	investigation?’


‘Why,	I	will	attend	to	this	personally.’
‘Venitt	Sathad,	my	assistant	who	awaits	in	the	courtyard	below,	can	serve	as
liaison	between	your	organization	and	myself	for	this	week;	thereafter,	I	will
assign	someone	else.’
‘Very	good.	Weekly	reports	should	suffice,	at	least	to	start.’
‘Agreed.’
Rautos	Hivanar	rose,	and	after	a	moment	Karos	Invictad	followed	suit.
The	office	was	suddenly	very	cramped,	and	Tanal	edged	back,	angry	at	the
intimidation	he	felt	instinctively	rising	within	him.	I	have	nothing	to	fear	from
Rautos	Hivanar.	Nor	Karos.	I	am	their	confidant,	the	both	of	them.	They	trust
me.
Karos	Invictad	was	a	step	behind	Rautos,	one	hand	on	the	man’s	back	as	the
Master	opened	the	door.	As	soon	as	Rautos	stepped	into	the	hallway,	Karos
smiled	and	said	a	few	last	words	to	the	man,	who	grunted	in	reply,	and	then	the
Invigilator	closed	the	door	and	turned	to	face	Tanal.
‘One	of	those	well-respected	academics	is	now	staining	your	sheets,
Yathvanar.’
Tanal	blinked.	‘Sir,	she	was	sentenced	to	the	Drowning—’
‘Revoke	the	punishment.	Get	her	cleaned	up.’
‘Sir,	it	may	well	be	that	she	will	recall—’
‘A	certain	measure	of	restraint,’	Karos	Invictad	said	in	a	cold	tone,	‘is
required	from	you,	Tanal	Yathvanar.	Arrest	some	daughters	of	those	already	in
chains,	damn	you,	and	have	your	fun	with	them.	Am	I	understood?’
‘Y-yes	sir.	If	she	remembers—’
‘Then	restitution	will	be	necessary,	won’t	it?	I	trust	you	keep	your	own
finances	in	order,	Yathvanar.	Now,	begone	from	my	sight.’
As	Tanal	closed	the	door	behind	him,	he	struggled	to	draw	breath.	The
bastard.	There	was	no	warning	off	her,	was	there?	Whose	mistake	was	all	this?
Yet,	you	think	to	make	me	pay	for	it.	All	of	it.	Blade	and	Axe	take	you,	Invictad,
I	won’t	suffer	alone.
I	won’t.
	
‘Depravity	holds	a	certain	fascination,	don’t	you	think?’
‘No.’
‘After	all,	the	sicker	the	soul,	the	sweeter	its	comeuppance.’
‘Assuming	there	is	one.’
‘There’s	a	centre	point,	I’m	sure	of	it.	And	it	should	be	dead	centre,	by	my
calculations.	Perhaps	the	fulcrum	itself	is	flawed.’


‘What	calculations?’
‘Well,	the	ones	I	asked	you	to	do	for	me,	of	course.	Where	are	they?’
‘They’re	on	my	list.’
‘And	how	do	you	calculate	the	order	of	your	list?’
‘That’s	not	the	calculation	you	asked	for.’
‘Good	point.	Anyway,	if	he’d	just	hold	all	his	legs	still,	we	could	properly
test	my	hypothesis.’
‘He	doesn’t	want	to,	and	I	can	see	why.	You’re	trying	to	balance	him	at	the
mid-point	of	his	body,	but	he’s	designed	to	hold	that	part	up,	with	all	those
legs.’
‘Are	those	formal	observations?	If	so,	make	a	note.’
‘On	what?	We	had	the	wax	slab	for	lunch.’
‘No	wonder	I	feel	I	could	swallow	a	cow	with	nary	a	hiccough.	Look!	Hah!
He’s	perched!	Perfectly	perched!’
Both	men	leaned	in	to	examine	Ezgara,	the	insect	with	a	head	at	each	end.
Not	unique,	of	course,	there	were	plenty	around	these	days,	filling	some	arcane
niche	in	the	complicated	miasma	of	nature,	a	niche	that	had	been	vacant	for
countless	millennia.	The	creature’s	broken-twig	legs	kicked	out	helplessly.
‘You’re	torturing	him,’	said	Bugg,	‘with	clear	depravity,	Tehol.’
‘It	only	seems	that	way.’
‘No,	it	is	that	way.’
‘All	right,	then.’	Tehol	reached	down	and	plucked	the	hapless	insect	from
the	fulcrum.	Its	heads	swivelled	about.	‘Anyway,’	he	said	as	he	peered	closely
at	the	creature,	‘that	wasn’t	the	depravity	I	was	talking	about.	How	goes	the
construction	business,	by	the	way?’
‘Sinking	fast.’
‘Ah.	Is	that	an	affirmation	or	decried	destitution?’
‘We’re	running	out	of	buyers.	No	hard	coin,	and	I’m	done	with	credit,
especially	when	it	turns	out	the	developers	can’t	sell	the	properties.	So	I’ve	had
to	lay	everyone	off,	including	myself.’
‘When	did	all	this	happen?’
‘Tomorrow.’
‘Typical.	I’m	always	the	last	to	hear.	Is	Ezgara	hungry,	do	you	think?’
‘He	ate	more	wax	than	you	did	–	where	do	you	think	all	the	waste	goes?’
‘His	or	mine?’
‘Master,	I	already	know	where	yours	goes,	and	if	Biri	ever	finds	out—’
‘Not	another	word,	Bugg.	Now,	by	my	observations,	and	according	to	the
notations	you	failed	to	make,	Ezgara	has	consumed	food	equivalent	in	weight
to	a	drowned	cat.	Yet	he	remains	tiny,	spry,	fit,	and	thanks	to	our	wax	lunch


today	his	heads	no	longer	squeak	when	they	swivel,	which	I	take	to	be	a	good
sign,	since	now	we	won’t	be	woken	up	a	hundred	times	a	night.’
‘Master.’
‘Yes?’
‘How	do	you	know	how	much	a	drowned	cat	weighs?’
‘Selush,	of	course.’
‘I	don’t	understand.’
‘You	must	remember.	Three	years	ago.	That	feral	cat	netted	in	the
Rinnesict	Estate,	the	one	raping	a	flightless	ornamental	duck.	It	was	sentenced
to	Drowning.’
‘A	terrible	demise	for	a	cat.	Yes,	I	remember	now.	The	yowl	heard	across
the	city.’
‘That’s	the	one.	Some	unnamed	benefactor	took	pity	on	the	sodden	feline
corpse,	paying	Selush	a	small	fortune	to	dress	the	beast	for	proper	burial.’
‘You	must	be	mad.	Who	would	do	that	and	why?’
‘For	ulterior	motives,	obviously.	I	wanted	to	know	how	much	a	drowned
cat	weighs,	of	course.	Otherwise,	how	valid	the	comparison?	Descriptively,
I’ve	been	waiting	to	use	it	for	years.’
‘Three.’
‘No,	much	longer.	Hence	my	curiosity,	and	opportunism.	Prior	to	that	cat’s
watery	end,	I	feared	voicing	the	comparison,	which,	lacking	veracity	on	my
part,	would	invite	ridicule.’
‘You’re	a	tender	one,	aren’t	you?’
‘Don’t	tell	anyone.’
‘Master,	about	those	vaults.’
‘What	about	them?’
‘I	think	extensions	are	required.’
Tehol	used	the	tip	of	his	right	index	finger	to	stroke	the	insect’s	back	–	or,
alternatively,	rub	it	the	wrong	way.	‘Already?	Well,	how	far	under	the	river	are
you	right	now?’
‘More	than	halfway.’
‘And	that	is	how	many?’
‘Vaults?	Sixteen.	Each	one	three	man-heights	by	two.’
‘All	filled?’
‘All.’
‘Oh.	So	presumably	it’s	starting	to	hurt.’
‘Bugg’s	Construction	will	be	the	first	major	enterprise	to	collapse.’
‘And	how	many	will	it	drag	down	with	it?’
‘No	telling.	Three,	maybe	four.’


‘I	thought	you	said	there	was	no	telling.’
‘So	don’t	tell	anyone.’
‘Good	idea.	Bugg,	I	need	you	to	build	me	a	box,	to	very	specific
specifications	which	I’ll	come	up	with	later.’
‘A	box,	Master.	Wood	good	enough?’
‘What	kind	of	sentence	is	that?	Would	good	enough.’
‘No,	wood,	you	know,	the	burning	kind.’
‘Yes,	would	that	wood	will	do.’
‘Size?’
‘Absolutely.	But	no	lid.’
‘Finally,	you’re	getting	specific.’
‘I	told	you	I	would.’
‘What’s	this	box	for,	Master?’
‘I	can’t	tell	you,	alas.	Not	specifically.	But	I	need	it	soon.’
‘About	the	vaults…’
‘Make	ten	more,	Bugg.	Double	the	size.	As	for	Bugg’s	Construction,	hold
on	for	a	while	longer,	amass	debt,	evade	the	creditors,	keep	purchasing
materials	and	stockpiling	them	in	storage	buildings	charging	exorbitant	rent.
Oh,	and	embezzle	all	you	can.’
‘I’ll	lose	my	head.’
‘Don’t	worry.	Ezgara	here	has	one	to	spare.’
‘Why,	thank	you.’
‘Doesn’t	even	squeak,	either.’
‘That’s	a	relief.	What	are	you	doing	now,	Master?’
‘What’s	it	look	like?’
‘You’re	going	back	to	bed.’
‘And	you	need	to	build	a	box,	Bugg,	a	most	clever	box.	Remember,
though,	no	lid.’
‘Can	I	at	least	ask	what	it’s	for?’
Tehol	settled	back	on	his	bed,	studied	the	blue	sky	overhead	for	a	moment,
then	smiled	over	at	his	manservant	–	who	just	happened	to	be	an	Elder	God.
‘Why,	comeuppance,	Bugg,	what	else?’


Chapter	Two

The	waking	moment	awaits	us	all	upon	a	threshold	or	where	the	road
turns	if	life	is	pulled,	sparks	like	moths	inward	to	this	single	sliver	of
time	gleaming	like	sunlight	on	water,	we	will	accrete	into	a	mass	made
small,	veined	with	fears	and	shot	through	with	all	that’s	suddenly
precious,	and	the	now	is	swallowed,	the	weight	of	self	a	crushing
immediacy,	on	this	day,	where	the	road	turns,	comes	the	waking
moment.
Winter	Reflections
Corara	of	Drene
The	ascent	to	the	summit	began	where	the	Letherii-built	road	ended.	With	the
river	voicing	its	ceaseless	roar	fifteen	paces	to	their	left,	the	roughly	shaped
pavestones	vanished	beneath	a	black-stoned	slide	at	the	base	of	a	moraine.
Uprooted	trees	reached	bent	and	twisted	arms	up	through	the	rubble,	jutting
limbs	from	which	hung	root	tendrils,	dripping	water.	Swaths	of	forest	climbed
the	mountainside	to	the	north,	on	the	other	side	of	the	river,	and	the	ragged
cliffs	edging	the	tumbling	water	on	that	side	were	verdant	with	moss.	The
opposite	mountain,	flanking	the	trail,	was	a	stark	contrast,	latticed	with
fissures,	broken,	gouged	and	mostly	treeless.	In	the	midst	of	this	shattered
façade	shadows	marked	out	odd	regularities,	of	line	and	angle;	and	upon	the
trail	itself,	here	and	there,	broad	worn	steps	had	been	carved,	eroded	by
flowing	water	and	centuries	of	footfalls.
Seren	Pedac	believed	that	a	city	had	once	occupied	the	entire	mountainside,
a	vertical	fortress	carved	into	living	stone.	She	could	make	out	what	she
thought	were	large	gaping	windows,	and	possibly	the	fragmented	ledges	of
balconies	high	up,	hazy	in	the	mists.	Yet	something	–	something	huge,	terrible
in	its	monstrosity	–	had	impacted	the	entire	side	of	the	mountain,	obliterating
most	of	the	city	in	a	single	blow.	She	could	almost	discern	the	outline	of	that
collision,	yet	among	the	screes	of	rubble	tracking	down	the	sundered	slopes
the	only	visible	stone	belonged	to	the	mountain	itself.


They	stood	at	the	base	of	the	trail.	Seren	watched	the	lifeless	eyes	of	the
Tiste	Andii	slowly	scan	upward.
‘Well?’	she	asked.
Silchas	Ruin	shook	his	head.	‘Not	from	my	people.	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘A	victim	of	your	war?’
He	glanced	across	at	her,	as	if	gauging	the	emotion	behind	her	question,
then	said,	‘Most	of	the	mountains	from	which	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	carved
their	sky	keeps	are	now	beneath	the	waves,	inundated	following	the	collapse	of
Omtose	Phellack.	The	cities	are	cut	into	the	stone,	although	only	in	the	very
earliest	versions	are	they	as	you	see	here	–	open	to	the	air	rather	than	buried
within	shapeless	rock.’
‘An	elaboration	suggesting	a	sudden	need	for	self-defence.’
He	nodded.
Fear	Sengar	had	moved	past	them	and	was	beginning	the	ascent.	After	a
moment	Udinaas	and	Kettle	followed.	Seren	had	prevailed	in	her	insistence	to
leave	the	horses	behind.	In	a	clearing	off	to	their	right	sat	four	wagons	covered
with	tarps.	It	was	clear	that	no	such	contrivance	could	manage	this	climb,	and
all	transport	from	here	on	was	by	foot.	As	for	the	mass	of	weapons	and
armour	the	slavers	had	been	conveying,	either	it	would	have	been	stashed	here,
awaiting	a	hauling	crew,	or	the	slaves	would	have	been	burdened	like	mules.
‘I	have	never	made	this	particular	crossing,’	Seren	said,	‘although	I	have
viewed	this	mountainside	from	a	distance.	Even	then,	I	thought	I	could	see
evidence	of	reshaping.	I	once	asked	Hull	Beddict	about	it,	but	he	would	tell	me
nothing.	At	some	point,	however,	I	think	our	trail	takes	us	inside.’
‘The	sorcery	that	destroyed	this	city	was	formidable,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.
‘Perhaps	some	natural	force—’
‘No,	Acquitor.	Starvald	Demelain.	The	destruction	was	the	work	of
dragons.	Eleint	of	the	pure	blood.	At	least	a	dozen,	working	in	concert,	a
combined	unleashing	of	their	warrens.	Unusual,’	he	added.
‘Which	part?’
‘Such	a	large	alliance,	for	one.	Also,	the	extent	of	their	rage.	I	wonder	what
crime	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	committed	to	warrant	such	retaliation.’
‘I	know	the	answer	to	that,’	came	a	sibilant	whisper	from	behind	them,	and
Seren	turned,	squinted	down	at	the	insubstantial	wraith	crouched	there.
‘Wither.	I	was	wondering	where	you	had	gone	to.’
‘Journeys	into	the	heart	of	the	stone,	Seren	Pedac.	Into	the	frozen	blood.
What	was	their	crime,	you	wonder,	Silchas	Ruin?	Why,	nothing	less	than	the
assured	annihilation	of	all	existence.	If	extinction	awaited	them,	then	so	too
would	all	else	die.	Desperation,	or	evil	spite?	Perhaps	neither,	perhaps	a


terrible	accident,	that	wounding	at	the	centre	of	it	all.	But	what	do	we	care?	We
shall	all	be	dust	by	then.	Indifferent.	Insensate.’
Silchas	Ruin	said,	without	turning,	‘Beware	the	frozen	blood,	Wither.	It	can
still	take	you.’
The	wraith	hissed	a	laugh.	‘Like	an	ant	to	sap,	yes.	Oh,	but	it	is	so
seductive,	Master.’
‘You	have	been	warned.	If	you	are	snared,	I	cannot	free	you.’
The	wraith	slithered	past	them,	flowed	up	the	ragged	steps.
Seren	adjusted	the	leather	satchel	on	her	shoulders.	‘The	Fent	carried
supplies	balanced	on	their	heads.	Would	that	I	could	do	the	same.’
‘The	vertebrae	become	compacted,’	Silchas	Ruin	said,	‘resulting	in
chronic	pain.’
‘Well,	mine	are	feeling	rather	crunched	right	now,	so	I’m	afraid	I	don’t	see
much	difference.’	She	began	the	climb.	‘You	know,	as	a	Soletaken,	you	could
just—’
‘No,’	he	said	as	he	followed,	‘there	is	too	much	bloodlust	in	the	veering.
The	draconean	hunger	within	me	is	where	lives	my	anger,	and	that	anger	is	not
easily	contained.’
She	snorted,	unable	to	help	herself.
‘You	are	amused,	Acquitor?’
‘Scabandari	is	dead.	Fear	has	seen	his	shattered	skull.	You	were	stabbed
and	then	imprisoned,	and	now	that	you	are	free,	all	that	consumes	you	is	the
desire	for	vengeance	–	against	what?	Some	incorporeal	soul?	Something	less
than	a	wraith?	What	will	be	left	of	Scabandari	by	now?	Silchas	Ruin,	yours	is	a
pathetic	obsession.	At	least	Fear	Sengar	seeks	something	positive	–	not	that
he’ll	find	it	since	you	will	probably	annihilate	what’s	left	of	Scabandari	before
he	gets	a	chance	to	talk	to	it,	assuming	that’s	even	possible.’	When	he	said
nothing,	she	continued,	‘It	seems	I	am	now	fated	to	guiding	such	quests.	Just
like	my	last	journey,	the	one	that	took	me	to	the	lands	of	the	Tiste	Edur.
Everyone	at	odds,	motives	hidden	and	in	conflict.	My	task	was	singular,	of
course:	deliver	the	fools,	then	stand	well	back	as	the	knives	are	drawn.’
‘Acquitor,	my	anger	is	more	complicated	than	you	believe.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘The	future	you	set	before	us	is	too	simple,	too	confined.	I	suspect	that
when	we	arrive	at	our	destination,	nothing	will	proceed	as	you	anticipate.’
She	grunted.	‘I	will	accept	that,	since	it	was	without	doubt	the	case	in	the
village	of	the	Warlock	King.	After	all,	the	fallout	was	the	conquest	of	the
Letherii	Empire.’
‘Do	you	take	responsibility	for	that,	Acquitor?’


‘I	take	responsibility	for	very	little,	Silchas	Ruin.	That	much	must	be
obvious.’
The	steps	were	steep,	the	edges	worn	and	treacherous.	As	they	climbed,	the
air	thinned,	mists	swirling	in	from	the	tumbling	falls	on	their	left,	the	sound	a
roar	that	clambered	among	the	stones	in	a	tumult	of	echoes.	Where	the	ancient
stairs	vanished	entirely,	wooden	trestles	had	been	constructed,	forming
something	between	a	ladder	and	steps	against	the	sheer,	angled	rock.
They	found	a	ledge	a	third	of	the	way	up	where	they	could	gather	to	rest.
Among	the	scatter	of	rubble	on	the	shelf	were	remnants	of	metopes,	cornices
and	friezes	bearing	carvings	too	fragmented	to	be	identifiable	–	suggesting
that	an	entire	façade	had	once	existed	directly	above	them.	The	scaffolding
became	a	true	ladder	here,	and	off	to	the	right,	three	man-heights	up,	gaped	the
mouth	of	a	cave,	rectangular,	almost	door-shaped.
Udinaas	stood	regarding	that	dark	portal	for	a	long	time,	before	he	turned
to	the	others.	‘I	suggest	we	try	it.’
‘There	is	no	need,	slave,’	replied	Fear	Sengar.	‘This	trail	is
straightforward,	reliable—’
‘And	getting	icier	the	higher	we	go.’	The	Indebted	grimaced,	then	laughed.
‘Oh,	there’re	songs	to	be	sung,	are	there,	Fear?	The	perils	and	tribulations,	the
glories	of	suffering,	all	to	win	your	heroic	triumph.	You	want	the	elders	who
were	once	your	grandchildren	to	gather	the	clan	round	the	fire,	for	the	telling
of	your	tale,	a	lone	warrior ’s	quest	for	his	god.	I	can	almost	hear	them	now,
describing	the	formidable	Fear	Sengar	of	the	Hiroth,	brother	to	the	Emperor,
with	his	train	of	followers	–	the	lost	child,	the	inveterate	Letherii	guide,	a
ghost,	a	slave	and	of	course	the	white-skinned	nemesis.	The	White	Crow	with
his	silver-tongued	lies.	Oh,	we	have	here	the	gamut	of	archetypes,	yes?’	He
reached	into	the	satchel	beside	him	and	drew	out	a	waterskin,	took	a	long
drink,	then	wiped	his	mouth	with	the	back	of	his	hand.	‘But	imagine	all	of	it
going	for	naught,	when	you	pitch	from	a	slippery	rung	and	plunge	five
hundred	man-heights	to	your	ignominious	death.	Not	how	the	story	goes,	alas,
but	then,	life	isn’t	a	story	now,	is	it?’	He	replaced	the	skin	and	shouldered	his
pack.	‘The	embittered	slave	chooses	a	different	route	to	the	summit,	the	fool.
But	then,’	he	paused	to	grin	back	at	Fear,	‘somebody	has	to	be	the	moral	lesson
in	this	epic,	right?’
Seren	watched	the	man	climbing	the	rungs.	When	he	came	opposite	the
cave	mouth,	he	reached	out	until	one	hand	gripped	the	edge	of	stone,	then
followed	with	a	foot,	stretching	until	the	probing	tip	of	his	moccasin	settled	on
the	ledge.	Then,	in	a	swift	shifting	of	weight,	combined	with	a	push	away	from
the	ladder,	he	fluidly	spun	on	one	leg,	the	other	swinging	over	empty	air.	Then


stepping	inward,	pulled	by	the	weight	of	the	satchel	on	his	back,	into	the	gloom
of	the	entrance.
‘Nicely	done,’	Silchas	Ruin	commented,	and	there	was	something	like
amusement	in	his	tone,	as	if	he	had	enjoyed	the	slave’s	poking	at	Fear	Sengar ’s
sententious	self-importance,	thus	revealing	two	edges	to	his	observation.	‘I	am
of	a	mind	to	follow	him.’
‘Me,	too,’	said	Kettle.
Seren	Pedac	sighed.	‘Very	well,	but	I	suggest	we	use	ropes	between	us,	and
leave	the	showing	off	to	Udinaas.’
	
The	mouth	of	the	cave	revealed	that	it	had	been	a	corridor,	probably	leading
out	onto	a	balcony	before	the	façade	had	sheared	off.	Massive	sections	of	the
walls,	riven	through	with	cracks,	had	shifted,	settled	at	conflicting	angles.	And
every	crevasse,	every	fissure	on	all	sides	that	Seren	could	see,	seethed	with	the
squirming	furred	bodies	of	bats,	awakened	now	to	their	presence,	chittering
and	moments	from	panic.	As	Seren	set	her	pack	down,	Udinaas	moved	beside
her.
‘Here,’	he	said,	his	breath	pluming,	‘light	this	lantern,	Acquitor	–	when	the
temperature	drops	my	hands	start	going	numb.’	At	her	look	he	glanced	over	at
Fear	Sengar,	then	said,	‘Too	many	years	reaching	down	into	icy	water.	A	slave
among	the	Edur	knows	little	comfort.’
‘You	were	fed,’	Fear	Sengar	said.
‘When	a	bloodwood	tree	toppled	in	the	forest,’	Udinaas	said,	‘we’d	be	sent
out	to	drag	it	back	to	the	village.	Do	you	remember	those	times,	Fear?
Sometimes	the	trunk	would	shift	unexpectedly,	slide	in	mud	or	whatever,	and
crush	a	slave.	One	of	them	was	from	our	own	household	–	you	don’t	recall
him,	do	you?	What’s	one	more	dead	slave?	You	Edur	would	shout	out	when
that	happened,	saying	the	bloodwood	spirit	was	thirsty	for	Letherii	blood.’
‘Enough,	Udinaas,’	Seren	said,	finally	succeeding	in	lighting	the	lantern.
As	the	illumination	burgeoned,	the	bats	exploded	from	the	cracks	and	suddenly
the	air	was	filled	with	frantic,	beating	wings.	A	dozen	heartbeats	later	the
creatures	were	gone.
She	straightened,	raising	the	lantern.
They	stood	on	a	thick	mouldy	paste	–	guano,	crawling	with	grubs	and
beetles	–	from	which	rose	a	foul	stench.
‘We’d	better	move	in,’	Seren	said,	‘and	get	clear	of	this.	There	are
fevers…’


	
The	man	was	screaming	as	the	guards	dragged	him	by	his	chains,	across	the
courtyard	to	the	ring-wall.	His	crushed	feet	left	bloody	smears	on	the
pavestones.	Screams	of	accusation	wailed	from	him,	shrill	outrage	at	the
shaping	of	the	world	–	the	Letherii	world.
Tanal	Yathvanar	snorted	softly.	‘Hear	him.	Such	naivety.’
Karos	Invictad,	standing	beside	him	on	the	balcony,	gave	him	a	sharp	look.
‘You	foolish	man,	Tanal	Yathvanar.’
‘Invigilator?’
Karos	Invictad	leaned	his	forearms	on	the	railing	and	squinted	down	at	the
prisoner.	Fingers	like	bloated	river-worms	slowly	entwined.	From	somewhere
overhead	a	gull	was	laughing.	‘Who	poses	the	greatest	threat	to	the	empire,
Yathvanar?’
‘Fanatics,’	Tanal	replied	after	a	moment.	‘Like	that	one	below.’
‘Incorrect.	Listen	to	his	words.	He	is	possessed	of	certainty.	He	holds	to	a
secure	vision	of	the	world,	a	man	with	the	correct	answers	–	that	the
prerequisite	questions	were	themselves	the	correct	ones	goes	without	saying.	A
citizen	with	certainty,	Yathvanar,	can	be	swayed,	turned,	can	be	made	into	a
most	diligent	ally.	All	one	needs	to	do	is	find	what	threatens	them	the	most.
Ignite	their	fear,	burn	to	cinders	the	foundations	of	their	certainty,	then	offer	an
equally	certain	alternate	way	of	thinking,	of	seeing	the	world.	They	will	reach
across,	no	matter	how	wide	the	gulf,	and	grasp	and	hold	on	to	you	with	all
their	strength.	No,	the	certain	are	not	our	enemies.	Presently	misguided,	as	in
the	case	of	the	man	below,	but	always	most	vulnerable	to	fear.	Take	away	the
comfort	of	their	convictions,	then	coax	them	with	seemingly	cogent	and
reasonable	convictions	of	our	own	making.	Their	eventual	embrace	is
assured.’
‘I	see.’
‘Tanal	Yathvanar,	our	greatest	enemies	are	those	who	are	without	certainty.
The	ones	with	questions,	the	ones	who	regard	our	tidy	answers	with
unquenchable	scepticism.	Those	questions	assail	us,	undermine	us.	They…
agitate.	Understand,	these	dangerous	citizens	understand	that	nothing	is	simple;
their	stance	is	the	very	opposite	of	naivety.	They	are	humbled	by	the
ambivalence	to	which	they	are	witness,	and	they	defy	our	simple,	comforting
assertions	of	clarity,	of	a	black	and	white	world.	Yathvanar,	when	you	wish	to
deliver	the	gravest	insult	to	such	a	citizen,	call	them	naive.	You	will	leave	them
incensed;	indeed,	virtually	speechless…until	you	watch	their	minds	backtracking,	revealed	by	a	cascade	of	expressions,	as	they	ask	themselves:	who	is


it	that	would	call	me	naive?	Well,	comes	the	answer,	clearly	a	person
possessing	certainty,	with	all	the	arrogance	and	pretension	that	position	entails;
a	confidence,	then,	that	permits	the	offhand	judgement,	the	derisive	dismissal
uttered	from	a	most	lofty	height.	And	from	all	this,	into	your	victim’s	eyes	will
come	the	light	of	recognition	–	in	you	he	faces	his	enemy,	his	truest	enemy.
And	he	will	know	fear.	Indeed,	terror.’
‘You	invite	the	question,	then,	Invigilator…’
Karos	Invictad	smiled.	‘Do	I	possess	certainty?	Or	am	I	in	fact	plagued	by
questions,	doubts,	do	I	flounder	in	the	wild	currents	of	complexity?’	He	was
silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	said,	‘I	hold	to	but	one	certainty.	Power	shapes	the
face	of	the	world.	In	itself,	it	is	neither	benign	nor	malicious,	it	is	simply	the
tool	by	which	its	wielder	reshapes	all	that	is	around	him	or	herself,	reshapes	it
to	suit	his	or	her	own…comforts.	Of	course,	to	express	power	is	to	enact
tyranny,	which	can	be	most	subtle	and	soft,	or	cruel	and	hard.	Implicit	in	power
–	political,	familial,	as	you	like	–	is	the	threat	of	coercion.	Against	all	who
choose	to	resist.	And	know	this:	if	coercion	is	available,	it	will	be	used.’	He
gestured.	‘Listen	to	that	man.	He	does	my	work	for	me.	Down	in	the	dungeons,
his	cellmates	hear	his	ravings,	and	some	among	them	join	in	chorus	–	the
guards	take	note	of	who,	and	that	is	a	list	of	names	I	peruse	daily,	for	they	are
the	ones	I	can	win	over.	The	ones	who	say	nothing,	or	turn	away,	now	that	is
the	list	of	those	who	must	die.’
‘So,’	said	Tanal,	‘we	let	him	scream.’
‘Yes.	The	irony	is,	he	truly	is	naive,	although	not	of	course	as	you
originally	meant.	It	is	his	very	certainty	that	reveals	his	blithe	ignorance.	It	is	a
further	irony	that	both	extremes	of	the	political	spectrum	reveal	a	convergence
of	the	means	and	methods	and	indeed	the	very	attitudes	of	the	believers	–	their
ferocity	against	naysayers,	the	blood	they	willingly	spill	for	their	cause,
defending	their	version	of	reality.	The	hatred	they	reveal	for	those	who	voice
doubts.	Scepticism	disguises	contempt,	after	all,	and	to	be	held	in	contempt	by
one	who	holds	to	nothing	is	to	feel	the	deepest,	most	cutting	wound.	And	so	we
who	hold	to	certainty,	Yathvanar,	soon	find	it	our	mission	to	root	out	and
annihilate	the	questioners.	And	my,	the	pleasure	we	derive	from	that…’
Tanal	Yathvanar	said	nothing,	inundated	with	a	storm	of	suspicions,	none
of	which	he	could	isolate,	chase	down.
Karos	Invictad	said,	‘You	were	so	quick	to	judge,	weren’t	you?	Ah,	you
revealed	so	much	with	that	contemptuous	utterance.	And	I	admit	to	being
amused	at	my	own	instinctive	response	to	your	words.	Naive.	Errant	take	me,	I
wanted	to	rip	your	head	from	your	body,	like	decapitating	a	swamp-fly.	I
wanted	to	show	you	true	contempt.	Mine.	For	you	and	your	kind.	I	wanted	to


take	that	dismissive	expression	on	your	face	and	push	it	through	an	offal
grinder.	You	think	you	have	all	the	answers?	You	must,	given	the	ease	of	your
voiced	judgement.	Well,	you	pathetic	little	creature,	one	day	uncertainty	will
come	to	your	door,	will	clamber	down	your	throat,	and	it	will	be	a	race	to	see
which	arrives	first,	humility	or	death.	Either	way,	I	will	spare	you	a	moment’s
compassion,	which	is	what	sets	you	and	me	apart,	isn’t	it?	A	package	arrived
today,	yes?’
Tanal	blinked.	See	how	we	all	possess	a	bloodlust.	Then	he	nodded.	‘Yes,
Invigilator.	A	new	puzzle	for	you.’
‘Excellent.	From	whom?’
‘Anonymous.’
‘Most	curious.	Is	that	part	of	the	mystery,	or	fear	of	ridicule	when	I	solve	it
after	a	mere	moment’s	thought?	Well,	how	can	you	possibly	answer	that
question?	Where	is	it	now?’
‘It	should	have	been	delivered	to	your	office,	sir.’
‘Good.	Permit	the	man	below	to	scream	for	the	rest	of	the	afternoon,	then
have	him	sent	below	again.’
Tanal	bowed	as	Karos	left	the	balcony.	He	waited	for	a	hundred	heartbeats,
then	he	too	departed.
	
A	short	time	later	he	descended	to	the	lowest	level	of	the	ancient	dungeons,
down	spiralling	stone	steps	to	corridors	and	cells	that	had	not	seen	regular	use
in	centuries.	The	recent	floods	had	inundated	both	this	level	and	the	one	above
it,	although	the	waters	had	since	drained,	leaving	behind	thick	silts	and	the
stench	of	stagnant,	filthy	water.	Carrying	a	lantern,	Tanal	Yathvanar	made	his
way	down	a	sloping	channel	until	he	came	to	what	had	once	been	the	primary
inquisition	chamber.	Arcane,	rust-seized	mechanisms	squatted	on	the
pavestoned	floor,	or	were	affixed	to	walls,	with	one	bedframe-like	cage
suspended	from	the	ceiling	by	thick	chains.
Directly	opposite	the	entrance	was	a	wedge-shaped	contraption,	replete
with	manacles	and	chains	that	could	be	drawn	tight	via	a	wall-mounted	ratchet
to	one	side.	The	inclined	bed	faced	onto	the	chamber,	and	shackled	to	it	was	the
woman	he	had	been	instructed	to	release.
She	was	awake,	turning	her	face	away	from	the	sudden	light.
Tanal	set	the	lantern	down	on	a	table	cluttered	with	instruments	of	torture.
‘Time	for	a	feeding,’	he	said.
She	said	nothing.
A	well-respected	academic.	Look	at	her	now.	‘All	those	lofty	words	of


yours,’	Tanal	said.	‘In	the	end,	they	prove	less	substantial	than	dust	on	the
wind.’
Her	voice	was	ragged,	croaking.	‘May	you	one	day	choke	on	that	dust,
little	man.’
Tanal	smiled.	‘“Little”.	You	seek	to	wound	me.	A	pathetic	effort.’	He
walked	over	to	a	chest	against	the	wall	to	his	right.	It	had	contained	vise-helms,
but	Tanal	had	removed	the	skull-crushers,	filling	the	chest	with	flasks	of	water
and	dried	foodstuffs.	‘I	shall	need	to	bring	down	buckets	with	soap-water,’	he
said,	drawing	out	the	makings	of	her	supper.	‘Unavoidable	as	your	defecation
is,	the	smell	and	the	stains	are	most	unpleasant.’
‘Oh,	I	offend	you,	do	I?’
He	glanced	over	at	her	and	smiled.	‘Janath	Anar,	a	senior	lecturer	in	the
Academy	of	Imperial	Learning.	Alas,	you	appear	to	have	learned	nothing	of
imperial	ways.	Although,	one	might	argue,	that	has	changed	since	your	arrival
here.’
She	studied	him,	a	strangely	heavy	look	to	her	bruised	eyes.	‘From	the
First	Empire	until	this	day,	little	man,	there	have	been	times	of	outright	tyranny.
That	the	present	oppressors	are	Tiste	Edur	is	scarely	worth	noting.	After	all,
the	true	oppression	comes	from	you.	Letherii	against	Letherii.	Furthermore—’
‘Furthermore,’	Tanal	said,	mocking	her,	‘the	Patriotists	are	the	Letherii
gift	of	mercy	against	their	own.	Better	us	than	the	Edur.	We	do	not	make
indiscriminate	arrests;	we	do	not	punish	out	of	ignorance;	we	are	not	random.’
‘A	gift?	Do	you	truly	believe	that?’	she	asked,	still	studying	him.	‘The	Edur
don’t	give	a	damn,	one	way	or	the	other.	Their	leader	is	unkillable,	and	that
makes	their	mastery	absolute.’
‘A	high-ranking	Tiste	Edur	liaises	with	us	almost	daily—’
‘To	keep	you	in	rein.	You,	Tanal	Yathvanar,	not	your	prisoners.	You	and
that	madman,	Karos	Invictad.’	She	cocked	her	head.	‘Why	is	it,	I	wonder,	that
organizations	such	as	yours	are	invariably	run	by	pitiful	human	failures?	By
small-minded	psychotics	and	perverts.	All	bullied	as	children,	of	course.	Or
abused	by	twisted	parents	–	I’m	sure	you	have	terrible	tales	to	confess,	of	your
miserable	youth.	And	now	the	power	is	in	your	hands,	and	oh	how	the	rest	of
us	suffer.’
Tanal	walked	over	with	the	food	and	the	flask	of	water.
‘For	Errant’s	sake,’	she	said,	‘loosen	at	least	one	of	my	arms,	so	I	can	feed
myself.’
He	came	up	beside	her.	‘No,	I	prefer	it	this	way.	Are	you	humiliated,	being
fed	like	a	babe?’
‘What	do	you	want	with	me?’	Janath	asked,	as	he	unstoppered	the	flask.


He	set	it	to	her	cracked	lips,	watched	her	drink.	‘I	don’t	recall	saying	I
wanted	anything,’	he	replied.
She	twisted	her	head	away,	coughing,	water	spilling	onto	her	chest.	‘I’ve
confessed	everything,’	she	said	after	a	moment.	‘You	have	all	my	notes,	my
treasonous	lectures	on	personal	responsibility	and	the	necessity	for
compassion—’
‘Yes,	your	moral	relativism.’
‘I	refute	any	notion	of	relativism,	little	man	–	which	you’d	know	had	you
bothered	reading	those	notes.	The	structures	of	a	culture	do	not	circumvent	nor
excuse	self-evident	injustice	or	inequity.	The	status	quo	is	not	sacred,	not	an
altar	to	paint	in	rivers	of	blood.	Tradition	and	habit	are	not	sound	arguments
—’
‘White	Crow,	woman,	you	are	most	certainly	a	lecturer.	I	liked	you	better
unconscious.’
‘Best	beat	me	senseless	again,’	she	said.
‘Alas,	I	cannot.	After	all,	I	am	supposed	to	free	you.’
Her	eyes	narrowed	on	his,	then	shied	away	again.	‘Careless	of	me,’	she
muttered.
‘In	what	way?’	he	asked.
‘I	was	almost	seduced.	The	lure	of	hope.	If	you	are	supposed	to	free	me,
you	would	never	have	brought	me	down	here.	No,	I’m	to	be	your	private
victim,	and	you	my	private	nightmare.	In	the	end,	the	chains	upon	you	will	be	a
match	to	mine.’
‘The	psychology	of	the	human	mind,’	Tanal	said,	pushing	some	fat-soaked
bread	into	her	mouth.	‘Your	speciality.	So,	you	can	read	my	life	as	easily	as
you	read	a	scroll.	Is	that	supposed	to	frighten	me?’
She	chewed,	then,	with	a	struggle,	swallowed.	‘I	wield	a	far	deadlier
weapon,	little	man.’
‘And	that	would	be?’
‘I	slip	into	your	head.	I	see	through	your	eyes.	Swim	the	streams	of	your
thought.	I	stand	there,	looking	at	the	soiled	creature	chained	to	this	rape-bed.
And	eventually,	I	begin	to	understand	you.	It’s	more	intimate	than	making	love,
little	man,	because	all	your	secrets	vanish.	And,	in	case	you	were	wondering,
yes,	I	am	doing	it	even	now.	Listening	to	my	own	words	as	you	listen,	feeling
the	tightness	gripping	your	chest,	that	odd	chill	beneath	your	skin	despite	the
fresh	sweat.	The	sudden	fear,	as	you	realize	the	extent	of	your	vulnerability—’
He	struck	her.	Hard	enough	to	snap	her	head	to	one	side.	Blood	gushed
from	her	mouth.	She	coughed,	spat,	then	spat	again,	her	breath	coming	in
ragged,	liquid	gasps.	‘We	can	resume	this	meal	later,’	he	said,	struggling	to


keep	his	words	toneless.	‘I	expect	you’ll	do	your	share	of	screaming	in	the
days	and	weeks	to	come,	Janath,	but	I	assure	you,	your	cries	will	reach	noone.’
A	peculiar	hacking	sound	came	from	her.
After	a	moment,	Tanal	realized	she	was	laughing.
‘Impressive	bravado,’	he	said,	with	sincerity.	‘Eventually,	I	may	in	truth
free	you.	For	now,	I	remain	undecided.	I’m	sure	you	understand.’
She	nodded.
‘You	arrogant	bitch,’	he	said.
She	laughed	again.
He	backed	away.	‘Do	not	think	I	will	leave	the	lantern,’	he	snarled.
Her	laughter	followed	him	out,	cutting	like	broken	glass.
	
The	ornate	carriage,	trimmed	in	gleaming	bloodwood,	was	motionless,	drawn
up	to	one	side	of	the	main	thoroughfare	of	Drene,	its	tall	wheels	straddling	the
open	sewer.	The	four	bone-white	horses	stood	listless	in	the	unseasonal	heat,
heads	hanging	down	over	their	collars.	Directly	ahead	of	them	the	street	was
framed	in	an	arching	open	gate,	and	beyond	it	was	the	sprawling	maze	of	the
High	Market,	a	vast	concourse	crowded	with	stalls,	carts,	livestock	and	throngs
of	people.
The	flow	of	wealth,	the	cacophony	of	voices	and	the	multitude	of
proffering	or	grasping	hands	seemed	to	culminate	in	a	force,	battering	at
Brohl	Handar ’s	senses	even	from	where	he	sat,	protected	within	the	plush
confines	of	the	carriage.	The	heaving	sounds	from	the	market,	the	chaotic	back
and	forth	flow	of	people	beneath	the	gate,	and	the	crowds	on	the	street	itself,	all
made	the	Overseer	think	of	religious	fervour,	as	if	he	was	witness	to	a	frenzied
version	of	a	Tiste	Edur	funeral.	In	place	of	the	women	voicing	their	rhythmic
grunts	of	constrained	grief,	drovers	bullied	braying	beasts	through	the	press.
Instead	of	unblooded	youths	wading	through	blood-frothed	surf	pounding
paddles	against	the	waves,	there	was	the	clatter	of	cartwheels	and	the	high,
piping	cries	of	hawkers.	The	woodsmoke	of	the	pyres	and	offerings
enwreathing	an	Edur	village	was,	here,	a	thick,	dusty	river	tainted	with	a
thousand	scents.	Dung,	horse	piss,	roasting	meat,	vegetables	and	fish,	uncured
myrid	hides	and	tanned	rodara	skins;	rotting	wastes	and	the	cloying	smells	of
intoxicating	drugs.
Here,	among	the	Letherii,	no	precious	offerings	were	thrown	into	the	sea.
Tusked	seal	ivory	leaned	against	shelves	like	fang-rows	from	some	wooden
mechanisms	of	torture.	In	other	stalls,	that	ivory	reappeared,	this	time	carved


into	a	thousand	shapes,	many	of	them	mimicking	religious	objects	from	the
Edur,	the	Jheck	and	the	Fent,	or	as	playing	pieces	for	a	game.	Polished	amber
was	adornment,	not	the	sacred	tears	of	captured	dusk,	and	bloodwood	itself	had
been	carved	into	bowls,	cups	and	cooking	utensils.
Or	to	trim	an	ostentatious	carriage.
Through	a	slit	in	the	shutters,	the	Overseer	watched	the	surging	to	and	fro
on	the	street.	An	occasional	Tiste	Edur	appeared	in	the	crowds,	a	head	taller
than	most	Letherii,	and	Brohl	thought	he	could	read	something	of	bemusement
behind	their	haughty,	remote	expressions;	and	once,	in	the	face	of	an
overdressed,	ring-speared	Elder	whom	Brohl	knew	personally,	he	saw	the	glint
of	avarice	in	the	Edur ’s	eyes.
Change	was	rarely	chosen,	and	its	common	arrival	was	slow,	subtle.
Granted,	the	Letherii	had	experienced	the	shock	of	defeated	armies,	a	slain
king,	and	a	new	ruling	class,	but	even	then	such	sudden	reversals	had	proved
not	nearly	as	catastrophic	as	one	might	have	expected.	The	skein	that	held
Lether	together	was	resilient	and,	Brohl	now	knew,	far	stronger	than	it
appeared.	What	disturbed	him	the	most,	however,	was	the	ease	with	which	that
skein	entwined	all	who	found	themselves	in	its	midst.
Poison	in	that	touch,	yet	not	fatal,	just	intoxicating.	Sweet,	yet	perhaps,
ultimately,	deadly.	This	is	what	comes	of…comfort.	Yet,	he	could	well	see,	the
reward	of	comfort	was	not	available	to	all;	indeed,	it	seemed	disturbingly	rare.
While	those	who	possessed	wealth	clearly	exulted	in	its	display,	that	very
ostentation	underscored	the	fact	that	they	were	a	distinct	minority.	But	that
imbalance	was,	he	now	understood,	entirely	necessary.	Not	everyone	could	be
rich	–	the	system	would	not	permit	such	equity,	for	the	power	and	privilege	it
offered	was	dependent	on	the	very	opposite.	Inequity,	else	how	can	power	be
assessed,	how	can	the	gifts	of	privilege	be	valued?	For	there	to	be	rich,	there
must	be	poor,	and	more	of	the	latter	than	the	former.
Simple	rules,	easily	arrived	at	through	simple	observation.	Brohl	Handar
was	not	a	sophisticated	man,	a	shortcoming	he	was	reminded	of	every	day
since	his	arrival	as	Overseer	of	Drene.	He	had	no	particular	experience	with
governing,	and	few	of	the	skills	in	his	possession	were	proving	applicable	to
his	new	responsibilities.
The	Factor,	Letur	Anict,	was	conducting	an	unofficial	war	against	the
tribes	beyond	the	borderlands,	using	imperial	troops	to	steal	land	and
consolidate	his	new-found	holdings.	There	was	no	real	justification	for	this
bloodshed;	the	goal	was	personal	wealth.	As	yet,	however,	Brohl	Handar	did
not	know	what	he	was	going	to	do	about	it,	if	indeed	he	was	going	to	do
anything.	He	had	prepared	a	long	report	to	the	Emperor,	providing	well-


documented	details	describing	the	situation	here	in	Drene.	That	report
remained	in	Brohl’s	possession,	for	he	had	begun	to	suspect	that,	should	he
send	it	off	to	Letheras,	it	would	not	reach	the	Emperor,	or	any	of	his	Edur
advisors.	The	Letherii	Chancellor,	Triban	Gnol,	appeared	to	be	complicit	and
possibly	even	in	league	with	Letur	Anict	–	hinting	at	a	vast	web	of	power,
hidden	beneath	the	surface	and	seemingly	thriving	unaffected	by	Edur	rule.	At
the	moment,	all	Brohl	Handar	had	were	suspicions,	hints	of	that	insidious	web
of	power.	One	link	was	certain,	and	that	was	with	this	Letherii	association	of
wealthy	families,	the	Liberty	Consign.	Possibly,	this	organization	was	at	the
very	heart	of	the	hidden	power.	But	he	could	not	be	sure.
Brohl	Handar,	a	minor	noble	among	the	Tiste	Edur,	and	newly	appointed
Overseer	to	a	small	city	in	a	remote	corner	of	the	empire,	well	knew	that	he
could	not	challenge	such	a	thing	as	the	Liberty	Consign.	He	was,	indeed,
beginning	to	believe	that	the	Tiste	Edur	tribes,	scattered	as	they	had	become
across	this	vast	land,	were	little	more	than	flotsam	riding	the	indifferent
currents	of	a	turgid,	deep	river.
Yet,	there	is	the	Emperor.
Who	is	quite	probably	insane.
He	did	not	know	to	whom	to	turn;	nor	even	if	what	he	was	witnessing	was,
in	truth,	as	dangerous	as	it	seemed.
Brohl	was	startled	by	a	commotion	near	the	gate	and	he	leaned	forward	to
set	an	eye	against	the	slit	between	the	shutters.
An	arrest.	People	were	quickly	moving	away	from	the	scene	as	two
nondescript	Letherii,	one	to	each	side,	pushed	their	victim	face-first	against
one	of	the	gate’s	uprights.	There	were	no	shouted	accusations,	no	frightened
denials.	The	silence	shared	by	the	Patriotist	agents	and	their	prisoner	left	the
Overseer	strangely	shaken.	As	if	the	details	did	not	matter	to	any	of	them.
One	of	the	agents	was	searching	for	weapons,	finding	none,	and	then,	as
his	fellow	agent	held	the	man	against	the	ornate	upright,	he	removed	the
leather	hip-satchel	from	the	man’s	belt	and	began	rummaging	through	it.	The
prisoner ’s	face	was	pressed	sideways	against	the	bas-relief	carvings	on	the
broad,	squared	column,	and	those	carvings	depicted	some	past	glory	of	the
Letherii	Empire.	Brohl	Handar	suspected	the	irony	was	lost	on	all	concerned.
Sedition	would	be	the	charge.	It	was	always	the	charge.	But	against	what?
Not	the	presence	of	the	Tiste	Edur	–	that	would	be	pointless,	after	all,	and
certainly	there	had	been	virtually	no	attempts	at	reprisal,	at	least	none	that
Brohl	Handar	had	heard	about.	So…what,	precisely?	Against	whom?	The
Indebted	always	existed,	and	some	fled	their	debts,	but	most	did	not.	There
were	sects	formulated	around	political	or	social	disquiet,	many	of	them


drawing	membership	from	the	disenfranchised	remnants	of	subjugated	tribes	–
the	Fent,	the	Nerek,	Tarthenal	and	others.	But	since	the	conquest,	most	of	these
sects	had	either	dissolved	or	fled	the	empire.	Sedition.	A	charge	to	silence
debate.	Somewhere,	therefore,	there	must	exist	a	list	of	the	accepted	beliefs,	the
host	of	convictions	and	faiths	that	composed	the	proper	doctrine.	Or	was
something	more	insidious	at	work?
There	was	a	scratch	at	the	carriage	door,	and	a	moment	later	it	opened.
Brohl	Handar	studied	the	figure	stepping	onto	the	runner,	the	carriage
tilting	with	his	weight.	‘By	all	means,	Orbyn,’	he	said,	‘enter.’
Muscle	softened	by	years	of	inactivity,	fleshy	face,	the	jowls	heavy	and
slack,	Orbyn	‘Truthfinder ’	seemed	to	sweat	incessantly,	regardless	of	ambient
temperature,	as	if	some	internal	pressure	forced	the	toxins	of	his	mind	to	the
surface	of	his	skin.	The	local	head	of	the	Patriotists	was,	to	Brohl	Handar ’s
eye,	the	most	despicable,	malicious	creature	he	had	ever	met.
‘Your	arrival	is	well	timed,’	the	Tiste	Edur	said	as	Orbyn	entered	the
carriage	and	settled	down	on	the	bench	opposite,	the	acrid	smell	of	his	sweat
wafting	across.	‘Although	I	was	not	aware	that	you	personally	oversee	the
daily	activities	of	your	agents.’
Orbyn’s	thin	lips	creased	in	a	smile.	‘We	have	stumbled	on	some
information	that	might	be	of	interest	to	you,	Overseer.’
‘Another	one	of	your	non-existent	conspiracies?’
The	smile	widened	momentarily,	a	flicker.	‘If	you	are	referring	to	the
Bolkando	Conspiracy,	alas,	that	one	belongs	to	the	Liberty	Consign.	The
information	we	have	acquired	concerns	your	people.’
My	people.	‘Very	well.’	Brohl	Handar	waited.	Outside,	the	two	agents	were
dragging	their	prisoner	away,	and	around	them	the	flow	of	humanity	resumed,
furtive	in	their	avoidance.
‘A	party	was	sighted,	west	of	Bluerose.	Two	Tiste	Edur,	one	of	them	whiteskinned.	This	latter	one,	I	believe,	has	become	known	as	the	White	Crow	–	a
most	disturbing	title	for	us	Letherii,	by	the	way.’	He	blinked,	the	lids	heavy.
‘Accompanying	them	were	three	Letherii,	two	female	and	one	an	escaped	slave
with	the	ownership	tattoos	of	the	Hiroth	tribe.’
Brohl	forced	himself	to	remain	expressionless,	although	a	tightness
gripped	his	chest.	This	is	none	of	your	business.	‘Do	you	have	more	details	as
to	their	precise	location?’
‘They	were	heading	east,	to	the	mountains.	There	are	three	passes,	only
two	open	this	early	in	the	season.’
Brohl	Handar	slowly	nodded.	‘The	Emperor ’s	K’risnan	are	also	capable	of
determining	their	general	whereabouts.	Those	passes	are	blocked.’	He	paused,


then	said,	‘It	is	as	Hannan	Mosag	predicted.’
Orbyn’s	dark	eyes	studied	him	from	between	folds	of	fat.	‘I	am	reminded
of	Edur	efficiency.’
Yes.
The	man	known	as	Truthfinder	went	on,	‘The	Patriotists	have	questions
regarding	this	white-skinned	Tiste	Edur,	this	White	Crow.	From	which	tribe
does	he	hail?’
‘None.	He	is	not	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Ah.	I	am	surprised.	The	description…’
Brohl	Handar	said	nothing.
‘Overseer,	can	we	assist?’
‘Unnecessary	at	this	time,’	Brohl	replied.
‘I	am	most	curious	as	to	why	you	have	not	already	closed	in	on	this	party
and	effected	a	capture.	My	sources	indicate	that	the	Tiste	Edur	is	none	other
than	Fear	Sengar,	the	Emperor ’s	brother.’
‘As	I	said,	the	passes	are	blocked.’
‘Ah,	then	you	are	tightening	the	net	even	as	we	speak.’
Brohl	Handar	smiled.	‘Orbyn,	you	said	earlier	the	Bolkando	Conspiracy	is
under	the	purview	of	the	Liberty	Consign.	By	that,	are	you	truly	telling	me	that
the	Patriotists	are	without	interest	in	that	matter?’
‘Not	at	all.	The	Consign	makes	use	of	our	network	on	a	regular	basis—’
‘For	which	you	are	no	doubt	rewarded.’
‘Of	course.’
‘I	find	myself—’
Orbyn	raised	a	hand,	head	cocking.	‘You	will	have	to	excuse	me,	Overseer.
I	hear	alarms.’	He	rose	with	a	grunt,	pushing	open	the	carriage	door.
Bemused,	Brohl	said	nothing,	watching	as	the	Letherii	left.	Once	the	door
was	closed	he	reached	to	a	small	compartment	and	withdrew	a	woven	ball
filled	with	scented	grasses,	then	held	it	to	his	face.	A	tug	on	a	cord	stirred	the
driver	to	collect	up	the	traces.	The	carriage	lurched	as	it	rolled	forward.	Brohl
could	hear	the	alarms	now,	a	frantic	cacophony.	Leaning	forward,	he	spoke
into	the	voice-tube.	‘Take	us	to	those	bells,	driver.’	He	hesitated,	then	added,
‘No	hurry.’
	
The	Drene	Garrison	commanded	a	full	dozen	stone	buildings	situated	on	a	low
hill	north	of	the	city	centre.	Armoury,	stables,	barracks	and	command
headquarters	were	all	heavily	fortified,	although	the	complex	was	not	walled.
Drene	had	been	a	city-state	once,	centuries	past,	and	after	a	protracted	war	with


the	Awl	the	beleaguered	king	had	invited	Letherii	troops	to	effect	victory
against	the	nomads.	Decades	later,	evidence	had	come	out	that	the	conflict	itself
had	been	the	result	of	Letherii	manipulations.	In	any	case,	the	Letherii	troops
had	never	left;	the	king	accepted	the	title	of	vizier	and	in	a	succession	of	tragic
accidents	he	and	his	entire	line	were	wiped	out.	But	that	was	history,	now,	the
kind	that	was	met	with	indifference.
Four	principal	avenues	extended	out	from	the	garrison’s	parade	grounds,
the	one	leading	northward	converging	with	the	Gate	Road	that	led	to	the	city
wall	and	the	North	Coast	track	–	the	least	frequented	of	the	three	landward
routes	to	and	from	the	city.
In	the	shadows	beneath	the	gabled	balcony	of	a	palatial	estate	just	beyond
the	armoury,	on	the	north	avenue,	a	clear	line	of	sight	was	available	for	the
short,	lithe	figure	standing	in	the	cool	gloom.	A	rough-woven	hood	hid	the
features,	although	had	anyone	bothered	to	pause	in	passing,	squinting	hard,
they	would	have	been	startled	to	see	the	glint	of	crimson	scales	where	the	face
should	have	been,	and	eyes	hidden	in	black-rimmed	slits.	But	there	was
something	about	the	figure	that	encouraged	inattention.	Gazes	slid	past,	rarely
comprehending	that,	indeed,	someone	stood	in	those	shadows.
He	had	positioned	himself	there	just	before	dawn	and	it	was	now	late
afternoon.	Eyes	fixed	on	the	garrison,	the	messengers	entering	and	exiting	the
headquarters,	the	visitation	of	a	half-dozen	noble	merchants,	the	purchasing	of
horses,	scrap	metal,	saddles	and	other	sundry	materiel.	He	studied	the	skin
hides	on	the	round-shields	of	the	lancers	–	flattened	faces,	the	skin	darkened	to
somewhere	between	purple	and	ochre,	making	the	tattooing	subtle	and
strangely	beautiful.
Late	afternoon,	the	shadows	lengthening,	and	the	figure	made	note	of	two
Letherii	men,	passing	across	his	field	of	vision	for	the	second	time.	Their	lack
of	attention	seemed…conspicuous,	and	some	instinct	told	the	cowled	figure
that	it	was	time	to	leave.
As	soon	as	they	had	passed	by,	heading	up	the	street,	westward,	the	figure
stepped	out	from	the	shadows,	walked	swiftly	and	silently	after	the	two	men.	He
sensed	their	sudden,	heightened	awareness	–	and	perhaps	something	like	alarm.
Moments	before	catching	up	to	them,	he	turned	right,	into	an	alley	leading
north.
Fifteen	paces	in,	he	found	a	dark	recess	in	which	he	could	hide.	He	drew
back	his	cloak	and	cinched	it,	freeing	his	arms	and	hands.
A	dozen	heartbeats	passed	before	he	heard	their	footfalls.
He	watched	them	walk	past,	cautious,	both	with	drawn	knives.	One
whispered	something	to	the	other	and	they	hesitated.


The	figure	allowed	his	right	foot	to	scrape	as	he	stepped	forward.
They	spun	round.
The	Awl’dan	cadaran	whip	was	a	whisper	as	it	snaked	out,	the	leather	–
studded	with	coin-sized,	dagger-sharp,	overlapping	half-moon	blades	–
flickering	out	in	a	gleaming	arc	that	licked	both	men	across	their	throats.
Blood	sprayed.
He	watched	them	crumple.	The	blood	flowed	freely,	more	from	the	man
who	had	been	on	the	left,	spreading	across	the	greasy	cobbles.	Stepping	close
to	the	other	victim,	he	unsheathed	a	knife	and	plunged	it	point-first	into	his
throat;	then,	with	practised	familiarity,	he	cut	off	the	man’s	face,	taking	skin,
muscle	and	hair.	He	repeated	the	ghastly	task	with	the	other	man.
Two	fewer	agents	of	the	Patriotists	to	contend	with.
Of	course,	they	worked	in	threes,	one	always	at	a	distance,	following	the
first	two.
From	the	garrison,	the	first	alarms	sounded,	a	shrill	collection	of	bells	that
trilled	out	through	the	dusty	air	above	the	buildings.
Folding	up	his	grisly	trophies	and	pushing	them	beneath	a	fold	in	the	loose
rodara	wool	shirt	that	covered	his	scaled	hauberk,	the	figure	set	off	along	the
alley,	making	for	the	north	gate.
A	squad	of	the	city	guard	appeared	at	the	far	mouth,	five	armoured,	helmed
Letherii	with	shortswords	and	shields.
Upon	seeing	them,	the	figure	sprinted	forward,	freeing	the	cadaran	whip	in
his	left	hand,	while	in	his	right	hand	he	shook	free	the	rygtha	crescent	axe	from
the	over-under	strips	of	rawhide	that	had	held	it	against	his	hip.	A	thick	haft,	as
long	as	a	grown	man’s	thigh	bone,	to	which	each	end	was	affixed	a	threequarter-moon	iron	blade,	their	planes	perpendicular	to	each	other.	Cadaran	and
rygtha:	ancient	weapons	of	the	Awl’dan,	their	mastery	virtually	unknown
among	the	tribes	for	at	least	a	century.
The	constabulary	had,	accordingly,	never	before	faced	such	weapons.
At	ten	paces	from	the	first	three	guardsmen,	the	whip	lashed	out,	a	blurred
sideways	figure-eight	that	spawned	screams	and	gouts	of	blood	that	spilled
almost	black	in	the	alley’s	gloom.	Two	of	the	Letherii	reeled	back.
The	lithe,	wiry	figure	closed	on	the	last	man	in	the	front	row.	Right	hand
slid	along	the	haft	to	run	up	against	a	flange	beneath	the	left-side	crescent
blade,	the	haft	slapping	parallel	to	the	underside	of	his	forearm	as	he	brought
the	weapon	up	–	blocking	a	desperate	slash	from	the	guard’s	shortsword.	Then,
as	the	Awl	threw	his	elbow	forward,	the	right-side	blade	flashed	out,	cutting	at
the	man’s	face,	connecting	just	below	the	helm’s	rim,	chopping	through	the
nasal	ridge	and	frontal	bone	before	dipping	into	the	soft	matter	of	his	brain.


The	tapered,	sharp	crescent	blade	slid	back	out	with	ease,	as	the	Awl	slipped
past	the	falling	guard,	whip	returning	from	an	over-the-head	gather	to	hiss	out,
wrapping	round	the	neck	of	the	fourth	Letherii	–	who	shrieked,	dropping	his
sword	as	he	scrabbled	at	the	deadly	blades	–	as	the	Awl	dropped	into	a	crouch,
his	right	hand	sliding	the	length	of	the	rygtha	haft	to	abut	the	flanged	base	of
the	right-blade,	then	slashing	out.	The	fifth	guard	jerked	his	shield	upward	to
block,	but	too	late	–	the	blade	caught	him	across	the	eyes.
A	tug	on	the	whip	decapitated	the	fourth	guard.
The	Awl	released	his	hold	on	the	cadaran’s	handle	and,	gripping	the	rygtha
at	both	ends,	stepped	close	to	slam	the	haft	into	the	last	guard’s	throat,	crushing
the	windpipe.
Collecting	the	whip,	he	moved	on.
A	street,	the	sound	of	lancers	off	to	the	right.	The	gate,	fifty	paces	to	the
left,	now	knotted	with	guards	–	heads	turning	his	way.
He	raced	straight	for	them.
	
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	took	personal	command	of	a	troop	of	lancers.	Twenty	riders
at	her	back,	she	led	her	horse	at	a	canter,	following	the	trail	of	a	bloodbath.
The	two	Patriotist	agents	midway	down	the	alley.	Five	city	guardsmen	at
the	far	end.
Riding	out	onto	the	street,	she	angled	her	mount	to	the	left,	drawing	her
longsword	as	she	neared	the	gate.
Bodies	everywhere,	twenty	or	more,	and	only	two	seemed	to	be	still	alive.
Bivatt	stared	from	beneath	the	rim	of	her	helm,	cold	sweat	prickling	awake
beneath	her	armour.	Blood	everywhere.	On	the	cobbles,	splashed	high	on	the
walls	and	the	gate	itself.	Dismembered	limbs.	The	stench	of	vacated	bowels,
spilled	intestines.	One	of	the	survivors	was	screaming,	head	whipping	back	and
forth.	Both	his	hands	had	been	sliced	off.
Just	beyond	the	gate,	Bivatt	saw	as	she	reined	in,	four	horses	were	down,
their	riders	sprawled	out	on	the	road.	Drifting	dust	indicated	that	the	others
from	the	first	troop	to	arrive	were	riding	in	pursuit.
The	other	survivor	stumbled	up	to	her.	He	had	taken	a	blow	to	the	head,	the
helm	dented	on	one	side	and	blood	flowing	down	that	side	of	his	face	and	neck.
In	his	eyes	as	he	stared	up	at	her,	a	look	of	horror.	He	opened	his	mouth,	but	no
words	came	forth.
Bivatt	scanned	the	area	once	more,	then	turned	to	her	Finadd.	‘Take	the
troop	through,	go	after	them.	Get	your	weapons	out,	damn	you!’	She	glared
back	down	at	the	guardsman.	‘How	many	were	there?’


He	gaped.
More	guardsmen	were	arriving.	A	cutter	hurried	to	the	screaming	man
who	had	lost	his	hands.
‘Did	you	hear	my	question?’	Bivatt	hissed.
He	nodded,	then	said.	‘One.	One	man,	Atri-Preda.’
One?	Ridiculous.	‘Describe	him!’
‘Scales	–	his	face	was	scales.	Red	as	blood!’
A	rider	from	her	troop	returned	from	the	road.	‘The	first	troop	of	lancers
are	all	dead,	Atri-Preda,’	he	said,	his	tone	high	and	pinched.	‘Further	down	the
road.	All	the	horses	but	one	–	sir,	should	we	follow?’
‘Should	you	follow?	You	damned	fool	–	of	course	you	should	follow!	Stay
on	his	trail!’
A	voice	spoke	behind	her.	‘That	description,	Atri-Preda…’
She	twisted	round	in	her	saddle.
Orbyn	Truthfinder,	sheathed	in	sweat,	stood	amidst	the	carnage,	his	small
eyes	fixed	on	her.
Bivatt	bared	her	teeth	in	a	half-snarl.	‘Yes,’	she	snapped.	Redmask.	None
other.
The	commander	of	the	Patriotists	in	Drene	pursed	his	lips,	glanced	down
to	scan	the	corpses	on	all	sides.	‘It	seems,’	he	said,	‘his	exile	from	the	tribes	is
at	an	end.’
Yes.
Errant	save	us.
	
Brohl	Handar	stepped	down	from	the	carriage	and	surveyed	the	scene	of	battle.
He	could	not	imagine	what	sort	of	weapons	the	attackers	had	used,	to	achieve
the	sort	of	damage	he	saw	before	him.	The	Atri-Preda	had	taken	charge,	as
more	soldiery	appeared,	while	Orbyn	Truthfinder	stood	in	the	shade	of	the
gate	blockhouse	entrance,	silent	and	watching.
The	Overseer	approached	Bivatt.	‘Atri-Preda,’	he	said,	‘I	see	none	but	your
own	dead	here.’
She	glared	at	him,	yet	it	was	a	look	containing	more	than	simple	anger.	He
saw	fear	in	her	eyes.	‘The	city	was	infiltrated,’	she	said,	‘by	an	Awl	warrior.’
‘This	is	the	work	of	one	man?’
‘It	is	the	least	of	his	talents.’
‘Ah,	then	you	know	who	this	man	is.’
‘Overseer,	I	am	rather	busy—’
‘Tell	me	of	him.’


Grimacing,	she	gestured	him	to	one	side	of	the	gate.	They	both	had	to	step
carefully	over	corpses	sprawled	on	the	slick	cobblestones.	‘I	think	I	have	sent	a
troop	of	lancers	out	to	their	deaths,	Overseer.	My	mood	is	not	conducive	to
lengthy	conversation.’
‘Oblige	me.	If	a	war-party	of	Awl’dan	warriors	is	at	the	very	edge	of	this
city,	there	must	be	an	organized	response	–	one,’	he	added,	seeing	her	offended
look,	‘involving	the	Tiste	Edur	as	well	as	your	units.’
After	a	moment,	she	nodded.	‘Redmask.	The	only	name	by	which	we	know
him.	Even	the	Awl’dan	have	but	legends	of	his	origins—’
‘And	they	are?’
‘Letur	Anict—’
Brohl	Handar	hissed	in	anger	and	glared	across	at	Orbyn,	who	had	moved
within	hearing	range.	‘Why	is	it	that	every	disaster	begins	with	that	man’s
name?’
Bivatt	resumed.	‘There	was	skirmishing,	years	ago	now,	between	a	rich
Awl	tribe	and	the	Factor.	Simply,	Letur	Anict	coveted	the	tribe’s	vast	herds.	He
despatched	agents	who,	one	night,	entered	an	Awl	camp	and	succeeded	in
kidnapping	a	young	woman	–	one	of	the	clan	leader ’s	daughters.	The	Awl,	you
see,	were	in	the	habit	of	stealing	Letherii	children.	In	any	case,	that	daughter
had	a	brother.’
‘Redmask.’
She	nodded.	‘A	younger	brother.	Anyway,	the	Factor	adopted	the	girl	into
his	household,	and	before	too	long	she	was	Indebted	to	him—’
‘No	doubt	without	even	being	aware	of	that.	Yes,	I	understand.	And	so,	in
order	to	purchase	that	debt,	and	her	own	freedom,	Letur	demanded	her	father ’s
herds.’
‘Yes,	more	or	less.	And	the	clan	leader	agreed.	Alas,	even	as	the	Factor ’s
forces	approached	the	Awl	camp	with	their	precious	cargo,	the	girl	plunged	a
knife	into	her	own	heart.	Thereafter,	things	got	rather	confused.	Letur	Anict’s
soldiers	attacked	the	Awl	camp,	killing	everyone—’
‘The	Factor	decided	he	would	take	the	herds	anyway.’
‘Yes.	It	turned	out,	however,	that	there	was	one	survivor.	A	few	years	later,
as	the	skirmishes	grew	fiercer,	the	Factor ’s	troops	found	themselves	losing
engagement	after	engagement.	Ambushes	were	turned.	And	the	name	of
Redmask	was	first	heard	–	a	new	war	chief.	Now,	what	follows	is	even	less
precise	than	what	I	have	described	thus	far.	It	seems	there	was	a	gathering	of
the	clans,	and	Redmask	spoke	–	argued,	that	is,	with	the	Elders.	He	sought	to
unify	the	clans	against	the	Letherii	threat,	but	the	Elders	could	not	be
convinced.	In	his	rage,	Redmask	spoke	unwise	words.	The	Elders	demanded	he


retract	them.	He	refused,	and	so	was	exiled.	It	is	said	he	travelled	east,	into	the
wildlands	between	here	and	Kolanse.’
‘What	is	the	significance	of	the	mask?’
Bivatt	shook	her	head.	‘I	don’t	know.	There	is	a	legend	that	he	killed	a
dragon,	in	the	time	immediately	following	the	slaughter	of	his	family.	No
more	than	a	child	–	which	makes	the	tale	unlikely.’	She	shrugged.
‘And	so	he	has	returned,’	Brohl	Handar	said,	‘or	some	other	Awl	warrior
has	adopted	the	mask	and	so	seeks	to	drive	fear	into	your	hearts.’
‘No,	it	was	him.	He	uses	a	bladed	whip	and	a	two-headed	axe.	The	weapons
themselves	are	virtually	mythical.’
The	Overseer	frowned	at	her.	‘Mythical?’
‘Awl	legends	hold	that	their	people	once	fought	a	war,	far	to	the	east,	when
the	Awl	dwelt	in	the	wildlands.	The	cadaran	and	rygtha	were	weapons	designed
to	deal	with	that	enemy.	I	have	no	more	details	than	what	I	have	just	given	you,
except	that	it	appears	that	whatever	that	enemy	was,	it	wasn’t	human.’
‘Every	tribe	has	tales	of	past	wars,	an	age	of	heroes—’
‘Overseer,	the	Awl’dan	legends	are	not	like	that.’
‘Oh?’
‘Yes.	First	of	all,	the	Awl	lost	that	war.	That	is	why	they	fled	west.’
‘Have	there	been	no	Letherii	expeditions	into	the	wildlands?’
‘Not	in	decades,	Overseer.	After	all,	we	are	clashing	with	the	various
territories	and	kingdoms	along	that	border.	The	last	expedition	was	virtually
wiped	out,	a	single	survivor	driven	mad	by	what	she	had	seen.	She	spoke	of
something	called	the	Hissing	Night.	The	voice	of	death,	apparently.	In	any	case,
her	madness	could	not	be	healed	and	so	she	was	put	to	death.’
Brohl	Handar	considered	that	for	a	time.	An	officer	had	arrived	and	was
waiting	to	speak	with	the	Atri-Preda.	‘Thank	you,’	he	said	to	Bivatt,	then	turned
away.
‘Overseer.’
He	faced	her	again.	‘Yes?’
‘If	Redmask	succeeds	this	time…with	the	tribes,	I	mean,	well,	we	shall
indeed	have	need	of	the	Tiste	Edur.’
His	brows	rose.	‘Of	course,	Atri-Preda.’	And	maybe	this	way,	I	can	reach
the	ear	of	the	Emperor	and	Hannan	Mosag.	Damn	this	Letur	Anict.	What	has	he
brought	down	upon	us	now?
	
He	rode	the	Letherii	horse	hard,	leaving	the	north	road	and	cutting	east,	across
freshly	tilled	fields	that	had	once	been	Awl’dan	grazing	land.	His	passage	drew


the	attention	of	farmers,	and	from	the	last	hamlet	he	skirted	three	stationed
soldiers	had	saddled	horses	and	set	off	in	pursuit.
In	a	dip	of	the	valley	Redmask	had	just	left,	they	met	their	deaths	in	a
chorus	of	animal	and	human	screams,	piercing	but	short-lived.
A	bluster	of	rhinazan	spun	in	a	raucous	cloud	over	the	Awl	warrior ’s	head,
driven	away	from	their	favoured	hosts	by	the	violence,	their	wings	beating	like
tiny	drums	and	their	long	serrated	tails	hissing	in	the	air	as	they	tracked
Redmask.	He	had	long	since	grown	used	to	their	ubiquitous	presence.
Residents	of	the	wildlands,	the	weasel-sized	flying	reptiles	were	far	from
home,	unless	their	hosts	–	in	the	valley	behind	him	and	probably	preparing
another	ambush	–	could	be	called	home.
He	slowed	his	horse,	shifting	in	discomfort	at	the	awkward	Letherii	saddle.
No-one	would	reach	him	now,	he	knew,	and	there	was	no	point	in	running	this
beast	into	the	ground.	The	enemy	had	been	confident	in	their	city	garrison,
brazen	with	their	trophies,	and	Redmask	had	learned	much	in	the	night	and	the
day	he	had	spent	watching	them.	Bluerose	lancers,	properly	stirruped	and
nimble	on	their	mounts.	Far	more	formidable	than	the	foot	soldiers	of	years
before.
And	thus	far,	since	his	return,	he	had	seen	of	his	own	people	only
abandoned	camps,	drover	tracks	from	smallish	herds	and	disused	tipi	rings.	It
was	as	if	his	home	had	been	decimated,	and	all	the	survivors	had	fled.	And	at
the	only	scene	of	battle	he	had	come	upon,	there	had	been	naught	but	the
corpses	of	foreigners.
The	sun	was	low	on	the	horizon	behind	him,	dusk	closing	in,	when	he
came	upon	the	first	burned	Awl’dan	encampment.	A	year	old,	maybe	more.
White	bones	jutting	from	the	grasses,	blackened	stumps	from	the	hut	frames,	a
dusty	smell	of	desolation.	No-one	had	come	to	retrieve	the	fallen,	to	lift	the
butchered	bodies	onto	lashed	platforms,	freeing	the	souls	to	dance	with	the
carrion	birds.	The	scene	raised	grim	memories.
He	rode	on.	As	the	darkness	gathered,	the	rhinazan	slowly	drifted	away,
and	Redmask	could	hear	the	double-thump,	one	set	to	either	side,	as	his	two
companions,	their	bloody	work	done,	moved	up	into	flanking	positions,	barely
visible	in	the	gloom.
The	rhinazan	settled	onto	the	horizontal,	scaled	backs,	to	lick	splashed
gore	and	pluck	ticks,	to	lift	their	heads	in	snapping	motions,	inhaling	sharply
to	draw	in	the	biting	insects	that	buzzed	too	close.
Redmask	allowed	his	eyes	to	half	close	–	he	had	been	awake	for	most	of
two	days.	With	Sag’Churok,	the	hulking	male,	gliding	over	the	ground	to	his
right;	and	Gunth	Mach,	the	young	drone	that	was	even	now	growing	into	a


female,	on	his	left,	he	could	not	be	more	secure.
Like	the	rhinazan,	the	two	K’Chain	Che’Malle	seemed	content,	even	in	this
strange	land	and	so	far	away	from	their	kin.
Content	to	follow	Redmask,	to	protect	him,	to	kill	Letherii.
And	he	had	no	idea	why.
	
Silchas	Ruin’s	eyes	were	reptilian	in	the	lantern	light,	no	more	appropriate	a
sight	possible	given	the	chamber	they	now	found	themselves	in,	as	far	as	Seren
Pedac	was	concerned.	The	stone	walls,	curving	upward	to	a	dome,	were	carved
in	overlapping	scales.	The	unbroken	pattern	left	her	feeling	disoriented,
slightly	nauseous.	She	settled	onto	the	floor,	blinked	the	grit	from	her	eyes.
It	must	be	near	morning,	she	judged.	They	had	been	walking	tunnels,
ascending	inclines	and	spiralling	ramps	for	most	of	an	entire	night.	The	air
was	stale,	despite	the	steady	downward	flow	of	currents,	as	if	it	was	gathering
ghosts	with	every	chamber	and	down	every	corridor	it	traversed.
She	glanced	away	from	her	regard	of	Silchas	Ruin,	irritated	at	her	own
fascination	with	the	savage,	unearthly	warrior,	the	way	he	could	hold	himself
so	perfectly	still,	even	the	rise	and	fall	of	his	chest	barely	discernible.	Buried
for	millennia,	yet	he	did	indeed	live.	Blood	flowed	in	his	veins,	thoughts	rose
grimed	with	the	dust	of	disuse.	When	he	spoke,	she	could	hear	the	weight	of
barrowstones.	It	was	unimaginable	to	her	how	a	person	could	so	suffer	without
going	mad.
Then	again,	perhaps	he	was	mad,	something	hidden	deep	within	him,	either
constrained	by	exigencies,	or	simply	awaiting	release.	As	a	killer	–	for	that
surely	was	what	he	was	–	he	was	both	thorough	and	dispassionate.	As	if	mortal
lives	could	be	reduced	in	meaning,	reduced	to	surgical	judgement:	obstacle	or
ally.	Nothing	else	mattered.
She	understood	the	comfort	of	seeing	the	world	in	that	manner.	The	ease	of
its	simplicity	was	inviting.	But	for	her,	impossible.	One	could	not	will	oneself
blind	to	the	complexities	of	the	world.	Yet,	for	Silchas	Ruin,	such	seeming
complexities	were	without	relevance.	He	had	found	a	kind	of	certainty,	and	it
was	unassailable.
Alas,	Fear	Sengar	was	not	prepared	to	accept	the	hopelessness	of	his
constant	assaults	upon	Silchas	Ruin.	The	Tiste	Edur	stood	near	the	triangular
portal	they	would	soon	pass	through,	as	if	impatient	with	this	rest	stop.	‘You
think,’	he	now	said	to	Silchas	Ruin,	‘that	I	know	virtually	nothing	of	that
ancient	war,	the	invasion	of	this	realm.’
The	albino	Tiste	Andii’s	eyes	shifted,	fixed	on	Fear	Sengar,	but	Silchas


Ruin	made	no	reply.
‘The	women	remembered,’	Fear	said.	‘They	passed	the	tales	to	their
daughters.	Generation	after	generation.	Yes,	I	know	that	Scabandari	drove	a
knife	into	your	back,	there	on	that	hill	overlooking	the	field	of	battle.	Yet,	was
this	the	first	betrayal?’
If	he	was	expecting	a	reaction,	he	was	disappointed.
Udinaas	loosed	a	low	laugh	from	where	he	sat	with	his	back	to	the	scaled
wall.	‘You	two	are	so	pointless,’	he	said.	‘Who	betrayed	whom.	What	does	it
matter?	It’s	not	as	if	we’re	relying	on	trust	to	keep	us	together.	Tell	me,	Fear
Sengar	–	once-master	of	mine	–	does	your	brother	have	any	idea	of	who	Ruin
is?	Where	he	came	from?	I	would	suggest	not.	Else	he	would	have	come	after
us	personally,	with	ten	thousand	warriors	at	his	back.	Instead,	they	toy	with	us.
Aren’t	you	even	curious	why?’
No-one	spoke	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	Kettle	giggled,	drawing	all
eyes	to	her.	Her	blink	was	owlish.	‘They	want	us	to	find	what	we’re	looking	for
first,	of	course.’
‘Then	why	block	our	attempts	to	travel	inland?’	Seren	demanded.
‘Because	they	know	it’s	the	wrong	direction.’
‘How	could	they	know	that?’
Kettle’s	small,	dust-stained	hands	fluttered	like	bats	in	the	gloom.	‘The
Crippled	God	told	them,	that’s	how.	The	Crippled	God	said	it’s	not	yet	time	to
travel	east.	He’s	not	ready	for	open	war,	yet.	He	doesn’t	want	us	to	go	into	the
wildlands,	where	all	the	secrets	are	waiting.’
Seren	Pedac	stared	at	the	child.	‘Who	in	Errant’s	name	is	the	Crippled
God?’
‘The	one	who	gave	Rhulad	his	sword,	Acquitor.	The	true	power	behind	the
Tiste	Edur.’	Kettle	threw	up	her	hands.	‘Scabandari’s	dead.	The	bargain	was
Hannan	Mosag’s,	and	the	coin	was	Rhulad	Sengar.’
Fear	stood	with	bared	teeth,	staring	at	Kettle	with	something	like	terror	in
his	eyes.	‘How	do	you	know	this?’	he	demanded.
‘The	dead	told	me.	They	told	me	lots	of	things.	So	did	the	ones	under	the
trees,	the	trapped	ones.	And	they	said	something	else	too.	They	said	the	vast
wheel	is	about	to	turn,	one	last	time,	before	it	closes.	It	closes,	because	it	has	to,
because	that’s	how	he	made	it.	To	tell	him	all	he	needs	to	know.	To	tell	him	the
truth.’
‘Tell	who?’	Seren	asked,	scowling	in	confusion.
‘Him,	the	one	who’s	coming.	You’ll	see.’	She	ran	over	to	where	Fear
stood,	took	him	by	one	hand	and	started	tugging.	‘We	need	to	hurry,	or	they’ll
get	us.	And	if	they	get	us,	Silchas	Ruin	will	have	to	kill	everyone.’


I	could	strangle	that	child.	But	she	pushed	herself	to	her	feet	once	more.
Udinaas	was	laughing.
She	was	inclined	to	strangle	him	as	well.
‘Silchas,’	she	said	as	she	moved	close,	‘do	you	have	any	idea	what	Kettle
was	talking	about?’
‘No,	Acquitor.	But,’	he	added,	‘I	intend	to	keep	listening.’


Chapter	Three

We	came	upon	the	fiend	on	the	eastern	slope	of	the	Radagar	Spine.	It
was	lying	in	a	shallow	gorge	formed	by	flash	flooding,	and	the	stench
pervading	the	hot	air	told	us	of	rotting	flesh,	and	indeed	upon
examination,	conducted	with	utmost	caution	on	this,	the	very	day
following	the	ambush	on	our	camp	by	unknown	attackers,	we
discovered	that	the	fiend	was,	while	still	alive,	mortally	wounded.	How
to	describe	such	a	demonic	entity?	When	upright,	it	would	have
balanced	on	two	hugely	muscled	hind	legs,	reminiscent	of	that	of	a
shaba,	the	flightless	bird	found	on	the	isles	of	the	Draconean
Archipelago,	yet	in	comparison	much	larger	here.	The	hip	level	of	the
fiend,	when	standing,	would	have	been	at	a	man’s	eye	level.	Longtailed,	the	weight	of	the	fiend’s	torso	evenly	balanced	by	its	hips,
thrusting	the	long	neck	and	head	far	forward,	the	spine	made
horizontal.	Two	long	forelimbs,	thickly	bound	in	muscle	and	hardened
scales	providing	natural	armour,	ended,	not	in	grasping	talons	or
hands,	but	enormous	swords,	iron-bladed,	that	seemed	fused,	metal	to
bone,	with	the	wrists.	The	head	was	snouted,	like	that	of	a	crocodile,
such	as	those	found	in	the	mud	of	the	southern	shoreline	of	the
Bluerose	Sea,	yet,	again,	here	much	larger.	Desiccation	had	peeled	the
lips	back	to	reveal	jagged	rows	of	fangs,	each	one	dagger-long.	The
eyes,	clouded	with	approaching	death,	were	nonetheless	uncanny	and
alien	to	our	senses.
The	Atri-Preda,	bold	as	ever,	strode	forward	to	deliver	the	fiend
from	its	suffering,	with	a	sword	thrust	into	the	soft	tissue	of	its	throat.
With	this	fatal	wound,	the	fiend	loosed	a	death	cry	that	struck	us	with
pain,	for	the	sound	it	voiced	was	beyond	our	range	of	hearing,	yet	it
burst	in	our	skulls	with	such	ferocity	that	blood	was	driven	from	our
nostrils,	eyes	and	ears.
One	other	detail	is	worth	noting,	before	I	expound	on	the	extent	of
said	injuries.	The	wounds	visible	upon	the	fiend	were	most	curious.
Elongated,	curving	slashes,	perhaps	from	some	form	of	tentacle,	but	a
tentacle	bearing	sharp	teeth,	whilst	other	wounds	were	shorter	but


deeper	in	nature,	invariably	delivered	to	a	region	vital	to	locomotion
or	other	similar	dispensation	of	limbs,	severing	tendons	and	so	forth…
Factor	Breneda	Anict,	Expedition	into	the	Wildlands
Official	Annals	of	Pufanan	Ibyris
He	was	not	a	man	in	bed.	Oh,	his	parts	functioned	well	enough,	but	in	every
other	way	he	was	a	child,	this	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths.	But	worst	of	all,
Nisall	decided,	was	what	happened	afterwards,	as	he	fell	into	that	half-sleep,
half-something	else,	limbs	spasming,	endless	words	tumbling	from	him	in	a
litany	of	pleading,	punctuated	by	despairing	sobs	that	scraped	the	scented	air	of
the	chamber.	And	before	long,	after	she’d	escaped	the	bed	itself,	drawing	a
robe	about	her	and	taking	position	near	the	painted	scene	in	the	false	window,
five	paces	distant,	she	would	watch	him	crawl	down	onto	the	floor	and	make
his	way	as	if	crippled	from	some	spinal	injury,	the	ever-present	sword	trailing
in	one	hand,	across	the	room	to	the	corner,	where	he	would	spend	the	rest	of
the	night,	curled	up,	locked	in	some	eternal	nightmare.
A	thousand	deaths,	lived	through	night	upon	night.	A	thousand.
An	exaggeration,	of	course.	A	few	hundred	at	most.
Emperor	Rhulad’s	torment	was	not	the	product	of	a	fevered	imagination,
nor	born	of	a	host	of	anxieties.	What	haunted	him	were	the	truths	of	his	past.
She	was	able	to	identify	some	of	his	mutterings,	in	particular	the	one	that
dominated	his	nightmares,	for	she	had	been	there.	In	the	throne	room,	witness
to	Rhulad’s	non-death,	weeping	there	on	the	floor	all	slick	with	his	spilled
blood,	with	a	corpse	on	his	throne	and	Rhulad’s	own	slayer	lying	half	upright
against	the	dais	–	stolen	away	by	poison.
Hannan	Mosag’s	pathetic	slither	towards	that	throne	had	been	halted	by	the
demon	that	had	appeared	to	collect	the	body	of	Brys	Beddict,	and	the	almost
indifferent	sword	thrust	that	killed	Rhulad	as	the	apparition	made	its	way	out.
The	Emperor ’s	awakening	shriek	had	turned	her	heart	into	a	frozen	lump,
a	cry	so	brutally	raw	that	she	felt	its	fire	in	her	own	throat.
But	it	was	what	followed,	a	short	time	after	his	return,	that	stalked	Rhulad
with	a	thousand	dripping	blades.
To	die,	only	to	return,	is	to	never	escape.	Never	escape…anything.
Wounds	closing,	he	had	lifted	himself	up,	onto	his	hands	and	knees,	still
gripping	the	cursed	sword,	the	weapon	that	would	not	let	go.	Weeping,	drawing
in	ragged	breaths,	he	crawled	towards	the	throne,	sagging	down	once	more
when	he	reached	the	dais.


Nisall	had	stepped	out	from	where	she	had	hidden	moments	earlier.	Her
mind	was	numb	–	the	suicide	of	her	king	–	her	lover	–	and	the	Eunuch,	Nifadas
–	the	shocks,	one	upon	another	in	this	terrible	throne	room,	the	deaths,
tumbling	like	crowded	gravestones	in	a	flooded	field.	Triban	Gnol,	ever	the
pragmatist,	knelt	before	the	new	Emperor,	pledging	his	service	with	the	ease	of
an	eel	sliding	under	a	new	rock.	The	First	Consort	had	been	witness,	as	well,
but	she	could	not	see	Turudal	Brizad	now,	as	Rhulad,	blood-wet	coins
gleaming,	twisted	round	on	the	step	and	bared	his	teeth	at	Hannan	Mosag.
‘Not	yours,’	he	said	in	a	rasp.
‘Rhulad—’
‘Emperor!	And	you,	Hannan	Mosag,	are	my	Ceda.	Warlock	King	no
longer.	My	Ceda,	yes.’
‘Your	wife—’
‘Dead.	Yes.’	Rhulad	lifted	himself	onto	the	dais,	then	rose,	staring	now	at
the	dead	Letherii	king,	Ezgara	Diskanar.	Then	he	reached	out	with	his
unburdened	hand,	grasped	the	front	of	the	king’s	brocaded	tunic,	and	dragged
the	corpse	from	the	throne,	letting	it	fall	to	one	side,	head	crunching	on	the
tiled	floor.	A	shiver	seemed	to	rack	through	Rhulad.	Then	he	sat	on	the	throne
and	looked	out,	eyes	settling	once	more	on	Hannan	Mosag.	‘Ceda,’	he	said,	‘in
this,	our	chamber,	you	will	ever	approach	us	on	your	belly,	as	you	do	now.’
From	the	shadows	at	the	far	end	of	the	throne	room	there	came	a
phlegmatic	cackle.
Rhulad	flinched,	then	said,	‘Now	you	will	leave	us,	Ceda.	And	take	that	hag
Janall	and	her	son	with	you.’
‘Emperor,	please,	you	must	understand—’
‘Get	out!’
The	shriek	jarred	Nisall,	and	she	hesitated,	fighting	the	urge	to	flee,	to	get
away	from	this	place.	From	the	court,	from	the	city,	from	everything.
Then	his	free	hand	snapped	out	and	without	turning	he	said	to	her,	‘Not
you,	whore.	You	stay.’
Whore.	‘That	term	is	inappropriate,’	she	said,	then	stiffened	in	fear,
surprised	by	her	own	temerity.
He	fixed	feverish	eyes	on	her.	Then,	incongruously,	he	waved	dismissively
and	spoke	with	sudden	weariness.	‘Of	course.	We	apologize.	Imperial
Concubine…’	His	glittering	face	twisted	in	a	half-smile.	‘Your	king	should
have	taken	you	as	well.	He	was	being	selfish,	or	perhaps	his	love	for	you	was
so	deep	that	he	could	not	bear	inviting	you	into	death.’
She	said	nothing,	for,	in	truth,	she	had	no	answer	to	give	him.
‘Ah,	we	see	the	doubt	in	your	eyes.	Concubine,	you	have	our	sympathy.


Know	that	we	will	not	use	you	cruelly.’	He	fell	silent	then,	as	he	watched
Hannan	Mosag	drag	himself	back	across	the	threshold	of	the	chamber ’s	grand
entranceway.	A	half-dozen	more	Tiste	Edur	had	appeared,	tremulous	in	their
furtive	motions,	their	uncertainty	at	what	they	were	witnessing.	A	hissed
command	from	Hannan	Mosag	sent	two	into	the	room,	each	one	drawing	up
the	burlap	over	the	mangled	forms	of	Janall	and	Quillas,	her	son.	The	sound	as
they	dragged	the	two	flesh-filled	sacks	from	the	chamber	was,	to	Nisall’s	ears,
more	grisly	than	anything	else	she	had	yet	heard	on	this	fell	day.
‘At	the	same	time,’	the	Emperor	went	on	after	a	moment,	‘the	title	and	its
attendant	privileges…remain,	should	you	so	desire.’
She	blinked,	feeling	as	if	she	was	standing	on	shifting	sand.	‘You	free	me
to	choose,	Emperor?’
A	nod,	the	bleary,	red-shot	eyes	still	fixed	on	the	chamber ’s	entranceway.
‘Udinaas,’	he	whispered.	‘Betrayer.	You…you	were	not	free	to	choose.	Slave	–
my	slave	–	I	should	never	have	trusted	the	darkness,	never…’	He	flinched	once
more	on	the	throne,	eyes	suddenly	glittering.	‘He	comes.’
She	had	no	idea	whom	he	meant,	but	the	raw	emotion	in	his	voice
frightened	her	anew.	What	more	could	come	on	this	terrible	day?
Voices	outside,	one	of	them	sounding	bitter,	then	diffident.
She	watched	as	a	Tiste	Edur	warrior	strode	into	the	throne	room.	Rhulad’s
brother.	One	of	them.	The	one	who	had	left	Rhulad	lying	on	the	tiles.	Young,
handsome	in	that	way	of	the	Edur	–	both	alien	and	perfect.	She	tried	to	recall	if
she	had	heard	his	name—
‘Trull,’	said	the	Emperor	in	a	rasp.	‘Where	is	he?	Where	is	Fear?’
‘He	has…left.’
‘Left?	Left	us?’
‘Us.	Yes,	Rhulad	–	or	do	you	insist	I	call	you	Emperor?’
Expressions	twisted	across	Rhulad’s	coin-studded	face,	one	after	another,
then	he	grimaced	and	said,	‘You	left	me,	too,	brother.	Left	me	bleeding…on	the
floor.	Do	you	think	yourself	different	from	Udinaas?	Less	a	betrayer	than	my
Letherii	slave?’
‘Rhulad,	would	that	you	were	my	brother	of	old—’
‘The	one	you	sneered	down	upon?’
‘If	it	seemed	I	did	that,	then	I	apologize.’
‘Yes,	you	see	the	need	for	that	now,	don’t	you?’
Trull	Sengar	stepped	forward.	‘It’s	the	sword,	Rhulad.	It	is	cursed	–	please,
throw	it	away.	Destroy	it.	You’ve	won	the	throne	now,	you	don’t	need	it	any
more—’
‘You	are	wrong.’	He	bared	his	teeth,	as	if	sickened	by	self-hatred.	‘Without


it	I	am	just	Rhulad,	youngest	son	of	Tomad.	Without	the	sword,	brother,	I	am
nothing.’
Trull	cocked	his	head.	‘You	have	led	us	to	conquest.	I	will	stand	beside	you.
So	will	Binadas,	and	our	father.	You	have	won	that	throne,	Rhulad	–	you	need
not	fear	Hannan	Mosag—’
‘That	miserable	worm?	You	think	me	frightened	of	him?’	The	sword-tip
made	a	snapping	sound	as	its	point	jumped	free	of	the	tiles.	Rhulad	aimed	the
weapon	at	Trull’s	chest.	‘I	am	the	Emperor!’
‘No,	you’re	not,’	Trull	replied.	‘Your	sword	is	Emperor	–	your	sword	and
the	power	behind	it.’
‘Liar!’	Rhulad	shrieked.
Nisall	saw	Trull	flinch	back,	then	steady	himself.	‘Prove	it.’
The	Emperor ’s	eyes	widened.
‘Shatter	the	sword	–	Sister ’s	blessing,	just	let	it	fall	from	your	hand.	Even
that,	Rhulad.	Just	that.	Let	it	fall!’
‘No!	I	know	what	you	want,	brother!	You	will	take	it	–	I	see	you	tensed,
ready	to	dive	for	it	–	I	see	the	truth!’	The	weapon	was	shuddering	between
them,	as	if	eager	for	blood,	anyone’s	blood.
Trull	shook	his	head.	‘I	want	it	shattered,	Rhulad.’
‘You	cannot	stand	at	my	side,’	the	Emperor	hissed.	‘Too	close	–	there	is
betrayal	in	your	eyes	–	you	left	me!	Crippled	on	the	floor!’	He	raised	his	voice.
‘Where	are	my	warriors?	Into	the	chamber!	Your	Emperor	commands	it!’
A	half-dozen	Edur	warriors	suddenly	appeared,	weapons	out.
‘Trull,’	Rhulad	whispered.	‘I	see	you	have	no	sword.	Now	it	is	for	you	to
drop	your	favoured	weapon,	your	spear.	And	your	knives.	What?	Do	you	fear	I
will	slay	you?	Show	me	the	trust	you	claim	in	yourself.	Guide	me	with	your
honour,	brother.’
She	did	not	know	it	then;	she	did	not	understand	enough	of	the	Edur	way	of
life,	but	she	saw	something	in	Trull’s	face,	a	kind	of	surrender,	but	a	surrender
that	was	far	more	complicated,	fraught,	than	simply	disarming	himself	there
before	his	brother.	Levels	of	resignation,	settling	one	upon	another,	the	descent
of	impossible	burdens	–	and	the	knowledge	shared	between	the	two	brothers,
of	what	such	a	surrender	signified.	She	did	not	realize	at	the	time	what	Trull’s
answer	would	mean,	the	way	it	was	done,	not	in	his	own	name,	not	for	himself,
but	for	Fear.	Fear	Sengar,	more	than	anyone	else.	She	did	not	realize,	then,	the
immensity	of	his	sacrifice,	as	he	unslung	his	spear	and	let	it	clatter	to	the	tiles;
as	he	removed	his	knife	belt	and	threw	it	to	one	side.
There	should	have	been	triumph	in	Rhulad’s	tortured	eyes,	then,	but	there
wasn’t.	Instead,	a	kind	of	confusion	clouded	his	gaze,	made	him	shy	away,	as	if


seeking	help.	His	attention	found	and	focused	upon	the	six	warriors,	and	he
gestured	with	the	sword	and	said	in	a	broken	voice,	‘Trull	Sengar	is	to	be
Shorn.	He	will	cease	to	exist,	for	ourself,	for	all	Edur.	Take	him.	Bind	him.
Take	him	away.’
Neither	had	she	realized	what	that	judgement,	that	decision,	had	cost
Rhulad	himself.
Free	to	choose,	she	had	chosen	to	remain,	for	reasons	she	could	not
elucidate	even	in	her	own	mind.	Was	there	pity?	Perhaps.	Ambition,	without
question	–	for	she	had	sensed,	in	that	predatory	manner	demanded	of	life	in	the
court,	that	there	was	a	way	through	to	him,	a	way	to	replace	–	without	all	the
attendant	history	–	those	who	were	no	longer	at	Rhulad’s	side.	Not	one	of	his
warrior	sycophants	–	they	were	worthless,	ultimately,	and	she	knew	that	Rhulad
was	well	aware	of	that	truth.	In	the	end,	she	could	see,	he	had	no-one.	Not	his
brother,	Binadas,	who,	like	Trull,	proved	too	close	and	thus	too	dangerous	for
the	Emperor	to	keep	around	–	and	so	he	had	sent	him	away,	seeking	champions
and	scattered	kin	of	the	Edur	tribes.	As	for	his	father,	Tomad,	again	the
suborning	role	proved	far	too	awkward	to	accommodate.	Of	the	surviving
K’risnan	of	Hannan	Mosag,	fully	half	had	been	sent	to	accompany	Tomad	and
Binadas,	so	as	to	keep	the	new	Ceda	weak.
And	all	the	while,	as	these	decisions	were	made,	as	the	Shorning	was
conducted,	in	secrecy,	away	from	Letherii	eyes,	and	as	Nisall	manoeuvred
herself	into	the	Emperor ’s	bed,	the	Chancellor,	Triban	Gnol,	had	watched	on,
with	the	hooded	eyes	of	a	raptor.
The	consort,	Turudal	Brizad,	had	vanished,	although	Nisall	had	heard
rumours	among	the	court	servants	that	he	had	not	gone	far;	that	he	haunted	the
lesser	travelled	corridors	and	subterranean	mysteries	of	the	old	palace,	ghostly
and	rarely	more	than	half	seen.	She	was	undecided	on	the	veracity	of	such
claims;	even	so,	if	he	were	indeed	hiding	still	in	the	palace,	she	realized	that
such	a	thing	would	not	surprise	her	in	the	least.	It	did	not	matter	–	Rhulad	had
no	wife,	after	all.
The	Emperor ’s	lover,	a	role	she	was	accustomed	to,	although	it	did	not
seem	that	way.	Rhulad	was	so	young,	so	different	from	Ezgara	Diskanar.	His
spiritual	wounds	were	too	deep	to	be	healed	by	her	touch,	and	so,	even	as	she
found	herself	in	a	position	of	eminence,	of	power	–	close	as	she	was	to	the
throne	–	she	felt	helpless.	And	profoundly	alone.
She	stood,	watching	the	Emperor	of	Lether	writhing	as	he	curled	up	ever
tighter	in	the	corner	of	the	room.	Among	the	whimpers,	groans	and	gasps,	he
spat	out	fragments	of	his	conversation	with	Trull,	his	forsaken	brother.	And
again	and	again,	in	hoarse	whispers,	Rhulad	begged	forgiveness.


Yet	a	new	day	awaited	them,	she	reminded	herself.	And	she	would	see	this
broken	man	gather	himself,	collect	the	pieces	and	then	take	his	place	seated	on
the	imperial	throne,	looking	out	with	red-rimmed	eyes,	his	fragmented	armour
of	coins	gleaming	dull	in	the	light	of	the	traditional	torches	lining	the
chamber ’s	walls;	and	where	those	coins	were	missing,	there	was	naught	but
scarred	tissue,	crimson-ringed	weals	of	malformed	flesh.	And	then,	this
ghastly	apparition	would,	in	the	course	of	that	day,	proceed	to	astonish	her.
Eschewing	the	old	protocols	of	imperial	rule,	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand
Deaths	would	sit	through	a	presentation	of	petitions,	an	ever-growing	number
of	citizens	of	the	empire,	poor	and	rich	alike,	who	had	come	to	accept	the
Imperial	Invitation,	feeding	their	courage	to	come	face	to	face	with	their
foreign	ruler.	For	bell	after	bell,	Rhulad	would	mete	out	justice	as	best	he
could.	His	struggles	to	understand	the	lives	of	the	Letherii	had	touched	her	in
unexpected	ways	–	there	was,	she	had	come	to	believe,	a	decent	soul	beneath	all
that	accursed	trauma.	And	it	was	then	that	Nisall	found	herself	most	needed,
although	more	often	of	late	it	was	the	Chancellor	who	dominated	the	advising,
and	she	had	come	to	realize	that	Triban	Gnol	had	begun	to	view	her	as	a	rival.
He	was	the	principal	organizer	of	the	petitions,	the	filter	that	kept	the	numbers
manageable,	and	his	office	had	burgeoned	accordingly.	That	his	expanded	staff
also	served	as	a	vast	and	invasive	web	of	spies	in	the	palace	was	of	course	a
given.
Thus,	Nisall	watched	her	Emperor,	who	had	ascended	the	throne	wading
through	blood,	strive	for	benign	rule,	seeking	a	sensitivity	too	honest	and
awkward	to	be	other	than	genuine.	And	it	was	breaking	her	heart.
For	power	had	no	interest	in	integrity.	Even	Ezgara	Diskanar,	so	full	of
promise	in	his	early	years,	had	come	to	raise	a	wall	between	himself	and	the
empire’s	citizens	in	the	last	decade	of	his	rule.	Integrity	was	too	vulnerable	to
abuse	by	others,	and	Ezgara	had	suffered	that	betrayal	again	and	again,	and,
perhaps	most	painfully	of	all,	from	his	own	wife,	Janall,	and	then	their	son.
Too	easy	to	dismiss	the	burden	of	such	wounds,	the	depth	of	such	scars.
And	Rhulad,	this	youngest	son	of	an	Edur	noble	family,	had	been	a	victim
of	betrayal,	of	what	must	have	been	true	friendship	–	with	the	slave,	Udinaas	–
and	in	the	threads	of	shared	blood,	from	his	very	own	brothers.
But	each	day,	he	overcame	the	torments	of	the	night	just	gone.	Nisall
wondered,	however,	how	much	longer	that	could	last.	She	alone	was	witness	to
his	inner	triumph,	to	that	extraordinary	war	he	waged	with	himself	every
morning.	The	Chancellor,	for	all	his	spies,	knew	nothing	of	it	–	she	was	certain
of	that.	And	that	made	him	dangerous	in	his	ignorance.
She	needed	to	speak	to	Triban	Gnol.	She	needed	to	mend	this	bridge.	But	I


will	not	be	his	spy.
A	most	narrow	bridge,	then,	one	to	be	trod	with	caution.
Rhulad	stirred	in	the	gloom.
And	then	he	whispered,	‘I	know	what	you	want,	brother…
‘So	guide	me…guide	me	with	your	honour…’
Ah,	Trull	Sengar,	wherever	your	spirit	now	lurks,	does	it	please	you?	Does
this	please	you,	to	know	that	your	Shorning	failed?
So	that	you	have	now	returned.
To	so	haunt	Rhulad.
‘Guide	me,’	Rhulad	croaked.
The	sword	scraped	on	the	floor,	rippling	over	mosaic	stones	like	cold
laughter.
	
‘It	is	not	possible,	I’m	afraid.’
Bruthen	Trana	studied	the	Letherii	standing	before	him	for	a	long	moment
and	said	nothing.
The	Chancellor ’s	gaze	flicked	away,	as	if	distracted,	and	seemed	moments
from	dismissing	the	Edur	warrior	outright;	then,	perhaps	realizing	that	might
be	unwise,	he	cleared	his	throat	and	spoke	in	a	tone	of	sympathy.	‘The
Emperor	insists	on	these	petitions,	as	you	are	aware,	and	they	consume	his
every	waking	moment.	They	are,	if	you	forgive	me,	his	obsession.’	His	brows
lifted	a	fraction.	‘How	can	a	true	subject	question	their	Emperor ’s	love	of
justice?	The	citizens	have	come	to	adore	him.	They	have	come	to	see	him	for
the	honourable	ruler	he	is	in	truth.	That	transition	has	taken	some	time,	I	admit,
and	involved	immense	effort	on	our	part.’
‘I	wish	to	speak	to	the	Emperor,’	Bruthen	said,	his	tone	matching	precisely
the	previous	time	he	had	spoken	those	words.
Triban	Gnol	sighed.	‘Presumably	you	wish	to	make	your	report	regarding
Invigilator	Karos	Invictad	and	his	Patriotists	in	person.	I	assure	you,	I	do
forward	said	reports.’	He	frowned	at	the	Tiste	Edur,	then	nodded	and	said,
‘Very	well.	I	will	convey	your	wishes	to	his	highness,	Bruthen	Trana.’
‘If	need	be,	place	me	among	the	petitioners.’
‘That	will	not	be	necessary.’
The	Tiste	Edur	gazed	at	the	Chancellor	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	he
turned	about	and	left	the	office.	In	the	larger	room	beyond	waited	a	crowd	of
Letherii.	A	score	of	faces	turned	to	regard	Bruthen	as	he	threaded	his	way
through	–	faces	nervous,	struggling	with	fear	–	while	others	studied	the	Tiste
Edur	with	eyes	that	gave	away	nothing:	the	Chancellor ’s	agents,	the	ones	who,


Bruthen	suspected,	went	out	each	morning	to	round	up	the	day’s	petitioners,
then	coached	them	in	what	to	say	to	their	Emperor.
Ignoring	the	Letherii	as	they	parted	to	let	him	pass,	he	made	his	way	out
into	the	corridor,	then	onward	through	the	maze	of	chambers,	hallways	and
passages	that	composed	the	palace.	He	saw	very	few	other	Tiste	Edur,	barring
one	of	Hannan	Mosag’s	K’risnan,	bent-backed	and	walking	with	one	shoulder
scraping	against	a	wall,	dark	eyes	flickering	an	acknowledgement	as	he	limped
along.
Bruthen	Trana	made	his	way	into	the	wing	of	the	palace	closest	to	the	river,
and	here	the	air	was	clammy,	the	corridors	mostly	empty.	While	the	flooding
that	had	occurred	during	the	early	stages	of	construction	had	been	rectified,	via
an	ingenious	system	of	subsurface	pylons,	it	seemed	nothing	could	dispel	the
damp.	Holes	had	been	knocked	in	outer	walls	to	create	a	flow	of	air,	to	little
effect	apart	from	filling	the	musty	gloom	with	the	scent	of	river	mud	and
decaying	plants.
Bruthen	walked	through	one	such	hole,	emerging	out	onto	a	mostly
broken-up	cobble	path,	with	felled	trees	rotting	amidst	high	grasses	off	to	his
left	and	the	foundations	of	a	small	building	to	his	right.	Abandonment	lingered
in	the	still	air	like	suspended	pollen,	and	Bruthen	was	alone	as	he	ascended	the
path’s	uneven	slope	to	arrive	at	the	edge	of	a	cleared	area,	at	the	other	end	of
which	rose	the	ancient	tower	of	the	Azath,	with	the	lesser	structures	of	the
Jaghut	to	either	side.	In	this	clearing	there	were	grave	markers,	set	out	in	no
discernible	order.	Half-buried	urns,	wax-sealed	at	the	mouth,	from	which
emerged	weapons.	Swords,	broken	spears,	axes,	maces	–	trophies	of	failure,	a
stunted	forest	of	iron.
The	Fallen	Champions,	the	residents	of	a	most	prestigious	cemetery.	All
had	killed	Rhulad	at	least	once,	some	more	than	once	–	the	greatest	of	these,	an
almost	full-blood	Tarthenal,	had	slain	the	Emperor	seven	times,	and	Bruthen
could	remember,	with	absolute	clarity,	the	look	of	growing	rage	and	terror	in
that	Tarthenal’s	bestial	face	each	time	his	fallen	opponent	arose,	renewed,
stronger	and	deadlier	than	he	had	been	only	moments	earlier.
He	entered	the	bizarre	necropolis,	eyes	drifting	across	the	various
weapons,	once	so	lovingly	cared	for	–	many	of	them	bearing	names	–	but	now
sheathed	in	rust.	At	the	far	end,	slightly	separated	from	all	the	others,	stood	an
empty	urn.	Months	earlier,	out	of	curiosity,	he	had	reached	down	into	it,	and
found	a	silver	cup.	The	cup	that	had	contained	the	poison	that	killed	three
Letherii	in	the	throne	room	–	that	had	killed	Brys	Beddict.
No	ashes.	Even	his	sword	had	disappeared.
Bruthen	Trana	suspected	that	if	this	man	were	to	return,	now,	he	would	face


Rhulad	again,	and	do	what	he	did	before.	No,	it	was	more	than	suspicion.	A
certainty.
Unseen	by	Rhulad,	as	the	new	Emperor	lay	there,	cut	to	shreds	on	the	floor,
Bruthen	had	edged	into	the	chamber	to	see	for	himself.	And	in	that	moment’s
fearful	glance,	he	had	discerned	the	appalling	precision	of	that	butchery.	Brys
Beddict	had	been	perfunctory.	Like	a	scholar	dissecting	a	weak	argument,	an
effort	on	his	part	no	greater	than	tying	on	his	moccasins.
Would	that	he	had	seen	the	duel	itself,	that	he	had	witnessed	the	artistry	of
this	tragically	slain	Letherii	swordsman.
He	stood,	looking	down	at	the	dusty,	web-covered	urn.
And	prayed	for	Brys	Beddict’s	return.
	
A	pattern	was	taking	shape,	incrementally,	inexorably.	Yet	the	Errant,	once
known	as	Turudal	Brizad,	Consort	to	Queen	Janall,	could	not	discern	its
meaning.	The	sensation,	of	unease,	of	dread,	was	new	to	him.	Indeed,	he
considered,	one	could	not	imagine	a	more	awkward	state	of	mind	for	a	god,
here	in	the	heart	of	his	realm.
Oh,	he	had	known	times	of	violence;	he	had	walked	the	ashes	of	dead
empires,	but	his	own	sense	of	destiny	was,	even	then,	ever	untarnished,
inviolate	and	absolute.	And,	to	make	matters	worse,	patterns	were	his	personal
obsession,	held	to	with	a	belief	in	his	mastery	of	that	arcane	language,	a
mastery	beyond	challenge.
Then	who	is	it	who	plays	with	me	now?
He	stood	in	the	gloom,	listening	to	the	trickle	of	water	seeping	down	some
unseen	wall,	and	stared	down	at	the	Cedance,	the	stone	tiles	of	the	Holds,	the
puzzle	floor	that	was	the	very	foundation	of	his	realm.	The	Cedance.	My	tiles.
Mine.	I	am	the	Errant.	This	is	my	game.
While	before	him	the	pattern	ground	on,	the	rumbling	of	stones	too	low
and	deep	to	hear,	yet	their	resonance	grated	in	his	bones.	Disparate	pieces,
coming	together.	A	function	hidden,	until	the	last	moment	–	when	all	is	too	late,
when	the	closure	denies	every	path	of	escape.
Do	you	expect	me	to	do	nothing?	I	am	not	just	one	more	of	your	victims.	I
am	the	Errant.	By	my	hand,	every	fate	is	turned.	All	that	seems	random	is	by	my
design.	This	is	an	immutable	truth.	It	has	ever	been.	It	shall	ever	be.
Still,	the	taste	of	fear	was	on	his	tongue,	as	if	he’d	been	sucking	on	dirtied
coins	day	after	day,	running	the	wealth	of	an	empire	through	his	mouth.	But	is
that	bitter	flow	inward	or	out?
The	grinding	whisper	of	motion,	all	resolution	of	the	images	carved	into


the	tiles…lost.	Not	a	single	Hold	would	reveal	itself.
The	Cedance	had	been	this	way	since	the	day	Ezgara	Diskanar	died.	The
Errant	would	be	a	fool	to	disregard	linkage,	but	that	path	of	reason	had	yet	to
lead	him	anywhere.	Perhaps	it	was	not	Ezgara’s	death	that	mattered,	but	the
Ceda’s.	He	never	liked	me	much.	And	I	stood	and	watched,	as	the	Tiste	Edur
edged	to	one	side,	as	he	flung	his	spear,	transfixing	Kuru	Qan,	killing	the
greatest	Ceda	since	the	First	Empire.	My	game,	I’d	thought	at	the	time.	But
now,	I	wonder…
Maybe	it	was	Kuru	Qan’s.	And,	somehow,	it	still	plays	out.	I	did	not	warn
him	of	that	imminent	danger,	did	I?	Before	his	last	breath	rattled,	he	would
have	comprehended	that…omission.
Has	this	damned	mortal	cursed	me?	Me,	a	god!
Such	a	curse	should	be	vulnerable.	Not	even	Kuru	Qan	was	capable	of
fashioning	something	that	could	not	be	dismantled	by	the	Errant.	He	need	only
understand	its	structure,	all	that	pinned	it	in	place,	the	hidden	spikes	guiding
these	tiles.
What	comes?	The	empire	is	reborn,	reinvigorated,	revealing	the	veracity	of
the	ancient	prophecy.	All	is	as	I	foresaw.
His	study	of	the	blurred	pavestones	below	the	walkway	became	a	glare.	He
hissed	in	frustration,	and	watched	his	breath	plume	away	in	the	chill.
An	unknown	transformation,	in	which	I	see	naught	but	the	ice	of	my	own
exasperation.	Thus,	I	see,	but	am	blind,	blind	to	it	all.
The	cold,	too,	was	a	new	phenomenon.	The	heat	of	power	had	bled	away
from	this	place.	Nothing	was	as	it	should	be.
Perhaps,	at	some	point,	he	would	have	to	admit	defeat.	And	then	I	will	have
to	pay	a	visit	to	a	little,	crabby	old	man.	Working	as	a	servant	to	a	worthless
fool.	Humble,	I	will	come	in	search	of	answers.	I	let	Tehol	live,	didn’t	I?	That
must	count	for	something.
Mael,	I	know	you	interfered	last	time.	With	unconscionable	disregard	for
the	rules.	My	rules.	But	I	have	forgiven	you,	and	that,	too,	must	count	for
something.
Humility	tasted	even	worse	than	fear.	He	was	not	yet	ready	for	that.
He	would	take	command	of	the	Cedance.	But	to	usurp	the	pattern,	he	would
first	have	to	find	its	maker.	Kuru	Qan?	He	was	unconvinced.
There	are	disturbances	in	the	pantheons,	new	and	old.	Chaos,	the	stink	of
violence.	Yes,	this	is	a	god’s	meddling.	Perhaps	Mael	himself	is	to	blame	–	no,	it
feels	wrong.	More	likely,	he	knows	nothing,	remains	blissfully	ignorant.	Will	it
serve	me	to	make	him	aware	that	something	is	awry?
An	empire	reborn.	True,	the	Tiste	Edur	had	their	secrets,	or	at	least	they


believed	such	truths	were	well	hidden.	They	were	not.	An	alien	god	had
usurped	them,	and	had	made	of	a	young	Edur	warrior	an	avatar,	a	champion,
suitably	flawed	in	grisly	homage	to	the	god’s	own	pathetic	dysfunctions.	Power
from	pain,	glory	from	degradation,	themes	in	apposition	–	an	empire	reborn
offered	the	promise	of	vigour,	of	expansion	and	longevity,	none	of	which	was,
he	had	to	admit,	truly	assured.	And	such	are	promises.
The	god	shivered	suddenly	in	the	bitter	cold	air	of	this	vast,	subterranean
chamber.	Shivered,	on	this	walkway	above	a	swirling	unknown.
The	pattern	was	taking	shape.
And	when	it	did,	it	would	be	too	late.
	
‘It’s	too	late.’
‘But	there	must	be	something	we	can	do.’
‘I’m	afraid	not.	It’s	dying,	Master,	and	unless	we	take	advantage	of	its
demise	right	now,	someone	else	will.’
The	capabara	fish	had	used	its	tentacles	to	crawl	up	the	canal	wall,	pulling
itself	over	the	edge	onto	the	walkway,	where	it	flattened	out,	strangely
spreadeagled,	to	lie,	mouth	gaping,	gills	gasping,	watching	the	morning	get
cloudy	as	it	expired.	The	beast	was	as	long	as	a	man	is	tall,	as	fat	as	a	mutton
merchant	from	the	Inner	Isles,	and,	to	Tehol’s	astonishment,	even	uglier.	‘Yet
my	heart	breaks.’
Bugg	scratched	his	mostly	hairless	pate,	then	sighed.	‘It’s	the	unusually
cold	water,’	he	said.	‘These	like	their	mud	warm.’
‘Cold	water?	Can’t	you	do	something	about	that?’
‘Bugg’s	Hydrogation.’
‘You’re	branching	out?’
‘No,	I	was	just	trying	on	the	title.’
‘How	do	you	hydrogate?’
‘I	have	no	idea.	Well,	I	have,	but	it’s	not	quite	a	legitimate	craft.’
‘Meaning	it	belongs	in	the	realm	of	the	gods.’
‘Mostly.	Although,’	he	said,	brightening,	‘with	the	recent	spate	of	flooding,
and	given	my	past	experience	in	engineering	dry	foundations,	I	begin	to	see
some	possibilities.’
‘Can	you	soak	investors?’
Bugg	grimaced.	‘Always	seeing	the	destructive	side,	aren’t	you,	Master?’
‘It’s	my	opportunistic	nature.	Most	people,’	he	added,	‘would	view	that	as	a
virtue.	Now,	are	you	truly	telling	me	you	can’t	save	this	poor	fish?’
‘Master,	it’s	already	dead.’


‘Is	it?	Oh.	Well,	I	guess	we	now	have	supper.’
‘More	like	fifteen	suppers.’
‘In	any	case,	I	have	an	appointment,	so	I	will	see	you	and	the	fish	at	home.’
‘Why,	thank	you,	Master.’
‘Didn’t	I	tell	you	this	morning	walk	would	prove	beneficial?’
‘Not	for	the	capabara,	alas.’
‘Granted.	Oh,	by	the	way,	I	need	you	to	make	me	a	list.’
‘Of	what?’
‘Ah,	I	will	have	to	tell	you	that	later.	As	I	said,	I	am	late	for	an	appointment.
It	just	occurred	to	me:	is	this	fish	too	big	for	you	to	carry	by	yourself?’
‘Well,’	Bugg	said,	eyeing	the	carcass,	‘it’s	small	as	far	as	capabara	go	–
remember	the	one	that	tried	to	mate	with	a	galley?’
‘The	betting	on	that	outcome	overwhelmed	the	Drownings.	I	lost
everything	I	had	that	day.’
‘Everything?’
‘Three	copper	docks,	yes.’
‘What	outcome	did	you	anticipate?’
‘Why,	small	rowboats	that	could	row	themselves	with	big	flippery
paddles.’
‘You’re	late	for	your	appointment,	Master.’
‘Wait!	Don’t	look!	I	need	to	do	something	unseemly	right	now.’
‘Oh,	Master,	really.’
	
Spies	stood	on	street	corners.	Small	squads	of	grey	rain-caped	Patriotists
moved	through	the	throngs	that	parted	to	give	them	wide	berth	as	they
swaggered	with	gloved	hands	resting	on	their	belted	truncheons,	and	on	their
faces	the	bludgeon	arrogance	of	thugs.	Tehol	Beddict,	wearing	his	blanket	like
a	sarong,	walked	with	the	benign	grace	of	an	ascetic	from	some	obscure	but
harmless	cult.	Or	at	least	he	hoped	so.	To	venture	onto	the	streets	of	Letheras
these	days	involved	a	certain	measure	of	risk	that	had	not	existed	in	King
Ezgara	Diskanar ’s	days	of	pleasant	neglect.	While	on	the	one	hand	this	lent	an
air	of	intrigue	and	danger	to	every	journey	–	including	shopping	for	over-ripe
root	crops	–	there	were	also	the	taut	nerves	that	one	could	not	quell,	no	matter
how	many	mouldy	turnips	one	happened	to	be	carrying.
Compounding	matters,	in	this	instance,	was	the	fact	that	he	was	indeed
intent	on	subversion.	One	of	the	first	victims	in	this	new	regime	had	been	the
Rat	Catchers’	Guild.	Karos	Invictad,	the	Invigilator	of	the	Patriotists,	had	acted
on	his	first	day	of	officialdom,	despatching	fully	a	hundred	agents	to	Scale


House,	the	modest	Guild	headquarters,	whereupon	they	effected	arrests	on
scores	of	Rat	Catchers,	all	of	whom,	it	later	turned	out,	were	illusions	–	a	detail
unadvertised,	of	course,	lest	the	dread	Patriotists	announce	their	arrival	to	cries
of	ridicule.	Which	would	not	do.
After	all,	tyranny	has	no	sense	of	humour.	Too	thin-skinned,	too	thoroughly
full	of	its	own	self-importance.	Accordingly,	it	presents	an	almost	overwhelming
temptation	–	how	can	I	not	be	excused	the	occasional	mockery?	Alas,	the
Patriotists	lacked	flexibility	in	such	matters	–	the	deadliest	weapon	against
them	was	derisive	laughter,	and	they	knew	it.
He	crossed	Quillas	Canal	at	a	lesser	bridge,	made	his	way	into	the	less
ostentatious	north	district,	and	eventually	sauntered	into	a	twisting,	shadowfilled	alley	that	had	once	been	a	dirt	street,	before	the	invention	of	fourwheeled	wagons	and	side-by-side	horse	collars.	Instead	of	the	usual	hovels	and
back	doors	that	one	might	expect	to	find	in	such	an	alley,	lining	this	one	were
shops	that	had	not	changed	in	any	substantial	way	in	the	past	seven	hundred	or
so	years.	There,	first	to	the	right,	the	Half-Axe	Temple	of	Herbs,	smelling	like
a	swamp’s	sinkhole,	wherein	one	could	find	a	prune-faced	witch	who	lived	in	a
mudpit,	with	all	her	precious	plants	crowding	the	banks,	or	growing	in	the
insect-flecked	pool	itself.	It	was	said	she	had	been	born	in	that	slime	and	was
only	half	human;	and	that	her	mother	had	been	born	there	too,	and	her	mother
and	so	on.	That	such	conceptions	were	immaculate	went	without	saying,	since
Tehol	could	hardly	imagine	any	reasonable	or	even	unreasonable	man	taking
that	particular	plunge.
Opposite	the	Half-Axe	was	the	narrow-fronted	entrance	to	a	shop	devoted
to	short	lengths	of	rope	and	wooden	poles	a	man	and	a	half	high.	Tehol	had	no
idea	how	such	a	specialized	enterprise	could	survive,	especially	in	this
unravelled,	truncated	market,	yet	its	door	had	remained	open	for	almost	six
centuries,	locked	up	each	night	by	a	short	length	of	rope	and	a	wooden	pole.
The	assortment	proceeding	down	the	alley	was	similar	only	in	its
peculiarity.	Wooden	stakes	and	pegs	in	one,	sandal	thongs	in	another	–	not	the
sandals,	just	the	thongs.	A	shop	selling	leaky	pottery	–	not	an	indication	of
incompetence:	rather,	the	pots	were	deliberately	made	to	leak	at	various,
precise	rates	of	loss;	a	place	selling	unopenable	boxes,	another	toxic	dyes.
Ceramic	teeth,	bottles	filled	with	the	urine	of	pregnant	women,	enormous
amphorae	containing	dead	pregnant	women;	the	excreta	of	obese	hogs;	and
miniature	pets	–	dogs,	cats,	birds	and	rodents	of	all	sorts,	each	one	reduced	in
size	through	generation	after	generation	of	selective	breeding	–	Tehol	had
seen	guard	dogs	standing	no	higher	than	his	ankle,	and	while	cute	and
appropriately	yappy,	he	had	doubts	as	to	their	efficacy,	although	they	were


probably	a	terror	for	the	thumbnail-sized	mice	and	the	cats	that	could	ride	an
old	woman’s	big	toe,	secured	there	by	an	ingenious	loop	in	the	sandal’s	thong.
Since	the	outlawing	of	the	Rat	Catchers’	Guild,	Adventure	Alley	had
acquired	a	new	function,	to	which	Tehol	now	set	about	applying	himself	with
the	insouciance	of	the	initiated.	First,	into	the	Half-Axe,	clawing	his	way
through	the	vines	immediately	beyond	the	entrance,	then	drawing	up	one	step
short	of	pitching	head-first	into	the	muddy	pool.
Splashing,	thick	slopping	sounds,	then	a	dark-skinned	wrinkled	face
appeared	amidst	the	high	grasses	fringing	the	pit.	‘It’s	you,’	the	witch	said,
grimacing	then	slithering	out	her	overlong	tongue	to	display	all	the	leeches
attached	to	it.
‘And	it’s	you,’	Tehol	replied.
The	red	protuberance	with	all	its	friends	went	back	inside.	‘Come	in	for	a
swim,	you	odious	man.’
‘Come	out	and	let	your	skin	recover,	Munuga.	I	happen	to	know	you’re
barely	three	decades	old.’
‘I	am	a	map	of	wisdom.’
‘As	a	warning	against	the	perils	of	overbathing,	perhaps.	Where’s	the	fat
root	this	time?’
‘What	have	you	got	for	me	first?’
‘What	I	always	have.	The	only	thing	you	ever	want	from	me,	Munuga.’
‘The	only	thing	you’ll	never	give,	you	mean!’
Sighing,	Tehol	drew	out	from	under	his	makeshift	sarong	a	small	vial.	He
held	it	up	for	her	to	see.
She	licked	her	lips,	which	proved	alarmingly	complicated.	‘What	kind?’
‘Capabara	roe.’
‘But	I	want	yours.’
‘I	don’t	produce	roe.’
‘You	know	what	I	mean,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘Alas,	poverty	is	more	than	skin	deep.	Also,	I	have	lost	all	incentive	to	be
productive,	in	any	sense	of	the	word.	After	all,	what	kind	of	a	world	is	this	that
I’d	even	contemplate	delivering	a	child	into?’
‘Tehol	Beddict,	you	cannot	deliver	a	child.	You’re	a	man.	Leave	the
delivering	to	me.’
‘Tell	you	what,	climb	out	of	that	soup,	dry	out	and	let	me	see	what	you’re
supposed	to	look	like,	and	who	knows?	Extraordinary	things	might	happen.’
Scowling,	she	held	out	an	object.	‘Here’s	your	fat	root.	Give	me	that	vial,
then	go	away.’
‘I	so	look	forward	to	next	time—’


‘Tehol	Beddict,	do	you	know	what	fat	root	is	used	for?’
Her	eyes	had	sharpened	with	suspicion,	and	Tehol	realized	that,	were	she
indeed	to	dry	out,	she	might	be	rather	handsome	after	all,	in	a	vaguely
amphibian	way.	‘No,	why?’
‘Are	you	required	to	partake	of	it	in	some	bizarre	fashion?’
He	shook	his	head.
‘Are	you	certain?	No	unusual	tea	smelling	yellow?’
‘Smelling	yellow?	What	does	that	mean?’
‘If	you	smelled	it,	you’d	know.	Clearly,	you	haven’t.	Good.	Get	out,	I’m
puckering.’
	
A	hasty	departure,	then,	from	the	Half-Axe.	Onward,	to	the	entrance	to	Grool’s
Immeasurable	Pots.	Presumably,	that	description	was	intended	to	emphasize
unmatched	quality	or	something	similar,	since	the	pots	themselves	were	sold	as
clocks,	and	for	alchemical	experiments	and	the	like,	and	such	functions	were
dependent	on	accurate	rates	of	flow.
He	stepped	inside	the	cramped,	damp	shop.
‘You’re	always	frowning	when	you	come	in	here,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘Good	morning,	Laudable	Grool.’
‘The	grey	one,	yes,	that	one	there.’
‘A	fine-looking	pot—’
‘It’s	a	beaker,	not	a	pot.’
‘Of	course.’
‘Usual	price.’
‘Why	do	you	always	hide	behind	all	those	pots,	Laudable	Grool?	All	I	ever
see	of	you	is	your	hands.’
‘My	hands	are	the	only	important	part	of	me.’
‘All	right.’	Tehol	drew	out	a	recently	removed	dorsal	fin.	‘A	succession	of
spines,	these	ones	from	a	capabara.	Gradating	diameters—’
‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘Well,	you	can	see	it	–	they	get	smaller	as	they	go	back.’
‘Yes,	but	how	precise?’
‘That’s	for	you	to	decide.	You	demand	objects	with	which	to	make	holes.
Here	you	have…what…twelve.	How	can	you	not	be	pleased	by	that?’
‘Who	said	I	wasn’t	pleased?	Put	them	on	the	counter.	Take	the	beaker.	And
get	that	damned	fat	root	out	of	here.’
From	there	it	was	across	to	the	small	animals	shop	and	Beastmonger	Shill,
an	oversized	woman	endlessly	bustling	up	and	down	the	rows	of	tiny	stacked


cages,	on	her	flattened	heels	a	piping,	scurrying	swarm	of	little	creatures.	She
squealed	her	usual	delight	at	the	gifts	of	beaker	and	fat	root,	the	latter	of	which,
it	turned	out,	was	most	commonly	used	by	malicious	wives	to	effect	the
shrinkage	of	their	husbands’	testicles;	whilst	Shill	had,	with	some	delicate
modifications,	applied	the	root’s	diminutive	properties	to	her	broods,	feeding
the	yellow-smelling	tea	out	in	precise	increments	using	the	holed	beaker.
The	meeting	soured	when	Tehol	slapped	at	a	mosquito	on	his	neck,	only	to
be	informed	he	had	just	killed	a	pygmy	blood-sucking	bat.	His	reply	that	the
distinction	was	lost	on	him	was	not	well	received.	But	Shill	opened	the
trapdoor	on	the	floor	at	the	back	of	the	shop	nevertheless,	and	Tehol	descended
the	twenty-six	narrow,	steep	stone	steps	to	the	crooked	corridor	–	twenty-one
paces	long	–	that	led	to	the	ancient,	empty	beehive	tomb,	the	walls	of	which	had
been	dismantled	in	three	places	to	fashion	rough	doorways	into	snaking,	lowceilinged	tunnels,	two	of	which	ended	in	fatal	traps.	The	third	passageway
eventually	opened	out	into	a	long	chamber	occupied	by	a	dozen	or	so
dishevelled	refugees,	most	of	whom	seemed	to	be	asleep.
Fortunately,	Chief	Investigator	Rucket	was	not	among	the	somnolent.	Her
brows	rose	when	she	saw	him,	her	admirable	face	filling	with	an	expression	of
unfeigned	relief	as	she	gestured	him	to	her	table.	The	surface	was	covered	in
parchment	sheets	depicting	various	floor	plans	and	structural	diagrams.
‘Sit,	Tehol	Beddict!	Here,	some	wine!	Drink.	By	the	Errant,	a	new	face!
You	have	no	idea	how	sick	I	am	of	my	interminable	companions	in	this	hovel.’
‘Clearly,’	he	replied,	sitting,	‘you	need	to	get	out	more.’
‘Alas,	most	of	my	investigations	these	days	are	archival	in	nature.’
‘Ah,	the	Grand	Mystery	you’ve	uncovered.	Any	closer	to	a	solution?’
‘Grand	Mystery?	More	like	Damned	Mystery,	and	no,	I	remain	baffled,
even	as	my	map	grows	with	every	day	that	passes.	But	let’s	not	talk	any	more
about	that.	My	agents	report	that	the	cracks	in	the	foundation	are	inexorably
spreading	–	well	done,	Tehol.	I	always	figured	you	were	smarter	than	you
looked.’
‘Why	thank	you,	Rucket.	Have	you	got	those	lacquered	tiles	I	asked	for?’
‘Onyx	finished	the	last	one	this	morning.	Sixteen	in	all,	correct?’
‘Perfect.	Bevelled	edges?’
‘Of	course.	All	of	your	instructions	were	adhered	to	with	diligence.’
‘Great.	Now,	about	that	inexorable	spreading—’
‘You	wish	us	to	retire	to	my	private	room?’
‘Uh,	not	now,	Rucket.	I	need	some	coin.	An	infusion	to	bolster	a	capital
investment.’
‘How	much?’


‘Fifty	thousand.’
‘Will	we	ever	see	a	return?’
‘No,	you’ll	lose	it	all.’
‘Tehol,	you	certainly	do	take	vengeance	a	long	way.	What	is	the	benefit	to
us,	then?’
‘Why,	none	other	than	the	return	to	pre-eminence	of	the	Rat	Catchers’
Guild.’
Her	rather	dreamy	eyes	widened.	‘The	end	of	the	Patriotists?	Fifty
thousand?	Will	seventy-five	be	better?	A	hundred?’
‘No,	fifty	is	what	I	need.’
‘I	do	not	anticipate	any	objections	from	my	fellow	Guild	Masters.’
‘Wonderful.’	He	slapped	his	hands	together,	then	rose.
She	frowned	up	at	him.	‘Where	are	you	going?’
‘Why,	to	your	private	room,	of	course.’
‘Oh,	how	nice.’
His	gaze	narrowed	on	her.	‘Aren’t	you	joining	me,	Rucket?’
‘What	would	be	the	point?	The	name	“fat	root”	is	a	woman’s	joke,	you
know.’
‘I	haven’t	drunk	any	yellow-smelling	tea!’
‘In	the	future,	I	advise	you	to	use	gloves.’
‘Where’s	your	room,	Rucket?’
One	brow	lifted.	‘Got	something	to	prove?’
‘No,	I	just	need	to	check	on…things.’
‘What’s	the	point?’	she	asked	again.	‘Now	that	your	imagination	is	awake,
you’ll	convince	yourself	you’ve	got	smaller,	Tehol	Beddict.	Human	nature.
Worse	that	you	happen	to	be	a	man,	too.’	She	rose.	‘I,	however,	can	be
objective,	albeit	devastatingly	so,	on	occasion.	So,	do	you	dare	my	scrutiny?’
He	scowled.	‘Fine,	let’s	go.	Next	time,	however,	let	us	dispense	entirely
with	the	invitation	to	your	room,	all	right?’
‘Misery	lies	in	the	details,	Tehol	Beddict.	As	we’re	about	to	discover.’
	
Venitt	Sathad	unrolled	the	parchment	and	anchored	its	corners	with	flatstones.
‘As	you	can	see,	Master,	there	are	six	separate	buildings	to	the	holdings.’	He
began	pointing	to	the	illustrations	of	each.	‘Stables	and	livery.	Icehouse.
Drystore,	with	cellar.	Servants’	quarters.	And,	of	course,	the	inn	proper—’
‘What	of	that	square	building	there?’	Rautos	Hivanar	asked.
Venitt	frowned.	‘As	I	understand	it,	the	interior	is	virtually	filled	with	an
iconic	object	of	some	sort.	The	building	predates	the	inn	itself.	Attempts	to


dislodge	it	failed.	Now,	what	space	remains	is	used	for	sundry	storage.’
Rautos	Hivanar	leaned	back	in	his	chair.	‘How	solvent	is	this	acquisition?’
‘No	more	nor	less	than	any	other	hostel,	Master.	It	may	be	worth
discussing	investment	on	restoration	with	the	other	shareholders,	including
Karos	Invictad.’
‘Hmm,	I	will	consider	that.’	He	rose.	‘In	the	meantime,	assemble	the	new
artifacts	on	the	cleaning	table	on	the	terrace.’
‘At	once,	Master.’
	
Fourteen	leagues	west	of	the	Draconean	Isles,	doldrums	had	settled	on	this
stretch	of	ocean,	levelling	the	seas	to	a	glassy,	greasy	patina	beneath	humid,
motionless	air.	Through	the	eyeglass,	the	lone	ship,	black	hull	low	in	the	water,
looked	lifeless.	The	mainmast	was	splintered,	all	rigging	swept	away.	Someone
had	worked	up	a	foresail,	but	the	storm-rigged	canvas	hung	limp.	The	steering
oar	was	tied	in	place.	No	movement	anywhere	to	be	seen.
Skorgen	Kaban,	known	as	the	Pretty,	slowly	lowered	the	eyeglass,	yet
continued	squinting	with	his	one	good	eye	at	the	distant	ship.	He	reached	up	to
scratch	one	of	the	air	holes	–	all	that	remained	of	what	had	once	been	a	large,
hawkish	nose	–	then	winced	as	a	nail	dug	into	sensitive	scar	tissue.	The	itch	was
non-existent,	but	the	gaping	nostrils	had	a	tendency	to	weep,	and	the	feigned
scratch	served	to	warn	him	of	telltale	wetness.	This	was	one	of	his	many
gestures	he	probably	imagined	were	subtle.
Alas,	his	captain	was	too	sharp	for	that.	She	drew	away	her	sidelong	study
of	Skorgen,	then	glanced	back	at	her	waiting	crew.	A	miserable	but	cocky
bunch.	Doldrums	weighed	everyone	down,	understandably,	but	the	hold	of	the
raider	was	packed	with	loot,	and	this	run	of	the	Errant’s	luck	seemed	without
end.
Now	that	they’d	found	another	victim.
Skorgen	drew	in	a	whistling	breath,	then	said,	‘It’s	Edur,	all	right.	My
guess	is,	a	stray	that	got	tossed	around	a	bit	in	that	storm	we	spied	out	west
yesterday.	Chances	are,	the	crew’s	either	sick	or	dead,	or	they	abandoned	ship
in	one	of	their	Knarri	lifeboats.	If	they	did	that,	they’ll	have	taken	the	good
stuff	with	them.	If	not,’	he	grinned	across	at	her,	revealing	blackened	teeth,
‘then	we	can	finish	what	the	storm	started.’
‘At	the	very	least,’	the	captain	said,	‘we’ll	take	a	look.’	She	sniffed.	‘At
least	maybe	something	will	come	of	getting	blown	into	the	flats.	Have	’em
send	out	the	sweeps,	Skorgen,	but	keep	that	lookout’s	head	spinning	in	every
direction.’


Skorgen	looked	across	at	her.	‘You	think	there	might	be	more	of	’em	out
here?’
She	made	a	face.	‘How	many	ships	did	the	Emperor	send	out?’
His	good	eye	widened,	then	he	studied	the	lone	derelict	once	more	through
the	eyeglass.	‘You	think	it’s	one	of	those?	Errant’s	butt	hole,	Captain,	if	you’re
right…’
‘You	have	your	orders,	and	it	seems	I	must	remind	you	yet	again,	First
Mate.	No	profanity	on	my	ship.’
‘Apologies,	Captain.’
He	hurried	off,	began	relaying	orders	to	the	waiting	crew.
Doldrums	made	for	a	quiet	lot,	a	kind	of	superstitious	furtiveness	gripping
the	sailors,	as	if	any	sound	reaching	too	far	might	crack	the	mirror	of	the	sea.
She	listened	as	the	twenty-four	sweeps	slid	out,	blades	settling	in	the	water.
A	moment	later	came	the	muted	call-out	of	the	cox,	and	the	Undying	Gratitude
groaned	as	it	lurched	forward.	Clouds	of	sleeper	flies	rose	around	the	ship	as
the	nearby	sea’s	pellucid	surface	was	disturbed.	The	damned	things	had	a
tendency	to	seek	out	dark	cover	once	driven	to	flight.	Sailors	coughed	and	spat
–	all	very	well	for	them,	the	captain	observed,	as	a	whining	cloud	spun	round
her	head	and	countless	insects	crawled	up	her	nose,	into	her	ears,	and	across
her	eyes.	Sun	and	sea	were	bad	enough,	combining	to	assail	her	dignity	and
whatever	vanity	a	woman	who	was	dead	could	muster,	but	for	Shurq	Elalle,
these	flies	made	for	profoundly	acute	misery.
Pirate,	divine	undead,	strumpet	of	insatiability,	witch	of	the	deep	waters	–
the	times	had	been	good	ever	since	she	first	sailed	out	of	the	Letheras	harbour,
down	the	long,	broad	river	to	the	western	seas.	Lean	and	sleek,	that	first	galley
had	been	her	passage	to	fame,	and	Shurq	still	regretted	its	fiery	loss	to	that
Mare	escort	in	Laughter ’s	End.	But	she	was	well	pleased	with	the	Undying
Gratitude.	Slightly	too	big	for	her	crew,	granted,	but	with	their	return	to
Letheras	that	problem	could	be	solved	easily	enough.	Her	greatest	sense	of
loss	was	with	the	departure	of	the	Crimson	Guard.	Iron	Bars	had	made	it	plain
from	the	very	start	that	they	were	working	for	passage.	Even	so,	they’d	been
formidable	additions	on	that	wild	crossing	of	the	ocean,	keeping	the	blood
wake	wide	and	unbroken	as	one	merchant	trader	after	another	was	taken,
stripped	of	all	valuables,	then,	more	often	than	not,	sent	down	into	the	dark.	It
hadn’t	been	just	their	swords,	deadly	as	those	were,	but	the	magery	of	Corlos	–
a	magery	far	more	refined,	far	more	clever,	than	anything	Shurq	had	witnessed
before.
Such	details	opened	her	eyes,	her	mind	as	well.	The	world	out	there	was
huge.	And	in	many	fundamental	ways,	the	empire	of	Lether,	child	of	the	First


Empire,	had	been	left	in	a	kind	of	backwater,	in	its	thinking,	in	its	ways	of
working.	A	humbling	revelation	indeed.
The	leavetaking	with	Iron	Bars	and	his	squad	had	not	been	quite	as
emotional	or	heartfelt	for	Shurq	Elalle	as	it	had	probably	seemed	to	everyone
else,	for	the	truth	was,	she	had	been	growing	ever	more	uneasy	in	their
company.	Iron	Bars	was	not	one	to	find	subordination	palatable	for	very	long	–
oh,	no	doubt	it	was	different	when	it	came	to	his	fellow	Avowed	among	the
Crimson	Guard,	or	to	their	legendary	commander,	Prince	K’azz.	But	she	was
not	an	Avowed,	nor	even	one	of	that	company’s	soldiers.	So	long	as	their	goals
ran	in	parallel,	things	were	fine	enough,	and	Shurq	had	made	certain	to	never
deviate,	so	as	to	avoid	any	confrontation.
They	had	deposited	the	mercenaries	on	a	stony	beach	of	the	eastern	shore
of	a	land	called	Jacuruku,	the	sky	squalling	with	sleeting	rain.	The	landing	had
not	been	without	witnesses,	alas,	and	the	last	she’d	seen	of	Iron	Bars	and	his
soldiers,	they	were	turning	inland	to	face	a	dozen	massively	armoured	figures
descending	the	broken	slope,	great-helmed	with	visors	lowered.	Brutallooking	bunch,	and	Shurq	hoped	all	that	belligerence	was	mostly	for	show.	The
grey	sheets	of	rain	had	soon	obscured	all	details	from	the	strand	as	they	pulled
away	on	the	oars	back	to	the	Gratitude.
Skorgen	had	sworn	he’d	caught	the	sound	of	blades	clashing	–	a	faint	echo
–	with	his	one	good	ear,	but	Shurq	herself	had	heard	nothing.
In	any	case,	they’d	scurried	from	those	waters,	as	pirates	were	wont	to	do
when	there	was	the	risk	of	organized	resistance	lurking	nearby,	and	Shurq
consoled	her	agitated	conscience	by	reminding	herself	that	Iron	Bars	had
spoken	of	Jacuruku	with	some	familiarity	–	at	least	in	so	far	as	knowing	its
name.	And	as	for	Corlos’s	wide-eyed	prayers	to	a	few	dozen	divinities,	well,
he	was	prone	to	melodrama.	A	dozen	knights	wouldn’t	have	been	enough	to
halt	Iron	Bars	and	his	Crimson	Guard,	determined	as	they	were	to	do	whatever
it	was	they	had	to	do,	which,	in	this	instance,	was	cross	Jacuruku	from	one
coast	to	the	other,	then	find	themselves	another	ship.
A	huge	world	indeed.
The	sweeps	lifted	clear	of	the	water	and	were	quietly	shipped	as	the
Undying	Gratitude	sidled	up	alongside	the	Edur	wreck.	Shurq	Elalle	moved	to
the	rail	and	studied	the	visible	deck	of	the	Blackwood	ship.
‘Riding	low,’	Skorgen	muttered.
No	bodies	amidst	the	clutter.	But	there	was	clutter.	‘No	orderly	evacuation,’
Shurq	Elalle	said,	as	grappling	hooks	sailed	out,	the	tines	biting	as	the	lines
were	drawn	taut.	‘Six	with	us,	weapons	out,’	she	commanded,	unsheathing	her
own	rapier,	then	stepping	up	onto	the	rail.


She	leapt	across,	landed	lightly	on	the	mid	deck	two	strides	from	the
splintered	stump	of	the	mainmast.	Moments	later	Skorgen	joined	her,	arriving
with	a	grunt	then	a	curse	as	he	jarred	his	bad	leg.
‘This	was	a	scrap,’	he	said,	looking	about.	He	limped	back	to	the	rail	and
tugged	loose	a	splintered	arrow	shaft,	then	scowled	as	he	studied	it.	‘Damned
short	and	stubby	–	look	at	that	head,	that	could	punch	through	a	bronze-sheeted
shield.	And	this	fletching	–	it’s	leather,	like	fins.’
So	where	were	the	bodies?	Frowning,	Shurq	Elalle	made	her	way	to	the
cabin’s	hatchway.	She	paused	at	the	hold,	seeing	that	the	hatch	had	been	staved
in.	Nudging	it	aside	with	her	boot,	she	crouched	and	looked	down	into	the
gloom	of	the	hold.
The	glimmer	of	water,	and	things	floating.	‘Skorgen,	there’s	booty	here.
Come	over	and	reach	down	for	one	of	those	amphorae.’
The	second	mate,	Misery,	called	over	from	their	ship,	‘Captain!	That
hulk’s	lower	in	the	water	than	it	was	when	we	arrived.’
She	could	now	hear	the	soft	groans	of	the	hull.
Skorgen	used	his	good	arm	to	reach	down	and	hook	his	hand	through	an
ear	of	the	amphora.	Hissing	with	the	weight,	he	lifted	the	hip-high	object	into
view,	rolling	it	onto	the	deck	between	himself	and	the	captain.
The	amphora	itself	was	a	gorgeous	piece	of	work,	Shurq	observed.
Foreign,	the	glaze	cream	in	colour	down	to	the	inverted	beehive	base,	where
the	coils	were	delineated	in	black	geometric	patterns	on	gleaming	white.	But	it
was	the	image	painted	on	the	shoulder	and	belly	that	captured	her	interest.
Down	low	on	one	side	there	was	a	figure,	nailed	to	an	X-shaped	cross.
Whirling	out	from	the	figure’s	upturned	head,	there	were	crows.	Hundreds,
each	one	profoundly	intricate,	every	detail	etched	–	crows,	flooding	outward	–
or	perhaps	inward	–	to	mass	on	the	amphora’s	broad	shoulders,	encircling	the
entire	object.	Converging	to	feed	on	the	hapless	man?	Fleeing	him	like	his	last,
dying	thoughts?
Skorgen	had	drawn	a	knife	and	was	cutting	away	at	the	seal,	stripping	away
the	thick	wax	binding	the	stopper.	After	a	moment	he	succeeded	in	working	it
loose.	He	tugged	the	stopper	free,	then	leapt	back	as	thick	blood	poured	forth,
spreading	on	the	deck.
It	looked	fresh,	and	from	it	rose	a	scent	of	flowers,	pungent	and	oversweet.
‘Kagenza	pollen,’	Skorgen	said.	‘Keeps	blood	from	thickening	–	the	Edur
use	it	when	they	paint	temples	in	the	forest	–	you	know,	on	trees.	The	blood
sanctifies.	It’s	not	a	real	temple,	of	course.	No	walls,	or	ceiling,	just	a	grove—’
‘I	don’t	like	first	mates	who	babble,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	straightening	once
more.	‘Get	the	others	out.	The	vessels	alone	will	make	us	rich	for	a	month	or


two.’	She	resumed	her	walk	to	the	cabin.
The	corridor	was	empty,	the	cabin	door	broken	open	and	hanging	from
one	leather	hinge.	As	she	made	her	way	towards	it,	she	glanced	into	the	side
alcoves	and	saw	the	layered	bunks	of	the	crew	–	but	all	were	unoccupied,
although	dishevelled	as	if	subject	to	searching.
In	the	cabin	itself,	more	signs	of	looting,	while	on	the	floor	was
spreadeagled	an	Edur	corpse.	Hands	and	feet	had	been	spiked	into	the
floorboards,	and	someone	had	used	a	knife	on	him,	methodically.	The	room
stank	of	spilled	wastes,	and	the	expression	frozen	on	the	face	was	a	twisted,
agony-racked	mask,	the	eyes	staring	out	as	if	witness	to	a	shattered	faith,	a
terrible	revelation	at	the	moment	of	death.
She	heard	Skorgen	come	up	behind	her,	heard	his	low	curse	upon	seeing
the	body.	‘Tortured	’im,’	he	said.	‘Tortured	the	captain.	This	one	was	Merude,
damn	near	an	Elder.	Errant	save	us,	Captain,	we’re	gonna	get	blamed	if	anyone
else	comes	on	this	afore	it	all	sinks.	Torture.	I	don’t	get	that—’
‘It’s	simple,’	she	said.	‘They	wanted	information.’
‘About	what?’
Shurq	Elalle	looked	round.	‘They	took	the	log,	the	charts.	Now,	maybe
pirates	might	do	that,	if	they	were	strangers	to	Lether,	but	then	they’d	have	no
need	to	torture	this	poor	bastard.	Besides,	they’d	have	taken	the	loot.	No,
whoever	did	this	wanted	more	information	–	not	what	you	could	get	from
charts.	And	they	didn’t	give	a	damn	about	booty.’
‘Nasty	bastards,	whoever	they	were.’
She	thought	back	to	that	amphora	and	its	grisly	contents.	Then	turned	away.
‘Maybe	they	had	a	good	reason.	Hole	the	hull,	Skorgen.	We’ll	wait	around,
though.	Blackwood	doesn’t	like	sinking.	We	may	have	to	fire	it.’
‘A	pyre	to	bring	’em	all	in,	Captain.’
‘I	am	aware	of	the	risks.	Get	on	with	it.’
Back	on	the	deck,	Shurq	Elalle	made	her	way	to	the	forecastle,	where	she
stood	scanning	the	horizon	while	Skorgen	and	the	crew	began	their
demolition.
Strangers	on	the	sea.
Who	are	no	friends	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Even	so,	I	think	I’d	rather	not	meet
them.	She	turned	to	face	the	mid	deck.	‘Skorgen!	When	we’re	done	here,	we
take	to	the	sweeps.	Back	to	the	coast.’
His	scarred	brows	rose.	‘Letheras?’
‘Why	not?	We	can	sell	off	and	load	up	on	crew.’
The	battered	man	grinned.
Back	to	Letheras,	aye.	And	fast.


Chapter	Four

The	mutiny	came	that	fell	dawn,	when	through	the	heavy	mists	that	had
plagued	us	for	ten	days	we	looked	to	the	east,	and	there	saw,	rising	vast
and	innumerable	on	the	cloud-bound	horizon,	dragons.	Too	large	to
comprehend,	their	heads	above	the	sun,	their	folded	wings	reaching
down	to	cast	a	shadow	that	could	swallow	all	of	Drene.	This	was	too
much,	too	frightening	even	for	the	more	seasoned	soldiers	in	our
troop,	for	their	dark	eyes	were	upon	us,	an	alien	regard	that	drained	the
blood	from	our	hearts,	the	very	iron	from	our	swords	and	spears.
To	walk	into	those	shadows	would	quail	a	champion	of	the	First
Empire.	We	could	not	face	such	challenge,	and	though	I	voiced	my
fury,	my	dismay,	it	was	naught	but	the	bolster	demanded	of	any
expedition’s	leader,	and	indeed,	I	had	no	intention	of	demanding	of	my
party	the	courage	that	I	myself	lacked.	Bolster	is	a	dangerous	thing,	lest
one	succeeds	where	one	would	not.	And	so	I	ceased	my	umbrage,
perhaps	too	easily	yet	none	made	account	of	that,	relieved	as	they	all
were	as	we	broke	camp,	packed	our	mules,	and	turned	to	the	west.
Four	Days	Into	the	Wildlands
Thrydis	Addanict
Banishment	killed	most	victims,	when	the	world	beyond	was	harsh,	when
survival	could	not	be	purchased	without	the	coin	of	co-operation.	No	graver
punishment	was	possible	among	the	tribal	peoples,	whether	Awl	or
D’rhasilhani	or	Keryn.	Yet	it	was	the	clan	structure	itself	that	imposed	deadly
intransigence,	and	with	it	a	corresponding	devastation	when	one	was	cast	out,
alone,	bereft	of	all	that	gave	meaning	to	life.	Victims	crumpled	into
themselves,	abandoning	all	skills	that	could	serve	to	sustain	them;	they
withered,	then	died.
The	Letherii,	and	their	vast	cities,	the	tumult	of	countless	faces,	were	–
beyond	the	chains	of	Indebtedness	–	almost	indifferent	to	banishing.	True,	such
people	were	not	immune	to	the	notion	of	spiritual	punishment	–	they	existed	in


families,	after	all,	a	universal	characteristic	of	humans	–	yet	such	scars	as	were
delivered	from	estrangement	were	survivable.	Another	village,	another	city	–
the	struggle	of	beginning	again	could	be	managed	and	indeed,	for	some,
beginning	anew	became	an	addiction	in	its	own	right.	A	way	of	absolving
responsibility.
Redmask,	his	life	that	of	the	Awl,	unsullied	for	generations,	had	come	to
believe	that	the	nature	of	the	Letherii	–	his	most	hated	enemy	–	had
nevertheless	stained	his	spirit.	Banishment	had	not	proved	a	death	sentence.
Banishment	had	proved	a	gift,	for	with	it	he	discovered	freedom.	The	very	lure
that	drew	so	many	young	warriors	into	the	Lether	Empire,	where	anonymity
proved	both	bane	and	emancipation.
Driven	away,	he	had	wandered	far,	with	no	thought	of	ever	returning.	He
was	not	as	he	had	once	been,	no	longer	the	son	of	his	father,	yet	what	he	had
become	was,	even	to	himself,	a	mystery.
The	sky	overhead	was	unmarred	by	clouds,	the	new	season	finding	its	heat,
and	jackrabbits	raced	from	one	thicket	of	momentary	cover	to	another	ahead
of	him	as	he	rode	the	Letherii	horse	on	the	herd	trail	on	its	north-easterly
route.	A	small	herd,	he	had	noted,	with	few	fly-swarmed	birth-stains	along	the
path’s	outskirts,	where	rodara	males	would	gather	protectively	until	the
newborn	was	able	to	find	its	legs.	The	clan	guiding	these	beasts	was	probably
small.
Redmask’s	guardian	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	nowhere	to	be	seen,	but	that
was	not	unusual.	The	huge	reptiles	had	prodigious	appetites.	At	this	time	of
year,	the	wild	bhederin	that	had	wintered	in	pocket	forests	–	a	solitary,	larger
breed	than	those	of	the	plains	to	the	south	–	ventured	out	from	cover	in	search
of	mates.	Massing	more	than	two	Letherii	oxen,	the	bulls	were	ferocious	and
belligerent	and	would	charge	anything	that	approached	too	close,	barring	a
female	of	its	own	kind.	Sag’Churok,	the	male	K’ell	Hunter,	delighted	in
meeting	that	thundering	charge	–	Redmask	had	seen	its	pleasure,	revealed	in
the	slow	sinuous	lashing	of	the	tail	–	as	it	stood	in	the	bull’s	path,	iron	blades
lifted	high.	As	fast	as	the	bhederin	was,	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	was	faster.	Each
time	after	slaying	the	beast,	Sag’Churok	would	yield	the	carcass	to	Gunth
Mach,	until	she’d	eaten	her	fill.
Redmask	rode	on	through	the	day,	his	pace	leisurely	to	ease	the	burden	on
the	horse,	and	when	the	sun	was	descending	towards	the	horizon,	igniting
distant	storm	clouds,	he	came	within	sight	of	the	Awl	encampment,	situated	on
an	ancient	oxbow	island	between	two	dry	eroded	riverbeds.	The	herds	were
massed	on	the	flanks	of	the	valleys	to	either	side	and	the	sprawl	of	domeshaped,	sewn-hide	huts	huddled	amidst	the	smoke	of	cookfires	blanketing	the


valley.
No	outriders.	No	pickets.	And	far	too	large	a	camp	for	the	size	of	the
herds.
Redmask	reined	in	on	the	ridge	line.	He	studied	the	scene	below.	Here	and
there,	voices	rose	in	ritual	mourning.	Few	children	were	visible	moving	about
between	the	huts.
After	some	time,	as	he	sat	motionless	on	the	high	Letherii	saddle,	someone
saw	him.	Sudden	cries,	scurrying	motion	in	the	growing	shadows,	then	a	halfdozen	warriors	set	out	at	a	trot	towards	him.
Behind	them,	the	camp	had	already	begun	a	panicked	breaking,	sparks
flying	as	hearths	were	kicked	and	stamped	out.	Hide	walls	rippled	on	the	huts.
Herd	and	dray	dogs	appeared,	racing	to	join	the	approaching	warriors.
The	Awl	warriors	were	young,	he	saw	as	they	drew	closer.	Only	a	year	or
two	past	their	death	nights.	Not	a	single	veteran	among	them.	Where	were	the
Elders?	The	shouldermen?
Halting	fifteen	paces	downslope,	the	six	warriors	began	conferring	in
hissed	undertones,	then	one	faced	the	encampment	and	loosed	a	piercing	cry.
All	activity	stopped	below.
Faces	stared	up	at	Redmask.	Not	a	single	warrior	among	them	seemed	bold
enough	to	venture	closer.
The	dogs	were	less	cowed	by	the	presence	of	a	lone	warrior.	Growling,
hackles	raised,	they	crept	in	a	half-circle	towards	him.	Then,	catching	an
unexpected	scent,	the	beasts	suddenly	shrank	back,	tails	dipping,	thin	whines
coming	from	their	throats.
Finally,	one	young	warrior	edged	forward	a	step.	‘You	cannot	be	him,’	he
said.
Redmask	sighed.	‘Where	is	your	war	leader?’	he	demanded.
The	youth	filled	his	chest	and	straightened.	‘I	am	this	clan’s	war	leader.
Masarch,	son	of	Nayrud.’
‘When	was	your	death	night?’
‘Those	are	the	old	ways,’	Masarch	said,	baring	his	teeth	in	a	snarl.	‘We
have	abandoned	such	foolishness.’
Another	spoke	up	behind	the	war	leader.	‘The	old	ways	have	failed	us!	We
have	cast	them	out!’
Masarch	said,	‘Remove	that	mask;	it	is	not	for	you.	You	seek	to	deceive	us.
You	ride	a	Letherii	horse	–	you	are	one	of	the	Factor ’s	spies.’
Redmask	made	no	immediate	reply.	His	gaze	slid	past	the	war	leader	and
his	followers,	fixing	once	more	on	the	camp	below.	A	crowd	was	gathering	at
the	near	edge,	watching.	He	was	silent	for	another	twenty	heartbeats,	then	he


said,	‘You	have	set	out	no	pickets.	A	Letherii	troop	could	line	this	ridge	and
plunge	down	into	your	midst,	and	you	would	not	be	prepared.	Your	women	cry
out	their	distress,	a	sound	that	can	be	heard	for	leagues	on	a	still	night	like	this.
Your	people	are	starving,	war	leader,	yet	they	light	an	excess	of	fires,	enough
to	make	above	you	a	cloud	of	smoke	that	will	not	move,	and	reflects	the	light
from	below.	You	have	been	culling	the	newborn	rodara	and	myrid,	instead	of
butchering	the	ageing	males	and	females	past	bearing.	You	must	have	no
shouldermen,	for	if	you	did,	they	would	bury	you	in	the	earth	and	force	upon
you	the	death	night,	so	that	you	might	emerge,	born	anew	and,	hopefully,	gifted
with	new	wisdom	–	wisdom	you	clearly	lack.’
Masarch	said	nothing	to	that.	He	had	finally	seen	Redmask’s	weapons.	‘You
are	him,’	he	whispered.	‘You	have	returned	to	the	Awl’dan.’
‘Which	clan	is	this?’
‘Redmask,’	the	war	leader	said,	gesturing	behind	him.	‘This	clan…it	is
yours…’
Receiving	naught	but	silence	from	the	mounted	warrior,	Masarch	added,
‘We,	we	are	all	that	remain.	There	are	no	shouldermen,	Redmask.	No	witches.’
He	waved	out	towards	the	flanking	herds.	‘These	beasts	you	see	here,	they	are
all	that’s	left.’	He	hesitated,	then	straightened	once	more.	‘Redmask,	you	have
returned…for	nothing.	You	do	not	speak,	and	this	tells	me	that	you	see	the	truth
of	things.	Great	Warrior,	you	are	too	late.’
Even	to	this,	Redmask	was	silent.	He	slowly	dismounted.	The	dogs,	which
had	continued	their	trepid	circling,	tails	ducked,	either	picked	up	a	fresh	scent
or	heard	something	from	the	gloom	beyond,	for	they	suddenly	broke	and
pelted	back	down	the	slope,	disappearing	into	the	camp.	That	panic	seemed	to
ripple	through	the	warriors	facing	him,	but	none	fled,	despite	the	fear	and
confusion	gripping	their	expressions.
Licking	his	lips,	Masarch	said,	‘Redmask,	the	Letherii	are	destroying	us.
Outrider	camps	have	been	ambushed,	set	upon	and	slaughtered,	the	herds
stolen	away.	The	Aendinar	clan	is	no	more.	Sevond	and	Niritha	remnants
crawled	to	the	Ganetok	–	only	the	Ganetok	remains	strong,	for	they	are
furthest	east	and,	cowards	that	they	are,	they	made	pact	with	foreigners—’
‘Foreigners.’	Redmask’s	eyes	narrowed	in	their	slits.	‘Mercenaries.’
Masarch	nodded.	‘There	was	a	great	battle,	four	seasons	past,	and	those
foreigners	were	destroyed.’	He	made	a	gesture.	‘The	Grey	Sorcery.’
‘Did	not	the	victorious	Letherii	then	march	on	the	Ganetok	camps?’
‘No,	Redmask,	too	few	remained	–	the	foreigners	fought	well.’
‘Masarch,’	he	said,	‘I	do	not	understand.	Did	not	the	Ganetok	fight
alongside	their	mercenaries?’


The	youth	spat.	‘Their	war	leader	gathered	from	the	clans	fifteen	thousand
warriors.	When	the	Letherii	arrived,	he	fled,	and	the	warriors	followed.	They
abandoned	the	foreigners!	Left	them	to	slaughter!’
‘Settle	the	camp	below,’	Redmask	said.	He	pointed	to	the	warriors	standing
behind	Masarch.	‘Stand	first	watch	along	this	ridge	line,	here	and	to	the	west.	I
am	now	war	leader	to	the	Renfayar	clan.	Masarch,	where	hides	the	Ganetok?’
‘Seven	days	to	the	east.	They	now	hold	the	last	great	herd	of	the	Awl.’
‘Masarch,	do	you	challenge	my	right	to	be	war	leader?’
The	youth	shook	his	head.	‘You	are	Redmask.	The	Elders	among	the
Renfayar	who	were	your	enemies	are	all	dead.	Their	sons	are	dead.’
‘How	many	warriors	remain	among	the	Renfayar?’
Masarch	frowned,	then	gestured.	‘You	have	met	us,	War	Leader.’
‘Six.’
A	nod.
Redmask	noted	a	lone	dray	dog	sitting	at	the	edge	of	the	camp.	It	seemed	to
be	watching	him.	He	raised	his	left	hand	and	the	beast	lunged	into	motion.	The
huge	animal,	a	male,	reached	him	moments	later,	dropping	onto	its	chest	and
settling	its	wide,	scarred	head	between	Redmask’s	feet.	He	reached	down	and
touched	its	snout	–	a	gesture	that,	for	most,	would	have	risked	fingers.	The	dog
made	no	move.
Masarch	was	staring	down	at	it	with	wide	eyes.	‘A	lone	survivor,’	he	said,
‘from	an	outrider	camp.	It	would	not	let	us	approach.’
‘The	foreigners,’	Redmask	said	quietly,	‘did	they	possess	wardogs?’
‘No.	But	they	were	sworn	followers	of	the	Wolves	of	War,	and	indeed,	War
Leader,	it	seemed	those	treacherous,	foul	beasts	tracked	them	–	always	at	a
distance,	yet	in	vast	numbers.	Until	the	Ganetok	Elders	invoked	magic	and
drove	them	all	away.’	Masarch	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Redmask,	the	war	leader
among	the	Ganetok—’
Unseen	behind	the	mask,	a	slow	smile	formed.	‘Firstborn	son	of	Capalah.
Hadralt.’
‘How	did	you	know?’
‘Tomorrow,	Masarch,	we	drive	the	herds	east	–	to	the	Ganetok.	I	would
know	more	of	those	hapless	foreigners	who	chose	to	fight	for	us.	To	die	for
the	people	of	the	Awl’dan.’
‘We	are	to	crawl	to	the	Ganetok	as	did	the	Sevond	and	the	Niritha?’
‘You	are	starving.	The	herds	are	too	weakened.	I	lead	six	youths	none	of
whom	has	passed	the	death	night.	Shall	the	seven	of	us	ride	to	war	against	the
Letherii?’
Though	young,	it	was	clear	that	Masarch	was	no	fool.	‘You	shall	challenge


Hadralt?	Redmask,	your	warriors	–	we,	we	will	all	die.	We	are	not	enough	to
meet	the	hundreds	of	challenges	that	will	be	flung	at	us,	and	once	we	are	dead,
you	will	have	to	face	those	challenges,	long	before	you	are	deemed	worthy	to
cross	weapons	with	Hadralt	himself.’
‘You	will	not	die,’	Redmask	said.	‘And	none	shall	challenge	any	of	you.’
‘Then	you	mean	to	carve	through	a	thousand	warriors	to	face	Hadralt?’
‘What	would	be	the	point	of	that,	Masarch?	I	need	those	warriors.	Killing
them	would	be	a	waste.	No.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘I	am	not	without	guardians,
Masarch.	And	I	doubt	that	a	single	Ganetok	warrior	will	dare	challenge	them.
Hadralt	shall	have	to	face	me,	he	and	I,	alone	in	the	circle.	Besides,’	he	added,
‘we	haven’t	the	time	for	all	the	rest.’
‘The	Ganetok	hold	to	the	old	ways,	War	Leader.	There	will	be	rituals.	Days
and	days	before	the	circle	is	made—’
‘Masarch,	we	must	go	to	war	against	the	Letherii.	Every	warrior	of	the	Awl
—’
‘War	Leader!	They	will	not	follow	you!	Even	Hadralt	could	only	manage	a
third	of	them,	and	that	with	payment	of	rodara	and	myrid	that	halved	his
holdings!’	Masarch	waved	at	the	depleted	herds	on	the	hillsides.	‘We	–	we	have
nothing	left!	You	could	not	purchase	the	spears	of	a	hundred	warriors!’
‘Who	holds	the	largest	herds,	Masarch?’
‘The	Ganetok	themselves—’
‘No.	I	ask	again,	who	holds	the	largest	herds?’
The	youth’s	scowl	deepened.	‘The	Letherii.’
‘I	will	send	three	warriors	to	accompany	the	last	of	the	Renfayar	to	the
Ganetok.	Choose	two	of	your	companions	to	accompany	us.’	The	dray	dog
rose	and	moved	to	one	side.	Redmask	collected	the	reins	of	his	horse	and	set
out	down	towards	the	camp.	The	dray	fell	in	to	heel	on	his	left.	‘We	shall	ride
west,	Masarch,	and	find	us	some	herds.’
‘We	ride	against	the	Letherii?	War	Leader,	did	you	not	moments	ago	mock
the	notion	of	seven	warriors	waging	war	against	them?	Yet	now	you	say—’
‘War	is	for	later,’	Redmask	said.	‘As	you	say,	we	need	herds.	To	buy	the
services	of	the	warriors.’	He	paused	and	looked	back	at	the	trailing	youth.
‘Where	did	the	Letherii	get	their	beasts?’
‘From	the	Awl!	From	us!’
‘Yes.	They	stole	them.	So	we	must	steal	them	back.’
‘Four	of	us,	War	Leader?’
‘And	one	dray,	and	my	guardians.’
‘What	guardians?’
Redmask	resumed	his	journey.	‘You	lack	respect,	Masarch.	Tonight,	I


think,	you	will	have	your	death	night.’
‘The	old	ways	are	useless!	I	will	not!’
Redmask’s	fist	was	a	blur	–	it	was	questionable	whether,	in	the	gloom,
Masarch	even	saw	it	–	even	as	it	connected	solidly	with	the	youth’s	jaw,
dropping	him	in	his	tracks.	Redmask	reached	down	and	grabbed	a	handful	of
hide	jerkin,	then	began	dragging	the	unconscious	Masarch	back	down	to	the
camp.
When	the	young	man	awoke,	he	would	find	himself	in	a	coffin,	beneath	an
arm’s	reach	of	earth	and	stones.	None	of	the	usual	traditional,	measured	rituals
prior	to	a	death	night,	alas,	the	kind	that	served	to	prepare	the	chosen	for
internment.	Of	course,	Masarch’s	loose	reins	displayed	an	appalling	absence	of
respect,	sufficient	to	obviate	the	gift	of	mercy,	which	in	truth	was	what	all	those
rituals	were	about.
Hard	lessons,	then.	But	becoming	an	adult	depended	on	such	lessons.
He	expected	he	would	have	to	pound	the	others	into	submission	as	well,
which	made	for	a	long	night	ahead.
For	us	all.
The	camp’s	old	women	would	be	pleased	by	the	ruckus,	he	suspected.
Preferable	to	wailing	through	the	night,	in	any	case.
	
The	last	tier	of	the	buried	city	proved	the	most	interesting,	as	far	as	Udinaas
was	concerned.	He’d	had	his	fill	of	the	damned	sniping	that	seemed	to	plague
this	fell	party	of	fugitives,	a	testiness	that	seemed	to	be	getting	worse,
especially	from	Fear	Sengar.	The	ex-slave	knew	that	the	Tiste	Edur	wanted	to
murder	him,	and	as	for	the	details	surrounding	the	abandonment	of	Rhulad	–
which	made	it	clear	that	Udinaas	himself	had	had	no	choice	in	the	matter,	that
he	had	been	as	much	a	victim	as	Fear ’s	own	brother	–	well,	Fear	wasn’t
interested.	Mitigating	circumstances	did	not	alter	his	intransigence,	his	harsh
sense	of	right	and	wrong	which	did	not,	it	appeared,	extend	to	his	own	actions
–	after	all,	Fear	had	been	the	one	to	deliberately	walk	away	from	Rhulad.
Udinaas,	upon	regaining	consciousness,	should	have	returned	to	the
Emperor.
To	do	what?	Suffer	a	grisly	death	at	Rhulad’s	hands?	Yes,	we	were	almost
friends,	he	and	I	–	as	much	as	might	be	possible	between	slave	and	master,	and
of	that	the	master	ever	feels	more	generous	and	virtuous	than	the	slave	–	but	I
did	not	ask	to	be	there,	at	the	madman’s	side,	struggling	to	guide	him	across
that	narrow	bridge	of	sanity,	when	all	Rhulad	wanted	to	do	was	leap	head-first
over	the	side	at	every	step.	No,	he	had	made	do	with	what	he	had,	and	in


showing	that	mere	splinter	of	sympathy,	he	had	done	more	for	Rhulad	than	any
of	the	Sengars	–	brothers,	mother,	father.	More	indeed	than	any	Tiste	Edur.	Is	it
any	wonder	none	of	you	know	happiness,	Fear	Sengar?	You	are	all	twisted
branches	from	the	same	sick	tree.
There	was	no	point	in	arguing	this,	of	course.	Seren	Pedac	alone	might
understand,	might	even	agree	with	all	that	Udinaas	had	to	say,	but	she	wasn’t
interested	in	actually	being	one	of	this	party.	She	clung	to	the	role	of	Acquitor,
a	finder	of	trails,	the	reader	of	all	those	jealously	guarded	maps	in	her	head.
She	liked	not	having	to	choose;	better	still,	she	liked	not	having	to	care.
A	strange	woman,	the	Acquitor.	Habitually	remote.	Without	friends…yet
she	carries	a	Tiste	Edur	sword.	Trull	Sengar’s	sword.	Kettle	says	he	set	it	into
her	hands.	Did	she	understand	the	significance	of	that	gesture?	She	must	have.
Trull	Sengar	had	then	returned	to	Rhulad.	Perhaps	the	only	brother	who’d
actually	cared	–	where	was	he	now?	Probably	dead.
Fresh,	night-cooled	air	flowed	down	the	broad	ramp,	moaned	in	the
doorways	situated	every	ten	paces	or	so	to	either	side.	They	were	nearing	the
surface,	somewhere	in	the	saddleback	pass	–	but	on	which	side	of	the	fort	and
its	garrison?	If	the	wrong	side,	then	Silchas	Ruin’s	swords	would	keen	loud
and	long.	The	dead	piled	up	in	the	wake	of	that	walking	white-skinned,	redeyed	nightmare,	didn’t	they	just.	The	few	times	the	hunters	caught	up	with	the
hunted,	they	paid	with	their	lives,	yet	they	kept	coming,	and	that	made	little
sense.
Almost	as	ridiculous	as	this	mosaic	floor	with	its	glowing	armies.	Images
of	lizard	warriors	locked	in	war,	long-tails	against	short-tails,	with	the	longtails	doing	most	of	the	dying,	as	far	as	he	could	tell.	The	bizarre	slaughter
beneath	their	feet	spilled	out	into	the	adjoining	rooms,	each	one,	it	seemed,
devoted	to	the	heroic	death	of	some	champion	–	Fouled	K’ell,	Naw’rhuk	A’dat
and	Matrons,	said	Silchas	Ruin	as,	enwreathed	in	sorcerous	light,	he	explored
each	such	side	chamber,	his	interest	desultory	and	cursory	at	best.	In	any	case,
Udinaas	could	read	enough	into	the	colourful	scenes	to	recognize	a	campaign
of	mutual	annihilation,	with	every	scene	of	short-tail	victory	answered	with	a
Matron’s	sorcerous	conflagration.	The	winners	never	won	because	the	losers
refused	to	lose.	An	insane	war.
Seren	Pedac	was	in	the	lead,	twenty	paces	ahead,	and	Udinaas	saw	her	halt
and	suddenly	crouch,	one	hand	lifting.	The	air	sweeping	in	was	rich	with	the
scent	of	loam	and	wood	dust.	The	mouth	of	the	tunnel	was	small,	overgrown
and	half	blocked	by	angled	fragments	of	basalt	from	what	had	once	been	an
arched	gate,	and	beyond	was	darkness.
Seren	Pedac	waved	the	rest	forward.	‘I	will	scout	out	ahead,’	she	whispered


as	they	gathered	about	just	inside	the	cave	mouth.	‘Did	anyone	else	notice	that
there	were	no	bats	in	that	last	stretch?	That	floor	was	clean.’
‘There	are	sounds	beyond	human	hearing,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.	‘The	flow	of
air	is	channelled	through	vents	and	into	tubes	behind	the	walls,	producing	a
sound	that	perturbs	bats,	insects,	rodents	and	the	like.	The	Short-Tails	were
skilled	at	such	things.’
‘So,	not	magic,	then?’	Seren	Pedac	asked.	‘No	wards	or	curses	here?’
‘No.’
Udinaas	rubbed	at	his	face.	His	beard	was	filthy,	and	there	were	things
crawling	in	the	snarls	of	hair.	‘Just	find	out	if	we’re	on	the	right	side	of	that
damned	fort,	Acquitor.’
‘I	was	making	sure	I	wouldn’t	trip	some	kind	of	ancient	ward	stepping
outside,	Indebted,	something	that	all	these	broken	boulders	suggests	has
happened	before.	Unless	of	course	you	want	to	rush	out	there	yourself.’
‘Now	why	would	I	do	that?’	Udinaas	asked.	‘Ruin	gave	you	your	answer,
Seren	Pedac;	what	are	you	waiting	for?’
‘Perhaps,’	Fear	Sengar	said,	‘she	waits	for	you	to	be	quiet.	We	shall	all,	I
suppose,	end	up	waiting	for	ever	in	that	regard.’
‘Tormenting	you,	Fear,	gives	me	my	only	pleasure.’
‘A	sad	admission	indeed,’	Seren	Pedac	murmured,	then	edged	forward,
over	the	tumbled	rocks,	and	into	the	night	beyond.
Udinaas	removed	his	pack	and	settled	down	on	the	littered	floor,	dried
leaves	crunching	beneath	him.	He	leaned	against	a	tilted	slab	of	stone	and
stretched	out	his	legs.
Fear	moved	up	to	crouch	at	the	very	edge	of	the	cave	mouth.
Humming	to	herself,	Kettle	wandered	off	into	a	nearby	side	chamber.
Silchas	Ruin	stood	regarding	Udinaas.	‘I	am	curious,’	he	said	after	a	time.
‘What	gives	your	life	meaning,	Letherii?’
‘That’s	odd.	I	was	just	thinking	the	same	of	you,	Tiste	Andii.’
‘Indeed.’
‘Why	would	I	lie?’
‘Why	wouldn’t	you?’
‘All	right,’	Udinaas	said.	‘You	have	a	point.’
‘So	you	will	not	answer	my	question.’
‘You	first.’
‘I	do	not	disguise	what	drives	me.’
‘Revenge?	Well,	fine	enough,	I	suppose,	as	a	motivation	–	at	least	for	a
while	and	maybe	a	while	is	all	you’re	really	interested	in.	But	let’s	be	honest
here,	Silchas	Ruin:	as	the	sole	meaning	for	existing,	it’s	a	paltry,	pathetic


cause.’
‘Whereas	you	claim	to	exist	to	torment	Fear	Sengar.’
‘Oh,	he	manages	that	all	on	his	own.’	Udinaas	shrugged.	‘The	problem
with	questions	like	that	is,	we	rarely	find	meaning	to	what	we	do	until	well
after	we’ve	done	it.	At	that	point	we	come	up	with	not	one	but	thousands	–
reasons,	excuses,	justifications,	heartfelt	defences.	Meaning?	Really,	Silchas
Ruin,	ask	me	something	interesting.’
‘Very	well.	I	am	contemplating	challenging	our	pursuers	–	no	more	of	this
unnecessary	subterfuge.	It	offends	my	nature,	truth	be	told.’
At	the	tunnel	mouth,	Fear	turned	to	regard	the	Tiste	Andii.	‘You	will	kick
awake	a	hornet’s	nest,	Silchas	Ruin.	Worse,	if	this	fallen	god	is	indeed	behind
Rhulad’s	power,	you	might	find	yourself	suffering	a	fate	far	more	dire	than
millennia	buried	in	the	ground.’
‘Fear ’s	turning	into	an	Elder	before	our	eyes,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Jumping	at
shadows.	You	want	to	take	on	Rhulad	and	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	K’risnan,
Silchas	Ruin,	you	have	my	blessing.	Grab	the	Errant	by	the	throat	and	tear	this
empire	to	pieces.	Turn	it	all	into	ash	and	dust.	Level	the	whole	damned
continent,	Tiste	Andii	–	we’ll	just	stay	here	in	this	cave.	Come	collect	us	when
you’re	finished.’
Fear	bared	his	teeth	at	Udinaas.	‘Why	would	he	bother	sparing	us?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	the	ex-slave	replied,	raising	an	eyebrow.	‘Pity?’
Kettle	spoke	from	the	side	chamber ’s	arched	doorway.	‘Why	don’t	any	of
you	like	each	other?	I	like	all	of	you.	Even	Wither.’
‘It’s	all	right,’	Udinaas	said,	‘we’re	all	just	tortured	by	who	we	are,	Kettle.’
No-one	said	much	after	that.

Seren	Pedac	reached	the	edge	of	the	forest,	keeping	low	to	remain	level	with
the	stunted	trees.	The	air	was	thin	and	cold	at	this	altitude.	The	stars	overhead
were	bright	and	sharp,	the	dust-shrouded	crescent	moon	still	low	on	the
horizon	to	the	north.	Around	her	was	whispered	motion	through	the	clumps	of
dead	leaves	and	lichen	–	a	kind	of	scaled	mouse	ruled	the	forest	floor	at	night,
a	species	she	had	never	seen	before.	They	seemed	unusually	fearless,	so	much
so	that	more	than	one	had	scampered	across	her	boots.	No	predators,
presumably.	Even	so,	their	behaviour	was	odd.
Before	her	stretched	a	sloped	clearing,	sixty	or	more	paces,	ending	at	a
rutted	track.	Beyond	it	was	a	level	stretch	of	sharp,	jagged	stones,	loose
enough	to	be	treacherous.	The	fort	squatting	in	the	midst	of	this	moat	of	rubble


was	stone-walled,	thick	at	the	base	and	tapering	sharply	to	twice	the	height	of	a
man.	The	corner	bastions	were	massive,	squared	and	flat-topped.	On	those
platforms	were	swivel-mounted	ballestae.	Seren	could	make	out	huddled
figures	positioned	around	the	nearest	one,	while	other	soldiers	were	visible,
shoulders	and	heads,	walking	the	raised	platform	on	the	other	side	of	the	walls.
As	she	studied	the	fortification,	she	heard	the	soft	clunk	of	armour	and
weapons	to	her	left.	She	shrank	back	as	a	patrol	appeared	on	the	rutted	track.
Motionless,	breath	held,	she	watched	them	amble	past.
After	another	twenty	heartbeats,	she	turned	about	and	made	her	way	back
through	the	stunted	forest.	She	almost	missed	the	entrance	to	the	cave	mouth,	a
mere	slit	of	black	behind	high	ferns	beneath	a	craggy	overhang	of	tilted,
layered	granite.	Pushing	through,	she	stumbled	into	Fear	Sengar.
‘Sorry,’	he	whispered.	‘We	were	beginning	to	worry,	or,	at	least,’	he	added,
‘I	was.’
She	gestured	him	back	into	the	cave.
‘Good	news,’	she	said	once	they	were	inside.	‘We’re	behind	the	garrison	–
the	pass	ahead	should	be	virtually	unguarded—’
‘There	are	K’risnan	wards	up	the	trail,’	Silchas	Ruin	cut	in.	‘Tell	me	of	this
garrison,	Acquitor.’
Seren	closed	her	eyes.	Wards?	Errant	take	us,	what	game	is	Hannan	Mosag
playing	here?	‘I	could	smell	horses	from	the	fort.	Once	we	trip	those	wards
they’ll	be	after	us,	and	we	can’t	outrun	mounted	soldiers.’
‘The	garrison,’	Silchas	said.
She	shrugged.	‘The	fort	looks	impregnable.	I’d	guess	there’s	anywhere
between	a	hundred	and	two	hundred	soldiers	there.	And	with	that	many	there’s
bound	to	be	mages,	as	well	as	a	score	or	more	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Silchas	Ruin	is	tired	of	being	chased,’	Udinaas	said	from	where	he
lounged,	back	resting	on	a	stone	slab.
Dread	filled	Seren	Pedac	at	these	words.	‘Silchas,	can	we	not	go	round
these	wards?’
‘No.’
She	glanced	across	at	Fear	Sengar,	saw	suspicion	and	unease	in	the
warrior ’s	expression,	but	he	would	not	meet	her	eyes.	What	conversation	did	I
just	miss	here?	‘You	are	no	stranger	to	sorcery,	Silchas	Ruin.	Could	you	put
everyone	in	that	fort	to	sleep	or	something?	Or	cloud	their	minds,	make	them
confused?’
He	gave	her	an	odd	look.	‘I	know	of	no	sorcery	that	can	achieve	that.’
‘Mockra,’	she	replied.	‘The	warren	of	Mockra.’
‘No	such	thing	existed	in	my	day,’	he	said.	‘The	K’risnan	sorcery,	rotted


through	with	chaos	as	it	is,	seems	recognizable	enough	to	me.	I	have	never
heard	of	this	Mockra.’
‘Corlos,	the	mage	with	Iron	Bars	–	the	Crimson	Guard	mercenaries	–	he
could	reach	into	minds,	fill	them	with	false	terrors.’	She	shrugged.	‘He	said	the
magic	of	Holds	and	Elder	Warrens	has,	almost	everywhere	else,	been
supplanted.’
‘I	had	wondered	at	the	seeming	weakness	of	Kurald	Galain	in	this	land.
Acquitor,	I	cannot	achieve	what	you	ask.	Although,	I	do	intend	to	silence
everyone	in	that	fort.	And	collect	for	us	some	horses.’
‘Silchas,	there	are	hundreds	of	Letherii	there,	not	just	soldiers.	A	fort	needs
support	staff.	Cooks,	scullions,	smiths,	carpenters,	servants—’
‘And	the	Tiste	Edur,’	Fear	added,	‘will	have	slaves.’
‘None	of	this	interests	me,’	the	Tiste	Andii	said,	moving	past	Seren	and
leaving	the	mouth	of	the	cave.
Udinaas	laughed	softly.	‘Red	Ruin	stalks	the	land.	We	must	heed	this	tale	of
righteous	retribution	gone	horribly	wrong.	So,	Fear	Sengar,	your	epic	quest
twists	awry	–	what	will	you	tell	your	grandchildren	now?’
The	Edur	warrior	said	nothing.
Seren	Pedac	hesitated;	she	could	hear	Silchas	Ruin	walking	away	–	a	few
strides	crunching	through	leaves	–	then	he	was	gone.	She	could	hurry	after
him.	Attempt	one	last	time	to	dissuade	him.	Yet	she	did	not	move.	In	the	wake
of	Ruin’s	passage	the	only	sound	filling	the	forest	was	the	scurry	and	rustle	of
the	scaled	mice,	in	their	thousands	it	seemed,	all	flowing	in	the	same	direction
as	the	Tiste	Andii.	Sweat	prickled	like	ice	on	her	skin.	Look	at	us.	Frozen	like
rabbits.
Yet	what	can	I	do?	Nothing.	Besides,	it’s	not	my	business,	is	it?	I	am	but	a
glorified	guide.	Not	one	of	these	here	holds	to	a	cause	that	matters	to	me.
They’re	welcome	to	their	grand	ambitions.	I	was	asked	to	lead	them	out,	that’s
all.
This	is	Silchas	Ruin’s	war.	And	Fear	Sengar’s.	She	looked	over	at	Udinaas
and	found	him	studying	her	from	where	he	sat,	eyes	glittering,	as	if	presciently
aware	of	her	thoughts,	the	sordid	tracks	each	converging	on	a	single,	pathetic
conclusion.	Not	my	business.	Errant	take	you,	Indebted.
	
Mangled	and	misshapen,	the	K’risnan	Ventrala	reached	up	a	scrawny,	root-like
forearm	and	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	brow.	Around	him	candles	flickered,	a
forlorn	invocation	to	Sister	Shadow,	but	it	seemed	the	ring	of	darkness	in	the
small	chamber	was	closing	in	on	all	sides,	as	inexorable	as	any	tide.


He	had	woken	half	a	bell	earlier,	heart	pounding	and	breath	coming	in
gasps.	The	forest	north	of	the	fort	was	seething	with	orthen,	a	rock-dwelling
scaled	creature	unique	to	this	mountain	pass	–	since	his	arrival	at	the	fort	he
had	seen	perhaps	a	half-dozen,	brought	in	by	the	maned	cats	the	Letherii	locals
kept.	Those	cats	knew	better	than	to	attempt	to	eat	the	orthen,	poison	as	they
were,	yet	were	not	averse	to	playing	with	them	until	dead.	Orthen	avoided
forest	and	soft	ground.	They	dwelt	among	rocks.	Yet	now	they	swarmed	the
forest,	and	the	K’risnan	could	feel	something	palpable	from	their	presence,	a
stirring	that	tasted	of	bloodlust.
Should	he	crouch	here	in	his	room,	terrified	of	creatures	he	could	crush
underfoot?	He	needed	to	master	this	unseemly	panic	–	listen!	He	could	hear
nothing	from	the	fort	lookouts.	No	alarms	shouted	out.
But	the	damned	orthen	carpeted	the	forest	floor	up	the	pass,	massing	in
unimaginable	numbers,	and	that	dread	scaly	flood	was	sweeping	down,	and
Ventrala’s	panic	rose	yet	higher,	threatening	to	erupt	from	his	throat	in	shrieks.
He	struggled	to	think.
Some	kind	of	once	in	a	decade	migration,	perhaps.	Once	in	a	century,	even.
A	formless	hunger.	That	and	nothing	more.	The	creatures	would	heave	up
against	the	walls,	seethe	for	a	time,	then	leave	before	the	dawn.	Or	they’d	flow
around	the	fort,	only	to	plunge	from	the	numerous	ledges	and	cliffs	to	either
side	of	the	approach.	Some	creatures	were	driven	to	suicide	–	yes,	that	was	it…
The	bloodlust	suddenly	burgeoned.	The	K’risnan’s	head	rocked	back,	as	if
he’d	just	been	slapped.	Chills	swept	through	him.	He	heard	himself	begin
gibbering,	even	as	he	awakened	the	sorcery	within	him.	His	body	flinched	as
chaotic	power	blossomed	like	poison	in	his	muscles	and	bones.	Sister	Shadow
had	nothing	to	do	with	this	magic	racing	through	him,	nothing	at	all,	but	he
was	past	caring	about	such	things.
Then,	as	shouts	rose	from	the	wall,	K’risnan	Ventrala	sensed	another
presence	in	the	forest	beyond,	a	focus	to	all	that	bloodlust,	a	presence	–	and	it
was	on	its	way.
	
Atri-Preda	Hayenar	awoke	to	distant	shouts.	An	alarm	was	being	raised,	from
the	wall	facing	up-trail.	And	that,	she	realized	as	she	quickly	donned	her
uniform,	made	little	sense.	Then	again,	there	wasn’t	much	about	this	damned
assignment	that	did.	Pursue,	she’d	been	told,	but	avoid	contact.	And	now,	one	of
those	disgusting	K’risnan	had	arrived,	escorted	by	twenty-five	Merude
warriors.	Well,	if	there	was	any	real	trouble	brewing,	she	would	let	them
handle	it.


Their	damned	fugitives,	after	all.	They	could	have	them,	with	the	Errant’s
blessing.
A	moment	later	she	was	flung	from	her	feet	as	a	deafening	concussion	tore
through	the	fort.
	
K’risnan	Ventrala	screamed,	skidding	across	the	floor	to	slam	up	against	the
wall,	as	a	vast	cold	power	swept	over	him,	plucking	at	him	as	would	a	crow	a
rotted	corpse.	His	own	sorcery	had	recoiled,	contracted	into	a	trembling	core
deep	in	his	chest	–	it	had	probed	towards	that	approaching	presence,	probed
until	some	kind	of	contact	was	achieved.	And	then	Ventrala	–	and	all	that
churning	power	within	him	–	had	been	rebuffed.
Moments	later,	the	fort’s	wall	exploded.
	
Atri-Preda	Hayenar	stumbled	from	the	main	house	and	found	the	compound	a
scene	of	devastation.	The	wall	between	the	up-trail	bastions	had	been	breached,
the	impact	spilling	huge	pieces	of	stone	and	masonry	onto	the	muster	area.	And
the	rock	was	burning	–	a	black,	sizzling	coruscation	that	seemed	to	devour	the
stone	even	as	it	flared	wild,	racing	across	the	rubble.
Broken	bodies	were	visible	amidst	the	wreckage,	and	from	the	stables	–
where	the	building’s	back	wall	leaned	precariously	inward	–	horses	were
screaming	as	if	being	devoured	alive.	Swarming	over	everything	in	sight	were
orthen,	closing	on	fallen	soldiers,	and	where	they	gathered,	skin	was	chewed
through	and	the	tiny	scaled	creatures	then	burrowed	in	a	frenzy	into	pulped
meat.
Through	the	clouds	of	dust	in	the	breach,	came	a	tall	figure	with	drawn
swords.
White-skinned,	crimson-eyed.
Errant	take	me	–	he’s	had	enough	of	running	–	the	White	Crow—
She	saw	a	dozen	Tiste	Edur	appear	near	the	barracks.	Heavy	throwing
spears	darted	across	the	compound,	converging	on	the	ghastly	warrior.
He	parried	them	all	aside,	one	after	the	other,	and	with	each	clash	of	shaft
against	blade	the	swords	sang,	until	it	seemed	a	chorus	of	deathly	voices	filled
the	air.
Hayenar,	seeing	a	score	of	her	Letherii	soldiers	arrive,	staggered	towards
them.	‘Withdraw!’	she	shouted,	waving	like	a	madwoman.	‘Retreat,	you
damned	fools!’


It	seemed	they	had	but	awaited	the	command,	as	the	unit	broke	into	a	rout,
heading	en	masse	for	the	down-trail	gate.
One	of	the	Tiste	Edur	closed	on	the	Atri-Preda.	‘What	are	you	doing?’	he
demanded.	‘The	K’risnan	is	coming	–	he’ll	slap	this	gnat	down—’
‘When	he	does,’	she	snarled,	pulling	back,	‘we’ll	be	happy	to	regroup!’
The	Edur	unsheathed	his	cutlass.	‘Call	them	into	battle,	Atri-Preda	–	or	I’ll
cut	you	down	right	here!’
She	hesitated.
To	their	right,	the	other	Tiste	Edur	had	rushed	forward	and	now	engaged
the	White	Crow.
The	swords	howled,	a	sound	so	filled	with	glee	that	Hayenar ’s	blood
turned	to	ice.	She	shook	her	head,	watching,	as	did	the	warrior	confronting	her,
as	the	White	Crow	carved	his	way	through	the	Merude	in	a	maelstrom	of
severed	limbs,	decapitations	and	disembowelling	slashes	that	sent	bodies
reeling	away.
‘—your	Letherii!	Charge	him,	damn	you!’
She	stared	across	at	the	Edur	warrior.	‘Where’s	your	K’risnan?’	she
demanded.	‘Where	is	he?’
	
Ventrala	clawed	his	way	into	the	corner	of	the	room	furthest	from	the
conflagration	outside.	Endless,	meaningless	words	were	spilling	from	his
drool-threaded	mouth.	His	power	had	fled.	Abandoning	him	here,	in	this
cursed	room.	Not	fair.	He	had	done	all	that	was	asked	of	him.	He	had
surrendered	his	flesh	and	blood,	his	heart	and	his	very	bones,	all	to	Hannan
Mosag.
There	had	been	a	promise,	a	promise	of	salvation,	of	vast	rewards	for	his
loyalty	–	once	the	hated	youngest	son	of	Tomad	Sengar	was	torn	down	from
the	throne.	They	were	to	track	Fear	Sengar,	the	traitor,	the	betrayer,	and	when
the	net	was	finally	closed	around	him	it	would	not	be	Rhulad	smiling	in
satisfaction.	No,	Rhulad,	the	fool,	knew	nothing	about	any	of	this.	The	gambit
belonged	to	Hannan	Mosag,	the	Warlock	King,	who	had	had	his	throne	stolen
from	him.	And	it	was	Hannan	who,	with	Fear	Sengar	in	his	hands	–	and	the
slave,	Udinaas	–	would	work	out	his	vengeance.
The	Emperor	needed	to	be	stripped,	every	familiar	face	twisted	into	a	mask
of	betrayal,	stripped,	yes,	until	he	was	completely	alone.	Isolated	in	his	own
madness.
Only	then—
Ventrala	froze,	curled	tight	into	a	foetal	ball,	at	soft	laughter	spilling


towards	him…from	inside	his	room!
‘Poor	K’risnan,’	it	then	murmured.	‘You	had	no	idea	this	pale	king	of	the
orthen	would	turn	on	you,	this	strider	of	battlefields.	His	road	is	a	river	of
blood,	you	pathetic	fool,	and…oh!	look!	his	patience,	his	forbearance	–	it’s	all
gone!’
A	wraith,	here	with	him,	whispering	madness.	‘Begone,’	he	hissed,	‘lest
you	share	my	fate!	I	did	not	summon	you—’
‘No,	you	didn’t.	My	chains	to	the	Tiste	Edur	have	been	severed.	By	the	one
out	there.	Yes,	you	see,	I	am	his,	not	yours.	The	White	Crow’s	–	hah,	the
Letherii	surprised	me	there	–	but	it	was	the	mice,	K’risnan…seems	a	lifetime
ago	now.	In	the	forest	north	of	Hannan	Mosag’s	village.	And	an	apparition	–
alas,	no-one	understands,	no-one	takes	note.	But	that	is	not	my	fault,	is	it?’
‘Go	away—’
‘I	cannot.	Will	not,	rather.	Can	you	hear?	Outside?	It’s	all	quiet	now.	Most
of	the	Letherii	got	away,	unfortunately.	Tumbling	like	drunk	goats	down	the
stairs,	with	their	captain	among	them	–	she	was	no	fool.	As	for	your	Merude,
well,	they’re	all	dead.	Now,	listen!	Boots	in	the	hallway	–	he’s	on	his	way!’
The	terror	drained	away	from	Ventrala.	There	was	no	point,	was	there?	At
least,	finally,	he	would	be	delivered	from	this	racked,	twisted	cage	of	a	body.
As	if	recalling	the	dignity	it	had	once	possessed,	that	body	now	lurched	into
motion,	lifting	itself	into	a	sitting	position,	back	pushed	into	the	corner	–	it
seemed	to	have	acquired	its	own	will,	disconnected	from	Ventrala,	from	the
mind	and	spirit	that	held	to	that	name,	that	pathetic	identity.	Hannan	Mosag	had
once	said	that	the	power	of	the	Fallen	One	fed	on	all	that	was	flawed	and
imperfect	in	one’s	soul,	which	in	turn	manifested	in	flesh	and	bone	–	what	was
then	necessary	was	to	teach	oneself	to	exult	in	that	power,	even	as	it	twisted	and
destroyed	the	soul’s	vessel.
Ventrala,	with	the	sudden	clarity	that	came	with	approaching	death,	now
realized	that	it	was	all	a	lie.	Pain	was	not	to	be	embraced.	Chaos	was	anathema
to	a	mortal	body.	It	ruined	the	flesh	because	it	did	not	belong	there.	There	was
no	exaltation	in	self-destruction.
A	chorus	of	voices	filled	his	skull,	growing	ever	louder.	The	swords…
There	was	a	soft	scuffing	sound	in	the	hallway	beyond,	then	the	door
squealed	open.
Orthen	poured	in,	flowing	like	grey	foam	in	the	grainy	darkness.	A
moment	later,	the	White	Crow	stepped	into	view.	The	song	of	the	two	swords
filled	the	chamber.
Red,	lambent	eyes	fixed	on	Ventrala.
The	Tiste	Andii	then	sheathed	his	weapons,	muting	the	keening	music.	‘Tell


me	of	this	one	who	so	presumes	to	offend	me.’
Ventrala	blinked,	then	shook	his	head.	‘You	think	the	Crippled	God	is
interested	in	challenging	you,	Silchas	Ruin?	No,	this…offence…it	is	Hannan
Mosag’s,	and	his	alone.	I	understand	that	now,	you	see.	It’s	why	my	power	is
gone.	Fled.	The	Crippled	God	is	not	ready	for	the	likes	of	you.’
The	white-skinned	apparition	was	motionless,	silent,	for	a	time.	Then	he
said,	‘If	this	Hannan	Mosag	knows	my	name,	he	knows	too	that	I	have	reason
to	be	affronted.	By	him.	By	all	the	Tiste	Edur	who	have	inherited	the	rewards
of	Scabandari’s	betrayal.	Yet	he	provokes	me.’
‘Perhaps,’	Ventrala	said,	‘Hannan	Mosag	presumed	the	Crippled	God’s
delight	in	discord	was	without	restraint.’
Silchas	Ruin	cocked	his	head.	‘What	is	your	name,	K’risnan?’
Ventrala	told	him.
‘I	will	let	you	live,’	the	Tiste	Andii	said,	‘so	that	you	may	deliver	to
Hannan	Mosag	my	words.	The	Azath	cursed	me	with	visions,	its	own
memories,	and	so	I	was	witness	to	many	events	on	this	world	and	on	others.
Tell	Hannan	Mosag	this:	a	god	in	pain	is	not	the	same	as	a	god	obsessed	with
evil.	Your	Warlock	King’s	obsessions	are	his	own.	It	would	seem,	alas,	that	he
is…confused.	For	that,	I	am	merciful	this	night…and	this	night	alone.
Hereafter,	should	he	resume	his	interference,	he	will	know	the	extent	of	my
displeasure.’
‘I	shall	convey	your	words	with	precision,	Silchas	Ruin.’
‘You	should	choose	a	better	god	to	worship,	Ventrala.	Tortured	spirits	like
company,	even	a	god’s.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘Then	again,	perhaps	it	is	the
likes	of	you	who	have	in	turn	shaped	the	Crippled	God.	Perhaps,	without	his
broken,	malformed	worshippers,	he	would	have	healed	long	ago.’
Soft	rasping	laughter	from	the	wraith.
Silchas	Ruin	walked	back	through	the	doorway.	‘I	am	conscripting	some
horses,’	he	said	without	turning	round.
Moments	later,	the	wraith	slithered	after	him.
The	orthen,	which	had	been	clambering	about	in	seemingly	aimless
motion,	now	began	to	withdraw	from	the	chamber.
Ventrala	was	alone	once	more.	To	the	stairs,	find	the	Atri-Preda	–	an
escort,	for	the	journey	back	to	Letheras.	And	I	will	speak	to	Hannan	Mosag.
And	I	will	tell	him	about	death	in	the	pass.	I	will	tell	him	of	a	Soletaken	Tiste
Andii	with	two	knife	wounds	in	his	back,	wounds	that	will	not	heal.	Yet…he
forbears.
Silchas	Ruin	knows	more	of	the	Crippled	God	than	any	of	us,	barring
perhaps	Rhulad.	But	he	does	not	hate.	No,	he	feels	pity.


Pity,	even	for	me.
	
Seren	Pedac	heard	the	horses	first,	hoofs	thumping	at	the	walk	up	the	forested
trail.	The	night	sky	above	the	fort	was	strangely	black,	opaque,	as	if	from
smoke	–	yet	there	was	no	glow	from	flames.	They	had	heard	the	concussion,
the	destruction	of	at	least	one	stone	wall,	and	Kettle	had	yelped	with	laughter,	a
chilling,	grotesque	sound.	Then,	distant	screams	and,	all	too	quickly	thereafter,
naught	but	silence.
Silchas	Ruin	appeared,	leading	a	dozen	mounts,	accompanied	by	sullen
moaning	from	the	scabbarded	swords.
‘And	how	many	of	my	kin	did	you	slay	this	time?’	Fear	Sengar	asked.
‘Only	those	foolish	enough	to	oppose	me.	This	pursuit,’	he	said,	‘it	does
not	belong	to	your	brother.	It	is	the	Warlock	King’s.	I	believe	we	cannot	doubt
that	he	seeks	what	we	seek.	And	now,	Fear	Sengar,	the	time	has	come	to	set	our
knives	on	the	ground,	the	two	of	us.	Perhaps	Hannan	Mosag’s	desires	are	a
match	to	yours,	but	I	assure	you,	such	desires	cannot	be	reconciled	with	mine.’
Seren	Pedac	felt	a	heaviness	settle	in	the	pit	of	her	stomach.	This	had	been
a	long	time	in	coming,	the	one	issue	avoided	again	and	again,	ever	excused	to
the	demands	of	simple	expediency.	Fear	Sengar	could	not	win	this	battle	–	they
all	knew	it.	Did	he	intend	to	stand	in	Silchas	Ruin’s	way?	One	more	Tiste	Edur
to	cut	down?	‘There	is	no	compelling	reason	to	broach	this	subject	right	now,’
she	said.	‘Let’s	just	get	on	these	horses	and	ride.’
‘No,’	Fear	Sengar	said,	eyes	fixed	on	the	Tiste	Andii’s.	‘Let	it	be	now.
Silchas	Ruin,	in	my	heart	I	accept	the	truth	of	Scabandari’s	betrayal.	You
trusted	him,	and	you	suffered	unimaginably	in	consequence.	Yet	how	can	we
make	reparation?	We	are	not	Soletaken.	We	are	not	ascendants.	We	are	simply
Tiste	Edur,	and	so	we	fall	like	saplings	before	you	and	your	swords.	Tell	me,
how	do	we	ease	your	thirst	for	vengeance?’
‘You	do	not,	nor	is	my	killing	your	kin	in	any	way	an	answer	to	my	need.
Fear	Sengar,	you	spoke	of	reparation.	Is	this	your	desire?’
The	Edur	warrior	was	silent	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	he	said,
‘Scabandari	brought	us	to	this	world.’
‘Yours	was	dying.’
‘Yes.’
‘You	may	not	be	aware	of	this,’	Silchas	Ruin	continued,	‘but	Bloodeye	was
partly	responsible	for	the	sundering	of	Shadow.	Nonetheless,	of	greater
relevance,	to	me,	are	the	betrayals	that	came	before	that	particular	crime.
Betrayals	against	my	own	kin	–	my	brother,	Andarist	–	which	set	such	grief


upon	his	soul	that	he	was	driven	mad.’	He	slowly	cocked	his	head.	‘Did	you
imagine	me	naive	in	fashioning	an	alliance	with	Scabandari	Bloodeye?’
Udinaas	barked	a	laugh.	‘Naive	enough	to	turn	your	back	on	him.’
Seren	Pedac	shut	her	eyes.	Please,	Indebted,	just	keep	your	mouth	shut.	Just
this	once.
‘You	speak	truth,	Udinaas,’	Silchas	Ruin	replied	after	a	moment.	‘I	was
exhausted,	careless.	I	did	not	imagine	he	would	be	so…public.	Yet,	in
retrospect,	the	betrayal	had	to	be	absolute	–	and	that	included	the	slaughter	of
my	followers.’
Fear	Sengar	said,	‘You	intended	to	betray	Scabandari,	only	he	acted	first.	A
true	alliance	of	equals,	then.’
‘I	imagined	you	might	see	it	that	way,’	the	Tiste	Andii	replied.	‘Understand
me,	Fear	Sengar.	I	will	not	countenance	freeing	the	soul	of	Scabandari
Bloodeye.	This	world	has	enough	reprehensible	ascendants.’
‘Without	Father	Shadow,’	Fear	said,	‘I	cannot	free	Rhulad	from	the	chains
of	the	Crippled	God.’
‘You	could	not,	even	with	him.’
‘I	do	not	believe	you,	Silchas	Ruin.	Scabandari	was	your	match,	after	all.
And	I	do	not	think	the	Crippled	God	hunts	you	in	earnest.	If	it	is	indeed	Hannan
Mosag	behind	this	endless	pursuit,	then	the	ones	he	seeks	are	myself	and
Udinaas.	Not	you.	It	is,	perhaps,	even	possible	that	the	Warlock	King	knows
nothing	of	you	–	of	who	you	are,	beyond	the	mysterious	White	Crow.’
‘That	does	not	appear	to	be	the	case,	Fear	Sengar.’
The	statement	seemed	to	rock	the	Tiste	Edur.
Silchas	Ruin	continued,	‘Scabandari	Bloodeye’s	body	was	destroyed.
Against	me,	now,	he	would	be	helpless.	A	soul	without	provenance	is	a
vulnerable	thing.	Furthermore,	it	may	be	that	his	power	is	already	being…
used.’
‘By	whom?’	Fear	asked,	almost	whispering.
The	Tiste	Andii	shrugged.	‘It	seems,’	he	said	with	something	close	to
indifference,	‘that	your	quest	is	without	purpose.	You	cannot	achieve	what	you
seek.	I	will	offer	you	this,	Fear	Sengar.	The	day	I	choose	to	move	against	the
Crippled	God,	your	brother	shall	find	himself	free,	as	will	all	the	Tiste	Edur.
When	that	time	comes,	we	can	speak	of	reparation.’
Fear	Sengar	stared	at	Silchas	Ruin,	then	glanced,	momentarily,	at	Seren
Pedac.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	said,	‘Your	offer…humbles	me.	Yet	I	could
not	imagine	what	the	Tiste	Edur	could	gift	you	in	answer	to	such	deliverance.’
‘Leave	that	to	me,’	the	Tiste	Andii	said.
Seren	Pedac	sighed,	then	strode	to	the	horses.	‘It’s	almost	dawn.	We	should


ride	until	midday	at	least.	Then	we	can	sleep.’	She	paused,	looked	once	more
over	at	Silchas	Ruin.	‘You	are	confident	we	will	not	be	pursued?’
‘I	am,	Acquitor.’
‘So,	were	there	in	truth	wards	awaiting	us?’
The	Tiste	Andii	made	no	reply.
	
As	the	Acquitor	adjusted	the	saddle	and	stirrups	on	one	of	the	horses	to	suit
Kettle,	Udinaas	watched	the	young	girl	squatting	on	her	haunches	near	the
forest	edge,	playing	with	an	orthen	that	did	not	seem	in	any	way	desperate	to
escape	her	attentions.	The	darkness	had	faded,	the	mists	silver	in	the	growing
light.
Wither	appeared	beside	him,	like	a	smear	of	reluctant	night.	‘These	scaled
rats,	Udinaas,	came	from	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	world.	There	were	larger
ones,	bred	for	food,	but	they	were	smart	–	smarter	perhaps	than	they	should
have	been.	Started	escaping	their	pens,	vanishing	into	the	mountains.	It’s	said
there	are	some	still	left—’
Udinaas	grunted	his	derision.	‘It’s	said?	Been	hanging	round	in	bars,
Wither?’
‘The	terrible	price	of	familiarity	–	you	no	longer	respect	me,	Indebted.	A
most	tragic	error,	for	the	knowledge	I	possess—’
‘Is	like	a	curse	of	boredom,’	Udinaas	said,	pushing	himself	to	his	feet.
‘Look	at	her,’	he	said,	nodding	towards	Kettle.	‘Tell	me,	do	you	believe	in
innocence?	Never	mind;	I’m	not	that	interested	in	your	opinion.	By	and	large,	I
don’t.	Believe,	that	is.	And	yet,	that	child	there…well,	I	am	already	grieving.’
‘Grieving	what?’	Wither	demanded.
‘Innocence,	wraith.	When	we	kill	her.’
Wither	was,	uncharacteristically,	silent.
Udinaas	glanced	down	at	the	crouching	shade,	then	sneered.	‘All	your
coveted	knowledge…’
	
Seventeen	legends	described	the	war	against	the	scaled	demons	the	Awl	called
the	Kechra;	of	those,	sixteen	were	of	battles,	terrible	clashes	that	left	the
corpses	of	warriors	scattered	across	the	plains	and	hills	of	the	Awl’dan.	Less	a
true	war	than	headlong	flight,	at	least	in	the	first	years.	The	Kechra	had	come
from	the	west,	from	lands	that	would	one	day	belong	to	the	empire	of	Lether
but	were	then,	all	those	countless	centuries	ago,	little	more	than	blasted	wastes


–	fly-swarmed	marshlands	of	peat	and	rotten	ice.	A	ragged,	battered	horde,	the
Kechra	had	seen	battle	before,	and	it	was	held	in	some	versions	of	those
legends	that	the	Kechra	were	themselves	fleeing,	fleeing	a	vast,	devastating	war
that	gave	cause	to	their	own	desperation.
In	the	face	of	annihilation,	the	Awl	had	learned	how	to	fight	such	creatures.
The	tide	was	met,	held,	then	turned.
Or	so	the	tales	proclaimed,	in	ringing,	stirring	tones	of	triumph.
Redmask	knew	better,	although	at	times	he	wished	he	didn’t.	The	war	ended
because	the	Kechra’s	migration	reached	the	easternmost	side	of	the	Awl’dan,
and	then	continued	onward.	Granted,	they	had	been	badly	mauled	by	the
belligerent	ancestors	of	the	Awl,	yet,	in	truth,	they	had	been	almost	indifferent
to	them	–	an	obstacle	in	their	path	–	and	the	death	of	so	many	of	their	own	kind
was	but	one	more	ordeal	in	a	history	of	fraught,	tragic	ordeals	since	coming	to
this	world.
Kechra.	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	the	Firstborn	of	Dragons.
There	was,	to	Redmask’s	mind,	nothing	palatable	or	sustaining	about
knowledge.	As	a	young	warrior,	his	world	had	been	a	single	knot	on	the	rope
of	the	Awl	people,	his	own	deliberate	binding	to	the	long,	worn	history	of
bloodlines.	He	had	never	imagined	that	there	were	so	many	other	ropes,	so
many	intertwined	threads;	he	had	never	before	comprehended	how	vast	the	net
of	existence,	nor	how	tangled	it	had	become	since	the	Night	of	Life	–	when	all
that	was	living	came	into	being,	born	of	deceit	and	betrayal	and	doomed	to	an
eternity	of	struggle.
And	Redmask	had	come	to	understand	struggle	–	there	in	the	startled	eyes
of	the	rodara,	the	timid	fear	of	the	myrid;	in	the	disbelief	of	a	young	warrior
dying	on	stone	and	wind-blown	sand;	in	the	staring	comprehension	of	a
woman	surrendering	her	life	to	the	child	she	pushed	out	from	between	her
legs.	He	had	seen	elders,	human	and	beast,	curl	up	to	die;	he	had	seen	others
fight	for	their	last	breath	with	all	the	will	they	could	muster.	Yet	in	his	heart,	he
could	find	no	reason,	no	reward	waiting	beyond	that	eternal	struggle.
Even	the	spirit	gods	of	his	people	battled,	flailed,	warred	with	the	weapons
of	faith,	with	intolerance	and	the	sweet,	deadly	waters	of	hate.	No	less	confused
and	sordid	than	any	mortal.
The	Letherii	wanted,	and	want	invariably	transformed	into	a	moral	right	to
possess.	Only	fools	believed	such	things	to	be	bloodless,	either	in	intent	or
execution.
Well,	by	the	same	argument	–	by	its	very	fang	and	talon	–	there	existed	a
moral	right	to	defy	them.	And	in	such	a	battle,	there	would	be	no	end	until	one
side	or	the	other	was	obliterated.	More	likely,	both	sides	were	doomed	to


suffer	that	fate.	This	final	awareness	is	what	came	from	too	much	knowledge.
Yet	he	would	fight	on.
These	plains	he	and	his	three	young	followers	moved	through	had	once
belonged	to	the	Awl.	Until	the	Letherii	expanded	their	notion	of	self-interest	to
include	stealing	land	and	driving	away	its	original	inhabitants.	Cairn	markers
and	totem	stones	had	all	been	removed,	the	boulders	left	in	heaps;	even	the
ring-stones	that	had	once	anchored	huts	were	gone.	The	grasses	were
overgrazed,	and	here	and	there	long	rectangular	sections	had	seen	the	earth
broken	in	anticipation	of	planting	crops,	fence	posts	stacked	nearby.	But
Redmask	knew	that	this	soil	was	poor,	quickly	exhausted	except	in	the	old	river
valleys.	The	Letherii	might	manage	a	generation	or	two	before	the	top-soil
blew	away.	He	had	seen	the	results	east	of	the	wastelands,	in	far	Kolanse	–	an
entire	civilization	tottering	on	the	edge	of	starvation	as	desert	spread	like
plague.
The	blurred	moon	had	lifted	high	in	the	star-spattered	night	sky	as	they
drew	closer	to	the	mass	of	rodara.	There	was	little	point	in	going	after	the
myrid	–	the	beasts	were	not	swift	runners	over	any	reasonable	distance	–	but	as
they	edged	closer,	Redmask	could	see	the	full	extent	of	this	rodara	herd.
Twenty	thousand	head,	perhaps	even	more.
A	large	drover	camp,	lit	by	campfires,	commanded	a	hilltop	to	the	north.
Two	permanent	buildings	of	cut-log	walls	and	sod-capped	roofs	overlooked
the	shallow	valley	and	the	herds	–	these	would,	Redmask	knew,	belong	to	the
Factor ’s	foreman,	forming	the	focus	for	the	beginning	of	a	true	settlement.
Crouched	in	the	grasses	at	the	edge	of	a	drainage	gully	cutting	through	the
valley	side,	the	three	young	warriors	on	his	left,	Redmask	studied	the	Letherii
for	another	twenty	heartbeats;	then	he	gestured	Masarch	and	the	others	back
into	the	gully	itself.
‘This	is	madness,’	the	warrior	named	Theven	whispered.	‘There	must	be	a
hundred	Letherii	in	that	camp	–	and	what	of	the	shepherds	and	their	dogs?	If	the
wind	shifts…’
‘Quiet,’	said	Redmask.	‘Leave	the	dogs	and	the	shepherds	to	me.	As	for	the
camp,	well,	they	will	soon	be	busy	enough.	Return	to	the	horses,	mount	up,	and
be	ready	to	flank	and	drive	the	herd	when	it	arrives.’
In	the	moon’s	pale	light,	Masarch’s	expression	was	nerve-twisted,	a	wild
look	in	his	eyes	–	he	had	not	done	well	on	his	death	night,	but	thus	far	he
appeared	more	or	less	sane.	Both	Theven	and	Kraysos	had,	Redmask
suspected,	made	use	of	bledden	herb	smuggled	with	them	into	their	coffins,
which	they	chewed	to	make	themselves	insensate,	beyond	such	things	as	panic
and	convulsions.	Perhaps	that	was	just	as	well.	But	Masarch	had	possessed	no


bledden	herb.	And,	as	was	common	to	people	of	open	lands,	confinement	was
worse	than	death,	worse	than	anything	one	could	imagine.
Yet	there	was	value	in	searing	that	transition	into	adulthood,	rebirth	that
began	with	facing	oneself,	one’s	own	demonic	haunts	that	came	clambering
into	view	in	grisly	succession,	immune	to	every	denial.	With	the	scars	born	of
that	transition,	a	warrior	would	come	to	understand	the	truth	of	imagination:
that	it	was	a	weapon	the	mind	drew	at	every	turn,	yet	as	deadly	to	its	wielder	as
to	its	conjured	foes.	Wisdom	arrived	as	one’s	skill	with	that	weapon	grew	–	we
fight	every	battle	with	our	imaginations:	the	battles	within,	the	battles	in	the
world	beyond.	This	is	the	truth	of	command,	and	a	warrior	must	learn
command,	of	oneself	and	of	others.	It	was	possible	that	soldiers,	such	as	the
Letherii,	experienced	something	similar	in	attaining	rank,	but	Redmask	was	not
sure	of	that.
Glancing	back,	he	saw	that	his	followers	had	vanished	into	the	darkness.
Probably,	he	judged,	now	at	their	horses.	Waiting	with	fast,	shallow	breaths
drawn	into	suddenly	tight	lungs.	Starting	at	soft	noises,	gripping	their	reins	and
weapons	in	sweat-layered	hands.
Redmask	made	a	soft	grunting	sound	and	the	dray,	lying	on	its	belly,	edged
closer.	He	settled	a	hand	on	its	thick-furred	neck,	briefly,	then	drew	it	away.
Together,	the	two	set	out,	side	by	side,	both	low	to	the	ground,	towards	the
rodara	herd.
	
Abasard	walked	slowly	along	the	edge	of	the	sleeping	herd	to	keep	himself
alert.	His	two	favoured	dogs	trotted	in	his	wake.	Born	and	raised	as	an	Indebted
in	Drene,	the	sixteen-year-old	had	not	imagined	a	world	such	as	this	–	the	vast
sky,	sprawling	darkness	and	countless	stars	at	night,	enormous	and	depthless	at
day;	the	way	the	land	itself	reached	out	impossible	distances,	until	at	times	he
could	swear	he	saw	a	curvature	to	the	world,	as	if	it	existed	like	an	island	in	the
sea	of	the	Abyss.	And	so	much	life,	in	the	grasses,	in	the	sky.	In	the	spring	tiny
flowers	erupted	from	every	hillside,	with	berries	ripening	in	the	valleys.	All
his	life,	until	his	family	had	accompanied	the	Factor ’s	foreman,	he	had	lived
with	his	father	and	mother,	his	brothers	and	sisters,	with	his	grandmother	and
two	aunts	–	all	crowded	into	a	house	little	more	than	a	shack,	facing	onto	a
rubbish-filled	alley	that	stank	of	urine.	The	menagerie	of	his	youth	was	made
up	of	rats,	blue-eyed	mice,	meers,	cockroaches,	scorpions	and	silverworms.
But	here,	in	this	extraordinary	place,	he	had	discovered	a	new	life.	Winds
that	did	not	stink	with	rot	and	waste.	And	there	was	room,	so	much	room.	He
had	witnessed	with	his	own	eyes	a	return	to	health	among	the	members	of	his


family	–	his	frail	little	sister	now	wiry	and	sun-darkened,	ever	grinning;	his
grandmother,	whose	cough	had	virtually	vanished;	his	father,	who	stood	taller
now,	no	longer	hunched	beneath	low-ceilinged	shacks	and	worksheds.	Only
yesterday,	Abasard	had	heard	him	laugh,	for	the	very	first	time.
Perhaps,	the	youth	dared	believe,	once	the	land	was	broken	and	crops	were
planted,	there	would	be	the	chance	to	work	their	way	free	of	debt.	Suddenly,	all
things	seemed	possible.
His	two	dogs	loped	past	him,	vanished	in	the	gloom	ahead.	A	not	unusual
occurrence.	They	liked	to	chase	jackrabbits,	or	low-flying	rhinazan.	He	heard	a
brief	commotion	in	the	grasses	just	beyond	a	slight	rise.	Abasard	adjusted	his
grip	on	the	staff	he	carried,	increased	his	pace	–	if	the	dogs	had	trapped	and
killed	a	jackrabbit,	there	would	be	extra	meat	in	the	stew	tomorrow.
Reaching	the	rise,	he	paused,	searched	the	darkness	below	for	his	dogs.
They	were	nowhere	to	be	seen.	Abasard	frowned,	then	let	out	a	low	whistle,
expecting	at	any	moment	to	hear	them	trot	back	to	him.	Yet	only	silence
answered	his	summons.	Confused,	he	slowly	dropped	into	a	crouch.
Ahead	and	to	his	right,	a	few	hundred	rodara	shifted	–	awake	and	restless
now.
Something	was	wrong.	Wolves?	The	Bluerose	cavalry	the	foreman	kept
under	contract	had	hunted	the	local	ones	down	long	ago.	Even	the	coyotes	had
been	driven	away,	as	had	the	bears.
Abasard	crept	forward,	his	mouth	suddenly	dry,	his	heart	pounding	hard	in
his	chest.
His	free	hand,	reaching	out	before	him,	came	into	contact	with	soft,	warm
fur.	One	of	his	dogs,	lying	motionless,	still	under	his	probing	touch.	Near	its
neck,	the	fur	was	wet.	He	reached	down	along	it	until	his	fingers	sank	into	torn
flesh	where	its	throat	should	have	been.	The	wound	was	ragged.	Wolf.	Or	one
of	those	striped	cats.	But	of	the	latter	he	had	only	ever	seen	skins,	and	those
came	from	the	far	south,	near	Bolkando	Kingdom.
Truly	frightened	now,	he	continued	on,	and	moments	later	found	his	other
dog.	This	one	had	a	broken	neck.	The	two	attacks,	he	realized,	had	to	have	been
made	simultaneously,	else	one	or	the	other	of	the	beasts	would	have	barked.
A	broken	neck…but	no	other	wounds,	no	slather	of	saliva	on	the	fur.
The	rodara	heaved	a	half-dozen	paces	to	one	side	again,	and	he	could
make	out,	at	the	very	edge	of	his	vision,	their	heads	lifted	on	their	long	necks,
their	ears	upright.	Yet	no	fear-sounds	came	from	them.	So,	no	dangerous	scent,
no	panic	–	someone	has	their	attention.	Someone	they’re	used	to	obeying.
There	was	no	mistaking	this	–	the	herd	was	being	stolen.	Abasard	could	not
believe	it.	He	turned	about,	retracing	his	route.	Twenty	paces	of	silent	footfalls


later,	he	set	out	into	a	run	–	back	to	the	camp.
	
Redmask’s	whip	snaked	out	to	wrap	round	the	shepherd’s	neck	–	the	old
Letherii	had	been	standing,	outlined	well	against	the	dark,	staring	mutely	at	the
now-moving	herd.	A	sharp	tug	from	Redmask	and	the	shepherd’s	head	rolled
from	the	shoulders,	the	body	–	arms	jerking	momentarily	out	to	the	sides	–
falling	to	one	side.
The	last	of	them,	Redmask	knew,	as	he	moved	up.	Barring	one,	who	had
been	smart	enough	to	flee,	although	that	would	not	save	him	in	the	end.	Well,
invaders	had	to	accept	the	risks	–	they	were	thieves	as	well,	weren’t	they?
Luxuriating	in	their	unearned	wealth,	squatting	on	land	not	their	own,	arrogant
enough	to	demand	that	it	change	to	suit	their	purposes.	As	good	as	pissing	on
the	spirits	in	the	earth	–	one	paid	for	such	temerity	and	blasphemy.
He	pushed	away	that	last	thought	as	unworthy.	The	spirits	could	take	care
of	themselves,	and	they	would	deliver	their	own	vengeance,	in	time	–	for	they
were	as	patient	as	they	were	inexorable.	It	was	not	for	Redmask	to	act	on	behalf
of	those	spirits.	No,	that	form	of	righteousness	was	both	unnecessary	and
disingenuous.	The	truth	was	this:	Redmask	enjoyed	being	the	hand	of	Awl
vengeance.	Personal	and,	accordingly,	all	the	more	delicious.
He	had	already	begun	his	killing	of	the	Letherii,	back	in	Drene.
Drawing	his	knife	as	he	crouched	over	the	old	man’s	severed	head,	he	cut
off	the	Letherii’s	face,	rolled	it	up	and	stored	it	with	the	others	in	the	saltcrusted	bag	at	his	hip.
Most	of	the	herd	dogs	had	submitted	to	the	Awl	dray’s	challenge	–	they
now	followed	the	larger,	nastier	beast	as	it	worked	to	waken	the	entire	herd,
then	drive	it	en	masse	eastward.
Straightening,	Redmask	turned	as	the	first	screams	erupted	from	the
drover	camp.
	
Abasard	was	still	forty	paces	from	the	camp	when	he	saw	one	of	the	tents
collapse	to	one	side,	poles	and	guides	snapping,	as	an	enormous	two-legged
creature	thumped	over	it,	talons	punching	through	to	the	struggling	forms
beneath,	and	screams	tore	through	the	air.	Head	swivelling	to	one	side,	the
fiend	continued	on	in	its	loping,	stiff-tailed	gait.	There	were	huge	swords	in	its
hands.
Another	one	crossed	its	path,	fast,	low,	heading	for	the	foreman’s	house.


Abasard	saw	a	figure	dart	from	this	second	beast’s	path	–	but	not	quickly
enough,	as	its	head	snapped	forward,	twisting	so	that	its	jaws	closed	to	either
side	of	the	man’s	head.	Whereupon	the	reptile	threw	the	flailing	form	upward
in	a	bone-breaking	surge.	The	limp	corpse	sailed	in	the	air,	landing	hard	and
rolling	into	the	hearth	fire	in	a	spray	of	sparks.
Abasard	stood,	paralysed	by	the	horror	of	the	slaughter	he	saw	before	him.
He	had	recognized	that	man.	Another	Indebted,	a	man	who	had	been	courting
one	of	his	aunts,	a	man	who	always	seemed	to	be	laughing.
Another	figure	caught	his	eye.	His	baby	sister,	ten	years	old,	racing	out
from	the	camp	–	away	from	another	tent	whose	inhabitants	were	dying	beneath
chopping	swords	–	our	tent.	Father—
The	reptile	lifted	its	head,	saw	his	sister ’s	fleeting	form,	and	surged	after
her.
All	at	once,	Abasard	found	himself	running,	straight	for	the	monstrous
creature.
If	it	saw	him	converging,	it	was	indifferent	–	until	the	very	last	moment,	as
Abasard	raised	his	staff	to	swing	overhand,	hoping	to	strike	the	beast	on	its
hind	leg,	imagining	bones	breaking—
The	nearer	sword	lashed	out,	so	fast,	so—
Abasard	found	himself	lying	on	sodden	grasses,	feeling	heat	pour	from
one	side	of	his	body,	and	as	the	heat	poured	out,	he	grew	ever	colder.	He
stared,	seeing	nothing	yet,	sensing	how	something	was	wrong	–	he	was	on	his
side,	but	his	head	was	flattened	down,	his	ear	pressed	to	the	ground.	There
should	have	been	a	shoulder	below	and	beneath	his	head,	and	an	arm,	and	it
was	where	all	the	heat	was	pouring	out.
And	further	down,	the	side	of	his	chest,	this	too	seemed	to	be	gone.
He	could	feel	his	right	leg,	kicking	at	the	ground.	But	no	left	leg.	He	did
not	understand.
Slowly,	he	settled	onto	his	back,	stared	up	at	the	night	sky.
So	much	room	up	there,	a	ceiling	beyond	the	reach	of	everyone,	covering
a	place	in	which	they	could	live.	Uncrowded,	room	enough	for	all.
He	was	glad,	he	realized,	that	he	had	come	here,	to	see,	to	witness,	to
understand.	Glad,	even	as	he	died.
	
Redmask	walked	out	of	the	dark	to	where	Masarch	waited	with	the	Letherii
horse.	Behind	him,	the	rodara	herd	was	a	mass	of	movement,	the	dominant
males	in	the	lead,	their	attention	fixed	on	Redmask.	Dogs	barked	and	nipped
from	the	far	flanks.	Distant	shouts	from	the	other	two	young	warriors	indicated


they	were	where	they	should	be.
Climbing	into	the	saddle,	Redmask	nodded	to	Masarch	then	swung	his
mount	round.
Pausing	for	a	long	moment,	Masarch	stared	at	the	distant	Letherii	camp,
where	it	seemed	the	unholy	slaughter	continued	unabated.	His	guardians,	he’d
said.
He	does	not	fear	challenges	to	come.	He	will	take	the	fur	of	the	Ganetok
war	leader.	He	will	lead	us	to	war	against	the	Letherii.	He	is	Redmask,	who
forswore	the	Awl,	only	to	now	return.
I	thought	it	was	too	late.
I	now	think	I	am	wrong.
He	thought	again	of	his	death	night,	and	memories	returned	like	winged
demons.	He	had	gone	mad,	in	that	hollowed-out	log,	gone	so	far	mad	that
hardly	any	of	him	had	survived	to	return,	when	the	morning	light	blinded	him.
Now,	the	insanity	was	loose,	tingling	at	the	very	ends	of	his	limbs,	loose	and
wild	but	as	yet	undecided,	not	yet	ready	to	act,	to	show	its	face.	There	was
nothing	to	hold	it	back.	No-one.
No-one	but	Redmask.	My	war	leader.
Who	unleashed	his	own	madness	years	ago.


Chapter	Five

Denigration	afflicted	our	vaunted	ideals	long	ago,	but	such	inflictions
are	difficult	to	measure,	to	rise	up	and	point	a	finger	to	this	place,	this
moment,	and	say:	here,	my	friends,	this	was	where	our	honour,	our
integrity	died.
The	affliction	was	too	insipid,	too	much	a	product	of	our
surrendering	mindful	regard	and	diligence.	The	meanings	of	words
lost	their	precision	–	and	no-one	bothered	taking	to	task	those	who
cynically	abused	those	words	to	serve	their	own	ambitions,	their	own
evasion	of	personal	responsibility.	Lies	went	unchallenged,	lawful
pursuit	became	a	sham,	vulnerable	to	graft,	and	justice	itself	became	a
commodity,	mutable	in	imbalance.	Truth	was	lost,	a	chimera	reshaped
to	match	agenda,	prejudices,	thus	consigning	the	entire	political
process	to	a	mummer ’s	charade	of	false	indignation,	hypocritical
posturing	and	a	pervasive	contempt	for	the	commonry.
Once	subsumed,	ideals	and	the	honour	created	by	their	avowal	can
never	be	regained,	except,	alas,	by	outright,	unconstrained	rejection,
invariably	instigated	by	the	commonry,	at	the	juncture	of	one	particular
moment,	one	single	event,	of	such	brazen	injustice	that	revolution
becomes	the	only	reasonable	response.
Consider	this	then	a	warning.	Liars	will	lie,	and	continue	to	do	so,
even	beyond	being	caught	out.	They	will	lie,	and	in	time,	such	liars	will
convince	themselves,	will	in	all	self-righteousness	divest	the	liars	of
culpability.	Until	comes	a	time	when	one	final	lie	is	voiced,	the	one	that
can	only	be	answered	by	rage,	by	cold	murder,	and	on	that	day,	blood
shall	rain	down	every	wall	of	this	vaunted,	weaning	society.
Impeached	Guild	Master ’s	Speech
Semel	Fural	of	the	Guild	of	Sandal-Clasp	Makers
Of	the	turtles	known	as	vinik	the	females	dwelt	for	the	most	part	in	the
uppermost	reaches	of	the	innumerable	sources	of	the	Lether	River,	in	the


pooled	basins	and	high-ground	bogs	found	in	the	coniferous	forests	crowding
the	base	of	the	Bluerose	Mountains.	The	mountain	runoff,	stemmed	and	backed
by	the	dams	built	by	flat-tailed	river-rats,	descended	in	modest	steps	towards
the	broader,	conjoined	tributaries	feeding	the	vast	river.	Vinik	turtles	were
long-shelled	and	dorsal-ridged,	and	their	strong	forelimbs	ended	in	taloned
hands	bearing	opposable	thumbs.	In	the	egg-laying	season,	the	females	–
smaller	by	far	than	their	male	kin	of	the	deep	rivers	and	the	seas	–	prowled	the
ponds	seeking	the	nests	of	waterfowl.	Finding	one	large	enough	and	properly
accessible,	the	female	vinik	would	appropriate	it.	Prior	to	laying	her	own	eggs,
the	turtle	exuded	a	slime	that	coated	the	bird	eggs,	the	slime	possessing
properties	that	suspended	the	development	of	those	young	birds.	Once	the
vinik’s	clutch	was	in	place,	the	turtle	then	dislodged	the	entire	nest,	leaving	it
free	to	float,	drawn	by	the	current.	At	each	barrier	juvenile	male	vinik	were
gathered,	to	drag	the	nests	over	dry	ground	so	that	they	could	continue	their
passive	migration	down	to	the	Lether	River.
Many	sank,	or	encountered	some	fatal	obstacle	on	their	long,	arduous
journey	to	the	sea.	Others	were	raided	by	adult	vinik	dwelling	in	the	depths	of
the	main	river.	Of	those	nests	that	made	it	to	sea,	the	eggs	hatched,	the
hatchlings	fed	on	the	bird	embryos,	then	slipped	out	into	the	salty	water.	Only
upon	reaching	juvenile	age	–	sixty	or	seventy	years	–	would	the	new
generation	of	vinik	begin	the	years-long	journey	back	up	the	river,	to	those
distant,	murky	ponds	of	the	Bluerose	boreal	forest.
Nests	bobbed	in	the	waters	of	the	Lether	River	as	it	flowed	past	the
Imperial	City,	Letheras,	seat	of	the	Emperor.	Local	fisher	boats	avoided	them,
since	large	vinik	males	sometimes	tracked	the	nests	just	beneath	the	surface	–
and	provided	they	weren’t	hungry	enough	to	raid	the	nest,	they	would	defend	it.
Few	fisher	folk	willingly	challenged	a	creature	that	could	weigh	as	much	as	a
river	galley	and	was	capable	of	tearing	such	a	galley	to	pieces	with	its	beak	and
its	clawed	forearms.
The	arrival	of	the	nests	announced	the	beginning	of	summer,	as	did	the
clouds	of	midges	swarming	over	the	river,	the	settling	of	the	water	level	and
the	reek	of	exposed	silts	along	the	banks.
On	the	faint	rise	behind	the	Old	Palace,	the	dishevelled	expanse	where
stood	the	foundations	of	ancient	towers,	and	one	in	particular	constructed	of
black	stone	with	a	low-walled	yard,	a	hunched,	hooded	figure	dragged	himself
towards	the	gateway	step	by	aching,	awkward	step.	His	spine	was	twisted,
pushed	by	past	ravages	of	unconstrained	power	until	the	ridge	of	each	vertebra
was	visible	beneath	the	threadbare	cloak,	the	angle	forcing	his	shoulders	far
forward	so	that	the	unkempt	ground	before	him	was	within	reach	of	his	arms,


which	he	used	to	pull	his	broken	body	along.
He	came	searching	for	a	nest.	A	mound	of	ragged	earth	and	dying	grasses,
a	worm-chewed	hole	into	a	now	dead	realm.	Questing	with	preternatural
senses,	he	moved	through	the	yard	from	one	barrow	to	the	next.	Empty…
empty…empty.
Strange	insects	edged	away	from	his	path.	Midges	spun	in	cavorting	swirls
over	him,	but	would	not	alight	to	feed,	for	the	searcher ’s	blood	was	rotted	with
chaos.	The	day’s	dying	light	plucked	at	his	misshapen	shadow,	as	if	seeking
sense	of	a	stain	so	malign	on	the	yard’s	battered	ground.
Empty…
But	this	one	was	not.	He	allowed	himself	a	small	moment	of	glee.
Suspicions	confirmed,	at	last.	The	place	that	was	dead…was	not	entirely	dead.
Oh,	the	Azath	was	now	nothing	more	than	lifeless	stone,	all	power	and	all	will
drained	away.	Yet	some	sorcery	lingered,	here,	beneath	this	oversized	mound
ringed	in	shattered	trees.	Kurald	for	certain.	Probably	Galain	–	the	stink	of
Tiste	Andii	was	very	nearly	palpable.	Binding	rituals,	a	thick,	interwoven	skein
to	keep	something…someone…down.
Crouched,	the	figure	reached	with	his	senses,	then	suddenly	recoiled,
breath	hissing	from	between	mangled	lips.
It	has	begun	unravelling!	Someone	has	been	here	–	before	me!	Not	long.
Sorcery,	working	the	release	of	this	imprisoned	creature.	Father	of	Shadows,	I
must	think!
Hannan	Mosag	remained	motionless,	hunched	at	the	very	edge	of	this
mound,	his	mind	racing.
Beyond	the	ruined	grounds,	the	river	flowed	on,	down	to	the	distant	sea.
Carried	on	its	current,	vinik	nests	spun	lazily;	milky	green	eggs,	still	warm
with	the	day’s	heat,	enclosed	vague	shapes	that	squirmed	about,	eager	for	the
birth	of	light.
	
She	lifted	her	head	with	a	sharp	motion,	blood	and	fragments	of	human	lung
smearing	her	mouth	and	chin,	sliding	then	dripping	down	into	the	split-open
ribcage	of	her	victim	–	a	fool	who,	consumed	by	delusions	of	domination	and
tyranny	no	doubt,	had	chosen	to	stalk	her	all	the	way	from	Up	Markets.	It	had
become	a	simple	enough	thing,	a	lone,	seemingly	lost	woman	of	high	birth,
wandering	through	crowds	unaware	of	the	hooded	looks	and	expressions	of
avarice	tracking	her.	She	was	like	the	bait	the	fisher	folk	used	to	snare
brainless	fish	in	the	river.	True,	while	she	remained	hooded,	her	arms	covered
in	shimmering	silk	the	hue	of	raw	ox-heart,	wearing	elegant	calf-leather


gloves,	as	well	as	close-wrapped	leggings	of	black	linen,	there	was	no	way
anyone	could	see	the	cast	of	her	skin,	nor	her	unusual	features.	And,	despite	the
Tiste	Edur	blood	coursing	diluted	in	her	veins,	she	was	not	uncommonly	tall,
which	well	suited	her	apparent	vulnerability,	for	it	was	clear	that	these	Edur
occupiers	in	this	city	were	far	too	dangerous	to	be	hunted	by	the	common
Letherii	rapist.
She	had	led	him	into	an	alley,	whereupon	she	drove	one	hand	into	his
chest,	tearing	out	his	heart.	But	it	was	the	lungs	she	enjoyed	the	most,	the	pulpy
meat	rich	with	oxygen	and	not	yet	soured	by	the	rank	juices	of	violent	death.
The	mortal	realm	was	a	delightful	place.	She	had	forgotten	that.
But	now,	her	feeding	had	been	interrupted.	Someone	had	come	to	the	Azath
grounds.	Someone	had	probed	her	rituals,	which	had	been	dissolving	the
binding	wards	set	by	Silchas	Ruin.	There	could	be	trouble	there,	and	she	was
not	inclined	to	suffer	interference	in	her	plans.
Probably	the	Errant,	that	meddling	bastard.	Or,	even	more	alarming,	that
Elder	God,	Mael.	A	miserably	crowded	city,	this	Letheras	–	she	had	no
intention	of	tarrying	overlong	here,	lest	her	presence	be	discovered,	her
schemes	knocked	awry.
Wiping	her	mouth	and	chin	with	the	back	of	one	sleeved	forearm,	she
straightened	from	her	feast,	then	set	off.
	
Rautos	Hivanar,	head	of	the	Liberty	Consign,	squatted	on	the	muddy	bank	of
the	river,	the	work	crews	finishing	the	day’s	excavation	directly	behind	him,
the	pump	crews	already	washing	down,	the	sounds	from	the	estate’s	back
kitchen	rising	with	the	approaching	demands	of	supper.	He	was	making	a	point
of	feeding	his	diggers	well,	as	much	to	ease	their	bemusement	as	to	keep	them
working.	They	were	now	excavating	way	below	the	river	level,	after	all,	and	if
not	for	the	constantly	manned	pumps,	they	would	be	working	chest-deep	in
muddy	water.	As	it	was,	the	shoring	on	the	walls	needed	continual	attention,
prone	as	they	were	to	sag	inward.
Eyes	tracking	a	half-dozen	vinik	nests	rafting	down	the	river,	Rautos
Hivanar	was	lost	in	thought.	There	had	been	more	mysterious	objects,	buried
deep	and	disconnected,	but	he	had	begun	to	suspect	that	they	all	belonged
together;	that	in	an	as	yet	inconceivable	way	they	could	be	assembled	into	a
kind	of	mechanism.	Some	central	piece	remained	undiscovered,	he	believed.
Perhaps	tomorrow…
He	heard	slippered	feet	on	the	plank	walkway	leading	down	to	the	river,
and	a	moment	later	came	Venitt	Sathad’s	voice.	‘Master.’


‘Venitt,	you	have	allotted	yourself	two	house	guards	for	the	journey.	Take
two	more.	And,	accordingly,	two	more	packhorses.	You	will	travel	without	a
supply	wagon,	as	agreed,	but	that	need	not	be	a	reason	to	reduce	your	level	of
comfort.’
‘Very	well,	Master.’
‘And	remember,	Venitt.	Letur	Anict	is	in	every	way	the	de	facto	ruler	of
Drene,	regardless	of	the	Edur	governor ’s	official	status.	I	am	informed	that
you	will	find	Orbyn	Truthfinder,	the	Invigilator ’s	agent,	a	reliable	ally.	As	to
Letur	Anict…the	evidence	points	to	the	Factor ’s	having	lost…perspective.	His
ambition	seems	without	restraint,	no	longer	harnessed	to	reason	or,	for	that
matter,	common	sense.’
‘I	shall	be	diligent	in	my	investigation,	Master.’
Rautos	Hivanar	rose	and	faced	his	servant.	‘If	needs	must,	Venitt,	err	on	the
side	of	caution.	I	would	not	lose	you.’
A	flicker	of	something	like	surprise	in	the	Indebted’s	lined	face,	then	the
man	bowed.	‘I	will	remain	circumspect,	Master.’
‘One	last	thing,’	Rautos	said	as	he	moved	past	Venitt	on	his	way	up	to	the
estate.	‘Do	not	embarrass	me.’
The	Indebted’s	eyes	tracked	his	master	for	a	moment,	his	expression	once
more	closed.
Unseen	behind	them	on	the	river,	a	huge	shape	lifted	beneath	one	vinik
nest,	and	breaking	the	water	as	the	nest	overturned	was	the	prow	ridge	of	an
enormous	shell,	and	below	that	a	sinewy	neck	and	a	vast,	gaping	beak.
Swallowing	the	nest	entire.
The	currents	then	carried	the	disturbance	away,	until	no	sign	of	it
remained.
	
‘You	know,	witnessing	something	is	one	thing.	Understanding	it	another.’
Bugg	turned	away	from	his	study	of	the	distant	river,	where	the	setting
sun’s	light	turned	the	water	into	a	rippled	sheet	of	beaten	gold,	and	frowned	at
Tehol	Beddict.	‘Very	pondering	of	you,	Master.’
‘It	was,	wasn’t	it?	I	have	decided	that	it	is	my	normal	eye	that	witnesses,
while	it	is	my	blue	eye	that	understands.	Does	that	make	sense	to	you?’
‘No.’
‘Good,	I’m	glad.’
‘The	night	promises	to	be	both	heavy	and	hot,	Master.	And	I	suggest	the
mosquito	netting.’
‘Agreed.	Can	you	get	to	it?	I	can’t	reach.’


‘You	could	if	you	stretched	an	arm.’
‘What’s	your	point?’
‘Nothing.	I	admit	to	some…distraction.’
‘Just	now?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are	you	over	it	yet?’
‘Almost.	Alas,	certain	individuals	are	stirring	in	the	city	this	evening.’
‘Well,	are	you	going	to	do	something	about	it	or	do	I	have	to	do
everything	around	here?’
Bugg	walked	across	the	roof	to	stand	beside	the	bed.	He	studied	the
reposed	form	of	Tehol	Beddict	for	a	moment,	then	he	collected	the	netting	and
draped	it	over	his	master.
Eyes,	one	brown,	the	other	blue,	blinked	up	at	him.	‘Shouldn’t	there	be	a
frame	or	something?	I	feel	I	am	being	readied	for	my	own	funeral	here.’
‘We	used	the	frame	for	this	morning’s	fire.’
‘Ah.	Well,	is	this	going	to	keep	me	from	being	bitten?’
‘Probably	not,	but	it	looks	rather	fetching.’
Tehol	closed	his	blue	eye.	‘I	see…’
Bugg	sighed.	‘Gallows	humour,	Master.’
‘My,	you	are	in	a	state,	aren’t	you?’
‘I	am	undecided,’	Bugg	said,	nodding.	‘Yes	I	know,	one	of	my	eternal
flaws.’
‘What	you	require,	old	friend,	is	a	mortal’s	perspective	on	things.	So	let’s
hear	it.	Lay	out	the	dilemma	for	me,	Bugg,	so	that	I	might	provide	you	with	a
properly	pithy	solution.’
‘The	Errant	follows	the	Warlock	King,	to	see	what	he	plans.	The	Warlock
King	meddles	with	nefarious	rituals	set	in	place	by	another	ascendant,	who	in
turn	leaves	off	eating	a	freshly	killed	corpse	and	makes	for	an	unexpected
rendezvous	with	said	Warlock	King,	where	they	will	probably	make	each
other ’s	acquaintance	then	bargain	to	mutual	benefit	over	the	crumbling	chains
binding	another	ascendant	–	one	soon	to	be	freed,	which	will	perturb	someone
far	to	the	north,	although	that	one	is	probably	not	yet	ready	to	act.	In	the
meantime,	the	long-departed	Edur	fleet	skirts	the	Draconean	Sea	and	shall	soon
enter	the	river	mouth	on	its	fated	return	to	our	fair	city,	and	with	it	are	two	fell
champions,	neither	of	whom	is	likely	to	do	what	is	expected	of	them.	Now,	to
add	spice	to	all	of	that,	the	secret	that	is	the	soul	of	one	Scabandari	Bloodeye
will,	in	a	depressingly	short	time,	cease	to	be	a	secret,	and	consequently	and	in
addition	to	and	concomitant	with,	we	are	in	for	an	interesting	summer.’
‘Is	that	all?’


‘Not	in	the	least,	but	one	mouthful	at	a	time,	I	always	say.’
‘No	you	don’t.	Shurq	Elalle	is	the	one	always	saying	that.’
‘Your	penchant	for	disgusting	images,	Master,	is	as	ever	poorly	timed	and
thoroughly	inappropriate.	Now,	about	that	pithy	solution	of	yours…’
‘Well,	I	admit	to	disappointment.	You	didn’t	even	mention	my	grand
scheme	to	bankrupt	the	empire.’
‘The	Invigilator	now	hunts	for	you	in	earnest.’
‘Karos	Invictad?	No	wonder	you	put	me	under	a	shroud.	I	shall	endeavour
to	be	close	to	the	roof	’s	edge	the	day	he	clambers	into	view	with	his	drooling
henchmen,	so	that	I	can	fling	myself	over	the	side,	which,	you’ll	agree,	is	far
preferable	to	even	one	bell’s	worth	of	his	infamous,	ghastly	inquisition.	In	the
meantime,	what’s	for	supper?’
‘Vinik	eggs	–	I	found	a	somewhat	broken	nest	washed	up	under	a	dock.’
‘But	vinik	eggs	are	poisonous,	hence	the	clouds	of	complaining	gulls
constantly	circling	over	every	nasty	little	floating	island.’
‘It’s	a	matter	of	proper	cooking,	Master,	and	the	addition	of	a	few	essential
herbs	that	serve	to	negate	most	of	the	ill	effects.’
‘Most?’
‘Yes.’
‘And	do	you	have	in	your	possession	those	life-sustaining	herbs?’
‘Well,	no,	but	I	thought	I’d	improvise.’
‘There	you	have	it.’
‘There	I	have	what,	Master?’
‘Why,	my	pithy	reply,	of	course.’
Bugg	squinted	at	Tehol	Beddict,	who	winked,	this	time	closing	his	brown
eye.	The	Elder	God	scowled,	then	said,	‘Thank	you,	Master.	What	would	I	ever
do	without	you?’
‘Scant	little,	I’d	wager.’

Tanal	Yathvanar	set	the	package	down	on	the	Invigilator ’s	desk.	‘Delivered	by
a	rat-faced	urchin	this	morning.	Sir,	I	expect	it	will	prove	no	particular
challenge.	In	any	case,’	he	continued	as	he	began	unwrapping	the	package,	‘I
was	instructed	to	treat	it	delicately,	and	to	keep	it	upright.	And	you	will,	in
moments,	see	why.’
Karos	Invictad	watched	with	heavy-lidded	eyes	as	the	grease-stained,	poor
quality	ragweed	wrapping	was	delicately	pulled	away,	revealing	a	small,	opentopped	wooden	box	that	seemed	to	possess	layered	sides.	The	Invigilator


leaned	forward	to	peer	inside.
And	saw	a	two-headed	insect,	such	as	were	now	appearing	down	by	the
river.	Its	legs	were	moving	precisely,	carrying	it	round…and	round.	The
insides	of	the	box	were	each	of	coloured,	polished	tiles,	and	it	appeared	that	the
tiles	could	be	slid	free,	or	rearranged,	if	one	so	chose.
‘What	were	the	instructions,	Tanal?’
‘The	challenge	is	to	halt	the	insect’s	motion.	It	will,	apparently,	continue
walking	in	a	circle,	in	the	same	place,	until	it	dies	of	starvation	–	which,
incidentally,	is	the	fail	point	for	the	puzzle…approximately	four	months.	While
the	creature	rotates	in	place,	it	will	not	eat.	As	for	water,	a	small	clump	of
soaked	moss	will	suffice.	As	you	can	see,	the	tiles	on	the	inside	can	be
rearranged,	and	presumably,	once	the	proper	order	or	sequence	is	discovered,
the	insect	will	stop.	And	you	will	have	defeated	the	puzzle.	The	restrictions	are
these:	no	object	may	be	placed	inside	the	container;	nor	can	you	physically
touch	or	make	contact	with	the	insect.’
Karos	Invictad	grunted.	‘Seems	direct	enough.	What	is	the	record	for	the
solution?’
‘There	is	none.	You	are	the	first	and	only	player,	apparently.’
‘Indeed.	Curious.	Tanal,	three	prisoners	died	in	their	cells	last	night	–	some
contagion	is	loose	down	there.	Have	the	corpses	burned	in	the	Receiving
Ground	west	of	the	city.	Thoroughly.	And	have	the	rest	washed	down	with
disinfectant.’
‘At	once,	Invigilator.’
	
The	ruins	were	far	more	extensive	than	is	commonly	imagined.	In	fact,	most
historians	of	the	early	period	of	the	colony	have	paid	little	or	no	attention	to
the	reports	of	the	Royal	Engineer,	specifically	those	of	Keden	Qan,	who	served
from	the	founding	until	the	sixth	decade.	During	the	formulation	of	the
settlement	building	plan,	a	most	thorough	survey	was	conducted.	The	three
extant	Jhag	towers	behind	the	Old	Palace	were	in	fact	part	of	a	far	larger
complex,	which	of	course	runs	contrary	to	what	is	known	of	Jhag	civilization.
For	this	reason,	it	may	be	safe	to	assume	that	the	Jhag	complex	on	the	bank	of
the	Lether	River	represents	a	pre-dispersion	site.	That	is,	before	the	culture
disintegrated	in	its	sudden,	violent	diaspora.	An	alternative	interpretation
would	be	that	the	three	main	towers,	four	subterranean	vaults,	and	what	Qan
called	the	Lined	Moat	all	belonged	to	a	single,	unusually	loyal	family.
In	either	case,	the	point	I	am	making	here	is	this:	beyond	the	Jhag	–	or
more	correctly,	Jaghut	–	complex,	there	were	other	ruins.	Of	course,	one	need


not	point	out	the	most	obvious	and	still	existing	Azath	structure	–	that	lecture
will	have	to	wait	another	day.	Rather,	in	an	area	covering	almost	the	entire
expanse	of	present-day	Letheras	could	be	found	foundation	walls,	plazas	or
concourses,	shaped	wells,	drainage	ditches	and,	indeed,	some	form	of	cemetery
or	mortuary,	and	–	listen	carefully	now	–	all	of	it	not	of	human	design.	Nor
Jaghut,	nor	even	Tarthenal.
Now,	what	were	the	details	of	this	unknown	complex?	Well,	for	one,	it	was
self-contained,	walled,	entirely	covered	by	multilevel	roofing	–	even	the	plazas,
alleys	and	streets.	As	a	fortress,	it	was	virtually	impregnable.	Beneath	the
intricately	paved	floors	and	streets,	there	was	a	second	even	more	defensible
city,	the	corridors	and	tunnels	of	which	can	now	be	found	as	an	integral	part	of
our	sewer	outflow.
In	short,	Letheras,	the	colony	of	the	First	Empire,	was	founded	upon	the
ruins	of	an	earlier	city,	one	whose	layout	seemed	to	disregard	the	presence	of
the	Jaghut	towers	and	the	Azath,	suggesting	that	it	pre-dates	both.
Even	the	first	engineer,	Keden	Qan,	was	unable	or	unwilling	to	attempt	an
identification	of	these	early	builders.	Virtually	no	artifacts	were	found	–	no
potsherds,	no	sculptures,	no	remnants	of	metal-working.	One	last	interesting
detail.	It	appeared	that	in	the	final	stages	of	occupation,	the	dwellers	set	about
frantic	alterations	to	their	city.	Qan’s	analysis	of	these	efforts	led	him	to
conclude	that	a	catastrophic	climate	change	had	occurred,	for	the	efforts
indicated	a	desperate	attempt	to	add	insulation.
Presumably,	that	effort	failed—
Her	interior	monologue	ceased	abruptly	as	she	heard	the	faint	scuff	of
someone	approaching.	Lifting	her	head	was	a	struggle,	but	Janath	Anar
managed,	just	as	the	chamber ’s	heavy	door	creaked	open	and	light	flooded	in
from	a	lantern	–	dull	and	low	yet	blinding	her	nonetheless.
Tanal	Yathvanar	stepped	into	view	–	it	would	be	none	other	but	him,	she
knew	–	and	a	moment	later	he	spoke.	‘I	pray	you’ve	yet	to	drive	yourself	mad.’
Through	cracked,	blistered	lips,	she	smiled,	then	said	in	a	croaking	voice,
‘Lectures.	I	am	halfway	into	the	term.	Early	history.	Mad?	Oh	yes,	without
question.’
She	heard	him	come	closer.	‘I	have	been	gone	from	you	too	long	–	you	are
suffering.	That	was	careless	of	me.’
‘Careless	is	keeping	me	alive,	you	miserable	little	wretch,’	she	said.
‘Ah,	perhaps	I	deserved	that.	Come,	you	must	drink.’
‘What	if	I	refuse?’
‘Then,	with	your	inevitable	death,	you	are	defeated.	By	me.	Are	you	sure
you	want	that,	Scholar?’


‘You	urge	me	to	stubborn	resistance.	I	understand.	The	sadist	needs	his
victim	alive,	after	all.	For	as	long	as	humanly	possible.’
‘Dehydration	is	a	most	unpleasant	way	to	die,	Janath	Anar.’
He	lifted	the	spigot	of	a	waterskin	to	her	mouth.	She	drank.
‘Not	too	quickly,’	Tanal	said,	stepping	back.	‘You	will	just	make	yourself
sick.	Which	wouldn’t,	I	see,	be	the	first	time	for	you.’
‘When	you	see	maggots	crawl	out	of	your	own	wastes,	Yathvanar…Next
time,’	she	added,	‘take	your	damned	candle	with	you.’
‘If	I	do	that,’	he	replied,	‘you	will	go	blind—’
‘And	that	matters?’
He	stepped	close	once	again	and	poured	more	water	into	her	mouth.
Then	he	set	about	washing	her	down.	Sores	had	opened	where	stomach
fluids	had	burned	desiccated	skin,	and,	he	could	see,	she	had	been	pulling	on
her	bindings,	seeking	to	squeeze	her	hands	through	the	shackles.	‘You	are
looking	much	worse	for	wear,’	he	said	as	he	dabbed	ointment	on	the	wounds.
‘You	cannot	get	your	hands	through,	Janath—’
‘Panic	cares	nothing	for	what	can	and	can’t	be	done,	Tanal	Yathvanar.	One
day	you	will	discover	that.	There	was	a	priest	once,	in	the	second	century,	who
created	a	cult	founded	on	the	premise	that	every	victim	tallied	in	one’s	mortal
life	awaits	that	one	beyond	death.	From	the	slightest	of	wounds	to	the	most
grievous,	every	victim	preceding	you	into	death…waits.	For	you.
‘A	mortal	conducts	spiritual	economics	in	his	or	her	life,	amassing	credit
and	debt.	Tell	me,	Patriotist,	how	indebted	are	you	by	now?	How	vast	the
imbalance	between	good	deeds	and	your	endless	acts	of	malice?’
‘A	bizarre,	insane	cult,’	he	muttered,	moving	away.	‘No	wonder	it	failed.’
‘In	this	empire,	yes,	it’s	no	wonder	at	all.	The	priest	was	set	upon	in	the
street	and	torn	limb	from	limb.	Still,	it’s	said	adherents	remain,	among	the
defeated	peoples	–	the	Tarthenal,	the	Fent	and	Nerek,	the	victims,	as	it	were,	of
Letherii	cruelty	–	and	before	those	people	virtually	disappeared	from	the	city,
there	were	rumours	that	the	cult	was	reviving.’
Tanal	Yathvanar	sneered.	‘The	ones	who	fail	ever	need	a	crutch,	a
justification	–	they	fashion	virtue	out	of	misery.	Karos	Invictad	has	identified
that	weakness,	in	one	of	his	treatises—’
Janath’s	laugh	broke	into	ragged	coughing.	When	she	recovered,	she	spat
and	said,	‘Karos	Invictad.	Do	you	know	why	he	so	despises	academics?	He	is	a
failed	one	himself.’	She	bared	her	stained	teeth.	‘He	calls	them	treatises,	does
he?	Errant	fend,	how	pathetic.	Karos	Invictad	couldn’t	fashion	a	decent
argument,	much	less	a	treatise.’
‘You	are	wrong	in	that,	woman,’	Tanal	said.	‘He	has	even	explained	why	he


did	so	poorly	as	a	young	scholar	–	oh	yes,	he	would	not	refute	your
assessment	of	his	career	as	a	student.	Driven	by	emotions,	back	then.	Incapable
of	a	cogent	position,	leaving	him	rife	with	anger	–	but	at	himself,	at	his	own
failings.	But,	years	later,	he	learned	that	all	emotion	had	to	be	scoured	from
him;	only	then	would	his	inner	vision	become	clear.’
‘Ah,	he	needed	wounding,	then.	What	was	it?	A	betrayal	of	sorts,	I	expect.
Some	woman?	A	protégé,	a	patron?	Does	it	even	matter?	Karos	Invictad	makes
sense	to	me,	now.	Why	he	is	what	he	has	become.’	She	laughed	again,	this	time
without	coughing,	then	said,	‘Delicious	irony.	Karos	Invictad	became	a	victim.’
‘Don’t	be—’
‘A	victim,	Yathvanar!	And	he	didn’t	like	it,	oh	no,	not	at	all.	It	hurt	–	the
world	hurt	him,	so	now	he’s	hurting	it	back.	And	yet,	he	has	still	to	even	the
score.	But	you	see,	he	never	will,	because	in	his	mind,	he’s	still	that	victim,	still
lashing	out.	And	as	you	said	earlier,	the	victim	and	his	crutch,	his	virtue	of
misery	–	one	feeds	the	other,	without	cessation.	No	wonder	he	bridles	with
self-righteousness	for	all	his	claims	to	emotionless	intellect—’
He	struck	her,	hard,	her	head	snapping	to	one	side,	spittle	and	blood
threading	out.
Breathing	fast,	chest	strangely	tight,	Tanal	hissed,	‘Rail	at	me	all	you	will,
Scholar.	I	expect	that.	But	not	at	Karos	Invictad.	He	is	the	empire’s	last	true
hope.	Only	Karos	Invictad	will	guide	us	into	glory,	into	a	new	age,	an	age
without	the	Edur,	without	the	mixed-bloods,	without	even	the	failed	peoples.
No,	just	the	Letherii,	an	empire	expanding	outward	with	sword	and	fire,	all	the
way	back	to	the	homeland	of	the	First	Empire.	He	has	seen	our	future!	Our
destiny!’
She	stared	at	him	in	the	dull	light.	‘Of	course.	But	first,	he	needs	to	kill
every	Letherii	worthy	of	the	name.	Karos	Invictad,	the	Great	Scholar,	and	his
empire	of	thugs—’
He	struck	her	again,	harder	than	before,	then	lurched	back,	raising	his	hand
–	it	was	trembling,	skin	torn	and	battered,	a	shard	of	one	broken	tooth	jutting
from	one	knuckle.
She	was	unconscious.
Well,	she	asked	for	it.	She	wouldn’t	stop.	That	means	she	wanted	it,	deep
inside,	she	wanted	me	to	beat	her.	I’ve	heard	about	this	–	Karos	has	told	me	–
they	come	to	like	it,	eventually.	They	like	the…attention.
So,	I	must	not	neglect	her.	Not	again.	Plenty	of	water,	keep	her	clean	and
fed.
And	beat	her	anyway.
But	she	was	not	unconscious,	for	she	then	spoke	in	a	mumble.	He	could	not


make	it	out	and	edged	closer.
‘…on	the	other	side…I	will	wait	for	you…on	the	other	side…’
Tanal	Yathvanar	felt	a	slither	deep	in	his	gut.	And	fled	from	it.	No	god
waits	to	pass	judgement.	No-one	marks	the	imbalance	of	deeds	–	no	god	is
beyond	its	own	imbalances	–	for	its	own	deeds	are	as	subject	to	judgement	as
any	other.	So	who	then	fashions	this	afterlife?	Some	natural	imposition?
Ridiculous	–	there	is	no	balance	in	nature.	Besides,	nature	exists	in	this	world
and	this	world	alone	–	its	rules	mean	nothing	once	the	bridge	is	crossed…
Tanal	Yathvanar	found	himself	walking	up	the	corridor,	that	horrid	woman
and	her	cell	far	behind	him	now	–	he	had	no	recollection	of	actually	leaving.
Karos	has	said	again	and	again,	justice	is	a	conceit.	It	does	not	exist	in
nature.	‘Retribution	seen	in	natural	catastrophes	is	manufactured	by	all	too
eager	and	all	too	pious	people,	each	one	convinced	the	world	will	end	but	spare
them	and	them	alone.	But	we	all	know,	the	world	is	inherited	by	the	obnoxious,
not	the	righteous.’
Unless,	came	the	thought	in	Janath’s	voice,	the	two	are	one	and	the	same.
He	snarled	as	he	hurried	up	the	worn	stone	stairs.	She	was	far	below.
Chained.	A	prisoner	in	her	solitary	cell.	There	was	no	escape	for	her.
I	have	left	her	down	there,	far	below.	Far	behind.	She	can’t	escape.
Yet,	in	his	mind,	he	heard	her	laughter.
And	was	no	longer	so	sure.
	
Two	entire	wings	of	the	Eternal	Domicile	were	empty,	long,	vacated	corridors
and	never-occupied	chambers,	storage	rooms,	administration	vaults,	servant
quarters	and	kitchens.	Guards	patrolling	these	sections	once	a	day	carried	their
own	lanterns,	and	left	unrelieved	darkness	in	their	wake.	In	the	growing	damp
of	these	unoccupied	places,	dust	had	become	mould,	mould	had	become	rot,
and	the	rot	in	turn	leaked	rank	fluids	that	ran	down	plastered	walls	and	pooled
in	dips	in	the	floors.
Abandonment	and	neglect	would	soon	defeat	the	ingenious	innovations	of
Bugg’s	Construction,	as	they	defeated	most	things	raised	by	hands	out	of	the
earth,	and	Turudal	Brizad,	the	Errant,	considered	himself	almost	unique	in	his
fullest	recognition	of	such	sordid	truths.	Indeed,	there	were	other	elders
persisting	in	their	nominal	existence,	but	they	one	and	all	fought	still	against
the	ravages	of	inevitable	dissolution.	Whereas	the	Errant	could	not	be
bothered.
Most	of	the	time.
The	Jaghut	had	come	to	comprehend	the	nature	of	futility,	inspiring	the


Errant	to	a	certain	modicum	of	empathy	for	those	most	tragic	of	people.
Where	was	Gothos	now,	he	wondered.	Probably	long	dead,	all	things
considered.	He	had	written	a	multiple-volumed	suicide	note	–	his	Folly	–	that
presumably	concluded	at	some	point,	although	the	Errant	had	neither	seen	nor
heard	that	such	a	conclusion	existed.	Perhaps,	he	considered	with	sudden
suspicion,	there	was	some	hidden	message	in	a	suicidal	testimonial	without
end,	but	if	so,	such	meaning	was	too	obscure	for	the	mind	of	anyone	but	a
Jaghut.
He	had	followed	the	Warlock	King	to	the	dead	Azath,	remained	there	long
enough	to	discern	Hannan	Mosag’s	intentions,	and	had	now	returned	to	the
Eternal	Domicile,	where	he	could	walk	these	empty	corridors	in	peace.
Contemplating,	among	other	things,	stepping	once	again	into	the	fray.	To
battle,	one	more	time,	the	ravages	of	dissolution.
He	thought	he	could	hear	Gothos	laughing,	somewhere.	But	no	doubt	that
was	only	his	imagination,	ever	eager	to	mock	his	carefully	reasoned	impulses.
Finding	himself	in	a	stretch	of	corridor	awash	with	slime-laden	water,	the
Errant	paused.	‘Well,’	he	said	with	a	soft	sigh,	‘to	bring	a	journey	to	a	close,
one	must	first	begin	it.	Best	I	act	whilst	the	will	remains.’
His	next	step	took	him	into	a	glade,	thick	verdant	grasses	underfoot,	a	ring
of	dazzling	flowers	at	the	very	edges	of	the	black-boled	trees	encircling	the
clearing.	Butterflies	danced	from	one	bloom	of	colour	to	the	next.	The	patch	of
sky	visible	overhead	was	faintly	tinted	vermilion	and	the	air	seemed	strangely
thin.
A	voice	spoke	behind	him.	‘I	do	not	welcome	company	here.’
The	Errant	turned.	He	slowly	cocked	his	head.	‘It’s	not	often	the	sight	of	a
woman	inspires	fear	in	my	soul.’
She	scowled.	‘Am	I	that	ugly,	Elder?’
‘To	the	contrary,	Menandore.	Rather…formidable.’
‘You	have	trespassed	into	my	place	of	refuge.’	She	paused,	then	asked,
‘Does	it	so	surprise	you,	that	one	such	as	myself	needs	refuge?’
‘I	do	not	know	how	to	answer	that,’	he	replied.
‘You’re	a	careful	one,	Errant.’
‘I	suspect	you	want	a	reason	to	kill	me.’
She	walked	past	him,	long	black	sarong	flowing	from	frayed	ends	and
ragged	tears.	‘Abyss	below,’	she	murmured,	‘am	I	so	transparent?	Who	but	you
could	have	guessed	that	I	require	justification	for	killing?’
‘So	your	sense	of	sarcasm	has	survived	your	solitude,	Menandore.	It	is
what	I	am	ever	accused	of,	isn’t	it?	My…random	acts.’
‘Oh,	I	know	they’re	not	random.	They	only	seem	that	way.	You	delight	in


tragic	failure,	which	leads	me	to	wonder	what	you	want	with	me?	We	are	not
well	suited,	you	and	I.’
‘What	have	you	been	up	to	lately?’	he	asked.
‘Why	should	I	tell	you?’
‘Because	I	have	information	to	impart,	which	you	will	find…well	suited	to
your	nature.	And	I	seek	recompense.’
‘If	I	deny	it	you	will	have	made	this	fraught	journey	for	nothing.’
‘It	will	only	be	fraught	if	you	attempt	something	untoward,	Menandore.’
‘Precisely.’
Her	unhuman	eyes	regarded	him	steadily.
He	waited.
‘Sky	keeps,’	she	said.
‘Ah,	I	see.	Has	it	begun,	then?’
‘No,	but	soon.’
‘Well,	you	are	not	one	to	act	without	long	preparation,	so	I	am	not	that
surprised.	And	which	side	will	we,	eventually,	find	you	on,	Menandore?’
‘Why,	mine	of	course.’
‘You	will	be	opposed.’
One	thin	brow	arched.
The	Errant	glanced	around.	‘A	pleasant	place.	What	warren	are	we	in?’
‘You	would	not	believe	me	if	I	told	you.’
‘Ah,’	he	nodded,	‘that	one.	Very	well,	your	sisters	conspire.’
‘Not	against	me,	Errant.’
‘Not	directly,	or,	rather,	not	immediately.	Rest	assured,	however,	that	the
severing	of	your	head	from	your	shoulders	is	the	eventual	goal.’
‘Has	she	been	freed,	then?’
‘Imminent.’
‘And	you	will	do	nothing?	What	of	the	others	in	that	fell	city?’
Others?	‘Mael	is	being…Mael.	Who	else	hides	in	Letheras,	barring	your
two	sisters?’
‘Sisters,’	she	said,	then	sneered	as	she	turned	away,	walked	to	one	edge	of
the	glade,	where	she	crouched	and	plucked	a	flower.	Facing	him	once	more,
she	lifted	the	flower	to	draw	deep	its	scent.
From	the	snapped	stem,	thick	red	blood	dripped	steadily.
I’ve	indeed	heard	it	said	that	beauty	is	the	thinnest	skin.
She	suddenly	smiled.	‘Why,	no-one.	I	misspoke.’
‘You	invite	me	to	a	frantic	and	no	doubt	time-devouring	search	to	prove
your	ingenuousness,	Menandore.	What	possible	reason	could	you	have	to	set
me	on	such	a	trail?’


She	shrugged.	‘Serves	you	right	for	infringing	upon	my	place	of	refuge,
Errant.	Are	we	done	here?’
‘Your	flower	is	bled	out,’	he	said,	as	he	stepped	back,	and	found	himself
once	more	in	the	empty,	flooded	corridor	of	the	Eternal	Domicile’s	fifth	wing.
Others.	The	bitch.
	
As	soon	as	the	Errant	vanished	from	the	glade,	Menandore	flung	the	wilted
flower	to	one	side,	and	two	figures	emerged	from	the	forest,	one	from	her	left,
the	other	from	her	right.
Menandore	arched	her	back	as	she	ran	both	hands	through	her	thick	red
hair.
Both	figures	paused	to	watch.
She	had	known	they	would.	‘You	heard?’	she	asked,	not	caring	which	one
answered.
Neither	did.	Menandore	dropped	her	pose	and	scowled	over	to	the
scrawny,	shadow-swarmed	god	to	her	left.	‘That	cane	is	an	absurd	affectation,
you	know.’
‘Never	mind	my	absurd	affectations,	woman.	Blood	dripping	from	a
flower,	for	Hood’s	sake	–	oops—’	The	god	known	as	Shadowthrone	tilted	a
head	towards	the	tall,	cowled	figure	opposite.	‘Humblest	apologies,	Reaper.’
Hood,	Lord	of	Death,	seemed	to	cock	his	head	as	if	surprised.	‘Yours?’
‘Apologies?	Naturally	not.	I	but	made	a	declarative	statement.	Was	there	a
subject	attached	to	it?	No.	We	three	fell	creatures	have	met,	have	spoken,	have
agreed	on	scant	little,	and	have	concluded	that	our	previous	impressions	of
each	other	proved	far	too…generous.	Nonetheless,	it	seems	we	are	agreed,
more	or	less,	on	the	one	matter	you,	Hood,	wanted	to	address.	It’s	no	wonder
you’re	so	ecstatic.’
Menandore	frowned	at	the	Lord	of	Death,	seeking	evidence	of	ecstasy.
Finding	none,	she	eyed	Shadowthrone	once	more.	‘Know	that	I	have	never
accepted	your	claim.’
‘I’m	crushed.	So	your	sisters	are	after	you.	What	a	dreadful	family	you
have.	Want	help?’
‘You	too?	Recall	my	dismissal	of	the	Errant.’
Shadowthrone	shrugged.	‘Elders	think	too	slowly.	My	offer	is	of	another
magnitude.	Think	carefully	before	you	reject	it.’
‘And	what	do	you	ask	in	return?’
‘Use	of	a	gate.’
‘Which	gate?’


Shadowthrone	giggled,	then	the	eerie	sound	abruptly	stopped,	and	in	a
serious	tone	he	said,	‘Starvald	Demelain.’
‘To	what	end?’
‘Why,	providing	you	with	assistance,	of	course.’
‘You	want	my	sisters	out	of	the	way,	too	–	perhaps	more	than	I	do.
Squirming	on	that	throne	of	yours,	are	you?’
‘Convenient	convergence	of	desires,	Menandore.	Ask	Hood	about	such
things,	especially	now.’
‘If	I	give	you	access	to	Starvald	Demelain,	you	will	use	it	more	than	once.’
‘Not	I.’
‘Do	you	so	vow?’
‘Why	not?’
‘Foolish,’	Hood	said	in	a	rasp.
‘I	hold	you	to	that	vow,	Shadowthrone,’	Menandore	said.
‘Then	you	accept	my	help?’
‘As	you	do	mine	in	this	matter.	Convergence	of	desires,	you	said.’
‘You’re	right,’	Shadowthrone	said.	‘I	retract	all	notions	of	“help”.	We	are
mutually	assisting	one	another,	as	fits	said	convergence;	and	once	finished	with
the	task	at	hand,	no	other	obligations	exist	between	us.’
‘That	is	agreeable.’
‘You	two,’	Hood	said,	turning	away,	‘are	worse	than	advocates.	And	you
don’t	want	to	know	what	I	do	with	the	souls	of	advocates.’	A	heartbeat	later	and
the	Lord	of	Death	was	gone.
Menandore	frowned.	‘Shadowthrone,	what	are	advocates?’
‘A	profession	devoted	to	the	subversion	of	laws	for	profit,’	he	replied,	his
cane	inexplicably	tapping	as	he	shuffled	back	into	the	woods.	‘When	I	was
Emperor,	I	considered	butchering	them	all.’
‘So	why	didn’t	you?’	she	asked	as	he	began	to	fade	into	a	miasma	of
gloom	beneath	the	trees.
Faintly	came	the	reply,	‘The	Royal	Advocate	said	it’d	be	a	terrible
mistake.’
Menandore	was	alone	once	again.	She	looked	around,	then	grunted.	‘Gods,
I	hate	this	place.’	A	moment	later	she	too	vanished.
	
Janall,	once	Empress	of	the	Lether	Empire,	was	now	barely	recognizable	as	a
human.	Brutally	used	as	a	conduit	of	the	chaotic	power	of	the	Crippled	God,
her	body	had	been	twisted	into	a	malign	nightmare,	bones	bent,	muscles
stretched	and	bunched,	and	now,	huge	bulges	of	fat	hung	in	folds	from	her


malformed	body.	She	could	not	walk,	could	not	even	lift	her	left	arm,	and	the
sorcery	had	broken	her	mind,	the	madness	burning	from	eyes	that	glittered
malevolently	in	the	gloom	as	Nisall,	carrying	a	lantern,	paused	in	the	doorway.
The	chamber	was	rank	with	sweat,	urine	and	other	suppurations	from	the
countless	oozing	sores	on	Janall’s	skin;	the	sweet	reek	of	spoiled	food,	and
another	odour,	pungent,	that	reminded	the	Emperor ’s	Concubine	of	rotting
teeth.
Janall	dragged	herself	forward	with	a	strange,	asymmetrical	shift	of	her
hips,	pivoting	on	her	right	arm.	The	motion	made	a	sodden	sound	beneath	her,
and	Nisall	saw	the	streams	of	saliva	easing	out	from	the	once-beautiful
woman’s	misshapen	mouth.	The	floor	was	pooled	in	the	mucus	and	it	was	this,
she	realized,	that	was	the	source	of	the	pungent	smell.
Fighting	back	nausea,	the	Concubine	stepped	forward.	‘Empress.’
‘No	longer!’	The	voice	was	ragged,	squeezed	out	from	a	deformed	throat,
and	drool	spattered	with	every	jerk	of	her	misshapen	jaw.	‘I	am	Queen!	Of	his
House,	his	honeyed	House	–	oh,	we	are	a	contented	family,	oh	yes,	and	one
day,	one	day	soon,	you’ll	see,	that	pup	on	the	throne	will	come	here.	For	me,
his	Queen.	You,	whore,	you’re	nothing	–	the	House	is	not	for	you.	You	blind
Rhulad	to	the	truth,	but	his	vision	will	clear,	once,’	her	voice	dropped	to	a
whisper	and	she	leaned	forward,	‘we	are	rid	of	you.’
‘I	came,’	Nisall	said,	‘to	see	if	you	needed	anything—’
‘Liar.	You	came	in	search	of	allies.	You	think	to	steal	him	away.	From	me.
From	our	true	master.	You	will	fail!	Where’s	my	son?	Where	is	he?’
Nisall	shook	her	head.	‘I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	even	know	if	he’s	still	alive	–
there	are	those	in	the	court	who	claim	he	is,	whilst	others	tell	me	he	is	long
dead.	But,	Empress,	I	will	seek	to	find	out.	And	when	I	do,	I	will	return.	With
the	truth.’
‘I	don’t	believe	you.	You	were	never	my	ally.	You	were	Ezgara’s	whore,
not	mine.’
‘Has	Turudal	Brizad	visited	you,	Empress?’
For	a	moment	it	seemed	she	would	not	answer.	Then	she	managed
something	like	a	shrug.	‘He	does	not	dare.	Master	sees	through	my	eyes	–	tell
Rhulad	that,	and	he	will	understand	what	must	be.	Through	my	eyes	–	look
closer,	if	you	would	know	a	god.	The	god.	The	only	god	that	matters	now.	The
rest	of	them	are	blind,	as	blind	as	you’ve	made	Rhulad,	but	they’re	all	in	for	a
surprise,	oh	yes.	The	House	is	big	–	bigger	than	you	imagine.	The	House	is	all
of	us,	whore,	and	one	day	that	truth	will	be	proclaimed,	so	that	all	will	hear.
See	me?	I	am	on	my	knees,	and	that	is	no	accident.	Every	human	shall	be	on
their	knees,	one	day,	and	they	will	know	me	for	their	Queen.	As	for	the	King	in


Chains,’	she	laughed,	a	sound	thick	with	phlegm,	‘well,	the	crown	is	indifferent
to	whose	skull	it	binds.	The	pup	is	failing,	you	know.	Failing.	There	is…
dissatisfaction.	I	should	kill	you,	now,	here.	Come	closer,	whore.’
Instead,	Nisall	backed	away	a	step,	then	two,	until	she	was	once	more	in	the
doorway.	‘Empress,	the	Chancellor	is	the	source	of	Rhulad’s…failings.	Your
god	should	know	that,	lest	it	make	a	mistake.	If	you	would	kill	anyone,	it
should	be	Triban	Gnol,	and,	perhaps,	Karos	Invictad	–	they	plot	to	usurp	the
Edur.’
‘The	Edur?’	She	spat.	‘Master ’s	almost	done	with	them.	Almost	done.’
‘I	will	send	servants	down,’	Nisall	said.	‘To	clean	your	chamber,	Empress.’
‘Spies.’
‘No,	from	your	own	entourage.’
‘Turned.’
‘Empress,	they	will	take	care	of	you,	for	their	loyalty	remains.’
‘But	I	don’t	want	them!’	Janall	hunched	lower.	‘I	don’t	want	them…to	see
me	like	this.’
‘A	bed	will	be	sent	down.	Canopied.	You	can	draw	the	shroud	when	they
arrive.	Pass	out	the	soiled	bedding	through	a	part	in	the	curtain.’
‘You	would	do	this?	I	wanted	you	dead.’
‘The	past	is	nothing,’	Nisall	said.	‘Not	any	more.’
‘Get	out,’	Janall	rasped,	looking	away.	‘Master	is	disgusted	with	you.
Suffering	is	our	natural	state.	A	truth	to	proclaim,	and	so	I	shall,	when	I	win	my
new	throne.	Get	out,	whore,	or	come	closer.’
‘Expect	your	servants	within	the	bell,’	Nisall	said,	turning	and	walking
from	the	grisly	chamber.
	
As	the	echo	of	the	whore’s	footsteps	faded,	Janall,	Queen	of	the	House	of
Chains,	curled	up	into	a	ball	on	the	slick,	befouled	floor.	Madness	flickered	in
her	eyes,	there,	then	gone,	then	there	once	more.	Over	and	over	again.	She
spoke,	one	voice	thick,	the	other	rasping.
‘Vulnerable.’
‘Until	the	final	war.	Watch	the	army,	as	it	pivots	round,	entirely	round.
These	sordid	games	here,	the	times	are	almost	past,	past	us	all.	Oh,	when	the
pain	at	last	ends,	then	you	shall	see	the	truth	of	me.	Dear	Queen,	my	power	was
once	the	sweetest	kiss.	A	love	that	broke	nothing.’
‘Give	me	my	throne.	You	promised.’
‘Is	it	worth	it?’
‘I	beg	you—’


‘They	all	beg	me,	and	call	it	prayer.	What	sour	benediction	must	I	swallow
from	this	eternal	fount	of	dread	and	spite	and	bald	greed?	Will	you	never	see?
Never	understand?	I	must	find	the	broken	ones,	just	do	not	expect	my	reach,
my	touch.	No-one	understands,	how	the	gods	fear	freedom.	No-one.’
‘You	have	lied	to	me.’
‘You	have	lied	to	yourself.	You	all	do,	and	call	it	faith.	I	am	your	god.	I	am
what	you	made	me.	You	all	decry	my	indifference,	but	I	assure	you,	you	would
greater	decry	my	attention.	No,	make	no	proclamations	otherwise.	I	know	what
you	claim	to	do	in	my	name.	I	know	your	greatest	fear	is	that	I	will	one	day
call	you	on	it	–	and	that	is	the	real	game	here,	this	knuckles	of	the	soul.	Watch
me,	mortal,	watch	me	call	you	on	it.	Every	one	of	you.’
‘My	god	is	mad.’
‘As	you	would	have	me,	so	I	am.’
‘I	want	my	throne.’
‘You	always	want.’
‘Why	won’t	you	give	it	to	me?’
‘I	answer	as	a	god:	if	I	give	you	what	you	want,	we	all	die.	Hah,	I	know	–
you	don’t	care!	Oh,	you	humans,	you	are	something	else.	You	make	my	every
breath	agony.	And	my	every	convulsion	is	your	ecstasy.	Very	well,	mortal,	I
will	answer	your	prayers.	I	promise.	Just	do	not	ever	say	I	didn’t	warn	you.	Do
not.	Ever.’
Janall	laughed,	spraying	spit.	‘We	are	mad,’	she	whispered.	‘Oh	yes,	quite
mad.	And	we’re	climbing	into	the	light…’
	
For	all	the	scurrying	servants	and	the	motionless,	helmed	guards	at	various
entrances,	Nisall	found	the	more	populated	areas	of	the	Eternal	Domicile	in
some	ways	more	depressing	than	the	abandoned	corridors	she’d	left	behind	a
third	of	a	bell	past.	Suspicion	soured	the	air,	fear	stalked	like	shadows
underfoot	between	the	stanchions	of	torchlight.	The	palace’s	name	had
acquired	a	taint	of	irony,	rife	as	the	Eternal	Domicile	was	with	paranoia,
intrigue	and	incipient	betrayal.	As	if	humans	could	manage	no	better,	and	were
doomed	to	such	sordid	existence	for	all	time.
Clearly,	there	was	nothing	satisfying	in	peace,	beyond	the	freedom	it
provided	to	get	up	to	no	good.	She	had	been	shaken	by	her	visit	to	the
supposedly	insane	once-empress,	Janall.	This	Crippled	God	indeed	lurked	in
the	woman’s	eyes	–	Nisall	had	seen	it,	felt	that	chilling,	unhuman	attention
fixing	on	her,	calculating,	pondering	her	potential	use.	She	did	not	want	to	be
part	of	a	god’s	plans,	especially	that	god’s.	Even	more	frightening,	Janall’s


ambitions	remained,	engorged	with	visions	of	supreme	power,	her	tortured,
brutalized	body	notwithstanding.	The	god	was	using	her	as	well.
There	were	rumours	of	war	hissing	like	wind	in	the	palace,	tales	of	a
belligerent	conspiracy	of	border	kingdoms	and	tribes	to	the	east.	The
Chancellor ’s	reports	to	Rhulad	had	been	anything	but	simple	in	their
exhortations	to	raise	the	stakes.	A	formal	declaration	of	war,	the	marching	of
massed	troops	over	the	borders	in	a	pre-emptive	campaign	of	conquest.	Far
better	to	spill	blood	on	their	lands	than	on	Letherii	soil,	after	all.	‘If	the
Bolkando-led	alliance	wants	war,	we	should	give	it	to	them.’	The	Chancellor ’s
glittering	eyes	belied	the	cool,	almost	toneless	enunciation	of	those	words.
Rhulad	had	fidgeted	on	his	throne,	muttering	his	unease	–	the	Edur	were
too	spread	out,	the	K’risnan	were	overworked.	Why	did	the	Bolkandans	so
dislike	him?	There	had	been	no	list	of	grievances.	He	had	done	nothing	to
spark	this	fire	to	life.
Triban	Gnol	had	pointed	out,	quietly,	that	four	agents	of	the	conspiracy	had
been	captured	entering	Letheras	only	the	other	day.	Disguised	as	merchants
seeking	ivory.	Karos	Invictad	had	sent	by	courier	their	confessions	and	would
the	Emperor	like	to	see	them?
Shaking	his	head	in	denial,	Rhulad	had	said	nothing,	his	pain-racked	eyes
fixed	on	the	tiles	of	the	dais	beyond	his	slippered	feet.
So	lost,	this	terrible	Emperor.
As	she	turned	onto	the	corridor	leading	to	her	private	chambers,	she	saw	a
tall	figure	standing	near	her	door.	A	Tiste	Edur,	one	of	the	few	who	were
resident	in	the	palace.	She	vaguely	recalled	the	warrior ’s	having	something	to
do	with	security.
He	tilted	his	head	in	greeting	as	she	approached.	‘First	Concubine	Nisall.’
‘Has	the	Emperor	sent	you?’	she	asked,	stepping	past	and	waving	him
behind	her	into	the	chambers.	Few	men	could	intimidate	her	–	she	knew	too
well	their	minds.	She	was	less	at	ease	in	the	company	of	women,	and	the
virtually	neutered	men	such	as	Triban	Gnol.
‘Alas,’	the	warrior	said,	‘I	am	not	permitted	to	speak	to	my	Emperor.’
She	paused	and	glanced	back	at	him.	‘Are	you	out	of	favour?’
‘I	have	no	idea.’
Intrigued	now,	Nisall	regarded	the	Edur	for	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘Would
you	like	some	wine?’
‘No,	thank	you.	Were	you	aware	that	a	directive	has	been	issued	by
Invigilator	Karos	Invictad	to	compile	evidence	leading	to	your	arrest	for
sedition?’
She	grew	very	still.	Sudden	heat	flashed	through	her,	then	she	felt	cold,


beads	of	sweat	like	ice	against	her	skin.	‘Are	you	here,’	she	whispered,	‘to
arrest	me?’
His	brows	rose.	‘No,	nothing	of	the	sort.	The	very	opposite,	in	fact.’
‘You	wish,	then,	to	join	in	my	treason?’
‘First	Concubine,	I	do	not	believe	you	are	engaged	in	any	seditious	acts.
And	if	you	are,	I	doubt	they	are	directed	against	Emperor	Rhulad.’
She	frowned.	‘If	not	the	Emperor,	then	whom?	And	how	could	it	be
considered	treasonous	if	they	are	not	aimed	at	Rhulad?	Do	you	think	I	resent
the	Tiste	Edur	hegemony?	Precisely	whom	am	I	conspiring	against?’
‘If	I	was	forced	to	hazard	a	guess…Chancellor	Triban	Gnol.’
She	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then,	‘What	do	you	want?’
‘Forgive	me.	My	name	is	Bruthen	Trana.	I	was	appointed	to	oversee	the
operations	of	the	Patriotists,	although	it	is	likely	that	the	Emperor	has	since
forgotten	that	detail.’
‘I	am	not	surprised.	You’ve	yet	to	report	to	him.’
He	grimaced.	‘True.	The	Chancellor	has	made	certain	of	that.’
‘He	insists	you	report	to	him	instead,	yes?	I’m	beginning	to	understand,
Bruthen	Trana.’
‘Presumably,	Triban	Gnol’s	assurances	that	he	has	conveyed	said	reports
to	Rhulad	are	false.’
‘The	only	reports	the	Emperor	receives	regarding	the	Patriotists	are	those
from	the	Invigilator,	as	vetted	through	the	Chancellor.’
He	sighed.	‘As	I	suspected.	First	Concubine,	it	is	said	your	relationship
with	the	Emperor	has	gone	somewhat	beyond	that	of	ruler	and	chosen	whore	–
forgive	me	for	the	use	of	that	term.	Rhulad	is	being	isolated	–	from	his	own
people.	Daily	he	receives	petitions,	but	they	are	all	from	Letherii,	and	those	are
carefully	selected	by	Triban	Gnol	and	his	staff.	This	situation	had	worsened
since	the	fleets	sailed,	for	with	them	went	Tomad	Sengar	and	Uruth,	and	many
other	Hiroth,	including	Rhulad’s	brother,	Binadas.	All	who	might	have
effectively	opposed	the	Chancellor ’s	machinations	were	removed	from	the
scene.	Even	Hanradi	Khalag…’	His	words	fell	away	and	he	stared	at	her,	then
shrugged.	‘I	must	speak	to	the	Emperor,	Nisall.	Privately.’
‘I	may	not	be	able	to	help	you,	if	I	am	to	be	arrested,’	she	said.
‘Only	Rhulad	himself	can	prevent	that	from	occurring,’	Bruthen	Trana
said.	‘In	the	meantime,	I	can	afford	you	some	protection.’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘How?’
‘I	will	assign	you	two	Edur	bodyguards.’
‘Ah,	so	you	are	not	entirely	alone,	Bruthen.’
‘The	only	Edur	truly	alone	here	is	the	Emperor.	And,	perhaps,	Hannan


Mosag,	although	he	still	has	his	K’risnan	–	but	it	is	anything	but	certain	that	the
once-Warlock	King	is	loyal	to	Rhulad.’
Nisall	smiled	without	much	humour.	‘And	so	it	turns	out,’	she	said,	‘that	the
Tiste	Edur	are	no	different	from	the	Letherii	after	all.	Do	you	know,	Rhulad
would	have	it…otherwise.’
‘Perhaps,	then,	First	Concubine,	we	can	work	together	to	help	him	realize
his	vision.’
‘Your	bodyguards	had	best	be	subtle,	Bruthen.	The	Chancellor ’s	spies
watch	me	constantly.’
The	Edur	smiled.	‘Nisall,	we	are	children	of	Shadow…’
	
Once,	long	ago,	she	had	walked	for	a	time	through	Hood’s	Realm.	In	the
language	of	the	Eleint,	the	warren	that	was	neither	new	nor	Elder	was	known	as
Festal’rythan,	the	Layers	of	the	Dead.	She	had	found	proof	of	that	when
traversing	the	winding	cut	of	a	gorge,	the	raw	walls	of	which	revealed
innumerable	strata	evincing	the	truth	of	extinction.	Every	species	that	ever
existed	was	trapped	in	the	sediments	of	Festal’rythan,	not	in	the	same	manner
of	similar	formations	of	geology	as	could	be	found	in	any	world;	no,	in
Hood’s	Realm,	the	soul	sparks	persisted,	and	what	she	was	witness	to	was	their
‘lives’,	abandoned	here,	crushed	into	immobility.	The	stone	itself	was,	in	the
peculiar	oxymoron	that	plagued	the	language	of	death,	alive.
In	the	broken	grounds	surrounding	the	lifeless	Azath	of	Letheras,	many	of
those	long-extinct	creatures	had	crawled	back	through	the	gate,	as	insidious	as
any	vermin.	True,	it	was	not	a	gate	as	such,	just…rents,	fissures,	as	if	some
terrible	demon	had	slashed	from	both	sides,	talons	the	size	of	two-handed
swords	tearing	through	the	fabric	between	the	warrens.	There	had	been	battles
here,	the	spilling	of	ascendant	blood,	the	uttering	of	vows	that	could	not	be
kept.	She	could	still	smell	the	death	of	the	Tarthenal	gods,	could	almost	hear
their	outrage	and	disbelief,	as	one	fell,	then	another,	and	another…until	all
were	gone,	delivered	unto	Festal’rythan.	She	did	not	pity	them.	It	was	too	easy
to	be	arrogant	upon	arriving	in	this	world,	to	think	that	none	could	challenge
the	unleashing	of	ancient	power.
She	had	long	since	discovered	a	host	of	truths	in	time’s	irresistible
progression.	Raw	became	refined,	and	with	refinement,	power	grew	ever
deadlier.	All	that	was	simple	would,	in	time	and	under	sufficient	pressure	–	and
if	random	chance	proved	benign	rather	than	malignant	–	acquire	greater
complexity.	And	yet,	at	some	point,	a	threshold	was	crossed,	and	complexity
crumbled	into	dissolution.	There	was	nothing	fixed	in	this;	some	forms	rose


and	fell	with	astonishing	rapidity,	while	others	could	persist	for
extraordinarily	long	periods	in	seeming	stasis.
Thus,	she	believed	she	comprehended	more	than	most,	yet	found	that	she
could	do	little	with	that	knowledge.	Standing	in	the	overgrown,	battered	yard,
her	cold	unhuman	eyes	fixed	on	the	malformed	shape	squatting	at	the	edge	of
the	largest	sundered	barrow,	she	could	see	through	to	the	chaos	inside	him,
could	see	how	it	urged	dissolution	within	that	complex	matrix	of	flesh,	blood
and	bone.	Pain	radiated	from	his	hunched,	twisted	back	as	she	continued
studying	him.
He	had	grown	aware	of	her	presence,	and	fear	whispered	through	him,	the
sorcery	of	the	Crippled	God	building.	Yet	he	was	uncertain	if	she	presented	a
threat.	In	the	meantime,	ambition	rose	and	fell	like	crashing	waves	around	the
island	of	his	soul.
She	could,	she	decided,	make	use	of	this	one.
‘I	am	Hannan	Mosag,’	the	figure	said	without	turning.	‘You…you	are
Soletaken.	The	cruellest	of	the	Sisters,	accursed	among	the	Edur	pantheon.
Your	heart	is	betrayal.	I	greet	you,	Sukul	Ankhadu.’
She	approached.	‘Betrayal	belongs	to	the	one	buried	beneath,	Hannan
Mosag,	to	the	Sister	you	once	worshipped.	How	much,	Edur,	did	that	shape
your	destiny,	I	wonder?	Any	betrayals	plaguing	your	people	of	late?	Ah,	I	saw
that	flinch.	Well,	then,	neither	of	us	should	be	surprised.’
‘You	work	to	free	her.’
‘I	always	worked	better	with	Sheltatha	Lore	than	I	did	with	Menandore…
although	that	may	not	be	the	case	now.	The	buried	one	has	her…obsessions.’
The	Tiste	Edur	grunted.	‘Don’t	we	all.’
‘How	long	have	you	known	your	most	cherished	protectress	was	entombed
here?’
‘Suspicions.	For	years.	I	had	thought	–	hoped	–	that	I	would	discover	what
remained	of	Scabandari	Bloodeye	here	as	well.’
‘Wrong	ascendant,’	Sukul	Ankhadu	said,	her	tone	droll.	‘Had	you	got	it
right	as	to	who	betrayed	whom	back	then,	you	would	have	known	that.’
‘I	hear	the	contempt	in	your	voice.’
‘Why	are	you	here?	So	impatient	as	to	add	your	power	to	the	rituals	I
unleashed	below?’
‘It	may	be,’	Hannan	Mosag	said,	‘that	we	could	work	together…for	a	time.’
‘What	would	be	the	value	in	that?’
The	Tiste	Edur	shifted	to	look	up	at	her.	‘It	seems	obvious.	Even	now,
Silchas	Ruin	hunts	for	the	one	I’d	thought	here.	I	doubt	that	either	you	or
Sheltatha	Lore	would	be	pleased	should	he	succeed.	I	can	guide	you	onto	his


trail.	I	can	also	lend	you…support,	at	the	moment	of	confrontation.’
‘And	in	return?’
‘For	one,	we	can	see	an	end	to	your	killing	and	eating	citizens	in	the	city.
For	another,	we	can	destroy	Silchas	Ruin.’
She	grunted.	‘I	have	heard	that	determination	voiced	before,	Hannan
Mosag.	Is	the	Crippled	God	truly	prepared	to	challenge	him?’
‘With	allies…yes.’
She	considered	his	proposal.	There	would	be	treachery,	but	it	would
probably	not	occur	until	after	Ruin	was	disposed	of	–	the	game	would	turn
over	the	disposition	of	the	Finnest.	She	well	knew	that	Scabandari	Bloodeye’s
power	was	not	as	it	once	was,	and	what	remained	would	be	profoundly
vulnerable.	‘Tell	me,	does	Silchas	Ruin	travel	alone?’
‘No.	He	has	a	handful	of	followers,	but	of	them,	only	one	is	cause	for
concern.	A	Tiste	Edur,	the	eldest	brother	of	the	Sengar,	once	commander	of	the
Edur	Warriors.’
‘A	surprising	alliance.’
‘Shaky	is	a	better	way	of	describing	it.	He	too	seeks	the	Finnest,	and	will,	I
believe,	do	all	he	can	to	prevent	its	falling	into	Ruin’s	hands.’
‘Ah,	expedience	plagues	us	all.’	Sukul	Ankhadu	smiled.	‘Very	well,	Hannan
Mosag.	We	are	agreed,	but	tell	your	Crippled	God	this:	fleeing	at	the	moment
of	attack,	abandoning	Sheltatha	Lore	and	myself	to	Silchas	Ruin	and,	say,
making	off	with	the	Finnest	during	the	fight,	will	prove	a	fatal	error.	With	our
dying	breaths,	we	will	tell	Silchas	Ruin	all	he	needs	to	know,	and	he	will	come
after	the	Crippled	God,	and	he	will	not	relent.’
‘You	will	not	be	abandoned,	Sukul	Ankhadu.	As	for	the	Finnest	itself,	do
you	wish	to	claim	it	for	yourselves?’
She	laughed.	‘To	fight	over	it	between	us?	No,	we’d	rather	see	it
destroyed.’
‘I	see.	Would	you	object,	then,	to	the	Crippled	God’s	making	use	of	its
power?’
‘Will	such	use	achieve	eventual	destruction?’
‘Oh	yes,	Sukul	Ankhadu.’
She	shrugged.	‘As	you	like.’	You	must	truly	think	me	a	fool,	Hannan
Mosag.	‘Your	god	marches	to	war	–	he	will	need	all	the	help	he	can	get.’
Hannan	Mosag	managed	his	own	smile,	a	twisted,	feral	thing.	‘He	is
incapable	of	marching.	He	does	not	even	crawl.	The	war	comes	to	him,	Sister.’
If	there	was	hidden	significance	to	that	distinction,	Sukul	Ankhadu	was
unable	to	discern	it.	Her	gaze	lifted,	fixed	on	the	river	to	the	south.	Wheeling
gulls,	strange	islands	of	sticks	and	grasses	spinning	on	the	currents.	And,	she


could	sense,	beneath	the	swirling	surface,	enormous,	belligerent	leviathans,
using	the	islands	as	bait.	Whatever	came	close	enough…
She	was	drawn	to	a	rumble	of	power	from	the	broken	barrow	and	looked
down	once	more.	‘She’s	coming,	Hannan	Mosag.’
‘Shall	I	leave?	Or	will	she	be	amenable	to	our	arrangement?’
‘On	that,	Edur,	I	cannot	speak	for	her.	Best	you	depart	–	she	will,	after	all,
be	very	hungry.	Besides,	she	and	I	have	much	to	discuss…old	wounds	to	mend
between	us.’
She	watched	as	the	malformed	warlock	dragged	himself	away.	After	all,
you	are	much	more	her	child	than	you	are	mine,	and	I’d	rather	she	was,	for	the
moment,	without	allies.
It	was	all	Menandore’s	doing,	anyway.


Chapter	Six

The	argument	was	this:	a	civilization	shackled	to	the	strictures	of
excessive	control	on	its	populace,	from	choice	of	religion	through	to
the	production	of	goods,	will	sap	the	will	and	the	ingenuity	of	its
people	–	for	whom	such	qualities	are	no	longer	given	sufficient
incentive	or	reward.	At	face	value,	this	is	accurate	enough.	Trouble
arrives	when	the	opponents	to	such	a	system	institute	its	extreme
opposite,	where	individualism	becomes	godlike	and	sacrosanct,	and	no
greater	service	to	any	other	ideal	(including	community)	is	possible.	In
such	a	system	rapacious	greed	thrives	behind	the	guise	of	freedom,	and
the	worst	aspects	of	human	nature	come	to	the	fore,	a	kind	of
intransigence	as	fierce	and	nonsensical	as	its	maternalistic	counterpart.
And	so,	in	the	clash	of	these	two	extreme	systems,	one	is	witness	to
brute	stupidity	and	blood-splashed	insensitivity;	two	belligerent	faces
glowering	at	each	other	across	the	unfathomed	distance,	and	yet,	in
deed	and	in	fanatic	regard,	they	are	but	mirror	reflections.
This	would	be	amusing	if	it	weren’t	so	pathetically	idiotic…
In	Defence	of	Compassion
Denabaris	of	Letheras,	4th	century
Dead	pirates	were	better,	Shurq	Elalle	mused.	There	was	a	twisted	sort	of
justice	in	the	dead	preying	upon	the	living,	especially	when	it	came	to	stealing
all	their	treasured	possessions.	Her	pleasure	in	prying	those	ultimately
worthless	objects	from	their	hands	was	the	sole	reason	for	her	criminal
activities,	more	than	sufficient	incentive	to	maintain	her	new-found	profession.
Besides,	she	was	good	at	it.
The	hold	of	the	Undying	Gratitude	was	filled	with	the	cargo	from	the
abandoned	Edur	ship,	the	winds	were	fresh	and	steady,	pushing	them	hard
north	out	of	the	Draconean	Sea,	and	it	looked	as	if	the	huge	fleet	in	her	wake
was	not	getting	any	closer.
Edur	and	Letherii	ships,	a	hundred,	maybe	more.	They’d	come	out	of	the


southwest,	driving	at	a	converging	angle	towards	the	sea	lane	that	led	to	the
mouth	of	the	Lether	River.	The	same	lane	that	Shurq	Elalle’s	ship	now	tracked,
as	well	as	two	merchant	scows	the	Undying	Gratitude	was	fast	overhauling.
And	that	last	detail	was	too	bad,	since	those	Pilott	scows	were	ripe	targets,	and
without	a	mass	of	Imperial	ships	crawling	up	her	behind,	she’d	have	pounced.
Cursing,	Skorgen	Kaban	limped	up	to	where	she	stood	at	the	aft	rail.	‘It’s
that	infernal	search,	ain’t	it?	The	two	main	fleets,	or	what’s	left	of	’em.’	The
first	mate	leaned	over	the	rail	and	spat	down	into	the	churning	foam	skirling
out	from	the	keel.	‘They’re	gonna	be	nipping	our	tails	all	the	way	into	Letheras
harbour.’
‘That’s	right,	Pretty,	which	means	we	have	to	stay	nice.’
‘Aye.	Nothing	more	tragic	than	staying	nice.’
‘We’ll	get	over	it,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.	‘Once	we’re	in	the	harbour,	we	can
sell	what	we	got,	hopefully	before	the	fleet	arrives	to	do	the	same	–	because
then	the	price	will	drop,	mark	my	words.	Then	we	head	back	out.	There’ll	be
more	Pilott	scows,	Skorgen.’
‘You	don’t	think	that	fleet	came	up	on	the	floating	wreck,	do	you?	They’ve
got	every	stretch	of	canvas	out,	like	maybe	they	was	chasing	us.	We	get	to	the
mouth	and	we’re	trapped,	Captain.’
‘Well,	you	have	a	point	there.	If	they	were	truly	scattered	by	that	storm,	a
few	of	them	could	have	come	up	on	the	wreck	before	it	went	under.’	She
thought	for	a	time,	then	said,	‘Tell	you	what.	We’ll	sail	past	the	mouth.	And	if
they	ignore	us	and	head	upriver,	we	can	come	round	and	follow	them	in.	But
that	means	they’ll	offload	before	we	will,	which	means	we	won’t	make	as
much—’
‘Unless	their	haul	ain’t	going	to	market,’	the	first	mate	cut	in.	‘Could	be	it’s
all	to	replenish	the	royal	vaults,	Captain,	or	maybe	it	goes	to	the	Edur	and
nobody	else.	Blood	and	Kagenza,	after	all.	We	could	always	find	a	coastal	port
and	do	our	selling	there.’
‘You	get	wiser	with	every	body	part	you	lose,	Pretty.’
He	grunted.	‘Gotta	be	some	kind	of	upside.’
‘That’s	the	attitude,’	she	replied.	‘All	right,	that’s	what	we’ll	do,	but	never
mind	the	coastal	port	–	they’re	all	dirt	poor	this	far	north,	surrounded	by
nothing	but	wilderness	and	bad	roads	where	the	bandits	line	up	to	charge	tolls.
And	if	a	few	Edur	galleys	take	after	us,	we	can	always	scoot	straight	up	to	that
hold-out	prison	isle	this	side	of	Fent	Reach	–	that’s	a	tight	harbour	mouth,	or
so	I’ve	been	told,	and	they	got	a	chain	to	keep	the	baddies	out.’
‘Pirates	ain’t	baddies?’
‘Not	as	far	as	they’re	concerned.	The	prisoners	are	running	things	now.’


‘I	doubt	it’ll	be	that	easy,’	Skorgen	muttered.	‘We’d	just	be	bringing
trouble	down	on	them	–	it’s	not	like	the	Edur	couldn’t	have	conquered	them
long	ago.	They	just	can’t	be	bothered.’
‘Maybe,	maybe	not.	The	point	is,	we’ll	run	out	of	food	and	water	if	we
can’t	resupply	somewhere.	Edur	galleys	are	fast,	fast	enough	to	stay	with	us.
Anywhere	we	dock	they’ll	be	on	us	before	the	last	line	is	drawn	to	the	bollard.
With	the	exception	of	the	prison	isle.’	She	scowled.	‘It’s	a	damned	shame.	I
wanted	to	go	home	for	a	bit.’
‘Then	we’d	best	hope	the	whole	damned	fleet	back	there	heads	upriver,’
Skorgen	the	Pretty	said,	scratching	round	an	eye	socket.
‘Hope	and	pray	–	you	pray	to	any	gods,	Skorgen?’
‘Sea	spirits,	mostly.	The	Face	Under	the	Waves,	the	Guardian	of	the
Drowned,	the	Swallower	of	Ships,	the	Stealer	of	Winds,	the	Tower	of	Water,
the	Reef	Hiders,	the—’
‘All	right,	Pretty,	that’ll	do.	You	can	keep	your	host	of	disasters	to
yourself…just	make	sure	you	do	all	the	propitiations.’
‘Thought	you	didn’t	believe	in	all	that,	Captain.’
‘I	don’t.	But	it	never	hurts	to	make	sure.’
‘One	day	their	names	will	rise	from	the	water,	Captain,’	Skorgen	Kaban
said,	making	a	complicated	warding	gesture	with	his	one	remaining	hand.	‘And
with	them	the	seas	will	lift	high,	to	claim	the	sky	itself.	And	the	world	will
vanish	beneath	the	waves.’
‘You	and	your	damned	prophecies.’
‘Not	mine.	Fent.	Ever	see	their	early	maps?	They	show	a	coast	leagues	out
from	what	it	is	now.	All	their	founding	villages	are	under	hundreds	of	spans	of
water.’
‘So	they	believe	their	prophecy	is	coming	true.	Only	it’s	going	to	take	ten
thousand	years.’
His	shrug	was	lopsided.	‘Could	be,	Captain.	Even	the	Edur	claim	that	the
ice	far	to	the	north	is	breaking	up.	Ten	thousand	years,	or	a	hundred.	Either
way,	we’ll	be	long	dead	by	then.’
Speak	for	yourself,	Pretty.	Then	again,	what	a	thought.	Me	wandering	round
on	the	sea	bottom	for	eternity.	‘Skorgen,	get	young	Burdenar	down	from	the
crow’s	nest	and	into	my	cabin.’
The	first	mate	made	a	face.	‘Captain,	you’re	wearing	him	out.’
‘I	ain’t	heard	him	complain.’
‘Of	course	not.	We’d	all	like	to	be	as	lucky	–	your	pardon,	Captain,	for	me
being	too	forward,	but	it’s	true.	I	was	serious,	though.	You’re	wearing	him	out,
and	he’s	the	youngest	sailor	we	got.’


‘Right,	meaning	I’d	probably	kill	the	rest	of	you.	Call	him	down,	Pretty.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
She	stared	back	at	the	distant	ships.	The	long	search	was	over,	it	seemed.
What	would	they	be	bringing	back	to	fair	Letheras,	apart	from	casks	of	blood?
Champions.	Each	one	convinced	they	can	do	what	no	other	has	ever	managed.
Kill	the	Emperor.	Kill	him	dead,	deader	than	me,	so	dead	he	never	gets	back	up.
Too	bad	that	would	never	happen.
	
On	his	way	out	of	Letheras,	Venitt	Sathad,	Indebted	servant	to	Rautos	Hivanar,
halted	the	modest	train	outside	the	latest	addition	to	the	Hivanar	holdings.	The
inn’s	refurbishment	was	well	under	way,	he	saw,	as,	accompanied	by	the	owner
of	the	construction	company	under	hire,	he	made	his	way	past	the	work	crews
crowding	the	main	building,	then	out	back	to	where	the	stables	and	other
outbuildings	stood.
Then	stopped.
The	structure	that	had	been	raised	round	the	unknown	ancient	mechanism
had	been	taken	down.	Venitt	stared	at	the	huge	monolith	of	unknown	metal,
wondering	why,	now	that	it	had	been	exposed,	it	looked	so	familiar.	The
edifice	bent	without	a	visible	seam,	three-quarters	of	the	way	up	–	at	about	one
and	a	half	times	his	own	height	–	a	seemingly	perfect	ninety	degrees.	The	apex
looked	as	if	it	awaited	some	kind	of	attachment,	if	the	intricate	loops	of	metal
were	anything	more	than	decorative.	The	object	stood	on	a	platform	of	the
same	peculiar,	dull	metal,	and	again	there	was	no	obvious	separation	between	it
and	the	platform	itself.
‘Have	you	managed	to	identify	its	purpose?’	Venitt	asked	the	old,	mostly
bald	man	at	his	side.
‘Well,’	Bugg	conceded,	‘I	have	some	theories.’
‘I	would	be	interested	in	hearing	them.’
‘You	will	find	others	in	the	city,’	Bugg	said.	‘No	two	alike,	but	the	same
nonetheless,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.’
‘No,	I	don’t,	Bugg.’
‘Same	manufacture,	same	mystery	as	to	function.	I’ve	never	bothered
actually	mapping	them,	but	it	may	be	that	there	is	some	kind	of	pattern,	and
from	that	pattern,	the	purpose	of	their	existence	might	be	comprehended.
Possibly.’
‘But	who	built	them?’
‘No	idea,	Venitt.	Long	ago,	I	suspect	–	the	few	others	I’ve	seen	myself	are
mostly	underground,	and	further	out	towards	the	river	bank.	Buried	in	silts.’


‘In	silts…’	Venitt	continued	staring,	then	his	eyes	slowly	widened.	He
turned	to	the	old	man.	‘Bugg,	I	have	a	most	important	favour	to	ask	of	you.	I
must	continue	on	my	way,	out	of	Letheras.	I	need	a	message	delivered,
however,	back	to	my	master.	To	Rautos	Hivanar.’
Bugg	shrugged.	‘I	see	no	difficulty	managing	that,	Venitt.’
‘Good.	Thank	you.	The	message	is	this:	he	must	come	here,	to	see	this	for
himself.	And	–	and	this	is	most	important	–	he	must	bring	his	collection	of
artifacts.’
‘Artifacts?’
‘He	will	understand,	Bugg.’
‘All	right,’	the	old	man	said.	‘I	can	get	over	there	in	a	couple	of	days…or	I
can	send	a	runner	if	you	like.’
‘Best	in	person,	Bugg,	if	you	would.	If	the	runner	garbles	the	message,	my
master	might	end	up	ignoring	it.’
‘As	you	like,	Venitt.	Where,	may	I	ask,	are	you	going?’
The	Indebted	scowled.	‘Bluerose,	and	then	on	to	Drene.’
‘A	long	journey	awaits	you,	Venitt.	May	it	prove	dull	and	uneventful.’
‘Thank	you,	Bugg.	How	go	things	here?’
‘We’re	waiting	for	another	shipment	of	materials.	When	that	arrives,	we
can	finish	up.	Your	master	has	pulled	another	of	my	crews	over	for	that
shoring-up	project	at	his	estate,	but	until	the	trusses	arrive	that’s	not	as
inconvenient	as	it	might	be.’	He	glanced	at	Venitt.	‘Do	you	have	any	idea	when
Hivanar	will	be	finished	with	all	of	that?’
‘Strictly	speaking,	it’s	not	shoring-up	–	although	that	is	involved.’	He
paused,	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘More	of	a	scholarly	pursuit.	Master	is	extending
bulwarks	out	into	the	river,	then	draining	and	pumping	the	trenches	clear	so
that	the	crews	can	dig	down	through	the	silts.’
Bugg	frowned.	‘Why?	Is	he	planning	to	build	a	breakwater	or	a	pier?’
‘No.	He	is	recovering…artifacts.’
Venitt	watched	the	old	man	look	back	at	the	edifice,	and	saw	the	watery
eyes	narrow.	‘I	wouldn’t	mind	seeing	those.’
‘Some	of	your	foremen	and	engineers	have	done	just	that…but	none	were
able	to	work	out	their	function.’	And	yes,	they	are	linked	to	this	thing	here.	In
fact,	one	piece	is	a	perfect	replica	of	this,	only	on	a	much	smaller	scale.	‘When
you	deliver	your	message,	you	can	ask	to	see	what	he’s	found,	Bugg.	I	am	sure
he	would	welcome	your	observations.’
‘Perhaps,’	the	old	man	said	distractedly.
‘Well,’	Venitt	said.	‘I	had	best	be	going.’
‘Errant	ignore	you,	Venitt	Sathad.’


‘And	you,	Bugg.’
‘If	only…’
That	last	statement	was	little	more	than	a	whisper,	and	Venitt	glanced	back
at	Bugg	as	he	crossed	the	courtyard	on	his	way	out.	A	peculiar	thing	to	say.
But	then,	old	men	were	prone	to	such	eccentricities.
	
Dismounting,	Atri-Preda	Bivatt	began	walking	among	the	wreckage.	Vultures
and	crows	clambered	about	from	one	bloated	body	to	the	next,	as	if	confused
by	such	a	bounteous	feast.	Despite	the	efforts	of	the	carrion	eaters,	it	was	clear
to	her	that	the	nature	of	the	slaughter	was	unusual.	Huge	blades,	massive	fangs
and	talons	had	done	the	damage	to	these	hapless	settlers,	soldiers	and	drovers.
And	whatever	had	killed	these	people	had	struck	before	–	the	unit	of	cavalry
that	had	pursued	Redmask	from	Drene’s	North	Gate	had	suffered	an	identical
fate.
In	her	wake	strode	the	Edur	Overseer,	Brohl	Handar.	‘There	are	demons,’
he	said,	‘capable	of	this.	Such	as	those	the	K’risnan	conjured	during	the	war…
although	they	rarely	use	teeth	and	claws.’
Bivatt	halted	near	a	dead	hearth.	She	pointed	to	a	sweep	of	dirt	beside	it.
‘Do	your	demons	leave	tracks	such	as	these?’
The	Edur	warrior	came	to	her	side.	‘No,’	he	said	after	a	moment.	‘This	has
the	appearance	of	an	oversized,	flightless	bird.’
‘Oversized?’	She	glanced	over	at	him,	then	resumed	her	walk.
Her	soldiers	were	doing	much	the	same,	silent	as	they	explored	the
devastated	encampment.	Outriders,	still	mounted,	were	circling	the	area,
keeping	to	the	ridge	lines.
The	rodara	and	myrid	herds	had	been	driven	away,	their	tracks	clearly
visible	heading	east.	The	rodara	herd	had	gone	first,	and	the	myrid	had	simply
followed.	It	was	possible,	if	the	Letherii	detachment	rode	hard,	that	they	would
catch	up	to	the	myrid.	Bivatt	suspected	the	raiders	would	not	lag	behind	to	tend
to	the	slower-moving	beasts.
‘Well,	Atri-Preda?’	Brohl	Handar	asked	from	behind	her.	‘Do	we	pursue?’
She	did	not	turn	round.	‘No.’
‘The	Factor	will	be	severely	displeased	by	your	decision.’
‘And	that	concerns	you?’
‘Not	in	the	least.’
She	said	nothing.	The	Overseer	was	growing	more	confident	in	his
appointment.	More	confident,	or	less	cautious	–	there	had	been	contempt	in	the
Tiste	Edur ’s	tone.	Of	course,	that	he	had	chosen	to	accompany	this	expedition


was	evidence	enough	of	his	burgeoning	independence.	For	all	of	that,	she
almost	felt	sorry	for	the	warrior.
‘If	this	Redmask	is	conjuring	demons	of	some	sort,’	Brohl	Handar
continued,	‘then	we	had	best	move	in	strength,	accompanied	by	both	Letherii
and	Edur	mages.	Accordingly,	I	concur	with	your	decision.’
‘It	pleases	me	that	you	grasp	the	military	implications	of	this,	Overseer.
Even	so,	in	this	instance	even	the	desires	of	the	Factor	are	of	no	importance	to
me.	I	am	first	and	foremost	an	officer	of	the	empire.’
‘You	are,	and	I	am	the	Emperor ’s	representative	in	this	region.	Thus.’
She	nodded.
A	few	heartbeats	later	the	Tiste	Edur	sighed.	‘It	grieves	me	to	see	so	many
slain	children.’
‘Overseer,	we	are	no	less	thorough	when	slaying	the	Awl.’
‘That,	too,	grieves	me.’
‘Such	is	war,’	she	said.
He	grunted,	then	said,	‘Atri-Preda,	what	is	happening	on	these	plains	is	not
simply	war.	You	Letherii	have	initiated	a	campaign	of	extermination.	Had	we
Edur	elected	to	cross	that	threshold,	would	you	not	have	called	us	barbarians	in
truth?	You	do	not	hold	the	high	ground	in	this	conflict,	no	matter	how	you	seek
to	justify	your	actions.’
‘Overseer,’	Bivatt	said	coldly,	‘I	care	nothing	about	justifications,	nor
moral	high	ground.	I	have	been	a	soldier	too	long	to	believe	such	things	hold
any	sway	over	our	actions.	Whatever	lies	in	our	power	to	do,	we	do.’	She
gestured	at	the	destroyed	encampment	around	them.	‘Citizens	of	Lether	have
been	murdered.	It	is	my	responsibility	to	give	answer	to	that,	and	so	I	shall.’
‘And	who	will	win?’	Brohl	Handar	asked.
‘We	will,	of	course.’
‘No,	Atri-Preda.	You	will	lose.	As	will	the	Awl.	The	victors	are	men	such
as	Factor	Letur	Anict.	Alas,	such	people	as	the	Factor	view	you	and	your
soldiers	little	differently	from	how	they	view	their	enemies.	You	are	to	be	used,
and	this	means	that	many	of	you	will	die.	Letur	Anict	does	not	care.	He	needs
you	to	win	this	victory,	but	beyond	that	his	need	for	you	ends…until	a	new
enemy	is	found.	Tell	me,	do	empires	exist	solely	to	devour?	Is	there	no	value
in	peace?	In	order	and	prosperity	and	stability	and	security?	Are	the	only
worthwhile	rewards	the	stacks	of	coin	in	Letur	Anict’s	treasury?	He	would
have	it	so	–	all	the	rest	is	incidental	and	only	useful	if	it	serves	him.	Atri-Preda,
you	are	in	truth	less	than	an	Indebted.	You	are	a	slave	–	I	am	not	wrong	in	this,
for	I	am	a	Tiste	Edur	who	possesses	slaves.	A	slave,	Bivatt,	is	how	Letur	Anict
and	his	kind	see	you.’


‘Tell	me,	Overseer,	how	would	you	fare	without	your	slaves?’
‘Poorly,	no	doubt.’
She	turned	about	and	walked	back	to	her	horse.	‘Mount	up.	We’re	returning
to	Drene.’
‘And	these	dead	citizens	of	the	empire?	Do	you	leave	their	bodies	to	the
vultures?’
‘In	a	month	even	the	bones	will	be	gone,’	Bivatt	said,	swinging	onto	her
horse	and	gathering	the	reins.	‘The	whittle	beetles	will	gnaw	them	all	to	dust.
Besides,	there	is	not	enough	soil	to	dig	proper	graves.’
‘There	are	stones,’	Brohl	Handar	noted.
‘Covered	in	Awl	glyphs.	To	use	them	would	be	to	curse	the	dead.’
‘Ah,	so	the	enmity	persists,	so	that	even	the	ghosts	war	with	each	other.	It	is
a	dark	world	you	inhabit,	Atri-Preda.’
She	looked	down	at	him	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Are	the	shadows	any
better,	Overseer?’	When	he	made	no	reply,	she	said,	‘On	your	horse,	sir,	if	you
please.’
	
The	Ganetok	encampment,	swollen	with	the	survivors	of	the	Sevond	and
Niritha	clans,	sprawled	across	the	entire	valley.	Beyond	to	the	east	loomed	vast
dun-hued	clouds	from	the	main	herds	in	the	next	few	valleys.	The	air	was	gritty
with	dust	and	the	acrid	smell	of	hearth	fires.	Small	bands	of	warriors	moved
back	and	forth	like	gangs	of	thugs,	weapons	bristling,	their	voices	loud.
Outriders	had	made	contact	with	Redmask	and	his	paltry	tribe	earlier	in	the
day,	yet	had	kept	their	distance,	seemingly	more	interested	in	the	substantial
herd	of	rodara	trailing	the	small	group.	An	unexpected	wealth	for	so	few	Awl,
leaving	possession	open	to	challenge,	and	it	was	clear	to	Redmask	as	he	drew
rein	on	a	rise	overlooking	the	encampment	that	word	had	preceded	them,
inciting	countless	warriors	into	bold	challenge,	one	and	all	coveting	rodara
and	eager	to	strip	the	beasts	away	from	the	mere	handful	of	Renfayar	warriors.
Alas,	he	would	have	to	disappoint	them.	‘Masarch,’	he	now	said,	‘remain
here	with	the	others.	Accept	no	challenges.’
‘No-one	has	come	close	enough	to	see	your	mask,’	the	youth	said.	‘No-one
suspects	what	you	seek,	War	Leader.	As	soon	as	they	do,	we	shall	be	under
siege.’
‘Do	you	fear,	Masarch?’
‘Dying?	No,	not	any	more.’
‘Then	you	are	a	child	no	longer.	Wait,	do	nothing.’	Redmask	nudged	his
horse	onto	the	slope,	gathering	it	into	a	collected	canter	as	he	approached	the


Ganetok	encampment.	Eyes	fixed	on	him,	then	held,	as	shouts	rose,	the	voices
more	angry	than	shocked.	Until	the	nearer	warriors	made	note	of	his	weapons.
All	at	once	a	hush	fell	over	the	encampment,	rippling	in	a	wave,	and	in	its	wake
rose	a	murmuring,	the	anger	he	had	first	heard	only	now	with	a	deeper	timbre.
Dray	dogs	caught	the	burgeoning	rage	and	drew	closer,	fangs	bared	and
hackles	stiff.
Redmask	reined	in.	His	Letherii	horse	tossed	its	head	and	stamped,
snorting	to	warn	off	the	huge	dogs.
Someone	was	coming	through	the	gathered	crowd,	like	the	prow	of	an
unseen	ship	pushing	through	tall	reeds.	Settling	back	on	the	foreign	saddle,
Redmask	waited.
Hadralt,	firstborn	son	to	Capalah,	walked	with	his	father ’s	swagger	but	not
his	physical	authority.	He	was	short	and	lean,	reputedly	very	fast	with	the	hookbladed	shortswords	cross-strapped	beneath	each	arm.	Surrounding	him	were	a
dozen	of	his	favoured	warriors,	huge,	hulking	men	whose	faces	had	been
painted	in	a	simulacrum	of	scales,	copper	in	tone	yet	clearly	intended	to	echo
Redmask’s	own.	The	expressions	beneath	that	paint	were	now	ones	of	chagrin.
His	hands	restless	around	the	fetishes	lining	his	belt,	Hadralt	glowered	up
at	Redmask.	‘If	you	are	who	you	claim	to	be,	then	you	do	not	belong	here.
Leave,	or	your	blood	will	feed	the	dry	earth.’
Redmask	let	his	impassive	gaze	slide	over	the	copper-faced	warriors.	‘You
mouth	the	echoes,	yet	quail	from	the	source.’	He	looked	once	more	upon	the
war	leader.	‘I	am	before	you	now,	Hadralt	son	of	Capalah.	Redmask,	war
leader	of	the	Renfayar	clan,	and	on	this	day	I	will	kill	you.’
The	dark	eyes	widened,	then	Hadralt	sneered.	‘Your	life	was	a	curse,
Redmask.	You	have	not	yet	earned	the	right	to	challenge	me.	Tell	me,	will	your
pathetically	few	pups	fight	for	you?	Your	ambition	will	see	them	all	killed,	and
my	warriors	shall	take	the	Renfayar	herds.	And	the	Renfayar	women	–	but	only
of	bearing	age.	The	children	and	elders	will	die,	for	they	are	burdens	we	will
not	abide.	The	Renfayar	shall	cease	to	be.’
‘For	your	warriors	to	gain	the	right	to	challenge	my	kin,	Hadralt,	they
must	first	defeat	my	own	champions.’
‘And	where	are	they	hiding,	Redmask?	Unless	you	mean	that	scarred	dray
that	followed	you	in.’
The	laughter	at	that	jest	was	overloud.
Redmask	glanced	back	at	the	lone	beast.	Lying	on	the	ground	just	to	the
right	of	the	horse,	it	had	faced	down	all	the	other	dogs	in	the	area	without	even
rising.	The	dray	lifted	its	head	and	met	Redmask’s	eyes,	as	if	the	animal	not
only	comprehended	the	words	that	had	been	spoken,	but	also	welcomed	the


opportunity	to	face	every	challenger.	He	felt	something	stir	in	his	chest.	‘This
beast	understands	courage,’	he	said,	facing	Hadralt	once	more.	‘Would	that	I
had	ten	thousand	warriors	to	match	it.	Yet	all	I	see	before	me	is	you,	Hadralt,
war	leader	of	ten	thousand	cowards.’
The	clamour	that	erupted	then	seemed	to	blister	the	air.	Weapons	flashed
into	sunlight,	the	massed	crowd	edging	in.	A	sea	of	faces	twisted	with	rage.
Hadralt	had	gone	pale.	Then	he	raised	his	arms	and	held	them	high	until	the
outcry	fell	away.	‘Every	warrior	here,’	he	said	in	a	trembling	voice,	‘shall	take
a	piece	of	your	hide,	Redmask.	They	deserve	no	less	in	answer	to	your	words.
You	seek	to	take	my	place?	You	seek	to	lead?	Lead…these	cowards?	You	have
learned	nothing	in	your	exile.	Not	a	warrior	here	will	follow	you	now,
Redmask.	Not	one.’
‘You	hired	an	army,’	Redmask	said,	unable	to	keep	the	contempt	from	his
tone.	‘You	marched	at	their	sides	against	the	Letherii.	And	then,	when	the	battle
was	offered	and	your	new-found	allies	were	engaged	–	fighting	for	you	–	you
all	fled.	Cowards?	That	is	too	kind	a	word.	In	my	eyes,	Hadralt,	you	and	your
people	are	not	Awl,	not	any	more,	for	no	true	Awl	warrior	would	do	such	a
thing.	I	came	upon	their	bodies.	I	was	witness	to	your	betrayal.	The	truth	is	this.
When	I	am	war	leader	here,	before	this	day’s	sun	touches	the	horizon,	it	will
fall	to	every	warrior	present	to	prove	his	worth,	to	earn	the	right	to	follow	me.
And	I	shall	not	be	easy	to	convince.	Copper	paint	on	the	faces	of	cowards	–	no
greater	insult	could	you	have	delivered	to	me.’
‘Climb	down,’	Hadralt	said	in	a	rasp.	‘Down	off	that	Letherii	nag.	Climb
down,	Redmask,	to	meet	your	end.’
Instead	he	drew	out	a	hollowed	rodara	horn	and	lifted	it	to	his	lips.	The
piercing	blast	silenced	all	in	the	encampment	except	for	the	dogs,	which	began
a	mournful	howling	in	answer.	Redmask	replaced	the	horn	at	his	belt.	‘It	is	the
way	of	time,’	he	said,	loud	enough	for	his	voice	to	carry,	‘for	old	enemies	to
find	peace	in	the	passing	of	ages.	We	have	fought	many	wars,	yet	it	was	the
first	that	holds	still	in	the	memory	of	the	Awl,	here	in	this	very	earth.’	He
paused,	for	he	could	feel	the	reverberation	beneath	him	–	as	did	others	now	–
as	the	two	K’Chain	Che’Malle	approached	in	answer	to	his	call.	‘Hadralt,	son
of	Capalah,	you	are	about	to	stand	alone,	and	you	and	I	shall	draw	our
weapons.	Prepare	yourself.’
From	the	ridge,	where	stood	the	modest	line	of	Renfayar	warriors,	six	in
all,	two	other	shapes	loomed	into	view,	huge,	towering.	Then,	in	liquid	motion,
the	pair	flowed	down	the	slope.
Silence	hung	heavy,	beyond	the	thump	of	taloned	feet,	and	hands	that	had
rested	on	the	grips	and	pommels	of	weapons	slowly	fell	away.


‘My	champions,’	said	Redmask.	‘They	are	ready	for	your	challengers,
Hadralt.	For	your	copper-faces.’
The	war	leader	said	nothing,	and	Redmask	could	see	in	the	warrior ’s
expression	that	he	would	not	risk	losing	the	force	of	his	words,	when	his
commands	were	disobeyed	–	as	they	would	be,	a	truth	of	which	all	who	were
present	were	now	aware.	Destiny	awaited,	then,	in	this	solitary	clash	of	wills.
Hadralt	licked	his	lips.	‘Redmask,	when	I	have	killed	you,	what	then	of
these	Kechra?’
Making	no	reply,	Redmask	dismounted,	walking	to	halt	six	paces	in	front
of	Hadralt.	He	unlimbered	the	rygtha	crescent	axe	and	centred	his	grip	on	the
hafted	weapon.	‘Your	father	is	gone.	You	must	now	let	go	of	his	hand	and	stand
alone,	Hadralt.	The	first	and	last	time.	You	have	failed	as	war	leader.	You	led
Awl	warriors	to	battle,	then	led	them	in	flight.	You	betrayed	allies.	And	now,
you	hide	here	on	the	very	edge	of	the	wastelands,	rather	than	meet	the	invading
Letherii	blade	to	blade,	teeth	to	throat.	You	will	now	step	aside,	or	die.’
‘Step	aside?’	Hadralt	tilted	his	head,	then	managed	a	rictus	smile.	‘That
choice	is	not	offered	to	an	Awl	warrior.’
‘True,’	Redmask	said.	‘Only	to	elders	who	can	no	longer	defend
themselves,	or	to	those	too	broken	by	wounds.’
Hadralt	bared	his	teeth.	‘I	am	neither.’
‘Nor	are	you	an	Awl	warrior.	Did	your	father	step	aside?	No,	I	see	that	he
did	not.	He	looked	into	your	soul,	and	knew	you,	Hadralt.	And	so,	old	as	he
was,	he	fought	you.	For	his	tribe.	For	his	honour.’
Hadralt	unsheathed	his	hook-blades.	He	was	trembling	once	more.
One	of	the	copper-faces	then	spoke.	‘Capalah	ate	in	the	hut	of	his	son.	In	a
single	night	he	sickened	and	died.	In	the	morning,	his	face	was	the	colour	of
blue	lichen.’
‘Trenys’galah?’	Redmask’s	eyes	narrowed	in	the	mask’s	slits.	‘You
poisoned	your	father,	Hadralt?	Rather	than	meet	his	blades?	How	is	it	you	stand
here	at	all?’
‘Poison	has	no	name,’	muttered	the	same	copper-face.
Hadralt	said,	‘I	am	the	reason	the	Awl	still	live!	You	will	lead	them	to
slaughter,	Redmask!	We	are	not	yet	ready	to	face	the	Letherii.	I	have	been
trading	for	weapons	–	yes,	there	are	Letherii	who	believe	our	cause	is	just.	We
give	up	poor	land,	and	receive	fine	iron	weapons	–	and	now	you	come,	to	undo
all	my	plans!’
‘I	see	those	weapons,’	Redmask	said.	‘In	the	hands	of	many	of	your
warriors.	Have	they	been	tested	in	battle?	You	are	a	fool,	Hadralt,	to	believe
you	won	that	bargain.	The	traders	you	meet	are	in	the	employ	of	the	Factor	–


he	profits	on	both	sides	of	this	war—’
‘A	lie!’
‘I	was	in	Drene,’	Redmask	said,	‘less	than	two	weeks	ago.	I	saw	the	wagons
and	their	crates	of	cast-off	weapons,	the	iron	blades	that	will	shatter	at	the	first
blow	against	a	shield.	Weapons	break,	are	lost,	yet	this	is	what	you	accepted,
this	is	what	you	surrendered	land	for	–	land	home	to	the	dust	of	our	ancestors.
Home	to	Awl	spirits,	land	that	has	drunk	Awl	blood.’
‘Letherii	weapons—’
‘Must	be	taken	from	the	corpses	of	soldiers	–	those	are	the	weapons
worthy	of	the	term,	Hadralt.	If	you	must	use	their	way	of	fighting,	then	you
must	use	weapons	of	a	quality	to	match.	Lest	you	invite	your	warriors	to
slaughter.	And	this,’	he	added,	‘is	clearly	what	you	were	not	prepared	to	do.
Thus,	Hadralt,	I	am	led	to	conclude	that	you	knew	the	truth.	If	so,	then	the
traders	paid	you	in	more	than	weapons.	Did	you	share	out	the	coin,	War
Leader?	Do	your	kin	even	know	of	the	hoard	you	hide	in	your	hut?’
Redmask	watched	as	the	copper-faces	slowly	moved	away	from	Hadralt.
Recognizing	the	betrayal	their	leader	had	committed	upon	them,	upon	the	Awl.
‘You	intended	surrender,’	Redmask	continued,	‘didn’t	you?	You	were
offered	an	estate	in	Drene,	yes?	And	slaves	and	Indebted	to	do	your	bidding.
You	planned	on	selling	off	our	people,	our	history—’
‘We	cannot	win!’
Hadralt’s	last	words.	Three	sword-blades	erupted	from	his	chest,	thrust
into	his	back	by	his	own	copper-faces.	Eyes	wide	with	shock,	the	firstborn	son
and	slayer	of	Capalah,	last	worthy	leader	of	the	Ganetok,	stared	across	at
Redmask.	Hook-blades	fell	from	his	hands,	then	he	sagged	forward,	sliding
from	the	swords	with	a	ghastly	sucking	sound	almost	immediately	replaced	by
the	gush	of	blood.
Eyes	blank	now	in	death,	the	corpse	of	Hadralt	then	toppled	face-first	into
the	dust.
Redmask	returned	the	rygtha	to	its	harness.	‘Seeds	fall	from	the	crown	of
the	stalk.	What	is	flawed	there	makes	its	every	child	weak.	The	curse	of
cowardice	has	ended	this	day.	We	are	the	Awl,	and	I	am	your	war	leader.’	He
paused,	looked	round,	then	said,	‘And	so	I	shall	lead	you	to	war.’
	
On	the	ridge	overlooking	the	sprawling	encampment,	Masarch	made	a	gesture
to	sun	and	sky,	then	earth	and	wind.	‘Redmask	now	rules	the	Awl.’
Kraysos,	standing	on	his	right,	grunted	then	said,	‘Did	you	truly	doubt	he
would	succeed,	Masarch?	Kechra	guard	his	flanks.	He	is	the	charging	crest	of	a


river	of	blood,	and	he	shall	flood	these	lands.	And	even	as	the	Letherii	drown
in	it,	so	shall	we.’
‘You	cheated	the	death	night,	Kraysos,	and	so	you	still	fear	dying.’
On	Masarch’s	other	side,	Theven	snorted.	‘The	bledden	herb	had	lost	most
of	its	potency.	It	took	neither	of	us	through	the	night.	I	screamed	to	the	earth,
Masarch.	I	screamed	and	screamed.	So	did	Kraysos.	We	do	not	fear	what	is	to
come.’
‘Hadralt	was	killed	by	his	own	warriors,’	Masarch	said.	‘From	behind.
This	does	not	bode	well.’
‘You	are	wrong,’	Theven	said.	‘Redmask’s	words	have	turned	them	all.	I
did	not	think	such	a	thing	would	be	possible.’
‘I	suspect	we	will	be	saying	that	often,’	noted	Kraysos.
‘We	should	walk	down,	now,’	said	Masarch.	‘We	are	his	first	warriors,	and
behind	us	now	there	are	tens	of	thousands.’
Theven	sighed.	‘The	world	has	changed.’
‘We	will	live	a	while	longer,	you	mean.’
The	young	warrior	glanced	across	at	Masarch.	‘That	is	for	Redmask	to
decide.’
	
Brohl	Handar	rode	at	the	Atri-Preda’s	side	as	the	troop	made	its	way	down	the
trader	track,	still	half	a	day	from	Drene’s	gates.	The	soldiers	at	their	backs
were	silent,	stoking	anger	and	dreams	of	vengeance,	no	doubt.	There	had	been
elements	of	Bluerose	cavalry	stationed	in	Drene	since	shortly	after	the
annexation	of	Bluerose	itself.	As	far	as	Brohl	Handar	understood,	the
acquisition	of	Bluerose	had	not	been	as	bloodless	as	Drene	had	been.	A
complicated	religion	had	served	to	unite	disaffected	elements	of	the
population,	led	by	a	mysterious	priesthood	the	Letherii	had	been	unable	to
entirely	exterminate.	Reputedly	some	rebel	groups	still	existed,	active	mostly
in	the	mountains	lining	the	western	side	of	the	territory.
In	any	case,	the	old	Letherii	policy	of	transferring	Bluerose	units	to	distant
parts	of	the	empire	continued	under	Edur	rule,	certainly	suggesting	that	risks
remained.	Brohl	Handar	wondered	how	the	newly	appointed	Edur	overseer	in
Bluerose	was	managing,	and	he	reminded	himself	to	initiate	contact	with	his
counterpart	–	stability	in	Bluerose	was	essential,	for	any	disruption	of	Drene’s
principal	supply	route	and	trading	partner	could	prove	disastrous	if	the
situation	here	in	the	Awl’dan	ignited	into	full-out	war.
‘You	seem	thoughtful,	Overseer,’	Bivatt	said	after	a	time.
‘Logistics,’	he	replied.


‘If	by	that	you	mean	military,	such	needs	are	my	responsibility,	sir.’
‘Your	army’s	needs	cannot	be	met	in	isolation,	Atri-Preda.	If	this	conflict
escalates,	as	I	believe	it	will,	then	even	the	Factor	cannot	ensure	that	shortages
will	not	occur,	particularly	among	non-combatants	in	Drene	and	surrounding
communities.’
‘In	all-out	war,	Overseer,	the	requirements	of	the	military	always	take
precedence.	Besides,	there	is	no	reason	to	anticipate	shortages.	The	Letherii	are
well	versed	in	these	matters.	Our	entire	system	of	transport	was	honed	by	the
exigencies	of	expansion.	We	possess	the	roads,	the	necessary	sea	lanes	and
merchant	vessels.’
‘There	nonetheless	remains	a	chokepoint,’	Brohl	Handar	pointed	out.	‘The
Bluerose	Mountains.’
She	shot	him	a	startled	glance.	‘The	primary	eastward	trade	goods	through
that	range	are	slaves	and	some	luxury	foodstuffs	from	the	far	south.	Bluerose
of	course	is	renowned	for	its	mineral	wealth,	producing	a	quality	of	iron	that
rivals	Letherii	steel.	Tin,	copper,	lead,	lime	and	firerock,	as	well	as	cedar	and
spruce	–	all	in	abundance,	while	the	Bluerose	Sea	abounds	with	cod.	In	return,
Drene’s	vast	farms	annually	produce	a	surplus	harvest	of	grains.	Overseer,	you
appear	to	have	been	misinformed	with	respect	to	the	materiel	demands	in
question.	There	will	be	no	shortages—’
‘Perhaps	you	are	right.’	He	paused,	then	continued,	‘Atri-Preda,	it	is	my
understanding	that	the	Factor	has	instituted	extensive	trafficking	of	low-grade
weapons	and	armour	across	the	Bluerose	Mountains.	These	weapons	are	in
turn	sold	to	the	Awl,	in	exchange	for	land	or	at	least	the	end	of	dispute	over
land.	Over	four	hundred	broad-bed	wagonloads	have	been	shipped	thus	far.
Although	the	Factor	holds	the	tithe	seal,	no	formal	acknowledgement	nor
taxation	of	these	items	has	taken	place.	From	this,	I	can	only	assume	that	a
good	many	other	supplies	are	moving	to	and	fro	across	those	mountains,	none
with	official	approval.’
‘Overseer,	regardless	of	the	Factor ’s	smuggling	operations,	the	Bluerose
Mountains	are	in	no	way	a	chokepoint	when	it	comes	to	necessary	supplies.’
‘I	hope	you	are	right,	especially	given	the	recent	failures	of	that	route.’
‘Excuse	me?	What	failures?’
‘The	latest	shipment	of	poor	quality	war	materiel	failed	to	arrive	this	side
of	the	mountains,	Atri-Preda.	Furthermore,	brigands	struck	a	major	fortress	in
the	pass,	routing	the	Letherii	company	stationed	there.’
‘What?	I	have	heard	nothing	of	this!	An	entire	company	–	routed?’
‘So	it	seems.	Alas,	that	was	the	extent	of	the	information	provided	me.
Apart	from	the	weapons,	I	was	unsure	what	other	items	the	Factor	lost	in	that


shipment.	If,	as	you	tell	me,	there	was	nothing	more	of	consequence	to	fall	into
the	hands	of	the	brigands,	then	I	am	somewhat	relieved.’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time.	Brohl	Handar	was	aware	that	the	Atri-Preda’s
thoughts	were	racing,	perhaps	drawn	into	a	tumult	of	confusion	–	uncertainty
at	how	much	Brohl	knew,	and	by	extension	the	Tiste	Edur,	regarding	Letherii
illegalities;	and	perhaps	greater	unease	at	the	degree	to	which	she	herself	had
remained	ignorant	of	recent	events	in	Bluerose.	That	she’d	been	shaken	told
him	she	was	not	as	much	an	agent	of	Letur	Anict	as	he	had	feared.
He	decided	he	had	waited	long	enough.	‘Atri-Preda,	this	imminent	war	with
the	Awl.	Tell	me,	have	you	determined	the	complement	of	forces	you	feel	will
be	necessary	to	effect	victory?’
She	blinked,	visibly	shifting	the	path	of	her	thinking	to	address	his
question.	‘More	or	less,	Overseer.	We	believe	that	the	Awl	could,	at	best,	field
perhaps	eight	or	nine	thousand	warriors.	Certainly	not	more	than	that.	As	an
army,	they	are	undisciplined,	divisive	due	to	old	feuds	and	rivalries,	and	their
style	of	combat	is	unsuited	to	fighting	as	a	unit.	So,	easily	broken,	unprepared
as	they	are	for	any	engagement	taking	longer	than	perhaps	a	bell.	Generally,
they	prefer	to	raid	and	ambush,	keeping	to	small	troops	and	striving	to	remain
elusive.	At	the	same	time,	their	almost	absolute	dependency	on	their	herds,	and
the	vulnerability	of	their	main	camps,	will,	inevitably,	force	them	to	stand	and
fight	–	whereupon	we	annihilate	them.’
‘A	succinct	preface,’	Brohl	Handar	said.
‘To	answer	you,	we	possess	six	companies	of	the	Bluerose	Battalion	and
near	full	complement	of	the	reformed	Artisan	Battalion,	along	with
detachments	from	the	Drene	Garrison	and	four	companies	from	the	Harridict
Brigade.	To	ensure	substantial	numerical	superiority,	I	will	request	the
Crimson	Rampant	Brigade	and	at	least	half	of	the	Merchants’	Battalion.’
‘Do	you	anticipate	that	this	Redmask	will	in	any	way	modify	the	tactics
employed	by	the	Awl?’
‘No.	He	did	not	do	so	the	first	time.	The	threat	he	represents	lies	in	his
genius	for	superior	ambushes	and	appallingly	effective	raids,	especially	on
our	supply	lines.	The	sooner	he	is	killed,	the	swifter	the	end	of	the	war.	If	he
succeeds	in	evading	our	grasp,	then	we	can	anticipate	a	long	and	bloody
conflict.’
‘Atri-Preda,	I	intend	to	request	three	K’risnan	and	four	thousand	Edur
warriors.’
‘Victory	will	be	quick,	then,	Overseer,	for	Redmask	will	not	be	able	to	hide
for	long	from	your	K’risnan.’
‘Precisely.	I	want	this	war	over	as	soon	as	possible,	and	with	minimal	loss


of	life	–	on	both	sides.	Accordingly,	we	must	kill	Redmask	at	the	first
opportunity.	And	shatter	the	Awl	army,	such	as	it	is.’
‘You	wish	to	force	the	Awl	to	capitulate	and	seek	terms?’
‘Yes.’
‘Overseer,	I	will	accept	capitulation.	As	for	terms,	the	only	ones	I	will
demand	are	complete	surrender.	The	Awl	will	be	enslaved,	one	and	all.	They
will	be	scattered	throughout	the	empire	but	nowhere	near	their	traditional
homelands.	As	slaves,	they	will	be	booty,	and	the	right	to	pick	first	will	be	the
reward	I	grant	my	soldiers.’
‘The	fate	of	the	Nerek	and	the	Fent	and	the	Tarthenal.’
‘Even	so.’
‘The	notion	does	not	sit	well	with	me,	Atri-Preda.	Nor	will	it	with	any	Tiste
Edur,	including	the	Emperor.’
‘Let	us	argue	this	point	once	we	have	killed	Redmask,	Overseer.’
He	grimaced,	then	nodded.	‘Agreed.’
Brohl	Handar	silently	cursed	this	Redmask,	who	had	single-handedly	torn
through	his	hopes	for	a	cessation	of	hostilities,	for	an	equitable	peace.	Instead,
Letur	Anict	now	possessed	all	the	justification	he	needed	to	exterminate	the
Awl,	and	no	amount	of	tactical	genius	in	ambushes	and	raids	would,	in	the	end,
make	any	difference	at	all.	It	is	the	curse	of	leaders	to	believe	they	can	truly
change	the	world.
A	curse	that	has	even	afflicted	me,	it	seems.	Am	I	too	now	a	slave	to	Letur
Anict	and	those	like	him?
	
The	rage	within	him	was	the	breath	of	ice,	held	deep	and	overlong,	until	its
searing	touch	burned	in	his	chest.	Upon	hearing	the	copper-face	Natarkas’s	last
words,	he	rose	in	silent	fury	and	stalked	from	the	hut,	then	stood,	eyes
narrowed,	until	his	vision	could	adjust	to	the	moonless,	cloud-covered	night.
Nearby,	motionless	as	carved	sentinels	of	stone,	stood	his	K’Chain	Che’Malle
guardians,	their	eyes	faintly	glowing	smudges	in	the	darkness.	As	Redmask
pushed	himself	into	motion,	their	heads	turned	in	unison	to	watch	as	he	set	off
through	the	encampment.
Neither	creature	followed,	for	which	he	was	thankful.	Every	step	taken	by
the	huge	beasts	set	the	camp’s	dogs	to	howling	and	he	was	in	no	mood	for	their
brainless	cries.
Half	the	night	was	gone.	He	had	called	in	the	clan	leaders	and	the	most
senior	elders,	one	and	all	crowding	into	the	hut	that	had	once	belonged	to
Hadralt.	They	had	come	expecting	castigation,	more	condemnation	from	their


new	and	much	feared	war	leader,	but	Redmask	had	no	interest	in	further
belittling	the	warriors	now	under	his	command.	The	wounds	of	earlier	that	day
were	fresh	enough.	The	courage	they	had	lost	could	only	be	regained	in	battle.
For	all	of	Hadralt’s	faults,	he	had	been	correct	in	one	thing	–	the	old	way
of	fighting	against	the	Letherii	was	doomed	to	fail.	Yet	the	now-dead	war
leader ’s	purported	intent	to	retrain	the	Awl	to	a	mode	of	combat	identical	to
that	of	the	Letherii	was,	Redmask	told	his	followers,	also	doomed.	The
tradition	did	not	exist,	the	Awl	were	skilled	in	the	wrong	weapons,	and	loyalties
rarely	crossed	lines	of	clan	and	kin.
A	new	way	had	to	be	found.
Redmask	had	then	asked	about	the	mercenaries	that	had	been	hired,	and	the
tale	that	unfolded	had	proved	both	complicated	and	sordid,	details	teased	out
from	reluctant,	shamefaced	warriors.	Oh,	there	had	been	plenty	of	Letherii
coin	delivered	as	part	of	the	land	purchase,	and	that	wealth	had	been	originally
amassed	with	the	intent	of	hiring	a	foreign	army	–	one	that	had	been	found	on
the	borderlands	to	the	east.	But	Hadralt	had	then	grown	to	covet	all	that	gold
and	silver,	so	much	so	that	he	betrayed	that	army	–	led	them	to	their	deaths	–
rather	than	deliver	the	coin	into	their	possession.
Such	was	the	poison	that	was	coin.
Where	had	these	foreigners	come	from?
From	the	sea,	it	appeared,	a	landing	on	the	north	coast	of	the	wastelands,	in
transports	under	the	flag	of	Lamatath,	a	distant	peninsular	kingdom.	Soldier
priests	and	priestesses,	sworn	to	wolf	deities.
What	had	brought	them	to	this	continent?
Prophecy.
Redmask	had	started	at	that	answer,	which	came	from	Natarkas,	the
spokesman	among	the	copper-faces,	the	same	warrior	who	had	revealed
Hadralt’s	murder	of	Capalah.
A	prophecy,	War	Leader,	Natarkas	had	continued.	A	final	war.	They	came
seeking	a	place	they	called	the	Battlefield	of	the	Gods.	They	called	themselves
the	Grey	Swords,	the	Reve	of	Togg	and	Fanderay.	There	were	many	women
among	them,	including	one	of	the	commanders.	The	other	is	a	man,	one-eyed,
who	claims	he	has	lost	that	eye	three	times—
No,	War	Leader,	this	one	still	lives.	A	survivor	of	the	battle.	Hadralt
imprisoned	him.	He	lies	in	chains	behind	the	women’s	blood-hut—
Natarkas	had	fallen	silent	then,	recoiling	at	the	sudden	rage	he	clearly	saw
in	Redmask’s	eyes.
And	now	the	masked	war	leader	strode	through	the	Ganetok	encampment,
eastward	to	the	far	edge	where	trenches	had	been	carved	into	the	slope,	taking


away	the	wastes	of	the	Awl;	to	the	hut	of	blood	that	belonged	to	the	women,
then	behind	it,	where,	chained	to	a	stake,	slept	a	filthy	creature,	the	lower	half
of	his	battered	body	in	the	drainage	trench,	where	women’s	blood	and	urine
trickled	through	mud,	roots	and	stones	on	their	way	to	the	deep	pits	beyond.
Halting,	then,	to	stand	over	the	man,	who	awoke,	turning	his	head	to	peer
with	one	glittering	eye	up	at	Redmask.
‘Do	you	understand	me?’	the	war	leader	asked.
A	nod.
‘What	is	your	name?’
The	lone	eye	blinked,	and	the	man	reached	up	to	scratch	the	blistered	scar
tissue	around	the	empty	socket	where	his	other	eye	had	been.	He	then	grunted,
as	if	surprised,	and	struggled	into	a	sitting	position.	‘Anaster	was	my	new
name,’	he	said;	a	strange	twist	of	his	mouth	that	might	have	been	a	grin,	then
the	man	added,	‘but	I	think	my	older	name	better	suits	me,	with	a	slight
alteration,	that	is.	I	am	Toc.’	The	smile	broadened.	‘Toc	the	Unlucky.’
‘I	am	Redmask—’
‘I	know	who	you	are.	I	even	know	what	you	are.’
‘How?’
‘Can’t	help	you	there.’
Redmask	tried	again.	‘What	hidden	knowledge	of	me	do	you	think	you
possess?’
The	smile	faded,	and	the	man	looked	down,	seeming	to	study	the	turgid
stream	of	thinned	blood	round	his	knees.	‘It	made	little	sense	back	then.	Makes
even	less	sense	now.	You’re	not	what	we	expected,	Redmask.’	He	coughed,	then
spat,	careful	to	avoid	the	women’s	blood.
‘Tell	me	what	you	expected?’
Another	half-smile,	yet	Toc	would	not	look	up	as	he	said,	‘Why,	when	one
seeks	the	First	Sword	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	well,	one	assumes	it	would
be…K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Not	human.	An	obvious	assumption,	don’t	you
think?’
‘First	Sword?	I	do	not	know	this	title.’
Toc	shrugged.	‘K’ell	Champion.	Consort	to	the	Matron.	Hood	take	me,
King.	They’re	all	the	same	in	your	case.’	The	man	finally	glanced	up	once
more,	and	something	glistened	in	his	lone	eye	as	he	asked,	‘So	don’t	tell	me
the	mask	fooled	them.	Please…’
	
The	gorge	the	lone	figure	emerged	from	was	barely	visible.	Less	than	three
man-heights	across,	the	crevasse	nestled	between	two	steep	mountainsides,	half


a	league	long	and	a	thousand	paces	deep.	Travellers	thirty	paces	away,
traversing	the	raw	rock	of	the	mountain	to	either	side,	would	not	even	know
the	gorge	existed.	Of	course,	the	likelihood	of	unwitting	travellers	anywhere
within	five	leagues	of	the	valley	was	virtually	non-existent.	No	obvious	trails
wended	through	the	Bluerose	range	this	far	north	of	the	main	passes;	there
were	no	high	pastures	or	plateaux	to	invite	settlement,	and	the	weather	was
often	fierce.
Clambering	over	the	edge	of	the	gorge	into	noon	sunlight,	the	figure
paused	in	a	crouch	and	scanned	the	vicinity.	Seeing	nothing	untoward,	he
straightened.	Tall,	thin,	his	midnight-black	hair	long,	straight	and	unbound,	his
face	unlined,	the	features	somewhat	hooded,	eyes	like	firerock,	the	man
reached	into	a	fold	in	his	faded	black	hide	shirt	and	withdrew	a	length	of	thin
chain,	both	ends	holding	a	plain	finger-ring	–	one	gold,	the	other	silver.	A
quick	flip	of	his	right	index	finger	spun	the	rings	round,	then	wrapped	them
close	as	the	chain	coiled	tight.	A	moment	later	he	reversed	the	motion.	His
right	hand	thus	occupied,	coiling	and	uncoiling	the	chain,	he	set	off.
Southward	he	went,	into	and	out	of	swaths	of	shadow	and	sunlight,	his
footfalls	almost	soundless,	the	snap	of	the	chain	the	only	noise	accompanying
him.	Tied	to	his	back	was	a	horn	and	bloodwood	bow,	unstrung.	At	his	right
hip	was	a	quiver	of	arrows,	bloodwood	shafts	and	hawk-feather	fletching;	at
the	quiver ’s	moss-packed	base,	the	arrowheads	were	iron,	teardrop-shaped	and
slotted,	the	blades	on	each	head	forming	an	X	pattern.	In	addition	to	this
weapon	he	carried	a	baldric-slung	plain	rapier	in	a	silver-banded	turtleshell
scabbard.	The	entire	scabbard	and	its	fastening	rings	were	bound	with
sheepskin	to	deaden	the	noise	as	he	padded	along.	These	details	to	stealth	were
one	and	all	undermined	by	the	spinning	and	snapping	chain.
The	afternoon	waned	on,	until	he	moved	through	unbroken	shadow	as	he
skirted	the	eastern	flank	of	each	successive	valley	he	traversed,	ever
southward.	Through	it	all	the	chain	twirled,	the	rings	clacking	upon	contacting
each	other,	then	whispering	out	and	spinning	yet	again.
At	dusk	he	came	to	a	ledge	overlooking	a	broader	valley,	this	one	running
more	or	less	east–west,	whereupon,	satisfied	with	his	vantage	point,	he	settled
into	a	squat	and	waited.	Chain	whispering,	rings	clacking.
Two	thousand	spins	later,	the	rings	clattered,	then	went	still,	trapped	inside
the	fist	of	his	right	hand.	His	eyes,	which	had	held	fixed	on	the	western	mouth
of	the	pass,	unmindful	of	the	darkness,	had	caught	movement.	He	tucked	the
chain	and	rings	back	into	the	pouch	lining	the	inside	of	his	shirt,	then	rose.
And	began	the	long	descent.


The	Onyx	Wizards,	purest	of	the	blood,	had	long	since	ceased	to	struggle
against	the	strictures	of	the	prison	they	had	created	for	themselves.	Antiquity
and	the	countless	traditions	that	were	maintained	to	keep	its	memory	alive	were
the	chains	and	shackles	they	had	come	to	accept.	To	accept,	they	said,	was	to
grasp	the	importance	of	responsibility,	and	if	such	a	thing	as	a	secular	god
could	exist,	then	to	the	dwellers	of	Andara,	the	last	followers	of	the	BlackWinged	Lord,	that	god’s	name	was	Responsibility.	And	it	had,	over	the	decades
since	the	Letherii	Conquest,	come	to	rival	in	power	the	Black-Winged	Lord
himself.
The	young	archer,	nineteen	years	of	age,	was	not	alone	in	his	rejection	of
the	stolid,	outdated	ways	of	the	Onyx	Wizards.	And	like	many	of	his
compatriots	of	similar	age	–	the	first	generation	born	to	the	Exile	–	he	had
taken	a	name	for	himself	that	bespoke	the	fullest	measure	of	that	rejection.
Clan	name	cast	away,	all	echoes	of	the	old	language	–	both	the	common	tongue
and	the	priest	dialect	–	dispensed	with.	His	clan	was	that	of	the	Exiled,	now.
For	all	these	gestures	of	independence,	a	direct	command	delivered	by
Ordant	Brid,	Reve	Master	of	the	Rock	among	the	Onyx	Order,	could	not	be
ignored.
And	so	the	young	warrior	named	Clip	of	the	Exiled	had	exited	the	eternally
dark	monastery	of	Andara,	had	climbed	the	interminable	cliff	wall	and
eventually	emerged	into	hated	sunlight	to	travel	overland	beneath	the	blinded
stars	of	day,	arriving	at	an	overlook	above	the	main	pass.
The	small	party	of	travellers	he	now	approached	were	not	traders.	No
baggage	train	of	goods	accompanied	them.	No	shackled	slaves	stumbled	in
their	wake.	They	rode	Letherii	horses,	yet	even	with	the	presence	of	at	least
three	Letherii,	Clip	knew	that	this	was	no	imperial	delegation.	No,	these	were
refugees.	And	they	were	being	hunted.
And	among	them	walks	the	brother	of	my	god.
As	Clip	drew	nearer,	as	yet	unseen	by	the	travellers,	he	sensed	a	presence
flowing	alongside	him.	He	snorted	his	disgust.	‘A	slave	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	tell
me,	do	you	not	know	your	own	blood?	We	will	tear	you	free,	ghost	–
something	you	should	have	done	for	yourself	long	ago.’
‘I	am	unbound,’	came	the	hissing	reply.
‘Then	I	suppose	you	are	safe	enough	from	us.’
‘Your	blood	is	impure.’
Clip	smiled	in	the	darkness.	‘Yes,	I	am	a	cauldron	of	failures.	Nerek,
Letherii	–	even	D’rhasilhani.’


‘And	Tiste	Andii.’
‘Then	greet	me,	brother.’
Rasping	laughter.	‘He	has	sensed	you.’
‘Was	I	sneaking	up	on	them,	ghost?’
‘They	have	halted	and	now	await.’
‘Good,	but	can	they	guess	what	I	will	say	to	them?	Can	you?’
‘You	are	impertinent.	You	lack	respect.	You	are	about	to	come	face	to	face
with	Silchas	Ruin,	the	White	Crow—’
‘Will	he	bring	word	of	his	lost	brother?	No?	I	thought	not.’
Another	hiss	of	laughter.	‘Oddly	enough,	I	believe	you	will	fit	right	in	with
the	ones	you	are	about	to	meet.’
	
Seren	Pedac	squinted	into	the	gloom.	She	was	tired.	They	all	were	after	long
days	traversing	the	pass,	with	no	end	in	sight.	Silchas	Ruin’s	announcement	that
someone	was	approaching	brought	them	all	to	a	halt	beside	the	sandy	fringe	of
a	stream,	where	insects	rose	in	clouds	to	descend	upon	them.	The	horses
snorted,	tails	flicking	and	hides	rippling.
She	dismounted	a	moment	after	Silchas	Ruin,	and	followed	him	across	the
stream.	Behind	her	the	others	remained	where	they	were.	Kettle	slept	in	the
arms	of	Udinaas,	and	he	seemed	disinclined	to	move	lest	he	wake	her.	Fear
Sengar	slipped	down	from	his	horse	but	made	no	further	move.
Standing	beside	the	albino	Tiste	Andii,	Seren	could	now	hear	a	strange
swishing	and	clacking	sound,	whispering	down	over	the	tumbled	rocks
beyond.	A	moment	later	a	tall,	lean	form	appeared,	silhouetted	against	grey
stone.
A	smudge	of	deeper	darkness	flowed	out	from	his	side	to	hover	before
Silchas	Ruin.
‘Kin,’	said	the	wraith.
‘A	descendant	of	my	followers,	Wither?’
‘Oh	no,	Silchas	Ruin.’
Breath	slowly	hissed	from	the	Tiste	Andii.	‘My	brother ’s.	They	were	this
close?’
The	young	warrior	drew	closer,	his	pace	almost	sauntering.	The	tone	of
his	skin	was	dusky,	not	much	different	from	that	of	a	Tiste	Edur.	He	was
twirling	a	chain	in	his	right	hand,	the	rings	on	each	end	blurring	in	the	gloom.
‘Silchas	Ruin,’	he	said,	‘I	greet	you	on	behalf	of	the	Onyx	Order	of	Andara.	It
has	been	a	long	time	since	we	last	met	a	Tiste	Andii	not	of	our	colony.’	The
broad	mouth	quirked	slightly.	‘You	do	not	look	at	all	as	I	had	expected.’


‘Your	words	verge	on	insult,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.	‘Is	this	how	the	Onyx
Order	would	greet	me?’
The	young	warrior	shrugged,	the	chain	snapping	taut	for	a	beat,	then
spinning	out	once	more.	‘There	are	K’risnan	wards	on	the	trail	ahead	of	you	–
traps	and	snares.	Nor	will	you	find	what	you	seek	in	Bluerose,	not	the	city	itself
nor	Jasp	nor	Outbound.’
‘How	is	it	you	know	what	I	seek?’
‘He	said	you	would	come,	sooner	or	later.’
‘Who?’
Brows	rose.	‘Why,	your	brother.	He	didn’t	arrive	in	time	to	prevent	your
getting	taken	down,	nor	the	slaughter	of	your	followers—’
‘Did	he	avenge	me?’
‘A	moment,’	Seren	Pedac	cut	in.	‘What	is	your	name?’
A	white	smile.	‘Clip.	To	answer	you,	Silchas	Ruin,	he	was	not	inclined	to
murder	all	the	Tiste	Edur.	Scabandari	Bloodeye	had	been	destroyed	by	Elder
Gods.	A	curse	was	laid	upon	the	lands	west	of	here,	denying	even	death’s
release.	The	Edur	were	scattered,	assailed	by	ice,	retreating	seas	and	terrible
storms.	In	the	immediate	aftermath	of	the	Omtose	Phellack	curse,	their	survival
was	at	risk,	and	Rake	left	them	to	it.’
‘I	do	not	recall	my	brother	being	so…merciful.’
‘If	our	histories	of	that	time	are	accurate,’	Clip	said,	‘then	he	was	rather
preoccupied.	The	sundering	of	Kurald	Emurlahn.	Rumours	of	Osserc	in	the
vicinity,	a	mercurial	dalliance	with	Lady	Envy,	arguments	and	a	shaky	alliance
with	Kilmandaros,	and	then,	finally,	Silanah,	the	Eleint	who	emerged	at	his	side
from	Emurlahn	at	the	closing	of	the	gate.’
‘It	seems	much	of	that	time	is	common	knowledge	among	your	Order,’
Silchas	Ruin	observed,	his	tone	flat.	‘He	stayed	with	you	for	a	lengthy	period,
then.’
‘He	stays	nowhere	for	very	long,’	Clip	replied,	clearly	amused	by
something.
Seren	Pedac	wondered	if	the	youth	knew	how	close	he	was	to	pushing	Ruin
over	the	edge.	A	few	more	ill-chosen	words	and	Clip’s	head	would	roll	from
his	shoulders.	‘Is	it	your	mission,’	she	asked	the	Tiste	Andii,	‘to	guide	us	to	our
destination?’
Another	smile,	another	snap	of	the	chain.	‘It	is.	You	will	be,	uh,	welcomed
as	guests	of	the	Andara.	Although	the	presence	of	both	Letherii	and	Tiste	Edur
in	your	party	is	somewhat	problematic.	The	Onyx	Order	has	been	outlawed,	as
you	know,	subject	to	vicious	repression.	The	Andara	represents	the	last	secret
refuge	of	our	people.	Its	location	must	not	be	compromised.’


‘What	do	you	suggest?’	Seren	asked.
‘The	remainder	of	this	journey,’	Clip	replied,	‘will	be	through	warren.
Through	Kurald	Galain.’
Silchas	Ruin	cocked	his	head	at	that,	then	grunted,	‘I	am	beginning	to
understand.	Tell	me,	Clip,	how	many	wizards	of	the	Order	dwell	in	the
Andara?’
‘There	are	five,	and	they	are	the	last.’
‘And	can	they	agree	on	anything?’
‘Of	course	not.	I	am	here	by	the	command	of	Ordant	Brid,	Reve	Master	of
the	Rock.	My	departure	from	the	Andara	was	uneventful,	else	it	is	likely	I
would	not	be	here—’
‘Should	another	of	the	Order	have	intercepted	you.’
A	nod.	‘Can	you	wait	for	the	maelstrom	your	arrival	will	bring,	Silchas
Ruin?	I	can’t.’
‘Thus,	your	greeting	earlier	should	have	been	qualified.	The	Order	does
not	welcome	us.	Rather,	this	Ordant	Brid	does.’
‘They	all	choose	to	speak	for	the	Order,’	Clip	said,	his	eyes	glittering,
‘when	it	will	most	confound	the	others.	Now,	I	can	see	how	eager	you	all	are.’
From	his	right	hand	the	chain	whipped	out,	the	silver	ring	round	his	index
finger,	and	at	the	snap	of	the	chain’s	full	length,	a	gate	into	Darkness	appeared
to	the	warrior ’s	right.	‘Call	the	others	here,’	Clip	said,	‘at	haste.	Even	now,
bound	wraiths	serving	the	Tiste	Edur	are	converging.	Of	course,	they	all
dream	of	escape	–	alas,	that	we	cannot	give	them.	But	their	Edur	masters	watch
through	their	eyes,	and	that	won’t	do.’
Seren	Pedac	turned	about	and	summoned	the	others.
Clip	stepped	to	one	side	and	bowed	low.	‘Silchas	Ruin,	I	invite	you	to	walk
through	first,	and	know	once	more	the	welcome	embrace	of	true	Darkness.
Besides,’	he	added,	straightening	as	Ruin	strode	towards	the	gate,	‘you	will
make	for	us	a	bright	beacon—’
One	of	Silchas	Ruin’s	swords	hissed	out,	a	gleaming	blur,	the	edge
slashing	across	the	space	where	Clip’s	neck	had	been,	but	the	young	warrior
had	leaned	back…just	enough,	and	the	weapon	sang	through	air.
A	soft	laugh	from	the	youth,	appallingly	relaxed.	‘He	said	you’d	be	angry.’
Silchas	Ruin	stared	across	at	Clip	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	turned	and
walked	through	the	gate.
Drawing	a	deep	breath	to	slow	her	heart,	Seren	Pedac	glared	at	Clip.	‘You
have	no	idea—’
‘Don’t	I?’
The	others	appeared,	leading	their	horses.	Udinaas,	with	Kettle	tucked	into


one	arm,	barely	glanced	over	at	Clip	before	he	tugged	his	horse	into	the	rent.
‘You	wish	to	cross	swords	with	a	god,	Clip?’
‘He	gave	himself	away	–	oh,	he’s	fast	all	right,	and	with	two	weapons	he’d
be	hard	to	handle,	I’ll	grant	you—’
‘And	will	the	Reve	Master	who	sent	you	be	pleased	with	your	immature
behaviour?’
Clip	laughed.	‘Ordant	could	have	selected	any	of	a	hundred	warriors	at
hand	for	this	mission,	Letherii.’
‘Yet	he	chose	you,	meaning	he	is	either	profoundly	stupid	or	he	anticipated
your	irreverence.’
‘You	waste	your	time,	Acquitor,’	Fear	Sengar	said,	coming	up	alongside
her	and	eyeing	Clip.	‘He	is	Tiste	Andii.	His	mind	is	naught	but	darkness,	in
which	ignorance	and	foolishness	thrive.’
To	Fear	the	young	warrior	bowed	again.	‘Edur,	please,	proceed.	Darkness
awaits	you.’	And	he	waved	at	the	gate.
As	Fear	Sengar	led	his	horse	into	the	gate,	the	chain	on	Clip’s	right	index
finger	spun	out	once	more,	ending	with	a	clash	of	rings.
‘Why	do	you	do	that?’	Seren	demanded,	irritated.
Brows	lifted.	‘Do	what?’
Swearing	under	her	breath,	the	Acquitor	walked	through	the	gate.


Book	Two

Layers	of	the	Dead


	

Who	now	strides	on	my	trail
devouring	the	distance	between
no	matter	how	I	flee,	the	wasted
breath	of	my	haste	cast	into	the	wind
and	these	dogs	will	prevail
dragging	me	down	with	howling	glee
for	the	beasts	were	born	fated,
trained	in	bold	vengeance
by	my	own	switch	and	hand
and	no	god	will	stand	in	my	stead,
nor	provide	me	sanctuary,	even
should	I	plead	for	absolution—
the	hounds	of	my	deeds	belong
only	to	me,	and	they	have	long	hunted
and	now	the	hunt	ends.
Songs	of	Guilt
Bet’netrask
	


Chapter	Seven

Twice	as	far	as	you	think
Half	the	distance	you	fear
Too	thin	to	hold	you
and	well	over	your	head
So	much	cleverer	by	far
yet	witless	beyond	measure
will	you	hear	my	story	now?
Tales	of	the	Drunken	Bard
Fisher
Standing	at	the	rail,	Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis,	known	to	her	soldiers	as	Twilight,
watched	the	sloping	shoreline	of	the	Lether	River	track	past.	Gulls	rode	the
waves	in	the	shallows.	Fisher	boats	sculled	among	the	reeds,	the	net-casters
pausing	to	watch	the	battered	fleet	work	its	way	towards	the	harbour.	Along	the
bank	birds	crowded	the	leafless	branches	of	trees	that	had	succumbed	to	the	last
season’s	flood.	Beyond	the	dead	trees,	riders	were	on	the	coast	road,	cantering
towards	the	city	to	report	to	various	officials,	although	Yan	Tovis	was	certain
that	the	palace	had	already	been	informed	that	the	first	of	the	fleets	now
approached,	with	another	a	bare	half-day	behind.
She	would	welcome	solid	ground	beneath	her	boots	again.	And	the
presence	of	unfamiliar	faces	within	range	of	her	vision,	rather	than	these	tired
features	behind	and	to	either	side	that	she	had	come	to	know	all	too	well,	and	at
times,	she	had	to	admit,	despise.
The	last	ocean	they	had	crossed	was	far	in	their	wake	now,	and	for	that	she
was	profoundly	relieved.	The	world	had	proved…immense.	Even	the	ancient
Letherii	charts	mapping	the	great	migration	route	from	the	land	of	the	First
Empire	had	revealed	but	a	fraction	of	the	vast	expanse	that	was	this	mortal
realm.	The	scale	had	left	them	all	belittled,	as	if	their	grand	dramas	were
without	consequence,	as	if	true	meaning	was	too	thinly	spread,	too	elusive	for
a	single	mind	to	grasp.	And	there	had	been	a	devastating	toll	paid	for	these


fated	journeys.	Scores	of	ships	lost,	thousands	of	hands	dead	–	there	were
belligerent	and	all	too	capable	empires	and	peoples	out	there,	few	of	whom
were	reluctant	to	test	the	prowess	and	determination	of	foreign	invaders.	If	not
for	the	formidable	sorceries	of	the	Edur	and	the	new	cadres	of	Letherii	mages,
there	would	have	been	more	defeats	than	victories	recorded	in	the	ledgers,	and
yet	fewer	soldiers	and	sailors	to	rest	eyes	once	more	upon	their	homeland.
Hanradi	Khalag,	Uruth	and	Tomad	Sengar	would	have	dire	news	to	deliver
to	the	Emperor,	sufficient	to	overwhelm	their	meagre	successes,	and	Yan	Tovis
was	thankful	that	she	would	not	be	present	at	that	debriefing.	She	would	have
more	than	enough	to	deal	with	in	her	own	capacity,	besides.	The	Letherii
Marines	had	been	decimated	–	families	would	need	to	be	informed,	deathpensions	distributed,	lost	equipment	charged	and	debts	transferred	to	heirs	and
kin.	Depressing	and	tedious	work	and	she	already	longed	for	the	last	scroll	to
be	sealed	and	signed.
As	the	stands	of	trees	and	undergrowth	dwindled,	replaced	by	fisher
shacks,	jetties	and	then	the	walled	estates	of	the	elite,	she	stepped	back	from	the
rail	and	looked	round	the	deck.	Seeing	Taralack	Veed	positioned	near	the	stern,
she	walked	over.
‘We	are	very	close	now,’	she	said.	‘Letheras,	seat	of	the	Emperor,	the
largest	and	richest	city	on	this	continent.	And	still	your	champion	will	not
come	on	deck.’
‘I	see	bridges	ahead,’	the	barbarian	observed,	looking	back	up	the	length
of	the	ship.
‘Yes.	The	Tiers.	There	are	canals	in	the	city.	Did	I	not	tell	you	of	the
Drownings?’
The	man	grimaced,	then	swung	about	once	more	and	spat	over	the	stern
rail.	‘They	die	without	honour	and	this	entertains	you.	What	is	it	you	would
wish	Icarium	to	see,	Twilight?’
‘He	shall	need	his	anger,’	she	replied	in	a	low	voice.
Taralack	Veed	ran	both	hands	over	his	scalp,	flattening	back	his	hair.
‘When	he	is	next	awakened,	matters	of	resolve	will	mean	nothing.	Your
Emperor	shall	be	annihilated,	and	likely	most	of	this	sparkling	city	with	him.	If
you	choose	to	witness,	then	you	too	will	die.	As	will	Tomad	Sengar	and
Hanradi	Khalag.’
‘Alas,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘I	will	not	be	present	to	witness	the	clash.
My	duties	will	take	me	back	north,	back	to	Fent	Reach.’	She	glanced	across	at
him.	‘A	journey	of	over	a	month	by	horseback,	Taralack	Veed.	Will	that	be
distant	enough?’
He	shrugged.	‘I	make	no	promises.’


‘But	one,’	she	pointed	out.
‘Oh?’
‘That	he	will	fight.’
‘You	do	not	know	Icarium	as	I	do.	He	may	remain	below,	but	there	is	an
excitement	about	him.	Anticipation,	now,	unlike	any	I	have	ever	seen	before.
Twilight,	he	has	come	to	accept	his	curse;	indeed,	to	embrace	it.	He	sharpens
his	sword,	again	and	again.	Oils	his	bow.	Examines	his	armour	for	flaws	with
every	dawn.	He	has	no	more	questions	for	me,	and	that	is	the	most	ominous
detail	of	all.’
‘He	has	failed	us	once,’	she	said.
‘There	was…intervention.	That	shall	not	occur	again,	unless	your
carelessness	permits	it.’
At	a	gentle	bend	in	the	river,	Letheras	revealed	itself,	sprawling	up	and
back	from	the	north	shore,	magnificent	bridges	arching	over	garishly	painted
buildings	and	the	haze	of	innumerable	cookfires.	Domes	and	terraces,	towers
and	platforms	loomed,	edges	blurred	in	the	gold-lit	smoke.	The	imperial	quays
were	directly	ahead,	just	beyond	a	mole,	and	the	first	dromons	of	the	fleet	were
shipping	oars	and	swinging	in	towards	berths.	Scores	of	figures	were
gathering	along	the	waterfront,	including	a	bristling	procession	coming	down
from	the	Eternal	Domicile,	pennons	and	standards	wavering	overhead	–	the
official	delegation,	although	Yan	Tovis	noted	that	there	were	no	Edur	among
them.
It	seemed	that	Triban	Gnol’s	quiet	usurpation	was	all	but	complete.	She	was
not	surprised.	The	Chancellor	had	probably	begun	his	plans	long	before	King
Ezgara	Diskanar	downed	the	fatal	draught	in	the	throne	room.	Ensuring	a
smooth	transition,	is	how	he	would	have	defended	himself.	The	empire	is
greater	than	its	ruler,	and	that	is	where	lies	the	Chancellor’s	loyalty.	Always
and	for	ever	more.	Laudable	sentiments,	no	doubt,	but	the	truth	was	never	so
clear.	The	lust	for	power	was	a	strong	current,	roiling	with	clouds	that
obscured	all	to	everyone,	barring,	perhaps,	Triban	Gnol	himself,	who	was	at
the	very	centre	of	the	maelstrom.	His	delusion	of	control	had	never	been
challenged,	but	Yan	Tovis	believed	that	it	would	not	last.
After	all,	the	Tiste	Edur	had	returned.	Tomad	Sengar,	Hanradi	Khalag	and
three	other	former	war	chiefs	of	the	tribes,	as	well	as	over	four	thousand
seasoned	warriors	who’d	long	ago	left	their	naivety	behind,	lost	in	Callows,	in
Sepik,	Nemil,	the	Perish	Coast,	Shal-Morzinn	and	Drift	Avalii,	in	a	host	of
foreign	waters,	among	the	Meckros	–	the	journey	had	been	long.	Fraught—
‘The	nest	is	about	to	be	kicked	awake,’	Taralack	Veed	said,	a	rather	ugly
grin	twisting	his	features.


Yan	Tovis	shrugged.	‘To	be	expected.	We	have	been	absent	a	long	time.’
‘Maybe	your	Emperor	is	already	dead.	I	see	no	Tiste	Edur	in	that
contingent.’
‘I	do	not	think	that	likely.	Our	K’risnan	would	have	known.’
‘Informed	by	their	god?	Yan	Tovis,	no	gift	from	a	god	comes	for	free.
More,	if	it	sees	fit,	it	will	tell	its	followers	nothing.	Or,	indeed,	it	will	lie.	The
Edur	do	not	understand	any	of	this,	but	you	surprise	me.	Is	it	not	the	very
nature	of	your	deity,	this	Errant,	to	deceive	you	at	every	turn?’
‘The	Emperor	is	not	dead,	Taralack	Veed.’
‘Then	it	is	only	a	matter	of	time.’
‘So	you	continually	promise.’
But	he	shook	his	head.	‘I	do	not	speak	of	Icarium	now.	I	speak	of	when	a
god’s	chosen	one	fails.	And	they	always	do,	Twilight.	We	are	never	enough	in
their	eyes.	Never	faithful	enough,	never	fearful	enough,	never	abject	enough.
Sooner	or	later	we	betray	them,	in	weakness	or	in	overwrought	ambition.	We
see	before	us	a	city	of	bridges	yet	what	I	see	and	what	you	see	are	two	different
things.	Do	not	let	your	eyes	deceive	you	–	the	bridges	awaiting	us	are	all	too
narrow	for	mortals.’
Their	ship	slowly	angled	in	towards	the	central	imperial	dock	like	a	weary
beast	of	burden,	and	a	handful	of	Edur	officers	were	now	on	deck,	whilst
sailors	readied	the	lines	along	the	port	rail.	The	stench	of	effluent	from	the
murky	waters	rose	thick	enough	to	sting	the	eyes.
Taralack	Veed	spat	onto	his	hands	and	smoothed	back	his	hair	yet	again.
‘Almost	time.	I	go	to	collect	my	champion.’
	
Noticed	by	no-one,	Turudal	Brizad,	the	Errant,	stood	with	his	back	to	a
quayside	warehouse	thirty	or	so	paces	from	the	main	pier.	His	gaze	noted	the
disembarking	of	Tomad	Sengar	–	the	venerable	warrior	looking	worn	and
aged	–	and	his	expression,	as	he	observed	the	absence	of	Tiste	Edur	among	the
delegation	from	the	palace,	seemed	to	grow	darker	by	the	moment.	But	neither
he	nor	any	of	the	other	Edur	held	the	god’s	attention	for	long.	His	attention
sharpened	as	the	Atri-Preda	in	command	of	this	fleet’s	Letherii	Marines	strode
the	length	of	the	gangway,	followed	by	a	half-dozen	aides	and	officers,	for	he
sensed,	all	at	once,	that	there	was	something	fated	about	the	woman.	Yet	the
details	eluded	him.
The	god	frowned,	frustrated	by	his	diminishing	percipience.	He	should
have	sensed	immediately	what	awaited	Yan	Tovis.	Five	years	ago	he	would
have,	thinking	nothing	of	the	gift,	the	sheer	privilege	of	such	ascendant	power.


Not	since	those	final	tumultuous	days	of	the	First	Empire	–	the	succession	of
ghastly	events	that	led	to	the	intercession	of	the	T’lan	Imass	to	quell	the	fatal
throes	of	Dessimbelackis’s	empire	–	had	the	Errant	felt	so	disconnected.	Chaos
was	rolling	towards	Letheras	with	the	force	of	a	cataclysmic	wave,	an	ocean
surge	that	simply	engulfed	this	river ’s	currents	–	yes,	it	comes	from	the	sea.
That	much	I	know,	that	much	I	can	feel.	From	the	sea,	just	like	this	woman,	this
Twilight.
Another	figure	appeared	on	the	plank.	A	foreigner,	the	skin	of	his
forearms	a	swirl	of	arcane	tattoos,	the	rest	of	his	upper	body	wrapped	in	a
roughly	woven	cape,	the	hood	hiding	his	features.	Barbaric,	wary,	the	glitter	of
eyes	taking	it	all	in,	pausing	halfway	down	to	hawk	and	spit	over	the	side,	a
gesture	that	startled	the	Errant	and,	it	seemed,	most	of	those	standing	on	the
dock.
A	moment	later	another	foreigner	rose	into	view,	pausing	at	the	top	of	the
gangway.	The	Errant’s	breath	caught,	a	sudden	chill	flowing	through	him,	as	if
Hood	himself	had	arrived,	his	cold	breath	whispering	across	the	back	of	the
god’s	neck.
Abyss	take	me,	all	that	waits	within	him.	The	foment	none	other	here	can
see,	could	even	guess	at.	Dear	son	of	Gothos	and	that	overgrown	hag,	the	stain
of	Azath	blood	is	about	you	like	a	cloud.	This	was	more	than	a	curse	–	all	that
afflicted	this	fell	warrior.	Deliberate	skeins	were	woven	about	him,	the	threads
of	some	elaborate,	ancient,	and	deadly	ritual.	And	he	knew	their	flavour.	The
Nameless	Ones.
Two	soldiers	from	Triban	Gnol’s	Palace	Guard	moved	to	await	the	Jhag	as
he	slowly	walked	down	to	the	dock.
The	Errant’s	heart	was	thudding	hard	in	his	chest.	They	have	delivered	a
champion,	a	challenger	to	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths—
The	Jhag	stepped	onto	solid	ground.
From	the	buildings	beyond	the	harbour	front,	birds	rose	suddenly,
hundreds,	then	thousands,	voicing	a	chorus	of	shrieks,	and	beneath	the	Errant’s
feet	the	stones	shifted	with	a	heavy,	groaning	sound.	Something	large	collapsed
far	into	the	city,	beyond	Quillas	Canal,	and	distant	screams	followed.	The
Errant	stepped	out	from	the	wall	and	saw	the	bloom	of	a	dust	cloud	rising
behind	the	caterwauling,	panicked	pigeons,	rooks,	gulls	and	starlings.
The	subterranean	groaning	then	ceased	and	a	heavy	silence	settled.
Icarium’s	tusked	mouth	revealed	the	faintest	of	smiles,	as	if	pleased	with
the	earth’s	welcome,	and	the	Errant	could	not	be	sure	–	at	this	distance	–	if	that
smile	was	truly	as	childlike	as	it	seemed,	or	if	it	was	in	fact	ironic	or,	indeed,
bitter.	He	repressed	the	urge	to	draw	closer	seeking	an	answer	to	that	question,


reminding	himself	that	he	did	not	want	Icarium’s	attention.	Not	now,	not	ever.
Tomad	Sengar,	what	your	son	will	face…
It	was	no	wonder,	he	suddenly	realized,	that	all	that	was	to	come	was
obscured	in	a	maelstrom	of	chaos.	They	have	brought	Icarium…into	the	heart
of	my	power.
Among	the	delegation	and	other	Letherii	nearby,	it	was	clear	that	no
particular	connection	had	been	made	between	Icarium’s	first	touch	on	solid
ground	and	the	minor	earthquake	rumbling	through	Letheras	–	yet	such
stirrings	were	virtually	unknown	for	this	region,	and	while	the	terror	among
the	birds	and	the	bawling	of	various	beasts	of	burden	continued	unabated,
already	the	consternation	of	those	within	the	Errant’s	sight	was	diminishing.
Foolish	mortals,	so	quick	to	disregard	unease.
In	the	river	beyond,	the	water	slowly	lost	its	shivering	agitation	and	the
gulls	further	out	began	to	settle	once	again	amidst	yet	more	ships	angling
towards	shore.	Yet	somewhere	in	the	city,	a	building	had	toppled,	probably
some	venerable	ancient	edifice,	its	foundations	weakened	by	groundwater,	its
mortar	crumbled	and	supports	rotted	through.
There	would	have	been	casualties	–	Icarium’s	first,	but	most	assuredly	not
his	last.
And	he	smiles.
	
Still	cursing,	Taralack	Veed	turned	to	Yan	Tovis.	‘Unsettled	lands	–	Burn	does
not	rest	easy	here.’
The	Atri-Preda	shrugged	to	hide	her	queasy	shock.	‘To	the	north	of	here,
along	the	Reach	Mountains,	the	ground	shakes	often.	The	same	can	be	said	for
the	north	side	of	the	ranges	to	the	far	south,	the	other	side	of	the	Draconean
Sea.’
She	saw	the	glimmer	of	bared	teeth	in	the	hood’s	shadow.	‘But	not	in
Letheras,	yes?’
‘I’ve	not	heard	of	such	before,	but	that	means	little,’	she	replied.	‘This	city
is	not	my	home.	Not	where	I	was	born.	Not	where	I	grew	up.’
Taralack	Veed	edged	closer,	facing	away	from	Icarium,	who	stood
listening	to	the	two	palace	guards	as	they	instructed	him	in	what	was	to	come.
‘You	fool,’	he	hissed	at	her.	‘Burn’s	flesh	flinched,	Twilight.	Flinched	–
because	of	him.’
She	snorted.
The	Gral	cocked	his	head,	and	she	could	feel	his	contempt.	‘What	happens
now?’	he	asked.


‘Now?	Very	little.	There	are	secure	residences,	for	you	and	your
champion.	As	for	when	the	Emperor	chooses	to	face	his	challengers,	that	is	up
to	him.	Sometimes,	he	is	impatient	and	the	clash	occurs	immediately.	Other
times,	he	waits,	often	for	weeks.	But	I	will	tell	you	what	will	begin
immediately.’
‘What	is	that?’
‘The	burial	urn	for	Icarium,	and	his	place	in	the	cemetery	where	resides
every	challenger	Rhulad	has	faced.’
‘Even	that	place	will	not	survive,’	Taralack	Veed	muttered.
	
The	Gral,	feeling	sick	to	his	stomach,	walked	over	to	Icarium.	He	did	not	want
to	think	of	the	destruction	to	come.	He	had	seen	it	once,	after	all.	Burn,	even	in
your	eternal	sleep,	you	felt	the	stabbing	wound	that	is	Icarium	–	and	none	of
these	people	here	countenanced	it,	none	was	ready	for	the	truth.	Their	hands
are	not	in	the	earth,	the	touch	is	lost	–	yet	look	at	them:	they	would	call	me	the
savage.
‘Icarium,	my	friend—’
‘Can	you	not	feel	it,	Taralack	Veed?’	In	his	unhuman	eyes,	the	gleam	of
anticipation.	‘This	place…I	have	been	here	before	–	no,	not	this	city.	From	the
time	before	this	city	was	born.	I	have	stood	on	this	ground—’
‘And	it	remembered,’	growled	Taralack	Veed.
‘Yes,	but	not	in	the	way	you	believe.	There	are	truths	here,	waiting	for	me.
Truths.	I	have	never	been	as	close	to	them	as	I	am	now.	Now	I	understand	why	I
did	not	refuse	you.’
Refuse	me?	You	considered	such	a	thing?	Was	it	truly	so	near	the	edge?
‘Your	destiny	will	soon	welcome	you,	Icarium,	as	I	have	said	all	along.	You
could	no	more	refuse	that	than	you	could	the	Jaghut	blood	in	your	veins.’
A	grimace.	‘Jaghut…yes,	they	have	been	here.	In	my	wake.	Perhaps,	even,
on	my	trail.	Long	ago,	and	now	again—’
‘Again?’
‘Omtose	Phellack	–	the	heart	of	this	city	is	ice,	Taralack	Veed.	A	most
violent	imposition.’
‘Are	you	certain?	I	do	not	understand—’
‘Nor	I.	Yet.	But	I	shall.	No	secret	shall	survive	my	sojourn	here.	It	will
change.’
‘What	will	change?’
Icarium	smiled,	one	hand	resting	on	the	pommel	of	his	sword,	and	did	not
reply.


‘You	will	face	this	Emperor	then?’
‘So	it	is	expected	of	me,	Taralack	Veed.’	A	bright	glance.	‘How	could	I
refuse	them?’
Spirits	below,	my	death	draws	close.	It	was	what	we	wanted	all	along.	So
why	do	I	now	rail	at	it?	Who	has	stolen	my	courage?
‘It	is	as	if,’	Icarium	whispered,	‘my	life	awakens	anew.’
	
The	hand	shot	out	in	the	gloom,	snatching	the	rat	from	atop	the	wooden	cage
holding	the	forward	pump.	The	scrawny	creature	had	a	moment	to	squeal	in
panic	before	its	neck	was	snapped.	There	was	a	thud	as	the	dead	rat	was	flung
to	one	side,	where	it	slid	down	into	the	murky	bilge	water.
‘Oh,	how	I	hate	you	when	you	lose	patience,’	Samar	Dev	said	in	a	weary
tone.	‘That’s	an	invitation	to	disease,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘Life	is	an	invitation	to	disease,’	the	huge	warrior	rumbled	from	the
shadows.	After	a	moment,	he	added,	‘I’ll	feed	it	to	the	turtles.’	Then	he	snorted.
‘Turtles	big	enough	to	drag	down	this	damned	ship.	These	Letherii	live	in	a
mad	god’s	nightmare.’
‘More	than	you	realize,’	Samar	Dev	muttered.	‘Listen.	Shouts	from	shore.
We’re	finally	drawing	in.’
‘The	rats	are	relieved.’
‘Don’t	you	have	something	you	need	to	do	to	get	ready?’
‘Such	as?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Knock	a	few	more	chips	off	your	sword,	or	something.	Get
it	sharp.’
‘The	sword	is	unbreakable.’
‘What	about	that	armour?	Most	of	the	shells	are	broken	–	it’s	not	worthy	of
the	name	and	won’t	stop	a	blade—’
‘No	blade	will	reach	it,	witch.	I	shall	face	but	one	man,	not	twenty.	And	he
is	small	–	my	people	call	you	children.	And	that	is	all	you	truly	are.	Shortlived,	stick-limbed,	with	faces	I	want	to	pinch.	The	Edur	are	little	different,	just
stretched	out	a	bit.’
‘Pinch?	Would	that	be	before	or	after	decapitation?’
He	grunted	a	laugh.
Samar	Dev	leaned	back	against	the	bale	in	which	something	hard	and
lumpy	had	been	packed	–	despite	the	mild	discomfort	she	was	not	inclined	to
explore	any	further.	Both	the	Edur	and	the	Letherii	had	peculiar	ideas	about
what	constituted	booty.	In	this	very	hold	there	were	amphorae	containing
spiced	human	blood	and	a	dozen	wax-clad	corpses	of	Edur	‘refugees’	from


Sepik	who	had	not	survived	the	journey,	stacked	like	bolts	of	cloth	against	a
bloodstained	conch-shell	throne	that	had	belonged	to	some	remote	island
chieftain	–	whose	pickled	head	probably	resided	in	one	of	the	jars	Karsa
Orlong	leaned	against.	‘At	least	we’re	soon	to	get	off	this	damned	ship.	My
skin	has	all	dried	up.	Look	at	my	hands	–	I’ve	seen	mummified	ones	looking
better	than	these.	All	this	damned	salt	–	it	clings	like	a	second	skin,	and	it’s
moulting—’
‘Spirits	below,	woman,	you	incite	me	to	wring	another	rat’s	neck.’
‘So	I	am	responsible	for	that	last	rat’s	death,	am	I?	Needless	to	say,	I	take
exception	to	that.	Was	your	hand	that	reached	out,	Toblakai.	Your	hand	that—’
‘And	your	mouth	that	never	stops,	making	me	need	to	kill	something.’
‘I	am	not	to	blame	for	your	violent	impulses.	Besides,	I	was	just	passing
time	in	harmless	conversation.	We’ve	not	spoken	in	a	while,	you	and	I.	I	find	I
prefer	Taxilian’s	company,	and	were	he	not	sick	with	homesickness	and	even
more	miserable	than	you…’
‘Conversation.	Is	that	what	you	call	it?	Then	why	are	my	ears	numb?’
‘You	know,	I	too	am	impatient.	I’ve	not	cast	a	curse	on	anyone	in	a	long
time.’
‘Your	squalling	spirits	do	not	frighten	me,’	Karsa	Orlong	replied.	‘And
they	have	been	squalling,	ever	since	we	made	the	river.	A	thousand	voices
clamouring	in	my	skull	–	can	you	not	silence	them?’
Sighing,	she	tilted	her	head	back	and	closed	her	eyes.	‘Toblakai…you	will
have	quite	an	audience	when	you	clash	swords	with	this	Edur	Emperor.’
‘What	has	that	to	do	with	your	spirits,	Samar	Dev?’
‘Yes,	that	was	too	obscure,	wasn’t	it?	Then	I	shall	be	more	precise.	There
are	gods	in	this	city	we	approach.	Resident	gods.’
‘Do	they	ever	get	a	moment’s	rest?’
‘They	don’t	live	in	temples.	Nor	any	signs	above	the	doors	of	their
residences,	Karsa	Orlong.	They	are	in	the	city,	yet	few	know	of	it.	Understand,
the	spirits	shriek	because	they	are	not	welcome,	and,	even	more	worrying,
should	any	one	of	those	gods	seek	to	wrest	them	away	from	me,	well,	there	is
little	I	could	do	against	them.’
‘Yet	they	are	bound	to	me	as	well,	aren’t	they?’
She	clamped	her	mouth	shut,	squinted	across	at	him	in	the	gloom.	The	hull
thumped	as	the	ship	edged	up	alongside	the	dock.	She	saw	the	glimmer	of
bared	teeth,	feral,	and	a	chill	rippled	through	her.	‘What	do	you	know	of	that?’
she	asked.
‘It	is	my	curse	to	gather	souls,’	he	replied.	‘What	are	spirits,	witch,	if	not
simply	powerful	souls?	They	haunt	me…I	haunt	them.	The	candles	I	lit,	in	that


apothecary	of	yours	–	they	were	in	the	wax,	weren’t	they?’
‘Released,	then	held	close,	yes.	I	gathered	them…after	I’d	sent	you	away.’
‘Bound	them	into	that	knife	at	your	belt,’	Karsa	said.	‘Tell	me,	do	you
sense	the	two	Toblakai	souls	in	my	own	weapon?’
‘Yes,	no.	That	is,	I	sense	them,	but	I	dare	not	approach.’
‘Why?’
‘Karsa,	they	are	too	strong	for	me.	They	are	like	fire	in	the	crystal	of	that
flint,	trapped	by	your	will.’
‘Not	trapped,’	he	replied.	‘They	dwell	within	because	they	choose	to,
because	the	weapon	honours	them.	They	are	my	companions,	Samar	Dev.’	The
Toblakai	rose	suddenly,	hunching	beneath	the	ceiling.	‘Should	a	god	be	foolish
enough	to	seek	to	steal	our	spirits,	I	will	kill	it.’
She	regarded	him	from	half-closed	eyes.	Declarative	statements	such	as
that	one	were	not	rare	utterances	from	Karsa	Orlong,	and	she	had	long	since
learned	that	they	were	not	empty	boasts,	no	matter	how	absurd	the	assertion
might	have	sounded.	‘That	would	not	be	wise,’	she	said	after	a	moment.
‘A	god	devoid	of	wisdom	deserves	what	it	gets.’
‘That’s	not	what	I	meant.’
Karsa	stooped	momentarily	to	retrieve	the	dead	rat,	then	he	headed	for	the
hatch.
She	followed.
When	she	reached	the	main	deck,	the	Toblakai	was	walking	towards	the
captain.	She	watched	as	he	placed	the	sodden	rat	in	the	Letherii’s	hands,	then
turned	away,	saying,	‘Get	the	hoists	–	I	want	my	horse	on	deck	and	off	this
damned	hulk.’	Behind	him,	the	captain	stared	down	at	the	creature	in	his	hands,
then,	with	a	snarl,	he	flung	it	over	the	rail.
Samar	Dev	contemplated	a	few	quick	words	with	the	captain,	to	stave	off
the	coming	storm	–	a	storm	that	Karsa	had	nonchalantly	triggered	innumerable
times	before	on	this	voyage	–	then	decided	it	was	not	worth	the	effort.	It
seemed	that	the	captain	concluded	much	the	same,	as	a	sailor	hurried	up	with	a
bucket	of	seawater,	into	which	the	Letherii	thrust	his	hands.
The	main	hatch	to	the	cargo	hold	was	being	removed,	while	other	hands
set	to	assembling	the	winches.
Karsa	strode	to	the	gangway.	He	halted,	then	said	in	a	loud	voice,	‘This	city
reeks.	When	I	am	done	with	its	Emperor,	I	may	well	burn	it	to	the	ground.’
The	planks	sagged	and	bounced	as	the	Toblakai	descended	to	the	landing.
Samar	Dev	hurried	after	him.
One	of	two	fully	armoured	guards	had	already	begun	addressing	Karsa	in
contemptuous	tones.	‘—to	be	unarmed	whenever	you	are	permitted	to	leave	the


compound,	said	permission	to	be	granted	only	by	the	ranking	officer	of	the
Watch.	Our	immediate	task	is	to	escort	you	to	your	quarters,	where	the	filth
will	be	scrubbed	from	your	body	and	hair—’
He	got	no	further,	as	Karsa	reached	out,	closed	his	hand	on	the	guard’s
leather	weapons	harness,	and	with	a	single	heave	flung	the	Letherii	into	the	air.
Six	or	more	paces	to	the	left	he	sailed,	colliding	with	three	stevedores	who	had
been	watching	the	proceedings.	All	four	went	down.
Voicing	an	oath,	the	second	guard	tugged	at	his	shortsword.
Karsa’s	punch	rocked	his	head	back	and	the	man	collapsed.
Hoarse	shouts	of	alarm,	more	Letherii	soldiers	converging.
Samar	Dev	rushed	forward.	‘Hood	take	you,	Toblakai	–	do	you	intend	to
war	with	the	whole	empire?’
Glaring	at	the	half-circle	of	guards	closing	round	him,	Karsa	grunted	then
crossed	his	arms.	‘If	you	are	to	be	my	escort,’	he	said	to	them,	‘then	be	civil,	or
I	will	break	you	all	into	pieces.’	Then	he	swung	about,	pushing	past	Samar.
‘Where	is	my	horse?’	he	bellowed	to	the	crew	still	on	deck.	‘Where	is	Havok!	I
grow	tired	of	waiting!’
Samar	Dev	considered	returning	to	the	ship,	demanding	that	they	sail	out,
back	down	the	river,	back	into	the	Draconean	Sea,	then	beyond.	Leaving	this
unpredictable	Toblakai	to	Letheras	and	all	its	hapless	denizens.
Alas,	even	gods	don’t	deserve	that.
	
Bugg	stood	thirty	paces	from	the	grand	entrance	to	the	Hivanar	Estate,	one
hand	out	as	he	leaned	against	a	wall	to	steady	himself.	In	some	alley	garden	a
short	distance	away,	chickens	screeched	in	wild	clamour	and	flung	themselves
into	the	grille	hatches	in	frenzied	panic.	Overhead,	starlings	still	raced	back
and	forth	en	masse.
He	wiped	beads	of	sweat	from	his	brow,	struggled	to	draw	a	deep	breath.
A	worthy	reminder,	he	told	himself.	Everything	was	only	a	matter	of	time.
What	stretched	would	then	contract.	Events	tumbled,	forces	closed	to	collision,
and	for	all	that,	the	measured	pace	seemed	to	remain	unchanged,	a	current
beneath	all	else.	Yet,	he	knew,	even	that	slowed,	incrementally,	from	one	age	to
the	next.	Death	is	written	in	birth	–	the	words	of	a	great	sage.	What	was	her
name?	When	did	she	live?	Ah,	so	much	has	whispered	away	from	my	mind,	these
memories,	like	sand	between	the	fingers.	Yet	she	could	see	what	most	cannot	–
not	even	the	gods.	Death	and	birth.	Even	in	opposition	the	two	forces	are
bound,	and	to	define	one	is	to	define	the	other.
And	now	he	had	come.	With	his	first	step,	delivering	the	weight	of	history.


This	land’s.	His	own.	Two	forces	in	opposition,	yet	inextricably	bound.	Do	you
now	feel	as	if	you	have	come	home,	Icarium?	I	remember	you,	striding	from	the
sea,	a	refugee	from	a	realm	you	had	laid	to	waste.	Yet	your	father	did	not	await
you	–	he	had	gone,	he	had	walked	down	the	throat	of	an	Azath.	Icarium,	he	was
Jaghut,	and	among	the	Jaghut	no	father	reaches	across	to	take	his	child’s	hand.
‘Are	you	sick,	old	man?’
Blinking,	Bugg	looked	across	to	see	a	servant	from	one	of	the	nearby
estates,	returning	from	market	with	a	basket	of	foodstuffs	balanced	on	his	head.
Only	with	grief,	dear	mortal.	He	shook	his	head.
‘It	was	the	floods,’	the	servant	went	on.	‘Shifting	the	clay.’
‘Aye.’
‘Scale	House	fell	down	–	did	you	hear?	Right	into	the	street.	Good	thing	it
was	empty,	hey?	Though	I	heard	there	was	a	fatality	–	in	the	street.’	The	man
suddenly	grinned.	‘A	cat!’	Laughing,	he	resumed	his	journey.
Bugg	stared	after	him;	then,	with	a	grunt,	he	set	off	for	the	gate.

He	waited	on	the	terrace,	frowning	down	at	the	surprisingly	deep	trench	the
crew	had	managed	to	excavate	into	the	bank,	then	outward,	through	the	bedded
silts	of	the	river	itself.	The	shoring	was	robust,	and	Bugg	could	see	few	leaks
from	between	the	sealed	slats.	Even	so,	two	workers	were	on	the	pump,	their
bared	backs	slick	with	sweat.
Rautos	Hivanar	came	to	his	side.	‘Bugg,	welcome.	I	imagine	you	wish	to
retrieve	your	crew.’
‘No	rush,	sir,’	Bugg	replied.	‘It	is	clear	to	me	now	that	this	project	of	yours
is…ambitious.	How	much	water	is	coming	up	from	the	floor	of	that	pit?’
‘Without	constant	pumping,	the	trench	would	overflow	in	a	little	under	two
bells.’
‘I	bring	you	a	message	from	your	servant,	Venitt	Sathad,	who	visited	on
his	way	out	of	the	city.	He	came	to	observe	our	progress	on	the	refurbishment
of	the	inn	you	recently	acquired,	and	was	struck	with	something	of	a	revelation
upon	seeing	the	mysterious	mechanism	we	found	inside	an	outbuilding.	He
further	suggested	it	was	imperative	that	you	see	it	for	yourself.	Also,	he
mentioned	a	collection	of	artifacts…recovered	from	this	trench,	yes?’
The	large	man	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	seemed	to	reach	a
decision,	for	he	gestured	Bugg	to	follow.
They	entered	the	estate,	passing	through	an	elongated,	shuttered	room	in
which	hung	drying	herbs,	down	a	corridor	and	into	a	workroom	dominated	by


a	large	table	and	prism	lanterns	attached	to	hinged	arms	so	that,	if	desired,	they
could	be	drawn	close	or	lifted	clear	when	someone	was	working	at	the	table.
Resting	on	the	polished	wood	surface	were	a	dozen	or	so	objects,	both	metal
and	fired	clay,	not	one	of	which	revealed	any	obvious	function.
Rautos	Hivanar	still	silent	and	standing	now	at	his	side,	Bugg	scanned	the
objects	for	a	long	moment,	then	reached	out	and	picked	up	one	in	particular.
Heavy,	unmarked	by	pitting	or	rust,	seamlessly	bent	almost	to	right	angles.
‘Your	engineers,’	Rautos	Hivanar	said,	‘could	determine	no	purpose	to
these	mechanisms.’
Bugg’s	brows	rose	at	the	man’s	use	of	the	word	‘mechanism’.	He	hefted
the	object	in	his	hands.
‘I	have	attempted	to	assemble	these,’	the	merchant	continued,	‘to	no	avail.
There	are	no	obvious	attachment	points,	yet,	somehow,	they	seem	to	me	to	be
of	a	piece.	Perhaps	some	essential	item	is	still	buried	beneath	the	river,	but	we
have	found	nothing	for	three	days	now,	barring	a	wheelbarrow’s	worth	of
stone	chips	and	shards	–	and	these	were	recovered	in	a	level	of	sediment	far
below	these	artifacts,	leading	me	to	believe	that	they	pre-date	them	by
centuries,	if	not	millennia.’
‘Yes,’	Bugg	muttered.	‘Eres’al,	a	mated	pair,	preparing	flint	for	tools,	here
on	the	bank	of	the	vast	marsh.	He	worked	the	cores,	she	did	the	more	detailed
knapping.	They	came	here	for	three	seasons,	then	she	died	in	childbirth,	and	he
wandered	with	a	starving	babe	in	his	arms	until	it	too	died.	He	found	no	others
of	his	kind,	for	they	had	been	scattered	after	the	conflagration	of	the	great
forests,	the	wildfires	sweeping	out	over	the	plains.	The	air	was	thick	with	ash.
He	wandered,	until	he	died,	and	so	was	the	last	of	his	line.’	He	stared	unseeing
at	the	artifact,	even	as	its	weight	seemed	to	burgeon,	threatening	to	tug	at	his
arms,	to	drag	him	down	to	his	knees.	‘But	Icarium	said	there	would	be	no	end,
that	the	cut	thread	was	but	an	illusion	–	in	his	voice,	then,	I	could	hear	his
father.’
A	hand	closed	on	his	shoulder	and	swung	him	round.	Startled,	he	met
Rautos	Hivanar ’s	sharp,	glittering	eyes.	Bugg	frowned.	‘Sir?’
‘You	–	you	are	inclined	to	invent	stories.	Or,	perhaps,	you	are	a	sage,
gifted	with	unnatural	sight.	Is	this	what	I	am	hearing,	old	man?	Tell	me,	who
was	this	Icarium?	Was	that	the	name	of	the	Eres’al?	The	one	who	died?’
‘I	am	sorry,	sir.’	He	raised	the	object	higher.	‘This	artifact	–	you	will	find	it
is	identical	to	the	massive	object	at	the	inn,	barring	scale.	I	believe	this	is	what
your	servant	wanted	you	to	realize	–	as	he	himself	did	when	he	first	looked
upon	the	edifice	once	we	had	brought	down	the	walls	enclosing	it.’
‘Are	you	certain	of	all	this?’


‘Yes.’	Bugg	gestured	at	the	array	of	items	on	the	table.	‘A	central	piece	is
missing,	as	you	suspected,	sir.	Alas,	you	will	not	find	it,	for	it	is	not	physical.
The	framework	that	will	hold	it	together	is	one	of	energy,	not	matter.	And,’	he
added,	still	in	a	distracted	tone,	‘it	has	yet	to	arrive.’
He	set	the	artifact	back	down	and	walked	from	the	chamber,	back	up	the
corridor,	through	the	dry-rack	room,	out	onto	the	terrace.	Unmindful	of	the
two	workers	pausing	to	stare	across	at	him	as	Rautos	Hivanar	appeared	as	if	in
pursuit	–	the	merchant’s	hands	were	spread,	palms	up,	as	if	beseeching,
although	the	huge	man	said	not	a	word,	his	mouth	working	in	silence,	as
though	he	had	been	struck	mute.	Bugg’s	glance	at	the	large	man	was
momentary.	He	continued	on,	along	the	passage	between	estate	wall	and
compound	wall,	to	the	side	postern	near	the	front	gate.
He	found	himself	once	more	on	the	street,	only	remotely	noticing	the
passers-by	in	the	cooler	shade	of	afternoon.
It	has	yet	to	arrive.
And	yet,	it	comes.
‘Watch	where	you’re	walking,	old	man!’
‘Leave	off	him	–	see	how	he	weeps?	It’s	an	old	man’s	right	to	grieve,	so
leave	him	be.’
‘Must	be	blind,	the	clumsy	fool…’
And	here,	long	before	this	city	was	born,	there	stood	a	temple,	into	which
Icarium	walked	–	as	lost	as	any	son,	the	child	severed	from	the	thread.	But	the
Elder	God	within	could	give	him	nothing.	Nothing	beyond	what	he	himself	was
preparing	to	do.
Could	you	have	imagined,	K’rul,	how	Icarium	would	take	what	you	did?
Take	it	into	himself	as	would	any	child	seeking	a	guiding	hand?	Where	are	you,
K’rul?	Do	you	sense	his	return?	Do	you	know	what	he	seeks?
‘Clumsy	or	not,	it’s	a	question	of	manners	and	proper	respect.’
Bugg’s	threadbare	tunic	was	grasped	and	he	was	dragged	to	one	side,	then
flung	up	against	a	wall.	He	stared	at	a	battered	face	beneath	the	rim	of	a	helm.
To	one	side,	scowling,	another	guard.
‘Do	you	know	who	we	are?’	the	man	holding	him	demanded,	baring
stained	teeth.
‘Karos	Invictad’s	thugs,	aye.	His	private	police,	the	ones	who	kick	in	doors
at	the	middle	of	night.	The	ones	who	take	mothers	from	babes,	fathers	from
sons.	The	ones	who,	in	the	righteous	glory	that	comes	with	unchallenged
power,	then	loot	the	homes	of	the	arrested,	not	to	mention	raping	the	daughters
—’
Bugg	was	thrown	a	second	time	against	the	wall,	the	back	of	his	head


crunching	hard	on	the	pitted	brick.
‘For	that,	bastard,’	the	man	snarled,	‘you’ll	Drown.’
Bugg	blinked	sweat	from	his	eyes,	then,	as	the	thug’s	words	penetrated,	he
laughed.	‘Drown?	Oh,	that’s	priceless.	Now,	take	your	hands	off	me	or	I	will
lose	my	temper.’
Instead,	the	man	tightened	his	hold	on	the	front	of	Bugg’s	tunic,	while	the
other	said,	‘You	were	right,	Kanorsos,	he	needs	beating.’
‘The	bully’s	greatest	terror,’	Bugg	said,	‘comes	when	he	meets	someone
bigger	and	meaner—’
‘And	is	that	you?’
Both	men	laughed.
Bugg	twisted	his	head,	looked	round.	People	were	hurrying	past	–	it	was
never	wise	to	witness	such	events,	not	when	the	murderers	of	the	Patriotists
were	involved.	‘So	be	it,’	he	said	under	his	breath.	‘Gentlemen,	allow	me	to
introduce	to	you	someone	bigger	and	meaner,	or,	to	be	more	accurate,
something.’
A	moment	later	Bugg	was	alone.	He	adjusted	his	tunic,	glanced	about,	then
set	off	once	more	for	his	master ’s	abode.
It	was	inevitable,	he	knew,	that	someone	had	witnessed	the	sudden
vanishing	of	two	armed	and	amoured	men.	But	no-one	cried	out	in	his	wake,
for	which	he	was	relieved,	since	he	was	not	inclined	to	discuss	much	with
anyone	right	at	that	moment.
Did	I	just	lose	my	temper?	It’s	possible,	but	then,	you	were	distracted.
Perturbed,	even.	These	things	happen.
	
Feather	Witch	wasted	little	time.	Off	the	cursed	ships	and	their	countless,
endlessly	miserable	crowds,	the	eyes	always	upon	her,	the	expressions	of
suspicion	or	contempt	and	the	stench	of	suffering	that	came	of	hundreds	of
prisoners	–	the	fallen	Edur	of	Sepik,	mixed-blood	one	and	all,	worse	in	the
eyes	of	the	tribes	than	Letherii	slaves;	the	scores	of	foreigners	who	possessed
knowledge	deemed	useful	–	at	least	for	now;	the	Nemil	fisher	folk;	the	four
copper-skinned	Shal-Morzinn	warriors	dragged	from	a	floundering	carrack;
denizens	of	Seven	Cities,	hailing	from	Ehrlitan,	the	Karang	Isles,	Pur	Atrii	and
other	places;	Quon	sailors	who	claimed	to	be	citizens	of	an	empire	called
Malaz;	dwellers	of	Lamatath	and	Callows…
Among	them	there	were	warriors	considered	worthy	enough	to	be	treated
as	challengers.	An	axeman	from	the	ruined	Meckros	City	the	fleet	had
descended	upon,	a	Cabalhii	monk	and	a	silent	woman	wearing	a	porcelain


mask	the	brow	of	which	was	marked	with	eleven	arcane	glyphs	–	she	had	been
found	near	dead	in	a	storm-battered	scow	south	of	Callows.
There	were	others,	chained	in	the	holds	of	other	ships	in	other	fleets,	but
where	they	came	from	and	what	they	were	was	mostly	irrelevant.	The	only
detail	that	had	come	to	fascinate	Feather	Witch	–	among	all	these	pathetic
creatures	–	was	the	bewildering	array	of	gods,	goddesses,	spirits	and
ascendants	they	worshipped.	Prayers	in	a	dozen	languages,	voices	reaching	out
into	vast	silences	–	all	these	forlorn	fools	and	all	the	unanswered	calls	for
salvation.
No	end,	in	that	huge,	chaotic	world,	to	the	delusions	of	those	who	believed
they	were	chosen.	Unique	among	their	kind,	basking	beneath	the	gaze	of	gods
that	gave	a	damn	–	as	if	they	would,	when	the	truth	was,	each	immortal	visage,
for	all	its	peculiar	traits,	was	but	a	facet	of	one,	and	that	one	had	long	since
turned	away,	only	to	fight	an	eternal	battle	against	itself.	From	the	heavens,
only	indifference	rained	down,	like	ash,	stinging	the	eyes,	scratching	raw	the
throat.	There	was	no	sustenance	in	that	blinding	deluge.
Chosen	–	now	there	was	a	conceit	of	appalling	proportions.	Either	we	all
are,	or	none	of	us	are.	And	if	the	former,	then	we	will	all	face	the	same	judge,
the	same	hand	of	justice	–	the	wealthy,	the	Indebted,	the	master,	the	slave,	the
murderer	and	the	victim,	the	raper	and	the	raped,	all	of	us,	so	pray	hard,
everyone	–	if	that	helps	–	and	look	well	to	your	own	shadow.	More	likely,	in	her
mind,	no-one	was	chosen,	and	there	was	no	day	of	judgement	awaiting	every
soul.	Each	and	every	mortal	faced	a	singular	end,	and	that	was	oblivion.
Oh,	indeed,	the	gods	existed,	but	not	one	cared	a	whit	for	the	fate	of	a
mortal’s	soul,	unless	they	could	bend	that	soul	to	their	will,	to	serve	as	but	one
more	soldier	in	their	pointless,	self-destructive	wars.
For	herself,	she	was	past	such	thinking.	She	had	found	her	own	freedom,
basking	beneath	that	blessed	rain	of	indifference.	She	would	do	as	she	willed,
and	not	even	the	gods	could	stop	her.	It	would	be	the	gods	themselves,	she
vowed,	who	would	come	to	her.	Beseeching,	on	their	knees,	snared	in	their
own	game.
She	moved	silently,	now,	deep	in	the	crypts	beneath	the	Old	Palace.	I	was	a
slave,	once	–	many	believe	I	still	am,	yet	look	at	me	–	I	rule	this	buried	realm.	I
alone	know	where	the	hidden	chambers	reside,	I	know	what	awaits	me	within
them.	I	walk	this	most	fated	path,	and,	when	the	time	is	right,	I	will	take	the
throne.
The	Throne	of	Oblivion.
Uruth	might	well	be	looking	for	her	right	now,	the	old	hag	with	all	her
airs,	the	smugness	of	a	thousand	imagined	secrets,	but	Feather	Witch	knew	all


those	secrets.	There	was	nothing	to	fear	from	Uruth	Sengar	–	she	had	been
usurped	by	events.	By	her	youngest	son,	by	the	other	sons	who	then	betrayed
Rhulad.	By	the	conquest	itself.	The	society	of	Edur	women	was	now	scattered,
torn	apart;	they	went	where	their	husbands	were	despatched;	they	had
surrounded	themselves	in	Letherii	slaves,	fawners	and	Indebted.	They	had
ceased	to	care.	In	any	case,	Feather	Witch	had	had	enough	of	all	that.	She	was
in	Letheras	once	more	and	like	that	fool,	Udinaas,	she	was	fleeing	her
bondage;	and	here,	in	the	catacombs	of	the	Old	Palace,	none	would	find	her.
Old	storage	rooms	were	already	well	supplied,	equipped	a	morsel	at	a	time
in	the	days	before	the	long	journey	across	the	oceans.	She	had	fresh	water,
wine	and	beer,	dried	fish	and	beef,	fired	clay	jugs	with	preserved	fruits.
Bedding,	spare	clothes,	and	over	a	hundred	scrolls	stolen	from	the	Imperial
Library.	Histories	of	the	Nerek,	the	Tarthenal,	the	Fent	and	a	host	of	even	more
obscure	peoples	the	Letherii	had	devoured	in	the	last	seven	or	eight	centuries	–
the	Bratha,	the	Katter,	the	Dresh	and	the	Shake.
And	here,	beneath	the	Old	Palace,	Feather	Witch	had	discovered	chambers
lined	with	shelves	on	which	sat	thousands	of	mouldering	scrolls,	crumbling
clay	tablets	and	worm-gnawed	bound	books.	Of	those	she	had	examined,	the
faded	script	in	most	of	them	was	written	in	an	arcane	style	of	Letherii	that
proved	difficult	to	decipher,	but	she	was	learning,	albeit	slowly.	A	handful	of
old	tomes,	however,	were	penned	in	a	language	she	had	never	seen	before.
The	First	Empire,	whence	this	colony	originally	came	all	those	centuries
ago,	seemed	to	be	a	complicated	place,	home	to	countless	peoples	each	with
their	own	languages	and	gods.	For	all	the	imperial	claims	to	being	the	birth	of
human	civilization,	it	was	clear	to	Feather	Witch	that	no	such	claim	could	be
taken	seriously.	Perhaps	the	First	Empire	marked	the	initial	nation	consisting
of	more	than	a	single	city,	probably	born	out	of	conquest,	one	city-state	after
another	swallowed	up	by	the	rampaging	founders.	Yet	even	then,	the	fabled
Seven	Cities	was	an	empire	bordered	by	independent	tribes	and	peoples,	and
there	had	been	wars	and	then	treaties.	Some	were	broken,	most	were	not.
Imperial	ambitions	had	been	stymied,	and	it	was	this	fact	that	triggered	the	age
of	colonization	to	distant	lands.
The	First	Empire	had	met	foes	who	would	not	bend	a	knee.	This	was,	for
Feather	Witch,	the	most	important	truth	of	all,	one	that	had	been	conveniently
and	deliberately	forgotten.	She	had	gained	strength	from	that,	but	such	details
were	themselves	but	confirmation	of	discoveries	she	had	already	made	–	out	in
the	vast	world	beyond.	There	had	been	clashes,	fierce	seafarers	who	took
exception	to	a	foreign	fleet’s	invading	their	waters.	Letherii	and	Edur	ships	had
gone	down,	figures	amidst	flotsam-filled	waves,	arms	raised	in	hopeless


supplication	–	the	heave	and	swirl	of	sharks,	dhenrabi	and	other	mysterious
predators	of	the	deep	–	screams,	piteous	screams,	they	still	echoed	in	her	head,
writhing	at	the	pit	of	her	stomach.	Revulsion	and	glee	both.
The	storms	that	had	battered	the	fleet,	especially	west	of	the	Draconean
Sea,	had	revealed	the	true	immensity	of	natural	power,	its	fickle	thrashings	that
swallowed	entire	ships	–	there	was	delight	in	being	so	humbled,	coming	upon
her	with	the	weight	of	revelation.	The	Lether	Empire	was	puny	–	like	Uruth
Sengar,	it	held	to	airs	of	greatness	when	it	was	but	one	more	pathetic	hovel	of
cowering	mortals.
She	would	not	regret	destroying	it.
Huddled	now	in	her	favoured	chamber,	the	ceiling	overhead	a	cracked
dome,	its	plaster	paintings	obscured	by	stains	and	mould,	Feather	Witch	sat
herself	down	cross-legged	and	drew	out	a	small	leather	pouch.	Within,	her
most	precious	possession.	She	could	feel	its	modest	length	through	the	thin
hide,	the	protuberances,	the	slightly	ragged	end,	and,	opposite,	the	curl	of	a
nail	that	had	continued	growing.	She	wanted	to	draw	it	out,	to	touch	once	again
its	burnished	skin—
‘Foolish	little	girl.’
Hissing,	Feather	Witch	flinched	back	from	the	doorway.	A	twisted,
malformed	figure	occupied	the	threshold	–	she	had	not	seen	it	in	a	long	time,
had	almost	forgotten	–	‘Hannan	Mosag.	I	do	not	answer	to	you.	And	if	you
think	me	weak—’
‘Oh	no,’	wheezed	the	Warlock	King,	‘not	that.	I	chose	my	word	carefully
when	I	said	“foolish”.	I	know	you	have	delved	deep	into	your	Letherii	magic.
You	have	gone	far	beyond	casting	those	old,	chipped	tiles	of	long	ago,	haven’t
you?	Even	Uruth	has	no	inkling	of	your	Cedance	–	you	did	well	to	disguise
your	learning.	Yet,	for	all	that,	you	are	still	a	fool,	dreaming	of	all	that	you
might	achieve	–	when	in	truth	you	are	alone.’
‘What	do	you	want?	If	the	Emperor	were	to	learn	that	you’re	skulking
around	down	here—’
‘He	will	learn	nothing.	You	and	I,	Letherii,	we	can	work	together.	We	can
destroy	that	abomination—’
‘With	yet	another	in	his	place	–	you.’
‘Do	you	truly	think	I	would	have	let	it	come	to	this?	Rhulad	is	mad,	as	is
the	god	who	controls	him.	They	must	be	expunged.’
‘I	know	your	hunger,	Hannan	Mosag—’
‘You	do	not!’	the	Edur	snapped,	a	shudder	taking	him.	He	edged	closer	into
the	chamber,	then	held	up	a	mangled	hand.	‘Look	carefully	upon	me,	woman.
See	what	the	Chained	One’s	sorcery	does	to	the	flesh	–	oh,	we	are	bound	now


to	the	power	of	chaos,	to	its	taste,	its	seductive	flavour.	It	should	never	have
come	to	this—’
‘So	you	keep	saying,’	she	cut	in	with	a	sneer.	‘And	how	would	the	great
empire	of	Hannan	Mosag	have	looked?	A	rain	of	flowers	onto	every	street,
every	citizen	freed	of	debt,	with	the	benign	Tiste	Edur	overseeing	it	all?’	She
leaned	forward.	‘You	forget,	I	was	born	among	your	people,	in	your	very
tribe,	Warlock	King.	I	remember	going	hungry	during	the	unification	wars.	I
remember	the	cruelty	you	heaped	upon	us	slaves	–	when	we	got	too	old,	you
used	us	as	bait	for	beskra	crabs	–	threw	our	old	ones	into	a	cage	and	dropped	it
over	the	side	of	your	knarri.	Oh,	yes,	drowning	was	a	mercy,	but	the	ones	you
didn’t	like	you	kept	their	heads	above	the	tide	line,	you	let	the	crabs	devour
them	alive,	and	laughed	at	the	screams.	We	were	muscle	and	when	that	muscle
was	used	up,	we	were	meat.’
‘And	is	Indebtedness	any	better—’
‘No,	for	that	is	a	plague	that	spreads	to	every	family	member,	every
generation.’
Hannan	Mosag	shook	his	misshapen	head.	‘I	would	not	have	succumbed	to
the	Chained	One.	He	believed	he	was	using	me,	but	I	was	using	him.	Feather
Witch,	there	would	have	been	no	war.	No	conquest.	The	tribes	were	joined	as
one	–	I	made	certain	of	that.	Prosperity	and	freedom	from	fear	awaited	us,	and
in	that	world	the	lives	of	the	slaves	would	have	changed.	Perhaps,	indeed,	the
lives	of	Letherii	among	the	Tiste	Edur	would	have	proved	a	lure	to	the
Indebted	in	the	southlands,	enough	to	shatter	the	spine	of	this	empire,	for	we
would	have	offered	freedom.’
She	turned	away,	deftly	hiding	the	small	leather	bag.	‘What	is	the	point	of
this,	Hannan	Mosag?’
‘You	wish	to	bring	down	Rhulad—’
‘I	will	bring	you	all	down.’
‘But	it	must	begin	with	Rhulad	–	you	can	see	that.	Unless	he	is	destroyed,
and	that	sword	with	him,	you	can	achieve	nothing.’
‘If	you	could	have	killed	him,	Warlock	King,	you	would	have	done	so	long
ago.’
‘Oh,	but	I	will	kill	him.’
She	glared	across	at	him.	‘How?’
‘Why,	with	his	own	family.’
Feather	Witch	was	silent	for	a	dozen	heartbeats.	‘His	father	cowers	in	fear.
His	mother	cannot	meet	his	eyes.	Binadas	and	Trull	are	dead,	and	Fear	has
fled.’
‘Binadas?’	The	breath	hissed	slowly	from	Hannan	Mosag.	‘I	did	not	know


that.’
‘Tomad	dreamed	of	his	son’s	death,	and	Hanradi	Khalag	quested	for	his
soul	–	and	failed.’
The	Warlock	King	regarded	her	with	hooded	eyes.	‘And	did	my	K’risnan
attempt	the	same	of	Trull	Sengar?’
‘No,	why	would	he?	Rhulad	himself	murdered	Trull.	Chained	him	in	the
Nascent.	If	that	was	meant	to	be	secret,	it	failed.	We	heard	–	we	slaves	hear
everything—’
‘Yes,	you	do,	and	that	is	why	we	can	help	each	other.	Feather	Witch,	you
wish	to	see	this	cursed	empire	collapse	–	so	do	I.	And	when	that	occurs,	know
this:	I	intend	to	take	my	Edur	home.	Back	to	our	northlands.	If	the	south	is	in
flames,	that	is	of	no	concern	to	me	–	I	leave	the	Letherii	to	the	Letherii,	for	no
surer	recipe	for	obliteration	do	any	of	us	require.	I	knew	that	from	the	very
start.	Lether	cannot	sustain	itself.	Its	appetite	is	an	addiction,	and	that	appetite
exceeds	the	resources	it	needs	to	survive.	Your	people	had	already	crossed	that
threshold,	although	they	knew	it	not.	It	was	my	dream,	Feather	Witch,	to	raise	a
wall	of	power	and	so	ensure	the	immunity	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Tell	me,	what	do
you	know	of	the	impending	war	in	the	east?’
‘What	war?’
Hannan	Mosag	smiled.	‘The	unravelling	begins.	Let	us	each	grasp	a	thread,
you	at	one	end,	me	at	the	other.	Behind	you,	the	slaves.	Behind	me,	all	the
K’risnan.’
‘Does	Trull	Sengar	live?’
‘It	is	Fear	Sengar	who	seeks	the	means	of	destroying	Rhulad.	And	I	mean
for	him	to	find	it.	Decide	now,	Feather	Witch.	Are	we	in	league?’
She	permitted	herself	a	small	smile.	‘Hannan	Mosag,	when	the	moment	of
obliteration	comes…you	had	better	crawl	fast.’
	
‘I	don’t	want	to	see	them.’
With	these	words	the	Emperor	twisted	on	his	throne,	legs	drawing	up,	and
seemed	to	focus	on	the	wall	to	his	left.	The	sword	in	his	right	hand,	point
resting	on	the	dais,	was	trembling.
Standing	in	an	alcove	to	one	side,	Nisall	wanted	to	hurry	forward,	reaching
out	for	the	beleaguered,	frightened	Edur.
But	Triban	Gnol	stood	facing	the	throne.	This	audience	belonged	to	him
and	him	alone;	nor	would	the	Chancellor	countenance	any	interruption	from
her.	He	clearly	detested	her	very	presence,	but	on	that	detail	Rhulad	had	insisted
–	Nisall’s	only	victory	thus	far.


‘Highness,	I	agree	with	you.	Your	father,	alas,	insisted	I	convey	to	you	his
wishes.	He	would	greet	his	most	cherished	son.	Further,	he	brings	dire	news—’
‘His	favourite	kind,’	Rhulad	muttered,	eyes	flickering	as	if	he	was	seeking
an	escape	from	the	chamber.	‘Cherished?	His	word?	No,	I	thought	not.	What	he
cherishes	is	my	power	–	he	wants	it	for	himself.	Him	and	Binadas—’
‘Forgive	my	interruption,	Highness,’	Triban	Gnol	said,	bowing	his	head.
‘There	is	news	of	Binadas.’
The	Emperor	flinched.	Licked	dry	lips.	‘What	has	happened?’
‘It	is	now	known,’	the	Chancellor	replied,	‘that	Binadas	was	murdered.	He
was	commanding	a	section	of	the	fleet.	There	was	a	battle	with	an	unknown
enemy.	Terrible	sorcery	was	exchanged,	and	the	remnants	of	both	fleets	were
plunged	into	the	Nascent,	there	to	complete	their	battle	in	that	flooded	realm.
Yet,	this	was	all	prelude.	After	the	remaining	enemy	ships	fled,	a	demon	came
upon	Binadas’s	ship.	Such	was	its	ferocity	that	all	the	Edur	were	slaughtered.
Binadas	himself	was	pinned	to	his	chair	by	a	spear	flung	by	that	demon.’
‘How,’	Rhulad	croaked,	‘how	is	all	this	known?’
‘Your	father…dreamed.	In	that	dream	he	found	himself	a	silent,	ghostly
witness,	drawn	there	as	if	by	the	caprice	of	a	malevolent	god.’
‘What	of	that	demon?	Does	it	still	haunt	the	Nascent?	I	shall	hunt	it	down,	I
shall	destroy	it.	Yes,	there	must	be	vengeance.	He	was	my	brother.	I	sent	him,
my	brother,	sent	him.	They	all	die	by	my	word.	All	of	them,	and	this	is	what	my
father	will	tell	me	–	oh	how	he	hungers	for	that	moment,	but	he	shall	not	have
it!	The	demon,	yes,	the	demon	who	stalks	my	kin…’	His	fevered	ramble
trickled	away,	and	so	ravaged	was	Rhulad’s	face	that	Nisall	had	to	look	away,
lest	she	cry	out.
‘Highness,’	the	Chancellor	said	in	a	quiet	voice.
Nisall	stiffened	–	this	was	what	Triban	Gnol	was	working	towards	–	all	that
had	come	before	was	for	this	precise	moment.
‘Highness,	the	demon	has	been	delivered.	It	is	here,	Emperor.’
Rhulad	seemed	to	shrink	back	into	himself.	He	said	nothing,	though	his
mouth	worked.
‘A	challenger,’	Triban	Gnol	continued.	‘Tarthenal	blood,	yet	purer,
Hanradi	Khalag	claims,	than	any	Tarthenal	of	this	continent.	Tomad	knew	him
for	what	he	was	the	moment	the	giant	warrior	took	his	first	step	onto	Edur
bloodwood.	Knew	him,	yet	could	not	face	him,	for	Binadas’s	soul	is	in	the
Tarthenal’s	shadow	–	along	with	a	thousand	other	fell	victims.	They	clamour,
one	and	all,	for	both	freedom	and	vengeance.	Highness,	the	truth	must	now	be
clear	to	you.	Your	god	has	delivered	him.	To	you,	so	that	you	may	slay	him,	so
that	you	may	avenge	your	brother ’s	death.’


‘Yes,’	Rhulad	whispered.	‘He	laughs	–	oh,	how	he	laughs.	Binadas,	are	you
close?	Close	to	me	now?	Do	you	yearn	for	freedom?	Well,	if	I	cannot	have	it,
why	should	you?	No,	there	is	no	hurry	now,	is	there?	You	wanted	this	throne,
and	now	you	learn	how	it	feels	–	just	a	hint,	yes,	of	all	that	haunts	me.’
‘Highness,’	the	Chancellor	murmured,	‘are	you	not	eager	to	avenge
Binadas?	Tomad—’
‘Tomad!’	Rhulad	jolted	on	the	throne,	glared	at	Triban	Gnol	–	who	visibly
rocked	back.	‘He	saw	the	demon	slay	Binadas,	and	now	he	thinks	it	will	do	the
same	to	me!	That	is	the	desire	for	vengeance	at	work	here,	you	fish-skinned
fool!	Tomad	wants	me	to	die	because	I	killed	Binadas!	And	Trull!	I	have	killed
his	children!	But	whose	blood	burns	in	my	veins?	Whose?	Where	is	Hanradi?
Oh,	I	know	why	he	will	not	be	found	in	the	outer	room	–	he	goes	to	Hannan
Mosag!	They	plunge	into	Darkness	and	whisper	of	betrayal	–	I	am	past	my
patience	with	them!’
Triban	Gnol	spread	his	hands.	‘Highness,	I	had	intended	to	speak	to	you	of
this,	but	at	another	time—’
‘Of	what?	Out	with	it!’
‘A	humble	inquiry	from	Invigilator	Karos	Invictad,	Highness.	With	all
respect,	I	assure	you,	he	asks	your	will	in	regard	to	matters	of	treason	–	not
among	the	Letherii,	of	course,	for	he	has	that	well	in	hand	–	but	among	the
Tiste	Edur	themselves…’
Nisall’s	gasp	echoed	in	the	suddenly	silent	room.	She	looked	across	to
where	Edur	guards	were	stationed,	and	saw	them	motionless	as	statues.
Rhulad	looked	ready	to	weep.	‘Treason	among	the	Edur?	My	Edur?	No,
this	cannot	be	–	has	he	proof?’
A	faint	shrug.	‘Highness,	I	doubt	he	would	have	ventured	this	inquiry	had
he	not	inadvertently	stumbled	on	some…sensitive	information.’
‘Go	away.	Get	out.	Get	out!’
Triban	Gnol	bowed,	then	backed	from	the	chamber.	Perhaps	he’d	gone	too
far,	yet	the	seed	had	been	planted.	In	most	fertile	soil.
As	soon	as	the	outer	doors	closed,	Nisall	stepped	from	the	alcove.	Rhulad
waved	her	closer.
‘My	love,’	he	whispered	in	a	child’s	voice,	‘what	am	I	to	do?	The	demon	–
they	brought	it	here.’
‘You	cannot	be	defeated,	Emperor.’
‘And	to	destroy	it,	how	many	times	must	I	die?	No,	I’m	not	ready.	Binadas
was	a	powerful	sorcerer,	rival	to	the	Warlock	King	himself.	My	brother…’
‘It	may	be,’	Nisall	ventured,	‘that	the	Chancellor	erred	in	the	details	of	that.
It	may	indeed	be	that	Tomad’s	dream	was	a	deceitful	sending	–	there	are	many


gods	and	spirits	out	there	who	see	the	Crippled	God	as	an	enemy.’
‘No	more.	I	am	cursed	into	confusion;	I	don’t	understand	any	of	this.	What
is	happening,	Nisall?’
‘Palace	ambitions,	beloved.	The	return	of	the	fleets	has	stirred	things	up.’
‘My	own	Edur…plotting	treason…’
She	reached	out	and	set	a	hand	on	his	left	shoulder.	The	lightest	of	touches,
momentary,	then	withdrawn	once	more.	Dare	I?	‘Karos	Invictad	is	perhaps	the
most	ambitious	of	them	all.	He	revels	in	his	reign	of	terror	among	the	Letherii,
and	would	expand	it	to	include	the	Tiste	Edur.	Highness,	I	am	Letherii	–	I	know
men	like	the	Invigilator,	I	know	what	drives	them,	what	feeds	their	malign
souls.	He	hungers	for	control,	for	his	heart	quails	in	fear	at	all	that	is	outside
his	control	–	at	chaos	itself.	In	his	world,	he	is	assailed	on	all	sides.	Highness,
Karos	Invictad’s	ideal	world	is	one	surrounded	by	a	sea	of	corpses,	every
unknown	and	unknowable	obliterated.	And	even	then,	he	will	find	no	peace.’
‘Perhaps	he	should	face	me	in	the	arena,’	Rhulad	said,	with	a	sudden
vicious	smile.	‘Face	to	face	with	a	child	of	chaos,	yes?	But	no,	I	need	him	to
hunt	down	his	Letherii.	The	traitors.’
‘And	shall	this	Letherii	be	granted	domination	over	Tiste	Edur	as	well?’
‘Treason	is	colourless,’	Rhulad	said,	shifting	uneasily	on	the	throne	once
more.	‘It	flows	unseen	no	matter	the	hue	of	blood.	I	have	not	decided	on	that.	I
need	to	think,	to	understand.	Perhaps	I	should	summon	the	Chancellor	once
again.’
‘Highness,	you	once	appointed	an	Edur	to	oversee	the	Patriotists.	Do	you
recall?’
‘Of	course	I	do.	Do	you	think	me	an	idiot,	woman?’
‘Perhaps	Bruthen	Trana—’
‘Yes,	that’s	him.	Not	once	has	he	reported	to	me.	Has	he	done	as	I
commanded?	How	do	I	even	know?’
‘Summon	him,	then,	Highness.’
‘Why	does	he	hide	from	me?	Unless	he	conspires	with	the	other	traitors.’
‘Highness,	I	know	for	a	truth	that	he	seeks	an	audience	with	you	almost
daily.’
‘You?’	Rhulad	glanced	over	at	her,	eyes	narrowing.	‘How?’
‘Bruthen	Trana	sought	me	out,	beseeching	me	to	speak	to	you	on	his
behalf.	The	Chancellor	denies	him	an	audience	with	you—’
‘Triban	Gnol	cannot	deny	such	things!	He	is	a	Letherii!	Where	are	my
Edur?	Why	do	I	never	see	them?	And	now	Tomad	has	returned,	and	Hanradi
Khalag!	None	of	them	will	speak	to	me!’
‘Highness,	Tomad	waits	in	the	outer	chamber—’


‘He	knew	I	would	deny	him.	You	are	confusing	me,	whore.	I	don’t	need
you	–	I	don’t	need	anyone!	I	just	need	time.	To	think.	That	is	all.	They’re	all
frightened	of	me,	and	with	good	reason,	oh	yes.	Traitors	are	always
frightened,	and	when	their	schemes	are	discovered,	oh	how	they	plead	for	their
lives!	Perhaps	I	should	kill	everyone	–	a	sea	of	corpses,	then	there	would	be
peace.	And	that	is	all	I	want.	Peace.	Tell	me,	are	the	people	happy,	Nisall?’
She	bowed	her	head.	‘I	do	not	know,	Highness.’
‘Are	you?	Are	you	happy	with	me?’
‘I	feel	naught	but	love	for	you,	Emperor.	My	heart	is	yours.’
‘The	same	words	you	spoke	to	Diskanar,	no	doubt.	And	all	the	other	men
you’ve	bedded.	Have	your	slaves	draw	a	bath	–	you	stink	of	sweat,	woman.
Then	await	me	beneath	silks.’	He	raised	his	voice.	‘Call	the	Chancellor!	We
wish	to	speak	to	him	immediately!	Go,	Nisall,	your	Letherii	stink	makes	me
ill.’
As	she	backed	away	Rhulad	raised	his	free	hand.	‘My	dearest,	the	golden
silks	–	you	are	like	a	pearl	among	those.	The	sweetest	pearl…’
	
Bruthen	Trana	waited	in	the	corridor	until	Tomad	Sengar,	denied	audience	with
the	Emperor,	departed	the	Citizens’	Chamber.	Stepping	into	the	elder ’s	path	he
bowed	and	said,	‘I	greet	you,	Tomad	Sengar.’
Distracted,	the	older	Tiste	Edur	frowned	at	him.	‘Den-Ratha.	What	do	you
wish	from	me?’
‘A	word	or	two,	no	more	than	that.	I	am	Bruthen	Trana—’
‘One	of	Rhulad’s	sycophants.’
‘Alas,	no.	I	was	appointed	early	in	the	regime	to	oversee	the	Letherii
security	organization	known	as	the	Patriotists.	As	part	of	my	responsibilities,	I
was	to	report	to	the	Emperor	in	person	each	week.	As	of	yet,	I	have	not	once
addressed	him.	The	Chancellor	has	interposed	himself	and	turns	me	away	each
and	every	time.’
‘My	youngest	son	suckles	at	Gnol’s	tit,’	Tomad	Sengar	said	in	a	low,	bitter
voice.
‘It	is	my	belief,’	Bruthen	Trana	said,	‘that	the	Emperor	himself	is	not
entirely	aware	of	the	extent	of	the	barriers	the	Chancellor	and	his	agents	have
raised	around	him,	Elder	Sengar.	Although	I	have	sought	to	penetrate	them,	I
have	failed	thus	far.’
‘Then	why	turn	to	me,	Den-Ratha?	I	am	even	less	able	to	reach	through	to
my	son.’
‘It	is	the	Tiste	Edur	who	are	being	isolated	from	their	Emperor,’	Bruthen


said.	‘Not	just	you	and	I.	All	of	us.’
‘Hannan	Mosag—’
‘Is	reviled,	for	it	is	well	understood	that	the	Warlock	King	is	responsible
for	all	of	this.	His	ambition,	his	pact	with	an	evil	god.	He	sought	the	sword	for
himself,	did	he	not?’
‘Then	Rhulad	is	truly	alone?’
Bruthen	Trana	nodded,	then	added,	‘There	is	a	possibility…there	is	one
person.	The	Letherii	woman	who	is	his	First	Concubine—’
‘A	Letherii?’	Tomad	snarled.	‘You	must	be	mad.	She	is	an	agent	for	Gnol,
a	spy.	She	has	corrupted	Rhulad	–	how	else	could	she	remain	as	First
Concubine?	My	son	would	never	have	taken	her,	unless	she	had	some
nefarious	hold	over	him.’	The	snarl	twisted	the	elder ’s	features.	‘You	are	being
used,	warrior.	You	and	I	shall	not	speak	again.’
Tomad	Sengar	pushed	him	to	one	side	and	marched	down	the	corridor.
Bruthen	Trana	turned	to	watch	him	go.
	
Drawing	out	a	crimson	silk	cloth,	Karos	Invictad	daubed	at	the	sweat	on	his
brow,	his	eyes	fixed	on	the	strange	two-headed	insect	as	it	circled	in	place,
round	and	round	and	round	in	its	box	cage.	‘Not	a	single	arrangement	of	tiles
will	halt	this	confounded,	brainless	creature.	I	begin	to	believe	this	is	a	hoax.’
‘Were	it	me,	sir,’	Tanal	Yathvanar	said,	‘I	would	have	crushed	the	whole
contraption	under	heel	long	ago.	Indeed	it	must	be	a	hoax	–	the	proof	is	that
you	have	not	defeated	it	yet.’
The	Invigilator ’s	gaze	lifted,	regarded	Tanal.	‘I	do	not	know	which	is	the
more	disgusting,	you	acknowledging	defeat	by	an	insect,	or	your	pathetic
attempts	at	flattery.’	He	set	the	cloth	down	on	the	table	and	leaned	back.	‘The
studied	pursuit	of	solutions	requires	patience,	and,	more,	a	certain	cast	of
intellect.	This	is	why	you	will	never	achieve	more	than	you	have,	Tanal
Yathvanar.	You	totter	at	the	very	edge	of	your	competence	–	ah,	no	need	for	the
blood	to	so	rush	to	your	face,	it	is	what	you	are	that	I	find	so	useful	to	me.
Furthermore,	you	display	uncommon	wisdom	in	restraining	your	ambition,	so
that	you	make	no	effort	to	attempt	what	is	beyond	your	capacity.	That	is	a	rare
talent.	Now,	what	have	you	to	report	to	me	this	fine	afternoon?’
‘Master,	we	have	come	very	close	to	seeing	our	efforts	extended	to	include
the	Tiste	Edur.’
Karos	Invictad’s	brows	rose.	‘Triban	Gnol	has	spoken	to	the	Emperor?’
‘He	has.	Of	course,	the	Emperor	was	shaken	by	the	notion	of	traitors
among	the	Edur.	So	much	so	that	he	ordered	the	Chancellor	from	the	throne


room.	For	a	while.’	Tanal	Yathvanar	smiled.	‘A	quarter-bell,	apparently.	The
subject	was	not	broached	again	that	day,	yet	it	is	clear	that	Rhulad’s	suspicions
of	his	fellow	Edur	have	burgeoned.’
‘Very	well.	It	will	not	be	long,	then.’	The	Invigilator	leaned	forward	again,
frowning	down	at	the	puzzle	box.	‘It	is	important	that	all	obstacles	be	removed.
The	only	words	the	Emperor	should	be	hearing	should	come	from	the
Chancellor.	Tanal,	prepare	a	dossier	on	the	First	Concubine.’	He	looked	up
again.	‘You	understand,	don’t	you,	that	your	opportunity	to	free	that	scholar
you	have	chained	far	below	has	passed?	There	is	no	choice	now	but	that	she
must	disappear.’
Unable	to	speak,	Tanal	Yathvanar	simply	nodded.
‘I	note	this	–	and	with	some	urgency	–	because	you	have	no	doubt	grown
weary	of	her	in	any	case,	and	if	not,	you	should	have.	I	trust	I	am	understood.
Would	you	not	enjoy	replacing	her	with	the	First	Concubine?’	Karos	smiled.
Tanal	licked	dry	lips.	‘Such	a	dossier	will	be	difficult,	Master—’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool.	Work	with	the	Chancellor ’s	agents.	We’re	not	interested
in	factual	reportage	here.	Invent	what	we	need	to	incriminate	her.	That	should
not	be	difficult.	Errant	knows,	we	have	had	enough	practice.’
‘Even	so	–	forgive	me,	sir	–	but	she	is	the	Emperor ’s	only	lover.’
‘You	do	not	understand	at	all,	do	you?	She	is	not	Rhulad’s	first	love.	No,
that	woman,	an	Edur,	killed	herself	–	oh,	never	mind	the	official	version,	I
have	witness	reports	of	that	tragic	event.	She	was	carrying	the	Emperor ’s	child.
Thus,	in	every	respect	imaginable,	she	betrayed	him.	Tanal,	for	Rhulad	the
rains	have	just	passed,	and	while	the	clay	feels	firm	underfoot,	it	is	in	truth	thin
as	papyrus.	At	the	first	intimation	of	suspicion,	Rhulad	will	lose	his	mind	to
rage	–	we	will	be	lucky	to	wrest	the	woman	from	his	clutches.	Accordingly,	the
arrest	must	take	effect	in	the	palace,	in	private,	when	the	First	Concubine	is
alone.	She	must	then	be	brought	here	immediately.’
‘Do	you	not	believe	the	Emperor	will	demand	her	return?’
‘The	Chancellor	will	advise	against	it,	of	course.	Please,	Tanal	Yathvanar,
leave	the	subtle	details	of	human	–	and	Edur	–	natures	to	those	of	us	who	fully
comprehend	them.	You	shall	have	the	woman,	fear	not.	To	do	with	as	you
please	–	once	we	have	her	confession,	that	is.	Bloodied	and	bruised,	is	that	not
how	you	prefer	them?	Now,	leave	me.	I	believe	I	have	arrived	at	a	solution	to
this	contraption.’

Tanal	Yathvanar	stood	outside	the	closed	door	for	a	time,	struggling	to	slow


his	heart,	his	mind	racing.	Murder	Janath	Anar?	Make	her	disappear	like	all	the
others?	Fattening	the	crabs	at	the	bottom	of	the	river?	Oh,	Errant,	I	do	not
know…if…I	do	not	know—
From	behind	the	office	door	came	a	snarl	of	frustration.
Oddly	enough,	the	sound	delighted	him.	Yes,	you	towering	intellect,	it
defeats	you	again.	That	two-headed	nightmare	in	miniature.	For	all	your	lofty
musings	on	your	own	genius,	this	puzzle	confounds	you.	Perhaps,	Invigilator,
the	world	is	not	how	you	would	have	it,	not	so	clear,	not	so	perfectly	designed
to	welcome	your	domination.
He	forced	himself	forward,	down	the	hall.	No,	he	would	not	kill	Janath
Anar.	He	loved	her.	Karos	Invictad	loved	only	himself	–	it	had	always	been	so,
Tanal	suspected,	and	that	was	not	going	to	change.	The	Invigilator	understood
nothing	of	human	nature,	no	matter	how	he	might	delude	himself.	Indeed,
Karos	had	given	himself	away	in	that	careless	command	to	kill	her.	Yes,
Invigilator,	this	is	my	revelation.	I	am	smarter	than	you.	I	am	superior	in	all	the
ways	that	truly	matter.	You	and	your	power,	it	is	all	compensation	for	what	you
do	not	understand	about	the	world,	for	the	void	in	your	soul	where	compassion
belongs.	Compassion,	and	the	love	that	one	can	feel	for	another	person.
He	would	tell	her,	now.	He	would	confess	the	depth	of	his	feelings,	and
then	he	would	unchain	her,	and	they	would	flee.	Out	of	Letheras.	Beyond	the
reach	of	the	Patriotists.	Together,	they	would	make	their	lives	anew.
He	hurried	down	the	damp,	worn	stairs,	beyond	the	sight	of	everyone	now,
down	into	his	own	private	world.	Where	his	love	awaited	him.
The	Invigilator	could	not	reach	everywhere	–	as	Tanal	was	about	to	prove.
Down	through	darkness,	all	so	familiar	now	he	no	longer	needed	a	lantern.
Where	he	ruled,	not	Karos	Invictad,	no,	not	here.	This	was	why	the	Invigilator
attacked	him	again	and	again,	with	ever	the	same	weapon,	the	implicit	threat	of
exposure,	of	defamation	of	Tanal	Yathvanar ’s	good	name.	But	all	these	crimes,
they	belonged	to	Karos	Invictad.	Imagine	the	counter-charges	Tanal	could
level	against	him,	if	he	needed	to	–	he	had	copies	of	records;	he	knew	where
every	secret	was	buried.	The	accounts	of	the	bloodstained	wealth	the
Invigilator	had	amassed	from	the	estates	of	his	victims	–	Tanal	knew	where
those	records	were	kept.	And	as	for	the	corpses	of	the	ones	who	had
disappeared…
Reaching	the	barred	door	to	the	torture	chamber,	he	drew	down	the	lantern
he	had	left	on	a	ledge	and,	after	a	few	efforts,	struck	the	wick	alight.	He	lifted
clear	the	heavy	bar	and	pushed	open	the	heavy	door	with	one	hand.
‘Back	so	soon?’	The	voice	was	a	raw	croak.
Tanal	stepped	into	the	chamber.	‘You	have	fouled	yourself	again.	No


matter	–	this	is	the	last	time,	Janath	Anar.’
‘Come	to	kill	me,	then.	So	be	it.	You	should	have	done	that	long	ago.	I	look
forward	to	leaving	this	broken	flesh.	You	cannot	chain	a	ghost.	And	so,	with
my	death,	you	shall	become	the	prisoner.	You	shall	be	the	one	who	is
tormented.	For	as	long	as	you	live,	and	I	do	hope	it	is	long,	I	shall	whisper	in
your	ear—’	She	broke	into	a	fit	of	coughing.
He	walked	closer,	feeling	emptied	inside,	his	every	determination	stripped
away	by	the	vehemence	in	her	words.
The	manacles	seemed	to	weep	blood	–	she	had	been	struggling	against	her
fetters	again.	Dreaming	of	haunting	me,	of	destroying	me.	How	is	she	any
different?	How	could	I	have	expected	her	to	be	any	different?	‘Look	at	you,’	he
said	in	a	low	voice.	‘Not	even	human	any	more	–	do	you	not	care	about	your
appearance,	about	how	you	want	me	to	see	you	when	I	come	here?’
‘You’re	right,’	she	said	in	a	grating	voice,	‘I	should	have	waited	until	you
arrived,	until	you	came	close.	Then	voided	all	over	you.	I’m	sorry.	I’m	afraid
my	bowels	are	in	bad	shape	right	now	–	the	muscles	are	weakening,
inevitably.’
‘You’ll	not	haunt	me,	woman,	your	soul	is	too	useless	–	the	Abyss	will
sweep	it	away,	I’m	sure.	Besides,	I	won’t	kill	you	for	a	long	while	yet—’
‘I	don’t	think	it’s	up	to	you	any	more,	Tanal	Yathvanar.’
‘It’s	all	up	to	me!’	he	shrieked.	‘All	of	it!’
He	stalked	over	to	her	and	began	unshackling	her	arms,	then	her	legs.	She
lost	consciousness	before	he	had	freed	her	second	wrist,	and	slid	into	a	heap
that	almost	snapped	both	her	legs	before	he	managed	to	work	the	manacles
from	her	battered,	torn	ankles.
She	weighed	almost	nothing,	and	he	was	able	to	move	quickly,	up	twenty
or	so	stairs,	until	he	reached	a	side	passage.	The	slimy	cobble	floor	underfoot
gradually	sloped	downward	as	he	shambled	along,	the	woman	over	one
shoulder,	the	lantern	swinging	from	his	free	hand.	Rats	scurried	from	his	path,
out	to	the	sides	where	deep,	narrow	gutters	had	been	cut	by	an	almost	constant
flow	of	runoff.
Eventually,	the	drip	of	dark	water	from	the	curved	ceiling	overhead
became	a	veritable	rain.	The	droplets	revived	Janath	momentarily,	enough	for
her	to	moan,	then	cough	for	a	half-dozen	strides	–	he	was	thankful	when	she
swooned	once	more,	and	the	feeble	clawing	on	his	back	ceased.
And	now	came	the	stench.	Disappeared?	Oh	no,	they	are	here.	All	of	them.
All	the	ones	Karos	Invictad	didn’t	like,	didn’t	need,	wanted	out	of	the	way.
Into	the	first	of	the	huge	domed	chambers	with	its	stone	walkway
encircling	a	deep	well,	in	which	white-shelled	crabs	clambered	amidst	bones.


This	well	was	entirely	filled,	which	is	what	had	forced	the	opening	of	another,
then	another	and	another	–	there	were	so	many	of	them,	down	here	beneath	the
river.
Arriving	at	the	last	of	the	chambers,	Tanal	set	her	down,	where	he	shackled
one	of	her	legs	to	the	wall.	On	either	side	of	her,	she	had	company,	although
neither	victim	was	alive.	He	stepped	back	as	she	stirred	once	more.
‘This	is	temporary,’	he	said.	‘You	won’t	be	joining	your	friends	beside
you.	When	I	return	–	and	it	won’t	be	long	–	I	will	move	you	again.	To	a	new
cell,	known	to	no-one	but	me.	Where	I	will	teach	you	to	love	me.	You’ll	see,
Janath	Anar.	I	am	not	the	monster	you	believe	me	to	be.	Karos	Invictad	is	the
monster	–	he	has	twisted	me,	he	has	made	me	into	what	I	am.	But	Karos
Invictad	is	not	a	god.	Not	immortal.	Not…infallible.	As	we	shall	all	discover.
He	thinks	I	want	her,	that	whore	of	the	Emperor ’s	–	that	dirty,	fallen	bitch.	He
could	not	be	more	wrong.	Oh,	there’s	so	much	to	do	now,	but	I	promise	I	won’t
be	gone	long.	You’ll	see,	my	love…’
	
She	awoke	to	the	sound	of	his	footfalls,	dwindling,	then	lost	to	the	trickle	and
drip	of	water.	It	was	dark,	and	cold,	colder	than	it	had	ever	been	before	–	she
was	somewhere	else	now,	some	other	crypt,	but	the	same	nightmare.
She	lifted	a	hand	–	as	best	she	could	–	and	wiped	at	her	face.	Her	hand
came	away	slick	with	slime.	Yet…the	chains,	they’re	gone.	She	struggled	to
draw	her	limbs	inward,	then	almost	immediately	heard	the	rattle	of	iron	links
snaking	across	stone.	Ah,	not	completely.
And	now	pain	arrived,	in	every	joint,	piercing	fire.	Ligaments	and	tendons,
stretched	for	so	long,	now	began	contracting	like	burning	ropes	–	oh,	Errant
take	me—
Her	eyes	flickered	open	once	more,	and	with	returning	consciousness	she
became	aware	of	savage	hunger,	coiling	in	her	shrunken	stomach.	Watery
waste	trickled	loose.
There	was	no	point	in	weeping.	No	point	in	wondering	which	of	them	was
madder	–	him	for	his	base	appetites	and	senseless	cruelty,	or	her	for	clinging
so	to	this	remnant	of	a	life.	A	battle	of	wills,	yet	profoundly	unequal	–	she
knew	that	in	her	heart,	had	known	it	all	along.
The	succession	of	grand	lectures	she	had	devised	in	her	mind	all	proved
hollow	conceits,	their	taste	too	bitter	to	bear.	He	had	defeated	her,	because	his
were	weapons	without	reason	–	and	so	I	answered	with	my	own	madness.	I
thought	it	would	work.	Instead,	I	ended	up	surrendering	all	that	I	had	that	was
of	any	worth.


And	so	now,	the	cold	of	death	stealing	over	me,	I	can	only	dream	of
becoming	a	vengeful	ghost,	eager	to	torment	the	one	who	tormented	me,	eager
to	be	to	him	as	he	was	to	me.	Believing	that	such	a	balance	was	just,	was
righteous.
Madness.	To	give	in	kind	is	to	be	in	kind.
So	now,	let	me	leave	here,	for	ever	gone—
And	she	felt	that	madness	reach	out	to	her,	an	embrace	that	would	sweep
away	her	sense	of	self,	her	knowledge	of	who	she	had	been,	once,	that	proud,
smug	academic	with	her	pristine	intellect	ordering	and	reordering	the	world.
Until	even	practicality	was	a	quaint	notion,	not	even	worthy	of	discourse,
because	the	world	outside	wasn’t	worth	reaching	out	to,	not	really	–	besides,	it
was	sullied,	wasn’t	it?	By	men	like	Tanal	Yathvanar	and	Karos	Invictad	–	the
ones	who	revelled	in	the	filth	they	made,	because	only	the	stench	of	excess
could	reach	through	to	their	numbed	senses—
—as	it	reaches	through	to	mine.	Listen!	He	returns,	step	by	hesitant	step—
A	calloused	hand	settled	on	her	brow.
Janath	Anar	opened	her	eyes.
Faint	light,	coming	from	every	direction.	Warm	light,	gentle	as	a	breath.
Looming	above	her	was	a	face.	Old,	lined	and	weathered,	with	eyes	deep	as	the
seas,	even	as	tears	made	them	glisten.
She	felt	the	chain	being	dragged	close.	Then	the	old	man	tugged	with	one
hand	and	the	links	parted	like	rotted	reeds.	He	reached	down,	then,	and	lifted
her	effortlessly.
Abyss,	yours	is	such	a	gentle	face…
Darkness,	once	more.
	
Beneath	the	bed	of	the	river,	below	silts	almost	a	storey	thick,	rested	the
remains	of	almost	sixteen	thousand	citizens	of	Letheras.	Their	bones	filled
ancient	wells	that	had	been	drilled	before	the	river ’s	arrival	–	before	the
drainage	course	from	the	far	eastern	mountains	changed	cataclysmically,
making	the	serpent	lash	its	tail,	the	torrent	carving	a	new	channel,	one	that
inundated	a	nascent	city	countless	millennia	ago.
Letherii	engineers	centuries	past	had	stumbled	upon	these	submerged
constructs,	wondering	at	the	humped	corridors	and	the	domed	chambers,
wondering	at	the	huge,	deep	wells	with	their	clear,	cold	water.	And	baffled	to
explain	how	such	tunnels	remained	more	or	less	dry,	the	cut	channels	seeming
to	absorb	water	like	runners	of	sponge.
No	records	existed	any	more	recounting	these	discoveries	–	the	tunnels


and	chambers	and	wells	were	lost	knowledge	to	all	but	a	chosen	few.	And	of
the	existence	of	parallel	passages,	the	hidden	doors	in	the	walls	of	corridors,
and	the	hundreds	of	lesser	tombs,	not	even	those	few	were	aware.	Certain
secrets	belonged	exclusively	to	the	gods.
The	Elder	God	carried	the	starved,	brutalized	woman	into	one	of	those
side	passages,	the	cantilevered	door	swinging	shut	noiselessly	behind	him.	In
his	mind	there	was	recrimination,	a	seething	torrent	of	anger	at	himself.	He
had	not	imagined	the	full	extent	of	depravity	and	slaughter	conducted	by	the
Patriotists,	and	he	was	sorely	tempted	to	awaken	himself,	unleashing	his	fullest
wrath	upon	these	unmitigated	sadists.
Of	course,	that	would	lead	to	unwarranted	attention,	which	would	no	doubt
result	in	yet	greater	slaughter,	and	one	that	made	no	distinction	between	those
who	deserved	death	and	those	who	did	not.	This	was	the	curse	of	power,	after
all.
As,	he	well	knew,	Karos	Invictad	would	soon	discover.
You	fool,	Invigilator.	Who	has	turned	his	deadly	regard	upon	you?	Deadly,
oh	my,	yes	indeed.
Though	few	might	comprehend	that,	given	the	modestly	handsome,
thoroughly	benign	features	surrounding	that	face.
Even	so,	Karos	Invictad.	Tehol	Beddict	has	decided	that	you	must	go.
And	I	almost	pity	you.

Tehol	Beddict	was	on	his	knees	on	the	dirt	floor	of	the	hovel,	rummaging
through	a	small	heap	of	debris,	when	he	heard	a	scuffling	sound	at	the
doorway.	He	glanced	over	a	shoulder.	‘Ublala	Pung,	good	evening,	my	friend.’
The	huge	half-blood	Tarthenal	edged	into	the	chamber,	hunching	beneath
the	low	ceiling.	‘What	are	you	doing?’
‘A	wooden	spoon	–	or	at	least	the	fragment	thereof.	Employed	in	a	central
role	in	the	preparation	of	this	morning’s	meal.	I	dread	the	possibility	that	Bugg
tossed	it	into	the	hearth.	Ah!	Here,	see	that?	A	curdle	of	fat	remains	on	it!’
‘Looks	like	dirt	to	me,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘Well,	even	dirt	has	flavour,’	he	replied,	crawling	over	to	the	pot
simmering	on	the	hearth.	‘Finally,	my	soup	acquires	subtle	sumptuousness.	Can
you	believe	this,	Ublala	Pung?	Look	at	me,	reduced	to	menial	chores,	even
unto	preparing	my	own	meals!	I	tell	you,	my	manservant’s	head	has	grown	too
large	by	far.	He	rises	above	his	station,	does	Bugg.	Perhaps	you	could	box	him
about	the	ears	for	me.	Now,	I	am	not	as	indifferent	as	you	think	–	there	is	the


glow	of	heightened	excitement	in	your	rather	blunt,	dogged	features.	What	has
happened?	Has	Shurq	Elalle	returned,	then?’
‘Would	I	be	here	if	she	had?’	Ublala	asked.	‘No,	Tehol	Beddict.	She	is
gone.	Out	to	the	seas,	with	all	her	pirated	young	men.	I	was	too	big,	you	see.	I
had	to	sleep	on	the	deck,	no	matter	the	weather,	and	that	was	no	fun	–	and	those
pirates,	they	kept	wanting	to	tie	sails	to	me,	laughing	as	if	that	was	funny	or
something.’
‘Ah	well,	sailors	have	simple	minds,	friend.	And	pirates	are	failed	sailors,
mostly,	taking	simpledom	to	profound	extremes—’
‘What?	I	have	news,	you	know.’
‘Do	you	now?’
‘I	do.’
‘Can	I	hear	it?’
‘Do	you	want	to?’
‘Why	yes,	else	I	would	not	have	asked.’
‘Really	want	to?’
‘Look,	if	you’re	not	interested	in	telling	me—’
‘No,	I’m	interested.	In	telling	you.	That	is	why	I’m	here,	although	I	will
have	some	of	that	soup	if	you’re	offering.’
‘Ublala	Pung,	you	are	most	welcome	to	this	soup,	but	first	let	me	fish	out
this	rag	I	fed	into	the	broth,	lest	you	choke	or	something.’
‘Rag?	What	kind	of	rag?’
‘Well,	squarish,	mostly.	I	believe	it	was	used	to	wipe	down	a	kitchen
counter,	thereby	absorbing	countless	assorted	foodstuffs.’
‘Tehol	Beddict,	one	of	the	pure	blood	has	come	to	the	city.’
‘Is	that	your	news?’
The	huge	man	nodded	solemnly.
‘Pure	blood?’
Another	nod.
‘So,	a	Tarthenal—’
‘No,’	Ublala	Pung	cut	in.	‘Pure	blood.	Purer	than	any	Tarthenal.	And	he
carries	a	stone	sword.	On	his	face	are	the	most	terrifying	tattoos,	like	a
shattered	tile.	He	is	greatly	scarred	and	countless	ghosts	swirl	in	his	wake—’
‘Ghosts?	You	could	see	ghosts	following	him	around?’
‘See	them?	Of	course	not.	But	I	smelled	them.’
‘Really?	So	what	do	ghosts	smell	like?	Never	mind.	A	Tarthenal	who’s
more	Tarthenal	than	any	Tarthenal	has	arrived	in	the	city.	What	does	he	want?’
‘You	do	not	understand,	Tehol	Beddict.	He	is	a	champion.	He	is	here	to
challenge	the	Emperor.’


‘Oh,	the	poor	man.’
‘Yes.	The	poor	man,	but	he’s	not	a	man,	is	he?	He’s	a	Tiste	Edur.’
Tehol	Beddict	frowned	across	at	Ublala	Pung.	‘Ah,	we	were	speaking	of
two	different	poor	men.	Well,	a	short	time	earlier	a	runner	from	Rucket	visited
–	it	seems	Scale	House	collapsed	during	that	earthquake.	But	it	was	not	your
normal	earthquake,	such	as	never	occurs	around	here	anyway.	Ublala	Pung,
there	is	another	champion,	one	far	more	frightening	than	any	pure	blood
Tarthenal.	There	is	great	consternation	among	the	Rat	Catchers,	all	of	whom
seem	to	know	more	than	they’re	letting	on.	The	view	seems	to	be	that	this	time
the	Emperor ’s	search	has	drawn	in	a	most	deadly	haul.’
‘Well,	I	don’t	know	nothing	about	that,’	Ublala	Pung	said,	rubbing
thoughtfully	at	the	bristle	on	his	chin.	‘Only,	this	pure	blood	has	a	stone	sword.
Chipped,	like	those	old	spear-points	people	are	selling	in	the	Downs	Market.
It’s	almost	as	tall	as	he	is,	and	he’s	taller	than	me.	I	saw	him	pick	up	a	Letherii
guard	and	throw	him	away.’
‘Throw	him	away?’
‘Like	a	small	sack	of…of	mushrooms	or	something.’
‘So	his	temper	is	even	worse	than	yours,	then.’
‘Pure	bloods	know	no	fear.’
‘Right.	So	how	is	it	you	know	about	pure	bloods?’
‘The	Sereghal.	Our	gods,	the	ones	I	helped	to	kill,	they	were	fallen	pure
bloods.	Cast	out.’
‘So	the	one	who	has	just	arrived,	he’s	the	equivalent	of	one	of	your	gods,
Ublala	Pung?	Please,	don’t	tell	me	you’re	planning	on	trying	to	kill	him.	I
mean,	he	has	a	stone	sword	and	all.’
‘Kill	him?	No,	you	don’t	understand,	Tehol	Beddict.	This	one,	this	pure
blood,	he	is	worthy	of	true	worship.	Not	the	way	we	appeased	the	Sereghal	–
that	was	to	keep	them	away.	Wait	and	see,	wait	and	see	what	is	going	to	happen.
My	kin	will	gather,	once	the	word	spreads.	They	will	gather.’
‘What	if	the	Emperor	kills	him?’
Ublala	Pung	simply	shook	his	head.
They	both	looked	over	as	Bugg	appeared	in	the	doorway,	in	his	arms	the
body	of	a	naked	woman.
‘Now	really,’	Tehol	said,	‘the	pot’s	not	nearly	big	enough.	Besides,	hungry
as	I	am,	there	are	limits	and	eating	academics	far	exceeds	them—’
The	manservant	frowned.	‘You	recognize	this	woman?’
‘I	do,	from	my	former	life,	replete	as	it	was	with	stern	tutors	and	the
occasional	subjects	of	youthful	crushes	and	the	like.	Alas,	she	looks	much
worse	for	wear.	I	had	always	heard	that	the	world	of	scholars	was	cut-throat	–


what	debate	on	nuances	resulted	in	this,	I	wonder?’
Bugg	carried	her	over	and	set	her	down	on	his	own	sleeping	pallet.
As	the	manservant	stepped	back,	Ublala	Pung	stepped	close	and	struck
Bugg	in	the	side	of	the	head,	hard	enough	to	send	the	old	man	reeling	against	a
wall.
‘Wait!’	Tehol	shouted	to	the	giant.	‘No	more!’
Rubbing	at	his	temple,	Bugg	blinked	up	at	Ublala	Pung.	‘What	was	that	all
about?’	he	demanded.
‘Tehol	said—’
‘Never	mind	what	I	said,	Ublala.	It	was	but	a	passing	thought,	a	musing
devoid	of	substance,	a	careless	utterance	disconnected	in	every	way	from
physical	action.	Never	intended—’
‘You	said	he	needed	boxing	about	the	head,	Tehol	Beddict.	You	asked	me	–
because	it’d	got	bigger	or	something,	so	I	needed	to	puncture	it	so	it’d	get
smaller	again.	It	didn’t	look	any	bigger	to	me.	But	that’s	what	you	said.	He	was
above	his	situation,	you	said—’
‘Station,	not	situation.	My	point	is	–	both	of	you	–	stop	looking	at	me	like
that.	My	point	was,	I	was	but	voicing	a	few	minor	complaints	of	a	domestic
nature	here.	Not	once	suspecting	that	Ublala	Pung	would	take	me	so	literally.’
‘Master,	he	is	Ublala	Pung.’
‘I	know,	I	know.	Clearly,	all	the	once-finely	honed	edges	of	my	intellect
have	worn	off	of	late.’	Then	his	expression	brightened.	‘But	now	I	have	a
tutor!’
‘A	victim	of	the	Patriotists,’	Bugg	said,	eyeing	Ublala	askance	as	he	made
his	way	over	to	the	pot	on	the	hearth.	‘Abyss	below,	Master,	this	barely	passes
as	muddy	water.’
‘Aye,	alas,	in	dire	need	of	your	culinary	magic.	The	Patriotists?	You	broke
her	out	of	prison?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.	I	do	not	anticipate	a	city-wide	manhunt,	however.
She	was	to	have	been	one	of	the	ones	who	simply	vanished.’
Ublala	Pung	grunted	a	laugh.	‘They’d	never	find	her	if	it	was	a	manhunt.’
The	other	two	men	looked	across	at	him.
The	half-blood	Tarthenal	gestured	at	the	obvious.	‘Look,	she’s	got	breasts
and	stuff.’
Bugg’s	tone	was	soft	as	he	said	to	Tehol,	‘She	needs	gentle	healing,	Master.
And	peace.’
‘Well,	no	better	refuge	from	the	dreads	of	the	world	than	Tehol	Beddict’s
abode.’
‘A	manhunt.’	Ublala	laughed	again,	then	shook	his	head.	‘Them	Patriotists


are	idiots.’


Chapter	Eight

When	stone	is	water,	time	is	ice.
When	all	is	frozen	in	place
fates	rain	down	in	fell	torrent.
My	face	revealed,	in	this	stone	that	is	water.
The	ripples	locked	hard	to	its	shape
a	countenance	passing	strange.
Ages	will	hide	when	stone	is	water.
Cycles	bound	in	these	depths
are	flawed	illusions	breaking	the	stream.
When	stone	is	water,	time	is	ice.
When	all	is	frozen	in	place
our	lives	are	stones	in	the	torrent.
And	we	rain	down,	rain	down
like	water	on	stone
with	every	strike	of	the	hand.
Water	and	Stone
Elder	Fent
The	Realm	of	Shadow	was	home	to	brutal	places,	yet	not	one	could	match	the
brutality	of	shadows	upon	the	soul.	Such	thoughts	haunted	Cotillion	these	days.
He	stood	on	a	rise,	before	him	a	gentle,	elongated	slope	reaching	down	to	a
lake’s	placid	waters.	A	makeshift	camp	was	visible	on	a	level	terrace	forty
paces	to	his	left,	a	single	longhouse	flanked	by	half-buried	outbuildings,
including	stable	and	coop.	The	entire	arrangement	–	fortunately	unoccupied	at
the	time,	excepting	a	dozen	hens	and	a	rooster,	one	irritated	rook	with	a	gimp
leg	and	two	milk	cows	–	had	been	stolen	from	another	realm,	captured	by
some	vagary	of	happenstance,	or,	more	likely,	the	consequence	of	the	breaking


of	mysterious	laws,	as	seemed	to	occur	sporadically	during	Shadow	Realm’s
endless	migration.
However	it	had	arrived,	Shadowthrone	learned	of	it	in	time	to	despatch	a
flurry	of	wraiths	to	lay	claim	to	the	buildings	and	livestock,	saving	them	from
predation	by	roving	demons	or,	indeed,	one	of	the	Hounds.
Following	the	disaster	at	the	First	Throne,	the	score	of	survivors	had	been
delivered	to	this	place,	to	wander	and	wonder	at	the	strange	artifacts	left	by	the
previous	inhabitants:	the	curved	wooden	prows	surmounting	the	peaks	of	the
longhouse	with	their	intricate,	serpentine	carvings;	the	mysterious	totemic
jewellery,	mostly	of	silver	although	amber	seemed	common	as	well;	the	bolts
of	cloth,	wool	both	coarse	and	fine;	wooden	bowls	and	cups	of	hammered
bronze.	Wandering	through	it	all,	dazed,	a	blankness	in	their	eyes…
Recovering.
As	if	such	a	thing	is	possible.
Off	to	his	right,	a	lone	cape-shrouded	figure	stood	at	the	water ’s	edge,
motionless,	seeming	to	stare	out	on	the	unmarred	expanse	of	the	lake.	There
was	nothing	normal	to	this	lake,	Cotillion	knew,	although	the	scene	it	presented
from	this	section	of	the	shore	was	deceptively	serene.	Barring	the	lack	of	birds.
And	the	absence	of	molluscs,	crustaceans	or	even	insects.
Every	scrap	of	food	to	feed	the	livestock	–	and	the	miserable	rook	–	was
brought	in	by	the	wraiths	Shadowthrone	had	assigned	to	the	task.	For	all	of
that,	the	rooster	had	died	mere	days	after	arriving.	Died	from	grief,	I	expect.
Not	a	single	dawn	to	crow	awake.
He	could	hear	voices	from	somewhere	just	beyond	the	longhouse.	Panek,
Aystar	and	the	other	surviving	children	–	well,	hardly	children	any	more.
They’d	seen	battle,	they’d	seen	their	friends	die,	they	knew	the	world	–	every
world	–	was	an	unpleasant	place	where	a	human’s	life	was	not	worth	much.
They	knew,	too,	what	it	meant	to	be	used.
Further	down	the	beach,	well	past	the	lone	hooded	figure,	walked	Trull
Sengar	and	the	T’lan	Imass,	Onrack	the	Broken.	Like	an	artist	with	his
deathless	muse,	or	perhaps	at	his	shoulder	a	critic	of	ghastly	mien.	An	odd
friendship,	that	one.	But	then,	T’lan	Imass	were	full	of	surprises.
Sighing,	Cotillion	set	off	down	the	slope.
The	hooded	head	half	turned	at	his	approach.	A	face	the	hue	of	burnished
leather,	eyes	dark	beneath	the	felted	wool	rim	of	the	hood.	‘Have	you	come
with	the	key,	Cotillion?’
‘Quick	Ben,	it	is	good	to	see	that	you	have	recovered.’
‘More	or	less.’
‘What	key?’


The	flash	of	a	humourless	smile.	‘The	one	that	sets	me	free.’
Cotillion	stood	beside	the	wizard	and	studied	the	murky	expanse	of	water.
‘I	would	imagine	that	you	could	leave	here	at	any	time.	You	are	a	High	Mage,
with	more	than	one	warren	at	your	disposal.	Force	a	gate,	then	walk	through
it.’
‘Do	you	take	me	for	a	fool?’	Quick	Ben	asked	in	a	quiet	voice.	‘This
damned	realm	is	wandering.	There’s	no	telling	where	I	would	come	out,
although	if	I	guess	correctly,	I	would	be	in	for	a	long	swim.’
‘Ah.	Well,	I’m	afraid	I	pay	little	attention	to	such	things	these	days.	We	are
crossing	an	ocean,	then?’
‘So	I	suspect.’
‘Then	indeed,	to	journey	anywhere	you	require	our	help.’
The	wizard	shot	him	a	glance.	‘As	I	thought.	You	have	created	pathways,
gates	with	fixed	exits.	How	did	you	manage	that,	Cotillion?’
‘Oh,	not	our	doing,	I	assure	you.	We	simply	stumbled	onto	them,	in	a
manner	of	speaking.’
‘The	Azath.’
‘Very	good.	You	always	were	sharp,	Ben	Delat.’
A	grunt.	‘I’ve	not	used	that	version	of	my	name	in	a	long	time.’
‘Oh?	When	was	the	last	time	–	do	you	recall?’
‘These	Azath,’	Quick	Ben	said,	clearly	ignoring	the	question.	‘The	House
of	Shadow	itself,	here	in	this	realm,	correct?	Somehow,	it	has	usurped	the	gate,
the	original	gate.	Kurald	Emurlahn.	The	House	exists	both	as	a	cast	shadow	and
as	its	true	physical	manifestation.	No	distinction	can	be	made	between	the	two.
A	nexus…but	that	is	not	unusual	for	Azath	constructs,	is	it?	What	is,	however,
is	that	the	gate	to	Kurald	Emurlahn	was	vulnerable	in	the	first	place,	to	such	a
usurpation.’
‘Necessity,	I	expect,’	said	Cotillion,	frowning	at	seeing	a	slow	sweep	of
broad	ripples	approach	the	shore,	their	source	somewhere	further	out.	Not	at
all	what	it	seems…
‘What	do	you	mean?’
The	god	shrugged.	‘The	realm	was	shattered.	Dying.’
‘The	Azath	participated	in	healing	the	fragments?	Intentional?	By	design,
by	intellect?	Or	in	the	manner	that	blood	dries	to	create	a	scab?	Is	the	Azath
nothing	more	than	some	kind	of	natural	immune	system,	such	as	our	bodies
unleash	to	fight	illness?’
‘The	breadth	of	your	scholarly	knowledge	is	impressive,	Quick	Ben.’
‘Never	mind	that.	The	warrens	were	K’rul’s	supreme	sacrifice	–	his	own
flesh,	his	own	blood.	But	not	the	Elder	Warrens	–	or	so	we	are	to	believe.


Whose	veins	were	opened	to	create	those,	Cotillion?’
‘I	wish	I	knew.	No,	rather,	I	don’t.	I	doubt	it	is	relevant,	in	any	case.	Does
the	Azath	simply	respond	to	damage,	or	is	there	a	guiding	intelligence	behind
its	actions?	I	cannot	answer	you.	I	doubt	anyone	can.	Does	it	even	matter?’
‘I	don’t	know,	to	be	honest.	But	not	knowing	makes	me	nervous.’
‘I	have	a	key	for	you,’	Cotillion	said	after	a	moment.	Trull	Sengar	and
Onrack	were	now	walking	towards	them.	‘For	the	three	of	you,	in	fact.	If	you
want	it.’
‘There’s	a	choice?’
‘Not	for	them,’	Cotillion	said,	nodding	in	the	direction	of	Trull	and	the
T’lan	Imass.	‘And	they	could	use	your	help.’
‘The	same	was	true	of	Kalam	Mekhar,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘Not	to	mention
Adjunct	Tavore.’
‘They	survived,’	Cotillion	replied.
‘You	cannot	be	sure,	though	–	not	with	Kalam.	You	can’t	be	entirely	sure,
can	you?’
‘He	was	alive	when	the	Deadhouse	took	him.’
‘So	Shadowthrone	claims.’
‘He	would	not	lie.’
The	wizard	barked	a	bitter	laugh.
‘Kalam	still	lives,	Quick	Ben.	The	Deadhouse	has	him,	beyond	the	reach	of
time	itself.	Yet	he	will	heal.	The	poison	will	degrade,	become	inert.
Shadowthrone	saved	the	assassin’s	life—’
‘Why?’
‘Now	that	is	a	harder	question	to	answer,’	Cotillion	admitted.	‘Perhaps
simply	to	defy	Laseen,	and	you	should	not	be	surprised	if	that	is	his	only
reason.	Believe	me,	for	Shadowthrone,	it	suffices.’	Be	glad,	Ben	Adaephon
Delat,	that	I	do	not	tell	you	his	real	reason.
Trull	Sengar	and	Onrack	drew	close,	then	halted.	The	Tiste	Edur ’s	new
stone-tipped	spear	was	strapped	to	his	back;	he	was	wearing	a	long	cape
against	the	chill,	the	wool	dyed	deep	burgundy	–	one	of	the	more	useful
treasures	found	in	the	longhouse.	It	was	held	in	place	by	an	exquisite	silver
brooch	depicting	some	sort	of	stylized	hammer.	At	his	side,	Onrack	the
Broken’s	skeletal	frame	was	so	battered,	dented	and	fractured	it	was	a	wonder
that	the	warrior	was	still	in	one	piece.
The	T’lan	Imass	spoke.	‘This	lake,	god.	The	shore	opposite…’
‘What	of	it?’
‘It	does	not	exist.’
Cotillion	nodded.


Trull	Sengar	asked,	‘How	can	that	be?	Onrack	says	it’s	not	a	gate,	on	the
other	side.	It’s	not	anything	at	all.’
Cotillion	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair,	then	scratched	his	chin	–	realizing	he
needed	to	shave	–	and	squinted	out	on	the	water.	‘The	other	side	is…
unresolved.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’	Quick	Ben	demanded.
‘To	fully	understand,	you	will	have	to	go	there,	wizard.	The	three	of	you	–
that	is	the	path	of	your	journey.	And	you	must	leave	soon.’
‘Forgive	us	for	being	unimpressed,’	the	Tiste	Edur	said	drily.	‘The	last
nightmare	you	sent	us	into	has	made	us	rather	reluctant	adventurers.	We	need	a
better	reason,	Cotillion.’
‘I	imagine	you	do.’
‘We’re	waiting,’	Quick	Ben	said,	crossing	his	arms.
‘Alas,	I	cannot	help	you.	Any	explanation	I	attempt	will	affect	your
perception	of	what	you	will	find,	at	your	journey’s	end.	And	that	must	not	be
allowed	to	happen,	because	the	manner	in	which	you	perceive	will	shape	and
indeed	define	the	reality	that	awaits	you.’	He	sighed	again.	‘I	know,	that’s	not
very	helpful.’
‘Then	summon	Shadowthrone,’	Trull	Sengar	said.	‘Maybe	he	can	do
better.’
Cotillion	shrugged,	then	nodded.
A	dozen	heartbeats	later	a	mostly	formless	shadow	rose	in	their	midst,
from	which	emerged	a	knobby	cane	at	the	end	of	a	skinny,	gnarled	arm.	The
god	glanced	about,	then	down,	to	find	itself	ankle-deep	in	water.	Hissing,
Shadowthrone	picked	up	the	tattered	ends	of	his	cloak	then	pranced	onto	dry
land.	‘Oh,	wasn’t	that	amusing?’	he	sang.	‘Wretches,	all	of	you.	What	do	you
want?	I’m	busy.	Do	you	understand?	Busy.’
Onrack	pointed	one	skeletal	arm	out	towards	the	lake.	‘Cotillion	would
send	us	across	this	water,	on	a	mission	he	will	not	explain,	to	achieve	goals	he
refuses	to	define,	in	a	place	he	cannot	describe.	We	therefore	call	upon	you,
formless	one,	to	deliver	what	he	will	not.’
Shadowthrone	giggled.
Cotillion	glanced	away,	suspecting	what	was	coming.
‘Delighted	to,	bony	one.	I	respond	in	this	manner.	It	is	as	Cotillion	believes.
The	rooster	died	of	grief.’
A	curse	from	Quick	Ben	as	Shadowthrone	then	swirled	into	nothingness.
Cotillion	turned	away.	‘Supplies	await	you	outside	the	longhouse.	When
you	return	down	here,	a	boat	will	have	been	readied.	Make	your	goodbyes	to
Minala	and	the	children	as	brief	as	possible.	The	way	ahead	is	long	and


arduous,	and	we	are	running	out	of	time.’
	
The	Undying	Gratitude	heeled	hard	to	starboard,	the	gale	bitter	with	the	cold
reek	of	ice.	Pulling	and	half	climbing	his	way	across	the	aft	deck	as	the	crew
struggled	against	the	sudden	onslaught,	First	Mate	Skorgen	Kaban	reached	the
pilot	station	where	Shurq	Elalle,	held	in	place	by	a	leather	harness,	stood	with
legs	planted	wide.
She	seemed	impervious	to	the	plunging	temperature,	with	not	even	a	hint
of	colour	slapped	to	her	cheeks	by	the	buffeting	wind.	An	uncanny	woman
indeed.	Uncanny,	insatiable,	unearthly,	she	was	like	a	sea	goddess	of	old,	a
glamoured	succubus	luring	them	all	to	their	doom	–	but	no,	that	was	not	a
good	thought,	not	now,	not	ever.	Or	at	least	for	as	long	as	he	sailed	with	her.
‘Captain!	It’s	going	to	be	close	–	them	mountains	of	ice	are	closin’	on	the
cut,	maybe	faster	than	we	are!	Where	in	the	Errant’s	name	did	they	come
from?’
‘We’ll	make	it,’	Shurq	Elalle	asserted.	‘Come	round	into	the	lee	of	the
island	–	it’s	the	northwest	shore	that’s	going	to	get	hammered.	I’d	be	amazed	if
the	citadel’s	walls	on	that	side	survive	what’s	coming.	Look	at	the	Reach,
Pretty,	it’s	nothing	but	fangs	of	ice	–	wherever	all	this	has	come	from,	it’s
devouring	the	entire	coast.’
‘Damned	cold,	is	what	it	is,’	Skorgen	said	in	a	growl.	‘Maybe	we	should
turn	round,	Captain.	That	fleet	never	came	after	us	anyway	–	we	could	head	for
Lether	Mouth—’
‘And	starve	before	we’re	halfway	there.	No,	Pretty,	Second	Maiden	Fort’s
an	independent	state	now,	and	I’m	finding	that	rather	appealing.	Besides,	I’m
curious.	Aren’t	you?’
‘Not	enough	to	risk	getting	crushed	by	them	white	jaws,	Captain.’
‘We’ll	make	it.’
	
The	foment	that	was	the	crest	of	the	heaving	bergs	was	the	colour	of	old
leather,	shredded	by	the	churning	fragments	of	ice,	tree	roots,	shattered	trunks
and	huge	broken	rocks	that	seemed	to	defy	the	pull	to	the	deep	–	at	least	for
long	enough	to	appear	atop	the	water,	like	the	leading	edge	of	a	slide,	rolling
on	across	the	surface	of	the	tumult	before	reluctantly	vanishing	into	the	depths.
Tumbling	out	from	this	surge	like	rotted	curtains	was	fog,	plucked	and
torn	by	the	ferocious	winds,	and	Shurq	Elalle,	facing	astern,	watched	as	the


maelstrom	heaved	in	their	wake.	It	was	gaining,	but	not	fast	enough;	they	were
moments	from	rounding	the	isle’s	rocky	headland,	which	looked	to	be
formidable	enough	to	shunt	the	ice	aside,	down	its	length.
At	least,	she	hoped	so.	If	not,	then	Second	Maiden’s	harbour	was	doomed.
And	so	is	my	ship	and	crew.	As	for	herself,	well,	if	she	managed	to	avoid	being
crushed	or	frozen	in	place,	she	could	probably	work	her	way	clear,	maybe
even	clamber	aboard	for	the	long	ride	to	the	mainland’s	coast.
It	won’t	come	to	that.	Islands	don’t	get	pushed	around.	Buried,	possibly,	but
then	Fent	Reach	is	where	it’s	all	piling	up	–	what’s	chasing	us	here	is	just	an
outer	arm,	and	before	long	it’ll	be	fighting	the	tide.	Errant	fend,	imagine	what
happened	to	the	Edur	homeland	–	that	entire	coast	must	have	been	chewed	to
pieces	–	or	swallowed	up	entire.	So	what	broke	up	the	dam,	that’s	what	I	want	to
know.
Groaning,	the	Undying	Gratitude	rounded	the	point,	the	wind	quickly
dropping	off	as	the	ship	settled	and	began	its	crawl	into	the	high-walled
harbour.	A	prison	island	indeed	–	all	the	evidence	remained:	the	massive
fortifications,	the	towers	with	lines	of	sight	and	fire	arcs	facing	both	to	sea	and
inland.	Huge	ballistae,	mangonels	and	scorpions	mounted	on	every	available
space,	and	in	the	harbour	itself	rock-pile	islands	held	miniature	forts	festooned
with	signal	flags,	fast	ten-man	pursuit	galleys	moored	alongside.
A	dozen	ships	rode	at	anchor	in	the	choppy	waters.	Along	the	docks,	she
saw,	tiny	figures	were	racing	in	every	direction,	like	ants	on	a	kicked	nest.
‘Pretty,	have	us	drop	anchor	other	side	of	that	odd-looking	dromon.	Seems
like	nobody’s	going	to	pay	us	much	attention	–	hear	that	roar?	That’s	the
northwest	shore	getting	hit.’
‘The	whole	damned	island	could	go	under,	Captain.’
‘That’s	why	we’re	staying	aboard	–	to	see	what	happens.	If	we	have	to	run
east,	I	want	us	ready	to	do	so.’
‘Look,	there’s	a	harbour	scow	comin’	our	way.’
Damn.	‘Typical.	World’s	falling	in	but	that	don’t	stop	the	fee-takers.	All
right,	prepare	to	receive	them.’
The	anchor	had	rattled	down	by	the	time	the	scow	fought	its	way	alongside.
Two	officious-looking	women	climbed	aboard,	one	tall,	the	other	short.	The
latter	spoke	first.	‘Who’s	the	captain	here	and	where	d’you	hail	from?’
‘I	am	Captain	Shurq	Elalle.	We’ve	come	up	from	Letheras.	Twenty	months
at	sea	with	a	hold	full	of	goods.’
The	tall	woman,	thin,	pale,	with	stringy	blonde	hair,	smiled.	‘Very
accommodating	of	you,	dear.	Now,	if	you’ll	be	so	kind,	Brevity	here	will	head
down	into	the	hold	to	inspect	the	cargo.’


The	short	dark-haired	woman,	Brevity,	then	said,	‘And	Pithy	here	will
collect	the	anchoring	fee.’
‘Fifteen	docks	a	day.’
‘That’s	a	little	steep!’
‘Well,’	Pithy	said	with	a	lopsided	shrug,	‘it’s	looking	like	the	harbour ’s
days	are	numbered.	We’d	best	get	what	we	can.’
Brevity	was	frowning	at	Shurq’s	first	mate.	‘You	wouldn’t	be	Skorgen
Kaban	the	Pretty,	would	you?’
‘Aye,	that’s	me.’
‘I	happen	to	have	your	lost	eye,	Skorgen.	In	a	jar.’
The	man	scowled	across	at	Shurq	Elalle,	then	said,	‘You	and	about	fifty
other	people.’
‘What?	But	I	paid	good	money	for	that!	How	many	people	lose	an	eye
sneezing?	By	the	Errant,	you’re	famous!’
‘Sneeze	is	it?	That’s	what	you	heard?	And	you	believed	it?	Spirits	of	the
deep,	lass,	and	you	paid	the	crook	how	much?’
Shurq	said	to	Pithy,	‘You	and	your	friend	here	are	welcome	to	inspect	the
cargo	–	but	if	we’re	not	offloading	that’s	as	far	as	it	goes,	and	whether	we
offload	or	not	depends	on	the	kinds	of	prices	your	buyers	are	prepared	to
offer.’
‘I’ll	prove	it	to	you,’	Brevity	said,	advancing	on	Skorgen	Kaban.	‘It’s	a
match	all	right	–	I	can	tell	from	here.’
‘Can’t	be	a	match,’	the	first	mate	replied.	‘The	eye	I	lost	was	a	different
colour	from	this	one.’
‘You	had	different-coloured	eyes?’
‘That’s	right.’
‘That’s	a	curse	among	sailors.’
‘Maybe	that’s	why	it	ain’t	there	no	more.’	Skorgen	nodded	towards	the
nearby	dromon.	‘Where’s	that	hailing	from?	I	never	seen	lines	like	those
before	–	looks	like	it’s	seen	a	scrap	or	two,	asides.’
Brevity	shrugged.	‘Foreigners.	We	get	a	few—’
‘No	more	of	that,’	Pithy	cut	in.	‘Check	the	cargo,	dearie.	Time’s	a-wasting.’
Shurq	Elalle	turned	and	examined	the	foreign	ship	with	more	intensity
after	that	peculiar	exchange.	The	dromon	looked	damned	weather-beaten,	she
decided,	but	her	first	mate’s	lone	eye	had	been	sharp	–	the	ship	had	been	in	a
battle,	one	involving	sorcery.	Black,	charred	streaks	latticed	the	hull	like	a
painted	web.	A	whole	lot	of	sorcery.	That	ship	should	be	kindling.
‘Listen,’	Pithy	said,	facing	inland.	‘They	beat	it	back,	like	they	said	they
would.’


The	cataclysm	in	the	making	seemed	to	be	dying	a	rapid	death,	there	on	the
other	side	of	the	island	where	clouds	of	ice	crystals	billowed	skyward.	Shurq
Elalle	twisted	round	to	look	out	to	the	sea	to	the	south,	past	the	promontory.
Ice,	looking	like	a	massive	frozen	lake,	was	piling	up	in	the	wake	of	the	violent
vanguard	that	had	come	so	close	to	wrecking	the	Undying	Gratitude.	But	its
energy	was	fast	dissipating.	A	gust	of	warm	wind	backed	across	the	deck.
Skorgen	Kaban	grunted.	‘And	how	many	sacrifices	did	they	fling	off	the
cliff	to	earn	this	appeasement?’	He	laughed.	‘Then	again,	you	probably	got	no
shortage	of	prisoners!’
‘There	are	no	prisoners	on	this	island,’	Pithy	said,	assuming	a	lofty
expression	as	she	crossed	her	arms.	‘In	any	case,	you	ignorant	oaf,	blood
sacrifices	wouldn’t	have	helped	–	it’s	just	ice,	after	all.	The	vast	sheets	up	north
went	and	broke	to	pieces	–	why,	just	a	week	past	and	we	was	sweating
uncommon	here,	and	that’s	not	something	we	ever	get	on	Second	Maiden.	I
should	know,	I	was	born	here.’
‘Born	to	prisoners?’
‘You	didn’t	hear	me,	Skorgen	Kaban?	No	prisoners	on	this	island—’
‘Not	since	you	ousted	your	jailers,	you	mean.’
‘Enough	of	that,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	seeing	the	woman’s	umbrage	ratchet
up	a	few	more	notches	on	the	old	hoist	pole	–	and	it	was	plenty	high	enough
already.	‘Second	Maiden	is	now	independent,	and	for	that	I	have	boundless
admiration.	Tell	me,	how	many	Edur	ships	assailed	your	island	in	the
invasion?’
Pithy	snorted.	‘They	took	one	look	at	the	fortifications,	and	one	sniff	at	the
mages	we’d	let	loose	on	the	walls,	and	went	right	round	us.’
The	captain’s	brows	rose	a	fraction.	‘I	had	heard	there	was	a	fight.’
‘There	was,	when	our	glorious	liberation	was	declared.	Following	the
terrible	accidents	befalling	the	warden	and	her	cronies.’
‘Accidents,	hah!	That’s	a	good	one.’
Shurq	Elalle	glared	across	at	her	first	mate,	but	like	most	men	he	was
impervious	to	such	non-verbal	warnings.
‘I	will	take	that	fifteen	docks	now,’	Pithy	said,	her	tone	cold.	‘Plus	the	five
docks	disembarking	fee,	assuming	you	intend	to	come	ashore	to	take	on
supplies	or	sell	your	cargo,	or	both.’
‘You	ain’t	never	mentioned	five—’
‘Pretty,’	Shurq	Elalle	interrupted,	‘head	below	and	check	on	Brevity	–	she
may	have	questions	regarding	our	goods.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’	With	a	final	glower	at	Pithy	he	stumped	off	for	the	hatch.
Pithy	squinted	at	Shurq	Elalle	for	a	moment,	then	scanned	the	various


sailors	in	sight.	‘You’re	pirates.’
‘Don’t	be	absurd.	We’re	independent	traders.	You	have	no	prisoners	on
your	island,	I	have	no	pirates	on	my	ship.’
‘What	are	you	suggesting	by	that	statement?’
‘Clearly,	if	I	had	been	suggesting	anything,	it	was	lost	on	you.	I	take	it	you
are	not	the	harbour	master,	just	a	toll-taker.’	She	turned	as	first	Skorgen	then
Brevity	emerged	onto	the	deck.	The	short	woman’s	eyes	were	bright.
‘Pithy,	they	got	stuff!’
‘Now	there’s	a	succinct	report,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.	‘Brevity,	be	sure	to
inform	the	harbour	master	that	we	wish	a	berth	at	one	of	the	stone	piers,	to
better	effect	unloading	our	cargo.	A	messenger	out	to	potential	buyers	might
also	prove…rewarding.’	She	glanced	at	Pithy,	then	away,	as	she	added,	‘As	for
mooring	and	landing	fees,	I	will	settle	up	with	the	harbour	master	directly,
once	I	have	negotiated	the	master ’s	commission.’
‘You	think	you’re	smart,’	Pithy	snapped.	‘I	should	have	brought	a	squad
with	me	–	how	would	you	have	liked	that,	Captain?	Poking	in	here	and	there,
giving	things	a	real	look.	How	would	you	like	that?’
‘Brevity,	who	rules	Second	Maiden?’	Shurq	Elalle	asked.
‘Shake	Brullyg,	Captain.	He’s	Grand	Master	of	the	Putative	Assembly.’
‘The	Putative	Assembly?	Are	you	sure	you	have	the	right	word	there,	lass?
Putative?’
‘That’s	what	I	said.	That’s	right,	isn’t	it,	Pithy?’
‘The	captain	thinks	she’s	smart,	but	she’s	not	so	smart,	is	she?	Wait	until
she	meets	Shake	Brullyg,	then	won’t	she	be	surprised—’
‘Not	really,’	Shurq	said.	‘I	happen	to	know	Shake	Brullyg.	I	even	know	the
crime	for	which	he	was	sent	away.	The	only	surprise	is	that	he’s	still	alive.’
‘Nobody	kills	Shake	Brullyg	easily,’	Pithy	said.
One	of	the	crew	burst	into	a	laugh	that	he	quickly	converted	into	a	cough.
‘We’ll	await	the	harbour	master ’s	response,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.
Pithy	and	Brevity	returned	to	their	scow,	the	former	taking	the	oars.
‘Strange	women,’	Skorgen	Kaban	muttered	as	they	watched	the	wallowing
craft	pull	away.
‘An	island	full	of	inbred	prisoners,’	Shurq	replied	in	a	murmur.	‘Are	you
at	all	surprised,	Pretty?	And	if	that’s	not	enough,	a	full-blooded	Shake	–	who
just	happens	to	be	completely	mad	–	is	ruling	the	roost.	I	tell	you	this,	our	stay
should	be	interesting.’
‘I	hate	interesting.’
‘And	probably	profitable.’
‘Oh,	good.	I	like	profitable.	I	can	swallow	interesting	so	long	as	it’s


profitable.’
‘Get	the	hands	ready	to	ship	the	anchor.	I	doubt	we’ll	have	to	wait	overlong
for	the	harbour	master ’s	signal	flag.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
	
Udinaas	sat	watching	her	clean	and	oil	her	sword.	An	Edur	sword,	set	into	her
hands	by	a	Tiste	Edur	warrior.	All	she	needed	now	was	a	house	so	she	could
bury	the	damned	thing.	Oh	yes,	and	the	future	husband’s	fateful	return.	Now,
maybe	nothing	was	meant	by	it;	just	a	helpful	gesture	by	one	of	Fear ’s	brothers
–	the	only	Sengar	brother	Udinaas	actually	respected.	Maybe,	but	maybe	not.
The	interminable	chanting	droned	through	the	stone	walls,	a	sound	even
grimmer	than	the	blunt	grunting	of	Edur	women	at	mourning.	The	Onyx
Wizards	were	in	consultation.	If	such	an	assertion	held	any	truth	then	the
priestly	version	of	their	language	was	incomprehensible	and	devoid	of	the
rhythm	normally	found	in	both	song	and	speech.	And	if	it	was	nothing	but
chanting,	then	the	old	fools	could	not	even	agree	on	the	tempo.
And	he	had	thought	the	Tiste	Edur	strange.	They	were	nothing	compared	to
these	Tiste	Andii,	who	had	carried	dour	regard	to	unhuman	extremes.
It	was	no	wonder,	though.	The	Andara	was	a	crumbling	blackstone	edifice
at	the	base	of	a	refuse-cluttered	gorge.	As	isolated	as	a	prison.	The	cliff	walls
were	honeycombed	with	caves,	pocked	with	irregular	chambers,	like	giant
burst	bubbles	along	the	course	of	winding	tunnels.	There	were	bottomless	pits,
dead	ends,	passages	so	steep	they	could	not	be	traversed	without	rope	ladders.
Hollowed-out	towers	rose	like	inverted	spires	through	solid	bedrock;	while
over	subterranean	chasms	arched	narrow	bridges	of	white	pumice,	carved	into
amorphous	shapes	and	set	without	mortar.	In	one	place	there	was	a	lake	of
hardened	lava,	smoother	than	wind-polished	ice,	the	obsidian	streaked	with
red,	and	this	was	the	Amass	Chamber,	where	the	entire	population	could	gather
–	barefooted	–	to	witness	the	endless	wrangling	of	the	Reve	Masters,	otherwise
known	as	the	Onyx	Wizards.
Master	of	the	Rock,	of	the	Air,	of	the	Root,	of	the	Dark	Water,	of	the	Night.
Five	wizards	in	all,	squabbling	over	orders	of	procession,	hierarchies	of
propitiation,	proper	hem-length	of	the	Onyx	robes	and	Errant	knew	what	else.
With	these	half-mad	neurotics	any	burr	in	the	cloth	became	a	mass	of	wrinkles
and	creases.
From	what	Udinaas	had	come	to	understand,	no	more	than	fourteen	of	the
half-thousand	or	so	denizens	–	beyond	the	wizards	themselves	–	were	pure
Tiste	Andii,	and	of	those,	only	three	had	ever	seen	daylight	–	which	they


quaintly	called	the	blinded	stars	–	only	three	had	ever	climbed	to	the	world
above.
No	wonder	they’d	all	lost	their	minds.
‘Why	is	it,’	Udinaas	said,	‘when	some	people	laugh	it	sounds	more	like
crying?’
Seren	Pedac	glanced	up	from	the	sword	bridging	her	knees,	the	oil-stained
cloth	in	her	long-fingered	hands.	‘I	don’t	hear	anyone	laughing.	Or	crying.’
‘I	didn’t	necessarily	mean	out	loud,’	he	replied.
A	snort	from	Fear	Sengar,	where	he	sat	on	a	stone	bench	near	the	portal
way.	‘Boredom	is	stealing	the	last	fragments	of	sanity	in	your	mind,	slave.	I	for
one	will	not	miss	them.’
‘The	wizards	and	Silchas	are	probably	arguing	the	manner	of	your
execution,	Fear	Sengar,’	Udinaas	said.	‘You	are	their	most	hated	enemy,	after
all.	Child	of	the	Betrayer,	spawn	of	lies	and	all	that.	It	suits	your	grand	quest,
for	the	moment	at	least,	doesn’t	it?	Into	the	viper ’s	den	–	every	hero	needs	to
do	that,	right?	And	moments	before	your	doom	arrives,	out	hisses	your
enchanted	sword	and	evil	minions	die	by	the	score.	Ever	wondered	what	the
aftermath	of	such	slaughter	must	be?	Dread	depopulation,	shattered	families,
wailing	babes	–	and	should	that	crucial	threshold	be	crossed,	then	inevitable
extinction	is	assured,	hovering	before	them	like	a	grisly	spectre.	Oh	yes,	I
heard	my	share	when	I	was	a	child,	of	epic	tales	and	poems	and	all	the	rest.	But
I	always	started	worrying…about	those	evil	minions,	the	victims	of	those
bright	heroes	and	their	intractable	righteousness.	I	mean,	someone	invades
your	hide-out,	your	cherished	home,	and	of	course	you	try	to	kill	and	eat	them.
Who	wouldn’t?	There	they	were,	nominally	ugly	and	shifty-looking,	busy	with
their	own	little	lives,	plaiting	nooses	or	some	such	thing.	Then	shock!	The
alarms	are	raised!	The	intruders	have	somehow	slipped	their	chains	and	death
is	a	whirlwind	in	every	corridor!’
Seren	Pedac	sheathed	the	sword.	‘I	think	I	would	like	to	hear	your	version
of	such	stories,	Udinaas.	How	you	would	like	them	to	turn	out.	At	the	very
least,	it	will	pass	the	time.’
‘I’d	rather	not	singe	Kettle’s	innocent	ears—’
‘She’s	asleep.	Something	she	does	a	lot	of	these	days.’
‘Perhaps	she’s	ill.’
‘Perhaps	she	knows	how	to	wait	things	out,’	the	Acquitor	responded.	‘Go
on,	Udinaas,	how	does	the	heroic	epic	of	yours,	your	revised	version,	turn
out?’
‘Well,	first,	the	hidden	lair	of	the	evil	ones.	There’s	a	crisis	brewing.	Their
priorities	got	all	mixed	up	–	some	past	evil	ruler	with	no	management	skills	or


something.	So,	they’ve	got	dungeons	and	ingenious	but	ultimately	ineffective
torture	devices.	They	have	steaming	chambers	with	huge	cauldrons,	awaiting
human	flesh	to	sweeten	the	pot	–	but	alas,	nobody’s	been	by	of	late.	After	all,
the	lair	is	reputedly	cursed,	a	place	whence	no	adventurer	ever	returns	–	all
dubious	propaganda,	of	course.	In	fact,	the	lair ’s	a	good	market	for	the	local
woodcutters	and	the	pitch-sloppers	–	huge	hearths	and	torches	and	murky	oil
lamps	–	that’s	the	problem	with	underground	lairs	–	they’re	dark.	Worse	than
that,	everyone’s	been	sharing	a	cold	for	the	past	eight	hundred	years.	Anyway,
even	an	evil	lair	needs	the	necessities	of	reasonable	existence.	Vegetables,
bushels	of	berries,	spices	and	medicines,	cloth	and	pottery,	hides	and	wellgnawed	leather,	evil-looking	hats.	Of	course	I’ve	not	even	mentioned	all	the
weapons	and	intimidating	uniforms.’
‘You	have	stumbled	from	your	narrative	trail,	Udinaas,’	Seren	Pedac
observed.
‘So	I	have,	and	that	too	is	an	essential	point.	Life	is	like	that.	We	stumble
astray.	Just	like	those	evil	minions.	A	crisis	–	no	new	prisoners,	no	fresh	meat.
Children	are	starving.	It’s	an	unmitigated	disaster.’
‘What’s	the	solution?’
‘Why,	they	invent	a	story.	A	magical	item	in	their	possession,	something	to
lure	fools	into	the	lair.	It’s	reasonable,	if	you	consider	it.	Every	hook	needs	a
wriggling	worm.	And	then	they	choose	one	among	them	to	play	the	role	of	the
Insane	Master,	the	one	seeking	to	unlock	the	dire	powers	of	that	magical	item
and	so	bring	about	a	utopia	of	animated	corpses	stumbling	through	a	realm	of
ash	and	rejected	tailings.	Now,	if	this	doesn’t	bring	heroes	in	by	the	drove,
nothing	will.’
‘Do	they	succeed?’
‘For	a	time,	but	recall	those	ill-conceived	torture	implements.	Invariably,
some	enterprising	and	lucky	fool	gets	free,	then	crushes	the	skull	of	a	dozing
guard	or	three,	and	mayhem	is	let	loose.	Endless	slaughter	–	hundreds,	then
thousands	of	untrained	evil	warriors	who	forgot	to	sharpen	their	swords	and
never	mind	the	birch-bark	shields	that	woodcutter	with	the	hump	sold	them.’
Even	Fear	Sengar	grunted	a	laugh	at	that.	‘All	right,	Udinaas,	you	win.	I
think	I	prefer	your	version	after	all.’
Udinaas,	surprised	into	silence,	stared	across	at	Seren	Pedac,	who	smiled
and	said,	‘You	have	revealed	your	true	talent,	Udinaas.	So	the	hero	wins	free.
Then	what?’
‘The	hero	does	nothing	of	the	sort.	Instead,	the	hero	catches	a	chill	down	in
those	dank	tunnels.	Makes	it	out	alive,	however,	and	retreats	to	a	nearby	city,
where	the	plague	he	carries	spreads	and	kills	everyone.	And	for	thousands	of


years	thereafter,	that	hero’s	name	is	a	curse	to	both	people	living	above	ground
and	those	below.’
After	a	moment,	Fear	spoke.	‘Ah,	even	your	version	has	an	implicit
warning,	slave.	And	this	is	what	you	would	have	me	heed,	but	that	leads	me	to
wonder	–	what	do	you	care	for	my	fate?	You	call	me	your	enemy,	your
lifelong	foe,	for	all	the	injustices	my	people	have	delivered	upon	you.	Do	you
truly	wish	me	to	take	note	of	your	message?’
‘As	you	like,	Edur,’	Udinaas	replied,	‘but	my	faith	runs	deeper	than	you
imagine,	and	on	an	entirely	different	course	from	what	you	clearly	think.	I	said
the	hero	wins	clear,	at	least	momentarily,	but	I	mentioned	nothing	of	his
hapless	followers,	his	brave	companions.’
‘All	of	whom	died	in	the	lair.’
‘Not	at	all.	In	the	aftermath	there	was	dire	need	for	new	blood.	They	were
one	and	all	adopted	by	the	evil	ones,	who	were	only	evil	in	a	relative	sense,
being	sickly	and	miserable	and	hungry	and	not	too	bright.	In	any	case,	there
was	a	great	renaissance	in	the	lair ’s	culture,	producing	the	finest	art	and
treasures	the	world	had	ever	seen.’
‘And	what	happened	then?’	Seren	asked.
‘It	lasted	until	a	new	hero	arrived,	but	that’s	another	tale	for	another	time.	I
have	talked	myself	hoarse.’
‘Among	the	women	of	the	Tiste	Edur,’	Fear	Sengar	said	then,	‘is	told	the
tale	that	Father	Shadow,	Scabandari	Bloodeye,	chose	of	his	own	free	will	to
die,	freeing	his	soul	to	journey	down	the	Grey	Road,	a	journey	in	search	of
absolution,	for	such	was	the	guilt	of	what	he	had	done	on	the	plains	of	the
Kechra.’
‘Now	that	is	a	convenient	version.’
‘Now	it	is	you	who	lack	subtlety,	Udinaas.	This	alternative	interpretation	is
itself	allegorical,	for	what	it	truly	represents	is	our	guilt.	For	Scabandari’s
crime.	We	cannot	take	back	the	deeds	of	Father	Shadow;	nor	were	we	in	any
position,	ever,	to	gainsay	him.	He	led,	the	Edur	followed.	Could	we	have	defied
him?	Possibly.	But	not	likely.	As	such,	we	are	left	with	a	guilt	that	cannot	be
appeased,	except	in	an	allegorical	sense.	And	so	we	hold	to	legends	of
redemption.’
Seren	Pedac	rose	and	walked	over	to	set	her	scabbarded	sword	down
beside	the	food	pack.	‘Yet	this	was	a	tale	held	in	private	by	the	women	of	your
tribes,	Fear.	Setting	aside	for	the	moment	the	curious	fact	that	you	know	of	it,
how	is	it	the	promise	of	redemption	belongs	only	to	the	women?’
‘The	warriors	follow	another	path,’	Fear	replied.	‘That	I	know	of	the	story
–	and	the	truth	of	Scabandari	–	is	due	to	my	mother,	who	rejected	the	tradition


of	secrecy.	Uruth	does	not	flee	knowledge,	and	she	would	her	sons	do	not
either—’
‘Then	how	do	you	explain	Rhulad?’	Udinaas	asked.
‘Do	not	bait	him,’	Seren	Pedac	said	to	the	slave.	‘Rhulad	is	accursed.	By	the
sword	in	his	hand,	by	the	god	who	made	that	sword.’
‘Rhulad	was	young,’	Fear	said,	unconsciously	wringing	his	hands	as	he
stared	at	the	chamber ’s	worn	floor.	‘There	was	so	much	still	to	teach	him.	He
sought	to	become	a	great	warrior,	a	heroic	warrior.	He	was	discomfited	in	the
shadows	of	his	three	older	brothers,	and	this	made	him	precipitate.’
‘I	think	the	god	chose	him…over	Hannan	Mosag,’	said	Udinaas.	‘Rhulad
had	no	choice.’
Fear	studied	Udinaas	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	nodded.	‘If	that	is	your
belief,	then	you	are	far	more	generous	towards	Rhulad	than	any	Tiste	Edur.
Again	and	again,	Udinaas,	you	leave	me	unbalanced.’
Udinaas	closed	his	eyes	as	he	leaned	back	against	the	rough	wall.	‘He
spoke	to	me,	Fear,	because	I	listened.	Something	the	rest	of	you	never	bothered
doing	–	which	isn’t	that	surprising,	since	your	vaunted	family	order	had	just
been	shattered.	Your	precious	hierarchy	was	in	disarray.	Shocking.	Terrible.
So,	while	he	could	not	speak	to	you,	you	in	turn	were	unwilling	to	hear	him.
He	was	silent	and	you	were	deaf	to	that	silence.	A	typical	mess	–	I	don’t	regret
having	no	family.’
‘You	lay	all	the	blame	at	the	foot	of	the	chaotic	god.’
Udinaas	opened	his	eyes,	blinked	for	a	moment,	then	smiled.	‘Too
convenient	by	far.	Now,	if	I	was	seeking	redemption,	I’d	leap	on	the	back	of
that	one,	and	ride	the	beast	all	the	way	–	to	the	cliff’s	edge,	then	right	over,
amen.’
‘Then…what?’
‘What	to	blame?	Well,	how	should	I	know?	I’m	just	a	worn-out	slave.	But
if	I	had	to	guess,	I’d	look	first	at	that	rigid	hierarchy	I	mentioned	earlier.	It
traps	everyone,	and	everyone	makes	sure	it	traps	everyone	else.	Until	none	of
you	can	move,	not	side	to	side,	not	up	either.	You	can	move	down,	of	course	–
just	do	something	no-one	else	likes.	Disapproval	kicks	out	every	rung	of	the
ladder,	and	down	you	go.’
‘So	it	is	the	way	of	living	among	the	Tiste	Edur.’	Fear	snorted,	looked
away.
‘All	right,’	Udinaas	said,	sighing,	‘let	me	ask	you	this.	Why	wasn’t	that
sword	offered	to	some	Letherii	–	a	brilliant	officer	of	an	army,	a	cold-blooded
merchant	prince?	Why	not	Ezgara	himself?	Or	better	still,	his	son,	Quillas?
Now	there	was	ambition	and	stupidity	in	perfect	balance.	And	if	not	a	Letherii,


then	why	not	a	Nerek	shaman?	Or	a	Fent	or	a	Tarthenal?	Of	course,	all	those
others,	well,	those	tribes	were	mostly	obliterated	–	at	least,	all	the	taboos,
traditions	and	rules	of	every	sort	that	kept	people	in	line	–	all	gone,	thanks	to
the	Letherii.’
‘Very	well,’	Seren	Pedac	said,	‘why	not	a	Letherii?’
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘The	wrong	fatal	flaws,	obviously.	The	Chained	One
recognized	the	absolute	perfection	of	the	Tiste	Edur	–	their	politics,	their
history,	their	culture	and	their	political	situation.’
‘Now	I	understand,’	Fear	murmured,	his	arms	crossed.
‘Understand	what?’
‘Why	Rhulad	so	valued	you,	Udinaas.	You	were	wasted	scraping	fish	scales
all	day	when	by	the	measure	of	your	intelligence	and	your	vision,	you	could	sit
tall	on	any	kingdom’s	throne.’
The	slave’s	grin	was	hard	with	malice.	‘Damn	you,	Fear	Sengar.’
‘How	did	that	offend	you?’
‘You	just	stated	the	central	argument	–	both	for	and	against	the	institution
of	slavery.	I	was	wasted,	was	I?	Or	of	necessity	kept	under	firm	heel.	Too	many
people	like	me	on	the	loose	and	no	ruler,	tyrant	or	otherwise,	could	sit	assured
on	a	throne.	We	would	stir	things	up,	again	and	again.	We	would	challenge,	we
would	protest,	we	would	defy.	By	being	enlightened,	we	would	cause	utter
mayhem.	So,	Fear,	kick	another	basket	of	fish	over	here,	it’s	better	for
everyone.’
‘Except	you.’
‘No,	even	me.	This	way,	all	my	brilliance	remains	ineffectual,	harmless	to
anyone	and	therefore	especially	to	myself,	lest	my	lofty	ideas	loose	a	torrent
of	blood.’
Seren	Pedac	grunted,	‘You	are	frightened	by	your	own	ideas,	Udinaas?’
‘All	the	time,	Acquitor.	Aren’t	you?’
She	said	nothing.
‘Listen,’	Fear	said.	‘The	chanting	has	stopped.’
	
As	usual,	the	debate	ended	with	everyone	losing.	The	clash	of	intractable	views
produced	no	harmony,	just	exhaustion	and	an	ache	in	the	back	of	the	skull.
Clip,	seated	with	his	legs	propped	up	on	the	back	of	the	next	lower	bench,	in
the	gloom	of	the	uppermost	tier	overlooking	the	absurdly	named	Disc	of
Concordance	on	which	stood	five	glowering	Onyx	Wizards,	struggled	to
awaken	his	mind	as	the	wizards	turned	as	one	to	face	Silchas	Ruin.
Ordant	Brid,	Reve	of	the	Rock,	who	had	sent	Clip	to	retrieve	these	fell


wanderers,	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Silchas	Ruin,	brother	of	blood	to	our	BlackWinged	Lord,	we	know	what	you	seek.’
‘Then	you	also	know	not	to	get	in	my	way.’
At	these	cold	words,	Clip	sat	straighter.
‘It	is	as	I	warned!’	cried	Rin	Varalath,	Reve	of	the	Night,	in	his	highpitched,	grating	voice.	‘He	arrives	like	a	leviathan	of	destruction!	Which	of	the
brothers	was	gifted	the	greater	share	of	deliberation	and	wisdom?	Well,	the
answer	is	clear!’
‘Calm	down,’	said	Penith	Vinandas.
Clip	smiled	to	himself,	wondering	yet	again	if	the	Reve	aspects	created	the
personalities	of	their	masters	–	or,	in	the	case	of	Penith,	mistress	–	or	was	it	the
other	way	round?	Of	course	the	Mistress	of	the	Root	would	advise	calm,	a
settling	of	wild	wills,	for	she	was	so	assuredly…rooted.
‘I	am	calm!’	snarled	Rin	Varalath.	He	jabbed	a	finger	at	Silchas	Ruin.	‘We
must	not	yield	to	this	one,	else	all	that	we	have	achieved	will	be	brought	down
upon	our	very	heads.	The	balance	is	all	that	keeps	us	alive,	and	each	of	you
knows	that.	And	if	you	do	not,	then	you	are	more	lost	than	I	ever	imagined.’
Draxos	Hulch,	Reve	of	the	Dark	Water,	spoke	in	his	depthless	baritone.
‘The	issue,	my	fellow	wizards,	is	less	open	to	debate	than	you	would	hope.
Unless,	of	course,	we	can	explain	to	this	warrior	the	nature	of	our	struggle	and
the	uneasy	balance	we	have	but	recently	won.’
‘Why	should	he	be	interested?’	Rin	Varalath	asked.	‘If	this	all	collapses	it	is
nothing	to	him.	He	will	move	on,	uncaring	–	our	deaths	will	be	meaningless	as
far	as	he	is	concerned.’
Silchas	Ruin	sighed.	‘I	am	not	insensitive	to	the	battle	you	have	waged
here,	wizards.	But	your	success	is	due	entirely	to	the	inevitable	disintegration
of	the	Jaghut’s	ritual.’	He	scanned	the	faces	before	him.	‘You	are	no	match	for
Omtose	Phellack,	when	its	wielder	was	none	other	than	Gothos.	In	any	case,	the
balance	you	believe	you	have	achieved	is	illusory.	The	ritual	fails.	Ice,	which
had	been	held	in	check,	held	timeless,	has	begun	to	move	once	more.	It	falters
in	the	warmth	of	this	age,	yet	its	volume	is	so	vast	that,	even	melted,	it	will
effect	vast	change.	As	for	the	glaciers	bound	in	the	highest	reaches	of	the
mountains	of	Bluerose	–	those	to	the	north	–	well,	they	have	already	begun
their	migration.	Unmindful	of	the	distant	ocean’s	assault,	they	draw	power
from	a	wayward	flow	of	cold	air.	These	glaciers,	wizards,	still	hold	the	spear
of	the	ritual,	and	soon	it	will	drive	for	your	heart.	The	Andara	is	doomed.’
‘We	care	nothing	for	the	Andara,’	said	Gestallin	Aros,	Reve	of	the	Air.
‘The	balance	you	speak	of	is	not	the	one	that	matters	to	us.	Silchas	Ruin,	the
Jaghut’s	ritual	was	of	ice	only	in	the	manner	that	fire	is	of	wood	–	it	was	the


means	of	achieving	a	specific	goal,	and	that	goal	was	the	freezing	in	place	of
time.	Of	life,	and	of	death.’
Clip’s	gaze	narrowed	on	Silchas	Ruin,	as	the	albino	Andii	slowly	cocked
his	head,	then	said,	‘You	speak	of	a	different	failing,	yet	the	two	are	linked—’
‘We	are	aware	of	that,’	cut	in	Ordant	Brid.	Then,	with	a	faint	smile,
‘Perhaps	more	so	than	you.	You	speak	of	a	spear	of	ice,	of	Omtose	Phellack’s
very	core,	still	living,	still	powerful.	That	spear,	Silchas	Ruin,	casts	a	shadow,
and	it	is	within	that	shadow	that	you	will	find	what	you	seek.	Although	not,	I
think,	in	the	way	you	desire.’
‘Explain.’
‘We	will	not,’	snapped	Rin	Varalath.	‘If	you	wish	to	understand,	then	look
to	your	kin.’
‘My	kin?	Are	you	then	able	to	summon	Anomander?’
‘Not	him,’	replied	Ordant	Brid.	He	hesitated,	then	continued.	‘We	were
visited,	not	so	long	ago,	by	an	ascendant.	Menandore.	Sister	Dawn—’
If	anything,	Ruin’s	voice	grew	even	colder	as	he	demanded,	‘What	has	she
to	do	with	this?’
‘Balance,	you	ignorant	fool!’	Rin	Varalath’s	shriek	echoed	in	the	chamber.
‘Where	is	she	now?’	Silchas	Ruin	asked.
‘Alas,’	replied	Draxos	Hulch,	‘we	do	not	know.	But	she	is	close,	for
reasons	that	are	entirely	her	own.	She	will,	I	fear,	oppose	you,	should	you
decide	to	force	your	way	past	us.’
‘I	seek	the	soul	of	Scabandari	Bloodeye.	I	do	not	understand	that	you
would	object	to	such	a	goal.’
‘We	see	the	truth	of	that,’	said	Ordant	Brid.
A	long	moment	of	silence.	The	five	Onyx	Wizards	faced	a	nonplussed
Silchas	Ruin,	who	seemed	at	a	loss	for	words.
‘It	is,’	said	Penith	Vinandas,	‘a	question	of…compassion.’
‘We	are	not	fools,’	said	Ordant	Brid.	‘We	cannot	oppose	you.	Perhaps,
however,	we	can	guide	you.	The	journey	to	the	place	you	seek	is	arduous	–	the
path	is	not	straight.	Silchas	Ruin,	it	is	with	some	astonishment	that	I	tell	you	that
we	have	reached	something	of	a	consensus	on	this.	You	have	no	idea	how	rare
such	a	thing	is	–	granted,	I	speak	of	a	compromise,	one	which	sits	uneasier
with	some	of	us	than	with	others.	Nonetheless,	we	have	agreed	to	offer	you	a
guide.’
‘A	guide?	To	lead	me	on	this	crooked	path,	or	tug	me	ever	astray	from	it?’
‘Such	deceit	would	not	work	for	very	long.’
‘True;	nor	would	I	be	merciful	upon	its	discovery.’
‘Of	course.’


Silchas	Ruin	crossed	his	arms.	‘You	will	provide	us	with	a	guide.	Very
well.	Which	of	you	has	volunteered?’
‘Why,	none	of	us,’	said	Ordant	Brid.	‘The	need	for	us	here	prevents	such	a
thing.	As	you	said,	a	spear	of	ice	is	directed	at	us,	and	while	we	cannot	shatter
it,	perhaps	we	can…redirect	it.	Silchas	Ruin,	your	guide	shall	be	the	Mortal
Sword	of	the	Black-Winged	Lord.’	At	that,	the	wizard	gestured.
Clip	rose	to	his	feet,	then	began	his	descent	to	the	Disc	of	Concordance.
The	chain	and	its	rings	appeared	in	his	hand,	whirring,	then	snapping,	then
whirring	out	again.
‘He	is	Anomander ’s	Mortal	Sword?’	Silchas	Ruin	asked	in	obvious
disbelief	as	he	stared	up	at	this	meeting’s	audience	of	one.
Clip	smiled.	‘Do	you	think	he	would	be	displeased?’
After	a	moment,	the	brother	of	Rake	grimaced,	then	shook	his	head.
‘Probably	not.’
‘Come	the	morrow,’	Ordant	Brid	said,	‘we	will	begin	preparing	the	way
for	the	continuation	of	your	journey.’
Reaching	the	edge	of	the	lowest	tier,	Clip	dropped	lightly	onto	the	polished
stone	of	the	Disc,	then	approached	Silchas	Ruin,	the	chain	in	his	hand	spinning
and	clacking.
‘Must	you	always	do	that?’	Silchas	Ruin	demanded.
‘Do	what?’
	
Silchas	Ruin	walked	into	the	chamber,	followed	a	moment	later	by	the	Tiste
Andii,	Clip.
Seren	Pedac	felt	a	sudden	chill,	although	she	could	not	determine	its
source.	Clip	was	smiling,	but	it	was	a	cynical	smile,	and	it	seemed	his	eyes	held
steady	on	Fear	Sengar,	as	if	awaiting	some	kind	of	challenge.
‘Acquitor,’	said	Silchas	Ruin,	releasing	the	clasp	of	his	cloak	as	he	walked
over	to	the	stone	table	against	a	far	wall,	where	waited	wine	and	food,	‘at	least
one	mystery	has	been	answered.’
‘Oh?’
‘The	preponderance	of	wraiths	here	in	the	Andara,	the	countless	ghosts	of
dead	Tiste	Andii	–	I	know	why	they	are	here.’
‘I	am	sorry,	I	did	not	know	this	place	was	crowded	with	wraiths.	I’ve	not
even	seen	Wither	lately.’
He	glanced	across	at	her,	then	poured	himself	a	goblet	of	wine.	‘It	is
extraordinary,’	he	murmured,	‘how	something	as	basic	as	the	absence	of	a	taste
on	the	tongue	can	prove	the	most	excruciating	torture…when	one	is	buried	for


thousands	of	years.’
She	watched	him	take	a	mouthful	of	the	watery	wine,	watched	him	savour
it.	Then	he	said,	‘Time,	Acquitor.	The	Omtose	Phellack	ritual,	which	froze	all
in	place,	defied	Hood	himself	–	apologies,	Hood	is	the	Lord	of	Death.	The
ghosts	–	they	had	nowhere	to	go.	Easily	captured	and	enslaved	by	the	Tiste
Edur,	but	many	others	managed	to	evade	that	fate,	and	they	are	here,	among
their	mortal	kin.	The	Onyx	Wizards	speak	of	compassion	and	balance,	you
see…’
No,	I	do	not,	but	I	think	that	is	of	no	matter.	‘Will	the	wizards	help	us?’
A	wry	grimace	from	Silchas	Ruin,	then	he	shrugged.	‘Our	fell	party	now
has	a	new	member,	Acquitor,	who	is	charged	with	guiding	us	to	what	we	seek.’
Fear	Sengar,	suddenly	tense,	stepped	close	to	Clip.	‘Tiste	Andii,’	he	said,
‘know	this,	please.	I	possess	no	enmity	towards	you	or	your	people.	If	indeed
you	will	lead	us	to	where	the	soul	of	Scabandari	is	bound,	I	will	be	in	your	debt
–	indeed,	all	of	the	Edur	will	be	in	your	debt.’
Clip	grinned.	‘Oh,	you	don’t	want	that,	warrior.’
Fear	seemed	taken	aback.
‘You,’	said	Silchas	Ruin	to	the	Tiste	Edur,	‘pose	the	gravest	threat	to	these
Andii.	Your	kind	has	good	reason	to	hunt	down	every	last	one	of	them;	nor	are
the	Letherii	well	disposed	to	them,	given	their	resistance	to	the	annexation	–	a
resistance	that	continues	to	this	day.	Bluerose	does	not	appreciate	being
occupied;	nor	do	the	humans	who	lived	in	peace	alongside	those	possessing
Andii	blood	in	their	veins	hold	any	loyalty	to	the	Letherii	conquerors.	When
the	Onyx	Order	ruled,	it	was	a	distant	sort	of	rule,	reluctant	to	interfere	in	daily
activities	and	making	few	demands	on	the	populace.	And	now,	Fear	Sengar,
your	kind	rule	the	Letherii,	compounding	the	resentment	seething	in	Bluerose.’
‘I	cannot	speak	for	the	empire,’	Fear	said.	‘Only	for	myself.	Yet	I	believe
that,	should	events	transpire	in	the	manner	I	desire,	then	true	liberation	may	be
the	reward	granted	by	the	Edur	for	their	assistance	–	to	the	entire	province	of
Bluerose	and	all	its	inhabitants.	Certainly,	I	would	argue	for	that.’
Clip’s	laugh	was	sardonic.
The	chain	spun	to	wrap	tight	around	his	right	hand,	yet	that	served	as	his
only	comment	to	these	grave	pronouncements	and	bold	promises.
Seren	Pedac	felt	sick	inside.	Clip,	this	maddening	pup	with	his	chain	and
rings,	his	ever-mocking	expression…
Oh,	Fear	Sengar,	do	not	trust	this	one.	Do	not	trust	him	at	all.
	
‘Are	you	certain	you	want	to	do	this,	Overseer?’


Brohl	Handar	glanced	across	at	the	Atri-Preda.	‘This	expedition	is	to	be
punitive,	Bivatt.	No	formal	proclamation	of	war	has	been	made	–	the	missive
from	Letheras	is	very	clear	on	this.	Apparently,	it	falls	under	my	duties	as
Overseer	to	ensure	that	the	engagement	does	not	exceed	its	parameters.	You
march	to	hunt	down	and	destroy	those	who	slaughtered	the	settlers.’
Her	eyes	remained	on	the	columns	of	Letherii	and	Edur	troops	marching
along	the	road.	Dust	hung	in	the	air,	staining	the	sky’s	bright	blue.	The	sound
from	the	army	reminded	Brohl	Handar	of	broken	ice	groaning	and	crunching
its	way	down	a	river.	Bivatt	spoke.	‘That	is	precisely	my	intention,	Overseer.
That	and	nothing	more,	as	I	have	been	commanded.’
He	studied	her	for	a	moment	longer,	then	shifted	on	the	saddle	to	ease	the
strain	on	his	lower	back	–	he	preferred	admiring	horses	from	afar	to	perching
atop	the	damned	things.	It	seemed	they	understood	his	distaste	and	reciprocated
in	kind,	and	this	one	was	in	the	habit	of	tossing	its	head	as	it	drew	up	from
every	canter,	clearly	seeking	to	crack	Brohl’s	chin.	The	Atri-Preda	told	him	he
leaned	too	far	forward,	and	the	horse	knew	it	and	saw	the	error	as	an
opportunity	to	inflict	damage.	The	Tiste	Edur	was	not	looking	forward	to	this
journey.	‘Nonetheless,’	he	finally	said,	‘I	will	accompany	you.’
He	knew	she	was	unhappy	with	the	prospect.	Yet	he	had	his	own
bodyguards,	from	his	own	tribe.	His	own	carriage	and	driver	and	team	of
oxen.	More	than	enough	supplies	to	ensure	they	were	not	a	burden	on	the
military	train.
‘I	remain	concerned	for	your	safety,’	she	said.
‘No	need.	I	have	every	confidence	in	my	Arapay—’
‘Forgive	me,	Overseer,	but	hunting	seals	is	not	the	same	as—’
‘Atri-Preda,’	Brohl	Handar	interrupted	in	turn,	‘my	warriors	faced	crack
Letherii	soldiers	in	the	conquest,	and	it	was	your	Letherii	who	broke.	Seals?
Indeed,	some	of	them	weighing	as	much	as	an	ox,	with	tusks	longer	than	a
shortsword.	And	white-furred	bears,	and	cave-dwelling	bears.	Short-legged
wolves	and	pack	wolves.	And,	one	should	not	forget,	Jheck	shape-shifters.	Did
you	imagine	the	white	wastes	of	the	north	are	empty	lands?	Against	what	an
Arapay	must	face	every	day,	the	Letherii	were	no	great	threat.	As	for
protecting	me	from	the	Awl,	presumably	such	a	need	would	only	arise
following	the	rout	of	your	forces.	We	shall	have	a	K’risnan	of	the	Den-Ratha,
as	well	as	your	mage	cadre.	In	short,’	he	concluded,	‘your	concerns	ring	false.
Tell	me,	Atri-Preda,	what	was	the	substance	of	your	secret	meeting	with	Factor
Letur	Anict?’
The	question,	voiced	as	an	afterthought,	seemed	to	strike	her	like	a	blow,
and	the	eyes	she	fixed	on	him	were	wide,	alarmed,	until	something	darker


swirled	to	life.	‘Financial	discussions,	Overseer,’	she	said	in	a	cold	tone.	‘An
army	needs	to	eat.’
‘The	financing	of	this	punitive	expedition	is	provided	by	the	Imperial
Treasury.’
‘Said	funds	managed	by	the	Factor.	After	all,	that	is	the	function	of	being	a
factor,	sir.’
‘Not	in	this	instance,’	Brohl	Handar	replied.	‘Disbursement	is	being
managed	by	my	office.	In	fact,	it	is	Edur	coin	that	is	sponsoring	this	expedition.
Atri-Preda,	you	should	in	the	future	be	certain	of	the	facts	before	you	contrive
to	lie.	Now,	it	would	seem	that	you	are	to	proceed	under	the	burden	of	two	sets
of	orders.	I	do	hope	for	the	sake	of	your	peace	of	mind	that	the	two	do	not
prove	conflicting.’
‘I	should	imagine	not,’	she	said	tightly.
‘Are	you	confident	of	that,	Atri-Preda?’
‘I	am,	sir.’
‘Good.’
‘Overseer,	a	number	of	the	settlers	killed	originated	from	within	the
Factor ’s	own	household.’
Brohl’s	brows	lifted.	‘The	desire	for	a	most	bloody	vengeance	must	be
overwhelming,	then,	for	poor	Letur	Anict.’
‘At	that	meeting,	sir,	I	simply	reiterated	my	intent	to	exact	the	necessary
punishment	against	the	murderers.	The	Factor	sought	reassurance,	which	I	was
pleased	to	give	him	under	the	circumstances.’
‘In	other	words,	Letur	Anict	was	somewhat	alarmed	that	his	control	over
the	management	of	the	expedition	had	been	taken	away,	for	such	a	decision	was
unprecedented.	One	must	assume	he	is	intelligent	enough	to	recognize	–	once
he	has	calmed	down	somewhat	–	that	the	move	indicates	disapproval	of	his
recent	excesses.’
‘I	would	not	know,	sir.’
‘I	shall	be	interested	to	gauge	his	humility	upon	our	triumphant	return,
Atri-Preda.’
She	said	nothing.
Of	course,	he	added	to	himself,	there	would	probably	be	much	more	to
Letur	Anict’s	response	at	that	time,	given	that	there	was,	in	fact,	nothing	truly
official	in	any	of	this.	The	Factor ’s	cronies	in	the	palace	–	the	Letherii	servants
of,	it	was	likely,	the	Chancellor	–	would	be	outraged	upon	discovering	this
circumvention;	but	this	time	it	was	the	Edur	who	had	organized	this	minor
usurpation,	a	working	of	the	tribes,	the	linkage	established	via	the	K’risnan	and
the	Edur	staffs	of	various	overseers.	There	was	vast	risk	in	all	this	–	the


Emperor	himself	knew	nothing	of	it,	after	all.
Letur	Anict	needed	to	be	reined	in.	No,	more	than	that,	the	man	needed
hobbling.	Permanently.	If	Brohl	had	his	way,	there	would	be	a	new	Factor	of
Drene	within	a	year,	and	as	for	Letur	Anict’s	holdings,	well,	the	crime	for	high
treason	and	corruption	at	the	scale	he	had	managed	would	without	doubt	result
in	their	confiscation,	with	all	familial	rights	stripped	away,	and	restitution	at
such	high	level	that	the	Anict	line	would	be	Indebted	for	generations	to	come.
He	is	corrupt.	And	he	has	spun	a	deadly	web	here,	from	Drene	out	into
every	bordering	nation.	He	seeks	war	with	all	of	our	neighbours.	Unnecessary
war.	Pointless	beyond	the	covetous	greed	of	one	man.	Such	corruption	needed
excision,	for	there	were	plenty	of	Letur	Anicts	in	this	empire,	thriving	under
the	protection	of	the	Liberty	Consign	and,	quite	possibly,	the	Patriotists.	This
man	here	would	be	the	example	and	the	warning.
You	Letherii	think	us	fools.	You	laugh	behind	our	backs.	Mock	us	in	our
ignorance	of	your	sophisticated	deceptions.	Well,	there	is	more	than	one	kind	of
sophistication,	as	you	shall	discover.
Finally,	Brohl	Handar	no	longer	felt	helpless.
	
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	fumed	in	silence.	The	damned	fool	at	her	side	was	going	to
get	himself	killed,	and	she	would	be	made	responsible	for	that	failure	to
protect	him.	K’risnan	and	Arapay	bodyguards	would	achieve	nothing.	The
Factor ’s	agents	infected	every	Letherii	legion	on	this	march,	and	among	those
agents…Errant-damned	assassins.	Masters	of	the	Poison.
She	liked	this	warrior	at	her	side,	dour	as	he	was	–	which	seemed	a	trait	of
the	Tiste	Edur	in	any	case.	And	though	clearly	intelligent,	he	was	also…naive.
It	was	clear	that	Letur	Anict	had	penetrated	the	pathetic	unofficial	efforts	of
Brohl	Handar	and	a	half-dozen	other	overseers,	and	the	Factor	intended	to
eliminate	this	nascent	threat	here	and	now.	On	this	very	expedition.
‘We	have	a	problem	with	Brohl	Handar,’	the	Factor	had	said,	his	pale	round
face	looking	like	dusty	stone	in	the	habitual	gloom	of	his	inner	sanctum.
‘Sir?’
‘Unsanctioned,	he	seeks	to	exceed	his	responsibilities,	and	in	so	doing
undermine	the	traditional	functions	of	a	factor	in	a	border	province.	His
ambitions	have	drawn	others	into	his	web,	which	could,	alas,	have	fatal
repercussions.’
‘Fatal?	How?’
‘Atri-Preda,	I	must	tell	you.	No	longer	are	the	Patriotists	focusing
exclusively	on	the	Letherii	in	the	empire.	There	has	come	to	light	evidence	of


an	emerging	conspiracy	among	the	Tiste	Edur	–	against	the	state,	possibly
against	the	Emperor	himself.’
Absurd.	Do	you	truly	take	me	for	such	a	fool,	Anict?	Against	the	state	and
against	the	Emperor	are	two	different	things.	The	state	is	you	and	people	like
you.	The	state	is	the	Liberty	Consign	and	the	Patriotists.	The	state	is	the
Chancellor	and	his	cronies.	Against	them,	the	notion	of	a	conspiracy	among
the	Tiste	Edur	to	rid	the	empire	of	Letherii	corruption	seemed	more	than
plausible.	They	had	been	occupiers	long	enough	to	come	to	understand	the
empire	they	had	won;	to	begin	to	realize	that	a	far	more	subtle	conquest	had
taken	place,	of	which	they	were	the	losers.
The	Tiste	Edur	were,	above	all	else,	a	proud	people.	Not	likely	to	abide
defeat,	and	the	fact	that	the	victors	were,	by	their	measure,	cowards	in	the	true
sense	of	the	term	would	sting	all	the	more.	So	she	was	not	surprised	that	Brohl
Handar	and	his	fellow	Edur	had	at	last	begun	a	campaign	of	eradication	against
the	Letherii	running	the	state.	Not	surprising,	either,	the	extent	to	which	the
Edur	have	underestimated	their	enemy.
‘Sir,	I	am	an	officer	in	the	Imperial	Army.	My	commander	is	the	Emperor
himself.’
‘The	Emperor	rules	us	all,	Atri-Preda,’	Letur	Anict	had	said	with	a	faint
smile.	‘The	conspiracy	among	his	kind	directly	threatens	his	loyal	support
structure	–	those	who	endeavour,	at	great	personal	sacrifice,	to	maintain	that
apparatus.’
‘People	such	as	yourself.’
‘Indeed.’
‘What	are	you	asking	of	me,	sir?’
‘Brohl	Handar	will	insist	on	accompanying	your	punitive	expedition.	I
believe	it	is	his	intent	to	claim	territories	reconquered	for	himself’	–	a	wave	of
one	hand	–	‘no	doubt	in	the	name	of	the	empire	or	some	such	meaningless
nonsense.’
You	mean,	as	you	have	done?
‘I	will	try	to	talk	him	out	of	it,’	she	said.	‘It’s	not	safe—’
‘Indeed	it	isn’t.	Precisely	my	point.’	After	a	moment,	Letur	Anict	leaned
back.	‘You	will,	alas,	not	win	your	argument.	The	Overseer	will	march	with
you,	accepting	the	risks.’
The	risks,	yes.	Imagining	they	come	from	the	Awl.
‘I	will	do	all	I	can	to	preserve	his	life,’	Bivatt	said.
A	spread	of	hands.	‘Of	course.	That	is	your	duty,	and	we	both	know	how
treacherous	the	Awl	can	be,	especially	as	they	are	now	commanded	by	none
other	than	Redmask.	Who	can	say	what	dread	ambushes	he	has	contrived	to


spring	upon	you,	with	the	principal	aim	of	murdering	commanders	and	other
important	personages.	Indeed,	Atri-Preda,	you	have	your	duty	and	I	would
expect	no	less	from	you.	But	I	do	remind	you,	Brohl	Handar	is	engaged	in
treason.’
‘Then	have	Orbyn	Truthfinder	arrest	him.’	If	he	dares,	for	that	will	bring	it
all	out	into	the	open,	and	you’re	not	ready	for	that.
‘We	will,’	the	Factor	then	said,	‘be	prepared	for	his	return.’
So	soon?	‘Has	the	Emperor	been	informed	of	these	developments,	sir?’
‘He	has.	The	Patriotists	would	not	be	engaged	in	this	hunt	were	it	not	so	–	I
am	sure	you	understand	that,	Atri-Preda.’
She	believed	she	did.	Even	Karos	Invictad	would	not	proceed	without	some
sort	of	sanction.	‘Is	that	all,	sir?’
‘It	is.	Errant	smile	on	your	hunt,	Atri-Preda.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.’
And	now,	everything	had	proceeded	to	match	the	Factor ’s	predictions.
Brohl	Handar	would	accompany	the	expedition,	refuting	her	every	argument
against	the	idea.	Reading	his	expression,	she	saw	a	renewed	confidence	and
will	–	the	Overseer	felt	as	if	he	had	found,	at	last,	firm	footing.	No	error	in	his
recognition	of	his	true	enemy.	The	unmitigated	disaster	lay	in	the	Edur ’s	belief
that	he	had	made	the	first	move.
She	said	now	to	the	Overseer,	‘Sir,	if	you	will	excuse	me.	I	must	have
words	with	my	officers.’
‘Of	course,’	Brohl	Handar	replied.	‘When	do	you	anticipate	contacting	the
enemy?’
Oh,	you	fool,	you	already	have.	‘That	depends,	sir,	on	whether	they’re
fleeing,	or	coming	straight	for	us.’
The	Overseer ’s	brows	lifted.	‘Do	you	fear	this	Redmask?’
‘Fear	that	yields	respect	is	not	a	bad	thing,	sir.	In	that	fashion,	yes,	I	fear
Redmask.	As	he	will	me,	before	too	long.’
She	rode	away	then,	down	to	her	troops,	seeking	out,	not	an	officer,	but
one	man	in	particular,	a	horseman	among	the	Bluerose,	taller	and	duskier	than
most.
After	a	time	she	found	him,	gestured	him	to	ride	out	to	her	side,	and	they
walked	their	horses	along	one	edge	of	the	road.	She	spoke	of	two	things,	one
loud	enough	to	be	heard	by	others	and	concerning	the	health	of	the	mounts	and
other	such	mundane	details;	the	other	in	much	quieter	tones,	which	no-one	but
the	man	could	hear.
	


‘What	can	you	see	of	the	horizon’s	bruised	smear,	that	cannot	be	blotted	out	by
a	raised	hand?’
Redmask	glanced	over	at	the	foreigner.
Anaster	Toc	smiled.	‘Lying	in	a	ditch	amidst	the	wastes	of	humanity	is
something	I	would	recommend	to	any	nascent	poet.	The	rhythms	of	ebb	and
flow,	the	legacy	of	what	we	discard.	Wealth	like	liquid	gold.’
Not	entirely	sane	any	more,	Redmask	judged,	unsurprised.	Skin	and	bones,
scabbed	and	stained	with	fiery,	peeling	rashes.	At	least	he	could	now	stand
without	the	aid	of	a	stick,	and	his	appetite	had	returned.	Before	long,	Redmask
believed,	the	foreigner	would	recover,	at	least	physically.	The	poor	man’s
mind	was	another	matter.
‘Your	people,’	Anaster	Toc	continued	after	a	moment,	‘do	not	believe	in
poetry,	in	the	power	of	simple	words.	Oh,	you	sing	with	the	coming	of	dawn
and	the	fleeing	sun.	You	sing	to	storm	clouds	and	wolf	tracks	and	shed	antlers
you	find	in	the	grass.	You	sing	to	decide	the	order	of	beads	on	a	thread.	But	no
words	to	any	of	them.	Just	tonal	variations,	as	senseless	as	birdsong—’
‘Birds	sing,’	cut	in	Natarkas	who	stood	on	the	foreigner ’s	other	side,
squinting	westward	to	the	dying	sun,	‘to	tell	others	they	exist.	They	sing	to
warn	of	hunters.	They	sing	to	woo	mates.	They	sing	in	the	days	before	they
die.’
‘Very	well,	the	wrong	example.	You	sing	like	whales—’
‘Like	what?’	asked	Natarkas	and	two	other	copper-faces	behind	them.
‘Oh,	never	mind,	then.	My	point	was,	you	sing	without	words—’
‘Music	is	its	own	language.’
‘Natarkas,’	said	Anaster	Toc,	‘answer	me	this,	if	you	will.	The	song	the
children	use	when	they	slip	beads	onto	a	thread,	what	does	it	mean?’
‘There	is	more	than	one,	depending	on	the	pattern	desired.	The	song	sets
the	order	of	the	type	of	bead,	and	its	colour.’
‘Why	do	such	things	have	to	be	set?’
‘Because	the	beads	tell	a	story.’
‘What	story?’
‘Different	stories,	depending	on	the	pattern,	which	is	assured	by	the	song.
The	story	is	not	lost,	not	corrupted,	because	the	song	never	changes.’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	the	foreigner	muttered.	‘What’s	wrong	with	words?’
‘With	words,’	said	Redmask,	turning	away,	‘meanings	change.’
‘Well,’	Anaster	Toc	said,	following	as	Redmask	made	his	way	back	to	his
army’s	camp,	‘that	is	precisely	the	point.	That’s	their	value	–	their	ability	to
adapt—’
‘Grow	corrupt,	you	mean.	The	Letherii	are	masters	at	corrupting	words,


their	meanings.	They	call	war	peace,	they	call	tyranny	liberty.	On	which	side	of
the	shadow	you	stand	decides	a	word’s	meaning.	Words	are	the	weapons	used
by	those	who	see	others	with	contempt.	A	contempt	which	only	deepens	when
they	see	how	those	others	are	deceived	and	made	into	fools	because	they	chose
to	believe.	Because	in	their	naivety	they	thought	the	meaning	of	a	word	was
fixed,	immune	to	abuse.’
‘Togg’s	teats,	Redmask,	that’s	a	long	speech	coming	from	you.’
‘I	hold	words	in	contempt,	Anaster	Toc.	What	do	you	mean	when	you	say
“Togg’s	teats”?’
‘Togg’s	a	god.’
‘Not	a	goddess?’
‘No.’
‘Then	its	teats	are—’
‘Useless.	Precisely.’
‘What	of	the	others?	“Hood’s	Breath”?’
‘Hood	is	the	Lord	of	Death.’
‘Thus…no	breath.’
‘Correct.’
‘Beru’s	mercy?’
‘She	has	no	mercy.’
‘Mowri	fend?’
‘The	Lady	of	the	Poor	fends	off	nothing.’
Redmask	regarded	the	foreigner.	‘Your	people	have	a	strange	relationship
with	your	gods.’
‘I	suppose	we	do.	Some	decry	it	as	cynical	and	they	may	have	a	point.	It’s
all	to	do	with	power,	Redmask,	and	what	it	does	to	those	who	possess	it.	Gods
not	excepted.’
‘If	they	are	so	unhelpful,	why	do	you	worship	them?’
‘Imagine	how	much	more	unhelpful	they’d	be	if	we	didn’t.’	At	whatever
Anaster	Toc	saw	in	Redmask’s	eyes,	he	then	laughed.
Annoyed,	Redmask	said,	‘You	fought	as	an	army	devoted	to	the	Lord	and
Lady	of	the	Wolves.’
‘And	see	where	it	got	us.’
‘The	reason	your	force	was	slaughtered	is	because	my	people	betrayed
you.	Such	betrayal	did	not	come	from	your	wolf	gods.’
‘True,	I	suppose.	We	accepted	the	contract.	We	assumed	we	shared	the
meaning	of	the	words	we	had	exchanged	with	our	employers—’	At	that	he
offered	Redmask	a	wry	smile.	‘We	marched	to	war	believing	in	honour.	So.
Togg	and	Fanderay	are	not	responsible	–	especially	for	the	stupidity	of	their


followers.’
‘Are	you	now	godless,	Anaster	Toc?’
‘Oh,	I	heard	their	sorrowful	howls	every	now	and	then,	or	at	least	I
imagined	I	did.’
‘Wolves	came	to	the	place	of	slaughter	and	took	the	hearts	of	the	fallen.’
‘What?	What	do	you	mean?’
‘They	broke	open	the	chests	of	your	comrades	and	ate	their	hearts,	leaving
everything	else.’
‘Well,	I	didn’t	know	that.’
‘Why	did	you	not	die	with	them?’	Redmask	asked.	‘Did	you	flee?’
‘I	was	the	best	rider	among	the	Grey	Swords.	Accordingly,	I	was	acting	to
maintain	contact	between	our	forces.	I	was,	unfortunately,	with	the	Awl	when
the	decision	was	made	to	flee.	They	dragged	me	down	from	my	horse	and	beat
me	senseless.	I	don’t	know	why	they	didn’t	kill	me	there	and	then.	Or	just	leave
me	for	the	Letherii.’
‘There	are	levels	to	betrayal,	Anaster	Toc;	limits	to	what	even	the	Awl	can
stomach.	They	could	run	from	the	battle,	but	they	could	not	draw	a	blade
across	your	throat.’
‘Well,	that’s	a	comforting	relief.	Apologies.	I	have	always	been	prone	to
facetious	commentary.	I	suppose	I	should	be	thankful,	but	I’m	not.’
‘Of	course	you’re	not,’	Redmask	said.	They	were	approaching	the	broad
hide	awning	protecting	the	rodara-skin	maps	the	war	leader	had	drawn	–
mostly	from	what	he	could	recall	of	Letherii	military	maps	he	had	seen.	These
new	maps	had	been	stretched	out	on	the	ground,	pegged	down,	arrayed	like
pieces	of	a	puzzle	to	create	a	single	rendition	of	a	vast	area	–	one	that	included
the	south	border	kingdoms.	‘But	you	are	a	soldier,	Anaster	Toc,	and	I	have
need	of	soldiers.’
‘So,	you	seek	an	agreement	between	us.’
‘I	do.’
‘A	binding	of	words.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	what	if	I	choose	to	leave?	To	walk	away?’
‘You	will	be	permitted	and	given	a	horse	and	supplies.	You	may	ride	east
or	southeast	or	indeed	north,	although	there	is	nothing	to	be	found	to	the	north.
But	not	west,	not	southwest.’
‘Not	to	the	Lether	Empire,	in	other	words.’
‘Correct.	I	do	not	know	what	vengeance	you	hold	close	to	your	wounded
soul.	I	do	not	know	if	you	would	betray	the	Awl	–	to	answer	their	betrayal	of
you.	For	which	I	would	not	blame	you	in	the	least.	I	have	no	desire	to	have	to


kill	you	and	this	is	why	I	forbid	you	to	ride	to	Lether.’
‘I	see.’
Redmask	studied	the	map	in	the	crepuscular	light.	The	black	lines	seemed
to	be	fading	into	oblivion	before	him.	‘It	is	my	thought,	however,	to	appeal	to
your	desire	for	vengeance	against	the	Letherii.’
‘Rather	than	the	Awl.’
‘Yes.’
‘You	believe	you	can	defeat	them.’
‘I	shall,	Anaster	Toc.’
‘By	preparing	fields	of	battle	well	in	advance.	Well,	as	a	tactic	I	would	not
gainsay	it.	Assuming	the	Letherii	are	foolish	enough	to	position	themselves
precisely	where	you	want	them.’
‘They	are	arrogant,’	Redmask	said.	‘Besides,	they	have	no	choice.	They
wish	to	avenge	the	slaughter	of	settlements	and	the	theft	of	herds	they	call	their
property	–	even	though	they	stole	them	from	us.	They	wish	to	punish	us,	and	so
will	be	eager	to	cross	blades.’
‘Using	cavalry,	infantry,	archers	and	mages.’
‘Yes.’
‘How	do	you	intend	to	negate	those	mages,	Redmask?’
‘I	will	not	tell	you,	yet.’
‘In	case	I	leave,	circle	round	and	somehow	elude	you	and	your	hunters.’
‘The	chance	of	that	is	remote.’
At	the	foreigner ’s	smile,	Redmask	continued,	‘I	understand	you	are	a
skilled	rider,	but	I	would	not	send	Awl	after	you.	I	would	send	my	K’Chain
Che’Malle.’
Anaster	Toc	had	turned	and	he	seemed	to	be	studying	the	encampment,	the
rows	upon	rows	of	tents,	the	wreathed	dung	smoke	of	the	fires.	‘You	have
fielded	what,	ten,	twelve	thousand	warriors?’
‘Closer	to	fifteen.’
‘Yet	you	have	broken	up	the	clans.’
‘I	have.’
‘In	the	manner	needed	to	field	something	resembling	a	professional	army.
You	must	shift	their	loyalty	from	the	old	blood-ties.	I’ve	seen	you	badgering
your	troop	commanders,	ensuring	that	they	will	follow	your	commands	in
battle.	I’ve	seen	them	in	turn	badgering	their	squad	leaders,	and	the	squad
leaders	their	squads.’
‘You	are	a	soldier,	Anaster	Toc.’
‘And	I	hated	every	moment	of	it,	Redmask.’
‘That	matters	not.	Tell	me	of	your	Grey	Swords,	the	tactics	they


employed.’
‘That	won’t	be	much	help.	I	could,	however,	tell	you	of	the	army	I
originally	belonged	to,	before	the	Grey	Swords.’	He	glanced	over	with	his	one
glittering	eye,	and	Redmask	saw	amusement	there,	a	kind	of	mad	hilarity	that
left	him	uneasy.	‘I	could	tell	you	of	the	Malazans.’
‘I	have	not	heard	of	that	tribe.’
Anaster	Toc	laughed	again.	‘Not	a	tribe.	An	empire.	An	empire	three,	four
times	the	size	of	Lether.’
‘You	will	stay,	then?’
Anaster	Toc	shrugged.	‘For	now.’
There	was	nothing	simple	to	this	man,	Redmask	realized.	Mad	indeed,	but
it	could	prove	a	useful	madness.	‘Then	how,’	he	asked,	‘do	the	Malazans	win
their	wars?’
The	foreigner ’s	twisted	smile	gleamed	in	the	dusk,	like	the	flash	of	a	knife.
‘This	could	take	a	while,	Redmask.’
‘I	will	send	for	food.’
‘And	oil	lamps	–	I	can’t	make	out	a	damned	thing	on	your	map.’
‘Do	you	approve	of	my	intent,	Anaster	Toc?’
‘To	create	a	professional	army?	Yes,	it’s	essential,	but	it	will	change
everything.	Your	people,	your	culture,	everything.’	He	paused,	then	added	in	a
dry,	mocking	tone,	‘You’ll	need	a	new	song.’
‘Then	you	must	create	it,’	Redmask	replied.	‘Choose	one	from	among	the
Malazans.	Something	appropriate.’
‘Aye,’	the	man	muttered,	‘a	dirge.’
The	white	knife	flashed	again,	and	Redmask	would	rather	it	had	remained
sheathed.


Chapter	Nine

Everywhere	I	looked	I	saw	the	signs	of	war	upon	the	landscape.	There
the	trees	had	crested	the	rise,	despatching	skirmishers	down	the	slope
to	challenge	the	upstart	low	growth	in	the	riverbed,	which	had	been	dry
as	bone	until	the	breaking	of	the	ice	dams	high	in	the	mountains,	where
the	savage	sun	had	struck	in	unexpected	ambush,	a	siege	that	breached
the	ancient	barricades	and	unleashed	torrents	of	water	upon	the
lowlands.
And	here,	on	this	tuck	and	fold	of	bedrock,	the	old	scars	of
glaciers	were	vanishing	beneath	advancing	mosses,	creeping	and
devouring	colonies	of	lichen	which	were	themselves	locked	in	feuds
with	kin.
Ants	flung	bridges	across	cracks	in	the	stone,	the	air	above
swirling	with	winged	termites,	dying	in	silence	in	the	serrated	jaws	of
rhinazan	that	swung	and	ducked	as	they	evaded	yet	fiercer	predators	of
the	sky.
All	these	wars	proclaim	the	truth	of	life,	of	existence	itself.	Now
we	must	ask	ourselves,	are	we	to	excuse	all	we	do	by	citing	such
ancient	and	ubiquitous	laws?	Or	can	we	proclaim	our	freedom	of	will
by	defying	our	natural	urge	to	violence,	domination	and	slaughter?
Such	were	my	thoughts	–	puerile	and	cynical	–	as	I	stood	triumphant
over	the	last	man	I	had	slain,	his	lifeblood	a	dwindling	stream	down	the
length	of	my	sword-blade,	whilst	in	my	soul	there	surged	such
pleasure	as	to	leave	me	trembling…
King	Kilanbas	in	the	Valley	of	Slate
Third	Letheras	Tide	–	the	Wars	of	Conquest
The	ruins	of	a	low	wall	encircled	the	glade,	the	battered	rough-cut	basalt
dividing	swaths	of	green	grasses.	Just	beyond	rose	a	thin	copse	of	young	birch
and	aspen,	spring	leaves	bright	and	fluttering.	Behind	this	stand	the	forest
thickened,	darkened,	grey-skinned	boles	of	pine	crowding	out	all	else.


Whatever	the	wall	had	enclosed	had	vanished	beneath	the	soft	loam	of	the
glade,	although	depressions	were	visible	here	and	there	to	mark	out	cellar	pits
and	the	like.
The	sunlit	air	seemed	to	spin	and	swirl,	so	thick	were	the	clouds	of	flying
insects,	and	there	was	a	taint	of	something	in	the	warm,	sultry	air	that	left	Sukul
Ankhadu	with	a	vague	sense	of	unease,	as	if	ghosts	watched	from	the	black
knots	on	the	trees	surrounding	them.	She	had	quested	outward	more	than	once,
finding	nothing	but	minute	life-sparks	–	the	natural	denizens	of	any	forest	–
and	the	low	murmurings	of	earth	spirits,	too	weak	to	do	much	more	than	stir
restlessly	in	their	eternal,	dying	sleep.	Nothing	to	concern	them,	then,	which
was	well.
Standing	close	to	one	of	the	shin-high	walls,	she	glanced	back	at	the
makeshift	shelter,	repressing	yet	another	surge	of	irritation	and	impatience.
Freeing	her	sister	should	have	yielded	nothing	but	gratitude	from	the	bitch.
Sheltatha	Lore	had	not	exactly	fared	well	in	that	barrow	–	beaten	senseless	by
Silchas	Ruin	and	a	damned	Locqui	Wyval,	left	near-drowned	in	a	bottomless
bog	in	some	memory	pocket	realm	of	the	Azath,	where	every	moment
stretched	like	centuries	–	so	much	so	that	Sheltatha	had	emerged	indelibly
stained	by	those	dark	waters,	her	hair	a	burnt	red,	her	skin	the	hue	of	a	betel
nut,	as	waxy	and	seamed	as	that	of	a	T’lan	Imass.	Wounds	gaped	bloodless.
Taloned	fingernails	gleamed	like	elongated	beetle	carapaces	–	Sukul	had	found
her	eyes	drawn	to	them	again	and	again,	as	if	waiting	for	them	to	split,
revealing	wings	of	exfoliated	skin	as	they	dragged	the	fingers	loose	to	whirl
skyward.
And	her	sister	was	fevered.	Day	after	day,	raving	with	madness.	Dialogue	–
negotiation	–	had	been	hopeless	thus	far.	It	had	been	all	Sukul	had	managed,
just	getting	her	from	that	infernal	city	out	here	to	a	place	of	relative	quietude.
She	now	eyed	the	lean-to	which,	from	this	angle,	hid	the	recumbent	form
of	Sheltatha	Lore,	grimly	amused	by	the	sight.	Hardly	palatial,	as	far	as
residences	were	concerned,	and	especially	given	their	royal	blood	–	if	the	fiery
draconean	torrent	in	their	veins	could	justify	the	appellation,	and	why	wouldn’t
it?	Worthy	ascendants	were	few	and	far	between	in	this	realm,	after	all.	Barring
a	handful	of	dour	Elder	Gods	–	and	these	nameless	spirits	of	stone	and	tree,
spring	and	stream.	No	doubt	Menandore	has	fashioned	for	herself	a	more
stately	abode	–	ripe	for	appropriation.	Some	mountain	fastness,	spired	and
impregnable,	so	high	as	to	be	for	ever	wreathed	in	clouds.	I	want	to	walk	those
airy	halls	and	call	them	my	own.	Our	own.	Unless	I	have	no	choice	but	to	lock
Sheltatha	in	some	crypt,	where	she	can	rave	and	shriek	disturbing	no-one—
‘I	should	tear	your	throat	out.’


The	croak,	coming	from	beneath	the	boughed	shelter,	triggered	a	sigh
from	Sukul.	She	approached	until	she	came	round	to	the	front	and	could	look
within.	Her	sister	had	sat	up,	although	her	head	was	bowed,	that	long,	crimson
hair	obscuring	her	face.	Her	long	nails	at	the	end	of	her	dangling	hands
glistened	as	if	leaking	oil.	‘Your	fever	has	broken	–	that	is	well.’
Sheltatha	Lore	did	not	look	up.	‘Is	it?	I	called	for	you	–	when	Ruin	was
clawing	loose	–	when	he	turned	upon	me	–	that	self-serving,	heartless	bastard!
Turned	on	me!	I	called	on	you!’
‘I	heard,	sister.	Alas,	too	far	away	to	do	much	about	it	–	that	fight	of	yours.
But	I	came	at	last,	didn’t	I?	Came,	and	freed	you.’
Silence	for	a	long	moment;	then,	her	voice	dark	and	brutal,	‘Where	is	she,
then?’
‘Menandore?’
‘It	was	her,	wasn’t	it?’	Lore	looked	up	suddenly,	revealing	amber	eyes,	the
whites	stained	like	rust.	A	ghastly	gaze,	yet	wide	and	searching.	‘Striking	me
from	behind	–	I	suspected	nothing	–	I	thought	you	were	there,	I	thought	–	you
were	there,	weren’t	you!’
‘As	much	a	victim	as	you,	Sheltatha.	Menandore	had	prepared	long	for	that
betrayal,	a	score	of	rituals	–	to	drive	you	down,	to	leave	me	helpless	to
intervene.’
‘She	struck	first,	you	mean.’	The	statement	was	a	half-snarl.	‘Were	we	not
planning	the	same,	Sukul?’
‘That	detail	is	without	much	relevance	now,	isn’t	it?’
‘And	yet,	dear	sister,	she	didn’t	bury	you,	did	she?’
‘Not	through	any	prowess	on	my	part.	Nor	did	I	bargain	for	my	freedom.
No,	it	seemed	Menandore	was	not	interested	in	destroying	me.’	Sukul	could
feel	her	own	sneer	of	hatred	twisting	her	features.	‘She	never	thought	I	was
worth	much.	Sukul	Ankhadu,	Dapple,	the	Fickle.	Well,	she	is	about	to	learn
otherwise,	isn’t	she?’
‘We	must	find	an	Azath,’	Sheltatha	Lore	said,	baring	brown	teeth.	‘She
must	be	made	to	suffer	what	I	suffered.’
‘I	agree,	sister.	Alas,	there	are	no	surviving	Azath	in	this	place	–	on	this
continent,	I	mean.	Sheltatha	Lore	–	will	you	trust	me?	I	have	something	in	mind
–	a	means	of	trapping	Menandore,	of	exacting	our	long-awaited	revenge.	Will
you	join	me?	As	true	allies	–	together,	there	are	none	here	powerful	enough	to
stop	us—’
‘You	fool,	there	is	Silchas	Ruin.’
‘I	have	an	answer	for	him	as	well,	sister.	But	I	need	your	help.	We	must
work	together,	and	in	so	doing	we	will	achieve	the	demise	of	both	Menandore


and	Silchas	Ruin.	Do	you	trust	me?’
Sheltatha	Lore’s	laugh	was	harsh.	‘Cast	that	word	away,	sister.	It	is
meaningless.	I	demand	vengeance.	You	have	something	to	prove	–	to	us	all.
Very	well,	we	shall	work	together,	and	see	what	comes	of	it.	Tell	me	your
grand	plan,	then.	Tell	me	how	we	shall	crush	Silchas	Ruin	who	is	without	equal
in	this	realm—’
‘You	must	conquer	your	fear	of	him,’	Sukul	said,	glancing	away,	studying
the	glade,	noting	how	the	shafts	of	sunlight	had	lengthened,	and	the	ruined	wall
surrounding	them	now	hunched	like	crumbling	darkness.	‘He	is	not
indomitable.	Scabandari	proved	that	well	enough—’
‘Are	you	truly	so	stupid	as	to	believe	that?’	Sheltatha	demanded,
clambering	free	of	the	lean-to,	straightening	like	some	anthropomorphic	tree.
Her	skin	gleamed,	polished	and	the	colour	of	stained	wood.	‘I	shared	the
bastard’s	barrow	for	a	thousand	eternities.	I	tasted	his	dreams,	I	sipped	at	the
stream	of	his	secretmost	thoughts	–	he	grew	careless…’
Sukul	scowled	at	her	kin.	‘What	are	you	saying?’
The	terrible	eyes	fixed	mockingly	on	her.	‘He	stood	on	the	field	of	battle.
He	stood,	his	back	to	Scabandari	–	whom	he	called	Bloodeye	and	was	that	not
hint	enough?	Stood,	I	tell	you,	and	but	waited	for	the	knives.’
‘I	do	not	believe	you	–	that	must	be	a	lie,	it	must	be!’
‘Why?	Wounded,	weaponless.	Sensing	the	fast	approach	of	this	realm’s
powers	–	powers	that	would	not	hesitate	in	destroying	him	and	Bloodeye	both.
Destroying	in	the	absolute	sense	–	Silchas	was	in	no	condition	to	defend
against	them.	Nor,	he	well	knew,	was	Scabandari,	for	all	that	idiot’s	pompous
preening	over	the	countless	dead.	So,	join	in	Scabandari’s	fate,	or…escape?’
‘Millennia	within	a	barrow	of	an	Azath	–	you	call	that	an	escape,
Sheltatha?’
‘More	than	any	of	us	–	more	even	than	Anomandaris,’	she	said,	her	eyes
suddenly	veiled,	‘Silchas	Ruin	thinks…draconean.	As	cold,	as	calculating,	as
timeless.	Abyss	below,	Sukul	Ankhadu,	you	have	no	idea…’	A	shudder	took
Sheltatha	then	and	she	turned	away.	‘Be	sure	of	your	schemes,	sister,’	she	added
in	a	guttural	tone,	‘and,	no	matter	how	sure	you	make	yourself,	leave	us	a
means	of	escape.	For	when	we	fail.’
Another	faint	groan,	from	the	earth	spirits	on	all	sides,	and	Sukul	Ankhadu
shivered,	assailed	by	uncertainty	–	and	fear.	‘You	must	tell	me	more	of	him,’
she	said.	‘All	you	learned—’
‘Oh,	I	shall.	Freedom	has	left	you…arrogant,	sister.	We	must	strip	that
from	you,	we	must	free	your	gaze	of	that	veil	of	confidence.	And	refashion
your	plans	accordingly.’	A	long	pause,	then	Sheltatha	Lore	faced	Sukul	once


again,	an	odd	glint	in	her	eyes.	‘Tell	me,	did	you	choose	in	deliberation?’
‘What?’
A	gesture.	‘This	place…for	my	recovery.’
Sukul	shrugged.	‘Shunned	by	the	local	people.	Private	–	I	thought—’
‘Shunned,	aye.	With	reason.’
‘And	that	would	be?’
Sheltatha	studied	her	for	a	long	moment,	then	she	simply	turned	away.
‘Matters	not.	I	am	ready	to	leave	here	now.’
As	am	I,	I	think.	‘Agreed.	North—’
Another	sharp	glance,	then	a	nod.
Oh,	I	see	your	contempt,	sister.	I	know	you	felt	as	Menandore	did	–	I	know
you	think	little	of	me.	And	you	thought	I	would	step	forward	once	she	struck?
Why?	I	spoke	of	trust,	yes,	but	you	did	not	understand.	I	do	indeed	trust	you,
Sheltatha.	I	trust	you	to	lust	for	vengeance.	And	that	is	all	I	need.	For	ten
thousand	lifetimes	of	slight	and	disregard…it	will	be	all	I	need.
	
His	tattooed	arms	bared	in	the	humid	heat,	Taxilian	walked	to	the	low	table
where	sat	Samar	Dev,	ignoring	the	curious	regard	from	other	patrons	in	the
courtyard	restaurant.	Without	a	word	he	sat,	reached	for	the	jug	of	watered,
chilled	wine	and	poured	himself	a	goblet,	then	leaned	closer.	‘By	the	Seven
Holies,	witch,	this	damned	city	is	a	wonder	–	and	a	nightmare.’
Samar	Dev	shrugged.	‘The	word	is	out	–	a	score	of	champions	now	await
the	Emperor ’s	pleasure.	You	are	bound	to	attract	attention.’
He	shook	his	head.	‘You	misunderstand.	I	was	once	an	architect,	yes?	It	is
one	thing’	–	he	waved	carelessly	–	‘to	stand	agape	at	the	extraordinary
causeways	and	spans,	the	bridges	and	that	dubious	conceit	that	is	the	Eternal
Domicile	–	even	the	canals	with	their	locks,	inflows	and	outflows,	the	aqueduct
courses	and	the	huge	blockhouses	with	their	massive	pumps	and	the	like.’	He
paused	for	another	mouthful	of	wine.	‘No,	I	speak	of	something	else	entirely.
Did	you	know,	an	ancient	temple	of	sorts	collapsed	the	day	we	arrived	–	a
temple	devoted,	it	seems,	to	rats—’
‘Rats?’
‘Rats,	not	that	I	could	glean	any	hint	of	a	cult	centred	on	such	foul
creatures.’
‘Karsa	would	find	the	notion	amusing,’	Samar	Dev	said	with	a	half-smile,
‘and	acquire	in	such	cultists	yet	another	enemy,	given	his	predilection	for
wringing	the	necks	of	rodents—’
Taxilian	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘Not	just	rodents,	I	gather…’


‘Alas,	but	on	that	matter	I	would	allow	the	Toblakai	some	steerage	room	–
he	warned	them	that	no-one	was	to	touch	his	sword.	A	dozen	or	more	times,	in
fact.	That	guard	should	have	known	better.’
‘Dear	witch,’	Taxilian	sighed,	‘you’ve	been	careless	or,	worse,	lazy.	It’s	to
do	with	the	Emperor,	you	see.	The	weapon	destined	to	cross	blades	with
Rhulad’s	own.	The	touch	signifies	a	blessing	–	did	you	not	know?	The	loyal
citizens	of	this	empire	want	the	champions	to	succeed.	They	want	their	damned
tyrant	obliterated.	They	pray	for	it;	they	dream	of	it—’
‘All	right,’	Samar	Dev	hissed,	‘keep	your	voice	down!’
Taxilian	spread	his	hands,	then	he	grimaced.	‘Yes,	of	course.	After	all,
every	shadow	hides	a	Patriotist—’
‘Careful	of	whom	you	mock.	That’s	a	capricious,	bloodthirsty	bunch,
Taxilian,	and	you	being	a	foreigner	only	adds	to	your	vulnerability.’
‘You	need	to	eavesdrop	on	more	conversations,	witch.	The	Emperor	is
unkillable.	Karsa	Orlong	will	join	all	the	others	in	that	cemetery	of	urns.	Do
not	expect	otherwise.	And	when	that	happens,	why,	all	his…hangers-on,	his
companions	–	all	who	came	with	him	will	suffer	the	same	fate.	Such	is	the
decree.	Why	would	the	Patriotists	bother	with	us,	given	our	inevitable	demise?’
He	drained	the	last	wine	from	his	goblet,	then	refilled	it.	‘In	any	case,	you
distracted	me.	I	was	speaking	of	that	collapsed	temple,	and	what	I	saw	of	its
underpinnings	–	the	very	proof	for	my	growing	suspicions.’
‘I	didn’t	know	we’re	destined	for	execution.	Well,	that	changes	things	–
although	I	am	not	sure	how.’	She	fell	silent;	then,	considering	Taxilian’s	other
words,	she	said,	‘Go	on.’
Taxilian	slowly	leaned	back,	cradling	the	goblet	in	his	hands.	‘Consider
Ehrlitan,	a	city	built	on	the	bones	of	countless	others.	In	that,	little	different
from	the	majority	of	settlements	across	all	Seven	Cities.	But	this	Letheras,	it	is
nothing	like	that,	Samar	Dev.	No.	Here,	the	older	city	never	collapsed,	never
disintegrated	into	rubble.	It	still	stands,	following	street	patterns	not	quite
obscured.	Here	and	there,	the	ancient	buildings	remain,	like	crooked	teeth.	I
have	never	seen	the	like,	witch	–	it	seems	no	regard	whatsoever	was	accorded
those	old	streets.	At	least	two	canals	cut	right	through	them	–	you	can	see	the
bulge	of	stonework	on	the	canal	walls,	like	the	sawed	ends	of	long-bones.’
‘Peculiar	indeed.	Alas,	a	subject	only	an	architect	or	a	mason	would	find	a
source	of	excitement,	Taxilian.’
‘You	still	don’t	understand.	That	ancient	pattern,	that	mostly	hidden
gridwork	and	the	remaining	structures	adhering	to	it	–	witch,	none	of	it	is
accidental.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’


‘I	should	probably	not	tell	you	this,	but	among	masons	and	architects	there
are	secrets	of	a	mystical	nature.	Certain	truths	regarding	numbers	and
geometry	reveal	hidden	energies,	lattices	of	power.	Samar	Dev,	there	are	such
courses	of	energy,	like	twisted	wires	in	mortar,	woven	through	this	city.	The
collapse	of	Scale	House	revealed	it	to	my	eyes:	a	gaping	wound,	dripping
ancient	blood	–	nearly	dead	blood,	I’ll	grant	you,	but	undeniable.’
‘Are	you	certain	of	this?’
‘I	am,	and	furthermore,	someone	knows.	Enough	to	ensure	that	the
essential	constructs,	the	buildings	that	form	a	network	of	fulcra	–	the	fixingpoints	to	the	lattice	of	energy	–	they	all	remain	standing—’
‘Barring	this	Scale	House.’
A	nod.	‘Not	necessarily	a	bad	thing	–	indeed,	not	necessarily	accidental,
that	collapse.’
‘Now	you	have	lost	me.	That	temple	fell	down	on	purpose?’
‘I	would	not	discount	that.	In	fact,	that	accords	precisely	with	my
suspicions.	We	approach	a	momentous	event,	Samar	Dev.	For	now,	that	is	as
far	as	I	can	take	it.	Something	is	going	to	happen.	I	only	pray	we	are	alive	to
witness	it.’
‘You’ve	done	little	to	enliven	my	day,’	she	said,	eyeing	her	half-finished
breakfast	of	bread,	cheeses	and	unfamiliar	fruit.	‘At	the	very	least	you	can
order	us	another	carafe	of	wine	for	your	sins.’
‘I	think	you	should	run,’	Taxilian	said	under	his	breath,	not	meeting	her
eyes.	‘I	would,	barring	the	event	I	believe	is	coming.	But	as	you	say,	my
interest	is	perhaps	mostly	professional.	You,	on	the	other	hand,	would	do	better
to	look	to	your	own	life	–	to	maintaining	it,	that	is.’
She	frowned.	‘It’s	not	that	I	hold	to	an	unreasoning	faith	in	the	martial
prowess	of	Karsa	Orlong.	There	have	been	enough	hints	that	the	Emperor	has
fought	other	great	champions,	other	warriors	of	formidable	skill,	and	none
could	defeat	him.	Nonetheless,	I	admit	to	a	feeling	of…well,	loyalty.’
‘Enough	to	join	him	at	Hood’s	Gate?’
‘I	am	not	sure.	In	any	case,	don’t	you	imagine	that	we’re	being	watched?
Don’t	you	think	that	others	have	tried	to	flee	their	fate?’
‘No	doubt.	But	Samar	Dev,	to	not	even	try…’
‘I	will	think	on	it,	Taxilian.	Now,	I’ve	changed	my	mind	–	that	second
carafe	of	wine	will	have	to	wait.	Let	us	walk	this	fair	city.	I	am	of	a	mind	to	see
this	ruined	temple	for	myself.	We	can	gawk	like	the	foreigners	we	are,	and	the
Patriotists	will	think	nothing	of	it.’	She	rose	from	her	seat.
Taxilian	followed	suit.	‘I	trust	you’ve	already	paid	the	proprietor.’
‘No	need.	Imperial	largesse.’


‘Generosity	towards	the	condemned	–	that	runs	contrary	to	my	sense	of
this	fell	empire.’
‘Things	are	always	more	complex	than	they	first	seem.’
Tracked	by	the	eyes	of	a	dozen	patrons,	the	two	left	the	restaurant.
	
The	sun	devoured	the	last	shadows	in	the	sand-floored	compound,	heat	rising
in	streaming	waves	along	the	length	of	the	rectangular,	high-walled	enclosure.
The	sands	had	been	raked	and	smoothed	by	servants,	and	that	surface	would
remain	unmarred	until	late	afternoon,	when	the	challengers	in	waiting	would
troop	out	to	spar	with	each	other	and	gather	–	those	who	shared	a	language	–	to
chew	and	gnaw	on	these	odd,	macabre	circumstances.	Yet,	leaning	against	a
wall	just	within	the	inner	entranceway,	Taralack	Veed	watched	Icarium	move
slowly	alongside	the	compound’s	outer	wall,	one	hand	out	to	brush	with
fingertips	the	bleached,	dusty	stone	and	its	faded	frieze.
On	that	frieze,	faded	images	of	imperial	heroes	and	glory-soaked	kings,
chipped	and	scarred	now	by	the	weapons	of	unmindful	foreigners	sparring
with	each	other,	each	and	every	one	of	those	foreigners	intent	upon	the	murder
of	the	Emperor	now	commanding	the	throne.
Thus,	a	lone	set	of	footprints	now,	tracking	along	that	wall,	a	shadow
diminished	to	almost	nothing	beneath	the	tall,	olive-skinned	warrior,	who
paused	to	look	skyward	as	a	flock	of	unfamiliar	birds	skittered	across	the	blue
gap,	then	continued	on	until	he	reached	the	far	end,	where	a	huge	barred	gate
blocked	the	way	into	the	street	beyond.	The	figures	of	guards	were	just	visible
beyond	the	thick,	rust-pitted	bars.	Icarium	halted	facing	that	gate,	stood
motionless,	the	sunlight	bleaching	him	as	if	the	Jhag	had	just	stepped	out	from
the	frieze	on	his	left,	as	faded	and	worn	as	any	hero	of	antiquity.
But	no,	not	a	hero.	Not	in	anyone’s	eyes.	Not	ever.	A	weapon	and	nothing
more.	Yet…he	lives,	he	breathes,	and	when	something	breathes,	it	is	more	than	a
weapon.	Hot	blood	in	the	veins,	the	grace	of	motion,	a	cavort	of	thoughts	and
feelings	in	that	skull,	awareness	like	flames	in	the	eyes.	The	Nameless	Ones	had
knelt	on	the	threshold	of	stone	for	too	long.	Worshipping	a	house,	its	heaved
grounds,	its	echoing	rooms	–	why	not	the	living,	breathing	ones	who	might
dwell	within	that	house?	Why	not	the	immortal	builders?	A	temple	was
hallowed	ground	not	to	its	own	existence	but	to	the	god	it	would	honour.	But
the	Nameless	Ones	did	not	see	it	that	way.	Worship	taken	to	its	absurd
extreme…yet	perhaps	in	truth	as	primitive	as	leaving	an	offering	in	a	fold	of
rock,	of	blood-paint	on	that	worn	surface…oh,	I	am	not	the	one	for	this,	for
thoughts	that	chill	the	marrow	of	my	soul.


A	Gral,	cut	and	scarred	by	the	betrayals.	The	ones	that	wait	in	every	man’s
shadow	–	for	we	are	both	house	and	dweller.	Stone	and	earth.	Blood	and	flesh.
And	so	we	will	haunt	the	old	rooms,	walk	the	familiar	corridors,	until,	turning	a
corner,	we	find	ourselves	facing	a	stranger,	who	can	be	none	other	than	our
most	evil	reflection.
And	then	the	knives	are	drawn	and	a	life’s	battle	is	waged,	year	after	year,
deed	after	deed.	Courage	and	vile	treachery,	cowardice	and	bright	malice.
The	stranger	has	driven	me	back,	step	by	step.	Until	I	no	longer	know
myself	–	what	sane	man	would	dare	recognize	his	own	infamy?	Who	would	draw
pleasure	from	the	sensation	of	evil,	satisfaction	from	its	all	too	bitter	rewards?
No,	instead	we	run	with	our	own	lies	–	do	I	not	utter	my	vows	of	vengeance
each	dawn?	Do	I	not	whisper	my	curses	against	all	those	who	wronged	me?
And	now	I	dare	judge	the	Nameless	Ones,	who	would	wield	one	evil	against
another.	And	what	of	my	place	in	this	dread	scheme?
He	stared	across	at	Icarium,	who	still	faced	the	gate,	who	stood	like	a
statue,	blurred	behind	ripples	of	heat.	My	stranger.	Yet	which	one	of	us	is	the
evil	one?
His	predecessor,	Mappo	–	the	Trell	–	had	long	ago	left	such	struggles
behind,	Taralack	suspected.	Choosing	to	betray	the	Nameless	Ones	rather	than
this	warrior	before	the	gate.	An	evil	choice?	The	Gral	was	no	longer	so	sure
of	his	answer.
Hissing	under	his	breath,	he	pushed	himself	from	the	wall	and	walked	the
length	of	the	compound,	through	waves	of	heat,	to	stand	at	the	Jhag’s	side.	‘If
you	leave	your	weapons,’	Taralack	said,	‘you	are	free	to	wander	the	city.’
‘Free	to	change	my	mind?’	Icarium	asked	with	a	faint	smile.
‘That	would	achieve	little	–	except	perhaps	our	immediate	execution.’
‘There	might	be	mercy	in	that.’
‘You	do	not	believe	your	own	words,	Icarium.	Instead,	you	speak	to	mock
me.’
‘That	may	be	true,	Taralack	Veed.	As	for	this	city,’	he	shook	his	head,	‘I	am
not	yet	ready.’
‘The	Emperor	could	decide	at	any	moment—’
‘He	will	not.	There	is	time.’
The	Gral	scowled	up	at	the	Jhag.	‘How	are	you	certain?’
‘Because,	Taralack	Veed,’	Icarium	said,	quiet	and	measured	as	he	turned	to
walk	back,	‘he	is	afraid.’
Staring	after	him,	the	Gral	was	silent.	Of	you?	What	does	he	know?	Seven
Holies,	who	would	know	of	this	land’s	history?	Its	legends?	Are	they	forewarned
of	Icarium	and	all	that	waits	within	him?


Icarium	vanished	in	the	shadow	beneath	the	building	entranceway.	After	a
dozen	rapid	heartbeats,	Taralack	followed,	not	to	reclaim	the	Jhag’s	dour
companionship,	but	to	find	one	who	might	give	him	the	answers	to	the	host	of
questions	now	assailing	him.
	
Varat	Taun,	once	second	in	command	to	Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis,	huddled	in	a
corner	of	the	unfurnished	room.	His	only	reaction	to	Yan	Tovis’s	arrival	was	a
flinch.	Curling	yet	tighter	in	that	corner,	he	did	not	lift	his	head	to	look	upon
her.	This	man	had,	alone,	led	Taralack	Veed	and	Icarium	back	through	the
warrens	–	a	tunnel	torn	open	by	unknown	magic,	through	every	realm	the
expedition	had	traversed	on	their	outward	journey.	The	Atri-Preda	herself	had
seen	the	blistering	wound	that	had	been	the	exit	gate;	she	had	heard	its
shrieking	howl,	a	voice	that	seemed	to	reach	into	her	chest	and	grip	her	heart;
she	had	stared	in	disbelieving	wonder	at	the	three	figures	emerging	from	it,
one	dragged	between	two…
No	other	survivors.	Not	one.	Neither	Edur	nor	Letherii.
Varat	Taun’s	mind	had	already	snapped.	Incapable	of	coherent
explanations,	he	had	babbled,	shrieking	at	anyone	who	drew	too	close	to	his
person,	yet	unable	or	unwilling	to	tear	his	wide	eyes	from	the	unconscious
form	of	Icarium.
Taralack	Veed’s	rasping	words,	then:	All	dead.	Everyone.	The	First	Throne
is	destroyed,	every	defender	slaughtered	–	Icarium	alone	was	left	standing,	and
even	he	was	grievously	wounded.	He	is…he	is	worthy	of	your	Emperor.
But	so	the	Gral	had	been	saying	since	the	beginning.	The	truth	was,	no-one
knew	for	certain.	What	had	happened	in	the	subterranean	sepulchre	where
stood	the	First	Throne?
The	terrible	claims	did	not	end	there.	The	Throne	of	Shadow	had	also	been
destroyed.	Yan	Tovis	remembered	the	dismay	and	horror	upon	the	features	of
the	Tiste	Edur	when	they	comprehended	Taralack	Veed’s	badly	accented	words.
Another	expedition	was	necessary.	That	much	had	been	obvious.	To	see	the
truth	of	such	claims.
The	gate	had	closed	shortly	after	spitting	out	the	survivors,	the	healing
almost	as	violent	and	fraught	as	the	first	wounding,	with	a	cacophony	of
screams	–	like	the	lost	souls	of	the	damned	–	erupting	from	that	portal	at	the
last	moment,	leaving	witnesses	with	the	terrible	conviction	that	others	had	been
racing	to	get	out.
Swift	into	the	wake	of	that	suspicion	came	the	news	of	failures	–	on	ship
after	ship	of	the	fleet	–	by	the	warlocks	of	the	Edur	when	they	sought	to	carve


new	paths	into	the	warrens.	The	trauma	created	by	that	chaotic	rent	had
somehow	sealed	every	possible	path	to	the	place	of	the	Throne	of	Shadow,	and
that	of	the	T’lan	Imass	First	Throne.	Was	this	permanent?	No-one	knew.	Even
to	reach	out,	as	the	warlocks	had	done,	was	to	then	recoil	in	savage	pain.	Hot,
they	said;	the	very	flesh	of	existence	rages	like	fire.
Yet	in	truth	Yan	Tovis	had	little	interest	in	such	matters.	She	had	lost
soldiers,	and	none	stung	more	than	her	second	in	command,	Varat	Taun.
She	stared	now	upon	his	huddled	form.	Is	this	what	I	will	deliver	to	his
wife	and	child	in	Bluerose?	Letherii	healers	had	tended	to	him,	unsuccessfully
–	the	wounds	on	his	mind	were	beyond	their	powers	to	mend.
The	sounds	of	boots	in	the	corridor	behind	her.	She	stepped	to	one	side	as
the	guard	arrived	with	his	barefooted	charge.	Another	‘guest’.	A	monk	from
the	archipelago	theocracy	of	Cabal	who	had,	oddly	enough,	volunteered	to	join
the	Edur	fleet,	following,	it	turned	out,	a	tradition	of	delivering	hostages	to
fend	off	potential	enemies.	The	Edur	fleet	had	been	too	damaged	to	pose	much
threat	at	that	time,	still	licking	its	wounds	after	clashing	with	the	denizens	of
Perish,	but	that	had	not	seemed	to	matter	much	–	the	tradition	announcing	first
contact	with	strangers	was	an	official	policy.
The	Cabalhii	monk	standing	now	in	the	threshold	of	the	doorway	was	no
higher	than	Twilight’s	shoulder,	slight	of	build,	bald,	his	round	face	painted
into	a	comical	mask	with	thick,	solid	pigments,	bright	and	garish,	exaggerating
an	expression	of	hilarity	perfectly	reflected	in	the	glitter	of	the	man’s	eyes.	Yan
Tovis	had	not	known	what	to	expect,	but	certainly	nothing	like…this.
‘Thank	you	for	agreeing	to	see	him,’	she	now	said.	‘I	understand	that	you
possess	talent	as	a	healer.’
The	monk	seemed	moments	from	bursting	into	laughter	at	her	every	word,
and	Twilight	felt	a	flash	of	irritation.
‘Can	you	understand	me?’	she	demanded.
Beneath	the	face	paint	the	features	were	flat,	unresponsive,	as	he	said	in
fluid	Letherii,	‘I	understand	your	every	word.	By	the	lilt	of	your	accent,	you
come	from	the	empire’s	north,	on	the	coast.	You	have	also	learned	the
necessary	intonation	that	is	part	of	the	military’s	own	lexicon,	which	does	not
entirely	amend	the	residue	of	your	low	birth,	yet	is	of	sufficient	mediation	to
leave	most	of	your	comrades	uncertain	of	your	familial	station.’	The	eyes,	a
soft	brown,	were	brimming	with	silent	mirth	with	each	statement.	‘This	of
course	does	not	refer	to	the	temporary	taint	that	has	come	from	long	proximity
among	sailors,	as	well	as	the	Tiste	Edur.	Which,	you	may	be	relieved	to	hear,	is
fast	diminishing.’
Yan	Tovis	glanced	at	the	guard	standing	behind	the	monk.	A	gesture	sent


her	away.
‘If	that	was	your	idea	of	a	joke,’	she	said	to	the	Cabalhii	after	the	woman
had	left,	‘then	even	the	paint	does	not	help.’
The	eyes	flashed.	‘I	assure	you,	no	humour	was	intended.	Now,	I	am	told
your	own	healers	have	had	no	success.	Is	this	correct?’
‘Yes.’
‘And	the	Tiste	Edur?’
‘They	are…uninterested	in	Varat	Taun’s	fate.’
A	nod,	then	the	monk,	drawing	his	loose	silks	closer,	walked	noiselessly
towards	the	figure	in	the	far	corner.
Varat	Taun	squealed	and	began	clawing	at	the	walls.
The	monk	halted,	cocking	his	head,	then	turned	about	and	approached	Yan
Tovis.	‘Do	you	wish	to	hear	my	assessment?’
‘Go	on.’
‘He	is	mad.’
She	stared	down	into	those	dancing	eyes,	and	felt	a	sudden	desire	to	throttle
this	Cabalhii.	‘Is	that	all?’	Her	question	came	out	in	a	rasping	tone,	rough	with
threat.
‘All?	It	is	considerable.	Madness.	Myriad	causes,	some	the	result	of
physical	damage	to	the	brain,	others	due	to	dysfunctioning	organs	which	can
be	ascribed	to	traits	of	parentage	–	an	inherited	flaw,	as	it	were.	Other	sources
include	an	imbalance	of	the	Ten	Thousand	Secretions	of	the	flesh,	a	tainting	of
select	fluids,	the	fever	kiss	of	delusion.	Such	imbalances	can	be	the	result	of
aforementioned	damage	or	dysfunction.’
‘Can	you	heal	him?’
The	monk	blinked.	‘Is	it	necessary?’
‘Well,	that	is	why	I	sent	for	you	–	excuse	me,	but	what	is	your	name?’
‘My	name	was	discarded	upon	attaining	my	present	rank	within	the	Unified
Sects	of	Cabal.’
‘I	see,	and	what	rank	is	that?’
‘Senior	Assessor.’
‘Assessing	what?’
The	expression	did	not	change.	‘All	matters	requiring	assessment.	Is	more
explanation	required?’
Yan	Tovis	scowled.	‘I’m	not	sure,’	she	muttered.	‘I	think	we	are	wasting
our	time.’
Another	wild	cavort	in	the	monk’s	eyes.	‘The	appearance	of	a	foreign	fleet
among	our	islands	required	assessment.	The	empire	that	despatched	it	required
assessment.	The	demands	of	this	Emperor	require	assessment.	And	now,	as	we


see,	the	condition	of	this	young	soldier	requires	assessment.	So	I	have	assessed
it.’
‘So	where,	precisely,	does	your	talent	for	healing	come	in?’
‘Healing	must	needs	precede	assessing	success	or	failure	of	the	treatment.’
‘What	treatment?’
‘These	things	follow	a	progression	of	requirements,	each	of	which	must
be	fully	met	before	one	is	able	to	proceed	to	the	next.	Thus.	I	have	assessed	this
soldier ’s	present	condition.	He	is	mad.	I	then,	for	your	benefit,	described	the
various	conditions	of	madness	and	their	possible	causes.	Thereafter	we
negotiated	the	issue	of	personal	nomenclature	–	an	aside	with	little	relevance,
as	it	turns	out	–	and	now	I	am	ready	to	resume	the	task	at	hand.’
‘Forgive	my	interruption,	then.’
‘There	is	no	need.	Now,	to	continue.	This	soldier	has	suffered	a	trauma
sufficient	to	disrupt	the	normal	balance	of	the	Ten	Thousand	Secretions.
Various	organs	within	his	brain	are	now	trapped	in	a	cycle	of	dysfunction
beyond	any	measures	of	self-repair.	The	trauma	has	left	a	residue	in	the	form
of	an	infection	of	chaos	–	it	is,	I	might	add,	never	wise	to	sip	the	deadly	waters
between	the	warrens.	Furthermore,	this	chaos	is	tainted	with	the	presence	of	a
false	god.’
‘A	false	god	–	what	is	false	about	it?’
‘I	am	a	monk	of	the	Unified	Sects	of	Cabal,	and	it	now	seems	necessary
that	I	explain	the	nature	of	my	religion.	Among	the	people	of	Cabal	there	are
three	thousand	and	twelve	sects.	These	sects	are	devoted,	one	and	all,	to	the
One	God.	In	the	past,	terrible	civil	wars	plagued	the	islands	of	Cabal,	as	each
sect	fought	for	domination	of	both	secular	and	spiritual	matters.	Not	until	the
Grand	Synod	of	New	Year	One	was	peace	secured	and	formalized	for	every
generation	to	come.	Hence,	the	Unified	Sects.	The	solution	to	the	endless
conflicts	was,	it	turned	out,	brilliantly	simple.	“Belief	in	the	One	God	occludes
all	other	concerns.”’
‘How	could	there	be	so	many	sects	and	only	one	god?’
‘Ah.	Well,	you	must	understand.	The	One	God	writes	nothing	down.	The
One	God	has	gifted	its	children	with	language	and	thought	in	the	expectation
that	the	One	God’s	desires	be	recorded	by	mortal	hands	and	interpreted	by
mortal	minds.	That	there	were	three	thousand	and	twelve	sects	at	New	Year	One
is	only	surprising	in	that	there	were	once	tens	of	thousands,	resulting	from	a
previous	misguided	policy	of	extensive	education	provided	to	every	citizen	of
Cabal	–	a	policy	since	amended	in	the	interests	of	unification.	There	is	now	one
college	per	sect,	wherein	doctrine	is	formalized.	Accordingly,	Cabal	has
known	twenty-three	months	of	uninterrupted	peace.’


Yan	Tovis	studied	the	small	man,	the	dancing	eyes,	the	absurd	mask	of
paint.	‘And	which	sect	doctrine	did	you	learn,	Senior	Assessor?’
‘Why,	that	of	the	Mockers.’
‘And	their	tenet?’
‘Only	this:	the	One	God,	having	written	nothing	down,	having	left	all
matters	of	interpretation	of	faith	and	worship	to	the	unguided	minds	of	overeducated	mortals,	is	unequivocally	insane.’
‘Which,	I	suppose,	is	why	your	mask	shows	wild	laughter—’
‘Not	at	all.	We	of	the	Mockers	are	forbidden	laughter,	for	that	is	an
invitation	to	the	hysteria	afflicting	the	One	God.	In	the	Holy	Expression
adorning	my	face	you	are	granted	a	true	image	of	the	One	Behind	the	Grand
Design,	in	so	far	as	our	sect	determines	such.’	The	monk	suddenly	clasped	his
hands	beneath	his	chin.	‘Now,	our	poor	soldier	has	suffered	overlong	as	it	is,
whilst	we	digressed	yet	again.	I	have	assessed	the	taint	of	a	false	god	in	the
beleaguered	mind	of	this	wounded	man.	Accordingly,	that	false	god	must	be
driven	out.	Once	this	is	done,	I	shall	remove	the	blockages	in	the	brain
preventing	self-repair,	and	so	all	imbalances	will	be	redressed.	The	effects	of
said	treatment	will	be	virtually	immediate	and	readily	obvious.’
Yan	Tovis	blinked.	‘You	can	truly	heal	him?’
‘Have	I	not	said	so?’
‘Senior	Assessor.’
‘Yes?’
‘Are	you	aware	of	the	purpose	you	are	meant	to	serve	here	in	Letheras?’
‘I	believe	I	will	be	expected	to	meet	the	Emperor	on	a	pitch,	whereupon	we
shall	endeavour	to	kill	each	other.	Furthermore,	I	am	led	to	understand	that	this
Emperor	cannot	be	slain	with	any	measure	of	finality,	cursed	as	he	is	by	a	false
god	–	the	very	same	false	god	who	has	afflicted	this	soldier	here,	by	the	way.
Thus,	it	is	my	assessment	that	I	will	be	killed	in	that	contest,	to	the	dismay	of
no-one	and	everyone.’
‘And	your	One	God	will	not	help	you,	a	senior	priest	of	its	temple?’
The	man’s	eyes	glittered.	‘The	One	God	helps	no-one.	After	all,	should	it
help	one	then	it	must	help	all,	and	such	potentially	universal	assistance	would
inevitably	lead	to	irreconcilable	conflict,	which	in	turn	would	without	question
drive	the	One	God	mad.	As	indeed	it	did,	long	ago.’
‘And	that	imbalance	can	never	be	redressed?’
‘You	lead	me	to	reassess	you,	Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis.	You	are	rather	clever,
in	an	intuitive	way.	I	judge	that	your	Ten	Thousand	Secretions	flow	even	and
clear,	probably	the	result	of	remorseless	objectivity	or	some	similar
blasphemy	of	the	spirit	–	for	which,	I	assure	you,	I	hold	no	particular


resentment.	So,	we	share	this	question,	which	enunciates	the	very	core	of	the
Mockers’	Doctrine.	It	is	our	belief	that,	should	every	mortal	in	this	realm
achieve	clarity	of	thought	and	a	cogent	regard	of	morality,	and	so	acquire	a
profound	humility	and	respect	for	all	others	and	for	the	world	in	which	they
live,	then	the	imbalance	will	be	redressed,	and	sanity	will	return	once	more	to
the	One	God.’
‘Ah…I	see.’
‘I	am	sure	you	do.	Now,	I	believe	a	healing	was	imminent.	A	conjoining	of
the	warrens	of	High	Mockra	and	High	Denul.	Physiological	amendment
achieved	by	the	latter.	Expurgation	of	the	taint	and	elimination	of	the
blockages,	via	the	former.	Of	course,	said	warrens	are	faint	in	their
manifestation	here	in	this	city,	for	a	variety	of	reasons.	Nonetheless,	I	do
indeed	possess	substantial	talents,	some	of	which	are	directly	applicable	to	the
matter	at	hand.’
Feeling	slightly	numbed,	Yan	Tovis	rubbed	at	her	face.	She	closed	her	eyes
–	then,	at	a	ragged	sigh	from	Varat	Taun,	opened	them	again,	to	see	her	second
in	command’s	limbs	slowly	unfold,	the	fierce	clutch	of	muscles	on	his	neck
visibly	ease	as	the	man,	blinking,	slowly	lifted	his	head.
And	saw	her.
‘Varat	Taun.’
A	faint	smile,	worn	with	sorrow	–	but	a	natural	sorrow.	‘Atri-Preda.	We
made	it	back,	then…’
She	frowned,	then	nodded.	‘You	did.	And	since	that	time,	Lieutenant,	the
fleet	has	come	home.’	She	gestured	at	the	room.	‘You	are	in	the	Domicile’s
Annexe,	in	Letheras.’
‘Letheras?	What?’	He	struggled	to	rise,	pausing	a	moment	to	look
wonderingly	at	the	Cabalhii	monk;	then,	using	the	wall	behind	him,	he
straightened	and	met	Twilight’s	eyes.	‘But	that	is	impossible.	We’d	two	entire
oceans	to	cross,	at	the	very	least—’
‘Your	escape	proved	a	terrible	ordeal,	Lieutenant,’	Yan	Tovis	said.	‘You
have	lain	in	a	coma	for	many,	many	months.	I	expect	you	are	feeling	weak—’
A	grimace.	‘Exhausted,	sir.’
‘What	do	you	last	recall,	Lieutenant?’
Dread	filled	his	wan	features	and	his	gaze	fell	away	from	hers.	‘Slaughter,
sir.’
‘Yes.	The	barbarian	known	as	Taralack	Veed	survived,	as	did	the	Jhag,
Icarium—’
Varat	Taun’s	head	snapped	up.	‘Icarium!	Yes	–	Atri-Preda,	he	–	he	is	an
abomination!’


‘A	moment!’	cried	the	Senior	Assessor,	eyes	now	piercing	as	he	stared	at
the	lieutenant.	‘Icarium,	the	Jhag	Warrior?	Icarium,	Lifestealer?’
Suddenly	frightened,	Yan	Tovis	said,	‘Yes,	Cabalhii.	He	is	here.	Like	you,
he	will	challenge	the	Emperor—’	She	stopped	then,	in	shock,	as	the	monk,	eyes
bulging,	flung	both	hands	to	his	face,	streaking	across	the	thick	paint,	and,	teeth
appearing	to	clench	down	hard	on	his	lower	lip,	bit.	Until	blood	spurted.	The
monk	reeled	back	until	he	struck	the	wall	beside	the	doorway	–	then,	all	at
once,	he	whirled	about	and	fled	the	room.
‘Errant	take	us,’	Varat	Taun	hissed,	‘what	was	all	that	about?’
Forbidden	laughter?	She	shook	her	head.	‘I	don’t	know,	Lieutenant.’
‘Who…what…?’
‘A	healer,’	she	replied	in	a	shaky	voice,	forcing	herself	to	draw	a	steadying
breath.	‘The	one	who	awakened	you,	Varat.	A	guest	of	the	Emperor ’s	–	from
Uruth’s	fleet.’
Varat	Taun	licked	chapped,	broken	lips.	‘Sir.’
‘Yes?’
‘Icarium…Errant	save	us,	he	must	not	be	awakened.	Taralack	knows,	he
was	there,	he	saw.	The	Jhag…have	him	sent	away,	sir—’
She	approached	him,	boots	hard	on	the	floor.	‘The	Gral’s	claims	are	not
exaggerated,	then?	He	will	bring	destruction?’
A	whisper:	‘Yes.’
She	could	not	help	herself	then,	and	reached	out,	gloved	hands	grasping
the	front	of	Varat’s	ragged	shirt,	dragging	him	close.	‘Tell	me,	damn	you!	Can
he	kill	him?	Can	Icarium	kill	him?’
Horror	swirled	in	the	soldier ’s	eyes	as	he	nodded.
Errant’s	blessing,	maybe	this	time…‘Varat	Taun.	Listen	to	me.	I	am	leading
my	company	out	in	two	days.	Back	to	the	north.	You	will	ride	with	me,	as	far
up	the	coast	as	necessary	–	then	you	ride	east	–	to	Bluerose.	I	am	assigning	you
to	the	Factor ’s	staff	there,	understood?	Two	days.’
‘Yes	sir.’
She	released	him,	suddenly	embarrassed	at	her	own	outburst.	Yet	her	legs
were	weak	as	reeds	beneath	her	still.	She	wiped	sweat	from	her	eyes.	‘Welcome
back,	Lieutenant,’	she	said	in	a	rough	voice,	not	meeting	his	gaze.	‘Are	you
strong	enough	to	accompany	me?’
‘Sir.	Yes,	I	shall	try.’
‘Good.’
Emerging	from	the	room,	they	came	face	to	face	with	the	Gral	barbarian.
Breath	hissed	from	Varat	Taun.
Taralack	Veed	had	halted	in	the	corridor	and	was	staring	at	the	lieutenant.


‘You	are…recovered.	I	did	not	think—’	He	shook	his	head,	then	said,	‘I	am
pleased,	soldier—’
‘You	warned	us	again	and	again,’	Varat	Taun	said.
The	Gral	grimaced	and	seemed	ready	to	spit,	then	decided	otherwise.
Gravely,	he	said,	‘I	did.	And	yes,	I	was	foolish	enough	to	be	an	eager
witness…’
‘And	next	time?’	The	question	from	Varat	Taun	was	a	snarl.
‘You	do	not	need	to	ask	me	that.’
The	lieutenant	stared	hard	at	the	savage,	then	he	seemed	to	sag,	and	Yan
Tovis	was	astonished	to	see	Taralack	Veed	move	forward	to	take	Varat’s
weight.	Ah,	it	is	what	they	have	shared.	It	is	that.	That.
The	Gral	glared	over	at	her.	‘He	is	half	dead	with	exhaustion!’
‘Yes.’
‘I	will	help	him	now	–	where	would	you	lead	us,	Atri-Preda?’
‘To	more	hospitable	quarters.	What	are	you	doing	here,	Veed?’
‘A	sudden	fear,’	he	said	as	he	now	struggled	with	Varat’s	unconscious
form.
She	moved	to	help	him.	‘What	sort	of	fear?’
‘That	he	would	be	stopped.’
‘Who?’
‘Icarium.	That	you	would	stop	him	–	now,	especially,	now	that	this	man	is
sane	once	more.	He	will	tell	you	–	tell	you	everything—’
‘Taralack	Veed,’	she	said	in	a	harsh	tone,	‘the	lieutenant	and	I	leave	this	city
in	two	days.	We	ride	north.	Between	then	and	now,	Varat	Taun	is	under	my	care.
No-one	else’s.’
‘None	but	me,	that	is.’
‘If	you	insist.’
The	lieutenant	between	them,	the	Gral	studied	her.	‘You	know,	don’t	you.
He	told	you—’
‘Yes.’
‘And	you	mean	to	say	nothing,	to	no-one.	No	warning—’
‘That	is	correct.’
‘Who	else	might	suspect	–	your	ancient	histories	of	the	First	Empire.	Your
scholars—’
‘I	don’t	know	about	that.	There	is	one,	and	if	I	am	able	he	will	be	coming
with	us.’	That	damned	monk.	It	should	be	simple	enough.	The	Cabal	priests
misunderstood.	Sent	us	an	ambassador,	not	a	champion.	No	value	in	killing	him
–	the	poor	fool	cannot	fight	–	imagine	Rhulad’s	rage	at	wasting	his	time…yes,
that	should	do	it.


‘No	scholars…’
She	grimaced	and	said,	‘Dead,	or	in	prison.’	She	glared	across	at	the	Gral.
‘What	of	you?	Will	you	flee	with	us?’
‘You	know	I	cannot	–	I	am	to	share	Icarium’s	fate.	More	than	any	of	them
realize.	No,	Atri-Preda,	I	will	not	leave	this	city.’
‘Was	this	your	task,	Taralack	Veed?	To	deliver	Icarium	here?’
He	would	not	meet	her	eyes.
‘Who	sent	you?’	she	demanded.
‘Does	it	matter?	We	are	here.	Listen	to	me,	Twilight,	your	Emperor	is
being	sorely	used.	There	is	war	among	the	gods,	and	we	are	as	nothing	–	not
you,	not	me,	not	Rhulad	Sengar.	So	ride,	yes,	as	far	away	as	you	can.	And	take
this	brave	warrior	with	you.	Do	this,	and	I	will	die	empty	of	sorrow—’
‘And	what	of	regrets?’
He	spat	on	the	floor.	His	only	answer,	but	she	understood	him	well	enough.
	
Sealed	by	a	massive,	thick	wall	of	cut	limestone	at	the	end	of	a	long-abandoned
corridor	in	a	forgotten	passage	of	the	Old	Palace,	the	ancient	Temple	of	the
Errant	no	longer	existed	in	the	collective	memory	of	the	citizens	of	Letheras.
Its	beehive-domed	central	chamber	would	have	remained	unlit,	its	air	still	and
motionless,	for	over	four	centuries,	and	the	spoked	branches	leading	off	to
lesser	rooms	would	have	last	echoed	to	footfalls	almost	a	hundred	years
earlier.
The	Errant	had	walked	out	into	the	world,	after	all.	The	altar	stood	cold
and	dead	and	probably	destroyed.	The	last	priests	and	priestesses	–	titles	held	in
secret	against	the	plague	of	pogroms	–	had	taken	their	gnostic	traditions	to
their	graves,	with	no	followers	left	to	replace	them.
The	Master	of	the	Holds	has	walked	out	into	the	world.	He	is	now	among
us.	There	can	be	no	worship	now	–	no	priests,	no	temples.	The	only	blood	the
Errant	will	taste	from	now	on	is	his	own.	He	has	betrayed	us.
Betrayed	us	all.
And	yet	the	whispers	never	went	away.	They	echoed	like	ghost-winds	in	the
god’s	mind.	With	each	utterance	of	his	name,	as	prayer,	as	curse,	he	could	feel
that	tremble	of	power	–	mocking	all	that	he	had	once	held	in	his	hands,
mocking	the	raging	fires	of	blood	sacrifice,	of	fervent,	fearful	faith.	There
were	times,	he	admitted,	that	he	knew	regret.	For	all	that	he	had	so	willingly
surrendered.
Master	of	the	Tiles,	the	Walker	Among	the	Holds.	But	the	Holds	have
waned,	their	power	forgotten,	buried	by	the	passing	of	age	upon	age.	And	I	too


have	faded,	trapped	in	this	fragment	of	land,	this	pathetic	empire	in	a	corner	of
a	continent.	I	walked	into	the	world…but	the	world	has	grown	old.
He	stood	now	facing	the	stone	wall	at	the	end	of	the	corridor.	Another	halfdozen	heartbeats	of	indecision,	then	he	stepped	through.
And	found	himself	in	darkness,	the	air	stale	and	dry	in	his	throat.	Once,
long	ago,	he	had	needed	tiles	to	manage	such	a	thing	as	walking	through	a
solid	stone	wall.	Once,	his	powers	had	seemed	new,	brimming	with
possibilities;	once,	it	had	seemed	he	could	shape	and	reshape	the	world.	Such
arrogance.	It	had	defied	every	assault	of	reality	–	for	a	time.
He	still	persisted	in	his	conceit,	he	well	knew	–	a	curse	among	all	gods.
And	he	would	amuse	himself,	a	nudge	here,	a	tug	there,	to	then	stand	back	and
see	how	the	skein	of	fates	reconfigured	itself,	each	strand	humming	with	his
intrusion.	But	it	was	getting	harder.	The	world	resisted	him.	Because	I	am	the
last,	I	am	myself	the	last	thread	reaching	back	to	the	Holds.	And	if	that	thread
was	severed,	the	tension	suddenly	snapping,	flinging	him	loose,	stumbling
forward	into	the	day’s	light…what	then?
The	Errant	gestured,	and	flames	rose	once	more	from	the	clamshell	niches
low	on	the	dome’s	ring-wall,	casting	wavering	shadows	across	the	mosaic
floor.	A	sledgehammer	had	been	taken	to	the	altar	on	its	raised	dais.	The
shattered	stones	seemed	to	bleed	recrimination	still	in	the	Errant’s	eyes.	Who
served	whom,	damn	you?	I	went	out,	among	you,	to	make	a	difference	–	so	that	I
could	deliver	wisdom,	whatever	wisdom	I	possessed.	I	thought	–	I	thought	you
would	be	grateful.
But	you	preferred	shedding	blood	in	my	name.	My	words	just	got	in	your
way,	my	cries	for	mercy	for	your	fellow	citizens	–	oh,	how	that	enraged	you.
His	thoughts	fell	silent.	The	hairs	on	the	back	of	his	neck	rose.	What	is
this?	I	am	not	alone.
A	soft	laugh	from	one	of	the	passageways.	He	slowly	turned.
The	man	crouched	there	was	more	ogre	than	human,	broad	shoulders
covered	in	bristly	black	hair,	a	bullet	head	thrust	forward	on	a	short	neck.	The
bottom	half	of	the	face	was	strangely	pronounced	beneath	long,	curling
moustache	and	beard,	and	large	yellowed	tusks	jutted	from	the	lower	jaw,
pushing	clear	of	lip	and	thick,	ringleted	hair.	Stubby,	battered	hands	hung	down
from	long	arms,	the	knuckles	on	the	floor.
From	the	apparition	came	a	bestial,	rank	stench.
The	Errant	squinted,	seeking	to	pierce	the	gloom	beneath	the	heavy	brows,
where	small	narrow-set	eyes	glittered	dull	as	rough	garnets.	‘This	is	my
temple,’	he	said.	‘I	do	not	recall	an	open	invitation	to…guests.’
Another	low	laugh,	but	there	was	no	humour	in	it,	the	Errant	realized.


Bitterness,	as	thick	and	pungent	as	the	smell	stinging	the	god’s	nostrils.
‘I	remember	you,’	came	the	creature’s	voice,	low	and	rumbling.	‘And	I
knew	this	place.	I	knew	what	it	had	been.	It	was…safe.	Who	recalls	the	Holds,
after	all?	Who	knew	enough	to	suspect?	Oh,	they	can	hunt	me	down	all	they
want	–	yes,	they	will	find	me	in	the	end	–	I	know	this.	Soon,	maybe.	Sooner,
now	that	you	have	found	me,	Master	of	the	Tiles.	He	might	have	returned	me,
you	know,	along	with	other…gifts.	But	he	has	failed.’	Another	laugh,	this	time
harsh.	‘A	common	demise	among	mortals.’
Though	he	spoke,	no	words	emerged	from	the	ogre’s	mouth.	That	heavy,
awkward	voice	was	in	the	Errant’s	head,	which	was	all	for	the	best	–	those
tusks	would	have	brutalized	every	utterance	into	near	incomprehensibility.
‘You	are	a	god.’
More	laughter.	‘I	am.’
‘You	walked	into	the	world.’
‘Not	by	choice,	Master	of	the	Tiles.	Not	like	you.’
‘Ah.’
‘And	so	my	followers	died	–	oh,	how	they	have	died.	Across	half	the
world,	their	blood	soaked	the	earth.	And	I	could	do	nothing.	I	can	do	nothing.’
‘It	is	something,’	the	Errant	observed,	‘to	hold	yourself	to	such	a	modest
form.	But	how	much	longer	will	that	control	last?	How	soon	before	you	burst
the	confines	of	this	temple	of	mine?	How	long	before	you	heave	yourself	into
the	view	of	all,	shouldering	aside	the	clouds,	shaking	mountains	to	dust—’
‘I	will	be	long	from	here	before	then,	Master	of	the	Tiles.’
The	Errant’s	smile	was	wry.	‘That	is	a	relief,	god.’
‘You	have	survived,’	the	god	now	said.	‘For	so	long.	How?’
‘Alas,’	said	the	Errant,	‘my	advice	to	you	would	be	useless.	My	power
quickly	dissipated.	It	had	already	been	terribly	wounded	–	the	Forkrul	Assail’s
pogroms	against	my	faithful	saw	to	that.	The	thought	of	another	failure	like
that	one	was	too	much…so	I	willingly	relinquished	most	of	what	remained	to
me.	It	made	me	ineffectual,	beyond,	perhaps,	this	city	and	a	modest	stretch	of
river.	And	so	not	a	threat	to	anyone.’	Not	even	you,	tusked	one.	‘You,	however,
cannot	make	a	similar	choice.	They	will	want	the	raw	power	within	you	–	in
your	blood	–	and	they	will	need	it	spilled	before	they	can	drink,	before	they
can	bathe	in	what’s	left	of	you.’
‘Yes.	One	last	battle	awaits	me.	That	much,	at	least,	I	do	not	regret.’
Lucky	you.	‘A	battle.	And…a	war?’
Amusement	in	his	thoughts,	then,	‘Oh,	indeed,	Master	of	the	Tiles.	A	war	–
enough	to	make	my	heart	surge	with	life,	with	hunger.	How	could	it	not?	I	am
the	Boar	of	Summer,	Lord	of	the	Hosts	on	the	Field	of	Battle.	The	chorus	of


the	dying	to	come…ah,	Master,	be	glad	it	will	be	nowhere	close—’
‘I	am	not	so	sure	of	that.’
A	shrug.
The	Errant	frowned,	then	asked,	‘How	long	do	you	intend	to	remain	here,
then?’
‘Why,	as	long	as	I	can,	before	my	control	crumbles	–	or	I	am	summoned
to	my	battle,	my	death,	I	mean.	Unless,	of	course,	you	choose	to	banish	me.’
‘I	would	not	risk	the	power	revealed	by	that,’	the	Errant	said.
A	rumbling	laugh.	‘You	think	I	would	not	go	quietly?’
‘I	know	it,	Boar	of	Summer.’
‘True	enough.’	Hesitation,	then	the	war	god	said,	‘Offer	me	sanctuary,
Errant,	and	I	will	yield	to	you	a	gift.’
‘Very	well.’
‘No	bargaining?’
‘No.	I’ve	not	the	energy.	What	is	this	gift,	then?’
‘This:	the	Hold	of	the	Beasts	is	awakened.	I	was	driven	out,	you	see,	and
there	was	need,	necessity,	insistence	that	some	inheritor	arise	to	take	my	place
–	to	assume	the	voices	of	war.	Treach	was	too	young,	too	weak.	And	so	the
Wolves	awoke.	They	flank	the	throne	now	–	no,	they	are	the	throne.’
The	Errant	could	barely	draw	breath	at	this	revelation.	A	Hold,	awakened?
From	a	mouth	gone	dry	as	dust,	he	said,	‘Sanctuary	is	yours,	Boar	of	Summer.
And,	for	your	trail	here,	my	fullest	efforts	at…misdirection.	None	shall	know,
none	shall	even	suspect.’
‘Please,	then,	block	those	who	call	on	me	still.	Their	cries	fill	my	skull	–	it
is	too	much—’
‘Yes,	I	know.	I	will	do	what	I	can.	Your	name	–	do	they	call	upon	the	Boar
of	Summer?’
‘Not	often,’	the	god	replied.	‘Fener.	They	call	upon	Fener.’
The	Errant	nodded,	then	bowed	low.
He	passed	through	the	stone	wall	and	once	more	found	himself	in	the
disused	corridor	of	the	Old	Palace.	Awakened?	Abyss	below…no	wonder	the
Cedance	whirls	in	chaos.	Wolves?	Could	it	be…
	
This	is	chaos!	It	makes	no	sense!	Feather	Witch	stared	down	at	the	chipped	tiles
scattered	on	the	stone	floor	before	her.	Axe,	bound	to	both	Saviour	and
Betrayer	of	the	Empty	Hold.	Knuckles	and	the	White	Crow	circle	the	Ice	Throne
like	leaves	in	a	whirlpool.	Elder	of	Beast	Hold	stands	at	the	Portal	of	the	Azath
Hold.	Gate	of	the	Dragon	and	Blood-Drinker	converge	on	the	Watcher	of	the


Empty	Hold	–	but	no,	this	is	all	madness.
The	Dragon	Hold	was	virtually	dead.	Everyone	knew	this,	every	Caster	of
the	Tiles,	every	Dreamer	of	the	Ages.	Yet	here	it	vied	for	dominance	with	the
Empty	Hold	–	and	what	of	Ice?	Timeless,	unchanging,	that	throne	had	been
dead	for	millennia.	White	Crow	–	yes,	I	have	heard.	Some	bandit	in	the	reaches
of	the	Bluerose	Mountains	now	claims	that	title.	Hunted	by	Hannan	Mosag	–
that	tells	me	there	is	power	to	that	bandit’s	bold	claim.	I	must	speak	again	to
the	Warlock	King,	the	bent,	broken	bastard.
She	leaned	back	on	her	haunches,	wiped	chilled	sweat	from	her	brow.
Udinaas	had	claimed	to	see	a	white	crow,	centuries	ago	it	seemed	now,	there	on
the	strand	beside	the	village.	A	white	crow	in	the	dusk.	And	she	had	called	upon
the	Wyval,	her	lust	for	power	overwhelming	all	caution.	Udinaas	–	he	had
stolen	so	much	from	her.	She	dreamed	of	the	day	he	was	finally	captured,
alive,	helpless	in	chains.
The	fool	thought	he	loved	me	–	I	could	have	used	that.	I	should	have.	My
own	set	of	chains	to	snap	shut	on	his	ankles	and	wrists,	to	drag	him	down.
Together,	we	could	have	destroyed	Rhulad	long	before	he	came	to	his	power.
She	stared	down	at	the	tiles,	at	the	ones	that	had	fallen	face	up	–	none	of	the
others	were	in	play,	as	the	fates	had	decreed.	Yet	the	Errant	is	nowhere	to	be
seen	–	how	can	that	be?	She	reached	down	to	one	of	the	face-down	tiles	and
picked	it	up,	looked	at	its	hidden	side.	Shapefinder.	See,	even	here,	the	Errant
does	not	show	his	hand.	She	squinted	at	the	tile.	Fiery	Dawn,	these	hints	are
new…Menandore.	And	I	was	thinking	about	Udinaas	–	yes,	I	see	now.	You
waited	for	me	to	pick	you	up	from	this	field.	You	are	the	secret	link	to	all	of	this.
She	recalled	the	scene,	the	terrible	vision	of	her	dream,	that	horrendous
witch	taking	Udinaas	and…Maybe	the	chains	on	him	now	belong	to	her.	I	did
not	think	of	that.	True,	he	was	raped,	but	men	sometimes	find	pleasure	in	being
such	a	victim.	What	if	she	is	protecting	him	now?	An	immortal…rival.	The
Wyval	chose	him,	didn’t	it?	That	must	mean	something	–	it’s	why	she	took	him,
after	all.	It	must	be.
In	a	sudden	gesture	she	swept	up	the	tiles,	replacing	them	in	their	wooden
box,	then	wrapping	the	box	in	strips	of	hide	before	pushing	the	package
beneath	her	cot.	She	then	drew	from	a	niche	in	one	wall	a	leather-bound
volume,	easing	back	its	stained,	mouldy	cover.	Her	trembling	fingers	worked
through	a	dozen	brittle	vellum	pages	before	she	reached	the	place	where	she
had	previously	left	off	memorizing	the	names	listed	within	–	names	that	filled
the	entire	volume.
Compendium	of	the	Gods.
The	brush	of	cool	air.	Feather	Witch	looked	up,	glared	about.	Nothing.	No-


one	at	the	entrance,	no	unwelcome	shadows	in	the	corners	–	lanterns	burned	on
all	sides.	There	had	been	a	taint	to	that	unseemly	breath,	something	like	wax…
She	shut	the	book	and	slid	it	back	onto	its	shelf,	then,	heartbeat	rapid	in	her
chest,	she	hurried	over	to	a	single	pavestone	in	the	room’s	centre,	wherein	she
had	earlier	inscribed,	with	an	iron	stylus,	an	intricate	pattern.	Capture.	‘The
Holds	are	before	me,’	she	whispered,	closing	her	eyes.	‘I	see	Tracker	of	the
Beasts,	footfalls	padding	on	the	trail	of	the	one	who	hides,	who	thinks	to	flee.
But	no	escape	is	possible.	The	quarry	circles	and	circles,	yet	is	drawn	ever
closer	to	the	trap.	It	pulls,	it	drags	–	the	creature	screams,	but	no	succour	is
possible	–	none	but	my	mercy	–	and	that	is	never	free!’	She	opened	her	eyes,
and	saw	a	smudge	of	mist	bound	within	the	confines	of	the	inscribed	pattern.	‘I
have	you!	Ghost,	spy	–	show	yourself!’
Soft	laughter.
The	mist	spun,	wavered,	then	settled	once	more,	tendrils	reaching	out
tentatively	–	beyond	the	carved	borders.
Feather	Witch	gasped.	‘You	mock	me	with	your	power	–	yet,	coward	that
you	are,	you	dare	not	show	yourself.’
‘Dear	girl,	this	game	will	eat	you	alive.’	The	words,	the	faintest	whisper	–
the	touch	of	breath	along	both	ears.	She	started,	glared	about,	sensed	a
presence	behind	her	and	spun	round	–	no-one.
‘Who	is	here?’	she	demanded.
‘Beware	the	gathering	of	names…it	is…premature…’
‘Name	yourself,	ghost!	I	command	it.’
‘Oh,	compulsion	is	ever	the	weapon	of	the	undeserving.	Let	us	instead
bargain	in	faith.	That	severed	finger	you	keep	round	your	neck,	Caster,	what
do	you	intend	with	it?’
She	clutched	at	the	object.	‘I	will	not	tell	you—’
‘Then	I	in	turn	will	reveal	to	you	the	same	–	nothing.’
She	hesitated.	‘Can	you	not	guess?’
‘Ah,	and	have	I	guessed	correctly?’
‘Yes.’
‘Premature.’
‘I	am	biding	my	time,	ghost	–	I	am	no	fool.’
‘No	indeed,’	the	ghost	replied.	‘Even	so,	let	us	extend	the	bargain—’
‘Why?	You	have	revealed	nothing	of	yourself—’
‘Patience.	Caster	of	the	Tiles,	await	my…encouragement.	Before	you	do
what	you	intend.	Await	me,	and	I	will	assist	you.’
She	snorted.	‘You	are	a	ghost.	You	have	no	power—’
‘I	am	a	ghost,	and	that	is	precisely	why	I	have	power.	For	what	you	seek,


that	is.’
‘Why	should	I	believe	you?	Why	should	I	agree	to	anything	you	suggest?’
‘Very	well,	my	part	of	the	bargain.	You	speak	now	with	Kuru	Qan,	once
Ceda	to	King	Ezgara	Diskanar.’
‘Slain	by	Trull	Sengar…’
Something	like	a	chuckle.	‘Well,	someone	needed	to	thrust	the	spear…’
‘You	knew	it	was	coming?’
‘Knowing	and	being	able	to	do	something	about	it	are	two	different
matters,	Caster	of	the	Tiles.	In	any	case,	lay	the	true	blame	at	the	Errant’s	feet.
And	I	admit,	I	am	of	a	mind	to	call	him	out	on	that,	eventually.	But	like	you,	I
understand	the	necessity	of	biding	one’s	time.	Have	we	a	bargain?’
She	licked	her	lips,	then	nodded.	‘We	have.’
‘Then	I	shall	leave	you	to	your	education.	Be	careful	when	casting	your
tiles	–	you	risk	much	by	so	revealing	your	talents	as	a	seer.’
‘But	I	must	know—’
‘Knowing	and	being	able	to	do	something	about	it—’
‘Yes,’	she	snapped,	‘I	heard	you	the	first	time.’
‘You	lack	respect,	girl.’
‘And	be	glad	of	it.’
‘You	may	have	a	point	there.	Worth	some	consideration,	I	think.’
‘Do	you	now	intend	to	spy	on	me	my	every	moment	down	here?’
‘No,	that	would	be	cruel,	not	to	mention	dull.	When	I	come	here,	you	shall
be	warned	–	the	wind,	the	mist,	yes?	Now,	witness	its	vanishing.’
She	stared	down	at	the	swirling	cloud,	watched	as	it	faded,	then	was	gone.
Silence	in	the	chamber,	the	air	still	beyond	her	own	breath.	Kuru	Qan,	the
Ceda!	See	how	I	gather	allies.	Oh,	this	shall	be	sweet	vengeance	indeed!
	
The	waning	sun’s	shafts	of	dusty	light	cut	across	the	space	where	the	old
temple	had	stood,	although	the	wreckage	filling	the	lower	half	of	that	gap	was
swallowed	in	gloom.	Fragments	of	façade	were	scattered	on	the	street	–	pieces
of	rats	in	dismaying	profusion.	Edging	closer,	Samar	Dev	kicked	at	the	rubble,
frowning	down	at	the	disarticulated	stone	rodents.	‘This	is	most…alarming,’
she	said.
‘Ah,’	Taxilian	said,	smiling,	‘now	the	witch	speaks.	Tell	me,	what	do	you
sense	in	this	fell	place?’
‘Too	many	spirits	to	count,’	she	murmured.	‘And	all	of	them…rats.’
‘There	was	a	D’ivers	once,	wasn’t	there?	A	terrible	demonic	thing	that
travelled	the	merchant	roads	across	Seven	Cities—’


‘Gryllen.’
‘Yes,	that	was	its	name!	So,	do	we	have	here	another	such…Gryllen?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘No,	this	feels	older,	by	far.’
‘And	what	of	that	bleeding?	Of	power?’
‘I’m	not	sure.’	Glancing	around,	she	saw	a	tall,	cloaked	man	leaning
against	a	wall	on	the	other	side	of	the	street,	watching	them.	‘Some	things,	long
ago	grinding	to	a	halt,	should	never	be	reawakened.	Alas…’
Taxilian	sighed.	‘You	use	that	word	a	lot.	“Alas”.	You	are	too	resigned,
Samar	Dev.	You	flee	from	your	own	curiosity	–	I	do	not	think	you	were	always
like	this.’
She	squinted	at	him.	‘Oh,	my	curiosity	remains.	It’s	my	belief	in	my	own
efficacy	that	has	taken	a	beating.’
‘We	spin	and	swirl	on	the	currents	of	fate,	do	we?’
‘If	you	like.’	She	sighed.	‘Very	well,	I’ve	seen	enough.	Besides,	it	will	be
curfew	soon,	and	I	gather	guards	kill	lawbreakers	on	sight.’
‘You	have	seen	–	but	you	explain	nothing!’
‘Sorry,	Taxilian.	All	of	this	requires…some	thought.	If	I	reach	any
spectacular	conclusions	any	time	soon,	I	will	be	sure	to	let	you	know.’
‘Do	I	deserve	such	irony?’
‘No,	you	don’t.	Alas.’
	
Bugg	finally	made	his	way	round	the	corner,	emerging	from	the	alley’s	gloom
then	pausing	in	the	sunlit	street.	He	glanced	over	at	Tehol,	who	stood	leaning
against	a	wall,	arms	crossed	beneath	his	blanket,	which	he	had	wrapped	about
him	like	a	robe.	‘Master,’	he	said,	‘why	do	you	hesitate	now?’
‘Me?	Why,	this	only	appears	to	be	hesitation.	You	know,	you	could	have	let
me	help	you	carry	that.’
Bugg	set	the	heavy	sack	down.	‘You	never	offered.’
‘Well,	that	would	be	unseemly.	You	should	have	insisted.’
‘Are	you	sure	you	have	that	right,	Master?’
‘Not	in	the	least,	but	some	graciousness	on	your	part	would	have	helped	us
move	past	this	awkward	moment.’
From	the	bag	came	soft	clucking	sounds.
Tehol	blinked	down	at	it.	‘Bugg,	you	said	retired	hens,	correct?’
‘I	did.	In	exchange	for	some	modest	repairs	to	a	water	trough.’
‘But…they’re	not	dead.’
‘No,	Master.’
‘But…that	means	one	of	us	has	to	kill	them.	Wring	their	necks.	See	the


light	of	life	dim	in	their	beady	eyes.	You	are	a	hard	man,	Bugg.’
‘Me?’
‘Retired	–	their	egg-laying	days	over.	Isn’t	there	some	kind	of	pasture
awaiting	them?	Some	well-strewn	pecking	ground?’
‘Only	the	one	in	the	sky,	Master.	But	I	see	your	point.	About	killing	them,	I
mean.’
‘Blood	on	your	hands,	Bugg	–	I’m	glad	I’m	not	you.’
‘This	is	ridiculous.	We’ll	figure	something	out	when	we	get	back	home.’
‘We	could	build	us	a	coop	on	the	roof,	as	mad	folk	do	for	pigeons.	That
way	the	birds	could	fly	in	and	out,	back	and	forth,	and	see	something	of	this
fine	city.’
‘Chickens	can’t	fly,	Master.’
‘Beats	wringing	their	necks,	though,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Seeing	the	city?’
‘Well,	momentarily.’
Clearly	satisfied	with	his	solution,	Tehol	adjusted	his	blanket	then	walked
out	onto	the	street.	Sighing,	Bugg	collected	the	sack	with	its	dozen	hens	and
followed	at	a	somewhat	slower	pace.
‘Well,’	he	said	as	he	joined	Tehol	in	front	of	the	ruin,	‘at	least	that	foreign
witch	is	gone.’
‘She	was	a	foreign	witch?	Rather	pretty,	in	a	stolid,	earthy	way.	All	right,
handsome,	then,	although	I	assure	you	I	would	never	say	that	to	her	face,
knowing	how	women	are	so	easily	offended.’
‘By	a	compliment?’
‘Absolutely.	If	it	is	the	wrong	compliment.	You	have	been…inactive	far	too
long,	dear	Bugg.’
‘Possibly.	I	am	also	reticent	when	it	comes	to	compliments.	They	have	a
way	of	coming	after	you.’
Tehol	glanced	over	at	him,	brows	lifted.	‘Sounds	like	you’ve	been	married
once	or	twice.’
‘Once	or	twice,’	Bugg	replied,	grimacing.	Glancing	up	at	the	ruined	Scale
House,	he	went	very	still.	‘Ah,	I	see	now	what	she	no	doubt	saw.’
‘If	what	you	are	seeing	is	the	source	for	making	the	hairs	of	my	neck	stand
on	end	every	time	I	come	here,	then	I	would	be	pleased	if	you	explained.’
‘For	someone	to	step	inside,’	Bugg	said,	‘of	necessity	there	must	be	a	door.
And	if	one	does	not	exist,	one	must	be	made.’
‘How	can	a	collapsed	building	be	a	door,	Bugg?’
‘I	begin	to	comprehend	what	is	coming.’
‘Sufficient	to	suggest	a	course	of	action?’


‘In	this	matter,	Master,	the	best	course	is	to	do	nothing.’
‘Hold	on,	Bugg,	that	particular	conclusion	seems	to	crop	up	rather	often
with	you.’
‘We’d	best	get	home	before	curfew,	Master.	Care	to	take	a	turn	with	this
sack?’
‘Errant’s	blessing,	have	you	lost	your	mind?’
‘I	thought	as	much.’
	
There	was	little	in	Sirryn	Kanar ’s	thoughts	that	reached	down	to	the	depths	of
his	soul	–	he	had	a	sense	of	that,	sufficient	to	make	him	recognize	that	he	was
blessed	with	a	virtually	untroubled	life.	He	possessed	a	wife	frightened	enough
to	do	whatever	he	told	her	to	do.	His	three	children	held	him	in	the	proper
mixture	of	respect	and	terror,	and	he	had	seen	in	his	eldest	son	the	development
of	similar	traits	of	dominance	and	certainty.	His	position	as	a	lieutenant	in	the
Palace	Cell	of	the	Patriotists	did	not,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned,	conflict	with
his	official	title	of	Sergeant	of	the	Guard	–	protection	of	the	powerful
demanded	both	overt	and	covert	diligence,	after	all.
The	emotions	commanding	him	were	similarly	simple	and
straightforward.	He	feared	what	he	could	not	understand,	and	he	despised	what
he	feared.	But	acknowledging	fear	did	not	make	him	a	coward	–	for	he	had
proclaimed	for	himself	an	eternal	war	against	all	that	threatened	him,	be	it	a
devious	wife	who	had	raised	walls	round	her	soul,	or	conspirators	against	the
empire	of	Lether.	His	enemies,	he	well	understood,	were	the	true	cowards.
They	thought	within	clouds	that	obscured	all	the	harsh	truths	of	the	world.
Their	struggles	to	‘understand’	led,	inevitably,	to	seditious	positions	against
authority.	Even	as	they	forgave	the	empire’s	enemies,	they	condemned	the
weaknesses	of	their	own	homeland	–	not	recognizing	that	they	themselves
personified	such	weaknesses.
An	empire	such	as	Lether	was	ever	under	siege.	This	had	been	the	first
statement	uttered	by	Karos	Invictad	during	the	recruitment	and	training
process,	and	Sirryn	Kanar	had	understood	the	truth	of	that	with	barely	a
moment’s	thought.	A	siege,	inside	and	out,	yes	–	the	very	privileges	the	empire
granted	were	exploited	by	those	who	would	see	the	empire	destroyed.	And
there	could	be	no	room	for	‘understanding’	such	people	–	they	were	evil,	and
evil	must	be	expurgated.
The	vision	of	Karos	Invictad	had	struck	him	with	the	force	of	revelation,
yielding	such	perfect	clarity	and,	indeed,	peace	in	what	had	been,	at	times,	a
soul	in	turmoil	–	battered	and	assailed	on	occasion	by	a	world	blurry	with


confusion	and	uncertainty	–	that	all	that	raged	within	him	settled	out	as
certainty	arrived,	blazing	and	blinding	in	its	wondrous	gift	of	release.
He	now	lived	an	untroubled	life,	and	so	set	an	example	to	his	fellow	agents
in	the	palace.	In	their	eyes	he	had	seen,	again	and	again,	the	glimmer	of	awe
and	fear,	or,	equally	satisfying,	a	perfect	reflection	of	his	own	–	flat,
remorseless,	as	impervious	to	every	deceit	the	enemy	might	attempt	as	he
himself	was.
Untroubled,	then,	he	gestured	to	two	burly	Patriotists	who	stepped	forward
and	kicked	in	the	door.	It	virtually	flew	off	its	flimsy	hinges,	crashing	down
into	the	opulent	chamber	beyond.	A	scream,	then	another,	from	the	gloom	to
the	left	–	where	the	handmaidens	slept	–	but	already	the	lead	agents	were
crossing	the	room	to	the	door	opposite.	More	violence,	wood	splintering
beneath	heavy	boots.
Sprawled	in	the	hallway	behind	Sirryn	was	the	corpse	of	a	Tiste	Edur	–
someone	had	set	a	guard.	Curious,	but	of	little	consequence.	Poisoned	quarrels
had	proved	both	quick	and	virtually	silent.	Already	two	of	his	men	were
preparing	to	carry	the	corpse	away	–	just	one	more	Edur	who	mysteriously
vanished.
Sirryn	Kanar	positioned	himself	in	the	centre	of	the	first	chamber,	as
another	agent	arrived	with	a	hooded	lantern	to	stand	off	to	one	side,	shedding
just	enough	light.	Too	much	would	not	do	–	the	shadows	needed	to	be	alive,
writhing,	confusion	on	all	sides.	Sirryn	delighted	in	precision.
His	men	emerged	from	the	inner	room,	a	figure	between	them	–	half
naked,	hair	tousled,	a	look	of	disbelief—No.	Sirryn	Kanar ’s	eyes	narrowed.
Not	disbelief.	Resignation.	Good,	the	traitor	knew	her	fate,	knew	she	could
never	escape	it.	Saying	nothing,	he	gestured	for	his	agents	to	take	her	out.
Three	handmaidens,	weeping	now,	huddled	against	the	wall,	near	their
sleeping	pallets.	‘Attend	to	them,’	Sirryn	commanded,	and	four	from	his	squad
moved	towards	them.	‘The	senior	one	will	be	questioned,	the	other	two
disposed	of	immediately.’
He	looked	around,	pleased	at	the	ease	of	this	operation,	barely	noticing	the
death-cries	of	two	women.
In	a	short	while,	he	would	deliver	his	two	prisoners	to	the	squad	waiting	at
a	side	postern	of	the	palace,	who	would	move	quickly	through	the	night	–
alone	on	the	streets	this	long	after	curfew	–	to	the	headquarters	of	the
Patriotists.	Deliver	the	two	women	into	interrogation	cells.	And	the	work
would	begin,	the	only	release	from	the	ordeal	full	confession	of	their	crimes
against	the	empire.
A	simple,	straightforward	procedure.	Proven	effective.	Traitors	were


invariably	weak	of	will.
And	Sirryn	Kanar	did	not	think	the	First	Concubine	would	be	any	different.
If	anything,	even	more	flimsy	of	spirit	than	most.
Women	delighted	in	their	airs	of	mystery,	but	those	airs	vanished	before
the	storm	of	a	man’s	will.	True,	whores	hid	things	better	than	most	–	behind	an
endless	succession	of	lies	that	never	fooled	him.	He	knew	they	were
contemptuous	of	him	and	men	like	him,	believing	him	weak	by	simple	virtue
of	his	using	them	–	as	if	that	use	came	from	actual,	genuine	need.	But	he	had
always	known	how	to	wipe	the	smirks	from	their	painted	faces.
He	envied	the	interrogators.	That	bitch	Nisall	–	she	was	no	different	from
his	wife,	he	suspected.
Our	enemies	are	legion,	Karos	Invictad	had	said,	so	you	must	understand,
all	of	you	–	this	war,	it	will	last	for	ever.	For	ever.
Sirryn	Kanar	was	content	with	that	notion.	Kept	things	simple.
And	it	is	our	task,	the	Master	of	the	Patriotists	had	continued,	to	ensure
that.	So	that	we	are	never	expendable.
Somewhat	more	confusing,	that	part,	but	Sirryn	felt	no	real	compulsion	to
pursue	the	notion.	Karos	was	very	clever,	after	all.	Clever	and	on	our	side.	The
right	side.
His	thoughts	shifting	to	the	bed	that	awaited	him,	and	the	whore	he’d	have
delivered	to	him	there,	the	lieutenant	marched	down	the	empty	palace	corridor,
his	men	falling	in	behind	him.
	
Bruthen	Trana	stepped	into	the	chamber.	His	eyes	settled	on	the	corpses	of	the
two	handmaidens.	‘How	long	ago?’	he	asked	the	Arapay	warlock	who	was
crouched	over	the	bodies.	Two	other	Edur	entered	the	First	Concubine’s
bedroom,	emerged	again	a	moment	later.
The	warlock	muttered	something	inaudible	under	his	breath,	then	said	in	a
louder	voice,	‘A	bell,	perhaps.	Shortswords.	The	kind	used	by	the	Palace
Guard.’
‘Gather	ten	more	warriors,’	Bruthen	Trana	said.	‘We	are	marching	to	the
headquarters	of	the	Patriotists.’
The	warlock	slowly	straightened.	‘Shall	I	inform	Hannan	Mosag?’
‘Not	yet.	We	cannot	delay	here.	Sixteen	Edur	warriors	and	a	warlock
should	suffice.’
‘You	mean	to	demand	the	release	of	the	woman?’
‘There	are	two,	yes?’
A	nod.


‘They	will	begin	interrogations	immediately,’	Bruthen	Trana	said.	‘And
that	is	not	a	pleasant	procedure.’
‘And	if	they	have	wrung	confessions	from	them?’
‘I	understand	your	concern,	K’ar	Penath.	Do	you	fear	violence	this	night?’
The	other	warriors	in	the	chamber	had	paused,	eyes	fixed	on	the	Arapay
warlock.
‘Fear?	Not	in	the	least.	With	confessions	in	hand,	however,	Karos	Invictad
and,	by	extension,	Triban	Gnol,	will	be	able	to	assert	righteous	domain—’
‘We	are	wasting	time,’	Bruthen	Trana	cut	in.	‘My	patience	with	Karos
Invictad	is	at	an	end.’	And	where	is	the	guard	I	set	in	the	hallway	outside?	As	if	I
cannot	guess.
A	new	voice	spoke	from	the	outer	doorway:	‘Personal	enmity,	Bruthen
Trana,	is	a	very	dangerous	guide	to	your	actions.’
The	Tiste	Edur	turned.
The	Chancellor,	with	two	bodyguards	hovering	in	the	corridor	behind	him,
stood	with	hands	folded.	After	a	moment	he	took	a	step	into	the	room	and
looked	about.	An	expression	of	regret	when	he	saw	the	two	dead	women.
‘Clearly,	there	was	some	resistance.	They	were	most	loyal	servants	to	the	First
Concubine,	probably	innocent	of	all	wrongdoing	–	this	is	tragic	indeed.	Blood
on	Nisall’s	hands	now.’
Bruthen	Trana	studied	the	tall,	thin	man	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	walked
past	him	and	out	into	the	hall.
Neither	bodyguard	was	suspicious,	and	neither	had	time	to	draw	their
weapons	before	the	Edur ’s	knives	–	one	in	each	hand	–	slid	up	under	their
jaws,	points	driven	deep	into	their	brains.	Leaving	the	weapons	embedded,
Bruthen	Trana	spun	round,	both	hands	snapping	out	to	grasp	the	Chancellor ’s
heavy	brocaded	collar.	The	Letherii	gasped	as	he	was	yanked	from	his	feet,
flung	round	to	face	Bruthen,	then	slammed	hard	against	the	corridor ’s
opposite	wall.
‘My	patience	with	you,’	the	Edur	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘is	at	an	end	as	well.
Tragic	demise	for	your	bodyguards.	Blood	on	your	hands,	alas.	And	I	am	not
of	a	mind,	presently,	to	forgive	you	their	deaths.’
Triban	Gnol’s	feet	dangled,	the	stiff-tipped	slippers	kicking	lightly	against
Bruthen	Trana’s	shins.	The	Letherii’s	face	was	darkening,	eyes	bulging	as	they
stared	into	the	Edur ’s	hard,	cold	gaze.
I	should	kill	him	now.	I	should	stand	here	and	watch	him	suffocate	in	the
drawn	folds	of	his	own	robe.	Better	yet,	retrieve	a	knife	and	slice	open	his	guts
–	watch	them	tumble	onto	the	floor.
Behind	him,	K’ar	Penath	said,	‘Commander,	as	you	said,	we’ve	no	time	for


this.’
Baring	his	teeth,	Bruthen	Trana	flung	the	pathetic	man	aside.	An	awkward
fall:	Triban	Gnol	threw	a	hand	down	to	break	his	descent,	and	the	snap	of
finger	bones	–	like	iron	nails	driven	into	wood	–	was	followed	immediately	by
a	gasp	and	squeal	of	pain.
Gesturing	for	his	warriors	to	follow,	Bruthen	Trana	stepped	over	the
Chancellor	and	marched	quickly	down	the	corridor.
As	the	footfalls	echoed	away,	Triban	Gnol,	clutching	one	hand	against	his
torso,	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.	He	glared	down	the	now	empty	corridor.
Licked	dry	lips,	then	hissed,	‘You	will	die	for	that,	Bruthen	Trana.	You	and
every	other	witness	who	stood	back	and	did	nothing.	You	will	all	die.’
Could	he	warn	Karos	Invictad	in	time?	Not	likely.	Well,	the	Master	of	the
Patriotists	was	a	capable	man.	With	more	than	just	two	incompetent,	pathetic
bodyguards.	Perfunctory	notes	to	their	widows:	Your	husbands	failed	in	their
responsibilities.	No	death-pensions	will	be	forthcoming.	Leave	the	family
residences	of	the	Palace	Guard	immediately	–	barring	your	eldest	child	who	is
now	Indebted	to	the	estate	of	the	Chancellor.
He	despised	incompetence	–	and	to	be	made	to	suffer	its	consequences…
well,	someone	paid.	Always.	Two	children,	then,	yes.	Hopefully	boys.	And	now
he	would	need	two	new	bodyguards.	From	among	the	married	guard,	of
course.	Someone	to	pay	the	debt	should	they	fail	me.
His	broken	fingers	were	growing	numb,	although	a	heavy	ache	throbbed	in
his	wrist	and	forearm	now.
The	Chancellor	set	off	for	the	residence	of	his	private	healer.
	
Her	nightgown	half	torn,	Nisall	was	pushed	into	a	windowless	room	that	was
lit	by	a	single	candle	positioned	on	a	small	table	in	the	centre.	The	chill,	damp
air	stank	of	old	fear	and	human	waste.	Shivering	from	the	night’s	march
through	the	streets,	she	stood	unmoving	for	a	moment,	seeking	to	wrap	the
gauze-thin	material	closer	about	herself.
Two	young	innocent	women	were	dead.	Butchered	like	criminals.	And
Tissin	is	next	–	as	close	to	a	mother	as	I	have	ever	had.	She	has	done	nothing	–
no,	stop	that.	None	of	us	have.	But	that	doesn’t	matter	–	I	cannot	think
otherwise.	I	cannot	pretend	that	anything	I	say	will	make	a	difference,	will	in
any	way	change	my	fate.	No,	this	is	a	death	sentence.	For	me.	For	Tissin.
The	Emperor	would	not	hear	of	this.	She	was	certain	of	that.	Triban	Gnol
would	announce	that	she	was	missing	from	the	palace.	That	she	had	fled	–	just
one	more	betrayal.	Rhulad	would	flinch	back	in	his	throne,	seeming	to	shrink


in	upon	himself,	as	the	Chancellor	carefully,	remorselessly	fed	the	Emperor ’s
many	insecurities,	then	stood	back	to	observe	how	his	poisoned	words	stole	the
life	from	Rhulad’s	tortured	eyes.
We	cannot	win	against	this.	They	are	too	clever,	too	ruthless.	Their	only
desire	is	to	destroy	Rhulad	–	his	mind	–	to	leave	him	gibbering,	beset	by	unseen
terrors,	unable	to	do	anything,	unwilling	to	see	anyone.	Anyone	who	might	help
him.
Errant	save	him—
The	door	was	thrown	open,	swinging	to	slam	hard	against	the	wall,	where
old	cracks	showed	that	this	violent	announcement	was	part	of	the	pattern.	But
she	had	noted	those,	and	so	did	not	start	at	the	cracking	crunch,	but	merely
turned	to	face	her	tormentor.
None	other	than	Karos	Invictad	himself.	A	swirl	of	crimson	silks,	onyx
rings	on	his	fingers,	the	sceptre	of	his	office	held	in	one	hand	and	resting
between	right	shoulder	and	clavicle.	A	look	of	faint	dismay	in	the	mundane
features.	‘Dearest	woman,’	he	said	in	his	high	voice,	‘let	us	be	quick	about	this,
so	that	I	can	be	merciful.	I’ve	no	wish	to	damage	you,	lovely	as	you	are.	Thus,
a	signed	statement	outlining	your	treason	against	the	empire,	then	a	quick,
private	execution.	Your	handmaiden	has	already	complied,	and	has	been
mercifully	decapitated.’
Oh,	well	done,	Tissin.	Yet	she	herself	struggled,	seeking	similar	courage	–
to	accept	things	as	they	were,	to	recognize	that	no	other	recourse	was	possible.
‘Decapitation	is	not	damage?’
An	empty	smile.	‘The	damage	I	was	referring	to,	of	course,	concerned
wresting	from	you	your	confession.	Some	advice:	compose	your	features	in
the	moment	before	the	blade	descends.	It	is	an	unfortunate	fact	that	the	head
lives	on	a	few	moments	after	it	has	been	severed	from	the	neck.	A	few	blinks,	a
roll	or	two	of	the	eyes,	and,	if	one	is	not…mindful,	a	rash	of	unpleasant
expressions.	Alas,	your	handmaiden	was	disinclined	to	heed	such	advice,	too
busy	as	she	was	with	a	pointless	tirade	of	curses.’
‘Pray	the	Errant	heard	her,’	Nisall	said.	Her	heart	was	thudding	hard
against	her	ribs.
‘Oh,	she	did	not	curse	me	in	the	Errant’s	name,	sweet	whore.	No,	instead
she	revealed	a	faith	long	believed	to	be	extinct.	Did	you	know	her	ancestry	was
Shake?	By	the	Holds,	I	cannot	even	recall	the	name	of	the	god	she	uttered.’	He
shrugged	and	smiled	his	empty	smile	once	more.	‘No	matter.	Indeed,	even	had
she	called	upon	the	Errant,	I	would	have	no	cause	to	panic.	Coddled	as	you	are
–	or,	rather,	were	–	in	the	palace,	you	are	probably	unaware	that	the	handful	of
temples	in	the	city	purportedly	sanctified	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	in	truth


private	and	wholly	secular	–	businesses,	in	fact,	profiting	from	the	ignorance
of	citizens.	Their	priests	and	priestesses	are	actors	one	and	all.	I	sometimes
wonder	if	Ezgara	Diskanar	even	knew	–	he	seemed	oddly	devoted	to	the
Errant.’	He	paused,	then	sighed.	The	sceptre	began	tapping	in	place.	‘You	seek
to	delay	the	inevitable.	Understandable,	but	I	have	no	wish	to	remain	here	all
night.	I	am	sleepy	and	desire	to	retire	at	the	earliest	opportunity.	You	look
chilled,	Nisall.	And	this	is	a	dreadful	room,	after	all.	Let	us	return	to	my	office.
I	have	a	spare	robe	that	is	proof	against	any	draught.	And	writing	materials	at
hand.’	He	gestured	with	the	sceptre	and	turned	about.
The	door	opened	and	Nisall	saw	two	guards	in	the	corridor.
Numbed,	she	followed	Karos	Invictad.
Up	a	flight	of	stairs,	down	a	passageway,	then	into	the	man’s	office.	As
promised,	Karos	Invictad	found	a	cloak	and	set	it	carefully	on	Nisall’s
shoulders.
She	drew	it	tight.
He	waved	her	to	a	chair	in	front	of	the	huge	desk,	where	waited	a	sheet	of
vellum,	a	horsehair	brush	and	a	pot	of	squid	ink.	Slightly	off	to	one	side	of	the
ink	pot	was	a	small,	strange	box,	opened	at	the	top.	Unable	to	help	herself,
Nisall	leaned	over	for	a	look.
‘That	is	none	of	your	concern.’	The	words	were	a	pitch	higher	than	usual
and	she	glanced	over	to	see	the	man	scowling.
‘You	have	a	pet	insect,’	Nisall	said,	wondering	at	the	flush	of	colour	in
Karos	Invictad’s	face.
‘Hardly.	As	I	said,	not	your	concern.’
‘Do	you	seek	a	confession	from	it	as	well?	You	will	have	to	decapitate	it
twice.	With	a	very	small	blade.’
‘Are	you	amusing	yourself,	woman?	Sit	down.’
Shrugging,	she	did	as	he	commanded.	Stared	down	at	the	blank	vellum,
then	reached	over	and	collected	the	brush.	Her	hand	trembled.	‘What	is	it	you
wish	me	to	confess?’
‘You	need	not	be	specific.	You,	Nisall,	admit	to	conspiring	against	the
Emperor	and	the	empire.	You	state	this	freely	and	with	sound	mind,	and	submit
to	the	fate	awaiting	all	traitors.’
She	dipped	the	brush	into	the	ink	and	began	writing.
‘I	am	relieved	you	are	taking	this	so	well,’	Karos	Invictad	said.
‘My	concern	is	not	for	me,’	she	said	as	she	completed	the	terse	statement
and	signed	it	with	a	flourish	that	did	not	quite	succeed	in	hiding	the	shakiness
of	her	hand.	‘It	is	for	Rhulad.’
‘He	will	spare	you	nothing	but	venom,	Nisall.’


‘Again,’	she	said,	leaning	back	in	the	chair.	‘I	do	not	care	for	myself.’
‘Your	sympathy	is	admirable—’
‘It	extends	to	you,	Karos	Invictad.’
He	reached	out	and	collected	the	vellum,	waved	it	in	the	air	to	dry	the	ink.
‘Me?	Woman,	you	insult	me—’
‘Not	intended.	But	when	the	Emperor	learns	that	you	executed	the	woman
who	carried	his	heir,	well,	Master	of	the	Patriotists	or	not…’
The	vellum	dropped	from	the	man’s	fingers.	The	sceptre	ceased	its
contented	tapping.	Then,	a	rasp:	‘You	lie.	Easily	proved—’
‘Indeed.	Call	in	a	healer.	Presumably	you	have	at	least	one	in	attendance,
lest	the	executioner	be	stung	by	a	sliver	–	or,	more	likely,	a	burst	blister,	busy
as	he	is.’
‘When	we	discover	your	ruse,	Nisall,	well,	the	notion	of	mercy	is
dispensed	with,	regardless	of	this	signed	confession.’	He	leaned	over	and
collected	the	vellum.	Then	scowled.	‘You	used	too	much	ink	–	it	has	run	and	is
now	illegible.’
‘Most	missives	I	pen	are	with	stylus	and	wax,’	she	said.
He	slapped	the	sheet	back	down	in	front	of	her,	the	reverse	side	up.	‘Again.
I	will	be	back	in	a	moment	–	with	the	healer.’
She	heard	the	door	open	and	shut	behind	her.	Writing	out	her	confession
once	more,	she	set	the	brush	down	and	rose.	Leaned	over	the	odd	little	box
with	its	pivoting	two-headed	insect.	Round	and	round	you	go.	Do	you	know
dismay?	Helplessness?
A	commotion	somewhere	below.	Voices,	something	crashing	to	the	floor.
The	door	behind	her	was	flung	open.
She	turned.
Karos	Invictad	walked	in,	straight	for	her.
She	saw	him	twist	the	lower	half	of	the	sceptre,	saw	a	short	knife-blade
emerge	from	the	sceptre’s	base.
Nisall	looked	up,	met	the	man’s	eyes.
And	saw,	in	them,	nothing	human.
He	thrust	the	blade	into	her	chest,	into	her	heart.	Then	twice	more	as	she
sagged,	falling	to	strike	the	chair.
She	saw	the	floor	come	up	to	meet	her	face,	heard	the	crack	of	her
forehead,	felt	the	vague	sting,	then	darkness	closed	in.	Oh,	Tissin—
	
Bruthen	Trana	shouldered	a	wounded	guard	aside	and	entered	Invictad’s	office.
The	Master	of	the	Patriotists	was	stepping	back	from	the	crumpled	form	of


Nisall,	the	sceptre	in	his	hand	–	the	blade	at	its	base	–	gleaming	crimson.	‘Her
confession	demanded—’
The	Tiste	Edur	walked	to	the	desk,	kicking	aside	the	toppled	chair.	He
picked	up	the	sheet	of	vellum,	squinted	to	make	out	the	Letherii	words.	A	single
line.	A	statement.	A	confession	indeed.	For	a	moment,	he	felt	as	if	his	heart
stuttered.
In	the	corridor,	Tiste	Edur	warriors.	Bruthen	Trana	said	without	turning,
‘K’ar	Penath,	collect	the	body	of	the	First	Concubine—’
‘This	is	an	outrage!’	Karos	Invictad	hissed.	‘Do	not	touch	her!’
Snarling,	Bruthen	Trana	took	one	stride	closer	to	the	man,	then	lashed	out
with	the	back	of	his	left	hand.
Blood	sprayed	as	Karos	Invictad	staggered,	sceptre	flying,	his	shoulder
striking	the	wall	–	more	blood,	from	mouth	and	nose,	a	look	of	horror	in	the
man’s	eyes	as	he	stared	down	at	the	spatter	on	his	hands.
From	the	corridor,	a	warrior	spoke	in	the	Edur	language.	‘Commander.
The	other	woman	has	been	beheaded.’
Bruthen	Trana	carefully	rolled	the	sheet	of	vellum	and	slipped	it	beneath
his	hauberk.	Then	he	reached	out	and	dragged	Karos	Invictad	to	his	feet.
He	struck	the	man	again,	then	again.	Gouts	of	blood,	broken	teeth,	threads
of	crimson	spit.
Again.	Again.
The	reek	of	urine.
Bruthen	Trana	took	handfuls	of	the	silk	beneath	the	flaccid	neck	and	shook
the	Letherii,	hard,	watching	the	head	snap	back	and	forth.	He	kept	shaking	him.
Until	a	hand	closed	on	his	wrist.
Through	a	red	haze,	Bruthen	Trana	looked	over,	met	the	calm	eyes	of	K’ar
Penath.
‘Commander,	if	you	continue	so	with	this	unconscious	man,	you	will	break
his	neck.’
‘Your	point,	warlock?’
‘The	First	Concubine	is	dead,	by	his	hand.	Is	it	for	you	to	exact	this
punishment?’
‘Sister	take	you,’	Bruthen	Trana	growled,	then	he	flung	Karos	Invictad	to
the	floor.	‘Both	bodies	come	with	us.’
‘Commander,	the	Chancellor—’
‘Never	mind	him,	K’ar	Penath.	Wrap	well	the	bodies.	We	return	to	the
Eternal	Domicile.’
‘What	of	the	dead	Letherii	below?’
‘His	guards?	What	of	them?	They	chose	to	step	into	our	path,	warlock.’


‘As	you	say.	But	with	their	healer	dead,	some	of	them	will	bleed	out	unless
we	call	upon—’
‘Not	our	concern,’	Bruthen	Trana	said.
K’ar	Penath	bowed.	‘As	you	say,	Commander.’
	
Half	blind	with	terror,	Tanal	Yathvanar	approached	the	entrance	to	the
headquarters.	She	was	gone.	Gone,	from	that	place,	that	most	hidden	place	–
her	shackle	snapped,	the	iron	bent	and	twisted,	the	links	of	the	chain	parted	as	if
they	were	nothing	but	damp	clay.
Karos	Invictad,	it	was	your	work.	Again.	Yet	another	warning	to	me	–	do	as
you	command.	You	know	all,	you	see	all.	For	you,	nothing	but	games,	ones
where	you	make	certain	you	always	win.	But	she	was	not	a	game.	Not	for	me,
you	bastard.	I	loved	her	–	where	is	she?	What	have	you	done	with	her?
Slowly,	it	registered	upon	him	that	something	was	amiss.	Guards	running
in	the	compound.	Shouts,	wavering	torchlight.	The	front	entrance	to	the
building	yawned	wide	–	he	saw	a	pair	of	boots,	attached	to	motionless	legs,
prone	across	the	threshold.
Errant	take	us,	we	have	been	attacked!
He	hurried	forward.
A	guard	emerged,	stepping	over	the	body.
‘You!’	shouted	Tanal.	‘What	has	happened	here?’
A	rough	salute.	The	man’s	face	was	pale.	‘We	have	called	for	healers,	sir
—’
‘What	has	happened,	damn	you?’
‘Edur	–	a	vicious	ambush	–	we	did	not	expect—’
‘The	Master?’
‘Alive.	But	beaten	badly.	Beaten,	sir,	by	a	Tiste	Edur!	The	liaison	–	Trana	–
Bruthen	Trana—’
Tanal	Yathvanar	pushed	past	the	fool,	into	the	hallway,	to	the	stairs.	More
bodies,	guards	cut	down	without	so	much	as	their	weapons	drawn.	What
initiated	this	from	the	Edur?	Did	they	catch	word	of	our	investigations?
Bruthen	Trana	–	does	his	file	remain?	Damn	him,	why	didn’t	he	just	kill	the
bastard?	Choke	the	life	from	him	–	make	his	face	as	red	as	those	damned	silks?
Oh,	I	would	run	this	differently	indeed.	Given	the	chance—
He	reached	the	office,	stumbled	to	a	halt	upon	seeing	the	spattered	blood
on	the	walls,	the	pools	of	it	on	the	floor.	The	reek	of	piss	was	heavy	in	the	air.
Looking	small	and	broken,	Karos	Invictad	sat	hunched	in	his	oversized	chair,
stained	cloths	held	to	his	swollen,	bruised	face.	In	the	man’s	eyes,	a	rage	as


sharp	as	diamonds.	Fixing	now	upon	Tanal	Yathvanar.
‘Master!	Healers	are	on	the	way—’
From	mashed	lips,	muffled	words:	‘Where	were	you?’
‘What?	Why,	at	home.	In	bed.’
‘We	arrested	Nisall	tonight.’
Tanal	looked	about.	‘I	was	not	informed,	sir—’
‘No	–	no-one	could	find	you!	Not	at	your	home	–	not	anywhere!’
‘Sir,	has	Bruthen	Trana	retrieved	the	whore,	then?’
A	hacking,	muffled	laugh.	‘Oh	yes.	Her	cold	flesh	–	but	not	her	spirit.	But
he	carries	her	written	confession	–	by	the	Holds,	it	hurts	to	speak!	He	broke	my
face!’
And	how	many	times	did	your	fist	do	the	same	to	a	prisoner?	‘Will	you	risk
some	wine,	sir?’
A	glare	above	the	cloths,	then	a	sharp	nod.
Tanal	went	quickly	to	the	cabinet.	Found	a	clay	jug	containing	undiluted
wine.	A	better	smell	than	–	the	piss	of	your	terror,	little	man.	He	poured	a
goblet,	then	hesitated	–	and	poured	another	for	himself.	Damn	you,	why	not?
‘The	healers	will	be	here	soon	–	I	informed	the	guards	that	any	delay	risks
their	lives.’
‘Swift-thinking	Tanal	Yathvanar.’
He	carried	the	goblet	over	to	Karos	Invictad,	not	sure	if	there	was	irony	in
that	last	statement,	so	distorted	was	the	voice.	‘The	guards	were	struck
unawares	–	vicious	betrayal—’
‘Those	that	aren’t	yet	dead	will	wish	they	were,’	the	Master	of	the
Patriotists	said.	‘Why	weren’t	we	warned?	Chancellor	or	no,	I	will	have	his
answer.’
‘I	did	not	think	we’d	take	the	whore	yet,’	Tanal	said,	retrieving	his	own
wine.	He	watched	over	the	rim	of	the	goblet	as	Karos	pulled	the	soaked	cloth
away,	revealing	the	terrible	assault	done	on	his	face	as	he	gingerly	sipped	at
the	wine	–	wincing	as	the	alcohol	bit	into	gashes	and	cuts.	‘Perhaps	the	Edur
should	have	been	first.	Bruthen	Trana	–	he	did	not	seem	such	a	viper.	He	said
not	a	word,	revealed	nothing—’
‘Of	course	not.	Nor	would	I	in	his	place.	No.	Wait,	observe,	then	strike
without	warning.	Yes,	I	underestimated	him.	Well,	such	a	failing	occurs	but
once.	Tonight,	Tanal	Yathvanar,	a	war	has	begun.	And	this	time	the	Letherii
will	not	lose.’	Another	sip.	‘I	am	relieved,’	he	then	said,	‘that	you	got	rid	of	that
academic	–	too	bad	you	did	not	get	Nisall	to	play	with,	but	I	needed	to	act
quickly.	Tell	me	how	you	disposed	of	her	–	the	academic.	I	need	some
satisfying	news	for	a	change…’


Tanal	stared	at	the	man.	If	not	you…
From	the	corridor,	rushing	feet.	The	healers	had	arrived.
	
‘Commander,’	K’ar	Penath	said	as	he	hurried	alongside	Bruthen	Trana,	‘do	we
seek	audience	with	the	Emperor?’
‘No.	Not	yet.	We	will	watch	all	of	this	play	out	for	a	time.’
‘And	the	bodies?’
‘Hide	them	well,	warlock.	And	inform	Hannan	Mosag	that	I	wish	to	speak
to	him.	As	soon	as	possible.’
‘Sir,	he	is	not	in	the	Emperor ’s	favour	at	the	moment—’
‘You	misunderstand	me,	warlock.	This	has	nothing	to	do	with	Rhulad.	Not
yet.	We	conquered	this	empire.	It	seems	the	Letherii	have	forgotten	that.	The
time	has	come	to	stir	the	Tiste	Edur	awake	once	more.	To	deliver	terror,	to
make	our	displeasure	clear.	This	night,	K’ar,	the	weapons	are	drawn.’
‘You	speak	of	civil	war,	Commander.’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking,	although	I	expect	nothing	overt	from	the
Chancellor	or	Invictad.	A	war,	yes,	but	one	waged	behind	the	Emperor ’s	back.
He	will	know	nothing—’
‘Commander—’
‘Your	shock	at	my	words	does	not	convince	me.	Hannan	Mosag	is	no	fool
–	nor	are	you	or	any	of	his	other	warlocks.	Tell	me	now	you	anticipated
nothing…ah,	I	thought	as	much.’
‘I	fear	we	are	not	ready—’
‘We	aren’t.	But	neither	were	they.	This	taking	Nisall	–	this	murder	–	tells
me	something	gave	them	reason	to	panic.	We	need	to	find	out	what.	Something
has	happened,	or	is	happening	even	now,	that	forced	matters	to	a	head.	And	that
is	the	trail	Hannan	Mosag	must	pursue	–	no,	I	do	not	presume	to	command	him
—’
‘I	understand,	Bruthen	Trana.	You	speak	as	a	Tiste	Edur.	I	will	support	your
advice	to	the	Warlock	King	with	all	my	zeal.’
‘Thank	you.’
‘Tonight,	Commander,’	K’ar	Penath	said,	‘in	witnessing	you…I	was	proud.
We	are…awakened,	as	you	said.	This	civilization,	it	is	a	poison.	A	rot	upon	our
souls.	It	must	be	excised.’
And	now	I	hear	Hannan	Mosag	speaking	through	you,	warlock.	Answering
other…suspicions.	So	be	it.
Nisall.	First	Concubine,	I	am	sorry.	But	know	this,	I	will	avenge	you	in
truth.	As	I	will	avenge	my	brave	warrior	–	Sister	take	me,	that	was	careless—


‘The	Chancellor	will	speak	to	the	Emperor—’
‘Only	if	he	is	stupid,’	Bruthen	Trana	said,	‘or	inclined	to	panic.	He	is
neither.	No,	he	needs	to	be	pushed,	kept	off	balance	–	oh,	we	will	deliver	panic,
yes,	and	sooner	or	later	he	will	do	as	you	say.	Speak	to	Rhulad.	And	then	we
will	have	him.	And	Invictad.	Two	snakes	in	the	same	basket	–	a	basket	soaked
in	oil.	And	it	will	be	Triban	Gnol	himself	who	strikes	the	spark.’
‘How?’
‘You	will	see.’

Tehol	stared	down	through	the	roof	hatch	in	unmitigated	horror.	‘That	was	a
mistake,’	he	said.
Leaning	beside	him,	also	looking	down,	Bugg	nodded.	‘It	was	an	act	of
mercy,	Master.	Twelve	hens	in	a	sack,	half	crushing	each	other,	jostled	about	in
fetid	darkness.	There	was	the	risk	of	suffocation.’
‘Precisely!	Peaceful	demise,	remote,	unseen.	No	wringing	of	necks
required!	But	now	look	at	them!	They’ve	taken	over	our	room!	My	house.	My
abode,	my	very	hearth—’
‘About	that	–	seems	one	of	them	has	caught	fire,	Master.’
‘It’s	smouldering,	and	too	brainless	to	care.	If	we	wait	we	can	dine	on	roast
chicken	for	breakfast.	And	which	one	laid	that	egg?’
‘Hmm,	a	most	gravid	mystery	indeed.’
‘You	may	find	this	amusing	right	now,	Bugg,	but	you	are	the	one	who	will
be	sleeping	down	there.	They’ll	peck	your	eyes	out,	you	know.	Evil	has	been
bred	into	them,	generation	after	generation,	until	their	tiny	black	bean	brains
are	condensed	knots	of	malice—’
‘You	display	unexpected	familiarity	with	hens,	Master.’
‘I	had	a	tutor	who	was	a	human	version.’
Bugg	leaned	back	and	glanced	over	at	the	woman	sleeping	in	Tehol’s	bed.
‘Not	her.	Janath	was	only	mildly	vicious,	as	properly	befits	all	instructors,
plagued	as	they	often	are	by	mewling,	lovestruck,	pimply-faced	students.’
‘Oh,	Master,	I	am	sorry.’
‘Be	quiet.	We’re	not	talking	about	that.	No,	instead,	Bugg,	my	house	has
been	invaded	by	rabid	hens,	because	of	your	habit	of	taking	in	strays	and	the
like.’
‘Strays?	We’re	going	to	eat	those	things.’
‘No	wonder	strays	avoid	you	these	days.	Listen	to	them	–	how	will	we
sleep	with	all	that	racket	going	on?’


‘I	suppose	they’re	happy,	Master.	And	in	any	case	they	are	taking	care	of
that	cockroach	infestation	really	fast.’
Creaking	from	the	bed	behind	them	drew	their	attention.
The	scholar	was	sitting	up,	looking	about	in	confusion.
Tehol	hastily	pushed	Bugg	towards	her.
She	frowned	as	the	old	man	approached.	‘Where	am	I?	Who	are	you?	Are
we	on	a	roof?’
‘What	do	you	last	recall?’	Bugg	asked.
‘Being	alone.	In	the	dark.	He	moved	me…to	a	new	place.’
‘You	have	been	freed,’	he	said.
Janath	was	examining	her	shapeless,	rough	tunic.	‘Freed,’	she	said	in	a	low
voice.
‘That	shift	was	all	we	could	find	at	short	notice,’	Bugg	said.	‘Of	course,	we
will	endeavour	to,	uh,	improve	your	apparel	as	soon	as	we	are	able.’
‘I	have	been	healed.’
‘Your	physical	wounds,	yes.’
Grimacing,	she	nodded.	‘The	other	kind	is	rather	more	elusive.’
‘You	seem	remarkably…sound,	Janath.’
She	glanced	up	at	him.	‘You	know	me.’
‘My	master	was	once	a	student	of	yours.’	He	watched	as	she	sought	to	look
past	him,	first	to	one	side,	then	the	other.	Bemused,	Bugg	turned,	to	see	Tehol
moving	back	and	forth	in	an	effort	to	keep	the	manservant	between	himself	and
the	woman	on	the	bed.	‘Tehol?	What	are	you	doing?’
‘Tehol?	Tehol	Beddict?’
Bugg	spun	round	again,	to	see	Janath	gathering	her	tunic	and	stretching	it
out	here	and	there	in	an	effort	to	cover	as	much	of	her	body	as	she	could.
‘That	lecherous,	pathetic	worm?	Is	that	you,	Tehol?	Hiding	there	behind
this	old	man?	Well,	you	certainly	haven’t	changed,	have	you?	Get	out	here,
front	and	centre!’
Tehol	stepped	into	view.	Then	bridled.	‘Hold	on,	I	am	no	longer	your
student,	Janath!	Besides,	I’m	well	over	you,	I’ll	have	you	know.	I	haven’t
dreamt	of	you	in…in…years!	Months!’
Her	brows	rose.	‘Weeks?’
Tehol	drew	himself	straighter.	‘It	is	well	known	that	an	adult	man’s
adolescent	misapprehensions	often	insinuate	themselves	when	said	man	is
sleeping,	in	his	dreams,	I	mean.	Or,	indeed,	nightmares—’
‘I	doubt	I	feature	in	your	nightmares,	Tehol,’	Janath	said.	‘Although	you	do
in	mine.’
‘Oh,	really.	I	was	no	more	pathetic	than	any	other	pathetic,	lovestruck


student.	Was	I?’
To	that	she	said	nothing.
Bugg	said	to	her,	‘You	are	indeed	on	a	roof—’
‘Above	a	chicken	coop?’
‘Well,	as	to	that.	Are	you	hungry?’
‘The	fine	aroma	of	roasting	chicken	is	making	my	mouth	water,’	she
replied.	‘Oh,	please,	have	you	no	other	clothes?	I	have	no	doubt	at	all	what	is
going	on	in	my	former	student’s	disgusting	little	brain	right	now.’
‘Come	the	morning,’	Bugg	said,	‘I	will	pay	a	visit	to	Selush	–	her
wardrobe,	while	somewhat	abysmal	in	taste,	is	nonetheless	extensive.’
‘Want	my	blanket?’	Tehol	asked	her.
‘Gods	below,	Master,	you’re	almost	leering.’
‘Don’t	be	insane,	Bugg.	I	was	making	light.	Ha	ha,	we’re	trapped	in	a
dearth	of	attire.	Ha	ha.	After	all,	what	if	that	had	been	a	child’s	tunic?’
In	a	deadpan	voice,	Janath	said,	‘What	if	it	had.’
‘Errant’s	blessing,’	Tehol	said	with	a	loud	sigh,	‘these	summer	nights	are
hot,	aren’t	they?’
‘I	know	one	hen	that	would	agree	with	you,’	Bugg	noted,	walking	back	to
the	hatch,	from	which	a	column	of	smoke	was	now	rising.
‘Tehol	Beddict,’	said	Janath,	‘I	am	glad	you	are	here.’
‘You	are?’	both	Bugg	and	Tehol	asked.
She	nodded,	not	meeting	their	eyes.	‘I	was	going	mad	–	I	thought	I	had
already	done	so.	Yathvanar	–	he	beat	me,	he	raped	me…and	told	me	of	his
undying	love	all	the	while.	So,	Tehol,	you	are	as	his	opposite	–	harmless	in
your	infatuation.	You	remind	me	of	better	days.’	She	was	silent	for	a	long
moment.	‘Better	days.’
Bugg	and	Tehol	exchanged	a	look,	then	the	manservant	made	his	way
down	the	ladder.	From	above	he	heard	Tehol	say,	‘Janath,	are	you	not
impressed	with	what	I	have	done	with	my	extensive	education?’
‘It	is	a	very	fine	roof,	Tehol	Beddict.’
Nodding	to	himself,	Bugg	went	in	search	of	roasted	chicken	through
clouds	of	acrid	smoke.	Surrounded	on	all	sides	by	mindless	clucking.	Abyss
take	me,	I	might	as	well	be	in	a	temple…
	
The	morning	sun	pushed	through	the	slats	on	the	shutters,	stretching	ribbons	of
light	across	the	long,	heavy	table	dominating	the	council	room.	Wiping	his
hands	with	a	cloth,	Rautos	Hivanar	entered	and	moved	to	stand	behind	his	chair
at	one	end	of	the	table.	He	set	the	cloth	down	and	studied	the	arrayed	faces


turned	towards	him	–	and	saw	in	more	than	one	expressions	of	taut	fear	and
anxiety.
‘My	friends,	welcome.	Two	matters	on	the	agenda.	We	will	first	address	the
one	that	I	suspect	is	foremost	in	your	minds	at	the	moment.	We	have	reached	a
state	of	crisis	–	the	dearth	of	hard	coin,	of	silver,	of	gold,	of	cut	gems	and
indeed	of	copper	bars,	is	now	acute.	Someone	is	actively	sabotaging	our
empire’s	economy—’
‘We	knew	this	was	coming,’	interrupted	Uster	Taran.	‘Yet	what	measures
were	taken	by	the	Consign?	As	far	as	I	can	see,	none.	Rautos	Hivanar,	as	much
on	the	minds	of	those	assembled	here	is	the	question	of	your	continued
position	as	Master.’
‘I	see.	Very	well,	present	to	me	your	list	of	concerns	in	that	regard.’
Uster ’s	craggy	face	reddened.	‘List?	Concerns?	Errant	take	us,	Rautos,
have	you	not	even	set	the	Patriotists	on	the	trail	of	this	mad	creature?	Or
creatures?	Could	this	not	be	an	effort	from	the	outside	–	from	one	of	the
border	kingdoms	–	to	destabilize	us	prior	to	invasion?	News	of	this	Bolkando
Conspiracy	should	have—’
‘A	moment,	please.	One	issue	at	a	time,	Uster.	The	Patriotists	are	indeed
pursuing	an	investigation,	without	result	to	date.	A	general	announcement	to
that	effect,	while	potentially	alleviating	your	anxieties,	would	have	been,	in	my
judgement,	equally	likely	to	trigger	panic.	Accordingly,	I	chose	to	keep	the
matter	private.	My	own	inquiries,	in	the	meantime,	have	led	me	to	eliminate
external	sources	to	this	financial	assault.	The	source,	my	friends,	is	here	in
Letheras—’
‘Then	why	haven’t	we	caught	the	bastard?’	demanded	Druz	Thennict,	his
head	seeming	to	bob	atop	its	long,	thin	neck.
‘The	trails	are	most	cleverly	obscured,	good	Druz,’	said	Rautos.	‘Quite
simply,	we	are	at	war	with	a	genius.’
From	the	far	end	of	the	table,	Horul	Rinnesict	snorted,	then	said,	‘Why	not
just	mint	more	coins	and	take	the	pressure	off?’
‘We	could,’	Rautos	replied,	‘although	it	would	not	be	easy.	There	is	a	fixed
yield	from	the	Imperial	Mines	and	it	is,	of	necessity,	modest.	And,
unfortunately,	rather	inflexible.	Beyond	that	concern,	you	might	ask	yourself:
what	would	I	do	then,	were	I	this	saboteur?	A	sudden	influx	of	new	coin?	If	you
sought	to	create	chaos	in	the	economy,	what	would	you	do?’
‘Release	my	hoard,’	Barrakta	Ilk	said	in	a	growl,	‘setting	off	runaway
inflation.	We’d	be	drowning	in	worthless	coin.’
Rautos	Hivanar	nodded.	‘It	is	my	belief	that	our	saboteur	cannot	hide	much
longer.	He	or	she	will	need	to	become	overt.	The	key	will	lie	in	observing


which	enterprise	is	the	first	to	topple,	for	it	is	there	that	his	or	her	trail	will
become	readily	discernible.’
‘At	which	point,’	said	Barrakta,	‘the	Patriotists	will	pounce.’
‘Ah,	this	leads	me	into	the	second	subject.	There	has,	I	understand,	been
news	from	Drene	–	no,	I	have	no	specifics	as	yet,	but	it	seems	to	have	triggered
something	very	much	like	panic	among	the	Patriotists.	Last	night,	here	in
Letheras,	a	number	of	unprecedented	arrests	occurred—’
Uster	laughed.	‘What	could	be	unprecedented	about	the	Patriotists	arresting
people?’
‘Well,	foremost	among	them	was	the	First	Concubine.’
Silence	around	the	table.
Rautos	Hivanar	cleared	his	throat,	working	hard	to	keep	the	fury	from	his
voice.	‘It	seems	Karos	Invictad	acted	in	haste,	which,	as	I	am	sure	you	all	know,
is	quite	unlike	him.	As	a	result,	things	went	awry.	There	was	a	clash,	both
inside	and	outside	the	Eternal	Domicile,	between	the	Patriotists	and	the	Tiste
Edur.’
‘That	damned	fool!’	bellowed	Barrakta,	one	fist	pounding	on	the	tabletop.
‘The	First	Concubine	is,	I	understand,	dead.	As	are	a	number	of	guards	–
primarily	those	in	the	Patriotist	compound,	and	at	least	two	bodyguards	to	the
Chancellor.’
‘Has	that	damned	snake	turned	suicidal	as	well?’
‘It	almost	seems	so,	Barrakta,’	Rautos	conceded.	‘All	very	troubling	–
especially	Karos	Invictad’s	reluctance	to	be	forthcoming	on	what	exactly
happened.	The	only	hint	I	possess	of	just	how	extreme	events	were	last	night	is
a	rumour	that	Karos	was	beaten,	nearly	to	death.	I	cannot	confirm	that	rumour,
since	he	was	seeing	no-one,	and	besides,	no	doubt	healers	visited	in	the
aftermath.’
‘Rautos,’	murmured	Druz,	‘do	we	need	to	distance	ourselves	from	the
Patriotists?’
‘It	is	worth	considering,’	Rautos	replied.	‘You	might	wish	to	begin
preparations	in	that	regard.	In	the	meantime,	however,	we	need	the	Patriotists,
but	I	admit	to	worry	that	they	may	prove	lacking	come	the	day	we	most	need
their	services.’
‘Hire	our	own,’	Barrakta	said.
‘I	have	done	so.’
Sharp	nods	answered	this	quiet	statement.
Uster	Taran	cleared	his	throat.	‘My	apologies,	Rautos.	You	proceed	on
matters	with	your	usual	assurance.	I	regret	my	doubt.’
‘As	ever,’	Rautos	said,	reaching	once	more	for	the	cloth	and	wiping	his


hands,	‘I	welcome	discourse.	Indeed,	even	challenge.	Lest	I	grow	careless.
Now,	we	need	to	assess	the	health	of	our	own	holdings,	to	give	us	all	a	better
indication	of	our	resilience…’
As	the	meeting	continued,	Rautos	wiped	at	his	hands	again	and	again.	A
corpse	had	snagged	on	one	of	the	mooring	poles	opposite	the	estate’s	landing
this	morning.	Bloated	and	rotting,	crawling	with	crayfish	and	seething	with
eels.
An	occasional	occurrence,	but	one	that	each	time	struck	him	with	greater
force,	especially	in	the	last	few	years.	This	morning	it	had	been	particularly
bad,	and	though	he	had	approached	no	closer	than	the	uppermost	tier	in	his
yard,	still	it	was	as	if	some	residue	had	reached	him,	making	his	hands	oddly
sticky	–	a	residue	that	he	seemed	unable	to	remove,	no	matter	how	hard	he
tried.


Chapter	Ten

The	One	God	strode	out	–	a	puppet	trailing	severed	strings	–	from	the
conflagration.	Another	city	destroyed,	another	people	cut	down	in	their
tens	of	thousands.	Who	among	us,	witnessing	his	emergence,	could	not
but	conclude	that	madness	had	taken	him?	For	all	the	power	of	creation
he	possessed,	he	delivered	naught	but	death	and	destruction.	Stealer	of
Life,	Slayer	and	Reaper,	in	his	eyes	where	moments	earlier	there	had
been	the	blaze	of	unreasoning	rage,	now	there	was	calm.	He	knew
nothing.	He	could	not	resolve	the	blood	on	his	own	hands.	He	begged
us	for	answers,	but	we	could	say	nothing.
We	could	weep.	We	could	laugh.
We	chose	laughter.
Creed	of	the	Mockers
Cabal
Let’s	play	a	game,	the	wind	whispered.	Then	it	laughed	in	the	soft	hiss	of	dust
and	sand.
Hedge	sat,	listening,	the	crumbly	stone	block	beneath	him	eroded	into	a
saddle	shape,	comforting	enough,	all	things	considered.	It	might	have	been	an
altar	once,	fallen	through	some	hole	in	the	sky	–	Hood	knew,	enough	strange
objects	had	tumbled	down	from	the	low,	impenetrable	clouds	during	his	long,
meandering	journey	across	this	dire	world.	Some	of	them	far	too	close	for
comfort.
Yes,	probably	an	altar.	The	depression	wherein	resided	his	behind	felt	too
even,	too	symmetrical	to	be	natural.	But	he	did	not	worry	about	blasphemy	–
this	was,	after	all,	where	the	dead	went.	And	the	dead	included,	on	occasion,
gods.
The	wind	told	him	as	much.	It	had	been	his	companion	for	so	long,	now,	he
had	grown	accustomed	to	its	easy	revelations,	its	quiet	rasp	of	secrets	and	its
caressing	embrace.	When	he	stumbled	onto	a	scatter	of	enormous	bones,
hinting	at	some	unhuman,	monstrous	god	of	long	ago,	the	wind	–	as	it	slipped


down	among	those	bones,	seeped	between	jutting	ribs	and	slithered	through
orbitals	and	into	the	hollow	caves	of	skulls	–	moaned	that	god’s	once-holy
name.	Names.	It	seemed	they	had	so	many,	their	utterances	now	and	for	ever
more	trapped	in	the	wind’s	domain.	Voiced	in	the	swirl	of	dust,	nothing	but
echoes	now.
Let’s	play	a	game.
There	is	no	gate	–	oh,	you’ve	seen	it,	I	well	know.
But	it	is	a	lie.	It	is	what	your	mind	builds,	stone	by	stone.
For	your	kind	love	borders.	Thresholds,	divisions,	delineations.	To	enter	a
place	you	believe	you	must	leave	another.	But	look	around	and	you	can	see.
There	is	no	gate,	my	friend.
I	show	you	this.	Again	and	again.	The	day	you	comprehend,	the	day	wisdom
comes	to	you,	you	will	join	me.	The	flesh	that	encompasses	you	is	your	final
conceit.	Abandon	it,	my	love.	You	once	scattered	yourself	and	you	will	do	so
again.	When	wisdom	arrives.	Has	wisdom	arrived	yet?
The	wind’s	efforts	at	seduction,	its	invitations	to	his	accepting	some	kind
of	wilful	dissolution,	were	getting	irritating.	Grunting,	he	pushed	himself
upright.
On	the	slope	to	his	left,	a	hundred	or	more	paces	away,	sprawled	the
skeleton	of	a	dragon.	Something	had	shattered	its	ribcage,	puncturing	blows
driving	shards	and	fragments	inward	–	fatally	so,	he	could	see	even	from	this
distance.	The	bones	looked	strange,	sheathed	one	and	all	in	something	like
black,	smoky	glass.	Glass	that	webbed	down	to	the	ground,	then	ran	in	frozen
streams	through	furrows	on	the	slope.	As	if	the	beast’s	melting	flesh	had
somehow	vitrified.
He	had	seen	the	same	on	the	two	other	dragon	remains	he	had	come	across.
He	stood,	luxuriating	in	his	conceit	–	in	the	dull	pain	in	his	lower	back,	the
vague	earache	from	the	insistent	wind,	and	the	dryness	at	the	back	of	his	throat
that	forced	him	to	repeatedly	clear	it.	Which	he	did,	before	saying,	‘All	the
wonders	and	miseries	of	a	body,	wind,	that	is	what	you	have	forgotten.	What
you	long	for.	You	want	me	to	join	you?	Ha,	it’s	the	other	way	round.’
You	will	never	win	this	game,	my	love—
‘Then	why	play	it?’
He	set	off	at	an	angle	up	the	hillside.	On	the	summit,	he	could	see	more
stone	rubble,	the	remnants	of	a	temple	that	had	dropped	through	a	hole	in	the
earth,	plucked	from	mortal	eyes	in	a	conflagration	of	dust	and	thunder.	Like
cutting	the	feet	out	from	under	a	god.	Like	obliterating	a	faith	with	a	single
slash	of	the	knife.	A	hole	in	the	earth,	then,	the	temple’s	pieces	tumbling
through	the	Abyss,	the	ethered	layers	of	realm	after	realm,	until	they	ran	out	of


worlds	to	plunge	through.
Knock	knock,	right	on	Hood’s	head.
Your	irreverence	will	deliver	unto	you	profoundest	regret,	beloved.
‘My	profoundest	regret,	wind,	is	that	it	never	rains	here.	No	crashing
descent	of	water	–	to	drown	your	every	word.’
Your	mood	is	foul	today.	This	is	not	like	you.	We	have	played	so	many
games	together,	you	and	I.
‘Your	breath	is	getting	cold.’
Because	you	are	walking	the	wrong	way!
‘Ah.	Thank	you,	wind.’
A	sudden	bitter	gust	buffeted	him,	evincing	its	displeasure.	Grit	stung	his
eyes,	and	he	laughed.	‘Hood’s	secret	revealed,	at	last.	Scurry	on	back	to	him,
wind,	you	have	lost	this	game.’
You	fool.	Ponder	this	question:	among	the	fallen,	among	the	dead,	will	you
find	more	soldiers	–	more	fighters	than	non-fighters?	Will	you	find	more	men
than	women?	More	gods	than	mortals?	More	fools	than	the	wise?	Among	the
Fallen,	my	friend,	does	the	echo	of	marching	armies	drown	all	else?	Or	the
moans	of	the	diseased,	the	cries	of	the	starving?
‘I	expect,	in	the	end,’	he	said	after	a	moment,	‘it	all	evens	out.’
You	are	wrong.	I	must	answer	you,	even	though	it	will	break	your	heart.	I
must.
‘There	is	no	need,’	he	replied.	‘I	already	know.’
Do	you?	whispered	the	wind.
‘You	want	me	to	falter.	In	despair.	I	know	your	tricks,	wind.	And	I	know,
too,	that	you	are	probably	all	that	remains	of	some	ancient,	long-forgotten
god.	Hood	knows,	maybe	you	are	all	of	them,	their	every	voice	a	tangled	mess,
pushing	dust	and	sand	and	little	else.	You	want	me	to	fall	to	my	knees	before
you.	In	abject	worship,	because	maybe	then	some	trickle	of	power	will	come	to
you.	Enough	to	make	your	escape.’	He	grunted	a	laugh.	‘But	this	is	for	you	to
ponder,	wind.	Among	all	the	fallen,	why	do	you	haunt	me?’
Why	not?	You	boldly	assert	bone	and	flesh.	You	would	spit	in	Hood’s	face	–
you	would	spit	in	mine	if	you	could	think	of	a	way	to	dodge	my	spitting	it	right
back.
‘Aye,	I	would	at	that.	Which	is	my	point.	You	chose	wrongly,	wind.	Because
I	am	a	soldier.’
Let’s	play	a	game.
‘Let’s	not.’
Among	the	Fallen,	who—
‘The	answer	is	children,	wind.	More	children	than	anyone	else.’


Then	where	is	your	despair?
‘You	understand	nothing,’	he	said,	pausing	to	spit.	‘For	a	man	or	a	woman
to	reach	adulthood,	they	must	first	kill	the	child	within	them.’
You	are	a	most	vicious	man,	soldier.
‘You	still	understand	nothing.	I	have	just	confessed	my	despair,	wind.	You
win	the	game.	You	win	every	game.	But	I	will	march	on,	into	your	icy	breath,
because	that’s	what	soldiers	do.’
Odd,	it	does	not	feel	as	if	I	have	won.
	
On	a	flat	stretch	of	cold	but	not	yet	frozen	mud,	he	came	upon	tracks.	Broad,
flattened	and	bony	feet,	one	set,	heading	in	the	same	direction.	Someone…
seeking	perhaps	what	he	sought.	Water	pooled	in	the	deep	prints,	motionless
and	reflecting	the	pewter	sky.
He	crouched	down,	studying	the	deep	impressions.	‘Be	useful,	wind.	Tell
me	who	walks	ahead	of	me.’
Silent.	One	who	does	not	play.
‘Is	that	the	best	you	can	do?’
Undead.
He	squinted	down	at	the	tracks,	noting	the	wide,	slightly	misaligned	gait,
the	faint	streaks	left	by	dangling	tufts	of	hide,	skins,	whatever.	‘T’lan	Imass?’
Broken.
‘Two,	maybe	three	leagues	ahead	of	me.’
More.	Water	crawls	slowly	here.
‘I	smell	snow	and	ice.’
My	breath	betrays	all	that	I	devour.	Turn	back	to	a	sweeter	kiss,	beloved.
‘You	mean	the	reek	of	fly-swarmed	swamp	I’ve	endured	for	the	past	two
months?’	He	straightened,	adjusted	his	heavy	pack.
You	are	cruel.	At	least	the	one	ahead	says	nothing.	Thinks	nothing.	Feels
nothing.
‘T’lan	Imass	for	certain,	then.’
Broken.
‘Yes,	I	understood	you	the	first	time.’
What	will	you	do?
‘If	need	be,	I	will	give	you	a	gift,	wind.’
A	gift?	Oh,	what	is	it?
‘A	new	game	–	you	have	to	guess.’
I	will	think	and	think	and—
‘Hood’s	breath	–	oh	–	oh!	Forget	I	just	said	that!’


—and	think	and	think…
	
They	rode	hard,	westward	at	first,	paralleling	the	great	river	for	most	of	two
days,	before	reaching	the	feeder	track	that	angled	northerly	towards	Almas,	a
modest	town	distinguished	only	by	its	garrison	and	stables,	where	Atri-Preda
Yan	Tovis,	Varat	Taun	and	their	Letherii	company	could	rest,	resupply	and
requisition	fresh	mounts.
Varat	Taun	knew	flight	when	he	saw	it,	when	he	found	himself	part	of	it.
Away	from	Letheras,	where,	a	day	before	their	departure,	the	palace	and
barracks	seemed	caught	in	a	rising	storm	of	tension,	the	smell	of	blood	heady
in	the	air,	a	thousand	rumours	cavorting	in	all	directions	but	none	of	them
possessing	much	substance,	beyond	news	relating	the	casting	out	of	two
families,	the	widows	and	children	of	two	men	who	had	been	the	Chancellor ’s
bodyguards,	and	who	were	clearly	no	longer	among	the	living.
Had	someone	tried	to	assassinate	Triban	Gnol?	He’d	wondered	that	out
loud	early	in	this	journey	and	his	commander	had	simply	grunted,	as	if	nothing
in	the	notion	surprised	or	even	alarmed	her.	Of	course	she	knew	more	than	she
was	letting	on,	but	Twilight	had	never	been	free	with	her	words.
Nor	am	I,	it	turns	out.	The	horrors	of	what	I	witnessed	in	that	cavern	–	no,
nothing	I	can	say	could	possibly	convey	the…the	sheer	extremity	of	the	truth.
So	best	leave	it.	The	ones	who	will	witness	will	not	live	long	past	the
experience.	What	then	will	remain	of	the	empire?
And	is	this	not	why	we	are	running	away?
A	foreigner	rode	with	them.	A	Mocker,	Yan	Tovis	had	said,	whatever	that
meant.	A	monk	of	some	sort.	With	the	painted	face	of	a	cavorting	mummer	–
what	mad	religion	is	that?	Varat	Taun	could	not	recall	the	strange	little	man
saying	a	word	–	perhaps	he	was	mute,	perhaps	his	tongue	had	been	cut	out.
Cultists	did	terrible	things	to	themselves.	The	journey	across	the	seas	and
oceans	of	the	world	had	provided	a	seemingly	endless	pageantry	of	bizarre
cultures	and	customs.	No	amount	of	self-mutilation	in	misguided	service	to
some	god	would	surprise	Varat	Taun.	The	Mocker	had	been	among	the
challengers,	but	the	absurdity	of	this	was	now	obvious	–	after	the	first	day	of
riding	he	had	been	exhausted,	reeling	in	the	saddle.	He	was,	evidently,	a	healer.
Who	healed	me.	Who	guided	me	out	from	the	terror	and	confusion.	I	have
spoken	my	gratitude,	but	he	just	nodded.	Did	he	witness	the	visions	in	my	mind?
Is	he	now	struck	mute,	his	very	sanity	under	siege?	In	any	case,	he	was	no
challenger	to	the	Emperor,	and	that	was	why	he	now	rode	beside	Yan	Tovis,
although	what	value	she	placed	in	this	Mocker	escaped	the	lieutenant.


Perhaps	it’s	no	different	from	how	she	views	me.	I	ride	in	this	company	in
an	act	of	mercy.	Soon	to	be	sent	to	a	posting	in	my	home	city.	To	be	with	my	wife
and	my	child.	Twilight	is	not	thinking	as	an	Atri-Preda	–	not	even	her	duty	as	a
soldier	was	enough	to	compel	her	to	report	what	she	had	learned	to	her
superiors.
But	this	is	not	the	first	time,	is	it?	Why	should	I	be	surprised?	She
surrendered	Fent	Reach	to	the	Edur,	didn’t	she?	No	battle,	they	just	opened	the
gates.
‘Clearly,	she	loves	the	Edur	so	much	she	can	go	with	them,	to	take
command	of	the	Letherii	forces	in	the	fleets.’	So	went	the	argument,	dry	and
mocking.
The	truth	may	be	that	Yan	Tovis	is	a	coward.
Varat	Taun	did	not	like	that	thought,	even	as	it	now	hounded	him.	He
reminded	himself	of	the	battles,	the	skirmishes,	both	on	water	and	ashore,
where	there	had	been	nothing	–	not	a	single	moment	–	when	he	had	been	given
cause	to	doubt	her	courage.
Yet	here,	now,	she	was	fleeing	Letheras	with	her	elite	company.
Because	I	confirmed	that	Gral’s	claims.	Besides,	would	I	willingly	stand
beside	Icarium	again?	No,	not	at	his	side,	not	in	the	same	city,	preferably	not
on	the	same	damned	continent.	Does	that	make	me	a	coward	as	well?
There	had	been	a	child,	in	that	cavern,	a	strange	thing,	more	imp	than
human.	And	it	had	managed	what	no-one	else	could	–	taking	down	Icarium,
stealing	away	his	rage	and	all	the	power	that	came	with	it.	Varat	Taun	did	not
think	there	would	be	another	such	intervention.	The	defenders	of	the	First
Throne	had	possessed	allies.	The	Emperor	in	Gold	could	not	but	refuse	the
same.	There	would	be	no-one	there	to	stop	Icarium.	No-one	but	Rhulad
himself,	which	was	of	course	possible.
It	is	our	lack	of	faith	in	our	Emperor	that	has	set	us	on	this	road.
But	what	if	neither	one	will	fall?	What	if	Icarium	finds	himself	killing
Rhulad	again	and	again?	Ten	times,	fifty,	a	hundred	–	ten	thousand?	An	endless
succession	of	battles,	obliterating	all	else.	Could	we	not	see	the	end	of	the
world?
Icarium	cannot	yield.	Rhulad	will	not.	They	will	share	that	inevitability.
And	they	will	share	the	madness	that	comes	of	it.
Bluerose	would	not	be	far	enough	away.	No	place	will.
He	had	left	behind	the	one	man	who	understood	what	was	coming	better
than	anyone	else.	The	barbarian.	Who	wore	a	heavy	hood	to	hide	his	features
when	among	strangers.	Who	spat	on	his	hands	to	smooth	back	his	hair.	Who
greeted	each	and	every	dawn	with	a	litany	of	curses	against	all	who	had


wronged	him.	Yet,	now,	I	see	him	in	my	mind	as	if	looking	upon	a	brother.
He	and	I	alone	survived.	Together,	we	brought	Icarium	out.
His	thoughts	had	brought	him	to	this	moment,	this	conflation	of
revelations,	and	he	felt	his	heart	grow	cold	in	his	chest.	Varat	Taun	pushed	his
horse	to	a	greater	pace,	until	he	came	up	alongside	his	commander.	‘AtriPreda.’
She	looked	across	at	him.
‘I	must	go	back,’	he	said.
‘To	warn	them?’
‘No,	sir.’
‘What	of	your	family,	Varat	Taun?’
He	glanced	away.	‘I	have	realized	something.	Nowhere	is	far	enough.’
‘I	see.	Then,	would	you	not	wish	to	be	at	her	side?’
‘Knowing	I	cannot	save	them…’	Varat	shook	his	head.	‘The	Gral	and	I	–
together	–	I	don’t	know,	perhaps	we	can	do	something	–	if	we’re	there.’
‘Can	I	talk	you	out	of	this?’
He	shook	his	head.
‘Very	well.	Errant’s	blessing	on	you,	Varat	Taun.’
‘He	is	right,’	said	the	Mocker	behind	them.	‘I	too	must	return.’
A	heavy	sigh	gusted	from	Yan	Tovis.	‘So	be	it	–	I	should	have	known	better
than	to	try	to	save	anyone	but	myself	–	no,	I’m	not	as	bitter	as	that	sounded.	My
apologies.	You	both	have	my	blessing.	Be	sure	to	walk	those	horses	on
occasion,	however.’
‘Yes	sir.	Atri-Preda?	Thank	you.’
‘What	word	do	I	send	to	your	wife?’
‘None,	sir.	Please.’
Yan	Tovis	nodded.
Varat	Taun	guided	his	mount	off	the	road,	reining	in.	The	monk	followed
suited,	somewhat	more	awkwardly.	The	lieutenant	watched	in	some	amusement.
‘You	have	no	horses	in	your	lands?’
‘Few.	Cabal	is	an	archipelago	for	the	most	part.	The	mainland	holdings	are
on	the	sides	of	rather	sheer	cliffs,	a	stretch	of	coast	that	is	severely
mountainous.	And	what	horses	we	do	have	are	bred	for	labour	and	food.’
To	that,	Varat	Taun	said	nothing.
They	waited	on	the	side	of	the	track,	watching	the	column	of	mounted
soldiers	ride	past.
Errant	take	me,	what	have	I	done?


The	lake	stretched	on	with	no	end	in	sight.	The	three	figures	had	rowed	their
well-provisioned	boat	for	what	passed	for	a	day	and	most	of	a	night	in	the
Shadow	Realm,	before	the	craft	ran	aground	in	shallows.	Unable	to	find	a	way
past,	they	had	shouldered	the	packs	and	disembarked,	wading	in	silty,	kneedeep	water.	Now,	midway	through	the	next	day,	they	dragged	exhausted,
numbed	legs	through	a	calm	lake	that	had	been	no	deeper	than	their	hips	since
dawn	–	until	they	reached	a	sudden	drop-off.
Trull	Sengar	had	been	in	the	lead,	using	his	spear	to	probe	the	waters
ahead,	and	now	he	moved	to	one	side,	step	by	step,	the	butt	of	the	weapon
stirring	the	grey,	milky	silts	along	the	edge.	He	continued	on	for	a	time,
watched	by	his	companions.	‘Doesn’t	feel	natural,’	he	finally	said,	making	his
way	back	to	the	others.	‘The	drop-away	is	smooth,	even.’	Moving	past	Onrack
and	Quick	Ben,	he	resumed	probing	the	ledge	in	the	opposite	direction.	‘No
change	here.’
The	wizard	voiced	a	long,	elaborate	string	of	curses	in	his	Malazan
tongue,	then	said,	‘I	could	take	to	the	air,	drawing	on	Serc	–	although	how	long
I	could	manage	that	is	anyone’s	guess.’	He	glared	across	at	Onrack.	‘You	can
just	melt	into	silts,	you	damned	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Leaving	me,’	said	Trull,	who	then	shrugged.	‘I	will	swim,	then	–	there
may	well	be	a	resumption	of	the	shallows	ahead	–	you	know,	we’ve	been
walking	on	an	unnaturally	level	bottom	for	some	time.	Imagine	for	the
moment	that	we	are	on	a	submerged	concourse	of	some	sort	–	enormous,
granted,	but	still.	This	drop-off	could	simply	mark	a	canal.	In	which	case	I
should	soon	find	the	opposite	side.’
‘A	concourse?’	Quick	Ben	grimaced.	‘Trull,	if	this	is	a	concourse	beneath
us	it’s	the	size	of	a	city-state.’
Onrack	said,	‘You	will	find	one	such	construct,	Wizard,	covering	the
southeast	peninsula	of	Stratem.	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	A	place	where	ritual	wars
were	fought	–	before	all	ritual	was	abandoned.’
‘You	mean	when	the	Short-Tails	rebelled.’
Trull	swore	under	his	breath.	‘I	hate	it	when	everyone	knows	more	than
me.’	Then	he	snorted.	‘Mind	you,	my	company	consists	of	a	mage	and	an
undead,	so	I	suppose	it’s	no	surprise	I	falter	in	comparison.’
‘Falter?’	Onrack’s	neck	creaked	loud	as	the	warrior	turned	to	regard	the
Tiste	Edur.	‘Trull	Sengar,	you	are	the	Knight	of	Shadow.’
Quick	Ben	seemed	to	choke.
Above	the	wizard’s	sudden	fit	of	coughing,	Trull	shouted:	‘I	am	what?	Was
this	Cotillion’s	idea?	That	damned	upstart—’
‘Cotillion	did	not	choose	you,	friend,’	Onrack	said.	‘I	cannot	tell	you	who


made	you	what	you	now	are.	Perhaps	the	Eres’al,	although	I	do	not
comprehend	the	nature	of	her	claim	within	the	realm	of	Shadow.	One	thing,
however,	is	very	clear	–	she	has	taken	an	interest	in	you,	Trull	Sengar.	Even	so,
I	do	not	believe	the	Eres’al	was	responsible.	I	believe	you	yourself	were.’
‘How?	What	did	I	do?’
The	T’lan	Imass	slowly	tilted	its	head	to	one	side.	‘Warrior,	you	stood
before	Icarium.	You	held	the	Lifestealer.	You	did	what	no	warrior	has	ever
done.’
‘Absurd,’	snapped	Trull.	‘I	was	finished.	If	not	for	Quick	Ben	here	–	and
the	Eres’al	–	I’d	be	dead,	my	chopped-up	bones	mouldering	outside	the	throne
room.’
‘It	is	your	way,	my	friend,	to	disarm	your	own	achievements.’
‘Onrack—’
Quick	Ben	laughed.	‘He’s	calling	you	modest,	Edur.	And	don’t	bother
denying	the	truth	of	that	–	you	still	manage	to	startle	me	on	that	count.	I’ve
lived	most	of	my	life	among	mages	or	in	the	ranks	of	an	army,	and	in	neither
company	did	I	ever	find	much	in	the	way	of	self-deprecation.	We	were	all	too
busy	pissing	on	each	other ’s	trees.	One	needs	a	certain	level	of,	uh,	bravado
when	it’s	your	job	to	kill	people.’
‘Trull	Sengar	fought	as	a	soldier,’	Onrack	said	to	the	wizard.	‘The
difference	between	you	two	is	that	he	is	unable	to	hide	his	grief	at	the	frailty	of
life.’
‘Nothing	frail	about	us,’	Quick	Ben	muttered.	‘Life	stays	stubborn	until	it
has	no	choice	but	to	give	up,	and	even	then	it’s	likely	to	spit	one	last	time	in	the
eye	of	whatever ’s	killed	it.	We’re	cruel	in	victory	and	cruel	in	defeat,	my
friends.	Now,	if	you	two	will	be	quiet	for	a	moment,	I	can	go	in	search	of	a
way	out	of	here.’
‘Not	flying?’	Trull	asked,	leaning	on	his	spear.
‘No,	a	damned	gate.	I’m	beginning	to	suspect	this	lake	doesn’t	end.’
‘It	must	end,’	the	Edur	said.
‘The	Abyss	is	not	always	twisted	with	wild	storms.	Sometimes	it’s	like	this
–	placid,	colourless,	a	tide	rising	so	slowly	that	it’s	impossible	to	notice,	but
rise	it	does,	swallowing	this	tilted,	dying	realm.’
‘The	Shadow	Realm	is	dying,	Quick	Ben?’
The	wizard	licked	his	lips	–	a	nervous	gesture	Trull	had	seen	before	from
the	tall,	thin	man	–	then	shrugged.	‘I	think	so.	With	every	border	an	open
wound,	it’s	not	that	surprising.	Now,	quiet	everyone.	I	need	to	concentrate.’
Trull	watched	as	Quick	Ben	closed	his	eyes.
A	moment	later	his	body	grew	indistinct,	grainy	at	its	edges,	then	began


wavering,	into	and	out	of	solidity.
The	Tiste	Edur,	still	leaning	on	his	spear,	grinned	over	at	Onrack.	‘Well,
old	friend,	it	seems	we	wander	the	unknown	yet	again.’
‘I	regret	nothing,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘It’s	virtually	the	opposite	for	me	–	with	the	exception	of	talking	you	into
freeing	me	when	I	was	about	to	drown	in	the	Nascent	–	which,	I’ve	just
realized,	doesn’t	look	much	different	from	this	place.	Flooding	worlds.	Is	this
more	pervasive	than	we	realize?’
A	clattering	of	bones	as	the	T’lan	Imass	shrugged.	‘I	would	know
something,	Trull	Sengar.	When	peace	comes	to	a	warrior…’
The	Edur ’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	battered	undead.	‘How	do	you	just	cast
off	all	the	rest?	The	surge	of	pleasure	at	the	height	of	battle?	The	rush	of
emotions,	each	one	threatening	to	overwhelm	you,	drown	you?	That	sizzling
sense	of	being	alive?	Onrack,	I	thought	your	kind	felt…nothing.’
‘With	awakening	memories,’	Onrack	replied,	‘so	too	other…forces	of	the
soul.’	The	T’lan	Imass	lifted	one	withered	hand.	‘This	calm	on	all	sides	–	it
mocks	me.’
‘Better	a	wild	storm?’
‘I	think,	yes.	A	foe	to	fight.	Trull	Sengar,	should	I	join	this	water	as	dust,	I
do	not	think	I	would	return.	Oblivion	would	take	me	with	the	promise	of	a
struggle	ended.	Not	what	I	desire,	friend,	for	that	would	mean	abandoning	you.
And	surrendering	my	memories.	Yet	what	does	a	warrior	do	when	peace	is
won?’
‘Take	up	fishing,’	Quick	Ben	muttered,	eyes	still	closed,	body	still
wavering.	‘Now	enough	words	from	you	two.	This	isn’t	easy.’
Wavering	once	more	in	and	out	of	existence,	then,	suddenly	–	gone.
	
Ever	since	Shadowthrone	had	stolen	him	away	–	when	Kalam	needed	him	the
most	–	Quick	Ben	had	quietly	seethed.	Repaying	a	debt	in	one	direction	had
meant	betraying	a	friend	in	another.	Unacceptable.
Diabolical.
And	if	Shadowthrone	thinks	he	has	my	loyalty	just	because	he	pushed	Kal
into	the	Deadhouse,	then	he	is	truly	as	mad	as	we	all	think	he	is.	Oh,	I’m	sure
the	Azath	and	whatever	horrid	guardian	resides	in	there	would	welcome	Kalam
readily	enough.	Mount	his	head	on	the	wall	above	the	mantel,	maybe	–	all	right,
that’s	not	very	likely.	But	the	Azath	collects.	That’s	what	it	does,	and	now	it	has
my	oldest	friend.	So,	how	in	Hood’s	name	do	I	get	him	out?
Damn	you,	Shadowthrone.


But	such	anger	left	him	feeling	unbalanced,	making	concentration	difficult.
And	the	skin	rotting	from	my	legs	isn’t	helping	either.	Still,	they	needed	a	way
out.	Cotillion	hadn’t	explained	much.	No,	he’d	just	expected	us	to	figure	things
out	for	ourselves.	What	that	means	is	that	there’s	only	one	real	direction.
Wouldn’t	do	to	have	us	get	lost	now,	would	it?
Slightly	emboldened	–	a	momentary	triumph	over	diffidence	–	Quick	Ben
concentrated,	his	senses	reaching	out	to	the	surrounding	ether.	Solid,	clammy,
a	smooth	surface	yielding	like	sponge	under	the	push	of	imagined	hands.	The
fabric	of	this	realm,	the	pocked	skin	of	a	ravaged	world.	He	began	applying
more	pressure,	seeking…soft	spots,	weaknesses	–	I	know	you	exist.
Ah,	you	are	now	aware	of	me	–	I	can	feel	that.	Curious,	you	feel	almost…
feminine.	Well,	a	first	time	for	everything.	What	had	been	clammy	beneath	his
touch	was	now	simply	cool.	Hood’s	breath,	I’m	not	sure	I	like	the	images
accompanying	this	thought	of	pushing	through.
Beyond	his	sense	of	touch,	there	was	nothing.	Nothing	for	his	eyes	to	find;
no	scent	in	the	tepid	air;	no	sound	beyond	the	faint	swish	of	blood	in	the	body	–
there	one	moment,	gone	the	next	as	he	struggled	to	separate	his	soul,	free	it	to
wander.
This	isn’t	that	bad—
A	grisly	tearing	sound,	then	a	vast,	inexorable	inhalation,	tearing	his	spirit
loose	–	yanking	him	forward	and	through,	stumbling,	into	acrid	swirling	heat,
thick	clouds	closing	on	all	sides,	soft	sodden	ground	underfoot.	He	groped
forward,	his	lungs	filling	with	a	pungent	vapour	that	made	his	head	reel.	Gods,
what	sickness	is	this?	I	can’t	breathe—
The	wind	spun,	drove	him	staggering	forward	–	sudden	chill,	stones
turning	beneath	his	feet,	blessed	clean	air	that	he	sucked	in	with	desperate
gasps.
Down	onto	his	hands	and	knees.	On	the	rocky	ground,	lichen	and	mosses.
On	either	side,	a	thinly	spread	forest	in	miniature	–	he	saw	oaks,	spruce,	alder,
old	and	twisted	and	none	higher	than	his	hip.	Dun-hued	birds	flitted	among
small	green	leaves.	Midges	closed	in,	sought	to	alight	–	but	he	was	a	ghost
here,	an	apparition	–	thus	far.	But	this	is	where	we	must	go.
The	wizard	slowly	lifted	his	head,	then	climbed	to	his	feet.
He	stood	in	a	shallow,	broad	valley,	the	dwarf	forest	covering	the	basin
behind	him	and	climbing	the	slopes	on	all	sides,	strangely	park-like	in	the
generous	spacing	of	the	trees.	And	they	swarmed	with	birds.	From	somewhere
nearby	came	the	sound	of	trickling	water.	Overhead,	dragonflies	with
wingspans	to	match	that	of	crows	darted	in	their	uncanny	precision,	feeding	on
midges.	Beyond	this	feeding	frenzy	the	sky	was	cerulean,	almost	purple	near


the	horizons.	Tatters	of	elongated	clouds	ran	in	high	ribbons,	like	the	froth	of
frozen	waves	on	some	celestial	shore.
Primordial	beauty	–	tundra’s	edge.	Gods,	I	hate	tundra.	But	so	be	it,	as
kings	and	queens	say	when	it’s	all	swirled	down	the	piss-hole.	Nothing	to	be
done	for	it.	Here	we	must	come.
Trull	Sengar	started	at	the	sudden	coughing	–	Quick	Ben	had	reappeared,
half	bent	over,	tears	streaming	from	his	eyes	and	something	like	smoke
drifting	from	his	entire	body.	He	hacked,	then	spat	and	slowly	straightened.
Grinning.
	
The	proprietor	of	the	Harridict	Tavern	was	a	man	under	siege.	An	affliction
that	had	reached	beyond	months	and	into	years.	His	establishment,	once
devoted	to	serving	the	island	prison’s	guards,	had	since	been	usurped	along
with	the	rest	of	the	port	town	following	the	prisoners’	rebellion.	Chaos	now
ruled,	ageing	honest	folk	beyond	their	years.	But	the	money	was	good.
He	had	taken	to	joining	Captain	Shurq	Elalle	and	Skorgen	Kaban	the	Pretty
at	their	preferred	table	in	the	corner	during	lulls	in	the	mayhem,	when	the
serving	wenches	and	scull-boys	rushed	about	with	more	purpose	than	panic,
dull	exhaustion	replacing	abject	terror	in	their	glazed	eyes	–	and	all	seemed,
for	the	moment,	right	and	proper.
There	was	a	certain	calm	with	this	here	captain	–	a	pirate	if	the	Errant
pisses	straight	and	he	ain’t	missed	yet	–	and	a	marked	elegance	and	civility	to
her	manner	that	told	the	proprietor	that	she	had	stolen	not	just	coins	from	the
highborn	but	culture	as	well,	which	marked	her	as	a	smart,	sharp	woman.
He	believed	he	was	falling	in	love,	hopeless	as	that	was.	Stress	of	the
profession	and	too	much	sampling	of	inland	ales	had	left	him	–	in	his	honest,
not	unreasonably	harsh	judgement	–	a	physical	wreck	to	match	his	moral
lassitude	which	on	good	days	he	called	his	business	acumen.	Protruding	belly
round	as	a	stew	pot	and	damned	near	as	greasy.	Bulbous	nose	–	one	up	on
Skorgen	there	–	with	burst	veins,	hair-sprouting	blackheads	and	swirling
bristles	that	reached	down	from	the	nostrils	to	entwine	with	his	moustache	–
once	a	fashion	among	hirsute	men	but	no	more,	alas.	Watery	close-set	eyes,	the
whites	so	long	yellow	he	was	no	longer	sure	they	hadn’t	always	been	that
colour.	A	few	front	teeth	were	left,	four	in	all,	one	up	top,	three	below.	Better
than	his	wife,	then,	who’d	lost	her	last	two	stumbling	into	a	wall	while	draining
an	ale	casket	–	the	brass	spigot	knocking	the	twin	tombstones	clean	out	of	their
sockets,	and	if	she	hadn’t	then	choked	on	the	damned	things	she’d	still	be	with
him,	bless	her.	Times	she	was	sober	she’d	work	like	a	horse	and	bite	just	as


hard	and	both	talents	did	her	well	working	the	tables.
But	life	was	lonely	these	days,	wasn’t	it	just,	then	in	saunters	this	glorious,
sultry	pirate	captain.	A	whole	sight	better	than	those	foreigners,	walking	in	and
out	of	the	Brullyg	Shake’s	Palace	as	if	it	was	their	ancestral	home,	then
spending	their	nights	here,	hunched	down	at	the	games	table	–	the	biggest	table
in	the	whole	damned	tavern,	if	you	mind,	with	a	single	jug	of	ale	to	last	the
entire	night	no	matter	how	many	of	them	crowded	round	their	strange,	foreign,
seemingly	endless	game.
Oh,	he’d	demanded	a	cut	as	was	his	right	and	they	paid	over	peaceably
enough	–	even	though	he	could	make	no	sense	of	the	rules	of	play.	And	how
those	peculiar	rectangular	coins	went	back	and	forth!	But	the	tavern’s	take
wasn’t	worth	it.	A	regular	game	of	Bale’s	Scoop	on	any	given	night	would
yield	twice	as	much	for	the	house.	And	the	ale	quaffed	–	a	player	didn’t	need	a
sharp	brain	to	play	Bale’s,	Errant	be	praised.	So	these	foreigners	were	worse
than	lumps	of	moss	renting	a	rock,	as	his	dear	wife	used	to	say	whenever	he	sat
down	for	a	rest.
Contemplating	life,	my	love.	Contemplate	this	fist,	dear	husband.	Wasn’t	she
something,	wasn’t	she	just	something.	Been	so	quiet	since	that	spigot	punched
her	teeth	down	her	throat.
‘All	right,	Ballant,’	Skorgen	Kaban	said	in	a	sudden	gust	of	beery	breath,
leaning	over	the	table.	‘You	come	and	sit	wi’	us	every	damned	night.	And	just
sit.	Saying	nothing.	You’re	the	most	tight-lipped	tavernkeep	I’ve	ever	known.’
‘Leave	the	man	alone,’	the	captain	said.	‘He’s	mourning.	Grief	don’t	need
words	for	company.	In	fact,	words	is	the	last	thing	grief	needs,	so	wipe	your
dripping	nose,	Pretty,	and	shut	the	toothy	hole	under	it.’
The	first	mate	ducked.	‘Hey,	I	never	knew	nothing	about	grief,	Captain.’	He
used	the	back	of	one	cuff	to	blot	at	the	weeping	holes	where	his	nose	used	to
be,	then	said	to	Ballant,	‘You	just	sit	here,	Keeper,	and	go	on	saying	nothing	to
no-one	for	as	long	as	you	like.’
Ballant	struggled	to	pull	his	adoring	gaze	from	the	captain,	long	enough	to
nod	and	smile	at	Skorgen	Kaban,	then	looked	back	again	to	Shurq	Elalle.
The	diamond	set	in	her	forehead	glittered	in	the	yellowy	lantern	light	like	a
knuckle	sun,	the	jewel	in	her	frown	–	oh,	he’d	have	to	remember	that	one	–	but
she	was	frowning,	and	that	was	never	good.	Not	for	a	woman.
‘Pretty,’	she	now	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘you	remember	a	couple	of	them
Crimson	Guard	–	in	the	squad?	There	was	that	dark-skinned	one	–	sort	of	a
more	earthy	colour	than	an	Edur.	And	the	other	one,	with	that	faint	blue	skin,
some	island	mix,	he	said.’
‘What	about	them,	Captain?’


‘Well.’	She	nodded	towards	the	foreigners	at	the	games	table	on	the	other
side	of	the	room.	‘Them.	Something	reminds	me	of	those	two	in	Iron	Bars’s
squad.	Not	just	skin,	but	their	gestures,	the	way	they	move	–	even	some	of	the
words	I’ve	overheard	in	that	language	they’re	speaking.	Just…odd	echoes.’	She
then	fixed	her	dark	but	luminous	gaze	on	Ballant.	‘What	do	you	know	about
them,	Keeper?’
‘Captain,’	Skorgen	objected,	‘he’s	in	mourning—’
‘Be	quiet,	Pretty.	Me	and	Ballant	are	having	an	inconsequential
conversation.’
Yes,	most	inconsequential,	even	if	that	diamond	blinded	him,	and	that
wonderful	spicy	aroma	that	was	her	breath	made	his	head	swim	as	if	it	was	the
finest	liqueur.	Blinking,	he	licked	his	lips	–	tasting	sweat	–	then	said,	‘They
have	lots	of	private	meetings	with	Brullyg	Shake.	Then	they	come	down	here
and	waste	time.’
Even	her	answering	grunt	was	lovely.
Skorgen	snorted	–	wetly	–	then	reached	out	with	his	one	good	hand	and
wiped	clean	the	tabletop.	‘Can	you	believe	that,	Captain?	Brullyg	an	old	friend
of	yours	and	you	can’t	e’en	get	in	to	see	him	while	a	bunch	of	cheap	foreigners
can	natter	in	his	ear	all	day	an’	every	day!’	He	half	rose.	‘I’m	thinking	a	word
with	these	here—’
‘Sit	down,	Pretty.	Something	tells	me	you	don’t	want	to	mess	with	that
crowd.	Unless	you’re	of	a	mind	to	lose	another	part	of	your	body.’	Her	frown
deepened,	almost	swallowing	that	diamond.	‘Ballant,	you	said	they	waste	time,
right?	Now,	that’s	the	real	curious	part	about	all	this.	People	like	them	don’t
waste	time.	No.	They’re	waiting.	For	something	or	someone.	And	those
meetings	with	the	Shake	–	that	sounds	like	negotiating,	the	kind	of	negotiating
that	Brullyg	can’t	walk	away	from.’
‘That	don’t	sound	good,	Captain,’	Skorgen	muttered.	‘In	fact,	it	makes	me
nervous.	Never	mind	avalanches	of	ice	–	Brullyg	didn’t	run	when	that	was
coming	down—’
Shurq	Elalle	thumped	the	table.	‘That’s	it!	Thank	you,	Pretty.	It	was
something	one	of	those	women	said.	Brevity	or	Pithy	–	one	of	them.	That	ice
was	beaten	back,	all	right,	but	not	thanks	to	the	handful	of	mages	working	for
the	Shake.	No	–	those	foreigners	are	the	ones	who	saved	this	damned	island.
And	that’s	why	Brullyg	can’t	bar	his	door	against	them.	It	isn’t	negotiation,
because	they’re	the	ones	doing	all	the	talking.’	She	slowly	leaned	back.	‘No
wonder	the	Shake	won’t	see	me	–	Errant	take	us,	I’d	be	surprised	if	he	was	still
alive—’
‘No,	he’s	alive,’	Ballant	said.	‘At	least,	people	have	seen	him.	Besides,	he


has	a	liking	for	Fent	ale	and	orders	a	cask	from	me	once	every	three	days
without	fail,	and	that	hasn’t	changed.	Why,	just	yesterday—’
The	captain	leaned	forward	again.	‘Ballant.	Next	time	you’re	told	to
deliver	one,	let	me	and	Pretty	here	do	the	delivering.’
‘Why,	I	could	deny	you	nothing,	Captain,’	Ballant	said,	then	felt	his	face
flush.
But	she	just	smiled.
He	liked	these	inconsequential	conversations.	Not	much	different	from
those	he	used	to	have	with	his	wife.	And…yes,	here	it	was	–	that	sudden	sense
of	a	yawning	abyss	awaiting	his	next	step.	Nostalgia	rose	within	him,
brimming	his	eyes.
Under	siege,	dear	husband?	One	swing	of	this	fist	and	those	walls	will
come	tumbling	down	–	you	do	know	that,	husband,	don’t	you?
Oh	yes,	my	love.
Odd,	sometimes	he	would	swear	she’d	never	left.	Dead	or	not,	she	still	had
teeth.
	
Blue-grey	mould	filled	pocks	in	the	rotted	ice	like	snow’s	own	fur,	shedding
with	the	season	as	the	sun’s	bright	heat	devoured	the	glacier.	But	winter,	when	it
next	came,	would	do	little	more	than	slow	the	inexorable	disintegration.	This
river	of	ice	was	dying,	an	age	in	retreat.
Seren	Pedac	had	scant	sense	of	the	age	to	come,	since	she	felt	she	was
drowning	in	its	birth,	swept	along	in	the	mud	and	refuse	of	long-frozen	debris.
Periodically,	as	their	discordant,	constantly	bickering	party	climbed	ever
higher	into	the	northern	Bluerose	Mountains,	they	would	hear	the	thundering
collapse	of	distant	ice	cliffs,	calving	beneath	the	besieging	sun;	and
everywhere	water	streamed	across	bared	rock,	coughed	its	way	along	channels
and	fissures,	swept	past	them	in	its	descent	into	darkness	–	the	journey	to	the
sea	just	begun	–	swept	past,	to	traverse	subterranean	caverns,	shadowed
gorges,	sodden	forests.
The	mould	was	sporing,	and	that	had	triggered	a	recoil	of	Seren’s	senses	–
her	nose	was	stuffed,	her	throat	was	dry	and	sore	and	she	was	racked	with
bouts	of	sneezing	that	had	proved	amusing	enough	to	elicit	even	a	sympathetic
smile	from	Fear	Sengar.	That	hint	of	sympathy	alone	earned	her	forgiveness	–
the	pleasure	the	others	took	at	her	discomfort	deserved	nothing	but
reciprocation,	when	the	opportunity	arose,	and	she	was	certain	it	would.
Silchas	Ruin,	of	course,	was	not	afflicted	with	a	sense	of	humour,	in	so	far
as	she	could	tell.	Or	its	dryness	beggared	a	desert.	Besides,	he	strode	far


enough	ahead	to	spare	himself	her	sneezing	fits,	with	the	Tiste	Andii,	Clip,
only	a	few	strides	in	his	wake	–	like	a	sparrow	harassing	a	hawk.	Every	now
and	then	some	fragment	of	Clip’s	monologue	drifted	back	to	where	Seren	and
her	companions	struggled	along,	and	while	it	was	clear	that	he	was	baiting	the
brother	of	his	god,	it	was	equally	evident	that	the	Mortal	Sword	of	the	BlackWinged	Lord	was,	as	Udinaas	had	remarked,	using	the	wrong	bait.
Four	days	now,	this	quest	into	the	ravaged	north,	climbing	the	spine	of	the
mountains.	Skirting	huge	masses	of	broken	ice	that	slid	–	almost	perceptibly	–
ever	downslope,	voicing	terrible	groans	and	gasps.	The	leviathans	are	fatally
wounded,	Udinaas	once	observed,	and	will	not	go	quietly.
Melting	ice	exuded	a	stench	beyond	the	acrid	bite	of	the	mould	spores.
Decaying	detritus:	vegetation	and	mud	frozen	for	centuries;	the	withered
corpses	of	animals,	some	of	them	beasts	long	extinct,	leaving	behind	twisted
hides	of	brittle	fur	every	whisper	of	wind	plucked	into	the	air,	fractured	bones
and	bulging	cavities	filled	with	gases	that	eventually	burst,	hissing	out	fetid
breath.	It	was	no	wonder	Seren	Pedac’s	body	was	rebelling.
The	migrating	mountains	of	ice	were,	it	turned	out,	cause	for	the	nearpanic	among	the	Tiste	Andii	inhabitants	of	the	subterranean	monastery.	The
deep	gorge	that	marked	its	entrance	branched	like	a	tree	to	the	north,	and	back
down	each	branch	now	crawled	packed	snow	and	enormous	blocks	of	ice,	with
streams	of	meltwater	providing	the	grease,	ever	speeding	their	southward
migration.	And	there	was	fetid	magic	in	that	ice,	remnants	of	an	ancient	ritual
still	powerful	enough	to	defeat	the	Onyx	Wizards.
Seren	Pedac	suspected	that	there	was	more	to	this	journey,	and	to	Clip’s
presence,	than	she	and	her	companions	had	been	led	to	believe.	We	walk
towards	the	heart	of	that	ritual,	to	the	core	that	remains.	Because	a	secret
awaits	us	there.
Does	Clip	mean	to	shatter	the	ritual?	What	will	happen	if	he	does?
And	what	if	to	do	so	ruins	us?	Our	chances	of	finding	the	soul	of
Scabandari	Bloodeye,	of	releasing	it?
She	was	beginning	to	dread	this	journey’s	end.
There	will	be	blood.
Swathed	in	the	furs	the	Andii	had	provided,	Udinaas	moved	up	alongside
her.	‘Acquitor,	I	have	been	thinking.’
‘Is	that	wise?’	she	asked.
‘Of	course	not,	but	it’s	not	as	if	I	can	help	it.	The	same	for	you,	I	am	sure.’
Grimacing,	she	said,	‘I	have	lost	my	purpose	here.	Clip	now	leads.	I…I
don’t	know	why	I	am	still	walking	in	your	sordid	company.’
‘Contemplating	leaving	us,	are	you?’


She	shrugged.
‘Do	not	do	that,’	said	Fear	Sengar	behind	them.
Surprised,	she	half	turned.	‘Why?’
The	warrior	looked	uncomfortable	with	his	own	statement.	He	hesitated.
What	mystery	is	this?
Udinaas	laughed.	‘His	brother	offered	you	a	sword,	Acquitor.	Fear
understands	–	it	wasn’t	just	expedience.	Nor	was	your	taking	it,	I’d	wager—’
‘You	do	not	know	that,’	Seren	said,	suddenly	uneasy.	‘Trull	spoke	–	he
assured	me	it	was	nothing	more—’
‘Do	you	expect	everyone	to	speak	plainly?’	the	ex-slave	asked.	‘Do	you
expect	anyone	to	speak	plainly?	What	sort	of	world	do	you	inhabit,	Acquitor?’
He	laughed.	‘Not	the	same	as	mine,	that’s	for	certain.	For	every	word	we	speak,
are	there	not	a	thousand	left	unsaid?	Do	we	not	often	say	one	thing	and	mean
the	very	opposite?	Woman,	look	at	us	–	look	at	yourself.	Our	souls	might	as
well	be	trapped	inside	a	haunted	keep.	Sure,	we	built	it	–	each	of	us	–	with	our
own	hands,	but	we’ve	forgotten	half	the	rooms,	we	get	lost	in	the	corridors.	We
stumble	into	rooms	of	raging	heat,	then	stagger	back,	away,	lest	our	own
emotions	roast	us	alive.	Other	places	are	cold	as	ice	–	as	cold	as	this	frozen
land	around	us.	Still	others	remain	for	ever	dark	–	no	lantern	will	work,	every
candle	dies	as	if	starved	of	air,	and	we	grope	around,	collide	with	unseen
furniture,	with	walls.	We	look	out	through	the	high	windows,	but	distrust	all
that	we	see.	We	armour	ourselves	against	unreal	phantasms,	yet	shadows	and
whispers	make	us	bleed.’
‘Good	thing	the	thousand	words	for	each	of	those	were	left	unsaid,’	Fear
Sengar	muttered,	‘else	we	find	ourselves	in	the	twilight	of	all	existence	before
you	are	through.’
Udinaas	replied	without	turning.	‘I	tore	away	the	veil	of	your	reason,	Fear,
for	asking	the	Acquitor	to	stay.	Do	you	deny	that?	You	see	her	as	betrothed	to
your	brother.	And	that	he	happens	to	be	dead	means	nothing,	because,	unlike
your	youngest	brother,	you	are	an	honourable	man.’
A	grunt	of	surprise	from	Udinaas,	as	Fear	Sengar	reached	out	to	grasp	the
ex-slave,	hands	closing	on	the	wrapped	folds	of	fur.	A	surge	of	anger	sent
Udinaas	sprawling	onto	the	muddy	scree.
As	the	Tiste	Edur	then	whirled	to	advance	on	the	winded	Letherii,	Seren
Pedac	stepped	into	his	path.	‘Stop.	Please,	Fear.	Yes,	I	know	he	deserved	it.
But…stop.’
Udinaas	had	managed	to	sit	up,	Kettle	crouching	down	at	his	side	and
trying	to	wipe	the	smears	of	mud	from	his	face.	He	coughed,	then	said,	‘That
will	be	the	last	time	I	compliment	you,	Fear.’


Seren	turned	on	the	ex-slave.	‘That	was	a	rather	vicious	compliment,
Udinaas.	And	I	second	your	own	advice	–	don’t	say	anything	like	that	again.
Ever.	Not	if	you	value	your	life—’
Udinaas	spat	grit	and	blood,	then	said,	‘Ah,	but	now	we’ve	stumbled	into	a
dark	room	indeed.	And,	Seren	Pedac,	you	are	not	welcome	there.’	He	pushed
himself	upright.	‘You	have	been	warned.’	Then	he	looked	up,	one	hand	settling
on	Kettle’s	shoulder.	His	eyes,	suddenly	bright,	avid,	scanned	Seren,	Fear,	and
then	moved	up	the	trail,	to	where	Silchas	Ruin	and	Clip	now	stood	side	by	side,
regarding	those	downslope.	‘Here’s	a	most	telling	question	–	the	kind	few	dare
utter,	by	the	way.	Which	one	among	us,	friends,	is	not	haunted	by	a	death	wish?
Perhaps	we	ought	to	discuss	mutual	suicide…’
No-one	spoke	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	Until	Kettle	said,	‘I	don’t	want	to
die!’
Seren	saw	the	ex-slave’s	bitter	smile	crumble,	a	sudden	collapse	into
undeniable	grief,	before	he	turned	away.
‘Trull	was	blind	to	his	own	truth,’	Fear	said	to	her	in	a	quiet	voice.	‘I	was
there,	Acquitor.	I	know	what	I	saw.’
She	refused	to	meet	his	eyes.	Expedience.	How	could	such	a	warrior
proclaim	his	love	for	me?	How	could	he	even	believe	he	knew	me	enough	for
that?
And	why	can	I	see	his	face	as	clear	in	my	mind	as	if	he	stood	here	before
me?	I	am	haunted	indeed.	Oh,	Udinaas,	you	were	right.	Fear	is	an	honourable
man,	so	honourable	as	to	break	all	our	hearts.
But,	Fear,	there	is	no	value	in	honouring	one	who	is	dead.
‘Trull	is	dead,’	she	said,	stunning	herself	with	her	own	brutality	as	she	saw
Fear	visibly	flinch.	‘He	is	dead.’	And	so	am	I.	There	is	no	point	in	honouring	the
dead.	I	have	seen	too	much	to	believe	otherwise.	Grieve	for	lost	potential,	the
end	of	possibilities,	the	eternally	silent	demise	of	promise.	Grieve	for	that,	Fear
Sengar,	and	you	will	understand,	finally,	how	grief	is	but	a	mirror,	held	close	to
one’s	own	face.
And	every	tear	springs	from	the	choices	we	ourselves	did	not	make.
When	I	grieve,	Fear,	I	cannot	even	see	the	bloom	of	my	own	breath	–	what
does	that	tell	you?
They	resumed	walking.	Silent.
	
A	hundred	paces	above	the	group,	Clip	spun	his	chain	and	rings.	‘What	was	all
that	about?’	he	asked.
‘You	have	lived	in	your	tidy	cave	for	too	long,’	the	white-skinned	Tiste


Andii	said.
‘Oh,	I	get	out	often	enough.	Carousing	in	Bluerose	–	the	gods	know	how
many	bastards	have	been	brewed	by	my	seed.	Why—’
‘One	day,	Mortal	Sword,’	Silchas	Ruin	interrupted,	‘you	will	discover	what
cuts	deeper	than	any	weapon	of	iron.’
‘Wise	words	from	the	one	who	smells	still	of	barrows	and	rotting
cobwebs.’
‘If	the	dead	could	speak,	Clip,	what	would	they	tell	you?’
‘Little,	I	expect,	beyond	complaints	about	this	and	that.’
‘Perhaps,	then,	that	is	all	you	deserve.’
‘Oh,	I	lack	honour,	do	I?’
‘I	am	not	sure	what	you	lack,’	Silchas	Ruin	replied,	‘but	I	am	certain	I	will
comprehend	before	we	are	done.’
Rings	and	chain	snapped	taut.	‘Here	they	come.	Shall	we	continue	onward
and	upward?’
	
There	was	so	much	that	Toc	the	Younger	–	Anaster,	Firstborn	of	the	Dead
Seed,	the	Thrice-blinded,	Chosen	by	the	Wolf	Gods,	the	Unlucky	–	did	not	wish
to	remember.	His	other	body	for	one;	the	body	he	had	been	born	into,	the	first
home	to	his	soul.	Detonations	against	Moon’s	Spawn	above	the	doomed	city	of
Pale,	fire	and	searing,	blazing	heat	–	oh,	don’t	stand	there.	Then	that	damned
puppet,	Hairlock,	delivering	oblivion,	wherein	his	soul	had	found	a	rider,
another	force	–	a	wolf,	one-eyed	and	grieving.
How	the	Pannion	Seer	had	lusted	for	its	death.	Toc	recalled	the	cage,	that
spiritual	prison,	and	the	torment	as	his	body	was	broken,	healed,	then	broken
yet	again,	a	procession	seemingly	without	end.	But	these	memories	and	pain
and	anguish	persisted	as	little	more	than	abstract	notions.	Yet,	mangled	and
twisted	as	that	body	had	been,	at	least	it	was	mine.
Strip	away	years,	course	sudden	in	new	blood,	feel	these	strange	limbs	so
vulnerable	to	cold.	To	awaken	in	another ’s	flesh,	to	start	against	muscle
memories,	to	struggle	with	those	that	were	suddenly	gone.	Toc	wondered	if
any	other	mortal	soul	had	ever	before	staggered	this	tortured	path.	Stone	and
fire	had	marked	him,	as	Tool	once	told	him.	To	lose	an	eye	delivers	the	gift	of
preternatural	sight.	And	what	of	leaving	a	used-up	body	for	a	younger,
healthier	one?	Surely	a	gift	–	so	the	wolves	desired,	or	was	it	Silverfox?
But	wait.	A	closer	look	at	this	Anaster	–	who	lost	an	eye,	was	given	a	new
one,	then	lost	it	yet	again.	Whose	mind	–	before	it	was	broken	and	flung	away	–
was	twisted	with	terror,	haunted	by	a	mother’s	terrible	love;	who	had	lived	the


life	of	a	tyrant	among	cannibals	–	oh	yes,	look	closely	at	these	limbs,	the
muscles	beneath,	and	remember	–	this	body	has	grown	with	the	eating	of	human
flesh.	And	this	mouth,	so	eager	with	its	words,	it	has	tasted	the	succulent	juices
of	its	kin	–	remember	that?
No,	he	could	not.
But	the	body	can.	It	knows	hunger	and	desire	on	the	battlefield	–	walking
among	the	dead	and	dying,	seeing	the	split	flesh,	the	jutting	bones,	smelling	the
reek	of	spilled	blood	–	ah,	how	the	mouth	waters.
Well,	everyone	had	his	secrets.	And	few	are	worth	sharing.	Unless	you
enjoy	losing	friends.
He	rode	apart	from	the	train,	ostensibly	taking	an	outrider	flank,	as	he	had
done	as	a	soldier,	long	ago.	The	Awl	army	of	Redmask,	fourteen	thousand	or
so	warriors,	half	again	as	many	in	the	trailing	support	train	–	weaponsmiths,
healers,	horsewives,	elders,	old	women,	the	lame	and	the	once-born	children,
and,	of	course,	twenty	or	so	thousand	rodara.	Along	with	wagons,	travois,	and
almost	three	thousand	herd	dogs	and	the	larger	wolf-hunters	the	Awl	called
dray.	If	anything	could	trigger	cold	fear	in	Toc	it	was	these	beasts.	Too	many
by	far,	and	rarely	fed,	they	ranged	in	packs,	running	down	every	creature	on
the	plains	for	leagues	around.
But	let	us	not	forget	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Living,	breathing	ones.	Tool	–
or	perhaps	it	was	Lady	Envy	–	had	told	him	that	they	had	been	extinct	for
thousands	of	years	–	tens,	hundreds	of	thousands,	even.	Their	civilization	was
dust.	And	wounds	in	the	sky	that	never	heal;	now	there’s	a	detail	worth
remembering,	Toc.
The	huge	creatures	provided	Redmask’s	bodyguard	at	the	head	of	the
vanguard	–	no	risk	of	assassination,	to	be	sure.	The	male	–	Sag’Churok	–	was
a	K’ell	Hunter,	bred	to	kill,	the	elite	guard	of	a	Matron.	So	where	is	the
Matron?	Where	is	his	Queen?
Perhaps	it	was	the	young	female	in	the	K’ell’s	company.	Gunth	Mach.	Toc
had	asked	Redmask	how	he	had	come	to	know	their	names,	but	the	war	leader
had	refused	him	an	answer.	Reticent	bastard.	A	leader	must	have	his	secrets,
perhaps	more	so	than	anyone	else.	But	Redmask’s	secrets	are	driving	me	mad.
K’Chain	Che’Malle,	for	Hood’s	sake!
Outcast,	the	young	warrior	had	journeyed	into	the	eastern	wastelands.	So
went	the	tale,	although	after	that	initial	statement	it	was	a	tale	that	in	truth	went
nowhere,	since	virtually	nothing	else	was	known	of	Redmask’s	adventures
during	those	decades	–	yet	at	some	point,	this	man	donned	a	red-scaled	mask.
And	found	himself	flesh	and	blood	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Who	did	not	chop	him
to	pieces.	Who	somehow	communicated	to	him	their	names.	Then	swore


allegiance.	What	is	it,	then,	about	this	story	that	I	really	do	not	like?
How	about	all	of	it.
The	eastern	wastelands.	A	typical	description	for	a	place	the	name-givers
found	inhospitable	or	unconquerable.	We	can’t	claim	it	so	it	is	worthless,	a
wasted	land,	a	wasteland.	Hah,	and	you	thought	us	without	imaginations!
Haunted	by	ghosts,	or	demons,	the	earth	blasted,	where	every	blade	of
grass	clings	to	a	neighbour	in	abject	terror.	The	sun’s	light	is	darker,	its
warmth	colder.	Shadows	are	smudged.	Water	brackish	and	quite	possibly
poisonous.	Two-headed	babies	are	common.	Every	tribe	needed	such	a	place.
For	heroic	war	leaders	to	wander	into	on	some	fraught	quest	rife	with	obscure
motivations	that	could	easily	be	bludgeoned	into	morality	tales.	And,	alas,	this
particular	tale	is	far	from	done.	The	hero	needs	to	return,	to	deliver	his	people.
Or	annihilate	them.
Toc	had	his	memories,	a	whole	battlefield’s	worth,	and	as	the	last	man	left
standing	he	held	few	illusions	of	grandeur,	either	as	witness	or	as	player.	So
this	lone	eye	cannot	help	but	look	askance.	Is	it	any	wonder	I’ve	taken	to
poetry?
The	Grey	Swords	had	been	cut	to	pieces.	Slaughtered.	Oh,	they’d	yielded
their	lives	in	blood	enough	to	pay	the	Hound’s	Toll,	as	the	Gadrobi	were	wont
to	say.	But	what	had	their	deaths	meant?	Nothing.	A	waste.	Yet	here	he	rode,	in
the	company	of	his	betrayers.
Does	Redmask	offer	redemption?	He	promises	the	defeat	of	the	Letherii	–
but	they	were	not	our	enemies,	not	until	we	agreed	the	contract.	So,	what	is
redeemed?	The	extinction	of	the	Grey	Swords?	Oh,	I	need	to	twist	and	bend	to
bind	those	two	together,	and	how	am	I	doing	thus	far?
Badly.	Not	a	whisper	of	righteousness	–	no	crow	croaks	on	my	shoulder	as
we	march	to	war.
Oh,	Tool,	I	could	use	your	friendship	right	now.	A	few	terse	words	on
futility	to	cheer	me	up.
Twenty	myrid	had	been	killed,	gutted	and	skinned	but	not	hung	to	drain
their	blood.	The	cavities	where	their	organs	had	been	were	stuffed	solid	with	a
local	tuber	that	had	been	sweated	on	hot	stones.	The	carcasses	were	then
wrapped	in	hides	and	loaded	into	a	wagon	that	was	kept	apart	from	all	the
others	in	the	train.	Redmask’s	plans	for	the	battle	to	come.	No	more	peculiar
than	all	the	others.	The	man	has	spent	years	thinking	on	this	inevitable	war.
That	makes	me	nervous.
Hey,	Tool,	you’d	think	after	all	I’ve	been	through,	I’d	have	no	nerves	left.
But	I’m	no	Whiskeyjack.	Or	Kalam.	No,	for	me,	it	just	gets	worse.
Marching	to	war.	Again.	Seems	the	world	wants	me	to	be	a	soldier.


Well,	the	world	can	go	fuck	itself.
	
‘A	haunted	man,’	the	elder	said	in	his	broken	growl	as	he	reached	up	and
scratched	the	savage	red	scar	marring	his	neck.	‘He	should	not	be	with	us.	Fey
in	darkness,	that	one.	He	dreams	of	running	with	wolves.’
Redmask	shrugged,	wondering	yet	again	what	this	old	man	wanted	with
him.	An	elder	who	did	not	fear	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	who	was	so	bold	as	to
guide	his	ancient	horse	between	Redmask	and	Sag’Churok.
‘You	should	have	killed	him.’
‘I	do	not	ask	for	your	advice,	Elder,’	Redmask	said.	‘He	is	owed	respite.
We	must	redeem	our	people	in	his	eyes.’
‘Pointless,’	the	old	man	snapped.	‘Kill	him	and	we	need	redeem	ourselves
to	no-one.	Kill	him	and	we	are	free.’
‘One	cannot	flee	the	past.’
‘Indeed?	That	belief	must	taste	bitter	for	one	such	as	you,	Redmask.	Best
discard	it.’
Redmask	slowly	faced	the	man.	‘Of	me,	Elder,	you	know	nothing.’
A	twisted	smile.	‘Alas,	I	do.	You	do	not	recognize	me,	Redmask.	You
should.’
‘You	are	Renfayar	–	my	tribe.	You	share	blood	with	Masarch.’
‘Yes,	but	more	than	that.	I	am	old.	Do	you	understand?	I	am	the	oldest
among	our	people,	the	last	one	left…who	was	there,	who	remembers.
Everything.’	The	smile	broadened,	revealing	rotted	teeth,	a	pointed	red	–
almost	purple	–	tongue.	‘I	know	your	secret,	Redmask.	I	know	what	she	meant
to	you,	and	I	know	why.’	The	eyes	glittered,	black	and	red-rimmed.	‘You	had
best	fear	me,	Redmask.	You	had	best	heed	my	words	–	my	advice.	I	shall	ride
your	shoulder,	yes?	From	this	moment	on,	until	the	very	day	of	battle.	And	I
shall	speak	with	the	voice	of	the	Awl,	my	voice	the	voice	of	their	souls.	And
know	this,	Redmask:	I	shall	not	countenance	their	betrayal.	Not	by	you,	not	by
that	one-eyed	stranger	and	his	bloodthirsty	wolves.’
Redmask	studied	the	old	man	a	moment	longer,	then	fixed	his	gaze	ahead
once	more.
A	soft,	ragged	laugh	at	his	side,	then,	‘You	dare	say	nothing.	You	dare	do
nothing.	I	am	a	dagger	hovering	over	your	heart.	Do	not	fear	me	–	there	is	no
need,	unless	you	intend	evil.	I	wish	you	great	glory	in	this	war.	I	wish	the	end
of	the	Letherii,	for	all	time.	Perhaps	such	glory	shall	come	by	your	hand	–
together,	you	and	I,	let	us	strive	for	that,	yes?’
A	long	moment	of	silence.


‘Speak,	Redmask,’	the	elder	growled.	‘Lest	I	suspect	defiance.’
‘An	end	to	the	Letherii,	yes,’	Redmask	finally	said,	in	a	grating	voice.
‘Victory	for	the	Awl.’
‘Good,’	grunted	the	old	man.	‘Good.’
	
The	magic	world	had	ended	abruptly,	an	ending	as	sudden	as	the	slamming	of	a
trunk	lid	–	a	sound	that	had	always	shocked	her,	frozen	her	in	place.	Back	in	the
city,	that	place	of	reeks	and	noise,	there	had	been	a	house	steward,	a	tyrant,	who
would	hunt	down	slave	children	who	had,	in	his	words,	disappointed	him.	A
night	spent	in	the	musty	confines	of	the	bronze	box	would	teach	them	a	thing
or	two,	wouldn’t	it?
Stayandi	had	spent	one	such	night,	enclosed	in	cramped	darkness,	two
months	or	so	before	the	slaves	joined	the	colonists	out	on	the	plain.	The	solid
clunk	of	the	lid	had	truly	seemed,	then,	the	end	of	the	world.	Her	shrieks	had
filled	the	close	air	of	the	trunk	until	something	broke	in	her	throat,	until	every
scream	was	naught	but	a	hiss	of	air.
Since	that	time,	she	had	been	mute,	yet	this	had	proved	a	gift,	for	she	had
been	selected	to	enter	the	Mistress’s	domain	as	a	handmaiden	in	training.	No
secrets	would	pass	her	lips,	after	all.	And	she	would	have	been	there	still,	if	not
for	the	homesteading.
A	magic	world.	So	much	space,	so	much	air.	The	freedom	of	blue	skies,
unending	wind	and	darkness	lit	by	countless	stars	–	she	had	not	imagined	such
a	world	existed,	all	within	reach.
And	then	one	night,	it	ended.	A	fierce	nightmare	made	real	in	screams	of
slaughter.
Abasard—
She	had	fled	into	the	darkness,	stunned	with	the	knowledge	of	his	death	–
her	brother,	who	had	flung	himself	into	the	demon’s	path,	who	had	died	in	her
place.	Her	bared	feet,	feather-light,	carrying	her	away,	the	hiss	of	grasses	soon
the	only	sound	to	reach	her	ears.	Stars	glittering,	the	plain	bathed	silver,	the
wind	cooling	the	sweat	on	her	skin.
In	her	mind,	her	feet	carried	her	across	an	entire	continent.	Away	from	the
realm	of	people,	of	slaves	and	masters,	of	herds	and	soldiers	and	demons.	She
was	alone	now,	witness	to	a	succession	of	dawns,	smeared	sunsets,	alone	on	a
plain	that	stretched	out	unbroken	on	all	sides.	She	saw	wild	creatures,	always	at
a	distance.	Darting	hares,	antelope	watching	from	ridgelines,	hawks	wheeling
in	the	sky.	At	night	she	heard	the	howl	of	wolves	and	coyotes	and,	once,	the
guttural	bellow	of	a	bear.


She	did	not	eat,	and	the	pangs	of	hunger	soon	passed,	so	that	she	floated,
and	all	that	her	eyes	witnessed	shone	with	a	luminous	clarity.	Water	she	licked
from	dew-laden	grasses,	the	cupped	holes	of	deer	and	elk	tracks	in	basins,	and
once	she	found	a	spring,	almost	hidden	by	thick	brush	in	which	flitted	hundreds
of	tiny	birds.	It	had	been	their	chittering	songs	that	had	drawn	her	attention.
An	eternity	of	running	later,	she	had	fallen.	And	found	no	strength	to	rise
once	more,	to	resume	the	wondrous	journey	through	this	glowing	land.
Night	then	stole	upon	her,	and	not	long	after	came	the	four-legged	people.
They	wore	furs	smelling	of	wind	and	dust,	and	they	gathered	close,	lying
down,	sharing	the	warmth	of	their	thick,	soft	cloaks.	There	were	children
among	them,	tiny	babes	that	crawled	as	did	their	parents,	squirming	and
snuggling	up	against	her.
And	when	they	fed	on	milk,	so	did	Stayandi.
The	four-legged	people	were	as	mute	as	she	was,	until	they	began	their
mournful	cries,	when	night	was	at	its	deepest;	crying	–	she	knew	–	to	summon
the	sun.
They	stayed	with	her,	guardians	with	their	gifts	of	warmth	and	food.	After
the	milk,	there	was	meat.	Crushed,	mangled	carcasses	–	mice,	shrews,	a
headless	snake	–	she	ate	all	they	gave	her,	tiny	bones	crunching	in	her	mouth,
damp	fur	and	chewy	skin.
This	too	seemed	timeless,	a	foreverness.	The	grown-ups	came	and	went.
The	children	grew	burlier,	and	she	now	crawled	with	them	when	it	was	time	to
wander.
When	the	bear	appeared	and	rushed	towards	them,	she	was	not	afraid.	It
wanted	the	children,	that	much	was	obvious,	but	the	grown-ups	attacked	and
drove	it	off.	Her	people	were	strong,	fearless.	They	ruled	this	world.
Until	one	morning	she	awoke	to	find	herself	alone.	Forcing	herself	to	her
hind	legs,	helpless	whimpering	coming	from	her	throat	in	jolts	of	pain,	she
scanned	the	land	in	all	directions—
And	saw	the	giant.	Bare	above	the	waist,	the	deep	hue	of	sun-darkened	skin
almost	entirely	obscured	beneath	white	paint	–	paint	that	transformed	his	chest,
shoulders	and	face	into	bone.	His	eyes,	as	he	walked	closer,	were	black	pits	in
the	caked	mask	skull.	He	carried	weapons:	a	long	spear,	a	sword	with	a	broad,
curved	blade.	The	fur	of	the	four-legged	people	was	wrapped	about	his	hips,
and	the	small	but	deadly	knives	strung	in	a	necklace	about	the	warrior ’s	neck,
they	too	belonged	to	her	people.
Frightened,	angry,	she	bared	her	teeth	at	the	stranger,	even	as	she	cowered
in	the	fold	of	a	small	hummock	–	nowhere	to	run,	knowing	he	could	catch	her
effortlessly.	Knowing	that	yet	another	of	her	worlds	had	shattered.	Fear	was


her	bronze	box,	and	she	was	trapped,	unable	to	move.
He	studied	her	for	a	time,	cocking	his	head	as	she	snapped	and	snarled.
Then	slowly	crouched	down	until	his	eyes	were	level	with	her	own.
And	she	fell	silent.
Remembering…things.
They	were	not	kind	eyes,	but	they	were	–	she	knew	–	like	her	own.	As	was
his	hairless	face	beneath	that	deathly	paint.
She	had	run	away,	she	now	recalled,	until	it	seemed	her	fleeing	mind	had
outstripped	her	flesh	and	bone,	had	darted	out	into	something	unknown	and
unknowable.
And	this	savage	face,	across	from	her,	was	slowly	bringing	her	mind	back.
And	she	understood,	now,	who	the	four-legged	people	were,	what	they	were.
She	remembered	what	it	was	to	stand	upright,	to	run	with	two	legs	instead	of
four.	She	remembered	an	encampment,	the	digging	of	cellar	pits,	the	first	of
the	sod-walled	houses.	She	remembered	her	family	–	her	brother	–	and	the
night	the	demons	came	to	steal	it	all	away.
After	a	time	of	mutual	silent	regard,	he	straightened,	settled	the	weapons
and	gear	about	himself	once	more,	then	set	out.
She	hesitated,	then	rose.
And,	at	a	distance,	she	followed.
He	walked	towards	the	rising	sun.
	
Scratching	at	the	scarred,	gaping	hole	where	one	eye	had	been,	Toc	watched
the	children	running	back	and	forth	as	the	first	cookfires	were	lit.	Elders
hobbled	about	with	iron	pots	and	wrapped	foodstuffs	–	they	were	wiry,
weathered	folk,	but	days	of	marching	had	dulled	the	fire	in	their	eyes,	and
more	than	a	few	snapped	at	the	young	ones	who	passed	too	close.
He	saw	Redmask,	trailed	by	Masarch	and	Natarkas	and	another	bearing	the
red	face-paint,	appear	near	the	area	laid	out	for	the	war	leader ’s	yurt.	Seeing
Toc,	Redmask	approached.
‘Tell	me,	Toc	Anaster,	you	flanked	our	march	on	the	north	this	day	–	did
you	see	tracks?’
‘What	sort	do	you	mean?’
Redmask	turned	to	Natarkas’s	companion.	‘Torrent	rode	to	the	south.	He
made	out	a	trail	that	followed	an	antelope	track	–	a	dozen	men	on	foot—’
‘Or	more,’	the	one	named	Torrent	said.	‘They	were	skilled.’
‘Not	Letherii,	then,’	Toc	guessed.
‘Moccasined,’	Redmask	replied,	his	tone	betraying	slight	irritation	at


Torrent’s	interruption.	‘Tall,	heavy.’
‘I	noted	nothing	like	that,’	said	Toc.	‘Although	I	admit	I	was	mostly
scanning	horizon	lines.’
‘This	place	shall	be	our	camp,’	Redmask	said	after	a	moment.	‘We	will
meet	the	Letherii	three	leagues	from	here,	in	the	valley	known	as	Bast	Fulmar.
Toc	Anaster,	will	you	stay	with	the	elders	and	children	or	accompany	us?’
‘I	have	had	my	fill	of	fields	of	battle,	Redmask.	I	said	I’d	found	myself	a
soldier	again,	but	even	an	army’s	train	needs	guards,	and	that	is	about	all	I	am
up	to	right	now.’	He	shrugged.	‘Maybe	from	now	on.’
The	eyes	in	that	scaled	mask	held	on	Toc	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then
slowly	turned	away.	‘Torrent,	you	too	will	stay	here.’
The	warrior	stiffened	in	surprise.	‘War	Leader—’
‘You	will	begin	training	those	children	who	are	close	to	their	death	nights.
Bows,	knives.’
Torrent	bowed,	stiffly.	‘As	you	command.’
Redmask	left	them,	trailed	by	Natarkas	and	Masarch.
Torrent	glanced	over	at	Toc.	‘My	courage	is	not	broken,’	he	said.
‘You’re	young	still,’	he	replied.
‘You	will	oversee	the	younger	children,	Toc	Anaster.	That	and	nothing
more.	You	will	keep	them	and	yourself	out	of	my	way.’
Toc	had	had	enough	of	this	man.	‘Torrent,	you	rode	at	your	old	war
leader ’s	side	when	you	Awl	abandoned	us	to	the	Letherii	army.	Be	careful	of
your	bold	claims	of	courage.	And	when	I	came	to	you	and	pleaded	for	the	lives
of	my	soldiers,	you	turned	away	with	the	rest	of	them.	I	believe	Redmask	has
just	taken	your	measure,	Torrent,	and	if	I	hear	another	threat	from	you	I	will
give	you	reason	to	curse	me	–	with	what	will	be	your	last	breath.’
The	warrior	bared	his	teeth	in	a	humourless	smile.	‘All	I	see	in	that	lone
eye,	Toc	Anaster,	tells	me	you	are	already	cursed.’	He	pivoted	and	walked
away.
Well,	the	bastard	has	a	point.	So	maybe	I’m	not	as	good	at	this	give	and
take	as	I	imagined	myself	to	be.	For	these	Awl,	it	is	a	way	of	life,	after	all.	Then
again,	the	Malazan	armies	are	pretty	good	at	it,	too	–	no	wonder	I	never	really
fit.
A	half-dozen	children	hurried	past,	trailed	by	a	mud-smeared	toddler
struggling	to	keep	up.	Seeing	the	chattering	mob	vanish	round	a	tent,	the
toddler	halted,	then	let	out	a	wail.
Toc	grunted.	Aye,	you	and	me	both.
He	made	a	rude	sound	and	the	toddler	looked	over,	eyes	wide.	Then
laughed.


Eye	socket	fiercely	itching	once	more,	Toc	scratched	for	a	moment,	then
headed	over,	issuing	yet	another	rude	noise.	Oh,	look	at	that	–	innocent	delight.
Well,	Toc,	take	your	rewards	where	and	when	you	can.
	
Redmask	stood	at	the	very	edge	of	the	sprawling	encampment,	studying	the
horizon	to	the	south.	‘Someone	is	out	there,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.
‘So	it	seems,’	Natarkas	said.	‘Strangers	–	who	walk	our	land	as	if	they
owned	it.	War	Leader,	you	have	wounded	Torrent—’
‘Torrent	must	learn	the	value	of	respect.	And	so	he	will,	as	weapon	master
to	a	score	of	restless	adolescents.	When	next	he	joins	us,	he	will	be	a	wiser
man.	Do	you	challenge	my	decisions,	Natarkas?’
‘Challenge?	No,	War	Leader.	But	at	times	I	will	probe	them,	if	I	find	the
need	to	understand	them	better.’
Redmask	nodded,	then	said	to	the	warrior	standing	a	short	distance	away,
‘Heed	those	words,	Masarch.’
‘So	I	shall,’	the	young	warrior	replied.
‘Tomorrow,’	said	Redmask,	‘I	lead	my	warriors	to	war.	Bast	Fulmar.’
Natarkas	hissed,	then	said,	‘A	cursed	valley.’
‘We	will	honour	the	blood	spilled	there	three	hundred	years	ago,	Natarkas.
The	past	will	die	there,	and	from	there	on	we	shall	look	only	to	a	new	future.
New	in	every	way.’
‘This	new	way	of	fighting,	War	Leader,	I	see	little	honour	in	it.’
‘You	speak	true.	There	is	none	to	be	found.	Such	is	necessity.’
‘Must	necessity	be	surrender?’
Redmask	looked	across	at	the	warrior	whose	face	was	painted	in	the
likeness	of	his	own	mask.	‘When	the	ways	surrendered	hold	naught	but	the
promise	of	failure,	then	yes.	It	must	be	done.	They	must	be	cast	away.’
‘The	elders	will	find	that	difficult	to	accept,	War	Leader.’
‘I	know.	You	and	I	have	played	this	game	before.	This	is	not	their	war.	It	is
mine.	And	I	mean	to	win	it.’
They	were	silent	then,	as	the	wind,	a	dirge	through	dead	grasses,	moaned
ghostly	across	the	land.


Chapter	Eleven

Sea	without	water
spreads	white	bones
crumbled	flat	and	bleached
like	parchment
where	I	walked.
But	this	scrawl
scratching	my	wake
is	without	history
bereft	of	raiment
to	clothe	my	fate.
Sky	has	lost	its	clouds
to	some	ragged	wind
that	never	runs	aground
these	shoals	revealed
on	paths	untrod.
Wind	heaves	waves
unseen	in	the	shell
a	cup	of	promise	unfulfilled
the	rank	lie	of	salt
that	bites	my	tongue.
I	dwelt	by	a	sea,	once
etching	histories
along	the	endless	strand
in	rolling	scrolls
of	flotsam	and	weed.
Rumours	of	the	Sea
Fisher	kel	Tath


There	had	been	rain	in	the	afternoon,	which	was	just	as	well	since	there	wasn’t
much	value	in	burning	the	entire	forest	down	and	besides,	he	wasn’t	popular	at
the	best	of	times.	They	had	mocked	his	antics,	and	they	had	said	he	stank,	too,
so	much	so	that	no-one	ever	came	within	reach	of	his	huge,	gnarled	hands.	Of
course,	had	any	of	his	neighbours	done	so,	he	might	well	have	torn	their	limbs
off	to	answer	years	of	scorn	and	abuse.
Old	Hunch	Arbat	no	longer	pulled	his	cart	from	farm	to	farm,	from	shack
to	shack,	collecting	the	excrement	with	which	he	buried	the	idols	of	the
Tarthenal	gods	that	had	commanded	a	mostly	forgotten	glade	deep	in	the
woods.	The	need	had	passed,	after	all.	The	damned	hoary	nightmares	were
dead.
His	neighbours	had	not	appreciated	Arbat’s	sudden	retirement,	since	now
the	stink	of	their	wastes	had	begun	to	foul	their	own	homes.	Lazy	wastrels	that
they	were,	they	weren’t	of	a	mind	to	deepen	their	cesspits	–	didn’t	Old	Hunch
empty	them	out	on	a	regular	basis?	Well,	not	any	more.
That	alone	might	have	been	reason	enough	to	light	out.	And	Arbat	would
have	liked	nothing	better	than	to	just	vanish	into	the	forest	gloom,	never	to	be
seen	again.	Walk	far,	yes,	until	he	came	to	a	hamlet	or	village	where	none	knew
him,	where	none	even	knew	of	him.	Rainwashed	of	all	odour,	just	some	kindly,
harmless	old	mixed-blood	Tarthenal	who	could,	for	a	coin	or	two,	mend
broken	things,	including	flesh	and	bone.
Walk,	then.	Leaving	behind	the	old	Tarthenal	territories,	away	from	the
weed-snagged	statues	in	the	overgrown	glades.	And	maybe,	even,	away	from
the	ancient	blood	of	his	heritage.	Not	all	healers	were	shamans,	were	they?
They’d	not	ask	any	awkward	questions,	so	long	as	he	treated	them	right,	and	he
could	do	that,	easy.
Old	bastards	like	him	deserved	their	rest.	A	lifetime	of	service.
Propitiations,	the	Masks	of	Dreaming,	the	leering	faces	of	stone,	the	solitary
rituals	–	all	done,	now.	He	could	walk	his	last	walk,	into	the	unknown.	A
hamlet,	a	village,	a	sun-warmed	boulder	beside	a	trickling	stream,	where	he
could	settle	back	and	ease	his	tortured	frame	and	not	move,	until	the	final	mask
was	pulled	away…
Instead,	he	had	woken	in	darkness,	in	the	moments	before	false	dawn,
shaking	as	if	afflicted	with	ague,	and	before	his	eyes	had	hovered	the	slowly
shredding	fragments	of	a	most	unexpected	Dream	Mask.	One	he	had	never
seen	before,	yet	a	visage	of	terrifying	power.	A	mask	crazed	with	cracks,	a
mask	moments	from	shattering	explosively—
Lying	on	his	cot,	the	wood	frame	creaking	beneath	him	as	he	trembled
from	head	to	foot,	he	waited	for	revelation.


The	sun	was	high	overhead	when	he	finally	emerged	from	his	shack.
Banks	of	clouds	climbed	the	sky	to	the	west	–	an	almost-spent	storm	coming	in
from	the	sea	–	and	he	set	about	his	preparations,	ignoring	the	rain	when	it
arrived.
Now,	with	dusk	fast	approaching,	Arbat	collected	a	bundled	cane	of	rushes
and	set	one	end	aflame	from	the	hearth.	He	fired	his	shack,	then	the	woodshed,
and	finally	the	old	barn	wherein	resided	his	two-wheeled	cart.	Then,	satisfied
that	each	building	was	truly	alight,	he	shouldered	the	sack	containing	those
possessions	and	supplies	he	would	need,	and	set	out	onto	the	trail	leading	down
to	the	road.
A	grunt	of	surprise	a	short	time	later,	on	the	road,	as	he	ran	into	a	score	of
villagers	hurrying	in	a	mob	towards	him.	In	their	lead,	the	Factor,	who	cried
out	in	relief	upon	seeing	Arbat.
‘Thank	the	Errant	you’re	alive,	Hunch!’
Scowling,	Arbat	studied	the	man’s	horsey	face	for	a	moment,	then	scanned
the	pale	smudges	of	the	other	faces,	hovering	behind	the	Factor.	‘What	is	all
this?’	he	demanded.
‘A	troop	of	Edur	are	staying	at	the	inn	tonight,	Arbat.	When	word	of	the
fires	reached	them	they	insisted	we	head	up	to	help	–	in	case	the	wood	goes	up,
you	see—’
‘The	wood,	right.	So	where	are	the	meddlers	now,	then?’
‘They	remained	behind,	of	course.	But	I	was	ordered—’	the	Factor	paused,
then	leaned	closer	to	peer	up	at	Arbat.	‘Was	it	Vrager,	then?	The	fool	likes	his
fires,	and	is	no	friend	of	yours.’
‘Vrager?	Could	be.	He’s	been	in	the	habit	of	sneaking	in	at	night	and
pissing	on	my	door.	Doesn’t	accept	me	being	retired	and	all.	Says	I	got	a	duty
to	cart	away	his	shit.’
‘And	so	you	do!’	someone	growled	from	the	mob	behind	the	Factor.	‘Why
else	do	we	let	you	live	here	anyway?’
‘Well	that’s	a	problem	solved	now,	ain’t	it?’	Arbat	said,	grinning.	‘Vrager
burned	me	out,	so	I’m	leaving.’	He	hesitated,	then	asked,	‘What	business	was
this	of	the	Edur?	It’s	just	done	rained	–	the	chances	of	the	blaze	moving	much
ain’t	worth	the	worry.	Didn’t	you	tell	them	my	place	is	cleared	back	eighty,	a
hundred	paces	on	all	sides?	And	there’s	the	old	settling	pools	–	good	as	a
moat.’
The	Factor	shrugged,	then	said,	‘They	asked	about	you,	then	decided
maybe	someone	had	torched	you	out	of	spite	–	and	that’s	breaking	the	law	and
the	Edur	don’t	like	it	when	that	happens—’
‘And	they	told	you	to	do	your	job,	did	they?’	Arbat	laughed	at	the	man.


‘That’d	be	a	first!’
‘Vrager,	you	said	–	is	that	a	formal	accusation,	Arbat?	If	it	is,	you	gotta
dictate	and	make	your	mark	and	stay	round	for	the	convening	and	if	Vrager
hires	an	advocate—’
‘Vrager ’s	got	a	cousin	in	Letheras	who’s	just	that,’	someone	said.
The	Factor	nodded.	‘All	this	could	take	a	damned	while,	Arbat,	and	ain’t
none	of	us	obliged	to	give	you	a	roof	overhead,	neither—’
‘So	best	I	don’t	cause	trouble,	right?	You	can	tell	the	Edur	I	wasn’t	making
no	formal	complaint,	so	that’s	that.	And	what	with	the	shacks	pretty	much	burnt
down	by	now	and	the	chill	seeping	into	your	bones	and	no	sign	the	fire’s
jumped	anywhere…’	Arbat	slapped	the	Factor	on	the	shoulder	–	a	gesture	that
nearly	drove	the	man	to	his	knees	–	then	stepped	past.	‘Make	way,	the	rest	of
you	–	could	be	I’m	still	contagious	with	all	the	sick	you	been	dumping	in	my
cart.’
That	worked	readily	enough,	and	Arbat’s	way	was	suddenly	clear.	And	on
he	walked.
They’d	give	Vrager	some	trouble	–	not	good	calling	down	the	Edur ’s
regard,	after	all	–	but	it’d	be	nothing	fatal.	Pissing	against	a	door	don’t	forfeit
the	fool’s	life,	now	did	it?	Anyway,	the	Edur	would	ride	on,	to	wherever	it	was
they	were	going,	and	he’d	leave	them—
What	now?	Horses	on	the	road,	riders	coming	at	the	canter.	Grumbling
under	his	breath,	Old	Hunch	Arbat	worked	his	way	to	one	verge,	then	waited.
Another	damned	troop.	Letherii	this	time.
The	lead	rider,	an	officer,	slowed	her	mount	upon	seeing	Arbat,	and	the
troop	behind	her	did	the	same	at	her	command.	As	she	trotted	her	horse	closer,
she	called	out,	‘You,	sir	–	is	there	a	village	ahead?’
‘There	is,’	Arbat	replied,	‘though	you	might	have	to	fight	for	room	at	the
inn.’
‘And	why’s	that?’	she	asked	as	she	rode	opposite.
‘Some	Edur	staying	the	night	there.’
At	that	the	officer	reined	in,	gesturing	the	rest	to	a	halt.	Twisting	in	her
saddle,	she	eyed	him	from	beneath	the	ridge	of	her	iron	helm.	‘Tiste	Edur?’
‘That’s	them	all	right.’
‘What	are	they	doing	there?’
Before	he	could	answer,	one	of	her	soldiers	said,	‘Atri-Preda,	something’s
blazing	ahead	–	y’can	see	the	glow	and	smell	it.’
‘That’d	be	my	homestead,’	Arbat	replied.	‘Accident.	It	won’t	spread,	I’m
sure	of	that	as	can	be.	Got	nothing	to	do,’	he	added,	‘with	them	Edur.	They’re
just	passing	through.’


The	Atri-Preda	swore	under	her	breath.	‘Tarthenal,	yes?’
‘Mostly.’
‘Can	you	think	of	anywhere	we	can	camp	for	the	night,	then?	Close	by,	but
well	off	the	trail.’
Arbat	squinted	at	her.	‘Off	the	trail,	eh?	Far	enough	off	so’s	your	privacy
ain’t	disturbed,	you	mean?’
She	nodded.
Arbat	rubbed	at	the	bristly	hair	covering	his	prognathous	jaw.	‘Forty	or	so
paces	up	there’s	a	trail,	right	side	of	the	road.	Leads	through	a	thicket,	then	an
old	orchard,	and	beyond	that	there’s	an	abandoned	homestead	–	barn’s	still	got
a	roof,	though	I	doubt	it’s	weatherproof.	There’s	a	well	too,	which	should	be
serviceable	enough.’
‘This	close	by,	and	no-one’s	occupied	it	or	stripped	it	down?’
Arbat	grinned.	‘Oh,	they’ll	get	to	that	before	long.	It	was	downwind	of	my
place,	you	see.’
‘No,	I	don’t.’
His	grin	broadened	into	a	smile.	‘Local	colour	kinda	pales	when	told	to
outsiders.	It’s	no	matter,	really.	All	you’ll	be	smelling	is	woodsmoke	this	night,
and	that’ll	keep	the	bugs	away.’
He	watched	as	she	thought	about	pressing	the	matter;	then,	as	her	horse
tossed	its	head,	she	gathered	the	reins	once	more.	‘Thank	you,	Tarthenal.	Be
safe	in	your	journey.’
‘And	you,	Atri-Preda.’
They	rode	on,	and	Arbat	waited	on	the	verge	for	the	troop	to	pass.
Safe	in	my	journey.	Yes,	safe	enough,	I	suppose.	Nothing	on	the	road	I	can’t
handle.
No,	it’s	the	destination	that’s	got	my	knees	knocking	together	like	two	skulls
in	a	sack.
	
Lying	on	his	stomach,	edging	up	to	the	trapdoor,	peering	down.	A	menagerie
in	the	room	below,	yet	comforting	in	its	odd	domesticity	nonetheless.	Why,	he
knew	artists	who	would	pay	for	such	a	scene.	Ten	hens	wandering	about,
occasionally	squawking	from	the	path	of	a	clumsily	swung	foot	from	Ublala
Pung	as	the	huge	man	paced	back	and	forth.	The	scholar	Janath	sitting	with	her
back	to	one	wall,	rolling	chicken	down	or	whatever	it	was	called	between	the
palms	of	her	hands,	prior	to	stuffing	it	into	a	burlap	sack	that	was	intended	to
serve	as	a	pillow	at	some	point	–	proving	beyond	all	doubt	that	academics
knew	nothing	about	anything	worth	knowing	about.	Not	to	mention	inserting	a


sliver	of	fear	that	Bugg’s	healing	of	her	mind	had	not	been	quite	up	to	scratch.
And	finally,	Bugg	himself,	crouched	by	the	hearth,	using	a	clawed	hen	foot	to
stir	the	steaming	pot	of	chicken	soup,	a	detail	which,	Tehol	admitted,	had	a
certain	macabre	undercurrent.	As	did	the	toneless	humming	coming	from	his
stalwart	manservant.
True	enough,	the	household	was	blessed	with	food	aplenty,	marking	the
continuation	of	their	good	run	of	luck.	Huge	capabara	fish	beside	the	canal	a
couple	of	weeks	back,	and	now	retired	hens	being	retired	one	by	one,	as
inexorable	as	the	growl	of	a	stomach.	Or	two	or	three.	Or	four,	assuming
Ublala	Pung	had	but	one	stomach	which	was	not	in	any	way	certain.	Selush
might	know,	having	dressed	enough	bodies	from	the	inside	out.	Tarthenal	had
more	organs	in	those	enormous	bodies	than	regular	folk,	after	all.	Alas,	this
trait	did	not	extend	to	brains.
Yet	another	formless,	ineffable	worry	was	afflicting	Ublala	Pung.	Could	be
lovestruck	again,	or	struck	to	fear	by	love.	The	half-blood	lived	in	a	world	of
worry,	which,	all	things	considered,	was	rather	surprising.	Then	again,	that
undeniable	virtue	between	his	legs	garnered	its	share	of	worshippers,	lighting
feminine	eyes	with	the	gleam	of	possession,	avarice,	malicious	competition	–
in	short,	all	those	traits	most	common	to	priesthoods.	But	it	was	worship	for
all	the	wrong	reasons,	as	poor	Ublala’s	fretful	state	of	mind	made	plain.	His
paltry	brain	wanted	to	be	loved	for	itself.
Making	him,	alas,	a	complete	idiot.
‘Ublala,’	Bugg	said	from	where	he	hovered	over	the	soup	pot,	‘glance
upward	for	me	if	you	will	to	confirm	that	those	beady	eyes	studying	us	belong
to	my	master.	If	so,	please	be	so	kind	as	to	invite	him	down	for	supper.’
Tall	as	he	was,	Ublala’s	face,	lifting	into	view	to	squint	upwards	at	Tehol,
was	within	reach.	Smiling	and	patting	him	on	the	head,	Tehol	said,	‘My	friend,
if	you	could,	step	back	from	what	serves	as	a	ladder	here	–	and	given	my
manservant’s	lacklustre	efforts	at	repair	I	am	using	the	description	advisedly	–
so	that	I	may	descend	in	a	manner	befitting	my	station.’
‘What?’
‘Get	out	of	the	way,	you	oaf!’
Ducking,	edging	away,	Ublala	grunted.	‘Why	is	he	so	miserable?’	he
asked,	jerking	a	thumb	up	at	Tehol.	‘The	world	is	about	to	end	but	does	he	care
about	that?	No.	He	doesn’t.	Care	about	that.	The	world	ending.	Does	he?’
Tehol	shifted	round	to	lead	with	his	feet	on	the	uppermost	rung	of	the
ladder.	‘Loquacious	Ublala	Pung,	how	ever	will	we	follow	the	track	of	your
thoughts?	I	despair.’	He	wiggled	over	the	edge	then	groped	with	his	feet.
Bugg	spoke.	‘Given	the	view	you	are	presently	providing	us,	master,


despair	is	indeed	the	word.	Best	look	away,	Janath.’
‘Too	late,’	she	replied.	‘To	my	horror.’
‘I	live	in	the	company	of	voyeurs!’	Tehol	managed	to	find	the	rung	with
one	foot	and	began	making	his	way	down.
‘I	thought	they	were	chickens,’	Ublala	said.
A	piercing	avian	cry,	ending	in	a	mangled	crunch.
‘Oh.’
Cursing	from	Bugg.	‘Damn	you,	Pung!	You’re	eating	that	one!	All	by
yourself!	And	you	can	cook	it	yourself,	too!’
‘It	just	got	in	the	way!	If	you	built	some	more	rooms,	Bugg,	it	wouldn’t
have	happened.’
‘And	if	you	did	your	damned	pacing	in	the	alley	outside	–	better	yet,	if	you
just	stopped	worrying	about	things	–	or	bringing	those	worries	here	–	or
always	showing	up	around	supper	time	–	or—’
‘Now	now,’	Tehol	interjected,	stepping	free	of	the	last	rung	and	adjusting
his	blanket.	‘Nerves	are	frayed	and	quarters	are	cramped	and	Ublala’s	cramped
brain	is	fraying	our	nerves	without	quarter,	so	it	would	be	best	if	we	all—’
‘Master,	he	just	flattened	a	hen!’
‘A	voyeur,’	Ublala	insisted.
‘—got	along,’	Tehol	finished.
‘Time,	I	think,’	said	Janath,	‘for	some	mitigation,	Tehol.	I	seem	to	recall
you	having	some	talent	for	that,	especially	working	your	way	around	the	many
attempts	at	expelling	you.’
‘Yeah,’	said	Ublala,	‘where	do	we	do	that?’
‘Do	what?’	Janath	asked.
‘I	gotta	go.’
‘Over	to	the	warehouse,’	Tehol	said,	pushing	Ublala	towards	the	door	–
without	much	success.	‘Ublala,	do	your	expelling	back	of	the	warehouse,	near
the	drain	spout.	Use	the	comfrey	bush	poking	out	of	the	rubbish	heap	then	wash
your	hands	in	the	tilted	trough.’
Looking	relieved,	the	huge	man	ducked	his	way	out	into	the	alley.
Turning,	Tehol	regarded	Bugg.	‘All	right,	a	moment	of	silence,	then,	for
the	retired	hen.’
Rubbing	his	brow,	Bugg	leaned	back	and	sighed.	‘Sorry.	I’m	not	used	to
these…crowds.’
‘What	amazes	me,’	Tehol	said,	now	studying	the	surviving	hens,	‘is	their
eerie	indifference.	They	just	walk	around	their	crushed	sister—’
‘Wait	a	moment	and	they’ll	start	ripping	it	apart,’	Bugg	said,	shambling
over	to	collect	the	carcass.	‘Between	the	two,	I	prefer	indifference.’	He	picked


the	limp	form	up,	frowned	at	the	dangling	neck.	‘Quiet	in	death,	as	with	all
things.	Almost	all	things,	I	mean…’	Abruptly	he	shook	his	head	and	tossed	the
dead	creature	onto	the	floor	in	front	of	Janath.	‘More	feathers	for	you,
Scholar.’
‘A	most	appropriate	task,’	Tehol	murmured,	‘plucking	lovely	plumage	to
reveal	the	pimpled	nightmare	beneath.’
‘Sort	of	like	inadvertently	looking	up	your	tunic,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘You	are	a	cruel	woman.’
She	paused	and	looked	up	at	him.	‘Assuming	those	were	just	pimples.’
‘Most	cruel,	leading	me	to	suspect	that	you	in	fact	fancy	me.’
Janath	shot	Bugg	a	glance.	‘What	kind	of	healing	did	you	do	on	me,	Bugg?
My	world	seems…smaller.’	She	tapped	one	temple.	‘In	here.	My	thoughts
travel	any	distance	–	any	distance	at	all	–	and	they	vanish	in	a…in	a	white
nothing.	Blissful	oblivion.	So,	I	do	remember	what	happened,	but	not	even	a
whisper	of	emotion	reaches	me.’
‘Janath,	most	of	those	protections	are	of	your	own	making.	Things	will…
expand.	But	it	will	take	time.	In	any	case,	it	is	not	too	surprising	that	you	are
developing	an	attachment	to	Tehol,	seeing	him	as	your	protector—’
‘Now	hold	on,	old	man!	Attachment?	To	Tehol?	To	an	ex-student?	That	is,
in	every	way	imaginable,	disgusting.’
‘I	thought	it	was	a	common	occurrence,’	Tehol	said.	‘Why,	some	of	the
stories	I’ve	heard—’
‘Common	for	those	fools	who	confuse	love	with	worship	–	all	to	feed
their	paltry	egos,	I	might	add.	Usually	men,	too.	Married	men.	It’s	pathetic—’
‘Janath,	did—No,	never	mind.’	Rubbing	his	hands	together,	Tehol	faced
Bugg.	‘My,	that	soup	smells	wonderful.’
Ublala	Pung	returned,	shouldering	his	way	through	the	doorway.	‘That
comfrey	tasted	awful,’	he	said.
The	three	stared	at	him	for	a	long	moment.
Then	Bugg	spoke.	‘See	those	half-gourds,	Ublala?	Bring	them	over	and
get	your	voyeur	soup.’
‘I	could	eat	a	whole	one	all	by	myself,	I’m	so	hungry.’
Tehol	pointed.	‘There’s	one	right	there,	Ublala.’
The	huge	man	paused,	glanced	over	at	the	bedraggled	carcass.	Then
pushed	the	gourds	into	Tehol’s	hands	and	said,	‘Okay.’
‘Leave	me	some	feathers?’	Janath	asked.
‘Okay.’
Tehol	said,	‘Do	you	mind,	Ublala,	if	the	rest	of	us	eat…uh,	up	on	the
roof?’


‘Go	ahead.’
‘After	supper,’	Tehol	continued	as	the	half-blood	lowered	himself	into	a
cross-legged	position,	reached	for	the	carcass	and	tore	off	a	leg.	‘After,	I
mean,	Ublala,	we	can	talk	about	what’s	worrying	you,	all	right?’
‘No	point	talking,’	Ublala	said	around	a	mouthful	of	feathers,	skin	and
meat.	‘I	got	to	take	you	to	him.’
‘Who?’
‘A	champion.	The	Toblakai.’
Tehol	met	Bugg’s	eyes,	and	saw	in	them	unfeigned	alarm.
‘We	got	to	break	into	the	compound,’	Ublala	continued.
‘Uh,	right.’
‘Then	make	sure	he	doesn’t	kill	us.’
‘I	thought	you	said	there	was	no	point	in	talking!’
‘I	did.	There	isn’t.’
Janath	collected	her	gourd	of	soup.	‘So	we	have	to	climb	one-handed	up
that	ladder?	And	I	expect	you	want	me	to	go	first?	Do	you	think	me	an	idiot?’
Tehol	scowled	at	her,	then	brightened.	‘You	have	a	choice,	Janath.	You
follow	me	and	Bugg,	at	the	risk	of	your	appetite,	or	we	follow	you,	lifting	you
skyward	with	our	sighs	of	admiration.’
‘How	about	neither?’	With	that,	she	headed	out	into	the	alley.
Horrible	crunching	sounds	came	from	where	Ublala	sat.	After	a	moment,
both	Tehol	and	Bugg	followed	in	Janath’s	wake.
	
Ormly,	once	Champion	Rat	Catcher,	sat	down	opposite	Rucket.
After	a	nod	of	greeting,	she	returned	to	her	meal.	‘I’d	offer	you	some	of
these	crisped	hog	ears,	but	as	you	can	see,	there’s	not	many	left	and	they	are
one	of	my	favourites.’
‘You	do	it	on	purpose,	don’t	you?’
‘Men	always	assume	beautiful	women	think	of	nothing	but	sex,	or,	rather,
are	obsessed	with	the	potential	thereof,	at	any	and	every	moment.	But	I	assure
you,	food	poses	a	sensuality	rarely	achieved	in	clumsy	gropings	on	some	fleabitten	mattress	with	errant	draughts	sending	chills	through	you	at	every	change
of	position.’
Ormly’s	withered	face	twisted	into	a	scowl.	‘Change	of	position?	What
does	that	mean?’
‘Something	tells	me	there	is	no	legion	of	beleaguered	women	bemoaning
the	loss	of	one	Ormly.’
‘I	wouldn’t	know	nothing	about	that.	Listen,	I’m	nervous.’


‘How	do	you	think	I	feel?	Care	for	some	wine?	Oh,	I	was	hoping	you’d
decline.	You	know,	hiding	in	this	burial	crypt	has	put	a	strain	on	select	vintages.
It’s	all	very	well	for	you,	skulking	in	the	shadows	every	night,	but	as	the	new
commander	of	our	insurgent	organization,	I	have	to	hide	down	here,	receiving
and	despatching	all	day,	doing	endless	paperwork—’
‘What	paperwork?’
‘Well,	the	paperwork	I	do	to	convince	the	minions	how	busy	I	am,	so	they
don’t	come	running	to	me	every	damned	moment.’
‘Yes,	but	what	are	you	writing	down,	Rucket?’
‘I	record	snatches	of	overheard	conversations	–	the	acoustics	down	here
are	impressive	if	a	tad	wayward.	One	can	achieve	sheer	poetry	on	occasion,
with	judicial	use	of	juxtaposition.’
‘If	it’s	random	then	it	ain’t	poetry,’	Ormly	said,	still	scowling.
‘Clearly	you	don’t	keep	up	with	modern	movements,	then.’
‘Just	one,	Rucket,	and	that’s	what	I’m	nervous	about.	It’s	Tehol	Beddict,
you	see.’
‘A	most	extraordinary	juxtaposition	there,’	she	replied,	reaching	for
another	hog’s	ear.	‘Idiocy	and	genius.	In	particular,	his	genius	for	creating
idiotic	moments.	Why,	the	last	time	we	made	love—’
‘Rucket,	please!	Don’t	you	see	what’s	going	on	out	there?	Oh,	sorry,	I
guess	you	don’t.	But	listen	to	me,	then.	He’s	too	successful!	It’s	going	too	fast!
The	Patriotists	are	stirred	up	something	awful,	and	you	can	be	sure	the	Liberty
Consign	is	backing	them	with	every	resource	at	its	disposal.	In	the	Low
Markets	they’re	starting	to	barter	because	there’s	no	coin.’
‘Well,	that	was	the	plan—’
‘But	we’re	not	ready!’
‘Ormly,	Scale	House	collapsed,	didn’t	it?’
He	glared	at	her	suspiciously,	then	grunted	and	looked	away.	‘All	right,	so
we	knew	that	was	coming.	We’ve	been	ready	for	that,	yes.	True	enough.	Even
though	we’re	no	closer	to	knowing	what’ll	happen	when	whatever	it	is
happens,	assuming	we’ll	even	know	it’s	happening	when	it	does.	Anyway,
you’re	just	trying	to	confuse	me,	because	you’ve	lost	all	objectivity	when	it
comes	to	Tehol.’
‘Oh	now	really,	do	you	take	me	for	a	fool?’
‘Yes.	Love,	lust,	whatever,	it’s	affected	your	ability	to	think	straight	when	it
comes	to	that	madman.’
‘You’re	the	one	not	thinking	straight.	Tehol’s	not	the	mystery	here.	Tehol’s
easy	–	no,	not	that	kind	of	–	oh,	very	well,	that	kind,	too.	Anyway,	like	I	said.
Easy.	The	true	mystery	before	us,	Ormly,	is	his	damned	manservant.’


‘Bugg?’
‘Bugg.’
‘But	he’s	just	the	front	man—’
‘You	sure	it’s	not	the	other	way	round?	What	does	he	do	with	all	that	coin
they’ve	leveraged	into	their	hands?	Bury	it	in	the	back	yard?	They	don’t	even
have	a	back	yard.	Ormly,	we’re	talking	tons	of	coinage	here.’	She	waved	a
hand	about.	‘Could	fill	this	crypt	twenty	times	over.	Now,	sure,	there’re	other
crypts	under	the	city,	but	we	know	them	all.	I’ve	sent	runners	to	every	one	of
them,	but	they’re	empty,	the	dust	underfoot	not	disturbed	in	years.	We’ve	sent
rats	into	every	fissure,	every	crevasse,	every	crack.	Nothing.’	She	snapped	her
fingers.	‘Gone.	As	if	into	thin	air.	And	not	just	in	this	city,	either.’
‘So	maybe	Tehol’s	found	a	hiding	place	we	ain’t	looked	at	yet.	Something
both	clever	and	idiotic,	like	you	said.’
‘I	thought	of	that,	Ormly.	Trust	me	when	I	tell	you,	it’s	all	gone.’
His	scowl	suddenly	cleared	and	he	reached	for	a	refill	of	the	wine.	‘I
figured	it	out.	It’s	all	dumped	into	the	river.	Simple.	Easy.’
‘Except	that	Tehol	insists	it	can	be	recovered	–	to	flood	the	market,	if	the
Consign	financiers	panic	and	start	minting	more	than	the	usual	quota.	And	even
that	quota	is	proving	inflationary,	since	there’s	no	recycling	of	old	coins
taking	place.	There’s	no	return	for	recasting.	I	hear	even	the	Imperial	Treasury
is	hurting.	Tehol	says	he	can	dump	it	all	back	onto	the	streets,	at	a	moment’s
notice.’
‘Maybe	he’s	lying.’
‘Maybe	he	isn’t.’
‘Maybe	I’ll	have	that	last	hog	ear.’
‘Forget	it.’
‘Fine.	We	got	another	problem.	Tensions	are	high	between	the	Edur	and	the
Patriotists	–	and	the	Chancellor	and	his	army	of	thugs	and	spies.	Blood	was
spilled.’
‘Not	surprising,’	Rucket	replied.	‘It	was	bound	to	happen.	And	don’t	think
the	financial	strain	has	nothing	to	do	with	it.’
‘If	it	does	it’s	only	indirectly,’	Ormly	said.	‘No,	this	clash	was,	I	think,
personal.’
‘Can	we	make	use	of	it?’
‘Ah,	finally	we	can	discuss	something	and	actually	get	somewhere.’
‘You’re	just	jealous	of	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘So	what	if	I	am.	Forget	it.	Let’s	make	plans.’
Sighing,	Rucket	gestured	to	one	of	her	servants.	‘Bring	us	another	bottle,
Unn.’


Ormly’s	brow	lifted,	and,	as	the	huge	man	shambled	off	into	a	side
chamber,	he	leaned	closer.	‘Unn?	The	one	who…?’
‘Murdered	Gerun	Eberict?	Indeed,	the	very	man.	With	his	own	two	hands,
Ormly.	His	own	two	hands.’	Then	she	smiled.	‘And	those	hands,	well,
murdering	isn’t	the	only	thing	they’re	good	at.’
‘I	knew	it!	It	is	all	you	ever	think	about!’
She	settled	back	in	her	chair.	Make	them	feel	clever.	The	only	sure	way	to
keep	the	peace.
	
Beneath	the	city	of	Letheras	was	a	massive	core	of	ice.	A	fist	of	Omtose
Phellack,	clutching	in	its	implacable	grip	an	ancient	spirit.	Lured,	then	trapped
by	a	startling	alliance	of	Ceda	Kuru	Qan,	a	Jaghut	sorceress	and	an	Elder	God.
For	the	Errant,	it	was	a	struggle	to	appreciate	that	conjoining,	no	matter	how
advantageous	the	consequence.	A	spirit	imprisoned,	until	such	time	as	that
hoary	ritual	weakened	–	or,	more	likely,	was	shattered	in	wilful	malice.	So,
though	temporary	–	and	what	truly	wasn’t?	–	it	had	prevented	death	and
destruction	on	a	colossal	scale.	All	very	well.
Kuru	Qan	treating	with	a	Jaghut	sorceress	–	surprising	but	not	disturbing.
No,	it	was	Mael’s	involvement	that	gnawed	ceaselessly	in	the	Errant’s	thoughts.
An	Elder	God.	But	not	K’rul,	not	Draconus,	not	Kilmandaros.	No,	this	was
the	one	Elder	God	who	never	got	involved.	Mael’s	curse	was	everyone	else’s
blessing.	So	what	changed?	What	forced	the	old	bastard’s	hand,	enough	so	that
he	forged	alliances,	that	he	unleashed	his	power	in	the	streets	of	the	city,	that
he	emerged	onto	a	remote	island	and	battered	a	broken	god	senseless?
Friendship	towards	a	pathetic	mortal?
And	what,	dear	Mael,	do	you	now	plan	to	do	about	all	those	worshippers?
The	ones	so	abusing	your	indifference?	They	are	legion	and	their	hands	drip
blood	in	your	name.	Does	this	please	you?	From	them,	after	all,	you	acquire
power.	Enough	to	drown	this	entire	realm.
War	among	the	gods,	but	was	the	battle	line	so	simply	drawn	as	it	seemed?
The	Errant	was	no	longer	sure.
He	stood	in	solid	rock,	within	reach	of	the	enormous	knot	of	ice.	He	could
smell	it,	that	gelid	ancient	sorcery	that	belonged	to	another	era.	The	spirit
imprisoned	within	it,	frozen	in	the	act	of	rising	through	a	fetid	lake,	was	a
seething	storm	of	helpless	rage,	blurred	and	indistinct	at	its	centre.	One	of
Mael’s	own	kin,	the	Errant	suspected,	like	a	piece	torn	free	only	to	suffer	a
geas	of	the	Crippled	God.	Entirely	unaware	–	so	far	–	of	the	terrible	fissures
spread	like	crazed	webs	through	that	ice,	fissures	even	now	working	their	way


inwards.
Shattered	indeed.	With	intent?	No,	not	this	time,	but	in	imagining	a	place	of
permanence	they	chose	in	error.	And	no,	they	could	not	have	known.	This…
nudge…not	mine.	Just…dread	circumstance.
Does	Mael	know?	Abyss	take	me,	I	need	to	speak	to	him	–	ah,	how	I	recoil
at	the	notion!	How	much	longer	can	I	delay?	What	rotted	commodity	would	my
silence	purchase?	What	meagre	reward	my	warning?
Perhaps	another	word	with	that	war	god,	Fener.	But	no,	that	poor	creature
probably	knew	even	less	than	he	did.	Cowering,	virtually	usurped…usurped,
now	there’s	an	interesting	notion.	Gods	at	war…yes,	possibly.
The	Errant	withdrew,	passing	ghostly	through	rock.	Sudden	desire,
impatience,	pushed	him	onward.	He	would	need	a	mortal’s	hand	for	what	he
planned.	A	mortal’s	blood.
He	emerged	onto	a	floor	of	mouldy,	uneven	pavestones.	How	far	had	he
travelled?	How	much	time	had	passed?	Darkness	and	the	muted	sound	of
dripping	water.	He	sniffed	the	air,	caught	the	scent	of	life.	Tainted	acrid	by
delving	into	old	magic.	And	knew	where	he	was.	Not	far,	then.	Not	long.	Never
hide	in	the	same	place,	child.	Mouth	dry	–	something	like	anticipation	–	he
hurried	down	the	crooked	corridor.
I	can	do	nothing,	weak	as	I	am.	Edging	askew	the	course	of	fates	–	I	was
once	far	more.	Master	of	the	Tiles.	All	that	power	in	those	scribed	images,	the
near-words	from	a	time	when	no	written	words	existed.	They	would	have	starved
without	my	blessing.	Withered.	Does	this	mean	nothing?	Am	I	past	bargaining?
He	could	feel	now,	within	him,	flaring	to	life,	a	once-dull	ember	of…
of…of	what?	Ah,	yes,	I	see	it	clear.	I	see	it.
Ambition.
The	Errant	reached	the	secret	chamber,	could	discern	trickling	heat	at	the
entrance.
Crouched	over	a	brazier,	she	spun	round	when	he	stepped	into	the	room.
The	heady,	damp	air,	thick	with	spices,	made	him	feel	half	drunk.	He	saw	her
eyes	widen.
‘Turudal	Brizad—’
The	Errant	staggered	forward.	‘It’s	this,	you	see.	A	bargain—’
He	saw	her	hand	edge	out,	hovering	over	the	coals	of	the	brazier.	‘They	all
want	to	bargain.	With	me—’
‘The	Holds,	witch.	They	clash,	clumsy	as	crones.	Against	the	young	ones	–
the	Warrens.	Only	a	fool	would	call	it	a	dance	of	equals.	Power	was	robust,
once.	Now	it	is…’	he	smiled,	taking	another	step	closer,	‘gracile.	Do	you
understand?	What	I	offer	you,	witch?’


She	was	scowling	to	hide	her	fear.	‘No.	You	stink	like	a	refuse	pit,	Consort
–	you	are	not	welcome	here—’
‘The	tiles	so	want	to	play,	don’t	they?	Yet	they	clatter	down	in	broken
patterns,	ever	broken.	There	is	no	flow.	They	are	outmoded,	witch.	Outmoded.’
A	gesture	with	the	hovering	hand,	and	Feather	Witch’s	eyes	flicked	past	the
Errant.
A	faint	voice	behind	him.	‘Do	not	do	this.’
The	Errant	turned.	‘Kuru	Qan.	She	summoned	you?’	He	laughed.	‘I	could
banish	you	with	the	blink	of	an	eye,	ghost.’
‘She	was	not	to	know	that.	Heed	my	warning,	Errant;	you	are	driven	to
desperation.	And	the	illusion	of	glory	–	do	you	not	understand	what	has	so
afflicted	you?	You	stood	too	close	to	the	ice.	Assailed	by	a	storm	of	desire	from
the	trapped	demon.	Its	ambition.	Its	lust.’
A	sliver	of	doubt,	stinging,	then	the	Errant	shook	his	head.	‘I	am	the	Master
of	the	Tiles,	Elder.	No	pathetic	wellspring	spirit	could	so	infect	me.	My
thoughts	are	clear.	My	purpose—’	He	turned	again,	dismissing	the	ghost
behind	him.	And	reeled	slightly,	needing	a	step	to	right	himself.
The	ghost	of	the	Ceda	spoke.	‘Errant,	you	think	to	challenge	the	Warrens?
Do	you	not	realize	that,	as	the	Tiles	once	had	a	Master,	so	too	the	Warrens?’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool,’	the	Errant	said.	‘There	are	no	tiles	describing	these
warrens—’
‘Not	Tiles.	Cards.	A	Deck.	And	yes,	there	is	a	Master.	Do	you	now	choose	to
set	yourself	against	him?	To	achieve	what?’
The	Errant	made	no	reply,	although	his	answer	whispered	in	his	skull.
Usurpation.	As	a	child	before	one	such	as	myself.	I	might	even	pity	him,	as	I
wrest	from	him	all	power,	every	drop	of	blood,	his	very	life.
I	shall	retreat	from	this	world	no	longer.
Kuru	Qan	continued,	‘If	you	set	the	Holds	to	battle	against	the	Warrens,
Errant,	you	will	shatter	alliances—’
The	Errant	snorted.	‘They	are	already	shattered,	Ceda.	What	began	as	yet
another	march	on	the	Crippled	God	to	exact	brutal	punishment	–	as	if	the
Fallen	One	commits	a	crime	by	virtue	of	his	very	existence	–	well,	it	is	that	no
more.	The	Elders	are	awakened,	awakened	to	themselves	–	the	memory	of	what
they	once	were,	what	they	could	be	again.	Besides,’	he	added	as	he	took	another
step	towards	the	now	trembling	Letherii	witch,	‘the	enemy	is	divided,	confused
—’
‘All	strangers	to	you.	To	us.	Are	you	so	certain	that	what	you	sense	is	true?
Not	simply	what	your	enemy	wants	you	to	believe?’
‘Now	you	play	games,	Kuru	Qan.	Ever	your	flaw.’


‘This	is	not	our	war,	Errant.’
‘Oh,	but	it	is.	My	war.	Rhulad’s	war.	The	Crippled	God’s.	After	all,	it	is	not
the	Elder	Gods	who	so	hunger	to	destroy	the	Fallen	One.’
‘They	would	if	they	but	understood,	Errant.	But	they	are	blinded	by	the	lure
of	resurrection	–	as	blinded	as	you,	here,	now.	All	but	one,	and	that	is	the	maker
of	the	Warrens.	K’rul	himself.	Errant,	listen	to	me!	To	set	the	Holds	against	the
Warrens,	you	declare	war	upon	K’rul—’
‘No.	Just	his	children.	Children	who	will	kill	him	if	they	can.	They	don’t
want	him.	He	was	gone,	but	now	he	walks	the	realms	again,	and	drags	with	him
the	Tiles,	the	Holds,	the	ancient	places	he	knew	so	well	–	there	is	the	real	war,
Ceda!’
‘True,	and	K’rul’s	idiotic	nostalgia	is	proving	a	most	virulent	poison	–
although	he	is	yet	to	realize	that.	I	am	dead,	Errant	–	the	paths	I	have	wandered
—’
‘Do	not	interest	me.’
‘Do	not	do	this.	This	is	all	the	Crippled	God’s	game!’
Smiling,	the	Errant	reached	out,	the	motion	a	blur.	Grasped	the	Letherii
witch	round	the	throat.	Lifted	her	clear	of	the	floor.
In	his	other	hand,	a	knife	appeared.
Blood.	Mortal’s	gift	to	the	Elder—
She	held	something	in	one	hand.	Thrashing,	struggling	against	his	lifestealing	grip,	her	eyes	bulging,	face	darkening,	she	lashed	out	with	that	hand.
And	stabbed	a	severed	finger	into	his	left	eye.
The	Errant	bellowed	in	shock,	a	spear	of	incandescence	lancing	into	his
brain.
His	knife	bit	into	the	woman’s	body.	He	flung	her	away,	then	lurched,
flailing	at	his	own	face	–	where	blood	streamed	down,	where	something
dangled	at	the	end	of	a	thread	against	his	cheek.	Got	her,	never	mind	what	she
did	to	me	–	got	her,	that	foul	creature	–	her	blood	–	my	blood	–	Abyss	take	me,
the	pain!
Then	she	was	back.	Clawed	hands	gouging	against	his	face	–	grasping
something,	tearing	it	away	–	pain!	And	her	vicious	snarl,	close	–	‘I’m
collecting.’	Twisting	away,	even	as	he	slashed	again	with	the	knife,	cutting	into
flesh,	the	edge	rippling	along	bones.
She	had	torn	away	an	eye.	Gone.	Crushed	in	one	bloody	hand.
But	her	blood	gleamed	on	his	knife.	Enough.	More	than	enough.
The	Errant,	one	hand	outstretched,	lone	eye	struggling	to	make	sense	of	a
battered,	broken	perspective,	staggered	towards	the	doorway.
All	I	need.


	
Trailing	blood,	Feather	Witch	dragged	herself	to	the	far	wall,	where	she	curled
up,	in	one	stained	hand	the	eye	of	a	god,	in	the	other	the	severed	finger	of	Brys
Beddict	–	it	felt	swollen	now,	as	if	it	absorbed	the	Errant’s	blood.	Warm,	no,
hot.
‘Collecting,’	she	whispered.
The	ghost	of	the	Ceda	drew	close.	‘You	are	dying,	child.	You	need	a	healer.’
She	spat.	‘Then	find	me	one.’
The	brazier ’s	coals	pulsed,	but	all	she	could	feel	was	cold,	deep	in	her
body,	spreading	outward	to	steal	all	life	from	her	limbs.
‘Hurry,’	she	said	in	a	mumble.
But	no-one	replied.
	
The	Errant	stumbled	down	the	bridge.	To	either	side,	the	tiles	of	the	Cedance
spun	in	confused	mayhem.	He	barked	out	a	laugh,	holding	the	slick	knife
before	him	as	if	it	was	a	torch	–	he	could	feel	the	heat	searing	his	face,	drying
the	blood	and	other	fluids	weeping	down	from	his	left	socket.
Someone	had	been	here.	Not	long	past.
Hannan	Mosag.	Delving	the	mysteries	of	ancient	power.
But	he	was	Tiste	Edur.	A	stranger	to	these	forces.
No,	they	are	mine.	They	were	always	mine.	And	now	I	come.
To	reclaim	them.
And	I	challenge	you,	Master	of	the	Deck,	whoever,	whatever	you	are.	Face
me	here,	if	you’ve	the	courage.	I	challenge	you!
The	Errant	reached	the	centre	dais,	held	the	knife	high,	then	flung	it	down
onto	the	tiles.
The	point	sank	deep	into	painted	stone.
He	stared	down.	One	eye.	Widening.
The	knife	had	pierced	the	centre	of	a	tile,	nailing	it	in	place.	The	others
now	began	swirling	round	it,	as	if	drawn	into	a	vortex.
The	centre	of	a	tile.
His	own.	The	blade	buried	in	the	chest	of	the	image.	My	chest.	What	does
that	mean?	No	matter.	What	other	tile	could	it	possibly	choose?
The	world	trembled	–	he	could	feel	it,	deep	in	its	core,	spreading	in
ripples,	those	ripples	rising,	devouring	energy,	lifting	into	waves.	The	waves
heaving	higher,	gaining	speed,	lifting…
The	Errant	laughed	as	power	burgeoned	within	him.	‘Mortal	blood!’


Was	she	dead	now?	He’d	struck	her	twice.	Driven	the	weapon	deep.	She
would	have	spilled	out	by	now.	A	corpse	huddled	in	that	cursed	chamber.	Until
the	rats	found	her.	And	this	was	well.	She	could	not	be	allowed	to	survive	–	he
wanted	no	High	Priestess,	no	mortal	bound	to	his	resurrected	godhood.	The
other	prayers	I	can	swallow.	Ignore.	They	all	know	I	never	answer.	Never	give	a
thing	away.	Expecting	nothing,	so	they	receive	nothing,	and	I	am	not	bound	to
them.
But	a	High	Priestess…
He	would	have	to	make	sure.	Go	back.	And	make	sure.
The	Errant	spun	round,	began	walking.
	
‘Bastard,’	Feather	Witch	said,	her	mouth	filled	with	the	taste	of	blood.	Running
from	her	nostrils,	bubbling	at	the	back	of	her	throat.	Immense	pressures
crushing	her	chest	on	the	right	side.
She	could	wait	no	longer.	The	ghost	was	too	late.
‘I	am	dying.’
No.	Errant,	bastard	god,	forgotten	god,	hungry	god.
Well,	you	are	not	the	only	hungry	one	around	here.
She	bared	her	teeth	in	a	red	smile,	then	pushed	the	mangled	eyeball	into	her
mouth.
And	swallowed.
	
The	Errant	staggered,	rebounded	from	a	corridor	wall,	as	something	reached
into	his	chest	and	tore	free	a	welter	of	power.	Stole	it	away.	Leaving	a	cavern
of	agony.
‘The	bitch!’
The	roar	echoed	against	cold	stone.
And	he	heard	her	voice,	filling	his	skull:	‘I	am	yours	now.	You	are	mine.
Worshipper	and	worshipped,	locked	together	in	mutual	hate.	Oh,	won’t	that
twist	things,	yes?
‘You	should	have	found	someone	else,	Errant.	I	have	read	the	histories.
Destrai	Anant,	God	Chosen,	the	Well	of	the	Spirit.	Feather	Witch.	You	are	mine.
I	am	yours.	And	listen	to	my	prayer	–	listen!	Your	Destrai	demands	it!	In	my
hand,	now,	waits	our	Mortal	Sword.	He	too	has	tasted	your	blood.	Your	power
can	heal	him	as	it	has	done	me.	Do	you	not	still	feel	his’	–	malicious	delight	–
‘touch?’


Her	laughter	rasped	in	his	head,	rebounding	bitter	with	his	stolen	power.
‘Summon	him,	Errant.	We	need	him.’
‘No.’
‘We	need	him!	And	a	Shield	Anvil	–	a	T’orrud	Segul	in	the	language	of	the
First	Empire.	Which	of	us	shall	choose?	Oh,	of	course,	you	would	claim	that
right	for	yourself.	But	I	have	a	candidate.	Another	wrapped	tight	in	webs	of
spite	–	I	utter	his	name	and	so	find	a	face	to	my	deepest	hatred	–	is	that	not	well
suited?
‘And	yes,	he	still	lives.	Udinaas.	Let	us	make	of	this	priesthood	a	company
of	betrayers.	Let	us	claim	the	Empty	Throne	–	it	was	ever	rightfully	ours,	Errant
–	beloved.
‘Udinaas.	Claim	him!	Choose	him!	We	can	devour	each	other’s	souls	across
the	span	of	a	thousand	years.	Ten	thousand!’
‘Leave	me,	damn	you!’
‘Leave	you?	God	of	mine,	I	compel	you!’
The	Errant	fell	to	his	knees,	tilted	his	head	back,	and	screamed	his	rage.
And	the	world	trembled	anew.
He	had	forgotten.	The	chains.	The	wills	locked	in	an	eternal	tug	of	war.
The	flood	waters	of	fierce	emotion	rising	again	and	again.	The	deathless
drowning.	I	am	in	the	world	again.	I	surrendered	my	weakness,	and	am
imprisoned	by	power.	‘Only	the	weak	and	useless	are	truly	free,’	he	whispered.
She	heard	him.	‘No	need	to	be	so	maudlin,	Errant.	Go	back	to	the	Cedance
and	see	for	yourself.	Blood	now	flows	between	the	Tiles.	Between	them	all.	The
Warrens.	The	Cedance,	at	last,	maps	the	truth	of	things.	The	truth	of	things.	To
use	your	words,	the	Tiles	now…flow.
‘Can	you	not	taste	them?	These	new	Warrens?	Come,	let	us	explore	them,
you	and	I,	and	choose	our	aspect.	There	are	flavours…light	and	dark,	shadow
and	death,	life	and…oh,	what	is	this?	The	Jesters	of	Chance,	an	Unaligned,
Oponn?	Oponn	–	dear	Errant,	you	have	upstarts	standing	in	your	stead.	These
Twins	play	your	game,	Errant.
‘What	will	we	do	about	that?’
‘Abyss	take	me,’	the	god	groaned,	sinking	down	onto	the	cold,	clammy
pavestones.
‘Summon	him,	Errant.	He	is	needed.	Now.	Summon	our	Mortal	Sword.’
‘I	cannot.	You	damned	fool.	He	is	lost	to	us.’
‘I	possess—’
‘I	know	what	you	possess.	Do	you	truly	think	it	enough?	To	wrest	him
from	Mael’s	grasp?	You	stupid,	pathetic	bitch.	Now,	cease	this	damned	prayer,
Destrai.	Your	every	demand	weakens	me	–	and	that	is	not	smart.	Not	now.	Too


soon.	I	am…vulnerable.	The	Edur—’
‘The	Edur	warlocks	tremble	and	start	at	shadows	now	–	they	do	not	know
what	has	happened.	All	they	know	is	blind	terror—’
‘Silence!’	the	god	bellowed.	‘Who	can	reach	through	those	warlocks,	you
blubbering	capabara?	Leave	me	alone!	Now!’
He	was	answered	with…nothing.	Sudden	absence,	a	presence	recoiling.
‘Better,’	he	snarled.
Yet	he	remained,	slumped	onto	the	cold	floor,	surrounded	in	darkness.
Thinking.	But	even	thoughts	did	not	come	free,	without	a	price.
Abyss	below,	I	think	I	have	made	a	mistake.	And	now	I	must	live	with	it.
And	make	plans.
	
Gadalanak	stepped	in	behind	and	under	his	round-shield.	A	huge	hand	grasped
his	arm,	wrapping	round	it	just	below	his	shoulder,	and	a	moment	later	he	was
flying	across	the	compound,	landing	hard,	skidding	then	rolling	until	he
crashed	up	against	the	wall.
The	Meckros	warrior	groaned,	shook	his	head,	then	released	his	shorthandled	double-bladed	axe	and	reached	up	to	tug	clear	his	helm.	‘Not	fair,’	he
said,	wincing	as	he	sat	up.	He	glared	across	at	Karsa	Orlong.	‘The	Emperor
couldn’t	have	done	that.’
‘Too	bad	for	him,’	the	Toblakai	rumbled	in	reply.
‘I	think	you	tore	something	in	my	arm.’
Samar	Dev	spoke	from	where	she	sat	on	a	chair	in	the	shade,	‘Best	find	a
healer,	then,	Gadalanak.’
‘Who	else	will	dare	face	me?’	Karsa	demanded,	eyeing	the	half-dozen
other	warriors	as	he	leaned	on	his	sword.	All	eyes	turned	to	the	masked
woman,	who	stood	silent	and	motionless,	worn	and	weathered	like	a	forgotten
statue	in	some	ruin.	She	seemed	indifferent	to	the	attention.	And	she	had	yet	to
draw	her	two	swords.
Karsa	snorted.	‘Cowards.’
‘Hold	on,’	the	one	named	Puddy	said,	his	scarred	face	twisting.	‘It	ain’t
that,	y’damned	bhederin	bull.	It’s	your	style	of	fighting.	No	point	in	learning	to
deal	with	it,	since	this	Edur	Emperor	don’t	fight	that	way.	He	couldn’t.	I	mean,
he	ain’t	got	the	strength.	Nor	the	reach.	Besides,	he’s	civilized	–	you	fight	like
an	animal,	Karsa,	and	you	just	might	take	the	bastard	down	–	only	you	won’t
have	to,	’cause	I’ll	do	it	before	you.’	He	hefted	the	short	javelin	in	one	hand.
‘I’ll	skewer	him	first	–	then	let’s	see	him	fight	with	a	shaft	of	wood	impaling
him.	I	skewer	him	from	six	paces,	right?	Then	I	close	with	my	cutlass	and	chop


him	into	pieces.’
Samar	Dev	stopped	listening,	since	she	had	heard	Puddy’s	boasts	before,
and	held	her	gaze	on	the	woman	the	Meckros	warrior	had	called	a	Seguleh.
First	Empire	word,	that.	The	Anvil.	Strange	name	for	a	people	–	probably	some
remnant	clan	from	the	colonial	period	of	Dessimbelackis’s	empire.	A	fragment
of	an	army,	settled	on	some	pleasant	island	as	their	reward	for	some	great
victory	–	those	armies	were	each	named,	and	‘the	Anvil’	was	but	a	variation	on
a	theme	common	among	the	First	Empire	military.	The	mask,	however,	was	a
unique	affectation.	Gadalanak	said	all	Seguleh	were	so	attired,	and	something
in	the	glyphs	and	scratches	on	those	enamel	masks	indicated	rank.	But	if	those
marks	are	writing,	it’s	not	First	Empire.	Not	even	close.	Curious.	Too	bad	she
never	says	anything.
Cradling	his	shield	arm,	Gadalanak	used	the	wall	to	lever	himself	upright,
then	set	off	in	search	of	a	healer.
There	had	been	events	in	the	palace,	sending	tremors	far	enough	to	reach
the	challengers’	compound.	Perhaps	the	List	had	been	formalized,	the	order	of
the	battles	decided.	A	rumour	to	please	the	idiotic	warriors	gathered	here	–
although	Karsa’s	only	response	to	the	possibility	was	a	sour	grunt.	Samar	Dev
was	inclined	to	agree	with	him	–	she	was	not	convinced	that	the	rumour	was
accurate.	No,	something	else	had	happened,	something	messy.	Factions	sniping
like	mongrels	at	a	feast	all	could	share	had	they	any	brains.	But	that’s	always
the	way,	isn’t	it?	Enough	is	never	enough.
She	felt	something	then,	a	shivering	along	the	strands	–	the	bones	–	buried
beneath	the	flesh	of	this	realm.	This	realm…and	every	other	one.	Gods	below…
The	witch	found	she	was	on	her	feet.	Blinking.	And	in	the	compound’s	centre
she	saw	Karsa	now	facing	her,	a	fierce	regard	in	his	bestial	eyes.	The	Toblakai
bared	his	teeth.
Shaking	her	gaze	free	of	the	terrible	warrior,	she	walked	quickly	into	the
colonnaded	hallway,	then	through	to	the	passage	lined	by	the	cells	where	the
champions	were	quartered.	Down	the	corridor.
Into	her	modest	room.
She	closed	the	door	behind	her,	already	muttering	the	ritual	of	sealing.
Trouble	out	there,	blood	spilled	and	sizzling	like	acid.	Dreadful	events,
something	old	beyond	belief,	exulting	in	new	power—
Her	heart	stuttered	in	her	chest.	An	apparition	was	rising	from	the	floor	in
the	centre	of	the	room.	Shouldering	through	her	wards.
She	drew	her	knife.
A	damned	ghost.	The	ghost	of	a	damned	mage,	in	fact.
Luminous	but	faint	eyes	fixed	on	her.	‘Witch,’	it	whispered,	‘do	not	resist,	I


beg	you.’
‘You	are	not	invited,’	she	said.	‘Why	would	I	not	resist?’
‘I	need	your	help.’
‘Seems	a	little	late	for	that.’
‘I	am	Ceda	Kuru	Qan.’
She	frowned,	then	nodded.	‘I	have	heard	that	name.	You	fell	at	the	Edur
conquest.’
‘Fell?	A	notion	worth	consideration.	Alas,	not	now.	You	must	heal	someone.
Please.	I	can	lead	you	to	her.’
‘Who?’
‘A	Letherii.	She	is	named	Feather	Witch—’
Samar	Dev	hissed,	then	said,	‘You	chose	the	wrong	person,	Ceda	Kuru
Qan.	Heal	that	blonde	rhinazan?	If	she’s	dying,	I	am	happy	to	help	her	along.
That	woman	gives	witches	a	bad	name.’
Another	tremor	rumbled	through	the	unseen	web	binding	the	world.
She	saw	Kuru	Qan’s	ghost	flinch,	saw	the	sudden	terror	in	its	eyes.
And	Samar	Dev	spat	on	her	knife	blade,	darted	forward	and	slashed	the
weapon	through	the	ghost.
The	Ceda’s	shriek	was	short-lived,	as	the	iron	weapon	snared	the	ghost,
drew	it	inward,	trapped	it.	In	her	hand	the	knife’s	hilt	was	suddenly	cold	as	ice.
Steam	slithered	from	the	blade.
She	quickly	added	a	few	words	under	her	breath,	tightening	the	binding.
Then	staggered	back	until	her	legs	bumped	against	her	cot.	She	sank	down,
shivering	in	the	aftermath	of	the	capture.	Her	eyes	fell	to	the	weapon	in	her
hand.	‘Gods	below,’	she	mumbled.	‘Got	another	one.’
	
Moments	later	the	door	swung	open.	Ducking,	Karsa	Orlong	entered.
Samar	Dev	cursed	at	him,	then	said,	‘Must	you	do	that?’
‘This	room	stinks,	witch.’
‘You	walk	through	my	wards	as	if	they	were	cobwebs.	Toblakai,	it	would
take	a	damned	god	to	do	what	you	just	did	–	yet	you	are	no	god.	I	would	swear
to	that	on	the	bones	of	every	poor	fool	you’ve	killed.’
‘I	care	nothing	for	your	damned	wards,’	the	huge	warrior	replied,	leaning
his	sword	against	a	wall	then	taking	a	single	step	that	placed	him	in	the	centre
of	the	room.	‘I	know	that	smell.	Ghosts,	spirits,	it’s	the	stink	of	forgetting.’
‘Forgetting?’
‘When	the	dead	forget	they’re	dead,	witch.’
‘Like	your	friends	in	that	stone	sword	of	yours?’


The	eyes	that	fixed	on	her	were	cold	as	ashes.	‘They	have	cheated	death,
Samar	Dev.	Such	was	my	gift.	Such	was	theirs,	to	turn	away	from	peace.	From
oblivion.	They	live	because	the	sword	lives.’
‘Yes,	a	warren	within	a	weapon.	Don’t	imagine	that	as	unique	as	you	might
want	it	to	be.’
He	bared	his	teeth.	‘No.	After	all,	you	have	that	knife.’
She	started.	‘Hardly	a	warren	in	this	blade,	Karsa	Orlong.	It’s	just	folded
iron.	Folded	in	a	very	specific	way—’
‘To	fashion	a	prison.	You	civilized	people	are	so	eager	to	blunt	the
meaning	of	your	words.	Probably	because	you	have	so	many	of	them,	which
you	use	too	often	and	for	no	reason.’	He	looked	round.	‘So	you	have	bound	a
ghost.	That	is	not	like	you.’
‘I	could	not	argue	that,’	she	admitted,	‘since	I	am	no	longer	sure	who	I	am.
What	I’m	supposed	to	be	like.’
‘You	once	told	me	you	did	not	compel,	you	did	not	bind.	You	bargained.’
‘Ah,	that.	Well,	yes,	given	the	choice.	Seems	that	being	in	your	company
crushes	under	heel	the	privilege	of	choice,	Toblakai.’
‘You	blame	me	for	your	greed?’
‘Not	greed.	More	like	an	overwhelming	need	for	power.’
‘To	oppose	me?’
‘You?	No,	I	don’t	think	so.	To	stay	alive,	I	think.	You	are	dangerous,	Karsa
Orlong.	Your	will,	your	strength,	your…disregard.	You	present	the	quaint	and
appalling	argument	that	through	wilful	ignorance	of	the	laws	and	rules	of	the
universe	you	cannot	suffer	their	influence.	As	you	might	imagine,	your	very
success	poses	evidence	of	that	tenet,	and	it	is	one	I	cannot	reconcile,	since	it
runs	contrary	to	a	lifetime	of	observation.’
‘Too	many	words	again,	Samar	Dev.	State	it	plain.’
‘Fine,’	she	snapped.	‘Everything	about	you	terrifies	me.’
He	nodded.	‘And	fascinates	as	well.’
‘Arrogant	bastard.	Believe	what	you	like!’
He	turned	back	to	the	doorway.	Collecting	his	sword,	he	said	over	one
shoulder,	‘The	Seguleh	has	unsheathed	her	swords	for	me,	witch.’
Then	he	was	gone.
Samar	Dev	remained	on	her	cot	for	another	dozen	heartbeats,	then,	‘Damn
him!’	And	she	rose,	hurrying	to	arrive	before	the	bout	began.	Damn	him!
	
The	sun	had	crawled	far	enough	to	one	side	of	the	sky	to	leave	the	compound
in	shadow.	As	she	emerged	from	the	covered	colonnade	Samar	Dev	saw	the


Seguleh	standing	in	the	middle	of	the	exercise	area,	a	thin-bladed	longsword	in
each	gloved	hand.	Her	dark	hair	hung	in	greasy	strands	down	her	shoulders,
and	through	the	eye-holes	of	the	mask	her	midnight	gaze	tracked	Karsa	Orlong
as	he	strode	to	join	her	in	the	sand-floored	clearing.
A	full	score	of	champions	looked	on,	indicating	that	word	had	travelled,
and	Samar	Dev	saw	–	with	shock	–	the	Gral,	Taralack	Veed,	and,	behind	him,
Icarium.	Gods	below,	the	name,	the	Jhag…all	that	I	know,	all	that	I	have	heard.
Icarium	is	here.	A	champion.
He	will	leave	this	city	a	heap	of	rubble.	He	will	leave	its	citizens	a
mountain	of	shattered	bones.	Gods,	look	at	him!	Standing	calm,	so	deep	in
shadow	as	to	be	almost	invisible	–	Karsa	does	not	see	him,	no.	The	Toblakai’s
focus	rests	on	the	Seguleh,	as	he	circles	her	at	a	distance.	And	she	moves	like	a
cat	to	ever	face	him.
Oh,	she	is	a	fighter	all	right.
And	Karsa	will	throw	her	over	the	damned	wall.
If	she	dares	close.	As	she	must.	Get	inside	that	huge	flint	sword.
Over	the	wall.	Or	through	it.
Her	heart	pounded,	the	beat	rapid,	disturbingly	erratic.
She	sensed	someone	at	her	side	and	saw,	with	a	jolt	of	alarm,	a	Tiste	Edur
–	and	she	then	recognized	him.	Preda…Tomad.	Tomad	Sengar.
The	Emperor’s	father.
Karsa,	you	don’t	want	this	audience—

An	explosion	of	motion	as	the	two	contestants	closed	–	afterwards,	none	could
agree	on	who	moved	first,	as	if	some	instinctive	agreement	was	reached
between	the	Seguleh	and	Karsa,	and	acted	upon	faster	than	thought	itself.
And,	as	iron	rang	on	stone	–	or	stone	on	iron	–	Karsa	Orlong	did
something	unexpected.
Pounded	down	with	one	foot.	Hard	onto	the	packed	sand.
In	the	midst	of	the	Seguleh’s	lithe	dance.
Pounded	down,	hard	enough	to	stagger	onlookers	as	the	entire	compound
floor	thundered.
The	Seguleh’s	perfect	balance…vanished.
No	doubt	it	was	but	a	fraction,	the	dislodging	so	minor	few	would	even
register	it,	and	no	doubt	her	recovery	was	as	instantaneous	–	but	she	was
already	reeling	back	to	a	savage	blow	with	the	flat	of	Karsa’s	blade,	both	wrists
broken	by	the	impact.


Yet,	as	she	toppled,	she	twisted,	one	foot	lashing	upward	towards	the
Toblakai’s	crotch.
He	caught	her	kick	with	one	hand,	blocking	the	blow,	then	boldly	lifted	her
into	the	air.
She	swung	the	other	foot.
And	the	Toblakai,	laughing,	released	his	sword	and	snagged	that	leg	as
well.
And	held	her	there.
Dangling.
	
Behind	Taralack	Veed,	there	was	a	soft	sigh,	and	the	Gral,	blinking,	turned
round.
Icarium	smiled.	Then	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘We	have	met,	I	think.	He	and	I.
Perhaps	long	ago.	A	duel	that	was	interrupted.’
By	Mappo.	Has	to	be.	Mappo,	who	saw	a	storm	coming	between	these	two.
Oh,	Trell…
Taralack	licked	dry	lips.	‘Would	you	resume	that	duel,	Icarium?’
The	Jhag’s	brows	lifted	fractionally.	Then	he	shook	his	head,	leaving	that
as	his	answer.
Thank	the	spirits.
	
From	Preda	Tomad	Sengar,	a	grunt.
‘These	games,’	Samar	Dev	ventured,	drawing	his	attention,	‘they	are
intended	to	entertain,	yes?	Each	contest	more	challenging	than	the	last.’
The	Tiste	Edur	eyed	her,	expressionless,	then	he	said,	‘Among	the
audience,	there	are	those	who	are	entertained.’
‘Yes.’
After	a	moment,	he	added,	‘Yes,	this	Tarthenal	will	come	last.	The	decision
was	unanimous	among	our	observers.’	Then	he	shrugged	and	said,	‘I	came	to
see	for	myself.	Although	my	judgement	has	no	relevance.’
‘That	Seguleh	was	very	good,’	Samar	Dev	said.
‘Perhaps.	But	she	has	sparred	with	no	others.’
‘They	hold	her	in	great	respect.’
‘Even	now?	When	will	he	set	her	down?’
She	shook	her	head.
Tomad	Sengar	turned	away.	‘The	Tarthenal	is	superb.’


‘And	yet	your	son	is	better.’
This	halted	him	once	more	and	he	stared	back	at	her	with	narrowed	eyes.
‘Your	Tarthenal	is	superb,’	he	repeated.	‘But	he	will	die	anyway.’
The	Tiste	Edur	walked	away.
Finally	responding	to	shouts	and	entreaties	from	the	onlookers,	Karsa
Orlong	set	the	woman	down	onto	the	ground.
Three	Letherii	healers	rushed	in	to	tend	to	her.
Collecting	his	sword,	Karsa	straightened,	then	looked	round.
Oh,	thought	Samar	Dev,	oh	no.
But	Icarium	was	gone.	As	was	his	Gral	keeper.
The	Toblakai	walked	towards	her.
‘I	didn’t	need	to	know,’	she	said.
‘No,	you	knew	already.’
Oh,	gods!
Then	he	drew	closer	and	stared	down	at	her.	‘The	Jhag	fled.	The	Trell	who
was	with	him	is	gone.	Probably	dead.	Now	there	is	a	desert	warrior	I	could
break	with	one	hand.	There	would	have	been	none	to	stop	us,	this	Icarium	and
me.	He	knew	that.	So	he	fled.’
‘You	damned	fool,	Karsa.	Icarium	is	not	the	kind	of	warrior	who	spars.	Do
you	understand	me?’
‘We	would	not	have	sparred,	Samar	Dev.’
‘So	why	spend	yourself	against	him?	Is	it	not	these	Edur	and	their	Letherii
slaves	you	seek	vengeance	against?’
‘When	I	am	finished	with	their	Emperor,	I	will	seek	out	Icarium.	We	will
finish	what	we	began.’
‘Beware	gathering	the	men	before	the	battering	ram,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘A	foolish	saying,’	he	pronounced	after	a	moment.
‘Oh,	and	why	is	that?’
‘Among	the	Teblor,	men	are	the	battering	ram.	Look	upon	me,	Samar	Dev.
I	have	fought	and	won.	See	the	sweat	on	my	muscles?	Come	lie	with	me.’
‘No,	I	feel	sick.’
‘I	will	make	you	feel	better.	I	will	split	you	in	two.’
‘That	sounds	fun.	Go	away.’
‘Must	I	hunt	down	another	whore?’
‘They	all	run	when	they	see	you	now,	Karsa	Orlong.	In	the	opposite
direction,	I	mean.’
He	snorted,	then	looked	round.	‘Perhaps	the	Seguleh.’
‘Oh,	really!	You	just	broke	her	arms!’
‘She	won’t	need	them.	Besides,	the	healers	are	mending	her.’


‘Gods	below,	I’m	leaving.’
As	she	strode	away,	she	heard	his	rumbling	laugh.	Oh,	I	know	you	make
sport	of	me.	I	know	and	yet	I	fall	into	your	traps	every	time.	You	are	too	clever,
barbarian.	Where	is	that	thick-skulled	savage?	The	one	to	match	your	pose?

Dragging	mangled	legs,	every	lurch	stabbing	pain	along	the	length	of	his	bent,
twisted	spine,	Hannan	Mosag	squinted	ahead,	and	could	just	make	out	the	scree
of	river-polished	stones	rising	like	a	road	between	the	cliffs	of	the	gorge.	He
did	not	know	if	what	he	was	seeing	was	real.
Yet	it	felt	right.
Like	home.
Kurald	Emurlahn,	the	Realm	of	Shadow.	Not	a	fragment,	not	a	torn	smear
riven	through	with	impurities.	Home,	as	it	once	was,	before	all	the	betrayals
ripped	it	asunder.	Paradise	awaits	us.	In	our	minds.	Ghost	images,	all
perfection	assembled	by	will	and	will	alone.	Believe	what	you	see,	Hannan
Mosag.	This	is	home.
And	yet	it	resisted.	Seeking	to	reject	him,	his	broken	body,	his	chaosstained	mind.
Mother	Dark.	Father	Light.	Look	upon	your	crippled	children.	Upon	me.
Upon	Emurlahn.	Heal	us.	Do	you	not	see	the	world	fashioned	in	my	mind?	All
as	it	once	was.	I	hold	still	to	this	purity,	to	all	that	I	sought	to	create	in	the
mortal	realm,	among	the	tribes	I	brought	to	heel	–	the	peace	I	demanded,	and
won.
None	could	have	guessed	my	deepest	desire.	The	Throne	of	Shadow	–	it	was
for	me.	And	by	my	rule,	Kurald	Emurlahn	would	grow	strong	once	again.
Whole.	Rightfully	in	its	place.
Yes,	there	was	chaos	–	the	raw	unbound	power	coursing	like	impassable
rivers,	isolating	every	island	of	Shadow.	But	I	would	have	used	that	chaos	–	to
heal.
Chains.	Chains	to	draw	the	fragments	together,	to	bind	them	together.
The	Fallen	God	was	a	tool,	nothing	more.
But	Rhulad	Sengar	had	destroyed	all	that.	In	the	reach	of	a	child’s	hand.
And	now,	everything	was	dying.	Poisoned.	Crumbling	into	dissolution.
He	reached	the	base	of	the	scree,	smooth	round	pebbles	clacking	beneath
his	clawed	fingers.	Coarse	sand	under	his	nails,	wet,	biting.	My	world.
Rain	falling	in	wisps	of	mist,	the	pungent	smell	of	moss	and	rotting	wood.
And	on	the	wind…the	sea.	Surmounting	the	steep	slope	of	stones,	the	boles	of


Blackwood	trees	stood	arrayed	like	sentinels.
There	were	no	invasive	demons	here.	This	world	was	the	world	of	the
Tiste	Edur.
The	shadow	of	a	gliding	owl	slipped	over	the	glistening	slide,	crossing	his
intended	path,	and	Hannan	Mosag	froze.
No.	It	cannot	be.	There	is	no-one	alive	to	claim	that	title.
He	is	dead.
He	was	not	even	Tiste	Edur!
And	yet,	who	stood	alone	before	Rhulad	Sengar?	Yes,	she	has	his	severed
finger.	The	owl	–	most	ancient	of	omens	–	the	owl,	to	mark	the	coming	of	the
one.
Yet	anger	surged	within	him.
It	is	for	me	to	choose.	Me!	Mother	Dark!	Father	Light!	Guide	me	to	the
Throne	of	Shadow.	Emurlahn	reborn!	It	is	this,	I	tell	you	both,	this	or	the	King
in	Chains,	and	behind	him	the	Crippled	God!	Hear	my	offer!
‘Andii,	Liosan,	Edur,	the	Armies	of	the	Tiste.	No	betrayal.	The	betrayals	are
done	–	bind	us	to	our	words	as	you	have	bound	each	other.	Light,	Dark	and
Shadow,	the	first	elements	of	existence.	Energy	and	void	and	the	ceaseless
motion	of	the	ebb	and	flow	between	them.	These	three	forces	–	the	first,	the
greatest,	the	purest.	Hear	me.	I	would	so	pledge	the	Edur	to	this	alliance!	Send
to	me	those	who	would	speak	for	the	Andii.	The	Liosan.	Send	them	–	bring
your	children	together!
‘Mother	Dark.	Father	Light.	I	await	your	word.	I	await…’
He	could	go	no	further.
Weeping,	Hannan	Mosag	rested	his	head	on	the	stones.	‘As	you	say,’	he
muttered.	‘I	will	not	deny	the	omen.	Very	well,	it	is	not	for	me	to	choose.
‘He	shall	be	our	Mortal	Sword	of	Emurlahn	–	no,	not	the	old	title.	The	new
one,	to	suit	this	age.	Mortal	Sword.’	Madness	–	why	would	he	even	agree?
Letherii…
‘So	be	it.’
Dusk	had	arrived.	Yet	he	felt	a	sliver	of	warmth	against	one	cheek,	and	he
lifted	his	head.	The	clouds	had	broken,	there,	to	the	east	–	a	welling	band	of
darkness.
And,	to	the	west,	another	slash	parting	the	overcast.
The	lurid	glow	of	the	sun.
‘So	be	it,’	he	whispered.
	
Bruthen	Trana	stepped	back	as	the	prostrate	Warlock	King	flinched,	Hannan


Mosag’s	legs	drawing	up	like	an	insect	in	death.
A	moment	later,	the	warlock’s	bloodshot	eyes	prised	open.	And	seemed	to
see	nothing	for	a	moment.	Then	they	flicked	upward.	‘Warrior,’	he	said	thickly,
then	grimaced	and	spat	a	throatful	of	phlegm	onto	the	grimy	pavestones.
‘Bruthen	Trana.	K’ar	Penath	speaks	boldly	of	your	loyalty,	your	honour.	You
are	Tiste	Edur	–	as	we	all	once	were.	Before	–	before	Rhulad.’	He	coughed,
then	pushed	himself	into	a	sitting	position,	raising	his	head	with	obvious	effort
to	glower	up	at	Bruthen	Trana.	‘And	so,	I	must	send	you	away.’
‘Warlock	King,	I	serve	this	empire—’
‘Errant	take	this	damned	empire!	You	serve	the	Tiste	Edur!’
Bruthen	Trana	regarded	the	broken	creature	below,	said	nothing.
‘I	know,’	Hannan	Mosag	said,	‘you	would	lead	our	warriors	–	through	the
palace	above	us.	Room	by	room,	cutting	down	every	one	of	the	Chancellor ’s
pernicious	spies.	Cutting	Rhulad	free	of	the	snaring	web	spun	about	him	–	but
that	fool	on	his	throne	could	not	recognize	freedom	if	it	sprouted	wings	on	his
shoulders.	He	will	see	it	as	an	attack,	a	rebellion.	Listen	to	me!	Leave	the
Chancellor	to	us!’
‘And	Karos	Invictad?’
‘All	of	them,	Bruthen	Trana.	So	I	vow	before	you.’
‘Where	do	you	wish	me	to	go,	Warlock	King?	After	Fear	Sengar?’
Hannan	Mosag	started,	then	shook	his	head.	‘No.	But	I	dare	not	speak	the
name	of	the	one	you	must	find.	Here,	in	this	realm,	the	Crippled	God	courses
in	my	veins	–	where	I	travelled	a	few	moments	ago,	I	was	free	then.	To
understand.	To…pray.’
‘How	will	I	know	where	to	look?	How	will	I	know	when	I	find	the	one	you
seek?’
The	Warlock	King	hesitated.	He	licked	his	lips,	then	said,	‘He	is	dead.	But
not	dead.	Distant,	yet	is	summoned.	His	tomb	lies	empty,	yet	was	never
occupied.	He	is	never	spoken	of,	though	his	touch	haunts	us	all	again	and
again.’
Bruthen	Trana	raised	a	hand	–	not	surprised	to	see	that	it	trembled.	‘No
more.	Where	shall	I	find	the	beginning	of	the	path?’
‘Where	the	sun	dies.	I	think.’
The	warrior	scowled.	‘West?	But	you	are	not	sure?’
‘I	am	not.	I	dare	not.’
‘Am	I	to	travel	alone?’
‘For	you	to	decide,	Bruthen	Trana.	But	before	all	else,	you	must	get
something	–	an	item	–	from	the	Letherii	slave.	Feather	Witch	–	she	hides
beneath	the	Old	Palace—’


‘I	know	those	tunnels,	Warlock	King.	What	is	this	item?’
Hannan	Mosag	told	him.
He	studied	the	twisted	warlock	for	a	moment	longer	–	the	avid	gleam	in
Hannan	Mosag’s	eyes	bright	as	fever	–	then	spun	round	and	strode	from	the
chamber.
	
Bearing	lanterns,	the	squad	of	guards	formed	a	pool	of	lurid	yellow	light	that
glimmered	along	the	waters	of	Quillas	Canal	as	they	trudged,	amidst	clanking
weapons	and	desultory	muttering,	across	the	bridge.	Once	on	the	other	side,	the
squad	turned	right	to	follow	the	main	avenue	towards	the	Creeper	district.
As	soon	as	the	glow	trundled	away,	Tehol	nudged	Ublala	and	they	hurried
onto	the	bridge.	Glancing	back	at	the	half-blood,	Tehol	scowled,	then	hissed,
‘Watch	me,	you	fool!	See?	I’m	skulking.	No	–	hunch	down,	look	about
suspiciously,	skitter	this	way	and	that.	Duck	down,	Ublala!’
‘But	then	I	can’t	see.’
‘Quiet!’
‘Sorry.	Can	we	get	off	this	bridge?’
‘First,	let	me	see	you	skulk.	Go	on,	you	need	to	practise.’
Grumbling,	Ublala	Pung	hunched	low,	his	beetled	brow	rippling	as	he
looked	first	one	way,	then	the	other.
‘Nice,’	Tehol	said.	‘Now,	hurry	up	and	skulk	after	me.’
‘All	right,	Tehol.	It’s	just	that	there’s	the	curfew,	and	I	don’t	want	trouble.’
They	reached	the	other	side	and	Tehol	led	the	way,	thirty	paces	into	the
wake	of	the	guards,	then	an	abrupt	cut	to	the	left,	coming	within	sight	of	the
Tolls	Repository.	Into	an	alley,	where	he	crouched,	then	gestured	frantically
for	Ublala	to	do	the	same.
‘All	right,’	he	whispered,	‘do	you	know	which	wing?’
Ublala	blinked	in	the	gloom.	‘What?’
‘Do	you	know	where	this	Tarthenal	is	quartered?’
‘Yes.	With	all	the	other	champions.’
‘Good.	Where	is	that?’
‘Well,	it	must	be	somewhere.’
‘Good	thinking,	Ublala.	Now,	stay	close	to	me.	I	am,	after	all,	a	master	of
this	thieving	skulduggery.’
‘Really?	But	Bugg	said—’
‘What?	What	did	my	miserable	manservant	say?	About	me?	Behind	my
back?’
Ublala	shrugged.	‘Lots	of	things.	I	mean,	nothing.	Oh,	you	misheard	me,


Tehol.	I	didn’t	say	anything.	You’re	not	a	clumsy	oaf	with	a	head	full	of
grander	delusions,	or	anything.	Like	that.’	He	brightened.	‘You	want	me	to	box
him	about	the	ears	again?’
‘Later.	Here’s	what	I	think.	Near	the	Imperial	Barracks,	but	a	wing	of	the
Eternal	Domicile.	Or	between	the	Eternal	Domicile	and	the	Old	Palace.’
Ublala	was	nodding.
‘So,’	Tehol	continued,	‘shall	we	get	going?’
‘Where?’
‘Somehow	I	don’t	think	this	night	is	going	to	go	well.	Never	mind,	just
stay	with	me.’
A	quick	peek	into	the	street,	up	one	way,	down	the	other,	then	Tehol	moved
out,	keeping	low	against	the	near	wall.	As	they	drew	closer	to	the	Eternal
Domicile,	the	shadows	diminished	–	lantern	poles	at	intersections,	broader
streets,	and	there	soldiers	positioned	at	postern	gates,	outside	corner
blockhouses,	soldiers,	in	fact,	everywhere.
Tehol	tugged	Ublala	into	the	last	usable	alley,	where	they	crouched	once
more	in	gloom.	‘This	looks	bad,’	he	whispered.	‘There’s	people,	Ublala.	Well,
listen,	it	was	a	good	try.	But	we’ve	been	bested	by	superior	security	and	that’s
that.’
‘They’re	all	standing	in	their	own	light,’	Ublala	said.	‘They	can’t	see
nothing,	Tehol.	Besides,	I	got	in	mind	a	diversion.’
‘A	diversion	like	your	usual	diversions,	Ublala?	Forget	it.	Shurq	Elalle’s
told	me	about	that	last	time—’
‘Yes,	like	that.	It	worked,	didn’t	it?’
‘But	that	was	to	get	her	inside	the	Gerrun	Estate	–	her,	not	you.	Aren’t	you
the	one	who	wants	to	talk	to	this	champion?’
‘That’s	why	you’re	doing	the	diversion,	Tehol.’
‘Me?	Are	you	mad?’
‘It’s	the	only	way.’
They	heard	the	scuff	of	boots	from	the	street,	then	a	loud	voice:	‘There!
Who’s	skulking	in	that	alley?’
Ublala	flinched	down.	‘How	did	he	know?’
‘We	better	run!’
They	bolted,	as	a	spear	of	lantern-light	lanced	across	the	alley	mouth;	then,
pursued	by	shouting	soldiers,	the	two	fugitives	reached	the	far	end	of	the	alley.
Where	Tehol	went	left.
And	Ublala	went	right.
Alarms	resounded	in	the	night.


The	answering	of	his	prayers	was	nothing	like	Bruthen	Trana	had	imagined.
Not	through	the	grotesque	creature	that	was	Hannan	Mosag,	the	Warlock	King.
The	very	man	who	had	started	the	Edur	down	this	path	of	dissolution.
Ambition,	greed	and	betrayal	–	it	was	all	Bruthen	could	manage	to	stand	still
before	Hannan	Mosag,	rather	than	strangle	the	life	from	the	Warlock	King.
Yet	from	that	twisted	mouth	had	come…hope.	It	seemed	impossible.
Macabre.	Mocking	Bruthen	Trana’s	visions	of	heroic	salvation.	Rhulad	falls	–
the	whole	Sengar	bloodline	obliterated	–	and	then…Hannan	Mosag.	For	his
crimes.	Honour	can	be	won	–	I	will	see	to	that.
This	is	how	it	must	be.
He	was	not	unduly	worried	over	the	Letherii.	The	Chancellor	would	not
live	much	longer.	The	palace	would	be	purged.	The	Patriotists	would	be
crushed,	their	agents	slain,	and	those	poor	prisoners	whose	only	crime,	as	far
as	he	could	tell,	was	to	disagree	with	the	practices	of	the	Patriotists	–	those
prisoners,	Letherii	one	and	all,	could	be	freed.	There	was	no	real	sedition	at
work	here.	No	treason.	Karos	Invictad	used	such	accusations	as	if	they
encompassed	a	guilt	that	needed	no	proof,	as	if	they	justified	any	treatment	of
the	accused	he	desired.	Ironically,	in	so	doing	he	subverted	humanity	itself,
making	him	the	most	profound	traitor	of	all.
But	not	even	that	mattered	much.	Bruthen	Trana	did	not	like	the	man,	a
dislike	that	seemed	reason	enough	to	kill	the	bastard.	Karos	Invictad	took
pleasure	in	cruelty,	making	him	both	pathetic	and	dangerous.	If	he	were
permitted	to	continue,	there	was	the	very	real	risk	that	the	Letherii	people
would	rise	up	in	true	rebellion,	and	the	gutters	in	every	city	of	the	empire
would	run	crimson.	No	matter.	I	do	not	like	him.	For	years	I	was	witness	to	his
contempt	for	me,	there	in	his	eyes.	I	will	brook	the	affront	no	longer.
This,	more	than	anything	else,	dismayed	Bruthen	Trana.	Hannan	Mosag’s
insisting	he	leave	immediately	–	for	some	place	where	the	sun	dies.	West.	But
no,	not	west.	The	Warlock	King	misunderstood	his	own	vision—
A	sudden	thought,	slowing	his	steps	as	he	made	his	way	down	into	the
subterranean	corridors	and	chambers	beneath	the	Old	Palace.	Who	answered
his	prayers?	Who	showed	him	this	path?	He	suggested	it	was	not	this	Crippled
God.	Father	Shadow?	Has	Scabandari	Bloodeye	returned	to	us?
No,	he	has	not.	Then…who?
A	moment	later,	Bruthen	Trana	scowled,	then	cursed	under	his	breath	and
resumed	his	journey.	I	am	given	hope	and	what	do	I	do?	Seek	to	kill	it	with	my
own	hands.	No,	I	understand	the	path	–	better	than	Hannan	Mosag	himself.


Where	the	sun	dies	is	not	to	the	west.
It	is	beneath	the	waves.	In	the	depths.
Did	not	a	demon	of	the	seas	retrieve	his	body?	No,	Hannan	Mosag,	you
dare	not	name	him.	He	is	not	even	Tiste	Edur.	Yet	he	must	be	our	salvation.
He	reached	the	sloping	tunnel	that	would	take	him	to	the	slave’s	supposedly
secret	abode.	These	Letherii	were	indeed	pathetic.
We	each	carry	a	whisper	of	Emurlahn	within	us	–	each	and	every	Tiste
Edur.	This	is	why	no	slave	among	the	tribes	could	escape	us.
Except	for	one,	he	corrected	himself.	Udinaas.	But	then,	the	K’risnan	knew
where	he	was	–	or	so	Bruthen	Trana	suspected.	They	knew,	yet	chose	to	do
nothing.
It	was	no	wonder	Rhulad	did	not	trust	them.
Nor	do	I.
He	could	smell	the	stench	of	bitter	magic	as	he	drew	nearer,	and	he	heard
her	muttering	in	her	chamber,	and	knew	that	something	had	changed.	In	the	one
named	Feather	Witch.	In	the	power	she	possessed.
Well,	he	would	give	her	no	time	to	prepare.
	
Feather	Witch	looked	up	in	fear	and	alarm	as	the	Tiste	Edur	warrior	strode	in.
Squealing,	she	backed	away	until	brought	short	by	a	wall,	then	sank	down	and
covered	her	face.
The	stark	intent	in	the	warrior ’s	face	was	fierce.
He	grasped	her	by	the	hair	and	yanked	her	to	her	feet,	then	higher,	the	pain
forcing	a	shriek	from	her.
With	his	other	hand	he	grasped	the	small	leather	pouch	between	her
breasts.	When	he	tore	it	loose,	the	thong	cut	like	wire	across	the	back	of	her
neck	and	behind	one	ear.	She	could	feel	blood.	She	thought	that	her	ear	had
very	nearly	been	cut	loose,	that	it	hung	by	a	strand	of—
He	flung	her	back	down.	Her	head	cracked	against	the	stone	of	the	wall.
She	slumped	onto	the	floor,	ragged	sobbing	erupting	from	her	heaving	chest.
And	listened	–	beyond	the	close	roar	of	blood	in	her	skull	–	to	his
dwindling	footsteps.
He	had	taken	the	severed	finger.
He	goes	to	find	the	soul	of	Brys	Beddict.
	
Tehol	staggered	into	the	single	room,	collapsed	down	near	the	hearth.


Sheathed	in	sweat,	gasping	to	gain	his	breath.
Bugg,	seated	with	his	back	to	a	wall	and	sipping	tea,	slowly	raised	his
brows.	‘Afflicted	with	the	delusion	of	competence,	I	see.’
‘That	–	that’s	what	you	said	–	to	Ublala?	You	cruel,	heartless—’
‘The	observation	was	made	regarding	all	mortals,	actually.’
‘He	didn’t	take	it	that	way!’
Janath	spoke	from	where	she	sat	sipping	from	her	own	chipped	clay	cup.
‘All	those	alarms	ringing	through	the	city	are	because	of	you,	Tehol	Beddict?’
‘They	will	be	on	the	lookout	now,’	Bugg	observed,	‘for	a	man	wearing	a
blanket.’
‘Well,’	Tehol	retorted,	‘there	must	be	plenty	of	those,	right?’
There	was	no	immediate	reply.
‘There	must	be,’	Tehol	insisted,	a	little	wildly	even	to	his	own	ears.	He
hastened	on	in	a	more	reasonable	tone.	‘The	ever	growing	divide	between	the
rich	and	the	poor	and	all	that.	Why,	blankets	are	the	new	fashion	among	the
destitute.	I’m	sure	of	it.’
Neither	listener	said	anything,	then	both	sipped	from	their	cups.
Scowling,	Tehol	said,	‘What’s	that	you’re	drinking?’
‘Hen	tea,’	Bugg	said.
‘Soup,	you	mean.’
‘No,’	said	Janath.	‘Tea.’
‘Wait,	where	are	all	the	chickens?’
‘On	the	roof,’	Bugg	said.
‘Won’t	they	fall	off?’
‘One	or	two	might.	We	do	regular	rounds.	So	far,	they	have	displayed
uncharacteristic	cleverness.	Rather	unique	for	this	household.’
‘Oh	right,	kick	the	exhausted	fugitive	why	don’t	you?	They	probably
caught	poor	old	Ublala.’
‘Maybe.	He	did	have	a	diversion	in	mind.’
Tehol’s	eyes	narrowed	on	his	manservant.	‘Those	wisps	above	your	ears
need	trimming.	Janath,	find	me	a	knife,	will	you?’
‘No.’
‘You	would	side	with	him,	wouldn’t	you?’
‘Bugg	is	actually	a	very	capable	man,	Tehol.	You	don’t	deserve	him,	you
know.’
‘I	assure	you,	Scholar,	the	undeservedness	is	mutual.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘You	know,	from	the	smell	I	think	I	could	make	a	strong	argument	that	hen
tea	is	no	different	from	watery	chicken	soup,	or,	at	the	very	least,	broth.’


‘You	never	could	grasp	semantics,	Tehol	Beddict.’
‘I	couldn’t	grasp	much	of	anything,	I	seem	to	recall.	Yet	I	will	defend	my
diligence,	my	single-minded	lust	for	seductive	knowledge,	the	purity	of	true
academic…uh,	pursuit	–	why,	I	could	go	on	and	on—’
‘Ever	your	flaw,	Tehol.’
‘—but	I	won’t,	cursed	as	I	am	with	an	unappreciative	audience.	So	tell	me,
Bugg,	why	was	Ublala	so	eager	to	talk	to	this	true	blood	Tarthenal?’
‘He	wishes	to	discover,	I	imagine,	if	the	warrior	is	a	god.’
‘A	what?’
‘A	new	god,	I	mean.	Or	an	ascendant,	to	be	more	precise.	I	doubt	there	are
worshippers	involved.	Yet.’
‘Well,	Tarthenal	only	worship	what	terrifies	them,	right?	This	is	just	some
warrior	doomed	to	die	by	the	Emperor ’s	sword.	Hardly	the	subject	to	inspire
poor	Ublala	Pung.’
To	that	Bugg	simply	shrugged.
Tehol	wiped	sweat	from	his	brow.	‘Give	me	some	of	that	hen	tea,	will
you?’
‘With	or	without?’
‘With	or	without	what?’
‘Feathers.’
‘That	depends.	Are	they	clean	feathers?’
‘They	are	now,’	Bugg	replied.
‘All	right,	then,	since	I	can’t	think	of	anything	more	absurd.	With.’
Bugg	reached	for	a	clay	cup.	‘I	knew	I	could	count	on	you,	Master.’
	
She	woke	to	a	metallic	clang	out	in	the	corridor.
Sitting	up,	Samar	Dev	stared	into	the	darkness	of	her	room.
She	thought	she	could	hear	breathing,	just	outside	her	door,	then,	distinctly,
a	muted	whimper.
She	rose,	wrapping	the	blanket	about	her,	and	padded	to	the	doorway.
Lifted	the	latch	and	swung	the	flimsy	barrier	aside.
‘Karsa?’
The	huge	figure	spun	to	face	her.
‘No,’	she	then	said.	‘Not	Karsa.	Who	are	you?’
‘Where	is	he?’
‘Who?’
‘The	one	like	me.	Which	room?’
Samar	Dev	edged	out	into	the	corridor.	She	looked	to	the	left	and	saw	the


motionless	forms	of	the	two	palace	guards	normally	stationed	to	either	side	of
the	corridor ’s	entranceway.	Their	helmed	heads	were	conspicuously	close
together,	and	those	iron	pots	were	both	severely	dented.	‘You	killed	them?’
The	huge	man	glanced	over,	then	grunted.	‘They	were	looking	the	wrong
way.’
‘You	mean	they	didn’t	see	you.’
‘Maybe	my	hands.’
The	nonsensical	yet	oddly	satisfying	exchange	had	been	in	whispers.
Samar	Dev	gestured	that	he	follow	and	set	off	up	the	corridor	until	she	came	to
the	door	to	Karsa	Orlong’s	room.	‘He’s	in	here.’
‘Knock,’	the	giant	ordered.	‘Then	walk	in	ahead	of	me.’
‘Or	else?’
‘Or	else	I	knock	your	head…together.’
Sighing,	she	reached	towards	the	door	with	one	fist.
It	opened	and	the	point	of	a	stone	sword	suddenly	hovered	in	the	hollow	of
her	throat.
‘Who	is	that	behind	you,	witch?’
‘You	have	a	visitor,’	she	replied.	‘From…outside.’
Karsa	Orlong,	naked	above	the	waist,	his	escaped	slave	tattoos	a	crazed
web	reaching	down	to	his	shoulders	and	chest,	withdrew	the	sword	and	stepped
back.
The	stranger	pushed	Samar	Dev	to	one	side	and	entered	the	small	room.
Whereupon	he	sank	down	to	his	knees,	head	bowing.	‘Pure	one,’	he	said,
the	words	like	a	prayer.
Samar	Dev	edged	in	and	shut	the	door	behind	her,	as	Karsa	Orlong	tossed
his	sword	on	the	cot,	then	reached	down	with	one	hand	–	and	hammered	the
stranger	in	the	side	of	the	head.
Rocking	the	man.	Blood	started	from	his	nostrils	and	he	blinked	stupidly
up	at	Karsa.
Who	said,	‘There	is	Toblakai	blood	in	you.	Toblakai	kneel	to	no-one.’
Samar	Dev	crossed	her	arms	and	leaned	back	against	the	door.	‘First
lesson	when	dealing	with	Karsa	Orlong,’	she	murmured.	‘Expect	the
unexpected.’
The	huge	man	struggled	back	to	his	feet,	wiping	at	the	blood	on	his	face.
He	was	not	as	tall	as	Karsa,	but	almost	as	wide.	‘I	am	Ublala	Pung,	of	the
Tarthenal—’
‘Tarthenal.’
Samar	Dev	said,	‘A	mixed-blood	remnant	of	some	local	Toblakai
population.	Used	to	be	more	in	the	city	–	I	certainly	have	not	seen	any	others


out	in	the	markets	and	such.	But	they’ve	virtually	vanished,	just	like	most	of	the
other	tribes	the	Letherii	subjugated.’
Ublala	half	turned	to	glower	at	her.	‘Not	vanished.	Defeated.	And	now
those	who	are	left	live	on	islands	in	the	Draconean	Sea.’
At	the	word	‘defeated’,	Samar	Dev	saw	Karsa	scowl.
Ublala	faced	the	Toblakai	once	more,	then	said,	with	strange	awkwardness,
‘Lead	us,	War	Leader.’
Sudden	fire	in	Karsa’s	eyes	and	he	met	Samar	Dev’s	gaze.	‘I	told	you	once,
witch,	that	I	would	lead	an	army	of	my	kind.	It	has	begun.’
‘They’re	not	Toblakai—’
‘If	but	one	drop	of	Toblakai	blood	burns	in	their	veins,	witch,	then	they	are
Toblakai.’
‘Decimated	by	Letherii	sorcery—’
A	sneer.	‘Letherii	sorcery?	I	care	naught.’
Ublala	Pung,	however,	was	shaking	his	head.	‘Even	with	our	greatest
shamans,	Pure	One,	we	could	not	defeat	it.	Why,	Arbanat	himself—’
This	time	it	was	Samar	Dev	who	interrupted.	‘Ublala,	I	have	seen	Karsa
Orlong	push	his	way	through	that	sorcery.’
The	mixed-blood	stared	at	her,	mouth	agape.	‘Push?’	The	word	was	mostly
mouthed,	the	barest	of	whispers.
Despite	herself,	she	nodded.	‘I	wish	I	could	tell	you	otherwise,	you	poor
bastard.	I	wish	I	could	tell	you	to	run	away	and	hide	with	your	kin	on	those
islands,	because	this	one	here	makes	empty	promises.	Alas,	I	cannot.	He	does
not	make	empty	promises.	Not	so	far,	anyway.	Of	course,’	she	added	with	a
shrug	that	belied	the	bitterness	she	felt,	‘this	Edur	Emperor	will	kill	him.’
To	that,	Ublala	Pung	shook	his	head.
Denial?	Dismay?
Karsa	Orlong	addressed	Ublala:	‘You	must	leave	when	this	is	done,
warrior.	You	must	travel	to	your	islands	and	gather	our	people,	then	bring
them	here.	You	are	now	my	army.	I	am	Karsa	Orlong,	Toblakai	and	Teblor.	I
am	your	war	leader.’
‘The	marks	on	your	face,’	Ublala	whispered.
‘What	of	them?’
‘As	shattered	as	the	Tarthenal.	As	the	Toblakai	–	broken,	driven	apart.	So
the	oldest	legends	say	–	scattered,	by	ice,	by	betrayal…’
An	icy	draught	seemed	to	flow	up	around	Samar	Dev,	like	a	cold	wave
engulfing	a	rock,	and	she	shivered.	Oh,	I	dislike	the	sound	of	that,	since	it
echoes	the	truth	of	things.	Too	clearly.
‘Yet	see	my	face	behind	it,’	Karsa	said.	‘Two	truths.	What	was	and	what


will	be.	Do	you	deny	this,	Ublala	of	the	Tarthenal?’
A	mute	shake	of	the	head.	Then	the	warrior	shot	another	glance	at	Samar
Dev,	before	saying,	‘War	Leader,	I	have	words.	Of…of	Rhulad	Sengar,	the
Edur	Emperor.	Words…of	his	secret.’
‘Leave	us,	witch,’	Karsa	said.
She	started.	‘What?	Not	a	chance—’
‘Leave	us	or	I	will	instruct	my	warrior	to	knock	your	head	together.’
‘Oh,	so	now	it’s	idiocy	that	inspires	you?’
‘Samar	Dev,’	Karsa	said.	‘This	warrior	has	defeated	every	barrier
surrounding	this	compound.	I	am	not	interested	in	his	words.	Did	you	not	hear
the	alarms?	He	fights	as	would	a	Toblakai.’
‘They	tried	Drowning	me	too,	once,’	Ublala	said.
Samar	Dev	snorted.	‘With	him	around,	it	truly	is	a	struggle	to	remain
solemn,	never	mind	dignified.	A	cure	for	pomposity,	Karsa	Orlong	–	be	sure
to	keep	this	one	at	your	side.’
‘Go.’
She	gestured	with	sudden	contempt.	‘Oh,	fine,	on	with	you	two,	then.	Later,
Karsa,	I	will	remind	you	of	one	thing.’
‘What?’
She	opened	the	door	behind	her.	‘This	oaf	couldn’t	even	find	your	room.’
Out	in	the	corridor,	Samar	Dev	heard	a	stirring	from	one	of	the	guards,
then	a	groan	and	then,	distinctly:	‘What	are	all	those	lights?’


Chapter	Twelve

I	looked	to	the	west	and	saw	a	thousand	suns	setting.
Sidivar	Trelus
The	earthy	smell	of	the	dung-fires	preceded	the	first	sighting	of	the	Awl	army.
Beneath	the	smudged	light	of	a	dull	moon,	the	Atri-Preda	and	Brohl	Handar
rode	with	the	scout	troop	to	the	base	of	a	ridge,	where	they	dismounted	and,
leaving	one	soldier	with	the	horses,	set	out	on	foot	up	the	slope.
The	summit	was	almost	devoid	of	grasses,	knobs	of	angular	bedrock
pushing	through	where	the	ceaseless	winds	had	eroded	away	the	scant	soil.
Dropping	down	low,	the	half-dozen	Letherii	and	one	Tiste	Edur	edged	up
between	the	outcroppings,	filling	the	spaces	in	the	broken	spine	of	basalt.
Beyond,	perhaps	a	third	of	a	league	distant,	burned	the	cookfires	of	the
enemy.	A	sea	of	fallen,	smouldering	stars,	spreading	out	to	fill	the	basin	of	an
entire	valley,	then	up	the	far	slope,	defining	its	contours.
‘How	many	do	you	judge?’	Brohl	Handar	asked	the	Atri-Preda	in	a	low
voice.
Bivatt	sighed.	‘Combatants?	Maybe	ten,	eleven	thousand.	These	armies	are
more	like	migrations,	Overseer.	Everyone	tags	along.’
‘Then	where	are	the	herds?’
‘Probably	the	other	side	of	the	far	valley.’
‘So	tomorrow,	we	ride	to	battle.’
‘Yes.	And	again,	I	advise	that	you	and	your	bodyguard	remain	with	the
train—’
‘That	will	not	be	necessary,’	Brohl	Handar	cut	in,	repeating	words	he	had
uttered	a	dozen	times	in	the	past	three	days	and	nights.	‘There	are	Edur
warriors	with	you,	and	they	will	be	used,	yes?’
‘If	needed,	Overseer.	But	the	fight	awaiting	us	looks	to	be	no	different
from	all	the	others	we	Letherii	have	had	against	these	people	of	the	plains.	It
looks	as	if	Redmask	was	not	able	to	sway	the	elders	with	any	new	schemes.	It’s
the	old	tactics	–	the	ones	that	fail	them	time	and	again.’	She	was	silent	for	a


moment,	then	she	continued,	‘The	valley	behind	us	is	called	Bast	Fulmar.	It	has
some	arcane	significance	for	the	Awl.	That	is	where	we	will	meet.’
He	turned	his	head	and	studied	her	in	the	gloom.	‘You	are	content	to	let
them	choose	the	place	of	battle?’
She	snorted.	‘Overseer,	if	these	lands	were	filled	with	defiles,	canyons,
arroyos	or	impassable	rivers	–	or	forests	–	then	indeed	I	would	think	carefully
about	engaging	the	enemy	where	they	want	us	to.	But	not	here.	Visibility	is	not
an	issue	–	with	our	mages	the	Awl	cannot	hide	in	any	case.	There	are	no
difficult	avenues	of	retreat,	no	blinds.	The	fight	tomorrow	will	be	brutal	in	its
simplicity.	Awl	ferocity	against	Letherii	discipline.’
‘And	with	this	Redmask	leading	them,	they	will	be	ferocious	indeed.’
‘Yes.	But	it	will	fail	in	the	end.’
‘You	are	confident,	Atri-Preda.’
He	caught	her	smile.	‘Relieved,	Overseer.	This	night,	I	see	only	what	I	have
seen	a	dozen	times	before.	Do	not	imagine,	however,	that	I	am	dismissing	the
enemy.	It	will	be	bloody.’	With	that	she	gestured,	and	the	group	began
withdrawing	from	the	ridgeline.
As	they	made	their	way	down	to	the	waiting	horses,	Brohl	Handar	said,	‘I
saw	no	pickets,	Atri-Preda.	Nor	mounted	outriders.	Does	that	not	seem	odd	to
you?’
‘No.	They	know	we	are	close.	They	wanted	us	to	see	that	camp.’
‘To	achieve	what?	Some	pointless	effort	to	overawe	us?’
‘Something	like	that,	yes.’
You	invite	me	to	feel	contempt	for	these	Awl.	Why?	So	that	you	can	justify
not	using	the	Tiste	Edur?	The	K’risnan?	You	want	this	victory	on	the	morrow	to
be	Letherii.	You	do	not	want	to	find	yourself	beholden	to	the	Edur	–	not	for	this
grand	theft	of	land	and	beast,	this	harvesting	of	slaves.
So,	I	suspect,	the	Factor	instructed.	Letur	Anict	is	not	one	to	share	the
spoils.
I,	Atri-Preda,	am	not	relieved.
	
‘Stone-tipped	arrows	–	you	are	truly	a	fool.	They	will	break	against	Letherii
armour.	I	can	expect	nothing	from	you.	At	least	I	discover	that	now,	instead	of
in	the	midst	of	battle.’
Toc	Anaster	settled	back	on	his	haunches	and	watched	Torrent	march	out
of	the	firelight.	Off…somewhere.	Somewhere	important.	Like	the	latrines.	He
resumed	examining	the	fletching	on	the	Imass	arrows.	Gift	of	an	old	friend.
That	clunking,	creaking	collection	of	droll	bones.	He	could	barely	recall	the	last


time	he	was	among	friends.	Gruntle,	perhaps.	Another	continent.	A	drunken
evening	–	was	that	Saltoan	wine?	Gredfallan	ale?	He	couldn’t	recall.
Surrounding	him,	the	murmur	of	thousands	–	their	moving	through	the
camp,	their	quiet	conversations	around	the	cookfires.	Old	men	and	old	women,
the	lame,	the	young.	A	fire	burning	for	each	and	every	Awl.
And	somewhere	out	on	the	plain,	Redmask	and	his	warriors	–	a	night
without	fires,	without	conversations.	Nothing,	I	imagine,	but	the	soft	honing	of
weapon	edges.	Iron	and	stone	whispering	in	the	night.
A	simple	deceit,	its	success	dependent	on	Letherii	expectations.	Enemy
scouts	had	spotted	this	camp,	after	all.	As	predicted.	Countless	fires	in	the
darkness,	appropriately	close	to	Bast	Fulmar,	the	site	of	the	impending	battle.
All	the	way	it	was	supposed	to	be.
But	Redmask	had	other	plans.	And	to	aid	in	the	deception,	Toc	suspected,
some	arcane	sorcery	from	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
An	elder	appeared,	walking	into	the	fire’s	glow	on	bowed	legs.	Toc	had
seen	this	one	speaking	to	Redmask,	often	riding	at	the	war	leader ’s	side.	He
crouched	down	opposite	Toc	and	studied	him	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	spat
into	the	flames,	nodded	at	the	answering	sizzle,	and	spoke:	‘I	do	not	trust	you.’
‘I’m	crushed.’
‘Those	arrows,	they	are	bound	in	ritual	magic.	Yet	no	spirit	has	blessed
them.	What	sort	of	sorcery	is	that?	Letherii?	Are	you	a	creature	of	the	Tiles
and	Holds?	A	traitor	in	our	midst.	You	plot	betrayal,	vengeance	against	our
abandoning	you.’
‘Trying	to	inspire	me,	Elder?	Sorry	to	disappoint	you,	but	there	are	no
embers	in	the	ashes,	nothing	to	stir	to	life.’
‘You	are	young.’
‘Not	as	young	as	you	think.	Besides,	what	has	that	to	do	with	anything?’
‘Redmask	likes	you.’
Toc	scratched	the	scar	where	an	eye	had	been.	‘Are	your	wits	addled	by
age?’
A	grunt.	‘I	know	secrets.’
‘Me	too.’
‘None	to	compare	with	mine.	I	was	there	when	Redmask’s	sister	killed
herself.’
‘And	I	suckled	at	the	tit	of	a	K’Chain	Che’Malle	Matron.	If	tit	is	the	right
word.’
The	old	man’s	face	twisted	in	disbelief.	‘That	is	a	good	lie.	But	it	is	not	the
game	I	am	playing.	I	saw	with	my	own	eyes	the	great	sea	canoes.	Upon	the
north	shore.	Thousands	upon	thousands.’


Toc	began	returning	the	arrows	to	the	hide	quiver.	‘These	arrows	were
made	by	a	dead	man.	Dead	for	a	hundred	thousand	years,	or	more.’
The	wrinkled	scowl	opposite	him	deepened.	‘I	have	seen	skeletons	running
in	the	night	–	on	this	very	plain.’
‘This	body	you	see	isn’t	mine.	I	stole	it.’
‘I	alone	know	the	truth	of	Bast	Fulmar.’
‘This	body’s	father	was	a	dead	man	–	he	gasped	his	last	breath	even	as	his
seed	was	taken	on	a	field	of	battle.’
‘The	victory	of	long	ago	was	in	truth	a	defeat.’
‘This	body	grew	strong	on	human	meat.’
‘Redmask	will	betray	us.’
‘This	mouth	waters	as	I	look	at	you.’
The	old	man	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.	‘Evil	speaks	in	lies.’
‘And	the	good	know	only	one	truth.	But	it’s	a	lie,	because	there’s	always
more	than	one	truth.’
Another	throatful	of	phlegm	into	the	campfire.	Then	a	complicated	series
of	gestures,	the	inscribing	in	the	air	above	the	flames	of	a	skein	of	wards	that
seemed	to	swirl	for	a	moment	in	the	thin	smoke.	‘You	are	banished,’	the	elder
then	pronounced.
‘You	have	no	idea,	old	man.’
‘I	think	you	should	have	died	long	ago.’
‘More	times	than	I	can	count.	Started	with	a	piece	of	a	moon.	Then	a
damned	puppet,	then…oh,	never	mind.’
‘Torrent	says	you	will	run.	In	the	end.	He	says	your	courage	is	broken.’
Toc	looked	down	into	the	flames.	‘That	may	well	be,’	he	said.
‘He	will	kill	you	then.’
‘Assuming	he	can	catch	me.	If	there’s	one	thing	I	know	how	to	do,	it’s	ride
a	horse.’
With	a	snarl,	the	elder	stormed	off.
‘Courage,’	Toc	muttered	to	himself.	‘Yes,	there	is	that.	And	maybe
cowardice	truly	is	bred	in	the	very	bones.’	Because	let’s	face	it,	Anaster	was	no
cold	iron.	Nor	hot,	for	that	matter.
From	somewhere	in	the	night	came	the	keening	howl	of	a	wolf.
Toc	grunted.	‘Yes,	well,	it’s	not	as	if	I	had	the	privilege	of	choice,	is	it?	I
wonder	if	any	of	us	has.	Ever.’	He	raised	his	voice	slightly,	‘You	know,	Torrent
–	yes,	I	see	you	hulking	out	there	–	it	occurs	to	me,	given	the	precedent,	that	the
question	of	cowardice	is	one	your	Awl	must	face,	tomorrow.	I	have	no	doubt
Redmask	–	if	he	has	any	concerns	–	is	thinking	on	that	right	now.	Wondering.
Can	he	bully	all	of	you	into	honour?’


The	vague	shape	that	was	Torrent	moved	off.
Toc	fell	silent,	tossed	yet	another	lump	of	rodara	dung	onto	the	fire,	and
thought	about	old	friends	long	gone.
	
The	lone	line	of	scuffed	footprints	ended	with	a	figure,	trudging	up	the	distant
slope	of	clay	and	pebbles.	That	was	the	thing	about	following	a	trail,	Hedge
reminded	himself.	Easy	to	forget	the	damned	prints	belonged	to	something
real,	especially	after	what	seemed	weeks	of	tracking	the	bastard.
T’lan	Imass,	as	he	had	suspected.	Those	splayed,	bony	feet	dragged	too
much,	especially	with	an	arch	so	high	it	left	no	imprint.	True,	some	bowlegged
Wickan	might	leave	something	similar,	but	not	walking	at	a	pace	that	stayed
ahead	of	Hedge	for	this	long.	Not	a	chance	of	that.	Still,	it	was	odd	that	the
ancient	undead	warrior	was	walking	at	all.
Easier	traversing	this	wasteland	as	dust.
Maybe	it’s	too	damp.	Maybe	it’s	no	fun	being	mud.	I’ll	have	to	ask	it	that.
Assuming	it	doesn’t	kill	me	outright.	Or	try	to,	I	mean.	I	keep	forgetting	that
I’m	already	dead.	If	there’s	one	thing	the	dead	should	remember,	it’s	that	crucial
detail,	don’t	you	think,	Fid?	Bah,	what	would	you	know.	You’re	still	alive.	And
not	here	either.
Hood	take	me,	I’m	in	need	of	company.
Not	that	damned	whispering	wind,	though.	Good	thing	it	had	fled,	in	tatters,
unable	to	draw	any	closer	to	this	T’lan	Imass	with	–	yes	–	but	one	arm.	Beat	up
thing,	ain’t	it	just?
He	was	sure	it	knew	he	was	here,	a	thousand	paces	behind	it.	Probably
knows	I’m	a	ghost,	too.	Which	is	why	it	hasn’t	bothered	attacking	me.
I	think	I’m	getting	used	to	this.
Another	third	of	a	league	passed	before	Hedge	was	able	to	draw	close
enough	to	finally	snare	the	undead	warrior ’s	regard.	Halting,	slowly	turning
about.	The	flint	weapon	in	its	lone	hand	was	more	a	cutlass	than	a	sword,	its
end	strangely	hooked.	A	hilt	had	been	fashioned	from	the	palmate	portion	of	an
antler,	creating	a	shallow,	tined	bell-guard	polished	brown	with	age.	Part	of	the
warrior ’s	face	had	been	brutally	smashed:	but	one	side	of	its	heavy	jaw	was
intact,	giving	its	ghastly	mien	a	lopsided	cant.
‘Begone,	ghost,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said	in	a	ravaged	voice.
‘Well	I	would,’	Hedge	replied,	‘only	it	seems	we’re	heading	in	the	same
direction.’
‘That	cannot	be.’
‘Why?’


‘Because	you	do	not	know	where	I	am	going.’
‘Oh,	perfect	Imass	logic.	In	other	words,	absurd	idiocy.	No,	I	don’t	know
precisely	where	you	are	going,	but	it	is	undeniably	to	be	found	in	the	same
direction	as	where	I	am	headed.	Is	that	too	sharp	an	observation	for	you?’
‘Why	do	you	hold	to	your	flesh?’
‘The	same	reason,	I	suppose,	why	you	hold	on	to	what’s	left	of	yours.
Listen,	I	am	named	Hedge.	I	was	once	a	soldier,	a	Bridgeburner.	Malazan
marines.	Are	you	some	cast-off	from	Logros	T’lan	Imass?’
The	warrior	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then,	‘I	was	once	of	Kron	T’lan
Imass.	Born	in	the	Season	of	Blood-from-the-Mountain	to	the	clan	of	Eptr
Phinana.	My	own	blood	arrived	on	the	shores	of	Jagra	Til.	I	am	Emroth.’
‘A	woman?’
A	clattering,	uneven	shrug.
‘Well,	Emroth,	what	are	you	doing	walking	across	Hood’s	forgotten	icepit?’
‘There	is	no	pit	here.’
‘As	you	say.’	Hedge	looked	round.	‘Is	this	where	abandoned	T’lan	Imass
go,	then?’
‘Not	here,’	Emroth	replied.	Then	the	cutlass	lifted	and	slowly	pointed.
Ahead.	The	direction	Hedge	had	decided	to	call	north.	‘What,	are	we
headed	towards	a	huge	pile	of	frozen	bones,	then?’
Emroth	turned	and	began	walking	once	more.
Hedge	moved	up	alongside	the	undead	creature.	‘Were	you	beautiful	once,
Emroth?’
‘I	do	not	remember.’
‘I	was	hopeless	with	women,’	Hedge	said.	‘My	ears	are	too	big	–	yes,	that’s
why	I	wear	this	leather	cap.	And	I	got	knobby	knees.	It’s	why	I	became	a
soldier,	you	know.	To	meet	women.	And	then	I	discovered	that	women	soldiers
are	scary.	I	mean,	a	lot	more	scary	than	normal	women,	which	is	saying
something.	I	guess	with	you	Imass,	well,	everyone	was	a	warrior,	right?’
‘I	understand,’	Emroth	said.
‘You	do?	Understand	what?’
‘Why	you	have	no	companions,	Hedge	of	the	Bridgeburners.’
‘You’re	not	going	to	turn	into	a	cloud	of	dust	on	me,	are	you?’
‘In	this	place,	I	cannot.	Alas.’
Grinning,	Hedge	resumed,	‘It’s	not	like	I	died	a	virgin	or	anything,	of
course.	Even	ugly	bastards	like	me	–	well,	so	long	as	there’s	enough	coin	in
your	hand.	But	I’ll	tell	you	something,	Emroth,	that’s	not	what	you’d	call	love
now,	is	it?	So	anyway,	the	truth	of	it	is,	I	never	shared	that	with	anybody.	Love.


I	mean,	from	the	time	I	stopped	being	a	child,	right	up	until	I	died.
‘Now	there	was	this	soldier,	once.	She	was	big	and	mean.	Named	Detoran.
She	decided	she	loved	me,	and	showed	it	by	beating	me	senseless.	So	how	do
you	figure	that	one?	Well,	I’ve	got	it	worked	out.	You	see,	she	was	even	less
lovable	than	me.	Poor	old	cow.	Wish	I’d	understood	that	at	the	time.	But	I	was
too	busy	running	away	from	her.	Funny	how	that	is,	isn’t	it?
‘She	died,	too.	And	so	I	had	a	chance	to,	you	know,	talk	to	her.	Since	we
found	ourselves	in	the	same	place.	Her	problem	was,	she	couldn’t	put	enough
words	together	to	make	a	real	sentence.	Not	thick,	much.	Just	inarticulate.
People	like	that,	how	can	you	guess	what’s	in	their	mind?	They	can’t	tell	you,
so	the	guessing	stays	guessing	and	most	of	the	time	you’re	so	wrong	it’s
pathetic.	Well,	we	worked	it	out,	more	or	less.	I	think.	She	said	even	less	as	a
ghost.
‘But	that’s	the	thing	with	it	all,	Emroth.	There’s	the	big	explosion,	the
white,	then	black,	then	you’re	stirring	awake	all	over	again.	A	damned	ghost
with	nowhere	worthwhile	to	go,	and	all	you’re	left	with	is	realizations	and
regrets.	And	a	list	of	wishes	longer	than	Hood’s—’
‘No	more,	Hedge	of	the	Bridgeburners,’	Emroth	interjected,	the	tremor	of
emotion	in	its	voice.	‘I	am	not	a	fool.	I	comprehend	this	game	of	yours.	But	my
memories	are	not	for	you.’
Hedge	shrugged.	‘Not	for	you	either,	I	gather.	Gave	them	all	away	to	wage
war	against	the	Jaghut.	They	were	so	evil,	so	dangerous,	you	made	of
yourselves	your	first	victims.	Kind	of	a	backwards	kind	of	vengeance,
wouldn’t	you	say?	Like	you	went	and	done	their	work	for	them.	And	the	real
joke	is,	they	weren’t	much	evil	or	dangerous	at	all.	Oh,	maybe	a	handful,	but
those	handful	earned	the	wrath	of	their	kin	real	fast	–	often	long	before	you
and	your	armies	even	showed	up.	They	could	police	themselves	just	fine.	They
flung	glaciers	at	you,	so	what	did	you	do	to	defeat	that?	Why,	you	made	your
hearts	even	colder,	even	more	lifeless	than	any	glacier.	Hood	knows,	that’s
irony	for	you.’
‘I	am	unbound,’	Emroth	said	in	a	rasp.	‘My	memories	remain	with	me.	It	is
these	memories	that	have	broken	me.’
‘Broken?’
Another	shrug.	‘Hedge	of	the	Bridgeburners,	unlike	you,	I	remember
love.’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time	after	that.	The	wind	whipped	bitter	and	dry.	The
crusted	remnants	of	snow	crackled	underfoot	in	the	beds	of	moss	and	lichen.
On	the	horizon	ahead	there	was	a	slate-grey	ridge	of	some	sort,	angular	like	a
massed	line	of	toppled	buildings.	Above	it	the	sky	was	milky	white.	Hedge


gestured	northward.	‘So,	Emroth,	is	that	it?’
The	half-shattered	head	lifted.	‘Omtose	Phellack.’
‘Really?	But—’
‘We	must	cross	it.’
‘Oh,	and	what	lies	beyond?’
The	T’lan	Imass	halted	and	stared	at	Hedge	with	its	withered,	shadowshrunken	eyes.	‘I	am	not	sure,’	it	replied.	‘But,	I	now	believe,	it	may	be…
home.’
Damn	you,	Emroth.	You’ve	just	made	things	a	lot	harder.
	
The	temple	stood	on	a	low	hill,	the	land	barren	on	all	sides.	Its	huge	cyclopean
walls	looked	battered,	shoved	inward	as	if	by	ten	thousand	stone	fists.	Crooked
fissures	tracked	the	dark	grey	granite	from	ground	level	to	the	massive	lintel
stone	leaning	drunkenly	above	what	had	once	been	a	grand,	noble	entranceway.
The	remnants	of	statues	jutted	from	pedestals	set	to	either	side	of	the	broad,
now	sagging	steps.
Udinaas	did	not	know	where	he	was.	Just	another	dream,	or	what	started	as
a	dream.	Doomed,	like	all	the	others,	to	slide	into	something	far	worse.
And	so	he	waited,	trembling,	his	legs	crippled,	broken	and	lifeless	beneath
him	–	a	new	variation	on	the	theme	of	incapacity.	Bludgeoning	symbol	to	his
many	flaws.	The	last	time,	he	recalled,	he	had	been	squirming	on	the	ground,
limbless,	a	broken-backed	snake.	It	seemed	his	subconscious	lacked	subtlety,	a
most	bitter	admission.
Unless,	of	course,	someone	or	something	else	was	sending	these
visitations.
And	now,	corpses	had	appeared	on	the	stony	slopes	beneath	the	temple.
Scores,	then	hundreds.
Tall,	skin	pale	as	the	shell	of	turtle	eggs,	red-rimmed	eyes	set	deep	in
elongated,	chiselled	faces,	and	too	many	joints	on	their	long	limbs,
transforming	their	stiff	expressions	of	death	into	something	surreal,	fevered	–
but	that	last	detail	was	no	surprise.
And	now,	a	smudge	of	motion	in	the	darkness	beneath	the	lintel	stone.	A
figure	staggering	into	view.	Unlike	the	dead.	No,	this	one	looked…human.
Splashed	in	blood	from	head	to	toe,	the	man	reeled	forward,	halted	at	the
top	of	the	steps	and	looked	round	with	wild,	enraged	eyes.	Then,	flinging	his
head	back,	he	screamed	at	the	colourless	sky.
No	words.	Just	fury.
Udinaas	recoiled,	sought	to	drag	himself	away.


And	the	figure	saw	him.	One	crimson,	dripping	hand,	lifting,	reaching	out
for	him.	Beckoning.
As	if	grasped	by	the	throat,	Udinaas	lurched	closer	to	the	man,	to	the
temple,	to	the	cold	scree	of	corpses.	‘No,’	he	muttered,	‘not	me.	Choose
someone	else.	Not	me.’
‘Can	you	feel	this	grief,	mortal?’
‘Not	for	me!’
‘But	it	is.	You	are	the	only	one	left.	Are	their	deaths	to	be	empty,	forgotten,
without	meaning?’
Udinaas	tried	to	hold	on	to	the	ground,	but	the	stones	pulled	loose	under
his	hands,	the	sandy	soil	broke	free	as	his	nails	dragged	furrows	in	his	wake.
‘Find	someone	else!’	His	shriek	echoed,	as	if	launched	directly	at	the	temple,	in
through	the	gaping	entrance,	and	echoing	within	–	trapped,	stolen	away,
rebounding	until	it	was	no	longer	his	own	voice,	but	that	of	the	temple	itself	–	a
mournful	cry	of	dying,	of	desperate	defiance.	The	temple,	voicing	its	thirst.
And	something	shook	the	sky	then.	Lightning	without	fire,	thunder	without
sound	–	an	arrival,	jarring	loose	the	world.
The	entire	temple	heaved	sideways,	clouds	of	dust	gasping	out	from
between	mortarless	joins.	It	was	moments	from	collapse—
‘No!’	bellowed	the	figure	at	the	top	of	the	stairs,	even	as	he	staggered	to
regain	his	balance.	‘This	one	is	mine!	My	T’orrud	Segul!	Look	at	these	dead	–
they	must	be	saved,	delivered,	they	must	be—’
And	now	another	voice	sounded,	behind	Udinaas,	high,	distant,	a	voice	of
the	sky	itself.	‘No,	Errant.	These	dead	are	Forkrul	Assail.	Dead	by	your	own
hand.	You	cannot	kill	them	to	save	them—’
‘Dread	witch,	you	know	nothing!	They’re	the	only	ones	I	can	save!’
‘The	curse	of	Elder	Gods	–	look	at	the	blood	on	your	hands.	It	is	all	of
your	own	making.	All	of	it.’
A	huge	shadow	swept	over	Udinaas	then.	Wheeled	round.
Wind	gusting,	tossing	tangled	black	hair	upward	from	corpses,	buffeting
the	torn	fragments	of	their	clothes;	then,	a	sudden	pressure,	as	of	vast	weight
descending,	and	the	dragon	was	there	–	between	Udinaas	and	the	Errant	–	long
hind	limbs	stretching	downward,	claws	plunging	through	cold	bodies,
crushing	them	in	the	snapping	of	bones	as	the	enormous	creature	settled	on	the
slope.	Sinuous	neck	curling	round,	the	huge	head	drawing	closer	to	Udinaas,
eyes	of	white	fire.
Its	voice	filled	his	skull.	‘Do	you	know	me?’
Argent	flames	rippling	along	the	golden	scales,	a	presence	exuding
incandescent	heat	–	Forkrul	Assail	bodies	blackened	beneath	her,	skin


crinkling,	peeling	back.	Fats	melting,	popping	from	sudden	blisters,	weeping
from	joints.
Udinaas	nodded.	‘Menandore.	Sister	Dawn.	Rapist.’
Thick,	liquid	laughter.	The	head	swung	away,	angled	up	towards	the	Errant.
‘This	one	is	mine,’	she	said.	‘I	claimed	him	long	ago.’
‘Claim	what	you	like,	Menandore.	Before	we	are	done	here,	you	will	give
him	to	me.	Of	your	own	will.’
‘Indeed?’
‘As…payment.’
‘For	what?’
‘For	news	of	your	sisters.’
She	laughed	again.	‘Do	you	imagine	I	don’t	know?’
‘But	I	offer	more.’	The	god	raised	his	red	hands.	‘I	can	ensure	they	are
removed	from	your	path,	Menandore.	A	simple…nudge.’
The	dragon	shifted	round,	regarded	Udinaas	once	more.	‘For	this	one?’
‘Yes.’
‘Very	well,	you	can	have	him.	But	not	our	child.’
It	was	the	Errant’s	turn	to	laugh.	‘When	last	did	you	visit	that…child,
Menandore?’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘Only	this.	He	is	grown	now.	His	mind	is	his	own.	Not	yours,	Menandore.
You	are	warned,	and	this	time	I	demand	nothing	in	return.	Elder	Gods,	my	dear,
can	on	occasion	know	mercy.’
She	snorted	–	a	gust	of	raw	power.	‘I	have	heard	that.	Fine	propaganda,	the
morsel	you	feed	to	your	starving,	pathetic	worshippers.	This	man,	this	father
of	my	child,	he	will	fail	you.	T’orrud	Segul.	He	has	no	faith.	The	compassion
within	him	is	like	a	meer-rat	in	a	pit	of	lions	–	dancing	faster	than	you	can	see,
ever	but	moments	from	annihilation.	He	has	played	with	it	for	a	long	time,
Errant.	You	will	not	catch	it,	cannot	claim	it,	cannot	bind	it	to	your	cause.’	She
voiced	her	cruel	laughter	once	more.	‘I	took	more	from	him	than	you	realize.’
Including,	bitch,	my	fear	of	you.	‘You	think	you	can	give	me	away,
Menandore?’
The	eyes	flared	with	amusement	or	contempt	or	both.	‘Speak	then,
Udinaas,	let	us	hear	your	bold	claims.’
‘You	both	think	you	summoned	me	here,	don’t	you?	For	your	stupid	tug	of
war.	But	the	truth	is,	I	summoned	the	two	of	you.’
‘You	are	mad—’
‘Maybe	so,	Menandore.	But	this	is	my	dream.	Not	yours.	Not	his.	Mine.’
‘You	fool,’	she	spat.	‘Just	try	banishing	us—’


	
Udinaas	opened	his	eyes,	stared	up	at	a	cold,	clear	night	sky,	and	allowed
himself	a	smile.	My	dream,	your	nightmare.	He	pulled	the	furs	tighter	about
himself,	drawing	up	his	legs	–	making	sure	they	weren’t	broken.	Stiffness	in
the	knees	–	normal,	what	came	of	scrabbling	over	rock	and	ice	–	but	warm
with	life.	‘All	is	well,’	he	whispered.
‘Good,’	said	Kettle.
Udinaas	turned,	looked	up.	She	was	crouched	at	his	side.	‘Why	are	you
awake?’	he	demanded.
‘I’m	not.	And	neither	are	you.	That	temple,	it	fell	over.	After	you	left.’
‘Hope	it	crushed	the	Errant	flat,	then.’
‘No.	You’d	already	sent	him	away.	Her	too.’
‘But	not	you.’
‘No.	You	didn’t	know	I	was	there.’
‘All	right,	so	I	am	still	dreaming.	What	do	you	want?’
‘That	temple.	It	couldn’t	have	held	all	those	souls.	All	that	grief.	It	was
broken	and	that’s	why	it	fell	over.	That	was	what	you	were	supposed	to	see.	So
you’d	understand	when	everything	happens.	And	not	be	sad.	And	be	able	to	do
what	he	wants	you	to	do,	just	not	in	the	way	he	thought	it	would	be.	That’s	all.’
‘Good.	Now	crawl	back	to	your	own	dreams,	Kettle.’
‘Okay.	Just	remember,	don’t	cry	too	soon.	You	have	to	wait.’
‘Really.	How	long	before	I	do	this	crying?’
But	she	was	gone.
He’d	caught	some	damn	fever	from	the	rotting	ice.	Shivering	and
hallucinating	for	three	–	maybe	four	–	nights	now.	Bizarre	dreams	inside
dreams	and	on	and	on.	Delusions	of	warmth,	the	comfort	of	furs	not	sodden
with	sweat,	the	balm	of	mysterious	conversations	where	meaning	wasn’t	an
issue.	I	like	this	life.	It’s	predictable.	Mostly.	And	when	it	isn’t,	it	feels	no
different.	I	take	whatever	comes	at	me.	As	if	each	night	I	receive	lessons	in…in
taking	control.
Now	it	was	time	for	the	huge	table	heaped	with	all	his	favourite	foods.
They	said	he	was	gaunt	as	a	wraith.
But	every	night	he	ate	his	fill.
	
With	the	dawn	light	pushing	the	shadows	into	the	clefts	and	valleys	and
transforming	the	snow-clad	peaks	into	molten	gold,	Seren	Pedac	rose	from	her
furs	and	stood,	feeling	grimy	and	dishevelled.	The	high	altitude	left	her	throat


sore	and	her	eyes	dry,	and	her	allergies	only	exasperated	those	conditions.
Shivering	in	the	cutting	wind,	she	watched	Fear	Sengar	struggling	to	relight
the	fire.	Long-frozen	wood	was	reluctant	to	burn.	Kettle	had	been	gathering
grasses	and	she	now	squatted	down	beside	the	Tiste	Edur	with	her	offerings.
A	ragged	cough	from	where	Udinaas	lay	still	buried	in	furs.	After	a
moment,	he	slowly	sat	up.	Face	flushed	with	fever,	sweat	on	his	brow,	his	eyes
dull.	He	hacked	out	a	noise	Seren	belatedly	realized	was	laughter.
Fear ’s	head	snapped	round	as	if	wasp-stung.	‘This	amuses	you?	You’d
rather	another	cold	meal	to	start	the	day?’
Udinaas	blinked	over	at	the	Tiste	Edur,	then	shrugged	and	looked	away.
Seren	cleared	her	throat.	‘Whatever	amused	him,	Fear,	had	nothing	to	do
with	you.’
‘Speaking	for	me	now?’	Udinaas	asked	her.	He	tottered	weakly	to	his	feet,
still	wrapped	in	the	furs.	‘This	might	be	another	dream,’	he	said.	‘At	any
moment	that	white-skinned	warrior	perched	over	there	might	transform	into	a
dragon.	And	the	child	Kettle	will	open	her	mouth	like	a	door,	into	which	Fear
Sengar	will	plunge,	devoured	by	his	own	hunger	to	betray.’	The	flat,	murky
eyes	fixed	on	Seren	Pedac.	‘And	you	will	conjure	lost	ages,	Acquitor,	as	if	the
follies	of	history	had	any	relevance,	any	at	all.’
The	whirl	and	snap	of	a	chain	punctuated	the	bizarre	pronouncements.
Udinaas	glanced	over	at	Clip,	and	smiled.	‘And	you’re	dreaming	of
sinking	your	hands	into	a	pool	of	blood,	but	not	any	old	blood.	The	question
is,	can	you	manipulate	events	to	achieve	that	red	torrent?’
‘Your	fever	has	boiled	your	brain,’	the	Tiste	Andii	warrior	said	with	an
answering	smile.	He	faced	Silchas	Ruin.	‘Kill	him	or	leave	him	behind.’
Seren	Pedac	sighed,	then	said,	‘Clip,	when	will	we	begin	our	descent?
Lower	down,	there	will	be	herbs	to	defeat	his	fever.’
‘Not	for	days,’	he	replied,	spinning	the	chain	in	his	right	hand.	‘And	even
then…well,	I	doubt	you’ll	find	what	you’re	looking	for.	Besides,’	he	added,
‘what	ails	him	isn’t	entirely	natural.’
Silchas	Ruin,	facing	the	trail	they	would	climb	this	day,	said,	‘He	speaks
true.	Old	sorcery	fills	this	fetid	air.’
‘What	kind?’	Seren	asked.
‘It	is	fragmented.	Perhaps…K’Chain	Che’Malle	–	they	rarely	used	their
magic	in	ways	easily	understood.	Never	in	battle.	I	do	recall	something…
necromantic.’
‘And	is	that	what	this	is?’
‘I	cannot	say,	Acquitor.’
‘So	why	is	Udinaas	the	one	afflicted?	What	about	the	rest	of	us?’


No-one	ventured	a	response,	barring	another	broken	laugh	from	Udinaas.
Rings	clacked.	‘I	have	made	my	suggestion,’	Clip	said.
Again,	the	conversation	seemed	to	die.	Kettle	walked	over	to	stand	close	to
Udinaas,	as	if	conferring	protection.
The	small	campfire	was	finally	alight,	if	feebly	so.	Seren	collected	a	tin	pot
and	set	out	to	find	some	clean	snow,	which	should	have	been	a	simple	enough
task.	But	the	rotted	patches	were	foul	with	detritus.	Smears	of	decaying
vegetation,	speckled	layers	of	charcoal	and	ash,	the	carcasses	of	some	kind	of
ice-dwelling	worm	or	beetle,	wood	and	pieces	of	countless	animals.	Hardly
palatable.	She	was	surprised	they	weren’t	all	sick.
She	halted	before	a	long,	narrow	stretch	of	ice-crusted	snow	that	filled	a
crack	or	fold	in	the	rock.	She	drew	her	knife,	knelt	down	and	began	pecking	at
it.	Chunks	broke	away.	She	examined	each	one,	discarding	those	too
discoloured	with	filth,	setting	the	others	into	the	pot.	Not	much	like	normal
glaciers	–	those	few	she	had	seen	up	close.	After	all,	they	were	made	of
successive	snowfalls	as	much	as	creeping	ice.	Those	snowfalls	normally
produced	relatively	pristine	strata.	But	here,	it	was	as	if	the	air	through	which
the	snow	fell	had	been	thick	with	drifting	refuse,	clogging	every	descending
flake.	Air	thick	with	smoke,	ash,	pieces	of	once	living	things.	What	could	have
done	that?	If	just	ash	then	she	could	interpret	it	as	the	result	of	some	volcanic
eruption.	But	not	damned	fragments	of	skin	and	meat.	What	secret	hides	in
these	mountains?
She	managed	to	dig	the	knife-point	deep	into	the	ice,	then	settled	her
weight	on	it.	The	entire	remaining	slab	of	ice	lifted	suddenly,	prised	away	from
the	crack.	And	there,	lying	beneath	it,	a	spear.
The	shaft,	long	as	Seren	was	tall,	was	not	wood.	Polished,	mottled	amber
and	brown,	it	looked	almost…scaled.	The	broad	head	was	of	one	piece,	blade
and	stem,	ground	jade,	milky	smooth	and	leaf-shaped.	No	obvious	glue	or
binding	held	the	socket	onto	the	shaft.
She	pulled	the	weapon	loose.	The	scaled	texture,	she	saw,	was	created	by
successive,	intricate	layering	of	horn,	which	explained	the	mottled	appearance.
Again,	she	could	discern	no	indication	of	how	the	layers	were	fixed.	The	spear
was	surprisingly	heavy,	as	if	the	shaft	had	mineralized.
A	voice	spoke	behind	her.	‘Now	that	is	an	interesting	find.’
She	turned,	studied	Clip’s	mocking	expression,	and	felt	a	flash	of	irritation.
‘In	the	habit	of	following	people	around,	Clip?’
‘No,	mostly	I	lead	them.	I	know,	that	task	serves	to	push	you	to	one	side.
Leaves	you	feeling	useless.’
‘Any	other	bright	observations	you	want	to	make?’


He	shrugged,	spinning	the	damned	chain	back	and	forth.	‘That	spear	you
found.	It’s	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Is	that	supposed	to	mean	something	to	me?’
‘It	will.’
‘It’s	not	a	weapon	you	fight	with,	is	it?’
‘No.	And	I	don’t	hide	in	trees	and	throw	fruit	either.’
She	frowned.
He	laughed,	turning	away.	‘I	was	born	in	Darkness,	Acquitor.’
‘And?’
He	paused,	glanced	back	at	her.	‘Why	do	you	think	I	am	the	Mortal	Sword
of	the	Black-Winged	Lord?	My	good	looks?	My	charming	personality?	My
skill	with	these	blades	here?’
‘Well,’	she	replied,	‘you’ve	just	exhausted	my	list	of	reasons.’
‘Ha	ha.	Hear	me.	Born	in	Darkness.	Blessed	by	our	Mother.	The	first	in
thousands	of	years	–	she	turned	away,	you	know.	From	her	chosen	sons.
Thousands	of	years?	More	like	tens	of	thousands.	But	not	from	me.	I	can	walk
the	Darkness,	Acquitor.’	He	waved	his	chain-spinning	hand	back	towards	the
others.	‘Not	even	Silchas	Ruin	can	make	that	claim.’
‘Does	he	know?’
‘No.	This	is	our	secret	for	as	long	as	you	choose.’
‘And	why	would	I	choose	to	not	tell	him	this,	Clip?’
‘Because	I	am	the	only	one	here	who	can	keep	him	from	killing	you.	You
and	Udinaas	–	the	two	he	considers	most	useless.	Indeed,	potential	enemies.’
‘Enemies?	Why	would	he	think	that?’	She	shook	her	head	in	disbelief.
‘We’re	just	bugs	he	can	crush	underfoot	any	time	he	likes.	An	enemy	is	one
who	poses	a	threat.	We	don’t.’
‘Well,	on	that	count,	I	see	no	need	to	enlighten	you.	Yet.’
Snorting,	she	turned	and	collected	the	pot	with	its	chunks	of	glittering	ice.
‘Plan	on	keeping	your	find?’	Clip	asked.
She	looked	down	at	the	weapon	in	her	right	hand.	‘Udinaas	can	use	it	as	a
crutch.’
Clip’s	laugh	was	bitterly	cruel.	‘Oh,	the	injustice,	Acquitor.	For	a	storied
weapon	such	as	that	one.’
She	frowned	at	him.	‘You	speak	as	if	you	recognise	it.	Do	you?’
‘Let’s	just	say	it	belongs	with	us.’
Frustrated,	she	moved	past	him,	back	towards	the	camp.
The	spear	drew	attention,	frighteningly	fast	from	Silchas	Ruin,	who	–
before	he	spun	round	to	face	her	–	seemed	to	flinch.	Udinaas,	too	–	his	head
snapping	up	as	she	walked	towards	him.	She	felt	her	heart	lurch	in	her	chest


and	was	suddenly	afraid.
She	sought	to	hide	it	by	holding	stubbornly	to	her	original	thought.
‘Udinaas,	I	found	this	–	you	can	use	it	to	keep	your	balance.’
He	grunted,	then	nodded.	‘A	ground-stone	tip	–	can’t	have	much	of	an
edge,	can	it?	At	least	I	won’t	stumble	and	poke	my	eye	out,	unless	I	work	hard
at	it,	and	why	would	I	do	that?’
‘Do	not	mock	it,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.	‘Use	it	in	the	manner	the	Acquitor	has
suggested,	by	all	means.	But	know	that	it	is	not	yours.	You	will	have	to
surrender	it	–	know	that,	Udinaas.’
‘Surrender	it	–	to	you,	perchance?’
Again	the	flinch.	‘No.’	And	Silchas	Ruin	turned	away	once	more.
Udinaas	grinned	weakly	at	Seren.	‘Have	you	just	given	me	a	cursed
weapon,	Acquitor?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
He	leaned	on	it.	‘Well,	never	mind.	I’ve	a	whole	collection	of	curses	–	one
more	won’t	make	much	difference.’
Ice	was	melted,	waterskins	refilled.	Another	pot	of	frozen	snow	provided
the	water	for	a	broth	of	herbs,	rinds	of	myrid	fat,	berries	and	nuggets	of	sap
taken	from	maple	trees	–	the	last	of	which	they	had	seen	ten	days	ago,	at	an
elevation	where	the	air	was	invigorating	and	sweetly	pungent	with	life.	Here,
there	were	no	trees.	Not	even	shrubs.	The	vast	forest	surrounding	them	was
barely	ankle	high	–	a	tangled	world	of	lichen	and	mosses.
Holding	a	bowl	of	the	soup	in	trembling	hands,	Udinaas	spoke	to	Seren.
‘So,	just	to	get	things	straight	in	this	epic	farce	of	ours,	did	you	find	this	spear
or	did	it	find	you?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘No	matter.	It’s	yours	now.’
‘No.	Silchas	is	right.	You’ve	but	loaned	it	to	me,	Acquitor.	It	slides	like
grease	in	my	hands.	I	couldn’t	use	it	to	fight	–	even	if	I	knew	how,	which	I
don’t.’
‘Not	hard,’	Clip	said.	‘Just	don’t	hold	it	at	the	sharp	end	and	poke	people
with	it	until	they	fall	over.	I’ve	yet	to	face	a	warrior	with	a	spear	I	couldn’t	cut
to	pieces.’
Fear	Sengar	snorted.
And	Seren	knew	why.	It	was	enough	to	brighten	this	morning,	enough	to
bring	a	wry	smile	to	her	lips.
Clip	noted	it	and	sneered,	but	said	nothing.
‘Pack	up,’	Silchas	Ruin	said	after	a	moment.	‘I	weary	of	waiting.’
‘I	keep	telling	you,’	Clip	said,	spinning	the	rings	once	more,	‘it’ll	all	come
in	its	own	time,	Silchas	Ruin.’


Seren	turned	to	face	the	rearing	peaks	to	the	north.	The	gold	had	paled,	as
if	drained	of	all	life,	all	wonder.	Another	day	of	weary	travel	awaited	them.
Her	mood	plunged	and	she	sighed.
	
Given	the	choice,	this	game	should	have	been	his	own.	Not	Cotillion’s,	not
Shadowthrone’s.	But	enough	details	had	drifted	down	to	Ben	Adaephon	Delat,
heavy	and	grim	as	the	ash	from	a	forest	fire,	to	make	him	content,	for	the
moment,	to	choke	on	someone	else’s	problems.	Since	the	Enfilade	at	Pale,	his
life	had	been	rather	headlong.	He	felt	as	if	he	was	plunging	down	a	steep	hill,
for	ever	but	one	step	from	bone-snapping,	blood-spraying	disaster.
Used	to	be	he	thrived	on	such	feelings.	Proof	that	he	was	alive.
Yet…too	many	friends	had	fallen	to	the	wayside	on	the	journey.	Far	too
many,	and	he	was	reluctant	to	let	others	take	their	places	–	not	even	this	humble
Tiste	Edur	with	his	too-full	heart,	his	raw	wound	of	grief;	nor	that	damned
T’lan	Imass	who	now	waded	through	a	turgid	sea	of	memories,	as	if	seeking
one	–	just	one	–	that	did	not	sob	with	futility.	The	wrong	company	indeed	for
Quick	Ben	–	they	were	such	open	invitations	to	friendship.	Not	pity	–	which
would	have	been	easier.	No,	their	damned	nobility	demolished	that	possibility.
And	look	where	all	his	friends	had	gone.	Whiskeyjack,	Hedge,	Trotts,
Dujek	Onearm,	Kalam…well,	wasn’t	it	always	the	way,	that	the	pain	of	loss	so
easily	overwhelmed	the…the	not-yet-lost?	And	that	sad	list	was	only	the	most
recent	version.	All	since	Pale.	What	of	all	the	others,	from	long	ago?	Us
damned	survivors	don’t	have	it	easy.	Not	even	close.
The	thought	made	him	sneer	inside.	What	was	this	feeling	sorry	for
himself?	Pathetic	indulgence	and	nothing	else.
Skirting	the	edge	of	a	submerged	ravine,	they	sloshed	through	tepid,	waistdeep	water,	their	passage	swirling	up	clouds	of	silts	that	had	rested	lightly	on
some	unseen,	interminably	paved	lake-bottom.	Tracked	now	by	some	kind	of
fish,	their	humped	backs	appearing	every	now	and	then	to	one	side	or	the	other,
the	dorsal	fin	ribbed,	the	bulge	of	water	hinting	at	sizes	a	little	too	large	for
restful	contemplation.
Least	pleasant	of	all,	Trull	Sengar ’s	comment	only	moments	past	that	these
fish	were	probably	the	same	kind	that	had	once	tried	to	eat	him.
And	Onrack	the	Broken	had	replied,	‘Yes,	they	are	the	same	as	the	ones	we
fought	on	the	floodwall,	although	of	course	they	were	then	in	their	landdwelling	stage	of	life.’
‘So	why	are	they	here?’	Trull	then	asked.
‘Hungry,’	Onrack	answered.


Enough,	right	then	and	there,	to	stir	Quick	Ben	from	his	morose
taciturnity.	‘Listen	to	you	two!	We’re	about	to	be	attacked	by	giant	wizardeating	fish	and	you’re	reminiscing!	Look,	are	we	in	real	danger	or	what?’
Onrack’s	robust,	prognathous	face	swung	to	regard	him	for	a	moment,
then	the	T’lan	Imass	said,	‘We	were	assuming	that	you	were	warding	us	from
them,	Quick	Ben.’
‘Me?’	He	looked	about,	seeking	any	sign	of	dry	land	–	but	the	milky	water
stretched	on	and	on.
‘Is	it	time,	then,	to	make	use	of	your	gate?’
Quick	Ben	licked	his	lips.	‘I	think	so.	I	mean,	I’ve	recovered	from	the	last
time,	more	or	less.	And	I	found	somewhere	to	go.	It’s	just…’
Trull	Sengar	leaned	on	his	spear.	‘You	came	out	of	that	magical	journey,
Quick	Ben,	wearing	the	grin	of	the	condemned.	If	indeed	our	destination	is	as
fraught	as	it	must	be,	I	can	understand	your	reluctance.	Also,	having	observed
you	for	some	time	now,	it	is	clear	to	me	that	your	battle	against	Icarium	has
weakened	you	at	some	fundamental	level	–	perhaps	you	fear	you	will	not	be
able	to	fashion	a	gate	durable	enough	to	permit	the	passage	of	all	three	of	us?
If	so—’
‘Wait,’	the	wizard	interjected,	silently	cursing.	‘All	right,	I	am	a	little…
fragile.	Ever	since	Icarium.	You	see	far	too	much,	Trull	Sengar.	But	I	can	take
us	all	through.	That’s	a	promise.	It’s	just…’	He	glanced	over	at	Onrack.	‘Well,
there	may	be	some…unanticipated,	uh,	developments.’
Onrack	spoke,	‘I	am	at	risk?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	Maybe.’
‘This	should	not	unduly	affect	your	decision,’	the	T’lan	Imass	replied.	‘I
am	expendable.	These	fish	cannot	eat	me,	after	all.’
‘If	we	leave,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘you	will	be	trapped	here	for	ever.’
‘No.	I	will	abandon	this	form.	I	will	join	oblivion	in	these	waters.’
‘Onrack—’	Trull	began	in	clear	alarm.
But	Quick	Ben	cut	in,	‘You’re	coming	with	us,	Onrack.	I’m	just	saying
there’s	a	little	uncertainty	with	what	will	happen	to	you.	I	can’t	explain	more.	It
just	relates	to	where	we	will	find	ourselves.	To	the	aspect	of	that	realm,	I
mean.’
Trull	Sengar	snorted.	‘Sometimes,’	he	said	with	a	wry	smile,	‘you	are	truly
hopeless,	wizard.	Best	open	the	gate	now,	before	we	end	up	in	the	belly	of	a
fish.’	He	then	pointed	behind	Quick	Ben.	‘That	one	looks	to	be	the	biggest	yet	–
see	the	others	scatter	–	and	it’s	coming	straight	for	us.’
Turning,	the	wizard’s	eyes	widened.
The	waist-deep	water	did	not	even	reach	its	eyes,	and	the	monstrous	fish


was	simply	bulling	its	way	through	the	shallows.	A	damned	catfish	of	some
sort,	longer	than	a	Napan	galley—
Quick	Ben	raised	his	arms	and	shouted	in	a	loud,	oddly	high-pitched	voice:
‘It’s	time	to	leave!’
Fragile.	Oh	yes,	there	is	that.	I	poured	too	much	through	me	trying	to	beat
him	back.	There’s	only	so	much	mortal	flesh	and	bone	can	take.	The	oldest	rule
of	all,	for	Hood’s	sake.
He	forced	open	the	gate,	heard	the	explosive	plunge	of	water	into	the	realm
beyond	–	the	current	wrapping	round	his	legs	–	and	he	lunged	forward,
shouting,	‘Follow	me!’
Once	again,	that	nauseating,	dreadful	moment	of	suffocation,	then	he	was
staggering	through	a	stream,	water	splashing	out	on	all	sides,	rushing	away	–
and	cold	wintry	air	closed	in	amidst	clouds	of	vapour.
Trull	Sengar	stumbled	past	him,	using	the	spear	to	right	himself	a	moment
before	falling.
Gasping,	Quick	Ben	turned.
And	saw	a	figure	emerge	from	the	white	mists.
Trull	Sengar ’s	shout	of	surprise	startled	into	the	air	birds	from	a	nearby
swath	of	knee-high	trees,	and	as	they	raced	skyward	they	spun	in	a	half-circle
over	the	head	of	Onrack	the	Broken.	At	their	cries,	at	the	swarm	of	tiny
shadows	darting	around	him,	the	warrior	looked	up,	then	halted.
Quick	Ben	saw	Onrack’s	chest	swell	with	an	indrawn	breath	that	seemed
without	end.
The	head	then	tilted	down	once	more.
And	the	wizard	stared	into	a	face	of	smooth,	wind-burnished	skin.	Eyes	of
green	glittered	beneath	the	heavy	ridge	of	the	brow.	Twin	streams	of	cold	air
then	plumed	down	from	Onrack’s	broad,	flattened,	oft-broken	nose.
From	Trull	Sengar,	‘Onrack?	By	the	Sisters,	Onrack!’
The	small	eyes,	buried	in	epicanthic	folds,	shifted.	A	low,	reverberating
voice	rumbled	from	the	flesh	and	blood	warrior.	‘Trull	Sengar.	Is	this…is	this
mortality?’
The	Tiste	Edur	drew	a	step	closer.	‘You	don’t	remember?	How	it	feels	to
be	alive?’
‘I	–	I…yes.’	A	sudden	look	of	wonder	in	that	heavy,	broadly	featured	face.
‘Yes.’	Another	deep	breath,	then	a	gust	that	was	nearly	savage	in	its	exultation.
The	strange	gaze	fixed	on	Quick	Ben	once	more.	‘Wizard,	is	this	illusion?
Dream?	A	journey	of	my	spirit?’
‘I	don’t	think	so.	I	mean,	I	think	it’s	real	enough.’
‘Then…this	realm.	It	is	Tellann.’


‘Maybe.	I’m	not	sure.’
Trull	Sengar	was	suddenly	on	his	knees,	and	Quick	Ben	saw	tears
streaming	down	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	lean,	dusky	face.
The	burly,	muscled	warrior	before	them,	still	wearing	the	rotted	remnants
of	fur,	slowly	looked	round	at	the	withered	landscape	of	open	tundra.
‘Tellann,’	he	whispered.	‘Tellann.’
	
‘When	the	world	was	young,’	Redmask	began,	‘these	plains	surrounding	us
were	higher,	closer	to	the	sky.	The	earth	was	as	a	thin	hide,	covering	thick	flesh
that	was	nothing	but	frozen	wood	and	leaves.	The	rotted	corpse	of	ancient
forests.	Beneath	summer	sun,	unseen	rivers	flowed	through	that	forest,	between
every	twig,	every	crushed-down	branch.	And	with	each	summer,	the	sun’s	heat
was	greater,	the	season	longer,	and	the	rivers	flowed,	draining	the	vast	buried
forest.	And	so	the	plains	descended,	settled	as	the	dried-out	forest	crumbled	to
dust,	and	with	the	rains	more	water	would	sink	down,	sweeping	away	that	dust,
southward,	northward,	eastward,	westward,	following	valleys,	rising	to	join
streams.	All	directions,	ever	flowing	away.’
Masarch	sat	silent	with	the	other	warriors	–	a	score	or	more	now,
gathering	to	hear	the	ancient	tale.	None,	however	–	Masarch	included	–	had
heard	it	told	in	quite	this	way,	the	words	emerging	from	the	red-scaled	mask	–
from	a	warrior	who	rarely	spoke	yet	who	spoke	now	with	ease,	matching	the
cadence	of	elders	with	perfect	precision.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	stood	nearby,	hulking	and	motionless	like	a	pair
of	grotesque	statues.	Yet	Masarch	imagined	that	they	were	listening,	even	as	he
and	his	companions	were.
‘The	land	left	the	sky.	The	land	settled	onto	stone,	the	very	bone	of	the
world.	In	this	manner,	the	land	changed	to	echo	the	cursed	sorceries	of	the
Shamans	of	the	Antlers,	the	ones	who	kneel	among	boulders,	the	worshippers
of	stone,	the	weapon-makers.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘This	was	no	accident.
What	I	have	just	described	is	but	one	truth.	There	is	another.’	A	longer
hesitation,	then	a	long,	drawn-out	sigh.	‘Shamans	of	the	Antlers,	gnarled	as
tree	roots,	those	few	left,	those	few	still	haunting	our	dreams	even	as	they
haunt	this	ancient	plain.	They	hide	in	cracks	in	the	world’s	bone.	Sometimes
their	bodies	are	all	but	gone,	until	only	their	withered	faces	stare	out	from
those	cracks,	challenging	eternity	as	befits	their	terrible	curse.’
Masarch	was	not	alone	in	shivering	in	the	pre-dawn	chill,	at	the	images
Redmask’s	words	conjured.	Every	child	knew	of	those	twisted,	malevolent
spirits,	the	husks	of	shamans	long,	long	dead,	yet	unable	to	truly	die.	Rolling


stones	into	strange	patterns	beneath	star-strewn	night	skies,	chewing	with	their
teeth	the	faces	of	boulders	to	make	frightening	scenes	that	only	appeared	at
dusk	or	dawn,	when	the	sun’s	light	was	newborn	or	fading	into	death	–	and	far
more	often	the	boulders	were	so	angled	that	it	was	at	the	moments	of	dusk	that
the	deep	magic	was	awakened,	the	images	rising	into	being	from	what	had
seemed	random	pecules	in	the	stone.	Magic	to	murder	the	wind	in	that	place—
‘In	the	time	before	the	plains	descended,	the	shamans	and	their	dread
followers	made	music	at	the	sun’s	dying,	on	the	night	of	its	shortest	passage,
and	at	other	holy	times	before	the	snows	came.	They	did	not	use	skin	drums.
There	was	no	need.	No,	they	used	the	hide	of	the	earth,	the	buried	forest
beneath.	They	pounded	the	skin	of	the	world	until	every	beast	of	the	plain
trembled,	until	the	bhederin	burst	into	motion,	tens	of	thousands	as	one,	and
ran	wild	through	the	night	–	and	so	they	too	echoed	the	music	of	the	Shamans
of	the	Antlers,	feeding	their	dark	power.
‘But	the	land	fell	away	in	the	end	–	in	grasping	eternity,	the	shamans	slew
the	very	earth	itself.	This	curse	is	without	rest.	This	curse	would	close	about
our	necks	–	each	and	every	one	of	us	here	–	this	very	night,	if	it	could.’
Redmask	was	silent	for	a	time	then,	as	if	allowing	the	terror	to	run	free
through	the	hearts	of	his	audience.	Eventually	he	resumed.	‘The	Shamans	of	the
Antlers	gathered	their	deathless	warriors	then,	and	set	out	to	wage	war.
Abandoning	this	plain	–	and	from	that	time,	only	those	who	fell	in	battle	were
returned	here.	Broken	pieces.	Failed	and	withered	as	the	plain	itself,	never
again	to	reach	or	even	look	skyward.	Such	was	their	curse.
‘We	do	not	forgive.	It	is	not	in	us	to	forgive.	But	nor	will	we	forget.
‘Bast	Fulmar,	the	Valley	of	Drums.	The	Letherii	believe	we	hold	it	in	great
awe.	They	believe	this	valley	was	the	site	of	an	ancient	war	between	the	Awl
and	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	–	although	the	Letherii	know	not	the	true	name	of
our	ancient	enemy.	Perhaps	indeed	there	were	skirmishes,	such	that	memory
survives,	only	to	twist	and	bind	anew	in	false	shapes.	Many	of	you	hold	to
those	new	shapes,	believing	them	true.	An	ancient	battle.	One	we	won.	One	we
lost	–	there	are	elders	who	are	bold	with	the	latter	secret,	as	if	defeat	was	a
knife	hidden	in	their	heart-hand.’	Redmask	shrugged	at	the	notion,	dismissing
it.	Pale	light	was	creeping	close.	Birdsong	rose	from	the	low	shrubs.
‘Bast	Fulmar,’	Redmask	said	again.	‘Valley	of	Drums.	Here,	then,	is	its
secret	truth.	The	Shamans	of	the	Antlers	drummed	the	hide	of	this	valley
before	us.	Until	all	life	was	stolen,	all	the	waters	fled.	They	drank	deep,	until
nothing	was	left.	For	at	this	time,	the	shamans	were	not	alone,	not	for	that	fell
ritual.	No,	others	of	their	kind	had	joined	them	–	on	distant	continents,
hundreds,	thousands	of	leagues	away,	each	and	all	on	that	one	night.	To	sever


their	life	from	the	earth,	to	sever	this	earth	from	its	own	life.’
Silence,	then,	not	a	single	warrior	even	so	much	as	drawing	breath.	Held	–
too	long—
Redmask	released	them	with	another	sigh.	‘Bast	Fulmar.	We	rise	now	to
make	war.	In	the	Valley	of	Drums,	my	warriors,	Letherii	sorcery	will	fail.	Edur
sorcery	will	fail.	In	Bast	Fulmar,	there	is	no	water	of	magic,	no	stream	of
power	from	which	to	steal.	All	used	up,	all	taken	to	quench	the	fire	that	is	life.
Our	enemy	is	not	aware.	They	will	find	the	truth	this	day.	Too	late.	Today,	my
warriors,	shall	be	iron	against	iron.	That	and	nothing	more.’
Redmask	then	rose.	‘Release	the	truth	–	to	every	warrior.	Then	make	ready.
We	march	to	battle.	To	victory.’
Courage	surged	through	Masarch’s	chest,	and	he	found	he	was	on	his	feet,
trembling,	and	now	moving	off	into	the	fading	gloom,	whispering	his	words
to	all	that	he	passed.	Again	and	again.
‘Bast	Fulmar	sings	this	day.	It	sings:	there	is	no	magic.	There	is	no	magic!’
	
Stablers	gathering	the	horses	and	leading	them	across	the	courtyard	behind
her,	Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis	left	the	reins	of	her	mount	in	the	hands	of	an	aide,
then	strode	towards	the	estate’s	squat,	brooding	entrance.	Thirty	leagues	south
of	the	port	town	of	Rennis,	Boaral	Keep	was	the	birthplace	of	the	Grass	Jackets
Brigade,	but	that	was	a	long	century	past	and	now	some	third	or	fourth	son	of	a
remotely	related	Boaral	held	this	fortress,	clinging	to	the	antiquated	noble	title
of	Dresh-Preda,	or	Demesne	Lord.	And	in	his	command,	a	garrison	consisting
of	barely	a	dozen	soldiers,	at	least	two	of	whom	–	at	the	outer	gate	–	were
drunk.
Weary,	saddlesore,	and	feeling	decidedly	short	on	patience,	Yan	Tovis
ascended	the	four	broad,	shallow	steps	to	the	lintel-capped	main	doors.	No
guard	in	sight.	She	wrenched	the	latch	clear,	then	kicked	open	the	heavy	door
and	marched	into	the	gloomy	foyer	within,	startling	two	old	women	with
buckets	and	khalit	vine	mops.
They	flinched	back,	eyes	down,	hastily	genuflecting.
‘Where	is	Dresh	Boaral?’	Twilight	demanded	as	she	tugged	free	her
gauntlets.
The	hags	exchanged	glances,	then	one	attempted	something	like	a	curtsy
before	saying,	‘Ma’am,	he	be	well	sleeping	it	off,	aye.	An’	us,	we	be	well
cleaning	up	his	supper.’
A	muffled	snort	from	the	other	servant.
Only	now	did	Yan	Tovis	detect	the	acrid	smell	of	bile	beneath	that	of	lye


soap.	‘Where	then	is	the	Master	at	Arms?’
‘Ma’am,’	another	curtsy,	then,	‘he	be	ridin’	off	wi’	four	soljers,	west	as
they	say,	t’reach	the	coast	fast	as	a	clam	squirt,	an’	that’s	a	cloud	ain’t	e’en
settled	yet.’
‘He	left	recently	then?	What	was	the	reason?	And	how	far	is	the	coast	from
here?’
‘Ma’am,	would	be	unner	a	bell,	fast-goin’	as	he	was.’
‘And	the	reason?’
Another	mysterious	exchange	of	glances,	then,	‘Ma’am,	coast	be	well
black	an’	whispery	of	late.	Got	fishers	vanishin’	an’	demon	eyes	flashin’	from
the	deeps.	Got	islands	be	well	ice	an’	all,	pale	an’	deathly	as	the	innards	of	a
murderer ’s	skull.’
‘The	Master	at	Arms	rode	off	after	superstitious	rumours?’
‘Ma’am,	I	be	well	’ave	a	cousin	on	the	shore—’
‘The	ditsy	one,	aye,’	interjected	the	other	hag.
‘Be	well	ditsy	but	that	don’t	matter	in	this,	in	this	being	the	voices	of	the
sea,	which	she	heard	an’	heard	more’n	once	too.	Voices,	ma’am,	like	the	ghosts
of	the	drowned	as	she	says,	havin’	heard	them	an’	heard	them	more’n	once
too.’
Two	of	her	sergeants	were	now	behind	the	Atri-Preda,	listening.	Twilight
loosened	the	strap	on	her	helm.	‘This	Master	stays	sober?’	she	asked.
‘One	a	them	hast,	be	well	an’	all.’
‘It	be	him,’	the	other	agreed.	‘An’	that	a	curse	what	make	us	worse	at	bad
times	of	the	night	like	now—’
‘Shush	you!	This	ma’am	be	a	soljer	outrankin’	Dresh	himself!’
‘You	don’t	know	that,	Pully!	Why—’
‘But	I	do!	Whose	nephew	dug	latrines	for	the	Grass	Jackets,	be	well	he	did!
It’s	ranks	an’	neck	torcs	an’	the	cut	of	the	cape	an’	all—’
Yan	Tovis	turned	to	one	of	her	sergeants.	‘Are	there	fresh	horses	in	the
stables?’
A	nod.	‘Four,	Atri-Preda.’
The	first	old	woman	pushed	at	the	other	at	that	and	said,	‘Tolya!	Be	well	I
did!’
Yan	Tovis	tilted	her	head	back	in	an	effort	to	loosen	the	muscles	of	her
neck.	She	closed	her	eyes	for	a	moment,	then	sighed.	‘Saddle	them	up,
Sergeant.	Pick	me	three	of	the	least	exhausted	riders.	I	am	off	to	find	our
missing	Master	at	Arms.’
‘Sir.’	The	man	saluted	and	departed.
Turning	back	to	the	old	women,	the	Atri-Preda	asked,	‘Where	is	the	nearest


detachment	of	Tiste	Edur?’
A	half-dozen	heartbeats	of	non-verbal	communication	between	the	two
hags,	then	the	first	one	nodded	and	said,	‘Rennis,	ma’am.	An’	they	be	well	not
once	visited	neither.’
‘Be	glad	they	haven’t,’	Twilight	said.	‘They	would	have	separated	Boaral’s
head	from	his	shoulders.’
The	second	woman	snorted.	‘Not	so’s	he’d	notice—’
‘Shush!’	scolded	the	first	one.	Then,	to	Twilight,	‘Ma’am,	Dresh	Boaral,	he
lost	mostly	alla	his	kin	when	the	Edur	come	down.	Lost	his	wife,	too,	in	Noose
Bog,	what,	now	be	well	three	years—’
The	other	hag	spat	onto	the	floor	they	had	just	cleaned.	‘Lost?	Be	well
strangled	and	dumped,	Pully,	by	his	master	himself!	So	now	he	drowns	on	his
own	drinkin’!	But	oh	she	was	fire	wasn’t	she	–	no	time	for	mewlin’	husbands
only	he	likes	his	mewlin’	and	be	well	likes	it	enough	to	murder	his	own	wife!’
Twilight	said	to	the	sergeant	who	had	remained,	‘We	will	stay	for	a	few
days.	I	want	the	Dresh	here	under	house	arrest.	Send	a	rider	to	Rennis	to
request	adjudication	by	the	Tiste	Edur.	The	investigation	will	involve	some
sorcery,	specifically	speaking	with	the	dead.’
The	sergeant	saluted	and	left.
‘Best	be	well	not	speak	wi’	the	mistress,	ma’am.’
Twilight	frowned	at	the	woman.	‘Why	not?’
‘Liable	she	is	t’start	talkin’	and	ne’er	stop.	Master	drunk	an’	she’s	fire,	all
fire	–	she’s	a	might	claw	his	eyes	out,	be	well	an’	that.’
‘Are	you	two	witches?’
More	silent	communication	between	the	two	hags,	then	the	first	one	edged
one	knobby,	hairy	foot	forward	and	carefully	wiped	at	the	gobbet	of	spit	on	the
pavestones.	The	toes,	Twilight	saw,	were	taloned.
‘You	are	Shake?	Shoulderwomen	of	the	Old	Ways?’
Wrinkled	brows	rose,	then	the	one	named	Pully	curtsied	again.	‘Local	born
you	be	well	as	we’d	known,	aye.	It’s	there,	ma’am,	you’re	a	child	of	the	shore
an’	ain’t	you	gone	far,	but	not	so	far	as	to	f’get.	Mistress	ne’er	liked	us	much.’
‘So	who	strangled	her	and	dumped	her	corpse	in	Noose	Bog,	Pully?’
The	other	seemed	to	choke,	then	she	said,	‘Dresh	give	’is	orders	plain	as
web	on	a	trail,	didn’t	he,	Pully?	Give	’is	orders	an’	wi’	us	we	be	well	here	since
the	Keep’s	first	black	stone	was	laid.	Loyal,	aye.	Boaral	blood	was	Letherii
blood,	the	first	t’these	lands,	the	first	masters	a’all.	Dresh	the	First	give	us	’is
blood	in	full	knowing,	t’blacken	the	Black	Stone.’
‘The	first	Dresh	here	found	you	and	forced	your	blessing?’
A	cackle	from	the	second	woman.	‘What	he	be	well	think	were	blessing!’


Twilight	looked	away,	then	stepped	to	one	side	and	leaned	a	shoulder
against	the	grimy	wall.	She	was	too	tired	for	this.	Boaral	line	cursed	by	Shake
witches	–	who	remained,	alive	and	watchful,	through	generation	after
generation.	She	closed	her	eyes.	‘Pully,	how	many	wives	have	you	two
murdered?’
‘None	wi’out	Dresh’s	command,	ma’am.’
‘But	your	curse	drives	them	mad,	every	one	of	them.	Don’t	make	me	ask
the	question	again.’
‘Ma’am,	be	well	twenty	and	one.	Once	their	bearin’	days	are	done.	Mostly.’
‘And	you	have	been	working	hard	at	keeping	the	Tiste	Edur	away.’
‘No	business	a	theirs,	ma’am.’
Nor	mine.	Yet…not	entirely	true,	is	it?	‘End	the	curse,	Pully.	You’ve	done
enough.’
‘Boaral	killed	more	Shake	than	any	other	Dresh,	ma’am.	You	know	that.’
‘End	it,’	Twilight	said,	opening	her	eyes	and	facing	the	two	women,	‘or
your	heads	will	be	in	sacks	and	buried	deep	in	Noose	Bog	before	this	night	is
out.’
Pully	and	her	companion	grinned	at	each	other.
‘I	am	of	the	shore,’	Yan	Tovis	said	in	a	hard	voice.	‘My	Shake	name	is
Twilight.’
The	hags	suddenly	backed	away,	then	sank	down	onto	their	knees,	heads
bowed.
‘End	the	curse,’	Twilight	said	again.	‘Will	you	defy	a	princess	of	the	Last
Blood?’
‘Princess	no	longer,’	Pully	said	to	the	floor.
Yan	Tovis	felt	the	blood	drain	from	her	face	–	if	not	for	the	wall	she	leaned
against	she	would	have	staggered.
‘Your	mother	died	be	well	a	year	past,’	Pully	said	in	a	soft,	sad	voice.
The	other	witch	added,	‘Crossin’	from	the	Isle,	the	boat	overturning.	They
say	it	was	some	demon	o’	the	deep,	pushed	too	close	by	dark	magic	out	at	sea	–
the	same	magic,	my	Queen,	as	could	be	well	squirted	Master	at	Arms	west	as
they	say.	A	demon,	up	unner	the	boat,	an’	all	drowned.	Whisperin’	from	the
waters,	my	Queen,	dark	and	well	nigh	black.’
Yan	Tovis	drew	a	deep	breath.	To	be	Shake	was	to	know	grief.	Her	mother
was	dead,	now	a	face	emptied	of	life.	Well,	she	had	not	seen	the	woman	in	over
a	decade,	had	she?	So,	why	this	pain?	Because	there	is	something	else.	‘What	is
the	name	of	the	Master	at	Arms,	Pully?’
‘Yedan	Derryg,	Highness.	The	Watch.’
The	half-brother	I	have	never	met.	The	one	who	ran	–	from	his	blood,	from


everything.	Ran	nearly	as	far	as	I	did.	And	yet,	was	that	old	tale	even	true?	The
Watch	was	here,	after	all,	a	mere	bell’s	ride	from	the	shore.	She	understood
now	why	he	had	ridden	out	on	this	night.	Something	else,	and	this	is	it.
Yan	Tovis	drew	her	cloak	about	herself,	began	pulling	on	her	gauntlets.
‘Feed	well	my	soldiers.	I	will	return	with	Derryg	by	dawn.’	As	she	turned	to	the
door	she	paused.	‘The	madness	afflicting	the	Dresh,	Pully.’
Behind	her	the	witch	replied,	‘Be	well	too	late	for	him,	Highness.	But	we
will	scour	the	Black	Stone	this	night.	Before	the	Edur	arrive.’
Oh,	yes,	I	sent	for	them,	didn’t	I?	‘I	imagine,’	she	said,	her	gaze	fixed	on
the	door,	‘the	summary	execution	of	Dresh	Boaral	will	be	something	of	a
mercy	for	the	poor	man.’
‘You	mean	to	do	it	before	the	Edur	come	here	as	they	say,	Highness?’
‘Yes,	Pully.	He	will	die,	I	suppose,	trying	to	flee	arrest.’	After	a	moment,
she	asked,	‘Pully,	how	many	shoulderwomen	are	left?’
‘More	than	two	hundred,	Highness.’
‘I	see.’
‘My	Queen,’	ventured	the	other,	‘word	will	be	sent	out,	cob	to	web	as	they
say,	before	the	sun’s	rise.	You	have	been	chosen	a	betrothed.’
‘I	have,	have	I?	Who?’
‘Shake	Brullyg,	of	the	Isle.’
‘And	does	my	betrothed	remain	on	Second	Maiden	Fort?’
‘We	think	so,	Highness,’	Pully	replied.
At	that	she	turned	round.	‘You	don’t	know?’
‘The	web’s	been	snapped,	Highness.	Almost	a	month	now.	Ice	an’	dark	and
whisperings,	we	cannot	reach	across	the	waves.	The	shore	is	blind	to	the	sea,
Highness.’
The	shore	is	blind	to	the	sea.	‘Has	such	a	thing	ever	occurred	before?’
Both	witches	shook	their	heads.
Twilight	swung	about	and	hastened	outside.	Her	riders	awaited	her,	already
mounted,	silent	with	fatigue.	She	strode	to	the	horse	bearing	her	saddle	–	a
chestnut	gelding,	the	fittest	of	the	lot,	she	could	see	in	the	torchlight	–	and
pulled	herself	onto	its	broad	back.
‘Atri-Preda?’
‘To	the	coast,’	she	said,	gathering	the	reins.	‘At	the	canter.’
	
‘What’s	wrong	with	them?’
The	Hound	Master ’s	face	was	ravaged	with	distress,	tears	streaming	down
his	wind-burned	cheeks	and	glistening	like	sweat	in	his	beard.	‘They’ve	been


poisoned,	Atri-Preda!	Poisoned	meat,	left	on	the	ground	–	I’m	going	to	lose
them	all!’
Bivatt	cursed	under	her	breath,	then	said,	‘Then	we	shall	have	to	do
without.’
‘But	the	Edur	mages—’
‘If	our	own	cannot	treat	them,	Bellict,	then	neither	can	the	warlocks	–	the
Edur	tribes	do	not	breed	dogs	for	war,	do	they?	I	am	sorry.	Leave	me	now.’
Just	one	more	unpleasant	surprise	to	greet	this	dawn.	Her	army	had
marched	through	the	last	two	bells	of	night	to	reach	the	valley	–	she	wanted	to
be	the	first	to	array	her	troops	for	the	battle	to	come,	to	force	Redmask	to	react
rather	than	initiate.	Given	the	location	of	the	Awl	encampment,	she	had	not	felt
rushed	in	conducting	that	march,	anticipating	it	would	be	midday	at	the	earliest
before	the	savages	appeared	on	the	east	side	of	Bast	Fulmar,	thus	negating	any
advantage	of	a	bright	morning	sun	at	their	backs.
But	that	enemy	encampment	had	been	a	deceit.
Less	than	a	half-league	from	the	valley,	scouts	had	returned	to	the	column
to	report	enemy	in	strength	at	Bast	Fulmar.
How	had	her	mages	not	found	them?	They	had	no	answer,	barring	a
disquieting	fear	in	their	eyes.	Even	Brohl	Handar ’s	Den-Ratha	K’risnan	and	his
four	warlocks	had	been	at	a	loss	to	explain	the	success	of	Redmask’s	deception.
The	news	had	left	the	sour	taste	of	self-recrimination	in	Bivatt	–	relying	upon
mages	had	been	a	mistake,	laziness	leaning	heavy	on	past	successes.	Outriding
scouts	would	have	discovered	the	ruse	days	ago,	had	she	bothered	to	send	them
beyond	line	of	sight.	Keeping	them	close	ensured	no	raids	or	ambushes,	both
gambits	for	which	the	Awl	were	renowned.	She	had	been	following	doctrine,	to
the	letter.
Damn	this	Redmask.	Clearly	he	knows	that	doctrine	as	well	as	I	do.	And
used	it	against	us.
Now,	the	battle	awaiting	them	was	imminent,	and	the	bright	dawn	sun
would	indeed	blaze	into	the	eyes	of	her	soldiers	even	as	the	first	blood	was
spilled.
Rising	in	her	stirrups,	she	squinted	once	more	at	the	valley’s	far	side.
Mounted	Awl	in	swirling	motion,	in	seeming	chaos,	riding	back	and	forth,
lifting	clouds	of	dust	that	burned	gold	in	the	morning	light.	Horse-archers	for
the	most	part.	Tending	to	mass	in	front	of	one	of	the	broader	slopes	to	the
south,	on	her	right.	A	second	gentle	incline	was	situated	slightly	to	her	left,	and
there,	shifting	restlessly,	were	five	distinct	wedges	of	Awl	warriors	on	foot,
lining	what	passed	for	a	ridge	–	and	she	could	see	their	long	spears	waving
like	reeds	on	a	shore.	Spears,	not	those	flimsy	swords	sold	them	by	the


Factor ’s	agents.	She	judged	around	a	thousand	warriors	per	wedge	formation	–
too	disciplined	even	now,	before	the	fighting	began.	They	should	be	drunk.
Pounding	on	shields.	Their	shamans	should	be	rushing	about	in	front,	down	all
the	way	to	the	riverbed.	Showing	us	their	backsides	as	they	defecate.	Screaming
curses,	dancing	to	summon	dread	spirits	and	all	the	rest.	Instead,	this…
Well,	how	likely	is	it	those	wedges	will	survive	contact	with	my	soldiers?
They	are	not	trained	to	this	kind	of	war	–	nor	did	Redmask	have	the	time	to
manage	anything	but	this	thin	shell	of	organization.	I	have	over	sixteen
thousand	with	me.	Eighteen	if	I	include	the	Tiste	Edur.	This	one	army	of	mine
outnumbers	the	entire	Awl	population	of	warriors	–	and	while	it	looks	indeed	as
if	Redmask	has	gathered	them	all,	still	they	are	not	enough.
But	he	wasn’t	making	it	easy	to	gauge	numbers.	The	tumultuous	back	and
forth	of	the	horse-archers,	the	clouds	of	dust,	the	truncated	line	of	sight	beyond
the	valley’s	ridge	–	he	was	keeping	her	blind.
Brohl	Handar	reined	in	at	her	side,	speaking	loudly	to	be	heard	over	the
movement	of	her	troops	and	the	officers	bellowing	orders.	‘Atri-Preda,	you
seem	to	intend	to	hold	most	of	your	medium	infantry	in	reserve.’	He	gestured
behind	them	to	punctuate	his	words.	Then,	when	it	was	clear	she	would	not
respond,	he	waved	ahead.	‘This	valley’s	flanks,	while	not	steeply	inclined,	are
ribboned	with	drainage	channels—’
‘Narrow,’	she	cut	in.	‘Not	deep.’
‘True,	but	they	serve	to	separate	the	field	of	battle	into	segments
nonetheless.’
She	glanced	across	at	him.	‘We	have	three	such	channels	on	our	side,	and
all	of	them	on	my	right.	They	have	four,	one	to	my	right,	two	before	me	and
one	to	my	left	–	and	in	that	direction,	north,	the	valley	narrows.’	She	pointed.
‘See	the	bluff	on	our	side	there,	where	the	Dresh	ballistae	are	being	emplaced?
It	cannot	be	assaulted	from	the	valley	floor.	That	shall	be	our	rock	in	the
stream.	And	before	the	day	is	through,	not	simply	a	rock,	but	an	anvil.’
‘Provided	you	can	hold	the	debouch	beneath	it,’	the	Tiste	Edur	observed.
‘I	pray	to	the	Errant	that	the	Awl	seek	to	flee	down	that	defile.	It	may	not
look	deadly	but	I	assure	you,	push	a	few	thousand	panicking	barbarians	into
that	chokepoint	and	as	many	will	die	underfoot	as	we	ourselves	slaughter.’
‘So	you	intend	to	sweep	down	and	in	with	your	right	flank,	pushing	the
enemy	on	the	valley	floor	north	to	that	narrowing.	Cannot	Redmask	see	the
same?’
‘He	chose	this	site,	Overseer.’
‘Suggesting	he	sees	what	you	see	–	that	this	place	invites	a	halfencirclement	to	funnel	his	warriors	north	–	to	their	deaths.	You	said,	did	you


not,	that	this	Redmask	is	no	fool.	How	then	will	he	counter	what	you	seek?’
She	faced	the	valley	once	again.	‘Overseer,	I	am	afraid	I	do	not	have	time
for	this—’
‘Would	not	a	slow	placing	of	your	forces	be	to	our	advantage,	given	the
sun’s	position?’
‘I	believe	he	is	ready,	even	now,’	she	replied,	biting	back	her	irritation.	‘He
could	advance	at	any	time	–	and	we	are	not	ready.’
‘Then	why	not	withdraw?’
‘Because	the	plain	behind	us	is	level	for	leagues	–	he	will	have	more
mounted	warriors	than	I,	lighter-armoured	than	my	Bluerose	lancers,	and	on
rested	horses	–	they	can	harry	us	at	will,	Overseer.	Worse,	we	have	lost	our
wardogs,	while	from	the	sounds	of	that	barking,	Redmask	has	hundreds	if	not
thousands	of	his	drays	and	herders.	Your	suggestion	invites	chaos,	a	messy
succession	of	skirmishes,	attacks,	feints,	raids—’
‘Very	well,’	Brohl	Handar	interrupted.	‘Atri-Preda,	my	K’risnan	tells	me
this	valley	is	dead.’
‘What	does	he	mean,	dead?’
‘Bereft	of	the	energies	one	uses	to	create	magic.	It	has	been…murdered.’
‘This	is	why	none	of	the	mages	sensed	the	Awl	army?’
Brohl	Handar	nodded.
Murdered?	By	Redmask?	Never	mind.	‘Did	you	ask	your	K’risnan	about	the
impending	battle?	Will	he	be	able	to	use	sorcery?’
‘No.	Nor	can	your	mages.	As	he	said,	there	will	be	no	magic	here.	In	this
valley.	That	is	why	I	again	advise	we	withdraw.	Even	on	the	plain,	exposed	as
you	say	we	are,	at	least	we	will	have	sorcery.’
Bivatt	was	silent,	considering.	She	had	already	known	her	mages	would	be
ineffective	in	the	valley	below,	although	they	could	not	explain	why	it	was	so.
That	the	Edur	warlocks	had	found	the	reason	confirmed	that	spirit	magic	was
involved.	After	a	long	moment,	she	swore	and	shook	her	head.	‘We	still
outnumber	them,	with	better-disciplined,	better-armoured	troops.	Iron	to	iron,
we	will	crush	the	Awl	today.	An	end	to	this	war,	Overseer.	Did	you	not	counsel
a	quick,	succinct	campaign?’
‘I	did.	But	I	am	uneasy,	Atri-Preda—’
‘A	battle	awaits	–	we	are	all	uneasy.’
‘Not	in	that	way.’
Bivatt	grimaced.	‘Retain	your	warriors,	Overseer,	midway	between	our
baggage	camp	and	my	reserve	units	–	those	medium	infantry,	by	the	way,	are
arrayed	into	discrete	platoons	of	five	hundred	at	the	minimum,	and	each	one
protects	one	of	my	mages.	They	are	not	in	the	valley.’


‘Thus,	if	you	are	forced	to	retreat—’
‘We	will	be	positioned	to	blunt	the	pursuit	with	sorcery,	yes.’
‘Is	this	your	plan?	A	feigned	retreat,	Atri-Preda?’
‘One	of	them,	but	I	do	not	believe	it	will	be	necessary.’
Brohl	Handar	studied	her	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	gathered	his	reins
and	swung	his	horse	round.	‘I	will	reposition	my	warriors,	then.’
As	he	rode	away,	signal	horns	were	sounding	from	various	locations
along	the	western	side	of	the	valley	as	units	announced	they	were	in	place	and
at	the	ready.	Bivatt	rose	once	more	on	her	stirrups	and	scanned	her	lines.
This	section	of	the	valley	certainly	invited	a	horned	advance	–	the	west
edge	curved,	marking	what	had	once	been	a	broad	bend	in	the	course	of	the
long-dead	river.	The	enemy’s	side	was	more	undulating,	bulging	in	the	centre.
The	widest	approach	for	the	Awl	was	to	her	right.	To	counter	that	she	had	set
three	legions	of	the	Crimson	Rampant	Brigade	in	shield-wall	formation	at	the
top	of	the	slope,	fifteen	hundred	medium	infantry,	flanked	on	the	nearer	inside
by	five	hundred	heavies	of	the	Harridict	Brigade.	To	the	furthest	right	and
already	edging	down	into	the	valley	were	a	thousand	skirmishing	light	infantry
of	the	Crimson	Rampant.	Inside	of	the	heavies	another	fifteen	hundred
skirmishers,	these	of	the	Artisan	Battalion,	were	likewise	slowly,	raggedly,
working	their	way	down.	The	foot	soldiers	on	this	side	screened	three	wings	of
Bluerose	cavalry:	fifteen	hundred	lancers	who	would,	when	she	gave	the
signal,	sweep	down	between	the	south	skirmishers	and	the	Crimson	Rampant
shield-wall	to	begin	the	hard	push	of	the	enemy	northward	along	the	floor	of
the	valley,	even	as	that	shield-wall	advanced	towards	the	riverbed.
On	her	immediate	right,	at	a	modest	bulge	in	the	ridge	line,	the	Atri-Preda
had	positioned	the	Drene	Garrison	–	fifteen	hundred	medium	infantry	–
looking	down	on	an	approach	narrowed	by	two	drainage	channels.	Directly	in
front	of	her	waited	the	conjoined	wedges	of	a	thousand	heavy	infantry	of	the
Merchants’	Battalion	–	a	sawtooth	formation	that	she	would	advance	down	then
swing	either	right	or	left,	depending	on	the	state	of	battle.	Rightward	was
problematic	in	that	they	would	have	to	cross	a	drainage	channel,	but	they
would	do	that	so	early	in	the	march	down	that	she	was	not	unduly	concerned.
To	her	immediate	left	waited	three	half-legions	of	heavies	from	the	Artisan
Battalion,	screened	in	front	by	a	thousand	Harridict	skirmishers	just	beginning
their	move	down	towards	the	broad,	flat	riverbed.	Just	north	of	these	units
waited	the	Atri-Preda’s	mailed	fist,	a	thousand	heavies	of	the	Crimson
Rampant,	again	in	sawtooth	formation,	against	whom	she	expected	Redmask	to
throw	his	main	force	of	warriors	–	who	were	already	directly	opposite,	still
holding	to	their	spearhead	forms,	five	in	all.


Behind	this	solid	wall	of	heavy	infantry	waited	the	remaining	three
companies	of	Bluerose	lancers,	although	this	was	a	feint,	since	Bivatt	intended
to	send	them	northward,	round	behind	the	ballistae	knoll	and	down	into	the
riverbed	beyond	the	chokepoint.
North	of	the	Crimson	Rampant	heavy	infantry	was	another	shield-wall	of
the	brigade’s	medium	infantry,	positioned	to	guard	the	flank	of	the	heavies	to
their	right	and	the	approach	to	the	knoll	to	their	left.
Settling	back	onto	her	saddle,	Bivatt	gestured	and	an	aide	hurried	to	her
side.	‘Signal	the	Crimson	Rampant	heavy	to	advance	into	the	valley	and	halt
midway	between	their	present	position	and	the	riverbed.	Confirm	that	the	Dresh
ballistae	are	properly	sighted	for	enfilade.’
The	runner	rushed	off	to	the	block	of	flag	signallers	gathered	on	the	raised
platform	behind	her.	Without	mages	they	were	resorting	to	the	ancient
practices	of	communication.	Far	from	ideal,	she	admitted,	and	once	the	clouds
of	dust	rose	above	the	engagement…well,	at	that	point	such	signalling	often
became	irrelevant.
She	waved	another	aide	forward.	‘Send	the	left	flank	lancers	to	north	of	the
chokepoint.’
Right	and	left	on	the	valley	slope	before	her,	Letherii	skirmishers	were
reaching	the	flats	of	the	riverbed,	still	unchallenged.	The	sound	of	masses	of
soldiers	in	motion	rose	in	a	whisper	above	the	thunder	of	horse-hoofs	from
the	other	side	of	the	valley.
On	that	side	the	clouds	of	sunlit	dust	obscured	almost	everything,	but	she
noted	that	those	clouds	stretched	both	north	and	south,	well	beyond	the	battle
site.	Well,	one	of	those	marks	a	feint,	likely	the	north	one.	He	knows	which	of	my
horns	will	strike	deepest	and	turn.	She	called	out	to	a	third	message-bearer.
‘Signal	the	right	flank	lancers	to	advance	to	the	edge	of	the	riverbed,	widely
arrayed	in	case	the	skirmishers	need	to	withdraw	in	haste.	Crimson	Rampant
mediums	and	the	Harridict	heavies	to	march	down	in	their	wake.’
Let’s	get	this	damned	thing	started,	Redmask.
She	couldn’t	see	him.	No	knot	of	standards	or	banners	marked	his
command	position.	No	riders	converging	in	one	place	then	back	out	again.
But,	finally,	movement.	Lightly	armoured	skirmishers	were	pelting	down
to	meet	her	right	advance.	Slingers,	shortbow	archers,	javelin-hurlers,	round
hide	shields	and	scimitars.	The	mass	of	horse-archers	that	had	been	riding	back
and	forth	along	that	ridge	line	was	suddenly	gone.
‘Have	the	south	lancers	hold!’	Bivatt	snapped.	Those	Awl	skirmishers	were
an	invitation	to	charge,	at	which	point	her	cavalry’s	flank	would	be	swept	by
those	mounted	archers	–	and	whatever	lurked	hidden	behind	them.


Light	engagement	now	between	skirmishers,	directly	down	from	the	Drene
Garrison.	The	javelins	were	an	unexpected	inclusion,	and	were	proving
bloodily	effective.
The	southernmost	Crimson	Rampant	skirmishers	had	crossed	the	riverbed
and	were	angling	northward	–	still	a	thousand	or	more	paces	from	contacting
their	Awl	counterparts.	Then	arrows	began	descending	in	their	midst	–	horsearchers,	crowding	the	ridge	just	above	its	steepest	bank.	Hardly	clouds	of
missiles,	but	enough	to	make	those	lightly	armoured	skirmishers	flinch,	then
contract	slightly	back	towards	the	riverbed.
Where	the	hand-to-hand	fighting	was	occurring,	the	Artisan	skirmishers	–
weathering	the	javelin	strike	–	were	now	driving	the	Awl	back.
The	early	morning	air	remained	infuriatingly	still	–	no	wind	at	all,	and	the
dust	swirled	and	rolled	and	spread	in	an	ever-thickening	haze.
At	sighting	the	half-thousand	heavy	infantry	of	the	Harridict	appear	at	the
west	edge	of	the	riverbed,	the	Awl	skirmishers	began	a	wholesale	retreat,	many
flinging	away	their	round-shields.
Redmask	does	not	have	their	hearts.	Oh,	we	can	break	them	here.	Hard	and
fast.	‘Signal	the	Merchants’	heavies	to	advance	and	swing	south!’
To	her	left,	the	only	movement	was	from	her	own	forces,	the	skirmishers
of	the	Harridict	and,	just	north	of	them,	the	Crimson	Rampant	heavy	infantry	–
almost	to	the	riverbed	now.	She	squinted	at	the	valley’s	opposite	side.	Perhaps
this	chaos	she	was	seeing	was	evidence	of	Redmask’s	loss	of	control.	No,	wait
on	this.	Wait	until	we	take	the	valley’s	south	end.
The	Artisan	skirmishers	were	seeking	to	maintain	contact	with	the
retreating	Awl,	but	Bivatt	could	see	the	sergeants	holding	them	in	check,
keeping	them	just	ahead	of	the	advancing	heavies	on	their	right	flank.	Still,
throwing	away	their	damned	shields…
Then,	directly	before	her,	horse-archers	appeared,	a	narrow	spear	driving
down	the	centre	of	the	battlefield,	with	only	skirmishers	opposite	them	–	who
quickly	backed	up	the	slope	at	a	southerly	angle	to	draw	in	behind	her
advancing	Merchants’	Battalion	of	heavy	infantry.	Is	Redmask	mad?	That
spear-point	will	be	smashed	against	the	heavies	–	this	is	not	how	cavalry
charge	–	they’re	only	horse-archers!
Whereupon	the	mounted	archers	wheeled,	the	spear	becoming	a	line	–	a
thousand	or	more	–	suddenly	sweeping	southward.
Catching	the	Artisan	skirmishers	in	the	flank.
Arrows	flashed.
The	Letherii	light	infantry	seemed	to	melt	away,	bodies	tumbling	down.
Survivors	ran	for	their	lives.


That	broad	line	of	horse-archers	then	began	a	complicated,	stunning
manoeuvre,	its	tailing,	easternmost	end	now	slowing,	swinging	up,	west,
pulling	to	shift	the	line	south-north,	now	launching	sweeping	arrow-fire	across
the	front	ranks	of	the	Harridict	heavy	infantry,	then	the	Crimson	Rampant
medium,	before	the	head	of	the	line	swung	back	eastward,	more	missiles
arcing	across	to	the	Bluerose	lancers,	who	responded	with	a	blare	of	horns,
surging	forward	to	close	with	the	Awl.
Yet	they	were	not	interested	in	such	an	engagement.	The	line	broke	apart,
as	riders	spurred	hard	back	towards	the	east	ridge.
‘Halt	that	charge!’	Bivatt	shouted.	Stung,	we	lash	out	–	who	commands	that
wing?
As	the	lancers	spread	out	in	their	hard	pursuit,	three	wings	of	heavierarmed	and	armoured	Awl	horse-warriors	appeared	on	the	ridge	line,	then
plunged	down	the	slope	to	take	the	Bluerose	companies	in	the	flank.	Three
wings,	outnumbering	the	lancers	by	two	to	one.
Bivatt	watched	in	fury	as	her	cavalry	sought	to	wheel	to	meet	the	attack,
whilst	others	responded	to	her	command	–	and	so	lost	all	momentum.
‘Sound	the	withdrawal	for	those	lancers!’
Too	late.
The	Awl	horse-warriors	swept	through	scattered	skirmishers	of	the
Crimson	Rampant,	then	slammed	into	the	Bluerose	companies.
She	heard	animals	scream,	felt	the	impact	tremble	through	the	ground	–
enough	to	make	her	mount	sidestep	–	and	then	dust	obscured	the	scene.
‘Advance	the	heavies	at	the	double!’
‘Which	heavies,	Atri-Preda?’
‘Harridict	and	Merchants’,	you	fool!	And	same	command	for	the	Crimson
Rampant	medium!	Quickly!’
She	saw	riders	and	riderless	horses	plunge	into	view	from	the	roiling	dust
clouds.	Her	lancers	had	been	shattered	–	were	the	Awl	pursuing?	Their	blood
must	be	high	–	oh,	let	them	lose	control,	let	them	meet	the	fists	of	my	heavies!
But	no,	there	they	were,	rising	up	the	far	slope,	waving	weapons	in	the	air
to	announce	their	triumph.
She	saw	the	Awl	skirmishers	reappearing	on	the	ridge	line,	in	blocks	with
avenues	in	between	to	let	the	riders	pass	through	–	but	those	light	infantry	were
transformed.	Equipped	now	with	rectangular,	copper-sheathed	shields	and
bearing	long	spears,	they	closed	ranks	after	the	last	horse-warriors	were
through,	and	steadied	their	line	at	the	very	edge	of	the	ridge.
On	the	valley	floor,	dust	climbed	skyward,	slowly	revealing	the
devastating	effects	of	that	flank	charge	into	the	Bluerose	companies.	Errant


below,	they’ve	been	wiped	out.	Hundreds	of	dead	and	dying	skirmishers
covered	the	grounds	to	either	side	of	that	fateful	impact.
Her	right	advance	had	been	deeply	wounded	–	not	yet	mortal,	even	so	–
‘Advance	the	medium	and	the	two	heavies	across	the	valley	–	order	to	engage
that	line	on	the	ridge.	Wedge	formations!’	Those	skirmishers	are	too	thinly
arrayed	to	hold.
‘Atri-Preda!’	called	an	aide.	‘Movement	to	the	north	side!’
She	cantered	her	horse	to	the	very	edge	of	the	rise	and	scanned	the	scene
below	and	to	her	left.	‘Report!’
‘Bluerose	lancers	in	retreat,	Atri-Preda	–	the	valley	floor	beyond	the
chokepoint	is	theirs—’
‘What?	How	many	damned	horse-archers	does	he	have?’
The	officer	shook	her	head.	‘Wardogs,	sir.	Close	on	two	thousand	of	the
damned	things	–	moving	through	the	high	grasses	in	the	basin	–	they	were	on
the	lancers	before	they	knew	it.	The	horses	went	wild,	sir—’
‘Shit!’	Then,	upon	seeing	the	messenger ’s	widening	eyes,	she	steeled
herself.	‘Very	well.	Move	the	reserve	medium	to	the	north	flank	of	the	knoll.’
Seven	hundred	and	fifty,	Merchants’	Battalion	–	I	doubt	they’d	try	sending	dogs
against	that.	I	can	still	advance	them	to	retake	the	chokepoint’s	debouch,	when
the	time	comes.
As	she	thought	this,	she	was	scanning	the	array	before	her.	Directly
opposite,	the	thousand	Harridict	skirmishers	had	crossed	the	riverbed,	even	as
the	Crimson	Rampant	sawtooth	advance	moved	onto	level	ground.
And	Redmask’s	five	wedges	of	warriors	were	marching	to	meet	them.
Excellent.	We’ll	lock	that	engagement	–	with	ballistae	enfilade	to	weaken	their
north	flank	–	then	down	come	the	Crimson	Rampant	medium,	to	wheel	into	their
flank.
Surprisingly	the	Awl	wedges	more	or	less	held	to	their	formations,
although	they	were	each	maintaining	considerable	distance	from	their	flanking
neighbours	–	once	the	space	drew	tighter,	she	suspected,	the	wedges	would
start	mixing,	edges	pulled	ragged.	Marching	in	time	was	the	most	difficult
battlefield	manoeuvre,	after	all.	Between	each	of	them,	then,	could	be	found	the
weak	points.	Perhaps	enough	to	push	through	with	the	saw’s	teeth	and	begin
isolating	each	wedge.
‘Wardogs	on	the	knoll!’
She	spun	at	the	cry.	‘Errant’s	kick!’	Frenzied	barking,	shrieks	from	the
weapon	crews	–	‘Second	reserve	legion	–	the	Artisan!	Advance	on	the	double	–
butcher	those	damned	things!’
Obscurely,	she	suddenly	recalled	a	scene	months	ago	–	wounded	but	alive,


less	than	a	handful	of	the	beasts	on	a	hill	overlooking	an	Awl	camp,	watching
the	Letherii	slaughtering	the	last	of	their	masters.	And	she	wondered,	with	a
shiver	of	superstitious	fear,	if	those	beasts	were	now	exacting	ferocious
vengeance.	Dammit,	Bivatt	–	never	mind	all	that.
The	Awl	spear-heads	were	not	drawing	together,	she	saw	–	nor	was	there
need	to,	now	that	she’d	temporarily	lost	her	ballistae.	Indeed,	the	two
northernmost	of	those	wedges	were	now	angling	to	challenge	her	Crimson
Rampant	medium.	But	this	would	be	old-style	fighting,	she	knew	–	and	the	Awl
did	not	possess	the	discipline	nor	the	training	for	this	kind	of	steeled	butchery.
Yet,	Redmask	is	not	waging	this	battle	in	the	Awl	fashion,	is	he?	No,	this	is
something	else.	He’s	treating	this	like	a	plains	engagement	in	miniature	–	the
way	those	horse-archers	wheeled,	reformed,	then	reformed	again	–	a	hit	and
run	tactic,	all	on	a	compacted	scale.
I	see	now	–	but	it	will	not	work	for	much	longer.
Once	his	warriors	locked	with	her	mailed	fist.
The	Awl	spear-heads	were	now	nearing	the	flat	of	the	riverbed	–	the	two
sides	would	engage	on	the	hardpacked	sand	of	the	bed	itself.	No	advantage	of
slope	to	either	side	–	until	the	tide	shifts.	One	way	or	the	other	–	no,	do	not
think—
A	new	reverberation	trembled	through	the	ground	now.	Deeper,	rolling,
ominous.
From	the	dust,	between	the	Awl	wedges,	huge	shapes	loomed,	rumbled
forward.
Wagons.	Awl	wagons,	the	six-wheeled	bastards	–	not	drawn,	but	pushed.
Their	beds	were	crowded	with	half-naked	warriors,	spears	bristling.	The	entire
front	end	of	each	rocking,	pitching	wagon	was	a	horizontal	forest	of	oversized
spears.	Round-shields	overlapped	to	form	a	half-turtleshell	that	encased	the
forward	section.
They	now	thundered	through	the	broad	gaps	between	the	wedges	–	twenty,
fifty,	a	hundred	–	lumbering	yet	rolling	so	swiftly	after	the	long	descent	into
the	valley	that	the	masses	of	burly	warriors	who	had	been	pushing	them	now
trailed	in	their	wake,	sprinting	to	catch	up.
The	wagons	plunged	straight	into	the	face	of	the	Crimson	Rampant	heavy
infantry.
Armoured	bodies	cartwheeled	above	the	press	as	the	entire	saw-tooth
formation	was	torn	apart	–	and	now	the	bare-chested	fanatics	riding	those
wagons	launched	themselves	out	to	all	sides,	screaming	like	demons.
The	three	wedges	facing	the	heavy	infantry	then	thrust	into	the	chaotic
wake,	delivering	frenzied	slaughter.


Bivatt	stared,	disbelieving,	then	snapped,	‘Artisan	heavy,	advance	down	at
the	double,	crescent,	and	prepare	to	cover	the	retreat.’
The	aide	beside	her	stared.	‘Retreat,	Atri-Preda?’
‘You	heard	me!	Signal	general	withdrawal	and	sound	the	Crimson
Rampant	to	retreat!	Quickly,	before	every	damned	one	of	them	is	butchered!’
Will	Redmask	follow?	Oh,	I’ll	lose	heavily	if	he	does	–	but	I’ll	also	hit	back
hard	–	on	the	plain.	I’ll	see	his	bones	burst	into	flames—
She	heard	more	wagons,	this	time	to	her	right.	My	other	advance	–	‘Sound
general	withdrawal!’
Horns	blared.
Shouts	behind	her.	‘Attack	on	the	baggage	camp!	Attack—’
‘Quiet!	Do	you	think	the	Edur	cannot	deal	with	that?’	She	prayed	Brohl
Handar	could.	Without	supplies	this	campaign	was	over.	Without	supplies,	we’ll
never	make	it	back	to	Drene.	Errant	fend,	I	have	been	outwitted	at	every	turn—
And	now	the	sound	behind	her	was	rising	to	challenge	that	in	the	valley
below.	With	sick	dread,	she	tugged	her	horse	round	and	rode	back,	past	the
signallers’	platform.
Her	remaining	reserve	units	had	all	wheeled	round,	reversing	their	facing.
Seeing	an	officer	riding	between	two	of	the	squares,	Bivatt	spurred	to	catch
him.
‘What	in	the	Errant’s	name	is	happening	over	there?’	she	demanded.
Distant	screams,	the	reek	of	smoke,	thunder—
The	helmed	head	swung	round,	the	face	beneath	it	pale.	‘Demons,	AtriPreda!	The	mages	pursue	them—’
‘They	what?	Recall	them,	damn	you!	Recall	them	now!’
	
Brohl	Handar	sat	astride	his	horse	in	the	company	of	eight	Arapay	war	leaders,
four	warlocks	and	the	Den-Ratha	K’risnan.	The	two	thousand	foot	soldiers	–
Tiste	Edur	warriors,	categorized	in	Letherii	military	terms	as	medium	to	light
infantry	–	were	arranged	into	eight	distinct	blocks,	fully	caparisoned	in
armour	and	awaiting	the	word	to	march.
The	supply	train’s	camp	was	sprawled	on	a	broad,	mostly	level	hill	fifteen
hundred	paces	to	the	west,	the	corralled	beasts	of	burden	milling	beneath	dust
and	slowly	drifting	dung-smoke.	The	Overseer	could	see	hospital	tents	rising
along	the	near	side,	the	canvas	sides	bright	in	the	morning	light.	Above	another
hill,	north	of	the	train’s	camp,	wheeled	two	hawks	or	perhaps	eagles.	The	sky
was	otherwise	empty,	a	span	of	deep	blue	slowly	paling	as	the	sun	climbed
higher.


Butterflies	flitted	among	small	yellow	flowers	–	their	wings	matched
precisely	the	colour	of	the	petals,	Brohl	realized,	surprised	that	he	had	not
noted	such	a	detail	before.	Nature	understands	disguise	and	deceit.	Nature
reminds	us	what	it	is	to	survive.	The	Tiste	Edur	had	well	grasped	those	truths	–
grey	as	the	shadows	from	which	they	had	been	born;	grey	as	the	boles	of	the
trees	in	the	murky	forests	of	this	world;	grey	as	the	shrouds	of	dusk.
‘What	have	we	forgotten?’	he	murmured.
An	Arapay	war	leader	–	a	Preda	–	turned	his	helmed	head,	the	scarred	face
beneath	its	jutting	rim	hidden	in	shadow.	‘Overseer?	We	are	positioned	as	you
commanded—’
‘Never	mind,’	Brohl	Handar	cut	in,	inexplicably	irritated	by	the	veteran’s
attention.	‘What	is	the	guard	at	the	camp?’
‘Four	hundred	mixed	infantry,’	the	warrior	replied,	then	shrugged.	‘These
Letherii	are	ever	confident.’
‘Comes	with	overwhelming	superiority,’	another	Arapay	drawled.
The	first	Preda	nodded.	‘I	do	well	recall,	old	friend,	the	surprise	on	their
faces	the	day	we	shattered	them	outside	Letheras.	As	if,	all	at	once,	the	world
revealed	itself	to	be	other	than	what	they	had	always	believed.	That	look	–	it
was	disbelief.’	The	warrior	grunted	a	laugh.	‘Too	busy	with	their	denial	to
adapt	when	it	was	needed	most.’
‘Enough	of	this,’	Brohl	Handar	snapped.	‘The	Atri-Preda’s	forces	have
engaged	the	Awl	–	can	you	not	hear?’	He	twisted	on	his	saddle	and	squinted
eastward.	‘See	the	dust.’	He	was	silent	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	he	turned	to
the	first	Arapay	Preda.	‘Take	two	cohorts	to	the	camp.	Four	hundred	Letherii
are	not	enough.’
‘Overseer,	what	if	we	are	called	on	to	reinforce	the	Atri-Preda?’
‘If	we	are,	then	this	day	is	lost.	I	have	given	you	my	order.’
A	nod,	and	the	Preda	spurred	his	horse	towards	the	arrayed	Edur	warriors.
Brohl	Handar	studied	the	K’risnan	at	his	side	for	a	moment.	The	bent
creature	sat	hunched	in	his	saddle	like	a	bloated	crow.	He	was	hooded,	no
doubt	to	hide	the	twisted	ravaging	of	his	once-handsome	features.	A	chief’s
son,	transformed	into	a	ghastly	icon	of	the	chaotic	power	before	which	the
Tiste	Edur	now	knelt.	He	saw	the	figure	twitch.	‘What	assails	you?’	the
Overseer	demanded.
‘Something,	nothing.’	The	reply	was	guttural,	the	words	misshaped	by	a
malformed	throat.	It	was	the	sound	of	pain,	enduring	and	unyielding.
‘Which?’
Another	twitch,	passing,	Brohl	realized,	for	a	shrug.	‘Footfalls	on	dead
land.’


‘An	Awl	war-party?’
‘No.’	The	hooded	head	pivoted	until	the	shadow-swallowed	face	was
directed	at	the	Overseer.	‘Heavier.’
All	at	once	Brohl	Handar	recalled	the	enormous	taloned	tracks	found	at	the
destroyed	homestead.	He	straightened,	one	hand	reaching	for	the	Arapay
scimitar	at	his	side.	‘Where?	Which	direction?’
A	long	pause,	then	the	K’risnan	pointed	with	a	clawed	hand.
Towards	the	supply	camp.
Where	sudden	screams	erupted.
‘Cohorts	at	the	double!’	Brohl	Handar	bellowed.	‘K’risnan,	you	and	your
warlocks	–	with	me!’	With	that	he	spurred	his	horse,	kicking	the	startled	beast
into	a	canter,	then	a	gallop.
Ahead,	he	saw,	the	Arapay	Preda	who	had	been	escorting	the	two	cohorts
had	already	commanded	them	into	a	half-jog.	The	warrior ’s	helmed	head
turned	and	tracked	the	Overseer	and	his	cadre	of	mages	as	they	pounded	past.
Ahead,	the	braying	of	terrified	oxen	and	mules	rose,	mournful	and
helpless,	above	the	sounds	of	slaughter.	Tents	had	gone	down,	guide-ropes
whipping	into	the	air,	and	Brohl	saw	figures	now,	fleeing	the	camp,	pelting
northward—
—where	a	perfect	Awl	ambush	awaited	them.	Rising	from	the	high	grasses.
Arrows,	javelins,	sleeting	through	the	air.	Bodies	sprawling,	tumbling,	then	the
savages,	loosing	war-cries,	rushing	to	close	with	spears,	axes	and	swords.
Nothing	to	be	done	for	them	–	poor	bastards.	We	need	to	save	our	supplies.
They	reached	the	faint	slope	and	rode	hard	towards	the	row	of	hospital
tents.
The	beast	that	burst	into	view	directly	before	them	was	indeed	a	demon	–
an	image	that	closed	like	talons	in	his	mind	–	the	shock	of	recognition.	Our
ancient	enemy	–	it	must	be	–	the	Edur	cannot	forget	–
Head	thrust	forward	on	a	sinuous	neck,	broad	jaw	open	to	reveal	dagger
fangs.	Massive	shoulders	behind	the	neck,	long	heavily	muscled	arms	with
huge	curved	blades	of	iron	strapped	where	hands	should	have	been.	Leaning
far	forward	as	it	ran	towards	them	on	enormous	hind	legs,	the	huge	tail	thrust
straight	back	for	balance,	the	beast	was	suddenly	in	their	midst.
Horses	screamed.	Brohl	found	himself	to	the	demon’s	right,	almost	within
reach	of	those	scything	sword	blades,	and	he	stared	in	horror	as	that	viper ’s
head	snapped	forward,	jaws	closing	on	the	neck	of	a	horse,	closing,	crunching,
then	tearing	loose,	blood	spraying,	its	mouth	still	filled	with	meat	and	bone,	the
horse’s	spine	half	ripping	loose	from	the	horrid	gap	left	in	the	wake	of	those
savage	jaws.	A	blade	cut	in	half	the	warlock	astride	that	mount.	The	other


sword	slashed	down,	chopping	through	another	warlock’s	thigh,	the	saddle,
then	deep	into	the	horse’s	shoulder,	smashing	scapula,	then	ribs.	The	beast
collapsed	beneath	the	blow,	as	the	rider	–	the	severed	stump	of	his	leg	gushing
blood	–	pitched	over,	balanced	for	a	moment	on	the	one	stirrup,	then	sprawled
to	land	on	the	ground,	even	as	another	horse’s	stamping	hoof	descended	onto
his	upturned	face.
The	Overseer ’s	horse	seemed	to	collide	with	something,	snapping	both
front	legs.	The	animal’s	plunging	fall	threw	Brohl	over	its	head.	He	struck,
rolled,	the	scimitar ’s	blade	biting	into	his	left	leg,	and	came	to	a	stop	facing	his
thrashing	mount.	The	demon’s	tail	had	swept	into	and	through	their	path.
He	saw	it	wheel	for	a	return	attack.
A	foaming	wave	of	sorcery	rose	into	its	path,	lifting,	climbing	with	power.
The	demon	vanished	from	Brohl’s	view	behind	that	churning	wave.
Sun’s	light	suddenly	blotted—
—the	demon	in	the	air,	arcing	over	the	crest	of	the	K’risnan’s	magic,	then
down,	the	talons	of	its	hind	feet	outstretched.	One	closing	on	another	warlock,
pushing	the	head	down	at	an	impossible	angle	into	the	cup	between	the	man’s
shoulders	as	the	demon’s	weight	descended	–	the	horse	crumpling	beneath	that
overwhelming	force,	legs	snapping	like	twigs.	The	other	raking	towards	the
K’risnan,	a	glancing	blow	that	flung	him	from	the	back	of	his	bolting	horse,
the	claws	catching	the	horse’s	rump	before	it	could	lunge	out	of	reach,	the
talons	sinking	deep,	then	tearing	free	a	mass	of	meat	to	reveal	–	in	a	gory	flash
–	the	bones	of	its	hips	and	upper	legs.
The	horse	crashed	down	in	a	twisting	fall	that	cracked	ribs,	less	than	three
strides	away	from	where	Brohl	was	lying.	He	saw	the	whites	of	the	beast’s	eyes
–	shock	and	terror,	death’s	own	spectre—
The	Overseer	sought	to	rise,	but	something	was	wrong	with	his	left	leg	–
drained	of	all	strength,	strangely	heavy,	sodden	in	the	tangled	grass.	He	looked
down.	Red	from	the	hip	down	–	his	own	scimitar	had	opened	a	deep,	welling
gash	at	an	angle	over	his	thigh,	the	cut	ending	just	above	the	knee.
A	killing	wound	–	blood	pouring	out	–	Brohl	Handar	fell	back,	staring	up
at	the	sky,	disbelieving.	I	have	killed	myself.
He	heard	the	thump	of	the	demon’s	feet,	swift,	moving	away	–	then	a
deeper	sound,	the	rush	of	warriors,	closing	now	around	him,	weapons	drawn.
Heads	turned,	faces	stretched	as	words	were	shouted	–	he	could	not	understand
them,	the	sounds	fading,	retreating	–	a	figure	crawling	to	his	side,	hooded,
blood	dripping	from	its	nose	–	the	only	part	of	the	face	that	was	visible	–	a
gnarled	hand	reaching	for	him	–	and	Brohl	Handar	closed	his	eyes.


	
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	sawed	the	reins	of	her	horse	as	she	came	between	two	units
of	her	reserve	medium	infantry,	Artisan	on	her	right,	Harridict	on	her	left,	and
beyond	them,	where	another	Artisan	unit	was	positioned,	there	was	the
commotion	of	fighting.
She	saw	a	reptilian	monstrosity	plunging	into	their	ranks	–	soldiers
seeming	to	melt	from	its	path,	others	lifting	into	the	air	on	both	sides,	in
welters	of	blood,	as	the	beast’s	taloned	hands	slashed	right	and	left.	Dark-hued,
perfectly	balanced	on	two	massive	hind	legs,	the	demon	tore	a	path	straight	to
the	heart	of	the	packed	square—
Reaching	out,	both	hands	closing	on	a	single	figure,	a	woman,	a	mage	–
plucking	her	flailing	into	the	air,	then	dismembering	her	as	would	a	child	a
straw	doll.
Beyond,	she	could	see,	the	southernmost	unit,	seven	hundred	and	fifty
medium	infantry	of	the	Merchants’	Battalion,	were	a	milling	mass	strewn	with
dead	and	dying	soldiers.
‘Sorcery!’	she	screamed,	wheeling	towards	the	Artisan	unit	on	her	right	–
seeking	out	the	mage	in	its	midst	–	motion,	someone	pushing	through	the
ranks.
Dust	clouds	caught	her	eye	–	the	camp	–	the	Edur	legion	was	nowhere	in
sight	–	they	had	rushed	to	its	defence.	Against	more	of	these	demons?
The	creature	barrelled	free	of	the	Artisan	soldiers	south	of	the	nowretreating	Harridict	unit,	where	a	second	sorceror	stumbled	into	view,	running
towards	the	other	mage.	She	could	see	his	mouth	moving	as	he	wove	magic,
adding	his	power	to	that	of	the	first.
The	demon	had	spun	to	its	left	instead	of	continuing	its	attack,	launching
itself	into	a	run,	wheeling	round	the	unit	it	had	just	torn	through,	placing	them
between	itself	and	the	sorcery	now	bursting	loose	in	a	refulgent	tumult	from
the	ground	in	front	of	the	mages.
Leaning	far	forward,	the	demon’s	speed	was	astonishing	as	it	fled.
Bivatt	heard	the	ritual	sputter	and	die	and	she	twisted	on	her	saddle.	‘Damn
you!	Hit	it!’
‘Your	soldiers!’
‘You	took	too	long!’	She	spied	a	Preda	from	the	Harridict	unit.	‘Draw	all
the	reserves	behind	the	mages!	North,	you	fool	–	sound	the	order!	Cadre,	keep
that	damned	magic	at	the	ready!’
‘We	are,	Atri-Preda!’
Chilled	despite	the	burgeoning	heat,	Bivatt	swung	her	horse	round	once


more	and	rode	hard	back	towards	the	valley.	I	am	outwitted.	Flinching	on	every
side,	recoiling,	reacting	–	Redmask,	this	one	is	yours.
But	I	will	have	you	in	the	end.	I	swear	it.
Ahead,	she	could	see	her	troops	appearing	on	the	rise,	withdrawing	in
order,	in	what	was	clearly	an	uncontested	retreat.	Redmask,	it	seemed,	was
satisfied	–	he	would	not	be	drawn	out	from	the	valley,	even	with	his	demonic
allies—
The	camp.	She	needed	to	get	her	soldiers	back	to	that	damned	camp	–	pray
the	Edur	beat	off	the	attack.	Pray	Brohl	Handar	has	not	forgotten	how	to	think
like	a	soldier.
Pray	he	fared	better	than	I	did	this	day.
	
The	shore	is	blind	to	the	sea.	Might	as	well	say	the	moon	has	for	ever	fled	the
night	sky.	Chilled,	exhausted,	Yan	Tovis	rode	with	her	three	soldiers	down	the
level,	narrow	road.	Thick	stands	of	trees	on	either	side,	the	leaves	black	where
the	moon’s	light	did	not	reach,	the	banks	high	and	steep	evincing	the	antiquity
of	this	trail	to	the	shore,	roots	reaching	down	witch-braided,	gnarled	and
dripping	in	the	clammy	darkness.	Stones	snapping	beneath	hooves,	the	gusts	of
breath	from	the	horses,	the	muted	crackle	of	shifting	armour.	Dawn	was	still
two	bells	away.
Blind	to	the	sea.	The	sea’s	thirst	was	ceaseless.	The	truth	of	that	could	be
seen	in	its	endless	gnawing	of	the	shore,	could	be	heard	in	its	hungry	voice,
could	be	found	in	the	bitter	poison	of	its	taste.	The	Shake	knew	that	in	the
beginning	the	world	had	been	nothing	but	sea,	and	that	in	the	end	it	would	be
the	same.	The	water	rising,	devouring	all,	and	this	was	an	inexorable	fate	to
which	the	Shake	were	helpless	witness.
The	shore’s	battle	had	ever	been	the	battle	of	her	people.	The	Isle,	which
had	once	been	sacred,	had	been	desecrated,	made	a	fetid	prison	by	the	Letherii.
Yet	now	it	is	freed	once	again.	Too	late.	Generations	past	there	had	been	land
bridges	linking	the	many	islands	south	of	the	Reach.	Now	gone.	The	Isle	itself
rose	from	the	sea	with	high	cliffs,	everywhere	but	the	single	harbour	now.
Such	was	the	dying	world.
Often	among	the	Shake	there	had	been	born	demon-kissed	children.	Some
would	be	chosen	by	the	coven	and	taught	the	Old	Ways;	the	rest	would	be	flung
from	those	cliffs,	down	into	the	thirsty	sea.	Gift	of	mortal	blood;	momentary,
pathetic	easing	of	its	need.
She	had	run,	years	ago,	for	a	reason.	The	noble	blood	within	her	had
burned	like	poison,	the	barbaric	legacy	of	her	people	overwhelmed	her	with


shame	and	guilt.	With	the	raw	vigour	of	youth	she	had	refused	to	accept	the
barbaric	brutality	of	her	ancestors,	refused	to	wallow	in	the	cloying,
suffocating	nihilism	of	a	self-inflicted	crime.
All	of	the	defiance	within	her	was	obliterated	when	she	had	seen	for	herself
the	birth	of	a	demon-kissed	monstrosity	–	the	taloned	hands	and	feet,	the
scaled,	elongated	face,	the	blunt	tail	twitching	like	a	headless	worm,	the	eyes	of
lurid	green.	If	naught	but	the	taloned	hands	and	feet	had	marked	the	demon’s
seed,	the	coven	would	have	chosen	this	newborn,	for	there	was	true	power	in
demonic	blood	when	no	more	than	a	single	drop	trickled	in	the	child’s	veins.
More	than	that,	and	the	creation	was	an	abomination.
Grotesque	babes	crawling	in	the	muck	of	the	sea’s	floor,	claws	gouging
furrows	in	the	dark,	the	sea’s	legion,	the	army	awaiting	us	all.
The	seeds	thrived	in	the	foaming	waves	where	they	met	the	land,
generation	upon	generation.	Flung	high	onto	the	shore,	they	sank	into	the
ground.	Dwelling	within	living	creatures,	prey	and	predator;	bound	inside
plants;	adhering	to	the	very	blades	of	grass,	the	leaves	of	the	trees	–	these	seeds
could	not	be	escaped:	another	bitter	truth	among	the	Shake.	When	they	found	a
woman’s	womb	where	a	child	was	already	growing,	the	seed	stole	its	fate.
Seeking…something,	yet	yielding	naught	but	a	shape	that	warred	with	that	of
the	human.
The	demons	had	been	pure,	once.	Birthing	their	own	kind,	a	world	of
mothers	and	offspring.	The	seeds	had	dwelt	in	the	sea	found	in	demonic
wombs.	Until	the	war	that	saw	the	bellies	of	those	mothers	slit	open,	spilling
what	belonged	inside	out	into	this	world	–	the	seeds	even	the	sea	sought	to
reject.	A	war	of	slaughter	–	yet	the	demons	had	found	a	way	to	survive,	to	this
very	day.	In	the	swirling	spume	of	tidal	pools,	in	the	rush	of	tumbling,	crashing
waves.	Lost,	yet	not	defeated.	Gone,	yet	poised	to	return.
Seeking	the	right	mother.
So	the	witches	remained.	Yan	Tovis	had	believed	the	coven	obliterated,
crushed	into	extinction	–	the	Letherii	well	knew	that	resistance	to	tyranny	was
nurtured	in	schools	of	faith,	espoused	by	old,	bitter	priests	and	priestesses,	by
elders	who	would	work	through	the	foolish	young	–	use	them	like	weapons,
flung	away	when	broken,	melodramatically	mourned	when	destroyed.	Priests
and	priestesses	whose	version	of	faith	justified	the	abuse	of	their	own
followers.
The	birth	of	a	priesthood,	Yan	Tovis	now	understood,	forced	a	hierarchy
upon	piety,	as	if	the	rules	of	servitude	were	malleable,	where	such	a	scheme	–
shrouded	in	mysterious	knowledge	and	learning	–	conveyed	upon	the	life	of	a
priest	or	priestess	greater	value	and	virtue	than	those	of	the	ignorant	common


folk.
In	her	years	of	Letherii	education,	Yan	Tovis	had	seen	how	the	arrival	of
shouldermen	–	of	warlocks	and	witches	–	was	in	truth	a	devolution	among	the
Shake,	a	devolution	from	truly	knowing	the	god	that	was	the	shore.	Artifice
and	secular	ambition,	withholding	sacred	knowledge	from	those	never	to	be
initiated	–	these	were	not	the	shore’s	will.	No,	only	what	the	warlocks	and
witches	wanted.
Taloned	hands	and	feet	have	proved	iconic	indeed.
But	power	came	with	demonic	blood.	And	so	long	as	every	child	born	with
such	power	and	allowed	to	survive	was	initiated	into	the	coven,	then	that	power
remained	exclusive.
The	Letherii	in	their	conquest	of	the	Shake	had	conducted	a	pogrom
against	the	coven.
And	had	failed.
With	all	her	being,	Yan	Tovis	wished	they	had	succeeded.
The	Shake	were	gone	as	a	people.	Even	the	soldiers	of	her	company	–	each
one	carefully	selected	over	the	years	on	the	basis	of	Shake	remnants	in	their
blood	–	were	in	truth	more	Letherii	than	Shake.	She	had	done	little,	after	all,	to
awaken	their	heritage.
Yet	I	chose	them,	did	I	not?	I	wanted	their	loyalty,	beyond	that	of	a	Letherii
soldier	for	his	or	her	Atri-Preda.
Admit	it,	Twilight.	You	are	a	queen	now,	and	these	soldiers	–	these	Shake	–
know	it.	And	it	is	what	you	sought	in	the	depths	of	your	own	ambition.	And	now,
it	seemed,	she	would	have	to	face	the	truth	of	that	ambition,	the	stirring	of	her
noble	blood	–	seeking	its	proper	pre-eminence,	its	right.
What	has	brought	my	half-brother	to	the	shore?	Did	he	ride	as	a	Shake,	or	a
Letherii	Master	at	Arms	for	a	Dresh-Preda?	But	she	found	she	could	not
believe	her	own	question.	She	knew	the	answer,	quivering	like	a	knife	in	her
soul.	The	shore	is	blind…
They	rode	on	in	the	dark.
We	were	never	as	the	Nerek,	the	Tarthenal	and	the	others.	We	could	raise	no
army	against	the	invaders.	Our	belief	in	the	shore	held	no	vast	power,	for	it	is	a
belief	in	the	mutable,	in	transformation.	A	god	with	no	face	but	every	face.	Our
temple	is	the	strand	where	the	eternal	war	between	land	and	sea	is	waged,	a
temple	that	rises	only	to	crumble	yet	again.	Temple	of	sound,	of	smell,	taste	and
tears	upon	every	fingertip.
Our	coven	healed	wounds,	scoured	away	diseases,	and	murdered	babies.
The	Tarthenal	viewed	us	with	horror.	The	Nerek	hunted	our	folk	in	the
forests.	For	the	Faered,	we	were	child-snatchers	in	the	night.	They	would	leave


us	husks	of	bread	on	tree	stumps,	as	if	we	were	no	better	than	malignant	crows.
Of	these	people,	these	Shake,	I	am	now	Queen.
And	a	man	who	would	be	her	husband	awaited	her.	On	the	Isle.
Errant	take	me,	I	am	too	tired	for	this.
Horse-hoofs	splashing	through	puddles	where	the	old	road	dipped	–	they
were	nearing	the	shore.	Ahead,	the	land	rose	again	–	some	long-ago	high	tide
mark,	a	broad	ridge	of	smoothed	stones	and	cobbles	bedded	in	sandy	clay	–	the
kind	of	clay	that	became	shale	beneath	the	weight	of	time,	pocked	by	the
restless	stones.	In	that	shale	one	could	find	embedded	shells,	mollusc
fragments,	proof	of	the	sea’s	many	victories.
The	trees	were	sparser	here,	bent	down	by	the	wind	that	she	could	not	yet
feel	on	her	face	–	a	calm	that	surprised	her,	given	the	season.	The	smell	of	the
shore	was	heavy	in	the	air,	motionless	and	fetid.
They	slowed	their	mounts.	From	the	as	yet	unseen	sea	there	was	no	sound,
not	even	the	whisper	of	gentle	waves.	As	if	the	world	on	the	other	side	of	the
ridge	had	vanished.
‘Tracks	here,	sir,’	one	of	her	soldiers	said	as	they	drew	to	a	halt	close	to
the	slope.	‘Riders,	skirting	the	bank,	north	and	south	both.’
‘As	if	they	were	hunting	someone,’	another	observed.
Yan	Tovis	held	up	a	gauntleted	hand.
Horses	to	the	north,	riding	at	the	canter,	approaching.
Struck	by	a	sudden,	almost	superstitious	fear,	Yan	Tovis	made	a	gesture,
and	her	soldiers	drew	their	swords.	She	reached	for	her	own.
The	first	of	the	riders	appeared.
Letherii.
Relaxing,	Yan	Tovis	released	her	breath.	‘Hold,	soldier!’
The	sudden	command	clearly	startled	the	figure	and	the	three	other	riders
behind	it.	Hoofs	skidding	on	loose	pebbles.
Armoured	as	if	for	battle	–	chain	hauberks,	the	blackened	rings	glistening,
visors	drawn	down	on	their	helms.	The	lead	rider	held	a	long-handled	singlebladed	axe	in	his	right	hand;	those	behind	him	wielded	lances,	the	heads	wide
and	barbed	as	if	the	troop	had	been	hunting	boar.
Yan	Tovis	nudged	her	horse	round	and	guided	it	a	few	steps	closer.	‘I	am
Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis,’	she	said.
A	tilt	of	the	helmed	head	from	the	lead	man.	‘Yedan	Derryg,’	he	said	in	a
low	voice,	‘Master	at	Arms,	Boaral	Keep.’
She	hesitated,	then	said,	‘The	Watch.’
‘Twilight,’	he	replied.	‘Even	in	this	gloom,	I	can	see	it	is	you.’
‘I	find	that	difficult	to	believe	–	you	fled—’


‘Fled,	my	Queen?’
‘The	House	of	our	mother,	yes.’
‘Your	father	and	I	did	not	get	along,	Twilight.	You	were	but	a	toddler	when
last	I	saw	you.	But	that	does	not	matter.	I	see	now	in	your	face	what	I	saw	then.
No	mistaking	it.’
Sighing,	she	dismounted.
After	a	moment,	the	others	did	the	same.	Yedan	gestured	with	a	tilt	of	his
head	and	he	and	Yan	Tovis	walked	off	a	short	distance.	Stood	beneath	the	tallest
tree	this	close	to	the	ridge	–	a	dead	pine	–	as	a	light	rain	began	to	fall.
‘I	have	just	come	from	the	Keep,’	she	said.	‘Your	Dresh	attempted	to
escape	arrest	and	is	dead.	Or	will	be	soon.	I	have	had	a	word	with	the	witches.
There	will	be	Tiste	Edur,	from	Rennis,	but	by	the	time	they	arrive	the
investigation	will	be	over	and	I	will	have	to	apologize	for	wasting	their	time.’
Yedan	said	nothing.	The	grilled	visor	thoroughly	hid	his	features,	although
the	black	snarl	of	his	beard	was	visible	–	it	seemed	he	was	slowly	chewing
something.
‘Watch,’	she	resumed,	‘you	called	me	“Queen”	in	front	of	your	soldiers.’
‘They	are	Shake.’
‘I	see.	Then,	you	are	here…at	the	shore—’
‘Because	I	am	the	Watch,	yes.’
‘That	title	is	without	meaning,’	she	said,	rather	more	harshly	than	she	had
intended.	‘It’s	an	honorific,	some	old	remnant—’
‘I	believed	the	same,’	he	cut	in	–	like	an	older	brother,	damn	him	–	‘until
three	nights	ago.’
‘Why	are	you	here,	then?	Who	are	you	looking	for?’
‘I	wish	I	could	answer	you	better	than	I	can.	I	am	not	sure	why	I	am	here,
only	that	I	am	summoned.’
‘By	whom?’
He	seemed	to	chew	some	more,	then	he	said,	‘By	the	shore.’
‘I	see.’
‘As	for	who	–	or	what	–	I	am	looking	for,	I	cannot	say	at	all.	Strangers
have	arrived.	We	heard	them	this	night,	yet	no	matter	where	we	rode,	no	matter
how	quickly	we	arrived,	we	found	no-one.	Nor	any	sign	–	no	tracks,	nothing.
Yet…they	are	here.’
‘Perhaps	ghosts	then.’
‘Perhaps.’
Twilight	slowly	turned.	‘From	the	sea?’
‘Again,	no	tracks	on	the	strand.	Sister,	since	we	have	arrived,	the	air	has
not	stirred.	Not	so	much	as	a	sigh.	Day	and	night,	the	shore	is	still.’	He	tilted	his


head	upward.	‘Now,	this	rain	–	the	first	time.’
A	murmur	from	the	soldiers	drew	their	attention.	They	were	facing	the
ridge,	six	motionless	spectres,	metal	and	leather	gleaming.
Beyond	the	ridge,	the	fitful	rise	and	ebb	of	a	glow.
‘This,’	Yedan	said,	and	he	set	off.
Yan	Tovis	followed.
They	scrambled	through	loose	stones,	stripped	branches	and	naked	roots,
pulling	themselves	onto	the	rise.	The	six	soldiers	in	their	wake	now	on	the
slope,	Yan	Tovis	moved	to	her	half-brother ’s	side,	pushing	through	the	soft
brush	until	they	both	emerged	onto	the	shoreline.
Where	they	halted,	staring	out	to	sea.
Ships.
A	row	of	ships,	all	well	offshore.	Reaching	to	the	north,	to	the	south.
All	burning.
‘Errant’s	blessing,’	Yan	Tovis	whispered.
Hundreds	of	ships.	Burning.
Flames	playing	over	still	water,	columns	of	smoke	rising,	lit	from	beneath
like	enormous	ash-dusted	coals	in	the	bed	of	the	black	sky.
‘Those,’	Yedan	said,	‘are	not	Letherii	ships.	Nor	Edur.’
‘No,’	Twilight	whispered,	‘they	are	not.’
Strangers	have	arrived.
‘What	means	this?’	There	was	raw	fear	in	the	question,	and	Yan	Tovis
turned	to	look	at	the	soldier	who	had	spoken.	Faint	on	his	features,	the	orange
glow	of	the	distant	flames.
She	looked	back	at	the	ships.	‘Dromons,’	she	said.	Her	heart	was	pounding
hard	in	her	chest,	a	kind	of	febrile	excitement	–	strangely	dark	with	malice
and…savage	delight.
‘What	name	is	that?’	Yedan	asked.
‘I	know	them	–	those	prows,	the	rigging.	Our	search	–	a	distant	continent.
An	empire.	We	killed	hundreds	–	thousands	–	of	its	subjects.	We	clashed	with
its	fleets.’	She	was	silent	for	a	dozen	breaths,	then	she	turned	to	one	of	her
soldiers.	‘Ride	back	to	the	Keep.	Make	sure	the	Dresh	is	dead.	The	company	is
to	leave	immediately	–	we	will	meet	you	north	of	Rennis	on	the	coast	road.	Oh,
and	bring	those	damned	witches	with	you.’
Yedan	said,	‘What—’
She	cut	off	her	half-brother	with	cruel	glee.	‘You	are	the	Watch.	Your
Queen	needs	you.’	She	glared	at	him.	‘You	will	ride	with	us,	Yedan.	With	your
troop.’
The	bearded	jaw	bunched,	then,	‘Where?’


‘The	Isle.’
‘What	of	the	Letherii	and	their	masters?	We	should	send	warning.’
Eyes	on	the	burning	hulks	in	the	sea,	she	almost	snarled	her	reply.	‘We
killed	their	subjects.	And	clearly	they	will	not	let	that	pass.	Errant	take	the
Letherii	and	the	Edur.’	She	spun	round,	making	for	her	horse.	The	others
scrambled	after	her.	‘Strangers,	Yedan?	Not	to	me.	They	followed	us.’	She
swung	herself	onto	her	horse	and	tugged	it	towards	the	north	trail.	‘We	left	a
debt	in	blood,’	she	said,	baring	her	teeth.	‘Malazan	blood.	And	it	seems	they
will	not	let	that	stand.’
They	are	here.	On	this	shore.
The	Malazans	are	on	our	shore.


Book	Three

Knuckles	of	the	Soul


	

We	are	eager
to	impugn	the	beast	crouched
in	our	souls
but	this	creature	is	pure
with	shy	eyes
and	it	watches	our	frantic	crimes
cowering
in	the	cage	of	our	cruelty
I	will	take
for	myself	and	your	fate
in	these	hands
the	grace	of	animal	to	amend
broken	dreams	–
freedom	unchained	and	unbound
long	running	–
the	beast	will	kill	when	I	murder
In	absolution
a	list	of	unremarked	distinctions
availed	these	hands
freedom	without	excuse
see	how	clean
this	blood	compared	to	yours
the	death	grin
of	your	bestial	snarl	mars	the	scape
Of	your	face
this	is	what	sets	us	apart
in	our	souls
my	beast	and	I	chained	together
as	we	must
who	leads	and	who	is	the	led	is


never	quite	asked
of	the	charmed	and	the	innocent
Dog	in	an	Alley
Confessions
Tibal	Feredict
	


Chapter	Thirteen

Keel	and	half	a	hull	remained	of	the	wreck	where	us	wreckers
gathered,	and	the	storm	of	the	night	past	remained	like	spit	in	the	air
when	we	clambered	down	into	that	bent-rib	bed.
I	heard	many	a	prayer	muttered,	hands	flashing	to	ward	this	and
that	as	befits	each	soul’s	need,	its	conversation	with	fear	begun	in
childhood	no	doubt	and,	could	I	recall	mine,	I	too	would	have	been	of
mind	to	mime	flight	from	terror.
As	it	was	I	could	only	look	down	at	that	crabshell	harvest	of	tiny
skeletons,	the	tailed	imps	with	the	human-like	faces,	their	hawk	talons
and	all	sorts	of	strange	embellishments	to	give	perfect	detail	to	the
bright	sunny	nightmare.
No	wonder	is	it	I	forswore	the	sea	that	day.	Storm	and	broken	ship
had	lifted	a	host	most	unholy	and	oh	there	were	plenty	more	no	doubt,
ringing	this	damned	island.
As	it	was,	it	was	me	who	then	spoke	a	most	unsavoury	tumble	of
words.	‘I	guess	not	all	imps	can	fly.’
For	all	that,	it	was	hardly	cause	to	gouge	out	my	eyes	now,	was	it?
Blind	Tobor	of	the	Reach
‘Now	there,	friends,	is	one	beautiful	woman.’
‘If	that’s	how	you	like	them.’
‘Now	why	wouldn’t	I,	y’damned	barrow-digger?	Thing	is,	and	it’s	always
the	way	isn’t	it,	look	at	that	hopeless	thug	she’s	with.	I	can’t	figure	things	like
that.	She	could	have	anyone	in	here.	She	could	have	me,	even.	But	no,	there	she
is,	sittin’	aside	that	limpin’	one-armed,	one-eared,	one-eyed	and	no-nosed
cattle-dog.	I	mean,	talk	about	ugly.’
The	third	man,	who	had	yet	to	speak,	gave	him	a	surreptitious,	sidelong
look,	noting	the	birdnest	hair,	the	jutting	steering-oar	ears,	the	bulging	eyes,
and	the	piebald	patches	that	were	the	scars	of	fire	on	features	that	reminded
him	of	a	squashed	gourd	–	sidelong	and	brief,	that	glance,	and	Throatslitter


quickly	looked	away.	The	last	thing	he	wanted	to	do	was	break	into	another	one
of	his	trilling,	uncanny	laughs	that	seemed	to	freeze	everyone	within	earshot.
Never	used	to	have	a	laugh	sounding	like	that.	Damn	thing	scares	even	me.
Well,	he’d	taken	a	throatful	of	oily	flames	and	it’d	done	bad	things	to	his
voice-reed.	The	damage	only	revealed	itself	when	he	laughed,	and,	he	recalled,
in	the	months	following…all	that	stuff…there	had	been	few	reasons	for	mirth.
‘There	goes	that	tavernkeeper,’	Deadsmell	observed.
It	was	easy	talking	about	anything	and	everything,	since	no-one	here	but
them	understood	Malazan.
‘There’s	another	one	all	moon-eyed	over	her,’	Sergeant	Balm	said	with	a
sneer.	‘But	who	does	she	sit	with?	Hood	take	me,	it	don’t	make	sense.’
Deadsmell	slowly	leaned	forward	on	the	table	and	carefully	refilled	his
tankard.	‘It’s	the	delivery	of	that	cask.	Brullyg’s.	Looks	like	the	pretty	one	and
the	dead	lass	have	volunteered.’
Balm’s	bulging	eyes	bulged	even	more.	‘She	ain’t	dead!	I’ll	tell	you	what’s
dead,	Deadsmell,	that	puddle-drowned	worm	between	your	legs!’
Throatslitter	eyed	the	corporal.	‘If	that’s	how	you	like	them,’	he’d	said.	A
half-strangled	gulp	escaped	him,	making	both	his	companions	flinch.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	gonna	laugh	about?’	Balm	demanded.	‘Just
don’t,	and	that’s	an	order.’
Throatslitter	bit	down	hard	on	his	own	tongue.	Tears	blurred	his	vision	for
a	moment	as	pain	shot	round	his	skull	like	a	pebble	in	a	bucket.	Mute,	he	shook
his	head.	Laugh?	Not	me.
The	sergeant	was	glaring	at	Deadsmell	again.	‘Dead?	She	don’t	look	much
dead	to	me.’
‘Trust	me,’	the	corporal	replied	after	taking	a	deep	draught.	He	belched.
‘Sure,	she’s	hiding	it	well,	but	that	woman	died	some	time	ago.’
Balm	was	hunched	over	the	table,	scratching	at	the	tangles	of	his	hair.
Flakes	drifted	down	to	land	like	specks	of	paint	on	the	dark	wood.	‘Gods
below,’	he	whispered.	‘Maybe	somebody	should…I	don’t	know…maybe…tell
her?’
Deadsmell’s	mostly	hairless	brows	lifted.	‘Excuse	me,	ma’am,	you	have	a
complexion	to	die	for	and	I	guess	that’s	what	you	did.’
Another	squawk	from	Throatslitter.
The	corporal	continued,	‘Is	it	true,	ma’am,	that	perfect	hair	and	expensive
make-up	can	hide	anything?’
A	choked	squeal	from	Throatslitter.
Heads	turned.
Deadsmell	drank	down	another	mouthful,	warming	to	the	subject.	‘Funny,


you	don’t	look	dead.’
The	high-pitched	cackle	erupted.
As	it	died,	sudden	silence	in	the	main	room	of	the	tavern,	barring	that	of	a
rolling	tankard,	which	then	plunged	off	a	tabletop	and	bounced	on	the	floor.
Balm	glared	at	Deadsmell.	‘You	done	that.	You	just	kept	pushing	and
pushing.	Another	word	from	you,	corporal,	and	you’ll	be	deader	than	she	is.’
‘What’s	that	smell?’	Deadsmell	asked.	‘Oh	right.	Essence	of	putrescence.’
Balm’s	cheeks	bulged,	his	face	turning	a	strange	purple	shade.	His	yellowy
eyes	looked	moments	from	leaping	out	on	their	stalks.
Throatslitter	tried	squeezing	his	own	eyes	shut,	but	the	image	of	his
sergeant’s	face	burst	into	his	mind.	He	shrieked	behind	his	hands.	Looked
round	in	helpless	appeal.
All	attention	was	fixed	on	them	now,	no-one	speaking.	Even	the	beautiful
woman	who’d	shipped	in	with	that	maimed	oaf	and	the	oaf	himself	–	whose
one	good	eye	glittered	out	from	the	folds	of	a	severe	frown	–	had	paused,
standing	each	to	one	side	of	the	cask	of	ale	the	tavernkeeper	had	brought	out.
And	the	keeper	himself,	staring	at	Throatslitter	with	mouth	hanging	open.
‘Well,’	Deadsmell	observed,	‘there	goes	our	credit	as	bad	boys.	Throaty
here’s	making	mating	calls	–	hope	there’s	no	turkeys	on	this	island.	And	you,
sergeant,	your	head	looks	ready	to	explode	like	a	cusser.’
Balm	hissed,	‘It	was	your	fault,	you	bastard!’
‘Hardly.	As	you	see,	I	am	calm.	Although	somewhat	embarrassed	by	my
company,	alas.’
‘Fine,	we’re	shifting	you	off.	Hood	knows,	Gilani’s	a	damned	sight	prettier
to	look	at—’
‘Yes,	but	she	happens	to	be	alive,	sergeant.	Not	your	type	at	all.’
‘I	didn’t	know!’
‘Now	that	is	a	most	pathetic	admission,	wouldn’t	you	say?’
‘Hold	on,’	Throatslitter	finally	interjected.	‘I	couldn’t	tell	about	her	either,
Deadsmell.’	He	jabbed	a	finger	at	the	corporal.	‘Further	proof	you’re	a
damned	necromancer.	No,	forget	that	shocked	look,	we	ain’t	buying	no	more.
You	knew	she	was	dead	because	you	can	smell	’em,	just	like	your	name	says
you	can.	In	fact,	I’d	wager	that’s	why	Braven	Tooth	gave	you	that	name	–
doesn’t	miss	a	thing,	ever,	does	he?’
The	ambient	noise	was	slowly	resurrecting	itself,	accompanied	by	more
than	a	few	warding	gestures,	a	couple	of	chairs	scraping	back	through	filth	as
patrons	made	furtive	escapes	out	of	the	front	door.
Deadsmell	drank	more	ale.	And	said	nothing.
The	dead	woman	and	her	companion	headed	out,	the	latter	limping	as	he


struggled	to	balance	the	cask	on	one	shoulder.
Balm	grunted.	‘There	they	go.	Typical,	isn’t	it?	Just	when	we’re	under
strength,	too.’
‘Nothing	to	worry	about,	sergeant,’	Deadsmell	said.	‘It’s	all	in	hand.
Though	if	the	keeper	decides	on	following…’
Throatslitter	grunted.	‘If	he	does,	he’ll	regret	it.’	He	rose	then,	adjusting
the	marine-issue	rain	cape.	‘Lucky	you	two,	getting	to	sit	here	adding	fat	to
your	arses.	It’s	damned	cold	out	there,	you	know.’
‘I’m	making	note	of	all	this	insubordination,’	Balm	grumbled.	Then	tapped
his	head.	‘In	here.’
‘Well	that’s	a	relief,’	Throatslitter	said.	He	left	the	tavern.
	
Shake	Brullyg,	tyrant	of	Second	Maiden	Fort,	would-be	King	of	the	Isle,
slouched	in	the	old	prison	prefect’s	high-backed	chair	and	glared	from	under
heavy	brows	at	the	two	foreigners	at	the	table	beside	the	chamber ’s	door.	They
were	playing	another	of	their	damned	games.	Knuckle	bones,	elongated
wooden	bowl	and	split	crow-feathers.
‘Two	bounces	earns	me	a	sweep,’	one	of	them	said,	although	Brullyg	was
not	quite	sure	of	that	–	picking	up	a	language	on	the	sly	was	no	easy	thing,	but
he’d	always	been	good	with	languages.	Shake,	Letherii,	Tiste	Edur,	Fent,
trader ’s	tongue	and	Meckros.	And	now,	spatterings	of	this…this	Malazan.
Timing.	They’d	taken	it	from	him,	as	easily	as	they’d	taken	his	knife,	his
war-axe.	Foreigners	easing	into	the	harbour	–	not	so	many	aboard	as	to	cause
much	worry,	or	so	it	had	seemed.	Besides,	there	had	been	enough	trouble	to
chew	on	right	then.	A	sea	filled	with	mountains	of	ice,	bearing	down	on	the
Isle,	more	ominous	than	any	fleet	or	army.	They	said	they	could	take	care	of
that	–	and	he’d	been	a	drowning	man	going	down	for	the	last	time.
Would-be	King	of	the	Isle,	crushed	and	smeared	flat	under	insensate	ice.
Face	to	face	with	that	kind	of	truth	had	been	like	dragon	claws	through	his	sail.
After	all	he’d	done…
Timing.	He	now	wondered	if	these	Malazans	had	brought	the	ice	with	them.
Sent	it	spinning	down	on	the	season’s	wild	current,	just	so	they	could	arrive
one	step	ahead	and	offer	to	turn	it	away.	He’d	not	even	believed	them,	Brullyg
recalled,	but	desperation	had	spoken	with	its	very	own	voice.	‘Do	that	and
you’ll	be	royal	guests	for	as	long	as	you	like.’	They’d	smiled	at	that	offer.
I	am	a	fool.	And	worse.
And	now,	two	miserable	squads	ruled	over	him	and	every	damned	resident
of	this	island,	and	there	was	not	a	thing	he	could	do	about	it.	Except	keep	the


truth	from	everyone	else.	And	that’s	getting	a	whole	lot	harder	with	every	day
that	passes.
‘Sweep’s	in	the	trough,	pluck	a	knuckle	and	that	about	does	it,’	said	the
other	soldier.
Possibly.
‘It	skidded	when	you	breathed	–	I	saw	it,	you	cheat!’
‘I	ain’t	breathed.’
‘Oh	right,	you’re	a	Hood-damned	corpse,	are	you?’
‘No,	I	just	ain’t	breathed	when	you	said	I	did.	Look,	it’s	in	the	trough,	you
deny	it?’
‘Here,	let	me	take	a	closer	look.	Ha,	no	it	isn’t!’
‘You	just	sighed	and	moved	it,	damn	you!’
‘I	didn’t	sigh.’
‘Right,	and	you’re	not	losing	neither,	are	ya?’
‘Just	because	I’m	losing	doesn’t	mean	I	sighed	right	then.	And	see,	it’s	not
in	the	trough.’
‘Hold	on	while	I	breathe—’
‘Then	I’ll	sigh!’
‘Breathing	is	what	winners	do.	Sighing	is	what	losers	do.	Therefore,	I
win.’
‘Sure,	for	you	cheating	is	as	natural	as	breathing,	isn’t	it?’
Brullyg	slowly	shifted	his	attention	from	the	two	at	the	door,	regarded	the
last	soldier	in	the	chamber.	By	the	coven	she	was	a	beauty.	Such	dark,	magical
skin,	and	those	tilted	eyes	just	glowed	with	sweet	invitation	–	damn	him,	all	the
mysteries	of	the	world	were	in	those	eyes.	And	that	mouth!	Those	lips!	If	he
could	just	get	rid	of	the	other	two,	and	maybe	steal	away	those	wicked	knives
of	hers,	why	then	he’d	discover	those	mysteries	the	way	she	wanted	him	to.
I’m	King	of	the	Isle.	About	to	be.	One	more	week,	and	if	none	of	the	dead
Queen’s	bitch	daughters	show	up	before	then,	it	all	falls	to	me.	King	of	the	Isle.
Almost.	Close	enough	to	use	the	title,	sure.	And	what	woman	wouldn’t	set	aside
a	miserable	soldier’s	life	for	the	soft,	warm	bed	of	a	king’s	First	Concubine?
Sure,	that	is	indeed	a	Letherii	way,	but	as	king	I	can	make	my	own	rules.	And	if
the	coven	doesn’t	like	it,	well,	there’re	the	cliffs.
One	of	the	Malazans	at	the	table	said,	‘Careful,	Masan,	he’s	getting	that
look	again.’
The	woman	named	Masan	Gilani	straightened	catlike	in	her	chair,	lifting
her	smooth,	not-scrawny	arms	in	an	arching	stretch	that	transformed	her	large
breasts	into	round	globes,	tautening	the	worn	fabric	of	her	shirt.	‘’S	long	as	he
keeps	thinking	with	the	wrong	brain,	Lobe,	we’re	good	and	easy.’	She	then


settled	back,	straightening	her	perfect	legs.
‘We	should	bring	him	another	whore,’	the	one	named	Lobe	said	as	he
gathered	the	knuckle	bones	into	a	small	leather	bag.
‘No,’	Masan	Gilani	said.	‘Deadsmell	barely	revived	the	last	one.’
But	that’s	not	the	real	reason,	is	it?	Brullyg	smiled.	No,	you	want	me	for
yourself.	Besides,	I’m	not	usually	like	that.	I	was	taking	out	some…frustrations.
That’s	all.	His	smile	faded.	They	sure	do	use	their	hands	a	lot	when	talking.
Gestures	of	all	sorts.	Strange	people,	these	Malazans.	He	cleared	his	throat	and
spoke	Letherii	in	the	slow	way	they	seemed	to	need.	‘I	could	do	with	another
walk.	My	legs	want	exercise.’	A	wink	towards	Masan	Gilani,	who	responded
with	a	knowing	smile	that	lit	him	up	low	down,	enough	to	make	him	shift	in	the
chair.	‘My	people	need	to	see	me,	you	understand?	If	they	start	getting
suspicious	–	well,	if	anybody	knows	what	a	house	arrest	looks	like,	it	is	the
citizens	of	Second	Maiden	Fort.’
In	terribly	accented	Letherii,	Lobe	said,	‘You	get	your	ale	comes	today,
right?	Best	want	to	be	waiting	here	for	that.	We	walk	you	tonight.’
Like	a	Liberty	mistress	her	pampered	dog.	Isn’t	that	nice?	And	when	I	lift	a
leg	and	piss	against	you,	Lobe,	what	then?
These	soldiers	here	did	not	frighten	him.	It	was	the	other	squad,	the	one
still	up-island.	The	one	with	that	scrawny	little	mute	girl.	And	she	had	a	way	of
showing	up	as	if	from	nowhere.	From	a	swirl	of	light	–	he	wondered	what	the
Shake	witches	would	make	of	that	cute	trick.	All	Lobe	needed	to	do	–	Lobe,	or
Masan	Gilani,	or	Galt,	any	of	them	–	all	they	needed	to	do	was	call	her	name.
Sinn.
A	real	terror	that	one,	and	not	a	talon	showing.	He	suspected	he’d	need	the
whole	coven	to	get	rid	of	her.	Preferably	with	great	losses.	The	coven	had	a
way	of	crowding	the	chosen	rulers	of	the	Shake.	And	they’re	on	their	way,	like
ravens	to	a	carcass,	all	spit	and	cackle.	Of	course,	they	can’t	fly.	Can’t	even
swim.	No,	they’ll	need	boats,	to	take	them	across	the	strait	–	and	that’s
assuming	the	Reach	isn’t	now	a	jumbled	mass	of	ice,	which	is	how	it	looks	from
here.
The	soldier	named	Galt	rose	from	his	chair,	wincing	at	some	twinge	in	his
lower	back,	then	ambled	over	to	what	had	been	the	prefect’s	prize	possession,	a
tapestry	that	dominated	an	entire	wall.	Faded	with	age	–	and	stained	in	the
lower	left	corner	with	dried	spatters	of	the	poor	prefect’s	blood	–	the	hanging
depicted	the	First	Landing	of	the	Letherii,	although	in	truth	that	was	not	the
colonizers’	first	landing.	The	fleet	had	come	within	sight	of	shore	somewhere
opposite	the	Reach.	Fent	canoes	had	ventured	out	to	establish	contact	with	the
strangers.	An	exchange	of	gifts	had	gone	awry,	resulting	in	the	slaughter	of	the


Fent	men	and	the	subsequent	enslavement	of	the	women	and	children	in	the
village.	Three	more	settlements	had	suffered	the	same	fate.	The	next	four,
southward	down	the	coast,	had	been	hastily	abandoned.
The	fleet	had	eventually	rounded	Sadon	Peninsula	on	the	north	coast	of	the
Ouster	Sea,	then	sailed	past	the	Lenth	Arm	and	into	Gedry	Bay.	The	city	of
Gedry	was	founded	on	the	place	of	the	First	Landing,	at	the	mouth	of	the
Lether	River.	This	tapestry,	easily	a	thousand	years	old,	was	proof	enough	of
that.	The	general	belief	these	days	was	that	the	landing	occurred	at	the	site	of
the	capital	itself,	well	up	the	river.	Strange	how	the	past	was	remade	to	suit	the
present.	A	lesson	there	Brullyg	could	use,	once	he	was	king.	The	Shake	were	a
people	of	failure,	fated	to	know	naught	but	tragedy	and	pathos.	Guardians	of
the	shore,	but	incapable	of	guarding	it	against	the	sea’s	tireless	hunger.	All	of
that	needed…revising.
The	Letherii	had	known	defeat.	Many	times.	Their	history	on	this	land	was
bloody,	rife	with	their	betrayals,	their	lies,	their	heartless	cruelties.	All	of
which	were	now	seen	as	triumphant	and	heroic.
This	is	how	a	people	must	see	itself.	As	we	Shake	must.	A	blinding	beacon
on	this	dark	shore.	When	I	am	king…
‘Look	at	this	damned	thing,’	Galt	said.	‘Here,	that	writing	in	the	borders	–
that	could	be	Ehrlii.’
‘But	it	isn’t,’	Lobe	muttered.	He	had	dismantled	one	of	his	daggers;	on	the
table	before	him	was	the	pommel,	a	few	rivets	and	pins,	a	wooden	handle
wrapped	in	leather,	a	slitted	hilt	and	the	tanged	blade.	It	seemed	the	soldier	was
now	at	a	loss	on	how	to	put	it	all	back	together	again.
‘Some	of	the	letters—’
‘Ehrlii	and	Letherii	come	from	the	same	language,’	Lobe	said.
Galt’s	glare	was	suspicious.	‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘I	don’t,	you	idiot.	It’s	just	what	I	was	told.’
‘Who?’
‘Ebron,	I	think.	Or	Shard.	What	difference	does	it	make?	Somebody	who
knows	things,	that’s	all.	Hood,	you’re	making	my	brain	hurt.	And	look	at	this
mess.’
‘Is	that	my	knife?’
‘Was.’
Brullyg	saw	Lobe	cock	his	head,	then	the	soldier	said,	‘Footsteps	bottom
of	the	stairs.’	And	with	these	words,	his	hands	moved	in	a	blur,	and	even	as
Galt	was	walking	towards	the	door,	Lobe	was	twisting	home	the	pommel	and
flipping	the	knife	into	Galt’s	path.	Where	it	was	caught	one-handed	–	Galt	had
not	even	slowed	in	passing.


Brullyg	settled	back	in	his	chair.
Rising,	Masan	Gilani	loosened	from	their	scabbards	the	vicious-looking
long-bladed	knives	at	her	hips.	‘Wish	I	was	with	my	own	squad,’	she	said,	then
drew	a	step	closer	to	where	Brullyg	sat.
‘Stay	put,’	she	murmured.
Mouth	dry,	he	nodded.
‘It’s	likely	the	ale	delivery,’	Lobe	said	from	one	side	of	the	door,	while
Galt	unlocked	it	and	pushed	it	out	wide	enough	to	enable	him	to	peer	through
the	crack.
‘Sure,	but	those	boots	sound	wrong.’
‘Not	the	usual	drooling	fart	and	his	son?’
‘Not	even	close.’
‘All	right.’	Lobe	reached	under	the	table	and	lifted	into	view	a	crossbow.	A
truly	foreign	weapon,	constructed	entirely	of	iron	–	or	something	very	much
like	Letherii	steel.	The	cord	was	thick	as	a	man’s	thumb,	and	the	quarrel	set
into	the	groove	was	tipped	with	an	x-shaped	head	that	would	punch	through	a
Letherii	shield	as	if	it	was	birch	bark.	The	soldier	cranked	the	claw	back	and
somehow	locked	it	in	place.	Then	he	moved	along	the	door ’s	wall	to	the
corner.
Galt	edged	back	as	the	footsteps	on	the	stairs	drew	nearer.	He	made	a	series
of	hand	gestures	to	which	Masan	Gilani	grunted	in	response	and	Brullyg	heard
ripping	cloth	behind	him	and	a	moment	later	the	point	of	a	knife	pressed
between	his	shoulder	blades	–	thrust	right	through	the	damned	chair.	She
leaned	down.	‘Be	nice	and	be	stupid,	Brullyg.	We	know	these	two	and	we	can
guess	why	they’re	here.’
Glancing	back	at	Masan	Gilani,	nodding	once,	Galt	then	moved	into	the
doorway,	opening	wide	the	door.	‘Well,’	he	drawled	in	his	dreadful	Letherii,	‘if
it	isn’t	the	captain	and	her	first	mate.	Run	out	of	money	comes	too	soon?	What
you	making	to	comes	with	ale?’
A	heavy	growl	from	beyond.	‘What	did	he	say,	Captain?’
‘Whatever	it	was,	he	said	it	badly.’	A	woman,	and	that	voice	–	Brullyg
frowned.	That	was	a	voice	he	had	heard	before.	The	knife	tip	dug	deeper	into
his	spine.
‘We’re	bringing	Shake	Brullyg	his	ale,’	the	woman	continued.
‘That’s	nice,’	Galt	replied.	‘We	see	he	comes	gets	it.’
‘Shake	Brullyg’s	an	old	friend	of	mine.	I	want	to	see	him.’
‘He’s	busy.’
‘Doing	what?’
‘Thinking.’


‘Shake	Brullyg?	I	really	doubt	that	–	and	who	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	you
anyway?	You’re	no	Letherii,	and	you	and	those	friends	of	yours	hanging	out	at
the	tavern,	well,	none	of	you	were	prisoners	here	either.	I	asked	around.	You’re
from	that	strange	ship	anchored	in	the	bay.’
‘Why,	Captain,	it	is	simple.	We	comes	to	goes	all	the	ice.	So	Brullyg	he
rewards	us.	Guests.	Royal	guests.	Now	we	keep	him	company.	He	is	smiles	nice
all	the	time.	We	nice	too.’
‘Nice	idiots,	I	think,’	the	man	outside	–	presumably	the	captain’s	first	mate
–	said	in	a	growl.	‘Now,	my	arm’s	getting	tired	–	move	aside	and	let	me	deliver
this	damned	thing.’
Galt	glanced	back	over	a	shoulder	at	Masan	Gilani,	who	said	in	Malazan,
‘Why	you	looking	at	me?	I’m	just	here	to	keep	this	man’s	tongue	hanging.’
Brullyg	licked	sweat	from	his	lips.	So	even	knowing	that,	why	does	it	still
work?	Am	I	that	stupid?	‘Let	them	in,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘So	I	can	ease
their	minds	and	send	them	away.’
Galt	looked	at	Masan	Gilani	again,	and	though	she	said	nothing,	some	kind
of	communication	must	have	passed	between	them,	for	he	shrugged	and
stepped	back.	‘Comes	the	ale.’
Brullyg	watched	as	the	two	figures	entered	the	chamber.	The	one	in	the
lead	was	Skorgen	Kaban	the	Pretty.	Which	meant…yes.	The	would-be	king
smiled,	‘Shurq	Elalle.	You’ve	not	aged	a	day	since	I	last	saw	you.	And	Skorgen
–	put	the	cask	down,	before	you	dislocate	your	shoulder	and	add	lopsided	to
your	list	of	ailments.	Broach	the	damned	thing	and	we	can	all	have	a	drink.
Oh,’	he	added	as	he	watched	the	two	pirates	take	in	the	soldiers	–	Skorgen
almost	jumping	when	he	saw	Lobe	in	the	corner,	crossbow	now	cradled	in	his
arms	–	‘these	are	some	of	my	royal	guests.	At	the	door,	Galt.	In	the	corner,
Lobe,	and	this	lovely	here	with	the	one	hand	behind	the	back	of	my	chair	is
Masan	Gilani.’
Shurq	Elalle	collected	one	of	the	chairs	near	the	door	and	dragged	it
opposite	Brullyg.	Sitting,	she	folded	one	leg	over	the	other	and	laced	her	hands
together	on	her	lap.	‘Brullyg,	you	half-mad	cheating	miser	of	a	bastard.	If	you
were	alone	I’d	be	throttling	that	flabby	neck	of	yours	right	now.’
‘Can’t	say	I’m	shocked	by	your	animosity,’	Shake	Brullyg	replied,
suddenly	comforted	by	his	Malazan	bodyguards.	‘But	you	know,	it	was	never
as	bad	or	ugly	as	you	thought	it	was.	You	just	never	gave	me	the	chance	to
explain—’
Shurq’s	smile	was	both	beautiful	and	dark.	‘Why,	Brullyg,	you	were	never
one	to	explain	yourself.’
‘A	man	changes.’


‘That’d	be	a	first.’
Brullyg	resisted	shrugging,	since	that	would	have	opened	a	nasty	slit	in	the
flesh	of	his	back.	Instead,	he	lifted	his	hands,	palms	up,	as	he	said,	‘Let’s	set
aside	all	that	history.	The	Undying	Gratitude	rests	safe	and	sound	in	my
harbour.	Cargo	offloaded	and	plenty	of	coin	in	your	purse.	I	imagine	you’re
itching	to	leave	our	blessed	isle.’
‘Something	like	that,’	she	replied.	‘Alas,	it	seems	we’re	having	trouble
getting,	uh,	permission.	There’s	the	biggest	damned	ship	I’ve	ever	seen
blocking	the	harbour	mouth	right	now,	and	a	sleek	war	galley	of	some	kind	is
making	for	berth	at	the	main	pier.	You	know,’	she	added,	with	another	quick
smile,	‘it’s	all	starting	to	look	like	some	kind	of…well…blockade.’
The	knife-point	left	Brullyg’s	back	and	Masan	Gilani,	sliding	the	weapon
into	its	scabbard,	stepped	round.	When	she	spoke	this	time,	it	was	in	a	language
Brullyg	had	never	heard	before.
Lobe	levelled	the	crossbow	again,	aiming	towards	Brullyg,	and	answered
Masan	in	the	same	tongue.
Skorgen,	who	had	been	kneeling	beside	the	cask,	thumping	at	the	spigot
with	the	heel	of	one	hand,	now	rose.	‘What	in	the	Errant’s	name	is	going	on
here,	Brullyg?’
A	voice	spoke	from	the	doorway,	‘Just	this.	Your	captain’s	right.	Our
waiting’s	done.’
The	soldier	named	Throatslitter	was	leaning	against	the	door	frame,	arms
crossed.	He	was	smiling	across	at	Masan	Gilani.	‘Good	news	ain’t	it?	Now	you
can	take	your	delicious	curves	and	such	and	dance	your	way	down	to	the	pier	–
I’m	sure	Urb	and	the	rest	are	missing	’em	something	awful.’
Shurq	Elalle,	who	had	not	moved	from	her	chair,	sighed	loudly	then	said,
‘Pretty,	I	don’t	think	we’ll	be	leaving	this	room	for	a	while.	Find	us	some
tankards	and	pour,	why	don’t	you?’
‘We’re	hostages?’
‘No	no,’	his	captain	replied.	‘Guests.’
Masan	Gilani,	hips	swaying	considerably	more	than	was	necessary,
sauntered	out	of	the	chamber.
Under	his	breath,	Brullyg	groaned.
‘As	I	said	earlier,’	Shurq	murmured,	‘men	don’t	change.’	She	glanced	over
at	Galt,	who	had	drawn	up	the	other	chair.	‘I	assume	you	won’t	let	me	strangle
this	odious	worm.’
‘Sorry,	no.’	A	quick	smile.	‘Not	yet	anyway.’
‘So,	who	are	your	friends	in	the	harbour?’
Galt	winked.	‘We’ve	a	little	work	to	do,	Captain.	And	we’ve	decided	this


island	will	do	just	fine	as	headquarters.’
‘Your	skill	with	Letherii	has	noticeably	improved.’
‘Must	be	your	fine	company,	Captain.’
‘Don’t	bother,’	Throatslitter	said	from	the	doorway.	‘Deadsmell	says	she’s
standing	on	the	wrong	side	of	Hood’s	gate,	despite	what	you	see	or	think	you
see.’
Galt	slowly	paled.
‘Not	sure	what	he	means	by	all	that,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	her	sultry	eyes
settling	on	Galt,	‘but	my	appetites	are	as	lively	as	ever.’
‘That’s…disgusting.’
‘Explains	the	sweat	on	your	brow,	I	suppose.’
Galt	hastily	wiped	his	forehead.	‘This	one’s	worse	than	Masan	Gilani,’	he
complained.
Brullyg	shifted	nervously	in	his	chair.	Timing.	These	damned	Malazans
had	it	by	the	bucketful.	Freedom	should’ve	lasted	longer	than	this.	‘Hurry	up
with	that	ale,	Pretty.’
	
Finding	yourself	standing,	alone,	cut	loose,	with	an	unhappy	army	squirming
in	your	hands,	was	a	commander ’s	greatest	nightmare.	And	when	you	got	them
running	straight	into	the	wilderness	of	an	ocean	at	the	time,	it’s	about	as	bad	as
it	can	get.
Fury	had	united	them,	for	a	while.	Until	the	truth	started	to	sink	in,	like
botfly	worms	under	the	skin.	Their	homeland	wanted	them	all	dead.	There’d	be
no	seeing	family	–	no	wives,	husbands,	mothers,	fathers.	No	children	to
bounce	on	one	knee	while	working	numbers	in	the	head	–	wondering	which
neighbour ’s	eyes	you’re	looking	down	at.	No	chasms	to	cross,	no	breaches	to
mend.	Every	loved	one	as	good	as	dead.
Armies	get	unruly	when	that	happens.	Almost	as	bad	as	no	loot	and	no	pay.
We	were	soldiers	of	the	empire.	Our	families	depended	on	the	wages,	the	tax
relief,	the	buy-outs	and	the	pensions.	And	a	lot	of	us	were	young	enough	to	think
about	signing	out,	making	a	new	life,	one	that	didn’t	involve	swinging	a	sword
and	looking	in	the	eye	of	some	snarling	thug	wanting	to	cut	you	in	two.	Some	of
us	were	damned	tired.
So,	what	kept	us	together?
Well,	no	ship	likes	to	sail	alone,	does	it?
But	Fist	Blistig	knew	that	there	was	more	to	it.	Dried	blood	holding
everyone	in	place	like	glue.	The	seared	burn	of	betrayal,	the	sting	of	fury.	And
a	commander	who	sacrificed	her	own	love	to	see	them	all	survive.


He	had	spent	too	many	days	and	nights	on	the	Froth	Wolf	standing	no	less
than	five	paces	from	the	Adjunct,	studying	her	stiff	back	as	she	faced	the	surly
seas.	A	woman	who	showed	nothing,	but	some	things	no	mortal	could	hide,
and	one	of	those	things	was	grief.	He	had	stared	and	he	had	wondered.	Was	she
going	to	come	through	this?
Someone	–	might	have	been	Keneb,	who	at	times	seemed	to	understand
Tavore	better	than	anyone	else,	maybe	even	Tavore	herself	–	had	then	made	a
fateful	decision.	The	Adjunct	had	lost	her	aide.	In	Malaz	City.	Aide,	and	lover.
Now,	maybe	nothing	could	be	done	about	the	lover,	but	the	role	of	aide	was	an
official	position,	a	necessary	one	for	any	commander.	Not	a	man,	of	course	–
would	have	to	be	a	woman	for	certain.
Blistig	recalled	that	night,	even	as	the	eleventh	bell	was	sounded	on	deck	–
the	ragged	fleet,	flanked	by	the	Perish	Thrones	of	War,	was	three	days	east	of
Kartool,	beginning	a	northward-wending	arc	to	take	them	round	the
tumultuous,	deadly	straits	between	Malaz	Island	and	the	coast	of	Korel	–	and
the	Adjunct	was	standing	alone	just	beyond	the	forecastle	mast,	the	wind
tugging	fitfully	at	her	rain	cape,	making	Blistig	think	of	a	broken-winged
crow.	A	second	figure	appeared,	halting	close	to	Tavore	on	her	left.	Where
T’amber	would	stand,	where	any	aide	to	a	commander	would	stand.
Tavore’s	head	had	turned	in	startlement,	and	words	were	exchanged	–	too
low	for	Blistig’s	ears	–	followed	by	a	salute	from	the	newcomer.
The	Adjunct	is	alone.	So	too	is	another	woman,	seemingly	as	bound	up	in
grief	as	Tavore	herself,	yet	this	one	possesses	an	edge,	an	anger	tempered	like
Aren	steel.	Short	on	patience,	which	might	be	precisely	what’s	needed	here.
Was	it	you,	Keneb?
Of	course,	Lostara	Yil,	once	a	captain	in	the	Red	Blades,	now	just	one
more	outlawed	soldier,	had	revealed	no	inclinations	to	take	a	woman	to	her
bed.	Not	anyone,	in	fact.	Yet	she	was	no	torture	to	look	at,	if	one	had	a	taste	for
broken	glass	made	pretty.	That	and	Pardu	tattoos.	But	it	was	just	as	likely	that
the	Adjunct	wasn’t	thinking	in	those	terms.	Too	soon.	Wrong	woman.
Throughout	the	fleet,	officers	had	been	reporting	talk	of	mutiny	among	the
soldiers	–	excepting,	oddly	enough,	the	marines,	who	never	seemed	capable	of
thinking	past	the	next	meal	or	game	of	Troughs.	A	succession	of	reports,
delivered	in	increasingly	nervous	tones,	and	it	had	seemed	the	Adjunct	was
unwilling	or	unable	to	even	so	much	as	care.
You	can	heal	wounds	of	the	flesh	well	enough,	but	it’s	the	other	ones	that
can	bleed	out	a	soul.
After	that	night,	Lostara	Yil	clung	to	a	resentful	Tavore	like	a	damned	tick.
Commander ’s	aide.	She	understood	the	role.	In	the	absence	of	actual	direction


from	her	commander,	Lostara	Yil	assumed	the	task	of	managing	nearly	eight
thousand	miserable	soldiers.	The	first	necessity	was	clearing	up	the	matter	of
pay.	The	fleet	was	making	sail	for	Theft,	a	paltry	kingdom	torn	to	tatters	by
Malazan	incursions	and	civil	war.	Supplies	needed	to	be	purchased,	but	more
than	that,	the	soldiers	needed	leave	and	for	that	there	must	be	not	only	coin	but
the	promise	of	more	to	come,	lest	the	entire	army	disappear	into	the	back
streets	of	the	first	port	of	call.
The	army’s	chests	could	not	feed	what	was	owed.
So	Lostara	hunted	down	Banaschar,	the	once-priest	of	D’rek.	Hunted	him
down	and	cornered	him.	And	all	at	once,	those	treasury	chests	were
overflowing.
Now,	why	Banaschar?	How	did	Lostara	know?
Grub,	of	course.	That	scrawny	runt	climbing	the	rigging	with	those	notquite-right	bhok’aral	–	I	ain’t	once	seen	him	come	down,	no	matter	how	brutal
the	weather.	Yet	Grub	somehow	knew	about	Banaschar ’s	hidden	purse,	and
somehow	got	the	word	to	Lostara	Yil.
The	Fourteenth	Army	was	suddenly	rich.	Too	much	handed	out	all	at	once
would	have	been	disastrous,	but	Lostara	knew	that.	Enough	that	it	be	seen,	that
the	rumours	were	let	loose	to	scamper	like	stoats	through	every	ship	in	the
fleet.
Soldiers	being	what	they	were,	it	wasn’t	long	before	they	were	griping
about	something	else,	and	this	time	the	Adjunct’s	aide	could	do	nothing	to	give
answer.
Where	in	Hood’s	name	are	we	going?
Are	we	still	an	army	and	if	we	are,	who	are	we	fighting	for?	The	notion	of
becoming	mercenaries	did	not	sit	well,	it	turned	out.
The	story	went	that	Lostara	Yil	had	it	out	with	Tavore	one	night	in	the
Adjunct’s	cabin.	A	night	of	screams,	curses	and,	maybe,	tears.	Or	something
else	happened.	Something	as	simple	as	Lostara	wearing	her	commander	down,
like	D’rek’s	own	soldier	worms	gnawing	the	ankles	of	the	earth,	snap	snick
right	through.	Whatever	the	details,	the	Adjunct	was…awakened.	The	entire
Fourteenth	was	days	from	falling	to	pieces.
A	call	was	issued	for	the	Fists	and	officers	ranking	captain	and	higher	to
assemble	on	the	Froth	Wolf.	And,	to	the	astonishment	of	everyone,	Tavore
Paran	appeared	on	deck	and	delivered	a	speech.	Sinn	and	Banaschar	were
present,	and	through	sorcery	the	Adjunct’s	words	were	heard	by	everyone,
even	crew	high	in	the	riggings	and	crow’s	nests.
A	Hood-damned	speech.
From	Tavore.	Tighter-lipped	than	a	cat	at	Togg’s	teats,	but	she	talked.	Not


long,	not	complicated.	And	there	was	no	brilliance,	no	genius.	It	was	plain,
every	word	picked	up	from	dusty	ground,	strung	together	on	a	chewed	thong,
not	even	spat	on	to	bring	out	a	gleam.	Not	a	precious	stone	to	be	found.	No
pearls,	no	opals,	no	sapphires.
Raw	garnet	at	best.
At	best.
Tied	to	Tavore’s	sword	belt,	there	had	been	a	finger	bone.	Yellowed,
charred	at	one	end.	She	stood	in	silence	for	a	time,	her	plain	features	looking
drawn,	aged,	her	eyes	dull	as	smudged	slate.	When	at	last	she	spoke,	her	voice
was	low,	strangely	measured,	devoid	of	all	emotion.
Blistig	could	still	remember	every	word.
‘There	have	been	armies.	Burdened	with	names,	the	legacy	of	meetings,	of
battles,	of	betrayals.	The	history	behind	the	name	is	each	army’s	secret
language	–	one	that	no-one	else	can	understand,	much	less	share.	The	First
Sword	of	Dassem	Ultor	–	the	Plains	of	Unta,	the	Grissian	Hills,	Li	Heng,
Y’Ghatan.	The	Bridgeburners	–	Raraku,	Black	Dog,	Mott	Wood,	Pale,	Black
Coral.	Coltaine’s	Seventh	–	Gelor	Ridge,	Vathar	Crossing	and	the	Day	of	Pure
Blood,	Sanimon,	the	Fall.
‘Some	of	you	share	a	few	of	those	–	with	comrades	now	fallen,	now	dust.
They	are,	for	you,	the	cracked	vessels	of	your	grief	and	your	pride.	And	you
cannot	stand	in	one	place	for	long,	lest	the	ground	turn	to	depthless	mud
around	your	feet.’	Her	eyes	fell	then,	a	heartbeat,	another,	before	she	looked	up
once	more,	scanning	the	array	of	sombre	faces	before	her.
‘Among	us,	among	the	Bonehunters,	our	secret	language	has	begun.	Cruel
in	its	birth	at	Aren,	sordid	in	a	river	of	old	blood.	Coltaine’s	blood.	You	know
this.	I	need	tell	you	none	of	this.	We	have	our	own	Raraku.	We	have	our	own
Y’Ghatan.	We	have	Malaz	City.
‘In	the	civil	war	on	Theft,	a	warlord	who	captured	a	rival’s	army	then
destroyed	them	–	not	by	slaughter;	no,	he	simply	gave	the	order	that	each
soldier ’s	weapon	hand	lose	its	index	finger.	The	maimed	soldiers	were	then
sent	back	to	the	warlord’s	rival.	Twelve	thousand	useless	men	and	women.	To
feed,	to	send	home,	to	swallow	the	bitter	taste	of	defeat.	I	was…I	was	reminded
of	that	story,	not	long	ago.’
Yes,	Blistig	thought	then,	and	I	think	I	know	by	whom.	Gods,	we	all	do.
‘We	too	are	maimed.	In	our	hearts.	Each	of	you	knows	this.
‘And	so	we	carry,	tied	to	our	belts,	a	piece	of	bone.	Legacy	of	a	severed
finger.	And	yes,	we	cannot	help	but	know	bitterness.’	She	paused,	held	back	for
a	long	moment,	and	it	seemed	the	silence	itself	grated	in	his	skull.
Tavore	resumed.	‘The	Bonehunters	will	speak	in	our	secret	language.	We


sail	to	add	another	name	to	our	burden,	and	it	may	be	it	will	prove	our	last.	I	do
not	believe	so,	but	there	are	clouds	before	the	face	of	the	future	–	we	cannot
see.	We	cannot	know.
‘The	island	of	Sepik,	a	protectorate	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	is	now	empty
of	human	life.	Sentenced	to	senseless	slaughter,	every	man,	child	and	woman.
We	know	the	face	of	the	slayer.	We	have	seen	the	dark	ships.	We	have	seen	the
harsh	magic	unveiled.
‘We	are	Malazan.	We	remain	so,	no	matter	the	judgement	of	the	Empress.
Is	this	enough	reason	to	give	answer?
‘No,	it	is	not.	Compassion	is	never	enough.	Nor	is	the	hunger	for
vengeance.	But,	for	now,	for	what	awaits	us,	perhaps	they	will	do.	We	are	the
Bonehunters,	and	sail	to	another	name.	Beyond	Aren,	beyond	Raraku	and
beyond	Y’Ghatan,	we	now	cross	the	world	to	find	the	first	name	that	will	be
truly	our	own.	Shared	by	none	other.	We	sail	to	give	answer.
‘There	is	more.	But	I	will	not	speak	of	that	beyond	these	words:	“What
awaits	you	in	the	dusk	of	the	old	world’s	passing,	shall	go…unwitnessed.”
T’amber ’s	words.’	Another	long	spell	of	pained	silence.
‘They	are	hard	and	well	might	they	feed	spite,	if	in	weakness	we	permit
such.	But	to	those	words	I	say	this,	as	your	commander:	we	shall	be	our	own
witness,	and	that	will	be	enough.	It	must	be	enough.	It	must	ever	be	enough.’
Even	now,	over	a	year	later,	Blistig	wondered	if	she	had	said	what	was
needed.	In	truth,	he	was	not	quite	certain	what	she	had	said.	The	meaning	of	it.
Witnessed,	unwitnessed,	does	it	really	make	a	difference?	But	he	knew	the
answer	to	that,	even	if	he	could	not	articulate	precisely	what	it	was	he	knew.
Something	stirred	deep	in	the	pit	of	his	soul,	as	if	his	thoughts	were	black
waters	caressing	unseen	rocks,	bending	to	shapes	that	even	ignorance	could
not	alter.
Well,	how	can	any	of	this	make	sense?	I	do	not	have	the	words.
But	damn	me,	she	did.	Back	then.	She	did.
Unwitnessed.	There	was	crime	in	that	notion.	A	profound	injustice	against
which	he	railed.	In	silence.	Like	every	other	soldier	in	the	Bonehunters.	Maybe.
No,	I	am	not	mistaken	–	I	see	something	in	their	eyes.	I	can	see	it.	We	rail
against	injustice,	yes.	That	what	we	do	will	be	seen	by	no-one.	Our	fate
unmeasured.
Tavore,	what	have	you	awakened?	And,	Hood	take	us,	what	makes	you	think
we	are	equal	to	any	of	this?
There	had	been	no	desertions.	He	did	not	understand.	He	didn’t	think	he
would	ever	understand.	What	had	happened	that	night,	what	had	happened	in
that	strange	speech.


She	told	us	we	would	never	see	our	loved	ones	again.	That	is	what	she	told
us.	Isn’t	it?
Leaving	us	with	what?
With	each	other,	I	suppose.
‘We	shall	be	our	own	witness.’
And	was	that	enough?
Maybe.	So	far.
But	now	we	are	here.	We	have	arrived.	The	fleet,	the	fleet	burns	–	gods,	that
she	would	do	that.	Not	a	single	transport	left.	Burned,	sunk	to	the	bottom	off
this	damned	shore.	We	are…cut	away.
Welcome,	Bonehunters,	to	the	empire	of	Lether.
Alas,	we	are	not	here	in	festive	spirit.

The	treacherous	ice	was	behind	them	now,	the	broken	mountains	that	had	filled
the	sea	and	clambered	onto	the	Fent	Reach,	crushing	everything	on	it	to	dust.
No	ruins	to	ponder	over	in	some	distant	future,	not	a	single	sign	of	human
existence	left	on	that	scraped	rock.	Ice	was	annihilation.	It	did	not	do	what	sand
did,	did	not	simply	bury	every	trace.	It	was	as	the	Jaghut	had	meant	it:	negation,
a	scouring	down	to	bare	rock.
Lostara	Yil	drew	her	fur-lined	cloak	tighter	about	herself	as	she	followed
the	Adjunct	to	the	forecastle	deck	of	the	Froth	Wolf.	The	sheltered	harbour	was
before	them,	a	half-dozen	ships	anchored	in	the	bay,	including	the	Silanda	–	its
heap	of	Tiste	Andii	heads	hidden	beneath	thick	tarpaulin.	Getting	the	bone
whistle	from	Gesler	hadn’t	been	easy,	she	recalled;	and	among	the	soldiers	of
the	two	squads	left	to	command	the	haunted	craft,	the	only	one	willing	to	use	it
had	been	that	corporal,	Deadsmell.	Not	even	Sinn	would	touch	it.
Before	the	splitting	of	the	fleet	there	had	been	a	flurry	of	shifting	about
among	the	squads	and	companies.	The	strategy	for	this	war	demanded	certain
adjustments,	and,	as	was	expected,	few	had	been	thrilled	with	the	changes.
Soldiers	are	such	conservative	bastards.
But	at	least	we	pulled	Blistig	away	from	real	command	–	worse	than	a
rheumy	old	dog,	that	one.
Lostara,	still	waiting	for	her	commander	to	speak,	turned	for	a	glance	back
at	the	Throne	of	War	blockading	the	mouth	of	the	harbour.	The	last	Perish	ship
in	these	waters,	for	now.	She	hoped	it	would	be	enough	for	what	was	to	come.
‘Where	is	Sergeant	Cord’s	squad	now?’	the	Adjunct	asked.
‘Northwest	tip	of	the	island,’	Lostara	replied.	‘Sinn	is	keeping	the	ice	away


—’
‘How?’	Tavore	demanded,	not	for	the	first	time.
And	Lostara	could	but	give	the	same	answer	she	had	given	countless	times
before.	‘I	don’t	know,	Adjunct.’	She	hesitated,	then	added,	‘Ebron	believes	that
this	ice	is	dying.	A	Jaghut	ritual,	crumbling.	He	notes	the	water	lines	on	this
island’s	cliffs	–	well	past	any	earlier	high	water	mark.’
To	this	the	Adjunct	said	nothing.	She	seemed	unaffected	by	the	cold,	damp
wind,	barring	an	absence	of	colour	on	her	features,	as	if	her	blood	had
withdrawn	from	the	surface	of	her	flesh.	Her	hair	was	cut	very	short,	as	if	to
discard	every	hint	of	femininity.
‘Grub	says	the	world	is	drowning,’	Lostara	said.
Tavore	turned	slightly	and	looked	up	at	the	unlit	shrouds	high	overhead.
‘Grub.	Another	mystery,’	she	said.
‘He	seems	able	to	communicate	with	the	Nachts,	which	is,	well,
remarkable.’
‘Communicate?	It’s	become	hard	to	tell	them	apart.’
The	Froth	Wolf	was	sidling	past	the	anchored	ships,	angling	towards	the
stone	pier,	on	which	stood	two	figures.	Probably	Sergeant	Balm	and
Deadsmell.
Tavore	said,	‘Go	below,	Captain,	and	inform	the	others	we	are	about	to
disembark.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Remain	a	soldier,	Lostara	Yil	told	herself,	a	statement	that	whispered
through	her	mind	a	hundred	times	a	day.	Remain	a	soldier,	and	all	the	rest	will
go	away.
	
With	dawn’s	first	light	paling	the	eastern	sky,	the	mounted	troop	of	Letherii
thundered	down	the	narrow	coastal	track,	the	berm	of	the	old	beach	ridge	on
their	left,	the	impenetrable,	tangled	forest	on	their	right.	The	rain	had	dissolved
into	a	clammy	mist,	strengthening	the	night’s	last	grip	of	darkness,	and	the
pounding	of	hoofs	was	oddly	muted,	quick	to	dwindle	once	the	last	rider	was
out	of	sight.
Puddles	in	the	track	settled	once	more,	clouded	with	mud.	The	mists
swirled,	drifted	into	the	trees.
An	owl,	perched	high	on	a	branch	of	a	dead	tree,	had	watched	the	troop
pass.	The	echoes	fading,	it	remained	where	it	was,	not	moving,	its	large
unblinking	eyes	fixed	on	a	chaotic	mass	of	shrubs	and	brambles	amidst	thinboled	poplars.	Where	something	was	not	quite	as	it	seemed.	Unease	sufficient


to	confuse	its	predatory	mind.
The	scrub	blurred	then,	as	if	disintegrating	in	a	fierce	gale	–	although	no
wind	stirred	–	and	upon	its	vanishing,	figures	rose	as	if	from	nowhere.
The	owl	decided	it	would	have	to	wait	a	little	longer.	While	hungry,	it
nevertheless	experienced	a	strange	contentment,	followed	by	a	kind	of	tug	on
its	mind,	as	of	something…leaving.
	
Bottle	rolled	onto	his	back.	‘Over	thirty	riders,’	he	said.	‘Lancers,	lightly
armoured.	Odd	stirrups.	Hood,	but	my	skull	aches.	I	hate	Mockra—’
‘Enough	bitching,’	Fiddler	said	as	he	watched	his	squad	–	barring	a
motionless	Bottle	–	drawing	in,	with	Gesler ’s	doing	the	same	beneath	some
trees	a	few	paces	away.	‘You	sure	they	didn’t	smell	nothing?’
‘Those	first	scouts	nearly	stepped	right	on	us,’	Bottle	said.	‘Something
there…especially	in	one	of	them.	As	if	he	was	somehow…I	don’t	know,
sensitized,	I	suppose.	Him	and	this	damned	ugly	coast	where	we	don’t	belong
—’
‘Just	answer	the	questions,’	Fiddler	cut	in	again.
‘We	should’ve	ambushed	the	whole	lot,’	Koryk	muttered,	checking	the
knots	on	all	the	fetishes	he	was	wearing,	then	dragging	over	his	oversized
supply	pack	to	examine	the	straps.
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘No	fighting	until	our	feet	dry.	I	hate	that.’
‘Then	why	are	you	a	damned	marine,	Sergeant?’
‘Accident.	Besides,	those	were	Letherii.	We’re	to	avoid	contact	with	them,
for	now.’
‘I’m	hungry,’	Bottle	said.	‘Well,	no.	It	was	the	owl,	dammit.	Anyway,	you
would	not	believe	what	looking	through	an	owl’s	eyes	at	night	is	like.	Bright	as
noon	in	the	desert.’
‘Desert,’	Tarr	said.	‘I	miss	the	desert.’
‘You’d	miss	a	latrine	pit	if	it	was	the	last	place	you	crawled	out	of,’	Smiles
observed.	‘Koryk	had	his	crossbow	trained	on	those	riders,	Sergeant.’
‘What	are	you,	my	little	sister?’	Koryk	demanded.	He	then	mimed	Smiles’s
voice.	‘He	didn’t	shake	his	baby-maker	when	he’d	done	peeing,	Sergeant!	I	saw
it!’
‘See	it?’	Smiles	laughed.	‘I’d	never	get	that	close	to	you,	half-blood,	trust
me.’
‘She’s	getting	better,’	Cuttle	said	to	Koryk,	whose	only	response	was	a
grunt.
‘Quiet	everyone,’	Fiddler	said.	‘No	telling	who	else	lives	in	these	woods	–


or	might	be	using	the	road.’
‘We’re	alone,’	Bottle	pronounced,	slowly	sitting	up,	then	gripping	the	sides
of	his	head.	‘Hiding	fourteen	grunting,	farting	soldiers	ain’t	easy.	And	once	we
get	to	more	populated	areas	it’s	going	to	be	worse.’
‘Getting	one	miserable	mage	to	shut	his	mouth	is	even	harder,’	Fiddler
said.	‘Check	your	gear,	everyone.	I	want	us	a	ways	deeper	into	these	woods
before	we	dig	in	for	the	day.’	For	the	past	month	on	the	ships	the	Bonehunters
had	been	shifting	over	into	reversing	their	sleep	cycles.	A	damned	hard	thing
to	do,	as	it	turned	out.	But	now	at	least	pretty	much	everyone	was	done	turning
round.	Lost	the	tans,	anyway.	Fiddler	moved	over	to	where	Gesler	crouched.
Except	this	gold-skinned	bastard	and	his	hairy	corporal.	‘Your	people
ready?’
Gesler	nodded.	‘Heavies	are	complaining	their	armour ’s	gonna	rust.’
‘So	long	as	they	keep	the	squeaking	to	a	minimum.’	Fiddler	glanced	at	the
huddled	soldiers	of	Gesler ’s	squad,	then	back	towards	his	own.	‘Some	army,’
he	said	under	his	breath.
‘Some	invasion,	aye,’	Gesler	agreed.	‘Ever	known	anyone	to	do	it	this
way?’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘It	makes	a	weird	kind	of	sense,	though,	doesn’t	it?
The	Edur	are	spread	thin,	from	all	reports.	The	oppressed	are	legion	–	all	these
damned	Letherii.’
‘That	troop	just	passed	us	didn’t	look	much	oppressed	to	me,	Fid.’
‘Well,	I	suppose	we’ll	find	out	one	way	or	the	other,	won’t	we?	Now,	let’s
get	this	invasion	under	way.’
‘A	moment,’	Gesler	said,	settling	a	scarred	hand	on	Fiddler ’s	shoulder.
‘She	burned	the	fucking	transports,	Fid.’
The	sergeant	winced.
‘Hard	to	miss	the	point	of	that,	wouldn’t	you	say?’
‘Which	meaning	are	you	referring	to,	Gesler?	The	one	about	patrols	on
this	coast	seeing	the	flames	or	the	one	about	for	us	there’s	no	going	back?’
‘Hood	take	me,	I	can	only	chew	on	one	piece	of	meat	at	a	time,	you	know?
Start	with	the	first	one.	If	I	was	this	damned	empire,	I’d	be	flooding	this
coastline	with	soldiers	before	this	day’s	sun	is	down.	And	no	matter	how	much
Mockra	our	squad	mages	now	know,	we’re	going	to	mess	up.	Sooner	or	later,
Fid.’
‘Would	that	be	before	or	after	we	start	drawing	blood?’
‘I	ain’t	even	thinking	about	once	we	start	killing	Hood-damned	Tiste	Edur.
I’m	thinking	about	today.’
‘Someone	stumbles	onto	us	and	we	get	nasty	and	dirty,	then	we	bolt


according	to	the	plan.’
‘And	try	to	stay	alive,	aye.	Great.	And	what	if	these	Letherii	ain’t	friendly?’
‘We	just	keep	going,	and	steal	what	we	need.’
‘We	should’ve	landed	en	masse,	not	just	marines.	With	shields	locked	and
see	what	they	can	throw	at	us.’
Fiddler	rubbed	at	the	back	of	his	neck.	Then	sighed	and	said,	‘You	know
what	they	can	throw	at	us,	Gesler.	Only	the	next	time,	there	won’t	be	Quick	Ben
dancing	in	the	air	and	matching	them	horror	for	horror.	This	is	a	night	war
we’re	looking	at.	Ambushes.	Knives	in	the	dark.	Cut	and	bolt.’
‘With	no	way	out.’
‘Aye.	So	I	do	wonder	if	she	lit	up	our	transports	to	tell	’em	we’re	here,	or
to	tell	us	there’s	no	point	in	thinking	about	retreat.	Or	both.’
Gesler	grunted.	‘“Unwitnessed”,	she	said.	Is	that	where	we	are?	Already?’
Shrugging,	Fiddler	half	rose.	‘Might	be,	Gesler.	Let’s	get	moving	–	the
birds	are	twittering	almost	as	loud	as	we	are.’
But,	as	they	tramped	deeper	into	the	wet,	rotting	forest,	Gesler ’s	last
question	haunted	Fiddler.	Is	he	right,	Adjunct?	We	there	already?	Invading	a
damned	empire	in	two-squad	units.	Running	alone,	unsupported,	living	or
dying	on	the	shoulders	of	a	single	squad	mage.	What	if	Bottle	gets	killed	in	the
first	scrap?	We’re	done	for,	that’s	what.	Best	keep	Corabb	nice	and	close	to
Bottle,	and	hope	the	old	rebel’s	luck	keeps	pulling.
At	the	very	least,	the	waiting	was	over.	Real	ground	underfoot	–	they’d	all
wobbled	like	drunks	coming	up	from	the	strand,	which	might	have	been
amusing	in	other	circumstances.	But	not	when	we	could	have	staggered	right
into	a	patrol.	Things	were	feeling	solid	now,	though.	Thank	Hood.	Well,	as
solid	as	one	could	be	stumping	over	moss,	overgrown	sinkholes	and	twisted
roots.	Almost	as	bad	as	Black	Dog.	No,	don’t	think	like	that.	Look	ahead,	Fid.
Keep	looking	ahead.
Somewhere	above	them,	through	a	mad	witch’s	weave	of	branches,	the	sky
was	lightening.
	
‘Any	more	complainin’	from	any	of	you	and	I’ll	cut	off	my	left	tit.’
A	half-circle	of	faces	ogled	her.	Good.	She	was	pleased	with	the	way	that
always	worked.
‘Good	thing	the	swim	put	you	out,’	Bowl	said.
Sergeant	Hellian	frowned	at	the	huge	soldier.	Put	out?	‘Heavies	are	idiots,
you	know	that?	Now.’	She	looked	down	and	tried	counting	the	number	of	rum
casks	she’d	managed	to	drag	from	the	hold	before	the	flames	went	wild.	Six,


maybe	ten.	Nine.	She	waved	at	the	blurry	array.	‘Everybody	make	room	in
your	packs.	For	one	each.’
Touchy	Brethless	said,	‘Sergeant,	ain’t	we	supposed	to	find	Urb	and	his
squad?	They	gotta	be	close.’	Then	her	corporal	spoke	again,	this	time	in	a
different	voice,	‘He’s	right.	Bowl,	where’d	you	come	from	again?	Up	the
shore	or	down	it?’
‘I	don’t	remember.	It	was	dark.’
‘Hold	on,’	Hellian	said,	taking	a	sidestep	to	maintain	her	balance	on	the
pitching	deck.	No,	the	pitching	ground.	‘You’re	not	in	my	squad,	Bowl.	Go
away.’
‘I’d	like	nothing	better,’	he	replied,	squinting	at	the	wall	of	trees
surrounding	them.	‘I	ain’t	carrying	no	cask	of	damned	ale.	Look	at	you,
Sergeant,	you’re	scorched	all	over.’
Hellian	straightened.	‘Now	hold	on,	we’re	talking	’ssential	victuals.	But	I’ll
tell	you	what’s	a	lot	worse.	I	bet	that	fire	was	seen	by	somebody	–	and	I	hope
the	fool	that	started	it	is	a	heap	of	ash	right	now,	that’s	what	I	hope.
Somebody’s	seen	it,	that’s	for	sure.’
‘Sergeant,	they	lit	up	all	the	transports,’	said	another	one	of	her	soldiers.
Beard,	thick	chest,	solid	as	a	tree	trunk	and	probably	not	much	smarter	either.
What	was	his	name?
‘Who	are	you?’
The	man	rubbed	at	his	eyes.	‘Balgrid.’
‘Right,	Baldy,	now	try	explaining	to	me	how	some	fool	swam	from	ship	to
ship	and	set	them	afire?	Well?	That’s	what	I	thought.’
‘Someone’s	coming,’	hissed	the	squad	sapper.
The	one	with	the	stupid	name.	A	name	she	always	had	trouble
remembering.	Could	be?	No.	Sometimes?	Unsure?	Ah,	Maybe.	Our	sapper’s
name	is	Maybe.	And	his	friend	there,	that’s	Lutes.	And	there’s	Tavos	Pond	–	he’s
too	tall.	Tall	soldiers	get	arrows	in	their	foreheads.	Why	isn’t	he	dead?
‘Anybody	got	a	bow?’	she	asked.
A	rustling	of	undergrowth,	then	two	figures	emerged	from	the	gloom.
Hellian	stared	at	the	first	one,	feeling	an	inexplicable	surge	of	rage.	She
rubbed	thoughtfully	at	her	jaw,	trying	to	remember	something	about	this	sadlooking	soldier.	The	rage	drained	away,	was	replaced	with	heartfelt	affection.
Bowl	stepped	past	her.	‘Sergeant	Urb,	thank	Hood	you	found	us.’
‘Urb?’	Hellian	asked,	weaving	as	she	moved	closer	and	peered	up	into	the
man’s	round	face.	‘That	you?’
‘Found	the	rum,	did	you?’
Lutes	said	from	behind	her,	‘She’s	poisoning	her	liver.’


‘My	liver ’s	fine,	soldier.	Just	needs	a	squeezing	out.’
‘Squeezing	out?’
She	turned	round	and	glared	at	the	squad	healer.	‘I	seen	livers	before,
Cutter.	Big	sponges	full	of	blood.	Tumbles	out	when	you	cut	someone	open.’
‘Sounds	more	like	a	lung,	Sergeant.	The	liver ’s	this	flat	thing,	muddy
brown	or	purple—’
‘Doesn’t	matter,’	she	said,	wheeling	back	to	stare	at	Urb.	‘If	the	first	one
dies	the	other	one	kicks	in.	I’m	fine.	Well,’	she	added	with	a	loud	sigh	which
seemed	to	make	Urb	reel	back	a	step,	‘I’m	in	the	best	of	moods,	my	friends.
The	best	of	moods.	And	now	we’re	all	together,	so	let’s	march	because	I’m
pretty	sure	we’re	supposed	to	march	somewhere.’	She	smiled	over	at	her
corporal.	‘What	say	you,	Touchy	Brethless?’
‘Sounds	good,	Sergeant.
‘Brilliant	plan,	Sergeant.’
‘Why	do	you	always	do	that,	Corporal?’
‘Do	what?
‘Do	what?’
‘Look,	Baldy’s	the	one	who’s	half	deaf—’
‘I’m	not	half	deaf	any	more,	Sergeant.’
‘You’re	not?	So	who	here	is	half	deaf?’
‘Nobody,	Sergeant.’
‘No	need	to	shout.	Baldy	can	hear	you	and	if	he	can’t	then	we	should’ve
left	him	on	the	boat,	along	with	that	tall	one	there	with	the	arrow	in	his	skull,
because	neither	one’s	no	good	to	us.	We’re	looking	for	grey-skinned
murderers	and	they’re	hiding	in	these	trees.	Behind	them,	I	mean.	If	they	were
in	them,	it’d	hurt.	So	we	need	to	start	looking	behind	all	these	trees.	But	first,
collect	us	a	cask	here,	one	each	now,	and	then	we	can	get	going.
‘What’re	you	all	staring	at?	I’m	the	one	giving	the	orders	and	I	got	me	a
new	sword	which	will	make	chopping	off	one	of	these	here	tits	a	whole	lot
easier.	Get	moving,	everyone,	we	got	us	a	war	to	fight.	Behind	those	trees.’
	
Crouched	before	him,	Gullstream	had	the	furtive	look	of	a	weasel	in	a	chicken
coop.	He	wiped	his	runny	nose	with	the	back	of	one	forearm,	squinted,	then
said,	‘Everyone	accounted	for,	sir.’
Fist	Keneb	nodded,	then	turned	as	someone	slid	loudly	down	the	beach
ridge.	‘Quiet	over	there.	All	right,	Gullstream,	find	the	captain	and	send	her	to
me.’
‘Aye,	sir.’


The	soldiers	were	feeling	exposed,	which	was	understandable.	It	was	one
thing	for	a	squad	or	two	to	scout	ahead	of	a	column	–	at	least	retreat	was
possible	in	the	traditional	sense.	Here,	if	they	got	into	trouble,	their	only	way
out	was	to	scatter.	As	the	commander	of	what	would	be	a	prolonged,	chaotic
engagement,	Keneb	was	worried.	His	attack	unit	of	six	squads	would	be	the
hardest	one	to	hide	–	the	mages	with	him	were	the	weakest	of	the	lot,	for	the
simple	reason	that	his	platoon	would	be	holding	back	on	their	inland	march,
with	the	primary	objective	being	avoiding	any	contact.	As	for	the	rest	of	his
legion,	it	was	now	scattered	up	and	down	thirty	leagues	of	coastline.	Moving	in
small	units	of	a	dozen	or	so	soldiers	and	about	to	begin	a	covert	campaign	that
might	last	months.
There	had	been	profound	changes	to	the	Fourteenth	Army	since	Malaz
City.	A	kind	of	standardization	had	been	imposed	on	the	scores	of	wizards,
shamans,	conjurers	and	casters	in	the	legions,	with	the	intent	of	establishing
sorcery	as	the	principal	means	of	communication.	And,	for	the	squad	mages
among	the	marines	–	a	force	that	now	had	as	many	heavy	infantry	as	sappers	–
certain	rituals	of	Mockra	were	now	universally	known.	Illusions	to	affect
camouflage,	to	swallow	sound,	confuse	scent.
And	all	of	this	told	Keneb	one	thing.	She	knew.	From	the	very	beginning.
She	knew	where	we	were	going,	and	she	planned	for	it.	Once	again	there	had
been	no	consultation	among	the	officers.	The	Adjunct’s	only	meetings	were
with	that	Meckros	blacksmith	and	the	Tiste	Andii	from	Drift	Avalii.	What	could
they	have	told	her	about	this	land?	None	of	them	are	even	from	here.
He	preferred	to	assume	it	was	a	simple	stroke	of	fortune	when	the	fleet	had
sighted	two	Edur	ships	that	had	been	separated	from	the	others	following	a
storm.	Too	damaged	to	flee,	they	had	been	taken	by	the	marines.	Not	easily	–
these	Tiste	Edur	were	fierce	when	cornered,	even	when	half-starved	and	dying
of	thirst.	Officers	had	been	captured,	but	only	after	every	other	damned
warrior	had	been	cut	down.
The	interrogation	of	those	Edur	officers	had	been	bloody.	Yet,	for	all	the
information	they	provided,	it	had	been	the	ship’s	logs	and	charts	that	had
proved	the	most	useful	for	this	strange	campaign.	Ah,	‘strange’	is	too	mild	a
word	for	this.	True,	the	Tiste	Edur	fleets	clashed	with	our	empire	–	or	what	used
to	be	our	empire	–	and	they’d	conducted	wholesale	slaughter	of	peoples	under
our	nominal	protection.	But	isn’t	all	that	Laseen’s	problem?
The	Adjunct	would	not	relinquish	her	title,	either.	Adjunct	to	whom?	The
woman	who	had	done	all	she	could	to	try	to	murder	her?	What	had	happened
that	night	up	in	Mock’s	Hold,	anyway?	The	only	other	witnesses	beyond
Tavore	and	the	Empress	herself	were	dead.	T’amber.	Kalam	Mekhar	–	gods,


that’s	a	loss	that	will	haunt	us.	Keneb	wondered	then	–	and	wondered	still	–	if
the	entire	debacle	at	Malaz	City	had	not	been	planned	out	between	Laseen	and
her	cherished	Adjunct.	Each	time	this	suspicion	whispered	through	him,	the
same	objections	arose	in	his	mind.	She	would	not	have	agreed	to	T’amber’s
murder.	And	Tavore	damned	near	died	at	the	harbour	front.	And	what	about
Kalam?	Besides,	even	Tavore	Paran	was	not	cold	enough	to	see	the	sacrifice	of
the	Wickans,	all	to	feed	some	damned	lie.	Was	she?
But	Laseen’s	done	this	before.	With	Dujek	Onearm	and	the	Host.	And	that
time,	the	deal	involved	the	annihilation	of	the	Bridgeburners	–	at	least	that’s
how	it	looks.	So…why	not?
What	would	have	happened	if	we’d	just	marched	into	the	city?	Killing	every
damned	fool	who	got	in	our	way?	If	we’d	gone	in	strength	with	Tavore	up	to
Mock’s	Hold?
Civil	war.	He	knew	that	to	be	the	answer	to	those	questions.	Nor	could	he
see	a	way	out,	even	after	months	and	months	of	second-guessing.
No	wonder,	then,	that	all	of	this	was	eating	at	Keneb’s	guts,	and	he	knew	he
was	not	alone	in	that.	Blistig	believed	in	nothing	any	more,	beginning	with
himself.	His	eyes	seemed	to	reflect	some	spectre	of	the	future	that	only	he
could	see.	He	walked	as	a	man	already	dead	–	the	body	refusing	what	the	mind
knew	to	be	an	irrevocable	truth.	And	they’d	lost	Tene	Baralta	and	his	Red
Blades,	although	perhaps	that	was	not	quite	as	tragic.	Well,	come	to	think	on	it,
Tavore’s	inner	circle	is	pretty	much	gone.	Carved	out.	Hood	knows	I	never
belonged	there	anyway	–	which	is	why	I’m	here,	in	this	damned	dripping	swamp
of	a	forest.
‘We’re	assembled	and	waiting,	Fist.’
Blinking,	Keneb	saw	that	his	captain	had	arrived.	Standing	–	waiting	–	how
long?	He	squinted	up	at	the	greying	sky.	Shit.	‘Very	well,	we’ll	head	inland
until	we	find	some	dry	ground.’
‘Aye.’
‘Oh,	Captain,	have	you	selected	out	the	mage	you	want?’
Faradan	Sort’s	eyes	narrowed	briefly,	and	in	the	colourless	light	the	planes
of	her	hard	face	looked	more	angular	than	ever.	She	sighed	and	said,	‘I	believe
so,	Fist.	From	Sergeant	Gripe’s	squad.	Beak.’
‘Him?	Are	you	sure?’
She	shrugged.	‘Nobody	likes	him,	so	you’ll	not	rue	the	loss.’
Keneb	felt	a	flicker	of	irritation.	In	a	low	tone	he	said,	‘Your	task	is	not
meant	to	be	a	suicide	mission,	Captain.	I	am	not	entirely	convinced	this
sorcerous	communication	system	is	going	to	work.	And	once	the	squads	start
losing	mages,	it	will	all	fall	apart.	You	will	probably	become	the	only	link


among	all	the	units—’
‘Once	we	find	some	horses,’	she	cut	in.
‘Correct.’
He	watched	as	she	studied	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	she	said,	‘Beak	has
tracking	skills,	Fist.	Of	a	sort.	He	says	he	can	smell	magic,	which	will	help	in
finding	our	soldiers.’
‘Very	good.	Now,	it’s	time	to	move	inland,	Captain.’
‘Aye,	Fist.’
A	short	time	later,	the	forty-odd	soldiers	of	Keneb’s	command	platoon
were	fighting	their	way	through	a	bog	of	fetid,	black	water,	as	the	day’s	heat
grew.	Insects	swarmed	in	hungry	clouds.	Few	words	were	exchanged.
None	of	us	are	sure	of	this,	are	we?	Find	the	Tiste	Edur	–	this	land’s
oppressors	–	and	cut	them	down.	Free	the	Letherii	to	rebel.	Aye,	foment	a	civil
war,	the	very	thing	we	fled	the	Malazan	Empire	to	avoid.
Odd,	isn’t	it,	how	we	now	deliver	upon	another	nation	what	we	would	not
have	done	to	ourselves.
About	as	much	moral	high	ground	as	this	damned	swamp.	No,	we’re	not
happy,	Adjunct.	Not	happy	at	all.
	
Beak	didn’t	know	much	about	any	of	this.	In	fact,	he	would	be	the	first	to	admit
he	didn’t	know	much	about	anything	at	all,	except	maybe	weaving	sorcery.	The
one	thing	he	knew	for	certain,	however,	was	that	no-one	liked	him.
Getting	tied	to	the	belt	of	this	scary	captain	woman	would	probably	turn
out	to	be	a	bad	idea.	She	reminded	him	of	his	mother,	looks-wise,	which
should	have	killed	quick	any	thoughts	of	the	lustful	kind.	Should	have,	but
didn’t,	which	he	found	a	little	disturbing	if	he	thought	about	it,	which	he	didn’t.
Much.	Unlike	his	mother,	anyway,	she	wasn’t	the	type	to	browbeat	him	at	every
turn,	and	that	was	refreshing.
‘I	was	born	a	stupid	boy	to	very	rich	noble-born	parents.’	Usually	the	first
words	he	uttered	to	everyone	he	met.	The	next	ones	were:	‘That’s	why	I	became
a	soldier,	so’s	I	could	be	with	my	own	kind.’	Conversations	usually	died	away
shortly	after	that,	which	made	Beak	sad.
He	would	have	liked	to	talk	with	the	other	squad	mages,	but	even	there	it
seemed	he	couldn’t	quite	get	across	his	deep-in-the-bone	love	of	magic.
‘Mystery,’	he’d	say,	nodding	and	nodding,	‘mystery,	right?	And	poetry.	That’s
sorcery.	Mystery	and	poetry,	which	is	what	my	mother	used	to	say	to	my
brother	when	she	crawled	into	his	bed	on	the	nights	Father	was	somewhere
else.	“We’re	living	in	mystery	and	poetry,	my	dear	one,”	she’d	say	–	I’d


pretend	I	was	asleep,	since	once	I	sat	up	and	she	beat	me	real	bad.	Normally	she
never	did	that,	with	her	fists	I	mean.	Most	of	my	tutors	did	that,	so	she	wouldn’t
have	to.	But	I	sat	up	and	that	made	her	mad.	The	House	healer	said	I	almost
died	that	night,	and	that’s	how	I	learned	about	poetry.’
The	wonder	that	was	sorcery	was	his	greatest	love,	maybe	his	only	one,	so
far,	though	he	was	sure	he’d	meet	his	perfect	mate	one	day.	A	pretty	woman	as
stupid	as	he	was.	In	any	case,	the	other	mages	usually	just	stared	at	him	while
he	babbled	on,	which	was	what	he	did	when	getting	nervous.	On	and	on.
Sometimes	a	mage	would	just	up	and	hug	him,	then	walk	away.	Once,	a	wizard
he	was	talking	to	just	started	crying.	That	had	frightened	Beak.
The	captain’s	interview	of	the	mages	in	the	platoon	had	ended	with	him,
second	in	line.
‘Where	are	you	from,	Beak,	to	have	you	so	convinced	you’re	stupid?’
He	wasn’t	sure	what	that	question	meant,	but	he	did	try	to	answer.	‘I	was
born	in	the	great	city	of	Quon	on	Quon	Tali	in	the	Malazan	Empire,	which	is
an	empire	ruled	by	a	little	Empress	and	is	the	most	civilized	place	in	the	world.
All	my	tutors	called	me	stupid	and	they	should	know.	Nobody	didn’t	agree	with
them,	either.’
‘So	who	taught	you	about	magic?’
‘We	had	a	Seti	witch	in	charge	of	the	stables.	In	the	country	estate.	She	said
that	for	me	sorcery	was	the	lone	candle	in	the	darkness.	The	lone	candle	in	the
darkness.	She	said	my	brain	had	put	out	all	the	other	candles,	so	this	one	would
shine	brighter	and	brighter.	So	she	showed	me	magic,	first	the	Seti	way,	which
she	knew	best.	But	later,	she	always	found	other	servants,	other	people	who
knew	the	other	kinds.	Warrens.	That’s	what	they’re	called.	Different	coloured
candles	for	each	and	every	one	of	them.	Grey	for	Mockra,	green	for	Ruse,
white	for	Hood,	yellow	for	Thyr,	blue	for—’
‘You	know	how	to	use	Mockra?’
‘Yes.	Want	me	to	show	you?’
‘Not	now.	I	need	you	to	come	with	me	–	I	am	detaching	you	from	your
squad,	Beak.’
‘All	right.’
‘You	and	I,	we	are	going	to	travel	together,	away	from	everyone	else.
We’re	going	to	ride	from	unit	to	unit,	as	best	we	can.’
‘Ride,	on	horses?’
‘Do	you	know	how?’
‘Quon	horses	are	the	finest	horses	in	the	world.	We	bred	them.	It	was
almost	another	candle	in	my	head.	But	the	witch	said	it	was	different,	since	I’d
been	born	into	it	and	riding	was	in	my	bones	like	writing	in	black	ink.’


‘Do	you	think	you’ll	be	able	to	find	the	other	squads,	even	when	they’re
using	sorcery	to	hide	themselves?’
‘Find	them?	Of	course.	I	smell	magic.	My	candle	flickers,	then	leans	this
way	and	whatever	way	the	magic’s	coming	from.’
‘All	right,	Beak,	you	are	now	attached	to	Captain	Faradan	Sort.	I’ve	chosen
you,	over	all	the	others.’
‘All	right.’
‘Grab	your	gear	and	follow	me.’
‘How	close?’
‘Like	you	were	tied	to	my	sword-belt,	Beak.	Oh,	and	how	old	are	you,	by
the	way?’
‘I’ve	lost	count.	I	was	thirty	but	that	was	six	years	ago	so	I	don’t	know	any
more.’
‘The	warrens,	Beak	–	how	many	candles	do	you	know	about?’
‘Oh,	lots.	All	of	them.’
‘All	of	them.’
‘We	had	a	half-Fenn	blacksmith	for	my	last	two	years	and	he	once	asked
me	to	list	them,	so	I	did,	then	he	said	that	was	all	of	them.	He	said:	“That’s	all
of	them,	Beak.”’
‘What	else	did	he	say?’
‘Nothing	much,	only	he	made	me	this	knife.’	Beak	tapped	the	large	weapon
at	his	hip.	‘Then	he	told	me	to	run	away	from	home.	Join	the	Malazan	Army,	so
I	wouldn’t	get	beaten	any	more	for	being	stupid.	I	was	one	year	less	than	thirty
when	I	did	that,	just	like	he	told	me	to,	and	I	haven’t	been	beaten	since.	Nobody
likes	me	but	they	don’t	hurt	me.	I	didn’t	know	the	army	would	be	so	lonely.’
She	was	studying	him	the	way	most	people	did,	then	she	asked,	‘Beak,	did
you	never	use	your	sorcery	to	defend	yourself,	or	fight	back?’
‘No.’
‘Have	you	ever	seen	your	parents	or	brother	since?’
‘My	brother	killed	himself	and	my	parents	are	dead	–	they	died	the	night	I
left.	So	did	the	tutors.’
‘What	happened	to	them?’
‘I’m	not	sure,’	Beak	admitted.	‘Only,	I	showed	them	my	candle.’
‘Have	you	done	that	since,	Beak?	Showed	your	candle?’
‘Not	all	of	it,	not	all	the	light,	no.	The	blacksmith	told	me	not	to,	unless	I
had	no	choice.’
‘Like	that	last	night	with	your	family	and	tutors.’
‘Like	that	night,	yes.	They’d	had	the	blacksmith	whipped	and	driven	off,
you	see,	for	giving	me	this	knife.	And	then	they	tried	to	take	it	away	from	me.


And	all	at	once,	I	had	no	choice.’
So	she	said	they	were	going	away	from	the	others,	but	here	they	were,
trudging	along	with	the	rest,	and	the	insects	kept	biting	him,	especially	on	the
back	of	his	neck,	and	getting	stuck	in	his	ears	and	up	his	nose,	and	he	realized
that	he	didn’t	understand	anything.
But	she	was	right	there,	right	at	his	side.
The	platoon	reached	a	kind	of	island	in	the	swamp,	moated	in	black	water.
It	was	circular,	and	as	they	scrambled	onto	it	Beak	saw	moss-covered	rubble.
‘Was	a	building	here,’	one	of	the	soldiers	said.
‘Jaghut,’	Beak	called	out,	suddenly	excited.	‘Omtose	Phellack.	No	flame,
though,	just	the	smell	of	tallow.	The	magic’s	all	drained	away	and	that’s	what
made	this	swamp,	but	we	can’t	stay	here,	because	there’s	broken	bodies	under
the	rocks	and	those	ghosts	are	hungry.’
They	were	all	staring	at	him.	He	ducked	his	head.	‘Sorry.’
But	Captain	Faradan	Sort	laid	a	hand	on	his	shoulder.	‘No	need,	Beak.
These	bodies	–	Jaghut?’
‘No.	Forkrul	Assail	and	Tiste	Liosan.	They	fought	on	the	ruins.	During
what	they	called	the	Just	Wars.	Here,	it	was	only	a	skirmish,	but	nobody
survived.	They	killed	each	other,	and	the	last	warrior	standing	had	a	hole	in	her
throat	and	she	bled	out	right	where	the	Fist	is	standing.	She	was	Forkrul	Assail,
and	her	last	thought	was	about	how	victory	proved	they	were	right	and	the
enemy	was	wrong.	Then	she	died.’
‘It’s	the	only	dry	land	anywhere	in	sight,’	Fist	Keneb	said.	‘Can	any	mage
here	banish	the	ghosts?	No?	Hood’s	breath.	Beak,	what	are	they	capable	of
doing	to	us	anyway?’
‘They’ll	eat	into	our	brains	and	make	us	think	terrible	things,	so	that	we	all
end	up	killing	each	other.	That’s	the	thing	with	the	Just	Wars	–	they	never	end
and	never	will	because	Justice	is	a	weak	god	with	too	many	names.	The	Liosan
called	it	Serkanos	and	the	Assail	called	it	Rynthan.	Anyway,	no	matter	what
language	it	spoke,	its	followers	could	not	understand	it.	A	mystery	language,
which	is	why	it	has	no	power	because	all	its	followers	believe	the	wrong	things
–	things	they	just	make	up	and	nobody	can	agree	and	that’s	why	the	wars	never
end.’	Beak	paused,	looking	around	at	the	blank	faces,	then	he	shrugged.	‘I	don’t
know,	maybe	if	I	talk	to	them.	Summon	one	and	we	can	talk	to	it.’
‘I	think	not,	Beak,’	the	Fist	said.	‘On	your	feet,	soldiers,	we’re	moving	on.’
No-one	complained.
Faradan	Sort	drew	Beak	to	one	side.	‘We’re	leaving	them	now,’	she	said.
‘Which	direction	do	you	think	will	get	us	out	of	this	the	quickest?’
Beak	pointed	north.


‘How	far?’
‘A	thousand	paces.	That’s	where	the	edge	of	the	old	Omtose	Phellack	is.’
She	watched	Keneb	and	his	squads	move	down	from	the	island,	splashing
their	way	further	inland,	due	west.	‘How	long	before	they’re	out	of	this
heading	in	that	direction	–	heading	west,	I	mean?’
‘Maybe	twelve	hundred	paces,	if	they	stay	out	of	the	river.’
She	grunted.	‘Two	hundred	extra	steps	won’t	kill	them.	All	right,	Beak,
north	it	is.	Lead	on.’
‘Aye,	Captain.	We	can	use	the	old	walkway.’
She	laughed	then.	Beak	had	no	idea	why.
	
There	was	a	sound	in	war	that	came	during	sieges,	moments	before	an	assault
on	the	walls.	The	massed	onagers,	ballistae	and	catapults	were	let	loose	in	a
single	salvo.	The	huge	missiles	striking	the	stone	walls,	the	fortifications	and
the	buildings	raised	a	chaotic	chorus	of	exploding	stone	and	brick,	shattered
tiles	and	collapsing	rooftops.	The	air	itself	seemed	to	shiver,	as	if	recoiling
from	the	violence.
Sergeant	Cord	stood	on	the	promontory,	leaning	into	the	fierce,	icy	wind,
and	thought	of	that	sound	as	he	stared	across	at	the	churning	bergs	of	ice
warring	across	the	strait.	Like	a	city	tumbling	down,	enormous	sections
looming	over	where	Fent	Reach	used	to	be	were	splitting	away,	in	momentary
silence,	until	the	waves	of	concussion	rolled	over	the	choppy	waves	of	the	sea,
arriving	in	thunder.	Roiling	silver	clouds,	gouts	of	foamy	water—
‘A	mountain	range	in	its	death-throes,’	muttered	Ebron	at	his	side.
‘War	machines	pounding	a	city	wall,’	Cord	countered.
‘A	frozen	storm,’	said	Limp	behind	them.
‘You	all	have	it	wrong,’	interjected	Crump	through	chattering	teeth.	‘It’s
like	big	pieces	of	ice…falling	down.’
‘That’s…simply	stunning,	Crump,’	said	Corporal	Shard.	‘You’re	a	Hooddamned	poet.	I	cannot	believe	the	Mott	Irregulars	ever	let	you	get	away.	No,
truly,	Crump.	I	cannot	believe	it.’
‘Well,	it’s	not	like	they	had	any	choice,’	the	tall,	knock-kneed	sapper	said,
rubbing	vigorously	at	both	sides	of	his	jaw	before	adding,	‘I	mean,	I	left	when
no-one	was	looking.	I	used	a	fish	spine	to	pick	the	manacles	–	you	can’t	arrest
a	High	Marshal	anyhow.	I	kept	telling	them.	You	can’t.	It’s	not	allowed.’
Cord	turned	to	his	corporal.	‘Any	better	luck	at	talking	to	your	sister?	Is
she	getting	tired	holding	all	this	back?	We	can’t	tell.	Widdershins	doesn’t	even
know	how	she’s	doing	it	in	the	first	place,	so	he	can’t	help.’


‘Got	no	answers	for	you,	Sergeant.	She	doesn’t	talk	to	me	either.	I	don’t
know	–	she	doesn’t	look	tired,	but	she	hardly	sleeps	any	more	anyway.	There’s
not	much	I	recognize	in	Sinn	these	days.	Not	since	Y’Ghatan.’
Cord	thought	about	this	for	a	time,	then	he	nodded.	‘I’m	sending
Widdershins	back.	The	Adjunct	should	be	landing	in	the	Fort	by	now.’
‘She	has,’	said	Ebron,	pulling	at	his	nose	as	if	to	confirm	it	hadn’t	frozen
off.	Like	Widdershins,	the	squad	mage	had	no	idea	how	Sinn	was	managing	to
fend	off	mountains	of	ice.	A	bad	jolt	to	his	confidence,	and	it	showed.	‘The
harbour ’s	blocked,	the	thug	in	charge	is	contained.	Everything	is	going	as
planned.’
A	grunt	from	Limp.	‘Glad	you’re	not	the	superstitious	type,	Ebron.	As	for
me,	I’m	getting	down	off	this	spine	before	I	slip	and	blow	a	knee.’
Shard	laughed.	‘You’re	just	about	due,	Limp.’
‘Thanks,	Corporal.	I	really	do	appreciate	your	concern.’
‘Concern	is	right.	I	got	five	imperials	on	you	living	up	to	your	name
before	the	month’s	out.’
‘Bastard.’
‘Shard,’	Cord	said	after	they’d	watched	–	with	some	amusement	–	Limp
gingerly	retreat	from	the	promontory,	‘where	is	Sinn	now?’
‘In	that	old	lighthouse,’	the	corporal	replied.
‘All	right.	Let’s	get	under	some	cover	ourselves	–	there’s	more	freezing
rain	on	the	way.’
‘That’s	just	it,’	Ebron	said	in	sudden	anger.	‘She’s	not	just	holding	the	ice
back,	Sergeant.	She’s	killing	it.	And	the	water ’s	rising	and	rising	fast.’
‘Thought	it	was	all	dying	anyway.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	But	she’s	quickened	that	up	–	she	just	took	apart	that
Omtose	Phellack	like	reeds	from	a	broken	basket	–	but	she	didn’t	throw	’em
away,	no,	she’s	weaving	something	else.’
Cord	glared	at	his	mage.	‘Sinn	ain’t	the	only	one	not	talking.	What	do	you
mean	by	“something	else”?’
‘I	don’t	know!	Hood’s	balls,	I	don’t!’
‘There’s	no	baskets	over	there,’	Crump	said.	‘Not	that	I	can	see.	Marsh
pigs,	you	got	good	eyes,	Ebron.	Even	when	I	squint	with	one	eye,	I	don’t	see
—’
‘That’s	enough,	Sapper,’	Cord	cut	in.	He	studied	Ebron	for	a	moment
longer,	then	turned	away.	‘Come	on,	I	got	a	block	of	ice	between	my	legs	and
that’s	the	warmest	part	of	me.’
They	headed	down	towards	the	fisher ’s	shack	they	used	as	their	base.
‘You	should	get	rid	of	it,	Sergeant,’	Crump	said.


‘What?’
‘That	block	of	ice.	Or	use	your	hands,	at	least.’
‘Thanks,	Crump,	but	I	ain’t	that	desperate	yet.’
	
It	had	been	a	comfortable	life,	all	things	considered.	True,	Malaz	City	was
hardly	a	jewel	of	the	empire,	but	at	least	it	wasn’t	likely	to	fall	apart	and	sink	in
a	storm.	And	he’d	had	no	real	complaints	about	the	company	he	kept.	Coop’s
had	its	assortment	of	fools,	enough	to	make	Withal	feel	as	if	he	belonged.
Braven	Tooth.	Temper.	Banaschar	–	and	at	least	Banaschar	was	here,	the
one	familiar	face	beyond	a	trio	of	Nachts	and,	of	course,	his	wife.	Of	course.
Her.	And	though	an	Elder	God	had	told	him	to	wait,	the	Meckros	blacksmith
would	have	been	content	to	see	that	waiting	last	for	ever.	Damn	the	gods,
anyway,	with	their	constant	meddling,	they	way	they	just	use	us.	As	they	like.
Even	after	what	had	to	be	a	year	spent	on	the	same	ship	as	the	Adjunct,
Withal	could	not	claim	to	know	her.	True,	there	had	been	that	prolonged	period
of	grief	–	Tavore’s	lover	had	been	killed	in	Malaz	City,	he’d	been	told	–	and
the	Adjunct	had	seemed,	for	a	time,	like	a	woman	more	dead	than	alive.
If	she	was	now	back	to	herself,	then,	well,	her	self	wasn’t	much.
The	gods	didn’t	care.	They’d	decided	to	use	her	as	much	as	they	had	used
him.	He	could	see	it,	that	bleak	awareness	in	her	unremarkable	eyes.	And	if	she
had	decided	to	stand	against	them,	then	she	stood	alone.
I	would	never	have	the	courage	for	that.	Not	even	close.	But	maybe,	to	do
what	she’s	doing,	she	has	to	make	herself	less	than	human.	More	than	human?
Choosing	to	be	less	to	be	more,	perhaps.	So	many	here	might	see	her	as
surrounded	by	allies.	Allies	such	as	Withal	himself,	Banaschar,	Sandalath,	Sinn
and	Keneb.	But	he	knew	better.	We	all	watch.	Waiting.	Wondering.
Undecided.
Is	this	what	you	wanted,	Mael?	To	deliver	me	to	her?	Yes,	she	was	who	I
was	waiting	for.
Leading,	inevitably,	to	that	most	perplexing	question:	But	why	me?
True,	he	could	tell	her	of	the	sword.	His	sword.	The	tool	he	had	hammered
and	pounded	into	life	for	the	Crippled	God.	But	there	was	no	answering	that
weapon.
Yet	the	Adjunct	was	undeterred.	Choosing	a	war	not	even	her	soldiers
wanted.	With	the	aim	of	bringing	down	an	empire.	And	the	Emperor	who	held
that	sword	in	his	hands.	An	Emperor	driven	mad	by	his	own	power.	Another
tool	of	the	gods.
It	was	hard	to	feel	easy	about	all	this.	Hard	to	find	any	confidence	in	the


Adjunct’s	bold	decision.	The	marines	had	been	flung	onto	the	Letherii	shore,
not	a	single	landing	en	masse,	in	strength,	but	one	scattered,	clandestine,	at
night.	Then,	as	if	to	defy	the	tactic,	the	transports	had	been	set	aflame.
An	announcement	to	be	sure.
We	are	here.	Find	us,	if	you	dare.	But	be	assured,	in	time	we	will	find	you.
While	most	of	another	legion	remained	in	ships	well	off	the	Letherii	coast.
And	the	Adjunct	alone	knew	where	the	Khundryl	had	gone.	And	most	of	the
Perish.
‘You	have	taken	to	brooding,	husband.’
Withal	slowly	lifted	his	head	and	regarded	the	onyx-skinned	woman	sitting
opposite	him	in	the	cabin.	‘I	am	a	man	of	deep	thoughts,’	he	said.
‘You’re	a	lazy	toad	trapped	in	a	pit	of	self-obsession.’
‘That,	too.’
‘We	will	soon	be	ashore.	I	would	have	thought	you’d	be	eager	at	the
gunnel,	given	all	your	groaning	and	moaning.	Mother	Dark	knows,	I	would
never	have	known	you	for	a	Meckros	with	your	abiding	hatred	of	the	sea.’
‘Abiding	hatred,	is	it?	No,	more	like…frustration.’	He	lifted	his	huge
hands.	‘Repairing	ships	is	a	speciality.	But	it’s	not	mine.	I	need	to	be	back	doing
what	I	do	best,	wife.’
‘Horseshoes?’
‘Precisely.’
‘Shield-rims?	Dagger-hilts?	Swords?’
‘If	need	be.’
‘Armies	always	drag	smiths	with	them.’
‘Not	my	speciality.’
‘Rubbish.	You	can	fold	iron	into	a	blade	as	well	as	any	weaponsmith.’
‘Seen	plenty	of	’em,	have	you?’
‘With	a	life	as	long	as	mine	has	been,	I’ve	seen	too	much	of	everything.
Now,	our	young	miserable	charges	are	probably	down	in	the	hold	again.	Will
you	get	them	or	will	I?’
‘Is	it	truly	time	to	leave?’
‘I	think	the	Adjunct	is	already	off.’
‘You	go.	They	still	make	my	skin	crawl.’
She	rose.	‘You	lack	sympathy,	which	is	characteristic	of	self-obsession.
These	Tiste	Andii	are	young,	Withal.	Abandoned	first	by	Anomander	Rake.
Then	by	Andarist.	Brothers	and	sisters	fallen	in	pointless	battle.	Too	many
losses	–	they	are	caught	in	the	fragility	of	the	world,	in	the	despair	it	delivers
to	their	souls.’
‘Privilege	of	the	young,	to	wallow	in	world-weary	cynicism.’


‘Unlike	your	deep	thoughts.’
‘Completely	unlike	my	deep	thoughts,	Sand.’
‘You	think	they	have	not	earned	that	privilege?’
He	could	sense	her	growing	ire.	She	was,	after	all,	no	less	Tiste	Andii	than
they	were.	Some	things	needed	steering	around.	Volcanic	island.	Floating
mountain	of	ice.	Sea	of	fire.	And	Sandalath	Drukorlat’s	list	of	sensitivities.	‘I
suppose	they	have,’	he	replied	carefully.	‘But	since	when	was	cynicism	a
virtue?	Besides,	it	gets	damned	tiring.’
‘No	argument	there,’	she	said	in	a	deadly	tone,	then	turned	and	marched
out.
‘Brooding’s	different,’	he	muttered	to	the	empty	chair	across	from	him.
‘Could	be	any	subject,	for	one	thing.	A	subject	not	at	all	cynical.	Like	the
meddling	of	the	gods	–	no,	all	right,	not	like	that	one.	Smithing,	yes.
Horseshoes.	Nothing	cynical	about	horseshoes…I	don’t	think.	Sure.	Keeping
horses	comfortable.	So	they	can	gallop	into	battle	and	die	horribly.’	He	fell
silent.	Scowling.

Phaed’s	flat,	heart-shaped	face	was	the	colour	of	smudged	slate,	a	hue
unfortunate	in	its	lifelessness.	Her	eyes	were	flat,	except	when	filled	with
venom,	which	they	were	now	as	they	rested	on	Sandalath	Drukorlat’s	back	as
the	older	woman	spoke	to	the	others.
Nimander	Golit	could	see	the	young	woman	he	called	his	sister	from	the
corner	of	his	eye,	and	he	wondered	yet	again	at	the	source	of	Phaed’s
unquenchable	malice,	which	had	been	there,	as	far	as	he	could	recall,	from	her
very	earliest	days.	Empathy	did	not	exist	within	her,	and	in	its	absence
something	cold	now	thrived,	promising	a	kind	of	brutal	glee	at	every	victory,
real	or	imagined,	obvious	or	subtle.
There	was	nothing	easy	in	this	young,	beautiful	woman.	It	began	with	the
very	first	impression	a	stranger	had	upon	seeing	her,	a	kind	of	natural	glamour
that	could	take	one’s	breath	away.	The	perfection	of	art,	the	wordless	language
of	the	romantic.
This	initial	moment	was	short-lived.	It	usually	died	following	the	first
polite	query,	which	Phaed	invariably	met	with	cold	silence.	A	silence	that
transformed	that	wordless	language,	dispelling	all	notions	of	romance,	and
filling	the	vast,	prolonged	absence	of	decorum	with	bald	contempt.
Spite	was	reserved	for	those	who	saw	her	truly,	and	it	was	in	these
instances	that	Nimander	felt	a	chill	of	premonition,	for	he	knew	that	Phaed	was


capable	of	murder.	Woe	to	the	sharp	observer	who	saw,	unflinchingly,	through
to	her	soul	–	to	that	trembling	knot	of	darkness	veined	with	unimaginable	fears
–	then	chose	to	disguise	nothing	of	that	awareness.
Nimander	had	long	since	learned	to	affect	a	kind	of	innocence	when	with
Phaed,	quick	with	a	relaxed	smile	which	seemed	to	put	her	at	ease.	It	was	at
these	moments,	alas,	when	she	was	wont	to	confide	her	cruel	sentiments,
whispering	elaborate	schemes	of	vengeance	against	a	host	of	slights.
Sandalath	Drukorlat	was	nothing	if	not	perceptive,	which	was	hardly
surprising.	She	had	lived	centuries	upon	centuries.	She	had	seen	all	manner	of
creatures,	from	the	honourable	to	the	demonic.	It	had	not	taken	her	long	to
decide	towards	which	end	of	the	spectrum	Phaed	belonged.	She	had	answered
cold	regard	with	her	own;	the	contempt	flung	her	way	was	like	pebbles	thrown
at	a	warrior ’s	shield,	raising	not	even	a	scratch.	And,	most	cutting	riposte	of
all,	she	had	displayed	amusement	at	Phaed’s	mute	histrionics,	even	unto	overt
mockery.	These,	then,	were	the	deep	wounds	suppurating	in	Phaed’s	soul,
delivered	by	the	woman	who	now	stood	as	a	surrogate	mother	to	them	all.
And	now,	Nimander	knew,	heart-faced	Phaed	was	planning	matricide.
He	admitted	to	his	own	doldrums	–	long	periods	of	flat	indifference	–	as	if
none	of	this	was	in	fact	worth	thinking	about.	He	had	his	private	host	of
demons,	after	all,	none	of	which	seemed	inclined	to	simply	fade	away.
Unperturbed	by	the	occasional	neglect,	they	played	on	in	their	dark	games,	and
the	modest	hoard	of	wealth	that	made	up	Nimander ’s	life	went	back	and	forth,
until	the	scales	spun	without	surcease.	Clashing	discord	and	chaos	to	mark	the
triumphant	cries,	the	hissed	curses,	the	careless	scattering	of	coin.	He	often	felt
numbed,	deafened.
It	may	have	been	that	these	were	the	traits	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	Introverts
devoid	of	introspection.	Darkness	in	the	blood.	Chimerae,	even	unto	ourselves.
He’d	wanted	to	care	about	the	throne	they	had	been	defending,	the	one	that
Andarist	died	for,	and	he	had	led	his	charges	into	that	savage	battle	without
hesitation.	Perhaps,	even,	with	true	eagerness.
Rush	to	death.	The	longer	one	lives,	the	less	valued	is	that	life.	Why	is	that?
But	that	would	be	introspection,	wouldn’t	it?	Too	trying	a	task,	pursuing
such	questions.	Easier	to	simply	follow	the	commands	of	others.	Another	trait
of	his	kind,	this	comfort	in	following?	Yet	who	stood	among	the	Tiste	Andii	as
symbols	of	respect	and	awe?	Not	young	warriors	like	Nimander	Golit.	Not
wicked	Phaed	and	her	vile	ambitions.	Anomander	Rake,	who	walked	away.
Andarist,	his	brother,	who	did	not.	Silchas	Ruin	–	ah,	such	a	family!	Clearly
unique	among	the	brood	of	the	Mother.	They	lived	larger,	then,	in	great	drama.
Lives	tense	and	humming	like	bowstrings,	the	ferocity	of	truth	in	their	every


word,	the	hard,	cruel	exchanges	that	drove	them	apart	when	nothing	else
would.	Not	even	Mother	Dark’s	turning	away.	Their	early	lives	were	poems	of
epic	grandeur.	And	we?	We	are	nothing.	Softened,	blunted,	confused	into
obscurity.	We	have	lost	our	simplicity,	lost	its	purity.	We	are	the	Dark	without
mystery.
Sandalath	Drukorlat	–	who	had	lived	in	those	ancient	times	and	must	grieve
in	her	soul	for	the	fallen	Tiste	Andii	–	now	turned	about	and	with	a	gesture
beckoned	the	motley	survivors	of	Drift	Avalii	to	follow.	Onto	the	deck	–	‘you
have	hair,	Nimander,	the	colour	of	starlight’	–	to	look	upon	this	squalid
harbour	town	that	would	be	their	home	for	the	next	little	eternity,	to	use
Phaed’s	hissing	words.
‘It	used	to	be	a	prison,	this	island.	Full	of	rapists	and	murderers.’	A	sudden
look	into	his	eyes,	as	if	seeking	something,	then	she	gave	him	a	fleeting	smile
that	was	little	more	than	a	showing	of	teeth	and	said,	‘A	good	place	for	murder.’
Words	that,	millennia	past,	could	have	triggered	a	civil	war	or	worse,	the
fury	of	Mother	Dark	herself.	Words,	then,	that	barely	stirred	the	calm	repose	of
Nimander ’s	indifference.
‘You	have	hair,	Nimander,	the	colour	of—’	But	the	past	was	dead.	Drift
Avalii.	Our	very	own	prison	isle,	where	we	learned	about	dying.
And	the	terrible	price	of	following.
Where	we	learned	that	love	does	not	belong	in	this	world.


Chapter	Fourteen

I	took	the	stone	bowl
in	both	hands
and	poured	out	my	time
onto	the	ground
drowning	hapless	insects
feeding	the	weeds
until	the	sun	stood
looking	down
and	stole	the	stain.
Seeing	in	the	vessel’s	cup
a	thousand	cracks
a	thousand	cracks
I	looked	back
the	way	I	came
and	saw	a	trail	green
with	memories	lost
whoever	made	this	bowl
was	a	fool	but	the	greater
he	who	carried	it.
Stone	Bowl
Fisher	kel	Tath
The	pitched	sweep	of	ice	had	gone	through	successive	thaws	and	freezes	until
its	surface	was	pocked	and	sculpted	like	the	colourless	bark	of	some	vast
toppled	tree.	The	wind,	alternating	between	warm	and	cold,	moaned	a	chorus
of	forlorn	voices	through	this	muricated	surface,	and	it	seemed	to	Hedge	that
with	each	crunching	stamp	of	his	boot,	a	lone	cry	was	silenced	for	ever.	The
thought	left	him	feeling	morose,	and	this	motley	scatter	of	refuse	dotting	the
plain	of	ice	and	granulated	snow	only	made	things	worse.


Detritus	of	Jaghut	lives,	slowly	rising	like	stones	in	a	farmer ’s	field.
Mundane	objects	to	bear	witness	to	an	entire	people	–	if	only	he	could	make
sense	of	them,	could	somehow	assemble	together	all	these	disparate	pieces.
Ghosts,	he	now	believed,	existed	in	a	perpetually	confused	state,	the	way	before
them	an	endless	vista	strewn	with	meaningless	dross	–	the	truths	of	living	were
secrets,	the	physicality	of	facts	for	ever	withheld.	A	ghost	could	reach	but
could	not	touch,	could	move	this	and	that,	but	never	be	moved	by	them.	Some
essence	of	empathy	had	vanished	–	but	no,	empathy	wasn’t	the	right	word.	He
could	feel,	after	all.	The	way	he	used	to,	when	he	had	been	alive.	Emotions
swam	waters	both	shallow	and	deep.	Tactile	empathy	perhaps	was	closer	to	the
sense	he	sought.	The	comfort	of	mutual	resistance.
He	had	willed	himself	this	shape,	this	body	in	which	he	now	dwelt,	walking
heavily	alongside	the	withered,	animate	carcass	that	was	Emroth.	And	it
seemed	he	could	conjure	a	kind	of	physical	continuity	with	everything	around
him	–	like	the	crunching	of	his	feet	–	but	he	now	wondered	if	that	continuity
was	a	delusion,	as	if	in	picking	up	this	curved	shell	of	some	ancient	broken	pot
just	ahead	of	him	he	was	not	in	truth	picking	up	its	ghost.	But	for	that
revelation	his	eyes	were	blind,	the	senses	of	touch	and	sound	were	deceits,	and
he	was	as	lost	as	an	echo.
They	continued	trudging	across	this	plateau,	beneath	deep	blue	skies	where
stars	glittered	high	in	the	vault	directly	overhead,	a	world	of	ice	seemingly
without	end.	The	scree	of	garbage	accompanied	them	on	all	sides.	Fragments
of	cloth	or	clothing	or	perhaps	tapestry,	potsherds,	eating	utensils,	arcane	tools
of	wood	or	ground	stone,	the	piece	of	a	musical	instrument	that	involved
strings	and	raised	finger-drums,	the	splintered	leg	of	a	wooden	chair	or	stool.
No	weapons,	not	in	days,	and	the	one	they	had	discovered	early	on	–	a	spear
shaft	–	had	been	Imass.
Jaghut	had	died	on	this	ice.	Slaughtered.	Emroth	had	said	as	much.	But
there	were	no	bodies,	and	there	had	been	no	explanation	forthcoming	from	the
T’lan	Imass.	Collected	then,	Hedge	surmised,	perhaps	by	a	survivor.	Did	the
Jaghut	practise	ritual	interment?	He	had	no	idea.	In	all	his	travels,	he	could	not
once	recall	talk	of	a	Jaghut	tomb	or	burial	ground.	If	they	did	such	things,	they
kept	them	to	themselves.
But	when	they	died	here,	they	had	been	on	the	run.	Some	of	those	swaths	of
material	were	from	tents.	Flesh	and	blood	Imass	did	not	pursue	them	–	not
across	this	lifeless	ice.	No,	they	must	have	been	T’lan.	Of	the	Ritual.	Like
Emroth	here.
‘So,’	Hedge	said,	his	own	voice	startlingly	loud	in	his	ears,	‘were	you
involved	in	this	hunt,	Emroth?’


‘I	cannot	be	certain,’	she	replied	after	a	long	moment.	‘It	is	possible.’
‘One	scene	of	slaughter	looks	pretty	much	the	same	as	the	next,	right?’
‘Yes.	That	is	true.’
Her	agreement	left	him	feeling	even	more	depressed.
‘There	is	something	ahead,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said.	‘We	are,	I	believe,	about
to	discover	the	answer	to	the	mystery.’
‘What	mystery?’
‘The	absence	of	bodies.’
‘Oh,	that	mystery.’
Night	came	abruptly	to	this	place,	like	the	snuffing	out	of	a	candle.	The
sun,	which	circled	just	above	the	horizon	through	the	day,	would	suddenly
tumble,	like	a	rolling	ball,	beneath	the	gleaming,	blood-hued	skyline.	And	the
black	sky	would	fill	with	stars	that	only	faded	with	the	coming	of	strangely
coloured	brushstrokes	of	light,	spanning	the	vault,	that	hissed	like	sprinkled
fragments	of	fine	glass.
Hedge	sensed	that	night	was	close,	as	the	wind’s	pockets	of	warmth	grew
more	infrequent,	the	ember	cast	to	what	he	assumed	was	west	deepening	into	a
shade	both	lurid	and	baleful.
He	could	now	see	what	had	caught	Emroth’s	attention.	A	hump	on	the
plateau,	ringed	in	dark	objects.	The	shape	rising	from	the	centre	of	that	hillock
at	first	looked	like	a	spar	of	ice,	but	as	they	neared,	Hedge	saw	that	its	core	was
dark,	and	that	darkness	reached	down	to	the	ground.
The	objects	surrounding	the	rise	were	cloth-swaddled	bodies,	many	of
them	pitifully	small.
As	the	day’s	light	suddenly	dropped	away,	night	announced	on	a	gust	of
chill	wind,	Hedge	and	Emroth	halted	just	before	the	hump.
The	upthrust	spar	was	in	fact	a	throne	of	ice,	and	on	it	sat	the	frozen	corpse
of	a	male	Jaghut.	Mummified	by	cold	and	desiccating	winds,	it	nevertheless
presented	an	imposing	if	ghastly	figure,	a	figure	of	domination,	the	head	tilted
slightly	downward,	as	if	surveying	a	ring	of	permanently	supine	subjects.
‘Death	observing	death,’	Hedge	muttered.	‘How	damned	appropriate.	He
collected	the	bodies,	then	sat	down	and	just	died	with	them.	Gave	up.	No
thoughts	of	vengeance,	no	dreams	of	resurrection.	Here’s	your	dread	enemy,
Emroth.’
‘More	than	you	realize,’	the	T’lan	Imass	replied.
She	moved	on,	edging	round	the	edifice,	her	hide-wrapped	feet	plunging
through	the	crust	of	brittle	ice	in	small	sparkling	puffs	of	powdery	snow.
Hedge	stared	up	at	the	Jaghut	on	his	half-melted	throne.	All	thrones	should
be	made	of	ice,	I	think.


Sit	on	that	numb	arse,	sinking	down	and	down,	with	the	puddle	of
dissolution	getting	ever	wider	around	you.	Sit,	dear	ruler,	and	tell	me	all	your
grand	designs.
Of	course,	the	throne	wasn’t	the	only	thing	falling	apart	up	there.	The
Jaghut’s	green,	leathery	skin	had	sloughed	away	on	the	forehead,	revealing
sickly	bone,	almost	luminescent	in	the	gloom;	and	on	the	points	of	the
shoulders	the	skin	was	frayed,	with	the	polished	knobs	of	the	shoulder	bones
showing	through.	Similar	gleams	from	the	knuckles	of	both	hands	where	they
rested	on	the	now-tilted	arms	of	the	chair.
Hedge’s	gaze	returned	to	the	face.	Black,	sunken	pits	for	eyes,	a	nose	broad
and	smashed	flat,	tusks	of	black	silver.	I	thought	these	things	never	quite	died.
Needed	big	rocks	on	them	to	keep	them	from	getting	back	up.	Or	chopped	to
pieces	and	every	piece	planted	under	a	boulder.
I	didn’t	think	they	died	this	way	at	all.
He	shook	himself	and	set	off	after	Emroth.
They	would	walk	through	the	night.	Camps,	meals	and	sleeping	were	for
still-breathing	folk,	after	all.
‘Emroth!’
The	head	creaked	round.
‘That	damned	thing	back	there’s	not	still	alive,	is	it?’
‘No.	The	spirit	left.’
‘Just…left?’
‘Yes.’
‘Isn’t	that,	uh,	unusual?’
‘The	Throne	of	Ice	was	dying.	Is	dying	still.	There	was	–	is	–	nothing	left
to	rule,	ghost.	Would	you	have	him	sit	there	for	ever?’	She	did	not	seem
inclined	to	await	a	reply,	for	she	then	said,	‘I	have	not	been	here	before,	Hedge
of	the	Bridgeburners.	For	I	would	have	known.’
‘Known	what,	Emroth?’
‘I	have	never	before	seen	the	true	Throne	of	Ice,	in	the	heart	of	the	Hold.
The	very	heart	of	the	Jaghut	realm.’
Hedge	glanced	back.	The	true	Throne	of	Ice?	‘Who	–	who	was	he,
Emroth?’
But	she	did	not	give	answer.
After	a	time,	however,	he	thought	he	knew.	Had	always	known.
He	kicked	aside	a	broken	pot,	watched	it	skid,	roll,	then	wobble	to	a	halt.
King	on	your	melting	throne,	you	drew	a	breath,	then	let	it	go.	And…never
again.	Simple.	Easy.	When	you	are	the	last	of	your	kind,	and	you	release	that
last	breath,	then	it	is	the	breath	of	extinction.


And	it	rides	the	wind.
Every	wind.
‘Emroth,	there	was	a	scholar	in	Malaz	City	–	a	miserable	old	bastard
named	Obo	–	who	claimed	he	was	witness	to	the	death	of	a	star.	And	when	the
charts	were	compared	again,	against	the	night	sky,	well,	one	light	was	gone.’
‘The	stars	have	changed	since	my	mortal	life,	ghost.’
‘Some	have	gone	out?’
‘Yes.’
‘As	in…died?’
‘The	Bonecasters	could	not	agree	on	this,’	she	said.	‘Another	observation
offered	a	different	possibility.	The	stars	are	moving	away	from	us,	Hedge	of
the	Bridgeburners.	Perhaps	those	we	no	longer	see	have	gone	too	far	for	our
eyes.’
‘Obo’s	star	was	pretty	bright	–	wouldn’t	it	have	faded	first,	over	a	long
time,	before	going	out?’
‘Perhaps	both	answers	are	true.	Stars	die.	Stars	move	away.’
‘So,	did	that	Jaghut	die,	or	did	he	move	away?’
‘Your	question	makes	no	sense.’
Really?	Hedge	barked	a	laugh.	‘You’re	a	damned	bad	liar,	Emroth.’
‘This,’	she	said,	‘is	not	a	perfect	world.’
The	swaths	of	colours	sweeping	overhead	hissed	softly,	while	around	them
the	wind	plucked	at	tufts	of	cloth	and	fur,	moaning	through	miniature	gullies
and	caverns	of	ice,	and	closer	still,	a	sound	shared	by	ghost	and	T’lan	Imass,
the	crackling	destruction	of	their	footsteps	across	the	plateau.

Onrack	knelt	beside	the	stream,	plunging	his	hands	into	the	icy	water,	then
lifting	them	clear	again	to	watch	the	runnels	trickling	down.	The	wonder	had
not	left	his	dark	brown	eyes	since	his	transformation,	since	the	miracle	of	a
life	regained.
A	man	could	have	no	heart	if	he	felt	nothing	watching	this	rebirth,	this
innocent	joy	in	a	savage	warrior	who	had	been	dead	a	hundred	thousand	years.
He	picked	up	polished	stones	as	if	they	were	treasure,	ran	blunt,	calloused
fingertips	across	swaths	of	lichen	and	moss,	brought	to	his	heavy	lips	a
discarded	antler	to	taste	with	his	tongue,	to	draw	in	its	burnt-hair	scent.
Walking	through	the	thorny	brush	of	some	arctic	rose,	Onrack	had	then	halted,
with	a	cry	of	astonishment,	upon	seeing	red	scratches	on	his	bowed	shins.
The	Imass	was,	Trull	Sengar	reminded	himself	yet	again,	nothing	–


nothing	–	like	what	he	would	have	imagined	him	to	be.	Virtually	hairless
everywhere	barring	the	brown,	almost	black	mane	sweeping	down	past	his
broad	shoulders.	In	the	days	since	they	had	come	to	this	strange	realm,	a	beard
had	begun,	thin	along	Onrack’s	jawline	and	above	his	mouth,	the	bristles	widespaced	and	black	as	a	boar ’s;	but	not	growing	at	all	on	the	cheeks,	or	the	neck.
The	features	of	the	face	were	broad	and	flat,	dominated	by	a	flaring	nose	with
a	pronounced	bridge,	like	a	knuckle	bone	between	the	wide-spaced,	deeply
inset	eyes.	The	heavy	ridge	over	those	eyes	was	made	all	the	more	robust	by
the	sparseness	of	the	eyebrows.
Although	not	particularly	tall,	Onrack	nevertheless	seemed	huge.	Ropy
muscles	bound	to	thick	bone,	the	arms	elongated,	the	hands	wide	but	the
fingers	stubby.	The	legs	were	disproportionately	short,	bowed	so	that	the	knees
were	almost	as	far	out	to	the	sides	as	his	hips.	Yet	Onrack	moved	with	lithe
stealth,	furtive	as	prey,	eyes	flicking	in	every	direction,	head	tilting,	nostrils
flaring	as	he	picked	up	scents	on	the	wind.	Prey,	yet	now	he	needed	to	satisfy	a
prodigious	appetite,	and	when	Onrack	hunted,	it	was	with	discipline,	a	singlemindedness	that	was	fierce	to	witness.
This	world	was	his,	in	every	way.	A	blend	of	tundra	to	the	north	and	a
treeline	in	the	south	that	reached	up	every	now	and	then	to	the	very	shadow	of
the	huge	glaciers	stretching	down	the	valleys.	The	forest	was	a	confused	mix
of	deciduous	and	coniferous	trees,	broken	with	ravines	and	tumbled	rocks,
springs	of	clean	water	and	boggy	sinkholes.	The	branches	swarmed	with	birds,
their	incessant	chatter	at	times	overwhelming	all	else.
Along	the	edges	there	were	trails.	Caribou	moved	haphazardly	between
forest	and	tundra	in	their	grazing.	Closer	to	the	ice,	on	higher	ground	where
bedrock	was	exposed,	there	were	goat-like	creatures,	scampering	up	ledges	to
look	back	down	on	the	two-legged	strangers	passing	through	their	domain.
Onrack	had	disappeared	into	the	forest	again	and	again	in	the	first	week	of
their	wandering.	Each	time	he	reappeared	his	toolkit	had	expanded.	A	wooden
shaft,	the	point	of	which	he	hardened	in	the	fire	of	their	camp;	vines	and	reeds
from	which	he	fashioned	snares,	and	nets	that	he	then	attached	to	the	other	end
of	the	spear,	displaying	impressive	skill	at	trapping	birds	on	the	wing.
From	the	small	mammals	caught	in	his	nightly	snares	he	assembled	skins
and	gut.	With	the	stomachs	and	intestines	of	hares	he	made	floats	for	the
weighted	nets	he	strung	across	streams,	and	from	the	grayling	and	sturgeon
harvested	he	gathered	numerous	spines	which	he	then	used	to	sew	together	the
hides,	fashioning	a	bag.	He	collected	charcoal	and	tree	sap,	lichens,	mosses,
tubers,	feathers	and	small	pouches	of	animal	fat,	all	of	which	went	into	the	hide
bag.


But	all	of	these	things	were	as	nothing	when	compared	with	the
burgeoning	of	the	man	himself.	A	face	Trull	had	known	only	as	dried	skin	taut
over	shattered	bone	was	now	animate	with	expression,	and	it	was	as	if	Trull
had	been	blind	to	his	friend	in	the	time	before,	when	even	vocal	inflection	had
been	flat	and	lifeless.
Onrack	now	smiled.	A	sudden	lighting	of	genuine	pleasure	that	not	only
took	Trull’s	breath	away	–	and,	he	admitted,	often	filled	his	eyes	with	tears	–
but	could	silence	Quick	Ben	as	well,	the	wizard’s	dark	face	suddenly	evincing
ineffable	wonder,	an	expression	that	a	well-meaning	adult	might	have	upon
seeing	a	child	at	play.
Everything	about	this	Imass	invited	friendship,	as	if	his	smile	alone	cast
some	sorcery,	a	geas	of	charm,	to	which	unquestioning	loyalty	was	the	only
possible	response.	This	glamour	Trull	Sengar	had	no	interest	in	resisting.
Onrack,	after	all,	is	the	one	brother	I	chose.	But	the	Tiste	Edur	could	see,	on
occasion,	the	gleam	of	suspicion	in	the	Malazan	wizard,	as	if	Quick	Ben	was
catching	himself	at	the	edge	of	some	inner	precipice,	some	slide	into	a	place
Ben	could	not,	by	his	very	nature,	wholly	trust.
Trull	felt	no	worry;	he	could	see	that	Onrack	was	not	interested	in
manipulating	his	companions.	His	was	a	spirit	contained	within	itself,	a	spirit
that	had	emerged	from	a	haunted	place	and	was	haunted	no	longer.	Dead	in	a
demonic	nightmare.	Reborn	into	a	paradise.	Onrack,	my	friend,	you	are
redeemed,	and	you	know	it,	with	every	sense	–	with	your	touch,	your	vision,
with	the	scents	of	the	land	and	the	songs	in	the	trees.
The	previous	evening	he	had	returned	from	a	trip	into	the	forest	with	a
sheath	of	bark	in	his	hands.	On	it	were	nuggets	of	crumbly	yellow	ochre.	Later,
beside	the	fire,	while	Quick	Ben	cooked	the	remaining	meat	from	a	small	deer
Onrack	had	killed	in	the	forest	two	days	previously,	the	Imass	ground	the
nuggets	into	powder.	Then,	using	spit	and	grease,	he	made	a	yellow	paste.	As
he	worked	these	preparations,	he	hummed	a	song,	a	droning,	vibrating	cadence
that	was	as	much	nasal	as	vocal.	The	range,	like	his	speaking	voice,	was
unearthly.	It	seemed	capable	of	carrying	two	distinct	tones,	one	high	and	the
other	deep.	The	song	ended	when	the	task	was	done.	There	was	a	long	pause;
then,	as	Onrack	began	applying	the	paint	to	his	face,	neck	and	arms,	a	different
song	emerged,	this	one	with	a	rapid	beat,	fast	as	the	heart	of	a	fleeing	beast.
When	the	last	daub	of	paint	marked	his	amber	skin,	the	song	stopped.
‘Gods	below!’	Quick	Ben	had	gasped,	one	hand	on	his	chest.	‘My	heart’s
about	to	pound	right	through	my	cage	of	bones,	Onrack!’
The	Imass,	settling	back	in	his	cross-legged	position,	regarded	the	wizard
with	calm,	dark	eyes.	‘You	have	been	pursued	often.	In	your	life.’


A	grimace	from	Quick	Ben,	then	he	nodded.	‘Feels	like	years	and	years	of
that.’
‘There	are	two	names	to	the	song.	Agkor	Raella	and	Allish	Raella.	The
wolf	song,	and	the	caribou	song.’
‘Ah,	so	my	cud-chewing	ways	are	exposed	at	last.’
Onrack	smiled.	‘One	day,	you	must	become	the	wolf.’
‘Might	be	I	already	am,’	Quick	Ben	said	after	a	long	moment.	‘I’ve	seen
wolves	–	plenty	of	them	around	here,	after	all.	Those	long-legged	ones	with
the	smallish	heads—’
‘Ay.’
‘Ay,	right.	And	they’re	damned	shy.	I’d	wager	they	don’t	go	for	the	kill
until	the	odds	are	well	in	their	favour.	The	worst	kind	of	gamblers,	in	fact.	But
very	good	at	survival.’
‘Shy,’	Onrack	said,	nodding.	‘Yet	curious.	The	same	pack	follows	us	now
for	three	days.’
‘They	enjoy	scavenging	your	kills	–	let	you	take	all	the	risks.	Makes	for	a
sweet	deal.’
‘Thus	far,’	Onrack	said,	‘there	have	been	few	risks.’
Quick	Ben	glanced	over	at	Trull,	then	shook	his	head	and	said,	‘That
mountain	sheep	or	whatever	you	call	it	not	only	charged	you,	Onrack,	but	it
sent	you	flying.	We	thought	it’d	broken	every	bone	in	your	body,	and	you	just
two	days	into	your	new	one	at	that.’
‘The	bigger	the	prey,	the	more	you	must	pay,’	Onrack	said,	smiling	again.
‘In	the	way	of	gambling,	yes?’
‘Absolutely,’	the	wizard	said,	prodding	at	the	meat	on	the	spit.	‘My	point
was,	the	wolf	is	the	caribou	until	necessity	forces	otherwise.	If	the	odds	are	too
bad,	the	wolf	runs.	It’s	a	matter	of	timing,	of	choosing	the	right	moment	to	turn
round	and	hold	your	ground.	As	for	those	wolves	tracking	us,	well,	I’d	guess
they’ve	never	seen	our	kind	before—’
‘No,	Quick	Ben,’	Onrack	said.	‘The	very	opposite	is	true.’
Trull	studied	his	friend	for	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘We’re	not	alone	here?’
‘The	ay	knew	to	follow	us.	Yes,	they	are	curious,	but	they	are	also	clever,
and	they	remember.	They	have	followed	Imass	before.’	He	lifted	his	head	and
sniffed	loudly.	‘They	are	close	tonight,	those	ay.	Drawn	to	my	song,	which	they
have	heard	before.	The	ay	know,	you	see,	that	tomorrow	I	will	hunt	dangerous
prey.	And	when	the	moment	of	the	kill	comes,	well,	we	shall	see.’
‘Just	how	dangerous?’	Trull	asked,	suddenly	uneasy.
‘There	is	a	hunting	cat,	an	emlava	–	we	entered	its	territory	today,	for	I
found	the	scrapes	of	its	claim,	on	stone	and	on	wood.	A	male	by	the	flavour	of


its	piss.	Today,	the	ay	were	more	nervous	than	usual,	for	the	cat	will	kill	them
at	every	opportunity,	and	it	is	a	creature	of	ambush.	But	I	have	assured	them
with	my	song.	I	found	Tog’tol	–	yellow	ochre	–	after	all.’
‘So,’	Quick	Ben	said,	his	eyes	on	the	dripping	meat	above	the	flames,	‘if
your	wolves	know	we	are	here,	how	about	the	cat?’
‘He	knows.’
‘Well,	that’s	just	terrific,	Onrack.	I’m	going	to	need	some	warrens	close	to
hand	all	damned	day,	then.	That	happens	to	be	exhausting,	you	know.’
‘You	need	not	worry	with	the	sun	overhead,	wizard,’	Onrack	said.	‘The	cat
hunts	at	night.’
‘Hood’s	breath!	Let’s	hope	those	wolves	smell	it	before	we	do!’
‘They	won’t,’	the	Imass	replied	with	infuriating	calm.	‘In	scenting	its
territory,	the	emlava	saturates	the	air	with	its	sign.	Its	own	body	scent	is	much
weaker,	freeing	the	beast	to	move	wherever	it	will	when	inside	its	territory.’
‘Why	are	dumb	brutes	so	damned	smart,	anyway?’
‘Why	are	us	smart	folk	so	often	stupidly	brutal,	Quick	Ben?’	Trull	asked.
‘Stop	trying	to	confuse	me	in	my	state	of	animal	terror,	Edur.’
An	uneventful	night	passed	and	now,	the	following	day,	they	walked	yet
further	into	the	territory	of	the	emlava.	Halting	at	a	stream	in	mid-morning,
Onrack	had	knelt	beside	it	to	begin	his	ritual	washing	of	hands.	At	least,	Trull
assumed	it	was	a	ritual,	although	it	might	well	have	been	another	of	those
moments	of	breathless	wonder	that	seemed	to	afflict	Onrack	–	and	no	surprise
there;	Trull	suspected	he’d	be	staggering	about	for	months	after	such	a	rebirth.
Of	course,	he	does	not	think	like	us.	I	am	much	closer	in	my	ways	of	thought	to
this	human,	Quick	Ben,	than	I	am	to	any	Imass,	dead	or	otherwise.	How	can
that	be?
Onrack	then	rose	and	faced	them,	his	spear	in	one	hand,	sword	in	the	other.
‘We	are	near	the	emlava’s	lair.	Although	he	sleeps,	he	senses	us.	Tonight,	he
means	to	kill	one	of	us.	I	shall	now	challenge	his	claim	to	this	territory.	If	I	fail,
he	may	well	leave	you	be,	for	he	will	feed	on	my	flesh.’
But	Quick	Ben	was	shaking	his	head.	‘You’re	not	doing	this	alone,	Onrack.
Granted,	I’m	not	entirely	sure	of	how	my	sorcery	will	work	in	this	place,	but
dammit,	it’s	just	a	dumb	cat,	after	all.	A	blinding	flash	of	light,	a	loud	sound—’
‘And	I	will	join	you	as	well,’	Trull	Sengar	said.	‘We	begin	with	spears,
yes?	I	have	fought	enough	wolves	in	my	time.	We	will	meet	its	charge	with
spears.	Then,	when	it	is	wounded	and	crippled,	we	close	with	bladed	weapons.’
Onrack	studied	them	for	a	moment,	then	he	smiled.	‘I	see	that	I	will	not
dissuade	you.	Yet,	for	the	fight	itself,	you	must	not	interfere.	I	do	not	think	I
will	fail,	and	you	will	see	why	before	long.’


Trull	and	the	wizard	followed	the	Imass	up	the	slope	of	an	outwash	fan	that
filled	most	of	a	crevasse,	up	among	the	lichen-clad,	tilted	and	folded	bedrock.
Beyond	this	blackstone	ledge	rose	a	sheer	wall	of	grey	shale	pocked	with	caves
where	sediments	had	eroded	away	beneath	an	endless	torrent	of	glacial	melt.
The	stream	in	which	Onrack	had	plunged	his	hands	earlier	poured	out	from
this	cliff,	forming	a	pool	in	one	cavern	that	extended	out	to	fill	a	basin	before
continuing	downslope.	To	the	right	of	this	was	another	cave,	triangular	in
shape,	with	one	entire	side	formed	by	a	collapse	in	the	shale	overburden.	The
flat	ground	before	it	was	scattered	with	splintered	bones.
As	they	skirted	the	pool	Onrack	suddenly	halted,	lifting	a	hand.
A	massive	shape	now	filled	the	cave	mouth.
Three	heartbeats	later,	the	emlava	emerged.
‘Hood’s	breath,’	Quick	Ben	whispered.
Trull	had	expected	a	hunting	cat	little	different	from	a	mountain	lion	–
perhaps	one	of	the	black	ones	rumoured	to	live	in	the	deeper	forests	of	his
homeland.	The	creature	hulking	into	view,	blinking	sleep	from	its	charcoal
eyes,	was	the	size	of	a	plains	brown	bear.	Its	enormous	upper	canines	projected
down	past	its	lower	jaw,	long	as	a	huntsman’s	knife	and	polished	the	hue	of
amber.	The	head	was	broad	and	flat,	the	ears	small	and	set	far	back.	Behind	the
short	neck,	the	emlava’s	shoulders	were	hunched,	forming	a	kind	of	muscled
hump.	Its	fur	was	striped,	black	barbs	on	deep	grey,	although	its	throat	revealed
a	flash	of	white.
‘Not	quite	built	for	speed,	is	it?’
Trull	glanced	over	at	Quick	Ben,	saw	the	wizard	holding	a	dagger	in	one
hand.	‘We	should	get	you	a	spear,’	the	Tiste	Edur	said.
‘I’ll	take	one	of	your	spares	–	if	you	don’t	mind.’
Trull	slipped	the	bound	clutch	from	his	shoulder	and	said,	‘Take	your
pick.’
The	emlava	was	studying	them.	Then	it	yawned	and	with	that	Onrack
moved	lightly	forward	in	a	half-crouch.
As	he	did	so,	pebbles	scattered	nearby	and	Trull	turned.	‘Well,	it	seems
Onrack	has	allies	in	this	after	all.’
The	wolves	–	ay	in	the	Imass	language	–	had	appeared	and	were	now
closing	on	Onrack’s	position,	heads	lowered	and	eyes	fixed	on	the	huge	cat.
The	sudden	arrival	of	seven	wolves	clearly	displeased	the	emlava,	for	it
then	lowered	itself	until	its	chest	brushed	the	ground,	gathering	its	legs	beneath
it.	The	mouth	opened	again,	and	a	deep	hiss	filled	the	air.
‘We	might	as	well	get	out	of	their	way,’	Quick	Ben	said,	taking	a	step	back
with	obvious	relief.


‘I	wonder,’	Trull	said	as	he	watched	the	momentary	stand-off,	‘if	this	is
how	domestication	first	began.	Not	banding	together	in	a	hunt	for	prey,	but	in
an	elimination	of	rival	predators.’
Onrack	had	readied	his	spear,	not	to	meet	a	charge,	but	to	throw	the
weapon	using	a	stone-weighted	antler	atlatl.	The	wolves	to	his	either	side	had
fanned	out,	edging	closer	with	fangs	bared.
‘Not	a	growl	to	be	heard,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘Somehow	that’s	more
chilling.’
‘Growls	are	to	warn,’	Trull	replied.	‘There	is	fear	in	growls,	just	as	there
is	in	that	cat’s	hissing.’
The	emlava’s	single	lungful	of	breath	finally	whistled	down	into	silence.	It
refilled	its	lungs	and	began	again.
Onrack	lunged	forward,	the	spear	darting	from	his	hand.
Flinching	back,	the	emlava	screamed	as	the	weapon	drove	deep	into	its
chest,	just	to	one	side	of	the	neck	and	beneath	the	clavicle.	At	that	moment	the
wolves	rushed	in.
A	mortal	wound,	however,	was	not	enough	to	slow	the	cat	as	it	lashed	out
with	two	staggered	swings	of	its	forepaws	at	one	of	the	wolves.	The	first	paw
sank	talons	deep	into	the	wolf’s	shoulder,	snatching	the	entire	animal	closer,
within	the	reach	of	the	second	paw,	which	dragged	the	yelping	wolf	closer	still.
The	massive	head	then	snapped	down	on	its	neck,	fangs	burying	themselves	in
flesh	and	bone.
The	emlava,	lurching,	then	drove	its	full	weight	down	on	the	dying	wolf,
probably	breaking	every	bone	in	its	body.
As	it	did	so,	four	other	wolves	lunged	for	its	soft	belly,	two	to	each	side,
their	canines	tearing	deep,	then	pulling	away	as,	screaming,	the	emlava	spun
round	to	fend	them	off.
Exposing	its	neck.
Onrack’s	sword	flashed,	point-first,	into	the	cat’s	throat.
It	recoiled,	sending	one	wolf	tumbling,	then	reared	back	on	its	hind	legs	–
as	if	to	wheel	and	flee	back	into	its	cave	–	but	all	strength	left	the	emlava	then.
It	toppled,	thumped	hard	onto	the	ground,	and	was	still.
The	six	remaining	wolves	–	one	limping	–	padded	away,	keeping	a
distance	between	themselves	and	the	three	men,	and	moments	later	were	gone
from	sight.
Onrack	walked	up	to	the	emlava	and	tugged	free	his	gore-spattered	spear.
Then	he	knelt	beside	the	cat’s	head.
‘Asking	forgiveness?’	Quick	Ben	queried,	his	tone	only	slightly	ironic.
The	Imass	looked	over	at	them.	‘No,	that	would	be	dishonest,	wizard.’


‘You’re	right,	it	would.	I	am	glad	you’re	not	dumping	any	blessed	spirit
rubbish	on	us.	It’s	pretty	obvious,	isn’t	it,	that	there	were	wars	long	before
there	were	wars	between	people.	You	had	your	rival	hunters	to	dispose	of
first.’
‘Yes,	that	is	true.	And	we	found	allies.	If	you	wish	to	find	irony,	Quick	Ben,
know	that	we	then	hunted	until	most	of	our	prey	was	extinct.	And	our	allies
then	starved	–	those	that	did	not	surrender	to	our	stewardship.’
‘The	Imass	are	hardly	unique	in	that,’	Trull	Sengar	said.
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘That’s	understating	it,	Trull.	So	tell	us,	Onrack,	why
are	you	kneeling	beside	that	carcass?’
‘I	have	made	a	mistake,’	the	Imass	replied,	climbing	to	his	feet	and	staring
into	the	cave.
‘Seemed	pretty	flawless	to	me.’
‘The	killing,	yes,	Quick	Ben.	But	this	emlava,	it	is	female.’
The	wizard	grunted,	then	seemed	to	flinch.	‘You	mean	the	male’s	still
around?’
‘I	do	not	know.	Sometimes	they…wander.’	Onrack	looked	down	at	the
bloodied	spear	in	his	hands.	‘My	friends,’	he	said.	‘I	am	now…hesitant,	I	admit.
Perhaps,	long	ago,	I	would	not	have	thought	twice	–	as	you	said,	wizard,	we
warred	against	our	competitors.	But	this	realm	–	it	is	a	gift.	All	that	was	lost,
because	of	our	thoughtless	acts,	now	lives	again.	Here.	I	wonder,	can	things	be
different?’
In	the	silence	following	that	question,	they	heard,	coming	from	the	cave,
the	first	pitiful	cry.
	
‘Did	you	ever	wish,	Udinaas,	that	you	could	sink	inside	stone?	Shake	loose	its
vast	memories—’
The	ex-slave	glanced	at	Wither	–	a	deeper	smear	in	the	gloom	–	then
sneered.	‘And	see	what	they	have	seen?	You	damned	wraith,	stones	can’t	see.’
‘True	enough.	Yet	they	swallow	sound	and	bind	it	trapped	inside.	They	hold
conversations	with	heat	and	cold.	Their	skins	wear	away	to	the	words	of	the
wind	and	the	lick	of	water.	Darkness	and	light	live	in	their	flesh	–	and	they
carry	within	them	the	echoes	of	wounding,	of	breaking,	of	being	cruelly
shaped—’
‘Oh,	enough!’	Udinaas	snapped,	pushing	a	stick	further	into	the	fire.	‘Go
melt	away	into	these	ruins,	then.’
‘You	are	the	last	one	awake,	my	friend.	And	yes,	I	have	been	in	these	ruins.’
‘Games	like	those	are	bound	to	drive	you	mad.’


A	long	pause.	‘You	know	things	you	have	no	right	to	know.’
‘How	about	this,	then?	Sinking	into	stone	is	easy.	It’s	getting	out	again
that’s	hard.	You	can	get	lost,	trapped	in	the	maze.	And	on	all	sides,	all	those
memories	pressing	in,	pressing	down.’
‘It	is	your	dreams,	isn’t	it?	Where	you	learn	such	things.	Who	speaks	to
you?	Tell	me	the	name	of	this	fell	mentor!’
Udinaas	laughed.	‘You	fool,	Wither.	My	mentor?	Why,	none	other	than
imagination.’
‘I	do	not	believe	you.’
There	seemed	little	point	in	responding	to	that	declaration.	Staring	into	the
flames,	Udinaas	allowed	its	flickering	dance	to	lull	him.	He	was	tired.	He
should	be	sleeping.	The	fever	was	gone,	the	nightmarish	hallucinations,	the
strange	nectars	that	fed	the	tumbling	delusions	all	seeped	away,	like	piss	in
moss.	The	strength	I	felt	in	those	other	worlds	was	a	lie.	The	clarity,	a	deceit.
All	those	offered	ways	forward,	through	what	will	come,	every	one	a	dead	end.	I
should	have	known	better.
‘K’Chain	Nah’ruk,	these	ruins.’
‘You	still	here,	Wither?	Why?’
‘This	was	once	a	plateau	on	which	the	Short-Tails	built	a	city.	But	now,	as
you	can	see,	it	is	shattered.	Now	there	is	nothing	but	these	dread	slabs	all
pitched	and	angled	–	yet	we	have	been	working	our	way	downward.	Did	you
sense	this?	We	will	soon	reach	the	centre,	the	heart	of	this	crater,	and	we	will
see	what	destroyed	this	place.’
‘The	ruins,’	said	Udinaas,	‘remember	cool	shadow.	Then	concussion.
Shadow,	Wither,	in	a	flood	to	announce	the	end	of	the	world.	The	concussion,
well,	that	belonged	to	the	shadow,	right?’
‘You	know	things—’
‘You	damned	fool,	listen	to	me!	We	came	to	the	edge	of	this	place,	this
high	plateau,	expecting	to	see	it	stretch	out	nice	and	flat	before	us.	Instead,	it
looks	like	a	frozen	puddle	onto	which	someone	dropped	a	heavy	rock.	Splat.
All	the	sides	caved	inward.	Wraith,	I	don’t	need	any	secret	knowledge	to	work
this	out.	Something	big	came	down	from	the	sky	–	a	meteorite,	a	sky	keep,
whatever.	We	trudged	through	its	ash	for	days.	Covering	the	ancient	snow.	Ash
and	dust,	eating	into	that	snow	like	acid.	And	the	ruins,	they’re	all	toppled,
blasted	outward,	then	tilted	inward.	Out	first,	in	second.	Heave	out	and	down,
then	slide	back.	Wither,	all	it	takes	is	for	someone	to	just	look.	Really	look.
That’s	it.	So	enough	with	all	this	mystical	sealshit,	all	right?’
His	tirade	had	wakened	the	others.	Too	bad.	Nearly	dawn	anyway.	Udinaas
listened	to	them	moving	around,	heard	a	cough,	then	someone	hawking	spit.


Which?	Seren?	Kettle?	The	ex-slave	smiled	to	himself.	‘Your	problem,	Wither,
is	your	damned	expectations.	You	hounded	me	for	months	and	months,	and
now	you	feel	the	need	to	have	made	it	–	me	–	worth	all	that	attention.	So	here
you	are,	pushing	some	kind	of	sage	wisdom	on	this	broken	slave,	but	I	told
you	then	what	I’ll	tell	you	now.	I’m	nothing,	no-one.	Understand?	Just	a	man
with	a	brain	that,	every	now	and	then,	actually	works.	Yes,	I	work	it,	because	I
find	no	comfort	in	being	stupid.	Unlike,	I	think,	most	people.	Us	Letherii,
anyway.	Stupid	and	proud	of	it.	Belongs	on	the	Imperial	Seal,	that	happy
proclamation.	No	wonder	I	failed	so	miserably.’
Seren	Pedac	moved	into	the	firelight,	crouching	down	to	warm	her	hands.
‘Failed	at	what,	Udinaas?’
‘Why,	everything,	Acquitor.	No	need	for	specifics	here.’
Fear	Sengar	spoke	from	behind	him.	‘You	were	skilled,	I	recall,	at
mending	nets.’
Udinaas	did	not	turn	round,	but	he	smiled.	‘Yes,	I	probably	deserved	that.
My	well-meaning	tormentor	speaks.	Well-meaning?	Oh,	perhaps	not.
Indifferent?	Possibly.	Until,	at	least,	I	did	something	wrong.	A	badly	mended
net	–	aaii!	Flay	the	fool’s	skin	from	his	back!	I	know,	it	was	all	for	my	own
good.	Someone’s,	anyway.’
‘Another	sleepless	night,	Udinaas?’
He	looked	across	the	fire	at	Seren,	but	she	was	intent	on	the	flames	licking
beneath	her	outstretched	hands,	as	if	the	question	had	been	rhetorical.
‘I	can	see	my	bones,’	she	then	said.
‘They’re	not	real	bones,’	Kettle	replied,	settling	down	with	her	legs	drawn
up.	‘They	look	more	like	twigs.’
‘Thank	you,	dear.’
‘Bones	are	hard,	like	rock.’	She	set	her	hands	on	her	knees	and	rubbed
them.	‘Cold	rock.’
‘Udinaas,’	Seren	said,	‘I	see	puddles	of	gold	in	the	ashes.’
‘I	found	pieces	of	a	picture	frame.’	He	shrugged.	‘Odd	to	think	of	K’Chain
Nah’ruk	hanging	pictures,	isn’t	it?’
Seren	looked	up,	met	his	eyes.	‘K’Chain—’
Silchas	Ruin	spoke	as	he	stepped	round	a	heap	of	cut	stone.	‘Not	pictures.
The	frame	was	used	to	stretch	skin.	K’Chain	moult	until	they	reach	adulthood.
The	skins	were	employed	as	parchment,	for	writing.	The	Nah’ruk	were
obsessive	recorders.’
‘You	know	a	lot	about	creatures	you	killed	on	sight,’	Fear	Sengar	said.
Clip’s	soft	laughter	sounded	from	somewhere	beyond	the	circle	of	light,
followed	by	the	snap	of	rings	on	a	chain.


Fear ’s	head	lifted	sharply.	‘That	amuses	you,	pup?’
The	Tiste	Andii’s	voice	drifted	in,	eerily	disembodied.	‘Silchas	Ruin’s
dread	secret.	He	parleyed	with	the	Nah’ruk.	There	was	this	civil	war	going	on,
you	see…’
‘It	will	be	light	soon,’	Silchas	said,	turning	away.
	
Before	too	long,	the	group	separated	as	it	usually	did.	Striding	well	ahead	were
Silchas	Ruin	and	Clip.	Next	on	the	path	was	Seren	Pedac	herself,	while	twenty
or	more	paces	behind	her	straggled	Udinaas	–	still	using	the	Imass	spear	as	a
walking	stick	–	and	Kettle	and	Fear	Sengar.
Seren	was	not	sure	if	she	was	deliberately	inviting	solitude	upon	herself.
More	likely	some	remnant	of	her	old	profession	was	exerting	on	her	a
disgruntled	pressure	to	take	the	lead,	deftly	dismissing	the	presence	ahead	of
the	two	Tiste	warriors.	As	if	they	don’t	count.	As	if	they’re	intrinsically
unreliable	as	guides…to	wherever	it	is	we’re	going.
She	thought	back,	often,	on	their	interminable	flight	from	Letheras,	the
sheer	chaos	of	that	trek,	its	contradictions	of	direction	and	purpose;	the	times
when	they	were	motionless	–	setting	down	tentative	roots	in	some	backwater
hamlet	or	abandoned	homestead	–	but	their	exhaustion	did	not	ease	then,	for	it
was	not	of	blood	and	flesh.	Scabandari	Bloodeye’s	soul	awaited	them,	like
some	enervating	parasite,	in	a	place	long	forgotten.	Such	was	the	stated
purpose,	but	Seren	had	begun,	at	last,	to	wonder.
Silchas	had	endeavoured	to	lead	them	west,	ever	west,	and	was	turned	aside
each	time	–	as	if	whatever	threat	the	servants	of	Rhulad	and	Hannan	Mosag
presented	was	too	vast	to	challenge.	And	that	made	no	sense.	The	bastard	can
change	into	a	damned	dragon.	And	is	Silchas	a	pacifist	at	heart?	Hardly.	He
kills	with	all	the	compunction	of	a	man	swatting	mosquitoes.	Did	he	turn	us
away	to	spare	our	lives?	Again,	unlikely.	A	dragon	doesn’t	leave	behind
anything	alive,	does	it?	Driven	north,	again	and	again,	away	from	the	more
populated	areas.
To	the	very	edge	of	Bluerose,	a	region	once	ruled	by	Tiste	Andii	–	hiding
still	under	the	noses	of	Letherii	and	Edur	–	no,	I	do	not	trust	any	of	this.	I
cannot.	Silchas	Ruin	sensed	his	kin.	He	must	have.
Suspecting	Silchas	Ruin	of	deceit	was	one	thing,	voicing	the	accusation
quite	another.	She	lacked	the	courage.	As	simple	as	that.	Easier,	isn’t	it,	to	just
go	along,	and	to	keep	from	thinking	too	hard.	Because	thinking	too	hard	is	what
Udinaas	has	done,	and	look	at	the	state	he’s	in.	Yet,	even	then,	he’s	managing	to
keep	his	mouth	shut.	Most	of	the	time.	He	may	be	an	ex-slave,	he	may	be	‘no-


one’	–	but	he	is	not	a	fool.
So	she	walked	alone.	Bound	by	friendship	to	none	–	none	here,	in	any	case
–	and	disinclined	to	change	that.
The	ruined	city,	little	more	than	heaps	of	tumbled	stone,	rolled	past	on	all
sides,	the	slope	ahead	becoming	ever	steeper,	and	she	thought,	after	a	time,	that
she	could	hear	the	whisper	of	sand,	crumbled	mortar,	fragments	of	rubble,	as
if	their	passage	was	yet	further	pitching	this	landscape,	and	as	they	walked	they
gathered	to	them	streams	of	sliding	refuse.	As	if	our	presence	alone	is	enough
shift	the	balance.
The	whispering	could	have	been	voices,	uttered	beneath	the	wind,	and	she
felt	–	with	a	sudden	realization	that	lifted	beads	of	sweat	to	her	skin	–	within
moments	of	understanding	the	words.	Of	stone	and	broken	mortar.	I	am	sliding
into	madness	indeed—
‘When	the	stone	breaks,	every	cry	escapes.	Can	you	hear	me	now,	Seren
Pedac?’
‘Is	that	you,	Wither?	Leave	me	be.’
‘Are	any	warrens	alive?	Most	would	say	no.	Impossible.	They	are	forces.
Aspects.	Proclivities	manifest	as	the	predictable	–	oh,	the	Great	Thinkers	who
are	long	since	dust	worried	this	in	fevered	need,	as	befits	the	obsessed.	But	they
did	not	understand.	One	warren	lies	like	a	web	over	all	the	others,	and	its	voice
is	the	will	necessary	to	shape	magic.	They	did	not	see	it.	Not	for	what	it	was.
They	thought…chaos,	a	web	where	each	strand	was	undifferentiated	energy,	not
yet	articulated,	not	yet	given	shape	by	an	Elder	God’s	intent.’
She	listened,	as	yet	uncomprehending,	even	as	her	heart	thundered	in	her
chest	and	her	each	breath	came	in	a	harsh	rasp.	This,	she	knew,	was	not
Wither ’s	voice.	Not	the	wraith’s	language.	Not	its	cadence.
‘But	K’rul	understood.	Spilled	blood	is	lost	blood,	powerless	blood	in	the
end.	It	dies	when	abandoned.	Witness	violent	death	for	proof	of	that.	For	the
warrens	to	thrive,	coursing	in	their	appointed	rivers	and	streams,	there	must	be
a	living	body,	a	grander	form	that	exists	in	itself.	Not	chaos.	Not	Dark,	nor
Light.	Not	heat,	not	cold.	No,	a	conscious	aversion	to	disorder.	Negation	to	and
of	all	else,	when	all	else	is	dead.	For	the	true	face	of	Death	is	dissolution,	and
in	dissolution	there	is	chaos	until	the	last	mote	of	energy	ceases	its	wilful	glow,
its	persistent	abnegation.	Do	you	understand?’
‘No.	Who	are	you?’
‘There	is	another	way,	then,	of	seeing	this.	K’rul	realized	he	could	not	do
this	alone.	The	sacrifice,	the	opening	of	his	veins	and	arteries,	would	mean
nothing,	would	indeed	fail.	Without	living	flesh,	without	organized
functionality.


‘Ah,	the	warrens,	Seren	Pedac,	they	are	a	dialogue.	Do	you	see	now?’
‘No!’
Her	frustrated	cry	echoed	through	the	ruins.	She	saw	Silchas	and	Clip	halt
and	turn	about.
Behind	her,	Fear	Sengar	called	out,	‘Acquitor?	What	is	it	you	deny?’
Knowing	laughter	from	Udinaas.
‘Disregard	the	vicious	crowd	now,	the	torrent	of	sound	overwhelming	the
warrens,	the	users,	the	guardians,	the	parasites	and	the	hunters,	the	complicit
gods	elder	and	young.	Shut	them	away,	as	Corlos	taught	you.	To	remember	rape
is	to	fold	details	into	sensation,	and	so	relive	each	time	its	terrible	truth.	He
told	you	this	could	become	habit,	an	addiction,	until	even	despair	became	a
welcome	taste	on	your	tongue.	Understand,	then	–	as	only	you	can	here	–	that	to
take	one’s	own	life	is	the	final	expression	of	despair.	You	saw	that.	Buruk	the
Pale.	You	felt	that,	at	the	sea’s	edge.	Seren	Pedac,	K’rul	could	not	act	alone	in
this	sacrifice,	lest	he	fill	every	warren	with	despair.
‘Dialogue.	Presupposition,	yes,	of	the	plural.	One	with	another.	Or
succession	of	others,	for	this	dialogue	must	be	ongoing,	indeed,	eternal.
‘Do	I	speak	of	the	Master	of	the	Holds?	The	Master	of	the	Deck?	Perhaps	–
the	face	of	the	other	is	ever	turned	away	–	to	all	but	K’rul	himself.	This	is	how
it	must	be.	The	dialogue,	then,	is	the	feeding	of	power.	Power	unimaginable,
power	virtually	omnipotent,	unassailable…so	long	as	that	other’s	face
remains…turned	away.
‘From	you.	From	me.	From	all	of	us.’
She	stared	wildly	about	then,	at	these	tilted	ruins,	this	endless	scree	of
destruction.
‘The	dialogue,	however,	can	be	sensed	if	not	heard	–	such	is	its	power.	The
construction	of	language,	the	agreement	in	principle	of	meaning	and	intent,	the
rules	of	grammar	–	Seren	Pedac,	what	did	you	think	Mockra	was?	If	not	a	game
of	grammar?	Twisting	semantics,	turning	inference,	inviting	suggestion,
reshaping	a	mind’s	internal	language	to	deceive	its	own	senses?
‘Who	am	I?
‘Why,	Seren	Pedac,	I	am	Mockra.’
The	others	were	gathered	round	her	now.	She	found	herself	on	her	knees,
driven	there	by	revelation	–	there	would	be	bruises,	an	appalling	softness	in	the
tissue	where	it	pressed	against	hard	pavestone.	She	registered	this,	as	she	stared
up	at	the	others.	Reproachful	communication,	between	damaged	flesh	and	her
mind,	between	her	senses	and	her	brain.
She	shunted	those	words	aside,	then	settled	into	a	sweet,	painless	calm.
As	easy	as	that.


‘Beware,	there	is	a	deadly	risk	in	deceiving	oneself.	You	can	blind	youself
to	your	own	damage.	You	can	die	quickly	in	that	particular	game,	Seren	Pedac.
No,	if	you	must…experiment…then	choose	another.
‘Corlos	would	have	showed	you	that,	had	he	the	time	with	you.’
‘So	–	so	he	knows	you?’
‘Not	as	intimately	as	you.	There	are	few	so…blessed.’
‘But	you	are	not	a	god,	are	you?’
‘You	need	not	ask	that,	Seren	Pedac.’
‘You	are	right.	But	still,	you	are	alive.’
She	heard	amusement	in	the	reply.	‘Unless	my	greatest	deceit	is	the
announcement	of	my	own	existence!	There	are	rules	in	language,	and	language
is	needed	for	the	stating	of	the	rules.	As	K’rul	understood,	the	blood	flows	out,
and	then	it	returns.	Weak,	then	enlivened.	Round	and	round.	Who	then,	ask
yourself,	who	then	is	the	enemy?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Not	yet,	perhaps.	You	will	need	to	find	out,	however,	Seren	Pedac.	Before
we	are	through.’
She	smiled.	‘You	give	me	a	purpose?’
‘Dialogue,	my	love,	must	not	end.’
‘Ours?	Or	the	other	one?’
‘Your	companions	think	you	fevered	now.	Tell	me,	before	we	part,	which	you
would	choose.	For	your	experiments?’
She	blinked	up	at	the	half-circle	of	faces.	Expressions	of	concern,
mockery,	curiosity,	indifference.	‘I	don’t	know,’	she	said.	‘It	seems…cruel.’
‘Power	ever	is,	Seren	Pedac.’
‘I	won’t	decide,	then.	Not	yet.’
‘So	be	it.’
‘Seren?’	Kettle	asked.	‘What	is	wrong	with	you?’
She	smiled,	then	pushed	herself	to	her	feet,	Udinaas	–	to	her	astonishment	–
reaching	out	to	help	her	regain	her	balance.
Seeing	her	wince,	he	half	smiled.	‘You	landed	hard,	Acquitor.	Can	you
walk?’	His	smile	broadened.	‘Perhaps	no	faster	than	the	rest	of	us	laggards,
now?’
‘You,	Udinaas?	No,	I	think	not.’
He	frowned.	‘Just	the	two	of	us	right	now,’	he	said.
Her	eyes	flickered	up	to	meet	his,	shied	away,	then	returned	again	–	hard.
‘You	heard?’
‘Didn’t	need	to,’	he	replied	under	his	breath	as	he	set	the	Imass	walking
stick	into	her	hands.	‘Had	Wither	sniffing	at	my	heels	long	before	I	left	the


north.’	He	shrugged.
Silchas	Ruin	and	Clip	had	already	resumed	the	journey.
Leaning	on	the	Imass	spear,	Seren	Pedac	walked	alongside	the	ex-slave,
struggling	with	a	sudden	flood	of	emotion	for	this	broken	man.	Perhaps,	true
comrades	after	all.	He	and	I.
‘Seren	Pedac.’
‘Yes?’
‘Stop	shifting	the	pain	in	your	knees	into	mine,	will	you?’
Stop	–	what?	Oh.
‘Either	that	or	give	me	that	damned	stick	back.’
‘If	I	say	“sorry”	then,	well…’
‘You	give	it	away.	Well,	say	it	if	you	mean	it,	and	either	way	we’ll	leave	it
at	that.’
‘Sorry.’
His	surprised	glance	delighted	her.
	
The	rising	sea	level	had	saturated	the	ground	beneath	the	village.	Anyone	with
half	their	wits	would	have	moved	to	the	stony,	treed	terrace	bordering	the
flood	plain,	but	the	sordid	remnants	of	the	Shake	dwelling	here	had	simply
levered	their	homes	onto	stilts	and	raised	the	slatted	walkways,	living	above
fetid,	salty	bog	crawling	with	the	white-backed	crabs	known	as	skullcaps.
Yan	Tovis,	Yedan	Derryg	and	the	troop	of	lancers	reined	in	at	Road’s	End,
the	ferry	landing	and	its	assorted	buildings	on	their	left,	a	mass	of	felled	trees
rotting	into	the	ground	on	their	right.	The	air	was	chill,	colder	than	it	should
have	been	this	late	into	spring,	and	tendrils	of	low-lying	fog	hid	most	of	the
salt	marsh	beneath	the	stilts	and	bridged	walkways.
Among	the	outbuildings	of	the	landing	–	all	situated	on	higher	ground	–
there	was	a	stone-walled	stable	fronted	by	a	courtyard	of	planed	logs,	and
beyond	that,	facing	the	village,	an	inn	without	a	name.
Dismounting,	Yan	Tovis	stood	beside	her	horse	for	a	long	moment,	her
eyes	closing.	We	have	been	invaded.	I	should	be	riding	to	every	garrison	on	this
coast	–	Errant	fend,	they	must	know	by	now.	Truth	delivered	the	hard	way.	The
empire	is	at	war.
But	she	was	now	Queen	of	the	Last	Blood,	Queen	of	the	Shake.	Opening
her	weary	eyes	she	looked	upon	the	decrepit	fishing	village.	My	people,	Errant
help	me.	Running	away	had	made	sense	back	then.	It	made	even	more	sense
now.
Beside	her,	Yedan	Derryg,	her	half-brother,	loosened	the	strap	of	his


visored	helm,	then	said,	‘Twilight,	what	now?’
She	glanced	over	at	him,	watched	the	rhythmic	bunching	of	his	bearded
jaw.	She	understood	the	question	in	all	its	ramifications.	What	now?	Do	the
Shake	proclaim	their	independence,	rising	eager	in	the	chaos	of	a	MalazanLetherii	war?	Do	we	gather	our	arms,	our	young	whom	we	would	call	soldiers?
The	Shake	cry	out	their	liberty,	and	the	sound	is	devoured	by	the	shore’s	rolling
surf.
She	sighed.	‘I	was	in	command	on	the	Reach,	when	the	Edur	came	in	their
ships.	We	surrendered.	I	surrendered.’
To	do	otherwise	would	have	been	suicidal.	Yedan	should	have	said	those
words,	then.	For	he	knew	the	truth	of	them.	Instead,	he	seemed	to	chew	again
for	a	moment,	before	turning	to	squint	at	the	flat,	broad	ferry.	‘That’s	not
slipped	its	mooring	in	some	time,	I	think.	The	coast	north	of	Awl	must	be
flooded.’
He	gives	me	nothing.	‘We	shall	make	use	of	it,	all	the	way	out	to	Third
Maiden	Fort.’
A	nod.
‘Before	that,	however,	we	must	summon	the	witches	and	warlocks.’
‘You’ll	find	most	of	them	huddled	in	the	village	yonder,	Queen.	And	Pully
and	Skwish	will	have	announced	your	return.	Taloned	toes	are	tapping	the
floorboards,	I	would	wager.’
‘Go	down	there,’	she	commanded,	facing	the	inn.	‘Escort	them	back	here	–
I	will	be	in	the	tavern.’
‘And	if	the	tavern	is	not	big	enough?’
An	odd	concern.	She	began	walking	towards	the	entrance.	‘Then	they	can
perch	on	shoulders	like	the	crows	they	are,	Yedan.’
‘Twilight.’
She	half	turned.
Yedan	was	tightening	the	straps	of	his	helm	once	again.	‘Do	not	do	it.’
‘Do	not	do	what?’
‘Send	us	to	war,	sister.’
She	studied	him.
But	he	said	nothing	more,	and	a	moment	later	he	had	turned	away	and	set
off	down	towards	the	village.
She	resumed	her	walk,	while	her	soldiers	led	the	mounts	towards	the
stable,	the	beasts’	hoofs	slipping	on	the	slick	logs	of	the	courtyard.	They	had
ridden	hard,	these	last	horses	drawn	from	a	virtually	empty	garrison	fort	just
north	of	Tulamesh	–	reports	of	bandits	had	sent	the	squads	into	the	countryside
and	they’d	yet	to	return.	Yan	Tovis	believed	they	would	never	do	so.


At	the	entranceway	she	paused,	looking	down	at	the	slab	of	stone	beneath
her	boots,	on	which	were	carved	Shake	runes.
‘This	Raised	Stone	honours	Teyan	Atovis,	Rise,	who	was	claimed	by	the
Shore	1113th	Year	of	the	Isle.	Slain	by	the	Letherii	for	Debts	Unremitted.’
Yan	Tovis	grunted.	One	of	her	kin,	no	less,	dead	a	thousand	years	now.
‘Well,	Teyan,’	she	muttered,	‘you	died	of	drink,	and	now	your	stone	straddles
the	threshold	of	a	tavern.’	True,	some	list	of	mysterious,	crushing	debts	had
invited	his	ignoble	fall	to	alcohol	and	misery,	but	this	grand	commemoration
had	taken	a	slanted	view	on	the	hands	guiding	the	man’s	fate.	And
now…Brullyg	would	be	Rise.	Will	you	wear	the	crown	as	well	as	Teyan	did?
She	pushed	open	the	door	and	strode	inside.
The	low-ceilinged	room	was	crowded,	every	face	turned	to	her.
A	familiar	figure	pushed	into	view,	her	face	a	mass	of	wrinkles	twisted	into
a	half-smile.
‘Pully,’	Twilight	said,	nodding.	‘I	have	just	sent	the	Watch	down	to	the
village	to	find	you.’
‘Be	well	he’ll	find	Skwish	and	a	score	others.	They	be	well	weaving	cob	to
web	on	th’	close	sea	beyond	the	shore,	Queen,	an’	all	the	truths	writ	there.
Strangers—’
‘I	know,’	Yan	Tovis	interjected,	looking	past	the	old	hag	and	scanning	the
other	witches	and	warlocks,	the	Shoulderfolk	of	the	Old	Ways.	Their	eyes
glittered	in	the	smoky	gloom,	and	Twilight	could	now	smell	these	Shake	elders
–	half-unravelled	damp	wool	and	patchy	sealskin,	fish-oil	and	rank	sweat,	the
breath	coming	from	mouths	dark	with	sickened	gums	or	rotting	teeth.
If	there	was	a	proprietor	to	this	tavern	he	or	she	had	fled.	Casks	had	been
broached	and	tankards	filled	with	pungent	ale.	A	huge	pot	of	fish	soup	steamed
on	the	centre	hearth	and	there	were	countless	gourd-shell	bowls	scattered	on
the	tables.	Large	rats	waddled	about	on	the	filthy	floor.
Far	more	witches	than	warlocks,	she	noted.	This	had	been	a	discernible
trend	among	the	demon-kissed	–	fewer	and	fewer	males	born	bearing	the
accepted	number	of	traits;	most	were	far	too	demonic.	More	than	two	hundred
of	the	Shoulderfolk.	Gathered	here.
‘Queen,’	Pully	ventured,	ducking	her	head.	‘Cob	to	web,	all	of	Shake	blood
know	that	you	now	rule.	Barring	them	that’s	on	the	Isle,	who	only	know	that
your	mother ’s	dead.’
‘So	Brullyg	is	there,	anticipating…’
‘Aye,	Twilight,	that	be	well	he	will	be	Rise,	King	of	the	Shake.’
Errant	take	me.	‘We	must	sail	to	the	Isle.’
A	murmur	of	agreement	amidst	the	eager	quaffing	of	ale.


‘You	intend,	this	night,’	Yan	Tovis	said,	‘a	ritual.’
‘We	are	loosening	the	chains	as	they	say,	Queen.	There	are	nets	be	strung
across	the	path	of	the	world,	t’see	what	we	catch.’
‘No.’
Pully’s	black	eyes	narrowed.	‘What’s	that?’
‘No.	There	will	be	no	ritual	tonight.	Nor	tomorrow	night,	nor	the	next.	Not
until	we	are	on	the	Isle,	and	perhaps	not	even	then.’
Not	a	sound	in	the	tavern	now.
Pully	opened	her	mouth,	shut	it,	then	opened	it	again.	‘Queen,	the	shore	be
alive	wi’	voices	as	they	say	and	the	words	they	are	for	us.	These	–	these	they	be
the	Old	Ways,	our	ways—’
‘And	my	mother	was	in	the	habit	of	looking	away,	yes.	But	I	am	not.’	She
lifted	her	head	and	scanned	once	more	the	array	of	faces,	seeing	the	shock,	the
anger,	the	growing	malice.	‘The	Old	Ways	failed	us.	Then	and	now.	Your
ways,’	she	told	them	in	a	hard	voice,	‘have	failed	us	all.	I	am	Queen.	Twilight
on	the	shore.	At	my	side	in	my	rule	is	the	Watch.	Brullyg	would	be	Rise	–	that
remains	to	be	seen,	for	your	proclamation	is	not	cause	enough,	not	even	close.
Rise	is	chosen	by	all	the	Shake.	All.’
‘Do	not	mar	us,	Queen.’	Pully’s	smile	was	gone.	Her	face	was	a	mask	of
venom.
Yan	Tovis	snorted.	‘Will	you	send	a	curse	my	way,	old	woman?	Do	not
even	think	it.	I	mean	to	see	my	people	survive,	through	all	that	will	happen.
From	all	of	you,	I	will	need	healing,	I	will	need	blessing.	You	rule	no	longer	–
no,	do	not	speak	to	me	of	my	mother.	I	know	better	than	any	of	you	the	depths
of	her	surrender.	I	am	Queen.	Obey	me.’
They	were	not	happy.	They	had	been	the	true	power	for	so	long	–	if	that
pathetic	curse-weaving	in	the	shadows	could	be	called	power	–	and	Yan	Tovis
knew	that	this	struggle	had	but	just	begun,	for	all	their	apparent	acquiescence.
They	will	begin	planning	my	downfall.	It	is	to	be	expected.
Yedan	Derryg,	never	mind	watching	the	shore.	You	must	now	watch	my
back.
	
Fiddler	opened	his	eyes.	Dusk	had	just	begun	to	settle.	Groaning,	he	rolled
onto	his	back.	Too	many	years	of	sleeping	on	hard,	cold	ground;	too	many
years	of	a	tattered	rain	cape	for	a	mattress,	a	single	blanket	of	coarse	wool	for
cover.	At	least	now	he	was	sleeping	through	the	day,	easing	his	old	bones	with
the	sun’s	warmth.
Sitting	up,	he	looked	round	the	glade.	Huddled	figures	on	all	sides.	Just


beyond	them	was	Koryk,	the	sleep’s	last	watch,	sitting	on	a	tree	stump.	Aye,
woodcutters	in	this	forest.
Not	that	we’ve	seen	any.
Three	nights	since	the	landing.	Ever	moving	eastward,	inland.	A	strange
empire,	this.	Roads	and	tracks	and	the	occasional	farmstead,	barely	a	handful
of	towns	on	the	coast	that	we	saw.	And	where	in	Hood’s	name	are	these	Tiste
Edur?
Fiddler	climbed	to	his	feet,	arching	his	back	to	work	out	the	aches	and
twinges.	He’d	wanted	to	be	a	soldier	named	Strings,	here	among	the
Bonehunters,	a	different	man,	a	new	man.	But	that	hadn’t	worked	so	well.	The
conceit	had	fooled	no-one.	Even	worse,	he	could	not	convince	himself	that	he
had	begun	anew,	that	the	legacy	of	past	campaigns	could	be	put	aside.	A	life
don’t	work	that	way.	Dammit.	He	trudged	over	to	Koryk.
The	Seti	half-blood	glanced	up.	‘Some	damned	war	we	got	ourselves	here,
Sergeant.	I’d	even	take	one	of	Smiles’s	knives	in	the	leg	just	to	get	us	the	smell
of	blood.	Let’s	forget	these	damned	Edur	and	go	ahead	and	start	killing
Letherii.’
‘Farmers	and	swineherds,	Koryk?	We	need	them	on	our	side,	remember?’
‘So	far	there	ain’t	been	enough	of	them	to	muster	a	damned	squad.	Least
we	should	show	ourselves—’
‘Not	yet.	Besides,	it’s	probably	been	just	bad	luck	we	haven’t	met	the
enemy	yet.	I’d	wager	other	squads	have	already	been	in	a	scrap	or	two.’
Koryk	grunted.	‘I	doubt	it.	All	it	takes	is	just	one	squad	to	kick	the	nest	and
these	woods	should	be	swarming.	They	ain’t.’
Fiddler	had	nothing	to	say	to	that.	He	scratched	himself,	then	turned	away.
‘Shut	your	eyes	for	a	time	now,	soldier.	We’ll	wake	you	when	breakfast’s
ready.’
Do	your	complainin’	now,	Koryk,	because	when	this	lets	loose	we’ll	look
back	on	sunsets	like	this	one	like	it	was	idyllic	paradise.	Still,	how	many	times
could	he	make	that	promise?	The	legacy	of	the	Bonehunters	thus	far	was
nothing	to	sing	songs	about.	Even	Y’Ghatan	had	been	a	mess,	with	them
whistling	a	song	while	they	walked	right	into	a	trap.	It	galled	him	still,	that	one.
He	should	have	smelled	trouble.	Same	for	Gesler	–	aye,	we	let	them	down	that
day.	Badly.
Malaz	City	had	been	worse.	True,	weapons	had	been	drawn.	There’d	even
been	a	shield-line	for	a	few	squads	of	marines.	Against	Malazans.	An
undisciplined	mob	of	our	own	people.	Somehow,	somewhere,	this	army	needed
to	fight	for	real.
The	Adjunct	had	thrown	them	onto	this	coast,	like	a	handful	of	ticks	onto	a


dog’s	back.	Sooner	or	later	the	beast	was	going	to	scratch.
As	the	others	wakened	to	the	coming	of	night,	Fiddler	walked	over	to	his
pack.	Stood	studying	it	for	a	time.	The	Deck	was	in	there,	waiting.	And	he	was
sorely	tempted.	Just	to	get	a	taste	of	what	was	coming.	Don’t	be	a	fool,	Fid.
Remember	Tattersail.	Remember	all	the	good	it	did	her.
‘Bad	idea,	Sergeant.’
Fiddler	glanced	over,	scowled.	‘Stop	reading	my	mind,	Bottle.	You’re	not
as	good	at	it	as	you	think.’
‘You’re	like	a	man	who’s	sworn	off	drink	but	carries	a	flask	in	his	pouch.’
‘Enough	of	that,	soldier.’
Bottle	shrugged,	looked	round.	‘Where’s	Gesler	gone?’
‘Probably	off	fertilizing	the	trees.’
‘Maybe,’	Bottle	said,	sounding	unconvinced.	‘It’s	just	that	I	woke	up
earlier,	and	didn’t	see	him	then	either.’
Gods	below.	Waving	at	midges,	Fiddler	walked	over	to	the	far	end	of	the
glade,	where	the	other	squad	was	positioned.	He	saw	Stormy	standing	like	a
sleep-addled	bear	–	his	red	hair	and	beard	a	wild	mass	of	twig-filled	tangles	–
repeatedly	kicking	the	side	of	a	loudly	snoring	Shortnose.
‘Stormy,’	Fiddler	called	out	softly,	‘where’s	your	sergeant	gone	to?’
‘No	idea,’	the	huge	man	replied.	‘He	had	last	watch	on	this	side,	though.
Hey,	Fid,	she	wouldn’t	have	burned	the	Silanda,	would	she?’
‘Of	course	not.	Listen,	if	Gesler	ain’t	back	soon	you’re	going	to	have	to
go	looking	for	him.’
Stormy’s	small	porcine	eyes	blinked	at	him.	‘Might	be	he’s	lost?	I	didn’t
think	of	that.’
‘Never	mind	that	dimwitted	act,	Corporal.’
‘Yeah.	That	Koryk	you	got,	he	any	good	at	tracking?’
‘No.	Damned	near	useless	in	fact,	although	don’t	say	that	to	his	face.	Bottle
—’
‘Oh,	him.	That	one	gives	me	the	creeps,	Fid.	Masturbates	like	I	pick	my
nose.	Now	sure,	soldiers	will	do	that,	but—’
‘He	says	it’s	not	him.’
‘Well,	if	Smiles	wants	to	reach	in	under	the	covers—’
‘Smiles?	What	are	you	going	on	about,	Stormy?’
‘I	mean—’
‘Look,	Bottle’s	haunted	by	a	damned	ghost	of	some	kind	–	Quick	Ben
confirmed	it,	so	stop	giving	me	that	look.	Anyway,	that	ghost’s,	uh,	female,	and
she	likes	him	way	too	much—’
‘Mages	are	sick,	Fid.’


‘Not	a	relevant	point	here,	Stormy.’
‘So	you	say,’	the	corporal	said,	shaking	himself	then	turning	away.	‘“Not	a
relevant	point	here,”’	he	mimicked	under	his	breath.
‘I	can	still	hear	you,	Corporal.’
Stormy	waved	a	wide,	hairy	hand	but	did	not	turn	round,	instead	making
his	way	towards	the	hearth.	He	paused	in	his	first	step	to	set	his	boot	down	on
one	of	Shortnose’s	hands.	There	was	an	audible	crack	and	the	heavy
infantryman	made	a	small	sound,	then	sat	up.	Stormy	continued	on,	while
Shortnose	looked	down	at	his	hand,	frowning	at	the	oddly	angled	third	finger,
which	he	then	reset	with	a	tug,	before	rising	and	wandering	off	to	find
somewhere	to	empty	his	bladder.
Fiddler	scratched	at	his	beard,	then	swung	about	and	walked	back	to	his
squad.
Aye,	we’re	a	lethal	bunch.
	
Gesler	wandered	the	strange	ruins.	The	light	was	fast	fading,	making	the	place
seem	even	more	spectral.	Round	wells	on	all	sides,	at	least	a	dozen	scattered
among	the	old	trees.	The	stones	were	exquisitely	cut,	fitted	without	mortar	–	as
he	had	discovered	upon	peeling	back	some	moss.	He	had	caught	sight	of	the
regular	shapes	from	the	edge	of	the	glade,	had	first	thought	them	to	be	the
pedestals	for	some	colonnaded	structure	long	since	toppled	over.	But	the	only
other	stone	he	found	was	paving,	buckled	by	roots,	making	footing
treacherous.
Seating	himself	on	the	edge	of	one	of	the	wells,	he	peered	down	into	the
inky	blackness,	and	could	smell	stagnant	water.	He	felt	oddly	pleased	with
himself	to	find	that	his	curiosity	had	not	been	as	thoroughly	dulled	as	he’d
once	believed.	Not	nearly	as	bad	as,	say,	Cuttle.	Now	there	was	a	grim	bastard.
Still,	Gesler	had	seen	a	lot	in	his	life,	and	some	of	it	had	permanently	stained
his	skin	–	not	to	mention	other,	more	subtle	changes.	But	mostly	that	host	of
things	witnessed,	deeds	done,	not	done,	they	just	wore	a	man	down.
He	could	not	look	at	the	tiny	flames	of	the	squad’s	hearth	without
remembering	Truth	and	that	fearless	plunge	into	Y’Ghatan’s	palace.	Or	he’d
glance	down	at	the	crossbow	in	his	hands	as	they	stumbled	through	this
damned	forest	and	recall	Pella,	skewered	through	the	forehead,	sagging
against	the	corner	of	a	building	barely	a	hundred	paces	into	Y’Ghatan	itself.
With	every	crow’s	cackle	he	heard	the	echoes	of	the	screams	when	dread
ghosts	had	assailed	the	camp	of	the	Dogslayers	at	Raraku.	A	glance	down	at	his
bared	hands	and	their	battered	knuckles,	and	the	vision	rose	in	his	mind	of	that


Wickan,	Coltaine,	down	on	the	banks	of	the	Vathar	–	gods,	to	have	led	that	mob
that	far,	with	more	still	to	go,	with	nothing	but	cruel	betrayal	at	the	Fall.
The	slaughter	of	the	inhabitants	of	Aren,	when	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass
rose	from	the	dust	of	the	streets	and	their	weapons	of	stone	began	to	rise	and
fall,	rise	and	fall.	If	not	for	that	ex-Red	Blade	driving	open	the	gates	and	so
opening	a	path	of	escape,	there	would	have	been	no	survivors	at	all.	None.
Except	us	Malazans,	who	could	only	stand	aside	and	watch	the	slaughter.
Helpless	as	babes…
A	dragon	through	fire,	a	ship	riding	flames	–	his	first	sight	of	a	Tiste	Edur:
dead,	pinned	to	his	chair	by	a	giant’s	spear.	Oar	benches	where	sat	decapitated
rowers,	hands	resting	on	the	sweeps,	and	their	severed	heads	heaped	in	a	pile
round	the	mainmast,	eyes	blinking	in	the	sudden	light,	faces	twisting	into
appalling	expressions—
So	who	built	twelve	wells	in	a	forest?	That’s	what	I	want	to	know.
Maybe.
He	recalled	a	knock	at	the	door,	and	opening	it	to	see,	with	absurd	delight,
a	drenched	T’lan	Imass	whom	he	recognized.	Stormy,	it’s	for	you.	And	aye,	I
dream	of	moments	like	this,	you	red-haired	ox.	And	what	did	that	say	about
Gesler	himself?	Wait,	I’m	not	that	curious.
‘There	you	are.’
Gesler	looked	up.	‘Stormy.	I	was	just	thinking	of	you.’
‘Thinking	what?’
He	waved	at	the	well’s	black	hole.	‘If	you’d	fit,	of	course.	Most	of	you
would	go,	but	not,	alas,	your	head.’
‘You	keep	forgetting,	Gesler,’	the	corporal	said	as	he	drew	nearer,	‘I	was
one	of	the	ones	who	punched	back.’
‘Got	no	recollection	of	that	at	all.’
‘Want	me	to	remind	you?’
‘What	I	want	is	to	know	why	you’re	bothering	me.’
‘We’re	all	gettin’	ready	to	head	out.’
‘Stormy.’
‘What?’
‘What	do	you	think	about	all	this?’
‘Someone	liked	building	wells.’
‘Not	this.	I	mean,	the	war.	This	war,	the	one	here.’
‘I’ll	let	you	know	once	we	start	busting	heads.’
‘And	if	that	never	happens?’
Stormy	shrugged,	ran	thick	fingers	through	his	knotted	beard.	‘Just
another	typical	Bonehunter	war,	then.’


Gesler	grunted.	‘Go	on,	lead	the	way.	Wait.	How	many	battles	have	we
fought,	you	and	me?’
‘You	mean,	with	each	other?’
‘No,	you	damned	idiot.	I	mean	against	other	people.	How	many?’
‘I	lost	count.’
‘Liar.’
‘All	right.	Thirty-seven,	but	not	counting	Y’Ghatan	since	I	wasn’t	there.
Thirty-eight	for	you,	Gesler.’
‘And	how	many	did	we	manage	to	avoid?’
‘Hundreds.’
‘So	maybe,	old	friend,	we’re	just	getting	better	at	this.’
The	huge	Falari	scowled.	‘You	trying	to	ruin	my	day,	Sergeant?’
	
Koryk	tightened	the	straps	of	his	bulky	pack.	‘I	just	want	to	kill	someone,’	he
growled.
Bottle	rubbed	at	his	face	then	eyed	the	half-blood	Seti.	‘There’s	always
Smiles.	Or	Tarr,	if	you	jump	him	when	he’s	not	looking.’
‘You	being	funny?’
‘No,	just	trying	to	deflect	your	attention	from	the	weakest	guy	in	this
squad.	Namely,	me.’
‘You’re	a	mage.	Sort	of.	You	smell	like	one,	anyway.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘If	I	kill	you,	you’d	just	curse	me	with	your	last	breath,	then	I’d	be
miserable.’
‘So	what	would	change,	Koryk?’
‘Having	a	reason	to	be	miserable	is	always	worse	than	having	no	reason
but	being	miserable	anyway.	If	it’s	just	a	way	of	life,	I	mean.’	He	suddenly	drew
out	the	latest	weapon	in	his	arsenal,	a	long-knife.	‘See	this?	Just	like	the	kind
Kalam	used.	It’s	a	damned	fast	weapon,	but	I	can’t	see	it	doing	much	against
armour.’
‘Where	Kalam	stuck	them	there	wasn’t	no	armour.	Throat,	armpit,	crotch	–
you	should	give	it	to	Smiles.’
‘I	grabbed	it	to	keep	it	from	her,	idiot.’
Bottle	looked	over	to	where	Smiles	had,	moments	earlier,	disappeared	into
the	forest.	She	was	on	her	way	back,	the	placid	expression	on	her	face	hiding
all	sorts	of	evil,	no	doubt.	‘I	hope	we’re	not	expected	to	stand	against	Edur	the
way	heavies	are,’	he	said	to	Koryk	while	watching	Smiles.	‘Apart	from	you
and	Tarr,	and	maybe	Corabb,	we’re	not	a	big	mailed	fist	kind	of	squad,	are	we?


So,	in	a	way,	this	kind	of	war	suits	us	–	subterfuge,	covert	stuff.’	He	glanced
over	and	saw	the	half-blood	glaring	at	him.	Still	holding	the	long-knife.	‘But
maybe	we’re	actually	more	versatile.	We	can	be	half	mailed	fist	and	half	black
glove,	right?’
‘Anyway,’	Koryk	said,	resheathing	the	weapon,	‘when	I	said	I	wanted	to
kill	someone	I	meant	the	enemy.’
‘Tiste	Edur.’
‘Letherii	bandits	will	do	–	there	must	be	bandits	around	here	somewhere.’
‘Why?’
‘What	do	you	mean,	why?	There’s	always	bandits	in	the	countryside,
Bottle.	Led	by	moustached	rogues	with	fancy	names.	Zorala	Snicker,	or	Pamby
Doughty—’
A	loud	snort	from	Smiles,	who	had	just	arrived.	‘I	remember	those	stories.
Pamby	Doughty	with	the	feather	in	his	hat	and	his	hunchback	sidekick,	Pomolo
Paltry	the	Sly.	Stealers	of	the	Royal	Treasure	of	Li	Heng.	Cutters	of	the	Great
Rope	that	held	Drift	Avalii	in	one	place.	And	Zorala,	who	as	a	child	climbed
the	tallest	tree	in	the	forest,	then	found	he	couldn’t	get	back	down,	so	that’s
where	he	lived	for	years,	growing	up.	Until	the	woodsman	came—’
‘Gods	below,’	Cuttle	growled	from	the	blankets	he	remained	under,
‘someone	cut	her	throat,	please.’
‘Well,’	Smiles	said	with	a	tight,	eponymous	curve	of	her	mouth,	‘at	least	I
started	the	night	in	a	good	mood.’
‘She	means	she	had	a	most	satisfying—’
‘Clack	the	teeth	together,	Koryk,	or	I’ll	cut	those	braids	off	when	you’re
sleeping	and	trust	me,	you	won’t	like	what	I’ll	use	’em	for.	And	you,	Bottle,
don’t	let	that	give	you	any	ideas,	neither.	I	took	the	blame	for	something	you
did	once,	but	never	again.’
‘I	wouldn’t	cut	off	Koryk’s	braids,’	Bottle	said.	‘He	needs	them	to	sneeze
into.’
‘Get	moving,	Cuttle,’	Fiddler	said	as	he	strode	among	them.	‘Look	at
Corabb	–	he’s	the	only	one	actually	ready—’
‘No	I’m	not,’	the	man	replied.	‘I	just	fell	asleep	in	my	armour,	Sergeant,
and	now	I	need	somewhere	to	pee.	Only—’
‘Never	mind,’	Fiddler	cut	in.	‘Let’s	see	if	we	can’t	stumble	onto	some	Edur
tonight.’
‘We	could	start	a	forest	fire,’	Koryk	said.
‘But	we	happen	to	be	in	it,’	Tarr	pointed	out.
‘It	was	just	an	idea.’


	
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	admitted	to	himself	that	these	Malazans	were
nothing	like	the	soldiers	of	the	Dogslayers,	or	the	warriors	of	Leoman’s	army.
He	was	not	even	sure	if	they	were	human.	More	like…animals.	Endlessly
bickering	ones	at	that,	like	a	pack	of	starving	dogs.
They	pretty	much	ignored	him,	which	was	a	good	thing.	Even	Bottle,	to
whom	the	sergeant	had	instructed	Corabb	to	stay	close.	Guarding	someone
else’s	back	was	something	Corabb	was	familiar	with,	so	he	had	no	issue	with
that	command.	Even	though	Bottle	was	a	mage	and	he	wasn’t	too	sure	about
mages.	They	made	deals	with	gods	–	but	one	didn’t	have	to	be	a	mage	to	do
that,	he	knew.	No,	one	could	be	a	most	trusted	leader,	a	commander	whose
warriors	would	follow	him	into	the	pit	of	the	Abyss	itself.	Even	someone	like
that	could	make	deals	with	gods,	and	so	doom	his	every	follower	in	a	fiery
cataclysm	even	as	that	one	ran	away.
Yes,	ran	away.
He	was	pleased	that	he	had	got	over	all	that.	Old	history,	and	old	history
was	old	so	it	didn’t	mean	anything	any	more,	because…well,	because	it	was
old.	He	had	a	new	history,	now.	It	had	begun	in	the	rubble	beneath	Y’Ghatan.
Among	these…animals.	Still,	there	was	Fiddler	and	Corabb	knew	he	would
follow	his	sergeant	because	the	man	was	worth	following.	Not	like	some
people.
An	army	of	fourteen	seemed	a	little	small,	but	it	would	have	to	do	for	now.
He	hoped,	however,	that	somewhere	ahead	–	further	inland	–	they’d	come	to	a
desert.	Too	many	trees	in	this	wet,	bad-smelling	forest.	And	he’d	like	to	get	on
a	horse	again,	too.	All	this	walking	was,	he	was	certain,	unhealthy.
As	the	squad	left	the	glade,	slipping	into	the	deeper	darkness	beyond,	he
moved	alongside	Bottle,	who	glanced	over	and	grimaced.	‘Here	to	protect	me
from	bats,	Corabb?’
The	warrior	shrugged.	‘If	they	try	attacking	you	I	will	kill	them.’
‘Don’t	you	dare.	I	happen	to	like	bats.	I	talk	to	them,	in	fact.’
‘The	same	as	that	rat	and	her	pups	you	kept,	right?’
‘Exactly.’
‘I	was	surprised,	Bottle,	that	you	left	them	to	burn	on	the	transports.’
‘I’d	never	do	that.	I	shipped	them	onto	the	Froth	Wolf.	Some	time	ago,	in
fact—’
‘So	you	could	spy	on	the	Adjunct,	yes.’
‘It	was	an	act	of	mercy	–	the	one	ship	I	knew	would	be	safe,	you	see—’
‘And	so	you	could	spy.’


‘All	right,	fine.	So	I	could	spy.	Let’s	move	on	to	another	subject.	Did
Leoman	ever	tell	you	about	his	bargain	with	the	Queen	of	Dreams?’
Corabb	scowled.	‘I	don’t	like	that	subject.	It’s	old	history,	which	means
nobody	talks	about	it	any	more.’
‘Fine,	so	why	didn’t	you	go	with	him?	I’m	sure	he	offered.’
‘I	will	kill	the	next	bat	I	see.’
Someone	hissed	from	up	ahead:	‘Stop	that	jabbering,	idiots!’
Corabb	wished	he	was	riding	a	fine	horse,	across	a	sun-blistered	desert	–
no-one	could	truly	understand	the	magic	wonder	of	water,	unless	they	had
spent	time	in	a	desert.	Here,	there	was	so	much	of	it	a	man’s	feet	could	rot	off
and	that	wasn’t	right.	‘This	land	is	mad,’	he	muttered.
Bottle	grunted.	‘More	like	deathless.	Layer	on	layer,	ghosts	tangled	in
every	root,	squirming	restlessly	under	every	stone.	Owls	can	see	them,	you
know.	Poor	things.’
Another	hiss	from	ahead	of	them.
It	started	to	rain.
Even	the	sky	holds	water	in	contempt.	Madness.
	
Trantalo	Kendar,	youngest	son	among	four	brothers	in	a	coastal	clan	of	the
Beneda	Tiste	Edur,	rode	with	surprising	grace,	unmatched	by	any	of	his	Edur
companions,	alas.	He	was	the	only	one	in	his	troop	who	actually	liked	horses.
Trantalo	had	been	a	raw	fifteen	years	of	age	at	the	conquest,	unblooded,	and
the	closest	he	had	come	to	fighting	had	been	as	an	apprentice	to	a	distantly
related	aunt	who	had	served	as	a	healer	in	Hannan	Mosag’s	army.
Under	her	bitter	command,	he	had	seen	the	terrible	damage	war	did	to
otherwise	healthy	warriors.	The	ghastly	wounds,	the	suppurating	burns	and
limbs	withered	from	Letherii	sorcery.	And,	walking	the	fields	of	battle	in
search	of	the	wounded,	he	had	seen	the	same	horrid	destruction	among	dead
and	dying	Letherii	soldiers.
Although	young,	something	of	the	eagerness	for	battle	had	left	him	then,
driving	him	apart	from	his	friends.	Too	many	spilled	out	intestines,	too	many
crushed	skulls,	too	many	desperate	pleas	for	help	answered	by	naught	but
crows	and	gulls.	He	had	bound	countless	wounds,	had	stared	into	the	glazed
eyes	of	warriors	shocked	by	their	own	mortality,	or,	worse,	despairing	with	the
misery	of	lost	limbs,	scarred	faces,	lost	futures.
He	did	not	count	himself	clever,	nor	in	any	other	way	exceptional	–
barring,	perhaps,	his	talent	for	riding	horses	–	but	he	now	rode	with	eleven
veteran	Edur	warriors,	four	of	them	Beneda,	including	the	troop	commander,


Estav	Kendar,	Trantalo’s	eldest	brother.	And	he	was	proud	to	be	at	the	column’s
head,	first	down	this	coastal	track	that	led	to	Boaral	Keep,	where,	as	he
understood	it,	some	sort	of	Letherii	impropriety	demanded	Edur	attention.
This	was	as	far	south	from	Rennis	as	he	had	been	since	managing	to	flee
his	aunt’s	clutches	just	inland	of	the	city	of	Awl.	Trantalo	had	not	seen	the	walls
of	Letheras,	nor	the	battlefields	surrounding	it,	and	for	that	he	was	glad,	for	he
had	heard	that	the	sorcery	in	those	final	clashes	had	been	the	most	horrifying
of	them	all.
Life	in	Rennis	had	been	one	of	strange	privilege.	To	be	Tiste	Edur	alone
seemed	sufficient	reason	for	both	fear	and	respect	among	the	subservient
Letherii.	He	had	exulted	in	the	respect.	The	fear	had	dismayed	him,	but	he	was
not	so	naive	as	not	to	understand	that	without	that	fear,	there	would	be	none	of
the	respect	that	so	pleased	him.	‘The	threat	of	reprisal,’	Estav	had	told	him	the
first	week	of	his	arrival.	‘This	is	what	keeps	the	pathetic	creatures	cowering.
And	there	will	be	times,	young	brother,	when	we	shall	have	to	remind	them	–
bloodily	–	of	that	threat.’
Seeking	to	tug	down	his	elation	was	the	apprehension	that	this	journey,
down	to	this	in-the-middle-of-nowhere	keep,	was	just	that	–	the	delivery	of
reprisal.	Blood-splashed	adjudication.	It	was	no	wonder	the	Letherii	strove	to
keep	the	Edur	out	of	such	disputes.	We	are	not	interested	in	niceties.	Details
bore	us.	And	so	swords	will	be	drawn,	probably	this	very	night.
Estav	would	make	no	special	demands	of	him,	he	knew.	It	was	enough	that
he	rode	point	on	the	journey.	Once	at	the	keep,	Trantalo	suspected	he	would	be
stationed	to	guard	the	gate	or	some	such	thing.	He	was	more	than	satisfied	with
that.
The	sun’s	light	was	fast	fading	on	the	narrow	track	leading	to	the	keep.
They	had	a	short	time	earlier	left	the	main	coastal	road,	and	here	on	this	lesser
path	the	banks	were	steep,	almost	chest-high	were	one	standing	rather	than
riding,	and	braided	with	dangling	roots.	The	trees	pressed	in	close	from	both
sides,	branches	almost	entwining	overhead.	Rounding	a	twist	in	the	trail,
Trantalo	caught	first	sight	of	the	stockade,	the	rough	boles	–	still	bearing	most
of	their	bark	–	irregularly	tilted	and	sunken.	A	half-dozen	decrepit	outbuildings
crouched	against	a	stand	of	alders	and	birch	to	the	left	and	a	flatbed	wagon
with	a	broken	axle	squatted	in	high	grasses	just	to	the	right	of	the	gate.
Trantalo	drew	rein	before	the	entrance.	The	gate	was	open.	The	single
door,	made	of	saplings	and	a	Z-shaped	frame	of	planks,	had	been	pushed	well
to	one	side	and	left	there,	its	base	snarled	with	grasses.	The	warrior	could	see
through	to	the	compound	beyond,	oddly	lifeless.	Hearing	his	fellow	Edur	draw
closer	at	the	canter,	he	edged	his	horse	forward	until	he	made	out	the	smoke-


stained	façade	of	the	keep	itself.	No	lights	from	any	of	the	vertical	slit
windows.	And	the	front	door	yawned	wide.
‘Why	do	you	hesitate,	Trantalo?’	Estav	inquired	as	he	rode	up.
‘Preda,’	Trantalo	said,	delighting,	as	ever,	in	these	new	Letherii	titles,	‘the
keep	appears	to	be	abandoned.	Perhaps	we	have	ridden	to	the	wrong	one—’
‘Boaral,’	affirmed	a	warrior	behind	Estav.	‘I’ve	been	here	before.’
‘And	is	it	always	this	quiet?’	Estav	asked,	one	brow	lifting	in	the	way
Trantalo	knew	so	well.
‘Nearly,’	the	warrior	said,	rising	gingerly	on	the	swivelling	Letherii
stirrups	to	look	round.	‘There	should	be	at	least	two	torches,	one	planted	above
that	wagon	–	then	one	in	the	courtyard	itself.’
‘No	guards?’
‘Should	be	at	least	one	–	could	be	he’s	staggered	off	to	the	latrine	trench
—’
‘No,’	said	Estav,	‘there’s	no-one	here.’	He	worked	his	horse	past	Trantalo’s
and	rode	through	the	gate.
Trantalo	followed.
The	two	brothers	approached	the	stepped	front	entrance	to	the	keep.
‘Estav,	something	wet	on	those	stairs.’
‘You’re	right.	Good	eye,	brother.’	The	Beneda	warrior	dismounted	with
obvious	relief,	passing	the	reins	over	to	Trantalo,	then	strode	towards	the	steps.
‘Blood-trail.’
‘Perhaps	a	mutiny?’
The	other	Edur	had	left	their	horses	with	one	of	their	company	and	were
now	moving	out	across	the	courtyard	to	search	the	stables,	smithy,	coop	and
well-house.
Estav	stood	at	the	base	of	the	steps,	eyes	on	the	ground.	‘A	body	has	been
dragged	outside,’	he	said,	tracking	the	blood-trail.
Trantalo	saw	his	brother ’s	head	lift	to	face	the	stable.	As	it	did	Estav
grunted	suddenly,	then	abruptly	sat	down.
‘Estav?’
Trantalo	looked	out	to	the	courtyard,	in	time	to	see	four	warriors	crumple.
Sudden	shouts	from	the	three	near	the	stables,	as	something	like	a	rock	sailed
down	into	their	midst.
A	flash	of	fire.	A	solid,	cracking	sound.	The	three	were	thrown	onto	their
backs.	As	a	small	cloud	bloomed,	there	was	shrieking.
Trantalo	kicked	his	boots	free	of	the	stirrups,	swung	one	leg	over	then
dropped	down	into	a	crouch.	His	mouth	was	dry	as	tinder.	His	heart	pounded	so
hard	in	his	chest	he	felt	half	deafened	by	its	drumbeat.	Drawing	his	sword,	he


hurried	over	to	his	brother.
‘Estav?’
Sitting,	legs	out	before	him	in	the	careless	manner	of	a	child,	hands	resting
on	the	muddy	ground.	Something	was	jutting	from	his	chest.	A	hand’s	length	of
a	shaft,	thicker	than	a	normal	arrow,	the	fletching	curved	fins	of	leather.	Blood
had	poured	down	from	Estav’s	mouth,	covering	his	chin	and	soaking	into	the
front	of	his	woollen	cloak.	His	staring	eyes	did	not	blink.
‘Estav?’
In	the	courtyard,	the	sharp	clash	of	blades.
Disbelieving,	Trantalo	dragged	his	eyes	from	his	brother ’s	corpse.	Two
Edur	warriors	were	attempting	a	fighting	withdrawal,	backing	towards	the
uneasy	horses	that	still	stood	five	or	so	paces	in	from	the	gate.	The	Edur	who
had	been	left	with	them	was	on	his	hands	and	knees,	crawling	for	the	opening.
There	was	something	jutting	from	the	side	of	his	head.
Difficult	to	make	out	who	the	attackers	were	in	the	darkness,	but	they	were
well	armed	and	armoured,	four	in	all,	maintaining	close	contact	with	the	last
two	Edur.
Smudged	movement	behind	them	–	Trantalo	leapt	to	his	feet,	about	to	cry
out	a	warning,	when	sudden	fire	filled	his	throat.	Gagging,	he	lurched	away
and	felt	something	cold	slide	out	from	the	side	of	his	neck.	Blood	gushed
down,	inside	and	out.	Coughing,	drowning,	he	fell	to	one	knee,	almost	within
reach	of	his	brother.	Blindness	closing	in,	he	lunged	towards	Estav,	arms
outstretched.
Estav?
He	never	made	it.

Managing	a	straight	line,	Hellian	walked	out	from	the	stable.	She	was	slightly
shivering,	now	that	the	time	of	serious	sweating	had	passed.	Fighting	always
evened	her	out.	She	didn’t	know	why	that	was	the	case,	but	it	was	and	all	in	all
probably	a	good	thing,	too.	‘Someone	light	a	damned	lantern,’	she	growled.
‘You,	Maybe,	put	that	sharper	away	–	we	got	’em	all.’	She	let	out	a	loud	sigh.
‘The	big	nasty	enemy.’
Drawing	nearer	the	two	Edur	down	in	front	of	the	keep,	she	waved	her
sword.	‘Tavos,	check	those	two.	It	ain’t	enough	to	stab	’im	then	just	stand	there
looking	down.	Might	be	one	last	bite	in	’im,	you	know.’
‘Both	dead	as	my	sex-life,’	Tavos	Pond	said.	‘Who	sniped	the	first	one,
Sergeant?	Damned	fine	shot.’


‘Lutes,’	she	replied,	now	watching	Urb	lead	the	others	on	a	walk-past	of	the
Edur	bodies	in	the	courtyard.	‘Leaned	the	weapon	on	my	back.’
‘Your	back?’
‘I	was	throwing	up,	if	it’s	any	of	your	business.	Between	heaves,	he	let	go.
Got	him	dead	centre,	didn’t	he?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘And	you	didn’t	want	t’bring	the	rum.	Well,	that’s	why	I’m	in	charge	and
you’re	not.	Where’s	my	corporal?’
‘Here.
‘Here.’
‘Gather	up	them	horses	–	I	don’t	care	what	the	Fist	ordered,	we’re	going	to
ride.’
At	that	Urb	glanced	over,	then	approached.	‘Hellian—’
‘Don’t	even	try	to	sweet-talk	me.	I	almost	remember	what	you	did.’	She
drew	out	her	flask	and	drank	down	a	mouthful.	‘So	be	careful,	Urb.	Now,
everybody	who	loosed	quarrels	go	find	them	and	that	means	all	of	them!’	She
looked	back	down	at	the	two	dead	Edur	by	the	entrance.
‘Think	we’re	the	first	to	draw	blood?’	Tavos	Pond	asked,	crouching	to
clean	the	blade	of	his	sword	on	the	cloak	of	the	older	Edur.
‘Big	fat	war,	Tavos	Pond.	That’s	what	we	got	ourselves	here.’
‘They	weren’t	so	hard,	Sergeant.’
‘Wasn’t	expecting	nothing	either,	were	they?	You	think	we	can	just	ambush
our	way	all	the	way	to	Letheras?	Think	again.’	She	drank	a	couple	more
mouthfuls,	then	sighed	and	glowered	over	at	Urb.	‘How	soon	before	they’re
the	ones	doing	the	ambushin’?	That’s	why	I	mean	for	us	to	ride	–	we’re	gonna
stay	ahead	of	the	bad	news	’s	long	as	we	can.	That	way	we	can	be	the	bad	news,
right?	The	way	it’s	s’posed	t’be.’
Corporal	Reem	walked	up	to	Urb.	‘Sergeant,	we	got	us	twelve	horses.’
‘So	we	get	one	each,’	Hellian	said.	‘Perfect.’
‘By	my	count,’	said	Reem	with	narrowed	eyes,	‘someone’s	going	to	have
to	ride	double.’
‘If	you	say	so.	Now,	let’s	get	these	bodies	dragged	away	–	they	got	any
coin?	Anybody	checked?’
‘Some,’	said	Maybe.	‘But	mostly	just	polished	stones.’
‘Polished	stones?’
‘First	I	thought	slingstones,	but	none	of	them’s	carrying	slings.	So,	aye,
Sergeant.	Polished	stones.’
Hellian	turned	away	as	the	soldiers	set	off	to	dispose	of	the	Edur	corpses.
Oponn’s	pull,	finding	this	keep,	and	finding	nobody	in	it	but	one	freshly	dead


Letherii	in	the	hallway.	Place	had	been	cleaned	out,	although	there’d	been	some
foodstocks	in	the	cold-rooms.	Not	a	drop	of	wine	or	ale,	the	final	proof,	as	far
as	she	was	concerned,	that	this	foreign	empire	was	a	mess	and	useless	besides
and	pretty	much	worth	destroying	down	to	its	very	last	brick.
Too	bad	they	weren’t	going	to	get	a	chance	to	do	so.
But	then,	it	does	a	body	good	to	misunderstand	orders	on	occasion.	So,	let’s
go	hunting	Edur	heads.	Hellian	faced	the	courtyard	again.	Damn	this	darkness.
Easy	enough	for	the	mages,	maybe.	And	these	grey-skins.	‘Urb,’	she	said	in	a
low	voice.
He	edged	closer,	warily.	‘Hellian?’
‘We	need	us	to	arrange	our	ambushes	for	dusk	and	dawn.’
‘Aye.	You’re	right.	You	know,	I’m	glad	our	squads	were	paired	up.’
‘Of	course	you	are.	You	unnerstand	me,	Urb.	You’re	the	only	one	who
does,	you	know.’	She	wiped	her	nose	with	the	back	of	one	hand.	‘It’s	a	sad
thing,	Urb.	A	sad	thing.’
‘What?	Killing	these	Tiste	Edur?’
She	blinked	at	him.	‘No,	you	oaf.	The	fact	that	nobody	else	unnerstands
me.’
‘Aye,	Hellian.	Tragic.’
‘That’s	what	Banaschar	always	said	to	me,	no	matter	what	I	was	talking
about.	He’d	just	look	at	me,	like	you	did	there,	and	say	tragic.	So	what’s	all	that
about?’	She	shook	the	flask	–	still	half	full,	but	another	mouthful	means	I’m
running	it	down,	so’s	I’ll	need	to	top	it	up.	Gotta	be	measured	about	these
things,	in	case	something	terrible	happens	and	I	can’t	get	a	fast	refill.	‘Come
on,	it’s	time	to	ride.’
‘And	if	we	run	into	a	troop	of	Letherii?’
Hellian	frowned.	‘Then	we	do	as	Keneb	told	us.	We	talk	to	’em.’
‘And	if	they	don’t	like	what	we	say?’
‘Then	we	kill	’em,	of	course.’
‘And	we’re	riding	for	Letheras?’
She	smiled	at	Urb.	Then	tapped	the	side	of	her	slightly	numb	head	with	one
finger.	‘I	memmored	th’map	–	ized,	memmized	the	map.	There’s	towns,	Urb.
An’	the	closer	we	get	t’Letheras,	the	more	of	them.	Wha’s	in	towns,	Urb?
Taverns.	Bars.	So,	we’re	not	takin’	a	straight,	pre-dic-table	route.’
‘We’re	invading	Lether	from	tavern	to	tavern?’
‘Aye.’
‘Hellian,	I	hate	to	say	this,	but	that’s	kind	of	clever.’
‘Aye.	And	that	way	we	can	eat	real	cooked	food,	too.	It’s	the	civilized	way
of	conductin’	war.	Hellian’s	way.’


The	bodies	joined	the	lone	Letherii	in	the	latrine	pit.	Half	naked,	stripped
of	valuables,	they	were	dumped	down	into	the	thick,	turgid	slop,	which	proved
deeper	than	anyone	had	expected,	as	it	swallowed	up	those	corpses,	leaving	not
a	trace.
The	Malazans	threw	the	polished	stones	after	them.
Then	rode	off	down	the	dark	road.
	
‘That	has	the	look	of	a	way	station,’	the	captain	said	under	her	breath.
Beak	squinted,	then	said,	‘I	smell	horses,	sir.	That	long	building	over
there.’
‘Stables,’	Faradan	Sort	said,	nodding.	‘Any	Tiste	Edur	here?’
Beak	shook	his	head.	‘Deepest	blue	of	Rashan	–	that’s	their	candle,	mostly.
Not	as	deep	as	Kurald	Galain.	They	call	it	Kurald	Emurlahn,	but	these	ones
here,	well,	there’s	skuzzy	foam	on	that	blue,	like	what	sits	on	waves	outside	a
harbour.	That’s	chaotic	power.	Sick	power.	Power	like	pain	if	pain	was	good,
maybe	even	strong.	I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	like	these	Edur	here.’
‘They’re	here?’
‘No.	I	meant	this	continent,	sir.	There’s	just	Letherii	in	there.	Four.	In	that
small	house	beside	the	road.’
‘No	magic?’
‘Just	some	charms.’
‘I	want	to	steal	four	horses,	Beak.	Can	you	cast	a	glamour	on	those
Letherii?’
‘The	Grey	Candle,	yes.	But	they’ll	find	out	after	we’ve	gone.’
‘True.	Any	suggestions?’
Beak	was	happy.	He	had	never	been	so	happy.	This	captain	was	asking	him
things.	Asking	for	suggestions.	Advice.	And	it	wasn’t	just	for	show	neither.	I’m
in	love	with	her.	To	her	question	he	nodded,	then	tilted	up	his	skullcap	helm	to
scratch	in	his	hair,	and	said,	‘Not	the	usual	glamour,	sir.	Something	lots	more
complicated.	Finishing	with	the	Orange	Candle—’
‘Which	is?’
‘Tellann.’
‘Is	this	going	to	be	messy?’
‘Not	if	we	take	all	the	horses,	Captain.’
He	watched	her	studying	him,	wondered	what	she	saw.	She	wasn’t	much	for
expressions	on	that	hard	but	beautiful	face.	Not	even	her	eyes	showed	much.	He
loved	her,	true,	but	he	was	also	a	little	frightened	of	Faradan	Sort.
‘All	right,	Beak,	where	do	you	want	me?’


‘In	the	stables	with	all	the	horses	ready	to	leave,	and	maybe	two	saddled.
Oh,	and	feed	for	us	to	take	along.’
‘And	I	can	do	all	that	without	an	alarm’s	being	raised?’
‘They	won’t	hear	a	thing,	sir.	In	fact,	you	could	go	up	right	now	and	knock
on	their	door	and	they	won’t	hear	it.’
Still	she	hesitated.	‘So	I	can	just	walk	over	to	the	stables,	right	out	in	the
open,	right	now?’
Beak	nodded	with	a	broad	smile.
‘Gods	below,’	she	muttered,	‘I	don’t	know	if	I’ll	ever	get	used	to	this.’
‘Mockra	has	their	minds,	sir.	They’ve	got	no	defences.	They’ve	never	been
glamoured	before,	I	don’t	think.’
She	set	out	in	a	half-crouch,	moving	quickly,	although	none	of	that	was
necessary,	and	moments	later	was	inside	the	stables.
It	would	take	some	time,	Beak	knew,	for	her	to	do	all	that	he’d	asked	–	I
just	told	a	captain	what	to	do!	And	she’s	doing	it!	Does	that	mean	she	loves	me
right	back?	He	shook	himself.	Not	a	good	idea,	letting	his	mind	wander	just
now.	He	edged	out	from	the	cover	of	the	trees	lining	this	side	of	the	stony	road.
Crouched	to	pick	up	a	small	rock,	which	he	then	spat	on	and	set	back	down	–	to
hold	the	Mockra	in	place	–	as	he	closed	his	eyes	and	sought	out	the	White
Candle.
Hood.	Death,	a	cold,	cold	place.	Even	the	air	was	dead.	In	his	mind	he
looked	in	on	that	realm	as	if	peering	through	a	window,	the	wooden	sill	thick
with	melted	candle	wax,	the	white	candle	itself	flickering	to	one	side.	Beyond,
ash-heaped	ground	strewn	with	bones	of	all	sorts.	He	reached	through,	closed	a
hand	on	the	shaft	of	a	heavy	longbone,	and	drew	it	back.	Working	quickly,
Beak	pulled	as	many	bones	as	would	fit	through	the	wandering	window,	always
choosing	big	ones.	He	had	no	idea	what	the	beasts	had	been	to	which	all	these
bones	belonged,	but	they	would	do.
When	he	was	satisfied	with	the	white,	dusty	pile	heaped	on	the	road,	Beak
closed	the	window	and	opened	his	eyes.	Glancing	across	he	saw	the	captain
standing	at	the	stables,	gesturing	at	him.
Beak	waved	back,	then	turned	and	showed	the	bones	the	Purple	Candle.
They	lifted	from	the	road	like	feathers	on	an	updraught,	and	as	the	mage
hurried	over	to	join	Faradan	Sort	the	bones	followed	in	his	wake,	floating
waist-high	above	the	ground.
The	captain	disappeared	back	inside	the	stables	before	Beak	arrived,	then
emerged,	leading	the	horses,	just	as	he	padded	up	to	the	broad	doors.
Grinning,	Beak	went	into	the	stables,	the	bones	tracking	him.	Once	inside,
smelling	that	wonderful	musty	smell	of	horses,	leather,	dung	and	piss-damp


straw,	he	scattered	the	bones,	a	few	into	each	stall,	snuffing	out	the	purple
candle	when	he	was	done.	He	walked	over	to	the	mound	of	straw	at	one	end,
closed	his	eyes	to	awaken	the	Orange	Candle,	then	spat	into	the	straw.
Rejoining	the	captain	outside	he	said	to	her,	‘We	can	go	now.’
‘That’s	it?’
‘Yes	sir.	We’ll	be	a	thousand	paces	down	the	road	before	the	Tellann	lights
up—’
‘Fire?’
‘Yes	sir.	A	terrible	fire	–	they	won’t	even	be	able	to	get	close	–	and	it’ll
burn	fast	but	go	nowhere	else	and	by	the	morning	there’ll	be	nothing	but
ashes.’
‘And	charred	bones	that	might	belong	to	horses.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘You’ve	done	well	tonight,	Beak,’	Faradan	Sort	said,	swinging	up	onto	one
of	the	saddled	horses.
Feeling	impossibly	light	on	his	feet,	Beak	leapt	onto	the	other	one	then
looked	back,	with	pride,	at	the	remaining	seven	beasts.	Decent	animals,	just
badly	treated.	Which	made	it	good	that	they	were	stealing	them.	Malazans	knew
how	to	care	for	their	horses,	after	all.
Then	he	frowned	and	looked	down	at	his	stirrups.
The	captain	was	doing	the	same,	he	saw	a	moment	later,	with	her	own.
‘What	is	this?’	she	demanded	in	a	hiss.
‘Broken?’	Beak	wondered.
‘Not	that	I	can	see	–	and	yours	are	identical	to	mine.	What	fool	invented
these?’
‘Captain,’	said	Beak,	‘I	don’t	think	we	have	to	worry	much	about	Letherii
cavalry,	do	we?’
‘You’ve	that	right,	Beak.	Well,	let’s	ride.	If	we’re	lucky,	we	won’t	break
our	necks	twenty	paces	up	the	road.’
	
The	father	of	the	man	named	Throatslitter	used	to	tell	stories	of	the	Emperor ’s
conquest	of	Li	Heng,	long	before	Kellanved	was	emperor	of	anywhere.	True,
he’d	usurped	Mock	on	Malaz	Island	and	had	proclaimed	himself	the	island’s
ruler,	but	since	when	was	Malaz	Island	anything	but	a	squalid	haven	for
pirates?	Few	on	the	mainland	took	much	notice	of	such	things.	A	new
tyrannical	criminal	in	place	of	the	old	tyrannical	criminal.
The	conquest	of	Li	Heng	changed	all	that.	There’d	been	no	fleet	of	ships
crowding	the	river	mouth	to	the	south	and	east	of	the	city;	nothing,	in	fact,	to


announce	the	assault.	Instead,	on	a	fine	spring	morning	no	different	from
countless	other	such	mornings,	Throatslitter ’s	father,	along	with	thousands	of
other	doughty	citizens,	had,	upon	a	casual	glance	towards	the	Inner	Focus
where	stood	the	Palace	of	the	Protectress,	noted	the	sudden	inexplicable
presence	of	strange	figures	on	the	walls	and	battlements.	Squat,	wide,	wearing
furs	and	wielding	misshapen	swords	and	axes.	Helmed	in	bone.
What	had	happened	to	the	vaunted	Guard?	And	why	were	tendrils	of	smoke
rising	from	the	barracks	of	the	courtyard	and	parade	ground?	And	was	it	–	was
it	truly	–	the	Protectress	herself	who	had	been	seen	plunging	from	the	High
Tower	beside	the	City	Temple	at	the	heart	of	the	cynosure?
Someone	had	cut	off	Li	Heng’s	head	in	the	Palace.	Undead	warriors	stood
sentinel	on	the	walls	and,	a	short	time	later,	emerged	in	their	thousands	from
the	Inner	Focus	Gate	to	occupy	the	city.	Li	Heng’s	standing	army	–	after	a	halfdozen	suicidal	skirmishes	–	capitulated	that	same	day.	Kellanved	now	ruled	the
city-state,	and	officers	and	nobles	of	the	high	court	knelt	in	fealty,	and	the
reverberations	of	this	conquest	rattled	the	windows	of	palaces	across	the	entire
mainland	of	Quon	Tali.
‘This,	son,	was	the	awakening	of	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass.	The	Emperor’s
undead	army.	I	was	there,	on	the	streets,	and	saw	with	my	own	eyes	those
terrible	warriors	with	their	pitted	eyeholes,	the	stretched,	torn	skin,	the	wisps
of	hair	bleached	of	all	colour.	They	say,	son,	that	the	Logros	were	always	there,
below	Reacher’s	Falls.	Maybe	in	the	Crevasse,	maybe	not.	Maybe	just	the	very
dust	that	blew	in	from	the	west	every	damned	day	and	night	–	who	can	say?	But
he	woke	them,	he	commanded	them,	and	I	tell	you	after	that	day	every	ruler	on
Quon	Tali	saw	a	skull’s	face	in	their	silver	mirror,	aye.
‘The	fleet	of	ships	came	later,	under	the	command	of	three	madmen	–	Crust,
Urko	and	Nok	–	but	first	to	step	ashore	was	none	other	than	Surly	and	you	know
who	she’d	become,	don’t	you?’
Didn’t	he	just.	Command	of	the	T’lan	Imass	didn’t	stop	the	knife	in	the
back,	did	it?	This	detail	was	the	defining	revelation	of	Throatslitter ’s	life.
Command	thousands,	tens	of	thousands.	Command	sorcerors	and	imperial
fleets.	Hold	in	your	hand	the	lives	of	a	million	citizens.	The	real	power	was
none	of	this.	The	real	power	was	the	knife	in	the	hand,	the	hand	at	a	fool’s	back.
The	egalitarian	plunge.	There,	Father,	you	old	crab,	a	word	you’ve	never
heard	among	the	fifty	or	so	you	knew	about	in	your	long,	pointless	life.	Paint	on
pots,	now	there’s	a	useless	skill,	since	pots	never	survive,	and	so	all	those	lovely
images	end	up	in	pieces,	on	the	pebbled	beaches,	in	the	fill	between	walls,	on
the	fields	of	the	farmers.	And	it’s	true	enough,	isn’t	it,	Father,	that	your	private
firing	of	‘The	Coming	of	the	Logros’	proved	about	as	popular	as	a	whore’s	dose


of	the	face-eater?
Eldest	son	or	not,	mixing	glazes	and	circling	a	kiln	on	firing	day	was	not
the	future	he	dreamed	about.	But	you	can	paint	me,	Father,	and	call	it	‘The
Coming	of	the	Assassin’.	My	likeness	to	adorn	funeral	urns	–	those	who	fell	to
the	knife,	of	course.	Too	bad	you	never	understood	the	world	well	enough	to
honour	me.	My	chosen	profession.	My	war	against	inequity	in	this	miserable,
evil	existence.
And	striking	my	name	from	the	family	line,	well	now,	really,	that	was
uncalled	for.
Fourteen	years	of	age,	Throatslitter	found	himself	in	the	company	of
secretive	old	men	and	old	women.	The	why	and	the	how	were	without
relevance,	even	back	then.	His	future	was	set	out	before	him,	in	measured
strides,	and	not	even	the	gods	could	drive	him	from	this	cold	path.
He	wondered	about	his	old	masters	from	time	to	time.	All	dead,	of	course.
Surly	had	seen	to	that.	Not	that	death	meant	failure.	Her	agents	had	failed	in
tracking	down	Throatslitter,	after	all,	and	he	doubted	he	was	the	only	one	to
evade	the	Claws.	He	also	wondered	if	indeed	he	was	still	on	the	path	–	torn
away,	as	he	had	been,	from	the	Malazan	Empire.	But	he	was	a	patient	man;	one
in	his	profession	had	to	be,	after	all.
Still,	the	Adjunct	has	asked	for	loyalty.	For	service	to	an	unknown	cause.
We	are	to	be	unwitnessed,	she	said.	That	suits	me	fine.	It’s	how	assassins
conduct	their	trade.	So	he	would	go	along	with	her	and	this	Oponn-pushed
army	of	sorry	fools.	For	now.
He	stood,	arms	crossed,	shoulders	drawn	forward	as	he	leaned	against	the
wall,	and	could	feel	the	occasional	touch,	light	as	a	mouse’s	paw,	on	his	chest
as	he	watched,	with	half-hearted	interest,	the	proceedings	in	Brullyg’s	private
chamber.
The	poor	Shake	ruler	was	sweating	and	no	amount	of	his	favoured	ale
could	still	the	trembling	of	his	hands	as	he	sat	huddled	in	his	high-backed
chair,	eyes	on	the	tankard	in	his	grip	rather	than	on	the	two	armoured	women
standing	before	him.
Lostara	Yil,	Throatslitter	considered,	was	if	anything	better-looking	than
T’amber	had	been.	Or	at	least	more	closely	aligned	with	his	own	tastes.	The
Pardu	tattoos	were	sensuality	writ	on	skin,	and	the	fullness	of	her	figure	–
unsuccessfully	disguised	by	her	armour	–	moved	with	a	dancer ’s	grace	(when
she	moved,	which	she	wasn’t	doing	now,	although	the	promise	of	elegance	was
unmistakable).	The	Adjunct	stood	in	grim	contrast,	the	poor	woman.	Like	those
destined	to	dwell	in	the	shadows	of	more	attractive	friends,	she	suffered	the
comparison	with	every	sign	of	indifference,	but	Throatslitter	–	who	was


skilled	at	seeing	unspoken	truths	–	could	read	the	pain	that	dull	paucity
delivered,	and	this	was	a	human	truth,	no	more	or	less	sordid	than	all	the	other
human	truths.	Those	without	beauty	compensated	in	other	ways,	the	formal	but
artificial	ways	of	rank	and	power,	and	that	was	just	how	things	were	the	world
over.
Of	course	when	you’ve	finally	got	that	power,	it	doesn’t	matter	how	ugly
you	are,	you	can	breed	with	the	best.	Maybe	this	explained	Lostara’s	presence
at	Tavore’s	side.	But	Throatslitter	was	not	entirely	sure	of	that.	He	didn’t	think
they	were	lovers.	He	wasn’t	even	convinced	they	were	friends.
Aligned	near	the	wall	to	the	right	of	the	door	stood	the	rest	of	the	Adjunct’s
retinue.	Fist	Blistig,	his	blunt,	wide	face	shadowed	with	some	kind	of	spiritual
exhaustion.	Doesn’t	pay,	Adjunct,	to	keep	close	a	man	like	that	–	he	drains	life,
hope,	faith.	No,	Tavore,	you	need	to	get	rid	of	him	and	promote	some	new	Fists.
Faradan	Sort.	Madan	tul’Rada.	Fiddler.	Not	Captain	Kindly,	though,	don’t	even
think	that,	woman.	Not	unless	you	want	a	real	mutiny	on	your	hands.
Mutiny.	Well,	there,	he’d	said	it.	Thought	it,	actually,	but	that	was	close
enough.	To	conjure	the	word	was	to	awaken	the	possibility,	like	making	the
scratch	to	invite	the	fester.	The	Bonehunters	were	now	scattered	to	the	winds
and	that	was	a	terrible	risk.	He	suspected	that,	at	the	end	of	this	bizarre
campaign,	her	soldiers	would	come	trickling	back	in	paltry	few	number,	if	at
all.
Unwitnessed.	Most	soldiers	don’t	like	that	idea.	True,	it	made	them	hard	–
when	she	told	them	–	but	that	fierceness	can’t	last.	The	iron	is	too	cold.	Its	taste
too	bitter.	Gods,	just	look	at	Blistig	for	the	truth	of	that.
Beside	the	Fist	stood	Withal,	the	Meckros	blacksmith	–	the	man	we	went	to
Malaz	City	to	get,	and	we	still	don’t	know	why.	Oh,	there’s	blood	in	your
shadow,	isn’t	there?	Malazan	blood.	T’amber’s.	Kalam’s.	Maybe	Quick	Ben’s,
too.	Are	you	worth	it?	Throatslitter	had	yet	to	see	Withal	speaking	to	a	soldier.
Not	one,	not	a	word	of	thanks,	not	an	apology	for	the	lives	sacrificed.	He	was
here	because	the	Adjunct	needed	him.	For	what?	Hah,	not	like	she’s	talking,	is
it?	Not	our	cagey	Tavore	Paran.
To	Withal’s	right	stood	Banaschar,	a	deposed	high	priest	of	D’rek,	if	the
rumours	were	true.	Yet	another	passenger	in	this	damned	renegade	army.	But
Throatslitter	knew	Banaschar ’s	purpose.	Coin.	Thousands,	tens	of	thousands.
He’s	our	paymaster,	and	all	this	silver	and	gold	in	our	pouches	was	stolen	from
somewhere.	Has	to	be.	Nobody’s	that	rich.	The	obvious	answer?	Why,	how	about
the	Worm	of	Autumn’s	temple	coffers?
Pray	to	the	Worm,	pay	an	army	of	disgruntled	malcontents.	Somehow,	all
you	believers,	I	doubt	that	was	in	your	prayers.


Poor	Brullyg	had	few	allies	in	this	chamber.	Balm’s	source	of	lust,	this
Captain	Shurq	Elalle	of	the	privateer	Undying	Gratitude,	and	her	first	mate,
Skorgen	Kaban	the	Pretty.	And	neither	seemed	eager	to	leap	to	Brullyg’s	side
of	the	sandpit.
But	that	Shurq,	she	was	damned	watchful.	Probably	a	lot	more	dangerous
than	the	usurper	of	this	cruddy	island.
The	Adjunct	had	been	explaining,	in	decent	traders’	tongue,	the	new	rules
of	governance	on	Second	Maiden	Fort,	and	with	each	statement	Brullyg’s
expression	had	sagged	yet	further.
Entertaining,	if	one	was	inclined	towards	sardonic	humour.
‘Ships	from	our	fleet,’	she	was	now	explaining,	‘will	be	entering	the
harbour	to	resupply.	One	at	a	time,	since	it	wouldn’t	do	to	panic	your	citizens
—’
A	snort	from	Shurq	Elalle,	who	had	drawn	her	chair	to	one	side,	almost	in
front	of	where	Throatslitter	leaned	against	the	wall,	to	permit	herself	a	clear
view	of	host	and	guests.	Beside	her,	Skorgen	was	filling	his	prodigious	gut
with	Brullyg’s	favourite	ale,	the	tankard	in	one	hand,	the	finger	of	the	other
hand	exploring	the	depths	of	one	mangled,	rose-red	ear.	The	man	had	begun	a
succession	of	belches,	each	released	in	a	heavy	sigh,	that	had	been	ongoing	for
half	a	bell	now,	with	no	sign	of	ending.	The	entire	room	stank	of	his	yeasty
exhalations.
The	captain’s	derisive	expostulation	drew	the	Adjunct’s	attention.	‘I
understand	your	impatience,’	Tavore	said	in	a	cool	voice,	‘and	no	doubt	you
wish	to	leave.	Unfortunately,	I	must	speak	to	you	and	will	do	so	shortly—’
‘Once	you’ve	thoroughly	detailed	Brullyg’s	emasculation,	you	mean.’
Shurq	lifted	one	shapely	leg	and	crossed	it	on	the	other,	then	laced	together	her
hands	on	her	lap,	smiling	sweetly	up	at	the	Adjunct.
Tavore’s	colourless	eyes	regarded	the	pirate	captain	for	a	long	moment,
then	she	glanced	over	to	where	stood	her	retinue.	‘Banaschar.’
‘Adjunct?’
‘What	is	wrong	with	this	woman?’
‘She’s	dead,’	the	ex-priest	replied.	‘A	necromantic	curse.’
‘Are	you	certain?’
Throatslitter	cleared	his	throat	and	said,	‘Adjunct,	Corporal	Deadsmell
said	the	same	thing	when	we	saw	her	down	in	the	tavern.’
Brullyg	was	staring	at	Shurq	with	wide,	bulging	eyes,	his	jaw	hanging
slack.
At	Shurq’s	side,	Skorgen	Kaban	was	suddenly	frowning,	his	eyes	darting.
Then	he	withdrew	the	finger	that	had	been	plugging	one	ear	and	looked	down


at	the	gunk	smeared	all	over	it.	After	a	moment,	Pretty	slid	that	finger	into	his
mouth.
‘Well,’	Shurq	sighed	up	at	Tavore,	‘you’ve	done	it	now,	haven’t	you?	Alas,
the	coin	of	this	secret	is	the	basest	of	all,	namely	vanity.	Now,	if	you	possess
some	unpleasant	bigotry	regarding	the	undead,	then	I	must	re-evaluate	my
assessment	of	you,	Adjunct.	And	your	motley	companions.’
To	Throatslitter ’s	surprise,	Tavore	actually	smiled.	‘Captain,	the	Malazan
Empire	is	well	acquainted	with	undead,	although	few	possessing	your	host	of
charms.’
Gods	below,	she’s	flirting	with	this	sweet-scented	corpse!
‘Host	indeed,’	murmured	Banaschar,	then	was	so	rude	as	to	offer	no
elaboration.	Hood-damned	priests.	Good	for	nothing	at	all.
‘In	any	case,’	Tavore	resumed,	‘we	are	without	prejudice	in	this	matter.	I
apologize	for	posing	the	question	leading	to	this	unveiling.	I	was	simply
curious.’
‘So	am	I,’	Shurq	replied.	‘This	Malazan	Empire	of	yours	–	do	you	have
any	particular	reason	for	invading	the	Lether	Empire?’
‘I	was	led	to	understand	that	this	island	is	independent—’
‘So	it	is,	since	the	Edur	Conquest.	But	you’re	hardly	invading	one	squalid
little	island.	No.	You’re	just	using	this	to	stage	your	assault	on	the	mainland.	So
let	me	ask	again,	why?’
‘Our	enemy,’	the	Adjunct	said,	all	amusement	now	gone,	‘are	the	Tiste
Edur,	Captain.	Not	the	Letherii.	In	fact,	we	would	encourage	a	general	uprising
of	Letherii—’
‘You	won’t	get	it,’	Shurq	Elalle	said.
‘Why	not?’	Lostara	Yil	asked.
‘Because	we	happen	to	like	things	the	way	they	are.	More	or	less.’	When
no-one	spoke,	she	smiled	and	continued,	‘The	Edur	may	well	have	usurped	the
rulers	in	their	absurd	half-finished	palace	in	Letheras.	And	they	may	well	have
savaged	a	few	Letherii	armies	on	the	way	to	the	capital.	But	you	will	not	find
bands	of	starving	rebels	in	the	forests	dreaming	of	independence.’
‘Why	not?’	Lostara	demanded	again	in	an	identical	tone.
‘They	conquered,	but	we	won.	Oh,	I	wish	Tehol	Beddict	was	here,	since
he’s	much	better	at	explaining	things,	but	let	me	try.	I	shall	imagine	Tehol
sitting	here,	to	help	me	along.	Conquest.	There	are	different	kinds	of
conquests.	Now,	we	have	Tiste	Edur	lording	it	here	and	there,	the	elite	whose
word	is	law	and	never	questioned.	After	all,	their	sorcery	is	cruel,	their
judgement	cold	and	terribly	simplistic.	They	are,	in	fact,	above	all	law	–	as	the
Letherii	understand	the	notion—’


‘And,’	Lostara	pressed,	‘how	do	they	understand	the	notion	of	law?’
‘Well,	a	set	of	deliberately	vague	guidelines	one	hires	an	advocate	to	evade
when	necessary.’
‘What	were	you,	Shurq	Elalle,	before	you	were	a	pirate?’
‘A	thief.	I’ve	employed	a	few	advocates	in	my	day.	In	any	case,	my	point	is
this.	The	Edur	rule	but	either	through	ignorance	or	indifference	–	and	let’s	face
it,	without	ignorance	you	don’t	get	to	indifference	–	they	care	little	about	the
everyday	administration	of	the	empire.	So,	that	particular	apparatus	remains
Letherii	and	is,	these	days,	even	less	regulated	than	it	has	been	in	the	past.’	She
smiled	again,	one	leg	rocking.	‘As	for	us	lower	orders,	well,	virtually	nothing
has	changed.	We	stay	poor.	Debt-ridden	and	comfortably	miserable	and,	as
Tehol	might	say,	miserable	in	our	comfort.’
‘So,’	Lostara	said,	‘not	even	the	Letherii	nobles	would	welcome	a	change
in	the	present	order.’
‘Them	least	of	all.’
‘What	of	your	Emperor?’
‘Rhulad?	From	all	accounts,	he	is	insane,	and	effectively	isolated	besides.
The	empire	is	ruled	by	the	Chancellor,	and	he’s	Letherii.	He	was	also
Chancellor	in	the	days	of	King	Diskanar,	and	he	was	there	to	ensure	that	the
transition	went	smoothly.’
A	grunt	from	Blistig,	and	he	turned	to	Tavore.	‘The	marines,	Adjunct,’	he
said	in	a	half-moan.
And	Throatslitter	understood	and	felt	a	dread	chill	seeping	through	him.
We	sent	them	in,	expecting	to	find	allies,	expecting	them	to	whip	the	countryside
into	a	belligerent	frenzy.	But	they	won’t	get	that.
The	whole	damned	empire	is	going	to	rise	up	all	right.	To	tear	out	their
throats.
Adjunct,	you	have	done	it	again.


Chapter	Fifteen

Crawl	down	sun	this	is	not	your	time
Black	waves	slide	under	the	sheathed	moon
upon	the	shore	a	silent	storm	a	will	untamed
heaves	up	from	the	red-skirled	foam
Scud	to	your	mountain	nests	you	iron	clouds
to	leave	the	sea	its	dancing	refuse	of	stars
on	this	host	of	salty	midnight	tides
Gather	drawn	and	swell	tight	your	tempest
lift	like	scaled	heads	from	the	blind	depths
all	your	effulgent	might	in	restless	roving	eyes
Reel	back	you	tottering	forests	this	night
the	black	waves	crash	on	the	black	shore
to	steal	the	flesh	from	your	bony	roots
death	comes,	shouldering	aside	in	cold	legion
in	a	marching	wind	this	dread	this	blood
this	reaper ’s	gale
The	Coming	Storm
Reffer
The	fist	slammed	down	at	the	far	end	of	the	table.	Food-crusted	cutlery	danced,
plates	thumped	then	skidded.	The	reverberation	–	heavy	as	thunder	–	rattled	the
goblets	and	shook	all	that	sat	down	the	length	of	the	long	table’s	crowded
world.
Fist	shivering,	pain	lancing	through	the	numb	shock,	Tomad	Sengar
slowly	sat	back.
Candle	flames	steadied,	seeming	eager	to	please	with	their	regained	calm,
the	pellucid	warmth	of	their	yellow	light	an	affront	nonetheless	to	the	Edur ’s
bitter	anger.
Across	from	him,	his	wife	lifted	a	silk	napkin	to	her	lips,	daubed	once,
then	set	it	down	and	regarded	her	husband.	‘Coward.’


Tomad	flinched,	his	gaze	shifting	away	to	scan	the	plastered	wall	to	his
right.	Lifting	past	the	discordant	object	hanging	there	to	some	place	less…
painful.	Damp	stains	painted	mottled	maps	near	the	ceiling.	Plaster	had	lifted,
buckled,	undermined	by	that	incessant	leakage.	Cracks	zigzagged	down	like	the
after-image	of	lightning.
‘You	will	not	see	him,’	Uruth	said.
‘He	will	not	see	me,’	Tomad	replied,	and	this	was	not	in	agreement.	It	was,
in	fact,	a	retort.
‘A	disgusting,	scrawny	Letherii	who	sleeps	with	young	boys	has	defeated
you,	husband.	He	stands	in	your	path	and	your	bowels	grow	weak.	Do	not
refute	my	words	–	you	will	not	even	meet	my	eyes.	You	have	surrendered	our
last	son.’
Tomad’s	lips	twisted	in	a	snarl.	‘To	whom,	Uruth?	Tell	me.	Chancellor
Triban	Gnol,	who	wounds	children	and	calls	it	love?’	He	looked	at	her	then,
unwilling	to	admit,	even	to	himself,	the	effort	that	gesture	demanded	of	him.
‘Shall	I	break	his	neck	for	you,	wife?	Easier	than	snapping	a	dead	branch.	What
do	you	think	his	bodyguards	will	do?	Stand	aside?’
‘Find	allies.	Our	kin—’
‘Are	fools.	Grown	soft	with	indolence,	blind	with	uncertainty.	They	are
more	lost	than	is	Rhulad.’
‘I	had	a	visitor	today,’	Uruth	said,	refilling	her	goblet	with	the	carafe	of
wine	that	had	nearly	toppled	from	the	table	with	Tomad’s	sudden	violence.
‘I	am	pleased	for	you.’
‘Perhaps	you	are.	A	K’risnan.	He	came	to	tell	me	that	Bruthen	Trana	has
disappeared.	He	suspects	that	Karos	Invictad	–	or	the	Chancellor	–	have	exacted
their	revenge.	They	have	murdered	Bruthen	Trana.	A	Tiste	Edur ’s	blood	is	on
their	hands.’
‘Can	your	K’risnan	prove	this?’
‘He	has	begun	on	that	path,	but	admits	to	little	optimism.	But	none	of	that
is,	truth	be	told,	what	I	would	tell	you.’
‘Ah,	so	you	think	me	indifferent	to	the	spilling	of	Edur	blood	by	Letherii
hands?’
‘Indifferent?	No,	husband.	Helpless.	Will	you	interrupt	me	yet	again?’
Tomad	said	nothing,	not	in	acquiescence,	but	because	he	had	run	out	of
things	to	say.	To	her.	To	anyone.
‘Good,’	she	said.	‘I	would	tell	you	this.	I	believe	the	K’risnan	was	lying.’
‘About	what?’
‘I	believe	he	knows	what	has	happened	to	Bruthen	Trana,	and	that	he	came
to	me	to	reach	the	women’s	council,	and	to	reach	you,	husband.	First,	to	gauge


my	reaction	to	the	news	at	the	time	of	its	telling,	then	to	gauge	our	more
measured	reaction	in	the	days	to	come.	Second,	by	voicing	his	suspicion,	false
though	it	is,	he	sought	to	encourage	our	growing	hatred	for	the	Letherii.	And
our	hunger	for	vengeance,	thus	continuing	this	feud	behind	curtains,	which,
presumably,	will	distract	Karos	and	Gnol.’
‘And,	so	distracted,	they	perchance	will	miss	comprehension	of	some
greater	threat	–	which	has	to	do	with	wherever	Bruthen	Trana	has	gone.’
‘Very	good,	husband.	Coward	you	may	be,	but	you	are	not	stupid.’	She
paused	to	sip,	then	said,	‘That	is	something.’
‘How	far	will	you	push	me,	wife?’
‘As	far	as	is	necessary.’
‘We	were	not	here.	We	were	sailing	half	this	damned	world.	We	returned	to
find	the	conspiracy	triumphant,	dominant	and	well	entrenched.	We	returned,	to
find	that	we	have	lost	our	last	son.’
‘Then	we	must	win	him	back.’
‘There	is	no-one	left	to	win,	Uruth.	Rhulad	is	mad.	Nisall’s	betrayal	has
broken	him.’
‘The	bitch	is	better	gone	than	still	in	our	way.	Rhulad	repeats	his	errors.
With	her,	so	he	had	already	done	with	that	slave,	Udinaas.	He	failed	to	learn.’
Tomad	allowed	himself	a	bitter	smile.	‘Failed	to	learn.	So	have	we	all,
Uruth.	We	saw	for	ourselves	the	poison	that	was	Lether.	We	perceived	well	the
threat,	and	so	marched	down	to	conquer,	thus	annihilating	that	threat	for	ever
more.	Or	so	we’d	thought.’
‘It	devoured	us.’
He	looked	again	to	the	wall	on	the	right,	where,	hanging	from	an	iron
hook,	there	was	a	bundle	of	fetishes.	Feathers,	strips	of	sealskin,	necklaces	of
strung	shells,	shark	teeth.	The	bedraggled	remnants	of	three	children	–	all	that
remained	to	remind	them	of	their	lives.
Some	did	not	belong,	for	the	son	who	had	owned	certain	of	those	items
had	been	banished,	his	life	swept	away	as	if	it	had	never	been.	Had	Rhulad	seen
these,	even	the	binding	of	filial	blood	would	not	spare	the	lives	of	Tomad	and
Uruth.	Trull	Sengar	–	the	name	itself	was	anathema,	a	crime,	and	the
punishment	of	its	utterance	was	death.
Neither	cared.
‘A	most	insipid	poison	indeed,’	Uruth	continued,	eyeing	her	goblet.	‘We
grow	fat.	The	warriors	get	drunk	and	sleep	in	the	beds	of	Letherii	whores.	Or
lie	unconscious	in	the	durhang	dens.	Others	simply…disappear.’
‘They	return	home,’	Tomad	said,	repressing	a	pang	at	the	thought.	Home.
Before	all	this.


‘Are	you	certain?’
He	met	her	eyes	once	more.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Karos	Invictad	and	his	Patriotists	never	cease	their	vigilant	tyranny	of	the
people.	They	make	arrests	every	day.	Who	is	to	say	they	have	not	arrested	Tiste
Edur?’
‘He	could	not	hide	that,	wife.’
‘Why	not?	Now	that	Bruthen	Trana	is	gone,	Karos	Invictad	does	as	he
pleases.	No-one	stands	at	his	shoulder	now.’
‘He	did	as	he	pleased	before.’
‘You	cannot	know	that,	husband.	Can	you?	What	constraints	did	Invictad
perceive	–	real	or	imagined,	it	matters	not	–	when	he	knew	Bruthen	Trana	was
watching	him?’
‘I	know	what	you	want,’	Tomad	said	in	a	low	growl.	‘But	who	is	to	blame
for	all	of	this?’
‘That	no	longer	matters,’	she	replied,	watching	him	carefully	–	fearing
what,	he	wondered.	Another	uncontrolled	burst	of	violence?	Or	the	far	more
insipid	display	revealing	his	despair?
‘I	don’t	know	how	you	can	say	that,’	he	said.	‘He	sent	our	sons	to	retrieve
the	sword.	That	decision	doomed	them	all.	Us	all.	And	look,	we	now	sit	in	the
palace	of	the	Lether	Empire,	rotting	in	the	filth	of	Letherii	excess.	We	have	no
defence	against	indolence	and	apathy,	against	greed	and	decadence.	These
enemies	do	not	fall	to	the	sword,	do	not	skid	away	from	a	raised	shield.’
‘Hannan	Mosag,	husband,	is	our	only	hope.	You	must	go	to	him.’
‘To	conspire	against	our	son?’
‘Who	is,	as	you	have	said,	insane.	Blood	is	one	thing,’	Uruth	said,	slowly
leaning	forward,	‘but	we	now	speak	of	the	survival	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Tomad,
the	women	are	ready	–	we	have	been	ready	for	a	long	time.’
He	stared	at	her,	wondering	who	this	woman	was,	this	cold,	cold	creature.
Perhaps	he	was	a	coward,	after	all.	When	Rhulad	had	sent	Trull	away,	he	had
said	nothing.	But	then,	neither	had	Uruth.	And	what	of	his	own	conspiracy?
With	Binadas?	Find	Trull.	Please.	Find	the	bravest	among	us.	Recall	the	Sengar
bloodline,	son.	Our	first	strides	onto	this	world.	Leading	a	legion	onto	its
stony	ground,	loyal	officers	of	Scabandari.	Who	drew	the	first	Andii	blood	on
the	day	of	betrayal?	That	is	our	blood.	That	–	not	this.
So,	Tomad	had	sent	Binadas	away.	Had	sent	a	son	to	his	death.	Because	I
had	not	the	will	to	do	it	myself.
Coward.
Watching	him	still,	Uruth	carefully	refilled	her	goblet.
Binadas,	my	son,	your	slayer	awaits	Rhulad’s	pleasure.	Is	that	enough?


	
Like	any	old	fool	who	had	once	wagered	mortal	lives,	the	Errant	wandered	the
corridors	of	enlivened	power,	muttering	his	litany	of	lost	opportunities	and
bad	choices.	Exhalation	of	sorcery	averted	the	eyes	of	those	who	strode	past,
the	guards	at	various	doorways	and	intersections,	the	scurrying	servants	who
fought	their	losing	battle	with	the	crumbling	residence	known	–	now	with
irony	–	as	the	Eternal	Domicile.	They	saw	but	did	not	see,	and	no	after-image
remained	in	their	minds	upon	passing.
More	than	any	ghost,	the	Elder	God	was	forgettable.	But	not	as	forgettable
as	he	would	have	liked.	He	had	worshippers	now,	at	the	cost	of	an	eye	binding
him	and	his	power,	warring	with	his	will	in	the	guise	of	faith.	Of	course,	every
god	knew	of	that	war	–	such	subversion	seemed	the	primary	purpose	of	every
priest.	Reduction	of	the	sacred	into	the	mundane	world	of	mortal	rivalries,
politics	and	the	games	of	control	and	manipulation	of	as	many	people	as	there
were	adherents.	Oh,	and	yes,	the	acquisition	of	wealth,	be	it	land	or	coin,	be	it
the	adjudication	of	fate	or	the	gathering	of	souls.
With	such	thoughts	haunting	him,	the	Errant	stepped	into	the	throne	room,
moving	silently	to	one	side	to	take	his	usual	place	against	a	wall	between	two
vast	tapestries,	as	unnoticed	as	the	grandiose	scenes	woven	into	those	frames	–
images	in	which	could	be	found	some	figure	in	the	background	very	closely
resembling	the	Errant.
The	Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	–	with	whom	the	Errant	had	shared	a	bed
when	expedience	demanded	it	–	stood	before	Rhulad	who	slouched	like	some
sated	monstrosity,	poignant	with	wealth	and	madness.	One	of	the	Chancellor ’s
bodyguards	hovered	a	few	paces	back	from	Gnol,	looking	bored	as	his	master
recited	numbers.	Detailing,	once	more,	the	growing	dissolution	of	the	treasury.
These	sessions,	the	Errant	understood,	with	some	admiration,	were
deliberate	travails	intended	to	further	exhaust	the	Emperor.	Revenues	and
losses,	expenses	and	the	sudden	peak	in	defaulted	debts,	piled	up	in	droning
cadence	like	the	gathering	of	forces	preparing	to	lay	siege.	An	assault	against
which	Rhulad	had	no	defence.
He	would	surrender,	as	he	always	did.	Relinquishing	all	management	to	the
Chancellor.	A	ritual	as	enervating	to	witness	as	it	was	to	withstand,	yet	the
Errant	felt	no	pity.	The	Edur	were	barbarians.	Like	children	in	the	face	of
civilized	sophistication.
Why	do	I	come	here,	day	after	day?	What	am	I	waiting	to	witness	here?
Rhulad’s	final	collapse?	Will	that	please	me?	Entertain	me?	How	sordid	have
my	tastes	become?


He	held	his	gaze	on	the	Emperor.	Dulled	coins	luridly	gleaming,	a	rhythm
of	smudged	reflection	rising	and	settling	with	Rhulad’s	breathing;	the	black
sanguine	promise	of	the	sword’s	long,	straight	blade,	tip	dug	into	the	marble
dais,	the	grey	bony	hand	gripping	the	wire-wrapped	handle.	Sprawled	there	on
his	throne,	Rhulad	was	indeed	a	metaphor	made	real.	Armoured	in	riches	and
armed	with	a	weapon	that	promised	both	immortality	and	annihilation,	he	was
impervious	to	everything	but	his	own	growing	madness.	When	Rhulad	fell,	the
Errant	believed,	it	would	be	from	the	inside	out.
The	ravaged	face	revealed	this	truth	in	a	cascade	of	details,	from	the
seamed	scars	of	past	failures	to	which,	by	virtue	of	his	having	survived	them,
he	was	indifferent,	to	whatever	lessons	they	might	hold.	Pocked	flesh	to	mock
the	possession	of	wealth	long	lost.	Sunken	eyes	wherein	resided	the	despairing
penury	of	his	spirit,	a	spirit	that	at	times	pushed	close	to	those	glittering	dark
prisms	and	let	loose	its	silent	howl.
Twitches	tracked	this	brutal	mien.	Random	ripples	beneath	the	mottled
skin,	a	migration	of	expressions	attempting	to	escape	the	remote	imperial
mask.
One	could	understand,	upon	looking	at	Rhulad	on	his	throne,	the	lie	of
simplicity	that	power	whispered	in	the	beholder ’s	ear.	The	seductive	voice
urging	pleasurable	and	satisfying	reduction,	from	life’s	confusion	to	death’s
clarity.	This,	murmured	power,	is	how	I	am	revealed.	Stepping	naked	through
all	the	disguises.	I	am	threat	and	if	threat	does	not	suffice,	then	I	act.	Like	a
reaper ’s	scythe.
The	lie	of	simplicity.	Rhulad	still	believed	it.	In	that	he	was	no	different
from	every	other	ruler,	through	every	age,	in	every	place	where	people
gathered	to	fashion	a	common,	the	weal	of	community	with	its	necessity	for
organization	and	division.	Power	is	violence,	its	promise,	its	deed.	Power
cares	nothing	for	reason,	nothing	for	justice,	nothing	for	compassion.	It	is,	in
fact,	the	singular	abnegation	of	these	things	–	once	the	cloak	of	deceits	is
stripped	away,	this	one	truth	is	revealed.
And	the	Errant	was	tired	of	it.	All	of	it.
Mael	once	said	there	was	no	answer.	For	any	of	this.	He	said	it	was	the	way
of	things	and	always	would	be,	and	the	only	redemption	that	could	be	found
was	that	all	power,	no	matter	how	vast,	how	centralized,	no	matter	how
dominant,	will	destroy	itself	in	the	end.	What	entertained	then	was	witnessing
all	those	expressions	of	surprise	on	the	faces	of	the	wielders.
This	seemed	a	far	too	bitter	reward,	as	far	as	the	Errant	was	concerned.	I
have	naught	of	Mael’s	capacity	for	cold,	depthless	regard.	Nor	his	legendary
patience.	Nor,	for	that	matter,	his	temper.


No	Elder	God	was	blind	to	the	folly	of	those	who	would	reign	in	the	many
worlds.	Assuming	it	was	able	to	think	at	all,	of	course,	and	for	some	that	was	in
no	way	a	certain	thing.	Anomander	Rake	saw	it	clearly	enough,	and	so	he
turned	away	from	its	vastness,	instead	choosing	to	concentrate	on	specific,
minor	conflicts.	And	he	denied	his	worshippers,	a	crime	so	profound	to	them
that	they	simply	rejected	it	out	of	hand.	Osserc,	on	the	other	hand,	voiced	his
own	refusal	–	of	the	hopeless	truth	–	and	so	tried	again	and	again	and	failed
every	time.	For	Osserc,	Anomander	Rake’s	very	existence	became	an
unconscionable	insult.
Draconus	–	ah,	now	he	was	no	fool.	He	would	have	wearied	of	his	tyranny	–
had	he	lived	long	enough.	I	still	wonder	if	he	did	not	in	fact	welcome	his
annihilation.	To	die	beneath	the	sword	made	by	his	own	hands,	to	see	his	most
cherished	daughter	standing	to	one	side,	witness,	wilfully	blind	to	his	need…
Draconus,	how	could	you	not	despair	of	all	you	once	dreamed?
And	then	there	was	Kilmandaros.	Now	she	liked	the	notion	of…simplicity.
The	solid	righteousness	of	her	fist	was	good	enough	for	her.	But	then,	see	where
it	took	her!
And	what	of	K’rul?	Why,	he	was—
‘Stop!’	Rhulad	shrieked,	visibly	jolting	on	the	throne,	the	upper	half	of	his
body	suddenly	leaning	forward,	the	eyes	black	with	sudden	threat.	‘What	did
you	just	say?’
The	Chancellor	frowned,	then	licked	his	withered	lips.	‘Emperor,	I	was
recounting	the	costs	of	disposing	the	corpses	from	the	trench-pens—’
‘Corpses,	yes.’	Rhulad’s	hand	twitched	where	it	folded	over	the	throne’s
ornate	arm.	He	stared	fixedly	at	Triban	Gnol,	then,	with	a	strange	smile,	he
asked,	‘What	corpses?’
‘From	the	fleets,	sire.	The	slaves	rescued	from	the	island	of	Sepik,	the
northernmost	protectorate	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’
‘Slaves.	Rescued.	Slaves.’
The	Errant	could	see	Triban	Gnol’s	confusion,	a	momentary	flicker,
then…comprehension.
Oh	now,	let	us	witness	this!
‘Your	fallen	kin,	sire.	Those	of	Tiste	Edur	blood	who	had	suffered	beneath
the	tyranny	of	the	Malazans.’
‘Rescued.’	Rhulad	paused	as	if	to	taste	that	word.	‘Edur	blood.’
‘Diluted—’
‘Edur	blood!’
‘Indeed,	Emperor.’
‘Then	why	are	they	in	the	trench-pens?’


‘They	were	deemed	fallen,	sire.’
Rhulad	twisted	on	the	throne,	as	if	assailed	from	within.	His	head	snapped
back.	His	limbs	were	seized	with	trembling.	He	spoke	as	one	lost.	‘Fallen?	But
they	are	our	kin.	In	this	entire	damned	world,	our	only	kin!’
‘That	is	true,	Emperor.	I	admit,	I	was	somewhat	dismayed	at	the	decision	to
consign	them	to	those	most	terrible	cells—’
‘Whose	decision,	Gnol?	Answer	me!’
A	bow,	which	the	Errant	knew	hid	a	satisfied	gleam	in	the	Chancellor ’s
eyes	–	quickly	disguised	as	he	looked	up	once	more.	‘The	disposition	of	the
fallen	Sepik	Edur	was	the	responsibility	of	Tomad	Sengar,	Emperor.’
Rhulad	slowly	settled	back.	‘And	they	are	dying.’
‘In	droves,	sire.	Alas.’
‘We	rescued	them	to	deliver	our	own	torment.	Rescued	them	to	kill	them.’
‘It	is,	I	would	suggest,	a	somewhat	unjust	fate—’
‘Unjust?	You	scrawny	snake	–	why	did	you	not	tell	me	of	this	before?’
‘Emperor,	you	indicated	no	interest	in	the	financial	details—’
Oh,	a	mistake	there,	Gnol.
‘The	what?’
Beads	of	sweat	on	the	back	of	the	Chancellor ’s	neck	now.	‘The	varied
expenses	associated	with	their	imprisonment,	sire.’
‘They	are	Tiste	Edur!’
Another	bow.
Rhulad	suddenly	clawed	at	his	face	and	looked	away.	‘Edur	blood,’	he
murmured.	‘Rescued	from	slavery.	Trench-pens	is	their	reward.’
Triban	Gnol	cleared	his	throat.	‘Many	died	in	the	holds	of	the	ships,	sire.
As	I	understand	it,	their	maltreatment	began	upon	leaving	Sepik	Island.	What	is
it	you	would	have	me	do,	Emperor?’
And	so	deftly	you	regain	ground,	Triban	Gnol.
‘Bring	me	Tomad	Sengar.	And	Uruth.	Bring	to	me	my	father	and	mother.’
‘Now?’
The	sword	scraped	free,	point	lifting	to	centre	on	Triban	Gnol.	‘Yes,
Chancellor.	Now.’
Triban	Gnol	and	his	bodyguard	quickly	departed.
Rhulad	was	alone	in	his	throne	room,	now	holding	his	sword	out	on
nothing.
‘How?	How	could	they	do	this?	These	poor	people	–	they	are	of	our	own
blood.	I	need	to	think.’	The	Emperor	lowered	the	sword	then	shifted	about	on
the	throne,	drawing	his	coin-clad	legs	up.	‘How?	Nisall?	Explain	this	to	me	–
no,	you	cannot,	can	you.	You	have	fled	me.	Where	are	you,	Nisall?	Some	claim


you	are	dead.	Yet	where	is	your	body?	Are	you	just	another	bloated	corpse	in
the	canal	–	the	ones	I	see	from	the	tower	–	were	you	one	of	those,	drifting	past?
They	tell	me	you	were	a	traitor.	They	tell	me	you	were	not	a	traitor.	They	all
lie	to	me.	I	know	that,	I	can	see	that.	Hear	that.	They	all	lie	to	me—’	He	sobbed
then,	his	free	hand	covering	his	mouth,	his	eyes	darting	about	the	empty	room.
The	Errant	saw	that	gaze	slide	right	over	him.	He	thought	to	step	forward
then,	to	relinquish	the	sorcery	hiding	him,	to	say	to	the	Emperor:	Yes,	sire.
They	all	lie	to	you.	But	I	will	not.	Do	you	dare	hear	the	truth,	Emperor	Rhulad?
All	of	it?
‘Slaves.	This	–	this	is	wrong.	Tomad	–	Father	–	where	did	this	cruelty
come	from?’
Oh,	dear	Rhulad…
‘Father,	we	will	talk.	You	and	me.	Alone.	And	Mother,	yes,	you	too.	The
three	of	us.	It	has	been	so	long	since	we	did	that.	Yes,	that	is	what	we	will	do.
And	you	must…you	must	not	lie	to	me.	No,	that	I	will	not	accept.
‘Father,	where	is	Nisall?
‘Where	is	Trull?’
Could	an	Elder	God’s	heart	break?	The	Errant	almost	sagged	then,	as
Rhulad’s	plaintive	query	echoed	momentarily	in	the	chamber,	then	quickly
died,	leaving	only	the	sound	of	the	Emperor ’s	laboured	breathing.
Then,	a	harder	voice	emerging	from	the	Emperor:	‘Hannan	Mosag,	this	is
all	your	fault.	You	did	this.	To	us.	To	me.	You	twisted	me,	made	me	send	them
all	away.	To	find	champions.	But	no,	that	was	my	idea,	wasn’t	it?	I	can’t	–	can’t
remember	–	so	many	lies	here,	so	many	voices,	all	lying.	Nisall,	you	left	me.
Udinaas	–	I	will	find	you	both.	I	will	see	the	skin	flayed	from	your	writhing
bodies,	I	will	listen	to	your	screams—’
The	sound	of	boots	in	the	hallway	beyond.
Rhulad	looked	up	guiltily,	then	settled	into	the	throne.	Righting	the	weapon.
Licking	his	lips.	Then,	as	the	doors	creaked	open,	he	sat	with	a	fixed	grin,	a
baring	of	his	teeth	to	greet	his	parents.
	
Dessert	arrived	at	the	point	of	a	sword.	A	full	dozen	Letherii	guards,	led	by
Sirryn	Kanar,	burst	into	the	private	chambers	of	Tomad	and	Uruth	Sengar.
Weapons	drawn,	they	entered	the	dining	room	to	find	the	two	Edur	seated	each
at	one	end	of	the	long	table.
Neither	had	moved.	Neither	seemed	surprised.
‘On	your	feet,’	Sirryn	growled,	unable	to	hide	his	satisfaction,	his
delicious	pleasure	at	this	moment.	‘The	Emperor	demands	your	presence.


Now.’
The	tight	smile	on	Tomad’s	face	seemed	to	flicker	a	moment,	before	the
old	warrior	rose	to	his	feet.
Sneering,	Uruth	had	not	moved.	‘The	Emperor	would	see	his	mother?	Very
well,	he	may	ask.’
Sirryn	looked	down	at	her.	‘This	is	a	command,	woman.’
‘And	I	am	a	High	Priestess	of	Shadow,	you	pathetic	thug.’
‘Sent	here	by	the	Emperor ’s	will.	You	will	stand,	or—’
‘Or	what?	Will	you	dare	lay	hands	on	me,	Letherii?	Recall	your	place.’
The	guard	reached	out.
‘Stop!’	Tomad	shouted.	‘Unless,	Letherii,	you	wish	your	flesh	torn	from
your	bones.	My	wife	has	awakened	Shadow,	and	she	will	not	suffer	your
touch.’
Sirryn	Kanar	found	he	was	trembling.	With	rage.	‘Then	advise	her,	Tomad
Sengar,	of	her	son’s	impatience.’
Uruth	slowly	drained	her	goblet	of	wine,	set	it	carefully	down,	then	rose.
‘Sheathe	your	weapons,	Letherii.	My	husband	and	I	can	walk	to	the	throne
room	in	your	company,	or	alone.	My	preference	is	for	the	latter,	but	I	permit
you	this	single	warning.	Sheathe	your	swords,	or	I	will	kill	you	all.’
Sirryn	gestured	to	his	soldiers	and	weapons	slid	back	into	scabbards.	After
a	moment,	his	did	the	same.	I	will	have	an	answer	for	this,	Uruth	Sengar.	Recall
my	place?	Of	course,	if	the	lie	suits	you,	as	it	does	me…for	now.
‘Finally,’	Uruth	said	to	Tomad,	‘we	shall	have	an	opportunity	to	tell	our
son	all	that	needs	to	be	told.	An	audience.	Such	privilege.’
‘It	may	be	you	shall	await	his	pleasure,’	Sirryn	said.
‘Indeed?	How	long?’
The	Letherii	smiled	at	her.	‘That	is	not	for	me	to	say.’
‘This	game	is	not	Rhulad’s.	It	is	yours.	You	and	your	Chancellor.’
‘Not	this	time,’	Sirryn	replied.
	
‘I	have	killed	Tiste	Edur	before.’
Samar	Dev	watched	Karsa	Orlong	as	the	Toblakai	examined	the	tattered
clamshell	armour	shirt	he	had	laid	out	on	the	cot.	The	pearlescent	scales	were
tarnished	and	chipped,	and	large	patches	of	the	thick	leather	under-panels	–
hinged	with	rawhide	–	were	visible.	He	had	gathered	a	few	hundred	holed	coins
–	made	of	tin	and	virtually	worthless	–	and	was	clearly	planning	to	use	them	to
amend	the	armour.
Was	this	a	gesture	of	mockery,	she	wondered.	A	visible	sneer	in	Rhulad’s


face?	Barbarian	or	not,	she	would	not	put	it	past	Karsa	Orlong.
‘I	cleared	the	deck	of	the	fools,’	he	continued,	then	glanced	over	at	her.
‘And	what	of	those	in	the	forest	of	the	Anibar?	As	for	the	Letherii,	they’re	even
more	pathetic	–	see	how	they	cower,	even	now?	I	will	explore	this	city,	with	my
sword	strapped	to	my	back,	and	none	shall	stop	me.’
She	rubbed	at	her	face.	‘There	is	a	rumour	that	the	first	roll	of	champions
will	be	called.	Soon.	Raise	the	ire	of	these	people,	Karsa,	and	you	will	not	have
to	wait	long	to	face	the	Emperor.’
‘Good,’	he	grunted.	‘Then	I	shall	walk	Letheras	as	its	new	emperor.’
‘Is	that	what	you	seek?’	she	asked,	her	eyes	narrowing	on	him	in	surprise.
‘If	that	is	what	is	needed	for	them	to	leave	me	be.’
She	snorted.	‘Then	the	last	thing	you	want	is	to	be	emperor.’
He	straightened,	frowning	down	at	the	gaudy	if	bedraggled	armour	shirt.	‘I
am	not	interested	in	fleeing,	witch.	There	is	no	reason	for	them	to	forbid	me.’
‘You	can	step	outside	this	compound	and	wander	where	you	will…just
leave	your	sword	behind.’
‘That	I	will	not	do.’
‘Then	here	you	remain,	slowly	going	mad	at	the	Emperor ’s	pleasure.’
‘Perhaps	I	shall	fight	my	way	through.’
‘Karsa,	they	just	don’t	want	you	killing	citizens.	Given	that	you	are	so,	uh,
easily	offended,	it’s	not	an	unusual	request.’
‘What	offends	me	is	their	lack	of	faith.’
‘Right,’	she	snapped,	‘which	you	have	well	earned	by	killing	Edur	and
Letherii	at	every	turn.	Including	a	Preda—’
‘I	did	not	know	he	was	that.’
‘Would	it	have	made	a	difference?	No,	I	thought	not.	How	about	the	fact
that	he	was	a	brother	to	the	Emperor?’
‘I	did	not	know	that	either.’
‘And?’
‘And	what,	Samar	Dev?’
‘Murdered	him	with	a	spear,	wasn’t	it?’
‘He	assailed	me	with	magic—’
‘You	have	told	me	this	tale,	Karsa	Orlong.	You	had	just	slaughtered	his
crew.	Then	kicked	in	the	door	to	his	cabin.	Then	crushed	the	skulls	of	his
bodyguards.	I	tell	you,	in	his	place	I	too	would	have	drawn	upon	my	warren	–
assuming	I	had	one,	which	I	don’t.	And	I	would	have	thrown	everything	I	had	at
you.’
‘There	is	no	point	to	this	conversation,’	the	Toblakai	said	in	a	growl.
‘Fine,’	she	said,	rising	from	her	chair.	‘I	am	off	to	find	Taxilian.	At	least


his	obdurate	obsessions	are	less	infuriating.’
‘Is	he	your	lover	now?’
She	halted	at	the	doorway.	‘And	if	he	was?’
‘Just	as	well,’	Karsa	said,	now	glowering	down	at	his	patchy	armour.	‘I
would	break	you	in	two.’
Jealousy	to	join	the	host	of	other	madnesses?	Spirits	below!	She	turned
back	to	the	door.	‘I’d	be	more	inclined	towards	Senior	Assessor.	Alas,	he	has
taken	vows	of	celibacy.’
‘The	fawning	monk	is	still	here?’
‘He	is.’
‘You	have	sordid	tastes,	witch.’
‘Well,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘I	see	no	possible	way	of	responding	to
that	comment.’
‘Of	course	not.’
Lips	pressed	tight	together,	Samar	Dev	left	the	room.
	
Karsa	Orlong’s	mood	was	foul,	but	it	did	not	occur	to	him	that	it	in	any	way
flavoured	his	conversation	with	Samar	Dev.	She	was	a	woman	and	any
exchange	of	words	with	a	woman	was	fraught	with	her	torturer ’s	array	of
deadly	implements,	each	one	hovering	at	the	very	edge	of	a	man’s
comprehension.	Swords	were	simpler.	Even	the	harried	disaster	of	all-out	war
was	simpler	than	the	briefest,	lightest	touch	of	a	woman’s	attention.	What
infuriated	him	was	how	much	he	missed	that	touch.	True,	there	were	whores
aplenty	for	the	champions	awaiting	the	Emperor.	But	there	was	nothing	subtle	–
nothing	real	–	in	that.
There	must	be	a	middle	ground,	Karsa	told	himself.	Where	the	exchange
exulted	in	all	the	sparks	and	feints	that	made	things	interesting,	without	putting
his	dignity	at	risk.	Yet	he	was	realistic	enough	to	hold	little	hope	of	ever
finding	it.
The	world	was	filled	with	weapons	and	combat	was	a	way	of	life.	Perhaps
the	only	way	of	life.	He’d	bled	to	whips	and	words,	to	punches	and	glances.
He’d	been	bludgeoned	by	invisible	shields,	blindsided	by	unseen	clubs,	and	had
laboured	under	the	chains	of	his	own	vows.	And	as	Samar	Dev	would	say,	one
survives	by	withstanding	this	onslaught,	this	history	of	the	then	and	the	now.	To
fail	was	to	fall,	but	falling	was	not	always	synonymous	with	a	quick,	merciful
death.	Rather,	one	could	fall	into	the	slow	dissolution,	losses	heaped	high,	that
dragged	a	mortal	to	his	or	her	knees.	That	made	them	slow	slayers	of
themselves.


He	had	come	to	understand	his	own	traps,	and,	in	that	sense,	he	was
probably	not	yet	ready	to	encounter	someone	else’s,	to	step	awry	and	discover
the	shock	of	pain.	Still,	the	hunger	never	went	away.	And	this	tumult	in	his	soul
was	wearisome	and	so	a	most	sordid	invitation	to	a	disgruntled	mood.
Easily	solved	by	mayhem.
Lacking	love,	the	warrior	seeks	violence.
Karsa	Orlong	sneered	as	he	slung	the	stone	sword	over	his	left	shoulder
and	strode	out	into	the	corridor.	‘I	hear	you,	Bairoth	Gild.	You	would	be	my
conscience?’	He	grunted	a	laugh.	‘You,	who	stole	my	woman.’
Perhaps	you	have	found	another,	Karsa	Orlong.
‘I	would	break	her	in	two.’
That	has	not	stopped	you	before.
But	no,	this	was	a	game.	Bairoth	Gild’s	soul	was	bound	within	a	sword.
These	sly	words	filling	Karsa’s	skull	were	his	own.	Lacking	someone	else’s
attention,	he	was	now	digging	his	own	pitfalls.	‘I	think	I	need	to	kill	someone.’
From	the	corridor	to	a	broader	hallway,	then	on	to	the	colonnaded
transept,	into	a	side	passage	and	on	to	the	compound’s	north	postern	gate.
Meeting	no-one	on	the	way,	further	befouling	Karsa’s	mood.	The	gate	was
inset	with	a	small	guardhouse	to	its	left	where	the	heavy	latch	release	could	be
found.
The	Letherii	seated	within	had	time	to	glance	up	before	the	Toblakai’s	fist
connected	solidly	with	his	face.	Blood	sprayed	from	a	shattered	nose	and	the
hapless	man	sank	down	into	his	chair,	then	slid	like	a	sack	of	onions	to	the
floor.	Stepping	over	him,	Karsa	lifted	the	latch	and	slid	the	bronze	bar	to	his
left,	until	its	right-hand	end	cleared	the	gate	itself.	The	bar	dropped	down	into	a
wheeled	recess	with	a	clunk.	Emerging	outside	once	more,	Karsa	pushed	the
gate	open	and,	ducking	to	clear	the	lintel,	stepped	out	into	the	street	beyond.
There	was	a	flash	as	some	sort	of	magical	ward	ignited	the	moment	he
crossed	the	threshold.	Fires	burgeoned,	a	whisper	of	vague	pain,	then	the
flames	dwindled	and	vanished.	Shaking	his	head	to	clear	the	spell’s	metallic
reverberation	from	his	mind,	he	continued	on.
A	few	citizens	here	and	there;	only	one	noted	his	appearance	and	that	one	–
eyes	widening	–	quickened	his	pace	and	moments	later	turned	a	corner	and	was
lost	from	sight.
Karsa	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	set	off	for	the	canal	he	had	seen	from	the
roof	of	the	barracks.
	
Vast	as	a	river	barge,	the	enormous	black-haired	woman	in	mauve	silks	filled


the	entrance	to	the	courtyard	restaurant,	fixed	her	eyes	on	Tehol	Beddict,	then
surged	forward	with	the	singular	intent	of	a	hungry	leviathan.
Beside	him,	Bugg	seemed	to	cringe	back	in	his	chair.	‘By	the	Abyss,
Master—’
‘Now	now,’	Tehol	murmured	as	the	woman	drew	closer.	‘Pragmatism,
dear	Bugg,	must	now	be	uppermost	among	your,	uh,	considerations.	Find
Huldo	and	get	his	lads	to	drag	over	that	oversized	couch	from	the	back	of	the
kitchen.	Quick	now,	Bugg!’
The	manservant’s	departure	was	an	uncharacteristic	bolt.
The	woman	–	sudden	centre	of	attention	with	most	conversations	falling
away	–	seemed	for	all	her	impressive	girth	to	glide	as	she	moved	between	the
blessedly	widely	spaced	tables,	and	in	her	dark	violet	eyes	there	gleamed	a
sultry	confidence	so	at	odds	with	her	ungainly	proportions	that	Tehol	felt	an
alarming	stir	in	his	groin	and	sweat	prickled	in	enough	manly	places	to	make
him	shift	uneasily	in	his	chair,	all	thoughts	of	the	meal	on	the	plate	before	him
torn	away	like	so	many	clothes.
He	did	not	believe	it	possible	that	flesh	could	move	in	as	many	directions
all	at	once,	every	swell	beneath	the	silk	seemingly	possessed	of	corporeal
independence,	yet	advancing	in	a	singular	chorus	of	overt	sexuality.	Her
shadow	engulfing	him,	Tehol	loosed	a	small	whimper,	struggling	to	drag	his
eyes	up,	past	the	stacked	folds	of	her	belly,	past	the	impossibly	high,	bulging,
grainsack-sized	breasts	–	lost	for	a	moment	in	that	depthless	cleavage	–	then,
with	heroic	will,	yet	higher	to	the	smooth	udder	beneath	her	chin;	higher	still,
neck	straining,	to	that	so	round	face	with	its	broad,	painted,	purple	lips	–
higher	–	Errant	help	me	–	to	those	delicious,	knowing	eyes.
‘You	disgust	me,	Tehol.’
‘I	–	what?’
‘Where’s	Bugg	with	that	damned	couch?’
Tehol	leaned	forward,	then	recoiled	again	with	instinctive	selfpreservation.	‘Rucket?	Is	that	you?’
‘Quiet,	you	fool.	Do	you	have	any	idea	how	long	it	took	us	to	perfect	this
illusion?’
‘B-but—’
‘The	best	disguise	is	misdirection.’
‘Misdirection?	Oh,	why…oh,	well	of	course,	when	you	put	it	that	way.	I
mean,	all	the	way.	Sorry,	that	just	tumbled	out.	Came	out	wrong,	I	mean—’
‘Stop	staring	at	my	tits.’
‘I’d	be	the	only	one	in	here	not	staring,’	he	retorted,	‘which	would	be	very
suspicious.	Besides,	who	decided	on	that	particular…defiance	of	the	earth’s


eternal	pull?	Probably	Ormly	–	it’s	those	piggy	eyes	of	his,	hinting	at	perverse
fantasies.’
Bugg	had	arrived	with	two	of	Huldo’s	servers	carrying	the	couch	between
them.	They	set	it	down	then	hastily	retreated.
Bugg	returned	to	his	seat.	‘Rucket,’	he	said	under	his	breath,	shaking	his
head,	‘do	you	not	imagine	that	a	woman	of	your	stature	would	not	already	be
infamous	in	Letheras?’
‘Not	if	I	never	went	out,	would	I?	As	it	turns	out,	there	are	plenty	of
recluses	in	this	city—’
‘Because	most	of	them	were	the	Guild’s	illusions	–	false	personalities	you
could	assume	when	necessity	demanded	it.’
‘Precisely,’	she	said,	as	if	settling	the	matter.
Which	she	then	did	with	consummate	grace,	easing	down	fluidly	into	the
huge	couch,	her	massive	alabaster	arms	spreading	out	along	the	back,	which
had	the	effect	of	hitching	her	breasts	up	still	further	then	spreading	them	like
the	Gates	of	the	Damned.
Tehol	glanced	at	Bugg.	‘There	are	certain	laws	regarding	the	properties	of
physical	entities,	yes?	There	must	be.	I’m	sure	of	it.’
‘She	is	a	defiant	woman,	Master.	And	please,	if	you	will,	adjust	your
blanket.	Yes,	there,	beneath	this	blessed	table.’
‘Stop	that.’
‘Whom	or	what	are	you	addressing?’	Rucket	asked	with	a	leer	big	enough
for	two	women.
‘Damn	you,	Rucket,	we’d	just	ordered,	you	know.	Bugg’s	purse,	or	his
company’s,	that	is.	And	now	my	appetite…well…it’s—’
‘Shifted?’	she	asked,	thin	perfect	brows	lifting	above	those	knowing	eyes.
‘The	problem	with	men	elucidated	right	there:	your	inability	to	indulge	in
more	than	one	pleasure	at	any	one	time.’
‘Which	you	presently	personify	with	terrible	perfection.	So,	how	precise	is
this	illusion	of	yours?	I	mean,	the	couch	creaked	and	everything.’
‘No	doubt	you’re	most	eager	to	explore	that	weighty	question.	But	first,
where’s	Huldo	with	my	lunch?’
‘He	took	one	look	at	you	and	then	went	out	to	hire	more	cooks.’
She	leaned	forward	and	pulled	Tehol’s	plate	closer.	‘This	will	do.
Especially	after	that	cruel	attempt	at	humour,	Tehol.’	She	began	eating	with
absurd	delicacy.
‘There’s	no	real	way	in	there,	is	there?’
Morsel	of	food	halted	halfway	to	her	open	mouth.
Bugg	seemed	to	choke	on	something.


Tehol	wiped	sweat	from	his	brow.	‘Errant	take	me,	I’m	losing	my	mind.’
‘You	force	me,’	Rucket	said,	‘to	prove	to	you	otherwise.’	The	dainty
popped	into	her	mouth.
‘You	expect	me	to	succumb	to	an	illusion?’
‘Why	not?	Men	do	that	a	thousand	times	a	day.’
‘Without	that,	the	world	would	grind	to	a	halt.’
‘Yours,	maybe.’
‘Speaking	of	which,’	Bugg	interjected	hastily,	‘your	Guild,	Rucket,	is
about	to	become	bankrupt.’
‘Nonsense.	We	have	more	wealth	hidden	away	than	the	Liberty	Consign.’
‘That’s	good,	because	they’re	about	to	discover	that	most	of	their
unadvertised	holdings	have	been	so	thoroughly	undermined	that	they’re	not
only	worthless,	but	fatal	liabilities.’
‘We	transferred	ours	beyond	the	empire,	Bugg.	Months	ago.	Once	we	fully
understood	what	you	and	Tehol	were	doing.’
‘Where?’	Bugg	asked.
‘Should	I	tell	you?’
‘We’re	not	going	after	it,’	Tehol	said.	‘Right,	Bugg?’
‘Of	course	not.	I	just	want	to	be	sure	it’s,	uh,	far	enough	removed.’
Rucket’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘Are	you	that	close?’
Neither	man	replied.
She	looked	down	at	the	plate	for	a	moment,	then	settled	back	like	a	human
canal	lock,	her	belly	re-emerging	from	the	shadows	in	silky	waves.	‘Very	well,
gentlemen.	South	Pilott.	Far	enough	away,	Bugg?’
‘Just.’
‘That	answer	makes	me	nervous.’
‘I	am	about	to	default	on	everything	I	owe,’	Bugg	said.	‘This	will	cause	a
massive	financial	cascade	that	will	not	spare	a	single	sector	of	industry,	and	not
just	here	in	Letheras,	but	across	the	entire	empire	and	beyond.	Once	I	do	it,
there	will	be	chaos.	Anarchy.	People	may	actually	die.’
‘Bugg’s	Construction	is	that	big?’
‘Not	at	all.	If	it	was,	we’d	have	been	rounded	up	long	ago.	No,	there	are
about	two	thousand	seemingly	independent	small-and	middling-sized	holdings,
each	one	perfectly	positioned	according	to	Tehol’s	diabolical	planning	to
ensure	that	dread	cascade.	Bugg’s	Construction	is	but	the	first	gravestone	to	tip
–	and	it’s	a	very	crowded	cemetery.’
‘Your	analogy	makes	me	even	more	nervous.’
‘Your	glamour	fades	a	touch	when	you’re	nervous,’	Tehol	observed.
‘Please,	regain	your	confidence,	Rucket.’


‘Shut	your	mouth,	Tehol.’
‘In	any	case,’	Bugg	resumed,	‘this	meeting	was	to	deliver	to	you	and	the
Guild	the	final	warning	before	the	collapse.	Needless	to	say,	I	will	be	hard	to
track	down	once	it	happens.’
Her	eyes	settled	on	Tehol.	‘And	you,	Tehol?	Planning	on	crawling	into	a
hole	as	well?’
‘I	thought	we	weren’t	talking	about	that	any	more.’
‘By	the	Abyss,	Master,’	Bugg	muttered.
Tehol	blinked,	first	at	Bugg,	then	at	Rucket.	Then,	‘Oh.	Sorry.	You	meant,
um,	was	I	planning	on	going	into	hiding,	right?	Well,	I’m	undecided.	Part	of
the	satisfaction,	you	see,	is	in	witnessing	the	mess.	Because,	regardless	of	how
we’ve	insinuated	ourselves	in	the	machinery	of	Lether ’s	vast	commerce,	the
most	bitter	truth	is	that	the	causes	behind	this	impending	chaos	are	in	fact
systemic.	Granted,	we’re	hastening	things	somewhat,	but	dissolution	–	in	its
truest	sense	–	is	an	integral	flaw	in	the	system	itself.	It	may	well	view	itself	as
immortal,	eminently	adaptable	and	all	that,	but	that’s	all	both	illusional	and
delusional.	Resources	are	never	infinite,	though	they	might	seem	that	way.	And
those	resources	include	more	than	just	the	raw	product	of	earth	and	sea.	They
also	include	labour,	and	the	manifest	conceit	of	a	monetary	system	with	its
arbitrary	notions	of	value	–	the	two	forces	we	set	our	sights	on,	by	the	way.
Shipping	out	the	lowest	classes	–	the	dispossessed	–	to	pressure	the
infrastructure,	and	then	stripping	away	hard	currency	to	escalate	a	recession	–
why	are	you	two	staring	at	me	like	that?’
Rucket	smiled.	‘Defaulting	to	the	comfort	of	your	scholarly	analysis	to
deflect	us	from	your	more	pathetic	fixations.	That,	Tehol	Beddict,	is	perhaps
the	lowest	you	have	gone	yet.’
‘But	we’ve	just	begun.’
‘You	may	wish	to	believe	that	to	be	the	case.	For	myself,	my	own	curiosity
is	fast	diminishing.’
‘But	think	of	all	the	challenges	in	store	for	us,	Rucket!’
She	surged	to	her	feet.	‘I’m	going	out	the	back	way.’
‘You	won’t	fit.’
‘Alas,	Tehol,	the	same	will	never	be	said	of	you.	Good	day,	gentlemen.’
‘Wait!’
‘Yes,	Tehol?’
‘Well,	uh,	I	trust	this	conversation	will	resume	at	a	later	date?’
‘I’m	not	hanging	around	for	that,’	Bugg	said,	crossing	his	brawny	arms	in
a	show	of…something.	Disgust,	maybe.	Or,	Tehol	reconsidered,	more	likely
abject	envy.


‘Nothing	is	certain,’	Rucket	told	him.	‘Barring	the	truth	that	men	are	wont
to	get	lost	in	their	illusions	of	grandeur.’
‘Oh,’	murmured	Bugg,	‘very	nice,	Rucket.’
‘If	that	hadn’t	left	me	speechless,’	Tehol	said	as	she	rolled	away,	‘I’d	have
said	something.’
‘I	have	no	doubt	of	that,	Master.’
‘Your	faith	is	a	relief,	Bugg.’
‘Small	comfort	in	comparison,	I’d	wager.’
‘In	comparison,’	Tehol	agreed,	nodding.	‘Now,	shall	we	go	for	a	walk,	old
friend?’
‘Assuming	your	drape	is	now	unmarred	by	unsightly	bulges.’
‘In	a	moment.’
‘Master?’
Tehol	smiled	at	the	alarm	on	Bugg’s	face.	‘I	was	just	imaging	her	stuck
there,	wedged	in	Huldo’s	alleyway.	Unable	to	turn.	Helpless,	in	fact.’
‘There	it	is,’	he	said	with	a	sigh,	‘you	did	indeed	manage	to	sink	lower.’
	
There	was	an	old	Gral	legend	that	had	begun	to	haunt	Taralack	Veed,	although
he	could	not	quite	grasp	its	relevance	to	this	moment,	here	in	Letheras,	with	the
Lifestealer	walking	at	his	side	as	they	pushed	through	the	crowds	milling
outside	a	row	of	market	stalls	opposite	the	Quillas	Canal.
The	Gral	were	an	ancient	people;	their	tribes	had	dwelt	in	the	wild	hills	of
the	First	Empire,	and	there	had	been	Gral	companies	serving	in
Dessimbelackis’s	vaunted	armies,	as	trackers,	as	skirmishers	and	as	shock
troops,	although	this	manner	of	combat	ill	suited	them.	Even	then,	the	Gral
preferred	their	feuds,	the	spilling	of	blood	in	the	name	of	personal	honour.
The	pursuit	of	vengeance	was	a	worthy	cause.	Slaughtering	strangers	made	no
sense	and	stained	the	soul,	demanding	tortured	cleansing	rituals.	Further,	there
was	no	satisfaction	in	such	murder.
Two	months	before	the	Great	Fall,	a	commander	named	Vorlock	Duven,
leading	the	Karasch	Legion	deep	into	the	untamed	wastes	of	the	southwest,	had
sent	her	seventy-four	Gral	warriors	into	the	Tasse	Hills	to	begin	a	campaign	of
subjugation	against	the	tribe	believed	to	rule	that	forbidding	range.	The	Gral
were	to	incite	the	Tasse	to	battle,	then	withdraw,	with	the	savages	hard	on	their
heels,	to	a	place	of	ambush	at	the	very	edge	of	the	highlands.
Leading	the	Gral	was	a	wise	veteran	of	the	Bhok’ar	clan	named	Sidilack,
called	by	many	Snaketongue	after	a	sword-thrust	into	his	mouth	had	sliced
down	the	length	of	his	tongue.	His	warriors,	well	blooded	after	a	three-year


campaign	of	conquest	among	the	desert	and	plains	peoples	south	of	Ugari,
were	skilled	at	finding	the	hidden	trails	leading	into	the	rough	heights,	and
before	long	they	were	coming	upon	rude	dwellings	and	rock	shelters	in	the
midst	of	ancient	ruins	that	hinted	that	some	terrible	descent	from	civilization
had	afflicted	the	Tasse	long	ago.
At	dusk	on	the	third	day	seven	woad-painted	savages	ambushed	the	lead
scouts,	killing	one	before	being	driven	off.	Of	the	four	Tasse	who	had	fallen	in
the	clash,	only	one	was	not	already	dead	of	his	wounds.	The	language	of	his
pain-stricken	ravings	was	like	nothing	Sidilack	and	his	warriors	had	ever
heard	before.	Beneath	the	dusty	blue	paint	the	Tasse	were	physically	unlike	any
other	nearby	tribes.	Tall,	lithe,	with	strangely	small	hands	and	feet,	they	had
elongated	faces,	weak	chins	and	oversized	teeth.	Their	eyes	were	close-set,	the
irises	tawny	like	dried	grass,	the	whites	blistered	with	so	many	blood	vessels	it
seemed	they	might	well	weep	red	tears.
Among	all	four	of	the	Tasse	the	signs	of	dehydration	and	malnutrition
were	obvious,	and	as	fighters	they	had	been	singularly	ineffective	with	their
stone-tipped	spears	and	knotted	clubs.
The	wounded	savage	soon	died.
Resuming	their	hunt,	the	Gral	pushed	ever	deeper,	ever	higher	into	the
hills.	They	found	ancient	terraces	that	had	once	held	crops,	the	soil	now
lifeless,	barely	able	to	sustain	dry	desert	scrub.	They	found	stone-lined
channels	to	collect	rainwater	that	no	longer	came.	They	found	stone	tombs	with
large	capstones	carved	into	phallic	shapes.	On	the	trail	potsherds	and	white
bleached	bone	fragments	crunched	underfoot.
At	noon	on	the	fourth	day	the	Gral	came	upon	the	settlement	of	the	Tasse.
Twelve	scraggy	huts,	from	which	rushed	three	warriors	with	spears,	shrieking
as	they	lined	up	in	a	pathetic	defensive	line	in	front	of	five	starving	females
and	a	lone	two-or	three-year-old	female	child.
Sidilack,	the	wise	veteran	who	had	fought	twenty	battles,	who	had	stained
his	soul	with	the	slaughter	of	countless	strangers,	sent	his	Gral	forward.	The
battle	lasted	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	When	the	Tasse	men	fell	their	women
attacked	with	their	hands	and	teeth.	When	they	were	all	dead,	the	lone	child
crouched	down	and	hissed	at	them	like	a	cat.
A	sword	was	raised	to	strike	her	down.
It	never	descended.	The	clearing	was	suddenly	swallowed	in	shadows.
Seven	terrible	hounds	emerged	to	surround	the	child,	and	a	man	appeared.	His
shoulders	so	broad	as	to	make	him	seem	hunched,	he	was	wearing	an	anklelength	coat	of	blued	chain,	his	black	hair	long	and	unbound.	Cold	blue	eyes
fixed	upon	Sidilack	and	he	spoke	in	the	language	of	the	First	Empire:	‘They


were	the	last.	I	do	not	decry	your	slaughter.	They	lived	in	fear.	This	land	–	not
their	home	–	could	not	feed	them.	Abandoned	by	the	Deragoth	and	their	kind,
they	had	failed	in	life’s	struggle.’	He	turned	then	to	regard	the	child.	‘But	this
one	I	will	take.’
Sidilack,	it	was	said,	could	feel	then	the	deepest	stain	settling	upon	his	soul.
One	that	no	cleansing	ritual	could	eradicate.	He	saw,	in	that	moment,	the	grim
fate	of	his	destiny,	a	descent	into	the	madness	of	inconsolable	grief.	The	god
would	take	the	last	child,	but	it	was	most	certainly	the	last.	The	blood	of	the
others	was	on	Sidilack’s	hands,	a	curse,	a	haunting	that	only	death	could
relieve.
Yet	he	was	Gral.	Forbidden	from	taking	his	own	life.
Another	legend	followed,	that	one	recounting	the	long	journey	to
Snaketongue’s	final	end,	his	pursuit	of	questions	that	could	not	be	answered,
the	pathos	of	his	staggering	walk	into	the	Dead	Man’s	Desert	–	realm	of	the
fallen	Gral	–	where	even	the	noble	spirits	refused	him,	his	soul,	the	hollow
defence	of	his	own	crime.
Taralack	Veed	did	not	want	to	think	of	these	things.	Echoes	of	the	child,
that	hissing,	less-than-human	creature	who	had	been	drawn	into	the	shadows	by
a	god	–	to	what	end?	A	mystery	within	the	legend	that	would	never	be	solved.
But	he	did	not	believe	there	had	been	mercy	in	that	god’s	heart.	He	did	not	want
to	think	of	young	females	with	small	hands	and	feet,	with	sloped	chins	and
large	canines,	with	luminous	eyes	the	hue	of	savanna	grasses.
He	did	not	want	to	think	of	Sidilack	and	the	endless	night	of	his	doom.	The
warrior	with	slaughter ’s	blood	staining	his	hands	and	his	soul.	That	tragic	fool
was	nothing	like	Taralack	Veed,	he	told	himself	again	and	again.	Truths	did	not
hide	in	vague	similarities,	after	all;	only	in	the	specific	details,	and	he	shared
none	of	those	with	old	Snaketongue.
‘You	speak	rarely	these	days,	Taralack	Veed.’
The	Gral	glanced	up	at	Icarium.	‘I	am	frightened	for	you,’	he	said.
‘Why?’
‘I	see	nothing	of	the	hardness	in	your	eyes,	friend,	the	hardness	that
perhaps	none	but	a	longtime	companion	would	be	able	to	detect.	The	hardness
that	bespeaks	your	rage.	It	seems	to	sleep,	and	I	do	not	know	if	even	Rhulad	can
awaken	it.	If	he	cannot,	then	you	will	die.	Quickly.’
‘If	all	you	say	of	me	is	true,’	the	Jhag	replied,	‘then	my	death	would	be
welcome.	And	justified	in	every	sense	of	the	word.’
‘No	other	can	defeat	the	Emperor—’
‘Why	are	you	so	certain	I	can?	I	do	not	wield	a	magical	sword.	I	do	not
return	to	life	should	I	fall.	These	are	the	rumours	regarding	the	Tiste	Edur


named	Rhulad,	yes?’
‘When	your	anger	is	unleashed,	Icarium,	you	cannot	be	stopped.’
‘Ah,	but	it	seems	I	can.’
Taralack	Veed’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘Is	this	the	change	that	has	come	to	you,
Icarium?	Have	your	memories	returned	to	you?’
‘I	believe	if	they	had,	I	would	not	now	be	here,’	the	Jhag	replied,	pausing
before	one	stall	offering	cord-wrapped	pottery.	‘Look	upon	these	items	here,
Taralack	Veed,	and	tell	me	what	you	see.	Empty	vessels?	Or	endless
possibilities?’
‘They	are	naught	but	pots.’
Icarium	smiled.
It	was,	the	Gral	decided,	a	far	too	easy	smile.	‘Do	you	mock	me,	Icarium?’
‘Something	awaits	me.	I	do	not	mean	this	mad	Emperor.	Something	else.
Answer	me	this.	How	does	one	measure	time?’
‘By	the	course	of	the	sun,	the	phases	of	the	moon,	the	wheel	of	the	stars.
And,	of	course,	in	cities	such	as	this	one,	the	sounding	of	a	bell	at	fixed
intervals	–	a	wholly	absurd	conceit	and,	indeed,	one	that	is	spiritually
debilitating.’
‘The	Gral	speaks.’
‘Now	you	truly	mock	me.	This	is	unlike	you,	Icarium.’
‘The	sounding	of	bells,	their	increments	established	by	the	passing	of	sand
or	water	through	a	narrowed	vessel.	As	you	say,	a	conceit.	An	arbitrary
assertion	of	constancy.	Can	we	truly	say,	however,	that	time	is	constant?’
‘As	any	Gral	would	tell	you,	it	is	not.	Else	our	senses	lie.’
‘Perhaps	they	do.’
‘Then	we	are	lost.’
‘I	appreciate	your	intellectual	belligerence	today,	Taralack	Veed.’
They	moved	on,	wandering	slowly	alongside	the	canal.
‘I	understand	your	obsession	with	time,’	the	Gral	said.	‘You,	who	have
passed	through	age	after	age,	unchanging,	unknowing.’
‘Unknowing,	yes.	That	is	the	problem,	isn’t	it?’
‘I	do	not	agree.	It	is	our	salvation.’
They	were	silent	for	a	few	more	strides.	Many	were	the	curious	–	at	times
pitying	–	glances	cast	their	way.	The	champions	were	also	the	condemned,
after	all.	Yet	was	there	hope,	buried	deep	behind	those	shying	eyes?	There	must
be.	For	an	end	to	the	nightmare	that	was	Rhulad	Sengar,	the	Edur	Emperor	of
Lether.
‘Without	an	understanding	of	time,	history	means	nothing.	Do	you	follow,
Taralack	Veed?’


‘Yet	you	do	not	understand	time,	do	you?’
‘No,	that	is	true.	Yet	I	believe	I	have…pursued	this…again	and	again.	From
age	to	age.	In	the	faith	that	a	revelation	on	the	meaning	of	time	will	unlock	my
own	hidden	history.	I	would	find	its	true	measure,	Taralack	Veed.	And	not	just
its	measure,	but	its	very	nature.	Consider	this	canal,	and	those	linked	to	it.	The
water	is	pushed	by	current	and	tide	from	the	river,	then	traverses	the	city,	only
to	rejoin	the	river	not	far	from	where	it	first	entered.	We	may	seek	to	step	out
from	the	river	and	so	choose	our	own	path,	but	no	matter	how	straight	it
seems,	we	will,	in	the	end,	return	to	that	river.’
‘As	with	the	bells,	then,’	the	Gral	said,	‘water	tracks	the	passage	of	time.’
‘You	misunderstand,’	Icarium	replied,	but	did	not	elaborate.
Taralack	Veed	scowled,	paused	to	spit	thick	phlegm	onto	his	palms,	then
swept	it	back	through	his	hair.	Somewhere	in	the	crowd	a	woman	screamed,
but	the	sound	was	not	repeated.	‘The	canal’s	current	cannot	change	the	law	that
binds	its	direction.	The	canal	is	but	a	detour.’
‘Yes,	one	that	slows	the	passage	of	its	water.	And	in	turn	that	water
changes,	gathering	the	refuse	of	the	city	it	passes	through,	and	so,	upon
returning	to	the	river,	it	is	a	different	colour.	Muddier,	more	befouled.’
‘The	slower	your	path,	the	muddier	your	boots?’
‘Even	so,’	Icarium	said,	nodding.
‘Time	is	nothing	like	that.’
‘Are	you	so	certain?	When	we	must	wait,	our	minds	fill	with	sludge,
random	thoughts	like	so	much	refuse.	When	we	are	driven	to	action,	our
current	is	swift,	the	water	seemingly	clear,	cold	and	sharp.’
‘I’d	rather,	Icarium,	we	wait	a	long	time.	Here,	in	the	face	of	what	is	to
come.’
‘The	path	to	Rhulad?	As	you	like.	But	I	tell	you,	Taralack	Veed,	that	is	not
the	path	I	am	walking.’
Another	half-dozen	strides.
Then	the	Gral	spoke.	‘They	wrap	the	cord	around	them,	Icarium,	to	keep
them	from	breaking.’
	
Senior	Assessor ’s	eyes	glittered	as	he	stood	amidst	a	crowd	twenty	paces	from
where	Icarium	and	Taralack	Veed	had	paused	in	front	of	a	potter ’s	stall.	His
hands	were	folded	together,	the	fingers	twitching.	His	breathing	was	rapid	and
shallow.
Beside	him,	Samar	Dev	rolled	her	eyes,	then	asked,	‘Are	you	about	to	fall
dead	on	me?	If	I’d	known	this	walk	involved	skulking	in	that	Jhag’s	shadow,	I


think	I	would	have	stayed	in	the	compound.’
‘The	choices	you	make,’	he	replied,	‘must	needs	be	entirely	of	your	own
accord,	Samar	Dev.	Reasonably	distinct	from	mine	or	anyone	else’s.	It	is	said
that	the	history	of	human	conflict	resides	exclusively	in	the	clash	of
expectations.’
‘Is	it	now?’
‘Furthermore—’
‘Never	mind	your	“furthermore”,	Senior	Assessor.	Compromise	is	the
negotiation	of	expectation.	With	your	wayward	notions	we	do	not	negotiate,
and	so	all	the	compromising	is	mine.’
‘As	you	choose.’
She	thought	about	hitting	him,	decided	she	didn’t	want	to	make	a	scene.
What	was	it	with	men	and	their	obsessions?	‘He	is	in	all	likelihood	going	to
die,	and	soon.’
‘I	think	not.	No,	most	certainly	I	think	not.’
Icarium	and	the	Gral	resumed	their	meander	through	the	crowds,	and	after
a	moment	Senior	Assessor	followed,	maintaining	his	distance.	Sighing,	Samar
Dev	set	off	after	him.	She	didn’t	like	this	mob.	It	felt	wrong.	Tense,
overwrought.	Strain	was	visible	on	faces,	and	the	cries	of	the	hawkers	sounded
strident	and	half	desperate.	Few	passers-by,	she	noted,	were	buying.
‘Something’s	wrong,’	she	said.
‘There	is	nothing	here	that	cannot	be	explained	by	impending	financial
panic,	Samar	Dev.	Although	you	may	believe	I	am	unaware	of	anything	but
him,	I	assure	you	that	I	have	assessed	the	condition	of	Letheras	and,	by
extension,	this	entire	empire.	A	crisis	looms.	Wealth,	alas,	is	not	an	infinite
commodity.	Systems	such	as	this	are	dependent	upon	the	assumption	of
unlimited	resources,	however.	These	resources	range	from	cheap	labour	and
materials	to	an	insatiable	demand.	Such	demand,	in	turn,	depends	on	rather
more	ethereal	virtues,	such	as	confidence,	will,	perceived	need	and	the	bliss	of
short-term	thinking,	any	one	of	which	is	vulnerable	to	mysterious	and	often
inexplicable	influences.	We	are	witness,	here,	to	the	effects	of	a	complex
collusion	of	factors	which	are	serving	to	undermine	said	virtues.	Furthermore,
it	is	my	belief	that	the	situation	has	been	orchestrated.’
Her	mind	had	begun	to	drift	with	Senior	Assessor ’s	diatribe,	but	this	last
observation	drew	her	round.	‘Letheras	is	under	economic	assault?’
‘Well	put,	Samar	Dev.	Someone	is	manipulating	the	situation	to	achieve	a
cascading	collapse,	yes.	Such	is	my	humble	assessment.’
‘Humble?’
‘Of	course	not.	I	view	my	own	brilliance	with	irony.’


‘To	what	end?’
‘Why,	to	make	me	humble.’
‘Are	we	going	to	follow	Icarium	and	his	pet	Gral	all	afternoon?’
‘I	am	the	only	living	native	of	Cabal,	Samar	Dev,	to	have	seen	with	my
own	eyes	our	god.	Is	it	any	wonder	I	follow	him?’
God?	He’s	not	a	god.	He’s	a	damned	Jhag	from	the	Odhan	west	of	Seven
Cities.	Suffering	a	tragic	curse,	but	then,	aren’t	they	all?	A	figure	well	ahead	of
Icarium	and	Taralack	Veed	caught	her	attention.	A	figure	tall,	hulking,	with	a
shattered	face	and	a	huge	stone	sword	strapped	to	its	back.	‘Oh	no,’	she
murmured.
‘What	is	it?’	Senior	Assessor	asked.
‘He’s	seen	him.’
‘Samar	Dev?’
But	he	was	behind	her	now,	and	she	was	hurrying	forward,	roughly
pushing	past	people.	Expectations?	Most	certainly.	Compromise?	Not	a	chance.
	
One	of	the	sconces	had	a	faulty	valve	and	had	begun	producing	thick	black
tendrils	of	smoke	that	coiled	like	serpents	in	the	air,	and	Uruth’s	coughing
echoed	like	barks	in	the	antechamber.	His	back	to	the	door	leading	to	the
throne	room,	Sirryn	Kanar	stood	with	crossed	arms,	watching	the	two	Tiste
Edur.	Tomad	Sengar	was	pacing,	walking	a	path	that	deftly	avoided	the	other
waiting	guards	even	as	he	made	a	point	of	pretending	they	weren’t	there.	His
wife	had	drawn	her	dark	grey	robe	about	herself,	so	tight	she	reminded	Sirryn
of	a	vulture	with	its	wings	folded	close.	Age	had	made	her	shoulders	slightly
hunched,	adding	to	the	avian	impression,	sufficient	to	draw	a	half-smile	to	the
guard’s	mouth.
‘No	doubt	this	waiting	amuses	you,’	Tomad	said	in	a	growl.
‘So	you	were	watching	me	after	all.’
‘I	was	watching	the	door,	which	you	happen	to	be	standing	against.’
Contemplating	kicking	through	it,	no	doubt.	Sirryn’s	smile	broadened.
Alas,	you’d	have	to	go	through	me,	and	that	you	won’t	do,	will	you?	‘The
Emperor	is	very	busy.’
‘With	what?’	Tomad	demanded.	‘Triban	Gnol	decides	everything,	after	all.
Rhulad	just	sits	with	a	glazed	look	and	nods	every	now	and	then.’
‘You	think	little	of	your	son.’
That	struck	a	nerve,	he	saw,	as	husband	and	wife	both	fixed	hard	eyes	on
him.
‘We	think	less	of	Triban	Gnol,’	Uruth	said.


There	was	no	need	to	comment	on	that	observation,	for	Sirryn	well	knew
their	opinions	of	the	Chancellor;	indeed,	their	views	on	all	Letherii.	Blind
bigotry,	of	course,	all	the	more	hypocritical	for	the	zeal	with	which	the	Edur
had	embraced	the	Letherii	way	of	living,	even	as	they	sneered	and	proclaimed
their	disgust	and	contempt.	If	you	are	so	disgusted,	why	do	you	still	suckle	at
the	tit,	Edur?	You	had	your	chance	at	destroying	all	this.	Us.	And	our	own
whole	terrible	civilization.	No,	there	was	little	that	was	worth	saying	to	these
two	savages.
He	felt	more	than	heard	the	scratch	at	the	door	behind	him,	and	slowly
straightened.	‘The	Emperor	will	see	you	now.’
Tomad	wheeled	round	to	face	the	door,	and	Sirryn	saw	in	the	bastard’s	face
a	sudden	strain	beneath	the	haughty	façade.	Beyond	him,	Uruth	swept	her	cloak
back,	freeing	her	arms.	Was	that	fear	in	her	eyes?	He	watched	her	move	up	to
stand	beside	her	husband,	yet	it	seemed	all	they	drew	from	that	proximity	was
yet	another	tension.
Stepping	to	one	side,	Sirryn	Kanar	swung	open	the	door.	‘Halt	in	the	tiled
circle,’	he	said.	‘Step	past	it	and	a	dozen	arrows	will	find	your	body.	No
warning	will	be	voiced.	By	the	Emperor ’s	own	command.	Now,	proceed.
Slowly.’
	
At	this	moment,	a	Tiste	Edur	and	four	Letherii	soldiers	approached	the	city’s
west	gate	on	lathered	horses.	A	shout	from	the	Edur	sent	pedestrians	scattering
from	the	raised	road.	The	five	riders	were	covered	in	mud	and	two	bore
wounds.	The	swords	of	the	two	whose	scabbards	were	not	empty	were	bloodcrusted.	The	Edur	was	one	of	those	without	weapons,	and	from	his	back	jutted
the	stub	of	an	arrow,	its	iron	head	buried	in	his	right	scapula.	Blood	soaked	his
cloak	where	the	quarrel	had	pinned	it	to	his	back.	This	warrior	was	dying.	He
had	been	dying	for	four	days.
Another	hoarse	shout	from	the	Tiste	Edur,	as	he	led	his	ragged	troop
beneath	the	gate’s	arch,	and	into	the	city	of	Letheras.
	
The	Errant	studied	Rhulad	Sengar,	who	had	sat	motionless	since	the	Chancellor
had	returned	to	announce	the	imminent	arrival	of	Tomad	and	Uruth.	Was	it
some	faltering	of	courage	that	had	kept	the	Emperor	from	demanding	their
immediate	presence?	There	was	no	way	to	tell.	Even	the	Chancellor ’s	cautious
queries	had	elicited	nothing.


Lanterns	burned	on.	The	traditional	torches	breathed	out	smoke,	their
flickering	light	licking	the	walls.	Triban	Gnol	stood,	hands	folded,	waiting.
Within	Rhulad’s	head	battles	were	being	waged.	Armies	of	will	and	desire
contested	with	the	raving	forces	of	fear	and	doubt.	The	field	was	sodden	with
blood	and	littered	with	fallen	heroes.	Or	into	his	skull	some	blinding	fog	had
rolled	in,	oppressive	as	oblivion	itself,	and	Rhulad	wandered	lost.
He	sat	as	if	carved,	clothed	in	stained	wealth,	the	product	of	a	mad	artist’s
vision.	Lacquered	eyes	and	scarred	flesh,	twisted	mouth	and	black	strands	of
greasy	hair.	Sculpted	solid	to	the	throne	to	cajole	symbols	of	permanence	and
imprisonment,	but	this	madness	had	lost	all	subtlety	–	ever	the	curse	of
fascism,	the	tyranny	of	gleeful	servility	that	could	not	abide	subversion.
Look	upon	him,	and	see	what	comes	when	justice	is	vengeance.	When
challenge	is	criminal.	When	scepticism	is	treason.	Call	upon	them,	Emperor!
Your	father,	your	mother.	Call	them	to	stand	before	you	in	this	inverted
nightmare	of	fidelity,	and	unleash	your	wrath!
‘Now,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	croak.
The	Chancellor	gestured	to	a	guard	near	the	side	door,	who	turned	in	a	soft
rustle	of	armour	and	brushed	his	gauntleted	hand	upon	the	ornate	panel.	A
moment	later	it	opened.
All	of	this	was	occurring	to	the	Errant’s	left,	along	the	same	wall	he	leaned
against,	so	he	could	not	see	what	occurred	then	beyond,	barring	a	few
indistinct	words.
Tomad	and	Uruth	Sengar	strode	into	the	throne	room,	halting	in	the	tiled
circle.	Both	then	bowed	to	their	Emperor.
Rhulad	licked	his	broken	lips.	‘They	are	kin,’	he	said.
A	frown	from	Tomad.
‘Enslaved	by	humans.	They	deserved	our	liberation,	did	they	not?’
‘From	the	Isle	of	Sepik,	Emperor?’	asked	Uruth.	‘Are	these	of	whom	you
speak?’
‘They	were	indeed	liberated,’	Tomad	said,	nodding.
Rhulad	leaned	forward.	‘Enslaved	kin.	Liberated.	Then	why,	dear	Father,
do	they	now	rot	in	chains?’
Tomad	seemed	unable	to	answer,	a	look	of	confusion	on	his	lined	face.
‘Awaiting	your	disposition,’	Uruth	said.	‘Emperor,	we	have	sought
audience	with	you	many	times	since	our	return.	Alas,’	she	glanced	over	at
Triban	Gnol,	‘the	Chancellor	sends	us	away.	Without	fail.’
‘And	so,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	rasp,	‘you	proclaimed	them	guests	of	the	empire
as	was	their	right,	then	settled	them	where?	Why,	not	in	our	many	fine
residences	surrounding	the	palace.	No.	You	chose	the	trenches	–	the	pits


alongside	debtors,	traitors	and	murderers.	Is	this	your	notion	of	the	Guest	Gift
in	your	household,	Tomad?	Uruth?	Strange,	for	I	do	not	recall	in	my	youth	this
most	profound	betrayal	of	Tiste	Edur	custom.	Not	in	the	House	of	my	family!’
‘Rhulad.	Emperor,’	Tomad	said,	almost	stepping	back	in	the	face	of	his
son’s	rage,	‘have	you	seen	these	kin	of	ours?	They	are…pathetic.	To	look	upon
them	is	to	feel	stained.	Dirtied.	Their	spirits	are	crushed.	They	have	been	made
a	mockery	of	all	that	is	Tiste	Edur.	This	was	the	crime	the	humans	of	Sepik
committed	against	our	blood,	and	for	that	we	answered,	Emperor.	That	island
is	now	dead.’
‘Kin,’	the	Emperor	whispered.	‘Explain	to	me,	Father,	for	I	do	not
understand.	You	perceive	the	crime	and	deliver	the	judgement,	yes,	in	the	name
of	Edur	blood.	No	matter	how	fouled,	no	matter	how	decrepit.	Indeed,	those
details	are	without	relevance	–	they	in	no	way	affect	the	punishment,	except
perhaps	to	make	it	all	the	more	severe.	All	of	this,	Father,	is	a	single	thread	of
thought,	and	it	runs	true.	Yet	there	is	another,	isn’t	there?	A	twisted,	knotted
thing.	One	where	the	victims	of	those	humans	are	undeserving	of	our	regard,
where	they	must	be	hidden	away,	left	to	rot	like	filth.
‘What,	then,	were	you	avenging?
‘Where	–	oh	where,	Father	–	is	the	Guest	Gift?	Where	is	the	honour	that
binds	all	Tiste	Edur?	Where,	Tomad	Sengar,	where,	in	all	this,	is	my	will?	I	am
Emperor	and	the	face	of	the	empire	is	mine	and	mine	alone!’
As	the	echoes	of	that	shriek	rebounded	in	the	throne	room,	reluctant	to
fade,	neither	Uruth	nor	Tomad	seemed	able	to	speak.	Their	grey	faces	were	the
colour	of	ash.
Triban	Gnol,	standing	a	few	paces	behind	and	to	the	right	of	the	two	Edur,
looked	like	a	penitent	priest,	his	eyes	down	on	the	floor.	But	the	Errant,	whose
senses	could	reach	out	with	a	sensitivity	that	far	surpassed	that	of	any	mortal,
could	hear	the	hammering	of	that	old	man’s	wretched	heart;	could	almost	smell
the	dark	glee	concealed	behind	his	benign,	vaguely	rueful	expression.
Uruth	seemed	to	shake	herself	then,	slowly	straightening.	‘Emperor,’	she
said,	‘we	cannot	know	your	will	when	we	are	barred	from	seeing	you.	Is	it	the
Chancellor ’s	privilege	to	deny	the	Emperor ’s	own	parents?	The	Emperor ’s
own	blood?	And	what	of	all	the	other	Tiste	Edur?	Emperor,	a	wall	has	been
raised	around	you.	A	Letherii	wall.’
The	Errant	heard	Triban	Gnol’s	heart	stutter	in	its	cage.	‘Majesty!’	the
Chancellor	cried	in	indignation.	‘No	such	wall	exists!	You	are	protected,	yes.
Indeed.	From	all	who	would	harm	you—’
‘Harm	him?’	Tomad	shouted,	wheeling	on	the	Chancellor.	‘He	is	our	son!’
‘Assuredly	not	you,	Tomad	Sengar.	Nor	you,	Uruth.	Perhaps	the	protection


necessary	around	a	ruler	might	seem	to	you	a	wall,	but—’
‘We	would	speak	to	him!’
‘From	you,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	dreadful	rasp,	‘I	would	hear	nothing.	Your
words	are	naught	but	lies.	You	both	lie	to	me,	as	Hannan	Mosag	lies,	as	every
one	of	my	fellow	Tiste	Edur	lies.	Do	you	imagine	I	cannot	smell	the	stench	of
your	fear?	Your	hatred?	No,	I	will	hear	neither	of	you.	However,	you	shall
hear	me.’
The	Emperor	slowly	leaned	back	in	his	throne,	his	eyes	hard.	‘Our	kin	will
be	set	free.	This	I	command.	They	will	be	set	free.	For	you,	my	dear	parents,	it
seems	a	lesson	is	required.	You	left	them	to	rot	in	darkness.	In	the	ships.	In	the
trench-pits.	From	these	egregious	acts,	I	can	only	assume	that	you	do	not
possess	any	comprehension	of	the	horror	of	such	ordeals.	Therefore	it	is	my
judgement	that	you	must	taste	something	of	what	you	inflicted	upon	our	kin.
You	will	both	spend	two	months	interred	in	the	dungeon	crypts	of	the	Fifth
Wing.	You	will	live	in	darkness,	fed	once	a	day	through	chutes	in	the	ceilings
of	your	cells.	You	will	have	no-one	but	each	other	with	whom	to	speak.	You
will	be	shackled.	In	darkness	–	do	you	understand,	Uruth?	True	darkness.	No
shadows	for	you	to	manipulate,	no	power	to	whisper	in	your	ear.	In	that	time,	I
suggest	you	both	think	long	of	what	Guest	Gift	means	to	a	Tiste	Edur,	of
honouring	our	kin	no	matter	how	far	they	have	fallen.	Of	what	it	truly	means	to
liberate.’	Rhulad	waved	his	free	hand.	‘Send	them	away,	Chancellor.	I	am	made
ill	by	their	betrayal	of	our	own	kin.’
The	Errant,	very	nearly	as	stunned	as	were	Tomad	and	Uruth,	missed
whatever	gesture	Triban	Gnol	used	to	summon	forth	the	Letherii	guards.	They
appeared	quickly,	as	if	conjured	from	thin	air,	and	closed	round	Tomad	and
Uruth.
Letherii	hands,	iron-scaled	and	implacable,	closed	about	Tiste	Edur	arms.
And	the	Errant	knew	that	the	end	had	begun.
	
Samar	Dev’s	hope	of	ending	things	before	they	began	did	not	last	long.	She
was	still	four	strides	from	Karsa	Orlong	when	he	reached	Icarium	and
Taralack	Veed.	The	Toblakai	had	approached	from	the	side,	almost	behind	the
Jhag	–	who	had	turned	to	contemplate	the	canal’s	murky	waters	–	and	she
watched	as	the	huge	warrior	reached	out	one	hand,	grasped	Icarium	by	an
upper	arm,	and	swung	him	round.
Taralack	Veed	lunged	to	break	that	grip	and	his	head	was	snapped	by	a
punch	that	seemed	almost	casual.	The	Gral	collapsed	onto	the	pavestones	and
did	not	move.


Icarium	was	staring	down	at	the	hand	clutching	his	left	arm,	his	expression
vaguely	perturbed.
‘Karsa!’	Samar	Dev	shouted,	as	heads	turned	and	citizens	–	those	who	had
witnessed	Taralack	Veed’s	fate	–	moved	away.	‘If	you’ve	killed	the	Gral—’
‘He	is	nothing,’	Karsa	said	in	a	growl,	his	eyes	fixed	on	Icarium.	‘Your	last
minder,	Jhag,	was	far	more	formidable.	Now	you	stand	here	with	no-one	to
attack	me	from	behind.’
‘Karsa,	he	is	unarmed.’
‘But	I	am	not.’
Icarium	was	still	studying	that	battered	hand	gripping	his	arm	–	the	red
weals	of	scarring	left	by	shackles	encircling	the	thick	wrist,	the	dots	and	dashes
of	old	tattoos	–	as	if	the	Jhag	was	unable	to	comprehend	its	function.	Then	he
glanced	over	at	Samar	Dev,	and	his	face	brightened	in	a	warm	smile.	‘Ah,
witch.	Both	Taxilian	and	Varat	Taun	have	spoken	highly	of	you.	Would	that	we
had	met	earlier	–	although	I	have	seen	you	from	across	the	compound—’
‘She	is	not	your	problem,’	Karsa	said.	‘I	am	your	problem.’
Icarium	slowly	turned	and	met	the	Toblakai’s	eyes.	‘You	are	Karsa	Orlong,
who	does	not	understand	what	it	means	to	spar.	How	many	comrades	have	you
crippled?’
‘They	are	not	comrades.	Nor	are	you.’
‘What	about	me?’	Samar	Dev	demanded.	‘Am	I	not	a	comrade	of	yours,
Karsa?’
He	scowled.	‘What	of	it?’
‘Icarium	is	unarmed.	If	you	kill	him	here	you	will	not	face	the	Emperor.
No,	you	will	find	yourself	in	chains.	At	least	until	your	head	gets	lopped	off.’
‘I	have	told	you	before,	witch.	Chains	do	not	hold	me.’
‘You	want	to	face	the	Emperor,	don’t	you?’
‘And	if	this	one	kills	him	first?’	Karsa	demanded,	giving	the	arm	a	shake
that	clearly	startled	Icarium.
‘Is	that	the	problem?’	Samar	Dev	asked.	And	is	that	why	you’re	crippling
other	champions?	Not	that	any	will	play	with	you	any	more,	you	brainless	bully.
‘You	wish	to	face	Emperor	Rhulad	before	I	do?’	Icarium	inquired.
‘I	do	not	ask	for	your	permission,	Jhag.’
‘Yet	I	give	it	nonetheless,	Karsa	Orlong.	You	are	welcome	to	Rhulad.’
Karsa	glared	at	Icarium	who,	though	not	as	tall,	somehow	still	seemed	able
to	meet	the	Toblakai	eye	to	eye	without	lifting	his	head.
Then	something	odd	occurred.	Samar	Dev	saw	a	slight	widening	of
Karsa’s	eyes	as	he	studied	Icarium’s	face.	‘Yes,’	he	said	in	a	gruff	voice.	‘I	see
it	now.’


‘I	am	pleased,’	replied	Icarium.
‘See	what?’	Samar	Dev	demanded.
On	the	ground	behind	her	Taralack	Veed	groaned,	coughed,	then	rolled
onto	his	side	and	was	sick.
Karsa	released	the	Jhag’s	arm	and	stepped	back.	‘You	are	good	to	your
word?’
Icarium	bowed	slightly	then	said,	‘How	could	I	not	be?’
‘That	is	true.	Icarium,	I	witness.’
The	Jhag	bowed	a	second	time.
‘Keep	your	hands	away	from	that	sword!’
This	shout	brought	them	all	round,	to	see	a	half-dozen	Letherii	guards
edging	closer,	their	weapons	unsheathed.
Karsa	sneered	at	them.	‘I	am	returning	to	the	compound,	children.	Get	out
of	my	way.’
They	parted	like	reeds	before	a	canoe’s	prow	as	the	Toblakai	marched
forward,	then	moved	into	his	wake,	hurrying	to	keep	up	with	Karsa’s	long
strides.
Samar	Dev	stared	after	them,	then	loosed	a	sudden	yelp,	before	clapping
her	hands	to	her	mouth.
‘You	remind	me	of	Senior	Assessor,	doing	that,’	Icarium	observed	with
another	smile.	His	gaze	lifted	past	her.	‘And	yes,	there	he	remains,	my	very
own	personal	vulture.	If	I	gesture	him	to	us,	do	you	think	he	will	come,	witch?’
She	shook	her	head,	still	struggling	with	an	overwhelming	flood	of	relief
and	the	aftermath	of	terror ’s	cold	clutch	that	even	now	made	her	hands	tremble.
‘No,	he	prefers	to	worship	from	a	distance.’
‘Worship?	The	man	is	deluded.	Samar	Dev,	will	you	inform	him	of	that?’
‘As	you	like,	but	it	won’t	matter,	Icarium.	His	people,	you	see,	they
remember	you.’
‘Do	they	now.’	Icarium’s	eyes	narrowed	slightly	on	the	Senior	Assessor,
who	had	begun	to	cringe	from	the	singular	attention	of	his	god.
Spirits	below,	why	was	I	interested	in	this	monk	in	the	first	place?	There	is
no	lure	to	the	glow	of	fanatical	worship.	There	is	only	smug	intransigence	and
the	hidden	knives	of	sharp	judgement.
‘Perhaps,’	said	Icarium,	‘I	must	speak	to	him	after	all.’
‘He’ll	run	away.’
‘In	the	compound,	then—’
‘Where	you	can	corner	him?’
The	Jhag	smiled.	‘Proof	of	my	omnipotence.’


	
Sirryn	Kanar ’s	exultation	was	like	a	cauldron	on	the	boil,	the	heavy	lid
moments	from	stuttering	loose,	yet	he	had	held	himself	down	on	the	long	walk
into	the	crypts	of	the	Fifth	Wing,	where	the	air	was	wet	enough	to	taste,	where
mould	skidded	beneath	their	boots	and	the	dank	chill	reached	tendrils	to	their
very	bones.
This,	then,	would	be	the	home	of	Tomad	and	Uruth	Sengar	for	the	next	two
months,	and	Sirryn	could	not	be	more	pleased.	In	the	light	of	the	lanterns	the
guards	carried	he	saw,	with	immense	satisfaction,	that	certain	look	on	the	Edur
faces,	the	one	that	settled	upon	the	expression	of	every	prisoner:	the	numbed
disbelief,	the	shock	and	fear	stirring	in	the	eyes	every	now	and	then,	until	they
were	once	more	overwhelmed	by	that	stupid	refusal	to	accept	reality.
He	would	take	sexual	pleasure	this	night,	he	knew,	as	if	this	moment	now
was	but	one	half	of	desire’s	dialogue.	He	would	sleep	satiated,	content	with	the
world.	His	world.
They	walked	the	length	of	the	lowest	corridor	until	reaching	the	very	end.
Sirryn	gestured	that	Tomad	be	taken	to	the	cell	on	the	left;	Uruth	into	the	one
opposite.	He	watched	as	the	Edur	woman,	with	a	last	glance	back	at	her
husband,	turned	and	accompanied	her	three	Letherii	guards.	A	moment	later
Sirryn	followed.
‘I	know	that	you	are	the	more	dangerous,’	he	said	to	her	as	one	of	his
guards	bent	to	fix	the	shackle	onto	her	right	ankle.	‘There	are	shadows	here,	so
long	as	we	remain.’
‘I	leave	your	fate	to	others,’	she	replied.
He	studied	her	for	a	moment.	‘You	shall	be	forbidden	visitors.’
‘Yes.’
‘The	shock	goes	away.’
She	looked	at	him,	and	he	saw	in	her	eyes	raw	contempt.
‘In	its	place,’	he	continued,	‘comes	despair.’
‘Begone,	you	wretched	man.’
Sirryn	smiled.	‘Take	her	cloak.	Why	should	Tomad	be	the	only	one	to
suffer	the	chill?’
She	pushed	the	guard’s	hand	away	and	unlocked	the	clasp	herself.
‘You	were	foolish	enough	to	refuse	the	Edur	Gift,’	he	said,	‘so	now	you
receive’	–	he	waved	at	the	tiny	cell	with	its	dripping	ceiling,	its	streaming	walls
–	‘the	Letherii	gift.	Granted	with	pleasure.’
When	she	made	no	reply,	Sirryn	turned	about.	‘Come,’	he	said	to	his
guards,	‘let	us	leave	them	to	their	darkness.’


	
As	the	last	echoes	of	their	footfalls	faded,	Feather	Witch	moved	out	from	the
cell	in	which	she	had	been	hiding.	Guests	had	arrived	in	her	private	world.
Unwelcome.	These	were	her	corridors;	the	uneven	stones	beneath	her	feet,	the
slick,	slimy	walls	within	her	reach,	the	sodden	air,	the	reek	of	rot,	the	very
darkness	itself	–	these	all	belonged	to	her.
Tomad	and	Uruth	Sengar.	Uruth,	who	had	once	owned	Feather	Witch.	Well,
there	was	justice	in	that.	Feather	Witch	was	Letherii,	after	all,	and	who	could
now	doubt	that	the	grey	tide	had	turned?
She	crept	out	into	the	corridor,	her	moccasin-clad	feet	noiseless	on	the
slumped	floor,	then	hesitated.	Did	she	wish	to	look	upon	them?	To	voice	her
mockery	of	their	plight?	The	temptation	was	strong.	But	no,	better	to	remain
unseen,	unknown	to	them.
And	they	were	now	speaking	to	each	other.	She	drew	closer	to	listen.
‘…not	long,’	Tomad	was	saying.	‘This,	more	than	anything	else,	wife,
forces	our	hand.	Hannan	Mosag	will	approach	the	women	and	an	alliance	will
be	forged—’
‘Do	not	be	so	sure	of	that,’	Uruth	replied.	‘We	have	not	forgotten	the	truth
of	the	Warlock	King’s	ambition.	This	is	of	his	making—’
‘Move	past	that	–	there	is	no	choice.’
‘Perhaps.	But	concessions	will	be	necessary	and	that	will	be	difficult,	for
we	do	not	trust	him.	Oh,	he	will	give	his	word,	no	doubt.	As	you	say,	there	is
no	choice.	But	what	value	Hannan	Mosag’s	word?	His	soul	is	poisoned.	He	still
lusts	for	that	sword,	for	the	power	it	holds.	And	that	we	will	not	give	him.
Never	within	his	reach.	Never!’
There	was	a	rustle	of	chains,	then	Tomad	spoke:	‘He	did	not	sound	mad,
Uruth.’
‘No,’	she	replied	in	a	low	voice.	‘He	did	not.’
‘He	was	right	in	his	outrage.’
‘Yes.’
‘As	were	we,	on	Sepik,	when	we	saw	how	far	our	kin	had	fallen.	Their
misery,	their	surrender	of	all	will,	all	pride,	all	identity.	They	were	once	Tiste
Edur!	Had	we	known	that	from	the	first—’
‘We	would	have	left	them,	husband?’
Silence,	then:	‘No.	Vengeance	against	the	Malazans	was	necessary.	But	for
our	sake,	not	that	of	our	kin.	Rhulad	misunderstood	that.’
‘He	did	not.	Tomad,	those	kin	suffered	the	holds	of	the	fleet.	They	suffered
the	pits.	Rhulad	did	not	misunderstand.	We	were	punishing	them	for	their


failure.	That,	too,	was	vengeance.	Against	our	very	own	blood.’
Bitterness	now	in	Tomad’s	voice:	‘You	said	nothing	when	judgement	was
cast,	wife.	Please	yourself	with	this	false	wisdom	if	you	like.	If	it	is	what	I	must
hear	from	you,	then	I’d	rather	silence.’
‘Then,	husband,	you	shall	have	it.’
Feather	Witch	eased	back.	Yes,	Hannan	Mosag	would	be	told.	And	what
would	he	then	do?	Seek	out	the	Edur	women?	She	hoped	not.	If	Feather	Witch
possessed	a	true	enemy,	it	was	they.	Was	the	Warlock	King	their	match?	In
deceit,	most	certainly.	But	in	power?	Not	any	more.	Unless,	of	course,	he	had
hidden	allies.
She	would	need	to	speak	with	the	Errant.	With	her	god.
She	would	need	to	force	some…concessions.
Smiling,	Feather	Witch	slipped	her	way	up	the	corridor.
The	fate	of	Tomad	and	Uruth	Sengar	drifted	through	her	mind,	then	passed
on,	leaving	scarce	a	ripple.
	
One	subterranean	tunnel	of	the	Old	Palace	stretched	inland	almost	to	the
junction	of	the	Main	Canal	and	Creeper	Canal.	This	passage	had	been	bricked
in	at	three	separate	locations,	and	these	barriers	Hannan	Mosag	had	left	in
place,	twisting	reality	with	Kurald	Emurlahn	in	order	to	pass	through	them,	as
he	had	done	this	time	with	Bruthen	Trana	in	tow.
The	Warlock	King’s	followers	had	kept	the	warrior	hidden	for	some	time
now,	whilst	Hannan	Mosag	worked	his	preparations,	and	this	had	not	been	an
easy	task.	It	was	not	as	if	the	palace	was	astir	with	search	parties	and	the	like	–
the	fever	of	confusion	and	fear	was	endemic	these	days,	after	all.	People
vanished	with	disturbing	regularity,	especially	among	the	Tiste	Edur.	No,	the
difficulty	resided	with	Bruthen	Trana	himself.
A	strong-willed	man.	But	this	will	do	us	well,	provided	I	can	pound	into	his
skull	the	fact	that	impatience	is	a	weakness.	A	warrior	needed	resolve,	true
enough,	but	there	was	a	time	and	there	was	a	place,	and	both	had	yet	to	arrive.
Hannan	Mosag	had	led	Bruthen	to	the	chamber	at	the	very	end	of	the
tunnel,	an	octagonal	room	of	ill-fitted	stones.	The	angular	domed	ceiling
overhead,	tiled	in	once	bright	but	now	black	copper,	was	so	low	the	room	felt
like	a	hut.
When	the	Warlock	King	had	first	found	this	chamber,	it	and	at	least	forty
paces	of	the	tunnel	had	been	under	water,	the	depth	following	the	downward
gradient	until	the	black,	murky	sludge	very	nearly	brushed	the	chamber ’s
ceiling.


Hannan	Mosag	had	drained	the	water	through	a	modest	rent	that	led	into
the	realm	of	the	Nascent,	which	he	then	closed,	moving	quickly	in	his	crab-like
scrabble	to	drag	seven	bundled	arm-length	shafts	of	Blackwood	down	the
slimy	corridor	and	into	the	chamber.	It	had	begun	refilling,	of	course,	and	the
Warlock	King	sloshed	his	way	to	the	centre,	where	he	untied	the	bundle,	then
began	constructing	an	octagonal	fence,	each	stick	a	hand’s	width	in	from	the
walls,	two	to	each	side,	held	mostly	upright	in	the	thick	sludge	covering	the
floor.	When	he	had	completed	this	task,	he	called	upon	his	fullest	unveiling	of
Kurald	Emurlahn.
At	a	dreadful	cost.	Seeking	to	purge	the	power	of	all	chaos,	of	the
poisonous	breath	of	the	Crippled	God,	he	was	almost	unequal	to	the	task.	His
malformed	flesh,	his	twisted	bones,	the	thin,	blackened	blood	in	his	veins	and
arteries;	these	now	served	the	malign	world	of	the	Fallen	One,	forming	a
symbiosis	of	life	and	power.	It	had	been	so	long	since	he	had	last	felt	–	truly
felt	–	the	purity	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	that,	even	in	its	fragmented,	weakened
state,	he	very	nearly	recoiled	at	its	burning	touch.
With	the	air	reeking	of	scorched	flesh	and	singed	hair,	Hannan	Mosag
sought	to	force	sanctification	upon	the	chamber.	Trapping	the	power	of
Shadow	in	this,	his	new,	private	temple.	An	entire	night	of	struggle,	the	cold
water	ever	rising,	his	legs	numb,	he	began	to	feel	his	concentration	tearing
apart.	In	desperation	–	feeling	it	all	slipping	away	–	he	called	upon	Father
Shadow.
Scabandari.
Despairing,	knowing	that	he	had	failed—
And	sudden	power,	pure	and	resolute,	burgeoned	in	the	chamber.	Boiling
away	the	water	in	roiling	gusts	of	steam,	until	oven-dry	heat	crackled	from	the
stone	walls.	The	mud	on	the	floor	hardened,	cementing	the	Blackwood	shafts.
That	heat	reached	into	Hannan	Mosag’s	flesh,	down	to	grip	his	very	bones.
He	had	shrieked	in	agony,	even	as	a	new	kind	of	life	spread	through	him.
It	had	not	healed	him;	had	done	nothing	to	straighten	his	bones	or	unclench
scarred	tissue.
No,	it	had	been	more	like	a	promise,	a	whispering	invitation	to	some
blessed	future.	Fading	in	a	dozen	heartbeats,	yet	the	memory	of	that	promise
remained	with	Hannan	Mosag.
Scabandari,	Father	Shadow,	still	lived.	Torn	from	bone	and	flesh,	true,	but
the	spirit	remained.	Answering	his	desperate	prayer,	gifting	this	place	with
sanctity.
I	have	found	the	path.	I	can	see	the	end.
Now	he	crouched	on	the	hard,	desiccated	ground	and	Bruthen	Trana	–


forced	to	hunch	slightly	because	of	the	low	ceiling	–	stood	at	his	side.	The
Warlock	King	gestured	to	the	centre	of	the	chamber.	‘There,	warrior.	You	must
lie	down.	The	ritual	is	readied,	but	I	warn	you,	the	journey	will	be	long	and
difficult.’
‘I	do	not	understand	this,	Warlock	King.	This…this	temple.	It	is	true	Kurald
Emurlahn.’
‘Yes,	Bruthen	Trana.	Blessed	by	the	power	of	Father	Shadow	himself.
Warrior,	your	journey	itself	is	so	blessed.	Does	this	not	tell	you	that	we	are	on
the	right	path?’
Bruthen	Trana	stared	down	at	him,	was	silent	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,
then	said,	‘You,	among	all	others,	should	have	been	turned	away.	By	Father
Shadow.	Your	betrayal—’
‘My	betrayal	means	nothing,’	the	Warlock	King	snapped.	‘Warrior,	we	are
blessed!	This	place,	it	is	not	simply	a	temple	of	Kurald	Emurlahn!	It	is	a	temple
of	Scabandari!	Of	our	god	himself!	The	very	first	such	temple	in	this	realm	–
do	you	not	grasp	what	that	means?	He	is	coming	back.	To	us.’
‘Then	perhaps	what	we	seek	is	pointless,’	Bruthen	replied.
‘What?’
‘Scabandari	will	return,	and	he	will	stand	before	Rhulad	Sengar.	Tell	me,
will	your	Crippled	God	risk	that	confrontation?’
‘Do	not	be	a	fool,	Bruthen	Trana.	You	ask	the	wrong	question.	Will
Scabandari	risk	that	confrontation?	Upon	the	very	moment	of	his	return?	We
cannot	know	Father	Shadow’s	power,	but	I	believe	he	will	be	weak,	exhausted.
No,	warrior,	it	is	for	us	to	protect	him	upon	his	return.	Protect,	and	nourish.’
‘Has	Fear	Sengar	found	him	then?’
Hannan	Mosag’s	dark	eyes	narrowed.	‘What	do	you	know	of	that,	Bruthen
Trana?’
‘Only	what	most	Edur	know.	Fear	left,	to	seek	out	Father	Shadow.	In
answer	to	his	brother.	In	answer	to	you,	Warlock	King.’
‘Clearly,’	Hannan	Mosag	said	in	a	tight	voice,	‘there	has	been	a
reconciliation.’
‘Perhaps	there	has.	You	did	not	answer	my	question.’
‘I	cannot.	For	I	do	not	know.’
‘Do	you	dissemble	yet	again?’
‘Your	accusation	is	unjust,	Bruthen	Trana.’
‘Let	us	begin	this	ritual.	Tell	me,	will	I	journey	in	the	flesh?’
‘No.	You	would	die,	and	instantly,	warrior.	No,	we	must	tug	free	your
spirit.’
Hannan	Mosag	watched	as	Bruthen	Trana	moved	to	the	centre	of	the


chamber.	The	warrior	divested	himself	of	his	sword	and	belt	and	lay	down	on
his	back.
‘Close	your	eyes,’	the	Warlock	King	said,	crawling	closer.	‘Lead	your
mind	into	the	comfort	of	Shadow.	You	shall	feel	my	touch,	upon	your	chest.
Shortly	after,	all	sense	of	your	physical	body	will	vanish.	Open	your	eyes	then,
and	you	will	find	yourself…elsewhere.’
‘How	will	I	know	when	I	have	found	the	path	I	seek?’
‘By	virtue	of	seeking,	you	will	find,	Bruthen	Trana.	Now,	silence	please.	I
must	concentrate.’
A	short	time	later	the	Warlock	King	reached	out	and	settled	his	hand	upon
the	warrior ’s	chest.
As	easy	as	that.
The	body	lying	before	him	drew	no	breath.	Left	alone	for	too	long	it
would	begin	to	rot.	But	this	was	sanctified	ground,	alive	now	with	the	power	of
Kurald	Emurlahn.	There	would	be	no	decay.	There	would,	for	the	body,	be	no
passage	of	time	at	all.
Hannan	Mosag	pulled	himself	closer.	He	began	searching	Bruthen	Trana’s
clothing.	The	warrior	had	something	hidden	on	him	–	something	with	an	aura
of	raw	power	that	struck	the	Warlock	King’s	senses	like	a	stench.	He	worked
through	the	pockets	on	the	underside	of	the	warrior ’s	leather	cloak	and	found
naught	but	a	tattered	note	of	some	kind.	He	emptied	the	coin	pouch	tied	to	the
sword-belt.	A	lone	polished	stone,	black	as	onyx	but	nothing	more	than	waveeroded	obsidian.	Three	docks	–	the	local	Letherii	currency.	And	nothing	else.
With	growing	irritation,	Hannan	Mosag	began	stripping	the	warrior.
Nothing.	Yet	he	could	smell	it,	permeating	the	clothing.
Snarling,	Hannan	Mosag	settled	back,	his	hands	twitching.
He’s	taken	it	with	him.	That	should	have	been	impossible.	Yet…what	other
possibility	is	there?
His	fevered	gaze	found	the	crumpled	note.	Collecting	it,	he	flattened	the
linen	and	read	what	had	been	written	there.
At	first	he	could	make	no	sense	of	the	statement	–	no,	not	a	statement,	he
realized.	A	confession.	A	signature	he	had	not	seen	before,	so	stylized	in	the
Letherii	fashion	as	to	be	indecipherable.	Moments	later,	his	mind	racing,
revelation	arrived.
His	eyes	lifted,	fixed	upon	Bruthen	Trana’s	now	naked	form.	‘What	deceit
were	you	planning	with	this,	warrior?	Perhaps	you	are	cleverer	than	I	had
imagined.’	He	paused,	then	smiled.	‘No	matter	now.’
The	Warlock	King	drew	his	dagger.	‘Some	blood,	yes,	to	seal	the	sacred
life	of	my	temple.	Scabandari,	you	would	understand	this.	Yes.	The	necessity.’


He	crawled	up	beside	Bruthen	Trana.	‘Deliver	the	one	we	seek,	warrior.
Yes.	Beyond	that,	alas,	my	need	for	you	ends.’	He	raised	the	knife,	then	drove	it
hard	into	the	warrior ’s	heart.
	
Glancing	over	at	Bugg,	Tehol	Beddict	saw	his	manservant	complete	an	entire
turn,	his	eyes	tracking	the	huge	Tarthenal	as	if	they	had	been	nailed	to	the
barbaric	warrior	with	his	absurd	stone	sword.	The	cordon	of	guards	flanking
the	giant	looked	appropriately	terrified.	‘Well,’	Tehol	said,	‘he’s	no	Ublala
Pung,	now	is	he?’
Bugg	did	not	even	seem	to	hear	him.
‘Oh,	be	like	that,	then.	I	think	I	want	to	talk	to	that	other	one	–	what	did	you
call	him?	Oh	yes,	the	Jhag.	Any	person	who	would	not	flinch	in	the	grip	of	that
Tarthenal	is	either	brainless	or	–	oh,	not	a	pleasant	thought	–	even	scarier.
Perhaps	it	would	do	to	hesitate	at	this	moment,	mindful	as	ever	of	loyal
manservant’s	advice…no?	No	it	is.	So	please,	do	stand	there	like	a	man	whose
heart	has	just	dropped	through	to	lodge	somewhere	underneath	his	spliver	or
some	such	organ	I	don’t	want	to	know	about.	Yes,	then,	do	that.’
Tehol	set	off	towards	the	Jhag.	The	other	savage	who	had	been	punched
unconscious	by	the	Tarthenal	–	the	Tarthenal	whom	Ublala	Pung	had	broken
into	the	compound	to	find	–	was	now	sitting	up,	looking	dazedly	about.	Blood
still	streamed	from	his	thoroughly	broken	nose.	The	woman,	attractive	in	an
earthy	way,	Tehol	noted	again,	was	speaking	to	the	tattooed	giant,	while	a
dozen	paces	away	a	foreigner	stood	gazing	with	something	like	awe	upon
either	the	woman	or	the	Jhag.
In	all,	Tehol	decided,	an	interesting	scenario.	Interesting	enough	to
interrupt	in	his	usual	charming	manner.	As	he	drew	closer,	he	spread	his	arms
and	announced,	‘Time,	I	think,	for	a	more	proper	welcome	to	our	fair	city!’
And	his	blanket	slipped	down	to	gather	at	his	feet.
	
Bugg,	alas,	missed	this	delightful	introduction,	for	even	as	his	eyes	had	clung
to	the	Toblakai,	so	he	found	himself	walking,	following,	step	after	step,	as	the
warrior	and	his	escort	marched	towards	the	Champion’s	Compound	–	or
whatever	unintentionally	ironic	name	the	guileless	officials	of	the	palace	had
named	it.	They	had	come	to	within	a	street	of	the	walled	enclosure	when	all
hopes	of	continuing	came	to	a	sudden	but	confused	end.	For	the	street	was
filled	with	people.


Emaciated,	fouled	with	excrement,	mostly	naked	flesh	covered	in	welts	and
sores,	they	packed	the	street	like	abandoned	children,	lost	and	forlorn,	blinking
in	the	harsh	afternoon	sun.	Hundreds	of	the	wretched	creatures.
The	Toblakai’s	guards	halted	at	this	unexpected	barrier,	and	Bugg	saw	the
foremost	one	reel	back	as	if	assailed	by	a	stench,	then	turn	to	argue	with	the
others.	Their	‘prisoner ’,	on	the	other	hand,	simply	bellowed	at	the	mob	to
clear	the	way,	then	walked	on,	shouldering	through	the	press.
He	had	gone	perhaps	twenty	paces	when	he	too	drew	to	a	halt.	Shoulders
and	head	above	the	crowd,	he	glared	about,	then	shouted	in	a	rude	version	of
Malazan:	‘I	know	you!	Once	slaves	of	Sepik	Island!	Hear	me!’
Faces	swung	round.	The	crowd	shifted	on	all	sides,	forming	a	rough
circle.
They	hear.	They	are	desperate	to	hear.
‘I,	Karsa	Orlong,	will	give	answer!	So	I	vow.	Your	kin	refuse	you.	They
cast	you	out.	You	live	or	you	die	and	neither	matters	to	them.	Nor	to	any	in	this
cursed	land.	To	your	fate	I	offer	nothing!	In	vengeance	for	what	has	been	done
to	you,	I	offer	everything.	Now,	go	your	way	–	your	chains	are	gone.	Go,	so
that	never	again	will	they	return	to	you!’	With	that,	the	Toblakai	warrior	moved
on,	towards	the	compound’s	main	gate.
Not	precisely	what	they	needed	to	hear,	I	think.	Not	yet,	anyway.	In	time,	I
suspect,	it	may	well	return	to	them.
No,	this	–	here	and	now	–	this	demands	another	kind	of	leadership.
The	guards	had	retreated,	seeking	another	route.
The	few	citizens	within	sight	were	doing	the	same.	No-one	wanted	to	see
this	legacy.
Bugg	pushed	himself	forward.	He	drew	upon	his	power,	felt	it	struggle	at
this	unseemly	purpose.	Damn	my	worshippers	–	whoever,	wherever	you	are.	I
will	have	my	way	here!	Power,	devoid	of	sympathy,	cold	as	the	sea,	dark	as	the
depths.	I	will	have	my	way.
‘Close	your	eyes,’	he	said	to	the	mob.	The	words	were	little	more	than	a
whisper,	yet	all	heard	them,	solid	and	undeniable	in	their	minds.	Close	your
eyes.
They	did.	Children,	women,	men.	Motionless	now.	Eyes	closed	tight,
breaths	held	in	sudden	tension,	perhaps	even	fear	–	but	Bugg	suspected	that
these	people	were	beyond	fear.	They	waited	for	what	would	come	next.	And	did
not	move.
I	will	have	my	way.	‘Hear	me.	There	is	a	place	of	safety.	Far	from	here.	I
will	send	you	there.	Now.	Friends	will	find	you.	They	will	bring	healing,	and
you	will	have	food,	clothing	and	shelter.	When	you	feel	the	ground	shift


beneath	you,	open	your	eyes	to	your	new	home.’
The	sea	did	not	forgive.	Its	power	was	hunger	and	swelling	rage.	The	sea
warred	with	the	shore,	with	the	very	sky.	The	sea	wept	for	no-one.
Bugg	did	not	care.
Like	any	tidal	pool	motionless	under	the	hot	sun,	his	blood	had	grown…
heated.	And	the	smallest	pool	was	filled	with	the	promise	of	an	ocean,	a	score
of	oceans	–	all	their	power	could	be	held	in	a	single	drop	of	water.	Such	was
Denaeth	Rusen,	such	was	Ruse,	the	warren	where	life	was	first	born.	And	there,
in	that	promise	of	life	itself,	will	I	find	what	I	need.
Of	empathy.
Of	warmth.
The	power,	when	it	came,	was	a	true	current.	Angry,	yes,	yet	true.	Water
had	known	life	for	so	long	it	held	no	memory	of	purity.	Power	and	gift	had
become	one,	and	so	it	yielded	to	its	god.
And	he	sent	them	away.
Bugg	opened	his	eyes,	and	saw	before	him	an	empty	street.
	
In	his	room	once	more,	Karsa	Orlong	lifted	free	his	shoulder	scabbard,	then,
holding	the	weapon	and	its	harness	in	his	hands,	he	stared	down	at	the	long
table,	on	which	sat	an	oil	lantern	set	on	low	burn.	After	a	moment	he	laid	the
sword	and	rigging	down.	And	grew	still	once	more.
Many	things	to	consider,	a	heaving	of	foam	and	froth	from	some	struck
well	deep	within	him.	The	slaves.	Cast	out	because	their	lives	were
meaningless.	Both	these	Edur	and	the	Letherii	were	heartless,	yet	cowards.
Eager	to	turn	away	from	witnessing	the	cost	of	their	indifference.	Content	to
strip	fellowship	from	any	whenever	it	suited	them.
Yet	they	would	call	him	the	barbarian.
If	so,	then	he	was	well	pleased	with	the	distinction.
And,	true	to	his	savagely	clear	vision	of	right	and	wrong,	he	would	hold	in
his	mind	that	scene	–	those	starved	faces,	the	liquid	eyes	that	seemed	to	shine	so
bright	he	felt	burned	by	their	touch	–	hold	to	it	when	he	faced	Emperor	Rhulad.
When	he	then	faced	every	Letherii	and	every	Edur	who	chose	to	stand	in	his
way.
So	he	had	vowed,	and	so	all	would	witness.
This	cold	thought	held	him	motionless	for	another	dozen	heartbeats,	then	a
second	image	returned	to	him.	Icarium,	the	one	they	called	Lifestealer.
He	had	been	moments	from	breaking	that	Jhag’s	neck.
And	then	he	had	seen	in	the	ash-skinned	face…something.	And	with	it,


recognition.
He	would	yield	to	Karsa.	He	had	given	his	word,	and	Karsa	now	knew	that
would	not	be	broken.
There	was	Jhag	blood	in	this	Icarium,	but	of	that	Karsa	knew	little.	Father
or	mother	a	Jaghut;	it	hardly	mattered	which.
Yet	the	other	parent.	Father	or	mother.	Well,	he	had	seen	enough	in
Icarium’s	face	to	know	that	blood.	To	know	it	like	the	whisper	of	his	very	own.
Toblakai.
	
In	his	opulent	office,	Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	slowly	sat	down	with
uncharacteristic	caution.	A	dust-laden,	sweat-	and	blood-stained	Letherii
soldier	stood	before	him,	flanked	on	his	right	by	Sirryn	Kanar,	whose	return
from	the	crypts	had	coincided	with	the	arrival	of	this	messenger.
Triban	Gnol	looked	away	from	the	exhausted	soldier.	He	would	call	in	the
scrub-slaves	afterwards,	to	wash	down	the	floor	where	the	man	now	stood;	to
scent	the	air	once	again	with	pine	oil.	Eyes	on	a	lacquered	box	on	the	desktop
before	him,	he	asked,	‘How	many	did	you	come	in	with,	Corporal?’
‘Three	others.	And	an	Edur.’
Triban	Gnol’s	head	snapped	up.	‘Where	is	he	now?’
‘Died	not	three	steps	into	the	Domicile’s	grand	entrance,	sir.’
‘Indeed?	Died?’
‘He	was	grievously	wounded,	sir.	And	I	knew	enough	to	prevent	any	healer
reaching	him	in	time.	I	moved	close	to	help	him	as	he	staggered,	and	gave	the
arrow	in	his	back	a	few	twists,	then	a	deeper	push.	He	passed	out	with	the	pain
of	that,	and	as	I	caught	him	and	lowered	him	to	the	floor,	I	closed	my	thumb
upon	the	great	artery	in	his	neck.	I	was	able	to	hold	that	grip	for	thirty	or	more
heartbeats.	That	was	more	than	the	Edur	could	withstand.’
‘And	you	a	mere	corporal	in	my	employ?	I	think	not.	Sirryn,	after	we	are
done	here,	draft	a	promotion	for	this	man.’
‘Yes,	Chancellor.’
‘And	so,’	Triban	Gnol	resumed,	‘being	of	rank	among	the	remaining
Letherii,	the	responsibility	for	reporting	fell	to	you.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘I	need	the	names	of	the	others.’
The	corporal	seemed	to	flinch.	‘Sir,	without	my	soldiers,	I	would	never
have—’
‘I	understand	your	loyalty,	and	I	commend	you.	Alas,	we	must	face	this
situation	with	a	clear	eye.	We	must	recognize	necessity.	Those	soldiers	are	not


mine.	Not	like	you.’
‘They	are	loyal,	sir—’
‘To	whom?	To	what?	No,	the	risk	is	too	great.	I	will	grant	you	this	gift,
however.’	The	Chancellor ’s	gaze	flicked	to	Sirryn.	‘Quick	and	painless.	No
interrogation.’
Sirryn’s	brows	rose.	‘None?’
‘None.’
‘As	you	command,	sir.’
The	corporal	licked	his	lips,	and	then,	clearly	forcing	out	the	words,	he
said,	‘I	thank	you,	sir.’
The	Chancellor ’s	nod	was	distracted,	his	gaze	once	more	on	the	gleaming
box	of	Blackwood	on	his	desk.	‘I	would	ask	again,’	he	said,	‘there	was	no
indication	of	who	they	were?	No	formal	declaration	of	war?’
‘Nothing	like	that	at	all,	sir,’	the	corporal	replied.	‘Hundreds	of	burning
ships	–	that	was	their	declaration	of	war.	And	even	then,	they	seemed…few.	No
army	–	no	sign	at	all	of	the	landing.’
‘Yet	there	was	one.’
‘Errant	fend,	yes!	Sir,	I	rode	with	twenty	Letherii,	veterans	all,	and	six	Tiste
Edur	of	the	Arapay.	Edur	magic	or	not,	we	were	ambushed	in	a	clearing	behind
an	abandoned	homestead.	One	moment	–	thinking	to	make	our	camp	–	we	were
reining	in	amidst	the	high	grasses	–	alone	–	and	the	next	there	was	thunder	and
fire,	and	bodies	flying	–	flying,	sir,	through	the	air.	Or	just	limbs.	Pieces.	And
arrows	hissing	in	the	dusk.’
‘Yet	your	troop	recovered.’
But	the	corporal	shook	his	head.	‘The	Edur	commanding	us	–	he	knew	that
the	news	we	were	bringing	to	the	capital	–	that	of	the	burning	ships	and	the
dead	Tiste	bodies	on	the	roads	–	that	news	demanded	that	we	disengage.	As
many	of	us	as	could	fight	clear.	Sir,	with	the	Edur	in	the	lead,	we	bolted.	Seven
of	us	at	first	–	they	had	killed	the	other	five	Edur	in	the	first	breath	of	the	attack
–	seven,	then	five.’
‘Did	this	enemy	pursue?’	Triban	Gnol	asked	in	a	quiet,	thoughtful	voice.
‘No	sir.	They	had	no	horses	–	none	that	we	saw	in	any	case.’
The	Chancellor	simply	nodded	at	that.	Then	asked,	‘Human?’
‘Yes	sir.	But	not	Letherii,	not	tribal	either,	from	what	we	could	see.	Sir,
they	used	crossbows,	but	not	the	small,	weak	fisher	bows	such	as	we	use	in	the
shallows	during	the	carp	run.	No,	these	were	weapons	of	blackened	iron,	with
thick	cords	and	quarrels	that	punched	through	armour	and	shield.	I	saw	one	of
my	soldiers	knocked	flat	onto	his	back	by	one	such	quarrel,	dead	in	the	instant.
And—’


He	halted	when	Triban	Gnol	raised	a	perfectly	manicured	finger.
‘A	moment,	soldier.	A	moment.	Something	you	said.’	The	Chancellor
looked	up.	‘Five	of	the	six	Edur,	killed	at	the	very	beginning	of	the	ambush.
And	the	discovery	of	Edur	corpses	on	the	roads	leading	in	from	the	coast.	No
Letherii	bodies	on	those	roads?’
‘None	that	we	found,	sir,	no.’
‘Yet	the	sixth	Edur	survived	that	initial	strike	in	the	glade	–	how?’
‘It	must	have	seemed	that	he	didn’t.	The	quarrel	in	his	back,	sir,	the	one	that
eventually	killed	him.	He	was	sent	tumbling	from	his	saddle.	I	doubt	any	one
expected	him	to	rise	again,	to	regain	his	mount—’
‘You	saw	all	this	with	your	own	eyes?’
‘I	did,	sir.’
‘That	quarrel	–	before	or	after	the	thunder	and	fire?’
The	corporal	frowned,	then	said,	‘Before.	Just	before	–	not	even	a	blink
from	one	to	the	next,	I	think.	Yes,	I	am	certain.	He	was	the	very	first	struck.’
‘Because	he	was	clearly	in	command?’
‘I	suppose	so,	sir.’
‘This	thunder	and	fire,	where	did	the	sorcery	strike	first?	Let	me	answer
that	for	myself.	In	the	midst	of	the	remaining	Edur.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘You	may	go	now,	soldier.	Sirryn,	remain	with	me	a	moment.’
As	soon	as	the	door	closed	Triban	Gnol	was	on	his	feet.	‘Errant	fend!	A
damned	invasion!	Against	the	Letherii	Empire!’
‘Sounds	more	like	against	the	Edur,’	Sirryn	ventured.
The	Chancellor	glared	across	at	him.	‘You	damned	fool.	That	is	incidental
–	an	interesting	detail	at	most.	Without	true	relevance.	Sirryn,	the	Edur	rule	us
–	perhaps	only	in	name,	yes,	but	they	are	our	occupiers.	In	our	midst.	Able	to
command	Letherii	forces	as	befits	their	need.’
He	slammed	a	fist	down	on	the	table.	The	lacquered	box	jumped,	the	lid
clattering	free.	Triban	Gnol	stared	at	what	lay	within.	‘We	are	at	war,’	he	said.
‘Not	our	war	–	not	the	one	we	planned	for	–	no.	War!’
‘We	will	crush	these	invaders,	sir—’
‘Of	course	we	will,	once	we	meet	their	sorcery	with	our	own.	That	too	is
not	relevant.’
‘I	do	not	understand,	sir.’
Triban	Gnol	glared	at	the	man.	No,	you	don’t.	Which	is	why	your	rank	will
never	rise	higher,	you	pathetic	thug.	‘When	you	are	done	with	silencing	the
other	soldiers,	Sirryn	–	oh	yes,	and	the	promotion	for	our	enterprising	young
corporal	–	I	want	you	to	deliver,	by	hand,	a	message	to	Karos	Invictad.’


‘Sir?’
‘An	invitation.	He	is	to	come	to	the	palace.’
‘When?’
‘Immediately.’
Sirryn	saluted.	‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Go.’
As	the	door	closed	a	second	time,	Triban	Gnol	stared	down	at	his	desk.
Down	into	the	box	with	its	dislodged	lid.	Wherein	sat	a	small,	squat	bottle.	A
third	of	its	contents	remaining.
Triban	Gnol	often	drew	satisfaction	from	the	sight	of	it,	the	very
knowledge	of	it	when	hidden	within	its	box.	He	would	recall	pouring	the
contents	into	the	vessel	of	wine	from	which	he	knew	Ezgara	Diskanar	would
drink,	there	on	that	last	terrible	day.	In	the	throne	room.	Ezgara,	and	that
pathetic	First	Eunuch.	Nisall	should	have	followed.	Not	Brys.	No,	anyone	but
Brys	Beddict.
Regrettable,	that.


Chapter	Sixteen

Every	field	of	battle
holds	every	cry	uttered
Threaded	like	roots
between	stones
and	broken	armour,
shattered	weapons,
leather	clasps	rotting
into	the	earth.
Centuries	are	as	nothing
to	those	voices,
those	aggrieved	souls.
They	die	in	the	now
And	the	now	is	for	ever.
On	the	Deal	Plains
Rael	of	Longspit
Fire	had	taken	the	grasses.	Wind	and	water	had	taken	the	soil.	The	level	stretch
where	the	two	drainage	channels	debouched	was	a	scatter	of	button	cacti,	fistsized	cobbles	and	fire-cracked	rock.	The	Letherii	outrider ’s	corpse	had	rolled
down	from	the	ridge	leaving	a	path	of	spattered	blood	now	black	as	ink	on	the
rocks.	Coyotes,	wolves	or	perhaps	Awl	dogs	had	chewed	away	the	softer
tissues	–	face	and	gut,	buttocks	and	inner	thighs	–	leaving	the	rest	to	the	flies
and	their	maggot	spawn.
Overseer	Brohl	Handar	–	who	knew	he	should	have	died	at	Bast	Fulmar,
had	indeed	believed	at	that	last	moment	that	he	would,	absurdly	killed	by	his
own	sword	–	gestured	to	two	of	his	troop	to	remain	on	the	ridge	and	waved	the
others	to	the	highest	rise	thirty	paces	away,	on	the	other	side	of	one	of	the
gullies,	then	walked	his	horse	down	onto	the	flat.	Steeling	himself	against	the
stench	of	the	dead	soldier,	he	forced	his	reluctant	mount	closer.
The	K’risnan	had	reached	him	in	time.	With	the	power	to	heal,	a	power


pure	–	no	stain	of	chaos	–	that	was,	Brohl	Handar	now	understood,	a	blessing.
Kurald	Emurlahn.	Darkness	reborn.	He	would	not	question	it,	would	not	doubt
it.	Blessing.
The	stub	of	an	arrow	jutted	from	the	outrider ’s	throat.	His	weapons	had
been	taken,	as	had	the	vest	of	fine	chain	beneath	the	light	tanned	leather	shirt.
There	was	no	sign	of	the	Letherii’s	horse.	The	buzz	of	the	flies	seemed
preternaturally	loud.
Brohl	Handar	wheeled	his	mount	round	and	guided	it	back	up	onto	the
ridge.	He	spoke	to	the	Sollanta	scout.	‘Tracks?’
‘Just	his	horse,	Overseer,’	the	warrior	replied.	‘The	ambusher	was,	I
believe,	on	foot.’
Brohl	nodded.	This	had	been	the	pattern.	The	Awl	were	collecting	horses,
weapons	and	armour.	The	Atri-Preda	had	since	commanded	that	no	outrider
scout	alone.	To	this	Redmask	would	no	doubt	add	more	ambushers.
‘The	Awl	rode	southeast,	Overseer.’
Days	ago,	alas.	There	was	no	point	in	pursuing.
Eyes	narrowed	against	the	harsh	sunlight,	Brohl	Handar	scanned	the	plain
on	all	sides.	How	could	a	warrior	hide	in	this	empty	land?	The	drainage	gullies
had	seemed	an	obvious	answer,	and	as	soon	as	one	was	spotted	a	troop	would
dismount,	advance	on	foot,	and	plunge	into	it	seeking	to	flush	out	the	enemy.
All	they	had	found	were	bedded	deer	and	coyote	dens.
Areas	of	high	grasses	were	virtually	attacked,	both	mounted	and	on	foot.
Again,	nothing	but	the	occasional	deer	bolting	almost	from	the	feet	of	some
startled,	cursing	soldier;	or	ptarmigan	or	thrushes	exploding	skyward	in	a
flurry	of	feathers	and	drumming	wings.
The	mages	insisted	that	sorcery	was	not	at	work	here;	indeed,	much	of	the
Awl’dan	seemed	strangely	bereft	of	whatever	was	necessary	to	shape	magic.
The	valley	known	as	Bast	Fulmar	had	been,	it	was	becoming	clear,	in	no	way
unique.	Brohl	Handar	had	begun	with	the	belief	that	the	plains	were	but
southern	versions	of	tundra.	In	some	ways	this	was	true;	in	others	it	was
anything	but.	Horizons	deceived,	distances	lied.	Valleys	hid	from	the	eye	until
one	was	upon	them.	Yet,	so	much	like	the	tundra,	a	terrible	place	to	fight	a	war.
Redmask	and	his	army	had	disappeared.	Oh,	there	were	trails	aplenty;	huge
swaths	of	trodden	ground	wending	this	way	and	that.	But	some	were	from
bhederin	herds;	others	were	old	and	still	others	seemed	to	indicate	travel	in
opposite	directions,	overlapping	back	and	forth	until	all	sense	was	lost.	And	so,
day	after	day,	the	Letherii	forces	set	out,	their	supplies	dwindling,	losing
outriders	to	ambushes,	marching	this	way	and	that,	as	if	doomed	to	pursue	a
mythic	battle	that	would	never	come.


Brohl	Handar	had	assembled	thirty	of	his	best	riders,	and	each	day	he	led
them	out	from	the	column,	pushing	far	onto	the	flanks	–	dangerously	far	–	in
hopes	of	sighting	the	Awl.
He	now	squinted	at	the	Sollanta	scout.	‘Where	have	they	gone?’
The	warrior	grimaced.	‘I	have	given	this	some	thought,	Overseer.	Indeed,
it	is	all	I	have	thought	about	this	past	week.	The	enemy,	I	believe,	is	all	around
us.	After	Bast	Fulmar,	Redmask	split	the	tribes.	Each	segment	employed
wagons	to	make	them	indistinguishable	–	as	we	have	seen	from	the	countless
trails,	those	wagons	are	drawn	from	side	to	side	to	side,	eight	or	ten	across,
and	they	move	last,	thus	obliterating	signs	of	all	that	precedes	them	on	the	trail.
Could	be	a	hundred	warriors	ahead,	could	be	five	thousand.’
‘If	so,’	Brohl	objected,	‘we	should	have	caught	up	with	at	least	one	such
train.’
‘We	do	not	move	fast	enough,	Overseer.	Recall,	we	remained	encamped	on
the	south	side	of	Bast	Fulmar	for	two	entire	days.	That	gave	them	a	crucial
head	start.	Their	columns,	wagons	and	all,	move	faster	than	ours.	It	is	as	simple
as	that.’
‘And	the	Atri-Preda	refuses	to	send	out	reconnaissance	in	force,’	Brohl
said,	nodding.
‘A	wise	decision,’	the	scout	said.
‘How	so?’
‘Redmask	would	turn	on	such	a	force.	He	would	overwhelm	it	and
slaughter	every	soldier	in	it.	Either	way,	Overseer,	we	are	playing	his	game.’
‘That	is…unacceptable.’
‘I	imagine	the	Atri-Preda	agrees	with	you,	sir.’
‘What	can	be	done?’
The	warrior ’s	brows	lifted.	‘I	do	not	command	this	army,	Overseer.’
Nor	do	I.	‘If	you	did?’
Sudden	unease	in	the	scout’s	face	and	he	glanced	over	at	the	other	outrider
with	them	on	the	ridge,	but	that	man	seemed	intent	on	something	else,	far	off
on	the	horizon,	as	he	tore	loose	bits	of	dried	meat	from	the	thin	strip	in	his	left
hand,	and	slowly	chewed.
‘Never	mind,’	Brohl	said,	sighing.	‘An	unfair	question.’
‘Yet	I	would	answer	still,	Overseer,	if	you	like.’
‘Go	on.’
‘Retreat,	sir.	Back	to	Drene.	Resume	claiming	land,	and	protect	it	well.
Redmask,	then,	will	have	to	come	to	us,	if	he	would	contest	the	theft	of	Awl
land.’
I	agree.	But	she	will	not	have	it.	‘Sound	the	recall,’	he	said.	‘We’re


returning	to	the	column.’

The	sun	had	crawled	past	noon	by	the	time	the	Tiste	Edur	troop	came	within
sight	of	the	Letherii	column,	and	it	was	immediately	evident	that	something	had
happened.	Supply	wagons	were	drawn	into	a	hollow	square	formation,	the
oxen	and	mules	already	unhitched	and	led	into	two	separate	kraals	within	that
defensive	array.	Elements	of	the	various	brigades	and	regiments	were	drawing
into	order	both	north	and	south	of	the	square,	with	mounted	troops	well	out
east	and	west.
Brohl	Handar	led	his	troop	into	a	quick	canter.	To	his	lead	scout	he	said,
‘Rejoin	my	Arapay	–	I	see	them	to	the	west.’
‘Yes	sir.’
As	the	troop	turned	behind	him,	the	Overseer	kicked	his	horse	into	a
gallop	and	rode	for	the	small	forest	of	standards	marking	the	Atri-Preda’s
position,	just	outside	the	east	barrier	of	wagons.	The	land	here	was	relatively
flat.	Another	ridge	of	slightly	higher	ground	ran	roughly	east–west	a	thousand
paces	to	the	south,	while	the	topography	on	this	north	side	was	more	or	less
level	with	the	trail,	thick	with	the	waist-high	silver-bladed	grass	known	as
knifegrass,	a	direct	translation	of	the	Awl	name,	masthebe.
Redmask	would	be	a	fool	to	meet	us	here.
He	eased	his	horse	down	to	a	fast	trot	as	he	drew	nearer.	He	could	see	the
Atri-Preda	now,	the	flush	of	excitement	on	her	face	replacing	the	strain	that	had
seemed	to	age	her	a	year	for	every	day	since	Bast	Fulmar.	She	had	gathered
her	officers,	and	they	were	now	pulling	away	in	answer	to	her	orders.	By	the
time	the	Overseer	arrived	only	a	few	messengers	remained,	along	with	the
standard	bearer	of	Bivatt’s	own	command.
He	reined	in.	‘What	has	happened?’
‘Seems	he’s	grown	weary	of	running,’	Bivatt	replied	with	a	fiercely
satisfied	expression.
‘You	have	found	him?’
‘He	even	now	marches	for	us,	Overseer.’
‘But…why	would	he	do	that?’
There	was	a	flicker	of	unease	in	her	eyes,	then	she	looked	away,	fixing	her
gaze	to	the	southeast,	where	Brohl	could	now	see	a	dust	cloud	on	the	horizon.
‘He	believes	us	tired,	worn	out.	He	knows	we	are	short	of	food	and	decent
forage,	and	that	we	have	wagons	crowded	with	wounded.	He	means	to	savage
us	yet	again.’


The	sweat	on	Brohl	Handar ’s	brow	was	plucked	away	by	a	gust	of	warm
wind.	Ceaseless	breath	of	the	plains,	that	wind,	always	from	the	west	or
northwest.	It	devoured	every	drop	of	moisture,	turning	the	skin	leathery	and
burnished.	Licking	chapped	lips,	the	Overseer	cleared	his	throat,	then	said,
‘Can	sorcery	be	unleashed	here,	Atri-Preda?’
Her	eyes	flashed.	‘Yes.	And	with	that,	we	will	give	answer.’
‘And	their	shamans?	What	of	the	Awl	shamans?’
‘Useless,	Overseer.	Their	rituals	are	too	slow	for	combat.	Nor	can	they
make	use	of	raw	power.	We	will	have	at	them	this	day,	Brohl	Handar.’
‘You	have	positioned	the	Tiste	Edur	once	again	to	the	rear.	Are	we	to	guard
the	dung	left	by	the	oxen,	Atri-Preda?’
‘Not	at	all.	I	believe	you	will	see	plenty	of	fighting	today.	There	are	bound
to	be	flanking	strikes,	seeking	our	supplies,	and	I	will	need	you	and	your	Edur
to	throw	them	back.	Recall,	as	well,	those	two	demons.’
‘They	are	difficult	to	forget,’	he	replied.	‘Very	well,	we	shall	position
ourselves	defensively.’	He	collected	his	reins.	‘Enjoy	your	battle,	Atri-Preda.’
	
Bivatt	watched	the	Overseer	ride	off,	irritated	with	his	questions,	his
scepticism.	Redmask	was	as	mortal	as	any	man.	He	was	not	immune	to
mistakes,	and	this	day	he	had	made	one.	The	defender	was	ever	at	an	advantage,
and	the	general	rule	was	that	an	attacker	required	substantial	numerical
superiority.	Bivatt	had	lost	to	death	or	wounding	over	eight	hundred	of	her
soldiers	in	the	debacle	that	was	Bast	Fulmar.	Even	with	that,	Redmask	did	not
possess	sufficient	numbers,	assuming	he	intended	to	advance	beyond	initial
sighting.
Ideally,	she	would	have	liked	to	position	her	forces	along	the	ridge	to	the
south,	but	there	had	been	no	time	for	that;	and	by	staying	where	she	was,	she
would	prevent	that	ridge	from	factoring	in	the	battle	to	come.	There	was	the
chance	that	Redmask	would	simply	take	the	ridge	then	await	her,	but	she	would
not	play	into	his	hands	again.	If	he	sought	battle	this	day,	he	would	have	to
advance.	And	quickly.	Standing	and	waiting	on	the	ridge	would	not	be
tolerated,	not	when	Bivatt	had	her	mages.	Stand	there	if	you	dare,	Redmask,	in
the	face	of	wave	upon	wave	of	sorcery.
But	he	was	coming.	Bivatt	did	not	believe	he	would	seek	the	ridge	then
simply	wait,	expecting	her	to	yield	her	defensive	formation	in	order	to	march
upon	him.
No,	he	has	lost	his	patience.	Revealed	his	weakness.
She	scanned	the	positioning	of	her	troops.	Crimson	Rampant	heavy


infantry	to	anchor	the	far	left,	the	easternmost	end	of	her	line.	Merchants’
Battalion	heavy	infantry	to	the	far	right.	Artisan	Battalion	heavy	infantry	at	the
centre.	To	their	flanks,	extending	out	and	at	double-depth	–	twenty	rather	than
ten	lines	–	were	the	assorted	medium	infantry	of	her	force.	Reserve	elements
of	her	remaining	skirmishers,	the	Drene	Garrison	and	medium	infantry	were
arrayed	closer	to	the	square	of	wagons.	The	Bluerose	cavalry,	divided	into	two
wings,	she	held	back	to	await	a	quick	response,	as	either	counter-attack	or
riding	to	close	a	breach.
Brohl	Handar ’s	Tiste	Edur	guarded	the	north.	They	would	be	facing	away
from	the	main	battle,	yet	Bivatt	was	certain	there	would	be	an	attack	on	them,
another	strike	for	the	supplies.	And	she	suspected	it	would	come	from	the	high
grasses	on	the	north	side	of	the	track.
Rising	on	her	stirrups,	she	studied	the	approaching	dust	cloud.	Her	scouts
had	confirmed	that	this	was	indeed	Redmask,	leading	what	had	to	be	the
majority	of	his	warriors.	That	haze	of	dust	seemed	to	be	angling	towards	the
ridge.	The	Atri-Preda	sneered,	then	gestured	a	messenger	over.	‘Bring	me	my
mages.	On	the	double.’
	
The	old	man	had	been	found	dead	in	his	tent	that	morning.	The	imprints	of	the
hands	that	had	strangled	him	left	a	mottled	map	of	brutality	below	his	bloated
face	and	bulging	eyes.	His	murderer	had	sat	atop	him,	staring	down	to	witness
death’s	arrival.	The	last	elder	of	the	Renfayar,	Redmask’s	own	tribe,	perhaps
the	most	ancient	man	among	the	entire	Awl.	The	Blind	Stalker	that	was	death
should	have	reached	out	a	most	gentle	touch	upon	such	a	man.
In	the	camp	fear	and	dismay	whistled	and	spun	like	a	trapped	wind	in	a
gorge,	punctuated	by	terrible	wails	from	the	crones	and	cries	announcing	ill
omen.	Redmask	had	arrived	to	look	down	upon	the	corpse	when	it	had	been
carried	into	the	open,	and	of	course	none	could	see	what	lay	behind	his	scaled
mask,	but	he	did	not	fall	to	his	knees	beside	the	body	of	his	kin,	his	wise
adviser.	He	had	stood,	motionless,	cadaran	whip	wrapped	crossways	about	his
torso,	the	rygtha	crescent	axe	held	loose	in	his	left	hand.
Dogs	were	howling,	their	voices	awakened	by	the	mourners,	and	on	the
flanks	of	the	slopes	to	the	south	the	rodara	herds	shifted	this	way	and	that,
nervous	and	fretful.
Redmask	had	turned	away,	then.	His	copper-masked	officers	drew	closer,
along	with	Masarch	and,	trailing	a	few	steps	behind,	Toc	Anaster.
‘We	are	done	fleeing,’	Redmask	said.	‘Today,	we	will	spill	yet	more
Letherii	blood.’


This	was	what	the	Awl	warriors	had	been	waiting	to	hear.	Their	loyalty	was
not	in	question,	not	since	Bast	Fulmar,	yet	they	were	young	and	they	had	tasted
blood.	They	wanted	to	taste	it	again.	The	elaborate	hare-dance	in	which	they
had	led	the	Letherii	had	gone	on	too	long.	Even	the	clever	ambushes	sprung	on
the	enemy	outriders	and	scouts	had	not	been	enough.	The	wending,	chaotic
march	had	seemed	too	much	like	flight.
The	warriors	were	assembled	north	of	the	encampment	with	dawn	still
fresh	in	the	air,	the	dog-masters	and	their	helpers	leashing	the	snapping,
restless	beasts	and	positioning	their	charges	slightly	to	the	east.	Horses
stamped	on	the	dew-smeared	ground,	clan	pennons	wavering	like	tall	reeds.
Scouts	were	sent	off	with	horse-archers	to	make	contact	with	the	Letherii
outriders	and	drive	them	back	to	their	nest.	This	would	ensure	that	the	specific
presentation	of	Redmask’s	forces	would	remain	unknown	for	as	long	as
possible.
Moments	before	the	army	set	out,	Torrent	arrived	to	position	himself	at
Toc’s	side.	The	warrior	was	scowling,	as	he	did	most	mornings	–	and
afternoons	and	evenings	–	when	he	had	forgotten	to	don	his	mask	of	paint.
Since	it	had	begun	to	give	him	a	blotchy	rash	on	cheeks,	chin	and	forehead,	he
‘forgot’	more	often	these	days	–	and	Toc	answered	that	belligerent	expression
with	a	bright	smile.
‘Swords	unsheathed	this	day,	Torrent.’
‘Has	Redmask	given	you	leave	to	ride	to	battle?’
Toc	shrugged.	‘He’s	said	nothing	either	way,	which	I	suppose	is	leave
enough.’
‘It	is	not.’	Torrent	backed	his	horse	away,	then	swung	it	round	to	ride	to
where	Redmask	sat	astride	his	Letherii	mount	beyond	the	rough	line	of	readied
riders.
Settling	back	in	the	strange	boxy	Awl	saddle,	Toc	examined	once	again	his
bow,	then	the	arrows	in	the	quiver	strapped	to	his	right	thigh.	He	wasn’t	much
interested	in	actually	fighting,	but	at	the	very	least	he	would	be	ready	to	defend
himself	if	necessary.	Ill	omens.	Clearly	Redmask	was	indifferent	to	such
notions.	Toc	scratched	at	the	lurid	tissue	surrounding	his	eyeless	socket.	I	miss
that	eye,	gift	of	High	Denul	in	what	seems	ages	past.	Gods	knew,	made	me	a
real	archer	again	–	these	days	I’m	damned	near	useless.	Fast	and	inaccurate,
that’s	Toc	the	Unlucky.
Would	Redmask	forbid	him	his	ride	this	day?	Toc	did	not	think	so.	He
could	see	Torrent	exchanging	words	with	the	war	leader,	the	unmasked
warrior ’s	horse	sidestepping	and	tossing	its	head.	True	enough,	how	the	beast
comes	to	resemble	its	master.	Imagine	all	the	one-eyed	dogs	I	might	have


owned.	Torrent	then	wheeled	his	mount	and	made	his	way	back	towards	Toc	at
a	quick	canter.
The	scowl	had	darkened.	Toc	smiled	once	more.	‘Swords	unsheathed	this
day,	Torrent.’
‘You’ve	said	that	before.’
‘I	thought	we	might	start	over.’
‘He	wants	you	out	of	danger.’
‘But	I	can	still	ride	with	the	army.’
‘I	do	not	trust	you,	so	do	not	think	that	anything	you	do	will	not	be
unwitnessed.’
‘Too	many	nots	there,	I	think,	Torrent.	But	I’m	feeling	generous	this
morning	so	I’ll	leave	the	reins	loose.’
‘One	must	never	knot	his	reins,’	Torrent	said.	‘Any	fool	knows	that.’
‘As	you	say.’
The	army	set	out,	all	mounted	for	the	moment	–	including	the	dog-masters
–	but	that	would	not	last.	Nor,	Toc	suspected,	would	the	force	remain	united.
Redmask	saw	no	battle	as	a	singular	event.	Rather,	he	saw	a	collection	of
clashes,	an	engagement	of	wills;	where	one	was	blunted	he	would	shift	his
attention	to	resume	the	sparring	elsewhere,	and	it	was	in	the	orchestration	of
these	numerous	meetings	that	a	battle	was	won	or	lost.	Flanking	elements
would	spin	off	from	the	main	column.	More	than	one	attack,	more	than	one
objective.
Toc	understood	this	well	enough.	It	was,	he	suspected,	the	essence	of	tactics
among	successful	commanders	the	world	over.	Certainly	the	Malazans	had
fought	that	way,	with	great	success.	Eschewing	the	notion	of	feints,	every
engagement	was	deliberate	and	deliberately	intended	to	lock	an	enemy	down,
into	fierce,	desperate	combat.
‘Leave	feints	to	the	nobility,’	Kellanved	had	once	said.	‘And	they	can	take
their	clever	elegance	to	the	barrow.’	That	had	been	while	he	and	Dassem	Ultor
had	observed	the	Untan	knights	on	the	field	of	battle	east	of	Jurda.	Riding	back
and	forth,	back	and	forth.	Tiring	their	burdened	warhorses,	sowing	confusion
in	the	dust-clouds	engulfing	their	own	ranks.	Feint	and	blind.	Dassem	had
ignored	the	pureblood	fools,	and	before	the	day’s	battle	was	done	he	had
shattered	the	entire	Untan	army,	including	those	vaunted,	once-feared	knights.
The	Letherii	did	not	possess	heavy	cavalry.	But	if	they	did,	Toc	believed,
they	would	play	feint	and	blind	all	day	long.
Or	perhaps	not.	Their	sorcery	in	battle	was	neither	subtle	nor	elegant.	Ugly
as	a	Fenn’s	fist,	in	fact.	This	suggested	a	certain	pragmatism,	an	interest	in
efficiency	over	pomp,	and,	indeed,	a	kind	of	impatience	regarding	the


mannerisms	of	war.
Sorcery.	Had	Redmask	forgotten	the	Letherii	mages?
The	vast	level	plain	where	the	enemy	waited	–	the	Awl	called	it	Pradegar,
Old	Salt	–	was	not	magically	dead.	Redmask’s	shamans	had	made	use	of	the
residual	magic	there	to	track	the	movements	of	the	enemy	army,	after	all.
Redmask,	have	you	lost	your	mind?
The	Awl	rode	on.
More	than	swords	unsheathed	this	day,	I	fear.	He	scratched	again	at	his
gaping	socket,	then	kicked	his	horse	into	motion.
	
Orbyn	Truthfinder	disliked	the	feel	of	soft	ground	beneath	him.	Earth,	loam,
sand,	anything	that	seemed	uneasy	beneath	his	weight.	He	would	suffer	a	ride	in
a	carriage,	since	the	wheels	were	solid	enough,	the	side	to	side	lurching	above
the	rocky	trail	serving	to	reassure	him	whenever	he	thought	of	that	uncertainty
below.	He	stood	now	on	firm	stone,	a	bulge	of	scraped	bedrock	just	up	from
the	trail	that	wound	the	length	of	the	valley	floor.
The	air ’s	breath	was	sun-warmed,	smelling	of	cold	water	and	pine.	Midges
wandered	in	swarms	along	the	streams	of	ice-melt	threading	down	the
mountainsides,	slanting	this	way	and	that	whenever	a	dragonfly	darted	into
their	midst.	The	sky	was	cloudless,	the	blue	so	sharp	and	clean	compared	to	the
dusty	atmosphere	of	Drene	–	or	any	other	city	for	that	matter	–	that	Orbyn
found	himself	glancing	upward	again	and	again,	struggling	with	something
like	disbelief.
When	not	looking	skyward,	the	Patriotist’s	eyes	were	fixed	on	the	three
riders	descending	from	the	pass	ahead.	They	had	moved	well	in	advance	of	his
company,	climbing	the	heights,	then	traversing	the	spine	of	the	mountains	to
the	far	pass,	where	a	garrison	had	been	slaughtered.	Where,	more	importantly,
a	certain	shipment	of	weapons	had	not	arrived.	In	the	grander	scheme,	such	a
loss	meant	little,	but	Factor	Letur	Anict	was	not	a	man	of	grand	schemes.	His
motivations	were	truncated,	parsed	into	a	language	of	precision,	intolerant	of
deviation,	almost	neurotic	when	faced	with	anything	messy.	And	this,	indeed,
was	messy.	In	short,	Letur	Anict,	for	all	his	wealth	and	power,	was	a	bureaucrat
in	the	truest	sense	of	the	word.
The	advance	riders	were	returning,	at	long	last,	but	Orbyn	was	not
particularly	pleased	by	that.	They	would	have	nothing	good	to	say,	he	knew.
Tales	of	rotting	corpses,	charred	wood,	squalling	ravens	and	mice	among
mouldering	bones.	At	the	very	least,	he	could	force	himself	once	again	into	the
Factor ’s	carriage	to	sit	opposite	that	obnoxious	number-chewer,	and	counsel	–


with	greater	veracity	this	time	–	that	they	turn	their	column	round	and	head
back	to	Drene.
Not	that	he	would	succeed,	he	knew.	For	Letur	Anict,	every	insult	was
grievous,	and	every	failure	was	an	insult.	Someone	would	pay.	Someone
always	did.
Some	instinct	made	Orbyn	glance	back	at	the	camp	and	he	saw	the	Factor
emerging	from	his	carriage.	Well,	that	was	a	relief,	since	Orbyn	was	in	the
habit	of	sweating	profusely	in	Letur ’s	cramped	contrivance.	He	watched	as	the
washed-out	man	picked	a	delicate	path	up	to	where	stood	Orbyn.	Overdressed
for	the	mild	air,	his	lank,	white	hair	covered	by	a	broad-rimmed	hat	to	keep	the
sun	from	pallid	skin,	his	strangely	round	face	already	flushed	with	exertion.
‘Truthfinder,’	he	said	as	soon	as	he	reached	the	bulge	of	bedrock,	‘we	both
know	what	our	scouts	will	tell	us.’
‘Indeed,	Factor.’
‘So…where	are	they?’
Orbyn’s	thin	brows	rose,	and	he	blinked	to	clear	the	sudden	sweat	stinging
his	eyes.	‘As	you	know,	they	never	descended	farther	than	this	–	where	we	are
camped	right	now.	Leaving	three	possibilities.	One,	they	turned	round,	back	up
and	through	the	pass—’
‘They	were	not	seen	to	do	that.’
‘No.	Two,	they	left	the	trail	here	and	went	south,	perhaps	seeking	the	Pearls
Pass	into	south	Bluerose.’
‘Travelling	the	spine	of	the	mountains?	That	seems	unlikely,	Truthfinder.’
‘Three,	they	went	north	from	here.’
The	Factor	licked	his	lips,	as	if	considering	something.	Inflectionless,	he
asked,	‘Why	would	they	do	that?’
Orbyn	shrugged.	‘One	could,	if	one	so	desired,	skirt	the	range	until	one
reached	the	coast,	then	hire	a	craft	to	take	one	to	virtually	any	coastal	village
or	port	of	the	Bluerose	Sea.’
‘Months.’
‘Fear	Sengar	and	his	companions	are	well	used	to	that,	Factor.	No	fugitive
party	has	ever	fled	for	as	long	within	the	confines	of	the	empire	as	have	they.’
‘Not	through	skill	alone,	Truthfinder.	We	both	know	that	the	Edur	could
have	taken	them	a	hundred	times,	in	a	hundred	different	places.	And	further,	we
both	know	why	they	have	not	done	so.	The	question	you	and	I	have	danced
round	for	a	long,	long	time	is	what,	if	anything,	are	we	going	to	do	regarding
all	of	that.’
‘That	question,	alas,’	said	Orbyn,	‘is	one	that	can	only	be	addressed	by	our
masters,	back	in	Letheras.’


‘Masters?’	Letur	Anict	snorted.	‘They	have	other,	more	pressing	concerns.
We	must	act	independently,	in	keeping	with	the	responsibilities	granted	us;
indeed,	in	keeping	with	the	very	expectation	that	we	will	meet	those
responsibilities.	Do	we	stand	aside	while	Fear	Sengar	searches	for	the	Edur
god?	Do	we	stand	aside	while	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	so-called	hunters	work
their	deft	incompetence	in	this	so-called	pursuit?	Is	there	any	doubt	in	your
mind,	Orbyn	Truthfinder,	that	Hannan	Mosag	is	committing	treason?	Against
the	Emperor?	Against	the	empire?’
‘Karos	Invictad,	and,	I’m	sure,	the	Chancellor,	are	dealing	with	the	matter
of	the	Warlock	King’s	treason.’
‘No	doubt.	Yet	what	might	occur	to	their	plans	if	Fear	Sengar	should
succeed?	What	will	happen	to	all	of	our	plans,	should	the	Edur	God	of
Shadows	rise	again?’
‘That,	Factor,	is	highly	unlikely.’	No,	it	is	in	fact	impossible.
‘I	am	well	acquainted,’	Letur	Anict	said	testily,	‘with	probabilities	and	risk
assessment,	Truthfinder.’
‘What	is	it	you	desire?’	Orbyn	asked.
Letur	Anict’s	smile	was	tight.	He	faced	north.	‘They	are	hiding.	And	we
both	know	where.’
Orbyn	was	not	happy.	‘The	extent	of	your	knowledge	surprises	me,
Factor.’
‘You	have	underestimated	me.’
‘It	seems	I	have	at	that.’
‘Truthfinder.	I	have	with	me	twenty	of	my	finest	guard.	You	have	forty
soldiers	and	two	mages.	We	have	enough	lanterns	to	cast	out	darkness	and	so
steal	the	power	of	those	decrepit	warlocks.	How	many	remain	in	that	hidden
fastness?	If	we	strike	quickly,	we	can	rid	ourselves	of	this	damnable	cult	and
that	alone	is	worth	the	effort.	Capturing	Fear	Sengar	in	the	bargain	would
sweeten	the	repast.	Consider	the	delight,	the	accolades,	should	we	deliver	to
Karos	and	the	Chancellor	the	terrible	traitor,	Fear	Sengar,	and	that	fool,
Udinaas.	Consider,	if	you	will,	the	rewards.’
Orbyn	Truthfinder	sighed,	then	he	said,	‘Very	well.’
‘Then	you	know	the	secret	path.	I	suspected	as	much.’
And	you	do	not,	and	I	knew	as	much.	He	withdrew	a	handkerchief	and
mopped	the	sweat	from	his	face,	then	along	the	wattle	beneath	his	chin.	‘The
climb	is	strenuous.	We	shall	have	to	leave	the	carriages	and	horses	here.’
‘Your	three	scouts	can	serve	to	guard	the	camp.	They	have	earned	a	rest.
When	do	we	leave,	Truthfinder?’
Orbyn	grimaced.	‘Immediately.’


	
Two	of	the	three	scouts	were	sitting	beside	a	fire	on	which	sat	a	soot-stained
pot	of	simmering	tea,	while	the	third	one	rose,	arched	to	ease	his	back,	then
sauntered	towards	the	modest	train	that	had	spent	most	of	the	day	descending
into	the	valley.
The	usual	greetings	were	exchanged,	along	with	invitations	to	share	this
night	and	this	camp.	The	leader	of	the	train	walked	wearily	over	to	join	the
scout.
‘Is	that	not	the	Drene	Factor ’s	seal	on	that	carriage?’	he	asked.
The	scout	nodded.	‘So	it	is.’	His	gaze	strayed	past	the	rather	unimpressive
man	standing	opposite	him.	‘You	are	not	traders,	I	see.	Yet,	plenty	of	guards.’
‘A	wise	investment,	I	should	judge,’	the	man	replied,	nodding.	‘The
garrison	fort	gave	proof	enough	of	that.	It	stands	abandoned	still,	half	burnt
down	and	strewn	with	the	bones	of	slaughtered	soldiers.’
The	scout	shrugged.	‘The	west	side	of	the	range	is	notorious	for	bandits.	I
heard	they	was	hunted	down	and	killed.’
‘Is	that	so?’
‘So	I	heard.	And	there’s	a	new	detachment	on	its	way,	along	with
carpenters,	tree-fellers	and	a	blacksmith.	The	fort	should	be	rebuilt	before
season’s	end.’	He	shrugged.	‘It’s	the	risk	of	the	road.’
Venitt	Sathad	nodded	again.	‘We	passed	no-one	on	the	trail.	Is	the	Factor
coming	to	join	you	here,	then?’
‘He	is.’
‘Is	it	not	unusual,	this	journey?	Drene,	after	all,	is	on	the	far	side	of	the
sea.’
‘Factor ’s	business	is	his	own,’	the	scout	replied,	a	little	tersely.	‘You	never
answered	me,	sir.’
‘I	did	not?	What	was	your	question	again?’
‘I	asked	what	you	were	carrying,	that	needs	so	few	packs	and	so	many
guards.’
‘I	am	not	at	liberty	to	tell	you,	alas,’	Venitt	Sathad	said,	as	he	began
scanning	the	camp.	‘You	had	more	soldiers	here,	not	long	ago.’
‘Went	down	the	valley	yesterday.’
‘To	meet	the	Factor?’
‘Just	so.	And	I’ve	had	a	thought	–	if	they	come	up	this	night,	the	campsite
here	won’t	be	big	enough.	Not	for	them	and	your	group.’
‘I	expect	you	are	correct.’
‘Perhaps	it’d	be	best,	then,	if	you	moved	on.	There’s	another	site	two


thousand	paces	down	the	valley.	You’ve	enough	light,	I	should	think.’
Venitt	Sathad	smiled.	‘We	shall	do	as	you	have	asked,	then.	Mayhap	we	will
meet	your	Factor	on	the	way.’
‘Mayhap	you	will,	sir.’
In	the	man’s	eyes,	Venitt	Sathad	saw	the	lie.	Still	smiling,	he	walked	back	to
his	horse.	‘Mount	up,’	he	told	his	guards.	‘We	ride	on.’
A	most	displeasing	command,	but	Venitt	Sathad	had	chosen	his	escort	well.
Within	a	very	short	time,	the	troop	was	once	more	on	its	way.
He	had	no	idea	why	the	man	he	was	sent	to	meet	was	on	this	trail,	so	far
from	Drene.	Nor	did	Venitt	know	where	Anict	had	gone,	since	on	all	sides	but
ahead	there	was	naught	but	rugged,	wild	mountains	populated	by	little	more
than	rock-climbing	horned	sheep	and	a	few	cliff-nesting	condors.	Perhaps	he
would	find	out	eventually.	As	it	was,	sooner	or	later	Letur	Anict	would	return
to	Drene,	and	he,	Venitt	Sathad,	agent	of	Rautos	Hivanar	and	the	Letheras
Liberty	Consign,	would	be	waiting	for	him.
With	some	questions	from	his	master.
And	some	answers.

A	shriek	echoed	in	the	distance,	then	faded.	Closer	to	hand,	amidst	flickering
lantern-light	and	wavering	shadows,	the	last	cries	of	the	slaughtered	had	long
since	fallen	away,	as	soldiers	of	Orbyn’s	guard	walked	among	the	piled	bodies
–	mostly	the	young,	women	and	the	aged	in	this	chamber	–	ensuring	that	none
still	breathed.
None	did.	Orbyn	Truthfinder	had	made	certain	of	that	himself.	In	a
distracted	way,	torn	as	he	was	by	distaste	and	the	necessity	that	no	carelessness
be	permitted.	They	had	been	four	bells	in	this	subterranean	maze,	at	the	most,
to	mark	the	first	breach	of	wards	at	the	entranceway	in	the	crevasse	and	all	that
followed,	from	room	to	room,	corridor	to	corridor,	the	assault	of	light	and
refulgent	sorcery.
Whatever	elaborate	organization	of	power	had	held	fast	in	this	buried
demesne	had	been	obliterated	with	scarce	the	loss	of	a	single	Letherii	life,	and
all	that	then	remained	was	simple	butchery.	Hunting	down	the	ones	who	hid,
who	fled	to	the	farthest	reaches,	the	smallest	storage	rooms,	the	children
huddling	in	alcoves	and,	for	one,	in	an	amphora	half	filled	with	wine.
Less	than	four	bells,	then,	to	annihilate	the	Cult	of	the	Black-Winged	Lord.
These	degenerate	versions	of	Tiste	Edur.	Hardly	worth	the	effort,	as	far	as
Orbyn	Truthfinder	was	concerned.	Even	more	bitter	to	the	tongue,	there	had


been	no	sign	of	Fear	Sengar	or	any	of	his	companions.	No	sign,	indeed,	that
they	had	ever	been	here.
His	gaze	resting	upon	the	heaped	corpses,	he	felt	sullied.	Letur	Anict	had
used	him	in	his	obsessive	pursuit	of	efficiency,	of	cruel	simplification	of	his
world.	One	less	nagging	irritant	for	the	Factor	of	Drene.	And	now	they	would
return,	and	Orbyn	wondered	if	this	journey	to	track	down	a	few	wagonloads	of
cheap	weapons	had,	in	fact,	been	nothing	more	than	a	ruse.	One	that	fooled	him
as	easily	as	it	would	a	wide-eyed	child.
He	drew	out	a	cloth	to	wipe	the	blood	from	his	dagger,	then	slipped	the
long-bladed	weapon	back	into	its	sheath	below	his	right	arm.
One	of	his	mages	approached.	‘Truthfinder.’
‘Are	we	done	here?’
‘We	are.	We	found	the	chamber	of	the	altar.	A	half-dozen	tottering	priests
and	priestesses	on	their	knees	beseeching	their	god	for	deliverance.’	The	mage
made	a	sour	face.	‘Alas,	the	Black-Winged	Lord	wasn’t	home.’
‘What	a	surprise.’
‘Yes,	but	there	was	one,	sir.	A	surprise,	that	is.’
‘Go	on.’
‘That	altar,	sir,	it	was	truly	sanctified.’
Orbyn	glanced	at	the	mage	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘Meaning?’
‘Touched	by	Darkness,	by	the	Hold	itself.’
‘I	did	not	know	such	a	Hold	even	existed.	Darkness?’
‘The	Tiles	possess	an	aspect	of	Darkness,	sir,	although	only	the	oldest	texts
make	note	of	that.	Of	the	Fulcra,	sir.	The	White	Crow.’
Orbyn’s	breath	suddenly	caught.	He	stared	hard	at	the	mage	standing
before	him,	watched	the	shadows	flit	over	the	man’s	lined	face.	‘The	White
Crow.	The	strange	Edur	who	accompanies	Fear	Sengar	is	so	named.’
‘If	that	stranger	is	so	named,	then	he	is	not	Tiste	Edur,	sir.’
‘Then	what?’
The	mage	gestured	at	the	bodies	lying	on	all	sides.	‘Tiste	Andii,	they	call
themselves.	Children	of	Darkness.	Sir,	I	know	little	of	this…White	Crow,	who
travels	with	Fear	Sengar.	If	indeed	they	walk	together,	then	something	has
changed.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘The	Edur	and	the	Andii,	sir,	were	most	vicious	enemies.	If	what	we	have
gleaned	from	Edur	legends	and	the	like	holds	any	truth,	then	they	warred,	and
that	war	ended	with	betrayal.	With	the	slaying	of	the	White	Crow.’	The	mage
shook	his	head.	‘That	is	why	I	do	not	believe	in	this	White	Crow	who	is	with
Fear	Sengar	–	it	is	but	a	name,	a	name	given	in	error,	or	perhaps	mockery.	But


if	I	am	wrong,	sir,	then	an	old	feud	has	been	buried	in	a	deep	grave,	and	this
could	prove…worrisome.’
Orbyn	looked	away.	‘We	have	slaughtered	the	last	of	these	Andii,	have	we
not?’
‘In	this	place,	yes.	Should	we	be	confident	that	they	are	the	last	Andii	left?
Even	in	Bluerose?	Did	not	the	Edur	find	kin	across	the	ocean?	Perhaps	other
contacts	were	made,	ones	our	spies	in	the	fleets	did	not	detect.	I	am	made
uneasy,	sir,	by	all	of	this.’
You	do	not	stand	alone	in	that,	mage.	‘Think	more	on	it,’	he	said.
‘I	shall.’
As	the	mage	turned	to	leave	Orbyn	reached	out	a	huge,	plump	hand	to	stay
him.	‘Have	you	spoken	with	the	Factor?’
A	frown,	as	if	the	mage	had	taken	offence	at	the	question.	‘Of	course	not,
sir.’
‘Good.	Of	the	altar,	and	the	sanctification,	say	nothing.’	He	thought	for	a
moment,	then	added,	‘Of	your	other	thoughts,	say	nothing	as	well.’
‘I	would	not	have	done	otherwise,	sir.’
‘Excellent.	Now,	gather	our	soldiers.	I	would	we	leave	here	as	soon	as	we
can.’
‘Yes	sir,	with	pleasure.’
Leave	Letur	Anict	to	his	world	made	simpler.	What	he	would	have	it	to	be
and	what	it	is,	are	not	the	same.	And	that,	dear	Factor,	is	the	path	to	ruin.	You
will	walk	it	without	me.
	
Clip	stood	facing	south.	His	right	hand	was	raised,	the	chain	and	its	rings
looped	tight.	He’d	not	spun	it	for	more	than	a	dozen	heartbeats.	His	hair,	left
unbound,	stirred	in	the	wind.	A	few	paces	away,	Silchas	Ruin	sat	on	a	boulder,
running	a	whetstone	along	the	edge	of	one	of	his	singing	swords.
Snow	drifted	down	from	a	pale	blue	sky,	some	high-altitude	version	of	a
sun-shower,	perhaps,	or	winds	had	lifted	the	flakes	from	the	young	peaks	that
reared	on	all	sides	but	directly	ahead.	The	air	was	bitter,	so	dry	that	wool
sparked	and	crackled.	They	had	crossed	the	last	of	the	broken	plateau	the	day
before,	leaving	behind	the	mass	of	shattered	black	stone	that	marked	its
cratered	centre.	The	climb	this	morning	had	been	treacherous,	as	so	many
slabs	of	stone	under	foot	were	sheathed	in	ice.	Reaching	the	crest	of	the	caldera
in	late	afternoon	light,	they	found	themselves	looking	upon	a	vast	descending
slope,	stretching	north	for	half	a	league	or	more	to	a	tundra	plain.	Beyond	that
the	horizon	reached	in	a	flat,	hazy	white	line.	Ice	fields,	Fear	Sengar	had	said,


to	which	Udinaas	had	laughed.
Seren	Pedac	paced	restlessly	along	the	ridge.	She	had	been	walking	with
the	others,	well	behind	Clip	and	Silchas	Ruin.	There	was	light	left	to	continue,
yet	the	young	Tiste	Andii	had	perched	himself	on	the	crest	to	stare	back	the
way	they	had	come.	Silent,	expressionless.
She	walked	over	to	stand	before	Udinaas,	who	had	taken	to	carrying	the
Imass	spear	again	and	was	now	seated	on	a	rock	poking	the	spear ’s	point	into
the	mossy	turf.	‘What	is	happening	here?’	she	asked	him	in	a	low	voice.	‘Do
you	know?’
‘Familiar	with	the	jarack	bird,	Acquitor?	The	grey-crested	thief	and
murderer	of	the	forest?’
She	nodded.
‘And	what	happens	when	a	jarack	female	finds	a	nest	containing	some
other ’s	bird’s	hatchlings?	An	unguarded	nest?’
‘It	kills	and	eats	the	chicks.’
He	smiled.	‘True.	Commonly	known.	But	jaracks	do	something	else	on
occasion,	earlier	in	the	season.	They	push	out	an	egg	and	leave	one	of	their
own.	The	other	birds	seem	blind	to	the	exchange.	And	when	the	jarack	hatches,
of	course	it	kills	and	eats	its	rivals.’
‘Then	sounds	its	call,’	she	said.	‘But	it’s	a	call	that	seems	no	different	from
those	of	the	other	bird’s	chicks.	And	those	birds	come	with	food	in	their
beaks.’
‘Only	to	be	ambushed	by	the	two	adult	jaracks	waiting	nearby	and	killed	in
the	nest.	Another	meal	for	their	hatchling.’
‘Jaracks	are	in	every	way	unpleasant	birds.	Why	are	we	talking	about
jaracks,	Udinaas?’
‘No	reason,	really.	But	sometimes	it’s	worth	reminding	ourselves	that	we
humans	are	hardly	unique	in	our	cruelty.’
‘The	Fent	believed	that	jaracks	are	the	souls	of	abandoned	children	who
died	alone	in	the	forest.	And	so	they	yearn	for	a	home	and	a	family,	yet	are	so
driven	to	rage	when	they	find	them	they	destroy	all	that	they	desire.’
‘The	Fent	were	in	the	habit	of	abandoning	children?’
Seren	Pedac	grimaced.	‘Only	in	the	last	hundred	or	so	years.’
‘Impediments	to	their	self-destructive	appetites,	I	should	think.’
She	said	nothing	to	that	comment,	yet	in	her	mind’s	eye	she	saw	Hull
Beddict	suddenly	standing	beside	her,	drawing	to	his	full	height,	reaching
down	to	take	Udinaas	by	the	throat	and	dragging	the	man	upright.
Udinaas	suddenly	bolted	forward,	choking,	one	hand	clawing	up	towards
her.


Seren	Pedac	stepped	back.	No,	dammit!	She	struggled	to	cast	the	vision
away.
It	would	not	leave.
Eyes	bulging,	face	blackening,	Udinaas	closed	his	own	hands	about	his
neck,	but	there	was	nothing	to	pull	away—
‘Seren!’	Kettle	shrieked.
Errant	fend!	What,	how…oh,	I’m	killing	him!	Hull	Beddict	stood,	crushing
the	life	from	Udinaas.	She	wanted	to	reach	out	to	him,	drag	his	grip	loose,	but
she	knew	she	would	not	be	strong	enough.	No,	she	realized,	she	needed
someone	else—
And	conjured	into	the	scene	within	her	mind	another	figure,	stepping
close,	lithe	and	half	seen.	A	hand	flashing	up,	striking	Hull	Beddict	in	his	own
throat.	The	Letherii	staggered	back,	then	fell	to	one	knee,	even	as	he	released
Udinaas.	Hull	then	reached	for	his	sword.
A	spear	shaft	scythed	into	view,	caught	Hull	flat	on	the	forehead,	snapping
his	head	back.	He	toppled.
The	Edur	warrior	now	stood	between	Hull	Beddict	and	Udinaas,	spear	held
in	a	guard	position.
Seeing	him,	seeing	his	face,	sent	Seren	reeling	back.	Trull	Sengar?	Trull—
The	vision	faded,	was	gone.
Coughing,	gasping,	Udinaas	rolled	onto	his	side.
Kettle	rushed	to	crouch	beside	the	ex-slave.
A	hand	closed	on	Seren’s	shoulder	and	swung	her	round.	She	found	herself
staring	up	into	Fear ’s	face,	and	wondered	at	the	warrior ’s	strange	expression.
He	–	he	could	not	have	seen.	That	would	be—
‘Shorn,’	Fear	whispered.	‘Older.	A	sadness—’	He	broke	off	then,	unable	to
go	on,	and	twisted	away.
She	stared	after	him.	A	sadness	upon	his	eyes.
Upon	his	eyes.
‘Deadly	games,	Acquitor.’
She	started,	looked	over	to	see	that	Silchas	Ruin	was	now	studying	her
from	where	he	sat.	Beyond	him,	Clip	had	not	turned	round,	had	not	even
moved.	‘I	did	not.	I	mean.	I	didn’t—’
‘Imagination,’	Udinaas	grated	from	the	ground	to	her	right,	‘is	ever	quick
to	judge.’	He	coughed	again,	then	laughter	broke	from	his	ravaged	throat.	‘Ask
any	jealous	man.	Or	woman.	Next	time	I	say	something	that	annoys	you,	Seren
Pedac,	just	swear	at	me,	all	right?’
‘I’m	sorry,	Udinaas.	I	didn’t	think—’
‘You	thought	all	right,	woman.’


Oh,	Udinaas.	‘I’m	sorry,’	she	whispered.
‘What	sorcery	have	you	found?’	Fear	Sengar	demanded,	his	eyes	slightly
wild	as	he	glared	at	her.	‘I	saw—’
‘What	did	you	see?’	Silchas	Ruin	asked	lightly,	slipping	one	sword	into	its
scabbard,	then	drawing	the	other.
Fear	said	nothing,	and	after	a	moment	he	pulled	his	gaze	from	Seren
Pedac.	‘What	is	Clip	doing?’	he	demanded.
‘Mourning,	I	expect.’
This	answer	brought	Udinaas	upright	into	a	sitting	position.	Glancing	at
Seren,	he	nodded,	mouthed	Jarack.
‘Mourning	what?’	Fear	asked.
‘All	who	dwelt	within	the	Andara,’	Silchas	Ruin	replied,	‘are	dead.
Slaughtered	by	Letherii	soldiers	and	mages.	Clip	is	the	Mortal	Sword	of
Darkness.	Had	he	been	there,	they	would	now	still	be	alive	–	his	kin.	And	the
bodies	lying	motionless	in	the	darkness	would	be	Letherii.	He	wonders	if	he
has	not	made	a	terrible	mistake.’
‘That	thought,’	the	young	Tiste	Andii	said,	‘was	fleeting.	They	were
hunting	for	you,	Fear	Sengar.	And	you,	Udinaas.’	He	turned,	his	face	appalling
in	its	calm	repose.	The	chains	spun	out,	snapped	in	the	cold	air,	then	whirled
back	inward	again.	‘My	kin	would	have	made	certain	there	would	remain	no
evidence	that	you	were	there.	Nor	were	the	Letherii	mages	powerful	enough	–
nor	clever	enough	–	to	desecrate	the	altar,	although	they	tried.’	He	smiled.
‘They	brought	their	lanterns	with	them,	you	see.’
‘The	gate	didn’t	stay	there	long	enough	anyway,’	Udinaas	said	in	a
cracking	voice.
Clip’s	hard	eyes	fixed	on	the	ex-slave.	‘You	know	nothing.’
‘I	know	what’s	spinning	from	your	finger,	Clip.	You	showed	us	once
before,	after	all.’
Silchas	Ruin,	finished	with	the	second	sword,	now	sheathed	it	and	rose.
‘Udinaas,’	he	said	to	Clip,	‘is	as	much	a	mystery	as	the	Acquitor	here.
Knowledge	and	power,	the	hand	and	the	gauntlet.	We	should	move	on.	Unless,’
he	paused,	facing	Clip,	‘it	is	time.’
Time?	Time	for	what?
‘It	is,’	Udinaas	said,	using	the	Imass	spear	to	get	to	his	feet.	‘They	knew
they	were	going	to	die.	Hiding	in	that	deep	pit	took	them	nowhere.	Fewer
young,	ever	weaker	blood.	But	that	blood,	well,	spill	enough	of	it…’
Clip	advanced	on	the	ex-slave.
‘No,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.
The	Mortal	Sword	stopped,	seemed	to	hesitate,	then	shrugged	and	turned


away.	Chain	spinning.
‘Mother	Dark,’	Udinaas	resumed	with	a	tight	smile.	‘Open	your	damned
gate,	Clip,	it’s	been	paid	for.’
And	the	spinning	chain	snapped	taut.	Horizontally.	At	each	end	a	ring,
balanced	as	if	on	end.	Within	the	band	closest	to	them	there	was…darkness.
Seren	Pedac	stared,	as	that	sphere	of	black	began	growing,	spilling	out
from	the	ring.
‘She	has	this	thing,’	Udinaas	muttered,	‘about	birth	canals.’
Silchas	Ruin	walked	into	the	Dark	and	vanished.	A	moment	later	there	was
a	ghostly	flit	as	Wither	raced	into	the	gate.	Kettle	took	Udinaas’s	hand	and	led
him	through.
Seren	glanced	over	at	Fear.	We	leave	your	world	behind,	Tiste	Edur.	And
yet,	I	can	see	the	realization	awaken	in	your	eyes.	Beyond.	Through	that	gate,
Fear	Sengar,	waits	the	soul	of	Scabandari.
He	settled	a	hand	on	his	sword,	then	strode	forward.
As	Seren	Pedac	followed,	she	looked	at	Clip,	met	his	eyes	as	he	stood
there,	waiting,	the	one	hand	raised,	the	gate	forming	a	spiralling	tunnel	out
from	the	nearest	ring.	In	some	other	world,	she	imagined,	the	gate	emerged
from	the	other	ring.	He’s	carried	it	with	him.	Our	way	through	to	where	we
needed	to	go.	All	this	time.
Clip	winked.
Chilled	by	that	gesture,	the	Acquitor	stepped	forward	and	plunged	into
darkness.
	
Third	Maiden	Isle	was	dead	astern,	rising	into	view	on	the	swells	then	falling
away	again	in	the	troughs.	The	ferry	groaned	like	a	floundering	beast,	twisting
beneath	its	forest	of	masts	and	their	makeshift	sails,	and	the	mass	of	Shake
huddled	sick	and	terrified	on	the	deck.	Witches	and	warlocks,	on	their	knees,
wailed	their	prayers	to	be	heard	above	the	gale’s	swollen	fury,	but	the	shore
was	far	away	now	and	they	were	lost.
Yedan	Derryg,	drenched	by	the	spume	that	periodically	thrashed	over	the
low	gunnels	with	what	seemed	demonic	glee,	was	making	his	way	towards	Yan
Tovis,	who	stood	beside	the	four	men	on	the	steering	oar.	She	was	holding	on
to	a	pair	of	thick	ratlines,	legs	set	wide	to	take	the	pitch	and	yawl,	and	as	she
studied	her	half-brother ’s	face	as	he	drew	nearer,	she	saw	what	she	already
knew	to	be	truth.
We’re	not	going	to	make	it.
Cleaving	the	lines	once	past	the	salt	marsh,	then	up,	rounding	the	peninsula


and	out	along	the	north	edge	of	the	reefs,	a	journey	of	three	days	and	two
nights	before	they	could	tie	up	in	one	of	the	small	coves	on	the	lee	side	of
Third	Maiden	Isle.	The	weather	had	held,	and	at	dawn	this	day	all	had	seemed
possible.
‘The	seams,	Twilight,’	Yedan	Derryg	said	upon	reaching	her.	‘These	waves
are	hammering	’em	wide	open.	We’re	going	down—’	He	barked	a	savage
laugh.	‘Beyond	the	shore,	be	well	as	they	say!	More	bones	to	the	deep!’
He	was	pale	–	as	pale	as	she	no	doubt	was	–	yet	in	his	eyes	there	was	a	dark
fury.	‘Tour ’s	Spit	lies	two	pegs	off	the	line,	and	there’re	shoals,	but,	sister,	it’s
the	only	dry	land	we	might	reach.’
‘Oh,	and	how	many	on	the	deck	there	know	how	to	swim?	Any?’	She
shook	her	head,	blinking	salty	spray	from	her	eyes.	‘What	would	you	have	us
do,	crash	this	damned	thing	onto	the	strand?	Pray	to	the	shore	that	we	can	slip
through	the	shoals	untouched?	Dear	Watch,	would	you	curl	up	in	the	lap	of	the
gods?’
Bearded	jaw	bunched,	cabled	muscles	growing	so	tight	she	waited	to	hear
bone	or	teeth	crack,	then	he	looked	away.	‘What	would	you	have	us	do,	then?’
‘Get	the	damned	fools	to	bail,	Yedan.	We	get	any	lower	and	the	next
wave’ll	roll	us	right	over.’
Yet	she	knew	it	was	too	late.	Whatever	grand	schemes	of	survival	for	her
people	she	had	nurtured,	deep	in	her	heart,	had	come	untethered.	By	this	one
storm.	It	had	been	madness,	flinging	this	coast-creeping	ferry	out	beyond	the
shore,	even	though	the	only	truly	dangerous	stretch	had	been…this	one,	here,
north	from	Third	Maiden	Isle	to	the	lee	of	Spyrock	Island.	The	only	stretch	truly
open	to	the	western	ocean.
The	gale	lifted	loose	suddenly,	slammed	a	fist	into	the	port	side	of	the
craft.	A	mast	splintered,	the	sail	billowing	round,	sheets	snapping,	and	like	a
huge	wing	the	sail	tore	itself	loose,	carrying	the	mast	with	it.	Rigging	snatched
up	hapless	figures	from	the	deck	and	flung	them	skyward.	A	second	mast
toppled,	this	one	heavy	enough	to	tug	its	sail	downward.	Yet	more	tinny
screams	reaching	through	the	howl.
The	ferry	seemed	to	slump,	as	if	moments	from	plunging	into	the	deep.
Yan	Tovis	found	herself	gripping	the	lines	as	if	they	could	pull	her	loose,	into
the	sky	–	as	if	they	could	take	her	from	all	of	this.	The	Queen	commands.	Her
people	die.
At	least	I	will	join—
A	shout	from	Yedan	Derryg,	who	had	gone	forward	into	the	chaos	of	the
deck,	a	shout	that	reached	her.
And	now	she	saw.	Two	enormous	ships	had	come	upon	them	from	astern,


one	to	each	side,	heaving	like	hunting	behemoths,	their	sails	alone	dwarfing
the	ferry	pitching	in	their	midst.	The	one	to	port	stole	the	gale’s	fierce	breath
and	all	at	once	the	ferry	righted	itself	amidst	choppy	waves.
Yan	Tovis	stared	across,	saw	figures	scrambling	about	side-mounted
ballistae,	saw	others	moving	to	the	rail	beneath	huge	coils	of	rope.
Pirates?	Now?
The	crew	of	the	ship	to	starboard,	she	saw	with	growing	alarm,	was	doing
much	the	same.
Yet	it	was	the	ships	that	most	frightened	her.	For	she	recognized	them.
Perish.	What	were	they	called?	Yes,	Thrones	of	War.	She	well	remembered
that	battle,	the	lash	of	sorceries	ripping	the	crests	of	waves,	the	detonations	as
Edur	galleys	disintegrated	before	her	very	eyes.	The	cries	of	drowning
warriors—
Ballistae	loosed	their	robust	quarrels,	yet	the	missiles	arced	high,	clearing
the	deck	by	two	or	more	man-heights.	And	from	them	snaked	out	ropes.	The
launching	had	been	virtually	simultaneous	from	both	ships.	She	saw	those
quarrels	rip	through	the	flimsy	sails,	slice	past	rigging,	then	the	heavy-headed
missiles	dipped	down	to	the	seas	in	between.
She	saw	as	the	ropes	were	hauled	taut.	She	felt	the	crunching	bite	of	the
quarrels	as	they	lifted	back	clear	of	the	water	and	anchored	barbs	deep	into	the
gunnels	of	the	ferry.
And,	as	the	wind	pushed	them	all	onward	now,	the	Thrones	of	War	drew
closer.
Massive	fends	of	bundled	seaweed	swung	down	to	cushion	the	contact	of
the	hulls.
Sailors	from	the	Perish	ships	scrambled	along	the	lines,	many	of	them
standing	upright	as	they	did	so	–	impossibly	balanced	despite	the	pitching	seas
–	and	dropped	down	onto	the	ferry	deck	with	ropes	and	an	assortment	of	tools.
The	ropes	were	cleated	to	stanchions	and	pills	on	the	ferry.
An	armoured	Perish	emerged	from	the	mass	of	humanity	on	the	main	deck
and	climbed	her	way	to	where	stood	Yan	Tovis.
In	the	language	of	the	trader ’s	tongue,	the	woman	said,	‘Your	craft	is
sinking,	Captain.	We	must	evacuate	your	passengers.’
Numbed,	Yan	Tovis	nodded.
‘We	are	sailing,’	said	the	Perish,	‘for	Second	Maiden	Isle.’
‘As	were	we,’	Yan	Tovis	responded.
A	sudden	smile,	as	welcome	to	Yan	Tovis’s	eyes	as	dawn	after	a	long	night.
‘Then	we	are	most	well	met.’
Well	met,	yes.	And	well	answered.	Second	Maiden	Fort.	The	silent	Isle	has


been	conquered.	Not	just	the	Malazans	then.	The	Perish.	Oh,	look	what	we	have
awakened.
	
He’d	had	months	to	think	things	over,	and	in	the	end	very	little	of	what	had
happened	back	in	the	Malazan	Empire	surprised	Banaschar,	once	Demidrek	of
the	Worm	of	Autumn.	Perhaps,	if	seen	from	the	outside,	from	some	borderland
where	real	power	was	as	ephemeral,	as	elusive,	as	a	cloud	on	the	face	of	the
moon,	there	would	be	a	sense	of	astonishment	and,	indeed,	disbelief.	That	the
mortal	woman	commanding	the	most	powerful	empire	in	the	world	could	find
herself	so…helpless.	So	bound	to	the	ambitions	and	lusts	of	the	faceless
players	behind	the	tapestries.	Folk	blissfully	unaware	of	the	machinations	of
politics	might	well	believe	that	someone	like	Empress	Laseen	was	omnipotent,
that	she	could	do	entirely	as	she	pleased.	And	that	a	High	Mage,	such	as
Tayschrenn,	was	likewise	free,	unconstrained	in	his	ambitions.
For	people	with	such	simplistic	world	views,	Banaschar	knew,	catastrophes
were	disconnected	things,	isolated	in	and	of	themselves.	There	was	no	sense	of
cause	and	effect	beyond	the	immediate,	beyond	the	directly	observable.	A	cliff
collapses	onto	a	village,	killing	hundreds.	The	effect:	death.	The	cause:	the
cliff’s	collapse.	Of	course,	if	one	were	to	then	speak	of	cutting	down	every	tree
within	sight,	including	those	above	that	cliff,	as	the	true	cause	of	the	disaster	–
a	cause	that,	in	its	essence,	lay	at	the	feet	ofthe	very	victims,	then	fierce	denial
was	the	response;	or,	even	more	pathetic,	blank	confusion.	And	if	one	were	to
then	elaborate	on	the	economic	pressures	that	demanded	such	rapacious
deforestation,	ranging	from	the	need	for	firewood	among	the	locals	and	the
desire	to	clear	land	for	pasture	to	increase	herds	all	the	way	to	the	hunger	for
wood	to	meet	the	shipbuilding	needs	of	a	port	city	leagues	distant,	in	order	to
go	to	war	with	a	neighbouring	kingdom	over	contested	fishing	areas	–
contested	because	the	shoals	were	vanishing,	leading	to	the	threat	of	starvation
in	both	kingdoms,	which	in	turn	might	destabilize	the	ruling	families,	thus
raising	the	spectre	of	civil	war…well,	then,	the	entire	notion	of	cause	and
effect,	suddenly	revealing	its	true	level	of	complexity,	simply	overwhelmed.
Rebellion	in	Seven	Cities,	followed	by	terrible	plague,	and	suddenly	the
heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire	–	Quon	Tali	–	was	faced	with	a	shortage	of	grain.
But	no,	Banaschar	knew,	one	could	go	yet	further	back.	Why	did	the	rebellion
occur	at	all?	Never	mind	the	convenient	prophecies	of	apocalypse.	The	crisis
was	born	in	the	aftermath	of	Laseen’s	coup,	when	virtually	all	of	Kellanved’s
commanders	vanished	–	drowned,	as	the	grisly	joke	went.	She	sat	herself	down
on	the	throne,	only	to	find	her	most	able	governors	and	military	leaders	gone.


And	into	the	vacuum	of	their	departure	came	far	less	capable	and	far	less
reliable	people.	She	should	not	have	been	surprised	at	their	avarice	and
corruption	–	for	the	chapter	she	had	begun	in	the	history	of	the	empire	had
been	announced	with	betrayal	and	blood.	Cast	bitter	seeds	yield	bitter	fruit,	as
the	saying	went.
Corruption	and	incompetence.	These	were	rebellion’s	sparks.	Born	in	the
imperial	palace	in	Unta,	only	to	return	with	a	vengeance.
Laseen	had	used	the	Claw	to	achieve	her	coup.	In	her	arrogance	she	clearly
imagined	no-one	could	do	the	same;	could	infiltrate	her	deadly	cadre	of
assassins.	Yet,	Banaschar	now	believed,	that	is	what	had	happened.	And	so	the
most	powerful	mortal	woman	in	the	world	had	suddenly	found	herself
emasculated,	indeed	trapped	by	a	host	of	exigencies,	unbearable	pressures,
inescapable	demands.	And	her	most	deadly	weapon	of	internal	control	had
been	irrevocably	compromised.
There	had	been	no	civil	war	–	the	Adjunct	had	seen	to	that	–	yet	the	enfilade
at	Malaz	City	might	well	have	driven	the	final	spike	into	the	labouring	heart	of
Laseen’s	rule.	The	Claw	had	been	decimated,	perhaps	so	much	so	that	no-one
could	use	it	for	years	to	come.
The	Claw	had	declared	war	on	the	wrong	people.	And	so,	at	long	last,
Cotillion	–	who	had	once	been	Dancer	–	had	his	revenge	on	the	organization
that	had	destroyed	his	own	Talon	and	then	lifted	Laseen	onto	the	throne.	For,
that	night	in	Malaz	City,	there	had	been	a	Shadow	Dance.
Causes	and	effects,	they	were	like	the	gossamer	strands	spanning	the
towers	of	Kartool	City,	a	deadly	web,	a	skein	tethered	to	a	thousand	places.	And
to	imagine	that	things	were	simple	was	to	be	naive,	often	fatally	so.
A	crime	that	he	himself	had	been	guilty	of,	Banaschar	now	understood.
D’rek’s	rage	against	her	worshippers	had	not	been	an	isolated,	internal	event.	It
belonged	to	a	vast	war,	and	in	war	people	died.	Perhaps,	unlike	Banaschar,
Tayschrenn	had	not	been	greatly	affected	by	the	tragedy.	Perhaps,	indeed,	the
Imperial	High	Mage	had	known	all	along.
Such	unpleasant	thoughts	were	in	the	habit	of	wandering	into	his	mind
when	the	sun	had	long	fled	the	sky,	when	he	should	have	been	asleep	–
plummeted	into	the	drunken	stupor	of	oblivion	here	in	the	decrepit	room	he
had	rented	opposite	the	Harridict	Tavern	on	this	damned	island.	Instead	he
stood	by	the	window,	wide	awake,	listening	to	the	cold	wind	creak	its	way
through	the	shutters.	And	even	if	it	had	been	a	warm	night,	he	doubted	he
would	have	opened	those	shutters.	Better	to	see	nothing	but	those	weathered
slats;	better	to	be	reminded	that	there	was	no	way	out.
The	Worm	of	Autumn	stirred	in	his	gut;	an	immortal	parasite	and	he	its


mortal	host.	The	goddess	was	within	him	once	more,	after	all	these	years.
Again,	no	surprise.	After	all,	I’m	the	only	one	left.	Yet	D’rek	remained	as	no
more	than	a	presence,	a	faint	taste	on	his	tongue.	There	had	been	no	battle	of
wills;	but	he	knew	it	would	come.	The	goddess	needed	him	and	sooner	or	later
she	would	reach	out	and	close	a	cold	fist	about	his	soul.
This	was	no	way	to	be	called	by	one’s	god.
He	heard	skittering	noises	behind	him	and	slowly	closed	his	eyes.
‘Smells.	Smells,	smells,	smells.’
The	words	were	a	whining	whisper	in	Banaschar ’s	head.
‘That’s	the	problem,	Telorast.	With	this	island.	With	this	entire	continent!
Oh,	why	did	we	come	here?	We	should	have	stolen	the	bodies	of	two	gulls,
never	mind	these	rotting	stick-things	with	empty	bellies	we	can’t	never	fill!
How	many	rats	have	we	killed,	Telorast?	Answer	me!’
‘So	we	couldn’t	eat	them,’	muttered	Telorast.	‘Killing	them	was	fun,	wasn’t
it?	Cleanest	ships	in	the	world.	Enough	of	your	complaining,	Curdle.	Can’t	you
feel	how	close	we	are?’
‘She’s	walked	here!’	Now	there	was	terror	in	Curdle’s	voice.	‘What	are	we
doing	in	this	place?’
Banaschar	turned.	The	two	knee-high	skeletal	reptiles	were	pacing	back
and	forth	the	length	of	the	cot,	clambering	awkwardly	amidst	the	dishevelled
folds	of	bedding.	‘A	good	question,’	he	said.	‘What	are	you	doing	here?	In	my
room?	And	who	is	“she”?’
Curdle’s	head	bobbed,	jaws	clacking.	‘Not-Not-Apsalar	drove	us	away.	But
we	need	to	tell	someone!’
‘Anyone!’	chimed	Telorast.	‘Even	you!’
‘Her	name	is	Lostara	Yil,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Not	Not-Not-Apsalar	–	gods,
did	I	just	say	that?’
‘“She”,’	Curdle	said,	tail	whipping,	‘is	the	one	who	walked	here.	Long	ago.
More	long	ago	than	you	could	even	think	of,	that	long	ago.	Telorast	is	mad.
She’s	excited,	but	how	can	anyone	be	excited	when	we’re	so	close	to	her?
Madness!’
‘Just	because	she	walked	here,’	Telorast	said,	‘doesn’t	mean	she’s	still
hanging	around.	Got	no	big	skulls	to	push	her	fist	through,	not	for	a	long	time,
right?	And	look	at	us,	Curdle.	We	could	dance	in	the	palm	of	her	hand.	Either
one.	Or	both,	one	for	me	and	one	for	you	–	and	she	wouldn’t	be	able	to	tell
anything	about	us,	not	anything.’	The	creature	swung	to	face	Banaschar	again.
‘So	there’s	no	reason	to	panic,	and	that’s	what	you	need	to	tell	Curdle,
Wormfood.	So,	go	on,	tell	her.’
Banaschar	slowly	blinked,	then	said,	‘There’s	nothing	to	worry	about,


Curdle.	Now,	will	you	two	leave?	I	have	more	brooding	to	do	and	half	the
night’s	gone.’
Telorast’s	razor-beaked	head	swung	to	Curdle.	‘See?	Everything’s	fine.
We’re	close	because	we	have	to	be.	Because	it’s	where	Edgewalker	wants—’
‘Quiet!’	Curdle	hissed.
Telorast	ducked.	‘Oh.	We	have	to	kill	him	now,	don’t	we?’
‘No,	that	would	be	messy.	We	just	have	to	hope	for	a	terrible	accident.
Quick,	Telorast,	think	of	a	terrible	accident!’
‘I’ve	never	heard	of	Edgewalker,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Relax	and	go	away	and
forget	thinking	about	killing	me.	Unless	you	want	to	awaken	D’rek,	that	is.	The
goddess	might	well	know	who	this	Edgewalker	is,	and	from	that	might	be	able
to	glean	something	of	your	deadly	secret	mission,	and	from	that	she	might
decide	it	would	be	better	if	you	two	were	crushed	into	dust.’
Curdle	leapt	down	from	the	cot,	crept	closer	to	Banaschar,	then	began	to
grovel.	‘We	didn’t	mean	anything	by	any	of	that.	We	never	mean	anything,	do
we,	Telorast?	We’re	most	useless	and	tiny	besides.’
‘We	can	smell	the	Worm	all	right,’	Telorast	said,	head	bobbing.	‘On	you.
In	you.	Just	one	more	dread	smell	hereabouts.	We	don’t	like	it	at	all.	Let’s	go,
Curdle.	He’s	not	the	one	we	should	be	talking	to.	Not	as	dangerous	as	NotApsalar,	but	just	as	scary.	Open	those	shutters,	Wormfood;	we’ll	go	out	that
way.’
‘Easy	for	you,’	Banaschar	muttered,	turning	back	to	pull	the	slatted
barriers	aside.	The	wind	gusted	in	like	Hood’s	own	breath,	and	the	reborn
priest	shivered.
In	a	flash	the	two	reptiles	were	perched	on	the	sill.
‘Look,	Telorast,	pigeon	poo.’
Then	the	two	creatures	leapt	from	sight.	After	a	moment,	Banaschar	closed
the	shutters	once	more.	Making	right	his	vision	of	the	world.	His	world,	at
least.
‘Shillydan	the	dark-eyed	man
Pokes	his	head	up	for	a	look	round
Hillyman	the	black-clawed	man
Came	up	the	well	for	a	look	round
“Well	and	and!”	says	the	twelve-toed	man
And	round	down	the	hill	he	bound
Still-me-hand	the	dead-smile	man
Went	bounding	bound	down	he	did	bound


Shillydan	the	red-water	man
Croaks	and	kisses	the	lass’s	brow
Hillyman	the	blue-cocked	man—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	Crump,	stop	that	damned	singing!’
The	gangly	sapper	straightened,	stared	with	mouth	agape,	then	ducked
down	once	more	and	resumed	digging	the	pit.	Under	his	breath	he	began
humming	his	mad,	endless	swamp	song.
Corporal	Shard	watched	the	dirt	flying	out,	caught	by	the	whipping	wind	in
wild	swirls,	for	a	moment	longer.	Twenty	paces	beyond	the	deep	hole	and
Crump’s	flashing	shovel	squatted	the	low-walled	stone	enclosure	where	the
squad	had	stashed	their	gear,	and	where	now	crouched	Sergeant	Cord,	Masan
Gilani,	Limp	and	Ebron,	taking	shelter	from	the	blustery	wind.	In	a	short	while,
Cord	would	call	everyone	to	their	feet,	and	the	patrol	of	this	part	of	the	coast
would	begin.
In	the	meantime,	Crump	was	digging	a	pit.	A	deep	pit,	just	like	the	sergeant
ordered.	Just	like	the	sergeant	had	been	ordering	every	day	for	nearly	a	week
now.
Shard	rubbed	at	his	numbed	face,	sick	with	worry	over	his	sister.	The	Sinn
he	knew	was	gone	and	no	sign	of	her	remained.	She’d	found	her	power,
creating	something	avid,	almost	lurid,	in	her	dark	eyes.	He	was	frightened	of
her	and	he	was	not	alone	in	that.	Limp’s	bad	knees	knocked	together	whenever
she	came	too	close,	and	Ebron	made	what	he	thought	were	subtle,	unseen
gestures	of	warding	behind	her	back.	Masan	Gilani	seemed	unaffected	–	that	at
least	was	something,	maybe	a	woman	thing	at	that,	since	Faradan	Sort	had	been
pretty	much	the	same.
That	simple?	Terrifying	to	men	but	not	women?	But	why	would	that	be	the
case?
He	had	no	answer	for	that.
Crump’s	humming	was	getting	louder,	drawing	Shard’s	attention	once
again.	Loud	enough	to	very	nearly	overwhelm	the	distant	groans	of	dying	ice
from	the	other	side	of	the	strait.	Worth	yelling	at	the	fool	again?	Maybe	not.
Dirt	flying	out,	skirling	skyward	then	racing	out	on	the	wave	of	the	gelid
wind.
There	were	holes	dotted	along	half	a	league	of	this	island’s	north	coast.
Crump	was	proud	of	his	achievement,	and	would	go	on	being	proud,	probably
for	ever.	Finest	holes	ever	dug.	Ten,	fifty,	a	hundred,	however	many	the
sergeant	wanted,	yes	sir.


Shard	believed	that	Cord’s	fervent	hope	that	one	such	pit	would	collapse,
burying	the	damned	idiot	once	and	for	all,	was	little	more	than	wishful
thinking.
After	all,	Crump	digs	great	holes.
He	heard	a	piping	shriek	from	some	way	behind	him	and	turned.	And	there
she	was.	Sinn,	the	girl	he	used	to	throw	onto	a	shoulder	like	a	sack	of	tubers	–	a
giggling	sack	–	and	rush	with	through	room	after	room	as	her	laughter	turned
to	squeals	and	her	legs	started	kicking.	Straggly	black	hair	whipping	about,	a
bone	flute	in	her	hands,	its	music	flung	out	into	the	bitter	tumult	like	inky
strands,	as	she	cavorted	in	the	face	of	the	weather	as	if	spider-bitten.
Sinn,	the	child	witch.	The	High	Mage	with	a	thirst	for	blood.
Child	of	the	rebellion.	Stolen	from	the	life	she	should	have	lived,
fashioned	by	horror	into	something	new.	Child	of	Seven	Cities,	of	the
Apocalyptic,	oh	yes.	Dryjhna’s	blessed	spawn.
He	wondered	how	many	such	creatures	were	out	there,	stumbling	through
the	ruins	like	starved	dogs.	Uprising,	grand	failure,	then	plague:	how	many
scars	could	a	young	soul	carry?	Before	it	twisted	into	something
unrecognizable,	something	barely	human?
Did	Sinn	find	salvation	in	sorcery?	Shard	held	no	faith	that	such	salvation
was	in	truth	benign.	A	weapon	for	her	will,	and	how	far	could	a	mortal	go	with
such	a	weapon	in	their	hands?	How	vast	the	weight	of	their	will,	unbound	and
unleashed?
They	were	right	to	fear.	So	very	right.
A	gruff	command	from	Sergeant	Cord	and	it	was	time	to	begin	the	patrol.
A	league’s	worth	of	blasted,	wind-torn	coastline.	Crump	climbed	out	of	the	pit
and	dusted	his	palms,	his	face	shining	as	he	looked	down	on	his	handiwork.
‘Isn’t	she	fine,	Corporal?	A	hole	dug	by	a	High	Marshal	of	Mott	Wood,
and	we	know	how	to	dig	’em,	don’t	we	just.	Why,	I	think	it	might	be	the	best
one	yet!	Especially	with	all	the	baby	skulls	on	the	bottom,	like	cobbles	they	are,
though	they	break	too	easy	–	need	to	step	light!	Step	light!’
Suddenly	chilled	in	a	place	far	deeper	than	any	wind	could	reach,	Shard
walked	to	the	edge	of	the	pit	and	looked	down.	Moments	later	the	rest	of	the
squad	joined	him.
In	the	gloom	almost	a	man’s	height	down,	the	glimmer	of	rounded	shapes.
Like	cobbles	they	are.
And	they	were	stirring.
A	hiss	from	Ebron	and	he	glared	across	at	Sinn,	whose	music	and	dancing
had	reached	a	frenzied	pitch.	‘Gods	below!	Sergeant—’
‘Grab	that	shovel	again,’	Cord	growled	to	Crump.	‘Fill	it	in,	you	fool!	Fill


it	in!	Fill	them	all	in!’
Crump	blinked,	then	collected	up	his	shovel	and	began	pushing	the	dry	soil
back	into	the	hole.	‘Best	hole-fillers	t’be	found	anywhere!	You’ll	see,	Sergeant!
Why,	you	won’t	never	see	holes	filled	so	good	as	them’s	done	by	a	High
Marshal	of	Mott	Wood!’
‘Hurry	up,	you	damned	fool!’
‘Yes	sir,	hurry	up.	Crump	can	do	that!’
After	a	moment,	the	sapper	began	singing.
‘Shillydan	the	red-water	man
Croaks	and	kisses	the	lass’s	brow
Hillyman	the	blue-cocked	man
Strokes	and	blessings	t’thank	’er	now!’
Nimander	Golit,	wrapped	in	a	heavy	dark	blue	woollen	cloak,	stood	at	one	end
of	the	winding	street.	Decrepit	harbour	buildings	leaned	and	sagged,	a	brick
grimace	curling	down	to	the	waterfront	that	glittered	a	hundred	paces	distant.
Shreds	of	cloud	scudded	beneath	a	night	sky	of	bleary	stars,	rushing	southward
like	advance	runners	of	snow	and	ice.
Tiste	Andii,	sentinel	to	the	dark;	he	would	have	liked	such	grand	notions
wrapped	about	him	as	tightly	as	this	cloak.	A	mythic	stance,	heavy	with…with
something.	And	the	sword	at	his	side,	a	weapon	of	heroic	will,	which	he	could
draw	forth	when	dread	fate	arrived	with	its	banshee	wail,	and	use	with	a	skill
that	could	astound	–	like	the	great	ones	of	old,	a	consummate	icon	of	power
unveiled	in	Mother	Dark’s	name.
But	it	was	all	a	dream.	His	skill	with	the	sword	was	middling,	a	symbol	of
mediocrity	as	muddied	as	his	own	bloodline.	He	was	no	soldier	of	darkness,
just	a	young	man	standing	lost	in	a	strange	street,	a	man	with	nowhere	to	go	–
yet	driven,	driven	on	at	this	very	moment	–	to	go	somewhere.
No,	even	that	was	untrue.	He	stood	in	the	night	because	of	a	need	to	escape.
Phaed’s	malice	had	become	rabid,	and	Nimander	was	the	one	in	whom	she	had
chosen	to	confide.	Would	she	murder	Sandalath	Drukorlat	here	in	this	port	city,
as	she	had	vowed?	More	to	the	point,	was	he,	Nimander,	going	to	permit	it?
Did	he	even	have	the	courage	to	betray	Phaed	–	knowing	how	swiftly	she
would	turn,	and	how	deadly	her	venom?
Anomander	Rake	would	not	hesitate.	No,	he	would	kick	down	the	door	to
Phaed’s	room	and	drag	the	squealing	little	stoat	out	by	her	neck.	And	he’d	then
shake	the	life	from	her.	He’d	have	no	choice,	would	he?	One	look	into	Phaed’s


eyes	and	the	secret	would	be	revealed.	The	secret	of	the	vast	empty	space	within
her,	where	her	conscience	should	be.	He	would	see	it	plain,	and	then	into	her
eyes	would	come	the	horror	of	exposure	–	moments	before	her	neck	snapped.
Mother	Dark	would	wait	for	Phaed’s	soul,	then,	for	its	shrieking	delivery,
the	malign	birth	of	just	execution,	of	choices	that	were	not	choices	at	all.	Why?
Because	nothing	else	can	be	done.	Not	for	one	such	as	her.
And	Rake	would	accept	the	blood	on	his	hands.	He	would	accept	that
terrible	burden	as	but	one	more	amidst	countless	others	he	carried	across	a
hundred	thousand	years.	Childslayer.	A	child	of	one’s	own	blood.
The	courage	of	one	with	power.	And	that	was	Nimander ’s	very	own
yawning	emptiness	in	the	heart	of	his	soul.	We	may	be	his	children,	his
grandchildren,	we	may	be	of	his	blood,	but	we	are	each	incomplete.	Phaed	and
her	wicked	moral	void.	Nenanda	and	his	unreasoning	rage.	Aranatha	with	her
foolish	hopes.	Kedeviss	who	screams	herself	awake	every	morning.	Skintick	for
whom	all	of	existence	is	a	joke.	Desra	who	would	spread	her	legs	for	any	man	if
it	could	boost	her	up	one	more	rung	on	the	ladder	towards	whatever	great	glory
she	imagines	she	deserves.	And	Nimander,	who	imagines	himself	the	leader	of
this	fell	family	of	would-be	heroes,	who	will	seek	out	the	ends	of	the	earth	in	his
hunt	for…for	courage,	for	conviction,	for	a	reason	to	do,	to	feel	anything.
Oh,	for	Nimander,	then,	an	empty	street	in	the	dead	of	night.	With	the
denizens	lost	in	their	fitful,	pathetic	sleep	–	as	if	oblivion	offered	any	escape,
any	escape	at	all.	For	Nimander,	these	interminable	moments	in	which	he	could
contemplate	actually	making	a	decision,	actually	stepping	between	an	innocent
elder	Tiste	Andii	and	Nimander ’s	own	murderous	little	sister.	To	say	No,
Phaed.	You	will	not	have	this.	No	more.	You	shall	be	a	secret	no	longer.	You
shall	be	known.
If	he	could	do	that.	If	he	could	but	do	that.
He	heard	a	sound.	Spinning,	the	whisper	of	fine	chain	cutting	a	path
through	the	air	–	close,	so	close	that	Nimander	spun	round	–	but	there	was	noone.	He	was	alone.	Spinning,	twirling,	a	hiss	–	then	a	sudden	snap,	two	distinct,
soft	clicks	as	of	two	tiny	objects	held	out	at	each	end	of	that	fine	chain	–	yes,
this	sound,	the	prophecy	–	Mother	fend,	is	this	the	prophecy?
Silence	now,	yet	the	air	felt	febrile	on	all	sides,	and	his	breath	was	coming
in	harsh	gasps.	‘He	carries	the	gates,	Nimander,	so	it	is	said.	Is	this	not	a
worthy	cause?	For	us?	To	search	the	realms,	to	find,	not	our	grandsire,	but	the
one	who	carries	the	gates?
‘Our	way	home.	To	Mother	Dark,	to	her	deepest	embrace	–	oh,	Nimander,
my	love,	let	us—’
‘Stop	it,’	he	croaked.	‘Please.	Stop.’


She	was	dead.	On	the	Floating	Isle.	Cut	down	by	a	Tiste	Edur	who’d
thought	nothing	of	it.	Nothing.	She	was	dead.
And	she	had	been	his	courage.	And	now	there	was	nothing	left.
The	prophecy?	Not	for	one	such	as	Nimander.
Dream	naught	of	glory.	She	too	is	dead.
She	was	everything.	And	she	is	dead.
A	cool	wind	sighed,	plucking	away	that	tension	–	a	tension	he	now	knew	he
but	imagined.	A	moment	of	weakness.	Something	skittering	on	a	nearby	roof.
These	things	did	not	come	to	those	who	were	incomplete.	He	should	have
known	better.
	
Three	soft	chimes	sounded	in	the	night,	announcing	yet	another	shift	of
personnel	out	in	the	advance	pickets.	Mostly	silent,	soldiers	rose,	dark	shapes
edging	out	from	their	positions,	quickly	replaced	by	those	who	had	come	to
guard	in	their	stead.	Weapons	rustled,	clasps	and	buckles	clicked,	leather
armour	making	small	animal	sounds.	Figures	moved	back	and	forth	on	the
plain.	Somewhere	in	the	darkness	beyond,	on	the	other	side	of	that	rise,	out	in
the	sweeps	of	high	grasses	and	in	the	distant	ravines,	the	enemy	hid.
The	soldiers	knew	that	Bivatt	had	believed	the	battle	was	imminent.
Redmask	and	his	Awl	were	fast	approaching.	Blood	would	be	spilled	in	the	late
afternoon	on	the	day	now	gone.	Oh,	as	the	Letherii	soldiers	along	the	advance
pickets	well	knew,	the	savages	had	indeed	arrived.	And	the	Atri-Preda	had
arrayed	her	mages	to	greet	them.	Foul	sorceries	had	crackled	and	spat,
blackening	whole	swaths	of	grassland	until	ash	thickened	the	air.
Yet	the	enemy	would	not	close,	the	damned	Awl	would	not	even	show	their
faces.	Even	as	they	moved,	just	beyond	line	of	sight,	to	encircle	the	Letherii
army.	This	sounded	deadlier	than	it	was	–	no	Awl	line	of	barbarians	would	be
able	to	hold	against	a	concerted	break-out,	and	the	hundreds	of	low-ranking
tactical	geniuses	common	to	all	armies	had	predicted	again	and	again	that
Bivatt	would	do	just	that:	drive	a	solid	wedge	into	contact	with	the	Awl,
scattering	them	to	the	winds.
Those	predictions	began	falling	away	as	the	afternoon	waned,	as	dusk
gathered,	as	night	closed	in	round	them	with	its	impenetrable	cloak.
Well,	they	then	said,	of	course	she	ain’t	bitten.	It’s	an	obvious	trap,	so
clumsy	it	almost	beggars	belief.	Redmask	wants	us	out	of	our	positions,	moving
this	way	and	that.	Wants	the	confusion,	d’you	see?	Bivatt’s	too	smart	for	that.
So	now	they	sat	the	night,	tired,	nervous,	and	heard	in	every	sound	the
stealthy	approach	of	killers	in	the	dark.	Yes,	friends,	there	was	movement	out


there,	no	doubt	of	that.	So	what	were	the	bastards	doing?
They’re	waiting.	To	draw	swords	with	the	dawn,	like	they	did	the	last	time.
We’re	sitting	out	here,	wide	awake,	for	nothing.	And	come	the	morrow	we’ll	be
sand-eyed	and	stiff	as	corpses,	at	least	until	the	fighting	starts	for	real,	then
we’ll	tear	their	hides	off.	Blade	and	magic,	friends.	To	announce	the	day	to
come.
	
The	Atri-Preda	paced.	Brohl	Handar	could	see	her	well	enough,	although	even
if	he	couldn’t	he	would	be	able	to	track	her	by	the	mutter	of	her	armour.	And,
despite	the	diminishment	of	details,	the	Tiste	Edur	knew	she	was	overwrought;
knew	she	held	none	of	the	necessary	calm	expected	of	a	commander;	and	so	it
was	well,	he	concluded,	that	the	two	of	them	were	twenty	or	more	paces	away
from	the	nearest	bivouac	of	troops.
More	than	a	little	exposed,	in	fact.	If	the	enemy	had	infiltrated	the	pickets,
they	might	be	hiding	not	ten	paces	distant,	adjusting	grips	on	their	knives
moments	before	the	sudden	rush	straight	for	them.	Slaying	the	two	leaders	of
this	invading	army.	Of	course,	to	have	managed	that,	the	savages	would	have
had	to	deceive	the	magical	wards	woven	by	the	mages,	and	that	seemed
unlikely.	Bivatt	was	not	unique	when	it	came	to	fraught	nerves,	and	he	needed
to	be	mindful	of	such	flaws.
Redmask	excelled	in	surprises.	He	had	already	proved	that,	and	it	had	been
foolish	to	expect	a	sudden	change,	a	dramatic	failure	in	his	deviousness.	Yet
was	this	simply	a	matter	of	seeking	battle	with	the	sun’s	rise?	That	seemed	too
easy.
The	Atri-Preda	walked	over.	‘Overseer,’	she	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘I	would
you	send	your	Edur	out.	I	need	to	know	what	he’s	doing.’
Startled,	Brohl	said	nothing	for	a	moment.
She	interpreted	that,	rightly,	as	disapproval.	‘Your	kind	are	better	able	to
see	in	the	dark.	Is	that	not	correct?	Certainly	better	than	us	Letherii;	but	more
important,	better	than	the	Awl.’
‘And	their	dogs,	Atri-Preda?	They	will	smell	us,	hear	us	–	they	will	raise
their	heads	and	awaken	the	night.	Like	your	soldiers,’	he	continued,	‘mine	are
in	position,	facing	the	high	grasses	and	expecting	to	sight	the	enemy	at	any
moment.’
She	sighed.	‘Yes,	of	course.’
‘He	plays	with	us,’	Brohl	Handar	said.	‘He	wants	us	second-guessing	him.
He	wants	our	minds	numbed	with	exhaustion	come	the	dawn,	and	so	slowed	in
our	capacity	to	react,	to	respond	with	alacrity.	Redmask	wants	us	confused,	and


he	has	succeeded.’
‘Do	you	imagine	that	I	don’t	know	all	that?’	she	demanded	in	a	hiss.
‘Atri-Preda,	you	do	not	even	trust	your	mages	just	now	–	the	wards	they
have	set	to	guard	us	this	night.	Our	soldiers	should	be	sleeping.’
‘If	I	have	reason	to	lack	confidence	in	my	mages,’	Bivatt	said	dryly,	‘I	have
good	cause.	Nor	has	your	K’risnan	impressed	me	thus	far,	Overseer.
Although,’	she	added,	‘his	healing	talents	have	proved	more	than	adequate.’
‘You	sound	very	nearly	resentful	of	that,’	Brohl	said.
She	waved	a	dismissive	hand	and	turned	away	to	resume	her	pacing.
A	troubled	commander	indeed.
Redmask	would	be	delighted.
	
Toc	leaned	along	the	length	of	the	horse’s	neck.	He	was	riding	bareback,	and
he	could	feel	the	animal’s	heat	and	its	acrid	yet	gentle	smell	filled	his	nostrils
as	he	let	the	beast	take	another	step	forward.	From	the	height	of	the	horse’s
shoulder	he	could	see	just	above	the	line	of	the	ridge	off	to	his	left.
The	modest	defensive	berms	were	like	humped	graves	along	the	flat	this
side	of	the	Letherii	camp.	There	had	been	a	change	of	guard	–	the	chimes	had
been	readily	audible	–	meaning	yet	another	ideal	time	for	the	attack	had	slipped
past.
He	was	no	military	genius,	but	Toc	believed	that	this	night	could	not	have
been	more	perfect	as	far	as	the	Awl	were	concerned.	They	had	their	enemy
confused,	weary	and	frayed.	Instead,	Redmask	exhausted	his	own	warriors	by
sending	them	one	way	and	then	the	next,	with	the	seemingly	sole	purpose	of
raising	dust	no-one	could	even	see.	No	command	to	initiate	contact	had	been
issued.	No	concerted	gathering	to	launch	a	sudden	strike	into	the	Letherii	camp.
Not	even	any	harassing	flights	of	arrows	to	speed	down	in	the	dark.
He	thought	he	understood	the	reason	for	Redmask’s	inconstancy.	The
Letherii	mages.	His	scouts	had	witnessed	that	impatient,	deadly	sorcery,	held
ready	to	greet	the	Awl	attack.	They	had	brought	back	stories	of	blistered	land,
rocks	snapping	in	the	incandescent	heat,	and	these	tales	had	spread	quickly,
driving	deep	into	the	army	a	spike	of	fear.	The	problem	was	simple.	Here,	in
this	place,	Redmask	had	no	answer	to	that	magic.	And	Toc	now	believed	that
Redmask	would	soon	sound	the	retreat,	no	matter	how	galling	–	no	spilling	of
blood,	and	the	great	advantage	of	advancing	well	beyond	reach	of	the	Letherii
column	and	so	avoiding	detection	had	been	surrendered,	uselessly	thrown
away.	No	battle,	yet	a	defeat	nonetheless.
His	horse,	unguided	by	the	human	on	its	back,	took	another	step,	head


dipping	so	that	the	animal	could	crop	grass.	Too	much	of	that	and	the	beast
would	find	its	bowels	in	knots.
Oh,	we	take	you	into	slaughter	without	a	moment’s	thought.	And	yes,	some
of	you	come	to	enjoy	it,	to	lust	for	that	cacophony,	that	violence,	the	reek	of
blood.	And	so	we	share	with	you,	dear	horse,	our	peculiar	madness.	But	who
judges	us	for	this	crime	against	you	and	your	kind?	No-one.
Unless	you	horses	have	a	god.
He	wondered	if	there	might	be	a	poem	somewhere	in	that.	But	poems	that
remind	us	of	our	ghastlier	traits	are	never	popular,	are	they?	Best	the	bald	lies
of	heroes	and	great	deeds.	The	slick	comfort	of	someone	else’s	courage	and
conviction.	So	we	can	bask	in	the	righteous	glow	and	so	feel	uplifted	in	kind.
Aye,	I’ll	stay	with	the	lies.	Why	not?	Everyone	else	does.
And	those	who	don’t	are	told	they	think	too	much.	Hah,	now	there’s	a
fearsome	attack	enough	to	quail	any	venturesome	soul.	See	me	tremble.
His	horse	heard	a	whinny	from	off	to	the	right	and	in	whatever	language
the	beasts	shared	that	sound	was	surely	a	summons,	for	it	lifted	its	head,	then
walked	slowly	towards	it.	Toc	waited	a	few	moments	longer,	then,	when	he
judged	they	were	well	clear	of	the	ridge	line	behind	them,	he	straightened	and
gathered	the	reins.
And	saw	before	him	a	solid	line	of	mounted	warriors,	lances	upright.
In	front	of	the	row	was	the	young	Renfayar,	Masarch.
Toc	angled	his	horse	on	an	approach.
‘What	is	this,	Masarch?	A	cavalry	charge	in	the	dark?’
The	young	warrior	shrugged.	‘We’ve	readied	three	times	this	night,
Mezla.’
Toc	smiled	to	himself.	He’d	thrown	that	pejorative	out	in	a	fit	of	selfmockery	a	few	days	past,	and	now	it	had	become	an	honorific.	Which,	he
admitted,	appealed	to	his	sense	of	irony.	He	edged	his	horse	closer	and	in	a	low
tone	asked:	‘Do	you	have	any	idea	what	Redmask	is	doing,	Masarch?’
A	hooded	glance,	then	another	shrug.
‘Well,’	Toc	persisted,	‘is	this	the	main	concentration	of	forces?	No?	Then
where?’
‘To	the	northwest,	I	think.’
‘Is	yours	to	be	a	feint	attack?’
‘Should	the	horn	sound,	Mezla,	we	ride	to	blood.’
Toc	twisted	on	the	horse	and	looked	back	at	the	ridge.	The	Letherii	would
feel	the	drumming	of	hoofs,	and	then	see	the	silhouettes	as	the	Awl	crested	the
line.	And	those	soldiers	had	dug	pits	–	he	could	already	hear	the	snapping	of
leg	bones	and	the	animal	screaming.	‘Masarch,’	he	said,	‘you	can’t	charge


those	pickets.’
‘We	can	see	them	well	enough	to	ride	around	them—’
‘Until	the	animal	beside	you	jostles	yours	into	one.’
At	first	Toc	thought	he	was	hearing	wolves	howling,	but	the	sudden	cry
levelled	out	–	Redmask’s	rodara	horn.
Masarch	raised	his	lance.	‘Do	you	ride	with	us,	Mezla?’
Bareback?	‘No.’
‘Then	ride	fast	to	one	side!’
Toc	kicked	his	horse	into	motion,	and	as	he	rode	down	the	line	he	saw	the
Awl	warriors	ready	their	weapons	above	suddenly	restless	mounts.	Breaths
gusted	like	smoke	into	the	air.	From	somewhere	on	the	far	side	of	the	Letherii
encampment	there	was	the	sudden	reverberation	of	clashing	arms.
He	judged	that	Masarch	led	six	or	seven	hundred	Awl	riders.	Urging	his
horse	into	a	gallop,	Toc	drew	clear	just	as	the	mass	of	warriors	surged
forward.	‘This	is	madness!’	He	spun	the	mount	round,	tugging	his	bow	loose
from	his	shoulder	even	as	he	looped	the	reins	over	his	left	wrist.	Jamming	one
end	of	the	bow	onto	his	moccasined	foot	–	between	the	big	toe	and	the	rest	–	he
leaned	down	his	weight	to	string	it.	Weapon	readied	and	in	his	right	hand,	he
deftly	adjusted	his	hold	on	the	reins	and	knotted	them	to	ensure	that	they	did	not
fall	and	foul	the	horse’s	front	legs.
As	the	beast	cantered	into	the	dusty	wake	of	the	cavalry	charge,	Toc
Anaster	drew	out	from	the	quiver	at	his	hip	the	first	stone-tipped	arrow.	What
in	Hood’s	name	am	I	doing?
Getting	ready	to	cover	the	retreat	I	know	is	coming?	Aye,	a	one-eyed
archer…
With	the	pressure	of	his	thighs	and	a	slight	shifting	of	weight,	he	guided
his	horse	in	the	direction	of	the	rise	–	where	the	Awl	warriors	had	arrived	in	a
dark	mass,	only	now	voicing	their	war-cries.	Somewhere	in	the	distance	rose
the	sound	of	dogs,	joining	that	ever-growing	cacophony	of	iron	on	iron	and
screaming	voices.
Redmask	had	finally	struck,	and	now	there	was	chaos	in	the	night.
The	cavalry,	reaching	the	rise,	swept	down	the	other	side	and	moments
later	were	lost	from	sight.
Toc	urged	his	horse	forward,	nocking	the	arrow.	He	had	no	stirrups	to
stand	in	while	shooting,	making	this	whole	exercise	seem	ridiculous,	yet	he
quickly	approached	the	crest.	Moments	before	arriving,	he	heard	the	clash
ahead	–	the	shouts,	the	piercing	shrieks	of	injured	horses,	and	beneath	it	all	the
thunder	of	hoofs.
Although	difficult	to	discern	amidst	the	darkness	and	dust,	Toc	could	see


that	most	of	the	lancers	had	swept	round	the	outlying	pickets,	continuing	on	to
crash	into	the	camp	itself.	He	saw	soldiers	emerging	from	those
entrenchments,	many	wounded,	some	simply	dazed.	Younger	Awl	warriors
rode	among	them,	slashing	down	with	scimitars	in	a	grotesque	slaughter.
Coruscating	light	burgeoned	off	to	the	right	–	the	foaming	rise	of	sorcery
–	and	Toc	saw	the	Awl	cavalry	begin	to	withdraw,	pulling	away	like	fangs	from
flesh.
‘No!’	he	shouted,	riding	hard	now	towards	them.	‘Stay	among	the	enemy!
Go	back!	Attack,	you	damned	fools!	Attack!’
But,	even	could	they	hear	him,	they	had	seen	the	magic,	the	tumult	building
into	a	writhing	wave	of	blistering	power.	And	fear	took	their	hearts.	Fear	took
them	and	they	fled—
Still	Toc	rode	forward,	now	among	the	berms.	Bodies	sprawled,	horses
lying	on	their	sides,	kicking,	ears	flat	and	teeth	bared;	others	broken	heaps
filling	pits.
The	first	of	the	retreating	Awl	raced	past,	unseeing,	their	faces	masks	of
terror.
A	second	wave	of	sorcery	had	appeared,	this	one	from	the	left,	and	he
watched	it	roll	into	the	first	of	the	horse-warriors	on	that	side.	Flesh	burst,
fluids	sprayed.	The	magic	climbed,	slowed	as	it	seemed	to	struggle	against	all
the	flesh	it	contacted.	Screams,	the	sound	reaching	Toc	on	its	own	wave,
chilling	his	very	bones.	Hundreds	died	before	the	magic	spent	itself,	and	into
the	dust	now	swirled	white	ash	–	all	that	was	left	of	human	and	horse	along	the
entire	west	flank.
Riders	swarming	past	Toc,	along	with	riderless	horses	surging	ahead	in
the	grip	of	panic.	Dust	biting	his	lone	eye,	dust	seeking	to	claw	down	his	throat,
and	all	around	him	shadows	writhing	in	their	own	war	of	light	and	dark	as
sorceries	lifted,	rolled	then	fell	in	gusting	clouds	of	ash.
And	then	Toc	Anaster	was	alone,	arrow	still	nocked,	in	the	wasteland	just
inside	the	berms.	Watching	another	wave	of	sorcery	sweep	past	his	position,
pursuing	the	fleeing	Awl.
Before	he	could	think	either	way,	Toc	found	himself	riding	hard,	in	behind
that	dread	wave,	into	the	scalding,	brittle	air	of	the	magic’s	wake	–	and	there,
sixty	paces	away,	within	a	mass	of	advancing	soldiers,	he	saw	the	mage.	The
latter	clenched	his	hands	and	power	tumbled	from	him,	forming	yet	another
excoriating	conjuration	of	raw	destruction	that	rose	up	to	greet	Toc,	then
heaved	for	him.
One	eye	or	not,	he	could	see	that	damned	wizard.
An	impossible	shot,	jostled	as	he	was	on	the	horse’s	back	as	the	beast


weaved	between	pits	and	suspect	tufts	of	grass,	as	its	head	lifted	in	sudden
recognition	of	terrible	danger.
Silver-veined	power	surging	towards	him.
Galloping	now,	mad	as	any	other	fool	this	night,	and	he	saw,	off	to	his	left,
a	deep,	elongated	trench	–	drainage	for	the	camp’s	latrines	–	and	he	forced	his
mount	towards	it,	even	as	the	sorcery	raced	for	him	on	a	convergent	path	from
his	right.
The	horse	saw	the	trench,	gauged	its	width,	then	stretched	out	a	moment
before	gathering	to	make	the	leap.
He	felt	the	beast	lift	beneath	him,	sail	through	the	air	–	and	for	that	one
moment	all	was	still,	all	was	smooth,	and	in	that	one	moment	Toc	twisted	at	the
hips,	knees	hard	against	the	animal’s	shoulders,	drew	the	bow	back,	aimed	–
damning	this	flat,	one-eyed	world	that	was	all	he	had	left	–	then	loosed	the
stone-tipped	arrow.
The	horse	landed,	throwing	Toc	forward	onto	its	neck.	Bow	in	his	right
hand,	legs	stretching	out	now	along	the	length	of	the	beast’s	back,	and	his	left
arm	wrapping,	desperately	tight,	about	the	animal’s	muscle-sheathed	neck	–
behind	them	and	to	the	right,	the	heat	of	that	wave,	reaching	out,	closer,	closer
—
The	horse	screamed,	bolting	forward.	He	held	on.
And	felt	a	gust	of	cool	air	behind	him.	Risked	a	glance.
The	magic	had	died.	Beyond	it,	at	the	front	line	of	the	advancing	–	now
halted	and	milling	–	Letherii	troops,	a	body	settling	onto	its	knees.	A	body
without	a	head;	a	neck	from	which	rose,	not	blood,	but	something	like	smoke
—
A	detonation?	Had	there	been	a	detonation	–	a	thumping	crack,
bludgeoning	the	air	–	yes,	maybe	he	had	heard—
He	regained	control	of	his	horse,	took	the	knotted	reins	in	his	left	hand	and
guided	the	frightened	creature	round,	back	towards	the	crest.
The	air	reeked	of	cooked	meat.	Other	flashes	lit	the	night.	Dogs	snarled.
Soldiers	and	warriors	died.	And	among	Masarch’s	cavalry,	Toc	would	later
learn,	half	were	not	there	to	see	the	dawn.
High	overhead,	night	and	its	audience	of	unblinking	stars	had	seen	enough,
and	the	sky	paled,	as	if	washed	of	all	blood,	as	if	drained	of	the	last	life.
	
The	sun	was	unkind	in	lighting	the	morning	sky,	revealing	the	thick,	biting	ash
of	incinerated	humans,	horses	and	dogs.	Revealing,	as	well,	the	strewn	carnage
of	the	battle	just	done.	Brohl	Handar	walked,	half	numbed,	along	the	east	edge


of	the	now-dishevelled	encampment,	and	approached	the	Atri-Preda	and	her
retinue.
She	had	dismounted,	and	was	now	crouched	beside	a	corpse	just	inside	the
berms	–	where,	it	seemed,	the	suicidal	Awl	had	elected	to	charge.	He	wondered
how	many	had	died	to	Letherii	sorcery	here.	Probably	every	damned	one	of
them.	Hundreds	for	certain,	perhaps	thousands	–	there	was	no	way	to	tell	in	this
kind	of	aftermath,	was	there?	A	handful	of	fine	ash	to	mark	an	entire	human.
Two	for	a	horse.	Half	for	a	dog.	Just	so.	The	wind	took	it	all	away,	less	than	an
orator ’s	echo,	less	than	a	mourner ’s	gut-deep	grunt	of	despair.
He	staggered	to	a	halt	opposite	Bivatt,	the	corpse	–	headless,	it	turned	out	–
between	them.
She	looked	up,	and	perhaps	it	was	the	harsh	sunlight,	or	the	dust	in	a	thin
sheath	–	but	her	face	was	paler	than	he	had	ever	seen	before.
Brohl	studied	the	headless	body.	One	of	the	mages.
‘Do	you	know,	Overseer,’	Bivatt	asked	in	a	rough	voice,	‘what	could	have
done	this?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Perhaps	his	sorcery	returned	to	him,	uncontrolled—’
‘No,’	she	cut	in.	‘It	was	an	arrow.	From	a	lone	archer	with	the	audacity	to
outrun…to	slip	between	–	Overseer,	an	archer	riding	bareback,	loosing	his
arrow	whilst	his	horse	leapt	a	trench…’
She	stared	up	at	him,	disbelieving,	as	if	challenging	him	to	do	other	than
shake	his	head.	He	was	too	tired	for	this.	He	had	lost	warriors	last	night.	Dogs
rushing	from	the	high	grasses.	Dogs…and	two	Kechra	–	two,	there	were	only
two,	weren’t	there?	The	same	two	he	had	seen	before.	Only	one	with	those
strapped-on	swords.
Swords	that	had	chopped	his	K’risnan	in	half,	one	swinging	in	from	one
side,	the	other	from	the	opposite	side.	Not	that	the	blades	actually	met.	The	left
one	had	been	higher,	from	the	top	of	the	shoulder	down	to	just	below	the
ribcage.	The	right	blade	had	cut	into	ribs,	down	through	the	gut,	tearing	free
below	the	hip	and	taking	a	lot	of	that	hip	out	with	it.	So,	to	be	accurate,	not	in
half.	In	three.
The	other	Kechra	had	just	used	its	talons	and	jaws,	proving	no	less	deadly
–	in	fact,	Brohl	thought	this	one	more	savage	than	its	larger	companion,	more
clearly	delighting	in	its	violent	mayhem.	The	other	fought	with	perfunctory
grace.	The	smaller,	swordless	Kechra	revelled	in	the	guts	and	limbs	it	flung	in
every	direction.
But	those	beasts	were	not	immortal.	They	could	bleed.	Take	wounds.	And
enough	spears	and	swords	had	managed	to	cut	through	their	tough	hides	to
drive	both	of	them	off.


Brohl	Handar	blinked	down	at	the	Atri-Preda.	‘A	fine	shot,	then.’
Rage	twisted	her	features.	‘He	was	bound	with	another	of	my	mages,	both
drawing	their	powers	together.	They	were	exhausted…all	the	wards.’	She	spat.
‘The	other	one,	Overseer,	his	head	burst	apart	too.	Same	as	this	one	here.	I’ve
lost	two	mages,	to	one	damned	arrow.’	She	clambered	stiffly	to	her	feet.	‘Who
was	that	archer?	Who?’
Brohl	said	nothing.
‘Get	your	K’risnan	to—’
‘I	cannot.	He	is	dead.’
That	silenced	her.	For	a	moment.	‘Overseer,	we	mauled	them.	Do	you
understand?	Thousands	died,	to	only	a	few	hundred	of	our	own.’
‘I	lost	eighty-two	Tiste	Edur	warriors.’
He	was	pleased	at	her	flinch,	at	the	faltering	of	her	hard	gaze.	‘An	arrow.	A
lone	rider.	Not	an	Awl	–	the	eyewitnesses	swear	to	that.	A	mage-killer.’
The	only	thorn	from	this	wild	ride	through	the	night.	I	see,	yes.	But	I	cannot
help	you.	Brohl	Handar	turned	away.	Ten,	fifteen	strides	across	cracked,
crackling,	ash-laden	ground.
Sorcery	had	taken	the	grasses.	Sorcery	had	taken	the	soil	and	its	very	life.
The	sun,	its	glory	stolen	before	it	could	rise	this	day,	looked	down,	one-eyed.
Affronted	by	this	rival.
Yes.	Affronted.


Chapter	Seventeen

When	I	go	in	search
The	world	cries	out
And	spins	away
To	walk	is	to	reach
But	the	world	turns
Shied	into	sublime	fend
Flinching	to	my	sting
So	innocent	a	touch
This	is	what	it	is	to	search
The	world’s	answer
Is	a	cornered	retort
It	does	not	want	seeing
Does	not	suffer	knowing
To	want	is	to	fail
And	die	mute
Ever	solitary	these	steps
Yielding	what	it	is
To	be	alone
Crying	out	to	the	world
Spinning	away
As	in	its	search
It	finds	you	out.
Search
Gaullag	of	the	Spring
He	might	well	speak	of	mystery	and	show	a	mask	of	delighted	wonder,	but	the
truth	of	it	was,	mystery	frightened	Beak.	He	could	smell	sorcery,	yes,	and	sense
its	poetic	music,	so	orderly	and	eloquent,	but	its	heat	could	so	easily	burn,
right	down	to	a	mortal	man’s	core.	He	was	not	much	for	bravery;	oh,	he	could
see	it	well	enough	among	other	soldiers	–	he	could	see	it	in	every	detail	of


Captain	Faradan	Sort,	who	now	sat	her	horse	at	his	side	–	but	he	knew	he
possessed	none	of	it	himself.
Coward	and	stupid	were	two	words	that	went	together,	Beak	believed,	and
both	belonged	to	him.	Smelling	magic	had	been	a	way	of	avoiding	it,	of
running	from	it,	and	as	for	all	those	candles	within	him,	well,	he	was	happiest
when	nothing	arrived	that	might	send	their	flames	flickering,	brightening,
bursting	into	a	conflagration.	He	supposed	it	was	just	another	stupid	decision,
this	being	a	soldier,	but	there	was	nothing	he	could	do	about	it	now.
Marching	across	that	desert	in	that	place	called	Seven	Cities	(although	he’d
only	seen	two	cities,	he	was	sure	there	were	five	more	somewhere),	Beak	had
listened	to	all	the	other	soldiers	complaining.	About…well,	everything.	The
fighting.	Not	fighting.	The	heat	of	the	day,	the	cold	at	night,	the	damned
coyotes	yipping	in	the	dark	sounding	so	close	you	thought	they	were	standing
right	beside	you,	mouth	at	your	ear.	The	biting	insects,	the	scorpions	and
spiders	and	snakes	all	wanting	to	kill	you.	Yes,	they’d	found	lots	to	complain
about.	That	terrible	city,	Y’Ghatan,	and	the	goddess	who’d	opened	one	eye	that
night	and	so	stolen	away	that	evil	rebel,	Leoman.	And	then,	when	all	had
seemed	lost,	that	girl	–	Sinn	–	showing	her	own	candle.	Blindingly	bright,	so
pure	that	Beak	had	cowered	before	it.	They’d	complained	about	all	of	that,	too.
Sinn	should	have	snuffed	that	firestorm	out.	The	Adjunct	should	have	waited	a
few	days	longer,	because	there	was	no	way	those	marines	would	have	died	so
easily.
And	what	about	Beak?	Hadn’t	he	sensed	them?	Well,	maybe.	That	mage,
Bottle,	the	one	with	all	the	pets.	Maybe	Beak	had	smelled	him,	still	alive	under
all	those	ashes.	But	then	he	was	a	coward,	wasn’t	he?	To	go	up	to,	say,	the
Adjunct,	or	Captain	Kindly,	and	tell	them	–	no,	that	was	too	much.	Kindly	was
like	his	own	father,	who	didn’t	like	to	listen	whenever	it	was	something	he
wasn’t	interested	in	hearing.	And	the	Adjunct,	well,	even	her	own	soldiers
weren’t	sure	of	her.
He’d	listened	with	all	the	rest	to	her	speech	after	they’d	left	Malaz	City	(a
most	terrifying	night,	that,	and	he	was	so	glad	he’d	been	far	away	from	it,	out
on	a	transport),	and	he	remembered	how	she	talked	about	going	it	alone	from
now	on.	And	doing	things	nobody	else	would	ever	know	about.	Unwitnessed,
she	said.	As	if	that	was	important.	Such	talk	usually	confused	Beak,	but	not	this
time.	His	entire	life	was,	he	knew,	unwitnessed.	So,	she	had	made	all	the	other
soldiers	just	like	him,	just	like	Beak,	and	that	had	been	an	unexpected	gift	from
that	cold,	cold	woman.	Coward	or	no	and	stupid	as	he	was,	she’d	won	him	that
night.	Something	she	wouldn’t	think	much	of,	obviously,	but	it	meant	a	lot	to
him.


Anyway,	his	heart	had	slowed	its	wild	run,	and	he	lifted	his	head	and
glanced	over	at	the	captain.	She	sat	her	horse	in	the	deep	shadow,	unmoving
just	as	he	had	been,	and	yet,	in	an	instant,	he	thought	he	caught	from	her	a
sound	–	the	hammering	of	waves	against	stone,	the	screams	of	soldiers	in
battle,	swords	and	slaughter,	lances	like	ice	piercing	hot	flesh,	and	the	waves	–
and	then	all	of	that	was	gone.
She	must	have	sensed	his	attention,	for	she	asked	in	a	low	voice:	‘Are	they
well	past,	Beak?’
‘Aye.’
‘Caught	no	scent	of	us?’
‘None,	Captain.	I	hid	us	with	grey	and	blue.	It	was	easy.	That	mage	she
kneels	in	front	of	the	Holds.	She	knows	nothing	about	the	grey	and	blue
warrens.’
‘The	Letherii	were	supposed	to	join	us,’	Faradan	Sort	muttered.	‘Instead,
we	find	them	riding	with	Tiste	Edur,	doing	their	work	for	them.’
‘All	stirred	up,	aye.	Especially	round	here.’
‘And	that’s	the	problem,’	she	replied,	gathering	her	reins	and	nudging	her
mount	out	from	beneath	the	heavy	branches	where	they	had	hidden	–	fifteen
paces	off	the	trail	–	while	the	war-party	rode	past.	‘We’re	well	ahead	of	the
other	squads.	Either	Hellian	or	Urb	has	lost	their	mind,	or	maybe	both	of
them.’
Beak	followed	on	his	own	horse,	a	gentle	bay	he’d	named	Lily.	‘Like	a	hot
poker,	Captain,	pushing	right	to	the	back	of	the	forge.	Do	that	and	you	burn
your	hand,	right?’
‘The	hand,	yes.	Keneb.	You	and	me.	All	the	other	squads.’
‘Um,	your	hand,	I	meant.’
‘I	am	learning	to	tell	those	moments,’	she	said,	now	eyeing	him.
‘What	moments?’	Beak	asked.
‘When	you’ve	convinced	yourself	how	stupid	you	are.’
‘Oh.’	Those	moments.	‘I	ain’t	never	been	so	loyal,	Captain.	Never.’
She	gave	him	a	strange	look	then,	but	said	nothing.
They	rode	up	onto	the	trail	and	faced	their	mounts	east.	‘They’re	up	there
somewhere	ahead,’	the	captain	said.	‘Causing	all	sorts	of	trouble.’
Beak	nodded.	They’d	been	tracking	those	two	squads	for	two	nights	now.
And	it	was	truly	a	trail	of	corpses.	Sprung	ambushes,	dead	Letherii	and	Tiste
Edur,	the	bodies	dragged	off	into	cover,	stripped	down	and	so	naked	Beak	had
to	avert	his	eyes,	lest	evil	thoughts	sneak	into	his	mind.	All	the	places	his
mother	liked	him	to	touch	that	one	night	–	no,	all	that	was	evil	thinking,	evil
memories,	the	kind	of	evil	that	could	make	him	hang	himself	as	his	brother


had	done.
‘We	have	to	find	them,	Beak.’
He	nodded	again.
‘We	have	to	rein	them	in.	Tonight,	do	you	think?’
‘It’s	the	one	named	Balgrid,	Captain.	And	the	other	named	Bowl	–	who’s
learned	magic	real	fast.	Balgrid’s	got	the	white	candle,	you	see,	and	this	land
ain’t	had	no	white	candle	for	a	long	time.	So	he’s	dragging	the	smell	off	all	the
bodies	they’re	leaving	and	that’s	muddying	things	up	–	those	ears	they’re
cutting	off,	and	the	fingers	and	stuff	that	they’re	tying	to	their	belts.	That’s	why
we’re	going	from	ambush	to	ambush,	right?	Instead	of	straight	to	them.’
‘Well,’	she	said	after	a	moment	and	another	long,	curious	look,	‘we’re	on
damned	horses,	aren’t	we?’
‘So	are	they	now,	Captain.’
‘Are	you	sure?’
‘I	think	so.	Just	tonight.	It’s	the	Holds.	There’s	one	for	beasts.	And	if	the
Letherii	mages	figure	things	out,	they	could	turn	with	that	and	find	them	real
fast.’
‘Hood’s	breath,	Beak.	And	what	about	us?’
‘Us	too.	Of	course,	there’s	plenty	of	people	riding	horses	round	here,	bad
stirrups	or	no.	But	if	they	get	close,	then	maybe	even	grey	and	blue	candles
won’t	work.’
‘You	might	end	up	having	to	show	a	few	more,	then.’
Oh,	he	didn’t	like	that	idea.	‘I	hope	not.	I	really	hope	not.’
‘Let’s	get	going	then,	Beak.’
Don’t	burn	me	down	to	the	core,	Captain.	Please.	It	won’t	be	nice,	not	for
anyone.	I	can	still	hear	their	screams	and	there’s	always	screams	and	I	start
first.	My	screams	scare	me	the	most,	Captain.	Scare	me	stupid,	aye.
	
‘Wish	Masan	Gilani	was	with	us,’	Scant	said,	pulling	up	clumps	of	moss	to
wash	the	blood	from	his	hands.
Hellian	blinked	at	the	fool.	Masan	who?
‘Listen,	Sergeant,’	Balgrid	said	again.
He	was	always	saying	that	and	so	she’d	stopped	listening	to	him.	It	was	like
pissing	in	the	fire,	the	way	men	could	do	when	women	couldn’t.	Just	a	hiss	into
sudden	darkness	and	then	that	awful	smell.	Listen,	Sergeant	and	hiss,	she
stopped	listening.
‘You’ve	got	to,’	Balgrid	insisted,	reaching	out	to	prod	her	with	a	finger.
‘Sergeant?’


She	glared	down	at	that	finger.	‘Want	me	t’cut	off	my	left	cheek,	soldier?
Touch	me	again	and	you’ll	be	sorry	’s	what	I’m	sayin’.’
‘Someone’s	tracking	us.’
She	scowled.	‘For	how	long?’
‘Two,	maybe	three	nights	going,’	Balgrid	replied.
‘So	you	decide	to	tell	me	now?	All	my	soljers	are	idiots.	How	they	trackin’
us?	You	and	Bowl	said	you	had	it	covered,	had	something	covered,	anyway.
What	was	it	you	had	covered?	Right,	you	been	pissing	all	over	our	trail	or
something.’	She	glared	at	him.	‘Hiss.’
‘What?	No.	Listen,	Sergeant—’
And	there	it	went	again.	She	rose	to	her	feet,	wobbling	on	the	soft,	loamy
ground.	Where	one	could	fall	at	every	damned	step	if	one	wasn’t	careful.
‘Someone	–	you,	Corporal,	drag	them	bodies	away.’
‘Aye	Sergeant.
‘Right	away,	Sergeant.’
‘And	you	two.	Maybe.	Louts—’
‘Lutes.’
‘Help	the	corporal.	You	all	made	a	mess	killing	these	ones.’	And	that	was
right	enough,	wasn’t	it?	This	one	had	been	nasty.	Sixteen	Letherii	and	four
Edur.	Quarrels	to	the	heads	did	for	them	Edur	what	it	does	for	normal	people.
Like	sacks	of	stones	on	a	big	drop,	whoo,	toppling	right	off	them	horses.	Then
a	pair	of	sharpers,	one	front	of	the	Letherii	column,	the	other	at	the	tail	end.
Boom	boom	and	the	dusk	was	nothing	but	screaming	and	thrashing	limbs
human	and	horse	and	some	couldn’t	tell	which.
Damned	Letherii	had	recovered	a	little	too	fast	for	her	liking.	Dead	sure
too	fast	for	Hanno’s	liking,	since	Hanno	went	down	with	only	half	a	skull	left
after	one	of	the	meanest	sword	swings	she’d	ever	seen.	Threw	the	soldier	right
off	balance,	though,	with	those	stupid	stirrups,	and	so	it’d	been	easy	for	Urb	to
reach	up	one	of	those	giant	hands	of	his,	grasp	a	belt	or	something	and	drag
the	fool	right	off.	Throwing	him	down	with	such	force	that	all	wind	rushed	out
of	him	both	ends.	At	which	point	Urb	pushed	a	mailed	fist	so	hard	into	the	face
under	the	helmet	that	Urb	hurt	his	knuckles	on	the	back	of	the	man’s	skull	–
low,	just	above	the	vertables	or	whatever	they	were	called.	Teeth	and	bone
splinters	and	meat	spurting	out	everywhere.
The	first	loss	in	the	squads,	that’d	been.	All	because	Hanno	jumped	in	close
thinking	the	Letherii	were	still	confused	and	useless.	But	no,	these	soldiers,
they’d	been	veterans.	They’d	come	round	damned	quick.
Saltlick	was	bad	cut	up,	though	Balgrid	had	worked	on	him	and	he	wasn’t
bleeding	out	and	unconscious	any	more.	And	Corporal	Reem	went	and	got	two


fingers	of	his	left	hand	cut	off	–	a	bad	fend	with	his	shield.	Poor	Urb	wasn’t
doing	too	well	as	sergeant.
Hellian	worked	round	carefully	until	she	faced	another	direction,	and
could	see	Urb	sitting	on	a	rotting	log,	looking	miserable.	She	drank	down	a
mouthful	of	rum	then	ambled	over.	‘We’re	both	sergeants	now,	right?	Let’s	go
find	some	bushes	t’crawl	under.	I’m	in	the	mood	for	sweat	and	grunts	with
somebody,	and	since	we’re	the	same	rank	an’	all	it’s	only	obvious	and	ain’t
nobody	here	gonna	c’mplain.’
He	blinked	up	at	her,	wide-eyed	as	an	owl.
‘Wha’s	your	probbem,	Urb?	I	ain’t	as	ugly	as	you,	am	I?’
‘Urb	ain’t	ugly,’	Reem	said	with	an	incredulous	laugh.	‘Masan	couldn’t
think	straight	around	him!	Probably	why	she	let	herself	get	shifted	over	to
Balm’s	squad.’
Hellian	grunted,	then	said,	‘Be	quiet,	Reem.	You’re	a	corporal.	This	is
sergeant	business.’
‘You	want	a	roll	with	Urb,	Sergeant,’	Reem	said.	‘Got	nothing	to	do	with
you	two	being	sergeants	and	everything	t’do	with	Urb	looking	like	some
goddamned	god	and	you	drunk	enough	to	get	hungry	for	the	sweats	and
grunts.’
‘Still	ain’t	your	business.’
‘Maybe	not,	but	we	gotta	listen	to	those	grunts.	Like	Scant	said,	if	Masan
was	around	we	could	all	of	us	dream	those	dreams	and	maybe	even	try,	hoping
she’d	be	so	frustrated	trying	to	get	anywhere	with	Urb	she	just	might—’
‘Since	when	you	find	that	runaway	mouth	of	yours,	Reem?’	Balgrid
demanded.	‘You	was	better	being	silent	and	mysterious.	So	now	you	lose	a
couple	fingers	and	what	happens?’
‘Quiet	allaya,’	Hellian	said.	‘You	want	another	patrol	coming	down	on	us
and	us	not	ready	for	’em	this	time?	Now,	the	rest	of	you,	not	countin’	Urb	here,
check	your	gear	and	get	your	trophies	and	all	that	and	if	you	wanna	listen	then
just	don’t	make	too	many	groanin’	noises.	Of	envy	and	the	like.’
‘We	won’t	be	groaning	outa	envy,	Hellian.	More	like—’
‘Silent	and	mysterious,	damn	you,	Reem!’
‘I	feel	like	talking,	Balgrid,	and	you	can’t	stop	me—’
‘But	I	can,	and	you	won’t	like	it	at	all.’
‘Damned	necromancer.’
‘Just	the	other	side	of	Denul,	Reem,	like	I	keep	telling	you.	Denul’s	giving,
Hood’s	taking	away.’
Hellian	closed	in	on	Urb,	who	suddenly	looked	terrified.	‘Relax,’	she	said.
‘I	ain’t	gonna	cut	anything	off.	Not	anything	of	yours,	anyway.	But	if	I	get


clobbered	with	terrible	rejection	here…’
‘Nice	bed	of	moss	over	here,’	Scant	said,	straightening	and	moving	away
with	a	gesture	in	his	wake.
Hellian	reached	down	and	tugged	Urb	to	his	feet.
Balgrid	was	suddenly	beside	him.	‘Listen,	Sergeant—’
She	dragged	Urb	past	the	mage.
‘No,	Sergeant!	Those	ones	tracking	us	–	I	think	they’ve	found	us!’
All	at	once	weapons	were	drawn,	figures	scattering	to	defensive	positions
–	a	rough	circle	facing	outward	with	Hellian	and	Urb	in	the	centre.
‘Balgrid,’	she	hissed.	‘You	coulda	said—’
Horse	hoofs,	the	heavy	breath	of	an	animal,	then	a	voice	called	out,	low,	in
Malazan:	‘Captain	Faradan	Sort	and	Beak.	We’re	coming	in	so	put	your
damned	sharpers	away.’
‘Oh,	that’s	just	great,’	Hellian	sighed.	‘Ease	down,	everyone,	it’s	that	scary
captain.’

Marines	all	right.	Beak	didn’t	like	the	look	of	them.	Mean,	hungry,	scowling
now	that	the	captain	had	found	them.	And	there	was	a	dead	one,	too.
Faradan	Sort	guided	her	horse	into	their	midst,	then	dismounted.	Beak
remained	where	he	was	for	the	moment,	not	far	from	where	two	soldiers
stood,	only	now	sheathing	their	swords.	He	could	see	the	necromancer,	the
man’s	aura	white	and	ghostly.	Death	was	everywhere	here,	the	still	air	heavy
with	last	breaths,	and	he	could	feel	this	assault	of	loss	like	a	tight	fist	in	his
chest.
It	was	always	this	way	where	people	died.	He	should	never	have	become	a
soldier.
‘Hellian,	Urb,	we	need	to	talk.	In	private.’	Cool	and	hard,	the	captain’s
voice.	‘Beak?’
‘Captain?’
‘Join	us.’
Oh	no.	But	he	rode	forward	and	then	slipped	down	from	the	saddle.	Too
much	attention	on	him	all	at	once,	and	he	ducked	as	he	made	his	way	to	the
captain’s	side.
Faradan	Sort	in	the	lead,	the	group	set	off	into	the	wood.
‘We	ain’t	done	nothin’	wrong,’	Sergeant	Hellian	said	as	soon	as	they	halted
twenty	or	so	paces	from	the	others.	She	seemed	to	be	weaving	back	and	forth
like	a	flat-headed	snake	moments	from	spitting	venom.


‘You	were	supposed	to	pace	yourselves,	not	get	too	far	ahead	of	the	other
squads.	At	any	moment	now,	Sergeant,	we	won’t	be	running	onto	patrols	of
twenty,	but	two	hundred.	Then	two	thousand.’
‘Tha’s	not	the	probbem,’	Hellian	said	–	an	accent	Beak	had	never	heard
before.	‘The	probbem	is,	Cap’in,	the	Letherii	are	fightin’	alongside	them	Edur
—’
‘Have	you	attempted	to	make	contact	with	those	Letherii?’
‘We	have,’	Urb	said.	‘It	got	messy.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘There’s	no	sign,
Captain,	that	these	people	want	to	be	liberated.’
‘Like	Urb	said,’	Hellian	added,	nodding	vigorously.
The	captain	looked	away.	‘The	other	squads	have	said	much	the	same.’
‘Maybe	we	can	convince	them	or	something,’	Urb	said.
Hellian	leaned	against	a	tree.	‘Seems	t’me,	Cap’in,	we	got	two	things	we
can	do	and	ony	two.	We	can	retreat	back	t’the	coast.	Build	ten	thousand	rafts
and	paddle	away	’s	fast	as	we	can.	Or	we	go	on.	Fast,	vicious	mean.	And	iffin
they	come	at	us	two	thousand	at	once,	then	we	run	an’	hide	like	we	was	trained
t’do.	Fast	and	vicious	mean,	Cap’in,	or	a	long	paddle.’
‘There	is	only	one	thing	worse	than	arguing	with	a	drunk,’	Faradan	Sort
said,	‘and	that’s	arguing	with	a	drunk	who’s	right.’
Hellian	beamed	a	big	smile.
She	was	drunk?	She	was	drunk.	A	drunk	sergeant,	only,	as	the	captain	had
just	said,	no	fool	either.
Faradan	Sort	continued,	‘Do	you	have	enough	horses	for	your	squads?’
‘Aye,	sir,’	Urb	replied.	‘More	than	enough.’
‘I	still	want	you	to	slow	down,	for	a	few	days	at	least.	I	intend	to	contact	the
other	squads	and	get	them	to	start	doing	what	you’re	doing,	but	that	will	take
some	time—’
‘Captain,’	Urb	said.	‘I	got	a	feeling	they’re	learning	already.	There’s	lots
more	patrols	now	and	they’re	getting	bigger	and	a	lot	more	wary.	We’ve	been
expecting	to	walk	into	an	ambush	at	any	time,	and	that’s	what’s	got	us	worried.
Next	time	you	ride	to	find	us	you	might	find	a	pile	of	corpses.	Malazan
corpses.	We	ain’t	got	the	munitions	to	carry	us	all	the	way	–	no-one	has	–	so
it’s	going	to	start	getting	a	lot	harder,	sir.’
‘I	know,	Sergeant.	You	lost	one	in	that	fight,	didn’t	you?’
‘Hanno.’
‘Got	careless,’	Hellian	said.
Urb	frowned,	then	nodded.	‘Aye,	that’s	true.’
‘Then	let	us	hope	that	one	hard	lesson	is	enough,’	the	captain	said.
‘Expect	it	is,’	Urb	confirmed.


Faradan	Sort	faced	Beak.	‘Tell	them	about	the	Holds,	Beak.’
He	flinched,	then	sighed	and	said,	‘Letherii	mages	–	they	might	be	able	to
find	us	by	the	horses,	by	smelling	them	out,	I	mean.’
‘Balgrid’s	covering	our	trail,’	Urb	said.	‘Are	you	saying	it	won’t	work?’
‘Might	be,’	Beak	said.	‘Necromancy’s	one	thing	they	can’t	figure.	Not
Letherii.	Not	Tiste	Edur.	But	there’s	a	Beast	Hold,	you	see.’
Hellian	withdrew	a	flask	and	drank	down	a	mouthful,	then	said,	‘We	need
to	know	for	certain.	Next	time,	Urb,	we	get	us	one	of	them	Letherii	mages
alive.	We	ask	some	questions,	and	in	between	the	screams	we	get	answers.’
Beak	shivered.	Not	just	drunk	but	bloodthirsty,	too.
‘Be	careful,’	the	captain	said.	‘That	could	go	sour	very	quickly.’
‘We	know	all	about	careful,	sir,’	Hellian	said	with	a	bleary	smile.
Faradan	Sort	studied	the	sergeant	the	way	she	sometimes	studied	Beak
himself,	then	she	said,	‘We’re	done.	Slow	down	some,	and	watch	out	for	small
patrols	–	they	might	be	bait.’	She	hesitated,	then	added,	‘We’re	in	this,	now.
Understand?’
‘No	rafts?’
‘No	rafts,	Hellian.’
‘Good.	If’n	I	never	see	another	sea	I’m	going	to	die	happy.’
She	would,	too,	Beak	knew.	Die	happy.	She	had	that	going	for	her.
‘Back	to	your	squads,’	the	captain	said.	‘Set	your	nervous	soldiers	at	ease.’
‘It’s	not	the	smell,’	Beak	said.
The	others	turned	inquiringly.
‘That’s	not	what’s	making	them	nervous,	I	mean,’	Beak	explained.	‘The
death	smell	–	they’re	carrying	all	that	with	them,	right?	So	they’re	used	to	it
now.	They’re	only	nervous	because	they’ve	been	sitting	around	too	long.	In
one	place.	That’s	all.’
‘Then	let	us	not	waste	any	more	time,’	Faradan	Sort	said.
Good	idea.	That	was	why	she	was	a	captain,	of	course.	Smart	enough	to
make	her	ways	of	thinking	a	mystery	to	him	–	but	that	was	one	mystery	he	was
happy	enough	with.	Maybe	the	only	one.
	
They	flung	themselves	down	at	the	forest’s	edge.	Edge,	aye	–	too	many	damned
edges.	Beyond	was	a	patchwork	of	farmland	and	hedgerows.	Two	small	farms
were	visible,	although	no	lantern-or	candle-light	showed	through	the	tiny,
shuttered	windows.	Heart	pounding	painfully	in	his	chest,	Fiddler	rolled	onto
his	side	to	see	how	many	had	made	it.	A	chorus	of	harsh	breaths	from	the
scatter	of	bodies	in	the	gloom	to	either	side	of	the	sergeant.	All	there.	Thanks


to	Corabb	and	the	desert	warrior ’s	impossible	luck.
The	ambush	had	been	a	clever	one,	he	admitted.	Should	have	taken	them	all
down.	Instead,	half	a	league	back,	in	a	small	grassy	glade,	there	was	the	carcass
of	a	deer	–	a	deer	that	Corabb	had	inadvertently	flushed	out	–	with	about	twenty
arrows	in	it.	Cleverly	planned,	poorly	executed.
The	Malazans	had	quickly	turned	it.	Sharpers	cracking	in	the	night,
crossbows	thudding,	the	flit	of	quarrels	and	the	punch	of	impact.	Shrieks	of
agony.	A	rush	from	Gesler ’s	heavies	had	broken	one	side	of	the	ambush—
And	then	the	sorcery	had	churned	awake,	something	raw	and	terrible,
devouring	trees	like	acid.	Grey	tongues	of	chaotic	fire,	heaving	into	a	kind	of
standing	wave.	Charging	forward,	engulfing	Sands	–	his	scream	had	been
mercifully	short.	Fiddler,	not	ten	paces	away	from	where	Sands	had	vanished,
saw	the	Letherii	mage,	who	seemed	to	be	screaming	with	his	own	pain,	even	as
the	wave	hurled	forward.	Bellowing,	he’d	swung	his	crossbow	round,	felt	the
kick	in	his	hands	as	he	loosed	the	heavy	quarrel.
The	cusser	had	struck	a	bole	just	above	and	behind	the	mage’s	head.	The
explosion	flattened	nearby	trees,	shredded	a	score	of	Letherii	soldiers.	Snuffed
the	sorcery	out	in	an	instant.	As	more	trees	toppled,	branches	thrashing	down,
the	Malazans	had	pulled	back,	fast,	and	then	they	ran.
Movement	from	Fiddler ’s	left	and	a	moment	later	Gesler	dragged	himself
up	alongside.	‘Hood’s	damned	us	all,	Fid.	We’re	running	out	of	forest	–	how’s
Cuttle?’
‘Arrow’s	deep,’	Fiddler	replied,	‘but	not	a	bleeder.	We	can	dig	it	out	when
we	get	a	chance.’
‘Think	they’re	tracking	us?’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	He	had	no	idea.	If	there	were	enough	of	them	left.
He	twisted	round.	‘Bottle,’	he	hissed,	‘over	here.’
The	young	mage	crawled	close.
‘Can	you	reach	back?’	Fiddler	asked.	‘Find	out	if	they’re	after	us?’
‘Already	did,	Sergeant.	Used	every	damned	creature	in	our	wake.’
‘And?’	Gesler	wanted	to	know.
‘That	cusser	did	most	of	them,	Sergeant.	But	the	noise	brought	others.	At
least	a	dozen	Tiste	Edur	and	maybe	a	few	hundred	Letherii.	Are	they	tracking
us	now?	Aye,	but	still	a	way	behind	–	they’ve	learned	to	be	cautious,	I	guess.’
‘We’re	losing	the	dark,’	Gesler	said.	‘We	need	a	place	to	hide,	Fid	–	only
that’s	probably	not	going	to	work	this	time,	is	it?	They’re	not	going	to	rest.’
‘Can	we	lose	them?’	Fiddler	asked	Bottle.
‘I’m	pretty	tired,	Sergeant—’
‘Never	mind.	You’ve	done	enough.	What	do	you	think,	Gesler?	Time	to	get


messy?’
‘And	use	up	our	few	cussers?’
‘Don’t	see	much	choice,	to	be	honest.	Of	course,	I	always	hold	one	back.
Same	for	Cuttle.’
Gesler	nodded.	‘We	had	ours	distributed	–	good	thing,	too,	the	way	Sands
went	up.	Still,	he	had	munitions	on	him,	yet	they	didn’t	ignite—’
‘Oh,	but	they	did,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Just	not	in	this	realm.	Am	I	right,	Bottle?
That	sorcery,	it’s	like	a	broken	gate,	the	kind	that	chews	up	whoever	goes
through	it.’
‘Spirits	below,	Fid,	you	smelled	it	out	about	dead	right.	That	magic,	it
started	as	one	thing,	then	became	another	–	and	the	mage	was	losing	control,
even	before	you	minced	him.’
Fiddler	nodded.	He’d	seen	as	much.	Or	thought	he	had.	‘So,	Bottle,	what
does	that	mean?’
The	young	mage	shook	his	head.	‘Things	are	getting	out	of	hand…
somewhere.	There	was	old	stuff,	primitive	magic,	at	first.	Not	as	ancient	as
spirit-bound	stuff.	Still,	primitive.	And	then	something	chaotic	grabbed	it	by
the	throat…’
	
A	short	distance	away,	Koryk	rolled	onto	his	back.	He	was	bone	tired.	Let
Bottle	and	the	sergeants	mutter	away,	he	knew	they	were	neck-deep	in	Hood’s
dusty	shit.
‘Hey,	Koryk.’
‘What	is	it,	Smiles?’
‘You	damned	near	lost	it	back	there,	you	know.’
‘I	did,	did	I?’
‘When	them	four	came	at	you	all	at	once,	oh,	you	danced	quite	a	jig,	halfblood.’	She	laughed,	low	and	brimming	with	what	sounded	like	malice.	‘And	if
I	hadn’t	come	along	to	stick	a	knife	in	that	one’s	eye	–	the	one	who’d	slipped
under	your	guard	and	was	ready	to	give	you	a	wide	belly	smile	–	well,	you’d
be	cooling	fast	back	there	right	now.’
‘And	the	other	three?’	Koryk	asked,	grinning	in	the	gloom.	‘Bet	you	never
knew	I	was	that	quick,	did	you?’
‘Something	tells	me	you	didn’t	either.’
He	said	nothing,	because	she	was	right.	He’d	been	in	something	like	a
frenzy,	yet	his	eye	and	his	hand	had	been	cold,	precise.	Through	it	all	it	had
been	as	if	he	had	simply	watched,	every	move,	every	block,	every	shift	in
stance	and	twist,	every	slash	of	his	heavy	blade.	Watched,	yes,	yet	profoundly


in	love	with	that	moment,	with	each	moment.	He’d	felt	some	of	this	at	the
shield	wall	on	the	dock	that	night	in	Malaz	City.	But	what	had	begun	as	vague
euphoria	was	now	transformed	into	pure	revelation.	I	like	killing.	Gods	below,
I	do	like	it,	and	the	more	I	like	it,	the	better	at	it	I	get.	He	never	felt	more	alive,
never	more	perfectly	alive.
‘Can’t	wait	to	see	you	dance	again,’	Smiles	murmured.
Koryk	blinked	in	the	gloom,	then	shifted	to	face	her.	Was	she	stirred?	Had
he	somehow	kissed	her	awake	between	those	muscled	legs	of	hers?	Because
he’d	killed	well?	Did	I	dance	that	jig,	Smiles?	‘You	get	scarier,	woman,	the
more	I	know	you.’
She	snorted.	‘As	it	should	be,	half-blood.’
Tarr	spoke	from	Koryk’s	other	side:	‘I	think	I’m	going	to	be	sick.’
A	slightly	more	distant	laugh	from	Cuttle,	‘Aye,	Tarr,	it’s	what	happens
when	your	entire	world	view	collapses.	Of	course,’	he	added,	‘if	you	could
manage	to	dance	like	poetry	when	killing	people,	who	knows—’
‘Enough	of	that.	Please.’
‘No	worries,’	Cuttle	persisted.	‘You	ain’t	the	dancing	kind.	You’re	as
rooted	as	a	tree,	and	just	about	as	slow,	Tarr.’
‘I	may	be	slow,	Cuttle,	but	the	fools	go	down	eventually,	don’t	they?’
‘Oh	aye,	that	they	do.	Not	suggesting	otherwise.	You’re	a	one-man	shieldwall,	you	are.’
	
Corporal	Stormy	was	spitting	blood.	A	damned	elbow	had	cracked	his	mouth,
and	now	two	teeth	were	loose	and	he’d	bitten	his	tongue.	The	elbow	might	have
been	his	own	–	someone	had	collided	hard	with	him	in	the	scrap	and	he’d	had
his	weapon	arm	lifted	high	with	the	sword’s	point	angled	downward.	Nearly
wrenched	his	shoulder	out	of	its	damned	socket.
A	savage	back-swing	with	the	pommel	had	crunched	the	attacker ’s	temple
and	he’d	reeled	away,	one	eye	half	popped	out.	Shortnose	had	then	cut	the
Letherii	down.
That	had	been	some	charge,	him	and	his	heavies,	Shortnose	and	the	trio	of
dread	ladies	each	one	of	whom	could	both	stare	down	a	rutting	bhederin	bull
and	beat	it	into	a	pulp	if	it	came	to	that.	Making	Stormy	a	very	happy	sergeant.
Bad	luck	about	Sands,	though.	But	we	ain’t	gonna	lose	any	more.	Not	one.	I	got
my	heavies	and	we	can	take	down	whatever	they	throw	at	us.
And	not	just	us	neither.	That	Tarr	and	Koryk…Fid’s	got	a	good	mean	pair	in
those.	And	that	Smiles,	she’s	got	the	blackrock	heart	of	a	Claw.	Good	squads
here,	for	this	kinda	work.	And	now	we’re	gonna	turn	round	and	kick	’em	dead	in


the	jaw,	I	can	feel	it.	Fid	and	Gesler,	cooking	in	Kellanved’s	old	cauldron.
He	was	delighted	the	Adjunct	had	finally	cut	them	loose.	In	just	this	way,
too.	To	Hood	with	damned	marching	in	column.	No,	cut	in	fast	and	low	and
keep	going,	aye,	and	keep	their	heads	spinnin’	every	which	way.	So	the	fools
on	their	trail	were	coming	for	them,	were	they?	And	why	not?	Just	two	puny
squads.	And	them	probably	in	the	hundreds	by	now.
‘Kellanved’s	curse,’	he	muttered	with	a	grin.
Flashwit’s	round	face	loomed	into	view,	‘Say	something,	Corporal?’
‘Malazan	marines,	my	dear,	that’s	us.’
‘Not	heavies?	I	thought—’
‘You’re	both,	Flash.	Relax.	It’s	this,	you	see	–	the	Malazan	marines	haven’t
done	what	they	was	trained	to	do	in	years,	not	since	before	Kellanved	died.
Trained,	y’see.	To	do	exactly	what	we’re	doing	right	now,	praise	Fener.	Them
poor	bastards	Letherii	and	Edur,	gods	below,	them	poor	ignorant	fools.’
‘Smart	enough	to	ambush	us,’	Uru	Hela	said	from	beyond	Flashwit.
‘Didn’t	work	though,	did	it?’
‘Only	because—’
‘Enough	from	you,	Uru	Hela.	I	was	talking	here,	right?	Your	corporal.	So
just	listen.’
‘I	was	just	askin’—’
‘Another	word	and	you’re	on	report,	soldier.’
If	she	snorted	she	fast	turned	it	into	a	cough.
From	Gesler	up	with	Fiddler:	‘Quiet	down	there!’
Point	proved.	Stormy	nodded.
Malazan	marines.	Hah.
	
Fiddler	nodded	at	the	narrow,	wending	track	snaking	towards	the	nearest
farmhouse	and	its	meagre	outbuildings.	‘We	jog	good	and	heavy,	dragging	our
wounded,	down	there.	Straight	for	the	farmhouse	along	that	cart	path.’
‘Like	we	was	still	running	scared,	panicked,’	Gesler	said.	‘Aye.	Of	course,
we	got	to	clear	that	farmhouse,	which	means	killing	civilians,	and	I	have	to	say,
Fid,	I	don’t	like	that.’
‘Maybe	we	can	figure	a	way	round	that,’	Fiddler	replied.	‘Bottle?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	I’m	tired,	but	I	could	probably	glamour	them.	Maybe	even
throw	some	false	ideas	in	their	heads.	Like,	we	went	north	when	we	really	went
south.	Like	that.’
‘Don’t	ever	die	on	us,	Bottle,’	Gesler	said.	To	Fiddler,	he	added,	‘I’ll	go
collect	munitions	from	my	squad,	then.’


‘Me	and	Cuttle,’	Fiddler	said,	nodding	again.
‘Trip	wires?’
‘No,	it’ll	be	daylight	by	then.	No,	we’ll	do	the	drum.’
‘Hood	take	me,’	Gesler	breathed.	‘You	sure?	I	mean,	I’ve	heard	about	it—’
‘You	heard	because	me	and	Hedge	invented	it.	And	perfected	it,	more	or
less.’
‘More	or	less?’
Fiddler	shrugged.	‘It	either	works	or	it	doesn’t.	We’ve	got	Bottle’s
deception,	in	case	it	doesn’t—’
‘But	there’ll	be	no	coming	back	to	retrieve	those	cussers,	though,	will
there?’
‘Not	unless	you	want	to	see	the	bright	white	light,	Gesler.’
‘Well,’	the	amber-hued	man	said	with	a	grin,	‘since	there’s	a	chance	at
seeing	the	legend	come	real,	with	the	genius	who	invented	it	right	here…I	ain’t
gonna	talk	you	out	of	it,	Fid.’
‘Half	the	genius,	Gesler.	Hedge	was	the	other.’
‘Second	thoughts?’
‘Second,	ninth	and	tenth,	friend.	But	we’re	doing	it	anyway.	When
everyone’s	ready,	you	lead	them	ahead,	excepting	me	and	Cuttle.	To	that
farmhouse	–	the	near	one.	I	think	the	far	one’s	abandoned.	Could	be	the	owner
rebuilt.	The	fields	look	damned	well	kept,	don’t	they?’
‘Yeah,	especially	given	how	small	the	homestead	is.’
‘Let	Bottle	sniff	it	out	before	you	go	charging	in.’
‘Aye.	You	hear	that,	mage?’
‘What?	Sorry,	I	think	I	fell	asleep.’
Gesler	glared	across	at	Fiddler.	‘Our	lives	are	in	this	man’s	hands?	Hood
help	us.’
	
Orders	were	given,	passed	down	the	ragged	row	of	supine	soldiers.	Dawn	was
just	tingeing	the	air	when	Gesler,	Bottle	at	his	side	and	trailed	by	Corabb
Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	led	his	now	oversized	squad	onto	the	cart	path.	Scuffing	the
ground,	dragging	furrows	here	and	there	–	not	too	obvious,	just	enough	–	as
they	made	their	way	towards	the	modest	farmhouse.
Fiddler	and	Cuttle	watched	them	for	a	time,	until	they	were	well	enough
away	from	the	place	they’d	decided	was	best	for	the	trap.	Shrubs	running	close
to	the	cart	path,	narrowing	lines	of	sight	for	that	span.	Beyond	the	bushes,	two
middle-aged	trees	on	the	left	and	one	old	ancient	on	the	right.
Four	cussers	for	this.	Two	close	together,	then	one,	and	then	the	last.


Cuttle,	his	face	sheathed	in	sweat	from	the	arrow-head	lodged	in	his
shoulder,	was	strangely	lacking	in	commentary	as	Fiddler	directed	the	sapper
to	pace	the	track	from	this	side	of	the	narrowing	to	twenty	strides	beyond	it,
and	set	sticks	in	the	ground	when	Fiddler	so	commanded.	Once	this	was	done,
Cuttle’s	task	was	to	dig	holes	in	the	packed	earth	where	the	sticks	had	been.
Shallow	holes.
A	sapper	who	trusted	to	Oponn’s	pull	might	have	left	it	at	that,	praying	to
the	fickle	Twins	that	a	horse	hoof	would	descend	on	at	least	one	of	the	planted
cussers.	But	that	was	not	how	the	drum	worked.	All	that	was	needed	was
vibration.	If	the	cussers	were	thinned	on	one	side	just	right;	if	the	sharp	stone
against	that	spot	was	sharp	enough	and	angled	just	right	so	that	the
reverberation	would	drive	its	tip	into	the	clay	shell.	The	real	challenge,	Fiddler
and	Hedge	had	discovered,	was	down	to	shaving	the	cusser	–	right	down	to
eggshell	thin	–	without	breaking	it	and	so	painting	leaves	in	the	highest	trees
with	one’s	own	blood	and	guts.
As	soon	as	Cuttle	finished	the	first	scooped-out	hole,	Fiddler	headed
towards	it	with	a	cusser	cradled	in	his	hands.	Setting	it	down	carefully	on	the
ground,	he	drew	a	knife	and	made	some	minute	adjustments	to	the	hole.	Then
he	turned	his	attention	to	the	cusser.	This	one,	furthest	down	along	the	track,
would	be	the	one	to	go	first.	Which	would	trigger	the	others,	in	the	midst	of	the
troop,	with	two	at	the	back	end	in	case	the	column	was	especially	long.
He	set	the	cusser	into	the	hole,	then	settled	down	onto	his	stomach	and
brought	his	knife	close	to	one	side	of	the	mine.	And	began	scraping	clay.
The	sun	had	risen,	and	although	the	air	was	still	cool	sweat	streamed	down
Fiddler ’s	face	as	he	shaved	away	minute	slivers	of	the	fine-grained	clay.	He
wished	for	direct	sunlight	on	the	cusser,	the	side	he	was	working	on,	so	he
could	work	until	he	saw	that	faint	glow	reaching	through	to	the	bright	yellow
incendiary	powder	with	its	shards	of	iron.	But	no	such	luck.	All	remained	in
shadow.
Finally,	one	last	scrape,	then	he	carefully	edged	the	blade	away.	Found	the
sharp	stone	and	set	it	down	beside	the	thinned	shell.	Point	against	the	clay,	he
made	a	half-twist	–	breath	held,	eyes	squeezed	shut	–	then	slowly	withdrew	his
hand.	Opened	his	eyes.	Studied	his	handiwork.
A	few	more	deep	breaths	to	settle	his	nerves,	then	he	began	filling	the	hole
with	small	handfuls	of	earth.	Then	scattered	detritus	over	the	spot.
Fiddler	belly-crawled	away,	until	he	reached	the	edge	of	the	track	where
he’d	left	the	other	cussers.	Glancing	up	the	path,	he	saw	Cuttle	waiting	at	the	far
end,	arms	wrapped	about	his	torso,	looking	like	he’d	just	pissed	himself.	Aye,
he	knows	why	we’re	a	dying	breed.


Taking	the	second	cusser,	Fiddler	made	his	way	–	lightly	–	to	the	second
hole.	Not	as	thin	this	time,	but	thin	enough.	Each	one	in	turn	slightly	easier,
which	made	shaving	each	of	them	increasingly	dangerous	–	the	risk	of	getting
careless,	sloppy,	just	in	that	wash	of	relief	at	having	managed	the	first	one…
well,	he	knew	all	the	dangers	in	all	this,	didn’t	he?
Teeth	gritted,	he	arrived	at	the	second	hole	in	the	path,	slowly	sank	to	his
knees.	Set	the	cusser	down,	and	reached	for	his	knife.
	
Cuttle	was	as	close	to	pissing	himself	as	he	had	ever	been.	Not	at	the	prospect
of	dying	–	he	was	fine	enough	with	that	and	had	been	ever	since	finding
himself	in	the	Fourteenth	–	but	at	what	he	was	witnessing	here.
The	last	great	Malazan	sapper.	No-one	else	came	close.	Imagine,	shaving
cusser	shells.	With	a	knife.	Eggshell	thin.	Cuttle	had	watched,	unable	to	make
out	much	from	this	distance,	as	Fiddler	had	set	to	work	on	the	first	one,	the
deadliest	one	of	all.	And	he	had	prayed,	to	every	god	he	could	think	of,	to	gods
he	didn’t	even	know	the	names	of,	to	spirits	and	ghosts	and	every	sapper	living
or	dead,	each	name	a	benediction	to	one	man’s	brilliance.	Praying	that	the	one
man	he	truly	worshipped	wouldn’t…wouldn’t	what?
Let	me	down.
How	pathetic.	He	knew	that.	He	kept	telling	himself	that,	in	between	the
breathed-out	beseechings.	As	if	he’d	have	time	to	rue	the	failing	of	his	faith.
So	there	was	Fiddler,	closer	now,	at	the	second	hole,	doing	it	all	over
again.	Imagine,	Fid	and	Hedge,	the	way	they	must	have	been	together.	Gods,
those	Bridgeburners	must	have	been	holy	terrors.	But	now…just	Fiddler,	and
Cuttle	here	poorer	than	a	shadow	of	the	famous	Hedge.	It	was	all	coming	to	an
end.	But	so	long	as	Fiddler	stayed	alive,	well	then,	damn	them	all,	it	was	worth
holding	on.	And	this	arrow	lodged	in	his	left	shoulder,	well,	true	he’d	seen	it
coming,	but	he	hadn’t	exactly	leaned	into	it,	had	he?	Might	have	looked	that
way.	Might	have	at	that.	As	if	he’d	had	time	to	even	think,	with	everything
going	on	around	him.	He	wasn’t	superhuman,	was	he?
	
Edging	back	from	the	second	set	mine,	Fiddler	glanced	over	at	Cuttle.	The
man’s	face	was	white	as	death.	Well,	thinking	on	it,	he	didn’t	need	the	man	that
close	any	more,	did	he?
He	hand-signalled	Leave,	rejoin	the	squads.
Cuttle	shook	his	head.


Shrugging	–	this	was	no	time	to	argue	and	if	Cuttle	had	a	death-wish	it
wasn’t	news	to	Fiddler	–	he	rose	and	set	off	to	collect	the	third	cusser.	Even
footfalls	were	now	risky,	forcing	him	to	move	slowly	along	the	verge	of	the
track.	There	was	plenty	of	superstition	about	where	to	stash	munitions	when
working.	Hedge	would	have	insisted	the	cussers	be	ahead	of	the	work	at	all
times,	but	the	less	Fiddler	handled	them	the	better	he	felt.	No	matter	what,	there
was	back	and	forth	with	the	damned	things,	wasn’t	there?
He	reached	the	spot	and	looked	down	at	the	two	remaining	cussers.	More
superstition.	Which	one?	Heart	side	or	head	side?	Facing	the	hole	or	with	the
hole	behind	him	as	it	was	now?	Hood’s	breath,	Hedge	was	clambering	around
in	his	skull	like	a	fiend.	Enough	of	the	superstition!	Fiddler	crouched	and
collected	a	cusser.
Heart	side.
And	was	random	chance	really	any	more	than	just	that?	The	Moranth	were
fanatics	when	it	came	to	precision.	Every	class	of	munitions	perfect	beyond
belief.	No	variation	at	all.	With	variation,	being	a	sapper	would	be	nothing
more	than	being	a	rock-thrower	–	with	explosive	rocks,	mind,	but	even	so.	No
real	talent	involved,	no	hard-earned	skill.
Fiddler	remembered,	with	the	appalling	clarity	of	a	god-touched
revelation,	his	first	encounter	with	Moranth	munitions.	Northern	Genabackis,	a
week	before	the	march	on	the	city	of	Mott	followed	by	the	twin	nightmares	of
Mott	Wood	and	Blackdog	Swamp.	There	had	been	rumours	of	contact	and
extensive	negotiations	with	a	strange	people	ruling	a	place	called	Cloud	Forest,
far	to	the	south.	An	isolated	people,	said	to	be	terrifying	and	inhuman	in
appearance,	who	rode	enormous	domesticated	four-winged	insects	–	giant
dragonflies	–	and	could	rain	death	upon	enemies	from	great	heights.
The	Malazan	negotiators	had	included	Tayschrenn,	some	nobleborn
dignitary	named	Aragan,	and	a	lone	T’lan	Imass	named	Onos	T’oolan.	The
Second	and	Third	Armies	had	been	encamped	on	Nathii	farmland	two	days
from	the	landing	south	of	Malyntaeas.	A	crate	had	been	carried	–	gingerly,	by
sweating	soldiers	from	the	quartermaster ’s	unit	–	and	set	down	ten	paces	from
the	squad’s	hearth	fire.	Whiskeyjack	had	gestured	Hedge	and	Fiddler	over.
‘You	two	do	most	of	the	sapping	in	this	miserable	squad,’	the	sergeant	had
said,	grimacing	as	if	he’d	swallowed	something	unpleasant	–	which	he	had,	by
virtue	of	legitimizing	Fid	and	Hedge’s	destructive	anarchy.	‘In	yon	box	there
are	grenados	and	nastier	stuff,	come	from	the	Moranth	now	that	we’re	allied
with	’em.	Seems	to	make	sense	–	in	an	insane	way	–	to	hand	’em	over	to	you
two.	Now,	obviously,	you	need	to	do	some	experimenting	with	what’s	in	that
box.	Just	make	sure	you	do	it	half	a	league	or	more	from	this	here	camp.’	He


hesitated,	scratched	at	his	bearded	jaw,	then	added,	‘The	big	ones	are	too	big	to
throw	far	enough,	far	enough	to	survive	them	exploding,	I	mean.	So	you’ll
need	to	crack	your	heads	together	to	work	out	trying	them.	As	a	final	order,
soldiers,	don’t	kill	yourselves.	This	squad’s	under	strength	as	it	is	and	I’d	need
to	pick	out	two	others	to	hump	these	damned	things	around.	And	the	only	two	I
could	use	are	Kalam	and	Trotts.’
Aye,	Trotts.
Fiddler	and	Hedge	had	pried	the	lid	loose,	then	had	stared	down,	bemused,
at	the	well-packed	grenados,	nestled	in	frames	and	matted	straw.	Small	round
ones,	long	tapered	ones,	spike-shaped	ones	of	exquisite	glass	–	not	a	bubble	to
be	seen	–	and,	at	the	bottom,	much	larger	ones,	big	enough	to	ride	a	catapult
cup	if	one	was	so	inclined	(and,	it	turned	out,	suicidal,	since	they	tended	to
detonate	as	soon	as	the	catapult	arm	struck	the	brace.	Great	for	destroying
catapults	and	their	hapless	crews,	though).
Experimentation	indeed.	Hedge	and	Fid	had	set	out,	the	crate	between	them,
on	a	long,	exhausting	walk	into	some	out-of-the-way	place,	where	they	threw
the	small	ones	they	decided	to	call	sharpers	because	when	detonated	too	close
they	had	a	tendency	to	pepper	the	thrower	with	slivers	of	iron	and	made	the
ears	bleed;	where	they	discovered	the	incendiary	properties	of	the	burners,	to
the	wailing	protestations	of	a	farmer	who’d	witnessed	the	fiery	destruction	of	a
hay	wagon	(at	least	until	they’d	handed	over	four	gold	imperial	sceptres	–
Kellanved’s	newly	minted	currency	–	which	was	enough	money	to	buy	a	new
farm).	Crackers,	driven	into	elongated	wedge-shaped	holes	in	hard-packed
earth,	did	sweet	mayhem	on	foundation	stones,	mortared	or	otherwise.	And,
finally,	the	cussers,	the	ugliest,	nastiest	munitions	ever	created.	They	were
intended	to	be	dropped	from	high	overhead	by	the	Moranth	on	their	Quorls,
and	Hedge	and	Fid	had	used	up	most	of	their	allotted	supply	trying	to	work	out
an	alternative	means	of	practical,	non-fatal	use.	And,	in	the	end,	had	needed
twenty	more	–	two	crates’	worth	–	to	finally	conclude	that	a	fool	would	have	to
be	Oponn-kissed	by	the	Lady	to	try	anything	but	secondary	usage;	add-ons	to
crackers	and	burners	and,	if	the	chance	presented	itself,	a	well-thrown	sharper.
The	oversized	crossbows	came	much	later,	as	did	maniacal	variations	like
the	drum	and	the	slow	burn.	And	through	all	of	that,	the	Lady’s	Pull	always
remained	as	the	last	resort.	Had	Fiddler	been	a	religious	man,	he	would	have
been	obliged,	he	well	knew,	to	drop	every	single	coin	of	pay	and	loot	he
earned	into	the	coffers	of	the	Lady’s	temples,	given	how	many	times	he	had
loosed	a	cusser	at	targets	well	within	blast	range	of	himself	and	countless	other
Malazans.	Hedge	had	been	even	less…restrained.	And,	alas,	his	demise	had
therefore	been	of	a	nature	succinctly	unsurprising.


Reminiscing	had	a	way	of	arriving	at	the	worst	of	moments,	a	glamour	of
nostalgia	no	doubt	infused	with	subtle	but	alluring	suicidal	inclinations,	and
Fiddler	was	forced	to	push	all	such	remembrances	aside	as	he	approached
Cuttle	and	the	last	hole	in	the	path.
‘You	should	have	hightailed	it	out	of	here,’	Fiddler	said	as	he	settled	down
beside	the	modest	excavation.
‘No	chance	of	that,’	Cuttle	replied	in	a	low	voice.
‘As	you	like,	then,	but	don’t	be	standing	there	at	Hood’s	Gate	if	I	mess	this
one	up.’
‘I	hear	you,	Fid.’
And,	trying	not	to	think	of	Hedge,	of	Whiskeyjack,	Trotts	and	all	the	rest;
trying	not	to	think	of	the	old	days,	when	the	world	still	seemed	new	and
wondrous,	when	taking	mad	risks	was	all	part	of	the	game,	Fiddler,	the	last
great	saboteur,	went	to	work.
	
Bottle	squinted	at	the	farmhouse.	Someone	or	ones	inside	there,	he	was	sure
enough	of	that.	Living,	breathing	folk,	oh	yes.	But…something,	a	faint	odour,
charnel	recollections,	or…whatever.	He	wasn’t	sure,	couldn’t	be	sure,	and	that
made	him	seriously	uneasy.
Gesler	had	moved	up	beside	him,	had	lain	there	patient	as	a	tick	on	a	blade
of	grass,	at	least	to	start.	But	now,	a	hundred	or	more	heartbeats	on,	Bottle
could	sense	the	man	growing	restless.	Fine	enough	for	him,	with	that	gold	skin
that	didn’t	burn	once	in	Y’Ghatan	–	of	course,	Truth	had	shown	that	the	strange
skin	wasn’t	truly	impervious,	especially	when	it	came	to	Moranth	munitions.
Even	so,	Gesler	was	a	man	who	had	walked	through	fire,	in	every	permutation
of	the	phrase	Bottle	could	think	of,	so	all	of	this	skulking	and	trickery	and
brutal	slaughter	was	fine	for	him.
But	I’m	the	one	they’re	all	counting	on,	and	I	couldn’t	use	this	stupid	sword
at	my	belt	to	hack	my	way	clear	of	a	gaggle	of	puritanical	do-gooders	with	their
pointing	fingers	and	sharp	nails	and	all	–	gods	below,	where	did	that	image
come	from?	Damned	Mockra,	someone’s	leaking	thoughts.	Bottle	glanced	over
at	Gesler.	‘Sergeant?’	he	whispered.
‘What?’
‘Got	strange	notions	in	your	skull,	by	any	chance?’
A	suspicious	glance,	then	Gesler	shook	his	head.	‘Was	thinking	of	an	old
mage	I	knew.	Kulp.	Not	that	you	remind	me	of	him	or	anything,	Bottle.	You’re
more	like	Quick	Ben,	I	think,	than	any	of	us	are	comfortable	with.	Last	I	saw	of
Kulp,	though,	was	the	poor	bastard	flung	head	over	heels	off	the	stern	rail	of	a


ship	–	in	a	firestorm.	Always	wondered	what	happened	to	him.	I	like	to	think	he
made	it	just	fine,	dropping	out	of	that	furnace	of	a	warren	and	finding	himself
in	some	young	widow’s	back	garden,	waist-deep	in	the	cool	waters	of	her
fountain.	Just	as	she	was	on	her	knees	praying	for	salvation	or	something.’	All
at	once	he	looked	embarrassed	and	his	gaze	flicked	away.	‘Aye,	I	paint	pretty
pictures	of	what	could	be,	since	what	is	always	turns	out	so	damned	bad.’
Bottle’s	grunt	was	soft,	then	he	nodded.	‘I	like	that,	Sergeant.	Kind	of…
relieves	me.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Only,	shows	that	you’re	not	as	far	from	the	rest	of	us	as	it	sometimes
seems.’
Gesler	grimaced.	‘Then	you’d	be	wrong,	soldier.	I’m	a	sergeant,	which
makes	me	as	far	from	you	and	these	other	idiots	as	a	cave	bear	from	a	damned
three-legged	stoat.	Understood?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Now	why	are	we	still	hiding	here?	There’s	smoke	trickling	up	from	that
chimney,	meaning	we	got	folks	inside.	So,	give	us	the	damned	go-ahead	on
this,	Bottle,	then	your	task’s	done,	for	now.’
‘All	right.	I	think	there’s	two	in	there.	Quiet,	contemplative	thoughts,	no
conversation	yet.’
‘Contemplative?	As	in	what	a	cow	thinks	with	a	bellyful	of	feed	in	her	and
a	calf	tugging	wet	and	hard	at	a	teat?	Or	like	some	kind	of	giant	two-headed
snake	that’s	just	come	down	the	chimney	and	swallowed	up	old	Crud-nails	and
his	missus?’
‘Somewhere	in	between,	I’d	say.’
Gesler ’s	expression	turned	into	a	glare;	then,	with	a	snort,	he	twisted	round
and	hand-signalled.	A	moment	later	Uru	Hela	crawled	past	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas	–	who	was	directly	behind	the	sergeant	–	and	came	up	on	Gesler ’s
left.
‘Sergeant?’
‘Bottle	says	there’s	two	in	there.	I	want	you	to	walk	up	peaceful-like	and
call	’em	out	–	you’re	thirsty	and	want	to	ask	for	a	ladle	or	two	from	that	well
there.’
‘I	ain’t	thirsty,	Sergeant.’
‘Lie,	soldier.’
Bottle	could	see	the	notion	upset	her.	Spirits	fend,	the	things	you	find	out…
‘How	about	I	just	ask	to	refill	my	waterskin?’
‘Aye,	that	will	do.’
‘Of	course,’	she	said,	frowning,	‘I’ll	need	to	empty	it	out	first.’


‘Why	don’t	you	do	that?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
Gesler	twisted	to	look	at	Bottle,	and	the	young	mage	could	plainly	see	the
man’s	battle	with	pathos	and	despair.	‘Get	yourself	ready,’	he	said,	‘to	hit	’em
with	a	glamour	or	something,	in	case	things	go	all	wrong.’
Bottle	nodded,	then,	seeing	an	entirely	new	expression	on	Gesler ’s	face,	he
asked,	‘What’s	wrong,	Sergeant?’
‘Well,	either	I	just	wet	myself	or	Uru	Hela’s	draining	her	waterskin.	On
some	level,’	he	added,	‘I	think	the	distinction’s	moot.’
That’s	it,	Sergeant.	You’ve	just	won	me.	Right	there.	Won	me,	so	I’ll	give	you
what	I	got.	From	now	on.	Yet,	even	with	that	quasi-serious	notion,	he	had	to
turn	his	head	away	and	bite	hard	on	the	sleeve	of	his	tanned	leather	shirt.	Better
yet,	Sergeant,	wait	till	we	all	see	that	fine	wet	patch	on	your	crotch.	You	won’t
live	this	one	down,	no	sir,	not	a	chance	of	that.	Oh,	precious	memory!
Strapping	her	now	empty	waterskin	onto	her	belt,	Uru	Hela	then	squirmed
forward	a	little	further,	and	climbed	to	her	feet.	Adjusting	her	heavy	armour
and	plucking	twigs	and	grass	from	metal	joins	and	hinges,	she	tightened	the
helm	strap	and	set	out	for	the	farmhouse.
‘Oh,’	Bottle	muttered.
‘What?’	Gesler	demanded.
‘They’re	suddenly	alert	–	I	don’t	know,	maybe	one	of	them	saw	her
through	a	crack	in	the	window	shutters	–	no,	that’s	not	right.’
‘What?’
‘Still	not	talking,	but	moving	around	now.	A	lot.	Fast,	too.	Sergeant,	I	don’t
think	they	saw	her.	I	think	they	smelled	her.	And	us.’
‘Smelled?	Bottle—’
‘Sergeant,	I	don’t	think	they’re	human—’
Uru	Hela	was	just	passing	the	well,	fifteen	paces	from	the	farmhouse’s
door,	when	that	door	flew	open	–	pushed	hard	enough	to	tear	it	from	its	leather
hinges	–	and	the	creature	that	surged	into	view	seemed	too	huge	to	even	fit
through	the	frame,	coming	up	as	if	from	stairs	sunk	steep	below	ground	level
–	coming	up,	looming	massive,	dragging	free	an	enormous	single-bladed	twohanded	wood-axe—
Uru	Hela	halted,	stood	motionless	as	if	frozen	in	place.
‘Forward!’	Gesler	bellowed,	scrambling	upright	as	he	swung	up	his
crossbow—
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	charged	past	the	sergeant,	blade	out—
Bottle	realized	his	mouth	was	moving,	yet	no	sounds	came	forth.	He
stared,	struggling	to	comprehend.	A	demon.	A	Hood-damned	Kenryll’ah


demon!
It	had	lunged	clear	of	the	doorframe	and	now	charged	straight	for	Uru
Hela.
She	threw	her	waterskin	at	it,	then	spun	to	flee,	even	as	she	tugged	at	her
sword.
Not	nearly	fast	enough	to	escape	–	the	demon’s	huge	axe	slashed	in	a
gleaming,	blurred	arc,	caught	the	soldier	solid	in	her	left	shoulder.	Arm	leapt
away.	Blood	spurted	from	joins	in	the	scales	right	across	her	entire	back,	as	the
blade’s	broad	wedge	drove	yet	deeper.	Deeper,	severing	her	spine,	then	further,
tearing	loose	with	her	right	scapula	–	cut	halfway	through	–	jammed	on	the
gory	blade	as	it	whipped	clear	of	Uru	Hela’s	body.
More	blood,	so	much	more,	yet	the	sudden	overwhelming	gouts	of	red
quickly	subsided	–	the	soldier ’s	heart	already	stopped,	the	life	that	was	her
mind	already	fleeing	this	corporeal	carnage	–	and	she	was	collapsing,
forward,	the	sword	in	her	right	hand	half	drawn	and	never	to	go	further,	head
dipping,	chin	to	chest,	then	down,	face-first	onto	the	ground.	A	heavy	sound.	A
thump.	Whereupon	all	motion	from	her	ceased.
Gesler ’s	crossbow	thudded,	releasing	a	quarrel	that	sliced	past	Corabb,	not
a	hand’s	breadth	from	his	right	shoulder.
A	bellow	of	pain	from	the	demon	–	the	finned	bolt	sunk	deep	into	its	chest,
well	above	its	two	hearts.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	closed	fast,	yelling	something	in	the	tribal
tongue,	something	like	‘Leoman’s	balls!’
Gesler	reloading	on	one	knee.	Stormy,	Saltlick	and	Shortnose	thundering
past	him,	followed	by	Koryk	and	Tarr.	Smiles	swinging	wide,	crossbow	in	her
hands	–	one	of	Fid’s	weapons,	this	one	headed	with	a	sharper	–	which	she	then
trained	on	the	farmhouse	entrance,	where	a	second	demon	had	appeared.	Oh,
she	was	fast	indeed,	that	quarrel	flitting	across	the	intervening	space,	making	a
strange	warbling	sound	as	it	went,	and	the	second	demon,	seeing	it,	somehow
swinging	his	weapon	–	a	tulwar	–	into	its	path	–	not	much	use,	that	gesture,	as
the	sharper	exploded.
Another	scream	of	pain,	the	huge	demon	knocked	back,	off	its	feet,
crashing	into	the	side	of	the	farmhouse.	Wood,	sod	and	chinking	bowed
inward,	and	as	the	demon	fell,	the	entire	wall	on	that	side	of	the	doorframe
went	with	it.
And	what	am	I	doing?	Damn	me,	what	am	I	doing?	Bottle	leapt	upright,
desperately	drawing	on	whatever	warren	first	answered	his	summons.
The	axe-wielding	demon	surged	towards	Corabb.	The	wedge-blade	slashed
its	deadly	arc.	Struck	Corabb’s	shield	at	an	oblique	angle,	caromed	upward	and


would	have	caught	the	side	of	Corabb’s	head	if	not	for	the	man’s	stumbling,
left	knee	buckling	as	he	inadvertently	stepped	into	a	groundhog	hole,	losing
his	balance	and	pitching	to	one	side.	His	answering	sword-swing,	which	should
have	been	batted	aside	by	the	demon’s	swing-through,	dipped	well	under	it,	the
edge	thunking	hard	into	the	demon’s	right	knee.
It	howled.
In	the	next	instant	Stormy,	flanked	by	his	heavies,	arrived.	Swords
chopping,	shields	clattering	up	against	the	wounded	Kenryll’ah.	Blood	and
pieces	of	meat	spattered	the	air.
Another	bellow	from	the	demon	as	it	launched	itself	backward,	clear	of	the
deadly	infighting,	gaining	room	to	swing	the	wood-axe	in	a	horizontal	slash
that	crumpled	all	three	shields	lifting	to	intercept	it.	Banded	metal	and	wood
exploded	in	all	directions.	Saltlick	grunted	from	a	broken	arm.
‘Clear!’	someone	shouted,	and	Stormy	and	his	heavies	flung	themselves
backward.	Corabb,	still	lying	on	the	ground,	rolled	after	them.
The	demon	stood,	momentarily	confused,	readying	its	axe.
Smiles’s	hand-thrown	sharper	struck	it	on	its	left	temple.
Bright	light,	deafening	crack,	smoke,	and	the	demon	was	reeling	away,	one
side	of	its	bestial	face	obliterated	into	red	pulp.
Yet	Bottle	sensed	the	creature’s	mind	already	righting	itself.
Gesler	was	yelling.	‘Withdraw!	Everyone!’
Summoning	all	he	had,	Bottle	assailed	the	demon’s	brain	with	Mockra.	Felt
it	recoil,	stunned.
From	the	ruined	farmhouse,	the	second	Kenryll’ah	was	beginning	to
clamber	free.
Smiles	tossed	another	sharper	into	the	wreckage.	A	second	snapping
explosion,	more	smoke,	more	of	the	building	falling	down.
‘We’re	pulling	out!’
Bottle	saw	Koryk	and	Tarr	hesitate,	desperate	to	close	in	on	the	stunned
demon.	At	that	moment	Fiddler	and	Cuttle	arrived.
‘Hood’s	balls!’	Fiddler	swore.	‘Get	moving,	Koryk!	Tarr!	Move!’
Gesler	was	making	some	strange	gesture.	‘We	go	south!	South!’
Saltlick	and	Shortnose	swung	in	that	direction,	but	Stormy	pulled	them
back.	‘That’s	called	misdirection,	y’damned	idiots!’
The	squads	reforming	as	they	moved,	eastward,	now	in	a	run.	The	shock	of
Uru	Hela’s	death	and	the	battle	that	followed	keeping	them	quiet	now,	just	their
gasping	breaths,	the	sounds	of	armour	like	broken	crockery	underfoot.	Behind
them,	smoke	billowing	from	the	farmhouse.	An	axe-wielding	demon
staggering	about	in	a	daze,	blood	streaming	from	its	head.


Damned	sharper	should	have	cracked	that	skull	wide	open,	Bottle	well
knew.	Thick	bones,	I	guess.	Kenryll’ah,	aye,	not	their	underlings.	No,	Highborn
of	Aral	Gamelon,	he	was	sure	of	that.
Stormy	started	up.	‘Hood-damned	demon	farmers!	They	got	Hood-damned
demon	farmers!	Sowing	seeds,	yanking	teats,	spinnin’	wool	–	and	chopping
strangers	to	pieces!	Gesler,	old	friend,	I	hate	this	place,	you	hear	me?	Hate	it!’
‘Keep	quiet!’	Fiddler	snarled.	‘We	was	lucky	enough	all	those	sharpers
didn’t	mince	us	on	the	road	–	now	your	bleating’s	telling	those	demons	exactly
where	we’re	going!’
‘I	wasn’t	going	to	lose	any	more,’	Stormy	retorted	in	a	bitter	growl.	‘I’d
swore	it—’
‘Should’ve	known	better,’	Gesler	cut	in.	‘Damn	you,	Stormy,	don’t	make
promises	you	can’t	keep	–	we’re	in	a	fight	here	and	people	are	going	to	die.
No	more	promises,	got	me?’
A	surly	nod	was	his	only	answer.
They	ran	on,	the	end	of	a	long,	long	night	now	tumbled	over	into	day.	For
the	others,	Bottle	knew,	there’d	be	rest	ahead.	Somewhere.	But	not	him.	No,
he’d	need	to	work	illusions	to	hide	them.	He’d	need	to	flit	from	creature	to
creature	out	in	the	forest,	checking	on	their	backtrail.	He	needed	to	keep	these
fools	alive.
	
Crawling	from	the	wreckage	of	the	farmhouse,	the	demon	prince	spat	out
some	blood,	then	settled	back	onto	his	haunches	and	looked	blearily	around.
His	brother	stood	nearby,	cut	and	lashed	about	the	body	and	half	his	face	torn
away.	Well,	it	had	never	been	much	of	a	face	anyway,	and	most	of	it	would
grow	back.	Except	maybe	for	that	eye.
His	brother	saw	him	and	staggered	over.	‘I’m	never	going	to	believe	you
again,’	he	said.
‘Whatever	do	you	mean?’	The	words	were	harsh,	painful	to	utter.	He’d
inhaled	some	flames	with	that	second	grenade.
‘You	said	farming	was	peaceful.	You	said	we	could	just	retire.’
‘It	was	peaceful,’	he	retorted.	‘All	our	neighbours	ran	away,	didn’t	they?’
‘These	ones	didn’t.’
‘Weren’t	farmers,	though.	I	believe	I	can	say	that	with	some	assurance.’
‘My	head	hurts.’
‘Mine	too.’
‘Where	did	they	run	to?’
‘Not	south.’


‘Should	we	go	after	them,	brother?	As	it	stands,	I’d	have	to	venture	the
opinion	that	they	had	the	better	of	us	in	this	little	skirmish,	and	that	displeases
me.’
‘It’s	worth	considering.	My	ire	is	awakened,	after	all.	Although	I	suggest
you	find	your	matlock,	brother,	instead	of	that	silly	wood-axe.’
‘Nearest	thing	within	reach.	And	now	I’ll	have	to	dig	into	our	crumpled,
smouldering	abode	–	all	that	digging	we	did,	all	for	nothing!’
At	that	moment	they	heard,	distinctly,	the	sound	of	horses.	Coming	fast	up
the	track.
‘Listen,	there’s	more	of	them.	No	time	to	find	your	matlock,	brother.	Let	us
set	forth	and	commence	our	sweet	vengeance,	shall	we?’
‘Superior	notion	indeed.	One	of	my	eyes	still	works,	which	should
suffice.’
The	two	Kenryll’ah	demon	princes	set	out	for	the	cart	path.
It	was	really	not	their	day.
	
A	quarter	of	a	league	now	from	the	farmhouse,	and	Fiddler	swung	round,
confirming	for	Bottle	yet	again	that	the	old	sergeant	had	hidden	talents.
‘Horses,’	he	said.
Bottle	had	sensed	the	same.
The	squads	halted,	under	bright	sunlight,	alongside	a	cobbled	road	left	in
bad	repair.	Another	cluster	of	farm	buildings	awaited	them	a	thousand	paces	to
the	east.	No	smoke	rising	from	the	chimney.	No	surprise	with	demons	for
neighbours,	I	suppose.
The	detonations	were	a	drumbeat	of	thunderous	concussions	that	shook	the
earth	beneath	them.
‘Four!’	Fiddler	said	with	a	savage	grin.
Bottle	saw	Cuttle	staring	at	the	sergeant	with	undisguised	awe	and	more
than	a	little	worship.
Smoke	now,	billowing	in	the	distance,	an	earthen	blot	rising	above	the
treeline.
‘Let’s	make	for	that	farm	ahead,’	Fiddler	said.	‘We’ll	rest	up	there	for	the
day	–	I	don’t	think	our	pursuers	are	in	any	condition	to	do	much.’
‘The	drum,’	Cuttle	whispered.	‘I	seen	it.	The	drum.	Now	I	can	die	happy.’
Damned	sappers.	Bottle	shook	his	head.	There	was	pain	there,	now,	in	that
mangled	stretch	of	track	a	quarter-league	away.	Human,	beast,	and…oh,	and
demon.	You’d	have	done	better	chasing	us.	Even	so,	what	a	mess	we’ve	made.
Yes,	plenty	of	pain,	but	more	death.	Flat,	dwindling	death,	spreading	dark


as	that	dust	in	the	air.	Fiddler ’s	drum.	No	better	announcement	imaginable,	that
the	Malazans	were	here.
	
Thom	Tissy’s	descent	from	the	tree	was	a	little	loud,	a	little	fast.	In	a	skein	of
snapped	branches,	twigs,	leaves	and	one	abandoned	wasp	nest,	the	sergeant
landed	heavy	and	hard	on	his	backside.	‘Ow,	gods	below,	gods	below!’
‘Ain’t	no	god	at	that	end,	just	a	tailbone,’	a	soldier	called	out	from	the
nearby	squads.
Keneb	waited	for	a	few	more	heartbeats,	then	asked,	‘Sergeant,	tell	me
what	you	saw.’
Thom	Tissy	slowly,	carefully,	regained	his	feet.	He	walked	about	on	his
short	bandy	legs,	squat	as	an	ogre,	replete	with	pocked	face	and	warty	hands.
‘Smoke,	Fist,	and	plenty	of	it.	Counted	ten	spots	in	all,	one	of	’em	big	–
probably	the	thunder	we	heard	a	little	while	back	–	more	than	one	cusser	for
sure.	Maybe	three,	maybe	more.’
Meaning	someone	was	in	desperate	trouble.	Keneb	glanced	away,	scanned
the	motley	soldiers	hunkered	down	in	the	forest	glade.	‘Ten?’
‘Aye,	Fist.	I	guess	we	stirred	’em	up	some,	enough	so	that	the	fighting’s
getting	fierce.	When	the	captain	gets	back,	we’ll	find	out	some	details,	I
suppose.’
Yes.	Faradan	Sort.	But	she	and	Beak	had	been	away	for	days,	almost	a	week
now.
‘Ten.’
‘Expecting	more,	Fist?’	Thom	Tissy	asked.	‘My	line	of	sight	wasn’t	bad,
but	not	perfect.	I	saw	six	on	the	north	side,	four	on	the	south,	putting	us	near
dead	centre	and	a	half	a	night’s	travel	behind.	Anyway,	the	outermost	smokes
were	right	on	the	horizons,	so	we’re	still	spread	well	out,	the	way	we	should
be.	And	the	smoke	just	tells	us	where	bigger	fights	happened,	not	all	the	other
little	ambushes	and	the	like.	Something	wrong,	Fist?’
‘Settle	the	squads	in,’	Keneb	replied,	turning	away.	Oh,	aye,	there	was
fighting	going	on.	But	nothing	evenly	matched.	His	marines	were
outnumbered;	no	chance	of	acquiring	the	allies	they’d	thought	they’d	get.	True,
they	were	loaded	down	with	munitions,	but	the	more	mages	arriving	with	the
Edur	and	Letherii	troops	the	more	the	sheer	overwhelming	imbalance	would
start	to	tell.	His	squads,	even	paired	up,	couldn’t	afford	losses.	Four	or	five
dead	and	that	threshold	of	effectiveness	would	have	been	crossed.	There	would
have	to	be	convergence,	merging	of	survivors	–	and	this	leagues-long	line	of
advance	would	start	thinning	out.	Instead	of	gaining	in	strength	and	momentum


as	the	advance	began	to	close	in	on	this	empire’s	capital,	the	Malazan	marines
would	in	fact	be	weaker.
Of	course,	this	invasion	was	not	simply	Keneb’s	covert	marine	advance.
There	were	other	elements	–	the	Adjunct	and	Blistig’s	regular	infantry,	who
would	be	led	in	the	field,	when	that	time	came,	by	the	terrifying	but	competent
Captain	Kindly.	There	were	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	and	the	Perish	–
although	they	were,	for	the	moment,	far	away.	A	complicated	invasion	indeed.
For	us,	here,	all	we	need	to	do	is	sow	confusion,	cut	supplies	to	the	capital
whenever	we	can,	and	just	keep	the	enemy	off	balance,	guessing,	reacting
rather	than	initiating.	The	fatal	blows	will	come	from	elsewhere,	and	I	need	to
remind	myself	of	that.	So	that	I	don’t	try	to	do	too	much.	What	counts	is	keeping
as	many	of	my	marines	alive	as	possible	–	not	that	the	Adjunct’s	tactics	with	us
give	me	much	chance	of	that.	I	think	I’m	starting	to	understand	how	the
Bridgeburners	felt,	when	they	were	being	thrown	into	every	nightmare,	again
and	again.
Especially	at	the	end.	Pale,	Darujhistan,	that	city	called	Black	Coral.
But	no,	this	is	different.	The	Adjunct	doesn’t	want	us	wiped	out.	That	would
be	insanity,	and	she	may	be	a	cold,	cold	bitch,	but	she’s	not	mad.	At	least	not	so
it’s	showed,	anyway.
Keneb	cursed	himself.	The	strategy	had	been	audacious,	yes,	yet	founded
on	sound	principles.	On	traditional	principles,	in	fact.	Kellanved’s	own,	in	the
purpose	behind	the	creation	of	the	marines;	in	the	way	the	sappers	rose	to	preeminence,	once	the	Moranth	munitions	arrived	to	revolutionize	Malazan-style
warfare.	This	was,	in	fact,	the	old,	original	way	of	employing	the	marines	–
although	the	absence	of	supply	lines,	no	matter	how	tenuous	or	stretched,
enforced	a	level	of	commitment	that	allowed	no	deviation,	no	possibility	of
retreat	–	she	burned	the	transports	and	not	a	Quorl	in	sight	–	creating	a
situation	that	would	have	made	the	Emperor	squirm.
Or	not.	Kellanved	had	known	the	value	of	gambles,	had	known	how	an
entire	war	could	shift,	could	turn	on	that	single	unexpected,	outrageous	act,	the
breaking	of	protocol	that	left	the	enemy	reeling,	then,	all	at	once,	entirely
routed.
Such	acts	were	what	made	military	geniuses.	Kellanved,	Dassem	Ultor,
Sher ’arah	of	Korel,	Prince	K’azz	D’avore	of	the	Crimson	Guard.	Caladan
Brood.	Coltaine.	Dujek.
Did	Adjunct	Tavore	belong	in	this	esteemed	company?	She’s	not	shown	it
yet,	has	she?	Gods	above,	Keneb,	you’ve	got	to	stop	thinking	like	this.	You’ll
become	another	Blistig	and	one	Blistig	is	more	than	enough.
He	needed	to	focus	on	the	matters	at	hand.	He	and	the	marines	were


committed	to	this	campaign,	this	bold	gamble.	Leave	the	others	to	do	their	part,
believing	at	all	times	that	they	would	succeed,	that	they	would	appear	in	their
allotted	positions	when	the	moment	arrived.	They	would	appear,	yes,	with	the
expectation	that	he,	Keneb,	would	do	the	same.	With	the	bulk	of	his	marines.
Game	pieces,	aye.	Leave	the	deciding	hand	to	someone	else.	To	fate,	to	the
gods,	to	Tavore	of	House	Paran,	Adjunct	to	No-one.	So	bringing	me	round,
damn	this,	to	faith.	Again.	Faith.	That	she’s	not	insane.	That	she’s	a	military
genius	to	rival	a	mere	handful	of	others	across	the	span	of	Malazan	history.
Faith.	Not	in	a	god,	not	in	fate,	but	in	a	fellow	mortal.	Whose	face	he	knew
well,	remembering	with	grim	clarity	its	limited	range	of	expression,	through
grief	to	anger,	to	her	ferocious	will	to	achieve…whatever	it	is	she	seeks	to
achieve.	Now,	if	only	I	knew	what	that	was.
Perhaps	this	kind	of	fighting	was	suited	to	the	marines.	But	it	was	not	suited
to	Keneb	himself.	Not	as	commander,	not	as	Fist.	It	was	hard	not	to	feel
helpless.	He	wasn’t	even	in	contact	with	his	army,	beyond	sporadic
murmurings	among	the	squad	mages.	I’ll	feel	better	when	Faradan	Sort
returns.
If	she	returns.
‘Fist.’
Keneb	turned.	‘You	following	me	round,	Sergeant?’
‘No	sir,’	Thom	Tissy	replied.	‘Just	thought	I’d	say,	before	I	sack	out,	that,
well,	we	understand.’
‘Understand	what?	Who	is	“we”?’
‘All	of	us,	sir.	It’s	impossible.	I	mean,	for	you.	We	know	that.’
‘Do	you	now?’
‘Aye.	You	can’t	lead.	You’re	stuck	with	following,	and	not	knowing	what	in
Hood’s	name	is	happening	to	your	soldiers,	because	they’re	all	over	the	place
—’
‘Go	get	some	sleep,	Sergeant.	And	tell	the	rest,	I	am	not	aware	that	any	of
this	is	impossible.	We	maintain	the	advance,	and	that	is	that.’
‘Well,	uh—’
‘You	presume	too	much,	Sergeant.	Now	return	to	your	squad,	tell	your
soldiers	to	stow	all	the	theorizing,	and	go	get	some	sleep.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Keneb	watched	the	squat	man	walk	away.	Decent	of	him,	all	that	rubbish.
Decent,	but	pointless	and	dangerous.	We’re	not	friends,	Thom	Tissy.	Neither	of
us	can	afford	that.
After	a	moment,	he	allowed	himself	a	wry	smile.	All	of	his	complaints
regarding	Tavore,	and	here	he	was,	doing	the	same	damned	thing	that	she	did	–


pushing	them	all	away.
Because	it	was	necessary.	Because	there	was	no	choice.
So,	if	she’s	mad,	then	so	am	I.
Hood	take	me,	maybe	we	all	are.
	
The	long	descent	of	the	ice	field	stretched	out	before	them,	studded	with	the
rubble	and	detritus	that	was	all	that	remained	of	the	Age	of	the	Jaghut.	They
stood	side	by	side,	a	body	without	a	soul	and	a	soul	without	a	body,	and	Hedge
wished	he	could	be	more	mindful	of	that	delicious	irony,	but	as	long	as	he
could	not	decide	which	of	them	was	more	lost,	the	cool	pleasure	of	that
recognition	evaded	his	grasp.
Beyond	the	ice	field’s	ragged	demise	two	thousand	paces	distant,	copses	of
deciduous	trees	rose	in	defiant	exuberance,	broken	here	and	there	by	glades
green	with	chest-high	grasses.	This	patchwork	landscape	extended	onward,
climbing	modest	hills	until	those	hills	lifted	higher,	steeper,	and	the	forest
canopy,	unbroken	now,	was	the	darker	green	of	conifers.
‘I	admit,’	Hedge	said,	finally	breaking	the	silence	between	them,	‘I	didn’t
expect	anything	like	this.	Broken	tundra,	maybe.	Heaps	of	gravel,	those	dry
dusty	dunes	stirred	round	by	the	winds.	Mostly	lifeless.	Struggling,	in	other
words.’
‘Yes,’	Emroth	said	in	her	rasping	voice.	‘Unexpected,	this	close	to	the
Throne	of	Ice.’
They	set	out	down	the	slope.
‘I	think,’	Hedge	ventured	after	a	time,	‘we	should	probably	get	around	to
discussing	our	respective,	uh,	destinations.’
The	T’lan	Imass	regarded	him	with	her	empty,	carved-out	eyes.	‘We	have
travelled	together,	Ghost.	Beyond	that,	nothing	exists	to	bind	you	to	me.	I	am	a
Broken,	an	Unbound,	and	I	have	knelt	before	a	god.	My	path	is	so	ordained,
and	all	that	would	oppose	me	will	be	destroyed	by	my	hand.’
‘And	how,	precisely,	do	you	plan	on	destroying	me,	Emroth?’	Hedge
asked.	‘I’m	a	Hood-forsaken	ghost,	after	all.’
‘My	inability	to	solve	that	dilemma,	Ghost,	is	the	only	reason	you	are	still
with	me.	That,	and	my	curiosity.	I	now	believe	you	intend	something	inimical
to	my	master	–	perhaps,	indeed,	your	task	is	to	thwart	me.	And	yet,	as	a	ghost,
you	can	do	nothing—’
‘Are	you	so	sure?’
She	did	not	reply.	They	reached	to	within	thirty	or	so	paces	from	the	edge
of	the	ice,	where	they	halted	again	and	the	T’lan	Imass	shifted	round	to	study


him.
‘Manifestation	of	the	will,’	Hedge	said,	smiling	as	he	crossed	his	arms.
‘Took	me	a	long	time	to	come	up	with	that	phrase,	and	the	idea	behind	it.	Aye,	I
am	a	ghost,	but	obviously	not	your	usual	kind	of	ghost.	I	persist,	even	unto
fashioning	this	seemingly	solid	flesh	and	bone	–	where	does	such	power	come
from?	That’s	the	question.	I’ve	chewed	on	this	for	a	long	time.	In	fact,	ever
since	I	opened	my	non-existent	eyes	and	realized	I	wasn’t	in	Coral	any	longer.	I
was	someplace	else.	And	then,	when	I	found	myself	in,	uh,	familiar	company,
well,	things	got	even	more	mysterious.’	He	paused,	then	winked.	‘Don’t	mind
me	talking	now,	Emroth?’
‘Go	on,’	she	said.
Hedge’s	smile	broadened,	then	he	nodded	and	said,	‘The	Bridgeburners,
Emroth.	That’s	what	we	were	called.	An	elite	division	in	the	Malazan	Army.
Pretty	much	annihilated	at	Coral	–	our	last	official	engagement,	I	suppose.	And
that	should	have	been	that.
‘But	it	wasn’t.	No.	Some	Tanno	Spiritwalker	gave	us	a	song,	and	it	was	a
very	powerful	song.	The	Bridgeburners,	Emroth	–	the	dead	ones,	that	is;
couldn’t	say	either	way	for	the	few	still	alive	–	us	dead	ones,	we	ascended.
‘Manifestation	of	the	will,	T’lan	Imass.	I’d	hazard	you	understand	that
notion,	probably	better	than	I	do.	But	such	power	didn’t	end	with	your	cursed
Ritual.	No,	maybe	you	just	set	the	precedent.’
‘You	are	not	flesh	without	soul.’
‘No,	I’m	more	like	your	reflection.	Sort	of	inverted,	aye?’
‘I	sense	no	power	from	you,’	Emroth	said,	head	tilting	a	fraction.	‘Nothing.
You	are	not	even	here.’
Hedge	smiled	again,	and	slowly	withdrew	a	cusser	from	beneath	his
raincape.	He	held	it	up	between	them.	‘Is	this,	Emroth?’
‘I	do	not	know	what	that	is.’
‘Aye,	but	is	it	even	here?’
‘No.	Like	you	it	is	an	illusion.’
‘An	illusion,	or	a	manifestation	of	the	will?	My	will?’
‘There	is	no	value	in	the	distinction,’	the	T’lan	Imass	asserted.
‘You	cannot	see	the	truth	within	me,	for	the	vision	you’d	need	to	see	it	is
not	within	you.	You	threw	it	away,	at	the	Ritual.	You	wilfully	blinded
yourselves	to	the	one	thing	that	can	destroy	you.	That	is,	perhaps,	destroying
your	kind	even	now	–	some	trouble	on	the	continent	of	Assail,	yes?	I	have
vague	recollections	of	somebody	hearing	something…well,	never	mind	that.
The	point	here,	Emroth,	is	this:	you	cannot	understand	me	because	you	cannot
see	me.	Beyond,	that	is,	what	I	have	willed	into	existence	–	this	body,	this


cusser,	this	face—’
‘In	which,’	Emroth	said,	‘I	now	see	my	destruction.’
‘Not	necessarily.	A	lot	depends	on	our	little	conversation	here.	You	say	you
have	knelt	before	a	god	–	no,	it’s	all	right,	I’ve	already	worked	out	who,
Emroth.	And	you’re	now	doing	its	bidding.’	Hedge	eyed	the	cusser	in	his	hand.
Its	weight	felt	just	right.	It’s	here,	just	like	back	at	the	Deragoth	statues.	No
different	at	all.	‘I’ve	walked	a	long	way,’	he	resumed,	‘starting	out	in	the
Jaghut	underworld.	I	don’t	recall	crossing	any	obvious	borders,	or	stepping
through	any	gates.	And	the	ice	fields	we’ve	been	crossing	for	what	must	have
been	weeks,	well,	that	made	sense,	too.	In	fact,	I’m	not	even	much	surprised	we
found	the	Ice	Throne	–	after	all,	where	else	would	it	be?’	With	his	free	hand	he
gestured	at	the	forest-clad	expanse	before	them.	‘But	this…’
‘Yes,’	said	the	T’lan	Imass.	‘You	held	to	the	notion	of	distinction,	as	do	all
your	kind.	The	warrens.	As	if	each	was	separate—’
‘But	they	are,’	Hedge	insisted.	‘I’m	not	a	mage,	but	I	knew	one.	A	very
good	one,	with	more	than	a	few	warrens	at	his	disposal.	Each	one	is	an	aspect
of	power.	There	are	barriers	between	them.	And	chaos	at	their	roots,	and
threading	in	between.’
‘Then	what	do	you	see	here,	Ghost?’
‘I	don’t	know,	but	it	isn’t	Jaghut.	Yet	now,	well,	I’m	thinking	it’s	Elder,	just
like	Jaghut.	An	Elder	Warren.	Which	doesn’t	leave	many	options,	does	it?
Especially	since	this	is	your	destination.’
‘In	that	you	would	be	wrong,’	Emroth	replied.
‘But	you	recognize	it.’
‘Of	course.	It	is	Tellann.	Home.’
‘Yet	it’s	here,	trapped	in	the	Jaghut	underworld,	Emroth.	How	can	that	be?’
‘I	do	not	know.’
‘If	it’s	not	your	destination,	then,	I	think	I	need	to	know	if	our	finding	it
changes	anything.	For	you,	I	mean.’
The	head	cocked	yet	further.	‘And	upon	my	answer	hangs	my	fate,	Ghost?’
Hedge	shrugged.	The	cusser	was	too	real	all	right:	his	arm	had	begun	to
ache.
‘I	have	no	answer	for	you,’	Emroth	said,	and	Hedge	might	have	heard
something	like	regret	in	the	creature’s	voice,	although	more	likely	that	was	just
his	imagination.	‘Perhaps,	Ghost,’	she	continued	after	a	moment,	‘what	we	see
here	is	an	example	of	this	manifestation	of	the	will.’
The	sapper ’s	eyes	widened.	‘Whose?’
‘In	the	Jaghut	Wars,	many	T’lan	Imass	fell.	Those	who	could	not	flee	what
remained	of	their	bodies	were	left	where	they	fell,	for	they	had	failed.	On	rare


occasions,	a	Fallen	would	be	gifted,	so	that	its	eternal	vision	looked	out	upon	a
vista	rather	than	a	stretch	of	ground	or	the	darkness	of	earth.	The	T’lan	Imass
who	were	more	thoroughly	destroyed	were	believed	to	have	found	oblivion.
True	nonexistence,	which	we	came	to	hold	as	the	greatest	gift	of	all.’
Hedge	glanced	away.	These	damned	T’lan	Imass	were	heartbreakers,	in
every	sense	of	the	term.
‘Perhaps,’	Emroth	continued,	‘for	some,	oblivion	was	not	what	they	found.
Dragged	down	into	the	Jaghut	underworld,	the	Jaghut	realm	of	death.	A	place
without	the	war,	without,	perhaps,	the	Ritual	itself.’
‘Without	the	war?	This	is	the	Jaghut	underworld	–	shouldn’t	it	be	filled
with	Jaghut?	Their	souls?	Their	spirits?’
‘The	Jaghut	do	not	believe	in	souls,	Ghost.’
Hedge	stared,	dumbfounded.	‘But…that’s	ridiculous.	If	no	souls,	then	how
in	Hood’s	name	am	I	here?’
‘It	occurs	to	me,’	Emroth	said	with	rasping	dryness,	‘that	manifestation	of
the	will	can	go	both	ways.’
‘Their	disbelief	annihilated	their	own	souls?	Then	why	create	an
underworld?’
‘Verdith’anath	is	an	ancient	creation.	It	may	be	that	the	first	Jaghut	souls
found	it	not	to	their	liking.	To	create	a	realm	of	death	is	the	truest
manifestation	of	will,	after	all.	And	yet,	what	is	created	is	not	always	solely
what	was	willed.	Every	realm	finds…resident	beings.	Every	realm,	once
formed,	is	rife	with	bridges,	gates,	portals.	If	the	Jaghut	did	not	find	it	to	their
liking,	other	creatures	did.’
‘Like	your	T’lan	Imass.’
‘In	the	ages	of	ice	that	beset	our	kind,’	Emroth	said,	‘there	existed	pockets
of	rich	land,	often	surrounded	in	ice,	yet	resisting	its	fierce	power.	In	these
pockets,	Ghost,	the	old	ways	of	the	Imass	persisted.	Places	of	forests,
sometimes	tundra,	and,	always,	the	beasts	we	knew	so	well.	Our	name	for	such
a	place	was	Farl	ved	ten	ara.	A	refugium.’
Hedge	studied	the	forested	hills.	‘There	are	Imass	in	there.’
‘I	believe	that	is	so.’
‘Do	you	intend	to	seek	them	out,	Emroth?’
‘Yes.	I	must.’
‘And	what	of	your	new	god?’
‘If	you	would	destroy	me,	do	it	now,	Ghost.’	With	that	she	turned	and
began	walking	towards	the	Refugium.
Hedge	stood,	shifted	the	cusser	to	his	right	hand,	and	gauged	distance.	The
Crippled	God	would	welcome	more	allies,	wouldn’t	he	just?	You	go,	Emroth,	to


meet	this	timeless	kin.	With	your	words	marshalled	to	sway	them,	to	offer	them
a	new	faith.	Your	kin.	Could	be	thousands	of	them.	Tens	of	thousands.
But	they’re	not	what	you	came	for.
Like	me,	Emroth,	you’re	heading	for	the	gate.	Starvald	Demelain.	Where
anything	is	possible.
Including	the	destruction	of	the	warrens.
It’s	the	blood,	you	see.	The	blood	of	dragons.	Outside	and	inside.	Dead	and
living.	Aye,	amazing	the	things	you	figure	out	once	you’re	dead.	But	not	dead.
Aye,	it’s	all	about	the	will.
The	cusser	returned	to	his	left	hand.
Arm	angled	back.	Then	swung	forward.	He	watched	the	cusser ’s	arc	for	the
briefest	of	moments,	then,	as	habit	demanded,	he	pitched	sideways,	onto	the
ground—
Even	as	it	lurched	up	to	meet	him,	a	stone	cracking	hard	against	his	chin.
The	concussion	had	of	course	deafened	him,	and	he	stared	about,	spitting
blood	from	his	tooth-sliced	tongue.	His	left	arm	was	gone,	as	was	most	of	his
left	hip	and	thigh.	Snow	and	dust	drifting	down,	sparkling	in	the	sunlight.
Pebbles	and	clods	of	frozen	earth	now	landing	all	around	him,	bouncing,
skittering.	The	snow	in	the	air,	sparkling	like	magic.
He	spat	more	blood,	felt	his	chin	with	his	one	remaining	hand	and	found	a
deep	gash	there,	studded	with	gravel.	He	scowled,	dismissed	these	absurd
details.	No	more	blood,	a	tongue	whole	and	ever	eager	to	wag.	Smooth	chin,
unmarred	by	any	gash	–	well,	more	or	less	smooth,	under	all	that	stubble.	New
left	leg,	hip,	arm.	Aye,	that’s	better.
The	sapper	climbed	to	his	feet.
The	crater	was	appropriately	large,	suitably	deep,	reaching	down	past	the
skin	of	ice	and	snow	to	the	ground	underneath,	that	now	steamed	sodden	and
glistening.	Pieces	of	Emroth	here	and	there.	Not	many.	Cussers	were	like	that,
after	all.
‘Aye,’	Hedge	muttered,	‘Fid’s	the	sentimental	one.’
Thirty,	then	thirty-five	paces	on,	reaching	the	first	sward	of	riotous	grass,
the	sapper	came	upon	one	more	fragment	of	Emroth’s	body.	And	he	halted.
Stared	down	for	some	time.	Then	slowly	turned	and	studied	the	way	he	had
come,	the	borderline	between	ice	and	earth.
Farl	ved	ten	ara.	Refugium	indeed.	‘Shit,’	he	muttered.	Worse	yet,	she’d
told	him.	A	place	without	the	Ritual	itself.
After	a	long	moment,	Hedge	turned	back	to	the	forest	ahead.	He	stepped
over	the	torn,	severed	left	leg	lying	bleeding	in	the	grass.	Flesh	and	blood,	aye.
A	woman’s	leg.	Damned	shapely	at	that.


‘Shit,’	he	said	again,	hurrying	on.	‘Fid’s	the	soft-hearted	one,	that	he	is.
Fiddler.	Not	me.	Not	me.’	Wiping	at	his	cheeks,	cursing	the	ghost	tears	on	his
ghost	face,	and	alone	once	more	in	this	insipid,	uninspiring	realm	of	the	dead,
the	Bridgeburner	went	on.	Undead	for	a	few	hundred	thousand	years.	Broken,
Fallen,	then	resurrected,	enough	to	walk	once	more.	And,	finally,	thirty	or	so
paces	from	a	return	to	life…
A	grim	lesson	about	keeping	the	wrong	company.
Seeking	the	forest.	Beneath	the	thick	branches	at	last,	the	heavy	fluttering
of	a	new	season’s	painfully	green	leaves.	Spin	and	whirl	of	insects,	the	chitter
of	birds.	Into	the	forest,	aye,	beyond	the	sight	of	that	severed	limb,	the
borderland,	the	steaming	crater.
Shit!
‘Damned	soft	of	you,	Fid.	But	we’re	at	war,	like	I	keep	telling	you.	We’re	at
war.	And	I	don’t	care	if	it’s	a	damned	Jaghut	Bridge	of	Death,	it’s	still	a	bridge,
and	you	know	what	we	do	to	bridges,	don’t	you?’
Refugium.
But	no	refuge	for	me.
	
The	emlava	kittens	were	heavy	as	cattle	dogs	but	shorter	of	leg	and	nowhere
near	as	energetic.	All	they	wanted	to	do	was	sleep.	And	feed.	For	the	first	few
days,	carrying	them	invited	deadly	fits	of	lashing	talons	and	terrifying	lunges
with	jaws	opened	wide.	Unmindful	of	macabre	irony,	Onrack	used	their
mother ’s	skinned	hide	to	fashion	a	sack.	Ends	affixed	to	a	cut	sapling,	the
Imass	and	either	Quick	Ben	or	Trull	would	then	carry	between	them	the	two
hissing,	thrashing	creatures	in	their	ghastly	bag.
The	ay	never	came	close	again.
A	male	and	a	female,	their	grey	fur	not	yet	banded	and	the	pale	hue	of
ashes	rather	than	the	dark	iron	of	their	mother.	In	the	cave	there	had	been	a
third	one,	dead	a	week	or	more.	From	the	condition	of	its	body,	its	siblings	had
decided	on	eliminating	it.	So	fared	the	weak	in	this	and	every	other	world.
Trull’s	sense	of	wonder	was	reawakened	every	time	he	glanced	across	at
Onrack.	A	friend	in	the	flesh	was	truly	a	revelation.	He	had	imagined	himself
long	past	such	profound,	prolonged	astonishment.	The	day	he	had	been	Shorn
by	his	brother,	it	had	seemed	to	him	that	his	heart	had	died.	Chained	to	stone,
awaiting	the	cold	water	and	the	rot	that	it	promised,	the	muscle	that	forged	the
tides	of	his	blood	seemed	to	beat	on	in	some	kind	of	waning	inertia.
The	desiccated	corpse	that	was	Onrack,	walking	up	to	where	he	had	been
bound,	had	even	then	seemed	an	unlikely	salvation.


Trull	recalled	he’d	had	to	argue	with	the	T’lan	Imass	to	win	his	own
release.	The	thought	amused	him	still.	Creaking	sinew	and	cabled	muscle	and
torque-twisted	bone,	Onrack	had	been	the	personification	of	indifference.	As
unmindful	of	life	and	its	struggle	to	persist	as	only	a	lifeless	thing	could	be.
And	so	Trull	had	simply	tagged	along,	unwilling	to	admit	to	himself	the
burgeoning	truth	of	his	salvation	–	his	reluctant	return	to	life	in	the	company
of	an	undead	warrior	who	had	begun	to	discover	his	own	life,	the	memories
once	thought	surrendered,	to	time	and	cruel	ritual,	to	wilful	denial	spanning
tens	of	thousands	of	years.
What	had	bound	them	together?	What	improbable	menagerie	of	terse
conversations,	unanticipated	emotions	and	the	shared	extremity	of	combat	had
so	thoroughly	entwined	them	together,	now	as	brothers	yet	more	a	brother	than
any	of	those	with	whom	Trull	Sengar	shared	blood?	We	stood	side	by	side,
together	facing	certain	defeat.	Only	to	find	blessing	in	the	timid	hand	of	a
creature	not	even	half	human.	Oh,	I	know	her	well,	that	one.
Yet	she	is	a	secret	I	find	I	cannot	share	with	Onrack,	with	my	friend.	Now,	if
only	he	was	as	coy,	as	guarded.	Not	this…this	open	regard,	this	casting	away	of
every	natural,	reasonable	defence.	This	childness	–	by	the	Sisters,	Trull,	at	least
find	yourself	a	word	that	exists.	But	he	seems	so	young!	Not	of	age,	but	of	cast.
A	species	of	unmitigated	innocence	–	is	such	a	thing	even	possible?
Well,	he	might	know	the	answer	to	that	soon	enough.	They	had	found	signs
as	they	trekked	this	youthful	world.	Camps,	hearthstones	lining	firepits.	Places
where	stone	tools	had	been	made,	a	flat	boulder	where	an	Imass	had	sat,
striking	flakes	from	flint,	leaving	behind	a	half-circle	scatter	of	splinters.
Refuse	pits,	filled	with	bones	charred	white	or	boiled	to	extract	the	fat,	leaving
them	crumbly	and	light	as	pumice;	scorched	shell	fragments	from	the	gourds
used	to	heat	the	bones	in	water;	and	the	shattered	rocks	that	had	been	plunged
hot	into	that	water	to	bring	it	to	a	boil.	Signs	of	passing	this	way,	some	only	a
few	weeks	old,	by	Onrack’s	estimations.
Did	those	Imass	know	that	strangers	had	come	among	them?	To	this	even
Onrack	had	no	answer.	His	kind	were	shy,	he	explained,	and	cunning.	They
might	watch	from	hiding	places	for	days,	nights,	and	only	when	they	so	chose
would	they	reveal	enough	to	touch	Onrack’s	senses,	his	animal	awareness	with
its	instinctive	whispering.	Eyes	are	upon	us,	friends.	It	is	time.
Trull	waited	for	those	words.
The	emlava	kits	yowled,	announcing	their	hunger.
Trull,	who	had	taken	point	whilst	Onrack	and	the	wizard	carried	the	beasts
in	their	sack,	halted	and	turned	about.
Time	for	feeding.	Else	not	a	single	moment	of	peace.


	
Groaning,	Quick	Ben	set	down	his	end	of	the	sling-pole,	watched	bemusedly	as
the	two	kits	spat	and	clawed	their	way	free	of	the	skin,	hissing	at	each	other
then	at	Onrack,	who	began	withdrawing	leaf-wrapped	hunks	of	raw	antelope.
The	meat	was	foul,	but	clearly	this	was	no	deterrent	for	the	emlava	cubs	as	they
lunged	towards	him.
The	Imass	flung	the	meat	onto	the	ground	to	spare	his	own	hands,	and	then
stepped	away	with	an	odd	smile	on	his	face.
Too	many	odd	smiles	these	days,	the	wizard	thought.	As	if	the	blinding
wonder	and	joy	had	begun	to	dim	–	not	much,	only	a	fraction,	yet	Quick	Ben
believed	it	was	there,	a	hint	of	dismay.	He	was	not	surprised.	No-one	could
sustain	such	pure	pleasure	indefinitely.	And,	for	all	this	seeming	paradise	–	at
least	a	paradise	by	Imass	standards	–	there	remained	something	vaguely	unreal
about	it.	As	if	it	was	no	more	than	an	illusion,	already	begun	to	fray	at	the
edges.
No	real	evidence	of	that,	however.	The	wizard	could	feel	the	health	of	this
place.	It	was	strong,	and,	he	now	suspected,	it	was	growing.	As	Omtose
Phellack	waned	on	all	sides.	The	end	of	an	age,	then.	An	age	that	had	ended
everywhere	else	long,	long	ago.	But	isn’t	Tellann	itself	dead	everywhere	else?
Maybe	it	isn’t.	Maybe	it’s	just	changed,	grown	into	itself.	Maybe,	everywhere
else,	what	we’re	seeing	–	what	we’re	living	in	–	is	Tellann	ascendant,	victor	in
the	war	of	millennia	past,	dominant	and	secure	in	its	maturity.	Is	that	possible?
Yet	that	did	not	mesh	with	Onrack,	with	how	he	had	been	and	how	he	was
now.	Unless…gods	below,	unlike	everywhere	else,	this	is	one	fragment	of
Tellann	that	lies,	somehow,	beyond	the	Ritual.	That	is	why	he	is	flesh	and	blood
here.	In	this	place,	there	was	no	Ritual	of	Tellann,	no	severing	of	Imass	souls.
Suggesting	that	the	Imass	living	here	know	nothing	about	it.
So	what	would	happen	if	Logros	led	his	thousands	here?	If	Kron—But	no,
Silverfox	wouldn’t	permit	that.	She	needed	them	for	something	else.	For	another
war.
It’d	be	nice	to	know	how	this	fragment	related	to	the	one	created	for	the
Wolves	at	the	end	of	the	Pannion	War.	From	what	Quick	Ben	had	understood,
that	Beast	Hold,	or	whatever	it	had	been	called,	had	been	seeded	with	the	souls
of	T’lan	Imass.	Or	at	least	the	memories	of	those	souls	–	could	be	that’s	all	a
soul	really	is:	the	bound,	snarled	mass	of	memories	from	one	life.	Huh.	Might
explain	why	mine	is	such	a	mess.	Too	many	lives,	too	many	disparate	strands	all
now	tangled	together…
Trull	Sengar	had	set	off	in	search	of	water	–	springs	bubbled	up	from


bedrock	almost	everywhere,	as	if	even	the	stone	itself	was	saturated	with
glacial	melt.
Onrack	eyed	the	cats	for	another	moment	then	turned	to	Quick	Ben.	‘There
is	a	sweep	of	ice	beyond	these	hills,’	he	said.	‘I	can	smell	its	rot	–	an	ancient
road,	once	travelled	by	Jaghut.	Fleeing	slaughter.	This	intrusion,	wizard,
troubles	me.’
‘Why?	Presumably	that	battle	occurred	thousands	of	years	ago	and	the
Jaghut	are	all	dead.’
‘Yes.	Still,	that	road	reminds	me	of…things.	Awakens	memories…’
Quick	Ben	slowly	nodded.	‘Like	shadows,	aye.’
‘Just	so.’
‘You	had	to	know	it	couldn’t	last.’
The	Imass	frowned,	the	expression	accentuating	his	strangely	unhuman,
robust	features.	‘Yes,	perhaps	I	did,	deep	within	me.	I	had…forgotten.’
‘You’re	too	damned	hard	on	yourself,	Onrack.	You	don’t	need	to	keep
yourself	shining	so	bright	all	the	time.’
Onrack’s	smile	held	sadness.	‘I	gift	my	friend,’	he	said	quietly,	‘for	all	the
gifts	he	has	given	me.’
Quick	Ben	studied	the	warrior ’s	face.	‘The	gift	loses	its	value,	Onrack,	if	it
goes	on	too	long.	It	begins	to	exhaust	us,	all	of	us.’
‘Yes,	I	see	that	now.’
‘Besides,’	the	wizard	added,	watching	the	two	emlava,	their	bellies	full,
now	mock-fighting	on	the	blood-smeared	grass,	‘showing	your	fallible	side	is
another	kind	of	gift.	The	kind	that	invites	empathy	instead	of	just	awe.	If	that
makes	any	sense.’
‘It	does.’
‘You’ve	been	making	lots	of	paints,	haven’t	you?’
A	sudden	smile.	‘You	are	clever.	When	I	find	a	wall	of	stone	that	speaks…
yes,	a	different	kind	of	gift.	My	forbidden	talents.’
‘Forbidden?	Why?’
‘It	is	taboo	among	my	people	to	render	our	own	forms	in	likeness	to	truth.
Too	much	is	captured,	too	much	is	trapped	in	time.	Hearts	can	break,	and
betrayals	breed	like	vermin.’
Quick	Ben	glanced	up	at	Onrack,	then	away.	Hearts	can	break.	Aye,	the	soul
can	haunt,	can’t	it	just.
Trull	Sengar	returned,	waterskins	sloshing.	‘By	the	Sisters,’	he	said	to
Onrack,	‘is	that	a	frown	you’re	wearing?’
‘It	is,	friend.	Do	you	wish	to	know	why?’
‘Not	at	all.	It’s	just,	uh,	well,	a	damned	relief,	to	be	honest.’


Onrack	reached	down	and	snagged	one	of	the	cubs,	lifting	it	by	the	scruff
of	its	neck.	The	beast	hissed	in	outrage,	writhing	as	he	held	it	up.	‘Trull	Sengar,
you	may	explain	to	our	friend	why	Imass	are	forbidden	to	paint	likenesses	of
themselves.	You	may	also	tell	him	my	story,	so	that	he	understands,	and	need
not	ask	again	why	I	am	awakened	to	pain	within	me,	recalling	now,	as	I	do,	that
mortal	flesh	is	only	made	real	when	fed	by	the	breath	of	love.’
Quick	Ben	studied	Onrack	with	narrowed	eyes.	I	don’t	recall	asking
anything	like	that.	Well,	not	out	loud,	anyway.
Trull	Sengar ’s	relieved	expression	fell	away	and	he	sighed,	but	it	was	a
loose	sigh,	the	kind	that	marked	the	unbinding	of	long-held	tensions.	‘I	shall.
Thank	you,	Onrack.	Some	secrets	prove	a	heavy	burden.	And	when	I	am	done
revealing	to	Quick	Ben	one	of	the	details	of	your	life	that	has	served	to	forge
our	friendship,	I	will	then	tell	you	both	of	my	own	secret.	I	will	tell	you	of	the
Eres’al	and	what	she	did	to	me,	long	before	she	appeared	to	us	all	in	the
cavern.’
A	moment	of	long	silence.
Then	Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘Fine.	And	I’ll	tell	a	tale	of	twelve	souls.	And	a
promise	I	made	to	a	man	named	Whiskeyjack	–	a	promise	that	has	brought	me
all	this	way,	with	farther	still	to	go.	And	then,	I	suppose,	we	shall	all	truly	know
each	other.’
‘It	is,’	Onrack	said,	collecting	the	second	cub	so	he	could	hold	both	beasts
up	side	by	side,	‘a	day	for	gifts.’
From	beyond	the	hills	there	came	the	sound	of	thunder.	That	faded,	and	did
not	repeat.
The	emlava	were	suddenly	quiet.
‘What	was	that?’	Trull	Sengar	asked.
Quick	Ben	could	feel	his	heart	pound	in	his	chest.	‘That,	friends,	was	a
cusser.’
	
Fiddler	made	his	way	across	the	dirt	floor	of	the	barn	to	where	Bottle	slept.	He
stared	down	at	the	young	soldier	curled	up	beneath	a	dark	grey	blanket.	Poor
bastard.	He	nudged	with	his	foot	and	Bottle	groaned.	‘Sun’s	set,’	Fiddler	said.
‘I	know,	Sergeant.	I	watched	it	going	down.’
‘We’ve	rigged	a	stretcher.	Just	get	up	and	eat	something	and	then	you’ve
got	a	mobile	bed	for	the	rest	of	the	night.’
‘Unless	you	need	me.’
‘Unless	we	need	you,	aye.’
Bottle	sat	up,	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘Thanks,	Sergeant.	I	don’t	need	the	whole


night	–	half	will	do.’
‘You	take	what	I	give	you,	soldier.	Cut	it	short	and	we	could	all	end	up
regretting	it.’
‘All	right,	fine,	make	me	feel	guilty,	then.	See	if	I	care.’
Smiling,	Fiddler	turned	away.	The	rest	of	the	squad	was	readying	the	gear,
a	few	muted	words	drifting	between	the	soldiers.	Gesler	and	his	crew	were	in
the	abandoned	farmhouse	–	no	point	in	crowding	up	all	in	one	place.	Poor
tactics	anyway.
There	had	been	no	pursuit.	The	drum	had	done	its	work.	But	that	was	four
cussers	lost,	to	add	to	the	others	they’d	already	used.	Down	to	two	left	and	that
was	bad	news.	If	another	enemy	column	found	them…we’re	dead	or	worse.
Well,	marines	weren’t	supposed	to	have	it	easy.	Good	enough	that	they	were
still	alive.
Cuttle	approached.	‘Tarr	says	we’re	ready,	Fid.’	He	glanced	over	at	Bottle.
‘I	got	the	sorry	end	of	the	stretcher	to	start,	soldier.	You	better	not	have	gas.’
Bottle,	a	mouthful	of	nuts	and	lard	bulging	his	cheeks,	simply	stared	up	at
the	sapper.
‘Gods	below,’	Cuttle	said,	‘you’re	eating	one	of	those	Khundryl	cakes,
ain’t	ya?	Well,	Fid,	if	we	need	us	a	torch	to	light	the	way—’
‘Permission	denied,	Cuttle.’
‘Aye,	probably	right.	It’d	light	up	half	the	night	sky.	Hood’s	breath,	why	do
I	always	get	the	short	twig?’
‘So	long	as	you	face	off	against	Corabb	on	that	kind	of	thing,’	Fiddler
said,	‘short’s	your	middle	name.’
Cuttle	edged	closer	to	Fiddler	and	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘That	big	bang
yesterday’s	gonna	draw	down	a	damned	army—’
‘Assuming	they’ve	fielded	one.	So	far,	we’re	running	into	companies,
battalion	elements	–	as	if	an	army’s	dispersed,	which	is	more	or	less	what	we
expected	them	to	do.	No	point	in	maintaining	a	single	force	when	your
enemy’s	scattered	right	across	Hood’s	pimply	backside.	If	they	were	smart
they’d	draw	up	reserves	and	saturate	the	region,	leave	us	not	a	single	deer	trail
to	slink	along.’
‘So	far,’	Cuttle	said,	squinting	through	the	gloom	at	the	rest	of	the	squad
and	massaging	his	roughly	healed	shoulder,	‘they	ain’t	been	very	smart.’
‘Moranth	munitions	are	new	to	them,’	Fiddler	pointed	out.	‘So’s	our	brand
of	magic.	Whoever ’s	in	command	here	is	probably	still	reeling,	still	trying	to
guess	our	plans.’
‘My	guess	is	whoever	was	in	command,	Fid,	is	now	Rannalled	in	tree
branches.’


Fiddler	shrugged,	then	lifted	his	pack	onto	his	shoulders	and	collected	his
crossbow.
	
Corporal	Tarr	checked	his	gear	one	last	time,	then	straightened.	He	drew	his
left	arm	through	the	shield	straps,	adjusted	his	sword	belt,	then	tightened	the
strap	of	his	helm.
‘Most	people	just	carry	their	shields	on	their	backs,’	Koryk	said	from
where	he	stood	by	the	barn’s	entrance.
‘Not	me,’	said	Tarr.	‘Get	ambushed	and	there’s	no	time	to	ready,	is	there?
So	I	stay	readied.’	He	then	rolled	his	shoulders	to	settle	his	scaled	hauberk,	a
most	familiar,	satisfying	rustle	and	clack	of	iron.	He	felt	unsteady	on	his	feet
without	that	solid,	anchoring	weight.	He	had	quick-release	clasps	for	his	pack
of	equipment,	could	drop	all	that	behind	him	one-handed	even	as	he	stepped
forward	and	drew	his	sword.	At	least	one	of	them	in	this	squad	had	to	be	first
to	the	front,	after	all,	to	give	them	time	to	bring	whatever	they	had	to	bear.
This	was	what	he	had	been	trained	to	do,	from	the	very	beginning.	Braven
Tooth	had	seen	it	true	enough,	seen	into	Tarr ’s	stolid,	stubborn	soul,	and	he’d
said	as	much,	hadn’t	he?	‘Your	name’s	Tarr,	soldier.	It’s	under	your	feet	and
you’re	stuck	fast.	When	needs	be.	It’s	your	job,	from	now	on.	You	hold	back	the
enemy	at	that	first	blink	of	contact,	you	make	your	squad	survive	that	moment,
aye?	Now,	you	ain’t	solid	enough	yet.	Strap	on	these	extra	weights,	soldier,	then
get	sparring…’
He	liked	the	idea	of	being	immovable.	He	liked	the	idea	of	being	corporal,
too,	especially	the	way	he	hardly	ever	had	to	say	anything.	He	had	a	good
squad	for	that.	Fast	learners.	Even	Smiles.	Corabb	he	wasn’t	too	sure	about.
Aye,	the	man	had	Oponn’s	wink	true	enough.	And	no	shortage	of	courage.	But
it	seemed	he	always	had	to	get	there	first,	before	Tarr	himself.	Trying	to	prove
something,	of	course.	No	mystery	there.	As	far	as	the	squad	was	concerned,
Corabb	was	a	recruit.	More	or	less.	Well,	maybe	he	was	a	bit	past	that	–	nobody
called	him	Recruit,	did	they?	Even	if	Tarr	still	thought	of	him	that	way.
But	Corabb	had	dragged	Fiddler	out.	All	by	himself.	A	damned	prisoner,
and	he’d	done	that.	Saved	the	sergeant’s	life.	Almost	enough	to	excuse	him
being	at	Leoman’s	side	as	the	two	of	them	lured	the	Bonehunters	into
Y’Ghatan’s	fiery	nightmare.
Almost.
Aye,	Tarr	knew	he	wasn’t	the	forgiving	kind.	Not	the	forgetting	kind,
either.	And	he	knew,	deep	down	inside,	that	he’d	stand	for	every	soldier	in	his
squad,	stand	till	he	fell.	Except,	maybe,	for	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.


Koryk	taking	far	point,	they	headed	out	into	the	night.
Along	the	edge	of	the	nearest	stand	of	trees,	on	the	path	between	those
boles	and	the	edge	of	the	fallow	field,	they	silently	merged	with	Gesler	and	his
squad.	Setting	out	in	darkness	beneath	burgeoning	stars.
Stormy’s	heavies	were	good	to	have	around,	Tarr	decided.	Almost	as
tough	and	stubborn	as	he	was.	Too	bad,	though,	about	Uru	Hela.	But	she’d	been
careless,	hadn’t	she?	Even	if	you’re	carrying	a	waterskin,	the	least	you	should
have	at	the	ready	was	a	shield.	Even	more	appalling,	she’d	turned	and	run,
exposing	her	back.
Should’ve	sent	me	to	do	all	that.	Demon	or	no,	I’d	have	stood	to	meet	the
bastard.	Stood,	and	held.
‘Remember	your	name,	Tarr.	And	just	to	help	you	remember	it,	come	over
here	and	listen	to	your	Master	Sergeant,	while	I	tell	you	a	tale.	About	another
soldier	with	tar	under	his	feet.	His	name	was	Temper,	and	on	the	day	Dassem
Ultor	fell,	outside	Y’Ghatan,	well,	here	then	is	that	tale…’
Tarr	had	listened,	all	right.	Enough	to	know	that	a	man	like	that	couldn’t
have	existed,	except	in	the	mind	of	Master	Sergeant	Braven	Tooth.	But	it	had
been	inspiring	anyway.	Temper,	a	good	name,	a	damned	good	name.	Almost	as
good	as	Tarr.
	
Three	paces	behind	her	corporal,	Smiles	scanned	to	either	side	as	they	moved
along	the	trail,	eyes	restless	with	unease,	senses	awakened	to	such	acuity	her
skull	ached.	Bottle	was	sleeping.	Which	meant	no	tiny	spying	eyes	checking	out
the	area,	no	forest	animals	tricked	into	succumbing	to	Bottle’s	puny	will,	that
empathy	of	similar	brain	size	and	intelligence	that	had	so	well	served	them	all
thus	far.
And	their	damned	corporal,	all	clicking	scales	and	creaking	leather,	who
probably	couldn’t	put	fifteen	words	together	in	any	reasonable,	understandable
order.	Fine	enough	jamming	a	breach,	with	his	ridiculous	oversized	shield	–
the	only	one	left	after	that	demon	took	care	of	the	ones	used	by	the	heavies	–
and	his	short	thick-bladed	sword.	The	kind	of	soldier	who’d	hold	his	ground
even	when	dead.	Useful,	aye,	but	as	a	corporal?	She	couldn’t	figure	that.
No,	Fid	would	have	been	better	served	with	a	quick-witted,	fast,	nasty	and
hard-to-hit	kind	of	corporal.	Well,	there	was	one	consolation,	and	that	was
anyone	could	see	she	was	next	in	line.	And	it’d	been	close	back	there,	hadn’t	it?
Could’ve	been	Tarr	sent	out	to	say	hello	to	that	demon,	and	that	would	have
been	that.	She’d	now	be	Corporal	Smiles,	and	look	sharp	there,	y’damned	fishsniffers.


But	never	mind	Tarr.	It	was	Koryk	who	was	riding	her,	uh,	mind.	A	killer,
oh	yes,	a	real	killer.	Sort	of	like	her	but	without	the	subtlety,	and	that	made	the
two	of	them	a	good	match.	Dangerous,	scary,	the	core	of	the	nastiest	squad	in
the	Bonehunters.	Oh,	Balm’s	crew	might	argue	that,	especially	that	yelping
Throatslitter,	but	they	were	lounging	round	on	a	damned	island	right	now,
weren’t	they?	Not	out	here	doing	what	marines	were	supposed	to	do,
infiltrating,	kicking	the	white	squirmy	balls	outa	Edur	and	Letherii	and
blowing	up	the	occasional	company	just	to	remind	Hood	who	did	all	the
delivering.
She	liked	this	life,	yes	she	did.	Better	than	that	squalid	existence	she’d
climbed	out	of	back	home.	Poor	village	girl	cowering	in	the	ghostly	shadow
of	a	dead	sister.	Wondering	when	the	next	vanishing	of	the	shoals	would	spell
her	watery	demise.	Oh,	but	the	boys	had	wanted	her	once	she’d	been	the	only
one	left,	wanted	to	fill	that	shadow	with	their	own,	as	if	that	was	even	possible.
But	Koryk	here,	well,	that	was	different.	Felt	different,	anyway.	Because
she	was	older	now,	she	supposed.	More	experienced,	so	much	so	that	she	now
knew	what	stirred	her	little	winged	flutter-bird.	Watching	Koryk	kill	people,
ah,	that	had	been	so	sweet,	and	lucky	everyone	else	was	too	busy	to	have	heard
her	moan	and	nearly	squeal	and	guess	what	it’d	meant.
Revelations	were	the	world’s	sharpest	spice,	and	she’d	just	had	a	noseful.
Making	the	night	somehow	clearer,	cleaner.	Every	detail	blade-edged,	eager	to
be	seen,	noted	by	her	glittering	eyes.	She	heard	the	small	creatures	moving
through	the	scrub	of	the	fallow	field,	heard	the	frogs	race	up	the	boles	of
nearby	trees.	Mosquito	hum	and—
A	sudden	blinding	flash	to	the	south,	a	bloom	of	fiery	light	lifting	skyward
above	a	distant	treeline.	A	moment	later	the	rumble	of	twin	detonations	reached
them.	Everyone	motionless	now,	crouched	down.	The	small	creatures	frozen,
quivering,	terrified.
‘Bad	time	for	an	ambush,’	Koryk	muttered	as	he	worked	his	way	back,
slipping	past	Tarr.
‘So	not	one	sprung	by	Malazan	marines,’	Fiddler	said,	moving	up	to	meet
Koryk	and	Tarr.	‘That	was	a	league	away,	maybe	less.	Anyone	recall	which
squads	were	to	our	right	first	night?’
Silence.
‘Should	we	head	over,	Sergeant?’	Tarr	asked.	He	had	drawn	his
shortsword.	‘Could	be	they	need	our	help.’
Gesler	arrived.	‘Stormy	says	he	heard	sharpers	after	the	cussers,’	the
sergeant	said.	‘Four	or	five.’
‘Could	be	the	ambush	got	turned,’	Smiles	said,	struggling	to	control	her


breathing.	Oh,	take	us	there,	you	damned	sergeant.	Let	me	see	Koryk	fight
again.	It’s	this	itch,	you	see…
‘Not	in	our	orders,’	Fiddler	said.	‘If	they’ve	been	mauled,	the	survivors
will	swing	north	or	south	and	come	looking	for	friends.	We	keep	going.’
‘They	come	up	to	find	us	and	they	might	have	a	thousand	enemy	on	their
heels,’	Gesler	said.
‘Always	a	possibility,’	Fiddler	conceded.	‘All	right,	Koryk,	back	on	point.
We	go	on,	but	with	extra	stealth.	We’re	not	the	only	ones	to	see	and	hear	that,
so	we	might	run	into	a	troop	riding	hard	across	our	path.	Set	us	a	cautious
pace,	soldier.’
Nodding,	Koryk	set	out	along	the	trail.
Smiles	licked	her	lips,	glowered	at	Tarr.	‘Put	the	damned	pig-sticker	away,
Tarr.’
‘That’s	“Corporal”	to	you,	Smiles.’
She	rolled	her	eyes.	‘Hood’s	breath,	it’s	gone	to	his	head.’
‘And	those	aren’t	knives	in	your	hands?’
Smiles	sheathed	them,	said	nothing.
‘Go	on,’	Fiddler	ordered	them.	‘Koryk’s	waiting.’
	
Corabb	picked	up	his	end	of	the	stretcher	again	and	set	out	after	the	others.
Bottle	had	slept	through	that	distant	succession	of	explosions.	Sign	of	just	how
exhausted	the	poor	man	was.	Still,	it	was	unnerving	not	having	him	awake	and
keeping	an	eye	on	things,	the	way	he	could	leap	from	animal	to	animal.	Birds,
too.	And	even	insects.	Although	Corabb	wondered	just	how	far	an	insect	could
see.
He	reached	up	and	crushed	a	mosquito	against	one	eyelid.	The	stretcher
pitched	behind	him	and	he	heard	Cuttle	swear	under	his	breath.	Corabb	quickly
regained	his	hold	on	the	sapling.	Damned	insects,	he	needed	to	stop	thinking
about	them.	Because	thinking	about	them	led	to	hearing	and	feeling	them,
crawling	and	biting	everywhere	and	him	with	both	hands	used	up.	This	wasn’t
like	the	desert.	You	could	see	chigger	fleas	coming	on	the	wind,	could	hear	a
bloodfly	from	five	paces,	could	pretty	much	guess	that	under	every	rock	or
stone	there	was	a	scorpion	or	a	big	hairy	spider	or	a	snake	all	of	which	wanted
to	kill	you.	Simple	and	straightforward,	in	other	words.	None	of	this	devious
whispering	in	the	night,	this	whining	at	the	ear,	this	winged	flit	up	a	man’s
nostril.	Or	crawling	into	the	hair	to	take	nips	of	flesh	that	left	a	swollen,
oozing,	damnably	itching	hole.
And	then	there	were	the	slithery	things	that	sucked	blood.	Hid	under	leaves


waiting	for	some	poor	bastard	handless	soldier	to	go	past.	And	ticks.	And
plants	that,	when	one	brushed	innocently	against	them,	started	up	an	awful
itching	rash	that	then	leaked	some	kind	of	oil	–	this	was	a	true	underworld,
peopled	by	demon	farmers	and	every	life	form	of	the	night	a	raving,	rapacious
devourer	of	desert-born	men.	And	never	mind	the	Tiste	Edur	and	the	spineless
Letherii.	Imagine,	fighting	at	the	behest	of	tyrannical	masters.	Had	they	no
pride?	Might	be	smart	to	take	a	prisoner	or	two,	just	to	get	some	answers.	A
Letherii.	He	might	mention	the	idea	to	the	sergeant.	Fiddler	was	all	right	with
suggestions.	In	fact,	the	entire	Malazan	Army	seemed	all	right	with	that	kind	of
thing.	Sort	of	a	constant	warrior	gathering,	when	anyone	could	speak	up,
anyone	could	argue,	and	thus	decisions	were	forged.	Of	course,	among	the
tribes,	when	that	gathering	was	done,	argument	ended.
No,	the	Malazans	did	almost	everything	differently,	their	own	way.	Corabb
wasn’t	bothered	by	that	any	more.	It	was	probably	a	good	thing	he	had	held	to
so	many	ignorant,	outrageous	beliefs	about	them	back	when	he	was	among	the
rebels.	Otherwise,	he	might	have	found	it	hard	to	hate	the	enemy	the	way	he
was	supposed	to,	the	way	it	needed	to	be.
But	now	I	know	what	it	means	to	be	a	marine	in	the	Malazan	Army,	even	if
the	empire’s	decided	we’re	outlaws	or	something.	Still	marines.	Still	the	elite
and	that’s	worth	fighting	for	–	the	soldier	at	your	side,	the	one	in	the	stretcher,
the	one	on	point.	Not	sure	about	Smiles,	though.	Not	sure	about	her	at	all.
Reminds	me	of	Dunsparrow,	with	that	knowing	look	in	her	eyes	and	the	way	she
licks	her	lips	whenever	someone	talks	about	killing.	And	those	knives	–	no,	not
sure	about	her	at	all.
At	least	they	had	a	good	corporal,	though.	A	tough	bastard	not	interested	in
words.	Shield	and	sword	did	all	Tarr ’s	talking,	and	Corabb	always	found
himself	rushing	forward	to	stand	at	the	man’s	side	in	every	scrap.	Sword-arm
side,	but	a	step	forward	since	Tarr	used	that	short-bladed	sticker	so	his
parrying	was	foreshortened	and	that	risked	too	much	close-in	stuff,	the	quick
dirty	underhanded	kind	–	the	style	the	desert	tribes	would	use	against	a	shieldwall	soldier	like	Tarr	–	when	there	was	no	shield-wall,	when	it	was	just	the	one
man,	flank	exposed	and	guard	too	tight.	Batter	and	wail	at	the	shield	until	his
knees	bent	a	fraction	more	and	he	ducked	in	behind	and	below	that	shield,	left
leg	forward	–	then	just	sidestep	and	slip	round	the	shield,	over	or	under	that
stabbing	shortsword,	to	take	arm	tendons	or	the	unprotected	underarm.
Corabb	knew	he	needed	to	protect	Tarr	on	that	side,	even	if	it	meant
disobeying	Fiddler ’s	orders	about	staying	close	to	Bottle.	So	long	as	Bottle
looked	to	be	out	of	trouble,	Corabb	would	move	forward,	because	he
understood	Tarr	and	Tarr ’s	way	of	fighting.	Not	like	Koryk,	who	was	more	the


desert	warrior	than	any	other	in	these	two	squads,	and	what	he	needed	fending
his	flanks	was	someone	like	Smiles,	with	her	flicking	knives,	crossbow
quarrels	and	the	like.	Staying	back	and	to	one	side,	out	of	range	of	Koryk’s
frenzied	swings	of	his	longsword,	and	take	down	the	enemy	that	worked	in
from	the	flanks.	A	good	pairing,	that.
Cuttle,	the	miserable	old	veteran,	he	had	his	cussers,	and	if	Bottle	got	in
danger	the	sapper	would	take	care	of	things.	Was	also	pretty	sharp	and	quick
with	the	crossbow,	an	old	hand	at	the	release	and	load-while-you-run.
It	was	no	wonder	Seven	Cities	was	conquered	the	first	time	round,	with
Malazan	marines	in	the	field.	Never	mind	the	T’lan	Imass.	They’d	only	been	let
loose	at	the	Aren	uprising,	after	all.	And	if	Fiddler’s	telling	the	truth,	that
wasn’t	the	Emperor	at	all.	No,	it	was	Laseen	who’d	given	the	order.
Gesler	ain’t	convinced,	so	the	truth	is,	no-one	knows	the	truth.	About	Aren.
Just	like,	I	suppose,	pretty	soon	no-one	will	know	the	truth	about	Coltaine	and
the	Chain	of	Dogs,	or	–	spirits	below	–	the	Adjunct	and	the	Bonehunters	at
Y’Ghatan,	and	at	Malaz	City.
He	felt	a	chill	whisper	through	him	then,	as	if	he’d	stumbled	onto
something	profound.	About	history.	As	it	was	remembered,	as	it	was	told	and
retold.	As	it	was	lost	to	lies	when	the	truth	proved	too	unpleasant.	Something,
aye…Something…Damn!	Lost	it!
From	the	stretcher	behind	him,	Bottle	muttered	in	his	sleep,	then	said,
distinctly:	‘He	never	sees	the	owl.	That’s	the	problem.’
Poor	bastard.	Raving	in	delirium.	Exhausted.	Sleep	easy,	soldier,	we	need
you.
I	need	you.	Like	Leoman	never	needed	me,	that’s	how	I	need	you.	Because
I’m	a	marine	now.	I	suppose.
‘Ask	the	mice,’	Bottle	said.	‘They’ll	tell	you.’	He	then	mumbled	something
under	his	breath,	before	sighing	and	saying:	‘If	you	want	to	live,	pay	attention
to	the	shadow.	The	shadow.	The	owl’s	shadow.’
At	the	other	end	of	the	stretcher,	Cuttle	grunted	then	shook	the	handles	until
Bottle	groaned	again	and	edged	onto	his	side.	Whereupon	the	young	mage	fell
silent.
They	continued	on	through	the	night.	And	once	more,	sometime	later,	they
heard	detonations	in	the	distance	again.	These	ones	to	the	north.
Oh,	they’d	stirred	’em	awake	all	right.
	
Shurq	Elalle’s	herbs	were	getting	stale.	It	had	been	all	right	out	on	the	Undying
Gratitude,	on	a	wind-whipped	deck	and	in	the	privacy	of	her	cabin.	And	with	a


man	with	no	nose	for	company.	But	now	she	found	herself	in	a	cramped	map
room	with	a	half-dozen	foreigners	and	Shake	Brullyg,	the	eponymous	king	of
this	miserable	little	island,	and	–	especially	among	the	women	–	she	could	see
their	nostrils	wrinkle	as	they	caught	unpleasant	aromas	in	the	turgid,	overwarm	air.
Oh	well.	If	they	wanted	to	deal	with	her,	they’d	have	to	live	with	it.	And	be
grateful	for	that	‘living’	part.	She	eyed	the	Adjunct,	who	never	seemed	to	want
to	actually	sit	down;	and	although	she	stood	behind	the	chair	she	had	claimed	at
one	end	of	the	long,	scarred	table,	hands	resting	on	its	back,	she	revealed	none
of	the	restlessness	one	might	expect	from	someone	for	whom	sitting	felt	like	a
sentence	in	a	stock	in	the	village	square.
When	it	came	to	looks,	there	was	not	much	to	this	Tavore	Paran.	Studious
drab,	sexless	indifference,	the	wardrobe	of	the	uncaring.	A	woman	for	whom
womanly	charms	had	less	value	than	the	lint	in	the	creases	of	a	coin	purse.	She
could	have	made	herself	more	attractive	–	almost	feminine,	in	fact	–	if	she	so
chose.	But	clearly	such	charms	did	not	count	as	valuable	assets	to	the	Adjunct’s
notions	of	command.	And	this	was	interesting,	in	a	vague,	academic	sort	of
way.	A	leader	who	sought	to	lead	without	physical	presence,	without	heroic	or
lustful	or	any	other	sort	of	imaginable	grandeur.	And	so,	with	nary	a	hint	of
personality,	what	was	Tavore	left	with?
Well,	Shurq	considered,	there	was	her	mind.	Some	kind	of	tactical	genius?
She	wasn’t	sure	of	that.	From	what	Shurq	had	gathered	from	the	fragmented
mutterings	of	Balm’s	squad,	some	vast	error	in	judgement	had	already
occurred.	Seemed	there	had	been	an	advance	landing	of	some	sort.	Elite
troops,	creeping	onto	the	wild	shore	and	its	tangled	swamps	and	forests	in	the
dead	of	night.	Soldiers	with	a	mission	to	sow	confusion	and	destabilize	the
Edur	rule,	and	so	stir	the	downtrodden	Letherii	into	uprising.
Tactical	genius?	More	like	bad	intelligence.	The	Letherii	liked	things	just
fine.	This	Tavore	may	well	have	condemned	to	slaughter	a	vital	element	of	her
army.	They’d	burned	the	transports	–	and	what	was	that	about?	Leaving	her
own	troops	with	no	choice	but	to	go	on?	That	stinks	of	distrust,	of	no	confidence
–	aye,	that	stinks	worse	than	I	do.	Unless	I’m	reading	it	all	wrong.	Which	is	a
distinct	possibility.	There’s	nothing	simple	about	these	Malazans.
The	Malazan	Empire,	aye.	But	nothing	like	the	Letherii	Empire,	with	its
petty	games	of	bloodlines	and	racial	hierarchy.	No,	these	Malazans	came	in	all
styles	indeed.	Look	at	Tavore’s	aide	–	a	stunning	tattooed	barbarian	whose
every	movement	was	sensuality	personified.	Anyone	looking	that	savage	and
primitive	would	be	cleaning	stalls	here	in	the	Letherii	Empire.	And	there	was
Masan	Gilani,	another	invitation	to	manly	blubbering	–	oh,	how	Shurq	wished


she	had	skin	that	luscious,	burnished	hue,	and	the	graceful,	leonine	lines	of
those	long	legs	and	full	thighs,	the	swell	of	unsagging	breasts	with	nipples	that
made	her	think	of	overripe	figs	–	not	that	I	needed	to	peek,	she’s	got	less
modesty	than	me	and	that’s	saying	a	lot	indeed.	So,	Tavore	keeps	the	pretty	ones
close.	Now	that	might	be	a	telling	hint.
‘What	are	we	waiting	for?’	Shake	Brullyg	demanded,	close	to	being	drunk
enough	to	start	slurring	his	words.	He	slouched	in	the	chair	at	the	other	end	of
the	long	table,	directly	opposite	the	Adjunct	but	with	his	heavy-lidded	eyes
fixed	on	Masan	Gilani.	The	man	truly	believed	that	lascivious	leers	could	make
a	woman	swoon	with	desire.	Yet	Masan	Gilani	hid	her	disgust	well,	playing	it
along	to	keep	the	pathetic	king	dangling.	The	barbaric	soldier	was	following
very	specific	orders,	Shurq	suspected.	To	keep	Brullyg	from	getting
belligerent.	Until	they	didn’t	need	him	any	more.
Well,	that	wouldn’t	work	with	her,	now,	would	it?	Unless	these	Malazans
had	an	Ublala	Pung	hidden	nearby.	Oh,	that	would	be	unfortunate	indeed,	to	see
her	dissolving	into	an	insatiable	rutting	animal	in	front	of	everyone.	That	was
one	secret	she	had	better	keep	to	herself.	‘Relax,	Brullyg,’	she	said.	‘All	of	this
has	to	do	with	those	huge	trimarans	that	sailed	into	harbour	last	night.’	She’d
love	to	have	one	of	those,	too,	although	she’d	need	two	crews	which	meant	less
coin	for	everyone	–	damned	logistics,	always	getting	in	the	way	of	my	dreams.
The	Adjunct	was	eyeing	her	now,	one	of	those	gauging	regards	she	settled
on	Shurq	Elalle	whenever	the	undead	pirate	said	anything.	Her	own	fault,
actually	–	Shurq	had	sent	Skorgen	back	to	the	Undying	Gratitude.	Her	first
mate’s	unfortunate	assortment	of	afflictions	had	proved	far	too	distracting	for
everyone	else,	until	she	realized	he	was	becoming	a	liability,	undermining
her…professionalism.	Yes,	that’s	the	word	I	was	looking	for.	Got	to	be	taken
seriously	here.	I	suspect	my	very	existence	depends	on	it.	But	she	now	found
herself	missing	his	weeping	hole	in	the	face,	his	mangled	ear,	blinded	eye,
stumped	arm	and	bad	leg	–	anything	to	swing	away	Tavore’s	attention	every
time	she	was	unwise	enough	to	voice	an	opinion	or	observation.
Throatslitter,	who	sat	opposite	Shurq,	now	cleared	his	throat	–	producing
an	odd	squeak	–	and	smiled	across	at	her.
She	looked	away,	pointedly.	That	man	was	not	a	nice	man.	The	way	Gerun
Eberict	hadn’t	been	a	nice	man.	Took	too	much	pleasure	in	his	job,	she
suspected.	And	even	for	a	soldier,	that	wasn’t	sensible.	People	like	that	tended
to	linger	when	lingering	wasn’t	good.	Tended	to	put	other	soldiers	at	risk.
Tended	to	get	carried	away.	No,	she	didn’t	like	Throatslitter.
Yet	her	glance	away	had	inadvertently	shifted	her	attention	to	Corporal
Deadsmell.	Oh,	funny	name,	that.	In	some	ways,	that	man	was	even	worse.	No


secrets	from	him,	she	suspected,	no	matter	how	coy	she	was	–	yes,	he	could
smell	her,	and	not	stale	herbs	either.	Had	smelled	her,	from	the	very	start.	Had
it	been	some	bastard	like	him	who	wove	the	curse	now	afflicting	me?	No,	that
wasn’t	right.	Deadsmell	had	talents	unknown	here	on	Lether.	Talents	that	made
her	think	of	that	dying	tower	in	Letheras,	and	Kettle,	and	the	barrows	in	the
yard.
Fortunately,	he	was	dozing	at	the	moment,	bearded	chin	on	his	broad	chest,
thus	sparing	her	his	knowing	look.
Ah,	if	only	Tehol	Beddict	was	here	with	me	–	he’d	have	them	all	reeling.	In
confusion	or	laughter?	Laughter	would	be	bad,	very	bad.	For	me.	For	anyone
sitting	too	close	to	me.	Very	well,	forget	Tehol	Beddict.	I	must	be	losing	my
mind.
The	Adjunct	addressed	her.	‘Captain,	I	have	spoken	at	length	with	Shake
Brullyg,	seeking	to	complete	my	understanding	of	this	Letherii	Empire.	Yet	I
find	his	replies	increasingly	unsatisfactory—’
‘Poor	Brullyg’s	despondent,’	Shurq	said.	‘And	lovelorn.	Well,	perhaps
unrequited	lust	is	more	accurate	a	description	for	his	sordid,	uncommunicative
state	of	mind.’	Hah,	she	could	out-Tehol	Tehol	Beddict!	With	no	risk	of	laughing
either!
Brullyg	blinked	at	her.
Sergeant	Balm	leaned	towards	Throatslitter.	‘What	did	she	just	say?’
‘The	Emperor,’	said	Tavore.
Shurq	frowned,	but	waited.
‘Of	a	Thousand	Deaths.’
‘The	title’s	an	exaggeration,	I’m	sure.	Maybe	a	few	hundred.	Champions.
They	all	die,	eventually.’
‘Presumably	he	is	well	protected	by	his	Edur	in	the	palace.’
Shurq	Elalle	shrugged.	‘Not	many	details	creep	out	of	the	Eternal
Domicile,	Adjunct.	The	Chancellor	and	his	entire	staff	–	Letherii	–	were
retained	after	the	conquest.	There	is	also,	now,	a	very	powerful	secret	police,
also	Letherii.	As	for	the	economic	apparatus,	well,	that	too	is	Letherii.’
The	tattooed	woman	named	Lostara	Yil	snorted.	‘Then	what	in	Hood’s
name	are	the	Edur	doing?	Where	do	they	fit?’
‘On	top,’	Shurq	replied.	‘Wobbling.’
There	was	a	long	moment	of	silence.
‘Yet,’	Tavore	finally	said,	‘the	Edur	Emperor	cannot	be	killed.’
‘That	is	true.’	Shurq	watched	as	these	details	worked	their	way	through	the
Malazans,	with	the	exception	of	Deadsmell,	of	course,	whose	snores	were
waves	rolling	ashore	in	the	little	dank	cavern	of	a	room.


‘Is	that,’	Tavore	asked,	‘irrelevant?’
‘Sometimes	seems	that	way,’	Shurq	conceded.	Oh,	she	wished	she	could
drink	wine	without	its	draining	out	everywhere.	She	could	do	with	a	tankard	or
two.
‘An	Emperor	whose	very	rule	is	dictated	by	the	sword,’	Tavore	said.	‘What
remain	unhoned,	however,	are	the	necessities	of	administering	an	empire.’
‘Very	dull	necessities,	aye,’	Shurq	said,	smiling.
‘The	Tiste	Edur,	leaning	hard	against	the	undying	solidity	of	their	ruler,
exist	under	the	delusion	of	mastery,’	Tavore	continued.	‘But	reality	is	not	so
generous.’
Nodding,	Shurq	Elalle	said,	‘The	Tiste	Edur	were	fisher	folk,	seal-hunters.
Builders	in	wood.	A	half-dozen	or	so	tribes.	There	was	someone	called	the
Warlock	King,	Hannan	Mosag,	who	waged	a	war	of	subjugation	–	why	he
didn’t	end	up	with	that	dreadful	sword	only	the	Edur	know	and	it	is	not
something	they	talk	about.’
‘Does	this	Hannan	Mosag	still	live?’	Tavore	asked.
‘The	Emperor ’s	new	Ceda.’
Deadsmell’s	snores	ceased.	‘Imperial	High	Mage,’	he	said.	‘Ceda,	a
degradation	of	“Cedance”,	I’d	wager.	“Cedance”	was	some	sort	of	ritual	back
in	the	days	of	the	First	Empire.’	His	eyes	opened	halfway.	‘Ebron	won’t	be	at
all	surprised.	These	Letherii	are	some	lost	colony	of	the	First	Empire.’	The
heavy	lids	slid	down	once	more,	and	a	moment	later	his	snores	groaned	back
to	life.
Shurq	Elalle	thought	to	clear	her	throat,	changed	her	mind.	Things	were
rank	enough	as	it	was.	‘The	point	I	was	making,	Adjunct,	is	that	the	Tiste	Edur
couldn’t	administer	their	way	through	a	mooring	tithe.	They’re	warriors	and
hunters	–	the	males,	that	is.	The	females	are,	as	far	as	I	can	tell,	completely
useless	mystics	of	some	sort,	and	since	the	conquest	they’ve	virtually
disappeared	from	sight.’
Boots	echoed	from	the	corridor	and	moments	later	the	door	opened.
Accompanied	by	Galt	and	the	odd	little	man	named	Widdershins,	two	Letherii
soldiers	strode	into	the	chamber.	One	of	them	was	an	Atri-Preda.
Shake	Brullyg	lurched	back	in	his	chair,	almost	toppling	it.	Face	twisting,
he	rose.	‘Damn	every	damned	witch	to	the	deep!’
‘It	gets	worse,’	the	Atri-Preda	replied	with	a	faint	smile	on	her	lips.	‘I
choose	my	own	Rise,	and	you	are	not	him.	Yedan,	throw	this	fool	out	on	his
arse	–	any	window	will	do.’
Sudden	alarm	in	Brullyg’s	eyes	as	he	stared	at	the	soldier	at	the	captain’s
side,	who	made	to	move	forward.


Galt’s	sword	was	out	of	its	scabbard	in	a	blur,	settled	flat	against	the
soldier ’s	stomach,	halting	the	man	in	his	tracks.	‘Maybe	we	should	all	back	this
up	a	few	steps,’	he	said	in	a	drawl.	‘Adjunct,	allow	me	to	present	Atri-Preda
Yan	Tovis	and	Shore	Watch	Yedan	Derryg	–	which	I	take	it	is	some	kind	of
sergeant	in	charge	of	some	kind	of	coastal	patrol.	What’s	“Atri-Preda”?
Captain?	Commander?	Whatever,	they	was	in	charge	of	that	half-drowned
bunch	the	Perish	plucked	from	the	storm.’
The	Adjunct	was	frowning	at	Yan	Tovis.	‘Atri-Preda,	welcome.	I	am
Adjunct	Tavore	Paran	of	the	Malazan	Empire—’
Yan	Tovis	glanced	across	at	her.	‘You’re	commanding	this	invasion?	How
many	soldiers	did	you	land	on	the	coast,	Adjunct?	Ten	thousand?	Twenty?	I
saw	the	ships,	the	burning	ships	–	you	followed	our	fleets	all	the	way	from
your	empire?	That’s	a	long	way	for	a	little	vengeful	bloodletting,	isn’t	it?’
Shurq	dreamed	of	downing	another	tankard	of	wine.	At	least	the	Malazans
weren’t	looking	her	way	any	more.
The	Adjunct’s	frown	deepened,	accentuating	her	drab	plainness.	‘If	you
wish,’	she	said	coolly,	‘we	can	formalize	your	status	as	prisoners	of	war.	Yet	I
find	it	difficult	to	characterize	your	sinking	ferry	as	a	punitive	invasion
expedition.	According	to	the	reports	I	have	received,	your	status	is	better
likened	as	refugees,	yes?	A	modest	company	of	soldiers	overseeing	a	sizeable
collection	of	old	men	and	women,	children	and	other	non-combatants.	Were
you	sailing	here	assuming	the	island	remained	independent?’	She	flicked	her
gaze	across	to	Brullyg,	who	stood	leaning	against	the	far	wall.	‘That	you	and
Shake	Brullyg	are	acquainted	suggests	you	are	here	to	resolve	some	private
matter	between	you.’
Yan	Tovis’s	eyes	were	flat	as	she	shrugged	and	said,	‘Hardly	private.
“Shake”	is	a	tribe’s	name	and	could,	if	desired,	precede	the	names	of	myself
and	Yedan	here,	as	well	as	our	“collection”	of	“refugees”.	The	Shake	were	the
original	inhabitants	of	the	central	west	coast	and	some	of	the	islands	off	shore.
We	were	long	ago	subjugated	by	the	Letherii.’	She	shrugged	again.	‘My	issue
with	Brullyg	refers	to	a	matter	of	succession.’
Tavore’s	brows	rose.	‘Succession?	You	retain	such	things	even	when
subjugated?’
‘More	or	less.	The	line	is	maintained	through	the	women.	The	Queen	–	my
mother	–	has	recently	died.	It	was	Brullyg’s	hope	that	I	not	return	to	claim	the
title.	Brullyg	wanted	to	rule	the	Shake	for	himself.	He	also	wanted,	I	suspect,	to
make	some	bold	claim	to	independence,	riding	the	wave	of	your	invasion	–
assuming	it	proves	successful.	Casting	off	the	Letherii	yoke	and	creating	a	new
centre	for	our	people,	on	this	once-holy	island.	Although	a	murderer	and	a


betrayer,	Brullyg	is	an	ambitious	creature.	Alas,	his	rule	on	this	island	has
come	to	an	end.’
Throatslitter	hissed	laughter.	‘Hear	that,	Masan	Gilani?	You	can	stop
showing	all	that	sweet	flesh	now.’
‘I	am	not	sure,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘the	decision	is	yours	to	make,	AtriPreda.’
‘That	rank	is	now	gone.	You	may	address	me	as	Queen	or,	if	you	like,	as
Twilight.’
Shurq	Elalle	saw	Deadsmell’s	eyes	flick	open	then,	saw	them	fix	hard	and
unblinking	on	Yan	Tovis.
The	Adjunct	missed	nothing,	for	she	glanced	at	Deadsmell	for	a	moment,
then	away	again.
‘Twilight,	Watch	and	Rise,’	Deadsmell	muttered.	‘Covered	the	whole	night,
haven’t	ya?	But	damn	me,	the	blood’s	awful	thin.	Your	skin’s	the	colour	of	clay
–	couldn’t	have	been	more	than	a	handful	at	the	start,	probably	refugees	hiding
among	the	local	savages.	A	pathetic	handful,	but	the	old	titles	remained.
Guarding	the	Shores	of	Night.’
Yan	Tovis	licked	her	lips.	‘Just	the	Shore,’	she	said.
Deadsmell	smiled.	‘Lost	the	rest,	did	you?’
‘Corporal,’	Tavore	said.
‘Our	squad	spent	time	on	the	right	ship,’	Deadsmell	explained.	‘Enough	for
me	to	do	plenty	of	talking	with	our	black-skinned	guests.	Twilight,’	he	said	to
Yan	Tovis,	‘that’s	a	Letherii	word	you	use.	Would	you	be	surprised	if	I	told	you
the	word	for	“twilight”,	in	your	original	language,	was	“yenander”?	And	that
“antovis”	meant	“night”	or	even	“dark”?	Your	own	name	is	your	title,	and	I	can
see	by	your	expression	that	you	didn’t	even	know	it.	Yedan	Derryg?	Not	sure
what	“derryg”	is	–	we’ll	need	to	ask	Sandalath	–	but	“yedanas”	is	“watch”,	both
act	and	title.	Gods	below,	what	wave	was	that?	The	very	first?	And	why	the
Shore?	Because	that’s	where	newborn	K’Chain	Che’Malle	came	from,	isn’t	it?
The	ones	not	claimed	by	a	Matron,	that	is.’	His	hard	eyes	held	on	Yan	Tovis	a
moment	longer,	then	he	settled	back	once	more	and	closed	his	eyes.
Errant	fend,	is	he	going	to	do	that	all	evening?
‘I	do	not	know	what	he	is	talking	about,’	Yan	Tovis	said,	but	it	was	clear
that	she	had	been	rattled.	‘You	are	all	foreigners	–	what	can	you	know	of	the
Shake?	We	are	barely	worth	mentioning	even	in	Letherii	history.’
‘Twilight,’	said	Tavore,	‘you	are	here	to	assert	your	title	as	Queen	–	will
you	also	proclaim	this	island	sovereign?’
‘Yes.’
‘And,	in	that	capacity,	do	you	seek	to	treat	with	us?’


‘The	sooner	I	can	negotiate	you	Malazans	off	this	island,	the	happier	I	will
be.	And	you,	as	well.’
‘Why	is	that?’
The	mage	named	Widdershins	spoke	up,	‘Those	refugees	of	hers,	Adjunct.
One	big	squall	of	witches	and	warlocks.	Oh,	squiggily	stuff	for	the	most	part	–
fouling	water	and	cursin’	us	with	the	runs	and	boils	and	the	like.	Mind,	they
could	get	together	and	work	nastier	rituals…’
Shurq	Elalle	stared	at	the	strange	man.	Squiggily?
‘Yes,’	said	Yan	Tovis.	‘They	could	become	troublesome.’
Galt	grunted.	‘So	saving	all	their	lives	don’t	count	for	nothing?’
‘It	does,	of	course.	But,	like	all	things,	even	gratitude	wanes	in	time,
soldier.	Especially	when	the	deed	hangs	over	us	like	an	executioner ’s	axe.’
Galt’s	scowl	deepened,	then	he	prodded	Yedan	Derryg	with	his	sword.	‘I
need	to	keep	this	here?’	he	asked.
The	bearded,	helmed	soldier	seemed	to	chew	on	his	reply	before
answering,	‘That	is	for	my	Queen	to	decide.’
‘Belay	my	last	order,’	Yan	Tovis	said.	‘We	can	deal	with	Brullyg	later.’
‘Like	demon-spawn	you	will!’	Brullyg	drew	himself	up.	‘Adjunct	Tavore
Paran,	I	hereby	seek	your	protection.	Since	I	have	co-operated	with	you	from
the	very	start,	the	least	you	can	do	is	keep	me	alive.	Sail	me	to	the	mainland	if
that	suits.	I	don’t	care	where	I	end	up	–	just	not	in	that	woman’s	clutches.’
Shurq	Elalle	smiled	at	the	fool.	Only	everything	you	don’t	deserve,	Brullyg.
Mercy?	In	the	Errant’s	fart,	that’s	where	you’ll	find	that.
Tavore’s	voice	was	suddenly	cold.	‘Shake	Brullyg,	your	assistance	is	duly
noted,	and	you	have	our	gratitude,	although	I	do	seem	to	recall	something
about	this	island’s	imminent	destruction	beneath	a	sea	of	ice	–	which	we
prevented	and	continue	to	prevent.	It	may	please	the	Queen	that	we	do	not
intend	to	remain	here	much	longer.’
Brullyg	paled.	‘But	what	about	that	ice?’	he	demanded.	‘If	you	leave—’
‘As	the	season	warms,’	Tavore	said,	‘the	threat	diminishes.	Literally.’
‘So	what	holds	you	here?’	Yan	Tovis	demanded.
‘We	seek	a	pilot	to	the	Lether	River.	And	Letheras.’
Silence	again.	Shurq	Elalle,	who	had	been	gleefully	observing	Brullyg’s
emotional	dissolution,	slowly	frowned.	Then	looked	round.	All	eyes	were
fixed	on	her.	What	had	the	Adjunct	just	said?	Oh.	The	Lether	River	and
Letheras.
And	a	pilot	to	guide	their	invasion	fleet.
‘What’s	that	smell?’	Widdershins	suddenly	asked.
Shurq	scowled.	‘The	Errant’s	fart,	is	my	guess.’


Chapter	Eighteen

The	view	thus	accorded	was	a	vista	to	answer	my	last	day	in	the	mortal
world.	The	march	down	of	hewn	stones,	menhirs	and	rygoliths	showed
in	these	unrelieved	shadows	the	array	of	stolid	faces,	the	underworld
grimaces	and	hisses,	bared	teeth	to	threaten,	the	infinite	rows	of	rooted
gods	and	spirits	stretching	down	the	slope,	across	hill	after	hill,	all	the
way,	yes,	to	the	limitless	beyond	sight,	beyond	the	mirror	of	these
misshapen,	squinting	eyes.	And	in	these	stalwart	belligerents,	who	each
in	their	day	of	eminence	reached	out	clawed,	grasping	hands,	the
crimson	touch	of	faith	in	all	its	demands	on	our	time,	our	lives,	our
loves	and	our	fears,	were	naught	but	mystery	now,	all	recognition
forgotten,	abandoned	to	the	crawl	of	remorseless	change.	Did	their	lost
voices	ride	this	forlorn	wind?	Did	I	tremble	to	the	echo	of	blood
beseechings,	the	tearing	of	young	virgin	flesh	and	the	wonder	of	an
exposed	heart,	the	bemused	last	beats	of	insistent	outrage?	Did	I	fall	to
my	knees	before	this	ghastly	succession	of	holy	tyranny,	as	might	any
ignorant	cowerer	in	crowded	shadows?
The	armies	of	the	faithful	were	gone.	They	marched	away	in	lifted
waves	of	dust	and	ash.	Priests	and	priestesses,	the	succumbers	to	hope
who	conveyed	their	convictions	with	the	desperate	thirst	of	demons
hoarding	fearful	souls	in	their	private	meanings	of	wealth,	they
remained	couched	in	the	cracks	of	their	idols,	bits	of	crumbling	bone
lodged	in	the	stone’s	weaknesses,	that	and	nothing	more.
The	view	thus	accorded,	is	the	historian’s	curse.	Lessons	endless
on	the	pointlessness	of	games	of	intellect,	emotion	and	faith.
The	only	worthwhile	historians,	I	say,	are	those	who	conclude	their
lives	in	succinct	acts	of	suicide.
Sixth	Note,	Volume	II
Collected	Suicide	Notes
Historian	Brevos	(the	Indecisive)


His	mother	had	loved	his	hands.	A	musician’s	hands.	A	sculptor ’s	hands.	An
artist’s	hands.	Alas,	they	had	belonged	on	someone	else,	for	Chancellor	Triban
Gnol	was	without	such	talents.	Yet	his	fondness	for	his	hands,	tainted	as	it
might	be	by	the	mockery	of	a	physical	gift	without	suitable	expression,	had
grown	over	the	years.	They	had,	in	a	sense,	become	his	own	works	of	art.
When	lost	in	thought,	he	would	watch	them,	their	sinuous	movements	filled
with	grace	and	elegance.	No	artist	could	capture	the	true	beauty	of	these
pointless	instruments,	and	although	there	was	darkness	to	such	appreciation,	he
had	long	since	made	peace	with	that.
Yet	now,	the	perfection	was	gone.	The	healers	had	done	what	they	could,
but	Triban	Gnol	could	see	the	misshapen	marring	of	once-flawless	lines.	He
could	still	hear	the	snap	of	his	finger	bones,	the	betrayal	of	all	that	his	mother
had	loved,	had	worshipped	in	their	secret	ways.
His	father,	of	course,	would	have	laughed.	A	sour	grunt	of	a	laugh.	Well,
not	his	true	father,	anyway.	Simply	the	man	who	had	ruled	the	household	with
thick-skulled	murky	cruelty.	He	had	known	that	his	wife’s	cherished	son	was
not	his	own.	His	hands	were	thick	and	clumsy	–	all	the	more	viciously	ironic	in
that	artistic	talent	resided	within	those	bludgeon	tools.	No,	Triban	Gnol’s	onceperfect	hands	had	come	from	his	mother ’s	lover,	the	young	(so	young,	then)
consort,	Turudal	Brizad,	a	man	who	was	anything	but	what	he	seemed	to	be.
Anything,	yes,	and	nothing	as	well.
She	would	have	approved,	he	knew,	of	her	son’s	finding	in	the	consort	–
his	father	–	a	perfect	lover.
Such	were	the	sordid	vagaries	of	palace	life	in	King	Ezgara	Diskanar ’s
cherished	kingdom,	all	of	which	seemed	aged	now,	exhausted,	bitter	as	ashes	in
Triban	Gnol’s	mouth.	The	consort	was	gone,	yet	not	gone.	Touch	withdrawn,
probably	for	ever	now,	a	consort	whose	existence	had	become	as	ephemeral	as
his	timeless	beauty.
Ephemeral,	yes.	As	with	all	things	that	these	hands	had	once	held;	as	with
all	things	that	had	passed	through	these	long,	slim	fingers.	He	knew	he	was
feeling	sorry	for	himself.	An	old	man,	beyond	all	hopes	of	attraction	for
anyone.	Ghosts	crowded	him,	the	array	of	stained	hues	that	had	once	painted
his	cherished	works	of	art,	layer	upon	layer	–	oh,	the	only	time	they	had	been
truly	soaked	in	blood	had	been	the	night	he	had	murdered	his	father.	All	the
others	had	died	somewhat	removed	from	such	direct	effort.	A	host	of	lovers
who	had	betrayed	him	in	some	way	or	other,	often	in	the	simple	but	terrible
crime	of	not	loving	him	enough.	And	now,	like	a	crooked	ancient,	he	took
children	to	his	bed,	gagging	them	to	silence	their	cries.	Using	them	up.
Watching	his	hands	do	their	work,	the	failed	and	ever-failing	artist	in	pursuit	of


some	kind	of	perfection,	yet	destroying	all	that	he	touched.
The	crowding	ghosts	were	accusation	enough.	They	did	not	need	to
whisper	in	his	skull.
Triban	Gnol	watched	his	hands	as	he	sat	behind	his	desk,	watched	their	hunt
for	beauty	and	perfection,	lost	now	and	for	ever	more.	He	broke	my	fingers.	I
can	still	hear—
‘Chancellor?’
He	looked	up,	studied	Sirryn,	his	newly	favoured	agent	in	the	palace.	Yes,
the	man	was	ideal.	Stupid	and	unimaginative,	he	had	probably	tormented
weaker	children	outside	the	tutor ’s	classroom,	to	compensate	for	the	fog	in	his
head	that	made	every	attempt	at	learning	a	pointless	waste	of	time.	A	creature
eager	for	faith,	suckling	at	someone’s	tit	as	if	begging	to	be	convinced	that
anything	–	absolutely	anything	–	could	taste	like	nectar.
‘It	draws	close	to	the	eighth	bell,	sir.’
‘Yes.’
‘The	Emperor—’
‘Tell	me	nothing	of	the	Emperor,	Sirryn.	I	do	not	need	your	observations
on	the	Emperor.’
‘Of	course.	My	apologies,	Chancellor.’
He	would	see	these	hands	before	him	painted	crimson	again,	he	now	knew.
In	a	most	literal	fashion.	‘Have	you	found	Bruthen	Trana?’
Sirryn’s	gaze	flickered,	then	fell	to	the	floor.	‘No.	He	has	truly	vanished,
sir.’
‘Hannan	Mosag	sent	him	away,’	Triban	Gnol	said,	musing.	‘Back	up	to	the
Edur	homeland,	I	suspect.	To	dig	in	the	middens.’
‘The	middens,	sir?’
‘Heaps	of	garbage,	Sirryn.’
‘But	–	why—’
‘Hannan	Mosag	did	not	approve	of	Bruthen’s	precipitous	stupidity.	The
fool	very	nearly	launched	a	palace	bloodbath.	At	the	very	least,	sent	away	or
not,	Bruthen	Trana	has	made	it	plain	to	all	that	such	a	bloodbath	is	imminent.’
‘But	the	Emperor	cannot	be	killed.	There	can	be	no—’
‘That	means	nothing.	It	never	has.	I	rule	this	empire.	Besides,	there	is	now
a	champion…’	Triban	Gnol	fell	silent,	then	shook	his	head	and	slowly	rose.
‘Come,	Sirryn,	it	is	time	to	tell	the	Emperor	of	the	war	we	are	now	in.’
Outside	in	the	corridor	waited	seven	Letherii	mages,	called	in	from	the
four	armies	massing	just	west	of	Letheras.	The	Chancellor	experienced	a
moment	of	regret	that	Kuru	Qan	was	gone.	And	Enedictal	and	Nekal	Bara,
mages	of	impressive	prowess.	These	new	ones	were	but	pale	shadows,	mostly


supplanted	by	Hannan	Mosag’s	Cedance	of	Tiste	Edur.	Yet	they	would	be
needed,	because	there	weren’t	enough	K’risnan	left.	And	soon,	the	Chancellor
suspected	as	he	set	out	for	the	throne	room,	the	others	falling	in	behind	him,
soon	there	would	be	still	fewer	K’risnan.
The	foreign	enemy	was	deadly.	They	killed	mages	as	a	matter	of	course.
Using	explosive	incendiaries,	grenados.	Able	to	somehow	hide	from	the
sorcery	seeking	them,	they	sprang	deadly	ambushes	that	rarely	left	behind	a
corpse	of	their	own.
But	the	most	important	detail	was	one	that	Triban	Gnol	would	keep	from
the	Emperor.	These	foreigners	were	making	a	point	of	killing	Tiste	Edur.	So,
although	Letherii	soldiers	were	assembling	to	march	west	against	the	invaders,
the	Chancellor	had	prepared	secret	instructions	to	the	commanders.	He	could
see	a	way	through	all	of	this.	For	the	Letherii,	that	is.
‘Have	you	readied	your	gear,	Sirryn?’	he	asked	as	they	approached	the
throne	room	doors.
‘Yes,’	the	soldier	said	bemusedly.
‘I	need	someone	I	can	rely	on	with	the	armies,	Sirryn,	and	that	someone	is
you.’
‘Yes,	Chancellor!’
Just	convey	my	words	to	the	letter,	idiot.	‘Fail	me,	Sirryn,	and	do	not	bother
coming	back.’
‘Understood,	sir.’
‘Get	the	doors.’
Sirryn	rushed	ahead.
Inside	the	throne	room	was	an	unexpected,	unwelcome	surprise.	Crouched
in	a	desultory	heap	of	twisted	bone	and	mangled	flesh	was	Hannan	Mosag	and
four	of	his	K’risnan.	As	emblems	of	the	foul	sorcery	feeding	these	Edur,	there
could	be	no	better	image	to	burn	its	bitter	way	into	the	Chancellor ’s	brain.	His
father	would	have	appreciated	the	scene,	would	indeed	have	gathered	huge
chunks	of	marble	from	which	he	would	hack	out	life-sized	likenesses,	as	if	in
mimicking	reality	he	could	somehow	discover	what	lay	beneath	it,	the	turgid
currents	of	soul.	A	waste	of	time,	as	far	as	Triban	Gnol	was	concerned.
Besides,	some	things	should	never	be	revealed.
Hannan	Mosag’s	deformed	face	seemed	to	leer	at	the	Chancellor	as	he
strode	past	the	Ceda	and	his	four	Tiste	Edur	warlocks,	but	there	was	fear	in	the
Ceda’s	eyes.
Sword-tip	skittering	on	the	cracked,	scarred	and	gouged	tiles,	the	Emperor
of	a	Thousand	Deaths	shifted	uneasily	on	his	throne.	‘Chancellor,’	Rhulad
rasped,	‘how	good	of	you	to	come.	And	Letherii	mages,	a	most	impressive	if


useless	gathering.’
Triban	Gnol	bowed,	then	said,	‘Allied	with	Hannan	Mosag’s	formidable
Cedance,	sire,	our	sorcerous	prowess	should	be	more	than	sufficient	to	rid
ourselves	of	these	foreign	interlopers.’
Coins	clicked	on	Rhulad’s	face	as	he	grimaced.	‘And	the	mages	of	the
Borthen	Brigade,	were	they	sufficient?	What	of	the	Brigade	itself,	Chancellor?
They	have	been	mauled!	Letherii	mages,	Letherii	soldiers!	Tiste	Edur!	Your
foreign	interlopers	are	carving	through	a	damned	army!’
‘Unanticipated,’	Triban	Gnol	murmured,	eyes	downcast,	‘that	the	imperial
fleets	in	their	search	for	champions	should	have	so	riled	a	distant	empire.	As	to
that	empire’s	belligerence,	well,	it	seems	almost	unmatched;	indeed,	virtually
insane,	given	the	distances	spanned	to	prosecute	vengeance.	Odd,	as	well,	that
no	formal	declaration	of	war	was	received	–	although,	of	course,	it	is	doubtful
our	fleets	ventured	the	same	preceding	the	slaughter	of	that	empire’s	citizens.
Perhaps,’	he	added,	glancing	up,	‘negotiation	remains	possible.	Some	form	of
financial	compensation,	should	we	prove	able	to	arrange	a	truce—’
Hacking	laughter	from	Hannan	Mosag.	‘You	provincial	fool,	Gnol.	Would
that	you	were	even	capable	of	expanding	that	puny,	melodramatic	theatre	of
your	mind,	then	mayhap	humility	would	still	that	flapping	tongue	of	yours.’
Brows	raised,	the	Chancellor	half	turned	to	regard	the	Ceda.	‘And	what
secret	knowledge	of	this	enemy	do	you	possess?	And	would	you	care	to
enlighten	myself	and	your	Emperor?’
‘This	is	not	punitive,’	Hannan	Mosag	said.	‘Although	it	might	seem	that
way.	Empires	get	their	noses	bloodied	all	the	time,	and	there	were	enough
clashes	at	sea	to	deliver	the	message	that	this	Malazan	Empire	was	not	to	be
trifled	with.	Our	fleets	were	sent	scurrying	from	their	waters	–	Hanradi	Khalag
was	brutally	honest	in	his	assessment.	Malazan	mages	are	more	than	a	match
for	us,	and	for	the	Letherii.’
‘If	not	punitive,’	Triban	Gnol	asked,	‘then	what?’
Hannan	Mosag	faced	the	Emperor.	‘Sire,	my	answer	is	best	reserved	for
you	alone.’
Rhulad	bared	his	teeth.	‘I	am	not	deceived	by	your	games,	Ceda.	Speak.’
‘Sire—’
‘Answer	him!’
‘I	must	not!’
Silence,	in	which	Triban	Gnol	could	hear	naught	but	his	own	heart,
thudding	hard	against	his	ribs.	Hannan	Mosag	had	made	a	terrible	mistake
here,	victim	of	his	own	self-importance.	Seeking	to	use	this	information	of	his
as	a	means	to	crawl	back	to	the	Emperor ’s	side.	But	the	effort…so	clumsy!


‘Tell	me,’	Rhulad	said	in	a	whisper,	‘why	this	must	be	our	secret.’
‘Sire,	this	matter	belongs	among	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘Why?’
Ah.	Because,	dear	Emperor,	these	Malazans,	they	are	coming	for	you.
Triban	Gnol	cleared	his	throat	and	clasped	his	hands	together	above	his	robe’s
belt.	‘This	is	unnecessary,’	he	said	in	his	smoothest	voice.	‘I	am	not	so
provincial	as	Hannan	Mosag	would	like	to	believe.	Emperor,	your	fleets	set	out
across	the	world	in	search	of	champions,	and	so	indeed	they	have	gathered	the
best,	most	capable	fighters	from	a	host	of	peoples.	What	they	could	not	have
anticipated	is	that	an	entire	empire	would	proclaim	itself	a	champion.	And	set
itself	against	you,	sire.	Our	reports	have	made	it	clear,’	he	added,	‘that	the
enemy	is	converging	on	Letheras,	on	this	very	city.’	He	regarded	Hannan
Mosag	as	he	added,	‘They	are	–	and	yes,	Ceda,	I	see	the	truth	plain	on	your
face	–	they	are	coming	for	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths.	Alas,	I	do	not
expect	they	will	elect	to	challenge	him	one	soldier	at	a	time.’
Rhulad	seemed	to	have	shrunk	back	into	the	throne.	His	red-shot	eyes	were
wide	with	terror.	‘They	must	be	stopped,’	he	said	in	a	trembling	hiss.	‘You	will
stop	them.	You,	Hannan	Mosag!	And	you,	Chancellor!	Our	armies	must	stop
them!’
‘And	so	we	shall,’	Triban	Gnol	said,	bowing	again,	before	straightening
and	glancing	across	at	the	Ceda.	‘Hannan	Mosag,	for	all	of	our…disputes,	do
not	for	a	moment	fear	that	we	Letherii	will	abandon	our	Emperor	to	these
foreign	dogs.	We	must	unite,	you	and	I,	and	bring	all	that	we	have	together,	and
so	annihilate	these	Malazans.	Such	audacity	must	be	punished,	thoroughly.
Truly	united,	the	Tiste	Edur	and	the	Letherii	cannot	be	defeated.’
‘Yes,’	said	Rhulad.	‘That	is	true.	Array	the	armies	in	an	unbroken	line
outside	the	city	–	it	is	clear,	isn’t	it,	that	they	do	not	have	the	numbers	to
challenge	such	a	thing?’
‘Sire,’	Triban	Gnol	ventured,	‘perhaps	it	would	be	best	to	advance	a	little
distance	nonetheless.	Westward.	In	that	way	we	can,	if	need	be,	assemble	our
reserves	in	case	there	is	a	breach.	Two	lines	of	defence,	sire,	to	make	certain.’
‘Yes,’	Rhulad	said,	‘those	tactics	are	sound.	How	far	away	are	these
Malazans?	How	long	do	we	have?’
‘Weeks,’	Triban	Gnol	said.
‘Good.	That	is	well.	Yes,	we	must	do	that.	All	of	that,	as	you	say.	Ceda!	You
will	second	yourself	and	your	K’risnan	to	the	Chancellor—’
‘Sire,	he	is	no	military	commander—’
‘Quiet!	You	have	heard	my	will,	Hannan	Mosag.	Defy	me	again	and	I	will
have	you	flailed.’


Hannan	Mosag	did	not	quail	at	the	threat.	Why	would	he	in	that	destroyed
body?	Clearly,	the	Ceda,	once	Warlock	King,	was	familiar	with	agony;	indeed,
at	times	it	seemed	the	deadly	magic	that	poured	through	him	transformed	pain
into	ecstasy,	lighting	Hannan	Mosag’s	eyes	with	fervent	fire.
Triban	Gnol	said	to	the	Emperor,	‘Sire,	we	shall	protect	you.’	He	hesitated,
just	long	enough,	then	half	raised	a	hand	as	if	struck	by	a	sudden	thought.
‘Emperor,	I	wonder,	perhaps	it	would	be	best	to	begin	the	Challenges?	Soon?
Their	presence	is	a	distraction,	an	irritant	for	my	guards.	There	have	been
incidents	of	violence,	a	growing	impatience.’	He	paused	again,	two	heartbeats,
then	said	in	a	lower	tone:	‘Speculation,	sire,	that	you	fear	to	face	them…’
Hannan	Mosag’s	sneer	produced	a	bestial	growl.	‘You	pathetic	creature,
Gnol—’
‘Not	another	word,	Ceda!’	Rhulad	hissed.	Spasms	rippled	across	the
Emperor ’s	mottled	face.	The	sword	skittered	again.
Yes,	Rhulad,	you	understand	what	it	is	to	fear	death	more	than	any	of	us.
Perhaps	more	than	any	mortal	creature	this	world	has	seen.	But	you	flinch	not
from	some	vague	notion	of	oblivion,	do	you?	No,	for	you,	dear	Emperor,	death	is
something	different.	Never	an	end,	only	that	which	precedes	yet	another	painfilled	rebirth.	Even	in	death	you	cannot	lose	yourself,	cannot	escape	–	does
anyone	else	here,	apart	from	me,	truly	grasp	the	sheer	horror	of	that?
‘The	Challenges,’	said	the	Emperor,	‘will	begin	in	four	days.	Chancellor,
have	your	assessors	agreed	on	an	order?’
‘Yes,	sire.	Three	of	the	least	skilled	to	begin.	It	is	likely	you	will	kill	all
three	in	a	single	day.	They	will	tax	you,	of	that	we	can	be	sure,	but	not	unduly
so.	The	second	day	is	reserved	for	one	champion.	A	masked	woman.
Exceptional	speed	but	perhaps	lacking	imagination.	Yet	she	will	be	difficult.’
‘Good.’
‘Sire…’
‘Yes?	What	is	it?’
‘There	are	the	two	we	have	spoken	of	before.	The	Tarthenal	with	the	flint
sword.	Undefeated	by	any	other	champion	–	in	fact,	no-one	dares	spar	with	him
any	more.	He	has	the	habit	of	breaking	bones.’
‘Yes.	The	arrogant	one.’	Rhulad	smiled.	‘But	I	have	faced	Tarthenal
before.’
‘But	not	one	with	Karsa	Orlong’s	prowess,	sire.’
‘No	matter,	that.’
‘He	may	succeed	in	killing	you,	sire.	Perhaps	more	than	once.	Not	seven.
Such	days	are	long	past.	But,	perhaps,	three	or	four.	We	have	allotted	three
days.’


‘Following	the	masked	woman?’
‘No,	there	are	six	others	to	span	two	days.’
Hannan	Mosag	was	staring	at	the	Chancellor	now.	‘Three	days	for	this
Tarthenal?	No	champion	has	yet	been	accorded	three	days.’
‘Nonetheless,	my	assessors	were	unanimous,	Ceda.	This	one	is…unique.’
Rhulad	was	trembling	once	more.	Slain	by	Karsa	Orlong	three,	four	times.
Yes,	sire,	the	sheer	horror	of	that…
‘There	remains	one	more,’	the	Emperor	said.
‘Yes.	The	one	named	Icarium.	He	will	be	the	last.	If	not	the	eighth	day,	then
the	ninth.’
‘And	the	number	of	days	with	him,	Chancellor?’
‘Unknown,	sire.	He	does	not	spar.’
‘Then	how	do	we	know	he	can	fight?’
Triban	Gnol	bowed	again.	‘Sire,	we	have	discussed	this	before.	The	report
of	Varat	Taun,	corroborated	by	Icarium’s	companion,	Taralack	Veed.	And	now,
I	learned	today,	something	new.	Something	most	extraordinary.’
‘What?	Tell	me!’
‘Among	the	rejected	champions,	sire,	a	monk	from	a	distant	archipelago.	It
would	appear,	sire,	that	this	monk	–	and	indeed	all	of	his	people	–	worship	a
single	god.	And	this	god	is	none	other	than	Icarium.’
Rhulad	flinched	as	if	struck	across	the	face.	The	sword’s	point	leapt	up
from	the	floor,	then	cracked	down	again.	Marble	chips	clattered	down	the	dais
step.	‘I	am	to	cross	blades	with	a	god?’
The	Chancellor	shrugged.	‘Do	such	claims	hold	veracity,	sire?	A
primitive,	ignorant	people,	these	Cabalhii.	No	doubt	seeing	in	dhenrabi	the
soul	of	sea-storms	and	in	crab	carapaces	the	faces	of	the	drowned.	I	should
add,	Emperor,	that	this	monk	believes	his	god	to	be	insane,	to	which	the	only
answer	is	a	painted	mask	denoting	laughter.	Savages	possess	the	strangest
notions.’
‘A	god…’
Triban	Gnol	risked	a	glance	at	Hannan	Mosag.	The	Warlock	King’s
expression	was	closed	as	he	studied	Rhulad.	Something	about	that	awakened	a
worm	of	unease	in	the	Chancellor ’s	gut.
‘I	shall	slay	a	god…’
‘There	is	no	reason	to	believe	otherwise,’	Triban	Gnol	said	in	a	calm,
confident	voice.	‘It	will	serve	timely,	sire,	in	pronouncing	your	own	godhood.’
Rhulad’s	eyes	widened.
‘Immortality,’	the	Chancellor	murmured,	‘already	well	established.
Worshipped?	Oh	yes,	by	every	citizen	of	this	empire.	Too	modest,	oh	yes,	to


make	the	pronouncement	of	what	is	obvious	to	us	all.	But,	when	you	stand	over
Icarium’s	destroyed	corpse,	well,	that	will	be	pronouncement	enough,	I	should
imagine.’
‘Godhood.	A	god.’
‘Yes,	sire.	Most	assuredly.	I	have	instructed	the	guild	of	sculptors,	and	their
finest	artists	have	already	begun	work.	We	shall	announce	the	end	of	the
Challenge	in	a	most	appropriate,	a	most	glorious,	manner.’
‘You	are	wise	indeed,’	Rhulad	said,	slowly	leaning	back.	‘Yes,	wise.’
Triban	Gnol	bowed,	ignoring	the	sour	grunt	from	Hannan	Mosag.	Oh,
Ceda,	you	are	mine	now,	and	I	shall	use	you.	You	and	your	foul	Edur.	Oh	yes.
His	eyes	focused	on	his	hands,	folded	so	serenely	where	they	rested	on	the
clasp	of	his	belt.	‘Sire,	orders	must	be	delivered	to	our	armies.	The	Ceda	and	I
must	discuss	the	disposition	of	mages	and	K’risnan.’
‘Yes,	of	course.	Leave	me,	all	of	you.	Attend	to	your	tasks.’
Gesturing	behind	him,	Triban	Gnol	backed	away,	head	still	lowered,	eyes
now	on	the	floor	with	its	chips	of	marble	and	streaks	of	dust.
He	could	hear	Hannan	Mosag	and	his	collection	of	freaks	dragging	their
way	towards	the	doors,	like	gigantic	migrating	toads.	The	simile	brought	a
faint	smile	to	his	lips.
Out	in	the	corridor,	the	doors	shutting	behind	them,	Triban	Gnol	turned	to
study	Hannan	Mosag.	But	the	Ceda	was	continuing	on,	toads	crowding	his
wake.
‘Hannan	Mosag,’	the	Chancellor	called	out.	‘You	and	I	have—’
‘Save	your	crap	for	Rhulad,’	the	Ceda	snapped.
‘He	will	be	displeased	to	hear	of	your	lack	of	co-operation.’
‘Flap	away	with	that	tongue	of	yours,	Gnol.	The	displeasures	yet	to	come
will	overwhelm	your	pathetic	bleatings,	I	am	sure.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
But	Hannan	Mosag	did	not	answer.
Triban	Gnol	watched	as	they	plunged	into	a	side	passage	and	were	gone
from	sight.	Yes,	I	will	deal	with	you,	Ceda,	with	great	satisfaction.	‘Sirryn,
assemble	your	entourage	in	the	compound	and	be	on	your	way	within	the	bell.
And	take	these	mages	with	you.’
‘Yes	sir.’
The	Chancellor	remained	where	he	was	until	they	too	were	gone,	then	he
set	off	for	his	office,	well	pleased.	That	worm	of	unease	was,	however,
reluctant	to	cease	its	gnawing	deep	inside	him.	He	would	have	to	think	on	that	–
too	dangerous	to	just	ignore	such	instincts,	after	all.	But	not	right	now.	It	was
important	to	reward	oneself,	promptly,	and	so	he	released	that	flow	of


satisfaction.	Everything	was	proceeding	nicely	–	that	detail	about	the	Emperor
himself	being	the	final	target	of	these	foreigners	simply	sweetened	the
scenario.	The	Tiste	Edur	would	of	course	stand	to	defend	their	Emperor	–	they
would,	certainly.
Yet,	Rhulad’s	own	brothers,	the	day	of	the	accession.	The	worm	writhed,
forcing	a	twitch	to	his	face,	and	he	quickened	his	pace,	eager	for	the	sanctuary
of	his	office.
Only	to	discover	it	occupied.
Triban	Gnol	stood	in	the	doorway,	surprised	and	discomfited	by	the	sight
of	the	man	standing	to	one	side	of	the	huge	desk.	The	crimson	silks,	the	onyx
rings,	that	damned	sceptre	of	office	tapping	rhythmically	on	one	rounded
shoulder.	‘What	in	the	Errant’s	name	are	you	doing	here,	Invigilator?’
Karos	Invictad	sighed.	‘I	share	your	displeasure,	Chancellor.’
Triban	Gnol	entered	the	room,	walked	round	his	desk	and	sat.	‘I	am	in	the
habit	of	assuming	that	your	control	of	the	city	is	well	in	hand—’
‘Where	is	Bruthen	Trana?’
The	Chancellor	pursed	his	lips.	‘I	haven’t	the	time	for	this.	Put	your	panic
to	rest	–	Bruthen	Trana	is	no	longer	in	Letheras.’
‘Then	where	has	he	gone?	What	road?	How	long	ago?	What	is	the	size	of
his	escort?’
Sighing,	Triban	Gnol	leaned	back,	eyes	settling	on	his	hands	where	they
rested	palms	down	on	the	desktop.	‘Your	need	for	vengeance,	Invigilator,	is
compromising	your	responsibilities	in	maintaining	order.	You	must	step	back,
draw	a	few	deep	breaths—’
The	sceptre	cracked	down	on	the	desktop,	directly	between	the
Chancellor ’s	hands.	Triban	Gnol	lurched	back	in	alarm.
Karos	Invictad	leaned	far	forward,	seeking	an	imposing,	threatening
posture	that,	alas,	failed.	The	man	was,	simply	put,	too	small.	Sweat	glistened
on	his	brow,	beads	glinting	from	his	nose	and	to	either	side	of	that	too-full
mouth.	‘You	patronizing	piece	of	shit,’	the	Invigilator	whispered.	‘I	was	given
leave	to	hunt	down	Tiste	Edur.	I	was	given	leave	to	make	arrests.	I	wanted	that
K’risnan	who	accompanied	Bruthen	Trana,	only	to	find	him	beyond	my	reach
because	of	Hannan	Mosag	and	this	damned	invasion	from	the	west.	Fine.	He
can	wait	until	the	trouble	passes.	But	Bruthen	Trana…no,	I	will	not	put	that
aside.	I	want	him.	I	want	him!’
‘He	has	been	whisked	away,	Invigilator,	and	no,	we	have	no	information	on
when,	or	which	road	or	ship	he	set	out	on.	He	is	gone.	Will	he	return?	I
imagine	he	will,	and	when	that	time	comes,	of	course	he	is	yours.	In	the
meantime,	Karos,	we	are	faced	with	far	more	important	concerns.	I	have	four


armies	massing	west	of	the	city	for	which	wages	are	now	two	weeks	overdue.
Why?	Because	the	treasury	is	experiencing	a	shortage	of	coin.	Even	as	you	and
your	favourite	agents	line	the	walls	of	your	new	estates	with	stolen	loot,	even
as	you	assume	control	of	one	confiscated	enterprise	after	another.	Tell	me,
Invigilator,	how	fares	the	treasury	of	the	Patriotists	these	days?	Minus	the
loot?’	The	Chancellor	then	rose	from	his	chair,	making	full	use	of	his	superior
height	and	seeing	with	grim	pleasure	the	small	man	step	back.	It	was	now
Triban	Gnol’s	turn	to	lean	across	the	desk.	‘We	have	a	crisis!	The	threat	of
financial	ruin	looms	over	us	all	–	and	you	stand	here	fretting	over	one	Tiste
Edur	barbarian!’	He	made	a	show	of	struggling	to	master	his	fury,	then	added,
‘I	have	received	increasingly	desperate	missives	from	the	Liberty	Consign,
from	Rautos	Hivanar	himself	–	the	wealthiest	man	in	the	empire.	Missives,
Invigilator,	imploring	me	to	summon	you	–	so	be	it,	here	you	are,	and	you	will
answer	my	questions!	And	if	those	answers	do	not	satisfy	me,	I	assure	you	they
will	not	satisfy	Rautos	Hivanar!’
Karos	Invictad	sneered.	‘Hivanar.	The	old	fool	has	gone	senile.	Obsessing
over	a	handful	of	artifacts	dug	up	from	the	river	bank.	Have	you	seen	him	of
late?	He	has	lost	so	much	weight	his	skin	hangs	like	drapery	on	his	bones.’
‘Perhaps	you	are	the	source	of	his	stress,	Invigilator—’
‘Hardly.’
‘Rautos	has	indicated	you	have	been…excessive,	in	your	use	of	his
resources.	He	begins	to	suspect	you	are	using	his	coin	for	the	payroll	of	the
entire	Patriotist	organization.’
‘I	am	and	will	continue	to	do	so.	In	pursuit	of	the	conspirators.’	Karos
smiled.	‘Chancellor,	your	opinion	that	Rautos	Hivanar	is	the	wealthiest	man	in
the	empire	is,	alas,	in	error.	At	least,	if	it	was	once	so,	it	is	no	longer.’
Triban	Gnol	stared	at	the	man.	At	his	flushed,	triumphant	expression.
‘Explain	yourself,	Karos	Invictad.’
‘At	the	beginning	of	this	investigation,	Chancellor,	I	perceived	the	essential
weakness	in	our	position.	Rautos	Hivanar	himself.	As	leader	of	the	Liberty
Consign.	And,	by	extension,	the	Consign	itself	was,	as	an	organization,
inherently	flawed.	We	were	faced	with	a	looming	collision,	one	that	I	could	not
will	myself	blind	to,	and	accordingly	it	was	incumbent	on	me	to	rectify	the
situation	as	quickly	as	possible.	You	see,	the	power	lay	with	me,	but	the	wealth
resided	in	the	clutches	of	Hivanar	and	his	Consign.	This	was	unacceptable.	In
order	to	meet	the	threat	of	the	conspirators	–	or,	as	I	now	see,	conspirator	–
yes,	there	is	but	one	–	in	order	to	meet	his	threat,	I	needed	to	attack	from	a
consolidated	position.’
Triban	Gnol	stared,	disbelieving	even	as	he	began	to	comprehend	the


direction	of	the	Invigilator ’s	pompous,	megalomaniacal	monologue.
‘The	sweetest	irony	is,’	Karos	Invictad	continued,	sceptre	once	more
tapping	a	beat	on	his	shoulder,	‘that	lone	criminal	and	his	pathetically
simplistic	efforts	at	financial	sabotage	provided	me	with	the	greatest
inspiration.	It	was	not	difficult,	for	one	of	my	intelligence,	to	advance	and
indeed	to	elaborate	on	that	theme	of	seeming	destabilization.	Of	course,	the
only	people	being	destabilized	were	Rautos	Hivanar	and	his	fellow	bloated
blue-bloods,	and	was	I	supposed	to	be	sympathetic?	I,	Karos	Invictad,	born	to	a
family	crushed	by	murderous	debt?	I,	who	struggled,	using	every	talent	I
possessed	to	finally	rid	myself	of	that	inherited	misery	–	no,’	he	laughed	softly,
‘there	was	no	sympathy	in	my	heart.	Only	bright	revelation,	brilliant
inspiration	–	do	you	know	who	was	my	greatest	idol	when	I	fought	my	war
against	Indebtedness?	Tehol	Beddict.	Recall	him?	Who	could	not	lose,	whose
wealth	shot	skyward	with	such	stunning	speed,	achieving	such	extraordinary
height,	before	flashing	out	like	a	spent	star	in	the	night	sky.	Oh,	he	liked	his
games,	didn’t	he?	Yet,	a	lesson	there,	and	one	I	heeded	well.	Such	genius,
sparking	too	hot,	too	soon,	left	him	a	gutted	shell.	And	that,	Chancellor,	I
would	not	emulate.’
‘You,’	Triban	Gnol	said,	‘are	the	true	source	of	this	empire-wide
sabotage.’
‘Who	better	positioned?	Oh,	I	will	grant	you,	my	fellow	conspirator	has
displayed	increasingly	impressive	deviousness	of	late.	And	there	is	no	doubt
that	I	could	not	have	achieved	quite	the	level	of	success	as	I	have	without	him
or	her.	Triban	Gnol,	standing	before	you	at	this	moment	is	the	wealthiest	man
ever	to	have	lived	in	Lether.	Yes,	appalling	stacks	of	coin	have	indeed	vanished.
Yes,	the	strain	has	sent	fatal	fissures	through	every	merchant	house	in	the
empire.	And	yes,	many	great	families	are	about	to	fall	and	nothing	can	save
them,	even	were	I	so	inclined.	Which	I	am	not.	Thus.’	The	sceptre	settled
motionless	onto	that	shoulder.	‘I	am	both	the	power	and	the	wealth,	and	I	am
poised	to	save	this	empire	from	financial	ruin	–	should	I	so	choose.’
The	Chancellor ’s	hands,	there	on	the	desktop,	had	gone	white,	the	veins
and	arteries	prominent	in	their	sickly	blue	and	green	hues.	The	hands	–	his
hands	–	felt	cold	as	death.	‘What	do	you	want,	Karos	Invictad?’
‘Oh,	I	mostly	have	it	already,	Chancellor.	Including,	I	am	pleased	to	see,
your	fullest	understanding	of	the	situation.	As	it	stands	now.	As	it	will	stand	in
the	future.’
‘You	seem	to	forget	there	is	a	war	on.’
‘There	always	is.	Opportunities	for	yet	more	profit	and	power.	In	the	next
week	or	two,	Chancellor,	I	will	become	more	famous,	more	beloved,	more


powerful	than	even	you	could	imagine,	or,	should	I	say,	fear.’	His	smile
broadened.	‘I	assume	it’s	fear,	but	relax,	Chancellor,	I	do	not	have	you	next	on
my	list.	Your	position	is	secure,	and,	once	these	damned	Tiste	Edur	are	taken
care	of,	including	the	Emperor,	it	shall	be	you	and	I	in	control	of	this	empire.
No,	you	will	see	plain	enough,	as	will	everyone	else.	The	saboteur	arrested.
The	coins	recovered.	The	invaders	bought	off.	The	Liberty	Consign	obliterated
and	the	Patriotists	dominant.	You	see,	my	agents	will	control	the	internal
matters,	while	you	will	possess	the	armies	–	well-paid	armies,	I	assure	you	–
and	absolute	mastery	of	the	palace.’
‘What?’	Triban	Gnol	asked	dryly.	‘You	do	not	seek	the	throne	for
yourself?’
The	sceptre	waved	dismissively.	‘Not	in	the	least.	Throw	a	fop	on	it	if	you
feel	the	need.	Or	better	still,	salute	the	legend	and	leave	it	empty.’
Triban	Gnol	folded	his	hands	together.	‘You	are	about	to	arrest	your
conspirator?’
‘I	am.’
‘And	my	armies?’
‘They	will	be	paid.	At	once.’
The	Chancellor	nodded.	‘Invigilator,’	he	then	said,	with	a	slight	frown	as
he	studied	his	hands,	‘I	have	heard	disturbing	reports…’
‘Oh?’
‘Yes.	It	seems	that,	in	a	manner	distressingly	similar	to	Rautos	Hivanar,
you	too	have	succumbed	to	a	peculiar	obsession.’	He	glanced	up	searchingly,
innocently.	‘Something	about	a	puzzle?’
‘Who	has	told	you	that?’
The	Chancellor	shrugged.
After	a	moment	the	flush	in	Invictad’s	round	face	faded	to	blotches	on	the
cheeks,	and	the	man	shrugged.	‘An	idle	pursuit.	Amusing.	A	quaint	challenge
which	I	will	solve	in	a	few	days.	Unlike	Rautos	Hivanar,	you	see,	I	have	found
that	this	puzzle	has	in	fact	sharpened	my	mind.	The	world	has	never	been
clearer	to	my	eyes.	Never	as	clean,	as	precise,	as	perfect.	That	puzzle,
Chancellor,	has	become	my	inspiration.’
‘Indeed.	Yet	it	haunts	you	–	you	cry	out	in	your	sleep—’
‘Lies!	Someone	mocks	you	with	such	untruths,	Triban	Gnol!	I	have	come
here,	have	I	not,	to	inform	you	of	the	impending	triumph	of	my	plans.	Every
detail	coming	to	fullest	fruition.	This	effort	of	yours	now,	pathetically
transparent	as	it	is,	is	entirely	unnecessary.	As	I	told	you,	your	position	is
secure.	You	are,	and	will	remain,	entirely	essential.’
‘As	you	say,	Invigilator.’


Karos	Invictad	turned	to	leave.	‘As	soon	as	you	learn	of	Bruthen	Trana’s
return…’
‘You	shall	be	informed	at	once.’
‘Excellent.	I	am	pleased.’	He	paused	at	the	door	but	did	not	turn	round.
‘Regarding	that	K’risnan	under	the	Ceda’s	protection…’
‘I	am	sure	something	can	be	arranged.’
‘I	am	doubly	pleased,	Chancellor.	Now,	fare	you	well.’
The	door	closed.	The	odious,	insane	creature	was	gone.
Odious	and	insane,	yes,	but…now	the	wealthiest	man	in	the	empire.	He
would	have	to	play	this	carefully,	very	carefully	indeed.	Yet	Karos	Invictad	has
revealed	his	own	flaw.	Too	eager	to	gloat	and	too	ready	to	give	in	to	that
eagerness.	All	too	soon.
The	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths	remains	on	the	throne.
A	foreign	army	uninterested	in	negotiation	approaches.
A	champion	who	is	a	god	will	soon	draw	his	sword.
Karos	Invictad	has	the	hands	of	a	child.	A	vicious	child,	crooning	as	he
watches	them	pull	out	the	entrails	of	his	still-alive	pet	cat.	Or	dog.	Or	abject
prisoner	in	one	of	his	cells.	A	child,	yes,	but	one	unleashed,	free	to	do	and	be	as
he	pleases.
By	the	Errant,	children	are	such	monsters.
Tonight,	the	Chancellor	realized,	he	would	summon	a	child	for	himself.
For	his	own	pleasure.	And	he	would	destroy	that	child,	as	only	an	adult	with
beautiful	hands	could.	Destroy	it	utterly.
It	was	the	only	thing	one	could	do	with	monsters.
	
The	one-eyed	god	standing	unseen	in	the	throne	room	was	furious.	Ignorance
was	ever	the	enemy,	and	the	Errant	understood	that	he	was	under	assault.	By
Chancellor	Triban	Gnol.	By	Hannan	Mosag.	The	clash	of	these	two	forces	of
the	empire	was	something	that	the	Emperor	on	his	throne	barely	sensed	–	the
Errant	was	sure	of	that.	Rhulad	was	trapped	in	his	own	cage	of	emotions,	terror
wielding	all	its	instruments	of	torture,	poking,	jabbing,	twisting	deep.	Yet	the
Errant	had	witnessed	with	clear	eyes	–	no,	a	clear	eye	–	in	the	fraught	audience
now	past,	just	how	vicious	this	battle	was	becoming.
But	I	cannot	fathom	their	secrets.	Neither	Triban	Gnol’s	nor	Hannan
Mosag’s.	This	is	my	realm.	Mine!
He	might	renew	one	old	path.	The	one	leading	into	the	Chancellor ’s
bedroom.	But	even	then,	when	that	relationship	had	been	in	fullest	bloom,
Triban	Gnol	held	to	his	secrets.	Sinking	into	his	various	personas	of	innocent


victim	and	wide-eyed	child,	he	had	become	little	more	than	a	simpleton	when
with	the	Errant	–	with	Turudal	Brizad,	the	Consort	to	the	Queen,	who	never
grew	old	–	and	would	not	be	moved	from	the	games	he	so	needed.	No,	that
would	not	work,	because	it	never	had.
Was	there	any	other	way	to	the	Chancellor?
Even	now,	Triban	Gnol	was	a	godless	creature.	Not	one	to	bend	knee	to	the
Errant.	So	that	path,	too,	was	closed.	I	could	simply	follow	him.	Everywhere.
Piece	together	his	scheme	by	listening	to	the	orders	he	delivers,	by	reading	the
missives	he	despatches.	By	hoping	he	talks	in	his	sleep.	Abyss	below!
Furious,	indeed.	At	his	own	growing	panic	as	the	convergence	drew	ever
closer.	His	knowledge	was	no	better	when	it	came	to	Hannan	Mosag,	although
some	details	were	beyond	dissembling.	The	power	of	the	Crippled	God,	for
one.	Yet	even	there,	the	Warlock	King	was	no	simple	servant,	no	mindless
slave	to	that	chaotic	promise.	He	had	sought	the	sword	now	in	Rhulad’s	hands,
after	all.	As	with	any	other	god,	the	Fallen	One	played	no	favourites.	First	to
arrive	at	the	altar…No,	Hannan	Mosag	would	hold	to	no	delusions	there.
The	Errant	glanced	once	more	at	Rhulad,	this	Emperor	of	a	Thousand
Deaths.	The	fool,	for	all	his	bulk,	now	sat	on	that	throne	in	painful
insignificance	–	so	obvious	it	hurt	to	just	look	at	him.	Alone	in	this	vast	domed
chamber,	the	thousand	deaths	refracted	into	ten	thousand	flinches	in	those
glittering	eyes.
The	Chancellor	and	his	retinue	were	gone.	The	Ceda	away	with	his	broken
handful	as	well.	Not	a	guard	in	sight,	yet	Rhulad	remained.	Sitting,	burnished
coins	gleaming.	And	on	his	face	all	that	had	been	private,	unrevealed,	was	now
loosed	in	expressive	array.	All	the	pathos,	the	abject	hauntings	–	the	Errant	had
seen,	had	always	seen,	in	face	after	face	spanning	too	many	years	to	count,	the
divide	of	the	soul,	the	difference	between	the	face	that	knew	it	was	being
watched,	and	the	face	that	believed	in	its	solitude.	Bifurcation.	And	he	had
witnessed	when	inside	crawled	outside	to	a	seemingly	unseeing	world.
Divided	soul.	Yours,	Rhulad,	has	been	cut	in	two.	By	that	sword,	by	the
spilled	blood	between	you	and	each	of	your	brothers,	between	you	and	your
parents.	Between	you	and	your	kind.	What	would	you	give	me,	Rhulad	Sengar	of
the	Hiroth	Tiste	Edur,	to	be	healed?
Assuming	I	could	manage	such	a	thing,	of	course.	Which	I	cannot.
But	it	was	clear	to	the	Errant	now	that	Rhulad	had	begun	to	understand	one
thing	at	least.	The	fast	approach	of	convergence,	the	dread	gathering	and
inevitable	clash	of	powers.	Perhaps	the	Crippled	God	had	been	whispering	in
his	sword-bearer ’s	ear.	Or	perhaps	Rhulad	was	not	quite	the	fool	most	believed
him	to	be.	Even	me,	on	occasion	–	and	who	am	I	to	sneer	in	contempt?	A


damned	Letherii	witch	swallowed	one	of	my	eyes!
The	growing	fear	was	undisguised	in	the	Emperor ’s	face.	Coins	bedded	in
burnt	skin.	Mottled	pocking	where	the	coins	were	gone.	Brutal	wealth	and
wounded	penury,	two	sides	of	yet	another	curse	to	plague	this	modern	age.	Yes,
divide	humanity’s	soul.	Into	the	haves,	the	have-nots.	Rhulad,	you	are	in	truth	a
living	symbol.	But	that	is	a	weight	no-one	can	bear	for	very	long.	You	see	the
end	coming.	Or,	many	endings,	and	yes,	one	of	them	is	yours.
Shall	it	be	this	foreign	army	that	has,	in	Triban	Gnol’s	clever	words,
proclaimed	itself	a	champion?
Shall	it	be	Icarium,	Stealer	of	Life?	The	Wanderer	through	Time?
Or	something	far	more	sordid	–	some	perfect	ambush	by	Hannan	Mosag;	or
one	final	betrayal	to	annihilate	you	utterly,	as	would	one	committed	by	your
Chancellor?
And	why	do	I	believe	the	answer	will	be	none	of	those?	Not	one.	Not	a
single	thing	so…so	direct.	So	obvious.
And	when	will	this	blood	stop	seeping	from	this	socket?	When	will	these
crimson	tears	end?
The	Errant	melted	into	the	wall	behind	him.	He’d	had	enough	of	Rhulad’s
private	face.	Too	much,	he	suspected,	like	his	own.	Imagined	unwatched	–	but
am	I	too	being	watched?	Whose	cold	gaze	is	fixed	on	me,	calculating	meanings,
measuring	weaknesses?
Yes,	see	where	I	weep,	see	what	I	weep.
And	yes,	this	was	all	by	a	mortal’s	hand.
He	moved	quickly,	unmindful	of	barriers	of	mortar	and	stone,	of	tapestry
and	wardrobe,	of	tiled	floors	and	ceiling	beams.	Through	darkness	and	light
and	shadows	in	all	their	flavours,	into	the	sunken	tunnels,	where	he	walked
through	ankle-deep	water	without	parting	its	murky	surface.
Into	her	cherished	room.
She	had	brought	stones	to	build	platforms	and	walkways,	creating	a	series
of	bridges	and	islands	over	the	shallow	lake	that	now	flooded	the	chamber.	Oil
lamps	painted	ripples	and	the	Errant	stood,	taking	form	once	more	opposite	the
misshapen	altar	she	had	erected,	its	battered	top	crowded	with	bizarre	votive
offerings,	items	of	binding	and	investiture,	reliquaries	assembled	to	give	new
shape	to	the	god’s	worship.	To	the	worship	of	me.	The	gnostic	chthonic
nightmare	might	have	amused	the	Errant	once,	long	ago.	But	now	he	could	feel
his	face	twisting	in	disdain.
She	spoke	from	the	gloomy	corner	to	his	left.	‘Everything	is	perfect,
Immortal	One.’
Solitude	and	insanity,	most	natural	bedmates.	‘Nothing	is	perfect,	Feather


Witch.	Look,	all	around	you	in	this	place	–	is	it	not	obvious?	We	are	in	the
throes	of	dissolution—’
‘The	river	is	high,’	she	said	dismissively.	‘A	third	of	the	tunnels	I	used	to
wander	are	now	under	water.	But	I	saved	all	the	old	books	and	scrolls	and
tablets.	I	saved	them	all.’
Under	water.	Something	about	that	disturbed	him	–	not	the	obvious	thing,
the	dissolution	he	had	spoken	of,	but…something	else.
‘The	names,’	she	said.	‘To	release.	To	bind.	Oh,	we	shall	have	many
servants,	Immortal	One.	Many.’
‘I	have	seen,’	the	god	said,	‘the	fissures	in	the	ice.	The	meltwater.	The
failing	prison	of	that	vast	demon	of	the	sea.	We	cannot	hope	to	enslave	such	a
creature.	When	it	breaks	free,	there	will	be	devastation.	Unless,	of	course,	the
Jaghut	returns	–	to	effect	repairs	on	her	ritual.	In	any	case	–	and	fortunately	for
everyone	–	I	do	not	believe	that	Mael	will	permit	it	to	get	even	that	far	–	to
escape.’
‘You	must	stop	him!’	Feather	Witch	said	in	a	hiss.
‘Why?’
‘Because	I	want	that	demon!’
‘I	told	you,	we	cannot	hope	to—’
‘I	can!	I	know	the	names!	All	of	the	names!’
He	stared	across	at	her.	‘You	seek	an	entire	pantheon,	Feather	Witch?	Is	one
god	under	your	heel	not	enough?’
She	laughed,	and	he	heard	something	splash	in	the	water	near	her.	‘The	sea
remembers.	In	every	wave,	every	current.	The	sea,	Immortal	One,	remembers
the	shore.’
‘What	–	what	does	that	mean?’
Feather	Witch	laughed	again.	‘Everything	is	perfect.	Tonight,	I	will	visit
Udinaas.	In	his	dreams.	By	morning	he	will	be	mine.	Ours.’
‘This	web	you	cast,’	the	Errant	said,	‘it	is	too	thin,	too	weak.	You	have
stretched	it	beyond	all	resilience,	and	it	will	snap,	Feather	Witch.’
‘I	know	how	to	use	your	power,’	she	replied.	‘Better	than	you	do.	Because
us	mortals	understand	certain	things	far	better	than	you	and	your	kind.’
‘Such	as?’	the	Errant	asked,	amused.
‘The	fact	that	worship	is	a	weapon,	for	one.’
At	those	dry	words,	chill	seeped	through	the	god.
Ah,	poor	Udinaas.
‘Now	go,’	she	said.	‘You	know	what	must	be	done.’
Did	he?	Well…yes.	A	nudge.	What	I	do	best.


	
The	sceptre	cracked	hard	against	the	side	of	Tanal	Yathvanar ’s	head,	exploding
stars	behind	his	eyes,	and	he	staggered,	then	sank	down	onto	one	knee,	as	the
blood	began	flowing.	Above	him,	Karos	Invictad	said	in	a	conversational	tone:
‘I	advise	you,	next	time	you	are	tempted	to	inform	on	my	activities	to	one	of
the	Chancellor ’s	agents,	to	reconsider.	Because	the	next	time,	Tanal,	I	will	see
you	killed.	In	a	most	unpleasant	fashion.’
Tanal	watched	the	blood	fall	in	elongated	droplets,	spattering	on	the	dusty
floor.	His	temple	throbbed,	and	his	probing	fingers	found	a	flap	of	mangled
skin	hanging	down	almost	to	his	cheek.	His	eye	on	that	side	ebbed	in	and	out	of
focus	in	time	with	the	throbbing.	He	felt	exposed,	vulnerable.	He	felt	like	a
child	among	cold-faced	adults.	‘Invigilator,’	he	said	in	a	shaky	voice,	‘I	have
told	no-one	anything.’
‘Lie	again	and	I	will	dispense	with	mercy.	Lie	again	and	the	breath	you	use
to	utter	it	will	be	your	last.’
Tanal	licked	his	lips.	What	could	he	do?	‘I’m	sorry,	Invigilator.	Never
again.	I	swear	it.’
‘Get	out,	and	send	for	a	servant	to	clean	up	the	mess	you’ve	left	in	my
office.’
Nauseated,	his	throat	tightening	against	an	eager	upswell	of	vomit,	Tanal
Yathvanar	hurried	out	in	a	half-crouch.
I’ve	done	nothing.	Nothing	to	deserve	this.	Invictad’s	paranoia	has	driven
him	into	the	abyss	of	madness.	Even	as	his	power	grows.	Imagine,	threatening
to	sweep	away	the	Chancellor’s	own	life,	in	Triban	Gnol’s	own	office!	Of
course,	that	had	been	but	the	Invigilator ’s	version	of	what	had	transpired.	But
Tanal	had	seen	the	bright	gleam	in	Invictad’s	eyes,	fresh	from	the	glory	of	his
visit	to	the	Eternal	Domicile.
It	had	all	gone	too	far.	All	of	it.
Head	spinning,	Tanal	set	out	to	find	a	healer.	There	was	much	still	to	do
this	day.	An	arrest	to	be	made,	and,	split-open	skull	or	no,	Karos	Invictad’s
precise	schedule	had	to	be	kept.	This	was	to	be	a	triumphant	day.	For	the
Patriotists.	For	the	great	Letherii	Empire.
It	would	ease	the	pressure,	the	ever-tightening	straits	that	gripped	the
people	–	and	not	just	here	in	Letheras,	but	across	the	entire	empire.	Too	many
fraught	rumours,	of	battles	and	defeats	suffered.	The	strictures	of	not	enough
hard	coin,	the	strange	disappearance	of	unskilled	labour,	the	tales	of	oncesecure	families	falling	into	Indebtedness.	The	whisper	of	huge	financial
holdings	tottering	like	trees	with	rotted	roots.	Heroic	victories	were	needed,


and	this	day	would	mark	one.	Karos	Invictad	had	found	the	greatest	traitor
ever,	and	he,	Tanal	Yathvanar,	would	make	the	arrest.	And	they	will	hear	that
detail.	My	name,	central	to	all	that	will	happen	this	day.	I	intend	to	make
certain	of	it.
Karos	Invictad	was	not	the	only	man	skilled	at	reaping	glory.

Ancient	cities	possessed	many	secrets.	The	average	citizen	was	born,	lived,	and
died	in	the	fugue	of	vast	ignorance.	The	Errant	knew	he	had	well	learned	his
contempt	for	humanity,	for	the	dross	of	mortal	existence	that	called	blindness
vision,	ignorance	comprehension,	and	delusion	faith.	He	had	seen	often
enough	the	wilful	truncation	people	undertook	upon	leaving	childhood	(and
the	wonder	of	its	endless	possibilities),	as	if	to	exist	demanded	the	sacrifice	of
both	unfettered	dreams	and	the	fearless	ambition	needed	to	achieve	them.	As	if
those	self-imposed	limitations	used	to	justify	failure	were	virtues,	to	add	to
those	of	pious	self-righteousness	and	the	condescension	of	the	flagellant.
Oh,	but	look	at	himself,	here	and	now,	look	at	what	he	was	about	to	do.	The
city’s	ancient	secrets	made	into	things	to	be	used,	and	used	to	achieve	cruel
ends.	Yet	was	he	not	a	god?	Was	this	not	his	realm?	If	all	that	existed	was	not
open	to	use	and,	indeed,	abuse,	then	what	was	its	purpose?
He	walked	through	the	ghostly	walls,	the	submerged	levels,
acknowledging	a	vague	awareness	of	hidden,	mostly	obscured	patterns,
structures,	the	array	of	things	that	held	significance,	although	such
comprehension	was	not	for	him,	not	for	his	cast	of	mind,	but	something	alien,
something	long	lost	to	the	dead	ages	of	the	distant	past.
No	end	to	manifestations,	however,	few	of	which	captured	the	awareness	of
the	mortals	he	now	walked	among	–	walked	unseen,	less	than	a	chill	draught
against	the	neck	–	and	the	Errant	continued	on,	observing	such	details	as	snared
his	attention.
Finding	the	place	he	sought,	he	halted.	Before	him	stood	the	walls	of	an
estate.	None	other	than	the	one	that	had	belonged	to	the	late	Gerun	Eberict.	It
stood	abandoned,	ownership	mired	in	a	legal	tangle	of	claims	that	had
stretched	on	and	on.	Gerun	Eberict	had,	it	seemed,	taken	all	his	wealth	with
him,	a	detail	that	amused	the	Errant	no	end.
The	huge	main	building’s	footprint	cut	across	the	unremarked	lines	of	an
older	structure	that	had	once	stood	bordered	on	three	sides	by	open	water:	two
cut	channels	and	a	stream	born	of	deep	artesian	wells	filled	with	cold	black
water	beneath	a	vast	shelf	of	limestone	that	itself	lay	below	a	thick	layer	of


silts,	sand	lenses	and	beds	of	clay.	There	had	been	significance	to	these
channels,	and	to	the	fact	that	the	fourth	side	had	possessed,	beneath	what	passed
for	a	street	seven	thousand	years	ago,	a	buried	tunnel	of	fire-hardened	clay.	In
this	tunnel,	kept	distinct	from	all	other	local	sources,	there	had	flowed	water
from	the	depths	of	the	river.	Thus,	all	four	sides,	the	precious	lifeblood	of	the
Elder	God	who	had	been	worshipped	in	the	temple	that	had	once	squatted	in
this	place.
Eberict	should	have	been	mindful	of	that	detail,	in	which	a	hired	seer	might
well	have	discerned	Gerun’s	eventual	demise	at	the	blunt	hands	of	a	half-breed
giant.	It	was	no	accident,	after	all,	that	those	of	Tarthenal	blood	were	so	drawn
to	Mael,	even	now	–	some	whispering	of	instinct	of	that	first	alliance,	forged
on	the	water,	between	Imass	and	Tarthenal	–	or	Toblakai,	to	use	their	true
name.	Before	the	Great	Landings	that	brought	the	last	of	the	giants	who	had
chosen	to	remain	pure	of	blood	to	this	and	other	shores,	where	the	first
founders	would	become	the	vicious,	spiteful	gods	of	the	Tarthenal.
But	it	was	not	just	Gerun	Eberict	and	the	countless	other	citizens	of
Letheras	who	dwelt	here	who	were	unmindful	–	or,	perhaps,	forgetful	–	of	the
ancient	significance	of	all	that	had	been	swept	clean	from	the	surface	in	this
city.
The	Errant	moved	forward.	Through	the	estate’s	outer	wall.	Then	down,
through	the	cobbles	of	the	compound,	sliding	ghostly	past	the	rubble	and	sand
of	fill,	down	into	the	foul,	motionless	air	of	the	clay-lined	tunnel.	Knee-deep	in
thick,	soupy	water.
He	faced	the	inner	sloping	wall	of	the	tunnel,	gauging	his	position	relative
to	whatever	remnants	of	the	old	temple	remained	beyond.	And	strode	forward.
Shattered	stone,	jammed	and	packed	tight,	stained	black	by	the	thick,	airless
clays	now	filling	every	space.	Evidence	of	fire	in	the	burst	cracks	of
foundation	blocks.	Remnants	of	ore-laden	paints	still	clinging	to	fragments	of
plaster.	Ubiquitous	pieces	of	pottery,	shapeless	clumps	of	green	copper,	the
mangled	black	knuckles	of	silver,	the	defiant	gleam	of	red-tinged	gold	–	all
that	remained	of	past	complexities	of	mortal	life,	reminders	of	hands	that	had
once	touched,	shaped,	pressed	tips	to	indent	and	nails	to	incise,	brushed	glaze
and	paint	and	dust	from	chipped	rims;	hands	that	left	nothing	behind	but	these
objects	poignant	with	failure.
Disgusted,	nauseated,	the	god	pushed	his	way	through	the	detritus,	and
clawed	his	way	clear:	a	steeply	angled	space,	created	by	the	partially	collapsed
inner	wall.	Blue	tesserae	to	paint	an	image	of	unbroken	sea,	but	various	pieces
had	fallen	away,	revealing	grey	plaster	still	bearing	the	grooved	patterns	left
by	the	undersides	of	the	minute	cut	tiles.	In	this	cramped	space	the	Errant


crouched,	gasping.	Time	told	no	bright	tales.	No,	time	delivered	its	mute
message	of	dissolution	with	unrelieved	monotony.
By	the	Abyss,	such	crushing	weight!
The	Errant	drew	a	deep	breath	of	the	stale,	dead	air.	Then	another.
And	sensed,	not	far	away,	the	faint	whisper	of	power.	Residual,	so	meagre
as	to	be	meaningless,	yet	it	started	the	god’s	heart	pounding	hard	in	his	chest.
The	sanctification	remained.	No	desecration,	making	what	he	sought	that	much
simpler.	Relieved	at	the	thought	of	being	quickly	done	with	this	ghastly	place,
the	Errant	set	out	towards	that	power.
The	altar	was	beneath	a	mass	of	rubble,	the	limestone	wreckage	so	packed
down	that	it	must	have	come	from	a	collapsing	ceiling,	the	huge	weight
slamming	down	hard	enough	to	shatter	the	stones	of	the	floor	beneath	that
runnelled	block	of	sacred	stone.	Even	better.	And…yes,	bone	dry.	He	could
murmur	a	thousand	nudges	into	that	surrounding	matrix.	Ten	thousand.
Edging	closer,	the	Errant	reached	down	and	settled	one	hand	on	the	altar.
He	could	not	feel	those	runnels,	could	not	feel	the	water-worn	basalt,	could	not
feel	the	deep-cut	channels	that	had	once	vented	living	blood	into	the	salty
streams	filling	the	runnels.	Ah,	we	were	thirsty	in	those	days,	weren’t	we?
He	awakened	his	own	power	–	as	much	as	she	would	give	him,	and	for	this
task	it	was	more	than	enough.
The	Errant	began	weaving	a	ritual.
	
Advocate	Sleem	was	a	tall,	thin	man.	Covering	most	of	his	forehead	and
spreading	down	onto	his	left	cheek,	reaching	the	line	of	the	jaw,	was	a	skin
ailment	that	created	a	cracked	scale	pattern	reminiscent	of	the	bellies	of	newly
hatched	alligators.	There	were	ointments	that	could	heal	this	condition,	but	it
was	clear	that	the	legendary	advocate	of	Letherii	law	in	fact	cultivated	this
reptilian	dermatosis,	which	so	cleverly	complemented	both	his	reputation	and
his	cold,	lifeless	eyes.
He	stood	now	in	Bugg’s	office,	hunched	at	the	shoulders	as	if	to	make
himself	even	narrower,	and	the	high	collar	of	his	dark	green	cloak	flared	out
like	a	snake’s	hood	behind	his	elongated,	small-eared	and	hairless	head.	His
regard	was	languid	in	that	lifeless	way	of	his	as	he	studied	Bugg.	‘Did	I	hear
you	correctly?’	the	advocate	asked	in	a	voice	that	he	tried	hard	to	make
sibilant,	but	which	instead	came	out	awkward	and	wavering.	The	effect,	Bugg
realized	with	a	faint	start,	precisely	matched	what	he	would	imagine	a	snake
would	sound	like	with	words	emerging	from	a	lipless	mouth.	Although,	he
added	to	himself,	the	specific	question	hardly	seemed	one	he	would	expect	a


snake	to	utter.	Snakes	don’t	ask	for	clarification.
Do	they?
‘You	wear	a	most	odd	expression,’	Sleem	said	after	a	moment.	‘Did	my
inability	to	understand	you	leave	you	confused,	Master	Bugg?’
‘Did	you	truly	misunderstand?’
‘That	is	why	I	sought	reiteration.’
‘Ah.	Well,	what	did	you	think	you	heard?’
The	eyes	blinked.	‘Have	we	truly	uttered	all	these	words	to	return	to	my
original	query?’
‘I	invite	you	to	use	some	more,	Sleem.’
‘Rather	than	simply	repeating	yourself.’
‘I	hate	repeating	myself.’
Advocate	Sleem,	Bugg	knew,	despised	discombobulation,	although	that
was	in	all	probability	not	even	a	word.
‘Master	Bugg,	as	you	know,	I	despise	discombobulation.’
‘Oh,	I’m	sorry	to	hear	that.’
‘You	should	be,	since	I	charge	by	the	word.’
‘Both	our	words,	or	just	yours?’
‘It	is	a	little	late	to	ask	that	now,	isn’t	it?’	Sleem’s	folded	hands	did
something	sinuous	and	vaguely	disreputable.	‘You	have	instructed	me,	if	I
understand	you	correctly	–	and	correct	me	if	I	am	in	error	–	you	have
instructed	me,	then,	to	approach	your	financier	to	request	yet	another	loan	with
the	stated	intention	to	use	it	to	pay	a	portion	of	the	interest	on	the	previous
loan,	which	if	I	recall	accurately,	and	I	do,	was	intended	to	address	in	part	the
interest	on	yet	another	loan.	This	leads	me	to	wonder,	since	I	am	not	your	only
advocate,	just	how	many	loans	you	have	arranged	to	pay	interest	on	yet	other
loans?’
‘Well,	that	was	expensive.’
‘I	become	loquacious	when	I	get	nervous,	Master	Bugg.’
‘Dealing	with	you	gets	more	costly	when	you’re	nervous?	That,	Sleem,	is
really	quite	clever.’
‘Yes,	I	am.	Will	you	now	answer	my	question?’
‘Since	you	insist.	There	are	perhaps	forty	loans	outstanding	with	respect	to
addressing	interest	payments	on	still	other	loans.’
The	advocate	licked	suitably	dry	lips.	‘It	was	reasons	of	courtesy	and
respect,	Master	Bugg	–	and,	I	now	see,	certain	misapprehensions	as	to	your
solvency	–	that	encouraged	me	to	refrain	from	asking	for	payment	up	front	–
for	my	services,	that	is,	which	have	been	substantial.	Although	not	as
substantial,	proportionately,	as	I	was	led	to	believe.’


‘I	don’t	recall	leading	you	into	any	such	assumptions,	Sleem.’
‘Of	course	you	don’t.	They	were	assumptions.’
‘As	an	advocate,	you	might	have	been	expected	to	make	very	few
assumptions	indeed.	About	anything.’
‘Permit	me	to	be	blunt,	Master	Bugg.	Where	in	this	financial	scheme	of
yours	is	the	money	you	owe	me?’
‘Nowhere	as	of	yet,	Sleem.	Perhaps	we	should	arrange	another	loan.’
‘This	is	most	distressing.’
‘I	am	sure	it	is,	but	how	do	you	think	I	feel?’
‘I	am	resisting	asking	myself	that	question,	because	I	fear	the	answer	will
be	something	like:	“He	feels	fine.”	Now,	were	I	to	cling	with	great	faith	to
those	particular	assumptions	we	spoke	of	earlier,	I	would	now	insist	that	this
next	loan	be	devoted	exclusively	to	addressing	my	fees.	No	matter	what	lies	I
deliver	to	your	financier.	Which	returns	us,	alas,	to	my	original	utterance,
which	was	voiced	in	a	tone	of	abject	disbelief.	You	see,	your	financiers’
present	state	of	panic	is	what	has	brought	me	here,	for	they	have	reached	a
level	of	harassment	of	my	office	with	respect	to	you,	Master	Bugg,	that	has
reached	absurd	proportions.	I	have	had	to	hire	bodyguards,	in	fact	–	at	your
expense.	Dare	I	ask	you	then,	how	much	money	is	in	your	possession?’
‘Right	now?’
‘Yes.’
Bugg	drew	out	his	tattered	leather	purse,	prised	it	open	and	peered	inside.
Then	he	looked	up.	‘Two	docks.’
‘I	see.	Surely	you	exaggerate.’
‘Well,	I	cut	a	sliver	off	one	of	them,	to	pay	for	a	haircut.’
‘You	have	no	hair.’
‘That’s	why	it	was	just	a	sliver.	Nose	hairs.	Ear	hairs,	a	trim	of	the
eyebrows.	It’s	important	to	be	presentable.’
‘At	your	Drowning?’
Bugg	laughed.	‘That	would	be	fun.’	Then	he	grew	sober	and	leaned
forward	across	his	desk.	‘You	don’t	think	it	will	come	to	that,	surely.	As	your
client,	I	expect	a	most	diligent	defence	at	my	trial.’
‘As	your	advocate,	Master	Bugg,	I	will	be	first	in	line	demanding	your
blood.’
‘Oh,	that’s	not	very	loyal	of	you.’
‘You	have	not	paid	for	my	loyalty.’
‘But	loyalty	is	not	something	one	pays	for,	Advocate	Sleem.’
‘Had	I	known	that	delusions	accompanied	your	now-apparent
incompetence,	Master	Bugg,	I	would	never	have	agreed	to	represent	you	in	any


matter	whatsoever.’
Bugg	leaned	back.	‘That	makes	no	sense,’	he	said.	‘As	Tehol	Beddict	has
observed	on	countless	occasions,	delusions	lie	at	the	very	heart	of	our
economic	system.	Indenture	as	ethical	virtue.	Pieces	of	otherwise	useless	metal
–	beyond	decoration	–	as	wealth.	Servitude	as	freedom.	Debt	as	ownership.	And
so	on.’
‘Ah,	but	those	stated	delusions	are	essential	to	my	well-being,	Master
Bugg.	Without	them	my	profession	would	not	exist.	All	of	civilization	is,	in
essence,	a	collection	of	contracts.	Why,	the	very	nature	of	society	is	founded
upon	mutually	agreed	measures	of	value.’	He	stopped	then,	and	slowly	shook
his	head	–	a	motion	alarmingly	sinuous.	‘Why	am	I	even	discussing	this	with
you?	You	are	clearly	insane,	and	your	insanity	is	about	to	trigger	an	avalanche
of	financial	devastation.’
‘I	don’t	see	why,	Master	Sleem.	Unless,	of	course,	your	faith	in	the	notion
of	social	contract	is	nothing	more	than	cynical	self-interest.’
‘Of	course	it	is,	you	fool!’
So	much	for	awkward	sibilance.
Sleem’s	fingers	wriggled	like	snared,	blind	and	groping	worms.	‘Without
cynicism,’	he	said	in	a	strangled	voice,	‘one	becomes	the	system’s	victim
rather	than	its	master,	and	I	am	too	clever	to	be	a	victim!’
‘Which	you	must	prove	to	yourself	repeatedly	in	the	measuring	by	your
wealth,	your	ease	of	life,	of	the	necessary	contrast	with	the	victims	–	a	contrast
that	you	must	surround	yourself	with	at	every	moment,	as	represented	by	your
material	excesses.’
‘Wordy,	Master	Bugg.	Smug	ostentation	will	suffice.’
‘Brevity	from	you,	Advocate	Sleem?’
‘You	get	what	you	pay	for.’
‘By	that	token,’	Bugg	observed,	‘I	am	surprised	you’re	saying	anything	at
all.’
‘What	follows	is	my	gift.	I	will	set	forth	immediately	to	inform	your
financiers	that	you	are	in	fact	broke,	and	I	will	in	turn	offer	my	services	in	the
feeding	frenzy	over	your	material	assets.’
‘Generous	of	you.’
Sleem’s	lips	disappeared	into	a	bony	grimace.	One	eye	twitched.	The
worms	at	the	ends	of	his	hands	had	gone	white	and	deathly.	‘In	the	meantime,	I
will	take	those	two	docks.’
‘Not	quite	two.’
‘Nonetheless.’
‘I	can	owe	you	that	missing	sliver.’


‘Be	certain	that	I	will	have	it,	eventually.’
‘All	right.’	Bugg	reached	into	the	purse	and	fished	out	the	two	coins.	‘This
is	a	loan,	yes?’
‘Against	my	fees?’
‘Naturally.’
‘I	sense	you	are	no	longer	playing	the	game,	Master	Bugg.’
‘Which	game	would	that	be?’
‘The	one	where	winners	win	and	losers	lose.’
‘Oh,	that	game.	No,	I	suppose	not.	Assuming,	of	course,	I	ever	did.’
‘I	have	a	sudden	suspicion	–	this	very	real	truth	behind	all	the	rumours	of
impending	market	collapse	–	it	is	all	your	doing,	isn’t	it?’
‘Hardly.	Countless	winners	jumped	in,	I	assure	you.	Believing,	naturally,
that	they	would	win	in	the	end.	That’s	how	these	things	work.	Until	they	stop
working.’	Bugg	snapped	his	fingers.	‘Poof!’
‘Without	those	contracts,	Master	Bugg,	there	will	be	chaos.’
‘You	mean	the	winners	will	panic	and	the	losers	will	launch	themselves
into	their	own	feeding	frenzy.	Yes.	Chaos.’
‘You	are	truly	insane.’
‘No,	just	tired.	I’ve	looked	into	the	eyes	of	too	many	losers,	Sleem.	Far	too
many.’
‘And	your	answer	is	to	make	losers	of	us	all.	To	level	the	playing	field?
But	it	won’t	do	that,	you	know.	You	must	know	that,	Bugg.	It	won’t.	Instead,	the
thugs	will	find	the	top	of	every	heap,	and	instead	of	debt	you	will	have	true
slavery;	instead	of	contracts	you	will	have	tyranny.’
‘All	the	masks	torn	off,	yes.’
‘Where	is	the	virtue	in	that?’
The	Elder	God	shrugged.	‘The	perils	of	unfettered	expansion,	Advocate
Sleem,	are	revealed	in	the	dust	and	ashes	left	behind.	Assume	the	species’
immortality	since	it	suits	the	game.	Every	game.	But	that	assumption	will	not
save	you	in	the	end.	No,	in	fact,	it	will	probably	kill	you.	That	one	self-serving,
pious,	pretentious,	arrogant	assumption.’
‘The	bitter	old	man	speaks.’
‘You	have	no	idea.’
‘Would	that	I	carried	a	knife.	For	I	would	kill	you	with	it,	here	and	now.’
‘Yes.	The	game	always	ends	at	some	point,	doesn’t	it?’
‘And	you	dare	call	me	the	cynical	one.’
‘Your	cynicism	lies	in	your	willing	abuse	of	others	to	consolidate	your
superiority	over	them.	My	cynicism	is	in	regard	to	humanity’s	wilful	blindness
with	respect	to	its	own	extinction.’


‘Without	that	wilful	blindness	there	is	naught	but	despair.’
‘Oh,	I	am	not	that	cynical.	In	fact,	I	do	not	agree	at	all.	Maybe	when	the
wilful	blindness	runs	its	inevitable	course,	there	will	be	born	wilful	wisdom,
the	revelation	of	seeing	things	as	they	are.’
‘Things?	To	which	things	are	you	referring,	old	man?’
‘Why,	that	everything	of	true	value	is,	in	fact,	free.’
Sleem	placed	the	coins	in	his	own	bulging	purse	and	walked	to	the	door.	‘A
very	quaint	notion.	Alas,	I	will	not	wish	you	a	good	day.’
‘Don’t	bother.’
Sleem	turned	at	the	hard	edge	in	Bugg’s	voice.	His	brows	lifted	in
curiosity.
Bugg	smiled.	‘The	sentiment	wouldn’t	be	free	now,	would	it?’
‘No,	it	would	not.’
As	soon	as	the	hapless	advocate	was	gone,	Bugg	rose.	Well,	it’s	begun.
Almost	to	the	day	when	Tehol	said	it	would.	The	man’s	uncanny.	And	maybe	in
that,	there	lies	some	hope	for	humanity.	All	those	things	that	cannot	be
measured,	cannot	be	quantified	in	any	way	at	all.
Maybe.
Bugg	would	have	to	disappear	now.	Lest	he	get	torn	limb	from	limb	by	a
murder	of	advocates,	never	mind	the	financiers.	And	that	would	be	a	most
unpleasant	experience.	But	first,	he	needed	to	warn	Tehol.
The	Elder	God	glanced	around	his	office	with	something	like	affectionate
regret,	almost	nostalgia.	It	had	been	fun,	after	all.	This	game.	Like	most	games.
He	wondered	why	Tehol	had	stopped	short	the	first	time.	But	no,	perhaps	that
wasn’t	at	all	baffling.	Come	face	to	face	with	a	brutal	truth	–	with	any	brutal
truth	–	and	it	was	understandable	to	back	away.
As	Sleem	said,	there	is	no	value	in	despair.
But	plenty	of	despair	in	value,	once	the	illusion	is	revealed.	Ah,	I	am	indeed
tired.
He	set	out	from	his	office,	to	which	he	would	never	return.
	
‘How	can	there	be	only	four	hens	left?	Yes,	Ublala	Pung,	I	am	looking	directly
at	you.’
‘For	the	Errant’s	sake,’	Janath	sighed,	‘leave	the	poor	man	alone.	What	did
you	expect	to	happen,	Tehol?	They’re	hens	that	no	longer	lay	eggs,	making
them	as	scrawny	and	dry	and	useless	as	the	gaggle	of	matronly	scholars	at	my
old	school.	What	Ublala	did	was	an	act	of	profound	bravery.’
‘Eat	my	hens?	Raw?’


‘At	least	he	plucked	their	feathers.’
‘Were	they	dead	by	that	point?’
‘Let’s	not	discuss	those	particular	details,	Tehol.	Everyone	is	permitted	one
mistake.’
‘My	poor	pets,’	Tehol	moaned,	eyeing	Ublala	Pung’s	overstuffed	pillow	at
one	end	of	the	reed	mat	that	served	as	the	half-blood	Tarthenal’s	bed.
‘They	were	not	pets.’
He	fixed	a	narrow	gaze	on	his	ex-tutor.	‘I	seem	to	recall	you	going	on	and
on	about	the	terrors	of	pragmatism,	all	through	history.	Yet	what	do	I	now	hear
from	you,	Janath?	“They	were	not	pets.”	A	declarative	statement	uttered	in
most	pragmatic	tones.	Why,	as	if	by	words	alone	you	could	cleanse	what	must
have	been	an	incident	of	brutal	avian	murder.’
‘Ublala	Pung	has	more	stomachs	than	both	you	and	me	combined.	They
need	filling,	Tehol.’
‘Oh?’	He	placed	his	hands	on	his	hips	–	actually	to	make	certain	that	the	pin
was	holding	the	blanket	in	place,	recalling	with	another	pang	his	most	public
display	a	week	past.	‘Oh?’	he	asked	again,	and	then	added,	‘And	what,	precisely
and	pragmatically,	was	wrong	with	my	famous	Grit	Soup?’
‘It	was	gritty.’
‘Hinting	of	most	subtle	flavours	as	can	only	be	cultivated	from	diligent
collection	of	floor	scrapings,	especially	a	floor	pranced	upon	by	hungry	hens.’
She	stared	up	at	him.	‘You	are	not	serious,	are	you?	That	really	was	grit
from	the	floor?	This	floor?’
‘Hardly	reason	for	such	a	shocked	expression,	Janath.	Of	course,’	he	threw
in	offhandedly	as	he	walked	over	to	stand	next	to	the	blood-splotched	pillow,
‘creative	cuisine	demands	a	certain	delicacy	of	the	palate,	a	culture	of
appreciation—’	He	kicked	at	the	pillow	and	it	squawked.
Tehol	spun	round	and	glared	at	Ublala	Pung,	who	sat,	back	to	a	wall,	and
now	hung	his	head.
‘I	was	saving	one	for	later,’	the	giant	mumbled.
‘Plucked	or	unplucked?’
‘Well,	it’s	in	there	to	stay	warm.’
Tehol	looked	over	at	Janath	and	nodded,	‘See?	Do	you	see,	Janath?	Finally
see?’
‘See	what?’
‘The	deadly	slope	of	pragmatism,	Mistress.	The	very	proof	of	your
arguments	all	those	years	ago.	Ublala	Pung’s	history	of	insensitive
rationalizations	–	if	you	could	call	anything	going	on	in	that	skull	rational	–
leading	him	–	and,	dare	I	add,	innumerable	unsuspecting	hens	–	into	the


inevitable,	egregious	extreme	of…of	abject	nakedness	inside	a	pillow!’
Her	brows	lifted.	‘Well,	that	scene	last	week	really	scarred	you,	didn’t	it?’
‘Don’t	be	absurd,	Janath.’
Ublala	had	stuck	out	his	tongue	–	a	huge,	pebbled	slab	of	meat	–	and	was
trying	to	study	it,	his	eyes	crossing	with	the	effort.
‘What	are	you	doing	now?’	Tehol	demanded.
The	tongue	retreated	and	Ublala	blinked	a	few	times	to	right	his	eyes.	‘Got
cut	by	a	beak,’	he	said.
‘You	ate	their	beaks?’
‘Easier	to	start	with	the	head.	They	ain’t	so	restless	with	no	heads.’
‘Really?’
Ublala	Pung	nodded.
‘And	I	suppose	you	consider	that	merciful?’
‘What?’
‘Of	course	not,’	Tehol	snapped.	‘It’s	just	pragmatic.	“Oh,	I’m	being	eaten.
But	that’s	all	right.	I	have	no	head!”’
Ublala	frowned	at	him.	‘Nobody’s	eating	you,	Tehol.	And	your	head’s	still
there	–	I	can	see	it.’
‘I	was	speaking	for	the	hens.’
‘But	they	don’t	speak	Letherii.’
‘You	are	not	eating	my	last	four	hens.’
‘What	about	the	one	in	the	pillow,	Tehol?	Do	you	want	it	back?	Its	feathers
might	grow	back,	though	it	might	catch	a	cold	or	something.	I	can	give	it	back
if	you	like.’
‘Generous	of	you,	Ublala,	but	no.	Put	it	out	of	its	misery,	but	mind	the
beak.	In	the	meantime,	however,	I	think	you	need	to	get	yourself	organized	–
you	were	supposed	to	leave	days	ago,	after	all,	weren’t	you?’
‘I	don’t	want	to	go	to	the	islands,’	Ublala	said,	dragging	a	chipped	nail
through	the	grit	on	the	floor.	‘I	sent	word.	That’s	good	enough,	isn’t	it?	I	sent
word.’
Tehol	shrugged.	‘If	it’s	good	enough,	it’s	good	enough.	Right,	Janath?	By
all	means,	stay	with	us,	but	you	have	to	set	out	now	to	find	food.	For	all	of	us.
A	hunting	expedition	and	it	won’t	be	easy,	Ublala.	Not	at	all	easy.	There’s	not
been	a	supply	ship	on	the	river	for	days	now,	and	people	have	started	hoarding
things,	as	if	some	terrible	disaster	were	imminent.	So,	as	I	said,	Ublala,	it	won’t
be	easy.	And	I	hate	to	admit	it,	but	there	are	people	out	there	who	don’t	think
you	can	succeed.’
Ublala	Pung’s	head	snapped	up,	fire	in	his	eyes.	‘Who?	Who?’
The	four	hens	paused	in	their	scratchings	and	cocked	heads	in	unison.


‘I	better	not	say,’	Tehol	said.	‘Anyway,	we	need	food.’
The	Tarthenal	was	on	his	feet,	head	crunching	on	the	ceiling	before	he
assumed	his	normal	hunched	posture	when	indoors.	Plaster	dust	sprinkled	his
hair,	drifted	down	to	settle	on	the	floor.	The	hens	pounced,	crowding	his	feet.
‘If	you	fail,’	Tehol	said,	‘we’ll	have	to	start	eating,	uh,	plaster.’
‘Lime	is	poisonous,’	Janath	said.
‘And	hen	guano	isn’t?	Did	I	hear	you	complain	when	you	were	slurping
down	my	soup?’
‘You	had	your	hands	over	your	ears,	Tehol,	and	I	wasn’t	slurping	anything
down,	I	was	spewing	it	back	up.’
‘I	can	do	it,’	Ublala	said,	hands	bunching	into	fists.	‘I	can	get	us	food.	I’ll
show	you.’	And	with	that	he	pushed	through	the	doorway,	out	into	the	narrow
alley,	and	was	gone.
‘How	did	you	do	that,	Tehol?’
‘I	won’t	take	credit.	It’s	how	Shurq	Elalle	manages	him.	Ublala	Pung	has	an
eagerness	to	show	what	he	can	do.’
‘You	prey	on	his	low	self-esteem,	you	mean.’
‘Now	that’s	rather	hypocritical	coming	from	a	tutor,	isn’t	it?’
‘Ooh,	all	the	old	wounds	still	smarting,	are	they?’
‘Never	mind	old	wounds,	Janath.	You	need	to	leave.’
‘What?	Are	there	rumours	I’m	incapable	of	something?’
‘No,	I’m	serious.	Any	day	now,	there	is	going	to	be	trouble.	Here.’
‘Where	am	I	supposed	to	go?’
‘You	need	to	contact	who’s	left	of	your	scholarly	friends	–	find	one	you
can	trust—’
‘Tehol	Beddict,	really	now.	I	have	no	friends	among	my	fellow	scholars,
and	certainly	not	one	I	can	trust.	You	clearly	know	nothing	of	my	profession.
We	crush	beaks	between	our	teeth	as	a	matter	of	course.	In	any	case,	what	kind
of	trouble	are	you	talking	about?	This	economic	sabotage	of	yours?’
‘Bugg	should	really	learn	to	keep	quiet.’
She	was	studying	him	in	a	most	discomforting	way.	‘You	know,	Tehol
Beddict,	I	never	imagined	you	for	an	agent	of	evil.’
Tehol	smoothed	back	his	hair	and	swelled	his	chest.
‘Very	impressive,	but	I’m	not	convinced.	Why	are	you	doing	all	this?	Is
there	some	wound	from	the	past	that	overwhelms	all	the	others?	Some	terrible
need	for	vengeance	to	answer	some	horrendous	trauma	of	your	youth?	No,	I
am	truly	curious.’
‘It	was	all	Bugg’s	idea,	of	course.’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Try	again.’


‘There	are	all	kinds	of	evil,	Janath.’
‘Yes,	but	yours	will	see	blood	spilled.	Plenty	of	it.’
‘Is	there	a	difference	between	spilled	blood	and	blood	squeezed	out	slowly,
excruciatingly,	over	the	course	of	a	foreshortened	lifetime	of	stress,	misery,
anguish	and	despair	–	all	in	the	name	of	some	amorphous	god	that	no-one
dares	call	holy?	Even	as	they	bend	knee	and	repeat	the	litany	of	sacred	duty?’
‘Oh	my,’	she	said.	‘Well,	that	is	an	interesting	question.	Is	there	a
difference?	Perhaps	not,	perhaps	only	as	a	matter	of	degree.	But	that	hardly
puts	you	on	a	moral	high	ground,	does	it?’
‘I	have	never	claimed	a	moral	high	ground,’	Tehol	said,	‘which	in	itself
sets	me	apart	from	my	enemy.’
‘Yes,	I	see	that.	And	of	course	you	are	poised	to	destroy	that	enemy	with	its
own	tools,	using	its	own	holy	scripture;	using	it,	in	short,	to	kill	itself.	You	are
at	the	very	end	of	the	slope	on	which	perches	your	enemy.	Or	should	I	say
“clings”.	Now,	that	you	are	diabolical	comes	as	no	surprise,	Tehol.	I	saw	that
trait	in	you	long	ago.	Even	so,	this	bloodthirstiness?	I	still	cannot	see	it.’
‘Probably	something	to	do	with	your	lessons	on	pragmatism.’
‘Oh	now,	don’t	you	dare	point	a	finger	at	me!	True	pragmatism,	in	this
instance,	would	guide	you	to	vast	wealth	and	the	reward	of	indolence,	to	the
fullest	exploitation	of	the	system.	The	perfect	parasite,	and	be	damned	to	all
those	lesser	folk,	the	destitute	and	the	witless,	the	discarded	failures	squatting
in	every	alley.	You	certainly	possess	the	necessary	talent	and	genius	and
indeed,	were	you	now	the	wealthiest	citizen	of	this	empire,	living	in	some
enormous	estate	surrounded	by	an	army	of	bodyguards	and	fifty	concubines	in
your	stable,	I	would	not	in	the	least	be	surprised.’
‘Not	surprised,’	Tehol	said,	‘but,	perhaps,	disappointed	nonetheless?’
She	pursed	her	lips	and	glanced	away.	‘Well,	that	is	another	issue,	Tehol
Beddict.	One	we	are	not	discussing	here.’
‘If	you	say	so,	Janath.	In	any	case,	the	truth	is,	I	am	the	wealthiest	citizen	in
this	empire.	Thanks	to	Bugg,	of	course,	my	front	man.’
‘Yet	you	live	in	a	hovel.’
‘Disparaging	my	abode?	You,	an	un-paying	guest!	I	am	deeply	hurt,
Janath.’
‘No	you’re	not.’
‘Well,	the	hens	are	and	since	they	do	not	speak	Letherii…’
‘Wealthiest	citizen	or	not,	Tehol	Beddict,	your	goal	is	not	the	ostentatious
expression	of	that	wealth,	not	the	fullest	exploitation	of	the	power	it	grants	you.
No,	you	intend	the	collapse	of	this	empire’s	fundamental	economic	structure.
And	I	still	cannot	fathom	why.’


Tehol	shrugged.	‘Power	always	destroys	itself	in	the	end,	Janath.	Would
you	contest	that	assertion?’
‘No.	So,	are	you	telling	me	that	all	of	this	is	an	exercise	in	power?	An
exercise	culminating	in	a	lesson	no-one	could	not	recognize	for	what	it	is?	A
metaphor	made	real?’
‘But	Janath,	when	I	spoke	of	power	destroying	itself	I	was	not	speaking	in
terms	of	metaphor.	I	meant	it	literally.	So,	how	many	generations	of	Indebted
need	to	suffer	–	even	as	the	civilized	trappings	multiply	and	abound	on	all
sides,	with	an	ever-increasing	proportion	of	those	material	follies	out	of	their
financial	reach?	How	many,	before	we	all	collectively	stop	and	say,	“Aaii!
That’s	enough!	No	more	suffering,	please!	No	more	hunger,	no	more	war,	no
more	inequity!”	Well,	as	far	as	I	can	see,	there	are	never	enough	generations.
We	just	scrabble	on,	and	on,	devouring	all	within	reach,	including	our	own
kind,	as	if	it	was	nothing	more	than	the	undeniable	expression	of	some	natural
law,	and	as	such	subject	to	no	moral	context,	no	ethical	constraint	–	despite	the
ubiquitous	and	disingenuous	blathering	over-invocation	of	those	two	grand
notions.’
‘Too	much	emotion	in	your	speechifying,	Tehol	Beddict.	Marks	deducted.’
‘Retreating	to	dry	humour,	Janath?’
‘Ouch.	All	right,	I	begin	to	comprehend	your	motivations.	You	will	trigger
chaos	and	death,	for	the	good	of	everyone.’
‘If	I	were	the	self-pitying	kind,	I	might	now	moan	that	no-one	will	thank
me	for	it,	either.’
‘So	you	accept	responsibility	for	the	consequences.’
‘Somebody	has	to.’
She	was	silent	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	and	Tehol	watched	her	eyes	–	lovely
eyes	indeed	–	slowly	widen.	‘You	are	the	metaphor	made	real.’
Tehol	smiled.	‘Don’t	like	me?	But	that	makes	no	sense!	How	can	I	not	be
likeable?	Admirable,	even?	I	am	become	the	epitome	of	triumphant
acquisitiveness,	the	very	icon	of	this	great	unnamed	god!	And	if	I	do	nothing
with	all	my	vast	wealth,	why,	I	have	earned	the	right.	By	every	rule	voiced	in
the	sacred	litany,	I	have	earned	it!’
‘But	where	is	the	virtue	in	then	destroying	all	that	wealth?	In	destroying	the
very	system	you	used	to	create	it	in	the	first	place?’
‘Janath,	where	is	the	virtue	in	any	of	it?	Is	possession	a	virtue?	Is	a	lifetime
of	working	for	some	rich	toad	a	virtue?	Is	loyal	employment	in	some
merchant	house	a	virtue?	Loyal	to	what?	To	whom?	Oh,	have	they	paid	for	that
loyalty	with	a	hundred	docks	a	week?	Like	any	other	commodity?	But	then,
which	version	is	truer	–	the	virtue	of	self-serving	acquisitiveness	or	the	virtue


of	loyalty	to	one’s	employer?	Are	the	merchants	at	the	top	of	their	treasure
heaps	not	ruthless	and	cut-throat	as	befits	those	privileges	they	have
purportedly	earned?	And	if	it’s	good	enough	for	them,	why	not	the	same	for
the	lowest	worker	in	their	house?	Where	is	the	virtue	in	two	sets	of	rules	at
odds	with	each	other,	and	why	are	those	fancy	words	like	“moral”	and
“ethical”	the	first	ones	to	bleat	out	from	the	mouths	of	those	who	lost	sight	of
both	in	their	climb	to	the	top?	Since	when	did	ethics	and	morality	become
weapons	of	submission?’
She	was	staring	up	at	him,	her	expression	unreadable.
Tehol	thought	to	toss	up	his	hands	to	punctuate	his	harangue,	but	he
shrugged	instead.	‘Yet	my	heart	breaks	for	a	naked	hen.’
‘I’m	sure	it	does,’	she	whispered.
‘You	should	have	left,’	Tehol	said.
‘What?’
Boots	clumping	in	the	alley,	rushing	up	to	the	doorway.	The	flimsy	broken
shutter	–	newly	installed	by	Bugg	in	the	name	of	Janath’s	modesty	–	torn	aside.
Armoured	figures	pushing	in.
A	soft	cry	from	Janath.
	
Tanal	Yathvanar	stared,	disbelieving.	His	guards	pushed	in	around	him	until	he
was	forced	to	hold	his	arms	out	to	the	sides	to	block	still	more	crowding	into
this	absurd	room	with	its	clucking,	frightened	chickens	and	two	wide-eyed
citizens.
Well,	she	at	least	was	wide-eyed.	The	man,	who	had	to	be	the	infamous
Tehol	Beddict,	simply	watched,	ridiculous	in	his	pinned	blanket,	as	Tanal	fixed
his	gaze	on	Janath	and	smiled.	‘Unexpected,	this.’
‘I	–	I	know	you,	don’t	I?’
Tehol	asked	in	a	calm	voice,	‘Can	I	help	you?’
Confused	by	Janath’s	question,	it	was	a	moment	before	Tanal	registered
Tehol’s	words.	Then	he	sneered	at	the	man.	‘I	am	here	to	arrest	your
manservant.	The	one	named	Bugg.’
‘Oh,	now	really,	his	cooking	isn’t	that	bad.’
‘As	it	turns	out,	it	seems	I	have	stumbled	upon	another	crime	in	progress.’
Tehol	sighed,	then	bent	to	retrieve	a	pillow.	Into	which	he	reached,
dragging	out	a	live	chicken.	Mostly	plucked,	only	a	few	tufts	remaining	here
and	there.	The	creature	tried	flapping	flabby	pink	wings,	its	head	bobbing	this
way	and	that	atop	a	scrawny	neck.	Tehol	held	the	chicken	out.	‘Here,	then.	We
never	really	expected	the	ransom	in	any	case.’


Behind	Tanal	a	guard	grunted	a	quickly	choked-off	laugh.
Tanal	scowled,	reminding	himself	to	find	out	who	had	made	that	noise.	On
report	and	a	week	of	disciplinary	duty	should	serve	notice	that	such
unprofessionalism	was	costly	in	Tanal	Yathvanar ’s	presence.	‘You	are	both
under	arrest.	Janath,	for	having	escaped	the	custody	of	the	Patriotists.	And
Tehol	Beddict,	for	harbouring	said	fugitive.’
‘Ah,	well,’	Tehol	said,	‘if	you	were	to	check	the	Advocacy	Accounts	for
the	past	month,	sir,	you	will	find	the	official	pardon	granted	Janath	Anar,	in
absentia.	The	kind	of	pardon	your	people	always	issue	when	someone	has
thoroughly	and,	usually,	permanently	disappeared.	So,	the	scholar	here	is
under	full	pardon,	which	in	turn	means	I	am	not	harbouring	a	fugitive.	As	for
Bugg,	why,	when	you	track	him	down,	tell	him	he’s	fired.	I	will	brook	no
criminals	in	my	household.	Speaking	of	which,	you	may	leave	now,	sir.’
Oh	no,	she	will	not	escape	me	a	second	time.	‘If	said	pardon	exists,’	Tanal
said	to	Tehol	Beddict,	‘then	of	course	you	will	both	be	released,	with
apologies.	For	the	moment,	however,	you	are	now	in	my	custody.’	He	gestured
to	one	of	his	guards.	‘Shackle	them.’
‘Yes	sir.’
	
Bugg	turned	the	corner	leading	into	the	narrow	lane	only	to	find	it	blocked	by
a	freshly	killed	steer,	legs	akimbo,	white	tongue	lolling	as	Ublala	Pung	–	an
arm	wrapped	about	the	beast’s	broken	neck	–	grunted	and	pulled,	his	face	red
and	the	veins	on	his	temples	purple	and	bulging.	The	odd	multiple	pulsing	of
his	hearts	visibly	throbbed	on	both	sides	of	the	Tarthenal’s	thick	neck	as	he
endeavoured	to	drag	the	steer	to	Tehol’s	door.
His	small	eyes	lit	up	on	seeing	Bugg.	‘Oh	good.	Help.’
‘Where	did	you	get	this?	Never	mind.	It	will	never	fit	in	through	the	door,
Ublala.	You’ll	have	to	dismember	it	out	here.’
‘Oh.’	The	giant	waved	one	hand.	‘I’m	always	forgetting	things.’
‘Ublala,	is	Tehol	home?’
‘No.	Nobody	is.’
‘Not	even	Janath?’
The	Tarthenal	shook	his	head,	eyeing	the	steer,	which	was	now	thoroughly
jammed	in	the	lane.	‘I’ll	have	to	rip	its	legs	off,’	he	said.	‘Oh,	the	hens	are
home,	Bugg.’
Bugg	had	been	growing	ever	more	nervous	with	each	step	that	had	brought
him	closer	to	their	house,	and	now	he	understood	why.	But	he	should	have	been
more	than	just	nervous.	He	should	have	known.	My	mind	–	I	have	been


distracted.	Distant	worshippers,	something	closer	to	hand…
Bugg	clambered	over	the	carcass,	pushing	past	Ublala	Pung,	which,	given
the	sweat	lathering	the	huge	man,	proved	virtually	effortless,	then	hurried	to
the	doorway.
The	shutter	was	broken,	torn	from	its	flimsy	hinges.	Inside,	four	hens
marched	about	on	the	floor	like	aimless	soldiers.	Ublala	Pung’s	pillow	was
trying	to	do	the	same.
Shit.	They’ve	got	them.
There	would	be	a	scene	at	the	headquarters	of	the	Patriotists.	Couldn’t	be
helped.	Wholesale	destruction,	an	Elder	God’s	rage	unleashed	–	oh,	this	was
too	soon.	Too	many	heads	would	look	up,	eyes	narrowing,	hunger	bursting
like	juices	under	the	tongue.	Just	stay	where	you	are.	Stay	where	you	are,
Icarium.	Lifestealer.	Do	not	reach	for	your	sword,	do	not	let	your	brow	knit.	No
furrows	of	anger	to	mar	your	unhuman	face.	Stay,	Icarium!
He	entered	the	room,	found	a	large	sack.
Ublala	Pung	filled	the	doorway.	‘What	is	happening?’
Bugg	began	throwing	their	few	possessions	into	the	sack.
‘Bugg?’
He	snatched	up	a	hen	and	stuffed	it	in,	then	another.
‘Bugg?’
The	mobile	pillow	went	last.	Knotting	the	sack,	Bugg	turned	about	and
gave	it	to	Ublala	Pung.	‘Find	somewhere	else	to	hide	out,’	Bugg	said.	‘Here,
it’s	all	yours—’
‘But	what	about	the	cow?’
‘It’s	a	steer.’
‘I	tried	but	it’s	jammed.’
‘Ublala	–	all	right,	stay	here,	then,	but	you’re	on	your	own.	Understand?’
‘Where	are	you	going?	Where	is	everyone?’
Had	Bugg	told	him	then,	in	clear	terms	that	Ublala	Pung	would
comprehend,	all	might	well	have	turned	out	differently.	The	Elder	God	would
look	back	on	this	one	moment,	over	all	others,	during	his	extended	time	of
retrospection	that	followed.	Had	he	spoken	true	–	‘They’re	just	gone,	friend,
and	none	of	us	will	be	back.	Not	for	a	long	time.	Maybe	never.	Take	care	of
yourself,	Ublala	Pung,	and	’ware	your	new	god	–	he	is	much	more	than	he
seems.’
With	that,	Bugg	was	outside,	climbing	over	the	carcass	once	more	and	to
the	mouth	of	the	alley.	Where	he	halted.
They	would	be	looking	for	him.	On	the	streets.	Did	he	want	a	running
battle?	No,	just	one	single	strike,	one	scene	of	unveiled	power	to	send	Patriotist


body	parts	flying.	Fast,	then	done.	Before	I	awaken	the	whole	damned
menagerie.
No,	I	need	to	move	unseen	now.
And	quickly.
The	Elder	God	stirred	power	to	life,	power	enough	to	pluck	at	his	material
being,	disassembling	it.	No	longer	corporeal,	he	slipped	down	through	the
grimy	cobbles	of	the	street,	into	the	veins	of	seepwater	threading	the	entire	city.
Yes,	much	swifter	here,	movement	as	fast	as	thought—
He	tripped	the	snare	before	he	was	even	aware	that	he	had	been	pulled	off
course,	drawn	like	an	iron	filing	to	a	lodestone.	Pulled,	hard	and	then	as	if	in	a
whirlpool,	down	to	a	block	of	stone	buried	in	darkness.	A	stone	of	power	–	of
Mael’s	very	own	power	–	a	damned	altar!
Eagerly	claiming	him,	chaining	him	as	all	altars	sought	to	do	to	their
chosen	gods.	Nothing	of	sentience	or	malice,	of	course,	but	a	certain	proclivity
of	structure.	The	flavour	of	ancient	blood	fused	particle	by	particle	into	the
stone’s	crystalline	latticework.
Mael	resisted,	loosing	a	roar	that	shivered	through	the	foundations	of
Letheras,	even	as	he	sought	to	reassert	his	physical	form,	to	focus	his	strength
—
And	the	trap	was	so	sprung	–	by	that	very	act	of	regaining	his	body.	The
altar,	buried	beneath	rubble,	the	rubble	grinding	and	shifting,	a	thousand
minute	adjustments	ensnaring	Mael	–	he	could	not	move,	could	no	longer	even
so	much	as	cry	out.
Errant!	You	bastard!
Why?
Why	have	you	done	this	to	me?
But	the	Errant	had	never	shown	much	interest	in	lingering	over	his
triumphs.	He	was	nowhere	close,	and	even	if	he	had	been,	he	would	not	have
answered.
A	player	had	been	removed	from	the	game.
But	the	game	played	on.
	
In	the	throne	room	of	the	Eternal	Domicile,	Rhulad	Sengar,	Emperor	of	a
Thousand	Deaths,	sat	alone,	sword	in	one	hand.	In	wavering	torchlight	he
stared	at	nothing.
Inside	his	mind	was	another	throne	room,	and	in	that	place	he	was	not
alone.	His	brothers	stood	before	him;	and	behind	them,	his	father,	Tomad,	and
his	mother,	Uruth.	In	the	shadows	along	the	walls	stood	Udinaas,	Nisall,	and	the


woman	Rhulad	would	not	name	who	had	once	been	Fear ’s	wife.	And,	close	to
the	locked	doors,	one	more	figure,	too	lost	in	the	dimness	to	make	out.	Too
lost	by	far.
Binadas	bowed	his	head.	‘I	have	failed,	Emperor,’	he	said.	‘I	have	failed,
my	brother.’	He	gestured	downward	and	Rhulad	saw	the	spear	transfixing
Binadas’s	chest.	‘A	Toblakai,	ghost	of	our	ancient	wars	after	the	fall	of	the
Kechra.	Our	wars	on	the	seas.	He	returned	to	slay	me.	He	is	Karsa	Orlong,	a
Teblor,	a	Tartheno	Toblakai,	Tarthenal,	Fenn	–	oh,	they	have	many	names	now,
yes.	I	am	slain,	brother,	yet	I	did	not	die	for	you.’	Binadas	looked	up	then	and
smiled	a	dead	man’s	smile.	‘Karsa	waits	for	you.	He	waits.’
Fear	took	a	single	step	forward	and	bowed.	Straightening,	he	fixed	his
heavy	gaze	on	Rhulad	–	who	whimpered	and	shrank	back	into	his	throne.
‘Emperor.	Brother.	You	are	not	the	child	I	nurtured.	You	are	no	child	I	have
nurtured.	You	betrayed	us	at	the	Spar	of	Ice.	You	betrayed	me	when	you	stole
my	betrothed,	my	love,	when	you	made	her	with	child,	when	you	delivered
unto	her	such	despair	that	she	took	her	own	life.’	As	he	spoke	his	dead	wife
walked	forward	to	join	him,	their	hands	clasping.	Fear	said,	‘I	stand	with
Father	Shadow	now,	brother,	and	I	wait	for	you.’
Rhulad	cried	out,	a	piteous	sound	that	echoed	in	the	empty	chamber.
Trull,	his	pate	pale	where	his	hair	had	once	been,	his	eyes	the	eyes	of	the
Shorn	–	empty,	unseen	by	any,	eyes	that	could	not	be	met	by	those	of	any	other
Tiste	Edur.	Eyes	of	alone.	He	raised	the	spear	in	his	hands,	and	Rhulad	saw	the
crimson	gleam	on	that	shaft,	on	the	broad	iron	blade.	‘I	led	warriors	in	your
name,	brother,	and	they	are	now	all	dead.	All	dead.
‘I	returned	to	you,	brother,	when	Fear	and	Binadas	could	not.	To	beg	for
your	soul,	your	soul	of	old,	Rhulad,	for	the	child,	the	brother	you	had	once
been.’	He	lowered	the	spear,	leaned	on	it.	‘You	drowned	me,	chained	to	stone,
while	the	Rhulad	I	sought	hid	in	the	darkness	of	your	mind.	But	he	will	hide	no
longer.’
From	the	gloom	of	the	doors,	the	vague	figure	moved	forward,	and
Rhulad	on	his	throne	saw	himself.	A	youth,	weaponless,	unblooded,	his	skin
free	of	coins,	his	skin	smooth	and	clear.
‘We	stand	in	the	river	of	Sengar	blood,’	Trull	said.	‘And	we	wait	for	you.’
‘Stop!’	Rhulad	shrieked.	‘Stop!’
‘Truth,’	said	Udinaas,	striding	closer,	‘is	remorseless,	Master.	Friend?’	The
slave	laughed.	‘You	were	never	my	friend,	Rhulad.	You	held	my	life	in	your
hand	–	either	hand,	the	empty	one	or	the	one	with	the	sword,	makes	no
difference.	My	life	was	yours,	and	you	thought	I	had	opened	my	heart	to	you.
Errant	take	me,	why	would	I	do	that?	Look	at	my	face,	Rhulad.	This	is	a	slave’s


face.	No	more	memorable	than	a	clay	mask.	This	flesh	on	my	bones?	It	works
limbs	that	are	naught	but	tools.	I	held	my	hands	in	the	sea,	Rhulad,	until	all
feeling	went	away.	All	life,	gone.	From	my	once-defiant	grasp.’	Udinaas
smiled.	‘And	now,	Rhulad	Sengar,	who	is	the	slave?
‘I	stand	at	the	end	of	the	chains.	The	end	but	one.	One	set	of	shackles.	Here,
do	you	see?	I	stand,	and	I	wait	for	you.’
Nisall	spoke,	gliding	forward	naked,	motion	like	a	serpent’s	in	candlelight.	‘I	spied	on	you,	Rhulad.	Found	out	your	every	secret	and	I	have	them
with	me	now,	like	seeds	in	my	womb,	and	soon	my	belly	will	swell,	and	the
monsters	will	emerge,	one	after	another.	Spawn	of	your	seed,	Rhulad	Sengar.
Abominations	one	and	all.	And	you	imagined	this	to	be	love?	I	was	your
whore.	The	coin	you	dropped	in	my	hand	paid	for	my	life,	but	it	wasn’t
enough.
‘I	stand	where	you	will	never	find	me.	I,	Rhulad,	do	not	wait	for	you.’
Remaining	silent,	then,	at	the	last,	his	father,	his	mother.
He	could	remember	when	last	he	saw	them,	the	day	he	had	sent	them	to
dwell	chained	in	the	belly	of	this	city.	Oh,	that	had	been	so	clever,	hadn’t	it?
But	moments	earlier	one	of	the	Chancellor ’s	guards	had	begged	audience.
A	terrible	event	to	relate.	The	Letherii’s	voice	had	quavered	like	a	badly	strung
lyre.	Tragedy.	An	error	in	rotation	among	the	jailers,	a	week	passing	without
anyone	descending	to	their	cells.	No	food,	but,	alas,	plenty	of	water.
A	rising	flood,	in	fact.
‘My	Emperor.	They	were	drowned.	The	cells,	chest-deep,	sire.	Their
chains…not	long	enough.	Not	long	enough.	The	palace	weeps.	The	palace	cries
out.	The	entire	empire,	sire,	hangs	its	head.
‘Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	is	stricken,	sire.	Taken	to	bed,	unable	to	give	voice
to	his	grief.’
Rhulad	could	stare	down	at	the	trembling	man,	stare	down,	yes,	with	the
blank	regard	of	a	man	who	has	known	death	again	and	again,	known	past	all
feeling.	And	listen	to	these	empty	words,	these	proper	expressions	of	horror
and	sorrow.
And	in	the	Emperor ’s	mind	there	could	be	these	words:	I	sent	them	down	to
be	drowned.	With	not	a	single	wager	laid	down.
The	rising	waters,	this	melting,	this	sinking	palace.	This	Eternal	Domicile.
I	have	drowned	my	father.	My	mother.	He	could	see	those	cells,	the	black	flood,
the	gouges	in	the	walls	where	they	had	clawed	at	the	very	ends	of	those	chains.
He	could	see	it	all.
And	so	they	stood.	Silent.	Flesh	rotted	and	bloated	with	gases,	puddles	of
slime	spreading	round	their	white,	wrinkled	feet.	A	father	on	whose	shoulders


Rhulad	had	ridden,	shrieking	with	laughter,	a	child	atop	his	god	as	it	ran	down
the	strand	with	limitless	power	and	strength,	with	the	promise	of	surety	like	a
gentle	kiss	on	the	child’s	brow.
A	mother	–	no,	enough.	I	die	and	die.	More	deaths,	yes,	than	anyone	can
imagine.	I	die	and	I	die,	and	I	die.
But	where	is	my	peace?
See	what	awaits	me?	See	them!
Rhulad	Sengar,	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths,	sat	alone	on	his	throne,
dreaming	peace.	But	even	death	could	not	offer	that.
	
At	that	moment	his	brother,	Trull	Sengar,	stood	near	Onrack,	the	emlava	cubs
squalling	in	the	dirt	behind	them,	and	watched	with	wonder	as	Ben	Adaephon
Delat,	a	High	Mage	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	walked	out	across	the	shallow
river.	Unmindful	of	the	glacial	cold	of	that	stream	that	threatened	to	leave
numb	his	flesh,	his	bones,	the	very	sentiments	of	his	mind	–	nothing	could
deter	him	from	this.
Upon	seeing	the	lone	figure	appear	from	the	brush	on	the	other	side,	Quick
Ben	had	halted.	And,	after	a	long	moment,	he	had	smiled,	and	under	his	breath
he	had	said	something	like:	‘Where	else	but	here?	Who	else	but	him?’	Then,
with	a	laugh,	the	High	Mage	had	set	out.
To	meet	an	old	friend	who	himself	strode	without	pause	into	that	broad
river.
Another	Malazan.
Beside	Trull,	Onrack	settled	a	hand	on	his	shoulder	and	said,	‘You,	my
friend,	weep	too	easily.’
‘I	know,’	Trull	sighed.	‘It’s	because,	well,	it’s	because	I	dream	of	such
things.	For	myself.	My	brothers,	my	family.	My	people.	The	gifts	of	peace,
Onrack	–	this	is	what	breaks	me,	again	and	again.’
‘I	think,’	said	Onrack,	‘you	evade	a	deeper	truth.’
‘I	do?’
‘Yes.	There	is	one	other,	is	there	not?	Not	a	brother,	not	kin,	not	even	Tiste
Edur.	One	who	offers	another	kind	of	peace,	for	you,	a	new	kind.	And	this	is
what	you	yearn	for,	and	see	the	echo	of,	even	in	the	meeting	of	two	friends
such	as	we	witness	here.
‘You	weep	when	I	speak	of	my	ancient	love.
‘You	weep	for	this,	Trull	Sengar,	because	your	love	has	not	been
answered,	and	there	is	no	greater	anguish	than	that.’
‘Please,	friend.	Enough.	Look.	I	wonder	what	they	are	saying	to	each


other?’
‘The	river ’s	flow	takes	their	words	away,	as	it	does	us	all.’	Onrack’s	hand
tightened	on	Trull’s	shoulder.	‘Now,	my	friend,	tell	me	of	her.’
Trull	Sengar	wiped	at	his	eyes,	then	he	smiled.	‘There	was,	yes,	a	most
beautiful	woman…’


Book	Four

Reaper’s	Gale


	

I	went	in	search	of	death
In	the	cast	down	wreckage
Of	someone’s	temple	nave
I	went	in	search	among	flowers
Nodding	to	the	wind’s	words
Of	woeful	tales	of	war
I	went	among	the	blood	troughs
Behind	the	women’s	tents
All	the	children	that	never	were
And	in	the	storm	of	ice	and	waves
I	went	in	search	of	the	drowned
Among	bony	shells	and	blunt	worms
Where	the	grains	swirled
Each	and	every	one	crying	out
its	name	its	life	its	loss
I	went	on	the	current	roads
That	led	me	nowhere	known
And	in	the	still	mists	afield
Where	light	itself	crept	uncertain
I	went	in	search	of	wise	spirits
Moaning	their	truths	in	dark	loam
But	the	moss	was	silent,	too	damp
to	remember	my	search
Finding	at	last	where	the	reapers	sow
Cutting	stalks	to	take	the	season
I	failed	in	my	proud	quest
To	a	scything	flint	blade
And	lying	asward	lost	to	summer
Bared	as	its	warm	carapace
of	youthful	promise	was	sent	away


into	autumn’s	reliquary	sky
Until	the	bones	of	night
Were	nails	glittering	in	the	cold
oblivion,	and	down	the	darkness
death	came	to	find	me
Before	Q’uson	Tapi
Toc	Anaster
	


Chapter	Nineteen

The	great	conspiracy	among	the	kingdoms	of	Saphinand,	Bolkando,
Ak’ryn,	and	D’rhasilhani	that	culminated	in	the	terrible	Eastlands	War
was	in	numerous	respects	profoundly	ironic.	To	begin	with,	there	had
been	no	conspiracy.	This	fraught	political	threat	was	in	fact	a
falsehood,	created	and	fomented	by	powerful	economic	interests	in
Lether;	and	more,	it	must	be	said,	than	just	economic.	Threat	of	a	dread
enemy	permitted	the	imposition	of	strictures	on	the	population	of	the
empire	that	well	served	the	brokers	among	the	elite;	and	would	no
doubt	have	made	them	rich	indeed	if	not	for	the	coincidental	financial
collapse	occurring	at	this	most	inopportune	of	moments	in	Letherii
history.	In	any	case,	the	border	kingdoms	and	nations	of	the	east	could
not	but	perceive	the	imminent	threat,	especially	with	the	ongoing
campaign	against	the	Awl	on	the	north	plains.	Thus	a	grand	alliance
was	indeed	created,	and	with	the	aforementioned	foreign	incentives,	the
war	exploded	across	the	entire	eastern	frontier.
Combined,	not	entirely	accidentally,	with	the	punitive	invasion
begun	on	the	northwest	coast,	it	is	without	doubt	that	Emperor	Rhulad
Sengar	felt	beleaguered	indeed…
The	Ashes	of	Ascension,
History	of	Lether,	Vol.	IV
Calasp	Hivanar
She	had	been	no	different	from	any	other	child	with	her	childish	dreams	of
love.	Proud	and	tall,	a	hero	to	stride	into	her	life,	taking	her	in	his	arms	and
sweeping	away	all	her	fears	like	silts	rushing	down	a	stream	to	vanish	in	some
distant	ocean.	The	benediction	of	clarity	and	simplicity,	oh	my,	yes,	that	had
been	a	most	cherished	dream.
Although	Seren	Pedac	could	remember	that	child,	could	remember	the
twisting	anguish	in	her	stomach	as	she	yearned	for	salvation,	an	anguish
delicious	in	all	its	possible	obliterations,	she	would	not	indulge	in	nostalgia.


False	visions	of	the	world	were	a	child’s	right,	not	something	to	be	resented,
but	neither	were	they	worthy	of	any	adult	sense	of	longing.
In	Hull	Beddict,	after	all,	the	young	Seren	Pedac	had	believed,	for	a	time	–
a	long	time,	in	fact,	before	her	foolish	dream	finally	withered	away	–	that	she
had	found	her	wondrous	hero,	her	majestic	conjuration	whose	every	glance
was	a	blessing	on	her	heart.	So	she	had	learned	how	purity	was	poison,	the
purity	of	her	faith,	that	is,	that	such	heroes	existed.	For	her.	For	anyone.
Hull	Beddict	had	died	in	Letheras.	Or,	rather,	his	body	had	died	there.	The
rest	had	died	in	her	arms	years	before	then.	In	a	way,	she	had	used	him	and
perhaps	not	just	used	him,	but	raped	him.	Devouring	his	belief,	stealing	away
his	vision	–	of	himself,	of	his	place	in	the	world,	of	all	the	meaning	that	he,
like	any	other	man,	sought	for	his	own	life.	She	had	found	her	hero	and	had
then,	in	ways	subtle	and	cruel,	destroyed	him	under	the	siege	of	reality.	Reality
as	she	had	seen	it,	as	she	still	saw	it.	That	had	been	the	poison	within	her,	the
battle	between	the	child’s	dream	and	the	venal	cynicism	that	had	seeped	into
adulthood.	And	Hull	had	been	both	her	weapon	and	her	victim.
She	had	in	turn	been	raped.	Drunk	in	a	port	city	tearing	itself	apart	as	the
armies	of	the	Tiste	Edur	swept	in	amidst	smoke,	flames	and	ashes.	Her	flesh
made	weapon,	her	soul	made	victim.	There	could	be	no	surprise,	no	blank
astonishment,	to	answer	her	subsequent	attempt	to	kill	herself.	Except	among
those	who	could	not	understand,	who	would	never	understand.
Seren	killed	what	she	loved.	She	had	done	it	to	Hull,	and	if	the	day	ever
arrived	when	that	deadly	flower	opened	in	her	heart	once	more,	she	would	kill
again.	Fears	could	not	be	swept	away.	Fears	returned	in	drowning	tides,
dragging	her	down	into	darkness.	I	am	poison.
Stay	away.	All	of	you,	stay	away.
She	sat,	the	shaft	of	the	Imass	spear	athwart	her	knees,	but	it	was	the	weight
of	the	sword	belted	to	her	left	hip	that	threatened	to	pull	her	down,	as	if	that
blade	was	not	a	hammered	length	of	iron,	but	links	in	a	chain.	He	meant
nothing	by	it.	You	meant	nothing,	Trull.	I	know	that.	Besides,	like	Hull,	you	are
dead.	You	had	the	mercy	of	not	dying	in	my	arms.	Be	thankful	for	that.
Nostalgia	or	no,	the	child	still	within	her	was	creeping	forward,	in	timid
increments.	It	was	safe,	wasn’t	it,	safe	to	cup	her	small	unscarred	hands	and	to
show,	in	private	oh-so-secret	display,	that	old	dream	shining	anew.	Safe,
because	Trull	was	dead.	No	harm,	none	at	all.
Loose	the	twist	deep	in	her	stomach	–	no,	further	down.	She	was	now,	after
all,	a	grown	woman.	Loose	it,	yes,	why	not?	For	one	who	is	poison,	there	is
great	pleasure	in	anguish.	In	wild	longing.	In	the	meaningless	explorations	of
delighted	surrender,	subjugation	–	well,	subjugation	that	was	in	truth


domination	–	no	point	in	being	coy	here.	I	surrender	in	order	to	demand.
Relinquish	in	order	to	rule.	I	invite	the	rape	because	the	rapist	is	me	and	this
body	here	is	my	weapon	and	you,	my	love,	are	my	victim.
Because	heroes	die.	As	Udinaas	says,	it	is	their	fate.
The	voice	that	was	Mockra,	that	was	the	Warren	of	the	Mind,	had	not
spoken	to	her	since	that	first	time,	as	if,	somehow,	nothing	more	needed	to	be
said.	The	discipline	of	control	was	hers	to	achieve,	the	lures	of	domination
hers	to	resist.	And	she	was	managing	both.	Just.
In	this	the	echoes	of	the	past	served	to	distract	her,	lull	her	into	moments	of
sensual	longing	for	a	man	now	dead,	a	love	that	could	never	be.	In	this,	even
the	past	could	become	a	weapon,	which	she	wielded	to	fend	off	the	present	and
indeed	the	future.	But	there	were	dangers	here,	too.	Revisiting	that	moment
when	Trull	Sengar	had	drawn	his	sword,	had	then	set	it	into	her	hands.	He
wished	me	safe.	That	is	all.	Dare	I	create	in	that	something	more?	Even	to	drip
honey	onto	desire?
Seren	Pedac	glanced	up.	The	fell	gathering	–	her	companions	–	were
neither	gathered	nor	companionable.	Udinaas	was	down	by	the	stream,
upending	rocks	in	search	of	crayfish	–	anything	to	add	variety	to	their	meals	–
and	the	icy	water	had	turned	his	hands	first	red,	then	blue,	and	it	seemed	he	did
not	care.	Kettle	sat	near	a	boulder,	hunched	down	to	fend	off	the	bitter	wind
racing	up	the	valley.	She	had	succumbed	to	an	uncharacteristic	silence	these
past	few	days,	and	would	not	meet	anyone’s	eyes.	Silchas	Ruin	stood	thirty
paces	away,	at	the	edge	of	an	overhang	of	layered	rock,	and	he	seemed	to	be
studying	the	white	sky	–	a	sky	the	same	hue	as	his	skin.	‘The	world	is	his
mirror,’	Udinaas	had	said	earlier,	with	a	hard	laugh,	before	walking	down	to
the	stream.	Clip	sat	on	a	flat	rock	about	halfway	between	Silchas	Ruin	and
everyone	else.	He	had	laid	out	his	assortment	of	weapons	for	yet	another
intense	examination,	as	if	obsession	was	a	virtue.	Seren	Pedac’s	glance	found
them	all	in	passing,	before	her	gaze	settled	on	Fear	Sengar.
Brother	of	the	man	she	loved.	Ah,	was	that	an	easy	thing	to	say?	Easy,
perhaps,	in	its	falsehood.	Or	in	its	simple	truth.	Fear	believed	that	Trull’s	gift
was	more	than	it	seemed;	that	even	Trull	hadn’t	been	entirely	aware	of	his	own
motivations.	That	the	sad-faced	Edur	warrior	had	found	in	her,	in	Seren	Pedac,
Acquitor,	a	Letherii,	something	he	had	not	found	before	in	anyone.	Not	one	of
the	countless	beautiful	Tiste	Edur	women	he	must	have	known.	Young	women,
their	faces	unlined	by	years	of	harsh	weather	and	harsher	grief.	Women	who
were	not	strangers.	Women	with	still-pure	visions	of	love.
This	realm	they	now	found	themselves	in,	was	it	truly	that	of	Darkness?
Kurald	Galain?	Then	why	was	the	sky	white?	Why	could	she	see	with	almost


painful	clarity	every	detail	for	such	distances	as	left	her	mind	reeling?	The
Gate	itself	had	been	inky,	impenetrable	–	she	had	stumbled	blindly,	cursing	the
uneven,	stony	ground	underfoot	–	twenty,	thirty	strides,	and	then	there	had	been
light.	A	rock-strewn	vista,	here	and	there	a	dead	tree	rising	crooked	into	the
pearlescent	sky.
At	what	passed	for	dusk	in	this	place	that	sky	assumed	a	strange,	pink	tinge,
before	deepening	to	layers	of	purple	and	blue	and	finally	black.	So	thus,	a
normal	passage	of	day	and	night.	Somewhere	behind	this	cloak	of	white,	then,
a	sun.
A	sun	in	the	Realm	of	Dark?	She	did	not	understand.
Fear	Sengar	had	been	studying	the	distant	figure	of	Silchas	Ruin.	Now	he
turned	and	approached	the	Acquitor.	‘Not	long,	now,’	he	said.
She	frowned	up	at	him.	‘Until	what?’
He	shrugged,	his	eyes	fixing	on	the	Imass	spear.	‘Trull	would	have
appreciated	that	weapon,	I	think.	More	than	you	appreciated	his	sword.’
Anger	flared	within	her.	‘He	told	me,	Fear.	He	gave	me	his	sword,	not	his
heart.’
‘He	was	distracted.	His	mind	was	filled	with	returning	to	Rhulad	–	to	what
would	be	his	final	audience	with	his	brother.	He	could	not	afford	to	think	of…
other	things.	Yet	those	other	things	claimed	his	hands	and	the	gesture	was
made.	In	that	ritual,	my	brother ’s	soul	spoke.’
She	looked	away.	‘It	no	longer	matters,	Fear.’
‘It	does	to	me.’	His	tone	was	hard,	bitter.	‘I	do	not	care	what	you	make	of	it,
what	you	tell	yourself	now	to	avoid	feeling	anything.	Once,	a	brother	of	mine
demanded	the	woman	I	loved.	I	did	not	refuse	him,	and	now	she	is	dead.
Everywhere	I	look,	Acquitor,	I	see	her	blood,	flowing	down	in	streams.	It	will
drown	me	in	the	end,	but	that	is	no	matter.	While	I	live,	while	I	hold	madness	at
bay,	Seren	Pedac,	I	will	protect	and	defend	you,	for	a	brother	of	mine	set	his
sword	into	your	hands.’
He	walked	away	then,	and	still	she	could	not	look	at	him.	Fear	Sengar,	you
fool.	A	fool,	like	any	other	man,	like	every	other	man.	What	is	it	with	your
gestures?	Your	eagerness	to	sacrifice?	Why	do	you	all	give	yourselves	to	us?
We	are	not	pure	vessels.	We	are	not	innocent.	We	will	not	handle	your	soul	like
a	precious,	fragile	jewel.	No,	you	fool,	we’ll	abuse	it	as	if	it	was	our	own,	or,
indeed,	of	lesser	value	than	that	–	if	that	is	possible.
The	crunch	of	stones,	and	suddenly	Udinaas	was	crouching	before	her.	In
his	cupped	hands,	a	minnow.	Writhing	trapped	in	a	tiny,	diminishing	pool	of
water.
‘Plan	on	splitting	it	six	ways,	Udinaas?’


‘It’s	not	that,	Acquitor.	Look	at	it.	Closely	now.	Do	you	see?	It	has	no	eyes.
It	is	blind.’
‘And	is	that	significant?’	But	it	was,	she	realized.	She	frowned	up	at	him,
saw	the	sharp	glitter	in	his	gaze.	‘We	are	not	seeing	what	is	truly	here,	are	we?’
‘Darkness,’	he	said.	‘The	cave.	The	womb.’
‘But…how?’	She	looked	round.	The	landscape	of	broken	rock,	the	pallid
lichen	and	mosses	and	the	very	dead	trees.	The	sky.
‘Gift,	or	curse,’	Udinaas	said,	straightening.	‘She	took	a	husband,	didn’t
she?’
She	watched	him	walking	back	to	the	stream,	watched	him	tenderly
returning	the	blind	minnow	to	the	rushing	water.	A	gesture	Seren	would	not
have	expected	from	him.	She?	Who	took	a	husband?
‘Gift	or	curse,’	said	Udinaas	as	he	approached	her	once	again.	‘The	debate
rages	on.’
‘Mother	Dark…and	Father	Light.’
He	grinned	his	usual	cold	grin.	‘At	last,	Seren	Pedac	stirs	from	her	pit.	I’ve
been	wondering	about	those	three	brothers.’
Three	brothers?
He	went	on	as	if	she	knew	of	whom	he	was	speaking.	‘Spawn	of	Mother
Dark,	yes,	but	then,	there	were	plenty	of	those,	weren’t	there?	Was	there
something	that	set	those	three	apart?	Andarist,	Anomander,	Silchas.	What	did
Clip	tell	us?	Oh,	right,	nothing.	But	we	saw	the	tapestries,	didn’t	we?	Andarist,
like	midnight	itself.	Anomander,	with	hair	of	blazing	white.	And	here,	Silchas,
our	walking	bloodless	abomination,	whiter	than	any	corpse	but	just	as	friendly.
So	what	caused	the	great	rift	between	sons	and	mother?	Maybe	it	wasn’t	her
spreading	her	legs	to	Light	like	a	stepfather	none	of	them	wanted.	Maybe	that’s
all	a	lie,	one	of	those	sweetly	convenient	ones.	Maybe,	Seren	Pedac,	it	was
finding	out	who	their	father	was.’
She	could	not	help	but	follow	his	gaze	to	where	stood	Silchas	Ruin.	Then
she	snorted	and	turned	away.	‘Does	it	matter?’
‘Does	it	matter?	Not	right	now,’	Udinaas	said.	‘But	it	will.’
‘Why?	Every	family	has	its	secrets.’
He	laughed.	‘I	have	my	own	question.	If	Silchas	Ruin	is	all	Light	on	the
outside,	what	must	he	be	on	the	inside?’
‘The	world	is	his	mirror.’
But	the	world	we	now	look	upon	is	a	lie.
‘Udinaas,	I	thought	the	Tiste	Edur	were	the	children	of	Mother	Dark	and
Father	Light.’
‘Successive	generations,	probably.	Not	in	any	obvious	way	connected	to


those	three	brothers.’
‘Scabandari.’
‘Yes,	I	imagine	so.	Father	Shadow,	right?	Ah,	what	a	family	that	was!	Let’s
not	forget	the	sisters!	Menandore	with	her	raging	fire	of	dawn,	Sheltatha	Lore
the	loving	dusk,	and	Sukul	Ankhadu,	treacherous	bitch	of	night.	Were	there
others?	There	must	have	been,	but	they’ve	since	fallen	by	the	wayside.	Myths
prefer	manageable	numbers,	after	all,	and	three	always	works	best.	Three	of
this,	three	of	that.’
‘But	Scabandari	would	be	the	fourth—’
‘Andarist	is	dead.’
Oh.	‘Andarist	is	dead.’	And	how	does	he	know	such	things?	Who	speaks	to
you,	Udinaas,	in	your	nightly	fevers?
She	could	find	out,	she	suddenly	realized.	She	could	slide	in,	like	a	ghost.
She	could,	with	the	sorcery	of	Mockra,	steal	knowledge.	I	could	rape	someone
else’s	mind,	is	what	I	mean.	Without	his	ever	knowing.
There	was	necessity,	wasn’t	there?	Something	terrible	was	coming.
Udinaas	knew	what	it	would	be.	What	it	might	be,	anyway.	And	Fear	Sengar	–
he	had	just	vowed	to	protect	her,	as	if	he	too	suspected	some	awful
confrontation	was	close	at	hand.	I	remain	the	only	one	to	know	nothing.
She	could	change	that.	She	could	use	the	power	she	had	found	within	her.	It
was	nothing	more	than	self-protection.	To	remain	ignorant	was	to	justly	suffer
whatever	fate	awaited	her;	yes,	in	lacking	ruthlessness	she	would	surely
deserve	whatever	befell	her.	For	ignoring	what	Mockra	offered,	for	ignoring
this	gift.
No	wonder	it	had	said	nothing	since	that	first	conversation.	She	had	been	in
her	pit,	stirring	old	sand	to	see	what	seeds	might	spring	to	life,	but	there	was
no	light	reaching	that	pit,	and	no	life	among	the	chill	grains.	An	indulgent
game	and	nothing	more.
I	have	a	right	to	protect	myself.	Defend	myself.
Clip	and	Silchas	Ruin	were	walking	back.	Udinaas	was	studying	them	with
the	avidness	he	had	displayed	when	examining	the	blind	minnow.
I	will	have	your	secrets,	slave.	I	will	have	those,	and	perhaps	much,	much
more.
	
Udinaas	could	not	help	but	see	Silchas	Ruin	differently.	In	a	new	light,	ha	ha.
The	aggrieved	son.	One	of	them,	anyway.	Aggrieved	sons,	daughters,
grandchildren,	their	children,	on	and	on	until	the	race	of	Shadow	wars	against
that	of	Darkness.	All	on	a	careless	word,	an	insult,	the	wrong	look	a	hundred


thousand	years	ago.
But,	then,	where	are	the	children	of	Light?
Well,	a	good	thing,	maybe,	that	they	weren’t	around.	Enough	trouble
brewing	as	it	was,	with	Silchas	Ruin	and	Clip	on	one	side	and	Fear	Sengar	and
–	possibly	–	Scabandari	on	the	other.	But	of	course	Fear	Sengar	is	no	Mortal
Sword	of	Shadow.	Although	he	probably	wants	to	be,	even	believes	himself	to
be.	Oh,	this	will	play	badly	indeed,	won’t	it?
Silent,	they	walked	on.	Across	this	blasted,	lifeless	landscape.	But	not
quite!	There	are…minnows.
The	quest	was	drawing	to	a	close.	Just	as	well.	Nothing	worse,	as	far	as	he
was	concerned,	than	those	legends	of	old	when	the	stalwart,	noble	adventurers
simply	went	on	and	on,	through	one	absurd	episode	after	another,	with	each
one	serving	some	arcane	function	for	at	least	one	of	the	wide-eyed	fools,	as
befitted	the	shining	serrated	back	of	morality	that	ran	the	length	of	the	story,
from	head	to	tip	of	that	long,	sinuous	tail.	Legends	that	bite.	Yes,	they	all	do.
That’s	the	point	of	them.
But	not	this	one,	not	this	glorious	quest	of	ours.	No	thunderous	message
driving	home	like	a	spike	of	lightning	between	the	eyes.	No	tumbling	cascade
of	fraught	scenes	ascending	like	some	damned	stairs	to	the	magical	tower
perched	on	the	mountain’s	summit,	where	all	truths	were	forged	into	the
simple	contest	of	hero	against	villain.
Look	at	us!	What	heroes?	We’re	all	villains,	and	that	tower	doesn’t	even
exist.
Yet.
I	see	blood	dripping	between	the	stones.	Blood	in	its	making.	So	much
blood.	You	want	that	tower,	Silchas	Ruin?	Fear	Sengar?	Clip?	You	want	it	that
much?	You	will	have	to	make	it,	and	so	you	shall.
Fevers	every	night.	Whatever	sickness	whispered	in	his	veins	preferred	the
darkness	of	the	mind	that	was	sleep.	Revelations	arrived	in	torn	fragments,
pieces	hinting	of	some	greater	truth,	something	vast.	But	he	did	not	trust	any	of
that	–	those	revelations,	they	were	all	lies.	Someone’s	lies.	The	Errant’s?
Menandore’s?	The	fingers	poking	into	his	brain	were	legion.	Too	many
contradictions,	each	vision	warring	with	the	next.
What	do	you	all	want	of	me?
Whatever	it	was,	he	wasn’t	going	to	give	it.	He’d	been	a	slave	but	he	was	a
slave	no	longer.
This	realm	had	not	been	lived	in	for	a	long,	long	time.	At	least	nowhere	in
this	particular	region.	The	trees	were	so	long	dead	they	had	turned	to	brittle
stone,	right	down	to	the	thinnest	twigs	with	their	eternally	frozen	buds	awaiting


a	season	of	life	that	never	came.	And	that	sun	up	there,	somewhere	behind	the
white	veil,	well,	it	too	was	a	lie.	Somehow.	After	all,	Darkness	should	be	dark,
shouldn’t	it?
He	thought	to	find	ruins	or	something.	Proof	that	the	Tiste	Andii	had	once
thrived	here,	but	he	had	not	seen	a	single	thing	that	had	been	shaped	by	an
intelligent	hand,	guided	by	a	sentient	mind.	No	roads,	no	trails	of	any	kind.
When	the	hidden	sun	began	its	fade	of	light,	Clip	called	a	halt.	Since
arriving	in	this	place,	he	had	not	once	drawn	out	the	chain	and	its	two	rings,	the
sole	blessing	to	mark	this	part	of	their	grand	journey.	There	was	nothing	to
feed	a	fire,	so	the	dried	remnants	of	smoked	deer	meat	found	no	succulence	in
a	stew	and	lent	no	warmth	to	their	desultory	repast.
What	passed	for	conversation	was	no	better.
Seren	Pedac	spoke.	‘Clip,	why	is	there	light	here?’
‘We	walk	a	road,’	the	young	Tiste	Andii	replied.	‘Kurald	Liosan,	Father
Light’s	gift	of	long,	long	ago.	As	you	can	see,	his	proud	garden	didn’t	last
very	long.’	He	shrugged.	‘Silchas	Ruin	and	myself,	well,	naturally	we	don’t
need	this,	but	leading	you	all	by	hand…’	His	smile	was	cold.
‘Thought	you	were	doing	that	anyway,’	Udinaas	said.	The	gloom	was
deepening,	but	he	found	that	there	was	little	effect	on	his	vision,	a	detail	he	kept
to	himself.
‘I	was	being	kind	in	not	stating	the	obvious,	Letherii.	Alas,	you	lack	such
tact.’
‘Tact?	Fuck	tact,	Clip.’
The	smile	grew	harder.	‘You	are	not	needed,	Udinaas.	I	trust	you	know
that.’
A	wince	tightened	Seren	Pedac’s	face.	‘There’s	no	point	in—’
‘It’s	all	right,	Acquitor,’	Udinaas	said.	‘I	was	getting	rather	tired	of	the
dissembling	bullshit	anyway.	Clip,	where	does	this	road	lead?	When	we	step
off	it,	where	will	we	find	ourselves?’
‘I’m	surprised	you	haven’t	guessed.’
‘Well,	I	have.’
Seren	Pedac	frowned	across	at	Udinaas	and	asked,	‘Will	you	tell	me,	then?’
‘I	can’t.	It’s	a	secret	–	and	yes,	I	know	what	I	said	about	dissembling,	but
this	way	maybe	you	stay	alive.	Right	now,	and	with	what’s	to	come,	you	have	a
chance	of	walking	away,	when	all’s	said	and	done.’
‘Generous	of	you,’	she	said	wearily,	glancing	away.
‘He	is	a	slave,’	Fear	Sengar	said.	‘He	knows	nothing,	Acquitor.	How	could
he?	He	mended	nets.	He	swept	damp	sheaves	from	the	floor	and	scattered	new
ones.	He	shelled	oysters.’


‘And	on	the	shore,	one	night,’	Udinaas	said,	‘I	saw	a	white	crow.’
Sudden	silence.
Finally,	Silchas	Ruin	snorted.	‘Means	nothing.	Except	perhaps	a
presentiment	of	my	rebirth.	Thus,	Udinaas,	it	may	be	you	are	a	seer	of	sorts.
Or	a	liar.’
‘More	likely	both,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Yet	there	was	a	white	crow.	Was	it	flying
through	darkness,	or	dusk?	I’m	not	sure,	but	I	think	the	distinction	is,	well,
important.	Might	be	worth	some	effort,	remembering	exactly,	I	mean.	But	my
days	of	working	hard	at	anything	are	done.’	He	glanced	over	at	Silchas	Ruin.
‘We’ll	find	out	soon	enough.’
‘This	is	pointless,’	Clip	announced,	settling	back	until	he	was	supine	on	the
hard	ground,	hands	laced	behind	his	head,	staring	up	at	the	black,	blank	sky.
‘So	this	is	a	road,	is	it?’	Udinaas	asked	–	seemingly	of	no-one	in	particular.
‘Gift	of	Father	Light.	That’s	the	interesting	part.	So,	the	question	I’d	like	to	ask
is	this:	are	we	travelling	it	alone?’
Clip	sat	back	up.
Udinaas	smiled	at	him.	‘Ah,	you’ve	sensed	it,	haven’t	you?	The	downy	hair
on	the	back	of	your	neck	trying	to	stand	on	end.	Sensed.	Smelled.	A	whisper	of
air	as	from	some	high	wind.	Sending	odd	little	chills	through	you.	All	that.’
Silchas	Ruin	rose,	anger	in	his	every	line.	‘Menandore,’	he	said.
‘I	would	say	she	has	more	right	to	this	road	than	we	do,’	Udinaas	said.	‘But
Clip	brought	us	here	out	of	the	goodness	of	his	heart.	Such	noble	intentions.’
‘She	tracks	us,’	Silchas	Ruin	muttered,	hands	finding	the	grips	of	his
singing	swords.	Then	he	glared	skyward.	‘From	the	sky.’
‘For	your	miserable	family	feuds	are	the	only	things	worth	living	for,
right?’
There	was	alarm	in	Fear	Sengar ’s	expression.	‘I	do	not	understand.	Why	is
Sister	Dawn	following	us?	What	cares	she	for	the	soul	of	Scabandari?’
‘The	Finnest,’	Clip	said	under	his	breath.	Then,	louder,	‘Bloodeye’s	soul,
Edur.	She	seeks	to	claim	it	for	herself.	Its	power.’
Udinaas	sighed.	‘So,	Silchas	Ruin,	what	terrible	deed	did	you	commit	on
your	sun-locked	sister?	Or	daughter,	or	whatever	relation	she	is?	Why	is	she
out	for	your	blood?	Just	what	did	you	all	do	to	each	other	all	those	millennia
ago?	Can’t	you	kiss	and	make	up?	No,	I	imagine	not.’
‘There	was	no	crime,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.	‘We	are	enemies	in	the	name	of
ambition,	even	when	I	would	not	have	it	so.	Alas,	to	live	as	long	as	we	have,	it
seems	there	is	naught	else	to	sustain	us.	Naught	but	rage	and	hunger.’
‘I	suggest	a	huge	mutual	suicide,’	Udinaas	said.	‘You	and	all	your	wretched
kin,	and	you,	Clip,	you	could	just	jump	in	to	appease	your	ego	or	something.


Vanish	from	the	mortal	realms,	all	of	you,	and	leave	the	rest	of	us	alone.’
‘Udinaas,’	Clip	said	with	amusement,	‘this	is	not	a	mortal	realm.’
‘Rubbish.’
‘Not	as	you	think	of	one,	then.	This	is	a	place	of	elemental	forces.
Unfettered,	and	beneath	every	surface,	the	potential	for	chaos.	This	is	a	realm
of	the	Tiste.’
Seren	Pedac	seemed	startled.	‘Just	“Tiste”?	Not	Andii,	Edur—’
‘Acquitor,’	Silchas	Ruin	said,	‘the	Tiste	are	the	first	children.	The	very
first.	Ours	were	the	first	cities,	the	first	civilizations.	Rising	here,	in	realms
such	as	this	one.	As	Clip	has	said,	elemental.’
‘Then	what	of	the	Elder	Gods?’	Seren	Pedac	demanded.
Neither	Clip	nor	Silchas	Ruin	replied,	and	the	silence	stretched,	until
Udinaas	snorted	a	laugh.	‘Unwelcome	relatives.	Pushed	into	closets.	Bar	the
door,	ignore	the	knocking	and	let’s	hope	they	move	on.	It’s	ever	the	problem
with	all	these	creation	stories.	“We’re	the	first,	isn’t	it	obvious?	Those	others?
Ignore	them.	Imposters,	interlopers,	and	worse!	Look	at	us,	after	all!	Dark,
Light,	and	the	gloom	in	between!	Could	anyone	be	purer,	more	elemental,	than
that?”	The	answer,	of	course,	is	yes.	Let’s	take	an	example,	shall	we?’
‘Nothing	preceded	Darkness,’	said	Clip,	irritation	sharpening	his
pronouncement.
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘That	seems	a	reasonable	enough	assertion.	But	then,	is
it?	After	all,	Darkness	is	not	just	absence	of	light,	is	it?	Can	you	have	a
negative	definition	like	that?	But	maybe	Clip	wasn’t	being	nearly	so	offhand	as
he	sounded	just	there.	“Nothing	preceded	Darkness.”	Nothing	indeed.	True
absence,	then,	of	anything.	Even	Darkness.	But	wait,	where	does	chaos	fit	in?
Was	that	Nothing	truly	empty,	or	was	it	filled	with	chaos?	Was	Darkness	the
imposition	of	order	on	chaos?	Was	it	the	only	imposition	of	order	on	chaos?
That	sounds	presumptuous.	Would	that	Feather	Witch	was	here	–	there’s	too
much	of	the	Tiles	that	I’ve	forgotten.	All	that	birth	of	this	and	birth	of	that	stuff.
But	chaos	also	produced	Fire.	It	must	have,	for	without	Fire	there	is	no	Light.
One	might	also	say	that	without	Light	there	is	no	Dark,	and	without	both	there
is	no	Shadow.	But	Fire	needs	fuel	to	burn,	so	we	would	need	matter	of	some
kind	–	solids	–	born	of	Earth.	And	Fire	needs	air,	and	so—’
‘I	am	done	listening	to	all	of	this	nonsense,’	Silchas	Ruin	said.
The	Tiste	Andii	walked	off	into	the	night,	which	wasn’t	night	at	all	–	at
least	not	in	the	eyes	of	Udinaas,	and	he	found	he	could	watch	Silchas	Ruin	as
the	warrior	went	on	for	another	forty	or	so	paces,	then	spun	round	to	face	the
camp	once	more.	Ah,	White	Crow,	you	would	listen	on,	would	you?	Yet	with
none	to	see	your	face,	none	to	challenge	you	directly.


My	guess	is,	Silchas	Ruin,	you	are	as	ignorant	as	the	rest	of	us	when	it
comes	to	the	birth	of	all	existence.	That	your	notions	are	as	quaint	as	ours,	and
just	as	pathetic,	too.
Fear	Sengar	spoke.	‘Udinaas,	the	Edur	women	hold	that	the	Kechra	bound
all	that	exists	to	time	itself,	thus	assuring	the	annihilation	of	everything.	Their
great	crime.	Yet	that	death	–	I	have	thought	hard	on	this	–	that	death,	it	does	not
have	the	face	of	chaos.	The	very	opposite,	in	fact.’
‘Chaos	pursues,’	Clip	muttered	with	none	of	his	characteristic	arrogance.
‘It	is	the	Devourer.	Mother	Dark	scattered	its	power,	its	armies,	and	it	seeks
ever	to	rejoin,	to	become	one	again,	for	when	that	happens	no	other	power	–
not	even	Mother	Dark	–	can	defeat	it.’
‘Mother	Dark	must	have	had	allies,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Either	that,	or	she
ambushed	chaos,	caught	her	enemy	unawares.	Was	all	existence	born	of
betrayal,	Clip?	Is	that	the	core	of	your	belief?	No	wonder	you	are	all	at	each
other ’s	throats.’	Listen	well,	Silchas	Ruin;	I	am	closer	on	your	trail	than	you
ever	imagined.	Which,	he	thought	then,	might	not	be	wise;	might,	in	fact,	prove
fatal.	‘In	any	case,	Mother	Dark	herself	had	to	have	been	born	of	something.	A
conspiracy	within	chaos.	Some	unprecedented	alliance	where	all	alliances	were
forbidden.	So,	yet	another	betrayal.’
Fear	Sengar	leaned	forward	slightly.	‘Udinaas,	how	did	you	know	we	were
being	followed?	By	Menandore.’
‘Slaves	need	to	hone	their	every	sense,	Fear	Sengar.	Because	our	masters
are	fickle.	You	might	wake	up	one	morning	with	a	toothache,	leaving	you
miserable	and	short-tempered,	and	in	consequence	an	entire	family	of	slaves
might	suffer	devastation	before	the	sun’s	at	midday.	A	dead	husband	or	wife,	a
dead	parent,	or	both.	Beaten,	maimed	for	life,	blinded,	dead	–	every	possibility
waits	in	our	shadows.’
He	did	not	think	Fear	was	convinced,	and,	granted,	the	argument	was	thin.
True,	those	heightened	senses	might	be	sufficient	to	raise	the	hackles,	to	light
the	instincts	that	something	was	on	their	trail.	But	that	was	not	the	same	as
knowing	that	it	was	Menandore.	I	was	careless	in	revealing	what	I	knew.	I
wanted	to	knock	the	fools	off	balance,	but	that	has	just	made	them	more
dangerous.	To	me.
Because	now	they	know	–	or	will	know,	soon	enough	–	that	this	useless
slave	does	not	walk	alone.
For	the	moment,	however,	no-one	was	inclined	to	challenge	him.
Drawing	out	bedrolls,	settling	in	for	a	passage	of	restless	sleep.	Dark	that
was	not	dark.	Light	that	was	not	light.	Slaves	who	might	be	masters,	and
somewhere	ahead	of	them	all,	a	bruised	stormcloud	overhead,	filled	with


thunder,	lightning,	and	crimson	rain.
	
She	waited	until	the	slave’s	breathing	deepened,	lengthened,	found	the	rhythm
of	slumber.	The	wars	of	conscience	were	past.	Udinaas	had	revealed	enough
secret	knowledge	to	justify	this.	He	had	never	left	his	slavery	behind,	and	now
his	Mistress	was	Menandore,	a	creature	by	all	accounts	as	treacherous,	vicious
and	cold-blooded	as	any	other	in	that	ancient	family	of	what-might-be-gods.
Mockra	whispered	into	life	in	her	mind,	as	free	as	wandering	thought,
unconstrained	by	a	shell	of	hard	bone,	by	the	well-worn	pathways	of	the	mind.
A	tendril	lifting	free,	hovering	in	the	air	above	her,	she	gave	it	the	shape	of	a
serpent,	head	questing,	tongue	flicking	to	find	the	scent	of	Udinaas,	of	the
man’s	very	soul	–	there,	sliding	forward	to	close,	a	touch—
Hot!
Seren	Pedac	felt	that	serpent	recoil,	felt	the	ripples	sweep	back	into	her	in
waves	of	scalding	heat.
Fever	dreams,	the	fire	of	Udinaas’s	soul.	The	man	stirred	in	his	blankets.
She	would	need	to	be	more	subtle,	would	need	the	essence	of	the	serpent
she	had	chosen.	Edging	forward	once	more,	finding	that	raging	forge,	then
burrowing	down,	through	hot	sand,	beneath	it.	Oh,	there	was	pain,	yes,	but	it
was	not,	she	now	realized,	some	integral	furnace	of	his	soul.	It	was	the	realm
his	dream	had	taken	him	into,	a	realm	of	blistering	light—
Her	eyes	opened	onto	a	torn	landscape.	Boulders	baked	red	and	brittle.
Thick,	turgid	air,	the	breath	of	a	potter ’s	kiln.	Blasted	white	sky	overhead.
Udinaas	wandered,	staggering,	ten	paces	away.
She	sent	her	serpent	slithering	after	him.
An	enormous	shadow	slid	over	them	–	Udinaas	spun	and	twisted	to	glare
upward	as	that	shadow	flowed	past,	then	on,	and	the	silver	and	gold	scaled
dragon,	gliding	on	stretched	wings,	flew	over	the	ridge	directly	ahead,	then,	a
moment	later,	vanished	from	sight.
Seren	saw	Udinaas	waiting	for	it	to	reappear.	And	then	he	saw	it	again,	now
tiny	as	a	speck,	a	glittering	mote	in	the	sky,	fast	dwindling.	The	Letherii	slave
cried	out,	but	Seren	could	not	tell	if	the	sound	had	been	one	of	rage	or
abandonment.
No-one	likes	being	ignored.
Stones	skittered	near	the	serpent	and	in	sudden	terror	she	turned	its	gaze,
head	lifting,	to	see	a	woman.	Not	Menandore.	No,	a	Letherii.	Small,	lithe,	hair
so	blonde	as	to	be	almost	white.	Approaching	Udinaas,	tremulous,	every
motion	revealing	taut,	frayed	nerves.


Another	intruder.
Udinaas	had	yet	to	turn	from	that	distant	sky,	and	Seren	watched	as	the
Letherii	woman	drew	still	closer.	Then,	five	paces	away,	she	straightened,	ran
her	hands	through	her	wild,	burnished	hair.	In	a	sultry	voice,	the	strange
woman	spoke.	‘I	have	been	looking	for	you,	my	love.’
He	did	not	whirl	round.	He	did	not	even	move,	but	Seren	saw	something
new	in	the	lines	of	his	back	and	shoulders,	the	way	he	now	held	his	head.	In	his
voice,	when	he	replied,	there	was	amusement.	‘“My	love”?’	And	then	he	faced
her,	with	ravaged	eyes,	a	bleakness	like	defiant	ice	in	this	world	of	fire.	‘No
longer	the	startled	hare,	Feather	Witch	–	yes,	I	see	the	provocative	way	you
now	look	at	me,	the	brazen	confidence,	the	invitation.	And	in	all	that,	the	truth
that	is	your	contempt	still	burns	through.	Besides,’	he	added,	‘I	heard	you
scrabbling	closer,	could	smell,	even,	your	fear.	What	do	you	want,	Feather
Witch?’
‘I	am	not	frightened,	Udinaas,’	the	woman	replied.
That	name,	yes.	Feather	Witch.	The	fellow	slave,	the	Caster	of	the	Tiles.	Oh,
there	is	history	between	them	beyond	what	any	of	us	might	have	imagined.
‘But	you	are,’	Udinaas	insisted.	‘Because	you	expected	to	find	me	alone.’
She	stiffened,	then	attempted	a	shrug.	‘Menandore	feels	nothing	for	you,
my	love.	You	must	realize	that.	You	are	naught	but	a	weapon	in	her	hands.’
‘Hardly.	Too	blunted,	too	pitted,	too	fragile	by	far.’
Feather	Witch’s	laugh	was	high	and	sharp.	‘Fragile?	Errant	take	me,
Udinaas,	you	have	never	been	that.’
Seren	Pedac	certainly	agreed	with	her	assessment.	What	reason	this	false
modesty?
‘I	asked	what	you	wanted.	Why	are	you	here?’
‘I	have	changed	since	you	last	saw	me,’	Feather	Witch	replied.	‘I	am	now
Destra	Irant	to	the	Errant,	to	the	last	Elder	God	of	the	Letherii.	Who	stands
behind	the	Empty	Throne—’
‘It’s	not	empty.’
‘It	will	be.’
‘Now	there’s	your	new-found	faith	getting	in	the	way	again.	All	that
hopeful	insistence	that	you	are	once	more	at	the	centre	of	things.	Where	is	your
flesh	hiding	right	now,	Feather	Witch?	In	Letheras,	no	doubt.	Some	airless,
stinking	hovel	that	you	have	proclaimed	a	temple	–	yes,	that	stings	you,	telling
me	I	am	not	in	error.	About	you.	Changed,	Feather	Witch?	Well,	fool	yourself
if	you	like.	But	don’t	think	I’m	deceived.	Don’t	think	I	will	now	fall	into	your
arms	gasping	with	lust	and	devotion.’
‘You	once	loved	me.’


‘I	once	pressed	red-hot	coins	into	Rhulad’s	dead	eyes,	too.	But	they	weren’t
dead,	alas.	The	past	is	a	sea	of	regrets,	but	I	have	crawled	a	way	up	the	shore
now,	Feather	Witch.	Quite	a	way,	in	fact.’
‘We	belong	together,	Udinaas.	Destra	Irant	and	T’orrud	Segul,	and	we	will
have,	at	our	disposal,	a	Mortal	Sword.	Letherii,	all	of	us.	As	it	should	be,	and
through	us	the	Errant	rises	once	more.	Into	power,	into	domination	–	it	is	what
our	people	need,	what	we	have	needed	for	a	long	time.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur—’
‘Are	on	their	way	out.	Rhulad’s	Grey	Empire	–	it	was	doomed	from	the
start.	Even	you	saw	that.	It’s	tottering,	crumbling,	falling	to	pieces.	But	we
Letherii	will	survive.	We	always	do,	and	now,	with	the	rebirth	of	the	faith	in	the
Errant,	our	empire	will	make	the	world	tremble.	Destra	Irant,	T’orrud	Segul
and	Mortal	Sword,	we	shall	be	the	three	behind	the	Empty	Throne.	Rich,	free	to
do	as	we	please.	We	shall	have	Edur	for	slaves.	Broken,	pathetic	Edur.	Chained,
beaten,	we	shall	use	them	up,	as	they	once	did	to	us.	Love	me	or	not,	Udinaas.
Taste	my	kiss	or	turn	away,	it	does	not	matter.	You	are	T’orrud	Segul.	The
Errant	has	chosen	you—’
‘He	tried,	you	mean.	I	sent	the	fool	away.’
She	was	clearly	stunned	into	silence.
Udinaas	half	turned	with	a	dismissive	wave	of	one	hand.	‘I	sent	Menandore
away,	too.	They	tried	using	me	like	a	coin,	something	to	be	passed	back	and
forth.	But	I	know	all	about	coins.	I’ve	smelled	the	burning	stench	of	their
touch.’	He	glanced	back	at	her	again.	‘And	if	I	am	a	coin,	then	I	belong	to	noone.	Borrowed,	occasionally.	Wagered,	often.	Possessed?	Never	for	long.’
‘T’orrud	Segul—’
‘Find	someone	else.’
‘You	have	been	chosen,	you	damned	fool!’	She	started	forward	suddenly,
tearing	at	her	own	threadbare	slave’s	tunic.	Cloth	ripped,	fluttered	on	the	hot
wind	like	the	tattered	fragments	of	some	imperial	flag.	She	was	naked,
reaching	out	to	drag	Udinaas	round,	arms	encircling	his	neck—
His	push	sent	her	sprawling	onto	the	hard,	stony	ground.	‘I’m	done	with
rapes,’	he	said	in	a	low,	grating	voice.	‘Besides,	I	told	you	we	have	company.
You	clearly	didn’t	completely	understand	me—’	And	he	walked	past	her,
walked	straight	towards	the	serpent	that	was	Seren	Pedac.
	
She	woke	with	a	calloused	hand	closed	about	her	throat.	Stared	up	into
glittering	eyes	in	the	gloom.
She	could	feel	him	trembling	above	her,	his	weight	pinning	her	down,	and


he	lowered	his	face	to	hers,	then,	wiry	beard	bristling	along	her	cheek,	brought
his	mouth	to	her	right	ear,	and	began	whispering.
‘I	have	been	expecting	something	like	that,	Seren	Pedac,	for	some	time.
Thus,	you	had	my	admiration…of	your	restraint.	Too	bad,	then,	it	didn’t	last.’
She	was	having	trouble	breathing;	the	hand	wrapping	her	throat	was	an
iron	band.
‘I	meant	what	I	said	about	rapes,	Acquitor.	If	you	ever	do	that	again,	I	will
kill	you.	Do	you	understand	me?’
She	managed	a	nod,	and	she	could	see	now,	in	his	face,	the	full	measure	of
the	betrayal	he	was	feeling,	the	appalling	hurt.	That	she	would	so	abuse	him.
‘Think	nothing	of	me,’	Udinaas	continued,	‘if	that	suits	the	miserable	little
hole	you	live	in,	Seren	Pedac.	It’s	what	wiped	away	your	restraint	in	the	first
place,	after	all.	But	I	have	had	goddesses	use	me.	And	gods	try	to.	And	now	a
scrawny	witch	I	once	lusted	after,	who	dreams	her	version	of	tyranny	is
preferable	to	everyone	else’s.	I	was	a	slave	–	I	am	used	to	being	used,
remember?	But	–	and	listen	carefully,	woman	–	I	am	a	slave	no	longer—’
Fear	Sengar ’s	voice	came	down	from	above	them.	‘Release	her	throat,
Udinaas.	That	which	you	feel	at	the	back	of	your	own	neck	is	the	tip	of	my
sword	–	and	yes,	that	trickle	of	blood	belongs	to	you.	The	Acquitor	is
Betrothed	to	Trull	Sengar.	She	is	under	my	protection.	Release	her	now,	or
die.’
The	hand	gripping	her	throat	loosened,	lifted	clear—
And	Fear	Sengar	had	one	hand	in	the	slave’s	hair,	was	tearing	him	back,
flinging	him	onto	the	ground,	the	sword	hissing	in	a	lurid	blur—
‘NO!’	Seren	Pedac	shrieked,	clawing	across	to	throw	herself	down	onto
Udinaas.	‘No,	Fear!	Do	not	touch	him!’
‘Acquitor—’
Others	awake	now,	rising	on	all	sides—
‘Do	not	hurt	him!’	I	have	done	enough	of	that	this	night.	‘Fear	Sengar	–
Udinaas,	he	had	that	right—’	Oh,	Errant	save	me	–	‘He	had	that	right,’	she
repeated,	her	throat	feeling	torn	on	the	inside	from	that	first	shriek.	‘I	–	listen,
don’t,	Fear,	you	don’t	understand.	I…I	did	something.	Something	terrible.
Please…’	she	was	sitting	up	now,	speaking	to	everyone,	‘please,	this	is	my
fault.’
Udinaas	pushed	her	weight	to	one	side,	and	she	scraped	an	elbow	raw	as	he
clambered	free.	‘Make	it	day	again,	Silchas	Ruin,’	he	said.
‘The	night—’
‘Make	it	day	again,	damn	you!	Enough	sleep	–	let’s	move	on.	Now!’
To	Seren	Pedac’s	astonishment,	the	sky	began	to	lighten	once	more.	What?


How?
Udinaas	was	at	his	bedroll,	fighting	to	draw	it	together,	stuff	it	into	his
pack.	She	saw	tears	glittering	on	his	weathered	cheeks.
Oh,	what	have	I	done.	Udinaas—
‘You	understand	too	much,’	Clip	said	in	that	lilting,	offhand	tone	of	his.
‘Did	you	hear	me,	Udinaas?’
‘Go	fuck	yourself,’	the	slave	muttered.
Silchas	Ruin	said,	‘Leave	him,	Clip.	He	is	but	a	child	among	us.	And	he
will	play	his	childish	games.’
Ashes	drifting	down	to	bury	her	soul,	Seren	Pedac	turned	away	from	all	of
them.	No,	the	child	is	me.	Still.	Always.
Udinaas…
Twelve	paces	away,	Kettle	sat,	legs	drawn	under	her,	and	held	hands	with
Wither,	ghost	of	an	Andii,	and	there	was	neither	warmth	nor	chill	in	that	grip.
She	stared	at	the	others	as	the	light	slowly	burgeoned	to	begin	a	new	day.
‘What	they	do	to	each	other,’	she	whispered.
Wither ’s	hand	tightened	around	hers.	‘It	is	what	it	is	to	live,	child.’
She	thought	about	that,	then.	The	ghost’s	words,	the	weariness	in	the	tone,
and,	after	a	long	time,	she	finally	nodded.
Yes,	this	is	what	it	is	to	live.
It	made	all	that	she	knew	was	coming	a	little	easier	to	bear.
	
In	the	litter-scattered	streets	of	Drene,	the	smell	of	old	smoke	was	bitter	in	the
air.	Black	smears	adorned	building	walls.	Crockery,	smashing	down	from
toppled	carts,	had	flung	pieces	everywhere,	as	if	the	sky	the	night	before	had
rained	glazed	sherds.	Bloodstained	cloth,	shredded	and	torn	remnants	of	tunics
and	shirts,	were	blackening	under	the	hot	sun.	Just	beyond	the	lone	table	where
sat	Venitt	Sathad,	the	chaos	of	the	riot	that	had	ignited	the	previous	day’s	dusk
was	visible	on	all	sides.
The	proprietor	of	the	kiosk	bar	limped	back	out	from	the	shadowed	alcove
that	served	as	kitchen	and	storehouse,	bearing	a	splintered	tray	with	another
dusty	bottle	of	Bluerose	wine.	The	stunned	look	in	the	old	man’s	eyes	had	yet
to	retreat,	giving	his	motions	an	oddly	disarticulated	look	as	he	set	the	bottle
down	on	Venitt	Sathad’s	table,	bowed,	then	backed	away.
The	few	figures	that	had	passed	by	on	the	concourse	this	morning	had	each
paused	in	their	furtive	passage	to	stare	at	Venitt	–	not	because,	he	knew,	he	was
in	any	way	memorable	or	imposing,	but	because	in	sitting	here,	eating	a	light
breakfast	and	now	drinking	expensive	wine,	the	servant	of	Rautos	Hivanar


presented	a	scene	of	civil	repose.	Such	a	scene	now	jarred,	now	struck	those
who	had	weathered	the	chaos	of	the	night	before,	as	if	lit	with	its	very	own
madness.
A	hundred	versions	clouded	the	riot’s	beginning.	A	money-lender ’s	arrest.
A	meal	overcharged	and	an	argument	that	got	out	of	hand.	A	sudden	shortage
of	this	or	that.	Two	Patriotist	spies	beating	someone,	and	then	being	set	upon
by	twenty	bystanders.	Perhaps	none	of	these	things	had	occurred;	perhaps	they
all	had.
The	riot	had	destroyed	half	the	market	on	this	side	of	the	city.	It	had	then
spilled	into	the	slums	northwest	of	the	docks,	where,	judging	from	the	smoke,
it	raged	on	unchecked.
The	garrison	had	set	out	into	the	streets	to	conduct	a	brutal	campaign	of
pacification	that	was	indiscriminate	at	first,	but	eventually	found	focus	in	a
savage	assault	on	the	poorest	people	of	Drene.	At	times	in	the	past,	the	poor	–
being	true	victims	–	had	been	easily	cowed	by	a	few	dozen	cracked	skulls.	But
not	this	time.	They	had	had	enough,	and	they	had	fought	back.
In	this	morning’s	air,	Venitt	Sathad	could	still	smell	the	shock	–	sharper	by
far	than	the	smoke,	colder	than	any	bundle	of	bloody	cloth	that	might	still
contain	pieces	of	human	meat	–	the	shock	of	guards	screaming	with	fatal
wounds,	of	armoured	bullies	being	cornered	then	torn	apart	by	frenzied	mobs.
The	shock,	finally,	of	the	city	garrison’s	ignoble	retreat	to	the	barracks.
They	had	been	under	strength,	of	course.	Too	many	out	with	Bivatt	in	the
campaign	against	the	Awl.	And	they	had	been	arrogant,	emboldened	by
centuries	of	precedent.	And	that	arrogance	had	blinded	them	to	what	had	been
happening	out	there,	to	what	was	about	to	happen.
The	one	detail	that	remained	with	Venitt	Sathad,	lodged	like	a	sliver	of
wood	in	infected	flesh	that	no	amount	of	wine	could	wash	away,	was	what	had
happened	to	the	resident	Tiste	Edur.
Nothing.
The	mobs	had	left	them	alone.	Extraordinary,	inexplicable.	Frightening.
No,	instead,	half	a	thousand	shrieking	citizens	had	stormed	Letur	Anict’s
estate.	Of	course,	the	Factor ’s	personal	guards	were,	one	and	all,	elite	troops	–
recruited	from	every	Letherii	company	that	had	ever	been	stationed	in	Drene	–
and	the	mob	had	been	repulsed.	It	was	said	that	corpses	lay	in	heaps	outside	the
estate’s	walls.
Letur	Anict	had	returned	to	Drene	two	days	before,	and	Venitt	Sathad
suspected	that	the	Factor	had	been	as	unprepared	for	the	sudden	maelstrom	as
had	the	garrison.	In	Overseer	Brohl	Handar ’s	absence,	Letur	governed	the	city
and	its	outlying	region.	Whatever	reports	his	agents	might	have	delivered	upon


his	return	would	have	been	rife	with	fears	but	scant	on	specifics	–	the	kind	of
information	that	Letur	Anict	despised	and	would	summarily	dismiss.	Besides,
the	Patriotists	were	supposed	to	take	care	of	such	things	in	their	perpetual
campaign	of	terror.	A	few	more	arrests,	some	notable	disappearances,	the
confiscation	of	properties.
Of	course,	Rautos	Hivanar,	his	master,	had	noted	the	telltale	signs	of
impending	chaos.	Tyrannical	control	was	dependent	on	a	multitude	of	often
disparate	forces,	running	the	gamut	from	perception	to	overt	viciousness.	The
sense	of	power	needed	to	be	pervasive	in	order	to	create	and	maintain	the
illusion	of	omniscience.	Invigilator	Karos	Invictad	understood	that	much,	at
least,	but	where	the	thug	in	red	silks	failed	was	in	understanding	that	thresholds
existed,	and	to	cross	them	–	with	ever	greater	acts	of	brutality,	with	paranoia
and	fear	an	ever-rising	fever	–	was	to	see	the	illusion	shattered.
At	some	point,	no	matter	how	repressive	the	regime,	the	citizenry	will
come	to	comprehend	the	vast	power	in	their	hands.	The	destitute,	the	Indebted,
the	beleaguered	middle	classes;	in	short,	the	myriad	victims.	Control	was
sleight	of	hand	trickery,	and	against	a	hundred	thousand	defiant	citizens,	it
stood	no	real	chance.	All	at	once,	the	game	was	up.
The	threshold,	this	time,	was	precisely	as	Rautos	Hivanar	had	feared.	The
pressure	of	a	crumbling,	over-burdened	economy.	Shortage	of	coin,	the
crushing	weight	of	huge	and	ever-growing	debts,	the	sudden	inability	to	pay
for	anything.	The	Patriotists	could	draw	knives,	swords,	could	wield	their
knotted	clubs,	but	against	desperate	hunger	and	a	sense	of	impending	calamity,
they	might	as	well	have	been	swinging	reeds	at	the	wind.
In	the	face	of	all	this,	the	Tiste	Edur	were	helpless.	Bemused,
uncomprehending,	and	wholly	unprepared.	Unless,	that	is,	their	answer	will	be
to	begin	killing.	Everyone.
Another	of	Karos	Invictad’s	blind	spots.	The	Invigilator ’s	contempt	for	the
Tiste	Edur	could	well	prove	suicidal.	Their	Emperor	could	not	be	killed.	Their
K’risnan	could	unleash	sorcery	that	could	devour	every	Letherii	in	the	empire.
And	the	fool	thought	to	target	them	in	a	campaign	of	arrests?
No,	the	Patriotists	had	been	useful;	indeed,	for	a	time,	quite	necessary.	But
—
‘Venitt	Sathad,	welcome	to	Drene.’
Without	looking	up,	Venitt	gestured	with	one	hand	as	he	reached	for	the
wine	bottle.	‘Find	yourself	a	chair,	Orbyn	Truthfinder.’	A	glance	upward.	‘I	was
just	thinking	about	you.’
The	huge,	odious	man	smiled.	‘I	am	honoured.	If,	that	is,	your	thoughts
were	of	me	specifically.	If,	however,	they	were	of	the	Patriotists,	well,	I	suspect


that	“honour”	would	be	the	wrong	word	indeed.’
The	proprietor	was	struggling	to	drag	another	chair	out	to	the	table,	but	it
was	clear	that	whatever	had	caused	the	limp	was	proving	most	painful.	Venitt
Sathad	set	the	bottle	back	down,	rose,	and	walked	over	to	help	him.
‘Humble	apologies,	kind	sir,’	the	old	man	gasped,	his	face	white	and	beads
of	sweat	spotting	his	upper	lip.	‘Had	a	fall	yestereve,	sir—’
‘Must	have	been	a	bad	one.	Here,	leave	the	chair	to	me,	and	find	us	another
unbroken	bottle	of	wine	–	if	you	can.’
‘Most	obliged,	sir…’
Wondering	where	the	old	man	had	found	this	solid	oak	dining	chair	–	one
large	enough	to	take	Orbyn’s	mass	–	Venitt	Sathad	pulled	it	across	the	cobbles
and	positioned	it	opposite	his	own	chair	with	the	table	in	between,	then	he	sat
down	once	more.
‘If	not	honour,’	he	said,	retrieving	the	bottle	again	and	refilling	the	lone
clay	cup,	‘then	what	word	comes	to	mind,	Orbyn?’
Truthfinder	eased	down	into	the	chair,	gusting	out	a	loud,	wheezing	sigh.
‘We	can	return	to	that	anon.	I	have	been	expecting	your	arrival	for	some	time
now.’
‘Yet	I	found	neither	you	nor	the	Factor	in	the	city,	Orbyn,	upon	my	muchanticipated	arrival.’
A	dismissive	gesture,	as	the	proprietor	limped	up	with	a	cup	and	a	second
bottle	of	Bluerose	wine,	then	retreated	with	head	bowed.	‘The	Factor	insisted	I
escort	him	on	a	venture	across	the	sea.	He	has	been	wont	to	waste	my	time	of
late.	I	assure	you,	Venitt,	that	such	luxuries	are	now	part	of	the	past.	For	Letur
Anict.’
‘I	imagine	he	is	in	a	most	discomfited	state	at	the	moment.’
‘Rattled.’
‘He	lacks	confidence	that	he	can	restore	order?’
‘Lack	of	confidence	has	never	been	Letur	Anict’s	weakness.	Reconciling	it
with	reality	is,	alas.’
‘It	is	unfortunate	that	the	Overseer	elected	to	accompany	Atri-Preda
Bivatt’s	campaign	to	the	east.’
‘Possibly	fatally	so,	yes.’
Venitt	Sathad’s	brows	lifted.	‘Have	some	wine,	Orbyn.	And	please
elaborate	on	that	comment.’
‘There	are	assassins	in	that	company,’	Truthfinder	replied,	frowning	to
indicate	his	distaste.	‘Not	mine,	I	assure	you.	Letur	plays	his	own	game	with	the
Overseer.	Political.	In	truth,	I	do	not	expect	Brohl	Handar	to	return	to	Drene,
except	perhaps	as	a	wrapped,	salted	corpse.’


‘I	see.	Of	course,	this	sparring	of	his	has	now	put	him	at	a	great
disadvantage.’
Orbyn	nodded	as	he	poured	his	cup	full.	‘Yes,	with	Brohl	nowhere	in	sight,
the	blame	for	last	night’s	riot	rests	exclusively	with	the	Factor.	There	will	be
repercussions,	no	doubt?’
‘Truthfinder,	that	riot	is	not	yet	over.	It	will	continue	into	this	night,	where
it	will	boil	out	from	the	slums	with	still	greater	force	and	ferocity.	There	will
be	more	assaults	on	Letur ’s	estate,	and	before	long	on	all	of	his	properties	and
holdings	throughout	Drene,	and	those	he	will	not	be	able	to	protect.	The
barracks	will	be	under	siege.	There	will	be	looting.	There	will	be	slaughter.’
Orbyn	was	leaning	forward,	rubbing	at	his	oily	brow.	‘So	it	is	true,	then.
Financial	collapse.’
‘The	empire	reels.	The	Liberty	Consign	is	mortally	wounded.	When	the
people	learn	that	there	have	been	other	riots,	in	city	after	city—’
‘The	Tiste	Edur	will	be	stirred	awake.’
‘Yes.’
Orbyn’s	eyes	fixed	on	Venitt	Sathad’s.	‘There	are	rumours	of	war	in	the
west.’
‘West?	What	do	you	mean?’
‘An	invasion	from	the	sea,	that	seems	to	be	focused	on	the	Tiste	Edur
themselves.	Punitive,	in	the	wake	of	the	fleets.	A	distant	empire	that	did	not	take
kindly	to	the	murder	of	its	citizens.	And	now,	reports	of	the	Bolkando	and	their
allies,	massing	along	the	border.’
A	tight	smile	from	Venitt	Sathad.	‘The	alliance	we	forged.’
‘Indeed.	Another	of	Letur	Anict’s	brilliant	schemes	gone	awry.’
‘Hardly	his	exclusively,	Orbyn.	Your	Patriotists	were	essential	participants
in	that	propaganda.’
‘I	wish	I	could	deny	that.	And	so	we	come	to	that	single	word,	the	one	that
filled	my	mind	in	the	place	of	“honour”.	I	find	you	here,	in	Drene.	Venitt
Sathad,	understand	me.	I	know	what	you	do	for	your	master,	and	I	know	just
how	well	you	do	it.	I	know	what	even	Karos	Invictad	does	not	–	nor	have	I	any
interest	in	enlightening	him.	Regarding	you,	sir.’
‘You	wish	to	speak	for	yourself,	now?	Rather	than	the	Patriotists?’
‘To	stay	alive,	yes.’
‘Then	the	word	is	indeed	not	honour.’
Orbyn	Truthfinder,	the	most	feared	man	in	Drene,	drained	his	cup	of	wine.
He	leaned	back.	‘You	sit	here,	amidst	carnage.	People	hurry	past	and	they	see
you,	and	though	you	are,	in	features	and	in	stature,	barely	worth	noting,	notice
you	they	do.	And	a	chill	grips	their	hearts,	and	they	do	not	know	why.	But	I	do.’


‘You	comprehend,	then,	that	I	must	pay	Letur	Anict	a	visit.’
‘Yes,	and	I	wish	you	well	in	that.’
‘Unfortunately,	Orbyn,	we	find	ourselves	in	a	moment	of	crisis.	In	the
absence	of	Overseer	Brohl	Handar,	it	falls	to	Letur	Anict	to	restore	order.	Yes,
he	may	well	fail,	but	he	must	be	given	the	opportunity	to	succeed.	For	the	sake
of	the	empire,	Orbyn,	I	expect	you	and	your	agents	to	assist	the	Factor	in	every
way	possible.’
‘Of	course.	But	I	have	lost	thirty-one	agents	since	yesterday.	And	those
among	them	who	had	families…well,	no-one	was	spared	retribution.’
‘It	is	a	sad	truth,	Orbyn,	that	all	who	have	been	rewarded	by	tyranny	must
eventually	share	an	identical	fate.’
‘You	sound	almost	satisfied,	Venitt.’
The	Indebted	servant	of	Rautos	Hivanar	permitted	a	faint	smile	to	reach	his
lips	as	he	reached	for	his	cup	of	wine.
Orbyn’s	expression	flattened.	‘Surely,’	he	said,	‘you	do	not	believe	a	mob
is	capable	of	justice?’
‘They	have	been	rather	restrained,	thus	far.’
‘You	cannot	be	serious.’
‘Orbyn,	not	one	Tiste	Edur	has	been	touched.’
‘Because	the	rioters	are	not	fools.	Who	dares	face	Edur	sorcery?	It	was	the
very	inactivity	of	the	local	Edur	that	incited	the	mobs	to	ever	more	vicious
extremes	–	and	I	assure	you,	Letur	Anict	is	well	aware	of	that	fact.’
‘Ah,	so	he	would	blame	the	Tiste	Edur	for	this	mess.	How	convenient.’
‘I	am	not	here	to	defend	the	Factor,	Venitt	Sathad.’
‘No,	you	are	here	to	bargain	for	your	life.’
‘I	will	of	course	assist	Letur	Anict	in	restoring	order.	But	I	am	not
confident	that	he	will	succeed,	and	I	will	not	throw	away	my	people.’
‘Actually,	you	will	do	just	that.’
Orbyn’s	eyes	widened.	Sweat	was	now	trickling	down	his	face.	His	clothes
were	sticking	patchily	to	the	folds	of	fat	beneath.
‘Truthfinder,’	Venitt	Sathad	continued,	‘the	Patriotists	have	outlived	their
usefulness,	barring	one	last,	most	noble	sacrifice.	As	the	focus	of	the	people’s
rage.	I	understand	there	is	a	Drene	custom,	something	to	do	with	the	season	of
storms,	and	the	making	of	seaweed	fisher	folk	–	life-sized	dolls	with	shells	for
eyes,	dressed	in	old	clothes	and	the	like.	Sent	out	to	mark	the	season’s	birth,	I
believe,	in	small	boats.	An	offering	to	the	sealords	of	old	–	for	the	storms	to
drown.	Quaint	and	unsurprisingly	bloodthirsty,	as	most	old	customs	are.	The
Patriotists,	Orbyn,	must	become	Drene’s	seaweed	fisher	folk.	We	are	in	a
season	of	storms,	and	sacrifices	are	necessary.’


Truthfinder	licked	his	lips.	‘And	what	of	me?’	he	asked	in	a	whisper.
‘Ah,	that	particular	session	of	bargaining	is	not	yet	complete.’
‘I	see.’
‘I	hope	so.’
‘Venitt	Sathad,	my	agents	–	there	are	wives,	husbands,	children—’
‘Yes,	I	am	sure	there	are.	Just	as	there	were	wives,	husbands	and	children
of	all	those	you	happily	arrested,	tortured	and	murdered	all	in	the	name	of
personal	financial	gain.	The	people,	Orbyn,	do	understand	redressing	an
imbalance.’
‘This	is	as	Rautos	Hivanar	demands—’
‘My	master	leaves	the	specifics	to	me.	He	respects	my	record	of…
efficiency.	While	the	authority	he	represents	no	doubt	bolsters	compliance,	I
rarely	make	overt	use	of	it.	By	that	I	mean	I	rarely	find	the	need.	You	said	you
know	me,	Truthfinder,	did	you	not?’
‘I	know	you,	Venitt	Sathad,	for	the	man	who	found	Gerun	Eberict’s
murderer	and	sent	that	half-blood	away	with	a	chest	full	of	coins.	I	know	you
for	the	killer	of	a	hundred	men	and	women	at	virtually	every	level	of	society,
and,	no	matter	how	well	protected,	they	die,	and	you	emerge	unscathed,	your
identity	unknown—’
‘Except,	it	seems,	to	you.’
‘I	stumbled	onto	your	secret	life,	Venitt	Sathad,	many	years	ago.	And	I	have
followed	your	career,	not	just	within	the	empire,	but	in	the	many	consulates
and	embassies	where	your…skills…were	needed.	To	advance	Letherii
interests.	I	am	a	great	admirer,	Venitt	Sathad.’
‘Yet	now	you	seek	to	cast	in	the	coin	of	your	knowledge	in	order	to
purchase	your	life.	Do	you	not	comprehend	the	risk?’
‘What	choice	do	I	have?	By	telling	you	all	I	know,	I	am	also	telling	you	I
have	no	illusions	–	I	know	why	you	are	here,	and	what	you	need	to	do;	indeed,
my	only	surprise	is	that	it	has	taken	Rautos	Hivanar	so	long	to	finally	send	you.
In	fact,	it	might	be	you	have	arrived	too	late,	Venitt	Sathad.’
To	that,	Venitt	slowly	nodded.	Orbyn	Truthfinder	was	a	dangerous	man.
Yet,	for	the	moment,	still	useful.	As,	alas,	was	Letur	Anict.	But	such	things	were
measured	day	by	day,	at	times	moment	by	moment.	Too	late.	You	fool,	Orbyn,
even	you	have	no	real	idea	just	how	true	that	statement	is	–	too	late.
Tehol	Beddict	played	a	small	game,	once,	to	see	how	it	would	work	out.	But
this	time	–	with	that	damned	manservant	of	his	–	he	has	played	a	game	on	a
scale	almost	beyond	comprehension.
And	I	am	Venitt	Sathad.	Indebted,	born	of	Indebted,	most	skilled	slave	and
assassin	of	Rautos	Hivanar,	and	you,	Tehol	Beddict	–	and	you,	Bugg	–	need


never	fear	me.
Take	the	bastards	down.	Every	damned	one	of	them.	Take	them	all	down.
It	seemed	Orbyn	Truthfinder	saw	something	in	his	expression	then	that
drained	all	colour	from	the	man’s	round,	sweat-streamed	face.
Venitt	Sathad	was	amused.	Orbyn,	have	you	found	a	truth?
	
Scattered	to	either	side	of	the	dark	storm	front,	grey	clouds	skidded	across	the
sky,	dragging	slanting	sheets	of	rain.	The	plains	were	greening	along	hillsides
and	in	the	troughs	of	valleys,	a	mottled	patchwork	of	lichen,	mosses	and
matted	grasses.	On	the	summit	of	a	nearby	hill	was	the	carcass	of	a	wild
bhederin,	hastily	butchered	after	dying	to	a	lightning	strike.	The	beast’s	legs
were	sticking	up	into	the	air	and	on	one	hoof	was	perched	a	storm-bedraggled
crow.	Eviscerated	entrails	stretched	out	and	down	the	slope	facing	Brohl
Handar	and	his	troop	as	they	rode	past.
The	Awl	were	on	the	run.	Warriors	who	had	died	of	their	wounds	were	left
under	heaps	of	stones,	and	they	were	as	road-markers	for	the	fleeing	tribe,
although	in	truth	unnecessary	since	with	the	rains	the	trail	was	a	broad	swath	of
churned	ground.	In	many	ways,	this	uncharacteristic	carelessness	worried	the
Overseer,	but	perhaps	it	was	as	Bivatt	had	said:	the	unseasonal	bank	of	storms
that	had	rolled	across	the	plains	in	the	past	three	days	had	caught	Redmask
unprepared	–	there	could	be	no	hiding	the	passage	of	thousands	of	warriors,
their	families,	and	the	herds	that	moved	with	them.	That,	and	the	bloody,
disastrous	battle	at	Praedegar	had	shown	Redmask	to	be	fallible;	indeed,	it	was
quite	possible	that	the	masked	war	leader	was	now	struggling	with	incipient
mutiny	among	his	people.
They	needed	an	end	to	this,	and	soon.	The	supply	train	out	of	Drene	had
been	disrupted,	the	cause	unknown.	Bivatt	had	this	day	despatched	a	hundred
Bluerose	lancers	onto	their	back-trail,	seeking	out	those	burdened	wagons	and
their	escort.	Food	shortage	was	imminent	and	no	army,	no	matter	how	loyal
and	well	trained,	would	fight	on	an	empty	stomach.	Of	course,	bounteous	feasts
were	just	ahead	–	the	herds	of	rodara	and	myrid.	Battle	needed	to	be	joined.
Redmask	and	his	Awl	needed	to	be	destroyed.
A	cloud	scudded	into	their	path	with	sleeting	rain.	Surprisingly	cold	for
this	late	in	the	season.	Brohl	Handar	and	his	Tiste	Edur	rode	on,	silent	–	this
was	not	the	rain	of	their	homeland,	nothing	soft,	gentle	with	mists.	Here,	the
water	lanced	down,	hard,	and	left	one	drenched	in	a	score	of	heartbeats.	We	are
truly	strangers	here.
But	in	that	we	are	not	alone.


They	were	finding	odd	cairns,	bearing	ghastly	faces	painted	in	white,	and
in	the	cracks	and	fissures	of	those	tumuli	there	were	peculiar	offerings	–	tufts
of	wolf	fur,	teeth,	the	tusks	from	some	unknown	beast	and	antlers	bearing	rows
of	pecules	and	grooves.	None	of	this	was	Awl	–	even	the	Awl	scouts	among
Bivatt’s	army	had	never	before	seen	the	like.
Some	wandering	people	from	the	eastern	wastelands,	perhaps,	yet	when
Brohl	had	suggested	that,	the	Atri-Preda	had	simply	shaken	her	head.	She
knows	something.	Another	damned	secret.
They	rode	out	of	the	rain,	into	steaming	hot	sunlight,	the	rich	smell	of
soaked	lichen	and	moss.
The	broad	swath	of	churned	ground	was	on	their	right.	To	draw	any	closer
was	to	catch	the	stench	of	manure	and	human	faeces,	a	smell	he	had	come	to
associate	with	desperation.	We	fight	our	wars	and	leave	in	our	wake	the
redolent	reek	of	suffering	and	misery.	These	plains	are	vast,	are	they	not?	What
terrible	cost	would	we	face	if	we	just	left	each	other	alone?	An	end	to	this
squabble	over	land	–	Father	Shadow	knows,	no-one	really	owns	it.	The	game	of
possession	belongs	to	us,	not	to	the	rocks	and	earth,	the	grasses	and	the
creatures	walking	the	surface	in	their	fraught	struggle	to	survive.
A	bolt	of	lightning	descends.	A	wild	bhederin	is	struck	and	nearly	explodes,
as	if	life	itself	is	too	much	to	bear.
The	world	is	harsh	enough.	It	does	not	need	our	deliberate	cruelties.	Our
celebration	of	viciousness.
His	scout	was	returning	at	the	gallop.	Brohl	Handar	raised	a	hand	to	halt
his	troop.
The	young	warrior	reined	in	with	impressive	grace.	‘Overseer,	they	are	on
Q’uson	Tapi.	They	did	not	go	round	it,	sir	–	we	have	them!’
Q’uson	Tapi,	a	name	that	was	found	only	on	the	oldest	Letherii	maps;	the
words	themselves	were	so	archaic	that	even	their	meaning	was	unknown.	The
bed	of	a	dead	inland	sea	or	vast	salt	lake.	Flat,	not	a	single	rise	or	feature
spanning	leagues	–	or	so	the	maps	indicated.	‘How	far	ahead	is	this	Q’uson
Tapi?’
The	scout	studied	the	sky,	eyes	narrowing	on	the	sun	to	the	west.	‘We	can
reach	it	before	dusk,’	he	said.
‘And	the	Awl?’
‘They	were	less	than	a	league	out	from	the	old	shoreline,	Overseer.	Where
they	go,	there	is	no	forage	–	the	herds	are	doomed,	as	are	the	Awl	themselves.’
‘Has	the	rain	reached	Q’uson	Tapi?’
‘Not	yet,	but	it	will,	and	those	clays	will	turn	into	slime	–	the	great	wagons
will	be	useless	against	us.’


As	will	cavalry	on	both	sides,	I	would	wager.
‘Ride	back	to	the	column,’	Brohl	Handar	told	the	scout,	‘and	report	to	the
Atri-Preda.	We	will	await	her	at	the	old	shoreline.’
A	Letherii	salute	–	yes,	the	younger	Edur	had	taken	quickly	to	such	things	–
and	the	scout	nudged	his	horse	into	motion.
Redmask,	what	have	you	done	now?
	
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	had	tried,	for	most	of	the	day,	to	convince	herself	that	what
she	had	seen	had	been	conjured	from	an	exhausted,	overwrought	mind,	the
proclivity	of	the	eye	to	find	shapes	in	nothing,	all	in	gleeful	service	to	a
trembling	imagination.	With	dawn’s	light	barely	a	hint	in	the	air	she	had
walked	out,	alone,	to	stand	before	a	cairn	–	these	strange	constructions	they
now	came	across	as	they	pushed	ever	further	east.	Demonic	faces	in	white	on
the	flatter	sides	of	the	huge	boulders.	Votive	offerings	on	niches	and	between
the	roughly	stacked	stones.
They	had	pried	apart	one	such	cairn	two	days	earlier,	finding	at	its	core…
very	little.	A	single	flat	stone	on	which	rested	a	splintered	fragment	of
weathered	wood	–	seemingly	accidental,	but	Bivatt	knew	differently.	She	could
recall,	long	ago	on	the	north	shores,	on	a	day	of	fierce	seas	crashing	that	coast,
a	row	of	war	canoes,	their	prows	dismantled	–	and	the	wood,	the	wood	was	as
this,	here	in	the	centre	of	a	cairn	on	the	Awl’dan.
Standing	before	this	new	cairn,	with	dawn	attempting	to	crawl	skyward	as
grey	sheets	of	rain	hammered	down,	she	had	happened	to	glance	up.	And	saw	–
a	darker	grey,	manshaped	yet	huge,	twenty,	thirty	paces	away.	Solitary,
motionless,	watching	her.	The	blood	in	her	veins	lost	all	heat	and	all	at	once
the	rain	was	as	cold	as	those	thrashing	seas	on	the	north	coast	years	past.
A	gust	of	wind,	momentarily	making	the	wall	of	water	opaque,	and	when	it
had	passed,	the	figure	was	gone.
Alas,	the	chill	would	not	leave	her,	the	sense	of	gauging,	almost	unhuman
regard.
A	ghost.	A	shape	cast	by	her	mind,	a	trick	of	the	rain	and	wind	and	dawn’s
uncertain	birth.	But	no,	he	was	there.	Watching.	The	maker	of	the	cairns.
Redmask.	Myself.	The	Awl	and	the	Letherii	and	Tiste	Edur,	here	we	duel	on
this	plain.	Assuming	we	are	alone	in	this	deadly	game.	Witnessed	by	naught	but
carrion	birds,	coyotes	and	the	antelope	grazing	on	the	valley	floors	that	watch
us	pass	by	day	after	day.
But	we	are	not	alone.
The	thought	frightened	her,	in	a	deep,	childlike	way	–	the	fear	born	in	a


mind	too	young	to	cast	anything	away,	be	it	dreams,	nightmares,	terrors	or
dread	of	all	that	was	for	ever	unknowable.	She	felt	no	different	now.
There	were	thousands.	There	must	have	been.	How,	then,	could	they	hide?
How	could	they	have	hidden	for	so	long,	all	this	time,	invisible	to	us,	invisible
to	the	Awl?
Unless	Redmask	knows.	And	now,	working	in	league	with	the	strangers	from
the	sea,	they	prepare	an	ambush.	Our	annihilation.
She	was	right	to	be	frightened.
There	would	be	one	more	battle.	Neither	side	had	anything	left	for	more
than	that.	And,	barring	more	appalling	displays	of	murderous	skill	from	the
mage-killer,	Letherii	sorcery	would	achieve	victory.	Brohl	Handar ’s	scout	had
returned	with	the	stunning	news	that	Redmask	had	led	his	people	out	onto
Q’uson	Tapi,	and	there	would	be	no	negation	of	magic	on	the	flat	floor	of	a
dead	sea.	Redmask	forces	the	issue.	Once	we	clash	on	Q’uson	Tapi,	our	fates
will	be	decided.	No	more	fleeing,	no	more	ambushes	–	even	those	Kechra	will
have	nowhere	to	hide.
Errant,	heed	me	please.	If	you	are	indeed	the	god	of	the	Letherii,	deliver	no
surprises	on	that	day.	Please.	Give	us	victory.
The	column	marched	on,	towards	the	ancient	shore	of	a	dead	sea.	Clouds
were	gathering	on	the	horizon	ahead.	Rain	was	thrashing	down	on	that	saltcrusted	bed	of	clay	and	silt.	They	would	fight	in	a	quagmire,	where	cavalry
was	useless,	where	no	horse	would	be	quick	enough	to	outrun	a	wave	of	deadly
magic.	Where	warriors	and	soldiers	would	lock	weapons	and	die	where	they
stood,	until	one	side	stood	alone,	triumphant.
Soon	now,	they	would	have	done	with	it.	Done	with	it	all.
	
Since	noon	Redmask	had	driven	his	people	hard,	out	onto	the	seabed,	racing
ahead	of	the	rain-clouds.	A	league,	then	two,	beneath	searing	sun	and	air
growing	febrile	with	the	coming	storm.	He	had	then	called	a	halt,	but	the
activity	did	not	cease,	and	Toc	Anaster	had	watched,	bemused	at	first	and	then
in	growing	wonder	and,	finally,	admiration,	as	the	Awl	warriors	set	down
weapons,	divested	themselves	of	their	armour,	and	joined	with	the	elders	and
every	other	non-combatant	in	pulling	free	from	the	wagons	the	tents	and	every
stretch	of	hide	they	could	find.
And	the	wagons	themselves	were	taken	apart,	broken	down	until	virtually
nothing	remained	but	the	huge	wheels	and	their	axles,	which	were	then	used	to
transport	the	planks	of	wood.	Hide	and	canvas	were	stretched	out,	pegged
down,	the	stakes	driven	flush	with	the	ground	itself.	Wooden	walkways	were


constructed,	each	leading	back	to	a	single,	centrally	positioned	wagon-bed	that
had	been	left	intact	and	raised	on	legs	of	bundled	spear-shafts	to	create	a
platform.
The	canvas	and	hides	stretched	in	rows,	with	squares	behind	each	row,
linked	by	flattened	wicker	walls	that	had	been	used	for	hut-frames.	But	no-one
would	sleep	under	cover	this	night.	No,	all	that	took	shape	here	served	but	one
purpose	–	the	coming	battle.	The	final	battle.
Redmask	intended	a	defence.	He	invited	Bivatt	and	her	army	to	close	with
him,	and	to	do	so	the	Letherii	and	the	Tiste	Edur	would	need	to	march	across
open	ground	–	Toc	sat	astride	his	horse,	watching	the	frenzied	preparations
and	occasionally	glancing	northwestward,	to	those	closing	stormclouds	–	open
ground,	then,	that	would	be	a	sea	of	mud.
She	might	decide	to	wait.	I	would,	if	I	were	her.	Wait	until	the	rains	had
passed,	until	the	ground	hardened	once	again.	But	Toc	suspected	that	she	would
not	exercise	such	restraint.	Redmask	was	trapped,	true,	but	the	Awl	had	their
herds	–	thousands	of	beasts	most	of	whom	were	now	being	slaughtered	–	so,
Redmask	could	wait,	his	warriors	well	fed,	whilst	Bivatt	and	her	army	faced
the	threat	of	real	starvation.	She	would	need	all	that	butchered	meat,	but	to	get
to	it	she	had	to	go	through	the	Awl;	she	had	to	destroy	her	hated	enemy.
Besides,	she	might	be	less	dismayed	than	Redmask	would	think,	come	the
day	of	battle.	She	has	her	mages,	after	all.	Not	as	many	as	before,	true,	but	still
posing	a	significant	threat	–	sufficient	to	win	the	day,	in	fact.
Redmask	would	have	his	warriors	standing	on	those	islands	of	dry	ground.
But	such	positions	–	with	reserves	on	the	squares	behind	them	–	offered	no
avenue	of	retreat.	A	final	battle,	then,	the	fates	decided	one	way	or	the	other.
Was	this	what	Redmask	had	planned?	Hardly.	Praedegar	was	a	disaster.
Torrent	rode	up.	No	mask	of	paint	again,	a	swath	of	red	hives	spanning	his
forehead.	‘The	sea	will	live	once	more,’	he	said.
‘Hardly,’	Toc	replied.
‘The	Letherii	will	drown	nonetheless.’
‘Those	tarps,	Torrent,	will	not	stay	dry	for	long.	And	then	there	are	the
mages.’
‘Redmask	has	his	Guardians	for	those	cowards.’
‘Cowards?’	Toc	asked,	amused.	‘Because	they	wield	sorcery	instead	of
swords?’
‘And	hide	behind	rows	of	soldiers,	yes.	They	care	nothing	for	glory.	For
honour.’
‘True:	the	only	thing	they	care	about	is	winning.	Leaving	them	free	to	talk
about	honour	and	glory	afterwards.	The	chief	spoil	of	the	victors,	that


privilege.’
‘You	speak	like	one	of	them,	Mezla.	That	is	why	I	do	not	trust	you,	and	so	I
will	remain	at	your	side	during	the	battle.’
‘My	heart	goes	out	to	you	–	I	am	tasked	with	guarding	the	children,	after
all.	We’ll	be	nowhere	close	to	the	fighting.’	Until	the	fighting	comes	to	us,
which	it	will.
‘I	shall	find	my	glory	in	slitting	your	miserable	throat,	Mezla,	the	moment
you	turn	to	run.	I	see	the	weakness	in	your	soul;	I	have	seen	it	all	along.	You
are	broken.	You	should	have	died	with	your	soldiers.’
‘Probably.	At	least	then	I’d	be	spared	the	judgements	of	someone	with
barely	a	whisker	on	his	spotty	chin.	Have	you	even	lain	with	a	woman	yet,
Torrent?’
The	young	warrior	glowered	for	a	moment,	then	slowly	nodded.	‘It	is	said
you	are	quick	with	your	barbed	arrows,	Mezla.’
‘A	metaphor,	Torrent?	I’m	surprised	at	this	turn	to	the	poetic.’
‘You	have	not	listened	to	our	songs,	have	you?	You	have	made	yourself
deaf	to	the	beauty	of	the	Awl,	and	in	your	deafness	you	have	blinded	that	last
eye	left	to	you.	We	are	an	ancient	people,	Mezla.’
‘Deaf,	blind,	too	bad	I’m	not	yet	mute.’
‘You	will	be	when	I	slit	your	throat.’
Well,	Toc	conceded,	he	had	a	point	there.
	
Redmask	had	waited	for	this	a	long	time.	And	no	old	man	of	the	Renfayar	with
his	damned	secrets	would	stand	poised	to	shatter	everything.	No,	with	his	own
hands	Redmask	had	taken	care	of	that,	and	he	could	still	see	in	his	mind	that
elder ’s	face,	the	bulging	eyes,	vessels	bursting,	the	jutting	tongue	as	the	lined
face	turned	blue,	then	a	deathly	shade	of	grey	above	his	squeezing	hands.	That
throat	had	been	as	nothing,	thin	as	a	reed,	the	cartilage	crumpling	like	a
papyrus	scroll	in	his	grip.	And	he	had	found	himself	unable	to	let	go,	long
after	the	fool	was	dead.
Too	many	memories	of	his	childhood	had	slithered	into	his	hands,
transforming	his	fingers	into	coiling	serpents	that	seemed	not	satisfied	with
lifeless	flesh	in	their	grip,	but	sought	that	touch	of	cold	that	came	long	after	the
soul’s	flight.	Of	course,	there	had	been	more	to	it	than	that.	The	elder	had
imagined	himself	Redmask’s	master,	his	overseer	to	use	the	Letherii	word,
standing	at	the	war	leader ’s	shoulder,	ever	ready	to	draw	breath	and	loose
words	that	held	terrible	truths,	truths	that	would	destroy	Redmask,	would
destroy	any	chance	he	had	of	leading	the	Awl	to	victory.


Yet	now	the	time	drew	near.	He	would	see	Bivatt’s	head	on	a	spear.	He
would	see	mud	and	Letherii	and	Tiste	Edur	corpses	in	their	thousands.	Crows
wheeling	overhead,	voicing	delighted	cries.	And	he	would	stand	on	the	wooden
platform,	witness	to	it	all.	To	his	scaled	Guardians,	who	had	found	him,	had
chosen	him,	rending	mages	limb	from	limb,	scything	through	enemy	lines—
And	the	face	of	the	elder	rose	once	more	in	his	mind.	He	had	revelled	in
that	vision,	at	first,	but	now	it	had	begun	to	haunt	him.	A	face	to	greet	his
dreams;	a	face	hinted	at	in	every	smear	of	stormcloud,	the	bruised	grey	and
blue	hues	cold	as	iron	filling	the	sky.	He	had	thought	himself	rid	of	that	fool
and	his	cruel	secrets,	in	that	weighing	look	–	like	a	father ’s	regard	on	a
wayward	son,	as	if	nothing	the	child	did	could	be	good	enough,	could	be	Awl
in	the	ways	of	the	people	as	they	had	been	and	would	always	be.
As	the	work	continued	on	all	sides,	Redmask	mounted	the	platform.
Cadaran	whip	at	his	belt.	Rygtha	axe	slung	from	its	leather	straps.	The	weapons
we	were	once	born	to,	long	ago.	Is	that	not	Awl	enough?	Am	I	not	more	Awl	than
any	other	among	the	Renfayar?	Among	the	warriors	gathered	here?	Do	not	look
so	at	me,	old	man.	You	have	not	the	right.	You	were	never	the	man	I	have
become	–	look	at	my	Guardians!
Shall	I	tell	you	the	tale,	Father?
But	no.	You	are	dead.	And	I	feel	still	your	feeble	neck	in	my	hands	–	ah,	an
error.	That	detail	belongs	to	the	old	man.	Who	died	mysteriously	in	his	tent.
Last	of	the	Renfayar	elders,	who	knew,	yes,	knew	well	my	father	and	all	his	kin,
and	the	children	they	called	their	own.
Fool,	why	did	you	not	let	the	years	blur	your	memories?	Why	did	you	not
become	like	any	other	doddering,	hopeless	ancient?	What	kept	your	eyes	honed
so	sharp?	But	no	longer,	yes.	Now	you	stare	at	stone	and	darkness.	Now	that
sharp	mind	rots	in	its	skull,	and	that	is	that.
Leave	me	be.
The	first	spatters	of	rain	struck	him	and	he	looked	up	at	the	sky.	Hard
drops,	bursting	against	his	mask,	this	scaled	armour	hiding	dread	truth.	I	am
immune.	I	cannot	be	touched.	Tomorrow,	we	shall	destroy	the	enemy.
The	Guardians	will	see	to	that.	They	chose	me,	did	they	not?	Theirs	is	the
gift	of	glory,	and	none	but	me	has	earned	such	a	thing.
By	the	lizard	eyes	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	I	will	have	my	victory.
The	deaf	drummer	began	his	arrhythmic	thunder	deep	within	the
stormclouds,	and	the	spirits	of	the	Awl,	glaring	downward	to	the	earth,	began
drawing	their	jagged	swords.


Chapter	Twenty

We	live	in	waiting
For	this	most	precious	thing:
Our	god	with	clear	eyes
Who	walks	into	the	waste
Of	our	lives
With	the	bound	straw
Of	a	broom
And	with	a	bright	smile
This	god	brushes	into	a	corner
Our	mess	of	crimes
The	ragged	expostulations
We	spit	out	on	the	morn
With	each	sun’s	rise
We	live	in	waiting,	yes
In	precious	abeyance
Cold-eyed	our	virtues
Sowing	the	seeds	of	waste
In	life’s	hot	earth
In	hand	the	gelid	iron
Of	weapons
And	with	bright	recompense
We	soak	this	ground
Under	the	clear	sky
With	the	blood	of	our	god
Spat	out	and	heaved
In	rigour ’d	disgust
Our	Waiting	God
Cormor	Fural


Towers	and	bridges,	skeletally	thin	and	nowhere	the	sign	of	guiding	hands,	of
intelligence	or	focused	will.	These	constructs,	reaching	high	towards	the	sofaint	bloom	of	light,	were	entirely	natural,	rough	of	line	and	raw	in	their	bony
elegance.	To	wander	their	spindly	feet	was	to	overwhelm	every	sense	of
proportion,	of	the	ways	the	world	was	supposed	to	look.	There	was	no	air,
only	water.	No	light,	only	the	glow	of	some	unnatural	gift	of	spiritual	vision.
Revealing	these	towers	and	arching	bridges,	so	tall,	so	thin,	that	they	seemed
but	moments	from	toppling	into	the	fierce,	swirling	currents.
Bruthen	Trana,	tugged	loose	from	the	flesh	and	bone	that	had	been	home	to
his	entire	existence,	now	wandered	lost	at	the	bottom	of	an	ocean.	He	had	not
expected	this.	Visions	and	prophecies	had	failed	them;	failed	Hannan	Mosag
especially.	Bruthen	had	suspected	that	his	journey	would	find	him	in	a	strange,
unanticipated	place,	a	realm,	perhaps,	of	myth.	A	realm	peopled	by	gods	and
demons,	by	sentinels	defending	long-dead	demesnes	with	immortal	stolidity.
‘Where	the	sun’s	light	will	not	reach.’	Perhaps	his	memory	was	not	perfect,
but	that	had	been	the	gist	of	that	fell	prophecy.	And	he	was	but	a	warrior	of	the
Tiste	Edur	–	now	a	warrior	bereft	of	flesh	beyond	what	his	spirit	insisted	out	of
some	wilful	stubbornness,	as	obstinate	in	its	conceits	as	any	sentinel.
And	so	now	he	walked,	and	he	could	look	down	upon	his	limbs,	his	body;
he	could	reach	up	and	touch	his	face,	feel	his	hair	–	now	unbound	–	sweeping
out	on	the	current	like	strands	of	seaweed.	He	could	feel	the	cold	of	the	water,
could	feel	even	the	immense	pressure	besieging	him	in	this	dark	world.	But
there	were	no	paths,	no	road,	no	obvious	trail	wending	around	these	stone
edifices.
The	rotted	wood	of	ship	timbers	burst	into	clouds	beneath	his	feet.	Clotted
rivets	turned	underfoot.	Fragments	that	might	be	bone	skittered	and	danced
along	the	muddy	bottom,	carried	every	which	way	by	the	currents.	Dissolution
seemed	to	be	the	curse	of	the	world,	of	all	the	worlds.	All	that	broke,	all	that
failed,	wandered	down	to	some	final	resting	place,	lost	to	darkness,	and	this
went	beyond	ships	on	the	sea	and	the	lives	on	those	ships.	Whales,	dhenrabi,	the
tiniest	crustacean.	Plans,	schemes	and	grandiose	visions.	Love,	faith	and
honour.	Ambition,	lust	and	malice.	He	could	reach	down	and	scoop	it	all	into
his	hands,	watching	the	water	tug	it	away,	fling	it	out	into	a	swirling,
momentary	path	of	glittering	glory,	then	gone	once	more.
Perhaps	this	was	the	truth	he	had	been	meant	to	see,	assuming	the
presumption	of	his	worthiness,	of	course	–	which	was	proving	a	struggle	to
maintain	indeed.	Instead,	waves	of	despair	swept	over	him,	swept	through	him,
spun	wild	out	of	his	own	soul.
He	was	lost.


What	am	I	looking	for?	Who	am	I	looking	for?	I	have	forgotten.	Is	this	a
curse?	Am	I	dead	and	now	wandering	doomed?	Will	these	towers	topple	and
crush	me,	leave	me	yet	one	more	broken,	mangled	thing	in	the	muck	and	silt?
I	am	Tiste	Edur.	This	much	I	know.	My	true	body	is	gone,	perhaps	for	ever.
And	something,	some	force	of	instinct,	was	driving	him	on,	step	by	step.
There	was	a	goal,	a	thing	to	be	achieved.	He	would	find	it.	He	had	to	find	it.	It
had	to	do	with	Hannan	Mosag,	who	had	sent	him	here	–	he	did	recall	that,
along	with	the	faint	echoes	of	prophecy.
Yet	he	felt	like	a	child,	trapped	in	a	dream	that	was	an	endless	search	for	a
familiar	face,	for	his	mother,	who	was	out	there,	unmindful	of	his	plight,	and
indifferent	to	it	had	she	known	–	for	that	was	the	heart	of	such	fearful	dreams	–
a	heart	where	love	is	revealed	to	be	necrotic,	a	lie,	the	deepest	betrayal
possible.	Bruthen	Trana	understood	these	fears	for	what	they	were,	for	the
weakness	they	revealed,	even	as	he	felt	helpless	against	them.
Wandering	onward,	leaving,	at	last,	those	dread	monuments	in	his	wake.
He	might	have	wept	for	a	time,	although	of	course	he	could	not	feel	his	own
tears	–	they	were	one	with	the	sea	around	him	–	but	he	voiced	muted	cries,
enough	to	make	his	throat	raw.	And	at	times	he	staggered,	fell,	hands	plunging
deep	into	the	muck,	and	struggled	to	regain	his	feet,	buffeted	by	the	currents.
All	of	this	seemed	to	go	on	for	a	long	time.
Until	something	loomed	out	of	the	darkness	ahead.	Blockish,	heaped	on
one	side	with	what	seemed	to	be	detritus	–	drifts	of	wreckage,	tree	branches
and	the	like.	Bruthen	Trana	stumbled	closer,	trying	to	make	sense	of	what	he
was	seeing.
A	house.	Enclosed	by	a	low	wall	of	the	same	black	stone.	Dead	trees	in	the
yard,	their	trunks	thick,	stubby,	each	rising	from	a	root-heaved	mound.	A
snaking	path	leading	to	three	sagging,	saddled	steps	and	a	recessed,	narrow
door.	To	either	side	of	this	entrance	there	were	square	windows,	shuttered	in
strips	of	slate.	To	the	right,	forming	a	rounded	corner,	rose	a	squat,	flat-topped
tower.	A	small	corniced	window	at	the	upper	level	was	lit	from	within	with	a
dull	yellow	glow,	fitful,	wavering.
A	house.	On	the	floor	of	the	ocean.
And	someone	is	home.
Bruthen	Trana	found	himself	standing	before	the	gate,	his	eyes	on	the
snaking	path	of	pavestones	leading	to	the	steps.	He	could	see	blooms	of	silts
rising	from	the	mounds	to	either	side,	as	if	the	mud	was	seething	with	worms.
Closer	now	to	the	house,	he	noted	the	thick	green	slime	bearding	the	walls,	and
the	prevailing	current	–	which	had	heaped	up	rubbish	against	one	side	–	had
done	its	work	on	the	ground	there	as	well,	uprooting	one	of	the	dead	trees	and


sculpting	out	the	mound	until	it	was	no	more	than	a	scatter	of	barnacled
boulders.	The	tree	leaned	against	the	house	with	unyielding	branches	from
which	algae	streamed	and	swirled	against	the	backwash	of	the	current.
This	is	not	what	I	seek.	He	knew	that	with	sudden	certainty.	And	yet…he
glanced	up	once	more	at	the	tower,	in	time	to	see	the	light	dim,	as	if
withdrawing,	then	vanish.
Bruthen	Trana	walked	onto	the	path.
The	current	seemed	fiercer	here,	as	if	eager	to	push	him	off	the	trail,	and
some	instinct	told	the	Tiste	Edur	that	losing	his	footing	in	this	yard	would	be	a
bad	thing.	Hunching	down,	he	pushed	on.
Upon	reaching	the	steps,	Bruthen	Trana	was	buffeted	by	a	sudden	roil	of
the	current	and	he	looked	up	to	see	that	the	door	had	opened.	And	in	the
threshold	stood	a	most	extraordinary	figure.	As	tall	as	the	Tiste	Edur,	yet	so
thin	as	to	seem	emaciated.	Bone-white	flesh,	thin	and	loose,	a	long,	narrow
face,	seamed	with	a	mass	of	wrinkles.	The	eyes	were	pale	grey,	surrounding
vertical	pupils.
The	man	wore	rotted,	colourless	silks	that	hid	little,	including	the	extra
joints	on	his	arms	and	legs,	and	what	seemed	to	be	a	sternum	horizontally
hinged	in	the	middle.	The	ripple	of	too	many	ribs,	a	set	of	lesser	collarbones
beneath	the	others.	His	hair	–	little	more	than	wisps	on	a	mottled	pate	–	stirred
like	cobwebs.	In	one	lifted	hand	the	man	held	a	lantern	in	which	sat	a	stone	that
burned	with	golden	fire.
The	voice	that	spoke	in	Bruthen	Trana’s	mind	was	strangely	childlike.	‘Is
this	the	night	for	spirits?’
‘Is	it	night	then?’	Bruthen	Trana	asked.
‘Isn’t	it?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Well,’	the	figure	replied	with	a	smile,	‘neither	do	I.	Will	you	join	us?	The
house	has	not	had	a	guest	for	a	long	time.’
‘I	am	not	for	this	place,’	Bruthen	Trana	said,	uncertain.	‘I	think…’
‘You	are	correct,	but	the	repast	is	timely.	Besides,	some	current	must	have
brought	you	here.	It	is	not	as	if	just	any	old	spirit	can	find	the	house.	You	have
been	led	here,	friend.’
‘Why?	By	whom?’
‘The	house,	of	course.	As	to	why,’	the	man	shrugged,	then	stepped	back
and	gestured.	‘Join	us,	please.	There	is	wine,	suitably…dry.’
Bruthen	Trana	ascended	the	steps,	and	crossed	the	threshold.
The	door	closed	of	its	own	accord	behind	him.	They	were	in	a	narrow
hallway,	directly	ahead	a	T-intersection.


‘I	am	Bruthen	Trana,	a	Tiste	Edur	of—’
‘Yes,	yes,	indeed.	The	Empire	of	the	Crippled	God.	Well,	one	of	them,
anyway.	An	Emperor	in	chains,	a	people	in	thrall’	–	a	quick	glance	over	the
shoulder	as	the	man	led	him	into	the	corridor	to	the	right	–	‘that	would	be	you,
Edur,	not	the	Letherii,	who	are	in	thrall	to	a	far	crueller	master.’
‘Coin.’
‘Well	done.	Yes.’
They	halted	before	a	door	set	in	a	curved	wall.
‘This	leads	to	the	tower,’	Bruthen	Trana	said.	‘Where	I	first	saw	your
light.’
‘Indeed.	It	is,	alas,	the	only	room	large	enough	to	accommodate	my	guest.
Oh,’	he	stepped	closer,	‘before	we	go	in,	I	must	warn	you	of	some	things.	My
guest	possesses	a	weakness	–	but	then,	don’t	we	all?	In	any	case,	it	has	fallen	to
me	to,	uh,	celebrate	that	weakness	–	now,	yes,	soon	it	will	end,	as	all	things	do
–	but	not	quite	yet.	Thus,	you	must	not	distract	my	dear	guest	from	the
distraction	I	already	provide.	Do	you	understand	me?’
‘Perhaps	I	should	not	enter	at	all,	then.’
‘Nonsense.	It	is	this,	Bruthen	Trana.	You	must	not	speak	of	dragons.	No
dragons,	do	you	understand?’
The	Tiste	Edur	shrugged.	‘That	topic	had	not	even	occurred	to	me—’
‘Oh,	but	in	a	way	it	has,	and	continues	to	do	so.	The	spirit	of	Emurlahnis.
Scabandari.	Father	Shadow.	This	haunts	you,	as	it	does	all	the	Tiste	Edur.	The
matter	is	delicate,	you	see.	Very	delicate,	for	both	you	and	my	guest.	I	must
needs	rely	upon	your	restraint,	or	there	will	be	trouble.	Calamity,	in	fact.’
‘I	shall	do	my	best,	sir.	A	moment	–	what	is	your	name?’
The	man	reached	for	the	latch.	‘My	name	is	for	no-one,	Bruthen	Trana.
Best	know	me	by	one	of	my	many	titles.	The	Letherii	one	will	do.	You	may	call
me	Knuckles.’
He	lifted	the	latch	and	pushed	open	the	door.
Within	was	a	vast	circular	chamber	–	far	too	large	for	the	modest	tower ’s
wall	that	Bruthen	Trana	had	seen	from	outside.	Whatever	ceiling	existed	was
lost	in	the	gloom.	The	stone-tiled	floor	was	fifty	or	more	paces	across.	As
Knuckles	stepped	inside,	the	glow	from	his	lantern	burgeoned,	driving	back
the	shadows.	Opposite	them,	abutting	the	curved	wall,	was	a	raised	dais	on
which	heaps	of	silks,	pillows	and	furs	were	scattered;	and	seated	at	the	edge	of
that	dais,	leaning	forward	with	forearms	resting	on	thighs,	was	a	giant.	An
ogre	or	some	such	demon,	bearing	the	same	hue	of	skin	as	Knuckles	yet
stretched	over	huge	muscles	and	a	robust	frame	of	squat	bones.	The	hands
dangling	down	over	the	knees	were	disproportionately	oversized	even	for	that


enormous	body.	Long,	unkempt	hair	hung	down	to	frame	a	heavy-featured	face
with	deep-set	eyes	–	so	deep	that	even	the	lantern’s	light	could	spark	but	a
glimmer	in	those	ridge-shelved	pits.
‘My	guest,’	Knuckles	murmured.	‘Kilmandaros.	Most	gentle,	I	assure	you,
Bruthen	Trana.	When…distracted.	Come,	she	is	eager	to	meet	you.’
They	approached,	footfalls	echoing	in	this	waterless	chamber.	Knuckles
shifted	his	route	slightly	towards	a	low	marble	table	on	which	sat	a	dusty	bottle
of	wine.	‘Beloved,’	he	called	to	Kilmandaros,	‘see	who	the	house	has	brought
to	us!’
‘Stuff	it	with	food	and	drink	and	send	it	on	its	way,’	the	huge	woman	said
in	a	growl.	‘I	am	on	the	trail	of	a	solution,	scrawny	whelp	of	mine.’
Bruthen	Trana	could	now	see,	scattered	on	the	tiles	before	Kilmandaros,	a
profusion	of	small	bones,	each	incised	in	patterns	on	every	available	surface.
They	seemed	arrayed	without	order,	nothing	more	than	rubbish	spilled	out
from	some	bag,	yet	Kilmandaros	was	frowning	down	at	them	with	savage
concentration.
‘The	solution,’	she	repeated.
‘How	exciting,’	Knuckles	said,	procuring	from	somewhere	a	third	goblet
into	which	he	poured	amber	wine.	‘Double	or	nothing,	then?’
‘Oh	yes,	why	not?	But	you	owe	me	the	treasuries	of	a	hundred	thousand
empires	already,	dear	Setch—’
‘Knuckles,	my	love.’
‘Dear	Knuckles.’
‘I	am	certain	it	is	you	who	owes	me,	Mother.’
‘For	but	a	moment	longer,’	she	replied,	now	rubbing	those	huge	hands
together.	‘I	am	so	close.	You	were	a	fool	to	offer	double	or	nothing.’
‘Ah,	my	weakness,’	Knuckles	sighed	as	he	walked	over	to	Bruthen	Trana
with	the	goblet.	Meeting	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	eyes,	Knuckles	winked.	‘The	grains
run	the	river,	Mother,’	he	said.	‘Best	hurry	with	your	solution.’
A	fist	thundered	on	the	dais.	‘Do	not	make	me	nervous!’
The	echoes	of	that	impact	were	long	in	fading.
Kilmandaros	leaned	still	further,	glowering	down	at	the	array	of	bones.
‘The	pattern,’	she	whispered,	‘yes,	almost	there.	Almost…’
‘I	feel	magnanimous,’	Knuckles	said,	‘and	offer	to	still	those	grains…for	a
time.	So	that	we	may	be	true	hosts	to	our	new	guest.’
The	giant	woman	looked	up,	a	sudden	cunning	in	her	expression.
‘Excellent	idea,	Knuckles.	Make	it	so!’
A	gesture,	and	the	wavering	light	of	the	lantern	ceased	its	waver.	All	was
still	in	a	way	Bruthen	Trana	could	not	define	–	after	all,	nothing	had	changed.


And	yet	his	soul	knew,	somehow,	that	the	grains	Knuckles	had	spoken	of	were
time,	its	passage,	its	unending	journey.	He	had	just,	with	a	single	gesture	of	one
hand,	stopped	time.
At	least	in	this	chamber.	Surely	not	everywhere	else.	And	yet…
Kilmandaros	leaned	back	with	a	satisfied	smirk	and	fixed	her	small	eyes
on	Bruthen	Trana.	‘I	see,’	she	said.	‘The	house	anticipates.’
‘We	are	as	flitting	dreams	to	the	Azath,’	Knuckles	said.	‘Yet,	even	though
we	are	but	momentary	conceits,	as	our	sorry	existence	might	well	be	defined,
we	have	our	uses.’
‘Some	of	us,’	Kilmandaros	said,	suddenly	dismissive,	‘prove	more	useful
than	others.	This	Tiste	Edur ’	–	a	wave	of	one	huge,	scarred	hand	–	‘is	of
modest	value	by	any	measure.’
‘The	Azath	see	what	we	do	not,	in	each	of	us.	Perhaps,	Mother,	in	all	of	us.’
A	sour	grunt.	‘You	think	this	house	let	me	go	of	its	own	will	–	proof	of
your	gullibility,	Knuckles.	Not	even	the	Azath	could	hold	me	for	ever.’
‘Extraordinary,’	Knuckles	said,	‘that	it	held	you	at	all.’
This	exchange,	Bruthen	Trana	realized,	was	an	old	one,	following	wellworn	ruts	between	the	two.
‘Would	never	have	happened,’	Kilmandaros	said	under	her	breath,	‘if	he’d
not	betrayed	me—’
‘Ah,	Mother.	I	have	no	particular	love	for	Anomander	Purake,	but	let	us	be
fair	here.	He	did	not	betray	you.	In	fact,	it	was	you	who	jumped	him	from
behind—’
‘Anticipating	his	betrayal!’
‘Anomander	does	not	break	his	word,	Mother.	Never	has,	never	will.’
‘Tell	that	to	Osserc—’
‘Also	in	the	habit	of	“anticipating”	Anomander ’s	imminent	betrayal.’
‘What	of	Draconus?’
‘What	of	him,	Mother?’
Kilmandaros	rumbled	something	then,	too	low	for	Bruthen	Trana	to	catch.
Knuckles	said,	‘Our	Tiste	Edur	guest	seeks	the	place	of	Names.’
Bruthen	Trana	started.	Yes!	It	was	true	–	a	truth	he	had	not	even	known
before	just	this	moment,	before	Knuckle’s	quiet	words.	The	place	of	Names.
The	Names	of	the	Gods.
‘There	will	be	trouble,	then,’	Kilmandaros	said,	shifting	in	agitation,	her
gaze	drawn	again	and	again	to	the	scatter	of	bones.	‘He	must	remember	this
house,	then.	The	path	–	every	step	–	he	must	remember,	or	he	will	wander	lost
for	all	time.	And	with	him,	just	as	lost	as	they	have	ever	been,	the	names	of
every	forgotten	god.’


‘His	spirit	is	strong,’	Knuckles	said,	then	faced	Bruthen	Trana	and	smiled.
‘Your	spirit	is	strong.	Forgive	me	–	we	often	forget	entirely	the	outside	world,
even	when,	on	rare	occasions	such	as	this	one,	that	world	intrudes.’
The	Tiste	Edur	shrugged.	His	head	was	spinning.	The	place	of	Names.
‘What	will	I	find	there?’	he	asked.
‘He	forgets	already,’	Kilmandaros	muttered.
‘The	path,’	Knuckles	answered.	‘More	than	that,	actually.	But	when	all	is
done	–	for	you,	in	that	place	–	you	must	recall	the	path,	Bruthen	Trana,	and	you
must	walk	it	without	a	sliver	of	doubt.’
‘But,	Knuckles,	all	my	life,	I	have	walked	no	path	without	a	sliver	of	doubt
–	more	than	a	sliver,	in	fact—’
‘Surprising,’	Kilmandaros	cut	in,	‘for	a	child	of	Scabandari—’
‘I	must	begin	the	grains	again,’	Knuckles	suddenly	announced.	‘Into	the
river	–	the	pattern,	Mother,	it	calls	to	you	once	more.’
She	swore	in	some	unknown	language,	bent	to	scowl	down	at	the	bones.	‘I
was	there,’	she	muttered.	‘Almost	there	–	so	close,	so—’
A	faint	chime	echoed	in	the	chamber.
Her	fist	thundered	again	on	the	dais,	and	this	time	the	echoes	seemed
unending.
At	a	modest	signal	from	Knuckles,	Bruthen	Trana	drained	the	fine	wine
and	set	the	goblet	down	on	the	marble	tabletop.
It	was	time	to	leave.
Knuckles	led	Bruthen	Trana	back	into	the	corridor.	A	final	glance	back	into
that	airy	chamber	and	the	Tiste	Edur	saw	Kilmandaros,	hands	on	knees,	staring
directly	at	him	with	those	faintly	glittering	eyes,	like	two	lone,	dying	stars	in
the	firmament.	Chilled	to	the	depths	of	his	heart,	Bruthen	Trana	pulled	his	gaze
away	and	followed	the	son	of	Kilmandaros	back	to	the	front	door.
At	the	threshold,	he	paused	for	a	moment	to	search	Knuckles’s	face.	‘The
game	you	play	with	her	–	tell	me,	does	such	a	pattern	exist?’
Brows	arched.	‘In	the	casting	of	bones?	Damned	if	I	know.’	A	sudden
smile,	then.	‘Our	kind,	ah,	but	we	love	patterns.’
‘Even	if	they	don’t	exist?’
‘Don’t	they?’	The	smile	grew	mischievous.	‘Go,	Bruthen	Trana,	and	mind
the	path.	Always	mind	the	path.’
The	Tiste	Edur	walked	down	onto	the	pavestones.	‘I	would,’	he	muttered,
‘could	I	find	it.’
Forty	paces	from	the	house,	he	turned	to	look	upon	it,	and	saw	nothing	but
swirling	currents,	spinning	silts	in	funnels.
Gone.	As	if	I	had	imagined	the	entire	thing.


But	I	was	warned,	wasn’t	I?	Something	about	a	path.
‘Remember…’
Lost.	Again.	Memories	tugged	free,	snatched	away	by	the	ferocious	winds
of	water.
He	swung	round	again	and	set	off,	staggering,	step	by	step,	towards
something	he	could	not	dredge	up	from	his	mind,	could	not	even	imagine.	Was
this	where	life	ended?	In	some	hopeless	quest,	some	eternal	search	for	a	lost
dream?
Remember	the	path.	Oh,	Father	Shadow,	remember…something.	Anything.

Where	the	huge	chunks	of	ice	had	been,	there	were	now	stands	of	young	trees.
Alder,	aspen,	dogwood,	forming	a	tangled	fringe	surrounding	the	dead
Meckros	City.	Beyond	the	trees	were	the	grasses	of	the	plains,	among	them
deep-rooted	bluestems	and	red-lipped	poppies	that	cloaked	the	burial	mounds
where	resided	the	bones	of	thousands	of	people.
The	wreckage	of	buildings	still	stood	here	and	there	on	their	massive
pylons	of	wood,	while	others	had	tilted,	then	toppled,	spilling	out	their	contents
onto	canted	streets.	Weeds	and	shrubs	now	grew	everywhere,	dotting	the
enormous,	sprawling	ruin,	and	among	the	broken	bones	of	buildings	lay	a
scatter	of	flowers,	a	profusion	of	colours	on	all	sides.
He	stood,	balanced	on	a	fallen	pillar	of	dusty	marble	allowing	him	a	view
of	the	vista,	the	city	stretching	to	his	left,	the	ragged	edge	and	green-leafed
trees	with	the	mounds	beyond	on	his	right.	His	eyes,	a	fiery	amber,	were	fixed
on	something	on	the	far	horizon	directly	ahead.	His	broad	mouth	held	its
habitual	downturn	at	the	corners,	an	expression	that	seemed	ever	at	war	with
the	blazing	joy	within	his	eyes.	His	mother’s	eyes,	it	was	said.	But	somehow
less	fierce	and	this,	perhaps,	was	born	of	his	father ’s	uneasy	gift	–	a	mouth	that
did	not	expect	to	smile,	ever.
His	second	father,	his	true	father.	The	thread	of	blood.	The	one	who	had
visited	in	his	seventh	week	of	life.	Yes,	while	it	had	been	a	man	named	Araq
Elalle	who	had	raised	him,	whilst	he	lived	in	the	Meckros	City,	it	had	been	the
other	–	the	stranger	in	the	company	of	a	yellow-haired	bonecaster	–	who	had
given	his	seed	to	Menandore,	Rud	Elalle’s	mother.	His	Imass	minders	had	not
been	blind	to	such	truths,	and	oh	how	Menandore	had	railed	at	them	afterwards.
‘I	took	all	that	I	needed	from	Udinaas!	And	left	him	a	husk	and	nothing
more.	He	can	never	sire	another	child	–	a	husk!	A	useless	mortal	–	forget	him,
my	son.	He	is	nothing.’	And	from	the	terrible	demand	in	her	blazing	eyes,	her


son	had	recoiled.
Rud	Elalle	was	tall	now,	half	a	hand	taller	than	even	his	mother.	His	hair,
long	and	wild	in	the	fashion	of	the	Bentract	Imass	warriors,	was	a	sun-bleached
brown.	He	wore	a	cloak	of	ranag	hide,	deep	brown	and	amber-tipped	the	fur.
Beneath	that	was	a	supple	leather	shirt	of	deerskin.	His	leggings	were	of
thicker,	tougher	allish	hide.	On	his	feet	were	ranag	leather	moccasins	that
reached	to	just	below	his	knees.
A	scar	ran	down	the	right	side	of	his	neck,	gift	of	a	boar ’s	dying	lunge.
The	bones	of	his	left	wrist	had	been	broken	and	were	now	misaligned,	the
places	of	the	breaks	knotted	protrusions	bound	in	thick	sinews,	but	the	arm	had
not	been	weakened	by	this;	indeed,	it	was	now	stronger	than	its	opposite.
Menandore’s	gift,	that	strange	response	to	any	injury,	as	if	his	body	sought	to
armour	itself	against	any	chance	of	the	same	injury’s	recurring.	There	had
been	other	breaks,	other	wounds	–	life	among	the	Imass	was	hard,	and	though
they	would	have	protected	him	from	its	rigour,	he	would	not	permit	that.	He
was	among	the	Bentract,	he	was	of	the	Bentract.	Here,	with	these	wondrous
people,	he	had	found	love	and	fellowship.	He	would	live	as	they	lived,	for	as
long	as	he	could.
Yet,	alas,	he	felt	now…that	time	was	coming	to	an	end.	His	eyes	remained
fixed	on	that	distant	horizon,	even	as	he	sensed	her	arrival,	now	at	his	side.
‘Mother,’	he	said.
‘Imass,’	she	said.	‘Speak	our	own	language,	my	son.	Speak	the	language	of
dragons.’
Faint	distaste	soured	Rud	Elalle.	‘We	are	not	Eleint,	Mother.	That	blood	is
stolen.	Impure—’
‘We	are	no	less	children	of	Starvald	Demelain.	I	do	not	know	who	has
filled	your	mind	with	these	doubts.	But	they	are	weaknesses,	and	now	is	not	the
time.’
‘Now	is	not	the	time,’	he	repeated.
She	snorted.	‘My	sisters.’
‘Yes.’
‘They	want	me.	They	want	him.	Yet,	in	both	schemes,	they	have	not	counted
you	a	threat,	my	son.	Oh,	they	know	you	are	grown	now.	They	know	the	power
within	you.	But	they	know	nothing	of	your	will.’
‘Nor,	Mother,	do	you.’
He	heard	her	catch	her	breath,	was	inwardly	amused	at	the	suddenly
crowded	silence	that	followed.
He	nodded	to	the	far	horizon.	‘Do	you	see	them,	Mother?’
‘Unimportant.	Mayhap	they	will	survive,	but	I	would	not	wager	upon	it.


Understand	me,	Rud,	with	what	is	to	come,	not	one	of	us	is	safe.	Not	one.	You,
me,	your	precious	Bentract—’
He	turned	at	that,	and	his	eyes	were	all	at	once	a	mirror	of	his	mother ’s	–
bright	with	rage	and	menace.
She	very	nearly	flinched,	and	he	saw	that	and	was	pleased.	‘I	will	permit	no
harm	to	come	to	them,	Mother.	You	wish	to	understand	my	will.	Now	you	do.’
‘Foolish.	No,	insanity.	They	are	not	even	alive—’
‘In	their	minds,	they	are.	In	my	mind,	Mother,	they	are.’
She	sneered.	‘Do	the	new	ones	now	among	the	Bentract	hold	to	such	noble
faith,	Rud?	Have	you	not	seen	their	disdain?	Their	contempt	for	their	own
deluded	kin?	It	is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	one	of	them	speaks	true	–
shattering	the	illusion	for	all	time—’
‘They	will	not,’	Rud	said,	once	more	eyeing	the	distant	party	of	wanderers
who	were	now,	without	question,	approaching	the	ruined	city.	‘You	do	not	visit
often	enough,’	he	said.	‘Disdain	and	contempt,	yes,	but	now,	too,	you	will	see
fear.’
‘Of	you?	Oh,	my	son,	you	fool!	And	do	your	adopted	kin	know	to	guard
your	back	against	them?	Of	course	not,	for	that	would	reveal	too	much,	would
invite	awkward	questions	–	and	the	Imass	are	not	ones	to	be	easily	turned	away
when	seeking	truth.’
‘My	back	will	be	guarded,’	Rud	said.
‘By	whom?’
‘Not	you,	Mother?’
She	hissed	in	a	most	reptilian	manner.	‘When?	While	my	sisters	are	busy
trying	to	kill	me?	When	he	has	the	Finnest	in	his	hand	and	casts	eyes	upon	all
of	us?’
‘If	not	you,’	he	said	easily,	‘then	someone	else.’
‘Wiser	to	kill	the	newcomers	now,	Rud.’
‘And	my	kin	would	have	no	questions	then?’
‘None	but	you	alive	to	answer,	and	you	of	course	may	tell	them	anything
you	care	to.	Kill	those	new	Imass,	those	strangers	with	their	sly	regard,	and	be
quick	about	it.’
‘I	think	not.’
‘Kill	them,	or	I	will.’
‘No,	Mother.	The	Imass	are	mine.	Shed	blood	among	my	people	–	any	of
them	–	and	you	will	stand	alone	the	day	Sukul	and	Sheltatha	arrive,	the	day	of
Silchas	Ruin	who	comes	to	claim	the	Finnest.’	He	glanced	across	at	her.	Could
white	skin	grow	still	paler?	‘Yes,	all	in	a	single	day.	I	have	been	to	the	Twelve
Gates	–	maintaining	my	vigil	as	you	have	asked.’


‘And?’	The	query	was	almost	breathless.
‘Kurald	Galain	is	most	perturbed.’
‘They	draw	close?’
‘You	know	that	as	well	as	I	do	–	my	father	is	with	them,	is	he	not?	You	steal
his	eyes	when	it	suits	you—’
‘Not	as	easy	as	you	think.’	Her	tone	was	genuine	in	its	bitterness.	‘He…
baffles	me.’
Frightens	you,	you	mean.	‘Silchas	Ruin	will	demand	the	Finnest.’
‘Yes,	he	will!	And	we	both	know	what	he	will	do	with	it	–	and	that	must	not
be	permitted!’
Are	you	sure	of	that,	Mother?	Because,	you	see,	I	am	not.	Not	any	more.
‘Silchas	Ruin	may	well	demand.	He	may	well	make	dire	threats,	Mother.	You
have	said	so	often	enough.’
‘And	if	we	stand	side	by	side,	my	son,	he	cannot	hope	to	get	past	us.’
‘Yes.’
‘But	who	will	be	guarding	your	back?’
‘Enough,	Mother.	I	warned	them	to	silence	and	I	do	not	think	they	will
attempt	anything.	Call	it	faith	–	not	in	the	measure	of	their	fear.	Instead,	my
faith	rests	in	the	measure	of…wonder.’
She	stared	at	him,	clearly	confused.
He	felt	no	inclination	to	elaborate.	She	would	see,	in	time.	‘I	would	go	to
welcome	these	new	ones,’	he	said,	eyes	returning	to	the	approaching	strangers.
‘Will	you	join	me,	Menandore?’
‘You	must	be	mad.’	Words	filled	with	affection	–	yes,	she	could	never	rail
at	him	for	very	long.	Something	of	his	father ’s	ethereal	ease,	perhaps	–	an	ease
even	Rud	himself	could	remember	from	that	single,	short	visit.	An	ease	that
would	slip	over	the	Letherii’s	regular,	unimpressive	features,	whenever	the
wave	of	pain,	dismay	–	or	indeed	any	harsh	emotion	–	was	past	and	gone,
leaving	not	a	ripple	in	its	wake.
That	ease,	Rud	now	understood,	was	the	true	face	of	Udinaas.	The	face	of
his	soul.
Father,	I	do	so	look	forward	to	seeing	you	again.
His	mother	was	gone	–	at	least	from	his	side.	At	a	sudden	gust	of	wind	Rud
Elalle	glanced	up	and	saw	the	white	and	gold	mass	of	her	dragon	form,
lurching	skyward	with	every	heave	of	the	huge	wings.
The	strangers	had	all	halted,	still	three	hundred	paces	away,	and	were
staring	up,	now,	as	Menandore	lunged	yet	higher,	slid	across	currents	of	air
for	a	moment,	until	she	faced	them,	and	then	swept	down,	straight	for	the	small
party.	Oh,	how	she	loved	to	intimidate	lesser	beings.


What	happened	then	without	doubt	surprised	Menandore	more	than	even
Rud	–	who	gave	an	involuntary	shout	of	surprise	as	two	feline	shapes	launched
into	the	air	from	the	midst	of	the	party.	Dog-sized,	forelegs	lashing	upward	as
Rud’s	mother	sailed	overhead	–	and	she	snapped	her	hind	legs	up	tight	against
her	belly	in	instinctive	alarm,	even	as	a	thundering	beat	of	her	wings	lifted	her
out	of	harm’s	way.	At	sight	of	her	neck	twisting	round,	eyes	flashing	in	an
outraged	glare	–	indignant	indeed	–	Rud	Elalle	laughed,	and	was	satisfied	to
see	that	the	sound	reached	his	mother,	enough	to	draw	her	glare	and	hold	it,
until	the	dragon’s	momentum	carried	her	well	past	the	strangers	and	their
defiant	pets,	out	of	the	moment	when	she	might	have	banked	hard,	jaws
hingeing	open	to	unleash	deadly	magic	down	on	the	obstreperous	emlava	and
their	masters.
The	threat’s	balance	tilted	away	–	as	Rud	had	sought	with	that	barking
laugh	–	and	on	she	flew,	dismissing	all	in	her	wake,	including	her	son.
And,	were	it	in	his	nature,	he	would	then	have	smiled.	For	he	knew	his
mother	was	smiling,	now.	Delighted	to	have	so	amused	her	only	son,	her	child
who,	like	any	Imass,	saved	his	laughter	for	the	wounds	his	body	received	in	the
ferocious	games	of	living.	And	even	her	doubts,	etched	in	by	this	conversation
just	past,	would	smooth	themselves	over	for	a	time.
A	little	time.	When	they	returned,	Rud	also	knew,	they	would	sting	like	fire.
But	by	then,	it	would	be	too	late.	More	or	less.
He	climbed	down	from	the	toppled	column.	It	was	time	to	meet	the
strangers.
	
‘That,’	Hedge	announced,	‘is	no	Imass.	Unless	they	breed	’em	big	round	here.’
‘Not	kin,’	Onrack	observed	with	narrowed	eyes.
Hedge’s	ghostly	heart	was	still	pounding	hard	in	his	ghostly	chest	in	the
wake	of	that	damned	dragon.	If	it	hadn’t	been	for	the	emlava	cubs	and	their
brainless	lack	of	fear,	things	might	well	have	got	messy.	A	cusser	in	Hedge’s
left	hand.	Quick	Ben	with	a	dozen	snarly	warrens	he	might	well	have	let	loose
all	at	once.	Trull	Sengar	and	his	damned	spears	–	aye,	dragon	steaks	raining
down	from	the	sky.
Unless	she	got	us	first.
No	matter,	the	moment	had	passed,	and	he	was	thankful	for	that.	‘Maybe
he’s	no	kin,	Onrack,	but	he	dresses	like	an	Imass,	and	those	are	stone	chips	at
the	business	end	of	that	bone	club	he’s	carrying.’	Hedge	glanced	across	at
Quick	Ben	–	feeling	once	again	the	surge	of	delight	upon	seeing	a	familiar
face,	the	face	of	a	friend	–	and	said,	‘I	wish	Fid	was	here,	because	just	looking


at	that	man	has	the	hairs	standing	on	the	back	of	my	neck.’
‘If	you’ve	already	got	a	bad	feeling	about	this,’	the	wizard	replied,	‘why	do
you	need	Fid?’
‘Confirmation,	is	why.	The	bastard	was	talking	to	a	woman,	who	then
veered	into	a	dragon	and	thought	to	give	us	a	scare.	Anybody	keeping	scaly
company	makes	me	nervous.’
‘Onrack,’	said	Trull	Sengar	as	the	man	drew	closer,	walking	with	a	casual,
almost	loose	stride,	‘I	think	we	approach	the	place	where	Cotillion	wanted	us
to	be.’
At	that,	Hedge	scowled.	‘Speaking	of	scaly	–	dealing	with	Shadowthrone’s
lackey	makes	all	this	stink	even	worse—’
‘Leaving	once	more	unspoken	the	explanation	for	what	you’re	doing	here,
Hedge,’	the	Tiste	Edur	replied	with	a	faint	smile	at	the	sapper	–	that	damned
smile,	so	bloody	disarming	that	Hedge	almost	spilled	out	every	secret	in	his
head,	just	to	see	that	smile	grow	into	something	more	welcoming.	Trull	Sengar
was	like	that,	inviting	friendship	and	camaraderie	like	the	sweet	scent	of	a
flower	–	probably	a	poisonous	one	–	but	that	might	be	just	me.	My	usual
paranoia.	Well	earned,	mind.	Still,	there	doesn’t	seem	to	be	anything	poisonous
about	Trull	Sengar.
It’s	just	that	I	don’t	trust	nice	people.	There,	it’s	said	–	at	least	here	in	my
head.	And	no,	I	don’t	need	any	Hood-kissed	reason	either.	He	stepped	too	close
to	one	of	the	emlava	cubs	and	had	to	dance	away	to	avoid	lashing	talons.	He
glared	at	the	hissing	creature.	‘Your	hide’s	mine,	you	know	that?	Mine,	kitty.
Take	good	care	of	it	in	the	meantime.’
The	eyes	burned	up	at	him,	and	the	emlava	cub	opened	wide	its	jaws	to
loose	yet	another	whispering	hiss.
Damn,	those	fangs	are	getting	long.
Onrack	had	moved	out	ahead,	and	now	the	Imass	stopped.	Moments	later
they	had	all	drawn	up	to	stand	a	few	paces	behind	him.
The	tall,	wild-haired	warrior	walked	closer.	Five	paces	from	Onrack	he
halted,	smiled	and	said	something	in	some	guttural	language.
Onrack	cocked	his	head.	‘He	speaks	Imass.’
‘Not	Malazan?’	Hedge	asked	with	mock	incredulity.	‘What’s	wrong	with
the	damned	fool?’
The	man’s	smile	broadened,	those	amber	nugget	eyes	fixing	on	Hedge,	and
in	Malazan	he	said,	‘All	the	children	of	the	Imass	tongue	are	as	poetry	to	this
damned	fool.	As	are	the	languages	of	the	Tiste,’	he	added,	gaze	shifting	to
Trull	Sengar.	Then	he	spread	his	hands	out	to	the	sides,	palms	exposed.	‘I	am
Rud	Elalle,	raised	among	the	Bentract	Imass	as	a	child	of	their	own.’


Onrack	said,	‘They	have	yet	to	show	themselves,	Rud	Elalle.	This	is	not	the
welcome	I	expected	from	kin.’
‘You	have	been	watched,	yes,	for	some	time.	Many	clans.	Ulshun	Pral	sent
out	word	that	none	were	to	block	your	path.’	Rud	Elalle	looked	down	at	the
tethered	cubs	to	either	side	of	Trull	Sengar.	‘The	ay	flee	your	scent,	and	now	I
see	why.’	He	then	lowered	his	hands	and	stepped	back.	‘I	have	given	you	my
name.’
‘I	am	Onrack,	of	Logros	T’lan	Imass.	The	one	who	restrains	the	emlava	is
Trull	Sengar,	Tiste	Edur	of	the	Hiroth	tribe.	The	dark-skinned	man	is	Ben
Adaephon	Delat,	born	in	a	land	called	Seven	Cities;	and	his	companion	is
Hedge,	once	a	soldier	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’
Rud’s	eyes	found	Hedge	again.	‘Tell	me,	soldier,	do	you	bleed?’
‘What?’
‘You	were	dead,	yes?	A	spirit	willing	itself	the	body	it	once	possessed.	But
now	you	are	here.	Do	you	bleed?’
Bemused,	Hedge	looked	to	Quick	Ben.	‘What’s	he	mean?	Like	a	woman
bleeds?	I’m	too	ugly	to	be	a	woman,	Quick.’
‘Forgive	me,’	Rud	Elalle	said.	‘Onrack	proclaims	himself	a	T’lan	Imass	–
yet	here	he	stands,	clothed	in	flesh	and	bearing	the	scars	of	your	journey	in	this
realm.	And	there	have	been	other	such	guests.	T’lan	Imass	–	lone	wanderers
who	have	found	this	place	–	and	they	too	are	clothed	in	flesh.’
‘Other	guests?’	Hedge	asked.	‘You	almost	had	one	more	of	those,	and	she
would	have	been	a	viper	in	your	midst,	Rud	Elalle.	For	what	it’s	worth,	I
wouldn’t	be	trusting	those	other	T’lan	Imass,	were	I	you.’
‘Ulshun	Pral	is	a	wise	leader,’	Rud	answered	with	another	smile.
‘I’m	still	a	ghost,’	Hedge	said.
‘Are	you?’
The	sapper	frowned.	‘Well,	I	ain’t	gonna	cut	myself	to	find	out	one	way	or
the	other.’
‘Because	you	intend	to	leave	this	place,	eventually.	Of	course,	I
understand.’
‘Sounds	like	you	do	at	that,’	Hedge	snapped.	‘So,	maybe	you	live	with
these	Bentract	Imass,	Rud	Elalle,	but	that’s	about	as	far	as	this	kinship	thing
goes.	So,	who	are	you?’
‘A	friend,’	the	man	replied	with	yet	another	smile.
Aye,	and	if	you	knew	how	I	felt	about	friendly	people.
‘You	have	given	me	your	names,	and	so	now	I	welcome	you	among	the
Bentract	Imass.	Come,	Ulshun	Pral	is	eager	to	meet	you.’
He	set	off.


They	followed.	With	hand	signals,	Hedge	drew	Quick	Ben	closer	to	his
side	and	they	dropped	back	a	bit	from	the	others.	The	sapper	spoke	in	very	low
tones.	‘That	furry	tree’s	standing	on	the	ruins	of	a	dead	city,	Quick,	like	he	was
its	Hood-damned	prince.’
‘A	Meckros	City,’	the	wizard	murmured.
‘Aye,	I	guessed	as	much.	So	where’s	the	ocean?	Glad	I	never	saw	the	wave
that	carried	it	here.’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘Gods	and	Elder	Gods,	Hedge.	Been	here	kicking
pieces	around,	I’d	wager.	And,	just	maybe,	a	Jaghut	or	two.	There’s	a	real	mess
of	residual	magic	in	this	place	–	not	just	Imass.	More	Jaghut	than	Imass,	in	fact.
And…other	stuff.’
‘Quick	Ben	Delat,	lucid	as	a	piss-hole.’
‘You	really	want	to	know	why	Cotillion	sent	us	here?’
‘No.	Just	knowing	snares	me	in	his	web	and	I	ain’t	gonna	dance	for	any
god.’
‘And	I	do,	Hedge?’
The	sapper	grinned.	‘Aye,	but	you	dance,	and	then	you	dance.’
‘Rud	has	a	point,	by	the	way.’
‘No,	he	has	a	club.’
‘About	you	bleeding.’
‘Hood	above,	Quick—’
‘Oh,	now	that’s	a	giveaway,	Hedge.	What’s	Hood	doing	“above”?	Just	how
deep	was	that	hole	you	crawled	out	of?	And	more	important,	why?’
‘My	company	soured	already?	I	liked	you	least,	you	know.	Even	Trotts—’
‘Now	who’s	dancing?’
‘Better	we	know	nothing	about	why	we’re	here,	is	what	I’m	trying	to	say.’
‘Relax.	I	have	already	figured	you	out,	Hedge,	and	here’s	something	that
might	surprise	you.	Not	only	do	I	have	no	problem	with	you	being	here	–
neither	does	Cotillion.’
‘Bastard!	What	–	you	and	Cotillion	sending	pigeons	back	and	forth	on	all
this?’
‘I’m	not	saying	Cotillion	knows	anything	about	you,	Hedge.	I’m	just
saying	that	if	he	did,	he’d	be	fine.	So	would	Shadowthrone—’
‘Gods	below!’
‘Calm	down!’
‘Around	you,	Quick,	that’s	impossible.	Always	was,	always	will	be!	Hood,
I’m	a	ghost	and	I’m	still	nervous!’
‘You	never	were	good	at	being	calm,	were	you?	One	would	think	dying
might	have	changed	you,	some,	but	I	guess	not.’


‘Funny.	Ha	ha.’
They	were	now	skirting	the	ruined	city,	and	came	within	sight	of	the	burial
mounds.	Quick	Ben	grunted.	‘Looks	like	the	Meckros	didn’t	survive	the	kick.’
‘Dead	or	no,’	Hedge	said,	‘you’d	be	nervous	too	if	you	was	carrying	a
sack	of	cussers	on	your	back.’
‘Damn	you,	Hedge	–	that	was	a	cusser	in	your	hand	back	there!	When	the
dragon—’
‘Aye,	Quick,	so	you	just	keep	them	kitties	away	from	me,	lest	I	jump	back
and	turn	an	ankle	or	something.	And	stop	talking	about	Shadowthrone	and
Cotillion,	too.’
‘A	sack	full	of	cussers.	Now	I	am	nervous	–	you	may	be	dead,	but	I’m	not!’
‘Just	so.’
‘I	wish	Fid	was	here,	too.	Instead	of	you.’
‘That’s	not	a	very	nice	thing	to	say!	You’re	hurting	my	feelings.	Anyway.
What	I	was	wanting	to	tell	you	was	about	that	T’lan	Imass	I	was	travelling	with,
for	a	time.’
‘What	happened	to	it?	Let	me	guess,	you	tossed	it	a	cusser.’
‘Damned	right	I	did,	Quick.	She	was	trailing	chains,	big	ones.’
‘Crippled	God?’
‘Aye.	Everyone	wants	in	on	this	game	here.’
‘That’d	be	a	mistake,’	the	wizard	asserted	as	they	walked	towards	a	series
of	rock	outcroppings	behind	which	rose	thin	tendrils	of	hearth	smoke.	‘The
Crippled	God	would	find	himself	seriously	outclassed.’
‘Think	highly	of	yourself,	don’t	you?	Some	things	never	change.’
‘Not	me,	idiot.	I	meant	the	dragon.	Menandore.	Rud	Elalle’s	mother.’
Hedge	dragged	the	leather	cap	from	his	head	and	pulled	at	what	was	left	of
his	hair.	‘This	is	what	drives	me	mad!	You!	Things	like	that,	just	dropped	out
like	a	big	stinking	lump	of	–	ow!’	He	let	go	of	his	hair.	‘Hey,	that	actually
hurt!’
‘Tug	hard	enough	to	bleed,	Hedge?’
Hedge	glared	across	at	the	wizard,	who	was	now	smirking.	‘Look,	Quick,
this	would	all	be	fine	if	I	was	planning	on	building	a	homestead	here,	planting
a	few	tubers	and	raising	emlava	for	their	cuddly	fur	or	something.	But	damn	it,
I’m	just	passing	through,	right?	And	when	I	come	out	the	other	side,	well,	I’m
back	being	a	ghost,	and	that’s	something	I	need	to	get	used	to,	and	stay	used	to.’
Quick	Ben	shrugged.	‘Just	stop	pulling	your	hair	and	you’ll	be	fine,	then.’
	
The	emlava	cubs	had	grown	and	were	now	strong	enough	to	pull	Trull	Sengar


off	balance	as	they	strained	on	their	leather	leashes,	their	attention	fixed	yet
again	on	the	Malazan	soldier	named	Hedge,	for	whom	they	had	acquired	a
mindless	hate.	Trull	leaned	forward	to	drag	the	beasts	along	–	it	always	worked
better	when	the	sapper	walked	ahead,	rather	than	lagging	back	as	he	was	doing
now.
Onrack,	noting	his	struggles,	turned	and	quickly	clouted	both	cubs	on	their
flat	foreheads.	Suitably	cowed,	the	two	emlava	ceased	their	efforts	and	padded
along,	heads	lowered.
‘Their	mother	would	do	the	same,’	Onrack	said.
‘The	paw	of	discipline,’	Trull	said,	smiling.	‘I	wonder	if	we	might	believe
the	same	for	our	guide	here.’
Rud	Elalle	was	ten	paces	ahead	of	them	–	perhaps	he	could	hear,	perhaps
not.
‘Yes,	they	share	blood,’	Onrack	said,	nodding.	‘That	much	was	clear	when
they	were	standing	side	by	side.	And	if	there	is	Eleint	blood	in	the	mother,	then
so	too	in	the	son.’
‘Soletaken?’
‘Yes.’
‘I	wonder	if	he	anticipated	this	complication?’	Trull	meant	Cotillion	when
saying	he.
‘Unknown,’	Onrack	replied,	understanding	well	enough.	‘The	task
awaiting	us	grows	ever	less	certain.	Friend	Trull,	I	fear	for	these	Imass.	For
this	entire	realm.’
‘Leave	the	wizard	and	his	sapper	to	address	our	benefactor ’s	needs,	then,
and	we	will	concern	ourselves	with	protecting	this	place,	and	your	kin	who	call
it	home.’
The	Imass	glanced	across	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘You	say	this,	with	such
ease?’
‘The	wizard,	Onrack,	is	the	one	who	needs	to	be	here.	His	power	–	he	will
be	our	benefactor ’s	hand	in	what	is	to	come.	You	and	me,	we	were	but	his
escort,	his	bodyguards,	if	you	will.’
‘You	misunderstand	me,	Trull	Sengar.	My	wonder	is	in	your	willingness	to
risk	your	life,	again.	This	time	for	a	people	who	are	nothing	to	you.	For	a
realm	not	your	own.’
‘They	are	your	kin,	Onrack.’
‘Distant.	Bentract.’
‘If	it	had	been,	say,	the	Den-Ratha	tribe	of	the	Edur	to	gain	supremacy
among	our	tribes,	Onrack,	instead	of	my	own	Hiroth,	would	I	not	give	my	life
to	defend	them?	They	are	still	my	people.	For	you	it	is	the	same,	yes?	Logros,


Bentract	–	just	tribes	–	but	the	same	people.’
‘There	is	too	much	within	you,	Trull	Sengar.	You	humble	me.’
‘Perhaps	there	lies	your	own	misunderstanding,	friend.	Perhaps	all	you	see
here	is	my	search	for	a	cause,	for	something	to	fight	for,	to	die	for.’
‘You	will	not	die	here.’
‘Oh,	Onrack—’
‘I	may	well	fight	to	protect	the	Bentract	and	this	realm,	but	they	are	not
why	I	am	here.	You	are.’
Trull	could	not	meet	his	friend’s	eyes,	and	in	his	heart	there	was	pain.
Deep,	old,	awakened.
‘The	son,’	Onrack	said	after	a	moment,	‘seems…very	young.’
‘Well,	so	am	I.’
‘Not	when	I	look	into	your	eyes.	It	is	not	the	same	with	this	Soletaken,’	he
continued,	seemingly	unmindful	of	the	wound	he	had	just	delivered.	‘No,	those
yellow	eyes	are	young.’
‘Innocent?’
A	nod.	‘Trusting,	as	a	child	is	trusting.’
‘A	gentle	mother,	then.’
‘She	did	not	raise	him,’	Onrack	said.
Ah,	the	Imass,	then.	And	now	I	begin	to	see,	to	understand.	‘We	will	be
vigilant,	Onrack.’
‘Yes.’
Rud	Elalle	led	them	into	a	split	between	two	upthrust	knobs	of	layered
rock,	a	trail	that	then	wound	between	huge	boulders	before	opening	out	into	the
Imass	village.
Rock	shelters	along	a	cliff.	Tusk-framed	huts,	the	spindly	frames	of	drying
racks	on	which	were	stretched	hides.	Children	running	like	squat	imps	in	the
midst	of	a	gathering	of	perhaps	thirty	Imass.	Men,	women,	elders.	One	warrior
stood	before	all	the	others,	while	off	to	one	side	stood	three	more	Imass,	their
garb	rotted	and	subtly	different	in	cut	and	style	from	that	of	the	Bentract	–	the
strangers,	Trull	realized	–	guests	yet	remaining	apart.
Upon	seeing	them,	Onrack’s	benign	expression	hardened.	‘Friend,’	he
murmured	to	Trull,	‘’ware	those	three.’
‘I	decided	the	same	myself,’	Trull	replied	under	his	breath.
Rud	Elalle	moved	to	stand	at	the	Bentract	leader ’s	side.	‘This	is	Ulshun
Pral,’	he	said,	setting	a	hand	on	the	man’s	thick	shoulder	–	a	gesture	of	open
affection	that	seemed	blissfully	unmindful	of	the	growing	tension	at	the	edge
of	this	village.
Onrack	moved	forward.	‘I	am	Onrack	the	Broken,	once	of	the	Logros


T’lan	Imass,	child	of	the	Ritual.	I	ask	that	we	be	made	guests	among	your	tribe,
Ulshun	Pral.’
The	honey-skinned	warrior	frowned	over	at	Rud	Elalle,	then	said
something	in	his	own	language.
Rud	nodded	and	faced	Onrack.	‘Ulshun	Pral	asks	that	you	speak	in	the	First
Language.’
‘He	asked,’	Onrack	said,	‘why	I	chose	not	to.’
‘Yes.’
‘My	friends	do	not	share	the	knowing	of	that	language.	I	cannot	ask	for
guesting	on	their	behalf	without	their	understanding,	for	to	be	guest	is	to	be
bound	to	the	rules	of	the	tribe,	and	this	they	must	know,	before	I	would	venture
a	promise	of	peace	on	their	behalf.’
‘Can	you	not	simply	translate?’	Rud	Elalle	asked.
‘Of	course,	yet	I	choose	to	leave	that	to	you,	Rud	Elalle,	for	Ulshun	Pral
knows	and	trusts	you,	while	he	does	not	know	me.’
‘Very	well,	I	shall	do	so.’
‘Enough	with	all	this,’	Hedge	called	out,	gingerly	setting	down	his	pack.
‘We’ll	all	be	good	boys,	so	long	as	no-one	tries	to	kill	us	or	worse,	like
making	us	eat	some	horrible	vegetable	rightly	extinct	on	every	other	realm	in
the	universe.’
Rud	Elalle	was	displaying	impressive	skill	and	translating	Hedge’s	words
almost	as	fast	as	the	sapper	spoke	them.
Ulshun	Pral’s	brows	lifted	in	seeming	astonishment,	then	he	turned	and
with	a	savage	gesture	yelled	at	a	small	crowd	of	elderly	women	at	one	side	of
the	crowd.
Hedge	scowled	at	Onrack,	‘Now	what	did	I	say?’	he	demanded.
But	Trull	saw	his	friend	smiling.	‘Ulshun	Pral	has	just	directed	the	cooks	to
fish	the	baektar	from	the	stew	they	have	prepared	for	us.’
‘The	baek-what?’
‘A	vegetable,	Hedge,	that	will	be	found	nowhere	but	here.’
All	at	once	the	tension	was	gone.	There	were	smiles,	shouts	of	apparent
welcome	from	other	Imass,	and	many	came	forward	to	close,	first	on	Onrack,
and	then	–	with	expressions	of	delight	and	wonder,	on	Trull	Sengar	–	no,	he
realized,	not	on	him	–	on	the	emlava	cubs.	Who	began	purring	deep	in	their
throats,	as	thick,	short-fingered	hands	reached	out	to	stroke	fur	and	scratch
behind	the	small,	tufted	ears.
‘Look	at	that,	Quick!’	Hedge	was	staring	in	disbelief.	‘Now	is	that	fair?’
The	wizard	slapped	the	sapper	on	the	back.	‘It’s	true,	Hedge,	the	dead
stink.’


‘You’re	hurting	my	feelings	again!’
Sighing,	Trull	released	the	leather	leashes	and	stepped	back.	He	smiled
across	at	Hedge.	‘I	smell	nothing	untoward,’	he	said.
But	the	soldier ’s	scowl	only	deepened.	‘Maybe	I	like	you	now,	Trull
Sengar,	but	you	keep	being	nice	and	that’ll	change,	I	swear	it.’
‘Have	I	offended	you—’
‘Ignore	Hedge,’	Quick	Ben	cut	in,	‘at	least	when	he’s	talking.	Trust	me,	it
was	the	only	way	the	rest	of	us	in	the	squad	stayed	sane.	Ignore	him…until	he
reaches	into	that	damned	sack	of	his.’
‘And	then?’	Trull	asked	in	complete	bewilderment.
‘Then	run	like	Hood	himself	was	on	your	heels.’
Onrack	had	separated	himself	from	his	welcomers	and	was	now	walking
towards	the	strangers.
‘Yes,’	Quick	Ben	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘They’re	trouble	indeed.’
‘Because	they	were	like	Onrack?	T’lan	Imass?’
‘Of	the	Ritual,	aye.	The	question	is,	why	are	they	here?’
‘I	would	imagine	that	whatever	mission	brought	them	to	this	place,	Quick
Ben,	the	transformation	they	experienced	has	shaken	them	–	perhaps,	as	with
Onrack,	their	spirits	have	reawakened.’
‘Well,	they	look	unbalanced	enough.’
Their	conversation	with	Onrack	was	short,	and	Trull	watched	as	his	old
friend	approached.
‘Well?’	the	wizard	demanded.
Onrack	was	frowning.	‘They	are	Bentract,	after	all.	But	from	those	who
joined	the	Ritual.	Ulshun	Pral’s	clan	were	among	the	very	few	who	did	not,
who	were	swayed	by	the	arguments	set	forth	by	Kilava	Onass	–	this	is	why,’
Onrack	added,	‘they	greet	the	emlava	as	if	they	were	Kilava’s	very	own
children.	Thus,	there	are	ancient	wounds	between	the	two	groups.	Ulshun	Pral
was	not	a	clan	chief	back	then	–	indeed,	the	T’lan	Bentract	do	not	even	know
him.’
‘And	that	is	a	problem?’
‘It	is,	because	one	of	the	strangers	is	a	chosen	chief	–	chosen	by	Bentract
himself.	Hostille	Rator.’
‘And	the	other	two?’	Quick	Ben	asked.
‘Yes,	even	more	difficult.	Ulshun	Pral’s	Bonecaster	is	gone.	Til’aras	Benok
and	Gr ’istanas	Ish’ilm,	who	stand	to	either	side	of	Hostille	Rator,	are
Bonecasters.’
Trull	Sengar	drew	a	deep	breath.	‘They	contemplate	usurpation,	then.’
Onrack	the	Broken	nodded.


‘Then	what	had	stopped	them?’	Quick	Ben	asked.
‘Rud	Elalle,	wizard.	The	son	of	Menandore	terrifies	them.’
	
The	rain	thundered	down,	every	moment	another	hundred	thousand	iron-tipped
lances	crashing	down	out	of	the	dark	onto	slate	rooftops,	exploding	on	the
cobbled	streets	where	streams	now	rushed	down,	racing	for	the	harbour.
The	ice	north	of	the	island	had	not	died	quietly.	Sundered	by	the	magic	of	a
wilful	child,	the	white	and	blue	mountains	had	lifted	skyward	in	pillars	of
steam	that	roiled	into	massive	stormclouds,	which	had	then	marched	south
freed	from	the	strictures	of	refusal,	and	those	clouds	now	erupted	over	the
beleaguered	city	with	rage	and	vengeance.	Late	afternoon	had	become
midnight	and	now,	as	the	half-drowned	chimes	of	midnight’s	bells	sounded,	it
seemed	as	if	this	night	would	never	end.
On	the	morrow	–	if	it	ever	came	–	the	Adjunct	would	set	sail	with	her
motley	fleet.	Thrones	of	War,	a	score	of	well-armed	fast	escorts,	the	last	of	the
transports	holding	the	rest	of	the	Fourteenth	Army,	and	one	sleek	black
dromon	propelled	by	the	tireless	oars	manned	by	headless	Tiste	Andii.	Oh,	and
of	course,	in	the	lead	would	be	a	local	pirate’s	ship,	captained	by	a	dead
woman	–	but	never	mind	her.	Return,	yes,	to	that	black-hulled	nightmare.
Their	hosts	had	worked	hard	to	keep	the	dread	truth	of	that	Quon	dromon
from	Nimander	Golit	and	his	kin.	The	severed	heads	on	the	deck,	mounded
around	the	mainmast,	well,	they	had	kept	them	covered.	No	point	in
encouraging	hysteria,	should	their	living	Tiste	Andii	guests	see	the	faces	of
their	kin,	their	true	kin,	for	were	they	not	of	Drift	Avalii?	Oh	yes,	they	were
indeed.	Uncles,	fathers,	mothers,	oh,	a	play	on	words	now	would	well	serve	the
notion	–	they	were,	yes,	heads	of	families,	cut	away	before	their	time,	before
their	children	had	grown	old	enough,	wise	enough,	hard	enough	to	survive	in
this	world.	Cut	away,	ha	ha.	Now,	death	would	have	been	one	thing.	Dying	was
one	thing.	Just	one	and	there	were	other	things,	always,	and	you	didn’t	need
any	special	wisdom	to	know	that.	But	those	heads	had	not	died,	not	stiffened
then	softened	with	rot.	The	faces	had	not	fallen	away	to	leave	just	bone,	just	the
recognition	that	came	with	a	sharing	of	what-is,	what-was	and	what-would-be.
No,	the	eyes	stared	on,	the	eyes	blinked	because	some	memory	told	them	that
blinking	was	necessary.	The	mouths	moved,	resuming	interrupted
conversations,	the	sharing	of	jests,	the	gossip	of	parents,	yet	not	a	single	word
could	claw	free.
But	hysteria	was	a	complicated	place	in	which	a	young	mind	might	find
itself.	It	could	be	deafening	with	screams,	shrieks,	the	endless	bursts	of	horror


again	and	again	and	again	–	a	tide	surging	without	end.	Or	it	could	be	quiet	–
silent	in	that	awful	way	of	some	silences	–	like	that	of	gaping	mouths,
desperate	but	unable	to	draw	breath,	the	eyes	above	bulging,	the	veins	standing
prominent	in	their	need,	but	no	breath	would	come,	nothing	to	slide	life	into
the	lungs.	This	was	the	hysteria	of	drowning.	Drowning	inside	oneself,	inside
horror.	The	hysteria	of	a	child,	blank-eyed,	drool	smearing	the	chin.
Some	secrets	were	impossible	to	keep.	The	truth	of	that	ship,	for	one.	The
Silanda’s	lines	were	known,	were	profoundly	familiar.	The	ship	that	had	taken
their	parents	on	a	pathetic	journey	in	search	of	the	one	whom	every	Tiste	Andii
of	Drift	Avalii	called	Father.	Anomander	Rake.	Anomander	of	the	silver	hair,
the	dragon’s	eyes.	Didn’t	find	him,	alas.	Never	the	chance	to	plead	for	help,	to
ask	all	the	questions	that	needed	asking,	to	stab	fingers	in	accusation,
condemnation,	damnation.	All	that,	yes	yes.
Take	to	your	oars,	brave	parents,	there	is	more	sea	to	cross.	Can	you	see
the	shore?	Of	course	not.	You	see	the	sunlight	when	there	is	sunlight	through
canvas	weave,	and	in	your	heads	you	feel	the	ache	of	your	bodies,	the	strain	in
your	shoulders,	the	bunch	and	loose,	bunch	and	loose	of	every	draw	on	the
sweeps.	You	feel	the	blood	welling	up	to	pool	in	the	neck	as	if	it	was	a	gilded
cup,	only	to	sink	back	down	again.	Row,	damn	you!	Row	for	the	shore!
Aye,	the	shore.	Other	side	of	this	ocean,	and	this	ocean,	dear	parents,	is
endless.
So	row!	Row!
He	might	have	giggled,	but	that	would	be	a	dangerous	thing,	to	break	the
silence	of	his	hysteria,	which	he	had	held	on	to	for	so	long	now	it	had	become
warm	as	a	mother ’s	embrace.
Best	to	carry	on,	working	to	push	away,	shut	away,	all	thought	of	the
Silanda.	Easier	on	land,	in	this	inn,	in	this	room.
But,	on	the	morrow,	they	would	sail.	Again.	Onto	the	ships,	oh	the	spray
and	wind	enlivens	so!
And	this	was	why,	on	this	horrid	night	of	vengeful	rain,	Nimander	was
awake.	For	he	knew	Phaed.	He	knew	Phaed’s	own	stain	of	hysteria,	and	what	it
might	lead	her	to	do.	Tonight,	in	the	sodden	ashes	of	midnight’s	bell.
She	could	make	her	footfalls	very	quiet,	as	she	crept	out	of	her	bed	and
padded	barefoot	to	the	door.	Blessed	sister	blessed	daughter	blessed	mother
blessed	aunt,	niece,	grandmother	–	blessed	kin,	blood	of	my	blood,	spit	of	my
spit,	gall	of	my	gall.	I	hear	you.
For	I	know	your	mind,	Phaed.	The	ever-surging	bursts	in	your	soul	–	yes,	I
see	your	bared	teeth,	the	smear	of	intent.	You	imagine	yourself	unseen,	yes,
unwitnessed,	and	so	you	reveal	your	raw	self.	There	in	that	blessed	slash	of


grey-white,	so	poetically	echoed	by	the	gleam	of	the	knife	in	your	hand.
To	the	door,	darling	Phaed.	Lift	the	latch,	and	out	you	go,	to	slide	down	the
corridor	all	slithering	limbs	as	the	rain	lashes	the	roof	above	and	water
trickles	down	the	walls	in	dirty	tears.	Cold	enough	to	see	your	breath,	Phaed,
reminding	you	not	just	that	you	are	alive,	but	that	you	are	sexually	awakened;
that	this	journey	is	the	sweetest	indulgence	of	under-the-cover	secrets,	fingers
ever	playful	on	the	knife,	and	on	the	rocking	ship	in	the	harbour	eyes	stare	at
blackness	beneath	drenched	canvas,	water	trickling	down…
She	worries,	yes,	about	Withal.	Who	might	awaken.	Before	or	after.	Who
might	smell	the	blood,	the	iron	stench,	the	death	riding	out	on	Sandalath
Drukorlat’s	last	breath.	Who	might	witness	when	all	that	Phaed	was,	truly	was,
could	never	be	witnessed	–	because	such	things	were	not	allowed,	never
allowed,	and	so	she	might	have	to	kill	him,	too.
Vipers	strike	more	than	once.
Now	at	the	door,	the	last	barrier	–	row	you	fools	–	the	shore	lies	just
beyond!	–	and	of	course	there	is	no	lock	binding	the	latch.	No	reason	for	it.
Save	one	murderous	child	whose	mother ’s	head	stares	at	canvas	on	a	pitching
deck.	The	one	child	who	went	to	see	that	for	herself.	And	we	are	drawn	to
pilgrimage.	Because	to	live	is	to	hunt	for	echoes.	Echoes	of	what?	No-one
knows.	But	the	pilgrimage	is	taken,	yes,	ever	taken,	and	every	now	and	then
those	echoes	are	caught	–	just	a	whisper	–	creaking	oars,	the	slap	and	chop	of
waves	like	fists	against	the	hull,	clamouring	to	get	in,	and	the	burbling	blood,
the	spitting	suck	as	it	sinks	back	down.	And	we	hear,	in	those	echoes,	some
master ’s	voice:	Row!	Row	for	the	shore!	Row	for	your	lives!
He	remembered	a	story,	the	story	he	always	remembered,	would	ever
remember.	An	old	man	alone	in	a	small	fisher	boat.	Rowing	into	the	face	of	a
mountain	of	ice.	Oh,	he	did	love	that	story.	The	pointless	glory	of	it,	the
mindless	magic	–	he	would	grow	chilled	at	the	thought,	at	the	vision	he
conjured	of	that	wondrous,	profound	and	profoundly	useless	scene.	Old	man,
what	do	you	think	you	are	doing?	Old	man	–	the	ice!
Inside,	a	shadow	among	shadows,	gloom	in	the	gloom,	teeth	hidden	now,
but	the	knife	is	a	lurid	gleam,	catching	reflections	of	rain	from	the	window’s
pitted	rainbow	glass.	And	a	shudder	takes	her	then,	pulling	her	down	into	a
crouch	as	sensations	flood	up	through	her	belly,	lancing	upward	into	her	brain
and	her	breath	catches	–	oh,	Phaed,	don’t	scream	now.	Don’t	even	moan.
They	have	drawn	their	cots	together	–	on	this	night,	then,	the	man	and	the
bitch	have	shared	the	spit	of	their	loins,	isn’t	that	sweet.	She	edges	closer,	eyes
searching.	Finding	Sandalath’s	form	on	the	left,	closest	to	her.	Convenient.
Phaed	raises	the	knife.


In	her	mind,	flashes,	scene	after	scene,	the	sordid	list	of	this	old	woman’s
constant	slights,	each	one	belittling	Phaed,	each	one	revealing	to	all	nearby	too
many	of	Phaed’s	secret	terrors	–	no-one	has	the	right	to	do	that,	no-one	has	the
right	to	then	laugh	–	laugh	in	the	eyes	if	not	out	loud.	All	those	insults,	well,	the
time	has	come	to	pay	them	back.	Here,	with	one	hard	thrust	of	the	knife.
She	lifts	the	knife	still	higher,	draws	in	her	breath	and	holds	it.
And	stabs	down.
Nimander ’s	hand	snaps	out,	catches	her	wrist,	hard,	tightening	as	she	twists
round,	lips	peeled	back,	eyes	blazing	with	rage	and	fear.	Her	wrist	is	a	tiny
thing,	like	a	bony	snake,	caught,	frenzied,	seeking	to	turn	the	knife,	to	set	the
edge	against	Nimander ’s	hand.	He	twists	again	and	bones	break,	an	awful
crunching,	grinding	sound.
The	knife	clunks	on	the	wooden	floor.
Nimander	bears	down	on	her,	using	his	weight	to	crumple	Phaed	onto	the
floor	beside	the	bed.	She	tries	to	scratch	at	his	eyes	and	he	releases	the	broken
limb	to	grasp	the	other	one.	He	breaks	that	one	too.
She	has	not	screamed.	Amazing,	that.	Not	a	sound	but	her	panting	breath.
Nimander	pins	her	down	and	takes	her	neck	in	his	hands.	He	begins	to
squeeze.
No	more,	Phaed.	I	now	do	as	would	Anomander	Rake.	As	would	Silchas
Ruin.	As	would	Sandalath	herself	were	she	awake.	I	do	this,	because	I	know	you
–	yes,	even	now,	there,	in	your	bulging	eyes	where	all	your	awareness	now
gathers	in	a	flood,	I	can	see	the	truth	of	you.
The	emptiness	inside.
Your	mother	stares	in	horror.	At	what	she	has	spawned.	She	stares,
disbelieving,	clinging	desperately	to	the	possibility	that	she	has	got	it	wrong,
that	we	all	have,	that	you	are	not	as	you	are.	But	that	is	no	help.	Not	to	her.	Not
to	you.
Yes,	stare	up	into	my	eyes,	Phaed,	and	know	that	I	see	you.
I	see	you—
He	was	being	dragged	away.	Off	Phaed.	His	hands	were	being	pried	loose,
twisted	painfully	to	break	his	grip	–	and	he	falls	back,	muscled	arms	wrapped
about	him	now,	and	is	dragged	from	Phaed,	from	her	bloated	face	and	the
dreadful	gasping	–	poor	Phaed’s	throat	hurts,	maybe	is	torn,	even.	To	breathe
is	to	know	agony.
But	she	lives.	He	has	lost	his	chance,	and	now	they	will	kill	him.
Sandalath	screams	at	him	–	she	has	been	screaming	at	him	for	some	time,
he	realizes.	She	first	screamed	when	he	broke	Phaed’s	second	wrist	–	awakened
by	Phaed’s	own	screams	–	oh,	of	course	she	had	not	stayed	quiet.	Snapping


bones	would	never	permit	that,	not	even	from	a	soulless	creature	as	was	Phaed.
She	had	screamed,	and	he’d	heard	nothing,	not	even	echoes	–	hands	on	the	oar
and	squeeze!
Now	what	would	happen?	Now	what	would	they	do?
‘Nimander!’
He	started,	stared	across	at	Sandalath,	studied	her	face	as	if	it	were	a
stranger ’s.
Withal	held	him,	arms	trapped	against	his	sides,	but	Nimander	was	not
interested	in	struggling.	It	was	too	late	for	that.
Phaed	had	thrown	up	and	the	stink	of	her	vomit	was	thick	in	the	air.
Someone	was	pounding	on	the	door	–	which	in	his	wisdom	Nimander	had
locked	behind	him	after	following	Phaed	into	the	room.
Sandalath	yelled	that	it	was	all	right,	everything	was	fine	–	an	accident,	but
everything	is	fine	now.
But	poor	Phaed’s	wrists	are	broken.	That	will	need	seeing	to.
Not	now,	Withal.
He	stands	limp	in	my	arms,	wife.	Can	I	release	him	now?
Yes,	but	be	wary—
I	shall,	no	doubt	of	that.
And	now	Sandalath,	positioned	between	Nimander	and	the	still-coughing,
gagging	Phaed,	took	Nimander ’s	face	in	her	hands	and	leaned	closer	to	study
his	eyes.
What	do	you	see,	Sandalath	Drukorlat?	Gems	bright	with	truths	and
wonders?	Pits	whispering	at	you	that	no	bottom	will	ever	be	found,	that	the
plunge	into	a	soul	never	ends?	Row,	you	fools!	We’re	sinking!	Oh,	don’t	giggle,
Nimander,	don’t	do	that.	Remain	as	you	are,	outwardly	numb.	Blank.	What	do
you	see?	Why,	nothing,	of	course.
‘Nimander.’
‘It’s	all	right,’	he	said.	‘You	can	kill	me	now.’
A	strange	look	on	her	face.	Something	like	horror.	‘Nimander,	no.	Listen
to	me.	I	need	to	know.	What	has	happened	here?	Why	were	you	in	our	room?’
‘Phaed.’
‘Why	were	you	both	in	our	room,	Nimander?’
Why,	I	followed	her.	I	stayed	awake	–	I’ve	been	doing	that	a	lot.	I’ve	been
watching	her	for	days	and	days,	nights	and	nights.	Watching	her	sleep,	waiting
for	her	to	wake	up,	to	take	out	her	knife	and	smile	a	greeting	to	the	dark.	The
dark	that	is	our	heritage,	the	dark	of	betrayal.
I	don’t	remember	when	last	I	slept,	Sandalath	Drukorlat.	I	needed	to	stay
awake,	always	awake.	Because	of	Phaed.


Did	he	answer	her	then?	Out	loud,	all	those	tumbling	statements,	those
reasonable	explanations.	He	wasn’t	sure.	‘Kill	me	now,	so	I	can	sleep,	I	so	want
to	sleep.’
‘No-one	is	going	to	kill	you,’	Sandalath	said.	Her	hands,	pressed	to	the
sides	of	his	face,	were	slick	with	sweat.	Or	rain,	perhaps.	Not	tears	–	leave	that
to	the	sky,	to	the	night.
‘I	am	sorry,’	Nimander	said.
‘I	think	that	apology	should	be	saved	for	Phaed,	don’t	you?’
‘I	am	sorry,’	he	repeated	to	her,	then	added,	‘that	she’s	not	dead.’
Her	hands	pulled	away,	leaving	his	cheeks	suddenly	cold.
‘Hold	a	moment,’	Withal	said,	stepping	to	the	foot	of	the	bed	and	bending
down	to	pick	up	something.	Gleaming,	edged.	Her	knife.	‘Now,’	he	said	in	a
murmur,	‘which	one	does	this	toy	belong	to,	I	wonder?’
‘Nimander ’s	still	wearing	his,’	Sandalath	said,	and	then	she	turned	to	stare
down	at	Phaed.
A	moment	later,	Withal	grunted.	‘She’s	been	a	hateful	little	snake	around
you,	Sand.	But	this?’	He	faced	Nimander.	‘You	just	saved	my	wife’s	life?	I	think
you	did.’	And	then	he	moved	closer,	but	there	was	nothing	of	the	horror	of
Sandalath’s	face	in	his	own.	No,	this	was	a	hard	expression,	that	slowly
softened.	‘Gods	below,	Nimander,	you	knew	this	was	coming,	didn’t	you?	How
long?	When	did	you	last	sleep?’	He	stared	a	moment	longer,	then	spun.	‘Move
aside,	Sand,	I	think	I	need	to	finish	what	Nimander	started—’
‘No!’	his	wife	snapped.
‘She’ll	try	again.’
‘I	understand	that,	you	stupid	oaf!	Do	you	think	I’ve	not	seen	into	that
fanged	maw	that	is	Phaed’s	soul?	Listen,	there	is	a	solution—’
‘Aye,	wringing	her	scrawny	neck—’
‘We	leave	them	here.	On	the	island	–	we	sail	tomorrow	without	them.
Withal	–	husband—’
‘And	when	she	recovers	–	creatures	like	this	one	always	do	–	she’ll	take
this	damned	knife	and	do	to	Nimander	what	she’s	tried	to	do	to	you.	He	saved
your	life,	and	I	will	not	abandon	him—’
‘She	won’t	kill	him,’	Sandalath	said.	‘You	don’t	understand.	She	cannot	–
without	him,	she	would	be	truly	alone,	and	that	she	cannot	abide	–	it	would
drive	her	mad—’
‘Mad,	aye,	mad	enough	to	take	a	knife	to	Nimander,	the	one	who	betrayed
her!’
‘No.’
‘Wife,	are	you	so	certain?	Is	your	faith	in	understanding	the	mind	of	a


sociopath	so	strong?	That	you	would	leave	Nimander	with	her?’
‘Husband,	her	arms	are	broken.’
‘And	broken	bones	can	be	healed.	A	knife	in	the	eye	cannot.’
‘She	will	not	touch	him.’
‘Sand—’
Nimander	spoke.	‘She	will	not	touch	me.’
Withal’s	eyes	searched	his.	‘You	as	well?’
‘You	must	leave	us	here,’	Nimander	said,	then	winced	at	the	sound	of	his
own	voice.	So	weak,	so	useless.	He	was	no	Anomander	Rake.	No	Silchas	Ruin.
Andarist’s	faith	in	choosing	him	to	lead	the	others	had	been	a	mistake.	‘We
cannot	go	with	you.	With	Silanda.	We	cannot	bear	to	see	that	ship	any	longer.
Take	it	away,	please,	take	them	away!’
Oh,	too	many	screams	this	night,	in	this	room.	More	demands	from
outside,	in	growing	alarm.
Sandalath	turned	and,	drawing	a	robe	about	her	–	she	had	been,	Nimander
suddenly	realized,	naked	–	a	woman	of	matronly	gifts,	the	body	of	a	woman	who
had	birthed	children,	a	body	such	as	young	men	dream	of.	And	might	there	be
wives	who	might	be	mothers	who	might	be	lovers…for	one	such	as	me?	Stop,
she	is	dead	–	robe	drawn,	Sandalath	walked	to	the	door,	quickly	unlocked	it
and	slipped	outside,	closing	the	door	behind	her.	More	voices	in	the	corridor.
Withal	was	staring	down	at	Phaed,	who	had	ceased	her	coughing,	her
whimpers	of	pain,	her	fitful	weeping.	‘This	is	not	your	crime,	Nimander.’
What?
Withal	reached	down	and	grabbed	Phaed	by	her	upper	arms.	She	shrieked.
‘Don’t,’	Nimander	said.
‘Not	your	crime.’
‘She	will	leave	you,	Withal.	If	you	do	that.	She	will	leave	you.’
He	stared	across	at	Nimander,	then	pushed	Phaed	back	down	onto	the	floor.
‘You	don’t	know	me,	Nimander.	Maybe	she	doesn’t,	either	–	not	when	it	comes
to	what	I	will	do	for	her	sake	–	and,	I	suppose,’	he	added	with	a	snarl,	‘for
yours.’
Nimander	had	thought	his	words	had	drawn	Withal	back,	had	kept	him
from	doing	what	he	had	intended	to	do,	and	so	he	was	unprepared,	and	so	he
stood,	watching,	as	Withal	snatched	Phaed	up,	surged	across	the	room	–
carrying	her	as	if	she	was	no	more	than	a	sack	of	tubers	–	and	threw	her
through	the	window.
A	punching	shatter	of	the	thick,	bubbled	glass,	and	body,	flopping	arms	and
bared	lower	limbs	–	with	dainty	feet	at	the	end	–	were	gone,	out	into	the	night
that	howled,	spraying	the	room	with	icy	rain.


Withal	stumbled	back	in	the	face	of	that	wind,	then	he	spun	to	face
Nimander.	‘I	am	going	to	lie,’	he	said	in	a	growl.	‘The	mad	creature	ran,	flung
herself	through	–	do	you	hear	me?’
The	door	opened	and	Sandalath	charged	into	the	room,	behind	her	the
Adjunct’s	aide,	Lostara	Yil,	and	the	priest,	Banaschar	–	and,	pushing	close
behind	them,	the	other	Tiste	Andii	–	eyes	wide	with	fear,	confusion	–	and
Nimander	lurched	towards	them,	one	step,	then	another—
And	was	pulled	round	to	face	Sandalath.
Withal	was	speaking.	A	voice	filled	with	disbelief.	Expostulations.
But	she	was	staring	into	his	eyes.	‘Did	she?	Nimander!	Did	she?’
Did	she	what?	Oh,	yes,	go	through	the	window.
Shouts	from	the	street	below,	muted	by	the	wailing	winds	and	lashing	rain.
Lostara	Yil	moved	to	stand	at	the	sill,	leaned	out.	A	moment	later	she	stepped
back	and	turned,	her	expression	grave.	‘Broken	neck.	I’m	sorry,	Sandalath.	But
I	have	questions…’
Mother,	wife,	Withal’s	lover,	was	still	staring	into	Nimander ’s	eyes	–	a
look	that	said	loss	was	rearing	from	the	dark,	frightened	places	in	her	mind,
rearing,	yes,	to	devour	the	love	she	held	for	her	husband	–	for	the	man	with	the
innocent	face;	that	told	him,	with	the	answer	he	might	give	to	her	question,	two
more	lives	might	be	destroyed.	Did	she?	Through	the	window?	Did	she…die?
Nimander	nodded.	‘Yes,’	he	said.
Another	dead	woman	screamed	in	his	skull	and	he	almost	reeled.	Dead
eyes,	devouring	all	love.	‘You	have	lied,	Nimander!’
Yes.	To	save	Withal.	To	save	Sandalath	Drukorlat—
‘To	save	yourself!’
Yes.
‘My	love,	what	has	happened	to	you?’
I	heard	a	spinning	sound.	A	whispering	promise	–	we	must	stay	here,	you
see.	We	must.	Andarist	chose	me.	He	knew	he	was	going	to	die.	He	knew	that
there	would	be	no	Anomander	Rake,	no	Silchas	Ruin,	no	great	kin	of	our	age	of
glory	–	no-one	to	come	to	save	us,	take	care	of	us.	There	was	only	me.
My	love,	to	lead	is	to	carry	burdens.	As	did	the	heroes	of	old,	with	clear
eyes.
So	look	at	my	eyes,	my	love.	See	my	burden?	Just	like	a	hero	of	old—
Sandalath	reached	up	again,	those	two	long-fingered	hands.	Not	to	take	his
face,	but	to	wipe	away	the	rain	streaming	down	his	cheeks.
My	clear	eyes.
We	will	stay	here,	on	this	island	–	we	will	look	to	the	Shake,	and	see	in	them
the	faint	threads	of	Tiste	Andii	blood,	and	we	will	turn	them	away	from	the


barbarity	that	has	taken	them	and	so	twisted	their	memories.
We	will	show	them	the	shore.	The	true	shore.
Burdens,	my	love.	This	is	what	it	is	to	live,	while	your	loved	ones	die.
Sandalath,	still	ignoring	Lostara	Yil’s	questioning,	now	stepped	back	and
turned	to	settle	into	her	husband’s	arms.
And	Withal	looked	across	at	Nimander.
Outside,	the	wind	screamed.
Yes,	my	love,	see	it	in	his	eyes.	Look	what	I	have	done	to	Withal.	All
because	I	failed.
	
Last	night’s	storm	had	washed	the	town	clean,	giving	it	a	scoured	appearance
that	made	it	very	nearly	palatable.	Yan	Tovis,	Twilight,	stood	on	the	pier
watching	the	foreign	ships	pull	out	of	the	harbour.	At	her	side	was	her	halfbrother,	Yedan	Derryg,	the	Watch.
‘Glad	to	see	them	go,’	he	said.
‘You	are	not	alone	in	that,’	she	replied.
‘Brullyg’s	still	dead	to	the	world	–	but	was	that	celebration	or	self-pity?’
Yan	Tovis	shrugged.
‘At	dawn,’	Yedan	Derryg	said	after	a	long	moment	of	silence	between
them,	‘our	black-skinned	cousins	set	out	to	build	the	tomb.’	His	bearded	jaw
bunched,	molars	grinding,	then	he	said,	‘Only	met	the	girl	once.	Sour-faced,
shy	eyes.’
‘Those	broken	arms	did	not	come	from	the	fall,’	Yan	Tovis	said.	‘Too
bruised	–	the	tracks	of	fingers.	Besides,	she	landed	on	her	head,	bit	through	her
tongue	clean	as	a	knife	cut.’
‘Something	happened	in	that	room.	Something	sordid.’
‘I	am	pleased	we	did	not	inherit	such	traits.’
He	grunted,	said	nothing.
Yan	Tovis	sighed.	‘Pully	and	Skwish	seem	to	have	decided	their	sole
purpose	in	living	these	days	is	to	harry	me	at	every	turn.’
‘The	rest	of	the	witches	have	elected	them	as	their	representatives.	You
begin	your	rule	as	Queen	in	a	storm	of	ill-feeling.’
‘It’s	worse	than	that,’	she	said.	‘This	town	is	crowded	with	ex-prisoners.
Debt-runners	and	murderers.	Brullyg	managed	to	control	them	because	he
could	back	his	claim	to	being	the	nastiest	adder	in	the	pit.	They	look	at	me	and
see	an	Atri-Preda	of	the	Imperial	Army	–	just	another	warden	–	and	you,
Derryg,	well,	you’re	my	strong-arm	Finadd.	They	don’t	care	a	whit	about	the
Shake	and	their	damned	queen.’


‘Which	is	precisely	why	you	need	the	witches,	Twilight.’
‘I	know.	And	if	that’s	not	misery	enough,	they	know	it,	too.’
‘You	need	clout,’	he	said.
‘Clever	man.’
‘Even	as	a	child,	you	were	prone	to	sarcasm.’
‘Sorry.’
‘The	answer,	I	think,	will	be	found	with	these	Tiste	Andii.’
She	looked	across	at	him.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Who	knows	more	of	our	past	than	even	the	witches?	Who	knows	it	as	a
clean	thing?	A	thing	not	all	twisted	by	generations	of	corruption,	of	halfremembrances	and	convenient	lies?’
‘Your	tongue	runs	away	with	you,	Yedan.’
‘More	sarcasm.’
‘No,	I	find	myself	somewhat	impressed.’
The	jaw	bunched	as	he	studied	her.
She	laughed.	Could	not	help	it.	‘Oh,	brother,	come	–	the	foreigners	are
gone	and	probably	won’t	be	back	–	ever.’
‘They	sail	to	their	annihilation?’
‘What	do	you	think?’
‘I’m	not	sure,	Twilight.	That	child	mage,	Sinn…’
‘You	may	be	right.	News	of	her	imminent	departure	had	Pully	and	Skwish
dancing.’
‘She	destroyed	a	solid	wall	of	ice	half	as	long	as	Fent	Reach.	I	would	not
discount	these	Malazans.’
‘The	Adjunct	did	not	impress	me,’	Yan	Tovis	said.
‘Maybe	because	she	didn’t	need	to.’
Twilight	thought	about	that,	then	thought	about	it	some	more.
Neither	spoke	as	they	turned	away	from	the	glittering	bay	and	the	nowdistant	foreign	ships.
The	morning	sun	was	actually	beginning	to	feel	warm	–	the	final,	most
poignant	proof	that	the	ice	was	dead,	the	threat	past.	The	Isle	would	live	on.
On	the	street	ahead	the	first	bucket	of	night-soil	slopped	down	onto	the
clean	cobbles	from	a	second-storey	window,	forcing	passers-by	to	dance	aside.
‘The	people	greet	you,	Queen.’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,	Yedan.’
	
Captain	Kindly	stood	by	the	port	rail,	staring	across	the	choppy	waves	to	the
Silanda.	Soldiers	from	both	of	the	squads	on	that	haunted	ship	were	visible	on


the	deck,	a	handful	gathered	about	a	game	of	bones	or	some	such	nefarious
activity,	whilst	the	sweeps	churned	the	water	in	steady	rhythm.	Masan	Gilani
was	up	near	the	steering	oar,	keeping	Sergeant	Cord	company.
Lucky	bastard,	that	Cord.	Lieutenant	Pores,	positioned	on	Kindly’s	right,
leaned	his	forearms	on	the	rail,	eyes	fixed	on	Masan	Gilani	–	as	were,	in	all
likelihood,	the	eyes	of	most	of	the	sailors	on	this	escort,	those	not	busy
readying	the	sails	at	any	rate.
‘Lieutenant.’
‘Sir?’
‘What	do	you	think	you	are	doing?’
‘Uh,	nothing,	sir.’
‘You’re	leaning	on	the	gunnel.	At	ease.	Did	I	at	any	time	say	“at	ease”,
Lieutenant?’
Pores	straightened.	‘Sorry,	sir.’
‘That	woman	should	be	put	up	on	report.’
‘Aye,	she’s	not	wearing	much,	is	she?’
‘Out	of	uniform.’
‘Damned	distracting,	isn’t	it,	sir?’
‘Disappointing,	you	mean,	surely,	Lieutenant.’
‘Ah,	that’s	the	word	I	was	looking	for,	all	right.	Thank	you,	sir.’
‘The	Shake	make	the	most	extraordinary	combs,’	Kindly	said.
‘Turtleshell.’
‘Impressive,	sir.’
‘Expensive	purchases,	but	well	worth	it,	I	should	judge.’
‘Yes	sir.	Tried	them	yet?’
‘Lieutenant,	do	you	imagine	that	to	be	amusing?’
‘Sir?	No,	of	course	not!’
‘Because,	as	is	readily	apparent,	Lieutenant,	your	commanding	officer	has
very	little	hair.’
‘If	by	that	you	mean	on	your	head,	then	yes	sir,	that	is,	uh,	apparent	indeed.’
‘Am	I	infested	with	lice,	then,	that	I	might	need	to	use	a	comb	elsewhere	on
my	body,	Lieutenant?’
‘I	wouldn’t	know,	sir.	I	mean,	of	course	not.’
‘Lieutenant,	I	want	you	to	go	to	my	cabin	and	prepare	the	disciplinary
report	on	that	soldier	over	there.’
‘But	sir,	she’s	a	marine.’
‘Said	report	to	be	forwarded	to	Fist	Keneb	when	such	communication	is
practicable.	Well,	why	are	you	still	standing	here?	Get	out	of	my	sight,	and	no
limping!’


‘Limp’s	long	gone,	sir!’
Pores	saluted	then	hurried	away,	trying	not	to	limp.	The	problem	was,	it
had	become	something	of	a	habit	when	he	was	around	Captain	Kindly.	Granted,
a	most	pathetic	attempt	at	eliciting	some	sympathy.	Kindly	had	no	sympathy.	He
had	no	friends,	either.	Except	for	his	combs.	‘And	they’re	all	teeth	and	no	bite,’
he	murmured	as	he	descended	to	Kindly’s	cabin.	‘Turtleshell,	ooh!’
Behind	him,	Kindly	spoke,	‘I	have	decided	to	accompany	you,	Lieutenant.
To	oversee	your	penmanship.’
Pores	cringed,	hitched	a	sudden	limp	then	rubbed	at	his	hip	before	opening
the	cabin	hatch.	‘Yes	sir,’	he	said	weakly.
‘And	when	you	are	done,	Lieutenant,	my	new	turtleshell	combs	will	need	a
thorough	cleansing.	Shake	are	not	the	most	fastidious	of	peoples.’
‘Nor	are	turtles.’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘I	will	be	most	diligent,	sir.’
‘And	careful.’
‘Absolutely,	sir.’
‘In	fact,	I	think	I	had	better	oversee	that	activity	as	well.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘That	wasn’t	a	limp	I	saw,	was	it?’
‘No	sir,	I’m	much	better	now.’
‘Otherwise	we	would	have	to	find	a	good	reason	for	your	limping,
Lieutenant.	For	example,	my	finding	a	billy	club	and	shattering	your	legs	into
pieces.	Would	that	do,	do	you	think?	No	need	to	answer,	I	see.	Now,	best	find
the	ink	box,	yes?’
	
‘I’m	telling	you,	Masan,	that	was	Kindly	himself	over	there.	Drooling	over
you.’
‘You	damned	fool,’	she	said,	then	added,	‘Sergeant.’
Cord	just	grinned.	‘Even	at	that	distance,	your	charms	are,	uh,
unmistakable.’
‘Sergeant,	Kindly	has	probably	not	lain	with	a	woman	since	the	night	of	his
coming	of	age,	and	that	time	was	probably	with	a	whore	his	father	or	uncle
bought	for	the	occasion.	Women	can	tell	these	things.	The	man’s	repressed,	in
all	the	worst	ways.’
‘Oh,	and	what	are	the	good	ways	of	being	repressed?’
‘For	a	man?	Well,	decorum	for	one,	as	in	not	taking	advantage	of	your
rank.	Listen	closely	now,	if	you	dare.	All	real	acts	of	chivalry	are	forms	of


repressed	behaviour.’
‘Where	in	Hood’s	name	did	you	get	that?	Hardly	back	on	the	savannas	of
Dal	Hon!’
‘You’d	be	surprised	what	the	women	in	the	huts	talk	about,	Sergeant.’
‘Well,	soldier,	I	happen	to	be	steering	this	damned	ship,	so	it	was	you	who
walked	up	here	to	stand	with	me,	not	the	other	way	round!’
‘I	was	just	getting	away	from	Balm’s	squad	–	not	to	mention	that	sapper	of
yours,	Crump,	who’s	decided	I’m	worthy	of	worship.	Says	I’ve	got	the	tail	of
some	salamander	god.’
‘You’ve	what?’
‘Aye.	And	if	he	grabs	it	it’s	liable	to	come	off.	I	think	he	means	he	thinks
I’m	too	perfect	for	the	likes	of	him.	Which	is	something	of	a	relief.	Doesn’t
stop	him	ogling	me,	though.’
‘You	get	the	ogles	because	you	want	the	ogles,	Masan	Gilani.	Keep	your
armour	on	and	we’ll	all	forget	about	you	quick	enough.’
‘Armour	on	a	ship?	No	thanks.	That’s	a	guarantee	of	a	fast	plunge	to	the
mucky	bottom,	Sergeant.’
‘We	won’t	be	seeing	any	battle	on	the	waves,’	Cord	pronounced.
‘Why	not?	The	Letherii	got	a	fleet	or	three,	don’t	they?’
‘Mostly	chewed	up	by	years	at	sea,	Masan	Gilani.	Besides,	they’re	not	very
good	at	the	ship-to-ship	kind	of	fighting	–	without	their	magic,	that	is.’
‘Well,	without	our	marines,	neither	are	we.’
‘They	don’t	know	that,	do	they?’
‘We	haven’t	got	Quick	Ben	any	more	either.’
Cord	leaned	on	the	steering	oar	and	looked	across	at	her.	‘You	spent	most
of	your	time	in	the	town,	didn’t	you?	Just	a	few	trips	back	and	forth	to	us	up	the
north	side	of	the	island.	Masan	Gilani,	Quick	Ben	had	all	the	moves,	aye,	and
even	the	look	of	an	Imperial	High	Mage.	Shifty,	mysterious	and	scary	as
Hood’s	arse-crack.	But	I’ll	tell	you	this	–	Sinn,	well,	she’s	the	real	thing.’
‘If	you	say	so.’	All	Masan	Gilani	could	think	of,	when	it	came	to	Sinn,	was
the	little	mute	child	curling	up	in	the	arms	of	every	woman	in	sight,	suckling
on	tits	like	a	newborn.	Of	course,	that	was	outside	Y’Ghatan.	Long	ago,	now.
‘I	do	say	so,’	Cord	insisted.	‘Now,	if	you	ain’t	interested	in	getting
unofficial	with	this	sergeant	here,	best	take	your	swaying	hips	elsewhere.’
‘You	men	really	are	all	the	same.’
‘And	so	are	you	women.	Might	interest	you,’	he	added	as	she	turned	to
leave,	‘Crump’s	no	whiskered	shrew	under	those	breeches.’
‘That’s	disgusting.’	But	she	paused	at	the	steps	leading	down	to	the	main
deck	and	glanced	back	at	the	sergeant.	‘Really?’


‘Think	I’d	lie	about	something	like	that?’
He	watched	Masan	Gilani	sashay	her	way	up	the	main	deck	to	where	Balm
and	the	rest	were	gambling,	Crump	with	all	the	winnings,	thus	far.	They’d	reel
him	in	later,	of	course.	Although	idiots	had	a	way	of	being	damnably	lucky.
In	any	case,	the	thought	of	Masan	Gilani	ending	up	with	Crump,	of	all
people,	was	simply	too	hilarious	to	let	pass.	If	she	wasn’t	interested	in	decent
men	like	Sergeant	Cord,	well,	she	could	have	the	sapper	and	so	deserve
everything	that	came	with	him.	Aye,	he’ll	worship	you	all	right.	Even	what	you
cough	up	every	morning	and	that	sweet	way	you	clear	your	nose	before	going
into	battle.	Oh,	wait	till	I	tell	Shard	about	this.	And	Ebron.	And	Limp.	We’ll	set
up	a	book,	aye.	How	long	before	she	runs	screaming.	With	Crump	loping
desperate	after	her,	knees	at	his	ears.
Ebron	climbed	onto	the	aft	deck.	‘What’s	got	you	looking	so	cheerful,
Sergeant?’
‘I’ll	tell	you	later.	Dropped	out	of	the	game?’
‘Crump’s	still	winning.’
‘Ain’t	turned	it	yet?’
‘We	tried,	half	a	bell	ago,	Sergeant.	But	the	damned	fool’s	luck’s	gone	all
uncanny.’
‘Really?	He’s	not	a	mage	or	something,	is	he?’
‘Gods	no,	the	very	opposite.	All	my	magics	go	awry	–	the	ones	I	tried	on
him	and	on	the	bones	and	skull.	Those	Mott	Irregulars,	they	were	magehunters,	you	know.	High	Marshal	this	and	High	Marshal	that	–	if	Crump	really
is	a	Bole,	one	of	the	brothers,	well,	they	were	legendary.’
‘You	saying	we’re	underestimating	the	bastard,	Ebron?’
The	squad	mage	looked	morose.	‘By	about	three	hundred	imperial	jakatas
and	counting,	Sergeant.’
Hood’s	balls,	maybe	Masan	Gilani	will	like	being	Queen	of	the	Universe.
‘What	was	that	you	were	going	to	tell	me	about,	Sergeant?’
‘Never	mind.’
	
Shurq	Elalle	stood	on	the	foredeck	of	the	Froth	Wolf	and	held	a	steady,	gauging
eye	on	the	Undying	Gratitude	five	reaches	ahead.	All	sails	out,	riding	high.
Skorgen	Kaban	was	captaining	her	ship	and	would	continue	to	do	so	until	they
reached	the	mouth	of	the	Lether	River.	Thus	far,	he’d	not	embarrassed	himself
–	or,	more	important,	her.
She	wasn’t	very	happy	about	all	of	this,	but	these	Malazans	were	paying
her	well	indeed.	Good-quality	gold,	and	a	chestful	of	that	would	come	in	handy


in	the	days,	months	and	probably	years	to	come.
Yet	another	invasion	of	the	Letherii	Empire,	and	in	its	own	way	possibly
just	as	nasty	as	the	last	one.	Were	these	omens,	then,	signalling	the	decline	of	a
once	great	civilization?	Conquered	by	barbaric	Tiste	Edur,	and	now	in	the
midst	of	a	protracted	war	that	might	well	bleed	them	out,	right	down	to	a
lifeless	corpse.
Unless,	of	course,	those	hapless	abandoned	marines	–	whatever	‘marines’
were;	soldiers,	anyway	–	were	already	jellied	and	dissolving	into	the	humus.	A
very	real	possibility,	and	Shurq	was	not	privy	to	any	details	of	the	campaign	so
she	had	no	way	of	knowing	either	way.
So,	here	she	was,	returning	at	last	to	Letheras…maybe	just	in	time	to
witness	its	conquest.	Witness	–	now	really,	darling	Shurq,	you’ve	a	bigger	role
than	that.	Like	leading	the	damned	enemy	right	up	to	the	docks.	And	how
famous	will	that	make	you	then?	How	many	more	curses	on	your	name?
‘There	is	a	ritual,’	said	a	voice	behind	her.
She	turned.	That	odd	man,	the	one	in	the	ratty	robes,	whose	face	was	so
easily	forgotten.	The	priest.	‘Banaschar,	is	it?’
He	nodded.	‘May	I	join	you,	Captain?’
‘As	you	please,	but	at	the	moment	I	am	not	a	captain.	I’m	a	passenger,	a
guest.’
‘As	am	I,’	he	replied.	‘As	I	mentioned	a	moment	ago,	there	is	a	ritual.’
‘Meaning	what?’
‘To	find	and	bind	your	soul	to	your	body	once	more	–	to	remove	your
curse	and	make	you	alive	again.’
‘A	little	late	for	that,	even	if	I	desired	such	a	thing,	Banaschar.’
His	brows	rose.	‘You	do	not	dream	of	living	again?’
‘Should	I?’
‘I	am	probably	the	last	living	High	Priest	of	D’rek,	the	Worm	of	Autumn.
The	face	of	the	aged,	the	dying	and	the	diseased.	And	of	the	all-devouring	earth
that	takes	flesh	and	bone,	and	the	fires	that	transform	into	ashes—’
‘Yes,	fine,	I	grasp	the	allusions.’
‘I,	more	perhaps	than	most,	do	understand	the	tension	between	the	living
and	the	dead,	the	bitterness	of	the	season	that	finds	each	and	every	one	of	us—’
‘Do	you	always	go	on	like	this?’
He	looked	away.	‘No.	I	am	trying	to	resurrect	my	faith—’
‘By	the	Tiles,	Banaschar,	don’t	make	me	laugh.	Please.’
‘Laugh?	Ah,	yes,	the	play	on	words.	Accidental—’
‘Rubbish.’
That	elicited	a	mocking	smile	–	which	was	better	than	the	grave	misery	that


had	been	there	a	moment	earlier.	‘Very	well,	Shurq	Elalle,	why	do	you	not	wish
to	live	once	again?’
‘I	don’t	get	old,	do	I?	I	stay	as	I	am,	suitably	attractive—’
‘Outwardly,	yes.’
‘And	have	you	taken	the	time	to	look	inward,	Banaschar?’
‘I	would	not	do	such	a	thing	without	your	permission.’
‘I	give	it.	Delve	deep,	High	Priest.’
His	gaze	fixed	on	her,	but	slowly	surrendered	its	focus.	A	moment	passed,
then	he	paled,	blinked	and	stepped	back.	‘Gods	below,	what	is	that?’
‘I	don’t	know	what	you	mean,	good	sir.’
‘There	are…roots…filling	your	entire	being.	Every	vein	and	artery,	the
thinnest	capillaries…alive…’
‘My	ootooloo	–	they	said	it	would	take	over,	eventually.	Its	appetites	are’	–
she	smiled	–	‘boundless.	But	I	have	learned	to	control	them,	more	or	less.	It
possesses	its	own	rigour,	yes?’
‘You	are	dead	and	yet	not	dead,	not	any	more	–	but	what	lives	within	you,
what	has	claimed	your	entire	body,	Shurq	Elalle,	it	is	alien.	A	parasite!’
‘Beats	fleas.’
He	gaped.
She	grew	impatient	with	his	burgeoning	alarm.	‘Errant	take	your	rituals.	I
am	content	enough	as	I	am,	or	will	be	once	I	get	scoured	out	and	some	new
spices	stuffed—’
‘Stop,	please.’
‘As	you	like.	Is	there	something	else	you	wanted	to	discuss?	Truth	is,	I
have	little	time	for	high	priests.	As	if	piety	comes	from	gaudy	robes	and	selfrighteous	arrogance.	Show	me	a	priest	who	knows	how	to	dance	and	I	might
bask	in	his	measure,	for	a	time.	Otherwise…’
He	bowed.	‘Forgive	me,	then.’
‘Forget	trying	to	resurrect	your	faith,	Banaschar,	and	try	finding	for
yourself	a	more	worthy	ritual	of	living.’
He	backed	away,	and	very	nearly	collided	with	the	Adjunct	and	Tavore’s
ever-present	bodyguard,	Lostara	Yil.	Another	hasty	bow,	then	flight	down	the
steps.
The	Adjunct	frowned	at	Shurq	Elalle.	‘It	seems	you	are	upsetting	my	other
passengers,	Captain.’
‘Not	my	concern,	Adjunct.	I	would	be	of	better	service	if	I	was	on	my	own
ship.’
‘You	lack	confidence	in	your	first	mate?’
‘My	incomplete	specimen	of	a	human?	Why	would	you	imagine	that?’


Lostara	Yil	snorted,	then	pointedly	ignored	the	Adjunct’s	quick	warning
glance.
‘I	will	have	many	questions	to	ask	you,	Captain,’	Tavore	said.	‘Especially
the	closer	we	get	to	Letheras.	And	I	will	of	course	value	your	answers.’
‘You	are	being	too	bold,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	‘heading	straight	for	the
capital.’
‘Answers,	not	advice.’
Shurq	Elalle	shrugged.	‘I	had	an	uncle	who	chose	to	leave	Letheras	and
live	with	the	Meckros.	He	wasn’t	much	for	listening	to	advice	either.	So	off	he
went,	and	then,	not	so	long	ago,	there	was	a	ship,	a	Meckros	ship	from	one	of
their	floating	cities	south	of	Pilott	–	and	they	told	tales	of	a	sister	city	being
destroyed	by	ice,	then	vanishing	–	almost	no	wreckage	left	behind	at	all	–	and
no	survivors.	Probably	straight	down	to	the	deep.	That	hapless	city	was	the	one
my	uncle	lived	on.’
‘Then	you	should	have	learned	a	most	wise	lesson,’	Lostara	Yil	said	in	a
rather	dry	tone	that	hinted	of	self-mockery.
‘Oh?’
‘Yes.	People	who	make	up	their	minds	about	something	never	listen	to
advice	–	especially	when	it’s	to	the	contrary.’
‘Well	said.’	Shurq	Elalle	smiled	at	the	tattooed	woman.	‘Frustrating,	isn’t
it?’
‘If	you	two	are	done	with	your	not	very	subtle	complaints,’	the	Adjunct
said,	‘I	wish	to	ask	the	captain	here	about	the	Letherii	secret	police,	the
Patriotists.’
‘Ah	well,’	Shurq	Elalle	said,	‘that	is	not	a	fun	subject.	Not	fun	at	all.’
‘I	am	not	interested	in	fun,’	Tavore	said.
And	one	look	at	her,	Shurq	Elalle	reflected,	was	proof	enough	of	that.
	
With	twelve	of	his	most	loyal	guards	from	the	Eternal	Domicile,	Sirryn
marched	up	Kravos	Hill,	the	west	wall	of	Letheras	two	thousand	paces	behind
him.	The	tents	of	the	Imperial	Brigade	dominated	in	the	midst	of	ancillary
companies	and	lesser	brigades,	although	the	Tiste	Edur	encampment,	situated
slightly	apart	from	the	rest,	to	the	north,	looked	substantial	–	at	least	two	or
three	thousand	of	the	damned	savages,	Sirryn	judged.
Atop	Kravos	Hill	stood	half	a	dozen	Letherii	officers	and	a	contingent	of
Tiste	Edur,	among	them	Hanradi	Khalag.	Sirryn	withdrew	a	scroll	and	said	to
the	once-king,	‘I	am	here	to	deliver	the	Chancellor ’s	orders.’
Expressionless,	Hanradi	reached	out	for	the	scroll,	then	passed	it	on	to	one


of	his	aides	without	looking	at	it.
Sirryn	scowled.	‘Such	orders—’
‘I	do	not	read	Letherii,’	Hanradi	said.
‘If	you’d	like,	I	can	translate—’
‘I	have	my	own	people	for	that,	Finadd.’	Hanradi	Khalag	looked	across	at
the	officers	of	the	Imperial	Brigade.	‘In	the	future,’	he	said,	‘we	Edur	will
patrol	the	boundaries	of	our	own	camp.	The	parade	of	Letherii	whores	is	now
at	an	end,	so	your	pimp	soldiers	will	have	to	make	their	extra	coin	elsewhere.’
The	Edur	commander	led	his	troop	away,	down	off	the	summit	of	the	hill.
Sirryn	stared	after	them	for	a	moment,	until	he	was	certain	they	would	not
return.	He	then	withdrew	a	second	scroll	and	approached	the	Preda	of	the
Imperial	Brigade.	‘These,	too,’	he	said,	‘are	the	Chancellor ’s	orders.’
The	Preda	was	a	veteran,	not	just	of	battle,	but	of	the	ways	of	the	palace.	He
simply	nodded	as	he	accepted	the	scroll.	‘Finadd,’	he	asked,	‘will	the
Chancellor	be	commanding	us	in	person	when	the	time	comes?’
‘I	imagine	not,	sir.’
‘That	could	make	things	awkward.’
‘In	some	matters,	I	will	speak	for	him,	sir.	As	for	the	rest,	you	will	find,
once	you	have	examined	that	scroll,	that	you	are	given	considerable	freedom
for	the	battle	itself.’
‘And	if	I	find	myself	at	odds	with	Hanradi?’
‘I	doubt	that	will	be	a	problem,’	Sirryn	said.
He	watched	the	Preda	mull	that	over,	and	thought	he	saw	a	slight	widening
of	the	man’s	eyes.
‘Finadd,’	the	Preda	said.
‘Sir?’
‘How	fares	the	Chancellor,	at	the	moment?’
‘Well	indeed,	sir.’
‘And…in	the	future?’
‘He	is	most	optimistic,	sir.’
‘Very	good.	Thank	you,	Finadd.’
Sirryn	saluted.	‘Begging	your	leave,	sir,	I	wish	to	oversee	the
establishment	of	my	camp.’
‘Make	it	close	to	this	hill,	Finadd	–	this	is	where	we	will	command	the
battle	–	and	I	will	want	you	close.’
‘Sir,	there	is	scant	room	left—’
‘You	have	my	leave	to	move	people	out	at	your	discretion,	Finadd.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.’
Oh,	he	would	enjoy	that.	Grubby	soldiers	with	dust	on	their	boots	–	they


always	imagined	themselves	superior	to	their	counterparts	in	the	palace.	Well,
a	few	cracked	skulls	would	change	that	quick	enough.	By	leave	of	their	very
own	Preda.	He	saluted	again	and	led	his	troops	back	down	the	hill.
	
The	man	looked	familiar.	Had	he	been	a	student	of	hers?	Son	of	a	neighbour,
son	of	another	scholar?	These	were	the	questions	in	Janath’s	mind	as	the	troop
dragged	them	from	Tehol’s	home.	Of	the	journey	to	the	compound	of	the
Patriotists,	she	now	recalled	very	little.	But	that	man,	with	the	familiar	face	–	a
face	that	stirred	oddly	intimate	feelings	within	her	–	would	not	leave	her.
Chained	in	her	cell,	chained	in	the	darkness	that	crawled	with	vermin,	she
had	been	left	alone	for	some	time	now.	Days,	perhaps	even	a	week.	A	single
plate	of	watery	stew	slid	through	the	trap	at	the	foot	of	the	door	at	what	seemed
irregular	intervals	–	it	would	not	be	pushed	into	her	cell	if	she	did	not	leave	the
empty	plate	from	the	last	meal	within	easy	reach	of	the	guard.	The	ritual	had
not	been	explained	to	her,	but	she	had	come	to	admire	its	precision,	its
eloquence.	Disobedience	meant	hunger;	or,	rather,	starvation	–	hunger	was
always	there,	something	that	she	had	not	experienced	in	the	household	of	Bugg
and	Tehol.	There	had	been	a	time,	back	then,	when	she	had	come	to	loathe	the
taste	of	chicken.	Now	she	dreamed	of	those	damned	hens.
The	man,	Tanal	Yathvanar,	had	visited	but	once,	apparently	to	gloat.	She’d
no	idea	she	had	been	wanted	for	sedition,	although	in	truth	that	did	not	surprise
her	much.	When	thugs	were	in	power,	educated	people	were	the	first	to	feel
their	fists.	It	was	so	pathetic,	really,	how	so	much	violence	came	from	someone
feeling	small.	Small	of	mind,	and	it	did	not	matter	how	big	the	sword	in	hand,
that	essential	smallness	remained,	gnawing	with	very	sharp	teeth.
Both	Bugg	and	Tehol	had	hinted,	occasionally,	that	things	would	not	go
well	if	the	Patriotists	found	her.	Well,	them,	as	it	turned	out.	Tehol	Beddict,	her
most	frustrating	student,	who	had	only	attended	her	lectures	out	of	adolescent
lust,	now	revealed	as	the	empire’s	greatest	traitor	–	so	Tanal	Yathvanar	had
said	to	her,	the	glee	in	his	voice	matched	by	the	lurid	reflections	in	his	eyes	as
he	stood	with	his	lantern	in	one	hand	and	the	other	touching	his	private	parts
whenever	he	thought	she	wasn’t	looking.	She	had	been	sitting	with	her	back	to
the	stone	wall,	head	tilted	down	chin	to	chest,	with	her	filthy	hair	hanging
ragged	over	her	face.
Tehol	Beddict,	masterminding	the	empire’s	economic	ruin	–	well,	that	was
still	a	little	hard	to	believe.	Oh,	he	had	the	talent,	yes.	And	maybe	even	the
inclination.	But	for	such	universal	collapse	as	was	now	occurring,	there	was	a
legion	of	co-conspirators.	Unwitting	for	the	most	part,	of	course,	barring	that


niggling	in	their	guts	that	what	they	were	doing	was,	ultimately,	destructive
beyond	measure.	But	greed	won	out,	as	it	always	did.	So,	Tehol	Beddict	had
paved	the	road,	but	hundreds	–	thousands?	–	had	freely	chosen	to	walk	it.	And
now	they	cried	out,	indignant	and	appalled,	even	as	they	scurried	for	cover	lest
blame	spread	its	crimson	pool.
As	things	stood	at	the	moment,	the	entire	crime	now	rested	at	Tehol’s	feet	–
and	Bugg’s,	the	still	elusive	manservant.
‘But	we	will	find	him,	Janath,’	Tanal	Yathvanar	had	said.	‘We	find	everyone,
eventually.’
Everyone	but	yourselves,	she	had	thought	to	reply,	for	that	search	leads	you
onto	a	far	too	frightening	path.	Instead,	she	had	said	nothing,	given	him
nothing	at	all.	And	watched	as	the	sword	got	ever	smaller	in	his	hand	–	yes,	that
sword,	too.
‘Just	as	we	found	you.	Just	as	I	found	you.	Oh,	it’s	well	known	now.	I	was
the	one	to	arrest	Tehol	Beddict	and	Scholar	Janath.	Me.	Not	Karos	Invictad,
who	sits	day	and	night	drooling	over	his	box	and	that	blessed	two-headed
insect.	It	has	driven	him	mad,	you	know.	He	does	nothing	else.’	He	then
laughed.	‘Did	you	know	he	is	now	the	richest	man	in	the	empire?	At	least,	he
thinks	he	is.	But	I	did	the	work	for	him.	I	made	the	transactions.	I	have	copies
of	everything.	But	the	real	glory	is	this	–	I	am	his	beneficiary,	and	he	doesn’t
even	know	it!’
Yes,	the	two-headed	insect.	One	drooling,	the	other	nattering.
Tanal	Yathvanar.	She	knew	him	–	that	was	now	a	certainty.	She	knew	him,
because	he	had	done	all	this	to	her	before.	There	had	been	no	dissembling
when	he	had	talked	about	that	–	it	was	the	source	for	his	gloating	over	her,
after	all,	so	it	could	not	be	a	lie.
And	now	her	memories	–	of	the	time	between	the	end	of	the	semester	at	the
academy,	and	her	awakening	in	the	care	of	Tehol	and	Bugg	–	memories	that
had	been	so	fragmented,	images	blurred	beyond	all	understanding,	began	to
coalesce,	began	to	draw	into	focus.
She	was	wanted,	because	she	had	escaped.	Which	meant	that	she	had	been
arrested	–	her	first	arrest	–	and	her	tormentor	had	been	none	other	than	Tanal
Yathvanar.
Logical.	Reasonable	intuitions	from	the	available	facts	and	her	list	of
observations.	Cogent	argument	and	standing	before	her	–	some	time	ago	now
–	the	one	man	who	offered	the	most	poignant	proof	as	he	babbled	on,	driven
by	her	lack	of	reaction.	‘Dear	Janath,	we	must	resume	where	we	left	off.	I	don’t
know	how	you	got	away.	I	don’t	even	know	how	you	ended	up	with	Tehol
Beddict.	But	once	more	you	are	mine,	to	do	with	as	I	please.	And	what	I	will	do


with	you	will	not,	alas,	please	you,	but	your	pleasure	is	not	what	interests	me.
This	time,	you	will	beg	me,	you	will	promise	anything,	you	will	come	to	worship
me.	And	that	is	what	I	will	leave	you	with,	today.	To	give	you	things	to	think
about,	until	my	return.’
Her	silence,	it	had	turned	out,	had	been	a	weak	defence.
She	was	beginning	to	remember	–	past	those	ordered	details	arranged	with
clinical	detachment	–	and	with	those	memories	there	was…pain.
Pain	beyond	comprehension.
I	was	driven	mad.	That	is	why	I	could	not	remember	anything.	Entirely	mad
–	I	don’t	know	how	Bugg	and	Tehol	healed	me,	but	they	must	have.	And	Tehol’s
consideration,	his	very	uncharacteristic	gentleness	with	me	–	not	once	did	he
seek	to	take	advantage	of	me,	although	he	must	have	known	that	he	could	have,
that	I	would	have	welcomed	it.	That	should	have	awakened	suspicion	in	me,	it
should	have,	but	I	was	too	happy,	too	strangely	content,	even	as	I	waited	and
waited	for	Tehol	to	find	himself	in	my	arms.
Ah,	now	isn’t	that	an	odd	way	of	putting	it?
She	wondered	where	he	was.	In	another	cell?	There	were	plenty	of
moaners	and	criers	for	neighbours,	most	beyond	all	hope	of	communication.
Was	one	of	them	Tehol	Beddict?	Broken	into	a	bleeding,	gibbering	thing?
She	did	not	believe	it.	Would	not.	No,	for	the	Great	Traitor	of	the	Empire,
there	would	have	to	be	spectacle.	A	Drowning	of	such	extravagance	as	to	burn
like	a	brand	into	the	collective	memory	of	the	Letherii	people.	He	would	need
to	be	broken	publicly.	Made	the	singular	focus	for	this	overwhelming	tide	of
rage	and	fear.	Karos	Invictad’s	crucial	act	to	regain	control,	to	quell	the
anarchy,	the	panic,	to	restore	order.
What	irony,	that	even	as	Emperor	Rhulad	prepared	to	slaughter	champions
–	among	them	some	reputed	to	be	the	most	dangerous	Rhulad	would	ever	face
–	Karos	Invictad	could	so	easily	usurp	the	attention	of	everyone	–	well,	among
the	Letherii,	that	is	–	with	this	one	arrest,	this	one	trial,	this	one	act	of
bloodletting.
Doesn’t	he	realize?	That	to	kill	Tehol	Beddict	this	way	will	be	to	make	of
him	a	martyr?	One	such	as	has	never	been	seen	before?	Tehol	Beddict	sought	to
destroy	the	Letherii	system	of	Indebtedness.	Sought	to	destroy	the	unholy	union
of	coin	and	power.	He	will	be	the	new	Errant,	but	a	new	kind	of	Errant.	One
bound	to	justice,	to	freedom,	to	the	commonality	of	humans.	Regardless	of
whether	he	was	right,	regardless	even	if	these	were	his	aims	–	none	of	that	will
matter.	He	will	be	written	of,	a	thousand	accounts,	and	in	time	but	a	handful
will	survive,	drawn	together	to	forge	the	heart	of	a	new	cult.
And	you,	Karos	Invictad,	oh,	how	your	name	will	ride	the	breath	of	curses,


for	ever	more.
Make	someone	a	martyr	and	surrender	all	control,	of	what	that	someone
was	in	life,	of	what	that	someone	becomes	in	death.	Do	this,	Karos	Invictad,	and
you	will	have	lost,	even	as	you	lick	the	man’s	blood	from	your	hands.
Yet,	perhaps	the	Invigilator	understood	all	of	that.	Enough	to	have	already
murdered	Tehol	Beddict,	murdered	him	and	dumped	the	body	into	the	river,
weighted	down	with	stones.	Unannounced,	all	in	the	darkness	of	night.
But	no	–	the	people	wanted,	needed,	demanded	that	public,	ritualized
execution	of	Tehol	Beddict.
And	so	she	went	round	and	round,	in	the	swirling	drain	of	her	mind,	the
bottomless	well	that	was	her	spirit’s	defensive	collapse	sucking	her	down,	ever
down.
Away	from	the	memories.
From	Tanal	Yathvanar.
And	what	he	had	done	to	her	before.
And	what	he	would	do	to	her	now.

The	proud,	boisterous	warrior	who	had	been	Gadalanak	returned	to	the
compound	barely	recognizable	as	human.	The	kind	of	failure,	Samar	Dev	was
led	to	understand,	that	infuriated	this	terrible,	terrifying	Emperor.	Accordingly,
Gadalanak	had	been	cut	to	pieces.	Long	after	he	was	dead,	Rhulad’s	dread
sword	had	swung	down,	chopping,	slashing,	stabbing	and	twisting.	Most	of	the
man’s	blood	had	probably	drained	into	the	sand	of	the	arena	floor,	since	the
corpse	carried	by	the	burial	retinue	of	Indebted	did	not	even	drip.
Puddy	and	other	warriors,	still	waiting	their	turn	–	the	masked	woman
included	–	stood	nearby,	watching	the	bearers	and	their	reed	stretcher	with	its
grisly	heap	of	raw	meat	and	jutting	bone	cross	the	compound	on	their	way	to
what	was	known	as	the	Urn	Room,	where	Gadalanak’s	remains	would	be
interred.	Another	Indebted	trailed	the	bearers,	carrying	the	warrior ’s	weapon
and	shield,	virtually	clean	of	any	blood,	spattered	or	otherwise.	Word	had
already	come	of	the	contest’s	details.	The	Emperor	had	cut	off	Gadalanak’s
weapon-arm	with	the	first	blow,	midway	between	hand	and	elbow,	sending	the
weapon	flying	off	to	one	side.	Shield-arm	followed,	severed	at	the	shoulder.	It
was	said	the	attending	Tiste	Edur	–	and	the	few	Letherii	dignitaries	whose
bloodlust	overwhelmed	panic	at	sudden	financial	straits	–	had	then	voiced	an
ecstatic	roar,	as	if	answering	Gadalanak’s	own	screams.
Silent,	sober	of	expression	and	pale	as	bleached	sand,	Puddy	and	the	others


watched	this	grim	train,	as	did	Samar	Dev	herself.	Then	she	turned	away.	Into
the	side	corridor,	down	its	dusty,	gloomy	length.
Karsa	Orlong	was	lying	on	the	oversized	cot	that	had	been	built	for	some
previous	champion	–	a	full-blood	Tarthenal,	although	still	not	as	tall	as	the
Teblor	now	sprawled	down	its	length,	bared	feet	jutting	over	the	end	with	the
toes	pressed	against	the	wall	–	a	wall	stamped	with	the	grime	of	those	toes	and
feet,	since	Karsa	Orlong	had	taken	to	doing	very	little,	ever	since	the
announcement	of	the	contests.
‘He’s	dead,’	she	said.
‘Who?’
‘Gadalanak.	Within	two	or	three	heartbeats	–	I	think	it	was	a	mistake,	all	of
you	deciding	not	to	attend	–	you	need	to	see	the	one	you	will	fight.	You	need	to
know	his	style.	There	might	be	weaknesses—’
Karsa	snorted.	‘Revealed	in	two	heartbeats?’
‘The	others,	I	suspect,	will	now	change	their	minds.	They	will	go,	see	for
themselves—’
‘Fools.’
‘Because	they	won’t	follow	your	lead	in	this?’
‘I	wasn’t	even	aware	they	had,	witch.	What	do	you	want?	Can’t	you	see	I’m
busy?’
She	stepped	into	the	room.	‘Doing	what?’
‘You	are	dragging	your	ghosts	with	you.’
‘More	like	they’re	clinging	to	my	heels,	gibbering	–	something	is	building
within	you,	Karsa	Orlong—’
‘Climb	onto	me	and	we	can	relieve	that,	Samar	Dev.’
‘Amazing,’	she	breathed.
‘Yes.’
‘No,	you	idiot.	I	was	just	commenting	on	how	you	can	still	manage	to
shock	me	on	occasion.’
‘You	only	pretend	to	innocence,	woman.	Take	your	clothes	off.’
‘If	I	did,	it	would	only	be	because	you	have	worn	me	down.	But	I	won’t,
because	I	am	tougher	than	you	think.	One	look	at	the	odious	stains	your	feet
have	left	on	that	wall	is	enough	to	quench	any	ardour	I	might	–	in	sudden
madness	–	experience.’
‘I	did	not	ask	you	to	make	love	to	my	feet.’
‘Shouldn’t	you	be	exercising	–	no,	not	that	kind.	I	mean,	staying	limber,
stretching	and	the	like.’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘Reassurance,	I	think.’


He	turned	to	look	at	her,	then	slowly	sat	up,	the	cot	groaning	beneath	him.
‘Samar	Dev,	what	is	it	you	fear	the	most?’
‘Well,	you	dying,	I	think.	Infuriating	as	you	are,	you	are	a	friend.	To	me,	at
least.	That,	and	the	fact	that,	uh,	after	you,	they	will	call	upon	Icarium.	As	you
can	see,	the	two	fears	are	closely	bound	together.’
‘Is	this	what	the	spirits	crowding	you	fear	as	well?’
‘An	interesting	question.	I’m	not	sure,	Karsa.’	And,	a	moment	later,	she
added,	‘Yes,	I	see	now	how	that	might	be	important	–	worth	knowing,	I	mean.’
‘I	have	my	own	ghosts,’	he	said.
‘I	know.	And	what	are	they	feeling?	Can	you	tell?’
‘Eager.’
She	frowned.	‘Truly,	Karsa	Orlong?	Truly?’
He	laughed.	‘Not	for	what	you	think.	No,	they	delight	in	the	end	that	is
coming	to	them,	to	the	sacrifice	they	will	make.’
‘What	kind	of	sacrifice?’
‘When	the	time	comes,	witch,	you	must	draw	your	iron	knife.	Give	it	your
blood.	Free	the	spirits	you	have	bound.’
‘What	time,	damn	you?’
‘You	will	know.	Now,	take	off	your	clothes.	I	will	see	you	naked.’
‘No.	Gadalanak	is	dead.	Never	again	will	we	hear	his	laughter—’
‘Yes,	so	it	is	for	us	to	laugh,	now,	Samar	Dev.	We	must	remind	ourselves
what	it	is	to	live.	For	him.	For	Gadalanak.’
She	stared	at	him,	then	hissed	in	anger.	‘You	almost	had	me,	Karsa	Orlong.
It’s	when	you	get	too	convincing,	you	know,	that	you	become	the	most
dangerous.’
‘Perhaps	you’d	rather	I	just	took	you,	then.	Tore	your	clothes	away	with
my	own	hands.	Flung	you	down	on	the	bed.’
‘I’m	leaving	now.’

Taralack	Veed	had	once	dreamt	of	the	time	now	imminent,	when	Icarium
Lifestealer	would	step	onto	the	sand	of	the	arena,	amidst	the	eager	roar	of
unwitting	onlookers	–	and	those	derisive	cries	would	change	very	quickly,	oh
yes,	to	ones	of	astonishment,	then	terror.	As	the	rage	was	awakened,	unleashed.
As	the	world	began	its	gory	end.	An	emperor,	a	palace,	a	city,	the	heart	of
an	empire.
But	this	Rhulad	would	not	die.	Not	with	finality.	No,	each	time	he	would
rise	again,	and	two	forces	would	lock	together	in	battle	that	might	never	end.


Unless…could	Icarium	be	killed?	Could	he	die?	He	was	not	immortal,	after	all
–	although	it	could	be	argued	that	his	rage	was,	the	rage	of	the	victim,
generation	after	generation,	a	rage	against	injustice	and	inequity,	and	such	a
thing	was	without	end.
No,	if	Taralack	Veed	pushed	his	thoughts	far	enough,	he	ever	came	to	the
same	place.	Rhulad	would	kill	Icarium.	A	hundred	clashes,	a	thousand	–	at
some	point,	on	a	continent	of	ashes,	the	burgeoning	chaos	would	strike
through,	into	the	heart	of	Icarium’s	rage.	And	Lifestealer	would	fall.
There	was	logic	to	this.	The	victim	might	awaken	to	fury,	but	the	victim
was	doomed	to	be	just	that:	a	victim.	This	was	the	true	cycle,	the	one	to	which
every	culture,	every	civilization,	was	witness,	century	upon	century.	A	natural
force,	the	core	of	the	struggle	to	exist	is	the	desire	to	not	just	survive,	but
thrive.	And	to	thrive	is	to	feed	on	victims,	ever	more	victims.
‘It	is	the	language	itself,’	Senior	Assessor	said,	kneeling	over	a	basin	of
still	water	to	study	his	reflection	as	he	applied	gaudy	paint.	‘Life	pushes
forward,	when	it	succeeds.	Life	halts	or	falls	to	the	wayside,	when	it	fails.
Progression,	Taralack	Veed,	implies	a	journey,	but	not	necessarily	one	through
a	fixed	interval	of	time.	That	is,	the	growth	and	ageing	of	an	individual	person,
although	that	too	is	quickly	sewn	into	the	cloth.	No,	the	true	journey	is	one	of
procreation,	one’s	seed	moving	from	host	to	host	in	a	succession	of
generations,	each	of	which	must	be	successful	to	some	degree,	lest	the	seed…
halt,	fall	to	the	wayside.	Of	course,	it	is	not	in	a	single	man’s	mind	to	think	in
terms	of	generation	upon	generation,	although	the	need	to	sow	his	seed	is	ever
paramount.	Other	concerns,	all	of	which	support	that	which	is	paramount,
generally	occupy	the	mind	on	a	moment	to	moment	basis.	The	acquisition	of
food,	the	security	of	one’s	shelter,	the	support	of	one’s	family,	relatives	and
allies,	the	striving	to	fashion	a	predictable	world,	peopled	with	predictable
people	–	the	quest,	if	you	will,	for	comfort.’
Taralack	Veed	looked	away,	back	to	the	window,	where	stood	Finadd	Varat
Taun,	watching	something	in	the	compound	below.	‘Monk,’	Taralack	said	in	a
growl,	‘among	my	tribe,	each	of	the	things	you	describe	was	but	part	of	a	war,
a	feud	that	could	never	end.	Each	was	desperate	and	vicious.	No	love,	no
loyalty	could	be	wholly	trusted,	because	the	ground	churned	beneath	our	feet.
Nothing	is	certain.	Nothing.’
‘One	thing	is,’	Varat	Taun	said,	facing	them.	‘The	warrior	named
Gadalanak	is	dead.	And	now	so	too	is	the	one	named	Puddy,	the	quick	one	who
loved	to	boast.’
Taralack	Veed	nodded.	‘You	come	to	believe	as	I	now	do,	Finadd.	Yes,	you
and	I,	we	have	seen	Icarium	in	his	anger.	But	this	Emperor,	this	Rhulad…’


The	monk	made	a	strange	grunting	noise,	then	pivoted	on	the	stool	–	away
from	them	both	–	and	hugged	himself.
Varat	Taun	frowned	and	took	a	step	forward.	‘Senior	Assessor?	Priest?	Is
something	wrong?’
A	vigorous	shake	of	the	head,	then:	‘No,	please.	Let	us	change	the	subject.
Blessed	God,	I	almost	failed	–	the	mirth,	you	see,	it	very	nearly	burst	from	me.
Ah,	it	is	all	I	can	do	to	restrain	myself.’
‘Your	faith	in	your	god	is	unshaken.’
‘Yes,	Taralack	Veed.	Oh	yes.	Is	it	not	said	Rhulad	is	mad?	Driven	insane	by
countless	deaths	and	rebirths?	Well,	my	friends,	I	tell	you,	Lifestealer,	my	most
beloved	god	–	the	one	god	–	well,	he	too	is	mad.	And	remember	this,	please,	it
is	Icarium	who	has	come	here.	Not	Rhulad	–	my	god	has	made	this	journey.	To
delight	in	his	own	madness.’
‘Rhulad	is—’
‘No,	Varat	Taun,	Rhulad	is	not.	A	god.	The	god.	He	is	a	cursed	creature,	as
mortal	as	you	or	me.	The	power	lies	in	the	sword	he	wields.	The	distinction,
my	friends,	is	essential.	Now,	enough,	lest	my	vow	is	sundered.	You	are	both
too	grave,	too	poisoned	by	fear	and	dread.	My	heart	is	near	to	bursting.’
Taralack	Veed	stared	at	the	monk’s	back,	saw	the	trembling	that	would	not
still.	No,	Senior	Assessor,	it	is	you	who	is	mad.	To	worship	Icarium?	Does	a
Gral	worship	the	viper?	The	scorpion?
Spirits	of	the	rock	and	sand,	I	cannot	wait	much	longer.	Let	us	be	done	with
this.
‘The	end,’	Senior	Assessor	said,	‘is	never	what	you	imagine.	Be	comforted
by	that,	my	friends.’
Varat	Taun	asked	the	monk,	‘When	do	you	intend	to	witness	your	first
contest?’
‘If	any	–	and	I	am	not	yet	decided	–	if	any,	then	the	Toblakai,	of	course,’
Senior	Assessor	murmured,	finally	in	control	of	his	amusement	–	so	much	so
that	he	twisted	round	to	look	up	at	the	Finadd	with	calm,	knowing	eyes.	‘The
Toblakai.’
	
Rhulad	Sengar,	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths,	stood	above	the	corpse	of	his
third	victim.	Splashed	in	blood	not	his	own,	sword	trembling	in	his	hand,	he
stared	down	at	the	still	face	with	its	lifeless	eyes	as	the	crowd	dutifully	roared
its	pleasure,	gave	voice	to	his	bitter	triumph.
That	onrushing	wall	of	noise	parted	around	him,	left	him	untouched.	It
was,	he	well	knew,	a	lie.	Everything	was	a	lie.	The	challenge,	which	had	proved


anything	but.	The	triumph,	which	was	in	truth	a	failure.	The	words	uttered	by
his	Chancellor,	by	his	bent	and	twisted	Ceda	–	and	every	face	turned	his	way
was	as	this	one	below.	A	mask,	a	thing	of	death,	an	expression	of	hidden
laughter,	hidden	mockery.	For	if	it	was	not	death	that	mocked	him,	then	what?
When	last	did	he	see	something	genuine	in	a	subject’s	face?	When	you	did
not	think	of	them	as	subjects.	When	they	were	not.	When	they	were	friends,
brothers,	fathers	and	mothers.	I	have	my	throne,	I	have	my	sword,	I	have	an
empire.	But	I	have…no-one.
He	so	wanted	to	die.	A	true	death.	To	fall	and	not	find	his	spirit	flesh	cast
up	on	the	strand	of	that	dread	god’s	island.
But	it	will	be	different	this	time.	I	can	feel	it.	Something…will	be	different.
Ignoring	the	crowd	and	its	roar	now	creeping	towards	hysteria,	Rhulad
walked	from	the	arena,	through	the	shimmering	ripples	rising	from	the	sunbaked	sand.	His	own	sweat	had	thinned	the	blood	splashed	upon	him,	sweat
seeping	out	from	between	tarnished	coins,	glistening	from	the	ringed	ridges	of
pocked	scars.	Sweat	and	blood	merged	into	these	streams	of	sour	victory	that
could	but	temporarily	stain	the	surfaces	of	the	coins.
Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	could	not	understand	that,	Rhulad	knew.	How	gold
and	silver	outlived	the	conceits	of	mortal	lives.	Nor	could	Invigilator	Karos
Invictad.
In	many	ways	Rhulad	found	himself	admiring	this	Great	Traitor,	Tehol
Beddict.	Beddict,	yes,	the	brother	of	the	one	honourable	Letherii	warrior	I	was
privileged	to	meet.	One,	only	one.	Brys	Beddict,	who	defeated	me	truly	–	and	in
that	too	he	was	like	no	other.	Karos	Invictad	had	wanted	to	drag	Tehol	Beddict
out	here	into	the	arena,	to	stand	before	the	Emperor,	to	be	shamed	and	made	to
hear	the	frenzied	hunger	of	the	crowd.	Karos	Invictad	had	thought	that	such	a
thing	would	humiliate	Tehol	Beddict.	But	if	Tehol	is	like	Brys,	he	would	but
stand,	he	would	but	smile,	and	that	smile	would	be	his	challenge.	To	me.	His
invitation	to	execute	him,	cut	him	down	as	I	never	did	to	Brys.	And	yes,	I	would
see	that	knowing,	there	in	his	eyes.	Rhulad	had	forbidden	that.	Leave	Tehol	to
the	Drownings.	To	that	circus	of	savagery	transformed	into	a	game	of	wagers.
In	the	meantime,	the	empire’s	foundations	wobbled,	spat	dust	in	grinding
protest;	the	once-firm	cornerstones	shook	as	if	revealed	to	be	nothing	more
than	clay,	still	wet	from	the	river.	Men	who	had	been	wealthy	had	taken	their
own	lives.	Warehouses	had	been	besieged	by	an	ever-growing	mob	–	this
thousand-headed	beast	of	need	rising	in	every	city	and	town	of	the	empire.
Blood	had	spilled	over	a	handful	of	docks,	a	crust	of	stale	bread,	and	in	the
poorest	slums	mothers	smothered	their	babies	rather	than	see	them	bloat	then
wither	with	starvation.


Rhulad	left	the	harsh	sunlight	and	stood	in	the	tunnel	entrance,	swallowed
by	shadows.
My	grand	empire.
The	Chancellor	stood	before	him	each	day,	and	lied.	All	was	well,	all
would	be	well	with	the	execution	of	Tehol	Beddict.	The	mines	were	working
overtime,	forging	more	currency,	but	this	needed	careful	control,	because
Karos	Invictad	believed	that	all	that	Tehol	had	stolen	would	be	retrieved.	Even
so,	better	a	period	of	inflation	than	the	chaos	now	plaguing	Lether.
But	Hannan	Mosag	told	him	otherwise,	had	indeed	fashioned	rituals
permitting	Rhulad	to	see	for	himself	–	the	riots,	the	madness,	scenes	blurred,	at
times	maddeningly	faded,	yet	still	they	stank	of	the	truth.	Where	the	Ceda	lied
was	in	what	he	would	not	reveal.
‘What	of	the	invasion,	Ceda?	Show	me	these	Malazans.’
‘I	cannot,	alas,	Emperor.	They	protect	themselves	with	strange	magics.	See,
the	water	in	the	bowl	grows	cloudy	when	I	quest	their	way.	As	if	they	could	cast
in	handfuls	of	flour.	Blinding	all	the	water	might	reveal.’
Lies.	Triban	Gnol	had	been	more	blunt	in	his	assessment	–	a	directness	that
unveiled	the	Chancellor ’s	growing	concern,	perhaps	even	his	fear.	The
Malazans	who	had	landed	on	the	west	coast,	who	had	begun	their	march	inland
–	towards	Letheras	itself	–	were	proving	themselves	both	cunning	and	deadly.
To	clash	with	them	was	to	reel	back	bloodied	and	battered,	a	retreat	strewn	with
dead	soldiers	and	dead	Tiste	Edur.	Yes,	they	were	coming	for	Rhulad.	Could
the	Chancellor	stop	them?
‘Yes,	Emperor.	We	can.	We	shall.	Hanradi	has	divided	his	Edur	forces.	One
waits	with	our	main	army	just	west	of	the	city.	The	other	has	travelled	fast	and
light	northward	and	is	even	now	swinging	westward,	like	a	sweeping	arm,	to
appear	behind	these	Malazans	–	but	not	as	has	been	attempted	before.	No,	your
Edur	do	not	ride	in	column,	do	not	travel	the	roads	now.	They	fight	as	they	once
did,	during	the	unification	wars.	War-parties,	moving	silent	in	the	shadows,
matching	the	Malazans	and	perhaps	going	one	better	in	their	stealth—’
‘Yes!	We	adapt,	not	into	something	new,	but	into	something	old	–	the	very
heart	of	our	prowess.	Whose	idea	was	this?	Tell	me!’
A	bow	from	Triban	Gnol.	‘Sire,	did	you	not	place	me	in	charge	of	this
defence?’
‘Then,	you.’
Another	bow.	‘As	I	said,	Emperor,	the	guiding	hand	was	yours.’
To	be	so	unctuous	was	to	reveal	contempt.	Rhulad	understood	that	much.
The	Ceda	lacked	such	civilized	nuances	in	his	reply:	‘The	idea	was	mine	and
Hanradi’s,	Emperor.	After	all,	I	was	the	Warlock	King	and	he	was	my	deadliest


rival.	This	can	be	remade	into	a	war	we	Edur	understand	and	know	well.	It	is
clear	enough	that	attempting	to	fight	these	Malazans	in	the	manner	of	the
Letherii	has	failed—’
‘But	there	will	be	a	clash,	a	great	battle.’
‘It	seems	so.’
‘Good.’
‘Perhaps	not.	Hanradi	believes…’
And	there	the	dissembling	had	begun,	the	half-truths,	the	poorly	veiled
attacks	upon	the	Chancellor	and	his	new	role	as	military	commander.
To	fashion	knowledge	to	match	the	reality	was	difficult,	to	sift	through	the
lies,	to	shake	free	the	truths	–	Rhulad	was	exhausted	by	it,	yet	what	else	could
he	do?	He	was	learning,	damn	them	all.	He	was	learning.
‘Tell	me,	Ceda,	of	the	Bolkando	invasion.’
‘Our	border	forts	have	been	overrun.	There	have	been	two	battles	and	in
both	the	Letherii	divisions	were	forced	to	withdraw,	badly	wounded.	That
alliance	among	the	eastern	kingdoms	is	now	real,	and	it	appears	that	they	have
hired	mercenary	armies…’
The	Bolkando	Conspiracy…now	real.	Meaning	it	had	begun	as	a	lie.	He
recalled	Triban	Gnol’s	shocked	expression	when	Rhulad	had	repeated	Hannan
Mosag’s	words	–	as	if	they	were	his	own.	‘That	alliance	among	the	eastern
kingdoms	is	now	real,	Chancellor…’
Triban	Gnol’s	mask	had	cracked	then	–	no	illusion	there,	no	game	brought
to	a	yet	deeper	level.	The	man	had	looked…guilty.
We	must	win	these	wars.	To	the	west	and	to	the	east.	We	must,	as	well,
refashion	this	empire.	The	days	of	the	Indebted	will	be	gone.	The	days	of	the
coins	ruling	this	body	are	over.	I,	Rhulad,	Emperor,	shall	set	my	hands	upon	this
clay,	and	make	of	it	something	new.
So,	let	the	plague	of	suicides	among	the	once-rich	continue.	Let	the	great
merchant	houses	crash	down	into	ruin.	Let	the	poor	rend	the	nobles	limb	from
limb.	Let	estates	burn.	When	the	ashes	have	settled,	have	cooled,	then	shall
Rhulad	find	fertile	ground	for	his	new	empire.
Yes,	that	is	what	is	different,	this	time.	I	sense	a	rebirth.	Close.	Imminent.	I
sense	it,	and	maybe	it	will	be	enough,	maybe	it	will	give	me	reason	again	to
cherish	this	life.	My	life.
Oh,	Father	Shadow,	guide	me	now.
	
Mael	had	been	careless.	It	had	been	that	carelessness	that	the	Errant	had	relied
upon.	The	Elder	God	so	fixed	on	saving	his	foolish	mortal	companion,


blundering	forward	into	such	a	simple	trap.	A	relief	to	have	the	meddling
bastard	out	of	the	way,	serving	as	a	kind	of	counter-balance	to	the	lurid
acquisitiveness	of	Feather	Witch,	whose	disgusting	company	the	Errant	had
just	left.
And	now	he	stood	in	the	dark	corridor.	Alone.
‘We	will	have	our	Mortal	Sword,’	she	had	announced	from	her	perch	on	the
altar	that	squatted	like	an	island	amidst	black	floodwater.	‘The	idiot	remains
blind	and	stupid.’
Which	idiot	would	that	be,	Feather	Witch?	Our	imminent	Mortal	Sword?
‘I	do	not	understand	your	sarcasm,	Errant.	Nothing	has	gone	astray.	Our
cult	grows	day	by	day,	among	the	Letherii	slaves,	and	now	the	Indebted—’
The	disaffected,	you	mean.	And	what	is	it	you	are	promising	them,	Feather
Witch?	In	my	name?
‘The	golden	age	of	the	past.	When	you	stood	ascendant	among	all	other
gods.	When	yours	was	the	worship	of	all	the	Letherii.	Our	glory	was	long	ago,
and	to	that	we	must	return.’
There	was	never	a	golden	age.	Worship	of	me	to	the	exclusion	of	all	other
gods	has	never	existed	among	the	Letherii.	The	time	you	speak	of	was	an	age	of
plurality,	of	tolerance,	a	culture	flowering—
‘Never	mind	the	truth.	The	past	is	what	I	say	it	is.	That	is	the	freedom	of
teaching	the	ignorant.’
He	had	laughed	then.	The	High	Priestess	stumbles	upon	a	vast	wisdom.	Yes,
gather	your	disaffected,	ignorant	fools,	then.	Fill	their	heads	with	the	noble
glory	of	a	non-existent	past,	then	send	them	out	with	their	eyes	blazing	in	stupid
–	but	comforting	–	fervour.	And	this	will	begin	our	new	golden	age,	an
exultation	in	the	pleasures	of	repression	and	tyrannical	control	over	the	lives	of
everyone.	Hail	the	mighty	Errant,	the	god	who	brooks	no	dissent.
‘What	you	do	with	your	power	is	up	to	you.	I	know	what	I	plan	to	do	with
mine.’
Udinaas	has	rejected	you,	Feather	Witch.	You	have	lost	the	one	you	wanted
the	most.
She	had	smiled.	‘He	will	change	his	mind.	You	will	see.	Together,	we	shall
forge	a	dynasty.	He	was	an	Indebted.	I	need	only	awaken	the	greed	within	him.’
Feather	Witch,	listen	well	to	your	god.	To	this	modest	sliver	of	wisdom.	The
lives	of	others	are	not	yours	to	use.	Offer	them	bliss,	yes,	but	do	not	be
disappointed	when	they	choose	misery	–	because	the	misery	is	theirs,	and	in
deciding	to	choose	someone	else’s	path	or	their	own,	they	will	choose	their	own.
The	Shake	have	a	saying:	‘Open	to	them	your	hand	to	the	shore,	watch	them
walk	into	the	sea.’


‘No	wonder	they	were	wiped	out.’
Feather	Witch—
‘Listen	to	my	wisdom	now,	Errant.	Wisdom	the	Shake	should	have	heeded.
When	it	comes	to	using	the	lives	of	others,	the	first	thing	to	take	from	them	is
the	privilege	of	choice.	Once	you	have	done	that,	the	rest	is	easy.’
He	had	found	his	High	Priestess.	Indeed.	Bless	us	all.


Chapter	Twenty-One

Open	to	them	your	hand	to	the	shore,	watch	them	walk	into	the	sea.
Press	upon	them	all	they	need,	see	them	yearn	for	all	they	want.
Gift	to	them	the	calm	pool	of	words,	watch	them	draw	the	sword.
Bless	upon	them	the	satiation	of	peace,	see	them	starve	for	war.
Grant	them	darkness	and	they	will	lust	for	light.
Deliver	to	them	death	and	hear	them	beg	for	life.
Beget	life	and	they	will	murder	your	kin.
Be	as	they	are	and	they	see	you	different.
Show	wisdom	and	you	are	a	fool.
The	shore	gives	way	to	the	sea.
And	the	sea,	my	friends,
Does	not	dream	of	you.
Shake	Prayer
Another	Hood-damned	village,	worse	than	mushrooms	after	a	rain.	Proof,	if
they’d	needed	it	–	and	they	didn’t	–	that	they	were	drawing	ever	closer	to	the
capital.	Hamlets,	villages,	towns,	traffic	on	the	roads	and	cart	trails,	the
thundering	passage	of	horses,	horns	sounding	in	the	distance	like	the	howl	of
wolves	closing	in	for	the	kill.
‘Best	life	there	is,’	Fiddler	muttered.
‘Sergeant?’
He	rolled	onto	his	back	and	studied	his	exhausted,	cutup,	blood-stained,
wild-eyed	excuses	for	soldiers.	What	were	they	now?	And	what,	as	they	stared
back	at	him,	were	they	seeing?	Their	last	hope,	and	if	that	isn’t	bad	news…
He	wondered	if	Gesler	and	his	squad	were	still	alive.	They’d	been	neatly
divided	the	night	before	by	a	clever	thrust	in	strength	of	Edur,	bristling	with
weapons	and	sniffing	the	air	like	the	hounds	they	had	become.	Edur	on	their
trail,	delivering	constant	pressure,	pushing	them	ever	forward,	into	what
Fiddler	damn	well	knew	was	a	wall	of	soldiers	somewhere	ahead	–	no	slipping
past	when	that	time	came.	No	squeezing	north	or	south	either	–	the	Edur	bands


filled	the	north	a	dozen	to	a	copse	and	not	too	far	away	on	the	south	was	the
wide	Lether	River	grinning	like	the	sun’s	own	smile.	Finally,	aye,	someone	on
the	other	side	had	got	clever,	had	made	the	necessary	adjustments,	had	turned
this	entire	invasion	into	a	vast	funnel	about	to	drive	the	Malazans	into	a	meatgrinder.
Well,	no	fun	lasts	for	ever.	After	Gesler	and	his	Fifth	had	been	pushed
away,	there	had	been	sounds	of	fighting	somewhere	in	that	direction.	And
Fiddler	had	faced	the	hard	choice	between	leading	his	handful	of	soldiers	into
a	flanking	charge	to	break	through	and	relieve	the	poor	bastards,	or	staying
quiet	and	hurrying	on,	east	on	a	southerly	tack,	right	into	that	waiting	maw.
The	splitting	cracks	of	sharpers	had	decided	him	–	suicide	running	into
that,	since	those	sharpers	tended	to	fly	every	which	way,	and	they	meant	that
Gesler	and	his	squad	were	running,	carving	a	path	through	the	enemy,	and
Fiddler	and	his	squad	might	simply	end	up	stumbling	into	their	wake,	in	the
sudden	midst	of	scores	of	enraged	Edur.
So	I	left	’em	to	it.	And	the	detonations	died	away,	but	the	screams
continued,	Hood	take	me.
Sprawled	in	the	high	grasses	at	the	edge	of	the	treeline,	his	squad.	They
stank.	The	glory	of	the	Bonehunters,	this	taking	to	the	grisliest	meaning	of	that
name.	Koryk’s	curse,	aye.	Who	else?	Severed	fingers,	ears,	pierced	through	and
dangling	from	belts,	harness	clasps,	rawhide	ties.	His	soldiers:	one	and	all
degraded	into	some	ghastly	blood-licking	barely	human	savages.	No	real
surprise	there.	It	was	one	thing	to	go	covert	–	as	marines	this	was,	after	all,
precisely	what	they	had	been	trained	to	do.	But	it	had	gone	on	too	long,	without
relief,	with	the	only	end	in	sight	nothing	other	than	Hood’s	own	gate.	Fingers
and	ears,	except	for	Smiles,	who’d	added	to	the	mix	with	that	which	only	males
could	provide.	‘My	blecker	worms,’	she’d	said,	referring	to	some	offshore
mud-dwelling	worm	native	to	the	Kanese	coast.	‘And	just	like	the	worms,	they
start	out	purple	and	blue	and	then	after	a	day	or	two	in	the	sun	they	turn	grey.
Bleckers,	Sergeant.’
Didn’t	need	to	lose	the	path	to	lose	their	minds,	that	much	was	obvious.
Gods	below,	look	at	these	fools	–	how	in	Hood’s	name	have	we	lasted	this	long?
They’d	not	seen	the	captain	and	her	runt	of	a	mage	in	some	time,	which
didn’t	bode	well.	Still,	threads	of	brown	telltale	smoke	drifting	around	here
and	there	in	the	mornings,	and	the	faint	sounds	of	munitions	at	night.	So,	at
least	some	of	them	were	still	alive.	But	even	those	signs	were	growing	scarce,
when	they	should	have	been,	if	anything,	increasing	as	things	got	nastier.
We’ve	run	out.	We’re	used	up.	Bah,	listen	to	me!	Starting	to	sound	like
Cuttle	there.	‘I’m	ready	to	die	now,	Fid.	Happy	to,	aye.	Now	that	I	seen—’


‘Enough	of	that,’	he	snapped.
‘Sergeant?’
‘Stop	asking	me	anything,	Bottle.	And	stop	looking	at	me	like	I’ve	gone
mad	or	something.’
‘You’d	better	not,	Sergeant.	Go	mad,	that	is.	You’re	the	only	sane	one	left.’
‘Does	that	assessment	include	you?’
Bottle	grimaced,	then	spat	out	another	wad	of	the	grass	he’d	taken	to
chewing.	Reached	for	a	fresh	handful.
Aye,	answer	enough.
‘Almost	dark,’	Fiddler	said,	eyeing	once	more	the	quaint	village	ahead.
Crossroads,	tavern	and	stable,	a	smithy	down	the	main	street,	in	front	of	a	huge
pile	of	tailings,	and	what	seemed	too	many	residences,	rows	of	narrow-laned
mews,	each	abode	looking	barely	enough	for	a	small	family.	Could	be	there
was	some	other	industry,	a	quarry	or	potter ’s	manufactury,	somewhere	on	the
other	side	of	the	village	–	he	thought	he	could	see	a	gravel	road	wending	up	a
hill	past	the	eastern	edge.
Strangely	quiet	for	dusk.	Workers	still	chained	to	their	workbenches?
Maybe.	But	still,	not	even	a	damned	dog	in	that	street.	‘I	don’t	like	the	looks	of
this,’	he	said.	‘You	sure	you	smell	nothing	awry,	Bottle?’
‘Nothing	magical.	Doesn’t	mean	there	isn’t	a	hundred	Edur	crouched
inside	those	houses,	just	waiting	for	us.’
‘So	send	in	a	squirrel	or	something,	damn	you.’
‘I’m	looking,	Sergeant,	but	if	you	keep	interrupting	me…’
‘Lord	Hood,	please	sew	up	the	mouths	of	mages,	I	implore	you.’
‘Sergeant,	I’m	begging	you.	We’ve	got	six	squads	of	Edur	less	than	a
league	behind	us,	and	I’m	damned	tired	of	dodging	javelins.	Let	me
concentrate.’
Aye,	concentrate	on	this	fist	down	your	throat,	y’damned	rat-kisser.	Oh,	I’m
way	too	tired,	way	too	old.	Maybe,	if	we	get	through	this	–	hah!	–	I’ll	just	creep
away,	vanish	into	the	streets	of	this	Letheras.	Retire.	Take	up	fishing.	Or	maybe
knitting.	Funeral	shawls.	Bound	to	be	a	thriving	enterprise	for	a	while,	I’d
wager.	Once	the	Adjunct	arrives	with	the	rest	of	us	snarly	losers	and	exacts	a
pleasant	revenge	for	all	us	dead	marines.	No,	stop	thinking	that	way.	We’re	still
alive.
‘Found	a	cat,	Sergeant.	Sleeping	in	the	kitchen	of	that	tavern.	It’s	having
bad	dreams.’
‘So	become	its	worse	nightmare,	Bottle,	and	quick.’
Birds	chirping	in	the	trees	behind	them.	Insects	busy	living	and	dying	in	the
grasses	around	them.	The	extent	of	his	world	now,	a	tiresome	travail


punctuated	by	moments	of	profound	terror.	He	itched	with	filth	and	could	smell
the	stale	stench	of	old	fear,	like	redolent	stains	in	the	skin.
Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	these	damned	Letherii	anyway?	So	this	damned
empire	with	its	Edur	overlords	scrapped	with	the	Malazan	Empire.	Laseen’s
problem,	not	ours.	Damn	you,	Tavore,	we	get	to	this	point	and	vengeance	ain’t
enough—
‘Got	her,’	Bottle	said.	‘Awake…stretching	–	yes,	got	to	stretch,	Sergeant,
don’t	ask	me	why.	All	right,	three	people	in	the	kitchen,	all	sweating,	all	rolling
their	eyes	–	they	look	terrified,	huddling	that	way.	I	hear	sounds	in	the	tavern.
Someone’s	singing…’
Fiddler	waited	for	more.
And	waited.
‘Bottle—’
‘Slipping	into	the	tavern	–	ooh,	a	cockroach!	Wait,	no,	stop	playing	with	it
–	just	eat	the	damned	thing!’
‘Keep	your	voice	down,	Bottle!’
‘Done.	Woah,	crowded	in	here.	That	song…up	onto	the	rail,	and	there—’
Bottle	halted	abruptly,	then,	swearing	under	his	breath,	he	rose.	Stood	for	a
moment,	then	snorted	and	said,	‘Come	on,	Sergeant.	We	can	just	walk	right	on
in.’
‘Marines	holding	the	village?	Spit	Hood	on	a	stake,	yes!’
The	others	heard	that	and	as	one	they	were	on	their	feet,	crowding	round	in
relief.
Fiddler	stared	at	all	the	stupid	grins	and	was	suddenly	sober	again.	‘Look
at	you!	A	damned	embarrassment!’
‘Sergeant.’	Bottle	plucked	at	his	arm.	‘Fid,	trust	me,	no	worries	on	that
front.’
	
Hellian	had	forgotten	which	song	she	was	singing.	Whatever	it	was,	it	wasn’t
what	everyone	else	was	singing,	not	that	they	were	still	singing,	much.	Though
her	corporal	was	somehow	managing	a	double	warble,	stretching	out	some
bizarre	word	in	Old	Cawn	–	foreigners	shouldn’t	sing,	since	how	could	people
understand	them	so	it	could	be	a	mean	song,	a	nasty,	insulting	song	about
sergeants,	all	of	which	meant	her	corporal	earned	that	punch	in	the	head	and	at
least	the	warbling	half	stopped.
A	moment	later	she	realized	that	the	other	half	had	died	away,	too.	And	that
she	herself	was	the	only	one	still	singing,	although	even	to	her	it	sounded	like
some	foreign	language	was	blubbering	from	her	numbed	lips	–	something


about	sergeants,	maybe	–	well,	she	could	just	take	out	this	knife	and—
More	soldiers	suddenly,	the	tavern	even	more	crowded.	Unfamiliar	faces
that	looked	familiar	and	how	could	that	be	well	it	was	it	just	was,	so	there.
Damn,	another	sergeant	–	how	many	sergeants	did	she	have	to	deal	with	here	in
this	tavern?	First	there	was	Urb,	who	seemed	to	have	been	following	her
around	for	weeks	now,	and	then	Gesler,	staggering	in	at	noon	with	more
wounded	than	walking.	And	now	here	was	another	one,	with	the	reddish	beard
and	that	battered	fiddle	on	his	back	and	there	he	was,	laughing	and	hugging
Gesler	like	they	was	long	lost	brothers	or	lovers	or	something	–	everyone	was
too	damned	happy	as	far	as	she	was	concerned.	Happier	than	her,	which	was	of
course	the	same	thing.
Things	had	been	better	in	the	morning.	Was	it	this	day?	Yesterday?	No
matter.	They’d	been	magicked	hard	to	find	–	was	that	Balgrid’s	doing?	Tavos
Pond’s?	And	so	the	three	squads	of	Edur	had	pretty	much	walked	right	on	top
of	them.	Which	made	the	killing	easier.	That	wonderful	sound	of	crossbows
letting	loose.	Thwok!	Thwok!	Thwokthwokthwok!	And	then	the	swordwork,	the
in-close	stabbing	and	chopping	and	slashing	then	poking	and	prodding	but
nope	ain’t	nobody	moving	any	more	and	that’s	a	relief	and	being	relieved	was
the	happiest	feeling.
Until	it	made	you	depressed.	Standing	around	surrounded	by	dead	people
did	that	on	occasion.	The	blood	on	the	sword	in	your	hand.	The	grunt	twist	and
pull	of	removing	quarrels	from	stubborn	muscle,	bone	and	organs.	All	the
flies	showing	up	like	they	was	gathered	on	a	nearby	branch	just	waiting.	And
the	stink	of	all	that	stuff	poured	out	of	bodies.
Stinking	almost	as	bad	as	what	was	on	all	these	marines.	Who’d	started	all
that?	The	fingers	and	cocks	and	ears	and	stuff?
A	sudden	flood	of	guilt	in	Hellian.	It	was	me!	She	stood,	reeled,	then
looked	over	at	the	long	table	that	served	large	parties	of	travellers,	the	table
that	went	along	the	side	wall	opposite	the	bar.	Edur	heads	were	piled	high	on	it,
amidst	plenty	of	buzzing,	crawling	flies	and	maggots.	Too	heavy	on	the	belt	–
pulled	Maybe’s	breeches	down,	hah!	No	wait,	I’m	supposed	to	be	feeling	bad.
There’s	going	to	be	trouble,	because	that’s	what	comes	when	you	get	nasty	with
the	corpses	of	your	enemies.	It	just…what’s	the	word?	‘Escalates!’
Faces	turned,	soldiers	stared.	Fiddler	and	Gesler	who	had	been	slapping
each	other	on	the	back	pulled	apart	and	then	walked	over.
‘Hood’s	pecker,	Hellian,’	Fiddler	said	under	his	breath,	‘what	happened	to
all	the	townfolk?	As	if	I	can’t	guess,’	he	added,	glancing	over	at	the	heaped
heads.	‘They’ve	all	run	away.’
Urb	had	joined	them	and	he	said,	‘They	were	all	those	Indebted	we	heard


about.	Fifth,	sixth	generations.	Working	on	blanks.’
‘Blanks?’	Gesler	asked.
‘For	weapons,’	Fiddler	explained.	‘So,	they	were	slaves,	Urb?’
‘In	everything	but	name,’	the	big	man	replied,	scratching	at	his	beard	from
which	dangled	one	severed	finger,	grey	and	black.	‘Under	all	those	Edur	heads
is	the	local	Factor ’s	head,	some	rich	bastard	in	silks.	We	killed	him	in	front	of
the	Indebted	and	listened	to	them	cheer.	And	then	they	cut	off	the	poor	fool’s
head	as	a	gift,	since	we	come	in	with	all	these	Edur	ones.	And	then	they	looted
what	they	could	and	headed	out.’
Gesler ’s	brows	had	risen	at	all	that.	‘So	you’ve	managed	what	the	rest	of	us
haven’t	–	arriving	as	damned	liberators	in	this	town.’
Hellian	snorted.	‘We	worked	that	out	weeks	back.	Never	mind	the	Lurrii
soljers,	since	they’re	all	perfessionals	and	so’s	they	like	things	jus’	fine	so’s
they’s	the	one	y’gotta	kill	no	diff’rent	from	the	Edur.	No,	y’go	into	the	hamlets
and	villages	and	kill	all	the	’ficials—’
‘The	what?’	Gesler	asked.
Urb	said,	‘Officials.	We	kill	the	officials,	Gesler.	And	anybody	with
money,	and	the	advocates,	too.’
‘The	what?’
‘Legal	types.	Oh,	and	the	money-lenders	and	debt-holders,	and	the	recordkeepers	and	toll-counters.	We	kill	them	all—’
‘Along	with	the	soljers,’	Hellian	added,	nodding	–	and	nodding,	for	some
reason	finding	herself	unable	to	stop.	She	kept	nodding	as	she	said,	‘An’	what
happens	then	is	simple.	Looting,	lotsa	sex,	then	everybody	skittles	out,	and	we
sleep	in	soft	beds	and	drink	an’	eat	in	the	tavern	an’	if	the	keepers	hang	round
we	pays	for	it	all	nice	an’	honest—’
‘Keepers	like	the	ones	hiding	in	the	kitchen?’
Hellian	blinked.	‘Hiding?	Oh,	maybe	we’ve	gotten	a	little	wild	–’
‘It’s	the	heads,’	Urb	said,	then	he	shrugged	sheepishly.	‘We’re	getting	outa
hand,	Gesler,	I	think.	Living	like	animals	in	the	woods	and	the	like—’
‘Like	animals,’	Hellian	agreed,	still	nodding.	‘In	soft	beds	and	lotsa	food
and	drink	an’	it’s	not	like	we	carry	them	heads	on	our	belts	or	anything.	We	just
leave	’em	in	the	taverns.	Every	village,	right?	Jus’	to	let	’em	know	we	been
through.’	Unaccountably	dizzy,	Hellian	sat	back	down,	then	reached	for	the
flagon	of	ale	on	the	table	–	needing	to	twist	Balgrid’s	fingers	from	the	handle
and	him	fighting	as	if	it	was	his	flagon	or	something,	the	idiot.	She	swallowed
a	mouthful	and	leaned	back	–	only	it	was	a	stool	she	was	sitting	on	so	there	was
no	back	to	it,	and	now	she	was	staring	up	at	the	ceiling	and	puddled	whatever
was	soaking	through	her	ragged	shirt	all	along	her	back	and	faces	were


peering	down	at	her.	She	glowered	at	the	flagon	still	in	her	hand.	‘Did	I	spill?
Did	I?	Did	I	spill,	dammit?’
	
‘Not	a	drop,’	Fiddler	said,	shaking	his	head	in	wonder.	This	damned	Sergeant
Hellian,	who	by	Urb’s	account	had	crossed	all	the	way	from	the	coast	in	an
inebriated	haze	–	this	soft-featured	woman,	soft	just	on	the	edge	of	dissolute,
with	the	bright	always	wet	lips	–	this	Hellian	had	managed	to	succeed	where
every	other	squad	–	as	far	as	Fiddler	knew	–	had	failed	miserably.	And	since
Urb	was	adamant	on	who	was	leading	whom,	it	really	had	been	her.	This
drunken,	ferocious	marine.
Leaving	severed	heads	in	every	tavern,	for	Hood’s	sake!
But	she	had	cut	loose	the	common	people,	all	these	serfs	and	slaves	and
Indebted,	and	had	watched	them	dance	off	in	joy	and	freedom.	Our	drunk
liberator,	our	bloodthirsty	goddess	–	what	in	Hood’s	name	do	all	those	people
think	when	they	first	see	her?	Endless	rumours	of	a	terrible	invading	army.
Soldiers	and	Edur	dying	in	ambushes,	chaos	on	the	roads	and	trails.	Then	she
shows	up,	dragging	heads	in	sacks,	and	her	marines	break	down	every	door	in
town	and	drag	out	all	the	ones	nobody	else	has	any	reason	to	like.	And	then?
Why,	the	not-so-subtle	cutting	away	of	all	burdens	for	all	these	poor	folk.	‘Give
us	the	bar	for	a	couple	nights	and	then	we’ll	just	be	on	our	way.
‘Oh,	and	if	you	run	into	any	Edur	in	the	woods,	send	somebody	back	to
warn	us,	right?’
Was	it	any	wonder	that	Hellian	and	Urb	and	their	squads	had	marched	so
far	ahead	of	the	others	–	or	so	Captain	Sort	had	complained	–	with	hardly	any
losses	among	her	marines?	The	drunk,	bright-eyed	woman	with	all	the
rounded	excesses	of	a	well-fed,	never	sober	but	still	young	harlot	had
somehow	managed	to	co-opt	all	the	local	help	they’d	needed	to	stay	alive.
In	a	strange	kind	of	floating	wonder,	the	near-euphoria	of	relief,
exhaustion	and	plenty	of	admiration	that	certainly	wasn’t	innocent	of	sudden
sexual	desire	–	for	a	damned	drunk	–	Fiddler	found	a	table	and	moments	later
was	joined	by	Gesler	and	Stormy,	the	latter	arriving	with	a	loaf	of	rye	bread,	a
broached	cask	of	ale	and	three	dented	pewter	flagons	with	inscriptions	on
them.
‘Can	almost	read	this,’	he	said,	squinting	at	the	side	of	his	cup.	‘Like	old
Ehrlii.’
‘Maker ’s	stamp?’	Gesler	asked	as	he	tore	off	a	hunk	of	bread.
‘No.	Maybe	something	like	“Advocate	of	the	Year”.	Then	a	name.	Could	be
Rizzin	Purble.	Or	Wurble.	Or	Fizzin.’


‘Could	be	that’s	the	name	of	this	village,’	Gesler	suggested.	‘Fizzin
Wurble.’
Stormy	grunted,	then	nudged	Fiddler.	‘Stop	dreaming	of	her,	Fid.	She’s
trouble	and	a	lost	cause	too.	Besides,	it’s	Urb	who’s	all	dreamy	’bout	her	and
he	looks	too	dangerous	to	mess	with.’
Fiddler	sighed.	‘Aye	to	all	of	that.	It’s	just	been	a	long	time,	that’s	all.’
‘We’ll	get	our	rewards	soon	enough.’
He	eyed	Stormy	for	a	moment,	then	glanced	over	to	Gesler.
Who	was	scowling	at	his	corporal.	‘You	lost	your	mind,	Stormy?	The	only
rewards	we’re	going	to	reap	are	the	crow	feathers	Hood	hands	out	as	we
march	through	his	gate.	Sure,	we’re	drawing	up	here,	gaining	in	strength	as	we
do	it,	but	those	Edur	on	our	trail	will	be	doing	the	same,	outnumbering	us	five,
ten	to	one	by	the	time	we	run	out	of	open	ground.’
Stormy	waved	a	dismissive	hand.	‘You	do	a	count,	Gesler?	Look	at	Urb’s
squad.	At	Hellian’s.	Look	at	Fid’s	and	ours.	We’re	all	damned	near	unscathed,
given	what	we’ve	been	through.	More	living	than	dead	in	every	squad	here.	So
who’s	to	say	the	other	squads	aren’t	in	the	same	shape?	We’re	damn	near	at
strength,	and	you	couldn’t	say	that	about	the	Letherii	and	the	Edur,	could	you?’
‘There’s	a	whole	lot	more	of	them	than	us,’	Gesler	pointed	out	as	he
collected	the	cask	and	began	pouring	the	ale	into	the	flagons.
‘Ain’t	made	that	much	difference,	though.	We	bulled	through	that	last
ambush—’
‘And	left	the	scene	so	cut	up	and	bleeding	a	vole	could’ve	tracked	us—’
‘Sharper	scatter,	is	all—’
‘Mayfly’s	back	was	a	shredded	mess—’
‘Armour	took	most	of	it—’
‘Armour	she	doesn’t	have	any	more—’
‘You	two	are	worse	than	married,’	Fiddler	said,	reaching	for	his	ale.
	
‘All	right,’	Koryk	pronounced,	‘there’s	no	disagreement	possible.	Those
bleckers	of	yours,	Smiles,	reek	the	worst	of	all.	Worse	than	fingers,	worse	than
ears,	worse	even	than	tongues.	We’ve	all	voted.	All	us	in	the	squad,	and	you’ve
got	to	get	rid	of	them.’
Smiles	sneered.	‘You	think	I	don’t	know	why	you	want	me	to	toss	’em,
Koryk?	It’s	not	the	smell,	oh	no.	It’s	the	sight	of	them,	and	the	way	that	makes
you	squirm	inside,	makes	your	balls	pull	up	and	hide.	That’s	what	this	is	all
about.	Pretty	soon,	none	of	us	will	be	smelling	much	at	all	–	everything’s
drying	out,	wrinkling	up—’


‘Enough,’	groaned	Tarr.
Koryk	glanced	across	at	Bottle.	The	fool	looked	to	be	asleep,	his	face
hanging	slack.	Well,	fair	enough.	Without	Bottle	they’d	never	have	come	this
far.	Virtually	unscathed	at	that.	He	tapped	the	finger	bone	strung	round	his	neck
–	the	bone	from	the	pit	outside	what	was	left	of	Y’Ghatan.	Always	worth	a
touch	or	two	with	thoughts	like	those.
And	he	knew	they	were	headed	for	trouble.	They	all	knew,	which	was	why
they’d	talk	about	anything	else	but	that	huge	grisly	beast	crouched	right	there
in	the	forefront	of	their	thoughts.	The	one	with	dripping	fangs	and	jagged
talons	and	that	smeared	grin	of	knowing.	Aye.	He	touched	the	bone	again.
‘Come	through	not	bad,’	Cuttle	said,	eyeing	the	other	marines	in	the
crowded	main	room.	‘Anybody	here	been	thinking	about	how	we’re	going	to
besiege	a	city	the	size	of	Unta?	We’re	pretty	much	out	of	munitions	–	Fid’s	got
a	cusser	left	and	maybe	I	do,	too,	but	that’s	it.	We	can	hardly	try	anything
covert,	since	they	know	we’re	coming—’
‘Magic,	of	course,’	Smiles	said.	‘We’ll	just	walk	right	in.’
Koryk	winced	at	this	turn	in	the	conversation.	Besieging	Letheras?	And
nobody	standing	ranks-deep	in	their	way?	Not	likely.	Besides,	the	Edur	were
pushing	them	right	along,	and	where	the	marines	ended	up	was	not	going	to	be
a	pleasure	palace,	now	was	it?	Had	Cuttle	lost	his	mind?	Or	was	this	just	his
way	of	dealing	with	the	death	looming	in	all	their	minds?
Probably.	The	sapper	had	little	or	no	imagination,	and	he	was	making	his
biggest	leap	possible	all	the	way	to	a	siege	that	was	never	going	to	happen	and
wouldn’t	work	anyway	if	it	did,	which	it	wouldn’t.	But	it	gave	Cuttle	something
to	think	about.
‘The	sergeant	will	figure	something	out,’	Cuttle	concluded	suddenly,	with	a
loud	sigh,	as	he	settled	back	in	his	chair.
Hah,	yes,	Fiddler,	Lord	of	the	Sappers.	Hie	and	fall	on	your	knees!
	
Bottle	sat	looking	through	the	ever-sharp	eyes	of	a	cat.	Perched	on	the	ridge	of
the	tavern	roof,	gaze	fixing	and	tracking	on	birds	whenever	the	mage’s
concentration	slipped	–	which	was	getting	too	often,	but	exhaustion	did	that,
didn’t	it?
But	now,	there	was	movement	there,	along	the	edge	of	the	forest	there	–
where	the	squad	had	been	hiding	not	so	long	ago.	And	more,	to	the	north	of
that.	And	there,	an	Edur	scout,	edging	out	from	the	south	end,	other	side	of	the
road.	Sniffing	the	air	as	was	their	wont	–	no	surprise,	the	Malazans	carried	a
carrion	reek	with	them	everywhere	they	went	these	days.


Oh,	they	were	cautious,	weren’t	they?	They	don’t	want	a	real	engagement.
They	just	want	us	to	bolt.	Again.	Once	their	strength’s	up,	they’ll	show
themselves	more	openly.	Show	their	numbers,	lances	at	the	ready.
A	little	time	yet,	then.	For	the	other	marines	to	relax.	But	not	too	much,	lest
they	all	got	so	drunk	they	couldn’t	stand,	much	less	fight.	Although,	come	to
think	on	it,	that	Hellian	seemed	capable	of	fighting	no	matter	how	sodden	she
got	–	one	of	her	corporals	had	talked	about	how	she	sobered	up	and	turned	into
ice	whenever	the	fighting	started.	Whenever	orders	needed	delivering.	That
was	a	singular	talent	indeed.	Her	soldiers	worshipped	her.	As	did	Urb	and	his
squad.	Worship	all	bound	up	with	terror	and	probably	more	than	a	little	lust,	so
a	mixed-up	kind	of	worship,	which	probably	made	it	thick	as	armour	and	that
was	why	so	many	were	still	alive.
Hellian,	like	a	more	modest	version	of,	say,	Coltaine.	Or	even	Dujek	during
the	Genabackan	campaigns.	Greymane	in	Korel.	Prince	K’azz	for	the	Crimson
Guard	–	from	what	I’ve	heard.
But	not,	alas,	the	Adjunct.	And	that’s	too	bad.	That’s	worse	than	too	bad—
Twenty	Tiste	Edur	visible	now,	all	eyeing	the	village	–	ooh,	look	at	that
bird!	No,	that	wasn’t	them.	That	was	the	damned	cat.	He	needed	to	focus.
More	of	the	barbaric	warriors	appearing.	Another	twenty.	And	there,
another	group	as	big	as	the	first	two	combined.
A	third	one,	coming	down	from	due	north	and	maybe	even	a	little	easterly
—
Bottle	shook	himself,	sat	up,	blinked	across	at	his	fellow	marines.	‘They’re
coming,’	he	said.	‘We	got	to	run.’
‘How	many?’	Koryk	demanded.
Three	hundred	and	climbing.	‘Too	many—’
‘Bottle!’
‘Hundreds,	damn	you!’
He	glared	around	the	room,	in	the	sudden	silence	following	his	scream.
Well	now,	that	sobered	’em	up.

Beak’s	eyes	felt	full	of	sand.	His	tongue	was	thick	in	his	mouth	and	he	felt
slightly	nauseous.	He	wasn’t	used	to	keeping	a	candle	lit	for	so	long,	but	there
had	been	little	choice.	The	Tiste	Edur	were	everywhere	now.	He	had	been
muffling	the	sounds	of	horse	hoofs	from	their	mounts,	he	had	been	blurring
their	passage	to	make	them	little	more	than	deeper	shadows	amidst	the	dappled
cascade	beneath	branches.	And	he	had	been	reaching	out,	his	every	sense


awakened	to	almost	painful	precision,	to	find	these	stealthy	hunters	as	they
closed	in	on	their	trail.	On	everyone’s	trail.	And	to	make	matters	worse,	they
were	fighting	in	the	same	way	as	the	Malazans	–	fast,	vicious	clashes,	not	even
worrying	about	actually	killing	because	wounding	was	better.	Wounding
slowed	the	marines	down.	Left	blood	trails.	They	cut	then	withdrew.	Then	did	it
all	over	again,	later.	Nights	and	into	the	days	now,	so	there	was	no	time	to	rest.
Time	only	to…run.
And	now	he	and	the	captain	were	riding	in	daylight,	trying	to	find	a	way
back	to	Fist	Keneb	and	all	the	squads	that	had	linked	up	with	his	company.	Four
hundred	marines	as	of	two	days	ago.	Beak	and	the	captain	had	pushed	east	in	an
effort	to	contact	those	squads	that	had	moved	faster	and	farther	than	all	the
others,	but	they	had	been	driven	back	–	too	many	Tiste	Edur	bands	in	between.
He	now	knew	that	Faradan	Sort	feared	those	squads	lost,	if	not	dead	already
then	as	good	as.
He	was	also	pretty	sure	that	this	invasion	was	not	quite	going	as	planned.
Something	in	the	look	in	the	captain’s	dark	eyes	told	him	that	it	wasn’t	just	the
two	of	them	who	kept	stumbling	into	trouble.	They’d	found	three	squads,	after
all,	that	had	been	butchered	–	oh,	they’d	charged	a	high	toll	for	the	privilege,
as	Faradan	Sort	had	said	after	wandering	the	glade	with	its	heaps	of	corpses
and	studying	the	blood	trails	leading	off	into	the	woods.	Beak	could	tell	just	by
the	silent	howl	of	death	roiling	in	the	air,	that	cold	fire	that	was	the	breath	of
every	field	of	battle.	A	howl	frozen	like	shock	into	the	trees,	the	trunks,	the
branches	and	the	leaves.	And	in	the	ground	underfoot,	oozing	like	sap,	and
Lily,	his	sweet	bay,	didn’t	want	to	take	a	single	step	into	that	clearing	and	Beak
knew	why.
A	high	toll,	yes,	just	like	she’d	said,	although	of	course	no	real	coins	were
paid.	Just	lives.
They	worked	their	weary	mounts	up	an	embankment	all	overgrown	with
bushes,	and	Beak	was	forced	to	concentrate	even	harder	to	mute	the	sounds	of
scrabbling	hoofs	and	snapping	brush,	and	the	candle	in	his	head	flared
suddenly	and	he	very	nearly	reeled	from	his	saddle.
The	captain’s	hand	reached	across	and	steadied	him.	‘Beak?’
‘It’s	hot,’	he	muttered.	And	now,	all	at	once,	he	could	suddenly	see	where
all	this	was	going,	and	what	he	would	need	to	do.
The	horses	broke	the	contact	between	them	as	they	struggled	up	the	last	of
the	ridge.
‘Hold,’	Faradan	Sort	murmured.
Yes.	Beak	sighed.	‘Just	ahead,	Captain.	We	found	them.’
A	score	of	trees	had	been	felled	and	left	to	rot	directly	ahead,	and	on	this


side	of	that	barrier	was	a	scum-laden	pool	on	which	danced	glittering	insects.
Two	marines	smeared	in	mud	rose	from	the	near	side	of	the	bank,	crossbows
at	the	ready.
The	captain	raised	her	right	hand	and	made	a	sequence	of	gestures,	and	the
crossbows	swung	away	and	they	were	waved	forward.
There	was	a	mage	crouched	in	a	hollow	beneath	one	of	the	felled	trees,	and
she	gave	Beak	a	nod	that	seemed	a	little	nervous.	He	waved	back	as	they	reined
in	ten	paces	from	the	pool.
The	mage	called	out	from	her	cover:	‘Been	expecting	you	two.	Beak,	you
got	a	glow	so	bright	it’s	damned	near	blinding.’	Then	she	laughed.	‘Don’t
worry,	it’s	not	the	kind	the	Edur	can	see,	not	even	their	warlocks.	But	I’d
dampen	it	down	some,	Beak,	lest	you	burn	right	up.’
The	captain	turned	to	him	and	nodded.	‘Rest	now,	Beak.’
Rest?	No,	there	could	be	no	rest.	Not	ever	again.	‘Sir,	there	are	hundreds	of
Edur	coming.	From	the	northwest—’
‘We	know,’	the	other	mage	said,	clambering	out	like	a	toad	at	dusk.	‘We
was	just	getting	ready	to	pack	our	travelling	trunks	and	the	uniforms	are
pressed	and	the	standards	restitched	in	gold.’
‘Really?’
She	sobered	and	there	was	a	sudden	soft	look	in	her	eyes,	reminding	Beak
of	that	one	nurse	his	mother	had	hired,	the	one	who	was	then	raped	by	his
father	and	had	to	go	away.	‘No,	Beak,	just	havin’	fun.’
Too	bad,	he	considered.	He	would	like	to	have	seen	that	gold	thread.
They	dismounted	and	walked	their	horses	round	one	end	of	the	felled	trees,
and	there,	before	them,	was	the	Fist’s	encampment.	‘Hood’s	mercy,’	Faradan
Sort	said,	‘there’s	more.’
‘Six	hundred	and	seventy-one,	sir,’	Beak	said.	And	like	the	mage	had	said,
there	were	getting	ready	to	leave,	swarming	like	ants	on	a	kicked	mound.
There	had	been	wounded	–	lots	of	them	–	but	the	healers	had	done	their	work
and	all	the	blood	smelled	old	and	the	smell	of	death	stayed	where	it	belonged,
close	to	the	dozen	graves	on	the	far	side	of	the	clearing.
‘Come	along,’	said	the	captain	as	two	soldiers	arrived	to	take	charge	of	the
horses,	and	Beak	followed	her	as	she	made	her	way	to	where	stood	Fist	Keneb
and	Sergeant	Thom	Tissy.
It	felt	strange	to	be	walking	after	so	long	seated	in	those	strange	Letherii
saddles,	as	if	the	ground	was	crumbling	underfoot,	and	everything	looked
oddly	fragile.	Yes.	My	friends.	All	of	them.
‘How	bad?’	Keneb	asked	Faradan	Sort.
‘We	couldn’t	reach	them,’	she	replied,	‘but	there	is	still	hope.	Fist,	Beak


says	we	have	to	hurry.’
The	Fist	glanced	at	Beak	and	the	young	mage	nearly	wilted.	Attention	from
important	people	always	did	that	to	him.
Keneb	nodded,	then	sighed.	‘I	want	to	keep	waiting,	in	case…’	He	shook
his	head.	‘Fair	enough.	It’s	time	to	change	tactics.’
‘Yes	sir,’	said	the	captain.
‘We	push	hard.	For	the	capital,	and	if	we	run	into	anything	we	can’t
handle…we	handle	it.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘Captain,	gather	ten	squads	with	full	complement	of	heavies.	Take
command	of	our	rearguard.’
‘Yes	sir.’	She	turned	and	took	Beak	by	the	arm.	‘I	want	you	on	a	stretcher,
Beak,’	she	said	as	she	led	him	along.	‘Sleeping.’
‘I	can’t,	sir—’
‘You	will.’
‘No,	I	really	can’t.	The	candles,	they	won’t	go	out.	Not	any	more.	They
won’t	go	out.’	Not	ever,	Captain,	and	it	isn’t	that	I	don’t	love	you	because	I	do
and	I’d	do	anything	you	asked.	But	I	just	can’t	and	I	can’t	even	explain.	Only,
it’s	too	late.
He	wasn’t	sure	what	she	saw	in	his	eyes,	wasn’t	sure	how	much	of	all	that
he	didn’t	say	got	heard	anyway,	but	the	grip	of	her	hand	on	his	arm	loosened,
became	almost	a	caress,	and	she	nodded	and	turned	her	head	away.	‘All	right,
Beak.	Help	us	guard	Keneb’s	back,	then.’
‘Yes	sir,	I	will.	You	just	watch	me,	I	will.’	He	waited	a	moment,	as	they
walked	side	by	side	through	the	camp,	and	then	asked,	‘Sir,	if	there’s
something	we	can’t	handle	how	do	we	handle	it	anyway?’
She	either	grunted	or	laughed	from	the	same	place	that	grunts	came	from.
‘Sawtooth	wedges	and	keep	going,	Beak.	Throw	back	whatever	is	thrown	at	us.
Keep	going,	until…’
‘Until	what?’
‘It’s	all	right,	Beak,	to	die	alongside	your	comrades.	It’s	all	right.	Do	you
understand	me?’
‘Yes	sir,	I	do.	It	is	all	right,	because	they’re	my	friends.’
‘That’s	right,	Beak.’
And	that’s	why	no-one	needs	to	worry,	Captain.
	
Keneb	watched	as	his	marines	fell	into	formation.	Fast	march,	now,	as	if	these
poor	souls	weren’t	beat	enough.	But	they	couldn’t	dart	and	hide	any	more.	The


enemy	had	turned	the	game	round	and	they	had	the	advantage	in	numbers	and
maybe,	finally,	they	were	also	a	match	for	the	ferocity	of	his	Malazans.
It	had	been	inevitable.	No	empire	just	rolls	over,	legs	splaying.	After
enough	pokes	and	jabs,	it	turns	and	snarls	and	then	the	fangs	sink	deep.	And
now	it	was	his	marines	who	were	doing	the	bleeding.	But	not	nearly	as	bad	as
I’d	feared.	Look	at	them,	Keneb.	Looking	meaner	than	ever.
‘Fist,’	Thom	Tissy	said	beside	him,	‘they’re	ready	for	you.’
‘I	see	that,	Sergeant.’
‘No	sir.	I	meant,	they’re	ready.’
Keneb	met	the	squat	man’s	dark,	beady	eyes,	and	wasn’t	sure	what	he	saw
in	them.	Whatever	it	was,	it	burned	bright.
‘Sir,’	Thom	Tissy	said,	‘it’s	what	we’re	meant	for.	All’	–	he	waved	one
grimy	hand	–	‘this.	Trained	to	play	more	than	one	game,	right?	We	stuck	’em
enough	to	get	’em	riled	up	and	so	here	they	are,	all	those	damned	Edur	drawn
right	to	us	like	we	was	a	lodestone.	Now	we’re	about	to	knock	’em	off	balance
all	over	again,	and	Hood	take	me,	it’s	got	my	blood	up!	Same	for	us	all!	So,
please,	sir,	sound	us	the	order	to	march.’
Keneb	stared	at	the	man	a	moment	longer,	then	he	nodded.
	
To	the	sound	of	laughter,	Koryk	barrelled	into	the	three	Edur	warriors,	his
heavy	longsword	hammering	aside	two	of	the	out-thrust	spears	jabbing	for	his
midsection.	With	his	left	hand	he	caught	the	shaft	of	the	third	one	and	used	it	to
pull	himself	forward.	Edge	of	his	blade	into	the	face	of	the	warrior	on	his	right
–	not	deep	enough	to	cause	serious	damage,	but	enough	to	spray	blinding
blood.	Against	the	one	in	the	middle,	Koryk	dropped	one	shoulder	and	hit	him
hard	in	the	centre	of	his	chest	–	hard	enough	to	lift	the	Edur	from	his	feet	and
send	him	sprawling	back.	Still	gripping	the	third	spear,	Koryk	twisted	the
warrior	round	and	drove	the	point	of	his	sword	into	the	Edur ’s	throat.
Koryk	spun	to	slash	at	the	first	warrior,	only	to	see	her	tumble	back	with	a
throwing	knife	skewering	one	eye	socket.	So	he	lunged	after	the	middle	Edur,
sword	chopping	down	in	a	frenzy	until	the	Edur ’s	smashed-up	arms	–	raised	to
fend	off	the	attack	–	fell	away,	freeing	the	half-blood	Seti	to	deliver	a	skullcrushing	blow.
Then	he	whirled.	‘Will	you	in	Hood’s	name	stop	that	laughing!’
But	Smiles	was	on	one	knee,	convulsing	with	hilarity	even	as	she	pulled
out	her	throwing	knife.	‘Gods!	I	can’t	breathe!	Wait	–	just	wait—’
Snarling,	Koryk	turned	to	face	the	cloister	again	–	these	narrow-laned
mews	created	perfect	cul-de-sacs	–	lead	them	in	at	a	run,	flank	out	then	turn	and


cut	the	bastards	down.	Even	so,	nobody	had	planned	on	making	this	ugly
village	the	site	of	their	last	stand.	Except	maybe	the	Edur,	who	now	entirely
surrounded	it	and	were	working	their	way	in,	house	by	house,	lane	by	lane.
Felt	good	kicking	back,	though,	whenever	they	got	too	spread	out	in	their
eagerness	to	spill	Malazan	blood.
‘They	stink	at	fighting	in	groups,’	Smiles	said,	coming	up	alongside	him.
She	glanced	up	into	his	face	and	then	burst	out	laughing	again.
‘What’s	so	funny?’
‘You!	Them!	The	look	in	their	eyes	–	the	surprise,	I	mean,	oh,	gods	of	the
deep!	I	can’t	stop!’
‘You’d	better,’	Koryk	warned,	shaking	the	blood	from	his	sword.	‘I’m
hearing	movement	–	that	lane	mouth	there	–	come	on.’

Three	quarrels	flitted	out,	two	of	them	taking	down	onrushing	Edur.	Two
lances	arced	in	retaliation,	both	darting	straight	for	Fiddler.	And	then	Tarr ’s
huge	shield	shifted	into	their	path,	and	the	sergeant	was	pushed	hard	to	one	side
–	grunts	from	the	corporal	as	both	lances	slammed	solidly	against	the	bronzescaled	face,	one	of	them	punching	through	a	finger ’s	length	to	pierce	Tarr ’s
upper	arm.	The	corporal	swore.
Fiddler	ducked	down	behind	the	smithy’s	quenching	barrel	as	a	third	lance
cracked	into	it.	Water	gushed	out	onto	the	ground.
The	crossfire	ambush	then	caught	the	half-dozen	charging	Edur	unawares
–	quarrels	sleeting	out	from	the	narrow	alley	mouths	on	both	sides.	Moments
later	all	were	down,	dead	or	dying.
‘Pull	back!’	Fiddler	shouted,	turning	to	exchange	his	unloaded	crossbow
for	the	loaded	one	Bottle	now	set	into	his	hands.
Tarr	covering	the	three	of	them,	they	retreated	back	through	the	smithy,
across	the	dusty	compound	with	its	piled	tailings	and	slag,	through	the	kickeddown	fence,	and	back	towards	the	tavern.
Where,	from	the	sounds,	Stormy	and	his	heavies	were	in	a	fight.
Motion	on	their	flanks	–	the	rest	of	the	ambush	converging.	Cuttle,	Corabb,
Maybe,	Gesler,	Balgrid	and	Brethless.	Reloading	on	the	run.
‘Gesler!	Stormy’s—’
‘I	can	hear	it,	Fid!	Corabb	–	hand	that	damned	crossbow	over	to	Brethless
–	you’re	useless	with	it.	Join	up	with	Tarr	there	and	you	two	in	first!’
‘I	got	my	target!’	Corabb	protested	even	as	he	gave	one	of	Hellian’s
corporals	the	heavy	weapon.


‘By	bouncing	your	quarrel	off	the	cobbles	and	don’t	tell	me	that	was	a
planned	shot!’
Corabb	was	already	readying	the	Edur	spear	he	had	picked	up.
Fiddler	waved	Tarr	forward	as	soon	as	Corabb	arrived.	‘Go,	you	two!	Fast
in	and	hard!’
	
Only	by	leaving	his	feet	and	throwing	his	entire	weight	on	the	shaft	was	the
Edur	able	to	drive	the	spear	entirely	through	Stormy’s	left	shoulder.	An	act	of
extraordinary	courage	that	was	rewarded	with	a	thumb	in	his	left	eye	–	that	dug
yet	deeper,	then	deeper	still.	Shrieking,	the	warrior	tried	to	jerk	his	head	away,
but	the	huge	red-bearded	corporal	now	clutched	a	handful	of	hair	and	was
holding	him	tight.
With	a	still	louder	shriek	and	even	greater	courage,	the	Edur	tore	his	head
back,	leaving	Stormy	with	a	handful	of	scalp	and	a	thumb	smeared	in	gel	and
blood.
‘Not	so	fast,’	the	corporal	said	in	a	strangely	matter-of-fact	tone,	as	he
lunged	forward	to	grapple	the	Edur.	Both	went	down	onto	the	smeared
floorboards	of	the	tavern	–	and	the	impact	pushed	the	spear	in	Stormy’s
shoulder	almost	entirely	through.	Drawing	his	gutting	knife,	Stormy	drove	the
blade	into	the	warrior ’s	side,	just	beneath	the	ribcage,	under	the	heart,	then	cut
outward.
Blood	gushed	in	a	flood.
Staggering,	slipping,	Stormy	managed	to	regain	his	feet	–	the	spear	falling
from	his	back	–	and	tottered	until	he	came	up	against	the	table	with	its	pile	of
severed	Edur	heads.	He	reached	for	one	and	threw	it	across	the	room,	into	the
crowd	of	Edur	pushing	in	through	the	doorway	where	Flashwit	and	Bowl	had
been	holding	position	until	a	spear	skewered	Bowl	through	the	man’s	neck	and
someone	knocked	off	Flashwit’s	helm	and	laid	open	her	head.	She	was	lying
on	her	back,	not	moving	as	the	moccasin-clad	feet	of	the	Edur	stamped	all	over
her	in	the	inward	rush.
The	head	struck	the	lead	warrior	in	the	face,	and	he	howled	in	shock	and
pain,	reeling	to	one	side.
Mayfly	stumbled	up	to	take	position	beside	Stormy.	Stabbed	four	times
already,	it	was	a	wonder	the	heavy	was	still	standing.
‘Don’t	you	die,	woman,’	Stormy	rumbled.
She	set	his	sword	into	his	hands.	‘Found	this,	Sergeant,	and	thought	you
might	want	it.’
There	was	no	time	to	answer	as	the	first	three	Edur	reached	them.


	
Emerging	from	the	kitchen	entrance	–	a	kitchen	now	emptied	of	serving	staff	–
Corabb	saw	that	charge,	and	he	leapt	forward	to	take	it	from	the	flank.
And	tripped	headlong	over	the	body	of	the	Edur	that	Stormy	had	just
stabbed.	His	hands	went	forward,	still	holding	the	spear.	The	point	drove
through	the	right	thigh	of	the	nearest	warrior,	missing	the	bone,	and	plunged
out	the	other	side	to	stab	into	the	next	Edur ’s	left	knee,	the	triangular	head
sliding	under	the	patella	and	neatly	separating	the	joint	on	its	way	through.
Angling	downward,	the	point	sticking	fast	between	two	floorboards,	until	the
far	one	sprang	loose,	in	time	to	foul	the	steps	of	the	third	Edur,	and	that
warrior	seemed	to	simply	throw	himself	onto	Stormy’s	out-thrust	sword.
As	Corabb	landed	amidst	falling	enemy,	Tarr	arrived,	his	shortsword
hacking	down	here	and	there	as	he	worked	forward	to	plant	himself	in	the	path
of	the	rest	of	the	Edur.
Flashwit	then	stood	up	in	their	midst	and	she	had	a	kethra	knife	in	each
hand.
	
Fiddler	led	the	charge	through	the	kitchen	doorway,	crossbow	ready,	to	find
Tarr	cutting	down	the	last	standing	Edur.	The	room	was	piled	with	bodies,	only
a	few	still	moving,	and	crawling	out	from	beneath	two	Edur	corpses	was
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	coughing	in	all	the	blood	that	had	spilled	over	him.
Brethless	moved	past	to	the	window.	‘Sergeant!	Another	mob	of	’em!’
‘Crossbows	up	front!’	Fiddler	snapped.
	
Hellian	squinted	across	the	street	at	the	fancy	house.	The	Factor ’s	house,	she
recalled.	Had	that	look.	Expensive,	tasteless.	She	pointed	with	a	dripping	sword.
‘Over	in	there,	that’s	where	we’ll	make	our	stand.’
Urb	grunted,	then	spat	out	a	red	stream	–	taken	to	chewing	betel	nut,
maybe.	The	things	some	people	would	do	to	their	bodies	beggared	belief.	She
drank	down	another	mouthful	of	the	local	whatever	that	tasted	like	bamboo
shoots	some	dog	had	pissed	on,	but	what	a	kick.	Then	waved	him	forward.
And	then	the	others,	except	for	Lutes	and	Tavos	Pond	who’d	both	been	cut
to	pieces	trying	to	hold	a	flank	at	that	alley	mouth	back	there.	‘I’ll	take	up
rearguard,’	she	said	by	way	of	explanation	as	the	six	remaining	marines
staggered	past.	‘In	a	smart	line,	now!’


Another	mouthful.	Just	got	worse,	this	stuff.	Who	would	come	up	with	a
drink	like	that?
She	set	out.	Was	halfway	there	or	maybe	just	halfway	along	when	a
hundred	or	so	Tiste	Edur	appeared	thirty	or	so	paces	down	the	main	street.	So
she	threw	the	clay	bottle	away	and	planted	her	feet	to	meet	the	charge.	Was	what
rearguard	did,	right?	Hold	’em	back.
The	first	row,	about	ten	of	them,	halted	and	raised	their	lances.
‘Not	fair!’	Hellian	shouted,	pulling	her	shield	up	and	getting	ready	to	duck
behind	it	–	oh,	this	wasn’t	a	shield	at	all.	It	was	the	lid	of	an	ale	cask,	the	kind
with	a	handle.	She	stared	at	it.	‘Hey,	I	wasn’t	issued	this.’
	
Three	straight	days	and	nights	on	the	run	from	the	river	bank	and	now	the
sounds	of	fighting	somewhere	ahead.	Since	he’d	lost	his	corporal	two	nights
past	–	the	fool	fell	down	an	abandoned	well,	one	moment	there	at	his	side,	the
next	gone.	Went	through	a	net	of	roots	at	least	most	of	the	way,	until	he
jammed	his	head	and	pop	went	the	neck	and	wasn’t	it	funny	how	Hood	never
forgot	since	it’d	been	join	the	marines	or	dance	the	gibbet	for	the	corporal	and
now	the	fool	had	done	both.	Since	Badan	Gruk	lost	his	corporal,	then,	he	now
dragged	Ruffle	with	him	–	not	quite	a	promotion,	Ruffle	was	not	the
promoting	type,	but	she	kept	a	cool	eye	when	she	wasn’t	busy	eating
everything	in	sight.
And	now	it	was	with	a	wheeze	that	Ruffle	settled	down	beside	Badan	Gruk,
5th	Squad	sergeant,	3rd	Company,	8th	Legion,	and	lifted	her	pale	rounded	face
up	to	his	with	that	cold	grey	regard.	‘We’re	kind	of	tired,	Sergeant.’
Badan	Gruk	was	Dal	Honese,	but	not	from	the	north	savanna	tribes.	He	had
been	born	in	the	south	jungle,	half	a	day	from	the	coast.	His	skin	was	as	black
as	a	Tiste	Andii’s,	and	the	epicanthic	folds	of	his	eyes	were	so	pronounced	that
little	more	than	slits	of	white	were	visible;	and	he	was	not	a	man	to	smile	much.
He	felt	most	comfortable	on	moonless	nights,	although	Skim	always
complained	about	how	their	sergeant	just	damn	disappeared,	usually	when	he
was	needed	the	most.
But	now	here	they	were,	in	bright	daylight,	and	oh	how	Badan	Gruk	wished
for	the	gloom	of	the	tropical	rainforest	of	his	homeland.	‘Stay	here,	Ruffle,’	he
now	said,	then	turned	and	scrabbled	back	to	where	Sergeant	Primly	crouched
with	the	rest	of	the	marines.	Primly’s	squad,	the	10th,	was	also	but	one	short,
while	the	4th	was	down	two,	including	Sergeant	Sinter	and	that	sent	yet	another
pang	through	Badan	Gruk.	She’d	been	from	his	own	tribe,	after	all.	Damn,
she’d	been	the	reason	he’d	joined	up	in	the	first	place.	Following	Sinter	had


always	been	way	too	easy.
Drawing	close,	Badan	Gruk	waved	Primly	over	and	the	Quon	noble’s
corporal,	Hunt,	tagged	along.	The	three	settled	a	short	distance	from	the	others.
‘So,’	Badan	breathed,	‘do	we	go	round	this?’
Primly’s	long	ascetic	face	soured,	which	is	what	it	always	did	whenever
anyone	spoke	to	him.	Badan	wasn’t	too	sure	of	the	man’s	history,	beyond	the
obvious,	which	was	that	Primly	had	done	something	bad,	once	–	bad	enough	to
get	him	disowned	and	maybe	even	on	the	run.	At	least	he’d	left	the	highborn
airs	behind.	To	Badan’s	whispered	question,	Corporal	Hunt	snorted,	then
looked	away.
‘You’re	here,’	Badan	said	to	the	Kartoolii,	‘so	talk.’
Hunt	shrugged.	‘We	been	running	since	the	river,	Sergeant.	Ducking	and
dodging	till	all	three	of	our	mages	are	used	up	and	worse	than	walking	dead.’
He	nodded	northwards.	‘Those	are	marines	up	there,	and	they’re	in	a	fight.
We’re	only	down	one	heavy	and	one	sapper—’
‘And	a	sergeant	and	a	corporal,’	Badan	added.
‘Seventeen	of	us,	Sergeant.	Now,	I	seen	what	your	heavies	can	do,	and	both
me	and	Sergeant	Primly	can	tell	you	that	Lookback,	Drawfirst	and	Shoaly	are
easy	matches	to	Reliko	and	Vastly	Blank.	And	Honey’s	still	got	three	cussers
and	half	again	all	the	sharpers	since	Kisswhere	left	’em	behind	when	she	and
Sinter	went	and—’
‘All	right,’	Badan	cut	in,	not	wanting	to	hear	again	what	had	happened	to
Sinter	and	Kisswhere,	since	it	had	been	Kisswhere	who	had	been	the	reason	for
Sinter ’s	joining.	Nothing	good	following	a	woman	who	was	following	another
woman	with	worship	in	her	eyes	–	even	a	sister	–	but	that	had	been	that	and	they
were	both	gone	now,	weren’t	they?	‘Primly?’
The	Quon	rubbed	at	what	passed	for	a	beard	on	his	face	–	gods,	showed
just	how	young	the	poor	bastard	was	–	and	cast	a	searching	gaze	back	on	the
waiting	soldiers.	Then	he	smiled	suddenly.	‘Look	at	Skulldeath,	Badan.	Here
we	got	a	soldier	that	Toothy	himself	named	first	day	on	Malaz	Island,	and	I	still
don’t	know	–	was	it	a	joke?	Skulldeath’s	yet	to	draw	a	drop	of	blood,	barring
mosquitoes	and	that	blood	was	his	own.	Besides,	Badan	Gruk,	you’ve	got	what
looks	like	some	kind	of	Dal	Honese	grand	council	here	and	you	moonless
nightshades	seem	to	put	holy	terror	in	the	Edur,	like	you	were	ghosts	or
something	and	sometimes	I	start	wondering	myself,	the	way	you	all	manage	to
vanish	in	the	dark.	In	any	case,	there’s	you,	Nep	Furrow,	Reliko	and	Neller	and
Strap	Mull	and	Mulvan	Dreader ’s	halfway	there	besides,	and,	well,	we’ve	come
to	fight,	haven’t	we?	So	let’s	fight.’
Maybe	you	came	to	fight,	Primly.	I’m	just	trying	to	stay	alive.	Badan	Gruk


studied	the	two	men	beside	him	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	rose	to	his	full
height,	coming	to	very	nearly	Primly’s	shoulder,	and	drew	out	the	two-handed
sickle	sword	from	its	deer-hide	harness	on	his	broad	back.	Adjusting	his	grip
on	the	ivory	handle,	he	eyed	the	two	thin	otataral	blades	inset	on	both	sides	of
the	curved	and	carved	tusk.	Vethbela,	the	weapon	was	called	in	his	own
language,	Bonekisser,	the	blades	not	deep	enough	to	do	more	than	touch	the
long	bones	of	a	normal	warrior ’s	legs,	since	those	femurs	were	prized
trophies,	to	be	polished	and	carved	with	scenes	of	the	owner ’s	glorious	death	–
and	any	warrior	seeking	the	heart	of	a	woman	needed	to	place	more	than	a	few
at	the	threshold	of	her	family’s	hut,	as	proof	of	his	prowess	and	courage.
Never	did	manage	to	use	this	thing	properly,	did	I?	Not	a	single	thigh	bone
to	show	Sinter.	He	nodded.	‘Time	to	collect	some	trophies,	then.’
	
Fifteen	paces	away,	Honey	nudged	Skim.	‘Hey,	beloved,	looks	like	we	get	to
toss	sharpers	today.’
‘Stop	calling	me	that,’	the	other	sapper	replied	in	a	bored	tone,	but	she
watched	as	Badan	Gruk	headed	back	up	to	where	Ruffle	hid,	and	she	watched	as
Corporal	Hunt	went	back	down-trail	to	collect	the	4th	Squad’s	corporal,
Pravalak	Rim,	who	had	been	guarding	their	butts	with	Shoaly	and	Drawfirst.
And	pretty	soon	something	less	than	whispered	was	dancing	through	every
soldier	and	she	saw	weapons	being	drawn,	armour	straps	tightened,	helms
adjusted,	and	finally	she	grunted.	‘All	right,	Honey	–	Hood	take	me,	how	I	hate
saying	that	–	looks	like	you’ve	sniffed	it	just	right—’
‘Just	let	me	prove	it—’
‘You’re	never	prying	my	legs	apart,	Honey.	Why	don’t	you	get	that?’
‘What	a	miserable	attitude,’	the	10th’s	sapper	complained	as	he	loaded	his
crossbow.	‘Now	Kisswhere,	she	was—’
‘So	tired	of	your	advances,	Honey,	that	she	went	and	blew	herself	up	–	and
took	her	sister	with	her,	too.	And	now	here	I	am	wishing	I’d	been	with	them	in
that	scull.’	With	that	she	rose	and	scrabbled	over	to	Nep	Furrow.
The	old	Dal	Honese	mage	lifted	one	yellowy	eye	to	squint	at	her,	then	both
eyes	opened	wide	when	he	saw	the	sharper	she	held	in	each	hand.	‘Eggit’way
fra	meen,	tit-woman!’
‘Relax,’	she	said,	‘we’re	heading	into	a	fight.	You	got	anything	left	in	that
bent	reed	of	yours?’
‘Wha’?’
‘Magicks,	Nep,	magicks	–	comes	from	the	bleckers	in	men.	Every	woman
knows	that,’	and	she	winked.


‘You	teasin’	tit-woman	you!	Eggit’way	fra	meen!’
‘I’m	not	eggitin’	away	from	you,	Nep,	until	you	bless	these	two	sharpers
here.’
‘Bliss	’em	clay	balls?	Ya	mad,	tit-woman?	Less	time	I	done	that—’
‘They	blew	up,	aye.	Sinter	and	Kisswhere.	Into	pieces	but	nice	and	quick,
right?	Listen,	it’s	my	only	way	to	escape	Honey’s	advances.	No,	seriously,	I
want	one	of	your	blissin’	curses	or	cursed	blissin’s.	Please,	Nep—’
‘Eggit’way	fra	meen!’
	
Reliko,	who	was	half	a	hand	shorter	even	than	his	sergeant	and	therefore,	by
Toothy’s	own	assertion,	the	smallest	heavy	infantry	soldier	in	the	history	of	the
Malazan	Empire,	grunted	upright	and	drew	out	his	shortsword	as	he	swung	his
shield	into	position.	He	glanced	over	at	Vastly	Blank.	‘Time	again.’
The	oversized	Seti	warrior,	still	sitting	on	the	bed	of	wet	moss,	looked	up.
‘Huh?’
‘Fighting	again.’
‘Where?’
‘Us,	Vastly.	Remember	Y’Ghatan?’
‘No.’
‘Well,	won’t	be	like	Y’Ghatan.	More	like	yesterday	only	harder.
Remember	yesterday?’
Vastly	Blank	stared	a	moment	longer,	then	he	laughed	his	slow	ha	ha	ha
laugh	and	said,	‘Yesterday!	I	remember	yesterday!’
‘Then	pick	up	your	sword	and	wipe	the	mud	off	it,	Vastly.	And	take	your
shield	–	no,	not	mine,	yours,	the	one	on	your	back.	Yes,	bring	it	round.	That’s	it
–	no,	sword	in	the	other	hand.	There,	perfect.	You	ready?’
‘Who	do	I	kill?’
‘I’ll	show	you	soon	enough.’
‘Good.’
‘Seti	should	never	breed	with	bhederin,	I	think.’
‘What?’
‘A	joke,	Vastly.’
‘Oh.	Ha	ha	ha!	Ha.’
‘Let’s	go	join	up	with	Lookback	–	we’ll	be	on	point.’
‘Lookback’s	on	point?’
‘He’s	always	on	point	for	this	kind	of	thing,	Vastly.’
‘Oh.	Good.’
‘Drawfirst	and	Shoaly	at	our	backs,	right?	Like	yesterday.’


‘Right.	Reliko,	what	happened	yesterday?’
	
Strap	Mull	stepped	close	to	Neller	and	they	both	eyed	their	corporal,	Pravalak
Rim,	who	was	just	sending	Drawfirst	and	Shoaly	up	to	the	other	heavies.
The	two	soldiers	spoke	in	their	native	Dal	Honese.	‘Broke-hearted,’	Strap
said.
‘Broker	than	broke,’	Neller	agreed.
‘Kisswhere,	she	was	lovely.’
‘Lovelier	than	lovely.’
‘Like	Badan	says,	though.’
‘Like	he	says,	yes.’
‘And	that’s	that,	is	what	he	says.’
‘I	know	that,	Strap,	you	don’t	need	to	tell	me	anything.	You	think	Letheras
will	be	like	Y’Ghatan?	We	didn’t	do	nothing	in	Y’Ghatan.	And,’	Neller
suddenly	added,	as	if	struck	by	something,	‘we	haven’t	done	nothing	here
either,	have	we?	Nothing	not	yet,	anyway.	If	it’s	going	to	be	like	Y’Ghatan,
though—’
‘We’re	not	even	there	yet,’	Strap	Mull	said.	‘Which	sword	you	going	to
use?’
‘This	one.’
‘The	one	with	the	broken	handle?’
Neller	looked	down,	frowned,	then	threw	the	weapon	into	the	bushes	and
drew	out	another	one.	‘This	one.	It’s	Letherii,	was	on	the	cabin	wall—’
‘I	know.	I	gave	it	to	you.’
‘You	gave	it	to	me	because	it	howls	like	a	wild	woman	every	time	I	hit
something	with	it.’
‘That’s	right,	Neller,	and	that’s	why	I	asked	what	sword	you	were	going	to
use.’
‘Now	you	know.’
‘Now	I	know	so	I’m	stuffing	my	ears	with	moss.’
‘Thought	they	already	were.’
‘I’m	adding	more.	See?’
	
Corporal	Pravalak	Rim	was	a	haunted	man.	Born	in	a	northern	province	of
Gris	to	poor	farmers,	he	had	seen	nothing	of	the	world	for	most	of	his	life,
until	the	day	a	marine	recruiter	had	come	through	the	nearby	village	on	the


very	day	Pravalak	was	there	with	his	older	brothers,	all	of	whom	sneered	at	the
marine	on	their	way	to	the	tavern.	But	Pravalak	himself,	well,	he	had	stared	in
disbelief.	His	first	sight	of	someone	from	Dal	Hon.	She	had	been	big	and
round	and	though	she	was	decades	older	than	him	and	her	hair	had	gone	grey
he	could	see	how	she	had	been	beautiful	and	indeed,	to	his	eyes,	she	still	was.
Such	dark	skin.	Such	dark	eyes,	and	oh,	she	spied	him	out	and	gave	him
that	gleaming	smile,	before	leading	him	by	the	hand	into	a	back	room	of	the
local	gaol	and	delivering	her	recruiting	pitch	sitting	on	him	and	rocking	with
exalted	glee	until	he	exploded	right	into	the	Malazan	military.
His	brothers	had	expressed	their	disbelief	and	were	in	a	panic	about	how	to
explain	to	their	ma	and	da	how	their	youngest	son	had	gone	and	got	himself
signed	up	and	lost	his	virginity	to	a	fifty-year-old	demoness	in	the	process	–
and	was,	in	fact,	not	coming	home	at	all.	But	that	was	their	problem,	and
Pravalak	had	trundled	off	in	the	recruiter ’s	wagon,	one	hand	firmly	snuggled
between	her	ample	legs,	without	a	backward	look.
That	first	great	love	affair	had	lasted	the	distance	to	the	next	town,	where
he’d	found	himself	transferred	onto	a	train	of	about	fifty	other	Grisian	farm
boys	and	girls	and	marching	an	imperial	road	down	to	Unta,	and	from	there
out	to	Malaz	Island	for	training	as	a	marine.	But	he	had	not	been	as
heartbroken	as	he	would	have	thought,	for	the	Malazan	forces	were	crowded
for	a	time	with	Dal	Honese	recruits	–	some	mysterious	population	explosion
or	political	upheaval	had	triggered	an	exodus	from	the	savanna	and	jungles	of
Dal	Hon.	And	he	had	soon	realized	that	his	worship	of	midnight	skin	and
midnight	eyes	did	not	doom	him	to	abject	longing	and	eternal	solitude.
Until	he	first	met	Kisswhere,	who	had	but	laughed	at	his	attempts,	as
smooth	and	honed	as	they	had	become	by	then.	And	it	was	this	rejection	that
stole	his	heart	for	all	time.
Yet	what	haunted	him	now	was,	perhaps	surprisingly,	not	all	of	that
unrequited	adoration.	It	was	what	he	had	seen,	or	maybe	but	imagined,	in	that
dark	night	on	the	river,	after	the	blinding	flash	of	the	munitions	and	the	roar
that	shook	the	water,	that	one	black-skinned	hand,	reaching	up	out	of	the
choppy	waves,	the	spinning	swirl	of	the	current	awakening	once	more	in	the
wake	of	the	tumult,	parting	round	the	elegant	wrist	–	and	then	that	hand	slipped
away,	or	was	simply	lost	to	his	straining	sight,	his	desperate,	anguished	search
in	the	grainy	darkness	–	the	hand,	the	skin,	the	dark,	dark	skin	that	so	defeated
him	that	night…
Oh,	he	wanted	to	die,	now.	To	end	his	misery.	She	was	gone.	Her	sister	was
gone,	too	–	a	sister	who	had	drawn	him	to	one	side	just	two	nights	earlier	and
had	whispered	in	his	ear,	‘Don’t	give	up	on	her,	Prav.	I	know	my	sister,	you	see,


and	there’s	a	look	growing	in	her	eyes	when	she	glances	your	way…so,	don’t
give	up…’
Both	gone,	and	that,	as	Badan	repeated	again	and	again	when	he	thought
no-one	else	was	close	enough	to	hear	him,	is	that.	And	that	is	that.
Sergeant	Primly	came	up	then	and	slapped	Pravalak	on	one	shoulder.
‘Ready,	Corporal?	Good.	Lead	your	squad,	just	like	Sinter	would’ve	done.
Lead	’em,	Prav,	and	let’s	go	gut	some	Edur.’
	
Skulldeath,	whose	name	had	once	been	Tribole	Futan,	last	surviving	male	of
the	Futani	royal	line	of	the	Gilani	tribe	of	southeast	Seven	Cities,	slowly
straightened	as	he	watched	the	heavies	work	their	way	up	the	slope	towards	the
sounds	of	fighting.
He	readied	his	two	Gilani	tulwars,	which	had	once	belonged	to	a	Falah’dan
champion	–	his	great-uncle	–	who	had	fallen	to	an	assassin’s	poison	three	years
before	the	Malazan	invasion,	when	Tribole	had	been	a	child	not	yet	cast	out
onto	the	mortal	sands.	Weapons	he	had	inherited	as	last	of	the	line	in	a	family
shattered	by	a	feud,	such	as	were	common	throughout	all	of	Seven	Cities
before	the	conquest.	The	tulwars	seemed	large	in	his	hands,	almost	oversized
for	his	wrists	–	but	he	was	Gilani	and	his	tribe	were	a	people	characterized	by
bodies	virtually	devoid	of	fat.	Muscles	like	ropes,	long,	gracile	and	far
stronger	than	they	appeared.
The	softness	of	his	feminine	eyes	did	not	change	as	he	studied	the	tulwars,
remembering	when	he	had	been	a	very	young	child	and	these	weapons,	if
balanced	on	their	curved	tips,	could	be	made	to	stand	if	he	set	the	silver
pommels	into	his	armpits,	and,	gripping	the	handles	just	above	the	hilts,	he
would	pitch	himself	round	the	camp	like	an	imp	with	but	one	leg.	Not	long
after	that,	he	was	using	weighted	sticks	carved	to	match	these	tulwars	of	his
great-uncle’s.	Working	the	patterns	in	the	Gilani	style,	both	afoot	and	atop	a
desert	horse	where	he	learned	to	perch	on	the	balls	of	his	feet	and	practise	the
lishgar	efhanah,	the	leaping	attack,	the	Edged	Net.	Many	a	night	with	bruised
shoulders,	then,	until	he	learned	how	to	roll	clean	after	the	mid-air	attack	was
done,	the	three	stuffed-grass	dummies	each	sliced	into	pieces,	the	wind
plucking	at	those	golden	grasses	as	they	drifted	in	the	dusty	air.	And	he,
rolling,	upright	once	more,	weapons	at	the	ready.
He	was	not	tall.	He	was	not	outspoken	and	his	smile	–	rare	as	it	was	–	was
as	shy	as	a	young	maiden’s.	Men	wanted	him	in	their	beds.	So	did	women.	But
he	was	of	the	royal	line,	and	his	seed	was	the	last	seed,	and	one	day	he	would
give	it	to	a	queen,	perhaps	even	an	empress,	as	befitted	his	true	station.	In	the


meantime,	he	would	let	men	use	him	as	they	would,	and	even	find	pleasure	in
that,	harmless	as	it	was.	But	he	refused	to	spill	his	seed.
He	stood	now,	and	when	the	signal	was	given,	he	moved	forward,	light	on
his	feet.
Skulldeath	was	twenty-three	years	old.	Such	was	his	discipline	that	he	had
not	spilled	seed	once,	not	even	in	his	sleep.
As	the	squad	mage	Mulvan	Dreader	would	say	later,	Skulldeath	was	truly	a
man	about	to	explode.
And	a	certain	Master	Sergeant	on	Malaz	Island	had	got	it	right.	Again.
	
Urb	ran	back	from	the	Factor ’s	house	as	fast	as	he	could,	angling	his	shield	to
cover	his	right	shoulder.	The	damned	woman!	Standing	there	with	a	damned
cask	lid	with	a	flight	of	lances	about	to	wing	her	way.	Oh,	her	soldiers
worshipped	her	all	right,	and	so	blind	was	that	worship	that	not	one	of	them
could	see	all	that	Urb	did	just	to	keep	the	fool	woman	alive.	He	was	exhausted
and	a	nervous	wreck	besides	and	now	–	this	time	–	it	looked	as	if	he	would	be
too	late.
Five	paces	from	Hellian	and	out	went	a	half-dozen	lances,	two	winging	to
intercept	Urb.	Skidding	as	he	pivoted	round	behind	his	shield,	he	lost	sight	of
her.
One	lance	darted	past	a	hand’s	width	from	his	face.	The	other	struck	true
against	the	shield,	the	iron	head	punching	through	to	impale	his	upper	arm,
pinning	it	to	his	side.	The	impact	spun	Urb	round	and	he	staggered	as	the	lance
pulled	at	him,	and,	grunting,	he	slid	down	on	his	knees,	the	hard	cobbles
driving	shocks	up	his	legs.	He	slammed	his	sword-hand	down	–	still	clutching
the	weapon	–	to	keep	from	pitching	forward,	and	heard	a	knuckle	crack.
At	that	instant,	the	world	exploded	white.
	
Four	lances	speeding	Hellian’s	way	came	close	to	sobering	her	up.	Crouching,
she	lifted	her	flimsy,	undersized	shield,	only	to	have	it	hammered	from	her
hand	in	a	splintering	concussion	that	sent	it	spinning,	the	snapped	foreshafts	of
two	lances	buried	deep	in	the	soaked,	heavy,	wonderful-smelling	wood.	Then
her	helm	was	torn	from	her	head	with	a	deafening	clang,	even	as	she	was
struck	a	glancing	blow	on	her	right	shoulder	that	ripped	away	the	leather
shingles	of	her	armour.	That	impact	turned	her	right	round	so	that	she	faced	up
the	street,	and,	upon	seeing	the	clay	bottle	she	had	thrown	away	moments


earlier,	she	dived	towards	it.
Better	to	die	with	one	last	mouthful—
The	air	above	her	whistled	as	she	sailed	through	the	air	and	she	saw	maybe
a	dozen	lances	flit	overhead.
She	slammed	chest-first	on	the	dusty	cobbles,	all	breath	punched	from	her
lungs	and	stared,	bug-eyed,	as	the	bottle	leapt	of	its	own	accord	into	the	air.
Then	she	was	lifted	by	her	feet	and	flipped	straight	over	to	thump	hard	on	her
back,	and	above	her	the	blue	sky	was	suddenly	grey	with	dust	and	gravel,	stone
chips,	red	bits,	all	raining	down.
She	could	not	hear	a	thing,	and	that	first	desperate	breath	was	so	thick	with
dust	that	she	convulsed	in	a	fit	of	coughing.	Twisting	onto	her	side,	she	saw
Urb	maybe	six	paces	away.	The	idiot	had	got	himself	skewered	and	looked
even	more	stunned	than	usual.	His	face	was	white	with	dust	except	the	blood	on
his	lips	from	a	tooth	gash,	and	he	was	staring	dumbly	down	the	street	to	where
all	the	Edur	were	–	might	be	they	were	charging	them	now	so	she’d	better	find
her	sword—
She’d	just	sat	up	when	a	hand	slapped	her	shoulder	and	she	glared	up	at	an
unfamiliar	face	–	a	Kanese	woman	frowning	intently	at	her.	With	a	voice	that
seemed	far	away	she	said,	‘Still	with	us,	Sergeant?	You	shouldn’t	ever	be	that
close	to	a	cusser,	you	know.’
And	then	she	was	gone.
Hellian	blinked.	She	squinted	down	the	street	and	saw	an	enormous	crater
where	the	Edur	had	been.	And	body	parts,	and	drifting	dust	and	smoke.
And	four	more	marines,	two	of	them	Dal	Honese,	loosing	quarrels	into	a
side	street	then	scattering	as	one	of	them	threw	a	sharper	in	the	same	direction.
Hellian	crawled	over	to	Urb.
He’d	managed	to	pull	the	lance	out	of	his	arm	which	had	probably	hurt,
and	there	was	plenty	of	blood	now,	pooling	beneath	him.	His	eyes	had	the	look
of	a	butchered	cow	though	maybe	not	as	dead	as	that	but	getting	there.
Another	marine	arrived,	another	stranger.	Black-haired,	pale	skin.	He	knelt
down	beside	Urb.
‘You,’	Hellian	said.
The	man	glanced	over.	‘None	of	your	wounds	look	to	kill	you,	Sergeant.
But	your	friend	here	is	going	fast,	so	let	me	do	my	work.’
‘What	squad,	damn	you?’
‘Tenth.	Third	Company.’
A	healer.	Well,	good.	Fix	Urb	right	up	so	she	could	kill	him.	‘You’re
Nathii,	aren’t	you?’
‘Sharp	woman,’	he	muttered	as	he	began	weaving	magic	over	the	huge


torn	hole	in	Urb’s	upper	arm.	‘Probably	even	sharper	when	you’re	sober.’
‘Never	count	on	that,	Cutter.’
‘I’m	not	really	a	cutter,	Sergeant.	I’m	a	combat	mage,	but	we	can’t	really
be	picky	about	those	things	any	more,	can	we?	I’m	Mulvan	Dreader.’
‘Hellian.	Eighth	Squad,	the	Fourth.’
He	shot	her	a	sudden	look.	‘Really.	You	one	of	the	ones	crawled	out	under
Y’Ghatan?’
‘Yeah.	Urb’s	gonna	live?’
The	Nathii	nodded.	‘Be	on	a	stretcher	for	a	while,	though.	All	the	lost
blood.’	He	straightened	and	looked	round.	‘Where	are	the	rest	of	your
soldiers?’
Hellian	looked	over	at	the	Factor ’s	house.	The	cusser	explosion	seemed	to
have	knocked	it	flat.	She	grunted.	‘Damned	if	I	know,	Mulvan.	You	don’t
happen	to	have	a	flask	of	something	on	you,	do	you?’
But	the	mage	was	frowning	at	the	wreckage	of	the	collapsed	house.	‘I	hear
calls	for	help,’	he	said.
Hellian	sighed.	‘Guess	you	found	’em	after	all,	Mulvan	Dreader.	Meaning
we’re	gonna	have	to	dig	’em	out.’	Then	she	brightened.	‘But	that’ll	work	us	up
a	thirst	now,	won’t	it?’
	
The	multiple	crack	of	sharpers	outside	the	tavern	and	the	biting	snap	of
shrapnel	striking	the	building’s	front	sent	the	Malazans	inside	flinching	back.
Screams	erupted	outside,	wailing	up	into	the	street’s	dust-filled	air.	Fiddler
watched	Gesler	grab	Stormy	to	keep	him	from	charging	out	there	–	the	huge
Falari	was	reeling	on	his	feet	–	then	he	turned	to	Mayfly,	Corabb	and	Tarr.
‘Let’s	meet	our	allies,	then,	but	stay	sharp.	Rest	of	you,	stay	here,	bind	wounds
–	Bottle,	where’s	Koryk	and	Smiles?’
But	the	mage	shook	his	head.	‘They	went	east	side	of	the	village,	Sergeant.’
‘All	right,	you	three	with	me,	then.	Bottle	–	can	you	do	something	for
Stormy?’
‘Aye.’
Fiddler	readied	his	crossbow,	then	led	the	way	to	the	tavern	entrance.	At	the
threshold	he	crouched	down,	peering	through	the	dust.
Allies	all	right.	Blessed	marines,	a	half-dozen,	walking	through	the
sprawled	Edur	bodies	and	silencing	the	screamers	with	quick	thrusts	of	their
swords.	Fiddler	saw	a	sergeant,	South	Dal	Honese,	short	and	wide	and	black	as
onyx.	The	woman	at	his	side	was	half	a	head	taller,	pale-skinned	and	greyeyed,	and	nearly	round	but	in	a	way	that	had	yet	to	sag.	Behind	these	two	stood


another	Dal	Honese,	this	one	wrinkled	with	pierced	everything	–	ears,	nose,
wattle,	cheeks	–	the	gold	ornaments	a	startling	contrast	to	his	dark	scowling
face.	A	damned	shaman.
Fiddler	approached,	his	eyes	on	the	sergeant.	There	was	fighting	still
going	on,	but	nowhere	close.	‘How	many	of	you?’
‘Seventeen	to	start,’	the	man	replied.	He	paused	to	look	down	at	the
barbaric	tusk-sword	in	his	hands.	‘Just	took	off	an	Edur ’s	head	with	this,’	he
said,	then	looked	up.	‘My	first	kill.’
Fiddler	gaped.	‘How	in	Hood’s	name	did	you	get	this	far	from	the	damned
coast,	then?	What	are	you	all,	Soletaken	bats?’
The	Dal	Honese	grimaced.	‘We	stole	a	fisher	boat	and	sailed	up.’
The	woman	at	his	side	spoke.	‘We	were	the	southmost	squads,	moving	east
till	we	hit	the	river,	then	it	was	either	wading	waist-deep	in	swamp	muck	or
taking	to	the	water.	Worked	fine	until	a	few	nights	ago,	when	we	ran	straight
into	a	Letherii	galley.	We	lost	a	few	that	night,’	she	added.
Fiddler	stared	at	her	a	moment	longer.	All	round	and	soft-looking,	except
for	those	eyes.	Hood	take	me,	this	one	could	pluck	the	skin	off	a	man	one	tiny
strip	at	a	time	with	one	hand	while	doing	herself	with	the	other.	He	looked
away,	back	to	the	sergeant.	‘What	company?’
‘Third.	I’m	Badan	Gruk,	and	you’re	Fiddler,	aren’t	you?’
‘Yeggetan,’	muttered	the	shaman	with	a	warding	gesture.
Badan	Gruk	turned	to	the	pale	woman.	‘Ruffle,	take	Vastly	and	Reliko	and
work	west	until	you	meet	up	with	Primly.	Then	back	here.’	He	faced	Fiddler
again.	‘We	caught	’em	good,	I	think.’
‘Thought	I	heard	a	cusser	a	while	back.’
A	nod.	‘Primly	had	the	sappers.	Anyway,	the	Edur	pulled	back,	so	I	suppose
we	scared	’em.’
‘Moranth	munitions	will	do	that.’
Badan	Gruk	glanced	away	again.	He	seemed	strangely	skittish.	‘We	never
expected	to	run	into	any	squads	this	far	east,’	he	said.	‘Not	unless	they	took	to
the	water	like	we	did.’	He	met	Fiddler ’s	eyes.	‘You’re	barely	a	day	from
Letheras,	you	know.’
	
Seven	Edur	had	turned	the	game	on	Koryk	and	Smiles,	pushing	them	into	a	less
than	promising	lane	between	decrepit,	leaning	tenements,	that	then	led	to	a
most	quaint	killing	ground	blocked	by	stacks	of	timber	on	all	sides	but	the	one
with	the	alley	mouth.
Pushing	Smiles	behind	him	as	he	backed	away	from	the	Edur	–	who


crowded	the	alley,	slowly	edging	forward	–	Koryk	readied	his	sword.	Handand-a-half	fighting	now	that	he’d	lost	his	shield.	If	the	bastards	threw	lances,
he’d	be	in	trouble.
The	thought	made	him	snort.	Him	against	seven	Tiste	Edur	and	all	he	had
behind	him	was	a	young	woman	who’d	used	up	all	her	throwing	knives	and
was	left	with	a	top-heavy	gutter	that	belonged	in	the	hands	of	a	butcher.
Trouble?	Only	if	they	threw	lances.
But	these	Edur	weren’t	interested	in	skewering	them	from	a	distance.	They
wanted	to	close,	and	Koryk	was	not	surprised	by	that.	Like	Seti,	these	grey
gaunts.	Face	to	face,	aye.	That	is	where	true	glory	is	found.	As	they	reached	the
mouth	of	the	alley,	Koryk	lifted	the	tip	of	his	sword	and	waved	them	forward.
‘Stay	right	back,’	he	said	to	Smiles	who	crouched	behind	him.	‘Give	me
plenty	of	room—’
‘To	do	what,	you	oaf?	Die	in	style?	Just	cut	a	few	and	I’ll	slide	in	low	and
finish	’em.’
‘And	get	a	pommel	through	the	top	of	your	head?	No,	stay	back.’
‘I	ain’t	staying	back	t’get	raped	by	all	the	ones	you	were	too	incompetent	to
kill	before	dying	yourself,	Koryk.’
‘Fine!	I’ll	punch	my	pommel	through	your	thick	skull,	then!’
‘Only	time	you’re	ever	gettin’	inside	of	me,	so	go	ahead	and	enjoy	it.’
‘Oh,	believe	me,	I	will—’
They	might	have	gone	on,	and	on,	but	the	Edur	had	fanned	out,	four	in
front	and	three	behind,	and	now	they	rushed	forward.
Koryk	and	Smiles	argued	often,	later,	about	whether	their	saviour
descended	on	wings	or	just	had	a	talent	for	leaping	extraordinary	distances,	for
he	arrived	in	a	blur,	sailing	right	across	the	path	of	the	first	four	Tiste	Edur,
and	in	that	silent	flight	he	seemed	to	writhe,	amidst	flashing	heavy	iron	blades.
A	flurry	of	odd	snicking	sounds	and	then	the	man	was	past	–	and	should	have
collided	badly	with	a	stack	of	rough-barked	wood.	Instead,	one	of	those
tulwars	touched	down	tip	first	on	a	log,	and	pivoting	on	that	single	point	of
contact	the	man	twisted	round	to	land	in	a	cat-like	crouch	against	the	slope	of
timbers	–	at	an	impossible	to	maintain	angle,	but	that	didn’t	matter	since	he	was
already	springing	back	the	way	he	had	come,	this	time	sailing	over	the
collapsing,	blood-drenched	forms	of	four	Tiste	Edur.	Snick	snick	snicksnick	–
and	the	back	three	Edur	toppled.
He	landed	again,	just	short	of	the	opposite	timber	wall	this	time,	head
ducking	and	shoulder	seeming	to	barely	brush	the	ground	before	he	tumbled
right	over,	touched	one	foot	on	a	horizontal	log	and	used	it	to	twist	round
before	landing	balanced	on	the	other	foot	now	drawn	tight	beneath	him.	Facing


the	seven	corpses	he	had	just	felled.
And	facing	two	Malazan	marines	who,	for	once	and	just	this	once,	had
precisely	nothing	to	say.
	
The	marines	of	the	3rd	and	4th	Companies	gathered	in	front	of	the	tavern,
stood	or	sat	on	the	bloodstained	cobbles	of	the	main	street.	Wounds	were
tended	to	here	and	there,	while	others	repaired	armour	or	filed	the	nicks	from
sword	edges.
Fiddler	sat	on	the	edge	of	a	water	trough	near	the	hitching	post	to	one	side
of	the	tavern	entrance,	taking	stock.	Since	the	coast,	the	three	other	squads	of
4th	Company	had	taken	losses.	Gone	from	Gesler ’s	squad	were	Sands	and	Uru
Hela.	From	Hellian’s,	Lutes	and	Tavos	Pond,	both	of	whom	had	died	in	this
cursed	village,	while	from	Urb’s	both	Hanno	and	now	Bowl	were	dead,	and
Saltlick	had	lost	his	left	hand.	Fiddler ’s	own	squad	had,	thus	far,	come	through
unscathed,	and	that	made	him	feel	guilty.	Like	one	of	Hood’s	minions,	one	in	the
row	just	the	other	side	of	the	gate.	Crow	feathers	in	hand,	or	wilted	roses,	or
sweetcakes,	or	any	of	the	countless	other	gifts	the	dead	were	eager	to	hand
their	newly	arrived	kin	–	gods	below,	Smiles	is	turning	me	into	another	Kanese
with	all	these	absurd	beliefs.	Ain’t	nobody	waiting	other	side	of	Hood’s	Gate,
unless	it’s	to	jeer.
The	two	sergeants	from	the	3rd	came	over.	Badan	Gruk,	whom	Fiddler	had
met	earlier,	and	the	Quon,	Primly.	They	made	an	odd	pair,	but	that	was	always
the	way,	wasn’t	it?
Primly	gave	Fiddler	a	strangely	deferential	nod.	‘We’re	fine	with	this,’	he
said.
‘With	what?’
‘Your	seniority,	Fiddler.	So,	what	do	we	do	now?’
Grimacing,	Fiddler	looked	away.	‘Any	losses?’
‘From	this	scrap?	No.	Those	Edur	pulled	out	fast	as	hares	in	a	kennel.	A	lot
shakier	than	we’d	expected.’
‘They	don’t	like	the	shield	to	shield	fighting,’	Fiddler	said,	scratching	at
his	filthy	beard.	‘They’ll	do	it,	aye,	especially	when	they’ve	got	Letherii	troops
with	them.	But	of	late	they	dropped	that	tactic,	since	with	our	munitions	we
made	it	a	costly	one.	No,	they’ve	been	hunting	us,	ambushing	us,	driving	us
hard.	Their	traditional	way	of	fighting,	I’d	guess.’
Primly	grunted.	‘Driving	you,	you	said.	So,	likely	there’s	a	damned	army
waiting	for	us	this	side	of	Letheras.	The	anvil.’
‘Aye,	which	is	why	I	think	we	should	wait	here	a	bit.	It’s	risky,	I	know,	since


the	Edur	might	return	and	next	time	there	might	be	a	thousand	of	them.’
Badan	Gruk’s	thinned	eyes	grew	yet	thinner.	‘Hoping	your	Fist	is	going	to
catch	up	with	a	lot	more	marines.’
‘Your	Fist	now,	too,	Badan	Gruk.’
A	sharp	nod,	then	a	scowl.	‘We	only	got	thrown	into	the	mix	because	of	the
4th’s	losses	at	Y’Ghatan.’
‘The	Adjunct	keeps	making	changes,’	Primly	said.	‘We	don’t	have	Fists	in
charge	of	nothing	but	marines	–	not	since	Crust’s	day—’
‘Well,	we	do	now.	We’re	not	in	the	Malazan	Army	any	more,	Primly.’
‘Yes,	Fiddler,	I’m	aware	of	that.’
‘That’s	my	suggestion,’	Fiddler	repeated.	‘Wait	here	for	a	while.	Let	our
mages	get	some	rest.	And	hope	Keneb	shows	and	hope	he’s	got	more	than	a
few	dozen	marines	with	him.	Now,	I’m	not	much	for	this	seniority	thing.	I’d
rather	we	sergeants	just	agreed	on	matters,	so	I’m	not	holding	you	to
anything.’
‘Gesler	agrees	with	you,	Fiddler?’
‘Aye.’
‘What	of	Hellian	and	Urb?’
Fiddler	laughed.	‘Tavern’s	still	wet,	Primly.’
	
The	sun	had	gone	down,	but	no-one	seemed	eager	to	go	anywhere.	Traffic	in
and	out	of	the	tavern	occurred	whenever	another	cask	needed	bringing	out.	The
tavern’s	main	room	was	a	slaughterhouse	no-one	was	inclined	to	stay	in	for
very	long.
Smiles	walked	over	to	where	Koryk	sat.	‘His	name’s	Skulldeath,	if	you	can
believe	that.’
‘Who?’
‘Nice	try.	You	know	who.	The	one	who	could	kill	you	with	his	big	toe.’
‘Been	thinking	about	that	attack,’	Koryk	said.	‘Only	works	if	they’re	not
expecting	it.’
Smiles	snorted.
‘No,	really.	I	see	someone	flying	at	me	I	cut	him	in	half.	It’s	not	like	he	can
retreat	or	change	his	mind,	is	it?’
‘You’re	an	idiot,’	she	said,	then	nudged	him.	‘Hey,	met	your	twin	brother,
too.	His	name	is	Vastly	Blank	and	between	you	two	I’d	say	he	got	all	the
brains.’
Koryk	glowered	at	her.	‘What	is	it	you	want	with	me,	Smiles?’
She	shrugged.	‘Skulldeath.	I’m	going	to	make	him	mine.’


‘Yours?’
‘Yes.	Did	you	know	he’s	saving	himself	for	a	woman	of	royal	blood?’
‘That’s	not	what	the	men	inclined	that	way	are	saying.’
‘Where’d	you	hear	that?’
‘Besides,	you’re	hardly	royal	blood,	Smiles.	Queen	of	shell-shuckers
won’t	cut	it.’
‘That’s	why	I	need	you	to	lie	for	me.	I	was	a	Kanese	princess	–	sent	into	the
Malazan	Army	to	keep	the	Claw	from	finding	me—’
‘Oh,	for	Hood’s	sake!’
‘Shh!	Listen,	the	rest	in	the	squad	said	they’d	be	happy	to	lie	for	me.	What’s
wrong	with	you?’
‘Happy…ha,	that’s	good.	Very	good.’	He	then	turned	to	study	her.	‘You’re
eager	for	Skulldeath	to	take	one	of	those	flying	leaps	straight	between	your
legs?	You	want	to	get	pregnant	with	some	prince	from	some	Seven	Cities
flying	squirrel	tribe?’
‘Pregnant?	Aye,	when	dolphins	walk	and	fish	nest	in	trees.	I	won’t	get
pregnant,’	she	pronounced.	‘Bottle’s	giving	me	some	herbs	to	take	care	of	that.
My	beloved	Skulldeath	can	empty	gallons	of	his	seed	into	me	for	Hooddamned	ever	and	there	won’t	be	any	little	jackrabbits	jumping	round.’
‘He’s	got	the	face	of	a	girl,’	Koryk	said.	‘And	the	men	say	he	kisses	like
one,	too.’
‘Who’s	telling	you	all	this?’
‘Saving	his	seed,	that’s	a	laugh.’
‘Listen,	those	men,	they	don’t	mean	nothing.	Now,	am	I	a	Kanese	princess
or	not?’
‘Oh,	aye.	Rival	to	the	empire’s	throne,	in	fact.	Be	the	flying	fish	to	the
flying	squirrel	and	make	your	nest	in	some	tree,	Smiles.	When	all’s	done
what’s	needed	doing.’
She	surprised	him	with	a	bright	smile.	‘Thanks,	Koryk.	You’re	a	true
friend.’
He	stared	after	her	as	she	hurried	off.	Poor	lass.	The	squirrel’s	saving	his
seed	because	he	doesn’t	know	what	to	do	with	it,	is	my	guess.
A	figure	walked	past	in	the	gloom	and	Koryk	squinted	until	he	recognized
the	man’s	gait.	‘Hey,	Bottle.’
The	young	mage	halted,	looked	over,	then,	feet	dragging,	approached.
Koryk	said,	‘You’re	supposed	to	be	asleep.’
‘Thanks.’
‘So	you’re	giving	Smiles	special	herbs,	are	you.	Why	do	you—’
‘I’m	what?’


‘Herbs.	So	she	won’t	get	pregnant.’
‘Look,	if	she	doesn’t	want	to	get	pregnant,	she	should	just	stop	straddling
every—’
‘Hold	on,	Bottle!	Wait.	I	thought	she’d	talked	to	you.	About	herbs	which
you	promised	to	give	her—’
‘Oh,	those	herbs.	No,	you	got	it	all	wrong,	Koryk.	Those	aren’t	to	keep	her
from	getting	pregnant.	In	fact,	it’s	some	concoction	of	my	grandmother ’s	and
I’ve	no	idea	if	it	even	works,	but	anyway,	it’s	got	nothing	to	do	with	not	getting
pregnant.	Why,	if	she’d	asked	me	about	that	kind	of	stuff,	sure,	there’s	some
very	reliable—’
‘Stop!	What	–	what	does	this	concoction	you’re	giving	her	do	to	her,
then?’
‘She’d	better	not	be	taking	it!	It’s	for	a	man—’
‘For	Skulldeath?’
‘Skulldeath?	What…’	Bottle	stared	down	for	a	long	moment.	‘Do	you
know	what	skulldeath	is,	Koryk?	It’s	a	plant	that	grows	on	Malaz	Island	and
maybe	Geni,	too.	You	see,	normally	there’s	male	plants	and	there’s	female
plants	and	that’s	how	you	get	fruit	and	the	like,	right?	Anyway,	not	so	with	the
sweet	little	skulldeath.	There’s	only	males	–	no	females	at	all.	Skulldeaths	loose
their	–	well,	they	spill	it	all	out	into	the	air,	and	it	ends	up	somehow	getting	into
the	seeds	of	other	plants	and	just	riding	along,	hiding,	until	that	seed	sprouts,
then	it	takes	over	and	suddenly,	another	nice	skulldeath	with	that	grey	flower
that’s	not	really	a	flower	at	all,	just	a	thin	sack	filled	with—’
‘So,	that	concoction	Smiles	asked	for	–	what	does	it	do?’
‘Supposed	to	change	a	man	who	prefers	other	men	into	one	who	prefers
women.	Does	it	work?	I	have	no	idea.’
‘Skulldeath	may	be	a	plant,’	Koryk	said,	‘but	it’s	also	the	name	for	a
soldier	in	Primly’s	squad.	A	pretty	one.’
‘Oh,	and	that	name…’
‘Is	obviously	very	appropriate,	Bottle.’
‘Oh.	Poor	Smiles.’
	
The	Factor ’s	house	might	have	looked	nice,	but	it	might	as	well	have	been
made	of	straw,	the	way	it	fell	down.	Astonishing	that	no-one	had	died	beneath
all	that	wreckage.	Urb	at	the	least	was	certainly	relieved	by	that,	though	his
mood	wilted	somewhat	after	Hellian	was	through	yelling	at	him.
In	any	case,	thereafter	satisfied	and	pleasantly	feeling…pleasant,	Hellian
was	anything	but	pleased	when	Balgrid’s	appallingly	unattractive	face	loomed


into	view	directly	in	front	of	her.	She	blinked	at	him.	‘You’re	shorter	than	I’d
thought.’
‘Sergeant,	I’m	kneeling.	What	are	you	doing	under	the	bar?’
‘I’m	not	the	one	who	keeps	movin’	it,	Baldy.’
‘The	other	sergeants	have	agreed	that	we’re	staying	here	for	a	while.	You
with	them	on	that,	Sergeant?’
‘Why	not?’
‘Good.	Oh,	did	you	know,	in	the	new	squads,	there’s	another	Kartoolii.’
‘Probbly	a	spy	–	they’re	still	after	me,	y’know.’
‘Why	would	they	be	after	you?’
‘Cause	I	did	something,	that’s	why.	Can’t	’member	’xactly	what,	but	it	was
bad	’nough	to	get	me	sent	here,	wasn’t	it?	A	damned	spy!’
‘I	doubt	he’s	anything—’
‘Yeah?	Fine,	make	him	come	’ere	and	kiss	my	feet,	then!	Tell	’im	I’m	the
Queen	of	Kartool!	An’	I	want	my	kissed	feet!	My	feeted	kiss,	I	mean.	Go	on,
damn	you!’
Less	than	six	paces	away,	tucked	beneath	the	bar	at	the	other	end,	sat
Skulldeath.	Hiding	from	that	pretty	but	way	too	lustful	woman	in	Fiddler ’s
squad.	And	at	Hellian’s	words	his	head	snapped	round	and	his	dark,	almondshaped	eyes,	which	had	already	broken	so	many	hearts,	slowly	widened	on	the
dishevelled	sergeant	crouched	in	a	pool	of	spilled	wine.
Queen	of	Kartool.
On	such	modest	things,	worlds	changed.
	
The	women	were	singing	an	ancient	song	in	a	language	that	was	anything	but
Imass.	Filled	with	strange	clicks	and	phlegmatic	stops,	along	with	rhythmic
gestures	of	the	hands,	and	the	extraordinary	twin	voices	emerging	from	each
throat,	the	song	made	the	hair	on	the	back	of	Hedge’s	neck	stand	on	end.
‘Eres’al,’	Quick	Ben	had	whispered,	looking	a	little	ashen	himself.	‘The	First
Language.’
No	wonder	it	made	the	skin	crawl,	awakening	faint	echoes	in	the	back	of
his	skull	–	as	if	stirring	to	life	the	soft	murmurings	of	his	mother	a	handful	of
days	after	he’d	been	born,	even	as	he	clung	by	the	mouth	to	her	tit	and	stared
stupidly	up	at	the	blur	of	her	face.	A	song	to	make	a	grown	man	feel	horribly
vulnerable,	weak	in	the	limbs	and	desperate	for	comfort.
Muttering	under	his	breath,	Hedge	plucked	at	Quick	Ben’s	sleeve.
The	wizard	understood	well	enough	and	they	both	rose,	then	backed	away
from	the	hearth	and	all	the	gathered	Imass.	Out	into	the	darkness	beneath	a


spray	of	glittering	stars,	up	into	the	sprawl	of	tumbled	boulders	away	from	the
rock	shelters	of	the	cliff	face.
Hedge	found	a	flat	stone	the	size	of	a	skiff,	lying	at	the	base	of	a	scree.	He
sat	down	on	it.	Quick	Ben	stood	nearby,	bending	down	to	collect	a	handful	of
gravel,	then	pacing	as	he	began	examining	his	collection	–	more	by	feel	than
sight	–	flinging	rejections	off	into	the	gloom	to	bounce	and	skitter.	‘So,
Hedge.’
‘What?’
‘How’s	Fiddler	these	days?’
‘It’s	not	like	I’m	squatting	on	his	shoulder	or	anything.’
‘Hedge.’
‘All	right,	I	catch	things	occasionally.	Whiffs.	Echoes.	He’s	still	alive,	I	can
say	that	much.’
Quick	Ben	paused.	‘Any	idea	what	the	Adjunct’s	up	to?’
‘Who?	No,	why	should	I	–	never	met	her.	You’re	the	one	should	be	doing
the	guessing,	wizard.	She	shackled	you	into	being	her	High	Mage,	after	all.	Me,
I’ve	been	wandering	for	what	seems	for	ever,	in	nothing	but	the	ashes	of	the
dead.	At	least	until	we	found	this	place,	and	it	ain’t	nearly	as	far	away	from	the
underworld	as	you	might	think.’
‘Don’t	tell	me	what	I	think,	sapper.	I	already	know	what	I	think	and	it’s	not
what	you	think.’
‘Well	now,	you’re	sounding	all	nervous	again,	Quick.	Little	heart	going
pitterpat?’
‘She	was	taking	them	to	Lether	–	to	the	Tiste	Edur	empire	–	once	she
managed	to	extricate	them	from	Malaz	harbour.	Now,	Cotillion	says	she
managed	that,	despite	my	disappearing	at	the	worst	possible	moment.	True,
some	nasty	losses.	Like	Kalam.	And	T’amber.	Me.	So,	Lether.	Pitching	her
measly	army	against	an	empire	spanning	half	a	continent	or	damn	near,	and
why?	Well,	maybe	to	deliver	some	vengeance	on	behalf	of	the	Malazan	Empire
and	every	other	kingdom	or	people	who	got	cut	up	by	those	roving	fleets.	But
maybe	that’s	not	it	at	all,	because,	let’s	face	it,	as	a	motive	it	sounds,	well,
insane.	And	I	don’t	think	the	Adjunct	is	insane.	So,	what’s	left?’
‘Sorry,	was	that	actually	a	question?	For	me?’
‘Of	course	not,	Hedge.	It	was	rhetorical.’
‘That’s	a	relief.	Go	on,	then.’
‘Seems	more	likely	she’s	set	herself	against	the	Crippled	God.’
‘Oh	yeah?	What’s	this	Lether	Empire	got	to	do	with	the	Crippled	God?’
‘A	whole	lot,	that’s	what.’
‘Meaning	me	and	Fiddler	are	back	fighting	the	same	damned	war.’


‘As	if	you	didn’t	already	know	that,	Hedge	–	and	no,	wipe	that	innocent
look	off	your	face.	It’s	not	dark	enough	and	you	know	that	so	that	look	is	for
me	and	it’s	a	damned	lie	so	get	rid	of	it.’
‘Ouch,	the	wizard’s	nerves	are	singing!’
‘This	is	why	I	liked	you	least	of	all,	Hedge.’
‘I	remember	once	you	being	scared	witless	of	a	recruit	named	Sorry,
because	she	was	possessed	by	a	god.	And	now	here	you	are,	working	for	that
god.	Amazing,	how	things	can	turn	right	round	in	ways	you’d	never	expect	nor
even	predict.’
The	wizard	stared	long	and	hard	at	the	sapper.	Then	he	said,	‘Now	hold	on,
Hedge.’
‘You	really	think	Sorry	was	there	to	get	at	the	Empress,	Quick?	Some
sordid	plan	for	vengeance	against	Laseen?	Why,	that	would	be…insane.’
‘What	are	you	getting	at?’
‘Just	wondering	if	you	should	be	as	sure	of	the	ones	you’re	working	for	as
you	think	you	are.	Because,	and	it	only	seems	this	way	to	me,	all	this	confusion
you’re	feeling	about	the	Adjunct	might	just	be	coming	from	some	wrongfooted,	uh,	misapprehensions	about	the	two	gods	crouching	in	your	shadow.’
‘Is	all	this	just	another	one	of	your	feelings?’
‘I	ain’t	Fiddler.’
‘No,	but	you’ve	been	so	close	to	him	–	in	his	damned	shadow	–	you’re
picking	up	all	his	uncanny,	whispered	suspicions,	and	don’t	even	try	to	deny	it,
Hedge.	So	now	I	better	hear	it	straight	from	you.	You	and	me,	are	we	fighting
on	the	same	side,	or	not?’
Hedge	grinned	up	at	him.	‘Maybe	not.	But,	just	maybe,	more	than	you
know,	wizard.’
Quick	Ben	had	selected	out	a	half-dozen	water-worn	pebbles.	Now	he	flung
the	rest	away.	‘That	answer	was	supposed	to	make	me	feel	better?’
‘How	do	you	think	I	feel?’	Hedge	demanded.	‘Been	at	your	damned	side,
Quick,	since	Raraku!	And	I	still	don’t	know	who	or	even	what	you	are!’
‘What’s	your	point?’
‘It’s	this.	I’m	beginning	to	suspect	that	even	Cotillion	–	and	Shadowthrone
–	don’t	know	you	half	as	well	as	they	might	think.	Which	is	why	they’re	now
keeping	you	close.	And	which	is	why,	too,	they	maybe	made	sure	you	ended	up
without	Kalam	right	there	guarding	your	back.’
‘If	you’re	right	–	about	Kalam	–	there’s	going	to	be	trouble.’
Hedge	shrugged.	‘All	I’m	saying	is,	maybe	the	plan	was	for	Sorry	to	be
right	there,	right	now,	beside	Fiddler.’
‘The	Adjunct	didn’t	even	have	an	army	then,	Hedge.	What	you’re


suggesting	is	impossible.’
‘Depends	on	how	much	Kellanved	and	Dancer	saw	–	and	came	to
understand	–	when	they	left	their	empire	and	went	in	search	of	ascendancy.’
The	sapper	paused,	then	said,	‘They	walked	the	paths	of	the	Azath,	didn’t	they?’
‘Almost	no-one	knows	that,	Hedge.	You	sure	didn’t…before	you	died.
Which	brings	us	back	to	the	path	you	ended	up	walking,	after	you’d	gone	and
blown	yourself	up	in	Black	Coral.’
‘You	mean,	after	I	did	my	own	ascending?’
‘Yes.’
‘I	already	told	you	most	of	it.	The	Bridgeburners	ascended.	Blame	some
Spiritwalker.’
‘And	now	there’s	more	of	you	damned	fools	wandering	around.	Hood	take
you	all,	Hedge,	there	were	some	real	nasty	people	in	the	Bridgeburners.	Brutal
and	vicious	and	outright	evil—’
‘Rubbish.	And	I’ll	tell	you	a	secret	and	maybe	one	day	it’ll	do	you	good,
too.	Dying	humbles	ya.’
‘I	don’t	need	any	humbling,	Hedge,	which	is	fine	since	I	don’t	plan	on
dying	any	time	soon.’
‘Best	stay	light	on	your	toes,	then.’
‘You	guarding	my	back,	Hedge?’
‘I	ain’t	no	Kalam,	but	aye,	I	am.’
‘For	now.’
‘For	now.’
‘That	will	have	to	do,	I	suppose—’
‘Mind	you,	only	if	you’re	guarding	mine,	Quick.’
‘Of	course.	Loyalty	to	the	old	squad	and	all	that.’
‘So	what	are	damned	pebbles	for?	As	if	I	couldn’t	guess.’
‘We’re	heading	into	an	ugly	scrap,	Hedge.’	He	rounded	on	the	sapper.	‘And
listen,	about	those	damned	cussers	–	if	you	blow	me	into	tiny	pieces	I	will
come	back	for	you,	Hedge.	That’s	a	vow,	sworn	by	every	damned	soul	in	me.’
‘Now	that	raises	a	question,	don’t	it?	Just	how	long	do	all	of	those	souls
plan	on	hiding	in	there,	Ben	Adaephon	Delat?’
The	wizard	eyed	him,	and,	predictably,	said	nothing.
	
Trull	Sengar	stood	at	the	very	edge	of	the	fire’s	light,	beyond	the	gathered
Imass.	The	women’s	song	had	sunk	into	a	series	of	sounds	that	a	mother	might
make	to	her	babe,	soft	sounds	of	comfort,	and	Onrack	had	explained	how	this
Eres’al	song	was	in	fact	a	kind	of	traverse,	back	into	the	roots	of	language,


beginning	with	the	bizarre	yet	clearly	complex	adult	Eres	language	with	its	odd
clicks	and	stops	and	all	the	gestures	that	provided	punctuation,	then	working
backward	and	growing	ever	more	simplified	even	as	it	became	more	musical.
The	effect	was	eerie	and	strangely	disturbing	to	the	Tiste	Edur.
Music	and	song	among	his	people	was	a	static	thing,	fixated	within	ritual.	If
the	ancient	tales	were	true,	there	had	once	been	a	plethora	of	instruments	in	use
among	the	Tiste	Edur,	but	most	of	these	were	now	unknown,	beyond	the	names
given	them.	Voice	now	stood	in	their	stead	and	Trull	began	to	sense	that,
perhaps,	something	had	been	lost.
The	gestures	among	the	women	had	transformed	into	dance,	sinuous	and
swaying	and	now,	suddenly,	sexual.
A	low	voice	beside	him	said,	‘Before	the	child,	there	is	passion.’
Trull	glanced	over	and	was	surprised	to	see	one	of	the	T’lan,	the	clan
chief,	Hostille	Rator.
An	array	of	calcified	bones	were	knotted	in	the	filthy	long	hair	dangling
from	the	warrior ’s	mottled,	scarred	pate.	His	brow	ridge	dominated	the	entire
face,	burying	the	eyes	in	darkness.	Even	clothed	in	the	flesh	of	life,	Hostille
Rator	seemed	deathly.
‘Passion	begets	the	child,	Tiste	Edur.	Do	you	see?’
Trull	nodded.	‘Yes.	I	think	so.’
‘So	it	was,	long	ago,	at	the	Ritual.’
Ah.
‘The	child,	alas,’	the	clan	chief	continued,	‘grows	up.	And	what	was	once
passion	is	now…’
Nothing.
Hostille	Rator	resumed.	‘There	was	a	Bonecaster	here,	among	these	clans.
She	saw,	clearly,	the	illusion	of	this	realm.	And	saw,	too,	that	it	was	dying.	She
sought	to	halt	the	bleeding	away,	by	sacrificing	herself.	But	she	is	failing	–	her
spirit	and	her	will,	they	are	failing.’
Trull	frowned	at	Hostille	Rator.	‘How	did	you	come	to	know	of	this
place?’
‘She	gave	voice	to	her	pain,	her	anguish.’	The	T’lan	was	silent	a	moment,
then	he	added,	‘It	was	our	intention	to	answer	the	call	of	the	Gathering	–	but	the
need	in	her	voice	was	undeniable.	We	could	not	turn	aside,	even	when	what	we
surrendered	was	–	possibly	–	our	final	rest.’
‘So	now	you	are	here,	Hostille	Rator.	Onrack	believes	you	would	usurp
Ulshun	Pral,	but	for	Rud	Elalle’s	presence	–	the	threat	he	poses	you.’
A	glitter	from	the	darkness	beneath	those	brow	ridges.	‘You	do	not	even
whisper	these	things,	Edur.	Would	you	see	weapons	drawn	this	night,	even	after


the	gift	of	the	First	Song?’
‘No.	Yet,	perhaps,	better	now	than	later.’
Trull	now	saw	that	the	two	T’lan	Bonecasters	had	moved	up	behind
Hostille	Rator.	The	singing	from	the	women	had	ceased	–	had	it	been	an	abrupt
end?	Trull	could	not	recall.	In	any	case,	it	was	clear	that	all	those	present	were
now	listening	to	this	conversation.	He	saw	Onrack	emerge	from	the	crowd,
saw	his	friend’s	stone	sword	gripped	in	both	hands.
Trull	addressed	Hostille	Rator	once	more,	his	tone	even	and	calm.	‘You
three	have	stood	witness	to	all	that	you	once	were—’
‘It	will	not	survive,’	the	clan	chief	cut	in.	‘How	can	we	embrace	this
illusion	when,	upon	its	fading,	we	must	return	to	what	we	truly	are?’
From	the	crowd	Rud	Elalle	spoke,	‘No	harm	shall	befall	my	people	–	not
by	your	hand,	Hostille	Rator,	nor	that	of	your	Bonecasters.	Nor,’	he	added,
‘that	of	those	who	are	coming	here.	I	intend	to	lead	the	clans	away	–	to	safety.’
‘There	is	no	safety,’	Hostille	Rator	said.	‘This	realm	dies,	and	so	too	will
all	that	is	within	it.	And	there	can	be	no	escape.	Rud	Elalle,	without	this	realm,
your	clans	do	not	even	exist.’
Onrack	said,	‘I	am	T’lan,	like	you.	Feel	the	flesh	that	now	clothes	you.	The
muscle,	the	heat	of	blood.	Feel	the	breath	in	your	lungs,	Hostille	Rator.	I	have
looked	into	your	eyes	–	each	of	you	three	–	and	I	see	what	no	doubt	resides	in
mine.	The	wonder.	The	remembering.’
‘We	cannot	permit	it,’	said	the	Bonecaster	named	Til’aras	Benok.	‘For
when	we	leave	this	place,	Onrack…’
‘Yes,’	Trull’s	friend	whispered.	‘It	will	be…too	much.	To	bear.’
‘There	was	passion	once,’	Hostille	Rator	said.	‘For	us.	It	can	never	return.
We	are	children	no	longer.’
‘None	of	you	understand!’
Rud	Elalle’s	sudden	shriek	startled	everyone,	and	Trull	saw	Ulshun	Pral	–
on	his	face	an	expression	of	distress	–	reach	out	a	hand	to	his	adopted	son,	who
angrily	brushed	it	away	as	he	stepped	forward,	the	fire	in	his	eyes	as	fierce	as
that	in	the	hearth	beyond.	‘Stone,	earth,	trees	and	grasses.	Beasts.	The	sky	and
the	stars!	None	of	this	is	an	illusion!’
‘A	trapped	memory—’
‘No,	Bonecaster,	you	are	wrong.’	He	struggled	to	hold	back	his	anger,	and
spun	to	face	Onrack.	‘I	see	your	heart,	Onrack	the	Broken.	I	know,	you	will
stand	with	me	–	in	the	time	that	comes.	You	will!’
‘Yes,	Rud	Elalle.’
‘Then	you	believe!’
Onrack	was	silent.


Hostille	Rator ’s	laugh	was	a	soft,	bitter	rasp.	‘It	is	this,	Rud	Elalle.	Onrack
of	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass	chooses	to	fight	at	your	side,	chooses	to	fight	for
these	Bentract,	because	he	cannot	abide	the	thought	of	returning	to	what	he
once	was,	and	so	he	would	rather	die	here.	And	death	is	what	Onrack	the
Broken	anticipates	–	indeed,	what	he	now	yearns	for.’
Trull	studied	his	friend,	and	saw	on	Onrack’s	firelit	face	the	veracity	of
Hostille	Rator ’s	words.
The	Tiste	Edur	did	not	hesitate.	‘Onrack	will	not	stand	alone,’	he	said.
Til’aras	Benok	faced	Trull.	‘You	surrender	your	life,	Edur,	to	defend	an
illusion?’
‘That,	Bonecaster,	is	what	we	mortals	delight	in	doing.	You	bind	yourself
to	a	clan,	to	a	tribe,	to	a	nation	or	an	empire,	but	to	give	force	to	the	illusion	of
a	common	bond,	you	must	feed	its	opposite	–	that	all	those	not	of	your	clan,	or
tribe,	or	empire,	do	not	share	that	bond.	I	have	seen	Onrack	the	Broken,	a	T’lan
Imass.	And	now	I	have	seen	him,	mortal	once	again.	To	the	joy	and	the	life	in
the	eyes	of	my	friend,	I	will	fight	all	those	who	deem	him	their	enemy.	For	the
bond	between	us	is	one	of	friendship,	and	that,	Til’aras	Benok,	is	not	an
illusion.’
Hostille	Rator	asked	Onrack,	‘In	your	mercy,	as	you	have	now	found	it
alive	once	more	in	your	soul,	will	you	now	reject	Trull	Sengar	of	the	Tiste
Edur?’
And	the	warrior	bowed	his	head	and	said,	‘I	cannot.’
‘Then,	Onrack	the	Broken,	your	soul	shall	never	find	peace.’
‘I	know.’
Trull	felt	as	if	he	had	been	punched	in	the	chest.	It	was	all	very	well	to
make	his	bold	claims,	in	ferocious	sincerity	that	could	only	come	of	true
friendship.	It	was	yet	another	thing	to	discover	the	price	it	demanded	in	the	soul
of	the	one	he	called	friend.	‘Onrack,’	he	whispered	in	sudden	anguish.
But	this	moment	would	not	await	all	that	might	have	been	said,	all	that
needed	to	be	said,	for	Hostille	Rator	had	turned	to	face	his	Bonecasters,	and
whatever	silent	communication	passed	among	these	three	was	quick,	decisive,
for	the	clan	chief	swung	round	and	walked	towards	Ulshun	Pral.	Whereupon	he
fell	to	one	knee	and	bowed	his	head.	‘We	are	humbled,	Ulshun	Pral.	We	are
shamed	by	these	two	strangers.	You	are	the	Bentract.	As	were	we,	once,	long
ago.	We	now	choose	to	remember.	We	now	choose	to	fight	in	your	name.	In
our	deaths	there	will	be	naught	but	honour,	this	we	vow.’	He	then	rose	and
faced	Rud	Elalle.	‘Soletaken,	will	you	accept	us	as	your	soldiers?’
‘As	soldiers?	No.	As	friends,	as	Bentract,	yes.’
The	three	T’lan	bowed	to	him.


All	of	this	passed	in	a	blur	before	Trull	Sengar ’s	eyes.	Since	Onrack	the
Broken’s	admission,	it	seemed	as	if	Trull’s	entire	world	had,	with	grinding,
stone-crushing	irresistibility,	turned	on	some	vast,	unimagined	axis	–	yet	he
was	drawn	round	again	by	a	hand	on	his	shoulder,	and	Onrack,	now	standing
before	him.
‘There	is	no	need,’	the	Imass	warrior	said.	‘I	know	something	even	Rud
Elalle	does	not,	and	I	tell	you	this,	Trull	Sengar,	there	is	no	need.	Not	for	grief.
Nor	regret.	My	friend,	listen	to	me.	This	world	will	not	die.’
And	Trull	found	no	will	within	him	to	challenge	that	assertion,	to	drive
doubt	into	his	friend’s	earnest	gaze.	After	a	moment,	then,	he	simply	sighed
and	nodded.	‘So	be	it,	Onrack.’
‘And,	if	we	are	careful,’	Onrack	continued,	‘neither	shall	we.’
‘As	you	say,	friend.’
	
Thirty	paces	away	in	the	darkness,	Hedge	turned	to	Quick	Ben	and	hissed,
‘What	do	you	make	of	all	that,	wizard?’
Quick	Ben	shrugged.	‘Seems	the	confrontation	has	been	averted,	if	Hostille
Rator ’s	kneeling	before	Ulshun	Pral	didn’t	involve	picking	up	a	dropped	fang
or	something.’
‘A	dropped	–	what?’
‘Never	mind.	That’s	not	the	point	at	all,	anyway.	But	I	now	know	I	am	right
in	one	thing	and	don’t	ask	me	how	I	know.	I	just	do.	Suspicion	into	certainty.’
‘Well,	go	on,	damn	you.’
‘Just	this,	Hedge.	The	Finnest.	Of	Scabandari	Bloodeye.	It’s	here.’
‘Here?	What	do	you	mean,	here?’
‘Here,	sapper.	Right	here.’
	
The	gate	was	a	shattered	mess	on	one	side.	The	huge	cyclopean	stones	that	had
once	formed	an	enormous	arch	easily	five	storeys	high	had	the	appearance	of
having	been	blasted	apart	by	multiple	impacts,	flinging	some	of	the	shaped
blocks	a	hundred	paces	or	more	from	the	entranceway.	The	platform	the	arch
had	once	spanned	was	heaved	and	buckled	as	if	some	earthquake	had	rippled
through	the	solid	bedrock	beneath	the	pavestones.	The	other	side	was
dominated	by	a	tower	of	still	standing	blocks,	corkscrew-twisted	and
seemingly	precariously	balanced.
The	illusion	of	bright	daylight	had	held	during	this	last	part	of	the	journey,


as	much	by	the	belligerent	insistence	of	Udinaas	as	by	the	amused	indulgence
of	Clip.	Or,	perhaps,	Silchas	Ruin’s	impatience.	The	foremost	consequence	of
this	was	that	Seren	Pedac	was	exhausted	–	and	Udinaas	looked	no	better.	Like
the	two	Tiste	Andii,	however,	Kettle	seemed	impervious	–	with	all	the
boundless	energy	of	a	child,	Seren	supposed,	raising	the	possibility	that	at
some	moment	not	too	far	off	she	would	simply	collapse.
Seren	could	see	that	Fear	Sengar	was	weary	as	well,	but	probably	that	had
more	to	do	with	the	unpleasant	burden	settling	ever	more	heavily	upon	his
shoulders.	She	had	been	harsh	and	unforgiving	of	herself	in	relating	to	the
Tiste	Edur	the	terrible	crime	she	had	committed	upon	Udinaas,	and	she	had
done	so	in	the	hope	that	Fear	Sengar	would	–	with	a	look	of	unfeigned	and
most	deserving	disgust	in	his	eyes	–	choose	to	reject	her,	and	his	own	vow	to
guard	her	life.
But	the	fool	had	instead	held	to	that	vow,	although	she	could	see	the	brutal
awakening	of	regret.	He	would	not	–	could	not	–	break	his	word.
It	was	getting	easier	to	disdain	these	bold	gestures,	the	severity	so	readily
embraced	by	males	of	any	species.	Some	primitive	holdover,	she	reasoned,	of
the	time	when	possessing	a	woman	meant	survival,	not	of	anything	so	prosaic
as	one’s	own	bloodline,	but	possession	in	the	manner	of	ownership,	and
survival	in	the	sense	of	power.	There	had	been	backward	tribes	all	along	the
fringe	territories	of	the	Letherii	kingdom	where	such	archaic	notions	were
practised,	and	not	always	situations	where	men	were	the	owners	and	wielders
of	power	–	for	sometimes	it	was	the	women.	In	either	case,	history	had	shown
that	such	systems	could	only	survive	in	isolation,	and	only	among	peoples	for
whom	magic	had	stagnated	into	a	chaotic	web	of	proscriptions,	taboos	and	the
artifice	of	nonsensical	rules	–	where	the	power	offered	by	sorcery	had	been
usurped	by	profane	ambitions	and	the	imperatives	of	social	control.
Contrary	to	Hull	Beddict’s	romantic	notions	of	such	people,	Seren	Pedac
had	come	to	feel	little	remorse	when	she	thought	about	their	inevitable	and
often	bloody	extinction.	Control	was	ever	an	illusion,	and	its	maintenance
could	only	persist	when	in	isolation.	Not	to	say,	of	course,	that	the	Letherii
system	was	one	of	unfettered	freedom	and	the	liberty	of	individual	will.
Hardly.	One	imposition	had	been	replaced	by	another.	But	at	the	very	least	it’s
not	one	divided	by	gender.
The	Tiste	Edur	were	different.	Their	notions…primitive.	Offer	a	sword,
bury	it	at	the	threshold	of	one’s	home,	the	symbolic	exchange	of	vows	so
archaic	no	words	were	even	necessary.	In	such	a	ritual,	no	negotiation	was
possible,	and	if	marriage	did	not	involve	negotiation	then	it	was	not	marriage.
No,	just	mutual	ownership.	Or	not-so-mutual	ownership.	Such	a	thing	deserved


little	respect.
And	now,	here,	it	was	not	even	a	prospective	husband	laying	claim	to	her
life,	but	that	prospective	husband’s	damned	brother.	And,	to	make	the	entire
situation	yet	more	absurd,	the	prospective	husband	was	dead.	Fear	will	defend
to	the	death	my	right	to	marry	a	corpse.	Or,	rather,	the	corpse’s	right	to	claim
me.	Well,	that	is	madness	and	I	will	not	–	I	do	not	–	accept	it.	Not	for	a	moment.
Yes,	I	have	moved	past	self-pity.	Now	I’m	just	angry.
Because	he	refused	to	let	his	disgust	dissuade	him.
For	all	her	notions	of	defiance,	that	last	thought	stung	her.
Udinaas	had	moved	past	her	to	study	the	ruined	gate,	and	now	he	turned	to
Clip.	‘Well,	does	it	yet	live?’
The	Tiste	Andii’s	chain	and	rings	were	spinning	from	one	finger	again,
and	he	offered	the	Letherii	slave	a	cool	smile.	‘The	last	road	to	walk,’	he	said,
‘lies	on	the	other	side	of	the	gate.’
‘So	who	got	mad	and	kicked	it	to	pieces,	Clip?’
‘Of	no	consequence	any	more,’	Clip	replied,	his	smile	broadening.
‘You	have	no	idea,	in	other	words,’	Udinaas	said.	‘Well,	if	we’re	to	go
through	it,	let’s	stop	wasting	time.	I’ve	almost	given	up	hoping	that	you’ll	end
up	garrotting	yourself	with	that	chain.	Almost.’
His	last	comment	seemed	to	startle	Clip	for	some	reason.
And	all	at	once	Seren	Pedac	saw	that	chain	with	its	rings	differently.	By	the
Errant!	Why	did	I	not	see	it	before?	It	is	a	garrotte.	Clip	is	a	damned	assassin!
She	snorted.	‘And	you	claim	to	be	a	Mortal	Sword!	You’re	nothing	but	a
murderer,	Clip.	Yes,	Udinaas	saw	that	long	ago	–	which	is	why	you	hate	him
so.	He	was	never	fooled	by	all	those	weapons	you	carry.	And	now,	neither	am
I.’
‘We’re	wasting	time	indeed,’	Clip	said,	once	more	seemingly	unperturbed,
and	he	turned	and	approached	the	huge	gate.	Silchas	Ruin	set	out	after	him,	and
Seren	saw	that	the	White	Crow	had	his	hands	on	the	grips	of	his	swords.
‘Danger	ahead,’	Fear	Sengar	announced	and	yes,	damn	him,	he	then	moved
from	his	position	just	behind	Seren’s	right	shoulder	to	directly	in	front	of	her.
And	drew	his	sword.
Udinaas	witnessed	all	this	and	grunted	dismissively,	then	half	turned	and
said,	‘Silchas	Ruin’s	earned	his	paranoia,	Fear.	But	even	that	doesn’t	mean
we’re	about	to	jump	into	a	pit	of	dragons.’	He	then	smiled	without	any	humour.
‘Not	that	dragons	live	in	pits.’
When	he	walked	after	the	two	Tiste	Andii,	Kettle	ran	up	to	take	his	hand.	At
first	Udinaas	reacted	as	if	her	touch	had	burned	him,	but	then	his	resistance
vanished.


Clip	reached	the	threshold,	stepped	forward	and	disappeared.	A	moment
later	Silchas	Ruin	did	the	same.
Neither	Udinaas	nor	Kettle	hesitated.
Reaching	the	same	point,	Fear	Sengar	paused	and	eyed	her.	‘What	is	in
your	mind,	Acquitor?’	he	asked.
‘Do	you	think	I	might	abandon	you	all,	Fear?	Watch	you	step	through	and,
assuming	you	can’t	get	back,	I	just	turn	round	and	walk	this	pointless	road	–
one	I	probably	would	never	leave?	Is	that	choice	left	to	me?’
‘All	choices	are	left	to	you,	Acquitor.’
‘You	too,	I	would	say.	Except,	of	course,	for	the	ones	you	willingly
surrendered.’
‘Yes.’
‘You	admit	that	so	easily.’
‘Perhaps	it	seems	that	way.’
‘Fear,	if	anyone	should	turn	round	right	now,	it	is	you.’
‘We	are	close,	Acquitor.	We	are	perhaps	a	few	strides	from	Scabandari’s
Finnest.	How	can	you	imagine	I	would	even	consider	such	a	thing?’
‘Some	stubborn	thread	of	self-preservation,	perhaps.	Some	last	surviving
faith	of	mine	that	you	actually	possess	a	brain,	one	that	can	reason,	that	is.	Fear
Sengar,	you	will	probably	die.	If	you	pass	through	this	gate.’
He	shrugged.	‘Perhaps	I	shall,	if	only	to	confound	Udinaas’s	expectations.’
‘Udinaas?’
A	faint	smile.	‘The	hero	fails	the	quest.’
‘Ah.	And	that	would	prove	satisfying	enough?’
‘Remains	to	be	seen,	I	suppose.	Now,	you	will	follow?’
‘Of	course.’
‘You	then	willingly	surrender	this	choice?’
In	answer	she	set	a	hand	against	his	chest	and	pushed	him,	step	by	step,	into
the	gate.	All	pressure	vanished	when	he	went	through,	and	Seren	stumbled
forward,	only	to	collide	with	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	broad,	muscled	chest.
He	righted	her	before	she	could	fall.
And	she	saw,	before	them	all,	a	most	unexpected	vista.	Black	volcanic	ash,
beneath	a	vast	sky	nearly	as	black,	despite	at	least	three	suns	blazing	in	the	sky
overhead.	And,	on	this	rough	plain,	stretching	on	all	sides	in	horrific
proliferation,	there	were	dragons.
Humped,	motionless.	Scores	–	hundreds.
She	heard	Kettle’s	anguished	whisper.	‘Udinaas!	They’re	all	dead!’
Clip,	standing	twenty	paces	ahead,	was	now	facing	them.	The	chain	spun
tight,	and	then	he	bowed.	‘Welcome,	my	dear	companions,	to	Starvald


Demelain.’


Chapter	Twenty-Two

The	shadows	lie	on	the	field	like	the	dead
From	night’s	battle	as	the	sun	lifts	high	its	standard
Into	the	dew-softened	air
The	children	rise	like	flowers	on	stalks
To	sing	unworded	songs	we	long	ago	surrendered
And	the	bees	dance	with	great	care
You	might	touch	this	scene	with	blessing
Even	as	you	settle	the	weight	of	weapon	in	hand
And	gaze	across	this	expanse
And	vow	to	the	sun	another	day	of	blood
Untitled
Toc	Anaster
Gaskaral	Traum	was	the	first	soldier	in	Atri-Preda	Bivatt’s	army	to	take	a	life
that	morning.	A	large	man	with	faint	threads	of	Tarthenal	blood	in	his	veins,	he
had	pitched	his	tent	the	night	before	forty	paces	from	the	Tiste	Edur
encampment.	Within	it	he	had	lit	a	small	oil	lamp	and	arranged	his	bedroll
over	bundles	of	clothing,	spare	boots	and	spare	helm.	Then	he	had	lain	down
beside	it,	on	the	side	nearest	the	Edur	tents,	and	let	the	lamp	devour	the	last
slick	of	oil	until	the	darkness	within	the	tent	matched	that	of	outside.
With	dawn’s	false	glow	ebbing,	Gaskaral	Traum	drew	a	knife	and	slit	the
side	of	the	tent	beside	him,	then	silently	edged	out	into	the	wet	grasses,	where
he	laid	motionless	for	a	time.
Then,	seeing	at	last	what	he	had	been	waiting	for,	he	rose	and,	staying	low,
made	his	way	across	the	sodden	ground.	The	rain	was	still	thrumming	down	on
the	old	seabed	of	Q’uson	Tapi	–	where	waited	the	hated	Awl	–	and	the	air
smelled	of	sour	mud.	Although	a	large	man,	Gaskaral	could	move	like	a	ghost.
He	reached	the	first	row	of	Edur	tents,	paused	with	held	breath	for	a	moment,


then	edged	into	the	camp.
The	tent	of	Overseer	Brohl	Handar	was	centrally	positioned,	but	otherwise
unguarded.	As	Gaskaral	came	closer,	he	saw	that	the	flap	was	untied,	hanging
loose.	Water	from	the	rain	just	past	streamed	down	the	oiled	canvas	like	tears,
pooling	round	the	front	pole	and	in	the	deep	footprints	crowding	the	entrance.
Gaskaral	slipped	his	knife	beneath	his	outer	shirt	and	used	the	grimy
undergarment	to	dry	the	handle	and	his	left	hand	–	palm	and	fingers	–	before
withdrawing	the	weapon	once	more.	Then	he	crept	for	that	slitted	opening.
Within	was	grainy	darkness.	The	sound	of	breathing.	And	there,	at	the	far
end,	the	Overseer ’s	cot.	Brohl	Handar	was	sleeping	on	his	back.	The	furs
covering	him	had	slipped	down	to	the	floor.	Of	his	face	and	chest,	Gaskaral
could	see	naught	but	heavy	shadow.
Blackened	iron	gleamed,	betrayed	by	the	honed	edge.
Gaskaral	Traum	took	one	more	step,	then	he	surged	forward	in	a	blur.
The	figure	standing	directly	over	Brohl	Handar	spun,	but	not	in	time,	as
Gaskaral’s	knife	sank	deep,	sliding	between	ribs,	piercing	the	assassin’s	heart.
The	black	dagger	fell	and	stuck	point-first	into	the	floor,	and	Gaskaral
took	the	body’s	weight	as,	with	a	faint	sigh,	the	killer	slumped.
Atri-Preda	Bivatt’s	favoured	bodyguard	–	chosen	by	her	outside	Drene	to
safeguard	the	Overseer	against	just	this	eventuality	–	froze	for	a	moment,	eyes
fixed	on	Brohl	Handar ’s	face,	on	the	Edur ’s	breathing.	No	stirring	awake.	And
that	was	good.	Very	good.
Angling	beneath	the	dead	assassin’s	weight,	Gaskaral	slowly	sheathed	his
knife,	then	reached	down	and	retrieved	the	black	dagger.	This	was	the	last	of
the	bastards,	he	was	sure.	Seven	in	all,	although	only	two	before	this	one	had
got	close	enough	to	attempt	Brohl’s	murder	–	and	both	of	those	had	been	in	the
midst	of	battle.	Letur	Anict	was	ever	a	thorough	man,	one	prone	to	redundancy
in	assuring	that	his	desires	were	satisfied.	Alas,	not	this	time.
Gaskaral	lowered	himself	yet	further	until	he	could	fold	the	body	over	one
shoulder,	then,	rising	into	a	bent-knee	stance,	he	padded	silently	back	to	the
tent-flap.	Stepping	to	avoid	the	puddle	and	the	upright	pole,	he	carefully	angled
his	burden	through	the	opening.
Beneath	overcast	clouds	with	yet	another	fall	of	rain	beginning,	Gaskaral
Traum	quickly	made	his	way	back	to	the	Letherii	side	of	the	camp.	The	body
could	remain	in	his	tent	–	the	day	now	approaching	was	going	to	be	a	day	of
battle,	which	meant	plenty	of	chaos,	plenty	of	opportunities	to	dispose	of	the
corpse.
He	was	somewhat	concerned,	however.	It	was	never	a	good	thing	to	not
sleep	the	night	before	a	battle.	But	he	was	ever	sensitive	to	his	instincts,	as	if	he


could	smell	the	approach	of	an	assassin,	as	if	he	could	slip	into	their	minds.
Certainly	his	uncanny	timing	proved	the	talent	–	another	handful	of	heartbeats
back	there	and	he	would	have	been	too	late—
Occasionally,	of	course,	instincts	failed.
The	two	figures	that	suddenly	rushed	him	from	the	darkness	caught
Gaskaral	Traum	entirely	by	surprise.	A	shock	blessedly	short-lived,	as	it	turned
out.	Gaskaral	threw	the	body	he	had	been	carrying	at	the	assassin	on	his	right.
With	no	time	to	draw	out	his	knife,	he	simply	charged	to	meet	the	other	killer.
Knocked	aside	the	dagger	stabbing	for	his	throat,	took	the	man’s	head	in	both
hands	and	twisted	hard.
Hard	enough	to	spin	the	assassin’s	feet	out	from	under	him	as	the	neck
snapped.
The	other	killer	had	been	thrown	down	by	the	corpse	and	was	just	rolling
back	into	a	crouch	when,	upon	looking	up,	he	met	Gaskaral’s	boot	–	under	his
chin.	The	impact	lifted	the	man	into	the	air,	arms	flung	out	to	the	sides,	his	head
separated	from	his	spine,	and	dead	before	he	thumped	back	onto	the	ground.
Gaskaral	Traum	looked	round,	saw	no	more	coming,	then	permitted
himself	a	moment	of	self-directed	anger.	Of	course	they	would	have	realized
that	someone	was	intercepting	them.	So	in	went	one	while	the	other	two
remained	back	to	see	who	their	unknown	hunter	was,	and	then	they	would	deal
with	that	hunter	in	the	usual	way.
‘Yeah?	Like	fuck	they	did.’
He	studied	the	three	bodies	for	a	moment	longer.	Damn,	it	was	going	to	be
a	crowded	tent.
	
The	sun	would	brook	no	obstacle	in	its	singular	observation	of	the	Battle	of
Q’uson	Tapi,	and	as	it	rose	it	burned	away	the	clouds	and	drove	spears	of	heat
into	the	ground	until	the	air	steamed.	Brohl	Handar,	awakening	surprisingly
refreshed,	stood	outside	his	tent	and	watched	as	his	Arapay	Tiste	Edur	readied
their	armour	and	weapons.	The	sudden,	unrelieved	humidity	made	iron	slick
and	the	shafts	of	spears	oily,	and	already	the	ground	underfoot	was	treacherous
–	the	seabed	would	be	a	nightmare,	he	feared.
In	the	evening	before,	he	and	his	troop	had	watched	the	Awl	preparations,
and	Brohl	Handar	well	understood	the	advantages	Redmask	was	seeking	in
secure	footing,	but	the	Overseer	suspected	that	such	efforts	would	fail	in	the
end.	Canvas	and	hide	tarps	would	before	long	grow	as	muddy	and	slippery	as
the	ground	beyond.	At	the	initial	shock	of	contact,	however,	there	would	likely
be	a	telling	difference…but	not	enough.


I	hope.
A	Letherii	soldier	approached	–	an	oversized	man	he’d	seen	before	–	with
a	pleasant	smile	on	his	innocuous,	oddly	gentle	face.	‘The	sun	is	most
welcome,	Overseer,	is	it	not?	I	convey	the	Atri-Preda’s	invitation	to	join	her	–
be	assured	that	you	will	have	time	to	return	to	your	warriors	and	lead	them	into
battle.’
‘Very	well.	Proceed,	then.’
The	various	companies	were	moving	into	positions	all	along	the	edge	of
the	seabed	opposite	the	Awl.	Brohl	saw	that	the	Bluerose	lancers	were	now
dismounted,	looking	a	little	lost	with	their	newly	issued	shields	and	spears.
There	were	less	than	a	thousand	left	and	the	Overseer	saw	that	they	had	been
placed	as	auxiliaries	and	would	only	be	thrown	into	battle	if	things	were	going
poorly.	‘Now	there’s	a	miserable	bunch,’	he	said	to	his	escort,	nodding	towards
the	Bluerose	Battalion.
‘So	they	are,	Overseer.	Yet	see	how	their	horses	are	saddled	and	not	too	far
away.	This	is	because	our	scouts	cannot	see	the	Kechra	in	the	Awl	camp.	The
Atri-Preda	expects	another	flanking	attack	from	those	two	creatures,	and	this
time	she	will	see	it	met	with	mounted	lancers.	Who	will	then	pursue.’
‘I	wish	them	well	–	those	Kechra	ever	remain	the	gravest	threat	and	the
sooner	they	are	dead	the	better.’
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	stood	in	a	position	at	the	edge	of	the	old	shoreline	that
permitted	her	a	view	of	what	would	be	the	field	of	battle.	As	was	her	habit,	she
had	sent	away	all	her	messengers	and	aides	–	they	hovered	watchfully	forty
paces	back	–	and	was	now	alone	with	her	thoughts,	her	observations,	and
would	remain	so	–	barring	Brohl’s	visit	–	until	just	before	the	engagement
commenced.
His	escort	halted	a	short	distance	away	from	the	Atri-Preda	and	waved
Brohl	Handar	forward	with	an	easy	smile.
How	can	he	be	so	calm?	Unless	he’s	one	of	those	who	will	be	standing
guarding	horses.	Big	as	he	is,	he	hasn’t	the	look	of	a	soldier	–	well,	even	horsehandlers	are	needed,	after	all.
‘Overseer,	you	look…well	rested.’
‘I	appear	to	be	just	that,	Atri-Preda.	As	if	the	spirits	of	my	ancestors	held
close	vigil	on	me	last	night.’
‘Indeed.	Are	your	Arapay	ready?’
‘They	are.	Will	you	begin	this	battle	with	your	mages?’
‘I	must	be	honest	in	this	matter.	I	cannot	rely	upon	their	staying	alive
throughout	the	engagement.	Accordingly,	yes,	I	will	use	them	immediately.
And	if	they	are	still	with	me	later,	then	all	the	better.’


‘No	sign	of	the	Kechra,	then.’
‘No.	Observe,	the	enemy	arrays	itself.’
‘On	dry	purchase—’
‘To	begin,	yes,	but	we	will	win	that	purchase,	Overseer.	And	that	is	the	flaw
in	Redmask’s	tactic.	We	will	strike	hard	enough	to	knock	them	back,	and	then	it
will	be	the	Awl	who	find	themselves	mired	in	the	mud.’
Brohl	Handar	turned	to	study	the	Letherii	forces.	The	various	brigades,
companies	and	battalion	elements	had	been	merged	on	the	basis	of	function.
On	the	front	facing	the	Awl,	three	wedges	of	heavy	infantry.	Flanks	of
skirmishers	mixed	with	medium	infantry	and	archers.	Blocks	of	archers
between	the	wedges,	who	if	they	moved	down	onto	the	seabed	would	not	go
very	far.	Their	flights	of	arrows	would	be	intended	to	perforate	the	Awl	line	so
that	when	the	heavies	struck	they	would	drive	back	the	enemy,	one	step,	two,
five,	ten	and	into	the	mud.
‘I	do	not	understand	this	Redmask,’	Brohl	said,	frowning	back	at	the	Awl
lines.
‘He	had	no	choice,’	Bivatt	replied.	‘Not	after	Praedegar.	And	that	was,	for
him,	a	failure	of	patience.	Perhaps	this	is,	as	well,	but	as	I	said:	no	choice	left.
We	have	him,	Overseer.	Yet	he	will	make	this	victory	a	painful	one,	given	the
chance.’
‘Your	mages	may	well	end	it	before	it’s	begun,	Atri-Preda.’
‘We	will	see.’
Overhead,	the	sun	continued	its	inexorable	climb,	heating	the	day	with
baleful	intent.	On	the	seabed	lighter	patches	had	begun	appearing	as	the
topmost	surface	dried.	But	immediately	beneath,	of	course,	the	mud	would
remain	soft	and	deep	enough	to	cause	trouble.
Bivatt	had	two	mages	left	–	the	third	had	died	two	days	past,	fatally
weakened	by	the	disaster	at	Praedegar	–	one	lone	mounted	archer	had
succeeded	in	killing	three	mages	with	one	damned	arrow.	Brohl	Handar	now
saw	those	two	figures	hobbling	like	ancients	out	to	the	old	shoreline’s	edge.
One	at	each	end	of	the	outermost	heavy	infantry	wedge.	They	would	launch
their	terrible	wave	of	magic	at	angles	intended	to	converge	a	dozen	or	so	ranks
deep	in	the	centre	formation	of	Awl,	so	as	to	maximize	the	path	of	destruction.
The	Atri-Preda	evidently	made	some	gesture	that	Brohl	did	not	see,	for	all
at	once	her	messengers	had	arrived.	She	turned	to	him.	‘It	is	time.	Best	return
to	your	warriors,	Overseer.’
Brohl	Handar	grimaced.	‘Rearguard	again.’
‘You	will	see	a	fight	this	day,	Overseer.	I	am	sure	of	that.’
He	was	not	convinced,	but	he	turned	away	then.	Two	strides	along	and	he


paused	and	said,	‘May	this	day	announce	the	end	of	this	war.’
The	Atri-Preda	did	not	reply.	It	was	not	even	certain	she	had	heard	him,	as
she	was	speaking	quietly	to	the	soldier	who	had	been	his	escort.	He	saw
surprise	flit	across	her	features	beneath	the	helm,	then	she	nodded.
Brohl	Handar	glared	up	at	the	sun,	and	longed	for	the	shadowed	forests	of
home.	Then	he	set	out	for	his	Arapay.
	
Sitting	on	a	boulder,	Toc	Anaster	watched	the	children	play	for	a	moment
longer,	then	he	rolled	the	thinned	flat	of	hide	into	a	scroll	and	slipped	it	into	his
satchel,	and	added	the	brush	of	softened	wood	and	the	now-resealed	bowl	of
charcoal,	marrow	and	gaenth-berry	ink.	He	rose,	squinted	skyward	for	a
moment,	then	walked	over	to	his	horse.	Seven	paces,	and	by	the	time	he	arrived
his	moccasins	were	oversized	clumps	of	mud.	He	tied	the	satchel	to	the	saddle,
drew	a	knife	and	bent	down	to	scrape	away	as	much	of	the	mud	as	he	could.
The	Awl	were	gathered	in	their	ranks	off	to	his	left,	standing,	waiting	as	the
Letherii	forces	five	hundred	paces	away	jostled	into	the	formations	they	would
seek	to	maintain	in	the	advance.	Redmask’s	warriors	seemed	strangely	silent	–
of	course,	this	was	not	their	kind	of	battle.	‘No,’	Toc	muttered.	‘This	is	the
Letherii	kind.’	He	looked	across	at	the	enemy.
Classic	wedges	in	sawtooth,	Toc	observed.	Three	arrowheads	of	heavy
infantry.	Those	formations	would	be	rather	messy	by	the	time	they	reached	the
Awl.	Moving	slow,	with	soldiers	falling,	stumbling	and	slipping	with	every
stride	they	attempted.	All	to	the	good.	There	would	be	no	heaving	push	at	the
moment	of	contact,	not	without	entire	front	ranks	of	heavily	armoured	soldiers
falling	flat	on	their	faces.
‘You	will	ride	away,’	Torrent	said	behind	him.	‘Or	so	you	think.	But	I	will
be	watching	you,	Mezla—’
‘Oh,	put	it	to	rest,’	Toc	said.	‘It’s	hardly	my	fault	Redmask	doesn’t	think
you’re	worth	much,	Torrent.	Besides,’	he	added,	‘it’s	not	as	if	a	horse	could	do
much	more	than	walk	in	this.	And	finally,	Redmask	has	said	he	might	want	me
close	to	hand	–	with	my	arrows	–	in	case	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	fail.’
‘They	will	not	fail.’
‘Oh,	and	what	do	you	know	of	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Torrent?’
‘I	know	what	Redmask	tells	us.’
‘And	what	does	he	know?	More	to	the	point,	how	does	he	know?	Have	you
not	wondered	that?	Not	even	once?	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	are	this	world’s
demons.	Creatures	of	the	far	past.	Virtually	everywhere	else	they	are	extinct.	So
what	in	Hood’s	name	are	they	doing	here?	And	why	are	they	at	Redmask’s	side,


seemingly	eager	to	do	as	he	bids?’
‘Because	he	is	Redmask,	Mezla.	He	is	not	as	we	are	and	yes,	I	see	how	the
envy	burns	in	your	eye.	You	will	ever	despise	those	who	are	better	than	you.’
Toc	leaned	his	forearms	across	the	back	of	his	horse.	‘Come	closer,
Torrent.	Look	into	the	eyes	of	this	mare	here.	Tell	me,	do	you	see	envy?’
‘A	mindless	beast.’
‘That	will	probably	die	today.’
‘I	do	not	understand	you,	Mezla.’
‘I	know.	Anyway,	I	see	that	same	look	in	your	eyes,	Torrent.	That	same
blind	willingness.	To	believe	everything	you	need	to	believe.	Redmask	is	to
you	as	I	am	to	this	poor	horse.’
‘I	will	listen	to	you	no	longer.’
The	young	warrior	headed	off,	the	stiffness	of	his	strides	soon
deteriorating	in	the	conglomeration	of	mud	on	his	feet.
Nearby	the	children	were	flinging	clumps	of	the	stuff	at	each	other	and
laughing.	The	younger	ones,	that	is.	Those	carrying	a	few	more	years	were
silent,	staring	over	at	the	enemy	forces,	where	horns	had	begun	sounding,	and
now,	two	well-guarded	groups	edging	out	to	the	very	edge	of	the	ancient	shore.
The	mages.
We	begin,	then.
	
Far	to	the	west	the	sun	had	yet	to	rise.	In	a	nondescript	village	a	day’s	fast
march	from	Letheras,	where	too	many	had	died	in	the	past	two	days,	three
Falari	heavy	infantry	from	3rd	Company	sat	on	one	edge	of	a	horse	trough
outside	the	only	tavern.	Lookback,	Drawfirst	and	Shoaly	were	cousins,	or	so
the	others	thought	of	them,	given	their	shared	Falar	traits	of	fiery	red	hair	and
blue	eyes,	and	the	olive-hued	skin	of	the	main	island’s	indigenous	people,	who
called	themselves	the	Walk.	The	idea	seemed	convenient	enough,	although
none	had	known	the	others	before	enlisting	in	the	Malazan	Army.
The	Walk	civilization	had	thrived	long	ago,	before	the	coming	of	iron,	in
fact,	and	as	miners	of	tin,	copper	and	lead	it	had	once	dominated	all	the	isles	of
the	archipelago	in	the	trade	of	bronze	weapons	and	ornamentation.	Had	they
been	of	pure	Walk	blood,	the	soldiers	would	have	been	squatter,	black-haired
and	reputedly	laconic	to	the	point	of	somnolent;	as	it	was,	they	all	possessed
the	harder,	fiercer	blood	of	the	Falari	invaders	who	had	conquered	most	of	the
islands	generations	past.	The	combination,	oddly	enough,	made	for	superb
marines.
At	the	moment,	amidst	darkness	and	a	pleasantly	cool	breeze	coming	in


from	the	river	to	the	south,	the	three	were	having	a	conversation,	the	subjects
of	which	were	Sergeant	Gesler	and	Corporal	Stormy.	Those	two	names	–	if	not
their	pathetic	ranks	–	were	well	known	to	all	natives	of	Falar.
‘But	they’ve	changed,’	Lookback	said.	‘That	gold	skin,	it’s	not	natural	at
all.	I	think	we	should	kill	them.’
Drawfirst,	who	possessed	the	unfortunate	combination	of	large	breasts	and
a	tendency	to	perspire	profusely,	had	taken	advantage	of	the	darkness	to	divest
herself	of	her	upper	armour	and	was	now	mopping	beneath	her	breasts	with	a
cloth.	Now	she	said,	‘But	what’s	the	point	of	that,	Look?	The	cult	is	dead.	It’s
been	dead	for	years.’
‘Ain’t	dead	for	us,	though,	is	it?’
‘Mostly,’	answered	Shoaly.
‘That’s	you	all	right,	Shoaly,’	Lookback	said.	‘Always	seeing	the	dying	and
dead	side	of	things.’
‘So	go	ask	’em,	Look.	And	they’ll	tell	you	the	same.	Fener	cult’s	finished.’
‘That’s	why	I	think	we	should	kill	them.	For	betraying	the	cult.	For
betraying	us.	And	what’s	with	that	gold	skin	anyway?	It’s	creepy.’
‘Listen,’	Shoaly	said,	‘we	just	partnered	with	these	squads.	In	case	you
forgot,	Lookback,	this	is	the	company	that	crawled	out	from	under	Y’Ghatan.
And	then	there’s	Fiddler.	A	Hood-damned	Bridgeburner	and	maybe	the	only
one	left.	Gesler	was	once	high-ranked	and	so	was	Stormy,	but	just	like
Whiskeyjack	they	got	busted	down	and	down,	and	down,	and	now	here	you	are
wanting	to	stick	’em.	The	cult	got	outlawed	and	now	Fener	ain’t	nowhere	a
god’s	supposed	to	be	but	that	ain’t	Gesler ’s	fault.	Not	Stormy’s	neither.’
‘So	what	are	you	saying?’	Lookback	retorted.	‘We	should	just	leave	’em
and	that’s	that?’
‘Leave	’em?	Drawfirst,	explain	it	to	this	fool.’
She	had	pushed	her	breasts	back	into	their	harness	and	was	making	some
final	adjustments.	‘It’s	simple,	Look.	Not	only	are	we	stuck	here,	with	Fid	and
the	rest.	We’re	all	gonna	die	with	’em,	too.	Now,	as	for	me	–	and	probably
Shoaly	here	–	we’re	gonna	stand	and	fight,	right	at	their	sides.	Gesler,	Stormy,
those	cute	heavies	they	got.	And	when	we	finally	fall,	nobody’s	gonna	be	able
to	say	we	wasn’t	worth	that	standing	there	beside	’em.	Now,	maybe	it’s	because
you’re	the	last	heavy	in	Primly’s	squad.	Maybe	if	Masker	was	still	with	you,
you’d	not	be	talking	the	way	you’re	talking.	So	now	you	gotta	choose,
Lookback.	Fight	with	us,	fight	with	Reliko	and	Vastly	Blank	in	Badan	Gruk’s
squad,	or	fight	on	your	own	as	the	sole	fist	in	Primly’s.	But	every	one	of	those
choices	is	still	fighting.	Creep	up	behind	Ges	or	Stormy	and	I’ll	lop	your	head
off	myself.’


‘All	right	all	right,	I	was	just	making	conversation—’
Sounds	from	their	left	drew	the	heavies	upright,	reaching	for	weapons.
Three	figures	padding	down	the	main	street	towards	them.	Strap	Mull,	Skim
and	Neller.
Skim	called	out	in	a	low	voice,	‘Soldiers	on	the	way.	Look	sharp.’
‘Letherii?’	Shoaly	asked.
‘No,’	she	replied,	halting	opposite	them	while	the	other	two	marines
continued	on	into	the	tavern.	‘Picture	in	your	heads	the	ugliest	faces	you	ever
seen,	and	you	then	kissin’	them	big	and	wet.’
‘Finally,’	Drawfirst	sighed,	‘some	good	news	for	a	change.’

Beak	and	the	captain	made	their	way	back	to	where	Fist	Keneb	waited	at	the
head	of	the	column.	There	had	been	Tiste	Edur	ahead	of	them	for	some	time,
unwilling	to	engage,	but	now	they	were	gone,	at	least	between	here	and	yon
village.
The	captain	drew	close	to	the	Fist.	‘Beak	says	they’re	marines,	Fist.	Seems
we	found	some	of	them.’
‘All	of	them,’	Beak	said.	‘The	ones	who	got	far	ahead	of	the	rest.	They’re
in	the	village	and	they’ve	been	killing	Tiste	Edur.	Lots	of	Tiste	Edur.’
‘The	munitions	we	heard	yesterday.’
‘Just	so,	Fist,’	Beak	said,	nodding.
‘All	right,	finally	some	good	news.	How	many?’
‘Seven,	eight	squads,’	Beak	replied.	He	delighted	in	being	able	to	talk,	in
person,	with	a	real	Fist.	Oh,	he’d	imagined	scenes	like	this,	of	course,	with
Beak	there	providing	all	kinds	of	information	to	make	the	Fist	do	all	the	heroic
things	that	needed	doing,	and	then	at	last	Beak	himself	being	the	biggest	hero
of	all.	He	was	sure	everyone	had	dreams	like	that,	the	sudden	revealing	of
some	hidden,	shy	side	that	no-one	else	knew	anything	about	and	couldn’t	ever
have	guessed	was	even	there.	Shy,	until	it	was	needed,	and	then	out	it	came,
amazing	everyone!
‘Beak?’
‘Fist?’
‘I	was	asking,	do	they	know	we’re	here?’
‘Yes	sir,	I	think	so.	They’ve	got	some	interesting	mages,	including	an	old
style	warlock	from	the	Jakata	people	who	were	the	first	people	on	Malaz	Island
after	the	Stormriders	retreated.	He	can	see	through	the	eyes	of	all	sorts	of
creatures	and	that	must	have	been	helpful	since	the	coast.	There’s	also	a	Dal


Honese	bush	shaman	and	a	Dal	Honese	Grass	Dancer.	And	a	Nathii	swamp
necromancer.’
‘Beak,’	said	Keneb,	‘do	these	squads	include	Fiddler?	Gesler	and	Stormy?’
‘Fiddler ’s	the	one	with	the	fiddle	who	played	so	sadly	in	Malaz	City?	The
one	with	the	Deck	games	in	his	head?	Yes	sir,	he’s	there.	Gesler	and	Stormy,
they’re	the	Falari	ones,	but	with	skins	of	gold	and	muscles	and	all	that,	the	ones
who	were	reforged	in	the	fires	of	Tellann.	Telas,	Kurald	Liosan,	the	fires,	the
ones	dragons	fly	through	to	gain	immunities	and	other	proofs	against	magic
and	worse.	Yes,	they’re	there,	too.’
See	how	they	stared	at	him	in	wonder!	Oh,	just	like	the	dream!
And	he	knew,	all	too	well,	how	all	this	was	going	to	turn	out	and	even	that
couldn’t	make	him	anything	but	proud.	He	squinted	up	at	the	darkness
overhead.	‘It’ll	be	dawn	in	a	bell	or	so.’
Keneb	turned	to	Faradan	Sort.	‘Captain,	take	Beak	with	you	and	head	into
the	village.	I’d	like	to	see	these	squads	presented	–	barring	whatever	pickets
they’ve	set	out.’
‘Yes,	Fist.	Plan	on	dressing	’em	down,	sir?’
Keneb’s	brows	lifted.	‘Not	at	all,	Faradan.	No.	I	might	end	up	kissing	every
damned	one	of	them,	though.’
	
So	once	more	Beak	walked	alongside	Captain	Faradan	Sort,	and	that	felt	good
and	proper	now,	as	if	he’d	always	belonged	with	her,	always	being	useful	when
that	was	what	she	needed.	False	dawn	was	just	beginning	and	the	air	smelled
wonderfully	fresh	–	at	least	until	they	came	to	the	pits	where	the	Edur	bodies
had	been	dumped.	That	didn’t	smell	good	at	all.
‘Gods	below,’	the	captain	muttered	as	they	skirted	one	of	the	shallow	pits.
Beak	nodded.	‘Moranth	munitions	do	that.	Just…parts	of	people,	and
everything	chewed	up.’
‘Not	in	this	pit,’	she	said,	pointing	as	they	passed	another	mass	grave.
‘These	ones	were	cut	down.	Swords,	quarrels…’
‘Aye,	Captain,	we’re	good	at	that,	too,	aren’t	we?	But	that’s	not	why	the
Edur	left	–	there	was	almost	a	thousand	of	them	gathered	here,	planning	on	one
more	push.	But	then	orders	came	to	withdraw	and	so	they	did.	They’re	now	a
league	behind	us,	joining	up	with	still	more	Edur.’
‘The	hammer,’	Faradan	Sort	said,	‘and	somewhere	ahead,	the	anvil.’
He	nodded	again.
She	paused	to	search	his	face	in	the	gloom.	‘And	the	Adjunct	and	the	fleet?
Beak?’


‘Don’t	know,	sir.	If	you’re	wondering	if	they’ll	get	to	us	in	time	to	relieve
us,	then	no.	Not	a	chance.	We’re	going	to	have	to	hold	out,	Captain,	for	so	long
it’s	impossible.’
She	scowled	at	that.	‘And	if	we	just	squat	here?	Right	in	this	village?’
‘They’ll	start	pushing.	There’ll	be	four	or	five	thousand	Edur	by	then.	That
many	can	push	us,	sir,	whether	we	want	them	to	or	not.	Besides,	didn’t	the	Fist
say	he	wanted	to	engage	and	hold	down	as	many	of	the	enemy	as	possible?	To
keep	them	from	going	anywhere	else,	like	back	behind	the	city	walls	which
would	mean	the	Adjunct’s	got	to	deal	with	another	siege	and	nobody	wants
that.’
She	glared	at	him	for	a	moment	longer,	then	set	out	again.	Beak	fell	in	step
behind	her.
From	just	behind	a	black	heap	of	tailings	at	the	edge	of	the	village	a	voice
called	out,	‘Nice	seeing	you	again,	Captain.’
Faradan	Sort	went	on.
Beak	saw	Corporal	Tarr	rise	from	behind	the	tailings,	slinging	his
crossbow	back	over	a	shoulder	then	dusting	himself	off	before	approaching	on
an	intercept	course.
‘Fist	wants	to	knock	before	coming	in,	does	he?’
The	captain	halted	in	front	of	the	stolid	corporal.	‘We’ve	been	fastmarching	for	a	while	now,’	she	said.	‘We’re	damned	tired,	but	if	we’re	going
to	march	into	this	village,	we’re	not	going	to	drag	our	boots.	So	the	Fist	called
a	short	halt.	That’s	all.’
Tarr	scratched	at	his	beard,	making	the	various	depending	bones	and	such
rustle	and	click.	‘Fair	enough,’	he	said.
‘I	am	so	relieved	that	you	approve,	Corporal.	Now,	the	Fist	wants	the
squads	here	all	out	in	the	main	street.’
‘We	can	do	that,’	Tarr	replied,	grinning.	‘Been	fighting	for	a	while	now
and	we’re	damned	tired,	Captain.	So	the	sergeants	got	most	of	us	resting	up	in
the,	uh,	the	tavern.	But	when	the	Fist	sees	us,	well,	we’ll	be	looking	smart	as
can	be,	I’m	sure.’
‘Get	your	arse	into	that	tavern,	Corporal,	and	wake	the	bastards	up.	We’ll
wait	right	here	–	but	not	for	long,	understood?’
A	quick,	unobtrusive	salute	and	Tarr	headed	off.
‘See	what	happens	when	an	officer ’s	not	around	enough?	They	get	damned
full	of	themselves,	that’s	what	happens,	Beak.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘Well,	when	they	hear	all	the	bad	news	they	won’t	be	anywhere	near	as
arrogant.’


‘Oh,	they	know,	sir.	Better	than	we	do.’	But	that’s	not	completely	true.	They
don’t	know	what	I	know,	and	neither,	Captain	my	love,	do	you.
They	both	turned	at	the	sound	of	the	column,	coming	up	fast.	Faster	than	it
should	be,	in	fact.
The	captain’s	comment	was	succinct.	‘Shit.’	Then	she	added,	‘Go	on	ahead,
Beak	–	get	’em	ready	to	move!’
‘Yes	sir!’
	
The	problem	with	owls	was	that,	even	as	far	as	birds	went,	they	were
profoundly	stupid.	Getting	them	to	even	so	much	as	turn	their	damned	heads
was	a	struggle,	no	matter	how	tightly	Bottle	gripped	their	tiny	squirming	souls.
He	was	locked	in	such	a	battle	at	the	moment,	so	far	past	the	notion	of	sleep
that	it	seemed	it	belonged	exclusively	to	other	people	and	would	for	ever
remain	beyond	his	reach.
But	all	at	once	it	did	not	matter	where	the	owl	was	looking,	nor	even	where
it	wanted	to	look.	Because	there	were	figures	moving	across	the	land,	through
the	copses,	the	tilled	grounds,	swarming	the	slopes	of	the	old	quarry	pits	and
on	the	road	and	all	its	converging	tracks.	Hundreds,	thousands.	Moving	quiet,
weapons	readied.	And	less	than	half	a	league	behind	Keneb’s	column.
Bottle	shook	himself,	eyes	blinking	rapidly	as	he	refocused	–	the	pitted
wall	of	the	tavern,	plaster	chipped	where	daggers	had	been	thrown	against	it,
the	yellow	runnels	of	leakage	from	the	thatched	roof	above	the	common	room.
Around	him,	marines	pulling	on	their	gear.	Someone,	probably	Hellian,
spitting	and	gagging	somewhere	behind	the	bar.
One	of	the	newly	arrived	marines	appeared	in	front	of	him,	pulling	up	a
chair	and	sitting	down.	The	Dal	Honese	mage,	the	one	with	the	jungle	still	in
his	eyes.
‘Nep	Furrow,’	he	now	growled.	‘Mimber	me?’
‘Mimber	what?’
‘Me!’
‘Yes.	Nep	Furrow.	Like	you	just	said.	Listen,	I’ve	got	no	time	to	talk—’
A	fluttering	wave	of	one	gnarled	hand.	‘We’en	know!	Bit	the	Edur!	We’en
know	all’at.’	A	bent	finger	stabbed	at	Bottle.	‘Issn	this.	You.	Used	dup!	An’thas
be-ad!	Be-ad!	We	all	die!	Cuzzin	you!’
‘Oh,	thanks	for	that,	you	chewed-up	root!	We	weren’t	taking	the	scenic	leg
like	you	bastards,	you	know.	In	fact,	we	only	got	this	far	because	of	me!’
‘Vlah!	Iss	th’feedle!	The	feedle	orn	your	sergeant!	Issn	the	song,	yeseen	–
it	ain’t	done-done	yeet.	Ain’t	yeet	done-done!	Hah!’


Bottle	stared	at	the	mage.	‘So	this	is	what	happens	when	you	pick	your	nose
but	never	put	anything	back,	right?’
‘Pick’n	back!	Hee	hee!	Een	so,	Bauble,	yeen	the	cause	alla	us	dyin,	s’long
as	yeen	know.’
‘And	what	about	the	unfinished	song?’
An	elaborate	shrug.	‘Oonoes	when,	eh?	Oonoes?’
Then	Fiddler	was	at	the	table.	‘Bottle,	now’s	not	the	time	for	a	Hooddamned	conversation.	Out	into	the	street	and	look	awake,	damn	you	–	we’re	all
about	to	charge	out	of	this	village	like	a	herd	of	bhederin.’
Yeah,	and	right	over	a	cliff	we	go.	‘Wasn’t	me	started	this	conversation,
Sergeant—’
‘Grab	your	gear,	soldier.’
	
Koryk	stood	with	the	others	of	the	squad,	barring	Bottle	who	clearly	thought
he	was	unique	or	something,	and	watched	as	the	leading	elements	of	the
column	appeared	at	the	end	of	the	main	street,	a	darker	mass	amidst	night’s
last,	stubborn	grip.	No-one	on	horses,	he	saw,	which	wasn’t	too	surprising.
Food	for	Keneb	and	his	tail-end	company	must	have	been	hard	to	find,	so
horses	went	into	the	stew	–	there,	a	few	left,	but	loaded	down	with	gear.	Soon
there’d	be	stringy,	lean	meat	to	add	flavour	to	the	local	grain	that	tasted	the	way
goat	shit	smelled.
He	could	feel	his	heart	thumping	strong	in	his	chest.	Oh,	there	would	be
fighting	today.	The	Edur	to	the	west	were	rolling	them	up	all	right.	And	ahead,
on	this	side	of	the	great	capital	city,	there’d	be	an	army	or	two.	Waiting	just	for
us	and	isn’t	that	nice	of	’em.
Fiddler	loomed	directly	in	front	of	Koryk	and	slapped	the	half-blood	on
the	side	of	his	helm.	‘Wake	up,	damn	you!’
‘I	was	awake,	Sergeant!’
But	that	was	all	right.	Understandable,	even,	as	Fiddler	went	down	the	line
snapping	at	everyone.	Aye,	there’d	been	way	too	much	drinking	in	this	village
and	wits	were	anything	but	sharp.	Of	course,	Koryk	felt	fine	enough.	He’d
mostly	slept	when	the	others	were	draining	the	last	casks	of	ale.	Slept,	aye,
knowing	what	was	coming.
The	new	marines	from	3rd	Company	had	provided	some	novelty	but	not
for	long.	They’d	taken	the	easy	route	and	they	knew	it	and	now	so	did	everyone
else,	and	it	gave	them	all	a	look	in	the	eyes,	one	that	said	they	still	had
something	to	prove	and	this	little	help-out	here	in	this	village	hadn’t	been
nearly	enough.	Gonna	have	to	dive	across	a	few	hundred	more	Edur,	sweetie,


before	any	of	us	but	Smiles	gives	you	a	nod	or	two.
At	the	head	of	the	column,	which	had	now	arrived,	there	was	Fist	Keneb
and	the	sergeant,	Thom	Tissy,	along	with	Captain	Sort	and	her	brainless	mage,
Beak.
Keneb	eyed	the	squads	then	said,	‘Sergeants,	to	me,	please.’
Koryk	watched	Fiddler,	Hellian,	Gesler,	Badan	Gruk	and	Primly	all	head
over	to	gather	in	a	half-circle	in	front	of	the	Fist.
‘Typical,’	muttered	Smiles	beside	him.	‘Now	we	all	go	up	on	report.
Especially	you,	Koryk.	You	don’t	think	anybody’s	forgotten	you	murdering
that	official	in	Malaz	City	–	so	they	know	you’re	the	one	to	watch	for.’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,’	Koryk	muttered.	‘They’re	just	deciding	now	which	squad
dies	first.’
That	shut	her	up	quick	enough.
	
‘You’ve	all	done	damned	well,’	Keneb	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘but	now	the	serious
work	begins.’
Gesler	snorted.	‘Think	we	didn’t	know	that,	Fist?’
‘Still	in	the	habit	of	irritating	your	superiors,	I	see.’
Gesler	flashed	his	typical	grin.	‘How	many	you	bring	with	you,	sir,	if	I
might	ask?	Because,	you	see,	I’m	starting	to	smell	something	and	it’s	a	bad
smell.	We	can	handle	two	to	one	odds.	Three	to	one,	even.	But	I’ve	got	a
feeling	we’re	about	to	find	ourselves	outnumbered	what,	ten	to	one?	Twenty?
Now,	maybe	you’ve	brought	us	some	more	munitions,	but	unless	you’ve	got
four	or	five	wagons	full	hidden	back	of	the	column,	it	won’t	be	enough—’
‘That’s	not	our	problem,’	Fiddler	said,	pulling	a	nit	from	his	beard	and
cracking	it	between	his	teeth.	‘There’ll	be	mages	and	I	know	for	a	fact,	Fist,
that	ours	are	used	up.	Even	Bottle,	and	that’s	saying	a	lot.’	Fiddler	then	scowled
at	Beak.	‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	smiling	about?’
Beak	wilted,	moved	to	hide	behind	Faradan	Sort.
The	captain	seemed	to	bridle.	‘Listen,	Fiddler,	maybe	you	know	nothing
about	this	mage	here,	but	I	assure	you	he	has	combat	magicks.	Beak,	can	you
hold	your	own	in	what’s	to	come?’
A	low	murmuring	reply:	‘Yes	sir.	You’ll	see.	Everyone	will	because	you’re
all	my	friends	and	friends	are	important.	The	most	important	thing	in	the
world.	And	I’ll	show	you.’
Fiddler	winced	and	looked	away,	then	squinted.	‘Shit,	we’re	losing	the
night.’
‘Form	up	for	the	march,’	Keneb	ordered	and	damn,	Fiddler	observed,	the


Fist	was	looking	old	right	now.	‘We’ll	alternate	to	double-time	every	hundred
paces	–	from	what	I	understand,	we	don’t	have	very	far	to	go.’
‘Until	the	way	ahead	is	full	of	enemy,’	Gesler	said.	‘Hope	at	least	it’s	within
sight	of	Letheras.	I’d	like	to	see	the	damned	walls	before	I	feed	the	weeds.’
‘Enough	of	that,	Sergeant.	Dismissed.’
Fiddler	didn’t	respond	to	Gesler ’s	grin	when	they	headed	back	to	their
squads.
‘Come	on,	Fid,	all	those	talents	of	yours	got	to	be	all	screaming	the	same
thing	right	now,	aren’t	they?’
‘Aye,	they’re	all	screaming	at	you	to	shut	your	damned	mouth,	Ges.’
	
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	had	collected	almost	more	weapons	than	he	could
carry.	Four	of	the	better	spears,	two	javelins.	A	single-edged	sword	something
like	a	scimitar;	a	nice	long,	straight	Letherii	longsword	with	a	sharply	tapered
point,	filed	down	from	what	had	been	a	blunted	end;	two	sticker	knives	and	a
brace	of	gutters	as	well.	Strapped	to	his	back	was	a	Letherii	shield,	wood,
leather	and	bronze.	He	also	carried	a	crossbow	and	twenty-seven	quarrels.	And
one	sharper.
They	were	headed,	he	well	knew,	to	their	last	stand,	and	it	would	be	heroic.
Glorious.	It	would	be	as	it	should	have	been	with	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	They
would	stand	side	by	side,	shoulder	to	shoulder,	until	not	one	was	left	alive.	And
years	from	now,	songs	would	be	sung	of	this	dawning	day.	And	there	would
be,	among	the	details,	a	tale	of	one	soldier,	wielding	spears	and	javelins	and
swords	and	knives	and	heaps	of	bodies	at	his	feet.	A	warrior	who	had	come
from	Seven	Cities,	yes,	from	thousands	of	leagues	away,	to	finally	give	the
proper	ending	to	the	Great	Uprising	of	his	homeland.	A	rebel	once	more,	in
the	outlawed,	homeless	Fourteenth	Army	who	were	now	called	the
Bonehunters,	and	whose	own	bones	would	be	hunted,	yes,	for	their	magical
properties,	and	sold	for	stacks	of	gold	in	markets.	Especially	Corabb’s	own
skull,	larger	than	all	the	others,	once	home	to	a	vast	brain	filled	with	genius
and	other	brilliant	thoughts.	A	skull	not	even	a	king	could	afford,	yes,
especially	with	the	sword	blade	or	spear	clove	right	through	it	as	lasting
memento	to	Corabb’s	spectacular	death,	the	last	marine	standing—
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	Corabb,’	snapped	Cuttle	behind	him,	‘I’m	dodging	more
spear	butts	now	than	I	will	in	a	bell’s	time!	Get	rid	of	some	of	them,	will	you?’
‘I	cannot,’	Corabb	replied.	‘I	shall	need	them	all.’
‘Now	that	doesn’t	surprise	me,	the	way	you	treat	your	weapons.’
‘There	will	be	many	enemy	that	need	killing,	yes.’


‘That	Letherii	shield	is	next	to	useless,’	Cuttle	said.	‘You	should	know	that
by	now,	Corabb.’
‘When	it	breaks	I	shall	find	another.’
He	so	looked	forward	to	the	imminent	battle.	The	screams,	the	shrieks	of
the	dying,	the	shock	of	the	enemy	as	it	reeled	back,	repulsed	again	and	again.
The	marines	had	earned	it,	oh	yes.	The	fight	they	had	all	been	waiting	for,
outside	the	very	walls	of	Letheras	–	and	the	citizens	would	line	them	to	watch,
with	wonder,	with	astonishment,	with	awe,	as	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas
unleashed	such	ferocity	as	to	sear	the	souls	of	every	witness…
	
Hellian	was	never	drinking	that	stuff	again.	Imagine,	sick,	still	drunk,	thirsty
and	hallucinating	all	at	once.	Almost	as	bad	as	that	night	of	the	Paralt	Festival
in	Kartool,	with	all	those	people	wearing	giant	spider	costumes	and	Hellian,	in
a	screaming	frenzy,	trying	to	stamp	on	all	of	them.
Now,	she	was	trudging	at	the	head	of	her	paltry	squad	in	the	grainy	halflight	of	dawn,	and	from	the	snatches	of	conversation	that	penetrated	her	present
state	of	disrepair	she	gathered	that	the	Edur	were	right	behind	them,	like	ten
thousand	giant	spiders	with	fangs	that	could	shoot	out	and	skewer	innocent
seagulls	and	terrified	women.	And	even	worse,	this	damned	column	was
marching	straight	for	a	giant	web	eager	to	ensnare	them	all.
Meanwhile,	there	were	the	hallucinations.	Her	corporal	splitting	in	two,	for
example.	One	here,	one	there,	both	talking	at	once	but	not	the	same	thing	and
not	even	in	the	same	voice.	And	what	about	that	doe-eyed	fool	with	the	stupid
name	who	was	now	always	hovering	close?	Scab	Breath?	Skulldent?	Whatever,
she	had	ten	years	on	him	easy,	maybe	more,	or	that’s	how	it	seemed	since	he
had	that	smooth	baby-skin	–	Babyskin?	–	face	that	made	him	look,	gods,
fourteen	or	so.	All	breathless	with	some	bizarre	story	about	being	a	prince	and
the	last	of	a	royal	line	and	saving	seeds	to	plant	in	perfect	soil	where	cacti
don’t	grow	and	now	he	wanted…wanted	what?	She	couldn’t	be	sure,	but	he	was
triggering	all	sorts	of	nasty	thoughts	in	her	head,	above	all	an	overwhelming
desire	to	corrupt	the	boy	so	bad	he’d	never	see	straight	ever	again,	just	to
prove	that	she	wasn’t	someone	anybody	messed	with	without	getting	all	messed
up	themselves.	So	maybe	it	all	came	down	to	power.	The	power	to	crush
innocence	and	that	was	something	even	a	terrified	woman	could	do,	couldn’t
she?
Passing	through	another	village	and	oh,	this	wasn’t	a	good	sign.	It’d	been
systematically	flattened.	Every	building	nothing	but	rubble.	Armies	did	things
like	that	to	remove	cover,	to	eliminate	the	chance	of	establishing	redoubts	and


all	that	sort	of	thing.	No	trees	beyond,	either,	just	a	level	stretch	of	ploughed
fields	with	the	hedgerows	cut	down	to	stumps	and	the	crops	all	burnt	to
blackened	stubble	and	already	the	morning	sun	was	lancing	deadly	darts	into
her	skull,	forcing	her	to	down	a	few	mouthfuls	of	her	dwindling	supply	of
Falari	rum	from	the	transports.
Steadying	her	some,	thank	Hood.
Her	corporal	merged	back	into	one,	which	was	a	good	sign,	and	he	was
pointing	ahead	and	talking	about	something—
‘What?	Wait,	Touchy	Breath,	wha’s	that	you’re	saying?’
‘The	rise	opposite,	Sergeant!	See	the	army	waiting	for	us?	See	it?	Gods
above,	we’re	finished!	Thousands!	No,	worse	than	thousands—’
‘Be	quiet!	I	can	see	’em	well	enough—’
‘But	you’re	looking	the	wrong	way!’
‘That’s	no	matter	either	way,	Corporal.	I	still	see	’em,	don’t	I?	Now	stop
crowding	me	and	go	find	Urb	–	got	to	keep	’im	close	to	keep	’im	alive,	the
clumsy	fool.’
‘He	won’t	come,	Sergeant.’
‘Wha’	you	talkin’	’bout?’
‘It’s	Skulldeath,	you	see.	He’s	announced	that	he’s	given	his	heart	to	you—’
‘His	what?	Listen,	you	go	an’	tell	Hearty	Death	that	he	can	have	his	skull
back	cause	I	don’t	wannit,	but	I’ll	take	his	cock	once	we’re	done	killing	all
these	bassards	or	maybe	even	before	then	if	there’s	a	chance,	but	in	the
meantime,	drag	Urb	here	because	I’m	’sponsible	for	’im,	you	see,	for	letting’
’im	kick	in	that	temple	door.’
‘Sergeant,	he	won’t—’
‘How	come	your	voice	keeps	changin’?’
	
‘So,’	said	the	commander	of	the	Letherii	forces	arrayed	along	the	ridge,	‘there
they	are.	What	do	you	judge,	Sirryn	Kanar?	Under	a	thousand?	I	would	believe
so.	All	the	way	from	the	coast.	Extraordinary.’
‘They	have	survived	thus	far,’	Sirryn	said,	scowling,	‘because	they	are
unwilling	to	stand	and	fight.’
‘Rubbish,’	the	veteran	officer	replied.	‘They	fought	the	way	they	needed	to,
and	they	did	it	exceptionally	well,	as	Hanradi	and	his	Edur	would	attest.	Under
a	thousand,	by	the	Errant.	What	I	could	do	with	ten	thousand	such	soldiers,
Finadd.	Pilott,	Korshenn,	Descent,	T’roos,	Isthmus	–	we	could	conquer	them
all.	Two	campaign	seasons,	no	more	than	that.’
‘Be	that	as	it	may,’	Sirryn	said,	‘we’re	about	to	kill	them	all,	sir.’


‘Yes,	Finadd,’	the	commander	sighed.	‘So	we	are.’	He	hesitated,	then	cast
Sirryn	an	oddly	sly	glance.	‘I	doubt	there	will	be	much	opportunity	to
excessively	bleed	the	Tiste	Edur,	Finadd.	They	have	done	their	task,	after	all,
and	now	need	only	dig	in	behind	these	Malazans	–	and	when	the	poor	fools
break,	as	they	will,	they	will	be	routing	right	into	Hanradi’s	Edur	spears,	and
that	will	be	the	end	of	that.’
Sirryn	Kanar	shrugged.	‘I	still	do	not	understand	how	these	Malazans
could	have	believed	a	thousand	of	their	soldiers	would	be	enough	to	conquer
our	empire.	Even	with	their	explosives	and	such.’
‘You	forget	their	formidable	sorcery,	Finadd.’
‘Formidable	at	stealth,	at	hiding	them	from	our	forces.	Naught	else.	And
now,	such	talents	have	no	use	at	all.	We	see	our	enemy,	sir,	and	they	are
exposed,	and	so	they	will	die.’
‘Best	we	get	on	with	it,	then,’	the	commander	said,	somewhat	shortly,	as	he
turned	to	gesture	his	mages	forward.
Below,	on	the	vast	plain	that	would	be	the	killing	field	for	this	invading
army	–	if	it	could	even	be	called	that	–	the	Malazan	column	began,	with
alacrity,	reforming	into	a	defensive	circle.	The	commander	grunted.	‘They
hold	to	no	illusions,	Finadd,	do	they?	They	are	finished	and	they	know	it.	And
so,	there	will	be	no	rout,	no	retreat	of	any	sort.	Look	at	them!	There	they	will
stand,	until	none	stand.’
Gathered	now	into	their	defensive	circle,	in	very	nearly	the	centre	of	the
killing	field,	the	force	suddenly	seemed	pathetically	small.	The	commander
glanced	at	his	seven	mages,	now	arrayed	at	the	very	crest	of	the	ridge	and
beginning	the	end	of	their	ritual	–	which	had	been	a	week	in	the	making.	Then
back	to	the	distant	huddle	of	Malazans.	‘Errant	bless	peace	upon	their	souls,’	he
whispered.

It	was	clear	that	Atri-Preda	Bivatt,	impatient	as	she	no	doubt	was,	had	at	the	last
moment	decided	to	draw	out	the	beginning	of	battle,	to	let	the	sun	continue	its
assault	on	the	mud	of	the	seabed.	Alas,	such	delay	was	not	in	Redmask’s
interest,	and	so	he	acted	first.
The	Letherii	mages	each	stood	within	a	protective	ring	of	soldiers
carrying	oversized	shields.	They	were	positioned	beyond	arrow	range,	but
Bivatt	well	knew	their	vulnerability	nonetheless,	particularly	once	they	began
their	ritual	summoning	of	power.
Toc	Anaster,	seated	on	his	horse	to	permit	him	a	clearer	view,	felt	the


scarring	of	his	missing	eye	blaze	into	savage	itching,	and	he	could	feel	how
the	air	grew	charged,	febrile,	as	the	two	mages	bound	their	wills	together.
They	could	not,	he	suspected,	maintain	control	for	very	long.	The	sorcery
would	need	to	erupt,	would	need	to	be	released.	To	roll	in	foaming	waves
down	into	the	seabed,	blistering	their	way	across	the	ground	to	crash	into	the
Awl	lines.	Where	warriors	would	die	by	the	hundreds,	perhaps	by	the
thousands.
Against	such	a	thing,	Redmask’s	few	shamans	could	do	nothing.	All	that
had	once	given	power	to	the	plains	tribe	was	torn,	very	nearly	shredded	by
displacement,	by	the	desecration	of	holy	grounds,	by	the	deaths	of	countless
warriors	and	elders	and	children.	The	Awl	culture,	Toc	now	understood,	was
crumbling,	and	to	save	it,	to	resurrect	his	people,	Redmask	needed	victory	this
day,	and	he	would	do	anything	to	achieve	it.
Including,	if	need	be,	the	sacrifice	of	his	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
Beneath	their	strange	armour,	beneath	the	fused	swords	at	the	end	of	the
K’ell	Hunter ’s	arms,	beneath	their	silent	language	and	inexplicable	alliance
with	Redmask	of	the	Awl,	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	were	reptiles,	and	their	blood
was	cold,	and	deep	in	their	brains,	perhaps,	could	be	found	ancient	memories,
recollections	of	a	pre-civilized	existence,	a	wildness	bound	in	the	skein	of
instincts.	And	so	the	patience	of	a	supreme	predator	coursed	in	that	chill	blood.
Reptiles.	Damned	lizards.
Thirty	or	so	paces	from	where	stood	the	mages	and	their	guardian
soldiers,	the	slope	reached	down	to	the	edge	of	the	ancient	sea,	where	the	mud
stretched	out	amidst	tufts	of	smeared,	flattened	grasses,	and	where	run-off	had
pooled	before	slowly	ebbing	away	into	the	silts	beneath.
The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	wallowed	down	into	that	mud,	quite	possibly
even	as	the	rains	continued	to	thrash	down	in	darkness.	Huge	as	they	were,	they
had	proved	skilled	at	burying	themselves	so	that	no	sign	was	visible	of	their
presence	–	no	sign	at	least	to	a	casual	viewer.	And	after	all,	who	could	have
imagined	such	enormous	beasts	were	capable	of	simply	disappearing	from
sight?
And	Redmask	had	guessed	more	or	less	correctly	where	the	mages	would
position	themselves;	indeed,	he	had	invited	such	placements,	where	waves	of
magic	would	converge	to	maximum	effect	against	his	waiting	warriors.
Neither	Sag’Churok	nor	Gunth	Mach	rose	to	find	themselves	too	far	away	for
that	sudden,	devastating	rush	upslope.
Screams	of	terror	as	the	flat	clay	seemed	to	erupt	at	the	old	shoreline,	and
then,	mud	cascading	from	their	backs,	the	demonic	creatures	were	racing
upslope,	each	closing	in	on	one	of	the	mages.


Panicked	retreat	–	flight	from	the	guards,	flinging	shields	and	swords
away	–	exposing	the	hapless	mages,	both	of	whom	sought	to	unleash	their
sorcery—
—no	time,	as	Sag’Churok’s	twin	blades	slashed	out	and	the	first	mage
seemed	to	vanish	in	a	bloom	of	blood	and	meat—
—no	time,	as	Gunth	Mach	leapt	high	in	the	air	then	landed	with	splayed
talons	directly	atop	the	second,	cowering	mage,	crushing	him	in	a	snap	of
bones—
And	then	the	beasts	wheeled,	racing	back	in	zigzag	patterns	as	flights	of
arrows	descended.	Those	that	struck	bounced	or,	rarely,	penetrated	the	thick
scaled	hide	enough	to	hold	fixed	in	place,	until	the	creature’s	motion	worked
them	loose.
In	the	wake	of	this	sudden	horror,	the	Letherii	horns	sounded	like	cries	of
rage,	and	all	at	once	the	wedges	were	moving	down	the	slope,	and	some	battle
song	lifted	skyward	to	set	cadence	–	but	it	was	a	shrill	sound,	erupting	from	the
throats	of	shaken	soldiers—
As	easily	as	that,	Toc	Anaster	reflected,	this	battle	begins.
Behind	him,	Torrent	was	dancing	in	gleeful	frenzy.
Shouting:	‘Redmask!	Redmask!	Redmask!’
The	wedges	edged	out	onto	the	seabed	and	visibly	sagged	as	momentum
slowed.	Between	them	milled	the	archers,	skirmishers	and	some	medium
infantry,	and	Toc	saw	soldiers	slipping,	falling,	boots	skidding	out	as	they
sought	purchase	to	draw	bowstrings	–	chaos.	The	heavy	infantry	in	front	were
now	sinking	to	their	knees,	while	those	at	the	back	stumbled	into	those	before
them,	as	the	rhythm	broke,	then	utterly	collapsed.
A	second	set	of	horns	sounded	as	soon	as	each	entire	wedge	was	on	the
flat,	and	all	forward	motion	ceased.	A	moment	of	relative	silence	as	the	wedges
reformed,	then	a	new	song	emerged	from	the	soldiers,	this	one	deeper,	more
assured,	and	carrying	a	slower	cadence,	a	drawn-out	beat	that	proved	the
perfect	match	to	an	advance	of	one	step	at	a	time,	with	a	settling	pause	between
it	and	the	next.
Toc	grunted	in	admiration.	That	was	impressive	control	indeed,	and	it
looked	to	be	working.
They	will	reach	the	Awl	lines	intact.	Still,	no	solid	footing	to	fix	shields	or
swing	weapons	with	strength.	Gods,	this	is	going	to	be	bloody.
For	all	of	Redmask’s	creativity,	he	was	not,	in	Toc’s	judgement,	a	tactical
genius.	Here,	he	had	done	all	he	could	to	gain	advantage,	displaying	due
competence.	Without	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	this	battle	might	already	be	over.
In	any	case,	Redmask’s	second	surprise	could	not	–	for	anyone	–	have	been


much	of	a	surprise	at	all.
	
Natarkas,	face	slick	with	sweat	behind	his	red	mask,	eased	his	horse	into	a
canter.	Surrounding	him	was	the	sound	of	thunder.	Two	thousand	chosen
warriors	rode	with	him	across	the	plain.	As	the	canter	was	loosed	into	a	gallop,
lances	were	set,	shields	settled	to	cover	groin,	hip	and	chest.
Natarkas	had	led	his	cavalry	through	the	night’s	rain,	east	of	the	seabed,
then	north	and	finally,	as	false	dawn	licked	the	darkness,	westward.
At	dawn,	they	were	positioned	a	third	of	a	league	behind	the	Letherii
forces.	Arrayed	into	a	wedge	with	Natarkas	himself	positioned	in	the	centre	of
the	sixth	row.	Awaiting	the	first	sounds	of	battle.
Redmask	had	been	adamant	with	his	instructions.	If	enemy	scouts	found
them,	they	were	to	wait,	and	wait	yet	longer,	listening	to	the	sounds	of	battle
for	at	least	two	turns	of	the	wheel.	If	they	believed	themselves	undiscovered	–
if	the	opportunity	for	surprise	remained	–	when	the	sounds	of	fighting
commenced,	Natarkas	was	to	immediately	lead	his	cavalry	into	an	attack	on	the
rear	formations	of	the	enemy	forces	–	on,	no	doubt,	the	Tiste	Edur.	There	was
to	be	no	deviation	from	these	instructions.
At	dawn,	his	own	scouts	had	ridden	to	Natarkas	to	announce	that	a	mounted
troop	of	Edur	had	discovered	them.	And	he	thought	back	to	Redmask	the	night
before.	‘Natarkas,	do	you	understand	why,	if	you	are	seen,	I	want	you	to	hold?
To	not	immediately	charge?	No?	Then	I	will	explain.	If	you	are	seen,	I	must	be
able	to	exploit	that	in	the	battle	on	the	seabed.	At	least	two	wheels	you	must
wait,	doing	nothing.	This	will	lock	the	Tiste	Edur	in	place.	It	may	even	draw	out
the	Bluerose	cavalry	–	and	should	they	approach	you,	invite	them	to	the	chase	–
lead	them	away,	yes,	and	keep	leading	them	away.	Do	not	engage	them,
Natarkas!	You	will	be	savaged!	Run	their	horses	into	the	dust	–	you	see,	they
will	cease	to	matter	by	then,	and	Bivatt	will	not	have	them	at	her	disposal.	This
is	important!	Do	you	understand	my	commands?’
Yes,	he	did	understand	them.	If	surprise	was	lost,	he	was	to	lead	his	Awl…
away.	Like	cowards.	But	they	had	played	the	cowards	before,	and	that	was	a
truth	that	burned	in	his	heart.	Flaring	into	agony	whenever	he	saw	the	Mezla,
Toc	Anaster,	yes,	the	one-eyed	foreigner	who	stood	as	living	proof	to	a	time
of	such	darkness	among	the	Awl	that	Natarkas	could	barely	breathe	whenever
he	thought	about	it.
And	he	knew	his	fellow	warriors	felt	the	same.	The	hollowness	inside,	the
terrible	need	to	give	answer,	to	reject	the	past	in	the	only	way	now	left	to	them.
They	had	been	seen,	yes.


But	they	would	not	run.	Nor	would	they	wait.	They	would	ride	to	the
sounds	of	battle.	They	would	sight	the	hated	enemy,	and	they	would	charge.
Redemption.	Do	you	understand	that	word,	Redmask?	No?	Then,	we	shall
show	you	its	meaning.
	
‘Sister	Shadow,	they’re	coming.’	Brohl	Handar	tightened	the	strap	of	his	helm.
‘Ready	your	spears!’	he	bellowed	to	his	warriors,	and	along	the	entire	front
line,	two	ranks	deep,	the	iron	points	of	the	spears	flashed	downward.	The
foremost	rank	knelt,	angling	their	points	to	the	chest	height	of	the	approaching
horses,	while	the	row	behind	them	remained	standing,	ready	to	thrust.	‘Shields
to	guard!’	The	third	rank	edged	forward	half	a	step	to	bring	their	shields	into	a
guard	position	beneath	the	weapon	arms	of	the	warriors	in	the	second	row.
Brohl	turned	to	one	of	his	runners.	‘Inform	the	Atri-Preda	that	we	face	a
cavalry	charge,	and	I	strongly	advise	she	order	the	Bluerose	to	mount	up	for	a
flank	attack	–	the	sooner	we	are	done	with	this	the	sooner	we	can	join	the	fight
on	the	seabed.’
He	watched	as	the	youth	rushed	off.
The	wedges	were	on	the	flat	now,	he	understood,	employing	the	step	and
settle	advance	Bivatt	had	devised	in	order	to	adjust	to	the	mud.	They	were
probably	nearing	the	Awl	lines,	although	yet	to	clash.	The	Atri-Preda	had
another	tactic	for	that	moment,	and	Brohl	Handar	wished	her	well.
The	slaying	of	the	mages	had	been	a	grim	opening	to	this	day’s	battle,	but
the	Overseer ’s	confidence	had,	if	anything,	begun	to	grow.
These	fools	charge	us!	They	charge	a	forest	of	spears!	It	is	suicide!
Finally,	he	realized,	they	could	end	this.	Finally,	this	absurd	war	could	end.
By	day’s	close,	not	a	single	Awl	would	remain	alive.	Not	one.
The	thunder	of	hoofs.	Lances	lowered,	the	horses	with	necks	stretched	out,
the	warriors	hunching	down	–	closer,	closer,	then,	all	at	once,	chaos.
	
No	horse	could	be	made	to	run	into	a	wall	of	bristling	spears.	In	the	midst	of
the	Awl	lancers	were	mounted	archers,	and	as	the	mass	of	riders	drew	to	within
a	hundred	paces	of	Edur,	these	archers	rose	on	their	stirrups	and	released	a
swarm	of	arrows.
The	first	row	of	Edur,	kneeling	with	spears	planted,	had	leaned	their
rectangular	Letherii	shields	against	their	shoulders	–	the	best	they	could
manage	with	both	hands	on	the	spear	shaft.	Those	immediately	behind	them


were	better	protected,	but	the	spear-hedge,	as	the	Letherii	called	it,	was
vulnerable.
Warriors	screamed,	spun	round	by	the	impact	of	arrows.	The	row	rippled,
wavered,	was	suddenly	ragged.
Horses	could	not	be	made	to	run	into	a	wall	of	bristling	spears.	But,	if
sufficiently	trained,	they	could	be	made	to	hammer	into	a	mass	of	human	flesh.
And,	among	those	still	facing	spears	positioned	at	chest	height,	they	could
jump.
A	second	flight	of	arrows	slanted	out	at	forty	or	so	paces.	Then	a	third	at
ten	paces.
The	facing	side	of	the	Edur	square	was	a	ragged	mess	by	the	time	the
charge	struck	home.	Beasts	launched	themselves	into	the	air,	straining	to	clear
the	first	spears,	only	to	intercept	other	iron-headed	points	–	but	none	of	these
were	butted	into	the	ground,	and	while	serrated	edges	slashed	through	leather
plates	and	the	flesh	beneath,	many	were	driven	aside	or	punched	back.	In	the
gaps	in	the	front	line,	the	horses	plunged	into	the	ranks	of	Edur,	flinging
warriors	away,	trampling	others.	Lances	thudded	into	reeling	bodies,	skidded
from	desperate	shield	blocks,	kissed	faces	and	throats	in	a	welter	of	blood.
Brohl	Handar,	positioned	behind	his	Edur	square,	stared	in	horror	as	the
entire	block	of	Arapay	warriors	seemed	to	recoil,	flinch	back,	then	inexorably
fold	inward	from	the	facing	side.
The	Awl	wedge	had	driven	deep	and	was	now	exploding	from	within	the
disordered	square.	The	impact	had	driven	warriors	back,	fouling	those	behind
them,	in	a	rippling	effect	that	spread	through	the	entire	formation.
Among	the	Awl,	in	the	midst	of	jostling,	stumbling	Edur,	heavy	cutting
swords	appeared	as	lances	were	shattered,	splintered	or	left	in	bodies.	In
screaming	frenzy,	the	savages	were	hacking	down	on	all	sides.
Horses	went	down,	kicking,	lashing	out	in	their	death-throes.	Spears
stabbed	upwards	to	lift	Awl	warriors	from	their	saddles.
The	square	was	seething	madness.
And	horses	continued	to	go	down,	whilst	others	backed,	despite	the
shrieking	commands	of	their	riders.	More	spears	raked	riders	from	their
saddles,	crowds	closing	about	individuals.
All	at	once,	the	Awl	were	seeking	to	withdraw,	and	the	Edur	warriors
began	pushing,	the	square’s	flanks	advancing	in	an	effort	to	enclose	the
attackers.
Someone	was	screaming	at	Brohl	Handar.	Someone	at	his	side,	and	he
turned	to	see	one	of	his	runners.
Who	was	pointing	westward	with	frantic	gestures.


Bluerose	cavalry,	forming	up.
Brohl	Handar	stared	at	the	distant	ranks,	the	sun-lashed	lance-heads	held
high,	the	horses’	heads	lifting	and	tossing,	then	he	shook	himself.	‘Sound	close
ranks!	The	square	does	not	pursue!	Close	ranks	and	let	the	enemy	withdraw!’
Moments	later,	horns	blared.
The	Awl	did	not	understand.	Panic	was	already	among	them,	and	the
sudden	recoiling	of	those	now	advancing	Edur	struck	them	as	an	opportunity.
Eager	to	disengage,	the	horse-warriors	sprang	away	from	all	contact	–	twenty
paces	–	archers	twisting	in	their	saddles	to	loose	arrows	–	forty,	fifty	paces,
and	a	copper-faced	officer	among	them	yelling	at	his	troops	to	draw	up,	to
reform	for	another	charge	–	and	there	was	thunder	in	the	west,	and	that	warrior
turned	in	his	saddle,	and	saw,	descending	upon	his	milling	ranks,	his	own
death.
His	death,	and	that	of	his	warriors.
Brohl	Handar	watched	as	the	commander	frantically	tried	to	wheel	his
troops,	to	set	them,	to	push	the	weary,	bloodied	beasts	and	their	equally	weary
riders	into	a	meeting	charge	–	but	it	was	too	late.	Voices	cried	out	in	fear	as
warriors	saw	what	was	descending	upon	them.	The	confusion	redoubled,	and
then	riders	were	breaking,	fleeing—
All	at	once,	the	Bluerose	lancers	swept	into	them.
Brohl	Handar	looked	down	upon	his	Arapay	–	Sister	Shadow,	but	we	have
been	wounded.	‘Sound	the	slow	advance!’	he	commanded,	stepping	forward
and	drawing	his	sword.	‘We	will	finish	what	the	Bluerose	have	begun.’	I	want
those	bastards.	Every	damned	one	of	them.	Screaming	in	pain,	dying	by	our
blades!
Something	dark	and	savage	swirled	awake	within	him.	Oh,	there	would	be
pleasure	in	killing.	Here.	Now.	Such	pleasure.
	
As	the	Bluerose	charge	rolled	through	the	Awl	cavalry,	a	broad-bladed	lance
caught	Natarkas	–	still	shrieking	his	commands	to	wheel	–	in	the	side	of	the
head.	The	point	punched	through	low	on	his	left	temple,	beneath	the	rim	of	the
bronze-banded	helm.	It	shattered	that	plate	of	the	skull,	along	with	his
cheekbone	and	the	orbit	of	the	eye.	Then	drove	still	deeper,	through	brain	and
nasal	cavity.
Blackness	bloomed	in	his	mind.
Beneath	him	–	as	he	toppled,	twisted	round	when	the	lance	dragged	free	–
his	horse	staggered	before	the	impact	of	the	attacker ’s	own	mount;	then,	as	the
weight	of	Natarkas’s	body	rolled	away,	the	beast	bolted,	seeking	a	place	away


from	this	carnage,	this	terror.
All	at	once,	open	plain	ahead	and	two	other	riderless	horses	racing	away,
heads	high	in	sudden	freedom.
Natarkas’s	horse	set	off	after	them.
The	chaos	in	its	heart	dwindled,	faded,	fluttered	away	with	every	exultant
breath	the	beast	drew	into	its	aching	lungs.
Free!
Never!	Free!
Never	again!
	
On	the	seabed,	the	heavy	infantry	wedges	advanced	beneath	the	now	constant
hail	of	descending	arrows.	Skittering	on	raised	shields,	glancing	from	visored
helms,	stabbing	down	through	gaps	in	armour	and	chance	ricochets.	Soldiers
cried	out,	stumbled,	recovered	or	sought	to	fall	–	but	these	latter	were	suddenly
grasped	by	hands	on	either	side	and	bodies	closed	in,	keeping	them	upright,
feet	now	dragging	as	life	poured	its	crimson	gift	to	the	churned	mud	below.
Those	hands	then	began	pushing	the	dead	and	the	dying	forward,	through	the
ranks.	Hands	reaching	back,	grasping,	tugging	and	pulling,	then	pushing	into
yet	more	waiting	hands.
Through	all	of	this,	the	chant	continued,	the	wait	beat	marked	each	settling
step.
Twelve	paces	from	the	Awl	on	their	islands	of	dry,	able	now	to	see	into
faces,	to	see	the	blazing	eyes	filled	with	fear	or	rage.
This	slow	advance	could	not	but	unnerve	the	waiting	Awl.	Human	spearheads,	edging	ever	closer.	Massive	iron	fangs,	inexorably	looming,	step,	wait,
step,	wait,	step.
And	now,	eight	paces	away,	arrow-riddled	corpses	were	being	flung
forward	from	the	front	ranks,	the	bodies	sprawling	into	the	mud.	Shields
followed	here	and	there.	Boots	settled	atop	these	things,	pushing	them	into	the
mud.
Bodies	and	shields,	appearing	in	a	seemingly	unending	stream.
Building,	there	in	the	last	six	strides,	a	floor	of	flesh,	leather,	wood	and
armour.
Javelins	sleeted	into	those	wedges,	driving	soldiers	back	and	down,	only	to
have	their	bodies	thrust	forward	with	chilling	disregard.	The	wounded	bled
out.	The	wounded	drowned	screaming	in	the	mud.	And	each	wedge	seemed	to
lift	itself	up	and	out	of	the	mud,	although	the	cadence	did	not	change.
Four	steps.	Three.


And,	at	a	bellowing	shout,	the	points	of	those	enormous	wedges	suddenly
drove	forward.
Into	human	flesh,	into	set	shields,	spears.	Into	the	Awl.
Each	and	every	mind	dreamed	of	victory.	Of	immortality.	And,	among
them	all,	not	one	would	yield.
The	sun	stared	down,	blazing	with	eager	heat,	on	Q’uson	Tapi,	where	two
civilizations	locked	throat	to	throat.
One	last	time.
	
A	fateful	decision,	maybe,	but	he’d	made	it	now.	Dragging	with	him	all	the
squads	that	had	been	in	the	village,	Fiddler	took	over	from	some	of	Keneb’s
more	beat-up	units	the	west-facing	side	of	their	turtleback	defence.	No	longer
standing	eye	to	eye	with	that	huge	Letherii	army	and	its	Hood-cursed	sorcerers.
No,	here	they	waited,	and	opposite	them,	drawing	up	in	thick	ranks,	the	Tiste
Edur.
Was	it	cowardice?	He	wasn’t	sure,	and	from	the	looks	he	caught	in	the	eyes
of	his	fellow	sergeants	–	barring	Hellian	who’d	made	a	temporarily
unsuccessful	grab	at	Skulldeath,	or	more	precisely	at	his	crotch,	before	Primly
intervened	–	they	weren’t	sure,	either.
Fine,	then,	I	just	don’t	want	to	see	my	death	come	rolling	down	on	me.	Is
that	cowardly?	Aye,	by	all	counts	it	couldn’t	be	anything	but.	Still,	there’s	this.	I
don’t	feel	frightened.
No,	all	he	wanted	right	now,	beyond	what	Hellian	so	obviously	wanted,	of
course,	all	he	wanted,	then,	was	to	die	fighting.	To	see	the	face	of	the	bastard
who	killed	him,	to	pass	on,	in	that	final	meeting	of	eyes,	all	that	dying	meant,
must	have	meant	and	would	always	mean…whatever	that	was,	and	let’s	hope	I
do	a	better	job	of	letting	my	killer	know	whatever	it	is	–	better,	that	is,	than	all
those	whose	eyes	I’ve	looked	into	as	they	died	at	my	hand.	Aye,	seems	a	worthy
enough	prayer.
But	I	ain’t	praying	to	you,	Hood.
In	fact,	damned	if	I	know	who	I’m	praying	to,	but	even	that	doesn’t	seem	to
matter.
His	soldiers	were	digging	holes	but	not	saying	much.	They’d	received	a
satchelful	of	munitions,	including	two	more	cussers,	and	while	that	wasn’t
nearly	enough	it	made	it	advisable	to	dig	the	holes	where	they	could	crouch	for
cover	when	those	sharpers,	cussers	and	all	the	rest	started	going	off.
All	of	this,	dammit,	assumed	there	would	be	fighting.
Far	more	likely,	magic	would	sweep	over	the	Malazans,	one	and	all,


grabbing	at	their	throats	even	as	it	burned	away	skin,	muscle	and	organs,
burned	away	even	their	last	desperate,	furious	screams.
Fiddler	vowed	to	make	his	last	scream	a	curse.	A	good	one,	too.
He	stared	across	at	the	rows	of	Tiste	Edur.
Beside	him,	Cuttle	said,	‘They	don’t	like	it	neither,	you	know.’
Fiddler	replied	with	a	wordless	grunt.
‘That’s	their	leader,	that	old	one	with	the	hunched	shoulders.	Too	many
paying	him	too	much	attention.	I	plan	to	take	him	out,	Fid	–	with	a	cusser.
Listen	–	are	you	listening?	As	soon	as	that	wave	of	magic	starts	its	roll,	we
should	damn	well	up	and	charge	these	bastards.’
Not	a	bad	idea,	actually.	Blinking,	Fiddler	faced	the	sapper,	and	then
nodded.	‘Pass	the	word,	then.’
At	that	moment	one	of	Thom	Tissy’s	soldiers	jogged	into	their	midst.
‘Fist’s	orders,’	he	said,	looking	round.	‘Where’s	your	captain?’
‘Holding	Beak’s	hand,	somewhere	else,’	Fiddler	replied.	‘You	can	give
those	orders	to	me,	soldier.’
‘All	right.	Maintain	the	turtleback	–	do	not	advance	on	the	enemy—’
‘That’s	fucking—’
‘Enough,	Cuttle!’	Fiddler	snapped.	To	the	runner	he	nodded	and	said,	‘How
long?’
A	blank	expression	answered	that	question.
Fiddler	waved	the	idiot	on,	then	turned	once	more	to	stare	across	at	the
Tiste	Edur.
‘Damn	him,	Fid!’
‘Relax,	Cuttle.	We’ll	set	out	when	we	have	to,	all	right?’
‘Sergeant?’	Bottle	was	suddenly	crawling	out	of	the	hole	he’d	dug,	and
there	was	a	strained	look	on	his	face.	‘Something…something’s	happening—’
At	that	moment,	from	the	ridge	to	the	east,	a	blood-chilling	sound	–	like
ten	thousand	anchor	chains	ripping	up	from	the	ground,	and	there	rose	a
virulent	wall	of	swirling	magic.	Dark	purple	and	shot	through	with	crimson
veins,	black	etchings	like	lightning	darting	along	the	crest	as	it	rose,	higher,
yet	higher—
‘Hood’s	balls!’	Cuttle	breathed,	eyes	wide.
Fiddler	simply	stared.	This	was	the	sorcery	they’d	seen	off	the	north	coast
of	Seven	Cities.	Only,	then	they’d	had	Quick	Ben	with	them.	And	Bottle	had	his
–	he	reached	out	and	pulled	Bottle	close.	‘Listen!	Is	she—’
‘No,	Fid!	Nowhere!	She’s	not	been	with	me	since	we	landed.	I’m	sorry—’
Fiddler	flung	the	man	back	down.
The	wall	heaved	itself	still	higher.


The	Tiste	Edur	along	the	western	edge	of	the	killing	field	were	suddenly
pulling	back.
Cuttle	yelled,	‘We	need	to	go	now!	Fiddler!	Now!’
Yet	he	could	not	move.	Could	not	answer,	no	matter	how	the	sapper	railed
at	him.	Could	only	stare,	craning,	ever	upward.	Too	much	magic.	‘Gods
above,’	he	muttered,	‘talk	about	overkill.’
Run	away	from	this?	Not	a	chance.
Cuttle	dragged	him	round.
Fiddler	scowled	and	pushed	the	man	back,	hard	enough	to	make	the	sapper
stumble.	‘Fuck	running,	Cuttle!	You	think	we	can	out-run	that?’
‘But	the	Edur—’
‘It’s	going	to	take	them	too	–	can’t	you	see	that?’	It	has	to	–	no-one	can
control	it	once	it’s	released	–	no-one.	‘Those	Hood-damned	Edur	have	been	set
up,	Cuttle!’	Oh	yes,	the	Letherii	wanted	to	get	rid	of	their	masters	–	they	just
didn’t	want	to	do	it	with	us	as	allies.	No,	they’ll	do	it	their	way	and	take	out
both	enemies	at	the	same	damned	time…
	
Three	hundred	paces	to	the	west,	Hanradi	stared	up	at	that	Letherii	magic.	And
understood,	all	at	once.	He	understood.
‘We	have	been	betrayed,’	he	said,	as	much	to	himself	as	to	the	warriors
standing	close	by.	‘That	ritual	–	it	has	been	days	in	the	making.	Maybe	weeks.
Once	unleashed…’	the	devastation	will	stretch	for	leagues	westward.
What	to	do?
Father	Shadow,	what	to	do?	‘Where	are	my	K’risnan?’	he	suddenly
demanded,	turning	to	his	aides.
Two	Edur	hobbled	forward,	their	faces	ashen.
‘Can	you	protect	us?’
Neither	replied,	and	neither	would	meet	Hanradi’s	eyes.
‘Can	you	not	call	upon	Hannan	Mosag?	Reach	through	to	the	Ceda,	damn
you!’
‘You	do	not	understand!’	one	of	the	once-young	K’risnan	shouted.	‘We	are
–	all	–	we	are	all	abandoned!’
‘But	Kurald	Emurlahn—’
‘Yes!	Awake	once	more!	But	we	cannot	reach	it!	Nor	can	the	Ceda!’
‘And	what	of	that	other	power?	The	chaos?’
‘Gone!	Fled!’
Hanradi	stared	at	the	two	warlocks.	He	drew	his	sword	and	lashed	the	blade
across	the	nearest	one’s	face,	the	edge	biting	through	bridge	of	nose	and


splitting	both	eyeballs.	Shrieking,	the	figure	reeled	back,	hands	at	his	face.
Hanradi	stepped	forward	and	drove	his	sword	into	the	creature’s	twisted	chest,
and	the	blood	that	gushed	forth	was	almost	black.
Tugging	the	weapon	free,	Hanradi	turned	to	the	other	one,	who	cowered
back.	‘You	warlocks,’	the	once-king	said	in	a	grating	voice,	‘are	the	cause	of
this.	All	of	this.’	He	took	another	step	closer.	‘Would	that	you	were	Hannan
Mosag	crouched	before	me	now—’
‘Wait!’	the	K’risnan	shrieked,	suddenly	pointing	eastward.	‘Wait!	One
gives	answer!	One	gives	answer!’
Hanradi	turned,	eyes	focusing	with	some	difficulty	on	the	Malazans	–	so
overwhelming	was	the	wave	of	Letherii	magic	that	a	shadow	had	descended
upon	the	entire	killing	field.
Rising	from	that	huddled	mass	of	soldiers,	a	faint,	luminous	glow.	Silver,
vaguely	pulsing.
Hanradi’s	laugh	was	harsh.	‘That	pathetic	thing	is	an	answer?’	He	half
raised	his	sword.
‘No!’	the	K’risnan	cried.	‘Wait!	Look,	you	stupid	fool!	Look!’
And	so	he	did,	once	again.
And	saw	that	dome	of	silver	light	burgeoning,	spreading	out	to	engulf	the
entire	force	–	and	it	thickened,	became	opaque—
The	last	K’risnan	clutched	at	Hanradi’s	arm.	‘Listen	to	me!	Its	power	–
Father	Shadow!	Its	power!’
‘Can	it	hold?’	Hanradi	demanded.	‘Can	it	hold	against	the	Letherii?’
He	saw	no	answer	in	the	K’risnan’s	red-rimmed	eyes.
It	cannot	–	look,	still,	it	is	tiny	–	against	that	ever-growing	wave—
But…it	need	be	no	larger	than	that,	need	it?	It	engulfs	them	all.
‘Sound	the	advance!’	he	shouted.	‘At	the	double!’
Wide	eyes	fixed	on	Hanradi,	who	pointed	at	that	scintillating	dome	of
ethereal	power.	‘At	the	very	least	we	can	crouch	in	its	shadow!	Now,	move
forward!	Everyone!’
	
Beak,	who	had	once	possessed	another	name,	a	more	boring	name,	had	been
playing	in	the	dirt	that	afternoon,	on	the	floor	of	the	old	barn	where	no-one
went	any	more	and	that	was	far	away	from	the	rest	of	the	buildings	of	the
estate,	far	enough	away	to	enable	him	to	imagine	he	was	alone	in	an	abandoned
world.	A	world	without	trouble.
He	was	playing	with	the	discarded	lumps	of	wax	he	collected	from	the
trash	heap	below	the	back	wall	of	the	main	house.	The	heat	of	his	hands	could


change	their	shape,	like	magic.	He	could	mould	faces	from	the	pieces	and	build
entire	families	like	those	families	down	in	the	village,	where	boys	and	girls	his
age	worked	alongside	their	parents	and	when	not	working	played	in	the	woods
and	were	always	laughing.
This	was	where	his	brother	found	him.	His	brother	with	the	sad	face	so
unlike	the	wax	ones	he	liked	to	make.	He	arrived	carrying	a	coil	of	rope,	and
stood	just	inside	the	gaping	entrance	with	its	jammed-wide	doors	all
overgrown.
Beak,	who	had	a	more	boring	name	back	then,	saw	in	his	brother ’s	face	a
sudden	distress,	which	then	drained	away	and	a	faint	smile	took	its	place	which
was	a	relief	since	Beak	always	hated	it	when	his	brother	went	off	somewhere	to
cry.	Older	brothers	should	never	do	that	and	if	he	was	older,	why,	he’d	never
do	that.
His	brother	then	walked	towards	him,	and	still	half	smiling	he	said,	‘I	need
you	to	leave,	little	one.	Take	your	toys	and	leave	here.’
Beak	stared	with	wide	eyes.	His	brother	never	asked	such	things	of	him.
His	brother	had	always	shared	this	barn.	‘Don’t	you	want	to	play	with	me?’
‘Not	now,’	his	brother	replied,	and	Beak	saw	that	his	hands	were	trembling
which	meant	there’d	been	trouble	back	at	the	estate.	Trouble	with	Mother.
‘Playing	will	make	you	feel	better,’	Beak	said.
‘I	know.	But	not	now.’
‘Later?’	Beak	began	collecting	his	wax	villagers.
‘We’ll	see.’
There	were	decisions	that	did	not	seem	like	decisions.	And	choices	could
just	fall	into	place	when	nobody	was	really	looking	and	that	was	how	things
were	in	childhood	just	as	they	were	for	adults.	Wax	villagers	cradled	in	his
arms,	Beak	set	off,	out	the	front	and	into	the	sunlight.	Summer	days	were
always	wonderful	–	the	sun	was	hot	enough	to	make	the	villagers	weep	with
joy,	once	he	lined	them	up	on	the	old	border	stone	that	meant	nothing	any
more.
The	stone	was	about	eighteen	of	Beak’s	small	paces	away,	toppled	down	at
one	corner	of	the	track	before	it	turned	and	sank	down	towards	the	bridge	and
the	stream	where	minnows	lived	until	it	dried	up	and	then	they	died	because
minnows	could	only	breathe	in	water.	He	had	just	set	his	toys	down	in	a	row
when	he	decided	he	needed	to	ask	his	brother	something.
Decisions	and	choices,	falling.
What	was	it	he	had	wanted	to	ask?	There	was	no	memory	of	that.	The
memory	of	that	was	gone,	melted	down	into	nothing.	It	had	been	a	very	hot	day.
Reaching	the	entrance	he	saw	his	brother	–	who	had	been	sitting	with	legs


dangling	from	the	loft’s	edge	–	slide	over	to	drop	down	onto	the	floor.	But	he
didn’t	drop	all	the	way.	The	rope	round	his	neck	caught	him	instead.
And	then,	his	face	turning	dark	as	his	eyes	bulged	and	his	tongue	pushed
out,	his	brother	danced	in	the	air,	kicking	through	the	shafts	of	dusty	sunlight.
Beak	ran	up	to	him	–	the	game	his	brother	had	been	playing	with	the	rope
had	gone	all	wrong,	and	now	his	brother	was	choking.	He	threw	his	arms	about
his	brother ’s	kicking	legs	and	tried	with	all	his	might	to	hold	him	up.
And	there	he	stood,	and	perhaps	he	was	screaming,	but	perhaps	he	wasn’t,
because	this	was	an	abandoned	place,	too	far	away	from	anyone	who	might
help.
His	brother	tried	to	kick	him	away.	His	brother ’s	fists	punched	down	on	the
top	of	Beak’s	head,	hard	enough	to	hurt	but	not	so	much	since	those	hands
couldn’t	but	barely	reach	him,	short	as	he	was	being	still	younger	than	his
brother.	So	he	just	held	on.
Fire	awoke	in	the	muscles	of	his	arms.	In	his	shoulders.	His	neck.	His	legs
shook	beneath	him,	because	he	needed	to	stand	on	his	toes	–	if	he	tried	to	move
his	arms	further	down	to	well	below	his	brother ’s	knees,	then	his	brother
simply	bent	those	knees	and	started	choking	again.
Fire	everywhere,	fire	right	through	Beak’s	body.
His	legs	were	failing.	His	arms	were	failing.	And	as	they	failed	his	brother
choked.	Pee	ran	down	to	burn	against	Beak’s	wrists	and	his	face.	The	air	was
suddenly	thick	with	worse	smells	and	his	brother	never	did	things	like	this	–	all
this	mess,	the	terrible	mistake	with	the	rope.
Beak	could	not	hold	on,	and	this	was	the	problem	with	being	a	younger
brother,	with	being	as	he	was.	And	the	kicking	finally	stilled,	the	muscles	of	his
brother ’s	legs	becoming	soft,	loose.	Two	fingertips	from	one	of	his	brother ’s
hands	lightly	brushed	Beak’s	hair,	but	they	only	moved	when	Beak	himself
moved,	so	those	fingers	were	as	still	as	the	legs.
It	was	good	that	his	brother	wasn’t	fighting	any	more.	He	must	have
loosened	the	rope	from	round	his	neck	and	was	now	just	resting.	And	that	was
good	because	Beak	was	now	on	his	knees,	arms	wrapped	tight	about	his
brother ’s	feet.
And	there	he	stayed.
Until,	three	bells	after	dusk,	one	of	the	stable	hands	from	the	search	party
came	into	the	barn	with	a	lantern.
By	then,	the	sun’s	heat	earlier	that	afternoon	had	ruined	all	his	villagers,
had	drawn	down	their	faces	into	expressions	of	grief,	and	Beak	did	not	come
back	to	collect	them	up,	did	not	reshape	them	into	nicer	faces.	Those	lumps
remained	on	the	border	stone	that	meant	nothing	any	more,	sinking	down	in


the	day	after	day	sun.
After	that	last	day	with	his	brother,	there	was	trouble	aplenty	in	the
household.	But	it	did	not	last	long,	not	long	at	all.
He	did	not	know	why	he	was	thinking	about	his	brother	now,	as	he	set
ablaze	every	candle	within	him	to	make	the	world	bright	and	to	save	all	his
friends.	And	before	long	he	no	longer	sensed	anyone	else,	barring	the	faint
smudges	they	had	become.	The	captain,	the	Fist,	all	the	soldiers	who	were	his
friends,	he	let	his	light	unfold	to	embrace	them	all,	to	keep	them	safe	from	that
frightening,	dark	magic	so	eager	to	rush	down	upon	them.
It	had	grown	too	powerful	for	those	seven	mages	to	contain.	They	had
created	something	that	would	now	destroy	them,	but	Beak	would	not	let	it	hurt
his	friends.	And	so	he	made	his	light	burn	yet	brighter.	He	made	of	it	a	solid
thing.	Would	it	be	enough?	He	did	not	know,	but	it	had	to	be,	for	without
friends	there	was	nothing,	no-one.
Brighter,	hotter,	so	hot	the	wax	of	the	candles	burst	into	clouds	of	droplets,
flaring	bright	as	the	sun,	one	after	another.	And,	when	every	coloured	candle
was	lit,	why,	there	was	white.
And	yet	more,	for	as	each	joined	the	torrent	emanating	from	him,	he	felt	in
himself	a	cleansing,	a	scouring	away,	what	priests	called	purification	only	they
really	knew	nothing	about	purification	because	it	had	nothing	to	do	with
offerings	of	blood	or	coin	and	nothing	to	do	with	starving	yourself	and
whipping	your	own	back	or	endlessly	chanting	until	the	brain	goes	numb.
Nothing	like	any	of	that.	Purification,	Beak	now	understood,	was	final.
	
Everything	glowed,	as	if	lit	from	fires	within.	The	once-black	stubble	of	crops
blazed	back	into	fierce	life.	Stones	shone	like	precious	gems.	Incandescence
raged	on	all	sides.	Fiddler	saw	his	soldiers	and	he	could	see	through,	in
pulsing	flashes,	to	their	very	bones,	the	organs	huddled	within	their	cages.	He
saw,	along	one	entire	side	of	Koryk,	old	fractures	on	the	ribs,	the	left	arm,	the
shoulder	blade,	the	hip.	He	saw	three	knuckle-sized	dents	on	Cuttle’s	skull
beneath	the	now	translucent	helm	–	a	rap	he	had	taken	when	still	a	babe,	softboned	and	vulnerable.	He	saw	the	damage	between	Smiles’s	legs	from	all	the
times	she	savaged	herself.	He	saw	in	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	the	coursing
blood	that	held	in	it	the	power	to	destroy	every	cancer	that	struck	him,	and	he
was	a	man	under	siege	from	that	disease,	but	it	would	never	kill.	Would	not
even	sicken	him.
He	saw	in	Bottle	coruscating	waves	of	raw	power,	a	refulgence	devoid	of
all	control	–	but	that	would	come.	It	will	come.


Corporal	Tarr	crouched	down	in	the	hole	he’d	dug,	and	the	light
emanating	from	him	looked	solid	as	iron.
Among	the	others	he	saw	more	than	any	mortal	would	want	to	see,	yet	he
could	not	close	his	eyes,	could	not	look	away.
Gesler	and	Stormy	were	lit	in	gold	fire.	Even	Stormy’s	beard	and	hair	–	all
spun	gold	now	–	a	brutal	beauty	cascading	round	his	face,	and	the	damned	fool
was	laughing.
The	world	beyond	had	vanished	behind	an	opaque,	curved	wall	of	silver
fire.	Vague	shapes	on	the	other	side	–	yes,	he’d	seen	the	Tiste	Edur
approaching,	seeking	some	kind	of	shelter.
Fiddler	found	he	was	standing,	facing	that	wall,	and	now	he	was	walking
forward.	Because	some	things	matter	more	than	others.	Stepping	into	that	silver
fire,	feeling	it	lance	through	his	entire	body,	neither	hot	nor	cold,	neither	pain
nor	joy.
He	staggered	suddenly,	blinking,	and	not	fifteen	paces	from	him	crouched
hundreds	of	Tiste	Edur.	Waiting	to	die.

Hanradi	knelt	with	his	gaze	fixed	on	the	sky,	half	of	which	had	vanished	behind
a	blackened	wall	of	writhing	madness.	The	crest	had	begun	its	toppling
advance.
Sudden	motion	drew	his	eyes	down.
To	see	a	Malazan	–	now	transformed	into	an	apparition	of	white	–	beard,
hair	–	the	dangling	finger	bones	were	now	polished,	luminous,	as	was	his
armour,	his	weapons.	Scoured,	polished,	even	the	leather	of	his	harness	looked
new,	supple.
The	Malazan	met	his	gaze	with	silver	eyes,	then	he	lifted	one	perfect	hand,
and	waved	them	all	forward.
Hanradi	rose,	flinging	his	sword	aside.
His	warriors	saw.	His	warriors	did	the	same,	and	as	they	all	moved
forward,	the	dome	of	silver	fire	all	at	once	rushed	towards	them.
A	piercing	shriek	and	Hanradi	turned	to	see	his	last	K’risnan	burst	into
flames	–	a	single	blinding	instant,	then	the	hapless	warlock	was	simply	ash,
settling	onto	the	ground—
	
Beak	was	happy	to	save	them.	He	had	understood	that	old	sergeant.	The	twisted
mage,	alas,	could	not	embrace	such	purification.	Too	much	of	his	soul	had


been	surrendered.	The	others	–	oh,	they	were	wounded,	filled	with	bitterness
that	he	needed	to	sweep	away,	and	so	he	did.
Nothing	was	difficult	any	more.	Nothing—
At	that	moment,	the	wave	of	Letherii	magic	descended.
	
The	Letherii	commander	could	not	see	the	killing	field,	could	indeed	see
nothing	but	that	swirling,	burgeoning	wall	of	eager	sorcery.	Its	cruel	hunger
poured	down	in	hissing	clouds.
When	it	heaved	forward,	all	illusion	of	control	vanished.
The	commander,	with	Sirryn	Kanar	cowering	beside	him,	saw	all	seven	of
his	mages	plucked	from	the	ground,	dragged	up	into	the	air,	into	the	wake	of
that	charging	wall.	Screaming,	flailing,	then	streaks	of	whipping	blood	as	they
were	torn	apart	moments	before	vanishing	into	the	dark	storm.
The	sorcery	lurched,	then	plunged	down	upon	the	killing	field.
Detonation.
Soldiers	were	thrown	from	their	feet.	Horses	were	flung	onto	their	sides,
riders	tumbling	or	pinned	as	the	terrified	beasts	rolled	onto	their	backs.	The
entire	ridge	seemed	to	ripple,	then	buckle,	and	sudden	slumping	pulled	soldiers
from	the	edge,	burying	them	in	slides	racing	for	the	field	below.	Mouths	were
open,	screams	unleashed	in	seeming	silence,	the	horror	in	so	many	eyes—
The	collapsing	wave	blew	apart—
	
Beak	was	driven	down	by	the	immense	weight,	the	horrible	hunger.	Yet	he
would	not	retreat.	Instead,	he	let	the	fire	within	him	lash	out,	devouring	every
candle,	igniting	everything.
His	friends,	yes,	the	only	ones	he	had	ever	known.
Survival,	he	realized,	could	only	be	found	through	purity.	Of	his	love	for
them	all	–	how	so	many	of	them	had	smiled	at	him,	laughed	with	him.	How
hands	clapped	him	on	the	shoulder	and	even,	now	and	then,	tousled	his	hair.
He	would	have	liked	to	see	the	captain	one	last	time,	and	maybe	even	kiss
her.	On	the	cheek,	although	of	course	he	would	have	liked	something	far
more…brave.	But	he	was	Beak,	after	all,	and	he	could	hold	on	to	but	one	thing
at	a	time.
Arms	wrapped	tight,	even	as	the	fire	began	to	burn	the	muscles	of	his	arms.
His	shoulders	and	neck.	His	legs.
He	could	hold	on,	now,	until	they	found	him.


Those	fires	were	so	hot,	now,	burning	–	but	there	was	no	pain.	Pain	had
been	scoured	away,	cleansed	away.	Oh,	the	weight	was	vast,	getting	heavier
still,	but	he	would	not	let	go.	Not	of	his	brothers	and	his	sisters,	the	ones	he	so
loved.
My	friends.

The	Letherii	sorcery	broke,	bursting	into	clouds	of	white	fire	that	corkscrewed
skyward	before	vanishing.	Fragments	crashed	down	to	either	side	of	the
incandescent	dome,	ripped	deep	into	the	earth	in	black	spewing	clouds.	And,
everywhere,	it	died.
The	commander	struggled	back	onto	his	feet,	stared	uncomprehending	at
the	scene	on	the	killing	field.
To	either	side	his	soldiers	were	stumbling	upright	once	again.	Runners
appeared,	one	nearly	colliding	with	him	as	he	careened	off	a	still-kneeling
Sirryn	Kanar,	the	woman	trying	to	tell	him	something.	Pointing	southward.
‘—landing!	Another	Malazan	army,	sir!	Thousands	more!	From	the	river!’
The	veteran	commander	frowned	at	the	woman,	whose	face	was	smeared
with	dirt	and	whose	eyes	were	brittle	with	panic.
He	looked	back	down	at	the	killing	field.	The	dome	was	flickering,	dying.
But	it	had	held.	Long	enough,	it	had	held.	‘Inform	my	officers,’	he	said	to	the
runner.	‘Prepare	to	wheel	and	fast	march	to	the	river	–	how	far?	Have	they
managed	a	beach-head?’
‘If	we	march	straight	to	the	river,	sir,	we	will	meet	them.	And	yes,	as	I	was
saying,	they	have	landed.	There	are	great	warships	in	the	river	–	scores	of
them!	And—’
‘Go,	damn	you!	To	my	officers!’
Sirryn	was	now	on	his	feet.	He	rounded	on	the	commander.	‘But	sir	–	these
ones	below!’
‘Leave	them	to	the	damned	Edur,	Sirryn!	You	wanted	them	mauled,	then
you	shall	have	your	wish!	We	must	meet	the	larger	force,	and	we	must	do	so
immediately!’
Sword	and	shield,	at	last,	a	battle	in	which	a	soldier	could	die	with	honour.
	
Captain	Faradan	Sort	had,	like	so	many	other	soldiers	relatively	close	to	where
Beak	had	sat,	been	driven	to	the	ground	by	the	ferocity	of	his	magic.	She	was
slow	to	recover,	and	even	as	the	silver	glow	pulsed	in	fitful	death,	she


saw…white.
Gleaming	armour	and	weapons.	Hair	white	as	snow,	faces	devoid	of	all
scars.	Figures,	picking	themselves	up	in	a	half-daze,	rising	like	perfect
conjurations	from	the	brilliant	green	shoots	of	some	kind	of	grass	that	now
snarled	everything	and	seemed	to	be	growing	before	her	eyes.
And,	turning,	she	looked	upon	Beak.
To	burn,	fire	needed	fuel.
To	save	them	all,	Beak	had	used	all	the	fuel	within	him.
In	horror,	Faradan	Sort	found	herself	staring	at	a	collapsed	jumble	of
ashes	and	scorched	bone.	But	no,	there	was	pattern	within	that,	a	configuration,
if	she	could	but	focus	through	her	tears.	Oh.	The	bones	of	the	arms	seemed	to
be	hugging	the	knees,	the	crumpled	skull	settled	on	them.
Like	a	child	hiding	in	a	closet,	a	child	seeking	to	make	himself	small,	so
small…
Beak.	Gods	below…Beak.
	
‘Plan	on	returning	to	your	weapons?’	Fiddler	asked	the	Edur	war	leader.	‘If
you’re	wanting	to	start	again,	that	is,	we’re	willing.’
But	the	elderly	warrior	shook	his	head.	‘We	are	done	with	empire.’	Then
he	added,	‘If	you	would	permit	us	to	leave.’
‘I	can	think	of	quite	a	few	of	us	who’d	be	more	inclined	to	kill	you	all,
right	now.’
A	nod.
‘But,’	Fiddler	then	said,	as	his	soldiers	gathered	behind	him,	all	staring	at
the	Tiste	Edur	–	who	were	staring	back	–	‘we’re	not	here	to	conduct	genocide.
You	would	leave	your	Emperor	defenceless?’
The	war	leader	pointed	northward.	‘Our	villages	lie	far	away.	Few	remain
there,	and	they	suffer	for	our	absence.	I	would	lead	my	warriors	home,
Malazan.	To	rebuild.	To	await	the	return	of	our	families.’
‘Go	on,	then.’
The	Tiste	Edur	elder	bowed.	Then	said,	‘Would	that	we	could…take	back…
all	that	we	have	done.’
‘Tell	me	this.	Your	Emperor	–	can	he	be	killed?’
‘No.’
Nothing	more	was	said.	Fiddler	watched	as	the	Edur	set	off.
Behind	him	a	grunt	from	Koryk,	who	then	said,	‘I	was	damned	sure	we’d
get	a	fight	today.’
‘Fiddler.	The	Letherii	army’s	marched	off,’	Gesler	said.


‘The	Adjunct,’	Fiddler	said,	nodding.	‘She’ll	hammer	them	into	the
ground.’
‘My	point	is,’	Gesler	continued,	‘our	way	to	Letheras…it’s	an	open	road.
Are	we	going	to	let	the	Adjunct	and	all	those	salty	soldiers	of	hers	beat	us
there?’
‘Good	question,’	Fiddler	said,	turning	at	last.	‘Let’s	go	ask	the	Fist,	shall
we?’
‘Aye,	and	maybe	we	can	find	out	why	we’re	all	still	alive,	too.’
‘Aye,	and	white,	too.’
Gesler	tugged	off	his	helm	and	grinned	at	Fiddler.	‘Speak	for	yourself,
Fid.’
Hair	of	spun	gold.	‘Hood	take	me,’	Fiddler	muttered,	‘that’s	about	as
obnoxious	a	thing	as	I’ve	ever	seen.’
	
Another	helping	hand,	lifting	Beak	to	his	feet.	He	looked	round.	Nothing	much
to	see.	White	sand,	a	gate	of	white	marble	ahead,	within	which	swirled	silver
light.
The	hand	gripping	his	arm	was	skeletal,	the	skin	a	strange	hue	of	green.
The	figure,	very	tall,	was	hooded	and	wearing	black	rags.	It	seemed	to	be
studying	the	gate.
‘Is	that	where	I’m	supposed	to	go,	now?’	Beak	asked.
‘Yes.’
‘All	right.	Are	you	coming	with	me?’
‘No.’
‘All	right.	Well,	will	you	let	go	of	my	arm,	then?’
The	hand	fell	away.	‘It	is	not	common,’	the	figure	then	said.
‘What?’
‘That	I	attend	to…arrivals.	In	person.’
‘My	name	is	Beak.’
‘Yes.’
‘What’s	through	there?’
‘Your	brother	waits	for	you,	Beak.	He	has	been	waiting	a	long	time.’
Beak	smiled	and	stepped	forward,	all	at	once	in	a	great	hurry	–	the	silver
light	within	that	gate	was	beautiful,	reminding	him	of	something.
The	stranger ’s	voice	brought	him	round:	‘Beak.’
‘Yes?’
‘Your	brother.	He	will	not	know	you.	Yet.	Do	you	understand?’
Beak	nodded.	‘Why	aren’t	you	coming	with	me?’


‘I	choose	to	wait…for	another.’
‘My	brother,’	Beak	said,	his	smile	broadening.	‘I’m	taller	now.	Stronger.	I
can	save	him,	can’t	I?’
A	long	pause,	and	then	the	figure	said,	‘Yes,	Beak,	you	can	save	him.’
Yes,	that	made	sense.	He	set	out	again.	With	sure	strides.	To	the	gate,	into
that	silver	glow,	to	emerge	on	the	other	side	in	a	glade	beside	a	trickling
stream.	And	kneeling	near	the	bank,	his	brother.	The	same	as	he	remembered.
On	the	ground	on	all	sides	there	were	hundreds	of	small	wax	figures.	Smiling
faces,	an	entire	village,	maybe	even	a	whole	town.
Beak	walked	up	to	his	brother.
Who	said,	too	shy	to	look	up,	‘I	made	all	of	these,	for	him.’
‘They’re	beautiful,’	Beak	said,	and	he	found	tears	running	down	his	face,
which	embarrassed	him	so	he	wiped	them	away.	Then	asked,	‘Can	I	play	with
you?’
His	brother	hesitated,	scanning	all	the	figures,	then	he	nodded.	‘All	right.’
And	so	Beak	knelt	down	beside	his	brother.
While,	upon	the	other	side	of	the	gate,	the	god	Hood	stood,	motionless.
Waiting.
	
A	third	army	rose	from	the	seabed	to	conquer	the	others.	An	army	of	mud,
against	whom	no	shield	could	defend,	through	whom	no	sword	could	cut	to	the
quick.	The	precious	islands	of	canvas	were	now	twisted	jumbles,	fouling	the
foot,	wrapping	tight	about	legs,	or	pushed	down	entirely	beneath	thick	silts.
Grey-smeared	soldier	struggled	against	grey-smeared	warrior,	locked
together	in	desperation,	rage	and	terror.
The	seething	mass	had	become	an	entity,	a	chaotic	beast	writhing	and
foundering	in	the	mud,	and	from	it	rose	the	deafening	clangour	of	clashing
metal	and	voices	erupting	in	pain	and	dying.
Soldiers	and	warriors	fell,	were	then	pushed	down	amidst	grey	and	red,
where	they	soon	merged	with	the	ground.	Shield	walls	could	not	hold,
advances	were	devoured;	the	battle	had	become	that	of	individuals	sunk	to	their
knees,	thrashing	in	the	press.
The	beast	heaved	back	and	forth,	consuming	itself	in	its	madness,	and	upon
either	side	those	who	commanded	sent	yet	more	into	the	maelstrom.
The	wedge	of	Letherii	heavy	infantry	should	have	swept	the	Awl	aside,	but
the	weight	of	their	armour	became	a	curse	–	the	soldiers	could	not	move	fast
enough	to	exploit	breaches,	were	sluggish	in	shoring	up	their	own.	Fighters
became	mired,	finding	themselves	suddenly	separated	from	their	comrades,


and	the	Awl	would	then	close	in,	surrounding	the	soldier,	cutting	and	stabbing
until	the	Letherii	went	down.	Wherever	the	Letherii	could	concentrate	in
greater	numbers	–	from	three	to	thirty	–	they	delivered	mayhem,	killing	scores
of	their	less	disciplined	enemy.	But	always,	before	long,	the	mud	reached	up,
pulled	the	units	apart.
Along	the	western	edge,	for	a	time,	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	appeared,
racing	along	the	flank,	unleashing	dreadful	slaughter.
Bivatt	sent	archers	and	spear-wielding	skirmishers	and,	with	heavy	losses,
they	drove	the	two	demons	away	–	studded	with	arrows,	the	female	limping
from	a	deeply	driven	spear	in	her	left	thigh.	The	Atri-Preda	would	have	then
despatched	her	Bluerose	cavalry	to	pursue	the	creatures,	but	she	had	lost	them
somewhere	to	the	northeast	–	where	they	still	pursued	the	few	surviving	Awl
cavalry	–	and	in	any	case,	the	Kechra	remained	on	the	seabed,	spraying	mud
with	every	elongated	stride,	circling	round	towards	the	eastern	side	of	the
locked	armies.
And,	should	they	attack	there,	the	Atri-Preda	had	few	soldiers	left	to	give
answer:	only	two	hundred	skirmishers	who,	without	the	protection	of	archers,
could	do	little	more	than	provide	a	modest	wall	of	spears	guarding	barely	a
quarter	of	the	Letherii	flank.
Seated	atop	her	restless	horse	on	the	rise	of	the	old	shoreline,	Bivatt	cursed
in	the	name	of	every	god	she	could	think	of	–	those	damned	Kechra!	Were	they
truly	unkillable?	No,	see	the	wounded	one!	Heavy	spears	can	hurt	them	–
Errant	take	me,	do	I	have	a	choice?
She	beckoned	to	one	of	her	few	remaining	runners.	‘Finadd	Treval	is	to
lead	his	skirmishers	down	to	the	east	flank,’	she	said.	‘Defensive	line	in	case
the	demons	return.’
The	messenger	raced	off.
Bivatt	settled	her	gaze	once	more	upon	the	battle	before	her.	At	least	there’s
no	dust	to	obscure	things.	And	the	evidence	was	plain	to	see.	The	Letherii	were
driving	the	Awl	back,	slowly	advancing	wings,	at	last,	to	form	encircling
horns.	The	fighting	had	lost	none	of	its	ferocity	–	indeed,	the	Awl	on	the
outside	edges	seemed	to	be	redoubling	their	desperate	efforts,	recognizing
what	was	happening.	Recognizing…the	beginning	of	the	end.
She	could	not	see	Redmask.	He	and	his	bodyguards	had	left	the	central
platform	half	a	bell	past,	rushing	into	the	battle	to	fill	a	breach.
The	fool	had	surrendered	his	overview	of	the	battle,	had	surrendered	his
command.	His	aides	carried	no	standard	upon	which	his	warriors	could	rally.
If	Redmask	was	not	already	dead,	he	would	be	covered	in	mud	like	all	the	rest,
unrecognizable,	useless.


She	wanted	so	to	feel	exultant,	triumphant.	But	she	could	see	that	she’d	lost
a	third	–	perhaps	more	–	of	her	entire	army.
Because	the	Awl	would	not	accept	the	truth.	Of	course,	there	could	be	no
surrender	–	this	day	was	for	annihilation	–	but	the	fools	would	not	even	flee,
when	clearly	they	could,	remaining	on	the	seabed	to	prevent	any	pursuit	from
cavalry	and	easily	outdistancing	their	heavier	foes	on	foot.	They	could	flee,
damn	them,	in	the	hopes	to	fight	another	day.
Instead,	the	bastards	stood,	fought,	killed	and	then	died.
Even	the	women	and	elders	had	joined,	adding	their	torn	flesh	and	spilled
blood	to	the	churned	morass.
Gods	how	she	hated	them!
	
Brohl	Handar,	Overseer	of	the	Drene	province,	tasted	the	woman’s	blood	in	his
mouth	and,	in	a	rush	of	pleasure,	he	swallowed	it	down.	She	had	poured	herself
onto	him	as	he’d	leaned	forward	to	drive	his	sword	right	through	her
midsection.	Into	his	face,	a	hot,	thick	torrent.	Tugging	his	weapon	free	as	she
fell	back	onto	the	ground,	he	spun,	seeking	yet	another	victim.
His	warriors	stood	on	all	sides,	few	moving	now	beyond	struggling	to
regain	their	breaths.	The	slaughtering	of	the	unhorsed	and	the	wounded	had
seemed	fevered,	as	if	every	Arapay	Tiste	Edur	had	charged	into	the	same
nightmare,	and	yet	there	had	been	such	glee	in	this	slaying	of	Awl	that	its
sudden	absence	filled	the	air	with	heavy,	turgid	shock.
This,	Brohl	Handar	realized,	was	nothing	like	killing	seals	on	the	shores
of	his	homeland.	Necessity	yielded	a	multitude	of	flavours,	some	bitter,	others
excruciatingly	sweet.	He	could	still	taste	that	woman’s	blood,	like	honey
coating	his	throat.
Father	Shadow,	have	I	gone	mad?
He	stared	about.	Dead	Awl,	dead	horses.	Edur	warriors	with	weapons	slick
and	dripping.	And	already	crows	were	descending	to	feed.
‘Are	you	injured,	Overseer?’
Brohl	wiped	blood	from	his	face	and	shook	his	head.	‘Form	ranks.	We
now	march	to	the	battle,	to	kill	some	more.	To	kill	them	all.’
‘Yes	sir!’
	
Masarch	stumbled	his	way	clear,	half	blinded	by	the	mud.	Where	was
Redmask?	Had	he	fallen?	There	was	no	way	to	tell.	Clutching	his	side,	where	a


sword-point	had	punched	through	the	leather	armour,	and	hot	blood	squeezed
between	his	fingers,	the	young	Renfayar	warrior	fought	through	the	mud
towards	the	platform	–	but	the	enemy	were	nearly	upon	it	on	the	east	flank,	and
atop	that	platform	no-one	remained.
No	matter.
All	he	desired,	at	this	moment,	was	to	pull	away	from	this	mud,	to	clamber
onto	those	wooden	boards.	Too	many	of	his	comrades	had	vanished	into	the
cloying	sodden	silts,	raising	in	his	mind	horrifying	memories	of	being	buried
alive	–	his	death	night	–	when	madness	reached	into	his	brain.	No,	he	would	not
fall,	would	not	sink	down,	would	not	drown	with	blackness	filling	his	eyes	and
mouth.
Disbelief	raged	through	him.	Redmask,	their	great	leader,	who	had
returned,	who	had	promised	them	triumph	–	the	end	of	the	Letherii	invaders	–
he	had	failed	the	Awl.	And	now,	we	die.	Our	people.	These	plains,	this	land,	will
surrender	even	the	echoes	of	our	lives.	Gone,	for	ever	more.
He	could	not	accept	that.
Yet	it	is	the	truth.
Redmask,	you	have	slain	us.
He	reached	the	edge	of	the	platform,	stretched	out	his	free	hand	–	the	one
that	should	have	held	a	weapon	–	where	had	it	gone?
A	bestial	scream	behind	him	and	Masarch	half	turned,	in	time	to	see	the
twisted,	grey,	cracked	face	beneath	the	helm,	the	white	of	eyes	staring	out	from
thick	scales	of	mud.
Fire	burst	in	Masarch’s	chest	and	he	felt	himself	lifted	up,	balanced	on	a
sword’s	hilt	and	its	sliding	stream	of	molten	iron,	thrown	onto	his	back	–	onto
the	boards	of	the	platform	–	and	the	Letherii	was	pulling	himself	up	after	him,
kicking	mud	from	his	boots,	still	pushing	with	his	shortsword	–	although	it
could	go	no	further,	no	deeper,	and	the	weapon	was	now	jammed,	having	thrust
through	Masarch’s	back	and	gouging	deep	into	the	wood.	On	his	knees
straddling	the	Renfayar,	the	Letherii,	smeared	teeth	bared,	stared	down	into
Masarch’s	eyes,	and	began	tugging	at	his	sword.
He	was	speaking,	the	Awl	realized,	words	repeated	over	and	over	again	in
that	foul	Letherii	tongue.	Masarch	frowned	–	he	needed	to	understand	what	the
man	was	saying	as	the	man	killed	him.
But	the	world	was	fading,	too	fast—
No,	I	hear	you,	soldier,	yes.	I	hear,	and	yes,	I	know—
The	Letherii	watched	the	life	leave	the	Awl	bastard’s	young	eyes.	And
though	the	Letherii’s	teeth	were	bared	as	if	in	a	smile,	though	his	eyes	were
wide	and	bright,	the	words	coming	from	him	repeated	their	litany:	‘Keep	me


alive,	please,	keep	me	alive,	please,	keep	me	alive…’
	
Seventy	paces	away,	Redmask	pulled	himself	onto	the	back	of	his	horse	–	one
of	the	few	left	–	and	sawed	at	the	reins	to	swing	the	beast	round.	He’d	lost	his
whip,	but	the	crescent	axe	remained	in	his	hands,	gore-spattered,	the	edges
notched.
Gods,	he	had	killed	so	many,	so	many,	and	there	were	more	to	come.	He
knew	it,	felt	it,	hungered	for	it.	Heels	pounded	into	the	horse’s	flanks	and	it
surged	forward,	hoofs	kicking	up	mud.	Madness	to	ride	on	this,	but	there	was
no	choice,	none	at	all.
Thousands	of	Letherii	slain,	more	yet	to	butcher.	Bivatt	herself,	yes	–	he
rode	towards	the	eastern	side	of	the	seething	mass,	well	outside	the	encircling
horn	–	oh,	that	would	not	last,	his	warriors	would	break	through.	Shattering	the
bastards	and	their	flimsy	lines.
Redmask	would	–	once	he	was	done	with	Bivatt	–	return	to	that	slaughter	–
and	yes,	here	were	his	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	thundering	to	join	him.	The	three
of	them,	together,	thrusting	like	an	enormous	sword	into	the	Letherii	ranks.
Again	and	again,	killing	all	within	reach.
Sag’Churok	closing	in	from	his	right	–	see	those	huge	arm-swords	lift,
readying	themselves.	And	Gunth	Mach,	swinging	round	to	his	inside	flank,
placing	herself	between	Redmask	and	the	jostling	line	of	skirmishers	with	their
pathetic	spears	–	Gunth	Mach	was	limping,	but	the	spear	had	worked	itself
loose	–	or	she	had	dragged	it	free.	These	beasts	felt	no	pain.
And	they	were	almost	with	him,	here,	yet	again,	for	they	had	chosen	him.
Victory	this	day!	Victory!
Sag’Churok	drew	yet	closer,	matching	the	pace	of	Redmask’s	horse,	and
he	saw	it	swing	its	head	to	regard	him.	Those	eyes,	so	cold,	so	appallingly
empty—
The	sword	lashed	out	in	a	blur,	taking	the	horse	from	the	front,	at	the	neck,
just	above	its	collarbones.	A	blow	of	such	savagery	and	strength	that	it	tore
entirely	through,	cracking	hard	against	the	wooden	rim	of	the	high	saddle.
Knocking	Redmask	back,	over	the	beast’s	rump,	even	as	the	headless	horse	ran
on	another	half-dozen	strides	before	wavering	to	one	side	then	collapsing.
He	struck	the	muddy	ground	on	one	shoulder,	skidded,	then	rolled	to	a	halt
–	and	onto	his	feet,	straightening,	even	as	Sag’Churok	slashed	its	second	blade,
taking	him	above	the	knees.	Blood	fountained	as	he	toppled	onto	his	back,	and
found	himself	staring	at	his	severed	legs,	still	standing	upright	in	the	mud.
Gunth	Mach	loomed	over	him,	the	talons	of	a	hind	foot	plunging	down	to


close	round	his	chest.	The	talons	punched	deep,	ribs	crushing	in	that	embrace,
and	Redmask	was	lifted	then	thrown	through	the	air	–	where	he	intersected	the
path	of	one	of	Sag’Churok’s	swords.	It	chopped	through	his	right	shoulder,
sending	the	arm	spinning	away	–	still	gripping	the	crescent	axe.
Redmask	thumped	onto	the	ground	once	more,	already	dead.
	
Three	hundred	paces	to	the	east,	Toc	Anaster	rose	on	his	stirrups,	ignoring
Torrent’s	shrieks	of	horror,	and	watched	as	the	two	K’Chain	Che’Malle	padded
once	more	towards	what	was	left	of	Redmask.	The	female	one	kicked	at	the
body,	lightly	nudging	it,	then	stepped	back.
A	moment	later	and	the	two	creatures	were	thumping	away,	northeast,
heads	stretched	out,	tails	horizontal	and	stiff	as	spears	behind	them.
‘He	failed	them,’	Toc	whispered.	What	other	reason	could	there	be	for
such	a	thing?	Perhaps,	many	reasons.	Only	Redmask	could	have	answered	all
the	mysteries	surrounding	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Their	presence	here,	their
alliance	–	an	alliance	now	at	an	end.	Because	he	failed.
The	suddenness	of	the	execution	remained	within	him,	reverberating,	a
shock.
Beyond,	the	last	of	the	Awl	–	no	more	than	a	few	hundred	now	–	were
surrounded,	and	were	dying	in	their	cemetery	of	mud.
A	score	of	skirmishers	had	moved	out	and	were	drawing	nearer	–	they	had
seen	this	last	remnant.	Toc	Anaster	on	his	horse.	Torrent.	Twenty-odd	children
deemed	too	young	to	die	with	a	weapon	in	hand	–	so	now	they	would	die
anyway.
Still	ignoring	Torrent’s	screams	of	anguish,	Toc	turned	in	his	saddle,	in
his	mind	the	thought	of	killing	these	children	with	his	own	hands	–	quick
thrusts,	with	his	hand	over	the	eyes	–	and	instead	he	saw,	to	the	southeast,	an
odd,	seething	line	–	bhederin?
No.	That	is	an	army.
Lone	eye	squinting,	he	watched	that	line	drawing	closer	–	yes,	they	were
coming	here.	Not	Letherii	–	I	see	no	standards,	nothing	at	all.	No,	not	Letherii.
Toc	glanced	back	at	the	skirmishers	now	jogging	towards	them.	Still	a
hundred	paces	away.
One	final	look,	down	at	the	huddled,	crying	or	mute	children,	and	then	he
untied	from	his	saddle	the	leather	satchel	containing	his	poems.	‘Torrent!’	he
snapped,	flinging	the	bag	to	the	warrior	–	who	caught	it,	his	rash-mottled	face
streaked	with	mud	and	tears,	his	eyes	wide	and	uncomprehending.
Toc	pointed	to	the	distant	line.	‘See?	An	army	–	not	Letherii.	Was	there	not


word	of	the	Bolkando	and	allies?	Torrent,	listen	to	me,	damn	you!	You’re	the
last	–	you	and	these	children.	Take	them,	Torrent	–	take	them	and	if	there’s	a
single	guardian	spirit	left	to	your	people,	then	this	need	not	be	the	last	day	of
the	Awl.	Do	you	understand?’
‘But—’
‘Torrent	–	just	go,	damn	you!’	Toc	Anaster,	last	of	the	Grey	Swords	of
Elingarth,	a	Mezla,	drew	out	his	bow	and	nocked	the	first	stone-tipped	arrow
on	the	gut	string.	‘I	can	buy	you	some	time	–	but	you	have	to	go	now!’
And	he	looped	the	reins	round	the	saddle	horn,	delivering	pressure	with
his	knees	as	he	leaned	forward,	and	he	rode	–	for	the	Letherii	skirmishers.
Mud	flew	out	as	the	horse	stretched	out	into	a	gallop.	Hood’s	breath,	this
won’t	be	easy.
Fifty	paces	away	from	the	foot	soldiers,	he	rose	on	his	stirrups,	and	began
loosing	arrows.
	
The	seabed	that	Torrent	guided	the	children	along	was	a	gentle,	drawn-out
slope,	rising	to	where	that	army	was,	the	mass	of	dark	figures	edging	ever
closer.	No	standards,	nothing	to	reveal	who	they	were,	but	he	saw	that	they	did
not	march	in	ordered	ranks.	Simply	a	mass,	as	the	Awl	might	march,	or	the
Ak’ryn	or	D’rhasilhani	plains	tribes	of	the	south.
If	this	army	belonged	to	either	of	those	two	rival	tribes,	then	Torrent	was
probably	leading	these	children	to	their	deaths.	So	be	it,	we	are	dead	anyway.
Another	ten	slogging	paces,	then	he	slowed,	the	children	drawing	in	round
him.	One	hand	settling	on	the	head	of	one	child,	Torrent	halted,	and	turned
about.
Toc	Anaster	deserved	that	much.	A	witness.	Torrent	had	not	believed	there
was	courage	left	in	the	strange	man.	He	had	been	wrong.
	
The	horse	was	unhappy.	Toc	was	unhappy.	He	had	been	a	soldier,	once,	but	he
was	no	longer.	He	had	been	young	–	had	felt	young	–	and	that	had	fed	the	fires
of	his	soul.	Even	a	shard	of	burning	stone	stealing	his	handsome	face,	not	to
mention	an	eye,	had	not	proved	enough	to	tear	away	his	sense	of
invulnerability.
Prisoner	to	the	Domin	had	changed	all	of	that.	The	repeated	destruction
delivered	upon	his	bones	and	flesh,	the	twisted	healing	that	followed	each	time,
the	caging	of	his	soul	until	even	his	own	screams	sounded	like	music	–	this	had


taken	his	youthful	beliefs,	taken	them	so	far	away	that	even	nostalgia	triggered
remembrances	of	nothing	but	agony.
Arising	in	the	body	of	another	man	should	have	given	him	all	that	a	new
life	promised.	But	inside,	he	had	remained	Toc	the	Younger.	Who	had	once
been	a	soldier,	but	was	one	no	longer.
Life	with	the	Grey	Swords	had	not	altered	that.	They	had	travelled	to	this
land,	drawn	by	the	Wolves	with	gifts	of	faint	visions,	murky	prophecies	born
in	confused	dreams:	some	vast	conflagration	awaited	them	–	a	battle	where
they	would	be	needed,	desperately	needed.
Not,	it	had	turned	out,	alongside	the	Awl.
A	most	fatal	error	in	judgement.	The	wrong	allies.	The	wrong	war.
Toc	had	never	trusted	the	gods	anyway.	Any	god.	In	truth,	his	list	of	those
whom	he	did	trust	was,	after	all	he	had	been	through,	pathetically	short.
Tattersail.	Ganoes	Paran.	Gruntle.
Tool.
A	sorceress,	a	mediocre	captain,	a	caravan	guard	and	a	damned	T’lan
Imass.
Would	that	they	were	with	him	now,	riding	at	his	side.
His	horse’s	charge	was	slow,	turgid,	slewing.	Perched	over	the	press	of	his
knees	against	the	beast’s	shoulders,	Toc	sent	arrow	after	arrow	towards	the
skirmishers	–	though	he	knew	it	was	hopeless.	He	could	barely	see,	so	jostled
was	he	atop	the	saddle,	with	mud	flying	up	on	all	sides	as	the	horse	careered	in
a	wild	struggle	to	stay	upright.
As	he	drew	closer,	he	heard	screams.	With	but	two	arrows	left,	he	rose
higher	still	on	his	stirrups,	drawing	on	his	bowstring—
His	arrows,	he	saw	with	astonishment,	had	not	missed.	Not	one.	Eight
skirmishers	were	down.
He	sent	another	hissing	outward,	saw	it	take	a	man	in	the	forehead,	the
stone	point	punching	through	bronze	and	then	bone.
Last	arrow.
Gods—
He	was	suddenly	among	the	Letherii.	Driving	his	last	arrow	at	near	pointblank	range	into	a	woman’s	chest.
A	spear	tore	into	his	left	leg,	cut	through	and	then	gouged	along	his
horse’s	flank.	The	beast	screamed,	launched	itself	forward—
Tossing	the	bow	away,	Toc	unsheathed	his	scimitar	–	damn,	should’ve
brought	a	shield	–	and	hacked	from	side	to	side,	beating	away	the	thrusting
spears.
His	horse	pulled	through	into	the	clear.	And	would	have	rushed	on,	straight


into	the	Letherii	ranks	two	hundred	paces	ahead,	but	Toc	grasped	the	reins	and
swerved	the	animal	round.
Only	to	find	a	dozen	or	so	skirmishers	right	behind	him	–	pursuing	on
foot.
Two	spears	drove	into	his	mount,	one	skidding	off	a	shoulder	blade,	the
other	stabbing	deep	into	the	animal’s	belly.
Squealing	piteously,	the	horse	foundered,	then	fell	onto	its	side,	hind	legs
already	fouled	with	spilled	out	intestines,	each	frantic	kick	tearing	more	loose
from	the	body	cavity.	Toc,	with	legs	still	drawn	high,	was	able	to	throw	himself
from	the	beast,	landing	clear.
Skidding	in	the	mud,	struggling	to	regain	his	feet.
A	spear	drove	into	his	right	hip,	lifting	him	from	the	muck	before
throwing	him	onto	his	back.
He	hacked	at	the	shaft.	It	splintered	and	the	pressure	pinning	him	down
vanished.
Slashing	blindly,	Toc	fought	his	way	back	onto	his	feet.	There	was	blood
pouring	down	both	legs.
Another	lunging	attack.	He	parried	the	spear	thrust,	lurched	close	and
chopped	his	scimitar	into	the	side	of	the	soldier ’s	neck.
A	point	slammed	into	his	back,	punched	him	forward.
And	onto	a	shortsword	that	slid	up	under	his	ribs,	cutting	his	heart	in	half.
Toc	Anaster	sank	down	onto	his	knees,	and,	releasing	his	last	breath,
would	have	fallen	forward	into	the	mud,	but	for	a	hand	grasping	him,	yanking
him	back.	The	flash	of	a	knife	before	his	lone	eye.	Sudden	heat	along	the	line
of	his	jaw—
	
Torrent	watched	as	the	Letherii	skirmisher	cut	away	Toc	Anaster ’s	face.	One
more	trophy.	The	task	was	quick,	well-practised,	and	then	the	soldier	pushed
his	victim	away,	and	the	red	wound	that	had	once	been	Toc’s	face	plunged
down	into	the	mud.
The	children	were	crying,	and	yes,	he	realized	–	in	watching,	in	waiting,	he
had	perhaps	condemned	them	all	to	the	Letherii	knives.	Still,	they	could—
Torrent	turned	round—
And	found	strangers	before	him.
Not	Ak’rynnai.
Not	D’rhasilhanii.
No,	he	had	never	before	seen	such	people.


	
The	clans	of	the	White	Face	Barghast	approached	the	scene	of	the	battle	–	a
battle	nearing	its	grisly	end.	Who	won,	who	lost,	was	without	meaning	to	them.
They	intended	to	kill	everyone.
Two	hundred	paces	ahead	of	the	ragged	lines	was	their	vanguard,	walking
within	a	stream	of	the	Tellann	Warren,	which	was	strong	in	this	place,	where
beneath	the	silts	of	the	ancient	shoreline	could	be	found	stone	tools,	harpoons
made	of	antler,	bone	and	ivory,	and	the	hulks	of	dugout	canoes.	And	out	here,
on	the	old	seabed,	there	were	offerings	buried	deep	now	in	the	silts.	Polished
stones,	pairs	of	antlers	locked	together,	animal	skulls	daubed	in	red	ochre	–
countless	gifts	to	a	dwindling	sea.
There	were	other	reasons	for	such	a	powerful	emanation	of	Tellann,	but
these	were	known	to	but	one	of	the	three	in	the	vanguard,	and	she	had	ever
been	close	with	her	secrets.
Emerging	from	the	warren,	the	three	had	stood	not	far	from	the	Awl
warrior	and	the	Awl	children.	They	had	watched,	in	silence,	the	extraordinary
bravery	of	that	lone	warrior	and	his	horse.	To	charge	more	than	a	score	of
skirmishers	–	the	horse’s	skill	at	staying	upright	had	been	exceptional.	The
warrior ’s	ability	to	guide	the	beast	with	but	his	legs,	whilst	loosing	arrow	after
arrow	–	none	of	which	did	not	find	a	target	–	was	simply	breathtaking.
That	warrior	–	and	his	horse	–	had	given	their	lives	to	save	these	last	Awl,
and	it	was	that	fact	alone	which	stayed	–	for	the	moment	–	the	hand	of	Tool,
chosen	now	among	all	the	White	Face	Barghast	–	with	Humbrall	Taur ’s	tragic
death	at	the	landing	–	as	war	leader,	even	though	he	was	not	Barghast	at	all.	But
Imass.	That	he	had	taken	as	his	mate	Taur ’s	daughter,	Hetan,	had	without	doubt
eased	the	ascension	to	rule;	but	more	than	that,	it	had	been	owing	to	Tool
himself.
His	wisdom.	His	will.
The	joy	of	life	that	could	burn	in	his	eyes.	The	fire	of	vengeance	that	could
blaze	in	its	stead	–	that	blazed	even	now	–	when	at	last	he	had	judged	the	time
aright,	the	time	to	answer	for	all	that	had	been	done.
To	the	Grey	Swords.
An	answer	delivered	unto	the	betrayers.
An	answer	delivered	unto	the	slayers.
If	not	for	that	brave	warrior	and	his	brave	horse,	then	Tool	would	have
killed	these	Awl	immediately.	The	youth	with	the	mottled	face.	The	muddy
children	huddled	around	him.	He	probably	still	planned	to.
Hetan	knew	all	of	this,	in	her	heart;	she	knew	her	husband.	And,	had	he


drawn	his	flint	sword,	she	would	not	have	tried	to	stop	him.
The	White	Faces	had	been	hiding	for	too	long.	Their	scouting	expeditions
to	the	east	had	long	since	told	them	all	they	needed	to	know,	of	the	path	that
awaited	them,	the	journey	they	must	soon	undertake.	It	had	been	vengeance
keeping	them	in	place.	That,	and	the	vast,	uncanny	patience	of	Tool.
Within	the	Tellann	Warrens,	the	Barghast	had	watched	this	latest	war,	the
protracted	engagement	that	had	begun	with	the	massing	of	the	two	armies	far
to	the	west.
They	had	not	come	in	time	to	save	the	Grey	Swords,	but	Hetan	well
recalled	her	and	her	husband	coming	upon	the	killing	ground	where	the
company	had	fallen.	Indeed,	they	had	witnessed	the	plains	wolves	engaged	in
their	ghastly	excision	of	human	hearts	–	an	act	of	honour?	There	was	no	way
of	knowing	–	each	animal	had	fled	with	its	prize	as	soon	as	it	was	able.	The
slaughter	of	those	betrayed	soldiers	had	been	particularly	brutal	–	faces	had
been	cut	away.	It	had	been	impossible	to	identify	anyone	among	the	fallen	–	and
this	had	delivered	upon	Tool	the	deepest	wound	of	all.	He	had	lost	a	friend
there.
The	betrayal.
The	slaying.
There	would	be,	in	Tool,	no	room	for	mercy.	Not	for	the	Awl.	Not	for	the
Letherii	army	so	far	from	home.
And	now	they	stood,	well	able	to	see	the	last	of	the	Awl	warriors	fall,	to	see
their	wardogs	dying	in	the	mud,	to	hear	the	triumphant	roars	of	the	Letherii,
even	as	the	nearby	skirmishers,	having	seen	the	Barghast	forces,	were	hastily
retreating	back	to	their	lines.
Hetan	studied	that	vast,	churned	killing	field,	and	said,	‘I	cannot	tell	them
apart.’
	
Torrent	stared,	not	knowing	what	to	think.	Both	women,	flanking	the	lone	man,
were	to	his	eyes	terrifying.	The	one	who	had	just	spoken	–	in	some	infernal
foreign	tongue	–	was	like	an	apparition	from	an	adolescent	boy’s	nightmare.
Danger	and	sensuality,	a	bloodthirstiness	that	simply	took	Torrent’s	breath
away	–	and	with	the	loss	of	that	breath,	so	too	the	loss	of	courage.	Of	manhood
itself.
The	other	woman,	dark,	short	yet	lithe,	wrapped	in	the	furs	of	a	panther.
And	the	blue-black	glint	of	that	beast’s	skin	seemed	to	be	reflected	in	the	heart
of	her	eyes	beneath	that	robust	brow.	A	shaman,	a	witch,	oh	yes.	A	most
dreadful	witch.


The	man	was	her	kin	–	the	resemblances	were	unmistakable	in	their
features,	as	well	as	their	modest	heights	and	the	bowing	of	their	legs.	And	for
all	that	the	women	terrified	Torrent,	the	stolidity	of	the	warrior ’s	expression
chilled	the	Awl’s	soul.
The	taller	woman,	with	her	face	streaked	in	white	paint,	now	settled	her
gaze	upon	Torrent	and	said,	in	halting	trader ’s	tongue,	‘You	still	live.	Because
of	the	horse	warrior ’s	sacrifice.	But,’	she	nodded	towards	the	savage	with	the
flint	sword,	‘he	remains	undecided.	Do	you	understand?’
Torrent	nodded.
The	man	then	said	something,	and	the	white-faced	woman	glanced	away,
eyes	thinning.	Then	her	gaze	settled	on	the	satchel	Torrent	still	held,	dangling
from	a	strap,	in	his	left	hand.	She	pointed	down	at	it.	‘What	do	you	carry?’
The	Awl	blinked,	then	looked	down	at	the	leather	bag.	Shrugging,	he	tossed
it	aside.	‘Scribblings,’	he	said.	‘He	painted	many	words,	like	a	woman.	But	he
was	not	the	coward	I	thought.	He	was	not.’
‘Scribblings?’
Torrent	found	that	there	were	tears	on	his	cheeks.	He	wiped	them	away.
‘The	horse-warrior,’	he	said.	‘The	Mezla.’
	
Hetan	saw	her	husband’s	head	slowly	turn	at	that	word,	saw	his	eyes	fix	on	the
Awl	warrior,	then	watched	as	a	cascade	of	realizations	took	hold	of	Tool’s
expression,	ending	with	a	terrible	scream	as	he	brought	his	hands	to	his	face,
then	fell	to	his	knees.
And	she	was	suddenly	at	his	side,	cradling	his	head	against	her	belly	as	he
loosed	another	piercing	cry,	clawing	at	his	own	face.
The	Awl	stared	as	if	in	shock.
Barghast	warriors	were	rushing	out	from	the	line	behind	them,	the	young
ones	with	their	ancient	single-edged	hook-swords	drawn,	Tool’s	most	beloved
whom	he	saw	as	his	own	children.	Faces	filled	with	consternation,	with	fear,
they	converged	towards	Tool.
Hetan	held	out	a	hand,	halted	them	all	in	their	tracks.
Beside	the	two	of	them	now,	drawing	her	panther	skin	about	her	shoulders,
Kilava	Onass.	Her	husband’s	sister,	whose	heart	held	more	sorrow	and	loss
than	Hetan	could	comprehend,	who	would	weep	every	night	as	if	it	was	ritually
demanded	of	her	with	the	sun’s	setting.	Who	would	walk	out	beyond	the	camp
and	sing	wordless	songs	to	the	night	sky	–	songs	that	would	send	the	ay
howling	with	voices	of	mourning	and	grief.
She	stood,	now,	on	her	brother ’s	right.	But	did	not	reach	down	a	hand,	did


not	even	cast	upon	Tool	a	glance	of	sympathy.	Instead,	her	dark	eyes	were
scanning	the	Letherii	army.	‘They	prepare	for	us,’	she	said.	‘The	Tiste	Edur
join	the	ranks.	The	cavalry	wait	along	the	old	shoreline.	Onos	Toolan,	we	are
wasting	time.	You	know	I	must	leave	soon.	Very	soon.’
Tool	drew	himself	from	Hetan’s	embrace.	Saying	nothing,	he	straightened,
then	began	walking.
To	where	his	friend	had	fallen.
The	Awl	warrior	took	a	half-step	towards	him.	‘No!’	he	shouted,	turning
pleading	eyes	upon	Hetan.	‘He	must	not!	The	Mezla	–	he	was	a	friend,	yes?
Please,	he	must	not!’
Tool	walked	on.
‘Please!	They	cut	off	his	face!’
Hetan	flinched.	‘He	knows,’	she	said.
And	then	Tool	did	halt,	looking	back,	meeting	Hetan’s	eyes.	‘My	love,’	he
said	in	a	ragged	voice.	‘I	do	not	understand.’
She	could	but	shake	her	head.
‘They	betrayed	him,’	Tool	continued.	‘Yet,	see.	This	day.	He	rode	to	the
enemy.’
‘To	save	the	lives	of	these	children,’	Hetan	said.	‘Yes.’
‘I	do	not	understand.’
‘You	have	told	me	many	tales,	husband,	of	your	friend.	Of	Toc	the
Younger.	Of	the	honour	within	him.	I	ask	you	this:	how	could	he	not?’
Her	heart	came	near	to	bursting	as	she	gazed	upon	her	beloved.	These
Imass	–	they	were	unable	to	hide	anything	they	felt.	They	possessed	none	of	the
masks,	the	disguises,	that	were	the	bitter	gifts	of	others,	including	her	own
Barghast.	And	they	were	without	control,	without	mastery,	which	left	grieving
to	wound	the	soul	deeper	than	anything	Hetan	could	imagine.	As	with	grieving,
so	too	love.	So	too	friendship.	So	too,	alas,	loyalty.
‘They	live,’	Tool	then	said.
She	nodded.
Her	husband	turned	and	resumed	his	dreadful	journey.
A	snort	of	impatience	from	Kilava.
Hetan	walked	over	to	the	leather	satchel	the	Awl	warrior	had	discarded.	She
picked	it	up,	slung	it	over	one	shoulder.	‘Kilava,’	she	said.	‘Bonecaster.	Lead
our	Barghast	into	this	battle.	I	go	down	to	my	husband.’
‘They	will	not—’
‘Don’t	be	absurd.	Terror	alone	will	ensure	their	obedience.	Besides,	the
sooner	they	are	done	slaughtering,	the	sooner	you	will	part	our	company.’
Her	sudden	smile	revealed	a	panther ’s	canines.


Sending	a	chill	through	Hetan.	Thank	the	spirits	you	smile	so	rarely,
Kilava.
	
Atri-Preda	Bivatt	had	commanded	her	forces	to	withdraw	from	the	seabed.
Back	onto	more	solid	ground.	Their	triumph	this	day	had	grown	sour	with	the
taste	of	fear.	Another	damned	army,	and	it	was	clear	that	they	intended	to	do
battle	against	her	exhausted,	bruised	and	battered	forces.	She	had	allowed
herself	but	a	few	moments’	silent	raging	at	the	injustice,	before	forcing	upon
herself	the	responsibilities	of	her	command.
They	would	fight	with	courage	and	honour,	although	as	the	barbaric
enemy	continued	massing	she	could	see	that	it	would	be	hopeless.	Seventy
thousand,	perhaps	more.	The	ones	who	landed	on	the	north	coast,	but	also,
perhaps,	the	rumoured	allies	of	the	Bolkando.	Returned	here	to	the	north	–	but
why?	To	join	with	the	Awl?	But	for	that,	their	main	army	had	come	too	late.
Bivatt	had	done	what	she	had	set	out	to	do;	had	done	what	had	been	commanded
of	her.	She	had	exterminated	the	Awl.
Seventy	thousand	or	two	hundred	thousand.	The	destruction	of	Bivatt	and
her	army.	Neither	mattered	in	the	greater	scheme	of	things.	The	Letherii
Empire	would	throw	back	these	new	invaders.	Failing	that,	they	would	bribe
them	away	from	the	Bolkando;	indeed,	turn	them	round	to	fashion	an	alliance
that	would	sweep	into	the	border	kingdoms	in	waves	of	brutal	slaughter.
Perhaps,	she	suddenly	realized,	there	was	a	way	through	this…She	glanced
about	until	she	saw	one	of	her	Finadds.	Walked	over.	‘Prepare	a	delegation,
Finadd.	We	will	seek	parley	with	this	new	enemy.’
‘Yes	sir.’	The	man	rushed	off.
‘Atri-Preda!’
Bivatt	turned	to	see	Brohl	Handar	approach.	The	Overseer	did	not,	at	this
moment,	look	like	an	imperial	governor.	He	was	covered	in	gore,	gripping	his
sword	in	one	hand	thick	with	dried	blood.
‘It	seems	we	are	not	too	late	after	all,’	he	said.
‘These	are	not	Awl,	Overseer.’
‘I	see	that	clearly	enough.	I	see	also,	Atri-Preda,	that	you	and	I	will	die	here
today.’	He	paused,	then	grunted	a	laugh.	‘Do	you	recall,	Bivatt,	warning	me	that
Letur	Anict	sought	to	kill	me?	Yet	here	I	have	marched	with	you	and	your
army,	all	this	way—’
‘Overseer,’	she	cut	in.	‘The	Factor	infiltrated	my	forces	with	ten	assassins.
All	of	whom	are	dead.’
His	eyes	slowly	widened.


Bivatt	continued,	‘Have	you	seen	the	tall	soldier	often	at	your	side?	I	set
him	the	task	of	keeping	you	alive,	and	he	has	done	all	that	I	commanded.
Unfortunately,	Overseer,	I	believe	that	he	shall	soon	fail	at	it.’	Unless	I	can
negotiate	our	way	out	of	this.
She	faced	the	advancing	enemy	once	more.	They	were	now	raising
standards.	Only	a	few,	and	identical	to	each	other.	Bivatt	squinted	in	the
afternoon	light.
And	recognized	those	standards.
She	went	cold	inside.	‘Too	bad,’	she	said.
‘Atri-Preda?’
‘I	recognize	those	standards,	Overseer.	There	will	be	no	parley.	Nor	any
chance	of	surrender.’
‘Those	warriors,’	Brohl	Handar	said	after	a	moment,	‘are	the	ones	who
have	been	raising	the	cairns.’
‘Yes.’
‘They	have	been	with	us,	then,	for	some	time.’
‘Their	scouts	at	the	least,	Overseer.	Longer	than	you	think.’
‘Atri-Preda.’
She	faced	him,	studied	his	grave	expression.	‘Overseer?’
‘Die	well,	Bivatt.’
‘I	intend	to.	And	you.	Die	well,	Brohl	Handar.’
	
Brohl	walked	away	from	her	then,	threading	through	a	line	of	soldiers,	his
eyes	fixed	on	one	in	particular.	Tall,	with	a	gentle	face	streaked	now	in	mud.
The	Tiste	Edur	caught	the	man’s	gaze,	and	answered	the	easy	smile	with
one	of	his	own.
‘Overseer,	I	see	you	have	had	an	exciting	day.’
‘I	see	the	same	on	you,’	Brohl	replied,	‘and	it	seems	there	is	more	to
come.’
‘Yes,	but	I	tell	you	this,	I	am	pleased	enough.	For	once,	there	is	solid
ground	beneath	me.’
The	Overseer	thought	to	simply	thank	the	soldier,	for	keeping	him	alive
this	long.	Instead,	he	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment.
The	soldier	rubbed	at	his	face,	then	said,	‘Sir,	your	Arapay	await	you,	no
doubt.	See,	the	enemy	readies	itself.’
And	yes,	this	is	what	Brohl	Handar	wanted.	‘My	Arapay	will	fight	well
enough	without	me,	Letherii.	I	would	ask	one	final	boon	of	you.’
‘Then	ask,	sir.’


‘I	would	ask	for	the	privilege	of	fighting	at	your	side.	Until	we	fall.’
The	man’s	soft	eyes	widened	slightly,	then	all	at	once	the	smile	returned.
‘Choose,	then,	Overseer.	Upon	my	right	or	upon	my	left.’
Brohl	Handar	chose	the	man’s	left.	As	for	guarding	his	own	unprotected
flank,	he	was	indifferent.
Somehow,	the	truth	of	that	pleased	him.
	
In	the	city	of	Drene	at	this	time,	riots	raged	over	the	entire	north	half	of	the
city,	and	with	the	coming	night	the	mayhem	would	spread	into	the	more
opulent	south	districts.
Venitt	Sathad,	granted	immediate	audience	with	Factor	Letur	Anict	–	who
awaited	him	standing	before	his	desk,	his	round,	pale	face	glistening	with
sweat,	and	in	whose	eyes	the	steward	saw,	as	he	walked	towards	the	man,	a	kind
of	bemusement	at	war	with	deeper	stresses	–	walked	forward,	in	neither	haste
nor	swagger.	Rather,	a	walk	of	singular	purpose.
He	saw	Letur	Anict	blink	suddenly,	a	rapid	reassessment,	even	as	he
continued	right	up	to	the	man.
And	drove	a	knife	into	the	Factor ’s	left	eye,	deep	into	the	brain.
The	weight	of	Letur	Anict,	as	he	collapsed,	pulled	the	weapon	free.
Venitt	Sathad	bent	to	clean	the	blade	off	on	the	Factor ’s	silk	robe;	then	he
straightened,	turned	for	the	door,	and	departed.
Letur	Anict	had	a	wife.	He	had	children.	He’d	had	guards,	but	Orbyn
Truthfinder	had	taken	care	of	them.
Venitt	Sathad	set	out	to	eliminate	all	heirs.
He	no	longer	acted	as	an	agent	of	the	Liberty	Consign.	Now,	at	this
moment,	he	was	an	Indebted.
Who	had	had	enough.
	
Hetan	left	her	husband	kneeling	beside	the	body	of	Toc	the	Younger.	She	could
do	no	more	for	him,	and	this	was	not	a	failing	on	her	part.	The	raw	grief	of	an
Imass	was	like	a	bottomless	well,	one	that	could	snatch	the	unsuspecting	and
send	them	plummeting	down	into	unending	darkness.
Once,	long	ago	now,	Tool	had	stood	before	his	friend,	and	his	friend	had
not	known	him,	and	for	the	Imass	–	mortal	once	more,	after	thousands	upon
thousands	of	years	–	this	had	been	the	source	of	wry	amusement,	in	the	manner
of	a	trickster ’s	game	where	the	final	pleasure	but	awaited	revelation	of	the


truth.
Tool,	in	his	unhuman	patience,	had	waited	a	long	time	to	unveil	that
revelation.	Too	long,	now.	His	friend	had	died,	unknowing.	The	trickster ’s
game	had	delivered	a	wound	from	which,	she	suspected,	her	husband	might
never	recover.
And	so,	she	now	knew	in	her	heart,	there	might	be	other	losses	on	this
tragic	day.	A	wife	losing	her	husband.	Two	daughters	losing	their	adopted
father,	and	one	son	his	true	father.
She	walked	to	where	Kilava	Onass	had	stationed	herself	to	watch	the	battle,
and	it	was	no	small	mercy	that	she	had	elected	not	to	veer	into	her	Soletaken
form,	that,	indeed,	she	had	left	the	clans	of	the	White	Face	Barghast	the
freedom	to	do	what	they	did	best:	kill	in	a	frenzy	of	explosive	savagery.
Hetan	saw	that	Kilava	stood	near	where	a	lone	rider	had	fallen	–	killed	by
the	weapons	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	she	noted.	A	typically	vicious	slaying,
stirring	in	her	memories	of	the	time	when	she	herself	had	stood	before	such
terrible	creatures,	a	memory	punctuated	with	the	sharp	pang	of	grief	for	a
brother	who	had	fallen	that	day.
Kilava	was	ignoring	the	legless,	one-armed	body	lying	ten	paces	to	her
left.	Hetan’s	gaze	settled	upon	it	in	sudden	curiosity.
‘Sister,’	she	said	to	Kilava	–	deliberate	in	her	usage	of	the	one	title	that
Kilava	most	disliked	–	‘see	how	this	one	wears	a	mask.	Was	not	the	war	leader
of	the	Awl	so	masked?’
‘I	imagine	so,’	Kilava	said,	‘since	he	was	named	Redmask.’
‘Well,’	Hetan	said,	walking	to	the	corpse,	‘this	one	is	wearing	the	garb	of
an	Awl.’
‘But	he	was	slain	by	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘Yes,	I	see	that.	Even	so…’	She	crouched	down,	studied	that	peculiar	mask,
the	strange,	minute	scales	beneath	the	spatters	of	mud.	‘This	mask,	Kilava,	it	is
the	hide	of	a	K’Chain,	I	would	swear	it,	although	the	scales	are	rather	tiny—’
‘Matron’s	throat,’	Kilava	replied.
Hetan	glanced	over.	‘Truly?’	Then	she	reached	down	and	tugged	the	mask
away	from	the	man’s	face.	A	long	look	down	into	those	pale	features.
Hetan	rose,	tossing	the	mask	to	one	side.	‘You	were	right,	it’s	not
Redmask.’
Kilava	asked,	‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘Well,	Awl	garb	or	not,	this	man	was	Letherii.’
	
Hood,	High	King	of	Death,	Collector	of	the	Fallen,	the	undemanding	master	of


more	souls	than	he	could	count	–	even	had	he	been	so	inclined,	which	he	was
not	–	stood	over	the	body,	waiting.
Such	particular	attention	was,	thankfully,	a	rare	occurrence.	But	some
deaths	arrived,	every	now	and	then,	bearing	certain…eccentricities.	And	the
one	lying	below	was	one	such	arrival.
Not	least	because	the	Wolves	wanted	his	soul,	yet	would	not	get	it,	but	also
because	this	mortal	had	evaded	Hood’s	grasp	again	and	again,	even	though	any
would	see	and	understand	well	the	sweet	gift	the	Lord	of	Death	had	been
offering.
Singular	lives,	yes,	could	be	most…singular.
Witness	that	of	the	one	who	had	arrived	a	short	time	earlier.	There	were	no
gifts	in	possessing	a	simple	mind.	There	was	no	haze	of	calming
incomprehension	to	salve	the	terrible	wounds	of	a	life	that	had	been	ordained
to	remain,	until	the	very	end,	profoundly	innocent.
Hood	had	not	begrudged	the	blood	on	Beak’s	hands.	He	had,	however,
most	succinctly	begrudged	the	heartless	actions	of	Beak’s	mother	and	father.
Few	mortal	priests	understood	the	necessity	for	redress,	although	they
often	spouted	the	notion	in	their	sermons	of	guilt,	with	their	implicit	extortions
that	did	little	more	than	swell	the	temple	coffers.
Redress,	then,	was	a	demand	that	even	a	god	could	not	deny.	And	so	it	had
been	with	the	one	named	Beak.
And	so	it	was,	now,	with	the	one	named	Toc	the	Younger.
‘Awaken,’	Hood	said.	‘Arise.’
And	Toc	the	Younger,	with	a	long	sigh,	did	as	Hood	commanded.
Standing,	tottering,	squinting	now	at	the	gate	awaiting	them	both.	‘Damn,’
Toc	muttered,	‘but	that’s	a	poor	excuse	for	a	gate.’
‘The	dead	see	as	they	see,	Toc	the	Younger.	Not	long	ago,	it	shone	white
with	purity.’
‘My	heart	goes	out	to	that	poor,	misguided	soul.’
‘Of	course	it	does.	Come.	Walk	with	me.’
They	set	out	towards	that	gate.
‘You	do	this	for	every	soul?’
‘I	do	not.’
‘Oh.’	And	then	Toc	halted	–	or	tried	to,	but	his	feet	dragged	onward	–
‘Hold	on,	my	soul	was	sworn	to	the	Wolves—’
‘Too	late.	Your	soul,	Toc	the	Younger,	was	sworn	to	me.	Long	ago.’
‘Really?	Who	was	the	fool	who	did	that?’
‘Your	father,’	Hood	replied.	‘Who,	unlike	Dassem	Ultor,	remained	loyal.’
‘Which	you	rewarded	by	killing	him?	You	bastard	piece	of	pigsh—’


‘You	will	await	him,	Toc	the	Younger.’
‘He	lives	still?’
‘Death	never	lies.’
Toc	the	Younger	tried	to	halt	again.	‘Hood,	a	question	–	please.’
The	god	stopped,	looked	down	at	the	mortal.
‘Hood,	why	do	I	still	have	only	one	eye?’
The	God	of	Death,	Reaper	of	Souls,	made	no	reply.	He	had	been
wondering	that	himself.
Damned	wolves.


Chapter	Twenty-Three

I	have	seen	the	face	of	sorrow
She	looks	away	in	the	distance
Across	all	these	bridges
From	whence	I	came
And	those	spans,	trussed	and	arched
Hold	up	our	lives	as	we	go	back	again
To	how	we	thought	then
To	how	we	thought	we	thought	then
I	have	seen	sorrow’s	face,
But	she	is	ever	turned	away
And	her	words	leave	me	blind
Her	eyes	make	me	mute
I	do	not	understand	what	she	says	to	me
I	do	not	know	if	to	obey
Or	attempt	a	flood	of	tears
I	have	seen	her	face
She	does	not	speak
She	does	not	weep
She	does	not	know	me
For	I	am	but	a	stone	fitted	in	place
On	the	bridge	where	she	walks
Lay	of	the	Bridgeburners
Toc	the	Younger
Once,	long	ago,	Onrack	the	broken	committed	a	crime.	He	had	professed	his
love	for	a	woman	in	fashioning	her	likeness	on	the	wall	of	a	cave.	There	had
been	such	talent	in	his	hands,	in	his	eyes,	he	had	bound	two	souls	into	that
stone.	His	own…that	was	his	right,	his	choice.	But	the	other	soul,	oh,	the
selfishness	of	that	act,	the	cruelty	of	that	theft…
He	stood,	now,	before	another	wall	of	stone,	within	another	cave,	looking


upon	the	array	of	paintings,	the	beasts	with	every	line	of	muscle,	every	hint	of
motion,	celebrating	their	veracity,	the	accuracy	of	genius.	And	in	the	midst	of
these	great	creatures	of	the	world	beyond,	awkward	stick	figures,	representing
the	Imass,	cavorted	in	a	poor	mime	of	dance.	Lifeless	as	the	law	demanded.	He
stood,	then,	still	Broken,	still	the	stealer	of	a	woman’s	life.
In	the	darkness	of	his	captivity,	long	ago,	someone	had	come	to	him,	with
gentle	hands	and	yielding	flesh.	He	so	wanted	to	believe	that	it	had	been	she,	the
one	whose	soul	he	had	stolen.	But	such	knowledge	was	now	lost	to	him;	so
confused	had	the	memory	become,	so	infused	with	all	that	his	heart	wished	to
believe.
And,	even	if	it	had	indeed	been	she,	well,	perhaps	she	had	no	choice.
Imprisoned	by	his	crime,	helpless	to	defy	his	desire.	In	his	own	breaking,	he
had	destroyed	her	as	well.
He	reached	out,	settled	fingertips	lightly	upon	one	of	the	images.	Ranag,
pursued	by	an	ay.	In	the	torch’s	wavering	light	both	beasts	seemed	in	motion,
muscles	rippling.	In	celebrating	the	world,	which	held	no	regrets,	the	Imass
would	gather	shoulder	to	shoulder	in	this	cavern,	and	with	their	voices	they
would	beat	out	the	rhythm	of	breaths,	the	huffing	of	the	beasts;	while	others,
positioned	in	selected	concavities,	pounded	their	hands	on	drums	of	hollowedout	wood	and	skin,	until	the	echoes	of	hoofbeats	thundered	from	all	sides.
We	are	the	witnesses.	We	are	the	eyes	trapped	for	ever	on	the	outside.	We
have	been	severed	from	the	world.	And	this	is	at	the	heart	of	the	law,	the
prohibition.	We	create	ourselves	as	lifeless,	awkward,	apart.	Once,	we	were	as
the	beasts,	and	there	was	no	inside,	no	outside.	There	was	only	the	one,	the	one
world,	of	which	we	were	its	flesh,	its	bone,	flesh	little	different	from	grasses,
lichens	and	trees.	Bones	little	different	from	wood	and	stone.	We	were	its	blood,
in	which	coursed	rivers	down	to	the	lakes	and	seas.
We	give	voice	to	our	sorrow,	to	our	loss.
In	discovering	what	it	is	to	die,	we	have	been	cast	out	from	the	world.
In	discovering	beauty,	we	were	made	ugly.
We	do	not	suffer	in	the	manner	that	beasts	suffer	–	for	they	surely	do.	We
suffer	with	the	memory	of	how	it	was	before	suffering	came,	and	this	deepens
the	wound,	this	tears	open	the	pain.	There	is	no	beast	that	can	match	our
anguish.
So	sing,	brothers.	Sing,	sisters.	And	in	the	torch’s	light,	floating	free	from
the	walls	of	our	minds	–	of	the	caves	within	us	–	see	all	the	faces	of	sorrow.	See
those	who	have	died	and	left	us.	And	sing	your	grief	until	the	very	beasts	flee.
Onrack	the	Broken	felt	the	tears	on	his	cheeks,	and	cursed	himself	for	a
sentimental	fool.


Behind	him,	Trull	Sengar	stood	in	silence.	In	humouring	a	foolish	Imass,
he	was	without	impatience.	Onrack	knew	he	would	simply	wait,	and	wait.	Until
such	time	as	Onrack	might	stir	from	his	grim	memories,	recalling	once	more
the	gifts	of	the	present.	He	would—
‘There	was	great	skill	in	the	painting	of	these	beasts.’
The	Imass,	still	facing	the	stone	wall,	still	with	his	back	to	the	Tiste	Edur,
found	himself	smiling.	So,	even	here	and	now,	I	indulge	silly	fantasies	that	are,
even	if	comforting,	without	much	meaning.	‘Yes,	Trull	Sengar.	True	talent.	Such
skill	is	passed	down	in	the	blood,	and	with	each	generation	there	is	the
potential	for…burgeoning.	Into	such	as	we	see	here.’
‘Is	the	artist	among	the	clans	here?	Or	were	these	painted	long	ago,	by
someone	else?’
‘The	artist,’	Onrack	said,	‘is	Ulshun	Pral.’
‘And	is	it	this	talent	that	has	earned	him	the	right	to	rule?’
No.	Never	that.	‘This	talent,’	the	Imass	replied,	‘is	his	weakness.’
‘Better	than	you,	Onrack?’
He	turned	about,	his	smile	now	wry.	‘I	see	some	flaws.	I	see	hints	of
impatience.	Of	emotion	free	and	savage	as	the	beasts	he	paints.	I	see	also,
perhaps,	signs	of	a	talent	he	had	lost	and	has	not	yet	rediscovered.’
‘How	does	one	lose	talent	like	that?’
‘By	dying,	only	to	return.’
‘Onrack,’	and	there	was	a	new	tone	to	Trull’s	voice,	a	gravity	that	unnerved
Onrack,	‘I	have	spoken	with	these	Imass	here.	Many	of	them.	With	Ulshun
himself.	And	I	do	not	think	they	ever	died.	I	do	not	think	they	were	once	T’lan,
only	to	have	forgotten	in	the	countless	generations	of	existence	here.’
‘Yes,	they	say	they	are	among	those	who	did	not	join	the	Ritual.	But	this
cannot	be	true,	Trull	Sengar.	They	must	be	ghosts,	willed	into	flesh,	held	here
by	the	timelessness	of	the	Gate	at	the	end	of	this	cave.	My	friend,	they	do	not
know	themselves.’	And	then	he	paused.	Can	this	be	true?
‘Ulshun	Pral	says	he	remembers	his	mother.	He	says	she	is	still	alive.
Although	not	here	right	now.’
‘Ulshun	Pral	is	a	hundred	thousand	years	old,	Trull	Sengar.	Or	more.	What
he	remembers	is	false,	a	delusion.’
‘I	do	not	believe	that,	not	any	more.	I	think	the	mystery	here	is	deeper	than
any	of	us	realize.’
‘Let	us	go	on,’	Onrack	said.	‘I	would	see	this	Gate.’
They	left	the	chamber	of	the	beasts.
	


Trull	was	filled	with	unease.	Something	had	been	awakened	in	his	friend	–	by
the	paintings	–	and	its	taste	was	bitter.	He	had	seen,	in	the	lines	of	Onrack’s
back,	his	shoulders,	a	kind	of	slow	collapse.	The	return	of	some	ancient
burden.	And,	seeing	this,	Trull	had	forced	himself	to	speak,	to	break	the	silence
before	Onrack	could	destroy	himself.
Yes.	The	paintings.	The	crime.	Will	you	not	smile	again,	Onrack?	Not	the
smile	you	gave	me	when	you	turned	to	face	me	just	now	–	too	broken,	too	filled
with	sorrow	–	but	the	smile	I	have	grown	to	treasure	since	coming	to	this	realm.
‘Onrack.’
‘Yes?’
‘Do	we	still	know	what	we	are	waiting	for?	Yes,	threats	approach.	Will	they
come	through	the	Gate?	Or	from	across	the	hills	beyond	the	camp?	Do	we
know	in	truth	if	these	Imass	are	indeed	threatened?’
‘Prepare	yourself,	Trull	Sengar.	Danger	draws	close…on	all	sides.’
‘Perhaps	then	we	should	return	to	Ulshun	Pral.’
‘Rud	Elalle	is	with	them.	There	is	time	yet…to	see	this	Gate.’
Moments	later,	they	came	to	the	edge	of	the	vast,	seemingly	limitless
cavern,	and	both	halted.
Not	one	Gate.	Many	gates.
And	all	were	seething	with	silent,	wild	fire.
‘Onrack,’	Trull	said,	unslinging	his	spear.	‘Best	return	to	Rud	Elalle	and	let
him	know	–	this	is	not	what	he	described.’
Onrack	pointed	towards	a	central	heap	of	stones.	‘She	has	failed.	This
realm,	Trull	Sengar,	is	dying.	And	when	it	dies…’
Neither	spoke	for	a	moment.
Then	Onrack	said,	‘I	will	return	quickly,	my	friend,	so	that	you	do	not
stand	alone	–	against	what	may	come	through.’
‘I	look	forward	to	your	company,’	Trull	replied.	‘So…hurry.’
	
Forty-odd	paces	beyond	the	camp	rose	a	modest	hill,	stretched	out	as	if	it	had
once	been	an	atoll,	assuming	the	plains	had	once	been	under	water	and	that,
Hedge	told	himself	as	he	kicked	his	way	through	a	ribbon	of	sand	studded	with
broken	shells,	was	a	fair	assumption.	Reaching	the	elongated	summit,	he	set
down	his	oversized	crossbow	near	an	outcrop	of	sun-bleached	limestone,	then
walked	over	to	where	Quick	Ben	sat	cross-legged,	facing	the	hills	two
thousand	paces	to	the	south.
‘You’re	not	meditating	or	something,	are	you?’
‘If	I	had	been,’	the	wizard	snapped,	‘you’d	have	just	ruined	it	and	possibly


killed	us	all.’
‘It’s	all	the	posturing,	Quick,’	Hedge	said,	flopping	down	onto	the	gravel
beside	him.	‘You	turn	picking	your	nose	into	a	Hood-damned	ritual,	so	it	gets	I
just	give	up	on	knowing	when	to	talk	to	you	or	not.’
‘If	that’s	the	case,	then	don’t	ever	talk	to	me	and	we’ll	both	be	happy.’
‘Miserable	snake.’
‘Hairless	rodent.’
The	two	sat	in	companionable	silence	for	a	time,	then	Hedge	reached	out
and	picked	up	a	shard	of	dark	brown	flint.	He	peered	at	one	serrated	edge.
‘What	are	you	doing?’	Quick	Ben	demanded.
‘Contemplating.’
‘Contemplating,’	Quick	Ben	mimed,	head	wagging	from	side	to	side	in
time	with	each	syllable.
‘I	could	cut	your	throat	with	this.	One	swipe.’
‘We	never	did	get	along,	did	we?	Gods,	I	can’t	believe	how	we	hugged	and
slapped	each	other	on	the	back,	down	at	that	river—’
‘Stream.’
‘Watering	hole.’
‘Spring.’
‘Will	you	please	cut	my	throat	now,	Hedge?’
The	sapper	tossed	the	flint	away	and	dusted	his	hands	with	brisk	slaps.
‘What	makes	you	so	sure	the	baddies	are	coming	up	from	the	south?’
‘Who	says	I’m	sure	of	anything?’
‘So	we	could	be	sitting	in	the	wrong	place.	Facing	the	wrong	direction.
Maybe	everybody’s	getting	butchered	right	now	even	as	I	speak.’
‘Well,	Hedge,	if	you	hadn’t	of	interrupted	my	meditating,	maybe	I’d	have
figured	out	where	we	should	be	right	now!’
‘Oh,	nice	one,	wizard.’
‘They’re	coming	from	the	south	because	it’s	the	best	approach.’
‘As	what,	rabbits?’
‘No,	as	dragons,	Hedge.’
The	sapper	squinted	at	the	wizard.	‘There	always	was	a	smell	of	Soletaken
about	you,	Quick.	We	finally	gonna	see	what	scrawny	beastie	you	got	hiding	in
there?’
‘That’s	a	rather	appalling	way	of	putting	it,	Hedge.	And	the	answer	is:	no.’
‘You	still	feeling	shaky?’
The	wizard	glanced	over,	his	eyes	bright	and	half	mad	–	his	normal	look,
in	other	words.	‘No.	In	fact,	the	very	opposite.’
‘How	so?’


‘I	stretched	myself,	way	more	than	I’d	ever	done	before.	It’s	made	me…
nastier.’
‘Really.’
‘Don’t	sound	so	impressed,	Hedge.’
‘All	I	know	is,’	the	sapper	said,	grunting	to	his	feet,	‘when	they	roll	over
you,	there’s	just	me	and	an	endless	supply	of	cussers.	And	that	suits	me	just
fine.’
‘Don’t	blast	my	body	to	pieces,	Hedge.’
‘Even	if	you’re	already	dead?’
‘Especially	then,	because	I	won’t	be,	will	I?	You’ll	just	think	it,	because
thinking	it	is	convenient,	because	then	you	can	go	wild	with	your	damned
cussers	until	you’re	standing	in	a	Hood-damned	crater	a	Hood-damned	league
across!’
This	last	bit	had	been	more	or	less	a	shriek.
Hedge	continued	his	squinting.	‘No	reason	to	get	all	testy,’	he	said	in	a	hurt
tone,	then	turned	and	walked	back	to	his	crossbow,	his	beloved	lobber.	And
said	under	his	breath,	‘Oh,	this	is	going	to	be	so	much	fun,	I	can’t	wait!’
‘Hedge!’
‘What?’
‘Someone’s	coming.’
‘From	where?’	the	sapper	demanded,	readying	a	cusser	in	the	cradle	of	the
crossbow.
‘Ha	ha.	From	the	south,	you	bloated	bladder	of	piss.’
‘I	knew	it,’	Hedge	said,	coming	to	the	wizard’s	side.
	
She	had	chosen	to	remain	as	she	was,	rather	than	veer	into	her	Soletaken	form.
That	would	come	later.	And	so	she	walked	across	the	plain,	through	the	high
grasses	of	the	basin.	On	a	ridge	directly	ahead	stood	two	figures.	One	was	a
ghost,	but	maybe	something	more	than	just	a	ghost.	The	other	was	a	mage,	and
without	question	more	than	just	a	mage.
A	sliver	of	disquiet	stirred	Menandore’s	thoughts.	Quickly	swept	away.	If
Rud	Elalle	had	selected	these	two	as	allies,	then	she	would	accept	that.	Just	as	he
had	recruited	the	Tiste	Edur	and	the	one	known	as	Onrack	the	Broken.	All…
complications,	but	she	would	not	be	alone	in	dealing	with	them,	would	she?
The	two	men	watched	as	she	ascended	the	gentle	slope.	One	was	cradling	a
bizarre	crossbow	of	some	kind.	The	other	was	playing	with	a	handful	of	small
polished	stones,	as	if	trying	to	choose	one	as	his	favourite.
They’re	fools.	Idiots.


And	soon,	they	will	both	be	dust.
She	fixed	on	them	her	hardest	glare	as	she	drew	up	to	the	edge	of	the	crest.
‘You	two	are	pathetic.	Why	stand	here	–	do	you	know	who	approaches?	Do	you
know	they	will	come	from	the	south?	Meaning	that	you	two	will	be	the	first
they	see.	And	so,	the	first	they	kill.’
The	taller,	darker-skinned	one	turned	slightly,	then	said,	‘Here	comes	your
son,	Menandore.	With	Ulshun	Pral.’	He	then	frowned.	‘That’s	a	familiar	walk…
Wonder	why	I	never	noticed	that	before.’
Walk?	Familiar	walk?	He	is	truly	mad.
‘I	have	summoned	them,’	she	said,	crossing	her	arms.	‘We	must	prepare
for	the	battle.’
The	shorter	one	grunted,	then	said,	‘We	don’t	want	any	company.	So	pick
somewhere	else	to	do	your	fighting.’
‘I	am	tempted	to	crush	your	skull	between	my	hands,’	Menandore	said.
‘Doesn’t	work,’	the	wizard	muttered.	‘Everything	just	pops	back	out.’
The	one	with	the	crossbow	gave	her	a	wide	smile.
Menandore	said,	‘I	assure	you,	I	have	no	intention	of	being	anywhere	near
you,	although	it	is	my	hope	I	will	be	within	range	to	see	your	grisly	deaths.’
‘What	makes	you	so	sure	they’ll	be	grisly?’	the	wizard	asked,	now
studying	one	pebble	in	particular,	holding	it	up	to	the	light	as	if	it	was	a	gem	of
some	sort,	but	Menandore	could	see	that	it	was	not	a	gem.	Simply	a	stone,	and
an	opaque	one	at	that.
‘What	are	you	doing?’	she	demanded.
He	glanced	across	at	her,	then	closed	his	hand	round	the	stone	and	brought
it	down	behind	his	back.	‘Nothing.	Why?	Anyway,	I	asked	you	a	question.’
‘And	I	am	obliged	to	answer	it?’	She	snorted.
Rud	Elalle	and	Ulshun	Pral	arrived,	halting	a	few	paces	behind	the	wizard
and	his	companion.
Menandore	saw	the	hard	expression	in	her	son’s	face.	Could	I	have	seen
anything	else?	No.	Not	for	this.	‘Beloved	son—’
‘I	care	nothing	for	the	Finnest,’	Rud	Elalle	said.	‘I	will	not	join	you	in	your
fight,	Mother.’
She	stared,	eyes	widening	even	as	they	filled	with	burning	rage.	‘You	must!
I	cannot	face	them	both!’
‘You	have	new	allies,’	Rud	Elalle	said.	‘These	two,	who	even	now	guard
the	approach—’
‘These	brainless	dolts?	My	son,	you	send	me	to	my	death!’
Rud	Elalle	straightened.	‘I	am	taking	my	Imass	away	from	here,	Mother.
They	are	all	that	matters	to	me—’


‘More	than	the	life	of	your	mother?’
‘More	than	the	fight	she	chooses	for	herself!’	he	snapped.	‘This	clash	–	this
feud	–	it	is	not	mine.	It	is	yours.	It	was	ever	yours!	I	want	nothing	to	do	with	it!’
Menandore	flinched	back	at	her	son’s	fury.	Sought	to	hold	his	eyes,	then
failed	and	looked	away.	‘So	be	it,’	she	whispered.	‘Go	then,	my	son,	and	take
your	chosen	kin.	Go!’
As	Rud	Elalle	nodded	and	turned	away,	however,	she	spoke	again,	in	a	tone
harder	than	anything	that	had	come	before.	‘But	not	him.’
Her	son	swung	round,	saw	his	mother	pointing	towards	the	Imass	at	his
side.
Ulshun	Pral.
Rud	Elalle	frowned.	‘What?	I	do	not—’
‘No,	my	son,	you	do	not.	Ulshun	Pral	must	remain.	Here.’
‘I	will	not	permit—’
And	then	the	Bentract	leader	reached	out	a	hand	to	stay	Rud	Elalle	–	who
was	moments	from	veering	into	his	dragon	form,	to	lock	in	battle	with	his	own
mother.
Menandore	waited,	outwardly	calm,	reposed,	even	as	her	heart	thudded
fierce	in	her	chest.
‘She	speaks	true,’	Ulshun	Pral	said.	‘I	must	stay.’
‘But	why?’
‘For	the	secret	I	possess,	Rud	Elalle.	The	secret	they	all	seek.	If	I	go	with
you,	all	will	pursue.	Do	you	understand?	Now,	I	beg	you,	lead	my	people	away
from	here,	to	a	safe	place.	Lead	them	away,	Rud	Elalle,	and	quickly!’
‘Will	you	now	fight	at	my	side,	my	son?’	Menandore	demanded.	‘To
ensure	the	life	of	Ulshun	Pral?’
But	Ulshun	Pral	was	already	pushing	Rud	Elalle	away.	‘Do	as	I	ask,’	he
said	to	Menandore’s	son.	‘I	cannot	die	fearing	for	my	people	–	please,	lead
them	away.’
The	wizard	then	spoke	up,	‘We’ll	do	our	best	to	safeguard	him,	Rud
Elalle.’
Menandore	snorted	her	contempt.	‘You	risk	such	a	thing?’	she	demanded
of	her	son.
Rud	Elalle	stared	across	at	the	wizard,	then	at	the	smiling	one	with	the
crossbow,	and	she	saw	a	strange	calm	slip	over	her	son’s	expression	–	and	that
sliver	of	disquiet	returned	to	her,	stinging.
‘I	shall,’	Rud	Elalle	then	said,	and	he	reached	out	to	Ulshun	Pral.	A	gentle
gesture,	a	hand	resting	lightly	against	one	side	of	the	Imass’s	face.	Rud	Elalle
then	stepped	back,	swung	round,	and	set	off	back	for	the	camp.


Menandore	spun	on	the	two	remaining	men.	‘You	damned	fools!’
‘Just	for	that,’	the	wizard	said,	‘I’m	not	giving	you	my	favourite	stone.’
	
Hedge	and	Quick	Ben	watched	her	march	back	down	the	slope.
‘That	was	odd,’	the	sapper	muttered.
‘Wasn’t	it.’
They	were	silent	for	another	hundred	heartbeats,	then	Hedge	turned	to
Quick	Ben.	‘So	what	do	you	think?’
‘You	know	exactly	what	I’m	thinking,	Hedge.’
‘Same	as	me,	then.’
‘The	same.’
‘Tell	me	something,	Quick.’
‘What?’
‘Was	that	really	your	favourite	stone?’
‘Do	you	mean	the	one	I	had	in	my	hand?	Or	the	one	I	slipped	into	her	fancy
white	cloak?’
	
With	skin	wrinkled	and	stained	by	millennia	buried	in	peat,	Sheltatha	Lore	did
indeed	present	an	iconic	figure	of	dusk.	In	keeping	now	with	her	reddish	hair
and	the	murky	hue	of	her	eyes,	she	wore	a	cloak	of	deep	burgundy,	black
leather	leggings	and	boots.	Bronze-studded	vest	drawn	tight	across	her	chest.
At	her	side	–	like	Sheltatha	facing	the	hills	–	stood	Sukul	Ankhadu,	Dapple,
the	mottling	of	her	skin	visible	on	her	bared	hands	and	forearms.	On	her	slim
shoulders	a	Letherii	night-cloak,	as	was	worn	now	by	the	noble	born	and	the
women	of	the	Tiste	Edur	in	the	empire,	although	this	one	was	somewhat	worse
for	wear.
‘Soon,’	said	Sheltatha	Lore,	‘this	realm	shall	be	dust.’
‘This	pleases	you,	sister?’
‘Perhaps	not	as	much	as	it	pleases	you,	Sukul.	Why	is	this	place	an
abomination	in	your	eyes?’
‘I	have	no	love	for	Imass.	Imagine,	a	people	grubbing	in	the	dirt	of	caves
for	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years.	Building	nothing.	All	history	trapped	as
memory,	twisted	as	tales	sung	in	rhyme	every	night.	They	are	flawed.	In	their
souls,	there	must	be	a	flaw,	a	failing.	And	these	ones	here,	they	have	deluded
themselves	into	believing	that	they	actually	exist.’
‘Not	all	of	them,	Sukul.’


Dapple	waved	dismissively.	‘The	greatest	failing	here,	Sheltatha,	lies	with
the	Lord	of	Death.	If	not	for	Hood’s	indifference,	this	realm	could	never	have
lasted	as	long	as	it	has.	It	irritates	me,	such	carelessness.’
‘So,’	Sheltatha	Lore	said	with	a	smile,	‘you	will	hasten	the	demise	of	these
Imass,	even	though,	with	the	realm	dying	anyway,	they	are	already	doomed.’
‘You	do	not	understand.	The	situation	has…changed.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Their	conceit,’	said	Sukul,	‘has	made	them	real.	Mortal,	now.	Blood,	flesh
and	bone.	Capable	of	bleeding,	of	dying.	Yet	they	remain	ignorant	of	their
world’s	imminent	extinction.	My	slaughtering	them,	sister,	will	be	an	act	of
mercy.’
Sheltatha	Lore	grunted.	‘I	cannot	wait	to	hear	them	thank	you.’
At	that	moment	a	gold	and	white	dragon	rose	into	view	before	them,
sailing	low	over	the	crests	of	the	hills.
Sukul	Ankhadu	sighed.	‘It	begins.’
The	Soletaken	glided	down	the	slope	directly	towards	them.	Looming
huge,	yet	still	fifty	paces	away,	the	dragon	tilted	its	wings	back,	crooked	them
as	its	hind	limbs	reached	downwards,	then	settled	onto	the	ground.
A	blurring	swirl	enveloped	the	beast,	and	a	moment	later	Menandore
walked	out	from	that	spice-laden	disturbance.
Sheltatha	Lore	and	Sukul	Ankhadu	waited,	saying	nothing,	their	faces
expressionless,	while	Menandore	approached,	finally	halting	five	paces	from
them,	her	blazing	eyes	moving	from	one	sister	to	the	other,	then	back	again.
She	said,	‘Are	we	still	agreed,	then?’
‘Such	glorious	precedent,	this	moment,’	Sheltatha	Lore	observed.
Menandore	frowned.	‘Necessity.	At	least	we	should	be	understood	on	that
matter.	I	cannot	stand	alone,	cannot	guard	the	soul	of	Scabandari.	The	Finnest
must	not	fall	in	his	hands.’
A	slight	catch	of	breath	from	Sukul.	‘Is	he	near,	then?’
‘Oh	yes.	I	have	stolen	the	eyes	of	one	travelling	with	him.	Again	and	again.
They	even	now	draw	to	the	last	gate,	and	look	upon	its	wound,	and	stand	before
the	torn	corpse	of	that	foolish	Imass	Bonecaster	who	thought	she	could	seal	it
with	her	own	soul.’	Menandore	sneered.	‘Imagine	such	effrontery.	Starvald
Demelain!	The	very	chambers	of	K’rul’s	heart!	Did	she	not	know	how	that
weakened	him?	Weakened	everything?’
‘So	we	three	kill	Silchas	Ruin,’	Sheltatha	Lore	said.	‘And	then	the	Imass.’
‘My	son	chooses	to	oppose	us	in	that	last	detail,’	Menandore	said.	‘But	the
Imass	have	outlived	their	usefulness.	We	shall	wound	Rud	if	we	must,	but	we
do	not	kill	him.	Understood?	I	will	have	your	word	on	this.	Again.	Here	and


now,	sisters.’
‘Agreed,’	Sheltatha	Lore	said.
‘Yes,’	said	Sukul	Ankhadu,	‘although	it	will	make	matters	more	difficult.’
‘We	must	live	with	that,’	Menandore	said,	and	then	turned.	‘It	is	time.’
‘Already?’
‘A	few	pathetic	mortals	seek	to	stand	in	our	way	–	we	must	crush	them
first.	And	Silchas	Ruin	has	allies.	Our	day’s	work	begins	now,	sisters.’
With	that	she	walked	towards	the	hills,	and	began	veering	into	her	dragon
form.
Behind	her,	Sheltatha	Lore	and	Sukul	Ankhadu	exchanged	a	look,	and	then
they	moved	apart,	giving	themselves	the	room	they	needed.
Veering	into	dragons.
Dawn,	Dusk	and	the	one	known	as	Dapple.	A	dragon	of	gold	and	white.
One	stained	brown	and	looking	half-rotted.	The	last	mottled,	neither	light	nor
dark,	but	the	uneasy	interplay	between	the	two.	Soletaken	with	the	blood	of
Tiam,	the	Mother.	Sail-winged	and	serpent-necked,	taloned	and	scaled,	the
blood	of	Eleint.
Lifting	into	the	air	on	gusts	of	raw	sorcery.	Menandore	leading	the	wedge
formation.	Sheltatha	Lore	on	her	left.	Sukul	Ankhadu	on	her	right.
The	hills	before	them,	now	dropping	away	as	they	heaved	their	massive
bulks	yet	higher.
Clearing	the	crests,	the	ancient	ridge	of	an	ancient	shore,	and	the	sun
caught	gleaming	scales,	bloomed	through	the	membranes	of	wings,	while
beneath	three	shadows	raced	over	grass	and	rock,	shadows	that	sent	small
mammals	scurrying	for	cover,	that	launched	birds	into	screeching	flight,	that
made	hares	freeze	in	their	tracks.
Beasts	in	the	sky	were	hunting,	and	nothing	on	the	ground	was	safe.
	
A	flat	landscape	studded	with	humped	mounds	–	dead	dragons,	ghastly	as
broken	barrows,	from	which	bones	jutted,	webbed	by	desiccated	skin	and
sinew.	Wings	snapped	like	the	wreckage	of	foundered	ships.	Necks	twisted	on
the	ground,	heads	from	which	the	skin	had	contracted,	pulled	back	to	reveal
gaunt	hollows	in	the	eye	sockets	and	beneath	the	cheekbones.	Fangs	coated	in
grey	dust	were	bared	as	if	in	eternal	defiance.
Seren	Pedac	had	not	believed	there	had	once	been	so	many	dragons.	Had
not,	in	truth,	believed	that	the	creatures	even	existed,	barring	those	who	could
create	such	a	form	from	their	own	bodies,	like	Silchas	Ruin.	Were	these,	she
had	first	wondered,	all	Soletaken?	For	some	reason,	she	knew	the	answer	to	be


no.
True	dragons,	of	which	Silchas	Ruin,	in	his	dread	winged	shape,	was	but	a
mockery.	Devoid	of	majesty,	of	purity.
The	shattering	of	bones	and	wings	had	come	from	age,	not	violence.	None
of	these	beasts	were	sprawled	out	in	death.	None	revealed	gaping	wounds.
They	had	each	settled	into	their	final	postures.
‘Like	blue	flies	on	the	sill	of	a	window,’	Udinaas	had	said.	‘Wrong	side,
trying	to	get	out.	But	the	window	stayed	closed.	To	them,	maybe	to	everyone,
every	thing.	Or…maybe	not	every	thing.’	And	then	he	had	smiled,	as	if	the
thought	had	amused	him.
They	had	seen	the	gate	that	was	clearly	their	destination	from	a	great
distance	away,	and	indeed	it	seemed	the	dragon	mounds	were	more	numerous
the	closer	they	came,	crowding	in	on	all	sides.	The	flanks	of	that	arch	were
high	as	towers,	thin	to	the	point	of	skeletal,	while	the	arch	itself	seemed
twisted,	like	a	vast	cobweb	wrapped	around	a	dead	branch.	Enclosed	by	this
structure	was	a	wall	smooth	and	grey,	yet	vaguely	swirling	widdershins	–	the
way	through,	to	another	world.	Where,	it	was	now	understood	by	all,	would	be
found	the	remnant	soul	of	Scabandari,	Father	Shadow,	the	Betrayer.	Bloodeye.
The	lifeless	air	tasted	foul	to	Seren	Pedac,	as	if	immeasurable	grief	tainted
every	breath	drawn	in	this	realm,	a	bleak	redolence	that	would	not	fade	even
after	countless	millennia.	It	sickened	her,	sapped	the	strength	from	her	limbs,
from	her	very	spirit.	Daunting	as	that	portal	was,	she	longed	to	claw	through
the	grey,	formless	barrier.	Longed	for	an	end	to	this.	All	of	it.
There	was	a	way,	she	was	convinced	–	there	had	to	be	a	way	–	of
negotiating	through	the	confrontation	fast	approaching.	Was	this	not	her	sole
talent,	the	singular	skill	she	would	permit	herself	to	acknowledge?
Three	strides	ahead	of	her,	Udinaas	and	Kettle	walked,	her	tiny	hand
nestled	in	his	much	larger,	much	more	battered	one.	The	sight	–	which	had
preceded	her	virtually	since	their	arrival	in	this	grim	place	–	was	yet	another
source	of	anguish	and	unease.	Was	he	alone	capable	of	setting	aside	all	his
nightmares,	to	comfort	this	lone,	lost	child?
Long	ago,	at	the	very	beginning	of	this	journey,	Kettle	had	held	herself
close	to	Silchas	Ruin.	For	he	had	been	the	one	who	had	spoken	to	her	through
the	dying	Azath.	And	he	had	made	vows	to	protect	her	and	the	burgeoning	life
that	had	come	to	her.	And	so	she	had	looked	upon	her	benefactor	with	all	the
adoration	one	might	expect	of	a	foundling	in	such	a	circumstance.
This	was	no	longer	true.	Oh,	Seren	Pedac	saw	enough	small	gestures	to
underscore	that	old	allegiance,	the	threads	linking	these	two	so-different
beings	–	their	shared	place	of	birth,	the	precious	mutual	recognition	that	was


solitude,	estrangement	from	all	others.	But	Silchas	Ruin	had…revealed	more
of	himself.	Had	revealed,	in	his	cold	disregard,	a	brutality	that	could	take	one’s
breath	away.	Oh,	and	how	different	is	that	from	Kettle’s	tales	of	murdering
people	in	Letheras?	Of	draining	their	blood,	feeding	their	corpses	into	the
hungry,	needy	grounds	of	the	Azath?
Still,	Kettle	expressed	none	of	those	desires	any	more.	In	returning	to	life,
she	had	abandoned	her	old	ways,	had	become,	with	each	passing	day,	more	and
more	simply	a	young	girl.	An	orphan.
Witness,	again	and	again,	to	her	adopted	family’s	endless	quarrelling	and
bickering.	To	the	undeniable	threats,	the	promises	of	murder.	Yes,	this	is	what
we	have	offered	her.
And	Silchas	Ruin	is	hardly	above	all	of	that,	is	he?
But	what	of	Udinaas?	Revealing	no	great	talent,	no	terrible	power.
Revealing,	in	truth,	naught	but	a	profound	vulnerability.
Ah,	and	this	is	what	draws	her	to	him.	What	he	gifts	back	to	her	in	that
clasping	of	hands,	the	soft	smile	that	reaches	even	his	sad	eyes.
Udinaas,	Seren	Pedac	realized	with	a	shock,	was	the	only	truly	likeable
member	of	their	party.
She	could	in	no	way	include	herself	as	one	with	even	the	potential	for
genuine	feelings	of	warmth	from	any	of	the	others,	not	since	her	rape	of
Udinaas’s	mind.	But	even	before	then,	she	had	revealed	her	paucity	of	skills	in
the	area	of	camaraderie.	Ever	brooding,	prone	to	despondency	–	these	were	the
legacies	of	all	she	had	done	–	and	not	done	–	in	her	life.
Kicking	through	dust,	with	Clip	and	Silchas	Ruin	well	ahead	of	the	others,
with	the	massive	humps	of	dead	dragons	on	all	sides,	they	drew	yet	closer	to
that	towering	gate.	Fear	Sengar,	who	had	been	walking	two	strides	behind	her
on	her	left,	now	came	alongside.	His	hand	was	on	the	grip	of	his	sword.
‘Do	not	be	a	fool,’	she	hissed	at	him.
His	face	was	set	in	stern	lines,	lips	tight.
Ahead,	Clip	and	Silchas	reached	the	gate	and	there	they	halted.	Both
seemed	to	be	looking	down	at	a	vague,	smallish	form	on	the	ground.
Udinaas	slowed	as	the	child	whose	hand	he	was	holding	began	pulling
back.	Seren	Pedac	saw	him	look	down	and	say	something	in	a	very	low	tone.
If	Kettle	replied	it	was	in	a	whisper.
The	ex-slave	nodded	then,	and	a	moment	later	they	carried	on,	Kettle
keeping	pace	without	any	seeming	reluctance.
What	had	made	her	shrink	away?
What	had	he	said	to	so	easily	draw	her	onward	once	more?
They	came	closer,	and	Seren	Pedac	heard	a	low	sigh	from	Fear	Sengar.


‘They	look	upon	a	body,’	he	said.
Oh,	Errant	protect	us.
‘Acquitor,’	continued	the	Tiste	Edur,	so	low	that	only	she	could	hear.
‘Yes?’
‘I	must	know…how	you	will	choose.’
‘I	don’t	intend	to,’	she	snapped	in	sudden	irritation.	‘Do	we	come	all	this
way	together	only	to	kill	each	other	now?’
He	grunted	in	wry	amusement.	‘Are	we	that	evenly	matched?’
‘Then,	if	it	is	truly	hopeless,	why	attempt	anything	at	all?’
‘Have	I	come	this	far	only	to	step	away,	then?	Acquitor,	I	must	do	what	I
must.	Will	you	stand	with	me?’
They	had	halted,	well	back	from	the	others,	all	of	whom	were	now
gathered	around	that	corpse.	Seren	Pedac	unstrapped	her	helm	and	pulled	it	off,
then	clawed	at	her	greasy	hair.
‘Acquitor,’	Fear	persisted,	‘you	have	shown	power	–	you	are	no	longer	the
weakest	among	us.	What	you	choose	may	prove	the	difference	between	our
living	and	dying.’
‘Fear,	what	is	it	you	seek	with	the	soul	of	Scabandari?’
‘Redemption,’	he	answered	immediately.	‘For	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘And	how	do	you	imagine	Scabandari’s	broken,	tattered	soul	will	grant
you	such	redemption?’
‘I	will	awaken	it,	Acquitor	–	and	together	we	will	purge	Kurald	Emurlahn.
We	will	drive	out	the	poison	that	afflicts	us.	And	we	will,	perhaps,	shatter	my
brother ’s	cursed	sword.’
Too	vague,	you	damned	fool.	Even	if	you	awaken	Scabandari,	might	he	not
in	turn	be	enslaved	by	that	poison,	and	its	promise	of	power?	And	what	of	his
own	desires,	hungers	–	what	of	the	vengeance	he	himself	will	seek?	‘Fear,’	she
said	in	sudden,	near-crippling	weariness,	‘your	dream	is	hopeless.’
And	saw	him	flinch	back,	saw	the	terrible	retreat	in	his	eyes.
She	offered	him	a	faint	smile.	‘Yes,	let	this	break	your	vow,	Fear	Sengar.	I
am	not	worth	protecting,	especially	in	the	name	of	a	dead	brother.	I	trust	you
see	that	now.’
‘Yes,’	he	whispered.
And	in	that	word	was	such	anguish	that	Seren	Pedac	almost	cried	out.	Then
railed	at	herself.	It	is	what	I	wanted!	Damn	it!	What	I	wanted.	Needed.	It	is
what	must	be!
Oh,	blessed	Errant,	how	you	have	hurt	him,	Seren	Pedac.	Even	this	one.	No
different	from	all	the	others.
And	she	knew,	then,	that	there	would	be	no	negotiation.	No	way	through


what	was	to	come.
So	be	it.	Do	not	count	on	me,	Fear	Sengar.	I	do	not	even	know	my	power,
nor	my	control	of	it.	So,	do	not	count	on	me.
But	I	shall	do,	for	you,	what	I	can.
A	promise,	yet	one	she	would	not	voice	out	loud,	for	it	was	too	late	for
that.	She	could	see	as	much	in	his	now	cold	eyes,	his	now	hardened	face.
Better	that	he	expect	nothing,	yes.	So	that,	should	I	fail…But	she	could	not
finish	that	thought,	not	with	every	word	to	follow	so	brightly	painted	in	her
mind	–	with	cowardice.
Fear	Sengar	set	out,	leaving	her	behind.	She	saw,	as	she	followed,	that	he
no	longer	held	on	to	his	sword.	Indeed,	he	suddenly	seemed	looser,	more
relaxed,	than	she	had	ever	seen	him	before.
She	did	not,	at	that	moment,	understand	the	significance	of	such	a
transformation.	In	a	warrior.	In	a	warrior	who	knew	how	to	kill.
	
Perhaps	he	had	always	known	where	this	journey	would	end.	Perhaps	that
seemingly	accidental	visit	the	first	time	had	been	anything	but,	and	Udinaas	had
been	shown	where	his	every	decision	in	the	interval	would	take	him,	as
inevitable	as	the	tide.	And	now,	at	last,	here	he	had	washed	up,	detritus	in	the
silt-laden	water.
Will	I	soon	be	dining	on	ranag	calf?	I	think	not.
The	body	of	the	female	Imass	was	a	piteous	thing.	Desiccated,	limbs	drawn
up	as	tendons	contracted.	The	wild	masses	of	her	hair	had	grown	like	roots
from	a	dead	tree,	the	nails	of	her	stubby	fingers	like	flattened	talons	the	hue	of
tortoiseshell.	The	smudged	garnets	that	were	her	eyes	had	sunk	deep	within
their	sockets,	yet	still	seemed	to	stare	balefully	at	the	sky.
Yes,	the	Bonecaster.	The	witch	who	gave	her	soul	to	staunch	the	wound.	So
noble,	this	failed,	useless	sacrifice.	No,	woman,	for	you	I	will	not	weep.	You
should	have	found	another	way.	You	should	have	stayed	alive,	among	your	tribe,
guiding	them	out	from	their	dark	cave	of	blissful	ignorance.
‘The	world	beyond	dies,’	said	Clip,	sounding	very	nearly	pleased	by	the
prospect.	Rings	sang	out	on	the	ends	of	the	chain.	One	silver,	one	gold,
spinning	in	blurs.
Silchas	Ruin	eyed	his	fellow	Tiste	Andii.	‘Clip,	you	remain	blind	to…
necessity.’
A	faint,	derisive	smile.	‘Hardly,	O	White	Crow.	Hardly.’
The	albino	warrior	then	turned	to	fix	his	uncanny	red-rimmed	eyes	upon
Udinaas.	‘Is	she	still	with	us?’


Kettle’s	hand	tightened	in	the	ex-slave’s,	and	it	was	all	he	could	do	to
squeeze	back	in	reassurance.	‘She	gauged	our	location	moments	ago,’	Udinaas
replied,	earning	a	hiss	from	Clip.	‘But	now,	no.’
Silchas	Ruin	faced	the	gate.	‘She	prepares	for	us,	then.	On	the	other	side.’
Udinaas	shrugged.	‘I	imagine	so.’
Seren	Pedac	stirred	and	asked,	‘Does	that	mean	she	holds	the	Finnest?
Silchas?	Udinaas?’
But	Silchas	Ruin	shook	his	head.	‘No.	That	would	not	have	been	tolerated.
Not	by	her	sisters.	Not	by	the	powerful	ascendants	who	saw	it	fashioned	in	the
first	place—’
‘Then	why	aren’t	they	here?’	Seren	demanded.	‘What	makes	you	think
they’ll	accept	your	possessing	it,	Silchas	Ruin,	when	they	will	not	stand	for
Menandore’s	owning	it	–	we	are	speaking	of	Menandore,	aren’t	we?’
Udinaas	snorted.	‘Left	no	stone	unturned	in	my	brain,	did	you,	Acquitor?’
Silchas	did	not	reply	to	her	questions.
The	ex-slave	glanced	over	at	Fear	Sengar,	and	saw	a	warrior	about	to	go
into	battle.	Yes,	we	are	that	close,	aren’t	we?	Oh,	Fear	Sengar,	I	do	not	hate	you.
In	fact,	I	probably	even	like	you.	I	may	mock	the	honour	you	possess.	I	may
scorn	this	path	you’ve	chosen.
As	I	scorned	this	Bonecaster’s,	and	yes,	Edur,	for	entirely	the	same	reasons.
Because	I	cannot	follow.
Udinaas	gently	disengaged	his	hand	from	Kettle’s,	then	lifted	free	the
Imass	spear	strapped	to	his	back.	He	walked	over	to	Seren	Pedac.	Set	the
weapon	into	her	hands,	ignoring	her	raised	brows,	the	confusion	sliding	into
her	gaze.
Yes,	Acquitor,	if	you	will	seek	to	aid	Fear	Sengar	–	and	I	believe	you	will	–
then	your	need	is	greater	than	mine.
After	all,	I	intend	to	run.
Silchas	Ruin	drew	his	two	swords,	thrust	them	both	point-first	into	the
ground.	And	then	began	tightening	the	various	buckles	and	straps	on	his
armour.
Yes,	no	point	in	rushing	in	unprepared,	is	there?	You	will	need	to	move
quickly,	Silchas	Ruin,	won’t	you?	Very	quickly	indeed.
He	found	his	mouth	was	dry.
Dry	as	this	pathetic	corpse	at	his	feet.
Seren	Pedac	gripped	his	arm.	‘Udinaas,’	she	whispered.
He	shook	his	arm	free.	‘Do	what	you	must,	Acquitor.’	Our	great	quest,	our
years	of	one	foot	in	front	of	the	other,	it	all	draws	now	to	a	close.
So	hail	the	blood.	Salute	the	inevitability.


And	who,	when	all	is	done,	will	wade	out	of	this	crimson	tide?
Rud	Elalle,	my	son,	how	I	fear	for	you.
	
Three	specks	in	the	sky	above	the	hills	to	the	south.	The	one	named	Hedge	now
half	turned	and	squinted	at	Ulshun	Pral,	then	said,	‘Best	withdraw	to	the	cave.
Stay	close	to	Onrack	the	Broken.	And	Trull	Sengar.’
Ulshun	Pral	smiled.
The	man	scowled.	‘Quick,	this	oaf	doesn’t	understand	Malazan.’	He	then
pointed	back	towards	the	rocks.	‘Go	there!	Onrack	and	Trull.	Go!’
The	taller	man	snorted.	‘Enough,	Hedge.	That	oaf	understands	you	just
fine.’
‘Oh,	so	why	ain’t	he	listening	to	me?’
‘How	should	I	know?’
Ulshun	waited	a	moment	longer,	fixing	into	his	memory	the	faces	of	these
two	men,	so	that	death	would	not	take	all	of	them.	He	hoped	they	were	doing
the	same	with	him,	although	of	course	they	might	well	not	understand	the	gift,
nor	even	that	they	had	given	it.
Imass	knew	many	truths	that	were	lost	to	those	who	were,	in	every	sense,
their	children.	This,	alas,	did	not	make	Imass	superior,	for	most	of	those	truths
were	unpleasant	ones,	and	these	children	could	not	defend	themselves	against
them,	and	so	would	be	fatally	weakened	by	their	recognition.
For	example,	Ulshun	Pral	reminded	himself,	he	had	been	waiting	for	this
time,	understanding	all	that	was	coming	to	this	moment,	all	the	truths	bound
within	what	would	happen.	Unlike	his	people,	he	had	not	been	a	ghost	memory.
He	had	not	lived	countless	millennia	in	a	haze	of	self-delusion.	Oh,	his	life	had
spanned	that	time,	but	it	had	been	just	that:	a	life.	Drawn	out	to	near
immortality,	not	through	any	soul-destroying	ritual,	but	because	of	this	realm.
This	deathless	realm.
That	was	deathless	no	longer.
He	set	out,	then,	leaving	these	two	brave	children,	and	made	his	way
towards	the	cave.
It	might	begin	here,	beneath	this	empty	sky.	But	it	would	end,	Ulshun	Pral
knew,	before	the	Gates	of	Starvald	Demelain.
Where	a	Bentract	Bonecaster	had	failed.	Not	because	the	wound	proved	too
virulent,	or	too	vast.	But	because	the	Bonecaster	had	been	nothing	more	than	a
ghost	to	begin	with.	A	faded,	pallid	soul,	a	thing	with	barely	enough	power	to
hold	on	to	itself.
Ulshun	Pral	was	twenty	paces	from	the	entrance	to	the	cave	when	Onrack


the	Broken	emerged,	and	in	Ulshun’s	heart	there	burgeoned	such	a	welling	of
pride	that	tears	filled	his	eyes.

‘So	I	take	it,’	Hedge	said,	locking	the	foot	of	his	crossbow,	‘that	what	we	were
both	thinking	means	neither	of	us	is	much	surprised.’
‘She	gave	in	too	easily.’
Hedge	nodded.	‘That	she	did.	But	I’m	still	wondering,	Quick,	why	didn’t
she	grab	that	damned	Finnest	a	long	time	ago?	Squirrel	it	away	some	place
where	Silchas	Ruin	would	never	find	it?	Answer	me	that!’
The	wizard	grunted	as	he	moved	out	to	the	crest	of	the	slope.	‘She
probably	thought	she’d	done	just	as	you	said,	Hedge.’
Hedge	blinked,	then	frowned.	‘Huh.	Hadn’t	thought	of	that.’
‘That’s	because	you’re	thick,	sapper.	Now,	if	this	goes	the	way	I	want	it	to,
you	won’t	be	needed	at	all.	Keep	that	in	mind,	Hedge.	I’m	begging	you.’
‘Oh,	just	get	on	with	it.’
‘Fine	then.	I	will.’
And	Ben	Adaephon	Delat	straightened,	then	slowly	raised	his	arms.
His	scrawny	arms.	Hedge	laughed.
The	wizard	glared	back	at	him	over	a	shoulder.	‘Will	you	stop	that?’
‘Sorry!	Had	no	idea	you	were	so	touchy.’
Quick	Ben	cursed,	then	turned	and	walked	back	to	Hedge.
And	punched	him	in	the	nose.
Stunned,	eyes	filling	with	tears,	the	sapper	staggered	back.	Brought	a	hand
to	his	face	to	stem	the	sudden	gushing	of	blood.	‘You	broke	my	damned	nose!’
‘So	I	did,’	the	wizard	answered,	shaking	one	hand.	‘And	look,	Hedge,
you’re	bleeding.’
‘Is	it	any	surprise?	Ow—’
‘Hedge.	You	are	bleeding.’
I’m	–	oh,	gods.
‘Get	it	now?’
And	Quick	turned	and	walked	back,	resumed	his	stance	at	the	crest.
Hedge	stared	down	at	his	bloody	hand.	‘Shit!’
Their	conversation	stopped	then.
Since	the	three	dragons	were	now	no	longer	tiny	specks.
	
Menandore’s	hatred	of	her	sisters	in	no	way	diminished	her	respect	for	their


power,	and	against	Silchas	Ruin	that	power	would	be	needed.	She	knew	that	the
three	of	them,	together,	could	destroy	that	bastard.	Utterly.	True,	one	or	two	of
them	might	fall.	But	not	Menandore.	She	had	plans	to	ensure	that	she	would
survive.
Before	her	now,	minuscule	on	the	edge	of	that	rise,	a	lone	mortal	–	the
other	one	was	crouching	as	if	in	terror,	well	behind	his	braver	but	equally
stupid	companion	–	a	lone	mortal,	raising	his	hands.
Oh,	mage,	to	think	that	will	be	enough.
Against	us!
Power	burgeoned	within	her	and	to	either	side	she	felt	the	same	–	sudden
pressure,	sudden	promise.
Angling	downward	now,	three	man-heights	from	the	basin’s	tawny	grasses,
huge	shadows	drawing	closer,	yet	closer.	Sleeting	towards	that	slope.
She	unhinged	her	jaws.
	
Hedge	wiped	blood	from	his	face,	blinked	to	clear	his	vision	as	he	swore	at	his
own	throbbing	head,	and	then	lifted	the	crossbow.	Just	in	case.	Sweet	candy	for
the	middle	one,	aye.
The	trio	of	dragons,	wings	wide,	glided	low	above	the	ground,	at	a	height
that	would	bring	them	more	or	less	level	with	the	crest	of	this	ancient	atoll.
They	were,	Hedge	realized,	awfully	big.
In	perfect	unison,	all	three	dragons	opened	their	mouths.
And	Quick	Ben,	standing	there	like	a	frail	willow	before	a	tsunami,
unleashed	his	magic.
The	very	earth	of	the	slope	lifted	up,	heaved	up	to	hammer	the	dragons	like
enormous	fists	into	their	chests.	Necks	whipped.	Heads	snapped	back.	Sorcery
exploded	from	those	jaws,	waves	lashing	skyward	–	flung	uselessly	into	the
air,	where	the	three	sorceries	clashed,	writhing	in	a	frenzy	of	mutual
destruction.
Where	the	slope	had	been	there	were	now	clouds	of	dark,	dusty	earth,
pieces	of	sod	still	spinning	upward,	long	roots	trailing	like	hair,	and	the	hill
lurched	as	the	three	dragons,	engulfed	by	tons	of	earth,	crashed	into	the	ground
forty	paces	from	where	stood	Quick	Ben.
And	down,	into	that	chaotic	storm	of	soil	and	dragon,	the	wizard	marched.
Waves	erupted	from	him,	rolling	amidst	the	crackle	of	lightning,	sweeping
down	in	charging	crests.	Striking	the	floundering	beasts	with	a	succession	of
impacts	that	shook	the	entire	hill.	Black	fire	gouted,	rocks	sizzled	as	they	were
launched	into	the	air,	where	they	simply	shattered	into	dust.


Wave	after	wave	unleashed	from	the	wizard’s	hands.
Hedge,	staggering	drunkenly	to	the	edge,	saw	a	dragon,	hammered	full	on,
flung	onto	its	back,	then	pushed,	skidding,	kicking,	like	a	flesh	and	blood
avalanche,	down	onto	the	basin,	gouging	deep	grooves	across	the	flat	as	it	was
driven	back,	and	back.
Another,	with	skin	seeming	afire,	sought	to	lift	itself	into	the	air.
Another	wave	rose	above	it,	slapped	the	beast	back	down	with	a	bonesnapping	crunch.
The	third	creature,	half	buried	beneath	steaming	soil,	suddenly	turned	then
and	launched	itself	straight	for	the	dragon	beside	it.	Jaws	opening,	magic
ripping	forth	to	lance	into	the	side	of	its	once-ally.	Flesh	exploded,	blood
spraying	in	a	black	cloud.
An	ear-piercing	shriek,	the	struck	one’s	head	whipping	–	even	as
enormous	jaws	closed	on	its	throat.
Hedge	saw	that	neck	collapse	in	a	welter	of	blood.
More	blood	poured	from	the	stricken	dragon’s	gaping	mouth,	a	damned
fountain	of	the	stuff—
Quick	Ben	was	walking	back	up	the	slope,	seemingly	indifferent	to	the
carnage	behind	him.
The	third	dragon,	the	one	driven	far	out	on	the	basin,	at	the	end	of	a	tornup	track	that	stretched	across	the	grass	like	a	wound,	now	lifted	itself	into	the
air,	streaming	blood,	and,	climbing	still	higher,	banked	south	and	then
eastward.
The	warring	dragons	at	the	base	of	the	slope	slashed	and	tore	at	each	other,
yet	the	attacker	would	not	release	its	death-grip	on	the	other ’s	neck,	and	those
huge	fangs	were	sawing	right	through.	Then	the	spine	crunched,	snapped,	and
suddenly	the	severed	head	and	its	arm-length’s	worth	of	throat	fell	to	the
churned	ground	with	a	heavy	thud.	The	body	kicked,	gouging	into	its	slayer ’s
underbelly	for	a	moment	longer,	then	sagged	down	as	a	spraying	exhalation
burst	from	the	severed	neck.
Quick	Ben	staggered	onto	the	summit.
Hedge	dragged	his	eyes	from	the	scene	below	and	stared	at	the	wizard.
‘You	look	like	Hood’s	own	arse-wipe,	Quick.’
‘Feel	like	it	too,	Hedge.’	He	pivoted	round,	the	motion	like	an	old	man’s.
‘Sheltatha	–	what	a	nasty	creature	–	turned	on	Menandore	just	like	that!’
‘When	she	realized	they	weren’t	getting	past	you,	aye,’	Hedge	said.	‘The
other	one’s	going	for	the	Imass,	I’d	wager.’
‘Won’t	get	past	Rud	Ellalle.’
‘No	surprise,	since	you	turned	her	into	one	giant	bruise.’


Below,	Sheltatha	Lore,	her	belly	ripped	open,	was	dragging	herself	away.
Hedge	eyed	the	treacherous	beast.
‘Aye,	sapper,’	Quick	Ben	said	in	a	hollow	voice.	‘Now	you	get	to	play.’
Hedge	grunted.	‘Damn	short	playtime,	Quick.’
‘And	then	you	nap.’
‘Funny.’
Hedge	raised	the	crossbow,	paused	to	gauge	the	angle.	Then	he	settled	his
right	index	finger	against	the	release.	And	grinned.	‘Here,	suck	on	this,	you	fat
winged	cow.’
A	solid	thunk	as	the	cusser	shot	out,	then	down.
Landing	within	the	gaping	cavity	of	Sheltatha	Lore’s	belly.
The	explosion	sent	chunks	of	dragon	flesh	in	all	directions.	The	thick,	red,
foul	rain	showered	down	on	Hedge	and	Quick	Ben.	And	what	might	have	been
a	vertebra	hammered	Hedge	right	between	the	eyes,	knocking	him	out	cold.
Flung	onto	his	hands	and	knees	by	the	concussion,	Quick	Ben	stared	across
at	his	unconscious	friend,	then	began	laughing.	Higher-pitched	than	usual.
	
As	they	strode	into	the	cave	of	paintings,	Onrack	reached	out	a	hand	to	stay
Ulshun	Pral.	‘Remain	here,’	he	said.
‘That	is	never	easy,’	Ulshun	Pral	replied,	yet	he	halted	nonetheless.
Nodding,	Onrack	looked	at	the	images	on	the	walls.	‘You	see	again	and
again	the	flaws.’
‘The	failing	of	my	hand,	yes.	The	language	of	the	eyes	is	ever	perfect.
Rendering	it	upon	stone	is	where	weakness	is	found.’
‘These,	Ulshun	Pral,	show	few	weaknesses.’
‘Even	so…’
‘Remain,	please,’	Onrack	said,	slowly	drawing	his	sword.	‘The	Gate…
there	will	be	intruders.’
‘Yes.’
‘Is	it	you	they	seek?’
‘Yes,	Onrack	the	Broken.	It	is	me.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	a	Jaghut	gave	me	something,	once,	long	ago.’
‘A	Jaghut?’
Ulshun	Pral	smiled	at	the	astonishment	on	Onrack’s	face.	‘Here,	in	this
world,’	he	said,	‘we	long	ago	ended	our	war.	Here,	we	chose	peace.’
‘Yet	that	which	the	Jaghut	gave	you	now	endangers	you,	Ulshun	Pral.	And
your	clans.’


Deep	thundering	concussions	suddenly	shook	the	walls	around	them.
Onrack	bared	his	teeth.	‘I	must	go.’
A	moment	later	Ulshun	Pral	was	alone,	in	the	cave	with	all	the	paintings	he
had	fashioned,	and	there	was	no	light	now	that	Onrack	and	the	torch	he	had
been	carrying	were	gone.	As	the	drums	of	grim	magic	reverberated	through
the	rock	surrounding	him,	he	remained	where	he	was,	motionless,	for	a	dozen
heartbeats.	Then	he	set	out,	after	Onrack.	On	the	path	to	the	Gate.
There	was,	in	truth,	no	choice.
	
Rud	Elalle	had	led	the	Imass	deeper	into	the	rugged	hills,	then	down	the	length
of	a	narrow,	crooked	defile	where	some	past	earthquake	had	broken	in	half	an
entire	mass	of	limestone,	forming	high,	angled	walls	flanking	a	crack	through
its	heart.	At	the	mouth	of	this	channel,	as	Rud	Elalle	urged	the	last	few	Imass
into	the	narrow	passage,	Hostille	Rator,	Til’aras	Benok	and	Gr ’istanas	Ish’ilm
halted.
‘Quickly!’	cried	Rud	Elalle.
But	the	clan	chief	was	drawing	out	his	cutlass-length	obsidian	sword	with
his	right	hand	and	a	bone-hafted,	groundstone	maul	with	his	left.	‘An	enemy
approaches,’	Hostille	Rator	said.	‘Go	on,	Rud	Elalle.	We	three	will	guard	the
mouth	of	this	passage.’
They	could	hear	terrible	thunder	from	just	south	of	the	old	camp.
Rud	Elalle	seemed	at	a	loss.
Hostille	Rator	said,	‘We	did	not	come	to	this	realm…expecting	what	we
have	found.	We	are	now	flesh,	and	so	too	are	those	Imass	you	call	your	own.
Death,	Rud	Elalle,	has	arrived.’	He	pointed	southward	with	his	sword.	‘A	lone
dragon	has	escaped	the	High	Mage.	To	hunt	down	you	and	the	Bentract.	Rud
Elalle,	even	as	a	dragon,	she	must	land	here.	She	must	then	semble	into	her
other	form.	So	that	she	can	walk	this	passageway.	We	will	meet	her	here,	the
three	of	us…strangers.’
‘I	can—’
‘No,	Rud	Elalle.	This	dragon	may	not	prove	the	only	danger	to	you	and	the
clans.	You	must	go,	you	must	prepare	to	stand	as	their	final	protector.’
‘Why	–	why	do	you	do	this?’
‘Because	it	pleases	us.’	Because	you	please	us,	Rud	Elalle.	So	too	Ulshun
Pral.	And	the	Imass…
And	we	came	here	with	chaos	in	our	hearts.
‘Go,	Rud	Elalle.’


	
Sukul	Ankhadu	knew	her	sisters	were	dead,	and	for	all	the	shock	this
realization	engendered	–	the	shattering	of	their	plan	to	destroy	Silchas	Ruin,	to
enslave	the	Finnest	of	Scabandari	and	subject	that	torn,	vulnerable	soul	to
endless	cruelty	–	a	part	of	her	was	filled	with	glee.	Menandore	–	whom	she	and
Sheltatha	Lore	had	intended	to	betray	in	any	case	–	would	never	again	befoul
Sukul’s	desires	and	ambitions.	Sheltatha	–	well,	she	had	done	what	was	needed,
turning	upon	Menandore	at	the	moment	of	her	greatest	weakness.	And	had	she
survived	that,	Sukul	would	have	had	to	kill	the	bitch	herself.
Extraordinary,	that	a	lone	mortal	human	could	unleash	such	venomous
power.	No,	not	a	mere	mortal	human.	There	were	other	things	hiding	inside
that	scrawny	body,	she	was	certain	of	that.	If	she	never	encountered	him	again,
she	would	know	a	life	of	peace,	a	life	without	fear.
Her	wounds	were,	all	things	considered,	relatively	minor.	One	wing	was
shattered,	forcing	her	to	rely	almost	entirely	on	sorcery	to	keep	her	in	the	air.
An	assortment	of	scrapes	and	gouges,	but	already	the	bleeding	had	ebbed,	the
wounds	were	closing.
She	could	smell	the	stench	of	the	Imass,	could	follow	their	trail	with	ease
as	it	wound	through	the	broken	hills	below.
Rud	Elalle	was	a	true	child	of	Menandore.	A	Soletaken.	But	so	very	young,
so	very	naive.	If	brute	force	could	not	defeat	him,	then	treachery	would.	Her
final	act	of	vengeance	–	and	betrayal	–	against	Menandore.
The	trail	led	into	a	high-walled,	narrow	channel,	one	that	seemed	to	lead
downward,	perhaps	to	caves.	Before	its	mouth	was	a	small,	level	clearing,
bounded	on	both	sides	by	boulders.
She	dropped	down,	slowed	her	flight.
And	saw,	standing	before	the	defile’s	entrance,	an	Imass	warrior.
Good.	I	can	kill.	I	can	feed.
Settling	down	into	the	clearing	–	a	tight	fit,	her	one	working	wing	needing
to	draw	in	close	–	and	then	sembling,	drawing	her	power	inward.	Until	she
stood,	not	twenty	paces	from	the	Imass.
Mortal.	Nothing	more	than	what	he	appeared.
Sukul	Ankhadu	laughed.	She	would	walk	up	to	him,	wrest	his	stone
weapons	away,	then	sink	her	teeth	into	his	throat.
Still	laughing,	she	approached.
He	readied	himself,	dropping	into	a	crouch.
At	ten	paces,	he	surprised	her.	The	maul,	swung	in	a	loop	underhand,	shot
out	from	his	extended	arm.


Sukul	threw	herself	to	one	side	–	had	that	weapon	struck,	it	would	have
shattered	her	skull	–	then,	as	the	Imass	leapt	forward	with	his	sword,	she
reached	out	and	caught	his	wrist.	Twisted,	snapping	the	bones.	With	her	other
hand	she	grasped	his	throat	and	lifted	him	from	his	feet.
And	saw,	in	his	face,	a	smile	–	even	as	she	crushed	that	throat.
Behind	her,	two	Bonecasters,	veered	into	identical	beasts	–	long-legged
bears	with	vestigial	tails,	covered	in	thick	brown	and	black	hair,	with	flattened
snouts,	at	their	shoulders	the	height	of	a	Tiste	–	emerged	from	the	cover	of	the
boulders	and,	as	Hostille	Rator	died,	the	Soletaken	arrived	at	a	full	charge.
Slamming	into	Sukul	Ankhadu,	one	on	her	left,	the	other	on	her	right.
Huge	talons	slashing,	massive	forelimbs	closing	about	her	as	jaws,	opened
wide,	tore	into	her.
Lower	canines	sank	under	her	left	jawline,	the	upper	canines	punching
down	through	flesh	and	bone,	and	as	the	beast	whipped	its	head	to	one	side,
Sukul’s	lower	jaw,	left	cheekbones	and	temporal	plate	all	went	with	it.
The	second	beast	bit	through	her	right	upper	arm	as	it	closed	its	jaws	about
her	ribcage,	clamping	round	a	mouthful	of	crushed	ribs	and	pulped	lung.
As	the	terrible	pain	and	pressure	suddenly	ripped	away	from	her	head,
Sukul	twisted	round.	Her	left	arm	–	the	only	one	still	attached	to	her	–	had	been
holding	up	the	warrior,	and	now,	releasing	the	dying	Imass,	she	swung	that	arm
backhand,	striking	the	side	of	the	giant	bear ’s	head.	And	with	that	impact,	she
released	a	surge	of	power.
The	beast’s	head	exploded	in	a	mass	of	bone	shards,	brains	and	teeth.
As	it	fell	away,	Sukul	Ankhadu	tried	twisting	further,	to	reach	across	for
the	second	beast’s	snout.
It	lurched	back,	tearing	away	ribs	and	lung.
She	spun,	driving	her	hand	between	the	creature’s	clavicles.	Through	thick
hide,	into	a	welter	of	spurting	blood	and	soft	meat,	fingers	closing	on	the
ridged	windpipe—
A	taloned	paw	struck	the	side	of	her	head	–	the	same	side	as	had	been
mauled	by	the	first	beast	–	and	where	the	temporal	plate	had	been,	cerebral
matter	now	sprayed	out	with	the	impact.	The	claws	caught	more	bone	and	hard
cartilage,	raked	through	forebrain	on	its	way	back	out.
The	upper	front	of	Sukul’s	head	and	the	rest	of	her	face	was	ripped	away,
spilling	brains	out	from	the	gaping	space.
At	that	moment,	the	other	paw	hammered	what	remained	from	the	other
side.	When	it	had	completed	its	passage,	all	that	was	left	was	a	section	of
occipital	plate	attached	to	a	flopping	patch	of	scalp,	dangling	from	the	back	of
the	neck.


Sukul	Ankhadu’s	knees	buckled.	Her	left	hand	exited	the	wound	in	the
second	beast’s	throat	with	a	sobbing	sound.
She	might	have	remained	on	her	knees,	balanced	by	the	sudden	absence	of
any	weight	above	her	shoulders,	but	then	the	creature	that	had	finally	killed	her
lurched	forward,	its	enormous	weight	crushing	her	down	as	the	Soletaken,
who	had	once	been	Til’aras	Benok,	collapsed,	slowly	suffocating	from	a
crushed	windpipe.
Moments	later,	the	only	sound	from	this	modest	clearing	was	the	dripping
of	blood.
	
Trull	Sengar	could	hear	the	faint	echoes	of	sorcery	and	he	feared	for	his
friends.	Something	was	seeking	to	reach	this	place,	and	if	it	–	or	they	–	got	past
Hedge	and	Quick	Ben,	then	once	more	Trull	would	find	himself	standing
before	unlikely	odds.	Even	with	Onrack	at	his	side…
Yet	he	held	his	gaze	on	the	gates.	The	silent	flames	rose	and	ebbed	within
the	portals,	each	to	its	own	rhythm,	each	tinted	in	a	different	hue.	The	air	felt
charged.	Static	sparks	crackled	in	the	dust	that	had	begun	swirling	up	from	the
stone	floor.
He	heard	a	sound	behind	him	and	turned.	Relief	flooded	through	him.
‘Onrack—’
‘They	seek	Ulshun	Pral,’	his	friend	replied,	emerging	from	the	tunnel
mouth,	two	paces,	three,	then	he	halted.	‘You	are	too	close	to	those	gates,	my
friend.	Come—’
He	got	no	further.
The	fires	within	one	of	the	gates	winked	out,	and	from	within	the	suddenly
dark	portal	figures	emerged.
	
Two	strides	behind	Silchas	Ruin,	Seren	Pedac	was	the	next	in	their	group	to
cross	the	threshold.	She	did	not	know	what	prompted	her	to	push	past	Fear
Sengar	–	and	attributed	no	special	significance	to	Clip’s	hanging	back.	A
strange	tug	took	hold	of	her	soul,	a	sudden,	excruciating	yearning	that
overwhelmed	her	growing	dread.	All	at	once,	the	stone	spear	she	held	in	her
hands	felt	light	as	a	reed.
Darkness,	a	momentary	flicker,	as	of	distant	light,	then	she	was	stepping
onto	gritty	stone.
A	cavern.	To	either	side,	the	raging	maws	of	more	gates,	flooding	all	with


light.
Before	her,	Silchas	Ruin	halted	and	his	swords	hissed	from	their
scabbards.	Someone	was	standing	before	him,	but	in	that	moment	Seren
Pedac’s	view	was	blocked	by	the	White	Crow.
She	saw	a	barbaric	warrior	standing	further	back,	and	behind	him,	a	lone
silhouette	standing	in	the	mouth	of	a	tunnel.
To	her	left	Fear	Sengar	appeared.
She	took	another	step,	to	bring	her	round	Silchas	Ruin,	to	see	the	one	who
had	made	the	albino	Tiste	Andii	pause.
And	all	at	once,	the	terror	began.
On	Fear	Sengar ’s	face,	an	expression	of	profound	horror	–	even	as	he
surged	past	Seren	Pedac.	A	knife	in	his	raised	hand.	The	blade	flashing	down
towards	Silchas	Ruin’s	back.
Then	all	of	Fear ’s	forward	motion	ceased.	The	out-thrust	arm	with	its	knife
flailed,	slashed	the	air	even	as	Silchas	Ruin	–	as	if	entirely	unaware	of	the
attack	–	took	a	single	step	forward.
A	terrible	gurgling	sound	from	Fear	Sengar.
Spinning	round,	Seren	Pedac	saw	Clip	standing	immediately	behind	Fear.
Saw	the	chain	between	Clip’s	hands	slide	almost	effortlessly	through	Fear
Sengar ’s	throat.	Blood	lashed	out.
Beyond	Clip,	Udinaas,	with	Kettle	now	held	tight	in	his	arms,	sought	to
lunge	away,	even	as	a	shadow	erupted	beneath	him,	writhed	about	his	lower
limbs,	and	dragged	the	Letherii	down	to	the	stone	floor,	where	Wither	then
swarmed	over	Udinaas.
Clip	released	one	end	of	his	chain	and	whipped	the	length	free	of	Fear
Sengar ’s	throat.	Eyes	staring,	the	expression	of	fierce	intent	fixed	upon	his
face,	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	head	sagged	back,	revealing	a	slash	reaching	all	the	way
back	to	his	spine.	As	Fear	Sengar	fell,	Clip	slid	in	a	deadly	blur	towards
Udinaas.
Frozen	in	shock,	Seren	Pedac	stood	rooted.	Disbelieving,	as	a	scream	of
raw	denial	tore	from	her	throat.
Silchas	Ruin’s	swords	were	singing	as	he	closed	in	deadly	battle	with
whomever	stood	before	him.	Staccato	impacts	as	those	blades	were	parried
with	impossible	speed.
Wither	had	wrapped	shadow	hands	around	Udinaas’s	neck.	Was	choking
the	life	from	the	ex-slave.
Kettle	pulled	herself	free,	then	twisted	round	to	pound	tiny	hands	against
the	wraith.
All	at	once,	a	ferocious	will	burgeoned	within	Seren	Pedac.	The	will	to	kill.


Launched	like	a	javelin	towards	Wither.
The	wraith	exploded	in	shreds—
—as	Clip	arrived,	standing	over	Udinaas	and	reaching	down	one	hand	to
grasp	Kettle’s	tunic	between	the	girl’s	shoulder	blades.
Clip	threw	the	child	across	the	floor.	She	struck,	skidded	then	rolled	like	a
bundle	of	rags.
With	focused	punches	of	Mockra,	Seren	Pedac	hammered	at	Clip,	sending
him	staggering.	Blood	sprayed	from	his	nose,	mouth	and	ears.	Then	he
whipped	round,	a	hand	lashing	out.
Something	pounded	Seren	Pedac	high	on	her	left	shoulder.	Sudden	agony
radiated	out	from	the	point	of	impact	and	all	her	concentration	vanished
beneath	those	overwhelming	waves.	She	looked	down	and	saw	a	dagger	buried
to	the	hilt	–	stared	down	at	it	in	disbelief.
	
There	had	been	no	time	to	think.	Trull	Sengar	was	left	with	naught	but
recognition.	One,	then	another,	arriving	in	shocks	that	left	him	stunned.
From	the	gate	emerged	an	apparition	–	and	Trull	Sengar	had	stood	before
this	one	before,	long	ago,	during	a	night’s	vigil	over	fallen	kin.	Ghost	of
darkness.	The	Betrayer.	No	longer	weaponless,	as	he	had	been	the	first	time.
No	longer	half	rotted,	yet	the	coals	of	those	terrifying	eyes	remained,	fixed
now	upon	him	in	bright	familiarity.
And,	in	a	low	voice,	almost	a	whisper,	the	Betrayer	said,	‘Of	course	it	is
you.	But	this	battle,	it	is	not—’
At	that	moment,	Trull	Sengar	saw	his	brother.	Fear,	the	god	of	his
childhood,	the	stranger	of	his	last	days	among	the	Tiste	Edur.	Fear,	meeting
Trull’s	wide	eyes.	Seeing	the	battle	about	to	begin.	Comprehending	–	and	then
there	was	a	knife	in	his	hand,	and,	as	he	surged	forward	to	stab	the	Betrayer	in
the	back,	Trull	saw	in	his	brother ’s	face	–	in	an	instant	–	the	full	measure	of
Fear ’s	sudden	self-awareness,	the	bitter	irony,	the	truth	of	generations	past
returned	once	more,	one	last	time.	Silchas	Ruin,	an	Edur	knife	seeking	his	back.
When	Fear	was	tugged	backward,	when	his	throat	opened	wide,	Trull
Sengar	felt	his	mind,	his	soul,	obliterated,	inundated	by	incandescent	fury,	and
he	was	moving	forward,	the	tip	of	his	spear	seeking	the	slayer	of	his	brother—
And	the	Betrayer	was	in	his	way.
A	slash	opened	up	the	Betrayer ’s	skin	at	the	base	of	his	throat,	the	tip
skittering	away	across	one	clavicle;	then	a	thrust,	punching	into	the
apparition’s	left	shoulder	muscle.
And	all	at	once	the	Betrayer ’s	swords	wove	a	skein	of	singing	iron,


parrying	the	spear ’s	every	lightning	thrust	and	sweep.	And	suddenly	Trull
Sengar ’s	advance	stalled,	and	then	he	was	being	driven	back,	as	those	swords,
hammering	the	shaft	of	his	spear,	tore	away	bronze	sheathing,	began
splintering	the	wood.
And	Trull	Sengar	recognized,	before	him,	his	own	death.
	
Onrack	the	Broken	saw	his	friend’s	attack	fail,	saw	the	fight	turn,	and	saw	that
Trull	Sengar	was	doomed	to	fall.
Yet	he	did	not	move.	Could	not.
He	felt	his	own	heart	tearing	itself	to	pieces,	for	the	man	behind	him	–	the
Imass,	Ulshun	Pral	–	was,	Onrack	knew	at	once,	of	his	own	blood.	A
revelation,	the	summation	of	a	thousand	mysterious	sensations,	instincts,	the
echoing	of	gestures	–	Ulshun	Pral’s	very	stance,	his	manner	of	walking,	and
the	talent	of	eyes	and	hand	–	he	was,	oh	he	was…
Trull	Sengar ’s	spear	exploded	in	the	warrior ’s	hands.	A	sword	lashed	out
—
	
The	blow	to	her	shoulder	had	driven	Seren	Pedac	down	to	her	knees,	then
pitched	her	sideways	–	and	she	saw,	there	before	Silchas	Ruin,	Trull	Sengar.
Clip,	blood	streaming	down	his	face,	had	turned	back	to	pursue	Udinaas,
who	was	crawling,	scrabbling	towards	Kettle.
And	before	her	rose	a	choice.
Trull
Or	Udinaas.
But,	alas,	Seren	Pedac	was	never	good	with	choices.
With	her	hands	she	sent	the	stone	spear	skittering	towards	Trull	Sengar	–
even	as	his	own	weapon	shattered	into	pieces.	And,	tearing	the	dagger	from	her
shoulder,	she	renewed	her	Mockra	assault	on	Clip	–	staggering	the	bastard
once	more.
	
As	the	sword	swung	to	take	Trull	in	the	side	of	his	head,	he	dropped	down,	then
rolled	to	evade	the	second	weapon	that	chopped	down.	He	wasn’t	fast	enough.
The	edge	slammed	deep	into	his	right	hip,	stuck	fast	in	solid	bone.
Trull	took	hold	of	the	Betrayer ’s	forearm	and	pulled	as	he	twisted	–	the
pain	as	he	sought	to	trap	that	embedded	sword	momentarily	blinded	him,


filling	his	skull	with	white	fire	–	and	against	the	other	sword	he	could	do
nothing—
But	the	Betrayer,	pulled	slightly	off	balance,	took	a	step	to	the	side	to	right
himself	–	onto	the	shaft	of	the	stone	spear	which	promptly	rolled	beneath	his
weight.
And	down	he	went.
Trull	saw	the	spear,	reached	for	it.	Closed	both	hands	about	the	shaft,	then,
still	lying	on	his	side,	one	of	the	singing	swords	pinned	beneath	him	–	the
Betrayer ’s	arm	stretched	out	as	he	sought	to	maintain	his	grip	–	Trull	drove	the
butt	end	of	the	spear	into	his	opponent’s	midsection.
Punching	all	the	air	from	his	lungs.
He	plunged	backward,	rolled,	and	the	sword	under	Trull	slapped	down	as
the	Betrayer ’s	hand	involuntarily	released	it.	And	Trull	pounded	a	hand	down
on	the	weapon,	dislodging	it	from	the	bone	of	his	hip.
The	white	fire	remained	in	his	mind,	even	as	he	forced	himself	onto	his
knees,	then	upward.	The	leg	beneath	the	wound	refused	to	obey	him	and	he
snarled	in	sudden	rage,	willing	himself	into	a	standing	position	–	then,	leg
dragging,	he	closed	in	on	the	Betrayer—
	
Seren	Pedac	–	all	her	efforts	at	incinerating	Clip’s	brain	failing	–	shrank	back
as	the	now	grinning	Tiste	Andii,	abandoning	his	hunt	for	Udinaas,	turned	about
and	advanced	on	her,	drawing	out	knife	and	rapier.	Crimson	teeth,	crimson
streaks	from	his	eyes	like	tears—
At	that	moment,	impossibly,	Trull	Sengar	hurt	Silchas	Ruin	–	drove	the
White	Crow	onto	his	back	where	his	head	snapped	back	to	crunch	against	the
floor,	stunning	him.
And	Clip	turned,	saw,	and	raced	in	a	low	blur	towards	Trull.
Meeting	a	spear	that	lashed	out.	Clip	parried	it	at	the	last	moment,	surprise
on	his	features,	and	he	skidded	to	a	halt,	and	was	suddenly	fighting	for	his	life.
Against	a	crippled	Tiste	Edur.
Who	drove	him	back	a	step.
Then	another.
Wounds	blossomed	on	Clip.	Left	arm.	Across	the	ribs	on	the	right	side.
Laying	open	his	right	cheek.
In	a	sudden,	appallingly	fast-shifting	attack,	Trull	Sengar	reversed	the
spear	and	the	stone	shaft	cracked	hard	into	Clip’s	right	forearm,	breaking	it.
Another	crack,	dislocating	the	right	shoulder	–	and	the	knife	spun	away.	Third
time,	this	one	on	the	upper	left	thigh,	hard	enough	to	splinter	the	femur.	A	final


one,	against	Clip’s	left	temple	–	a	spray	of	blood,	the	head	rocking	to	one	side,
the	body	collapsing	utterly	beneath	it.	Rapier	clunking	from	a	senseless	hand.
And	Trull	then	whirled	back	to	Silchas	Ruin—
But	his	wounded	leg	failed	him	and	he	fell	–	Seren	heard	his	curse	like	a
sharp	retort—
	
The	white-skinned	Tiste	Andii	advanced	to	where	Onrack	stood.	The	lone
sword	in	his	right	hand	howled	as	he	readied	it.
‘Step	aside,	Imass,’	he	said.	‘The	one	behind	you	is	mine.’
Onrack	shook	his	head.	He	is	mine.	Mine!
It	was	clear	that	the	Tiste	Andii	saw	Onrack’s	refusal	in	the	face	of	the
Imass	warrior,	for	he	suddenly	snarled	–	a	sound	of	raw	impatience	–	and
lashed	out	with	his	left	hand.
Sorcery	hammered	into	Onrack.	Lifting	him	from	his	feet,	high	into	the
air,	then	slamming	him	into	a	wall	of	stone.
As	he	dropped	down	hard	onto	the	floor,	a	single	thought	drifted	through
his	mind	before	unconsciousness	took	him:	Not	again.
	
Trull	Sengar,	lying	helpless	on	the	floor,	cried	out	upon	seeing	Onrack
engulfed	in	magic	and	then	flung	away.	He	struggled	to	regain	his	feet,	but	the
leg	was	a	dead	weight	now,	and	he	was	leaving	a	thick	trail	of	blood	as	he
dragged	himself	closer	to	Silchas	Ruin.
Then	someone	was	kneeling	at	his	side.	Hands	soft	on	one	shoulder—
‘Stop,’	a	woman’s	voice	murmured.	‘Stop,	Trull	Sengar.	It	is	too	late.’
	
Udinaas	struggled	to	breathe.	Wither ’s	shadowy	hands	had	crushed	something
in	his	throat.	He	felt	himself	weakening,	darkness	closing	in	on	all	sides.
He	had	failed.
Even	knowing,	he	had	failed.
This	is	the	truth	of	ex-slaves,	because	even	that	word	is	a	lie.	Slavery	settles
into	the	soul.	My	master	now	is	naught	but	failure	itself.
Forcing	himself	to	remain	conscious,	he	lifted	his	head.	Drag	the	breath	in,
dammit.	Lift	the	head	–	fail	if	need	be,	but	do	not	die.	Not	yet.	Lift	the	head!
And	watch.
	


Silchas	Ruin	sheathed	his	remaining	sword,	walked	up	to	Ulshun	Pral.
And	took	him	by	the	throat.
A	low	woman’s	voice	spoke	from	his	left.	‘Harm	my	son,	Tiste	Andii,	and
you	will	not	leave	here.’
He	turned	to	see	a	woman,	an	Imass,	clothed	in	the	skin	of	a	panther.	She
was	standing	over	the	prone	form	of	the	warrior	he	had	just	flung	aside.
‘That	this	one	lives,’	she	said,	with	a	gesture	down	to	the	Imass	at	her	bared
feet,	‘is	the	only	reason	I	have	not	already	torn	you	to	pieces.’
A	Bonecaster,	and	the	look	in	her	feline	eyes	was	a	dark	promise.
Silchas	Ruin	loosened	his	hold	on	the	Imass	before	him,	then	reached
down	and	deftly	plucked	free	a	flint	dagger.	‘This,’	he	said,	‘is	all	I	need.’	And
as	soon	as	he	held	the	primitive	weapon	in	his	hand,	he	knew	the	truth	of	his
claim.
Stepping	away,	eyes	holding	the	woman’s.
She	made	no	move.
Satisfied,	Silchas	Ruin	turned	about.
	
Seren,	kneeling	beside	Trull	Sengar,	watched	the	White	Crow	walk	over	to
where	Kettle	sat	on	the	stone	floor.	With	his	free	hand	he	reached	down	to	her.
A	fistful	of	tunic,	a	sudden	lift,	pulling	the	child	into	the	air,	then	back
down,	hard,	onto	the	flat	of	her	back,	her	head	cracking	hard	on	the	stone,	even
as	he	drove	the	flint	knife	into	the	centre	of	her	chest.
Her	small	legs	kicked,	then	went	still.
Silchas	Ruin	slowly	straightened.	Stepped	back.

Udinaas	turned	his	head	away,	his	vision	filling	with	tears.	Of	course,	the	child
had	known,	just	as	he	had	known.	Kettle	was,	after	all,	the	last	desperate
creation	of	an	Azath.
And	here,	in	this	brutal	place,	she	had	been	joined	to	a	Finnest.
He	heard	Seren	Pedac	cry	out.	Looked	once	more,	blinking	to	clear	his
eyes.
Silchas	Ruin	had	backed	away,	towards	one	of	the	gates.
Where	Kettle	lay,	the	leather-wrapped	handle	of	the	flint	knife	jutting	up
from	her	chest,	the	air	had	begun	to	swirl,	darkness	condensing.	And	the	small
body	was	moving	in	fitful	jerks,	then	a	slow	writhing	of	limbs	as	roots	snaked
out,	sank	tendrils	into	the	very	stone.	Rock	hissed,	steamed.


Silchas	Ruin	looked	on	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	swung	about,
collected	his	second	sword,	sheathed	it,	and	walked	into	a	gate,	vanishing	from
sight.
His	breathing	less	ragged,	Udinaas	twisted	round,	looked	for	Clip’s	body	–
but	the	bastard	was	gone.	A	blood	trail	leading	to	one	of	the	gates.	It	figures.
But	oh,	I	saw	Trull	Sengar	–	I	saw	him	take	you	on,	Clip.	You,	sneering	at	that
paltry	weapon,	the	lowly	spear.	I	saw,	Clip.
The	dark	cloud	surrounding	Kettle’s	body	had	burgeoned,	grown.	Stone
foundations,	black	roots,	the	trickle	of	water	spreading	in	a	stain.
An	Azath,	to	hold	for	ever	the	soul	of	Scabandari.	Silchas	Ruin,	you	have
your	vengeance.	Your	perfect	exchange.
And,	because	he	could	not	help	himself,	Udinaas	lowered	his	head	and
began	to	weep.
	
Somehow,	Trull	Sengar	forced	himself	back	onto	his	feet.	Although	without
Seren	Pedac	at	his	side,	taking	much	of	his	weight	–	and	without	the	spear	on
which	he	leaned	–	she	knew	that	that	would	have	been	impossible.
‘Please,’	he	said	to	her,	‘my	brother.’
She	nodded,	wincing	as	the	wound	in	her	shoulder	pulsed	fresh	blood,	and
began	helping	him	hobble	across	to	where	Fear	Sengar ’s	body	was	sprawled,
almost	at	the	foot	of	the	now	darkened	gate.
‘What	am	I	to	do?’	Trull	asked,	suddenly	hesitating	and	looking	to	where
stood	the	squat	woman	wearing	the	skin	of	a	panther.	She	and	the	Imass	who
had	carried	the	Finnest	were	both	now	crouched	at	the	form	of	a	third	Imass,	a
warrior.	The	woman	was	cradling	the	dead	or	unconscious	warrior ’s	head.
‘Onrack…my	friend…’
‘Kin	first,’	Seren	Pedac	said.	Then	she	raised	her	voice	and	called	out	to
the	Imass.	‘Does	the	fallen	one	live?’
‘Yes,’	the	warrior	replied.	‘My	father	lives.’
A	sob	broke	from	Trull	Sengar	and	he	sagged	against	her.	Seren	staggered
beneath	his	weight	for	a	moment,	then	straightened.	‘Come,	my	love.’
This	caught	Trull’s	attention	as,	perhaps,	nothing	else	would.	He	searched
her	face,	her	eyes.
‘We	must	return	to	my	house,’	she	said,	even	as	dread	clawed	at	her	heart	–
another,	after	all	I	have	done	to	those	who	came	before	him.	Errant	forgive	me.
Another.	‘I	carry	a	sword,’	she	added.	‘And	would	bury	it	before	the	threshold.’
And	shall	I	then	kneel	there,	dirt	on	my	hands,	and	cover	my	eyes?	Shall	I	cry
out	in	grief	for	what	is	to	come?	For	all	that	I	will	bring	to	you,	Trull	Sengar?


My	burdens—
‘I	have	dreamed	you	would	say	that,	Seren	Pedac.’
She	closed	her	eyes	for	a	long	moment,	and	then	nodded.
They	resumed	their	journey,	and	when	they	reached	Fear	Sengar,	she	let
Trull	settle	down	onto	the	ground,	and	he	set	the	spear	down,	then	reached	out
to	touch	his	brother ’s	ashen,	lifeless	face.
From	nearby,	Udinaas	–	his	face	streaked	in	tears	–	spoke	in	a	harsh,
grating	voice.	‘I	greet	you,	Trull	Sengar.	And	I	must	tell	you…your	brother,
Fear…he	died	as	a	hero	would.’
Trull	lifted	his	head,	stared	across	at	the	Letherii.	‘Udinaas.	You	are	wrong.
My	brother	sought…betrayal.’
‘No.	He	saw	you,	Trull,	and	he	knew	the	mind	of	Silchas	Ruin.	Knew	you
could	never	stand	against	the	White	Crow.	Do	you	understand	me?	He	saw
you.’
‘Is	that	helpful?’	Seren	Pedac	snapped.
Udinaas	bared	bloodstained	teeth.	‘With	the	only	alternative	betrayal,
Acquitor,	then	yes.	Trull,	I	am…sorry.	And	yet…Fear	–	I	am	proud	of	him.
Proud	to	have	known	him.’
And	she	saw	her	beloved	nod,	then	manage	a	sorrow-filled	smile	at	the	exslave.	‘Thank	you,	Udinaas.	Your	journey	–	all	of	you	–	your	journey,	it	must
have	been	long.	Difficult.’	He	glanced	to	her,	then	back	to	Udinaas.	‘For
remaining	at	my	brother ’s	side,	I	thank	you	both.’
Oh,	Trull,	may	you	never	know	the	truth.
	
Onrack	the	Broken	opened	his	eyes	to	an	ancient	dream,	and	its	conjuration
twisted	like	a	knife	in	his	soul.	Not	oblivion,	then.	Such	peace	is	denied	me.
Instead,	my	crimes	return.	To	haunt.
And	yet…Ulshun	Pral—
An	ancient	dream,	yes,	and	hovering	just	beyond,	a	far	younger	dream	–
one	he	had	not	even	known	to	exist.	The	Ritual	of	Tellann	had	stolen	from	so
many	men	of	the	Imass	this	reaching	into	the	future,	this	creation	of	sons,
daughters,	this	rooting	of	life	into	the	soil	that	lived	on.
Yes,	that	had	indeed	been	a	dream—
Kilava	Onass	suddenly	frowned.	‘You	stare,	Onrack,	with	all	the
intelligence	of	a	bhederin.	Have	you	lost	your	wits?’
Dreams	did	not	berate,	did	they?
‘Ah,’	she	then	said,	nodding,	‘now	I	see	you	of	old	–	I	see	the	panic	that
ever	fills	a	man’s	eyes,	when	all	he	longed	for	is	suddenly	within	reach.	But


know	this,	I	too	have	longed,	and	I	too	now	feel…panic.	To	love	in	absence	is
to	float	on	ever	still	waters.	No	sudden	currents.	No	treacherous	tides.	No
possibility	of	drowning.	You	and	I,	Onrack,	have	floated	so	for	a	very	long
time.’
He	stared	up	at	her	–	yes,	he	was	lying	on	hard	stone.	In	the	cavern	of	the
gates.
Then	Kilava	smiled,	revealing	those	deadly	canines.	‘But	I	fared	better,	I
think.	For	you	gave	me	a	gift,	from	that	one	night.	You	gave	me	Ulshun	Pral.
And	when	I	found	this…this	illusion,	I	found	for	our	son	a	home,	a	haven.’
‘This	realm…dies,’	Onrack	said.	‘Are	we	all	illusions	now?’
Kilava	shook	her	head,	the	luxuriant	black	hair	shimmering.	‘Gothos	gave
to	our	son	the	Finnest.	As	for	the	rest,	well,	your	son	has	explained	it	to	me.
The	white-skinned	Tiste	Andii,	Silchas	Ruin,	delivered	the	seed	of	an	Azath,	a
seed	in	the	guise	of	a	child.	To	accept	the	Finnest,	to	use	its	power	to	grow.
Onrack,	soon	these	gates	will	be	sealed,	each	and	all	drawn	into	the	House,	into
a	squat,	clumsy	tower.	And	this	realm	–	with	an	Azath	House	here,	this	realm
no	longer	wanders,	no	longer	fades.	It	is	rooted,	and	so	it	will	remain.’
Behind	her,	Ulshun	Pral	said,	‘Gothos	said	Silchas	Ruin	would	one	day
come	for	the	Finnest.	Gothos	thought	that	was…funny.	Jaghut,’	he	then	said,
‘are	strange.’
Kilava	Onass	added,	‘To	win	his	freedom,	Silchas	Ruin	bargained	with	an
Azath,	an	Azath	that	was	dying.	And	now	he	has	done	what	was	asked	of	him.
And	the	Azath	is	reborn.’
‘Then…we	need	not	have	fought.’
Kilava	scowled.	‘Never	trust	a	Tiste	Andii.’	Her	luminous	eyes	flickered
away	briefly.	‘It	seems	there	were	other…issues.’
But	Onrack	was	not	ready	to	think	of	those.	He	continued	staring	up	at
Kilava	Onass.	‘You,	then,	that	night	in	darkness.’
Her	scowl	deepened.	‘Were	you	always	this	thick?	I	cannot	remember	–	by
the	spirits,	my	panic	worsens.	Of	course	it	was	me.	You	bound	me	to	stone,
with	your	eyes	and	hand.	With,	Onrack,	your	love.	Yours	was	a	forbidden
desire	and	it	wounded	so	many.	But	not	me.	I	knew	only	that	I	must	give
answer.	I	must	let	my	heart	speak.’	She	laid	a	hand	on	his	chest.	‘As	yours	now
does.	You	are	flesh	and	blood,	Onrack.	The	Ritual	has	relinquished	your	soul.
Tell	me,	what	do	you	seek?’
He	held	his	eyes	on	hers.	‘I	have	found	it,’	he	said.
Every	bone	in	his	body	ached	as	he	forced	himself	to	his	feet.	At	once	his
gaze	was	drawn	to	where	he	had	last	seen	Trull	Sengar;	and	a	growing	dread
was	swept	from	his	mind	upon	seeing	his	friend.


Trull	Sengar,	you	are	as	hard	to	kill	as	I	am.
A	moment	later,	he	saw	the	tears	on	his	friend’s	face,	and	it	seemed	there
would	be	grief	this	day,	after	all.
	
At	the	mouth	of	a	fissure	not	far	away,	in	a	small	clearing,	Rud	Elalle	stood	in
the	midst	of	carnage.	Where	one	of	his	mother ’s	sisters	had	died.	Where	three
Imass	had	died.
And	somewhere	beyond,	he	knew	in	his	heart,	he	would	find	the	body	of
his	mother.
He	stood	on	blood-soaked	ground,	and	wondered	what	it	was	that	had	just
died	within	his	own	soul.
Some	time	later,	much	later,	he	would	find	the	word	to	describe	it.
Innocence.
	
Quick	Ben	still	hobbled	like	an	old	man,	amusing	Hedge	no	end.	‘There	you
are,’	he	said	as	they	made	their	way	towards	the	cave	and	its	tunnel	leading	to
the	Gates	of	Starvald	Demelain,	‘exactly	how	you’ll	look	twenty	years	from
now.	Creepy	and	gamey.	Pushing	wobbly	teeth	with	a	purple	tongue	and
muttering	rhymes	under	your	breath—’
‘Keep	talking,	sapper,	and	you’ll	know	all	about	loose	teeth.	In	fact,	I’m
surprised	a	few	weren’t	knocked	right	out	when	that	bone	hit	you.	Gods	below,
that	is	probably	the	funniest	thing	I	have	ever	seen.’
Hedge	reached	and	gingerly	touched	the	huge	lump	on	his	forehead.	‘So,
we	did	our	task	today.	How	do	you	think	the	others	fared?’
‘We’ll	soon	find	out,’	the	wizard	replied.	‘One	thing,	though.’
‘What?’
‘There	is	now	an	Azath	House	growing	in	this	damned	realm.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Oh,	lots	of	things.	First,	this	place	is	now	real.	And	it	will	live	on.	These
Imass	will	live	on.’
Hedge	grunted.	‘Rud	Elalle	will	be	pleased.	Onrack,	too,	I	imagine.’
‘Aye.	And	here’s	another	thing,	only	I	don’t	think	it’ll	please	anyone.	In	that
Azath	House	there	will	be	a	tower,	and	in	that	tower,	all	the	gates.’
‘So?’
Quick	Ben	sighed.	‘You	damned	idiot.	The	Gates	of	Starvald	Demelain.’
‘And?’


‘Just	this.	Shadowthrone,	and	Cotillion.	Who	like	using	the	Azath	whenever
it	suits	them.	Now	they’ve	got	a	way	in.	Not	just	to	this	realm,	either.’
‘Into	Starvald	Demelain?	Gods	below,	Quick!	Is	that	why	we	just	did	all
that?	Is	that	what	brought	you	here?’
‘No	need	to	scream,	sapper.	When	it	came	to	planting	that	House,	we
weren’t	even	witnesses.	Were	we?	But	you	know,	it’s	what	those	two	sneaky
bastards	know,	or	seem	to	know,	that	really	worries	me.	See	my	point?’
‘Oh,	Hood	piss	in	your	boots,	Ben	Adaephon	Delat.’
‘Got	all	your	gear	there,	Hedge?	Good.	Because	once	we	get	to	the	Gates,
we’re	going	through	one	of	them.’
‘We	are?’
‘We	are.’	And	the	wizard	grinned	across	at	the	sapper.	‘Fid’s	never	been	the
same	without	you.’
	
Silchas	Ruin	stood	among	ancient	foundations	–	some	Forkrul	Assail	remnant
slumping	its	slow	way	down	the	mountainside	–	and	lifted	his	face	to	the	blue
sky	beyond	the	towering	trees.
He	had	fulfilled	his	vow	to	the	Azath.
And	delivered	unto	the	soul	of	Scabandari	a	reprieve	Bloodeye	did	not
deserve.
Vengeance,	he	well	knew,	was	a	poisoned	triumph.
One	task	remained.	A	minor	one,	intended	to	serve	little	more	than	his	own
sense	of	redressing	an	egregious	imbalance.	He	knew	little	of	this	Crippled
God.	But	what	little	he	knew,	Silchas	Ruin	did	not	like.
Accordingly,	he	now	spread	his	arms.	And	veered	into	his	dragon	form.
Surged	skyward,	branches	torn	away	from	the	trees	he	shouldered	aside.
Into	the	crisp	mountain	air	–	far	to	the	west,	a	pair	of	condors	banked	away	in
sudden	terror.	But	the	direction	Silchas	Ruin	chose	was	not	to	the	west.
South.
To	a	city	called	Letheras.
And	this	time,	in	truth,	there	was	blood	on	his	mind.


Chapter	Twenty-Four

If	these	were	our	last	days
If	all	whose	eyes	can	look	inward
Now	passed	from	ken
Who	would	remain	to	grieve?
As	we	hang	our	heads
Beset	by	the	failure	of	ambition
Eyes	see	and	are	indifferent
Eyes	witness	and	they	are	uncaring.
The	stone	regard	of	the	statues
Guarding	the	perfected	square
Is	carved	as	warm
As	history’s	soft	surrender,
And	the	dancing	creatures
In	and	out	of	our	gaping	mouths
Alone	hear	the	wind	moaning
Its	hollow,	hallowed	voice.
So	in	these	our	last	days
The	end	of	what	we	see	is	inside
Where	it	all	began	and	begins	never	again
A	moment’s	reprieve,	then	darkness	falls.
The	Unwitnessed	Dance
Fisher	kel	Tath
Beak’s	barrow	began	with	a	few	bones	tossed	into	the	ash	and	charred,
splintered	skeleton	that	was	all	that	remained	of	the	young	mage.	Before	long,
other	objects	joined	the	heap.	Buckles,	clasps,	fetishes,	coins,	broken	weapons.
By	the	time	Fist	Keneb	was	ready	to	give	the	command	to	march,	the	mound


was	nearly	the	height	of	a	man.	When	Captain	Faradan	Sort	asked	Bottle	for	a
blessing,	the	squad	mage	had	shaken	his	head,	explaining	that	the	entire	killing
field	that	had	been	enclosed	by	Bottle’s	sorcery	was	now	magically	dead.
Probably	permanently.	At	this	news	the	captain	had	turned	away,	although
Keneb	thought	he	heard	her	say:	‘Not	a	candle	left	to	light,	then.’
As	the	marines	set	out	for	the	city	of	Letheras,	they	could	hear	the	rumble
of	detonations	from	the	south,	where	the	Adjunct	had	landed	with	the	rest	of	the
Bonehunters	and	was	now	engaging	the	Letherii	armies.	That	thunder,	Keneb
knew,	did	not	belong	to	sorcery.
He	should	be	leading	his	troops	to	that	battle,	to	hammer	the	Letherii
rearguard,	and	then	link	up	with	Tavore	and	the	main	force.	But	Keneb	agreed
with	the	captain	and	with	Fiddler	and	Gesler.	He	and	his	damned	marines	had
earned	this,	had	earned	the	right	to	be	the	first	to	assail	this	empire’s	capital
city.
‘Might	be	another	army	waiting	on	the	walls,’	Sergeant	Thom	Tissy	had
said,	making	his	face	twist	in	his	singular	expression	of	disapproval,	like	a
man	who’d	just	swallowed	a	nacht	turd.
‘It’s	possible	there	is,’	the	Fist	had	conceded.	And	that	particular
conversation	went	no	further.
Up	onto	the	imperial	road	with	its	well-set	cobbles	and	breadth	sufficient	to
accommodate	a	column	ten	soldiers	wide.	Marching	amidst	discarded
accoutrements	and	the	rubbish	left	by	the	Letherii	legions	as	the	day	drew	to	a
close	and	the	shadows	lengthened.
Dusk	was	not	far	off	and	the	last	sleep	had	been	some	time	past,	yet	his
soldiers,	Keneb	saw,	carried	themselves	–	and	their	gear	–	as	if	fresh	from	a
week’s	rest.
A	few	hundred	paces	along,	the	column	ran	into	the	first	refugees.
Smudged,	frightened	faces.	Sacks	and	baskets	of	meagre	provisions,	wideeyed	babies	peering	from	bundles.	Burdened	mules	and	two-wheeled	carts
creaking	and	groaning	beneath	possessions.	No	command	was	given,	yet	the
Letherii	shuffled	to	the	roadsides,	pulling	whatever	gear	they	had	with	them,	as
the	column	continued	on.	Eyes	downcast,	children	held	tight.	Saying	nothing	at
all.
Faradan	Sort	moved	alongside	Keneb.	‘This	is	odd,’	she	said.
The	Fist	nodded.	‘They	have	the	look	of	people	fleeing	something	that’s
already	happened.	Find	one,	Captain,	and	get	some	answers.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Studying	the	refugees	he	passed,	Keneb	wondered	what	was	behind	the
glances	a	few	of	them	furtively	cast	on	these	marching	soldiers,	these	white-


haired	foreigners	in	their	gleaming	armour.	Do	they	see	saviours?	Not	a
chance.	Yet,	where	is	the	hostility?	They	are	more	frightened	of	what	they’ve
just	left	behind	in	Letheras	than	they	are	of	us.	What	in	Hood’s	name	is
happening	there?
And	where	are	the	Tiste	Edur?
	
The	crowds	got	thicker,	more	reluctant	to	move	aside.	Fiddler	adjusted	the
pack	on	his	shoulder	and	settled	a	hand	on	the	grip	of	his	shortsword.	The
column’s	pace	had	slowed,	and	the	sergeant	could	feel	the	growing	impatience
among	his	troops.
They	could	see	the	end	–	Hood’s	breath	–	it	was	behind	that	white	wall	to
the	northeast,	now	a	league	or	less	distant.	The	imperial	road	stretching	down
towards	them	from	a	main	gate	was,	in	the	red	glare	of	sunset,	a	seething
serpent.	Pouring	out	by	the	thousands.
And	why?
Riots,	apparently.	An	economy	in	ruins,	people	facing	starvation.
‘Never	knew	we	could	cause	such	trouble,	eh	Fid?’
‘Can’t	be	us,	Cuttle.	Not	just	us,	I	mean.	Haven’t	you	noticed?	There	are	no
Tiste	Edur	in	this	crowd.	Now,	either	they’ve	retreated	behind	their	estate	walls,
or	to	the	palace	keep	or	whatever	it	is	where	the	Emperor	lives,	or	they	were
the	first	to	run.’
‘Like	those	behind	us,	then.	Heading	back	to	their	homelands	in	the	north.’
‘Maybe.’
‘So,	if	this	damned	empire	is	already	finished,	why	are	we	bothering	with
the	capital?’
Fiddler	shrugged.	‘Bottle	might	have	hidden	one	of	his	rats	in	the
Adjunct’s	hair	–	why	not	ask	him?’
‘Adjunct	ain’t	got	enough	hair	for	that,’	Cuttle	muttered,	though	he	did
glance	back	at	the	squad	mage.	Bottle	did	not	deign	to	reply.	‘See	anybody	on
those	walls,	Fid?	My	eyes	are	bad	in	bad	light.’
‘If	there	are,	they’re	not	holding	torches,’	Fiddler	replied.
There	had	been	so	little	time	to	think.	About	anything,	beyond	just	staying
alive.	Ever	since	the	damned	coast.	But	now,	as	he	walked	on	this	road,	Fiddler
found	his	thoughts	wandering	dusty	paths.	They	had	set	out	on	this	invasion	in
the	name	of	vengeance.	And,	maybe,	to	eradicate	a	tyrannical	Emperor	who
viewed	anyone	not	his	subject	as	meat	for	the	butcher ’s	cleaver.	All	very	well,
as	far	as	it	goes.	Besides,	that	hardly	makes	this	Emperor	unique.
So	why	is	this	our	battle?	And	where	in	Hood’s	name	do	we	go	from	here?


He	so	wanted	to	believe	the	Adjunct	knew	what	she	was	doing.	And	that,
whatever	came	and	however	it	ended,	there	would	be	some	meaning	to	what
they	did.
‘We	must	be	our	own	witness.’	To	what,	dammit?
‘Soldiers	on	the	wall,’	Koryk	called	out.	‘Not	many,	but	they	see	us	clear
enough.’
Fiddler	sighed.	First	to	arrive,	and	maybe	that’s	as	far	as	we’ll	get.	An
army	of	eight	hundred	camped	outside	one	gate.	They	must	be	pissing	in	their
boots.	He	drew	another	deep	breath,	then	shook	himself.	‘Fair	enough.	We
finally	got	an	appreciative	audience.’
	
Smiles	didn’t	much	like	the	look	of	these	refugees.	The	pathetic	faces,	the
shuffling	gaits,	they	reminded	her	too	much	of…home.	Oh,	there’d	been
nothing	in	the	way	of	hopeless	flight	back	then,	so	it	wasn’t	that,	exactly.	Just
the	dumb	animal	look	in	these	eyes.	The	uncomprehending	children	dragged
along	by	one	hand,	or	clinging	to	mother ’s	ratty	tunic.
The	Bonehunters	marched	to	Letheras	–	why	weren’t	these	fools
screaming	and	wailing	in	terror?	They’re	like	slaves,	pushed	into	freedom	like
sheep	into	the	wilds,	and	all	they	expect	ahead	is	more	slavery.	That,	or	dying
in	the	tangles	of	empty	forests.	They’ve	been	beaten	down.	All	their	lives.
That’s	what’s	so	familiar.	Isn’t	it?
She	turned	her	head	and	spat	onto	the	road.	Hood	take	all	empires.	Hood
take	all	the	prod	and	pull.	If	I	get	to	you,	dear	Emperor	of	Lether	–	if	I	get	to
you	first,	I’m	going	to	slice	you	into	slivers.	Slow,	with	lots	of	pain.	For	every
one	of	these	wretched	citizens	on	this	stinking	road.
Now,	the	sooner	all	these	fools	get	out	of	our	way,	the	sooner	I	can	torture
their	Emperor.
	
‘We	head	for	the	palace,’	Koryk	said	to	Tarr.	‘And	let	nothing	get	in	our	way.’
‘You’re	smoke-dreaming,	Koryk,’	the	corporal	replied.	‘We’d	have	to	cut
through	a	few	thousand	stubborn	Letherii	to	do	that.	And	maybe	even	more
Edur.	And	if	that’s	not	enough,	what	about	that	wall	there?	Plan	on	jumping	it?
We	haven’t	got	enough	munitions	to—’
‘Rubbish—’
‘I	mean,	there’s	no	way	Keneb’s	going	to	allow	the	sappers	to	use	up	all
their	stuff,	not	when	all	we	have	to	do	is	wait	for	the	Adjunct,	then	do	a	siege


all	proper.’
Koryk	snorted.	‘Proper	like	Y’Ghatan?	Oh,	I	can’t	wait.’
‘There’s	no	Leoman	of	the	Flails	in	Letheras,’	Tarr	said,	tugging	at	his
chin	strap.	‘Just	some	Edur	on	the	throne.	Probably	drunk.	Insane.	Drooling
and	singing	lullabies.	So,	why	bother	with	the	palace?	Won’t	be	anything	of
interest	there.	I	say	we	loot	some	estates,	Koryk.’
‘Malazan	soldiers	don’t	loot.’
‘But	we’re	not	any	more,	are	we?	I	mean,	soldiers	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’
Koryk	sneered	at	his	corporal.	‘So	that	means	you	just	sink	back	down	to
some	frothing	barbarian,	Tarr?	Why	am	I	not	surprised?	I	never	believed	all
those	civilized	airs	you’re	always	putting	on.’
‘What	airs?’
‘Well,	all	right,	maybe	it’s	just	how	everybody	sees	you.	But	now	I’m
seeing	you	different.	A	damned	thug,	Tarr,	just	waiting	to	get	nasty	on	us.’
‘I	was	just	thinking	out	loud,’	Tarr	said.	‘It’s	not	like	Fid’s	gonna	let	us	do
whatever	we	want,	is	it?’
‘I’m	not	gonna	let	you	do	whatever	you	want,	Tarr.’
‘Just	making	conversation,	Koryk.	That’s	all	it	was.’
Koryk	grunted.
‘You	being	insolent	with	your	corporal,	Koryk?’
‘I’m	thinking	of	pushing	all	your	armour	–	and	your	shield	–	right	up	your
bung	hole,	Corporal.	Is	that	insolent?’
‘Once	I’m	used	to	telling	the	difference,	I’ll	let	you	know.’
	
‘Listen,	Corabb,’	Bottle	said,	‘you	can	stop	looking	out	for	me	now,	all	right?’
The	round-shouldered	warrior	at	his	side	shook	his	head.	‘Sergeant
Fiddler	says—’
‘Never	mind	that.	We’re	in	column.	Hundreds	of	marines	on	all	sides,
right?	And	I’m	almost	rested	up,	ready	to	make	trouble	in	case	we	get
ambushed	or	whatever.	I’m	safe	here,	Corabb.	Besides,	you	keep	hitting	me
with	that	scabbard	–	my	leg’s	all	bruised.’
‘Better	a	bruise	than	a	chopped-off	head,’	Corabb	said.
‘Well,	that’s	a	fact.’
Corabb	nodded,	as	if	the	issue	was	now	closed.
Bottle	rubbed	at	his	face.	The	memory	of	Beak’s	sacrifice	haunted	him.
He’d	not	known	the	mage	very	well.	Just	a	face	with	a	gawking	expression	or	a
wide	smile,	a	pleasant	enough	man	not	much	older	than	Bottle	himself.	For
some	–	for	the	rarest	few	–	the	paths	to	power	were	smooth,	uncluttered,	and


yet	the	danger	was	always	there.	Too	easy	to	draw	too	much,	to	let	it	just	pour
through	you.
Until	you’re	nothing	but	ashes.
Yet	Beak	had	won	their	lives.	The	problem	was,	Bottle	wondered	if	it	had
been	worth	it.	That	maybe	the	lives	of	eight	hundred	marines	weren’t	worth	the
life	of	a	natural	High	Mage.	Whatever	was	coming,	at	the	very	end	of	this
journey,	was	going	to	be	trouble.	The	Adjunct	had	Sinn	and	that	was	it.	Another
natural	talent	–	but	I	think	she’s	mad.
Adjunct,	your	High	Mage	is	insane.	Will	that	be	a	problem?
He	snorted.
Corabb	took	that	sound	as	an	invitation	to	talk.	‘See	the	fear	in	these
people,	Bottle?	The	Bonehunters	turn	their	hearts	to	ice.	When	we	reach	the
gate,	it	will	swing	wide	open	for	us.	The	Letherii	soldiers	will	throw	down
their	arms.	The	people	shall	deliver	to	us	the	Emperor ’s	head	on	a	copper
plate,	and	roses	will	be	flung	into	our	path—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	Corabb,	enough.	You	keep	looking	for	glory	in	war.	But
there	is	no	glory.	And	heroes,	like	Beak	back	there,	they	end	up	dead.	Earning
what?	A	barrow	of	rubbish,	that’s	what.’
But	Corabb	was	shaking	his	head.	‘When	I	die—’
‘It	won’t	be	in	battle,’	Bottle	finished.
‘You	wound	me	with	your	words.’
‘You’ve	got	the	Lady	in	your	shadow,	Corabb.	You’ll	keep	scraping
through.	You’ll	break	weapons	or	they’ll	fly	from	your	hand.	Your	horse	will
flip	end	over	end	and	land	right	side	up,	with	you	still	in	the	saddle.	In	fact,	I’d
wager	all	my	back	pay	that	you’ll	be	the	last	one	of	us	standing	at	the	very	end.’
‘You	believe	there	will	be	a	fight	in	this	city?’
‘Of	course	there	will,	you	idiot.	In	fact,	I’d	be	surprised	if	we	even	get
inside	the	walls,	until	the	Adjunct	arrives.	But	then,	aye,	we’re	in	for	a	messy
street-by-street	battle,	and	the	only	thing	certain	about	that	is	a	lot	of	us	are
going	to	get	killed.’
Corabb	spat	on	his	hands,	rubbed	them	together.
Bottle	stared.	The	fool	was	actually	smiling.
‘You	need	fear	nothing,’	Corabb	assured	him,	‘for	I	will	guard	you.’
‘Wonderful.’
	
Hellian	scowled.	Damned	crowded	road,	was	it	always	like	this?	Must	be	a
busy	city,	and	everybody	going	on	about	things	like	there	wasn’t	a	column	of
foreign	invaders	pushing	through	them.	She	was	still	feeling	the	heat	of	shame


–	she’d	fallen	asleep	back	on	that	killing	field.	Supposed	to	be	ready	to	fight
and	if	not	fight,	then	die	horribly	in	a	conflagration	of	piss-reeking	magic,	and
what	does	she	do?
Fall	asleep.	And	dream	of	white	light,	and	fires	that	don’t	burn,	and
because	everybody	had	known	she	was	dreaming	they’d	all	decided	to	pull	out
their	hidden	supplies	of	aeb	root	paste	and	bleach	their	hair,	and	then	polish	all
their	gear.	Well.	Ha	ha.	Damned	near	the	most	elaborate	joke	ever	pulled	on
her.	But	she	wasn’t	going	to	let	on	about	any	of	it.	Pretend,	aye,	that	nothing
looked	any	different,	and	when	her	soldiers	went	over	to	where	that	one
marine	had	died	–	the	only	casualty	in	the	entire	battle	and	there	must	have	been
some	kind	of	battle	since	the	evil	Letherii	army	had	run	away	–	well,	she’d
done	the	same.	Left	on	the	mound	an	empty	flask	and	if	that	wasn’t	honouring
the	idiot	then	what	was?
But	it	was	getting	dark,	and	all	these	moon	faces	peering	at	them	from	the
roadsides	was	getting	eerie.	She’d	seen	one	baby,	in	an	old	woman’s	scrawny
arms,	stick	out	its	tongue	at	her,	and	it	had	taken	all	her	self-control	to	keep
from	pulling	her	sword	and	lopping	off	the	tyke’s	little	round	head	or	maybe
just	twisting	its	ears	or	even	tickling	it	to	death,	and	so	it	was	a	good	thing	that
nobody	else	could	listen	in	on	her	thoughts	because	then	they’d	know	she’d
been	rattled	bad	by	that	joke	and	her	falling	asleep	when	she	should	have	been
sergeant.
My	polished	sword	at	that.	Which	I	can	use	to	cut	off	all	my	white	hair	if	I
want	to.	Oh	yes,	they	did	it	all	to	me	and	mine,	too.
Someone	stumbled	on	the	back	of	her	heel	and	she	half	turned.	‘Get	back,
Corpor—’	But	it	wasn’t	Touchbreath.	It	was	that	sultry	dark-eyed	lad,	the	one
she’d	already	had	fantasies	about	and	maybe	they	weren’t	fantasies	at	all,	the
way	he	licked	his	lips	when	their	eyes	met.	Scupperskull.	No,	Skulldeath.	‘You
in	my	squad	now?’	she	asked.
A	broad	delicious	smile	answered	her.
‘The	fool’s	besotted,’	her	corporal	said	from	behind	Skulldeath.	‘Might	as
well	adopt	him,	Sergeant,’	he	added	in	a	different	voice.	‘Or	marry	him.	Or
both.’
‘You	ain’t	gonna	confuse	me,	Corporal,	talking	back	and	forth	like	that.
Just	so	you	know.’
All	at	once	the	crowds	thinned	on	the	road,	and	there,	directly	ahead,	the
road	was	clear,	rising	to	the	huge	double	gates	of	the	city.	The	gates	were
barred.	‘Oh,’	Hellian	said,	‘that’s	just	terrific.	We	gotta	pay	a	toll	now.’
	


The	commander	of	the	Letherii	forces	died	with	a	quarrel	in	his	heart,	one	of
the	last	to	fall	at	the	final	rally	point	four	hundred	paces	in	from	the	river.
Shattered,	the	remaining	soldiers	flung	away	their	weapons	and	fled	the	battle.
The	enemy	had	few	mounted	troops,	so	the	pursuit	was	a	dragged-out	affair,
chaotic	and	mad	as	the	day’s	light	ebbed,	and	the	slaughter	pulled	foreign
soldiers	well	inland	as	they	hunted	down	their	exhausted,	panic-stricken	foes.
Twice,	Sirryn	Kanar	had	barely	eluded	the	ruthless	squads	of	the	enemy,
and	when	he	heard	the	unfamiliar	horns	moan	through	the	dusk,	he	knew	the
recall	had	been	sounded.	Stumbling,	all	his	armour	discarded,	he	scrabbled
through	brush	and	found	himself	among	the	levelled	ruins	of	one	of	the
shanty-towns	outside	the	city	wall.	All	these	preparations	for	a	siege,	and	now
it	was	coming.	He	needed	to	get	back	inside,	he	needed	to	get	to	the	palace.
Disbelief	and	shock	raced	on	the	currents	of	his	pounding	heart.	He	was
smeared	in	sweat	and	the	blood	of	fallen	comrades,	and	uncontrollable	shivers
rattled	through	him	as	if	he	was	plagued	with	a	fever.	He	had	never	before	felt
such	terror.	The	thought	of	his	life	ending,	of	some	cowardly	bastard	driving	a
blade	into	his	precious	body.	The	thought	of	all	his	dreams	and	ambitions
gushing	away	in	a	red	torrent	to	soak	the	ground.	These	had	pushed	him	from
the	front	lines,	had	sent	him	running	as	fast	as	his	legs	could	carry	him.	There
was	no	honour	in	dying	alongside	one’s	comrades	–	he’d	not	known	any	of
them	anyway.	Strangers,	and	strangers	could	die	in	droves	for	all	he	cared.	No,
only	one	life	mattered:	his	own.
And,	Errant	be	praised,	Sirryn	had	lived.	Escaping	that	dark	slaughter.
The	Chancellor	would	have	an	answer	to	all	of	this.	The	Emperor	–	his
Tiste	Edur	–	Hannan	Mosag	–	they	would	all	give	answer	to	these	foreign	curs.
And	in	a	year,	maybe	less,	the	world	would	be	right	once	more,	Sirryn	ranking
high	in	the	Chancellor ’s	staff,	and	higher	still	in	the	Patriotists.	Richer	than
he’d	ever	been	before.	A	score	of	soft-eyed	whores	within	his	reach.	He	could
grow	fat	if	he	liked.
Reaching	the	wall,	he	made	his	way	along	its	length.	There	were	sunken
posterns,	tunnels	that	invited	breaching	yet	were	designed	to	flood	with	the	pull
of	a	single	lever.	He	knew	the	thick	wooden	doors	would	be	manned	on	the
inside.	Working	his	way	along	the	foot	of	the	massive	wall,	Sirryn	continued
his	search.
He	finally	found	one,	the	recessed	door	angled	like	a	coal	trap,	thick
grasses	snarled	on	all	sides.	Muttering	his	thanks	to	the	Errant,	Sirryn	slipped
down	into	the	depression,	and	leaned	against	the	wood	for	a	long	moment,	his
eyes	shut,	his	breathing	slowing.
Then	he	drew	out	his	one	remaining	weapon,	a	dagger,	and	began	tapping


the	pommel	against	the	wood.
And	thought	he	heard	a	sound	on	the	other	side.
Sirryn	pressed	his	cheek	against	the	door.	‘Tap	if	you	can	hear	me!’	His
own	rasp	sounded	frighteningly	loud	in	his	ears.
After	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	he	heard	a	faint	tap.
‘I’m	Finadd	Sirryn	Kanar,	an	agent	of	the	Chancellor’s.	There’s	no-one	else
about.	Let	me	through	in	the	name	of	the	Empire!’
Again,	another	long	wait.	Then	he	heard	the	sound	of	the	bar	scraping
clear,	and	then	a	weight	pushed	against	him	and	he	scrabbled	back	to	let	the
door	open.
The	young	face	of	a	soldier	peered	up	at	him.	‘Finadd?’
Very	young.	Sirryn	edged	down	into	the	entranceway,	forcing	the	soldier
back.	So	young	I	could	kiss	him,	take	him	right	here,	by	the	Errant!	‘Close	this
door,	quickly!’
‘What	has	happened?’	the	soldier	asked,	hastening	to	shut	the	portal,	then,
in	the	sudden	darkness,	struggling	with	the	heavy	bar.	‘Where	is	the	army,	sir?’
As	the	bar	clunked	back	in	place,	Sirryn	allowed	himself,	at	last,	to	feel
safe.	Back	to	his	old	form.	He	reached	out,	grasped	a	fistful	of	tunic,	and
dragged	the	soldier	close.	‘You	damned	fool!	Anybody	calling	himself	a
Finadd	and	you	open	the	damned	door?	I	should	have	you	flailed	alive,	soldier!
In	fact,	I	think	I	will!’
‘P-please,	sir,	I	just—’
‘Be	quiet!	You’re	going	to	need	to	convince	me	another	way,	I	think.’
‘Sir?’
There	was	still	time.	That	foreign	army	was	a	day	away,	maybe	more.	And
he	was	feeling	so	very	alive	at	this	moment.	He	reached	up	and	stroked	the
lad’s	cheek.	And	heard	a	sudden	intake	of	breath.	Ah,	a	quick-witted	lad,	then.	It
would	be	easy	to—
A	knife-tip	pricked	just	under	his	right	eye,	and	all	at	once	the	soldier ’s
young	voice	hardened.	‘Finadd,	you	want	to	live	to	climb	out	the	other	end	of
this	tunnel,	then	you’ll	leave	off	right	here.	Sir.’
‘I’ll	have	your	name—’
‘You’re	welcome	to	it,	Finadd,	and	may	the	Errant	bless	your	eternal
search	–	because	I	wasn’t	behind	this	door	as	a	guard,	sir.	I	was	readying	to
make	my	escape.’
‘Your	what?’
‘The	mob	rules	the	streets,	Finadd.	All	we	hold	right	now	are	the	walls	and
gate	houses.	Oh,	and	the	Eternal	Domicile,	where	our	insane	Emperor	keeps
killing	champions	like	it	was	a	civic	holiday.	Nobody’s	much	interested	in


besieging	that	place.	Besides,	the	Edur	left	yesterday.	All	of	them.	Gone.	So,
Finadd,	you	want	to	get	to	your	lover	Chancellor,	well,	you’re	welcome	to	try.’
The	knife	pressed	down,	punctured	skin	and	drew	out	a	tear	of	blood.
‘Now,	sir.	You	can	make	for	the	dagger	at	your	belt,	and	die.	Or	you	can	let	go
of	my	shirt.’
Insolence	and	cowardice	were	hardly	attractive	qualities.	‘Happy	to	oblige,
soldier,’	Sirryn	said,	releasing	his	hold	on	the	man.	‘Now,	if	you’re	going	out,
then	I	had	better	remain	here	and	lock	the	door	behind	you,	yes?’
‘Finadd,	you	can	do	whatever	you	please	once	I’m	gone.	So	back	away,	sir.
No,	farther.	That’s	good.’
Sirryn	waited	for	the	soldier	to	escape.	He	could	still	feel	that	knife-tip	and
the	wound	stung	as	sweat	seeped	into	it.	It	was	not	cowardice,	he	told	himself,
that	had	forced	him	back,	away	from	this	hot-headed	bastard	busy	disgracing
his	uniform.	Simple	expedience.	He	needed	to	get	to	the	Chancellor,	didn’t	he?
That	was	paramount.
And	now,	absurdly,	he	would	have	to	face	making	his	way,	unescorted,
through	the	very	city	where	he	had	been	born,	in	fear	for	his	life.	The	world
had	turned	on	its	end.	I	could	just	wait	here,	yes,	in	this	tunnel,	in	the	dark	–	no,
the	foreigners	are	coming.	The	Eternal	Domicile	–	where,	if	surrender	is
demanded,	Triban	Gnol	can	do	the	negotiating,	can	oversee	the	handing	over	of
the	Emperor.	And	the	Chancellor	will	want	his	loyal	guards	at	his	side.	He’ll
want	Finadd	Sirryn	Kanar,	the	last	survivor	of	the	battle	at	the	river	–	Sirryn
Kanar,	who	broke	through	the	enemy	lines	to	rush	back	to	his	Chancellor,
bearer,	yes,	of	grim	news.	Yet	he	won	through,	did	he	not?
The	soldier	lowered	the	door	back	down	from	the	other	side.	Sirryn
moved	up	to	it,	found	the	bar	and	lifted	it	into	place.	He	could	reach	the	Eternal
Domicile,	even	if	it	meant	swimming	the	damned	canals.
I	still	live.	I	can	win	through	all	of	this.
There’s	not	enough	of	these	foreigners	to	rule	the	empire.
They’ll	need	help,	yes.
He	set	out	along	the	tunnel.
	
The	young	soldier	was	twenty	paces	from	the	hidden	door	when	dark	figures
rose	on	all	sides	and	he	saw	those	terrifying	crossbows	aimed	at	him.	He	froze,
slowly	raised	his	hands.
One	figure	spoke,	then,	in	a	language	the	soldier	did	not	understand,	and
he	flinched	as	someone	stepped	round	him	from	behind	–	a	woman,	grinning,
daggers	in	her	gloved	hands.	She	met	his	eyes	and	winked,	then	mimed	a	kiss.


‘We	not	yet	decide	let	you	live,’	the	first	one	then	said	in	rough	Letherii.
‘You	spy?’
‘No,’	the	soldier	replied.	‘Deserter.’
‘Honest	man,	good.	You	answer	all	our	questions?	These	doors,	tunnels,
why	do	sappers’	work	for	us?	Explain.’
‘Yes,	I	will	explain	everything.	I	don’t	want	to	die.’
Corporal	Tarr	sighed,	then	turned	from	the	prisoner	to	face	Koryk.	‘Better
get	Fid	and	the	captain,	Koryk.	Looks	like	maybe	we	won’t	have	to	knock
down	any	walls	after	all.’
Smiles	snorted,	sheathing	her	knives.	‘No	elegant	back	stab.	And	no
torture.	This	isn’t	any	fun	at	all.’	She	paused,	then	added,	‘Good	thing	we	didn’t
take	down	the	first	one,	though,	isn’t	it?	Led	us	right	to	this.’

Their	horses	had	not	been	exercised	nearly	enough,	and	were	now	huffing,
heads	lifting	and	falling	as	Sergeant	Balm	led	his	small	troop	inland.	Too	dark
now	to	hunt	Letherii	and	besides,	the	fun	had	grown	sour	awfully	fast.	Sure,
slaughter	made	sense	when	on	the	enemy’s	own	soil,	since	every	soldier	who
got	away	was	likely	to	fight	again,	and	so	they’d	chased	down	the	miserable
wretches.	But	it	was	tiring	work.
When	magic	wasn’t	around	in	a	battle,	Moranth	munitions	took	its	place,
and	the	fit	was	very	nice	indeed.	As	far	as	we’re	concerned,	anyway.	Gods,	just
seeing	those	bodies	–	and	pieces	of	bodies	–	flying	up	into	the	air	–	and	I	was
getting	all	confused,	at	the	beginning	there.	Bits	of	Letherii	everywhere	and	all
that	ringing	in	my	ears.
He’d	come	around	sharp	enough	when	he	saw	Cord’s	idiot	sapper,	Crump,
running	up	the	slope	straight	at	the	enemy	line,	with	a	Hood-damned	cusser	in
each	hand.	If	it	hadn’t	been	for	all	those	blown-up	Letherii	absorbing	so	much
of	the	twin	blasts	then	Crump	would	still	be	standing	there.	His	feet,	anyway.
The	rest	of	him	would	be	red	haze	drifting	into	the	sunset.	As	it	was,	Crump
was	flattened	beneath	an	avalanche	of	body	parts,	eventually	clambering	free
like	one	of	Hood’s	own	revenants.	Although	Balm	was	pretty	sure	revenants
didn’t	smile.
Not	witless	smiles,	anyway.
Where	the	cussers	had	not	obliterated	entire	companies	of	the	enemy,	the
main	attack	–	wedges	of	advancing	heavies	and	medium	infantry	with	a	thin
scattering	of	skirmishers	and	sappers	out	front	–	had	closed	with	a	hail	of
sharpers,	virtually	disintegrating	the	Letherii	front	ranks.	And	then	it	was	just


the	killing	thrust	with	those	human	wedges,	ripping	apart	the	enemy’s
formations,	driving	the	Letherii	soldiers	back	until	they	were	packed	tight	and
unable	to	do	anything	but	die.
The	Adjunct’s	Fourteenth	Army,	the	Bonehunters,	had	shown,	at	long	last,
that	they	knew	how	to	fight.	She’d	gotten	her	straight-in	shield	to	shield
dragged-out	battle,	and	hadn’t	it	been	just	grand?
Riding	ahead	as	point	was	Masan	Gilani.	Made	sense,	using	her.	First	off,
she	was	the	best	rider	by	far,	and	secondly,	there	wasn’t	a	soldier,	man	or
woman,	who	could	drag	their	eyes	off	her	delicious	round	behind	in	that
saddle,	which	made	following	her	easy.	Even	in	the	gathering	dark,	aye.	Not
that	it	actually	glows.	I	don’t	think.	But…amazing	how	we	can	all	see	it	just
fine.	Why,	could	be	a	night	without	any	other	moon	and	no	stars	and	nothing
but	the	Abyss	on	all	sides,	and	we’d	follow	that	glorious,	jiggling—
Balm	sawed	his	reins,	pulling	off	to	one	side,	just	missing	Masan	Gilani’s
horse	–	which	was	standing	still,	and	Masan	suddenly	nowhere	in	sight.
Cursing,	he	dragged	his	weary	horse	to	a	halt,	raising	a	hand	to	command
those	behind	him	to	draw	up.
‘Masan?’
‘Over	here,’	came	the	luscious,	heavenly	voice,	and	a	moment	later	she
emerged	out	of	the	gloom	ahead.	‘We’re	on	the	killing	field.’
‘Not	a	chance,’	Throatslitter	said	from	behind	Balm.	‘No	bodies,	Masan,
no	nothing.’
Deadsmell	rode	a	few	paces	ahead,	then	stopped	and	dismounted.	He
looked	round	in	the	gloom.	‘No,	she’s	right,’	he	said.	‘This	was	where	Keneb’s
marines	closed	ranks.’
They’d	all	seen	the	strange	glow	to	the	north	–	seen	it	from	the	ships,	in
fact,	when	the	transports	did	their	neat	turn	and	surged	for	the	shoreline.	And
before	that,	well,	they’d	seen	the	Letherii	sorcery,	that	terrifying	wave
climbing	into	the	sky	and	it	was	then	that	everyone	knew	the	marines	were
finished.	No	Quick	Ben	to	beat	it	all	back,	even	if	he	could	have,	and	Balm
agreed	with	most	everyone	else	that,	good	as	he	was,	he	wasn’t	that	good.	No
Quick	Ben,	and	no	Sinn	–	aye,	there	she	was,	perched	on	the	bow	of	the	Froth
Wolf	with	Grub	at	her	side,	staring	at	that	dreadful	conjuration.
When	the	thing	rolled	forward	and	then	crashed	down,	well,	curses	rang	in
the	air,	curses	or	prayers	and	sometimes	both,	and	this,	soldiers	said,	was
worse	even	than	Y’Ghatan,	and	those	poor	damned	marines,	always	getting
their	teeth	kicked	in,	only	this	time	nobody	was	coming	out.	The	only	thing
that’d	be	pushing	up	from	the	ground	in	a	few	days’	time	would	be	slivers	of
burnt	bone.


So	the	Bonehunters	on	the	transports	had	been	a	mean-spirited	bunch	by
the	time	they	emptied	the	water	out	of	their	boots	and	picked	up	their	weapons.
Mean,	aye,	as	that	Letherii	army	could	attest	to,	oh	yes.
After	the	Letherii	magic	had	faded,	crashed	away	as	if	to	nothing	in	the
distance,	there	had	been	a	cry	from	Sinn,	and	Balm	had	seen	with	his	own	eyes
Grub	dancing	about	on	the	foredeck.	And	then	everyone	else	had	seen	that
blue-white	dome	of	swirling	light,	rising	up	from	where	the	Letherii	magic
had	come	down.
What	did	it	mean?
Cord	and	Shard	had	gone	up	to	Sinn,	but	she	wasn’t	talking	which	was	a
shock	to	them	all.	And	all	Grub	said	was	something	that	nobody	afterwards
could	even	agree	on,	and	since	Balm	hadn’t	heard	it	himself	he	concluded	that
Grub	probably	hadn’t	said	anything	at	all,	except	maybe	‘I	got	to	pee’	which
explained	all	that	dancing.
‘Could	it	be	that	Letherii	magic	turned	them	all	into	dust?’	Throatslitter
wondered	now	as	he	walked	on	the	dew-laden	field.
‘And	left	the	grasses	growing	wild?’	Masan	Gilani	countered.
‘Something	over	here,’	Deadsmell	said	from	ten	or	so	paces	on.
Balm	and	Throatslitter	dismounted	and	joined	Masan	Gilani	–	slightly
behind	her	to	either	side.	And	the	three	of	them	set	off	after	Deadsmell,	who
was	now	fast	disappearing	in	the	gloom.
‘Slow	up	there,	Corporal!’	It’s	not	like	the	Universal	Lodestone	is	bouncing
up	there	with	you,	is	it?
They	saw	that	Deadsmell	had	finally	halted,	standing	before	a	grey	heap	of
something.
‘What	did	you	find?’	Balm	asked.
‘Looks	like	a	shell	midden,’	Throatslitter	muttered.
‘Hah,	always	figured	you	for	a	fisher ’s	spawn.’
‘Spawn,	ha	ha,	that’s	so	funny,	Sergeant.’
‘Yeah?	Then	why	ain’t	you	laughing?	On	second	thought,	don’t	–	they’ll
hear	it	in	the	city	and	get	scared.	Well,	scareder	than	they	already	are.’
They	joined	Deadsmell.
‘It’s	a	damned	barrow,’	said	Throatslitter.	‘And	look,	all	kinds	of	Malazan
stuff	on	it.	Gods,	Sergeant,	you	don’t	think	all	that’s	left	of	all	those	marines	is
under	this	mound?’
Balm	shrugged.	‘We	don’t	even	know	how	many	made	it	this	far.	Could	be
six	of	’em.	In	fact,	it’s	a	damned	miracle	any	of	’em	did	in	the	first	place.’
‘No	no,’	Deadsmell	said.	‘There’s	only	one	in	there,	but	that’s	about	all	I
can	say,	Sergeant.	There’s	not	a	whisper	of	magic	left	here	and	probably	never


will	be.	It’s	all	been	sucked	dry.’
‘By	the	Letherii?’
The	corporal	shrugged.	‘Could	be.	That	ritual	was	a	bristling	pig	of	a
spell.	Old	magic,	rougher	than	what	comes	from	warrens.’
Masan	Gilani	crouched	down	and	touched	a	badly	notched	Malazan
shortsword.	‘Looks	like	someone	did	a	lot	of	hacking	with	this	thing,	and	if
they	made	it	this	far	doing	just	that,	well,	beat-up	or	not,	a	soldier	doesn’t	just
toss	it	away	like	this.’
‘Unless	the	dead	one	inside	earned	the	honour,’	Deadsmell	said,	nodding.
‘So,’	Masan	concluded,	‘a	Malazan.	But	just	one.’
‘Aye,	just	the	one.’
She	straightened.	‘So	where	are	the	rest	of	them?’
‘Start	looking	for	a	trail	or	something,’	Balm	said	to	Masan	Gilani.
They	all	watched	her	head	off	into	the	gloom.
Then	smiled	at	each	other.

Lostara	Yil	walked	up	to	where	stood	the	Adjunct.	‘Most	of	the	squads	are
back,’	she	reported.	‘Pickets	are	being	set	now.’
‘Has	Sergeant	Balm	returned?’
‘Not	yet,	Adjunct.’	She	hesitated,	then	added,	‘Fist	Keneb	would	have	sent	a
runner.’
Tavore	turned	slightly	to	regard	her.	‘Would	he?’
Lostara	Yil	blinked.	‘Of	course.	Even	at	full	strength	–	which	we	know
would	be	impossible	–	he	doesn’t	have	the	soldiers	to	take	Letheras.	Adjunct,
having	heard	nothing,	we	have	to	anticipate	the	worst.’
During	the	battle,	Lostara	Yil	had	remained	close	to	her	commander,
although	at	no	point	was	the	Adjunct	in	any	danger	from	the	Letherii.	The
landing	had	been	quick,	professional.	As	for	the	battle,	classic	Malazan,	even
without	the	usual	contingent	of	marines	to	augment	the	advance	from	the
shoreline.	Perfect,	and	brutal.
The	Letherii	were	already	in	poor	shape,	she	saw.	Not	from	any	fight,	but
from	a	fast	march	from	well	inland	–	probably	where	the	wave	of	sorcery	had
erupted.	Disordered	in	their	exhaustion,	and	in	some	other,	unaccountable	way,
profoundly	rattled.
Or	so	had	been	the	Adjunct’s	assessment,	after	watching	the	enemy	troops
form	ranks.
And	she	had	been	proved	right.	The	Letherii	had	shattered	like	thin	ice	on	a


puddle.	And	what	had	happened	to	their	mages?	Nowhere	in	sight,	leading
Lostara	to	believe	that	those	mages	had	used	themselves	up	with	that	terrible
conflagration	they’d	unleashed	earlier.
Moranth	munitions	broke	the	Letherii	apart	–	the	Letherii	commander	had
sent	archers	down	the	slope	and	the	Bonehunters	had	had	to	wither	a	hail	of
sleeting	arrows	on	their	advance.	There	had	been	three	hundred	or	so	killed	or
wounded	but	there	should	have	been	more.	Malazan	armour,	it	turned	out,	was
superior	to	the	local	armour;	and	once	the	skirmishers	drew	within	range	of
their	crossbows	and	sharpers,	the	enemy	archers	took	heavy	losses	before
fleeing	back	up	the	slope.
The	Malazans	simply	followed	them.
Sharpers,	a	few	cussers	sailing	over	the	heads	of	the	front	Letherii	ranks.
Burners	along	the	slope	of	the	far	left	flank	to	ward	off	a	modest	cavalry
charge.	Smokers	into	the	press	to	sow	confusion.	And	then	the	wedges	struck
home.
Even	then,	had	the	Letherii	stiffened	their	defence	along	the	ridge,	they
could	have	bloodied	the	Malazans.	Instead,	they	melted	back,	the	lines
collapsing,	writhing	like	a	wounded	snake,	and	all	at	once	the	rout	began.	And
with	it,	unmitigated	slaughter.
The	Adjunct	had	let	her	soldiers	go,	and	Lostara	Yil	understood	that
decision.	So	much	held	down,	for	so	long	–	and	the	growing	belief	that	Fist
Keneb	and	all	his	marines	were	dead.	Murdered	by	sorcery.	Such	things	can
only	be	answered	one	sword-swing	at	a	time,	until	the	arm	grows	leaden,	until
the	breaths	are	gulped	down	ragged	and	desperate.
And	now,	into	the	camp,	the	last	of	the	soldiers	were	returning	from	their
slaughter	of	Letherii.	Faces	drawn,	expressions	numbed	–	as	if	each	soldier
had	but	just	awakened	from	a	nightmare,	one	in	which	he	or	she	–	surprise	–
was	the	monster.
She	hardens	them,	for	that	is	what	she	needs.
The	Adjunct	spoke,	‘Grub	does	not	behave	like	a	child	who	has	lost	his
father.’
Lostara	Yil	snorted.	‘The	lad	is	addled,	Adjunct.	You	saw	him	dance.	You
heard	him	singing	about	candles.’
‘Addled.	Yes,	perhaps.’
‘In	any	case,’	Lostara	persisted,	‘unlike	Sinn,	Grub	has	no	talents,	no	way
of	knowing	the	fate	of	Fist	Keneb.	As	for	Sinn,	well,	as	you	know,	I	have	little
faith	in	her.	Not	because	I	believe	her	without	power.	She	has	that,	Dryjhna
knows.’	Then	she	shrugged.	‘Adjunct,	they	were	on	their	own	–	entirely	on
their	own	–	for	so	long.	Under	strength	to	conduct	a	full-scale	invasion.’	She


stopped	then,	realizing	how	critical	all	of	this	sounded.	And	isn’t	it	just	that?	A
criticism	of	this,	and	of	you,	Adjunct.	Didn’t	we	abandon	them?
‘I	am	aware	of	the	views	among	the	soldiers,’	Tavore	said,	inflectionless.
‘Adjunct,’	Lostara	said,	‘we	cannot	conduct	much	of	a	siege,	unless	we	use
what	sappers	we	have	and	most	of	our	heavier	munitions	–	I	sense	you’re	in
something	of	a	hurry	and	have	no	interest	in	settling	in.	When	will	the	rest	of
the	Perish	and	the	Khundryl	be	joining	us?’
‘They	shall	not	be	joining	us,’	Tavore	replied.	‘We	shall	be	joining	them.
To	the	east.’
The	other	half	of	this	campaign.	Another	invasion,	then.	Damn	you,
Adjunct,	I	wish	you	shared	your	strategies.	With	me.	Hood,	with	anyone!	‘I	have
wondered,’	she	said,	‘at	the	disordered	response	from	the	Tiste	Edur	and	the
Letherii.’
The	Adjunct	sighed,	so	low,	so	drawn	out	that	Lostara	Yil	barely	caught	it.
Then	Tavore	said,	‘This	empire	is	unwell.	Our	original	assessment	that	the
Tiste	Edur	were	unpopular	overseers	was	accurate.	Where	we	erred,	with
respect	to	Fist	Keneb’s	landing,	was	in	not	sufficiently	comprehending	the
complexities	of	that	relationship.	The	split	has	occurred,	Captain.	It	just	took
longer.’
At	the	expense	of	over	a	thousand	marines.
‘Fist	Keneb	would	not	send	a	runner,’	Tavore	said.	‘He	would,	in	fact,	lead
his	marines	straight	for	Letheras.	“First	in,	last	out,”	as	Sergeant	Fiddler	might
say.’
‘Last	in,	looking	around,’	Lostara	said	without	thinking,	then	winced.
‘Sorry,	Adjunct—’
‘The	Bonehunters’	motto,	Captain?’
She	would	not	meet	her	commander ’s	eyes.	‘Not	a	serious	one,	Adjunct.
Coined	by	some	heavy	infantry	soldier,	I	am	told—’
‘Who?’
She	thought	desperately.	‘Nefarrias	Bredd,	I	think.’
And	caught,	from	the	corner	of	her	eye,	a	faint	smile	twitch	Tavore’s	thin
lips.	Then	it	was	gone	and,	in	truth,	might	never	have	been.
‘It	may	prove,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘that	Fist	Keneb	will	earn	us	that	ironic
motto	–	those	of	us	here,	that	is,	in	this	camp.’
A	handful	of	marines	to	conquer	an	imperial	capital?	‘Adjunct—’
‘Enough.	You	will	command	for	this	night,	Captain,	as	my	representative.
We	march	at	dawn.’	She	turned.	‘I	must	return	to	the	Froth	Wolf.’
‘Adjunct?’
Tavore	grimaced.	‘Another	argument	with	a	certain	weaponsmith	and	his


belligerent	wife.’	Then	she	paused,	‘Oh,	when	or	if	Sergeant	Balm	returns,	I
would	hear	his	report.’
‘Of	course,’	Lostara	Yil	replied.	If?
She	watched	the	Adjunct	walk	away,	down	towards	the	shore.
	
Aboard	the	Froth	Wolf,	Shurq	Elalle	leaned	against	the	mainmast,	her	arms
crossed,	watching	the	three	black,	hairless,	winged	ape-like	demons	fighting
over	a	shortsword.	The	scrap,	a	tumbling	flurry	of	biting,	scratching	and
countless	inadvertent	cuts	and	slices	from	the	weapon	itself,	had	migrated	from
the	stern	end	of	the	mid-deck	and	was	now	climbing	up	onto	the	foredeck.
Sailors	stood	here	and	there,	keeping	well	clear,	and	trading	wagers	on
which	demon	would	win	out	–	an	issue	of	some	dispute	since	it	was	hard	to	tell
the	three	beasts	apart.
‘—with	the	cut	across	the	nose	–	wait,	Mael’s	salty	slick!	Now	another
one’s	got	the	same	cut!	Okay,	the	one	without—’
‘—which	one	just	lost	that	ear?	Cut	nose	and	missing	ear,	then!’
Close	beside	Shurq	Elalle,	a	voice	said,	‘None	of	it’s	real,	you	know.’
She	turned.	‘Thought	she	had	you	chained	below.’
‘Who,	the	Adjunct?	Why—’
‘No.	Your	wife,	Withal.’
The	man	frowned.	‘That’s	how	it	looks,	is	it?’
‘Only	of	late,’	Shurq	replied.	‘She’s	frightened	for	you,	I	think.’
To	that	he	made	no	response.
‘A	launch	is	returning,’	Shurq	observed,	then	straightened.	‘I	hope	it’s	the
Adjunct	–	I’m	ready	to	leave	your	blessed	company.	No	offence,	Withal,	but
I’m	nervous	about	my	first	mate	and	what	he	might	be	doing	with	the	Undying
Gratitude.’
The	Meckros	weaponsmith	turned	to	squint	out	into	the	darkness	of	the
main	channel.	‘Last	I	saw,	he’d	yet	to	drop	anchor	and	was	just	sailing	back	and
forth.’
‘Yes,’	Shurq	said.	‘Sane	people	pace	in	their	cabin.	Skorgen	paces	with	the
whole	damned	ship.’
‘Why	so	impatient?’
‘I	expect	he	wants	to	tie	up	in	Letheras	well	before	this	army	arrives.	And
take	on	panicky	nobles	with	all	their	worldly	goods.	Then	we	head	back	out
before	the	Malazan	storm,	dump	the	nobles	over	the	side	and	share	out	the
spoils.’
‘As	any	proper	pirate	would	do.’


‘Precisely.’
‘Do	you	enjoy	your	profession,	Captain?	Does	it	not	get	stale	after	a	time?’
‘No,	that’s	me	who	gets	stale	after	a	time.	As	for	the	profession,	why	yes,	I
do	enjoy	it,	Withal.’
‘Even	throwing	nobles	overboard?’
‘With	all	that	money	they	should	have	paid	for	swimming	lessons.’
‘Belated	financial	advice.’
‘Don’t	make	me	laugh.’
A	sudden	outcry	from	the	sailors.	On	the	foredeck,	the	demons	had
somehow	managed	to	skewer	themselves	on	the	sword.	The	weapon	pinned	all
three	of	them	to	the	deck.	The	creatures	writhed.	Blood	poured	from	their
mouths,	even	as	the	bottom-most	one	began	strangling	from	behind	the	one	in
the	middle,	who	followed	suit	with	the	one	on	top.	The	demon	in	the	middle
began	cracking	the	back	of	its	head	into	the	bottom	demon’s	face,	smashing	its
already	cut	nose.
Shurq	Elalle	turned	away.	‘Errant	take	me,’	she	muttered.	‘I	nearly	lost	it
there.’
‘Lost	what?’
‘You	do	not	want	to	know.’
The	launch	arrived,	thumping	up	against	the	hull,	and	moments	later	the
Adjunct	climbed	into	view.	She	cast	a	single	glance	over	at	the	pinned	demons,
then	nodded	greeting	to	Shurq	Elalle	as	she	walked	up	to	Withal.
‘Is	it	time?’	he	asked.
‘Almost,’	she	replied.	‘Come	with	me.’
Shurq	watched	the	two	head	below.
Withal,	you	poor	man.	Now	I’m	frightened	for	you	as	well.
Damn,	forgot	to	ask	permission	to	leave.	She	thought	to	follow	them,	then
decided	not	to.	Sorry,	Skorgen,	but	don’t	worry.	We	can	always	outsail	a
marching	army.	Those	nobles	aren’t	going	anywhere,	after	all,	are	they?
	
A	short	time	later,	while	the	sailors	argued	over	who’d	won	what,	the	three
nachts	–	who	had	been	lying	motionless	as	if	dead	–	stirred	and	deftly
extricated	themselves	from	the	shortsword.	One	of	them	kicked	the	weapon
into	the	river,	held	its	hands	over	its	ears	at	the	soft	splash.
The	three	then	exchanged	hugs	and	caresses.
Amused	and	curious	from	where	he	sat	with	his	back	to	a	rail	on	the
foredeck,	Banaschar,	the	last	Demidrek	of	the	Worm	of	Autumn,	continued
watching.	And	was	nevertheless	caught	entirely	by	surprise	when	the	nachts


swarmed	over	the	side	and	a	moment	later	there	followed	three	distinct
splashes.
He	rose	and	went	to	the	rail,	looking	down.	Three	vague	heads	bobbed	on
their	way	to	the	shore.
‘Almost	time,’	he	whispered.
	
Rautos	Hivanar	stared	down	at	the	crowded	array	of	objects	on	the	tabletop,
trying	once	more	to	make	sense	of	them.	He	had	rearranged	them	dozens	of
times,	sensing	that	there	was	indeed	a	pattern,	somewhere,	and	could	he	but
place	the	objects	in	their	proper	position,	he	would	finally	understand.
The	artifacts	had	been	cleaned,	the	bronze	polished	and	gleaming.	He	had
assembled	lists	of	characteristics,	seeking	a	typology,	groupings	based	on
certain	details	–	angles	of	curvature,	weight,	proximity	of	where	they	had	been
found,	even	the	various	depths	at	which	they	had	been	buried.
For	they	had	indeed	been	buried.	Not	tossed	away,	not	thrown	into	a	pit.
No,	each	one	had	been	set	down	in	a	hole	sculpted	into	the	clays	–	he	had
managed	to	create	moulds	of	those	depressions,	which	had	helped	him
establish	each	object’s	cant	and	orientation.
The	array	before	him	now	was	positioned	on	the	basis	of	spatial	location,
each	set	precisely	in	proper	relation	to	the	others	–	at	least	he	believed	so,
based	on	his	map.	The	only	exception	was	with	the	second	and	third	artifacts.
The	dig	at	that	time	–	when	the	first	three	had	been	recovered	–	had	not	been
methodical,	and	so	the	removal	of	the	objects	had	destroyed	any	chance	of
precisely	specifying	their	placement.	And	so	it	was	two	of	these	three	that	he
now	moved,	again	and	again.	Regarding	the	third	one	–	the	very	first	object
found	–	he	well	knew	where	it	belonged.
Meanwhile,	outside	the	estate’s	high,	well-guarded	walls,	the	city	of
Letheras	descended	into	anarchy.
Muttering	under	his	breath,	Rautos	Hivanar	picked	up	that	first	artifact.
Studied	its	now	familiar	right	angle	bend,	feeling	its	sure	weight	in	his	hands,
and	wondering	anew	at	the	warmth	of	the	metal.	Had	it	grown	hotter	in	the	last
few	days?	He	wasn’t	sure	and	had	no	real	way	of	measuring	such	a	thing.
Faint	on	the	air	in	the	room	was	the	smell	of	smoke.	Not	woodsmoke,	as
might	come	from	a	hundred	thousand	cookfires,	but	the	more	acrid	reek	of
burnt	cloth	and	varnished	furniture,	along	with	–	so	very	subtle	–	the	sweet
tang	of	scorched	human	flesh.
He	had	sent	his	servants	to	their	beds,	irritated	with	their	endless	reports,
the	fear	in	their	meek	eyes.	Was	neither	hungry	nor	thirsty,	and	it	seemed	a	new


clarity	was	taking	hold	of	his	vision,	his	mind.	The	most	intriguing	detail	of	all
was	that	he	had	now	found	twelve	full-scale	counterparts	throughout	the	city;
and	each	of	these	corresponded	perfectly	with	the	layout	before	him	–
excepting	the	two,	of	course.	So,	what	he	had	on	this	table	was	a	miniature
map,	and	this,	he	knew,	was	important.
Perhaps	the	most	important	detail	of	all.
If	he	only	knew	why.
Yes,	the	object	was	growing	warmer.	Was	it	the	same	with	its	much	larger
companion,	there	in	the	back	yard	of	his	new	inn?
He	rose.	No	matter	how	late	it	was,	he	needed	to	find	out.	Carefully
replacing	the	artifact	onto	the	tabletop	map,	matching	the	position	of	the	inn,	he
then	made	his	way	to	his	wardrobe.
The	sounds	of	rioting	in	the	city	beyond	had	moved	away,	back	into	the
poorer	districts	to	the	north.	Donning	a	heavy	cloak	and	collecting	his	walking
stick	–	one	that	saw	little	use	under	normal	circumstances,	but	there	was	now
the	possible	need	for	self-protection	–	Rautos	Hivanar	left	the	room.	Made	his
way	through	the	silent	house.	Then	outside,	turning	left,	to	the	outer	wall.
The	guards	standing	at	the	side	postern	gate	saluted.
‘Any	nearby	trouble?’	Rautos	asked.
‘Not	of	late,	sir.’
‘I	wish	to	go	out.’
The	guard	hesitated,	then	said,	‘I	will	assemble	an	escort—’
‘No	no.	I	intend	to	be	circumspect.’
‘Sir—’
‘Open	the	door.’
The	guard	complied.
Passing	through,	he	paused	in	the	narrow	avenue,	listening	to	the	guard
lock	the	door	behind	him.	The	smell	of	smoke	was	stronger	here,	a	haze
forming	haloes	round	those	few	lamps	still	lit	atop	their	iron	poles.	Rubbish
lined	the	gutters,	a	most	unpleasant	detail	evincing	just	how	far	all	order	and
civil	conduct	had	descended.	Failure	to	keep	the	streets	clean	was	symbolic	of	a
moribund	culture,	a	culture	that	had,	despite	loud	and	public	exhortations	to	the
contrary,	lost	its	sense	of	pride,	and	its	belief	in	itself.
When	had	this	happened?	The	Tiste	Edur	conquest?	No,	that	defeat	had
been	but	a	symptom.	The	promise	of	anarchy,	of	collapse,	had	been	whispered
long	before	then.	But	so	soft	was	that	whisper	that	none	heard	it.	Ah,	that	is	a
lie.	We	were	just	unwilling	to	listen.
He	continued	looking	round,	feeling	a	heavy	lassitude	settle	on	his
shoulders.


As	with	Letheras,	so	with	empire.
Rautos	Hivanar	set	out,	to	walk	a	dying	city.
	
Five	men	meaning	no	good	were	camped	out	in	the	old	Tarthenal	cemetery.
Frowning,	Ublala	Pung	strode	out	of	the	darkness	and	into	their	midst.	His	fists
flew.	A	few	moments	later	he	was	standing	amidst	five	motionless	bodies.	He
picked	up	the	first	one	and	carried	it	to	the	pit	left	behind	by	a	huge	fallen	tree,
threw	it	in	the	sodden	hole.	Then	went	back	for	the	others.
A	short	time	later	he	stamped	out	the	small	fire	and	began	clearing	a	space,
pulling	grass,	tossing	stones.	He	went	down	on	his	knees	to	tug	loose	the
smaller	weeds,	and	slowly	crawled	in	an	expanding	spiral.
Overhead,	the	hazy	moon	was	still	on	the	rise,	and	somewhere	to	the	north
buildings	burned.	He	needed	to	be	done	by	dawn.	The	ground	cleared,	a	wide,
circular	space	of	nothing	but	bared	earth.	It	could	be	lumpy.	That	was	all	right,
and	it	was	good	that	it	was	all	right	since	cemeteries	were	lumpy	places.
Hearing	a	moan	from	the	hole	where	the	tree	had	been,	Ublala	rose,
brushed	the	dirt	from	his	knees	and	then	his	hands,	and	walked	over.	Edging
down	into	the	pit,	he	stared	at	the	grey	forms	until	he	figured	out	which	one
was	coming	round.	Then	he	crouched	and	punched	the	man	in	the	head	a	few
more	times,	until	the	moaning	stopped.	Satisfied,	he	returned	to	his	clearing.
By	dawn,	yes.
Because	at	dawn,	Ublala	Pung	knew,	the	Emperor	would	lift	his	cursed
sword,	and	standing	across	from	him,	on	that	arena	floor,	would	be	Karsa
Orlong.
	
In	a	secret	chamber	–	what	had	once	been	a	tomb	of	some	kind	–	Ormly,	the
Champion	Rat	Catcher,	sat	down	opposite	an	enormously	fat	woman.	He
scowled.	‘You	don’t	need	that	down	here,	Rucket.’
‘True,’	she	replied,	‘but	I’ve	grown	used	to	it.	You	would	not	believe	the
power	being	huge	engenders.	The	intimidation.	You	know,	when	things	finally
get	better	and	there’s	plenty	of	food	to	be	had	again,	I’m	thinking	of	doing	this
for	real.’
‘But	that’s	just	my	point,’	Ormly	replied,	leaning	forward.	‘It’s	all	padding
and	padding	don’t	weigh	anything	like	the	real	thing.	You’ll	get	tired	walking
across	a	room.	Your	knees	will	hurt.	Your	breaths	will	get	shorter	because	the
lungs	can’t	expand	enough.	You’ll	get	stretch	marks	even	though	you’ve	never


had	a	baby—’
‘So	if	I	get	pregnant	too	then	it’ll	be	all	right?’
‘Except	for	all	that	other	stuff,	why	yes,	I	suppose	it	would.	Not	that
anybody	could	tell.’
‘Ormly,	you	are	a	complete	idiot.’
‘But	good	at	my	job.’
To	that,	Rucket	nodded.	‘And	so?	How	did	it	go?’
Ormly	squinted	across	at	her,	then	scratched	his	stubbly	jaw.	‘It’s	a
problem.’
‘Serious?’
‘Serious.’
‘How	serious?’
‘About	as	serious	as	it	can	get.’
‘Hmmm.	No	word	from	Selush?’
‘Not	yet.	And	you’re	right,	we’ll	have	to	wait	for	that.’
‘But	our	people	are	in	the	right	place,	yes?	No	trouble	with	all	the	riots	and
such?’
‘We’re	good	on	that	count,	Rucket.	Hardly	popular	sites,	are	they?’
‘So	has	there	been	any	change	in	the	time	of	execution?’
Ormly	shrugged.	‘We’ll	see	come	dawn,	assuming	any	criers	are	still
working.	I	sure	hope	not,	Rucket.	Even	as	it	is,	we	may	fail.	You	do	know	that,
don’t	you?’
She	sighed.	‘That	would	be	tragic.	No,	heartbreaking.’
‘You	actually	love	him?’
‘Oh,	I	don’t	know.	Hard	not	to,	really.	I’d	have	competition,	though.’
‘That	scholar?	Well,	unless	they’re	in	the	same	cell,	I	don’t	think	you	need
worry.’
‘Like	I	said,	you’re	an	idiot.	Of	course	I’m	worrying,	but	not	about
competition.	I’m	worried	for	him.	I’m	worried	for	her.	I’m	worried	that	all	this
will	go	wrong	and	Karos	Invictad	will	have	his	triumph.	We’re	running	out	of
time.’
Ormly	nodded.
‘So,	do	you	have	any	good	news?’	she	asked.
‘Not	sure	if	it’s	good	but	it’s	interesting.’
‘What?’
‘Ublala	Pung’s	gone	insane.’
Rucket	shook	her	head.	‘Not	possible.	He	hasn’t	enough	brains	to	go
insane.’
‘Well,	he	beat	up	five	scribers	hiding	out	from	the	riots	in	the	Tarthenal


cemetery,	and	now	he’s	crawling	around	on	his	hands	and	knees	and	pinching
weeds.’
‘So	what’s	all	that	about?’
‘No	idea,	Rucket.’
‘He’s	gone	insane.’
‘Impossible.’
‘I	know,’	she	replied.
They	sat	in	silence	for	a	time,	then	Rucket	said,	‘Maybe	I’ll	just	keep	the
padding.	That	way	I	can	have	it	without	all	the	costs.’
‘Is	it	real	padding?’
‘Illusions	and	some	real	stuff,	kind	of	a	patchwork	thing.’
‘And	you	think	he’ll	fall	in	love	with	you	looking	like	that?	I	mean,
compared	to	Janath	who’s	probably	getting	skinnier	by	the	moment	which,	as
you	know,	some	men	like	since	it	makes	their	women	look	like	children	or
some	other	ghastly	secret	truth	nobody	ever	admits	out	loud—’
‘He’s	not	one	of	those.’
‘Are	you	sure?’
‘I	am.’
‘Well,	I	suppose	you	would	know.’
‘I	would,’	she	replied.	‘Anyway,	what	you’re	talking	about	is	making	me
feel	kind	of	ill.’
‘Manly	truths	will	do	that,’	Ormly	said.
They	sat.	They	waited.
	
Ursto	Hoobutt	and	his	wife	and	sometime	lover	Pinosel	clambered	onto	the
muddy	bank.	In	Ursto’s	gnarled	hands	was	a	huge	clay	jug.	They	paused	to
study	the	frozen	pond	that	had	once	been	Settle	Lake,	the	ice	gleaming	in	the
diffuse	moonlight.
‘It’s	melting,	Cherrytart,’	he	said.
‘Well	you’re	just	getting	smarter	day	by	day,	dearie.	We	knowed	it	was
melting.	We	knowed	that	a	long	time	coming.	We	knowed	it	sober	and	we
knowed	it	drunk.’	She	lifted	her	hamper.	‘Now,	we	looking	at	a	late	supper	or
are	we	looking	at	an	early	breakfast?’
‘Let’s	stretch	it	out	and	make	it	both.’
‘Can’t	make	it	both.	One	or	the	other	and	if	we	stretch	it	out	it’ll	be	neither
so	make	up	your	mind.’
‘What’s	got	you	so	touchy,	love?’
‘It’s	melting,	dammit,	and	that	means	ants	at	the	picnic.’


‘We	knew	it	was	coming—’
‘So	what?	Ants	is	ants.’
They	settled	down	onto	the	bank,	waving	at	mosquitoes.	Ursto	unstoppered
the	jug	as	Pinosel	unwrapped	the	hamper.	He	reached	for	a	tidbit	and	she
slapped	his	hand	away.	He	offered	her	the	jug	and	she	scowled,	then	accepted	it.
With	her	hands	full,	he	snatched	the	tidbit	then	leaned	back,	content	as	he
popped	the	morsel	into	his	mouth.
Then	gagged.	‘Errant’s	ear,	what	is	this?’
‘That	was	a	clay	ball,	love.	For	the	scribing.	And	now,	we’re	going	to	have
to	dig	us	up	some	more.	Or,	you	are,	since	it	was	you	who	ate	the	one	we	had.’
‘Well,	it	wasn’t	all	bad,	really.	Here,	give	me	that	jug	so’s	I	can	wash	it
down.’
A	pleasant	evening,	Ursto	reflected	somewhat	blearily,	to	just	sit	and	watch
a	pond	melt.
At	least	until	the	giant	demon	trapped	in	the	ice	broke	loose.	At	that
disquieting	thought,	he	shot	his	wife	and	sometime	lover	a	glance,
remembering	the	day	long	ago	when	they’d	been	sitting	here,	all	peaceful	and
the	like,	and	she’d	been	on	at	him	to	get	married	and	he’d	said	–	oh	well,	he’d
said	it	and	now	here	they	were	and	that	might’ve	been	the	Errant’s	nudge	but	he
didn’t	think	so.
No	matter	what	the	Errant	thought.
‘I	seen	that	nostalgic	look	in	your	eyes,	hubby-bubby.	What	say	we	have	a
baby?’
Ursto	choked	a	second	time,	but	on	nothing	so	prosaic	as	a	ball	of	clay.
	
The	central	compound	of	the	Patriotists,	the	Lether	Empire’s	knotted	core	of
fear	and	intimidation,	was	under	siege.	Periodically,	mobs	heaved	against	the
walls,	rocks	and	jugs	of	oil	with	burning	rag	wicks	sailing	over	to	crash	down
in	the	compound.	Flames	had	taken	the	stables	and	four	other	outbuildings
three	nights	past,	and	the	terrible	sound	of	screaming	horses	had	filled	the
smoky	air.	It	had	been	all	the	trapped	Patriotists	could	do	to	keep	the	main
block	from	catching	fire.
Twice	the	main	gate	had	been	breached,	and	a	dozen	agents	had	died
pushing	the	frenzied	citizens	back.	Now	an	enormous	barricade	of	rubble,
charred	beams	and	furniture	blocked	the	passage.	Through	the	stench	and
sooty	puddles	of	the	compound,	figures	walked,	armoured	as	soldiers	might	be
and	awkward	in	the	heavy	gear.	Few	spoke,	few	met	the	eyes	of	others,	in	dread
of	seeing	revealed	the	haunted,	stunned	disbelief	that	resided	in	their	own


souls.
The	world	did	not	work	like	this.	The	people	could	always	be	cowed,	the
ringleaders	isolated	and	betrayed	with	a	purse	of	coin	or,	failing	that,	quietly
removed.	But	the	agents	could	not	set	out	into	the	streets	to	twist	the	dark	deals.
There	were	watchers,	and	gangs	of	thugs	nearby	who	delighted	in	beating
hapless	agents	to	death,	then	flinging	their	heads	back	over	the	wall.	And
whatever	operatives	remained	at	large	in	the	city	had	ceased	all	efforts	at
communicating	–	either	had	gone	into	hiding	or	were	dead.
The	vast	network	had	been	torn	apart.
If	it	had	been	simple,	Tanal	Yathvanar	knew,	if	it	had	been	as	easy	as
negotiating	the	release	of	prisoners	according	to	the	demands	of	the	mob,	then
order	could	be	restored.	But	those	people	beyond	the	compound	wall	were	not
friends	and	relatives	of	the	scores	of	scholars,	intellectuals	and	artists	still
locked	up	in	the	cells	below.	They	didn’t	care	a	whit	about	the	prisoners	and
would	be	just	as	happy	to	see	them	all	burn	along	with	the	main	block.	So	there
was	no	noble	cause	to	all	of	this.	It	was,	he	now	understood,	nothing	but
bloodlust.
Is	it	any	wonder	we	were	needed?	To	control	them.	To	control	their	baser
instincts.	Now	look	what	has	happened.
He	stood	near	the	front	door,	watching	the	pike-wielding	agents	patrolling
the	filthy	compound.	A	number	of	times,	in	fact,	they’d	heard	shouted	demands
for	Tehol	Beddict.	The	mob	wanted	him	for	themselves.	They	wanted	to	tear
him	to	pieces.	The	Grand	Drowning	at	dusk	on	the	morrow	was	not	enough	to
appease	their	savage	need.
But	there	would	be	no	releasing	Tehol	Beddict.	Not	as	long	as	Karos
Invictad	remained	in	charge.
Yet,	if	we	gave	him	up,	they	might	all	calm	down	and	go	away.	And	we	could
begin	again.	Yes.	Were	I	in	charge,	they	could	have	Tehol	Beddict,	with	my
blessing.
But	not	Janath.	Oh	no,	she	is	mine.	For	ever	now.	He	had	been	shocked	to
discover	that	she	had	few	memories	of	her	previous	incarceration,	but	he	had
taken	great	pleasure	in	re-educating	her.	Ha,	re-educating	the	teacher.	I	like
that	one.	At	least	Karos	Invictad	had	been	generous	there,	giving	her	to	him.
And	now	she	resided	in	a	private	cell,	chained	to	a	bed,	and	he	made	use	of	her
day	and	night.	Even	when	the	crowds	raged	against	the	walls	and	agents	were
dying	keeping	them	out,	he	would	lie	atop	her	and	have	his	way.	And	she’d	fast
learned	to	say	all	the	right	things,	how	to	beg	for	more,	whispering	her
undying	desire	(no,	he	would	not	force	her	to	speak	of	love,	because	that	word
was	dead	now	between	them.	For	ever	dead)	until	those	words	of	desire


became	real	for	her.
The	attention.	The	end	to	loneliness.	She	had	even	cried	out	the	last	time,
cried	out	his	name	as	her	back	arched	and	her	limbs	thrashed	against	the
manacles.
Cried	out	for	him:	Tanal	Yathvanar,	who	even	as	a	child	had	known	he	was
destined	for	greatness	–	for	was	that	not	what	they	all	told	him,	over	and	over
again?	Yes,	he	had	found	his	perfect	world,	at	last.	And	what	had	happened?
The	whole	damned	city	had	collapsed,	threatening	all	he	now	possessed.
All	because	of	Karos	Invictad.	Because	he	refused	to	hand	over	Tehol
Beddict	and	spent	all	his	waking	time	staring	into	a	small	wooden	box	at	a	twoheaded	insect	that	had	–	hah	–	outwitted	him	in	its	dim,	obstinate	stupidity.
There	is	a	truth	hidden	in	that,	isn’t	there?	I’m	certain	of	it.	Karos	and	his	twoheaded	insect,	going	round	and	round	and	round	and	so	it	will	go	until	it	dies.
And	when	it	does,	the	great	Invigilator	will	go	mad.
But	he	now	suspected	he	would	not	be	able	to	wait	for	that.	The	mob	was
too	hungry.
Beyond	the	walls	there	was	quiet,	for	the	moment,	but	something	vast	and
thousand-headed	was	seething	on	the	other	side	of	Creeper	Canal,	and	would
soon	cross	over	from	Far	Reaches	and	make	its	way	down	to	North	Tiers.	He
could	hear	its	heavy	susurration,	a	tide	in	the	darkness	pouring	down	streets,
gushing	into	and	out	of	alleys,	spreading	bloody	and	black	into	avenues	and
lanes.	He	could	smell	its	hunger	in	the	bitter	smoke.
And	it	comes	for	us,	and	it	will	not	wait.	Not	even	for	Karos	Invictad,	the
Invigilator	of	the	Patriotists,	the	wealthiest	man	in	all	the	empire.
He	allowed	himself	a	soft	laugh,	then	he	turned	about	and	entered	the	main
block.	Down	the	dusty	corridor,	walking	unmindful	over	crusted	streaks	left
behind	when	the	wounded	and	dying	had	been	dragged	inside.	The	smell	of
stale	sweat,	spilled	urine	and	faeces	–	as	bad	as	the	cells	below	–	and	yes,	are
we	not	prisoners	now,	too?	With	bare	scraps	for	food	and	well	water	fouled
with	ashes	and	blood.	Trapped	here	with	a	death	sentence	hanging	round	our
necks	with	the	weight	of	ten	thousand	docks,	and	nothing	but	deep	water	on	all
sides.
Another	thought	to	amuse	him;	another	thought	to	record	in	his	private
books.
Up	the	stairs	now,	his	boots	echoing	on	the	cut	limestone,	and	into	the
corridor	leading	to	the	Invigilator ’s	office,	Karos	Invictad’s	sanctum.	His	own
private	cell.	No	guards	in	the	passage	–	Karos	no	longer	trusted	them.	In	fact,
he	no	longer	trusted	anyone.	Except	me.	And	that	will	prove	his	greatest	error.
Reaching	the	door	he	pushed	it	open	without	knocking	and	stepped	inside,


then	halted.
The	room	stank,	and	its	source	was	sprawled	in	the	chair	opposite	the
Invigilator	and	his	desk.
Tehol	Beddict.	Smeared	in	filth,	cut	and	scabbed	and	bruised	–	Karos
Invictad’s	prohibition	against	such	treatment	was	over,	it	seemed.
‘I	have	a	guest,’	the	Invigilator	snapped.	‘You	were	not	invited,	Tanal
Yathvanar.	Furthermore,	I	did	not	hear	you	knock,	yet	another	sign	of	your
growing	insolence.’
‘The	mob	will	attack	again,’	Tanal	said,	eyes	flicking	to	Tehol.	‘Before
dawn.	I	thought	it	best	to	inform	you	of	our	weakened	defences.	We	have	but
fourteen	agents	remaining	still	able	to	defend	us.	This	time,	I	fear,	they	will
break	through.’
‘Fame	is	murderous,’	Tehol	Beddict	said	through	split	lips.	‘I	hesitate	in
recommending	it.’
Karos	Invictad	continued	glaring	at	Tanal	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he
said,	‘In	the	hidden	room	–	yes,	you	know	of	it,	I’m	aware,	so	I	need	not
provide	any	more	details	–	in	the	hidden	room,	then,	Tanal,	you	will	find	a
large	chest	filled	with	coins.	Stacked	beside	it	are	a	few	hundred	small	cloth
bags.	Gather	the	wounded	and	have	them	fill	sacks	with	coins.	Then	deliver
them	to	the	agents	at	the	walls.	They	will	be	their	weapons	tonight.’
‘That	could	turn	on	you,’	Tehol	observed,	beating	Tanal	Yathvanar	to	the
thought,	‘if	they	conclude	there’s	more	still	inside.’
‘They’ll	be	too	busy	fighting	each	other	to	conclude	anything,’	Karos	said
dismissively.	‘Now,	Tanal,	if	there	is	nothing	else,	go	back	to	your	sweet
victim,	who	will	no	doubt	plead	desperately	for	your	sordid	attention.’
Tanal	licked	his	lips.	Was	it	time?	Was	he	ready?
And	then	he	saw,	in	the	Invigilator ’s	eyes,	an	absolute	awareness,	chilling
Tanal’s	bones.	He	read	my	mind.	He	knows	my	thoughts.
Tanal	quickly	saluted,	then	hurried	from	the	room.	How	can	I	defeat	such	a
man?	He	is	ever	ten	steps	ahead	of	me.	Perhaps	I	should	wait,	until	the	troubles
have	passed,	then	make	my	move	when	he	relaxes,	when	he	feels	most	secure.
He	had	gone	to	Invictad’s	office	to	confirm	that	the	man	remained	alone
with	his	puzzle.	Whereupon	he	had	planned	to	head	down	to	the	cells	and
collect	Tehol	Beddict.	Bound,	gagged	and	hooded,	up	and	out	into	the
compound.	To	appease	the	mob,	to	see	them	away	and	so	save	his	own	life.
Instead,	the	Invigilator	had	Tehol	in	his	very	office.
For	what?	A	conversation?	An	extended	gloat?	Oh,	each	time	I	think	I	know
that	man…
He	found	an	agent	and	quickly	conveyed	Invictad’s	instruction,	as	well	as


directions	to	the	once-hidden	room.	Then	he	continued	on,	only	faintly	aware
of	the	irony	in	following	the	Invigilator ’s	orders	to	the	letter.
Onto	a	lower	level,	down	another	corridor,	this	one	thicker	with	dust	than
most	of	the	others,	barring	where	his	own	boots	had	scraped	an	eager	path.	To
the	door,	where	he	drew	a	key	and	unlocked	the	latch.	Stepping	inside.
‘I	knew	you’d	be	lonely,’	he	said.
The	lantern’s	wick	had	almost	burned	down	and	he	went	over	to	the	table
where	it	sat.	‘Thirsty?	I’m	sure	you	are.’	He	glanced	over	his	shoulder	and	saw
her	watching	him,	saw	the	desire	in	her	eyes.	‘There’s	more	trouble	in	the	city,
Janath.	But	I	will	protect	you.	I	will	always	protect	you.	You	are	safe.	You	do
understand	that,	yes?	For	ever	safe.’
She	nodded,	and	he	saw	her	spread	her	legs	wider	on	the	bed,	then	invite
him	with	a	thrust	of	her	pelvis.
And	Tanal	Yathvanar	smiled.	He	had	his	perfect	woman.
	
Karos	Invictad	regarded	Tehol	Beddict	from	above	steepled	fingers.	‘Very
close,’	he	said	after	a	time.
Tehol,	who	had	been	staring	dazedly	at	the	puzzle	box	on	the	desk,	stirred
slightly	then	looked	up	with	his	mismatched	eyes.
‘Very	close,’	Karos	repeated.	‘The	measure	of	your	intelligence,	compared
with	mine.	You	are,	I	believe,	the	closest	to	my	equal	of	any	man	I	have	met.’
‘Really?	Thank	you.’
‘I	normally	do	not	express	my	admiration	for	intelligence	in	others.
Primarily	because	I	am	surrounded	by	idiots	and	fools—’
‘Even	idiots	and	fools	need	supreme	leaders,’	Tehol	cut	in,	then	smiled,
then	winced	as	cuts	opened	on	his	lips,	then	smiled	more	broadly	than	before.
‘Attempts	at	humour,	alas,’	Karos	said	with	a	sigh,	‘poorly	disguise	the
deficiencies	of	one’s	intelligence.	Perhaps	that	alone	is	what	distinguishes	the
two	of	us.’
Tehol’s	smile	faded	and	suddenly	he	looked	dismayed.	‘You	never	attempt
humour,	Invigilator?’
‘The	mind	is	capable	of	playing	countless	games,	Tehol	Beddict.	Some	are
useful.	Others	are	worthless,	a	waste	of	time.	Humour	is	a	prime	example	of
the	latter.’
‘Funny.’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘Oh,	sorry,	I	was	just	thinking.	Funny.’
‘What	is?’


‘You	wouldn’t	get	it,	alas.’
‘You	actually	imagine	yourself	brighter	than	me?’
‘I	have	no	idea	regarding	that.	But,	since	you	abjure	all	aspects	of	humour,
anything	I	might	consider	and	then	observe	with	the	word	“funny”	is	obviously
something	you	would	not	understand.’	Tehol	then	leaned	slightly	forward.	‘But
wait,	that’s	just	it!’
‘What	nonsense	are	you—’
‘It’s	why	I	am,	after	all,	much	smarter	than	you.’
Karos	Invictad	smiled.	‘Indeed.	Please,	do	explain	yourself.’
‘Why,	without	a	sense	of	humour,	you	are	blind	to	so	much	in	this	world.
To	human	nature.	To	the	absurdity	of	so	much	that	we	say	and	do.	Consider
this,	a	most	poignant	example:	a	mob	approaches,	seeking	my	head	because	I
stole	all	their	money,	and	what	do	you	do	to	appease	them?	Why,	throw	them
all	the	money	you’ve	stolen	from	them!	And	yet,	it’s	clear	that	you	were
completely	unaware	of	just	how	hilarious	that	really	is	–	you	made	your
decision	unmindful	of	what,	eighty	per	cent	of	its	delicious	nuances.	Ninety	per
cent!	Ninety-three	per	cent!	And	a	half	or	just	shy	of	a	half,	but	more	than	a
third	but	less	than…oh,	somewhere	close	to	a	half,	then.’
Karos	Invictad	waggled	a	finger.	‘Incorrect,	I’m	afraid.	It	is	not	that	I	was
unmindful.	It	is	that	I	was	indifferent	to	such	nuances,	as	you	call	them.	They
are,	in	fact,	entirely	meaningless.’
‘Well,	you	may	have	a	point	there,	since	you	seem	capable	of	being
appreciative	of	your	own	brilliance	despite	your	ignorance.	But	let’s	see,
perhaps	I	can	come	up	with	another	example.’
‘You	are	wasting	your	time,	Tehol	Beddict.	And	mine.’
‘I	am?	It	didn’t	seem	you	were	very	busy.	What	is	so	occupying	you,
Invigilator?	Apart	from	anarchy	in	the	streets,	economic	collapse,	invading
armies,	dead	agents	and	burning	horses,	I	mean.’
The	answer	was	involuntary,	as	Karos	Invictad’s	eyes	flicked	down	to	the
puzzle	box.	He	corrected	himself	–	but	too	late,	for	he	saw	a	dawning
realization	in	Tehol’s	bruised	face,	and	the	man	leaned	yet	farther	forward	in
his	chair.
‘What’s	this,	then?	Some	magic	receptacle?	In	which	will	be	found	all	the
solutions	to	this	troubled	world?	Must	be,	to	so	demand	all	of	your	formidable
genius.	Wait,	is	something	moving	in	there?’
‘The	puzzle	is	nothing,’	Karos	Invictad	said,	waving	one	bejewelled	hand.
‘We	were	speaking	of	your	failings.’
Tehol	Beddict	leaned	back,	grimacing.	‘Oh,	my	failings.	Was	that	the	topic
of	this	sizzling	discourse?	I’m	afraid	I	got	confused.’


‘Some	puzzles	have	no	solution,’	Karos	said,	and	he	could	hear	how	his
own	voice	had	grown	higher-pitched.	He	forced	himself	to	draw	a	deep	breath,
then	said	in	a	lower	tone,	‘Someone	sought	to	confound	me.	Suggesting	that	a
solution	was	possible.	But	I	see	now	that	no	solution	was	ever	possible.	The
fool	did	not	play	fair,	and	I	so	dislike	such	creatures	and	could	I	find	him	or
her	I	would	make	an	immediate	arrest,	and	this	entire	building	would	echo	with
the	fool’s	screams	and	shrieks.’
Karos	paused	when	he	saw	Tehol	frowning	at	him.	‘What	is	it?’
‘Nothing.	Funny,	though.’
The	Invigilator	reached	for	his	sceptre	and	lifted	it	from	the	desktop,
pleased	as	ever	with	the	solid	weight	of	the	symbol,	how	it	felt	in	his	hand.
‘Okay,	not	funny.	Sorry	I	said	anything.	Don’t	hit	me	with	that	thing	again.
Please.	Although,’	Tehol	added,	‘considering	it’s	the	symbol	of	your	office,
hitting	me	with	it,	while	somewhat	heavy-handed,	is	nevertheless	somewhat…
funny.’
‘I	am	thinking	of	giving	you	over	to	the	citizens	of	Letheras,’	Karos	said,
glancing	up	to	gauge	how	the	man	would	react	to	that	statement.	And	was
surprised	to	see	the	fool	smiling	again.	‘You	think	I	jest?’
‘Never.	Obviously.’
‘Then	you	would	enjoy	being	torn	apart	by	the	mob?’
‘I	doubt	it.	But	then,	I	wouldn’t	be,	would	I?	Torn	apart,	I	mean.’
‘Oh,	and	why	not?’
‘Because,	not	only	do	I	have	more	money	than	you,	Invigilator,	I	am	–
unlike	you	–	entirely	indifferent	regarding	who	ends	up	owning	it.	Hand	me
over,	by	all	means,	sir.	And	watch	me	buy	my	life.’
Karos	Invictad	stared	at	the	man.
Tehol	wagged	a	broken	finger.	‘People	with	no	sense	or	appreciation	of
humour,	Invigilator,	always	take	money	too	seriously.	Its	possession,	anyway.
Which	is	why	they	spend	all	their	time	stacking	coins,	counting	this	and	that,
gazing	lovingly	over	their	hoards	and	so	on.	They’re	compensating	for	the
abject	penury	everywhere	else	in	their	lives.	Nice	rings,	by	the	way.’
Karos	forced	himself	to	remain	calm	in	the	face	of	such	overt	insults.	‘I
said	I	was	thinking	of	handing	you	over.	Alas,	you	have	just	given	me	reason
not	to.	So,	you	assure	your	own	Drowning	come	the	morrow.	Satisfied?’
‘Well,	if	my	satisfaction	is	essential,	then	might	I	suggest—’
‘Enough,	Tehol	Beddict.	You	no	longer	interest	me.’
‘Good,	can	I	go	now?’
‘Yes.’	Karos	rose,	tapping	the	sceptre	onto	one	shoulder.	‘And	I,	alas,	must
needs	escort	you.’


‘Good	help	is	hard	to	keep	alive	these	days.’
‘Stand	up,	Tehol	Beddict.’
The	man	had	some	difficulty	following	that	instruction,	but	the	Invigilator
waited,	having	learned	to	be	patient	with	such	things.
As	soon	as	Tehol	fully	straightened,	however,	a	look	of	astonishment	lit
his	features.	‘Why,	it’s	a	two-headed	insect!	Going	round	and	round!’
‘To	the	door	now,’	Karos	said.
‘What’s	the	challenge?’
‘It	is	pointless—’
‘Oh	now,	really,	Invigilator.	You	claim	to	be	smarter	than	me,	and	I’m
about	to	die	–	I	like	puzzles.	I	design	them,	in	fact.	Very	difficult	puzzles.’
‘You	are	lying.	I	know	all	the	designers	and	you	do	not	number	among
them.’
‘Well,	all	right.	I	designed	just	one.’
‘Too	bad,	then,	you	will	be	unable	to	offer	it	to	me,	for	my	momentary
pleasure,	since	you	are	now	returning	to	your	cell.’
‘That’s	all	right,’	Tehol	replied.	‘It	was	more	of	a	joke	than	a	puzzle,
anyway.’
Karos	Invictad	grimaced,	then	waved	Tehol	towards	the	door	with	the
sceptre.
As	he	slowly	shuffled	over,	Tehol	said,	‘I	figured	out	the	challenge,
anyway.	It’s	to	make	the	bug	stop	going	round	and	round.’
The	Invigilator	blocked	him	with	the	sceptre.	‘I	told	you,	there	is	no
solution.’
‘I	think	there	is.	I	think	I	know	it,	in	fact.	Tell	you	what,	sir.	I	solve	that
puzzle	there	on	your	desk	and	you	postpone	my	Drowning.	Say,	by	forty	years
or	so.’
‘Agreed.	Because	you	cannot.’	He	watched	Tehol	Beddict	walk	like	an	old
man	over	to	the	desk.	Then	lean	over.	‘You	cannot	touch	the	insect!’
‘Of	course,’	Tehol	replied.	And	leaned	yet	farther	over,	lowering	his	face
towards	the	box.
Karos	Invictad	hurried	forward	to	stand	beside	him.	‘Do	not	touch!’
‘I	won’t.’
‘The	tiles	can	be	rearranged,	but	I	assure	you—’
‘No	need	to	rearrange	the	tiles.’
Karos	Invictad	found	his	heart	pounding	hard	in	his	chest.	‘You	are	wasting
more	of	my	time.’
‘No,	I’m	putting	an	end	to	your	wasting	your	time,	sir.’	He	paused,	cocked
his	head.	‘Probably	a	mistake.	Oh	well.’


And	lowered	his	face	down	directly	over	the	box,	then	gusted	a	sharp
breath	against	one	of	the	tiles.	Momentarily	clouding	it.	And	the	insect,	with
one	of	its	heads	facing	that	suddenly	opaque,	suddenly	non-reflective	surface,
simply	stopped.	Reached	up	a	leg	and	scratched	its	abdomen.	As	the	mist
cleared	on	the	tile,	it	scratched	once	more,	then	resumed	its	circling.
Tehol	straightened.	‘I’m	free!	Free!’
Karos	Invictad	could	not	speak	for	ten,	fifteen	heartbeats.	His	chest	was
suddenly	tight,	sweat	beading	on	his	skin,	then	he	said	in	a	rasp,	‘Don’t	be	a
fool.’
‘You	lied?	Oh,	I	can’t	believe	how	you	lied	to	me!	Well	then,	piss	on	you
and	your	pissy	stupid	puzzle,	too!’
The	Invigilator ’s	sceptre	swept	in	an	arc,	intersecting	with	that	box	on	the
desk,	shattering	it,	sending	its	wreckage	flying	across	the	room.	The	insect
struck	a	wall	and	stayed	there,	then	it	began	climbing	towards	the	ceiling.
‘Run!’	whispered	Tehol	Beddict.	‘Run!’
The	sceptre	swung	next	into	Tehol’s	chest,	snapping	ribs.
	
‘Pull	the	chain	tighter	on	my	ankles,’	Janath	said.	‘Force	my	legs	wider.’
‘You	enjoy	being	helpless,	don’t	you?’
‘Yes.	Yes!’
Smiling,	Tanal	Yathvanar	knelt	at	the	side	of	the	bed.	The	chain	beneath	ran
through	holes	in	the	bed	frame	at	each	corner.	Pins	held	the	lengths	in	place.	To
tighten	the	ones	snaring	her	ankles	all	he	needed	to	do	was	pull	a	pin	on	each
side	at	the	foot	of	the	bed,	drawing	the	chain	down	as	far	as	he	could,	and,	as	he
listened	to	her	moans,	replace	the	pins.
Then	he	rose	and	sat	down	on	the	edge	of	the	bed.	Stared	down	at	her.
Naked,	most	of	the	bruises	fading	since	he	no	longer	liked	hurting	her.	A
beautiful	body	indeed,	getting	thinner	which	he	preferred	in	his	women.	He
reached	out,	then	drew	his	hand	away	again.	He	didn’t	like	any	touching	until
he	was	ready.	She	moaned	a	second	time,	arching	her	back.
Tanal	Yathvanar	undressed.	Then	he	crawled	up	onto	the	bed,	loomed	over
her	with	his	knees	between	her	legs,	his	hands	pressing	down	on	the	mattress	to
either	side	of	her	chest.
He	saw	how	the	manacles	had	torn	at	her	wrists.	He	would	need	to	treat	that
–	those	wounds	were	looking	much	worse.
Slowly,	Tanal	settled	onto	her	body,	felt	her	shiver	beneath	him	as	he	slid
smoothly	inside.	So	easy,	so	welcoming.	She	groaned,	and,	studying	her	face,
he	said,	‘Do	you	want	me	to	kiss	you	now?’


‘Yes!’
And	he	brought	his	head	down	as	he	made	his	first	deep	thrust.
	
Janath,	once	eminent	scholar,	had	found	in	herself	a	beast,	prodded	awake	as	if
from	a	slumber	of	centuries,	perhaps	millennia.	A	beast	that	understood
captivity,	that	understood	that,	sometimes,	what	needed	doing	entailed
excruciating	pain.
Beneath	the	manacles	on	her	wrists,	mostly	hidden	by	scabs,	blood	and
torn	shreds	of	skin,	the	very	bones	had	been	worn	down,	chipped,	cracked.	By
constant,	savage	tugging.	Animal	rhythm,	blind	to	all	else,	deaf	to	every
scream	of	her	nerves.	Tugging,	and	tugging.
Until	the	pins	beneath	the	frame	began	to	bend.	Ever	so	slowly,	bending,
the	wood	holes	chewed	into,	the	pins	bending,	gouging	through	the	holes.
And	now,	with	the	extra	length	of	chain	that	came	when	Tanal	Yathvanar
had	reset	the	pins	at	the	foot	of	the	bed	frame,	she	had	enough	slack.
To	reach	with	her	left	hand	and	grasp	a	clutch	of	his	hair.	To	push	his	head
to	the	right,	where	she	had,	in	a	clattering	blur,	brought	most	of	the	length	of
the	chain	through	the	hole,	enough	to	wrap	round	his	neck	and	then	twist	her
hand	down	under	and	then	over;	and	in	sudden,	excruciating	determination,	she
pulled	her	left	arm	up,	higher	and	higher	with	that	arm	–	the	manacle	and	her
right	wrist	pinned	to	the	frame,	tugged	down	as	far	as	it	could	go.
He	thrashed,	sought	to	dig	his	fingers	under	the	chain,	and	she	reached
ever	harder,	her	face	brushing	his	own,	her	eyes	seeing	the	sudden	blue	hue	of
his	skin,	his	bulging	eyes	and	jutting	tongue.
He	could	have	beaten	against	her.	He	could	have	driven	his	thumbs	into	her
eyes.	He	could	probably	have	killed	her	in	time	to	survive	all	of	this.	But	she
had	waited	for	his	breath	to	release,	which	ever	came	at	the	moment	he	pushed
in	his	first	thrust.	That	breath,	that	she	had	heard	a	hundred	times	now,	close	to
her	ear,	as	he	made	use	of	her	body,	that	breath	is	what	killed	him.
He	needed	air.	He	had	none.	Nothing	else	mattered.	He	tore	at	his	own
throat	to	get	his	fingers	under	the	chain.	She	pushed	her	left	arm	straight,
elbow	locking,	and	loosed	her	own	scream	as	the	manacle	round	her	right
wrist	shifted	as	a	bolt	slipped	down	into	the	hole.
That	blue,	bulging	face,	that	flooding	burst	from	his	penis,	followed	by	the
hot	gush	of	urine.
Staring	eyes,	veins	blossoming	red,	then	purple	until	the	whites	were
completely	filled.
She	looked	right	into	them.	Looked	into,	seeking	his	soul,	seeking	to	lock


her	gaze	with	that	pathetic,	vile,	dying	soul.
I	kill	you.	I	kill	you.	I	kill	you!
The	beast’s	silent	words.
The	beast’s	gleeful,	savage	assertion.	Her	eyes	shouted	it	at	him,	shouted	it
into	his	soul.
Tanal	Yathvanar.	I	kill	you!
	
Taralack	Veed	spat	into	his	hands,	rubbed	them	together	to	spread	out	the
phlegm,	then	raised	them	and	swept	his	hair	back.	‘I	smell	more	smoke,’	he
said.
Senior	Assessor,	who	sat	opposite	him	at	the	small	table,	raised	his	thin
brows.	‘It	surprises	me	that	you	can	smell	anything,	Taralack	Veed.’
‘I	have	lived	in	the	wild,	Cabalhii.	I	can	follow	an	antelope’s	spore	that’s	a
day	old.	This	city	is	crumbling.	The	Tiste	Edur	have	left.	And	suddenly	the
Emperor	changes	his	mind	and	slaughters	all	the	challengers	until	but	two
remain.	And	does	anyone	even	care?’	He	rose	suddenly	and	walked	to	the	bed,
on	which	he	had	laid	out	his	weapons.	He	unsheathed	his	scimitar	and	peered
down	at	the	edge	once	again.
‘You	could	trim	your	eyelashes	with	that	sword	by	now.’
‘Why	would	I	do	that?’	Taralack	asked	distractedly.
‘Just	a	suggestion,	Gral.’
‘I	was	a	servant	of	the	Nameless	Ones.’
‘I	know,’	Senior	Assessor	replied.
Taralack	turned,	studied	with	narrowed	eyes	the	soft	little	man	with	his
painted	face.	‘You	do?’
‘The	Nameless	Ones	are	known	in	my	homeland.	Do	you	know	why	they
are	called	that?	I	will	tell	you	as	I	see	that	you	do	not.	The	Initiated	must
surrender	their	names,	in	the	belief	that	to	know	oneself	by	one’s	own	name	is
to	give	it	too	much	power.	The	name	becomes	the	identity,	becomes	the	face,
becomes	the	self.	Remove	the	name	and	power	returns.’
‘They	made	no	such	demands	of	me.’
‘Because	you	are	little	more	than	a	tool,	no	different	from	that	sword	in
your	hands.	Needless	to	say,	the	Nameless	Ones	do	not	give	names	to	their
tools.	And	in	a	very	short	time	you	will	have	outlived	your	usefulness—’
‘And	I	will	be	free	once	more.	To	return	home.’
‘Home,’	mused	Senior	Assessor.	‘Your	tribe,	there	to	right	all	your
wrongs,	to	mend	all	the	wounds	you	delivered	in	your	zealous	youth.	You	will
come	to	them	with	wizened	eyes,	with	slowed	heart	and	a	gentling	hand.	And


one	night,	as	you	lie	sleeping	in	your	furs	in	the	hut	where	you	were	born,
someone	will	slip	in	and	slide	a	blade	across	your	throat.	Because	the	world
within	your	mind	is	not	the	world	beyond.	You	are	named	Taralack	Veed	and
they	have	taken	of	its	power.	From	the	name,	the	face.	From	the	name,	the	self,
and	with	it	all	the	history,	and	so	by	your	own	power	–	so	freely	given	away
long,	long	ago	–	you	are	slain.’
Taralack	Veed	stared,	the	scimitar	trembling	in	his	hands.	‘And	this,	then,	is
why	you	are	known	only	as	Senior	Assessor.’
The	Cabalhii	shrugged.	‘The	Nameless	Ones	are	fools	for	the	most	part.
Said	proof	to	be	found	in	your	presence	here,	with	your	Jhag	companion.	Even
so,	we	share	certain	understandings,	which	is	not	too	surprising,	since	we	both
came	from	the	same	civilization.	From	the	First	Empire	of	Dessimbelackis.’
‘It	was	a	common	joke	in	Seven	Cities,’	the	Gral	said,	sneering.	‘One	day
the	sun	will	die	and	one	day	there	will	be	no	civil	war	in	the	Cabal	Isles.’
‘Peace	has	at	long	last	been	won,’	Senior	Assessor	replied,	folding	his
hands	together	on	his	lap.
‘Then	why	does	every	conversation	I	have	with	you	of	late	make	me	want
to	throttle	you?’
The	Cabalhii	sighed.	‘Perhaps	I	have	been	away	from	home	too	long.’
Grimacing,	Taralack	Veed	slammed	the	scimitar	back	in	its	scabbard.
From	the	corridor	beyond	a	door	thumped	open	and	the	two	men	in	the
room	stiffened,	their	gazes	meeting.
Soft	footsteps,	passing	the	door.
With	a	curse	Taralack	began	strapping	on	his	weapons.	Senior	Assessor
rose,	adjusting	his	robe	before	heading	to	the	door	and	opening	it	just	enough
to	peer	outside.	Then	he	ducked	back	in.	‘He	is	on	his	way,’	he	said	in	a
whisper.
Nodding,	Taralack	joined	the	monk	who	opened	the	door	a	second	time.
They	went	out	into	the	corridor,	even	as	they	heard	the	sound	of	a	momentary
scuffle,	then	a	grunt,	after	which	something	crunched	on	the	stone	floor.
Taralack	Veed	in	the	lead,	they	padded	quickly	down	the	corridor.
At	the	threshold	of	the	practice	yard’s	door	was	a	crumpled	heap	–	the
guard.	From	the	compound	beyond	there	was	a	startled	shout,	a	scuffle,	then
the	sound	of	the	outer	gate	opening.
Taralack	Veed	hurried	out	into	the	darkness.	His	mouth	was	dry.	His	heart
pounded	heavy	in	his	chest.	Senior	Assessor	had	said	that	Icarium	would	not
wait.	That	Icarium	was	a	god	and	no-one	could	hold	back	a	god,	when	it	had	set
out	to	do	what	it	would	do.	They	will	find	him	gone.	Will	they	search	the	city?
No,	they	do	not	even	dare	unbar	the	palace	gate.


Icarium?	Lifestealer,	what	do	you	seek?
Will	you	return	to	stand	before	the	Emperor	and	his	cursed	sword?
The	monk	had	told	Taralack	to	be	ready,	to	not	sleep	this	night.	And	this	is
why.
They	reached	the	gate,	stepped	over	the	bodies	of	two	guards,	then	edged
outside.
And	saw	him,	standing	motionless	forty	paces	down	the	street,	in	its	very
centre.	A	group	of	four	figures,	wielding	clubs,	were	converging	on	him.	At
ten	paces	away	they	halted,	then	began	backing	away.	Then	they	whirled	about
and	ran,	one	of	the	clubs	clattering	on	the	cobbles.
Icarium	stared	up	at	the	night	sky.
Somewhere	to	the	north,	three	buildings	were	burning,	reflecting	lurid
crimson	on	the	bellies	of	the	clouds	of	smoke	seething	overhead.	Distant
screams	lifted	into	the	air.	Taralack	Veed,	his	breath	coming	in	gasps,	drew	out
his	sword.	Thugs	and	murderers	might	run	from	Icarium,	but	that	was	no
assurance	that	they	would	do	the	same	for	himself	and	the	monk.
Icarium	lowered	his	gaze,	then	looked	about,	as	if	only	now	discovering
where	he	was.	Another	moment’s	pause,	then	he	set	out.
Silent,	the	Gral	and	the	Cabalhii	followed.
	
Samar	Dev	licked	dry	lips.	He	was	lying	on	his	bed,	apparently	asleep.	And
come	the	dawn,	he	would	take	his	flint	sword,	strap	on	his	armour,	and	walk	in
the	midst	of	Letherii	soldiers	to	the	Imperial	Arena.	And	he	would	walk,	alone,
out	onto	the	sand,	the	few	hundred	onlookers	on	the	marble	benches	raising
desultory	hooting	and	cat-calls.	There	would	be	no	bet-takers,	no	frenzied
shouting	of	odds.	Because	this	game	always	ended	the	same.	And	now,	did
anyone	even	care?
In	her	mind	she	watched	him	stride	to	the	centre	of	the	arena.	Would	he	be
looking	at	the	Emperor?	Studying	Rhulad	Sengar	as	he	emerged	from	the	far
gate?	The	lightness	of	his	step,	the	unconscious	patterns	the	sword	made	at	the
end	of	his	hands,	patterns	that	whispered	of	all	that	muscles	and	bones	had
learned	and	were	wont	to	do?
No,	he	will	be	as	he	always	is.	He	will	be	Karsa	Orlong.	He’ll	not	even	look
at	the	Emperor,	until	Rhulad	draws	closer,	until	the	two	of	them	begin.
Not	overconfident.	Not	indifferent.	Not	even	contemptuous.	No	easy
explanations	for	this	Toblakai	warrior.	He	would	be	within	himself,	entirely
within	himself,	until	it	was	time…to	witness.
But	nothing	would	turn	out	right,	Samar	Dev	knew.	Not	all	of	Karsa


Orlong’s	prowess,	nor	that	ever-flooding,	ever-cascading	torrent	that	was	the
Toblakai’s	will;	nor	even	this	host	of	spirits	trapped	in	the	knife	she	now	held,
and	those	others	who	trailed	the	Toblakai’s	shadow	–	souls	of	the	slain,	desert
godlings	and	ancient	demons	of	the	sands	and	rock	–	spirits	that	might	well
burst	forth,	enwreathing	their	champion	god	(and	was	he	truly	that?	A	god?
She	did	not	know)	with	all	their	power.	No,	none	of	it	would	matter	in	the	end.
Kill	Rhulad	Sengar.	Kill	him	thrice.	Kill	him	a	dozen	times.	In	the	end	he
will	stand,	sword	bloodied,	and	then	will	come	Icarium,	the	very	last.
To	begin	it	all	again.
Karsa	Orlong,	reduced	to	a	mere	name	among	the	list	of	the	slain.	Nothing
more	than	that.	For	this	extraordinary	warrior.	And	this	is	what	you	whisper,
Fallen	One,	as	your	holy	credo.	Grandness	and	potential	and	promise,	they	all
break	in	the	end.
Even	your	great	champion,	this	terrible,	tortured	Tiste	Edur	–	you	see	him
broken	again	and	again.	You	fling	him	back	each	time	less	than	what	he	was,	yet
with	ever	more	power	in	his	hands.	He	is	there,	yes,	for	us	all.	The	power	and
its	broken	wielder	broken	by	his	power.
Karsa	Orlong	sat	up.	‘Someone	has	left,’	he	said.
Samar	Dev	blinked.	‘What?’
He	bared	his	teeth.	‘Icarium.	He	is	gone.’
‘What	do	you	mean,	gone?	He’s	left?	To	go	where?’
‘It	does	not	matter,’	the	Toblakai	replied,	swinging	round	to	settle	his	feet
on	the	floor.	He	stared	across	at	her.	‘He	knows.’
‘Knows	what,	Karsa	Orlong?’
The	warrior	stood,	his	smile	broadening,	twisting	the	crazed	tattoos	on	his
face.	‘That	he	will	not	be	needed.’
‘Karsa—’
‘You	will	know	when,	woman.	You	will	know.’
Know	what,	damn	you?	‘They	wouldn’t	have	just	let	him	go,’	she	said.	‘So
he	must	have	taken	down	all	the	guards.	Karsa,	this	is	our	last	chance.	To	head
out	into	the	city.	Leave	all	this—’
‘You	do	not	understand.	The	Emperor	is	nothing.	The	Emperor,	Samar
Dev,	is	not	the	one	he	wants.’
Who?	Icarium?	No	–	‘Karsa	Orlong,	what	secret	do	you	hold?	What	do
you	know	about	the	Crippled	God?’
The	Toblakai	rose.	‘It	is	nearly	dawn,’	he	said.	‘Nearly	time.’
‘Karsa,	please—’
‘Will	you	witness?’
‘Do	I	have	to?’


He	studied	her	for	a	moment,	and	then	his	next	words	shocked	her	to	the
core	of	her	soul:	‘I	need	you,	woman.’
‘Why?’	she	demanded,	suddenly	close	to	tears.
‘To	witness.	To	do	what	needs	doing	when	the	time	comes.’	He	drew	a
deep,	satisfied	breath,	looking	away,	his	chest	swelling	until	she	thought	his
ribs	would	creak.	‘I	live	for	days	like	these,’	he	said.
And	now	she	did	weep.
Grandness,	promise,	potential.	Fallen	One,	must	you	so	share	out	your
pain?
‘Women	always	get	weak	once	a	month,	don’t	they?’
‘Go	to	Hood,	bastard.’
‘And	quick	to	anger,	too.’
She	was	on	her	feet.	Pounding	a	fist	into	his	solid	chest.
Five	times,	six	–	he	caught	her	wrist,	not	hard	enough	to	hurt,	but	stopping
those	swings	as	if	a	manacle	had	snapped	tight.
She	glared	up	at	him.
And	he	was,	for	his	sake,	not	smiling.
Her	fist	opened	and	she	found	herself	almost	physically	pulled	up	and	into
his	eyes	–	seeing	them,	it	seemed,	for	the	first	time.	Their	immeasurable	depth,
their	bright	ferocity	and	joy.
Karsa	Orlong	nodded.	‘Better,	Samar	Dev.’
‘You	patronizing	shit.’
He	released	her	arm.	‘I	learn	more	each	day	about	women.	Because	of
you.’
‘You	still	have	a	lot	to	learn,	Karsa	Orlong,’	she	said,	turning	away	and
wiping	at	her	cheeks.
‘Yes,	and	that	is	a	journey	I	will	enjoy.’
‘I	really	should	hate	you,’	she	said.	‘I’m	sure	most	people	who	meet	you
hate	you,	eventually.’
The	Toblakai	snorted.	‘The	Emperor	will.’
‘So	now	I	must	walk	with	you.	Now	I	must	watch	you	die.’
From	outside	there	came	shouts.
‘They	have	discovered	the	escape,’	Karsa	Orlong	said,	collecting	his
sword.	‘Soon	they	will	come	for	us.	Are	you	ready,	Samar	Dev?’
‘No.’
	
The	water	had	rotted	her	feet,	he	saw.	White	as	the	skin	of	a	corpse,	shreds
hanging	loose	to	reveal	gaping	red	wounds,	and	as	she	drew	them	onto	the


altar	top	and	tucked	them	under	her,	the	Errant	suddenly	understood	something.
About	humanity,	about	the	seething	horde	in	its	cruel	avalanche	through
history.
The	taste	of	ashes	filling	his	mouth,	he	looked	away,	studied	the	runnels	of
water	streaming	down	the	stone	walls	of	the	chamber.	‘It	rises,’	he	said,
looking	back	at	her.
‘He	was	never	as	lost	as	he	thought	he	was,’	Feather	Witch	said,	reaching
up	distractedly	to	twirl	the	filthy	strands	of	her	once-golden	hair.	‘Are	you	not
eager,	dear	god	of	mine?	This	empire	is	about	to	kneel	at	your	feet.	And,’	she
suddenly	smiled,	revealing	brown	teeth,	‘at	mine.’
Yes,	at	yours,	Feather	Witch.	Those	rotting,	half-dead	appendages	that	you
could	have	used	to	run.	Long	ago.	The	empire	kneels,	and	lips	quiver	forth.	A
blossom	kiss.	So	cold,	so	like	paste,	and	the	smell,	oh,	the	smell…
‘Is	it	not	time?’	she	asked,	with	an	oddly	coy	glance.
‘For	what?’
‘You	were	a	consort.	You	know	the	ways	of	love.	Teach	me	now.’
‘Teach	you?’
‘I	am	unbroken.	I	have	never	lain	with	man	or	woman.’
‘A	lie,’	the	Errant	replied.	‘Gribna,	the	lame	slave	in	the	Hiroth	village.
You	were	very	young.	He	used	you.	Often	and	badly.	It	is	what	has	made	you
what	you	now	are,	Feather	Witch.’
And	he	saw	her	eyes	shy	away,	saw	the	frown	upon	her	brow,	and	realized
the	awful	truth	that	she	had	not	remembered.	Too	young,	too	wide-eyed.	And
then,	every	moment	buried	in	a	deep	hole	at	the	pit	of	her	soul.	She,	by	the
Abyss,	did	not	remember.	‘Feather	Witch—’
‘Go	away,’	she	said.	‘I	don’t	need	anything	from	you	right	now.	I	have
Udinaas.’
‘You	have	lost	Udinaas.	You	never	had	him.	Listen,	please—’
‘He’s	alive!	Yes	he	is!	And	all	the	ones	who	wanted	him	are	dead	–	the
sisters,	all	dead!	Could	you	have	imagined	that?’
‘You	fool.	Silchas	Ruin	is	coming	here.	To	lay	this	city	to	waste.	To
destroy	it	utterly—’
‘He	cannot	defeat	Rhulad	Sengar,’	she	retorted.	‘Not	even	Silchas	Ruin	can
do	that!’
The	Errant	said	nothing	to	that	bold	claim.	Then	he	turned	away.	‘I	saw
gangrene	at	your	feet,	Feather	Witch.	My	temple,	as	you	like	to	call	it,	reeks	of
rotting	flesh.’
‘Then	heal	me.’
‘The	water	rises,’	he	said,	and	this	time	the	statement	seemed	to	burgeon


within	him,	filling	his	entire	being.	The	water	rises.	Why?	‘Hannan	Mosag
seeks	the	demon	god,	the	one	trapped	in	the	ice.	That	ice,	Feather	Witch,	is
melting.	Water…everywhere.	Water…’
By	the	Holds,	was	it	possible?	Even	this?	But	no,	I	trapped	the	bastard.	I
trapped	him!
‘He	took	the	finger,’	Feather	Witch	said	behind	him.	‘He	took	it	and
thought	that	was	enough,	to	just	take	it.	But	how	could	I	go	where	he	has	gone?
I	couldn’t.	So	I	needed	him,	yes.	I	needed	him,	and	he	was	never	as	lost	as	he
thought	he	was.’
‘And	what	of	the	other	one?’	the	Errant	asked,	still	with	his	back	to	her.
‘Never	found—’
The	Elder	God	whirled	round.	‘Where	is	the	other	finger?’
He	saw	her	eyes	widen.
Is	it	possible?	Is	it—
He	found	himself	in	the	corridor,	the	water	at	his	hips,	though	he	passed
through	it	effortlessly.	We	have	come	to	the	moment	–	Icarium	walks	–	where?
A	foreign	army	and	a	horrifying	mage	approaches.	Silchas	Ruin	wings	down
from	the	north	with	eyes	of	fire.	Hannan	Mosag	–	the	fool	–	crawls	his	way	to
Settle	Lake	even	as	the	demon	god	stirs	–	and	she	says	he	was	never	as	lost	as
he	thought	he	was.
Almost	dawn,	somewhere	beyond	these	sagging,	weeping	walls.
An	empire	on	its	knees.
The	blossom	kiss,	but	moments	away.
	
The	word	came	to	Varat	Taun,	newly	appointed	Finadd	in	the	Palace	Guard,
that	Icarium,	along	with	Taralack	Veed	and	Senior	Assessor,	had	escaped.	At
that	statement	his	knees	had	weakened,	a	flood	rushing	through	him,	but	it	was
a	murky,	confused	flood.	Relief,	yes,	at	what	had	been	averted	–	at	least	for	the
moment,	for	might	Icarium	not	return?	–	relief	that	was	quickly	engulfed	by
his	growing	dread	for	this	invading	army	encamped	barely	two	leagues	away.
There	would	be	a	siege,	and	with	virtually	no-one	left	to	hold	the	walls	it
would	be	a	short	one.	And	then	the	Eternal	Domicile	itself	would	be	assailed,
and	by	the	time	all	was	done,	Emperor	Rhulad	Sengar	would	likely	be	standing
alone,	surrounded	by	the	enemy.
An	Emperor	without	an	empire.
Five	Letherii	armies	on	the	Bolkando	borderlands	far	to	the	east	had
seemingly	vanished.	Not	a	word	from	a	single	mage	among	those	forces.	They
had	set	out,	under	a	competent	if	not	brilliant	commander,	to	crush	the


Bolkando	and	their	allies.	That	should	have	been	well	within	the	woman’s
capabilities.	The	last	report	had	come	half	a	day	before	the	armies	clashed.
What	else	could	anyone	conclude?	Those	five	armies	were	shattered.	The
enemy	marches	on,	into	the	empire’s	very	heart.	And	what	has	happened	east	of
Drene?	More	silence,	and	Atri-Preda	Bivatt	was	considered	by	most	as	the	next
Preda	of	the	Imperial	Armies.
Rebellion	in	Bluerose,	riots	in	every	city.	Wholesale	desertion	of	entire
units	and	garrisons.	The	Tiste	Edur	vanishing	like	ghosts,	fleeing	back	to	their
homeland,	no	doubt.	By	the	Errant,	why	did	I	not	ride	with	Yan	Tovis?	Return	to
my	wife	–	I	am	a	fool,	who	will	die	here,	in	this	damned	palace.	Die	for	nothing.
He	stood,	positioned	beside	the	throne	room’s	entranceway,	and	watched
from	under	the	rim	of	his	helm	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths	pace	in
front	of	the	throne.	Filthy	with	blood	and	spilled	fluids	from	a	dozen	dead
challengers,	a	dozen	cut	through	in	a	whirlwind	frenzy,	Rhulad	shrieking	as	his
sword	whirled	and	chopped	and	severed	and	seemed	to	drink	in	the	pain	and
blood	of	its	victims.
And	now,	dawn	was	beginning	on	this	day,	and	the	sleepless	Emperor
paced.	Blackened	coins	shifting	on	his	ravaged	face	as	emotions	worked	his
features	in	endless	cycles	of	disbelief,	distress	and	fear.
Before	Rhulad	Sengar,	standing	motionless,	was	the	Chancellor.
Thrice,	the	Emperor	paused	to	glare	at	Triban	Gnol.	Thrice	he	made	as	if
to	speak,	only	to	resume	his	pacing,	the	sword-tip	dragging	across	the	tiles.
His	own	people	had	abandoned	him.	He	had	inadvertently	drowned	his	own
mother	and	father.	Killed	all	of	his	brothers.	Driven	the	wife	he	had	stolen	to
suicide.	Been	betrayed	by	the	First	and	only	Concubine	he	had	possessed,
Nisall.
An	economy	in	ruins,	all	order	crumbling,	and	armies	invading.
And	his	only	answer	was	to	force	hapless	foreigners	onto	the	sands	of	the
arena	and	butcher	them.
Pathos	or	grand	comedy?
It	will	not	do,	Emperor.	All	that	blood	and	guts	covering	you	will	not	do.
When	you	are	but	the	hands	holding	the	sword,	the	sword	rules,	and	the	sword
knows	nothing	but	what	it	was	made	for.	It	can	achieve	no	resolutions,	can
manage	no	subtle	diplomacy,	can	solve	none	of	the	problems	afflicting	people	in
their	tens	of	thousands,	hundreds	of	thousands.
Leave	a	sword	to	rule	an	empire	and	the	empire	falls.	Amidst	war,	amidst
anarchy,	amidst	a	torrent	of	blood	and	a	sea	of	misery.
Coin-clad,	the	wielder	of	the	sword	paced	out	the	true	extent	of	his	domain,
here	in	this	throne	room.


Halting,	facing	the	Chancellor	once	more.	‘What	has	happened?’
A	child’s	question.	A	child’s	voice.	Varat	Taun	felt	his	heart	give	slightly,
felt	its	hardness	suddenly	soften.	A	child.
The	Chancellor ’s	reply	was	measured,	so	reassuring	that	Varat	Taun	very
nearly	laughed	at	the	absurdity	of	that	tone.	‘We	are	never	truly	conquered,
Emperor.	You	will	stand,	because	none	can	remove	you.	The	invaders	will	see
that,	understand	that.	They	will	have	done	with	their	retribution.	Will	they
occupy?	Unknown.	If	not	them,	then	the	coalition	coming	from	the	eastern
kingdoms	will	–	and	such	coalitions	inevitably	break	apart,	devour	themselves.
They	too	will	be	able	to	do	nothing	to	you,	Emperor.’
Rhulad	Sengar	stared	at	Triban	Gnol,	his	mouth	working	but	no	sounds
coming	forth.
‘I	have	begun,’	the	Chancellor	resumed,	‘preparing	our	conditional
surrender.	To	the	Malazans.	At	the	very	least,	they	will	enforce	peace	in	the
city,	an	end	to	the	riots.	Likely	working	in	consort	with	the	Patriotists.	Once
order	is	restored,	we	can	begin	the	task	of	resurrecting	the	economy,	minting
—’
‘Where	are	my	people?’	Rhulad	Sengar	asked.
‘They	will	return,	Emperor.	I	am	sure	of	it.’
Rhulad	turned	to	face	the	throne.	And	suddenly	went	perfectly	still.	‘It	is
empty,’	he	whispered.	‘Look!’	He	spun	round,	pointing	his	sword	back	at	the
throne.	‘Do	you	see?	It	is	empty!’
‘Sire—’
‘Like	my	father ’s	chair	in	our	house!	Our	house	in	the	village!	Empty!’
‘The	village	is	no	longer	there,	Emperor—’
‘But	the	chair	remains!	I	see	it!	With	my	own	eyes	–	my	father ’s	chair!	The
paint	fades	in	the	sun.	The	wood	joins	split	in	the	rain.	Crows	perch	on	the
weathered	arms!	I	see	it!’
The	shout	echoed	in	silence	then.	Not	a	guard	stirring.	The	Chancellor	with
bowed	head,	and	who	knew	what	thoughts	flickered	behind	the	serpent’s	eyes?
Surrender.	Conditional.	Rhulad	Sengar	remains.	Rhulad	Sengar	and,	oh	yes,
Chancellor	Triban	Gnol.	And	the	Patriotists.	‘We	cannot	be	conquered.	We	are
for	ever.	Step	into	our	world	and	it	devours	you.’
Rhulad’s	broad	shoulders	slowly	sagged.	Then	he	walked	up	to	the	throne,
turned	about	and	sat	down.	Looked	out	with	bleak	eyes.	In	a	croaking	voice	he
asked,	‘Who	remains?’
The	Chancellor	bowed.	‘But	one,	Emperor.’
‘One?	There	should	be	two.’
‘The	challenger	known	as	Icarium	has	fled,	Emperor.	Into	the	city.	We	are


hunting	him	down.’
Liar.
But	Rhulad	Sengar	seemed	indifferent,	his	head	turning	to	one	side,	eyes
lowering	until	they	fixed	on	the	gore-spattered	sword.	‘The	Toblakai.’
‘Yes,	Emperor.’
‘Who	murdered	Binadas.	My	brother.’
‘Indeed,	sire.’
The	head	slowly	lifted.	‘Is	it	dawn?’
‘It	is.’
Rhulad’s	command	was	soft	as	a	breath.	‘Bring	him.’
	
They	let	the	poor	fool	go	once	he	had	shown	them	the	recessed	door	leading
under	the	city	wall.	It	was,	of	course,	locked,	and	while	the	rest	of	the	squads
waited	in	the	slowly	fading	darkness	–	seeking	whatever	cover	they	could	find
and	it	wasn’t	much	–	Fiddler	and	Cuttle	went	down	into	the	depression	to
examine	the	door.
‘Made	to	be	broken	down,’	Cuttle	muttered,	‘so	it’s	like	the	lad	said	–	we
go	in	and	then	the	floodgates	open	and	we	drown.	Fid,	I	don’t	see	a	way	to	do
this,	not	quietly	enough	so	as	no-one	hears	and	figures	out	we’ve	taken	the
trap.’
Fiddler	scratched	at	his	white	beard.	‘Maybe	we	could	dismantle	the	entire
door,	frame	and	all.’
‘We	ain’t	got	the	time.’
‘No.	We	pull	back	and	hide	out	for	the	day,	then	do	it	tomorrow	night.’
‘The	Adjunct	should	be	showing	up	by	then.	Keneb	wants	us	first	in	and
he’s	right,	we’ve	earned	it.’
At	that	moment	they	heard	a	thump	from	behind	the	door,	then	the	low
scrape	of	the	bar	being	lifted.
The	two	Malazans	moved	to	either	side,	quickly	cocking	their	crossbows.
A	grinding	sound,	then	the	door	was	pushed	open.
The	figure	that	climbed	into	view	was	no	Letherii	soldier.	It	was	wearing
plain	leather	armour	that	revealed,	without	question,	that	it	was	a	woman,	and
on	her	face	an	enamel	mask	with	a	modest	array	of	painted	sigils.	Two	swords
strapped	across	her	back.	One	stride,	then	two.	A	glance	to	Fiddler	on	her	right,
then	to	Cuttle	on	her	left.	Pausing,	brushing	dirt	from	her	armour,	then	setting
out.	Onto	the	killing	field,	and	away.
Bathed	in	sweat,	Fiddler	settled	back	into	a	sitting	position,	the	crossbow
trembling	in	his	hands.


Cuttle	made	a	warding	gesture,	then	sat	down	as	well.	‘Hood’s	breath	was
on	my	neck,	Fid.	Right	there,	right	then.	I	know,	she	didn’t	even	reach	for	those
weapons,	didn’t	even	twitch…’
‘Aye,’	Fid	answered,	the	word	whispered	like	a	blessing.	A	Hood-damned
Seguleh.	High	ranked,	too.	We’d	never	have	got	our	shots	off	–	no	way.	Our
heads	would	have	rolled	like	a	pair	of	oversized	snowballs.
‘I	looked	away,	Fid.	I	looked	right	down	at	the	ground	when	she	turned	my
way.’
‘Me	too.’
‘And	that’s	why	we’re	still	alive.’
‘Aye.’
Cuttle	turned	and	peered	down	into	the	dark	tunnel.	‘We	don’t	have	to	wait
till	tomorrow	night	after	all.’
‘Go	back	to	the	others,	Cuttle.	Get	Keneb	to	draw	’em	up.	I’m	heading	in	to
check	the	other	end.	If	it’s	unguarded	and	quiet,	well	and	good.	If	not…’
‘Aye,	Fid.’
The	sergeant	dropped	down	into	the	tunnel.
He	moved	through	the	dark	as	fast	as	he	could	without	making	too	much
noise.	The	wall	overhead	was	damned	thick	and	he’d	gone	thirty	paces	before
he	saw	the	grey	blur	of	the	exit	at	the	end	of	a	sharp	slope.	Crossbow	in	hands,
Fiddler	edged	forward.
He	need	not	have	worried.
The	tunnel	opened	into	a	cramped	blockhouse	with	no	ceiling.	One	bench
lined	the	wall	to	his	right.	Three	bodies	were	sprawled	on	the	dusty	stone	floor,
bleeding	out	from	vicious	wounds.	Should’ve	averted	your	eyes,	soldiers.
Assuming	she	even	gave	them	the	time	to	decide	either	way	–	she’d	wanted	out,
after	all.
The	door	opposite	him	was	ajar	and	Fiddler	crept	to	it,	looked	out	through
the	crack.	A	wide	street,	littered	with	rubbish.
They’d	been	listening	to	the	riots	half	the	night,	and	it	was	clear	that	mobs
had	swept	through	here,	if	not	this	night	then	other	nights.	The	garrison	blocks
opposite	were	gutted,	the	windows	soot-stained.	Better	and	better.
He	turned	round	and	hastened	back	down	the	tunnel.
At	the	other	end	he	found	Cuttle,	Faradan	Sort	and	Fist	Keneb,	all	standing
a	few	paces	in	from	the	door.
Fiddler	explained	to	them	what	he	had	found.	Then	said,	‘We	got	to	go
through	right	away,	I	think.	Eight	hundred	marines	to	come	through	and	that’ll
take	a	while.’
Keneb	nodded.	‘Captain	Faradan	Sort.’


‘Sir.’
‘Take	four	squads	through	and	establish	flanking	positions.	Send	one
squad	straight	across	to	the	nearest	barracks	to	see	if	they	are	indeed
abandoned.	If	so,	that	will	be	our	staging	area.	From	there,	I	will	lead	the	main
body	to	the	gate,	seize	and	secure	it.	Captain,	you	and	four	squads	will	strike
into	the	city,	as	far	as	you	can	go,	causing	trouble	all	the	way	–	take	extra
munitions	for	that.’
‘Our	destination?’
‘The	palace.’
‘Aye,	sir.	Fiddler,	collect	Gesler	and	Hellian	and	Urb	–	you’re	the	first	four
–	and	take	your	squads	through.	At	a	damned	run	if	you	please.’
	
In	the	grey	light	of	early	dawn,	four	figures	emerged	from	a	smear	of	blurred
light	twenty	paces	from	the	dead	Azath	Tower	behind	the	Old	Palace.	As	the
portal	swirled	shut	behind	them,	they	stood,	looking	round.
Hedge	gave	Quick	Ben	a	light	push	to	one	side,	somewhere	between
comradely	affection	and	irritation.	‘Told	you,	it’s	reunion	time,	wizard.’
‘Where	in	Hood’s	name	are	we?’	Quick	Ben	demanded.
‘We’re	in	Letheras,’	Seren	Pedac	said.	‘Behind	the	Old	Palace	–	but
something’s	wrong.’
Trull	Sengar	wrapped	his	arms	about	himself,	his	face	drawn	with	the	pain
of	freshly	healed	wounds,	his	eyes	filled	with	a	deeper	distress.
Hedge	felt	some	of	his	anticipation	dim	like	a	dying	oil	lamp	as	he	studied
the	Tiste	Edur.	The	poor	bastard.	A	brother	murdered	in	front	of	his	eyes.	Then,
the	awkward	goodbye	with	Onrack	–	joy	and	sadness	there	in	plenty,	seeing	his
old	friend	and	the	woman	at	his	side	–	a	woman	Onrack	had	loved	for	so	long.
So	long?	Damned	near	incomprehensible,	that’s	how	long.
But	now	–	‘Trull	Sengar.’
The	Tiste	Edur	slowly	looked	over.
Hedge	shot	Quick	Ben	a	glance,	then	he	said,	‘We’ve	a	mind	to	escort	you
and	Seren.	To	her	house.’
‘This	city	is	assailed,’	Trull	Sengar	said.	‘My	youngest	brother	–	the
Emperor—’
‘That	can	all	wait,’	Hedge	cut	in.	He	paused,	trying	to	figure	out	how	to	say
what	he	meant,	then	said,	‘Your	friend	Onrack	stole	a	woman’s	heart,	and	it
was	all	there.	In	her	eyes,	I	mean.	The	answer,	that	is.	And	if	you’d	look,	just
look,	Trull	Sengar,	into	the	eyes	of	Seren	Pedac,	well—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	Quick	Ben	sighed.	‘He	means	you	and	Seren	need	to	get


alone	before	anything	else,	and	we’re	going	to	make	sure	that	happens.	All
right?’
The	surprise	on	Seren	Pedac’s	face	was	almost	comical.
But	Trull	Sengar	then	nodded.
Hedge	regarded	Quick	Ben	once	again.	‘You	recovered	enough	in	case	we
walk	into	trouble?’
‘Something	your	sharpers	can’t	handle?	Yes,	probably.	Maybe.	Get	a
sharper	in	each	hand,	Hedge.’
‘Good	enough…since	you’re	a	damned	idiot,’	Hedge	replied.	‘Seren	Pedac
–	you	should	know,	I’m	well	envious	of	this	Tiste	Edur	here,	but	anyway.	Is
your	house	far?’
‘No,	it	is	not,	Hedge	of	the	Bridgeburners.’
‘Then	let’s	get	out	of	this	spooky	place.’
	
Silts	swirled	up	round	his	feet,	spun	higher,	engulfing	his	shins,	then	whirled
away	like	smoke	on	the	current.	Strange	pockets	of	luminosity	drifted	past,
morphing	as	if	subjected	to	unseen	pressures	in	this	dark,	unforgiving	world.
Bruthen	Trana,	who	had	been	sent	to	find	a	saviour,	walked	an	endless
plain,	the	silts	thick	and	gritty.	He	stumbled	against	buried	detritus,	tripped	on
submerged	roots.	He	crossed	current-swept	rises	of	hardened	clay	from	which
jutted	polished	bones	of	long-dead	leviathans.	He	skirted	the	wreckage	of
sunken	ships,	the	ribs	of	the	hulls	splayed	out	and	cargo	scattered	about.	And	as
he	walked,	he	thought	about	his	life	and	the	vast	array	of	choices	he	had	made,
others	he	had	refused	to	make.
No	wife,	no	single	face	to	lift	into	his	mind’s	eye.	He	had	been	a	warrior
for	what	seemed	all	his	life.	Fighting	alongside	blood	kin	and	comrades	closer
than	any	blood	kin.	He	had	seen	them	die	or	drift	away.	He	had,	he	realized
now,	watched	his	entire	people	pulled	apart.	With	the	conquest,	with	the	coldblooded,	anonymous	nightmare	that	was	Lether.	As	for	the	Letherii	themselves,
no,	he	did	not	hate	them.	More	like	pity	and	yes,	compassion,	for	they	were	as
trapped	in	the	nightmare	as	anyone	else.	The	rapacious	desperation,	the
gnawing	threat	of	falling,	of	drowning	beneath	the	ever-rising,	ever-onrushing
torrent	that	was	a	culture	that	could	never	look	back,	could	not	even	slow	its
headlong	plunge	into	some	gleaming	future	that	–	if	it	came	at	all	–	would	ever
only	exist	for	but	a	privileged	few.
This	eternal	seabed	offered	its	own	commentary,	and	it	was	one	that
threatened	to	drag	him	down	into	the	silts,	enervated	beyond	all	hope	of
continuing,	of	even	moving.	Cold,	crushing,	this	place	was	like	history’s	own


weight	–	history	not	of	a	people	or	a	civilization,	but	of	the	entire	world.
Why	was	he	still	walking?	What	saviour	could	liberate	him	from	all	of
this?	He	should	have	remained	in	Letheras.	Free	to	launch	an	assault	on	Karos
Invictad	and	his	Patriotists,	free	to	annihilate	the	man	and	his	thugs.	And	then
he	could	have	turned	to	the	Chancellor.	Imagining	his	hands	on	Triban	Gnol’s
throat	was	most	satisfying	–	for	as	long	as	the	image	lasted,	which	was	never
long	enough.	A	bloom	of	silts	up	into	his	eyes,	another	hidden	object	snagging
his	foot.
And	here,	now,	looming	before	him,	pillars	of	stone.	The	surfaces,	he	saw,
cavorted	with	carvings,	unrecognizable	sigils	so	intricate	they	spun	and	shifted
before	his	eyes.
As	he	drew	closer,	silts	gusted	ahead,	and	Bruthen	Trana	saw	a	figure
climbing	into	view.	Armour	green	with	verdigris	and	furred	with	slime.	A
closed	helm	covering	its	face.	In	one	gauntleted	hand	was	a	Letherii	sword.
And	a	voice	spoke	in	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	head:	‘You	have	walked	enough,
Ghost.’
Bruthen	Trana	halted.	‘I	am	not	a	ghost	in	truth—’
‘You	are,	stranger.	Your	soul	has	been	severed	from	now	cold,	now	rotting
flesh.	You	are	no	more	than	what	stands	here,	before	me.	A	ghost.’
Somehow,	the	realization	did	not	surprise	him.	Hannan	Mosag’s	legacy	of
treachery	made	all	alliances	suspect.	And	he	had,	he	realized,	felt…severed.
For	a	long	time,	yes.	The	Warlock	King	likely	did	not	waste	any	time	in	cutting
the	throat	of	Bruthen	Trana’s	helpless	body.
‘Then,’	he	said,	‘what	is	left	for	me?’
‘One	thing,	Ghost.	You	are	here	to	summon	him.	To	send	him	back.’
‘But	was	not	his	soul	severed	as	well?’
‘His	flesh	and	bones	are	here,	Ghost.	And	in	this	place,	there	is	power.	For
here	you	will	find	the	forgotten	gods,	the	last	holding	of	their	names.	Know	this,
Ghost,	were	we	to	seek	to	defy	you,	to	refuse	your	summoning,	we	could.	Even
with	what	you	carry.’
‘Will	you	then	refuse	me?’	Bruthen	Trana	asked,	and	if	the	answer	was	yes,
then	he	would	laugh.	To	have	come	all	this	way.	To	have	sacrificed	his	life…
‘No.	We	understand	the	need.	Better,	perhaps,	than	you.’	The	armoured
warrior	lifted	his	free	hand.	All	but	the	foremost	of	the	metal-clad	fingers
folded.	‘Go	there,’	it	said,	pointing	towards	a	pillar.	‘The	side	with	but	one
name.	Draw	forth	that	which	you	possess	of	his	flesh	and	bone.	Speak	the	name
so	written	on	the	stone.’
Bruthen	Trana	walked	slowly	to	the	standing	stone,	went	round	to	the	side
with	the	lone	carving.	And	read	thereon	the	name	inscribed:	‘“Brys	Beddict,


Saviour	of	the	Empty	Hold.”	I	summon	you.’
The	face	of	the	stone,	cleaned	here,	seeming	almost	fresh,	all	at	once
began	to	ripple,	then	bulge	in	places,	the	random	shapes	and	movement
coalescing	to	create	a	humanoid	shape,	pushing	out	from	the	stone.	An	arm
came	free,	then	shoulder,	then	head,	face	–	eyes	closed,	features	twisted	as	if	in
pain	–	upper	torso.	A	leg.	The	second	arm	–	Bruthen	saw	that	two	fingers	were
missing	on	that	hand.
He	frowned.	Two?
As	the	currents	streamed,	Brys	Beddict	was	driven	out	from	the	pillar.	He
fell	forward	onto	his	hands	and	knees,	was	almost	swallowed	in	billowing	silts.
The	armoured	warrior	arrived,	carrying	a	scabbarded	sword,	which	he
pushed	point-first	into	the	seabed	beside	the	Letherii.
‘Take	it,	Saviour.	Feel	the	currents	–	they	are	eager.	Go,	you	have	little
time.’
Still	on	his	hands	and	knees,	head	hanging,	Brys	Beddict	reached	out	for
the	weapon.	As	soon	as	his	hand	closed	about	the	scabbard	a	sudden	rush	of	the
current	lifted	the	man	from	the	seabed.	He	spun	in	a	flurry	of	silts	and	then	was
gone.
Bruthen	Trana	stood,	motionless.	That	current	had	rushed	right	through
him,	unimpeded.	As	it	would	through	a	ghost.
All	at	once	he	felt	bereft.	He’d	not	had	a	chance	to	say	a	word	to	Brys
Beddict,	to	tell	him	what	needed	to	be	done.	An	Emperor,	to	cut	down	once
more.	An	empire,	to	resurrect.
‘You	are	done	here,	Ghost.’
Bruthen	Trana	nodded.
‘Where	will	you	go?’
‘There	is	a	house.	I	lost	it.	I	would	find	it	again.’
‘Then	you	shall.’
	
‘Oh,	Padderunt,	look!	It’s	twitching!’
The	old	man	squinted	over	at	Selush	through	a	fog	of	smoke.	She	was
doing	that	a	lot	of	late.	Bushels	of	rustleaf	ever	since	Tehol	Beddict’s	arrest.
‘You’ve	dressed	enough	dead	to	know	what	the	lungs	of	people	who	do	too
much	of	that	look	like,	Mistress.’
‘Yes.	No	different	from	anyone	else’s.’
‘Unless	they	got	the	rot,	the	cancer.’
‘Lungs	with	the	rot	all	look	the	same	and	that	is	most	certainly	true.	Now,
did	you	hear	what	I	said?’


‘It	twitched,’	Padderunt	replied,	twisting	in	his	chair	to	peer	up	at	the
bubbly	glass	jar	on	the	shelf	that	contained	a	stubby	little	severed	finger
suspended	in	pink	goo.
‘It’s	about	time,	too.	Go	to	Rucket,’	Selush	said	between	ferocious	pulls	on
the	mouthpiece,	her	substantial	chest	swelling	as	if	it	was	about	to	burst.	‘And
tell	her.’
‘That	it	twitched.’
‘Yes!’
‘All	right.’	He	set	down	his	cup.	‘Rustleaf	tea,	Mistress.’
‘I’d	drown.’
‘Not	inhaled.	Drunk,	in	civil	fashion.’
‘You’re	still	here,	dear	servant,	and	I	don’t	like	that	at	all.’
He	rose.	‘On	my	way,	O	enwreathed	one.’
	
She	had	managed	to	push	the	corpse	of	Tanal	Yathvanar	to	one	side,	and	it	now
lay	beside	her	as	if	cuddled	in	sleep,	the	bloated,	blotched	face	next	to	her	own.
There	would	be	no-one	coming	for	her.	This	room	was	forbidden	to	all
but	Tanal	Yathvanar,	and	unless	some	disaster	struck	this	compound	in	the	next
day	or	two,	leading	Karos	Invictad	to	demand	Tanal’s	presence	and	so	seek
him	out,	Janath	knew	it	would	be	too	late	for	her.
Chained	to	the	bed,	legs	spread	wide,	fluids	leaking	from	her.	She	stared	up
at	the	ceiling,	strangely	comforted	by	the	body	lying	at	her	side.	Its	stillness,
the	coolness	of	the	skin,	the	flaccid	lack	of	resistance	from	the	flesh.	She	could
feel	the	shrivelled	thing	that	was	his	penis	pressing	against	her	right	thigh.	And
the	beast	within	her	was	pleased.
She	needed	water.	She	needed	that	above	all	else.	A	mouthful	would	be
enough,	would	give	her	the	strength	to	once	again	begin	tugging	at	the	chains,
dragging	the	links	against	the	wood,	dreaming	of	the	entire	frame	splintering
beneath	her	–	but	it	would	take	a	strong	man	to	do	that,	she	knew,	strong	and
healthy.	Her	dream	was	nothing	more	than	that,	but	she	held	on	to	it	as	her	sole
amusement	that	would,	she	hoped,	follow	her	into	death.	Yes,	right	up	until	the
last	moment.
It	would	be	enough.
Tanal	Yathvanar,	her	tormentor,	was	dead.	But	that	would	be	no	escape
from	her.	She	meant	to	resume	her	pursuit,	her	soul	–	sprung	free	of	this	flesh
–	demonic	in	its	hunger,	in	the	cruelty	it	wanted	to	inflict	on	whatever
whimpering,	cowering	thing	was	left	of	Tanal	Yathvanar.
A	mouthful	of	water.	That	would	be	so	sweet.


She	could	spit	it	into	the	staring	face	beside	her.
	
Coins	to	the	belligerent	multitude	brought	a	larger,	more	belligerent	multitude.
And,	at	last,	trepidation	awoke	in	Karos	Invictad,	the	Invigilator	of	the
Patriotists.	He	sent	servants	down	into	the	hiddenmost	crypts	below,	to	drag	up
chest	after	chest.	In	the	compound	his	agents	were	exhausted,	now	simply
flinging	handfuls	of	coins	over	the	walls	since	the	small	sacks	were	long	gone.
And	a	pressure	was	building	against	those	walls	that,	it	now	seemed,	no	amount
of	silver	and	gold	could	relieve.
He	sat	in	his	office,	trying	to	comprehend	that	glaring	truth.	Of	course,	he
told	himself,	there	were	simply	too	many	in	the	mob.	Not	enough	coins	was	the
problem.	They’d	fought	like	jackals	over	the	sacks,	had	they	not?
He	had	done	and	was	doing	what	the	Emperor	should	have	done.	Emptied
the	treasury	and	buried	the	people	in	riches.	That	would	have	purchased	peace,
yes.	An	end	to	the	riots.	Everyone	returning	to	their	homes,	businesses	opening
once	more,	food	on	the	stalls	and	whores	beckoning	from	windows	and	plenty
of	ale	and	wine	to	flow	down	throats	–	all	the	pleasures	that	purchased	apathy
and	obedience.	Yes,	festivals	and	games	and	Drownings	and	that	would	have
solved	all	of	this.	Along	with	a	few	quiet	arrests	and	assassinations.
But	he	was	running	out	of	money.	His	money.	Hard-won,	a	hoard	amassed
solely	by	his	own	genius.	And	they	were	taking	it	all.
Well,	he	would	start	all	over	again.	Stealing	it	back	from	the	pathetic
bastards.	Easy	enough	for	one	such	as	Karos	Invictad.
Tanal	Yathvanar	had	disappeared,	likely	hiding	with	his	prisoner,	and	he
could	rot	in	her	arms	for	all	that	the	Invigilator	cared.	Oh,	the	man	schemed	to
overthrow	him,	Karos	knew.	Pathetic,	simplistic	schemes.	But	they	would	come
to	naught,	because	the	next	time	Karos	saw	the	man,	he	would	kill	him.	A	knife
through	the	eye.	Quick,	precise,	most	satisfying.
He	could	hear	the	shouts	for	Tehol	Beddict,	somewhat	less	fierce	now	–
and	that	was,	oddly	enough,	vaguely	disturbing.	Did	they	no	longer	want	to	tear
him	to	pieces?	Was	he	indeed	hearing	cries	for	the	man’s	release?
Desperate	knocking	on	his	office	door.
‘Enter.’
An	agent	appeared,	his	face	white.	‘Sir,	the	main	block—’
‘Are	we	breached?’
‘No—’
‘Then	go	away	–	wait,	check	on	Tehol	Beddict.	Make	sure	he’s	regained
consciousness.	I	want	him	able	to	walk	when	we	march	to	the	Drownings.’


The	man	stared	at	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	said,	‘Yes	sir.’
‘Is	that	all?’
‘No,	the	main	block—’	He	gestured	out	into	the	corridor.
‘What	is	it,	you	damned	fool?’
‘It’s	filling	with	rats,	sir!’
Rats?
‘They’re	coming	from	over	the	walls	–	we	throw	coins	and	rats	come
back.	Thousands!’
‘That	guild	no	longer	exists!’
The	shriek	echoed	like	a	woman’s	scream.
The	agent	blinked,	and	all	at	once	his	tone	changed,	steadied.	‘The	mob,
sir,	they’re	calling	for	Tehol	Beddict’s	release	–	can	you	not	hear	it?	They’re
calling	him	a	hero,	a	revolutionary—’
Karos	Invictad	slammed	his	sceptre	down	on	his	desk	and	rose.	‘Is	this
what	my	gold	paid	for?’
	
Feather	Witch	sensed	the	rebirth	of	Brys	Beddict.	She	stopped	plucking	at	the
strips	of	skin	hanging	from	her	toes,	drawing	a	deep	breath	as	she	felt	him
rushing	closer,	ever	closer.	So	fast!
Crooning	under	her	breath,	she	closed	her	eyes	and	conjured	in	her	mind
that	severed	finger.	That	fool	the	Errant	had	a	lot	to	learn,	still.	About	his
formidable	High	Priestess.	The	finger	still	belonged	to	her,	still	held	drops	of
her	blood	from	when	she	had	pushed	it	up	inside	her.	Month	after	month,	like	a
waterlogged	stick	in	a	stream,	soaking	her	up.
Brys	Beddict	belonged	to	her,	and	she	would	use	him	well.
The	death	that	was	a	non-death,	for	Rhulad	Sengar,	the	insane	Emperor.
The	murder	of	Hannan	Mosag.	And	the	Chancellor.	And	everyone	else	she
didn’t	like.
And	then…the	handsome	young	man	kneeling	before	her	as	she	sat	on	her
raised	temple	throne	–	in	the	new	temple	that	would	be	built,	sanctified	to	the
Errant	–	kneeling,	yes,	while	she	spread	her	legs	and	invited	him	in.	To	kiss	the
place	where	his	finger	had	been.	To	drive	his	tongue	deep.
The	future	was	so	very	bright,	so	very—
Feather	Witch’s	eyes	snapped	open.	Disbelieving.
As	she	felt	Brys	Beddict	being	pulled	away,	pulled	out	of	her	grasp.	By
some	other	force.
Pulled	away!
She	screamed,	lurching	forward	on	the	dais,	hands	plunging	into	the


floodwater	–	as	if	to	reach	down	into	the	current	and	grasp	hold	of	him	once
more	–	but	it	was	deeper	than	she’d	remembered.	Unbalanced,	she	plunged
face-first	into	the	water.	Involuntarily	drew	in	a	lungful	of	the	cold,	biting
fluid.
Eyes	staring	into	the	darkness,	as	she	thrashed	about,	her	lungs	contracting
again	and	again,	new	lungfuls	of	water,	one	after	another.
Deep	–	where	was	up?
A	knee	scraped	the	stone	floor	and	she	sought	to	bring	her	legs	under	her,
but	they	were	numb,	heavy	as	logs	–	they	would	not	work.	One	hand	then,	onto
the	floor,	pushing	upward	–	but	not	high	enough	to	break	the	surface.	The
other	hand,	then,	trying	to	guide	her	knees	together	–	but	one	would	drift	out	as
soon	as	she	left	it	seeking	the	other.
The	darkness	outside	her	eyes	flooded	in.	Into	her	mind.
And,	with	blessed	relief,	she	ceased	struggling.
She	would	dream	now.	She	could	feel	the	sweet	lure	of	that	dream	–	almost
within	reach	–	and	all	the	pain	in	her	chest	was	gone	–	she	could	breathe	this,
she	could.	In	and	out,	in	and	out,	and	then	she	no	longer	had	to	do	even	that.
She	could	grow	still,	sinking	down	onto	the	slimy	floor.
Darkness	in	and	out,	the	dream	drifting	closer,	almost	within	reach.
Almost…
	
The	Errant	stood	in	the	waist-deep	water,	his	hand	on	her	back.	He	waited,	even
though	her	struggles	had	ceased.
Sometimes,	it	was	true,	a	nudge	was	not	enough.
	
The	malformed,	twisted	thing	that	was	Hannan	Mosag	crawled	up	the	last	street
before	the	narrow,	crooked	alley	that	led	to	Settle	Lake.	Roving	bands	had
come	upon	the	wretched	Tiste	Edur	in	the	darkness	before	dawn	and	had	given
him	wide	berth,	chased	away	by	his	laughter.
Soon,	everything	would	return	to	him.	All	of	his	power,	purest	Kurald
Emurlahn,	and	he	would	heal	this	mangled	body,	heal	the	scars	of	his	mind.
With	the	demon-god	freed	of	the	ice	and	bound	to	his	will	once	more,	who
could	challenge	him?
Rhulad	Sengar	could	remain	Emperor	–	that	hardly	mattered,	did	it?	The
Warlock	King	would	not	be	frightened	of	him,	not	any	more.	And,	to	crush
him	yet	further,	he	possessed	a	certain	note,	a	confession	–	oh,	the	madness


unleashed	then!
Then,	these	damned	invaders	–	well,	they	were	about	to	find	themselves
without	a	fleet.
And	the	river	shall	rise,	flooding,	a	torrent	to	cleanse	this	accursed	city.	Of
foreigners.	Of	the	Letherii	themselves.	I	will	see	them	all	drowned.
Reaching	the	mouth	of	the	alley,	he	dragged	himself	into	its	gloom,
pleased	to	be	out	of	the	dawn’s	grey	light,	and	the	stench	of	the	pond	wafted
down	to	him.	Rot,	dissolution,	the	dying	of	the	ice.	At	long	last,	all	his
ambitions	were	about	to	come	true.
Crawling	over	the	slick,	mould-slimed	cobblestones.	He	could	hear
thousands	in	the	streets,	somewhere	near.	Some	name	being	cried	out	like	a
chant.	Disgust	filled	Hannan	Mosag.	He	never	wanted	anything	to	do	with	these
Letherii.	No,	he	would	have	raised	an	impenetrable	wall	between	them	and	his
people.	He	would	have	ruled	over	the	tribes,	remaining	in	the	north,	where	the
rain	fell	like	mist	and	the	forests	of	sacred	trees	embraced	every	village.
There	would	have	been	peace,	for	all	the	Tiste	Edur.
Well,	he	had	sent	them	all	back	north,	had	he	not?	He	had	begun	his
preparations.	And	soon	he	would	join	them,	as	Warlock	King.	And	he	would
make	his	dream	a	reality.
And	Rhulad	Sengar?	Well,	I	leave	him	a	drowned	empire,	a	wasteland	of
mud	and	dead	trees	and	rotting	corpses.	Rule	well,	Emperor.
He	found	himself	scrabbling	against	a	growing	stream	of	icy	water	that
was	working	its	way	down	the	alley,	the	touch	numbing	his	hands,	knees	and
feet.	He	began	slipping.	Cursing	under	his	breath,	Hannan	Mosag	paused,
staring	down	at	the	water	flowing	round	him.
From	up	ahead	there	came	a	loud	crack!	and	the	Warlock	King	smiled.	My
child	stirs.
Drawing	upon	the	power	of	the	shadows	in	this	alley,	he	resumed	his
journey.
	
‘Ah,	the	fell	guardians,’	Ormly	said	as	he	strode	to	the	muddy	bank	of	Settle
Lake.	The	Champion	Rat	Catcher	had	come	in	from	the	north	side,	where	he’d
been	busy	in	Creeper	District,	hiring	random	folk	to	cry	out	the	name	of	the
empire’s	great	revolutionary,	the	hero	of	heroes,	the	this	and	that	and	all	the
rest.	Tehol	Beddict!	He’s	taken	all	the	money	back	–	from	all	the	rich	slobs	in
their	estates!	He’s	going	to	give	it	all	to	every	one	of	you	–	he’s	going	to	clear
all	your	debts!	And	are	you	listening?	I’ve	more	rubbish	to	feed	you	–	wait,
come	back!	True,	he’d	just	added	on	that	last	bit.


What	a	busy	night!	And	then	a	runner	from	Selush	had	brought	him	the
damned	sausage	that	a	man	had	once	used	to	pick	his	nose	or	something.
All	right,	there	was	some	disrespect	in	that	and	it	wasn’t	worthy,	not	of
Brys	Beddict	–	the	Hero’s	very	own	brother!	–	nor	of	himself,	Ormly	of	the
Rats.	So,	enough	of	that,	then.
‘Oh,	look,	sweetcakes,	it’s	him.’
‘Who,	dove-cookie?’
‘Why,	I	forget	his	name.	Tha’s	who.’
Ormly	scowled	at	the	pair	lolling	on	the	bank	like	a	couple	of	gaping	fish.
‘I	called	you	guardians?	You’re	both	drunk!’
‘You’d	be	too,’	Ursto	Hoobutt	said,	‘if	’n	you	had	to	listen	to	this	simperin’
witch	’ere.’	He	wagged	his	head	to	mime	his	wife	as	he	said:	‘Ooh,	I	wanna
baby!	A	big	baby,	with	only	one	upper	lip	but	a	bottom	one	too	to	clamp	onto
you	know	where	an’	get	even	bigger!	Ooh,	syrup-smoochies,	oh,	please?	Can
I?	Can	I?	Can	I!’
‘You	poor	man,’	Ormly	commiserated,	walking	up	to	them.	He	paused
upon	seeing	the	heaved	and	cracked	slabs	of	ice	crowding	the	centre	of	the
lake.	‘It’s	pushing,	is	it?’
‘Took	your	time,	too,’	Pinosel	muttered,	casting	her	husband	her	third
glowering	look	since	Ormly	had	arrived.	She	swished	whatever	was	in	the	jug
in	her	left	hand,	then	tilted	it	back	to	drink	deep.	Then	wiped	at	her	mouth,
leaned	forward	and	glared	up	at	Ormly	from	lowered	brows.	‘Ain’t	gonna
have	no	jus’	one	upper	lip,	neither.	Gonna	be	healthy—’
‘Really,	Pinosel,’	Ormly	said,	‘the	likelihood	of	that—’
‘You	don’t	know	nothing!’
‘All	right,	maybe	I	don’t.	Not	about	the	likes	of	you	two,	anyway.	But
here’s	what	I	do	know.	In	the	Old	Palace	there’s	a	panel	in	the	baths	that	was
painted	about	six	hundred	years	ago.	Of	Settle	Lake	or	something	a	lot	like	it,
with	buildings	in	the	background.	And	who’s	sitting	there	in	the	grasses	on	the
bank,	sharing	a	jug?	Why,	an	ugly	woman	and	an	even	uglier	man	–	both
looking	a	lot	like	you	two!’
‘Watchoo	yer	callin’	ugly,’	Pinosel	said,	lifting	her	head	with	an	effort,
taking	a	deep	breath	to	compose	her	features,	then	patting	at	her	crow’s	nest
hair.	‘Sure,’	she	said,	‘I’ve	had	better	days.’
‘Ain’t	that	the	truth,’	mumbled	Ursto.
‘An’	I	’eard	that!	An’	oose	fault	is	that,	porker-nose?’
‘Only	the	people	that	ain’t	no	more	’ere	t’worship	us	an’	all	that.’
‘’Zactly!’
Ormly	frowned	at	the	pond	and	its	ice.	At	that	moment	a	huge	slab	buckled


with	a	loud	crack!	And	he	found	himself	involuntarily	stepping	back,	one	step,
two.	‘Is	it	coming	up?’	he	demanded.
‘No,’	Ursto	said,	squinting	one-eyed	at	the	groaning	heap	of	ice.	‘That’d	be
the	one	needing	his	finger	back.’
The	meltwater	fringing	the	lake	was	bubbling	and	swirling	now,	bringing
up	clouds	of	silt	as	some	current	swept	round	the	solid	mass	in	the	middle.
Round	and	round,	like	a	whirlpool	only	in	reverse.
And	all	at	once	there	was	a	thrashing,	a	spray	of	water,	and	a	figure	in	its
midst	–	struggling	onto	the	bank,	coughing,	streaming	muddy	water,	and
holding	in	one	incomplete	hand	a	scabbarded	sword.
Pinosel,	her	eyes	bright	as	diamonds,	lifted	the	jug	in	a	wavering	toast.
‘Hail	the	Saviour!	Hail	the	half-drowned	dog	spitting	mud!’	And	then	she
crowed,	the	cry	shifting	into	a	cackle,	before	drinking	deep	once	more.
Ormly	plucked	the	severed	finger	from	his	purse	and	walked	down	to
where	knelt	Brys	Beddict.	‘Looking	for	this?’	he	asked.
	
There	had	been	a	time	of	sleep,	and	then	a	time	of	pain.	Neither	had	seemed	to
last	very	long,	and	now	Brys	Beddict,	who	had	died	of	poison	in	the	throne
room	of	the	Eternal	Domicile,	was	on	his	hands	and	knees	beside	a	lake	of	icy
water.	Racked	with	shivers,	still	coughing	out	water	and	slime.
And	some	man	was	crouched	beside	him,	trying	to	give	him	a	severed
finger	swollen	and	dyed	pink.
He	felt	his	left	hand	gripping	a	scabbard,	and	knew	it	for	his	own.	Blinking
to	clear	his	eyes,	he	flitted	a	glance	to	confirm	that	the	sword	still	resided
within	it.	It	did.	Then,	pushing	the	man’s	gift	away,	he	slowly	settled	onto	his
haunches,	and	looked	round.
Familiar,	yes.
The	man	beside	him	now	laid	a	warm	hand	on	his	shoulder,	as	if	to	still	his
shivering.	‘Brys	Beddict,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘Tehol	is	about	to	die.	Brys,
your	brother	needs	you	now.’
And,	as	Brys	let	the	man	help	him	to	his	feet,	he	drew	out	his	sword,	half
expecting	to	see	it	rusted,	useless	–	but	no,	the	weapon	gleamed	with	fresh	oil.
‘Hold	on!’	shouted	another	voice.
The	man	steadying	Brys	turned	slightly.	‘What	is	it,	Ursto?’
‘The	demon	god’s	about	to	get	free!	Ask	’im!’
‘Ask	him	what?’
‘The	name!	Ask	’im	what’s	its	name,	damn	you!	We	can’t	send	it	away
without	its	name!’


Brys	spat	grit	from	his	mouth.	Tried	to	think.	The	demon	god	in	the	ice,	the
ice	that	was	failing.	Moments	from	release,	moments	from…‘Ay’edenan	of	the
Spring,’	he	said.	‘Ay’edenan	tek’	velut	!enan.’
The	man	beside	him	snorted.	‘Try	saying	that	five	times	fast!	Errant,	try
saying	it	once!’
But	someone	was	cackling.
‘Brys—’
He	nodded.	Yes.	Tehol.	My	brother	–	‘Take	me,’	he	said.	‘Take	me	to	him.’
‘I	will,’	the	man	promised.	‘And	on	the	way,	I’ll	do	some	explaining.	All
right?’
Brys	Beddict,	Saviour	of	the	Empty	Throne,	nodded.
	
‘Imagine,’	Pinosel	said	with	a	gusty	sigh,	‘a	name	in	the	old	tongue.	Oh	now,
ain’t	this	one	come	a	long	way!’
‘You	stopped	being	drunk	now,	munch-sweets?’
She	stirred,	clambered	onto	her	feet,	then	reached	down	and	tugged	at	her
husband.	‘Come	on.’
‘But	we	got	to	wait	–	to	use	the	name	and	send	it	away!’
‘We	got	time.	Let’s	perch	ourselves	down	top	of	Wormface	Alley,	have
another	jug,	an’	we	can	watch	the	Edur	crawl	up	t’us	like	the	Turtle	of	the
Abyss.’
Ursto	snorted.	‘Funny	how	that	myth	didn’t	last.’
	
A	deeper,	colder	shadow	slid	over	Hannan	Mosag	and	he	halted	his	efforts.
Almost	there,	yes	–	where	the	alley	opened	out,	he	saw	two	figures	seated	in
careless	sprawls	and	leaning	against	one	another.	Passing	a	jug	between	them.
Squalid	drunks,	but	perhaps	most	appropriate	as	witnesses	–	to	the	death	of
this	gross	empire.	The	first	to	die,	too.	Also	fitting	enough.
He	made	to	heave	himself	closer,	but	a	large	hand	closed	about	his	cloak,
just	below	his	collar,	and	he	was	lifted	from	the	ground.
Hissing,	seeking	his	power—
Hannan	Mosag	was	slowly	turned	about,	and	he	found	himself	staring	into
an	unhuman	face.	Grey-green	skin	like	leather.	Polished	tusks	jutting	from	the
corners	of	the	mouth.	Eyes	with	vertical	pupils,	regarding	him	now	without
expression.
Behind	him	the	two	drunks	were	laughing.


The	Warlock	King,	dangling	in	the	air	before	this	giant	demoness,	reached
for	the	sorcery	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	to	blast	this	creature	into	oblivion.	And	he
felt	it	surge	within	him—
But	now	her	other	hand	took	him	by	the	throat.
And	squeezed.
Cartilage	crumpled	like	eggshells.	Vertebrae	crunched,	buckled,	broke
against	each	other.	Pain	exploded	upward,	filling	Hannan	Mosag’s	skull	with
white	fire.
As	the	sun’s	bright,	unforgiving	light	suddenly	bathed	his	face.
Sister	Dawn	–	you	greet	me—
But	he	stared	into	the	eyes	of	the	demoness,	and	saw	still	nothing.	A
lizard’s	eyes,	a	snake’s	eyes.
Would	she	give	him	nothing	at	all?


The	fire	in	his	skull	flared	outward,	blinding	him,	then,	with	a	soft,	fading
roar,	it	contracted	once	more,	darkness	rushing	into	its	wake.
But	Hannan	Mosag’s	eyes	saw	none	of	this.
The	sun	shone	full	on	his	dead	face,	highlighting	every	twist,	every	marred
flare	of	bone,	and	the	unseeing	eyes	that	stared	out	into	that	light	were	empty.
As	empty	as	the	Jaghut’s	own.
	
Ursto	and	Pinosel	watched	the	Jaghut	fling	the	pathetic,	mangled	body	away.
Then	she	faced	them.	‘My	ritual	is	sundered.’
Pinosel	laughed	through	her	nose,	which	proved	a	messy	outburst	the
cleaning	of	which	occupied	her	for	the	next	few	moments.
Ursto	cast	her	a	disgusted	glance,	then	nodded	to	the	Jaghut	sorceress.	‘Oh,
they	all	worked	at	doing	that.	Mosag,	Menandore,	Sukul	Ankhadu,	blah	blah.’
He	waved	one	hand.	‘But	we’re	here,	sweetness.	We	got	its	name,	y’see.’
The	Jaghut	cocked	her	head.	‘Then,	I	am	not	needed.’
‘Well,	that’s	true	enough.	Unless	you	care	for	a	drink?’	He	tugged	the	jug
free	of	Pinosel’s	grip,	raised	it.
The	Jaghut	stared	a	moment	longer,	then	she	said,	‘A	pleasing	offer,	thank
you.’
	
The	damned	sun	was	up,	but	on	this	side	the	city’s	wall	was	all	shadow.	Except,
Sergeant	Balm	saw,	for	the	wide	open	gate.
Ahead,	Masan	Gilani	did	that	unthinkable	thing	again	and	rose	in	her
stirrups,	leaning	forward	as	she	urged	her	horse	into	a	gallop.
From	just	behind	Balm,	Throatslitter	moaned	like	a	puppy	under	a	brick.
Balm	shook	his	head.	Another	sick	thought	just	popping	into	his	head	like	a
squeezed	tick.	Where	was	he	getting	them	from	anyway?	And	why	was	that	gate
open	and	why	were	they	all	riding	hard	straight	for	it?
And	was	that	corpses	he	saw	just	inside?	Figures	moving	about	amidst
smoke?	Weapons?
What	was	that	sound	from	the	other	side	of	that	gate?
‘Sharpers!’	Deadsmell	called	out	behind	him.	‘Keneb’s	in!	He’s	holding	the
gate!’
Keneb?	Who	in	Hood’s	name	was	Keneb?
‘Ride!’	Balm	shouted.	‘They’re	after	us!	Ride	for	Aren!’
Masan	Gilani’s	rising	and	lowering	butt	swept	into	the	shadow	of	the	gate.


Throatslitter	cried	out	and	that	was	the	sound	all	right,	when	the	cat	dives
under	the	cartwheel	and	things	go	squirt	and	it	wasn’t	his	fault	he’d	hardly
kicked	at	all.	‘It	dived	out	there,	Ma!	Oh,	I	hate	cities!	Let’s	go	home	–	ride!
Through	that	hole!	What’s	it	called?	The	big	false-arched	cantilevered	hole!’
Plunging	into	gloom,	horse	hoofs	suddenly	skidding,	the	entire	beast
slewing	round	beneath	him.	Impact.	Hip	to	rump,	and	Balm	was	thrown,	arms
reaching	out,	wrapping	tight	round	a	soft	yielding	assembly	of	perfected	flesh
–	and	she	yelped,	pulled	with	him	as	he	plunged	past	dragging	Masan	Gilani
from	her	saddle.
Hard	onto	cobbles,	Balm’s	head	slamming	down,	denting	and	dislodging
his	helm.	Her	weight	deliciously	flattening	him	for	a	single	exquisite	moment
before	she	rolled	off.
Horses	stumbling,	hoofs	cracking	down	way	too	close.	Soldiers	rushing
in,	pulling	them	clear.
Balm	stared	up	into	a	familiar	face.	‘Thom	Tissy,	you	ain’t	dead?’
The	ugly	face	spread	into	a	toad’s	grin	–	toad	under	a	brick	oh	they	smile
wide	then	don’t	they	–	and	then	a	calloused	hand	slapped	him	hard.	‘You	with
us,	Balm?	Glad	you	arrived	–	we’re	getting	pressed	here	–	seems	the	whole
damned	city	garrison	is	here,	tryin’	to	retake	the	gate.’
‘Garrison?	What’s	Blistig	thinking?	We’re	on	his	side!	Show	me	the
famous	dancing	girls	of	Aren,	Tissy,	that’s	what	I’m	here	to	see	and	maybe
more	than	see,	hey?’
Thom	Tissy	dragged	Balm	onto	his	feet,	set	the	dented	helm	back	onto
Balm’s	head,	then	he	took	him	by	the	shoulders	and	turned	him	round.
And	there	was	Keneb,	and	there,	just	beyond,	barricades	of	wreckage	and
soldiers	crouching	down	reloading	crossbows	while	others	hacked	at	Letherii
soldiers	trying	to	force	a	breach.	Somewhere	to	the	right	a	sharper	detonated
in	an	alley	mouth	where	the	enemy	had	been	gathering	for	another	rush.	People
screamed.
Fist	Keneb	stepped	up	to	Balm.	‘Where	are	the	rest,	Sergeant?’
‘Sir?’
‘The	Adjunct	and	the	army!’
‘In	the	transports,	sir,	where	else?	Worst	storm	I’ve	ever	seen	and	now	all
the	ships	are	upside	down—’
Behind	Balm	Deadsmell	said,	‘Fist,	they	should	be	on	the	march.’
‘Get	Masan	Gilani	back	on	her	horse,’	Keneb	said	and	Balm	wanted	to	kiss
the	man,	‘and	I	don’t	care	if	she	kills	the	beast	but	I	want	her	to	reach	the
Adjunct	–	they	need	to	step	it	up.	Send	their	cavalry	ahead	riding	hard.’
‘Yes	sir.’


‘We’re	running	low	on	munitions	and	quarrels	and	there’s	more	of	the
Letherii	gathering	with	every	damned	breath	and	if	they	find	a	decent
commander	we	won’t	be	able	to	hold.’
Was	the	Fist	talking	to	Balm?	He	wasn’t	sure,	but	he	wanted	to	turn	round
to	watch	Masan	Gilani	jump	with	her	legs	spread	onto	that	horse’s	back,	oh	yes
he	did,	but	these	hands	on	his	shoulders	wouldn’t	let	him	and	someone	was
whimpering	in	his	ear—
‘Stop	making	that	sound,	Sergeant,’	Keneb	said.
Someone	rode	back	out	through	the	gate	and	where	did	they	think	they
were	going?	There	was	a	fight	here!	‘Boyfriends	of	the	dancing	girls,’	he
whispered,	reaching	for	his	sword.
‘Corporal,’	Keneb	said.	‘Guide	your	sergeant	here	to	the	barricade	to	the
left.	You	too,	Throatslitter.’
Deadsmell	said,	‘He’ll	be	fine	in	a	moment,	sir—’
‘Yes,	just	go.’
‘Aye,	Fist.’
Boyfriends.	Balm	wanted	to	kill	every	one	of	them.
	
‘This	city	looks	like	a	hurricane	went	through	it,’	Cuttle	said	in	a	low	mutter.
He	had	that	right.	The	looting	and	all	the	rest	was	days	old,	however,	and
now	it	seemed	that	word	of	the	Malazan	breach	was	sweeping	through	in	yet
another	storm	–	this	one	met	with	exhaustion	–	as	the	squad	crouched	in
shadows	near	one	end	of	an	alley,	watching	the	occasional	furtive	figure	rush
across	the	street.
They’d	ambushed	one	unit	forming	up	to	march	for	the	western	gate.
Quarrels	and	sharpers	and	a	burner	under	the	weapons	wagon	–	still	burning
back	there	by	the	column	of	black	smoke	lifting	into	the	ever-brightening	sky.
Took	them	all	out,	twenty-five	dead	or	wounded,	and	before	he	and	Gesler	had
pulled	away	locals	were	scurrying	out	to	loot	the	bodies.
The	captain	had	commandeered	Urb	and	his	squad	off	to	find	Hellian	and
her	soldiers	–	the	damned	drunk	had	taken	a	wrong	turn	somewhere	–	which
left	Fiddler	and	Gesler	to	keep	pushing	for	the	palace.
Forty	paces	down	the	street	to	their	right	was	a	high	wall	with	a	fortified
postern.	City	Garrison	block	and	compound,	and	now	that	gate	had	opened	and
troops	were	filing	out	to	form	up	ranks	in	the	street.
‘That’s	where	we	find	the	commander,’	Cuttle	said.	‘The	one	organizing
the	whole	thing.’
Fiddler	looked	directly	across	from	where	he	and	his	marines	were	hiding


and	saw	Gesler	and	his	soldiers	in	a	matching	position	in	another	alley	mouth.
It’d	be	nice	if	we	were	on	the	roofs.	But	no-one	was	keen	to	break	into	these
official-looking	buildings	and	maybe	end	up	fighting	frenzied	clerks	and	night
watch	guards.	Noise	like	that	and	there’d	be	real	troops	pushing	in	from	behind
them.
Maybe	closer	to	the	palace	–	tenement	blocks	there,	and	crowded	together.
It’d	save	us	a	lot	of	this	ducking	and	crawling	crap.
And	what	could	be	messy	ambushes.
‘Hood’s	breath,	Fid,	there’s	a	hundred	out	there	and	still	more	coming.’
Cuttle	pointed.	‘There,	that’s	the	man	in	charge.’
‘Who’s	our	best	shot	with	the	crossbow?’	Fiddler	asked.
‘You.’
Shit.
‘But	Koryk’s	all	right.	Though,	if	I’d	pick	anyone,	it’d	be	Corabb.’
Fiddler	slowly	smiled.	‘Cuttle,	sometimes	you’re	a	genius.	Not	that	it’ll
ever	earn	you	rank	of	corporal	or	anything	like	that.’
‘I’ll	sleep	easy	tonight,	then.’	Cuttle	paused,	then	mused,	‘Forty	paces	and	a
clear	shot,	but	we’d	blow	any	chance	of	ambush.’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘No,	this	is	even	better.	He	looses	his	quarrel,	the
man	goes	down.	We	rush	out,	throw	five	or	six	sharpers,	then	wheel	and	back
into	the	alley	–	away	as	fast	as	we	can.	The	survivors	rush	up,	crowd	the	alley
mouth,	and	Gesler	hits	’em	from	behind	with	another	five	or	six	sharpers.’
‘Beautiful,	Fid.	But	how’s	Gesler	gonna	know—’
‘He’ll	work	it	out.’	Fiddler	turned	and	gestured	Corabb	forward.
	
A	freshly	appointed	Finadd	of	the	Main	Garrison,	standing	five	paces	from
Atri-Preda	Beshur,	turned	from	reviewing	his	squads	to	see	an	aide’s	head
twitch,	sparks	flying	from	his	helm,	and	then	Finadd	Gart,	who	was	beside	the
Atri-Preda,	shrieked.	He	was	holding	up	one	hand,	seemingly	right	in	Beshur ’s
face,	and	there	was	a	quarrel	stub	jutting	from	that	hand,	and	blood	was
gushing	down	Beshur ’s	face	–	as	the	Atri-Preda	staggered	back,	the	motion
pulling	Gart’s	hand	with	him.	For	the	quarrel	was	buried	in	Beshur ’s	forehead.
The	new	Finadd,	nineteen	years	of	age	and	now	the	ranking	officer	of	this
full-strength	unit,	stared	in	disbelief.
Shouts,	and	he	saw	figures	appearing	at	the	mouth	of	an	alley	a	ways	down
the	street.	Five,	six	in	all,	rushing	forward	with	rocks	in	their	hands—
Pointing,	the	Finadd	screamed	the	order	to	counter-charge,	and	then	he	was
running	at	the	very	head	of	his	soldiers,	waving	his	sword	in	the	air.


Thirty	paces.
Twenty.
The	rocks	flew	out,	arced	towards	them.	He	ducked	one	that	sailed	close
past	his	right	shoulder	and	then,	suddenly	deaf,	eyes	filled	with	grit,	he	was
lying	on	the	cobbles	and	there	was	blood	everywhere.	Someone	stumbled	into
his	line	of	sight,	one	of	his	soldiers.	The	woman’s	right	arm	dangled	from	a
single	thin	strip	of	meat,	and	the	appendage	swung	wildly	about	as	the	woman
did	a	strange	pirouette	before	promptly	sitting	down.
She	looked	across	at	him,	and	screamed.
The	Finadd	sought	to	climb	to	his	feet,	but	something	was	wrong.	His
limbs	weren’t	working,	and	now	there	was	a	fire	in	his	back	–	someone	had	lit
a	damned	fire	there	–	why	would	they	do	that?	Searing	heat	reaching	down,
through	a	strange	numbness,	and	the	back	of	his	head	was	wet.
Struggling	with	all	his	will,	he	brought	one	hand	up	behind,	to	settle	the
palm	on	the	back	of	his	head.
And	found	his	skull	entirely	gone.
Probing,	trembling	fingers	pushed	into	some	kind	of	pulped	matter	and	all
at	once	the	burning	pain	in	his	back	vanished.
He	could	make	things	work	again,	he	realized,	and	pushed	some	more,
deeper.
Whatever	he	then	touched	killed	him.
	
As	Fiddler	led	his	squad	into	a	seeming	rout,	with	fifty	or	sixty	Letherii
soldiers	charging	after	them,	Gesler	raised	his	hand,	which	held	a	burner.	Aye,
messy,	but	there	were	a	lot	of	them,	weren’t	there?
Fiddler	and	his	marines	made	it	into	the	alley,	tore	off	down	it.
A	crowd	of	Letherii	reached	the	mouth,	others	pushing	up	behind	them.
And	munitions	flew,	and	suddenly	the	street	was	a	conflagration.
Without	waiting,	and	as	a	gust	of	fierce	heat	swept	over	them,	Gesler
turned	and	pushed	Stormy	to	lead	the	retreat.
Running,	running	hard.
They’d	find	the	next	street	and	swing	right,	come	up	round	the	other	side
of	the	walled	compound.	Expecting	to	see	Fiddler	and	his	own	soldiers	waiting
opposite	them	again.	More	alley	mouths,	and	just	that	much	closer	to	the
palace.
	


‘We	got	gold,	damn	you!’
‘Everybody’s	got	that,’	replied	the	barkeep,	laconic	as	ever.
Hellian	glared	at	him.	‘What	kinda	accent	is	that?’
‘The	proper	kind	for	the	trader ’s	tongue,	which	makes	one	of	us	sound
educated	and	I	suppose	that’s	something.’
‘Oh,	I’ll	show	you	something!’	She	drew	out	her	corporal’s	sword,	giving
him	a	hard	push	on	the	chest	to	clear	the	weapon,	then	hammered	the	pommel
down	on	the	bartop.	The	weapon	bounced	up	from	her	hand,	the	edge	scoring
deep	across	Hellian’s	right	ear.	She	swore,	reached	up	and	saw	her	hand	come
away	red	with	blood.	‘Now	look	what	you	made	me	do!’
‘And	I	suppose	I	also	made	you	invade	our	empire,	and	this	city,	and—’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,	you	ain’t	that	important.	It	was	the	winged	monkeys	did
that.’
The	barkeep’s	thin,	overlong	face	twisted	slightly	as	he	arched	a	single
brow.
Hellian	turned	to	her	corporal.	‘What	kinda	sword	you	using,	fool?	One
that	don’t	work	right,	that’s	what	kind,	I’d	say.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.
‘Sorry,	Sergeant.’
‘Aye	and	sorry	don’t	cut	it	with	me,	Corporal.	Now	get	that	sword	outa	my
sight.’
‘Did	you	hear	it	coming?’	another	one	of	her	soldiers	asked.
‘What?	What’s	that	supposed	to	mean,	Boatsnort?’
‘Uh,	my	name’s—’
‘I	just	told	you	your	name!’
‘Nothing,	Sergeant.	I	didn’t	mean	nothing.’
The	barkeep	cleared	his	throat.	‘Now,	if	you	are	done	with	jabbering
amongst	yourselves,	you	can	kindly	leave.	As	I	said	before,	this	tavern	is	dry
—’
‘They	don’t	make	taverns	dry,’	Hellian	said.
‘I’m	sure	you	didn’t	say	that	quite	right—’
‘Corporal,	you	hearing	all	this?’
‘Yes.
‘Aye.’
‘Good.	String	this	fool	up.	By	his	nostrils.	From	that	beam	right	there.’
‘By	his	nostrils,	Sergeant?’
‘That	you	again,	Snortface?’
Hellian	smiled	as	the	corporal	used	four	arms	to	grab	the	barkeep	and	drag
him	across	the	counter.	The	man	was	suddenly	nowhere	near	as	laconic	as	he


was	a	moment	ago.	Sputtering,	clawing	at	the	hands	gripping	him,	he	shouted,
‘Wait!	Wait!’
Everyone	halted.
‘In	the	cellar,’	the	man	gasped.
‘Give	my	corporal	directions	and	proper	ones,’	Hellian	said,	so	very
satisfied	now,	except	for	her	dribbling	ear,	but	oh,	if	any	of	her	soldiers	got
out	of	line	she	could	pick	the	scab	and	bleed	all	over	them	and	wouldn’t	they
feel	just	awful	about	it	and	then	do	exactly	what	she	wanted	them	to	do,	‘which
is	guard	the	door.’
‘Sergeant?’
‘You	heard	me,	guard	the	door,	so	we’re	not	disturbed.’
‘Who	are	we	on	the	lookout	for?’	Snivelnose	asked.	‘Ain’t	nobody—’
‘The	captain,	who	else?	She’s	probably	still	after	us,	damn	her.’
	
Memories,	Icarium	now	understood,	were	not	isolated	things.	They	did	not
exist	within	high-walled	compartments	in	a	mind.	Instead,	they	were	like	the
branches	of	a	tree,	or	perhaps	a	continuous	mosaic	on	a	floor	that	one	could
play	light	over,	illuminating	patches	here	and	there.	Yet,	and	he	knew	this	as
well,	for	others	that	patch	of	light	was	vast	and	bright,	encompassing	most	of	a
life,	and	although	details	might	be	blurred,	scenes	made	hazy	and	uncertain
with	time,	it	was,	nevertheless,	a	virtual	entirety.	And	from	this	was	born	a
sense	of	a	self.
Which	he	did	not	possess	and	perhaps	had	never	possessed.	And	in	the	grip
of	such	ignorance,	he	was	as	malleable	as	a	child.	To	be	used;	to	be,	indeed,
abused.	And	many	had	done	so,	for	there	was	power	in	Icarium,	far	too	much
power.
Such	exploitation	was	now	at	an	end.	All	of	Taralack	Veed’s	exhortations
were	as	wind	in	the	distance,	and	he	was	not	swayed.	The	Gral	would	be
Icarium’s	last	companion.
He	stood	in	the	street,	all	of	his	senses	awakened	to	the	realization	that	he
knew	this	place,	this	modest	patch	of	the	mosaic	grey	with	promise.	And	true
illumination	was	finally	at	hand.	The	measuring	of	time,	from	this	moment	and
for	ever	onward.	A	life	begun	again,	with	no	risk	of	losing	his	sense	of	self.
My	hands	have	worked	here.	In	this	city,	beneath	this	city.
And	now	awaits	me,	to	be	awakened.
And	when	I	have	done	that,	I	will	begin	anew.	A	life,	a	host	of	tesserae	to
lay	down	one	by	one.
He	set	out,	then,	for	the	door.


The	door	into	his	machine.
He	walked,	unmindful	of	those	scurrying	in	his	wake,	of	the	figures	and
soldiers	moving	out	of	his	path.	He	heard	but	held	no	curiosity	for	the	sounds
of	fighting,	the	violence	erupting	in	the	streets	to	either	side,	the	detonations	as
of	lightning	although	this	dawn	was	breaking	clear	and	still.	He	passed	beneath
diffused	shadows	cast	down	by	billowing	smoke	from	burning	buildings,
wagons	and	barricades.	He	heard	screams	and	shouts	but	did	not	seek	out
where	they	came	from,	even	to	lend	succour	as	he	would	normally	have	done.
He	stepped	over	bodies	in	the	street.
He	walked	alongside	an	ash-laden	greasy	canal	for	a	time,	then	reached	a
bridge	and	crossed	over	into	what	was	clearly	an	older	part	of	the	city.	Down
another	street	to	an	intersection,	whereupon	he	swung	left	and	continued	on.
There	were	more	people	here	in	this	quarter	–	with	the	day	growing	bolder
and	all	sounds	of	fighting	a	distant	roar	to	the	west	–	yet	even	here	the	people
seemed	dazed.	None	of	the	usual	conversations,	the	hawkers	crying	their
wares,	beasts	pulling	loaded	carts.	The	drifting	smoke	wafted	down	like	an
omen,	and	the	citizens	wandered	through	it	as	if	lost.
He	drew	nearer	the	door.	Of	course,	it	was	nothing	like	a	door	in	truth.
More	like	a	wound,	a	breach.	He	could	feel	its	power	stir	to	life,	for	as	he
sensed	it	so	too	did	it	sense	him.
Icarium	then	slowed.	A	wound,	yes.	His	machine	was	wounded.	Its	pieces
had	been	twisted,	shifted	out	of	position.	Ages	had	passed	since	he	had	built	it,
so	he	should	not	be	surprised.	Would	it	still	work?	He	was	no	longer	so	sure.
This	is	mine.	I	must	make	it	right,	no	matter	the	cost.
I	will	have	this	gift.	I	will	have	it.
He	started	forward	once	more.
The	house	that	had	once	disguised	this	nexus	of	the	machine	had	collapsed
into	ruin	and	no	efforts	had	been	made	to	clear	the	wreckage.	There	was	a	man
standing	before	it.
After	a	long	moment,	Icarium	realized	that	he	recognized	this	man.	He	had
been	aboard	the	ships,	and	the	name	by	which	he	had	been	known	was	Taxilian.
As	Icarium	walked	up	to	him,	Taxilian,	his	eyes	strangely	bright,	bowed
and	stepped	back.	‘This,	Icarium,’	he	said,	‘is	your	day.’
My	day?	Yes,	my	first	day.
Lifestealer	faced	the	ruin.
A	glow	was	now	rising	from	somewhere	inside,	shafts	slanting	up	between
snapped	timbers	and	beams,	lancing	out	in	spears	from	beneath	stone	and
brick.	The	glow	burgeoned,	and	the	world	beneath	him	seemed	to	tremble.	But
no,	that	was	no	illusion	–	buildings	groaned,	shuddered.	Splintering	sounds,


shutters	rattling	as	from	a	gust	of	wind.
Icarium	drew	a	step	closer,	drawing	a	dagger.
Thunder	sounded	beneath	him,	making	the	cobbles	bounce	in	puffs	of	dust.
Somewhere,	in	the	city,	structures	began	to	break	apart,	as	sections	and
components	within	them	stirred	into	life,	into	inexorable	motion.	Seeking	to
return	to	a	most	ancient	pattern.
More	thunder,	as	buildings	burst	apart.
Columns	of	dust	corkscrewed	skyward.
And	still	the	white	glow	lifted,	spread	out	in	a	fashion	somewhere	between
liquid	and	fire,	pouring,	leaping,	the	shafts	and	spears	twisting	in	the	air.
Engulfing	the	ruin,	spilling	out	onto	the	street,	lapping	around	Icarium,	who
drew	the	sharp-edged	blade	diagonally,	deep,	up	one	forearm;	then	did	the
same	with	the	other	–	holding	the	weapon	tight	in	a	blood-soaked	hand.
Who	then	raised	his	hands.
To	measure	time,	one	must	begin.	To	grow	futureward,	one	must	root.
Deep	into	the	ground	with	blood.
I	built	this	machine.	This	place	that	will	forge	my	beginning.	No	longer
outside	the	world.	No	longer	outside	time	itself.	Give	me	this,	wounded	or	not,
give	me	this.	If	K’rul	can,	why	not	me?
All	that	poured	from	his	wrists	flared	incandescent.	And	Icarium	walked
into	the	white.
	
Taxilian	was	thrown	back	as	the	liquid	fire	exploded	outward.	A	moment	of
surprise,	before	he	was	incinerated.	The	eruption	tore	into	the	neighbouring
buildings,	obliterating	them.	The	street	in	front	of	what	had	once	been	Scale
House	became	a	maelstrom	of	shattered	cobbles,	the	shards	of	stone	racing
outward	to	stipple	walls	and	punch	through	shutters.	The	building	opposite
tilted	back,	every	brace	snapping,	then	collapsed	inward.
Fleeing	the	sudden	storm,	Taralack	Veed	and	Senior	Assessor	ran	–	a	halfdozen	strides	before	both	were	thrown	from	their	feet.
The	Cabalhii	monk,	lying	on	his	back,	had	a	momentary	vision	of	a	mass
of	masonry	rushing	down,	and	in	that	moment	he	burst	out	laughing	–	a	sound
cut	short	as	the	tons	of	rubble	crushed	him.
Taralack	Veed	had	rolled	with	his	tumble,	narrowly	avoiding	that
descending	wall.	Deafened,	half	blind,	he	used	his	hands	to	drag	himself
onward,	tearing	his	nails	away	and	lacerating	his	palms	and	fingers	on	the
broken	cobbles.
And	there,	through	the	dust,	the	billowing	white	fire,	he	saw	his	village,	the


huts,	the	horses	in	their	roped	kraal,	and	there,	on	the	hill	beyond,	the	goats
huddled	beneath	the	tree,	sheltering	from	the	terrible	sun.	Dogs	lying	in	the
shade,	children	on	their	knees	playing	with	the	tiny	clay	figurines	that	some
travelling	Malazan	scholar	had	thought	to	be	of	great	and	sacred	significance,
but	were	in	truth	no	more	than	toys,	for	all	children	loved	toys.
Why,	he	had	had	his	very	own	collection	and	this	was	long	before	he	killed
his	woman	and	her	lover,	before	killing	the	man’s	brother	who	had	proclaimed
the	feud	and	had	drawn	the	knife.
But	now,	all	at	once,	the	goats	were	crying	out,	crying	out	in	dread	pain
and	terror	–	dying!	The	huge	tree	in	flames,	branches	crashing	down.
The	huts	were	burning	and	bodies	sprawled	in	the	dust	with	faces	red	with
ruin.	And	this	was	death,	then,	death	in	the	breaking	of	what	had	always	been,
solid	and	predictable,	pure	and	reliable.	The	breaking	–	devastation,	to	take	it
all	away.
Taralack	Veed	screamed,	bloodied	hands	reaching	for	those	toys	–	those
beautiful,	so	very	sacred	toys—
The	enormous	chunk	of	stone	that	slanted	down	took	the	top	of	Taralack
Veed’s	head	at	an	angle,	crushing	bone	and	brain,	and,	as	it	skidded	away,	it	left
a	greasy	smear	of	red-	and	grey-streaked	hair.

Throughout	the	city,	buildings	erupted	into	clouds	of	dust.	Stone,	tile,	bricks
and	wood	sailed	outward,	and	white	fire	poured	forth,	shafts	of	argent	light
arcing	out	through	walls,	as	if	nothing	could	exist	that	could	impede	them.	A
shimmering,	crazed	web	of	light,	linking	each	piece	of	the	machine.	And	the
power	flowed,	racing	in	blinding	pulses,	and	they	all	drew	inward,	to	one
place,	to	one	heart.
Icarium.
The	north	and	west	outer	walls	detonated	as	sections	of	their	foundations
shifted,	moved	four,	five	paces,	twisting	as	if	vast	pieces	of	a	giant	puzzle	were
being	moved	into	place.	Rent,	sundered,	parts	of	those	walls	toppled	and	the
sound	of	that	impact	rumbled	beneath	every	street.
In	the	courtyard	of	an	inn	that	had,	through	nefarious	schemes,	become	the
property	of	Rautos	Hivanar,	a	huge	piece	of	metal,	bent	at	right	angles,	now
lifted	straight	upward	to	twice	the	height	of	the	man	standing	before	it.
Revealing,	at	its	base,	a	hinge	of	white	fire.
And	the	structure	then	tilted,	dropped	forward	like	a	smith’s	hammer.
Rautos	Hivanar	dived	to	escape,	but	not	quickly	enough,	as	the	massive


object	slammed	down	onto	the	backs	of	his	legs.
Pinned,	as	white	fire	licked	out	towards	him,	Rautos	could	feel	his	blood
draining	down	from	his	crushed	legs,	turning	the	compound’s	dust	into	mud.
Yes,	he	thought,	as	it	began	with	mud,	so	it	now	ends—
The	white	fire	enveloped	him.
And	sucked	out	from	his	mind	every	memory	he	possessed.
The	thing	that	died	there	a	short	time	later	was	not	Rautos	Hivanar.
	
The	vast	web’s	pulsing	lasted	but	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	The	shifting	of	the
pieces	of	the	machine,	with	all	the	destruction	that	entailed,	was	even	more
short-lived.	Yet,	in	that	time,	all	who	were	devoured	by	the	white	fire	emptied
their	lives	into	it.	Every	memory,	from	the	pain	of	birth	to	the	last	moment	of
death.
The	machine,	alas,	was	indeed	broken.
As	the	echoes	of	groaning	stone	and	metal	slowly	faded,	the	web	flickered,
then	vanished.	And	now,	dust	warred	with	the	smoke	in	the	air	above	Letheras.
A	few	remaining	sections	of	stone	and	brick	toppled,	but	these	were	but
modest	adjustments	in	the	aftermath	of	what	had	gone	before.
And	in	this	time	of	settling,	the	first	voices	of	pain,	the	first	cries	for	help,
lifted	weakly	from	heaps	of	rubble.
The	ruins	of	Scale	House	were	naught	but	white	dust,	and	from	it	nothing
stirred.
	
The	bed	of	a	canal	had	cracked	during	the	earthquake,	opening	a	wide	fissure
into	which	water	plunged,	racing	down	veins	between	compacted	bricks	and
fill.	And	in	the	shaking	repercussions	of	falling	structures,	buried	foundations
shifted,	cracked,	slumped.
Barely	noticed	amidst	all	the	others,	then,	the	explosion	that	tore	up
through	that	canal	in	a	spray	of	sludge	and	water	was	relatively	minor,	yet	it
proved	singular	in	one	detail,	for	as	the	muddy	rain	of	the	canal’s	water	sluiced
down	onto	the	still-buckling	streets,	a	figure	clawed	up	from	the	canal,	hands
reaching	for	mooring	rungs,	pulling	itself	from	the	churning	foam.
An	old	man.
Who	stood,	ragged	tunic	streaming	brown	water,	and	did	not	move	while
chaos	and	spears	of	blinding	light	tore	through	Letheras.	Who	remained
motionless,	indeed,	after	those	terrifying	events	vanished	and	faded.


An	old	man.
Torn	between	incandescent	rage	and	dreadful	fear.
Because	of	who	he	was,	the	fear	won	out.	Not	for	himself,	of	course,	but
for	a	mortal	man	who	was,	the	old	man	knew,	about	to	die.
And	he	would	not	reach	him	in	time.
Well,	so	it	would	be	rage	after	all.	Vengeance	against	the	Errant	would
have	to	wait	its	turn.	First,	vengeance	against	a	man	named	Karos	Invictad.
Mael,	Elder	God	of	the	Seas,	had	work	to	do.
	
Lostara	Yil	and	the	Adjunct	rode	side	by	side	at	the	head	of	the	column	of
cavalry.	Directly	ahead	they	could	see	the	west	wall	of	the	city.	Enormous
cracks	were	visible	through	the	dust,	and	the	gate	before	them	remained	open.
The	horses	were	winded,	their	breaths	gusting	from	foam-flecked	nostrils.
Almost	there.
‘Adjunct,	was	that	munitions?’
Tavore	glanced	across,	then	shook	her	head.
‘Not	a	chance,’	Masan	Gilani	said	behind	them.	‘Only	a	handful	of	crackers
in	the	whole	lot.	Something	else	did	all	that.’
Lostara	twisted	in	her	saddle.
Riding	beside	Masan	Gilani	was	Sinn.	Not	riding	well,	either.	Gilani	was
staying	close,	ready	to	reach	out	a	steadying	hand.	The	child	seemed	dazed,
almost	drunk.	Lostara	swung	back.	‘What’s	wrong	with	her?’	she	asked	the
Adjunct.
‘I	don’t	know.’
As	the	road’s	slope	climbed	towards	the	gate,	they	could	see	the	river	on
their	left.	Thick	with	sails.	The	Malazan	fleet	and	the	two	Thrones	of	War	had
arrived.	The	main	army	was	only	two	or	three	bells	behind	the	Adjunct’s
column,	and	Fist	Blistig	was	pushing	them	hard.
They	drew	closer.
‘That	gate’s	not	going	to	close	ever	again,’	Lostara	observed.	‘In	fact,	I’m
amazed	it’s	still	up.’	Various	carved	blocks	in	the	arch	had	slipped	down,
jamming	atop	the	massive	wooden	doors,	which	served	to	bind	them	in	place.
As	they	rode	up,	two	marines	emerged	from	the	shadows.	Had	the	look	of
heavies,	and	both	were	wounded.	The	Dal	Honese	one	waved.
Reining	in	before	them,	the	Adjunct	was	first	to	dismount,	one	gloved	hand
reaching	for	her	sword	as	she	approached.
‘We’re	holding	still,’	the	Dal	Honese	marine	said.	Then	he	raised	a
bloodied	arm.	‘Bastard	cut	my	tendon	–	it’s	all	rolled	up	under	the	skin	–	see?


Hurts	worse	than	a	burr	in	the	arse…sir.’
The	Adjunct	walked	past	both	marines,	into	the	shadow	of	the	gate.	Lostara
gestured	for	the	column	to	dismount,	then	set	out	after	Tavore.	As	she	came
opposite	the	marines,	she	asked,	‘What	company	are	you?’
‘Third,	Captain.	Fifth	Squad.	Sergeant	Badan	Gruk’s	squad.	I’m	Reliko	and
this	oaf	is	Vastly	Blank.	We	had	us	a	fight.’
Onward,	through	the	dusty	gloom,	then	out	into	dusty,	smoke-filled
sunlight.	Where	she	halted,	seeing	all	the	bodies,	all	the	blood.
The	Adjunct	stood	ten	paces	in,	and	Keneb	was	limping	towards	her	and	on
his	face	was	desperate	relief.
Aye,	they	had	them	a	fight	all	right.
	
Old	Hunch	Arbat	walked	into	the	cleared	space	and	halted	beside	the
slumbering	figure	in	its	centre.	He	kicked.
A	faint	groan.
He	kicked	again.
Ublala	Pung’s	eyes	flickered	open,	stared	up	uncomprehendingly	for	a
long	moment,	then	the	Tarthenal	sat	up.	‘Is	it	time?’
‘Half	the	damned	city’s	fallen	down	which	is	worse	than	Old	Hunch
predicted,	isn’t	it?	Oh	yes	it	is,	worse	and	more	than	worse.	Damned	gods.	But
that’s	no	mind	to	us,	Old	Hunch	says.’	He	cast	a	critical	eye	on	the	lad’s	efforts,
then	grudgingly	nodded.	‘It’ll	have	to	do.	Just	my	luck,	the	last	Tarthenal	left	in
Letheras	and	he’s	carrying	a	sack	of	sun-baked	hens.’
Frowning,	Ublala	stretched	a	foot	over	and	nudged	the	sack.	There	was	an
answering	cluck	and	he	smiled.	‘They	helped	me	clean,’	he	said.
Old	Hunch	Arbat	stared	for	a	moment,	then	he	lifted	his	gaze	and	studied
the	burial	grounds.	‘Smell	them?	Old	Hunch	does.	Get	out	of	this	circle,	Ublala
Pung,	unless	you	want	to	join	in.’
Ublala	scratched	his	jaw.	‘I	was	told	not	to	join	in	on	things	I	know	nothing
about.’
‘Oh?	And	who	told	you	that?’
‘A	fat	woman	named	Rucket,	when	she	got	me	to	swear	fealty	to	the	Rat
Catchers’	Guild.’
‘The	Rat	Catchers’	Guild?’
Ublala	Pung	shrugged.	‘I	guess	they	catch	rats,	but	I’m	not	sure	really.’
‘Out	of	the	circle,	lad.’
	


Three	strides	by	the	challenger	onto	the	sands	of	the	arena	and	the	earthquake
had	struck.	Marble	benches	cracked,	people	cried	out,	many	falling,	tumbling,
and	the	sand	itself	shimmered	then	seemed	to	transform,	as	conglomerated,
gritty	lumps	of	dried	blood	rose	into	view	like	garnets	in	a	prospector ’s	tin
pan.
Samar	Dev,	shivering	despite	the	sun’s	slanting	light,	held	tight	to	one	edge
of	a	bouncing	bench,	eyes	fixed	on	Karsa	Orlong	who	stood,	legs	wide	to	keep
his	balance	but	otherwise	looking	unperturbed	–	and	there,	at	the	other	end	of
the	arena,	a	swaying,	hulking	figure	emerged	from	a	tunnel	mouth.	Sword
sweeping	a	furrow	in	the	sand.
White	fire	suddenly	illuminated	the	sky,	arcing	across	the	blue-grey	sky	of
sunrise.	Flashing,	pulsing,	then	vanishing,	as	trembles	rippled	in	from	the	city,
then	faded	away.	Plumes	of	dust	spiralled	skyward	from	close	by	–	in	the
direction	of	the	Old	Palace.
On	the	imperial	stand	the	Chancellor	–	his	face	pale	and	eyes	wide	with
alarm	–	was	sending	runners	scurrying.
Samar	Dev	saw	Finadd	Varat	Taun	standing	near	Triban	Gnol.	Their	gazes
locked	–	and	she	understood.	Icarium.
Oh,	Taxilian,	did	you	guess	aright?	Did	you	see	what	you	longed	to	see?
‘What	is	happening?’
The	roar	brought	her	round,	to	where	stood	the	Emperor.	Rhulad	Sengar
was	staring	up	at	the	Chancellor.	‘Tell	me!	What	has	happened?’
Triban	Gnol	shook	his	head,	then	raised	his	hands.	‘An	earthquake,
Emperor.	Pray	to	the	Errant	that	it	has	passed.’
‘Have	we	driven	the	invaders	from	our	streets?’
‘We	do	so	even	now,’	the	Chancellor	replied.
‘I	will	kill	their	commander.	With	my	own	hands	I	will	kill	their
commander.’
Karsa	Orlong	drew	his	flint	sword.
The	act	captured	the	Emperor ’s	attention,	and	Samar	Dev	saw	Rhulad
Sengar	bare	his	teeth	in	an	ugly	smile.	‘Another	giant,’	he	said.	‘How	many
times	shall	you	kill	me?	You,	with	the	blood	of	my	kin	already	on	your	hands.
Twice?	Three	times?	It	will	not	matter.	It	will	not	matter!’
Karsa	Orlong,	bold	with	his	claims,	brazen	in	his	arrogance,	uttered	but
five	words	in	reply:	‘I	will	kill	you…once.’	And	then	he	turned	to	look	at
Samar	Dev	–	a	moment’s	glance,	and	it	was	all	that	Rhulad	Sengar	gave	him.
With	a	shriek,	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths	rushed	forward,	his
sword	a	whirling	blur	over	his	head.
Ten	strides	between	them.


Five.
Three.
The	gleaming	arc	of	that	cursed	weapon	slashed	out,	a	decapitating	swing
–	that	rang	deafeningly	from	Karsa’s	stone	sword.	Sprang	back,	chopped
down,	was	blocked	yet	again.
Rhulad	Sengar	staggered	back,	still	smiling	his	terrible	smile.	‘Kill	me,
then,’	he	said	in	a	ragged	rasp.
Karsa	Orlong	made	no	move.
With	a	scream	the	Emperor	attacked	again,	seeking	to	drive	the	Toblakai
back.
The	ringing	concussions	seemed	to	leap	from	those	weapons,	as	each
savage	attack	was	blocked,	shunted	aside.	Rhulad	pivoted,	angled	to	one	side,
slashed	down	at	Karsa’s	right	thigh.	Parried.	A	back-bladed	swing	up	towards
the	Toblakai’s	shoulder.	Batted	away.	Stumbling	off	balance	from	that	block,
the	Emperor	was	suddenly	vulnerable.	A	hack	downward	would	take	him,	a
thrust	would	pierce	him	–	a	damned	fool	could	have	cut	Rhulad	down	at	that
moment.
Yet	Karsa	did	nothing.	Nor	had	he	moved,	beyond	turning	in	place	to	keep
the	Emperor	in	front	of	him.
Rhulad	stumbled	clear,	then	spun	round,	righting	his	sword.	Chest	heaving
beneath	the	patchwork	of	embedded	coins,	eyes	wild	as	a	boar ’s.	‘Kill	me
then!’
Karsa	remained	where	he	was.	Not	taunting,	not	even	smiling.
Samar	Dev	stared	down	on	the	scene,	transfixed.	I	do	not	know	him.	I	have
never	known	him.
Gods,	we	should	have	had	sex	–	then	I’d	know!
Another	whirling	attack,	again	the	shrieking	reverberation	of	iron	and
flint,	a	flurry	of	sparks	cascading	down.	And	Rhulad	staggered	back	once
more.
The	Emperor	was	now	streaming	with	sweat.
Karsa	Orlong	did	not	even	seem	out	of	breath.
Inviting	a	fatal	response,	Rhulad	Sengar	dropped	down	onto	one	knee	to
regain	his	wind.
Invitation	not	accepted.
After	a	time,	in	which	the	score	or	fewer	onlookers	stared	on,	silent	and
confused;	in	which	Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	stood,	hands	clasped,	like	a	crow
nailed	to	a	branch;	the	Emperor	straightened,	lifted	his	sword	once	more,	and
resumed	his	fruitless	flailing	–	oh,	there	was	skill,	yes,	extraordinary	skill,	yet
Karsa	Orlong	stood	his	ground,	and	not	once	did	that	blade	touch	him.


Overhead,	the	sun	climbed	higher.
	
Karos	Invictad,	his	shimmering	red	silks	stained	and	smudged	with	grit	and
dust,	dragged	Tehol	Beddict’s	body	across	the	threshold.	Back	into	his	office.
From	down	the	corridor,	someone	was	screaming	about	an	army	in	the	city,
ships	crowding	the	harbour,	but	none	of	that	mattered	now.
Nothing	mattered	but	this	unconscious	man	at	his	feet.	Beaten	until	he
barely	clung	to	life.	By	the	Invigilator ’s	sceptre,	his	symbol	of	power,	and	was
that	not	right?	Oh,	but	it	was.
Was	the	mob	still	there?	Were	they	coming	in	now?	An	entire	wall	of	the
compound	had	collapsed,	after	all,	nothing	and	no-one	left	to	stop	them.
Motion	caught	his	eye	and	his	head	snapped	round	–	just	another	rat	in	the
corridor,	slithering	past.	The	Guild.	What	kind	of	game	were	those	fools
playing?	He’d	killed	dozens	of	the	damned	things,	so	easily	crushed	under	heel
or	with	a	savage	downward	swing	of	his	sceptre.
Rats.	They	were	nothing.	No	different	from	the	mob	outside,	all	those
precious	citizens	who	understood	nothing	about	anything,	who	needed	leaders
like	Karos	Invictad	to	guide	them	through	the	world.	He	adjusted	his	grip	on
the	sceptre,	flakes	of	blood	falling	away,	his	palm	seemingly	glued	to	the
ornate	shaft,	but	that	glue	had	not	set	and	wouldn’t	for	a	while,	would	it?	Not
until	he	was	truly	done.
Where	was	that	damned	mob?	He	wanted	them	to	see	–	this	final	skullshattering	blow	–	their	great	hero,	their	revolutionary.
Martyrs	could	be	dealt	with.	A	campaign	of	misinformation,	rumours	of
vulgarity,	corruption,	oh,	all	that	was	simple	enough.
I	stood	alone,	yes,	did	I	not?	Against	the	madness	of	this	day.	They	will
remember	that.	More	than	anything	else.	They	will	remember	that,	and
everything	else	I	choose	to	give	them.
Slaying	the	Empire’s	greatest	traitor	–	with	my	own	hand,	yes.
He	stared	down	at	Tehol	Beddict.	The	battered,	split-open	face,	the	shallow
breaths	that	trembled	from	beneath	snapped	ribs.	He	could	put	a	foot	down	on
the	man’s	chest,	settle	some	weight,	until	those	broken	ribs	punctured	the	lungs,
left	them	lacerated,	and	the	red	foam	would	spill	out	from	Tehol’s	mashed
nose,	his	torn	lips.	And,	surprise.	He	would	drown	after	all.
Another	rat	in	the	corridor?	He	turned.
The	sword-point	slashed	across	his	stomach.	Fluids	gushed,	organs
following.	Squealing,	Karos	Invictad	fell	to	his	knees,	stared	up	at	the	man
standing	before	him,	stared	up	at	the	crimson-bladed	sword	in	the	man’s	hand.


‘No,’	he	said	in	a	mumble,	‘but	you	are	dead.’
Brys	Beddict’s	calm	brown	eyes	shifted	from	the	Invigilator ’s	face,	noted
the	sceptre	still	held	in	Karos’s	right	hand.	His	sword	seemed	to	writhe.
Burning	pain	in	the	Invigilator ’s	wrist	and	he	looked	down.	Sceptre	was
gone.	Hand	was	gone.	Blood	streamed	from	the	stump.
A	kick	to	the	chest	sent	Karos	Invictad	toppling,	trailing	entrails	that
flopped	down	like	an	obscene,	malformed	penis	between	his	legs.
He	reached	down	with	his	one	hand	to	pull	it	all	back	in,	but	there	was	no
strength	left.
Did	I	kill	Tehol?	Yes,	I	must	have.	The	Invigilator	is	a	true	servant	of	the
empire,	and	always	will	be,	and	there	will	be	statues	in	courtyards	and	city
squares.	Karos	Invictad,	the	hero	who	destroyed	the	rebellion.
Karos	Invictad	died	then,	with	a	smile	on	his	face.
	
Brys	Beddict	sheathed	his	sword,	knelt	beside	his	brother,	lifted	his	head	into
his	lap.
Behind	him,	Ormly	said,	‘A	healer ’s	on	the	way.’
‘No	need,’	Brys	said.	And	looked	up.	‘An	Elder	God	comes.’
Ormly	licked	his	lips.	‘Saviour—’
A	cough	from	Tehol.
Brys	looked	down	to	see	his	brother ’s	eyes	flick	open.	One	brown,	one
blue.	Those	odd	eyes	stared	up	at	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	Tehol
whispered	something.
Brys	bent	lower.	‘What?’
‘I	said,	does	this	mean	I’m	dead?’
‘No,	Tehol.	Nor	am	I,	not	any	longer,	it	seems.’
‘Ah.	Then…’
‘Then	what?’
‘Death	–	what’s	it	like,	Brys?’
And	Brys	Beddict	smiled.	‘Wet.’
	
‘I	always	said	cities	were	dangerous	places,’	Quick	Ben	said,	brushing	plaster
dust	from	his	clothes.	The	collapsing	building	had	nearly	flattened	them	both,
and	the	wizard	was	still	trembling	–	not	from	the	close	call,	but	from	the
horrendous	sorcery	that	had	lit	the	morning	sky	–	a	devouring,	profoundly
hungry	sorcery.	Had	that	energy	reached	for	him,	he	was	not	sure	he	could


have	withstood	it.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	was	that?’	Hedge	demanded.
‘All	I	know,	it	was	old.	And	vicious.’
‘We	gonna	get	any	more,	you	think?’
Quick	Ben	shrugged.	‘I	hope	not.’
They	went	on,	through	streets	filled	with	rubble,	and	on	all	sides	the	cries
of	the	wounded,	figures	staggering	in	shock,	dust	and	smoke	lifting	into	the
sunlight.
Then	Hedge	held	up	a	hand.	‘Listen.’
Quick	Ben	did	as	he	was	bid.
And,	from	somewhere	ahead	–	closer	to	the	Eternal	Domicile	–	the	echo	of
‘Sharpers!’
‘Aye,	Quick,	aye.	Come	on,	let’s	go	find	’em!’
‘Wait	–	hold	it,	sapper	–	what	are—’
‘It’s	the	Fourteenth,	you	thick-skulled	halfwit!’
They	began	hurrying.
‘Next	time	I	see	Cotillion,’	Quick	Ben	hissed,	‘I’m	going	to	strangle	him
with	his	own	rope.’
	
Six	leagues	to	the	north,	a	bone-white	dragon	with	eyes	of	lurid	red	sailed
through	the	morning	sky.	Wings	creaking,	muscles	bunching,	the	wind	hissing
against	scales	and	along	bared	fangs	that	were	the	length	of	shortswords.
Returning,	after	all	this	time,	to	the	city	of	Letheras.
Hannan	Mosag	had	been	warned.	The	Crippled	God	had	been	warned.	And
yet	neither	had	heeded	Silchas	Ruin.	No,	instead,	they	had	conspired	with	Sukul
Ankhadu	and	Sheltatha	Lore,	and	possibly	with	Menandore	herself.	To	get	in
his	way,	to	oppose	him	and	what	he	had	needed	to	do.
More	than	this,	the	Letherii	Empire	had	been	hunting	them	for	an
inordinate	amount	of	time,	and	out	of	forbearance	Silchas	Ruin	had	ignored
the	affront.	For	the	sake	of	the	Acquitor	and	the	others.
Now,	he	was	no	longer	ignoring	anything.
An	empire,	a	city,	a	people,	a	Tiste	Edur	Ceda	and	a	mad	Emperor.
The	brother	of	Anomander	and	Andarist,	for	ever	deemed	the	coldest	of
the	three,	the	cruellest,	Silchas	Ruin	flew,	a	white	leviathan	with	murder	in	its
heart.
White	as	bone,	with	eyes	red	as	death.
	


Rhulad	Sengar	stumbled	away,	dragging	his	sword.	Sweat	streamed	from	him,
his	hair	hanging	ragged	and	dripping.	He	had	struck	again	and	again,	not	once
piercing	the	defensive	net	of	his	challenger ’s	stone	sword.	Six	paces	between
them	now,	chewed-up	sand	soaked	and	clumped	with	nothing	but	spatters	from
the	glistening	oil	that	made	the	coins	gleam.
Silent	as	all	the	other	witnesses,	Samar	Dev	watched	on,	wondering	how	all
this	would	end,	wondering	how	it	could	end.	As	long	as	Karsa	refused	to
counter-attack…
And	then	the	Toblakai	raised	his	sword	and	walked	forward.
Straight	for	the	Emperor.
As	easy	as	that,	then.
Who	rose	with	a	sudden	smile	and	lifted	his	weapon	into	a	guard	position.
The	flint	sword	lashed	out,	an	awkward	cut,	yet	swung	with	such	strength
that	Rhulad’s	block	with	his	own	weapon	knocked	one	of	his	hands	loose	from
the	grip,	and	the	iron	blade	flailed	outward,	and	then,	all	at	once,	that	cursed
sword	seemed	to	acquire	a	will	of	its	own,	the	point	thrusting	into	a	lunge	that
dragged	the	Emperor	forward	with	a	scream.
And	the	blade	sank	into	Karsa’s	left	thigh,	through	skin,	muscle,	narrowly
missing	the	bone,	then	punching	out	the	back	side.	The	Toblakai	pivoted	round,
even	as	with	appalling	fluidity	he	brought	his	sword	in	a	downward	cut	that
sliced	entirely	through	Rhulad’s	shoulder	above	the	sword-arm.
As	the	arm,	its	hand	still	gripping	the	weapon	now	bound	–	trapped	in
Karsa’s	leg	–	parted	from	Rhulad’s	body,	the	Toblakai	back-swung	the	flat	of
his	blade	into	Rhulad’s	face,	sending	him	sprawling	onto	the	sand.
And	Samar	Dev	found	that	she	held	the	knife,	the	blade	bared,	and	as	Karsa
turned	to	face	her,	she	was	already	slicing	deep	across	her	palm,	hissing	the
ancient	words	of	release	–	letting	loose	the	imprisoned	spirits,	the	desert
godlings	and	all	those	who	were	bound	to	the	old	knife—
Spirits	and	ghosts	of	the	slain	poured	forth,	freed	by	the	power	in	her
blood,	streaming	down	over	the	rows	of	benches,	down	onto	the	floor	of	the
arena.
To	the	terrible	sounds	of	Rhulad	Sengar ’s	shrieking,	those	spirits	rushed
straight	for	Karsa,	swept	round,	engulfed	him	–	swirling	chaos	–	a	blinding
moment	as	of	fires	unleashed—
—and	Karsa	Orlong,	the	Emperor ’s	sword	and	the	arm	still	holding	it,
vanished.
Lying	alone	on	the	sands	of	the	arena,	Rhulad	Sengar	spilled	crimson	from
the	stump	of	his	shoulder.
And	no-one	moved.


	
To	dwell	within	an	iron	blade	had	proved,	for	the	ghost	of	Ceda	Kuru	Qan,	a
most	interesting	experience.	After	an	immeasurable	time	of	exploration,
sensing	all	the	other	entities	trapped	within,	he	had	worked	out	a	means	of
escaping	whenever	he	wished.	But	curiosity	had	held	him,	a	growing	suspicion
that	all	dwelt	in	this	dark	place	for	some	hidden	purpose.	And	they	were
waiting.
Anticipation,	even	eagerness.	And,	indeed,	far	more	bloodlust	than	Kuru
Qan	could	abide.
He	had	considered	a	campaign	of	domination,	of	defeating	all	the	other
spirits,	and	binding	them	to	his	will.	But	a	leader,	he	well	understood,	could	not
be	ignorant,	and	to	compel	the	revelation	of	the	secret	was	ever	a	chancy
proposition.
Instead,	he	had	waited,	patient	as	was	his	nature	whether	living	or	dead.
Sudden	shock,	then,	upon	the	gushing	taste	of	blood	in	his	mouth,	and	the
frenzied	ecstasy	that	taste	unleashed	within	him.	Sour	recognition	–	most
humbling	–	in	discovering	such	bestial	weakness	within	him	–	and	when	the
summoning	arrived	in	the	language	of	the	First	Empire,	Kuru	Qan	found
himself	rising	like	a	demon	to	roar	his	domination	over	all	others,	then
lunging	forth	from	the	iron	blade,	into	the	world	once	again,	leading	a	dread
host—
To	the	one	standing.	Thelomen	Tartheno	Toblakai.
And	the	sword	impaling	his	leg.
Kuru	Qan	understood,	then,	what	needed	to	be	done.	Understood	the	path
that	must	be	forged,	and	understood,	alas,	the	sacrifice	that	must	be	made.
They	closed	round	the	Toblakai	warrior.	They	reached	for	that	cursed
sword	and	grasped	hold	of	its	blade.	They	drew	with	ferocious	necessity	on	the
blood	streaming	down	the	Toblakai’s	leg,	causing	him	to	stagger,	and,	with
Kuru	Qan	in	the	forefront,	the	spirits	tore	open	a	gate.
A	portal.
Chaos	roared	in	on	all	sides,	seeking	to	annihilate	them,	and	the	spirits
began	surrendering	their	ghostly	lives,	sacrificing	themselves	to	the	rapacious
hunger	assailing	them.	Yet,	even	as	they	did	so,	they	pushed	the	Toblakai
forward,	forging	the	path,	demanding	the	journey.
Other	spirits	awakened,	from	all	around	the	warrior	–	the	Toblakai’s	own
slain,	and	they	were	legion.
Death	roared.	The	pressure	of	the	chaos	stabbed,	ripped	spirits	to	pieces	–
even	with	all	their	numbers,	the	power	of	their	will,	they	were	slowing,	they


could	not	get	through	–	Kuru	Qan	screamed	–	to	draw	more	of	the	Toblakai’s
power	would	kill	him.	They	had	failed.
Failed—
	
In	a	cleared	circle	in	an	old	Tarthenal	burial	ground,	a	decrepit	shaman	seated
cross-legged	in	its	centre	stirred	awake,	eyes	blinking	open.	He	glanced	up	to
see	Ublala	Pung	standing	just	beyond	the	edge.
‘Now,	lad,’	he	said.
Weeping,	the	young	Tarthenal	rushed	forward,	a	knife	in	his	hands	–	one
of	Arbat’s	own,	the	iron	black	with	age,	the	glyphs	on	the	blade	so	worn	down
as	to	be	almost	invisible.
Arbat	nodded	as	Ublala	Pung	reached	him	and	drove	the	weapon	deep	into
the	shaman’s	chest.	Not	on	the	heart	side	–	Old	Hunch	needed	to	take	a	while	to
die,	to	bleed	out	his	power,	to	feed	the	multitude	of	ghosts	now	rising	from	the
burial	grounds.
‘Get	away	from	here!’	Arbat	shouted,	even	as	he	fell	onto	his	side,	blood
frothing	at	his	mouth.	‘Get	out!’
Loosing	a	childlike	bawl,	Ublala	Pung	ran.
The	ghosts	gathered,	pure-blooded	and	mixed-bloods,	spanning	centuries
upon	centuries	and	awake	after	so	long.
And	Old	Hunch	Arbat	showed	them	their	new	god.	And	then	showed	them,
with	the	power	of	his	blood,	the	way	through.
	
Kuru	Qan	felt	himself	lifted	on	a	tide,	shoved	forward	as	if	by	an	enormous
wave,	and	all	at	once	there	were	spirits,	an	army	of	them.
Thelomen	Tartheno	Toblakai.
Tarthenal—
Surging	forward,	the	chaos	thrust	back,	recoiling,	then	attacking	once
more.
Hundreds	vanishing.
Thousands	voicing	wailing	cries	of	agony.
Kuru	Qan	found	himself	close	to	the	Toblakai	warrior,	directly	in	front	of
the	flailing	figure,	and	he	reached	back,	as	if	to	grab	the	Toblakai’s	throat.
Closed	his	hand,	and	pulled.
Water,	a	crashing	surf,	coral	sand	shifting	wild	underfoot.	Blinding	heat
from	a	raging	sun.


Staggering,	onto	the	shore	–	and	yes,	this	was	as	far	as	Kuru	Qan	could	go.
Upon	the	shore.
He	released	the	warrior,	saw	him	stumble	onto	the	island’s	beach,	dragging
that	sword-impaled	leg—
Behind	the	old	Ceda,	the	sea	reached	out,	snatched	Kuru	Qan	back	with	a
rolling,	tumbling	inhalation.
Water	everywhere,	swirling,	pulling	him	ever	deeper,	ever	darker.
They	were	done.
We	are	done.
And	the	sea,	my	friends,	does	not	dream	of	you.
	
On	the	arena	floor,	Emperor	Rhulad	Sengar	lay	dead.	Bled	out,	his	flesh	where
visible	pale	as	river	clay,	and	as	cold.	Sand	dusted	the	sweaty	coins	and	all	the
blood	that	had	poured	from	him	was	turning	black.
And	the	onlookers	waited.
For	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths	to	rise	again.
The	sun	rose	higher,	the	sounds	of	fighting	in	the	city	drew	closer.
And,	had	anyone	been	looking,	they	would	have	seen	a	speck	above	the
horizon	to	the	north.	Growing	ever	larger.
	
One	street	away	from	the	Eternal	Domicile,	Fiddler	led	his	squad	onto	the
rooftop	of	some	gutted	public	building.	Flecks	of	ash	swirled	in	the	hot
morning	air	and	all	the	city	that	they	could	see	was	veiled	behind	dust	and
smoke.
They’d	lost	Gesler	and	his	squad,	ever	since	the	garrison	ambush,	but
Fiddler	was	not	overly	concerned.	All	opposition	was	a	shambles.	He	ran	in	a
crouch	to	the	edge	facing	the	Eternal	Domicile,	looked	across,	and	then	down
to	the	street	below.
There	was	a	gate,	closed,	but	no	guards	in	sight.	Damned	strange.	Where	is
everyone?
He	returned	to	where	his	soldiers	waited,	catching	their	breaths	in	the
centre	of	the	flat	rooftop.	‘All	right,’	he	said,	setting	down	his	crossbow	and
opening	his	satchel,	‘there’s	a	gate	that	I	can	take	out	with	a	cusser	from	here.
Then	down	we	go	and	straight	across	and	straight	in,	fast	and	mean.	Kill
everyone	in	sight,	understood?’	He	drew	out	his	cusser	quarrel	and	carefully
loaded	the	crossbow.	Then	resumed	his	instructions.	‘Tarr	takes	up	the	rear


crossing	the	street.	Bottle,	keep	everything	you	got	right	at	hand—’
‘Sergeant—’
‘Not	now,	Corabb.	Listen!	We’re	heading	for	the	throne	room.	I	want	Cuttle
out	front—’
‘Sergeant—’
‘—with	sharpers	in	hand.	Koryk,	you’re	next—’
‘Sergeant—’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	is	it,	Corabb?’
The	man	was	pointing.	Northward.
Fiddler	and	the	others	all	turned.
To	see	an	enormous	white	dragon	bearing	down	on	them.
	
An	infrequent	scattering	of	cut-down	Letherii	soldiers	and	small	fires	left
behind	by	munitions	had	provided	enough	of	a	trail	for	Quick	Ben	and	Hedge,
and	they	were	now	crouched	at	the	foot	of	a	door	to	a	burnt-out	building.
‘Listen,’	Hedge	was	insisting,	‘the	roof	here’s	right	opposite	the	gate.	I
know	Fid	and	I’m	telling	you,	he’s	on	that	Hood-damned	roof!’
‘Fine,	fine,	lead	on,	sapper.’	Quick	Ben	shook	his	head.	Something…I	don’t
know…
They	plunged	inside.	The	stench	of	smoke	was	acrid,	biting.	Charred
wreckage	lay	all	about,	the	detritus	of	a	ruined	empire.
‘There,’	Hedge	said,	then	headed	on	into	a	corridor,	down	to	a	set	of	stairs
leading	upward.
Something…oh,	gods!
‘Move	it!’	Quick	Ben	snarled,	shoving	the	sapper	forward.
‘What—’
‘Hurry!’
	
The	huge	dragon	angled	down,	straight	for	them.
Fiddler	stared	for	a	moment	longer,	seeing	the	beast	opening	its	mouth,
knowing	what	was	coming,	then	he	raised	his	crossbow	and	fired.
The	bolt	shot	upward.
A	hind	limb	of	the	dragon	snapped	out	to	bat	the	quarrel	aside.
And	the	cusser	detonated.
The	explosion	flattened	the	marines	on	the	rooftop,	sent	Fiddler	tumbling
backward.


The	roof	itself	sagged	beneath	them	with	grinding,	crunching	sounds.
Fiddler	caught	a	glimpse	of	the	dragon,	streaming	blood,	its	chest	torn
open,	sliding	off	to	one	side,	heading	towards	the	street	below,	shredded	wings
flailing	like	sails	in	a	storm.
A	second	bolt	flew	out	to	intercept	it.
Another	explosion,	sending	the	dragon	lurching	back,	down,	into	a
building,	which	suddenly	folded	inward	on	that	side,	then	collapsed	with	a
deafening	roar.
Fiddler	twisted	round—
—and	saw	Hedge.
—and	Quick	Ben,	who	was	running	towards	the	roof’s	edge,	his	hands
raised	and	sorcery	building	round	him	as	if	he	was	the	prow	of	a	ship	cutting
through	water.
Fiddler	leapt	to	his	feet	and	followed	the	wizard.
From	the	wreckage	of	the	building	beside	the	Eternal	Domicile,	the	dragon
was	pulling	itself	free.	Lacerated,	bones	jutting	and	blood	leaking	from	terrible
wounds.	And	then,	impossibly,	it	rose	skyward	once	more,	rent	wings	flapping
–	but	Fiddler	knew	that	it	was	sorcery	that	was	lifting	the	creature	back	into	the
air.
As	it	cleared	the	collapsed	building,	Quick	Ben	unleashed	his	magic.	A
wave	of	crackling	fire	crashed	into	the	dragon,	sent	it	reeling	back.
Another.
And	then	another	–	the	dragon	was	now	two	streets	away,	writhing	under
the	burgeoning	assault.
Then,	with	a	piercing	cry,	it	wheeled,	climbed	higher,	and	flew	away,	in
full	retreat.
Quick	Ben	lowered	his	arms,	then	fell	to	his	knees.
Staring	after	the	fast-diminishing	dragon,	Fiddler	leaned	his	crossbow
onto	his	shoulder.
‘This	ain’t	your	fight,’	he	said	to	the	distant	creature.	‘Fucking	dragon.’
Then	he	turned	and	stared	at	Hedge.
Who,	grinning,	stared	back.
‘No	ghost?’
‘No	ghost.	Aye,	Fid,	I’m	back.’
Fiddler	scowled,	then	shook	his	head.	‘Hood	help	us	all.’	Then	he	turned	to
Quick	Ben.	‘And	where	in	the	Abyss	have	you	been?’
	
Picking	himself	up	from	the	buckled	rooftop,	Bottle	stared	across	at	those


three	soldiers.	Didn’t	know	one	of	them	except	that	he	was	a	sapper.	And	a
damned	Bridgeburner.
Beside	him,	Koryk	groaned,	then	spat.	‘Look	at	’em,’	he	said.
Bottle	nodded.
And,	oddly	enough,	for	all	the	soldiers	in	the	squad,	nothing	more	about	it
needed	saying.
Bottle	squinted	at	the	fast-dwindling	dragon.	Allow	us	to	introduce
ourselves…
	
Trull	Sengar	gently	lifted	Seren’s	arms	and	stepped	back	from	her	embrace.
She	almost	sagged	forward,	not	wanting	the	moment	to	end,	and	something
cold	formed	a	fist	in	her	stomach.	Wincing,	she	turned	away.
‘Seren—’
She	waved	a	hand,	then	met	his	eyes	once	more.
‘My	brother.	My	parents.’
‘Yes,’	she	said.
‘I	cannot	pretend	that	they	are	not	there.	That	they	mean	nothing	to	me.’
She	nodded,	not	trusting	herself	to	speak.
He	crossed	the	dusty	room,	kicking	through	rubbish	–	the	place	had	been
stripped	of	virtually	everything,	no	matter	how	worthless.	They	had	lain
together	on	their	cloaks,	watched	by	spiders	in	the	corners	near	the	ceiling	and
bats	slung	in	a	row	beneath	a	window	sill.	He	picked	up	the	Imass	spear	from
where	it	leaned	against	a	wall	and	faced	her,	offering	a	faint	smile.	‘I	can
protect	myself.	And	alone,	I	can	move	quickly—’
‘Go,	then,’	she	said,	and	felt	anguish	at	the	sudden	hardness	in	her	voice.
His	half-smile	held	a	moment	longer,	then	he	nodded	and	walked	into	the
corridor	that	led	to	the	front	door.
After	a	moment	Seren	Pedac	followed.	‘Trull—’
He	paused	at	the	doorway.	‘I	understand,	Seren.	It’s	all	right.’
No	it’s	not	all	right!	‘Please,’	she	said,	‘come	back.’
‘I	will.	I	can	do	nothing	else.	You	have	all	there	is	of	me,	all	that’s	left.’
‘Then	I	have	all	I	need,’	she	replied.
He	reached	out,	one	hand	brushing	her	cheek.
And	then	was	gone.

Emerging	from	the	pathway	crossing	the	yard,	Trull	Sengar,	the	butt	of	the


spear	ringing	like	the	heel	of	a	staff	on	the	cobbles,	walked	out	into	the	street.
And	set	off	in	the	direction	of	the	Eternal	Domicile.
From	the	shadows	of	an	alley	opposite,	the	Errant	watched	him.
	
‘I	feel	much	better.’
Brys	Beddict	smiled	across	at	his	brother.	‘You	look	it.	So,	Tehol,	your
manservant	is	an	Elder	God.’
‘I’ll	take	anybody	I	can	find.’
‘Why	are	your	eyes	two	different	colours	now?’
‘I’m	not	sure,	but	I	think	Bugg	may	be	colour	blind.	Blue	and	green,	green
and	blue,	and	as	for	brown,	forget	it.’
Said	manservant	who	happened	to	be	an	Elder	God	walked	into	the	room.
‘I	found	her.’
Tehol	was	on	his	feet.	‘Where?	Is	she	alive?’
‘Yes,	but	we’ve	work	to	do…again.’
‘We	need	to	find	that	man,	that	Tanal—’
‘No	need	for	that,’	Bugg	replied,	eyes	settling	on	the	corpse	of	Karos
Invictad.
Brys	did	the	same.	A	two-headed	insect	was	slowly	making	its	way	towards
the	spilled	entrails.	‘What	in	the	Errant’s	name	is	that?’
And	Bugg	hissed	through	his	teeth.	‘Yes,’	he	said,	‘he’s	next.’
Outside,	in	the	compound,	in	the	street	beyond,	a	mass	of	citizens	were
gathering.	Their	sound	was	like	an	advancing	tide.	There	had	been	some
thunderous	explosions,	and	the	unmistakable	roar	of	sorcery,	from	the
direction	of	the	Eternal	Domicile,	but	that	had	all	been	short-lived.
Tehol	faced	Bugg,	‘Listen	to	that	mob.	We	going	to	be	able	to	leave	here
alive?	I’m	really	not	in	the	mood	for	a	Drowning.	Especially	my	own.’
Brys	grunted.	‘You’ve	not	been	paying	attention,	brother.	You’re	a	hero.
They	want	to	see	you.’
‘I	am?	Why,	I	never	imagined	that	they	had	it	in	them.’
‘They	didn’t,’	Bugg	replied,	with	a	sour	expression.	‘Ormly	and	Rucket
have	spent	a	fortune	on	criers.’
Brys	smiled.	‘Humbled,	Tehol?’
‘Never.	Bugg,	take	me	to	Janath.	Please.’
At	that,	Brys	Beddict’s	brows	rose.	Ah,	it	is	that	way,	then.
Well.
Good.


	
A	surviving	officer	of	the	city	garrison	formally	surrendered	to	the	Adjunct
just	inside	the	west	gate,	and	now	Tavore	led	her	occupying	army	into
Letheras.
Leaving	Fist	Blistig	in	charge	of	the	main	force,	she	assembled	the	five
hundred	or	so	surviving	marines,	along	with	Fist	Keneb,	and	her	own	troop	of
mounted	cavalry,	and	set	out	for	the	imperial	palace.	This	ill-named	‘Eternal
Domicile’.
Sinn,	riding	behind	Lostara	Yil,	had	cried	out	when	the	dragon	had
appeared	over	the	city;	then	had	laughed	and	clapped	her	hands	when	at	least
two	cussers	and	then	wave	after	wave	of	ferocious	sorcery	routed	the	creature.
Captain	Faradan	Sort’s	advance	squads	were	still	active	–	that	much	had
been	made	abundantly	clear.	And	they	were	at	the	palace,	or	at	least	very	close.
And	they	were	in	a	mood.
Most	commanders	would	have	raged	at	this	–	uncontrolled	soldiers	raising
mayhem	somewhere	ahead,	a	handful	of	grubby	marines	who’d	lived	in	the
wilds	for	too	long	now	battering	at	the	palace	door,	frenzied	with	bloodlust
and	eager	to	deliver	vengeance.	Was	this	how	she	wanted	to	announce	her
conquest?	Would	the	damned	fools	leave	anything	still	breathing	in	that	palace?
And	what	of	this	un-killable	Emperor?	Lostara	Yil	did	not	believe	such	a
thing	was	even	possible.	A	cusser	in	the	bastard’s	crotch	there	on	that	throne
and	he’ll	be	giving	to	the	people	for	days	and	days.	She	wouldn’t	put	it	past
Fiddler,	either.	One	step	into	the	throne	room,	the	thwock	of	that	oversized
crossbow,	and	then	the	sergeant	diving	back,	trying	to	get	clear	as	the	entire
room	erupted.	He’d	probably	happily	kill	himself	for	that	pleasure.
Yet,	while	without	doubt	the	Adjunct	shared	such	visions,	Tavore	said
nothing.	Nor	did	she	urge	her	troops	to	any	haste	–	not	that	any	of	them	were	in
shape	for	that,	especially	the	marines.	Instead,	they	advanced	at	a	measured
pace,	and	citizens	began	appearing	from	the	side	lanes,	alleys	and	avenues,	to
watch	them	march	past.	Some	even	cried	out	a	welcome,	with	voices	breaking
with	relief.
The	city	was	a	mess.	Riots	and	earthquakes	and	Moranth	munitions.
Lostara	Yil	began	to	realize	that,	if	the	arrival	of	the	Bonehunters	signified
anything,	it	was	the	promise	of	a	return	to	order,	a	new	settling	of	civilization,
of	laws	and,	ironically,	of	peace.
But	Adjunct,	if	we	tarry	here	too	long,	that	will	turn.	It	always	does.
Nobody	likes	being	under	an	occupier’s	heel.	Simple	human	nature,	to	take
one’s	own	despair	and	give	it	a	foreigner’s	face,	then	let	loose	the	hounds	of


blood.
See	these	citizens?	These	bright,	gladdened	faces?	Any	one	of	them,	before
long,	could	turn.	The	reapers	of	violence	can	hide	behind	the	calmest	eyes,	the
gentlest	of	smiles.
The	column’s	pace	was	slowing,	with	ever	more	crowds	before	them.
Chants	were	rising	and	falling	here	and	there.	Letherii	words,	the	tone
somewhere	between	hope	and	insistence.
‘Adjunct,	what	is	it	they’re	all	saying?’
‘A	name,’	she	replied.	‘Well,	two	names,	I	think.	One	they	call	the	Saviour.
The	other…’
‘The	other…what,	sir?’
She	cast	Lostara	a	quick	glance,	then	her	mouth	set,	before	she	said,
‘Emperor.’
Emperor?	‘But	I	thought—’
‘A	new	Emperor,	Captain.	By	proclamation,	it	would	seem.’
Oh,	and	have	we	nothing	to	say	on	this?
Directly	ahead	was	a	wall	of	citizens,	blocking	all	hopes	of	passage,
through	which	a	small	group	was	moving,	pushing	its	way	to	the	forefront.
The	Adjunct	raised	a	gloved	hand	to	signal	a	halt.
The	group	emerged,	an	enormously	fat	woman	in	the	lead,	followed	by	a
gnarled	little	man	who	seemed	to	be	carrying	rats	in	the	pockets	of	his	cloak,
and	then	two	men	who	looked	like	brothers.	Both	lean,	one	in	the	uniform	of
an	officer,	the	other	wearing	a	tattered,	blood-stained	blanket.
Tavore	dismounted,	gesturing	for	Lostara	to	do	the	same.
The	two	women	approached	the	group.	As	they	drew	closer,	the	fat	woman
stepped	to	one	side	and	with	a	surprisingly	elegant	wave	of	one	plump	hand
she	said,	‘Commander,	I	present	to	you	Brys	Beddict,	once	Champion	to	King
Ezgara	Diskanar	–	before	the	Edur	conquest	–	now	proclaimed	the	Saviour.
And	his	brother,	Tehol	Beddict,	financial	genius,	liberator	of	the	oppressed	and
not	half	bad	in	bed,	even	now	being	proclaimed	the	new	Emperor	of	Lether	by
his	loving	subjects.’
The	Adjunct	seemed	at	a	loss	for	a	reply.
Lostara	stared	at	this	Tehol	Beddict	–	although,	truth	be	told,	she’d	rather
let	her	eyes	linger	on	Brys	–	and	frowned	at	the	disgusting	blanket	wrapped
about	him.	Financial	genius?
Brys	Beddict	now	stepped	forward	and,	as	had	the	huge	woman,	spoke	in
the	trader ’s	tongue.	‘We	would	escort	you	to	the	Eternal	Domicile,
Commander,	where	we	will,	I	believe,	find	an	emperor	without	an	empire,	who
will	need	to	be	ousted.’	He	hesitated,	then	added,	‘I	assume	you	come	as


liberators,	Commander.	And,	accordingly,	have	no	wish	to	overstay	your
welcome.’
‘By	that,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘you	mean	to	imply	that	I	have	insufficient
forces	to	impose	a	viable	occupation.	Were	you	aware,	Brys	Beddict,	that	your
eastern	borderlands	have	been	overrun?	And	that	an	army	of	allies	now
marches	into	your	empire?’
‘Do	you	come	as	conquerors,	then?’	Brys	Beddict	asked.
The	Adjunct	sighed,	then	unstrapped	and	pulled	off	her	helm.	She	drew	her
hand	from	its	glove	and	ran	it	through	her	short,	sweat-damp	hair.	‘Hood
forbid,’	she	muttered.	‘Find	us	a	way	through	these	people,	then,	Brys	Beddict.’
She	paused,	cast	her	gaze	to	Tehol	Beddict,	and	slowly	frowned.	‘You	are
rather	shy	for	an	emperor,’	she	observed.
Tehol	refuted	that	with	the	brightest	smile,	and	it	transformed	him,	and
suddenly	Lostara	forgot	all	about	the	man’s	martial-looking	brother.
Spirits	of	the	sand,	those	eyes…
‘I	do	apologize,	Commander.	I	admit	I	have	been	somewhat	taken	aback.’
The	Adjunct	slowly	nodded.	‘By	this	popular	acclaim,	yes,	I	imagine—’
‘No,	not	that.	She	said	I	was	not	half	bad	in	bed.	I	am	crushed	by	the	other
half,	the	“half	good”	bit—’
‘Oh,	Tehol,’	the	fat	woman	said,	‘I	was	being	modest	for	your	sake.’
‘Modesty	from	you,	Rucket?	You	don’t	know	the	meaning	of	the	word!	I
mean,	I	just	look	at	you	and	it’s	hard	not	to,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.’
‘No.’
‘Anyway!’	Tehol	clapped	his	hands	together.	‘We’ve	had	the	fireworks,
now	let’s	get	this	parade	started!’
	
Sirryn	Kanar	ran	down	the	corridor,	away	from	the	fighting.	The	damned
foreigners	were	in	the	Eternal	Domicile,	delivering	slaughter	–	no	calls	for
surrender,	no	demands	to	throw	down	weapons.	Just	those	deadly	quarrels,
those	chopping	shortswords	and	those	devastating	grenados.	His	fellow	guards
were	dying	by	the	score,	their	blood	splashing	the	once	pristine	walls.
And	Sirryn	vowed	he	was	not	going	to	suffer	the	same	fate.
They	wouldn’t	kill	the	Chancellor.	They	needed	him,	and	besides,	he	was
an	old	man.	Obviously	unarmed,	a	peaceful	man.	Civilized.	And	the	guard
they’d	find	standing	at	his	side,	well,	even	he	carried	naught	but	a	knife	at	his
belt.	No	sword,	no	shield,	no	helm	or	even	armour.
I	can	stay	alive	there,	right	at	the	Chancellor’s	side.
But	where	is	he?


The	throne	room	had	been	empty.
The	Emperor	is	in	the	arena.	The	mad	fool	is	still	fighting	his	pointless,
pathetic	fights.	And	the	Chancellor	would	be	there,	attending,	ironic	witness	to
the	last	Tiste	Edur ’s	drooling	stupidity.	The	last	Tiste	Edur	in	the	city.	Yes.
He	hurried	on,	leaving	the	sounds	of	fighting	well	behind	him.
A	day	of	madness	–	would	it	never	end?
	
Chancellor	Triban	Gnol	stepped	back.	The	realization	had	come	suddenly	to
him,	with	the	force	of	a	hammer	blow.	Rhulad	Sengar	will	not	return.	The
Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths…has	died	his	last	death.
Toblakai.	Karsa	Orlong,	I	do	not	know	what	you	have	done,	I	do	not	know
how	–	but	you	have	cleared	the	path.
You	have	cleared	it	and	for	that	I	bless	you.
He	looked	about,	and	saw	that	the	meagre	audience	had	fled	–	yes,	the
Eternal	Domicile	was	breached,	the	enemy	was	within.	He	turned	to	the	Finadd
standing	nearby.	‘Varat	Taun.’
‘Sir?’
‘We	are	done	here.	Gather	your	soldiers	and	escort	me	to	the	throne	room,
where	we	will	await	the	conquerors.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘And	we	bring	that	witch	with	us	–	I	would	know	what	has	happened	here.	I
would	know	why	she	laid	open	her	hand	with	that	knife.	I	would	know
everything.’
‘Yes,	Chancellor.’
The	captain	was	surprisingly	gentle	taking	the	pale	woman	into	his
custody,	and	indeed,	he	seemed	to	whisper	something	to	her	that	elicited	a
weary	nod.	Triban	Gnol’s	eyes	narrowed.	No,	he	did	not	trust	this	new	Finadd.
Would	that	he	had	Sirryn	with	him.
As	they	made	their	way	from	the	arena,	the	Chancellor	paused	for	one	look
back,	one	last	look	at	the	pathetic	figure	lying	on	the	bloody	sand.	Dead.	He	is
truly	dead.
I	believe	I	always	knew	Karsa	Orlong	would	be	the	one.	Yes,	I	believe	I	did.
He	was	almost	tempted	to	head	back,	down	onto	the	arena	floor,	to	walk
across	the	pitch	and	stand	over	the	body	of	Rhulad	Sengar.	And	spit	into	the
Emperor ’s	face.
No	time.	Such	pleasure	will	have	to	wait.
But	I	vow	I	will	do	it	yet.


	
Cuttle	waved	them	to	the	intersection.	Fiddler	led	the	rest	of	his	squad	to	join
the	sapper.
‘This	is	the	main	approach,’	Cuttle	said.	‘It’s	got	to	be.’
Fiddler	nodded.	The	corridor	was	ornately	decorated,	impressively	wide,
with	an	arched	ceiling	gleaming	with	gold	leaf.	There	was	no-one	about.	‘So
where	are	the	guards,	and	in	which	direction	is	the	throne	room?’
‘No	idea,’	Cuttle	replied.	‘But	I’d	guess	we	go	left.’
‘Why?’
‘No	reason,	except	everyone	who	tried	to	get	away	from	us	was	more	or
less	heading	that	way.’
‘Good	point,	unless	they	were	all	headed	out	the	back	door.’	Fiddler	wiped
sweat	from	his	eyes.	Oh,	this	had	been	a	nasty	bloodletting,	but	he’d	let	his
soldiers	go,	despite	the	disapproving	looks	from	Quick	Ben.	Damned	High
Mage	and	his	nose	in	the	air	–	and	where	in	Hood’s	name	did	all	that	magic
come	from?	Quick	had	never	showed	anything	like	that	before.	Not	even	close.
He	looked	across	at	Hedge.
Same	old	Hedge.	No	older	than	the	last	time	Fiddler	had	seen	him.	Gods,	it
doesn’t	feel	real.	He’s	back.	Living,	breathing,	farting…He	reached	out	and
cuffed	the	man	in	the	side	of	the	head.
‘Hey,	what’s	that	for?’
‘No	reason,	but	I’m	sure	I	was	owed	doing	that	at	least	once.’
‘Who	saved	your	skin	in	the	desert?	And	under	the	city?’
‘Some	ghost	up	to	no	good,’	Fiddler	replied.
‘Hood,	that	white	beard	makes	you	look	ancient,	Fid,	you	know	that?’
Oh,	be	quiet.
‘Crossbows	loaded,	everyone?	Good.	Lead	on,	Cuttle,	but	slow	and
careful,	right?’
They	were	five	paces	into	the	corridor	when	a	side	entrance	ahead	and	to
their	right	was	suddenly	filled	with	figures.	And	mayhem	was	let	loose	once
more.
	
Tarr	saw	the	old	man	first,	the	one	in	the	lead,	or	even	if	he	didn’t	see	him	first,
he	got	off	his	shot	before	anyone	else.	And	the	quarrel	sank	into	the	side	of	the
man’s	head,	dead	in	the	centre	of	his	left	temple.	And	everything	sprayed	out
the	other	side.
Other	quarrels	caught	him,	at	least	two,	spinning	his	scrawny	but	nice-


robed	body	round	before	it	toppled.
A	handful	of	guards	who	had	been	accompanying	the	old	man	reeled	back,
at	least	two	stuck	good,	and	Tarr	was	already	rushing	forward,	drawing	his
shortsword	and	bringing	his	shield	round.	He	bumped	hard	against	Corabb
who	was	doing	the	same	and	swore	as	the	man	got	in	front	of	him.
Tarr	raised	his	sword,	a	sudden,	overwhelming	urge	to	hammer	the	blade
down	on	the	bastard’s	head	–	but	no,	save	that	for	the	enemy—
Who	were	throwing	down	their	weapons	as	they	backed	down	the	corridor.
‘For	Hood’s	sake!’	Quick	Ben	shouted,	dragging	at	Tarr	to	get	past,	then
shoving	Corabb	to	one	side.	‘They’re	surrendering,	damn	you!	Stop
slaughtering	everyone!’
And	from	the	Letherii	group,	a	woman’s	voice	called	out	in	Malazan,	‘We
surrender!	Don’t	kill	us!’
That	voice	was	enough	to	draw	everyone	up.
Tarr	swung	round,	as	did	the	others,	to	look	at	Fiddler.
After	a	moment,	the	sergeant	nodded.	‘Take	’em	prisoner,	then.	They	can
lead	us	to	the	damned	throne	room.’
Smiles	ran	up	to	the	body	of	the	old	man	and	started	pulling	at	all	his
gaudy	rings.
A	Letherii	officer	stepped	forward,	hands	raised.	‘There’s	no-one	in	the
throne	room,’	he	said.	‘The	Emperor	is	dead	–	his	body’s	in	the	arena—’
‘Take	us	there,	then,’	Quick	Ben	demanded,	with	a	glare	at	Fiddler.	‘I	want
to	see	for	myself.’
The	officer	nodded.	‘We	just	came	from	there,	but	very	well.’
Fiddler	waved	his	squad	forward,	then	scowled	over	at	Smiles.	‘Do	that
later,	soldier—’
She	bared	her	teeth	like	a	dog	over	a	kill,	then	drew	out	a	large	knife	and,
with	two	savage	chops,	took	the	old	man’s	pretty	hands.
	
Trull	Sengar	stepped	out	onto	the	sand	of	the	arena,	eyes	fixed	on	the	body
lying	near	the	far	end.	The	gleam	of	coins,	the	head	tilted	back.	He	slowly
walked	forward.
There	was	chaos	in	the	corridors	and	chambers	of	the	Eternal	Palace.	He
could	search	for	his	parents	later,	but	he	suspected	he	would	not	find	them.
They	had	gone	with	the	rest	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Back	north.	Back	to	their
homeland.	And	so,	in	the	end,	they	too	had	abandoned	Rhulad,	their	youngest
son.
Why	does	he	lie	unmoving?	Why	has	he	not	returned?


He	came	to	Rhulad’s	side	and	fell	to	his	knees.	Set	down	his	spear.	A
missing	arm,	a	missing	sword.
He	reached	out	and	lifted	his	brother ’s	head.	Heavy,	the	face	so	scarred,	so
twisted	with	pain	that	it	was	hardly	recognizable.	He	settled	it	into	his	lap.
Twice	now,	I	am	made	to	do	this.	With	a	brother	whose	face,	there	below
me,	rests	too	still.	Too	emptied	of	life.	They	look	so…wrong.
He	would	have	tried,	one	last	time,	a	final	offering	of	reason	to	his	young
brother,	an	appeal	to	all	that	he	had	once	been.	Before	all	this.	Before,	in
foolish	but	understandable	zeal,	he	had	grasped	hold	of	a	sword	on	a	field	of
ice.
Rhulad	would	then,	in	another	moment	of	weakness,	pronounce	Trull
Shorn.	Dead	in	the	eyes	of	all	Tiste	Edur.	And	chain	him	to	stone	to	await	a
slow,	wasting	death.	Or	the	rise	of	water.
Trull	had	come,	yes,	to	forgive	him.	It	was	the	cry	in	his	heart,	a	cry	he	had
lived	with	for	what	seemed	for	ever.	You	were	wounded,	brother.	So	wounded.
He	had	cut	you	down,	laid	you	low	but	not	dead.	He	had	done	what	he	needed	to
do,	to	end	your	nightmare.	But	you	did	not	see	it	that	way.	You	could	not.
Instead,	you	saw	your	brothers	abandon	you.
So	now,	my	brother,	as	I	forgive	you,	will	you	now	forgive	me?
Of	course,	there	would	be	no	answer.	Not	from	that	ever	still,	ever	empty
face.	Trull	was	too	late.	Too	late	to	forgive	and	too	late	to	be	forgiven.
He	wondered	if	Seren	had	known,	had	perhaps	guessed	what	he	would	find
here.
The	thought	of	her	made	his	breath	catch	in	his	throat.	Oh,	he	had	not
known	such	love	could	exist.	And	now,	even	in	the	ashes	surrounding	him
here,	the	future	was	unfolding	like	a	flower,	its	scent	sweet	beyond	belief.
This	is	what	love	means.	I	finally	see—
The	knife	thrust	went	in	under	his	left	shoulder	blade,	tore	through	into	his
heart.
Eyes	wide	in	sudden	pain,	sudden	astonishment,	Trull	felt	Rhulad’s	head	tilt
to	one	side	on	his	lap,	then	slide	down	from	hands	that	had	lost	all	strength.
Oh,	Seren,	my	love.
Oh,	forgive	me.
	
Teeth	bared,	Sirryn	Kanar	stepped	back,	tugging	his	weapon	free.	One	last
Tiste	Edur.	Now	dead,	by	his	own	hand.	Pure	justice	still	existed	in	this	world.
He	had	cleansed	the	Lether	Empire	with	this	knife,	and	look,	see	the	thick
blood	dripping	down,	welling	round	the	hilt.


A	thrust	to	the	heart,	the	conclusion	of	his	silent	stalk	across	the	sands,	his
breath	held	overlong	for	the	last	three	steps.	And	his	blessed	shadow,	directly
beneath	his	feet	–	no	risk	of	its	advancing	ahead	to	warn	the	bastard.	There	was
that	one	moment	when	a	shadow	had	flitted	across	the	sand	–	a	damned	owl,	of
all	things	–	but	the	fool	had	not	noticed.
No	indeed:	the	sun	stood	at	its	highest	point.
And	every	shadow	huddled,	trembling	beneath	that	fierce	ruler	in	the	sky.
He	could	taste	iron	in	his	mouth,	a	gift	so	bitter	he	exulted	in	its	cold	bite.
Stepping	back,	as	the	body	fell	to	one	side,	fell	right	over	that	pathetic	savage’s
spear.
The	barbarian	dies.	As	he	must,	for	mine	is	the	hand	of	civilization.
He	heard	a	commotion	at	the	far	end	and	spun	round.
The	quarrel	pounded	into	his	left	shoulder,	flung	him	back,	where	he
tripped	over	the	two	corpses	then	twisted	in	his	fall,	landing	on	his	wounded
side.
Pain	flared,	stunning	him.
	
‘No,’	Hedge	moaned,	pushing	past	Koryk	who	turned	with	a	chagrined
expression	on	his	face.
‘Damn	you,	Koryk,’	Fiddler	started.
‘No,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘You	don’t	understand,	Fid.’
Koryk	shrugged.	‘Sorry,	Sergeant.	Habit.’
Fiddler	watched	the	wizard	follow	Hedge	over	to	where	the	three	bodies
were	lying	on	the	sand.	But	the	sapper	was	paying	no	attention	to	the	skewered
Letherii,	instead	landing	hard	on	his	knees	beside	one	of	the	Tiste	Edur.
‘See	the	coins	on	that	one?’	Cuttle	asked.	‘Burned	right	in—’
‘That	was	the	Emperor,’	said	the	captain	who	had	brought	them	here.
‘Rhulad	Sengar.	The	other	Edur…I	don’t	know.	But,’	he	then	added,	‘your
friends	do.’
Yes,	Fiddler	could	see	that,	and	it	seemed	all	at	once	that	there	was	nothing
but	pain	in	this	place.	Trapped	in	the	last	breaths,	given	voice	by	Hedge’s
alarmingly	uncharacteristic,	almost	animal	cries	of	grief.	Shaken,	Fiddler
turned	to	his	soldiers.	‘Take	defensive	positions,	all	of	you.	Captain,	you	and
the	other	prisoners	over	there,	by	that	wall,	and	don’t	move	if	you	want	to	stay
alive.	Koryk,	rest	easy	with	that	damned	crossbow,	all	right?’
Fiddler	then	headed	over	to	his	friends.
And	almost	retreated	again	when	he	saw	Hedge’s	face,	so	raw	with
anguish,	so…exposed.


Quick	Ben	turned	and	glanced	back	at	Fiddler,	a	warning	of	some	sort,	and
then	the	wizard	walked	over	to	the	fallen	Letherii.
Trembling,	confused,	Fiddler	followed	Quick	Ben.	Stood	beside	him,
looking	down	at	the	man.
‘He’ll	live,’	he	said.
Behind	them,	Hedge	rasped,	‘No	he	won’t.’
That	voice	did	not	even	sound	human.	Fiddler	turned	in	alarm,	and	saw
Hedge	staring	up	at	Quick	Ben,	as	if	silent	communication	was	passing
between	the	two	men.
Then	Hedge	asked,	‘Can	you	do	it,	Quick?	Some	place	with…with	eternal
torment.	Can	you	do	that,	wizard?	I	asked	if	you	can	do	that!’
Quick	Ben	faced	Fiddler,	a	question	in	his	eyes.
Oh	no,	Quick,	this	one	isn’t	for	me	to	say—
‘Fiddler,	help	me	decide.	Please.’
Gods,	even	Quick	Ben’s	grieving.	Who	was	this	warrior?	‘You’re	High
Mage,	Quick	Ben.	Do	what	needs	doing.’
The	wizard	turned	back	to	Hedge.	‘Hood	owes	me,	Hedge.’
‘What	kind	of	answer	is	that?’
But	Quick	Ben	turned,	gestured,	and	a	dark	blur	rose	round	the	Letherii,
closed	entirely	about	the	man’s	body,	then	shrank,	as	if	down	into	the	sand,
until	nothing	remained.	There	was	a	faint	scream	as	whatever	awaited	the
Letherii	had	reached	out	to	take	hold	of	him.
Then	the	wizard	snapped	out	a	hand	and	pulled	Fiddler	close,	and	his	face
was	pale	with	rage.	‘Don’t	you	pity	him,	Fid.	You	understand	me?	Don’t	you	pity
him!’
Fiddler	shook	his	head.	‘I	–	I	won’t,	Quick.	Not	for	a	moment.	Let	him
scream,	for	all	eternity.	Let	him	scream.’
A	grim	nod,	then	Quick	Ben	pushed	him	back.
Hedge	wept	over	the	Tiste	Edur,	wept	like	a	man	for	whom	all	light	in	the
world	has	been	lost,	and	would	never	return.
And	Fiddler	did	not	know	what	to	do.
	
Watching	from	an	unseen	place,	the	Errant	stepped	back,	pulled	away	as	if	he
would	hurl	himself	from	a	cliff.
He	was	what	he	was.
A	tipper	of	balances.
And	now,	this	day	–	may	the	Abyss	devour	him	whole	–	a	maker	of
widows.


	
Ascending	the	beach’s	gentle	slope,	Karsa	Orlong	halted.	He	reached	down	to
the	sword	impaling	his	leg,	and	closed	a	hand	about	the	blade	itself,	just	above
the	hilt.	Unmindful	of	how	the	notched	edges	sliced	into	his	flesh,	he	dragged
the	weapon	free.
Blood	bloomed	from	the	puncture	wounds,	but	only	for	a	moment.	The	leg
was	growing	numb,	but	he	would	have	use	of	it	for	a	while	yet.
Still	holding	the	cursed	sword	by	its	blade,	he	pushed	himself	forward,
limped	onto	the	sward.	And	saw,	a	short	distance	to	his	right,	a	small	hut	from
which	smoke	gusted	out.
The	Toblakai	warrior	headed	over.
Coming	opposite	it,	he	dropped	the	iron	sword,	took	another	step	closer,
bent	down	and	pushed	one	hand	under	the	edge	of	the	hut.	With	an	upward
heave,	he	lifted	the	entire	structure	clear,	sent	it	toppling	onto	its	back	like	an
upended	turtle.
Smoke	billowed,	caught	the	breeze,	and	was	swept	away.
Before	him,	seated	cross-legged,	was	an	ancient,	bent	and	broken	creature.
A	man.	A	god.
Who	looked	up	with	narrowed	eyes	filled	with	pain.	Then	those	eyes
shifted,	to	behind	Karsa,	and	the	warrior	turned.
The	spirit	of	the	Emperor	had	arrived,	he	saw.	Young	–	younger	than
Karsa	had	imagined	Rhulad	Sengar	to	be	–	and,	with	his	clear,	unmarred	flesh,
a	man	not	unhandsome.	Lying	on	the	ground	as	if	in	gentle	sleep.
Then	his	eyes	snapped	open	and	he	shrieked.
A	short-lived	cry.
Rhulad	pushed	himself	onto	his	side,	up	onto	his	hands	and	knees	–	and
saw,	lying	close	by,	his	sword.
‘Take	it!’	the	Crippled	God	cried.	‘My	dear	young	champion,	Rhulad
Sengar	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	Take	up	your	sword!’
‘Do	not,’	Karsa	said.	‘Your	spirit	is	here	–	it	is	all	you	have,	all	you	are.
When	I	kill	it,	oblivion	will	take	you.’
‘Look	at	his	leg!	He	is	almost	as	crippled	as	I	am!	Take	the	sword,	Rhulad,
and	cut	him	down!’
But	Rhulad	still	hesitated,	there	on	his	hands	and	knees,	his	breaths	coming
in	rapid	gasps.
The	Crippled	God	wheezed,	coughed,	then	said	in	a	low,	crooning	voice,
‘You	can	return,	Rhulad.	To	your	world.	You	can	make	it	right.	This	time,	you
can	make	everything	right.	Listen	to	me,	Rhulad.	Trull	is	alive!	Your	brother,


he	is	alive,	and	he	walks	to	the	Eternal	Domicile!	He	walks	to	find	you!	Kill
this	Toblakai	and	you	can	return	to	him,	you	can	say	all	that	needs	to	be	said!
‘Rhulad	Sengar,	you	can	ask	his	forgiveness.’
At	that	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	head	lifted.	Eyes	suddenly	alight,	making	him
look…so	young.
And	Karsa	Orlong	felt,	in	his	heart,	a	moment	of	regret.
Rhulad	Sengar	reached	for	the	sword.
And	the	flint	sword	swung	down,	decapitating	him.
The	head	rolled,	settled	atop	the	sword.	The	body	pitched	sideways,	legs
kicking	spasmodically,	then	growing	still	as	blood	poured	from	the	open	neck.
In	a	moment,	that	blood	slowed.
Behind	Karsa,	the	Crippled	God	hacked	laughter,	then	said,	‘I	have	waited	a
long	time	for	you,	Karsa	Orlong.	I	have	worked	so	hard…to	bring	you	to	this
sword.	For	it	is	yours,	Toblakai.	No	other	can	wield	it	as	you	can.	No	other	can
withstand	its	curse,	can	remain	sane,	can	remain	its	master.	This	weapon,	my
Chosen	One,	is	for	you.’
Karsa	Orlong	faced	the	Crippled	God.	‘No-one	chooses	me.	I	do	not	give
anyone	that	right.	I	am	Karsa	Orlong	of	the	Teblor.	All	choices	belong	to	me.’
‘Then	choose,	my	friend.	Fling	away	that	pathetic	thing	of	stone	you	carry.
Choose	the	weapon	made	for	you	above	all	others.’
Karsa	bared	his	teeth.
The	Crippled	God’s	eyes	widened	briefly,	then	he	leaned	forward,	over	his
brazier	of	smouldering	coals.	‘With	the	sword,	Karsa	Orlong,	you	will	be
immortal.’	He	waved	a	gnarled	hand	and	a	gate	blistered	open	a	few	paces
away.	‘There.	Go	back	to	your	homeland,	Karsa.	Proclaim	yourself	Emperor
of	the	Teblor.	Guide	your	people	for	ever	more.	Oh,	they	are	sorely	beset.
Only	you	can	save	them,	Karsa	Orlong.	And	with	the	sword,	none	can	stand
before	you.	You	will	save	them,	you	will	lead	them	to	domination	–	a
campaign	of	slaughtered	“children”	such	as	the	world	has	never	seen	before.
Give	answer,	Toblakai!	Give	answer	to	all	the	wrongs	you	and	your	people
have	suffered!	Let	the	children	witness!’
Karsa	Orlong	stared	down	at	the	Crippled	God.
And	his	sneer	broadened,	a	moment,	before	he	turned	away.
‘Do	not	leave	it	here!	It	is	for	you!	Karsa	Orlong,	it	is	for	you!’
Someone	was	coming	up	from	the	sand.	A	wide,	heavily	muscled	man,	and
three	black-skinned	bhokorala.
Karsa	limped	to	meet	them.


	
	
Withal	felt	his	heart	pounding	in	his	chest.	He’d	not	expected…well,	he’d	not
known	what	to	expect,	only	what	was	expected	of	him.
‘You	are	not	welcome,’	said	the	giant	with	the	tattooed	face	and	the
wounded	leg.
‘I’m	not	surprised.	But	here	I	am	anyway.’	Withal’s	eyes	flicked	to	the
sword	lying	in	the	grass.	The	Tiste	Edur ’s	head	was	resting	on	it	like	a	gift.
The	weaponsmith	frowned.	‘Poor	lad,	he	never	understood—’
‘I	do,’	growled	the	giant.
Withal	looked	up	at	the	warrior.	Then	over	to	where	crouched	the	Crippled
God,	before	returning	once	more	to	his	regard	of	the	giant.	‘You	said	no?’
‘As	much.’
‘Good.’
‘Will	you	take	it	now?’
‘I	will	–	to	break	it	on	the	forge	where	it	was	made.’	And	he	pointed	to	the
ramshackle	smithy	in	the	distance.
The	Crippled	God	hissed,	‘You	said	it	could	never	be	broken,	Withal!’
The	weaponsmith	shrugged.	‘We’re	always	saying	things	like	that.	Pays	the
bills.’
A	horrid	cry	was	loosed	from	the	Crippled	God,	ending	in	strangled
hacking	coughs.
The	giant	was	studying	Withal	in	return,	and	he	now	asked,	‘You	made	this
cursed	weapon?’
‘I	did.’
The	back-handed	slap	caught	Withal	by	surprise,	sent	him	flying	backward.
Thumping	hard	onto	his	back,	staring	up	at	the	spinning	blue	sky	–	that
suddenly	filled	with	the	warrior,	looking	down.
‘Don’t	do	it	again.’
And	after	saying	that,	the	giant	moved	off.
Blinking	in	the	white	sunlight,	Withal	managed	to	turn	onto	his	side,	and
saw	the	giant	walk	into	a	portal	of	fire,	then	vanish	as	the	Crippled	God
screamed	again.	The	portal	suddenly	disappeared	with	a	snarl.
One	of	the	nachts	brought	its	horrid	little	face	close	over	Withal,	like	a	cat
about	to	steal	his	breath.	It	cooed.
‘Yes,	yes,’	Withal	said,	pushing	it	away,	‘get	the	sword.	Yes.	Break	the
damned	thing.’


The	world	spun	round	him	and	he	thought	he	would	be	sick.	‘Sandalath,
love,	did	you	empty	the	bucket?	Sure	it	was	piss	but	it	smelled	mostly	of	beer,
didn’t	it?	I	coulda	drunk	it	all	over	again,	you	see.’
He	clambered	upward,	swayed	back	and	forth	briefly,	then	reached	down
and,	after	a	few	tries,	collected	the	sword.
Off	to	the	smithy.	Not	many	ways	of	breaking	a	cursed	sword.	A	weapon
even	nastier	would	do	it,	but	in	this	case	there	wasn’t	one.	So,	back	to	the	old
smith’s	secret.	To	break	an	aspected	weapon,	bring	it	home,	to	the	forge	where	it
was	born.
Well,	he	would	do	just	that,	and	do	it	now.
Seeing	the	three	nachts	peering	up	at	him,	he	scowled.	‘Go	bail	out	the
damned	boat	–	I’m	not	in	the	mood	to	drown	fifty	sweeps	from	shore.’
The	creatures	tumbled	over	each	in	their	haste	to	rush	back	to	the	beach.
Withal	walked	to	the	old	smithy,	to	do	what	needed	doing.
Behind	him,	the	Crippled	God	bawled	to	the	sky.
A	terrible,	terrible	sound,	a	god’s	cry.	One	he	never	wanted	to	hear	ever
again.
At	the	forge,	Withal	found	an	old	hammer,	and	prepared	to	undo	all	that	he
had	done.	Although,	he	realized	as	he	set	the	sword	down	on	the	rust-skinned
anvil	and	studied	the	blood-splashed	blade,	that	was,	in	all	truth,	impossible.
After	a	moment,	the	weaponsmith	raised	the	hammer.
Then	brought	it	down.


Epilogue

She	walked	through	the	shrouds	of	dusk
And	came	to	repast
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.
Where	the	living	gamed	with	death
And	crowed	triumphant
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.
Where	the	dead	mocked	the	living
And	told	tales	of	futility
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.
She	came	to	set	down	her	new	child
There	on	the	stained	altar
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.
‘This,’	said	she,	‘is	what	we	must	do,
In	hope	and	humility
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.’
And	the	child	did	cry	in	the	night
To	announce	bold	arrival
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.
Have	we	dreamed	this	enough	now?
Our	promise	of	suffering
At	the	Gates	of	Madness?
Will	you	look	down	upon	its	new	face
And	whisper	songs	of	anguish
At	the	Gates	of	Madness?
Taking	the	sawtoothed	key	in	hand


To	let	loose	a	broken	future
At	the	Gates	of	Madness?
Tell	then	your	tale	of	futility	to	the	child
All	your	games	with	death
At	the	Gates	of	Madness.
We	who	stand	here	have	heard	it	before
On	this	the	other	side
Of	the	Gates	of	Madness.
Prayer	of	Child
The	Masked	Monks	of	Cabal
Dragging	his	soul	from	its	place	of	exhaustion	and	horror,	the	sound	of	a
spinning	chain	awoke	Nimander	Golit.	He	stared	up	at	the	stained	ceiling	of	his
small	room,	his	heart	thumping	hard	in	his	chest,	his	body	slick	with	sweat
beneath	damp	blankets.
That	sound	–	it	had	seemed	so	real—
And	now,	with	eyes	widening,	he	heard	it	again.
Spinning,	then	odd	snaps!	Then	spinning	once	more.
He	sat	up.	The	squalid	town	outside	slept,	drowned	in	darkness	unrelieved
by	any	moon.	And	yet…the	sound	was	coming	from	the	street	directly	below.
Nimander	rose	from	the	bed,	made	his	way	to	the	door,	out	into	the	chilly
hallway.	Grit	and	dust	beneath	his	bare	feet	as	he	padded	down	the	rickety
stairs.
Emerging,	he	rushed	out	into	the	street.
Yes,	night’s	deepest	pit,	and	this	was	not	–	could	not	be	–	a	dream.
The	hissing	chain	and	soft	clack,	close,	brought	him	round.	To	see	another
Tiste	Andii	emerge	from	the	gloom.	A	stranger.	Nimander	gasped.
The	stranger	was	twirling	a	chain	from	one	upraised	hand,	a	chain	with
rings	at	each	end.
‘Hello,	Nimander	Golit.’
‘Who	–	who	are	you?	How	do	you	know	my	name?’
‘I	have	come	a	long	way,	to	this	Isle	of	the	Shake	–	they	are	our	kin,	did
you	know	that?	I	suppose	you	did	–	but	they	can	wait,	for	they	are	not	yet	ready
and	perhaps	will	never	be	ready.	Not	just	Andii	blood,	after	all.	But	Edur.
Maybe	even	Liosan,	not	to	mention	human.	No	matter.	Leave	Twilight	her
island…’	he	laughed,	‘empire.’


‘What	do	you	want?’
‘You,	Nimander	Golit.	And	your	kin.	Go	now,	gather	them.	It	is	time	for	us
to	leave.’
‘What?	Where?’
‘Are	you	truly	a	child?’	the	stranger	snapped	in	frustration.	The	rings
clicked,	the	chain	spiralled	tight	about	his	index	finger.	‘I	am	here	to	lead	you
home,	Nimander.	All	you	spawn	of	Anomander	Rake,	the	Black-Winged	Lord.’
‘But	where	is	home?’
‘Listen	to	me!	I	am	taking	you	to	him!’
Nimander	stared,	then	stepped	back.	‘He	does	not	want	us—’
‘It	does	not	matter	what	he	wants.	Nor	even	what	I	want!	Do	you	understand
yet?	I	am	her	Herald!’
Her?
All	at	once	Nimander	cried	out,	dropped	hard	down	onto	his	knees	on	the
cobbles,	his	hands	at	his	face.	‘This	–	this	is	not	a	dream?’
The	stranger	sneered.	‘You	can	keep	your	nightmares,	Nimander.	You	can
stare	down	at	the	blood	on	your	hands	for	all	eternity,	for	all	I	care.	She	was,	as
you	say,	insane.	And	dangerous.	I	tell	you	this,	I	would	have	left	her	corpse
lying	here	in	the	street,	this	night,	if	she	still	lived.	So,	enough	of	that.
‘Go,	bring	your	kin	here.	Quickly,	Nimander,	while	Darkness	still	holds
this	island.’
And	Nimander	climbed	to	his	feet,	then	hobbled	into	the	decrepit	tenement.
Her	Herald.	Oh,	Mother	Dark,	you	would	summon	our	father,	as	you	now
summon	us?
But	why?
Oh,	it	must	be.	Yes.	Our	exile	–	Abyss	below	–	our	exile	is	at	an	end!
	
Waiting	in	the	street,	Clip	spun	his	chain.	A	pathetic	bunch,	if	this	Nimander
was	the	best	among	them.	Well,	they	would	have	to	do,	for	he	did	not	lie	when
he	said	the	Shake	were	not	yet	ready.
That	was,	in	fact,	the	only	truth	he	had	told,	on	this	darkest	of	nights.
And	how	did	you	fare	in	Letheras,	Silchas	Ruin?	Not	well,	I’d	wager.
You’re	not	your	brother.	You	never	were.
Oh,	Anomander	Rake,	we	will	find	you.	And	you	will	give	answer	to	us.	No,
not	even	a	god	can	blithely	walk	away,	can	escape	the	consequences.	Of
betrayal.
Yes,	we	will	find	you.	And	we	will	show	you.	We	will	show	you	just	how	it
feels.


	
Rud	Elalle	found	his	father	seated	atop	a	weathered	boulder	at	the	edge	of	the
small	valley	near	the	village.	Climbed	up	and	joined	Udinaas,	settling	onto	the
sun-warmed	stone	at	his	side.
A	ranag	calf	had	somehow	become	separated	from	its	mother,	and	indeed
the	entire	herd,	and	now	wandered	the	valley	floor,	bawling.
‘We	could	feast	on	that	one,’	Rud	said.
‘We	could,’	Udinaas	replied.	‘If	you	have	no	heart.’
‘We	must	live,	and	to	live	we	must	eat—’
‘And	to	live	and	eat,	we	must	kill.	Yes,	yes,	Rud,	I	am	aware	of	all	that.’
‘How	long	will	you	stay?’	Rud	asked,	then	his	breath	caught	in	his	throat.
The	question	had	just	come	out	–	the	one	he	had	been	dreading	to	ask	for	so
long.
Udinaas	shot	him	a	surprised	look,	then	returned	his	attention	to	the	lost
calf.	‘She	grieves,’	he	said.	‘She	grieves,	so	deep	in	her	heart	that	it	reaches	out
to	me	–	as	if	the	distance	was	nothing.	Nothing.	This	is	what	comes,’	he	added
without	a	trace	of	bitterness,	‘of	rape.’
Rud	decided	it	was	too	hard	to	watch	his	father ’s	face	at	this	moment,	so	he
swung	his	gaze	down	to	the	distant	calf.
‘I	told	Onrack,’	Udinaas	continued.	‘I	had	to.	To	just…get	it	out,	before	it
devoured	me.	Now,	well,	I	regret	doing	that.’
‘You	need	not.	Onrack	had	no	greater	friend.	It	was	necessary	that	he	know
the	truth—’
‘No,	Rud,	that	is	never	necessary.	Expedient,	sometimes.	Useful,	other
times.	The	rest	of	the	time,	it	just	wounds.’
‘Father,	what	will	you	do?’
‘Do?	Why,	nothing.	Not	for	Seren,	not	for	Onrack.	I’m	nothing	but	an	exslave.’	A	momentary	smile,	wry.	‘Living	with	the	savages.’
‘You	are	more	than	just	that,’	Rud	said.
‘I	am?’
‘Yes,	you	are	my	father.	And	so	I	ask	again,	how	long	will	you	stay?’
‘Until	you	toss	me	out,	I	suppose.’
Rud	came	as	close	to	bursting	into	tears	as	he	had	ever	been.	His	throat
closed	up,	so	tight	that	he	could	say	nothing	for	a	long	moment,	as	the	tide	of
feeling	rose	within	him	and	only	slowly	subsided.	Through	blurred	eyes,	he
watched	the	calf	wander	in	the	valley.
Udinaas	resumed	as	if	unmindful	of	the	reaction	his	words	had	elicited.
‘Not	that	I	can	teach	you	much,	Rud.	Mending	nets,	maybe.’


‘No,	father,	you	can	teach	me	the	most	important	thing	of	all.’
Udinaas	eyed	him	askance,	sceptical	and	suspicious.
Three	adult	ranag	appeared	on	a	crest,	lumbered	down	towards	the	calf.
Seeing	them,	the	young	beast	cried	out	again,	even	louder	this	time,	and	raced
to	meet	them.
Rud	sighed.	‘Father,	you	can	teach	me	your	greatest	skill.	How	to	survive.’
Neither	said	anything	then	for	some	time,	and	Rud	held	his	eyes	on	the
ranag	as	they	ascended	the	far	side	of	the	valley.	In	this	time,	it	seemed	Udinaas
had	found	something	wrong	with	his	eyes,	for	his	hands	went	to	his	face	again
and	again.	Rud	did	not	turn	to	observe	any	of	that.
Then,	eventually,	with	the	valley	empty	before	them,	his	father	rose.
‘Looks	like	we	go	hungry	after	all.’
‘Never	for	long,’	Rud	replied,	also	rising.
‘No,	that’s	true.’
They	made	their	way	back	to	the	village.
	
His	hands	stained	with	paint,	Onrack	tied	the	rawhide	straps	about	the	bundle,
then	slung	it	over	a	shoulder	and	faced	his	wife.	‘I	must	go.’
‘So	you	say,’	Kilava	replied.
‘The	journey,	to	where	lies	the	body	of	my	friend,	will	ease	my	spirit.’
‘Without	doubt.’
‘And	I	must	speak	to	Seren	Pedac.	I	must	tell	her	of	her	husband,	of	his	life
since	the	time	he	gave	her	his	sword.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	now,’	Onrack	said,	‘I	must	go	and	embrace	our	son.’
‘I	will	join	you.’
Onrack	smiled.	‘That	will	embarrass	him.’
‘No,	you	damned	fool.	I	said	I	will	join	you.	If	you	think	you’re	going
anywhere	without	me,	you	are	mad.’
‘Kilava—’
‘I	have	decided.	I	will	let	the	journey	ease	your	heart,	husband.	I	will	not
chatter	until	your	ears	bleed	and	like	a	bhederin	you	look	for	the	nearest	cliffedge.’
He	stared	at	her	with	love	welling	in	his	eyes.	‘Chatter?	I	have	never	heard
you	chatter.’
‘You	never	will,	either.’
He	nodded.	‘This	is	very	well,	wife.	Join	me,	then.	Help	me	heal	with	your
presence	alone—’


‘Be	very	careful	now,	Onrack.’
Wisely,	he	said	nothing	more.
They	went	to	say	goodbye	to	their	son.
	
‘This	is	exhausting!’	Emperor	Tehol	Beddict	said,	slumping	down	onto	his
throne.
Bugg’s	face	soured	as	he	said,	‘Why?	You	haven’t	done	anything	yet.’
‘Well,	it’s	only	been	three	weeks.	I	tell	you,	my	list	of	reforms	is	so	long
I’ll	never	get	around	to	any	of	them.’
‘I	applaud	your	embrace	of	incompetence,’	Bugg	said.	‘You’ll	make	a	fine
Emperor.’
‘Well,’	Brys	ventured	from	where	he	stood	leaning	against	the	wall	to	the
right	of	the	dais,	‘there	is	peace	in	the	land.’
Bugg	grimaced.	‘Yes,	leading	one	to	wonder	just	how	long	an	entire
empire	can	hold	its	breath.’
‘And	if	anyone	has	the	answer	to	that	one,	dear	manservant,	it	would	be
you.’
‘Oh,	now	I	am	amused.’
Tehol	smiled.	‘We	can	tell.	And	now,	that	wasn’t	the	royal	“we”.	Which	we
admit	we	cannot	get	used	to	in	our	fledgling	innocence.’
Brys	said,	‘The	Adjunct	is	on	her	way,	and	then	there	is	Shurq	Elalle	who
wants	to	talk	to	you	about	something.	Aren’t	there	things	that	need	discussing?’
He	then	waited	for	a	reply,	any	reply,	but	instead	earned	nothing	but	blank
stares	from	his	brother	and	Bugg.
From	a	side	entrance,	the	new	Chancellor	entered	in	a	swirl	of	gaudy
robes.	Brys	hid	his	wince.	Who	would	have	thought	she’d	plunge	right	into	bad
taste	like	a	grub	into	an	apple?
‘Ah,’	Tehol	said,	‘doesn’t	my	Chancellor	look	lovely	this	morning?’
Janath’s	expression	remained	aloof.	‘Chancellors	are	not	supposed	to	look
lovely.	Competence	and	elegance	will	suffice.’
‘No	wonder	you	stand	out	so	in	here,’	Bugg	muttered.
‘Besides,’	Janath	continued,	‘such	descriptions	are	better	suited	to	the	role
of	First	Concubine,	which	tells	me	precisely	which	brain	you’re	thinking	with,
beloved	husband.	Again.’
Tehol	held	up	his	hands	as	if	in	surrender,	then	he	said	in	his	most
reasonable	tone	–	one	Brys	recognized	with	faint	dismay	–	‘I	still	see	no
reason	why	you	can’t	be	First	Concubine	as	well.’
‘I	keep	telling	you,’	Bugg	said.	‘Wife	to	the	Emperor	means	she’s


Empress.’	He	then	turned	to	Janath.	‘Giving	you	three	legitimate	titles.’
‘Don’t	forget	scholar,’	Tehol	observed,	‘which	most	would	hold	cancels
out	all	the	others.	Even	wife.’
‘Why,’	said	Bugg,	‘now	your	lessons	will	never	end.’
Another	moment	of	silence,	as	everyone	considered	all	this.
Then	Tehol	stirred	on	his	throne.	‘There’s	always	Rucket!	She’d	make	a
fine	First	Concubine!	Goodness,	how	the	blessings	flow	over.’
Janath	said,	‘Careful	you	don’t	drown,	Tehol.’
‘Bugg	would	never	let	that	happen,	sweetness.	Oh,	since	we’re	discussing
important	matters	before	the	Adjunct	arrives	to	say	goodbye,	I	was	thinking
that	Preda	Varat	Taun	needs	an	able	Finadd	to	assist	his	reconstruction	efforts
and	all	that.’
Brys	straightened.	Finally,	they	were	getting	to	genuine	subjects.	‘Who	did
you	have	in	mind?’
‘Why,	none	other	than	Ublala	Pung!’
Bugg	said,	‘I’m	going	for	a	walk.’

Using	an	iron	bar	as	a	lever,	Seren	Pedac	struggled	with	the	heavy	pavestones
at	the	entrance	to	her	house.	Sweat	glistened	on	her	bared	arms	and	her	hair
had	come	loose	from	its	ties	–	she	would	get	it	cut	short	soon.	As	befitted	her
life	now.
But	on	this	morning,	this	task	remained	before	her,	and	she	set	about	it	with
unrelenting	diligence,	using	her	body	without	regard	to	the	consequences.
Prying	loose	the	heavy	stones,	dragging	and	pushing	them	to	one	side	with
scraped	and	bleeding	hands.
Once	done,	she	would	take	a	shovel	to	the	underfill,	as	far	down	as	she
could	manage.
For	the	moment,	however,	the	centre	stone	was	defeating	her,	and	she
feared	she	would	not	have	the	strength	to	move	it.
‘Pardon	my	intrusion,’	said	a	man’s	voice,	‘but	it	looks	as	if	you	need
help.’
She	looked	up	from	where	she	leaned	on	the	bar.	Squinted	sceptically.	‘Not
sure	you	want	to	risk	that,	sir,’	she	said	to	the	old	man,	and	then	fell	silent.	He
had	a	mason’s	wrists,	with	large,	well-worked	hands.	She	wiped	sweat	from
her	brow	and	frowned	down	at	the	pavestone.	‘I	know,	this	must	look…
unusual.	Where	everywhere	else	in	the	city	people	are	putting	things	back,	here
I	am…’


The	old	man	approached.	‘Not	in	the	least,	Acquitor	–	you	were	an
Acquitor,	were	you	not?’
‘Uh,	yes.	I	was.	Not	any	more.	I’m	Seren	Pedac.’
‘No,	not	in	the	least,	then,	Seren	Pedac.’
She	gestured	at	the	centre	stone.	‘This	one	defeats	me,	I’m	afraid.’
‘Not	for	long,	I	suspect,	no	matter	what.	You	seem	very	determined.’
She	smiled,	and	was	startled	by	how	odd	it	felt.	When	had	she	last	smiled	–
no,	she	would	not	think	back	to	that.
‘But	you	should	be	careful,’	the	old	man	continued.	‘Here,	let	me	try.’
‘Thank	you,’	she	said,	stepping	back	to	give	him	room.
The	old	man	promptly	bent	the	bar.
She	stared.
Cursing,	he	set	it	aside,	then	crouched	down	to	dig	his	fingers	into	one	side
of	the	enormous	stone	block.
And	pulled	it	into	its	edge,	then,	hands	going	out	to	the	sides,	he	lifted	it
with	a	grunt,	pivoted,	staggered	two	steps,	and	laid	it	down	atop	the	others.	He
straightened,	brushing	dust	from	his	hands.	‘Hire	a	couple	of	young	men	to	put
it	back	when	you’re	done.’
‘How	–	no,	well.	But.	How	do	you	know	I	intend	to	put	it	back?’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘Do	not	grieve	overlong,	Seren	Pedac.	You	are
needed.	Your	life	is	needed.’
And	then	he	bowed	to	her	and	left.
She	stared	after	him.
She	needed	to	go	inside	now,	to	collect	the	stone	spear	and	his	sword,	to
bury	the	weapons	beneath	the	threshold	of	her	home,	her	terribly	empty	home.
Yet	still	she	hesitated.
And	the	old	man	suddenly	returned.	‘I	found	the	Errant,’	he	said.	‘We	had
much	to…discuss.	It	is	how	I	learned	of	you,	and	of	what	happened.’
What?	Is	he	addled,	then?	One	of	the	Errant’s	new	zealots?	She	made	to
turn	away—
‘No,	wait!	Seren	Pedac.	You	have	all	there	is	of	him,	all	that’s	left.	Cherish
it,	please.	Seren	Pedac,	cherish	it.	And	yourself.	Please.’
And,	as	he	walked	away,	it	was	as	if	his	words	had	blessed	her	in	some
unaccountable	way.
‘You	have	all	there	is	of	me,	all	that’s	left…’
Unconsciously,	her	hand	lifted	to	settle	on	her	stomach.
Before	too	long,	she	would	be	doing	a	lot	of	that.
	


This	ends	the	seventh	tale	of	the
Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen


Glossary

Acquitor:	a	sanctioned	position	as	guide/factor	when	dealing	with	nonLetherii	people
Ahkrata:	a	Barghast	tribe
Andara:	temple	of	the	cult	of	the	Black-Winged	Lord
Arapay:	the	easternmost	tribe	of	Tiste	Edur
Artisan	Battalion:	a	military	unit	in	Lether
Atri-Preda:	military	commander	who	governs	a	city,	town	or	territory
Awl:	a	town	in	Lether.	Also	the	name	of	a	tribe
Awl’dan:	grasslands	east	of	Drene
Barahn:	a	Barghast	tribe
Barghast:	pastoral	nomadic	warrior	people
Bast	Fulmar:	battle	site
Beneda:	a	Tiste	Edur	tribe
Blue	Style	Steel:	a	Letherii	steel	once	used	for	weapons
Bluerose:	a	subjugated	nation	in	Lether
Bluerose	Battalion:	a	military	unit	in	Lether
Caladara	whip:	an	Awl	weapon
Cabil:	an	archipelago	nation	south	of	Perish
Ceda:	a	High	Mage	of	the	Letherii	Empire
Cedance:	a	chamber	of	tiles	representing	the	Holds,	in	Letheras
Crimson	Rampant	Brigade:	a	military	unit	in	Lether
Den-Ratha:	a	Tiste	Edur	tribe
Docks:	coin	of	Lether
Down	Markets:	a	district	in	Letheras
Drene:	a	Lether	city	east	of	Bluerose
Emlava:	a	sabre-toothed	cat
Eternal	Domicile:	seat	of	Lether	Emperor
Faraed:	a	subjugated	people	of	Lether
Fent:	a	subjugated	people	of	Lether
Finadd:	equivalent	of	captain	in	the	Letherii	military
Froth	Wolf:	Adjunct	Tavore’s	command	ship
Gilani:	tribe	in	Seven	Cities


Gilk:	a	Barghast	tribe
Harridict	Brigade:	a	Lether	military	unit
Hiroth:	a	Tiste	Edur	tribe
Ilgres:	a	Barghast	tribe
Jheck:	a	northern	tribe
Just	Wars:	mythical	conflict	between	the	Tiste	Liosan	and	the	Forkrul	Assail
K’risnan:	Tiste	Edur	sorcerers
Kenryll’ah:	demon	nobility
Liberty	Consign:	a	loose	consortium	of	businesses	in	Lether
Lupe	fish:	a	large	carnivorous	fish	of	Lether	River
Meckros:	a	seafaring	people
Merchants’	Battalion:	a	Lether	military	unit
Merude:	a	Tiste	Edur	tribe
Nerek:	a	subjugated	people	of	Lether
Nith’rithal:	a	Barghast	tribe
Obsidian	Throne:	traditional	throne	of	Bluerose
Onyx	Wizards:	Andii	wizards	ruling	the	Andara	of	Bluerose
Patriotists:	Lether	Empire’s	secret	police
Pamby	Doughty:	comic	poem
Preda:	equivalent	of	a	general	or	commander	in	Letherii	military
Quillas	Canal:	a	main	canal	in	Letheras
Rat	Catchers’	Guild:	a	now	outlawed	guild	in	Lether
Refugium:	a	magical	realm	surrounded	by	Omtose	Phellack
Rhinazan:	a	winged	lizard
Rise	(The):	Shake	title
Rygtha:	Awl	crescent	axe
Scale	House:	centre	of	Rat	Catchers’	Guild	in	Letheras
Senan:	a	Barghast	tribe
Settle	Lake:	a	decrepit	lake	in	the	centre	of	Letheras
Second	Maiden	Fort:	a	penal	island	now	independent
Shake:	a	subjugated	people	in	the	Lether	Empire
Shore	(The):	religion	of	the	Shake
Sollanta:	a	Tiste	Edur	tribe
Thrones	of	War:	Perish	ships
Twilight:	Shake	title
Watch	(The):	Shake	title
Verdith’anath:	the	Jaghut	Bridge	of	Death
Zorala	Snicker:	comic	poem

